THE
BONEHUNTERS
BOOK	SIX	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	of	the	characters,	organizations,	and	events
portrayed	in	this	novel	are	either	products	of	the	author ’s	imagination	or	are
used	fictitiously.
THE	BONEHUNTERS:	BOOK	SIX	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE
FALLEN
Copyright	©	2006	by	Steven	Erikson
All	rights	reserved.
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	in	2006	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers.
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor ® 	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
ISBN:	978-0-7653-4883-8
eISBN	9781429926973


To	Courtney	Welch.
Keep	the	music	coming,	friend.


For	all	that	is	made	real
In	this	age	descending
Where	heroes	leave	naught
But	the	iron	ring	of	their	names
From	bardic	throats
I	stand	in	this	silent	heart
Yearning	the	fading	beat
Of	lives	fallen	to	dust
And	the	sifting	whisper
Proclaims	glory’s	passing
As	the	songs	fail
In	dwindling	echoes
For	all	that	is	made	real
The	chambers	and	halls
Yawn	empty	to	my	cries	–
For	someone	must
Give	answer
Give	answer
To	all	of	this
Someone
The	Age	Descending
Torbora	Fethena


Acknowledgements

Thanks	to	the	usual	suspects,	including	my	early-draft	readers	Chris,	Mark,
Rick,	Courtney,	and	Bill	Hunter	who	has	proved	invaluable	on	the	mechanics
and	full	listing	of	variants	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons	–	but	listen,	Bill,	no	more
walking	miles	through	the	rain,	right?	Cam	Esslemont	for	a	most	diligent
read-through	–	I’m	glad	at	least	one	of	us	has	got	the	timeline	right.	Clare	and
Bowen,	as	always.	To	the	staff	at	Bar	Italia	for	seeing	me	through	another	one
–	three	novellas	and	four	novels	and	twenty-two	thousand	lattes,	that	was	quite
a	run,	wasn’t	it?	Steve,	Perry	and	Ross	Donaldson,	for	the	friendship.	Simon
Taylor,	Patrick	Walsh	and	Howard	Morhaim,	for	the	good	work	done	each	and
every	time.




Dramatis	Personae
The	Malazans
Empress	Laseen,	ruler	of	the	Malazan	Empire
Adjunct	Tavore,	commander	of	the	Fourteenth	Army
Fist	Keneb,	division	commander
Fist	Blistig,	division	commander
Fist	Tene	Baralta,	division	commander
Fist	Temul,	division	commander
Nil,	a	Wickan	warlock
Nether,	a	Wickan	witch
T’amber,	Tavore’s	aide
Lostara	Yil,	aide	to	Pearl
Pearl,	a	Claw
Nok,	Admiral	of	the	Imperial	Fleet
Banaschar,	an	ex-priest	of	D’rek
Hellian,	a	sergeant	in	the	city	guard	of	Kartool
Urb,	a	city	guard	in	Kartool
Brethless,	a	city	guard	in	Kartool
Touchy,	a	city	guard	in	Kartool
Quick	Ben,	High	Mage	in	the	Fourteenth	Army
Kalam	Mekhar,	an	assassin
Grub,	a	foundling

Selected	Soldiers	in	the	Fourteenth	Army
Captain	Kindly,	Ashok	Regiment
Lieutenant	Pores,	Ashok	Regiment
Captain	Faradan	Sort
Sergeant	Fiddler/Strings
Corporal	Tarr
Cuttle


Bottle
Koryk
Smiles
Sergeant	Gesler
Corporal	Stormy
Master	Sergeant	Braven	Tooth
Maybe
Lutes
Ebron
Sinn
Crump
Sergeant	Balm
Corporal	Deadsmell
Throatslitter
Masan	Gilani

Others
Barathol	Mekhar,	a	blacksmith
Kulat,	a	villager
Nulliss,	a	villager
Hayrith,	a	villager
Chaur,	a	villager
Noto	Boil,	company	cutter	(healer)	in	Onearm’s	Host
Hurlochel,	an	outrider	in	Onearm’s	Host
Captain	Sweetcreek,	an	officer	in	Onearm’s	Host
Corporal	Futhgar,	an	officer	in	Onearm’s	Host
Fist	Rythe	Bude,	an	officer	in	Onearm’s	Host
Ormulogun,	artist
Gumble,	his	critic
Apsalar,	an	assassin
Telorast,	a	spirit
Curdle,	a	spirit
Samar	Dev,	a	witch	of	Ugarat
Karsa	Orlong,	a	Teblor	warrior
Ganath,	a	Jaghut
Spite,	a	Soletaken	and	sister	to	Lady	Envy


Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas
Leoman	of	the	Flails,	last	leader	of	the	rebellion
Captain	Dunsparrow,	Y’Ghatan	city	guard
Karpolan	Demesand,	Trygalle	Trade	Guild
Torahaval	Delat,	a	priestess	of	Poliel
Cutter,	once	Crokus	of	Darujhistan
Heboric	Ghost	Hands,	Destraint	of	Treach
Scillara,	refugee	from	Raraku
Felisin	the	Younger,	refugee	from	Raraku
Greyfrog,	a	demon
Mappo	Runt,	a	Trell
Icarium,	a	Jhag
Iskaral	Pust,	a	priest	of	Shadow
Mogora,	a	D’ivers
Taralack	Veed,	a	Gral	and	agent	of	the	Nameless	Ones
Dejim	Nebrahl,	a	D’ivers	T’rolbarahl	of	the	First	Empire
Trull	Sengar,	a	Tiste	Edur
Onrack	the	Broken,	an	unbound	T’lan	Imass
Ibra	Gholan,	a	T’lan	Imass
Monok	Ochem,	a	T’lan	Imass	Bonecaster
Minala,	commander	of	the	Company	of	Shadow
Tomad	Sengar,	a	Tiste	Edur
Feather	Witch,	a	Letherii	slave
Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis	(Twilight),	commander	of	Letherii	forces
Captain	Varat	Taun,	officer	under	Twilight’s	Command
Taxilian,	an	interpreter
Ahlrada	Ahn,	a	Tiste	Andii	spy	among	the	Tiste	Edur
Sathbaro	Rangar,	Arapay	warlock


Prologue
1164	Burn’s	Sleep
Istral’fennidahn,	the	season	of	D’rek,	Worm	of	Autumn
Twenty-four	days	since	the	Execution	of	Sha’ik	in	Raraku
The	webs	between	the	towers	were	visible	in	glistening	sheets	far	overhead,
and	the	faint	wind	coming	in	from	the	sea	shivered	the	vast	threads	so	that	a
mist	of	rain	descended	on	Kartool	City,	as	it	did	every	morning	in	the	Clear
Season.
Most	things	a	person	could	get	used	to,	eventually,	and	since	the	yellowbanded	paralt	spiders	had	been	the	first	to	occupy	the	once	infamous	towers
following	the	Malazan	conquest	of	the	island,	and	that	was	decades	past	now,
there	had	been	plenty	of	time	to	become	inured	to	such	details.	Even	the	sight
of	gulls	and	pigeons	suspended	motionless	between	the	score	of	towers	every
morning,	before	the	fist-sized	spiders	emerged	from	their	upper-floor	dens	to
retrieve	their	prey,	yielded	little	more	than	faint	revulsion	among	the	citizens
of	Kartool	City.
Sergeant	Hellian	of	the	Septarch	District	city	guard,	alas,	was	an	exception
to	this.	There	were	gods,	she	suspected,	convulsed	in	perpetual	hilarity	at	her
wretched	fate,	for	which	they	were	no	doubt	responsible.	Born	in	the	city,
cursed	with	a	fear	of	all	manner	of	spiders,	she	had	lived	the	entirety	of	her
nineteen	years	in	unrelieved	terror.
Why	not	just	leave?	A	question	asked	by	comrades	and	acquaintances	more
times	than	she	cared	to	count.	But	it	wasn’t	that	simple.	It	was	impossible,	in
fact.	The	murky	waters	of	the	harbour	were	fouled	with	moult-skins	and	webfragments	and	sodden,	feather-tufted	carcasses	bobbing	here	and	there.	Inland,
things	got	even	worse.	The	young	paralt,	upon	escaping	their	elders	in	the	city,
struggled	to	maturity	among	the	limestone	cliffs	ringing	Kartool.	And	though
young,	they	were	no	less	aggressive	or	virulent.	While	traders	and	farmers
told	her	that	one	could	walk	the	trails	and	roads	all	day	without	encountering	a
single	one,	Hellian	didn’t	care.	She	knew	the	gods	were	waiting.	Just	like	the
spiders.
When	sober,	the	sergeant	noticed	things,	in	a	proper	and	diligent	manner


suited	to	a	city	guard.	And	while	she	was	not	consistently	drunk,	cold	sobriety
was	an	invitation	to	hysteria,	so	Hellian	endeavoured	to	proceed	steadily	on	the
wobbly	rope	of	not-quite-drunk.	Accordingly,	she	had	not	known	of	the	odd
ship	now	moored	in	the	Free	Docks,	that	had	arrived	before	sunrise,	its
pennons	indicating	that	it	had	come	from	Malaz	Island.
Ships	hailing	from	Malaz	Island	were	not	of	themselves	unusual	or
noteworthy;	however,	autumn	had	arrived,	and	the	prevailing	winds	of	the
Clear	Season	made	virtually	all	lanes	to	the	south	impossible	to	navigate	for	at
least	the	next	two	months.
Were	things	less	bleary,	she	might	also	have	noticed	–	had	she	taken	the
time	to	head	down	to	the	docks,	which	perhaps	could	have	been	managed	at
sword-point	–	that	the	ship	was	not	the	usual	barque	or	trader,	nor	a	military
dromon,	but	a	sleek,	gracile	thing,	styled	in	a	manner	not	employed	in	the	past
fifty	years	by	any	shipbuilders	of	the	empire.	Arcane	carvings	adorned	the
blade-like	prow,	minuscule	shapes	detailing	serpents	and	worms,	the	panels
sweeping	back	along	the	gunnels	almost	halfway	down	the	length	of	the	ship.
The	stern	was	squared	and	strangely	high,	with	a	side-mounted	steering	oar.
The	crew	numbered	about	a	dozen,	quiet	for	sailors,	and	disinclined	to	leave
the	ship	as	it	lolled	alongside	the	dock.	A	lone	figure	had	disembarked	as	soon
as	the	gangplank	had	settled,	shortly	before	dawn.
For	Hellian,	these	details	came	later.	The	runner	that	found	her	was	a	local
brat	who,	when	he	wasn’t	breaking	laws,	loitered	around	the	docks	in	the	hopes
of	being	hired	as	a	guide	for	visitors.	The	fragment	of	parchment	he	handed
her	was,	she	could	feel,	of	some	quality.	On	it	was	written	a	terse	message,	the
contents	of	which	made	her	scowl.
‘All	right,	lad,	describe	the	man	gave	this	to	you.’
‘I	can’t.’
Hellian	glanced	back	at	the	four	guards	standing	behind	her	on	the	street
corner.	One	of	them	stepped	behind	the	boy	and	picked	him	up,	one-handed,
gripping	the	back	of	the	ratty	tunic.	A	quick	shake.
‘Loosed	your	memory	some?’	Hellian	asked.	‘I	hope	so,	because	I	ain’t
paying	coin.’
‘I	can’t	remember!	I	looked	right	into	his	face,	Sergeant!	Only…I	can’t
remember	what	it	looked	like!’
She	studied	the	boy	for	a	moment,	then	grunted	and	turned	away.
The	guard	set	the	lad	down	but	did	not	release	his	grip.
‘Let	him	go,	Urb.’
The	lad	scampered	away.
With	a	vague	gesture	for	her	guards	to	follow,	she	set	off.


The	Septarch	District	was	the	city’s	most	peaceful	area,	not	through	any
particular	diligence	on	Hellian’s	part,	however.	There	were	few	commercial
buildings,	and	those	residences	that	existed	served	to	house	acolytes	and
support	staff	of	the	dozen	temples	commanding	the	district’s	main	avenue.
Thieves	who	wanted	to	stay	alive	did	not	steal	from	temples.
She	led	her	squad	onto	the	avenue,	noting	once	again	how	decrepit	many
of	the	temples	had	become.	The	paralt	spiders	liked	the	ornate	architecture	and
the	domes	and	lesser	towers,	and	it	seemed	the	priests	were	losing	the	battle.
Chitinous	rubbish	crackled	and	crunched	underfoot	as	they	walked.
Years	ago,	the	first	night	of	Istral’fennidahn,	just	past,	would	have	been
marked	with	an	island-wide	fete,	filled	with	sacrifices	and	propitiations	to
Kartool’s	patron	goddess,	D’rek,	the	Worm	of	Autumn,	and	the	archpriest	of
the	Grand	Temple,	the	Demidrek,	would	lead	a	procession	through	the	city	on
a	carpet	of	fecund	rubbish,	his	bared	feet	sweeping	through	maggot-	and
worm-ridden	refuse.	Children	would	chase	lame	dogs	down	the	alleys,	and
those	they	cornered	they	would	stone	to	death	whilst	shrieking	their	goddess’s
name.	Convicted	criminals	sentenced	to	execution	would	have	their	skins
publicly	flailed,	their	long-bones	broken,	then	the	hapless	victims	would	be
flung	into	pits	aswarm	with	carrion	beetles	and	red	fireworms,	that	would
devour	them	over	the	course	of	four	or	five	days.
All	of	this	was	before	the	Malazan	conquest,	of	course.	The	Emperor ’s
principal	target	had	been	the	cult	of	D’rek.	He’d	well	understood	that	the	heart
of	Kartool’s	power	was	the	Grand	Temple,	and	the	island’s	master	sorcerors
were	the	priests	and	priestesses	of	D’rek,	ruled	over	by	the	Demidrek.	Further,
it	was	no	accident	that	the	night	of	slaughter	that	preceded	the	naval	battle	and
the	subsequent	invasion,	a	night	led	by	the	infamous	Dancer	and	Surly,
Mistress	of	the	Claw,	had	so	thoroughly	obliterated	the	cult’s	sorcerors,
including	the	Demidrek.	For	the	archpriest	of	the	Grand	Temple	had	only
recently	gained	his	eminence	via	an	internal	coup,	and	the	ousted	rival	had
been	none	other	than	Tayschrenn,	the	Emperor ’s	new	–	at	the	time	–	High
Mage.
Hellian	had	but	heard	tales	of	the	celebrations,	since	they	had	been
outlawed	as	soon	as	the	Malazan	occupiers	settled	the	imperial	mantle	upon	the
island,	but	she	had	been	told	often	enough	about	those	glorious	days	of	long
ago,	when	Kartool	Island	had	been	at	the	pinnacle	of	civilization.
The	present	sordid	condition	was	the	fault	of	the	Malazans,	everyone
agreed.	Autumn	had	in	truth	arrived	upon	the	island	and	its	morose	inhabitants.
More	than	the	cult	of	D’rek	had	been	crushed,	after	all.	Slavery	was	abolished,
the	execution	pits	had	been	scoured	clean	and	permanently	sealed.	There	was


even	a	building	hosting	a	score	of	misguided	altruists	who	adopted	lame	dogs.
They	passed	the	modest	temple	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams	and,	squatting	on
the	opposite	side,	the	much-hated	Temple	of	Shadows.	There	had	once	been	but
seven	religions	permitted	upon	Kartool,	six	subservient	to	D’rek	–	hence	the
district’s	name.	Soliel,	Poliel,	Beru,	Burn,	Hood	and	Fener.	Since	the	conquest,
more	had	arrived	–	the	two	aforementioned,	along	with	Dessembrae,	Togg	and
Oponn.	And	the	Grand	Temple	of	D’rek,	still	the	largest	of	all	the	structures	in
the	city,	was	in	a	pathetic	state	of	disrepair.
The	figure	standing	before	the	broad-stepped	entrance	wore	the	garb	of	a
Malazan	sailor,	faded	waterproofed	leathers,	a	worn	shirt	of	thin,	ragged	linen.
His	dark	hair	was	in	a	queue,	hanging	down	between	his	shoulders	and
otherwise	unadorned.	As	he	turned	at	their	approach,	the	sergeant	saw	a
middle-aged	face	with	even,	benign	features,	although	there	was	something
odd	about	the	man’s	eyes,	something	vaguely	fevered.
Hellian	drew	a	deep	breath	to	help	clear	her	sodden	thoughts,	then	raised
the	parchment	between	them.	‘This	is	yours,	I	presume?’
The	man	nodded.	‘You	are	the	guard	commander	in	this	district?’
She	smiled.	‘Sergeant	Hellian.	The	captain	died	last	year	of	a	septic	foot.
We’re	still	waiting	for	a	replacement.’
Brows	rose	with	irony.	‘Not	a	promotion,	Sergeant?	One	presumes,
therefore,	that	sobriety	would	be	a	decisive	virtue	for	a	captain.’
‘Your	note	said	there’s	trouble	at	the	Grand	Temple,’	Hellian	said,
ignoring	the	man’s	rudeness	and	turning	to	study	the	massive	edifice.	The
double	doors,	she	noted	with	a	frown,	were	closed.	On	this	day	of	all	days,	this
was	unprecedented.
‘I	think	so,	Sergeant,’	the	man	said.
‘Had	you	come	to	pay	your	respects	to	D’rek?’	Hellian	asked	him,	as	faint
unease	struggled	through	the	alcoholic	haze.	‘Are	the	doors	locked?	What’s
your	name	and	where	are	you	from?’
‘I	am	named	Banaschar,	from	Malaz	Island.	We	arrived	this	morning.’
A	grunt	from	one	of	the	guards	behind	her,	and	Hellian	thought	about	it.
Then	she	shot	Banaschar	a	more	careful	look.	‘By	ship?	At	this	time	of	year?’
‘We	made	what	haste	we	could.	Sergeant,	I	believe	we	need	to	break	into
the	Grand	Temple.’
‘Why	not	just	knock?’
‘I	have	tried,’	Banaschar	replied.	‘No-one	comes.’
Hellian	hesitated.	Break	into	the	Grand	Temple?	The	Fist	will	have	my	tits
on	a	fry	pan	for	this.
‘There	are	dead	spiders	on	the	steps,’	Urb	said	suddenly.


They	turned.
‘Hood’s	blessing,’	Hellian	muttered,	‘lots	of	them.’	Curious	now,	she
walked	closer.	Banaschar	followed,	and	after	a	moment	the	squad	fell	in.
‘They	look…’	She	shook	her	head.
‘Decayed,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Rotting.	Sergeant,	the	doors,	please.’
Still	she	hesitated.	A	thought	occurred	to	her	and	she	glared	at	the	man.
‘You	said	you	made	all	haste	to	get	here.	Why?	Are	you	an	acolyte	of	D’rek?	–
You	don’t	look	it.	What	brought	you	here,	Banaschar?’
‘A	presentiment,	Sergeant.	I	was…many	years	past…a	priest	of	D’rek,	in
the	Jakatakan	temple	on	Malaz	Island.’
‘A	presentiment	brought	you	all	the	way	to	Kartool?	Do	you	take	me	for	a
fool?’
Anger	flashed	in	the	man’s	eyes.	‘Clearly	you’re	too	drunk	to	smell	what	I
can	smell.’	He	eyed	the	guards.	‘Do	you	share	your	sergeant’s	failings,	or	am	I
alone	in	this	matter?’
Urb	was	frowning,	then	he	said,	‘Sergeant,	we	should	kick	in	these	doors,	I
think.’
‘So	do	it	then,	damn	you!’
She	watched	as	her	guards	battered	away	at	the	door.	The	noise	attracted	a
crowd,	and	Hellian	saw,	threading	to	the	forefront,	a	tall,	robed	woman	who
was	clearly	a	priestess	from	one	of	the	other	temples.	Oh,	now	what?
But	the	woman’s	eyes	were	fixed	on	Banaschar,	who	had	in	turn	noted	her
approach	and	stared	steadily	back,	his	expression	setting	hard.
‘What	are	you	doing	here?’	the	woman	demanded.
‘Have	you	sensed	nothing,	High	Priestess?	Complacency	is	a	disease	fast
spreading,	it	seems.’
The	woman’s	gaze	shifted	to	the	guards	kicking	at	the	doors.	‘What	has
happened?’
The	door	on	the	right	splintered,	then	was	knocked	back	by	a	final	kick.
Hellian	gestured	for	Urb	to	enter	then	followed,	Banaschar	behind	her.
The	stench	was	overwhelming,	and	in	the	gloom	was	visible	great	splashes
of	blood	on	the	walls,	fragments	of	meat	scattered	on	the	polished	tiles,	and
pools	of	bile,	blood	and	faeces,	as	well	as	scraps	of	clothing	and	clumps	of
hair.
Urb	had	taken	no	more	than	two	steps	and	now	stood,	staring	down	at	what
he	was	standing	in.	Hellian	edged	past	him,	her	hand	of	its	own	accord
reaching	for	the	flask	tucked	in	her	belt.	Banaschar ’s	hand	stayed	her.	‘Not	in
here,’	he	said.
She	roughly	shook	him	off.	‘Go	to	Hood,’	she	growled,	pulling	the	flask


loose	and	tugging	free	the	stopper.	She	drank	three	quick	mouthfuls.
‘Corporal,	go	find	Commander	Charl.	We’ll	need	a	detachment	to	secure	the
area.	Have	word	sent	to	the	Fist,	I	want	some	mages	down	here.’
‘Sergeant,’	said	Banaschar,	‘this	is	a	matter	for	priests.’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.’	She	waved	at	her	remaining	guards.	‘Conduct	a	search.
See	if	there’s	any	survivors—’
‘There	are	none,’	Banaschar	pronounced.	‘The	High	Priestess	of	the	Queen
of	Dreams	has	already	left,	Sergeant.	Accordingly,	all	of	the	temples	will	be
informed.	Investigations	will	begin.’
‘What	sort	of	investigations?’	Hellian	demanded.
He	grimaced.	‘Priestly	sorts.’
‘And	what	of	you?’
‘I	have	seen	enough,’	he	said.
‘Don’t	even	think	of	going	anywhere,	Banaschar,’	she	said,	scanning	the
scene	of	slaughter.	‘First	night	of	the	Clear	Season	in	the	Grand	Temple,	that
used	to	involve	an	orgy.	Looks	like	it	got	out	of	hand.’	Two	more	quick
swallows	from	the	flask,	and	blessed	numbness	beckoned.	‘You’ve	a	lot	of
questions	you	need	to	answer—’
Urb’s	voice	cut	in,	‘He’s	gone,	Sergeant.’
Hellian	swung	about.	‘Damn!	Weren’t	you	keeping	an	eye	on	the	bastard,
Urb?’
The	big	man	spread	his	hands.	‘You	was	talking	away	to	’im,	Sergeant.	I
was	eyeing	the	crowd	out	front.	He	didn’t	get	past	me,	that’s	for	sure.’
‘Get	a	description	out.	I	want	him	found.’
Urb	frowned.	‘Uh,	I	can’t	remember	what	he	looked	like.’
‘Damn	you,	neither	can	I.’	Hellian	walked	over	to	where	Banaschar	had
been	standing.	Squinted	down	at	his	footprints	in	the	blood.	They	didn’t	lead
anywhere.
Sorcery.	She	hated	sorcery.	‘You	know	what	I’m	hearing	right	now,	Urb?’
‘No.’
‘I’m	hearing	the	Fist.	Whistling.	You	know	why	he’s	whistling?’
‘No.	Listen,	Sergeant—’
‘It’s	the	fry	pan,	Urb.	It’s	that	nice,	sweet	sizzle	that	makes	him	so	happy.’
‘Sergeant—’
‘Where	will	he	send	us,	do	you	think?	Korel?	That	one’s	a	real	mess.
Maybe	Genabackis,	though	that’s	quieted	down	some.	Seven	Cities,	maybe.’
She	drained	the	last	of	the	pear	brandy	in	the	flask.	‘One	thing’s	for	sure,	we’d
better	set	stones	to	our	swords,	Urb.’
The	tramp	of	heavy	boots	sounded	in	the	street	beyond.	A	half	dozen


squads	at	the	very	least.
‘Don’t	get	many	spiders	on	ships,	right,	Urb?’	She	glanced	over,	fought	the
bleariness	and	studied	the	miserable	expression	on	his	face.	‘That’s	right,	isn’t
it?	Tell	me	I’m	right,	damn	you.’
	
A	hundred	or	so	years	ago,	lightning	had	struck	the	huge	guldindha	tree,	the
white	fire	driving	like	a	spear	down	its	heartwood	and	splitting	wide	the
ancient	trunk.	The	blackened	scorch-marks	had	long	since	bleached	away	as
the	desert	sun	burned	its	unceasing	light	upon	the	worm-riven	wood.	Swaths	of
bark	had	peeled	back	and	now	lay	heaped	over	the	bared	roots	that	were
wrapped	about	the	hill’s	summit	like	a	vast	net.
The	mound,	misshapen	where	once	it	had	been	circular,	commanded	the
entire	basin.	It	stood	alone,	an	island	profoundly	deliberate	in	the	midst	of	a
haphazard,	random	landscape.	Beneath	the	jumbled	boulders,	sandy	earth	and
snaking	dead	roots,	the	capstone	that	had	once	protected	a	slab-walled	burial
chamber	had	cracked,	collapsing	to	swallow	the	space	beneath,	and	in	so	doing
settling	an	immense	weight	upon	the	body	interred	within.
The	tremor	of	footfalls	reaching	down	to	that	body	were	a	rare	enough
occurrence	–	perhaps	a	handful	of	times	over	the	past	countless	millennia	–
that	the	long-slumbering	soul	was	stirred	into	wakefulness,	then	intense
awareness,	upon	the	sensation	of	not	one	set	of	feet,	but	a	dozen,	ascending	the
steep,	rough	slopes	and	assembling	at	last	around	the	shattered	tree.
The	skein	of	wards	embracing	the	creature	was	twisted	and	tangled,	yet
persistent	in	its	multi-layered	power.	The	one	who	had	imprisoned	it	had	been
thorough,	fashioning	rituals	of	determined	permanence,	blood-traced	and
chaos-fed.	They	were	intended	to	last	for	ever.
Such	intentions	were	a	conceit,	asserted	in	the	flawed	belief	that	mortals
would	one	day	be	without	malice,	or	desperation.	That	the	future	was	a	safer
place	than	the	brutal	present,	and	that	all	that	was	once	past	would	never	again
be	revisited.	The	twelve	lean	figures,	bodies	swathed	in	ragged,	stained	linen,
their	heads	hooded	and	faces	hidden	behind	grey	veils,	well	understood	the
risks	entailed	when	driven	to	precipitous	acts.	Alas,	they	also	understood
desperation.
All	were	destined	to	speak	at	this	gathering,	the	order	specified	by	the
corresponding	position	of	various	stars,	planets	and	constellations,	all	unseen
behind	blue	sky	yet	the	locations	known	nonetheless.	Upon	taking	their
positions,	a	long	moment	of	stillness	passed,	then	the	first	of	the	Nameless
Ones	spoke.


‘We	stand	once	more	before	necessity.	These	are	the	patterns	long	ago
foreseen,	revealing	all	our	struggles	to	have	been	for	naught.	In	the	name	of
the	Warren	of	Mockra,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
At	these	words,	the	creature	within	the	barrow	felt	a	sudden	snap,	and	the
awakened	awareness	all	at	once	found	its	own	identity.	Its	name	was	Dejim
Nebrahl.	Born	on	the	eve	of	the	death	of	the	First	Empire,	when	the	streets	of
the	city	beyond	burned	and	screams	announced	unrelieved	slaughter.	For	the
T’lan	Imass	had	come.
Dejim	Nebrahl,	born	into	fullest	knowledge,	a	child	with	seven	souls,
climbing	blood-smeared	and	trembling	from	his	mother ’s	cooling	body.	A
child.	An	abomination.
T’rolbarahl,	demonic	creations	by	the	hand	of	Dessimbelackis	himself,
long	before	the	Dark	Hounds	took	shape	in	the	Emperor ’s	mind.	T’rolbarahl,
misshapen	errors	in	judgement,	had	been	expunged,	exterminated	at	the
Emperor ’s	own	command.	Blood-drinkers,	eaters	of	human	flesh,	yet
possessing	depths	of	cunning	even	Dessimbelackis	could	not	have	imagined.
And	so,	seven	T’rolbarahl	had	managed	to	elude	their	hunters	for	a	time,
sufficient	to	impart	something	of	their	souls	to	a	mortal	woman,	widowed	by
the	Trell	Wars	and	without	family,	a	woman	whom	none	would	notice,	whose
mind	could	be	broken,	whose	body	could	be	made	into	a	feeding	vessel,	a
M’ena	Mahybe,	for	the	seven-faced	D’ivers	T’rolbarahl	child	swiftly	growing
within	her.
Born	into	a	night	of	terror.	The	T’lan	Imass,	had	they	found	Dejim,	would
have	acted	without	hesitation:	dragging	forth	those	seven	demonic	souls,
binding	them	into	an	eternity	of	pain,	their	power	bled	out,	slowly	and
incrementally,	to	feed	the	T’lan	bonecasters	in	their	unceasing	wars	against	the
Jaghut.
But	Dejim	Nebrahl	had	escaped.	His	power	growing	as	he	fed,	night	after
night	through	the	ruins	of	the	First	Empire.	Always	hidden,	even	from	those
few	Soletaken	and	D’ivers	that	had	survived	the	Great	Slaughter,	for	even	they
would	not	abide	Dejim’s	existence.	He	fed	on	some	of	them	as	well,	for	he	was
smarter	than	they,	and	quicker,	and	had	not	the	Deragoth	stumbled	onto	his
trail…
The	Dark	Hounds	had	a	master	in	those	days,	a	clever	master,	who	excelled
in	ensnaring	sorceries	and,	once	decided	upon	a	task,	he	would	not	relent.
A	single	mistake,	and	Dejim’s	freedom	was	ended.	Binding	upon	binding,
taking	away	his	self-awareness,	and	with	it	all	sense	of	having	once	been…
otherwise.
Yet	now…awake	once	more.


The	second	Nameless	One,	a	woman,	spoke:	‘There	stands	a	plain	west	and
south	of	Raraku,	vast	and	level	for	leagues	in	all	directions.	When	the	sands
blow	away,	the	shards	of	a	million	broken	pots	are	exposed,	and	to	cross	the
plain	barefooted	is	to	leave	a	trail	of	blood.	In	this	scene	are	found	unmitigated
truths.	On	the	trail	out	of	savagery…some	vessels	must	needs	break.	And	for
the	sojourner,	a	toll	in	blood	must	be	paid.	By	the	power	of	the	Warren	of
Telas,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
Within	the	barrow,	Dejim	Nebrahl	became	aware	of	his	body.	Battered
flesh,	straining	bone,	sharp	gravel,	sifting	sands,	the	immense	weight	lying
upon	him.	Agony.
‘As	we	fashioned	this	dilemma,’	the	third	priest	said,	‘so	we	must	initiate
its	resolution.	Chaos	pursues	this	world,	and	every	world	beyond	this	one.	In
the	seas	of	reality	can	be	found	a	multitude	of	layers,	one	existence	flowing
upon	another.	Chaos	threatens	with	storms	and	tides	and	wayward	currents,
sending	all	into	dread	tumult.	We	have	chosen	one	current,	a	terrible,
unchained	force	–	chosen	to	guide	it,	to	shape	its	course	unseen	and
unchallenged.	We	intend	to	drive	one	force	upon	another,	and	so	effect	mutual
annihilation.	We	assume	a	terrible	responsibility	in	this,	yet	the	only	hope	of
success	lies	with	us,	with	what	we	do	here	on	this	day.	In	the	name	of	the
Warren	of	Denul,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
Pain	faded	from	Dejim’s	body.	Still	trapped	and	unable	to	move,	the
D’ivers	T’rolbarahl	felt	his	flesh	heal.
The	fourth	Nameless	One	said,	‘We	must	acknowledge	grief	for	the
impending	demise	of	an	honourable	servant.	It	must,	alas,	be	a	short-lived
grief,	and	so	unequal	to	the	measure	of	the	unfortunate	victim.	This,	of	course,
is	not	the	only	grief	demanded	of	us.	Of	the	other,	I	trust	we	have	all	made	our
peace,	else	we	would	not	be	here.	In	the	name	of	the	Warren	of	D’riss,	I	invoke
the	ritual	of	release.’
Dejim	Nebrahl’s	seven	souls	became	distinct	from	one	another.	D’ivers,
yet	far	more	so,	not	seven	who	are	one	–	although	that	could	be	said	to	be	true
–	but	seven	separate	in	identity,	independent	yet	together.
‘We	do	not	yet	understand	every	facet	of	this	trail,’	the	fifth,	a	priestess,
said,	‘and	to	this	our	absent	kin	must	not	relent	in	their	pursuit.	Shadowthrone
cannot	–	must	not	–	be	underestimated.	He	possesses	too	much	knowledge.	Of
the	Azath.	Perhaps,	too,	of	us.	He	is	not	yet	our	enemy,	but	that	alone	does	not
make	him	our	ally.	He…perturbs.	And	I	would	we	negate	his	existence	at	the
earliest	opportunity,	although	I	recognize	that	my	view	is	in	the	minority
within	our	cult.	Yet,	who	else	is	more	aware	than	I,	of	the	Realm	of	Shadow
and	its	new	master?	In	the	name	of	the	Warren	of	Meanas,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of


release.’
And	so	Dejim	came	to	comprehend	the	power	of	his	shadows,	seven
spawned	deceivers,	his	ambushers	in	the	necessary	hunt	that	sustained	him,	that
gave	him	so	much	pleasure,	far	beyond	that	of	a	filled	belly	and	fresh,	warm
blood	in	his	veins.	The	hunt	delivered…domination,	and	domination	was
exquisite.
The	sixth	Nameless	One	spoke,	her	accent	strange,	otherworldly:	‘All	that
unfolds	in	the	mortal	realm	gives	shape	to	the	ground	upon	which	the	gods
walk.	Thus,	they	are	never	certain	of	their	stride.	It	falls	to	us	to	prepare	the
footfalls,	to	dig	the	deep,	deadly	pits,	the	traps	and	snares	that	shall	be	shaped
by	the	Nameless	Ones,	for	we	are	the	hands	of	the	Azath,	we	are	the	shapers	of
the	will	of	the	Azath.	It	is	our	task	to	hold	all	in	place,	to	heal	what	is	torn
asunder,	to	lead	our	enemies	into	annihilation	or	eternal	imprisonment.	We
shall	not	fail.	I	call	upon	the	power	of	the	Shattered	Warren,	Kurald	Emurlahn,
and	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
There	were	favoured	paths	through	the	world,	fragment	paths,	and	Dejim
had	used	them	well.	He	would	do	so	again.	Soon.
‘Barghast,	Trell,	Tartheno	Toblakai,’	said	the	seventh	priest,	his	voice	a
rumble,	‘these	are	the	surviving	threads	of	Imass	blood,	no	matter	their	claims
to	purity.	Such	claims	are	inventions,	yet	inventions	have	purpose.	They	assert
distinction,	they	redirect	the	path	walked	before,	and	the	path	to	come.	They
shape	the	emblems	upon	the	standards	in	every	war,	and	so	give	justification	to
slaughter.	Their	purpose,	therefore,	is	to	assert	convenient	lies.	By	the	Warren
of	Tellann,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
Fire	in	the	heart,	a	sudden	drumming	of	life.	Cold	flesh	grew	warm.
‘Frozen	worlds	hide	in	darkness,’	came	the	rasping	words	of	the	eighth
Nameless	One,	‘and	so	hold	the	secret	of	death.	The	secret	is	singular.	Death
arrives	as	knowledge.	Recognition,	comprehension,	acceptance.	It	is	this	and
nothing	more	and	nothing	less.	There	shall	come	a	time,	perhaps	not	too	far
off,	when	death	discovers	its	own	visage,	in	a	multitude	of	facets,	and
something	new	will	be	born.	In	the	name	of	Hood’s	Warren,	I	invoke	the	ritual
of	release.’
Death.	It	had	been	stolen	from	him	by	the	master	of	the	Dark	Hounds.	It
was,	perhaps,	something	to	be	longed	for.	But	not	yet.
The	ninth	priest	began	with	a	soft,	lilting	laugh,	then	said,	‘Where	all
began,	so	it	will	return	in	the	end.	In	the	name	of	the	Warren	of	Kurald	Galain,
of	True	Darkness,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
‘And	by	the	power	of	Rashan,’	the	tenth	Nameless	One	hissed	with
impatience,	‘I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release!’


The	ninth	priest	laughed	again.
‘The	stars	are	wheeling,’	the	eleventh	Nameless	One	said,	‘and	so	the
tension	burgeons.	There	is	justice	in	all	that	we	do.	In	the	name	of	the	Warren
of	Thyrllan,	I	invoke	the	ritual	of	release.’
They	waited.	For	the	twelfth	Nameless	One	to	speak.	Yet	she	said	nothing,
instead	reaching	out	a	slim,	rust-red,	scaled	hand	that	was	anything	but	human.
And	Dejim	Nebrahl	sensed	a	presence.	An	intelligence,	cold	and	brutal,
seeping	down	from	above,	and	the	D’ivers	was	suddenly	afraid.
‘Can	you	hear	me,	T’rolbarahl?’
Yes.
‘We	would	free	you,	but	you	must	pay	us	for	that	release.	Refuse	to	pay	us,
and	we	shall	send	you	once	more	into	mindless	oblivion.’
Fear	became	terror.	What	is	this	payment	you	demand	of	me?
‘Do	you	accept?’
I	do.
She	explained	to	him,	then,	what	was	required.	It	seemed	a	simple	thing.	A
minor	task,	easily	achieved.	Dejim	Nebrahl	was	relieved.	It	would	not	take
long,	the	victims	were	close	by,	after	all,	and	once	it	was	done	the	D’ivers
would	be	freed	of	all	obligation,	and	could	do	as	he	pleased.
The	twelfth	and	last	Nameless	One,	who	had	once	been	known	as	Sister
Spite,	lowered	her	hand.	She	knew	that,	of	the	twelve	gathered	here,	she	alone
would	survive	the	emergence	of	this	fell	demon.	For	Dejim	Nebrahl	would	be
hungry.	Unfortunate,	and	unfortunate	too	the	shock	and	dismay	of	her
comrades	upon	witnessing	her	escape	–	in	the	brief	moment	before	the
T’rolbarahl	attacked.	She	had	her	reasons,	of	course.	First	and	foremost	being
the	simple	desire	to	stay	among	the	living,	for	a	while	longer,	anyway.	As	for
the	other	reasons,	they	belonged	to	her	and	her	alone.
She	said,	‘In	the	name	of	the	Warren	of	Starvald	Demelain,	I	invoke	the
ritual	of	release.’	And	from	her	words	descended,	through	dead	tree	root,
through	stone	and	sand,	dissolving	ward	after	ward,	a	force	of	entropy,	known
to	the	world	as	otataral.
And	Dejim	Nebrahl	rose	into	the	world	of	the	living.
Eleven	Nameless	Ones	began	invoking	their	final	prayers.	Most	of	them
never	finished.
	
Some	distance	away,	seated	cross-legged	before	a	small	fire,	a	tattooed
warrior	cocked	his	head	at	the	sound	of	distant	screams.	He	looked	southward
and	saw	a	dragon	rising	heavily	from	the	hills	lining	the	horizon,	mottled


scales	glimmering	in	the	sun’s	dying	light.	Watching	it	climb	ever	higher,	the
warrior	scowled.
‘Bitch,’	he	muttered.	‘I	should’ve	guessed.’
He	settled	back	down,	even	as	the	screams	faded	in	the	distance.	The
lengthening	shadows	among	the	rock	outcrop	surrounding	his	camp	were
suddenly	unpleasant,	thick	and	smeared.
Taralack	Veed,	a	Gral	warrior	and	the	last	survivor	of	the	Eroth	bloodline,
gathered	a	mouthful	of	phlegm	and	spat	it	onto	the	palm	of	his	left	hand.	He
brought	both	hands	together	to	spread	the	mucus	evenly,	which	he	then	used	to
flatten	down	his	swept-back	black	hair	in	an	elaborate	gesture	that	startled	the
mass	of	flies	crawling	through	it,	momentarily,	before	they	settled	once	again.
After	a	time,	he	sensed	that	the	creature	had	finished	feeding,	and	was	on
the	move.	Taralack	straightened.	He	pissed	on	the	fire	to	douse	it,	then
collected	his	weapons	and	set	off	to	find	the	demon’s	trail.
	
There	were	eighteen	residents	living	in	the	scatter	of	hovels	at	the	crossroads.
The	track	running	parallel	to	the	coast	was	Tapur	Road,	and	three	days’	trek
north	was	the	city	of	Ahol	Tapur.	The	other	road,	little	more	than	a	rutted	trail,
crossed	the	Path’Apur	Mountains	far	inland,	then	stretched	eastward,	past	this
hamlet,	for	another	two	days	of	travel,	where	it	finally	reached	the	coast	road
alongside	the	Otataral	Sea.
Four	centuries	ago	a	village	had	thrived	in	this	place.	The	ridge	to	the
south	had	been	clothed	in	hardwood	trees	with	a	distinctive,	feathery	foliage,
trees	now	extinct	on	the	subcontinent	of	Seven	Cities.	Appropriately,	the	wood
from	these	trees	had	been	used	to	carve	sarcophagi,	and	the	village	had
become	renowned	in	cities	as	far	away	as	Hissar	to	the	south,	Karashimesh	to
the	west,	and	Ehrlitan	to	the	northwest.	The	industry	died	with	the	last	tree.
Low-growth	vanished	into	the	gullets	of	goats,	the	topsoil	blew	away	and	the
village	shrank	within	a	single	generation	to	its	present	decrepit	state.
The	eighteen	residents	who	remained	now	provided	services	growing	ever
less	in	demand,	supplying	water	to	passing	caravans,	repairing	tack	and	such.	A
Malazan	official	had	been	through	once,	two	years	back,	muttering	something
about	a	new	raised	road,	and	a	garrisoned	outpost,	but	this	had	been	motivated
by	the	illegal	trade	in	raw	otataral,	which,	through	other	imperial	efforts,	had
since	dried	up.
The	recent	rebellion	had	barely	brushed	the	collective	awareness	of	the
residents,	apart	from	the	occasional	rumour	arriving	with	a	messenger	or
outlaw	riding	through,	but	even	they	no	longer	came	to	the	hamlet.	In	any	case,


rebellions	were	for	other	people.
Thus	it	was	that	the	appearance	of	five	figures,	standing	on	the	nearest	rise
of	the	inland	track,	shortly	after	midday,	was	quickly	noticed,	and	word	soon
reached	the	nominal	head	of	the	community,	the	blacksmith,	whose	name	was
Barathol	Mekhar,	and	who	was	the	only	resident	who	had	not	been	born	there.
Of	his	past	in	the	world	beyond,	little	was	known	except	what	was	self-evident
–	his	deep,	almost	onyx	black	skin	marked	him	as	from	a	tribe	of	the
southwestern	corner	of	the	subcontinent,	hundreds,	perhaps	thousands	of
leagues	distant.	And	the	curled	scarification	on	his	cheeks	looked	martial,	as
did	the	skein	of	blade-cuts	puckering	his	hands	and	forearms.	He	was	known	as
a	man	of	few	words	and	virtually	no	opinions	–	at	least	none	he	cared	to	share
–	and	so	was	well-suited	as	the	hamlet’s	unofficial	leader.
Trailed	by	a	half-dozen	adults	who	still	professed	to	curiosity,	Barathol
Mekhar	walked	up	the	only	street	until	he	came	to	the	hamlet’s	edge.	The
buildings	to	either	side	were	ruined,	long	abandoned,	their	roofs	caved	in	and
walls	crumbling	and	sand-heaped.	Sixty	or	so	paces	away	stood	the	five
figures,	motionless,	barring	the	ripple	of	the	ragged	strips	of	their	fur	cloaks.
Two	held	spears,	the	other	three	carrying	long	two-handed	swords	slung
across	their	backs.	Some	of	them	appeared	to	be	missing	limbs.
Barathol’s	eyes	were	not	as	sharp	as	they	once	had	been.	Even	so…‘Jhelim,
Filiad,	go	to	the	smithy.	Walk,	don’t	run.	There’s	a	trunk	behind	the	hide	bolts.
It’s	got	a	lock	–	break	it.	Take	out	the	axe	and	shield,	and	the	gauntlets,	and	the
helm	–	never	mind	the	chain	–	there’s	no	time	for	that.	Now,	go.’
In	the	eleven	years	that	Barathol	had	lived	among	them,	he	had	never
spoken	so	many	words	in	a	row	to	anyone.	Jhelim	and	Filiad	both	stared	in
shock	at	the	blacksmith’s	broad	back,	then,	sudden	fear	filling	their	guts,	they
turned	about	and	walked,	stiffly,	with	awkward,	overlong	strides,	back	down
the	street.
‘Bandits,’	whispered	Kulat,	the	herder	who’d	butchered	his	last	goat	in
exchange	for	a	bottle	of	liquor	from	a	caravan	passing	through	seven	years
ago,	and	had	done	nothing	since.	‘Maybe	they	just	want	water	–	we	ain’t	got
nothing	else.’	The	small	round	pebbles	he	kept	in	his	mouth	clicked	as	he
spoke.
‘They	don’t	want	water,’	Barathol	said.	‘The	rest	of	you,	go	find	weapons	–
anything	–	no,	never	mind	that.	Just	go	to	your	homes.	Stay	there.’
‘What	are	they	waiting	for?’	Kulat	asked,	as	the	others	scattered.
‘I	don’t	know,’	the	blacksmith	admitted.
‘Well,	they	look	to	be	from	a	tribe	I	ain’t	never	seen	before.’	He	sucked	on
the	stones	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Those	furs	–	ain’t	it	kind	of	hot	for	furs?


And	those	bone	helmets—’
‘They’re	bone?	Your	eyes	are	better	than	mine,	Kulat.’
‘Only	things	still	working,	Barathol.	Squat	bunch,	eh?	You	recognize	the
tribe,	maybe?’
The	blacksmith	nodded.	From	the	village	behind	them,	he	could	now	hear
Jhelim	and	Filiad,	their	breaths	loud	as	they	hurried	forward.	‘I	think	so,’
Barathol	said	in	answer	to	Kulat’s	question.
‘They	going	to	be	trouble?’
Jhelim	stepped	into	his	view,	struggling	beneath	the	weight	of	the	doublebladed	axe,	the	haft	encased	in	strips	of	iron,	a	looping	chain	at	the	weighted
pommel,	the	Aren	steel	of	the	honed	edges	gleaming	silver.	A	three-pronged
punch-spike	jutted	from	the	top	of	the	weapon,	edged	like	a	crossbow	quarrelhead.	The	young	man	was	staring	down	at	it	as	if	it	were	the	old	Emperor ’s
sceptre.
Beside	Jhelim	was	Filiad,	carrying	the	iron-scaled	gauntlets,	a	roundshield	and	the	camailed,	grille-faced	helm.
Barathol	collected	the	gauntlets	and	tugged	them	on.	The	rippling	scales
reached	up	his	forearms	to	a	hinged	elbow-cup,	and	the	gauntlets	were
strapped	in	place	just	above	the	joint.	The	underside	of	the	sleeves	held	a	single
bar,	the	iron	black	and	notched,	reaching	from	wrist	to	cup.	He	then	took	the
helm,	and	scowled.	‘You	forgot	the	quilted	under-padding.’	He	handed	it	back.
‘Give	me	the	shield	–	strap	it	on	my	arm,	damn	you,	Filiad.	Tighter.	Good.’
The	blacksmith	then	reached	out	for	the	axe.	Jhelim	needed	both	arms	and
all	his	strength	to	raise	the	weapon	high	enough	for	Barathol’s	right	hand	to
slip	through	the	chain	loop,	twisting	twice	before	closing	about	the	haft,	and
lifting	it	seemingly	effortlessly	from	Jhelim’s	grasp.	To	the	two	men,	he	said,
‘Get	out	of	here.’
Kulat	remained.	‘They’re	coming	forward	now,	Barathol.’
The	blacksmith	had	not	pulled	his	gaze	from	the	figures.	‘I’m	not	that
blind,	old	man.’
‘You	must	be,	to	stay	standing	here.	You	say	you	know	the	tribe	–	have	they
come	for	you,	maybe?	Some	old	vendetta?’
‘It’s	possible,’	Barathol	conceded.	‘If	so,	then	the	rest	of	you	should	be	all
right.	Once	they’re	done	with	me,	they’ll	leave.’
‘What	makes	you	so	sure?’
‘I’m	not.’	Barathol	lifted	the	axe	into	readiness.	‘With	T’lan	Imass,	there’s
no	way	to	tell.’


Book	One

The	Thousand-Fingered	God


	

I	walked	the	winding	path	down	into	the	valley,
Where	low	stone	walls	divided	the	farms	and	holds
And	each	measured	plot	had	its	place	in	the	scheme
That	all	who	lived	there	well	understood,
To	guide	their	travels	and	hails	in	the	day
And	lend	a	familiar	hand	in	the	darkest	night
Back	to	home’s	door	and	the	dancing	dogs.
I	walked	until	called	up	short	by	an	old	man
Who	straightened	from	work	in	challenge,
And	smiling	to	fend	his	calculation	and	judgement,
I	asked	him	to	tell	me	all	he	knew
Of	the	lands	to	the	west,	beyond	the	vale,
And	he	was	relieved	to	answer	that	there	were	cities,
Vast	and	teeming	with	all	sorts	of	strangeness,
And	a	king	and	feuding	priesthoods	and	once,
He	told	me,	he	saw	a	cloud	of	dust	flung	up
By	the	passing	of	an	army,	off	to	battle
Somewhere,	he	was	certain,	in	the	chilly	south,
And	so	I	gleaned	all	that	he	knew,	and	it	was	not	much,
Beyond	the	vale	he	had	never	been,	from	birth
Until	now,	he	had	never	known	and	had,
Truth	to	tell,	never	been	for	thus	it	is
That	the	scheme	transpires	for	the	low	kind
In	all	places	in	all	times	and	curiosity	lies	unhoned
And	pitted,	although	he	gave	breath	enough	to	ask
Who	I	was	and	how	had	I	come	here	and	where
My	destination,	leaving	me	to	answer	with	fading	smile,
That	I	was	bound	for	the	teeming	cities	yet	must	needs
Pass	first	through	here	and	had	he	yet	noticed
That	his	dogs	were	lying	still	on	the	ground,
For	I	had	leave	to	answer,	you	see,	that	I	am	come,
Mistress	of	Plague	and	this,	alas,	was	proof


Of	a	far	grander	scheme.
Poliel’s	Leave
Fisher	kel	Tath
	


Chapter	One
The	streets	are	crowded	with	lies	these	days.
High	Mage	Tayschrenn,	Empress	Laseen’s	Coronation
Recorded	by	Imperial	Historian	Duiker
1164	Burn’s	Sleep
Fifty-eight	days	after	the	Execution	of	Sha’ik
Wayward	winds	had	stirred	the	dust	into	the	air	earlier	that	day,	and	all	who
came	into	Ehrlitan’s	eastern	inland	gate	were	coated,	clothes	and	skin,	with	the
colour	of	the	red	sandstone	hills.	Merchants,	pilgrims,	drovers	and	travellers
appeared	before	the	guards	as	if	conjured,	one	after	another,	from	the	swirling
haze,	heads	bent	as	they	trudged	into	the	gate’s	lee,	eyes	slitted	behind	folds	of
stained	linen.	Rust-sheathed	goats	stumbled	after	the	drovers,	horses	and	oxen
arrived	with	drooped	heads	and	rings	of	gritty	crust	around	their	nostrils	and
eyes,	wagons	hissed	as	sand	sifted	down	between	weathered	boards	in	the	beds.
The	guards	watched	on,	thinking	only	of	the	end	of	their	watch,	and	the	baths,
meals	and	warm	bodies	that	would	follow	as	proper	reward	for	duties	upheld.
The	woman	who	came	in	on	foot	was	noted,	but	for	all	the	wrong	reasons.
Sheathed	in	tight	silks,	head	wrapped	and	face	hidden	beneath	a	scarf,	she	was
nonetheless	worth	a	second	glance,	if	only	for	the	grace	of	her	stride	and	the
sway	of	her	hips.	The	guards,	being	men	and	slavish	to	their	imaginations,
provided	the	rest.
She	noted	their	momentary	attention	and	understood	it	well	enough	to	be
unconcerned.	More	problematic	had	one	or	both	of	the	guards	been	female.
They	might	well	have	wondered	that	she	was	entering	the	city	by	this	particular
gate,	having	come	down,	on	foot,	this	particular	road,	which	wound	league
upon	league	through	parched,	virtually	lifeless	hills,	then	ran	parallel	to	a
mostly	uninhabited	scrub	forest	for	yet	more	leagues.	An	arrival,	then,	made
still	more	unusual	since	she	was	carrying	no	supplies,	and	the	supple	leather	of
her	moccasins	was	barely	worn.	Had	the	guards	been	female,	they	would	have
accosted	her,	and	she	would	have	faced	some	hard	questions,	none	of	which


she	was	prepared	to	answer	truthfully.
Fortunate	for	the	guards,	then,	that	they	had	been	male.	Fortunate,	too,	the
delicious	lure	of	a	man’s	imagination	as	those	gazes	followed	her	into	the
street,	empty	of	suspicion	yet	feverishly	disrobing	her	curved	form	with	every
swing	of	her	hips,	a	motion	she	only	marginally	exaggerated.
Coming	to	an	intersection	she	turned	left	and	moments	later	was	past	their
lines	of	sight.	The	wind	was	blunted	here	in	the	city,	although	fine	dust
continued	to	drift	down	to	coat	all	in	a	monochrome	powder.	The	woman
continued	through	the	crowds,	her	route	a	gradual,	inward	spiral	towards	the
Jen’rahb,	Ehrlitan’s	central	tel,	the	vast	multi-layered	ruin	inhabited	by	little
more	than	vermin,	of	both	the	four-legged	and	two-legged	kind.	Arriving	at
last	within	sight	of	the	collapsed	buildings,	she	found	a	nearby	inn,	modest	in
presentation	and	without	ambition	to	be	other	than	a	local	establishment
housing	a	few	whores	in	the	second-floor	rooms	and	a	dozen	or	so	regulars	in
the	ground-floor	tavern.
Beside	the	tavern’s	entrance	was	an	arched	passage	leading	into	a	small
garden.	The	woman	stepped	into	that	passage	to	brush	the	dust	from	her
clothing,	then	walked	on	to	the	shallow	basin	of	silty	water	beneath	a
desultorily	trickling	fountain,	where	she	unwound	the	scarf	and	splashed	her
face,	sufficient	to	take	the	sting	from	her	eyes.
Returning	through	the	passage,	the	woman	then	entered	the	tavern.
Gloomy,	the	smoke	from	fires,	oil	lanterns,	durhang,	itralbe	and	rustleaf
drifting	beneath	the	low	plaster	ceiling,	three-quarters	full	and	all	of	the	tables
occupied.	A	youth	had	preceded	her	by	a	few	moments,	and	was	now
breathlessly	expounding	on	some	adventure	barely	survived.	Noting	this	as	she
walked	past	the	young	man	and	his	listeners,	the	woman	allowed	herself	a	faint
smile	that	was,	perhaps,	sadder	than	she	had	intended.
She	found	a	place	at	the	bar	and	beckoned	the	tender	over.	He	stopped
opposite	and	studied	her	intently	while	she	ordered,	in	unaccented	Ehrlii,	a
bottle	of	rice	wine.
At	her	request	he	reached	under	the	counter	and	she	heard	the	clink	of
bottles	as	he	said,	in	Malazan,	‘Hope	you’re	not	expecting	anything	worth	the
name,	lass.’	He	straightened,	brushing	dust	from	a	clay	bottle	then	peering	at
the	stopper.	‘This	one’s	at	least	still	sealed.’
‘That	will	do,’	she	said,	still	speaking	the	local	dialect,	laying	out	on	the
bar-top	three	silver	crescents.
‘Plan	on	drinking	all	of	it?’
‘I’d	need	a	room	upstairs	to	crawl	into,’	she	replied,	tugging	the	stopper
free	as	the	barman	set	down	a	tin	goblet.	‘One	with	a	lock,’	she	added.


‘Then	Oponn’s	smiling	on	you,’	he	said.	‘One’s	just	become	available.’
‘Good.’
‘You	attached	to	Dujek’s	army?’	the	man	asked.
She	poured	out	a	full	draught	of	the	amber,	somewhat	cloudy	wine.	‘No.
Why,	is	it	here?’
‘Tail	ends,’	he	replied.	‘The	main	body	marched	out	six	days	ago.	Left	a
garrison,	of	course.	That’s	why	I	was	wondering—’
‘I	belong	to	no	army.’
Her	tone,	strangely	cold	and	flat,	silenced	him.	Moments	later,	he	drifted
away	to	attend	to	another	customer.
She	drank.	Steadily	working	through	the	bottle	as	the	light	faded	outside,
and	the	tavern	grew	yet	more	crowded,	voices	getting	louder,	elbows	and
shoulders	jostling	against	her	more	often	than	was	entirely	necessary.	She
ignored	the	casual	groping,	eyes	on	the	liquid	in	the	goblet	before	her.
At	last	she	was	done,	and	so	she	turned	about	and	threaded	her	way,
unsteadily,	through	the	press	of	bodies	to	arrive	finally	at	the	stairs.	She	made
her	ascent	cautiously,	one	hand	on	the	flimsy	railing,	vaguely	aware	that
someone	was,	unsurprisingly,	following	her.
At	the	landing	she	set	her	back	against	a	wall.
The	stranger	arrived,	still	wearing	a	stupid	grin	–	that	froze	on	his	face	as
the	point	of	a	knife	pressed	the	skin	beneath	his	left	eye.
‘Go	back	downstairs,’	the	woman	said.
A	tear	of	blood	trickled	down	the	man’s	cheek,	gathered	thick	along	the
ridge	of	his	jaw.	He	was	trembling,	wincing	as	the	point	slipped	in	ever	deeper.
‘Please,’	he	whispered.
She	reeled	slightly,	inadvertently	slicing	open	the	man’s	cheek,	fortunately
downward	rather	than	up	into	his	eye.	He	cried	out	and	staggered	back,	hands
up	in	an	effort	to	stop	the	flow	of	blood,	then	stumbled	his	way	down	the	stairs.
Shouts	from	below,	then	a	harsh	laugh.
The	woman	studied	the	knife	in	her	hand,	wondering	where	it	had	come
from,	and	whose	blood	now	gleamed	from	it.
No	matter.
She	went	in	search	of	her	room,	and,	eventually,	found	it.
	
The	vast	dust	storm	was	natural,	born	out	on	the	Jhag	Odhan	and	cycling
widdershins	into	the	heart	of	the	Seven	Cities	subcontinent.	The	winds	swept
northward	along	the	east	side	of	the	hills,	crags	and	old	mountains	ringing	the
Holy	Desert	of	Raraku	–	a	desert	that	was	now	a	sea	–	and	were	drawn	into	a


war	of	lightning	along	the	ridge’s	breadth,	visible	from	the	cities	of
Pan’potsun	and	G’danisban.	Wheeling	westward,	the	storm	spun	out	writhing
arms,	one	of	these	striking	Ehrlitan	before	blowing	out	above	the	Ehrlitan	Sea,
another	reaching	to	the	city	of	Pur	Atrii.	As	the	main	body	of	the	storm	curled
back	inland,	it	gathered	energy	once	more,	battering	the	north	side	of	the
Thalas	Mountains,	engulfing	the	cities	of	Hatra	and	Y’Ghatan	before	turning
southward	one	last	time.	A	natural	storm,	one	final	gift,	perhaps,	from	the	old
spirits	of	Raraku.
The	fleeing	army	of	Leoman	of	the	Flails	had	embraced	that	gift,	riding
into	that	relentless	wind	for	days	on	end,	the	days	stretching	into	weeks,	the
world	beyond	reduced	to	a	wall	of	suspended	sand	all	the	more	bitter	for	what
it	reminded	the	survivors	of	–	their	beloved	Whirlwind,	the	hammer	of	Sha’ik
and	Dryjhna	the	Apocalyptic.	Yet,	even	in	bitterness,	there	was	life,	there	was
salvation.
Tavore’s	Malazan	army	still	pursued,	not	in	haste,	not	with	the	reckless
stupidity	shown	immediately	following	the	death	of	Sha’ik	and	the	shattering
of	the	rebellion.	Now,	the	hunt	was	a	measured	thing,	a	tactical	stalking	of	the
last	organized	force	opposed	to	the	empire.	A	force	believed	to	be	in
possession	of	the	Holy	Book	of	Dryjhna,	the	lone	artifact	of	hope	for	the
embattled	rebels	of	Seven	Cities.
Though	he	possessed	it	not,	Leoman	of	the	Flails	cursed	that	book	daily.
With	almost	religious	zeal	and	appalling	imagination,	he	growled	out	his
curses,	the	rasping	wind	thankfully	stripping	the	words	away	so	that	only
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	riding	close	alongside	his	commander,	could	hear.
When	tiring	of	that	tirade,	Leoman	would	concoct	elaborate	schemes	to
destroy	the	tome	once	it	came	into	his	hands.	Fire,	horse	piss,	bile,	Moranth
incendiaries,	the	belly	of	a	dragon…until	Corabb,	exhausted,	pulled	away	to
ride	in	the	more	reasonable	company	of	his	fellow	rebels.
Who	would	then	ply	him	with	fearful	questions,	casting	uneasy	glances
Leoman’s	way.	What	was	he	saying?
Prayers,	Corabb	would	answer.	Our	commander	prays	to	Dryjhna	all	day.
Leoman	of	the	Flails,	he	told	them,	is	a	pious	man.
About	as	pious	as	could	be	expected.	The	rebellion	was	collapsing,
whipped	away	on	the	winds.	Cities	had	capitulated,	one	after	another,	upon	the
appearance	of	imperial	armies	and	ships.	Citizens	turned	on	neighbours	in
their	zeal	to	present	criminals	to	answer	for	the	multitude	of	atrocities
committed	during	the	uprising.	Once-heroes	and	petty	tyrants	alike	were
paraded	before	the	reoccupiers,	and	blood-lust	was	high.	Such	grim	news
reached	them	from	caravans	they	intercepted	as	they	fled	ever	onward.	And


with	each	tatter	of	news,	Leoman’s	expression	darkened	yet	further,	as	if	it	was
all	he	could	do	to	bind	taut	the	rage	within	him.
It	was	disappointment,	Corabb	told	himself,	punctuating	the	thought	each
time	with	a	long	sigh.	The	people	of	Seven	Cities	so	quickly	relinquished	the
freedom	won	at	the	cost	of	so	many	lives,	and	this	was	indeed	a	bitter	truth,	a
most	sordid	comment	on	human	nature.	Had	it	all	been	for	nothing,	then?	How
could	a	pious	warrior	not	experience	soul-burning	disappointment?	How	many
tens	of	thousands	of	people	had	died?	For	what?
And	so	Corabb	told	himself	he	understood	his	commander.	Understood
that	Leoman	could	not	let	go,	not	yet,	perhaps	never.	Holding	fast	to	the	dream
gave	meaning	to	all	that	had	gone	before.
Complicated	thoughts.	It	had	taken	Corabb	many	hours	of	frowning	regard
to	reach	them,	to	make	that	extraordinary	leap	into	the	mind	of	another	man,	to
see	through	his	eyes,	if	only	for	a	moment,	before	reeling	back	in	humble
confusion.	He	had	caught	a	glimpse,	then,	of	what	made	great	leaders,	in	battle,
in	matters	of	state.	The	facility	of	their	intelligence	in	shifting	perspectives,	in
seeing	things	from	all	sides.	When,	for	Corabb,	it	was	all	he	could	manage,
truth	be	told,	to	cling	to	a	single	vision	–	his	own	–	in	the	midst	of	so	much
discord	as	the	world	was	wont	to	rear	up	before	him.
If	not	for	his	commander,	Corabb	well	knew,	he	would	be	lost.
A	gloved	hand,	gesturing,	and	Corabb	kicked	his	mount	forward	until	he
was	at	Leoman’s	side.
The	hooded,	cloth-wrapped	face	swung	close,	leather-clad	fingers	tugging
the	stained	silk	away	from	the	mouth,	and	words	shouted	so	that	Corabb	could
hear	them:	‘Where	in	Hood’s	name	are	we?’
Corabb	stared,	squinted,	then	sighed.
	
Her	finger	provided	the	drama,	ploughing	a	traumatic	furrow	across	the	wellworn	path.	The	ants	scurried	in	confusion,	and	Samar	Dev	watched	them
scrabbling	fierce	with	the	insult,	the	soldiers	with	their	heads	lifted	and
mandibles	opened	wide	as	if	they	would	challenge	the	gods.	Or,	in	this	case,	a
woman	slowly	dying	of	thirst.
She	was	lying	on	her	side	in	the	shade	of	the	wagon.	It	was	just	past
midday,	and	the	air	was	still.	The	heat	had	stolen	all	strength	from	her	limbs.	It
was	unlikely	she	could	continue	her	assault	on	the	ants,	and	the	realization	gave
her	a	moment	of	regret.	The	deliverance	of	discord	into	otherwise	predictable,
truncated	and	sordid	lives	seemed	a	worthwhile	thing.	Well,	perhaps	not
worthwhile,	but	certainly	interesting.	God-like	thoughts,	then,	to	mark	her	last


day	among	the	living.
Motion	caught	her	attention.	The	dust	of	the	road,	shivering,	and	now	she
could	hear	a	growing	thunder,	reverberating	like	earthen	drums.	The	track	she
was	on	was	not	a	well-traversed	one	here	on	the	Ugarat	Odhan.	It	belonged	to
an	age	long	past,	when	the	caravans	plied	the	scores	of	routes	between	the
dozen	or	more	great	cities	of	which	ancient	Ugarat	was	the	hub,	and	all	those
cities,	barring	Kayhum	on	the	banks	of	the	river	and	Ugarat	itself,	were	dead	a
thousand	years	or	more.
Still,	a	lone	rider	could	as	easily	be	one	too	many	as	her	salvation,	for	she
was	a	woman	with	ample	womanly	charms,	and	she	was	alone.	Sometimes,	it
was	said,	bandits	and	raiders	used	these	mostly	forgotten	tracks	as	they	made
their	way	between	caravan	routes.	Bandits	were	notoriously	ungenerous.
The	hoofs	approached,	ever	louder,	then	the	creature	slowed,	and	a
moment	later	a	sultry	cloud	of	dust	rolled	over	Samar	Dev.	The	horse	snorted,
a	strangely	vicious	sound,	and	there	was	a	softer	thud	as	the	rider	slipped
down.	Faint	footfalls	drew	nearer.
What	was	this?	A	child?	A	woman?
A	shadow	slid	into	view	beyond	that	cast	by	the	wagon,	and	Samar	Dev
rolled	her	head,	watching	as	the	figure	strode	round	the	wagon	and	looked
down	on	her.
No,	neither	child	nor	woman.	Perhaps,	she	considered,	not	even	a	man.	An
apparition,	tattered	white	fur	riding	the	impossibly	broad	shoulders.	A	sword
of	flaked	flint	strapped	to	his	back,	the	grip	wrapped	in	hide.	She	blinked	hard,
seeking	more	details,	but	the	bright	sky	behind	him	defeated	her.	A	giant	of	a
man	who	walked	quiet	as	a	desert	cat,	a	nightmare	vision,	a	hallucination.
And	then	he	spoke,	but	not,	it	was	clear,	to	her.	‘You	shall	have	to	wait	for
your	meal,	Havok.	This	one	still	lives.’
‘Havok	eats	dead	women?’	Samar	asked,	her	voice	ragged.	‘Who	do	you
ride	with?’
‘Not	with,’	the	giant	replied.	‘On.’	He	moved	closer	and	crouched	down
beside	her.	There	was	something	in	his	hands	–	a	waterskin	–	but	she	found	she
could	not	pull	her	gaze	from	his	face.	Even,	hard-edged	features,	broken	and
crazed	by	a	tattoo	of	shattered	glass,	the	mark	of	an	escaped	slave.	‘I	see	your
wagon,’	he	said,	speaking	the	language	of	the	desert	tribes	yet	oddly	accented,
‘but	where	is	the	beast	that	pulled	it?’
‘In	the	bed,’	she	replied.
He	set	the	skin	at	her	side	and	straightened,	walked	over	and	leaned	in	for	a
look.	‘There’s	a	dead	man	in	there.’
‘Yes,	that’s	him.	He’s	broken	down.’


‘He	was	pulling	this	wagon?	No	wonder	he’s	dead.’
She	reached	over	and	managed	to	close	both	hands	around	the	waterskin’s
neck.	Tugged	the	stopper	free	and	tilted	it	over	her	mouth.	Warm,	delicious
water.	‘Do	you	see	those	double	levers	beside	him?’	she	asked.	‘Work	those
and	the	wagon	moves.	It’s	my	own	invention.’
‘Is	it	hard	work?	Then	why	hire	an	old	man	to	do	it?’
‘He	was	a	potential	investor.	Wanted	to	see	how	it	would	work	for	himself.’
The	giant	grunted,	and	she	saw	him	studying	her.	‘We	were	doing	fine,’	she
said.	‘At	first.	But	then	it	broke.	The	linkage.	We	were	only	planning	half	a	day,
but	he’d	taken	us	too	far	out	before	dropping	dead.	I	thought	to	walk,	but	then	I
broke	my	foot—’
‘How?’
‘Kicking	the	wheel.	Anyway,	I	can’t	walk.’
He	continued	staring	down	at	her,	like	a	wolf	eyeing	a	lame	hare.	She
sipped	more	water.	‘Are	you	planning	on	being	unpleasant?’	she	asked.
‘It	is	blood-oil	that	drives	a	Teblor	warrior	to	rape.	I	have	none.	I	have	not
taken	a	woman	by	force	in	years.	You	are	from	Ugarat?’
‘Yes.’
‘I	must	enter	that	city	for	supplies.	I	want	no	trouble.’
‘I	can	help	with	that.’
‘I	want	to	remain	beneath	notice.’
‘I’m	not	sure	that’s	possible,’	she	said.
‘Make	it	possible	and	I	will	take	you	with	me.’
‘Well,	that’s	not	fair.	You	are	half	again	taller	than	a	normal	man.	You	are
tattooed.	You	have	a	horse	that	eats	people	–	assuming	it	is	a	horse	and	not	an
enkar ’al.	And	you	seem	to	be	wearing	the	skin	of	a	white-furred	bear.’
He	turned	away	from	the	wagon.
‘All	right!’	she	said	hastily.	‘I’ll	think	of	something.’
He	came	close	again,	collected	the	waterskin,	slung	it	over	a	shoulder,	and
then	picked	her	up	by	the	belt,	one-handed.	Pain	ripped	through	her	right	leg	as
the	broken	foot	dangled.	‘Seven	Hounds!’	she	hissed.	‘How	undignified	do	you
have	to	make	this?’
Saying	nothing,	the	warrior	carried	her	over	to	his	waiting	horse.	Not	an
enkar ’al,	she	saw,	but	not	quite	a	horse	either.	Tall,	lean	and	pallid,	silver	mane
and	tail,	with	eyes	red	as	blood.	A	single	rein,	no	saddle	or	stirrups.	‘Stand	on
your	good	leg,’	he	said,	lifting	her	straight.	Then	he	picked	up	a	loop	of	rope
and	vaulted	onto	the	horse.
Gasping,	leaning	against	the	horse,	Samar	Dev	tracked	the	double	strands
of	the	rope	the	man	held,	and	saw	that	he	had	been	dragging	something	while


he	rode.	Two	huge	rotted	heads.	Dogs	or	bears,	as	oversized	as	the	man
himself.
The	warrior	reached	down	and	unceremoniously	pulled	her	up	until	she
was	settled	behind	him.	More	waves	of	pain,	darkness	threatening.
‘Beneath	notice,’	he	said	again.
Samar	Dev	glanced	back	at	those	two	severed	heads.	‘That	goes	without
saying,’	she	said.
	
Musty	darkness	in	the	small	room,	the	air	stale	and	sweaty.	Two	slitted,
rectangular	holes	in	the	wall	just	beneath	the	low	ceiling	allowed	the	cool	night
air	to	slip	inside	in	fitful	gusts,	like	sighs	from	a	waiting	world.	For	the	woman
huddled	on	the	floor	beside	the	narrow	bed,	that	world	would	have	to	wait	a
little	longer.	Arms	closed	about	her	drawn-up	knees,	head	lowered,	sheathed	in
black	hair	that	hung	in	oily	strands,	she	wept.	And	to	weep	was	to	be	inside
oneself,	entirely,	an	inner	place	far	more	unrelenting	and	unforgiving	than
anything	that	could	be	found	outside.
She	wept	for	the	man	she	had	abandoned,	fleeing	the	pain	she	had	seen	in
his	eyes,	as	his	love	for	her	kept	him	stumbling	in	her	wake,	matching	each
footfall	yet	unable	to	come	any	closer.	For	that	she	could	not	allow.	The
intricate	patterns	on	a	hooded	snake	held	mesmerizing	charms,	but	the	bite	was
no	less	deadly	for	that.	She	was	the	same.	There	was	nothing	in	her	–	nothing
that	she	could	see	–	worth	the	overwhelming	gift	of	love.	Nothing	in	her
worthy	of	him.
He	had	blinded	himself	to	that	truth,	and	that	was	his	flaw,	the	flaw	he	had
always	possessed.	A	willingness,	perhaps	a	need,	to	believe	in	the	good,	where
no	good	could	be	found.	Well,	this	was	a	love	she	could	not	abide,	and	she
would	not	take	him	down	her	path.
Cotillion	had	understood.	The	god	had	seen	clearly	into	the	depths	of	this
mortal	darkness,	as	clearly	as	had	Apsalar.	And	so	there	had	been	nothing
veiled	in	the	words	and	silences	exchanged	between	her	and	the	patron	god	of
assassins.	A	mutual	recognition.	The	tasks	he	set	before	her	were	of	a	nature
suited	to	his	aspect,	and	to	her	particular	talents.	When	condemnation	had
already	been	pronounced,	one	could	not	be	indignant	over	the	sentence.	But	she
was	no	god,	so	far	removed	from	humanity	as	to	find	amorality	a	thing	of
comfort,	a	refuge	from	one’s	own	deeds.	Everything	was	getting…harder,
harder	to	manage.
He	would	not	miss	her	for	long.	His	eyes	would	slowly	open.	To	other
possibilities.	He	travelled	now	with	two	other	women,	after	all	–	Cotillion	had


told	her	that	much.	So.	He	would	heal,	and	would	not	be	alone	for	long,	she
was	certain	of	that.
More	than	sufficient	fuel	to	feed	her	self-pity.
Even	so,	she	had	tasks	set	before	her,	and	it	would	not	do	to	wallow
overlong	in	this	unwelcome	self-indulgence.	Apsalar	slowly	raised	her	head,
studied	the	meagre,	grainy	details	of	the	room.	Trying	to	recall	how	she	had
come	to	be	here.	Her	head	ached,	her	throat	was	parched.	Wiping	the	tears
from	her	cheeks,	she	slowly	stood.	Pounding	pain	behind	her	eyes.
From	somewhere	below	she	could	hear	tavern	sounds,	a	score	of	voices,
drunken	laughter.	Apsalar	found	her	silklined	cloak,	reversed	it	and	slipped	the
garment	over	her	shoulders,	then	she	walked	over	to	the	door,	unlocked	it,	and
stepped	out	into	the	corridor	beyond.	Two	wavering	oil-lamps	set	in	niches
along	the	wall,	a	railing	and	stairs	at	the	far	end.	From	the	room	opposite	hers
came	the	muffled	noise	of	love-making,	the	woman’s	cries	too	melodramatic
to	be	genuine.	Apsalar	listened	a	moment	longer,	wondering	what	it	was	about
the	sounds	that	disturbed	her	so,	then	she	moved	through	the	flicker	of
shadows,	reaching	the	steps,	and	made	her	way	down.
It	was	late,	probably	well	after	the	twelfth	bell.	Twenty	or	so	patrons
occupied	the	tavern,	half	of	them	in	the	livery	of	caravan	guards.	They	were
not	regulars,	given	the	unease	with	which	they	were	regarded	by	the	remaining
denizens,	and	she	noted,	as	she	approached	the	counter,	that	three	were	Gral,
whilst	another	pair,	both	women,	were	Pardu.	Both	rather	unpleasant	tribes,	or
so	Cotillion’s	memories	informed	her	in	a	subtle	rustle	of	disquiet.	Typically
raucous	and	overbearing,	their	eyes	finding	and	tracking	her	progress	to	the
bar;	she	elected	caution	and	so	kept	her	gaze	averted.
The	barman	walked	over	as	she	arrived.	‘Was	beginning	to	think	you’d
died,’	he	said,	as	he	lifted	a	bottle	of	rice	wine	into	view	and	set	it	before	her.
‘Before	you	dip	into	this,	lass,	I’d	like	to	see	some	coin.’
‘How	much	do	I	owe	you	so	far?’
‘Two	silver	crescents.’
She	frowned.	‘I	thought	I’d	paid	already.’
‘For	the	wine,	aye.	But	then	you	spent	a	night	and	a	day	and	an	evening	in
the	room	–	and	I	have	to	charge	you	for	tonight	as	well,	since	it’s	too	late	to	try
renting	it	out	now.	Finally,’	he	gestured,	‘there’s	this	bottle	here.’
‘I	didn’t	say	I	wanted	it,’	she	replied.	‘But	if	you’ve	any	food	left…’
‘I’ve	some.’
She	drew	out	her	coin	pouch	and	found	two	crescents.	‘Here.	Assuming
this	is	for	tonight’s	room	as	well.’
He	nodded.	‘You	don’t	want	the	wine,	then?’


‘No.	Sawr ’ak	beer,	if	you	please.’
He	collected	the	bottle	and	headed	off.
A	figure	pushed	in	on	either	side	of	her.	The	Pardu	women.	‘See	those
Gral?’	one	asked,	nodding	to	a	nearby	table.	‘They	want	you	to	dance	for
them.’
‘No	they	don’t,’	Apsalar	replied.
‘No,’	the	other	woman	said,	‘they	do.	They’ll	even	pay.	You	walk	like	a
dancer.	We	could	all	see	that.	You	don’t	want	to	upset	them—’
‘Precisely.	Which	is	why	I	won’t	dance	for	them.’
The	two	Pardu	were	clearly	confused	by	that.	In	the	interval	the	barman
arrived	with	a	tankard	of	beer	and	a	tin	bowl	of	goat	soup,	the	layer	of	fat	on
the	surface	sporting	white	hairs	to	give	proof	of	its	origin.	He	added	a	hunk	of
dark	bread.	‘Good	enough?’
She	nodded.	‘Thank	you.’	Then	turned	to	the	woman	who	had	first	spoken.
‘I	am	a	Shadow	Dancer.	Tell	them	that,	Pardu.’
Both	women	backed	off	suddenly,	and	Apsalar	leaned	on	the	counter,
listening	to	the	hiss	of	words	spreading	out	through	the	tavern.	All	at	once	she
found	she	had	some	space	around	her.	Good	enough.
The	bartender	was	regarding	her	warily.	‘You’re	full	of	surprises,’	he	said.
‘That	dance	is	forbidden.’
‘Yes,	it	is.’
‘You’re	from	Quon	Tali,’	he	said	in	a	quieter	voice.	‘Itko	Kan,	I’d	guess,
by	the	tilt	of	your	eyes	and	that	black	hair.	Never	heard	of	a	Shadow	Dancer	out
of	Itko	Kan.’	He	leaned	close.	‘I	was	born	just	outside	Gris,	you	see.	Was
regular	infantry	in	Dassem’s	army,	took	a	spear	in	the	back	my	first	battle	and
that	was	it	for	me.	I	missed	Y’Ghatan,	for	which	I	daily	give	thanks	to	Oponn.
You	understand.	Didn’t	see	Dassem	die	and	glad	for	it.’
‘But	you	still	have	stories	aplenty,’	Apsalar	said.
‘That	I	have,’	he	said	with	an	emphatic	nod.	Then	his	gaze	sharpened	on
her.	After	a	moment	he	grunted	and	moved	away.
She	ate,	sipped	ale,	and	her	headache	slowly	faded.
Some	time	later,	she	gestured	to	the	barman	and	he	approached.	‘I	am
going	out,’	she	said,	‘but	I	wish	to	keep	the	room	so	do	not	rent	it	out	to
anyone	else.’
He	shrugged.	‘You’ve	paid	for	it.	I	lock	up	at	fourth	bell.’
She	straightened	and	made	her	way	towards	the	door.	The	caravan	guards
tracked	her	progress,	but	none	made	move	to	follow	–	at	least	not	immediately.
She	hoped	they	would	heed	the	implicit	warning	she’d	given	them.	She
already	intended	to	kill	a	man	this	night,	and	one	was	enough,	as	far	as	she	was


concerned.
Stepping	outside,	Apsalar	paused	for	a	moment.	The	wind	had	died.	The
stars	were	visible	as	blurry	motes	behind	the	veil	of	fine	dust	still	settling	in	the
storm’s	wake.	The	air	was	cool	and	still.	Drawing	her	cloak	about	her	and
slipping	her	silk	scarf	over	the	lower	half	of	her	face,	Apsalar	swung	left	down
the	street.	At	the	juncture	of	a	narrow	alley,	thick	with	shadows,	she	slipped
suddenly	into	the	gloom	and	was	gone.
A	few	moments	later	the	two	Pardu	women	padded	towards	the	alley.	They
paused	at	its	mouth,	looking	down	the	twisted	track,	seeing	no-one.
‘She	spoke	true,’	one	hissed,	making	a	warding	sign.	‘She	walks	the
shadows.’
The	other	nodded.	‘We	must	inform	our	new	master.’
They	headed	off.
Standing	within	the	warren	of	Shadow,	the	two	Pardu	looking	ghostly,
seeming	to	shiver	into	and	out	of	existence	as	they	strode	up	the	street,	Apsalar
watched	them	for	another	dozen	heartbeats.	She	was	curious	as	to	who	their
master	might	be,	but	that	was	a	trail	she	would	follow	some	other	night.
Turning	away,	she	studied	the	shadow-wrought	world	she	found	herself	in.	On
all	sides,	a	lifeless	city.	Nothing	like	Ehrlitan,	the	architecture	primitive	and
robust,	with	gated	lintel-stone	entrances	to	narrow	passageways	that	ran
straight	and	high-walled.	No-one	walked	those	cobbled	paths.	The	buildings	to
either	side	of	the	passageways	were	all	two	storeys	or	less,	flat-roofed,	and	no
windows	were	visible.	High	narrow	doorways	gaped	black	in	the	grainy
gloom.
Even	Cotillion’s	memories	held	no	recognition	of	this	manifestation	in	the
Shadow	Realm,	but	this	was	not	unusual.	There	seemed	to	be	uncounted	layers,
and	the	fragments	of	the	shattered	warren	were	far	more	extensive	than	one
might	expect.	The	realm	was	ever	in	motion,	bound	to	some	wayward	force	of
migration,	scudding	ceaseless	across	the	mortal	world.	Overhead,	the	sky	was
slate	grey	–	what	passed	for	night	in	Shadow,	and	the	air	was	turgid	and	warm.
One	of	the	passageways	led	in	the	direction	of	Ehrlitan’s	central	flattopped	hill,	the	Jen’rahb,	once	the	site	of	the	Falah’d	Crown,	now	a	mass	of
rubble.	She	set	off	down	it,	eyes	on	the	looming,	near-transparent	wreckage	of
tumbled	stone.	The	path	opened	out	onto	a	square,	each	of	the	four	walls	lined
with	shackles.	Two	sets	still	held	bodies.	Desiccated,	slumped	in	the	dust,	skinwrapped	skulls	sunk	low,	resting	on	gracile-boned	chests;	one	was	at	the	end
opposite	her,	the	other	at	the	back	of	the	left-hand	wall.	A	portal	broke	the	line
of	the	far	wall	near	the	right-side	corner.
Curious,	Apsalar	approached	the	nearer	figure.	She	could	not	be	certain,


but	it	appeared	to	be	Tiste,	either	Andii	or	Edur.	The	corpse’s	long	straight	hair
was	colourless,	bleached	by	antiquity.	Its	accoutrements	had	rotted	away,
leaving	only	a	few	withered	strips	and	corroded	bits	of	metal.	As	she	crouched
before	it,	there	was	a	swirl	of	dust	beside	the	body,	and	her	brows	lifted	as	a
shade	slowly	rose	into	view.	Translucent	flesh,	the	bones	strangely
luminescent,	a	skeletal	face	with	black-pitted	eyes.
‘The	body’s	mine,’	it	whispered,	bony	fingers	clutching	the	air.	‘You	can’t
have	it.’
The	language	was	Tiste	Andii,	and	Apsalar	was	vaguely	surprised	that	she
understood	it.	Cotillion’s	memories	and	the	knowledge	hidden	within	them
could	still	startle	her	on	occasion.	‘What	would	I	do	with	the	body?’	she	asked.
‘I	have	my	own,	after	all.’
‘Not	here.	I	see	naught	but	a	ghost.’
‘As	do	I.’
It	seemed	startled.	‘Are	you	certain?’
‘You	died	long	ago,’	she	said.	‘Assuming	the	body	in	chains	is	your	own.’
‘My	own?	No.	At	least,	I	don’t	think	so.	It	might	be.	Why	not?	Yes,	it	was
me,	once,	long	ago.	I	recognize	it.	You	are	the	ghost,	not	me.	I’ve	never	felt
better,	in	fact.	Whereas	you	look…unwell.’
‘Nonetheless,’	Apsalar	said,	‘I	have	no	interest	in	stealing	a	corpse.’
The	shade	reached	out	and	brushed	the	corpse’s	lank,	pale	hair.	‘I	was
lovely,	you	know.	Much	admired,	much	pursued	by	the	young	warriors	of	the
enclave.	Perhaps	I	still	am,	and	it	is	only	my	spirit	that	has	grown	so…tattered.
Which	is	more	visible	to	the	mortal	eye?	Vigour	and	beauty	moulding	flesh,	or
the	miserable	wretch	hiding	beneath	it?’
Apsalar	winced,	looked	away.	‘Depends,	I	think,	on	how	closely	you	look.’
‘And	how	clear	your	vision.	Yes,	I	agree.	And	beauty,	it	passes	so	quickly,
doesn’t	it	just?	But	misery,	ah,	misery	abides.’
A	new	voice	hissed	from	where	the	other	corpse	hung	in	its	chains.	‘Don’t
listen	to	her!	Treacherous	bitch,	look	where	we	ended	up!	My	fault?	Oh	no,	I
was	the	honest	one.	Everyone	knew	that	–	and	prettier	besides,	don’t	let	her	tell
you	otherwise!	Come	over	here,	dear	ghost,	and	hear	the	truth!’
Apsalar	straightened.	‘I	am	not	the	ghost	here—’
‘Dissembler!	No	wonder	you	prefer	her	to	me!’
She	could	see	the	other	shade	now,	a	twin	to	the	first	one,	hovering	over	its
own	corpse,	or	at	least	the	body	it	claimed	as	its	own.	‘How	did	you	two	come
to	be	here?’	she	asked.
The	second	shade	pointed	at	the	first.	‘She’s	a	thief!’
‘So	are	you!’	the	first	one	retorted.


‘I	was	only	following	you,	Telorast!	“Oh,	let’s	break	into	Shadowkeep!
There’s	no-one	there,	after	all!	We	could	make	off	with	uncounted	riches!”
Why	did	I	believe	you?	I	was	a	fool—’
‘Well,’	cut	in	the	other,	‘that’s	something	we	can	agree	on,	at	least.’
‘There	is	no	purpose,’	Apsalar	said,	‘to	the	two	of	you	remaining	here.
Your	corpses	are	rotting	away,	but	those	shackles	will	never	release	them.’
‘You	serve	the	new	master	of	Shadow!’	The	second	shade	seemed	most
agitated	with	its	own	accusation.	‘That	miserable,	slimy,	wretched—’
‘Quiet!’	hissed	the	first	shade,	Telorast.	‘He’ll	come	back	to	taunt	us	some
more!	I,	for	one,	have	no	desire	ever	to	see	him	again.	Nor	those	damned
Hounds.’	The	ghost	edged	closer	to	Apsalar.	‘Most	kind	servant	of	the
wondrous	new	master,	to	answer	your	question,	we	would	indeed	love	to	leave
this	place.	Alas,	where	would	we	go?’	It	gestured	with	one	filmy,	bony	hand.
‘Beyond	the	city,	there	are	terrible	creatures.	Deceitful,	hungry,	numerous!
Now,’	it	added	in	a	purr,	‘had	we	an	escort…’
‘Oh	yes,’	cried	the	second	shade,	‘an	escort,	to	one	of	the	gates	–	a	modest,
momentary	responsibility,	yet	we	would	be	most	thankful.’
Apsalar	studied	the	two	creatures.	‘Who	imprisoned	you?	And	speak	the
truth,	else	you’ll	receive	no	help	from	me.’
Telorast	bowed	deeply,	then	seemed	to	settle	even	lower,	and	it	was	a
moment	before	Apsalar	realized	it	was	grovelling.	‘Truth	to	tell.	We	would	not
lie	as	to	this.	No	clearer	recollection	and	no	purer	integrity	in	relating	said
recollection	will	you	hear	in	any	realm.	’Twas	a	demon	lord—’
‘With	seven	heads!’	the	other	interjected,	bobbing	up	and	down	in	some	illcontained	excitement.
Telorast	cringed.	‘Seven	heads?	Were	there	seven?	There	might	well	have
been.	Why	not?	Yes,	seven	heads!’
‘And	which	head,’	Apsalar	asked,	‘claimed	to	be	the	lord?’
‘The	sixth!’
‘The	second!’
The	two	shades	regarded	each	other	balefully,	then	Telorast	raised	a
skeletal	finger.	‘Precisely!	Sixth	from	the	right,	second	from	the	left!’
‘Oh,	very	good,’	crooned	the	other.
Apsalar	faced	the	shade.	‘Your	companion’s	name	is	Telorast	–	what	is
yours?’
It	flinched,	bobbed,	then	began	its	own	grovelling,	raising	minute	clouds
of	dust.	‘Prince	–	King	Cruel,	the	Slayer	of	All	Foes.	The	Feared.	The
Worshipped.’	It	hesitated,	then,	‘Princess	Demure?	Beloved	of	a	thousand
heroes,	bulging,	stern-faced	men	one	and	all!’	A	twitch,	low	muttering,	a	brief


clawing	at	its	own	face.	‘A	warlord,	no,	a	twenty-two-headed	dragon,	with	nine
wings	and	eleven	thousand	fangs.	Given	the	chance…’
Apsalar	crossed	her	arms.	‘Your	name.’
‘Curdle.’
‘Curdle.’
‘I	do	not	last	long.’
‘Which	is	what	brought	us	to	this	sorry	demise	in	the	first	place,’	Telorast
said.	‘You	were	supposed	to	watch	the	path	–	I	specifically	told	you	to	watch	the
path—’
‘I	did	watch	it!’
‘But	failed	to	see	the	Hound	Baran—’
‘I	saw	Baran,	but	I	was	watching	the	path.’
‘All	right,’	Apsalar	said,	sighing,	‘why	should	I	provide	you	two	with	an
escort?	Give	me	a	reason,	please.	Any	reason	at	all.’
‘We	are	loyal	companions,’	Telorast	said.	‘We	will	stand	by	you	no	matter
what	horrible	end	you	come	to.’
‘We’ll	guard	your	torn-up	body	for	eternity,’	Curdle	added,	‘or	at	least
until	someone	else	comes	along—’
‘Unless	it’s	Edgewalker.’
‘Well,	that	goes	without	saying,	Telorast,’	Curdle	said.	‘We	don’t	like	him.’
‘Or	the	Hounds.’
‘Of	course—’
‘Or	Shadowthrone,	or	Cotillion,	or	an	Aptorian,	or	one	of	those—’
‘All	right!’	Curdle	shrieked.
‘I	will	escort	you,’	Apsalar	said,	‘to	a	gate.	Whereupon	you	may	leave	this
realm,	since	that	seems	to	be	your	desire.	In	all	probability,	you	will	then	find
yourselves	walking	through	Hood’s	Gate,	which	would	be	a	mercy	to
everyone,	except	perhaps	Hood	himself.’
‘She	doesn’t	like	us,’	Curdle	moaned.
‘Don’t	say	it	out	loud,’	Telorast	snapped,	‘or	she’ll	actually	realize	it.	Right
now	she’s	not	sure,	and	that’s	good	for	us,	Curdle.’
‘Not	sure?	Are	you	deaf?	She	just	insulted	us!’
‘That	doesn’t	mean	she	doesn’t	like	us.	Not	necessarily.	Irritated	with	us,
maybe,	but	then,	we	irritate	everyone.	Or,	rather,	you	irritate	everyone,	Curdle.
Because	you’re	so	unreliable.’
‘I’m	not	always	unreliable,	Telorast.’
‘Come	along,’	Apsalar	said,	walking	towards	the	far	portal.	‘I	have	things
to	do	this	night.’
‘But	what	about	these	bodies?’	Curdle	demanded.


‘They	stay	here,	obviously.’	She	turned	and	faced	the	two	shades.	‘Either
follow	me,	or	don’t.	It’s	up	to	you.’
‘But	we	liked	those	bodies—’
‘It’s	all	right,	Curdle,’	Telorast	said	in	a	soothing	tone.	‘We’ll	find	others.’
Apsalar	shot	Telorast	a	glance,	bemused	by	the	comment,	then	she	set	off,
striding	into	the	narrow	passageway.
The	two	ghosts	scurried	and	flitted	after	her.
	
The	basin’s	level	floor	was	a	crazed	latticework	of	cracks,	the	clay	silts	of	the
old	lake	dried	by	decades	of	sun	and	heat.	Wind	and	sands	had	polished	the
surface	so	that	it	gleamed	in	the	moonlight,	like	tiles	of	silver.	A	deep-sunk
well,	encircled	by	a	low	wall	of	bricks,	marked	the	centre	of	the	lake-bed.
Outriders	from	Leoman’s	column	had	already	reached	the	well,
dismounting	to	inspect	it,	while	the	main	body	of	the	horse-warriors	filed
down	onto	the	basin.	The	storm	was	past,	and	stars	glistened	overhead.
Exhausted	horses	and	exhausted	rebels	made	a	slow	procession	over	the
broken,	webbed	ground.	Capemoths	flitted	over	the	heads	of	the	riders,
weaving	and	spinning	to	escape	the	hunting	rhizan	lizards	that	wheeled	in	their
midst	like	miniature	dragons.	An	incessant	war	overhead,	punctuated	by	the
crunch	of	carapaced	armour	and	the	thin,	metallic	death-cries	of	the
capemoths.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	leaned	forward	on	his	saddle,	the	hinged	horn
squealing,	and	spat	to	his	left.	Defiance,	a	curse	to	these	clamouring	echoes	of
battle.	And	to	get	the	taste	of	grit	from	his	mouth.	He	glanced	over	at	Leoman,
who	rode	in	silence.	They	had	been	leaving	a	trail	of	dead	horses,	and	almost
everyone	was	on	their	second	or	third	mount.	A	dozen	warriors	had
surrendered	to	the	pace	this	past	day,	older	men	who	had	dreamed	of	a	last
battle	against	the	hated	Malazans,	beneath	the	blessed	gaze	of	Sha’ik,	only	to
see	that	opportunity	torn	away	by	treachery.	There	were	more	than	a	few
broken	spirits	in	this	tattered	regiment,	Corabb	knew.	It	was	easy	to	understand
how	one	could	lose	hope	during	this	pathetic	journey.
If	not	for	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	Corabb	himself	might	have	given	up	long
ago,	slipping	off	into	the	blowing	sands	to	seek	his	own	destiny,	discarding	the
trappings	of	a	rebel	soldier,	and	settling	down	in	some	remote	city	with
memories	of	despair	haunting	his	shadow	until	the	Hoarder	of	Souls	came	to
claim	him.	If	not	for	Leoman	of	the	Flails.
The	riders	reached	the	well,	spreading	out	to	create	a	circle	encampment
around	its	life-giving	water.	Corabb	drew	rein	a	moment	after	Leoman	had


done	so,	and	both	dismounted,	boots	crunching	on	a	carpet	of	bones	and	scales
from	long-dead	fish.
‘Corabb,’	Leoman	said,	‘walk	with	me.’
They	set	off	in	a	northerly	direction	until	they	were	fifty	paces	past	the
outlying	pickets,	standing	alone	on	the	cracked	pan.	Corabb	noted	a	depression
nearby	in	which	sat	half-buried	lumps	of	clay.	Drawing	his	dagger,	he	walked
over	and	crouched	down	to	retrieve	one	of	the	lumps.	Breaking	it	open	to
reveal	the	toad	curled	up	within	it,	he	dug	the	creature	out	and	returned	to	his
commander ’s	side.	‘An	unexpected	treat,’	he	said,	pulling	off	a	withered	leg
and	tearing	at	the	tough	but	sweet	flesh.
Leoman	stared	at	him	in	the	moonlight.	‘You	will	have	strange	dreams,
Corabb,	eating	those.’
‘Spirit	dreams,	yes.	They	do	not	frighten	me,	Commander.	Except	for	all
the	feathers.’
Making	no	comment	on	that,	Leoman	unstrapped	his	helm	and	pulled	it	off.
He	stared	up	at	the	stars,	then	said,	‘What	do	my	soldiers	want	of	me?	Am	I	to
lead	us	to	an	impossible	victory?’
‘You	are	destined	to	carry	the	Book,’	Corabb	said	around	a	mouthful	of
meat.
‘And	the	goddess	is	dead.’
‘Dryjhna	is	more	than	that	goddess,	Commander.	The	Apocalyptic	is	as
much	a	time	as	it	is	anything	else.’
Leoman	glanced	over.	‘You	do	manage	to	surprise	me	still,	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas,	after	all	these	years.’
Pleased	by	this	compliment,	or	what	he	took	for	a	compliment,	Corabb
smiled,	then	spat	out	a	bone	and	said,	‘I	have	had	time	to	think,	Commander.
While	we	rode.	I	have	thought	long	and	those	thoughts	have	walked	strange
paths.	We	are	the	Apocalypse.	This	last	army	of	the	rebellion.	And	I	believe	we
are	destined	to	show	the	world	the	truth	of	that.’
‘Why	do	you	believe	that?’
‘Because	you	lead	us,	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	and	you	are	not	one	to	slink
away	like	some	creeping	meer-rat.	We	journey	towards	something	–	I	know,
many	here	see	this	as	a	flight,	but	I	do	not.	Not	all	the	time,	anyway.’
‘A	meer-rat,’	Leoman	mused.	‘That	is	the	name	for	those	lizard-eating	rats
in	the	Jen’rahb,	in	Ehrlitan.’
Corabb	nodded.	‘The	long-bodied	ones,	with	the	scaly	heads,	yes.’
‘A	meer-rat,’	Leoman	said	again,	oddly	thoughtful.	‘Almost	impossible	to
hunt	down.	They	can	slip	through	cracks	a	snake	would	have	trouble	with.
Hinged	skulls…’


‘Bones	like	green	twigs,	yes,’	Corabb	said,	sucking	at	the	skull	of	the	toad,
then	flinging	it	away.	Watching	as	it	sprouted	wings	and	flew	off	into	the	night.
He	glanced	over	at	his	commander ’s	feather-clad	features.	‘They	make	terrible
pets.	When	startled,	they	dive	for	the	first	hole	in	sight,	no	matter	how	small.	A
woman	died	with	a	meer-rat	halfway	up	her	nose,	or	so	I	heard.	When	they	get
stuck,	they	start	chewing.	Feathers	everywhere.’
‘I	take	it	no-one	keeps	them	as	pets	any	more,’	Leoman	said,	studying	the
stars	once	again.	‘We	ride	towards	our	Apocalypse,	do	we?	Yes,	well.’
‘We	could	leave	the	horses,’	Corabb	said.	‘And	just	fly	away.	It’d	be	much
quicker.’
‘That	would	be	unkind,	wouldn’t	it?’
‘True.	Honourable	beasts,	horses.	You	shall	lead	us,	Winged	One,	and	we
shall	prevail.’
‘An	impossible	victory.’
‘Many	impossible	victories,	Commander.’
‘One	would	suffice.’
‘Very	well,’	Corabb	said.	‘One,	then.’
‘I	don’t	want	this,	Corabb.	I	don’t	want	any	of	this.	I’m	of	a	mind	to
disperse	this	army.’
‘That	will	not	work,	Commander.	We	are	returning	to	our	birthplace.	It	is
the	season	for	that.	To	build	nests	on	the	rooftops.’
‘I	think,’	Leoman	said,	‘it	is	time	you	went	to	sleep.’
‘Yes,	you	are	right.	I	will	sleep	now.’
‘Go	on.	I	will	remain	here	for	a	time.’
‘You	are	Leoman	of	the	Feathers,	and	it	shall	be	as	you	say.’	Corabb
saluted,	then	strode	back	towards	the	encampment	and	its	host	of	oversized
vultures.	It	was	not	so	bad	a	thing,	he	mused.	Vultures	survived	because	other
things	did	not,	after	all.
Now	alone,	Leoman	continued	studying	the	night	sky.	Would	that	Toblakai
rode	with	him	now.	The	giant	warrior	was	blind	to	uncertainty.	Alas,	also
somewhat	lacking	in	subtlety.	The	bludgeon	of	Karsa	Orlong’s	reasoning
would	permit	no	disguising	of	unpleasant	truths.
A	meer-rat.	He	would	have	to	think	on	that.
	
‘You	can’t	come	in	here	with	those!’
The	giant	warrior	looked	back	at	the	trailing	heads,	then	he	lifted	Samar
Dev	clear	of	the	horse,	set	her	down,	and	slipped	off	the	beast	himself.	He
brushed	dust	from	his	furs,	walked	over	to	the	gate	guard.	Picked	him	up	and


threw	him	into	a	nearby	cart.
Someone	screamed	–	quickly	cut	short	as	the	warrior	swung	round.
Twenty	paces	up	the	street,	as	dusk	gathered	the	second	guard	was	in	full
flight,	heading,	Samar	suspected,	for	the	blockhouse	to	round	up	twenty	or	so
of	his	fellows.	She	sighed.	‘This	hasn’t	started	well,	Karsa	Orlong.’
The	first	guard,	lying	amidst	the	shattered	cart,	was	not	moving.
Karsa	eyed	Samar	Dev,	then	said,	‘Everything	is	fine,	woman.	I	am	hungry.
Find	me	an	inn,	one	with	a	stable.’
‘We	shall	have	to	move	quickly,	and	I	for	one	am	unable	to	do	that.’
‘You	are	proving	a	liability,’	Karsa	Orlong	said.
Alarm	bells	began	ringing	a	few	streets	away.	‘Put	me	back	on	your	horse,’
Samar	said,	‘and	I	will	give	you	directions,	for	all	the	good	that	will	do.’
He	approached	her.
‘Careful,	please	–	this	leg	can’t	stand	much	more	jostling.’
He	made	a	disgusted	expression.	‘You	are	soft,	like	all	children.’	Yet	he
was	less	haphazard	when	he	lifted	her	back	onto	the	horse.
‘Down	this	side	track,’	she	said.	‘Away	from	the	bells.	There’s	an	inn	on
Trosfalhadan	Street,	it’s	not	far.’	Glancing	to	her	right,	she	saw	a	squad	of
guards	appear	further	down	the	main	street.	‘Quickly,	warrior,	if	you	don’t
want	to	spend	this	night	in	a	gaol	cell.’
Citizens	had	gathered	to	watch	them.	Two	had	walked	over	to	the	dead	or
unconscious	guard,	crouching	to	examine	the	unfortunate	man.	Another	stood
nearby,	complaining	about	his	shattered	cart	and	pointing	at	Karsa	–	although
only	when	the	huge	warrior	wasn’t	looking.
They	made	their	way	down	the	avenue	running	parallel	to	the	ancient	wall.
Samar	scowled	at	the	various	bystanders	who	had	elected	to	follow	them.	‘I	am
Samar	Dev,’	she	said	loudly.	‘Will	you	risk	a	curse	from	me?	Any	of	you?’
People	shrank	back,	then	quickly	turned	away.
Karsa	glanced	back	at	her.	‘You	are	a	witch?’
‘You	have	no	idea.’
‘And	had	I	left	you	on	the	trail,	you	would	have	cursed	me?’
‘Most	certainly.’
He	grunted,	said	nothing	for	the	next	ten	paces,	then	turned	once	again.
‘Why	did	you	not	call	upon	spirits	to	heal	yourself?’
‘I	had	nothing	with	which	to	bargain,’	she	replied.	‘The	spirits	one	finds	in
the	wastelands	are	hungry	things,	Karsa	Orlong.	Covetous	and	not	to	be
trusted.’
‘You	cannot	be	much	of	a	witch,	then,	if	you	need	to	bargain.	Why	not	just
bind	them	and	demand	that	they	heal	your	leg?’


‘One	who	binds	risks	getting	bound	in	return.	I	will	not	walk	that	path.’
He	made	no	reply	to	that.
‘Here	is	Trosfalhadan	Street.	Up	one	avenue,	there,	see	that	big	building
with	the	walled	compound	beside	it?	Inn	of	the	Wood,	it’s	called.	Hurry,	before
the	guards	reach	this	corner.’
‘They	will	find	us	nonetheless,’	Karsa	said.	‘You	have	failed	in	your	task.’
‘I	wasn’t	the	one	who	threw	that	guard	into	a	cart!’
‘He	spoke	rudely.	You	should	have	warned	him.’
They	reached	the	double	gates	at	the	compound.
From	the	corner	behind	them	came	shouts.	Samar	twisted	round	on	the
horse	and	watched	the	guards	rush	towards	them.	Karsa	strode	past	her,
drawing	free	the	huge	flint	sword.	‘Wait!’	she	cried.	‘Let	me	speak	with	them
first,	warrior,	else	you	find	yourself	fighting	a	whole	city’s	worth	of	guards.’
He	paused.	‘They	are	deserving	of	mercy?’
She	studied	him	a	moment,	then	nodded.	‘If	not	them,	then	their	families.’
‘You	are	under	arrest!’	The	shout	came	from	the	rapidly	closing	guards.
Karsa’s	tattooed	face	darkened.
Samar	edged	down	from	the	horse	and	hobbled	to	place	herself	between
the	giant	and	the	guards,	all	of	whom	had	drawn	scimitars	and	were	fanning
out	on	the	street.	Beyond,	a	crowd	of	onlookers	was	gathering.	She	held	up	her
hands.	‘There	has	been	a	misunderstanding.’
‘Samar	Dev,’	one	man	said	in	a	growl.	‘Best	you	step	aside	–	this	is	no
affair	of	yours—’
‘But	it	is,	Captain	Inashan.	This	warrior	has	saved	my	life.	My	wagon
broke	down	out	in	the	wastes,	and	I	broke	my	leg	–	look	at	me.	I	was	dying.
And	so	I	called	upon	a	spirit	of	the	wild-lands.’
The	captain’s	eyes	widened	as	he	regarded	Karsa	Orlong.	‘This	is	a	spirit?’
‘Most	assuredly,’	Samar	replied.	‘One	who	is	of	course	ignorant	of	our
customs.	That	gate	guard	acted	in	what	this	spirit	perceived	as	a	hostile	manner.
Does	he	still	live?’
The	captain	nodded.	‘Knocked	senseless,	that	is	all.’	The	man	then	pointed
towards	the	severed	heads.	‘What	are	those?’
‘Trophies,’	she	answered.	‘Demons.	They	had	escaped	their	own	realm	and
were	approaching	Ugarat.	Had	not	this	spirit	killed	them,	they	would	have
descended	upon	us	with	great	slaughter.	And	with	not	a	single	worthy	mage	left
in	Ugarat,	we	would	have	fared	poorly	indeed.’
Captain	Inashan	narrowed	his	gaze	on	Karsa.	‘Can	you	understand	my
words?’
‘They	have	been	simple	enough	thus	far,’	the	warrior	replied.


The	captain	scowled.	‘Does	she	speak	the	truth?’
‘More	than	she	realizes,	yet	even	so,	there	are	untruths	in	her	tale.	I	am	not
a	spirit.	I	am	Toblakai,	once	bodyguard	to	Sha’ik.	Yet	this	woman	bargained
with	me	as	she	would	a	spirit.	More,	she	knew	nothing	of	where	I	came	from
or	who	I	was,	and	so	she	might	well	have	imagined	I	was	a	spirit	of	the	wildlands.’
Voices	rose	among	both	guards	and	citizens	at	the	name	Sha’ik,	and	Samar
saw	a	dawning	recognition	in	the	captain’s	expression.	‘Toblakai,	companion
to	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	Tales	of	you	have	reached	us.’	He	pointed	with	his
scimitar	at	the	fur	riding	Karsa’s	shoulders.	‘Slayer	of	a	Soletaken,	a	white
bear.	Executioner	of	Sha’ik’s	betrayers	in	Raraku.	It	is	said	you	slew	demons
the	night	before	Sha’ik	was	killed,’	he	added,	eyes	on	the	rotted,	flailed	heads.
‘And,	when	she	had	been	slain	by	the	Adjunct,	you	rode	out	to	face	the	Malazan
army	–	and	they	would	not	fight	you.’
‘There	is	some	truth	in	what	you	have	spoken,’	Karsa	said,	‘barring	the
words	I	exchanged	with	the	Malazans—’
‘One	of	Sha’ik’s	own,’	Samar	quickly	said,	sensing	the	warrior	was	about
to	say	something	unwise,	‘how	could	we	of	Ugarat	not	welcome	you?	The
Malazan	garrison	has	been	driven	from	this	city	and	is	even	now	starving	in
Moraval	Keep	on	the	other	side	of	the	river,	besieged	with	no	hope	of
succour.’
‘You	are	wrong	in	that,’	Karsa	said.
She	wanted	to	kick	him.	Then	again,	look	how	that	had	turned	out	the	last
time?	All	right,	you	ox,	go	and	hang	yourself.
‘What	do	you	mean?’	Captain	Inashan	asked.
‘The	rebellion	is	broken,	the	Malazans	have	retaken	cities	by	the	score.
They	will	come	here,	too,	eventually.	I	suggest	you	make	peace	with	the
garrison.’
‘Would	that	not	put	you	at	risk?’	Samar	asked.
The	warrior	bared	his	teeth.	‘My	war	is	done.	If	they	cannot	accept	that,	I
will	kill	them	all.’
An	outrageous	claim,	yet	no-one	laughed.	Captain	Inashan	hesitated,	then
he	sheathed	his	scimitar,	his	soldiers	following	suit.	‘We	have	heard	of	the
rebellion’s	failure,’	he	said.	‘For	the	Malazans	in	the	keep,	alas,	it	might	well
be	too	late.	They	have	been	trapped	in	there	for	months.	And	no-one	has	been
seen	on	the	walls	for	some	time—’
‘I	will	go	there,’	Karsa	said.	‘Gestures	of	peace	must	be	made.’
‘It	is	said,’	Inashan	muttered,	‘that	Leoman	still	lives.	That	he	leads	the	last
army	and	has	vowed	to	fight	on.’


‘Leoman	rides	his	own	path.	I	would	place	no	faith	in	it,	were	I	you.’
The	advice	was	not	well	received.	Arguments	rose,	until	Inashan	turned	on
his	guards	and	silenced	them	with	an	upraised	hand.	‘These	matters	must	be
brought	to	the	Falah’d.’	He	faced	Karsa	again.	‘You	will	stay	this	night	at	the
Inn	of	the	Wood?’
‘I	shall,	although	it	is	not	made	of	wood,	and	so	it	should	be	called	Inn	of
the	Brick.’
Samar	laughed.	‘You	can	bring	that	up	with	the	owner,	Toblakai.	Captain,
are	we	done	here?’
Inashan	nodded.	‘I	will	send	a	healer	to	mend	your	leg,	Samar	Dev.’
‘In	return,	I	bless	you	and	your	kin,	Captain.’
‘You	are	too	generous,’	he	replied	with	a	bow.
The	squad	headed	off.	Samar	turned	to	regard	the	giant	warrior.	‘Toblakai,
how	have	you	survived	this	long	in	Seven	Cities?’
He	looked	down	at	her,	then	slung	the	stone	sword	once	more	over	his
shoulder.	‘There	is	no	armour	made	that	can	withstand	the	truth…’
‘When	backed	by	that	sword?’
‘Yes,	Samar	Dev.	I	find	it	does	not	take	long	for	children	to	understand	that.
Even	here	in	Seven	Cities.’	He	pushed	open	the	gates.	‘Havok	will	require	a
stable	away	from	other	beasts…at	least	until	his	hunger	is	appeased.’
	
‘I	don’t	like	the	looks	of	that,’	Telorast	muttered,	nervously	shifting	about.
‘It	is	a	gate,’	Apsalar	said.
‘But	where	does	it	lead?’	Curdle	asked,	indistinct	head	bobbing.
‘It	leads	out,’	she	replied.	‘Onto	the	Jen’rahb,	in	the	city	of	Ehrlitan.	It	is
where	I	am	going.’
‘Then	that	is	where	we	are	going,’	Telorast	announced.	‘Are	there	bodies
there?	I	hope	so.	Fleshy,	healthy	bodies.’
She	regarded	the	two	ghosts.	‘You	intend	to	steal	bodies	to	house	your
spirits?	I	am	not	sure	that	I	can	permit	that.’
‘Oh,	we	wouldn’t	do	that,’	Curdle	said.	‘That	would	be	possession,	and
that’s	difficult,	very	difficult.	Memories	seep	back	and	forth,	yielding
confusion	and	inconsistency.’
‘True,’	Telorast	said.	‘And	we	are	most	consistent,	are	we	not?	No,	my
dear,	we	just	happen	to	like	bodies.	In	proximity.	They…comfort	us.	You,	for
example.	You	are	a	great	comfort	to	us,	though	we	know	not	your	name.’
‘Apsalar.’
‘She’s	dead!’	Curdle	shrieked.	To	Apsalar:	‘I	knew	you	were	a	ghost!’


‘I	am	named	after	the	Mistress	of	Thieves.	I	am	not	her	in	the	flesh.’
‘She	must	be	speaking	the	truth,’	Telorast	said	to	Curdle.	‘If	you	recall,
Apsalar	looked	nothing	like	this	one.	The	real	Apsalar	was	Imass,	or	very
nearly	Imass.	And	she	wasn’t	very	friendly—’
‘Because	you	stole	from	her	temple	coffers,’	Curdle	said,	squirming	about
in	small	dust-clouds.
‘Even	before	then.	Decidedly	unfriendly,	where	this	Apsalar,	this	one	here,
she’s	kind.	Her	heart	is	bursting	with	warmth	and	generosity—’
‘Enough	of	that,’	Apsalar	said,	turning	to	the	gate	once	more.	‘As	I
mentioned	earlier,	this	gate	leads	to	the	Jen’rahb…for	me.	For	the	two	of	you,
of	course,	it	might	well	lead	into	Hood’s	Realm.	I	am	not	responsible	for	that,
should	you	find	yourselves	before	Death’s	Gate.’
‘Hood’s	Realm?	Death’s	Gate?’	Telorast	began	moving	from	side	to	side,	a
strange	motion	that	Apsalar	belatedly	realized	was	pacing,	although	the	ghost
had	sunk	part-way	into	the	ground,	making	it	look	more	like	wading.	‘There	is
no	fear	of	that.	We	are	too	powerful.	Too	wise.	Too	cunning.’
‘We	were	great	mages,	once,’	Curdle	said.	‘Necromancers,	Spiritwalkers,
Conjurers,	Wielders	of	Fell	Holds,	Masters	of	the	Thousand	Warrens—’
‘Mistresses,	Curdle.	Mistresses	of	the	Thousand	Warrens.’
‘Yes,	Telorast.	Mistresses	indeed.	What	was	I	thinking?	Beauteous
mistresses,	curvaceous,	languid,	sultry,	occasionally	simpering—’
Apsalar	walked	through	the	gate.
She	stepped	onto	broken	rubble	alongside	the	foundations	of	a	collapsed
wall.	The	night	air	was	chill,	stars	sharp	overhead.
‘—and	even	Kallor	quailed	before	us,	isn’t	that	right,	Telorast?’
‘Oh	yes,	he	quailed.’
Apsalar	looked	down	to	find	herself	flanked	by	the	two	ghosts.	She	sighed.
‘You	evaded	Hood’s	Realm,	I	see.’
‘Clumsy	grasping	hands,’	Curdle	sniffed.	‘We	were	too	quick.’
‘As	we	knew	we’d	be,’	Telorast	added.	‘What	place	is	this?	It’s	all	broken
—’
Curdle	clambered	atop	the	foundation	wall.	‘No,	you	are	wrong,	Telorast,
as	usual.	I	see	buildings	beyond.	Lit	windows.	The	very	air	reeks	of	life.’
‘This	is	the	Jen’rahb,’	Apsalar	said.	‘The	ancient	centre	of	the	city,	which
collapsed	long	ago	beneath	its	own	weight.’
‘As	all	cities	must,	eventually,’	Telorast	observed,	trying	to	pick	up	a	brick
fragment.	But	its	hand	slipped	ineffectually	through	the	object.	‘Oh,	we	are
most	useless	in	this	realm.’
Curdle	glanced	down	at	its	companion.	‘We	need	bodies—’


‘I	told	you	before—’
‘Fear	not,	Apsalar,’	Curdle	replied	in	a	crooning	tone,	‘we	will	not	unduly
offend	you.	The	bodies	need	not	be	sentient,	after	all.’
‘Are	there	the	equivalent	of	Hounds	here?’	Telorast	asked.
Curdle	snorted.	‘The	Hounds	are	sentient,	you	fool!’
‘Only	stupidly	so!’
‘Not	so	stupid	as	to	fall	for	our	tricks,	though,	were	they?’
‘Are	there	imbrules	here?	Stantars?	Luthuras	–	are	there	luthuras	here?
Scaly,	long	grasping	tails,	eyes	like	the	eyes	of	purlith	bats—’
‘No,’	Apsalar	said.	‘None	of	those	creatures.’	She	frowned.	‘Those	you
have	mentioned	are	of	Starvald	Demelain.’
A	momentary	silence	from	the	two	ghosts,	then	Curdle	snaked	along	the
top	of	the	wall	until	its	eerie	face	was	opposite	Apsalar.	‘Really?	Now,	that’s	a
peculiar	coincidence—’
‘Yet	you	speak	the	language	of	the	Tiste	Andii.’
‘We	do?	Why,	that’s	even	stranger.’
‘Baffling,’	Telorast	agreed.	‘We,	uh,	we	assumed	it	was	the	language	you
spoke.	Your	native	language,	that	is.’
‘Why?	I	am	not	Tiste	Andii.’
‘No,	of	course	not.	Well,	thank	the	Abyss	that’s	been	cleared	up.	Where
shall	we	go	from	here?’
‘I	suggest,’	Apsalar	said	after	a	moment’s	thought,	‘that	you	two	remain
here.	I	have	tasks	to	complete	this	night,	and	they	are	not	suited	to	company.’
‘You	desire	stealth,’	Telorast	whispered,	crouching	low.	‘We	could	tell,
you	know.	There’s	something	of	the	thief	about	you.	Kindred	spirits,	the	three
of	us,	I	think.	A	thief,	yes,	and	perhaps	something	darker.’
‘Well	of	course	darker,’	Curdle	said	from	the	wall.	‘A	servant	of
Shadowthrone,	or	the	Patron	of	Assassins.	There	will	be	blood	spilled	this
night,	and	our	mortal	companion	will	do	the	spilling.	She’s	an	assassin,	and	we
should	know,	having	met	countless	assassins	in	our	day.	Look	at	her,	Telorast,
she	has	deadly	blades	secreted	about	her	person—’
‘And	she	smells	of	stale	wine.’
‘Stay	here,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Both	of	you.’
‘And	if	we	don’t?’	Telorast	asked.
‘Then	I	shall	inform	Cotillion	that	you	have	escaped,	and	he	will	send	the
Hounds	on	your	trail.’
‘You	bind	us	to	servitude!	Trap	us	with	threats!	Curdle,	we	have	been
deceived!’
‘Let’s	kill	her	and	steal	her	body!’


‘Let’s	not,	Curdle.	Something	about	her	frightens	me.	All	right,	Apsalar
who	is	not	Apsalar,	we	shall	stay	here…for	a	time.	Until	we	can	be	certain	you
are	dead	or	worse,	that’s	how	long	we’ll	stay	here.’
‘Or	until	you	return,’	Curdle	added.
Telorast	hissed	in	a	strangely	reptilian	manner,	then	said,	‘Yes,	idiot,	that
would	be	the	other	option.’
‘Then	why	didn’t	you	say	so?’
‘Because	it’s	obvious,	of	course.	Why	should	I	waste	breath	mentioning
what’s	obvious?	The	point	is,	we’re	waiting	here.	That’s	the	point.’
‘Maybe	it’s	your	point,’	Curdle	drawled,	‘but	it’s	not	necessarily	mine,	not
that	I’ll	waste	my	breath	explaining	anything	to	you,	Telorast.’
‘You	always	were	too	obvious,	Curdle.’
‘Both	of	you,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Be	quiet	and	wait	here	until	I	return.’
Telorast	slumped	down	against	the	wall’s	foundation	stones	and	crossed	its
arms.	‘Yes,	yes.	Go	on.	We	don’t	care.’
Apsalar	quickly	made	her	way	across	the	tumbled	stone	wreckage,
intending	to	put	as	much	distance	between	herself	and	the	two	ghosts	as
possible,	before	seeking	out	the	hidden	trail	that	would,	if	all	went	well,	lead
her	to	her	victim.	She	cursed	the	sentimentality	that	left	her	so	weakened	of
resolve	that	she	now	found	herself	shackled	with	two	insane	ghosts.	It	would
not	do,	she	well	knew,	to	abandon	them.	Left	to	their	own	devices,	they	would
likely	unleash	mayhem	upon	Ehrlitan.	They	worked	too	hard	to	convince	her
of	their	harmlessness,	and,	after	all,	they	had	been	chained	in	the	Shadow
Realm	for	a	reason	–	a	warren	rife	with	eternally	imprisoned	creatures,	few	of
whom	could	truly	claim	injustice.
There	was	no	distinct	Azath	House	in	the	warren	of	Shadow,	and	so,
accordingly,	more	mundane	methods	had	been	employed	in	the	negation	of
threats.	Or	so	it	seemed	to	Apsalar.	Virtually	every	permanent	feature	in
Shadow	was	threaded	through	with	unbreakable	chains,	and	bodies	lay	buried
in	the	dust,	shackled	to	those	chains.	Both	she	and	Cotillion	had	come	across
menhirs,	tumuli,	ancient	trees,	stone	walls	and	boulders,	all	home	to	nameless
prisoners	–	demons,	ascendants,	revenants	and	wraiths.	In	the	midst	of	one
stone	circle,	three	dragons	were	chained,	to	all	outward	appearances	dead,	yet
their	flesh	did	not	wither	or	rot,	and	dust	sheathed	eyes	that	remained	open.
That	dread	place	had	been	visited	by	Cotillion,	and	some	faint	residue	of
disquiet	clung	to	the	memory	–	there	had	been	more	to	that	encounter,	she
suspected,	but	not	all	of	Cotillion’s	life	remained	within	the	grasp	of	her
recollection.
She	wondered	who	had	been	responsible	for	all	those	chainings.	What


unknown	entity	possessed	such	power	as	to	overwhelm	three	dragons?	So
much	of	the	Shadow	Realm	defied	her	understanding.	As	it	did	Cotillion’s,	she
suspected.
Curdle	and	Telorast	spoke	the	language	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	Yet	betrayed
intimate	knowledge	of	the	draconean	realm	of	Starvald	Demelain.	They	had
met	the	Mistress	of	Thieves,	who	had	vanished	from	the	pantheon	long	ago,
although,	if	the	legends	of	Darujhistan	held	any	truth,	she	had	reappeared
briefly	less	than	a	century	past,	only	to	vanish	a	second	time.
She	sought	to	steal	the	moon.	One	of	the	first	stories	Crokus	had	told	her,
following	Cotillion’s	sudden	departure	from	her	mind.	A	tale	with	local
flavour	to	bolster	the	cult	in	the	region,	perhaps.	She	admitted	to	some
curiosity.	The	goddess	was	her	namesake,	after	all.	An	Imass?	There	are	no
iconic	representations	of	the	Mistress	–	which	is	odd	enough,	possibly	a
prohibition	enforced	by	the	temples.	What	are	her	symbols?	Oh,	yes.	Footprints.
And	a	veil.	She	resolved	to	question	the	ghosts	more	on	this	subject.
In	any	case,	she	was	fairly	certain	that	Cotillion	would	not	be	pleased	that
she	had	freed	those	ghosts.	Shadowthrone	would	be	furious.	All	of	which
might	have	spurred	her	motivation.	I	was	possessed	once,	but	no	longer.	I	still
serve,	but	as	it	suits	me,	not	them.
Bold	claims,	but	they	were	all	that	remained	that	she	might	hold	on	to.	A
god	uses,	then	casts	away.	The	tool	is	abandoned,	forgotten.	True,	it	appeared
that	Cotillion	was	not	as	indifferent	as	most	gods	in	this	matter,	but	how	much
of	that	could	she	trust?
Beneath	moonlight,	Apsalar	found	the	secret	trail	winding	through	the
ruins.	She	made	her	way	along	it,	silent,	using	every	available	shadow,	into	the
heart	of	the	Jen’rahb.	Enough	of	the	wandering	thoughts.	She	must	needs
concentrate,	lest	she	become	this	night’s	victim.
Betrayals	had	to	be	answered.	This	task	was	more	for	Shadowthrone	than
Cotillion,	or	so	the	Patron	of	Assassins	had	explained.	An	old	score	to	settle.
The	schemes	were	crowded	and	confused	enough	as	it	was,	and	that	situation
was	getting	worse,	if	Shadowthrone’s	agitation	of	late	was	any	indication.
Something	of	that	unease	had	rubbed	off	on	Cotillion.	There	had	been
mutterings	of	another	convergence	of	powers.	Vaster	than	any	that	had
occurred	before,	and	in	some	way	Shadowthrone	was	at	the	centre	of	it.	All	of
it.
She	came	within	sight	of	the	sunken	temple	dome,	the	only	nearly	complete
structure	this	far	into	the	Jen’rahb.	Crouching	behind	a	massive	block	whose
surfaces	were	crowded	with	arcane	glyphs,	she	settled	back	and	studied	the
approach.	There	were	potential	lines	of	sight	from	countless	directions.	It


would	be	quite	a	challenge	if	watchers	had	been	positioned	to	guard	the	hidden
entrance	to	that	temple.	She	had	to	assume	those	watchers	were	there,	secreted
in	cracks	and	fissures	on	all	sides.
As	she	watched,	she	caught	movement,	coming	out	from	the	temple	and
moving	furtively	away	to	her	left.	Too	distant	to	make	out	any	details.	In	any
case,	one	thing	was	clear.	The	spider	was	at	the	heart	of	its	nest,	receiving	and
sending	out	agents.	Ideal.	With	luck,	the	hidden	sentinels	would	assume	she	was
one	of	those	agents,	unless,	of	course,	there	were	particular	paths	one	must
use,	a	pattern	altered	each	night.
Another	option	existed.	Apsalar	drew	out	the	long,	thin	scarf	known	as	the
telab,	and	wrapped	it	about	her	head	until	only	her	eyes	were	left	exposed.	She
unsheathed	her	knives,	spent	twenty	heartbeats	studying	the	route	she	would
take,	then	bolted	forward.	A	swift	passage	held	the	element	of	the	unexpected,
and	made	her	a	more	difficult	target	besides.	As	she	raced	across	the	rubble,
she	waited	for	the	heavy	snap	of	a	crossbow,	the	whine	of	the	quarrel	as	it	cut
through	the	air.	But	none	came.	Reaching	the	temple,	she	saw	the	fissured	crack
that	served	as	the	entrance	and	made	for	it.
She	slipped	into	the	darkness,	then	paused.
The	passageway	stank	of	blood.
Waiting	for	her	eyes	to	adjust,	she	held	her	breath	and	listened.	Nothing.
She	could	now	make	out	the	sloping	corridor	ahead.	Apsalar	edged	forward,
halted	at	the	edge	of	a	larger	chamber.	A	body	was	lying	on	the	dusty	floor,
amidst	a	spreading	pool	of	blood.	At	the	chamber ’s	opposite	end	was	a	curtain,
drawn	across	a	doorway.	Apart	from	the	body,	a	few	pieces	of	modest
furniture	were	visible	in	the	room.	A	brazier	cast	fitful,	orange	light.	The	air
was	bitter	with	death	and	smoke.
She	approached	the	body,	eyes	on	the	curtained	doorway.	Her	senses	told
her	there	was	no-one	behind	it,	but	if	she	was	in	error	then	the	mistake	could
prove	fatal.	Reaching	the	crumpled	figure,	she	sheathed	one	knife,	then	reached
out	with	her	hand	and	pulled	the	body	onto	its	back.	Enough	to	see	its	face.
Mebra.	It	seemed	that	someone	had	done	her	work	for	her.
A	flit	of	movement	in	the	air	behind	her.	Apsalar	ducked	and	rolled	to	her
left	as	a	throwing	star	flashed	over	her,	punching	a	hole	through	the	curtain.
Regaining	her	feet	in	a	crouch,	she	faced	the	outside	passage.
Where	a	figure	swathed	in	tight	grey	clothing	stepped	into	the	chamber.	Its
gloved	left	hand	held	another	iron	star,	the	multiple	edges	glittering	with
poison.	In	its	right	hand	was	a	kethra	knife,	hooked	and	broad-bladed.	A	telab
hid	the	assassin’s	features,	but	around	its	dark	eyes	was	a	mass	of	white-etched
tattoos	against	black	skin.


The	killer	stepped	clear	of	the	doorway,	eyes	fixed	on	Apsalar.	‘Stupid
woman,’	hissed	a	man’s	voice,	in	accented	Ehrlii.
‘South	Clan	of	the	Semk,’	Apsalar	said.	‘You	are	far	from	home.’
‘There	were	to	be	no	witnesses.’	His	left	hand	flashed.
Apsalar	twisted.	The	iron	star	whipped	past	to	strike	the	wall	behind	her.
The	Semk	rushed	in	behind	the	throw.	He	chopped	down	and	crossways
with	his	left	hand	to	bat	aside	her	knife-arm,	then	thrust	with	the	kethra,	seeking
her	abdomen,	whereupon	he	would	tear	the	blade	across	in	a	disembowelling
slash.	None	of	which	succeeded.
Even	as	he	swung	down	with	his	left	arm,	Apsalar	stepped	to	her	right.	The
heel	of	his	hand	cracked	hard	against	her	hip.	Her	movement	away	from	the
kethra	forced	the	Semk	to	attempt	to	follow	with	the	weapon.	Long	before	he
could	reach	her,	she	had	driven	her	knife	between	ribs,	the	point	piercing	the
back	of	his	heart.
With	a	strangled	groan,	the	Semk	sagged,	slid	off	the	knife-blade,	and
pitched	to	the	floor.	He	sighed	out	his	last	breath,	then	was	still.
Apsalar	cleaned	her	weapon	across	the	man’s	thigh,	then	began	cutting
away	his	clothing.	The	tattoos	continued,	covering	every	part	of	him.	A
common	enough	trait	among	warriors	of	the	South	Clan,	yet	the	style	was	not
Semk.	Arcane	script	wound	across	the	assassin’s	brawny	limbs,	similar	to	the
carving	she	had	seen	in	the	ruins	outside	the	temple.
The	language	of	the	First	Empire.
With	growing	suspicion,	she	rolled	the	body	over	to	reveal	the	back.	And
saw	a	darkened	patch,	roughly	rectangular,	over	the	Semk’s	right	shoulderblade.	Where	the	man’s	name	had	once	been,	before	it	had	been	ritually
obscured.
This	man	had	been	a	priest	of	the	Nameless	Ones.
Oh,	Cotillion,	you	won’t	like	this	at	all.
	
‘Well?’
Telorast	glanced	up.	‘Well	what?’
‘She	is	a	pretty	one.’
‘We’re	prettier.’
Curdle	snorted.	‘At	the	moment,	I’d	have	to	disagree.’
‘All	right.	If	you	like	the	dark,	deadly	type.’
‘What	I	was	asking,	Telorast,	is	whether	we	stay	with	her.’
‘If	we	don’t,	Edgewalker	will	be	very	unhappy	with	us,	Curdle.	You	don’t
want	that,	do	you?	He’s	been	unhappy	with	us	before,	or	have	you	forgotten?’


‘Fine!	You	didn’t	have	to	bring	that	up,	did	you?	So	it’s	decided.	We	stay
with	her.’
‘Yes,’	Telorast	said.	‘Until	we	can	find	a	way	to	get	out	of	this	mess.’
‘You	mean,	cheat	them	all?’
‘Of	course.’
‘Good,’	Curdle	said,	stretching	out	along	the	ruined	wall	and	staring	up	at
the	strange	stars.	‘Because	I	want	my	throne	back.’
‘So	do	I.’
Curdle	sniffed.	‘Dead	people.	Fresh.’
‘Yes.	But	not	her.’
‘No,	not	her.’	The	ghost	was	silent	a	moment,	then	added,	‘Not	just	pretty,
then.’
‘No,’	Telorast	glumly	agreed,	‘not	just	pretty.’


Chapter	Two
It	must	be	taken	as	given	that	a	man	who	happens	to	be	the	world’s
most	powerful,	most	terrible,	most	deadly	sorceror,	must	have	a
woman	at	his	side.	But	it	does	not	follow,	my	children,	that	a	woman	of
similar	proportions	requires	a	man	at	hers.
Now	then,	who	wants	to	be	a	tyrant?
Mistress	Wu
Malaz	City	School	of	Waifs	and	Urchins
1152	Burn’s	Sleep
Insubstantial,	fading	in	and	out	of	sight,	smoky	and	wisp-threaded,	Ammanas
fidgeted	on	the	ancient	Throne	of	Shadow.	Eyes	like	polished	haematite	were
fixed	on	the	scrawny	figure	standing	before	it.	A	figure	whose	head	was
hairless	except	for	a	wild	curly	grey	and	black	tangle	over	the	ears	and	round
the	back	of	the	subtly	misshapen	skull.	And	twin	eyebrows	that	rivalled	the
fringe	in	chaotic	waywardness,	beetling	and	knotting	to	match	the	baffling	and
disquieting	mêlée	of	emotions	on	the	wrinkled	face	beneath	them.
The	subject	was	muttering,	not	quite	under	his	breath,	‘He’s	not	so
frightening,	is	he?	In	and	out,	off	and	on,	here	and	elsewhere,	a	wavering
apparition	of	wavering	intent	and	perhaps	wavering	intellect	–	best	not	let	him
read	my	thoughts	–	look	stern,	no,	attentive,	no,	pleased!	No,	wait.	Cowed.
Terrified.	No,	in	awe.	Yes,	in	awe.	But	not	for	long,	that’s	tiring.	Look	bored.
Gods,	what	am	I	thinking?	Anything	but	bored,	no	matter	how	boring	this
might	be,	what	with	him	looking	down	on	me	and	me	looking	up	at	him	and
Cotillion	over	there	with	his	arms	crossed,	leaning	against	that	wall	and
smirking	–	what	kind	of	audience	is	he?	The	worst	kind,	I	say.	What	was	I
thinking?	Well,	at	least	I	was	thinking.	I	am	thinking,	in	fact,	and	one	might
presume	that	Shadowthrone	is	doing	the	same,	assuming	of	course	that	his
brain	hasn’t	leaked	away,	since	he’s	nothing	but	shadows	so	what	holds	it	in?
The	point	is,	I	am	well	advised	to	remind	myself,	as	I	am	now	doing,	the	point
is,	he	summoned	me.	And	so	here	I	am.	Rightful	servant.	Loyal.	Well,	more	or
less	loyal.	Trustworthy.	Most	of	the	time.	Modest	and	respectful,	always.	To	all


outward	appearances,	and	what	is	outward	in	appearance	is	all	that	matters	in
this	and	every	other	world.	Isn’t	it?	Smile!	Grimace.	Look	helpful.	Hopeful.
Harried,	hirsute,	happenstance.	Wait,	how	does	one	look	happenstance?	What
kind	of	expression	must	that	one	be?	I	must	think	on	that.	But	not	now,	because
this	isn’t	happenstance,	it’s	circumstance—’
‘Silence.’
‘My	lord?	I	said	nothing.	Oh,	best	glance	away	now,	and	think	on	this.	I
said	nothing.	Silence.	Perhaps	he’s	making	an	observation?	Yes,	that	must	be	it.
Look	back,	now,	deferentially,	and	say	aloud:	Indeed,	my	lord.	Silence.	There.
How	does	he	react?	Is	that	growing	apoplexy?	How	can	one	tell,	with	all	those
shadows?	Now,	if	I	sat	on	that	throne—’
‘Iskaral	Pust!’
‘Yes,	my	lord?’
‘I	have	decided.’
‘Yes,	my	lord?	Well,	if	he’s	decided	something,	why	doesn’t	he	just	say	it?’
‘I	have	decided,	Iskaral	Pust—’
‘He’s	doing	some	more!	Yes,	my	lord?’
‘That	you…’	Shadowthrone	paused	and	seemed	to	pass	a	hand	over	his
eyes.	‘Oh	my…’	he	added	in	a	murmur,	then	straightened.	‘I	have	decided	that
you	will	have	to	do.’
‘My	lord?	Flick	eyes	away!	This	god	is	insane.	I	serve	an	insane	god!	What
kind	of	expression	does	that	warrant?’
‘Go!	Get	out	of	here!’
Iskaral	Pust	bowed.	‘Of	course,	my	lord.	Immediately!’	Then	he	stood,
waiting.	Looking	around,	one	pleading	glance	to	Cotillion.	‘I	was	summoned!	I
can’t	leave	until	this	foaming	idiot	on	the	throne	releases	me!	Cotillion
understands	–	that	might	be	amusement	in	those	horribly	cold	eyes	–	oh,	why
doesn’t	he	say	something?	Why	doesn’t	he	remind	this	blathering	smudge	on
this	throne—’
A	snarl	from	Ammanas,	and	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow,	Iskaral	Pust,
vanished.
Shadowthrone	then	sat	motionless	for	a	time,	before	slowly	turning	his
head	to	regard	Cotillion.	‘What	are	you	looking	at?’	he	demanded.
‘Not	much,’	Cotillion	replied.	‘You	have	become	rather	insubstantial	of
late.’
‘I	like	it	this	way.’	They	studied	each	other	for	a	moment.	‘All	right,	I’m	a
little	stretched!’	The	shriek	echoed	away,	and	the	god	subsided.	‘Do	you	think
he’ll	get	there	in	time?’
‘No.’


‘Do	you	think,	if	he	does,	he’ll	be	sufficient?’
‘No.’
‘Who	asked	you!?’
Cotillion	watched	as	Ammanas	seethed,	fidgeted	and	squirmed	on	the
throne.	Then	the	Lord	of	Shadow	fell	still,	and	slowly	raised	a	single,	spindly
finger.	‘I	have	an	idea.’
‘And	I	shall	leave	you	to	it,’	Cotillion	said,	pushing	himself	from	the	wall.
‘I	am	going	for	a	walk.’
Shadowthrone	did	not	reply.
Glancing	over,	Cotillion	saw	that	he	had	vanished.	‘Oh,’	he	murmured,
‘that	was	a	good	idea.’
Emerging	from	Shadowkeep,	he	paused	to	study	the	landscape	beyond.	It
was	in	the	habit	of	changing	at	a	moment’s	notice,	although	not	when	one	was
actually	looking,	which,	he	supposed,	was	a	saving	grace.	A	line	of	forested
hills	to	the	right,	gullies	and	ravines	directly	ahead,	and	a	ghostly	lake	to	the
left,	on	which	rode	a	half-dozen	grey-sailed	ships	in	the	distance.	Artorallah
demons,	off	to	raid	the	Aptorian	coastal	villages,	he	suspected.	It	was	rare	to
find	the	lake	region	appearing	so	close	to	the	keep,	and	Cotillion	felt	a	moment
of	unease.	The	demons	of	this	realm	seemed	to	do	little	more	than	bide	their
time,	paying	scant	attention	to	Shadowthrone,	and	more	or	less	doing	as	they
pleased.	Which	generally	involved	feuds,	lightning	attacks	on	neighbours	and
pillaging.
Ammanas	could	well	command	them,	if	he	so	chose.	But	he	hardly	ever
did,	perhaps	not	wanting	to	test	the	limits	of	their	loyalty.	Or	perhaps	just
preoccupied	with	some	other	concern.	With	his	schemes.
Things	were	not	well.	A	little	stretched,	are	you,	Ammanas?	I	am	not
surprised.	Cotillion	could	sympathize,	and	almost	did.	Momentarily,	before
reminding	himself	that	Ammanas	had	invited	most	of	the	risks	upon	himself.
And,	by	extension,	upon	me	as	well.
The	paths	ahead	were	narrow,	twisted	and	treacherous.	Requiring	utmost
caution	with	every	measured	step.
So	be	it.	After	all,	we	have	done	this	before.	And	succeeded.	Of	course,	far
more	was	at	stake	this	time.	Too	much,	perhaps.
Cotillion	set	off	for	the	broken	grounds	opposite	him.	Two	thousand
paces,	and	before	him	was	a	trail	leading	into	a	gully.	Shadows	roiled	between
the	rough	rock	walls.	Reluctant	to	part	as	he	walked	the	track,	they	slid	like
seaweed	in	shallows	around	his	legs.
So	much	in	this	realm	had	lost	its	rightful…place.	Confusion	triggered	a
seething	tumult	in	pockets	where	shadows	gathered.	Faint	cries	whispered


against	his	ears,	as	if	from	a	great	distance,	the	voice	of	multitudes	drowning.
Sweat	beaded	Cotillion’s	brow,	and	he	quickened	his	pace	until	he	was	past	the
sinkhole.
The	path	sloped	upward	and	eventually	opened	out	onto	a	broad	plateau.	As
he	strode	into	the	clear,	eyes	fixed	on	a	distant	ring	of	standing	stones,	he	felt	a
presence	at	his	side,	and	turned	to	see	a	tall,	skeletal	creature,	bedecked	in	rags,
walking	to	match	his	pace.	Not	close	enough	to	reach	out	and	touch,	but	too
close	for	Cotillion’s	comfort	nonetheless.	‘Edgewalker.	It	has	been	some	time
since	I	last	saw	you.’
‘I	cannot	say	the	same	of	you,	Cotillion.	I	walk—’
‘Yes,	I	know,’	Cotillion	cut	in,	‘you	walk	paths	unseen.’
‘By	you.	The	Hounds	do	not	share	your	failing.’
Cotillion	frowned	at	the	creature,	then	glanced	back,	to	see	Baran	thirty
paces	back,	keeping	its	distance.	Massive	head	low	to	the	ground,	eyes	glowing
bruised	crimson.	‘You	are	being	stalked.’
‘It	amuses	them,	I	imagine,’	Edgewalker	said.
They	continued	on	for	a	time,	then	Cotillion	sighed.	‘You	have	sought	me
out?’	he	asked.	‘What	do	you	want?’
‘From	you?	Nothing.	But	I	see	your	destination,	and	so	would	witness.’
‘Witness	what?’
‘Your	impending	conversation.’
Cotillion	scowled.	‘And	if	I’d	rather	you	did	not	witness?’
The	skeletal	face	held	a	permanent	grin,	but	in	some	way	it	seemed	to
broaden	slightly.	‘There	is	no	privacy	in	Shadow,	Usurper.’
Usurper.	I’d	have	long	since	killed	this	bastard	if	he	wasn’t	already	dead.
Long	since.
‘I	am	not	your	enemy,’	Edgewalker	said,	as	if	guessing	Cotillion’s
thoughts.	‘Not	yet.’
‘We	have	more	than	enough	enemies	as	it	is.	Accordingly,’	Cotillion
continued,	‘we	have	no	wish	for	more.	Unfortunately,	since	we	have	no
knowledge	as	to	your	purpose,	or	your	motivations,	we	cannot	predict	what
might	offend	you.	So,	in	the	interests	of	peace	between	us,	enlighten	me.’
‘That	I	cannot	do.’
‘Cannot,	or	will	not?’
‘The	failing	is	yours,	Cotillion,	not	mine.	Yours,	and	Shadowthrone’s.’
‘Well,	that	is	convenient.’
Edgewalker	seemed	to	consider	Cotillion’s	sardonic	observation	for	a
moment,	then	he	nodded.	‘Yes,	it	is.’
Long	since…


They	approached	the	standing	stones.	Not	a	single	lintel	left	to	bridge	the
ring,	just	rubble	scattered	about	down	the	slopes,	as	if	some	ancient	detonation
at	the	heart	of	the	circle	had	blasted	the	massive	structure	–	even	the	upright
stones	were	all	tilted	outward,	like	the	petals	of	a	flower.
‘This	is	an	unpleasant	place,’	Edgewalker	said	as	they	swung	right	to	take
the	formal	approach,	an	avenue	lined	with	low,	rotted	trees,	each	standing
upended	with	the	remnant	roots	clutching	the	air.
Cotillion	shrugged.	‘About	as	unpleasant	as	virtually	anywhere	else	in	this
realm.’
‘You	might	believe	that,	given	you	have	none	of	the	memories	I	possess.
Terrible	events,	long,	long	ago,	yet	the	echoes	remain.’
‘There	is	little	residual	power	left	here,’	Cotillion	said	as	they	neared	the
two	largest	stones,	and	walked	between	them.
‘That	is	true.	Of	course,	that	is	not	the	case	on	the	surface.’
‘The	surface?	What	do	you	mean?’
‘Standing	stones	are	always	half-buried,	Cotillion.	And	the	makers	were
rarely	ignorant	of	the	significance	of	that.	Overworld	and	underworld.’
Cotillion	halted	and	glanced	back,	studying	the	upended	trees	lining	the
avenue.	‘And	this	manifestation	we	see	here	is	given	to	the	underworld?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.’
‘Is	the	overworld	manifestation	to	be	found	in	some	other	realm?	Where
one	might	see	an	inward-tilting	ring	of	stones,	and	right-side-up	trees?’
‘Assuming	they	are	not	entirely	buried	or	eroded	to	nothing	by	now.	This
circle	is	very	old.’
Cotillion	swung	round	again	and	observed	the	three	dragons	opposite
them,	each	at	the	base	of	a	standing	stone,	although	their	massive	chains
reached	down	into	the	rough	soil,	rather	than	into	the	weathered	rock.	Shackled
at	the	neck	and	at	the	four	limbs,	with	another	chain	wrapped	taut	behind	the
shoulders	and	wings	of	each	dragon.	Every	chain	drawn	so	tight	as	to	prevent
any	movement,	not	even	a	lifting	of	the	head.	‘This,’	Cotillion	said	in	a
murmur,	‘is	as	you	said,	Edgewalker.	An	unpleasant	place.	I’d	forgotten.’
‘You	forget	every	time,’	Edgewalker	said.	‘Overcome	by	your	fascination.
Such	is	the	residual	power	in	this	circle.’
Cotillion	shot	him	a	quick	look.	‘I	am	ensorcelled?’
The	gaunt	creature	shrugged	in	a	faint	clatter	of	bones.	‘It	is	a	magic
without	purpose	beyond	what	it	achieves.	Fascination…and	forgetfulness.’
‘I	have	trouble	accepting	that.	All	sorcery	has	a	desired	goal.’
Another	shrug.	‘They	are	hungry,	yet	unable	to	feed.’
After	a	moment,	Cotillion	nodded.	‘The	sorcery	belongs	to	the	dragons,


then.	Well,	I	can	accept	that.	Yet,	what	of	the	circle	itself?	Has	its	power	died?	If
so,	why	are	these	dragons	still	bound?’
‘Not	dead,	simply	not	acting	in	any	manner	upon	you,	Cotillion.	You	are
not	its	intent.’
‘Well	enough.’	He	turned	as	Baran	padded	into	view,	swinging	wide	to
avoid	Edgewalker ’s	reach,	then	fixing	its	attention	on	the	dragons.	Cotillion
saw	its	hackles	stiffen.	‘Can	you	answer	me	this,’	he	said	to	Edgewalker,	‘why
will	they	not	speak	with	me?’
‘Perhaps	you	have	yet	to	say	anything	worth	a	reply.’
‘Possibly.	What	do	you	think	the	response	will	be,	then,	if	I	speak	of
freedom?’
‘I	am	here,’	said	Edgewalker,	‘to	discover	that	for	myself.’
‘You	can	read	my	thoughts?’	Cotillion	asked	in	a	low	voice.
Baran’s	huge	head	slowly	swung	round	to	regard	Edgewalker.	The	Hound
took	a	single	step	closer	to	the	creature.
‘I	possess	no	such	omniscience,’	Edgewalker	calmly	replied,	seeming	to
take	no	notice	of	Baran’s	attention.	‘Although	to	one	such	as	you,	it	might
appear	so.	But	I	have	existed	ages	beyond	your	reckoning,	Cotillion.	All
patterns	are	known	to	me,	for	they	have	been	played	out	countless	times	before.
Given	what	approaches	us	all,	it	was	not	hard	to	predict.	Especially	given	your
uncanny	prescience.’	The	dead	pits	that	were	Edgewalker ’s	eyes	seemed	to
study	Cotillion.	‘You	suspect,	do	you	not,	that	dragons	are	at	the	heart	of	all
that	will	come?’
Cotillion	gestured	at	the	chains.	‘They	reach	through	to	the	overworld
presumably?	And	that	warren	is	what?’
‘What	do	you	think?’	Edgewalker	countered.
‘Try	reading	my	mind.’
‘I	cannot.’
‘So,	you	are	here	because	you	are	desperate	to	know	what	I	know,	or	even
what	I	suspect.’
Edgewalker ’s	silence	was	answer	enough	to	that	question.	Cotillion	smiled.
‘I	think	I	will	make	no	effort	to	communicate	with	these	dragons	after	all.’
‘But	you	will,	eventually,’	Edgewalker	replied.	‘And	when	you	do,	I	will	be
here.	Thus,	what	does	it	avail	you	to	remain	silent	now?’
‘Well,	in	order	to	irritate	you,	I	suppose.’
‘I	have	existed	ages	beyond	your—’
‘So	you	have	been	irritated	before,	yes,	I	know.	And	will	be	again,	without
question.’
‘Make	your	effort,	Cotillion.	Soon	if	not	now.	If	you	wish	to	survive	what


is	to	come.’
‘All	right.	Provided	you	tell	me	the	names	of	these	dragons.’
A	clearly	grudging	reply:	‘As	you	wish—’
‘And	why	they	have	been	imprisoned	here,	and	by	whom.’
‘That	I	cannot	do.’
They	studied	each	other,	then	Edgewalker	cocked	its	head,	and	observed,
‘It	seems	we	are	at	an	impasse,	Cotillion.	What	is	your	decision?’
‘Very	well.	I	will	take	what	I	can	get.’
Edgewalker	faced	the	three	dragons.	‘These	are	of	the	pure	blood.	Eleint.
Ampelas,	Kalse	and	Eloth.	Their	crime	was…ambition.	It	is	a	common	enough
crime.’	The	creature	turned	back	to	Cotillion.	‘Perhaps	endemic.’
In	answer	to	that	veiled	judgement,	Cotillion	shrugged.	He	walked	closer
to	the	imprisoned	beasts.	‘I	shall	assume	you	can	hear	me,’	he	said	in	a	low
voice.	‘A	war	is	coming.	Only	a	few	years	away.	And	it	will,	I	suspect,	draw
into	its	fray	virtually	every	ascendant	from	all	the	realms.	I	need	to	know,
should	you	be	freed,	upon	which	side	shall	you	fight.’
There	was	silence	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	a	voice	rasped	in
Cotillion’s	mind.	‘You	come	here,	Usurper,	in	a	quest	for	allies.’
A	second	voice	cut	through,	this	one	distinctly	female,	‘Bound	by	gratitude
for	freeing	us.	Were	I	to	bargain	from	your	position,	I	would	be	foolish	to	hope
for	loyalty,	for	trust.’
‘I	agree,’	said	Cotillion,	‘that	that	is	a	problem.	Presumably,	you	will
suggest	I	free	you	before	we	bargain.’
‘It	is	only	fair,’	the	first	voice	said.
‘Alas,	I	am	not	that	interested	in	being	fair.’
‘You	fear	we	will	devour	you?’
‘In	the	interest	of	brevity,’	Cotillion	said,	‘and	I	understand	that	your	kind
delight	in	brevity.’
The	third	dragon	spoke	then,	a	heavy,	deep	voice:	‘Freeing	us	first	would
indeed	spare	us	the	effort	of	then	negotiating.	Besides,	we	are	hungry.’
‘What	brought	you	to	this	realm?’	Cotillion	asked.
There	was	no	reply.
Cotillion	sighed.	‘I	shall	be	more	inclined	to	free	you	–	assuming	I	am	able
–	if	I	have	reason	to	believe	your	imprisonment	was	unjust.’
The	female	dragon	asked,	‘And	you	presume	to	make	that	decision?’
‘This	hardly	seems	the	right	moment	to	be	cantankerous,’	he	replied	in
exasperation.	‘The	last	person	who	made	that	judgement	clearly	did	not	find	in
favour	of	you,	and	was	able	to	do	something	about	it.	I	would	have	thought	that
all	these	centuries	in	chains	might	have	led	you	three	to	reevaluate	your


motivations.	But	it	seems	your	only	regret	is	that	you	were	unequal	to	the	last
entity	that	presumed	to	judge	you.’
‘Yes,’	she	said,	‘that	is	a	regret.	But	it	is	not	our	only	one.’
‘All	right.	Let’s	hear	some	of	the	others.’
‘That	the	Tiste	Andii	who	invaded	this	realm	were	so	thorough	in	their
destruction,’	the	third	dragon	said,	‘and	so	absolute	in	their	insistence	that	the
throne	remain	unclaimed.’
Cotillion	drew	a	slow,	long	breath.	He	glanced	back	at	Edgewalker,	but	the
apparition	said	nothing.	‘And	what,’	he	asked	the	dragons,	‘so	spurred	their
zeal?’
‘Vengeance,	of	course.	And	Anomandaris.’
‘Ah,	I	think	I	can	now	assume	I	know	who	imprisoned	the	three	of	you.’
‘He	very	nearly	killed	us,’	said	the	female	dragon.	‘An	overreaction	on	his
part.	After	all,	better	Eleint	on	the	Throne	of	Shadow	than	another	Tiste	Edur,
or	worse,	a	usurper.’
‘And	how	would	Eleint	not	be	usurpers?’
‘Your	pedantry	does	not	impress	us.’
‘Was	all	this	before	or	after	the	Sundering	of	the	Realm?’
‘Such	distinctions	are	meaningless.	The	Sundering	continues	to	this	day,
and	as	for	the	forces	that	conspired	to	trigger	the	dread	event,	those	were	many
and	varied.	Like	a	pack	of	enkar’al	closing	on	a	wounded	drypthara.	What	is
vulnerable	attracts…feeders.’
‘Thus,’	said	Cotillion,	‘if	freed,	you	would	once	again	seek	the	Shadow
Throne.	Only	this	time,	someone	occupies	that	throne.’
‘The	veracity	of	that	claim	is	subject	to	debate,’	the	female	dragon	said.
‘A	matter,’	added	the	first	dragon,	‘of	semantics.	Shadows	cast	by
shadows.’
‘You	believe	that	Ammanas	is	sitting	on	the	wrong	Shadow	Throne.’
‘The	true	throne	is	not	even	in	this	fragment	of	Emurlahn.’
Cotillion	crossed	his	arms	and	smiled.	‘And	is	Ammanas?’
The	dragons	said	nothing,	and	he	sensed,	with	great	satisfaction,	their
sudden	disquiet.
‘That,	Cotillion,’	said	Edgewalker	behind	him,	‘is	a	curious	distinction.	Or
are	you	simply	being	disingenuous?’
‘That	I	cannot	tell	you,’	Cotillion	said,	with	a	faint	smile.
The	female	dragon	spoke,	‘I	am	Eloth,	Mistress	of	Illusions	–	Meanas	to
you	–	and	Mockra	and	Thyr.	A	Shaper	of	the	Blood.	All	that	K’rul	asked	of	me,	I
have	done.	And	now	you	presume	to	question	my	loyalty?’
‘Ah,’	Cotillion	said,	nodding,	‘then	I	take	it	you	are	aware	of	the


impending	war.	Are	you	also	aware	of	the	rumours	of	K’rul’s	return?’
‘His	blood	is	growing	sickly,’	said	the	third	dragon.	‘I	am	Ampelas,	who
shaped	the	Blood	in	the	paths	of	Emurlahn.	The	sorcery	wielded	by	the	Tiste
Edur	was	born	of	my	will	–	do	you	now	understand,	Usurper?’
‘That	dragons	are	prone	to	grandiose	claims	and	sententiousness?	Yes,	I	do
indeed	understand,	Ampelas.	And	I	should	now	presume	that	for	each	of	the
warrens,	Elder	and	new,	there	is	a	corresponding	dragon?	You	are	the	flavours
of	K’rul’s	blood?	What	of	the	Soletaken	dragons,	such	as	Anomandaris	and,
more	relevantly,	Scabandari	Bloodeye?’
‘We	are	surprised,’	said	the	first	dragon	after	a	moment,	‘that	you	know
that	name.’
‘Because	you	killed	him	so	long	ago?’
‘A	poor	guess,	Usurper,	poorer	for	that	you	have	revealed	the	extent	of	your
ignorance.	No,	we	did	not	kill	him.	In	any	case,	his	soul	remains	alive,	although
tormented.	The	one	whose	fist	shattered	his	skull	and	so	destroyed	his	body
holds	no	allegiance	to	us,	nor,	we	suspect,	to	anyone	but	herself.’
‘You	are	Kalse,	then,’	Cotillion	said.	‘And	what	path	do	you	claim?’
‘I	leave	the	grandiose	claims	to	my	kin.	I	have	no	need	to	impress	you,
Usurper.	Furthermore,	I	delight	in	discovering	how	little	you	comprehend.’
Cotillion	shrugged.	‘I	was	asking	about	the	Soletaken.	Scabandari,
Anomandaris,	Osserc,	Olar	Ethil,	Draconus—’
Edgewalker	spoke	behind	him:	‘Cotillion,	surely	you	have	surmised	by
now	that	these	three	dragons	sought	the	Shadow	Throne	for	honourable
reasons?’
‘To	heal	Emurlahn,	yes,	Edgewalker,	I	understand	that.’
‘And	is	that	not	what	you	seek	as	well?’
Cotillion	turned	to	regard	the	creature.	‘Is	it?’
Edgewalker	seemed	taken	aback	for	a	moment,	then,	head	cocking	slightly,
it	said,	‘It	is	not	the	healing	that	concerns	you,	it	is	who	will	be	sitting	on	the
Throne	afterwards.’
‘As	I	understand	things,’	Cotillion	replied,	‘once	these	dragons	did	what
K’rul	asked	of	them,	they	were	compelled	to	return	to	Starvald	Demelain.	As
the	sources	of	sorcery,	they	could	not	be	permitted	to	interfere	or	remain
active	across	the	realms,	lest	sorcery	cease	to	be	predictable,	which	in	turn
would	feed	Chaos	–	the	eternal	enemy	in	this	grand	scheme.	But	the	Soletaken
proved	a	problem.	They	possessed	the	blood	of	Tiam,	and	with	it	the	vast
power	of	the	Eleint.	Yet,	they	could	travel	as	they	pleased.	They	could	interfere,
and	they	did.	For	obvious	reasons.	Scabandari	was	originally	Edur,	and	so	he
became	their	champion—’


‘After	murdering	the	royal	line	of	the	Edur!’	Eloth	said	in	a	hiss.	‘After
spilling	draconean	blood	in	the	heart	of	Kurald	Emurlahn!	After	opening	the
first,	fatal	wound	upon	that	warren!	What	did	he	think	gates	were?’
‘The	Tiste	Andii	for	Anomandaris,’	Cotillion	continued.	‘Tiste	Liosan	for
Osserc.	The	T’lan	Imass	for	Olar	Ethil.	These	connections	and	the	loyalties
born	of	them	are	obvious.	Draconus	is	more	of	a	mystery,	of	course,	since	he
has	been	gone	a	long	time—’
‘The	most	reviled	of	them	all!’	Eloth	shrieked,	the	voice	filling	Cotillion’s
skull	so	that	he	winced.
Stepping	back,	he	raised	a	hand.	‘Spare	me,	please.	I	am	not	really
interested	in	all	that,	to	be	honest.	Apart	from	discovering	if	there	was	enmity
between	Eleint	and	Soletaken.	It	seems	there	is,	with	the	possible	exception	of
Silanah—’
‘Seduced	by	Anomandaris’s	charms,’	snapped	Eloth.	‘And	Olar	Ethil’s
endless	pleadings…’
‘To	bring	fire	to	the	world	of	the	Imass,’	Cotillion	said.	‘For	that	is	her
aspect,	is	it	not?	Thyr?’
Ampelas	observed,	‘He	is	not	so	uncomprehending	as	you	believed,	Kalse.’
‘Then	again,’	Cotillion	continued,	‘you	too	claim	Thyr,	Eloth.	Ah,	that	was
clever	of	K’rul,	forcing	you	to	share	power.’
‘Unlike	Tiam,’	Ampelas	said,	‘when	we’re	killed	we	stay	dead.’
‘Which	brings	me	to	what	I	truly	need	to	understand.	The	Elder	Gods.	They
are	not	simply	of	one	world,	are	they?’
‘Of	course	not.’
‘And	how	long	have	they	been	around?’
‘Even	when	Darkness	ruled	alone,’	Ampelas	replied,	‘there	were	elemental
forces.	Moving	unseen	until	the	coming	of	Light.	Bound	only	to	their	own	laws.
It	is	the	nature	of	Darkness	that	it	but	rules	itself.’
‘And	is	the	Crippled	God	an	Elder?’
Silence.
Cotillion	found	he	was	holding	his	breath.	He	had	taken	a	twisted	path	to
this	question,	and	had	made	discoveries	along	the	way	–	so	much	to	think
about,	in	fact,	that	his	mind	was	numb,	besieged	by	all	that	he	had	learned.	‘I
need	to	know,’	he	said	in	a	slow	release	of	his	breath.
‘Why?’	Edgewalker	asked.
‘If	he	is,’	Cotillion	said,	‘then	another	question	follows.	How	does	one	kill
an	elemental	force?’
‘You	would	shatter	the	balance?’
‘It’s	already	been	shattered,	Edgewalker!	That	god	was	brought	down	to


the	surface	of	a	world.	And	chained.	His	power	torn	apart	and	secreted	in
minuscule,	virtually	lifeless	warrens,	but	all	of	them	linked	to	the	world	I	came
from—’
‘Too	bad	for	that	world,’	Ampelas	said.
The	smug	disregard	in	that	reply	stung	Cotillion.	He	breathed	deep	and
remained	silent,	until	the	anger	passed.	Then	he	faced	the	dragons	again.	‘And
from	that	world,	Ampelas,	he	is	poisoning	the	warrens.	Every	warren.	Are	you
capable	of	fighting	that?’
‘Were	we	freed—’
‘Were	you	freed,’	Cotillion	said,	with	a	hard	smile,	‘you	would	resume
your	original	purpose,	and	there	would	be	more	draconean	blood	spilled	in	the
Realm	of	Shadow.’
‘And	you	and	your	fellow	usurper	believe	you	are	capable	of	that?’
‘You	as	much	as	admitted	it,’	Cotillion	said.	‘You	can	be	killed,	and	when
you	have	been	killed,	you	stay	dead.	It	is	no	wonder	Anomandaris	chained	the
three	of	you.	In	obstinate	stupidity	you	have	no	equals—’
‘A	sundered	realm	is	the	weakest	realm	of	all!	Why	do	you	think	the
Crippled	God	is	working	through	it?’
‘Thank	you,’	said	Cotillion	to	Ampelas	in	a	quiet	tone.	‘That	is	what	I
needed	to	know.’	He	turned	away	and	began	walking	back	down	the	approach.
‘Wait!’
‘We	will	speak	again,	Ampelas,’	he	said	over	a	shoulder,	‘before	it	all	goes
to	the	Abyss.’
Edgewalker	followed.
As	soon	as	they	were	clear	of	the	ring	of	stones,	the	creature	spoke:	‘I	must
chide	myself.	I	have	underestimated	you,	Cotillion.’
‘It’s	a	common	enough	mistake.’
‘What	will	you	do	now?’
‘Why	should	I	tell	you?’
Edgewalker	did	not	immediately	reply.	They	continued	down	the	slope,
strode	out	onto	the	plain.	‘You	should	tell	me,’	the	apparition	finally	said,
‘because	I	might	be	inclined	to	give	you	assistance.’
‘That	would	mean	more	to	me	if	I	knew	who	–	what	–	you	are.’
‘You	may	consider	me…an	elemental	force.’
A	dull	chill	seeped	through	Cotillion.	‘I	see.	All	right,	Edgewalker.	It
appears	that	the	Crippled	God	has	launched	an	offensive	on	multiple	fronts.
The	First	Throne	of	the	T’lan	Imass	and	the	Throne	of	Shadow	are	the	ones
that	concern	us	the	most,	for	obvious	reasons.	In	these	two,	we	feel	we	are
fighting	alone	–	we	cannot	even	rely	upon	the	Hounds,	given	the	mastery	the


Tiste	Edur	seem	to	hold	over	them.	We	need	allies,	Edgewalker,	and	we	need
them	now.’
‘You	have	just	walked	away	from	three	such	allies—’
‘Allies	who	won’t	rip	our	heads	off	once	the	threat’s	been	negated.’
‘Ah,	there	is	that.	Very	well,	Cotillion,	I	will	give	the	matter	some
consideration.’
‘Take	your	time.’
‘That	seems	a	contrary	notion.’
‘If	one	is	lacking	a	grasp	of	sarcasm,	I	imagine	it	does	at	that.’
‘You	do	interest	me,	Cotillion.	And	that	is	a	rare	thing.’
‘I	know.	You	have	existed	longer…’	Cotillion’s	words	died	away.	An
elemental	force.	I	guess	he	has	at	that.	Dammit.
	
There	were	so	many	ways	of	seeing	this	dreadful	need,	the	vast	conspiracy	of
motivations	from	which	all	shades	and	casts	of	morality	could	be	culled,	that
Mappo	Runt	was	left	feeling	overwhelmed,	from	which	only	sorrow	streamed
down,	pure	and	chilled,	into	his	thoughts.	Beneath	the	coarse	skin	of	his	hands,
he	could	feel	the	night’s	memory	slowly	fading	from	the	stone,	and	soon	this
rock	would	know	the	assault	of	the	sun’s	heat	–	this	pitted,	root-tracked
underbelly	that	had	not	faced	the	sun	in	countless	millennia.
He	had	been	turning	over	stones.	Six	since	dawn.	Roughly	chiselled
dolomite	slabs,	and	beneath	each	one	he	had	found	a	scatter	of	broken	bones.
Small	bones,	fossilized,	and	though	in	countless	pieces	after	the	interminable
crushing	weight	of	the	stone,	the	skeletons	were,	as	far	as	Mappo	could
determine,	complete.
There	were,	had	been,	and	would	always	be,	all	manner	of	wars.	He	knew
that,	in	all	the	seared,	scar-hardened	places	in	his	soul,	so	there	was	no	shock
in	his	discovery	of	these	long-dead	Jaghut	children.	And	horror	had	run	a
mercifully	swift	passage	through	his	thoughts,	leaving	at	the	last	his	old	friend,
sorrow.
Streaming	down,	pure	and	chilled.
Wars	in	which	soldier	fought	soldier,	sorceror	clashed	with	sorceror.
Assassins	squared	off,	knife-blades	flickering	in	the	night.	Wars	in	which	the
lawful	battled	the	wilfully	unlawful;	in	which	the	sane	stood	against	the
sociopath.	He	had	seen	crystals	growing	up	in	a	single	night	from	the	desert
floor,	facet	after	facet	revealed	like	the	petals	of	an	opening	flower,	and	it
seemed	to	him	that	brutality	behaved	in	a	like	manner.	One	incident	leading	to
another,	until	a	conflagration	burgeoned,	swallowing	everyone	in	its	path.


Mappo	lifted	his	hands	from	the	slab’s	exposed	underside	and	slowly
straightened.	To	look	over	at	his	companion,	still	wading	the	warm	shallows	of
the	Raraku	Sea.	Like	a	child	unfolding	to	a	new,	unexpected	pleasure.
Splashing	about,	running	his	hands	through	the	reeds	that	had	appeared	as	if
remembered	into	existence	by	the	sea	itself.
Icarium.
My	crystal.
When	the	conflagration	consumed	children,	then	the	distinction	between
the	sane	and	the	sociopath	ceased	to	exist.	It	was	his	flaw,	he	well	knew,	to
yearn	to	seek	the	truth	of	every	side,	to	comprehend	the	myriad	justifications
for	committing	the	most	brutal	crimes.	Imass	had	been	enslaved	by	deceitful
Jaghut	tyrants,	led	down	paths	of	false	worship,	made	to	do	unspeakable	things.
Until	they	had	uncovered	the	deceivers.	Unleashing	vengeance,	first	against	the
tyrants,	then	against	all	Jaghut.	And	so	the	crystal	grew,	facet	after	facet…
Until	this…He	glanced	down	once	more	upon	the	child’s	bones.	Pinned
beneath	dolomite	slabs.	Not	limestone,	for	dolomite	provided	a	good	surface
for	carving	glyphs,	and	though	soft,	it	absorbed	power,	making	it	slower	to
erode	than	raw	limestone,	and	so	it	held	those	glyphs,	faded	and	soft-edged
after	all	these	thousands	of	years	to	be	sure,	but	discernible	still.
The	power	of	those	wards	persisted,	long	after	the	creature	imprisoned	by
them	had	died.
Dolomite	was	said	to	hold	memories.	A	belief	among	Mappo’s	own
people,	at	least,	who	in	their	wanderings	had	encountered	such	Imass	edifices,
the	impromptu	tombs,	the	sacred	circles,	the	sight-stones	on	hill	summits	–
encountered,	and	then	studiously	avoided.	For	the	hauntings	in	these	places	was
a	palpable	thing.
Or	so	we	managed	to	convince	ourselves.
He	sat	here,	on	the	edge	of	Raraku	Sea,	in	the	place	of	an	ancient	crime,
and	beyond	what	his	own	thoughts	conjured,	there	was	nothing.	The	stone	he
had	set	his	hands	upon	seemed	possessed	of	the	shortest	of	memories.	The	cold
of	darkness,	the	heat	of	the	sun.	That,	and	nothing	more.
The	shortest	of	memories.
Splashing,	and	Icarium	was	striding	up	onto	the	shoreline,	his	eyes	bright
with	pleasure.	‘Such	a	worthy	boon,	yes,	Mappo?	I	am	enlivened	by	these
waters.	Oh,	why	will	you	not	swim	and	so	be	blessed	by	Raraku’s	gift?’
Mappo	smiled.	‘Said	blessing	would	quickly	wash	off	this	old	hide,	my
friend.	I	fear	the	gift	would	be	wasted,	and	so	will	not	risk	disappointing	the
awakened	spirits.’
‘I	feel,’	Icarium	said,	‘as	if	the	quest	begins	anew.	I	will	finally	discover	the


truth.	Who	I	am.	All	that	I	have	done.	I	will	discover,	too,’	he	added	as	he
approached,	‘the	reason	for	your	friendship	–	that	you	should	always	be	found
at	my	side,	though	I	lose	myself	again	and	again.	Ah,	I	fear	I	have	offended	you
–	no,	please,	do	not	look	so	glum.	It	is	only	that	I	cannot	understand	why	you
have	sacrificed	yourself	so.	As	far	as	friendships	go,	this	must	be	a	most
frustrating	one	for	you.’
‘No,	Icarium,	there	is	no	sacrifice	involved.	Nor	frustration.	This	is	what
we	are,	and	this	is	what	we	do.	That	is	all.’
Icarium	sighed	and	turned	to	look	out	over	the	new	sea.	‘If	only	I	could	be
as	restful	of	thought	as	you,	Mappo…’
‘Children	have	died	here.’
The	Jhag	swung	round,	his	green	eyes	studying	the	ground	behind	the
Trell.	‘I	saw	you	pitching	rocks.	Yes,	I	see	them.	Who	were	they?’
Some	nightmare	the	night	before	had	scoured	away	Icarium’s	memories.
This	had	been	happening	more	often	of	late.	Troubling.	And…crushing.
‘Jaghut.	From	the	wars	with	the	T’lan	Imass.’
‘A	terrible	thing	to	have	done,’	Icarium	said.	The	sun	was	fast	drying	the
water	beaded	on	his	hairless,	green-grey	skin.	‘How	is	it	that	mortals	can	be	so
cavalier	with	life?	Look	at	this	freshwater	sea,	Mappo.	The	new	shoreline
burgeons	with	sudden	life.	Birds,	and	insects,	and	all	the	new	plants,	there	is	so
much	joy	revealed,	my	friend,	that	my	heart	feels	moments	from	bursting.’
‘Infinite	wars,’	Mappo	said.	‘Life’s	struggles,	each	trying	to	push	the	other
aside,	and	so	win	out.’
‘You	are	grim	company	this	morning,	Mappo.’
‘Aye,	I	am	at	that.	I	am	sorry,	Icarium.’
‘Shall	we	remain	here	for	a	time?’
Mappo	studied	his	friend.	Bereft	of	his	upper	garments,	he	looked	more
savage,	more	barbaric	than	usual.	The	dye	with	which	he	had	disguised	the
colour	of	his	skin	had	mostly	faded	away.	‘As	you	like.	This	journey	is	yours,
after	all.’
‘Knowledge	is	returning,’	Icarium	said,	eyes	still	on	the	sea.	‘Raraku’s	gift.
We	were	witness	to	the	rise	of	the	waters,	here	on	this	west	shore.	Further	west,
then,	there	will	be	a	river,	and	many	cities—’
Mappo’s	gaze	narrowed.	‘Only	one,	now,	to	speak	of,’	he	said.
‘Only	one?’
‘The	others	died	thousands	of	years	ago,	Icarium.’
‘N’karaphal?	Trebur?	Inath’an	Merusin?	Gone?’
‘Inath’an	Merusin	is	now	called	Mersin.	It	is	the	last	of	the	great	cities
lining	the	river.’


‘But	there	were	so	many,	Mappo.	I	recall	all	their	names.	Vinith,	Hedori
Kwil,	Tramara…’
‘All	practising	intensive	irrigation,	drawing	the	river ’s	waters	out	onto	the
plains.	All	clearing	forests	to	build	their	ships.	Those	cities	are	dead	now,	my
friend.	And	the	river,	its	waters	once	so	clear	and	sweet,	is	now	heavy	with	silts
and	much	diminished.	The	plains	have	lost	their	topsoil,	becoming	the	Lato
Odhan	to	the	east	of	the	Mersin	River,	and	Ugarat	Odhan	to	the	west.’
Icarium	slowly	raised	his	hands,	set	them	against	his	temples,	and	closed
his	eyes.	‘That	long,	Mappo?’	he	asked	in	a	frail	whisper.
‘Perhaps	the	sea	has	triggered	such	memories.	For	it	was	indeed	a	sea	back
then,	freshwater	for	the	most	part,	although	there	was	seepage	through	the
limestone	escarpment	from	Longshan	Bay	–	that	vast	barrier	was	rotting
through,	as	it	will	do	again,	I	imagine,	assuming	this	sea	reaches	as	far	north
as	it	once	did.’
‘The	First	Empire?’
‘It	was	falling	even	then.	There	was	no	recovery.’	Mappo	hesitated,	seeing
how	his	words	had	wounded	his	friend.	‘But	the	people	returned	to	this	land,
Icarium.	Seven	Cities	–	yes,	the	name	derives	from	old	remembrances.	New
cities	have	grown	from	the	ancient	rubble.	We	are	only	forty	leagues	from	one
right	now.	Lato	Revae.	It	is	on	the	coast—’
Icarium	turned	away	suddenly.	‘No,’	he	said.	‘I	am	not	yet	ready	to	leave,	to
cross	any	oceans.	This	land	holds	secrets	–	my	secrets,	Mappo.	Perhaps	the
antiquity	of	my	memories	will	prove	advantageous.	The	lands	of	my
mindscape	are	the	lands	of	my	own	past,	after	all,	and	they	might	well	yield
truths.	We	shall	walk	those	ancient	roads.’
The	Trell	nodded.	‘I	will	break	camp,	then.’
‘Trebur.’
Mappo	turned,	waited	with	growing	dread.
Icarium’s	eyes	were	fixed	on	him	now,	the	vertical	pupils	narrowed	to
black	slivers	by	the	bright	sunlight.	‘I	have	memories	of	Trebur.	I	spent	time
there,	in	the	City	of	Domes.	I	did	something.	An	important	thing.’	He	frowned.
‘I	did…something.’
‘It	is	an	arduous	journey	ahead	of	us,	then,’	Mappo	said.	‘Three,	maybe
four	days	to	the	edge	of	the	Thalas	Mountains.	Ten	more	at	the	least	to	reach
the	Mersin	River ’s	Wend.	The	channel	has	moved	from	the	site	of	ancient
Trebur.	A	day’s	travel	west	of	the	river,	then,	and	we	will	find	those	ruins.’
‘Will	there	be	villages	and	such	on	our	route?’
Mappo	shook	his	head.	‘These	Odhans	are	virtually	lifeless	now,	Icarium.
Occasionally,	Vedanik	tribes	venture	down	from	the	Thalas	Mountains,	but	not


at	this	time	of	year.	Keep	your	bow	at	the	ready	–	there	are	antelope	and	hares
and	drolig.’
‘Waterholes,	then?’
‘I	know	them,’	Mappo	said.
Icarium	walked	over	to	his	gear.	‘We	have	done	this	before,	haven’t	we?’
Yes.	‘Not	for	a	long	while,	my	friend.’	Almost	eighty	years,	in	fact.	But	the
last	time,	we	stumbled	onto	it	–	you	remembered	nothing.	This	time,	I	fear,	it
will	be	different.
Icarium	paused,	the	horn-rimmed	bow	in	his	hands,	and	looked	over	at
Mappo.	‘You	are	so	patient	with	me,’	he	said,	with	a	faint,	sad	smile,	‘whilst	I
wander,	ever	lost.’
Mappo	shrugged.	‘It	is	what	we	do.’

The	Path’Apur	Mountains	rimmed	the	far	horizon	to	the	south.	It	had	been
almost	a	week	since	they	had	left	the	city	of	Pan’potsun,	and	with	each	day	the
number	of	villages	they	passed	through	had	dwindled,	whilst	the	distance
between	them	lengthened.	Their	pace	was	torturously	slow,	but	that	was	to	be
expected,	travelling	on	foot	as	they	did,	and	with	a	man	in	their	company	who
had	seemingly	lost	his	mind.
Sun-darkened	skin	almost	olive	beneath	the	dust,	the	demon	Greyfrog
clambered	onto	the	boulder	and	squatted	at	Cutter ’s	side.
‘Declaration.	It	is	said	that	the	wasps	of	the	desert	guard	gems	and	such.
Query.	Has	Cutter	heard	such	tales?	Anticipatory	pause.’
‘Sounds	more	like	someone’s	bad	idea	of	a	joke,’	Cutter	replied.	Below
them	was	a	flat	clearing	surrounded	by	massive	rock	outcroppings.	It	was	the
place	of	their	camp.	Scillara	and	Felisin	Younger	sat	in	view,	tending	the
makeshift	hearth.	The	madman	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.	Off	wandering	again,
Cutter	surmised.	Holding	conversations	with	ghosts,	or,	perhaps	more	likely,
the	voices	in	his	head.	Oh,	Heboric	carried	curses,	the	barbs	of	a	tiger	on	his
skin,	the	benediction	of	a	god	of	war,	and	those	voices	in	his	head	might	well
be	real.	Even	so,	break	a	man’s	spirit	enough	times…
‘Belated	observation.	Grubs,	there	in	the	dark	reaches	of	the	nest.	Nest?
Bemused.	Hive?	Nest.’
Frowning,	Cutter	glanced	over	at	the	demon.	Its	flat,	hairless	head	and
broad,	four-eyed	face	were	lumpy	and	swollen	with	wasp	stings.	‘You	didn’t.
You	did.’
‘Irate	is	their	common	state,	I	now	believe.	Breaking	open	their	cave	made


them	more	so.	We	clashed	in	buzzing	disagreement.	I	fared	the	worse,	I	think.’
‘Black	wasps?’
‘Tilt	head,	query.	Black?	Dreaded	reply,	why	yes,	they	were.	Black.
Rhetorical,	was	that	significant?’
‘Be	glad	you’re	a	demon,’	Cutter	said.	‘Two	or	three	stings	from	those	will
kill	a	grown	man.	Ten	will	kill	a	horse.’
‘A	horse	–	we	had	those	–	you	had	them.	I	was	forced	to	run.	Horse.	Large
four-legged	animal.	Succulent	meat.’
‘People	tend	to	ride	them,’	Cutter	said.	‘Until	they	drop.	Then	we	eat	them.’
‘Multiple	uses,	excellent	and	unwasteful.	Did	we	eat	yours?	Where	can	we
find	more	such	creatures?’
‘We	have	not	the	money	to	purchase	them,	Greyfrog.	And	we	sold	ours	for
food	and	supplies	in	Pan’potsun.’
‘Obstinate	reasonableness.	No	money.	Then	we	should	take,	my	young
friend.	And	so	hasten	this	journey	to	its	much-awaited	conclusion.	Latter	tone
indicating	mild	despair.’
‘Still	no	word	from	L’oric?’
‘Worriedly.	No.	My	brother	is	silent.’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time.	The	demon	was	picking	the	serrated	edges	of	its
lips,	where,	Cutter	saw	upon	a	closer	look,	grey	flecks	and	crushed	wasps	were
snagged.	Greyfrog	had	eaten	the	wasp	nest.	No	wonder	the	wasps	had	been
irate.	Cutter	rubbed	at	his	face.	He	needed	a	shave.	And	a	bath.	And	clean,	new
clothes.
And	a	purpose	in	life.	Once,	long	ago,	when	he	had	been	Crokus
Younghand	of	Darujhistan,	his	uncle	had	begun	preparing	the	way	for	a
reformed	Crokus.	A	youth	of	the	noble	courts,	a	figure	of	promise,	a	figure
inviting	to	the	young,	wealthy,	pampered	women	of	the	city.	A	short-lived
ambition,	in	every	way.	His	uncle	dead,	and	dead,	too,	Crokus	Younghand.	No
heap	of	ashes	left	to	stir.
What	I	was	is	not	what	I	am.	Two	men,	identical	faces,	but	different	eyes.	In
what	they	have	seen,	in	what	they	reflect	upon	the	world.
‘Bitter	taste,’	Greyfrog	said	in	his	mind,	long	tongue	slithering	out	to
collect	the	last	fragments.	A	heavy,	gusty	sigh.	‘Yet	oh	so	filling.	Query.	Can
one	burst	from	what	one	has	inside?’
I	hope	not.	‘We’d	best	find	Heboric,	if	we	are	to	make	use	of	this	day.’
‘Noted	earlier.	Ghost	Hands	was	exploring	the	rocks	above.	The	scent	of	a
trail	led	him	onward	and	upward.’
‘A	trail?’
‘Water.	He	sought	the	source	of	the	spring	we	see	pooling	below	near	the


fleshy	women	who,	said	jealously,	so	adore	you.’
Cutter	straightened.	‘They	don’t	seem	so	fleshy	to	me,	Greyfrog.’
‘Curious.	Mounds	of	flesh,	water	storage	vessels,	there	on	the	hips	and
behind.	On	the	chest—’
‘All	right.	That	kind	of	fleshy.	You	are	too	much	the	carnivore,	demon.’
‘Yes.	Fullest	delicious	agreement.	Shall	I	go	find	Ghost	Hands?’
‘No,	I	will.	I	think	those	riders	who	passed	us	yesterday	on	the	track	are	not
as	far	away	as	they	should	be,	and	I	would	be	relieved	to	know	you	are
guarding	Scillara	and	Felisin.’
‘None	shall	take	them	away,’	Greyfrog	said.
Cutter	looked	down	at	the	squatting	demon.	‘Scillara	and	Felisin	are	not
horses.’
Greyfrog’s	large	eyes	blinked	slowly,	first	the	two	side-by-side,	then	the
pair	above	and	below.	Tongue	darted.	‘Blithe.	Of	course	not.	Insufficient
number	of	legs,	worthily	observed.’
Cutter	edged	to	the	back	of	the	boulder,	then	leapt	across	to	another	one
tucked	deeper	into	the	talus-heaped	cliff-side.	He	grasped	a	ledge	and	pulled
himself	up.	Little	different	from	climbing	a	balcony,	or	an	estate	wall.	Adore
me,	do	they?	He	had	trouble	believing	that.	Easier	to	rest	eyes	upon,	he
imagined,	than	an	old	man	and	a	demon,	but	that	was	not	adoration.	He	could
make	no	sense	of	those	two	women.	Bickering	like	sisters,	competing	over
everything	in	sight,	and	over	things	Cutter	couldn’t	see	or	comprehend.	At
other	times,	unaccountably	close,	as	if	sharing	a	secret.	Both	fussed	over
Heboric	Ghost	Hands,	Destriant	of	Treach.
Maybe	war	needs	nurturers.	Maybe	the	god	is	happy	with	this.	The	priest
needs	acolytes,	after	all.	That	might	have	been	expected	with	Scillara,	since
Heboric	had	drawn	her	out	of	a	nightmarish	existence,	and	indeed	had	healed
her	in	some	as-yet	unspecified	way	–	if	Cutter	had	surmised	correctly	from	the
meagre	comments	overheard	now	and	then.	Scillara	had	a	lot	to	be	grateful	for.
And	for	Felisin,	there	had	been	something	about	revenge,	delivered	to	her
satisfaction	against	someone	who	had	done	her	a	terrible	wrong.	It	was
complicated.	So,	a	moment’s	thought,	and	it’s	obvious	they	do	possess	secrets.
Too	many	of	them.	Oh,	what	do	I	care?	Women	are	nothing	but	a	mass	of
contradictions	surrounded	by	deadly	pitfalls.	Approach	at	your	own	risk.	Better
yet,	approach	not	at	all.
He	reached	a	chimney	in	the	cliff-side	and	began	working	his	way	up	it.
Water	trickled	down	vertical	cracks	in	the	rock.	Flies	and	other	winged	insects
swarmed	him;	the	corners	of	the	chimney	were	thickly	webbed	by
opportunistic	spiders.	By	the	time	he	climbed	free	of	it,	he	had	been	thoroughly


bitten	and	was	covered	in	thick,	dusty	strands.	He	paused	to	brush	himself	off,
then	looked	around.	A	rough	trail	continued	upward,	winding	between
collapsed	shelves	of	stone.	He	headed	up	the	path.
At	their	meandering,	desultory	pace,	they	were	months	from	the	coast,	as
far	as	he	could	determine.	Once	there,	they	would	have	to	find	a	boat	to	take
them	across	to	Otataral	Island.	A	forbidden	journey,	and	Malazan	ships
patrolled	those	waters	diligently	–	or	at	least	they	did	before	the	uprising.	It
might	be	that	they	were	yet	to	fully	reorganize	such	things.
They	would	begin	the	passage	at	night,	in	any	case.
Heboric	had	to	return	something.	Something	found	on	the	island.	It	was	all
very	vague.	And	for	some	reason	Cotillion	had	wanted	Cutter	to	accompany
the	Destriant.	Or,	rather,	to	protect	Felisin	Younger.	A	path	to	take,	when	before
there	had	been	none.	Even	so,	it	was	not	the	best	of	motivations.	A	flight	from
despair	was	pathetic,	especially	since	it	could	not	succeed.
Adore	me,	do	they?	What	is	here	to	adore?
A	voice	ahead:	‘All	that	is	mysterious	is	as	a	lure	to	the	curious.	I	hear	your
steps,	Cutter.	Come,	see	this	spider.’
Cutter	stepped	round	an	outcrop	and	saw	Heboric,	kneeling	beside	a
stunted	scrub	oak.
‘And	where	there	is	pain	and	vulnerability	bound	into	the	lure,	it	becomes
all	the	more	attractive.	See	this	spider?	Below	this	branch,	yes?	Trembling	on
its	web,	one	leg	dismembered,	thrashing	about	as	if	in	pain.	Its	quarry,	you	see,
is	not	flies,	or	moths.	Oh	no,	what	she	hunts	is	fellow	spiders.’
‘Who	care	nothing	for	pain	or	mystery,	Heboric,’	Cutter	said,	crouching
down	to	study	the	creature.	The	size	of	a	child’s	hand.	‘That’s	not	one	of	its
legs.	It’s	a	prop.’
‘You	are	assuming	other	spiders	can	count.	She	knows	better.’
‘All	very	interesting,’	Cutter	said,	straightening,	‘but	we	must	get	going.’
‘We’re	all	watching	this	play	out,’	Heboric	said,	leaning	back	and	studying
the	strangely	pulsing,	taloned	hands	that	flitted	in	and	out	of	existence	at	the
ends	of	his	wrists.
We?	Oh,	yes,	you	and	your	invisible	friends.	‘I	wouldn’t	think	there’d	be
many	ghosts	in	these	hills.’
‘Then	you	would	be	wrong.	Hill	tribes.	Endless	warfare	–	it’s	those	who
fall	in	battle	that	I	see,	only	those	who	fall	in	battle.’	The	hands	flexed.	‘The
mouth	of	the	spring	is	just	ahead.	They	fought	over	control	of	it.’	His	toad-like
features	twisted.	‘There’s	always	a	reason,	or	reasons.	Always.’
Cutter	sighed,	studied	the	sky.	‘I	know,	Heboric.’
‘Knowing	means	nothing.’


‘I	know	that,	too.’
Heboric	rose.	‘Treach’s	greatest	comfort,	understanding	that	there	are
infinite	reasons	for	waging	war.’
‘And	are	you	comforted	by	that,	too?’
The	Destriant	smiled.	‘Come.	That	demon	who	speaks	in	our	heads	is
obsessing	about	flesh	at	the	moment,	with	watering	mouth.’
They	made	their	way	down	the	trail.	‘He	won’t	eat	them.’
‘I	am	not	convinced	that	is	the	nature	of	his	appetite.’
Cutter	snorted.	‘Heboric,	Greyfrog	is	a	four-handed,	four-eyed,	oversized
toad.’
‘With	a	surprisingly	boundless	imagination.	Tell	me,	how	much	do	you
know	of	him?’
‘Less	than	you.’
‘It	has	not	occurred	to	me,	until	now,’	Heboric	said,	as	he	led	Cutter	onto	a
path	offering	a	less	precarious	climb	–	but	more	roundabout	–	than	the	one	the
Daru	had	used,	‘that	we	know	virtually	nothing	of	who	Greyfrog	was,	and	what
he	did,	back	in	his	home	realm.’
This	was	proving	an	unusually	long	lucid	episode	for	Heboric.	Cutter
wondered	if	something	had	changed	–	he	hoped	it	would	stay	this	way.	‘Then
we	could	ask	him.’
‘I	shall.’
	
In	the	camp,	Scillara	kicked	sand	over	the	few	remaining	coals	of	the	cookfire.
She	walked	over	to	her	pack	and	sat	down,	settling	her	back	against	it	as	she
pushed	more	rustleaf	into	her	pipe	and	drew	hard	until	smoke	streamed	from
it.	Across	from	her,	Greyfrog	squatted	in	front	of	Felisin,	making	strange
whimpering	sounds.
She	had	seen	so	little	for	so	long.	Drugged	insensate	by	durhang,	filled
with	infantile	thoughts	by	her	old	master,	Bidithal.	And	now	she	was	free,	and
still	wide-eyed	with	the	complexities	of	the	world.	The	demon	lusted	after
Felisin,	she	believed.	Either	to	mate	with	or	to	devour	–	it	was	hard	to	tell.
While	Felisin	regarded	Greyfrog	as	if	it	was	a	dog	better	to	stroke	than	kick.
Which	might	in	turn	be	giving	the	demon	the	wrong	notions.
It	spoke	with	the	others	in	their	minds,	but	had	yet	to	do	so	with	Scillara.
Out	of	courtesy	to	her,	the	ones	the	demon	addressed	replied	out	loud,
although	of	course	they	did	not	have	to	–	and	perhaps	didn’t	more	often	than
not.	There	was	no	way	for	Scillara	to	tell.	She	wondered	why	she	had	been	set
apart	–	what	did	Greyfrog	see	within	her	that	so	affected	its	apparent


loquaciousness?
Well,	poisons	do	linger.	I	may	be…unpalatable.	In	her	old	life,	she	might
have	felt	some	resentment,	or	suspicion,	assuming	she	felt	anything	at	all.	But
now,	it	appeared	to	her	that	she	didn’t	much	care.	Something	had	taken	shape
within	her,	and	it	was	self-contained	and,	oddly	enough,	self-assured.
Perhaps	that	came	with	being	pregnant.	Just	beginning	to	show,	and	that
would	only	get	worse.	And	this	time	there	would	be	no	alchemies	to	scour	the
seed	out	of	her.	Although	other	means	were	possible,	of	course.	She	was
undecided	on	whether	to	keep	the	child,	whose	father	was	probably	Korbolo
Dom	but	could	have	been	one	of	his	officers,	or	someone	else.	Not	that	that
mattered,	since	whoever	he	had	been	he	was	probably	dead	now,	a	thought	that
pleased	her.
The	constant	nausea	was	wearying,	although	the	rustleaf	helped.	There	was
the	ache	in	her	breasts,	and	the	weight	of	them	made	her	back	ache,	and	that
was	unpleasant.	Her	appetite	had	burgeoned,	and	she	was	getting	heavier,
especially	on	the	hips.	The	others	had	simply	assumed	that	such	changes	were
coming	with	her	returning	health	–	she	hadn’t	coughed	in	over	a	week,	and	all
this	walking	had	strengthened	her	legs	–	and	she	did	not	disabuse	them	of	their
assumptions.
A	child.	What	would	she	do	with	it?	What	would	it	expect	of	her?	What	was
it	mothers	did	anyway?	Sell	their	babies,	mostly.	To	temples,	to	slavers,	to	the
harem	merchants	if	it’s	a	girl.	Or	keep	it	and	teach	it	to	beg.	Steal.	Sell	its	body.
This,	born	of	sketchy	observations	and	the	stories	told	by	the	waifs	of	Sha’ik’s
encampment.	Meaning,	a	child	was	an	investment	of	sorts,	which	made	sense.	A
return	on	nine	months	of	misery	and	discomfort.
She	supposed	she	could	do	something	like	that.	Sell	it.	Assuming	she	let	it
live	that	long.
It	was	a	dilemma	indeed,	but	she	had	plenty	of	time	to	think	on	it.	To	make
her	decision.
Greyfrog’s	head	twisted	round,	looking	past	Scillara’s	position.	She	turned
to	see	four	men	emerge	and	halt	at	the	edge	of	the	clearing.	The	fourth	one	was
leading	horses.	The	riders	who	had	passed	them	yesterday.	One	was	carrying	a
loaded	crossbow,	the	weapon	trained	on	the	demon.
‘Be	sure,’	the	man	said	in	a	growl	to	Felisin,	‘that	you	keep	that	damned
thing	away	from	us.’
The	man	on	his	right	laughed.	‘A	four-eyed	dog.	Yes,	woman,	get	a	leash
on	it…now.	We	don’t	want	any	blood	spilled.	Well,’	he	added,	‘not	much.’
‘Where	are	the	two	men	you	were	with?’	the	man	with	the	crossbow	asked.
Scillara	set	down	her	pipe.	‘Not	here,’	she	said,	rising	and	tugging	at	her


tunic.	‘Just	do	what	you’ve	come	here	to	do	and	then	leave.’
‘Now	that’s	accommodating.	You,	with	the	dog,	are	you	going	to	be	as	nice
as	your	friend	here?’
Felisin	said	nothing.	She	had	gone	white.
‘Never	mind	her,’	Scillara	said.	‘I’m	enough	for	all	of	you.’
‘But	maybe	you	ain’t	enough,	as	far	as	we’re	concerned,’	the	man	said,
smiling.
It	wasn’t	even	an	ugly	smile,	she	decided.	She	could	do	this.	‘I	plan	on
surprising	you,	then.’
The	man	handed	the	crossbow	over	to	one	of	his	comrades	and	unclasped
the	belt	of	his	telaba.	‘We’ll	see	about	that.	Guthrim,	if	that	dog-thing	moves,
kill	it.’
‘It’s	a	lot	bigger	than	most	dogs	I’ve	seen,’	Guthrim	replied.
‘Quarrel’s	poisoned,	remember?	Black	wasp.’
‘Maybe	I	should	just	kill	it	now.’
The	other	man	hesitated,	then	nodded.	‘Go	ahead.’
The	crossbow	thudded.
Greyfrog’s	right	hand	intercepted	the	quarrel,	plucking	it	out	of	the	air,
then	the	demon	studied	it,	and	slithered	out	its	tongue	to	lick	the	poison.
‘The	Seven	take	me!’	Guthrim	whispered	in	disbelief.
‘Oh,’	Scillara	said	to	Greyfrog,	‘don’t	make	a	mess	of	this.	There’s	no
problem	here—’
‘He	disagrees,’	Felisin	said,	her	voice	thin	with	fear.
‘Well,	convince	him	otherwise.’	I	can	do	this.	Just	like	it	was	before.
Doesn’t	matter,	they’re	just	men.
‘I	can’t,	Scillara.’
Guthrim	was	reloading	the	crossbow,	whilst	the	first	man	and	the	one	not
holding	the	reins	of	the	horses	both	drew	scimitars.
Greyfrog	bounded	forward,	appallingly	fast,	and	leapt	upward,	mouth
opening	wide.	That	mouth	clamped	onto	Guthrim’s	head.	The	demon’s	lower
jaw	slipped	out	from	its	hinges	and	the	man’s	head	disappeared.	Greyfrog’s
momentum	and	weight	toppled	him.	Horrific	crunching	sounds,	Guthrim’s
body	spasming,	spraying	fluids,	then	sagging	limp.
Greyfrog’s	jaws	closed	with	a	scraping,	then	snapping	sound,	then	the
demon	clambered	away,	leaving	behind	a	headless	corpse.
The	remaining	three	men	had	stared	in	shock	during	this	demonstration.
But	now	they	acted.	The	first	one	cried	out,	a	strangled,	terror-filled	sound,	and
rushed	forward,	raising	his	scimitar.
Spitting	out	a	mangled,	crushed	mess	of	hair	and	bone,	Greyfrog	jumped


to	meet	him.	One	hand	caught	the	man’s	sword-arm,	twisted	hard	until	the
elbow	popped,	flesh	tore,	and	blood	spurted.	Another	hand	closed	on	his	throat
and	squeezed,	crushing	cartilage.	The	man’s	scream	never	reached	the	air.	Eyes
bulging,	face	rushing	to	a	shade	of	dark	grey,	tongue	jutting	like	some
macabre	creature	trying	to	climb	free,	he	collapsed	beneath	the	demon.	A	third
hand	held	the	other	arm.	Greyfrog	used	the	fourth	one	to	reach	back	and
scratch	itself.
The	remaining	swordsman	fled	to	where	the	fourth	man	was	already
scrabbling	onto	his	horse.
Greyfrog	leapt	again.	A	fist	cracked	against	the	back	of	the	swordsman’s
head,	punching	the	bone	inward.	He	sprawled,	weapon	flying.	The	demon’s
charge	caught	the	last	man	with	one	leg	in	the	stirrup.
The	horse	shied	away	with	a	squeal,	and	Greyfrog	dragged	the	man	down,
then	bit	his	face.
A	moment	later	this	man’s	head	vanished	into	the	demon’s	maw	as	had	the
first	one.	More	crunching	sounds,	more	twitching	kicks,	grasping	hands.	Then,
merciful	death.
The	demon	spat	out	shattered	bone	still	held	in	place	by	the	scalp.	It	fell	in
such	a	way	that	Scillara	found	herself	looking	at	the	man’s	face	–	no	flesh,	no
eyes,	just	the	skin,	puckered	and	bruised.	She	stared	at	it	a	moment	longer,	then
forced	herself	to	look	away.
At	Felisin,	who	had	backed	up	as	far	as	she	could	against	the	stone	wall,
knees	drawn	up,	hands	covering	her	eyes.
‘It’s	done,’	Scillara	said.	‘Felisin,	it’s	over.’
The	hands	lowered,	revealing	an	expression	of	terror	and	revulsion.
Greyfrog	was	dragging	bodies	away,	round	behind	a	mass	of	boulders,
moving	with	haste.	Ignoring	the	demon	for	the	moment,	Scillara	walked	over
to	crouch	in	front	of	Felisin.	‘It	would	have	been	easier	my	way,’	she	said.	‘At
least	a	lot	less	messy.’
Felisin	stared	at	her.	‘He	sucked	out	their	brains.’
‘I	could	see	that.’
‘Delicious,	he	said.’
‘He’s	a	demon,	Felisin.	Not	a	dog,	not	a	pet.	A	demon.’
‘Yes.’	The	word	was	whispered.
‘And	now	we	know	what	he	can	do.’
A	mute	nod.
‘So,’	Scillara	said	quietly,	‘don’t	get	too	friendly.’	She	straightened,	and
saw	Cutter	and	Heboric	clambering	down	from	the	ridge.


	
‘Triumph	and	pride!	We	have	horses!’
Cutter	slowed.	‘We	heard	a	scream—’
‘Horses,’	Heboric	said	as	he	walked	towards	the	skittish	animals.	‘That’s	a
bit	of	luck.’
‘Innocent.	Scream?	No,	friend	Cutter.	Was	Greyfrog…breaking	wind.’
‘Really.	And	did	these	horses	just	wander	up	to	you?’
‘Bold.	Yes!	Most	curious!’
Cutter	headed	over	to	study	some	odd	stains	in	the	scuffled	dust.
Greyfrog’s	palm-prints	were	evident	in	the	effort	to	clean	up	the	mess.	‘Some
blood	here…’
‘Shock,	dismay…remorse.’
‘Remorse.	At	what	happened	here,	or	at	being	found	out?’
‘Sly.	Why,	the	former,	of	course,	friend	Cutter.’
Grimacing,	Cutter	glanced	over	at	Scillara	and	Felisin,	studied	their
expressions.	‘I	think,’	he	said	slowly,	‘that	I	am	glad	I	was	not	here	to	see	what
you	two	saw.’
‘Yes,’	Scillara	replied.	‘You	should	be.’
‘Best	keep	your	distance	from	these	beasts,	Greyfrog,’	Heboric	called	out.
‘They	may	not	like	me,	much,	but	they	really	don’t	like	you.’
‘Confident.	They	just	don’t	know	me	yet.’
	
‘I	wouldn’t	feed	this	to	a	rat,’	Smiles	said,	picking	desultorily	at	the	fragments
of	meat	on	the	tin	plate	resting	in	her	lap.	‘Look,	even	the	flies	are	avoiding	it.’
‘It’s	not	the	food	they’re	avoiding,’	Koryk	said.	‘It’s	you.’
She	sneered	across	at	him.	‘That’s	called	respect.	A	foreign	word	to	you,	I
know.	Seti	are	just	failed	Wickans.	Everybody	knows	that.	And	you,	you’re	a
failed	Seti.’	She	took	her	plate	and	sent	it	skidding	across	the	sand	towards
Koryk.	‘Here,	stick	it	in	your	half-blood	ears	and	save	it	for	later.’
‘She’s	so	sweet	after	a	day’s	hard	riding,’	Koryk	said	to	Tarr,	with	a	broad,
white	smile.
‘Keep	baiting	her,’	the	corporal	replied,	‘and	you’ll	probably	regret	it.’	He
too	was	eyeing	what	passed	for	supper	on	his	plate,	his	normally	placid
expression	wrinkling	into	a	slight	scowl.	‘It’s	horse,	I’m	sure	of	it.’
‘Dug	up	from	some	horse	cemetery,’	Smiles	said,	stretching	out	her	legs.
‘I’d	kill	for	some	grease-fish,	baked	in	clay	over	coals	down	on	the	beach.
Yellow-spiced,	weed-wrapped.	A	jug	of	Meskeri	wine	and	some	worthy	lad


from	the	inland	village.	A	farm-boy,	big—’
‘Hood’s	litany,	enough!’	Koryk	leaned	forward	and	spat	into	the	fire.	‘You
rounding	up	some	pig-swiller	with	fluff	on	his	chin	is	the	only	story	you	know,
that	much	is	obvious.	Dammit,	Smiles,	we’ve	heard	it	all	a	thousand	times.	You
crawling	out	of	Father ’s	estate	at	night	to	get	your	hands	and	knees	wet	down
on	the	beach.	Where	was	all	this	again?	Oh,	right,	little-girl	dream-land,	I’d
forgotten—’
A	knife	thudded	into	Koryk’s	right	calf.	Bellowing,	he	scrambled	back,
then	sank	down	to	clutch	at	his	leg.
Soldiers	from	nearby	squads	looked	over,	squinting	through	the	dust	that
suffused	the	entire	camp.	A	moment’s	curiosity,	quickly	fading.
As	Koryk	loosed	a	stream	of	indignant	curses,	both	hands	trying	to	stem
the	bleeding,	Bottle	sighed	and	rose	from	where	he	sat.	‘See	what	happens
when	the	old	men	leave	us	to	play	on	our	own?	Hold	still,	Koryk,’	he	said	as	he
approached.	‘I’ll	get	you	mended	–	won’t	take	long—’
‘Make	it	soon,’	the	half-blood	Seti	said	in	a	growl,	‘so	I	can	slit	that	bitch’s
throat.’
Bottle	glanced	over	at	the	woman,	then	leaned	in	close	to	Koryk.	‘Easy.
She’s	looking	a	little	pale.	A	bad	throw—’
‘Oh,	and	what	was	she	aiming	at?’
Corporal	Tarr	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Strings	won’t	be	happy	with	you,
Smiles,’	he	said,	shaking	his	head.
‘He	moved	his	leg—’
‘And	you	threw	a	knife	at	him.’
‘It	was	that	little-girl	thing.	I	was	provoked.’
‘Never	mind	how	it	started.	You	might	try	apologizing	–	maybe	Koryk	will
leave	it	at	that—’
‘Sure,’	Koryk	said.	‘The	day	Hood	climbs	into	his	own	grave.’
‘Bottle,	you	stopped	the	bleeding	yet?’
‘Pretty	much,	Corporal.’	Bottle	tossed	the	knife	over	towards	Smiles.	It
landed	at	her	feet,	the	blade	slick.
‘Thanks,	Bottle,’	Koryk	said.	‘Now	she	can	try	again.’
The	knife	thudded	into	the	ground	between	the	half-blood’s	boots.
All	eyes	snapped	to	stare	at	Smiles.
Bottle	licked	his	lips.	That	damned	thing	had	come	all	too	close	to	his	left
hand.
‘That’s	where	I	was	aiming,’	Smiles	said.
‘What	did	I	tell	you?’	Koryk	asked,	his	voice	strangely	high.
Bottle	drew	a	deep	breath	to	slow	his	pounding	heart.


Tarr	walked	over	and	pulled	the	knife	from	the	ground.	‘I’ll	keep	this	for	a
while,	I	think.’
‘I	don’t	care,’	Smiles	said.	‘I	got	plenty	more.’
‘And	you	will	keep	them	sheathed.’
‘Aye,	Corporal.	So	long	as	no-one	provokes	me.’
‘She’s	insane,’	Koryk	muttered.
‘She’s	not	insane,’	Bottle	replied.	‘Just	lonely	for…’
‘Some	farm-boy	from	the	inland	village,’	Koryk	finished,	grinning.
‘Probably	a	cousin,’	Bottle	added,	low	so	that	only	Koryk	heard.
The	man	laughed.
There.	Bottle	sighed.	Another	hairy	moment	on	this	endless	march	passed
by,	with	only	a	little	blood	spilled.	The	Fourteenth	Army	was	tired.	Miserable.
It	didn’t	like	itself,	much.	Deprived	of	delivering	fullest	vengeance	upon	Sha’ik
and	the	murderers,	rapists	and	cut-throats	who	followed	her,	and	now	in	slow
pursuit	of	the	last	remnant	of	that	rebel	army,	along	crumbling,	dusty	roads	in
a	parched	land,	through	sandstorms	and	worse,	the	Fourteenth	still	waited	for	a
resolution.	It	wanted	blood,	but	so	far	most	of	the	blood	spilled	had	been	its
own,	as	altercations	turned	into	feuds	and	things	got	ugly.
The	Fists	were	doing	their	best	to	keep	things	under	control,	but	they	were
as	worn	down	as	everyone	else.	It	didn’t	help	that	there	were	very	few	captains
worthy	of	the	rank	in	the	companies.
And	we	don’t	have	one	at	all,	now	that	Keneb	got	moved.	There	was	the
rumour	of	a	new	contingent	of	recruits	and	officers	disembarking	at	Lato
Revae	and	now	somewhere	behind	them,	hurrying	to	catch	up,	but	that	rumour
had	begun	ten	days	ago.	The	fools	should	have	caught	them	by	now.
Messengers	had	been	coming	and	going	in	the	last	two	days,	pelting	along
the	track	from	their	wake,	then	back	again.	Dujek	Onearm	and	the	Adjunct
were	doing	a	lot	of	talking,	that	much	was	clear.	What	wasn’t	was	what	they
were	talking	about.	Bottle	had	thought	about	eavesdropping	on	the	command
tent	and	its	occupants,	as	he	had	done	many	times	before,	between	Aren	and
Raraku,	but	the	presence	of	Quick	Ben	made	him	nervous.	A	High	Mage.	If
Quick	turned	over	a	rock	and	found	Bottle	under	it,	there’d	be	Hood	to	pay.
The	damned	bastards	fleeing	ahead	of	them	could	run	for	ever,	and
probably	would	if	their	commander	had	any	brains.	He	could	have	chosen	a
last	stand	at	any	time.	Heroic	and	inspiring	in	its	pointlessness.	But	it	seemed	he
was	too	clever	for	that.	Westward,	ever	westward,	out	into	the	wastes.
Bottle	returned	to	where	he	had	been	sitting,	collecting	handfuls	of	sand	to
scrub	Koryk’s	blood	from	his	fingers	and	palms.	We’re	just	getting	on	each
other’s	nerves.	That’s	all.	His	grandmother	would	know	what	to	do	about	this


situation,	but	she	was	long	dead	and	her	spirit	was	anchored	to	the	old	farm
outside	Jakata,	a	thousand	leagues	from	here.	He	could	almost	see	her,	shaking
her	head	and	squinting	in	that	half-crazed	genius	way	she’d	had.	Wise	in	the
ways	of	mortals,	seeing	through	to	every	weakness,	every	flaw,	reading
unconscious	gestures	and	momentary	expressions,	cutting	through	the
confused	surface	to	lay	bare	the	bones	of	truth.	Nothing	was	hidden	from	her.
He	could	not	talk	with	her,	however.
But	there’s	another	woman…isn’t	there?	Despite	the	heat,	Bottle	shivered.
She	still	haunted	his	dreams,	that	Eres’al	witch.	Still	showed	him	the	ancient
hand-axes	spread	out	over	this	land	like	the	stone	leaves	of	a	worldencompassing	tree,	scattered	by	the	winds	of	countless	passing	ages.	He	knew,
in	fact,	that	fifty	or	so	paces	south	of	this	track,	there	was	a	basin	cluttered	with
the	damned	things.	Out	there,	a	short	walk,	waiting	for	him.
I	see	them,	but	I	do	not	yet	understand	their	significance.	That’s	the
problem.	I’m	not	equal	to	this.
His	eyes	caught	movement	down	by	his	boots	and	he	saw	a	locust,	swollen
with	eggs	and	crawling	slowly.	Bottle	leaned	forward	and	picked	it	up	by
pinching	together	its	folded	wings.	With	his	other	hand	he	reached	into	his
pack,	and	removed	a	small	black	wooden	box,	its	lid	and	sides	pierced	through
with	small	holes.	He	flicked	open	the	clasp	and	lifted	the	lid.
Joyful	Union,	their	prized	Birdshit	scorpion.	In	the	sudden	light,	the
creature’s	tail	lifted	as	it	backed	into	a	corner.
Bottle	tossed	the	locust	into	the	box.
The	scorpion	had	known	what	was	coming,	and	it	darted	forward,	and
moments	later	was	feeding	on	the	still-kicking	insect.
‘Simple	for	you,	isn’t	it?’	Bottle	said	under	his	breath.
Something	thumped	into	the	sand	beside	him	–	a	karybral	fruit,	round	and
dusty-lime-coloured.	Bottle	looked	up	to	find	Cuttle	standing	over	him.
The	sapper	had	an	armful	of	the	fruit.	‘A	treat,’	he	said.
Grimacing,	Bottle	closed	the	lid	on	Joyful	Union.	‘Thanks.	Where	did	you
get	them?’
‘Went	for	a	walk.’	Cuttle	nodded	southward.	‘A	basin,	karybral	vines
everywhere.’	He	started	tossing	them	to	the	others	in	the	squad.
A	basin.	‘Plenty	of	hand-axes,	too,	right?’
Cuttle	squinted.	‘Didn’t	notice.	Is	that	dried	blood	on	your	hands?’
‘That	would	be	mine,’	Koryk	said	in	a	growl,	already	husking	the	fruit.
The	sapper	paused,	studied	the	rough	circle	of	soldiers	around	him,
finishing	on	Corporal	Tarr,	who	shrugged.	This	seemed	sufficient,	as	Cuttle
flung	the	last	karybral	globe	over	to	Smiles.


Who	caught	it	on	a	knife.
The	others,	Cuttle	included,	watched	as	she	proceeded	to	slice	the	skin
away	with	deft	strokes.
The	sapper	sighed.	‘Think	I’ll	go	find	the	sergeant.’
‘Good	idea,’	Bottle	said.
‘You	should	let	Joyful	out	for	the	occasional	walk,’	Cuttle	said.	‘Stretch	the
old	legs.	Maybe	and	Lutes	have	found	a	new	scorpion	–	never	seen	its	like
before.	They’re	talking	re-match.’
‘Scorpions	can’t	stretch	their	legs,’	Bottle	replied.
‘A	figure	of	speech.’
‘Oh.’
‘Anyway,’	Cuttle	said,	then	ambled	off.
Smiles	had	managed	to	remove	the	entire	husk	in	one	strip,	which	she
lobbed	in	Koryk’s	direction.	He	had	been	looking	down,	and	he	jumped	at	the
motion	in	the	edge	of	his	vision.
She	snorted.	‘There	you	go.	Add	it	to	your	collection	of	charms.’
The	half-Seti	set	down	his	karybral	and	slowly	stood,	then	winced	and
threw	Bottle	a	glare.	‘I	thought	you	healed	this	damned	thing.’
‘I	did.	It’s	still	going	to	be	sore,	though.’
‘Sore?	I	can	barely	stand.’
‘It’ll	get	better.’
‘She’s	liable	to	run,’	Tarr	observed.	‘It	should	be	amusing,	Koryk,	seeing
you	hobbling	after	her.’
The	big	man	subsided.	‘I’m	patient	enough,’	he	said,	sitting	back	down.
‘Ooh,’	Smiles	said,	‘I’m	all	in	a	sweat.’
Bottle	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘I’m	going	for	a	walk,’	he	said.	‘Nobody	kill
anybody	until	I	get	back.’
‘If	someone	gets	killed,’	Tarr	pointed	out,	‘your	healing	skills	won’t	be
much	help.’
‘I	wasn’t	thinking	about	healing,	just	watching.’
	
They	had	ridden	north,	out	of	sight	of	the	encamped	column,	over	a	low	ridge
and	onto	a	flat,	dusty	plain.	Three	guldindha	trees	rose	from	a	low	knoll	two
hundred	paces	distant,	and	they	had	reined	in	beneath	the	shade	of	the	leathery,
broad	leaves,	unpacking	food	and	a	jug	of	Gredfalan	ale	Fiddler	had	procured
from	somewhere,	and	there	they	awaited	the	High	Mage’s	arrival.
Something	of	Fiddler ’s	old	spirit	had	been	dampened,	Kalam	could	see.
More	grey	in	the	russet	beard,	a	certain	far-off	look	in	his	pale	blue	eyes.	True,


the	Fourteenth	was	an	army	filled	with	resentful,	bitter	soldiers,	the	glory	of	an
empire’s	vengeance	stolen	from	them	the	very	night	before	battle;	and	this
march	wasn’t	helping.	These	things	alone	could	suffice	to	explain	Fiddler ’s
condition,	but	Kalam	knew	better.
Tanno	song	or	no,	Hedge	and	the	others	were	dead.	Ghosts	on	the	other
side.	Then	again,	Quick	Ben	had	explained	that	the	official	reports	were
slightly	inaccurate.	Mallet,	Picker,	Antsy,	Blend,	Spindle,	Bluepearl…there
were	survivors,	retired	and	living	soft	in	Darujhistan.	Along	with	Captain
Ganoes	Paran.	So,	some	good	news,	and	it	had	helped.	A	little.
Fiddler	and	Hedge	had	been	as	close	as	brothers.	When	together,	they	had
been	mayhem.	A	conjoined	mindset	more	dangerous	than	amusing	most	of	the
time.	As	legendary	as	the	Bridgeburners	themselves.	It	had	been	a	fateful
decision	back	there	on	the	shoreline	of	Lake	Azur,	their	parting.	Fateful	for	all
of	us,	it	turns	out.
Kalam	could	make	little	sense	of	the	ascendancy.	This	Spiritwalker ’s
blessing	on	a	company	of	soldiers,	the	parting	of	the	fabric	at	Raraku.	He	was
both	comforted	and	uneasy	with	the	notion	of	unseen	guardians	–	Fiddler ’s	life
had	been	saved	by	Hedge’s	ghost…but	where	was	Whiskeyjack?	Had	he	been
there	as	well?
That	night	in	the	camp	of	Sha’ik	had	been	nightmarish.	Too	many	knives	to
count	had	been	unsheathed	in	those	dark	hours.	And	he	had	seen	some	of	those
ghosts	with	his	own	eyes.	Bridgeburners	long	dead,	come	back	grim	as	a
hangover	and	as	ugly	as	they	had	been	in	life.	If	he	ever	met	that	Tanno
Spiritwalker	Fid	had	talked	to…
The	sapper	was	pacing	in	the	shade	of	the	trees.
Crouching,	Kalam	Mekhar	studied	his	old	friend.	‘All	right,	Fid,	out	with
it.’
‘Bad	things,’	the	sapper	muttered.	‘Too	many	to	count.	Like	storm-clouds,
gathering	on	every	horizon.’
‘No	wonder	you’ve	been	miserable	company.’
Fiddler	squinted	over	at	him.	‘You	ain’t	been	much	better.’
The	assassin	grimaced.	‘Pearl.	He’s	keeping	out	of	my	sight,	but	he’s
hovering	nonetheless.	You’d	think	that	Pardu	woman	–	what’s	her	name?’
‘Lostara	Yil.’
‘Her.	You’d	think	she’d	have	unhorsed	him	by	now.’
‘The	game	those	two	play	is	all	their	own,’	Fiddler	said,	‘and	they’re
welcome	to	it.	Anyway,	it’s	clear	he’s	still	here	because	the	Empress	wants
someone	close	to	Tavore.’
‘That	was	always	her	problem,’	Kalam	said,	sighing.


‘Trust.’
Kalam	regarded	the	sapper.	‘You’ve	marched	with	Tavore	since	Aren.	Any
sense	of	her?	Any	at	all?’
‘I’m	a	sergeant,	Kalam.’
‘Exactly.’	The	assassin	waited.
Fiddler	scratched	his	beard,	tugged	at	the	strap	of	his	battered	helm,	then
unclasped	it	and	tossed	it	to	one	side.	He	continued	pacing,	kicking	at	the	leaves
and	nutshells	in	the	sand.	He	waved	at	an	errant	bloodfly	hovering	in	front	of
his	face.	‘She’s	cold	iron,	Kalam.	But	it’s	untested.	Can	she	think	in	battle?	Can
she	command	on	the	run?	Hood	knows,	her	favoured	Fist,	that	old	man	Gamet,
he	couldn’t.	Which	doesn’t	bode	well	for	her	judgement.’
‘She	knew	him	from	before,	didn’t	she?’
‘Someone	she	trusted,	aye,	there’s	that.	He	was	worn	out,	that’s	all.	I	ain’t
as	generous	as	I	used	to	be.’
Kalam	grinned,	looking	away.	‘Oh	yes,	generous,	that’s	Fid	all	right.’	He
gestured	at	the	finger	bones	hanging	from	the	sapper ’s	belt.	‘What	about
those?’
‘She	walked	straight	with	that,	it’s	true.	Oponn’s	shove,	maybe.’
‘Or	maybe	not.’
Fiddler	shrugged.	His	hand	snapped	out	and	closed	on	the	bloodfly.	He
smeared	it	to	death	between	his	palms	with	evident	satisfaction.
Looking	older,	true	enough,	but	fast	and	mean	as	ever.	A	wash	of	gritty,
dead	air	sent	the	leaves	scrabbling	over	the	sand,	the	air	audibly	splitting	a	few
paces	away,	and	Quick	Ben	emerged	from	a	warren.	Coughing.
Kalam	collected	the	jug	of	ale	and	walked	over.	‘Here.’
The	wizard	drank,	coughed	once	more,	then	spat.	‘Gods	below,	that
imperial	warren	is	awful.’	He	swallowed	another	mouthful.
‘Send	me	in	there,’	Fiddler	said,	striding	over,	‘then	I	can	drink	some	of
that,	too.’
‘Glad	to	see	your	mood’s	improved,’	Quick	Ben	said,	handing	the	jug
over.	‘We	will	be	having	some	company	in	a	short	while…after	we	eat,	that	is,’
he	added,	spying	the	wrapped	foodstuffs	and	heading	over.	‘I’m	so	hungry	I
could	eat	bloodflies.’
‘Lick	my	palm,’	Fiddler	said.
The	wizard	halted,	looked	over.	‘You’ve	lost	your	mind.	I’d	sooner	lick	the
hand	of	a	camel-dung	hawker.’	He	began	unwrapping	the	leaves	protecting	the
food.
‘How	was	your	meeting	with	Tavore?’	Kalam	asked,	joining	him.
‘Your	guess	is	as	good	as	mine,’	Quick	Ben	replied.	‘I’ve	seen	people


under	siege	before,	but	she’s	raised	walls	so	thick	and	so	high	I	doubt	a	dozen
irate	dragons	would	get	through…and	not	an	enemy	in	sight,	either.’
‘You	might	be	wrong	there,’	the	assassin	said.	‘Was	Pearl	around?’
‘Well,	one	curtain	moved	a	bit.’
Fiddler	snorted.	‘He	ain’t	that	obvious.	Was	probably	T’amber.’
‘I	wasn’t	being	literal,	Fid.	Somebody	in	a	warren,	close	and	watchful.’
‘Tavore	wasn’t	wearing	her	sword,	then,’	Kalam	said.
‘No,	she	never	does	when	talking	with	me,	thank	the	gods.’
‘Ah,	considerate,	then!’
The	wizard	shot	a	dark	glare	at	Kalam.	‘Doesn’t	want	to	suck	everything
out	of	her	High	Mage,	you	mean.’
‘Stop,’	Fiddler	said.	‘I	don’t	like	the	images	popping	into	my	head.	Hand
me	a	chunk	of	that	sepah	bread	–	no,	not	the	one	you’ve	taken	a	bite	out	of,
Quick,	thanks	anyway.	There	–	oh,	never	mind.’	He	reached	across.
‘Hey,	you’re	raining	sand	on	my	food!’
Kalam	settled	back	on	his	haunches.	Fiddler	was	looking	younger	by	the
minute.	Especially	with	that	scowl.	This	break	away	from	the	army	and	all	that
went	with	it	was	long	overdue.
‘What?’	Fiddler	demanded.	‘Worried	you’ll	wear	your	teeth	down?	Better
stop	chewing	on	that	bread,	then.’
‘It’s	not	that	hard,’	the	wizard	replied	in	a	mouth-full	muffle.
‘No,	but	it’s	full	of	grit,	Quick	Ben.	From	the	millstones.	Anyway,	I’m
always	raining	sand	these	days.	I	got	sand	in	places	you	wouldn’t	imagine—’
‘Stop,	images	popping	into	my	head	and	all	that.’
‘After	this,’	Fiddler	continued	remorselessly,	‘a	year ’s	worth	of	sitting
sweet	in	Darujhistan	and	I’ll	still	be	shitting	gritty	bricks—’
‘Stop,	I	said!’
Kalam’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	sapper.	‘Darujhistan?	Planning	on	joining
the	others,	then?’
The	sapper ’s	gaze	shied	away.	‘Some	day…’
‘Some	day	soon?’
‘I	ain’t	planning	on	running,	Kalam.’
The	assassin	met	Quick	Ben’s	eyes,	just	a	flicker	of	contact,	and	Kalam
cleared	his	throat.	‘Well…maybe	you	should,	Fid.	If	I	was	giving	advice—’
‘If	you’re	giving	advice	then	I	know	we’re	all	doomed.	Thanks	for	ruining
my	day.	Here,	Quick,	some	more	of	that	ale,	please,	I’m	parched.’
Kalam	subsided.	All	right,	at	least	that’s	cleared	up.
Quick	Ben	brushed	crumbs	from	his	long-fingered	hands	and	sat	back.
‘She	has	ideas	about	you,	Kalam…’


‘I’ve	got	one	wife	too	many	as	it	is.’
‘Maybe	she	wants	you	to	put	together	a	squad	of	assassins?’
‘A	what?	From	this	lot?’
‘Hey,’	Fiddler	growled,	‘I	know	this	lot.’
‘And?’
‘And	you’re	right,	is	all.	They’re	a	mess.’
‘Even	so,’	the	wizard	said,	shrugging.	‘And	she	probably	wants	you	to	do	it
on	the	sly—’
‘With	Pearl	listening	in	on	your	conversation,	right.’
‘No,	that	was	later.	The	second	half	of	our	meetings	is	for	our	audience.
The	first	half,	before	Pearl	and	whoever	else	arrives,	is	when	we	talk	privately.
She	makes	these	meetings	as	impromptu	as	possible.	Uses	Grub	as	a
messenger.’	The	wizard	made	a	warding	gesture.
‘Just	a	foundling,’	Fiddler	said.
But	Quick	Ben	simply	shook	his	head.
‘So	she	wants	her	own	cadre	of	assassins,’	Kalam	said.	‘Unknown	to	the
Claw.	Oh,	I	don’t	like	where	this	is	going,	Quick.’
‘Whoever	is	hiding	behind	those	walls	might	be	scared,	Kal,	but	stupid	it
ain’t.’
‘This	whole	thing	is	stupid,’	Fiddler	pronounced.	‘She	crushed	the
rebellion	–	what	more	does	Laseen	want?’
‘Strong,	when	it	comes	to	dealing	with	our	enemies,’	Kalam	said.	‘And
weak	when	it	comes	to	popularity.’
‘Tavore	ain’t	the	popular	sort	of	person,	so	what’s	the	problem?’
‘She	might	get	popular.	A	few	more	successes	–	ones	where	it’s	clear	it’s
not	dumb	luck.	Come	on,	Fid,	you	know	how	fast	an	army	can	turn	round.’
‘Not	this	army,’	the	sapper	said.	‘It	barely	got	up	off	the	ground	to	start
with.	We’re	a	damned	shaky	bunch	–	Quick	Ben,	does	she	have	any	idea	of
that?’
The	wizard	considered	for	a	time,	then	he	nodded.	‘I	think	so.	But	she
doesn’t	know	what	to	do	about	it,	beyond	catching	Leoman	of	the	Flails	and
obliterating	him	and	his	army.	Thoroughly.’
Fiddler	grunted.	‘That’s	what	Cuttle	is	afraid	of.	He’s	convinced	we’re	all
going	to	end	up	wearing	Ranal	before	this	is	done.’
‘Ranal?	Oh,	right.’
‘He’s	being	a	right	pain	about	it,	too,’	Fiddler	went	on.	‘Keeps	talking
about	the	cusser	he’s	holding	back,	the	one	he’ll	sit	on	when	the	doom
descends	on	us	all.	You	should	see	the	look	on	the	recruits’	faces	when	he	goes
on	like	that.’


‘Sounds	like	Cuttle	needs	a	talking	to.’
‘He	needs	a	fist	in	the	face,	Kal.	Believe	me,	I’ve	been	tempted…’
‘But	sappers	don’t	do	that	to	each	other.’
‘I’m	a	sergeant,	too.’
‘But	you	need	him	still	on	your	side.’
Glumly,	‘Aye.’
‘All	right,’	Kalam	said,	‘I’ll	put	him	right.’
‘Careful,	he	might	toss	a	sharper	at	your	feet.	He	don’t	like	assassins.’
‘Who	does?’	Quick	Ben	commented.
Kalam	frowned.	‘And	here	I	thought	I	was	popular…at	least	with	my
friends.’
‘We’re	only	playing	it	safe,	Kalam.’
‘Thanks,	Quick,	I’ll	remember	that.’
The	wizard	rose	suddenly.	‘Our	guests	are	about	to	arrive…’
Fiddler	and	Kalam	stood	as	well,	turning	to	see	the	imperial	warren	open
once	more.	Four	figures	strode	out.
The	assassin	recognized	two	of	them,	and	felt	both	tension	and	pleasure
rising	within	him;	the	sudden	hackles	for	High	Mage	Tayschrenn,	and	the
genuine	pleasure	at	seeing	Dujek	Onearm.	Flanking	Tayschrenn	were	two
bodyguards,	one	an	aged	Seti	with	a	waxed	moustache	–	vaguely	familiar	in
some	distant	way,	as	if	Kalam	had	perhaps	seen	him	once	before,	long	ago.
The	other	was	a	woman	somewhere	between	twenty-five	and	thirty-five,	lithe
and	athletic	beneath	tight	silks.	The	eyes	were	soft	and	dark	brown,	watchful;
her	hair	was	cut	short	in	the	imperial	fashion	around	her	heart-shaped	face.
‘Relax,’	Quick	Ben	murmured	low	beside	Kalam.	‘Like	I	said	before,
Tayschrenn’s	role	in…things	past…was	misunderstood.’
‘So	you	say.’
‘And	he	did	try	to	protect	Whiskeyjack.’
‘But	was	too	late.’
‘Kalam…’
‘All	right,	I’ll	be	civil.	Is	that	Seti	his	old	bodyguard	–	from	the	days	of	the
Emperor?’
‘Aye.’
‘Miserable	bastard?	Never	said	anything?’
‘That’s	him.’
‘Looks	like	he’s	mellowed	some.’
Quick	Ben	snorted.
‘Something	amusing	you,	High	Mage?’	Dujek	asked	as	the	group
approached.


‘Welcome,	High	Fist,’	Quick	Ben	said,	straightening,	adding	a	slightly
deferential	bow	to	Tayschrenn.	‘Colleague…’
Tayschrenn’s	thin,	almost	hairless	brows	rose.	‘A	field	promotion,	wasn’t
it?	Well,	perhaps	long	overdue.	Nonetheless,	I	do	not	believe	the	Empress	has
sanctioned	that	title	as	yet.’
Quick	Ben	offered	him	a	broad,	white	smile.	‘Do	you	recall,	High	Mage,	a
certain	other	High	Mage,	sent	by	the	Emperor,	early	on	in	the	Blackdog
Campaign?	Kribalah	Rule?’
‘Rule	the	Rude?	Yes,	he	died	after	a	month	or	so—’
‘In	a	horrible	conflagration,	aye.	Well,	that	was	me.	Thus,	I’ve	been	a	High
Mage	before,	colleague…’
Tayschrenn	was	frowning,	clearly	thinking	back,	then	the	frown	became	a
scowl.	‘And	the	Emperor	knew	this?	He	must	have,	having	sent	you	–	unless,	of
course,	he	didn’t	send	you	at	all.’
‘Well,	granted,	there	were	some	improprieties	involved,	and	had	one	set
out	on	that	particular	trail	they	might	well	have	been	noted.	But	you	did	not	feel
the	need	to	do	so,	evidently,	since,	although	briefly,	I	more	than	held	my	own	–
pulling	you	out	of	trouble	once,	I	seem	to	recall…something	about	Tiste	Andii
assassin-mages—’
‘When	I	lost	a	certain	object	containing	a	demon	lord…’
‘You	did?	Sorry	to	hear	that.’
‘The	same	demon	that	later	died	by	Rake’s	sword	in	Darujhistan.’
‘Oh,	how	unfortunate.’
Kalam	leaned	close	to	Quick	Ben.	‘I	thought,’	he	said	in	a	whisper,	‘you
told	me	to	relax.’
‘Long	ago	and	far	away,’	Dujek	Onearm	said	gruffly,	‘and	I’d	slap	my
hands	together	if	I	had	more	than	one.	Tayschrenn,	rein	in	that	Seti	before	he
does	something	stupid.	We	have	things	to	discuss	here.	Let’s	get	on	with	it.’
Kalam	glanced	across	at	Fiddler	and	winked.	Just	like	old	times…
	
Lying	flat	at	the	crest	of	the	ridge,	Pearl	grunted.	‘That’s	Dujek	Onearm	out
there,’	he	said.	‘He’s	supposed	to	be	in	G’danisban	right	now.’
Beside	him,	Lostara	Yil	hissed	and	began	slapping	about	her	body.
‘Chigger	fleas,	damn	you.	They’re	swarming	this	ridge.	I	hate	chigger	fleas—’
‘Why	not	jump	up	and	dance	about,	Captain?’	Pearl	asked.	‘Just	to	make
certain	they	know	we’re	here.’
‘Spying	is	stupid.	I	hate	this,	and	I	am	rediscovering	my	hatred	for	you,
too,	Claw.’


‘You	say	the	sweetest	things.	Anyway,	the	bald	one’s	Tayschrenn,	with
Hattar	and	Kiska	this	time,	meaning	he’s	serious	about	the	risks.	Oh,	why	did
they	have	to	do	this,	now?’
‘Do	what	now?’
‘Whatever	it	is	they’re	doing,	of	course.’
‘So	run	back	to	Laseen	like	the	eager	puppy	you	are,	Pearl,	and	tell	her	all
about	it.’
He	edged	back	down	the	side	of	the	ridge,	twisted	round	and	sat	up.	‘No
need	for	haste.	I	have	to	think.’
Lostara	clambered	down	the	slope	until	she	could	stand.	She	began
scratching	under	her	armour.	‘Well,	I’m	not	waiting	around	for	that.	I	need	a
milk	bath,	with	escura	leaves,	and	I	need	it	now.’
He	watched	her	stalk	away,	back	towards	the	encampment.	A	nice	walk,
apart	from	the	sudden	twitches.
A	simple	cantrip,	keeping	the	fleas	away	from	his	body.	Perhaps	he	should
have	extended	the	courtesy	to	her.
No.	This	is	much	better.
Gods,	we’re	made	for	each	other.


Chapter	Three
Yareth	Ghanatan,	the	city	stands	still
First	and	last	and	where	the	old	causeway
Curves	in	its	half-circle	there	are	towers
Of	sand	seething	with	empires	and
Marching	armies,	broken	wing	banners
And	the	dismembered	lining	the	walkways
Are	soon	the	bones	of	the	edifices,	warriors
And	builders	both,	the	city	ever	stands
To	house	insect	hordes,	oh	those	towers
Rear	so	proud,	rising	as	dreams	on	the
Heated	breath	of	the	sun,	Yareth	Ghanatan.
The	city	is	the	empress,	wife	and	lover,
Crone	and	child	of	the	First	Empire,
And	I	yet	remain,	with	all	my	kin,
The	bones	in	the	walls,	the	bones
Beneath	the	floor,	the	bones	that	cast
Down	this	gentle	shade	–	first	and	last,
I	see	what	comes,	all	that	has	gone,
And	the	clay	of	my	flesh	has	felt	your	hands
The	old	warmth	of	life,	for	the	city,
My	city,	it	stands	still,	and	it	stands,
Stands	ever	still.
Bones	in	the	Walls
		(stela	fragment,	circa	First	Empire)
Author	unknown
‘I	can	be	this	urn.’
‘You	don’t	want	to	be	that	urn.’
‘It’s	got	legs.’
‘Stubby	ones,	and	I	don’t	think	they	move.	They’re	just	for	show.	I
remember	things	like	that.’


‘But	it’s	pretty.’
‘And	she	pees	in	it.’
‘Pees?	Are	you	sure?	Have	you	seen	her	pee	in	it?’
‘Take	a	look,	Curdle.	That’s	her	pee	in	it.	You	don’t	want	to	be	that	urn.
You	want	something	alive.	Really	alive,	with	legs	that	work.	Or	wings…’
They	were	still	whispering	when	Apsalar	removed	the	last	bar	in	the
window	and	set	it	down.	She	climbed	onto	the	sill,	twisting	sideways	to	reach
up	to	the	nearest	roof-post.
‘Where	are	you	going?’	Telorast	demanded.
‘To	the	roof.’
‘Shall	we	join	you?’
‘No.’
Apsalar	pulled	herself	upward	and	moments	later	was	crouched	on	the	sunbaked	clay,	the	stars	glistening	overhead.	Dawn	was	not	far	off,	and	the	city
below	was	silent	and	motionless	like	a	thing	dead	in	the	night.	Ehrlitan.	The
first	city	they	had	come	to	in	this	land,	the	city	where	this	particular	journey
had	begun,	a	group	fated	to	break	apart	beneath	a	host	of	burdens.	Kalam
Mekhar,	Fiddler,	Crokus	and	herself.	Oh,	Crokus	had	been	so	angry	to
discover	that	their	companions	had	come	with	hidden	motives	–	not	just
escorting	her	home,	not	just	righting	an	old	wrong.	He	had	been	so	naïve.
She	wondered	how	he	was	faring,	thought	to	ask	Cotillion	the	next	time	the
god	visited,	then	decided	she	would	not	do	so.	It	would	not	do	to	let	herself
continue	to	care	about	him;	even	to	think	on	him,	achieving	little	more	than
loosing	the	flood-gates	of	yearning,	desire	and	regret.
Other,	more	immediate	issues	demanded	her	thought.	Mebra.	The	old	spy
was	dead,	which	was	what	Shadowthrone	had	wanted,	although	the	why	of	it
escaped	Apsalar.	Granted,	Mebra	had	been	working	all	sides,	serving	the
Malazan	Empire	at	one	moment,	Sha’ik’s	cause	the	next.	And…someone	else.
That	someone	else’s	identity	was	important,	and,	she	suspected,	it	was	the	true
reason	for	Shadowthrone’s	decision.
The	Nameless	Ones?	Had	the	Semk	assassin	been	sent	to	cover	a	trail?
Possible,	and	it	made	sense.	No	witnesses,	the	man	had	said.	To	what?	What
service	could	Mebra	have	provided	the	Nameless	Ones?	Hold	off	pursuing	an
answer	to	that.	Who	else?
Adherents	to	the	old	cult	of	Shadow	in	Seven	Cities	no	doubt	remained,
survivors	of	the	purges	that	had	accompanied	the	conquest.	Another	possible
employer	of	Mebra’s	many	skills,	and	more	likely	to	have	caught
Shadowthrone’s	attention,	as	well	as	his	ire.
She	had	been	told	to	kill	Mebra.	She	had	not	been	told	why,	nor	had	she


been	told	to	initiate	any	investigations	on	her	own.	Suggesting	Shadowthrone
felt	he	knew	enough.	The	same	for	Cotillion.	Or,	conversely,	they	were	both
woefully	ignorant,	and	Mebra	had	simply	switched	sides	once	too	often.
There	were	more	targets	on	her	list,	a	random	collection	of	names,	all	of
which	could	be	found	in	Cotillion’s	memories.	She	was	expected	simply	to
proceed	from	one	to	the	next,	with	the	final	target	the	most	challenging	of
all…but	that	one	was	in	all	likelihood	months	away,	and	she	would	need	to	do
some	deft	manoeuvring	to	get	close	enough	to	strike,	a	slow,	careful	stalking
of	a	very	dangerous	individual.	For	whom	she	felt	no	enmity.
This	is	what	an	assassin	does.	And	Cotillion’s	possession	has	made	me	an
assassin.	That	and	nothing	else.	I	have	killed	and	will	continue	to	kill.	I	need
think	of	nothing	else.	It	is	simple.	It	should	be	simple.
And	so	she	would	make	it	so.
Still,	what	made	a	god	decide	to	kill	some	lowly	mortal?	The	minor
irritation	of	a	stone	in	a	moccasin.	The	slap	of	a	branch	on	a	wooded	trail.
Who	thinks	twice	plucking	that	stone	out	and	tossing	it	away?	Or	reaching	out
and	snapping	that	branch?	It	seems	I	do,	for	I	am	that	god’s	hand	in	this.
Enough.	No	more	of	this	weakness…this…uncertainty.	Complete	the	tasks,
then	walk	away.	Vanish.	Find	a	new	life.
Only…how	does	one	do	that?
There	was	someone	she	could	ask	–	he	was	not	far	off,	she	knew,	having
culled	his	identity	from	Cotillion’s	memories.
She	had	moved	to	sit	with	her	legs	dangling	on	the	roof’s	edge.	Someone
now	sat	at	her	side.
‘Well?’	Cotillion	asked.
‘A	Semk	assassin	of	the	Nameless	Ones	completed	my	mission	for	me.’
‘This	very	night?’
‘I	met	him,	but	was	unable	to	question	him.’
The	god	slowly	nodded.	‘The	Nameless	Ones	again.	This	is	unexpected.
And	unwelcome.’
‘So	they	were	not	the	reason	for	killing	Mebra.’
‘No.	Some	stirrings	of	the	old	cult.	Mebra	was	positioning	himself	to
become	a	High	Priest.	The	best	candidate	–	we’re	not	worried	about	the
others.’
‘Cleaning	house.’
‘Necessary,	Apsalar.	We’re	in	for	a	scrap.	A	bad	one.’
‘I	see.’
They	were	silent	for	a	time,	then	Cotillion	cleared	his	throat.	‘I	have	not	yet
had	time	to	check	on	him,	but	I	know	he	is	hale,	although	understandably


dispirited.’
‘All	right.’
He	must	have	sensed	she	wanted	it	left	at	that,	for,	after	a	pause,	he	then
said,	‘You	freed	two	ghosts…’
She	shrugged.
Sighing,	Cotillion	ran	a	hand	through	his	dark	hair.	‘Do	you	know	what
they	once	were?’
‘Thieves,	I	think.’
‘Yes,	that.’
‘Tiste	Andii?’
‘No,	but	they	lingered	long	over	those	two	bodies	and	so…absorbed
certain	essences.’
‘Ah.’
‘They	are	now	agents	of	Edgewalker.	I	am	curious	to	see	what	they	will
do.’
‘For	the	moment	they	seem	content	to	accompany	me.’
‘Yes.	I	think	Edgewalker ’s	interests	include	you,	Apsalar,	because	of	our
past…relationship.’
‘Through	me,	to	you.’
‘I	seem	to	warrant	his	curiosity.’
‘Edgewalker.	That	apparition	seems	a	rather	passive	sort,’	she	observed.
‘We	first	met	him,’	Cotillion	said	slowly,	‘the	night	we	ascended.	The	night
we	made	passage	into	the	realm	of	Shadow.	He	made	my	spine	crawl	right
then,	and	it’s	been	crawling	ever	since.’
She	glanced	over	at	him.	‘You	are	so	unsuited	to	be	a	god,	Cotillion,	did
you	know	that?’
‘Thank	you	for	the	vote	of	confidence.’
She	reached	up	with	one	hand	and	brushed	the	line	of	his	jaw,	the	gesture
close	to	a	caress.	She	caught	the	sudden	intake	of	his	breath,	the	slight
widening	of	his	eyes,	but	he	would	not	look	at	her.	Apsalar	lowered	her	hand.
‘I’m	sorry.	Another	mistake.	It’s	all	I	seem	to	make	these	days.’
‘It’s	all	right,’	he	replied.	‘I	understand.’
‘You	do?	Oh,	of	course	you	do.’
‘Complete	your	mission,	and	all	that	is	asked	of	you	will	end.	You	will	face
no	more	demands	from	me.	Or	Shadowthrone.’
There	was	something	in	his	tone	that	gave	her	a	slight	shiver.	Something
like…remorse.	‘I	see.	That	is	good.	I’m	tired.	Of	who	I	am,	Cotillion.’
‘I	know.’
‘I	was	thinking	of	a	detour.	Before	my	next	task.’


‘Oh?’
‘The	coastal	road,	east.	Just	a	few	days	by	Shadow.’
He	looked	across	at	her,	and	she	saw	his	faint	smile	and	was	unaccountably
pleased	by	it.	‘Ah,	Apsalar…that	should	be	fun.	Send	him	my	greetings.’
‘Really?’
‘Absolutely.	He	needs	a	little	shaking	up.’	He	straightened.	‘I	must	leave.
It’s	almost	dawn.	Be	careful,	and	do	not	trust	those	ghosts.’
‘They	are	bad	liars.’
‘Well,	I	know	a	High	Priest	who	employs	a	similar	tactic	to	confound
others.’
Iskaral	Pust.	Now	it	was	Apsalar	who	smiled,	but	she	said	nothing,	for
Cotillion	was	gone.
The	east	horizon	was	in	flames	with	the	rising	of	the	sun.
	
‘Where	did	the	darkness	go?’	Curdle	demanded.
Apsalar	stood	near	the	bed,	running	through	her	assortment	of	concealed
weapons.	She	would	need	to	sleep	soon	–	perhaps	this	afternoon	–	but	first	she
would	make	use	of	the	daylight.	There	was	something	important	hidden	within
the	killing	of	Mebra	by	the	Semk.	Cotillion	had	been	shaken	by	that	detail.
Although	he	had	not	asked	her	to	pursue	it,	she	would	nonetheless,	for	a	day	or
two	at	least.	‘The	sun	has	risen,	Curdle.’
‘The	sun?	By	the	Abyss,	there’s	a	sun	in	this	world?	Have	they	gone	mad?’
Apsalar	glanced	over	at	the	cowering	ghost.	It	was	dissolving	in	the	grainy
light.	Huddled	in	a	shadow	nearby,	Telorast	looked	on,	mute	with	terror.	‘Has
who	gone	mad?’	Apsalar	asked	Curdle.
‘Well,	them!	The	ones	who	created	this	place!’
‘We’re	fading!’	Telorast	hissed.	‘What	does	it	mean?	Will	we	cease	to
exist?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	Apsalar	replied.	‘Probably	you	will	lose	some	substance,
assuming	you	have	any,	but	it	will	be	temporary.	Best	you	two	remain	here,	and
be	silent.	I	will	be	back	before	dusk.’
‘Dusk!	Yes,	excellent,	we	will	wait	here	for	dusk.	Then	night	and	all	that
darkness,	and	the	shadows,	and	things	to	possess.	Yes,	fearful	woman,	we	shall
wait	here.’
She	headed	down,	paid	for	another	night,	then	emerged	onto	the	dusty
street.	The	market-bound	citizens	were	already	on	the	move,	hawkers	dragging
burdened	mules,	carts	crowded	with	caged	songbirds	or	slabs	of	salted	meat	or
casks	of	oil	or	honey.	Old	men	laboured	beneath	bundles	of	firewood,	baskets


of	clay.	Down	the	centre	of	the	street	strode	two	Red	Blades	–	feared	sentinels
of	order	and	law	once	again	now	that	the	empire’s	presence	had	been
emphatically	reasserted.	They	were	headed	in	the	same	direction	as	Apsalar	–
and	indeed	as	most	of	the	people	–	towards	the	vast	sprawl	of	caravan	camps
beyond	the	city	wall	just	south	of	the	harbour.
The	Red	Blades	were	provided	a	wide	berth,	and	the	swagger	of	their
stride,	their	gauntleted	hands	resting	on	the	grips	of	their	sheathed	but	not
peace-strapped	tulwars,	made	of	their	arrogance	a	deliberate,	provocative
affront.	Yet	they	passed	unchallenged.
Moments	before	she	caught	up	with	them,	Apsalar	swung	left	down	a	side
passage.	There	was	more	than	one	route	to	the	caravan	camps.
A	merchant	employing	Pardu	and	Gral	guards,	and	appearing	to	display
unusual	interest	in	the	presence	of	a	Shadow	Dancer	in	the	city,	made	him	or
herself	in	turn	the	subject	of	interest.	It	might	simply	be	that	the	merchant	was	a
buyer	and	seller	of	information,	but	even	that	could	prove	useful	to	Apsalar	–
not	that	she	was	prepared	to	pay	for	any	information	she	gleaned.	The	tribal
guards	suggested	extensive	overland	travel,	between	distant	cities	and	the
rarely	frequented	tracks	linking	them.	That	merchant	would	know	things.
And	so,	indeed,	might	those	guards.
She	arrived	at	the	outskirts	of	the	first	camp.	If	seen	from	the	sky,	the
caravan	city	would	look	pockmarked,	as	merchants	came	and	went	in	a	steady
stream	of	wagons,	horse-warriors,	herd	dogs	and	camels.	The	outer	edges
were	home	to	lesser	merchants,	their	positions	fixed	according	to	some
obscure	hierarchy,	whilst	the	high-status	caravans	occupied	the	centre.
Entering	the	main	thoroughfare	from	a	side	path	between	tents,	Apsalar
began	the	long	search.
At	midday	she	found	a	tapu-hawker	and	sat	at	one	of	the	small	tables
beneath	an	awning	eating	the	skewered	pieces	of	fruit	and	meat,	the	grease
running	hot	tracks	down	her	hands.	She	had	noted	a	renewed	energy	among	the
merchant	camps	she	had	visited	so	far.	Insurrection	and	strife	were	bad	for
business,	obviously.	The	return	of	Malazan	rule	was	a	blessing	on	trade	in	all
its	normal	avaricious	glory,	and	she	had	seen	the	exultation	on	all	sides.	Coins
were	flowing	in	a	thousand	streams.
Three	figures	caught	her	eye.	Standing	before	the	entrance	to	a	large	tent
and	arguing,	it	seemed,	over	a	cage	of	puppies.	The	two	Pardu	women	and	one
of	the	Gral	tribesmen	she	had	seen	at	the	tavern.	They	were	too	preoccupied	to
have	spied	her,	she	hoped.	Wiping	her	hands	on	her	thighs,	Apsalar	rose	and
walked,	keeping	to	the	shadier	areas,	out	from	under	the	awning	and	away
from	the	guards	and	the	merchant’s	tent.


It	was	enough	to	have	found	them,	for	now.	Before	she	would	endeavour	to
interrogate	the	merchant,	or	the	guards,	another	task	awaited	her.
The	long	walk	back	to	the	inn	was	uneventful,	and	she	climbed	the	stairs
and	made	her	way	to	her	room.	It	was	mid-afternoon,	and	her	mind	was	filled
with	thoughts	of	sleep.
‘She’s	back!’
The	voice,	Curdle’s,	came	from	under	the	wood-framed	cot.
‘Is	it	her?’	asked	Telorast	from	the	same	place.
‘I	recognize	the	moccasins,	see	the	sewn-in	ridges	of	iron?	Not	like	the
other	one.’
Apsalar	paused	her	removing	of	her	leather	gloves.	‘What	other	one?’
‘The	one	who	was	here	earlier,	a	bell	ago—’
‘A	bell?’	Telorast	wondered.	‘Oh,	those	bells,	now	I	understand.	They
measure	the	passing	of	time.	Yes,	Not-Apsalar,	a	bell	ago.	We	said	nothing.	We
were	silent.	That	one	never	knew	we	were	here.’
‘The	innkeeper?’
‘Boots,	stirrup-worn	and	threaded	with	bronze	scales,	they	went	here	and
there	–	and	crouched	to	look	under	here,	but	saw	naught	of	us,	of	course,	and
naught	of	anything	else,	since	you	have	no	gear	for	him	to	rifle	through—’
‘It	was	a	man,	then.’
‘Didn’t	we	say	earlier?	Didn’t	we,	Curdle?’
‘We	must	have.	A	man,	with	boots	on,	yes.’
‘How	long	did	he	stay?’	Apsalar	asked,	looking	around	the	room.	There
was	nothing	there	for	the	thief	to	steal,	assuming	he	had	been	a	thief.
‘A	hundred	of	his	heartbeats.’
‘Hundred	and	six,	Telorast.’
‘Hundred	and	six,	yes.’
‘He	came	and	went	by	the	door?’
‘No,	the	window	–	you	removed	the	bars,	remember?	Down	from	the	roof,
isn’t	that	right,	Telorast?’
‘Or	up	from	the	alley.’
‘Or	maybe	from	one	of	the	other	rooms,	thus	from	the	side,	right	or	left.’
Apsalar	frowned	and	crossed	her	arms.	‘Did	he	come	in	by	the	window	at
all?’
‘No.’
‘By	warren,	then.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	he	wasn’t	a	man,’	Curdle	added.	‘He	was	a	demon.	Big,	black,	hairy,
with	fangs	and	claws.’


‘Wearing	boots,’	Telorast	said.
‘Exactly.	Boots.’
Apsalar	pulled	off	her	gloves	and	slapped	them	down	on	the	bed-stand.	She
sprawled	on	the	cot.	‘Wake	me	if	he	returns.’
‘Of	course,	Not-Apsalar.	You	can	depend	upon	us.’

When	she	awoke	it	was	dark.	Cursing,	Apsalar	rose	from	the	cot.	‘How	late	is
it?’
‘She’s	awake!’	The	shade	of	Telorast	hovered	nearby,	a	smeared	bodyshape	in	the	gloom,	its	eyes	dully	glowing.
‘Finally!’	Curdle	whispered	from	the	window	sill,	where	it	crouched	like	a
gargoyle,	head	twisted	round	to	regard	Apsalar	still	seated	on	the	cot.	‘It’s	two
bells	after	the	death	of	the	sun!	We	want	to	explore!’
‘Fine,’	she	said,	standing.	‘Follow	me,	then.’
‘Where	to?’
‘Back	to	the	Jen’rahb.’
‘Oh,	that	miserable	place.’
‘I	won’t	be	there	long.’
‘Good.’
She	collected	her	gloves,	checked	her	weapons	once	more	–	a	score	of
aches	from	knife	pommels	and	scabbards	attested	that	they	remained	strapped
about	her	person	–	and	headed	for	the	window.
‘Shall	we	use	the	causeway?’
Apsalar	stopped,	studied	Curdle.	‘What	causeway?’
The	ghost	moved	to	hug	one	edge	of	the	window	and	pointed	outward.
‘That	one.’
A	shadow	manifestation,	something	like	an	aqueduct,	stretched	from	the
base	of	the	window	out	over	the	alley	and	the	building	beyond,	then	curving	–
towards	the	heart	of	the	Jen’rahb.	It	had	the	texture	of	stone,	and	she	could	see
pebbles	and	pieces	of	crumbled	mortar	along	the	path.	‘What	is	this?’
‘We	don’t	know.’
‘It	is	from	the	Shadow	Realm,	isn’t	it?	It	has	to	be.	Otherwise	I	would	be
unable	to	see	it.’
‘Oh	yes.	We	think.	Don’t	we,	Telorast?’
‘Absolutely.	Or	not.’
‘How	long,’	Apsalar	asked,	‘has	it	been	here?’
‘Fifty-three	of	your	heartbeats.	You	were	stirring	to	wakefulness,	right,


Curdle?	She	was	stirring.’
‘And	moaning.	Well,	one	moan.	Soft.	A	half-moan.’
‘No,’	Telorast	said,	‘that	was	me.’
Apsalar	clambered	up	onto	the	sill,	then,	still	gripping	the	edges	of	the
wall,	she	stepped	out	onto	the	causeway.	Solid	beneath	her	feet.	‘All	right,’	she
muttered,	more	than	a	little	shaken	as	she	released	her	hold	on	the	building
behind	her.	‘We	might	as	well	make	use	of	it.’
‘We	agree.’
They	set	out,	over	the	alley,	the	tenement,	a	street	and	then	the	rubble	of	the
ruins.	In	the	distance	rose	ghostly	towers.	A	city	of	shadow,	but	this	one
thoroughly	unlike	the	one	of	the	night	before.	Vague	structures	lay	over	the
wreckage	below	–	canals,	the	glimmer	of	something	like	water.	Lower	bridges
spanned	these	canals.	A	few	thousand	paces	distant,	to	the	southeast,	rose	a
massive	domed	palace,	and	beyond	it	what	might	have	been	a	lake,	or	a	wide
river.	Ships	plied	those	waters,	square-sailed	and	sleek,	the	wood	midnight
black.	She	saw	tall	figures	crossing	a	bridge	fifty	paces	away.
Telorast	hissed.	‘I	recognize	them!’
Apsalar	crouched	low,	suddenly	feeling	terribly	vulnerable	here	on	this
high	walkway.
‘Tiste	Edur!’
‘Yes,’	she	half-breathed.
‘Oh,	can	they	see	us?’
I	don’t	know.	At	least	none	walked	the	causeway	they	were	on…not	yet.
‘Come	on,	it’s	not	far.	I	want	us	away	from	this	place.’
‘Agreed,	oh	yes,	agreed.’
Curdle	hesitated.	‘Then	again…’
‘No,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Attempt	nothing,	ghost.’
‘Oh	all	right.	It’s	just	that	there’s	a	body	in	the	canal	below.’
Damn	this.	She	edged	to	the	low	wall	and	looked	down.	‘That’s	not	Tiste
Edur.’
‘No,’	Curdle	confirmed.	‘It	most	certainly	isn’t,	Not	Apsalar.	It	is	like	you,
yes,	like	you.	Only	more	bloated,	not	long	dead	–	we	want	it—’
‘Don’t	expect	help	if	trying	for	it	attracts	attention.’
‘Oh,	she	has	a	point,	Curdle.	Come	on,	she’s	moving	away	from	us!	Wait!
Don’t	leave	us	here!’
Reaching	a	steep	staircase,	Apsalar	quickly	descended.	As	soon	as	she
stepped	onto	the	pale	dusty	ground,	the	ghostly	city	vanished.	In	her	wake	the
two	shades	appeared,	sinking	towards	her.
‘A	most	dreadful	place,’	Telorast	said.


‘But	there	was	a	throne,’	Curdle	cried.	‘I	sensed	it!	A	most	delicious
throne!’
Telorast	snorted.	‘Delicious?	You	have	lost	your	mind.	Naught	but	pain.
Suffering.	Affliction—’
‘Quiet,’	Apsalar	commanded.	‘You	will	tell	me	more	about	this	throne	you
two	sensed,	but	later.	Guard	this	entrance.’
‘We	can	do	that.	We’re	very	skilled	guards.	Someone	died	down	there,	yes?
Can	we	have	the	body?’
‘No.	Stay	here.’	Apsalar	entered	the	half-buried	temple.
The	chamber	within	was	not	as	she	had	left	it.	The	Semk’s	corpse	was
gone.	Mebra’s	body	had	been	stripped	of	its	clothing,	the	clothing	itself	cut
apart.	What	little	furnishings	occupied	the	room	had	been	methodically
dismantled.	Cursing	under	her	breath,	Apsalar	walked	to	the	doorway	leading
to	the	inner	chamber	–	the	curtain	that	had	covered	it	had	been	torn	away.	In	the
small	room	beyond	–	Mebra’s	living	quarters	–	the	searcher	or	searchers	had
been	equally	thorough.	Indifferent	to	the	absence	of	light,	she	scanned	the
detritus.	Someone	had	been	looking	for	something,	or	deliberately	obscuring	a
trail.
She	thought	about	the	Semk	assassin’s	appearance	last	night.	She	had
assumed	he’d	somehow	seen	her	sprint	across	the	rubble	and	so	was	compelled
to	return.	But	now	she	wondered.	Perhaps	he’d	been	sent	back,	his	task	only
half-completed.	In	either	case,	he	had	not	been	working	alone	that	night.	She
had	been	careless,	thinking	otherwise.
From	the	outer	chamber	came	a	wavering	whisper,	‘Where	are	you?’
Apsalar	stepped	back	through	the	doorway.	‘What	are	you	doing	here,
Curdle?	I	told	you	to—’
‘Two	people	are	coming.	Women,	like	you.	Like	us,	too.	I	forgot.	Yes,
we’re	all	women	here—’
‘Find	a	shadow	and	hide,’	Apsalar	cut	in.	‘Same	for	Telorast.’
‘You	don’t	want	us	to	kill	them?’
‘Can	you?’
‘No.’
‘Hide	yourselves.’
‘A	good	thing	we	decided	to	guard	the	door,	isn’t	it?’
Ignoring	the	ghost,	Apsalar	positioned	herself	beside	the	outer	entrance.
She	drew	her	knives,	set	her	back	against	the	sloping	stone,	and	waited.
She	heard	their	quick	steps,	the	scuffing	as	they	halted	just	outside,	their
breathing.	Then	the	first	one	stepped	through,	in	her	hands	a	shuttered	lantern.
She	strode	in	further	as	she	flipped	back	one	of	the	hinged	shutters,	sending	a


shaft	of	light	against	the	far	wall.	Behind	her	entered	the	second	woman,	a
scimitar	unsheathed	and	held	out.
The	Pardu	caravan	guards.
Apsalar	stepped	close	and	drove	the	point	of	one	dagger	into	the	woman’s
elbow	joint	on	the	sword-arm,	then	swung	the	other	weapon,	pommel-forward,
into	the	woman’s	temple.
She	dropped,	as	did	her	weapon.
The	other	spun	round.
A	high	swinging	kick	caught	her	above	the	jaw.	She	reeled,	lantern	flying
to	crack	against	the	wall.
Sheathing	her	knives,	Apsalar	closed	in	on	the	stunned	guard.	A	punch	to
the	solar	plexus	doubled	her	over.	The	guard	dropped	to	her	knees,	then	fell
onto	one	side,	curling	up	around	the	pain.
‘This	is	convenient,’	Apsalar	said,	‘since	I	was	intending	to	question	you
anyway.’
She	walked	back	to	the	first	woman	and	checked	on	her	condition.
Unconscious,	and	likely	would	remain	so	for	some	time.	Even	so,	she	kicked
the	scimitar	into	a	corner,	then	stripped	her	of	the	knives	she	found	hidden
under	her	arms.	Walking	back	to	the	other	Pardu,	she	looked	down	on	the
groaning,	motionless	woman	for	a	moment,	then	crouched	and	dragged	her	to
her	feet.
She	grasped	the	woman’s	right	arm,	the	one	she	used	to	hold	a	weapon,
and,	with	a	sharp	twist,	dislocated	it	at	the	elbow.
The	woman	cried	out.
Apsalar	closed	a	hand	on	her	throat	and	slammed	her	against	the	wall,	the
head	cracking	hard.	Vomit	spilled	onto	the	assassin’s	glove	and	wrist.	She	held
the	Pardu	there.	‘Now	you	will	answer	my	questions.’
‘Please!’
‘No	pleading.	Pleading	only	makes	me	cruel.	Answer	me	to	my	satisfaction
and	I	might	let	you	and	your	friend	live.	Do	you	understand?’
The	Pardu	nodded,	her	face	smeared	with	blood	and	an	elongated	bump
swelling	below	her	right	eye	where	the	iron-embedded	moccasin	had	struck.
Sensing	the	arrival	of	the	two	ghosts,	Apsalar	glanced	over	her	shoulder.
They	were	hovering	over	the	body	of	the	other	Pardu.
‘One	of	us	might	take	her,’	Telorast	whispered.
‘Easy,’	agreed	Curdle.	‘Her	mind	is	addled.’
‘Absent.’
‘Lost	in	the	Abyss.’
Apsalar	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Go	ahead.’


‘Me!’	hissed	Curdle.
‘No,	me!’	snarled	Telorast.
‘Me!’
‘I	got	to	her	first!’
‘You	did	not!’
‘I	choose,’	said	Apsalar.	‘Acceptable?’
‘Yes.’
‘Oh	yes,	you	choose,	dearest	Mistress—’
‘You’re	grovelling	again!’
‘Am	not!’
‘Curdle,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Possess	her.’
‘I	knew	you’d	pick	her!’
‘Patience,	Telorast.	This	night’s	not	yet	done.’
The	Pardu	woman	before	her	was	blinking,	a	wild	look	in	her	eyes.	‘Who
are	you	talking	to?	What	language	is	that?	Who’s	out	there	–	I	can’t	see—’
‘Your	lantern’s	out.	Never	mind.	Tell	me	about	your	master.’
‘Gods	below,	it	hurts—’
Apsalar	reached	down	and	twisted	the	dislocated	arm	again.
The	woman	shrieked,	then	sagged,	unconscious.
Apsalar	let	her	slide	down	the	wall	until	the	woman	was	roughly	in	a
sitting	position.	Then	she	drew	out	a	flask	and	splashed	water	into	the	Pardu’s
face.
The	eyes	opened,	comprehension	returned,	and	with	it,	terror.
‘I	don’t	want	to	hear	about	what	hurts,’	Apsalar	said.	‘I	want	to	hear	about
the	merchant.	Your	employer.	Now,	shall	we	try	again?’
The	other	Pardu	was	sitting	up	near	the	entrance,	making	grunting	noises,
then	coughing,	until	she	spat	out	bloody	phlegm.	‘Ah!’	Curdle	cried.	‘Better!
Oh,	everything	aches,	oh,	the	arm!’
‘Be	quiet,’	Apsalar	commanded,	then	fixed	her	attention	once	more	on	the
woman	in	front	of	her.	‘I	am	not	a	patient	person.’
‘Trygalle	Trade	Guild,’	the	woman	said	in	a	gasp.
Apsalar	slowly	leaned	back	on	her	haunches.	A	most	unexpected	answer.
‘Curdle,	get	out	of	that	body.’
‘What?’
‘Now.’
‘Just	as	well,	she	was	all	broken.	Ah,	free	of	pain	again!	This	is	better	–	I
was	a	fool!’
Telorast’s	laughter	was	a	rasp.	‘And	you	still	are,	Curdle.	I	could	have	told
you,	you	know.	She	wasn’t	right	for	you.’


‘No	more	talking,’	Apsalar	said.	She	needed	to	think	on	this.	The	Trygalle
Trade	Guild’s	centre	of	operations	was	Darujhistan.	It	had	been	a	long	time
since	they’d	visited	the	fragment	of	the	Shadow	Realm	with	munitions	for
Fiddler,	assuming	it	was	the	same	caravan	–	and	she	suspected	it	was.	As
purveyors	of	items	and	information,	it	now	seemed	obvious	that	more	than	one
mission	had	brought	them	to	Seven	Cities.	On	the	other	hand,	perhaps	they
were	doing	little	more	than	recovering	here	in	the	city	–	given	their	harrowing
routes	through	the	warrens	–	and	the	merchant-mage	had	instructed	his	guards
to	deliver	any	and	all	unusual	information.	Even	so,	she	needed	to	be	certain.
‘The	Trygalle	merchant	–	what	brought	him	or	her	here	to	Ehrlitan?’
The	swelling	was	closing	the	Pardu’s	right	eye.	‘Him.’
‘His	name?’
‘Karpolan	Demesand.’
At	that,	Apsalar	allowed	herself	a	faint	nod.
‘We,	uh,	we	were	making	a	delivery	–	us	guards,	we’re	shareholders—’
‘I	know	how	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild	works.	A	delivery,	you	said.’
‘Yes,	to	Coltaine.	During	the	Chain	of	Dogs.’
‘That	was	some	time	ago.’
‘Yes.	I’m	sorry,	the	pain,	it	hurts	to	talk.’
‘It’ll	hurt	more	if	you	don’t.’
The	Pardu	grimaced,	and	it	was	a	moment	before	Apsalar	realized	it	had
been	a	smile.	‘I	do	not	doubt	you,	Shadow	Dancer.	Yes,	there	was	more.	Altar
stones.’
‘What?’
‘Cut	stones,	to	line	a	holy	pool…’
‘Here	in	Ehrlitan?’
The	woman	shook	her	head,	winced,	then	said,	‘No.	Y’Ghatan.’
‘Are	you	on	your	way	there,	or	returning?’
‘Returning.	Outward	journeys	are	through	warrens.	We’re…uh…resting.’
‘So	Karpolan	Demesand’s	interest	in	a	Shadow	Dancer	is	just	passing.’
‘He	likes	to	know…everything.	Information	buys	us	advantages.	No-one
likes	rearguard	on	the	Ride.’
‘The	Ride.’
‘Through	the	warrens.	It’s…hairy.’
I	imagine	it	would	be.	‘Tell	your	master,’	Apsalar	said,	‘that	this	Shadow
Dancer	does	not	appreciate	the	attention.’
The	Pardu	nodded.
Apsalar	straightened.	‘I	am	done	with	you.’
The	woman	flinched	back,	up	against	the	wall,	her	left	forearm	rising	to


cover	her	face.
The	assassin	looked	down	on	the	guard,	wondering	what	had	set	her	off.
‘We	understand	that	language	now,’	Telorast	said.	‘She	thinks	you	are
going	to	kill	her,	and	you	are,	aren’t	you?’
‘No.	That	should	be	obvious,	if	she’s	to	deliver	a	message	to	her	master.’
‘She’s	not	thinking	straight,’	Curdle	said.	‘Besides,	what	better	way	to
deliver	your	message	than	with	two	corpses?’
Apsalar	sighed,	said	to	the	Pardu,	‘What	brought	you	to	this	place?	To
Mebra’s?’
Muffled	from	behind	the	forearm,	the	woman	replied,	‘Purchasing
information…but	he’s	dead.’
‘What	information?’
‘Any.	All.	Comings	and	goings.	Whatever	he	was	selling.	But	you’ve	killed
Mebra—’
‘No,	I	did	not.	By	way	of	peace	between	me	and	your	master,	I	will	tell	you
this.	An	assassin	of	the	Nameless	Ones	murdered	Mebra.	There	was	no	torture
involved.	A	simple	assassination.	The	Nameless	Ones	weren’t	looking	for
information.’
The	Pardu’s	lone	visible	eye,	now	above	the	guarding	wrist,	was	fixed	on
her.	‘The	Nameless	Ones?	Seven	Holies	protect	us!’
‘Now,’	Apsalar	said,	drawing	her	knife,	‘I	need	some	time.’	With	that	she
struck	the	woman	with	the	pommel	of	her	knife,	hard	against	the	temple,	and
watched	the	Pardu’s	eye	roll	up,	the	body	slump	over.
‘Will	she	live?’	Telorast	demanded,	slinking	closer.
‘Leave	her	alone.’
‘She	may	wake	up	not	remembering	anything	you	told	her.’
‘It	doesn’t	matter,’	Apsalar	replied,	sheathing	her	knife.	‘Her	master	will
glean	all	he	needs	to	know	anyway.’
‘A	sorceror.	Ah,	they	travel	the	warrens,	they	said.	Risky.	This	Karpolan
Demesand	must	be	a	formidable	wielder	of	magic	–	you	have	made	a
dangerous	enemy.’
‘I	doubt	he	will	pursue	this,	Telorast.	I	let	his	shareholders	live,	and	I	have
provided	him	with	information.’
‘And	what	of	the	tablets?’	Curdle	asked.
Apsalar	turned.	‘What	tablets?’
‘The	ones	hidden	under	the	floor.’
‘Show	me.’
The	shade	drifted	towards	Mebra’s	naked	corpse.	‘Under	him.	A	secret
cache,	beneath	this	pavestone.	Hard	clay,	endless	lists,	they	probably	mean


nothing.’
Apsalar	rolled	the	body	over.	The	stone	was	easily	pried	loose,	and	she
wondered	at	the	carelessness	of	the	searchers.	Then	again,	perhaps	Mebra	had
had	some	control	over	where	he	would	die.	He	had	been	lying	directly	over	it.
A	rough	pit	had	been	excavated,	and	it	was	crowded	with	clay	tablets.	In	one
corner	sat	a	damp	burlap	sack	filled	with	soft	clay,	and	a	half-dozen	bone
scribers	bound	in	twine.
She	rose	and	retrieved	the	lantern.	When	it	had	struck	the	wall,	the	shutter
had	closed	–	the	flame	within	remained.	She	pulled	the	top	ring	to	draw	up	the
hinged	shutters	part-way.	Returning	to	the	secret	cache,	she	collected	the
topmost	dozen	tablets	then	sat	cross-legged	beside	the	pit	within	the	small
circle	of	light,	and	began	reading.
Attending	the	Grand	Meeting	of	the	Cult	of	Rashan	was	Bridthok	of
G’danisban,	Septhune	Anabhin	of	Omari,	Sradal	Purthu	of	Y’Ghatan,
and	Torahaval	Delat	of	Karashimesh.	Fools	and	charlatans	one	and	all,
although	it	must	be	said,	Sradal	is	a	dangerous	fool.	Torahaval	is	a
bitch,	with	nothing	of	the	humour	of	her	cousin,	nor	his	deadliness.
She	plays	at	this	and	nothing	more,	but	she	will	make	a	fine	head-piece,
a	High	Priestess	with	seductive	charms	and	so	the	acolytes	shall	flock.
Of	Septhune	and	Bridthok,	the	latter	is	my	nearest	rival,	leaning
heavily	on	his	bloodline	to	that	madman	Bidithal,	but	I	know	well	his
weaknesses	now	and	soon	he	shall	be	eliminated	from	the	final	vote	by
misfortune.	Septhune	is	a	follower	and	no	more	need	be	said	of	him.
Two	of	these	cultists	numbered	among	Apsalar ’s	targets	for	assassination.
She	memorized	the	other	names,	in	case	the	opportunity	arose.
The	second,	third	and	fourth	tablets	contained	lists	of	contacts	made	in	the
past	week,	with	notes	and	observations	that	made	it	plain	that	Mebra	had	been
busy	weaving	his	usual	web	of	extortion	among	a	host	of	dim-witted	victims.
Merchants,	soldiers,	amorous	wives,	thieves	and	thugs.
The	fifth	tablet	proved	interesting.
Sribin,	my	most	trusted	agent,	has	confirmed	it.	The	outlawed	Gral,
Taralack	Veed,	was	in	Ehrlitan	one	month	past.	Truly	a	man	to	be
feared,	the	most	secret	dagger	of	the	Nameless	Ones.	This	only
reinforces	my	suspicion	that	they	have	done	something,	an	unleashing


of	some	ancient,	terrible	demon.	Even	as	the	Khundryl	wanderer	said,
and	so	it	was	no	lie,	that	harrowing	tale	of	the	barrow	and	the	fleeing
dragon.	A	hunt	has	begun.	Yet,	who	is	the	prey?	And	what	role	has
Taralack	Veed	in	all	this?	Oh,	the	name	alone,	scribed	here	in	damp
clay,	fills	my	bones	with	ice.	Dessimbelackis	curse	the	Nameless	Ones.
They	never	play	fair.
‘How	much	longer	are	you	going	to	do	that?’	Curdle	demanded	beside	her.
Ignoring	the	shade,	Apsalar	continued	working	her	way	through	the
tablets,	now	seeking	the	name	of	Taralack	Veed.	The	ghosts	wandered	about,
sniffing	every	now	and	then	at	the	two	unconscious	Pardu,	slipping	outside
occasionally	then	returning,	muttering	in	some	unknown	language.
There	were	thirty-three	tablets	in	the	pit,	and	as	she	removed	the	last	one,
she	noted	something	odd	about	the	pit’s	base.	She	brought	the	lantern	closer.
Shattered	pieces	of	dried	clay.	Fragments	of	writing	in	Mebra’s	hand.	‘He
destroys	them,’	she	said	under	her	breath.	‘Periodically.’	She	studied	the	last
tablet	in	her	hand.	It	was	dustier	by	far	than	all	the	others,	the	script	more	faded
by	wear.	‘But	he	saved	this	one.’	Another	list.	Only,	in	this	one	she	recognized
names.	Apsalar	began	reading	aloud:	‘Duiker	has	finally	freed	Heboric	Light
Touch.	Plan	ruined	by	the	rebellion,	and	Heboric	lost.	Coltaine	marches	with
his	refugees,	yet	there	are	vipers	among	the	Malazans.	Kalam	Mehkar	sent	to
Sha’ik,	the	Red	Blades	following.	Kalam	will	deliver	the	Book	into	Sha’ik’s
hands.	The	Red	Blades	will	kill	the	bitch.	I	am	well	pleased.’	The	next	few	lines
had	been	carved	into	the	clay	after	it	had	hardened,	the	script	looking	ragged
and	hurried.	‘Heboric	is	with	Sha’ik.	Known	now	as	Ghost	Hands,	and	in	those
hands	is	the	power	to	destroy	us	all.	This	entire	world.	And	none	can	stop	him.’
Written	in	terror	and	panic.	Yet…Apsalar	glanced	over	at	the	other	tablets.
Something	must	have	happened	to	have	eased	his	mind.	Was	Heboric	now
dead?	She	did	not	know.	Had	someone	else	stumbled	on	the	man’s	trail,
someone	aware	of	the	threat?	And	how	in	Hood’s	name	had	Heboric	–	a	minor
historian	of	Unta	–	ended	up	in	Sha’ik’s	company?
Clearly	the	Red	Blades	had	failed	in	their	assassination	attempt.	After	all,
the	Adjunct	Tavore	had	killed	the	woman,	hadn’t	she?	In	front	of	ten	thousand
witnesses.
‘This	woman	is	waking	up.’
She	looked	over	at	Telorast.	The	shade	was	hovering	over	the	Pardu	guard
lying	near	the	entrance.	‘All	right,’	Apsalar	said,	pushing	the	heap	of	tablets
back	into	the	pit	and	replacing	the	stone.	‘We’re	leaving.’


‘Finally!	It’s	almost	light	outside!’
‘No	causeway?’
‘Nothing	but	ruin,	Not-Apsalar.	Oh,	this	place	looks	too	much	like	home.’
Curdle	hissed.	‘Quiet,	Telorast,	you	idiot!	We	don’t	talk	about	that,
remember?’
‘Sorry.’
‘When	we	reach	my	room,’	Apsalar	said,	‘I	want	you	two	to	tell	me	about
that	throne.’
‘She	remembered.’
‘I	don’t,’	Curdle	said.
‘Me	neither,’	Telorast	said.	‘Throne?	What	throne?’
Apsalar	studied	the	two	ghosts,	the	faintly	luminous	eyes	peering	up	at	her.
‘Oh,	never	mind.’
	
The	Falah’d	was	a	head	shorter	than	Samar	Dev	–	and	she	was	of	barely
average	height	–	and	he	likely	weighed	less	than	would	one	of	her	legs	cut
clean	away	at	the	hip.	An	unpleasant	image,	she	allowed,	but	one	frighteningly
close	to	reality.	A	fierce	infection	had	set	in	the	broken	bones	and	it	had	taken
four	witches	to	draw	the	malign	presence	out.	That	had	been	the	night	before
and	she	still	felt	weak	and	light-headed,	and	standing	here	in	this	blistering	sun
wasn’t	helping.
However	short	and	slight	the	Falah’d	was,	he	worked	hard	at	presenting	a
noble,	imposing	figure,	perched	there	atop	his	long-legged	white	mare.	Alas,
the	beast	was	trembling	beneath	him,	flinching	every	time	Karsa	Orlong’s	Jhag
stallion	tossed	its	head	and	rolled	its	eyes	menacingly	in	the	mare’s	direction.
The	Falah’d	gripped	the	saddle	horn	with	both	hands,	his	thin	dark	lips	pinched
and	a	certain	timidity	in	his	eyes.	His	ornate,	jewel-studded	telaba	was
dishevelled,	and	the	round,	silken	and	padded	hat	on	his	head	was	askew	as	he
looked	on	the	one	known	to	all	as	Toblakai,	once-champion	of	Sha’ik.	Who,
standing	beside	his	horse,	was	still	able,	had	he	so	chosen,	to	look	down	on	the
ruler	of	Ugarat.
Fifty	palace	guards	accompanied	the	Falah’d,	none	of	them	–	nor	their
mounts	–	at	ease.
Toblakai	was	studying	the	massive	edifice	known	as	Moraval	Keep.	An
entire	flat-topped	mesa	had	been	carved	hollow,	the	rock	walls	shaped	into
imposing	fortifications.	A	deep,	steep-walled	moat	surrounded	the	keep.
Moranth	munitions	or	sorcery	had	destroyed	the	stone	bridge	spanning	it,	and
the	doors	beyond,	battered	and	scorched,	were	of	solid	iron.	A	few	scattered


windows	were	visible,	high	up	and	unadorned,	each	sealed	by	iron	doors
barbed	with	angled	arrow-slits.
The	besieging	encampment	was	squalid,	a	few	hundred	soldiers	sitting	or
standing	near	cookfires	and	looking	on	with	vaguely	jaded	interest.	Off	to	one
side,	just	north	of	the	narrow	road,	sprawled	a	rough	cemetery	of	a	hundred	or
so	makeshift,	shin-high	wooden	platforms,	each	holding	a	cloth-wrapped
corpse.
Toblakai	finally	turned	to	the	Falah’d.	‘When	last	was	a	Malazan	seen	at	the
battlements?’
The	young	ruler	started,	then	scowled.	‘I	am	to	be	addressed,’	he	said	in	his
piping	voice,	‘in	a	manner	due	my	authority	as	Holy	Falah’d	of	Ugarat—’
‘When?’	Toblakai	demanded,	his	expression	darkening.
‘Well,	uh,	well	–	Captain	Inashan,	answer	this	barbarian!’
With	a	quick	salute,	the	captain	walked	over	to	the	soldiers	in	the
encampment.	Samar	watched	him	speaking	with	a	half-dozen	besiegers,	saw
the	various	shrugs	in	answer	to	his	question,	saw	Inashan’s	back	straighten	and
heard	his	voice	get	louder.	The	soldiers	started	arguing	amongst	themselves.
Toblakai	made	a	grunting	sound.	He	pointed	at	his	horse.	‘Stay	here,
Havok.	Kill	nothing.’	Then	the	warrior	strode	to	the	edge	of	the	moat.
Samar	Dev	hesitated,	then	followed.
He	glanced	at	her	when	she	stopped	at	his	side.	‘I	will	assault	this	keep
alone,	witch.’
‘You	certainly	will,’	she	replied.	‘I’m	just	here	for	a	closer	look.’
‘I	doubt	there	will	be	much	to	see.’
‘What	are	you	planning,	Toblakai?’
‘I	am	Karsa	Orlong,	of	the	Teblor.	You	know	my	name	and	you	will	use	it.
To	Sha’ik	I	was	Toblakai.	She	is	dead.	To	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	I	was	Toblakai,
and	he	is	as	good	as	dead.	To	the	rebels	I	was—’
‘All	right,	I	understand.	Only	dead	or	nearly	dead	people	called	you
Toblakai,	but	you	should	know,	it	is	only	that	name	that	has	kept	you	from
rotting	out	the	rest	of	your	life	in	the	palace	pits.’
‘That	pup	on	the	white	horse	is	a	fool.	I	could	break	him	under	one	arm—’
‘Yes,	that	likely	would	break	him.	And	his	army?’
‘More	fools.	I	am	done	speaking,	witch.	Witness.’
And	so	she	did.
	
Karsa	clambered	down	into	the	moat.	Rubble,	broken	weapons,	siege-stones
and	withered	bodies.	Lizards	scampered	on	the	rocks,	capemoths	rising	like


pale	leaves	caught	in	an	updraught.	He	made	his	way	to	a	point	directly	beneath
the	two	massive	iron	doors.	Even	with	his	height	he	could	barely	reach	the
narrow	ledge	at	their	base.	He	scanned	the	wreckage	of	the	bridge	around	him,
then	began	piling	stones,	choosing	the	larger	fragments	and	fashioning	rough
steps.
Some	time	later	he	was	satisfied.	Drawing	his	sword,	he	climbed	the	steps,
and	found	himself	at	the	same	level	as	the	broad,	riveted	locking	mechanism.
Raising	his	stone	sword	in	both	hands,	he	set	the	point	in	the	join,	in	front	of
where	he	judged	the	lock	to	be.	He	waited	a	moment,	until	the	position	of	his
arms	and	the	angle	of	the	blade	was	set	in	his	mind,	then	he	lifted	the	sword
away,	edged	back	as	far	as	he	could	on	the	makeshift	platform	of	rubble,	drew
the	weapon	back,	and	swung.
The	blow	was	true,	the	unbreakable	chalcedony	edge	driving	into	the	join
between	the	doors.	Momentum	ceased	with	a	snapping	sound	as	the	blade
jammed	in	an	unseen,	solid	iron	bar,	the	reverberations	pounding	through
Karsa’s	arms	and	into	his	shoulders.
He	grunted,	waited	until	the	pain	ebbed,	then	tugged	the	weapon	free	in	a
screech	of	metal.	And	took	aim	once	again.
He	both	felt	and	heard	the	crack	of	the	bar.
Karsa	pulled	the	sword	loose	then	threw	his	shoulder	against	the	doors.
Something	fell	with	a	loud	clang,	and	the	door	on	the	right	swung	back.
	
On	the	other	side	of	the	moat,	Samar	Dev	stared.	She	had	just	witnessed
something…extraordinary.
Captain	Inashan	came	up	alongside	her.	‘The	Seven	Holies	protect	us,’	he
whispered.	‘He	just	cut	through	an	iron	door.’
‘Yes,	he	did.’
‘We	need…’
She	glanced	over.	‘We	need	what,	Captain?’
‘We	need	to	get	him	out	of	Ugarat.	Away,	as	soon	as	possible.’
	
Darkness	in	the	funnel	within	–	angled	walls,	chutes	and	arrow-slits.	Some
mechanism	had	lowered	the	arched	ceiling	and	narrowed	the	walls	–	he	could
see	that	they	were	suspended,	perhaps	a	finger ’s	width	from	contact	with	each
other	and	with	the	paved	floor.	Twenty	murderous	paces	to	an	inner	gate,	and
that	gate	was	ajar.


Karsa	listened	but	heard	nothing.	The	air	smelled	rank,	bitter.	He	squinted
at	the	arrow-slits.	They	were	dark,	the	hidden	chambers	to	either	side	unlit.
Readying	the	sword	in	his	hands,	Karsa	Orlong	entered	the	keep.
No	hot	sand	from	the	chutes,	no	arrows	darting	out	from	the	slits,	no
boiling	oil.	He	reached	the	gate.	A	courtyard	beyond,	one	third	sharply	bathed
in	white	sunlight.	He	strode	forward	until	he	was	past	the	gate	and	then	looked
up.	The	rock	had	been	hollowed	out	indeed	–	above	was	a	rectangle	of	blue
sky,	the	fiery	sun	filling	one	corner.	The	walls	on	all	four	sides	were	tiered
with	fortified	landings	and	balconies,	countless	windows.	He	could	make	out
doorways	on	those	balconies,	some	yawning	black,	others	closed.	Karsa
counted	twenty-two	levels	on	the	wall	opposite	him,	eighteen	on	the	one	to	his
left,	seventeen	to	the	right,	and	behind	him	–	the	outer	wall	–	twelve	in	the
centre	flanked	by	projections	each	holding	six	more.	The	keep	was	a	veritable
city.
And,	it	seemed,	lifeless.
A	gaping	pit,	hidden	in	the	shadow	in	one	corner	of	the	courtyard,	caught
his	attention.	Pavestones	lifted	clear	and	piled	to	the	sides,	an	excavated	shaft	of
some	sort,	reaching	down	into	the	foundations.	He	walked	over.
The	excavators	had	cleared	the	heavy	pavestones	to	reach	what	looked	to
be	bedrock	but	had	proved	to	be	little	more	than	a	cap	of	stone,	perhaps	half	an
arm’s	length	thick,	covering	a	hollowed-out	subterranean	chamber.	That	stank.
A	wooden	ladder	led	down	into	the	vault.
A	makeshift	cesspit,	he	suspected,	since	the	besiegers	had	likely	blocked
the	out-drains	into	the	moat,	in	the	hopes	of	fostering	plague	or	some	such
thing.	The	stench	certainly	suggested	that	it	had	been	used	as	a	latrine.	Then
again,	why	the	ladder?	‘These	Malazans	have	odd	interests,’	he	muttered.	In	his
hands	he	could	feel	a	tension	building	in	the	stone	sword	–	the	bound	spirits	of
Bairoth	Gild	and	Delum	Thord	were	suddenly	restive.	‘Or	a	chance	discovery,’
he	added.	‘Is	this	what	you	warn	me	of,	kindred	spirits?’
He	eyed	the	ladder.	‘Well,	as	you	say,	brothers,	I	have	climbed	into	worse.’
Karsa	sheathed	his	sword	and	began	his	descent.
Excrement	smeared	the	walls,	but	not,	fortunately,	the	rungs	of	the	ladder.
He	made	his	way	past	the	broken	shell	of	stone,	and	what	little	clean	air	drifted
down	from	above	was	overwhelmed	by	a	thick,	pungent	reek.	There	was	more
to	it	than	human	waste,	however.	Something	else…
Reaching	the	floor	of	the	chamber,	Karsa	waited,	ankle-deep	in	shit	and
pools	of	piss,	for	his	eyes	to	adjust	to	the	gloom.	Eventually,	he	could	make
out	the	walls,	rounded,	the	stones	bearing	horizontal	undulations	but	otherwise
unadorned.	A	beehive	tomb,	then,	but	not	in	a	style	Karsa	had	seen	before.	Too


large,	for	one	thing,	and	there	was	no	evidence	of	platforms	or	sarcophagi.	No
grave-goods,	no	inscriptions.
He	could	see	no	formal	entranceway	or	door	revealed	on	any	of	the	walls.
Sloshing	through	the	sewage	for	a	closer	look	at	the	stonework,	Karsa	almost
stumbled	as	he	stepped	off	an	unseen	ledge	–	he	had	been	standing	on	a	slightly
raised	dais,	extending	almost	out	to	the	base	of	the	walls.	Back-stepping,	he
edged	carefully	along	its	circumference.	In	the	process	he	discovered	six
submerged	iron	spikes,	driven	deep	into	the	stone	in	two	sets	of	three.	The
spikes	were	massive,	thicker	across	than	Karsa’s	wrists.
He	made	his	way	back	to	the	centre,	stood	near	the	base	of	the	ladder.	Were
he	to	lie	down	with	the	middle	spike	of	either	set	under	his	head,	he	could	not
have	reached	the	outer	ones	with	arms	outstretched.	Half	again	as	tall	and	he
might	manage	it.	Thus,	if	something	had	been	pinned	here	by	these	spikes,	it
had	been	huge.
And,	unfortunately,	it	looked	as	if	the	spikes	had	failed—
A	slight	motion	through	the	heavy,	turgid	air,	a	shadowing	of	the	faint	light
leaking	down.	Karsa	reached	for	his	sword.
An	enormous	hand	closed	on	his	back,	a	talon	lancing	into	each	shoulder,
two	beneath	his	ribs,	one	larger	one	stabbing	down	and	around,	just	under	his
left	clavicle.	The	fingers	clenched	and	he	was	being	hauled	straight	up,	the
ladder	passing	in	a	blur.	The	sword	was	pinned	against	his	back.	Karsa	reached
up	with	both	hands	and	they	closed	about	a	scaled	wrist	thicker	than	his	upper
arm.
He	cleared	the	hole	in	the	capstone,	and	the	tugs	and	tearing	in	his	muscles
told	him	the	beast	was	clambering	up	the	side	of	the	pit,	nimble	as	a	bhok’aral.
Something	heavy	and	scaled	slithered	across	his	arms.
Then	into	bright	sunlight.
The	beast	flung	the	Teblor	across	the	courtyard.	He	landed	hard,	skidding
until	he	crashed	up	against	the	keep’s	outer	wall.
Spitting	blood,	every	bone	in	his	back	feeling	out	of	place,	Karsa	Orlong
pushed	himself	to	his	feet,	reeled	until	he	could	lean	against	the	sun-heated
stone.
Standing	beside	the	pit	was	a	reptilian	monstrosity,	two-legged,	the
hanging	arms	oversized	and	overlong,	talons	scraping	the	pavestones.	It	was
tailed,	but	that	tail	was	stunted	and	thick.	The	broad-snouted	jaws	were	crowded
with	interlocking	rows	of	dagger-long	fangs,	above	them	flaring	cheekbones
and	brow-ridges	protecting	deep-set	eyes	that	glistened	like	wet	stones	on	a
strand.	A	serrated	crest	bisected	the	flat,	elongated	skull,	pale	yellow	above	the
dun	green	hide.	The	beast	reared	half	again	as	tall	as	the	Toblakai.


Motionless	as	a	statue,	it	studied	him,	blood	dripping	from	the	talons	of	its
left	hand.
Karsa	took	a	deep	breath,	then	drew	his	sword	and	flung	it	aside.
The	creature’s	head	twitched,	a	strange	sideways	tilt,	then	it	charged,
leaning	far	over	as	the	massive	legs	propelled	it	forward.
And	Karsa	launched	himself	straight	at	it.
Clearly,	an	unanticipated	response,	as	he	found	himself	inside	those	raking
hands	and	beneath	the	snapping	jaws.	He	flung	his	head	straight	up,	cracking
hard	against	the	underside	of	the	beast’s	jaw,	then	ducked	back	down,	sliding
his	right	arm	between	the	legs,	wrapping	it	about	the	creature’s	right	one.
Shoulder	pounding	into	its	belly,	his	hands	closing	tight	on	the	other	side	of
the	captured	leg.	Then	lifting,	a	bellow	escaping	him	as	he	heaved	the	beast	up
until	it	tottered	on	one	leg.
The	taloned	hands	hammered	down	on	his	back,	slicing	through	the	bear
fur,	ravaging	his	flesh	in	a	frenzy.
Karsa	planted	his	right	leg	behind	the	beast’s	left	one,	then	pushed	hard	in
that	direction.
It	crashed	down	and	he	heard	bones	snap.
The	short	tail	whipped	round,	struck	him	in	his	midsection.	Air	exploded
from	Karsa’s	four	lungs,	and	once	more	he	was	spinning	through	the	air,
striking	the	pavestones	and	leaving	most	of	the	skin	of	his	right	shoulder	and
hip	on	the	hard	stone	as	he	skidded	another	four	paces—
Over	the	edge	of	the	pit.	Down,	cracking	hard	against	one	edge	of	the
capstone,	breaking	it	further,	then	landing	face	first	in	the	pool	of	sewage	in
the	tomb,	rubble	splashing	on	all	sides.
He	lifted	himself,	twisting	into	a	half-seated	position,	spitting	out	foul
fluids	even	as	he	tried	to	draw	air	into	his	lungs.	Coughing,	choking,	he
crawled	towards	one	side	of	the	tomb,	away	from	the	hole	in	the	ceiling.
Moments	later	he	managed	to	restore	his	breathing.	Shaking	the	muck
from	his	head,	he	peered	at	the	shaft	of	sunlight	reaching	down	around	the
ladder.	The	beast	had	not	come	after	him…or	had	not	seen	him	fall.
He	rose	and	made	his	way	to	the	ladder.	Looked	straight	up,	and	saw
nothing	but	sunlight.
Karsa	climbed.	As	he	drew	level	with	the	pit’s	edge,	he	slowed,	then	lifted
himself	until	he	could	just	see	the	courtyard.	The	creature	was	nowhere	in
sight.	He	clambered	quickly	onto	the	pavestones.	Spitting	again,	he	shook
himself,	then	made	his	way	towards	the	keep’s	inner	entrance.	Hearing	no
screams	from	beyond	the	moat,	he	assumed	that	the	beast	had	not	gone	in	that
direction.	Which	left	the	keep	itself.


The	double	doors	were	ajar.	He	entered	a	broad	chamber,	its	floor	tiled,
the	walls	bearing	the	ghosts	of	long-faded	murals.
Pieces	of	mangled	armour	and	bits	of	blood-crusted	clothing	lay	scattered
about.	Nearby	stood	a	boot,	twin	bones	jutting	from	it.
Directly	opposite,	twenty	paces	away,	was	another	doorway,	both	doors
battered	down	and	smashed.	Karsa	padded	towards	it,	then	froze	upon	hearing
the	scrape	of	claws	on	tile	in	the	gloom	beyond.	From	his	left,	close	by	the
entrance.	He	backed	up	ten	paces,	then	sprinted	forward.	Through	the	doorway.
Hands	slashed	down	in	his	wake,	and	he	heard	a	frustrated	hiss	–	even	as	he
collided	with	a	low	divan,	propelling	him	forward,	down	onto	a	low	table.	The
wooden	legs	exploded	beneath	his	weight.	He	rolled	onward,	sending	a	highbacked	chair	cartwheeling,	then	sliding	on	a	rug,	the	thump	and	click	of	the
creature’s	clawed	feet	grew	louder	as	it	lunged	in	pursuit.
Karsa	got	his	feet	under	him	and	he	dove	sideways,	once	more	evading	the
descending	claws.	Up	against	another	chair,	this	one	massive.	Grasping	the
legs,	Karsa	heaved	it	into	the	path	of	the	creature	–	it	had	launched	itself	into
the	air.	The	chair	caught	both	its	outstretched	legs,	snapped	them	out	to	the	side.
The	beast	crashed	down,	cracking	its	head,	broken	tiles	flying.
Karsa	kicked	it	in	the	throat.
The	beast	kicked	him	in	the	chest,	and	he	was	pitched	backward	once	more,
landing	on	a	discarded	helmet	that	rolled,	momentarily,	sending	him	back
further,	up	against	a	wall.
Pain	thundering	in	his	chest,	the	Toblakai	climbed	to	his	feet.
The	beast	was	doing	the	same,	slowly,	wagging	its	head	from	side	to	side,
its	breath	coming	in	rough	wheezes	punctuated	by	sharp,	barking	coughs.
Karsa	flung	himself	at	it.	His	hands	closed	on	its	right	wrist	and	he	ducked
under,	twisting	the	arm	as	he	went,	then	spun	round	yet	again,	turning	the	arm
until	it	popped	at	the	shoulder.
The	creature	squealed.
Karsa	clambered	onto	its	back,	his	fists	hammering	on	the	dome	of	its
skull.	Each	blow	shook	the	beast’s	bones.	Teeth	snapped,	the	head	driven	down
at	each	blow,	springing	back	up	in	time	to	meet	the	next	one.	Staggering
beneath	him,	the	right	arm	hanging	limp,	the	left	one	attempting	to	reach	up	to
scrape	him	off,	the	creature	careened	across	the	room.
Karsa	continued	swinging,	his	own	hands	numbed	by	the	impacts.
Finally,	he	heard	the	skull	crack.
A	rattling	gasp	of	breath	–	from	him	or	the	beast,	he	wasn’t	sure	which	–
then	the	creature	dropped	and	rolled.
Most	of	its	immense	weight	settled	for	a	brief	moment	between	Karsa’s


thighs,	and	a	roar	burst	from	his	throat	as	he	clenched	the	muscles	of	his	legs
to	keep	that	ridged	spine	away	from	his	crotch.	Then	the	reptile	pitched
sideways,	pinning	his	left	leg.	He	reached	up	to	wrap	an	arm	around	its
thrashing	neck.
Rolling	further,	it	freed	its	own	left	arm,	scythed	it	up	and	around.	Talons
sank	into	Karsa’s	left	shoulder.	A	surge	of	overpowering	strength	dragged	the
Toblakai	off,	sending	him	tumbling	into	the	wreckage	of	the	collapsed	table.
Karsa’s	grasping	hand	found	one	of	the	table	legs.	He	scrambled	up	and
swung	it	hard	against	the	beast’s	outstretched	arm.
The	leg	shattered,	and	the	arm	was	snatched	back	with	a	squeal.
The	beast	reared	upright	once	more.
Karsa	charged	again.
Was	met	by	a	kick,	high	on	his	chest.
Sudden	blackness.
His	eyes	opened.	Gloom.	Silence.	The	stink	of	faeces	and	blood	and
settling	dust.	Groaning,	he	sat	up.
A	distant	crash.	From	somewhere	above.
He	studied	his	surroundings,	until	he	spied	the	side	doorway.	He	rose,
limped	towards	it.	A	wide	hallway	beyond,	leading	to	a	staircase.
	
‘Was	that	a	scream,	Captain?’
‘I	am	not	sure,	Falah’d.’
Samar	Dev	squinted	in	the	bright	light	at	the	soldier	beside	her.	He	had
been	muttering	under	his	breath	since	Toblakai’s	breach	of	the	iron	doors.
Stone	swords,	iron	and	locks	seemed	to	have	been	the	focus	of	his	private
monologue,	periodically	spiced	with	some	choice	curses.	That,	and	the	need	to
get	the	giant	barbarian	as	far	away	from	Ugarat	as	possible.
She	wiped	sweat	from	her	brow,	returned	her	attention	to	the	keep’s
entrance.	Still	nothing.
‘They’re	negotiating,’	the	Falah’d	said,	restless	on	the	saddle	as	servants
stood	to	either	side,	alternately	sweeping	the	large	papyrus	fans	to	cool
Ugarat’s	beloved	ruler.
‘It	did	sound	like	a	scream,	Holy	One,’	Captain	Inashan	said	after	a
moment.
‘Then	it	is	a	belligerent	negotiation,	Captain.	What	else	can	be	taking	so
long?	Were	they	all	starved	and	dead,	that	barbarian	would	have	returned.
Unless,	of	course,	there’s	loot.	Hah,	am	I	wrong	in	that?	I	think	not!	He’s	a
savage,	after	all.	Cut	loose	from	Sha’ik’s	leash,	yes?	Why	did	he	not	die


protecting	her?’
‘If	the	tales	are	true,’	Inashan	said	uncomfortably,	‘Sha’ik	sought	a
personal	duel	with	the	Adjunct,	Falah’d.’
‘Too	much	convenience	in	that	tale.	Told	by	the	survivors,	the	ones	who
abandoned	her.	I	am	unconvinced	by	this	Toblakai.	He	is	too	rude.’
‘Yes,	Falah’d,’	Inashan	said,	‘he	is	that.’
Samar	Dev	cleared	her	throat.	‘Holy	One,	there	is	no	loot	to	be	found	in
Moraval	Keep.’
‘Oh,	witch?	And	how	can	you	be	so	certain?’
‘It	is	an	ancient	structure,	older	even	than	Ugarat	itself.	True,	alterations
have	been	made	every	now	and	then	–	all	the	old	mechanisms	were	beyond	our
understanding,	Falah’d,	even	to	this	day,	and	all	we	have	now	from	them	is	a
handful	of	pieces.	I	have	made	long	study	of	those	few	fragments,	and	have
learned	much—’
‘You	bore	me,	now,	witch.	You	have	still	not	explained	why	there	is	no
loot.’
‘I	am	sorry,	Falah’d.	To	answer	you,	the	keep	has	been	explored	countless
times,	and	nothing	of	value	has	ever	been	found,	barring	those	dismantled
mechanisms—’
‘Worthless	junk.	Very	well,	the	barbarian	is	not	looting.	He	is	negotiating
with	the	squalid,	vile	Malazans	–	whom	we	shall	have	to	kneel	before	once
again.	I	am	betrayed	into	humiliation	by	the	cowardly	rebels	of	Raraku.	Oh,
one	can	count	on	no-one	these	days.’
‘It	would	seem	not,	Falah’d,’	Samar	Dev	murmured.
Inashan	shot	her	a	look.
Samar	wiped	another	sheath	of	sweat	from	her	brow.
‘Oh!’	the	Falah’d	cried	suddenly.	‘I	am	melting!’
‘Wait!’	Inashan	said.	‘Was	that	a	bellow	of	some	sort?’
‘He’s	probably	raping	someone!’
	
He	found	the	creature	hobbling	down	a	corridor,	its	head	wagging	from	side	to
side,	pitching	into	one	wall	then	the	other.	Karsa	ran	after	it.
It	must	have	heard	him,	for	it	wheeled	round,	jaws	opening	in	a	hiss,
moments	before	he	closed.	Battering	a	raking	hand	aside,	the	Toblakai	kneed
the	beast	in	the	belly.	The	reptile	doubled	over,	chest-ridge	cracking	down	onto
Karsa’s	right	shoulder.	He	drove	his	thumb	up	under	its	left	arm,	where	it
found	doeskin-soft	tissue.	Puncturing	it,	the	thumb	plunging	into	meat,	curling
round	ligaments.	Closing	his	hand,	Karsa	yanked	on	those	ligaments.


Dagger-sharp	teeth	raked	the	side	of	his	head,	slicing	a	flap	of	skin	away.
Blood	gushed	into	Karsa’s	right	eye.	He	pulled	harder,	throwing	himself	back.
The	beast	plunged	with	him.	Twisting	to	one	side,	Karsa	narrowly	escaped
the	crashing	weight,	and	was	close	enough	to	see	the	unnatural	splaying	of	its
ribs	at	the	impact.
It	struggled	to	rise,	but	Karsa	was	faster.	Straddling	it	once	more.	Fists
hammering	down	on	its	skull.	With	each	blow	the	lower	jaws	cracked	against
the	floor,	and	he	could	feel	a	sagging	give	in	the	plates	of	the	skull’s	bones
beneath	his	fists.	He	kept	pounding.
A	dozen	wild	heartbeats	later	and	he	slowed,	realizing	the	beast	was	no
longer	moving	beneath	him,	the	head	flat	on	the	floor,	getting	wider	and	flatter
with	each	impact	of	his	battered	fists.	Fluids	were	leaking	out.	Karsa	stopped
swinging.	He	drew	in	a	ragged,	agony-filled	breath,	held	it	against	the	sudden
waves	of	darkness	thundering	through	his	brain,	then	released	it	steady	and
long.	Another	mouthful	of	bloody	phlegm	to	spit	out,	onto	the	dead	beast’s
shattered	skull.
Lifting	his	head,	Karsa	glared	about.	A	doorway	on	his	right.	In	the	room
beyond,	a	long	table	and	chairs.	Groaning,	he	slowly	rose,	stumbled	into	the
chamber.
A	jug	of	wine	sat	on	the	table.	Cups	were	lined	up	in	even	rows	down	both
sides,	each	one	opposite	a	chair.	Karsa	swept	them	from	the	table,	collected	the
jug,	then	lay	down	on	the	stained	wood	surface.	He	stared	up	at	the	ceiling,
where	someone	had	painted	a	pantheon	of	unknown	gods,	all	looking	down.
Mocking	expressions	one	and	all.
Karsa	pushed	the	flap	of	loose	skin	back	against	his	temple,	then	sneered	at
the	faces	on	the	ceiling,	before	lifting	the	jug	to	his	lips.
	
Blessed	cool	wind,	now	that	the	sun	was	so	close	to	the	horizon.	Silence	for	a
while	now,	too,	since	that	last	bellow.	A	number	of	soldiers,	standing	for	bell
after	bell	all	afternoon,	had	passed	out	and	were	being	tended	to	by	the	lone
slave	the	Falah’d	had	relinquished	from	his	entourage.
Captain	Inashan	had	been	assembling	a	squad	to	lead	into	the	keep	for
some	time	now.
The	Falah’d	was	having	his	feet	massaged	and	bathed	in	mint-leaves
chewed	in	mouthfuls	of	oil	by	the	slaves.	‘You	are	taking	too	long,	Captain!’	he
said.	‘Look	at	that	demonic	horse,	the	way	it	eyes	us!	It	will	be	dark	by	the	time
you	storm	the	keep!’
‘Torches	are	being	brought	along,	Falah’d,’	Inashan	said.	‘We’re	almost


ready.’
His	reluctance	was	almost	comical,	and	Samar	Dev	dared	not	meet	his	eye
again,	not	after	the	expression	her	wink	earlier	had	elicited.
A	shout	from	the	besiegers’	encampment.
Toblakai	had	appeared,	climbing	down	from	the	ledge,	back	onto	the
makeshift	steps.	Samar	Dev	and	Inashan	made	their	way	to	the	moat,	arriving
in	time	to	see	him	emerge.	The	bear	fur	was	in	ribbons,	dark	with	blood.	He
had	tied	a	strip	of	cloth	about	his	head,	holding	the	skin	in	place	over	one
temple.	Most	of	his	upper	clothing	had	been	torn	away,	revealing	countless
gouges	and	puncture	wounds.
And	he	was	covered	in	shit.
From	the	Falah’d	twenty	paces	behind	them	came	a	querulous	enquiry:
‘Toblakai!	The	negotiations	went	well?’
In	a	low	voice,	Inashan	said,	‘No	Malazans	left,	I	take	it?’
Karsa	Orlong	scowled.	‘Didn’t	see	any.’	He	strode	past	them.
Turning,	Samar	Dev	flinched	at	the	horror	of	the	warrior ’s	ravaged	back.
‘What	happened	in	there?’	she	demanded.
A	shrug	that	jostled	the	slung	stone	sword.	‘Nothing	important,	witch.’
Not	slowing,	not	turning,	he	continued	on.
	
A	smudge	of	light	far	to	the	south,	like	a	cluster	of	dying	stars	on	the	horizon,
marked	the	city	of	Kayhum.	The	dust	of	the	storm	a	week	past	had	settled	and
the	night	sky	was	bright	with	the	twin	sweeps	of	the	Roads	of	the	Abyss.	There
were	scholars,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	had	heard,	who	asserted	that	those
broad	roads	were	nothing	more	than	stars,	crowded	in	multitudes	beyond
counting,	but	Corabb	knew	that	was	folly.	They	could	be	naught	but	celestial
roads,	the	paths	walked	by	the	dragons	of	the	deep,	and	Elder	Gods	and	the
blacksmiths	with	suns	for	eyes	who	hammered	stars	into	life;	and	the	worlds
spinning	round	those	stars	were	simply	dross,	cast-offs	from	the	forges,	pale
and	smudged,	on	which	crawled	creatures	preening	with	conceit.
Preening	with	conceit.	An	old	seer	had	told	him	that	once,	and	for	some
reason	the	phrase	lodged	in	Corabb’s	mind,	allowing	him	to	pull	it	free	every
now	and	then	to	play	with,	his	inner	eye	bright	with	shining	wonder.	People	did
that,	yes.	He	had	seen	them,	again	and	again.	Like	birds.	Obsessed	with	selfimportance,	thinking	themselves	tall,	as	tall	as	the	night	sky.	That	seer	had	been
a	genius,	to	have	seen	so	clearly,	and	to	manage	so	much	in	three	simple
words.	Not	that	conceit	was	a	simple	thing,	and	Corabb	recalled	having	to	ask
an	old	woman	what	the	word	meant,	and	she	had	cackled	and	reached	under	his


tunic	to	tug	on	his	penis,	which	had	been	unexpected	and,	instinctive	response
notwithstanding,	unwelcome.	A	faint	wave	of	embarrassment	accompanied	the
recollection,	and	he	spat	into	the	fire	flickering	before	him.
Leoman	of	the	Flails	sat	opposite	him,	a	hookah	filled	with	wine-soaked
durhang	at	the	man’s	side,	at	his	thin	lips	the	mouthpiece	of	hard	wood	carved
into	the	semblance	of	a	woman’s	nipple	and	stained	magenta	to	add	to	the
likeness.	His	leader ’s	eyes	glistened	dark	red	in	the	fire’s	light,	the	lids	low,	the
gaze	seemingly	fixed	on	the	licking	flames.
Corabb	had	found	a	piece	of	wood	the	length	of	his	arm,	light	as	a
woman’s	breath	–	telling	him	that	a	birit	slug	dwelt	within	–	and	he	had	just	dug
it	out	with	the	point	of	his	knife.	The	creature	squirmed	on	the	blade’s	tip,	and
it	had	been	the	sight	of	this	that	had,	alas,	reminded	him	of	the	debacle	with	his
penis.	Feeling	morose,	he	bit	the	slug	in	half	and	began	chewing,	juices
spurting	down	into	his	beard.	‘Ah,’	he	said	around	the	mouthful,	‘she	has	roe.
Delicious.’
Leoman	looked	over,	then	he	drew	once	more	on	the	mouthpiece.	‘We’re
running	out	of	horses,’	he	said.
Corabb	swallowed.	The	other	half	of	the	slug	was	writhing	on	the	knife	tip,
threads	of	pink	eggs	dangling	like	tiny	pearls.	‘We’ll	make	it,	Commander,’	he
said,	then	poked	out	his	tongue	to	lap	up	the	roe,	following	up	by	inserting	the
rest	of	the	slug	into	his	mouth.	He	chewed,	then	swallowed.	‘Four,	five	days,	I
would	judge.’
Leoman’s	eyes	glittered.	‘You	know,	then.’
‘Where	we’re	going?	Yes.’
‘Do	you	know	why?’
Corabb	tossed	the	piece	of	wood	onto	the	fire.	‘Y’Ghatan.	The	First	Holy
City.	Where	Dassem	Ultor,	curse	his	name,	died	in	betrayal.	Y’Ghatan,	the
oldest	city	in	the	world.	Built	atop	the	forge	of	a	blacksmith	of	the	Abyss,	built
on	his	very	bones.	Seven	Y’Ghatans,	seven	great	cities	to	mark	the	ages	we
have	seen,	the	one	we	see	now	crouched	on	the	bones	of	the	other	six.	City	of
the	Olive	Groves,	city	of	the	sweet	oils—’	Corabb	paused,	frowned.	‘What	was
your	question,	Commander?’
‘Why.’
‘Oh,	yes.	Do	I	know	why	you	have	chosen	Y’Ghatan?	Because	we	invite	a
siege.	It	is	a	difficult	city	to	conquer.	The	fool	Malazans	will	bleed	themselves
to	death	attempting	to	storm	its	walls.	We	shall	add	their	bones	to	all	the	others,
to	Dassem	Ultor ’s	very	own—’
‘He	didn’t	die	there,	Corabb.’
‘What?	But	there	were	witnesses—’


‘To	his	wounding,	yes.	To	the	assassination…attempt.	But	no,	my	friend,
the	First	Sword	did	not	die,	and	he	lives	still.’
‘Then	where	is	he?’
‘Where	doesn’t	matter.	You	should	ask:	Who	is	he?	Ask	that,	Corabb
Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	and	I	will	give	you	answer.’
Corabb	thought	about	that.	Even	swimming	in	the	fumes	of	durhang,
Leoman	of	the	Flails	was	too	smart	for	him.	Clever,	able	to	see	all	that	Corabb
could	not.	He	was	the	greatest	commander	Seven	Cities	had	ever	produced.	He
would	have	defeated	Coltaine.	Honourably.	And,	had	he	been	left	to	it,	he
would	have	crushed	Adjunct	Tavore,	and	then	Dujek	Onearm.	There	would
have	been	true	liberation,	for	all	Seven	Cities,	and	from	here	the	rebellion
against	the	damned	empire	would	have	rippled	outward,	until	the	yoke	was
thrown	off	by	all.	This	was	the	tragedy,	the	true	tragedy.	‘Blessed	Dessembrae
hounds	our	heels…’
Leoman	coughed	a	cloud	of	smoke.	He	doubled	over,	still	coughing.
Corabb	reached	for	a	skin	of	water	and	thrust	it	into	his	leader ’s	hands.
The	man	finally	drew	breath,	then	drank	deep.	He	leaned	back	with	a	gusty
sigh,	and	then	grinned.	‘You	are	a	wonder,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas!	To
answer	you,	I	certainly	hope	not!’
Corabb	felt	sad.	He	said,	‘You	mock	me,	Commander.’
‘Not	at	all,	you	Oponn-blessed	madman	–	my	only	friend	left	breathing	–
not	at	all.	It	is	the	cult,	you	see.	The	Lord	of	Tragedy.	Dessembrae.	That	is
Dassem	Ultor.	I	don’t	doubt	you	understood	that,	but	consider	this	–	for	there
to	be	a	cult,	a	religion,	with	priests	and	such,	there	must	be	a	god.	A	living
god.’
‘Dassem	Ultor	is	ascended?’
‘I	believe	so,	although	he	is	a	reluctant	god.	A	denier,	like	Anomander
Rake	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	And	so	he	wanders,	in	eternal	flight,	and	in,	perhaps,
eternal	hunt	as	well.’
‘For	what?’
Leoman	shook	his	head.	Then	said,	‘Y’Ghatan.	Yes,	my	friend.	There,	we
will	make	our	stand,	and	the	name	shall	be	a	curse	among	the	Malazans,	for	all
time,	a	curse,	bitter	on	their	tongues.’	His	eyes	hardened	suddenly	on	Corabb.
‘Are	you	with	me?	No	matter	what	I	command,	no	matter	the	madness	that	will
seem	to	afflict	me?’
Something	in	his	leader ’s	gaze	frightened	Corabb,	but	he	nodded.	‘I	am
with	you,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	Do	not	doubt	that.’
A	wry	smile.	‘I	shall	not	hold	you	to	that.	But	I	thank	you	for	your	words
nonetheless.’


‘Why	would	you	doubt	them?’
‘Because	only	I	know	what	I	intend	to	do.’
‘Tell	me.’
‘No,	my	friend.	This	burden	is	mine.’
‘You	lead	us,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	We	shall	follow.	As	you	say,	you	carry
all	of	us.	We	are	the	weight	of	history,	of	liberty,	and	yet	you	are	not	bowed—’
‘Ah,	Corabb…’
‘I	only	say	what	is	known	but	has	never	before	been	said	aloud,
Commander.’
‘There	is	mercy	in	silence,	my	friend.	But	no	mind.	It	is	done,	you	have
indeed	spoken.’
‘I	have	assailed	you	further.	I	am	sorry,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.’
Leoman	drank	again	from	the	waterskin,	then	spat	into	the	fire.	‘We	need
say	no	more	of	it.	Y’Ghatan.	This	shall	be	our	city.	Four,	five	days.	It	is	just
past	crushing	season,	yes?’
‘The	olives?	Yes,	we	shall	arrive	when	the	grovers	have	gathered.	A
thousand	merchants	will	be	there,	and	workers	out	on	the	road	leading	to	the
coast,	setting	new	stones.	And	potters,	and	barrel-makers,	and	wagoners	and
caravans.	The	air	shall	be	gold	with	dust	and	dusted	with	gold—’
‘You	are	a	poet	indeed,	Corabb.	Merchants,	and	their	hired	guards.	Tell	me,
will	they	bow	to	my	authority,	do	you	think?’
‘They	must.’
‘Who	is	the	city’s	Falah’d?’
‘Vedor.’
‘Which	one?’
‘The	ferret-faced	one,	Leoman.	His	fish-faced	brother	was	found	dead	in
his	lover ’s	bed,	the	whore	nowhere	to	be	found,	but	likely	rich	and	in	hiding	or
in	a	shallow	grave.	It’s	the	old	story	among	the	Fala’dhan.’
‘And	we	are	certain	Vedor	continues	to	deny	the	Malazans?’
‘No	fleet	or	army	could	have	reached	them	yet.	You	know	this,	Leoman	of
the	Flails.’
The	man	slowly	nodded,	eyes	once	more	on	the	flames.
Corabb	looked	up	at	the	night	sky.	‘One	day,’	he	said,	‘we	shall	walk	the
Roads	to	the	Abyss.	And	so	witness	all	the	wonders	of	the	universe.’
Leoman	squinted	upward.	‘Where	the	stars	are	thick	as	veins?’
‘They	are	roads,	Leoman.	Surely	you	do	not	believe	those	insane
scholars?’
‘All	scholars	are	insane,	yes.	They	say	nothing	worth	believing.	The	roads,
then.	The	trail	of	fire.’


‘Of	course,’	Corabb	continued,	‘that	shall	be	many	years	from	now…’
‘As	you	say,	friend.	Now,	best	get	some	sleep.’
Corabb	rose,	bones	cracking.	‘May	you	dream	of	glory	this	night,
Commander.’
‘Glory?	Oh,	yes,	my	friend.	Our	trail	of	fire…’
‘Aai,	that	slug	has	given	me	indigestion.	It	was	the	roe.’
	
‘The	bastard’s	heading	for	Y’Ghatan.’
Sergeant	Strings	glanced	over	at	Bottle.	‘You’ve	been	thinking,	haven’t
you?	That’s	not	good,	soldier.	Not	good	at	all.’
‘Can’t	help	it.’
‘That’s	even	worse.	Now	I	have	to	keep	an	eye	on	you.’
Koryk	was	on	his	hands	and	knees,	head	lowered	as	he	sought	to	breathe
life	back	into	the	bed	of	coals	from	the	night	just	past.	He	suddenly	coughed	as
he	inhaled	a	cloud	of	ashes	and	ducked	away,	blinking	and	hacking.
Smiles	laughed.	‘The	wise	plainsman	does	it	again.	You	were	asleep,
Koryk,	but	I	should	tell	you,	Tarr	pissed	that	fire	out	last	night.’
‘What!?’
‘She’s	lying,’	Tarr	said	from	where	he	crouched	beside	his	pack,	repairing
a	strap.	‘Even	so,	it	was	a	good	one.	You	should	have	seen	your	expression,
Koryk.’
‘How	can	anyone,	with	that	white	mask	he’s	wearing?	Shouldn’t	you	be
painting	death	lines	through	that	ash,	Koryk?	Isn’t	that	what	Seti	do?’
‘Only	when	going	into	battle,	Smiles,’	the	sergeant	said.	‘Now,	leave	off,
woman.	You’re	as	bad	as	that	damned	Hengese	lapdog.	It	bit	a	Khundryl’s	ankle
last	night	and	wouldn’t	let	go.’
‘Hope	they	skewered	it,’	Smiles	said.
‘Not	a	chance.	Bent	was	standing	guard.	Anyway,	they	had	to	get	Temul	to
pry	the	thing	off.	My	point	is,	Smiles,	you	ain’t	got	a	Wickan	cattle-dog	to
guard	your	back,	so	the	less	you	snipe	the	safer	you’ll	be.’
No-one	mentioned	the	knife	Koryk	had	taken	in	the	leg	a	week	past.
Cuttle	came	wandering	into	the	camp.	He’d	found	a	squad	that	had	already
brewed	some	foul-smelling	tea	and	was	sipping	from	his	tin	cup.	‘They’re
here,’	he	said.
‘Who?’	Smiles	demanded.
Bottle	watched	as	their	sergeant	settled	back	down,	leaning	against	his
pack.	‘All	right,’	Strings	said,	sighing.	‘March	will	be	delayed.	Someone	help
Koryk	get	the	fire	going	–	we’re	going	to	have	a	real	breakfast.	Cuttle	the


cook.’
‘Me?	All	right,	just	don’t	blame	me.’
‘For	what?’	Strings	asked	with	an	innocent	smile.
Cuttle	walked	over	to	the	hearth,	reaching	into	a	pouch.	‘Got	some	sealed
Flamer	dust—’
Everyone	scattered,	Strings	included.	Suddenly,	Cuttle	was	alone,	looking
round	bemusedly	at	his	fellow	soldiers,	now	one	and	all	at	least	fifteen	paces
distant.	He	scowled.	‘A	grain	or	two,	nothing	more.	Damn,	do	you	think	I’m
mad?’
Everyone	looked	to	Strings,	who	shrugged.	‘Instinctive	reaction,	Cuttle.
Surprised	you	ain’t	used	to	it	by	now.’
‘Yeah?	And	how	come	you	were	the	first	belting	out	of	here,	Fid?’
‘Who’d	know	better	than	me?’
Cuttle	crouched	down	beside	the	hearth.	‘Well,’	he	muttered,	‘I’m
absolutely	crushed.’	He	withdrew	a	small	clay	disk	from	the	pouch.	It	was	a
playing	piece	for	the	board-game	called	Troughs,	the	game	being	Cuttle’s
favourite	pastime.	The	sapper	spat	on	it,	then	tossed	it	into	the	coals.	And
quickly	backed	away.
No-one	else	moved.
‘Hey,’	Koryk	said,	‘that	wasn’t	a	real	Troughs	piece,	was	it?’
Cuttle	glanced	over.	‘Why	wouldn’t	it	be?’
‘Because	those	things	get	thrown	around!’
‘Only	when	I	lose,’	the	sapper	replied.
A	burst	of	ash,	sudden	flames.	Cuttle	walked	back	and	began	flinging
pieces	of	dung	on	the	fire.	‘All	right,	somebody	tend	to	this.	I’ll	get	what	passes
for	food	around	here	and	figure	something	out.’
‘Bottle	has	some	lizards,’	Smiles	said.
‘Forget	it,’	Bottle	shot	back.	‘They’re	my,	uh,	friends.’	He	flinched	as	the
other	squad	members	turned	to	regard	him.
‘Friends?’	Strings	asked.	He	scratched	his	beard,	studying	his	soldier.
‘What,’	Smiles	said,	‘the	rest	of	us	too	smart	for	you,	Bottle?	All	these
confounding	words	we	use?	The	fact	we	can	read	those	squiggly	etchings	on
clay	and	wax	tablets	and	scrolls?	Well,	except	for	Koryk,	of	course.	Anyway.
Feeling	insufficient,	Bottle?	I	don’t	mean	physically	–	that	goes	without	saying.
But,	mentally,	right?	Is	that	the	problem?’
Bottle	glared	at	her.	‘You’ll	regret	all	that,	Smiles.’
‘Oh,	he’s	going	to	send	his	lizard	friends	after	me!	Help!’
‘That’s	enough,	Smiles,’	Strings	said	in	a	warning	growl.
She	rose,	ran	her	hands	through	her	still-unbound	hair.	‘Well,	I’m	off	to


gossip	with	Flashwit	and	Uru	Hela.	Flash	said	she	saw	Neffarias	Bredd	a
couple	of	days	ago.	A	horse	had	died	and	he	carried	it	back	to	his	squad’s
camp.	They	roasted	it.	Nothing	but	bones	left.’
‘The	squad	ate	an	entire	horse?’	Koryk	snorted.	‘How	come	I’ve	never
seen	this	Neffarias	Bredd,	anyway?	Has	anybody	here	seen	him?’
‘I	have,’	Smiles	replied.
‘When?’	Koryk	demanded.
‘A	few	days	ago.	I’m	bored	talking	to	you.	Your	fire’s	going	out.’	She
walked	off.
The	sergeant	was	still	tugging	at	his	beard.	‘Gods	below,	I	need	to	hack	this
thing	off,’	he	muttered.
‘But	the	chicks	ain’t	left	the	nest	yet,’	Cuttle	said,	settling	down	with	an
armful	of	foodstuffs.	‘Who’s	been	collecting	snakes?’	he	asked,	letting	the
various	objects	drop.	He	picked	up	a	long,	rope-like	thing.	‘They	stink—’
‘That’s	the	vinegar,’	Koryk	said.	‘It’s	an	old	Seti	delicacy.	The	vinegar
cooks	the	meat,	you	see,	for	when	you	ain’t	got	the	time	to	smoke	it	slow.’
‘What	are	you	doing	killing	snakes?’	Bottle	demanded.	‘They’re	useful,
you	know.’
Strings	rose.	‘Bottle,	walk	with	me.’
Oh	damn.	I’ve	got	to	learn	to	say	nothing.	‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
They	crossed	the	ditch	and	headed	onto	the	broken	sweep	of	the	Lato
Odhan,	the	mostly	level,	dusty	ground	home	to	a	scattering	of	shattered	rock,
no	piece	larger	than	a	man’s	head.	Somewhere	far	to	the	southwest	was	the	city
of	Kayhum,	still	out	of	sight,	whilst	behind	them	rose	the	Thalas	Mountains,
treeless	for	centuries	and	now	eroded	like	rotting	teeth.	No	cloud	relieved	the
bright	morning	sun,	already	hot.
‘Where	do	you	keep	your	lizards?’	Strings	asked.
‘In	my	clothes,	out	of	the	sun,	during	the	day,	I	mean.	They	wander	at
night.’
‘And	you	wander	with	them.’
Bottle	nodded.
‘That’s	a	useful	talent,’	the	sergeant	commented,	then	went	on,	‘especially
for	spying.	Not	on	the	enemy,	of	course,	but	on	everyone	else.’
‘So	far.	I	mean,	we	haven’t	been	close	enough	to	the	enemy—’
‘I	know.	And	that’s	why	you	ain’t	told	nobody	yet	about	it.	So,	you’ve
listened	in	on	the	Adjunct	much?	I	mean,	since	that	time	you	learned	about	the
fall	of	the	Bridgeburners.’
‘Not	much,	to	tell	the	truth.’	Bottle	hesitated,	wondering	how	much	he
should	say.


‘Out	with	it,	soldier.’
‘It’s	that	Claw…’
‘Pearl.’
‘Aye,	and,	well,	uh,	the	High	Mage.’
‘Quick	Ben.’
‘Right,	and	now	there’s	Tayschrenn,	too—’
Strings	grasped	Bottle’s	arm	and	pulled	him	round.	‘He	left.	He	was	only
here	for	a	few	bells,	and	that	was	a	week	ago—’
‘Aye,	but	that	doesn’t	mean	he	can’t	come	back,	at	any	time,	right?	Anyway,
all	these	powerful,	scary	mages,	well,	they	make	me	nervous.’
‘You’re	making	me	nervous,	Bottle!’
‘Why?’
The	sergeant	squinted	at	him,	then	let	go	of	his	arm	and	resumed	walking.
‘Where	are	we	going?’	Bottle	demanded.
‘You	tell	me.’
‘Not	that	way.’
‘Why?’
‘Uh.	Nil	and	Nether,	just	the	other	side	of	that	low	rise.’
Strings	loosed	a	half-dozen	dockside	curses.	‘Hood	take	us!	Listen,	soldier,
I	ain’t	forgotten	anything,	you	know.	I	remember	you	playing	dice	with
Meanas,	making	dolls	of	Hood	and	the	Rope.	Earth-magic	and	talking	with
spirits	–	gods	below,	you’re	so	much	like	Quick	Ben	it	makes	my	hair	stand	on
end.	Oh,	right,	it	all	comes	from	your	grandmother	–	but	you	see,	I	know
where	Quick	got	his	talents!’
Bottle	frowned	at	the	man.	‘What?’
‘What	do	you	mean	what?’
‘What	are	you	talking	about,	Sergeant?	You’ve	got	me	confused.’
‘Quick’s	got	more	warrens	to	draw	on	than	any	mage	I’ve	ever	heard
about.	Except,’	he	added	in	a	frustrated	snarl,	‘except	maybe	you.’
‘But	I	don’t	even	like	warrens!’
‘No,	you’re	closer	to	Nil	and	Nether,	aren’t	you?	Spirits	and	stuff.	When
you’re	not	playing	with	Hood	and	Shadow,	that	is!’
‘They’re	older	than	warrens,	Sergeant.’
‘Like	that!	What	do	you	mean	by	that?’
‘Well.	Holds.	They’re	holds.	Or	they	were.	Before	warrens.	It’s	old	magic,
that’s	what	my	grandmother	taught	me.	Real	old.	Anyway,	I’ve	changed	my
mind	about	Nil	and	Nether.	They’re	up	to	something	and	I	want	to	see	it.’
‘But	you	don’t	want	them	to	see	us.’
Bottle	shrugged.	‘Too	late	for	that,	Sergeant.	They	know	we’re	here.’


‘Fine,	lead	on,	then.	But	I	want	Quick	Ben	to	meet	you.	And	I	want	to	know
all	about	these	holds	you	keep	talking	about.’
No	you	don’t.	‘All	right.’	Quick	Ben.	A	meeting.	That	was	bad.	Maybe	I
could	run	away.	No,	don’t	be	an	idiot.	You	can’t	run	away,	Bottle.	Besides,	what
were	the	risks	of	talking	with	the	High	Mage?	He	wasn’t	doing	anything
wrong,	exactly.	Not	really.	Not	so	anybody	would	know,	anyway.	Except	a
sneaky	bastard	like	Quick	Ben.	Abyss,	what	if	he	finds	out	who’s	walking	in	my
shadow?	Well,	it’s	not	like	I	asked	for	the	company,	is	it?
‘Whatever	you’re	thinking,’	Strings	said	in	a	growl,	‘it’s	got	my	skin
crawling.’
‘Not	me.	Nil	and	Nether.	They’ve	begun	a	ritual.	I’ve	changed	my	mind
again	–	maybe	we	should	go	back.’
‘No.’
They	began	ascending	the	gentle	slope.
Bottle	felt	sudden	sweat	trickling	beneath	his	clothes.	‘You’ve	got	some
natural	talent,	haven’t	you,	Sergeant?	Skin	crawling	and	all	that.	You’re
sensitive	to…stuff.’
‘I	had	a	bad	upbringing.’
‘Where’s	Gesler ’s	squad	gone?’
Strings	shot	him	a	glance.	‘You’re	doing	it	again.’
‘Sorry.’
‘They’re	escorting	Quick	and	Kalam	–	they’ve	gone	ahead.	So,	your
dreaded	meeting	with	Quick	is	still	some	time	off,	you’ll	be	glad	to	know.’
‘Gone	ahead.	By	warren?	They	shouldn’t	be	doing	that,	you	know.	Not
now.	Not	here—’
‘Why?’
‘Well.	Because.’
‘For	the	first	time	in	my	career	as	a	soldier	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	I	truly
want	to	strangle	a	fellow	soldier.’
‘Sorry.’
‘Stop	saying	that	name!’
‘It’s	not	a	name.	It’s	a	word.’
The	sergeant’s	battered	hands	clenched	into	fists.
Bottle	fell	silent.	Wondering	if	Strings	might	actually	strangle	him.
They	reached	the	crest.	Thirty	paces	beyond,	the	Wickan	witch	and	warlock
had	arranged	a	circle	of	jagged	stones	and	were	seated	within	it,	facing	each
other.	‘They’re	travelling,’	Bottle	said.	‘It’s	a	kind	of	Spiritwalking,	like	the
Tanno	do.	They’re	aware	of	us,	but	only	vaguely.’
‘I	assume	we	don’t	step	within	that	ring.’


‘Not	unless	we	need	to	pull	them	out.’
Strings	looked	over.
‘Not	unless	I	need	to	pull	them	out,	I	mean.	If	things	go	wrong.	If	they	get
in	trouble.’
They	drew	nearer.	‘What	made	you	join	the	army,	Bottle?’
She	insisted.	‘My	grandmother	thought	it	would	be	a	good	idea.	She’d	just
died,	you	see,	and	her	spirit	was,	um,	agitated	a	little.	About	something.’	Oh,
steer	away	from	this,	Bottle.	‘I	was	getting	bored.	Restless.	Selling	dolls	to
pilots	and	sailors	on	the	docks—’
‘Where?’
‘Jakatakan.’
‘What	kind	of	dolls?’
‘The	kind	the	Stormriders	seem	to	like.	Appeasement.’
‘Stormriders?	Gods	below,	Bottle,	I	didn’t	think	anything	worked	with
them	lately.	Not	for	years.’
‘The	dolls	didn’t	always	work,	but	they	sometimes	did,	which	was	better
than	most	propitiations.	Anyway,	I	was	making	good	coin,	but	it	didn’t	seem
enough—’
‘Are	you	feeling	cold	all	of	a	sudden?’
Bottle	nodded.	‘It	makes	sense,	where	they’ve	gone.’
‘And	where	is	that?’
‘Through	Hood’s	Gate.	It’s	all	right,	Sergeant.	I	think.	Really.	They’re
pretty	sneaky,	and	so	long	as	they	don’t	attract	the	wrong	attention…’
‘But…why?’
Bottle	glanced	over.	The	sergeant	was	looking	pale.	Not	surprising.	Those
damned	ghosts	at	Raraku	had	rattled	him.	‘They’re	looking	for…people.	Dead
ones.’
‘Sormo	E’nath?’
‘I	guess.	Wickans.	Ones	who	died	on	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	They’ve	done	this
before.	They	don’t	find	them—’	He	stopped	as	a	gust	of	bitter	cold	wind
swirled	up	round	the	circle	of	stones.	Sudden	frost	limned	the	ground.	‘Oh,
that’s	not	good.	I’ll	be	right	back,	Sergeant.’
Bottle	ran	forward,	then	leapt	into	the	ring.
And	vanished.
Or,	he	assumed	he	had,	since	he	was	no	longer	on	the	Lato	Odhan,	but
ankle-deep	in	rotting,	crumbling	bones,	a	sickly	grey	sky	overhead.	Someone
was	screaming.	Bottle	turned	at	the	sound	and	saw	three	figures	thirty	paces
away.	Nil	and	Nether,	and	facing	them,	a	horrific	apparition,	and	it	was	this	lich
that	was	doing	the	screaming.	The	two	young	Wickans	were	flinching	before


the	tirade.
A	language	Bottle	did	not	understand.	He	walked	closer,	bone-dust	puffing
with	each	step.
The	lich	suddenly	reached	out	and	grasped	both	Wickans,	lifting	them	into
the	air,	then	shaking	them.
Bottle	ran	forward.	And	what	do	I	do	when	I	get	there?
The	creature	snarled	and	flung	Nil	and	Nether	to	the	ground,	then	abruptly
disappeared	amidst	the	clouds	of	dust.
He	reached	them	as	they	were	climbing	to	their	feet.	Nether	was	swearing
in	her	native	tongue	as	she	brushed	dust	from	her	tunic.	She	glared	over	at
Bottle	as	he	arrived.	‘What	do	you	want?’
‘Thought	you	were	in	trouble.’
‘We’re	fine,’	Nil	snapped,	yet	there	was	a	sheepish	expression	on	his
adolescent	face.	‘You	can	lead	us	back,	mage.’
‘Did	the	Adjunct	send	you?’	Nether	demanded.	‘Are	we	to	have	no	peace?’
‘Nobody	sent	me.	Well,	Sergeant	Strings	–	we	were	just	out	walking—’
‘Strings?	You	mean	Fiddler.’
‘We’re	supposed	to—’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,’	Nether	said.	‘Everybody	knows.’
‘We’re	not	idiots.	It	clearly	hasn’t	occurred	to	either	of	you	that	maybe
Fiddler	wants	it	that	way.	Wants	to	be	called	Strings,	now,	because	his	old	life	is
gone,	and	with	the	old	name	comes	bad	memories,	and	he’s	had	enough	of
those.’
Neither	Wickan	replied.
After	a	few	more	strides,	Bottle	asked,	‘So,	was	that	a	Wickan	lich?	One	of
the	dead	you	were	looking	for?’
‘You	know	too	much.’
‘Was	it?’
Nil	cursed	under	his	breath,	then	said,	‘Our	mother.’
‘Your…’	Bottle	fell	silent.
‘She	was	telling	us	to	stop	moping	and	grow	up,’	Nil	added.
‘She	was	telling	you	that,’	Nether	retorted.	‘She	told	me	to—’
‘To	take	a	husband	and	get	pregnant.’
‘That	was	just	a	suggestion.’
‘Made	while	she	was	shaking	you?’	Bottle	asked.
Nether	spat	at	his	feet.	‘A	suggestion.	Something	I	should	maybe	think
about.	Besides,	I	don’t	have	to	listen	to	you,	soldier.	You’re	Malazan.	A	squad
mage.’
‘He’s	also	the	one,’	pointed	out	Nil,	‘who	rides	life-sparks.’


‘Small	ones.	The	way	we	did	as	children.’
Bottle	smiled	at	her	remark.
She	caught	it.	‘What’s	so	amusing?’
‘Nothing.	Sorry.’
‘I	thought	you	were	going	to	lead	us	back.’
‘I	thought	so,	too,’	Bottle	said,	halting	and	looking	round.	‘Oh,	I	think
we’ve	been	noticed.’
‘It’s	your	fault,	mage!’	Nil	accused.
‘Probably.’
Nether	hissed	and	pointed.
Another	figure	had	appeared,	and	to	either	side	padded	dogs.	Wickan	cattle
dogs.	Nine,	ten,	twelve.	Their	eyes	gleamed	silver.	The	man	in	their	midst	was
clearly	Wickan,	greying	and	squat	and	bow-legged.	His	face	was	savagely
scarred.
‘It	is	Bult,’	Nether	whispered.	She	stepped	forward.
The	dogs	growled.
‘Nil,	Nether,	I	have	been	searching	for	you,’	the	ghost	named	Bult	said,
halting	ten	paces	away,	the	dogs	lining	up	on	either	side.	‘Hear	me.	We	do	not
belong	here.	Do	you	understand?	We	do	not	belong.’	He	paused	and	pulled	at
his	nose	in	a	habitual	gesture.	‘Think	hard	on	my	words.’	He	turned	away,	then
paused	and	glanced	back	over	a	shoulder,	‘And	Nether,	get	married	and	have
babies.’
The	ghosts	vanished.
Nether	stamped	her	foot.	Dust	rose	up	around	her.	‘Why	does	everyone
keep	telling	me	that!?’
‘Your	tribe’s	been	decimated,’	Bottle	said	reasonably.	‘It	stands	to	reason
—’
She	advanced	on	him.
Bottle	stepped	back—
And	reappeared	within	the	stone	circle.
A	moment	later	gasps	came	from	Nil	and	Nether,	their	crosslegged	bodies
twitching.
‘I	was	getting	worried,’	Strings	said	behind	him,	standing	just	outside	the
ring.
The	two	Wickans	were	slow	in	getting	to	their	feet.
Bottle	hurried	to	his	sergeant’s	side.	‘We	should	get	going,’	he	said.
‘Before	she	comes	fully	round,	I	mean.’
‘Why?’
Bottle	started	walking.	‘She’s	mad	at	me.’


The	sergeant	snorted,	then	followed.	‘And	why	is	she	mad	at	you,	soldier?
As	if	I	need	ask.’
‘Just	something	I	said.’
‘Oh,	I	am	surprised.’
‘I	don’t	want	to	go	into	it,	Sergeant.	Sorry.’
‘I’m	tempted	to	throw	you	down	and	pin	you	for	her.’
They	reached	the	crest.	Behind	them,	Nether	began	shouting	curses.	Bottle
quickened	his	pace.	Then	he	halted	and	crouched	down,	reaching	under	his
shirt,	and	gingerly	drew	out	a	placid	lizard.	‘Wake	up,’	he	murmured,	then	set
it	down.	It	scampered	off.
Strings	watched.	‘It’s	going	to	follow	them,	isn’t	it?’
‘She	might	decide	on	a	real	curse,’	Bottle	explained.	‘And	if	she	does,	I
need	to	counter	it.’
‘Hood’s	breath,	what	did	you	say	to	her?’
‘I	made	a	terrible	mistake.	I	agreed	with	her	mother.’
	
‘We	should	be	getting	out	of	here.	Or…’
Kalam	glanced	over.	‘All	right,	Quick.’	He	raised	a	hand	to	halt	the
soldiers	flanking	them	and	the	one	trailing	behind,	then	uttered	a	low	whistle	to
alert	the	huge,	red-bearded	corporal	on	point.
The	squad	members	drew	in	to	surround	the	assassin	and	the	High	Mage.
‘We’re	being	followed,’	Sergeant	Gesler	said,	wiping	sweat	from	his
burnished	brow.
‘It’s	worse	than	that,’	Quick	Ben	said.
The	soldier	named	Sands	muttered,	‘Isn’t	it	just.’
Kalam	turned	and	studied	the	track	behind	them.	He	could	see	nothing	in
the	colourless	swirl.	‘This	is	still	the	Imperial	Warren,	isn’t	it?’
Quick	Ben	rubbed	at	his	neck.	‘I’m	not	so	sure.’
‘But	how	can	that	happen?’	This	from	the	corporal,	Stormy,	his	forehead
buckling	and	small	eyes	glittering	as	though	he	was	about	to	fly	into	a	berserk
rage	at	any	moment.	He	was	holding	his	grey	flint	sword	as	if	expecting	some
demon	to	come	bursting	into	existence	right	in	front	of	them.
The	assassin	checked	his	long-knives,	and	said	to	Quick	Ben,	‘Well?’
The	wizard	hesitated,	then	nodded.	‘All	right.’
‘What	did	you	two	just	decide?’	Gesler	asked.	‘And	would	it	be	so	hard
explaining	it	to	us?’
‘Sarcastic	bastard,’	Quick	Ben	commented,	then	gave	the	sergeant	a	broad,
white	smile.


‘I’ve	punched	a	lot	of	faces	in	my	day,’	Gesler	said,	returning	the	smile,
‘but	never	one	belonging	to	a	High	Mage	before.’
‘You	might	not	be	here	if	you	had,	Sergeant.’
‘Back	to	business,’	Kalam	said	in	a	warning	rumble.	‘We’re	going	to	wait
and	see	what’s	after	us,	Gesler.	Quick	doesn’t	know	where	we	are,	and	that	in
itself	is	troubling	enough.’
‘And	then	we	leave,’	the	wizard	added.	‘No	heroic	stands.’
‘The	Fourteenth’s	motto,’	Stormy	said,	with	a	loud	sigh.
‘Which?’	Gesler	asked.	‘And	then	we	leave	or	No	heroic	stands?’
‘Take	your	pick.’
Kalam	studied	the	squad,	first	Gesler,	then	Stormy,	then	the	lad,	Truth,	and
Pella	and	the	minor	mage,	Sands.	What	a	miserable	bunch.
‘Let’s	just	go	kill	it,’	Stormy	said,	shifting	about.	‘And	then	we	can	talk
about	what	it	was.’
‘Hood	knows	how	you’ve	lived	this	long,’	Quick	Ben	said,	shaking	his
head.
‘Because	I’m	a	reasonable	man,	High	Mage.’
Kalam	grunted.	All	right,	they	might	grow	on	me	at	that.	‘How	far	away	is
it,	Quick?’
‘Closing.	Not	it.	Them.’
Gesler	unslung	his	crossbow	and	Pella	and	Truth	followed	suit.	They
loaded	quarrels,	then	fanned	out.
‘Them,	you	said,’	the	sergeant	muttered,	glaring	over	at	Quick	Ben.
‘Would	that	be	two?	Six?	Fifty	thousand?’
‘It’s	not	that,’	Sands	said	in	a	suddenly	shaky	voice.	‘It’s	where	they’ve
come	from.	Chaos.	I’m	right,	ain’t	I,	High	Mage?’
‘So,’	Kalam	said,	‘the	warrens	really	are	in	trouble.’
‘I	did	tell	you	that,	Kal.’
‘You	did.	And	you	told	the	Adjunct	the	same	thing.	But	she	wanted	us	to	get
to	Y’Ghatan	before	Leoman.	And	that	means	the	warrens.’
‘There!’	Truth	hissed,	pointing.
Emerging	from	the	grey	gloom,	something	massive,	towering,	black	as	a
storm-cloud,	filling	the	sky.	And	behind	it,	another,	and	another…
‘Time	to	go,’	Quick	Ben	said.


Chapter	Four
All	that	K’rul	created,	you	understand,	was	born	of	the	Elder	God’s
love	of	possibility.	Myriad	paths	of	sorcery	spun	out	a	multitude	of
strands,	each	wild	as	hairs	in	the	wind,	hackled	to	the	wandering	beast.
And	K’rul	was	that	beast,	yet	he	himself	was	a	parody	of	life,	for	blood
was	his	nectar,	the	spilled	gift,	red	tears	of	pain,	and	all	that	he	was,
was	defined	by	that	singular	thirst.
For	all	that,	thirst	is	something	we	all	share,	yes?
Brutho	and	Nullit	speak	on	Nullit’s	Last	Night
Brutho	Parlet
The	land	was	vast,	but	it	was	not	empty.	Some	ancient	cataclysm	had	torn
through	the	scoured	bedrock,	splitting	it	with	fissures	in	a	chaotic	crisscross
skein	over	the	plain.	If	sand	had	once	covered	this	place,	even	filling	the
chasms,	wind	or	water	had	swept	away	the	very	last	grain.	The	stone	looked
polished	and	the	sun’s	light	bounced	from	it	in	a	savage	glare.
Squinting,	Mappo	Runt	studied	the	tormented	landscape	in	front	of	them.
After	a	time,	he	shook	his	head.	‘I	have	never	seen	this	place	before,	Icarium.	It
seems	as	though	something	has	just	peeled	back	the	skin	of	the	world.	Those
cracks…how	can	they	run	in	such	random	directions?’
The	half-blood	Jaghut	standing	at	his	side	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	his
pallid	eyes	scanning	the	scene	as	if	seeking	a	pattern.	Then	he	crouched	down
and	picked	up	a	piece	of	broken	bedrock.	‘Immense	pressures,’	he	murmured.
‘And	then…violence.’	He	straightened,	tossing	the	rock	aside.	‘The	fissures
follow	no	fault	lines	–	see	that	nearest	one?	It	cuts	directly	across	the	seams	in
the	stone.	I	am	intrigued,	Mappo.’
The	Trell	set	down	his	burlap	sack.	‘Do	you	wish	to	explore?’
‘I	do.’	Icarium	glanced	at	him	and	smiled.	‘None	of	my	desires	surprise
you,	do	they?	It	is	no	exaggeration	that	you	know	my	mind	better	than	I.	Would
that	you	were	a	woman.’
‘Were	I	a	woman,	Icarium,	I	would	have	serious	concerns	about	your	taste
in	women.’


‘Granted,’	the	Jhag	replied,	‘you	are	somewhat	hairy.	Bristly,	in	fact.	Given
your	girth,	I	believe	you	capable	of	wrestling	a	bull	bhederin	to	the	ground.’
‘Assuming	I	had	reason	to…although	none	comes	to	mind.’
‘Come,	let	us	explore.’
Mappo	followed	Icarium	out	onto	the	blasted	plain.	The	heat	was	vicious,
desiccating.	Beneath	their	feet,	the	bedrock	bore	twisted	swirls,	signs	of	vast,
contrary	pressures.	No	lichen	clung	to	the	stone.	‘This	has	been	long	buried.’
‘Yes,	and	only	recently	exposed.’
They	approached	the	sharp	edge	of	the	nearest	chasm.
The	sunlight	reached	down	part-way	to	reveal	jagged,	sheer	walls,	but	the
floor	was	hidden	in	darkness.
‘I	see	a	way	down,’	Icarium	said.
‘I	was	hoping	you	had	missed	it,’	Mappo	replied,	having	seen	the	same
chute	with	its	convenient	collection	of	ledges,	cracks	for	hand-	and	foot-holds.
‘You	know	how	I	hate	climbing.’
‘Until	you	mentioned	it,	no.	Shall	we?’
‘Let	me	retrieve	my	pack,’	Mappo	said,	turning	about.	‘We’ll	likely	be
spending	the	night	down	there.’	He	made	his	way	back	towards	the	edge	of	the
plain.	The	rewards	of	curiosity	had	diminished	for	Mappo,	over	the	years	since
he	had	vowed	to	walk	at	Icarium’s	side.	It	was	now	a	sentiment	bound	taut	with
dread.	Icarium’s	search	for	answers	was	not	a	hopeless	one,	alas.	And	if	truth
was	discovered,	it	would	be	as	an	avalanche,	and	Icarium	would	not,	could	not,
withstand	the	revelations.	About	himself.	And	all	that	he	had	done.	He	would
seek	to	take	his	own	life,	if	no-one	else	dared	grant	the	mercy.
That	was	a	precipice	they	had	both	clung	to	not	so	long	ago.	And	I	betrayed
my	vow.	In	the	name	of	friendship.	He	had	been	broken,	and	it	shamed	him	still.
Worse,	to	see	the	compassion	in	Icarium’s	eyes,	that	had	been	a	sword	through
Mappo’s	heart,	an	unhealed	wound	still	haunting	him.
But	curiosity	was	a	fickle	thing,	as	well.	Distractions	devoured	time,	drew
Icarium	from	his	relentless	path.	Yes,	time.	Delays.	Follow	where	he	will	lead,
Mappo	Runt.	You	can	do	naught	else.	Until…until	what?	Until	he	finally	failed.
And	then,	another	would	come,	if	it	was	not	already	too	late,	to	resume	the
grand	deceit.
He	was	tired.	His	very	soul	was	weary	of	the	whole	charade.	Too	many	lies
had	led	him	onto	this	path,	too	many	lies	held	him	here	to	this	day.	I	am	no
friend.	I	broke	my	vow	–	in	the	name	of	friendship?	Another	lie.	No.	Simple,
brutal	self-interest,	the	weakness	of	my	selfish	needs.
Whilst	Icarium	called	him	friend.	Victim	of	a	terrible	curse,	yet	he
remained,	trusting,	honourable,	filled	with	the	pleasure	of	living.	And	here	I


am,	happily	leading	him	astray,	again	and	again.	Oh,	the	word	for	it	was
indeed	shame.
He	found	himself	standing	before	his	pack.	How	long	he	had	stood	there,
unseeing,	unmoving,	he	did	not	know.	Ah,	now	that	is	just,	that	I	begin	to	lose
myself.	Sighing,	he	picked	it	up	and	slung	it	over	a	shoulder.	Pray	we	cross	noone’s	path.	No	threat.	No	risk.	Pray	we	never	find	a	way	out	of	the	chasm.	But	to
whom	was	he	praying?	Mappo	smiled	as	he	made	his	way	back.	He	believed	in
nothing,	and	would	not	presume	the	conceit	of	etching	a	face	on	oblivion.
Thus,	empty	prayers,	uttered	by	an	empty	man.
‘Are	you	all	right,	my	friend?’	Icarium	asked	as	he	arrived.
‘Lead	on,’	Mappo	said.	‘I	must	secure	my	pack	first.’
A	flash	of	something	like	concern	in	the	Jhag’s	expression,	then	he	nodded
and	walked	over	to	where	the	chute	debouched,	slipped	over	the	edge,	and
vanished	from	sight.
Mappo	tugged	a	small	belt-pouch	free	and	loosened	the	drawstrings.	He
pulled	another	pouch	from	the	first	one	and	unfolded	it,	revealing	that	it	was
larger	than	the	one	it	had	been	stored	in.	From	this	second	pouch	he	withdrew
another,	again	larger	once	unfolded.	Mappo	then,	with	some	effort,	pushed	the
shoulder	pack	into	this	last	one.	Tightened	the	strings.	He	stuffed	that	pouch
into	the	next	smaller	and	followed	by	forcing	that	one	into	the	small	beltpouch,	which	he	tied	at	his	waist.	Inconvenient,	though	temporary.	He	would
have	no	quick	access	to	his	weapons	should	some	calamity	arise,	at	least	for
the	duration	of	the	descent.	Not	that	he	could	fight	clinging	like	a	drunk	goat	to
the	cliff-side	in	any	case.
He	made	his	way	to	the	chute	and	looked	over	the	edge.	Icarium	was
making	swift	progress,	already	fifteen	or	more	man-heights	down.
What	would	they	find	down	there?	Rocks.	Or	something	that	should	have
remained	buried	for	all	time.
Mappo	began	his	descent.
Before	long,	the	passage	of	the	sun	swept	all	light	from	the	crevasse.	They
continued	in	deep	gloom,	the	air	cool	and	stale.	There	was	no	sound,	barring
the	occasional	scrape	of	Icarium’s	scabbard	against	stone	from	somewhere
below,	the	only	indication	that	the	Jhag	still	lived,	that	he	had	not	fallen,	for,
had	he	lost	his	grip	and	plummeted,	Mappo	knew	that	he	would	make	no
outcry.
The	Trell’s	arms	were	getting	tired,	the	calves	of	his	legs	aching,	his
fingers	growing	numb,	but	he	maintained	his	steady	pace,	feeling	strangely
relentless,	as	if	this	was	a	descent	with	no	end	and	he	was	eager	to	prove	it,	the
only	possible	proof	being	to	continue	on.	For	ever.	There	was	something


telling	in	that	desire,	but	he	was	not	prepared	to	be	mindful	of	it.
The	air	grew	colder.	Mappo	watched	the	plumes	of	his	breath	frosting	the
stone	face	opposite	him,	sparkling	in	some	faint,	sourceless	illumination.	He
could	smell	old	ice,	somewhere	below,	and	a	whisper	of	unease	quickened	his
breathing.
A	hand	on	the	heel	of	his	left,	down-reaching	foot	startled	him.
‘We	are	here,’	Icarium	murmured.
‘Abyss	take	us,’	Mappo	gasped,	pushing	away	from	the	wall	and	landing
with	sagging	legs	on	a	slick,	slanted	floor.	He	flung	his	arms	out	to	regain
balance,	then	straightened.	‘Are	you	certain?	Perhaps	this	slope	is	but	a	ledge,
and	should	we	lose	our	footing—’
‘We	will	get	wet.	Come,	there	is	a	lake	of	some	sort.’
‘Ah,	I	see	it.	It…glows…’
They	edged	down	until	the	motionless	sweep	of	water	was	before	them.	A
vague,	greenish-blue	illumination,	coming	from	below,	revealed	the	lake’s
depth.	They	could	see	to	the	bottom,	perhaps	ten	man-heights	down,	rough	and
studded	with	rotted	tree	stumps	or	broken	stalagmites,	pale	green	and	limned	in
white.
‘We	descended	a	third	of	a	league	for	this?’	Mappo	asked,	his	voice
echoing,	then	he	laughed.
‘Look	further	in,’	Icarium	directed,	and	the	Trell	heard	excitement	in	his
companion’s	tone.
The	stumps	marched	outward	four	or	five	paces,	then	stopped.	Beyond,
details	indistinct,	squatted	a	massive,	blockish	shape.	Vague	patterns	marked	its
visible	sides,	and	its	top.	Odd,	angular	projections	reached	out	from	the	far
side,	like	spider ’s	legs.	The	breath	hissed	from	Mappo.	‘Does	it	live?’	he	asked.
‘A	mechanism	of	some	sort,’	Icarium	said.	‘The	metal	is	very	nearly	white,
do	you	see?	No	corrosion.	It	looks	as	if	it	had	been	built	yesterday…but	I
believe,	my	friend,	that	it	is	ancient.’
Mappo	hesitated,	then	asked,	‘Is	it	one	of	yours?’
Icarium	glanced	at	him,	eyes	bright.	‘No.	And	that	is	the	wonder	of	it.’
‘No?	Are	you	sure?	We	have	found	others—’
‘I	am	certain.	I	do	not	know	how,	but	there	is	no	doubt	in	my	mind.	This
was	constructed	by	someone	else,	Mappo.’
The	Trell	crouched	down	and	dipped	his	hand	into	the	water,	then	snatched
it	back.	‘Gods,	that’s	cold!’
‘No	obstacle	to	me,’	Icarium	said,	smiling,	the	polished	lower	tusks	sliding
into	view.
‘You	mean	to	swim	down	and	examine	it?	Never	mind,	the	answer	is	plain.


Very	well,	I	shall	seek	out	some	level	ground,	and	pitch	our	camp.’
The	Jhag	was	tugging	off	his	clothes.
Mappo	set	off	along	the	slope.	The	gloom	was	sufficiently	relieved	by	the
glowing	water	that	he	was	able	to	make	certain	of	each	step	he	took,	moving	up
until	his	left	hand	was	brushing	the	cold	stone	wall.	After	fifteen	or	so	paces
that	hand	slipped	into	a	narrow	crack,	and,	upon	regaining	contact,
immediately	noted	a	change	of	texture	and	shape	in	the	surface	under	his	blunt
fingertips.	The	Trell	halted	and	began	a	closer	examination	along	its	length.
This	stone	was	basalt,	ragged,	bulging	out	until	the	slope	beneath	his	feet
dwindled,	then	disappeared.	Sharp	cracks	emanated	out	across	the	angled	floor
and	into	the	lake,	the	black	fissures	reappearing	on	the	lake’s	bottom.	The
basalt	was	some	kind	of	intrusion,	he	concluded.	Perhaps	the	entire	crevasse
had	been	created	by	its	arrival.
Mappo	retreated	until	he	had	room	to	sit,	perched	with	his	back	against	the
rock,	eyes	on	the	now	rippled	surface	of	the	lake.	He	drew	out	a	reed	and
began	cleaning	his	teeth	as	he	considered	the	matter.	He	could	not	imagine	a
natural	process	creating	such	an	intrusion.	Contrary	as	earth	pressures	were,
far	beneath	the	land’s	surface,	there	was	no	colliding	escarpment	shaping
things	in	this	part	of	the	subcontinent.
No,	there	had	been	a	gate,	and	the	basalt	formation	had	come	through	it.
Catastrophically.	From	its	realm…into	solid	bedrock	on	this	world.
What	was	it?	But	he	knew.
A	sky	keep.
Mappo	rose	and	faced	the	ravaged	basalt	once	more.	And	that	which
Icarium	now	studies	at	the	bottom	of	the	lake…it	came	from	this.	So	it	follows,
does	it	not,	that	there	must	be	some	sort	of	portal.	A	way	in.	Now	he	was
curious	indeed.	What	secrets	lay	within?	Among	the	rituals	of	inculcation	the
Nameless	Ones	had	intoned	in	the	course	of	Mappo’s	vow	were	tales	of	the	sky
keeps,	the	dread	K’Chain	Che’Malle	fortresses	that	floated	like	clouds	in	the
air.	An	invasion	of	sorts,	according	to	the	Nameless	Ones,	in	the	ages	before
the	rise	of	the	First	Empire,	when	the	people	who	would	one	day	found	it	did
little	more	than	wander	in	small	bands	–	not	even	tribes,	little	different,	in	fact,
from	mortal	Imass.	An	invasion	that,	in	this	region	at	least,	failed.	The	tales
said	little	of	who	or	what	had	opposed	them.	Jaghut,	perhaps.	Or	Forkrul
Assail,	or	the	Elder	Gods	themselves.
He	heard	splashing	and	peered	through	the	gloom	to	see	Icarium	pull
himself,	awkwardly,	onto	the	strand.	Mappo	rose	and	approached.
‘Dead,’	Icarium	gasped,	and	Mappo	saw	that	his	friend	was	racked	with
shivers.


‘The	mechanism?’
The	Jhag	shook	his	head.	‘Omtose	Phellack.	This	water…dead	ice.	Dead…
blood.’
Mappo	waited	for	Icarium	to	recover.	He	studied	the	now	swirling,	agitated
surface	of	the	lake,	wondering	when	last	that	water	had	known	motion,	the	heat
of	a	living	body.	For	the	latter,	it	had	clearly	been	thirsty.
‘There	is	a	corpse	inside	that	thing,’	the	Jhag	said	after	a	time.
‘K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘Yes.	How	did	you	know?’
‘I	have	found	the	sky	keep	it	emerged	from.	Part	of	it	remains	exposed,
extruding	from	the	wall.’
‘A	strange	creature,’	Icarium	muttered.	‘I	have	no	memory	of	ever	seeing
one	before,	yet	I	knew	its	name.’
‘As	far	as	I	know,	friend,	you	have	never	encountered	them	in	your	travels.
Yet	you	hold	knowledge	of	them,	nonetheless.’
‘I	need	to	think	on	this.’
‘Yes.’
‘Strange	creature,’	he	said	again.	‘So	reptilian.	Desiccated,	of	course,	as
one	would	expect.	Powerful,	I	would	think.	The	hind	limbs,	the	forearms.	Huge
jaws.	Stubby	tail—’
Mappo	looked	up.	‘Stubby	tail.	You	are	certain	of	that?’
‘Yes.	The	beast	was	reclined,	and	within	reach	were	levers	–	it	was	a	master
of	the	mechanism’s	operation.’
‘There	was	a	porthole	you	could	look	through?’
‘No.	The	white	metal	became	transparent	wherever	I	cast	my	gaze.’
‘Revealing	the	mechanism’s	inner	workings?’
‘Only	the	area	where	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	was	seated.	A	carriage	of
some	sort,	I	believe,	a	means	of	transportation	and	exploration…yet	not
intended	to	accommodate	being	submerged	in	water;	nor	was	it	an	excavating
device	–	the	jointed	arms	would	have	been	insufficient	for	that.	No,	the
unveiling	of	Omtose	Phellack	caught	it	unawares.	Devoured,	trapped	in	ice.	A
Jaghut	arrived,	Mappo,	to	make	certain	that	none	escaped.’
Mappo	nodded.	Icarium’s	descriptions	had	led	him	to	conclude	much	the
same	sequence	of	events.	Like	the	sky	keep	itself,	the	mechanism	was	built	to
fly,	borne	aloft	by	some	unknown	sorcery.	‘If	we	are	to	find	level	ground,’	he
said,	‘it	shall	have	to	be	within	the	keep.’
The	Jhag	smiled.	‘Is	that	a	glimmer	of	anticipation	in	your	eyes?	I	am
beginning	to	see	the	Mappo	of	old,	I	suspect.	Memory	or	no,	you	are	no
stranger	to	me,	and	I	have	been	much	chagrined	of	late,	seeing	you	so	forlorn.


I	understood	it,	of	course	–	how	could	I	not?	I	am	what	haunts	you,	friend,	and
for	that	I	grieve.	Come,	shall	we	find	our	way	inside	this	fell	keep?’
Mappo	watched	Icarium	stride	past,	and	slowly	turned	to	follow	him	with
his	eyes.
Icarium,	the	Builder	of	Mechanisms.	Where	did	such	skills	come	from?	He
feared	they	were	about	to	find	out.
	
The	monastery	was	in	the	middle	of	parched,	broken	wasteland,	not	a	village
or	hamlet	within	a	dozen	leagues	in	either	direction	along	the	faint	tracks	of
the	road.	On	the	map	Cutter	had	purchased	in	G’danisban,	its	presence	was
marked	with	a	single	wavy	line	of	reddish-brown	ink,	upright,	barely	visible
on	the	worn	hide.	The	symbol	of	D’rek,	Worm	of	Autumn.
A	lone	domed	structure	stood	in	the	midst	of	a	low-walled,	rectangular
compound,	and	the	sky	over	it	was	dotted	with	circling	vultures.
Beside	him	and	hunched	in	the	saddle,	Heboric	Ghost	Hands	spat,	then	said,
‘Decay.	Rot.	Dissolution.	When	what	once	worked	suddenly	breaks.	And	like	a
moth	the	soul	flutters	away.	Into	the	dark.	Autumn	awaits,	and	the	seasons	are
askew,	twisting	to	avoid	all	the	unsheathed	knives.	Yet	the	prisoners	of	the	jade,
they	are	forever	trapped.	There,	in	their	own	arguments.	Disputes,	bickering,
the	universe	beyond	unseen	–	they	care	not	a	whit,	the	fools.	They	wear
ignorance	like	armour	and	wield	spite	like	swords.	What	am	I	to	them?	A
curio.	Less.	So	it’s	a	broken	world,	why	should	I	care	about	that?	I	did	not	ask
for	this,	for	any	of	this…’
He	went	on,	but	Cutter	stopped	listening.	He	glanced	back	at	the	two
women	trailing	them.	Listless,	uncaring,	brutalized	by	the	heat.	The	horses
beneath	them	walked	with	drooped	heads;	their	ribs	were	visible	beneath	dusty,
tattered	hide.	Off	to	one	side	clambered	Greyfrog,	looking	fat	and	sleek	as
ever,	circling	the	riders	with	seemingly	boundless	energy.
‘We	should	visit	that	monastery,’	Cutter	said.	‘Make	use	of	the	well,	and	if
there’s	any	foodstuffs—’
‘They’re	all	dead,’	Heboric	croaked.
Cutter	studied	the	old	man,	then	grunted.	‘Explains	the	vultures.	But	we	still
need	water.’
The	Destriant	of	Treach	gave	him	an	unpleasant	smile.
Cutter	understood	the	meaning	of	that	smile.	He	was	becoming	heartless,
inured	to	the	myriad	horrors	of	this	world.	A	monastery	filled	with	dead
priests	and	priestesses	was	as…nothing.	And	the	old	man	could	see	it,	could
see	into	him.	His	new	god	is	the	Tiger	of	Summer,	Lord	of	War.	Heboric	Ghost


Hands,	the	High	Priest	of	strife,	he	sees	how	cold	I	have	become.	And	is…
amused.
Cutter	guided	his	horse	up	the	side	track	leading	to	the	monastery.	The
others	followed.	The	Daru	reined	in	in	front	of	the	gates,	which	were	closed,
and	dismounted.	‘Heboric,	do	you	sense	any	danger	to	us?’
‘I	have	that	talent?’
Cutter	studied	him,	said	nothing.
The	Destriant	clambered	down	from	his	horse.	‘Nothing	lives	in	there.
Nothing.’
‘No	ghosts?’
‘Nothing.	She	took	them.’
‘Who?’
‘The	unexpected	visitor,	that’s	who.’	He	laughed,	raised	his	hands.	‘We	play
our	games.	We	never	expect…umbrage.	Outrage.	I	could	have	told	them.
Warned	them,	but	they	wouldn’t	have	listened.	The	conceit	consumes	all.	A
single	building	can	become	an	entire	world,	the	minds	crowding	and	jostling,
then	clawing	and	gouging.	All	they	need	do	is	walk	outside,	but	they	don’t.
They’ve	forgotten	that	outside	exists.	Oh,	all	these	faces	of	worship,	none	of
which	is	true	worship.	Never	mind	the	diligence,	it	does	naught	but	serve	the
demon	hatreds	within.	The	spites	and	fears	and	malice.	I	could	have	told	them.’
Cutter	walked	to	the	wall,	leading	his	horse.	He	climbed	onto	its	back,
perched	on	the	saddle,	then	straightened	until	he	was	standing.	The	top	of	the
wall	was	within	easy	reach.	He	pulled	himself	up.	In	the	compound	beyond,
bodies.	A	dozen	or	so,	black-skinned,	mostly	naked,	lying	here	and	there	on	the
hard-packed,	white	ground.	Cutter	squinted.	The	bodies	looked	to	be…boiling,
frothing,	melting.	They	roiled	before	his	eyes.	He	pulled	his	gaze	away	from
them.	The	domed	temple’s	doors	were	yawning	open.	To	the	right	was	a	low
corral	surrounding	a	low,	long	structure,	the	mud-bricks	exposed	for	two
thirds	of	the	facing	wall.	Troughs	with	plaster	and	tools	indicated	a	task	never
to	be	completed.	Vultures	crowded	the	flat	roof,	yet	none	ventured	down	to
feast	on	the	corpses.
Cutter	dropped	down	into	the	compound.	He	walked	to	the	gates	and	lifted
the	bar	clear,	then	pulled	the	heavy	doors	open.
Greyfrog	was	waiting	on	the	other	side.	‘Dispirited	and	distraught.	So
much	unpleasantness,	Cutter,	in	this	fell	place.	Dismay.	No	appetite.’	He	edged
past,	scuttled	warily	towards	the	nearest	corpse.	‘Ah!	They	seethe!	Worms,
aswarm	with	worms.	The	flesh	is	foul,	foul	even	for	Greyfrog.	Revulsed.	Let	us
be	away	from	this	place!’
Cutter	spied	the	well,	in	the	corner	between	the	outbuilding	and	the	temple.


He	returned	to	where	the	others	still	waited	outside	the	gate.	‘Give	me	your
waterskins.	Heboric,	can	you	check	that	outbuilding	for	feed?’
Heboric	smiled.	‘The	livestock	were	never	let	out.	It’s	been	days.	The	heat
killed	them	all.	A	dozen	goats,	two	mules.’
‘Just	see	if	there’s	any	feed.’
The	Destriant	headed	towards	the	outbuilding.
Scillara	dismounted,	lifted	clear	the	waterskins	from	Felisin	Younger ’s
saddle	and,	with	her	own	thrown	over	a	shoulder,	approached	Cutter.	‘Here.’
He	studied	her.	‘I	wonder	if	this	is	a	warning.’
Her	brows	lifted	fractionally,	‘Are	we	that	important,	Cutter?’
‘Well,	I	don’t	mean	us,	specifically.	I	meant,	maybe	we	should	take	it	as	a
warning.’
‘Dead	priests?’
‘Nothing	good	comes	of	worship.’
She	gave	him	an	odd	smile,	then	held	out	the	skins.
Cutter	cursed	himself.	He	rarely	made	sense	when	trying	to	talk	with	this
woman.	Said	things	a	fool	would	say.	It	was	the	mocking	look	in	her	eyes,	the
expression	ever	anticipating	a	smile	as	soon	as	he	opened	his	mouth	to	speak.
Saying	nothing	more,	he	collected	the	waterskins	and	walked	back	into	the
compound.
	
Scillara	watched	him	for	a	moment,	then	turned	as	Felisin	slipped	down	from
her	horse.	‘We	need	the	water.’
The	younger	woman	nodded.	‘I	know.’	She	reached	up	and	tugged	at	her
hair,	which	had	grown	long.	‘I	keep	seeing	those	bandits.	And	now,	more	dead
people.	And	those	cemeteries	the	track	went	right	through	yesterday,	that	field
of	bones.	I	feel	we’ve	stumbled	into	a	nightmare,	and	every	day	we	go	further
in.	It’s	hot,	but	I’m	cold	all	the	time	and	getting	colder.’
‘That’s	dehydration,’	Scillara	said,	repacking	her	pipe.
‘That	thing’s	not	left	your	mouth	in	days,’	Felisin	said.
‘Keeps	the	thirst	at	bay.’
‘Really?’
‘No,	but	that	is	what	I	keep	telling	myself.’
Felisin	looked	away.	‘We	do	that	a	lot,	don’t	we?’
‘What?’
She	shrugged.	‘Tell	ourselves	things.	In	the	hope	that	it’ll	make	them	true.’
Scillara	drew	hard	on	the	pipe,	blew	a	lungful	of	smoke	upward,	watching
as	the	wind	took	it	away.


‘You	look	so	healthy,’	Felisin	said,	eyes	on	her	once	more.	‘Whilst	the	rest
of	us	wither	away.’
‘Not	Greyfrog.’
‘No,	not	Greyfrog.’
‘Does	he	talk	with	you	much?’
Felisin	shook	her	head.	‘Not	much.	Except	when	I	wake	up	at	night,	after
my	bad	dreams.	Then	he	sings	to	me.’
‘Sings?’
‘Yes,	in	his	people’s	language.	Songs	for	children.	He	says	he	needs	to
practise	them.’
Scillara	shot	her	a	glance.	‘Really?	Did	he	say	why?’
‘No.’
‘How	old	were	you,	Felisin,	when	your	mother	sold	you	off?’
Another	shrug.	‘I	don’t	remember.’
That	might	have	been	a	lie,	but	Scillara	did	not	pursue	it.
Felisin	stepped	closer.	‘Will	you	take	care	of	me,	Scillara?’
‘What?’
‘I	feel	as	if	I	am	going	backwards.	I	felt…older.	Back	in	Raraku.	Now,	with
every	day,	I	feel	more	and	more	like	a	child.	Smaller,	ever	smaller.’
Uneasy,	Scillara	said,	‘I	have	never	been	much	good	at	taking	care	of
people.’
‘I	don’t	think	Sha’ik	was,	either.	She	had…obsessions…’
‘She	did	fine	by	you.’
‘No,	it	was	mostly	Leoman.	Even	Toblakai.	And	Heboric,	before	Treach
claimed	him.	She	didn’t	take	care	of	me,	and	that’s	why	Bidithal…’
‘Bidithal	is	dead.	He	got	his	own	balls	shoved	down	his	scrawny	throat.’
‘Yes,’	a	whisper.	‘If	what	Heboric	says	really	happened.	Toblakai…’
Scillara	snorted.	‘Think	on	that,	Felisin.	If	Heboric	had	said	that	L’oric	had
done	it,	or	Sha’ik,	or	even	Leoman,	well,	you	might	have	some	reason	to
doubt.	But	Toblakai?	No,	you	can	believe	it.	Gods	below,	how	can	you	not?’
The	question	forced	a	faint	smile	from	Felisin	and	she	nodded.	‘You	are
right.	Only	Toblakai	would	have	done	that.	Only	Toblakai	would	have	killed
him…in	that	way.	Tell	me,	Scillara,	do	you	have	a	spare	pipe?’
‘A	spare	pipe?	How	about	a	dozen?	Want	to	smoke	them	all	at	once?’
Felisin	laughed.	‘No,	just	one.	So,	you’ll	take	care	of	me,	won’t	you?’
‘I	will	try.’	And	maybe	she	would.	Like	Greyfrog.	Practice.	She	went
looking	for	that	pipe.
	


Cutter	lifted	the	bucket	clear	and	peered	at	the	water.	It	looked	clean,	smelling
of	nothing	in	particular.	Nonetheless,	he	hesitated.
Footsteps	behind	him.	‘I	found	feed,’	Heboric	said.	‘More	than	we	can
carry.’
‘Think	this	water	is	all	right?	What	killed	those	priests?’
‘It’s	fine.	I	told	you	what	killed	them.’
You	did?	‘Should	we	look	in	the	temple?’
‘Greyfrog’s	already	in	there.	I	told	him	to	find	money,	gems,	food	that
hasn’t	spoiled	yet.	He	wasn’t	happy	about	it,	so	I	expect	he’ll	be	quick.’
‘All	right.’	Cutter	walked	to	a	trough	and	dumped	the	water	into	it,	then
returned	to	the	well.	‘Think	we	can	coax	the	horses	in	here?’
‘I’ll	try.’	But	Heboric	made	no	move	to	do	so.
Cutter	glanced	over	at	him,	saw	the	old	man’s	strange	eyes	fixed	on	him.
‘What’s	wrong?’
‘Nothing,	I	think.	I	was	noticing	something.	You	have	certain	qualities,
Cutter.	Leadership,	for	one.’
The	Daru	scowled.	‘If	you	want	to	be	in	charge,	fine,	go	ahead.’
‘I	wasn’t	twisting	a	knife,	lad.	I	meant	what	I	said.	You	have	taken
command,	and	that’s	good.	It’s	what	we	need.	I	have	never	been	a	leader.	I’ve
always	followed.	It’s	my	curse.	But	that’s	not	what	they	want	to	hear.	Not	from
me.	No,	they	want	me	to	lead	them	out.	Into	freedom.	I	keep	telling	them,	I
know	nothing	of	freedom.’
‘Them?	Who?	Scillara	and	Felisin?’
‘I’ll	get	the	horses,’	Heboric	said,	turning	about	and	walking	off	in	his	odd,
toad-like	gait.
Cutter	refilled	the	bucket	and	poured	the	water	into	the	trough.	They	would
feed	the	horses	here	with	what	they	couldn’t	take	with	them.	Load	up	on	water.
And,	even	now,	loot	the	temple.	Well,	he	had	been	a	thief	once,	long	ago.
Besides,	the	dead	cared	nothing	for	wealth,	did	they?
A	splitting,	tearing	sound	from	the	centre	of	the	compound	behind	him.
The	sound	of	a	portal	opening.	Cutter	spun	round,	knives	in	his	hands.
A	rider	emerged	from	the	magical	gate	at	full	gallop.	Reining	in	hard,
hoofs	skidding	in	clouds	of	dust,	the	dark	grey	horse	a	monstrous	apparition,
the	hide	worn	away	in	places,	exposing	tendons,	dried	muscle	and	ligaments.
Its	eyes	were	empty	pits,	its	mane	long	and	greasy,	whipping	as	the	beast	tossed
its	head.	Seated	in	a	high-backed	saddle,	the	rider	was,	if	anything,	even	more
alarming	in	appearance.	Black,	ornate	armour,	patched	with	verdigris,	a
dented,	gouged	helm,	open-faced	to	reveal	mostly	bone,	a	few	strips	of	flesh
hanging	from	the	cheek	ridges,	tendons	binding	the	lower	jaw,	and	a	row	of


blackened,	filed	teeth.
In	the	brief	moment	as	the	horse	reared,	dust	exploding	outward,	Cutter
saw	more	weapons	on	the	rider	than	he	could	count.	Swords	at	his	back,
throwing	axes,	sheathed	handles	jutting	upward	from	the	saddle,	something
like	a	boar-spitter,	the	bronze	point	as	long	as	a	short	sword,	gripped	in	the
gauntleted	left	hand.	A	long	bow,	a	short	bow,	knives—
‘Where	is	he!?’	The	voice	was	a	savage,	enraged	roar.	Pieces	of	armour
bounced	on	the	ground	as	the	figure	twisted	round,	searching	the	compound.
‘Damn	you,	Hood!	I	was	on	the	trail!’	He	saw	Cutter	and	was	suddenly	silent,
motionless.	‘She	left	one	alive?	I	doubt	it.	You’re	no	whelp	of	D’rek.	Drink
deep	that	water,	mortal,	it	matters	not.	You’re	dead	anyway.	You	and	every
damned	blood-swishing	living	thing	in	this	realm	and	every	other!’
He	pulled	his	horse	around	to	face	the	temple,	where	Greyfrog	had
appeared,	arms	heaped	with	silks,	boxes,	foodstuffs	and	cooking	utensils.	‘A
toad	who	likes	to	cook	in	comfort!	The	madness	of	the	Grand	Ending	is	upon
us!	Come	any	closer,	demon,	and	I’ll	spit	your	legs	and	roast	them	over	a	fire
–	do	you	think	I	no	longer	eat?	You	are	right,	but	I	will	roast	you	in	vicious
spite,	drooling	with	irony	–	ah!	You	liked	that,	didn’t	you?’	He	faced	Cutter
once	more.	‘Is	this	what	he	wanted	me	to	see?	He	pulled	me	from	the	trail…for
this?’
Cutter	sheathed	his	knives.	Through	the	gates	beyond	came	Heboric	Ghost
Hands,	leading	the	horses.	The	old	man	paused	upon	seeing	the	rider,	head
cocking,	then	he	continued	on.	‘Too	late,	Soldier,’	he	said.	‘Or	too	early!’	He
laughed.
The	rider	lifted	the	spear	high.	‘Treach	made	a	mistake,	I	see,	but	I	must
salute	you	nonetheless.’
Heboric	halted.	‘A	mistake,	Soldier?	Yes,	I	agree,	but	there	is	little	I	can	do
about	it.	I	acknowledge	your	reluctant	salute.	What	brings	you	here?’
‘Ask	Hood	if	you	want	the	answer	to	that!’	He	upended	the	spear	and	drove
it	point	first	into	the	ground,	then	swung	down	from	the	saddle,	more
fragments	of	the	rotting	armour	falling	away.	‘I	expect	I	must	look	around,	as
if	I	cannot	already	see	all	there	is	to	see.	The	pantheon	is	riven	asunder,	what	of
it?’
Heboric	pulled	the	nervous	horses	towards	the	trough,	giving	the	warrior	a
wide	berth.	As	he	approached	Cutter	he	shrugged.	‘The	Soldier	of	Hood,	High
House	Death.	He’ll	not	trouble	us,	I	think.’
‘He	spoke	to	me	in	Daru,’	Cutter	said.	‘At	first.	And	Malazan	with	you.’
‘Yes.’
The	Soldier	was	tall,	and	Cutter	now	saw	something	hanging	from	a	knife-


studded	belt.	An	enamel	mask,	cracked,	smudged,	with	a	single	streak	of	red
paint	along	one	cheek.	The	Daru’s	eyes	widened.	‘Beru	fend,’	he	whispered.	‘A
Seguleh!’
At	that	the	Soldier	turned,	then	walked	closer.	‘Daru,	you	are	far	from
home!	Tell	me,	do	the	Tyrant’s	children	still	rule	Darujhistan?’
Cutter	shook	his	head.
‘You	look	crazed,	mortal,	what	ails	you?’
‘I	–	I’d	heard,	I	mean	–	Seguleh	usually	say	nothing	–	to	anyone.	Yet
you…’
‘The	fever	zeal	still	grips	my	mortal	kin,	does	it?	Idiots!	The	Tyrant’s
army	still	holds	sway	in	the	city,	then?’
‘Who?	What?	Darujhistan	is	ruled	by	a	council.	We	have	no	army—’
‘Brilliant	insanity!	No	Seguleh	in	the	city?’
‘No!	Just…stories.	Legends,	I	mean.’
‘So	where	are	my	masked	stick-pivoting	compatriots	hiding?’
‘An	island,	it’s	said,	far	to	the	south,	off	the	coast,	beyond	Morn—’
‘Morn!	Now	the	sense	of	it	comes	to	me.	They	are	being	held	in	readiness.
Darujhistan’s	council	–	mages	one	and	all,	yes?	Undying,	secretive,	paranoid
mages!	Crouching	low,	lest	the	Tyrant	returns,	as	one	day	he	must!	Returns,
looking	for	his	army!	Hah,	a	council!’
‘That’s	not	the	council,	sir,’	Cutter	said.	‘If	you	are	speaking	of	mages,	that
would	be	the	T’orrud	Cabal—’
‘T’orrud!	Yes,	clever.	Outrageous!	Barukanal,	Derudanith,	Travalegrah,
Mammoltenan?	These	names	strike	your	soul,	yes?	I	see	it.’
‘Mammot	was	my	uncle—’
‘Uncle!	Hah!	Absurd!’	He	spun	round.	‘I	have	seen	enough!	Hood!	I	am
leaving!	She’s	made	her	position	clear	as	ice,	hasn’t	she?	Hood,	you	damned
fool,	you	didn’t	need	me	for	this!	Now	I	must	seek	out	his	trail	all	over	again,
damn	your	hoary	bones!’	He	swung	back	onto	the	undead	horse.
Heboric	called	out	from	where	he	stood	by	the	trough,	‘Soldier!	May	I	ask
–	who	do	you	hunt?’
The	sharpened	teeth	lifted	and	lowered	in	a	silent	laugh.	‘Hunt?	Oh	yes,	we
all	hunt,	but	I	was	closest!	Piss	on	Hood’s	bony	feet!	Pluck	out	the	hairs	of	his
nose	and	kick	his	teeth	in!	Drive	a	spear	up	his	puckered	behind	and	set	him	on
a	windy	mountain	top!	Oh,	I’ll	find	him	a	wife	some	day,	lay	coin	on	it!	But
first,	I	hunt!’
He	collected	the	reins,	pulled	the	horse	round.	The	portal	opened.	‘Skinner!
Hear	me,	you	damned	Avowed!	Cheater	of	death!	I	am	coming	for	you!	Now!’
Horse	and	rider	plunged	into	the	rent,	vanished,	and	a	moment	later	the	gate


disappeared	as	well.
The	sudden	silence	rang	like	a	dirge	in	Cutter ’s	head.	He	took	a	ragged
breath,	then	shook	himself.	‘Beru	fend,’	he	whispered	again.	‘He	was	my
uncle…’
‘I	will	feed	the	horses,	lad,’	Heboric	said.	‘Go	out	to	the	women.	They’ve
likely	been	hearing	shouting	and	don’t	know	what’s	going	on.	Go	on,	Cutter.’
Nodding,	the	Daru	began	walking.	Barukanal.	Mammoltenan…What	had
the	Soldier	revealed?	What	ghastly	secret	hid	in	the	apparition’s	words?	What
do	Baruk	and	the	others	have	to	do	with	the	Tyrant?	And	the	Seguleh?	The
Tyrant	is	returning?	‘Gods,	I’ve	got	to	get	home.’
Outside	the	gates,	Felisin	and	Scillara	were	seated	on	the	track.	Both
puffing	rustleaf,	and	although	Felisin	looked	sickly,	there	was	a	determined,
defiant	look	in	her	eyes.
‘Relax,’	Scillara	said.	‘She’s	not	inhaling.’
‘I’m	not?’	Felisin	asked	her.	‘How	do	you	do	that?’
‘Don’t	you	have	any	questions?’	Cutter	demanded.
They	looked	at	him.	‘About	what?’	Scillara	asked.
‘Didn’t	you	hear?’
‘Hear	what?’
They	didn’t	hear.	They	weren’t	meant	to.	But	we	were.	Why?	Had	the	Soldier
been	mistaken	in	his	assumptions?	Sent	by	Hood,	not	to	see	the	dead	priests	and
priestesses	of	D’rek…but	to	speak	with	us.
The	Tyrant	shall	return.	This,	to	a	son	of	Darujhistan.	‘Gods,’	he	whispered
again,	‘I’ve	got	to	get	home.’
Greyfrog’s	voice	shouted	in	his	skull,	‘Friend	Cutter!	Surprise	and
alarm!’
‘What	now?’	he	asked,	turning	to	see	the	demon	bounding	into	view.
‘The	Soldier	of	Death.	Wondrous.	He	left	his	spear!’
Cutter	stared,	with	sinking	heart,	at	the	weapon	clutched	between	the
demon’s	teeth.	‘Good	thing	you	don’t	need	your	mouth	to	talk.’
‘Solemn	agreement,	friend	Cutter!	Query.	Do	you	like	these	silks?’
	
The	portal	into	the	sky	keep	required	a	short	climb.	Mappo	and	Icarium	stood
on	the	threshold,	staring	into	a	cavernous	chamber.	The	floor	was	almost	level.
A	faint	light	seemed	to	emanate	from	the	walls	of	stone.	‘We	can	camp	here,’
the	Trell	said.
‘Yes,’	Icarium	agreed.	‘But	first,	shall	we	explore?’
‘Of	course.’


The	chamber	housed	three	additional	mechanisms,	identical	to	the	one
submerged	in	the	lake,	each	positioned	on	trestles	like	ships	in	dry-dock.	The
hatches	yawned	open,	revealing	the	padded	seats	within.	Icarium	walked	to	the
nearest	one	and	began	examining	its	interior.
Mappo	untied	the	pouch	at	his	belt	and	began	removing	the	larger	one
within.	A	short	time	later	he	laid	out	the	bedrolls,	food	and	wine.	Then	he	drew
out	from	his	pack	an	iron-banded	mace,	not	his	favourite	one,	but	another,
expendable	since	it	possessed	no	sorcerous	virtues.
Icarium	returned	to	his	side.	‘They	are	lifeless,’	he	said.	‘Whatever	energy
was	originally	imbued	within	the	machinery	has	ebbed	away,	and	I	see	no
means	of	restoring	it.’
‘That	is	not	too	surprising,	is	it?	I	suspect	this	keep	has	been	here	a	long
time.’
‘True	enough,	Mappo.	But	imagine,	were	we	able	to	enliven	one	of	these
mechanisms!	We	could	travel	at	great	speed	and	in	comfort!	One	for	you	and
one	for	me,	ah,	this	is	tragic.	But	look,	there	is	a	passageway.	Let	us	delve	into
the	greater	mystery	this	keep	offers.’
Carrying	only	his	mace,	Mappo	followed	Icarium	into	the	broad	corridor.
Storage	rooms	lined	the	passage,	whatever	they	had	once	held	now	nothing
more	than	heaps	of	undisturbed	dust.
Sixty	paces	in,	they	reached	an	intersection.	An	arched	barrier	was	before
them,	shimmering	like	a	vertical	pool	of	quicksilver.	Corridors	went	to	the
right	and	left,	both	appearing	to	curve	inward	in	the	distance.
Icarium	drew	out	a	coin	from	the	pouch	at	his	belt,	and	Mappo	was	amused
to	see	that	it	was	of	a	vintage	five	centuries	old.
‘You	are	the	world’s	greatest	miser,	Icarium.’
The	Jhag	smiled,	then	shrugged.	‘I	seem	to	recall	that	no-one	ever	accepts
payment	from	us,	no	matter	how	egregious	the	expense	of	the	service
provided.	Is	that	an	accurate	memory,	Mappo?’
‘It	is.’
‘Well,	then,	how	can	you	accuse	me	of	being	niggardly?’	He	tossed	the
coin	at	the	silver	barrier.	It	vanished.	Ripples	rolled	outward,	went	beyond	the
stone	frame,	then	returned.
‘This	is	a	passive	manifestation,’	Icarium	said.	‘Tell	me,	did	you	hear	the
coin	strike	anything	beyond?’
‘No,	nor	did	it	make	a	sound	upon	entering	the…uh,	the	door.’
‘I	am	tempted	to	pass	through.’
‘That	might	prove	unhealthy.’
Icarium	hesitated,	then	drew	a	skinning-knife	and	inserted	the	blade	into	the


barrier.	Gentler	ripples.	He	pulled	it	out.	The	blade	looked	intact.	None	of	the
substance	had	adhered	to	it.	Icarium	ran	a	fingertip	along	the	iron.	‘No	change
in	temperature,’	he	observed.
‘Shall	I	try	a	finger	I	won’t	miss	much?’	Mappo	asked,	holding	up	his	left
hand.
‘And	which	one	would	that	be,	friend?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	expect	I’d	miss	any	of	them.’
‘The	tip?’
‘Sound	caution.’	Making	a	fist,	barring	the	last,	smallest	finger,	Mappo
stepped	close,	then	dipped	the	finger	up	to	the	first	knuckle	into	the
shimmering	door.	‘No	pain,	at	least.	It	is,	I	think,	very	thin.’	He	drew	his	hand
back	and	examined	the	digit.	‘Hale.’
‘With	the	condition	of	your	fingers,	Mappo,	how	can	you	tell?’
‘Ah,	I	see	a	change.	No	dirt	left,	not	even	crusted	under	the	nail.’
‘To	pass	through	is	to	be	cleansed.	Do	you	think?’
Mappo	reached	in	with	his	whole	hand.	‘I	feel	air	beyond.	Cooler,	damper.’
He	withdrew	his	hand	and	peered	at	it.	‘Clean.	Too	clean.	I	am	alarmed.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	it	makes	me	realize	how	filthy	I’ve	become,	that’s	why.’
‘I	wonder,	will	it	do	the	same	with	our	clothes?’
‘That	would	be	nice,	although	it	may	possess	some	sort	of	threshold.	Too
filthy,	and	it	simply	annihilates	the	offending	material.	We	might	emerge	on	the
other	side	naked.’
‘Now	I	am	alarmed,	friend.’
‘Yes.	Well,	what	shall	we	do,	Icarium?’
‘Do	we	have	any	choice?’	With	that,	the	Jhag	strode	through	the	barrier.
Mappo	sighed,	then	followed.
Only	to	be	clutched	at	the	shoulder	and	pulled	back	from	a	second	step	–
which,	he	saw,	would	have	been	into	empty	air.
The	cavern	before	them	was	vast.	A	bridge	had	once	connected	the	ledge
they	stood	on	to	an	enormous,	towering	fortress	floating	in	space,	a	hundred
or	more	paces	opposite	them.	Sections	of	that	stone	span	remained,	seemingly
unsupported,	but	others	had	broken	away	and	now	floated,	motionless,	in	the
air.
Far	below,	dizzyingly	far,	the	cavern	was	swallowed	in	darkness.	Above
them,	a	faintly	glittering	dome	of	black	rough-hewn	stone,	like	a	night	sky.
Tiered	buildings	rose	along	the	inner	walls,	rows	of	dark	windows	but	no
balconies.	Dust	and	rubble	clouded	the	air,	none	of	it	moving.	Mappo	said
nothing,	he	was	too	stunned	by	the	vista	before	them.


Icarium	touched	his	shoulder,	then	pointed	to	something	small	hovering
directly	before	them.	The	coin,	but	not	motionless	as	it	had	first	seemed.	It	was
drifting	away,	slowly.	The	Jhag	reached	out	and	retrieved	it,	returning	it	to	the
pouch	at	his	waist.	‘A	worthy	return	on	my	investment,’	he	murmured.	‘Since
there	is	momentum,	we	should	be	able	to	travel.	Launch	ourselves	from	this
ledge.	Over	to	the	fortress.’
‘Sound	plan,’	Mappo	said,	‘but	for	all	the	obstacles	in	between.’
‘Ah,	good	point.’
‘There	may	be	an	intact	bridge,	on	the	opposite	side.	We	could	take	one	of
the	side	passages	behind	us.	If	such	a	bridge	exists,	likely	it	will	be	marked
with	a	silver	barrier	as	this	one	was.’
‘Have	you	never	wished	you	could	fly,	Mappo?’
‘As	a	child,	perhaps,	I	am	sure	I	did.’
‘Only	as	a	child?’
‘It	is	where	dreams	of	flight	belong,	Icarium.	Shall	we	explore	one	of	the
corridors	behind	us?’
‘Very	well,	although	I	admit	I	hope	we	fail	in	finding	a	bridge.’
	
Countless	rooms,	passages	and	alcoves	along	the	wide,	arched	corridor,	the
floors	thick	with	dust,	odd,	faded	symbols	etched	above	doorways,	possibly	a
numerical	system	of	some	sort.	The	air	was	stagnant,	faintly	acrid.	No
furnishings	remained	in	the	adjoining	chambers.	Nor,	Mappo	realized,	any
corpses	such	as	the	one	Icarium	had	discovered	in	the	mechanism	resting	on
the	lake-bed.	An	orderly	evacuation?	If	so,	where	had	the	Short-Tails	gone?
Eventually,	they	came	upon	another	silver	door.	Cautiously	passing
through	it,	they	found	themselves	standing	on	the	threshold	of	a	narrow	bridge.
Intact,	leading	across	to	the	floating	fortress,	which	hovered	much	closer	on
this,	the	opposite	side	from	whence	they	had	first	seen	it.	The	back	wall	of	the
island	keep	was	much	rougher,	the	windows	vertical	slashes	positioned
seemingly	haphazardly	on	the	misshapen	projections,	crooked	insets	and
twisted	towers.
‘Extraordinary,’	Icarium	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘What,	I	wonder,	does	this
hidden	face	of	madness	reveal	of	the	makers?	These	K’Chain	Che’Malle?’
‘A	certain	tension,	perhaps?’
‘Tension?’
‘Between,’	Mappo	said,	‘order	and	chaos.	An	inner	dichotomy,	conflicting
impulses…’
‘The	contradictions	evident	in	all	intelligent	life,’	Icarium	said,	nodding.


He	stepped	onto	the	span,	then,	arms	wheeling,	began	drifting	away.
Mappo	reached	out	and	just	managed	to	grasp	the	Jhag’s	flailing	foot.	He
pulled	Icarium	back	down	onto	the	threshold.	‘Well,’	he	said,	grunting,	‘that
was	interesting.	You	weighed	nothing,	when	I	had	you	in	my	grip.	As	light	as	a
mote	of	dust.’
Slowly,	tentatively,	the	Jhag	clambered	upright	once	more.	‘That	was	most
alarming.	It	seems	we	may	have	to	fly	after	all.’
‘Then	why	build	bridges?’
‘I	have	no	idea.	Unless,’	he	added,	‘whatever	mechanism	invokes	this
weightlessness	is	breaking	down,	losing	its	precision.’
‘So	the	bridges	should	have	been	exempted?	Possibly.	In	any	case,	see	the
railings,	projecting	not	up	but	out	to	either	side?	Modest,	but	sufficient	for
handholds,	were	one	to	crawl.’
‘Yes.	Shall	we?’
The	sensation,	Mappo	decided	as	he	reached	the	midway	point,	Icarium
edging	along	ahead	of	him,	was	not	a	pleasant	one.	Nausea,	vertigo,	a	strange
urge	to	pull	one’s	grip	loose	due	to	the	momentum	provided	by	one’s	own
muscles.	All	sense	of	up	and	down	had	vanished,	and	at	times	Mappo	was
convinced	they	were	climbing	a	ladder,	rather	than	snaking	more	or	less
horizontally	across	the	span	of	the	bridge.
A	narrow	but	tall	entranceway	gaped	ahead,	where	the	bridge	made	contact
with	the	fortress.	Fragments	of	the	door	it	had	once	held	floated	motionless
before	it.	Whatever	had	shattered	it	had	come	from	within.
Icarium	reached	the	threshold	and	climbed	to	his	feet.	Moments	later
Mappo	joined	him.	They	peered	into	the	darkness.
‘I	smell…vast…death.’
Mappo	nodded.	He	drew	out	his	mace,	looked	down	at	the	spiked	ball	of
iron,	then	slipped	the	handle	back	through	the	leather	loop	at	his	belt.
Icarium	in	the	lead,	they	entered	the	fortress.
The	corridor	was	as	narrow	as	the	doorway	itself,	the	walls	uneven,	black
basalt,	wet	with	condensation,	the	floor	precarious	with	random	knobs	and
projections,	and	depressions	slick	with	ice	that	cracked	and	shifted	underfoot.	It
ran	more	or	less	straight	for	forty	paces.	By	the	time	they	reached	the	opening
at	the	end	their	eyes	had	adjusted	to	the	gloom.
Another	enormous	chamber,	as	if	the	heart	of	the	keep	had	been	carved	out.
A	massive	cruciform	of	bound,	black	wood	filled	the	cavern,	and	on	it	was
impaled	a	dragon.	Long	dead,	once	frozen	but	now	rotting.	An	iron	spike	as
thick	around	as	Mappo’s	torso	had	been	driven	into	the	dragon’s	throat,	just
above	the	breast	bones.	Aquamarine	blood	had	seeped	down	from	the	wound


and	still	dripped	heavy	and	turgid	onto	the	stone	floor	in	slow,	steady,	fistsized	drops.
‘I	know	this	dragon,’	Icarium	whispered.
How?	No,	ask	not.
‘I	know	this	dragon,’	Icarium	said	again.	‘Sorrit.	Its	aspect	was…Serc.	The
warren	of	the	sky.’	He	lifted	both	hands	to	his	face.	‘Dead.	Sorrit	has	been
slain…’
	
‘A	most	delicious	throne.	No,	not	delicious.	Most	bitter,	foul,	ill-tasting,	what
was	I	thinking?’
‘You	don’t	think,	Curdle.	You	never	think.	I	can’t	remember	any	throne.
What	throne?	There	must	be	some	mistake.	Not-Apsalar	heard	wrong,	that
much	is	obvious.	Completely	wrong,	an	absolute	error.	Besides,	someone’s
sitting	in	it.’
‘Deliciously.’
‘I	told	you,	there	was	no	throne—’
The	conversation	had	been	going	on	for	half	the	night,	as	they	travelled	the
strange	paths	of	Shadow,	winding	across	a	ghostly	landscape	that	constantly
shifted	between	two	worlds,	although	both	were	equally	ravaged	and	desolate.
Apsalar	wondered	at	the	sheer	extent	of	this	fragment	of	the	Shadow	Realm.	If
her	recollection	of	Cotillion’s	memories	was	accurate,	the	realm	wandered
untethered	to	the	world	Apsalar	called	her	own,	and	neither	the	Rope	nor
Shadowthrone	possessed	any	control	over	its	seemingly	random
peregrinations.	Even	stranger,	it	was	clear	that	roads	of	a	sort	stretched	out
from	the	fragment,	twisting	and	wending	vast	distances,	like	roots,	or	tentacles,
and	sometimes	their	motions	proved	independent	of	the	larger	fragment.
As	with	the	one	they	now	traversed.	More	or	less	following	the	eastern
road	leading	out	from	Ehrlitan,	skirting	the	thin	ribbon	of	cedars	on	their	left,
beyond	which	was	the	sea.	And	as	the	traders’	track	began	to	curve	northward
to	meet	the	coastline,	the	Shadow	Road	joined	with	it,	narrowing	until	it	was
barely	the	width	of	the	track	itself.
Ignoring	the	ceaseless	nattering	from	the	two	ghosts	flitting	behind	her,
Apsalar	pushed	on,	fighting	the	lack	of	sleep	and	eager	to	cover	as	much
ground	as	possible	before	the	sun’s	rise.	Her	control	of	the	Shadow	Road	was
growing	more	tenuous	–	it	vanished	with	every	slip	of	her	concentration.
Finally,	she	halted.
The	warren	crumbled	around	them.	The	sky	to	the	east	was	lightening.
They	stood	on	the	traders’	track	at	the	base	of	a	winding	climb	to	the	coastal


ridge,	rhizan	darting	through	the	air	around	them.
‘The	sun	returns!	Not	again!	Telorast,	we	need	to	hide!	Somewhere!’
‘No	we	don’t,	you	idiot.	We	just	get	harder	to	see,	that’s	all,	unless	you’re
not	mindful.	Of	course,	Curdle,	you	are	incapable	of	being	mindful,	so	I	look
forward	to	your	wailing	dissolution.	Peace,	at	last.	For	a	while,	at	least—’
‘You	are	evil,	Telorast!	I’ve	always	known	it,	even	before	you	went	and
used	that	knife	on—’
‘Be	quiet!	I	never	used	that	knife	on	anyone.’
‘And	you’re	a	liar!’
‘Say	that	again	and	I’ll	stick	you!’
‘You	can’t!	I’m	dissolving!’
Apsalar	ran	a	hand	across	her	brow.	It	came	away	glistening	with	sweat.
‘That	thread	of	Shadow	felt…wrong,’	she	said.
‘Oh	yes,’	Telorast	replied,	slipping	round	to	crouch	before	her	in	a
miasma	of	swirling	grey.	‘It’s	sickly.	All	the	outer	reaches	are.	Poisoned,
rotting	with	chaos.	We	blame	Shadowthrone.’
‘Shadowthrone?	Why?’
‘Why	not?	We	hate	him.’
‘And	that	is	sufficient	reason?’
‘The	sufficientest	reason	of	all.’
Apsalar	studied	the	climbing	track.	‘I	think	we’re	close.’
‘Good.	Excellent.	I’m	frightened.	Let’s	stop	here.	Let’s	go	back,	now.’
Stepping	through	the	ghost,	Apsalar	began	the	ascent.
‘That	was	a	vicious	thing	to	do,’	Telorast	hissed	behind	her.	‘If	I	possessed
you	I	wouldn’t	do	that	to	me.	Not	even	to	Curdle,	I	wouldn’t.	Well,	maybe,	if	I
was	mad.	You’re	not	mad	at	me,	are	you?	Please	don’t	be	mad	at	me.	I’ll	do
anything	you	ask,	until	you’re	dead.	Then	I’ll	dance	on	your	stinking,	bloated
corpse,	because	that’s	what	you	would	want	me	to	do,	isn’t	it?	I	would	if	I	was
you	and	you	were	dead	and	I	lingered	long	enough	to	dance	on	you,	which	I
would	do.’
Reaching	the	crest,	Apsalar	saw	that	the	track	continued	along	the	ridge
another	two	hundred	paces	before	twisting	back	down	onto	the	lee	side.	Cool
morning	wind	plucked	the	sweat	from	her	face,	sighing	in	from	the	vast,	dark
cape	that	was	the	sea	on	her	left.	She	looked	down	to	see	a	narrow	strand	of
beach	fifteen	or	so	man-heights	below,	cluttered	with	driftwood.	Along	the
track	to	her	right,	near	the	far	end,	a	stand	of	stunted	trees	rose	from	a	niche	in
the	cliff-side,	and	in	their	midst	stood	a	stone	tower.	White	plaster	covered	its
surface	for	most	of	its	height,	barring	the	uppermost	third,	where	the	roughcut	stones	were	still	exposed.


She	walked	towards	it	as	the	first	spears	of	sunlight	shot	over	the	horizon.
Heaps	of	slate	filled	the	modest	enclosure	surrounding	the	tower.	No-one
was	visible,	and	Apsalar	could	hear	nothing	from	within	as	she	strode	across
to	halt	in	front	of	the	door.
Telorast’s	faint	whisper	came	to	her:	‘This	isn’t	good.	A	stranger	lives
here.	Must	be	a	stranger,	since	we’ve	never	met.	And	if	not	a	stranger	then
somebody	I	know,	which	would	be	even	worse—’
‘Be	quiet,’	Apsalar	said,	reaching	up	to	pound	on	the	door	–	then	stopped,
and	stepping	back,	stared	up	at	the	enormous	reptilian	skull	set	in	the	wall
above	the	doorway.	‘Hood’s	breath!’	She	hesitated,	Telorast	voicing	minute
squeals	and	gasps	behind	her,	then	thumped	on	the	weathered	wood	with	a
gloved	fist.
The	sounds	of	something	falling	over,	then	of	boots	crunching	on	grit	and
gravel.	A	bolt	was	tugged	aside,	and	the	door	swung	open	in	a	cloud	of	dust.
The	man	standing	within	filled	the	doorway.	Napan,	massive	muscles,	blunt
face,	small	eyes.	His	scalp	shaved	and	white	with	dust,	through	which	a	few
streaks	of	sweat	ran	down	to	glisten	in	his	thick,	wiry	eyebrows.
Apsalar	smiled.	‘Hello,	Urko.’
The	man	grunted,	then	said,	‘Urko	drowned.	They	all	drowned.’
‘It’s	that	lack	of	imagination	that	gave	you	away,’	she	replied.
‘Who	are	you?’
‘Apsalar—’
‘No	you’re	not.	Apsalar	was	an	Imass—’
‘Not	the	Mistress	of	Thieves.	It	is	simply	the	name	I	chose—’
‘Damned	arrogant	of	you,	too.’
‘Perhaps.	In	any	case,	I	bring	greetings	from	Dancer.’
The	door	slammed	in	her	face.
Coughing	in	the	dust	gusting	over	her,	Apsalar	stepped	back	and	wiped	grit
from	her	eyes.
‘Hee	hee,’	said	Telorast	behind	her.	‘Can	we	go	now?’
She	pounded	on	the	door	again.
After	a	long	moment,	it	opened	once	more.	He	was	scowling.	‘I	once	tried
to	drown	him,	you	know.’
‘No,	yes,	I	recall.	You	were	drunk.’
‘You	couldn’t	have	recalled	anything	–	you	weren’t	there.	Besides,	I	wasn’t
drunk.’
‘Oh.	Then…why?’
‘Because	he	irritated	me,	that’s	why.	Just	like	you’re	doing	right	now.’
‘I	need	to	talk	to	you.’


‘What	for?’
She	suddenly	had	no	answer	to	give	him.
His	eyes	narrowed.	‘He	really	thought	I	was	drunk?	What	an	idiot.’
‘Well,	I	suppose	the	alternative	was	too	depressing.’
‘I	never	knew	he	was	such	a	sensitive	soul.	Are	you	his	daughter?
Something…in	the	way	you	stand…’
‘May	I	come	in?’
He	moved	away	from	the	door.	Apsalar	entered,	then	halted	once	more,	her
eyes	on	the	enormous	headless	skeleton	commanding	the	interior,	reaching	all
the	way	up	to	the	tower ’s	ceiling.	Bipedal,	long-tailed,	the	bones	a	burnished
brown	colour.	‘What	is	this?’
Urko	said,	‘Whatever	it	was,	it	could	swallow	a	bhederin	in	one	bite.’
‘How?’	Telorast	asked	Apsalar	in	a	whisper.	‘It	has	no	head.’
The	man	heard	the	question,	and	he	now	scowled.	‘You	have	company.
What	is	it,	a	familiar	or	something?	I	can’t	see	it,	and	that	I	don’t	like.	Not	at
all.’
‘A	ghost.’
‘You	should	banish	it	to	Hood,’	he	said.	‘Ghosts	don’t	belong	here,	that’s
why	they’re	ghosts.’
‘He’s	an	evil	man!’	Telorast	hissed.	‘What	are	those?’
Apsalar	could	just	make	out	the	shade	as	it	drifted	towards	a	long	table	to
the	right.	On	it	were	smaller	versions	of	the	skeletal	behemoth,	three	of	them
crow-sized,	although	instead	of	beaks	the	creatures	possessed	long	snouts	lined
with	needle-like	teeth.	The	bones	had	been	bound	together	with	gut	and	the
figures	were	mounted	so	that	they	stood	upright,	like	sentry	meer-rats.
Urko	was	studying	Apsalar,	an	odd	expression	on	his	blunt,	strongfeatured	face.	Then	he	seemed	to	start,	and	said,	‘I	have	brewed	some	tea.’
‘That	would	be	nice,	thank	you.’
He	walked	over	to	the	modest	kitchen	area	and	began	a	search	for	cups.
‘It’s	not	that	I	don’t	want	visitors…well,	it	is.	They	always	bring	trouble.	Did
Dancer	have	anything	else	to	say?’
‘No.	And	he	now	calls	himself	Cotillion.’
‘I	knew	that.	I’m	not	surprised	he’s	the	Patron	of	Assassins.	He	was	the
most	feared	killer	in	the	empire.	More	than	Surly,	who	was	just	treacherous.	Or
Topper,	who	was	just	cruel.	I	suppose	those	two	still	think	they	won.	Fools.
Who	now	strides	among	the	gods,	eh?’	He	brought	a	clay	cup	over.	‘Local
herbs,	mildly	toxic	but	not	fatal.	Antidote	to	buther	snake	bites,	which	is	a	good
thing,	since	the	bastards	infest	the	area.	Turns	out	I	built	my	tower	near	a
breeding	pit.’


One	of	the	small	skeletons	on	the	tabletop	fell	over,	then	jerkily	climbed
back	upright,	the	tail	jutting	out,	the	torso	angling	almost	horizontal.
‘One	of	my	ghost	companions	has	just	possessed	that	creature,’	Apsalar
said.
A	second	one	lurched	into	awkward	motion.
‘Gods	below,’	whispered	Urko.	‘Look	how	they	stand!	Of	course!	It	has	to
be	that	way.	Of	course!’	He	stared	up	at	the	massive	fossil	skeleton.	‘It’s	all
wrong!	They	lean	forward	–	for	balance!’
Telorast	and	Curdle	were	quickly	mastering	their	new	bodies,	jaws
snapping,	hopping	about	on	the	tabletop.
‘I	suspect	they	won’t	want	to	relinquish	those	skeletons,’	Apsalar	said.
‘They	can	have	them	–	as	reward	for	this	revelation!’	He	paused,	looked
round,	then	muttered,	‘I’ll	have	to	knock	down	a	wall…’
Apsalar	sighed.	‘I	suppose	we	should	be	relieved	one	of	them	did	not
decide	on	the	big	version.’
Urko	looked	over	at	her	with	slightly	wide	eyes,	then	he	grunted.	‘Drink
your	tea	–	the	toxicity	gets	worse	as	it	cools.’
She	sipped.	And	found	her	lips	and	tongue	suddenly	numb.
Urko	smiled.	‘Perfect.	This	way	the	conversation	stays	brief	and	you	can
be	on	your	way	all	the	sooner.’
‘Mathard.’
‘It	wears	off.’	He	found	a	stool	and	sat	down	facing	her.	‘You’re	Dancer ’s
daughter.	You	must	be,	although	I	see	no	facial	similarities	–	your	mother	must
have	been	beautiful.	It’s	in	your	walk,	and	how	you	stand	there.	You’re	his
beget,	and	he	was	selfish	enough	to	teach	you,	his	own	child,	the	ways	of
assassination.	I	can	see	how	that	troubles	you.	It’s	there	in	your	eyes.	The
legacy	haunts	you	–	you’re	feeling	trapped,	caged	in.	There’s	already	blood	on
your	hands,	isn’t	there?	Is	he	proud	of	that?’	He	grimaced,	then	spat.	‘I
should’ve	drowned	him	then	and	there.	Had	I	been	drunk,	I	would	have.’
‘You	are	wong.’
‘Wong?	Wrong,	you	mean?	Am	I?’
She	nodded,	fighting	her	fury	at	his	trickery.	She	had	come	with	the	need	to
talk,	and	he	had	stolen	from	her	the	ability	to	shape	words.	‘Nnnoth	thaughther.	Mmothethed.’
He	frowned.
Apsalar	pointed	at	the	two	reptilian	skeletons	now	scuttling	about	on	the
stone-littered	floor.	‘Mmothethion.’
‘Possession.	He	possessed	you?	The	god	possessed	you?	Hood	pluck	his
balls	and	chew	slow!’	Urko	heaved	himself	to	his	feet,	hands	clenching	into


fists.	‘Here,	hold	on,	lass.	I	have	an	antidote	to	the	antidote.’	He	found	a	dusty
beaker,	rubbed	at	it	until	a	patch	of	the	glazed	reddish	earthenware	was	visible.
‘This	one,	aye.’	He	found	another	cup	and	poured	it	full.	‘Drink.’
Sickly	sweet,	the	taste	then	turning	bitter	and	stinging.	‘Oh.	That	was…
fast.’
‘My	apologies,	Apsalar.	I’m	a	miserable	sort	most	of	the	time,	I	admit	it.
And	I’ve	talked	more	since	you	arrived	than	I	have	in	years.	So	I’ll	stop	now.
How	can	I	help	you?’
She	hesitated,	then	looked	away.	‘You	can’t,	really.	I	shouldn’t	have	come.	I
still	have	tasks	to	complete.’
‘For	him?’
She	nodded.
‘Why?’
‘Because	I	gave	my	word.’
‘You	owe	him	nothing,	except	maybe	a	knife	in	his	back.’
‘Once	I	am	done…I	wish	to	disappear.’
He	sat	down	once	more.	‘Ah.	Yes,	well.’
‘I	think	an	accidental	drowning	won’t	hold	any	longer,	Urko.’
A	faint	grin.	‘It	was	our	joke,	you	see.	We	all	made	the	pact…to	drown.
Nobody	got	it.	Nobody	gets	it.	Probably	never	will.’
‘I	did.	Dancer	does.	Even	Shadowthrone,	I	think.’
‘Not	Surly.	She	never	had	a	sense	of	humour.	Always	obsessing	on	the
details.	I	wonder,	are	people	like	that	ever	happy?	Are	they	even	capable	of	it?
What	inspires	their	lives,	anyway?	Give	’em	too	much	and	they	complain.	Give
’em	too	little	and	they	complain	some	more.	Do	it	right	and	half	of	them
complain	it’s	too	much	and	the	other	half	too	little.’
‘No	wonder	you	gave	up	consorting	with	people,	Urko.’
‘Aye,	I	prefer	bones	these	days.	People.	Too	many	of	them	by	far,	if	you
ask	me.’
She	looked	round.	‘Dancer	wanted	you	shaken	up	some.	Why?’
The	Napan’s	eyes	shifted	away,	and	he	did	not	answer.
Apsalar	felt	a	tremor	of	unease.	‘He	knows	something,	doesn’t	he?	That’s
what	he’s	telling	you	by	that	simple	greeting.’
‘Assassin	or	not,	I	always	liked	Dancer.	Especially	the	way	he	could	keep
his	mouth	shut.’
The	two	reptilian	skeletons	were	scrabbling	at	the	door.	Apsalar	studied
them	for	a	moment.	‘Disappearing…from	a	god.’
‘Aye,	that	won’t	be	easy.’
‘He	said	I	could	leave,	once	I’m	done.	And	he	won’t	come	after	me.’


‘Believe	him,	Apsalar.	Dancer	doesn’t	lie,	and	I	suspect	even	godhood
won’t	change	that.’
I	think	that	is	what	I	needed	to	hear.	‘Thank	you.’	She	headed	towards	the
door.
‘So	soon?’	Urko	asked.
She	glanced	back	at	him.	‘Too	much	or	too	little?’
He	narrowed	his	gaze,	then	grunted	a	laugh.	‘You’re	right.	It’s	about
perfect	–	I	need	to	be	mindful	about	what	I’m	asking	for.’
‘Yes,’	she	said.	And	that	is	also	what	Dancer	wanted	to	remind	you	about,
isn’t	it?
Urko	looked	away.	‘Damn	him,	anyway.’
Smiling,	Apsalar	opened	the	door.	Telorast	and	Curdle	scurried	outside.
She	followed	a	moment	later.
	
Thick	spit	on	the	palms	of	the	hands,	a	careful	rubbing	together,	then	a	sweep
back	through	the	hair.	The	outlawed	Gral	straightened,	kicked	sand	over	the
small	cookfire,	then	collected	his	pack	and	slung	it	over	his	shoulders.	He
picked	up	his	hunting	bow	and	strung	it,	then	fitted	an	arrow.	A	final	glance
around,	and	he	began	walking.
The	trail	was	not	hard	to	follow.	Taralack	Veed	continued	scanning	the
rough,	broken	scrubland.	A	hare,	a	desert	grouse,	a	mamlak	lizard,	anything
would	do;	he	was	tired	of	the	sun-dried	strips	of	bhederin	and	he’d	eaten	the
last	date	two	nights	previously.	No	shortage	of	tubers,	of	course,	but	too	much
and	he’d	spend	half	the	day	squatting	over	a	hastily	dug	hole.
The	D’ivers	demon	was	closing	on	its	quarry,	and	it	was	vital	that	Taralack
remain	in	near	proximity,	so	that	he	could	make	certain	of	the	outcome.	He	was
being	well	paid	for	the	task	ahead	and	that	was	all	that	mattered.	Gold,	and	with
it,	the	clout	to	raise	a	company	of	mercenaries.	Then	back	to	his	village,	to
deliver	well-deserved	justice	upon	those	who	had	betrayed	him.	He	would
assume	the	mantle	of	warleader	then,	and	lead	the	Gral	to	glory.	His	destiny	lay
before	him,	and	all	was	well.
Dejim	Nebrahl	revealed	no	digressions,	no	detours	in	its	path.	The	D’ivers
was	admirably	singular,	true	to	its	geas.	There	would	be	no	deviation,	for	it
lusted	for	the	freedom	that	was	the	reward	for	the	task’s	completion.	This	was
the	proper	manner	in	which	to	make	bargains,	and	Taralack	found	himself
admiring	the	Nameless	Ones.	No	matter	how	dread-filled	the	tales	he	had	heard
of	the	secret	cult,	his	own	dealings	with	them	had	been	clean,	lucrative	and
straightforward.


It	had	survived	the	Malazan	conquest,	and	that	was	saying	something.	The
old	Emperor	had	displayed	uncanny	skill	at	infiltrating	the	innumerable	cults
abounding	in	Seven	Cities,	then	delivering	unmitigated	slaughter	upon	the
adherents.
That,	too,	was	worthy	of	admiration.
This	distant	Empress,	however,	was	proving	far	less	impressive.	She	made
too	many	mistakes.	Taralack	could	not	respect	such	a	creature,	and	he	ritually
cursed	her	name	with	every	dawn	and	every	dusk,	with	as	much	vehemence	as
he	cursed	the	seventy-four	other	avowed	enemies	of	Taralack	Veed.
Sympathy	was	like	water	in	the	desert.	Hoarded,	reluctantly	meted	out	in
the	barest	of	sips.	And	he,	Taralack	Veed,	could	walk	a	thousand	deserts	on	a
single	drop.
Such	were	the	world’s	demands.	He	knew	himself	well	enough	to
recognize	that	his	was	a	viper ’s	charm,	alluring	and	mesmerizing	and
ultimately	deadly.	A	viper	made	guest	in	a	nest-bundle	of	meer-rats,	how	could
they	curse	him	for	his	very	nature?	He	had	killed	the	husband,	after	all,	in
service	to	her	heart,	a	heart	that	had	swallowed	him	whole.	He	had	never
suspected	that	she	would	then	cast	him	out,	that	she	would	have	simply	made
use	of	him,	that	another	man	had	been	waiting	in	the	hut’s	shadow	to	ease	the
tortured	spirit	of	the	grieving	widow.	He	had	not	believed	that	she	too
possessed	the	charms	of	a	viper.
He	halted	near	a	boulder,	collected	a	waterskin	from	his	pack	and	removed
the	broad	fired-clay	stopper.	Tugging	his	loincloth	down	he	squatted	and	peed
into	the	waterskin.	There	were	no	rock-springs	for	fifteen	or	more	leagues	in
the	direction	the	D’ivers	was	leading	him.	That	path	would	eventually	converge
on	a	traders’	track,	of	course,	but	that	was	a	week	or	more	away.	Clearly,	the
D’ivers	Dejim	Nebrahl	did	not	suffer	the	depredations	of	thirst.
The	rewards	of	singular	will,	he	well	knew.	Worthy	of	emulation,	as	far	as
was	physically	possible.	He	straightened,	tugged	the	loincloth	back	up.
Replacing	the	stopper,	Taralack	Veed	slung	the	skin	over	a	shoulder	and
resumed	his	measured	pursuit.
	
Beneath	glittering	stars	and	a	pale	smear	in	the	east,	Scillara	knelt	on	the	hard
ground,	vomiting	the	last	of	her	supper	and	then	nothing	but	bile	as	heave	after
heave	racked	through	her.	Finally	the	spasms	subsided.	Gasping,	she	crawled
away	a	short	distance,	then	sat	with	her	back	to	a	boulder.
The	demon	Greyfrog	watched	from	ten	paces	away,	slowly	swaying	from
side	to	side.


Watching	him	invited	a	return	of	the	nausea,	so	she	looked	away,	pulled	out
her	pipe	and	began	repacking	it.	‘It’s	been	days,’	she	muttered.	‘I	thought	I	was
past	this.	Dammit…’
Greyfrog	ambled	closer,	approached	the	place	where	she	had	been	sick.	It
sniffed,	then	pushed	heaps	of	sand	over	the	offending	spot.
With	a	practised	gesture,	Scillara	struck	a	quick	series	of	sparks	down	into
the	pipe’s	bowl	with	the	flint	and	iron	striker.	The	shredded	sweet-grass	mixed
in	with	the	rustleaf	caught,	and	moments	later	she	was	drawing	smoke.	‘That’s
good,	Toad.	Cover	my	trail…it’s	a	wonder	you’ve	not	told	the	others.
Respecting	my	privacy?’
Greyfrog,	predictably,	did	not	reply.
Scillara	ran	a	hand	along	the	swell	of	her	belly.	How	could	she	be	getting
fatter	and	fatter	when	she’d	been	throwing	back	one	meal	in	three	for	weeks?
There	was	something	diabolical	about	this	whole	pregnancy	thing.	As	if	she
possessed	her	own	demon,	huddled	there	in	her	belly.	Well,	the	sooner	it	was
out	the	quicker	she	could	sell	it	to	some	pimp	or	harem	master.	There	to	be	fed
and	raised	and	to	learn	the	trade	of	the	supplicant.
Most	women	who	bothered	stopped	at	two	or	three,	she	knew,	and	now	she
understood	why.	Healers	and	witches	and	midwives	and	sucklers	kept	the
babies	healthy	enough,	and	the	world	remained	to	teach	them	its	ways.	The
misery	lay	in	the	bearing,	in	carrying	this	growing	weight,	in	its	secret
demands	on	her	reserves.
And	something	else	was	happening	as	well.	Something	that	proved	the
child’s	innate	evil.	She’d	been	finding	herself	drifting	into	a	dreamy,	pleasant
state,	inviting	a	senseless	smile	that,	quite	simply,	horrified	Scillara.	What	was
there	to	be	happy	about?	The	world	was	not	pleasant.	It	did	not	whisper
contentment.	No,	the	poisonous	seduction	stealing	through	her	sought
delusion,	blissful	stupidity	–	and	she	had	had	enough	of	that	already.	As
nefarious	as	durhang,	this	deadly	lure.
Her	bulging	belly	would	soon	be	obvious,	she	knew.	Unless	she	tried	to
make	herself	even	fatter.	There	was	something	comforting	about	all	that	solid
bulk	–	but	no,	that	was	the	delusional	seduction	all	over	again,	finding	a	new
path	into	her	brain.
Well,	it	seemed	the	nausea	was	fully	past,	now.	Scillara	regained	her	feet
and	made	her	way	back	to	the	encampment.	A	handful	of	coals	in	the	hearth,
drifting	threads	of	smoke,	and	three	recumbent	figures	wrapped	in	blankets.
Greyfrog	appeared	in	her	wake,	moving	past	her	to	squat	near	the	hearth.	It
snapped	a	capemoth	out	of	the	air	and	stuffed	it	into	its	broad	mouth.	Its	eyes
were	a	murky	green	as	it	studied	Scillara.


She	refilled	her	pipe.	Why	was	it	just	women	that	had	babies,	anyway?
Surely	some	ascendant	witch	could	have	made	some	sorcerous	adjustment	to
the	inequity	by	now?	Or	was	it	maybe	not	a	flaw	at	all,	but	an	advantage	of
some	sort?	Not	that	any	obvious	advantages	came	to	mind.	Apart	from	this
strange,	suspicious	bliss	constantly	stealing	through	her.	She	drew	hard	on	the
rustleaf.	Bidithal	had	made	the	cutting	away	of	pleasure	the	first	ritual	among
girls	in	his	cult.	He	had	liked	the	notion	of	feeling	nothing	at	all,	removing	the
dangerous	desire	for	sensuality.	She	could	not	recall	if	she	had	ever	known
such	sensations.
Bidithal	had	inculcated	religious	rapture,	a	state	of	being,	she	now
suspected,	infinitely	more	selfish	and	self-serving	than	satisfying	one’s	own
body.	Being	pregnant	whispered	of	a	similar	kind	of	rapture,	and	that	made	her
uneasy.
A	sudden	commotion.	She	turned	to	see	that	Cutter	had	sat	up.
‘Something	wrong?’	she	asked	in	a	low	voice.
He	faced	her,	his	expression	indistinct	in	the	darkness,	then	sighed	shakily.
‘No.	A	bad	dream.’
‘It’s	nearing	dawn,’	Scillara	said.
‘Why	are	you	awake?’
‘No	particular	reason.’
He	shook	off	the	blanket,	rose	and	walked	over	to	the	hearth.	Crouched,
tossing	a	handful	of	tinder	onto	the	glowing	coals,	waited	until	it	flared	to	life,
then	began	adding	dung	chips.
‘Cutter,	what	do	you	think	will	happen	on	Otataral	Island?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	That	old	Malazan’s	not	exactly	clear	on	the	matter,	is	he?’
‘He	is	Destriant	to	the	Tiger	of	Summer.’
Cutter	glanced	across	at	her.	‘Reluctantly.’
She	added	more	rustleaf	to	her	pipe.	‘He	doesn’t	want	followers.	And	if	he
did,	it	wouldn’t	be	us.	Well,	not	me,	nor	Felisin.	We’re	not	warriors.	You,’	she
added,	‘would	be	a	more	likely	candidate.’
He	snorted.	‘No,	not	me,	Scillara.	It	seems	I	follow	another	god.’
‘It	seems?’
She	could	just	make	out	his	shrug.	‘You	fall	into	things,’	he	said.
A	woman.	Well,	that	explains	a	lot.	‘As	good	a	reason	as	any	other,’	she
said	behind	a	lungful	of	smoke.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	mean,	I	don’t	see	much	reason	behind	following	any	god	or	goddess.	If
you’re	worth	their	interest,	they	use	you.	I	know	about	being	used,	and	most	of
the	rewards	are	anything	but,	even	if	they	look	good	at	the	time.’


‘Well,’	he	said	after	a	moment,	‘someone’s	rewarded	you.’
‘Is	that	what	you	call	it?’
‘Call	what?	You’re	looking	so…healthy.	Full	of	life,	I	mean.	And	you’re
not	as	skinny	as	before.’	He	paused,	then	hastily	added,	‘Which	is	good.	Halfstarved	didn’t	suit	you	–	doesn’t	suit	anyone,	of	course.	You,	included.	Anyway,
that’s	all.’
She	sat,	smoking,	watching	him	in	the	growing	light.	‘We	are	quite	a
burden	to	you,	aren’t	we,	Cutter?’
‘No!	Not	at	all!	I’m	to	escort	you,	a	task	I	happily	accepted.	And	that	hasn’t
changed.’
‘Don’t	you	think	Greyfrog	is	sufficient	to	protect	us?’
‘No,	I	mean,	yes,	he	probably	is.	Even	so,	he	is	a	demon,	and	that
complicates	things	–	it’s	not	as	if	he	can	just	amble	into	a	village	or	city,	is	it?
Or	negotiate	supplies	and	passage	or	stuff	like	that.’
‘Felisin	can.	So	can	I,	in	fact.’
‘Well.	You’re	saying	you	don’t	want	me	here?’
‘I’m	saying	we	don’t	need	you.	Which	isn’t	the	same	as	saying	we	don’t
want	you,	Cutter.	Besides,	you’ve	done	well	leading	this	odd	little	company,
although	it’s	obvious	you’re	not	used	to	doing	that.’
‘Listen,	if	you	want	to	take	over,	that’s	fine	by	me.’
Ah,	a	woman	who	wouldn’t	follow,	then.	‘I	see	no	reason	to	change
anything,’	she	said	offhandedly.
He	was	staring	at	her	as	she	in	turn	regarded	him,	her	gaze	as	level	and	as
unperturbed	as	she	could	manage.	‘What	is	the	point	of	all	this?’	he	demanded.
‘Point?	No	point.	Just	making	conversation,	Cutter.	Unless…is	there
something	in	particular	you	would	like	to	talk	about?’
She	watched	him	pull	back	in	every	way	but	physically,	as	he	said,	‘No,
nothing.’
‘You	don’t	know	me	well	enough,	then,	is	that	it?	Well,	we’ll	have	plenty	of
time.’
‘I	know	you…I	think.	I	mean,	oh,	you’re	right,	I	don’t	know	you	at	all.	I
don’t	know	women,	is	what	I	really	mean.	And	how	could	I?	It’s	impossible,
trying	to	follow	your	thoughts,	trying	to	make	sense	out	of	what	you	say,	what
is	hidden	behind	your	words—’
‘Would	that	be	me,	specifically,	or	women	in	general?’
He	threw	more	dung	on	the	fire.	‘No,’	he	muttered,	‘nothing	in	particular
I’d	like	to	talk	about.’
‘All	right,	but	I	have	a	few	topics…’
He	groaned.


‘You	were	given	the	task,’	she	said.	‘To	escort	us,	correct?	Who	gave	you
that	task?’
‘A	god.’
‘But	not	Heboric’s	god.’
‘No.’
‘So	there’s	at	least	two	gods	interested	in	us.	That’s	not	good,	Cutter.	Does
Ghost	Hands	know	about	this?	No,	he	wouldn’t,	would	he?	No	reason	to	tell
him—’
‘It’s	not	hard	to	figure	out,’	Cutter	retorted.	‘I	was	waiting	for	you.	In
Iskaral	Pust’s	temple.’
‘Malazan	gods.	Shadowthrone	or	Cotillion.	But	you’re	not	Malazan,	are
you?’
‘Really,	Scillara,’	Cutter	said	wearily,	‘do	we	have	to	discuss	this	right
now?’
‘Unless,’	she	went	on,	‘your	lover	was.	Malazan,	that	is.	The	original
follower	of	those	gods.’
‘Oh,	my	head	hurts,’	he	mumbled,	hands	up	over	his	eyes,	the	fingers
reaching	into	his	hair,	then	clenching	as	if	to	begin	tearing	it	out.	‘How	–	no,	I
don’t	want	to	know.	It	doesn’t	matter.	I	don’t	care.’
‘So	where	is	she	now?’
‘No	more.’
Scillara	subsided.	She	pulled	out	a	narrow-bladed	knife	and	began	cleaning
her	pipe.
He	suddenly	rose.	‘I’ll	start	on	breakfast.’
A	sweet	boy,	she	decided.	Like	damp	clay	in	a	woman’s	hands.	A	woman
who	knew	what	she	was	doing,	that	is.	Now	the	question	is,	should	I	be	doing
this?	Felisin	adored	Cutter,	after	all.	Then	again,	we	could	always	share.

‘Smirking	observation.	Soft-curved,	large-breasted	woman	wants	to	press	flesh
with	Cutter.’
Not	now,	Greyfrog,	he	replied	without	speaking	aloud	as	he	removed	food
from	the	pack.
‘Alarm.	No,	not	now	indeed.	The	others	are	wakening	from	their	uneasy
dreams.	Awkward	and	dismay	to	follow,	especially	with	Felisin	Younger.’
Cutter	paused.	What?	Why	–	but	she’s	barely	of	age!	No,	this	can’t	be.	Talk
her	out	of	it,	Greyfrog!
‘Greyfrog’s	own	advances	unwelcome.	Despondent	sulk.	You,	Cutter,	of


seed-issuing	capacity,	capable	of	effecting	beget.	Past	revelation.	Human
women	carry	breeding	pond	in	bellies.	But	one	egg	survives,	only	one.	Terrible
risk!	You	must	fill	pond	as	quickly	as	possible,	before	rival	male	appears	to
steal	your	destiny.	Greyfrog	will	defend	your	claim.	Brave	self-sacrifice,	such
as	Sentinel	Circlers	among	own	kind.	Altruistic	enlightenment	of	reciprocity
and	protracted	slant	reward	once	or	even	many	times	removed.	Signifier	of
higher	intelligence,	acknowledgement	of	community	interests.	Greyfrog	is
already	Sentinel	Circler	to	soft-curved,	large-breasted	goddess-human.’
Goddess?	What	do	you	mean,	goddess?
‘Lustful	sigh,	is	worthy	of	worship.	Value	signifiers	in	male	human	clouding
the	pond’s	waters	in	Greyfrog’s	mind.	Too	long	association.	Happily.	Sexual
desires	long	withheld.	Unhealthy.’
Cutter	set	a	pot	of	water	on	the	fire	and	tossed	in	a	handful	of	herbs.	What
did	you	say	earlier	about	uneasy	dreams,	Greyfrog?
‘Observation,	skimming	the	mind	ponds.	Troubled.	Approaching	danger.
There	are	warning	signs.’
What	warning	signs?
‘Obvious.	Uneasy	dreams.	Sufficient	unto	themselves.’
Not	always,	Greyfrog.	Sometimes	it’s	things	from	the	past	that	haunt	us.
That’s	all.
‘Ah.	Greyfrog	will	think	on	this.	But	first,	pangs.	Greyfrog	is	hungry.’
	
The	grey	haze	of	the	heat	and	the	dust	made	the	distant	walls	barely	visible.
Leoman	of	the	Flails	rode	at	the	head	of	the	ragged	column,	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas	at	his	side,	as	a	company	of	riders	approached	from	Y’Ghatan’s
gates.
‘There,’	Corabb	said,	‘front	rider	on	the	right	of	the	standard-bearer,	that
is	Falah’d	Vedor.	He	looks…unhappy.’
‘He’d	best	begin	making	peace	with	that	sentiment,’	Leoman	said	in	a
growl.	He	raised	a	gloved	hand	and	the	column	behind	him	slowed	to	a	halt.
They	watched	the	company	close.
‘Commander,	shall	you	and	I	meet	them	halfway?’	Corabb	asked.
‘Of	course	not,’	Leoman	snapped.
Corabb	said	nothing	more.	His	leader	was	in	a	dark	mood.	A	third	of	his
warriors	were	riding	double.	A	much-loved	old	healer	witch	had	died	this	very
morning,	and	they’d	pinned	her	corpse	beneath	a	slab	of	stone	lest	some
wandering	spirit	find	her.	Leoman	himself	had	spat	in	the	eight	directions	to
hallow	the	ground,	and	spilled	drops	of	his	own	blood	from	a	slash	he	opened


on	his	left	hand	onto	the	dusted	stone,	voicing	the	blessing	in	the	name	of	the
Apocalyptic.	Then	he	had	wept.	In	front	of	all	his	warriors,	who	had	stood
silent,	awestruck	by	the	grief	and	the	love	for	his	followers	Leoman	had
revealed	in	that	moment.
The	Falah’d	and	his	soldiers	approached,	then	drew	to	a	halt	five	paces	in
front	of	Leoman	and	Corabb.
Corabb	studied	Vedor ’s	sallow,	sunken	face,	murky	eyes,	and	knew	him
for	an	addict	of	d’bayang	poppy.	His	thick-veined	hands	trembled	on	the	saddle
horn,	and,	when	it	became	evident	that	Leoman	would	not	be	the	first	to	speak,
he	scowled	and	said,	‘I,	Falah’d	Vedor	of	Y’Ghatan,	the	First	Holy	City,	do
hereby	welcome	you,	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	refugee	of	Sha’ik’s	Fall	in	Raraku,
and	your	broken	followers.	We	have	prepared	secure	barracks	for	your
warriors,	and	the	tables	wait,	heaped	with	food	and	wine.	You,	Leoman,	and
your	remaining	officers	shall	be	the	Falah’d’s	guests	in	the	palace,	for	as	long
as	required	for	you	to	reprovision	your	army	and	recover	from	your	flight.
Inform	us	of	your	final	destination	and	we	shall	send	envoys	in	advance	to
proclaim	your	coming	to	each	and	every	village,	town	and	city	on	your	route.’
Corabb	found	he	was	holding	his	breath.	He	watched	as	Leoman	nudged
his	horse	forward,	until	he	was	positioned	side	by	side	with	the	Falah’d.
‘We	have	come	to	Y’Ghatan,’	Leoman	said,	in	a	low	voice,	‘and	it	is	in
Y’Ghatan	that	we	shall	stay.	To	await	the	coming	of	the	Malazans.’
Vedor ’s	stained	mouth	worked	for	a	moment	without	any	sound	issuing
forth,	then	he	managed	a	hacking	laugh.	‘Like	a	knife’s	edge,	your	sense	of
humour,	Leoman	of	the	Flails!	It	is	as	your	legend	proclaims!’
‘My	legend?	Then	this,	too,	will	not	surprise	you.’	The	kethra	knife	was	a
blinding	flash,	sweeping	to	caress	Vedor ’s	throat.	Blood	spurted,	and	the
Falah’d’s	head	rolled	back,	thumped	on	the	rump	of	the	startled	horse,	then
down	to	bounce	and	roll	in	the	dust	of	the	road.	Leoman	reached	out	to	steady
the	headless	corpse	still	seated	in	the	saddle,	and	wiped	the	blade	on	the	silken
robes.
From	the	company	of	city	soldiers,	not	a	sound,	not	a	single	motion.	The
standard-bearer,	a	youth	of	perhaps	fifteen	years,	stared	open-mouthed	at	the
headless	body	beside	him.
‘In	the	name	of	Dryjhna	the	Apocalyptic,’	Leoman	said,	‘I	now	rule	the
First	Holy	City	of	Y’Ghatan.	Who	is	the	ranking	officer	here?’
A	woman	pushed	her	horse	forward.	‘I	am.	Captain	Dunsparrow.’
Corabb	squinted	at	her.	Solid	features,	sun-darkened,	light	grey	eyes.
Twenty-five	years	of	age,	perhaps.	The	glint	of	a	chain	vest	was	just	visible
beneath	her	plain	telaba.	‘You,’	Corabb	said,	‘are	Malazan.’


The	cool	eyes	fixed	on	him.	‘What	of	it?’
‘Captain,’	Leoman	said,	‘your	troop	will	precede	us.	Clear	the	way	to	the
palace	for	me	and	my	warriors.	The	secure	barracks	spoken	of	by	the	late
Falah’d	will	be	used	to	house	those	soldiers	in	the	city	garrison	and	from	the
palace	who	might	be	disinclined	to	follow	my	orders.	Please	ensure	that	they
are	indeed	secured.	Once	you	have	done	these	things,	report	to	me	in	the	palace
for	further	orders.’
‘Sir,’	the	woman	said,	‘I	am	of	insufficient	rank	to	do	as	you	ask—’
‘No	longer.	You	are	now	my	Third,	behind	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.’
Her	gaze	briefly	flicked	back	to	Corabb,	revealing	nothing.	‘As	you
command,	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	Falah’d	of	Y’Ghatan.’
Dunsparrow	twisted	in	her	saddle	and	bellowed	out	to	her	troops,	‘About
face!	Smartly	now,	you	damned	pig-herders!	We	advance	the	arrival	of	the	new
Falah’d!’
Vedor ’s	horse	turned	along	with	all	the	others,	and	began	trotting,	the
headless	body	pitching	about	in	its	saddle.
Corabb	watched	as,	twenty	paces	along,	the	dead	Falah’d’s	mount	came	up
alongside	the	captain.	She	noted	it	and	with	a	single	straight-armed	shove	sent
the	corpse	toppling.
Leoman	grunted.	‘Yes.	She	is	perfect.’
A	Malazan.	‘I	have	misgivings,	Commander.’
‘Of	course	you	have.	It’s	why	I	keep	you	at	my	side.’	He	glanced	over.
‘That,	and	the	Lady’s	tug.	Come	now,	ride	with	me	into	our	new	city.’
They	kicked	their	horses	into	motion.	Behind	them	followed	the	others.
‘Our	new	city,’	Corabb	said,	grinning.	‘We	shall	defend	it	with	our	lives.’
Leoman	shot	him	an	odd	look,	but	said	nothing.
Corabb	thought	about	that.	Commander,	I	have	more	misgivings…


Chapter	Five
The	first	cracks	appeared	shortly	after	the	execution	of	Sha’ik.	None
could	know	the	mind	of	Adjunct	Tavore.	Not	her	closest	officers,	and
not	the	common	soldier	under	her	command.	But	there	were	distant
stirrings,	to	be	sure,	more	easily	noted	in	retrospect,	and	it	would	be
presumptuous	and	indeed	dismissive	to	claim	that	the	Adjunct	was
ignorant	of	the	growing	troubles,	not	only	in	her	command,	but	at	the
very	heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	Given	that,	the	events	at	Y’Ghatan
could	have	been	a	fatal	wound.	Were	someone	else	in	command,	were
that	someone’s	heart	any	less	hard,	any	less	cold.
This,	more	than	at	any	other	time	beforehand,	gave	brutal	truth	to
the	conviction	that	Adjunct	Tavore	was	cold	iron,	thrust	into	the	soul	of
a	raging	forge…
‘None	to	Witness’
		(The	Lost	History	of	the	Bonehunters)
Duiker	of	Darujhistan
‘Put	that	down,’	Samar	Dev	said	wearily	from	where	she	sat	near	the	window.
‘Thought	you	were	asleep,’	Karsa	Orlong	said.	He	returned	the	object	to
the	tabletop.	‘What	is	it?’
‘Two	functions.	The	upper	beaker	contains	filters	for	the	water,	removing
all	impurities.	The	water	gathering	in	the	lower	beaker	is	flanked	by	strips	of
copper,	which	livens	the	water	itself	through	a	complicated	and	mysterious
process.	A	particular	ethereal	gas	is	released,	thus	altering	the	air	pressure
above	the	water,	which	in	turn—’
‘But	what	do	you	use	it	for?’
Samar ’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘Nothing	in	particular.’
He	moved	away	from	the	table,	approached	the	work	benches	and	shelves.
She	watched	him	examining	the	various	mechanisms	she	had	invented,	and	the
long-term	experiments,	many	of	which	showed	no	evident	alteration	of
conditions.	He	poked.	Sniffed,	and	even	sought	to	taste	one	dish	filled	with
gelatinous	fluid.	She	thought	to	stop	him,	then	decided	to	remain	quiet.	The


warrior ’s	wounds	had	healed	with	appalling	swiftness,	with	no	signs	of
infection.	The	thick	liquid	he	was	licking	from	his	finger	wasn’t	particularly
healthy	to	ingest,	but	not	fatal.	Usually.
He	made	a	face.	‘This	is	terrible.’
‘I	am	not	surprised.’
‘What	do	you	use	it	for?’
‘What	do	you	think?’
‘Rub	it	into	saddles.	Leather.’
‘Saddles?	Indirectly,	I	suppose.	It	is	an	ointment,	for	the	suppurating
wounds	that	sometimes	arise	on	the	lining	of	the	anus—’
He	grunted	loudly,	then	said,	‘No	wonder	it	tasted	awful,’	and	resumed	his
examination	of	the	room’s	contents.
She	regarded	him	thoughtfully.	Then	said,	‘The	Falah’d	sent	soldiers	into
the	keep.	They	found	signs	of	past	slaughter	–	as	you	said,	not	one	Malazan	left
alive.	They	also	found	a	demon.	Or,	rather,	the	corpse	of	a	demon,	freshly
killed.	They	have	asked	me	to	examine	it,	for	I	possess	a	little	knowledge	of
anatomy	and	other,	related	subjects.’
He	made	no	reply,	peering	into	the	wrong	end	of	a	spyglass.
‘If	you	come	to	the	window,	and	look	through	the	other	end,	Karsa,	you
will	see	things	far	away	drawn	closer.’
He	scowled	at	her,	and	set	the	instrument	down.	‘If	something	is	far	away,	I
simply	ride	closer.’
‘And	if	it	is	at	the	top	of	a	cliff?	Or	a	distant	enemy	encampment	and	you
want	to	determine	the	picket	lines?’
He	retrieved	the	spyglass	and	walked	over.	She	moved	her	chair	to	one
side	to	give	him	room.	‘There	is	a	falcon’s	nest	on	the	ledge	of	that	tower,	the
copper-sheathed	one.’
He	held	up	the	glass.	Searched	until	he	found	the	nest.	‘That	is	no	falcon.’
‘You	are	right.	It’s	a	bokh’aral	that	found	the	abandoned	nest	to	its	liking.	It
carries	up	armfuls	of	rotting	fruit	and	it	spends	the	morning	dropping	them	on
people	in	the	streets	below.’
‘It	appears	to	be	snarling…’
‘That	would	be	laughter.	It	is	forever	driven	to	bouts	of	hilarity.’
‘Ah	–	no,	that	wasn’t	fruit.	It	was	a	brick.’
‘Oh,	unfortunate.	Someone	will	be	sent	to	kill	it,	now.	After	all,	only
people	are	allowed	to	throw	bricks	at	people.’
He	lowered	the	spyglass	and	studied	her.	‘That	is	madness.	What	manner	of
laws	do	you	possess,	to	permit	such	a	thing?’
‘Which	thing?	Stoning	people	or	killing	bokh’arala?’


‘You	are	strange,	Samar	Dev.	But	then,	you	are	a	witch,	and	a	maker	of
useless	objects—’
‘Is	that	spyglass	useless?’
‘No,	I	now	understand	its	value.	Yet	it	was	lying	on	a	shelf…’
She	leaned	back.	‘I	have	invented	countless	things	that	would	prove	of
great	value	to	many	people.	And	that	presents	me	with	a	dilemma.	I	must	ask
myself,	with	each	invention,	what	possible	abuses	await	such	an	object?	More
often	than	not,	I	conclude	that	those	abuses	outweigh	the	value	of	the	invention.
I	call	this	Dev’s	First	Law	of	Invention.’
‘You	are	obsessed	with	laws.’
‘Perhaps.	In	any	case,	the	law	is	simple,	as	all	true	laws	must	be—’
‘You	have	a	law	for	that,	too?’
‘Founding	principle,	rather	than	law.	In	any	case,	ethics	are	the	first
consideration	of	an	inventor	following	a	particular	invention.’
‘You	call	that	simple?’
‘The	statement	is,	the	consideration	is	not.’
‘Now	that	sounds	more	like	a	true	law.’
She	closed	her	mouth	after	a	moment,	then	rose	and	walked	over	to	the
scriber ’s	desk,	sat	and	collected	a	stylus	and	a	wax	tablet.	‘I	distrust
philosophy,’	she	said	as	she	wrote.	‘Even	so,	I	will	not	turn	away	from	the
subject…when	it	slaps	me	in	the	face.	Nor	am	I	particularly	eloquent	as	a
writer.	I	am	better	suited	to	manipulating	objects	than	words.	You,	on	the	other
hand,	seem	to	possess	an	unexpected	talent	for…uh…cogent	brevity.’
‘You	talk	too	much.’
‘No	doubt.’	She	finished	recording	her	own	unexpectedly	profound	words
–	profound	only	in	that	Karsa	Orlong	had	recognized	a	far	vaster	application
than	she	had	intended.	She	paused,	wanting	to	dismiss	his	genius	as	blind
chance,	or	even	the	preening	false	wisdom	of	savage	nobility.	But	something
whispered	to	her	that	Karsa	Orlong	had	been	underestimated	before,	and	she
vowed	not	to	leap	into	the	same	pit.	Setting	the	stylus	down,	she	rose	to	her
feet.	‘I	am	off	to	examine	the	demon	you	killed.	Will	you	accompany	me?’
‘No,	I	had	a	close	enough	examination	the	first	time.’
She	collected	the	leather	satchel	containing	her	surgical	instruments.	‘Stay
inside,	please,	and	try	not	to	break	anything.’
‘How	can	you	call	yourself	an	inventor	if	you	dislike	breaking	things?’
At	the	door,	she	paused	and	glanced	back	at	him.	His	head	was	brushing	the
ceiling	in	this,	the	highest	chamber	in	her	tower.	There	was	something…there
in	his	eyes.	‘Try	not	to	break	any	of	my	things.’
‘Very	well.	But	I	am	hungry.	Bring	more	food.’


	
The	reptilian	corpse	was	lying	on	the	floor	of	one	of	the	torture	chambers
situated	in	the	palace	crypts.	A	retired	Avower	had	been	given	the	task	of
standing	guard.	Samar	Dev	found	him	asleep	in	one	corner	of	the	room.
Leaving	him	to	his	snores,	she	stationed	around	the	huge	demon’s	body	the
four	lit	lanterns	she	had	brought	down	from	above,	then	settled	onto	her	knees
and	untied	the	flap	of	her	satchel,	withdrawing	a	variety	of	polished	surgical
instruments.	And,	finally,	her	preparations	complete,	she	swung	her	attention	to
the	corpse.
Teeth,	jaws,	forward-facing	eyes,	all	the	makings	of	a	superior	carnivore,
likely	an	ambush	hunter.	Yet,	this	was	no	simple	river	lizard.	Behind	the	orbital
ridges	the	skull	swept	out	broad	and	long,	with	massive	occipital	bulges,	the
sheer	mass	of	the	cranial	region	implying	intelligence.	Unless,	of	course,	the
bone	was	absurdly	thick.
She	cut	away	the	torn	and	bruised	skin	to	reveal	broken	fragments	of	that
skull.	Not	so	thick,	then.	Indentations	made	it	obvious	that	Karsa	Orlong	had
used	his	fists.	In	which,	it	was	clear,	there	was	astonishing	strength,	and	an
equally	astonishing	will.	The	brain	beneath,	marred	with	broken	vessels	and
blood	leakage	and	pulped	in	places	by	the	skull	pieces,	was	indeed	large,
although	arranged	in	a	markedly	different	manner	from	a	human’s.	There	were
more	lobes,	for	one	thing.	Six	more,	in	all,	positioned	beneath	heavy	ridged
projections	out	to	the	sides,	including	two	extra	vessel-packed	masses
connected	by	tissue	to	the	eyes.	Suggesting	these	demons	saw	a	different	world,
a	more	complete	one,	perhaps.
Samar	extracted	one	mangled	eye	and	was	surprised	to	find	two	lenses,	one
concave,	the	other	convex.	She	set	those	aside	for	later	examination.
Cutting	through	the	tough,	scaled	hide,	she	opened	the	neck	regions,
confirming	the	oversized	veins	and	arteries	necessary	to	feed	an	active	brain,
then	continued	on	to	reveal	the	chest	region.	Many	of	the	ribs	were	already
broken.	She	counted	four	lungs	and	two	proto-lungs	attached	beneath	them,
these	latter	ones	saturated	with	blood.
She	cut	through	the	lining	of	the	first	of	three	stomachs,	then	moved
quickly	back	as	the	acids	poured	out.	The	blade	of	her	knife	sizzled	and	she
watched	as	pitting	etched	into	the	iron	surface.	More	hissing	sounds,	from	the
stone	floor.	Her	eyes	began	watering.
Movement	from	the	stomach,	and	Samar	rose	and	took	a	step	back.	Worms
were	crawling	out.	A	score,	wriggling	then	dropping	to	the	muddy	stone.	The
colour	of	blued	iron,	segmented,	each	as	long	as	an	index	finger.	She	glanced


down	at	the	crumbling	knife	in	her	hand	and	dropped	the	instrument,	then
collected	wooden	tongs	from	her	satchel,	moved	to	the	edge	of	the	acid	pool,
reached	down	and	retrieved	one	of	the	worms.
Not	a	worm.	Hundreds	of	legs,	strangely	finned,	and,	even	more
surprising,	the	creatures	were	mechanisms.	Not	living	at	all,	the	metal	of	their
bodies	somehow	impervious	to	the	acids.	The	thing	twisted	about	in	the	grip	of
the	tongs,	then	stopped	moving.	She	shook	it,	but	it	had	gone	immobile,	like	a
crooked	nail.	An	infestation?	She	did	not	think	so.	No,	there	were	many
creatures	that	worked	in	concert.	The	pond	of	stomach	acid	had	been	home	to
these	mechanisms,	and	they	in	turn	worked	in	some	fashion	to	the	demon’s
benefit.
A	hacking	cough	startled	her,	and	she	turned	to	see	the	Avower	stumble	to
his	feet.	Hunched,	twisted	with	arthritis,	he	shambled	over.	‘Samar	Dev,	the
witch!	What’s	that	smell?	Not	you,	I	hope.	You	and	me,	we’re	the	same	sort,
aren’t	we	just?’
‘We	are?’
‘Oh	yes,	Samar	Dev.’	He	scratched	at	his	crotch.	‘We	strip	the	layers	of
humanity,	down	to	the	very	bones,	but	where	does	humanity	end	and	animal
begin?	When	does	pain	defeat	reason?	Where	hides	the	soul	and	to	where	does
it	flee	when	all	hope	in	the	flesh	is	lost?	Questions	to	ponder,	for	such	as	you
and	me.	Oh	how	I	have	longed	to	meet	you,	to	share	knowledge—’
‘You’re	a	torturer.’
‘Someone	has	to	be,’	he	said,	offended.	‘In	a	culture	that	admits	the	need
for	torture,	there	must	perforce	be	a	torturer.	A	culture,	Samar	Dev,	that	values
the	acquisition	of	truths	more	than	it	does	any	single	human	life.	Do	you	see?
Oh,’	he	added,	edging	closer	to	frown	down	at	the	demon’s	corpse,	‘the
justifications	are	always	the	same.	To	save	many	more	lives,	this	one	must	be
surrendered.	Sacrificed.	Even	the	words	used	disguise	the	brutality.	Why	are
torture	chambers	in	the	crypts?	To	mask	the	screams?	True	enough,	but	there’s
more.	This,’	he	said,	waving	one	gnarled	hand,	‘is	the	nether	realm	of
humanity,	the	rotted	heart	of	unpleasantness.’
‘I	am	seeking	answers	from	something	already	dead.	It	is	not	the	same—’
‘Details.	We	are	questioners,	you	and	I.	We	slice	back	the	armour	to
uncover	the	hidden	truth.	Besides,	I’m	retired.	They	want	me	to	train	another,
you	know,	now	that	the	Malazan	laws	have	been	struck	down	and	torture’s
popular	once	more.	But,	the	fools	they	send	me!	Ah,	what	is	the	point?	Now,
Falah’d	Krithasanan,	now	he	was	something	–	you	were	likely	just	a	child,
then,	or	younger	even.	My,	how	he	liked	torturing	people.	Not	for	truths	–	he
well	understood	that	facile	rubbish	for	what	it	was	–	facile	rubbish.	No,	the


greater	questions	interested	him.	How	far	along	can	a	soul	be	dragged,	trapped
still	within	its	broken	body,	how	far?	How	far	until	it	can	no	longer	crawl
back?	This	was	my	challenge,	and	oh	how	he	appreciated	my	artistry!’
Samar	Dev	looked	down	to	see	that	the	rest	of	the	mechanisms	had	all
ceased	to	function.	She	placed	the	one	she	had	retrieved	in	a	small	leather
pouch,	then	repacked	her	kit,	making	sure	to	include	the	eye	lenses.	She’d	get
them	to	burn	the	rest	of	the	body	–	well	away	from	the	city,	and	upwind.
‘Will	you	not	dine	with	me?’
‘Alas,	I	cannot.	I	have	work	to	do.’
‘If	only	they’d	bring	your	guest	down	here.	Toblakai.	Oh,	he	would	be	fun,
wouldn’t	he?’
She	paused.	‘I	doubt	I	could	talk	him	into	it,	Avower.’
‘The	Falah’d	has	been	considering	it,	you	know.’
‘No,	I	didn’t	know.	I	think	it	would	be	a	mistake.’
‘Well,	those	things	are	not	for	us	to	question,	are	they?’
‘Something	tells	me	Toblakai	would	be	delighted	to	meet	you,	Avower.
Although	it	would	be	a	short	acquaintance.’
‘Not	if	I	have	my	way,	Samar	Dev!’
‘Around	Karsa	Orlong,	I	suspect,	only	Karsa	Orlong	has	his	way.’
	
She	returned	to	find	the	Teblor	warrior	poring	over	her	collection	of	maps,
which	he’d	laid	out	on	the	floor	in	the	hallway.	He	had	brought	in	a	dozen
votive	candles,	now	lit	and	set	out	around	him.	He	held	one	close	as	he	perused
the	precious	parchments.	Without	looking	up,	he	said,	‘This	one	here,	witch.
The	lands	and	coast	west	and	north…I	was	led	to	believe	the	Jhag	Odhan	was
unbroken,	that	the	plains	ran	all	the	way	to	the	far-lands	of	Nemil	and	the	Trell,
yet	here,	this	shows	something	different.’
‘If	you	burn	holes	in	my	maps,’	Samar	Dev	said,	‘I	will	curse	you	and	your
bloodline	for	all	eternity.’
‘The	Odhan	sweeps	westward,	it	seems,	but	only	in	the	south.	There	are
places	of	ice	marked	here.	This	continent	looks	too	vast.	There	has	been	a
mistake.’
‘Possibly,’	she	conceded.	‘Since	that	is	the	one	direction	I	have	not
travelled,	I	can	make	no	claim	as	to	the	map’s	accuracy.	Mind	you,	that	one	was
etched	by	Othun	Dela	Farat,	a	century	ago.	He	was	reputed	to	be	reliable.’
‘What	of	this	region	of	lakes?’	he	asked,	pointing	to	the	northerly	bulge
along	the	coast,	west	of	Yath	Alban.
She	set	her	equipment	down,	then,	sighing,	she	crouched	at	his	side.


‘Difficult	to	cross.	The	bedrock	is	exposed	there,	badly	folded,	pocked	with
lakes	and	only	a	few,	mostly	impassable	rivers.	The	forest	is	spruce,	fir	and
pine,	with	low-lying	thickets	in	the	basins.’
‘How	do	you	know	all	that	if	you	have	never	been	there?’
She	pointed.	‘I	am	reading	Dela’s	notes,	there,	along	the	border.	He	also
says	he	found	signs	suggesting	there	were	people	living	there,	but	no	contact
was	ever	made.	Beyond	lies	the	island	kingdom	of	Sepik,	now	a	remote	subject
of	the	Malazan	Empire,	although	I	would	be	surprised	if	the	Malazans	ever
visited.	The	king	was	clever	enough	to	send	delegates	proposing	conditions	of
surrender,	and	the	Emperor	simply	accepted.’
‘The	mapmaker	hasn’t	written	that	much.’
‘No,	some	of	that	information	was	mine.	I	have	heard,	now	and	then,
certain	odd	stories	about	Sepik.	There	are,	it	seems,	two	distinct	populations,
one	the	subject	of	the	other.’	She	shrugged	at	his	blank	look.	‘Such	things
interest	me.’	Then	frowned,	as	it	became	obvious	that	the	distant	expression	on
the	giant’s	tattooed	visage	was	born	of	something	other	than	indifference.	‘Is
something	wrong?’
Karsa	Orlong	bared	his	teeth.	‘Tell	me	more	of	this	Sepik.’
‘I	am	afraid	I	have	exhausted	my	knowledge.’
Scowling	at	her	answer,	he	hunched	down	over	the	map	once	more.	‘I	shall
need	supplies.	Tell	me,	is	the	weather	the	same	as	here?’
‘You	are	going	to	Sepik?’
‘Yes.	Tell	the	Falah’d	that	I	demand	equipment,	two	extra	horses,	and	five
hundred	crescents	in	silver.	Dried	foods,	more	waterskins.	Three	javelins	and	a
hunting	bow	with	thirty	arrows,	ten	of	them	bird-pointed.	Six	extra	bowstrings
and	a	supply	of	fletching,	a	brick	of	wax—’
‘Wait!	Wait,	Karsa	Orlong.	Why	would	the	Falah’d	simply	gift	you	all
these	things?’
‘Tell	him,	if	he	does	not,	I	will	stay	in	this	city.’
‘Ah,	I	see.’	She	considered	for	a	time,	then	asked,	‘Why	are	you	going	to
Sepik?’
He	began	rolling	up	the	map.	‘I	want	this	one—’
‘Sorry,	no.	It	is	worth	a	fortune—’
‘I	will	return	it.’
‘No,	Karsa	Orlong.’	She	straightened.	‘If	you	are	prepared	to	wait,	I	will
copy	it	–	on	hide,	which	is	more	resilient—’
‘How	long	will	that	take?’
‘I	don’t	know.	A	few	days…’
‘Very	well,	but	I	am	getting	restless,	witch.’	He	handed	her	the	rolled-up


map	and	walked	into	the	other	chamber.	‘And	hungry.’
She	stooped	once	more	to	gather	in	the	other	maps.	The	candles	she	left
alone.	Each	one	was	aspected	to	a	local,	minor	god,	and	the	flames	had,	one
and	all,	drawn	the	attention	of	the	host	of	spirits.	This	hallway	was	crowded
with	presences,	making	the	air	taut,	bridling,	since	many	of	them	counted
others	as	enemies.	Yet,	she	suspected,	it	had	been	more	than	just	the	flickering
flames	that	had	earned	the	regard	of	the	spirits.	Something	about	Toblakai
himself…
There	were	mysteries,	she	believed,	swirling	in	Karsa	Orlong’s	history.
And	now,	the	spirits	drawn	close,	close	and…frightened…
‘Ah,’	she	whispered,	‘I	see	no	choice	in	the	matter.	None	at	all…’	She	drew
out	a	belt-knife,	spat	on	the	blade,	then	began	waving	the	iron	through	the
flame	of	each	candle.
The	spirits	howled	in	her	mind,	outraged	at	this	unexpected,	brutal
imprisonment.	She	nodded.	‘Yes,	we	mortals	are	cruel…’
	
‘Three	leagues,’	Quick	Ben	said	under	his	breath.
Kalam	scratched	at	the	stubble	on	his	chin.	Some	old	wounds	–	that
enkar ’al	at	the	edge	of	the	Whirlwind’s	wall	had	torn	him	up	pretty	bad	–	were
aching	after	the	long	forced	march	back	towards	the	Fourteenth	Army.	After
what	they	had	seen	in	the	warren,	no-one	was	in	the	mood	to	complain,
however.	Even	Stormy	had	ceased	his	endless	griping.	The	squad	was	hunkered
down	behind	the	assassin	and	the	High	Mage,	motionless	and	virtually	invisible
in	the	darkness.
‘So,’	Kalam	mused,	‘do	we	wait	for	them	here,	or	do	we	keep	walking?’
‘We	wait,’	Quick	Ben	replied.	‘I	need	the	rest.	In	any	case,	we	all	more	or
less	guessed	right,	and	the	trail	isn’t	hard	to	follow.	Leoman’s	reached
Y’Ghatan	and	that’s	where	he’ll	make	his	stand.’
‘And	us	with	no	siege	equipment	to	speak	of.’
The	wizard	nodded.	‘This	could	be	a	long	one.’
‘Well,	we’re	used	to	that,	aren’t	we?’
‘I	keep	forgetting,	you	weren’t	at	Coral.’
Kalam	settled	down	with	his	back	against	the	ridge’s	slope	and	pulled	free
a	flask.	He	drank	then	handed	it	to	the	High	Mage.	‘As	bad	as	the	last	day	at
Pale?’
Quick	Ben	sipped,	then	made	a	face.	‘This	is	water.’
‘Of	course	it	is.’
‘Pale…we	weren’t	fighting	anyone.	Just	collapsing	earth	and	raining


rocks.’
‘So,	the	Bridgeburners	went	down	fighting.’
‘Most	of	Onearm’s	Host	went	down	fighting,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘Even
Whiskeyjack,’	he	added.	‘His	leg	gave	out	under	him.	Mallet	won’t	forgive
himself	for	that,	and	I	can’t	say	I’m	surprised.’	He	shrugged	in	the	gloom.	‘It
was	messy.	A	lot	went	wrong,	as	usual.	But	Kallor	turning	on	us…that	we
should	have	foreseen.’
‘I’ve	got	a	space	on	my	blade	for	a	notch	in	his	name,’	Kalam	said,
retrieving	the	flask.
‘You’re	not	the	only	one,	but	he’s	not	an	easy	man	to	kill.’
Sergeant	Gesler	edged	into	view.	‘Saw	you	two	passing	something.’
‘Just	water,’	Kalam	said.
‘The	last	thing	I	wanted	to	hear.	Well,	don’t	mind	me.’
‘We	were	discussing	the	siege	to	come,’	the	assassin	said.	‘Could	be	a	long
one.’
‘Even	so,’	Gesler	said	with	a	grunt,	‘Tavore’s	a	patient	woman.	We	know
that	much	about	her,	anyway.’
‘Nothing	else?’	Quick	Ben	asked.
‘You’ve	talked	with	her	more	than	any	of	us,	High	Mage.	She	keeps	her
distance.	No-one	really	seems	to	know	what	she	is,	behind	the	title	of	Adjunct.
Nobleborn,	aye,	and	from	Unta.	From	House	Paran.’
Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	exchanged	glances,	then	the	assassin	pulled	out	a
second	flask.	‘This	one	ain’t	water,’	he	said,	tossing	it	to	the	sergeant.	‘We
knew	her	brother.	Ganoes	Paran.	He	was	attached	to	the	Bridgeburners,	rank	as
captain,	just	before	we	infiltrated	Darujhistan.’
‘He	led	the	squads	into	Coral,’	Quick	Ben	said.
‘And	died?’	Gesler	asked	after	pulling	at	the	flask.
‘Most	everyone	died,’	answered	the	High	Mage.	‘At	any	rate,	he	wasn’t	an
embarrassment	as	far	as	officers	go.	As	for	Tavore,	well,	I’m	in	the	dark	as
much	as	the	rest	of	you.	She’s	all	edges,	but	they’re	for	keeping	people	away,
not	cutting	them.	At	least	from	what	I’ve	seen.’
‘She’s	going	to	start	losing	soldiers	at	Y’Ghatan,’	Kalam	said.
No-one	commented	on	that	observation.	Different	commanders	reacted	in
different	ways	to	things	like	that.	Some	just	got	stubborn	and	threw	more	and
more	lives	away.	Others	flinched	back	and	if	nothing	then	happened,	the	spirit
of	the	army	drained	away.	Sieges	were	battles	of	will,	for	the	most	part,	along
with	cunning.	Leoman	had	shown	a	capacity	for	both	in	this	long	pursuit	west
of	Raraku.	Kalam	wasn’t	sure	what	Tavore	had	shown	at	Raraku	–	someone
else	had	done	most	of	the	killing	for	her,	for	the	entire	Fourteenth,	in	fact.


Ghosts.	Bridgeburners…ascended.	Gods,	what	a	chilling	thought.	They
were	all	half-mad	when	alive,	and	now…‘Quick,’	Kalam	said,	‘those	ghosts	at
Raraku…where	are	they	now?’
‘No	idea.	Not	with	us,	though.’
‘Ghosts,’	Gesler	said.	‘So	the	rumours	were	true	–	it	wasn’t	no	sorcerous
spell	that	slaughtered	the	Dogslayers.	We	had	unseen	allies	–	who	were	they?’
He	paused,	then	spat.	‘You	both	know,	don’t	you,	and	you’re	not	telling.	Fiddler
knows,	too,	doesn’t	he?	Never	mind.	Everybody’s	got	secrets	and	don’t	bother
asking	me	to	share	mine.	So	that’s	that.’	He	handed	the	flask	back.	‘Thanks	for
the	donkey	piss,	Kalam.’
They	listened	as	he	crawled	back	to	rejoin	his	squad.
‘Donkey	piss?’	Quick	Ben	asked.
‘Ground-vine	wine,	and	he’s	right,	it	tastes	awful.	I	found	it	at	the
Dogslayer	camp.	Want	some?’
‘Why	not?	Anyway,	when	I	said	the	ghosts	weren’t	with	us,	I	think	I	was
telling	the	truth.	But	something	is	following	the	army.’
‘Well,	that’s	just	great.’
‘I’m	not—’
‘Hush!	I	hear—’
Figures	rose	from	behind	the	ridge.	Gleaming,	ancient	armour,	axes	and
scimitars,	barbaric,	painted	faces	–	Khundryl	Burned	Tears.	Swearing,	Kalam
settled	back	down,	resheathing	his	long-knives.	‘That	was	a	stupid	move,	you
damned	savages—’
One	spoke:	‘Come	with	us.’
	
Three	hundred	paces	up	the	road	waited	a	number	of	riders,	among	them	the
Adjunct	Tavore.	Flanked	by	the	troop	of	Khundryl	Burned	Tears,	Kalam,
Quick	Ben	and	Gesler	and	his	squad	approached	the	group.
The	misshapen	moon	now	cast	down	a	silvery	light	on	the	land	–	it	was
looking	rougher	round	the	edges,	Kalam	realized,	as	if	the	surrounding
darkness	was	gnawing	at	it	–	he	wondered	that	he’d	not	noticed	before.	Had	it
always	been	like	that?
‘Good	evening,	Adjunct,’	Quick	Ben	said	as	they	arrived.
‘Why	have	you	returned?’	she	demanded.	‘And	why	are	you	not	in	the
Imperial	Warren?’
With	Tavore	were	the	Fists,	the	Wickan	Temul,	Blistig,	Keneb	and	Tene
Baralta,	as	well	as	Nil	and	Nether.	They	looked,	one	and	all,	to	have	been
recently	roused	from	sleep,	barring	the	Adjunct	herself.


Quick	Ben	shifted	uneasily.	‘The	warren	was	being	used…by	something
else.	We	judged	it	unsafe,	and	we	concluded	you	should	be	told	of	that	as	soon
as	possible.	Leoman	is	now	in	Y’Ghatan.’
‘And	you	believe	he	will	await	us	there?’
‘Y’Ghatan,’	Kalam	said,	‘is	a	bitter	memory	to	most	Malazans	–	those	that
care	to	remember,	anyway.	It	is	where	the	First—’
‘I	know,	Kalam	Mekhar.	You	need	not	remind	me	of	that.	Very	well,	I	shall
assume	your	assessment	is	correct.	Sergeant	Gesler,	please	join	the	Khundryl
pickets.’
The	marine’s	salute	was	haphazard,	his	expression	mocking.
Kalam	watched	Tavore’s	eyes	follow	the	sergeant	and	his	squad	as	they
headed	off.	Then	she	fixed	her	gaze	on	Quick	Ben	once	more.
‘High	Mage.’
He	nodded.	‘There	were…Moon’s	Spawns	in	the	Imperial	Warren.	Ten,
twelve	came	into	sight	before	we	retreated.’
‘Hood	take	us,’	Blistig	muttered.	‘Floating	fortresses?	Has	that	whitehaired	bastard	found	more	of	them?’
‘I	don’t	think	so,	Fist,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘Anomander	Rake	has	settled	in
Black	Coral,	now,	and	he	abandoned	Moon’s	Spawn,	since	it	was	falling	to
pieces.	No,	I	believe	the	ones	we	saw	in	the	warren	have	their,	uh,	original
owners	inside.’
‘And	who	might	they	be?’	Tavore	asked.
‘K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Adjunct.	Long-Tails	or	Short-Tails.	Or	both.’
‘And	why	would	they	be	using	the	Imperial	Warren?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	Quick	Ben	admitted.	‘But	I	have	some	notions.’
‘Let	us	hear	them.’
‘It’s	an	old	warren,	effectively	dead	and	abandoned,	although,	of	course,
not	nearly	as	dead	or	abandoned	as	it	first	seems.	Now,	there	is	no	known
warren	attributed	to	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	but	that	does	not	mean	one	never
existed.’
‘You	believe	the	Imperial	Warren	was	originally	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle
warren?’
The	High	Mage	shrugged.	‘It’s	possible,	Adjunct.’
‘What	else?’
‘Well,	wherever	the	fortresses	are	going,	they	don’t	want	to	be	seen.’
‘Seen	by	whom?’
‘That	I	don’t	know.’
The	Adjunct	studied	the	High	Mage	for	a	long	moment,	then	she	said,	‘I
want	you	to	find	out.	Take	Kalam	and	Gesler ’s	squad.	Return	to	the	Imperial


Warren.’
The	assassin	slowly	nodded	to	himself,	not	at	all	surprised	at	this	insane,
absurd	command.	Find	out?	Precisely	how?
‘Have	you	any	suggestions,’	Quick	Ben	asked,	his	voice	now	strangely
lilting,	as	it	always	was	when	he	struggled	against	speaking	his	mind,	‘on	how
we	might	do	that?’
‘As	High	Mage,	I	am	certain	you	can	think	of	some.’
‘May	I	ask,	why	is	this	of	particular	importance	to	us,	Adjunct?’
‘The	breaching	of	the	Imperial	Warren	is	important	to	all	who	would	serve
the	Malazan	Empire,	would	you	not	agree?’
‘I	would,	Adjunct,	but	are	we	not	engaged	in	a	military	campaign	here?
Against	the	last	rebel	leader	in	Seven	Cities?	Are	you	not	about	to	lay	siege	to
Y’Ghatan,	wherein	the	presence	of	a	High	Mage,	not	to	mention	the	empire’s
most	skilled	assassin,	might	prove	pivotal	to	your	success?’
‘Quick	Ben,’	Tavore	said	coolly,	‘the	Fourteenth	Army	is	quite	capable	of
managing	this	siege	without	your	assistance,	or	that	of	Kalam	Mekhar.’
All	right,	that	clinches	it.	She	knows	about	our	clandestine	meeting	with
Dujek	Onearm	and	Tayschrenn.	And	she	does	not	trust	us.	Probably	with	good
reason.
‘Of	course,’	Quick	Ben	said,	with	a	modest	bow.	‘I	trust	the	Burned	Tears
can	resupply	our	soldiers,	then.	I	request	we	be	permitted	to	rest	until	dawn.’
‘Acceptable.’
The	High	Mage	turned	away,	his	eyes	momentarily	meeting	Kalam’s	own.
Aye,	Quick,	she	wants	me	as	far	away	from	her	back	as	possible.	Well,	this	was
the	Malazan	Empire,	after	all.	Laseen’s	empire,	to	be	more	precise.	But	Tavore,
it’s	not	me	you	have	to	worry	about…
At	that	moment	a	figure	emerged	from	the	darkness,	approaching	from
one	side	of	the	road.	Green	silks,	graceful	motion,	a	face	very	nearly	ethereal
in	the	moonlight.	‘Ah,	a	midnight	assignation!	I	trust	all	matters	of	grave
import	have	already	been	addressed.’
Pearl.	Kalam	grinned	at	the	man,	one	hand	making	a	gesture	that	only
another	Claw	would	understand.
Seeing	it,	Pearl	winked.
Soon,	you	bastard.
Tavore	wheeled	her	horse	round.	‘We	are	done	here.’
‘Might	I	ride	double	with	one	of	you?’	Pearl	asked	the	assembled	Fists.
None	replied,	and	moments	later	they	were	cantering	up	the	road.
Pearl	coughed	delicately	in	the	dust.	‘How	rude.’
‘You	walked	out	here,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘you	can	walk	back	in,	Claw.’


‘It	seems	I	have	no	choice.’	A	fluttering	wave	of	a	gloved	hand.	‘Who
knows	when	we’ll	meet	again,	my	friends.	But	until	then…good	hunting…’	He
walked	off.
Now	how	much	did	he	hear?	Kalam	took	a	half-step	forward,	but	Quick
Ben	reached	out	and	restrained	him.
‘Relax,	he	was	just	fishing.	I	sensed	him	circling	closer	–	you	had	him	very
nervous,	Kal.’
‘Good.’
‘Not	really.	It	means	he	isn’t	stupid.’
‘True.	Too	bad.’
‘Anyway,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘you	and	me	and	Gesler	have	to	come	up	with	a
way	to	hitch	a	ride	on	one	of	those	fortresses.’
Kalam	turned	his	head.	Stared	at	his	friend.	‘That	wasn’t	a	joke,	was	it?’
‘I’m	afraid	not.’
	
Joyful	Union	was	basking	in	the	sun	as	it	dined,	ringed	in	by	stones,	with	Bottle
lying	close	by	and	studying	the	way	it	fed	as	the	scorpion	snipped	apart	the
capemoth	he	had	given	it	for	breakfast,	when	a	military	issue	boot	crunched
down	on	the	arachnid,	the	heel	twisting.
Bottle	jerked	back	in	dumbfounded	horror,	stared	up	at	the	figure	standing
over	him,	a	surge	of	murderous	intent	filling	his	being.
Backlit	by	the	morning	light,	the	figure	was	little	more	than	a	silhouette.
‘Soldier,’	the	voice	was	a	woman’s,	the	accent	Korelri,	‘which	squad	is
this?’
Bottle’s	mouth	opened	and	closed	a	few	times,	then	he	said	in	a	low	tone,
‘This	is	the	squad	that	will	start	making	plans	to	kill	you,	once	they	find	out
what	you’ve	just	done.’
‘Allow	me,’	she	said,	‘to	clarify	matters	for	you,	soldier.	I	am	Captain
Faradan	Sort,	and	I	cannot	abide	scorpions.	Now,	I	want	to	see	how	well	you
manage	a	salute	while	lying	down.’
‘You	want	a	salute,	Captain?	Which	one?	I	have	plenty	of	salutes	to	choose
from.	Any	preference?’
‘The	salute	that	tells	me	you	have	just	become	aware	of	the	precipice	I	am
about	to	kick	your	ass	over.	After	I	shove	the	sack	of	bricks	up	it,	of	course.’
Oh.	‘Standard	salute,	then.	Of	course,	Captain.’	He	arched	his	back	and
managed	to	hold	the	salute	for	a	few	heartbeats…waiting	for	her	to	respond,
which	she	did	not.	Gasping,	he	collapsed	back	down,	inhaling	a	mouthful	of
dust.


‘We	will	try	that	again	later,	soldier.	Your	name?’
‘Uh,	Smiles,	sir.’
‘Well,	I	doubt	I	will	see	many	of	those	on	your	ugly	face,	will	I?’
‘No,	sir.’
She	then	walked	on.
Bottle	stared	down	at	the	mashed,	glittering	pulp	that	had	been	Joyful
Union	and	half	a	capemoth.	He	wanted	to	cry.
	
‘Sergeant.’
Strings	glanced	up,	noted	the	torc	on	the	arm,	and	slowly	climbed	to	his
feet.	He	saluted,	studying	the	tall,	straight-backed	woman	standing	before	him.
‘Sergeant	Strings,	Captain.	Fourth	Squad.’
‘Good.	You	are	mine,	now.	My	name	is	Faradan	Sort.’
‘I	was	wondering	when	you’d	show	up,	sir.	The	replacements	have	been
here	for	days,	after	all.’
‘I	was	busy.	Do	you	have	a	problem	with	that,	Sergeant?’
‘No,	sir,	not	one.’
‘You	are	a	veteran,	I	see.	You	might	think	that	fact	yields	some	relief	on	my
part.	It	does	not.	I	do	not	care	where	you	have	been,	who	you	served	under,	or
how	many	officers	you	knifed	in	the	back.	All	I	care	about	is	how	much	you
know	about	fighting.’
‘Never	knifed	a	single	officer,	sir…in	the	back.	And	I	don’t	know	a
damned	thing	about	fighting,	except	surviving	it.’
‘That	will	do.	Where	are	the	rest	of	my	squads?’
‘Well,	you’re	missing	one.	Gesler ’s.	They’re	on	a	reconnaissance	mission,
no	idea	when	they’ll	be	back.	Borduke’s	squad	is	over	there.’	He	pointed.	‘With
Cord’s	just	beyond.	The	rest	you’ll	find	here	and	there.’
‘You	do	not	bivouac	together?’
‘As	a	unit?	No.’
‘You	will	from	now	on.’
‘Yes	sir.’
She	cast	her	eyes	over	the	soldiers	still	sprawled	in	sleep	around	the	hearth.
‘The	sun	is	up.	They	should	be	awake,	fed	and	equipped	for	the	march	by	now.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘So…wake	them.’
‘Yes	sir.’
She	started	to	walk	off,	then	turned	and	added,	‘You	have	a	soldier	named
Smiles	in	your	squad,	Sergeant	Strings?’


‘I	have.’
‘Smiles	is	to	carry	a	double	load	today.’
‘Sir?’
‘You	heard	me.’
He	watched	her	leave,	then	swung	about	and	looked	down	at	his	soldiers.
All	were	awake,	their	eyes	on	him.
‘What	did	I	do?’	Smiles	demanded.
Strings	shrugged.	‘She’s	a	captain,	Smiles.’
‘So?’
‘So,	captains	are	insane.	At	least,	this	one	is,	which	proves	my	claim.
Wouldn’t	you	agree,	Cuttle?’
‘Oh	yes,	Strings.	Raving	wide-eyed	insane.’
‘A	double	load!’
Bottle	stumbled	into	the	camp,	in	his	cupped	hands	a	mangled	mess.	‘She
stepped	on	Joyful	Union!’
‘Well,	that	settles	it,’	Cuttle	said,	grunting	as	he	sat	up.	‘She’s	dead.’
	
Fist	Keneb	strode	into	his	tent,	unstrapping	his	helm	and	pulling	it	free	to	toss
it	on	the	cot,	then	paused	upon	seeing	a	tousled	head	lift	clear	of	the	opened
travel	trunk	at	the	back	wall.	‘Grub!	What	were	you	doing	in	there?’
‘Sleeping.	She	is	not	stupid,	no.	They	are	coming,	to	await	the
resurrection.’	He	clambered	out	of	the	trunk,	dressed,	as	ever,	in	ragged
leathers,	Wickan	in	style	yet	badly	worn.	The	childish	roundness	of	his	cheeks
had	begun	to	thin,	hinting	at	the	man	he	would	one	day	become.
‘She?	Do	you	mean	the	Adjunct?	Who	is	coming?	What	resurrection?’
‘They	will	try	to	kill	her.	But	that	is	wrong.	She	is	our	last	hope.	Our	last
hope.	I’m	going	to	find	something	to	eat,	we’re	marching	to	Y’Ghatan.’	He
rushed	past	Keneb.	Outside	the	tent,	dogs	barked.	The	Fist	pulled	the	flap	aside
and	stepped	out	to	see	Grub	hurrying	down	the	aisle	between	the	tents,	flanked
by	the	Wickan	cattle-dog,	Bent,	and	the	Hengese	lapdog,	Roach.	Soldiers
deferentially	moved	aside	to	let	them	pass.
The	Fist	headed	back	inside.	A	baffling	child.	He	sat	down	on	the	cot,
stared	at	nothing	in	particular.
A	siege.	Ideally,	they	needed	four	or	five	thousand	more	soldiers,	five	or
six	Untan	catapults	and	four	towers.	Ballistae,	mangonels,	onagers,	scorpions,
wheeled	rams	and	ladders.	Perhaps	a	few	more	units	of	sappers,	with	a	few
wagons	loaded	with	Moranth	munitions.	And	High	Mage	Quick	Ben.
Had	it	been	just	a	matter	of	pride,	sending	the	wizard	away?	The	meetings


with	Dujek	Onearm	had	been	strained.	Tavore’s	refusal	of	assistance	beyond	a
contingent	of	replacements	from	Quon	Tali	made	little	sense.	Granted,	Dujek
had	plenty	to	occupy	himself	and	his	Host,	reinforcing	garrisons	and	pacifying
recalcitrant	towns	and	cities.	Then	again,	the	arrival	of	Admiral	Nok	and	a
third	of	the	imperial	fleet	in	the	Maadil	Sea	had	done	much	to	quell	rebellious
tendencies	among	the	locals.	And	Keneb	suspected	that	the	anarchy,	the
horrors,	of	the	rebellion	itself	was	as	much	a	force	for	pacification	as	any
military	presence.
A	scratch	against	the	outer	wall	of	his	tent.	‘Enter.’
Blistig	ducked	under	the	flap.	‘Good,	you’re	alone.	Tene	Baralta	has	been
speaking	with	Warleader	Gall.	Look,	we	knew	a	siege	was	likely—’
‘Blistig,’	Keneb	cut	in,	‘this	isn’t	right.	The	Adjunct	leads	the	Fourteenth
Army.	She	was	commanded	to	crush	the	rebellion,	and	she	is	doing	just	that.
Fitting	that	the	final	spark	should	be	snuffed	out	at	Y’Ghatan,	the	mythical
birthplace	of	the	Apocalypse—’
‘Aye,	and	we’re	about	to	feed	that	myth.’
‘Only	if	we	fail.’
‘Malazans	die	at	Y’Ghatan.	That	city	burned	to	the	ground	that	last	siege.
Dassem	Ultor,	the	company	of	the	First	Sword.	The	First	Army,	the	Ninth.
Eight,	ten	thousand	soldiers?	Y’Ghatan	drinks	Malazan	blood,	and	its	thirst	is
endless.’
‘Is	this	what	you’re	telling	your	officers,	Blistig?’
The	man	walked	over	to	the	trunk,	tipped	down	the	lid,	and	sat.	‘Of	course
not.	Do	you	think	me	mad?	But,	gods,	man,	can’t	you	feel	this	growing	dread?’
‘The	same	as	when	we	were	marching	on	Raraku,’	Keneb	said,	‘and	the
resolution	was	frustrated,	and	that	is	the	problem.	The	only	problem,	Blistig.
We	need	to	blunt	our	swords,	we	need	that	release,	that’s	all.’
‘She	should	never	have	sent	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	away.	Who	gives	a
rhizan’s	squinting	ass	what’s	going	on	in	the	Imperial	Warren?’
Keneb	looked	away,	wishing	he	could	disagree.	‘She	must	have	her
reasons.’
‘I’d	like	to	hear	them.’
‘Why	did	Baralta	speak	with	Gall?’
‘We’re	all	worried,	is	why,	Keneb.	We	want	to	corner	her,	all	the	Fists
united	on	this,	and	force	some	answers.	Her	reasons	for	things,	some	real
sense	of	how	she	thinks.’
‘No.	Count	me	out.	We	haven’t	even	reached	Y’Ghatan	yet.	Wait	and	see
what	she	has	in	mind.’
Blistig	rose	with	a	grunt.	‘I’ll	pass	your	suggestions	along,	Keneb.	Only,


well,	it	ain’t	just	the	soldiers	who	are	frustrated.’
‘I	know.	Wait	and	see.’
After	he	had	left,	Keneb	settled	back	on	the	cot.	Outside,	he	could	hear	the
sounds	of	tents	being	struck,	equipment	packed	away,	the	distant	lowing	of
oxen.	Shouts	filled	the	morning	air	as	the	army	roused	itself	for	another	day	of
marching.	Burned	Tears,	Wickans,	Seti,	Malazans.	What	can	this	motley
collection	of	soldiers	do?	We	are	facing	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	dammit.	Who’s
already	bloodied	our	noses.	Mind	you,	hit-and-run	tactics	are	one	thing,	a	city
under	siege	is	another.	Maybe	he’s	as	worried	as	we	are.
A	comforting	thought.	Too	bad	he	didn’t	believe	a	word	of	it.
	
The	Fourteenth	had	been	kicked	awake	and	was	now	swarming	with	activity.
Head	pounding,	Sergeant	Hellian	sat	on	the	side	of	the	road.	Eight	days	with
this	damned	miserable	army	and	that	damned	tyrant	of	a	captain,	and	now	she
was	out	of	rum.	The	three	soldiers	of	her	undersized	squad	were	packing	up
the	last	of	their	kits,	none	daring	to	address	their	hungover,	murderously
inclined	sergeant.
Bitter	recollections	of	the	event	that	had	triggered	all	this	haunted	Hellian.
A	temple	of	slaughter,	the	frenzy	of	priests,	officials	and	investigators,	and	the
need	to	send	all	witnesses	as	far	away	as	possible,	preferably	into	a	situation
they	would	not	survive.	Well,	she	couldn’t	blame	them	–	no,	wait,	of	course	she
could.	The	world	was	run	by	stupid	people,	that	was	the	truth	of	it.	Twenty-two
followers	of	D’rek	had	been	butchered	in	their	own	temple,	in	a	district	that
had	been	her	responsibility	–	but	patrols	were	never	permitted	inside	any	of	the
temples,	so	she	could	have	done	nothing	to	prevent	it	in	any	case.	But	no,	that
wasn’t	good	enough.	Where	had	the	killers	gone,	Sergeant	Hellian?	And	why
didn’t	you	see	them	leave?	And	what	about	that	man	who	accompanied	you,
who	then	vanished?
Killers.	There	weren’t	any.	Not	natural	ones.	A	demon,	more	likely,
escaped	from	some	secret	ritual,	a	conjuration	gone	awry.	The	fools	killed
themselves,	and	that	was	the	way	of	it.	The	man	had	been	some	defrocked
priest	from	another	temple,	probably	a	sorceror.	Once	he	figured	out	what	had
happened,	he’d	hightailed	it	out	of	there,	leaving	her	with	the	mess.
Not	fair,	but	what	did	fairness	have	to	do	with	anything?
Urb	lowered	his	massive	bulk	in	front	of	her.	‘We’re	almost	ready,
Sergeant.’
‘You	should’ve	strangled	him.’
‘I	wanted	to.	Really.’


‘Did	you?	Truth?’
‘Truth.’
‘But	then	he	slipped	away,’	Hellian	said.	‘Like	a	worm.’
‘Captain	wants	us	to	join	the	rest	of	the	squads	in	her	company.	They’re	up
the	road	some.	We	should	get	going	before	the	march	begins.’
She	looked	over	at	the	other	two	soldiers.	The	twins,	Brethless	and	Touchy.
Young,	lost	–	well,	maybe	not	young	in	years,	but	young	anyway.	She	doubted
they	could	fight	their	way	out	of	a	midwives’	picnic	–	though,	granted,	she’d
heard	those	could	be	rough	events,	especially	if	some	fool	pregnant	woman
wandered	in.	Oh,	well,	that	was	Kartool,	city	of	spiders,	city	that	crunched
underfoot,	city	of	webs	and	worse.	They	were	a	long	way	from	any	midwives’
picnic.
Out	here,	spiders	floated	in	the	air,	but	at	least	they	were	tiny,	easily
destroyed	with	a	medium-sized	stone.	‘Abyss	below,’	she	groaned.	‘Find	me
something	to	drink.’
Urb	handed	her	a	waterskin.
‘Not	that,	idiot.’
‘Maybe	in	the	company	we’re	joining…’
She	looked	up,	squinted	at	him.	‘Good	idea.	All	right,	help	me	up	–	no,
don’t	help	me	up.’	She	staggered	upright.
‘You	all	right,	Sergeant?’
‘I	will	be,’	she	said,	‘after	you	take	my	skull	in	your	hands	and	crush	it
flat.’
He	frowned.	‘I’d	get	in	trouble	if	I	did	that.’
‘Not	with	me	you	wouldn’t.	Never	mind.	Touchy,	take	point.’
‘We’re	on	a	road,	Sergeant.’
‘Just	do	it.	Practice.’
‘I	won’t	be	able	to	see	anything,’	the	man	said.	‘Too	many	people	and
things	in	the	way.’
Oh,	gods	crawling	in	the	Abyss,	just	let	me	live	long	enough	to	kill	that
man.	‘You	got	any	problem	with	taking	point,	Brethless?’
‘No,	Sergeant.	Not	me.’
‘Good.	Do	it	and	let’s	get	going.’
‘Want	me	out	on	flank?’	Touchy	asked.
‘Yeah,	somewhere	past	the	horizon,	you	brain-stunted	cactus.’
	
‘It’s	not	your	average	scorpion,’	Maybe	said,	peering	close	but	not	too	close.
‘It’s	damned	huge,’	Lutes	said.	‘Seen	that	type	before,	but	never	one	so…


huge.’
‘Could	be	a	freak,	and	all	its	brothers	and	sisters	were	tiny.	Making	it
lonely	and	that’s	why	it’s	so	mean.’
Lutes	stared	across	at	Maybe.	‘Yeah,	could	be	it.	You	got	a	real	brain	in	that
skull.	All	right,	now,	you	think	it	can	kill	Joyful	Union?	I	mean,	there’s	two	of
those…’
‘Well,	maybe	we	need	to	find	another	one	just	like	this	one.’
‘But	I	thought	all	its	brothers	and	sisters	were	tiny.’
‘Oh,	right.	Could	be	it’s	got	an	uncle,	or	something.’
‘Who’s	big.’
‘Huge.	Huger	than	this	one.’
‘We	need	to	start	looking.’
‘I	wouldn’t	bother,’	Bottle	said	from	where	he	sat	in	the	shadow	of	a
boulder,	five	paces	away	from	the	two	soldiers	of	Borduke’s	squad.
They	started,	then	Lutes	hissed	and	said,	‘He’s	been	spying!’
‘Not	spying.	Grieving.’
‘What	for?’	Maybe	demanded.	‘We	ain’t	even	arrived	at	Y’Ghatan	yet.’
‘Met	our	new	captain?’
The	two	looked	at	each	other,	then	Lutes	said,	‘No.	Knew	one	was	coming,
though.’
‘She’s	here.	She	killed	Joyful	Union.	Under	her	heel.	Crunch!’
Both	men	jumped.	‘That	murderer!’	Maybe	said	in	a	growl.	He	looked
down	at	the	scorpion	ringed	in	by	stones	at	his	feet.	‘Oh	yes,	let’s	see	her	try
with	Sparkle	here	–	he’d	get	her	ankle	for	sure,	right	through	the	boot	leather
—’
‘Don’t	be	a	fool,’	Bottle	said.	‘Anyway,	Sparkle’s	not	a	boy.	Sparkle’s	a
girl.’
‘Even	better.	Girls	are	meaner.’
‘The	smaller	ones	you	always	see	are	the	boys.	Not	as	many	girls	around,
but	that’s	just	the	way	of	it.	They’re	coy.	Anyway,	you’d	better	let	her	go.’
‘Why?’	Lutes	demanded.	‘Ain’t	no	prissy	captain	going	to—’
‘She’d	be	the	least	of	your	problems,	Lutes.	The	males	will	pick	up	her
distress	scent.	You’ll	have	hundreds	following	you.	Then	thousands,	and	they’ll
be	damned	aggressive,	if	you	get	my	meaning.’
Maybe	smiled.	‘Interesting.	You	sure	of	that,	Bottle?’
‘Don’t	get	any	stupid	ideas.’
‘Why	not?	We’re	good	at	stupid	ideas.	I	mean,	uh,	well—’
‘What	Maybe	means,’	Lutes	said,	‘is	we	can	think	things	through.	Right
through,	Bottle.	Don’t	you	worry	about	us.’


‘She	killed	Joyful	Union.	There	won’t	be	any	more	fights	–	spread	the
word,	all	those	squads	with	new	scorpions	–	let	the	little	ones	go.’
‘All	right,’	Lutes	said,	nodding.
Bottle	studied	the	two	men.	‘That	includes	the	one	you	got	there.’
‘Sure.	We’ll	just	look	at	her	a	while	longer,	that’s	all.’	Maybe	smiled	again.
Climbing	to	his	feet,	Bottle	hesitated,	then	shook	his	head	and	walked	off,
back	towards	the	squad’s	camp.	The	army	was	almost	ready	to	resume	the
march.	With	all	the	desultory	lack	of	enthusiasm	one	might	expect	of	an	army
about	to	lay	siege	to	a	city.
A	sky	without	clouds.	Again.	More	dust,	more	heat,	more	sweat.	Bloodflies
and	chigger	fleas,	and	the	damned	vultures	wheeling	overhead	–	as	they	had
been	doing	since	Raraku	–	but	this,	he	knew,	would	be	the	last	day	of	that
march.	The	old	road	ahead,	a	few	more	abandoned	hamlets,	feral	goats	in	the
denuded	hills,	distant	riders	tracking	them	from	the	ridge.
The	others	in	the	squad	were	on	their	feet	and	waiting	when	he	arrived.
Bottle	saw	that	Smiles	was	labouring	under	two	packs.	‘What	happened	to
you?’	he	asked	her.
The	look	she	turned	on	him	was	filled	with	abject	misery.	‘I	don’t	know.
The	new	captain	ordered	it.	I	hate	her.’
‘I’m	not	surprised,’	Bottle	said,	collecting	his	own	gear	and	shrugging	into
the	pack’s	straps.	‘Is	that	Strings’s	kit	you	got	there?’
‘Not	all	of	it,’	she	said.	‘He	won’t	trust	me	with	the	Moranth	munitions.’
Thank	Oponn	for	that.	‘The	captain	been	by	since?’
‘No.	The	bitch.	We’re	going	to	kill	her,	you	know.’
‘Really.	Well,	I	won’t	shed	any	tears.	Who	is	this	“we”	anyway?’
‘Me	and	Cuttle.	He’ll	distract	her,	I’ll	stick	a	knife	in	her	back.	Tonight.’
‘Fist	Keneb	will	have	you	strung	up,	you	know.’
‘We’ll	make	it	look	like	an	accident.’
Distant	horns	sounded.	‘All	right,	everyone,’	Strings	said	from	the	road.
‘Let’s	move.’
Groaning	wagon	wheels,	clacking	and	thumping	on	the	uneven	cobbles,
rocking	in	the	ruts,	the	lowing	of	oxen,	thousands	of	soldiers	lurching	into
motion,	the	sounds	a	rising	clatter	and	roar,	the	first	dust	swirling	into	the	air.
Koryk	fell	in	alongside	Bottle.	‘They	won’t	do	it,’	he	said.
‘Do	what?	Kill	the	captain?’
‘I	got	a	long	look	at	her,’	he	said.	‘She’s	not	just	from	Korelri.	She’s	from
the	Stormwall.’
Bottle	squinted	at	the	burly	warrior.	‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘There’s	a	silver	tracing	on	her	scabbard.	She	was	a	section	commander.’


‘That’s	ridiculous,	Koryk.	First,	standing	the	Wall	isn’t	something	you	can
just	resign	from,	if	what	I’ve	heard	is	true.	Besides,	this	woman’s	a	captain,	in
the	least-prepared	Malazan	army	in	the	entire	empire.	If	she’d	commanded	a
section	against	the	Stormriders,	she’d	rank	as	Fist	at	the	very	least.’
‘Only	if	she	told	people,	Bottle,	but	that	tracing	tells	another	story.’
Two	strides	ahead	of	them,	Strings	turned	his	head	to	regard	them.	‘So,
you	saw	it	too,	Koryk.’
Bottle	swung	round	to	Smiles	and	Cuttle.	‘You	two	hearing	this?’
‘So?’	Smiles	demanded.
‘We	heard,’	Cuttle	said,	his	expression	sour.	‘Maybe	she	just	looted	that
scabbard	from	somewhere…but	I	don’t	think	that’s	likely.	Smiles,	lass,	we’d
best	put	our	plans	on	a	pyre	and	strike	a	spark.’
‘Why?’	she	demanded.	‘What’s	this	Stormwall	mean,	anyway?	And	how
come	Koryk	thinks	he	knows	so	much?	He	doesn’t	know	anything,	except
maybe	the	back	end	of	a	horse	and	that	only	in	the	dark.	Look	at	all	your	faces
–	I’m	saddled	with	a	bunch	of	cowards!’
‘Who	plan	on	staying	alive,’	Cuttle	said.
‘Smiles	grew	up	playing	in	the	sand	with	farm	boys,’	Koryk	said,	shaking
his	head.	‘Woman,	listen	to	me.	The	Stormwall	is	leagues	long,	on	the	north
coast	of	Korelri.	It	stands	as	the	only	barricade	between	the	island	continent
and	the	Stormriders,	those	demonic	warriors	of	the	seas	between	Malaz	Island
and	Korelri	–	you	must	have	heard	of	them?’
‘Old	fishers’	tales.’
‘No,	all	too	real,’	Cuttle	said.	‘I	seen	them	myself,	plying	those	waters.
Their	horses	are	the	waves.	They	wield	lances	of	ice.	We	slit	the	throats	of	six
goats	to	paint	the	water	in	appeasement.’
‘And	it	worked?’	Bottle	asked,	surprised.
‘No,	but	tossing	the	cabin	boy	over	the	side	did.’
‘Anyway,’	Koryk	said	after	a	moment	of	silence,	‘only	chosen	warriors
are	given	the	task	of	standing	the	Wall.	Fighting	those	eerie	hordes.	It’s	an
endless	war,	or	at	least	it	was…’
‘It’s	over?’
The	Seti	shrugged.
‘So,’	Smiles	said,	‘what’s	she	doing	here?	Bottle’s	right,	it	doesn’t	make
sense.’
‘You	could	ask	her,’	Koryk	replied,	‘assuming	you	survive	this	day’s
march.’
‘This	isn’t	so	bad,’	she	sniffed.
‘We’ve	gone	a	hundred	paces,	soldier,’	Strings	called	back.	‘So	best	save


your	breath.’
Bottle	hesitated,	then	said	to	Smiles.	‘Here,	give	me	that	–	that	captain	ain’t
nowhere	about,	is	she?’
‘I	never	noticed	nothing,’	Strings	said	without	turning	round.
‘I	can	do	this—’
‘We’ll	spell	each	other.’
Her	eyes	narrowed	suspiciously,	then	she	shrugged.	‘If	you	like.’
He	took	the	second	pack	from	her.
‘Thanks,	Bottle.	At	least	someone	in	this	squad’s	nice	to	me.’
Koryk	laughed.	‘He	just	doesn’t	want	a	knife	in	his	leg.’
‘We	got	to	stick	together,’	Bottle	said,	‘now	that	we	got	ourselves	a	tyrant
officer	over	us.’
‘Smart	lad,’	Strings	said.
‘Still,’	Smiles	said,	‘thanks,	Bottle.’
He	smiled	sweetly	at	her.
	
‘They’ve	stopped	moving,’	Kalam	muttered.	‘Now	why	would	that	be?’
‘No	idea,’	Quick	Ben	said	at	his	side.
They	were	lying	flat	on	the	summit	of	a	low	ridge.	Eleven	Moon’s	Spawns
hovered	in	an	even	row	above	another	rise	of	hills	two	thousand	paces	distant.
‘So,’	the	assassin	asked,	‘what	passes	for	night	in	this	warren?’
‘It’s	on	its	way,	and	it	isn’t	much.’
Kalam	twisted	round	and	studied	the	squad	of	soldiers	sprawled	in	the	dust
of	the	slope	behind	them.	‘And	your	plan,	Quick?’
‘We	make	use	of	it,	of	course.	Sneak	up	under	one—’
‘Sneak	up?	There’s	no	cover,	there’s	nothing	to	even	throw	shadows!’
‘That’s	what	makes	it	so	brilliant,	Kalam.’
The	assassin	reached	out	and	cuffed	Quick	Ben.
‘Ow.	All	right,	so	the	plan	stinks.	You	got	a	better	one?’
‘First	off,	we	send	this	squad	behind	us	back	to	the	Fourteenth.	Two	people
sneaking	up	is	a	lot	better	than	eight.	Besides,	I’ve	no	doubt	they	can	fight	but
that	won’t	be	much	use	with	a	thousand	K’Chain	Che’Malle	charging	down	on
us.	Another	thing	–	they’re	so	cheery	it’s	a	struggle	to	keep	from	dancing.’
At	that,	Sergeant	Gesler	threw	him	a	kiss.
Kalam	rolled	back	round	and	glared	at	the	stationary	fortresses.
Quick	Ben	sighed.	Scratched	his	smooth-shaven	jaw.	‘The	Adjunct’s
orders…’
‘Forget	that.	This	is	a	tactical	decision,	it’s	in	our	purview.’


Gesler	called	up	from	below,	‘She	don’t	like	us	around	either,	Kalam.’
‘Oh?	And	why’s	that?’
‘She	keeps	cracking	up	in	our	company.	I	don’t	know.	We	was	on	the
Silanda,	you	know.	We	went	through	walls	of	fire	on	that	ship.’
‘We’ve	all	led	hard	lives,	Gesler…’
‘Our	purview?’	Quick	Ben	asked.	‘I	like	that.	You	can	try	it	on	her,	later.’
‘Let’s	send	them	back.’
‘Gesler?’
‘Fine	with	us.	I	wouldn’t	follow	you	two	into	a	latrine,	begging	your	sirs’
pardon.’
Stormy	added,	‘Just	hurry	up	about	it,	wizard.	I’m	getting	grey	waiting.’
‘That	would	be	the	dust,	Corporal.’
‘So	you	say.’
Kalam	considered,	then	said,	‘We	could	take	the	hairy	Falari	with	us,
maybe.	Care	to	come	along,	Corporal?	As	rearguard?’
‘Rearguard?	Hey,	Gesler,	you	were	right.	They	are	going	into	a	latrine.	All
right,	assuming	my	sergeant	here	won’t	miss	me	too	much.’
‘Miss	you?’	Gesler	sneered.	‘Now	at	least	I’ll	get	women	to	talk	to	me.’
‘It’s	the	beard	puts	them	off,’	Stormy	said,	‘but	I	ain’t	changing	for
nobody.’
‘It’s	not	the	beard,	it’s	what	lives	in	the	beard.’
‘Hood	take	us,’	Kalam	breathed,	‘send	them	away,	Quick	Ben,	please.’
	
Four	leagues	north	of	Ehrlitan,	Apsalar	stood	facing	the	sea.	The	promontory
on	the	other	side	of	A’rath	Strait	was	just	visible,	rumpling	the	sunset’s	line	on
the	horizon.	Kansu	Reach,	which	stretched	in	a	long,	narrow	arm	westward	to
the	port	city	of	Kansu.	At	her	feet	prowled	two	gut-bound	skeletons,	pecking	at
grubs	in	the	dirt	and	hissing	in	frustration	as	the	mangled	insects	they
attempted	to	swallow	simply	fell	out	beneath	their	jaws.
Even	bone,	or	the	physical	remembrance	of	bone,	held	power,	it	seemed.
The	behaviour	patterns	of	the	lizard-birds	the	creatures	once	were	had	begun
to	infect	the	ghost	spirits	of	Telorast	and	Curdle.	They	now	chased	snakes,
leapt	into	the	air	after	rhizan	and	capemoths,	duelled	each	other	in	dominance
contests,	strutting,	spitting	and	kicking	sand.	She	believed	they	were	losing
their	minds.
No	great	loss.	They	had	been	murderous,	vile,	entirely	untrustworthy	in
their	lives.	And,	perhaps,	they	had	ruled	a	realm.	As	usurpers,	no	doubt.	She
would	not	regret	their	dissolution.


‘Not-Apsalar!	Why	are	we	waiting	here?	We	dislike	water,	we	have
discovered.	The	gut	bindings	will	loosen.	We’ll	fall	apart.’
‘We	are	crossing	this	strait,	Telorast,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Of	course,	you	and
Curdle	may	wish	to	stay	behind,	to	leave	my	company.’
‘Do	you	plan	on	swimming?’
‘No,	I	intend	to	use	the	warren	of	Shadow.’
‘Oh,	that	won’t	be	wet.’
‘No,’	Curdle	laughed,	prancing	around	to	stand	before	Apsalar,	head
bobbing.	‘Not	wet,	oh,	that’s	very	good.	We’ll	come	along,	won’t	we,
Telorast?’
‘We	promised!	No,	we	didn’t.	Who	said	that?	We’re	just	eager	to	stand
guard	over	your	rotting	corpse,	Not-Apsalar,	that’s	what	we	promised.	I	don’t
understand	why	I	get	so	confused.	You	have	to	die	eventually.	That’s	obvious.
It’s	what	happens	to	mortals,	and	you	are	mortal,	aren’t	you?	You	must	be,	you
have	been	bleeding	for	three	days	–	we	can	smell	it.’
‘Idiot!’	Curdle	hissed.	‘Of	course	she’s	mortal,	and	besides,	we	were
women	once,	remember?	She	bleeds	because	that’s	what	happens.	Not	all	the
time,	but	sometimes.	Regularly.	Or	not.	Except	just	before	she	lays	eggs,	which
would	mean	a	male	found	her,	which	would	mean…’
‘She’s	a	snake?’	Telorast	asked	in	a	droll	tone.
‘But	she	isn’t.	What	were	you	thinking,	Telorast?’
The	sun’s	light	was	fading,	the	waters	of	the	strait	crimson.	A	lone	sail
from	a	trader ’s	carrack	was	cutting	a	path	southward	into	the	Ehrlitan	Sea.
‘The	warren	feels	strong	here,’	Apsalar	said.
‘Oh	yes,’	Telorast	said,	bony	tail	caressing	Apsalar ’s	left	ankle.	‘Fiercely
manifest.	This	sea	is	new.’
‘That	is	possible,’	she	replied,	eyeing	the	jagged	cliffs	marking	the
narrows.	‘Are	there	ruins	beneath	the	waves?’
‘How	would	we	know?	Probably.	Likely,	absolutely.	Ruins.	Vast	cities.
Shadow	Temples.’
Apsalar	frowned.	‘There	were	no	Shadow	Temples	in	the	time	of	the	First
Empire.’
Curdle’s	head	dipped,	then	lifted	suddenly.	‘Dessimbelackis,	a	curse	on	his
multitude	of	souls!	We	speak	of	the	time	of	the	Forests.	The	great	forests	that
covered	this	land,	long	before	the	First	Empire.	Before	even	the	T’lan	Imass
—’
‘Shhh!’	Telorast	hissed.	‘Forests?	Madness!	Not	a	tree	in	sight,	and	those
who	were	frightened	of	shadows	never	existed.	So	why	would	they	worship
them?	They	didn’t,	because	they	never	existed.	It’s	a	natural	ferocity,	this


shadow	power.	It’s	a	fact	that	the	first	worship	was	born	of	fear.	The	terrible
unknown—’
‘Even	more	terrible,’	Curdle	cut	in,	‘when	it	becomes	known!	Wouldn’t
you	say,	Telorast?’
‘No	I	wouldn’t.	I	don’t	know	what	you’re	talking	about.	You’ve	been
babbling	too	many	secrets,	none	of	which	are	true	in	any	case.	Look!	A	lizard!
It’s	mine!’
‘No,	mine!’
The	two	skeletons	scrambled	along	the	rocky	ledge.	Something	small	and
grey	darted	away.
A	wind	was	picking	up,	sweeping	rough	the	surface	of	the	strait,	carrying
with	it	the	sea’s	primal	scent	to	flow	over	the	cliff	where	she	stood.	Crossing
stretches	of	water,	even	through	a	warren,	was	never	a	pleasant	prospect.	Any
waver	of	control	could	fling	her	from	the	realm,	whereupon	she	would	find
herself	leagues	from	land	in	dhenrabi-infested	waters.	Certain	death.
She	could,	of	course,	choose	the	overland	route.	South	from	Ehrlitan,	to
Pan’potsun,	then	skirting	the	new	Raraku	Sea	westward.	But	she	knew	she	was
running	out	of	time.	Cotillion	and	Shadowthrone	had	wanted	her	to	take	care	of
a	number	of	small	players,	scattered	here	and	there	inland,	but	something
within	her	sensed	a	quickening	of	distant	events,	and	with	it	the	growing	need	–
a	desperate	insistence	–	that	she	be	there	without	delay.	To	cast	her	dagger,	to
affect,	as	best	she	could,	a	host	of	destinies.
She	assumed	Cotillion	would	understand	all	of	this.	That	he	would	trust	her
instincts,	even	if	she	was,	ultimately,	unable	to	explain	them.
She	must…hurry.
A	moment’s	concentration.	And	the	scene	before	her	was	transformed.	The
cliff	now	a	slope,	crowded	with	collapsed	trees,	firs,	cedars,	their	roots	torn
loose	from	dark	earth,	the	boles	flattened	as	if	the	entire	hillside	had	been
struck	by	some	unimaginable	wind.	Beneath	a	leaden	sky,	a	vast	forested	valley
clothed	in	mist	stretched	out	across	what	had	moments	before	been	the	waters
of	the	strait.
The	two	skeletons	pattered	up	to	crowd	her	feet,	heads	darting.
‘I	told	you	there’d	be	a	forest,’	Telorast	said.
Apsalar	gestured	at	the	wreckage	on	the	slope	immediately	before	them.
‘What	happened	here?’
‘Sorcery,’	Curdle	said.	‘Dragons.’
‘Not	dragons.’
‘No,	not	dragons.	Telorast	is	right.	Not	dragons.’
‘Demons.’


‘Yes,	terrible	demons	whose	very	breath	is	a	warren’s	gate,	oh,	don’t	jump
down	those	throats!’
‘No	breath,	Curdle,’	Telorast	said.	‘Just	demons.	Small	ones.	But	lots	of
them.	Pushing	trees	down,	one	by	one,	because	they’re	mean	and	inclined	to
senseless	acts	of	destruction.’
‘Like	children.’
‘Right,	as	Curdle	says,	like	children.	Children	demons.	But	strong.	Very
strong.	Huge,	muscled	arms.’
‘So,’	Apsalar	said,	‘dragons	fought	here.’
‘Yes,’	Telorast	said.
‘In	the	Shadow	Realm.’
‘Yes.’
‘Presumably,	the	same	dragons	that	are	now	imprisoned	within	the	stone
circle.’
‘Yes.’
Apsalar	nodded,	then	began	making	her	way	down.	‘This	will	be	hard
going.	I	wonder	if	I	will	save	much	time	traversing	the	forest.’
‘Tiste	Edur	forest,’	Curdle	said,	scampering	ahead.	‘They	like	their
forests.’
‘All	those	natural	shadows,’	Telorast	added.	‘Power	in	permanence.
Blackwood,	bloodwood,	all	sorts	of	terrible	things.	The	Eres	were	right	to
fear.’
In	the	distance	a	strange	darkness	was	sliding	across	the	treetops.	Apsalar
studied	it.	The	carrack,	casting	an	ethereal	presence	into	this	realm.	She	was
seeing	both	worlds,	a	common	enough	occurrence.	Yet,	even	so…someone	is
on	that	carrack.	And	that	someone	is	important…
	
T’rolbarahl,	ancient	creature	of	the	First	Empire	of	Dessimbelackis,	Dejim
Nebrahl	crouched	at	the	base	of	a	dead	tree,	or,	rather,	flowed	like	a	serpent
round	the	bleached,	exposed	roots,	seven-headed,	seven-bodied	and	mottled
with	the	colours	of	the	ground,	the	wood	and	the	rocks.	Fresh	blood,	slowly
losing	its	heat,	filled	the	D’ivers’	stomachs.	There	had	been	no	shortage	of
victims,	even	in	this	wasteland.	Herders,	salt-miners,	bandits,	desert	wolves,
Dejim	Nebrahl	had	fed	continuously	on	this	journey	to	the	place	of	ambush.
The	tree,	thick-boled,	squat,	with	only	a	few	twisted	branches	surviving	the
centuries	since	it	had	died,	rose	from	a	crack	in	the	rock	between	a	flat	stretch
that	marked	the	trail	and	an	upthrust	tower	of	pitted,	wind-worn	stone.	The	trail
twisted	at	this	point,	skirting	the	edge	of	a	cliff,	the	drop	below	ten	or	more


man-heights	to	boulders	and	jagged	rubble.
On	the	other	side	of	the	trail,	more	rocks	rose,	heaped,	the	stone	cracked
and	shelved.
The	D’ivers	would	strike	here,	from	both	sides,	lifting	free	of	the	shadows.
Dejim	Nebrahl	was	content.	Patience	easily	purchased	by	fresh	meat,	the
echoing	screams	of	death,	and	now	it	need	but	await	the	coming	of	the	victims,
the	ones	the	Nameless	Ones	had	chosen.
Soon,	then.

Plenty	of	room	between	the	trees,	a	cathedral	of	shadows	and	heavy	gloom,	the
flow	of	damp	air	like	water	against	her	face	as	Apsalar	jogged	onward,
flanked	by	the	darting	forms	of	Telorast	and	Curdle.	To	her	surprise,	she	was
indeed	making	good	time.	The	ground	was	surprisingly	level	and	tree-falls
seemed	nonexistent,	as	if	no	tree	in	this	expanse	of	forest	ever	died.	She	had
seen	no	wildlife,	had	come	upon	no	obvious	game	trail,	yet	there	had	been
glades,	circular	sweeps	of	moss	tightly	ringed	by	evenly	spaced	cedars,	or,	if
not	cedar,	then	something	much	like	it,	the	bark	rough,	shaggy,	black	as	tar.
The	circles	were	too	perfect	to	be	natural,	although	no	other	evidence	of	intent
or	design	was	visible.	In	these	places,	the	power	of	shadow	was,	as	Telorast
had	said,	fierce.
Tiste	Edur,	Kurald	Emurlahn,	their	presence	lingered,	but	only	in	the	same
manner	as	memories	clung	to	graveyards,	tombs	and	barrows.	Old	dreams
snarled	and	fading	in	the	grasses,	in	the	twist	of	wood	and	the	crystal
latticework	of	stone.	Lost	whispers	in	the	winds	that	ever	wandered	across	such
death-laden	places.	The	Edur	were	gone,	but	their	forest	had	not	forgotten
them.
A	darkness	ahead,	something	reaching	down	from	the	canopy,	straight	and
thin.	A	rope,	as	thick	round	as	her	wrist,	and,	resting	on	the	needle-strewn
humus	of	the	floor,	an	anchor.
Directly	in	her	path.	Ah,	so	even	as	I	sensed	a	presence,	so	it	in	turn	sensed
me.	This	is,	I	think,	an	invitation.
She	approached	the	rope,	grasped	it	in	both	hands,	then	began	climbing.
Telorast	hissed	below,	‘What	are	you	doing?	No,	dangerous	intruder!
Terrible,	terrifying,	horrible,	cruel-faced	stranger!	Don’t	go	up	there!	Oh,
Curdle,	look,	she’s	going.’
‘She’s	not	listening	to	us!’
‘We’ve	been	talking	too	much,	that’s	the	problem.’


‘You’re	right.	We	should	say	something	important,	so	she	starts	listening
to	us	again.’
‘Good	thinking,	Curdle.	Think	of	something!’
‘I’m	trying!’
Their	voices	faded	away	as	Apsalar	continued	climbing.	Among	thickneedled	branches	now,	old	cobwebs	strung	between	them,	small,	glittering
shapes	scampering	about.	The	leather	of	her	gloves	was	hot	against	her	palms
and	her	calves	were	beginning	to	ache.	She	reached	the	first	of	a	series	of
knots	and,	planting	her	feet	on	it,	she	paused	to	rest.	Glancing	down,	she	saw
nothing	but	black	boles	vanishing	into	mist,	like	the	legs	of	some	giant	beast.
After	a	few	moments,	she	resumed	her	climb.	Knots,	now,	every	ten	or	so	armlengths.	Someone	was	being	considerate.
The	ebon	hull	of	the	carrack	loomed	above,	crusted	with	barnacles,
glistening.	Reaching	it,	she	planted	her	boots	against	the	dark	planks	and
climbed	the	last	two	man-heights	to	where	the	anchor	line	ran	into	a	chute	in
the	gunnel.	Clambering	over	the	side,	she	found	herself	near	the	three	steps
leading	to	the	aft	deck.	Faint	smudges	of	mist,	slightly	glowing,	marked	where
mortals	stood	or	sat:	here	and	there,	near	rigging,	at	the	side-mounted	steering
oar,	one	perched	high	among	the	shrouds.	A	far	more	substantial,	solid	figure
was	standing	before	the	mainmast.
Familiar.	Apsalar	searched	her	memory,	her	mind	rushing	down	one	false
trail	after	another.	Familiar…yet	not.
With	a	faint	smile	on	his	clean-shaven,	handsome	face,	he	stepped	forward
and	held	up	both	hands.	‘I’m	not	sure	which	name	you	go	by	now.	You	were
little	more	than	a	child	–	was	it	only	a	few	years	ago?	Hard	to	believe.’
Her	heart	was	thudding	hard	against	her	chest,	and	she	wondered	at	the
sensation	within	her.	Fear?	Yes,	but	more	than	that.	Guilt.	Shame.	She	cleared
her	throat.	‘I	have	named	myself	Apsalar.’
A	quick	nod.	Recognition,	then	his	expression	slowly	changed.	‘You	do	not
remember	me,	do	you?’
‘Yes.	No,	I’m	not	sure.	I	should	–	I	know	that	much.’
‘Difficult	times,	back	then,’	he	said,	lowering	his	hands,	but	slowly,	as	if
unsure	how	he	would	be	received	as	he	said,	‘Ganoes	Paran.’
She	drew	off	her	gloves,	driven	by	the	need	to	be	doing	something,	and
ran	the	back	of	her	right	hand	across	her	brow,	was	shocked	to	see	it	come
away	wet,	the	sweat	beading,	trickling,	suddenly	cold	on	her	skin.	‘What	are
you	doing	here?’
‘I	might	ask	you	the	same.	I	suggest	we	retire	to	my	cabin.	There	is	wine.
Food.’	He	smiled	again.	‘In	fact,	I	am	sitting	there	right	now.’


Her	eyes	narrowed.	‘It	seems	you	have	come	into	some	power,	Ganoes
Paran.’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.’
She	followed	him	to	the	cabin.	As	he	closed	the	door	behind	her,	his	form
faded,	and	she	heard	movement	from	the	other	side	of	the	map-table.	Turning,
she	saw	a	far	less	substantial	Ganoes	Paran.	He	was	pouring	wine,	and	when	he
spoke	the	words	seemed	to	come	from	a	vast	distance.	‘You	had	best	emerge
from	your	warren	now,	Apsalar.’
She	did	so,	and	for	the	first	time	felt	the	solid	wood	beneath	her,	the	pitch
and	sway	of	a	ship	at	sea.
‘Sit,’	Paran	said,	gesturing.	‘Drink.	There’s	bread,	cheese,	salted	fish.’
‘How	did	you	sense	my	presence?’	she	asked,	settling	into	the	bolted-down
chair	nearest	her.	‘I	was	travelling	through	a	forest—’
‘A	Tiste	Edur	forest,	yes.	Apsalar,	I	don’t	know	where	to	begin.	There	is	a
Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons,	and	you	are	sharing	a	bottle	of	wine	with	him.
Seven	months	ago	I	was	living	in	Darujhistan,	in	the	Finnest	House,	in	fact,
with	two	eternally	sleeping	house-guests	and	a	Jaghut	manservant…although
he’d	likely	kill	me	if	he	heard	that	word	ascribed	to	him.	Raest	is	not	the	most
pleasant	company.’
‘Darujhistan,’	she	murmured,	looking	away,	the	glass	of	wine	forgotten	in
her	hand.	Whatever	confidence	she	felt	she	had	gained	since	her	time	there	was
crumbling	away,	assailed	by	a	swarm	of	disconnected,	chaotic	memories.
Blood,	blood	on	her	hands,	again	and	again.	‘I	still	do	not	understand…’
‘We	are	in	a	war,’	Paran	said.	‘Oddly	enough,	there	was	something	one	of
my	sisters	once	said	to	me,	when	we	were	young,	pitching	toy	armies	against
each	other.	To	win	a	war	you	must	come	to	know	all	the	players.	All	of	them.
Living	ones,	who	will	face	you	across	the	field.	Dead	ones,	whose	legends	are
wielded	like	weapons,	or	held	like	eternally	beating	hearts.	Hidden	players,
inanimate	players	–	the	land	itself,	or	the	sea,	if	you	will.	Forests,	hills,
mountains,	rivers.	Currents	both	seen	and	unseen	–	no,	Tavore	didn’t	say	all
that;	she	was	far	more	succinct,	but	it’s	taken	me	a	long	time	to	fully
understand.	It’s	not	“know	your	enemy”.	That’s	simplistic	and	facile.	No,	it’s
“know	your	enemies”.	There’s	a	big	difference,	Apsalar,	because	one	of	your
enemies	could	be	the	face	in	the	silver	mirror.’
‘Yet	now	you	call	them	players,	rather	than	enemies,’	she	said.	‘Suggesting
to	me	a	certain	shift	in	perspective	–	what	comes,	yes,	of	being	the	Master	of
the	Deck	of	Dragons?’
‘Huh,	I	hadn’t	thought	about	that.	Players.	Enemies.	Is	there	a	difference?’
‘The	former	implies…manipulation.’


‘And	you	would	understand	that	well.’
‘Yes.’
‘Does	Cotillion	haunt	you	still?’
‘Yes,	but	not	as…intimately.’
‘And	now	you	are	one	of	his	chosen	servants,	an	agent	of	Shadow.	An
assassin,	just	like	the	assassin	you	once	were.’
She	levelled	her	gaze	on	him.	‘What	is	your	point?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	I’m	just	trying	to	find	my	feet,	regarding	you,	and	whatever
mission	you	are	on	right	now.’
‘If	you	want	details	of	that,	best	speak	with	Cotillion	yourself.’
‘I	am	considering	it.’
‘Is	that	why	you	have	crossed	an	ocean,	Ganoes	Paran?’
‘No.	As	I	said,	we	are	at	war.	I	was	not	idle	in	Darujhistan,	or	in	the	weeks
before	Coral.	I	was	discovering	the	players…and	among	them,	true	enemies.’
‘Of	you?’
‘Of	peace.’
‘I	trust	you	will	kill	them	all.’
He	seemed	to	wince,	looked	down	at	the	wine	in	his	glass.	‘For	a	short
time,	Apsalar,	you	were	innocent.	Naïve,	even.’
‘Between	the	possession	of	a	god	and	my	awakening	to	certain	memories.’
‘I	was	wondering,	who	created	in	you	such	cynicism?’
‘Cynicism?	You	speak	of	peace,	yet	twice	you	have	told	me	we	are	at	war.
You	have	spent	months	learning	the	lie	of	the	battle	to	come.	But	I	suspect	that
even	you	do	not	comprehend	the	vastness	of	the	coming	conflict,	the	conflict
we	are	in	right	now.’
‘You	are	right.	Which	is	why	I	wanted	to	speak	with	you.’
‘It	may	be	we	are	on	different	sides,	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘Maybe,	but	I	don’t	think	so.’
She	said	nothing.
Paran	refilled	their	glasses.	‘The	pantheon	is	splitting	asunder.	The
Crippled	God	is	finding	allies.’
‘Why?’
‘What?	Well…I	don’t	really	know.	Compassion?’
‘And	is	that	something	the	Crippled	God	has	earned?’
‘I	don’t	know	that,	either.’
‘Months	of	study?’	Her	brows	rose.
He	laughed,	a	response	that	greatly	relieved	her.
‘You	are	likely	correct,’	she	said.	‘We	are	not	enemies.’
‘By	“we”	I	take	it	you	include	Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion.’


‘As	much	as	is	possible,	which	isn’t	as	much	as	I	would	like.	None	can
fathom	Shadowthrone’s	mind.	Not	even	Cotillion,	I	suspect.	Certainly	not	me.
But	he	has	shown…restraint.’
‘Yes,	he	has.	Quite	surprising,	if	you	think	about	it.’
‘For	Shadowthrone,	the	pondering	of	the	field	of	battle	has	consumed
years,	maybe	decades.’
He	grunted,	a	sour	expression	on	his	face.	‘Good	point.’
‘What	role	do	you	possess,	Paran?	What	role	are	you	seeking	to	play?’
‘I	have	sanctioned	the	Crippled	God.	A	place	in	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	A
House	of	Chains.’
She	considered	for	a	time,	then	nodded.	‘I	can	see	the	reason	in	that.	All
right,	what	has	brought	you	to	Seven	Cities?’
He	stared	at	her,	then	shook	his	head.	‘A	decision	I	chewed	on	for	what
seemed	forever,	and	you	grasp	my	motives	in	an	instant.	Fine.	I	am	here	to
counter	an	enemy.	To	remove	a	threat.	Only,	I	am	afraid	I	will	not	get	there	in
time,	in	which	case	I	will	clean	up	the	mess	as	best	I	can,	before	moving	on—’
‘To	Quon	Tali.’
‘How	–	how	did	you	know	that?’
She	reached	for	the	brick	of	cheese,	produced	a	knife	from	her	sleeve	and
sliced	off	a	piece.	‘Ganoes	Paran,	we	are	going	to	have	a	rather	long
conversation	now.	But	first,	where	do	you	plan	to	make	landfall?’
‘Kansu.’
‘Good,	this	will	make	my	journey	quicker.	Two	minuscule	companions	of
mine	are	even	now	clambering	onto	the	deck,	having	ascended	via	the	trees.
They	will	any	moment	begin	hunting	rats	and	other	vermin,	which	should
occupy	them	for	some	time.	As	for	you	and	me,	let	us	settle	to	this	meal.’
He	slowly	leaned	back	in	his	chair.	‘We	will	reach	port	in	two	days.
Something	tells	me	those	two	days	will	fly	past	like	a	gull	in	a	gale.’
For	me	as	well,	Ganoes	Paran.
	
Ancient	memories	whispered	through	Dejim	Nebrahl,	old	stone	walls	lit	red
with	reflected	fire,	the	cascade	of	smoke	down	streets	filled	with	the	dead	and
the	dying,	the	luscious	flow	of	blood	in	the	gutters.	Oh,	there	was	a	grandness
to	the	First	Empire,	that	first,	rough	flowering	of	humanity.	The	T’rolbarahl
were,	in	Dejim’s	mind,	the	culmination	of	truly	human	traits,	blended	with	the
strength	of	beasts.	Savagery,	the	inclination	towards	vicious	cruelty,	the
cunning	of	a	predator	that	draws	no	boundaries	and	would	sooner	destroy	one
of	its	own	kind	than	another.	Feeding	the	spirit	on	the	torn	flesh	of	children.


That	stunning	exercise	of	intelligence	that	could	justify	any	action,	no	matter
how	abhorrent.
Mated	with	talons,	dagger-long	teeth	and	the	D’ivers	gift	of	becoming
many	from	one…we	should	have	survived,	we	should	have	ruled.	We	were	born
masters	and	all	humanity	were	rightly	our	slaves.	If	only	Dessimbelackis	had
not	betrayed	us.	His	own	children.
Well,	even	among	T’rolbarahl,	Dejim	Nebrahl	was	supreme.	A	creation
beyond	even	the	First	Emperor ’s	most	dread	nightmare.	Domination,
subjugation,	the	rise	of	a	new	empire,	this	is	what	awaited	Dejim,	and	oh	how
he	would	feed.	Bloated,	sated	by	human	blood.	He	would	make	the	new,
fledgling	gods	kneel	before	him.
Once	his	task	was	complete,	the	world	awaited	him.	No	matter	its
ignorance,	its	blind	disregard.	That	would	all	change,	so	terribly	change.
Dejim’s	quarry	neared,	drawn	ever	so	subtly	onto	this	deadly	track.	Not
long	now.
	
The	seashell	vest	glimmered	white	in	the	morning	light.	Karsa	Orlong	had
drawn	it	from	his	pack	to	replace	the	shredded	remnants	of	the	padded	leather
he	had	worn	earlier.	He	sat	on	his	tall,	lean	horse,	the	blood-spattered,	stitched
white	fur	cloak	sweeping	down	from	his	broad	shoulders.	Bare-headed,	with	a
lone,	thick	braid	hanging	down	the	right	side	of	his	chest,	the	dark	hair	knotted
with	fetishes:	finger	bones,	strips	of	gold-threaded	silk,	bestial	canines.	A	row
of	withered	human	ears	was	sewn	onto	his	belt.	The	huge	flint	sword	was
strapped	diagonally	across	his	back.	Two	bone-handled	daggers,	each	as	long
and	broad-bladed	as	a	short	sword,	were	sheathed	in	the	high	moccasins	that
reached	to	just	below	his	knees.
Samar	Dev	studied	the	Toblakai	a	moment	longer,	gaze	lifting	to	fix	on	his
tattooed	face.	The	warrior	was	facing	west,	his	expression	unreadable.	She
turned	back	to	check	the	tethers	of	the	packhorses	once	more,	then	drew	herself
up	and	into	the	saddle.	She	settled	the	toes	of	her	boots	into	the	stirrups	and
gathered	the	reins.	‘Contrivances,’	she	said,	‘that	require	no	food	or	water,	that
do	not	tire	or	grow	lame,	imagine	the	freedom	of	such	a	world	as	that	would
bring,	Karsa	Orlong.’
The	eyes	he	set	upon	her	were	those	of	a	barbarian,	revealing	suspicion
and	a	certain	animal	wariness.	‘People	would	go	everywhere.	What	freedom	in
a	smaller	world,	witch?’
Smaller?	‘You	do	not	understand—’
‘The	sound	of	this	city	is	an	offence	to	peace,’	Karsa	Orlong	said.	‘We


leave	it,	now.’
She	glanced	back	at	the	palace	gate,	closed	with	thirty	soldiers	guarding	it.
Hands	restless	near	weapons.	‘The	Falah’d	seems	disinclined	for	a	formal
leavetaking.	So	be	it.’
The	Toblakai	in	the	lead,	they	met	few	obstacles	passing	through	the	city,
reaching	the	west	gate	before	the	morning’s	tenth	bell.	Initially	discomforted
by	the	attention	they	received	from	virtually	every	citizen,	on	the	street	and	at
windows	of	flanking	buildings,	Samar	Dev	had	begun	to	see	the	allure	of
notoriety	by	the	time	they	rode	past	the	silent	guards	at	the	gate,	enough	to
offer	one	of	the	soldiers	a	broad	smile	and	a	parting	wave	with	one	gloved
hand.
The	road	they	found	themselves	on	was	not	one	of	the	impressive	Malazan
feats	of	engineering	linking	the	major	cities,	for	the	direction	they	had	chosen
led…nowhere.	West,	into	the	Jhag	Odhan,	the	ancient	plains	that	defied	the
farmer ’s	plough,	the	mythical	conspiracy	of	land,	rain	and	wind	spirits,	content
only	with	the	deep-rooted	natural	grasses,	eager	to	wither	every	planted	crop
to	blackened	stalks,	the	soil	blown	into	the	sky.	One	could	tame	such	land	for	a
generation	or	two,	but	in	the	end	the	Odhan	would	reclaim	its	wild	mien,	fit	for
naught	but	bhederin,	jackrabbits,	wolves	and	antelope.
Westward,	then,	for	a	half-dozen	or	so	days.	Whereupon	they	would	come
to	a	long-dead	river-bed	wending	north-westward,	the	valley	sides	cut	and
gnawed	by	the	seasonal	run-off	from	countless	centuries	past,	gnarled	now
with	sage	brush	and	cacti	and	grey-oaks.	Dark	hills	on	the	horizon	where	the
sun	set,	a	sacred	place,	the	oldest	maps	noted,	of	some	tribe	so	long	extinct
their	name	meant	nothing.
Out	onto	the	battered	road,	then,	the	city	falling	away	behind	them.	After	a
time,	Karsa	glanced	back	and	bared	his	teeth	at	her.	‘Listen.	That	is	better,	yes?’
‘I	hear	only	the	wind.’
‘Better	than	ten	thousand	tireless	contrivances.’
He	turned	back,	leaving	Samar	to	mull	on	his	words.	Inventions	cast	moral
shadows,	she	well	knew,	better	than	most,	in	fact.	But…could	simple
convenience	prove	so	perniciously	evil?	The	action	of	doing	things,	laborious
things,	repetitive	things,	such	actions	invited	ritual,	and	with	ritual	came
meaning	that	expanded	beyond	the	accomplishment	of	the	deed	itself.	From
such	ritual	self-identity	emerged,	and	with	it	self-worth.	Even	so,	to	make	life
easier	must	possess	some	inherent	value,	mustn’t	it?
Easier.	Nothing	earned,	the	language	of	recompense	fading	away	until	as
lost	as	that	ancient	tribe’s	cherished	tongue.	Worth	diminished,	value
transformed	into	arbitrariness,	oh	gods	below,	and	I	was	so	bold	as	to	speak	of


freedom!	She	kicked	her	horse	forward	until	she	came	alongside	the	Toblakai.
‘But	is	that	all?	Karsa	Orlong!	I	ask	you,	is	that	all?’
‘Among	my	people,’	he	said	after	a	moment,	‘the	day	is	filled,	as	is	the
night.’
‘With	what?	Weaving	baskets,	trapping	fish,	sharpening	swords,	training
horses,	cooking,	eating,	sewing,	fucking—’
‘Telling	stories,	mocking	fools	who	do	and	say	foolish	things,	yes,	all	that.
You	must	have	visited	there,	then?’
‘I	have	not.’
A	faint	smile,	then	gone.	‘There	are	things	to	do.	And,	always,	witch,	ways
of	cheating	them.	But	no-one	truly	in	their	lives	is	naïve.’
‘Truly	in	their	lives?’
‘Exulting	in	the	moment,	witch,	does	not	require	wild	dancing.’
‘And	so,	without	those	rituals…’
‘The	young	warriors	go	looking	for	war.’
‘As	you	must	have	done.’
Another	two	hundred	paces	passed	before	he	said,	‘Three	of	us,	we	came
to	deliver	death	and	blood.	Yoked	like	oxen,	we	were,	to	glory.	To	great	deeds
and	the	heavy	shackles	of	vows.	We	went	hunting	children,	Samar	Dev.’
‘Children?’
He	grimaced.	‘Your	kind.	The	small	creatures	who	breed	like	maggots	in
rotting	meat.	We	sought	–	no,	I	sought	–	to	cleanse	the	world	of	you	and	your
kin.	You,	the	cutters	of	forests,	the	breakers	of	earth,	the	binders	of	freedom.	I
was	a	young	warrior,	looking	for	war.’
She	studied	the	escaped	slave	tattoo	on	his	face.	‘You	found	more	than	you
bargained	for.’
‘I	know	all	about	small	worlds.	I	was	born	in	one.’
‘So,	experience	has	now	tempered	your	zeal,’	she	said,	nodding.	‘No
longer	out	to	cleanse	the	world	of	humanity.’
He	glanced	across	and	down	at	her.	‘I	did	not	say	that.’
‘Oh.	Hard	to	manage,	I	would	imagine,	for	a	lone	warrior,	even	a	Toblakai
warrior.	What	happened	to	your	companions?’
‘Dead.	Yes,	it	is	as	you	say.	A	lone	warrior	cannot	slay	a	hundred	thousand
enemies,	even	if	they	are	children.’
‘A	hundred	thousand?	Oh,	Karsa,	that’s	barely	the	population	of	two	Holy
Cities.	Your	enemy	does	not	number	in	the	hundreds	of	thousands,	it	numbers
in	the	tens	of	millions.’
‘That	many?’
‘Are	you	reconsidering?’


He	shook	his	head	slowly,	clearly	amused.	‘Samar	Dev,	even	tens	of
millions	can	die,	one	city	at	a	time.’
‘You	will	need	an	army.’
‘I	have	an	army.	It	awaits	my	return.’
Toblakai.	An	army	of	Toblakai,	now	that	would	be	a	sight	to	loosen	the
bladder	of	the	Empress	herself.	‘Needless	to	say,	Karsa	Orlong,	I	hope	you
never	make	it	home.’
‘Hope	as	you	like,	Samar	Dev.	I	shall	do	what	needs	doing	in	my	own	time.
None	can	stop	me.’
A	statement,	not	a	boast.	The	witch	shivered	in	the	heat.
	
They	approached	a	range	of	cliffs	marking	the	Turul’a	Escarpment,	the	sheer
face	of	the	limestone	pocked	with	countless	caves.	Cutter	watched	Heboric
Ghost	Hands	urge	his	mount	into	a	canter,	drawing	ahead,	then	reining	in
sharply,	the	reins	cutting	into	his	wrists,	a	flare	of	greenish	fire	blossoming	at
his	hands.
‘Now	what?’	the	Daru	asked	under	his	breath.
Greyfrog	bounded	forward	and	halted	at	the	old	man’s	side.
‘They	sense	something,’	Felisin	Younger	said	behind	Cutter.	‘Greyfrog
says	the	Destriant	is	suddenly	fevered,	a	return	of	the	jade	poison.’
‘The	what?’
‘Jade	poison,	the	demon	says.	I	don’t	know.’
Cutter	looked	at	Scillara,	who	rode	at	his	side,	head	lowered,	almost
sleeping	in	the	saddle.	She’s	getting	fat.	Gods,	on	the	meals	we	cook?
Incredible.
‘His	madness	returns,’	Felisin	said,	her	voice	fearful.	‘Cutter,	I	don’t	like
this—’
‘The	road	cuts	through,	there.’	He	pointed.	‘You	can	see	the	notch,	beside
that	tree.	We’ll	camp	just	up	ahead,	at	the	base,	and	make	the	climb	tomorrow.’
Cutter	in	the	lead,	they	rode	forward	until	they	reached	Heboric	Ghost
Hands.	The	Destriant	was	glaring	at	the	cliff	rearing	before	them,	muttering
and	shaking	his	head.	‘Heboric?’
A	quick,	fevered	glance.	‘This	is	the	war,’	he	said.	Green	flames	flickered
across	his	barbed	hands.	‘The	old	belong	to	the	ways	of	blood.	The	new
proclaim	their	own	justice.’	The	old	man’s	toadlike	face	stretched	into	a
ghastly	grimace.	‘These	two	cannot	–	cannot	–	be	reconciled.	It	is	so	simple,
do	you	see?	So	simple.’
‘No,’	Cutter	replied,	scowling.	‘I	do	not	see.	What	war	are	you	talking


about?	The	Malazans?’
‘The	Chained	One,	perhaps	he	was	once	of	the	old	kind.	Perhaps,	yes,	he
was	that.	But	now,	now	he	is	sanctioned.	He	is	of	the	pantheon.	He	is	new.	But
then,	what	are	we?	Are	we	of	the	blood?	Or	do	we	bow	to	the	justice	of	kings,
queens,	emperors	and	empresses?	Tell	me,	Daru,	is	justice	written	in	blood?’
Scillara	asked,	‘Are	we	going	to	camp	or	not?’
Cutter	looked	at	her,	watched	as	she	pushed	rustleaf	into	the	bowl	of	her
pipe.	Struck	sparks.
‘They	can	talk	all	they	want,’	Heboric	said.	‘Every	god	must	choose.	In	the
war	to	come.	Blood,	Daru,	burns	with	fire,	yes?	Yet…yet,	my	friend,	it	tastes	of
cold	iron.	You	must	understand	me.	I	am	speaking	of	what	cannot	be
reconciled.	This	war	–	so	many	lives,	lost,	all	to	bury	the	Elder	Gods	once	and
for	all.	That,	my	friends,	is	the	heart	of	this	war.	The	very	heart,	and	all	their
arguing	means	nothing.	I	am	done	with	them.	Done	with	all	of	you.	Treach	has
chosen.	He	has	chosen.	And	so	must	you.’
‘I	don’t	like	choosing,’	Scillara	said	behind	a	wreath	of	smoke.	‘As	for
blood,	old	man,	that’s	a	justice	you	can	never	put	to	sleep.	Now,	let	us	find	a
camp	site.	I’m	hungry,	tired	and	saddlesore.’
Heboric	slipped	down	from	his	horse,	gathered	the	reins,	and	made	his
way	towards	a	side	track.	‘There’s	a	hollow	in	the	wall,’	he	said.	‘People	have
camped	there	for	millennia,	why	not	us?	One	day,’	he	added	as	he	continued
on,	‘the	jade	prison	shall	shatter,	and	the	fools	will	stumble	out,	coughing	in
the	ashes	of	their	convictions.	And	on	that	day,	they	will	realize	that	it’s	too
late.	Too	late	to	do	a	damned	thing.’
More	sparks	and	Cutter	glanced	over	to	see	Felisin	Younger	lighting	her
own	pipe.	The	Daru	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair,	squinting	in	the	glare	of	the
sun’s	light	reflecting	off	the	cliff-side.	He	dismounted.	‘All	right,’	he	said,
leading	his	horse.	‘Let’s	camp.’
Greyfrog	bounded	after	Heboric,	clambering	over	the	rock	like	a	bloated
lizard.
‘What	did	he	mean?’	Felisin	asked	Cutter	as	they	made	their	way	along	the
trail.	‘Blood	and	Elder	Gods	–	what	are	Elder	Gods?’
‘Old	ones,	mostly	forgotten	ones.	There’s	a	temple	dedicated	to	one	in
Darujhistan,	must	have	stood	there	a	thousand	years.	The	god	was	named
K’rul.	The	worshippers	vanished	long	ago.	But	maybe	that	doesn’t	matter.’
	
Tugging	her	own	horse	along	in	their	wake,	Scillara	stopped	listening	to
Cutter	as	he	went	on.	Elder	gods,	new	gods,	blood	and	wars,	it	made	little


difference	to	her.	She	just	wanted	to	rest	her	legs,	ease	the	aches	in	her	lower
back,	and	eat	everything	they	still	had	in	the	saddle-packs.
Heboric	Ghost	Hands	had	saved	her,	drawn	her	back	into	life,	and	that	had
lodged	something	like	mercy	in	her	heart,	stifling	her	inclination	to	dismiss
the	mad	old	man	outright.	He	was	haunted	in	truth,	and	such	things	could	drag
the	sanest	mind	into	chaos.	But	what	value	could	be	found	in	trying	to	make
sense	of	all	that	he	said?
The	gods,	old	or	new,	did	not	belong	to	her.	Nor	did	she	belong	to	them.
They	played	their	ascendancy	games	as	if	the	outcome	mattered,	as	if	they
could	change	the	hue	of	the	sun,	the	voice	of	the	wind,	as	if	they	could	make
forests	grow	in	deserts	and	mothers	love	their	children	enough	to	keep	them.
The	rules	of	mortal	flesh	were	all	that	mattered,	the	need	to	breathe,	to	eat,
drink,	to	find	warmth	in	the	cold	of	night.	And,	beyond	these	struggles,	when
the	last	breath	had	been	taken	inside,	well,	she	would	be	in	no	condition	to	care
about	anything,	about	what	happened	next,	who	died,	who	was	born,	the	cries
of	starving	children	and	the	vicious	tyrants	who	starved	them	–	these	were,	she
understood,	the	simple	legacies	of	indifference,	the	consequences	of	the
expedient,	and	this	would	go	on	in	the	mortal	realm	until	the	last	spark	winked
out,	gods	or	no	gods.
And	she	could	make	peace	with	that.	To	do	otherwise	would	be	to	rail	at	the
inevitable.	To	do	otherwise	would	be	to	do	as	Heboric	Ghost	Hands	did,	and
look	where	it	took	him.	Into	madness.	The	truth	of	futility	was	the	hardest	truth
of	all,	and	for	those	clear-eyed	enough	to	see	it,	there	was	no	escape.
She	had	been	to	oblivion,	after	all,	and	had	returned,	and	so	she	knew	there
was	nothing	to	fear	in	that	dream-thick	place.
True	to	Heboric’s	words,	the	rock	shelter	revealed	the	signs	of	countless
generations	of	occupation.	Boulder-lined	hearths,	red	ochre	paintings	on	the
bleached	walls,	heaps	of	broken	pottery	and	fire-split,	charred	bones.	The	clay
floor	of	the	hollow	was	packed	hard	as	stone	by	countless	passings.	Nearby
was	the	sound	of	trickling	water,	and	Scillara	saw	Heboric	crouched	there,
before	a	spring-fed	pool,	his	glowing	hands	held	over	the	placid,	dark-mirror
surface,	as	if	hesitating	to	plunge	them	down	into	the	coolness.	White-winged
butterflies	danced	in	the	air	around	him.
He	journeyed	with	the	gift	of	salvation.	Something	to	do	with	the	green
glow	of	his	hands,	and	the	ghosts	haunting	him.	Something	to	do	with	his	past,
and	what	he	saw	of	the	future.	But	he	belonged	to	Treach	now,	Tiger	of
Summer.	No	reconciliation.
She	spied	a	flat	rock	and	walked	over	to	sit,	stretching	out	her	weary	legs,
noting	the	bulge	of	her	belly	as	she	leaned	back	on	her	hands.	Staring	down


upon	it,	cruel	extrusion	on	what	had	once	been	a	lithe	form,	forcing	an
expression	of	disgust	on	her	features.
‘Are	you	with	child?’
She	glanced	up,	studied	Cutter ’s	face,	amused	at	his	dawning	revelation	as
it	widened	his	eyes	and	filled	them	with	alarm.
‘Bad	luck	happens,’	she	said.	Then,	‘I	blame	the	gods.’


Chapter	Six
Paint	a	line	with	blood	and,	standing	over	it,	shake	a	nest	of	spiders
good	and	hard.	They	fall	to	this	side	of	the	divide.	They	fall	to	that	side
of	the	divide.	Thus	did	the	gods	fall,	taut-legged	and	ready,	as	the
heavens	trembled,	and	in	the	scattering	rain	of	drifting	web	–	all	these
dread	cut	threads	of	scheming	settling	down	–	skirling	now	in	the
winds	that	roared	sudden,	alive	and	vengeful,	to	pronounce	in	tongues
of	thunder,	the	gods	were	at	war.
Slayer	of	Magic
A	History	of	the	Host	of	Days
Sarathan
Through	slitted	eyes,	in	the	bar	of	shadow	cast	by	the	great	helm’s	ridged
brow,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	studied	the	woman.
Harried	aides	and	functionaries	rushed	past	her	and	Leoman	of	the	Flails,
like	leaves	in	a	torrential	flood.	And	the	two,	standing	there,	like	stones.
Boulders.	Like	things…rooted,	yes,	rooted	to	bedrock.	Captain	Dunsparrow,
now	Third	Dunsparrow.	A	Malazan.
A	woman,	and	Leoman…well,	Leoman	liked	women.
So	they	stood,	oh	yes,	discussing	details,	finalizing	the	preparations	for	the
siege	to	come.	The	smell	of	sex	a	heady	smugness	enveloping	the	two	like	a
poisonous	fog.	He,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	who	had	ridden	at	Leoman’s
side	through	battle	after	battle,	who	had	saved	Leoman’s	life	more	than	once,
who	had	done	all	that	had	ever	been	asked	of	him,	was	loyal.	But	she,	she	is
desirable.
He	told	himself	it	made	no	difference.	There	had	been	other	women.	He’d
had	a	few	himself	from	time	to	time,	although	not	the	same	ones	as	Leoman
had	known,	of	course.	And,	one	and	all,	they	had	been	nothing	before	the	faith,
withering	into	insignificance	in	the	face	of	hard	necessity.	The	voice	of
Dryjhna	the	Apocalyptic	overwhelmed	with	its	descending	squall	of
destruction.	This	was	as	it	should	be.
Dunsparrow.	Malazan,	woman,	distraction	and	possible	corrupter.	For


Leoman	of	the	Flails	was	hiding	something	from	Corabb,	and	that	had	never
before	happened.	Her	fault.	She	was	to	blame.	He	would	have	to	do	something
about	her,	but	what?
He	rose	from	the	Falah’d’s	old	throne,	that	Leoman	had	so	contemptuously
discarded,	and	walked	to	the	wide,	arched	window	overlooking	the	inner	keep
compound.	More	chaotic	scurrying	below,	dust	twisting	in	the	sun-speared	air.
Beyond	the	palace	wall,	the	bleached	rooftops	of	Y’Ghatan,	clothes	drying	in
the	sun,	awnings	rippling	in	the	wind,	domes	and	the	cylindrical,	flat-topped
storage	buildings	called	maethgara	that	housed	in	vast	containers	the	olive	oil
for	which	the	city	and	its	outlying	groves	were	renowned.	In	the	very	centre	of
the	city	rose	the	eight-sided,	monstrously	buttressed	Temple	of	Scalissara,	with
its	inner	dome	a	mottled	hump	of	remnant	gold-leaf	and	green	copper	tiles
liberally	painted	by	bird	droppings.
Scalissara,	Matron	Goddess	of	Olives,	the	city’s	own,	cherished	protector,
now	in	abject	disrepute.	Too	many	conquests	she	could	not	withstand,	too	many
gates	battered	down,	walls	pounded	into	rubble.	While	the	city	itself	seemed
capable	of	ever	rising	again	from	the	dust	of	destruction,	Scalissara	had
revealed	a	more	finite	number	of	possible	resurrections.	And,	following	the
last	conquest,	she	did	not	return	to	pre-eminence.	Indeed,	she	did	not	return	at
all.
Now,	the	temple	belonged	to	the	Queen	of	Dreams.
A	foreign	goddess.	Corabb	scowled.	Well,	maybe	not	entirely	foreign,	but
still…
The	great	statues	of	Scalissara	that	once	rose	from	the	corners	of	the	city’s
outer	fortifications,	marble	arms	plump	and	fleshy,	upraised,	an	uprooted	olive
tree	in	one	hand,	a	newborn	babe	in	the	other,	the	umbilical	cord	wrapped
snake-like	up	her	forearm,	then	across	and	down,	into	her	womb	–	the	statues
were	gone.	Destroyed	in	the	last	conflagration.	Now,	on	three	of	the	four
corners,	only	the	pedestal	remained,	bare	feet	broken	clean	above	the	ankles,
and	on	the	fourth	even	that	was	gone.
In	the	days	of	her	supremacy,	every	foundling	child	was	named	after	her	if
female,	and,	male	or	female,	every	abandoned	child	was	taken	into	the	temple
to	be	fed,	raised	and	schooled	in	the	ways	of	the	Cold	Dream,	a	mysterious
ritual	celebrating	a	kind	of	divided	spirit	or	something	–	the	esoterica	of	cults
were	not	among	Corabb’s	intellectual	strengths,	but	Leoman	had	been	one	such
foundling	child,	and	had	spoken	once	or	twice	of	such	things,	when	wine	and
durhang	loosened	his	tongue.	Desire	and	necessity,	the	war	within	a	mortal’s
spirit,	this	was	at	the	heart	of	the	Cold	Dream.	Corabb	did	not	understand	much
of	that.	Leoman	had	lived	but	a	few	years	under	the	guidance	of	the	temple’s


priestesses,	before	his	wild	indulgences	saw	him	expelled	into	the	streets.	And
from	the	streets,	out	into	the	Odhans,	to	live	among	the	desert	tribes,	and	so	to
be	forged	by	the	sun	and	blowing	sands	of	Raraku	into	the	greatest	warrior
Seven	Cities	had	ever	beheld.	At	least	in	Corabb’s	lifetime.	The	Fala’dhan	of
the	Holy	Cities	possessed	grand	champions	in	their	day,	of	course,	but	they
were	not	leaders,	they	had	nothing	of	the	wiles	necessary	for	command.
Besides,	Dassem	Ultor	and	his	First	Sword	had	cut	them	down,	every	one	of
them,	and	that	was	that.
Leoman	had	sealed	Y’Ghatan,	imprisoning	within	its	new	walls	an
emperor ’s	ransom	in	olive	oil.	The	maethgara	were	filled	to	bursting	and	the
merchants	and	their	guilds	were	shrieking	their	outrage,	although	less	publicly
since	Leoman,	in	a	fit	of	irritation,	had	drowned	seven	representatives	in	the
Grand	Maeth	attached	to	the	palace.	Drowned	them	in	their	very	own	oil.
Priests	and	witches	were	now	petitioning	for	beakers	of	that	fell	amber	liquid.
Dunsparrow	had	been	given	command	of	the	city	garrison,	a	mob	of
drunken,	lazy	thugs.	The	first	tour	of	the	barracks	had	revealed	the	military
base	as	little	more	than	a	raucous	harem,	thick	with	smoke	and	pool-eyed,
prepubescent	boys	and	girls	staggering	about	in	a	nightmare	world	of	sick
abuse	and	slavery.	Thirty	officers	were	executed	that	first	day,	the	most	senior
one	by	Leoman’s	own	hand.	The	children	had	been	gathered	up	and
redistributed	among	the	temples	of	the	city	with	the	orders	to	heal	the	damage
and	purge	what	was	possible	of	their	memories.	The	garrison	soldiers	had
been	given	the	task	of	scouring	clean	every	brick	and	tile	of	the	barracks,	and
Dunsparrow	had	then	begun	drilling	them	to	counter	Malazan	siege	tactics,
with	which	she	seemed	suspiciously	familiar.
Corabb	did	not	trust	her.	It	was	as	simple	as	that.	Why	would	she	choose	to
fight	against	her	own	people?	Only	a	criminal,	an	outlaw,	would	do	that,	and
how	trustworthy	was	an	outlaw?	No,	there	were	likely	horrific	murders	and
betrayals	crowding	her	sordid	past,	and	now	here	she	was,	spreading	her	legs
beneath	Falah’d	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	the	known	world’s	most	feared	warrior.
He	would	have	to	watch	her	carefully,	hand	on	the	grip	of	his	new	cutlass,
ready	at	a	moment’s	notice	to	cut	her	clean	in	half,	head	to	crotch,	then	across,
diagonally,	twice	–	swish	swish!	–	right	shoulder	to	left	hip,	left	shoulder	to
right	hip,	and	watch	her	part	ways.	A	duty-bound	execution,	yes.	At	the	first	hint
of	betrayal.
‘What	has	so	lightened	your	expression,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas?’
Stiffening,	he	turned,	to	find	Dunsparrow	standing	at	his	side.	‘Third,’	he
said	in	sour	grunt	of	greeting.	‘I	was	thinking,	uh,	of	the	blood	and	death	to
come.’


‘Leoman	says	you	are	the	most	reasonable	of	the	lot.	I	now	dread	closer
acquaintance	with	his	other	officers.’
‘You	fear	the	siege	to	come?’
‘Of	course	I	do.	I	know	what	Imperial	Armies	are	capable	of.	There	is	said
to	be	a	High	Mage	among	them,	and	that	is	the	most	disturbing	news	of	all.’
‘The	woman	commanding	them	is	simple-minded,’	Corabb	said.	‘No
imagination,	or	none	that	she’s	bothered	showing.’
‘And	that	is	my	point	on	that	issue,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.’
He	frowned.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘She’s	had	no	need,	as	yet,	to	display	the	extent	of	her	imagination.	Thus
far,	it’s	been	easy	for	her.	Little	more	than	marching	endless	leagues	in
Leoman’s	dust.’
‘We	are	her	match,	and	better,’	said	Corabb,	straightening,	chest	swelling.
‘Our	spears	and	swords	have	already	drawn	their	foul	Malazan	blood,	and
shall	do	so	again.	More	of	it,	much	more.’
‘That	blood,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘is	as	red	as	yours,	warrior.’
‘Is	it?	Seems	to	me,’	he	continued,	looking	out	upon	the	city	once	more,
‘that	betrayal	is	a	dark	taint	upon	it,	to	so	easily	twist	one	of	its	own	into
switching	sides.’
‘As	with,	for	example,	the	Red	Blades?’
‘Corrupted	fools!’
‘Of	course.	Yet…Seven	Cities	born,	yes?’
‘They	have	severed	their	own	roots	and	now	flow	on	the	Malazan	tide.’
‘Nice	image,	Corabb.	You	do	stumble	on	those	often,	don’t	you?’
‘You’d	be	amazed	at	the	things	I	stumble	on,	woman.	And	I	will	tell	you
this,	I	guard	Leoman’s	back,	as	I	have	always	done.	Nothing	has	changed	that.
Not	you	and	your…your—’
‘Charms?’
‘Wiles.	I	have	marked	you,	Third,	and	best	you	be	mindful	of	that.’
‘Leoman	has	done	well	to	have	such	a	loyal	friend.’
‘He	shall	lead	the	Apocalypse—’
‘Oh,	he	will	at	that.’
‘—for	none	but	he	is	equal	to	such	a	thing.	Y’Ghatan	shall	be	a	curse	name
in	the	Malazan	Empire	for	all	time—’
‘It	already	is.’
‘Yes,	well,	it	shall	be	more	so.’
‘What	is	it	about	this	city,	I	wonder,	that	has	driven	so	deep	a	knife	into	the
empire?	Why	did	the	Claw	act	here	against	Dassem	Ultor?	Why	not
somewhere	else?	Somewhere	less	public,	less	risky?	Oh	yes,	they	made	it	seem


like	a	wayward	accident	of	battle,	but	no-one	was	fooled.	I	admit	to	a
fascination	with	this	city,	indeed,	it	is	what	brought	me	here	in	the	first	place.’
‘You	are	an	outlaw.	The	Empress	has	a	price	on	your	head.’
‘She	does?	Or	are	you	just	guessing?’
‘I	am	certain	of	it.	You	fight	against	your	own	people.’
‘My	own	people.	Who	are	they,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas?	The	Malazan
Empire	has	devoured	many	peoples,	just	as	it	has	done	those	of	Seven	Cities.
Now	that	the	rebellion	is	over,	are	your	kin	now	Malazan?	No,	that	thought	is
incomprehensible	to	you,	isn’t	it?	I	was	born	on	Quon	Tali,	but	the	Malazan
Empire	was	born	on	Malaz	Island.	My	people	too	were	conquered,	just	as
yours	have	been.’
Corabb	said	nothing,	too	confused	by	her	words.	Malazans	were…
Malazans,	dammit.	All	of	a	kind,	no	matter	the	hue	of	their	skin,	the	tilt	of	their
eyes,	no	matter	all	the	variations	within	that	Hood-cursed	empire.	Malazans!
‘You	will	get	no	sympathy	from	me,	Third.’
‘I	did	not	ask	for	it.’
‘Good.’
‘Now,	will	you	accompany	us?’
Us?	Corabb	slowly	turned.	Leoman	stood	a	few	paces	behind	them,	arms
crossed,	leaning	against	the	map-table.	In	his	eyes	a	sly,	amused	expression.
‘We	are	going	into	the	city,’	Leoman	said.	‘I	wish	to	visit	a	certain	temple.’
Corabb	bowed.	‘I	shall	accompany	you,	sword	at	the	ready,	Warleader.’
Leoman’s	brows	lifted	fractionally.	‘Warleader.	Is	there	no	end	of	titles	you
will	bestow	upon	me,	Corabb?’
‘None,	Hand	of	the	Apocalypse.’
He	flinched	at	that	honorific,	then	turned	away.	A	half-dozen	officers	stood
waiting	at	one	end	of	the	long	table,	and	to	these	warriors,	Leoman	said,
‘Begin	the	evacuation.	And	no	undue	violence!	Kill	every	looter	you	catch,	of
course,	but	quietly.	Ensure	the	protection	of	families	and	their	possessions,
including	livestock—’
One	of	the	warriors	started.	‘But	Commander,	we	shall	need—’
‘No,	we	shall	not.	We	have	all	we	need.	Besides,	those	animals	are	the	only
wealth	most	of	the	refugees	will	have	to	take	with	them.	I	want	escorts	on	the
west	road.’	He	glanced	over	at	Dunsparrow.	‘Have	the	messengers	returned
from	Lothal?’
‘Yes,	with	delighted	greetings	from	the	Falah’d.’
‘Delighted	that	I	am	not	marching	on	to	his	city,	you	mean.’
Dunsparrow	shrugged.
‘And	so	he	is	dispatching	troops	to	manage	the	road?’


‘He	is,	Leoman.’
Ah!	She	is	already	beyond	titles!	Corabb	struggled	to	keep	the	snarl	from
his	voice.	‘He	is	Warleader	to	you,	Third.	Or	Commander,	or	Falah’d—’
‘Enough,’	cut	in	Leoman.	‘I	am	pleased	enough	with	my	own	name	to	hear
it	used.	From	now	on,	friend	Corabb,	we	shall	dispense	with	titles	when	only
officers	are	present.’
As	I	thought,	the	corruption	has	begun.	He	glared	at	Dunsparrow,	but	she
was	paying	him	no	attention,	her	eyes	settled	possessively	on	Leoman	of	the
Flails.	Corabb’s	own	gaze	narrowed.	Leoman	the	Fallen.
	
No	track,	alley	or	street	in	Y’Ghatan	ran	straight	for	more	than	thirty	paces.
Laid	upon	successive	foundations,	rising,	it	was	likely,	from	the	very	first
maze-wound	fortress	city	built	here	ten	thousand	years	or	more	past,	the
pattern	resembled	a	termite	mound	with	each	twisting	passageway	exposed	to
the	sky,	although	in	many	cases	that	sky	was	no	more	than	a	slit,	less	than	an
arm’s	length	wide,	overhead.
To	look	upon	Y’Ghatan,	and	to	wander	its	corridors,	was	to	step	into
antiquity.	Cities,	Leoman	had	once	told	Corabb,	were	born	not	of	convenience,
nor	lordship,	nor	markets	and	their	babbling	merchants.	Born	not	even	of
harvest	and	surplus.	No,	said	Leoman,	cities	were	born	from	the	need	for
protection.	Fortresses,	that	and	nothing	more,	and	all	that	followed	did	just	that:
follow.	And	so,	cities	were	always	walled,	and	indeed,	walls	were	often	all	that
remained	of	the	oldest	ones.
And	this	was	why,	Leoman	had	explained,	a	city	would	always	build	upon
the	bones	of	its	forebears,	for	this	lifted	its	walls	yet	higher,	and	made	of	the
place	a	more	formidable	protection.	It	was	the	marauding	tribes,	he	had	said,
laughing,	that	forced	the	birth	of	cities,	of	the	very	cities	capable	of	defying
them	and,	ultimately,	conquering	them.	Thus	did	civilization	arise	from
savagery.
All	very	well,	Corabb	mused	as	they	walked	towards	this	city’s	heart,	and
possibly	even	true,	but	already	he	longed	for	the	open	lands	of	the	Odhans,	the
desert’s	sweet	whispering	wind,	the	sultry	heat	that	could	bake	a	man’s	brain
inside	his	helmet	until	he	dreamed	raving	that	he	was	being	pursued	by	herds
of	fat	aunts	and	leathery	grandmothers	who	liked	to	pinch	cheeks.
Corabb	shook	his	head	to	dispel	the	recollection	and	all	its	attendant
terrors.	He	walked	at	Leoman’s	left,	cutlass	drawn	and	a	scowl	of	belligerence
ready	for	any	suspicious-looking	citizen.	Third	Dunsparrow	was	to	Leoman’s
right,	the	two	brushing	arms	every	now	and	then	and	exchanging	soft	words,


probably	grim	with	romance,	that	Corabb	was	pleased	he	could	not	overhear.
That,	or	they	were	talking	about	ways	of	doing	away	with	him.
‘Oponn	pull	me,	push	her,’	he	said	under	his	breath.
Leoman’s	head	turned.	‘You	said	something,	Corabb?’
‘I	was	cursing	this	damned	rat	path,	Avenger.’
‘We’re	almost	there,’	Leoman	said,	uncharacteristically	considerate,	which
only	deepened	Corabb’s	foul	mood.	‘Dunsparrow	and	I	were	discussing	what
to	do	with	the	priesthood.’
‘Were	you	now?	That’s	nice.	What	do	you	mean,	what	to	do	with	them?’
‘They	are	resisting	the	notion	of	leaving.’
‘I	am	not	surprised.’
‘Nor	am	I,	but	leave	they	shall.’
‘It’s	all	the	wealth,’	Corabb	said.	‘And	their	reliquaries	and	icons	and	wine
cellars	–	they	fear	they	will	be	set	upon	on	the	road,	raped	and	robbed	and	their
hair	all	unbunned.’
Both	Leoman	and	Dunsparrow	peered	over	at	him	with	odd	expressions.
‘Corabb,’	Leoman	said,	‘I	think	it	best	you	remove	that	new	great	helm	of
yours.’
‘Yes,’	Dunsparrow	added.	‘There	are	streams	of	sweat	pouring	down	your
face.’
‘I	am	fine,’	Corabb	said	in	growl.	‘This	was	the	Champion’s	helm.	But
Leoman	would	not	take	it.	He	should	have.	In	truth,	I	am	only	carrying	it	for
him.	At	the	appropriate	time,	he	will	discover	the	need	to	tear	it	from	my	head
and	don	it	himself,	and	the	world	shall	right	itself	once	more,	may	all	the
yellow	and	blue	gods	be	praised.’
‘Corabb—’
‘I	am	fine,	although	we	had	better	do	something	about	all	those	old	women
following	us.	I	will	spit	myself	on	my	own	sword	before	I	let	them	get	me.	Ooh
what	a	nice	little	boy!	Enough	of	that,	I	say.’
‘Give	me	that	helm,’	Leoman	said.
‘It’s	about	time	you	recognized	your	destiny,	Adjunct	Slayer.’
	
Corabb’s	head	was	pounding	by	the	time	they	reached	the	Temple	of
Scalissara.	Leoman	had	elected	not	to	wear	the	great	helm,	even	with	its	sodden
quilted	under-padding	removed	–	without	which	it	would	have	been	too	loose
in	any	case.	At	least	the	old	women	were	gone;	in	fact,	the	route	they	had	taken
was	almost	deserted,	although	they	could	hear	the	chaotic	sounds	of	crowds	in
the	main	thoroughfares,	being	driven	from	the	city,	out	onto	the	west	road	that


led	to	Lothal	on	the	coast.	Panic	rode	the	sweltering	currents,	yet	it	was	clear
that	most	of	the	four	thousand	soldiers	now	under	Leoman’s	command	were
out	in	the	streets,	maintaining	order.
Seven	lesser	temples,	each	dedicated	to	one	of	the	Seven	Holies,	encircled
the	octagonal	edifice	now	sanctified	in	the	name	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams.	The
formal	approach	was	spiral,	wending	through	these	smaller	domed	structures.
The	flanking	compound	walls	had	been	twice	defaced,	first	with	rededication
to	Malazan	gods	soon	after	the	conquest;	then	again	with	the	rebellion,	when
the	temples	and	their	new	foreign	priesthoods	had	been	assailed,	the
sanctuaries	sundered	and	hundreds	slaughtered.	Friezes	and	metopes,	caryatids
and	panels	were	all	ruined	now,	entire	pantheons	defiled	and	made
incomprehensible.
All,	that	is,	but	the	temple	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams,	its	impressive
fortifications	making	it	virtually	impregnable.	There	were	in	any	case
mysteries	surrounding	the	Queen,	Corabb	knew,	and	it	was	generally	believed
that	her	cult	had	not	originated	in	the	Malazan	Empire.	The	Goddess	of
Divinations	cast	a	thousand	reflections	upon	a	thousand	peoples,	and	no	one
civilization	could	claim	her	as	exclusively	its	own.	So,	having	battered	futilely
at	the	temple’s	walls	for	six	days,	the	rebels	had	concluded	that	the	Queen	was
not	their	enemy	after	all,	and	had	thereafter	left	her	in	peace.	Desire	and
necessity,	Leoman	had	said,	laughing,	upon	hearing	the	tale.
Nonetheless,	as	far	as	Corabb	was	concerned,	the	goddess	was…foreign.
‘What	business	do	we	have,’	Corabb	asked,	‘visiting	this	temple?’
Leoman	replied	with	a	question	of	his	own:	‘Do	you	recall,	old	friend,
your	vow	to	follow	me	no	matter	what	seeming	madness	I	undertake?’
‘I	do,	Warleader.’
‘Well,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	you	shall	find	yourself	sorely	tested	in
that	promise.	For	I	intend	to	speak	with	the	Queen	of	Dreams.’
‘The	High	Priestess—’
‘No,	Corabb,’	said	Leoman,	‘with	the	goddess	herself.’
	
‘It	is	a	difficult	thing,	killing	dragons.’
Blood	the	colour	of	false	dawn	continued	to	spread	across	the	buckled
pavestones.	Mappo	and	Icarium	remained	beyond	its	reach,	for	it	would	not	do
to	make	contact	with	that	dark	promise.	The	Jhag	was	seated	on	a	stone	block
that	might	have	once	been	an	altar	but	had	been	pushed	up	against	the	wall	to
the	left	of	the	entrance.	The	warrior ’s	head	was	in	his	hands,	and	he	had	said
nothing	for	some	time.


Mappo	alternated	his	attention	between	his	friend	and	the	enormous
draconean	corpse	rearing	over	them.	Both	scenes	left	him	distraught.	There
was	much	worthy	of	grieving	in	this	cavern,	in	the	terrible	ritual	murder	that
had	taken	place	here,	and	in	the	fraught	torrent	of	memories	unleashed	within
Icarium	upon	its	discovery.
‘This	leaves	naught	but	Osserc,’	Mappo	said.	‘And	should	he	fall,	the
warren	of	Serc	shall	possess	no	ruler.	I	believe,	Icarium,	that	I	am	beginning	to
see	a	pattern.’
‘Desecration,’	the	Jhag	said	in	a	whisper,	not	looking	up.
‘The	pantheon	is	being	made	vulnerable.	Fener,	drawn	into	this	world,	and
now	Osserc	–	the	very	source	of	his	power	under	assault.	How	many	other
gods	and	goddesses	are	under	siege,	I	wonder?	We	have	been	away	from
things	too	long,	my	friend.’
‘Away,	Mappo?	There	is	no	away.’
The	Trell	studied	the	dead	dragon	once	more.	‘Perhaps	you	are	right.	Who
could	have	managed	such	a	thing?	Within	the	dragon	is	the	heart	of	the	warren
itself,	its	well-fount	of	power.	Yet…someone	defeated	Sorrit,	drove	her	down
into	the	earth,	into	this	cavern	within	a	sky	keep,	and	spiked	her	to	Blackwood
–	how	long	ago,	do	you	think?	Would	we	not	have	felt	her	death?’	With	no
answers	forthcoming	from	Icarium,	Mappo	edged	closer	to	the	blood	pool	and
peered	upward,	focusing	on	that	massive	iron,	rust-streaked	spike.	‘No,’	he
murmured	after	a	moment,	‘that	is	not	rust.	Otataral.	She	was	bound	by	otataral.
Yet,	she	was	Elder	–	she	should	have	been	able	to	defeat	that	eager	entropy.	I	do
not	understand	this…’
‘Old	and	new,’	Icarium	said,	his	tone	twisting	the	words	into	a	curse.	He
rose	suddenly,	his	expression	ravaged	and	eyes	hard.	‘Speak	to	me,	Mappo.
Tell	me	what	you	know	of	spilled	blood.’
He	turned	away.	‘Icarium—’
‘Mappo,	tell	me.’
Gaze	settling	on	the	aquamarine	pool,	the	Trell	was	silent	as	emotions
warred	within	him.	Then	he	sighed.	‘Who	first	dipped	their	hands	into	this	fell
stream?	Who	drank	deep	and	so	was	transformed,	and	what	effect	did	that
otataral	spike	have	upon	that	transformation?	Icarium,	this	blood	is	fouled—’
‘Mappo.’
‘Very	well.	All	blood	spilled,	my	friend,	possesses	power.	Beasts,	humans,
the	smallest	bird,	blood	is	the	life-force,	the	soul’s	own	stream.	Within	it	is
locked	the	time	of	living,	from	beginning	to	end.	It	is	the	most	sacred	force	in
existence.	Murderers	with	their	victims’	blood	staining	their	hands	feed	from
that	force,	whether	they	choose	to	or	not.	Many	are	sickened,	others	find	a	new


hunger	within	themselves,	and	so	become	slaves	to	the	violence	of	slaying.	The
risk	is	this:	blood	and	its	power	become	tainted	by	such	things	as	fear	and	pain.
The	stream,	sensing	its	own	demise,	grows	stressed,	and	the	shock	is	as	a
poison.’
‘What	of	fate?’	Icarium	asked	in	a	heavy	voice.
Mappo	flinched,	his	eyes	still	on	the	pool.	‘Yes,’	he	whispered,	‘you	cut	to
the	matter ’s	very	heart.	What	does	anyone	take	upon	themselves	when	such
blood	is	absorbed,	drawn	into	their	own	soul?	Must	violent	death	be	in	turn
delivered	upon	them?	Is	there	some	overarching	law,	seeking	ever	to	redress
the	imbalance?	If	blood	feeds	us,	what	in	turn	feeds	it,	and	is	it	bound	by
immutable	rules	or	is	it	as	capricious	as	we	are?	Are	we	creatures	on	this	earth
the	only	ones	free	to	abuse	our	possessions?’
‘The	K’Chain	Che’Malle	did	not	kill	Sorrit,’	Icarium	said.	‘They	knew
nothing	of	it.’
‘Yet	this	creature	here	was	frozen,	so	it	must	have	been	encompassed	in	the
Jaghut’s	ritual	of	Omtose	Phellack	–	how	could	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	not
have	known	of	this?	They	must	have,	even	if	they	themselves	did	not	slay
Sorrit.’
‘No,	they	are	innocent,	Mappo.	I	am	certain	of	it.’
‘Then…how?’
‘The	crucifix,	it	is	Blackwood.	From	the	realm	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	From	the
Shadow	Realm,	Mappo.	In	that	realm,	as	you	know,	things	can	be	in	two	places
at	once,	or	begin	in	one	yet	find	itself	eventually	manifesting	in	another.
Shadow	wanders,	and	respects	no	borders.’
‘Ah,	then…this…was	trapped	here,	drawn	from	Shadow—’
‘Snared	by	the	Jaghut’s	ice	magic	–	yet	the	spilled	blood,	and	perhaps	the
otataral,	proved	too	fierce	for	Omtose	Phellack,	thus	shattering	the	Jaghut’s
enchantment.’
‘Sorrit	was	murdered	in	the	Shadow	Realm.	Yes.	Now	the	pattern,	Icarium,
grows	that	much	clearer.’
Icarium	fixed	bright,	fevered	eyes	upon	the	Trell.	‘Is	it?	You	would	blame
the	Tiste	Edur?’
‘Who	else	holds	such	command	of	Shadow?	Not	the	Malazan	pretender
who	now	sits	on	the	throne!’
The	Jhag	warrior	said	nothing.	He	walked	along	the	pool’s	edge,	head
down	as	if	seeking	signs	from	the	battered	floor.	‘I	know	this	Jaghut.	I
recognize	her	work.	The	carelessness	in	the	unleashing	of	Omtose	Phellack.
She	was…distraught.	Impatient,	angry,	weary	of	the	endless	paths	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle	employed	in	their	efforts	to	invade,	to	establish	colonies	on	every


continent.	She	cared	nothing	for	the	civil	war	afflicting	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
These	Short-Tails	were	fleeing	their	kin,	seeking	a	refuge.	I	doubt	she	bothered
asking	questions.’
‘Do	you	think,’	Mappo	asked,	‘that	she	knows	of	what	has	happened	here?’
‘No,	else	she	would	have	returned.	It	may	be	that	she	is	dead.	So	many
are…’
Oh,	Icarium,	would	that	such	knowledge	remained	lost	to	you.
The	Jhag	halted	and	half-turned.	‘I	am	cursed.	This	is	the	secret	you	ever
keep	from	me,	isn’t	it?	There	are…recollections.	Fragments.’	He	lifted	a	hand
as	if	to	brush	his	brow,	then	let	it	fall.	‘I	sense…terrible	things…’
‘Yes.	But	they	do	not	belong	to	you,	Icarium.	Not	to	the	friend	standing
before	me	now.’
Icarium’s	deepening	frown	tore	at	Mappo’s	heart,	but	he	would	not	look
away,	would	not	abandon	his	friend	at	this	tortured	moment.
‘You,’	Icarium	said,	‘are	my	protector,	but	that	protection	is	not	as	it	seems.
You	are	at	my	side,	Mappo,	to	protect	the	world.	From	me.’
‘It	is	not	that	simple.’
‘Isn’t	it?’
‘No.	I	am	here	to	protect	the	friend	I	look	upon	now,	from	the…the	other
Icarium…’
‘This	must	end,	Mappo.’
‘No.’
Icarium	faced	the	dragon	once	more.	‘Ice,’	he	said	in	murmur.	‘Omtose
Phellack.’	He	turned	to	Mappo.	‘We	shall	leave	here	now.	We	travel	to	the	Jhag
Odhan.	I	must	seek	out	kin	of	my	blood.	Jaghut.’
To	ask	for	imprisonment.	Eternal	ice,	sealing	you	from	all	life.	But	they	will
not	trust	that.	No,	they	will	seek	to	kill	you.	Let	Hood	deal	with	you.	And	this
time,	they	will	be	right.	For	their	hearts	do	not	fear	judgement,	and	their
blood…their	blood	is	as	cold	as	ice.
	
Sixteen	barrows	had	been	raised	half	a	league	south	of	Y’Ghatan,	each	one	a
hundred	paces	long,	thirty	wide,	and	three	man-heights	high.	Rough-cut
limestone	blocks	and	internal	columns	to	hold	up	the	curved	roofs,	sixteen
eternally	dark	abodes,	home	to	Malazan	bones.	Newly	cut,	stone-lined	trenches
reached	out	to	them	from	the	distant	city,	carrying	Y’Ghatan’s	sewage	in	turgid
flows	swarming	with	flies.	Sentiments,	Fist	Keneb	reflected	sourly,	could	not
be	made	any	clearer.
Ignoring	the	stench	as	best	he	could,	Keneb	guided	his	horse	towards	the


central	barrow,	which	had	once	been	surmounted	by	a	stone	monument
honouring	the	empire’s	fallen.	The	statue	had	been	toppled,	leaving	only	the
broad	pedestal.	Standing	on	it	now	were	two	men	and	two	dogs,	all	facing
Y’Ghatan’s	uneven,	whitewashed	walls.
The	Barrow	of	Dassem	Ultor	and	his	First	Sword,	which	held	neither
Dassem	nor	any	of	his	guard	who	had	fallen	outside	the	city	all	those	years
ago.	Most	soldiers	knew	the	truth	of	that.	The	deadly,	legendary	fighters	of	the
First	Sword	had	been	buried	in	unmarked	graves,	to	keep	them	from
desecration,	and	Dassem’s	own	grave	was	believed	to	be	somewhere	outside
Unta,	on	Quon	Tali.
Probably	empty.
The	cattle-dog,	Bent,	swung	its	huge	head	to	watch	Keneb	push	his	horse
up	the	steep	slope.	Red-rimmed	eyes,	set	wide	in	a	nest	of	scars,	a	regard	that
chilled	the	Malazan,	reminding	him	yet	again	that	he	but	imagined	his	own
familiarity	with	that	beast.	It	should	have	died	with	Coltaine.	The	animal	looked
as	though	pieced	together	from	disparate,	unidentifiable	parts,	only	roughly
approximating	a	dog’s	shape.	Humped,	uneven	shoulder	muscles,	a	neck	as
thick	round	as	a	grown	man’s	thigh,	misshapen,	muscle-knitted	haunches,	a
chest	deep	as	a	desert	lion’s.	Beneath	the	empty	eyes	the	creature	was	all	jaw,
overwide,	the	snout	misaligned,	the	three	remaining	canines	visible	even	when
Bent’s	fierce	mouth	was	closed,	for	most	of	the	skin	covering	them	had	been
torn	away	at	the	Fall,	and	nothing	had	replaced	it.	One	shorn	ear,	the	other
healed	flat	and	out	to	the	side.
The	stub	that	was	all	that	was	left	of	Bent’s	tail	did	not	wag	as	Keneb
dismounted.	Had	it	done	so,	Keneb	allowed	the	possibility	that	he	would	have
been	shocked	to	death.
The	mangy,	rat-like	Hengese	dog,	Roach,	trotted	up	to	sniff	at	Keneb’s	left
boot,	whereupon	it	squatted	ladylike	and	urinated	against	the	leather.	Cursing,
the	Malazan	stepped	away,	cocking	one	foot	for	a	savage	kick,	then	halting	the
motion	at	a	deep	growl	from	Bent.
Warleader	Gall	rumbled	a	laugh.	‘Roach	but	claims	this	heap	of	stones,
Fist.	Hood	knows,	there’s	no-one	below	to	get	offended.’
‘Too	bad	one	cannot	say	the	same	for	the	other	barrows,’	Keneb	said,
drawing	off	his	riding	gloves.
‘Ah,	but	that	insult	belongs	at	the	feet	of	the	citizens	of	Y’Ghatan.’
‘Roach	should	have	displayed	more	patience,	then,	Warleader.’
‘Hood	take	us,	man,	she’s	a	damned	dog.	Besides,	you	think	she’ll	run	out
of	piss	any	time	soon?’
If	I	had	my	way,	she’d	run	out	of	a	lot	more	besides.	‘Not	likely,	I’ll	grant


you.	That	rat	has	more	malign	fluids	in	it	than	a	rabid	bhederin	bull.’
‘Poor	diet.’
Keneb	addressed	the	other	man:	‘Fist	Temul,	the	Adjunct	wishes	to	know	if
your	Wickan	scouts	have	ridden	round	the	city.’
The	young	warrior	was	a	child	no	longer.	He	had	grown	two	hand’s-widths
since	Aren.	Lean,	hawk-faced,	with	far	too	many	losses	pooled	in	his	black
eyes.	The	Crow	clan	warriors	who	had	so	resented	his	command	at	Aren	were
silent	these	days.	Gaze	fixed	on	Y’Ghatan,	he	gave	no	indication	of	having
heard	Keneb’s	words.
More	and	more	like	Coltaine	with	every	passing	day,	Gall	says.	Keneb
knew	enough	to	wait.
Gall	cleared	his	throat.	‘The	west	road	shows	signs	of	an	exodus,	no	more
than	a	day	or	two	before	we	arrived.	A	half-dozen	old	Crow	horse-warriors
demanded	that	they	pursue	and	ravage	the	fleeing	refugees.’
‘And	where	are	they	now?’	Keneb	asked.
‘Guarding	the	baggage	train,	hah!’
Temul	spoke.	‘Inform	the	Adjunct	that	all	gates	are	sealed.	A	trench	has
been	dug	at	the	base	of	the	tel,	cutting	through	the	ramped	roads	on	all	sides,	to
a	depth	of	nearly	a	man’s	height.	Yet,	this	trench	is	but	two	paces	wide	–	clearly
the	enemy	ran	out	of	time.’
Out	of	time.	Keneb	wondered	at	that.	With	pressed	workers,	Leoman	could
have	had	a	far	broader	barrier	excavated	within	the	span	of	a	single	day.	‘Very
well.	Did	your	scouts	report	any	large	weapons	mounted	on	the	walls	or	on	the
roofs	of	the	corner	towers?’
‘Malazan-built	ballistae,	an	even	dozen,’	Temul	replied,	‘ranged	about	at
equal	intervals.	No	sign	of	concentrations.’
‘Well,’	Keneb	said	with	a	grunt,	‘foolish	to	suppose	that	Leoman	would
give	away	his	perceived	weak-points.	And	those	walls	were	manned?’
‘Yes,	crowds,	all	shouting	taunts	to	my	warriors.’
‘And	showing	their	naked	backsides,’	Gall	added,	turning	to	spit.
Roach	trotted	over	to	sniff	at	the	gleaming	phlegm,	then	licked	it	up.
Nauseous,	Keneb	looked	away,	loosening	the	chin-strap	of	his	helm.	‘Fist
Temul,	have	you	made	judgement	as	to	our	surest	approach?’
Temul	glanced	over,	expressionless.	‘I	have.’
‘And?’
‘And	what,	Fist?	The	Adjunct	cares	nothing	for	our	opinions.’
‘Perhaps	not,	but	I	would	like	to	hear	your	thoughts	in	any	case.’
‘Ignore	the	gates.	Use	Moranth	munitions	and	punch	right	through	a	wall
midway	between	tower	and	gate.	Any	side	will	do.	Two	sides	would	be	even


better.’
‘And	how	will	the	sappers	survive	camping	out	at	the	base	of	a	wall?’
‘We	attack	at	night.’
‘That	is	a	risky	thing	to	do.’
Temul	scowled,	and	said	nothing.
Gall	turned	to	regard	Keneb,	his	tear-etched	face	mildly	incredulous.	‘We
begin	a	siege,	man,	not	a	Hood-damned	fly	dance.’
‘I	know.	But	Leoman	must	have	mages,	and	night	will	not	hide	sappers
from	them.’
‘They	can	be	countered,’	Gall	retorted.	‘It’s	what	our	mages	are	for.	But	we
waste	our	breaths	with	such	things.	The	Adjunct	will	do	as	she	chooses.’
Keneb	faced	right	and	studied	the	vast	encampment	of	the	Fourteenth
Army,	arrayed	to	fend	off	a	sortie,	should	Leoman	prove	so	foolish.	The
investiture	would	be	a	careful,	measured	exercise,	conducted	over	two	or	three
days.	The	range	of	the	Malazan	ballistae	on	the	walls	was	well	known,	so	there
would	be	no	surprises	there.	Even	so,	encirclement	would	stretch	their	lines
appallingly	thin.	They	would	need	advance	emplacements	to	keep	an	eye	on	the
gates,	and	Temul’s	Wickans	and	Seti,	as	well	as	Gall’s	Khundryl	horsewarriors,	divided	into	companies	and	positioned	to	respond	should	Leoman
surprise	them.
The	Fist	shook	his	head.	‘This	is	what	I	do	not	understand.	Admiral	Nok’s
fleet	is	even	now	sailing	for	Lothal	with	five	thousand	marines	on	board,	and
once	Dujek	forces	the	last	city	to	capitulate	he	will	begin	a	fast	march	to	join
us.	Leoman	must	know	his	position	is	hopeless.	He	cannot	win,	even	should	he
maul	us.	We	will	still	be	able	to	keep	this	noose	knotted	tight	round	Y’Ghatan,
whilst	we	wait	for	reinforcements.	He	is	finished.	So	why	does	he	continue	to
resist?’
‘Aye,’	said	Gall.	‘He	should	have	carried	on	riding	west,	out	into	the
odhan.	We	would	never	have	caught	him	out	there,	and	he	could	begin
rebuilding,	drawing	warriors	to	his	cause.’
Keneb	glanced	over.	‘So,	Warleader,	you	are	as	nervous	about	this	as	I
am.’
‘He	means	to	bleed	us,	Keneb.	Before	he	falls,	he	means	to	bleed	us.’	A
rough	gesture.	‘More	barrows	to	ring	this	cursed	city.	And	he	will	die	fighting,
and	so	will	become	yet	another	martyr.’
‘So,	the	killing	of	Malazans	is	sufficient	cause	to	fight.	What	have	we	done
to	deserve	this?’
‘Wounded	pride,’	Temul	said.	‘It	is	one	thing	to	suffer	defeat	on	a	field	of
battle,	it	is	another	to	be	crushed	when	your	foe	has	no	need	even	to	draw	a


sword.’
‘Humiliated	in	Raraku,’	Gall	said,	nodding.	‘The	growing	cancer	in	their
souls.	This	cannot	be	carved	out.	The	Malazans	must	be	made	to	know	pain.’
‘That	is	ridiculous,’	Keneb	said.	‘Was	not	the	Chain	of	Dogs	glory	enough
for	the	bastards?’
‘The	first	casualty	among	the	defeated	is	recalling	their	own	list	of	crimes,
Fist,’	Temul	said.
Keneb	studied	the	young	man.	The	foundling	Grub	was	often	in	Temul’s
company,	and	among	the	strange	lad’s	disordered	host	of	peculiar
observations,	Grub	had	hinted	of	glory,	or	perhaps	infamy,	bound	to	Temul’s
future.	Of	course,	that	future	could	be	tomorrow.	Besides,	Grub	might	be	no
more	than	a	brain-addled	waif…all	right,	I	don’t	believe	that	–	he	seems	to
know	too	much.	If	only	half	the	things	he	said	made	any	sense…Well,	in	any
case,	Temul	still	managed	to	startle	Keneb	with	statements	more	suited	to	some
veteran	campaigner.	‘Very	well,	Fist	Temul.	What	would	you	do,	were	you	in
Leoman’s	place?’
Silence,	then	a	quick	look	at	Keneb,	something	like	surprise	in	Temul’s
angular	features.	A	moment	later	the	expressionless	mask	returned,	and	he
shrugged.
‘Coltaine	walks	in	your	shadow,	Temul,’	Gall	said,	running	his	fingers
down	his	own	face	as	if	to	mimic	the	tears	tattooed	there.	‘I	see	him,	again	and
again—’
‘No,	Gall.	I	have	told	you	before.	You	see	naught	but	the	ways	of	the
Wickans;	all	else	is	but	your	imagination.	Coltaine	sent	me	away;	it	is	not	to	me
that	he	will	return.’
He	haunts	you	still,	Temul.	Coltaine	sent	you	with	Duiker	to	keep	you	alive,
not	to	punish	or	shame	you.	Why	won’t	you	accept	that?
‘I	have	seen	plenty	of	Wickans,’	Gall	said	in	a	growl.
This	had	the	sound	of	an	old	argument.	Sighing,	Keneb	walked	over	to	his
horse.	‘Any	last	words	for	the	Adjunct?	Either	of	you?	No?	Very	well.’	He
swung	up	into	the	saddle	and	gathered	the	reins.
The	cattle-dog	Bent	watched	him	with	its	sand-coloured,	dead	eyes.
Nearby,	Roach	had	found	a	bone	and	was	lying	sprawled	on	its	belly,	legs
spread	out	as	it	gnawed	with	the	mindless	concentration	unique	to	dogs.
Halfway	down	the	slope,	Keneb	realized	where	that	bone	had	likely	come
from.	A	kick,	all	right,	hard	enough	to	send	that	rat	straight	through	Hood’s
Gate.
	


Corporal	Deadsmell,	Throatslitter	and	Widdershins	were	sitting	round	a	game
of	Troughs,	black	stones	bouncing	off	the	rudder	and	rolling	in	the	cups,	as
Bottle	walked	up.
‘Where’s	your	sergeant?’	he	asked.
Deadsmell	glanced	up,	then	back	down.	‘Mixing	paint.’
‘Paint?	What	kind	of	paint?’
‘It’s	what	Dal	Honese	do,’	said	Widdershins,	‘death-mask	paint.’
‘Before	a	siege?’
Throatslitter	hissed	–	what	passed	for	laughter,	Bottle	supposed	–	and	said,
‘Hear	that?	Before	a	siege.	That’s	very	cute,	very	cute,	Bottle.’
‘It’s	a	death	mask,	idiot,’	Widdershins	said	to	Bottle.	‘He	paints	it	on	when
he	thinks	he’s	about	to	die.’
‘Great	attitude	for	a	sergeant,’	Bottle	said,	looking	around.	The	other	two
soldiers	of	the	Ninth	Squad,	Galt	and	Lobe,	were	feuding	over	what	to	put	in	a
pot	of	boiling	water.	Both	held	handfuls	of	herbs,	and	as	each	reached	to	toss
the	herbs	in	the	other	soldier	pushed	that	hand	away	and	sought	to	throw	in	his
own.	Again	and	again,	over	the	boiling	water.	Neither	spoke.	‘All	right,	where
is	Balm	finding	his	paint?’
‘There’s	a	local	cemetery	north	of	the	road,’	Deadsmell	said.	‘I’d	guess
maybe	there.’
‘If	I	don’t	find	him,’	Bottle	said,	‘the	captain	wants	a	meeting	with	all	the
sergeants	in	her	company.	Dusk.’
‘Where?’
‘The	sheep	pen	back	of	the	farm	south	of	the	road,	the	one	with	the	cavedin	roof.’
Over	by	the	hearth	the	pot	had	boiled	dry	and	Galt	and	Lobe	were	fighting
over	water	jugs.
Bottle	moved	on	to	the	next	encampment.	He	found	Sergeant	Moak
sprawled	with	his	back	resting	on	a	heap	of	bedrolls.	The	Falari,	copper-haired
and	bearded,	was	picking	at	his	overlarge	teeth	with	a	fish	spine.	His	soldiers
were	nowhere	in	sight.
‘Sergeant.	Captain	Faradan	Sort’s	called	a	meeting—’
‘I	heard.	I	ain’t	deaf.’
‘Where’s	your	squad?’
‘Got	the	squats.’
‘All	of	them?’
‘I	cooked	last	night.	They	got	weak	stomachs,	that’s	all.’	He	belched,	and	a
moment	later	Bottle	caught	a	whiff	of	something	like	rotting	fish	guts.
‘Hood	take	me!	Where’d	you	find	anywhere	to	catch	fish	on	this	trail?’


‘Didn’t.	Brought	it	with	me.	Was	a	bit	high,	it’s	true,	but	nothing	a	real
soldier	couldn’t	handle.	There’s	some	scrapings	in	the	pot	–	want	some?’
‘No.’
‘No	wonder	the	Adjunct’s	in	trouble,	what	with	a	whole	damn	army	of
cowardly	whiners.’
Bottle	stepped	past	to	move	on.
‘Hey,’	Moak	called	out,	‘tell	Fid	the	wager ’s	still	on	as	far	as	I’m
concerned.’
‘What	wager?’
‘Between	him	and	me	and	that’s	all	you	got	to	know.’
‘Fine.’
He	found	Sergeant	Mosel	and	his	squad	dismantling	a	broken	wagon	in	the
ditch.	They	had	piled	up	the	wood	and	Flashwit	and	Mayfly	were	prying	nails,
studs	and	fittings	from	the	weathered	planks,	whilst	Taffo	and	Uru	Hela
struggled	with	an	axle	under	the	sergeant’s	watchful	eye.
Mosel	glanced	over.	‘Bottle,	isn’t	it?	Fourth	Squad,	Fid’s,	right?	If	you’re
looking	for	Neffarias	Bredd	you	just	missed	him.	A	giant	of	a	man,	must	have
Fenn	blood	in	him.’
‘No,	I	wasn’t,	Sergeant.	You	saw	Bredd?’
‘Well,	not	me,	I’ve	just	come	back,	but	Flashwit…’
At	mention	of	her	name	the	burly	woman	looked	up.	‘Yah.	I	heard	he	was
just	by	here.	Hey,	Mayfly,	who	was	it	said	he	was	just	by?’
‘Who?’
‘Neffarias	Bredd,	you	fat	cow,	who	else	would	we	be	talking	’bout?’
‘I	don’t	know	who	said	what.	I	was	only	half	listening,	anyway.	I	think	it
was	Smiles,	was	it	Smiles?	Might	have	been.	Anyway,	I’d	like	to	roll	in	the
blankets	with	that	man—’
‘Smiles	isn’t	a	man—’
‘Not	her.	Bredd,	I	mean.’
Bottle	asked,	‘You	want	to	bed	Bredd?’
Mosel	stepped	closer,	eyes	narrowing.	‘You	making	fun	of	my	soldiers,
Bottle?’
‘I’d	never	do	that,	Sergeant.	Just	came	to	tell	there’s	a	meeting—’
‘Oh,	yes,	I	heard.’
‘From	who?’
The	lean	man	shrugged.	‘Can’t	remember.	Does	it	matter?’
‘It	does	if	it	means	I’m	wasting	my	time.’
‘You	ain’t	got	time	to	waste?	Why,	what	makes	you	unique?’
‘That	axle	doesn’t	look	broken,’	Bottle	observed.


‘Who	said	it	was?’
‘Then	why	are	you	taking	the	wagon	apart?’
‘We	been	eating	its	dust	so	long	we	just	took	revenge.’
‘Where’s	the	wagoner,	then?	The	load	crew?’
Flashwit	laughed	an	ugly	laugh.
Mosel	shrugged	again,	then	gestured	further	down	the	ditch.	Four	figures,
bound	and	gagged,	were	lying	motionless	in	the	yellow	grass.
The	two	squads	of	sergeants	Sobelone	and	Tugg	were	gathered	round	a
wrestling	match	between,	Bottle	saw	as	he	pushed	his	way	in	for	a	better	look,
Saltlick	and	Shortnose.	Coins	were	being	flung	down,	puffing	the	dust	of	the
road,	as	the	two	heavy	infantrymen	strained	and	heaved	in	a	knot	of	arm	and
leg	holds.	Saltlick’s	massive,	round	face	was	visible,	red,	sweaty	and	streaked
with	dust,	the	expression	fixed	in	its	usual	cow-like,	uninterested
incomprehensibility.	He	blinked	slowly,	and	seemed	to	be	concentrating	on
chewing	something.
Bottle	nudged	Toles,	the	soldier	on	his	right.	‘What	are	they	fighting
over?’
Toles	looked	down	on	Bottle,	his	thin,	pallid	face	twitching.	‘It’s	very
simple.	Two	squads,	marching	in	step,	one	behind	the	other,	then	the	other	in
front	of	the	one	that	had	been	in	front	beforehand,	proving	the	mythical
camaraderie	to	be	no	more	than	some	epic	instigator	of	bad	poetry	and	bawdy
songs	designed	to	appease	lowbrows,	in	short,	a	lie.	Culminating	at	the	last	in
this	disreputable	display	of	animal	instincts—’
‘Saltlick	bit	Shortnose’s	ear	off,’	cut	in	Corporal	Reem,	standing	on
Bottle’s	left.
‘Oh.	Is	that	what	he’s	chewing?’
‘Yeah.	Taking	his	time	with	it,	too.’
‘Do	Tugg	and	Sobelone	know	about	the	captain’s	meeting?’
‘Yeah.’
‘So,	Shortnose	who	got	his	nose	tip	cut	off	now	has	only	one	ear,	too.’
‘Yeah.	He’ll	do	anything	to	spite	his	face.’
‘Is	he	the	one	who	got	married	last	week?’
‘Yeah,	to	Hanno	there.	She’s	the	one	betting	against	him.	Anyway,	from
what	I	hear,	it	ain’t	his	face	that	she	adores,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.’
Bottle	caught	sight	of	a	low	hill	on	the	north	side	of	the	road	on	which
stood	a	score	of	twisted,	hunched	guldindha	trees.	‘Is	that	the	old	cemetery?’
‘Looks	like	it,	why?’
Without	answering,	Bottle	pushed	his	way	back	through	the	crowd	and	set
off	for	the	burial	ground.	He	found	Sergeant	Balm	in	a	looter ’s	pit,	face


streaked	with	ash,	making	a	strange	monotonous	nasal	groaning	sound	as	he
danced	in	tight	circles.
‘Sergeant,	captain	wants	a	meeting—’
‘Shut	up,	I’m	busy.’
‘Dusk,	in	the	sheep	pen—’
‘Interrupt	a	Dal	Honese	death	dirge	and	you’ll	know	a	thousand	thousand
lifetimes	of	curses,	your	bloodlines	for	ever.	Hairy	old	women	will	steal	your
children	and	your	children’s	children	and	chop	them	up	and	cook	them	with
vegetables	and	tubers	and	a	few	precious	threads	of	saffron—’
‘I’m	done,	Sergeant.	Orders	delivered.	Goodbye.’
‘—and	Dal	Honese	warlocks	wearing	snake	girdles	will	lie	with	your
woman	and	she’ll	birth	venomous	worms	all	covered	in	curly	black	hair—’
‘Keep	it	up,	Sergeant,	and	I’ll	make	a	doll	of	you—’
Balm	leapt	from	the	pit,	eyes	suddenly	wide.	‘You	evil	man!	Get	away	from
me!	I	never	done	nothing	to	you!’	He	spun	about	and	ran	away,	gazelle-skins
flapping.
Bottle	turned	and	began	the	long	walk	back	to	the	camp.
	
He	found	Strings	assembling	his	crossbow,	Cuttle	watching	with	avid	interest.
A	crate	of	Moranth	munitions	was	to	one	side,	the	lid	pried	loose	and	the
grenados	lying	like	turtle	eggs	in	nests	of	padding.	The	others	of	the	squad
were	sitting	some	distance	away,	looking	nervous.
The	sergeant	glanced	up.	‘Bottle,	you	found	them	all?’
‘Aye.’
‘Good.	So,	how	are	the	other	squads	holding	up?’
‘Just	fine,’	Bottle	replied.	He	regarded	the	others	on	the	far	side	of	the
hearth.	‘What’s	the	point?’	he	asked.	‘If	that	box	goes	up,	it’ll	knock	down
Y’Ghatan’s	wall	from	here,	and	you	and	most	of	this	army	will	be	red	hail.’
Sudden	sheepish	expressions.	Grunting,	Koryk	rose,	deliberately	casual.	‘I
was	already	sitting	here,’	he	said.	‘Then	Tarr	and	Smiles	crawled	over	to
huddle	in	my	shadow.’
‘The	man	lies,’	Smiles	said.	‘Besides,	Bottle,	why	did	you	volunteer	to	go
wandering	with	the	captain’s	orders?’
‘Because	I’m	not	stupid.’
‘Yeah?’	Tarr	said.	‘Well,	you’re	back	now,	aren’t	you?’
‘I	thought	they’d	be	finished	by	now.’	He	waved	a	fly	away	that	had	been
buzzing	in	front	of	his	face,	then	walked	over	to	sit	downwind	of	the	hearth.
‘So,	Sergeant,	what	do	you	figure	the	captain’s	got	to	say?’


‘Sappers	and	shields,’	Cuttle	said	in	a	growl.
‘Shields?’
‘Aye.	We	scurry	in	hunched	low	and	the	rest	of	you	shield	us	from	all	the
arrows	and	rocks	until	we’re	done	planting	the	mines,	then	whoever ’s	left	runs
back	out,	as	fast	as	they	can	and	it	won’t	be	fast	enough.’
‘A	one-way	trip,	then.’
Cuttle	grinned.
‘It’ll	be	more	elaborate	than	that,’	Strings	said.	‘I	hope.’
‘She	goes	straight	in,	that’s	what	she	does.’
‘Maybe,	Cuttle.	Maybe	not.	She	wants	most	of	her	army	still	breathing
when	the	dust’s	settled.’
‘Minus	a	few	hundred	sappers.’
‘We’re	getting	rare	enough	as	it	is,’	Strings	said.	‘She	won’t	want	to	waste
us.’
‘That’d	be	a	first	for	the	Malazan	Empire.’
The	sergeant	looked	over	at	Cuttle.	‘Tell	you	what,	why	don’t	I	just	kill	you
now	and	be	done	with	it?’
‘Forget	it.	I	want	to	take	the	rest	of	you	sorry	humpers	with	me.’
Nearby,	Sergeant	Gesler	and	his	squad	had	appeared	and	were	making
their	camp.	Corporal	Stormy,	Bottle	noted,	wasn’t	with	them.	Gesler	strode
over.	‘Fid.’
‘Kalam	and	Quick	back,	too?’
‘No,	they	went	on,	with	Stormy.’
‘On?	Where?’
Gesler	crouched	opposite	Strings.	‘Let’s	just	say	I’m	actually	glad	to	see
your	ugly	face,	Fid.	Maybe	they’ll	make	it	back,	maybe	they	won’t.	I’ll	tell	you
about	it	later.	Spent	the	morning	with	the	Adjunct.	She	had	lots	of	questions.’
‘About	what?’
‘About	the	stuff	I’ll	tell	you	about	later.	So	we’ve	got	a	new	captain.’
‘Faradan	Sort.’
‘Korelri?’
Strings	nodded.	‘Stood	the	Wall,	we	think.’
‘So	she	can	probably	take	a	punch.’
‘Then	punch	back,	aye.’
‘Well	that’s	just	great.’
‘She	wants	all	the	sergeants	for	a	meeting	tonight.’
‘I	think	I’ll	go	back	and	answer	a	few	more	of	the	Adjunct’s	questions.’
‘You	can’t	avoid	meeting	her	for	ever,	Gesler.’
‘Oh	yeah?	Watch	me.	So,	where	did	they	move	Captain	Kindly	to?’


Strings	shrugged.	‘To	some	company	that	needs	pulling	into	shape,	I’d
imagine.’
‘And	we	don’t?’
‘Harder	terrifying	us	than	most	in	this	army,	Gesler.	I	think	he’d	already
given	up	on	us,	in	any	case.	I’m	not	sorry	to	see	the	miserable	bastard	on	his
way.	This	meeting	tonight	will	likely	be	about	what	we’ll	be	doing	in	the	siege.
Either	that	or	she	just	wants	to	waste	our	time	with	some	inspiring	tirade.’
‘For	the	glory	of	the	empire,’	Gesler	said,	grimacing.
‘For	vengeance,’	Koryk	said	from	where	he	sat	tying	fetishes	onto	his
baldric.
‘Vengeance	is	glorious,	so	long	as	it’s	us	delivering	it,	soldier.’
‘No	it’s	not,’	said	Strings.	‘It’s	sordid,	no	matter	how	you	look	at	it.’
‘Ease	up,	Fid.	I	was	only	half	serious.	You’re	so	tense	you’d	think	we	was
heading	into	a	siege	or	something.	Anyway,	why	ain’t	there	a	few	hands	of
Claw	to	do	the	dirty	work?	You	know,	infiltrate	the	city	and	the	palace	and	stick
a	knife	in	Leoman	and	be	done	with	it.	Why	do	we	have	to	get	messed	up	with	a
real	fight?	What	kind	of	empire	are	we,	these	days?’
No-one	spoke	for	a	time.	Bottle	watched	his	sergeant.	Strings	was	testing
the	pull	on	the	crossbow,	but	Bottle	could	see	that	he	was	thinking.
Cuttle	said,	‘Laseen’s	pulled	’em	in.	Close	and	tight.’
The	regard	Gesler	fixed	on	the	sapper	was	level,	gauging.	‘That	the
rumour,	Cuttle?’
‘One	of	’em.	What	do	I	know?	Maybe	she	caught	something	on	the	wind.’
‘You	certainly	have,’	Strings	muttered	as	he	examined	the	case	of	quarrels.
‘Only	that	the	few	veteran	companies	still	on	Quon	Tali	were	ordered	to
Unta	and	Malaz	City.’
Strings	finally	looked	up.	‘Malaz	City?	Why	there?’
‘The	rumour	weren’t	that	specific,	Sergeant.	Just	the	where,	not	the	why.
Anyway,	there’s	something	going	on.’
‘Where’d	you	catch	all	this?’	Gesler	asked.
‘That	new	sergeant,	Hellian,	from	Kartool.’
‘The	drunk	one?’
‘That’s	her.’
‘Surprised	she	noticed	anything,’	Strings	observed.	‘What	got	her	shipped
out	here?’
‘That	she	won’t	talk	about.	In	the	wrong	place	at	the	wrong	time,	I	figure,
from	the	way	her	face	twists	all	sour	on	the	subject.	Anyway,	she	went	to	Malaz
City	first,	then	joined	up	with	the	transports	at	Nap,	then	on	to	Unta.	She	never
seems	so	drunk	she	can’t	keep	her	eyes	open.’


‘You	trying	to	get	your	hand	on	her	thigh,	Cuttle?’
‘A	bit	too	young	for	me,	Fid,	but	a	man	could	do	worse.’
‘A	bleary-eyed	wife,’	Smiles	said	with	a	snort.	‘That’s	probably	the	best
you	could	manage,	Cuttle.’
‘When	I	was	a	lad,’	the	sapper	said,	reaching	out	to	collect	a	grenado	–	a
sharper,	Bottle	noted	with	alarm	as	Cuttle	began	tossing	it	up	in	the	air	and
catching	it	one-handed	–	‘every	time	I	said	something	disrespectful	of	my
betters,	my	father ’d	take	me	out	back	and	slap	me	half-unconscious.	Something
tells	me,	Smiles,	your	da	was	way	too	indulgent	when	it	came	to	his	little	girl.’
‘You	just	try	it,	Cuttle,	and	I’ll	stick	a	knife	in	your	eye.’
‘If	I	was	your	da,	Smiles,	I’d	have	long	ago	killed	myself.’
She	went	pale	at	that,	although	no-one	else	seemed	to	notice,	since	their
eyes	were	following	the	grenado	up	and	down.
‘Put	it	away,’	Strings	said.
An	ironic	lifting	of	the	brows,	then,	smiling,	Cuttle	returned	the	sharper	to
the	crate.	‘Anyway,	it	looks	like	Hellian’s	got	a	capable	corporal,	which	tells
me	she’d	held	onto	good	judgement,	despite	drinking	brandy	like	water.’
Bottle	rose.	‘Actually,	I	forgot	about	her.	Where	are	they	camped,	Cuttle?’
‘Near	the	rum	wagon.	But	she	already	knows	about	the	meeting.’
Bottle	glanced	over	at	the	crate	of	munitions.	‘Oh.	Well,	I’m	going	for	a
walk	in	the	desert.’
‘Don’t	stray	too	far,’	the	sergeant	said,	‘could	be	some	of	Leoman’s
warriors	out	there.’
‘Right.’
A	short	while	later	he	came	within	sight	of	the	intended	meeting	place.	Just
beyond	the	collapsed	building	was	an	overgrown	rubbish	heap,	misshapen	with
tufts	of	yellow	grass	sprouting	from	the	barrow-sized	mound.	There	was	noone	in	sight.	Bottle	made	his	way	towards	the	midden,	the	sounds	of	the
encampment	dwindling	behind	him.	It	was	late	afternoon	but	the	wind	remained
hot	as	the	breath	of	a	furnace.
Chiselled	wall	and	foundation	stones,	shattered	idols,	lengths	of	splintered
wood,	animal	bones	and	broken	pottery.	Bottle	clambered	up	the	side,	noting
the	most	recent	leavings	–	Malazan-style	pottery,	black-glazed,	squat,
fragmented	images	of	the	most	common	motifs:	Dassem	Ultor ’s	death	outside
Y’Ghatan,	the	Empress	on	her	throne,	the	First	Heroes	and	the	Quon	pantheon.
The	local	style,	Bottle	had	seen	from	the	villages	they	had	passed	through,	was
much	more	elegant,	elongated	with	cream	or	white	glazing	on	the	necks	and
rims	and	faded	red	on	the	body,	adorned	with	full-toned	and	realistic	images.
Bottle	paused	at	seeing	one	such	shard,	a	body-piece,	on	which	had	been


painted	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	He	picked	it	up,	wiped	dust	from	the	illustrated
scene.	Part	of	Coltaine	was	visible,	affixed	to	the	cross	of	wood,	overhead	a
wild	flurry	of	black	crows.	Beneath	him,	dead	Wickans	and	Malazans,	and	a
cattle-dog	impaled	on	a	spear.	A	chill	whispered	along	his	spine	and	he	let	the
shard	drop.
Atop	the	mound,	he	stood	for	a	time,	studying	the	sprawl	of	the	Malazan
army	along	the	road	and	spilling	out	to	the	sides.	The	occasional	rider
wending	through	carrying	messages	and	reports;	carrion	birds,	capemoths	and
rhizan	wheeling	overhead	like	swarming	flies.
He	so	disliked	omens.
Drawing	off	his	helm,	Bottle	wiped	sweat	from	his	brow	and	turned	to	face
the	odhan	to	the	south.	Once	fertile,	perhaps,	but	now	a	wasteland.	Worth
fighting	for?	No,	but	then,	there	wasn’t	much	that	was.	The	soldier	at	your	side,
maybe	–	he’d	been	told	that	enough	times,	by	old	veterans	with	nothing	left	but
that	dubious	companionship.	Such	bonds	could	only	be	born	of	desperation,	a
closing	in	of	the	spirit,	down	to	a	manageable	but	pitiful	area	containing	things
and	people	one	could	care	about.	For	the	rest,	pure	indifference,	twisting	on
occasion	into	viciousness.
Gods,	what	am	I	doing	here?
Stumbling	into	ways	of	living	didn’t	seem	a	worthy	path	to	take.	Barring
Cuttle	and	the	sergeant,	the	squad	was	made	up	of	people	no	different	from
Bottle.	Young,	eager	for	a	place	to	stand	that	didn’t	feel	so	isolated	and	lonely,
or	filling	oneself	with	bravado	to	mask	the	fragile	self	hiding	within.	But	all
that	was	no	surprise.	Youth	was	headlong,	even	when	it	felt	static,	stagnant	and
stifling.	It	liked	its	emotions	extreme,	doused	in	fiery	spices,	enough	to	burn
the	throat	and	set	flame	to	the	heart.	The	future	was	not	consciously	rushed	into
–	it	was	just	the	place	you	suddenly	ended	up	in,	battered	and	weary	and
wondering	how	in	Hood’s	name	you	got	there.	Well.	He	could	see	that.	He
didn’t	need	the	echoes	of	his	grandmother ’s	ceaseless	advice	whispering
through	his	thoughts.
Assuming,	of	course,	that	voice	belonged	to	his	grandmother.	He	had
begun	to	suspect	otherwise.
Bottle	crossed	the	heap,	moved	down	onto	the	south	side.	At	the	base	here
the	desiccated	ground	was	pitted,	revealing	much	older	leavings	of	rubbish	–
red-glazed	sherds	with	faded	images	of	chariots	and	stilted	figures	wearing
ornate	headdresses	and	wielding	strange	hook-bladed	weapons.	The	massive
olive-oil	jars	common	to	this	region	retained	these	old	forms,	clinging	to	a
mostly	forgotten	antiquity	as	if	the	now	lost	golden	age	was	any	different	from
the	present	one.


His	grandmother ’s	observations,	those	ones.	She’d	had	nothing	good	to
say	about	the	Malazan	Empire,	but	even	less	about	the	Untan	Confederacy,	the
Li	Heng	League	and	all	the	other	despotic	rulers	of	the	pre-empire	days	on
Quon	Tali.	She	had	been	a	child	through	all	the	Itko	Kan–Cawn	Por	wars,	the
Seti	Tide,	the	Wickan	migrations,	the	Quon	attempt	at	hegemony.	All	blood	and
stupidity,	she	used	to	say.	All	prod	and	pull.	The	old	with	their	ambitions	and
the	young	with	their	eager	mindless	zeal.	At	least	the	Emperor	put	an	end	to	all
that	–	a	knife	in	the	back	for	those	grey	tyrants	and	distant	wars	for	the	young
zealots.	It	ain’t	right	but	nothing	ever	is.	Ain’t	right,	as	I	said,	but	better	than
worst,	and	I	remember	the	worst.
Now	here	he	was,	in	the	midst	of	one	of	those	distant	wars.	Yet	there	had
been	no	zeal	in	his	motivations.	No,	something	far	more	pathetic.	Boredom
was	a	poor	reason	to	do	anything.	Better	to	hold	high	some	raging	brand	of
righteousness,	no	matter	how	misguided	and	lacking	in	subtlety.
Cuttle	talks	of	vengeance.	But	he	makes	his	trying	to	feed	us	something	too
obvious,	and	we’re	not	swelling	with	rage	like	we’re	supposed	to.	He	couldn’t
be	sure	of	it,	but	this	army	felt	lost.	At	its	very	core	was	an	empty	place,
waiting	to	be	filled,	and	Bottle	feared	it	would	wait	for	ever.
He	settled	down	onto	the	ground,	began	a	silent	series	of	summonings.
Before	long,	a	handful	of	lizards	scampered	across	the	dusty	earth	towards
him.	Two	rhizan	settled	down	onto	his	right	thigh,	their	wings	falling	still.	An
arch	spider,	big	as	a	horse’s	hoof	and	the	colour	of	green	glass,	leapt	from	a
nearby	rock	and	landed	light	as	a	feather	on	his	left	knee.	He	studied	his	array
of	companions	and	decided	they	would	do.	Gestures,	the	stroke	of	fingers,
silent	commands,	and	the	motley	servants	hurried	off,	making	one	and	all
towards	the	sheep	pen	where	the	captain	would	address	the	sergeants.
It	paid	to	know	just	how	wide	Hood’s	Gate	was	going	to	be	come	the
assault.
And	then	something	else	was	on	its	way.
Sudden	sweat	on	Bottle’s	skin.
She	appeared	from	the	heat	haze,	moving	like	an	animal	–	prey,	not
predator,	in	her	every	careful,	watchful	motion	–	fine-furred,	deep	brown,	a
face	far	more	human	than	ape,	filled	with	expression	–	or	at	least	its	potential,
for	the	look	she	fixed	upon	him	now	was	singular	in	its	curiosity.	As	tall	as
Bottle,	lean	but	heavy-breasted,	belly	distended.	Skittish,	she	edged	closer.
She	is	not	real.	A	manifestation,	a	conjuration.	A	memory	sprung	from	the
dust	of	this	land.
He	watched	her	crouch	to	collect	a	handful	of	sand,	then	fling	it	at	him,
voicing	a	loud	barking	grunt.	The	sand	fell	short,	a	few	pebbles	bouncing	off


his	boots.
Or	maybe	I	am	the	conjured,	not	her.	In	her	eyes	the	wonder	of	coming	face
to	face	with	a	god,	or	a	demon.	He	looked	past	her,	and	saw	the	vista	of	a
savannah,	thick	with	grasses,	stands	of	trees	and	wildlife.	Nothing	like	it	should
have	been,	only	what	it	once	was,	long	ago.	Oh,	spirits,	why	won’t	you	leave	me
alone?
She	had	been	following.	Following	them	all.	The	entire	army.	She	could
smell	it,	see	the	signs	of	its	passing,	maybe	even	hear	the	distant	clack	of	metal
and	wooden	wheels	punching	down	the	sides	of	stones	in	the	road	as	they
rocked	along.	Driven	on	by	fear	and	fascination,	she	had	followed,	not
understanding	how	the	future	could	echo	back	to	her	world,	her	time.	Not
understanding?	Well,	he	couldn’t	either.	As	if	all	is	present,	as	if	every	moment
co-exists.	And	here	we	two	are,	face	to	face,	both	too	ignorant	to	partition	our
faith,	our	way	of	seeing	the	world	–	and	so	we	see	them	all,	all	at	once,	and	if
we’re	not	careful	it	will	drive	us	mad.
But	there	was	no	turning	back.	Simply	because	back	did	not	exist.
He	remained	seated	and	she	came	closer,	chattering	now	in	some	strange
glottal	tongue	filled	with	clicks	and	stops.	She	gestured	at	her	own	belly,	ran	an
index	figure	along	it	as	if	drawing	a	shape	on	the	downy,	paler	pelt.
Bottle	nodded.	Yes,	you	carry	a	child.	I	understand	that	much.	Still,	what	is
that	to	me?
She	threw	more	sand	at	him,	most	of	it	striking	below	his	chest.	He	waved
at	the	cloud	in	front	of	his	stinging	eyes.
A	lunge	forward,	surprisingly	swift,	and	she	gripped	his	wrist,	drew	his
arm	forward,	settled	his	hand	on	her	belly.
He	met	her	eyes,	and	was	shaken	to	his	very	core.	This	was	no	mindless
creature.	Eres’al.	The	yearning	in	those	dark,	stunningly	beautiful	eyes	made
him	mentally	reel.
‘All	right,’	he	whispered,	and	slowly	sent	his	senses	questing,	into	that
womb,	into	the	spirit	growing	within	it.
For	every	abomination,	there	must	emerge	its	answer.	Its	enemy,	its
counterbalance.	Here,	within	this	Eres’al,	is	such	an	answer.	To	a	distant
abomination,	the	corruption	of	a	once-innocent	spirit.	Innocence	must	be
reborn.	Yet…I	can	see	so	little…not	human,	not	even	of	this	world,	barring	what
the	Eres’al	herself	brought	to	the	union.	Thus,	an	intruder.	From	another	realm,
a	realm	bereft	of	innocence.	To	make	them	part	of	this	world,	one	of	their	kind
must	be	born…in	this	way.	Their	blood	must	be	drawn	into	this	world’s	flow	of
blood.
But	why	an	Eres’al?	Because…gods	below…because	she	is	the	last


innocent	creature,	the	last	innocent	ancestor	of	our	line.	After	her…the
degradation	of	spirit	begins.	The	shifting	of	perspective,	the	separation	from	all
else,	the	carving	of	borders	–	in	the	ground,	in	the	mind’s	way	of	seeing.	After
her,	there’s	only…us.
The	realization	–	the	recognition	–	was	devastating.	Bottle	pulled	his	hand
away.	But	it	was	too	late.	He	knew	too	many	things,	now.	The	father…Tiste
Edur.	The	child	to	come…the	only	pure	candidate	for	a	new	Throne	of	Shadow
–	a	throne	commanding	a	healed	realm.
And	it	would	have	so	many	enemies.	So	many…
‘No,’	he	said	to	the	creature,	shaking	his	head.	‘You	cannot	pray	to	me.
Must	not.	I’m	not	a	god.	I’m	only	a…’
Yet…to	her	I	must	seem	just	that.	A	vision.	She	is	spirit-questing	and	she
barely	knows	it.	She’s	stumbling,	as	much	as	we	all	are,	but	within	her	there’s	a
kind	of…certainty.	Hope.	Gods…faith.
Humbled	beyond	words,	filling	with	shame,	Bottle	pulled	away,	clawing	up
the	slope	of	the	mound,	amidst	the	detritus	of	civilization,	potsherds	and
fragments	of	mortar,	rusted	pieces	of	metal.	No,	he	didn’t	want	this.	Could	not
encompass	this…this	need	in	her.	He	could	not	be	her…her	faith.
She	drew	yet	closer,	hands	closing	round	his	neck,	and	dragged	him	back.
Teeth	bared,	she	shook	him.
Unable	to	breathe,	Bottle	flailed	in	her	grip.
She	threw	him	down,	straddled	him,	released	his	neck	and	raised	two	fists
as	if	to	batter	him.
‘You	want	me	to	be	your	god?’	he	gasped,	‘Fine,	then!	Have	it	your	way!’
He	stared	up	at	her	eyes,	at	the	fists	lifted	high,	framed	by	bright,	blinding
sunlight.
So,	is	this	how	a	god	feels?
A	flash	of	glare,	as	if	a	sword	had	been	drawn,	an	eager	hiss	of	iron	filling
his	head.	Something	like	a	fierce	challenge—
Blinking,	he	found	himself	staring	up	at	the	empty	sky,	lying	on	the	rough
scree.	She	was	gone,	but	he	could	still	feel	the	echo	of	her	weight	on	his	hips,
and	the	appalling	erection	her	position	had	triggered	in	him.
	
Fist	Keneb	walked	into	the	Adjunct’s	tent.	The	map-table	had	been	assembled
and	on	it	was	an	imperial	map	of	Y’Ghatan	that	had	been	delivered	a	week
earlier	by	a	rider	from	Onearm’s	Host.	It	was	a	scholar ’s	rendition	drawn
shortly	after	Dassem’s	fall.	Standing	at	Tavore’s	side	was	Tene	Baralta,	busy
scrawling	all	over	the	vellum	with	a	charcoal	stick,	and	the	Red	Blade	was


speaking.
‘…rebuilt	here,	and	here,	in	the	Malazan	style	of	sunk	columns	and
counter-sunk	braces.	The	engineers	found	the	ruins	beneath	the	streets	to	be	a
maze	of	pockets,	old	rooms,	half-buried	streets,	wells	and	inside-wall
corridors.	It	should	all	have	been	flattened,	but	at	least	one	age	of	construction
was	of	a	stature	to	rival	what’s	possible	these	days.	Obviously,	that	gave	them
problems,	which	is	why	they	gave	up	on	the	fourth	bastion.’
‘I	understand,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘however,	as	I	stated	earlier,	Fist	Baralta,	I
am	not	interested	in	assailing	the	fourth	bastion.’
Keneb	could	see	the	man’s	frustration,	but	he	held	his	tongue,	simply
tossing	down	the	charcoal	stick	and	stepping	away	from	the	table.
Over	in	the	corner	sat	Fist	Blistig,	legs	sprawled	out	in	a	posture	bordering
on	insubordination.
‘Fist	Keneb,’	Tavore	said,	eyes	still	on	the	map,	‘have	you	met	with	Temul
and	Warleader	Gall?’
‘Temul	reports	the	city	has	been	evacuated	–	an	exodus	of	citizens	on	the
road	to	Lothal.	Clearly,	Leoman	is	planning	for	a	long	siege,	and	is	not
interested	in	feeding	anyone	but	soldiers	and	support	staff.’
‘He	wants	room	to	manoeuvre,’	said	Blistig	from	where	he	sat.	‘Panic	in
the	streets	won’t	do.	We	shouldn’t	read	too	much	into	it,	Keneb.’
‘I	suspect,’	Tene	Baralta	said,	‘we’re	not	reading	enough	into	it.	I	am
nervous,	Adjunct.	About	this	whole	damned	situation.	Leoman	didn’t	come
here	to	defend	the	last	rebel	city.	He	didn’t	come	to	protect	the	last	believers	–
by	the	Seven	Holies,	he	has	driven	them	from	their	very	homes,	from	their
very	own	city!	No,	his	need	for	Y’Ghatan	was	tactical,	and	that’s	what	worries
me,	because	I	can	make	no	sense	of	it.’
The	Adjunct	spoke:	‘Did	Temul	have	anything	else	to	say,	Keneb?’
‘He	had	thoughts	of	a	night	attack,	with	sappers,	taking	out	a	section	of
wall.	Presumably,	we	would	then	follow	through	in	strength,	into	that	breach,
thrusting	deep	into	Y’Ghatan’s	heart.	Cut	through	far	enough	and	we	can
isolate	Leoman	in	the	Falah’d’s	palace…’
‘Too	risky,’	Tene	Baralta	said	in	a	grumble.	‘Darkness	won’t	cover	those
sappers	from	their	mages.	They’d	get	slaughtered—’
‘Risks	cannot	be	avoided,’	Tavore	said.
Keneb’s	brows	rose.	‘Temul	said	much	the	same,	Adjunct,	when	the	danger
was	discussed.’
‘Tene	Baralta,’	Tavore	continued	after	a	moment,	‘you	and	Blistig	have
been	directed	as	to	the	disposition	of	your	companies.	Best	you	begin
preparations.	I	have	spoken	directly	with	Captain	Faradan	Sort	on	what	will	be


required	of	her	and	her	squads.	We	shall	not	waste	time	on	this.	We	move
tonight.	Fist	Keneb,	remain,	please.	The	rest	of	you	are	dismissed.’
Keneb	watched	Blistig	and	Baralta	leave,	reading	in	an	array	of	small	signs
–	posture,	the	set	of	their	shoulders	and	the	stiffness	of	their	gaits	–	the	depth	of
their	demoralization.
‘Command	does	not	come	from	consensus,’	the	Adjunct	said,	her	tone
suddenly	hard	as	she	faced	Keneb.	‘I	deliver	the	orders,	and	my	officers	are	to
obey	them.	They	should	be	relieved	that	is	the	case,	for	all	responsibility	lies
with	me	and	me	alone.	No-one	else	shall	have	to	answer	to	the	Empress.’
Keneb	nodded,	‘As	you	say,	Adjunct.	However,	your	officers	do	feel
responsible	–	for	their	soldiers—’
‘Many	of	whom	will	die,	sooner	or	later,	on	some	field	of	battle.	Perhaps
even	here	in	Y’Ghatan.	This	is	a	siege,	and	sieges	are	messy.	I	do	not	have	the
luxury	of	starving	them	out.	The	longer	Leoman	resists,	the	greater	the	risk	of
flare-ups	all	over	Seven	Cities.	High	Fist	Dujek	and	I	are	fully	agreed	on	this.’
‘Then	why,	Adjunct,	did	we	not	accept	his	offer	of	more	troops?’
She	was	silent	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then,	‘I	am	aware	of	the
sentiments	among	the	squads	of	this	army,	none	of	whom,	it	seems,	are	aware
of	the	true	condition	of	Onearm’s	Host.’
‘The	true	condition?’
She	stepped	closer.	‘There’s	almost	nothing	left,	Keneb.	The	core	–	the
very	heart	–	of	Onearm’s	Host	–	it’s	gone.’
‘But	–	Adjunct,	he	has	received	replacements,	has	he	not?’
‘What	was	lost	cannot	be	replaced.	Recruits:	Genabarii,	Nathii,	half	the
Pale	Garrison,	oh,	count	the	boots	and	they	look	to	be	intact,	up	to	full
complement,	but	Keneb,	know	this	–	Dujek	is	broken.	And	so	is	the	Host.’
Shaken,	Keneb	turned	away.	He	unstrapped	his	helm	and	drew	the	battered
iron	from	his	head,	then	ran	a	hand	through	his	matted,	sweaty	hair.	‘Hood	take
us,	the	last	great	imperial	army…’
‘Is	now	the	Fourteenth,	Fist.’
He	stared	at	her.
She	began	pacing.	‘Of	course	Dujek	offered,	for	he	is,	well,	he	is	Dujek.
Besides,	the	ranking	High	Fist	could	do	no	less.	But	he	–	they	–	have	suffered
enough.	Their	task	now	is	to	make	the	imperial	presence	felt	–	and	we	should
all	pray	to	our	gods	that	they	do	not	find	their	mettle	tested,	by	anyone.’
‘That	is	why	you	are	in	such	a	hurry.’
‘Leoman	must	be	taken	down.	Y’Ghatan	must	fall.	Tonight.’
Keneb	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	asked,	‘Why,	Adjunct,	are
you	telling	me	this?’


‘Because	Gamet	is	dead.’
Gamet?	Oh,	I	see.
‘And	T’amber	is	not	respected	by	any	of	you.	Whereas,’	she	glanced	at
him,	with	an	odd	expression,	‘you	are.’
‘You	wish	for	me	to	inform	the	other	Fists,	Adjunct?’
‘Regarding	Dujek?	Decide	that	for	yourself,	but	I	advise	you,	Fist,	to	think
very	carefully	before	reaching	that	decision.’
‘But	they	should	be	told!	At	least	then	they	will	understand…’
‘Me?	Understand	me?	Perhaps.	But	that	is	not	the	most	important	issue
here.’
He	did	not	comprehend.	Not	at	once.	Then,	a	growing	realization.	‘Their
faith,	beyond	you,	beyond	the	Fourteenth,	lies	with	Dujek	Onearm.	So	long	as
they	believe	he	is	there,	poised	behind	us	and	ready	to	march	to	our	aid,	they
will	do	as	you	command.	You	do	not	want	to	take	that	away	from	them,	yet	by
your	silence	you	sacrifice	yourself,	you	sacrifice	the	respect	they	would
accord	you—’
‘Assuming	such	respect	would	be	granted,	Fist,	and	of	that	I	am	not
convinced.’	She	returned	to	the	map-table.	‘The	decision	is	yours,	Fist.’
He	watched	her	studying	the	map,	then,	concluding	he	had	been	dismissed,
Keneb	left	the	tent.
He	felt	sick	inside.	The	Host	–	broken?	Was	that	simply	her	assessment?
Maybe	Dujek	was	just	tired…yet,	who	might	know	better?	Quick	Ben,	but	he
wasn’t	here.	Nor	that	assassin,	Kalam	Mekhar.	Leaving…well,	one	man.	He
paused	outside	the	tent,	studied	the	sun’s	position.	There	might	be	time,	before
Sort	spoke	to	them	all,	if	he	hurried.
Keneb	set	out	towards	the	camps	of	the	marines.
	
‘What	do	you	want	me	to	say,	Fist?’	The	sergeant	had	laid	out	a	half-dozen
heavy	quarrels.	He	had	already	tied	sharpers	to	two	of	them	and	was	working
on	a	third.
Keneb	stared	at	the	clay-ball	grenado	in	Strings’s	hands.	‘I	don’t	know,	but
make	it	honest.’
Strings	paused	and	looked	over	at	his	squad,	eyes	narrowing.	‘Adjunct’s
hoping	for	reinforcements	if	things	go	bad?’	He	was	speaking	in	a	low	voice.
‘That’s	just	it,	Sergeant.	She	isn’t.’
‘So,	Fist,’	Strings	said,	‘she	thinks	Dujek’s	finished.	And	so’s	the	Host.	Is
that	what	she	thinks?’
‘Yes.	You	know	Quick	Ben,	and	the	High	Mage	was	there,	after	all.	At


Coral.	He’s	not	here	for	me	to	ask	him,	so	I’m	asking	you.	Is	the	Adjunct
right?’
He	resumed	affixing	the	grenado	to	the	quarrel	head.
Keneb	waited.
‘Seems,’	the	sergeant	muttered,	‘I	misjudged	the	Adjunct.’
‘In	what	way?’
‘She’s	better	at	reading	signs	than	I	thought.’
Hood’s	balls,	I	really	did	not	want	to	hear	that.

‘You	are	looking	well,	Ganoes	Paran.’
His	answering	smile	was	wry.	‘My	new	life	of	ease,	Apsalar.’
Shouts	from	the	sailors	on	the	deck	as	the	carrack	swung	towards	the
harbour	of	Kansu,	the	sound	of	gulls	a	muted	accompaniment	to	the	creak	of
cordage	and	timber.	A	cool	breeze	rode	the	salty	air	coming	through	the
cabin’s	round	window	portside,	smelling	of	the	shore.
Apsalar	studied	the	man	seated	across	from	her	a	moment	longer,	then
returned	to	her	task	of	roughing	with	a	pumice	stone	the	grip	of	one	of	her	infighting	knives.	Polished	wood	was	pretty,	but	far	too	slick	in	a	sweaty	hand.
Normally	she	used	leather	gloves,	but	it	never	hurt	to	consider	less	perfect
circumstances.	For	an	assassin,	the	ideal	situation	was	choosing	when	and
where	to	fight,	but	such	luxuries	were	not	guaranteed.
Paran	said,	‘I	see	that	you’re	as	methodical	as	ever.	Although	at	least	now,
there’s	more	animation	in	your	face.	Your	eyes…’
‘You’ve	been	at	sea	too	long,	Captain.’
‘Probably.	Anyway,	I’m	not	a	captain	any	more.	My	days	as	a	soldier	are
done.’
‘Regrets?’
He	shrugged.	‘Some.	I	was	never	where	I	wanted	to	be	with	them.	Until	the
very	end,	and	then,’	he	paused,	‘well,	it	was	too	late.’
‘That	might	have	been	for	the	better,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Less…sullied.’
‘Odd,	how	the	Bridgeburners	mean	different	things	for	us.	Memories,	and
perspectives.	I	was	treated	well	enough	among	the	survivors—’
‘Survivors.	Yes,	there’s	always	survivors.’
‘Picker,	Antsy,	Blend,	Mallet,	a	few	others.	Proprietors	of	K’rul’s	Bar,
now,	in	Darujhistan.’
‘K’rul’s	Bar?’
‘The	old	temple	once	sanctified	to	that	Elder	God,	aye.	It’s	haunted,	of


course.’
‘More	than	you	realize,	Paran.’
‘I	doubt	that.	I’ve	learned	a	lot,	Apsalar,	about	a	lot	of	things.’
A	heavy	thud	to	starboard,	as	the	harbour	patrol	arrived	to	collect	the
mooring	fees.	The	slap	of	lines.	More	voices.
‘K’rul	played	a	very	active	role	against	the	Pannion	Domin,’	Paran	went
on.	‘Since	that	time,	I’ve	grown	less	easy	with	his	presence	–	the	Elder	Gods
are	back	in	the	game—’
‘Yes,	you’ve	already	said	something	to	that	effect.	They	are	opposing	the
Crippled	God,	and	one	cannot	find	fault	in	that.’
‘Are	they?	Sometimes	I’m	convinced…other	times,’	he	shook	his	head.
Then	rose.	‘We’re	pulling	in.	I	need	to	make	arrangements.’
‘What	kind	of	arrangements?’
‘Horses.’
‘Paran.’
‘Yes?’
‘Are	you	now	ascended?’
His	eyes	widened.	‘I	don’t	know.	Nothing	feels	different.	I	admit	I’m	not
even	sure	what	ascendancy	means.’
‘Means	you’re	harder	to	kill.’
‘Why?’
‘You	have	stumbled	onto	power,	of	a	personal	nature,	and	with	it,	well,
power	draws	power.	Always.	Not	the	mundane	kind,	but	something	other,	a
force	in	nature,	a	confluence	of	energies.	You	begin	to	see	things	differently,	to
think	differently.	And	others	take	notice	of	you	–	that’s	usually	bad,	by	the	way.’
She	sighed,	studying	him,	and	said,	‘Perhaps	I	don’t	need	to	warn	you,	but	I
will.	Be	careful,	Paran;	of	all	the	lands	in	this	world,	there	are	two	more
dangerous	than	all	others—’
‘Your	knowledge,	or	Cotillion’s?’
‘Cotillion’s	for	one,	mine	for	the	other.	Anyway,	you’re	about	to	set	foot
on	one	of	those	two.	Seven	Cities,	Paran,	is	not	a	healthy	place	to	be,	especially
not	for	an	ascendant.’
‘I	know.	I	can	feel	that…what’s	out	there,	what	I	have	to	deal	with.’
‘Get	someone	else	to	do	your	fighting	for	you,	if	possible.’
His	gaze	narrowed	on	her.	‘Now	that’s	a	clear	lack	of	faith.’
‘I	killed	you	once—’
‘And	you	were	possessed	by	a	god,	by	the	Patron	of	Assassins	himself,
Apsalar.’
‘Who	played	by	the	rules.	There	are	things	here	that	do	not.’


‘I’ll	give	that	some	consideration,	Apsalar.	Thank	you.’
‘And	remember,	bargain	from	strength	or	don’t	bargain	at	all.’
He	gave	her	a	strange	smile,	then	headed	topside.
A	skittering	sound	from	one	corner,	and	Telorast	and	Curdle	scampered
into	view,	bony	feet	clattering	on	the	wooden	floor.
‘He	is	dangerous,	Not-Apsalar!	Stay	away,	oh,	you’ve	spent	too	long	with
him!’
‘Don’t	worry	about	me,	Telorast.’
‘Worry?	Oh,	we	have	worries,	all	right,	don’t	we,	Curdle?’
‘Endless	worries,	Telorast.	What	am	I	saying?	We’re	not	worried.’
Apsalar	said,	‘The	Master	of	the	Deck	knows	all	about	you	two,	no	doubt
compounding	those	worries.’
‘But	he	told	you	nothing!’
‘Are	you	so	certain	of	that?’
‘Of	course!’	The	bird-like	skeleton	bobbed	and	weaved	in	front	of	its
companion.	‘Think	on	it,	Curdle!	If	she	knew	she’d	step	on	us!	Wouldn’t	she?’
‘Unless	she	has	a	more	devious	betrayal	in	mind,	Telorast!	Have	you
thought	of	that?	No,	you	haven’t,	have	you?	I	have	to	do	all	the	thinking.’
‘You	never	think!	You	never	have!’
Apsalar	rose.	‘They’ve	dropped	the	gangplank.	Time	to	leave.’
‘Hide	us	under	your	cloak.	You	have	to.	There	are	dogs	out	there,	in	the
streets!’
She	sheathed	the	knife.	‘All	right,	but	no	squirming.’
	
A	squalid	port,	four	of	the	six	piers	battered	into	treacherous	hulks	by	Nok’s
fleet	a	month	earlier,	Kansu	was	in	no	way	memorable,	and	Apsalar	was
relieved	as	they	rode	past	the	last	sprawl	of	shanties	on	the	inland	road	and	saw
before	them	a	scattering	of	modest	stone	buildings,	marking	the	herders,	the
pens	and	the	demon-eyed	goats	gathered	beneath	guldindha	trees.	And	beyond
that,	tharok	orchards	with	their	silvery,	thread-like	bark	prized	for	ropemaking,	the	uneven	rows	looking	ghostly	with	their	boles	shimmering	in	the
wind.
There	had	been	something	odd	in	the	city	behind	them,	the	crowds	smaller
than	was	normal,	the	voices	more	muted.	A	number	of	merchant	shops	had
been	shut,	and	this	during	peak	market	time.	The	modest	garrison	of	Malazan
soldiers	was	present	only	at	the	gates	and	down	at	the	docks,	where	at	least	four
trader	ships	had	been	denied	berths.	And	no-one	seemed	inclined	to	offer
explanations	to	outsiders.


Paran	had	spoken	quietly	with	the	horse	trader	and	Apsalar	had	watched	as
more	coin	than	was	necessary	changed	hands,	but	the	ex-captain	had	said
nothing	during	their	ride	out.
Reaching	a	crossroads,	they	drew	rein.
‘Paran,’	Apsalar	said,	‘did	you	note	anything	strange	about	Kansu?’
He	grimaced.	‘I	don’t	think	we	need	worry,’	he	said.	‘You’ve	been
possessed	by	a	god,	after	all,	and	as	for	me,	well,	as	I	said,	there’s	no	real
cause	for	worry.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘Plague.	Hardly	surprising,	given	all	the	unburied	corpses	following	this
rebellion.	It	began	a	week	or	so	ago,	somewhere	east	of	Ehrlitan.	Any	ships
that	made	port	or	hail	from	there	are	being	turned	away.’
Apsalar	said	nothing	for	a	time.	Then	she	nodded.	‘Poliel.’
‘Aye.’
‘And	not	enough	healers	left	to	intercede.’
‘The	horse	trader	said	officials	went	to	the	Temple	of	D’rek,	in	Kansu.	The
foremost	healers	are	found	there,	of	course.	They	found	everyone	within
slaughtered.’
She	glanced	over	at	him.
‘I	take	the	south	track,’	Paran	said,	fighting	with	his	edgy	gelding.
Yes,	there	is	nothing	more	to	be	said,	is	there.	The	gods	are	indeed	at	war.
‘The	west	for	us,’	Apsalar	replied,	already	uncomfortable	with	the	Seven	Cities
style	of	saddle.	Neither	she	nor	Cotillion	had	ever	had	much	success	with
horses,	but	at	least	the	mare	beneath	her	seemed	a	docile	beast.	She	opened	her
cloak	and	dragged	out	Telorast,	then	Curdle,	tossing	them	both	onto	the
ground,	where	they	raced	ahead,	long	tails	flicking.
‘All	too	short,’	Paran	said,	meeting	her	eyes.
She	nodded.	‘But	just	as	well,	I	think.’
Her	comment	was	not	well	received.	‘I	am	sorry	to	hear	you	say	that.’
‘I	do	not	mean	to	offend,	Ganoes	Paran.	It’s	just	that,	well,	I	was
rediscovering…things.’
‘Like	comradeship?’
‘Yes.’
‘And	that	is	something	you	feel	you	cannot	afford.’
‘Invites	carelessness,’	she	said.
‘Ah,	well.	For	what	it	is	worth,	Apsalar,	I	believe	we	will	see	each	other
again.’
She	allowed	that	sentiment,	and	nodded.	‘I	will	look	forward	to	that.’
‘Good,	then	there’s	hope	for	you	yet.’


She	watched	him	ride	away,	his	two	packhorses	trailing.	Changes	came	to	a
man	in	ways	few	could	imagine.	He	seemed	to	have	let	go	of	so	much…she
was	envious	of	that.	And	already,	she	realized	with	a	faint	stab	of	regret,
already	she	missed	him.	Too	close,	too	dangerous	by	far.	Just	as	well.
As	for	plague,	well,	he	was	probably	right.	Neither	he	nor	Apsalar	had
much	to	fear.	Too	bad	for	everyone	else,	though.
	
The	broken	remnants	of	the	road	made	for	an	agonized	traverse	up	the
limestone	hillside,	rocks	tumbling	and	skittering	down	in	clouds	of	dust.	A
flash	flood	had	cut	through	the	passage	unknown	years	or	decades	past,
revealing	countless	layers	of	sediments	on	the	channel’s	steep-cut	walls.
Leading	her	horse	and	the	pack-mules	by	the	reins,	Samar	Dev	studied	those
multi-hued	layers.	‘Wind	and	water,	Karsa	Orlong,	without	end.	Time’s	endless
dialogue	with	itself.’
Three	paces	ahead,	the	Toblakai	warrior	did	not	reply.	He	was	nearing	the
summit,	taking	the	down-flow	path	of	the	past	flood,	ragged,	gnawed	rock
rising	to	either	side	of	him.	The	last	hamlet	was	days	behind	them	now;	these
lands	were	truly	wild.	Reclaimed,	since	surely	this	road	must	have	led
somewhere,	once,	but	there	were	no	other	signs	of	past	civilization.	In	any
case,	she	was	less	interested	in	what	had	gone	before.	What	was	to	come	was
her	fascination,	the	wellspring	of	all	her	inventions,	her	inspirations.
‘Sorcery,	Karsa	Orlong,	that	is	the	heart	of	the	problem.’
‘What	problem	now,	woman?’
‘Magic	obviates	the	need	for	invention,	beyond	certain	basic	requirements,
of	course.	And	so	we	remain	eternally	stifled—’
‘To	the	Faces	with	stifled,	witch.	There	is	nothing	wrong	with	where	we
are,	how	we	are.	You	spit	on	satisfaction,	leaving	you	always	unsettled	and
miserable.	I	am	a	Teblor	–	we	live	simply	enough,	and	we	see	the	cruelty	of
your	so-called	progress.	Slaves,	children	in	chains,	a	thousand	lies	to	make
one	person	better	than	the	next,	a	thousand	lies	telling	you	this	is	how	things
should	be,	and	there’s	no	stopping	it.	Madness	called	sanity,	slavery	called
freedom.	I	am	done	talking	now.’
‘Well,	I’m	not.	You’re	no	different,	calling	ignorance	wisdom,	savagery
noble.	Without	striving	to	make	things	better,	we’re	doomed	to	repeat	our
litany	of	injustices—’
Karsa	reached	the	summit	and	turned	to	face	her,	his	expression	twisting.
‘Better	is	never	what	you	think	it	is,	Samar	Dev.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’


He	raised	a	hand,	suddenly	still.	‘Quiet.	Something’s	not	right.’	He	slowly
looked	round,	eyes	narrowing.	‘There’s	a…smell.’
She	joined	him,	dragging	the	horse	and	mules	onto	level	ground.	High
rocks	to	either	side,	the	edge	of	a	gorge	just	beyond	–	the	hill	they	were	on	was
a	ridge,	blade-edged,	with	more	jagged	rock	beyond.	A	twisted	ancient	tree
squatting	on	the	summit.	‘I	don’t	smell	anything…’
The	Toblakai	drew	his	stone	sword.	‘A	beast	has	laired	here,	nearby,	I
think.	A	hunter,	a	killer.	And	I	think	it	is	close…’
Eyes	widening,	Samar	Dev	scanned	the	area,	her	heart	pounding	hard	in
her	chest.	‘You	may	be	right.	There	are	no	spirits	here…’
He	grunted.	‘Fled.’
Fled.	Oh.
	
Like	a	mass	of	iron	filings,	the	sky	was	slowly	lowering	on	all	sides,	a	heavy
mist	that	was	dry	as	sand.	Not	that	that	made	any	sense,	Kalam	Mekhar	allowed,
but	this	was	what	came	of	sustained	terror,	the	wild	pathetic	conjurations	of	a
beleaguered	imagination.	He	was	clinging	with	every	part	of	his	body	that	was
capable	of	clinging	to	the	sheer,	battered	underside	of	a	sky	keep,	the	wind	or
whatever	it	was	moaning	in	his	ears,	a	trembling	stealing	the	strength	from	his
limbs	as	he	felt	the	last	of	Quick	Ben’s	magic	seep	away.
Unanticipated,	this	sudden	repudiation	of	sorcery	–	he	could	see	no
otataral,	nothing	veined	through	this	brutal,	black	basalt.	No	obvious
explanation.	Leather	gloves	cut	through,	blood	slicking	his	hands,	and	above,	a
mountain	to	climb,	with	this	dry	silver	mist	closing	in	around	him.	Somewhere
far	below	crouched	Quick	Ben	and	Stormy,	the	former	wondering	what	had
gone	wrong	and,	hopefully,	trying	to	come	up	with	an	idea	for	dealing	with	it.
The	latter	likely	scratching	his	armpits	and	popping	lice	with	his	fingernails.
Well,	there	was	no	point	in	waiting	for	what	might	not	come,	when	what
was	going	to	come	was	inevitable.	Groaning	with	the	effort,	Kalam	began
pulling	himself	along	the	rock.
The	last	sky	keep	he	had	seen	had	been	Moon’s	Spawn,	and	its	pocked	sides
had	been	home	to	tens	of	thousands	of	Great	Ravens.	Fortunately,	this	did	not
seem	to	be	the	case	here.	A	few	more	man-heights’	worth	of	climbing	and	he
would	find	himself	on	a	side,	rather	than	virtually	upside-down	as	he	was	now.
Reach	there,	he	knew,	and	he	would	be	able	to	rest.
Sort	of.
That	damned	wizard.	That	damned	Adjunct.	Damned	everybody,	in	fact,
since	not	one	of	them	was	here,	and	of	course	they	weren’t,	since	this	was


madness	and	nobody	else	was	this	stupid.	Gods,	his	shoulders	were	on	fire,	the
insides	of	his	thighs	a	solid	ache	edging	towards	numbness.	And	that	wouldn’t
be	good,	would	it?
Too	old	for	this	by	far.	Men	his	age	didn’t	reach	his	age	falling	for	stupid
plans	like	this	one.	Was	he	getting	soft?	Soft-brained.
He	pulled	himself	round	a	chiselled	projection,	scrabbled	with	his	feet	for
a	moment,	then	edged	over,	drew	himself	up	and	found	ledges	that	would	take
his	weight.	A	whimper	escaped	him,	sounding	pathetic	even	to	his	own	ears,	as
he	settled	against	the	stone.
A	while	later,	he	lifted	his	head	and	began	looking	round,	searching	for	a
suitable	outcrop	or	knob	of	rock	that	he	could	loop	his	rope	over.
Quick	Ben’s	rope,	conjured	out	of	nothing.	Will	it	even	work	here,	or	will	it
just	vanish?	Hood’s	breath,	I	don’t	know	enough	about	magic.	Don’t	even	know
enough	about	Quick,	and	I’ve	known	the	bastard	for	bloody	ever.	Why	isn’t	he
the	one	up	here?
Because,	if	the	Short-Tails	noticed	the	gnat	on	their	hide,	Quick	was	better
backup,	even	down	there,	than	Kalam	could	have	been.	A	crossbow	quarrel
would	be	spent	by	the	time	it	reached	this	high	–	you	could	just	pluck	it	out	of
the	air.	As	for	Stormy	–	a	whole	lot	more	expendable	than	me,	as	far	as	I’m
concerned	–	the	man	swore	he	couldn’t	climb,	swore	that	as	a	babe	he	never
once	made	it	out	of	his	crib	without	help.
Hard	imagining	that	hairy-faced	miserable	hulk	ever	fitting	into	a	crib	in
the	first	place.
Regaining	control	of	his	breathing,	Kalam	looked	down.
To	find	Quick	Ben	and	Stormy	nowhere	in	sight.	Gods	below,	now	what?
The	modest	features	of	the	ash-laden	plain	beneath	offered	little	in	the	way	of
cover,	especially	from	this	height.	Yet,	no	matter	where	he	scanned,	he	saw	noone.	The	tracks	they	had	made	were	faintly	visible,	leading	to	where	the
assassin	had	left	them,	and	at	that	location	there	was…something	dark,	a	crack
in	the	ground.	Difficult	to	determine	scale,	but	maybe…maybe	big	enough	to
swallow	both	of	the	bastards.
He	resumed	his	search	for	projections	for	the	rope.	And	could	see	none.
‘All	right,	I	guess	it’s	time.	Cotillion,	consider	this	a	sharp	tug	on	your	rope.
No	excuses,	you	damned	god,	I	need	your	help	here.’
He	waited.	The	moan	of	the	wind,	the	slippery	chill	of	the	mist.
‘I	don’t	like	this	warren.’
Kalam	turned	his	head	to	find	Cotillion	alongside	him,	one	hand	and	one
foot	holding	the	god	in	place.	He	held	an	apple	in	the	other	hand,	from	which
he	now	took	a	large	bite.


‘You	think	this	is	funny?’	Kalam	demanded.
Cotillion	chewed,	then	swallowed.	‘Somewhat.’
‘In	case	you	hadn’t	noticed,	we’re	clinging	to	a	sky	keep,	and	it’s	got
companions,	a	whole	damned	row	of	them.’
‘If	you	needed	a	ride,’	the	god	said,	‘you’d	be	better	off	with	a	wagon,	or	a
horse.’
‘It’s	not	moving.	It	stopped.	And	I’m	trying	to	break	into	this	one.	Quick
Ben	and	a	marine	were	waiting	below,	but	they’ve	just	vanished.’
Cotillion	examined	the	apple,	then	took	another	bite.
‘My	arms	are	getting	tired.’
Chewing.	Swallowing.	‘I’m	not	surprised,	Kalam.	Even	so,	you	will	have
to	be	patient,	since	I	have	some	questions.	I’ll	start	with	the	most	obvious	one.
Why	are	you	trying	to	break	into	a	fortress	filled	with	K’Chain	Che’Malle?’
‘Filled?	Are	you	sure?’
‘Reasonably.’
‘Then	what	are	they	doing	here?’
‘Waiting,	looks	like.	Anyway,	I’m	the	one	asking	questions.’
‘Fine.	Go	ahead,	I’ve	got	all	day.’
‘Actually,	I	think	that	was	my	only	question.	Oh,	wait,	there’s	one	more.
Would	you	like	me	to	return	you	to	solid	ground,	so	we	can	resume	our
conversation	in	more	comfort?’
‘You’re	enjoying	this	way	too	much,	Cotillion.’
‘The	opportunities	for	amusement	grow	ever	rarer.	Fortunately,	we’re	in
something	like	this	keep’s	shadow,	so	our	descent	will	be	relatively	easy.’
‘Any	time.’
Cotillion	tossed	the	apple	aside,	then	reached	out	to	grasp	Kalam’s	upper
arm.	‘Step	away	and	leave	the	rest	to	me.’
‘Hold	on	a	moment.	Quick	Ben’s	spells	were	dispelled	–	that’s	how	I	ended
up	stuck	here—’
‘Probably	because	he’s	unconscious.’
‘He	is?’
‘Or	dead.	We	should	confirm	things	either	way,	yes?’
You	sanctimonious	blood-lapping	sweat-sucking—
‘Risky,’	Cotillion	cut	in,	‘making	your	cursing	sound	like	praying.’	A
sharp	tug,	and	Kalam	bellowed	as	he	was	snatched	out	from	the	rockface.	And
was	held,	suspended	in	the	air	by	Cotillion’s	grip	on	his	arm.	‘Relax,	you
damned	ox,	“easy”	is	a	relative	term.’
Thirty	heartbeats	later	their	feet	touched	ground.	Kalam	pulled	his	arm
away	and	headed	over	to	the	fissure	gaping	in	the	place	where	Quick	and


Stormy	had	been	waiting.	He	approached	the	edge	carefully.	Called	down	into
the	dark.	‘Quick!	Stormy!’	No	answer.
Cotillion	was	at	his	side.	‘Stormy?	That	wouldn’t	be	Adjutant	Stormy,
would	it?	Pig-eyed,	hairy,	scowling—’
‘He’s	now	a	corporal,’	Kalam	said.	‘And	Gesler ’s	a	sergeant.’
A	snort	from	the	god,	but	no	further	comment.
The	assassin	leaned	back	and	studied	Cotillion.	‘I	didn’t	really	think	you’d
answer	my	prayer.’
‘I	am	a	god	virtually	brimming	with	surprises.’
Kalam’s	gaze	narrowed.	‘You	came	damned	fast,	too.	As	if	you	were…
close	by.’
‘An	outrageous	assumption,’	Cotillion	said.	‘Yet,	oddly	enough,	accurate.’
The	assassin	drew	the	coil	of	rope	from	his	shoulder,	then	looked	around,
and	swore.
Sighing,	Cotillion	held	out	one	hand.
Kalam	gave	him	one	end	of	the	rope.	‘Brace	yourself,’	he	said,	as	he
tumbled	the	coil	down	over	the	pit’s	edge.	He	heard	a	distant	snap.
‘Don’t	worry	about	that,’	Cotillion	said.	‘I’ll	make	it	as	long	as	you	need.’
Hood-damned	gods.	Kalam	worked	his	way	over	the	edge,	then	began
descending	through	the	gloom.	Too	much	climbing	today.	Either	that	or	I’m
gaining	weight.	His	moccasins	finally	settled	on	stone.	He	stepped	away	from
the	rope.
From	overhead	a	small	globule	of	light	drifted	down,	illuminating	the
nearest	wall,	vertical,	man-made,	featuring	large	painted	panels,	the	images
seeming	to	dance	in	the	descending	light.	For	a	moment,	Kalam	simply	stared.
No	idle	decoration,	this,	but	a	work	of	art,	a	master ’s	hand	exuberantly
displayed	in	each	and	every	detail.	Heavily	clothed,	more	or	less	human	in
form,	the	figures	were	in	positions	of	transcendence,	arms	upraised	in	worship
or	exaltation,	faces	filled	with	joy.	Whilst,	crowding	their	feet,	dismembered
body	parts	had	been	painted,	blood-splashed	and	buzzing	with	flies.	The
mangled	flesh	continued	down	to	the	chamber ’s	floor,	then	on	out,	and	Kalam
saw	now	that	the	bloody	scene	covered	the	entire	expanse	of	floor,	as	far	as	he
could	see	in	every	direction.
Pieces	of	rubble	were	scattered	here	and	there,	and,	less	than	a	half-dozen
paces	away,	two	motionless	bodies.
Kalam	headed	over.
Both	men	lived,	he	was	relieved	to	discover,	though	it	was	difficult	to
determine	the	extent	of	their	injuries,	beyond	the	obvious.	Stormy	had	broken
both	legs,	one	above	the	knee,	the	other	both	bones	below	the	knee.	The	back


of	his	helm	was	dented,	but	he	breathed	evenly,	which	Kalam	took	for	a	good
sign.	Quick	Ben	seemed	physically	intact	–	nothing	obviously	shattered,	at
least,	nor	any	blood.	For	both	of	them,	however,	internal	injuries	were	another
matter.	Kalam	studied	the	wizard’s	face	for	a	moment,	then	slapped	it.
Quick’s	eyes	snapped	open.	He	blinked,	looked	round,	coughed,	then	sat
up.	‘One	half	of	my	face	is	numb	–	what	happened?’
‘No	idea,’	Kalam	said.	‘You	and	Stormy	fell	through	a	hole.	The	Falari’s	in
rough	shape.	But	somehow	you	made	it	unscathed	–	how	did	you	do	that?’
‘Unscathed?	I	think	my	jaw’s	broken.’
‘No	it	isn’t.	Must	have	hit	the	floor	–	looks	a	little	puffy	but	you	wouldn’t
be	talking	if	it	was	broke.’
‘Huh,	good	point.’	He	climbed	to	his	feet	and	approached	Stormy.	‘Oh,
those	legs	look	bad.	We	need	to	set	those	before	I	can	do	any	healing.’
‘Healing?	Dammit,	Quick,	you	never	did	any	healing	in	the	squad.’
‘No,	that	was	Mallet’s	task.	I	was	the	brains,	remember?’
‘Well,	as	I	recall,	that	didn’t	take	up	much	of	your	time.’
‘That’s	what	you	think.’	The	wizard	paused	and	looked	round.	‘Where	are
we?	And	where	did	that	light	come	from?’
‘Compliments	of	Cotillion,	who	is	on	the	other	end	of	that	rope.’
‘Oh.	Well,	he	can	do	the	healing,	then.	Get	him	down	here.’
‘Then	who	will	hold	the	rope?’
‘We	don’t	need	it.	Hey,	weren’t	you	climbing	the	Moon’s	Spawn?	Ah,	that’s
why	your	god	is	here.	Right.’
‘To	utter	the	demon’s	name	is	to	call	him,’	Kalam	said,	looking	up	to
watch	Cotillion’s	slow,	almost	lazy	descent.
The	god	settled	near	Stormy	and	Quick	Ben.	A	brief	nod	to	the	wizard,	one
eyebrow	lifting,	then	Cotillion	crouched	beside	the	marine.	‘Adjutant	Stormy,
what	has	happened	to	you?’
‘That	should	be	obvious,’	Kalam	said.	‘He	broke	his	legs.’
The	god	rolled	the	marine	onto	his	back,	pulled	at	each	leg,	drawing	the
bones	back	in	line,	then	rose.	‘That	will	do,	I	think.’
‘Hardly—’
‘Adjutant	Stormy,’	Cotillion	said,	‘is	not	quite	as	mortal	as	he	might	seem.
Annealed	in	the	fires	of	Thyrllan.	Or	Kurald	Liosan.	Or	Tellann.	Or	all	three.
In	any	case,	as	you	can	see,	he’s	mending	already.	The	broken	ribs	are
completely	healed,	as	is	the	failing	liver	and	shattered	hip.	And	the	cracked
skull.	Alas,	nothing	can	be	done	for	the	brain	within	it.’
‘He’s	lost	his	mind?’
‘I	doubt	he	ever	had	one,’	the	god	replied.	‘He’s	worse	than	Urko.	At	least


Urko	has	interests,	peculiar	and	pointless	as	they	are.’
A	groan	from	Stormy.
Cotillion	walked	over	to	the	nearest	wall.	‘Curious,’	he	said.	‘This	is	a
temple	to	an	Elder	God.	Not	sure	which	one.	Kilmandaros,	maybe.	Or	Grizzin
Farl.	Maybe	even	K’rul.’
‘A	rather	bloody	kind	of	worship,’	Kalam	muttered.
‘The	best	kind,’	Quick	Ben	said,	brushing	dust	from	his	clothes.
Kalam	noted	Cotillion’s	sly	regard	of	the	wizard	and	wondered	at	it.	Ben
Adaephon	Delat,	Cotillion	knows	something	about	you,	doesn’t	he?	Wizard,
you’ve	got	too	many	secrets	by	far.	The	assassin	then	noticed	the	rope,	still
dangling	from	the	hole	far	above.	‘Cotillion,	what	did	you	tie	the	rope	to?’
The	god	glanced	over,	smiled.	‘A	surprise.	I	must	be	going.	Gentlemen…’
And	he	faded,	then	was	gone.
‘Your	god	makes	me	nervous,	Kalam,’	Quick	Ben	said	as	Stormy	groaned
again,	louder	this	time.
And	you	in	turn	make	him	nervous.	And	now…He	looked	down	at	Stormy.
The	rips	in	the	leggings	were	all	that	remained	of	the	ghastly	compound
fractures.	Adjutant	Stormy.	Annealed	in	holy	fires.	Still	scowling.
	
High	rock,	the	sediments	stepped	and	ragged,	surrounded	their	camp,	an
ancient	tree	to	one	side.	Cutter	sat	near	the	small	dung-fire	they	had	lit,
watching	as	Greyfrog	circled	the	area,	evincing	ever	more	agitation.	Nearby,
Heboric	Ghost	Hands	looked	to	be	dozing,	the	hazy	green	emanations	at	the
ends	of	his	wrists	dully	pulsing.	Scillara	and	Felisin	Younger	were	packing
their	pipes	for	their	new	sharing	of	a	post-meal	ritual.	Cutter ’s	gaze	returned	to
the	demon.
Greyfrog,	what’s	ailing	you?
‘Nervous.	I	have	intimations	of	tragedy,	swiftly	approaching.	Something…
worried	and	uncertain.	In	the	air,	in	the	sands.	Sudden	panic.	We	should	leave
here.	Turn	back.	Flee.’
Cutter	felt	sweat	bead	his	skin.	He	had	never	heard	the	demon	so…
frightened.	‘We	should	get	off	this	ridge?’
The	two	women	looked	up	at	his	spoken	words.	Felisin	Younger	glanced	at
Greyfrog,	frowned,	then	paled.	She	rose.	‘We’re	in	trouble,’	she	said.
Scillara	straightened	and	walked	over	to	Heboric,	nudged	him	with	a	boot.
‘Wake	up.’
The	Destriant	of	Treach	blinked	open	his	eyes,	then	sniffed	the	air	and	rose
in	a	single,	fluid	motion.


Cutter	watched	all	this	in	growing	alarm.	Shit.	He	kicked	sand	over	the	fire.
‘Collect	your	gear,	everyone.’
Greyfrog	paused	in	his	circling	and	watched	them.	‘So	imminent?
Uncertain.	Troubled,	yes.	Need	for	panic?	Changing	of	mind?	Foolishness?
Uncertain.’
‘Why	take	chances?’	Cutter	asked.	‘There’s	enough	light	–	we’ll	see	if	we
can	find	a	more	defensible	place	to	camp.’
‘Appropriate	compromise.	Nerves	easing	their	taut	sensitivity.	Averted?
Unknown.’
‘Usually,’	Heboric	said	in	a	rough	voice,	pausing	to	spit.	‘Usually,	running
from	one	thing	throws	you	into	the	path	of	another.’
‘Well,	thanks	for	that,	old	man.’
Heboric	gave	Cutter	an	unpleasant	smile.	‘My	pleasure.’
	
The	cliff-face	was	pocked	with	caves	which	had,	over	countless	centuries,	seen
use	as	places	of	refuge,	as	crypts	for	internment	of	the	dead,	as	storage
chambers,	and	as	sheltered	panels	for	rock-paintings.	Detritus	littered	the
narrow	ledges	that	had	been	used	as	pathways;	here	and	there	a	dark	sooty	stain
marred	overhangs	and	crevasses	where	fires	had	been	lit,	but	nothing	looked
recent	to	Mappo’s	eye,	and	he	recognized	the	funerary	ceramics	as	belonging
to	the	First	Empire	era.
They	were	approaching	the	summit	of	the	escarpment,	Icarium	scrambling
up	towards	an	obvious	notch	cut	into	the	edge	by	past	rains.	The	lowering	sun
on	their	left	was	red	behind	a	curtain	of	suspended	dust	that	had	been	raised	by
the	passing	of	a	distant	storm.	Bloodflies	buzzed	the	air	around	the	two
travellers,	frenzied	by	the	storm’s	brittle,	energized	breath.
Icarium’s	drive	had	become	obsessive,	a	barely	restrained	ferocity.	He
wanted	judgement,	he	wanted	the	truth	of	his	past	revealed	to	him,	and	when
that	judgement	came,	no	matter	how	harsh,	he	would	stand	before	it	and	raise
not	a	single	hand	in	his	own	defence.
And	Mappo	could	think	of	nothing	to	prevent	it,	short	of	somehow
incapacitating	his	friend,	of	striking	him	into	unconsciousness.	Perhaps	it
would	come	to	that.	But	there	were	risks	to	such	an	attempt.	Fail	and	Icarium’s
rage	would	burgeon	into	life,	and	all	would	be	lost.
He	watched	as	the	Jhag	reached	the	notch	and	clambered	through,	then	out
of	sight.	Mappo	quickly	followed.	Reaching	the	summit,	he	paused,	wiping	grit
from	his	hands.	The	old	drainage	channel	had	carved	a	channel	through	the
next	tiers	of	limestone,	creating	a	narrow,	twisting	track	flanked	by	steep	walls.


A	short	distance	beyond,	Mappo	could	see	the	edge	of	another	drop-off,
towards	which	Icarium	was	heading.
Thick	shadows	within	the	channel,	insects	swarming	in	the	few	shafts	of
sunlight	spearing	through	a	gnarled	tree.	Three	strides	from	reaching
Icarium’s	side,	and	the	gloom	seemed	to	explode	around	the	Trell.	He	caught	a
momentary	glimpse	of	something	closing	on	Icarium	from	the	pinnacle	of
stone	to	the	Jhag’s	right,	then	figures	swarmed	him.
The	Trell	lashed	out,	felt	his	fist	connect	with	flesh	and	bone	to	his	left,	the
sound	solid	and	crunching.	A	spatter	of	blood	and	phlegm.
A	brawny	arm	snaked	round	from	behind	to	close	on	his	neck,	twisting	his
head	back,	the	glistening	skin	of	that	limb	sliding	as	if	oiled	before	the	arm
locked	tight.	Another	figure	plunged	into	view	from	the	front,	long-taloned
hands	snapping	out,	puncturing	Mappo’s	belly.	He	bellowed	in	agony	as	the
claws	raked	across	in	an	eviscerating	slash.
That	failed,	for	the	Trell’s	hide	was	thicker	than	the	leather	armour
covering	it.	Even	so,	blood	sprayed.	The	creature	behind	him	tightened	its
stranglehold.	He	could	feel	something	of	its	immense	weight	and	size.	Unable
to	draw	a	weapon,	Mappo	pivoted,	then	flung	himself	backward	into	a	rock
wall.	The	crunch	of	bone	and	skull	behind	him,	a	gasp	from	the	beast	that	rose
into	a	screech	of	pain.
The	creature	with	its	claws	in	Mappo’s	belly	had	been	dragged	closer	by
the	Trell’s	backward	lunge.	He	closed	his	hands	round	its	squat,	bony	skull,
flexed,	then	savagely	twisted	the	head	to	one	side.	The	neck	snapped.	Another
scream,	this	time	seeming	to	come	from	all	sides.
Roaring,	Mappo	staggered	forward,	grasping	at	the	forearm	drawn	across
his	neck.	The	beast’s	weight	slammed	into	him,	sent	him	stumbling.
He	caught	a	glimpse	of	Icarium,	collapsing	beneath	a	swarm	of	dark,
writhing	creatures.
Too	late	he	felt	his	leading	foot	pitch	down	over	the	crumbled	edge	of	the
cliff-side,	down	into…open	air.	The	creature’s	weight	pushed	him	further
forward,	then,	as	it	saw	the	precipice	they	were	both	about	to	plunge	over,	the
forearm	loosened.
But	Mappo	held	fast,	twisting	to	drag	the	beast	with	him	as	he	fell.
Another	shriek,	and	he	finally	caught	full	sight	of	the	thing.	Demonic,
mouth	opened	wide,	needle-like	fangs	fully	locked	in	their	hinges,	each	as	long
as	Mappo’s	thumb,	glistening	black	eyes,	the	pupils	vertical	and	the	hue	of
fresh	blood.
T’rolbarahl.
How?


He	saw	its	rage,	its	horror,	as	they	both	plummeted	from	the	cliff.
Falling.
Falling…
Gods,	this	was—


Book	Two

Beneath	this	Name


	

In	darkness	he	came,	this	brutal	slayer	of	kin,	discharged	and
unleashed,	when	all	but	ghosts	fled	the	wild	dishevelled	swagger	–	oh
he	knew	pain,	twin	fires	of	vast	oblivion	burning	his	soul—and	so	the
ghosts	did	gather,	summoned	by	one	who	would	stand,	mortal	and
feckless,	in	the	terrible	slayer ’s	path,	would	stand,	this	precious	fool,
and	gamble	all	in	the	clasping	of	hand,	warm	to	cold,	and	be	led	to	the
place	long	vanished,	and	beasts	long	vanquished	would	at	his	word
awaken	once	more.
And	who	was	there	to	warn	him?	Why,	no-one,	and	what	found	its	way
free	was	no	friend	to	the	living.	When	you	play	horror	against	horror,
dear	listener,	leave	all	hope	behind—and	ride	a	fast	horse.
Master	Blind
Saedevar	of	the	Widecut	Jhag


Chapter	Seven
Never	bargain	with	a	man	who	has	nothing	to	lose.
Sayings	of	the	Fool
Thenys	Bule
Leoman	of	the	Flails	staggered	from	the	inner	sanctum,	a	sheen	of	sweat	on	his
face.	In	a	hoarse	voice	he	asked,	‘Is	it	night	yet?’
Corabb	rose	quickly,	then	sat	back	down	on	the	bench	as	blackness
threatened	to	engulf	him	–	he	had	been	sitting	too	long,	watching	Dunsparrow
attempt	to	pace	a	trench	in	the	stone	floor.	He	opened	his	mouth	to	reply,	but
the	Malazan	woman	spoke	first.
‘No,	Leoman,	the	sun	rides	the	horizon.’
‘Movement	yet	from	the	Malazan	camps?’
‘The	last	runner	reported	half	a	bell	ago.	Nothing	at	that	time.’
There	was	a	strange,	triumphant	gleam	in	Leoman’s	eyes	that	troubled
Corabb,	but	he	had	no	time	to	ask	as	the	great	warrior	strode	past.	‘We	must
hurry.	Back	to	the	palace	–	some	final	instructions.’
The	enemy	was	attacking	this	very	night?	How	could	Leoman	be	so
certain?	Corabb	stood	once	again,	more	slowly	this	time.	The	High	Priestess
had	forbidden	witnesses	to	the	ritual,	and	when	the	Queen	of	Dreams
manifested,	even	the	High	Priestess	and	her	acolytes	had	left	the	chamber	with
discomfited	expressions,	leaving	Leoman	alone	with	the	goddess.	Corabb	fell
in	two	steps	behind	his	leader,	prevented	from	drawing	closer	by	that	damned
woman,	Dunsparrow.
‘Their	mages	will	make	detection	difficult,’	the	Third	was	saying	as	they
headed	out	of	the	temple.
‘No	matter,’	Leoman	snapped.	‘It’s	not	like	we	have	any	worthy	of	the
name	anyway.	Even	so,	we	need	to	make	it	look	as	if	we’re	trying.’
Corabb	frowned.	Trying?	He	did	not	understand	any	of	this.	‘We	need
soldiers	on	the	walls!’	he	said.	‘As	many	as	can	be	mustered!’
‘We	can’t	hold	the	walls,’	Dunsparrow	said	over	her	shoulder.	‘You	must
have	realized	that,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.’


‘Then	–	then,	why	are	we	here?’
The	sky	overhead	was	darkening,	the	bruise	of	dusk	only	moments	away.
Through	empty	streets,	the	three	of	them	rushed	along.	Corabb’s	frown
deepened.	The	Queen	of	Dreams.	Goddess	of	divination	and	who	knew	what
else.	He	despised	all	gods,	except,	of	course,	for	Dryjhna	the	Apocalyptic.
Meddlers,	deceivers,	murderers	one	and	all.	That	Leoman	would	seek	one
out…this	was	troubling	indeed.
Dunsparrow’s	fault,	he	suspected.	She	was	a	woman.	The	Queen’s
priesthood	was	mostly	women	–	at	least,	he	thought	it	was	–	there’d	been	a
High	Priestess,	after	all,	a	blurry-eyed	matron	swimming	in	the	fumes	of
durhang	and	likely	countless	other	substances.	Just	to	stand	near	her	was	to	feel
drunk.	Too	seductive	by	far.	Nothing	good	was	going	to	come	of	this,	nothing
at	all.
They	approached	the	palace	and,	finally,	some	signs	of	activity.	Warriors
moving	about,	weapons	clanking,	shouts	from	the	fortifications.	So,	the	outer
walls	would	be	breached	–	no	other	reason	for	all	this	preparation.	Leoman
expected	a	second	siege,	here	at	the	palace	itself.	And	soon.
‘Warleader!’	Corabb	said,	shouldering	Dunsparrow	aside.	‘Give	me
command	of	the	palace	gates!	We	shall	hold	against	the	Malazan	storm	in	the
name	of	the	Apocalypse!’
Leoman	glanced	back	at	him,	considering,	then	he	shook	his	head.	‘No,
friend.	I	need	you	for	a	far	more	important	task.’
‘What	will	that	be,	Great	Warrior?	I	am	equal	to	it.’
‘You’d	better	be,’	Leoman	said.
Dunsparrow	snorted.
‘Command	me,	Commander.’
This	time	she	laughed	outright.	Corabb	scowled	at	her.
Leoman	replied,	‘Your	task	this	night	is	this,	my	friend.	Guard	my	back.’
‘Ah,	we	shall	be	leading	the	fight,	then,	in	the	very	frontmost	ranks!
Glorious,	we	shall	deliver	unto	the	Malazan	dogs	a	judgement	they	shall	never
forget.’
Leoman	slapped	him	on	the	shoulder.	‘Aye,	Corabb,’	he	said.	‘That	we
shall.’
They	continued	on,	into	the	palace.
Dunsparrow	was	still	laughing.
Gods,	how	Corabb	hated	her.
	
Lostara	Yil	swept	back	the	tent-flap	and	marched	inside.	She	found	Pearl


lounging	on	looted	silk	pillows,	a	hookah	of	wine-flavoured	durhang	settled
like	a	bowl	in	his	lap.	Through	the	smoke	haze,	he	met	her	fury	with	a	lazy,
fume-laden	regard,	which	of	course	made	her	even	angrier.
‘I	see	you’ve	planned	out	the	rest	of	this	night,	Pearl.	Even	as	this	damned
army	prepares	to	assault	Y’Ghatan.’
He	shrugged.	‘The	Adjunct	doesn’t	want	my	help.	I	could	have	snuck	into
the	palace	by	now,	you	know	–	they	have	no	mages	to	speak	of.	I	could	be	at
this	very	moment	sliding	a	knife	across	Leoman’s	throat.	But	no,	she	won’t
have	it.	What	am	I	to	do?’
‘She	doesn’t	trust	you,	Pearl,	and	to	be	honest,	I’m	not	surprised.’
His	brows	lifted.	‘Darling,	I	am	offended.	You,	more	than	anyone	else,
know	the	sacrifices	I	have	made	to	protect	the	Adjunct’s	fragile	psyche.
Needless	to	say,’	he	added,	pausing	for	a	lungful	of	the	cloying	smoke,	‘I	have
of	late	been	tempted	to	shatter	that	psyche	with	the	truth	about	her	sister,	just
out	of	spite.’
‘Your	restraint	impresses	me,’	Lostara	said.	‘Of	course,	if	you	did
something	as	cruel	as	that,	I’d	have	to	kill	you.’
‘What	a	relief,	knowing	how	you	endeavour	to	protect	the	purity	of	my
soul.’
‘Purity	is	not	the	issue,’	she	replied.	‘Not	yours,	at	least.’
He	smiled.	‘I	was	attempting	to	cast	myself	in	a	more	favourable	light,	my
sweet.’
‘It	is	clear	to	me,	Pearl,	that	you	imagined	our	brief	romance	–	if	one
could	call	it	that	–	as	indicative	of	genuine	feelings.	I	find	that	rather	pathetic.
Tell	me,	do	you	plan	on	ever	returning	me	to	my	company	in	the	Red	Blades?’
‘Not	quite	yet,	I’m	afraid.’
‘Has	she	given	us	another	mission?’
‘The	Adjunct?	No,	but	as	you	may	recall,	what	we	did	for	Tavore	was	a
favour.	We	work	for	the	Empress.’
‘Fine.	What	does	our	Empress	command?’
His	eyes	were	heavy-lidded	as	they	studied	her	for	a	moment.	‘Wait	and
see.’
‘She	commands	us	to	wait	and	see?’
‘All	right,	since	you	insist,	you	are	temporarily	detached	from	me,	a
notion	that	should	give	you	untold	satisfaction.	Go	join	the	marines,	or	the
sappers,	or	whoever	in	Hood’s	name	is	attacking	tonight.	And	if	you	get	a	limb
lopped	off	don’t	come	crawling	back	to	me	–	gods,	I	can’t	believe	I	just	said
that.	Of	course	you	can	come	crawling	back	to	me,	just	be	sure	to	bring	the
limb	along.’


‘You	don’t	possess	High	Denul,	Pearl,	so	what	point	in	bringing	back	the
limb?’
‘I’d	just	like	to	see	it,	that’s	all.’
‘If	I	do	come	crawling	back,	Pearl,	it	will	be	to	stick	a	knife	in	your	neck.’
‘With	those	cheery	words	you	can	go	now,	dear.’
She	wheeled	and	marched	from	the	tent.
	
Fist	Keneb	joined	Tene	Baralta	in	the	mustering	area	just	inside	the	north
pickets.	Moths	and	biting	flies	were	swarming	in	the	crepuscular	air.	Heaps	of
rocky	earth	rose	like	modest	barrows	where	the	soldiers	had	dug	their
trenches.	As	yet,	few	squads	had	assembled,	so	as	not	to	reveal	the	army’s
intentions	too	early,	although	Keneb	suspected	that	Leoman	and	his	warriors
already	knew	all	that	needed	to	be	known.	Even	so,	the	Fist	noted	as	he	stared	at
the	distant,	uneven	wall,	topmost	among	the	tiers	of	earth	and	rubble,	there
seemed	to	be	no	activity.	Y’Ghatan	was	deathly	quiet,	virtually	unlit	as	darkness
spread	its	cloak.
Tene	Baralta	was	in	full	armour:	scaled	vest,	chain	skirt	and	camail,
greaves	and	vambraces	of	beaten	bronze	rimmed	with	iron.	He	was	adjusting
the	straps	of	his	helm	as	Keneb	came	to	his	side.
‘Blistig	is	not	happy,’	Keneb	said.
Baralta’s	laugh	was	low.	‘Tonight	belongs	to	you	and	me,	Keneb.	He	only
moves	in	if	we	get	in	trouble.	Temul	was	wondering…this	plan,	it	matches	his
own.	Did	you	advise	the	Adjunct?’
‘I	did.	Inform	Temul	that	she	was	pleased	that	his	strategy	matched	her	own
in	this	matter.’
‘Ah.’
‘Have	your	company’s	mages	begun?’	Keneb	asked.
A	grunt,	then,	‘They	say	there’s	no-one	there,	no-one	waiting	to	counter
them.	Nil	and	Nether	have	made	the	same	discovery.	Could	Leoman	have	lost
all	his	mages,	do	you	think?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Seems	unlikely.’
‘I	trust	you’ve	heard	the	rumours,	Keneb.’
‘About	what?’
‘Plague.	From	the	east.	It	has	swept	through	Ehrlitan.	If	we	fail	tonight	and
find	ourselves	bogged	down	outside	this	city…’
Keneb	nodded.	‘Then	we	must	succeed,	Tene	Baralta.’
A	rider	was	galloping	on	the	road	behind	and	to	their	right,	fast
approaching.	Both	men	turned	as	the	pounding	hoofs	reverberated	through	the


ground	at	their	feet.	‘An	urgent	message?’	Keneb	wondered,	squinting	to	make
out	the	grey-cloaked	figure,	face	hidden	by	a	hood.	A	longsword	at	his	side,
the	scabbard	banded	in	white	enamel.	‘I	do	not	recog—’
The	rider	rode	straight	for	them.	Bellowing	in	anger,	Tene	Baralta	leapt	to
one	side.	Keneb	followed,	then	spun	as	the	rider	flew	past,	his	white	horse
reaching	the	trenches,	and	launching	itself	over.	The	picket	guards	shouted.	A
crossbow	discharged,	the	quarrel	striking	the	stranger	on	the	back,	then
caroming	off	into	the	night.	Still	riding	at	full	gallop,	the	figure	now	leaning
forward	over	the	horse’s	neck,	they	sailed	over	the	narrow	inside	trench,	then
raced	for	the	city.
Where	a	gate	cracked	open,	spilling	muted	lantern	light.
‘Hood’s	breath!’	Tene	Beralta	swore,	regaining	his	feet.	‘An	enemy	rides
right	through	our	entire	army!’
‘We’ve	no	exclusive	claim	on	bravery,’	Keneb	said.	‘And	I	admit	to	a
grudging	admiration	–	I	am	glad	to	have	witnessed	it.’
‘A	rider	to	bring	word	to	Leoman—’
‘Nothing	he	doesn’t	already	know,	Tene	Baralta.	Consider	this	a	lesson,	a
reminder—’
‘I	need	none,	Keneb.	Look	at	this,	my	helm’s	full	of	dirt.	Light	grey	cloak,
white	horse	and	white-banded	sword.	A	tall	bastard.	I	will	find	him,	I	swear	it,
and	he	will	pay	for	his	temerity.’
‘We’ve	enough	concerns	ahead	of	us	this	night,’	Keneb	said.	‘If	you	go	off
hunting	one	man,	Tene	Baralta…’
He	emptied	the	dirt	from	the	helm.	‘I	hear	you.	Pray	to	Treach,	then,	that
the	bastard	crosses	my	path	one	more	time	this	night.’
Treach,	is	it?	Fener…gone	so	quickly	from	men’s	minds.	A	message	no	god
would	dare	to	heed,	I	think.

Lieutenant	Pores	stood	with	Captain	Kindly	and	the	Korelri	Faradan	Sort,
within	sight	of	their	respective	companies.	Word	of	a	spy	in	the	army’s	midst,
boldly	riding	into	Y’Ghatan,	had	everyone	more	on	edge	than	they	already
were,	given	that	at	any	moment	would	come	the	order	to	move.	Sappers	in	the
lead,	of	course,	disguised	within	gloomy	magic.
Magic.	It’s	all	gloomy.	Worse	than	sappers,	in	fact.	In	combination,	well,
this	night	was	headed	straight	into	the	Abyss,	as	far	as	Pores	was	concerned.	He
wondered	where	old	Ebron	was,	and	if	he	was	participating	in	the	rituals	–	he
missed	his	old	squad.	Limp,	Bell,	and	that	new	lass,	Sinn	–	now	there	was	a


scary	creature.	Well,	maybe	he	didn’t	miss	them	all	that	much.	Dangerous,	one
and	all,	and	mostly	to	each	other.
Captain	Kindly	had	been	trying	to	take	the	measure	of	the	woman	standing
beside	him	–	a	choice	of	phrase	that	brought	a	small	smile	to	the	lieutenant’s
mouth.	Take	her	measure.	But	ain’t	nobody’s	got	that	close,	from	what	I	hear.	In
any	case,	it	was	frustrating	being	unable	to	get	a	sense	of	a	fellow	officer.	Cold
iron,	probably	–	you	don’t	stand	the	Wall	long	enough	to	survive	without
something	icy,	brutal	and	calculated	wrapped	round	the	soul	–	but	this	one	was
cold	in	every	other	way	besides.	Rarest	of	all,	a	woman	of	few	words.	He
smiled	again.
‘Wipe	that	grin	off	your	face,	Lieutenant,’	Kindly	said,	‘or	I’ll	conclude
you’ve	lost	your	mind	and	promote	you.’
‘Apologies,	Captain,	I	promise	I	won’t	do	it	again.	Please	don’t	promote
me.’
‘You	two	are	idiots,’	Faradan	Sort	said.
Well,	that’s	one	way	to	halt	a	conversation.
	
Sergeant	Hellian	looked	on	the	wavering	scene,	comforted	by	an
overwhelming	sense	of	propriety,	although	the	way	everyone	was	swaying	was
making	her	nauseous.	Corporal	Urb	separated	himself	from	the	squad	and
came	up	to	her.
‘You	ready	for	this,	Sergeant?’
‘Ready	for	what?’	she	demanded.	Then	scowled,	all	sense	of	propriety
vanishing.	‘If	that	bastard	hadn’t	disappeared	the	way	he	did,	I	wouldn’t	be
trading	my	sword	for	a	jug	of	that	local	rot,	would	I?’	She	reached	down	for
the	weapon,	her	hand	groping	as	it	found	only	air,	then	the	empty	scabbard.
‘Why	didn’t	you	stop	me,	Urb?	I	mean,	it	was	my	sword,	after	all.	What	am	I
s’posed	to	use?’
He	shifted	nervously,	then	leaned	closer.	‘Get	a	new	one	from	the	armoury,
Sergeant.’
‘And	that’ll	get	back	to	the	captain	and	we’ll	get	shipped	off	somewhere
even	worse.’
‘Worse?	Where	is	worse	than	this,	Sergeant?’
‘Korel.	Theftian	Penins’la.	Black	Coral,	under	the	empty	eyes	of	the	Tiste
Andii.	The	Wreckers’	Coast	on	North	Assail—’
‘Ain’t	no	Malazan	forces	there.’
‘No,	but	it’s	worse	than	this.’
‘One	story	from	some	addled	sailor	in	Kartool	and	you’re	now	convinced


that	Hood	himself	strides	the	shadows—’
‘He’s	stridin’	our	shallows	–	shadows,	I	mean.’
‘Listen,	Sergeant,	we’re	about	to	head	into	battle—’
‘Right,	where’s	that	jug?’	She	looked	round,	found	it	lying	on	its	side	near
somebody’s	bedroll.	‘Hey,	who	in	my	squad	ain’t	packed	up	their	kit?’
‘That’s	yours,	Sergeant,’	Urb	said.
‘Oh.’	Collecting	the	jug,	she	gave	it	a	shake	and	was	pleased	at	the	sloshing
sounds	within.	She	glanced	over	to	stare	at	her…squad.	There	were	two
soldiers.	Two.	Some	squad.	Captain	had	said	something	about	a	few
newcomers	on	the	way.	‘Well,	where	are	they?’
‘Who?’	Urb	asked.	‘Your	squad?	They’re	right	in	front	of	you.’
‘Touchy	and	Brethless.’
‘That’s	right.’
‘Well,	where	are	the	rest?	Didn’t	we	have	more?’
‘Had	four	marching	with	us	the	last	day,	but	they	were	reassigned.’
‘So	my	squad	is	a	corporal	and	two	soljers.’
‘Twins,	Sergeant,’	Touchy	said.	‘But	I’m	older,	as	I’m	sure	you	can	tell.’
‘And	mentally	underdeveloped,	Sergeant,’	Brethless	said.	‘Those	last	few
minutes	were	obviously	crucial,	as	I’m	sure	you	can	tell.’
Hellian	turned	away.	‘They	look	the	same	to	me,	Urb.	All	right,	has	the
word	come	yet?	We	s’posed	to	be	mustering	somewhere	right	now?’
‘Sergeant,	you	might	want	to	pass	that	jug	around	–	we’re	about	to	get	in	a
fight	and	I	don’t	know	about	you	and	them	two,	but	I	joined	the	local	city	guard
so’s	I	wouldn’t	have	to	do	any	of	this.	I	been	to	the	latrines	four	times	since
supper	and	I’m	still	all	squishy	inside.’
At	Urb’s	suggestion	Hellian	clutched	the	jug	tight	to	her	chest.
‘Getyerown.’
‘Sergeant.’
‘All	right,	a	couple	mouthfuls	each,	then	I	get	the	rest.	I	see	anybody	take
more’n	two	swallows	and	I	cut	’em	down	where	they	stand.’
‘With	what?’	Urb	asked	as	he	pulled	the	jug	from	her	reluctant	hands.
Hellian	frowned.	With	what?	What	was	he	talking	about?	Oh,	right.	She
thought	for	a	moment,	then	smiled.	‘I’ll	borrow	your	sword,	of	course.’	There,
what	a	pleasing	solution.
	
Sergeant	Balm	squatted	in	the	dirt,	studying	the	array	of	pebbles,	stone	discs
and	clay	buttons	resting	on	the	elongated	Troughs	board.	He	muttered	under
his	breath,	wondering	if	this	was	a	dream,	a	nightmare	and	he	was	still	asleep.


He	glanced	across	at	Sergeant	Moak,	then	looked	back	down	at	the	gameboard.
Something	was	wrong.	He	could	make	no	sense	of	the	pieces.	He’d
forgotten	how	to	play	the	game.	Straws,	discs,	buttons,	pebbles	–	what	were
they	all	about?	What	did	they	signify?	Who	was	winning?	‘Who’s	playing	this
damned	game?’	he	demanded.
‘You	and	me,	you	Dal	Honese	weasel,’	Moak	said.
‘I	think	you’re	lying.	I	never	seen	this	game	before	in	my	life.’	He	glared
round	at	all	the	faces,	the	soldiers	all	looking	down	to	watch,	all	looking	at
him	now.	Strange	expressions	–	had	he	ever	seen	any	of	them	before?	He	was	a
sergeant,	wasn’t	he?	‘Where’s	my	damned	squad?	I’m	supposed	to	be	with	my
damned	squad.	Has	the	call	come?	What	am	I	doing	here?’	He	shot	upright,
making	sure	one	foot	toppled	the	game-board.	Pieces	flew,	soldiers	jumping
back.
‘Bad	omen!’	one	hissed,	backing	away.
Growling,	Moak	rose,	reaching	for	the	knife	at	his	belt.	‘Swamp	scum,
you’ll	pay	for	that.	I	was	winning—’
‘No	you	weren’t!	Those	pieces	were	a	mess!	A	jumble!	They	didn’t	make
sense!’	He	reached	up	and	scratched	at	his	face.	‘What	–	this	is	clay!	My	face	is
covered	in	clay!	A	death	mask!	Who	did	this	to	me?’
A	familiar	but	musty-smelling	man	stepped	close	to	Balm.	‘Sergeant,	your
squad’s	right	here.	I’m	Deadsmell—’
‘I’ll	say.’
‘Corporal	Deadsmell.	And	that’s	Throatslitter,	and	Widdershins,	Galt	and
Lobe—’
‘All	right,	all	right,	be	quiet,	I	ain’t	blind.	When’s	the	call	coming?	We
should’ve	heard	something	by	now.’
Moak	closed	in.	‘I	wasn’t	finished	with	you	–	that	was	a	curse,	what	you
did,	Balm,	on	me	and	my	squad	–	since	I	was	winning	the	game.	You	cursed	us,
you	damned	warlock—’
‘I	did	not!	It	was	an	accident.	Come	on,	Deadsmell,	let’s	make	our	way	to
the	pickets,	I’m	done	waiting	here.’
‘You’re	headed	the	wrong	way,	Sergeant!’
‘Lead	on,	then!	Who	designed	this	damned	camp,	anyway?	None	of	it
makes	any	sense!’
Behind	them,	Sergeant	Moak	made	to	step	after	them,	but	his	corporal,
Stacker,	pulled	him	back.	‘It’s	all	right,	Sergeant.	I	heard	about	this	from	my
da.	It’s	the	Confusion.	Comes	to	some	before	a	battle.	They	lose	track	–	of
everything.	It	should	settle	down	once	the	fighting	starts	–	but	sometimes	it


don’t,	and	if	that’s	the	case	with	Balm,	then	it’s	his	squad	that’s	doomed,	not
us.’
‘You	sure	about	all	that,	Stacker?’
‘Yeah.	Remember	Fist	Gamet?	Listen.	It’s	all	right.	We	should	check	our
weapons,	one	last	time.’
Moak	sheathed	his	knife.	‘Good	idea,	get	them	on	it,	then.’
Twenty	paces	away,	Deadsmell	fell	in	step	alongside	his	sergeant.	‘Smart,
all	that	back	there.	You	was	losing	bad.	Faking	the	Confusion,	well,	Sergeant,
I’m	impressed.’
Balm	stared	at	the	man.	Who	was	he	again?	And	what	was	he	blathering	on
about?	What	language	was	the	fool	speaking,	anyway?
	
‘I	got	no	appetite,’	Lutes	said,	tossing	the	chunk	of	bread	away.	A	camp	dog
closed	in,	collected	the	food	and	scampered	off.	‘I	feel	sick,’	the	soldier
continued.
‘You	ain’t	the	only	one,’	Maybe	said.	‘I’m	in	there	first,	you	know.	Us
sappers.	Rest	of	you	got	it	easy.	We	got	to	set	charges,	meaning	we’re	running
with	cussers	and	crackers	over	rough	ground,	climbing	rubble,	probably	under
fire	from	the	walls.	Then,	down	at	the	foot	of	the	wall	and	Hood	knows	what’s
gonna	pour	down	on	us.	Boiling	water,	oil,	hot	sand,	bricks,	offal,	barrackbuckets.	So	it’s	raining	down.	Set	the	munitions.	Acid	on	the	wax	–	too	much
and	we	all	go	up	right	there	and	then.	Dozens	of	sappers,	and	any	one	of	’em
makes	a	mistake,	or	some	piece	of	rock	drops	smack	onto	a	munition.	Boom!
We’re	as	good	as	dead	already,	if	you	ask	me.	Bits	of	meat.	Tomorrow
morning	the	crows	will	come	down	and	that’s	that.	Send	word	to	my	family,
will	you?	Maybe	was	blown	to	bits	at	Y’Ghatan,	that’s	all.	No	point	in	going
into	the	gory	details	–	hey,	where	you	going?	Gods	below,	Lutes,	do	your
throwing	up	outa	my	sight,	will	you?	Hood	take	us,	that’s	awful.	Hey,	Balgrid!
Look!	Our	squad	healer ’s	heaving	his	guts	out!’
	
Gesler,	Strings,	Cuttle,	Truth	and	Pella	sat	around	the	dying	coals	of	a	hearth,
drinking	tea.
‘They’re	all	losing	their	minds	with	this	waiting,’	Gesler	said.
‘I	get	just	as	bad	before	every	battle,’	Strings	admitted.	‘Cold	and	loose
inside,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.	It	never	goes	away.’
‘But	you	settle	once	it’s	begun,’	Cuttle	said.	‘We	all	do,	’cause	we’ve	done


this	before.	We	settled,	and	we	know	we	settle.	Most	of	these	soldiers,	they
don’t	know	nothing	of	the	sort.	They	don’t	know	how	they’ll	be	once	the
fighting	starts.	So	they’re	all	terrified	they’ll	curl	up	into	cringing	cowards.’
‘Most	of	them	probably	will,’	Gesler	said.
‘I	don’t	know	about	that,	Sergeant,’	Pella	said.	‘Saw	plenty	of	soldiers	just
like	these	ones	at	Skullcup.	When	the	rebellion	hit,	well,	they	fought	and	they
fought	well,	all	things	considered.’
‘Outnumbered.’
‘Yes.’
‘So	they	died.’
‘Most	of	them.’
‘That’s	the	thing	with	war,’	Gesler	said.	‘Ain’t	nearly	as	many	surprises,
when	all’s	said	and	done,	as	you	might	think.	Or	hope.	Heroic	stands	usually
end	up	with	not	a	single	hero	left	standing.	Held	out	longer	than	expected,	but
the	end	was	the	same	anyway.	The	end’s	always	the	same.’
‘Abyss	below,	Gesler,’	Strings	said,	‘ain’t	you	a	cheery	one.’
‘Just	being	realistic,	Fid.	Damn,	I	wish	Stormy	was	here,	now	it’s	up	to	me
to	keep	an	eye	on	my	squad.’
‘Yes,’	Cuttle	said,	‘that’s	what	sergeants	do.’
‘You	suggesting	Stormy	should’ve	been	sergeant	and	me	corporal?’
‘Now	why	would	I	do	that?’	the	sapper	asked.	‘You’re	both	just	as	bad	as
each	other.	Now	Pella	here…’
‘No	thanks,’	Pella	said.
Strings	sipped	his	tea.	‘Just	make	sure	everybody	sticks	together.	Captain
wants	us	on	the	tip	of	the	spear,	as	fast	and	as	far	in	as	we	can	get	–	the	rest	will
just	have	to	catch	up.	Cuttle?’
‘Once	the	wall’s	blown	I’ll	pull	our	sappers	together	and	we	meet	you
inside	the	breach.	Where’s	Borduke	right	now?’
‘Went	for	a	walk.	Seems	his	squad	got	into	some	kind	of	sympathetic
heaves.	Borduke	got	disgusted	and	stormed	off.’
‘So	long	as	everybody’s	belly	is	empty	by	the	time	we	get	the	call,’	Cuttle
said.	‘Especially	Maybe.’
‘Especially	maybe,’	Gesler	said,	with	a	low	laugh.	‘That’s	a	good	one.
You’ve	made	my	day,	Cuttle.’
‘Believe	me,	it	wasn’t	intentional.’
	
Seated	nearby,	hidden	from	the	others	in	a	brush-bordered	hollow,	Bottle
smiled.	So	that’s	how	the	veterans	get	ready	for	a	fight.	Same	as	everyone	else.


That	did	indeed	comfort	him.	Mostly.	Well,	maybe	not.	Better	had	they	been
confident,	brash	and	swaggering.	This	–	what	was	coming	–	sounded	all	too
uncertain.
He	had	just	returned	from	the	mage	gathering.	Magical	probes	had
revealed	a	muted	presence	in	Y’Ghatan,	the	priestly	kind,	for	the	most	part,	and
what	there	was	of	that	was	confused,	panicked.	Or	strangely	quiescent.	For	the
sappers’	advance,	Bottle	would	be	drawing	upon	Meanas,	rolling	banks	of
mist,	tumbling	darkness	on	all	sides.	Easily	dispelled,	if	a	mage	of	any	skill
was	on	the	wall,	but	there	didn’t	seem	to	be	any.	Most	troubling	of	all,	Bottle
would	need	all	his	concentration	to	work	Meanas,	thus	preventing	him	from
using	spirit	magic.	Leaving	him	as	blind	as	those	few	enemy	soldiers	on	the
wall.
He	admitted	to	a	bad	run	of	nerves	–	he	hadn’t	been	nearly	so	shaky	at
Raraku.	And	with	Leoman’s	ambush	in	the	sandstorm,	well,	it	was	an	ambush,
wasn’t	it	–	there’d	been	no	time	for	terror.	In	any	case,	he	didn’t	like	this
feeling.
Rising	into	a	crouch,	he	moved	away,	up	and	out	of	the	hollow,
straightening	and	walking	casually	into	the	squad’s	camp.	It	seemed	Strings
didn’t	mind	leaving	his	soldiers	alone	for	a	while	before	things	heated	up,
letting	them	chew	on	their	own	thoughts,	then	–	hopefully	–	reining	everyone
in	at	the	last	moment.
Koryk	was	tying	yet	more	fetishes	onto	the	various	rings	and	loops	in	his
armour,	strips	of	coloured	cloth,	bird	bones	and	chain-links	to	add	to	the
ubiquitous	finger	bones	that	now	signified	the	Fourteenth	Army.	Smiles	was
flipping	her	throwing-knives,	the	blades	slapping	softly	on	the	leather	of	her
gloves.	Tarr	stood	nearby,	shield	already	strapped	on	his	left	arm,	short	sword
in	his	gauntleted	right	hand,	most	of	his	face	hidden	by	his	helm’s	cheekguards.
Turning,	Bottle	studied	the	distant	city.	Dark	–	there	seemed	not	a	single
lantern	glowing	from	that	squat,	squalid	heap.	He	already	hated	Y’Ghatan.
A	low	whistle	in	the	night.	Sudden	stirring.	Cuttle	appeared.	‘Sappers,	to
me.	It’s	time.’
Gods	below,	so	it	is.
	
Leoman	stood	in	the	Falah’d’s	throne	room.	Eleven	warriors	were	arrayed
before	him,	glassy-eyed,	their	leather	armour	webbed	in	harnesses	with	straps
and	loops	dangling.	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	studied	them	–	familiar	faces
one	and	all,	yet	now	barely	recognizable	beneath	the	blood	and	strips	of	skin.


Deliverers	of	the	Apocalypse,	sworn	now	to	fanaticism,	sworn	not	to	see	the
coming	dawn,	bound	to	death	this	night.	The	very	sight	of	them,	with	their
drug-soaked	eyes,	chilled	Corabb.
‘You	know	what	is	asked	of	you	this	night,’	Leoman	said	to	his	chosen
warriors.	‘Leave	now,	my	brothers	and	sisters,	under	the	pure	eyes	of	Dryjhna,
and	we	shall	meet	again	at	Hood’s	Gate.’
They	bowed	and	headed	off.
Corabb	watched	until	the	last	of	them	vanished	beyond	the	great	doors,
then	faced	Leoman.	‘Warleader,	what	is	to	happen?	What	have	you	planned?
You	spoke	of	Dryjhna,	yet	this	night	you	have	bargained	with	the	Queen	of
Dreams.	Speak	to	me,	before	I	begin	to	lose	faith.’
‘Poor	Corabb,’	Dunsparrow	murmured.
Leoman	shot	her	a	glare,	then	said,	‘No	time,	Corabb,	but	I	tell	you	this	–	I
have	had	my	fill	of	fanatics,	through	this	lifetime	and	a	dozen	others,	I	have
had	my	fill—’
Boots	sounded	on	the	floor	in	the	hallway	beyond,	and	they	turned	as	a	tall,
cloaked	warrior	strode	in,	drawing	his	hood	back.	Corabb’s	eyes	widened,	and
hope	surged	through	him	as	he	stepped	forward.	‘High	Mage	L’oric!	Truly,
Dryjhna	shines	bright	in	the	sky	tonight!’
The	tall	man	was	massaging	one	shoulder,	wincing	as	he	said,	‘Would	that
I	could	have	arrived	within	the	damned	city	walls	–	too	many	mages	stirring	in
the	Malazan	camp.	Leoman,	I	did	not	know	you	had	the	power	to	summon	–	I
tell	you,	I	was	headed	elsewhere—’
‘The	Queen	of	Dreams,	L’oric.’
‘Again?	What	does	she	want?’
Leoman	shrugged.	‘You	were	part	of	the	deal,	I’m	afraid.’
‘What	deal?’
‘I	will	explain	later.	In	any	case,	we	need	you	this	night.	Come,	we	climb	to
the	South	Tower.’
Another	surge	of	hope.	Corabb	knew	he	could	trust	Leoman.	The	Holy
Warrior	possessed	a	plan,	a	diabolical,	brilliant	plan.	He	had	been	a	fool	to
doubt.	He	set	off	in	the	wake	of	Dunsparrow,	High	Mage	L’oric	and	Leoman	of
the	Flails.
L’oric.	Now	we	can	fight	the	Malazans	on	equal	terms.	And	in	such	a
contest,	we	can	naught	but	win!

In	the	dark,	beyond	the	rough	ground	of	the	pickets,	Bottle	crouched	a	few


paces	away	from	the	handful	of	sappers	he	had	been	assigned	to	protect.	Cuttle,
Maybe,	Crump,	Ramp	and	Widdershins.	Nearby	was	a	second	group	being
covered	by	Balgrid:	Taffo,	Able,	Gupp,	Jump	and	Bowl.	People	he	knew	from
the	march,	now	revealed	as	sappers	or	would-be	sappers.	Insane.	Never	knew
there	were	so	many	in	our	company.	Strings	was	in	neither	group;	he	would	be
leading	the	rest	of	the	squads	into	the	breach	before	the	smoke	and	dust	settled.
Y’Ghatan’s	walls	were	a	mess,	tiered	with	older	efforts,	the	last	series
Malazan-built	in	the	classic	sloping	style,	twenty	paces	thick	at	its	base.	As	far
as	anyone	knew,	this	would	be	the	first	time	the	sappers	would	challenge	the
engineering	of	imperial	fortifications	–	he	could	see	the	gleam	in	their	eyes.
Someone	approached	from	his	right	and	Bottle	squinted	through	the
gloom	as	the	man	arrived	to	crouch	down	beside	him.	‘Ebron,	isn’t	it?’
‘Aye,	Ashok	Regiment.’
Bottle	smiled.	‘They	don’t	exist	no	more,	Ebron.’
He	tapped	his	chest,	then	said,	‘You	got	a	squad-mate	of	mine	in	your
group.’
‘The	one	named	Crump.’
‘Aye.	Just	thought	you	should	know	–	he’s	dangerous.’
‘Aren’t	they	all?’
‘No,	this	one	especially.	He	was	tossed	out	of	the	Mott	Irregulars	back	on
Genabackis.’
‘Sorry,	that	don’t	mean	nothing	to	me,	Ebron.’
‘Too	bad.	Anyway,	consider	yourself	warned.	Might	think	about
mentioning	it	to	Cuttle.’
‘All	right,	I	will.’
‘Oponn’s	pull	on	you	this	night,	lad.’
‘And	on	you,	Ebron.’
The	man	vanished	into	the	darkness	once	more.
More	waiting.	No	lights	visible	along	the	city’s	wall,	nor	the	flanking
corner	bastions.	No	movement	among	the	battlements.
A	low	whistle.	Bottle	met	Cuttle’s	eyes,	and	the	sapper	nodded.
Meanas,	the	warren	of	shadows,	illusion	and	deception.	He	fashioned	a
mental	image	of	the	warren,	a	swirling	wall	before	him,	then	began	focusing
his	will,	watched	as	a	wound	formed,	lurid	red	at	first,	then	a	hole	burning
through.	Power	poured	into	him.	Enough!	No	more.	Gods,	why	is	it	so	strong?
Faint	sound,	something	like	movement,	a	presence,	there,	on	the	other	side	of
the	warren’s	wall…
Then…nothing.
Of	course	there	was	no	wall.	That	had	been	simply	a	construct,	a


fashioning	in	Bottle’s	mind	to	manifest	an	idea	into	something	physical.
Something	that	he	could	then	breach.
Simple,	really.	Just	incredibly	dangerous.	We	damned	mages	must	be	mad,
to	play	with	this,	to	persist	in	the	conceit	that	it	can	be	managed,	shaped,
twisted	by	will	alone.
Power	is	blood.
Blood	is	power.
And	this	blood,	it	belongs	to	an	Elder	God…
A	hiss	from	Cuttle.	He	blinked,	then	nodded	as	he	began	shaping	the
sorcery	of	Meanas.	Mists,	shot	through	with	inky	gloom,	spreading	out	across
the	rough	ground,	snaking	among	the	rubble,	and	the	sappers	set	out,	plunged
into	it,	and	moved	on,	unseen.
Bottle	followed	a	few	paces	behind.	The	soldiers	hiding	in	that	magic
could	see.	Nothing	of	the	illusion	confounded	their	senses.	Illusions	were
usually	one-	or	at	best	two-sided;	seen	from	the	other	sides,	well,	there	was
nothing	to	see.	True	masters,	of	course,	could	cheat	light	in	all	directions,
could	fashion	something	that	looked	physically	real,	that	moved	as	it	should,
casting	its	own	shadow,	even	scuffing	up	illusional	dust.	Bottle’s	level	of	skill
was	nowhere	near	that.	Balgrid	had	managed	it	–	barely,	it	was	true,	but	still…
impressive.
But	I	hate	this	kind	of	sorcery.	Sure,	it’s	fascinating.	Fun	to	play	with,	on
occasion,	but	not	like	tonight,	not	when	it’s	suddenly	life	and	death.
They	threw	wagon-planks	across	the	narrow	moat	Leoman’s	soldiers	had
dug,	then	drew	closer	to	the	wall.
	
Lostara	Yil	came	to	Tene	Baralta’s	side.	They	were	positioned	at	the	picket
line,	behind	them	the	massed	ranks	of	soldiery.	Her	former	commander ’s	face
revealed	surprise	as	he	looked	upon	her.
‘I	did	not	think	to	see	you	again,	Captain.’
She	shrugged.	‘I	was	getting	fat	and	lazy,	Commander.’
‘That	Claw	you	were	with	is	not	a	popular	man.	The	decision	was	made
that	he	was	better	off	staying	in	his	tent	–	indefinitely.’
‘I	have	no	objection	to	that.’
Through	the	gloom	they	could	see	swirling	clouds	of	deeper	darkness,
rolling	ominously	towards	the	city’s	wall.
‘Are	you	prepared,	Captain,’	Baralta	asked,	‘to	bloody	your	sword	this
night?’
‘More	than	you	could	imagine,	Commander.’


	
Waves	of	vertigo	rippled	through	Sergeant	Hellian,	nausea	threatening	as	she
watched	the	magics	draw	ever	closer	to	Y’Ghatan.	It	was	Y’Ghatan,	wasn’t	it?
She	turned	to	the	sergeant	standing	beside	her.	‘What	city	is	that?	Y’Ghatan.	I
know	about	that	city.	It’s	where	Malazans	die.	Who	are	you?	Who’s
undermining	the	walls?	Where	are	the	siege	weapons?	What	kind	of	siege	is
this?’
‘I’m	Strings,	and	you	look	to	be	drunk.’
‘So?	I	hate	fighting.	Strip	me	of	my	command,	throw	me	in	chains,	find	a
dungeon	–	only,	no	spiders.	And	find	that	bastard,	the	one	who	disappeared,
arrest	him	and	chain	him	within	reach.	I	want	to	rip	out	his	throat.’
The	sergeant	was	staring	at	her.	She	stared	back	–	at	least	he	wasn’t
weaving	back	and	forth.	Not	much,	anyway.
‘You	hate	fighting,	and	you	want	to	rip	out	someone’s	throat?’
‘Stop	trying	to	confuse	me,	Stirrings.	I’m	confused	’nough	as	it	is.’
‘Where’s	your	squad,	Sergeant?’
‘Somewhere.’
‘Where	is	your	corporal?	What	is	his	name?’
‘Urb?	I	don’t	know.’
‘Hood’s	breath.’
	
Pella	sat	watching	his	sergeant,	Gesler,	talking	with	Borduke.	The	sergeant	of
the	Sixth	Squad	had	only	three	soldiers	left	under	his	command	–	Lutes,	Ibb
and	Corporal	Hubb	–	the	others	either	magicking	or	sapping.	Of	course,	there
were	only	two	left	to	Gesler ’s	Fifth	Squad	–	Truth	and	Pella	himself.	The	plan
was	to	link	up	after	the	breach,	and	that	had	Pella	nervous.	They	might	have	to
grab	anyone	close	by	and	to	Hood	with	real	squads.
Borduke	was	tugging	at	his	beard	as	if	he	wanted	to	yank	it	off.	Hubb	stood
close	to	his	sergeant,	a	sickly	expression	on	his	face.
Gesler	looked	damn	near	bored.
Pella	thought	about	his	squad.	Something	odd	about	all	three	of	them.
Gesler,	Stormy	and	Truth.	Not	just	that	strangely	gold	skin,	either…Well,	he’d
stick	close	to	Truth	–	that	lad	still	seemed	too	wide-eyed	for	all	of	this,	despite
what	he’d	already	gone	through.	That	damned	ship,	Silanda,	which	had	been
commandeered	by	the	Adjunct	and	was	now	likely	north	of	them,	somewhere
in	the	Kansu	Sea	or	west	of	it.	Along	with	the	transport	fleet	and	a	sizeable


escort	of	dromons.	The	three	had	sailed	it,	sharing	the	deck	with	still-alive
severed	heads	and	a	lot	worse	below-decks.
Pella	checked	his	sword	one	more	time.	He’d	tied	new	leather	strapping
round	the	grip’s	tang	–	not	as	tight	as	he	would	have	liked.	He	hadn’t	soaked	it
yet,	either,	not	wanting	the	grip	still	wet	when	he	went	into	battle.	He	drew	the
crossbow	from	his	shoulder,	kept	a	quarrel	in	hand,	ready	for	a	quick	load
once	the	order	came	to	advance.
Bloody	marines.	Should’ve	volunteered	for	plain	old	infantry.	Should’ve
gotten	a	transfer.	Should’ve	never	joined	up	at	all.	Skullcup	was	more	than
enough	for	me,	dammit.	Should’ve	run,	that’s	what	I	should’ve	done.
	
Night	wind	whistling	about	them,	Corabb,	Leoman,	L’oric,	Dunsparrow	and	a
guard	stood	on	the	gently	swaying	platform	atop	the	palace	tower.	The	city
spread	out	in	all	directions,	frighteningly	dark	and	seeming	lifeless.
‘What	are	we	here	to	see,	Leoman?’	L’oric	asked.
‘Wait,	my	friend	–	ah,	there!’	He	pointed	to	the	rooftop	of	a	distant
building	near	the	west	wall.	On	its	flat	top	flickered	muted	lantern-light.
Then…gone.
‘And	there!’
Another	building,	another	flash	of	light.
‘Another!	More,	they	are	all	in	place!	Fanatics!	Damned	fools!	Dryjhna
take	us,	this	is	going	to	work!’
Work?	Corabb	frowned,	then	scowled.	He	caught	Dunsparrow’s	gaze	on
him	–	she	mouthed	a	kiss.	Oh	how	he	wanted	to	kill	her.
	
Heaps	of	rubble,	broken	pots,	a	dead,	bloated	dog,	and	animal	bones,	there
wasn’t	a	single	stretch	of	even	ground	at	the	base	of	the	wall.	Bottle	had
followed	on	the	heels	of	the	sappers,	up	the	first	tier,	brick	fragments	spilling
away	beneath	their	boots,	then	cries	of	pain	and	cursing	as	someone	stumbled
over	a	wasp	nest	–	darkness	alone	had	saved	them	from	what	could	have	been	a
fatal	few	moments	–	the	wasps	were	sluggish	–	Bottle	was	astonished	they	had
come	out	at	all,	until	he	saw	what	the	soldier	had	managed.	Knocking	over	one
rock,	then	thumping	his	entire	foot	down	the	nest’s	maw.
He’d	momentarily	relinquished	Meanas,	then,	to	slip	into	the	swarming
soul-sparks	of	the	wasps,	quelling	their	panic	and	anger.	Devoid	of	disguising
magic	for	the	last	two	tiers,	the	sappers	had	scrambled	like	terrified	beetles	–


the	rock	they	had	hidden	under	suddenly	vanishing	–	and	made	the	base	of	the
wall	well	ahead	of	the	others.	Where	they	crouched,	unlimbering	their	packs	of
munitions.
Bottle	scampered	up	to	crouch	at	Cuttle’s	side.	‘The	gloom’s	back,’	he
whispered.	‘Sorry	about	that	–	good	thing	they	weren’t	black	wasps	–	Maybe’d
be	dead	by	now.’
‘Not	to	mention	yours	truly,’	Cuttle	said.	‘It	was	me	who	stepped	in	the
damned	thing.’
‘How	many	stings?’
‘Two	or	three,	right	leg’s	numb,	but	that’s	better	than	it	was	fifteen
heartbeats	ago.’
‘Numb?	Cuttle,	that’s	bad.	Find	Lutes	fast	as	you	can	once	we’re	done
here.’
‘Count	on	it.	Now,	shut	up,	I	got	to	concentrate.’
Bottle	watched	him	lift	out	from	his	pack	a	bundle	of	munitions	–	two
cussers	strapped	together,	looking	like	a	pair	of	ample	breasts.	Affixed	to	them
at	the	base	were	two	spike-shaped	explosives	–	crackers.	Gingerly	setting	the
assemblage	on	the	ground	beside	him,	Cuttle	then	turned	his	attention	to	the
base	of	the	wall.	He	cleared	bricks	and	rocks	to	make	an	angled	hole,	large	and
deep	enough	to	accommodate	the	wall-breaker.
That	was	the	easy	part,	Bottle	reminded	himself	as	he	watched	Cuttle	place
the	explosive	into	the	hole.	Now	comes	the	acid	on	the	wax	plug.	He	glanced	up
and	down	the	length	of	wall,	saw	other	sappers	doing	the	very	same	thing
Cuttle	had	just	done.	‘Don’t	get	ahead	of	the	rest,’	Bottle	said.
‘I	know	what	needs	knowing,	mage.	Stick	to	your	spells	and	leave	me
alone.’
Miffed,	Bottle	looked	away	again.	Then	his	eyes	widened.	‘Hey,	what’s	he
doing	–	Cuttle,	what’s	Crump	doing?’
Cursing,	the	veteran	glanced	over.	‘Gods	below—’
The	sapper	from	Sergeant	Cord’s	squad	had	prepared	not	one	wallbreaker,	but	three,	the	mass	of	cussers	and	crackers	filling	his	entire	pack.	His
huge	teeth	were	gleaming,	eyes	glittering	as	he	wrestled	it	loose	and,	lying	on
his	back,	head	closest	to	the	wall,	settled	it	on	his	stomach	and	began	crawling
until	there	was	the	audible	crunch	of	the	back	of	his	skull	contacting	the
rearing	stonework.
Cuttle	scrambled	over.	‘You!’	he	hissed.	‘Are	you	mad?	Take	those	damned
things	apart!’
The	man’s	grin	collapsed.	‘But	I	made	it	myself!’
‘Keep	your	voice	down,	idiot!’


Crump	rolled	and	shoved	the	mass	of	munitions	up	against	the	wall.	A
small	glittering	vial	appeared	in	his	right	hand.	‘Wait	till	you	see	this!’	he
whispered,	smiling	once	more.
‘Wait!	Not	yet!’
A	sizzle,	threads	of	smoke	rising—
Cuttle	was	on	his	feet,	and,	dragging	a	leg,	he	began	running.	And	he
began	screaming.	‘Everyone!	Back!	Run,	you	fools!	Run!’
Figures	pelting	away	on	all	sides,	Bottle	among	them.	Crump	raced	past	as
if	the	mage	had	been	standing	still,	the	man’s	absurdly	long	legs	pumping	high
and	wild,	knobby	knees	and	huge	boots	scything	the	air.	Munitions	had	been
left	against	the	wall	but	unset,	others	remained	a	pace	or	more	back.	Sacks	of
sharpers,	smokers	and	burners	left	behind	–	gods	below,	this	is	going	to	be	bad
—
Shouts	from	atop	the	wall,	now,	voices	raised	in	alarm.	A	ballista	thumped
as	a	missile	was	loosed	at	the	fleeing	sappers.	Bottle	heard	the	crack	and	skitter
as	it	struck	the	ground.
Faster—He	glanced	over	his	shoulder,	and	saw	Cuttle	hobbling	along	in
his	wake.	Hood	take	us!	Bottle	skidded	to	a	halt,	turned	and	ran	back	to	the
sapper ’s	side.
‘Fool!’	Cuttle	grunted.	‘Just	go!’
‘Lean	on	my	shoulder—’
‘You’ve	just	killed	yourself—’
Cuttle	was	no	lightweight.	Bottle	sagged	with	his	weight	as	they	ran.
‘Twelve!’	the	sapper	gasped.
The	mage	scanned	the	ground	ahead	in	growing	panic.	Some	cover—
‘Eleven!’
A	shelf	of	old	foundation,	solid	limestone,	there,	ten,	nine	paces—
‘Ten!’
Five	more	paces	–	it	was	looking	good	–	a	hollow	on	the	other	side—
‘Nine!’
Two	paces,	then	down,	as	Cuttle	screamed:	‘Eight!’
The	night	vanished,	flinging	stark	shadows	forward	as	the	two	men
tumbled	down	behind	the	shelf	of	limestone,	into	a	heap	of	rotting	vegetation.
The	ground	lifted	to	meet	them,	a	god’s	uppercut,	driving	the	air	from	Bottle’s
lungs.
Sound,	like	a	collapsing	mountain,	then	a	wall	of	stone,	smoke,	fire,	and	a
rain	filled	with	flames—
	


The	concussion	threw	Lostara	Yil	from	her	feet	moments	after	she’d	stared,
uncomprehending,	at	the	squads	of	marines	arrayed	beyond	the	picket	line	–
stared,	as	they	were	one	and	all	flattened,	rolling	back	before	an	onrushing
wave	–	multiple	explosions	now,	rapid-fire,	marching	along	the	wall	to	either
side	–	then	she	was	hammered	in	the	chest,	flung	to	the	ground	amidst	other
soldiers.
Rocks	arrived	in	an	almost-horizontal	hail,	fast	as	sling-stones,	cracking
off	armour,	thudding	deep	into	exposed	flesh	–	bones	snapping,	screams—
—the	light	dimmed,	wavered,	then	contracted	to	a	knot	of	flames,	filling	an
enormous	gap	in	Y’Ghatan’s	wall,	almost	dead-centre,	and	as	Lostara	–
propped	on	one	elbow,	braving	the	hail	of	stones	–	watched,	she	saw	the	flanks
of	that	huge	gap	slowly	crumble,	and,	beyond,	two	three-storey	tenements
folding	inward,	flames	shooting	up	like	fleeing	souls—
Among	the	slowing	rain,	now,	body-parts.
	
Atop	the	palace	tower,	Corabb	and	the	others	had	been	thrown	down	–	the
guard	who	had	accompanied	them	cartwheeling	over	the	platform’s	low	wall
and	vanishing	with	a	dwindling	scream,	barely	heard	as	the	tower	swayed,	as
the	roar	settled	around	them	like	the	fury	of	a	thousand	demons,	as	huge	stones
slammed	into	the	tower ’s	side,	others	ricocheting	off	to	crash	among	the
buildings	below,	and,	now,	a	terrible	cracking,	popping	sound	that	sent	Corabb
clawing	across	the	pavestones	towards	the	hatch.
‘It’s	going	down!’	he	screamed.
Two	figures	reached	the	hatch	before	him	–	Leoman	and	Dunsparrow.
Cracking,	sagging,	the	platform	starting	its	inexorable	pitch.	Clouds	of
choking	dust.	Corabb	reached	the	hatch	and	pulled	himself	into	it	headfirst,
joining	Leoman	and	the	Malazan	woman	as	they	slithered	like	snakes	down	the
winding	steps.	Corabb’s	left	heel	connected	with	a	jaw	and	he	heard	L’oric’s
grunt	of	pain,	then	cursing	in	unknown	languages.
That	explosion	–	the	breach	of	the	wall	–	gods	below,	he	had	never	seen
anything	like	it.	How	could	one	challenge	these	Malazans?	With	their	damned
Moranth	munitions,	their	gleeful	disregard	of	the	rules	of	honourable	war.
Tumbling,	rolling,	sprawling	out	onto	a	scree	of	rubble	on	the	main	floor
of	the	palace	–	chambers	to	their	left	had	vanished	beneath	the	section	of	tower
that	had	broken	off.	Corabb	saw	a	leg	jutting	from	the	collapsed	ceiling,
strangely	unmarred,	free	even	of	blood	or	dust.
Coughing,	Corabb	clambered	upright,	eyes	stinging,	countless	bruises
upon	his	body,	and	stared	at	Leoman,	who	was	already	on	his	feet	and	brushing


mortar	dust	from	his	clothes.	Near	him,	L’oric	and	Dunsparrow	were	also
pulling	themselves	free	of	bricks	and	shards	of	wood.
Glancing	over,	Leoman	of	the	Flails	said,	‘Maybe	the	tower	wasn’t	such	a
good	idea	after	all.	Come	on,	we	need	to	saddle	our	horses	–	if	they	still	live	–
and	ride	to	the	Temple!’
The	Temple	of	Scalissara?	But—what—why?
	
The	rattle	of	gravel,	the	thump	of	larger	chunks,	and	gusts	of	smoky,	dusty
heat.	Bottle	opened	his	eyes.	Sebar	husks,	hairy	and	leathery,	crowded	his
vision,	his	nose	filling	with	the	pungent	overripe	scent	of	sebar	pulp.	The
fruit’s	juice	was	considered	a	delicacy	–	the	reek	was	nauseating	–	he	knew
he’d	never	be	able	to	drink	the	stuff	again.	A	groan	from	the	rubbish
somewhere	to	his	left.	‘Cuttle?	That	you?’
‘The	numb	feeling’s	gone.	Amazing	what	a	shot	of	terror	can	do	to	a
body.’
‘You	sure	the	leg’s	still	there?’
‘Reasonably.’
‘You	counted	down	to	eight!’
‘What?’
‘You	said	eight!	Then	–	boom!’
‘Had	to	keep	your	hopes	up,	didn’t	I?	Where	in	Hood’s	pit	are	we,
anyway?’
Bottle	began	clawing	his	way	free,	amazed	that	he	seemed	uninjured	–	not
even	a	scratch.	‘Among	the	living,	sapper.’	His	first	view	of	the	scene	on	the
killing	ground	made	no	sense.	Too	much	light	–	it	had	been	dark,	hadn’t	it?
Then	he	saw	soldiers	amidst	the	rubble,	some	writhing	in	pain,	others	picking
themselves	up,	covered	in	dust,	coughing	in	the	foul	air.
The	breach	on	Y’Ghatan’s	south	wall	ran	a	full	third	of	its	length,	fifty
paces	in	from	the	southwest	bastion	to	well	beyond	the	centre	gate
fortifications.	Buildings	had	collapsed,	whilst	those	that	remained	upright,
flanking	the	raging	flames	of	the	gap,	were	themselves	burning,	although	it
seemed	that	most	of	that	had	come	from	the	innumerable	burners	among	the
sapper-kits	left	behind.	The	fires	danced	on	cracked	stone	as	if	seeking
somewhere	to	go	before	the	fuel	vanished.
The	light	cast	by	the	aftermath	of	the	detonation	was	dimming,	shrouded
by	descending	dust.	Cuttle	appeared	at	his	side,	plucking	scraps	of	rotted	fruit
from	his	armour.	‘We	can	head	into	that	gap	soon	–	gods,	when	I	track	down
Crump—’


‘Get	in	line,	Cuttle.	Hey,	I	see	Strings…and	the	squad…’

Horns	sounded,	soldiers	scrambling	to	form	up.	Darkness	was	closing	in	once
more,	as	the	last	of	the	fires	dwindled	in	the	breach.	The	rain	of	dust	seemed
unending	as	Fist	Keneb	moved	to	the	rally	position,	his	officers	drawing	round
him	and	bellowing	orders.	He	saw	Tene	Baralta	and	Captain	Lostara	Yil	at	the
head	of	a	narrow	column	that	had	already	begun	moving.
The	sappers	had	messed	up.	That	much	was	clear.	And	some	of	them	had
not	made	it	back.	Damned	fools,	and	they	weren’t	even	under	fire.
He	saw	the	fires	guttering	out	in	the	gap,	although	webs	of	flame	clung
stubbornly	to	the	still-upright	buildings	to	either	side.	‘First,	second	and	third
squads,’	Keneb	said	to	Captain	Faradan	Sort.	‘The	heavies	lead	the	way	into	the
breach.’
‘The	marines	are	already	through,	Fist.’
‘I	know,	Captain,	but	I	want	backup	close	behind	them	if	things	get	hairy.
Get	them	moving.’
‘Aye,	Fist.’
Keneb	glanced	back	to	the	higher	ground	on	the	other	side	of	the	road	and
saw	a	row	of	figures	watching.	The	Adjunct,	T’amber,	Nil	and	Nether.	Fist
Blistig	and	Warleader	Gall.	Fist	Temul	was	likely	out	with	his	horse-warriors,
ranging	round	the	city	on	the	other	sides.	There	was	always	a	chance	Leoman
would	leave	his	followers	to	their	grisly	fate	and	attempt	to	escape	on	his	own.
Such	things	were	not	unknown.
‘Sergeant	Cord!’
The	soldier	strolled	up.	Keneb	noted	the	sigil	of	the	Ashok	Regiment	on
the	man’s	battered	leather	armour,	but	elected	to	ignore	it.	For	now.	‘Lead	the
mediums	in,	seventh	through	twelfth	squads.’
‘Aye,	Fist,	we’re	dogging	the	heavies’	heels.’
‘Good.	This	will	be	street	and	alley	fighting,	Sergeant,	assuming	the
bastards	don’t	surrender	outright.’
‘I’d	be	surprised	if	they	did	that,	Fist.’
‘Me	too.	Get	going,	Sergeant.’
Finally,	some	motion	among	the	troops	of	his	company.	The	waiting	was
over.	The	Fourteenth	was	heading	into	battle.	Hood	look	away	from	us	this
night.	Just	look	away.
	


Bottle	and	Cuttle	rejoined	their	squad.	Sergeant	Strings	carried	his	lobber
crossbow,	a	cusser	quarrel	slotted	and	locked.
‘There’s	a	way	through	the	flames,’	Strings	said,	wiping	sweat	from	his
eyes,	then	spitting.	‘Koryk	and	Tarr	up	front.	Cuttle	to	the	rear	and	keep	a
sharper	in	your	hand.	Behind	the	front	two,	me	and	Smiles.	You’re	a	step
behind	us,	Bottle.’
‘You	want	more	illusions,	Sergeant?’
‘No,	I	want	your	other	stuff.	Ride	the	rats	and	pigeons	and	bats	and	spiders
and	whatever	in	Hood’s	name	else	is	in	there.	I	need	eyes	you	can	look	through
into	places	we	can’t	see.’
‘Expecting	a	trap?’	Bottle	asked.
‘There’s	Borduke	and	his	squad,	dammit.	First	into	the	breach.	Come	on,
on	their	heels!’
They	sprinted	forward	across	the	uneven,	rock-littered	ground.	Moonlight
struggled	through	the	dust	haze.	Bottle	quested	with	his	senses,	seeking	life
somewhere	ahead,	but	what	he	found	was	in	pain,	dying,	trickling	away	beneath
mounds	of	rubble,	or	stunned	insensate	by	the	concussions.	‘We	have	to	get
past	the	blast	area,’	he	said	to	Strings.
‘Right,’	the	sergeant	replied	over	a	shoulder.	‘That’s	the	idea.’
They	reached	the	edge	of	the	vast,	sculpted	crater	created	by	Crump’s
munitions.	Borduke	and	his	squad	were	scrambling	up	the	other	side,	and
Bottle	saw	that	the	wall	they	climbed	was	tiered	with	once-buried	city	ruins,
ceilings	and	floors	compressed,	cracked,	collapsed,	sections	of	wall	that	had
slid	out	and	down	into	the	pit	itself,	taking	with	them	older	layers	of	floor	tiles.
He	saw	that	both	Balgrid	and	Maybe	had	survived	the	explosion,	but	wondered
how	many	sappers	and	squad	mages	they	had	lost.	Some	gut	instinct	told	him
Crump	had	survived.
Borduke	and	his	squad	were	having	a	hard	time	of	it.
‘To	the	right,’	Strings	said.	‘We	can	skirt	it	and	get	through	before	them!’
Borduke	heard	and	twisted	round	from	where	he	clung	to	the	wall,	three
quarters	of	the	way	up.	‘Bastards!	Balgrid,	get	that	fat	butt	of	yours	moving,
damn	you!’
Koryk	found	a	way	round	the	crater,	clambering	over	the	rubble,	and
Bottle	and	the	others	followed.	Too	distracted	for	the	moment	by	the	effort	of
staying	on	his	feet,	Bottle	did	not	attempt	to	sense	the	myriad,	minuscule	life
beyond	the	blast	area,	in	the	city	itself.	Time	for	that	later,	he	hoped.
The	half-blood	Seti’s	progress	halted	suddenly,	and	the	mage	looked	up	to
see	that	Koryk	had	encountered	an	obstacle,	a	broad	crack	in	a	sharply	angled,
subterranean	floor,	a	man’s	height	below	ground-level.	Dust-smeared	tiles


revealed	the	painted	images	of	yellow	birds	in	flight,	all	seeming	to	be	heading
deep	underground	with	the	slanting	pitch	of	the	floor.
Koryk	glanced	back	at	Strings.	‘Saw	the	whole	slab	move,	Sergeant.	Not
sure	how	solid	our	footing	will	be.’
‘Hood	take	us!	All	right,	get	the	ropes	out,	Smiles—’
‘I	tossed	’em,’	she	said,	scowling.	‘On	the	run	in	here.	Too	damned	heavy
—’
‘And	I	picked	them	up,’	Cuttle	interjected,	tugging	the	coils	from	his	left
shoulder	and	flinging	them	forward.
Strings	reached	out	and	rapped	a	knuckle	against	Smiles’s	chin	–	her	head
snapped	back,	eyes	widening	in	shock,	then	fury.	‘You	carry	what	I	tell	you	to
carry,	soldier,’	the	sergeant	said.
Koyrk	collected	one	end	of	the	rope,	backed	up	a	few	paces,	then	bolted
forward	and	leapt	over	the	fissure.	He	landed	clean,	although	with	very	little
room	to	spare.	There	was	no	way	Tarr	or	Cuttle	could	manage	such	a	long
jump.
Strings	cursed,	then	said,	‘Those	who	can	do	what	Koryk	just	did,	go	to	it.
And	nobody	leave	gear	behind,	either.’
Moments	later	both	Bottle	and	Smiles	crouched	at	Koryk’s	side,	helping
anchor	the	rope	as	the	sergeant,	twin	sacks	of	munitions	dangling	from	him,
crossed	hand	over	hand,	the	bags	swinging	wild	but	positioned	so	that	they
never	collided	with	one	another.	Bottle	released	the	rope	and	moved	forward	to
help,	once	Strings	found	footing	on	the	edge.
Cuttle	followed.	Then	Tarr,	with	the	rope	wrapped	about	himself,	made	his
way	down	onto	the	slanted	floor	and	was	dragged	quickly	across	as	it	shifted
then	slid	away	beneath	his	weight.	Armour	and	weapons	clanking,	the	rest	of
the	squad	pulled	the	corporal	onto	level	ground.
‘Gods,’	Cuttle	gasped.	‘The	man	weighs	as	much	as	a	damned	bhederin!’
Koryk	re-coiled	the	rope	and	handed	it,	grinning,	to	Smiles.
They	set	off	once	more,	up	over	a	ridge	of	wreckage	from	some	kind	of
stall	or	lean-to	that	had	abutted	the	inner	wall,	then	more	rubble,	beyond	which
was	a	street.
And	Borduke	and	his	squad	were	just	entering	it,	spread	out,	crossbows	at
the	ready.	The	bearded	sergeant	was	in	the	lead,	Corporal	Hubb	on	his	right
and	two	steps	behind.	Ibb	was	opposite	the	corporal,	and	two	paces	behind	the
pair	were	Tavos	Pond	and	Balgrid,	followed	by	Lutes,	with	the	rear	drawn	up
by	the	sapper	Maybe.	Classic	marine	advance	formation.
The	buildings	to	the	sides	were	dark,	silent.	Something	odd	about	them,
Bottle	thought,	trying	to	work	out	what	it	might	be…no	shutters	on	the


windows	–	they’re	all	open.	So	are	the	doors…every	door,	in	fact—‘Sergeant
—’
The	arrows	that	suddenly	sped	down	from	flanking	windows,	high	up,
were	loosed	at	the	precise	moment	that	a	score	of	figures	rushed	out	from
nearby	buildings,	screaming,	spears,	scimitars	and	shields	at	the	ready.	Those
arrows	had	been	fired	without	regard	to	the	charging	warriors,	and	two	cried
out	as	iron-barbed	points	tore	into	them.
Bottle	saw	Borduke	spin	round,	saw	the	arrow	jutting	from	his	left	eye
socket,	saw	a	second	arrow	transfixing	his	neck.	Blood	was	spraying	as	he
staggered,	clawing	and	clutching	at	his	throat	and	face.	Behind	him,	Corporal
Hubb	curled	up	round	an	arrow	in	his	gut,	then	sank	to	the	cobbles.	Ibb	had
taken	an	arrow	in	the	left	shoulder,	and	he	was	plucking	at	it,	swearing,	when	a
warrior	rushed	in	on	him,	scimitar	swinging	to	strike	him	across	the	side	of
his	head.	Bone	and	helm	caved	in,	a	gush	of	blood,	and	the	soldier	fell.
Strings’s	squad	arrived,	intercepting	a	half-dozen	warriors.	Bottle	found
himself	in	the	midst	of	a	vicious	exchange,	Koryk	on	his	left,	the	half-Seti’s
longsword	batting	away	a	scimitar,	then	driving	point	first	into	the	man’s
throat.	A	screaming	visage	seemed	to	lunge	at	Bottle,	as	if	the	warrior	was
seeking	to	tear	into	his	neck	with	bared	teeth,	and	Bottle	recoiled	at	the
madness	in	the	man’s	eyes,	then	reached	in	with	his	mind,	into	the	warrior ’s
fierce	maelstrom	of	thoughts	–	little	more	than	fractured	images	and	black
rage	–	and	found	the	most	primitive	part	of	his	brain;	a	burst	of	power	and	the
man’s	coordination	vanished.	He	crumpled,	limbs	twitching.
Cold	with	sweat,	Bottle	backed	away	another	step,	wishing	he	had	a	weapon
to	draw,	beyond	the	bush-knife	in	his	right	hand.
Fighting	on	all	sides.	Screams,	the	clash	of	metal,	snapping	of	chain	links,
grunts	and	gasps.
And	still	arrows	rained	down.
One	cracked	into	the	back	of	Strings’s	helm,	pitching	him	down	to	his
knees.	He	twisted	round,	lifting	his	crossbow,	glaring	at	the	building	opposite	–
its	upper	windows	crowded	with	archers.
Bottle	reached	out	and	grasped	Koryk’s	baldric.	‘Back!	Fid’s	cusser!
Everyone!	Back!’
The	sergeant	raised	the	crossbow	to	his	shoulder,	aimed	towards	an	upper
window—
There	were	heavy	infantry	among	them	now,	and	Bottle	saw	Taffo,	from
Mosel’s	squad,	wading	into	a	crowd	of	warriors,	now	ten	paces	from	the
building	–	from	Strings’s	target—
—as	the	crossbow	thunked,	the	misshapen	quarrel	flying	out,	up,	into	the


maw	of	the	window.
Bottle	threw	himself	flat,	arms	covering	his	head—
The	upper	floor	of	the	building	exploded,	huge	sections	of	wall	bulging,
then	crashing	down	into	the	street.	The	cobbles	jumped	beneath	Bottle.
Someone	rolled	up	against	him	and	he	felt	something	flop	heavy	and	slimy
onto	his	forearm,	twitching	and	hot.	A	sudden	reek	of	bile	and	faeces.
The	patter	of	stones,	piteous	moans,	the	lick	of	flames.	Then	another
massive	crash,	as	what	remained	of	the	upper	floor	collapsed	into	the	level
below.	The	groan	of	the	nearest	wall	preceded	its	sagging	dissolution.	Then,
beyond	the	few	groans,	silence.
Bottle	lifted	his	head.	To	find	Corporal	Harbyn	lying	beside	him.	The
lower	half	of	the	soldier ’s	body	was	gone,	entrails	spilled	out.	Beneath	the
helm’s	ridge,	eyes	stared	sightlessly.	Pulling	away,	Bottle	leaned	back	on	his
hands	and	crabbed	across	the	rock-strewn	street.	Where	Taffo	had	been
fighting	a	mob	of	warriors,	there	was	now	nothing	but	a	heap	of	rubble	and	a
few	dust-sheathed	limbs	jutting	from	beneath	it,	all	motionless.
Koryk	moved	past	him,	stabbing	down	at	stunned	figures	with	his	sword.
Bottle	saw	Smiles	cross	the	half-Seti’s	path,	her	two	knives	already	slick	with
blood.
Bodies	in	the	street.	Figures	slowly	rising,	shaking	their	heads,	spitting
blood.	Bottle	twisted	round	onto	his	knees,	dipped	his	head,	and	vomited	onto
the	cobbles.
‘Fiddler	–	you	bastard!’
Coughing,	but	stomach	quiescent	for	the	moment,	Bottle	looked	over	to
see	Sergeant	Mosel	advancing	on	Strings.
‘We	had	them!	We	were	rushing	the	damned	building!’
‘Then	rush	that	one!’	Strings	snapped,	pointing	at	the	tenement	on	the	other
side	of	the	street.	‘They	just	been	knocked	back,	that’s	all	–	any	moment	now
and	another	rain	of	arrows—’
Cursing,	Mosel	gestured	at	the	three	heavies	left	–	Mayfly,	Flashwit	and
Uru	Hela	–	and	they	lumbered	into	the	building’s	doorway.
Strings	was	fitting	another	quarrel	into	his	crossbow,	this	one	loaded	with
a	sharper.	‘Balgrid!	Who’s	left	in	your	squad?’
The	portly	mage	staggered	over.	‘What?’	he	shouted.	‘I	can’t	hear	you!
What?’
‘Tavos	Pond!’
‘Here,	Sergeant.	We	got	Maybe,	uhm,	Balgrid	–	but	he’s	bleeding	out	from
his	ears.	Lutes	is	down,	but	he	should	live	–	with	some	healing.	We’re	out	of
this—’


‘To	Hood	you	are.	Pull	Lutes	clear	–	there’s	a	squad	coming	up	–	the	rest
of	you	are	with	me—’
‘Balgrid’s	deaf!’
‘Better	he	was	mute	–	we	got	hand	signals,	remember?	Now	remind	the
bastard	of	that!	Bottle,	help	Tarr	out.	Cuttle,	take	Koryk	to	that	corner	up	ahead
and	wait	there	for	us.	Smiles,	load	up	on	quarrels	–	I	want	that	weapon	of	yours
cocked	and	your	eyes	sharp	on	everything	from	rooftops	on	down.’
Bottle	climbed	to	his	feet	and	made	his	way	to	where	Tarr	was	struggling
to	clamber	free	of	rubble	–	a	part	of	the	wall	had	fallen	on	him,	but	it	seemed
his	armour	and	shield	had	withstood	the	impact.	Lots	of	swearing,	but	nothing
voiced	in	pain.	‘Here,’	Bottle	said,	‘give	me	your	arm—’
‘I’m	fine,’	the	corporal	said,	grunting	as	he	kicked	his	feet	clear.	He	still
gripped	his	shortsword,	and	snagged	on	its	tip	was	a	hairy	piece	of	scalp,
coated	in	dust	and	dripping	from	the	underside.	‘Look	at	that,’	he	said,
gesturing	up	the	street	with	his	sword,	‘even	Cuttle’s	shut	up	now.’
‘Fid	had	no	choice,’	Bottle	said.	‘Too	many	arrows	coming	down—’
‘I	ain’t	complaining,	Bottle.	Not	one	bit.	See	Borduke	go	down?	And
Hubb?	That	could’ve	been	us,	if	we’d	reached	here	first.’
‘Abyss	take	me,	I	hadn’t	thought	of	that.’
He	glanced	over	as	a	squad	of	medium	infantry	arrived	–	Sergeant	Cord’s
–	Ashok	Regiment	and	all	that.	‘What	in	Hood’s	name	happened?’
‘Ambush,’	Bottle	said.	‘Sergeant	Strings	had	to	take	a	building	down.
Cusser.’
Cord’s	eyes	widened.	‘Bloody	marines,’	he	muttered,	then	headed	over	to
where	Strings	crouched.	Bottle	and	Tarr	followed.
‘You	formed	up	again?’	Cord	asked	their	sergeant.	‘We’re	bunching	up
behind	you—’
‘We’re	ready,	but	send	word	back.	There’ll	be	ambushes	aplenty.	Leoman
means	us	to	buy	every	street	and	every	building	with	blood.	Fist	Keneb	might
want	to	send	the	sappers	ahead	again,	under	marine	cover,	to	drop	buildings	–
it’s	the	safest	way	to	proceed.’
Cord	looked	round.	‘Safest	way?	Gods	below.’	He	turned.	‘Corporal
Shard,	you	heard	Fid.	Send	word	back	to	Keneb.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Sinn,’	Cord	added,	speaking	to	a	young	girl	nearby,	‘put	that	knife	away	–
he’s	already	dead.’
She	looked	up,	even	as	her	blade	cut	through	the	base	of	the	dead	warrior ’s
right	index	finger.	She	held	it	up	for	display,	then	stuffed	it	into	a	belt	pouch.
‘Nice	girl	you	got	there,’	Strings	said.	‘Had	us	one	of	those,	once.’


‘Shard!	Hold	back	there!	Send	Sinn	with	the	message,	will	you?’
‘I	don’t	want	to	go	back!’	Sinn	shouted.
‘Too	bad,’	Cord	said.	Then,	to	Strings:	‘We’ll	link	up	with	Mosel’s	heavies
behind	you.’
Strings	nodded.	‘All	right,	squad,	let’s	try	out	the	next	street,	shall	we?’
Bottle	swallowed	back	another	surge	of	nausea,	then	he	joined	the	others	as
they	scrambled	towards	Koryk	and	Cuttle.	Gods,	this	is	going	to	be	brutal.
	
Sergeant	Gesler	could	smell	it.	Trouble	in	the	night.	Unrelieved	darkness	from
gaping	windows,	yawning	doorways,	and	on	flanking	streets,	where	other
squads	were	moving,	the	sounds	of	pitched	battle.	Yet,	before	them,	no
movement,	no	sound	–	nothing	at	all.	He	raised	his	right	hand,	hooked	two
fingers	and	made	a	downward	tugging	motion.	Behind	him	he	heard	boots	on
the	cobbles,	one	padding	off	to	his	left,	the	other	to	his	right,	away,	halting
when	the	soldiers	reached	the	flanking	buildings.	Truth	on	his	left,	Pella	on	his
right,	crossbows	out,	eyes	on	opposite	rooftops	and	upper	windows.
Another	gesture	and	Sands	came	up	from	behind	to	crouch	at	his	side.
‘Well?’	Gesler	demanded,	wishing	for	the	thousandth	time	that	Stormy	was
here.
‘It’s	bad,’	Sands	said.	‘Ambushes.’
‘Right,	so	where’s	ours?	Go	back	and	call	up	Moak	and	his	squad,	and
Tugg’s	–	I	want	those	heavies	clearing	these	buildings,	before	it	all	comes
down	on	us.	What	sappers	we	got	with	us?’
‘Thom	Tissy’s	squad’s	got	some,’	Sands	said.	‘Able,	Jump	and	Gupp,
although	they	just	decided	to	become	sappers	tonight,	a	bell	or	so	ago.’
‘Great,	and	they	got	munitions?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Madness.	All	right.	Get	Thom	Tissy’s	squad	up	here,	too.	I	heard	one
cusser	go	off	already	–	might	be	the	only	way	to	do	this.’
‘Okay,	Sergeant.	I’ll	be	right	back.’
Under-strength	squads	and	a	night	engagement	in	a	strange,	hostile	city.
Had	the	Adjunct	lost	her	mind?
	
Twenty	paces	away,	Pella	crouched	low,	his	back	against	a	mud-brick	wall.	He
thought	he’d	caught	movement	in	a	high	window	opposite,	but	he	couldn’t	be
certain	–	not	enough	to	call	out	the	alarm.	Might	well	have	been	a	curtain	or


something,	plucked	by	the	wind.
Only…there	ain’t	much	wind.
Eyes	fixed	on	that	particular	window,	he	slowly	raised	his	crossbow.
Nothing.	Just	darkness.
Distant	detonations	–	sharpers,	he	guessed,	somewhere	to	the	south.	We’re
supposed	to	be	pushing	in	hard	and	fast,	and	here	we	are,	bogged	down	barely
one	street	in	from	the	breach.	Gesler’s	gotten	way	too	cautious,	I	think.
He	heard	the	clank	of	weapons,	armour	and	the	thud	of	footfalls	as	more
squads	came	up.	Flicking	his	gaze	away	from	the	window,	he	watched	as
Sergeant	Tugg	led	his	heavies	towards	the	building	opposite.	Three	soldiers
from	Thom	Tissy’s	squad	padded	up	to	the	doorway	of	the	building	Pella	was
huddled	against.	Jump,	Gupp	and	Able.	Pella	saw	sharpers	in	their	hands	–	and
nothing	else.	He	crouched	lower,	then	returned	his	attention	to	the	distant
window,	cursing	under	his	breath,	waiting	for	one	of	them	to	toss	a	grenado	in
through	the	doorway.
On	the	other	side	of	the	street,	Tugg’s	squad	plunged	into	the	building	–
there	was	a	shout	from	within,	the	clang	of	weapons,	sudden	screams—
Then	more	shrieking,	this	time	from	the	building	at	Pella’s	back,	as	the
three	sappers	rushed	inside.	Pella	cringed	–	no,	you	fools!	You	don’t	carry	them
inside	–	you	throw	them!
A	sharp	crack,	shaking	dust	from	the	wall	behind	Pella,	grit	raining	down
onto	the	back	of	his	neck,	then	screams.	Another	concussion	–	ducking	still
lower,	Pella	looked	back	up	at	the	opposite	window—
To	see,	momentarily,	a	single	flash—
—to	feel	the	shock	of	surprise—
—as	the	arrow	sped	at	him.	A	hard,	splintering	cracking	sound.	Pella’s
head	was	thrown	back,	helm	crunching	against	the	wall.	Something,	wavering,
at	the	upper	edge	of	his	vision,	but	those	edges	were	growing	darker.	He	heard
his	crossbow	clatter	to	the	cobbles	at	his	feet,	then	distant	pain	as	his	knees
struck	the	stones,	the	jolt	peeling	skin	away	–	he’d	done	that	once,	as	a	child,
playing	in	the	alley.	Stumbling,	knees	skidding	on	gritty,	filthy	cobbles—
So	filthy,	the	murk	of	hidden	diseases,	infections	–	his	mother	had	been	so
angry,	angry	and	frightened.	They’d	had	to	go	to	a	healer,	and	that	had	cost
money	–	money	they	had	been	saving	for	a	move.	To	a	better	part	of	the	slum.
The	dream…put	away,	all	because	he’d	skinned	his	knees.
Just	like	now.	And	darkness	closing	in.
Oh	Momma,	I	skinned	my	knees.	I’m	sorry.	I’m	so	sorry.	I	skinned	my
knees…


	
As	mayhem	was	exploding	in	the	buildings	to	either	side,	Gesler	crouched
lower.	He	glanced	over	to	his	right	and	saw	Pella.	An	arrow	was	jutting	from
his	forehead.	He	was	on	his	knees	for	a	moment,	his	weapon	falling,	then	he
sank	down	to	the	side.
Sharpers	going	off	in	that	building,	then	something	worse	–	a	burner,	the
flare	of	red	flame	bursting	through	the	ground-floor	windows.	Shrieks	–
someone	stumbled	outside,	wreathed	in	flames	–	a	Malazan,	running,	arms
waving,	slapping	–	straight	for	Moak	and	his	squad—
‘Get	away!’	Gesler	bellowed,	rising	and	raising	his	crossbow.
Moak	had	pulled	out	his	rain-cape	–	the	soldiers	were	rushing	towards	the
burning	man	–	they	didn’t	see	–	the	satchel	–	the	munitions—
Gesler	fired	his	crossbow.	The	quarrel	caught	the	sapper	in	the	midsection,
even	as	the	munitions	went	off.
Flung	back,	punched	in	the	chest,	Gesler	sprawled,	rolled,	then	came	to	his
feet.
Moak,	Stacker,	Rove.	Burnt,	Guano	and	Mud.	All	gone,	all	pieces	of	meat
and	shattered	bone.	A	helm,	the	head	still	in	it,	struck	a	wall,	spun	wildly	for	a
moment,	then	wobbled	to	a	halt.
‘Truth!	To	me!’	Gesler	waved	as	he	ran	towards	the	building	the	heavies
had	entered,	and	where	the	sounds	of	fighting	had	grown	fiercer.	‘You	see
Sands?’	he	demanded	as	he	reloaded	his	crossbow.
‘N-no,	Sergeant.	Pella—’
‘Pella’s	dead,	lad.’	He	saw	Thom	Tissy	and	what	was	left	of	his	squad	–
Tulip	and	Ramp	–	heading	towards	the	doorway	after	Tugg	and	his	heavies.
Good,	Thom’s	thinking	clear—
The	building	that	had	swallowed	Able,	Jump	and	Gupp	was	a	mass	of
flames,	the	heat	pouring	out	like	scalding	liquid.	Gods,	what	did	they	set	off	in
there?
He	darted	through	the	doorway,	skidded	to	a	halt.	Sergeant	Tugg’s	fighting
days	were	over	–	the	soldier	had	been	speared	through	just	below	the	sternum.
He	had	thrown	up	a	gout	of	bloody	bile	before	dying.	At	the	inner	doorway
opposite,	leading	into	a	hall,	lay	Robello,	his	head	caved	in.	Beyond,	out	of
sight,	the	rest	of	the	heavies	were	fighting.
‘Hang	back,	Truth,’	Gesler	said,	‘and	use	that	crossbow	to	cover	our	backs.
Tissy,	let’s	go.’
The	other	sergeant	nodded,	gesturing	towards	Tulip	and	Ramp.
They	plunged	into	the	hallway.


	
Hellian	stumbled	after	Urb,	who	suddenly	halted	–	it	was	like	hitting	a	wall	–
she	bounced	off,	fell	on	her	behind.	‘Ow,	you	bloody	ox!’
All	at	once	there	were	soldiers	around	them,	pulling	back	from	the	street
corner,	dragging	fallen	comrades.
‘Who?	What?’
A	woman	dropped	down	beside	her.	‘Hanno.	We	lost	our	sergeant.	We	lost
Sobelone.	And	Toles.	Ambush—’
One	hand	leaning	hard	on	Hanno’s	shoulder,	Hellian	pulled	herself
upright.	She	shook	her	head.	‘Right,’	she	said,	something	cold	and	hard
straightening	within	her,	as	if	her	spine	had	turned	into	a	sword,	or	a	spear,	or
whatever	else	won’t	bend,	no,	it’ll	bend,	maybe,	but	not	break.	Gods,	I	feel	sick.
‘Join	up	with	my	squad.	Urb,	what	squad	are	we?’
‘No	idea,	Sergeant.’
‘Don’t	matter,	then,	you’re	with	us,	Hanno.	Ambush?	Fine,	let’s	go	get	the
bastards.	Touchy,	Brethless,	pull	out	those	grenados	you	stole—’
The	twins	faced	her	–	innocence,	indignation,	both	dreadful	efforts,	then
the	two	pulled	out	munitions.	‘They’re	smokers,	Sergeant,	and	one	cracker,’
Touchy	said.	‘That’s	all—’
‘Smokers?	Perfect.	Hanno,	you’re	going	to	lead	us	into	the	building	the
bastards	attacked	from.	Touchy,	you	throw	yours	ahead	of	her.	Brethless,	pick
the	open	flank	and	do	the	same.	We	ain’t	gonna	stand	around	–	we	ain’t	even
going	in	slow	and	cautious.	I	want	fast,	you	all	got	that?	Fast.’
‘Sergeant?’
‘What	is	it,	Urb?’
‘Nothing.	Only,	I’m	ready,	I	guess.’
Well	that	makes	one	of	us.	I	knew	I’d	hate	this	city.	‘Weapons	out,	soldiers,
it’s	time	to	kill	people.’
They	set	off.
	
‘We	done	left	everybody	behind,’	Galt	said.
‘Shut	that	whining,’	Sergeant	Balm	snapped,	wiping	sweat	and	mud	from
his	eyes.	‘We	just	made	it	easier	for	the	rest	of	’em.’	He	glared	at	the	soldiers
in	his	squad.	Breathing	hard,	a	few	cuts	here	and	there,	but	nothing	serious.
They’d	carved	through	that	ambush	quick	and	dirty,	like	he’d	wanted	it.
They	were	on	a	second	floor,	in	a	room	filled	with	bolts	of	cloth	–	a
fortune’s	worth	of	silks.	Lobe	had	said	they’d	come	from	Darujhistan,	of	all


places.	A	damned	fortune’s	worth,	and	now	most	of	it	was	soaked	with	blood
and	bits	of	human	meat.
‘Maybe	we	should	check	the	top	floor,’	Throatslitter	said,	eyeing	the	nicks
in	his	long-knives.	‘Thought	I	heard	some	scuffing,	maybe.’
‘All	right,	take	Widdershins.	Deadsmell,	go	to	the	stairs—’
‘Leading	up?	It’s	a	ladder.’
‘Fine,	the	Hood-damned	fucking	ladder,	then.	You’re	backup	and
mouthpiece,	got	it?	Hear	any	scrapping	upstairs	and	you	join	it,	but	not	before
letting	us	know	about	it.	Understood?’
‘Clear	as	piss,	Sergeant.’
‘Good,	the	three	of	you	go.	Galt,	stay	at	the	window	and	keep	looking	at
what’s	opposite	you.	Lobe,	do	the	same	at	that	window.	There’s	more	crap
waiting	for	us	and	we’re	gonna	carve	right	through	all	of	it.’
A	short	while	later,	the	sound	of	footfalls	padding	back	and	forth	from
above	ceased	and	Deadsmell	called	out	from	the	hallway	that	Throatslitter	and
Widdershins	were	coming	down	the	ladder.	A	dozen	heartbeats	later	and	all
three	entered	the	silk	room.	Throatslitter	came	close	to	Balm’s	side	and
crouched.	‘Sergeant,’	he	said,	his	voice	near	a	whisper.
‘What?’
‘We	found	something.	Don’t	much	like	the	looks	of	it.	We	think	you	should
take	a	look.’
Balm	sighed,	then	straightened.	‘Galt?’
‘They’re	there,	all	right,	all	three	floors.’
‘Lobe?’
‘Same	here,	including	on	the	roof,	some	guy	with	a	hooded	lantern.’
‘Okay,	keep	watching.	Lead	on,	Throatslitter.	Deadsmell,	back	into	the
hallway.	Widdershins,	do	some	magic	or	something.’
He	followed	Throatslitter	back	to	the	ladder.	The	floor	above	was	lowceilinged,	more	of	an	attic	than	anything	else.	Plenty	of	rooms,	the	walls	thick,
hardened	clay.
Throatslitter	led	him	up	to	one	such	wall.	At	his	feet	stood	huge	urns	and
casks.	‘Found	these,’	he	said,	reaching	down	behind	one	cask	and	lifting	into
view	a	funnel,	made	from	a	gourd	of	some	sort.
‘All	right,’	Balm	said,	‘what	about	it?’
His	soldier	kicked	one	of	the	casks.	‘These	ones	are	full.	But	the	urns	are
empty.	All	of	’em.’
‘Okay…’
‘Olive	oil.’
‘Right,	this	city’s	famous	for	it.	Go	on.’


Throatslitter	tossed	the	funnel	aside,	then	drew	a	knife.	‘See	these	damp
spots	on	these	walls?	Here.’	He	pointed	with	the	knife-tip,	then	dug	into	the
patch.	‘The	clay’s	soft,	recently	plugged.	These	walls,	they’re	hollow.’
‘For	Fener ’s	sake,	man,	what	are	you	going	on	about?’
‘Just	this.	I	think	these	walls	–	the	whole	building,	it’s	filled	with	oil.’
‘Filled?	With…with	oil?’
Throatslitter	nodded.
Filled	with	oil?	What,	some	kind	of	piping	system	to	supply	it	downstairs?
No,	for	Hood’s	sake,	Balm,	don’t	be	an	idiot.	‘Throatslitter,	you	think	other
buildings	are	rigged	like	this?	Is	that	what	you’re	thinking?’
‘I	think,	Sergeant,	that	Leoman’s	turned	Y’Ghatan	into	one	big	trap.	He
wants	us	in	here,	fighting	in	the	streets,	pushing	in	and	in—’
‘But	what	about	his	followers?’
‘What	about	them?’
But…that	would	mean…	He	thought	back	–	the	faces	of	the	enemy,	the
fanaticism,	the	gleam	of	drugged	madness.	‘Abyss	take	us!’
‘We	got	to	find	Fist	Keneb,	Sergeant.	Or	the	captains.	We	got—’
‘I	know,	I	know.	Let’s	get	out	of	here,	before	that	bastard	with	the	lantern
throws	it!’
	
It	had	begun	messy,	only	to	get	messier	still.	Yet,	from	that	initial	reeling	back,
as	ambushes	were	unveiled	one	after	another,	mauling	the	advance	squads	of
marines,	Fist	Keneb’s	and	Fist	Tene	Baralta’s	companies	had	rallied,
regrouped,	then	pushed	inward,	building	by	building,	street	by	street.
Somewhere	ahead,	Keneb	knew,	what	was	left	of	the	marines	was	penetrating
still	further,	cutting	through	the	fanatic	but	poorly	armed	and	thoroughly
undisciplined	warriors	of	Leoman’s	renegade	army.
He	had	heard	that	those	warriors	were	in	a	drug-fuelled	frenzy,	that	they
fought	without	regard	to	injury,	and	that	none	retreated,	dying	where	they
stood.	What	he	had	expected,	truth	be	told.	A	last	stand,	a	heroic,	martyred
defence.	For	that	was	what	Y’Ghatan	had	been,	what	it	was,	and	what	it	would
always	be.
They	would	take	this	city.	The	Adjunct	would	have	her	first	true	victory.
Bloody,	brutal,	but	a	victory	nonetheless.
He	stood	one	street	in	from	the	breach,	smouldering	rubble	behind	him,
watching	the	line	of	wounded	and	unconscious	soldiers	being	helped	back	to
the	healers	in	camp,	watching	fresh	infantry	filing	forward,	through	the
secured	areas,	and	ahead	to	the	battle	that	was	the	closing	of	the	Malazan	fist


around	Leoman	and	his	followers,	around	the	last	living	vestiges	of	the
rebellion	itself.
He	saw	that	Red	Blade	officer	of	Tene	Baralta’s,	Lostara	Yil,	leading	three
squads	towards	the	distant	sounds	of	fighting.	And	Tene	himself	stood	nearby,
speaking	with	Captain	Kindly.
Keneb	had	sent	Faradan	Sort	ahead,	to	make	contact	with	the	advance
squads.	There	was	to	be	a	second	rendezvous,	near	the	palace	itself,	and
hopefully	everyone	was	still	following	the	battle	plan.
Shouts,	then	cries	of	alarm	–	from	behind	him.	From	outside	the	breach!
Fist	Keneb	spun	round,	and	saw	a	wall	of	flame	rising	in	the	killing	field
beyond	–	where	the	narrow,	deep	trench	had	been	dug	by	Leoman’s	warriors.
Buried	urns	filled	with	olive	oil	began	exploding	from	the	trench,	spraying
burning	liquid	everywhere.	Keneb	saw	the	line	of	retreating	wounded	scatter
apart	near	the	trench,	figures	aflame.	Shrieks,	the	roar	of	fire—
His	horrified	gaze	caught	motion	to	his	right,	up	on	the	nearest	building’s
rooftop,	where	it	faced	onto	the	rubble	of	the	breach.	A	figure,	lantern	in	one
hand,	flaring	torch	in	the	other	–	bedecked	in	web-slung	flasks,	surrounded	by
amphorae,	at	the	very	edge	of	the	roof,	arms	outstretched,	kicking	over	the	tall
clay	jars	–	ropes	affixed	between	them	and	his	ankles,	the	weight	then	plunging
the	figure	over	the	side.
Down	into	the	rubble	of	the	breach.
He	struck,	vanished	from	view,	then	a	sudden	flaring	of	flames,	rushing
out	in	sheets—
And	Keneb	saw,	upon	other	rooftops,	lining	the	city’s	walls,	more	figures
–	flinging	themselves	down.	Down,	then	the	glow	of	raging	fire,	rising	up,
encircling	–	from	the	bastions,	more	flames,	billowing	out,	spreading	wild	like
a	flood	unleashed.
Heat	rushed	upon	Keneb,	driving	him	back	a	step.	Oil	from	shattered	casks,
beneath	the	wreckage	of	fallen	wall	and	collapsed	buildings,	suddenly	caught
flame.	The	breach	was	closing,	demonic	fire	lunging	into	sight.
Keneb	looked	about,	horror	rising	within	him,	and	saw	the	half-dozen
signallers	of	his	staff	huddled	near	a	fragment	of	rubble.	Bellowing,	he	ran	to
them.	‘Sound	the	recall!	Damn	you,	soldiers,	sound	the	recall!’
	
Northwest	of	Y’Ghatan,	Temul	and	a	company	of	Wickans	rode	up	the	slope	to
the	Lothal	road.	They	had	seen	no-one.	Not	a	single	soul	fleeing	the	city.	The
Fourteenth’s	horse-warriors	had	fully	encircled	it.	Wickans,	Seti,	Burned
Tears.	There	would	be	no	escape.


Temul	had	been	pleased,	hearing	that	the	Adjunct’s	thinking	had	followed
identical	tracks	with	his	own.	A	sudden	strike,	hard	as	a	knife	pushed	into	a
chest,	straight	into	the	heart	of	this	cursed	rebellion.	They	had	heard	the
munitions	go	off	–	loud,	louder	than	expected,	and	had	seen	the	flame-shot
black	clouds	billowing	upward,	along	with	most	of	Y’Ghatan’s	south	wall.
Reining	in	on	the	road,	seeing	beneath	them	the	signs	of	the	massive
exodus	that	had	clogged	this	route	only	days	earlier.
A	flaring	of	firelight,	distant	rumbling,	as	of	thunder,	and	the	horsewarriors	turned	as	one	to	face	the	city.	Where	walls	of	flame	rose	behind	the
stone	walls,	from	the	bastions,	and	the	sealed	gates,	then,	building	after
building	within,	more	flames,	and	more.
Temul	stared,	his	mind	battered	by	what	he	was	seeing,	what	he	now
understood.
A	third	of	the	Fourteenth	Army	was	in	that	city	by	now.	A	third.
And	they	were	already	as	good	as	dead.
	
Fist	Blistig	stood	beside	the	Adjunct	on	the	road.	He	felt	sick	inside,	the	feeling
rising	up	from	a	place	and	a	time	he	had	believed	left	behind	him.	Standing	on
the	walls	of	Aren,	watching	the	slaughter	of	Coltaine’s	army.	Hopeless,
helpless—
‘Fist,’	the	Adjunct	snapped,	‘get	more	soldiers	filling	in	that	trench.’
He	started,	then	half-turned	and	gestured	towards	one	of	his	aides	–	the
woman	had	heard	the	command,	for	she	nodded	and	hurried	off.	Douse	the
trench,	aye.	But…what’s	the	point?	The	breach	had	found	a	new	wall,	this	one
of	flames.	And	more	had	risen	all	round	the	city,	beginning	just	within	the
tiered	walls,	buildings	bursting,	voicing	terrible	roars	as	fiery	oil	exploded
out,	flinging	mud-bricks	that	were	themselves	deadly,	burning	missiles.	And
now,	further	in,	at	junctures	and	along	the	wider	streets,	more	buildings	were
igniting.	One,	just	beyond	the	palace,	had	moments	earlier	erupted,	with
geysers	of	burning	oil	shooting	skyward,	obliterating	the	darkness,	revealing
the	sky	filling	with	tumbling	black	clouds.
‘Nil,	Nether,’	the	Adjunct	said	in	a	brittle	voice,	‘gather	our	mages	–	all	of
them	–	I	want	the	flames	smothered	in	the	breach.	I	want—’
‘Adjunct,’	Nether	cut	in,	‘we	have	not	the	power.’
‘The	old	earth	spirits,’	Nil	added	in	a	dull	tone,	‘are	dying,	fleeing	the
flames,	the	baking	agony,	all	dying	or	fleeing.	Something	is	about	to	be
born…’
Before	them,	the	city	of	Y’Ghatan	was	brightening	into	day,	yet	a	lurid,


terrible	day.
	
Coughing,	staggering,	wounded	soldiers	half-carried,	half-dragged	through
the	press	–	but	there	was	nowhere	to	go.	Keneb	stared	–	the	air	burning	his	eyes
–	at	the	mass	of	his	soldiers.	Seven,	eight	hundred.	Where	were	the	others?	But
he	knew.
Gone.	Dead.
In	the	streets	beyond,	he	could	see	naught	but	fire,	leaping	from	building	to
building,	filling	the	fierce,	hot	air,	with	a	voice	of	glee,	demonic,	hungry	and
eager.
He	needed	to	do	something.	Think	of	something,	but	this	heat,	this	terrible
heat	–	his	lungs	were	heaving,	desperate	despite	the	searing	pain	that
blossomed	with	each	strained	breath.	Lungful	after	lungful,	yet	it	was	as	if	the
air	itself	had	died,	all	life	sucked	from	it,	and	so	could	offer	him	nothing.
His	own	armour	was	cooking	him	alive.	He	was	on	his	knees,	now,	with	all
the	others.	‘Armour!’	he	rasped,	not	knowing	if	anyone	could	hear	him.	‘Get	it
off!	Armour!	Weapons!’	Gods	below,	my	chest	–	the	pain—
	
A	blade-on-blade	parry,	holding	contact,	two	edges	rasping	against	each	other,
then,	as	the	warrior	pushed	harder	with	his	scimitar,	Lostara	Yil	ducked	low,
disengaged	her	sword	downward,	slashing	up	and	under,	taking	him	in	the
throat.	Blood	poured	out.	Stepping	past,	she	batted	aside	another	weapon
thrusting	at	her	–	a	spear	–	hearing	splinters	from	the	shaft	as	she	pushed	it	to
one	side.	In	her	left	hand	was	her	kethra	knife,	which	she	punched	into	her
foe’s	belly,	twisting	as	she	yanked	it	back	out	again.
Lostara	staggered	free	of	the	crumpling	warrior,	a	flood	of	sorrow
shooting	through	her	as	she	heard	him	call	out	a	woman’s	name	before	he
struck	the	cobbles.
The	fight	raged	on	all	sides,	her	three	squads	now	down	to	fewer	than	a
dozen	soldiers,	whilst	yet	more	of	the	berserk	fanatics	closed	in	from	the
flanking	buildings	–	market	shops,	shuttered	doors	kicked	down	and	now
billowing	smoke,	carrying	out	into	the	street	the	reek	of	overheated	oil,
spitting,	crackling	sounds	–	something	went	thump	and	all	at	once	there	was
fire—
Everywhere.
Lostara	Yil	cried	out	a	warning,	even	as	another	warrior	rushed	her.


Parrying	with	the	knife,	stop-thrusting	with	her	sword,	then	kicking	the
impaled	body	from	her	blade,	his	sagging	weight	nearly	tugging	the	weapon
from	her	hand.
Terrible	shrieks	behind	her.	She	whirled.
A	flood	of	burning	oil,	roaring	out	from	buildings	to	either	side,	sweeping
among	the	fighters	–	their	legs,	then	clothes	–	telaba,	leathers,	linens,	the
flames	appearing	all	over	them.	Warrior	and	soldier,	the	fire	held	to	no
allegiance	–	it	was	devouring	everyone.
She	staggered	away	from	that	onrushing	river	of	death,	stumbled	and	fell,
sprawling,	onto	a	corpse,	clambered	onto	it	a	moment	before	fiery	oil	poured
around	her,	swept	past	her	already	burning	island	of	torn	flesh—
A	building	exploded,	the	fireball	expanding	outward,	plunging	towards
her.	She	cried	out,	throwing	up	both	arms,	as	the	searing	incandescence
reached	out	to	take	her—
A	hand	from	behind,	snagging	her	harness—
Pain	–	the	breath	torn	from	her	lungs	–	then…nothing.
	
‘Stay	low!’	Balm	shouted	as	he	led	his	squad	down	the	twisting	alley.	After	his
bellowed	advice,	the	sergeant	resumed	his	litany	of	curses.	They	were	lost.
Pushed	back	in	their	efforts	to	return	to	Keneb	and	the	breach,	they	were	now
being	herded.	By	flames.	They	had	seen	the	palace	a	short	while	earlier,
through	a	momentary	break	in	the	smoke,	and	as	far	as	Balm	could	determine
they	were	still	heading	in	that	direction	–	but	the	world	beyond	had	vanished,	in
fire	and	smoke,	and	pursuing	in	their	wake	was	the	growing	conflagration.
Alive,	and	hunting	them.
‘It’s	building,	Sergeant!	We	got	to	get	out	of	this	city!’
‘You	think	I	don’t	know	that,	Widdershins?	What	in	Hood’s	name	do	you
think	we’re	trying	to	do	here?	Now	be	quiet—’
‘We’re	gonna	run	out	of	air.’
‘We	are	already,	you	idiot!	Now	shut	that	mouth	of	yours!’
They	reached	an	intersection	and	Balm	halted	his	soldiers.	Six	alleymouths	beckoned,	each	leading	into	tracks	as	twisted	and	dark	as	the	next.
Smoke	was	tumbling	from	two	of	them,	on	their	left.	Head	spinning,	every
breath	growing	more	pained,	less	invigorating,	the	Dal	Honese	wiped	hot
sweat	from	his	eyes	and	turned	to	study	his	soldiers.	Deadsmell,	Throatslitter,
Widdershins,	Galt	and	Lobe.	Tough	bastards	one	and	all.	This	wasn’t	the	right
way	to	die	–	there	were	right	ones,	and	this	wasn’t	one	of	them.	‘Gods,’	he
muttered,	‘I’ll	never	look	at	a	hearth	the	same	again.’


‘You	got	that	right,	Sergeant,’	said	Throatslitter,	punctuating	his	agreement
with	a	hacking	cough.
Balm	pulled	off	his	helm.	‘Strip	down,	you	damned	fools,	before	we	bake
ourselves.	Hold	on	to	your	weapons,	if	you	can.	We	ain’t	dying	here	tonight.
You	understand	me?	All	of	you	listen	–	do	you	understand	me?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant,’	Throatslitter	said.	‘We	hear	you.’
‘Good.	Now,	Widdershins,	got	any	magic	to	make	us	a	path?	Anything	at
all?’
The	mage	shook	his	head.	‘Wish	I	did.	Maybe	soon,	though.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	mean	a	fire	elemental’s	being	born	here,	I	think.	A	fire	spirit,	a	godling.
We	got	a	firestorm	on	the	way,	and	that	will	announce	its	arrival	–	and	that’s
when	we	die	if	we	ain’t	dead	already.	But	an	elemental	is	alive.	It’s	got	a	will,	a
mind,	damned	hungry	and	eager	to	kill.	But	it	knows	fear,	fear	because	it
knows	it	won’t	last	long	–	too	fierce,	too	hot	–	days	at	best.	And	it	knows	other
kinds	of	fear,	too,	and	that’s	where	maybe	I	can	do	something	–	illusions.	Of
water,	but	not	just	water.	A	water	elemental.’	He	stared	round	at	the	others,	who
were	all	staring	back,	then	shrugged.	‘Maybe,	maybe	not.	How	smart	is	an
elemental?	Got	to	be	smart	to	be	fooled,	you	see.	Dog-smart,	at	least,	better	if	it
was	smarter.	Problem	is,	not	everybody	agrees	that	elementals	even	exist.	I
mean,	I’m	convinced	it’s	a	good	theory—’
Balm	cracked	him	across	the	head.	‘All	this	on	a	theory?	You	wasted	all
that	air	on	that?	Gods	below,	Widdershins,	I’m	minded	to	kill	you	right	now.’
He	rose.	‘Let’s	get	going,	while	we	can.	To	Hood	with	the	damned	palace	–
let’s	take	the	alley	opposite	and	when	the	theoretical	elemental	arrives	we	can
shake	its	hand	and	curse	it	to	the	nonexistent	Abyss.	Come	on	–	and	you,
Widdershins,	not	another	word,	got	it?’
	
The	soldier	returned,	wreathed	in	flames.	Running,	running	from	the	pain,	but
there	was	nowhere	to	go.	Captain	Faradan	Sort	aimed	the	crossbow	and	loosed
a	quarrel.	Watched	the	poor	man	fall,	grow	still	as	the	flames	leapt	all	over
him,	blackening	the	skin,	cracking	open	the	flesh.	She	turned	away.	‘Last
quarrel,’	she	said,	tossing	the	weapon	to	one	side.
Her	new	lieutenant,	with	the	mouthful	name	of	Madan’Tul	Rada,	said
nothing	–	a	characteristic	Faradan	was	already	used	to,	and	of	which	she	was,
most	of	the	time,	appreciative.
Except	now,	when	they	were	about	to	roast.	‘All	right,’	she	said,	‘scratch
that	route	–	and	I’m	out	of	scouts.	No	back,	no	forward,	and,	from	the	looks	of


it,	no	left	and	no	right.	Any	suggestions?’
Madan’Tul	Rada’s	expression	soured,	jaw	edging	down	as	tongue	probed	a
likely	rotted	molar,	then	he	spat,	squinted	in	the	smoke,	and	unslung	his	round
shield	to	study	its	charred	face.	Looked	up	again,	slowly	tracking,	then:	‘No.’
They	could	hear	a	wind	above	them,	shrieking,	whirling	round	and	round
over	the	city,	drawing	the	flames	up,	spinning	tails	of	fire	that	slashed	like
giant	swords	through	the	convulsing	smoke.	It	was	getting	harder	and	harder	to
breathe.
The	lieutenant’s	head	lifted	suddenly,	and	he	faced	the	wall	of	flame	up	the
street,	then	rose.
Faradan	Sort	followed	suit,	for	she	could	now	see	what	he	had	seen	–	a
strange	black	stain	spreading	out	within	the	flames,	the	tongues	of	fire
flickering	back,	dying,	the	stain	deepening,	circular,	and	out	from	its	heart
staggered	a	figure	shedding	charred	leathers,	clasps	and	buckles	falling	away
to	bounce	on	the	street.
Stumbling	towards	them,	flames	dancing	in	the	full	head	of	hair	–	dancing,
yet	not	burning.	Closer,	and	Faradan	Sort	saw	it	was	a	girl,	a	face	she	then
recognized.	‘She’s	from	Cord’s	Ashok	squad.	That’s	Sinn.’
‘How	did	she	do	that?’	Madan’Tul	Rada	asked.
‘I	don’t	know,	but	let’s	hope	she	can	do	it	again.	Soldier!	Over	here!’
	
An	upper	level	had	simply	sheared	away,	down,	crashing	in	an	explosion	of
dust	and	smoke	onto	the	street.	Where	Bowl	had	been	crouching.	He	had	not
even	seen	it	coming,	Hellian	suspected.	Lucky	bastard.	She	looked	back	at	her
squad.	Blistered,	red	as	boiled	lobsters.	Armour	shed,	weapons	flung	away	–
too	hot	to	hold.	Marines	and	heavies.	Herself	the	only	sergeant.	Two	corporals
–	Urb	and	Reem	–	their	expressions	dulled.	Red-eyed	all	of	them,	gasping	in
the	dying	air,	damn	near	hairless.	Not	much	longer,	I	think.	Gods,	what	I	would
do	for	a	drink	right	now.	Something	nice.	Chilled,	delicate,	the	drunk	coming	on
slow	and	sly,	peaceful	sleep	beckoning	as	sweet	as	the	last	trickle	down	my
ravaged	throat.	Gods,	I’m	a	poet	when	it	comes	to	drink,	oh	yes.	‘Okay,	that
way’s	blocked	now.	Let’s	take	this	damned	alley—’
‘Why?’	Touchy	demanded.
‘Because	I	don’t	see	flames	down	there,	that’s	why.	We	keep	moving	until
we	can’t	move	no	more,	got	it?’
‘Why	don’t	we	just	stay	right	here	–	another	building’s	bound	to	land	on	us
sooner	or	later.’
‘Tell	you	what,’	Hellian	snarled.	‘You	do	just	that,	but	me,	I	ain’t	waiting


for	nothing.	You	want	to	die	alone,	you	go	right	ahead.’
She	set	off.
Everyone	followed.	There	was	nothing	else	to	do.
	
Eighteen	soldiers	–	Strings	had	carried	them	through.	Three	more	skirmishes,
bloody	and	without	mercy,	and	now	they	crouched	before	the	palace	gates	–
which	yawned	wide,	a	huge	mouth	filled	with	fire.	Smoke	billowed	above	the
fortification,	glowing	in	the	night.	Bottle,	on	his	knees,	gasping,	slowly	looked
round	at	his	fellow	soldiers.	A	few	heavies,	the	whole	of	Strings’s	squad,	and
most	of	Sergeant	Cord’s,	along	with	the	few	marines	surviving	from
Borduke’s	squad.
They	had	hoped,	prayed,	even,	to	arrive	and	find	other	squads	–	anyone,
more	survivors,	defying	this	damned	conflagration…this	far.	Just	this	far,
that’s	all.	It	would	have	been	enough.	But	they	were	alone,	with	no	sign
anywhere	that	any	other	Malazans	had	made	it.
If	Leoman	of	the	Flails	was	in	the	palace,	he	was	naught	but	ashes,	now.
‘Crump,	Maybe,	Cuttle,	over	to	me,’	Strings	ordered,	crouching	and
setting	down	his	satchel.	‘Any	other	sappers?	No?	Anyone	carrying	munitions?
All	right,	I	just	checked	mine	–	the	wax	is	way	too	soft	and	getting	softer	–	it’s
all	gonna	go	up,	and	that’s	the	plan.	All	of	it,	except	the	burners	–	toss	those	–
the	rest	goes	right	into	the	mouth	of	that	palace—’
‘What’s	the	point?’	Cord	demanded.	‘I	mean,	fine	by	me	if	you’re	thinking
it’s	a	better	way	to	go.’
‘I	want	to	try	and	blow	a	hole	in	this	growing	firestorm	–	knock	it	back	–
and	we’re	heading	through	that	hole,	for	as	long	as	it	survives	–	Hood	knows
where	it’ll	lead.	But	I	don’t	see	any	fire	right	behind	the	palace,	and	that’ll	do
for	me.	Problems	with	that,	Cord?’
‘No.	I	love	it.	It’s	brilliant.	Genius.	If	only	I	hadn’t	tossed	my	helm	away.’
A	few	laughs.	Good	sign.
Then	hacking	coughs.	Bad	sign.
Someone	shrieked,	and	Bottle	turned	to	see	a	figure	lumbering	out	from	a
nearby	building,	flasks	and	bottles	hanging	from	him,	another	bottle	in	one
hand,	a	torch	in	the	other	–	heading	straight	for	them.	And	they	had	discarded
their	crossbows.
A	bellowing	answer	from	a	soldier	in	Cord’s	squad,	and	the	man,	Bell,
rushed	forward	to	intercept	the	fanatic.
‘Get	back!’	Cord	screamed.
Sprinting,	Bell	flung	himself	at	the	man,	colliding	with	him	twenty	paces


away,	and	both	went	down.
Bottle	dropped	flat,	rolled	away,	bumping	up	against	other	soldiers	doing
the	same.
A	whoosh,	then	more	screams.	Terrible	screams.	And	a	wave	of	heat,
blistering,	fierce	as	the	breath	of	a	forge.
Then	Strings	was	swearing,	scrambling	with	his	collection	of	satchels.
‘Away	from	the	palace!	Everyone!’
‘Not	me!’	Cuttle	growled.	‘You	need	help.’
‘Fine.	Everyone	else!	Sixty,	seventy	paces	at	least!	More	if	you	can!	Go!’
Bottle	climbed	upright,	watched	as	Strings	and	Cuttle	ran	crab-like	towards
the	palace	gates.	Then	he	looked	round.	Sixty	paces?	We	ain’t	got	sixty	paces	–
flames	were	devouring	buildings	in	every	direction	he	could	see,	now.
Still,	as	far	away	as	possible.	He	began	running.
And	found	himself	colliding	with	someone	–	who	gripped	his	left	arm	and
spun	him	round.
Gesler.	And	behind	him	Thom	Tissy,	then	a	handful	of	soldiers.	‘What	are
those	fools	doing?’	Gesler	demanded.
‘Blow	–	a	hole	–	through	the	storm—’
‘Puckered	gods	of	the	Abyss.	Sands	–	you	still	got	your	munitions?’
‘Aye,	Sergeant—’
‘Damned	fool.	Give	’em	to	me—’
‘No,’	said	Truth,	stepping	in	between.	‘I’ll	take	them.	We’ve	gone	through
fire	before,	right,	Sergeant?’	With	that	he	snatched	the	satchel	from	Sands’s
hands	and	ran	towards	the	palace	gates—
Where	Strings	and	Cuttle	had	been	forced	back	–	the	heat	too	fierce,	the
flames	slashing	bright	arms	out	at	them.
‘Damn	him!’	Gesler	hissed.	‘That	was	a	different	kind	of	fire—’
Bottle	pulled	loose	from	the	sergeant’s	grip.	‘We	got	to	get	going!	Away!’
Moments	later	all	were	running	–	except	Gesler,	who	was	heading	towards
the	sappers	outside	the	gate.	Bottle	hesitated.	He	could	not	help	it.	He	had	to	see
—
Truth	reached	Cuttle	and	Strings,	tugged	their	bags	away,	slung	them	over
a	shoulder,	then	shouted	something	and	ran	towards	the	palace	gates.
Both	sappers	leapt	to	their	feet,	retreating,	intercepting	Gesler	–	who
looked	determined	to	follow	his	young	recruit	–	Cuttle	and	Strings	dragged	the
sergeant	back.	Gesler	struggled,	turning	a	ravaged	face	in	Truth’s	direction—
But	the	soldier	had	plunged	into	the	flames.
Bottle	ran	back,	joined	with	the	two	sappers	to	help	drag	a	shrieking
Gesler	away.


Away.
They	had	managed	thirty	paces	down	the	street,	heading	towards	a	huddled
mass	of	soldiers	shying	from	a	wall	of	flames,	when	the	palace	blew	up	behind
them.
And	out,	huge	sections	of	stone	flung	skyward.
Batted	into	the	air,	tumbling	in	a	savage	wind,	Bottle	rolled	in	the	midst	of
bouncing	rubble,	limbs	and	bodies,	faces,	mouths	opened	wide,	everyone
screaming	–	in	silence.	No	sound	–	no…nothing.
Pain	in	his	head,	stabbing	fierce	in	his	ears,	a	pressure	closing	on	his
temples,	his	skull	ready	to	implode—
The	wind	suddenly	reversed,	pulling	sheets	of	flame	after	it,	closing	in
from	every	street.	The	pressure	loosed.	And	the	flames	drew	back,	writhing
like	tentacles.
Then	the	air	was	still.
Coughing,	staggering	upright,	Bottle	turned.
The	palace’s	heart	was	gone,	split	asunder,	and	naught	but	dust	and	smoke
filled	the	vast	swath	of	rubble.
‘Now!’	Strings	shrieked,	his	voice	sounding	leagues	away.	‘Go!	Everyone!
Go!’
The	wind	returned,	sudden,	a	scream	rising	to	a	wail,	pushing	them	onward
–	onto	the	battered	road	between	jagged,	sagging	palace	walls.
	
Dunsparrow	had	been	first	to	the	temple	doors,	shoving	them	wide	even	as
explosions	of	fire	lit	up	the	horizon,	all	round	the	city…all	within	the	city
walls.
Gasping,	heart	pounding	and	something	like	a	knife-blade	twisting	in	his
gut,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	followed	Leoman	and	the	Malazan	woman	into
the	Temple	of	Scalissara,	L’oric	two	paces	behind	him.
No,	not	Scalissara	–	the	Queen	of	Dreams.	Scalissara	the	matron	goddess	of
olive	oil	would	not	have…no,	she	would	not	have	allowed	this.	Not…this.
And	things	had	begun	to	make	sense.	Terrible,	awful	sense,	like	chiselled
stones	fitting	together,	raising	a	wall	between	humanity…and	what	Leoman	of
the	Flails	had	become.
The	warriors	–	who	had	ridden	with	them,	lived	with	them	since	the
rebellion	first	began,	who	had	fought	at	their	side	against	the	Malazans,	who
even	now	fought	like	fiends	in	the	streets	–	they	were	all	going	to	die.
Y’Ghatan,	this	whole	city,	it’s	going	to	die.
Hurrying	down	the	central	hallway,	into	the	nave,	from	which	gusted	a


cold,	dusty	wind,	wind	that	seemed	to	come	from	nowhere	and	everywhere	at
once.	Reeking	of	mould,	rot	and	death.
Leoman	spun	to	L’oric.	‘Open	a	gate,	High	Mage!	Quickly!’
‘You	must	not	do	this,’	Corabb	said	to	his	commander.	‘We	must	die,	this
night.	Fighting	in	the	name	of	Dryjhna—’
‘Hood	take	Dryjhna!’	Leoman	rasped.
L’oric	was	staring	at	Leoman,	as	if	seeing	him,	understanding	him,	for	the
first	time.	‘A	moment,’	he	said.
‘We’ve	no	time	for	that!’
‘Leoman	of	the	Flails,’	the	High	Mage	said,	unperturbed,	‘you	have
bargained	with	the	Queen	of	Dreams.	A	precipitous	thing	to	do.	That	goddess
has	no	interest	in	what’s	right	and	what’s	wrong.	If	she	once	possessed	a	heart,
she	flung	it	away	long	ago.	And	now	you	have	drawn	me	into	this	–	you	have
used	me,	so	that	a	goddess	may	make	use	of	me	in	turn.	I	do	not—’
‘The	gate,	damn	you!	If	you	have	objections,	L’oric,	raise	them	with	her!’
‘They	are	all	to	die,’	Corabb	said,	backing	away	from	his	commander,	‘so
that	you	can	live.’
‘So	that	we	can	live,	Corabb!	There	is	no	other	way	–	do	you	think	that	the
Malazans	would	ever	leave	us	be?	No	matter	where	or	how	far	we	fled?	I	thank
Hood’s	dusty	feet	the	Claw	hasn’t	struck	already,	but	I	do	not	intend	to	live	the
rest	of	my	life	looking	over	my	shoulder!	I	was	a	bodyguard,	damn	you	–	it
was	her	cause,	not	mine!’
‘Your	warriors	–	they	expected	you	to	fight	at	their	sides—’
‘They	expected	nothing	of	the	sort.	The	fools	wanted	to	die.	In	Dryjhna’s
name.’	He	bared	his	teeth	in	contempt.	‘Well,	let	them!	Let	them	die!	And	best
of	all,	they	are	going	to	take	half	the	Adjunct’s	army	with	them.	There’s	your
glory,	Corabb!’	He	advanced	on	him,	pointing	towards	the	temple	doors.	‘You
want	to	join	the	fools?	You	want	to	feel	your	lungs	searing	with	the	heat,	your
eyes	bursting,	skin	cracking?	You	want	your	blood	to	boil	in	your	veins?’
‘An	honourable	death,	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	compared	to	this.’
He	voiced	something	like	a	snarl,	spun	back	to	L’oric.	‘Open	the	way	–	and
fear	not,	I	made	no	promises	to	her	regarding	you,	beyond	bringing	you	here.’
‘The	fire	grows	into	life	outside	this	temple,	Leoman,’	L’oric	said.	‘I	may
not	succeed.’
‘Your	chances	diminish	with	each	moment	that	passes,’	Leoman	said	in	a
growl.
There	was	panic	in	the	man’s	eyes.	Corabb	studied	it,	the	way	it	seemed
so…out	of	place.	There,	in	the	features	he	thought	he	knew	so	well.	Knew
every	expression	possible.	Anger,	cold	amusement,	disdain,	the	stupor	and


lidded	eyes	within	the	fumes	of	durhang.	Every	expression…except	this	one.
Panic.
Everything	was	crumbling	inside,	and	Corabb	could	feel	himself
drowning.	Sinking	ever	deeper,	reaching	up	towards	a	light	that	grew	ever
more	distant,	dimmer.
With	a	hissed	curse,	L’oric	faced	the	altar.	Its	stones	seemed	to	glow	in	the
gloom,	so	new,	the	marble	unfamiliar	–	from	some	other	continent,	Corabb
suspected	–	traced	through	with	purple	veins	and	capillaries	that	seemed	to
pulse.	There	was	a	circular	pool	beyond	the	altar,	the	water	steaming	–	it	had
been	covered	the	last	time	they	had	visited;	he	could	see	the	copper	panels	that
had	sealed	it	lying	against	a	side-wall.
The	air	swirled	above	the	altar.
She	was	waiting	on	the	other	side.	A	flicker,	as	if	reflected	from	the	pool
of	water,	then	the	portal	opened,	engulfing	the	altar,	edges	spreading,	curling
black,	then	wavering	fitfully.	L’oric	gasped,	straining	beneath	some	invisible
burden.	‘I	cannot	hold	this	long!	I	see	you,	Queen!’
From	the	portal	came	a	languid,	cool	voice,	‘L’oric,	son	of	Osserc.	I	seek
no	geas	from	you.’
‘Then	what	do	you	want?’
A	moment,	during	which	the	portal	wavered,	then:	‘Sha’ik	is	dead.	The
Whirlwind	Goddess	is	no	more.	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	a	question.’	A	new	tone
to	her	voice,	something	like	irony.	‘Is	Y’Ghatan	–	what	you	have	done	here	–	is
this	your	Apocalypse?’
The	desert	warrior	scowled,	then	said,	‘Well,	yes.’	He	shrugged.	‘Not	as
big	as	we’d	hoped…’
‘But,	perhaps,	enough.	L’oric.	The	role	of	Sha’ik,	the	Seer	of	Dryjhna,	is…
vacant.	It	needs	to	be	filled—’
‘Why?’	L’oric	demanded.
‘Lest	something	else,	something	less	desirable,	assume	the	mantle.’
‘And	the	likelihood	of	that?’
‘Imminent.’
Corabb	watched	the	High	Mage,	sensed	a	rush	of	thoughts	behind	the
man’s	eyes,	as	mysterious	implications	fell	into	place	following	the	goddess’s
words.	Then,	‘You	have	chosen	someone.’
‘Yes.’
‘Someone	who	needs…protecting.’
‘Yes.’
‘Is	that	someone	in	danger?’
‘Very	much	so,	L’oric.	Indeed,	my	desires	have	been	anticipated,	and	we


may	well	have	run	out	of	time.’
‘Very	well.	I	accept.’
‘Come	forward,	then.	You,	and	the	others.	Do	not	delay	–	I	too	am	sorely
tried	maintaining	this	path.’
His	soul	nothing	but	ashes,	Corabb	watched	the	High	Mage	stride	into	the
portal,	and	vanish	within	the	swirling,	liquid	stain.
Leoman	faced	him	one	more	time,	his	voice	almost	pleading	as	he	said,
‘My	friend…’
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	shook	his	head.
‘Did	you	not	hear?	Another	Sha’ik	–	a	new	Sha’ik—’
‘And	will	you	find	her	a	new	army	as	well,	Leoman?	More	fools	to	lead	to
their	deaths?	No,	I	am	done	with	you,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	Take	your	Malazan
wench	and	be	gone	from	my	sight.	I	choose	to	die	here,	with	my	fellow
warriors.’
Dunsparrow	reached	out	and	grasped	Leoman’s	arm.	‘The	portal’s
crumbling,	Leoman.’
The	warrior,	last	commander	of	Dryjhna,	turned	away,	and,	the	woman	at
his	side,	strode	into	the	gate.	Moments	later	it	dissolved,	and	there	was	nothing.
Nothing	but	the	strange,	swirling	wind,	skirling	dust-devils	tracking	the
inlaid	tile	floor.
Corabb	blinked,	looked	round.	Outside	the	temple,	it	seemed	the	world	was
ending,	voicing	a	death-cry	ever	rising	in	timbre.	No…not	a	death-cry.
Something	else…
Hearing	a	closer	sound	–	from	a	side	passage	–	a	scuffle	–	Corabb	drew
his	scimitar.	Approached	the	curtain	barring	the	corridor.	With	the	tip	of	his
blade,	he	swung	the	cloth	aside.
To	see	children.	Crouching,	huddled.	Ten,	fifteen	–	sixteen	in	all.	Smudged
faces,	wide	eyes,	all	looking	up	at	him.	‘Oh	gods,’	he	murmured.	‘They	have
forgotten	you.’
They	all	have.	Every	single	one	of	them.
He	sheathed	his	weapon	and	stepped	forward.	‘It’s	all	right,’	he	said.	‘We
shall	find	us	a	room,	yes?	And	wait	this	out.’
Something	else…Thunder,	the	death	of	buildings,	the	burgeoning	wails	of
fire,	howling	winds.	This	is	what	is	outside,	the	world	beyond,	this…spirits
below,	Dryjhna—
Outside,	the	birth-cries	of	the	Apocalypse	rose	still	higher.
	
‘There!’	Throatslitter	said,	pointing.


Sergeant	Balm	blinked,	the	smoke	and	heat	like	broken	glass	in	his	eyes,
and	could	just	make	out	a	half-score	figures	crossing	the	street	before	them.
‘Who?’
‘Malazans,’	Throatslitter	said.
From	behind	Balm:	‘Great,	more	for	the	clam-bake,	what	a	night	we’re
going	to	have—’
‘When	I	said	be	quiet,	Widdershins,	I	meant	it.	All	right,	let’s	go	meet	them.
Maybe	they	ain’t	as	lost	as	us.’
‘Oh	yeah?	Look	who’s	leading	them!	That	drunk,	what’s	her	name?
They’re	probably	trying	to	find	a	bar!’
‘I	ain’t	lying,	Widdershins!	One	more	word	and	I’ll	skewer	you!’
	
Urb’s	huge	hand	landed	on	her	arm,	gripping	hard,	turning	her	round,	and
Hellian	saw	a	squad	stumbling	towards	them.	‘Thank	the	gods,’	she	said	in	a
ravaged	voice,	‘they	got	to	know	where	they’re	going—’
A	sergeant	approached	in	a	half-crouch.	Dal	Honese,	his	face	patchy	with
dried	mud.	‘I’m	Balm,’	he	said.	‘Wherever	you’re	headed,	we’re	with	you!’
Hellian	scowled.	‘Fine,’	she	said.	‘Just	fall	in	and	we’ll	all	be	rosy	in	no
time.’
‘Got	us	a	way	out?’
‘Yeah,	down	that	alley.’
‘Great.	What’s	down	there?’
‘The	only	place	not	yet	burning,	you	Dal	Honese	monk-rat!’	She	waved	at
her	troop	and	they	continued	on.	Something	was	visible	ahead.	A	huge,	smudgy
dome	of	some	kind.	They	were	passing	temples	now,	the	doors	swinging	wide,
banging	in	the	gusting,	furnace-hot	wind.	What	little	clothes	she	was	still
wearing	had	begun	smoking,	thready	wisps	stretching	out	from	the	rough
weave.	She	could	smell	her	own	burning	hair.
A	soldier	came	up	alongside	her.	He	was	holding	twin	long-knives	in
gloved	hands.	‘You	ain’t	got	no	cause	to	curse	Sergeant	Balm,	woman.	He
brought	us	through	this	far.’
‘What’s	your	name?’	Hellian	demanded.
‘Throatslitter—’
‘Nice.	Now	go	and	slit	your	own	throat.	Nobody’s	gotten	through	nowhere,
you	damned	idiot.	Now,	unless	you	got	a	bottle	of	chilled	wine	under	that	shirt,
go	find	someone	else	to	annoy.’
‘You	was	nicer	drunk,’	he	said,	falling	back.
Yeah,	everyone’s	nicer	drunk.


At	the	far	edge	of	the	collapsed	palace,	Limp’s	left	leg	was	trapped	by	a	sliding
piece	of	stonework,	his	screams	loud	enough	to	challenge	the	fiery	wind.
Cord,	Shard	and	a	few	others	from	the	Ashok	squad	pulled	him	free,	but	it	was
clear	the	soldier ’s	leg	was	broken.
Ahead	was	a	plaza	of	some	sort,	once	the	site	of	a	market	of	some	kind,
and	beyond	it	rose	a	huge	domed	temple	behind	a	high	wall.	Remnants	of	gold
leaf	trickled	down	the	dome’s	flanks	like	rainwater.	A	heavy	layer	of	smoke
roiled	across	the	scene,	making	the	dome	seem	to	float	in	the	air,	firelit	and
smeared.	Strings	gestured	for	everyone	to	close	in.
‘We’re	heading	for	that	temple,’	he	said.	‘It	likely	won’t	help	–	there’s	a
damned	firestorm	coming.	Never	seen	one	myself,	and	I’m	wishing	that	was
still	the	case.	Anyway,’	he	paused	to	cough,	then	spit,	‘I	can’t	think	of	anything
else.’
‘Sergeant,’	Bottle	said,	frowning,	‘I	sense…something.	Life.	In	that
temple.’
‘All	right,	maybe	we’ll	have	to	fight	to	find	a	place	to	die.	Fine.	Maybe
there’s	enough	of	’em	to	kill	us	all	and	that	ain’t	so	bad.’
No,	Sergeant.	Nowhere	close.	But	never	mind.
‘All	right,	let’s	try	and	get	across	this	plaza.’
It	looked	easy,	but	they	were	running	out	of	air,	and	the	winds	racing
across	the	concourse	were	blistering	hot	–	no	cover	provided	by	building
walls.	Bottle	knew	they	might	not	make	it.	Rasping	heat	tore	at	his	eyes,	poured
like	sand	into	his	throat	with	every	gasping	breath.	Through	blurred	pain,	he
saw	figures	appear	off	to	his	right,	racing	out	of	the	smoke.	Ten,	fifteen,	then
scores,	spilling	onto	the	concourse,	some	of	them	on	fire,	others	with	spears
—‘Sergeant!’
‘Gods	below!’
The	warriors	were	attacking.	Here,	in	this	square,	this…furnace.	Burning
figures	fell	away,	stumbling,	clawing	at	their	faces,	but	the	others	came	on.
‘Form	up!’	Strings	bellowed.	‘Fighting	retreat	–	to	that	temple	wall!’
Bottle	stared	at	the	closing	mass.	Form	up?	Fighting	retreat?	With	what?
One	of	Cord’s	soldiers	appeared	beside	him,	and	the	man	reached	out,
gesturing.	‘You!	A	mage,	right?’
Bottle	nodded.
‘I’m	Ebron	–	we	got	to	take	these	bastards	on	–	with	magic	–	no	other
weapons	left—’


‘All	right.	Whatever	you	got,	I’ll	add	to	it.’
Three	heavy	infantry,	the	women	Flashwit,	Mayfly	and	Uru	Hela,	had
drawn	knives	and	were	forming	up	a	front	line.	A	heartbeat	later,	Shortnose
joined	them,	huge	hands	closed	into	fists.
The	lead	score	of	attackers	closed	to	within	fifteen	paces,	and	launched
their	spears	as	if	they	were	javelins.	In	the	momentary	flash	of	the	shafts
crossing	the	short	distance,	Bottle	saw	that	the	wood	had	ignited,	spinning
wreaths	of	smoke.
Shouted	warnings,	then	the	solid	impact	of	the	heavy	weapons.	Uru	Hela
was	spun	round,	a	spear	transfixing	her	left	shoulder,	the	shaft	scything	into
Mayfly’s	neck	with	a	cracking	sound.	As	Uru	Hela	stumbled	to	her	knees,
Mayfly	staggered,	then	straightened.	Sergeant	Strings	sprawled,	a	spear
impaling	his	right	leg.	Swearing,	he	pulled	at	it,	his	other	leg	kicking	like	a
thing	gone	mad.	Tavos	Pond	staggered	into	Bottle,	knocking	him	down	as	the
soldier,	one	side	of	his	face	slashed	away,	the	eye	dangling,	stumbled	on,
screaming.
Moments	before	the	frenzied	attackers	reached	them,	a	wave	of	sorcery
rose	in	a	wall	of	billowing,	argent	smoke,	sweeping	out	to	engulf	the	warriors.
Shrieks,	bodies	falling,	skin	and	flesh	blackening,	curling	away	from	bones.
Sudden	horror.
Bottle	had	no	idea	what	kind	of	magic	Ebron	was	using,	but	he	unleashed
Meanas,	redoubling	the	smoke’s	thickness	and	breadth	–	illusional,	but	panic
tore	into	the	warriors.	Falling,	tumbling	out	of	the	smoke,	hands	at	their	eyes,
writhing,	vomit	gushing	onto	the	cobbles.	The	attack	shattered	against	the
sorcery,	and	as	the	wind	whipped	the	poisonous	cloud	away,	they	could	see
nothing	but	fleeing	figures,	already	well	beyond	the	heap	of	bodies.
Bodies	smouldering,	catching	fire.
Koryk	had	reached	Strings,	who	had	pulled	the	spear	from	his	leg,	and
began	stuffing	knots	of	cloth	into	the	puncture	wounds.	Bottle	went	to	them	–
no	spurting	blood	from	the	holes,	he	saw.	Still,	lots	of	blood	had	smeared	the
cobbles.	‘Wrap	that	leg!’	he	ordered	the	half-Seti.	‘We’ve	got	to	get	off	this
plaza!’
Cord	and	Corporal	Tulip	were	attending	to	Uru	Hela,	whilst	Scant	and
Balgrid	had	chased	down	and	tackled	Tavos	Pond	to	the	ground.	Bottle	watched
as	Scant	pushed	the	dangling	eye	back	into	its	socket,	then	fumbled	with	a	cloth
to	wrap	round	the	soldier ’s	head.
‘Drag	the	wounded!’	Sergeant	Gesler	yelled.	‘Come	on,	you	damned	fools!
To	that	wall!	We	need	to	find	us	a	way	in!’
Numbed,	Bottle	reached	down	to	help	Koryk	lift	Strings.


He	saw	that	his	fingers	had	turned	blue.	He	was	deafened	by	a	roaring	in
his	head,	and	everything	was	spinning	round	him.
Air.	We	need	air.
The	wall	rose	before	them,	and	then	they	were	skirting	it.	Seeking	a	way	in.
	
Lying	in	heaps,	dying	of	asphyxiation.	Keneb	pulled	himself	across	shattered
stone,	blistered	hands	clawing	through	the	rubble.	Blinding	smoke,	searing
heat,	and	now	he	could	feel	his	mind,	starving,	disintegrating	–	wild,	disjointed
visions	–	a	woman,	a	man,	a	child,	striding	out	from	the	flames.
Demons,	servants	of	Hood.
Voices,	so	loud,	the	wail	endless,	growing	–	and	darkness	flowed	out	from
the	three	apparitions,	poured	over	the	hundreds	of	bodies—
Yes,	his	mind	was	dying.	For	he	felt	a	sudden	falling	off	of	the	vicious
heat,	and	sweet	air	filled	his	lungs.	Dying,	what	else	can	this	be?	I	have	arrived.
At	Hood’s	Gate.	Gods,	such	blessed	relief—Someone’s	hands	pulled	at	him	–
spasms	of	agony	from	fingers	pressing	into	burnt	skin	–	and	he	was	being
rolled	over.
Blinking,	staring	up	into	a	smeared,	blistered	face.	A	woman.	He	knew	her.
And	she	was	speaking.
We’re	all	dead,	now.	Friends.	Gathering	at	Hood’s	Gate—
‘Fist	Keneb!	There	are	hundreds	here!’
Yes.
‘Still	alive!	Sinn	is	keeping	the	fire	back,	but	she	can’t	hold	on	much
longer!	We’re	going	to	try	and	push	through!	Do	you	understand	me!	We	need
help,	we	need	to	get	everyone	on	their	feet!’
What?	‘Captain,’	he	whispered.	‘Captain	Faradan	Sort.’
‘Yes!	Now,	on	your	feet,	Fist!’
	
A	storm	of	fire	was	building	above	Y’Ghatan.	Blistig	had	never	seen	anything
like	it.	Flames,	twisting,	spinning,	slashing	out	long	tendrils	that	seemed	to
shatter	the	billowing	smoke.	Wild	winds	tore	into	the	clouds,	annihilating	them
in	flashes	of	red.
The	heat—Gods	below,	this	has	happened	before.	This	Hood-damned	city…
A	corner	bastion	exploded	in	a	vast	fireball,	the	leaping	gouts	writhing,
climbing—
The	wind	that	struck	them	from	behind	staggered	everyone	on	the	road.	In


the	besiegers’	camp,	tents	were	torn	from	their	moorings,	flung	into	the	air,
then	racing	in	wild	billows	towards	Y’Ghatan.	Horses	screamed	amidst
curtains	of	sand	and	dust	rising	up,	whipping	like	the	fiercest	storm.
Blistig	found	himself	on	his	knees.	A	gloved	hand	closed	on	his	cloak
collar,	pulled	him	round.	He	found	himself	staring	into	a	face	that,	for	a
moment,	he	did	not	recognize.	Dirt,	sweat,	tears,	and	an	expression	buckled	by
panic	–	the	Adjunct.	‘Pull	the	camp	back!	Everyone!’
He	could	barely	hear	her,	yet	he	nodded,	turned	into	the	wind	and	fought
his	way	down	from	the	road.	Something	is	about	to	be	born,	Nil	said.
Something…
The	Adjunct	was	shouting.	More	commands.	Blistig,	reaching	the	edge	of
the	road,	dragged	himself	down	onto	the	back	slope.	Nil	and	Nether	moved
past	him,	towards	where	the	Adjunct	still	stood	on	the	road.
The	initial	blast	of	wind	had	eased	slightly,	this	time	a	longer,	steadier
breath	drawn	in	towards	the	city	and	its	burgeoning	conflagration.
‘There	are	soldiers!’	the	Adjunct	screamed.	‘Beyond	the	breach!	I	want
them	out!’
The	child	Grub	clambered	up	the	slope,	flanked	by	the	dogs	Bent	and
Roach.
And	now	other	figures	were	swarming	past	Blistig.	Khundryl.	Warlocks,
witches.	Keening	voices,	jabbering	undercurrents,	a	force	building,	rising
from	the	battered	earth.	Fist	Blistig	twisted	round	–	a	ritual,	magic,	what	were
they	doing?	He	shot	a	glance	back	at	the	chaos	of	the	encampment,	saw	officers
amidst	scrambling	figures	–	they	weren’t	fools.	They	were	already	pulling
back—
Nil’s	voice,	loud	from	the	road.	‘We	can	feel	her!	Someone!	Spirits	below,
such	power!’
‘Help	her,	damn	you!’
A	witch	shrieked,	bursting	into	flames	on	the	road.	Moments	later,	two
warlocks	huddled	near	Blistig	seemed	to	melt	before	his	eyes,	crumbling	into
white	ash.	He	stared	in	horror.	Help	her?	Help	who?	What	is	happening?	He
pulled	himself	onto	the	road’s	edge	once	more.
And	could	see,	in	the	heart	of	the	breach,	a	darkening	within	the	flames.
Fire	flickered	round	another	witch,	then	snapped	out	as	something	rolled
over	everyone	on	the	road	–	cool,	sweet	power	–	like	a	merciful	god’s	breath.
Even	Blistig,	despiser	of	all	things	magic,	could	feel	this	emanation,	this
terrible,	beautiful	will.
Driving	the	flames	in	the	breach	back,	opening	a	swirling	dark	tunnel.
From	which	figures	staggered.


Nether	was	on	her	knees	near	the	Adjunct	–	the	only	person	on	the	road
still	standing	–	and	Blistig	saw	the	Wickan	girl	turn	to	Tavore,	heard	her	say,
‘It’s	Sinn.	Adjunct,	that	child’s	a	High	Mage.	And	she	doesn’t	even	know	it—’
The	Adjunct	turned,	saw	Blistig.
‘Fist!	On	your	feet.	Squads	and	healers	forward.	Now!	They’re	coming
through	–	Fist	Blistig,	do	you	understand	me?	They	need	help!’
He	clambered	to	his	knees,	but	got	no	further.	He	stared	at	the	woman.	She
was	no	more	than	a	silhouette,	the	world	behind	her	nothing	but	flames,	a
firestorm	growing,	ever	growing.	Something	cold,	riven	through	with	terror,
filled	his	chest.
A	vision.
He	could	only	stare.
Tavore	snarled,	then	turned	to	the	scrawny	boy	standing	nearby.	‘Grub!
Find	some	officers	down	in	our	camp!	We	need—’
‘Yes,	Adjunct!	Seven	hundred	and	ninety-one,	Adjunct.	Fist	Keneb.	Fist
Tene	Baralta.	Alive.	I’m	going	to	get	help	now.’
And	then	he	was	running	past	Blistig,	down	the	slope,	the	dogs	padding
along	in	his	wake.
A	vision.	An	omen,	yes.	I	know	now,	what	awaits	us.	At	the	far	end.	At	the
far	end	of	this	long,	long	road.	Oh	gods…
She	had	turned	about,	now,	her	back	to	him.	She	was	staring	at	the	burning
city,	at	the	pathetic,	weaving	line	of	survivors	stumbling	through	the	tunnel.
Seven	hundred	and	ninety-one.	Out	of	three	thousand.
But	she	is	blind.	Blind	to	what	I	see.
The	Adjunct	Tavore.	And	a	burning	world.
	
The	doors	slammed	open,	pulling	in	an	undercurrent	of	smoke	and	heat	that
swept	across	Corabb’s	ankles,	then	up	and	round,	the	smoke	massing	in	the
dome,	pulled	and	tugged	by	wayward	currents.	The	warrior	stepped	in	front	of
the	huddled	children	and	drew	out	his	scimitar.
He	heard	voices	–	Malazan	–	then	saw	figures	appearing	from	the
hallway’s	gloom.	Soldiers,	a	woman	in	the	lead.	Seeing	Corabb,	they	halted.
A	man	stepped	past	the	woman.	His	blistered	face	bore	the	mangled	traces
of	tattooing.	‘I	am	Iutharal	Galt,’	he	said	in	a	ragged	voice.	‘Pardu—’
‘Traitor,’	Corabb	snapped.	‘I	am	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	Second	to
Leoman	of	the	Flails.	You,	Pardu,	are	a	traitor.’
‘Does	that	matter	any	more?	We’re	all	dead	now,	anyway.’
‘Enough	of	this,’	a	midnight-skinned	soldier	said	in	badly	accented	Ehrlii.


‘Throatslitter,	go	and	kill	the	fool—’
‘Wait!’	the	Pardu	said,	then	ducked	his	head	and	added:	‘Sergeant.	Please.
There	ain’t	no	point	to	this—’
‘It	was	these	bastards	that	led	us	into	this	trap,	Galt,’	the	sergeant	said.
‘No,’	Corabb	said,	drawing	their	attention	once	more.	‘Leoman	of	the
Flails	has	brought	us	to	this.	He	and	he	alone.	We	–	we	were	all	betrayed—’
‘And	where’s	he	hiding?’	the	one	named	Throatslitter	asked,	hefting	his
long-knives,	a	murderous	look	in	his	pale	eyes.
‘Fled.’
‘Temul	will	have	him,	then,’	Iutharal	Galt	said,	turning	to	the	sergeant.
‘They’ve	surrounded	the	city—’
‘No	use,’	Corabb	cut	in.	‘He	did	not	leave	that	way.’	He	gestured	behind
him,	towards	the	altar.	‘A	sorcerous	gate.	The	Queen	of	Dreams	–	she	took	him
from	here.	Him	and	High	Mage	L’oric	and	a	Malazan	woman	named
Dunsparrow—’
The	doors	opened	once	again	and	the	Malazans	whirled,	then,	as	voices
approached	–	cries	of	pain,	coughing,	cursing	–	they	relaxed.	More	brethren,
Corabb	realized.	More	of	the	damned	enemy.	But	the	Pardu	had	been	right.	The
only	enemy	now	was	fire.	He	swung	back	to	look	upon	the	children,	flinched	at
their	terror-filled	eyes,	and	turned	round	once	more,	for	he	had	nothing	to	say
to	them.	Nothing	worth	hearing.
	
As	he	stumbled	into	the	hallway,	Bottle	gasped.	Cold,	dusty	air,	rushing	past
him	–	where?	how?	–	and	then	Cuttle	pushed	the	doors	shut	once	more,
swearing	as	he	burned	his	hands.
Ahead,	at	the	threshold	leading	into	the	altar	chamber,	stood	more
Malazans.	Balm	and	his	squad.	The	Kartoolian	drunk,	Hellian.	Corporal	Reem
and	a	few	others	from	Sobelone’s	heavies.	And,	beyond	them	in	the	nave	itself,
a	lone	rebel	warrior,	and	behind	him,	children.
But	the	air	–	the	air…
Koryk	and	Tarr	dragged	Strings	past	him.	Mayfly	and	Flashwit	had	drawn
their	meat-knives	again,	even	as	the	rebel	flung	his	scimitar	to	one	side,	the
weapon	clanging	hollowly	on	the	tiled	floor.	Gods	below,	one	of	them	has
actually	surrendered.
Heat	was	radiating	from	the	stone	walls	–	the	firestorm	outside	would	not
spare	this	temple	for	much	longer.	The	last	twenty	paces	round	the	temple
corner	to	the	front	façade	had	nearly	killed	them	–	no	wind,	the	air	filled	with
the	crack	of	exploding	bricks,	buckling	cobblestones,	the	flames	seeming	to


feed	upon	the	very	air	itself,	roaring	down	the	streets,	spiralling	upward,
flaring	like	huge	hooded	snakes	above	the	city.	And	the	sound	–	he	could	hear
it	still,	beyond	the	walls,	closing	in	–	the	sound…is	terrible.	Terrible.
Gesler	and	Cord	strode	over	to	Balm	and	Hellian,	and	Bottle	moved	closer
to	listen	in	on	their	conversation.
‘Anybody	here	worship	the	Queen	of	Dreams?’	Gesler	asked.
Hellian	shrugged.	‘I	figure	it’s	a	little	late	to	start.	Anyway,	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas	–	our	prisoner	over	there	–	he	said	Leoman’s	already	done	that
deal	with	her.	Of	course,	maybe	she	ain’t	into	playing	favourites—’
A	sudden	loud	crack	startled	everyone	–	the	altar	had	just	shattered	–	and
Bottle	saw	that	Crump,	the	insane	saboteur,	had	just	finished	pissing	on	it.
Hellian	laughed.	‘Well,	scratch	that	idea.’
‘Hood’s	balls,’	Gesler	hissed.	‘Someone	go	kill	that	bastard,	please.’
Crump	had	noticed	the	sudden	attention.	He	looked	round	innocently.
‘What?’
‘Want	a	word	or	two	with	you,’	Cuttle	said,	rising.	‘’Bout	the	wall—’
‘It	weren’t	my	fault!	I	ain’t	never	used	cussers	afore!’
‘Crump—’
‘And	that	ain’t	my	name	neither,	Sergeant	Cord.	It’s	Jamber	Bole,	and	I	was
High	Marshall	in	the	Mott	Irregulars—’
‘Well,	you	ain’t	in	Mott	any	more,	Crump.	And	you	ain’t	Jamber	Bole
either.	You’re	Crump,	and	you	better	get	used	to	it.’
A	voice	from	behind	Bottle:	‘Did	he	say	Mott	Irregulars?’
Bottle	turned,	nodded	at	Strings.	‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘Gods	below,	who	recruited	him?’
Shrugging,	Bottle	studied	Strings	for	a	moment.	Koryk	and	Tarr	had
carried	him	to	just	within	the	nave’s	entrance,	and	the	sergeant	was	leaning
against	a	flanking	pillar,	the	wounded	leg	stretched	out	in	front	of	him,	his	face
pale.	‘I	better	get	to	that—’
‘No	point,	Bottle	–	the	walls	are	going	to	explode	–	you	can	feel	the	heat,
even	from	this	damned	pillar.	It’s	amazing	there’s	air	in	here…’	His	voice	fell
away,	and	Bottle	saw	his	sergeant	frown,	then	lay	both	hands	palm-down	on	the
tiles.	‘Huh.’
‘What	is	it?’
‘Cool	air,	coming	up	from	between	the	tiles.’
Crypts?	Cellars?	But	that	would	be	dead	air	down	there…‘I’ll	be	back	in	a
moment,	Sergeant,’	he	said,	turning	and	heading	towards	the	cracked	altar.	A
pool	of	water	steamed	just	beyond.	He	could	feel	that	wind,	now,	the	currents
rising	up	from	the	floor.	Halting,	he	settled	down	onto	his	hands	and	knees.


And	sent	his	senses	downward,	seeking	life-sparks.
Down,	through	layers	of	tight-packed	rubble,	then,	movement	in	the
darkness,	the	flicker	of	life.	Panicked,	clambering	down,	ever	down,	the	rush
of	air	sweeping	past	slick	fur	–	rats.	Fleeing	rats.
Fleeing.	Where?	His	senses	danced	out,	through	the	rubble	beneath,
brushing	creature	after	creature.	Darkness,	sighing	streams	of	air.	Smells,
echoes,	damp	stone…
‘Everyone!’	Bottle	shouted,	rising.	‘We	need	to	break	through	this	floor!
Whatever	you	can	find	–	we	need	to	bash	through!’
They	looked	at	him	as	if	he’d	gone	mad.
‘We	dig	down!	This	city	–	it’s	built	on	ruins!	We	need	to	find	a	way	down	–
through	them	–	damn	you	all	–	that	air	is	coming	from	somewhere!’
‘And	what	are	we?’	Cord	demanded.	‘Ants?’
‘There’s	rats,	below	–	I	looked	through	their	eyes	–	I	saw!	Caverns,	caves	–
passages!’
‘You	did	what?’	Cord	advanced	on	him.
‘Hold	it,	Cord!’	Strings	said,	twisting	round	where	he	sat.	‘Listen	to	him.
Bottle	–	can	you	follow	one	of	those	rats?	Can	you	control	one?’
Bottle	nodded.	‘But	there	are	foundation	stones,	under	this	temple	–	we
need	to	get	through—’
‘How?’	Cuttle	demanded.	‘We	just	got	rid	of	all	our	munitions!’
Hellian	cuffed	one	of	her	soldiers.	‘You,	Brethless!	Still	got	that	cracker?’
Every	sapper	in	the	chamber	suddenly	closed	in	on	the	soldier	named
Brethless.	He	stared	about	in	panic,	then	pulled	out	a	wedge-shaped	coppersheathed	spike.
‘Back	off	him!’	Strings	shouted.	‘Everyone.	Everyone	but	Cuttle.	Cuttle,
you	can	do	this,	right?	No	mistakes.’
‘None	at	all,’	Cuttle	said,	gingerly	taking	the	spike	from	Brethless’s	hand.
‘Who’s	still	got	a	sword?	Anything	hard	and	big	enough	to	break	these	tiles—’
‘I	do.’	The	man	who	spoke	was	the	rebel	warrior.	‘Or,	I	did	–	it’s	over
there.’	He	pointed.
The	scimitar	went	into	the	hands	of	Tulip,	who	battered	the	tiles	in	a	frenzy
that	had	inset	precious	stones	flying	everywhere,	until	a	rough	angular	hole
had	been	chopped	into	the	floor.
‘Good	enough,	back	off,	Tulip.	Everybody,	get	as	close	to	the	outer	walls
as	you	can	and	cover	your	faces,	your	eyes,	your	ears—’
‘How	many	hands	you	think	each	of	us	has	got?’	Hellian	demanded.
Laughter.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	stared	at	them	all	as	if	they’d	lost	their	minds.


A	reverberating	crack	shuddered	through	the	temple,	and	dust	drifted
down.	Bottle	looked	up	with	all	the	others	to	see	tongues	of	fire	reaching	down
through	a	fissure	in	the	dome,	which	had	begun	sagging.	‘Cuttle—’
‘I	see	it.	Pray	this	cracker	don’t	bring	it	all	down	on	us.’
He	set	the	spike.	‘Bottle,	which	way	you	want	it	pointing?’
‘Towards	the	altar	side.	There’s	a	space,	two	maybe	three	arm-lengths
down.’
‘Three?	Gods	below.	Well,	we’ll	see.’
The	outer	walls	were	oven-hot,	sharp	cracking	sounds	filling	the	air	as	the
massive	temple	began	settling.	They	could	hear	the	grate	of	foundation	stones
sliding	beneath	shifting	pressures.	The	heat	was	building.
‘Six	and	counting!’	Cuttle	shouted,	scrambling	away.
Five…four…three…
The	cracker	detonated	in	a	deadly	hail	of	stone-chips	and	tile	shards.
People	cried	out	in	pain,	children	screamed,	dust	and	smoke	filling	the	air	–
and	then,	from	the	floor,	the	sounds	of	rubble	falling,	striking	things	far	below,
bouncing,	tumbling	down,	down…
‘Bottle.’
At	Strings’s	voice,	he	crawled	forward,	towards	the	gaping	hole.	He
needed	to	find	another	rat.	Somewhere	down	below.	A	rat	my	soul	can	ride.	A
rat	to	lead	us	out.
He	said	nothing	to	the	others	of	what	else	he	had	sensed,	flitting	among
life-sparks	in	the	seeming	innumerable	layers	of	dead,	buried	city	below	–	that
it	went	down,	and	down,	and	down	–	the	air	rising	up	stinking	of	decay,	the
pressing	darkness,	the	cramped,	tortured	routes.	Down.	All	those	rats,	fleeing,
downward.	None,	none	within	my	reach	clambering	free,	into	the	night	air.
None.
Rats	will	flee.	Even	when	there’s	nowhere	to	go.
	
Wounded,	burned	soldiers	were	being	carried	past	Blistig.	Pain	and	shock,
flesh	cracked	open	and	lurid	red,	like	cooked	meat	–	which,	he	realized
numbly,	was	what	it	was.	The	white	ash	of	hair	–	on	limbs,	where	eyebrows	had
once	been,	on	blistered	pates.	Blackened	remnants	of	clothing,	hands	melted
onto	weapon	grips	–	he	wanted	to	turn	away,	so	desperately	wanted	to	turn
away,	but	he	could	not.
He	stood	fifteen	hundred	paces	away,	now,	from	the	road	and	its	fringes	of
burning	grass,	and	he	could	still	feel	the	heat.	Beyond,	a	fire	god	devoured	the
sky	above	Y’Ghatan	–	Y’Ghatan,	crumbling	inward,	melting	into	slag	–	the


city’s	death	was	as	horrible	to	his	eyes	as	the	file	of	Keneb	and	Baralta’s
surviving	soldiers.
How	could	he	do	this?	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	you	have	made	of	your	name	a
curse	that	will	never	die.	Never.
Someone	came	to	his	side	and,	after	a	long	moment,	Blistig	looked	over.
And	scowled.	The	Claw,	Pearl.	The	man’s	eyes	were	red	–	durhang,	it	could	be
nothing	else,	for	he	had	remained	in	his	tent,	at	the	far	end	of	the	encampment,
as	if	indifferent	to	this	brutal	night.
‘Where	is	the	Adjunct?’	Pearl	asked	in	a	low,	rough	voice.
‘Helping	with	the	wounded.’
‘Has	she	broken?	Is	she	on	her	hands	and	knees	in	the	blood-soaked	mud?’
Blistig	studied	the	man.	Those	eyes	–	had	he	been	weeping?	No.	Durhang.
‘Say	that	again,	Claw,	and	you	won’t	stay	alive	for	much	longer.’
The	tall	man	shrugged.	‘Look	at	these	burned	soldiers,	Fist.	There	are
worse	things	than	dying.’
‘The	healers	are	among	them.	Warlocks,	witches,	from	my	company—’
‘Some	scars	cannot	be	healed.’
‘What	are	you	doing	here?	Go	back	to	your	tent.’
‘I	have	lost	a	friend	this	night,	Fist.	I	will	go	wherever	I	choose.’
Blistig	looked	away.	Lost	a	friend.	What	of	over	two	thousand	Malazan
soldiers?	Keneb	has	lost	most	of	his	marines	and	among	them,	invaluable
veterans.	The	Adjunct	has	lost	her	first	battle	–	oh,	the	imperial	records	will
note	a	great	victory,	the	annihilation	of	the	last	vestiges	of	the	Sha’ik	rebellion.
But	we,	we	who	are	here	this	night,	we	will	know	the	truth	for	the	rest	of	our
lives.
And	this	Adjunct	Tavore,	she	is	far	from	finished.	I	have	seen.	‘Go	back	to
the	Empress,’	Blistig	said.	‘Tell	her	the	truth	of	this	night—’
‘And	what	would	be	the	point	of	that,	Fist?’
He	opened	his	mouth,	then	shut	it	again.
Pearl	said,	‘Word	will	be	sent	to	Dujek	Onearm,	and	he	in	turn	will	report
to	the	Empress.	For	now,	however,	it	is	more	important	that	Dujek	know.	And
understand,	as	I	am	sure	he	will.’
‘Understand	what?’
‘That	the	Fourteenth	Army	can	no	longer	be	counted	on	as	a	fighting	force
on	Seven	Cities.’
Is	that	true?	‘That	remains	to	be	seen,’	he	said.	‘In	any	case,	the	rebellion
is	crushed—’
‘Leoman	escaped.’
‘What?’


‘He	has	escaped.	Into	the	Warren	of	D’riss,	under	the	protection	of	the
Queen	of	Dreams	–	only	she	knows,	I	suppose,	what	use	he	will	be	to	her.	I
admit,	that	part	worries	me	–	gods	are	by	nature	unfathomable,	most	of	the
time,	and	she	is	more	so	than	most.	I	find	this	detail…troubling.’
‘Stand	here,	then,	and	fret.’	Blistig	turned	away,	made	for	the	hastily
erected	hospital	tents.	Hood	take	that	damned	Claw.	The	sooner	the	better.	How
could	he	know	such	things?	Leoman…alive.	Well,	perhaps	that	could	be	made
to	work	in	their	favour,	perhaps	his	name	would	become	a	curse	among	the
people	of	Seven	Cities	as	well.	The	Betrayer.	The	commander	who	murdered
his	own	army.
But	it	is	how	we	are.	Look	at	High	Fist	Pormqual,	after	all.	Yet,	his	crime
was	stupidity.	Leoman’s	was…pure	evil.	If	such	a	thing	truly	exists.
The	storm	raged	on,	unleashing	waves	of	heat	that	blackened	the
surrounding	countryside.	The	city’s	walls	had	vanished	–	for	no	human-built
wall	could	withstand	this	demon’s	fury.	A	distant,	pale	reflection	was	visible	to
the	east.	The	sun,	rising	to	meet	its	child.
	
His	soul	rode	the	back	of	a	small,	insignificant	creature,	fed	on	a	tiny,	racing
heart,	and	looked	through	eyes	that	cut	into	the	darkness.	Like	some	remote
ghost,	tethered	by	the	thinnest	of	chains,	Bottle	could	feel	his	own	body,
somewhere	far	above,	slithering	through	detritus,	cut	and	scraped	raw,	face
gone	slack,	eyes	straining.	Battered	hands	pulled	him	along	–	his	own,	he	was
certain	–	and	he	could	hear	soldiers	moving	behind	him,	the	crying	of
children,	the	scrape	and	catch	of	buckles,	leather	straps	snagging,	rubble	being
pushed	aside,	clawed	at,	clambered	over.
He	had	no	idea	how	far	they	had	gone.	The	rat	sought	out	the	widest,
highest	passages,	following	the	howling,	whistling	wind.	If	people	remained	in
the	temple,	awaiting	their	turn	to	enter	this	tortured	tunnel,	that	turn	would
never	come,	for	the	air	itself	would	have	burst	aflame	by	now,	and	soon	the
temple	would	collapse,	burying	their	blackened	corpses	in	melting	stone.
Strings	would	have	been	among	those	victims,	for	the	sergeant	had	insisted
on	going	last,	just	behind	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.	Bottle	thought	back	to
those	frantic	moments,	before	the	dust-clouds	had	even	cleared,	as	chunks	of
the	domed	ceiling	rained	down…
	
‘Bottle!’


‘I’m	looking!’	Questing	down,	through	cracks	and	fissures,	hunting	life.
Warm-blooded	life.	Brushing	then	closing	in	on	the	muted	awareness	of	a	rat,
sleek,	healthy	–	but	overheating	with	terror.	Overwhelming	its	meagre
defences,	clasping	hard	an	iron	control	about	its	soul	–	that	faint,	flickering
force,	yet	strong	enough	to	reach	beyond	the	flesh	and	bones	that	sheltered	it.
Cunning,	strangely	proud,	warmed	by	the	presence	of	kin,	the	rule	of	the
swarm’s	master,	but	now	all	was	in	chaos,	the	drive	of	survival	overpowering
all	else.	Racing	down,	following	spoor,	following	the	rich	scents	in	the	air—
And	then	it	turned	about,	began	climbing	upwards	once	more,	and	Bottle
could	feel	its	soul	in	his	grasp.	Perfectly	still,	unresisting	now	that	it	had	been
captured.	Observing,	curious,	calm.	There	was	more,	he	had	always	known	–
so	much	more	to	creatures.	And	so	few	who	understood	them	the	way	he	did,
so	few	who	could	reach	out	and	grasp	such	souls,	and	so	find	the	strange	web
of	trust	all	tangled	with	suspicion,	fear	with	curiosity,	need	with	loyalty.
He	was	not	leading	this	morsel	of	a	creature	to	its	death.	He	would	not	do
that,	could	not,	and	somehow	it	seemed	to	understand,	to	sense,	now,	a	greater
purpose	to	its	life,	its	existence.
‘I	have	her,’	Bottle	heard	himself	saying.
‘Get	down	there,	then!’
‘Not	yet.	She	needs	to	find	a	way	up	–	to	lead	us	back	down—’
‘Gods	below!’
Gesler	spoke:	‘Start	adopting	children,	soldiers.	I	want	one	between
everyone	behind	Cuttle,	since	Cuttle	will	be	right	behind	Bottle—’
‘Leave	me	to	the	last,’	Strings	said.
‘Your	leg—’
‘That’s	exactly	right,	Gesler.’
‘We	got	other	injured	–	got	someone	guiding	or	dragging	each	of	’em.	Fid
—’
‘No.	I	go	last.	Whoever ’s	right	ahead	of	me,	we’re	going	to	need	to	close
up	this	tunnel,	else	the	fire’ll	follow	us	down—’
‘There	are	copper	doors.	They	covered	the	pool.’	That	was	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas.	‘I	will	stay	with	you.	Together,	we	shall	use	those	panels	to	seal
our	retreat.’
‘Second	to	last?’	someone	snarled.	‘You’ll	just	kill	Fid	and—’
‘And	what,	Malazan?	No,	would	I	be	allowed,	I	would	go	last.	I	stood	at
Leoman’s	side—’
‘I’m	satisfied	with	that,’	Strings	said.	‘Corabb,	you	and	I,	that	will	do.’
‘Hold	on,’	said	Hellian,	leaning	close	to	Bottle.	‘I	ain’t	going	down	there.
Someone	better	kill	me	right	now—’


‘Sergeant—’
‘No	way,	there’s	spiders	down	there—’
The	sound	of	a	fist	cracking	into	a	jaw,	then	a	collapsing	body.
‘Urb,	you	just	knocked	out	your	own	sergeant.’
‘Aye.	I	known	her	a	long	time,	you	see.	She’s	a	good	sergeant,	no	matter
what	all	of	you	think.’
‘Huh.	Right.’
‘It’s	the	spiders.	No	way	she’d	go	down	there	–	now	I	got	to	gag	her	and	tie
her	arms	and	feet	–	I’ll	drag	her	myself—’
‘If	she’s	a	good	sergeant,	Urb,	how	do	you	treat	bad	ones?’
‘Ain’t	had	any	other	sergeant,	and	I	mean	to	keep	it	that	way.’
Below,	the	broad	crevasse	that	Bottle	had	sensed	earlier,	his	rat	scrambling
free,	now	seeking	to	follow	that	wide	but	shallow	crack	–	too	shallow?	No,
they	could	scrape	through,	and	there,	beneath	it,	a	tilted	chamber	of	some	kind,
most	of	the	ceiling	intact,	and	the	lower	half	of	a	doorway	–	he	sent	the	rat	that
way,	and	beyond	the	doorway…‘I	have	it!	There’s	a	street!	Part	of	a	street	–	not
sure	how	far—’
‘Never	mind!	Lead	us	down,	damn	you!	I’m	starting	to	blister	everywhere!
Hurry!’
All	right.	Why	not?	At	the	very	least,	it’ll	purchase	us	a	few	more	moments.
He	slithered	down	into	the	pit.	Behind	him,	voices,	the	scrabble	of	boots,	the
hissing	of	pain	as	flesh	touched	hot	stone.
Faintly:	‘How	hot	is	that	water	in	that	pool?	Boiling	yet?	No?	Good,	those
with	canteens	and	skins,	fill	’em	now—’
Into	the	crevasse…while	the	rat	scurried	down	the	canted,	littered	street,
beneath	a	ceiling	of	packed	rubble…
	
Bottle	felt	his	body	push	through	a	fissure,	then	plunge	downward,	onto	the
low-ceilinged	section	of	street.	Rocks,	mortar	and	potsherds	under	his	hands,
cutting,	scraping	as	he	scrabbled	forward.	Once	walked,	this	avenue,	in	an	age
long	past.	Wagons	had	rattled	here,	horse-hoofs	clumping,	and	there	had	been
rich	smells.	Cooking	from	nearby	homes,	livestock	being	driven	to	the	market
squares.	Kings	and	paupers,	great	mages	and	ambitious	priests.	All	gone.	Gone
to	dust.
The	street	sloped	sharply,	where	cobbles	had	buckled,	sagging	down	to	fill
a	subterranean	chamber	–	no,	an	old	sewer,	brick-lined,	and	it	was	into	this
channel	his	rat	had	crawled.
Pushing	aside	broken	pieces	of	cobble,	he	pulled	himself	down	into	the


shaft.	Desiccated	faeces	in	a	thin,	shallow	bed	beneath	him,	the	husks	of	dead
insects,	carapaces	crunching	as	he	slithered	along.	A	pale	lizard,	long	as	his
forearm,	fled	in	a	whisper	into	a	side	crack.	His	forehead	caught	strands	of
spider ’s	web,	tough	enough	to	halt	him	momentarily	before	audibly	snapping.
He	felt	something	alight	on	his	shoulder,	race	across	his	back,	then	leap	off.
Behind	him	Bottle	heard	Cuttle	coughing	in	the	dust	in	his	wake,	as	it	swept
over	the	sapper	on	the	gusting	wind.	A	child	had	been	crying	somewhere	back
there,	but	was	now	silent,	only	the	sound	of	movement,	gasps	of	effort.	Just
ahead,	a	section	of	the	tunnel	had	fallen	in.	The	rat	had	found	a	way	through,	so
he	knew	the	barrier	was	not	impassable.	Reaching	it,	he	began	pulling	away	the
rubble.
	
Smiles	nudged	the	child	ahead	of	her.	‘Go	on,’	she	murmured,	‘keep	going.
Not	far	now.’	She	could	still	hear	the	girl’s	sniffles	–	not	crying,	not	yet,
anyway,	just	the	dust,	so	much	dust	now,	with	those	people	crawling	ahead.
Behind	her,	small	hands	touched	her	blistered	feet	again	and	again,	lancing
vicious	stabs	of	pain	up	her	legs,	but	she	bit	back	on	it,	making	no	outcry.
Damned	brat	don’t	know	any	better,	does	he?	And	why	they	got	such	big	eyes,
looking	up	like	that?	Like	starving	puppies.	‘Keep	crawling,	little	one.	Not
much	farther…’
The	child	behind	her,	a	boy,	was	helping	Tavos	Pond,	whose	face	was
wrapped	in	bloody	bandages.	Koryk	was	right	behind	them.	Smiles	could	hear
the	half-Seti,	going	on	and	on	with	some	kind	of	chant.	Probably	the	only	thing
keeping	the	fool	from	deadly	panic.	He	liked	his	open	savannah,	didn’t	he.	Not
cramped,	twisting	tunnels.
None	of	this	bothered	her.	She’d	known	worse.	Times,	long	ago,	she’d
lived	in	worse.	You	learned	to	only	count	on	what’s	in	reach,	and	so	long	as	the
way	ahead	stayed	clear,	there	was	still	hope,	still	a	chance.
If	only	this	brat	of	a	girl	wouldn’t	keep	stopping.	Another	nudge.	‘Go	on,
lass.	Not	much	more,	you’ll	see…’
	
Gesler	pulled	himself	along	in	pitch	darkness,	hearing	Tulip’s	heavy	grunts
ahead	of	him,	Crump’s	maddening	singing	behind	him.	The	huge	soldier
whose	bare	feet	Gesler ’s	outstretched	hands	kept	touching	was	having	a	hard
time,	and	the	sergeant	could	feel	the	smears	of	blood	Tulip	left	behind	as	he
squeezed	and	pulled	himself	through	the	narrow,	twisting	passage.	Thick


gasps,	coughing	–	no,	not	coughing—
‘Abyss	take	us,	Tulip,’	Gesler	hissed,	‘what’s	so	funny?’
‘Tickling,’	the	man	called	back.	‘You.	Keep.	Tickling.	My.	Feet.’
‘Just	keep	moving,	you	damned	fool!’
Behind	him,	Crump’s	idiotic	song	continued.
‘and	I	says	oh	I	says	them	marsh	trees
got	soft	feet,	and	moss	beards	all	the	way	down
and	they	sway	in	the	smelly	breeze
from	that	swamp	water	all	yella’n’brown
oh	we	was	in	the	froggy	toady	dawn
belly-down	in	the	leeches	and	collectin’	spawn
’cause	when	you	give	those	worms	a	squeeze
the	blue	pinky	ropes	come	slimin’	down—
and	don’t	they	taste	sweet!
and	don’t	they	taste	sweet!
sweet	as	peat,	oh	yes
sweet	as	peat—’
Gesler	wanted	to	scream,	like	someone	up	ahead	was	doing.	Scream,	but
he	couldn’t	summon	the	breath	–	it	was	all	too	close,	too	fetid,	the	once	cool
sliding	air	rank	with	sweat,	urine	and	Hood	knew	what	else.	Truth’s	face	kept
coming	back	to	him,	rising	in	his	mind	like	dread	accusation.	Gesler	and
Stormy,	they’d	pulled	the	recruit	through	so	much	since	the	damned	rebellion.
Kept	him	alive,	showed	him	the	ways	of	staying	alive	in	this	Hood-cursed
world.
And	what	does	he	do?	He	runs	into	a	burning	palace.	With	a	half-dozen
cussers	on	his	back.	Gods,	he	was	right	on	one	thing,	though,	the	fire	couldn’t
take	him	–	he	went	way	in,	and	that’s	what’s	saved	us…so	far.	Blew	that	storm
back.	Saved	us…
Soldiers	all	round	him	were	blistered,	burned.	They	coughed	with	every
breath	drawn	into	scorched	lungs.	But	not	me.	He	could	sense	that	godling,
within	that	firestorm.	Could	sense	it,	a	child	raging	with	the	knowledge	that	it
was	going	to	die	all	too	soon.	Good,	you	don’t	deserve	nothing	more.	Fire
couldn’t	hurt	him,	but	that	didn’t	mean	he	had	to	kneel	before	it	in	prayer,	did
it?	He	didn’t	ask	for	any	of	this.	Him	and	Stormy	and	Truth	–	only,	Truth	was


dead,	now.	He’d	never	expected…
‘and	I	says	oh	I	says	that	ole	bridge
got	feeta	stone,	and	mortar	white	as	bone
and	the	badgers	dangle	from	the	ledge
swingin’	alla	day	alla	way	home
oh	we	was	pullin’	vines	from	you	know	where
and	stuffin’	our	ears	with	sweety	sweet	loam
jus	t’get	them	badgers	flyin’	outa	there
inta	them	cook	pots	in	the	hearthy	home—
and	don’t	they	taste	sweet!
and	don’t	they	taste	sweet!
sweet	as	peat,	oh	yes
sweet	as	peat—’
When	he	got	out	of	here,	he	was	going	to	wring	Crump’s	scrawny	neck.
High	Marshal?	Gods	below—
‘and	I	says	oh	I	says	that	warlock’s	tower—’
Corporal	Tarr	pulled	on	Balgrid’s	arms,	ignoring	the	man’s	squeals.	How	the
mage	had	managed	to	stay	fat	through	that	endless	march	was	baffling.	And
now,	all	too	likely	to	prove	deadly.	Mind	you,	fat	could	be	squeezed,	when
muscled	bulk	couldn’t.	That	was	something,	at	least.
Balgrid	shrieked	as	Tarr	dragged	him	through	the	crevasse.	‘You’re
tearing	my	arms	off!’
‘You	plug	up	here,	Balgrid,’	Tarr	said,	‘and	Urb	behind	you’s	gonna	take
out	his	knife—’
A	muted	voice	from	the	huge	man	behind	Balgrid:	‘Damn	right.	I’ll	joint
you	like	a	pig,	mage.	I	swear	it.’
The	darkness	was	the	worst	of	all	–	never	mind	the	spiders,	the	scorpions
and	centipedes,	it	was	the	darkness	that	clawed	and	chewed	on	Tarr ’s	sanity.	At
least	Bottle	had	a	rat’s	eyes	to	look	through.	Rats	could	see	in	the	dark,
couldn’t	they?	Then	again,	maybe	they	couldn’t.	Maybe	they	just	used	their
noses,	their	whiskers,	their	ears.	Maybe	they	were	too	stupid	to	go	insane.


Or	they’re	already	insane.	We’re	being	led	by	an	insane	rat—
‘I’m	stuck	again,	oh	gods!	I	can’t	move!’
‘Stop	yelling,’	Tarr	said,	halting	and	twisting	round	yet	again.	Reaching
out	for	the	man’s	arms.	‘Hear	that,	Balgrid?’
‘What?	What?’
‘Not	sure.	Thought	I	heard	Urb’s	knives	coming	outa	their	sheaths.’
The	mage	heaved	himself	forward,	kicking,	clawing.
	
‘You	stop	moving	again,’	Balm	snarled	to	the	child	in	front	of	him,	‘and	the
lizards	will	get	you.	Eat	you	alive.	Eat	us	all	alive.	Those	are	crypt	lizards,	you
damned	whelp.	You	know	what	crypt	lizards	do?	I’ll	tell	you	what	they	do.
They	eat	human	flesh.	That’s	why	they’re	called	crypt	lizards,	only	they	don’t
mind	if	it’s	living	flesh—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake!’	Deadsmell	growled	behind	him.	‘Sergeant	–	that	ain’t
the	way—’
‘Shut	your	mouth!	He’s	still	moving,	ain’t	he?	Oh	yes,	ain’t	he	just.	Crypt
lizards,	runt!	Oh	yes!’
‘Hope	you	ain’t	nobody’s	uncle,	Sergeant.’
‘You’re	getting	as	bad	as	Widdershins,	Corporal,	with	that	babbling	mouth
of	yours.	I	want	a	new	squad—’
‘Nobody’ll	have	you,	not	after	this—’
‘You	don’t	know	nothing,	Deadsmell.’
‘I	know	if	I	was	that	child	ahead	of	you,	I’d	shit	right	in	your	face.’
‘Quiet!	You	give	him	ideas,	damn	you!	Do	it,	boy,	and	I’ll	tie	you	up,	oh
yes,	and	leave	you	for	the	crypt	lizards—’
‘Listen	to	me,	little	one!’	Deadsmell	called	out,	his	voice	echoing.	‘Them
crypt	lizards,	they’re	about	as	long	as	your	thumb!	Balm’s	just	being	a—’
‘I’m	going	to	skewer	you,	Deadsmell.	I	swear	it!’

Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	dragged	himself	forward.	The	Malazan	in	his	wake
was	gasping	–	the	only	indication	that	the	man	still	followed.	They	had
managed	to	drop	one	of	the	copper	panels	over	the	pit,	burning	their	hands	–
bad	burns,	the	pain	wouldn’t	go	away	–	Corabb’s	palms	felt	like	soft	wax,
pushed	out	of	shape	by	the	stones	they	gripped,	the	ledges	they	grasped.
He	had	never	felt	such	excruciating	pain	before.	He	was	sheathed	in	sweat,
his	limbs	trembling,	his	heart	hammering	like	a	trapped	beast	in	his	chest.


Pulling	himself	through	a	narrow	space,	he	sank	down	onto	what	seemed
to	be	the	surface	of	a	street,	although	his	head	scraped	stone	rubble	above.	He
slithered	forward,	gasping,	and	heard	the	sergeant	slip	down	after	him.
Then	the	ground	shook,	dust	pouring	down	thick	as	sand.	Thunder,	one
concussion	after	another,	pounding	down	from	above.	A	rush	of	searing	hot
air	swept	over	them	from	behind.	Smoke,	dust—
‘Forward!’	Strings	screamed.	‘Before	the	ceiling	goes—’
Corabb	reached	back,	groping,	until	he	clasped	one	of	the	Malazan’s	hands
–	the	man	was	half-buried	under	rubble,	his	breath	straining	beneath	the
settling	weight.	Corabb	pulled,	then	pulled	harder.
A	savage	grunt	from	the	Malazan,	then,	amidst	clattering,	thumping	bricks
and	stones,	Corabb	tugged	the	man	clear.
‘Come	on!’	he	hissed.	‘There’s	a	pit	ahead,	a	sewer	–	the	rest	went	down
there	–	grab	my	ankles,	Sergeant—’
The	wind	was	beating	back	the	roiling	heat.
Corabb	pitched	headfirst	into	the	pit,	dragging	Strings	with	him.
	
The	rat	had	reached	a	vertical	shaft,	rough-walled	enough	so	that	she	could
climb	down.	The	wind	howled	up	it,	filled	with	rotted	leaves,	dust	and	insect
fragments.	The	creature	was	still	descending	when	Bottle	pulled	himself	up	to
the	ledge.	The	detritus	bit	at	his	eyes	as	he	peered	down.
Seeing	nothing.	He	pulled	free	a	piece	of	rubble	and	tossed	it	downward,
out	from	the	wall.	His	soul,	riding	the	rat’s	own,	sensed	its	passage.	Rodent
ears	pricked	forward,	waiting.	Four	human	heartbeats	later	there	was	a	dull,
muted	crack	of	stone	on	stone,	a	few	more,	then	nothing.	Oh	gods…
Cuttle	spoke	behind	him.	‘What’s	wrong?’
‘A	shaft,	goes	straight	down	–	a	long	away	down.’
‘Can	we	climb	it?’
‘My	rat	can.’
‘How	wide	is	it?’
‘Not	very,	and	gets	narrower.’
‘We	got	wounded	people	back	here,	and	Hellian’s	still	unconscious.’
Bottle	nodded.	‘Do	a	roll	call	–	I	want	to	know	how	many	made	it.	We	also
need	straps,	rope,	anything	and	everything.	Was	it	just	me	or	did	you	hear	the
temple	come	down?’
Cuttle	turned	about	and	started	the	roll	call	and	the	request	for	straps	and
rope,	then	twisted	round	once	more.	‘Yeah,	it	went	down	all	right.	When	the
wind	dropped	off.	Thank	Hood	it’s	back,	or	we’d	be	cooking	or	suffocating	or


both.’
Well,	we’re	not	through	this	yet…
‘I	know	what	you’re	thinking,	Bottle.’
‘You	do?’
‘Think	there’s	a	rat	god?	I	hope	so,	and	I	hope	you’re	praying	good	and
hard.’
A	rat	god.	Maybe.	Hard	to	know	with	creatures	that	don’t	think	in	words.	‘I
think	one	of	us,	one	of	the	bigger,	stronger	ones,	could	wedge	himself	across.
And	help	people	down.’
‘If	we	get	enough	straps	and	stuff	to	climb	down,	aye.	Tulip,	maybe,	or	that
other	corporal,	Urb.	But	there	ain’t	room	to	get	past	anyone.’
I	know.	‘I’m	going	to	try	and	climb	down.’
‘Where’s	the	rat?’
‘Down	below.	It’s	reached	the	bottom.	It’s	waiting	there.	Anyway,	here
goes.’	Drawing	on	the	Thyr	Warren	to	pierce	the	darkness,	he	moved	out	to	the
very	edge.	The	wall	opposite	looked	to	be	part	of	some	monumental	structure,
the	stones	skilfully	cut	and	fitted.	Patches	of	crumbling	plaster	covered	parts	of
it,	as	did	sections	of	the	frieze	fronting	that	plaster.	It	seemed	almost	perfectly
vertical	–	the	narrowing	of	the	gap	was	caused	by	the	wall	on	his	side	–	a	much
rougher	facing,	with	projections	remaining	from	some	kind	of	elaborate
ornamentation.	A	strange	clash	of	styles,	for	two	buildings	standing	so	close
together.	Still,	both	walls	had	withstood	the	ravages	of	being	buried,	seemingly
unaffected	by	the	pressures	of	sand	and	rubble.	‘All	right,’	he	said	to	Cuttle,
who	had	drawn	up	closer,	‘this	might	not	be	so	bad.’
‘You’re	what,	twenty	years	old?	No	wounds,	thin	as	a	spear…’
‘Fine,	you’ve	made	your	point.’	Bottle	pushed	himself	further	out,	then
drew	his	right	leg	round.	Stretching	it	outward,	he	slowly	edged	over,	onto	his
stomach.	‘Damn,	I	don’t	think	my	leg’s	long—’
The	ledge	he	leaned	on	splintered	–	it	was,	he	suddenly	realized,	nothing
but	rotted	wood	–	and	he	began	sliding,	falling.
He	spun	over,	kicking	out	with	both	legs	as	he	plummeted,	throwing	both
arms	out	behind	and	to	the	sides.	Those	rough	stones	tore	into	his	back,	one
outcrop	cracking	into	the	base	of	his	skull	and	throwing	his	head	forward.
Then	both	feet	contacted	the	stone	of	the	wall	opposite.
Flinging	him	over,	headfirst—
Oh	Hood—
Sudden	tugs,	snapping	sounds,	then	more,	pulling	at	him,	resisting,
slowing	his	descent.
Gods,	webs—


His	left	shoulder	was	tugged	back,	turning	him	over.	He	kicked	out	again
and	felt	the	plastered	wall	under	his	foot.	Reached	out	with	his	right	arm,	and
his	hand	closed	on	a	projection	that	seemed	to	sink	like	sponge	beneath	his
clutching	fingers.	His	other	foot	contacted	the	wall,	and	he	pushed	with	both
legs	until	his	back	was	against	rough	stone.
And	there	were	spiders,	each	as	big	as	an	outstretched	hand,	crawling	all
over	him.
Bottle	went	perfectly	still,	struggling	to	slow	his	breathing.
Hairless,	short-legged,	pale	amber	–	but	there	was	no	light	–	and	he
realized	that	the	creatures	were	glowing,	somehow	lit	from	within,	like
lantern-flame	behind	thick,	gold-tinted	glass.	They	had	swarmed	him,	now.
From	far	above,	he	heard	Cuttle	calling	down	in	desperate,	frightened	tones.
Bottle	reached	out	with	his	mind,	and	immediately	recoiled	at	the	blind
rage	building	in	the	spiders.	And	flashes	of	memory	–	the	rat	–	their	favoured
prey	–	somehow	evading	all	their	snares,	climbing	down	right	past	them,
unseeing,	unaware	of	the	hundreds	of	eyes	tracking	its	passing.	And	now…this.
Heart	thundering	in	his	chest,	Bottle	quested	once	more.	A	hive	mind,	of
sorts	–	no,	an	extended	family	–	they	would	mass	together,	exchange	nutrients
–	when	one	fed,	they	all	fed.	They	had	never	known	light	beyond	what	lived
within	them,	and,	until	recently,	never	known	wind.	Terrified…but	not	starving,
thank	Hood.	He	sought	to	calm	them,	flinched	once	more	as	all	motion	ceased,
all	attention	fixed	now	on	him.	Legs	that	had	been	scrambling	over	his	body
went	still,	tiny	claws	clasping	hard	in	his	skin.
Calm.	No	reason	to	fear.	An	accident,	and	there	will	be	more	–	it	cannot	be
helped.	Best	go	away	now,	all	of	you.	Soon,	the	silence	will	return,	we	will	have
gone	past,	and	before	long,	this	wind	will	end,	and	you	can	begin	to	rebuild.
Peace…please.
They	were	not	convinced.
The	wind	paused	suddenly,	then	a	gust	of	heat	descended	from	above.
Flee!	He	fashioned	images	of	fire	in	his	mind,	drew	forth	from	his	own
memory	scenes	of	people	dying,	destruction	all	around—
The	spiders	fled.	Three	heartbeats,	and	he	was	alone.	Nothing	clinging	still
to	his	skin,	nothing	but	strands	of	wiry	anchor	lines,	tattered	sheets	of	web.
And,	trickling	down	his	back,	from	the	soles	of	his	feet,	from	his	arms:	blood.
Damn,	I’m	torn	up	bad,	I	think.	Pain,	now,	awakening…everywhere.	Too
much	–	Consciousness	fled.
From	far	above:	‘Bottle!’
Stirring…blinking	awake.	How	long	had	he	been	hanging	here?
‘I’m	here,	Cuttle!	I’m	climbing	down	–	not	much	farther,	I	think!’


Grimacing	against	the	pain,	he	started	working	his	feet	downward	–	the	space
was	narrow	enough,	now,	that	he	could	straddle	the	gap.	He	gasped	as	he	pulled
his	back	clear	of	the	wall.
Something	whipped	his	right	shoulder,	stinging,	hard,	and	he	ducked	–	then
felt	the	object	slide	down	the	right	side	of	his	chest.	The	strap	of	a	harness.
From	above:	‘I’m	climbing	down!’
	
Koryk	called	behind	him,	‘Shard,	you	still	with	us?’	The	man	had	been
gibbering	–	they’d	all	discovered	an	unexpected	horror.	That	of	stopping.
Moving	forward	had	been	a	tether	to	sanity,	for	it	had	meant	that,	somewhere
ahead,	Bottle	was	still	crawling,	still	finding	a	way	through.	When	everyone
had	come	to	a	halt,	terror	had	slipped	among	them,	closing	like	tentacles
around	throats,	and	squeezing.
Shrieks,	panicked	fighting	against	immovable,	packed	stone	and	brick,
hands	clawing	at	feet.	Rising	into	a	frenzy.
Then,	voices	bellowing,	calling	back	–	they’d	reached	a	shaft	of	some	kind
–	they	needed	rope,	belts,	harness	straps	–	they	were	going	to	climb	down.
There	was	still	a	way	ahead.
Koryk	had,	through	it	all,	muttered	his	chant.	The	Child	Death	Song,	the
Seti	rite	of	passage	from	whelp	into	adulthood.	A	ritual	that	had,	for	girl	and
boy	alike,	included	the	grave	log,	the	hollowed-out	coffin	and	the	night-long
internment	in	a	crypt	of	the	bloodline.	Buried	alive,	for	the	child	to	die,	for	the
adult	to	be	born.	A	test	against	the	spirits	of	madness,	the	worms	that	lived	in
each	person,	coiled	at	the	base	of	the	skull,	wrapped	tight	about	the	spine.
Worms	that	were	ever	eager	to	awaken,	to	crawl,	gnawing	a	path	into	the	brain,
whispering	and	laughing	or	screaming,	or	both.
He	had	survived	that	night.	He	had	defeated	the	worms.
And	that	was	all	he	needed,	for	this.	All	he	needed.
He	had	heard	those	worms,	eating	into	soldiers	ahead	of	him,	soldiers
behind	him.	Into	the	children,	as	the	worms	raced	out	to	take	them	as	well.	For
an	adult	to	break	under	fear	–	there	could	be	no	worse	nightmare	for	the	child
that	witnessed	such	a	thing.	For	with	that	was	torn	away	all	hope,	all	faith.
Koryk	could	save	none	of	them.	He	could	not	give	them	the	chant,	for	they
would	not	know	what	it	meant,	and	they	had	never	spent	a	night	in	a	coffin.	And
he	knew,	had	it	gone	on	much	longer,	people	would	start	dying,	or	the	madness
would	devour	their	minds,	completely,	permanently,	and	that	would	kill
everyone	else.	Everyone.
The	worms	had	retreated,	and	now	all	he	could	hear	was	weeping	–	not	the


broken	kind,	but	the	relieved	kind	–	weeping	and	gibbering.	And	he	knew	they
could	taste	it,	could	taste	what	those	worms	had	left	behind,	and	they	prayed:
not	again.	No	closer,	please.	Never	again.	‘Corporal	Shard?’
‘W-what,	damn	you?’
‘Limp.	How	is	he?	I	keep	kicking	at	him,	hitting	what	I	think	is	an	arm,	but
he’s	not	moving.	Can	you	climb	ahead,	can	you	check?’
‘He’s	knocked	out.’
‘How	did	that	happen?’
‘I	crawled	onto	him	and	pounded	his	head	against	the	floor	until	he	stopped
screaming.’
‘You	sure	he’s	alive?’
‘Limp?	His	skull’s	solid	rock,	Koryk.’
He	heard	movement	back	there,	asked,	‘What	now?’
‘I’ll	prove	it	to	you.	Give	this	broke	leg	a	twist—’
Limp	shrieked.
‘Glad	you’re	back,	soldier,’	Shard	said.
‘Get	away	from	me,	you	bastard!’
‘Wasn’t	me	who	panicked.	Next	time	you	think	about	panicking,	Limp,	just
remind	yourself	I’m	here,	right	behind	you.’
‘I’m	going	to	kill	you	someday,	Corporal—’
‘As	you	like.	Just	don’t	do	it	again.’
Koryk	thought	back	to	the	babbling	noises	he’d	heard	from	Shard,	but	said
nothing.
More	scuffling	sounds,	then	a	bundle	of	rope	and	leather	straps	–	most	of
them	charred	–	was	pushed	into	Koryk’s	hands.	He	dragged	it	close,	then
shoved	it	out	ahead	to	the	small	boy	huddled	behind	Tavos	Pond.	‘Push	it	on,
lad,’	he	said.
‘You,’	the	boy	said.	‘I	heard	you.	I	listened.’
‘And	you	was	all	right,	wasn’t	you?’
‘Yes.’
‘I’ll	teach	it	to	you.	For	the	next	time.’
‘Yes.’
	
Someone	had	shouted	back	instructions,	cutting	through	the	frenzy	of	terror,
and	people	had	responded,	stripping	away	whatever	could	be	used	as	a	rope.
Chilled	beneath	a	gritty	layer	of	sweat,	Tarr	settled	his	forehead	onto	the	stones
under	him,	smelling	dust	mingled	with	the	remnants	of	his	own	fear.	When	the
bundle	reached	him	he	drew	it	forward,	then	struggled	out	of	what	was	left	of


his	own	harness	and	added	it	to	the	pathetic	collection.
Now,	at	least,	they	had	a	reason	to	wait,	they	weren’t	stopped	because
Bottle	had	run	out	of	places	to	crawl.	Something	to	hold	onto.	He	prayed	it
would	be	enough.
Behind	him,	Balgrid	whispered,	‘I	wish	we	was	marching	across	the	desert
again.	That	road,	all	that	space	on	both	sides…’
‘I	hear	you,’	Tarr	said.	‘And	I	also	remember	how	you	used	to	curse	it.	The
dryness,	the	sun—’
‘Sun,	hah!	I’m	so	crisp	I’ll	never	fear	the	sun	again.	Gods,	I’ll	kneel	in
prayer	before	it,	I	swear	it.	If	freedom	was	a	god,	Tarr…
If	freedom	was	a	god.	Now	that’s	an	interesting	thought…
	
‘Thank	Hood	all	that	screaming’s	stopped,’	Balm	said,	plucking	at	whatever
was	tingling	against	all	his	skin,	tingling,	prickling	like	some	kind	of	heat	rash.
Heat	rash,	that	was	funny—
‘Sergeant,’	Deadsmell	said,	‘it	was	you	doing	all	that	screaming.’
‘Quiet,	you	damned	liar.	Wasn’t	me,	was	the	kid	ahead	of	me.’
‘Really?	I	didn’t	know	he	spoke	Dal	Honese—’
‘I	will	skewer	you,	Corporal.	Just	one	more	word,	I	swear	it.	Gods,	I’m
itchy	all	over,	like	I	been	rolling	in	Fool’s	pollen—’
‘You	get	that	after	you	been	panicking,	Sergeant.	Fear	sweat,	it’s	called.
You	didn’t	piss	yourself	too,	did	you?	I’m	smelling—’
‘I	got	my	knife	out,	Deadsmell.	You	know	that?	All	I	got	to	do	is	twist
round	and	you	won’t	be	bothering	me	no	more.’
‘You	tossed	your	knife,	Sergeant.	In	the	temple—’
‘Fine!	I’ll	kick	you	to	death!’
‘Well,	if	you	do,	can	you	do	it	before	I	have	to	crawl	through	your
puddle?’
	
‘The	heat	is	winning	the	war,’	Corabb	said.
‘Aye,’	answered	Strings	behind	him,	his	voice	faint,	brittle.	‘Here.’
Something	was	pushed	against	Corabb’s	feet.	He	reached	back,	and	his
hand	closed	on	a	coil	of	rope.	‘You	were	carrying	this?’
‘Was	wrapped	around	me.	I	saw	Smiles	drop	it,	outside	the	temple	–	it	was
smouldering,	so	that’s	not	a	surprise…’
As	he	drew	it	over	him,	Corabb	felt	something	wet,	sticky	on	the	rope.


Blood.	‘You’re	bleeding	out,	aren’t	you?’
‘Just	a	trickle.	I’m	fine.’
Corabb	crawled	forward	–	there	was	some	space	between	them	and	the	next
soldier,	the	one	named	Widdershins.	Corabb	could	have	kept	up	had	he	been
alone	back	here,	but	he	would	not	leave	the	Malazan	sergeant	behind.	Enemy	or
no,	such	things	were	not	done.
He	had	believed	them	all	monsters,	cowards	and	bullies.	He	had	heard	that
they	ate	their	own	dead.	But	no,	they	were	just	people.	No	different	from
Corabb	himself.	The	tyranny	lies	at	the	feet	of	the	Empress.	These	–	they’re	all
just	soldiers.	That’s	all	they	are.	Had	he	gone	with	Leoman…he	would	have
discovered	none	of	this.	He	would	have	held	onto	his	fierce	hatred	for	all
Malazans	and	all	things	Malazan.
But	now…the	man	behind	him	was	dying.	A	Falari	by	birth	–	just	another
place	conquered	by	the	empire.	Dying,	and	there	was	no	room	to	get	to	him,
not	here,	not	yet.
‘Here,’	he	said	to	Widdershins.	‘Pass	this	up.’
‘Hood	take	us,	that’s	real	rope!’
‘Aye.	Move	it	along	fast	now.’
‘Don’t	order	me	around,	bastard.	You’re	a	prisoner.	Remember	that.’
Corabb	crawled	back.
The	heat	was	building,	devouring	the	thin	streams	of	cool	air	sliding	up
from	below.	They	couldn’t	lie	still	for	much	longer.	We	must	move	on.
From	Strings:	‘Did	you	say	something,	Corabb?’
‘No.	Nothing	much.’

From	above	came	sounds	of	Cuttle	making	his	way	down	the	makeshift	rope,
his	breath	harsh,	strained.	Bottle	reached	the	rubble-filled	base	of	the	fissure.	It
was	solidly	plugged.	Confused,	he	ran	his	hands	along	both	walls.	His	rat?	Ah,
there	–	at	the	bottom	of	the	sheer,	vertical	wall	his	left	hand	plunged	into	air
that	swept	up	and	past.	An	archway.	Gods,	what	kind	of	building	was	this?	An
archway,	holding	the	weight	of	at	least	two	–	maybe	three	–	storeys’	worth	of
stonework.	And	neither	the	wall	nor	the	arch	had	buckled,	after	all	this	time.
Maybe	the	legends	are	true.	Maybe	Y’Ghatan	was	once	the	first	Holy	City,	the
greatest	city	of	all.	And	when	it	died,	at	the	Great	Slaughter,	every	building	was
left	standing	–	not	a	stone	taken.	Standing,	to	be	buried	by	the	sands.
He	lowered	himself	to	twist	feet-first	through	the	archway,	almost
immediately	contacting	heaps	of	something	–	rubble?	–	nearly	filling	the


chamber	beyond.	Rubble	that	tipped	and	tilted	with	clunking	sounds,	rocked	by
his	kicking	feet.
Ahead,	his	rat	roused	itself,	startled	by	the	loud	sounds	as	Bottle	slid	into
the	chamber.	Reaching	out	with	his	will,	he	grasped	hold	of	the	creature’s	soul
once	more.	‘All	right,	little	one.	The	work	begins	again…’	His	voice	trailed
away.
He	was	lying	on	row	upon	row	of	urns,	stacked	so	high	they	were	an	arm’s
reach	from	the	chamber ’s	ceiling.	Groping	with	his	hands,	Bottle	found	that	the
tall	urns	were	sealed,	capped	in	iron,	the	edges	and	level	tops	of	the	metal
intricately	incised	with	swirling	patterns.	The	ceramic	beneath	was	smooth	to
the	touch,	finely	glazed.	Hearing	Cuttle	shouting	that	he’d	reached	the	base
behind	him,	he	crawled	in	towards	the	centre	of	the	room.	The	rat	slipped
through	another	archway	opposite,	and	Bottle	sensed	it	clambering	down,
alighting	on	a	clear,	level	stone	floor,	then	waddling	ahead.
Grasping	the	rim	of	one	urn’s	iron	cap,	he	strained	to	pull	it	loose.	The
seal	was	tight,	his	efforts	eliciting	nothing.	He	twisted	the	rim	to	the	right	–
nothing	–	then	the	left.	A	grating	sound.	He	twisted	harder.	The	cap	slid,	pulled
loose	from	its	seal.	Crumbled	wax	fell	away.	Bottle	pulled	upward	on	the	lid.
When	that	failed,	he	resumed	twisting	it	to	the	left,	and	quickly	realized	that	the
lid	was	rising,	incrementally,	with	every	full	turn.	Probing	fingers	discovered
a	canted,	spiralling	groove	on	the	rim	of	the	urn,	crusted	with	wax.	Two	more
turns	and	the	iron	lid	came	away.
A	pungent,	cloying	smell	arose.
I	know	that	smell…honey.	These	things	are	filled	with	honey.	For	how	long
had	they	sat	here,	stored	away	by	people	long	since	dust?	He	reached	down,
and	almost	immediately	plunged	his	hand	into	the	cool,	thick	contents.	A	balm
against	his	burns,	and	now,	an	answer	to	the	sudden	hunger	awakening	within
him.
‘Bottle?’
‘Through	here.	I’m	in	a	large	chamber	under	the	straight	wall.	Cuttle,
there’s	urns	here,	hundreds	of	them.	Filled	with	honey.’	He	drew	his	hands	free
and	licked	his	fingers.	‘Gods,	it	tastes	fresh.	When	you	get	in	here,	salve	your
burns,	Cuttle—’
‘Only	if	you	promise	we’re	not	going	to	crawl	through	an	ant	nest
anywhere	ahead.’
‘No	ants	down	here.	What’s	the	count?’
‘We	got	everybody.’
‘Strings?’
‘Still	with	us,	though	the	heat’s	working	its	way	down.’


‘Enough	rope	and	straps,	then.	Good.’
‘Aye.	So	long	as	they	hold.	Seems	Urb’s	proposing	to	carry	Hellian	down.
On	his	back.’
‘Is	the	next	one	on	their	way?’
‘Aye.	How	do	these	lids	come	off?’
‘Turn	them,	widdershins.	And	keep	turning	them.’
Bottle	listened	as	the	man	worked	on	one	of	the	lids.	‘Can’t	be	very	old,
this	stuff,	to	still	be	fresh.’
‘There’s	glyphs	on	these	lids,	Cuttle.	I	can’t	see	them,	but	I	can	feel	them.
My	grandmother,	she	had	a	ritual	blade	she	used	in	her	witchery	–	the
markings	are	the	same,	I	think.	If	I’m	right,	Cuttle,	this	iron	work	is	Jaghut.’
‘What?’
‘But	the	urns	are	First	Empire.	Feel	the	sides.	Smooth	as	eggshell	–	if	we
had	light	I’d	wager	anything	they’re	sky-blue.	So,	with	a	good	enough	seal…’
‘I	can	still	taste	the	flowers	in	this,	Bottle.’
‘I	know.’
‘You’re	talking	thousands	and	thousands	of	years.’
‘Yes.’
‘Where’s	your	favourite	rat?’
‘Hunting	us	a	way	through.	There’s	another	chamber	opposite,	but	it’s
open,	empty,	I	mean	–	we	should	move	in	there	to	give	the	others	room…’
‘What’s	wrong?’
Bottle	shook	his	head.	‘Nothing,	just	feeling	a	little…strange.	Cut	my	back
up	some…it’s	gone	numb—’
‘Hood’s	breath,	there	was	some	kind	of	poppy	in	that	honey,	wasn’t	there?
I’m	starting	to	feel…gods	below,	my	head’s	swimming.’
‘Yeah,	better	warn	the	others.’
Though	he	could	see	nothing,	Bottle	felt	as	if	the	world	around	him	was
shuddering,	spinning.	His	heart	was	suddenly	racing.	Shit.	He	crawled	towards
the	other	archway.	Reached	in,	pulled	himself	forward,	and	was	falling.
The	collision	with	the	stone	floor	felt	remote,	yet	he	sensed	he’d	plunged
more	than	a	man’s	height.	He	remembered	a	sharp,	cracking	sound,	realized	it
had	been	his	forehead,	hitting	the	flagstones.
Cuttle	thumped	down	on	top	of	him,	rolled	off	with	a	grunt.
Bottle	frowned,	pulling	himself	along	the	floor.	The	rat	–	where	was	she?
Gone.	I	lost	her.	Oh	no,	I	lost	her.
Moments	later,	he	lost	everything	else	as	well.
	


Corabb	had	dragged	an	unconscious	Strings	down	the	last	stretch	of	tunnel.
They’d	reached	the	ledge	to	find	the	rope	dangling	from	three	sword
scabbards	wedged	across	the	shaft,	and	vague	sounds	of	voices	far	below.	Heat
swirled	like	serpents	around	him	as	he	struggled	to	pull	the	Malazan	up	closer
to	the	ledge.
Then	he	reached	out	and	began	drawing	up	the	rope.
The	last	third	of	the	line	consisted	of	knots	and	straps	and	buckles	–	he
checked	each	knot,	tugged	on	each	strand,	but	none	seemed	on	the	verge	of
breaking.	Corabb	bound	the	Malazan’s	arms,	tight	at	the	wrists;	then	the	man’s
ankles	–	one	of	them	sheathed	in	blood,	and,	checking	for	bandages,	he
discovered	none	remaining,	just	the	ragged	holes	left	by	the	spear	–	and	from
the	rope	at	the	ankles	he	made	a	centre	knot	between	the	sergeant’s	feet.	With
the	rope	end	looped	in	one	hand,	Corabb	worked	the	man’s	arms	over	his	head,
then	down	so	that	the	bound	wrists	were	against	his	sternum.	He	then	pushed
his	own	legs	through,	so	that	the	Malazan’s	bound	feet	were	against	his	shins.
Drawing	up	the	centre-knotted	rope	he	looped	it	over	his	head	and	beneath	one
arm,	then	cinched	it	into	a	tight	knot.
He	worked	his	way	into	the	shaft,	leaning	hard	for	the	briefest	of	moments
on	the	wedged	scabbards,	then	succeeding	in	planting	one	foot	against	the
opposite	wall.	The	distance	was	a	little	too	great	–	he	could	manage	only	the
tips	of	his	feet	on	each	wall,	and	as	the	weight	of	Strings	on	his	back	fully
settled,	the	tendons	in	his	ankles	felt	ready	to	snap.
Gasping,	Corabb	worked	his	way	down.	Two	man-heights,	taken	in
increasing	speed,	control	slipping	away	with	every	lurch	downward,	then	he
found	a	solid	projection	on	which	he	could	rest	his	right	foot,	and	the	gap	had
narrowed	enough	to	let	his	left	hand	reach	out	and	ease	the	burden	on	that	leg.
Corabb	rested.
The	pain	of	deep	burns,	the	pounding	of	his	heart.	Some	time	later,	he
resumed	the	descent.	Easier	now,	the	gap	closing,	closing.
Then	he	was	at	the	bottom,	and	he	heard	something	like	laughter	from	his
left,	low,	which	then	trailed	away.
He	searched	out	that	side	and	found	the	archway,	through	which	he	tossed
the	rope,	hearing	it	strike	a	body	a	little	way	below.
Everyone’s	asleep.	No	wonder.	I	could	do	with	that	myself.
He	untied	Strings,	then	clambered	through,	found	his	feet	balancing	on
tight-packed,	clunking	jars,	the	sounds	of	snoring	and	breathing	on	all	sides
and	a	sweet,	cloying	smell.	He	pulled	Strings	after	him,	eased	the	man	down.
Honey.	Jars	and	jars	of	honey.	Good	for	burns,	I	think.	Good	for	wounds.
Finding	an	opened	jar,	Corabb	scooped	out	a	handful,	crawled	over	to	the


sergeant	and	pushed	the	honey	into	the	puncture	wounds.	Salved	the	burns,	on
Strings	and	on	himself.	Then	he	settled	back.	Numbing	bliss	stole	through	him.
Oh,	this	honey,	it’s	Carelbarra.	The	God	Bringer.	Oh…
	
Fist	Keneb	tottered	into	the	morning	light,	stood,	blinking,	looking	round	at
the	chaotic	array	of	tents,	many	of	them	scorched,	and	all	the	soldiers	–
stumbling,	wandering	or	standing	motionless,	staring	across	the	blasted
landscape	towards	the	city.	Y’Ghatan,	blurred	by	waves	of	rising	heat,	a
misshapen	mound	melted	down	atop	its	ragged	hill,	fires	still	flickering	here
and	there,	pale	orange	tongues	and,	lower	down,	fierce	deep	red.
Ash	filled	the	air,	drifting	down	like	snow.
It	hurt	to	breathe.	He	was	having	trouble	hearing	–	the	roar	of	that
firestorm	still	seemed	to	rage	inside	his	head,	as	hungry	as	ever.	How	long	had
it	been?	A	day?	Two	days?	There	had	been	healers.	Witches	with	salves,
practitioners	of	Denul	from	the	army	itself.	A	jumble	of	voices,	chanting,
whispers,	some	real,	some	imagined.
He	thought	of	his	wife.	Selv	was	away	from	this	accursed	continent,	safe	in
her	family	estate	back	on	Quon	Tali.	And	Kesen	and	Vaneb,	his	children.
They’d	survived,	hadn’t	they?	He	was	certain	they	had.	A	memory	of	that,
strong	enough	to	convince	him	of	its	truth.	That	assassin,	Kalam,	he’d	had
something	to	do	with	that.
Selv.	They	had	grown	apart,	in	the	two	years	before	the	rebellion,	the	two
years	–	was	it	two?	–	that	they	had	been	in	Seven	Cities,	in	the	garrison
settlement.	The	uprising	had	forced	them	both	to	set	aside	all	of	that,	for	the
children,	for	survival	itself.	He	suspected	she	did	not	miss	him;	although	his
children	might.	He	suspected	she	would	have	found	someone	else	by	now,	a
lover,	and	the	last	thing	she	would	want	was	to	see	him	again.
Well,	there	could	be	worse	things	in	this	life.	He	thought	back	on	those
soldiers	he’d	seen	with	the	fiercest	burns	–	gods	how	they	had	screamed	their
pain.
Keneb	stared	at	the	city.	And	hated	it	with	all	his	soul.
The	dog	Bent	arrived	to	lie	down	beside	him.	A	moment	later	Grub
appeared.	‘Father,	do	you	know	what	will	come	of	this?	Do	you?’
‘Come	of	what,	Grub?’
The	boy	pointed	at	Y’Ghatan	with	one	bare,	soot-stained	arm.	‘She	wants
us	to	leave.	As	soon	as	we	can.’	He	then	pointed	towards	the	morning	sun.	‘It’s
the	plague,	you	see,	in	the	east.	So.	We’re	marching	west.	To	find	the	ships.	But
I	already	know	the	answer.	To	find	what’s	inside	us,	you	got	to	take	everything


else	away,	you	see?’
‘No,	Grub.	I	don’t	see.’
The	Hengese	lapdog,	Roach,	scrambled	into	view,	sniffing	the	ground.
Then	it	began	digging,	as	if	in	a	frenzy.	Dust	engulfed	it.
‘Something’s	buried,’	Grub	said,	watching	Roach.
‘I	imagine	there	is.’
‘But	she	won’t	see	that.’	The	boy	looked	up	at	Keneb.	‘Neither	will	you.’
Grub	ran	off,	Bent	loping	at	his	side.	The	lapdog	kept	digging,	making
snuffling,	snorting	sounds.
Keneb	frowned,	trying	to	recall	what	Grub	had	said	earlier	–	was	it	the
night	of	the	breach?	Before	the	fated	order	went	out?	Had	there	been	a	warning
hidden	in	the	lad’s	words?	He	couldn’t	remember	–	the	world	before	the	fire
seemed	to	have	burned	away	to	nothing	in	his	mind.	It	had	been	a	struggle	to
conjure	up	the	names	of	his	wife,	his	children,	their	faces.	I	don’t	understand.
What	has	happened	to	me?
	
In	the	command	tent,	the	Adjunct	stood	facing	Nil	and	Nether.	Fist	Blistig
watched	from	near	the	back	wall,	so	exhausted	he	could	barely	stand.	Tavore
had	placed	him	in	charge	of	the	healing	–	setting	up	the	hospitals,	organizing
the	Denul	healers,	the	witches	and	the	warlocks.	Two	days	and	one	or	maybe
one	and	a	half	nights	–	he	was	not	sure	he	could	count	the	short	chaotic	time
before	the	sun	rose	on	the	night	of	the	breach.	Without	his	officers	that	first
night,	he	would	have	been	relieved	of	command	before	dawn.	His	soul	had
been	drowning	in	the	pit	of	the	Abyss.
Blistig	was	not	yet	certain	he	had	climbed	back	out.
Nil	was	speaking,	his	voice	a	monotone,	dulled	by	too	long	in	the	sorcery
he	had	grown	to	hate.	‘…nothing	but	death	and	heat.	Those	who	made	it	out	–
their	agony	deafens	me	–	they	are	driving	the	spirits	insane.	They	flee,
snapping	their	bindings.	They	curse	us,	for	this	vast	wound	upon	the	land,	for
the	crimes	we	have	committed—’
‘Not	our	crimes,’	the	Adjunct	cut	in,	turning	away,	her	gaze	finding	Blistig.
‘How	many	did	we	lose	today,	Fist?’
‘Thirty-one,	Adjunct,	but	the	witches	say	that	few	will	follow,	now.	The
worst	are	dead,	the	rest	will	live.’
‘Begin	preparations	for	the	march	–	have	we	enough	wagons?’
‘Provided	soldiers	pack	their	own	food	for	a	while,’	Blistig	said.
‘Speaking	of	which,	some	stores	were	lost	–	we’ll	end	up	chewing	leather
unless	we	can	arrange	a	resupply.’


‘How	long?’
‘A	week,	if	we	immediately	begin	rationing.	Adjunct,	where	are	we
going?’
Her	eyes	grew	veiled	for	a	moment,	then	she	looked	away.	‘The	plague	is
proving…virulent.	It	is	the	Mistress’s	own,	I	gather,	the	kiss	of	the	goddess
herself.	And	there	is	a	shortage	of	healers…’
‘Lothal?’
Nil	shook	his	head.	‘The	city	has	already	been	struck,	Fist.’
‘Sotka,’	said	the	Adjunct.	‘Pearl	has	informed	me	that	Admiral	Nok’s	fleet
and	the	transports	have	been	unable	to	dock	in	any	city	east	of	Ashok	on	the
Maadil	Peninsula,	so	he	has	been	forced	around	it,	and	expects	to	reach	Sotka
in	nine	days,	assuming	he	can	draw	in	for	water	and	food	in	Taxila	or	Rang.’
‘Nine	days?’	asked	Blistig.	‘If	the	plague’s	in	Lothal	already…’
‘Our	enemy	now	is	time,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘Fist,	you	have	orders	to	break
camp.	Do	it	as	quickly	as	possible.	The	Rebellion	is	over.	Our	task	now	is	to
survive.’	She	studied	Blistig	for	a	moment.	‘I	want	us	on	the	road	tonight.’
‘Tonight?	Aye,	Adjunct.	I	had	best	be	on	my	way,	then.’	He	saluted,	then
headed	out.	Outside,	he	halted,	momentarily	blinking,	then,	recalling	his
orders,	he	set	off.
	
After	Blistig’s	footsteps	had	trailed	away,	the	Adjunct	turned	to	Nether.	‘The
Mistress	of	Plague,	Nether.	Why	now?	Why	here?’
The	Wickan	witch	snorted.	‘You	ask	me	to	fathom	the	mind	of	a	goddess,
Adjunct?	It	is	hopeless.	She	may	have	no	reason.	Plague	is	her	aspect,	after	all.
It	is	what	she	does.’	She	shook	her	head,	said	nothing	more.
‘Adjunct,’	Nil	ventured,	‘you	have	your	victory.	The	Empress	will	be
satisfied	–	she	has	to	be.	We	need	to	rest—’
‘Pearl	informs	me	that	Leoman	of	the	Flails	is	not	dead.’
Neither	Wickan	replied,	and	the	Adjunct	faced	them	once	more.	‘You	both
knew	that,	didn’t	you?’
‘He	was	taken…away,’	Nil	said.	‘By	a	goddess.’
‘Which	goddess?	Poliel?’
‘No.	The	Queen	of	Dreams.’
‘The	Goddess	of	Divination?	What	possible	use	could	she	have	for
Leoman	of	the	Flails?’
Nil	shrugged.
Outside	the	tent	a	rider	reined	in	and	a	moment	later	Temul,	dust-sheathed
and	dripping	blood	from	three	parallel	slashes	tracking	the	side	of	his	face,


strode	in,	dragging	a	dishevelled	child	with	him.	‘Found	her,	Adjunct,’	he	said.
‘Where?’
‘Trying	to	get	back	into	the	ruins.	She	has	lost	her	mind.’
The	Adjunct	studied	the	child,	Sinn,	then	said,	‘She	had	best	find	it	again.	I
have	need	of	High	Mages.	Sinn,	look	at	me.	Look	at	me.’
She	gave	no	indication	of	even	hearing	Tavore,	her	head	still	hanging
down,	ropes	of	burnt	hair	hiding	her	face.
Sighing,	the	Adjunct	said,	‘Take	her	and	get	her	cleaned	up.	And	keep	her
under	guard	at	all	times	–	we	will	try	this	again	later.’
After	they	had	left,	Nil	asked,	‘Adjunct,	do	you	intend	to	pursue	Leoman?
How?	There	is	no	trail	to	follow	–	the	Queen	of	Dreams	could	have	spirited
him	to	another	continent	by	now.’
‘No,	we	shall	not	pursue,	but	understand	this,	Wickan,	while	he	yet	lives
there	will	be	no	victory	in	the	eyes	of	the	Empress.	Y’Ghatan	will	remain	as	it
always	has	been,	a	curse	upon	the	empire.’
‘It	will	not	rise	again,’	Nil	said.
Tavore	studied	him.	‘The	young	know	nothing	of	history.	I	am	going	for	a
walk.	Both	of	you,	get	some	rest.’
She	left.
Nil	met	his	sister ’s	eyes,	then	smiled.	‘Young?	How	easily	she	forgets.’
‘They	all	forget,	brother.’
‘Where	do	you	think	Leoman	has	gone?’
‘Where	else?	Into	the	Golden	Age,	Nil.	The	glory	that	was	the	Great
Rebellion.	He	strides	the	mists	of	myth,	now.	They	will	say	he	breathed	fire.
They	will	say	you	could	see	the	Apocalypse	in	his	eyes.	They	will	say	he	sailed
from	Y’Ghatan	on	a	river	of	Malazan	blood.’
‘The	locals	believe	Coltaine	ascended,	Nether.	The	new	Patron	of	Crows
—’
‘Fools.	Wickans	do	not	ascend.	We	just…reiterate.’


	
Lieutenant	Pores	was	awake,	and	he	lifted	his	good	hand	to	acknowledge	his
captain	as	Kindly	halted	at	the	foot	of	the	camp	cot.
‘They	say	your	hand	melted	together,	Lieutenant.’
‘Yes,	sir.	My	left	hand,	as	you	see.’
‘They	say	they	have	done	all	they	could,	taken	away	the	pain,	and	maybe
one	day	they	will	manage	to	cut	each	finger	free	once	again.	Find	a	High	Denul
healer	and	make	your	hand	look	and	work	like	new	again.’
‘Yes,	sir.	And	until	then,	since	it’s	my	shield	hand,	I	should	be	able	to—’
‘Then	why	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	taking	up	this	cot,	Lieutenant?’
‘Ah,	well,	I	just	need	to	find	some	clothes,	then,	sir,	and	I’ll	be	right	with
you.’
Kindly	looked	down	the	row	of	cots.	‘Half	this	hospital	is	filled	with
bleating	lambs	–	you	up	to	being	a	wolf,	Lieutenant?	We	march	tonight.
There’s	not	enough	wagons	and,	even	more	outrageous,	not	enough
palanquins	and	no	howdahs	to	speak	of	–	what	is	this	army	coming	to,	I
wonder?’
‘Shameful,	sir.	How	does	Fist	Tene	Baralta	fare,	sir?’
‘Lost	that	arm,	but	you	don’t	hear	him	whining	and	fussing	and	moaning.’
‘No?’
‘Of	course	not,	he’s	still	unconscious.	Get	on	your	feet,	soldier.	Wear	that
blanket.’
‘I	lost	my	arm	torc,	sir—’
‘You	got	the	burn	mark	where	it	was,	though,	haven’t	you?	They	see	that
and	they’ll	know	you	for	an	officer.	That	and	your	ferocious	comportment.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Good,	now	enough	of	wasting	my	time.	We’ve	work	to	do,	Lieutenant.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Lieutenant,	if	you	remain	lying	there	another	heartbeat,	I	will	fold	that	cot
up	with	you	in	it,	do	you	understand	me?’
‘Yes,	sir!’
	
She	sat	unmoving,	limbs	limp	as	a	doll’s,	while	an	old	Wickan	woman	washed
her	down	and	another	cut	away	most	of	her	hair,	and	did	not	look	up	as	Captain
Faradan	Sort	entered	the	tent.
‘That	will	do,’	she	said,	gesturing	for	the	two	Wickans	to	leave.	‘Get	out.’


Voicing,	in	tandem,	strings	of	what	the	captain	took	to	be	curses,	the	two
women	left.
Faradan	Sort	looked	down	on	the	girl.	‘Long	hair	just	gets	in	the	way,	Sinn.
You’re	better	off	without	it.	I	don’t	miss	mine	at	all.	You’re	not	talking,	but	I
think	I	know	what	is	going	on.	So	listen.	Don’t	say	anything.	Just	listen	to
me…’
	
The	dull	grey,	drifting	ash	devoured	the	last	light	of	the	sun,	while	dust-clouds
from	the	road	drifted	down	into	the	cut	banks	to	either	side.	Remnant	breaths	of
the	dead	city	still	rolled	over	the	Fourteenth	Army	–	all	that	remained	of	the
firestorm,	yet	reminder	enough	for	the	mass	of	soldiers	awaiting	the	horn
blasts	that	would	announce	the	march.
Fist	Keneb	lifted	himself	into	the	saddle,	gathered	the	reins.	All	round	him
he	could	hear	coughing,	from	human	and	beast	alike,	a	terrible	sound.	Wagons,
burdened	with	the	cloth-swathed	wounded,	were	lined	up	on	the	road	like
funeral	carts,	smoke-stained,	flame-blackened	and	reeking	of	pyres.	Among
them,	he	knew,	could	be	found	Fist	Tene	Baralta,	parts	of	his	body	burned	away
and	his	face	horribly	scarred	–	a	Denul	healer	had	managed	to	save	his	eyes,
but	the	man’s	beard	had	caught	fire,	and	most	of	his	lips	and	nose	were	gone.
The	concern	now	was	for	his	sanity,	although	he	remained,	mercifully,
unconscious.	And	there	were	others,	so	many	others…
He	watched	Temul	and	two	riders	cantering	towards	him.	The	Wickan
leader	reined	in,	shaking	his	head.	‘Nowhere	to	be	found,	Fist.	It’s	no	surprise
–	but	know	this:	we’ve	had	other	desertions,	and	we’ve	tracked	them	all	down.
The	Adjunct	has	issued	the	command	to	kill	the	next	ones	on	sight.’
Keneb	nodded,	looked	away.
‘From	now	on,’	Temul	continued,	‘my	Wickans	will	not	accept	counterorders	from	Malazan	officers.’
The	Fist’s	head	turned	back	and	he	stared	at	Temul.	‘Fist,	your	Wickans	are
Malazans.’
The	young	warrior	grimaced,	then	wheeled	his	horse.	‘They’re	your
problem	now,	Fist.	Send	out	searchers	if	you	like,	but	the	Fourteenth	won’t	wait
for	them.’
Even	as	he	and	his	aides	rode	away,	the	horns	sounded,	and	the	army
lurched	into	motion.
Keneb	rose	in	his	saddle	and	looked	around.	The	sun	was	down,	now.	Too
dark	to	see	much	of	anything.	And	somewhere	out	there	were	Captain	Faradan
Sort	and	Sinn.	Two	deserters.	That	damned	captain.	I	thought	she	was…well,	I


didn’t	think	she’d	do	something	like	this.
Y’Ghatan	had	broken	people,	broken	them	utterly	–	he	did	not	think	many
would	recover.	Ever.
The	Fourteenth	Army	began	its	march,	down	the	western	road,	towards	the
Sotka	Fork,	in	its	wake	dust	and	ash,	and	a	destroyed	city.
	
Her	head	was	serpentine,	the	slitted,	vertical	eyes	lurid	green,	and	Balm
watched	her	tongue	slide	in	and	out	with	fixed,	morbid	fascination.	The	wavy,
ropy	black	tendrils	of	her	hair	writhed,	and	upon	the	end	of	each	was	a	tiny
human	head,	mouth	open	in	piteous	screams.
Witch	Eater,	Thesorma	Raadil,	all	bedecked	in	zebra	skins,	her	four	arms
lifting	this	way	and	that,	threatening	with	the	four	sacred	weapons	of	the	Dal
Hon	tribes.	Bola,	kout,	hook-scythe	and	rock	–	he	could	never	understand	that:
where	were	the	more	obvious	ones?	Knife?	Spear?	Bow?	Who	thought	up
these	goddesses	anyway?	What	mad,	twisted,	darkly	amused	mind	conjured
such	monstrosities?	Whoever	it	was	–	is	–	I	hate	him.	Or	her.	Probably	her.	It’s
always	her.	She’s	a	witch,	isn’t	she?	No,	Witch	Eater.	Likely	a	man,	then,	and
one	not	mad	or	stupid	after	all.	Someone	has	to	eat	all	those	witches.
Yet	she	was	advancing	on	him.	Balm.	A	mediocre	warlock	–	no,	a	lapsed
warlock	–	just	a	soldier,	now,	in	fact.	A	sergeant,	but	where	in	Hood’s	name
was	his	squad?	The	army?	What	was	he	doing	on	the	savannah	of	his
homeland?	I	ran	from	there,	oh	yes	I	did.	Herd	cattle?	Hunt	monstrous,	vicious
beasts	and	call	it	a	fun	pastime?	Not	for	me.	Oh	no,	not	Balm.	I’ve	drunk
enough	bull	blood	to	sprout	horns,	enough	cow	milk	to	grow	udders	–	‘so	you,
Witch	Eater,	get	away	from	me!’
She	laughed,	the	sound	a	predictable	hiss,	and	said,	‘I’m	hungry	for
wayward	warlocks—’
‘No!	You	eat	witches!	Not	warlocks!’
‘Who	said	anything	about	eating?’
Balm	tried	to	get	away,	scrabbling,	clawing,	but	there	were	rocks,	rough
walls,	projections	that	snagged	him.	He	was	trapped.	‘I’m	trapped!’
‘Get	away	from	him,	you	rutting	snake!’
A	voice	of	thunder.	Well,	minute	thunder.	Balm	lifted	his	head,	looked
round.	A	huge	beetle	stood	within	arm’s	reach	–	reared	up	on	its	hind	legs,	its
wedge-shaped	head	would	have	been	level	with	Balm’s	knees,	could	he	stand.
So,	huge	in	a	relative	sense.	Imparala	Ar,	the	Dung	God	–	‘Imparala!	Save	me!’
‘Fear	not,	mortal,’	the	beetle	said,	antennae	and	limbs	waving	about.	‘She’ll
not	have	you!	No,	I	have	need	of	you!’


‘You	do?	For	what?’
‘To	dig,	my	mortal	friend.	Through	the	vast	dung	of	the	world!	Only	your
kind,	human,	with	your	clear	vision,	your	endless	appetite!	You,	conveyor	of
waste	and	maker	of	rubbish!	Follow	me,	and	we	shall	eat	our	way	into	the	very
Abyss	itself!’
‘Gods,	you	stink!’
‘Never	mind	that,	my	friend	–	before	too	long	you	too—’
‘Leave	him	alone,	the	both	of	you!’	A	third	voice,	shrill,	descending	from
above	and	closing	fast.	‘It’s	the	dead	and	dying	who	cry	out	the	truth	of	things!’
Balm	looked	up.	Brithan	Troop,	the	eleven-headed	vulture	goddess.	‘Oh,
leave	me	alone!	All	of	you!’
From	every	side,	now,	a	growing	clamour	of	voices.	Gods	and	goddesses,
the	whole	Dal	Honese	menagerie	of	disgusting	deities.
Oh,	why	do	we	have	so	many	of	them?
	
It	was	her	sister,	not	her.	She	remembered,	as	clearly	as	if	it	had	been
yesterday,	the	night	of	lies	that	lumbered	into	the	Itko	Kanese	village	when	the
seas	had	been	silent,	empty,	for	too	long.	When	hunger,	no,	starvation,	had
arrived,	and	all	the	civil,	modern	beliefs	–	the	stately,	just	gods	–	were	cast	off
once	again.	In	the	name	of	Awakening,	the	old	grisly	rites	had	returned.
The	fish	had	gone	away.	The	seas	were	lifeless.	Blood	was	needed,	to	stir
the	Awakening,	to	save	them	all.
They’d	taken	her	sister.	Smiles	was	certain	of	it.	Yet,	here	were	the	rough,
salt-gnawed	hands	of	the	elders,	carrying	her	drugged,	insensate	body	down
onto	the	wet	sands	–	the	tide	drawn	far	back	and	waiting	patiently	for	this	warm
gift	–	whilst	she	floated	above	herself,	looking	on	in	horror.
All	wrong.	Not	the	way	it	had	happened.	They’d	taken	her	twin	sister	–	so
much	power	in	the	Mirror	Birth,	after	all,	and	so	rare	in	the	small	village
where	she’d	been	born.
Her	sister.	That	was	why	she’d	fled	them	all.	Cursing	every	name,	every
face	glimpsed	that	night.	Running	and	running,	all	the	way	to	the	great	city	to
the	north	–	and,	had	she	known	what	awaited	her	there…
No,	I’d	do	it	again.	I	would.	Those	bastards.	‘For	the	lives	of	everyone	else,
child,	give	up	your	own.	This	is	the	cycle,	this	is	life	and	death,	and	that	eternal
path	lies	in	the	blood.	Give	up	your	own	life,	for	the	lives	of	all	of	us.’
Odd	how	those	priests	never	volunteered	themselves	for	that	glorious	gift.
How	they	never	insisted	that	they	be	the	ones	tied	and	weighted	down	to	await
the	tide’s	wash,	and	the	crabs,	the	ever	hungry	crabs.


And,	if	it	was	so	damned	blissful,	why	pour	durhang	oil	down	her	throat,
until	her	eyes	were	like	black	pearls	and	she	couldn’t	even	walk,	much	less
think?	Still	less	comprehend	what	was	happening,	what	they	were	planning	to
do	to	her?
Drifting	above	the	body	of	herself,	Smiles	sensed	the	old	spirits	drawing
close,	eager	and	gleeful.	And,	somewhere	in	the	depths	beyond	the	bay,	waited
the	Eldest	God.	Mael	himself,	that	feeder	on	misery,	the	cruel	taker	of	life	and
hope.
Rage	rising	within	her,	Smiles	could	feel	her	body	straining	at	the
numbing	turgid	chains	–	she	would	not	lie	unmoving,	she	would	not	smile	up
when	her	mother	kissed	her	one	last	time.	She	would	not	blink	dreamily	when
the	warm	water	stole	over	her,	into	her.
Hear	me!	All	you	cursed	spirits,	hear	me!	I	defy	you!
Oh	yes,	flinch	back!	You	know	well	enough	to	fear,	because	I	swear	this	–	I
will	take	you	all	down	with	me.	I	will	take	you	all	into	the	Abyss,	into	the	hands
of	the	demons	of	chaos.	It’s	the	cycle,	you	see.	Order	and	chaos,	a	far	older
cycle	than	life	and	death,	wouldn’t	you	agree?
So,	come	closer,	all	of	you.
In	the	end,	it	was	as	she	had	known.	They’d	taken	her	sister,	and	she,	well,
let’s	not	be	coy	now,	you	delivered	the	last	kiss,	dear	girl.	And	no	durhang	oil
to	soothe	away	the	excuse,	either.
Running	away	never	feels	as	fast,	never	as	far,	as	it	should.

You	could	believe	in	whores.	He	had	been	born	to	a	whore,	a	Seti	girl	of
fourteen	who’d	been	flung	away	by	her	parents	–	of	course,	she	hadn’t	been	a
whore	then,	but	to	keep	her	new	son	fed	and	clothed,	well,	it	was	the	clearest
course	before	her.
And	he	had	learned	the	ways	of	worship	among	whores,	all	those	women
knitted	close	to	his	mother,	sharing	fears	and	everything	else	that	came	with	the
profession.	Their	touch	had	been	kindly	and	sincere,	the	language	they	knew
best.
A	half-blood	could	call	on	no	gods.	A	half-blood	walked	the	gutter
between	two	worlds,	despised	by	both.
Yet	he	had	not	been	alone,	and	in	many	ways	it	was	the	half-bloods	who
held	closest	to	the	traditional	ways	of	the	Seti.	The	full-blood	tribes	had	gone
off	to	wars	–	all	the	young	lance	warriors	and	the	women	archers	–	beneath	the
standard	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	When	they	had	returned,	they	were	Seti	no


longer.	They	were	Malazan.
And	so	Koryk	had	been	immersed	in	the	old	rituals	–	those	that	could	be
remembered	–	and	they	had	been,	he	had	known	even	then,	godless	and	empty.
Serving	only	the	living,	the	half-blood	kin	around	each	of	them.
There	was	no	shame	in	that.
There	had	been	a	time,	much	later,	when	Koryk	had	come	upon	his	own
language,	protecting	the	miserable	lives	of	the	women	from	whom	he	had	first
learned	the	art	of	empty	worship.	A	mindful	dialect,	bound	to	no	cause	but	that
of	the	living,	of	familiar,	ageing	faces,	of	repaying	the	gifts	the	now	unwanted
once-whores	had	given	him	in	his	youth.	And	then	watching	them	one	by	one
die.	Worn	out,	so	scarred	by	so	many	brutal	hands,	the	indifferent	usage	by	the
men	and	women	of	the	city	–	who	proclaimed	the	ecstasy	of	god-worship	when
it	suited	them,	then	defiled	human	flesh	with	the	cold	need	of	carnivores
straddling	a	kill.
Deep	in	the	sleep	of	Carelbarra,	the	God	Bringer,	Koryk	beheld	no
visitors.	For	him,	there	was	naught	but	oblivion.
As	for	the	fetishes,	well,	they	were	for	something	else.	Entirely	something
else.
	
‘Go	on,	mortal,	pull	it.’
Crump	glowered,	first	at	Stump	Flit,	the	Salamander	God,	Highest	of	High
Marshals,	then	at	the	vast,	gloomy	swamp	of	Mott.	What	was	he	doing	here?	He
didn’t	want	to	be	here.	What	if	his	brothers	found	him?	‘No.’
‘Go	on,	I	know	you	want	to.	Take	my	tail,	mortal,	and	watch	me	thrash
about,	a	trapped	god	in	your	hands,	it’s	what	you	all	do	anyway.	All	of	you.’
‘No.	Go	away.	I	don’t	want	to	talk	to	you.	Go	away.’
‘Oh,	poor	Jamber	Bole,	all	so	alone,	now.	Unless	your	brothers	find	you,
and	then	you’ll	want	me	on	your	side,	yes	you	will.	If	they	find	you,	oh	my,	oh
my.’
‘They	won’t.	They	ain’t	looking,	neither.’
‘Yes	they	are,	my	foolish	young	friend—’
‘I	ain’t	your	friend.	Go	away.’
‘They’re	after	you,	Jamber	Bole.	Because	of	what	you	did—’
‘I	didn’t	do	nothing!’
‘Grab	my	tail.	Go	on.	Here,	just	reach	out…’
Jamber	Bole,	now	known	as	Crump,	sighed,	reached	out	and	closed	his
hand	on	the	Salamander	God’s	tail.
It	bolted,	and	he	was	left	holding	the	end	of	the	tail	in	his	hand.


Stump	Flit	raced	away,	laughing	and	laughing.
Good	thing	too,	Crump	reflected.	It	was	the	only	joke	it	had.
	
Corabb	stood	in	the	desert,	and	through	the	heat-haze	someone	was	coming.	A
child.	Sha’ik	reborn,	the	seer	had	returned,	to	lead	still	more	warriors	to	their
deaths.	He	could	not	see	her	face	yet	–	there	was	something	wrong	with	his
eyes.	Burned,	maybe.	Scoured	by	blowing	sand,	he	didn’t	know,	but	to	see	was
to	feel	pain.	To	see	her	was…terrible.
No,	Sha’ik,	please.	This	must	end,	it	must	all	end.	We	have	had	our	fill	of
holy	wars	–	how	much	blood	can	this	sand	absorb?	When	will	your	thirst	end?
She	came	closer.	And	the	closer	she	drew	to	where	he	was	standing,	the
more	his	eyes	failed	him,	and	when	he	heard	her	halt	before	him,	Corabb
Bhilan	Thenu’alas	was	blind.
Yet	not	deaf,	as	she	whispered,	‘Help	me.’
	
‘Open	your	eyes,	friend.’
But	he	didn’t	want	to.	Everybody	demanded	decisions.	From	him,	all	the
time,	and	he	didn’t	want	to	make	any	more.	Never	again.	The	way	it	was	now
was	perfect.	This	slow	sinking	away,	the	whisperings	that	meant	nothing,	that
weren’t	even	words.	He	desired	nothing	more,	nothing	else.
‘Wake	up,	Fiddler.	One	last	time,	so	we	can	talk.	We	need	to	talk,	friend.’
All	right.	He	opened	his	eyes,	blinked	to	clear	the	mists	–	but	they	didn’t
clear	–	in	fact,	the	face	looking	down	at	him	seemed	to	be	made	of	those	mists.
‘Hedge.	What	do	you	want?’
The	sapper	grinned.	‘I	bet	you	think	you’re	dead,	don’t	you?	That	you’re
back	with	all	your	old	buddies.	A	Bridgeburner,	where	the	Bridgeburners
never	die.	The	deathless	army	–	oh,	we	cheated	Hood,	didn’t	we	just.	Hah!
That’s	what	you’re	thinking,	yeah?	Okay,	then,	so	where’s	Trotts?	Where	are
all	the	others?’
‘You	tell	me.’
‘I	will.	You	ain’t	dead.	Not	yet,	maybe	not	for	a	while	either.	And	that’s	my
point.	That’s	why	I’m	here.	You	need	a	kicking	awake,	Fid,	else	Hood’ll	find
you	and	you	won’t	see	none	of	us	ever	again.	The	world’s	been	burned
through,	where	you	are	right	now.	Burned	through,	realm	after	realm,	warren
after	warren.	It	ain’t	a	place	anybody	can	claim.	Not	for	a	long	time.	Dead,
burned	down	straight	to	the	Abyss.’


‘You’re	a	ghost,	Hedge.	What	do	you	want	with	me?	From	me?’
‘You	got	to	keep	going,	Fid.	You	got	to	take	us	with	you,	right	to	the	end
—’
‘What	end?’
‘The	end	and	that’s	all	I	can	say—’
‘Why?’
‘’Cause	it	ain’t	happened	yet,	you	idiot!	How	am	I	supposed	to	know?	It’s
the	future	and	I	can’t	see	no	future.	Gods,	you’re	so	thick,	Fid.	You	always
were.’
‘Me?	I	didn’t	blow	myself	up,	Hedge.’
‘So?	You’re	lying	on	a	bunch	of	urns	and	bleeding	out	–	that’s	better?
Messing	up	all	that	sweet	honey	with	your	blood—’
‘What	honey?	What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘You	better	get	going,	you’re	running	outa	time.’
‘Where	are	we?’
‘No	place,	and	that’s	the	problem.	Maybe	Hood’ll	find	you,	maybe	no-one
will.	The	ghosts	of	Y’Ghatan	–	they	all	burned.	Into	nothing.	Destroyed,	all
those	locked	memories,	thousands	and	thousands.	Thousands	of	years…gone,
now.	You’ve	no	idea	the	loss…’
‘Be	quiet.	You’re	sounding	like	a	ghost.’
‘Time	to	wake	up,	Fid.	Wake	up,	now.	Go	on…’
	
Wildfires	had	torn	across	the	grasslands,	and	Bottle	found	himself	lying	on
blackened	stubble.	Nearby	lay	a	charred	carcass.	Some	kind	of	four-legged
grass-eater	–	and	around	it	had	gathered	a	half-dozen	human-like	figures,	finefurred	and	naked.	They	held	sharp-edged	stones	and	were	cutting	into	the	burnt
flesh.
Two	stood	as	sentinels,	scanning	the	horizons.	One	of	them	was…her.
My	female.	Heavy	with	child,	so	heavy	now.	She	saw	him	and	came	over.
He	could	not	look	away	from	her	eyes,	from	that	regal	serenity	in	her	gaze.
There	had	been	wild	apes	on	Malaz	Island	once.	He	remembered,	in
Jakatakan,	when	he	was	maybe	seven	years	old,	seeing	a	cage	in	the	market,	the
last	island	ape	left,	captured	in	the	hardwood	forests	on	the	north	coast.	It	had
wandered	down	into	a	village,	a	young	male	seeking	a	mate	–	but	there	were
no	mates	left.	Half-starved	and	terrified,	it	had	been	cornered	in	a	stable,
clubbed	unconscious,	and	now	it	crouched	in	a	filthy	bamboo	cage	at	the
dockside	market	in	Jakatakan.
The	seven-year-old	boy	had	stood	before	it,	his	eyes	level	with	that	black-


furred,	heavy-browed	beast’s	own	eyes,	and	there	had	been	a	moment,	a	single
moment,	when	their	gazes	locked.	A	single	moment	that	broke	Bottle’s	heart.
He’d	seen	misery,	he’d	seen	awareness	–	the	glint	that	knew	itself,	yet	did	not
comprehend	what	it	had	done	wrong,	what	had	earned	it	the	loss	of	its	freedom.
It	could	not	have	known,	of	course,	that	it	was	now	alone	in	the	world.	The	last
of	its	kind.	And	that	somehow,	in	some	exclusively	human	way,	that	was	its
crime.
Just	as	the	child	could	not	have	known	that	the	ape,	too,	was	aged	seven.
Yet	both	saw,	both	knew	in	their	souls	–	those	darkly	flickering	shapings,
not	yet	solidly	formed	–	that,	for	this	one	time,	they	were	each	looking	upon	a
brother.
Breaking	his	heart.
Breaking	the	ape’s	heart,	too	–	but	maybe,	he’d	thought	since,	maybe	he
just	needed	to	believe	that,	a	kind	of	flagellation	in	recompense.	For	being	the
one	outside	the	cage,	for	knowing	that	there	was	blood	on	the	hands	of	himself
and	his	kind.
Bottle’s	soul,	broken	away…and	so	freed,	gifted	or	cursed	with	the	ability
to	travel,	to	seek	those	duller	life-sparks	and	to	find	that,	in	truth,	they	were	not
dull	at	all,	that	the	failure	in	fully	seeing	belonged	to	himself.
Compassion	existed	when	and	only	when	one	could	step	outside	oneself,	to
suddenly	see	the	bars	from	inside	the	cage.
Years	later,	Bottle	had	tracked	down	the	fate	of	that	last	island	ape.
Purchased	by	a	scholar	who	lived	in	a	solitary	tower	on	the	wild,	unsettled
coast	of	Geni,	where	there	dwelt,	in	the	forests	inland,	bands	of	apes	little
different	from	the	one	he	had	seen;	and	he	liked	to	believe,	now,	that	that
scholar ’s	heart	had	known	compassion;	and	that	those	foreign	apes	had	not
rejected	this	strange,	shy	cousin.	His	hope:	that	there	had	been	a	reprieve,	for
that	one,	solitary	life.
His	fear	was	that	the	creature’s	wired	skeleton	stood	in	one	of	the	tower ’s
dingy	rooms,	a	trophy	of	uniqueness.
Amidst	the	smell	of	ash	and	charred	flesh,	the	female	crouched	down
before	him,	reached	out	to	brush	hard	finger	pads	across	his	forehead.
Then	that	hand	made	a	fist,	lifting	high,	then	flashing	down—
	
He	flinched,	eyes	snapping	open	and	seeing	naught	but	darkness.	Hard	rims
and	shards	digging	into	his	back	–	the	chamber,	the	honey,	oh	gods	my	head
aches…Groaning,	Bottle	rolled	over,	the	shard	fragments	cutting	and
crunching	beneath	him.	He	was	in	the	room	beyond	the	one	containing	the


urns,	although	at	least	one	had	followed	him	to	shatter	on	the	cold	stone	floor.
He	groaned	again.	Smeared	in	sticky	honey,	aches	all	over	him…but	the	burns,
the	pain	–	gone.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	coughed.	The	air	was	foul.	He
needed	to	get	everyone	going	–	he	needed—
‘Bottle?	That	you?’
Cuttle,	lying	nearby.	‘Aye,’	said	Bottle.	‘That	honey—’
‘Kicked	hard,	didn’t	it	just.	I	dreamed…a	tiger,	it	had	died	–	cut	to	pieces,
in	fact,	by	these	giant	undead	lizards	that	ran	on	two	feet.	Died,	yet	ascended,
only	it	was	the	death	part	it	was	telling	me	about.	The	dying	part	–	I	don’t
understand.	Treach	had	to	die,	I	think,	to	arrive.	The	dying	part	was	important	–
I’m	sure	of	it,	only…gods	below,	listen	to	me.	This	air ’s	rotten	–	we	got	to	get
moving.’
Yes.	But	he’d	lost	the	rat,	he	remembered	that,	he’d	lost	her.	Filled	with
despair,	Bottle	sought	out	the	creature—
—and	found	her.	Awakened	by	his	touch,	resisting	not	at	all	as	he	captured
her	soul	once	more,	and,	seeing	through	her	eyes,	he	led	the	rat	back	into	the
room.
‘Wake	the	others,	Cuttle.	It’s	time.’
	
Shouting,	getting	louder,	and	Gesler	awoke	soaked	in	sweat.	That,	he	decided,
was	a	dream	he	would	never,	ever	revisit.	Given	the	choice.	Fire,	of	course,	so
much	fire.	Shadowy	figures	dancing	on	all	sides,	dancing	around	him,	in	fact.
Night,	snapped	at	by	flames,	the	drumming	of	feet,	voices	chanting	in	some
barbaric,	unknown	language,	and	he	could	feel	his	soul	responding,	flaring,
burgeoning	as	if	summoned	by	some	ritual.
At	which	point	Gesler	realized.	They	were	dancing	round	a	hearth.	And	he
was	looking	out	at	them	–	from	the	very	flame	itself.	No,	he	was	the	flame.
Oh	Truth,	you	went	and	killed	yourself.	Damned	fool.
Soldiers	were	awakening	on	all	sides	of	the	chamber	–	shouts	and	moans
and	a	chorus	of	clunking	urns.
This	journey	was	not	yet	done.	They	would	go	on,	and	on,	deeper	and
deeper,	until	the	passage	dead-ended,	until	the	air	ran	out,	until	a	mass	of
rubble	shook	loose	and	crushed	them	all.
Any	way	at	all,	please,	except	fire.
	
How	long	had	they	been	down	here?	Bottle	had	no	idea.	Memories	of	open	sky,


of	sunlight	and	the	wind,	were	invitations	to	madness,	so	fierce	was	the	torture
of	recalling	all	those	things	one	took	for	granted.	Now,	the	world	was	reduced
to	sharp	fragments	of	brick,	dust,	cobwebs	and	darkness.	Passages	that	twisted,
climbed,	dropped	away.	His	hands	were	a	battered,	bloody	mess	from	clawing
through	packed	rubble.
And	now,	on	a	sharp	down-slope,	he	had	reached	a	place	too	small	to	get
through.	Feeling	with	his	half-numbed	hands,	he	tracked	the	edges.	Some	kind
of	cut	cornerstone	had	sagged	down	at	an	angle	from	the	ceiling.	Its	lowermost
corner	–	barely	two	hand’s-widths	above	the	rutted,	sandy	floor	–	neatly
bisected	the	passage.
Bottle	settled	his	forehead	against	the	gritty	floor.	Air	still	flowed	past,	a
faint	stirring	now,	nothing	more	than	that.	And	water	had	run	down	this	track,
heading	somewhere.
‘What’s	wrong?’	Cuttle	asked	behind	him.
‘We’re	blocked.’
Silence	for	a	moment,	then,	‘Your	rat	gone	ahead?	Past	the	block?’
‘Yes.	It	opens	out	again	–	there’s	an	intersection	of	some	kind	ahead,	a	hole
coming	down	from	above,	with	air	pulling	down	from	it	and	straight	into	a	pit
in	the	floor.	But,	Cuttle	–	there’s	a	big	cut	stone,	no	way	to	squeeze	past	it.	I’m
sorry.	We	have	to	go	back—’
‘To	Hood	we	do,	move	aside	if	you	can,	I	want	to	feel	this	for	myself.’
It	was	not	as	easy	as	it	sounded,	and	it	was	some	time	before	the	two	men
managed	to	swap	positions.	Bottle	listened	to	the	sapper	muttering	under	his
breath,	then	cursing.
‘I	told	you—’
‘Be	quiet,	I’m	thinking.	We	could	try	and	break	it	loose,	only	the	whole
ceiling	might	come	down	with	it.	No,	but	maybe	we	can	dig	under,	into	the
floor	here.	Give	me	your	knife.’
‘I	ain’t	got	a	knife	any	more.	Lost	it	down	a	hole.’
‘Then	call	back	for	one.’
‘Cuttle—’
‘You	ain’t	giving	up	on	us,	Bottle.	You	can’t.	You	either	take	us	through	or
we’re	all	dead.’
‘Damn	you,’	Bottle	hissed.	‘Hasn’t	it	occurred	to	you	that	maybe	there’s	no
way	through?	Why	should	there	be?	Rats	are	small	–	Hood,	rats	can	live	down
here.	Why	should	there	be	a	tunnel	big	enough	for	us,	some	convenient	route
all	the	way	out	from	under	this	damned	city?	To	be	honest,	I’m	amazed	we’ve
gotten	this	far.	Look,	we	could	go	back,	right	to	the	temple	–	and	dig	our	way
out—’


‘You’re	the	one	who	doesn’t	understand,	soldier.	There’s	a	mountain
sitting	over	the	hole	we	dropped	into,	a	mountain	that	used	to	be	the	city’s
biggest	temple.	Dig	out?	Forget	it.	There’s	no	going	back,	Bottle.	Only
forward;	now	get	me	a	knife,	damn	you.’
	
Smiles	drew	out	one	of	her	throwing-knives	and	passed	it	up	to	the	child	ahead
of	her.	Something	told	her	that	this	was	it	–	as	far	as	they	would	go.	Except
maybe	for	the	children.	The	call	had	come	to	send	the	urchins	ahead.	At	the
very	least,	then,	they	could	to	go	on,	find	a	way	out.	All	this	effort	–	somebody
had	better	live	through	it.
Not	that	they’d	get	very	far,	not	without	Bottle.	That	spineless	bastard	–
imagine,	depending	on	him.	The	man	who	could	see	eye	to	eye	with	rats,
lizards,	spiders,	fungi.	Matching	wits,	and	it	was	a	tough	battle,	wasn’t	it	just.
Still,	he	wasn’t	a	bad	sort	–	he’d	taken	half	the	load	that	day	on	the	march,
after	that	bitch	of	a	captain	revealed	just	how	psychotic	she	really	was.	That	had
been	generous	of	him.	Strangely	generous.	But	men	were	like	that,	on
occasion.	She	never	used	to	believe	that,	but	now	she	had	no	choice.	They
could	surprise	you.
The	child	behind	Smiles	was	climbing	over	her,	all	elbows	and	knees	and
running,	drippy,	smearing	nose.	It	smelled,	too.	Smelled	bad.	Awful	things,
children.	Needy,	self-centred	tyrants,	the	boys	all	teeth	and	fists,	the	girls	all
claws	and	spit.	Gathering	into	snivelling	packs	and	sniffing	out	vulnerabilities
–	and	woe	to	the	child	not	cunning	enough	to	hide	their	own	–	the	others	would
close	in	like	the	grubby	sharks	they	were.	Great	pastime,	savaging	someone.
If	these	runts	are	the	only	ones	here	who	survive,	I	will	haunt	them.	Every
one	of	them,	for	the	rest	of	their	days.	‘Look,’	she	snarled	after	an	elbow	in	the
nose,	‘just	get	your	smelly	slimy	hide	out	of	my	face!	Go	on,	you	little	ape!’
A	voice	from	behind	her:	‘Easy	there.	You	was	a	child	once,	you	know—’
‘You	don’t	know	nothing	about	me,	so	shut	it!’
‘What,	you	was	hatched?	Hah!	I	believe	it!	Along	with	all	the	other	snakes!’
‘Yeah,	well,	whoever	you	are,	don’t	even	think	of	climbing	past	me.’
‘And	get	that	close?	Not	a	chance.’
She	grunted.	‘Glad	we’re	understood,	then.’
If	there	was	no	way	through	–	they’d	all	lose	their	minds.	No	doubt	of	that
at	all.	Well,	at	least	she	had	a	couple	knives	left	–	anybody	fool	enough	to	come
for	her	and	they’d	pay.
	


The	children	were	squirming	through	–	even	as	Cuttle	dug	into	the	floor	with
the	knife	–	and	then	huddling	on	the	other	side.	Weeping,	clinging	to	each
other,	and	Bottle’s	heart	cried	out	for	them.	They	would	have	to	find	courage,
but	for	the	moment,	there	seemed	to	be	no	hope	of	that.
Cuttle’s	grunts	and	gasps,	then	his	curse	as	he	broke	the	knife’s	point	–	not
very	promising	sounds.	Ahead,	the	rat	circled	the	edge	of	the	pit,	whiskers
twitching	at	the	flow	of	warm	air	coming	from	the	shaft.	She	could	climb
round	to	the	other	side,	and	Bottle	was	willing	the	creature	to	do	so	–	yet	it
seemed	his	control	was	weakening,	for	the	rat	was	resisting,	her	head	tilted
over	the	edge	of	the	pit,	claws	gripping	the	pocked	side,	the	air	flowing	up
over	her…
Bottle	frowned.	From	the	shaft	above,	the	air	had	been	coming	down.	And
from	the	pit,	flowing	up.	Conjoining	in	the	tunnel,	then	drifting	towards	the
children.
But	the	rat…that	air	from	below.	Warm,	not	cool.	Warm,	smelling	of
sunlight.
‘Cuttle!’
The	sapper	halted.	‘What?’
‘We’ve	got	to	get	past	this!	That	pit	–	its	edges,	they’ve	been	cut.	That	shaft,
Cuttle,	it’s	been	mined,	cut	through	–	someone’s	dug	into	the	side	of	the	tel	–
there’s	no	other	possibility!’
The	children’s	cries	had	ceased	with	Bottle’s	words.	He	went	on,	‘That
explains	this,	don’t	you	see?	We	ain’t	the	first	ones	to	use	this	tunnel	–	people
have	been	mining	the	ruins,	looking	for	loot—’
He	could	hear	Cuttle	moving	about.
‘What	are	you	doing?’
‘I’m	gonna	kick	this	block	out	of	the	way—’
‘No,	wait!	You	said—’
‘I	can’t	dig	through	the	damned	floor!	I’m	gonna	kick	this	bastard	outa	the
way!’
‘Cuttle,	wait!’
A	bellow,	then	a	heavy	thump,	dust	and	gravel	streaming	from	above.	A
second	thump,	then	thunder	shook	the	floor,	and	the	ceiling	was	raining	down.
Screams	of	terror	through	the	dust-clouds.	Ducking,	covering	his	head	as
stones	and	sherds	descended	on	him,	Bottle	squeezed	his	eyes	shut	–	the	dust,
so	bright—
Bright.
But	he	couldn’t	breathe	–	he	could	barely	move	beneath	the	weight	of
rubble	atop	him.


Muted	yells	from	behind,	but	the	terrible	hiss	of	rubble	had	ceased.
Bottle	lifted	his	head,	gasping,	coughing.
To	see	a	white	shaft	of	sunlight,	dust-filled,	cutting	its	way	down.	Bathing
Cuttle’s	splayed	legs,	the	huge	foundation	stone	between	them.	‘Cuttle?’
A	cough,	then,	‘Gods	below,	that	damned	thing	–	it	came	down	between	my
legs	–	just	missed	my…oh	Hood	take	me,	I	feel	sick—’
‘Never	mind	that!	There’s	light,	coming	down.	Sunlight!’
‘Call	your	rat	back	–	I	can’t	see…how	far	up.	I	think	it	narrows.	Narrows
bad,	Bottle.’
The	rat	was	clambering	over	the	children,	and	he	could	feel	its	racing
heart.
‘I	see	it	–	your	rat—’
‘Take	her	in	your	hands,	help	her	into	the	shaft	over	you.	Yes,	there’s
daylight	–	oh,	it’s	too	narrow	–	I	might	make	it,	or	Smiles	maybe,	but	most	of
the	others…’
‘You	just	dig	when	you’re	up	there,	make	it	wider,	Bottle.	We’re	too	close,
now.’
‘Can	the	children	get	back	here?	Past	the	block?’
‘Uh,	I	think	so.	Tight,	but	yes.’
Bottle	twisted	round.	‘Roll	call!	And	listen,	we’re	almost	there!	Dig	your
way	free!	We’re	almost	there!’
The	rat	climbed,	closer	and	closer	to	that	patch	of	daylight.
Bottle	scrambled	free	of	the	gravel.	‘All	right,’	he	gasped	as	he	moved
over	Cuttle.
‘Watch	where	you	step!’	the	sapper	said.	‘My	face	is	ugly	enough	without	a
damned	heel	print	on	it.’
Bottle	pulled	himself	into	the	uneven	shaft,	then	halted.	‘I	got	to	pull	stuff
away,	Cuttle.	Move	from	directly	below…’
‘Aye.’
Names	were	being	called	out…hard	to	tell	how	many…maybe	most	of
them.	Bottle	could	not	afford	to	think	about	it	now.	He	began	tugging	at
outcrops,	bricks	and	rocks,	widening	the	shaft.	‘Stuff	coming	down!’
As	each	piece	thumped	down	or	bounced	off	the	foundation	stone,	Cuttle
collected	it	and	passed	it	back.
‘Bottle!’
‘What?’
‘One	of	the	urchins	–	she	fell	into	the	pit	–	she	ain’t	making	any	sound	–	I
think	we	lost	her.’
Shit.	‘Pass	that	rope	ahead	–	can	Smiles	get	over	to	them?’


‘I’m	not	sure.	Keep	going,	soldier	–	we’ll	see	what	we	can	do	down	here.’
Bottle	worked	his	way	upward.	A	sudden	widening,	then	narrowing	once
more	–	almost	within	reach	of	that	tiny	opening	–	too	small,	he	realized,	for
even	so	much	as	his	hand.	He	pulled	a	large	chunk	of	stone	from	the	wall,
dragged	himself	as	close	as	he	could	to	the	hole.	On	a	slight	ledge	near	his	left
shoulder	crouched	the	rat.	He	wanted	to	kiss	the	damned	thing.
But	not	yet.	Things	looked	badly	jammed	up	around	that	hole.	Big	stones.
Panic	whispered	through	him.
With	the	rock	in	his	hand,	Bottle	struck	at	the	stone.	A	spurt	of	blood	from
one	fingertip,	crushed	by	the	impact	–	he	barely	felt	it.	Hammering,
hammering	away.	Chips	raining	down	every	now	and	then.	His	arm	tiring	–	he
was	running	out	of	reserves,	he	didn’t	have	the	strength,	the	endurance	for	this.
Yet	he	kept	swinging.
Each	impact	weaker	than	the	one	before.
No,	damn	you!	No!
He	swung	again.
Blood	spattered	his	eyes.
	
Captain	Faradan	Sort	reined	in	on	the	ridge,	just	north	of	the	dead	city.
Normally,	a	city	that	had	fallen	to	siege	soon	acquired	its	scavengers,	old
women	and	children	scrambling	about,	picking	through	the	ruins.	But	not	here,
not	yet,	anyway.	Maybe	not	for	a	long	time.
Like	a	cracked	pot,	the	steep	sides	of	Y’Ghatan’s	tel	had	bled	out	–	melted
lead,	copper,	silver	and	gold,	veins	and	pools	filled	with	accreted	stone	chips,
dust	and	potsherds.
Offering	an	arm,	Sort	helped	Sinn	slip	down	from	the	saddle	behind	her	–
she’d	been	squirming,	whimpering	and	clutching	at	her,	growing	more
agitated	the	closer	the	day’s	end	came,	the	light	failing.	The	Fourteenth	Army
had	left	the	night	before.	The	captain	and	her	charge	had	walked	their	lone
horse	round	the	tel,	not	once,	but	twice,	since	the	sun’s	rise.
And	the	captain	had	begun	to	doubt	her	own	reading	of	the	child	Sinn,	her
own	sense	that	this	half-mad,	now	seemingly	mute	creature	had	known
something,	sensed	something	–	Sinn	had	tried	and	tried	to	get	back	into	the
ruins	before	her	arrest.	There	had	to	be	a	reason	for	that.
Or,	perhaps	not.	Perhaps	nothing	more	than	an	insane	grief	–	for	her	lost
brother.
Scanning	the	rubble-strewn	base	below	the	tel’s	north	wall	one	more	time,
she	noted	that	one	scavenger	at	least	had	arrived.	A	child,	smeared	in	white


dust,	her	hair	a	matted	snarl,	was	wandering	perhaps	thirty	paces	from	the
rough	wall.
Sinn	saw	her	as	well,	then	began	picking	her	way	down	the	slope,	making
strange	mewling	sounds.
The	captain	unstrapped	her	helm	and	lifted	it	clear	to	settle	it	on	the	saddle
horn.	She	wiped	grimy	sweat	from	her	brow.	Desertion.	Well,	it	wasn’t	the	first
time,	now,	was	it?	If	not	for	Sinn’s	magic,	the	Wickans	would	have	found	them.
And	likely	executed	them.	She’d	take	a	few	with	her,	of	course,	no	matter	what
Sinn	did.	People	learned	that	you	had	to	pay	to	deal	with	her.	Pay	in	every	way.
A	lesson	she	never	tired	of	teaching.
She	watched	as	Sinn	ran	to	the	city’s	cliff-side,	ignoring	the	scavenger,	and
began	climbing	it.
Now	what?
Replacing	the	helm,	the	sodden	leather	inside-rim	momentarily	cool
against	her	brow,	the	strap	feeling	stretched	as	she	fixed	the	clasp	beneath	her
jaw,	Faradan	Sort	collected	the	reins	and	guided	her	horse	into	a	slow	descent
down	the	scree.
The	scavenger	was	crying,	grubby	hands	pressed	against	her	eyes.	All	that
dust	on	her,	the	webs	in	her	hair	–	this	was	the	true	face	of	war,	the	captain
knew.	That	child’s	face	would	haunt	her	memories,	joining	the	many	other
faces,	for	as	long	as	she	lived.
Sinn	was	clinging	to	the	rough	wall,	perhaps	two	man-heights	up,
motionless.
Too	much,	Sort	decided.	The	child	was	mad.	She	glanced	again	at	the
scavenger,	who	did	not	seem	aware	that	they	had	arrived.	Hands	still	pressed
against	eyes.	Red	scrapes	through	the	dust,	a	trickle	of	blood	down	one	shin.
Had	she	fallen?	From	where?
The	captain	rode	up	to	halt	her	horse	beneath	Sinn.	‘Come	down	now,’	she
said.	‘We	need	to	make	camp,	Sinn.	Come	down,	it’s	no	use	–	the	sun’s	almost
gone.	We	can	try	again	tomorrow.’
Sinn	tightened	her	grip	on	the	broken	outcrops	of	stone	and	brick.
Grimacing,	the	captain	side-stepped	the	mount	closer	to	the	wall,	then
reached	up	to	pull	Sinn	from	her	perch.
Squealing,	the	girl	lunged	upward,	one	hand	shooting	into	a	hole—
	
His	strength,	his	will,	was	gone.	A	short	rest,	then	he	could	begin	again.	A	short
rest,	the	voices	below	drifting	away,	it	didn’t	matter.	Sleep,	now,	the	dark,
warm	embrace	–	drawing	him	down,	ever	deeper,	then	a	blush	of	sweet	golden


light,	wind	rippling	yellow	grasses—
—and	he	was	free,	all	pain	gone.	This,	he	realized,	was	not	sleep.	It	was
death,	the	return	to	the	most	ancient	memory	buried	in	each	human	soul.
Grasslands,	the	sun	and	wind,	the	warmth	and	click	of	insects,	dark	herds	in	the
distance,	the	lone	trees	with	their	vast	canopies	and	the	cool	shade	beneath,
where	lions	dozed,	tongues	lolling,	flies	dancing	round	indifferent,	languid
eyes…
Death,	and	this	long	buried	seed.	We	return.	We	return	to	the	world…
And	she	reached	for	him,	then,	her	hand	damp	with	sweat,	small	and	soft,
prying	his	fingers	loose	from	the	rock	they	gripped,	blood	sticking	–	she
clutched	at	his	hand,	as	if	filled	with	fierce	need,	and	he	knew	the	child	within
her	belly	was	calling	out	in	its	own	silent	language,	its	own	needs,	so
demanding…
Nails	dug	into	the	cuts	on	his	hand—
Bottle	jolted	awake,	eyes	blinking	–	daylight	almost	gone	–	and	a	small
hand	reaching	through	from	outside,	grasping	and	tugging	at	his	own.
Help.	‘Help	–	you,	outside	–	help	us—’

As	she	reached	up	yet	further	to	tug	the	girl	down,	Sort	saw	Sinn’s	head	snap
around,	saw	something	blazing	in	her	eyes	as	she	stared	down	at	the	captain.
‘What	now—’	And	then	there	came	a	faint	voice,	seemingly	from	the	very
stones.	Faradan	Sort’s	eyes	widened.	‘Sinn?’
The	girl’s	hand,	shoved	into	that	crack	–	it	was	holding	on	to	something.
Someone.
‘Oh,	gods	below!’
	
Crunching	sounds	outside,	boots	digging	into	stone,	then	gloved	fingers
slipped	round	one	edge	beside	the	child’s	forearm,	and	Bottle	heard:	‘You,
inside	–	who?	Can	you	hear	me?’
A	woman.	Accented	Ehrlii…familiar?	‘Fourteenth	Army,’	Bottle	said.
‘Malazans.’	The	child’s	grip	tightened.
‘Oponn’s	pull,	soldier,’	the	woman	said	in	Malazan.	‘Sinn,	let	go	of	him.	I
need	room.	Make	the	hole	bigger.	Let	go	of	him	–	it’s	all	right	–	you	were
right.	We’re	going	to	get	them	out.’
Sinn?	The	shouts	from	below	were	getting	louder.	Cuttle,	calling	up
something	about	a	way	out.	Bottle	twisted	to	call	back	down.	‘Cuttle!	We’ve


been	found!	They’re	going	to	dig	us	out!	Let	everyone	know!’
Sinn’s	hand	released	his,	withdrew.
The	woman	spoke	again.	‘Soldier,	move	away	from	the	hole	–	I’m	going
to	use	my	sword.’
‘Captain?	Is	that	you?’
‘Aye.	Now,	move	back	and	cover	your	eyes	–	what?	Oh,	where’d	all	those
children	come	from?	Is	that	one	of	Fiddler ’s	squad	with	them?	Get	down	there,
Sinn.	There’s	another	way	out.	Help	them.’
The	sword-point	dug	into	the	concreted	brick	and	stone.	Chips	danced
down.
Cuttle	was	climbing	up	from	below,	grunting.	‘We	gotta	widen	this	some
more,	Bottle.	That	runt	who	dropped	down	the	hole.	We	sent	Smiles	after	her.	A
tunnel,	angling	back	up	–	and	out.	A	looter ’s	tunnel.	The	children’re	all	out—’
‘Good.	Cuttle,	it’s	the	captain.	The	Adjunct,	she	must	have	waited	for	us	–
sent	searchers	out	to	find	us.’
‘That	makes	no	sense—’
‘You’re	right,’	Faradan	Sort	cut	in.	‘They’ve	marched,	soldiers.	It’s	just
me,	and	Sinn.’
‘They	left	you	behind?’
‘No,	we	deserted.	Sinn	knew	–	she	knew	you	were	still	alive,	don’t	ask	me
how.’
‘Her	brother ’s	down	here,’	Cuttle	said.	‘Corporal	Shard.’
‘Alive?’
‘We	think	so,	Captain.	How	many	days	has	it	been?’
‘Three.	Four	nights	if	you	count	the	breach.	Now,	no	more	questions,	and
cover	your	eyes.’
She	chopped	away	at	the	hole,	tugged	loose	chunks	of	brick	and	stone.	The
dusk	air	swept	in,	cool	and,	despite	all	the	dust,	sweet	in	Bottle’s	lungs.	Faradan
Sort	began	work	on	one	large	chunk,	and	broke	her	sword.	A	stream	of
Korelri	curses.
‘That	your	Stormwall	sword,	Captain?	I’m	sorry—’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.’
‘But	your	scabbard—’
‘Aye,	my	scabbard.	The	sword	it	belonged	to	got	left	behind…in
somebody.	Now,	let	me	save	my	breath	for	this.’	And	she	began	chopping	away
with	the	broken	sword.	‘Hood-damned	piece	of	Falari	junk—’	The	huge	stone
groaned,	then	slid	away,	taking	the	captain	with	it.
A	heavy	thump	from	the	ground	beyond	and	below,	then	more	cursing.
Bottle	clawed	his	way	into	the	gap,	dragged	himself	through,	then	was


suddenly	tumbling	down,	landing	hard,	rolling,	winded,	onto	his	stomach.
After	a	long	moment	he	managed	a	gasp	of	air,	and	he	lifted	his	head	–	to
find	himself	staring	at	the	captain’s	boots.	Bottle	arched,	raised	a	hand	and
saluted	–	briefly.
‘You	managed	that	better	the	last	time,	Bottle.’
‘Captain,	I’m	Smiles—’
‘You	know,	soldier,	it	was	a	good	thing	you	assumed	half	the	load	I
dumped	on	Smiles’s	back.	If	you	hadn’t	done	that,	well,	you	likely	wouldn’t
have	lived	this	long—’
He	saw	her	turn,	heard	a	grunted	snarl,	then	one	boot	lifted,	moved	out
slightly	to	the	side,	hovered—
—above	Bottle’s	rat—
—then	stamped	down	–	as	his	hand	shot	out,	knocked	the	foot	aside	at	the
last	moment.	The	captain	stumbled,	then	swore.	‘Have	you	lost	your	mind—’
Bottle	rolled	closer	to	the	rat,	collected	her	in	both	hands	and	held	her
against	his	chest	as	he	settled	down	onto	his	back.	‘Not	this	time,	Captain.	This
is	my	rat.	She	saved	our	lives.’
‘Vile,	disgusting	creatures.’
‘Not	her.	Not	Y’Ghatan.’
Faradan	Sort	stared	down	at	him.	‘She	is	named	Y’Ghatan?’
‘Aye.	I	just	decided.’
Cuttle	was	clambering	down.	‘Gods,	Captain—’
‘Quiet,	sapper.	If	you’ve	got	the	strength	left	–	and	you’d	better	–	you	need
to	help	the	others	out.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’	He	turned	about	and	began	climbing	back	up.
Still	lying	on	his	back,	Bottle	closed	his	eyes.	He	stroked	Y’Ghatan’s
smooth-furred	back.	My	darling.	You’re	with	me,	now.	Ah,	you’re	hungry	–
we’ll	take	care	of	that.	Soon	you’ll	be	waddling	fat	again,	I	promise,	and	you
and	your	kits	will	be…gods,	there’s	more	of	you,	isn’t	there?	No	problem.	When
it	comes	to	your	kind,	there’s	never	a	shortage	of	food…
He	realized	Smiles	was	standing	over	him.	Staring	down.
He	managed	a	faint,	embarrassed	smile,	wondering	how	much	she’d	heard,
how	much	she’d	just	put	together.
‘All	men	are	scum.’
So	much	for	wondering.

Coughing,	crying,	babbling,	the	soldiers	were	lying	or	sitting	all	around


Gesler,	who	stood,	trying	to	make	a	count	–	the	names,	the	faces,	exhaustion
blurred	them	all	together.	He	saw	Shard,	with	his	sister,	Sinn,	wrapped	all
around	him	like	a	babe,	fast	asleep,	and	there	was	something	like	shock	in	the
corporal’s	staring,	unseeing	eyes.	Tulip	was	nearby	–	his	body	was	torn,
shredded	everywhere,	but	he’d	dragged	himself	through	without	complaint	and
now	sat	on	a	stone,	silent	and	bleeding.
Crump	crouched	near	the	cliff-side,	using	rocks	to	pry	loose	a	slab	of
melted	gold	and	lead,	a	stupid	grin	on	his	ugly,	overlong	face.	And	Smiles,
surrounded	by	children	–	she	looked	miserable	with	all	the	attention,	and
Gesler	saw	her	staring	up	at	the	night	sky	again	and	again,	and	again,	and	that
gesture	he	well	understood.
Bottle	had	pulled	them	through.	With	his	rat.	Y’Ghatan.	The	sergeant	shook
his	head.	Well,	why	not?	We’re	all	rat-worshippers	right	now.	Oh,	right,	the	roll
call…Sergeant	Cord,	with	Ebron,	Limp	and	his	broken	leg.	Sergeant	Hellian,
her	jaw	swollen	in	two	places,	one	eye	closed	up,	and	blood	matting	her	hair,
just	now	coming	round	–	under	the	tender	ministrations	of	her	corporal,	Urb.
Tarr,	Koryk,	Smiles	and	Cuttle.	Tavos	Pond,	Balgrid,	Mayfly,	Flashwit,
Saltlick,	Hanno,	Shortnose	and	Masan	Gilani.	Bellig	Harn,	Maybe,	Brethless
and	Touchy.	Deadsmell,	Galt,	Sands	and	Lobe.	The	sergeants	Thom	Tissy	and
Balm.	Widdershins,	Uru	Hela,	Ramp,	Scant	and	Reem.	Throatslitter…Gesler ’s
gaze	swung	back	to	Tarr,	Koryk,	Smiles	and	Cuttle.
Hood’s	breath.
‘Captain!	We’ve	lost	two!’
Every	head	turned.
Corporal	Tarr	shot	to	his	feet,	then	staggered	like	a	drunk,	spinning	to	face
the	cliff-wall.
Balm	hissed,	‘Fiddler…and	that	prisoner!	The	bastard’s	killed	him	and	he’s
hiding	back	in	there!	Waiting	for	us	to	leave!’

Corabb	had	dragged	the	dying	man	as	far	as	he	could,	and	now	both	he	and	the
Malazan	were	done.	Crammed	tight	in	a	narrowing	of	the	tunnel,	the	darkness
devouring	them,	and	Corabb	was	not	even	sure	he	was	going	in	the	right
direction.	Had	they	been	turned	round?	He	could	hear	nothing…no-one.	All
that	dragging,	and	pushing…they’d	turned	round,	he	was	sure	of	it.
No	matter,	they	weren’t	going	anywhere.
Never	again.	Two	skeletons	buried	beneath	a	dead	city.	No	more	fitting	a
barrow	for	a	warrior	of	the	Apocalypse	and	a	Malazan	soldier.	That	seemed


just,	poetic	even.	He	would	not	complain,	and	when	he	stood	at	this	sergeant’s
side	at	Hood’s	Gate,	he	would	be	proud	for	the	company.
So	much	had	changed	inside	him.	He	was	no	believer	in	causes,	not	any
more.	Certainty	was	an	illusion,	a	lie.	Fanaticism	was	poison	in	the	soul,	and
the	first	victim	in	its	inexorable,	ever-growing	list	was	compassion.	Who
could	speak	of	freedom,	when	one’s	own	soul	was	bound	in	chains?
He	thought,	now,	finally,	that	he	understood	Toblakai.
And	it	was	all	too	late.	This	grand	revelation.	Thus,	I	die	a	wise	man,	not	a
fool.	Is	there	any	difference?	I	still	die,	after	all.
No,	there	is.	I	can	feel	it.	That	difference	–	I	have	cast	off	my	chains.	I	have
cast	them	off!
A	low	cough,	then,	‘Corabb?’
‘I	am	here,	Malazan.’
‘Where?	Where	is	that?’
‘In	our	tomb,	alas.	I	am	sorry,	all	strength	has	fled.	I	am	betrayed	by	my
own	body.	I	am	sorry.’
Silence	for	a	moment,	then	a	soft	laugh.	‘No	matter.	I’ve	been	unconscious
–	you	should	have	left	me	–	where	are	the	others?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	was	dragging	you.	We	were	left	behind.	And	now,	we’re
lost,	and	that’s	that.	I	am	sorry—’
‘Enough	of	that,	Corabb.	You	dragged	me?	That	explains	all	the	bruises.
For	how	long?	How	far?’
‘I	do	not	know.	A	day,	maybe.	There	was	warm	air,	but	then	it	was	cool	–	it
seemed	to	breathe	in	and	out,	past	us,	but	which	breath	was	in	and	which	was
out?	I	do	not	know.	And	now,	there	is	no	wind.’
‘A	day?	Are	you	mad?	Why	did	you	not	leave	me?’
‘Had	I	done	so,	Malazan,	your	friends	would	have	killed	me.’
‘Ah,	there	is	that.	But,	you	know,	I	don’t	believe	you.’
‘You	are	right.	It	is	simple.	I	could	not.’
‘All	right,	that	will	do.’
Corabb	closed	his	eyes	–	the	effort	making	no	difference.	He	was	probably
blind	by	now.	He	had	heard	that	prisoners	left	too	long	without	light	in	their
dungeon	cells	went	blind.	Blind	before	mad,	but	mad,	too,	eventually.
And	now	he	heard	sounds,	drawing	nearer…from	somewhere.	He’d	heard
them	before,	a	half-dozen	times	at	least,	and	for	a	short	while	there	had	been
faint	shouting.	Maybe	that	had	been	real.	The	demons	of	panic	come	to	take	the
others,	one	by	one.	‘Sergeant,	are	you	named	Strings	or	Fiddler?’
‘Strings	for	when	I’m	lying,	Fiddler	for	when	I’m	telling	the	truth.’
‘Ah,	is	that	a	Malazan	trait,	then?	Strange—’


‘No,	not	a	trait.	Mine,	maybe.’
‘And	how	should	I	name	you?’
‘Fiddler.’
‘Very	well.’	A	welcome	gift.	‘Fiddler.	I	was	thinking.	Here	I	am,	trapped.
And	yet,	it	is	only	now,	I	think,	that	I	have	finally	escaped	my	prison.	Funny,
isn’t	it?’
‘Damned	hilarious,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.	What	is	that	sound?’
‘You	hear	it,	too?’	Corabb	held	his	breath,	listened.	Drawing	closer—
Then	something	touched	his	forehead.
Bellowing,	Corabb	tried	to	twist	away.
‘Wait!	Damn	you,	I	said	wait!’
Fiddler	called	out,	‘Gesler?’
‘Aye,	calm	down	your	damned	friend	here,	will	you?’
Heart	pounding,	Corabb	settled	back.	‘We	were	lost,	Malazan.	I	am	sorry
—’
‘Be	quiet!	Listen	to	me.	You’re	only	about	seventy	paces	from	a	tunnel,
leading	out	–	we’re	all	out,	you	understand	me?	Bottle	got	us	out.	His	rat
brought	us	through.	There	was	a	rock	fall	blocking	you	up	ahead	–	I’ve	dug
through—’
‘You	crawled	back	in?’	Fiddler	demanded.	‘Gesler—’
‘Believe	me,	it	was	the	hardest	thing	I’ve	ever	done	in	my	life.	Now	I	know
–	or	I	think	I	know	–	what	Truth	went	through,	running	into	that	palace.	Abyss
take	me,	I’m	still	shaking.’
‘Lead	us	on,	then,’	Corabb	said,	reaching	back	to	grasp	Fiddler ’s	harness
once	more.
Gesler	made	to	move	past	him.	‘I	can	do	that—’
‘No.	I	have	dragged	him	this	far.’
‘Fid?’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	Gesler,	I’ve	never	been	in	better	hands.’


Chapter	Eight
Sarkanos,	Ivindonos	and	Ganath	stood	looking	down	on	the	heaped
corpses,	the	strewn	pieces	of	flesh	and	fragments	of	bone.	A	field	of
battle	knows	only	lost	dreams	and	the	ghosts	clutch	futilely	at	the
ground,	remembering	naught	but	the	last	place	of	their	lives,	and	the
air	is	sullen	now	that	the	clangour	is	past,	and	the	last	moans	of	the
dying	have	dwindled	into	silence.
While	this	did	not	belong	to	them,	they	yet	stood.	Of	Jaghut,	one
can	never	know	their	thoughts,	nor	even	their	aspirations,	but	they
were	heard	to	speak,	then.
‘All	told,’	said	Ganath.	‘This	sordid	tale	here	has	ended,	and	there
is	no-one	left	to	heave	the	standard	high,	and	proclaim	justice
triumphant.’
‘This	is	a	dark	plain,’	said	Ivindonos,	‘and	I	am	mindful	of	such
things,	the	sorrow	untold,	unless	witnessed.’
‘Not	mindful	enough,’	said	Sarkanos.
‘A	bold	accusation,’	said	Ivindonos,	his	tusks	bared	in	anger.	‘Tell
me	what	I	am	blind	to.	Tell	me	what	greater	sorrow	exists	than	what	we
see	before	us.’
And	Sarkanos	made	reply,	‘Darker	plains	lie	beyond.’
Stela	Fragment	(Yath	Alban)
Anonymous
There	were	times,	Captain	Ganoes	Paran	reflected,	when	a	man	could	believe
in	nothing.	No	path	taken	could	alter	the	future,	and	the	future	remained	ever
unknown,	even	by	the	gods.	Sensing	those	currents,	the	tumult	that	lay	ahead,
achieved	little	except	the	loss	of	restful	sleep,	and	a	growing	suspicion	that	all
his	efforts	to	shape	that	future	were	naught	but	conceit.
He	had	pushed	the	horses	hard,	staying	well	clear	of	villages	and	hamlets
where	the	Mistress	stalked,	sowing	her	deadly	seeds,	gathering	to	herself	the
power	of	poisoned	blood	and	ten	thousand	deaths	by	her	hand.	Before	long,	he
knew,	that	toll	would	rise	tenfold.	Yet	for	all	his	caution,	the	stench	of	death


was	inescapable,	arriving	again	and	again	as	if	from	nowhere,	and	no	matter
how	great	the	distance	between	him	and	inhabited	areas.
Whatever	Poliel’s	need,	it	was	vast,	and	Paran	was	fearful,	for	he	could	not
understand	the	game	she	played	here.
Back	in	Darujhistan,	ensconced	within	the	Finnest	House,	this	land	known
as	Seven	Cities	had	seemed	so	far	from	the	centre	of	things	–	or	what	he
believed	would	soon	become	the	centre	of	things.	And	it	had	been,	in	part,	that
mystery	that	had	set	him	on	this	path,	seeking	to	discover	how	what	happened
here	would	become	enfolded	into	the	greater	scheme.	Assuming,	of	course,
that	such	a	greater	scheme	existed.
Equally	as	likely,	he	allowed,	this	war	among	the	gods	would	implode	into
a	maelstrom	of	chaos.	There	had	been	need,	he	had	once	been	told,	for	a
Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	There	had	been	need,	he	had	been	told,	for	him.
Paran	had	begun	to	suspect	that,	even	then,	it	was	already	too	late.	This	web
was	growing	too	fast,	too	snarled,	for	any	single	mind	to	fathom.
Except	maybe	Kruppe,	the	famed	Eel	of	Darujhistan…gods,	I	wish	he	was
here,	in	my	place,	right	now.	Why	wasn’t	he	made	the	Master	of	the	Deck	of
Dragons?	Or	maybe	that	incorrigible	aplomb	was	naught	but	bravado,	behind
which	the	real	Kruppe	cowered	in	terror.
Imagine	Raest’s	thoughts…Paran	smiled,	recollecting.	It	had	been	early
morning	when	that	little	fat	man	knocked	on	the	door	of	the	Finnest	House,
flushed	of	face	and	beaming	up	at	the	undead	Jaghut	Tyrant	who	opened	it	wide
and	stared	down	upon	him	with	pitted	eyes.	Then,	hands	fluttering	and
proclaiming	something	about	a	crucial	meeting,	Kruppe	somehow	slid	past	the
Azath	guardian,	waddling	into	the	main	hall	and	sinking	with	a	delighted	sigh
of	contentment	into	the	plush	chair	beside	the	fireplace.
An	unexpected	guest	for	breakfast;	it	seemed	even	Raest	could	do	nothing
about	it.	Or	would	not.	The	Jaghut	had	been	typically	reticent	on	the	subject.
And	so	Paran	had	found	himself	seated	opposite	the	famed	Defier	of
Caladan	Brood	–	this	corpulent	little	man	in	his	faded	waistcoat	who	had
confounded	the	most	powerful	ascendants	on	Genabackis	–	and	watched	him
eat.	And	eat.	While	somehow,	at	the	same	time,	talking	nonstop.
‘Kruppe	knows	the	sad	dilemma,	yes	indeed,	of	sad	befuddled	Master.
Twice	sad?	Nay,	thrice	sad!	Four	times	sad	–	ah,	how	usage	of	the	dread	word
culminates!	Cease	now,	Sir	Kruppe,	lest	we	find	ourselves	weeping	without
surcease!’	Lifting	one	greasy	finger.	‘Ah,	but	Master	wonders,	does	he	not,
how	can	one	man	such	as	Kruppe	know	all	these	things?	What	things,	you
would	also	ask,	given	the	chance,	said	chance	Kruppe	hastens	to	intercept	with
suitable	answer.	Had	Kruppe	such	an	answer,	that	is.	But	lo!	He	does	not,	and	is


that	not	the	true	wonder	of	it	all?’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	Paran	cut	in	–	and	got	no	further.
‘Yes	indeed!	For	Hood’s	sake	indeed,	oh,	you	are	brilliant	and	so	worthy
of	the	grand	title	of	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons	and	Kruppe’s	most	trusted
friend!	Hood,	at	the	very	centre	of	things,	oh	yes,	and	that	is	why	you	must
hasten,	forthwith,	to	Seven	Cities.’
Paran	stared,	dumbfounded,	wondering	what	detail	in	that	barrage	of
words	he	had	missed.	‘What?’
‘The	gods,	dear	precious	friend	of	Kruppe’s!	They	are	at	war,	yes?
Terrible	thing,	war.	Terrible	things,	gods.	The	two,	together,	ah,	most
terribler!’
‘Terri—what?	Oh,	never	mind.’
‘Kruppe	never	does.’
‘Why	Seven	Cities?’
‘Even	the	gods	cast	shadows,	Master	of	the	Deck.	But	what	do	shadows
cast?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Gods?’
Kruppe’s	expression	grew	pained.	‘Oh	my,	a	nonsensical	reply.	Kruppe’s
faith	in	dubious	friend	lies	shaking.	No,	shaken.	Not	lies,	is.	See	how	Kruppe
shakens?	No,	not	gods.	How	can	gods	be	cast?	Do	not	answer	that	–	such	is	the
nature	and	unspoken	agreement	regards	rhetoric.	Now,	where	was	Kruppe?	Oh
yes.	Most	terrible	crimes	are	in	the	offing	off	in	Seven	Cities.	Eggs	have	been
laid	and	schemes	have	hatched!	One	particularly	large	shell	is	about	to	be
broken,	and	will	have	been	broken	by	the	time	you	arrive,	which	means	it	is	as
good	as	broken	right	now	so	what	are	you	waiting	for?	In	fact,	foolish	man,
you	are	already	too	late,	or	will	be,	by	then,	and	if	not	then,	then	soon,	in	the
imminent	sense	of	the	word.	Soon,	then,	you	must	go,	despite	it	being	too	late	–
I	suggest	you	leave	tomorrow	morning	and	make	use	of	warrens	and	other
nefarious	paths	of	inequity	to	hasten	your	hopeless	quest	to	arrive.	On	time,
and	in	time,	and	in	due	time	you	will	indeed	arrive,	and	then	you	must	walk	the
singular	shadow	–	between,	dare	Kruppe	utter	such	dread	words	–	between	life
and	death,	the	wavy,	blurry	metaphor	so	callously	and	indifferently	trespassed
by	things	that	should	know	better.	Now,	you	have	worn	out	Kruppe’s	ears,
distended	Kruppe’s	largesse	unto	bursting	his	trouser	belt,	and	heretofore
otherwise	exhausted	his	vast	intellect.’	He	rose	with	a	grunt,	then	patted	his
tummy.	‘A	mostly	acceptable	repast,	although	Kruppe	advises	that	you	inform
your	cook	that	the	figs	were	veritably	mummified	–	from	the	Jaghut’s	own
store,	one	must	assume,	yes,	hmm?’
There	had	been	some	sense,	Paran	had	eventually	concluded,	within	that


quagmire	of	verbosity.	Enough	to	frighten	him,	in	any	case,	leading	him	to	a
more	intense	examination	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Wherein	the	chaos	was
more	pronounced	than	it	ever	had	been	before.	And	there,	in	its	midst,	the
glimmer	of	a	path,	a	way	through	–	perhaps	simply	imagined,	an	illusion	–	but
he	would	have	to	try,	although	the	thought	terrified	him.
He	was	not	the	man	for	this.	He	was	stumbling,	half-blind,	within	a	vortex
of	converging	powers,	and	he	found	he	was	struggling	to	maintain	even	the
illusion	of	control.
Seeing	Apsalar	again	had	been	an	unexpected	gift.	A	girl	no	longer,	yet,	it
appeared,	as	deadly	as	ever.	Nonetheless,	something	like	humanity	had
revealed	itself,	there	in	her	eyes	every	now	and	then.	He	wondered	what	she
had	gone	through	since	Cotillion	had	been	banished	from	her	outside
Darujhistan	–	beyond	what	she	had	been	willing	to	tell	him,	that	is,	and	he
wondered	if	she	would	complete	her	journey,	to	come	out	the	other	end,
reborn	one	more	time.
He	rose	in	his	stirrups	to	stretch	his	legs,	scanning	the	south	for	the	telltale
shimmer	that	would	announce	his	destination.	Nothing	but	heat-haze	yet,	and
rugged,	treeless	hills	rising	humped	on	the	pan.	Seven	Cities	was	a	hot,	blasted
land,	and	he	decided	that	even	without	plague,	he	didn’t	like	it	much.
One	of	those	hills	suddenly	vanished	in	a	cloud	of	dust	and	flying	debris,
then	a	thundering	boom	drummed	through	the	ground,	startling	the	horses.	As
he	struggled	to	calm	them	–	especially	his	own	mount,	which	had	taken	this
opportunity	to	renew	its	efforts	to	unseat	him,	bucking	and	kicking	–	he	sensed
something	else	rolling	out	from	the	destroyed	mound.
Omtose	Phellack.
Settling	his	horse	as	best	he	could,	Paran	collected	the	reins	and	rode	at	a
slow,	jumpy	canter	towards	the	ruined	hill.
As	he	neared,	he	could	hear	crashing	sounds	from	within	the	barrow	–	for
a	barrow	it	was	–	and	when	he	was	thirty	paces	distant,	part	of	a	desiccated
body	was	flung	from	the	hole,	skidding	in	a	clatter	through	the	rubble.	It	came
to	a	stop,	then	one	arm	lifted	tremulously,	dropping	back	down	a	moment	later.
A	bone-helmed	skull	flew	into	view,	ropes	of	hair	twisting	about,	to	bounce
and	roll	in	the	dust.
Paran	reined	in,	watching	as	a	tall,	gaunt	figure	climbed	free	of	the	barrow,
slowly	straightening.	Grey-green	skin,	trailing	dusty	cobwebs,	wearing	a
silver-clasped	harness	and	baldric	of	iron	mail	from	which	hung	knives	in
copper	scabbards	–	the	various	metals	blackened	or	green	with	verdigris.
Whatever	clothing	had	once	covered	the	figure’s	body	had	since	rotted	away.
A	Jaghut	woman,	her	long	black	hair	drawn	into	a	single	tail	that	reached


down	to	the	small	of	her	back.	Her	tusks	were	silver-sheathed	and	thus	black.
She	slowly	looked	round,	her	gaze	finding	and	settling	on	him.	Vertical	pupils
set	in	amber	studied	Paran	from	beneath	a	heavy	brow.	He	watched	her	frown,
then	she	asked,	‘What	manner	of	creature	are	you?’
‘A	well-mannered	one,’	Paran	replied,	attempting	a	smile.	She	had	spoken
in	the	Jaghut	tongue	and	he	had	understood…somehow.	One	of	the	many	gifts
granted	by	virtue	of	being	the	Master?	Or	long	proximity	with	Raest	and	his
endless	muttering?	Either	way,	Paran	surprised	himself	by	replying	in	the	same
language.
At	which	her	frown	deepened.	‘You	speak	my	tongue	as	would	an	Imass…
had	any	Imass	bothered	to	learn	it.	Or	a	Jaghut	whose	tusks	had	been	pulled.’
Paran	glanced	over	at	the	partial	corpse	lying	nearby.	‘An	Imass	like	that
one?’
She	drew	her	thin	lips	back	in	what	he	took	to	be	a	smile.	‘A	guardian	left
behind	–	it	had	lost	its	vigilance.	Undead	have	a	tendency	towards	boredom,
and	carelessness.’
‘T’lan	Imass.’
‘If	others	are	near,	they	will	come	now.	I	have	little	time.’
‘T’lan	Imass?	None,	Jaghut.	None	anywhere	close.’
‘You	are	certain?’
‘I	am.	Reasonably.	You	have	freed	yourself…why?’
‘Freedom	needs	an	excuse?’	She	brushed	dust	and	webs	from	her	lean
body,	then	faced	west.	‘One	of	my	rituals	has	been	shattered.	I	must	needs
repair	it.’
Paran	thought	about	that,	then	asked,	‘A	binding	ritual?	Something,	or
someone	was	imprisoned,	and,	like	you	just	now,	it	seeks	freedom?’
She	looked	displeased	with	the	comparison.	‘Unlike	the	entity	I
imprisoned,	I	have	no	interest	in	conquering	the	world.’
Oh.	‘I	am	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘Ganath.	You	look	pitiful,	like	a	malnourished	Imass	–	are	you	here	to
oppose	me?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘I	was	but	passing	by,	Ganath.	I	wish	you	good	fortune
—’
She	suddenly	turned,	stared	eastward,	head	cocking.
‘Something?’	he	asked.	‘T’lan	Imass?’
She	glanced	at	him.	‘I	am	not	certain.	Perhaps…nothing.	Tell	me,	is	there	a
sea	south	of	here?’
‘Was	there	one	when	you	were…not	yet	in	your	barrow?’
‘Yes.’


Paran	smiled.	‘Ganath,	there	is	indeed	a	sea	just	south	of	here,	and	it	is
where	I	am	headed.’
‘Then	I	shall	travel	with	you.	Why	do	you	journey	there?’
‘To	talk	with	some	people.	And	you?	I	thought	you	were	in	a	hurry	to
repair	that	ritual?’
‘I	am,	yet	I	find	a	more	pressing	priority.’
‘And	that	is?’
‘The	need	for	a	bath.’
	
Too	bloated	to	fly,	the	vultures	scattered	with	outraged	cries,	hopping	and
waddling	with	wings	crooked,	leaving	the	once-human	feast	exposed	in	their
wake.	Apsalar	slowed	her	steps,	not	sure	whether	she	wanted	to	continue
walking	down	this	main	street,	although	the	raucous	chattering	and	bickering
of	feeding	vultures	sounded	from	the	side	avenues	as	well,	leading	her	to
suspect	that	no	alternative	route	was	possible.
The	villagers	had	died	suffering	–	there	was	no	mercy	in	this	plague,	for	it
had	carved	a	long,	tortured	path	to	Hood’s	Gate.	Swollen	glands,	slowly
closing	the	throat,	making	it	impossible	to	eat	solid	food,	and	narrowing	the
air	passages,	making	every	breath	drawn	agony.	And,	in	the	gut,	gases
distending	the	stomach.	Blocked	from	any	means	of	escape,	they	eventually
burst	the	stomach	lining,	allowing	the	victim’s	own	acids	to	devour	them	from
within.	These,	alas,	were	the	final	stages	of	the	disease.	Before	then,	there	was
fever,	so	hot	that	brains	were	cooked	in	the	skull,	driving	the	person	half-mad
–	a	state	from	which,	even	were	the	disease	somehow	halted	then	and	there	–
there	was	no	recovery.	Eyes	wept	mucus,	ears	bled,	flesh	grew	gelatinous	at	the
joints	–	this	was	the	Mistress	in	all	her	sordid	glory.
The	two	skeletal	reptiles	accompanying	Apsalar	had	sprinted	ahead,
entertaining	themselves	by	frightening	the	vultures	and	bursting	through
buzzing	masses	of	flies.	Now	they	scampered	back,	unmindful	of	the
blackened,	half-eaten	corpses	they	clambered	over.
‘Not-Apsalar!	You	are	too	slow!’
‘No,	Telorast,’	cried	Curdle,	‘not	slow	enough!’
‘Yes,	not	slow	enough!	We	like	this	village	–	we	want	to	play!’
Leading	her	placid	horse,	Apsalar	began	picking	her	way	down	the	street.
A	score	of	villagers	had	crawled	out	here	for	some	unknown	reason,	perhaps
in	some	last,	pathetic	attempt	to	escape	what	could	not	be	escaped.	They	had
died	clawing	and	fighting	each	other.	‘You	are	welcome	to	stay	as	long	as	you
like,’	she	said	to	the	two	creatures.


‘That	cannot	be,’	Telorast	said.	‘We	are	your	guardians,	after	all.	Your
sleepless,	ever-vigilant	sentinels.	We	shall	stand	guard	over	you	no	matter	how
diseased	and	disgusting	you	become.’
‘And	then	we’ll	pick	out	your	eyes!’
‘Curdle!	Don’t	tell	her	that!’
‘Well,	we’ll	wait	until	she’s	sleeping,	of	course.	Thrashing	in	fever.’
‘Exactly.	She’ll	want	us	to	by	then,	anyway.’
‘I	know,	but	we’ve	walked	through	two	villages	now	and	she	still	isn’t	sick.
I	don’t	understand.	All	the	other	mortals	are	dead	or	dying,	what	makes	her	so
special?’
‘Chosen	by	the	usurpers	of	Shadow	–	that’s	why	she	can	just	saunter
through	with	her	nose	in	the	air.	We	may	have	to	wait	before	we	can	pick	out
her	eyes.’
Apsalar	stepped	past	the	heap	of	corpses.	Just	ahead,	the	village	came	to	an
abrupt	end	and	beyond	stood	the	charred	remnants	of	three	outlying	buildings.
A	crow-haunted	cemetery	surmounted	a	nearby	low	hill	where	stood	a	lone
guldindha	tree.	The	black	birds	crowded	the	branches	in	sullen	silence.	A	few
makeshift	platforms	attested	to	some	early	efforts	at	ceremony	to	attend	the
dead,	but	clearly	that	had	been	short-lived.	A	dozen	white	goats	stood	in	the
tree’s	shade,	watching	Apsalar	as	she	continued	on	down	the	road,	flanked	by
the	skeletons	of	Telorast	and	Curdle.
Something	had	happened,	far	to	the	north	and	west.	No,	she	could	be	more
precise	than	that.	Y’Ghatan.	There	had	been	a	battle…and	the	committing	of	a
terrible	crime.	Y’Ghatan’s	lust	for	Malazan	blood	was	legendary,	and	Apsalar
feared	that	it	had	drunk	deep	once	more.
In	every	land,	there	were	places	that	saw	battle	again	and	again,	an	endless
succession	of	slaughter,	and	more	often	than	not	such	places	held	little
strategic	value	in	any	greater	scheme,	or	were	ultimately	indefensible.	As	if	the
very	rocks	and	soil	mocked	every	conqueror	foolish	enough	to	lay	claim	to
them.	Cotillion’s	thoughts,	these.	He	had	never	been	afraid	to	recognize	futility,
and	the	world’s	pleasure	in	defying	human	grandiosity.
She	passed	the	last	of	the	burned-out	buildings,	relieved	to	have	left	their
stench	behind	–	rotting	bodies	she	was	used	to,	but	something	of	that	charred
reek	slipped	beneath	her	senses	like	a	premonition.	It	was	nearing	dusk.
Apsalar	climbed	back	into	the	saddle	and	gathered	up	the	reins.
She	would	attempt	the	warren	of	Shadow,	even	though	she	already	knew	it
was	too	late	–	something	had	happened	at	Y’Ghatan;	at	the	very	least,	she	could
look	upon	the	wounds	left	behind	and	pick	up	the	trail	of	the	survivors.	If	any
existed.


‘She	dreams	of	death,’	Telorast	said.	‘And	now	she’s	angry.’
‘With	us?’
‘Yes.	No.	Yes.	No.’
‘Ah,	she’s	opened	a	warren!	Shadow!	Lifeless	trail	winding	through
lifeless	hills,	we	shall	perish	from	ennui!	Wait,	don’t	leave	us!’
	
They	climbed	out	of	the	pit	to	find	a	banquet	awaiting	them.	A	long	table,	four
high-backed	Untan-style	chairs,	a	candelabra	in	the	centre	bearing	four	thickstemmed	beeswax	candles,	the	golden	light	flickering	down	on	silver	plates
heaped	with	Malazan	delicacies.	Oily	santos	fish	from	the	shoals	off	Kartool,
baked	with	butter	and	spices	in	clay;	strips	of	marinated	venison,	smelling	of
almonds	in	the	northern	D’avorian	style;	grouse	from	the	Seti	plains	stuffed
with	bull-berries	and	sage;	baked	gourds	and	fillets	of	snake	from	Dal	Hon;
assorted	braised	vegetables	and	four	bottles	of	wine:	a	Malaz	Island	white	from
the	Paran	Estates,	warmed	rice	wine	from	Itko	Kan,	a	full-bodied	red	from
Gris,	and	the	orange-tinted	belack	wine	from	the	Napan	Isles.
Kalam	stood	staring	at	the	bounteous	apparition,	as	Stormy,	with	a	grunt,
walked	over,	boots	puffing	in	the	dust,	and	sat	down	in	one	of	the	chairs,
reaching	for	the	Grisian	red.
‘Well,’	Quick	Ben	said,	dusting	himself	off,	‘this	is	nice.	Who’s	the	fourth
chair	for,	you	think?’
Kalam	looked	up	at	the	looming	bulk	of	the	sky	keep.	‘I’d	rather	not	think
about	that.’
Snorting	sounds	from	Stormy	as	he	launched	into	the	venison	strips.
‘Do	you	suspect,’	Quick	Ben	ventured	as	he	sat	down,	‘there	is	some
significance	to	the	selection	provided	us?’	He	collected	an	alabaster	goblet	and
poured	himself	a	helping	of	the	Paran	white.	‘Or	is	it	the	sheer	decadence	that
he	wants	to	rub	our	noses	in?’
‘My	nose	is	just	fine,’	Stormy	said,	tipping	his	head	to	one	side	and	spitting
out	a	bone.	‘Gods,	I	could	eat	all	of	this	myself!	Maybe	I	will	at	that!’
Sighing,	Kalam	joined	them	at	the	table.	‘All	right,	at	least	this	gives	us
time	to	talk	about	things.’	He	saw	the	wizard	glance	suspiciously	at	Stormy.
‘Relax,	Quick,	I	doubt	Stormy	can	hear	us	above	his	own	chewing.’
‘Hah!’	the	Falari	laughed,	spitting	fragments	across	the	table,	one	landing
with	a	plop	in	the	wizard’s	goblet.	‘As	if	I	give	a	Hood’s	toenail	about	all	your
self-important	preening!	You	two	want	to	talk	yourselves	blue,	go	right	ahead
–	I	won’t	waste	my	time	listening.’
Quick	Ben	found	a	silver	meat-spear	and	delicately	picked	the	piece	of


venison	from	the	goblet.	He	took	a	tentative	sip,	made	a	face,	and	poured	the
wine	away.	As	he	refilled	the	goblet,	he	said,	‘Well,	I’m	not	entirely	convinced
Stormy	here	is	irrelevant	to	our	conversation.’
The	red-bearded	soldier	looked	up,	small	eyes	narrowing	with	sudden
unease.	‘I	couldn’t	be	more	irrelevant	if	I	tried,’	he	said	in	a	growl,	reaching
again	for	the	bottle	of	red.
Kalam	watched	the	man’s	throat	bob	as	he	downed	mouthful	after
mouthful.
‘It’s	that	sword,’	said	Quick	Ben.	‘That	T’lan	Imass	sword.	How	did	you
come	by	it,	Stormy?’
‘Huh,	santos.	In	Falar	only	poor	people	eat	those	ugly	fish,	and	the
Kartoolii	call	it	a	delicacy!	Idiots.’	He	collected	one	and	began	scooping	the
red,	oily	flesh	from	the	clay	shell.	‘It	was	given	to	me,’	he	said,	‘for
safekeeping.’
‘By	a	T’lan	Imass?’	Kalam	asked.
‘Aye.’
‘So	it	plans	on	coming	back	for	it?’
‘If	it	can,	aye.’
‘Why	would	a	T’lan	Imass	give	you	its	sword?	They	generally	use	them,	a
lot.’
‘Not	where	it	was	headed,	assassin.	What’s	this?	Some	kind	of	bird?’
‘Yes,’	said	Quick	Ben.	‘Grouse.	So,	where	was	the	T’lan	Imass	headed,
then?’
‘Grouse.	What’s	that,	some	kind	of	duck?	It	went	into	a	big	wound	in	the
sky,	to	seal	it.’
The	wizard	leaned	back.	‘Don’t	expect	it	any	time	soon,	then.’
‘Well,	it	took	the	head	of	a	Tiste	Andii	with	it,	and	that	head	was	still	alive	–
Truth	was	the	only	one	who	saw	that	–	the	other	T’lan	Imass	didn’t,	not	even
the	bonecaster.	Small	wings	–	surprised	the	thing	could	fly	at	all.	Not	very	well,
hah,	since	someone	caught	it!’	He	finished	the	Grisian	and	tossed	away	the
bottle.	It	thumped	in	the	thick	dust.	Stormy	then	reached	for	the	Napan	belack.
‘You	know	what’s	the	problem	with	you	two?	I’ll	tell	ya.	I’ll	tell	ya	the
problem.	You	both	think	too	much,	and	you	think	that	by	thinking	so	much	you
get	somewhere	with	all	that	thinking,	only	you	don’t.	Look,	it’s	simple.
Something	you	don’t	like	gets	in	your	way	you	kill	it,	and	once	you	kill	it	you
can	stop	thinking	about	it	and	that’s	that.’
‘Interesting	philosophy,	Stormy,’	said	Quick	Ben.	‘But	what	if	that
“something”	is	too	big,	or	too	many,	or	nastier	than	you?’
‘Then	you	cut	it	down	to	size,	wizard.’


‘And	if	you	can’t?’
‘Then	you	find	someone	else	who	can.	Maybe	they	end	up	killing	each
other,	and	that’s	that.’	He	waved	the	half-empty	bottle	of	belack.	‘You	think	you
can	make	all	sortsa	plans?	Idiots.	I	squat	down	and	shit	on	your	plans!’
Kalam	smiled	at	Quick	Ben.	‘Stormy’s	onto	something	there,	maybe.’
The	wizard	scowled.	‘What,	squatting—’
‘No,	finding	someone	else	to	do	the	dirty	work	for	us.	We’re	old	hands	at
that,	Quick,	aren’t	we?’
‘Only,	it	gets	harder.’	Quick	Ben	gazed	up	at	the	sky	keep.	‘All	right,	let	me
think—’
‘Oh	we’re	in	trouble	now!’
‘Stormy,’	said	Kalam,	‘you’re	drunk.’
‘I	ain’t	drunk.	Two	bottlesa	wine	don’t	get	me	drunk.	Not	Stormy,	they
don’t.’
‘The	question,’	said	the	wizard,	‘is	this.	Who	or	what	defeated	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle	the	first	time	round?	And	then,	is	that	powerful	force	still	alive?
Once	we	work	out	the	answers	to	those—’
‘Like	I	said,’	the	Falari	growled,	‘you	talk	and	talk	and	talk	and	you	ain’t
getting	a	damned	thing.’
Quick	Ben	settled	back,	rubbing	at	his	eyes.	‘Fine,	then.	Go	on,	Stormy,
let’s	hear	your	brilliance.’
‘First,	you’re	assuming	those	lizard	things	are	your	enemy	in	the	firs’
place.	Third,	if	the	legends	are	true,	those	lizards	defeated	themselves,	so	what
in	Hood’s	soiled	trousers	are	you	panicking	’bout?	Second,	the	Adjunct	wanted
to	know	all	’bout	them	and	where	they’re	going	and	all	that.	Well,	the	sky	keeps
ain’t	going	nowhere,	and	we	already	know	what’s	inside	’em,	so	we	done	our
job.	You	idiots	want	to	break	into	one	–	what	for?	You	ain’t	got	a	clue	what	for.
And	five,	you	gonna	finish	that	white	wine,	wizard?	’Cause	I	ain’t	touching	that
rice	piss.’
Quick	Ben	slowly	sat	forward	and	slid	the	bottle	towards	Stormy.
No	better	gesture	of	defeat	was	possible,	Kalam	decided.	‘Finish	up,
everyone,’	he	said,	‘so	we	can	get	outa	this	damned	warren	and	back	to	the
Fourteenth.’
‘Something	else,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘I	wanted	to	talk	about.’
‘So	go	ahead,’	Stormy	said	expansively,	waving	a	grouse	leg.	‘Stormy’s
got	your	answers,	yes	he	does.’
‘I’ve	heard	stories…a	Malazan	escort,	clashing	with	a	fleet	of	strange	ships
off	the	Geni	coast.	From	the	descriptions	of	the	foe,	they	sound	like	Tiste	Edur.
Stormy,	that	ship	of	yours,	what	was	it	called?’


‘The	Silanda.	Dead	grey-skinned	folk,	all	cut	down	on	the	deck,	and	the
ship’s	captain,	speared	right	through,	pinned	to	his	Hood-damned	chair	in	his
cabin	–	gods	below,	the	arm	that	threw	that…’
‘And	Tiste	Andii…heads.’
‘Bodies	were	below,	manning	the	sweeps.’
‘Those	grey-skinned	folk	were	Tiste	Edur,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘I	don’t	know,
maybe	I	shouldn’t	put	the	two	together,	but	something	about	them	makes	me
nervous.	Where	did	that	Tiste	Edur	fleet	come	from?’
Kalam	grunted,	then	said,	‘It’s	a	big	world,	Quick.	They	could’ve	come
from	anywhere,	blown	off	course	by	some	storm,	or	on	an	exploratory
mission	of	some	kind.’
‘More	like	raiding,’	Stormy	said.	‘If	they	attacked	right	off	like	they	did.
Anyway,	where	we	found	the	Silanda	in	the	first	place	–	there’d	been	a	battle
there,	too.	Against	Tiste	Andii.	Messy.’
Quick	Ben	sighed	and	rubbed	his	eyes	again.	‘Near	Coral,	during	the
Pannion	War,	the	body	of	a	Tiste	Edur	was	found.	It	had	come	up	from	deep
water.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘I’ve	a	feeling	we	haven’t	seen	the	last	of	them.’
‘The	Shadow	Realm,’	Kalam	said.	‘It	was	theirs,	once,	and	now	they	want	it
back.’
The	wizard’s	gaze	narrowed	on	the	assassin.	‘Cotillion	told	you	this?’
Kalam	shrugged.
‘It	keeps	coming	back	to	Shadowthrone,	doesn’t	it?	No	wonder	I’m
nervous.	That	slimy,	slippery	bastard—’
‘Oh	Hood’s	balls,’	Stormy	groaned,	‘give	me	that	rice	piss,	if	you’re
gonna	go	on	and	on.	Shadowthrone	ain’t	scary.	Shadowthrone’s	just	Ammanas,
and	Ammanas	is	just	Kellanved.	Just	like	Cotillion’s	Dancer.	Hood	knows,	we
knew	the	Emperor	well	enough.	And	Dancer.	They	up	to	something?	No
surprise.	They	were	always	up	to	something,	from	the	very	start.	I	tell	you	both
right	now,’	he	paused	for	a	swig	of	rice	wine,	made	a	face,	then	continued,
‘when	all	the	dust’s	settled,	they’ll	be	shining	like	pearls	atop	a	dung-heap.
Gods,	Elder	Gods,	dragons,	undead,	spirits	and	the	scary	empty	face	of	the
Abyss	itself	–	they	won’t	none	a	them	stand	a	chance.	You	want	to	worry	about
Tiste	Edur,	wizard?	Go	ahead.	Maybe	they	ruled	Shadow	once,	but
Shadowthrone’ll	take	’em	down.	Him	and	Dancer.’	He	belched.	‘An’	you	know
why?	I’ll	tell	you	why.	They	never	fight	fair.	That’s	why.’
Kalam	looked	over	at	the	empty	chair,	and	his	eyes	slowly	narrowed.
	
Stumbling,	crawling,	or	dragging	themselves	along	through	the	bed	of	white


ash,	they	all	came	to	where	Bottle	sat,	the	sky	a	swirl	of	stars	overhead.	Saying
nothing,	not	one	of	those	soldiers,	but	each	in	turn	managing	one	gentle
gesture	–	reaching	out	and	with	one	finger,	touching	the	head	of	Y’Ghatan	the
rat.
Tender,	with	great	reverence	–	until	she	bit	that	finger,	and	the	hand	would
be	snatched	back	with	a	hissed	curse.
One	after	another,	Y’Ghatan	bit	them	all.
She	was	hungry,	Bottle	explained,	and	pregnant.	So	he	explained.	Or	tried
to,	but	no-one	was	really	listening.	It	seemed	that	they	didn’t	even	care,	that	her
bite	was	part	of	the	ritual,	now,	a	price	of	blood,	the	payment	of	sacrifice.
He	told	those	who	would	listen	that	she	had	bitten	him	too.
But	she	hadn’t.	Not	her.	Not	him.	Their	souls	were	inextricably	bound,	now.
And	things	like	that	were	complicated,	profound	even.	He	studied	the	creature
where	it	was	settled	in	his	lap.	Profound,	yes,	that	was	the	word.
He	stroked	her	head.	My	dear	rat.	My	sweet—ow!	Damn	you!	Bitch!
Black,	glittering	eyes	looked	up	at	him,	whiskered	nose	twitching.
Vile,	disgusting	creatures.
He	set	the	creature	down	and	it	could	wander	over	a	precipice	for	all	he
cared.	Instead,	the	rat	snuggled	up	against	his	right	foot	and	curled	into	sleep.
Bottle	looked	over	at	the	makeshift	camp,	at	the	array	of	dim	faces	he	could
see	here	and	there.	No-one	had	lit	a	fire.	Funny,	that,	in	a	sick	way.
They	had	come	through	it.	Bottle	still	found	it	difficult	to	believe.	And
Gesler	had	gone	back	in,	only	to	return	a	while	later.	Followed	by	Corabb
Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	the	warrior	dragging	Strings	into	view,	then	himself
collapsing.	Bottle	could	hear	the	man’s	snores	that	had	been	going	on
uninterrupted	half	the	night.
The	sergeant	was	alive.	The	honey	smeared	into	his	wounds	seemed	to
have	delivered	healing	to	match	High	Denul,	making	it	obvious	that	it	had	been
anything	but	ordinary	honey	–	as	if	the	strange	visions	weren’t	proof	enough
of	that.	Still,	even	that	was	unable	to	replace	the	blood	Strings	had	lost,	and	that
blood	loss	should	have	killed	him.	Yet	now	the	sergeant	slept,	too	weak	to
manage	much	else,	but	alive.
Bottle	wished	he	was	as	tired…in	that	way,	at	least,	the	kind	that	beckoned
warm	and	welcoming.	Instead	of	this	spiritual	exhaustion	that	left	his	nerves
frayed,	images	returning	again	and	again	of	their	nightmare	journey	among
the	buried	bones	of	Y’Ghatan.	And	with	them,	the	bitter	taste	of	those	moments
when	all	seemed	lost,	hopeless.
Captain	Faradan	Sort	and	Sinn	had	stashed	away	a	supply	of	water-casks
and	food-packs,	which	they	had	since	retrieved,	but	for	Bottle	no	amount	of


water	could	wash	the	taste	of	smoke	and	ashes	from	his	mouth.	And	there	was
something	else	that	burned	still	within	him.	The	Adjunct	had	abandoned	them,
forcing	the	captain	and	Sinn	to	desert.	True	enough,	it	was	only	reasonable	to
assume	no-one	had	been	left	alive.	He	knew	his	feeling	was	irrational,	yet	it
gnawed	at	him	nonetheless.
The	captain	had	talked	about	the	plague,	sweeping	towards	them	from	the
east,	and	the	need	to	keep	the	army	well	ahead	of	it.	The	Adjunct	had	waited	as
long	as	she	could.	Bottle	knew	all	that.	Still…
‘We’re	dead,	you	know.’
He	looked	over	at	Koryk,	who	sat	cross-legged	nearby,	a	child	sleeping
beside	him.	‘If	we’re	dead,’	Bottle	said,	‘why	do	we	feel	so	awful?’
‘As	far	as	the	Adjunct’s	concerned.	We’re	dead.	We	can	just…leave.’
‘And	go	where,	Koryk?	Poliel	stalks	Seven	Cities—’
‘Ain’t	no	plague	gonna	kill	us.	Not	now.’
‘You	think	we’re	immortal	or	something?’	Bottle	asked.	He	shook	his
head.	‘We	survived	this,	sure,	but	that	doesn’t	mean	a	damned	thing.	It	sure	as
Hood	doesn’t	mean	that	the	next	thing	to	come	along	won’t	kill	us	right	and
quick.	Maybe	you’re	feeling	immune	–	to	anything	and	everything	the	world
can	throw	at	us,	now.	But,	believe	me,	we’re	not.’
‘Better	that	than	anything	else,’	Koryk	muttered.
Bottle	thought	about	the	soldier ’s	words.	‘You	think	some	god	decided	to
use	us?	Pulled	us	out	for	a	reason?’
‘Either	that,	Bottle,	or	your	rat’s	a	genius.’
‘The	rat	was	four	legs	and	a	good	nose,	Koryk.	Her	soul	was	bound.	By
me.	I	was	looking	through	her	eyes,	sensing	everything	she	sensed—’
‘And	did	she	dream	when	you	dreamed?’
‘Well,	I	don’t	know—’
‘Did	she	run	away,	then?’
‘No,	but—’
‘So	she	waited	around.	For	you	to	wake	back	up.	So	you	could	imprison
her	soul	again.’
Bottle	said	nothing.
‘Any	god	tries	to	use	me,’	Koryk	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘it’ll	regret	it.’
‘With	all	those	fetishes	you	wear,’	Bottle	noted,	‘I’d	have	thought	you’d	be
delighted	at	the	attention.’
‘You’re	wrong.	What	I	wear	ain’t	for	seeking	blessings.’
‘Then	what	are	they?’
‘Wards.’
‘All	of	them?’


Koryk	nodded.	‘They	make	me	invisible.	To	gods,	spirits,	demons…’
Bottle	studied	the	soldier	through	the	gloom.	‘Well,	maybe	they	don’t
work.’
‘Depends,’	he	replied.
‘On	what?’
‘Whether	we’re	dead	or	not.’
Smiles	laughed	from	nearby.	‘Koryk’s	lost	his	mind.	No	surprise,	it	being
so	small,	and	things	being	so	dark	in	there…’
‘Not	like	ghosts	and	all	that,’	Koryk	said	in	a	sneering	tone.	‘You	think	like
a	ten-year-old,	Smiles.’
Bottle	winced.
Something	skittered	off	a	rock	close	to	Koryk	and	the	soldier	started.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name?’
‘That	was	a	knife,’	Bottle	said,	having	felt	it	whip	past	him.	‘Amazing,	she
saved	one	for	you.’
‘More	than	one,’	Smiles	said.	‘And	Koryk,	I	wasn’t	aiming	for	your	leg.’
‘I	told	you	you	weren’t	immune,’	Bottle	said.
‘I’m	–	never	mind.’
I’m	still	alive,	you	were	going	to	say.	Then,	wisely,	decided	not	to.
	
Gesler	crouched	down	in	front	of	the	captain.	‘We’re	a	hairless	bunch,’	he	said,
‘but	otherwise	pretty	well	mending.	Captain,	I	don’t	know	what	made	you
believe	in	Sinn,	enough	to	run	from	the	army,	but	I’m	damned	glad	you	did.’
‘You	were	all	under	my	command,’	she	said.	‘Then	you	got	too	far	ahead
of	me.	I	did	my	best	to	find	you,	but	the	smoke,	the	flames	–	all	too	much.’	She
looked	away.	‘I	didn’t	want	to	leave	it	at	that.’
‘How	many	did	the	legion	lose?’	Gesler	asked.
She	shrugged.	‘Maybe	two	thousand.	Soldiers	were	still	dying.	We	were
trapped,	Fist	Keneb	and	Baralta	and	about	eight	hundred,	on	the	wrong	side	of
the	breach	–	until	Sinn	pushed	the	fire	back	–	don’t	ask	me	how.	They	say	she’s
a	High	Mage	of	some	kind.	There	was	nothing	addled	about	her	that	night,
Sergeant,	and	I	didn’t	think	she	was	addled	when	she	tried	getting	back	into	the
city.’
Nodding,	Gesler	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	rose.	‘I	wish	I	could
sleep…and	it	looks	like	I’m	not	alone	in	that.	I	wonder	why	that	is…’
‘The	stars,	Sergeant,’	said	Faradan	Sort.	‘They’re	glittering	down.’
‘Aye,	might	be	that	and	nothing	more.’
‘Nothing	more?	I	would	think,	more	than	enough.’


‘Aye.’	He	looked	down	at	the	small	bite	on	his	right	index	finger.	‘All	for	a
damned	rat,	too.’
‘All	of	you	fools	are	probably	infected	with	plague,	now.’
He	started,	then	smiled.	‘Let	the	bitch	try.’
	
Balm	rubbed	the	last	crusted	mud	from	his	face,	then	scowled	over	at	his
corporal.	‘You,	Deadsmell,	you	think	I	didn’t	hear	you	praying	and	gibbering
down	there?	You	ain’t	fooled	me	about	nothing	worth	fooling	about.’
The	man,	leaning	against	a	rock,	kept	his	eyes	closed	as	he	replied,
‘Sergeant,	you	keep	trying,	but	we	know.	We	all	know.’
‘You	all	know	what?’
‘Why	you’re	talking	and	talking	and	still	talking.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘You’re	glad	to	be	alive,	Sergeant.	And	you’re	glad	your	squad’s	made	it
through	in	one	piece,	the	only	one	barring	Fid’s,	and	maybe	Hellian’s,	as	far	as
I	can	tell.	We	were	charmed	and	that’s	all	there	was	to	it.	Damned	charmed,	and
you	still	can’t	believe	it.	Well,	neither	can	we,	all	right?’
Balm	spat	into	the	dust.	‘Listen	to	you	mewling	on	and	on.	Sentimental
tripe,	all	of	it.	I’m	wondering	who	cursed	me	so	that	I’m	still	stuck	with	all	of
you.	Fiddler	I	can	understand.	He’s	a	Bridgeburner.	And	gods	run	when	they
see	a	Bridgeburner.	But	you,	you	ain’t	nobody,	and	that’s	what	I	don’t	get.	In
fact,	if	I	did	get	it…’
	
Urb.	He’s	as	bad	as	the	priest	who	disappeared.	The	once-priest,	what	was	his
name	again?	What	did	he	look	like?	Nothing	like	Urb,	that’s	for	sure.	But	just
as	treacherous,	treasonous,	just	as	rotten	and	vile	as	whatever	his	name	was.
He	ain’t	my	corporal	no	more,	that’s	for	sure.	I	want	to	kill	him…oh	gods,
my	head	aches.	My	jaw…my	teeth	all	loose.
Captain	says	she	needs	more	sergeants.	Well,	she	can	have	him,	and
whatever	squad	he	ends	up	with	has	my	prayers	and	pity.	That’s	for	sure.	Said
there	were	spiders	and	maybe	there	were	and	maybe	I	wasn’t	conscious	so’s	I
couldn’t	go	crazy,	which	maybe	I	woulda	done,	but	that	don’t	change	one	truth,
and	that’s	for	sure	as	sure	can	be	that	they	crawled	on	me.	All	over	me	–	I	can
still	feel	where	their	little	sticky	pointy	legs	dug	into	my	skin.	All	over.
Everywhere.	And	he	just	let	’em	do	it.
Maybe	captain’s	got	a	bottle	of	something.	Maybe	if	I	call	her	over	and	talk


real	sweet,	real	sane	and	reasonable,	maybe	then	they’d	untie	me.	I	won’t	kill
Urb.	I	promise.	You	can	have	him,	Captain.	That’s	what	I’ll	say.	And	she’ll
hesitate	–	I	would	–	but	then	nod	–	the	idiot	–	and	cut	these	ropes.	And	hand	me
a	bottle	and	I’ll	finish	it.	Finish	it	and	everybody’ll	say,	hey,	it’s	all	right,	then.
She’s	back	to	normal.
And	that’s	when	I’ll	go	for	his	throat.	With	my	teeth	–	no,	they’re	loose,
can’t	use	’em	for	that.	Find	a	knife,	that’s	what	I	have	to	do.	Or	a	sword.	I	could
trade	the	bottle	for	a	sword.	I	did	it	the	other	way	round,	didn’t	I?	Half	the
bottle.	I’ll	drink	the	other	half.	Half	a	bottle,	half	a	sword.	A	knife.	Half	a	bottle
for	a	knife.	Which	I’ll	stick	in	his	throat,	then	trade	back,	for	the	other	half	of
the	bottle	–	if	I’m	quick	that	should	work	fine.	I	get	the	knife	and	the	whole
bottle.
But	first,	she	should	untie	me.	That’s	only	fair.
I’m	fine,	as	everyone	can	see.	Peaceful,	thoughtful—
‘Sergeant?’
‘What	is	it,	Urb?’
‘I	think	you	still	want	to	kill	me.’
‘What	makes	you	say	that?’
‘The	way	you	growl	and	gnash	your	teeth,	I	guess.’
Not	me,	that’s	for	sure.
Oh,	that’s	why	my	teeth	still	hurt	so.	I’ve	made	them	even	looser	with	all
that	gnashing.	Gods,	I	used	to	dream	stuff	like	this,	my	teeth	all	coming	loose.
The	bastard	punched	me.	No	different	from	that	man	who	disappeared,	what	was
his	name	again?
	
Flashwit	levered	her	bulk	further	down	in	the	soft	bed	her	weight	had
impressed	in	the	sand.	‘I	wish,’	she	said.
Mayfly	pursed	her	lips,	then	adjusted	the	nose	she’d	had	broken	more
times	than	she	could	count.	Moving	it	around	made	clicking	sounds	that	she
found,	for	some	reason,	vaguely	satisfying.	‘You	wish	what?’
‘I	wish	I	knew	things,	I	guess.’
‘What	things?’
‘Well,	listen	to	Bottle	there.	And	Gesler,	and	Deadsmell.	They’re	smart.
They	talk	about	things	and	all	that	other	stuff.	That’s	what	I	wish.’
‘Yeah,	well,	all	those	brains	are	goin’	t’waste	though,	ain’t	they?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Mayfly	snorted.	‘You	and	me,	Flashwit,	we’re	heavy	infantry,	right?	We
plant	our	feet	and	we	make	the	stand,	and	it	don’t	matter	what	it’s	for.	None	a


that	don’t	matter.’
‘But	Bottle—’
‘Waste,	Flashwit.	They’re	soldiers,	for	Treach’s	sake.	Soldiers.	So	who
needs	brains	to	soldier?	They	just	get	in	the	way	of	soldierin’	and	it’s	no	good
things	gettin’	in	the	way.	They	figure	things	out	and	that	gives	’em	opinions
and	then	maybe	they	don’t	want	t’fight	as	much	no	more.’
‘Why	wouldn’t	they	want	to	fight	no	more	’cause	of	’pinions?’
‘It’s	simple,	Flashwit.	Trust	me.	If	soldiers	thought	too	much	about	what
they’re	doin’,	they	wouldn’t	fight	no	more.’
‘So	how	come	I’m	so	tired,	anyway,	only	I	can’t	sleep?’
‘That’s	simple,	too.’
‘It	is?’
‘Yeah,	an’	it	ain’t	the	stars	neither.	We’re	waitin’	for	the	sun	to	come	up.	We
all	want	to	see	that	sun,	because	it	was	looking	like	we’d	never	see	it	no	more.’
‘Yeah.’	A	long	contemplative	silence,	then,	‘I	wish.’
‘Now	what	do	you	wish?’
‘Only,	that	I	was	smart	as	you,	Mayfly.	You’re	so	smart	you	got	no
’pinions	and	that’s	pretty	smart	an’	it	makes	me	wonder	if	you	ain’t	goin’
t’waste	being	a	heavy	an’	that.	A	soljer.’
‘I	ain’t	smart,	Flashwit.	Trust	me	on	that,	an’	you	know	how	I	know?’
‘No,	how?’
‘’Cause…down	there…you	an’	me,	an’	Saltlick	an’	Shortnose	an’	Uru	Hela
an’	Hanno,	us	heavies.	We	didn’t	get	scared,	not	one	of	us,	and	that’s	how	I
know.’
‘It	wasn’t	scary.	Jus’	dark,	an’	it	seemed	t’go	on	for	ever	an’	waitin’	for
Bottle	to	get	us	through,	well	that	got	boring	sometimes,	you	know.’
‘Right,	and	did	the	fire	get	you	scared?’
‘Well,	burnin’	hurt,	didn’t	it?’
‘Sure	did.’
‘I	didn’t	like	that.’
‘Me	neither.’
‘So,	what	do	you	think	we’re	all	gonna	do	now?’
‘The	Fourteenth?	Don’t	know,	save	the	world,	maybe.’
‘Yeah.	Maybe.	I’d	like	that.’
‘Me	too.’
‘Hey,	is	that	the	sun	comin’	up?’
‘Well,	it’s	east	where	it’s	getting	brighter,	so	I	guess,	yeah,	it	must	be.’
‘Great.	I	bin	waiting	for	this.	I	think.’


Cuttle	found	sergeants	Thom	Tissy,	Cord	and	Gesler	gathered	near	the	base	of
the	slope	leading	up	to	the	west	road.	It	seemed	they	weren’t	much	interested	in
the	rising	sun.	‘You’re	all	looking	serious,’	the	sapper	said.
‘We	got	a	walk	ahead	of	us,’	Gesler	said,	‘that’s	all.’
‘The	Adjunct	had	no	choice,’	Cuttle	said.	‘That	was	a	firestorm	–	there	was
no	way	she	could	have	known	there’d	be	survivors	–	digging	under	it	all	that
way.’
Gesler	glanced	at	the	other	two	sergeants,	then	nodded.	‘It’s	all	right,
Cuttle.	We	know.	We’re	not	contemplating	murder	or	anything.’
Cuttle	turned	to	face	the	camp.	‘Some	of	the	soldiers	are	thinking	wrong
on	all	of	this.’
‘Aye,’	said	Cord,	‘but	we’ll	put	’em	straight	on	it	before	this	day’s	out.’
‘Good.	Thing	is,’	he	hesitated,	turning	back	to	the	sergeants,	‘I’ve	been
thinking	on	that.	Who	in	Hood’s	name	is	going	to	believe	us?	More	like	we	did
our	own	deal	with	the	Queen	of	Dreams.	After	all,	we	got	one	of	Leoman’s
officers	with	us.	And	now,	with	the	captain	and	Sinn	going	and	getting
themselves	outlawed,	well,	it	could	be	seen	we’re	all	traitors	or	something.’
‘We	made	no	deal	with	the	Queen	of	Dreams,’	Cord	said.
‘Are	you	sure	about	that?’
All	three	sergeants	looked	at	him	then.
Cuttle	shrugged.	‘Bottle,	he’s	a	strange	one.	Maybe	he	did	make	some	deal,
with	somebody.	Maybe	the	Queen	of	Dreams,	maybe	some	other	god.’
‘He’d	have	told	us,	wouldn’t	he?’	Gesler	asked.
‘Hard	to	say.	He’s	a	sneaky	bastard.	I’m	getting	nervous	about	that	damned
rat	biting	every	one	of	us,	like	it	knew	what	it	was	doing	and	we	didn’t.’
‘Just	a	wild	rat,’	said	Thom	Tissy.	‘Ain’t	nobody’s	pet,	so	why	wouldn’t	it
bite?’
Gesler	said,	‘Listen,	Cuttle,	sounds	like	you’re	just	finding	new	things	to
worry	about.	What’s	the	point	of	doing	that?	What	we’ve	got	ahead	of	us	right
now	is	a	long	walk,	and	us	with	no	armour,	no	weapons	and	virtually	no
clothing	–	the	sun’s	gonna	bake	people	crisp.’
‘We	need	to	find	a	village,’	Cord	said,	‘and	hope	to	Hood	plague	ain’t
found	it	first.’
‘There	you	go,	Cuttle,’	Gesler	said,	grinning.	‘Now	you	got	another	thing
to	worry	about.’
	


Paran	began	to	suspect	that	his	horse	knew	what	was	coming:	nostrils	flaring,
tossing	its	head	as	it	shied	and	stamped,	fighting	the	reins	all	the	way	down	the
trail.	The	freshwater	sea	was	choppy,	silty	waves	in	the	bay	rolling	up	to	batter
at	sun-bleached	limestone	crags.	Dead	desert	bushes	poked	skeletal	limbs	out
of	the	muddy	shallows	and	insects	swarmed	everywhere.
‘This	is	not	the	ancient	sea,’	Ganath	said	as	she	approached	the	shoreline.
‘No,’	Paran	admitted.	‘Half	a	year	ago	Raraku	was	a	desert,	and	had	been
for	thousands	of	years.	Then,	there	was	a…rebirth	of	sorts.’
‘It	will	not	last.	Nothing	lasts.’
He	eyed	the	Jaghut	woman	for	a	moment.	She	stood	looking	out	on	the
ochre	waves,	motionless	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	she	made	her	way	down
into	the	shallows.	Paran	dismounted	and	hobbled	the	horses,	narrowly	evading
an	attempted	bite	from	the	gelding	he	had	been	riding.	He	unpacked	his	camp
kit	and	set	about	building	a	hearth.	Plenty	of	driftwood	about,	including	entire
uprooted	trees,	and	it	was	not	long	before	he	had	a	cookfire	lit.
Finished	her	bathing,	Ganath	joined	him	and	stood	nearby,	water	streaming
down	her	oddly	coloured,	smooth	skin.	‘The	spirits	of	the	deep	springs	have
awakened,’	she	said.	‘It	feels	as	if	this	place	is	young	once	again.	Young,	and
raw.	I	do	not	understand.’
Paran	nodded.	‘Young,	aye.	And	vulnerable.’
‘Yes.	Why	are	you	here?’
‘Ganath,	it	might	be	safer	for	you	if	you	left.’
‘When	do	you	begin	the	ritual?’
‘It’s	already	begun.’
She	glanced	away.	‘You	are	a	strange	god.	Riding	a	miserable	creature	that
dreams	of	killing	you.	Building	a	fire	with	which	to	cook	food.	Tell	me,	in	this
new	world,	are	all	gods	such	as	you?’
‘I’m	not	a	god,’	Paran	said.	‘In	place	of	the	ancient	Tiles	of	the	Holds	–	and
I’ll	grant	you	I’m	not	sure	that’s	what	they	were	called	–	in	any	case,	there	is
now	the	Deck	of	Dragons,	a	fatid	containing	the	High	Houses.	I	am	the	Master
of	that	Deck—’
‘A	Master,	in	the	same	manner	as	the	Errant?’
‘Who?’
‘The	Master	of	the	Holds	in	my	time,’	she	replied.
‘I	suppose	so,	then.’
‘He	was	an	ascendant,	Ganoes	Paran.	Worshipped	as	a	god	by	enclaves	of
Imass,	Barghast	and	Trell.	They	kept	his	mouth	filled	with	blood.	He	never
knew	thirst.	Nor	peace.	I	wonder	how	he	fell.’
‘I	think	I’d	like	to	know	that	detail	myself,’	Paran	said,	shaken	by	the


Jaghut’s	words.	‘No-one	worships	me,	Ganath.’
‘They	will.	You	are	newly	ascended.	Even	in	this	world	of	yours,	I	am
certain	that	there	is	no	shortage	of	followers,	of	those	who	are	desperate	to
believe.	And	they	will	hunt	down	others	and	make	of	them	victims.	They	will
cut	them	and	fill	bowls	with	their	innocent	blood,	in	your	name,	Ganoes	Paran,
and	so	beseech	your	intercession,	your	adherence	to	whatever	cause	they
righteously	fashion.	The	Errant	thought	to	defeat	them,	as	you	might	well	seek
to	do,	and	so	he	became	the	god	of	change.	He	walked	the	path	of	neutrality,	yet
flavoured	it	with	a	pleasure	taken	in	impermanence.	The	Errant’s	enemy	was
ennui,	stagnation.	This	is	why	the	Forkrul	Assail	sought	to	annihilate	him.	And
all	his	mortal	followers.’	She	paused,	then	added,	‘Perhaps	they	succeeded.	The
Assail	were	never	easily	diverted	from	their	chosen	course.’
Paran	said	nothing.	There	were	truths	in	her	words	that	even	he
recognized,	and	they	now	weighed	upon	him,	settling	heavy	and	imponderable
upon	his	spirit.	Burdens	were	born	from	the	loss	of	innocence.	Naïveté.	While
the	innocent	yearned	to	lose	their	innocence,	those	who	had	already	done	so	in
turn	envied	the	innocent,	and	knew	grief	in	what	they	had	lost.	Between	the	two,
no	exchange	of	truths	was	possible.	He	sensed	the	completion	of	an	internal
journey,	and	Paran	found	he	did	not	appreciate	recognizing	that	fact,	nor	the
place	where	he	now	found	himself.	It	did	not	suit	him	that	ignorance	remained
inextricably	bound	to	innocence,	and	the	loss	of	one	meant	the	loss	of	the
other.
‘I	have	troubled	your	mind,	Ganoes	Paran.’
He	glanced	up,	then	shrugged.	‘You	have	been…timely.	Much	to	my	regret,
yet	still,’	he	shrugged	again,	‘perhaps	all	for	the	best.’
She	faced	the	sea	again	and	he	followed	her	gaze.	A	sudden	calm	upon	the
modest	bay	before	them,	whilst	white-caps	continued	to	chop	the	waters
beyond.	‘What	is	happening?’	she	asked.
‘They’re	coming.’
Some	distant	clamour,	now,	rising	as	if	from	a	deep	cavern,	and	the	sunset
seemed	to	have	grown	sickly,	its	very	fires	slave	to	a	chaotic	tumult,	as	if	the
shades	of	a	hundred	thousand	sunsets	and	sunrises	now	waged	celestial	war.
Whilst	the	horizons	closed	in,	flickering	with	darkness,	smoke	and	racing
storms	of	sand	and	dust.
A	stirring	upon	the	pellucid	waters	of	the	bay,	silt	clouds	rising	from
beneath,	and	the	calm	was	spreading	outward	now,	south,	stilling	the	sea’s
wildness.
Ganath	stepped	back.	‘What	have	you	done?’
Muted	but	growing,	the	scuffle	and	rumble,	the	clangour	and	throat-hum,


the	sound	of	marching	armies,	the	echoing	of	locked	shields,	the	tympanous
beat	of	iron	and	bronze	weapons	upon	battered	rims,	of	wagons	creaking	and
churning	rutted	roads,	and	now	the	susurration,	thrumming	collisions,	walls	of
horseflesh	hammering	into	rows	of	raised	pikes,	the	animal	screams	filling	the
air,	then	fading,	only	for	the	collision	to	repeat,	louder	this	time,	closer,	and
there	was	a	violent	patter	cutting	a	swath	across	the	bay,	leaving	a	pale,	muddy
red	road	in	its	wake	that	bled	outward,	edges	tearing,	even	as	it	sank	down	into
the	depths.	Voices,	now,	crying	out,	bellowing,	piteous	and	enraged,	a
cacophony	of	enmeshed	lives,	each	one	seeking	to	separate	itself,	seeking	to
claim	its	own	existence,	unique,	a	thing	with	eyes	and	voice.	Fraught	minds
clutching	at	memories	that	tore	away	like	shredded	banners,	with	every	gush	of
lost	blood,	with	every	crushing	failure	–	soldiers,	dying,	ever	dying—
Paran	and	Ganath	watched,	as	colourless,	sodden	standards	pierced	the
surface	of	the	water,	the	spears	lifting	into	the	air,	streaming	mud	–	standards,
banners,	pikes	bearing	grisly,	rotting	trophies,	rising	along	the	entire	shoreline
now.
Raraku	Sea	had	given	up	its	dead.
In	answer	to	the	call	of	one	man.
White,	like	slashes	of	absence,	bone	hands	gripping	shafts	of	black	wood,
forearms	beneath	tattered	leather	and	corroded	vambraces,	and	then,	lifting
clear	of	the	water,	rotted	helms	and	flesh-stripped	faces.	Human,	Trell,
Barghast,	Imass,	Jaghut.	The	races,	and	all	their	race-wars.	Oh,	could	I	drag
every	mortal	historian	down	here,	to	this	shore,	so	that	they	could	look	upon
our	true	roll,	our	progression	of	hatred	and	annihilation.
How	many	would	seek,	desperate	in	whatever	zealotry	gripped	them,	to
hunt	reasons	and	justifications?	Causes,	crimes	and	justices	–	Paran’s	thoughts
stuttered	to	a	halt,	as	he	realized	that,	like	Ganath,	he	had	been	backing	up,	step
by	step,	pushed	back,	in	the	face	of	revelation.	Oh,	these	messengers	would
earn	so	much…displeasure.	And	vilification.	And	these	dead,	oh	how	they’d
laugh,	understanding	so	well	the	defensive	tactic	of	all-out	attack.	The	dead
mock	us,	mock	us	all,	and	need	say	nothing…
All	those	enemies	of	reason	–	yet	not	reason	as	a	force,	or	a	god,	not	reason
in	the	cold,	critical	sense.	Reason	only	in	its	purest	armour,	when	it	strides
forward	into	the	midst	of	those	haters	of	tolerance,	oh	gods	below,	I	am	lost,
lost	in	all	of	this.	You	cannot	fight	unreason,	and	as	these	dead	multitudes	will
tell	you	–	are	telling	you	even	now	–	certitude	is	the	enemy.
‘These,’	Ganath	whispered,	‘these	dead	have	no	blood	to	give	you,	Ganoes
Paran.	They	will	not	worship.	They	will	not	follow.	They	will	not	dream	of
glory	in	your	eyes.	They	are	done	with	that,	with	all	of	that.	What	do	you	see,


Ganoes	Paran,	in	these	staring	holes	that	once	were	eyes?	What	do	you	see?’
‘Answers,’	he	replied.
‘Answers?’	Her	voice	was	harsh	with	rage.	‘To	what?’
Not	replying,	Paran	forced	himself	forward,	one	step,	then	another.
The	first	ranks	stood	upon	the	shore’s	verge,	foam	swirling	round	their
skeletal	feet,	behind	them	thousands	upon	thousands	of	kin.	Clutching	weapons
of	wood,	bone,	horn,	flint,	copper,	bronze	and	iron.	Arrayed	in	fragments	of
armour,	fur,	hide.	Silent,	now,	motionless.
The	sky	overhead	was	dark,	lowering	and	yet	still,	as	if	a	storm	had	drawn
its	first	breath…only	to	hold	it.
Paran	looked	upon	that	ghastly	rank	facing	him.	He	was	not	sure	how	to	do
this	–	he	had	not	even	known	if	his	summoning	would	succeed.	And
now…there	are	so	many.	He	cleared	his	throat,	then	began	calling	out	names.
‘Shank!	Aimless!	Runter!	Detoran!	Bucklund,	Hedge,	Mulch,	Toes,	Trotts!’
And	still	more	names,	as	he	scoured	his	memory,	his	recollection,	for	every
Bridgeburner	he	knew	had	died.	At	Coral,	beneath	Pale,	in	Blackdog	Forest
and	Mott	Wood,	north	of	Genabaris	and	northeast	of	Nathilog	–	names	he	had
once	fixed	in	his	mind	as	he	researched	–	for	Adjunct	Lorn	–	the	turgid,	grim
history	of	the	Bridgeburners.	He	drew	upon	names	of	the	deserters,	although
he	knew	not	if	they	lived	still	or,	if	indeed	dead,	whether	or	not	they	had
returned	to	the	fold.	The	ones	that	had	vanished	in	Blackdog’s	great	marshes,
that	had	disappeared	after	the	taking	of	Mott	City.
And	when	he	was	done,	when	he	could	remember	no	more	names,	he
began	his	list	again.
Then	saw	one	figure	in	the	front	row	dissolving,	melting	into	sludge	that
pooled	in	the	shallow	water,	slowly	seeping	away.	And	in	its	place	arose	a	man
he	recognized,	the	fire-scorched,	blasted	face	grinning	–	Paran	belatedly
realized	that	the	brutal	smile	held	no	amusement,	only	the	memory	of	a	deathgrimace.	That	and	the	terrible	damage	left	behind	by	a	weapon.
‘Runter,’	Paran	whispered.	‘Black	Coral—’
‘Captain,’	cut	in	the	dead	sapper,	‘what	are	you	doing	here?’
I	wish	people	would	stop	asking	me	that.	‘I	need	your	help.’
More	Bridgeburners	were	forming	in	the	front	ranks.	Detoran.	Sergeant
Bucklund.	Hedge,	who	now	stepped	from	the	water ’s	edge.	‘Captain.	I	always
wondered	why	you	were	so	hard	to	kill.	Now	I	know.’
‘You	do?’
‘Aye,	you’re	doomed	to	haunt	us!	Hah!	Hah	hah!’	Behind	him,	the	others
began	laughing.
Hundreds	of	thousands	of	ghosts,	all	joined	in	laughter,	was	a	sound


Ganoes	Paran	never,	ever	wanted	to	hear	again.	Mercifully,	it	was	shortlived,
as	if	all	at	once	the	army	of	dead	forgot	the	reason	for	their	amusement.
‘Now,’	Hedge	finally	said,	‘as	you	can	see,	we’re	busy.	Hah!’
Paran	shot	out	a	hand.	‘No,	please,	don’t	start	again,	Hedge.’
‘Typical.	People	need	to	be	dead	to	develop	a	real	sense	of	humour.	You
know,	Captain,	from	this	side	the	world	seems	a	whole	lot	funnier.	Funny	in	a
stupid,	pointless	way,	I’ll	grant	you—’
‘Enough	of	that,	Hedge.	You	think	I	don’t	sense	the	desperation	here?
You’re	all	in	trouble	–	even	worse,	you	need	us.	The	living,	that	is,	and	that’s
the	part	you	don’t	want	to	admit—’
‘I	admitted	it	clear	enough,’	Hedge	said.	‘To	Fid.’
‘Fiddler?’
‘Aye.	He’s	not	too	far	away	from	here,	you	know.	With	the	Fourteenth.’
‘He’s	with	the	Fourteenth?	What,	has	he	lost	his	mind?’
Hedge	smirked.	‘Damn	near,	but,	thanks	to	me,	he’s	all	right.	For	now.	This
ain’t	the	first	time	we’ve	walked	among	the	living,	Captain.	Gods	below,	you
shoulda	seen	us	twist	Korbolo’s	hair	–	him	and	his	damned	Dogslayers	–	that
was	a	night,	let	me	tell	you—’
‘No,	don’t	bother.	I	need	your	help.’
‘Fine,	be	that	way.	With	what?’
Paran	hesitated.	He’d	needed	to	get	to	this	point,	yet	now	that	he’d	arrived,
this	was	suddenly	the	last	place	he	wanted	to	be.	‘You,	here,’	he	said,	‘in	Raraku
–	this	sea,	it’s	a	damned	gate.	Between	whatever	nightmare	world	you’re	from,
and	mine.	I	need	you,	Hedge,	to	summon…something.	From	the	other	side.’
The	mass	of	ghosts	collectively	recoiled,	the	motion	snatching	a	tug	of	air
seaward.
The	dead	Bridgeburner	mage	Shank	asked,	‘Who	you	got	in	mind,
Captain,	and	what	do	you	want	it	to	do?’
Paran	glanced	back	over	a	shoulder	at	Ganath,	then	back	again.
‘Something’s	escaped,	Shank.	Here,	in	Seven	Cities.	It	needs	to	be	hunted	down.
Destroyed.’	He	hesitated.	‘I	don’t	know,	maybe	there	are	entities	out	there	that
could	do	it,	but	there’s	no	time	to	go	looking	for	them.	You	see,	this…thing…it
feeds	on	blood,	and	the	more	blood	it	feeds	on,	the	more	powerful	it	gets.	The
First	Emperor ’s	gravest	mistake,	attempting	to	create	his	own	version	of	an
Elder	God	–	you	know,	don’t	you?	What	–	who	–	I	am	talking	about.	You
know…it’s	out	there,	loose,	unchained	and	hunting—’
‘Oh	it	hunted	all	right,’	Hedge	said.	‘They	set	it	free,	under	a	geas,	then
gave	their	own	blood	to	it	–	the	blood	of	six	High	Mages,	priests	and
priestesses	of	the	Nameless	Ones	–	the	fools	sacrificed	themselves.’


‘Why?	Why	set	Dejim	Nebrahl	free?	What	geas	did	they	set	upon	it?’
‘Just	another	path.	Maybe	it’ll	lead	where	they	wanted	it	to,	maybe	not,	but
Dejim	Nebrahl	is	now	free	of	its	geas.	And	now	it	just…hunts.’
Shank	asked,	in	a	tone	filled	with	suspicion,	‘So,	Captain,	who	is	it	you
want?	To	take	the	damned	thing	down?’
‘I	could	only	think	of	one…entity.	The	same	entity	that	did	it	the	first	time.
Shank,	I	need	you	to	find	the	Deragoth.’


Chapter	Nine
If	thunder	could	be	caught,	trapped	in	stone,	and	all	its	violent
concatenation	stolen	from	time,	and	tens	of	thousands	of	years	were
freed	to	gnaw	and	scrape	this	racked	visage,	so	would	this	first
witnessing	unveil	all	its	terrible	meaning.	Such	were	my	thoughts,	then,
and	such	they	are	now,	although	decades	have	passed	in	the	interval,
when	I	last	set	eyes	upon	that	tragic	ruin,	so	fierce	was	its	ancient	claim
to	greatness.
The	Lost	City	of	the	Path’Apur
Prince	I’farah	of	Bakun,	987–1032	Burn’s	Sleep
He	had	washed	most	of	the	dried	blood	away	and	then	had	watched,	as	time
passed,	the	bruises	fade.	Blows	to	the	head	were,	of	course,	more	problematic,
and	so	there	had	been	fever,	and	with	fever	in	the	mind	demons	were	legion,
the	battles	endless,	and	there	had	been	no	rest	then.	Just	the	heat	of	war	with	the
self,	but,	finally,	that	too	had	passed,	and	shortly	before	noon	on	the	second
day,	he	watched	the	eyes	open.
Incomprehension	should	have	quickly	vanished,	yet	it	did	not,	and	this,
Taralack	Veed	decided,	was	as	he	had	expected.	He	poured	out	some	herbal	tea
as	Icarium	slowly	sat	up.	‘Here,	my	friend.	You	have	been	gone	from	me	a
long	time.’
The	Jhag	reached	for	the	tin	cup,	drank	deep,	then	held	it	out	for	more.
‘Yes,	thirst,’	the	Gral	outlaw	said,	refilling	the	cup.	‘Not	surprising.	Blood
loss.	Fever.’
‘We	fought?’
‘Aye.	A	sudden,	inexplicable	attack.	D’ivers.	My	horse	was	killed	and	I	was
thrown.	When	I	awoke,	it	was	clear	that	you	had	driven	off	our	assailant,	yet	a
blow	to	your	head	had	dragged	you	into	unconsciousness.’	He	paused,	then
added,	‘We	were	lucky,	friend.’
‘Fighting.	Yes,	I	recall	that	much.’	Icarium’s	unhuman	gaze	sought	out
Taralack	Veed’s	eyes,	searching,	quizzical.
The	Gral	sighed.	‘This	has	been	happening	often	of	late.	You	do	not


remember	me,	do	you,	Icarium?’
‘I	–	I	am	not	sure.	A	companion…’
‘Yes.	For	many	years	now.	Your	companion.	Taralack	Veed,	once	of	the
Gral	Tribe,	yet	now	sworn	to	a	much	higher	cause.’
‘And	that	is?’
‘To	walk	at	your	side,	Icarium.’
The	Jhag	stared	down	at	the	cup	in	his	hands.	‘For	many	years	now,	you
say,’	he	whispered.	‘A	higher	cause…that	I	do	not	understand.	I	am…nothing.
No-one.	I	am	lost—’	He	looked	up.	‘I	am	lost,’	he	repeated.	‘I	know	nothing	of
a	higher	cause,	such	that	would	make	you	abandon	your	people.	To	walk	at	my
side,	Taralack	Veed.	Why?’
The	Gral	spat	on	his	palms,	rubbed	them	together,	then	slicked	his	hair
back.	‘You	are	the	greatest	warrior	this	world	has	ever	seen.	Yet	cursed.	To	be,
as	you	say,	forever	lost.	And	that	is	why	you	must	have	a	companion,	to	recall
to	you	the	great	task	that	awaits	you.’
‘And	what	task	is	this?’
Taralack	Veed	rose.	‘You	will	know	when	the	time	comes.	This	task	shall
be	made	plain,	so	plain	to	you,	and	so	perfect,	you	will	know	that	you	have
been	fashioned	–	from	the	very	start	–	to	give	answer.	Would	that	I	could	be
more	helpful,	Icarium.’
The	Jhag’s	gaze	scanned	their	small	encampment.	‘Ah,	I	see	you	have
retrieved	my	bow	and	sword.’
‘I	have.	Are	you	mended	enough	to	travel?’
‘Yes,	I	think	so.	Although…hungry.’
‘I	have	smoked	meat	in	my	pack.	The	very	hare	you	killed	three	days	ago.
We	can	eat	as	we	walk.’
Icarium	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Yes.	I	do	feel	some	urgency.	As	if,	as	if	I	have
been	looking	for	something.’	He	smiled	at	the	Gral.	‘Perhaps	my	own	past…’
‘When	you	discover	what	you	seek,	my	friend,	all	knowledge	of	your	past
will	return	to	you.	So	it	is	prophesied.’
‘Ah.	Well	then,	friend	Veed,	have	we	a	direction	in	mind?’
Taralack	gathered	his	gear.	‘North,	and	west.	We	are	seeking	the	wild
coast,	opposite	the	island	of	Sepik.’
‘Do	you	recall	why?’
‘Instinct,	you	said.	A	sense	that	you	are…compelled.	Trust	those	instincts,
Icarium,	as	you	have	in	the	past.	They	will	guide	us	through,	no	matter	who	or
what	stands	in	our	way.’
‘Why	should	anyone	stand	in	our	way?’	The	Jhag	strapped	on	his	sword,
then	retrieved	the	cup	and	downed	the	last	of	the	herbal	tea.


‘You	have	enemies,	Icarium.	Even	now,	we	are	being	hunted,	and	that	is
why	we	can	delay	here	no	longer.’
Collecting	his	bow,	then	stepping	close	to	hand	the	Gral	the	empty	tin	cup,
Icarium	paused,	then	said,	‘You	stood	guard	over	me,	Taralack	Veed.	I	feel…I
feel	I	do	not	deserve	such	loyalty.’
‘It	is	no	great	burden,	Icarium.	True,	I	miss	my	wife,	my	children.	My	tribe.
But	there	can	be	no	stepping	aside	from	this	responsibility.	I	do	what	I	must.
You	are	chosen	by	all	the	gods,	Icarium,	to	free	the	world	of	a	great	evil,	and	I
know	in	my	heart	that	you	will	not	fail.’
The	Jhag	warrior	sighed.	‘Would	that	I	shared	your	faith	in	my	abilities,
Taralack	Veed.’
‘E’napatha	N’apur	–	does	that	name	stir	your	memories?’
Frowning,	Icarium	shook	his	head.
‘A	city	of	evil,’	Taralack	explained.	‘Four	thousand	years	ago	–	with	one
like	me	standing	at	your	side	–	you	drew	your	fearsome	sword	and	walked
towards	its	barred	gates.	Five	days,	Icarium.	Five	days.	That	is	what	it	took	you
to	slaughter	the	tyrant	and	every	soldier	in	that	city.’
A	look	of	horror	on	the	Jhag’s	face.	‘I	–	I	did	what?’
‘You	understood	the	necessity,	Icarium,	as	you	always	do	when	faced	with
such	evil.	You	understood,	too,	that	none	could	be	permitted	to	carry	with	them
the	memory	of	that	city.	And	why	it	was	necessary	to	then	slay	every	man,
woman	and	child	in	E’napatha	N’apur.	To	leave	none	breathing.’
‘No.	I	would	not	have.	Taralack,	no,	please	–	there	is	no	necessity	so
terrible	that	could	compel	me	to	commit	such	slaughter—’
‘Ah,	dear	companion,’	said	Taralack	Veed,	with	great	sorrow.	‘This	is	the
battle	you	must	always	wage,	and	this	is	why	one	such	as	myself	must	be	at
your	side.	To	hold	you	to	the	truth	of	the	world,	the	truth	of	your	own	soul.
You	are	the	Slayer,	Icarium.	You	walk	the	Blood	Road,	but	it	is	a	straight	and
true	road.	The	coldest	justice,	yet	a	pure	one.	So	pure	even	you	recoil	from	it.’
He	settled	a	hand	on	the	Jhag’s	shoulder.	‘Come,	we	can	speak	more	of	it	as	we
travel.	I	have	spoken	these	words	many,	many	times,	my	friend,	and	each	time
you	are	the	same,	wishing	with	all	your	heart	that	you	could	flee	from
yourself,	from	who	and	what	you	are.	Alas,	you	cannot,	and	so	you	must,	once
more,	learn	to	harden	yourself.
‘The	enemy	is	evil,	Icarium.	The	face	of	the	world	is	evil.	And	so,	friend,
your	enemy	is…’
The	warrior	looked	away,	and	Taralack	Veed	barely	heard	his	whispered
reply,	‘The	world.’
‘Yes.	Would	that	I	could	hide	such	truth	from	you,	but	I	could	not	claim	to


be	your	friend	if	I	did	such	a	thing.’
‘No,	that	is	true.	Very	well,	Taralack	Veed,	let	us	as	you	say	speak	more	of
this	whilst	we	journey	north	and	west.	To	the	coast	opposite	the	island	of	Sepik.
Yes,	I	feel…there	is	something	there.	Awaiting	us.’
‘You	must	needs	be	ready	for	it,’	the	Gral	said.
Icarium	nodded.	‘And	so	I	shall,	my	friend.’
	
Each	time,	the	return	journey	was	harder,	more	fraught,	and	far,	far	less
certain.	There	were	things	that	would	have	made	it	easier.	Knowing	where	he
had	been,	for	one,	and	knowing	where	he	must	return	to,	for	another.	Returning
to…sanity?	Perhaps.	But	Heboric	Ghost	Hands	had	no	firm	grasp	of	what
sanity	was,	what	it	looked	like,	felt	like,	smelled	like.	It	might	be	that	he	had
never	known.
Rock	was	bone.	Dust	was	flesh.	Water	was	blood.	Residues	settled	in
multitudes,	becoming	layers,	and	upon	those	layers	yet	more,	and	on	and	on
until	a	world	was	made,	until	all	that	death	could	hold	up	one’s	feet	where	one
stood,	and	rise	to	meet	every	step	one	took.	A	solid	bed	to	lie	on.	So	much	for
the	world.	Death	holds	us	up.	And	then	there	were	the	breaths	that	filled,	that
made	the	air,	the	heaving	assertions	measuring	the	passing	of	time,	like	notches
marking	the	arc	of	a	life,	of	every	life.	How	many	of	those	breaths	were	last
ones?	The	final	expellation	of	a	beast,	an	insect,	a	plant,	a	human	with	film
covering	his	or	her	fading	eyes?	And	so	how,	how	could	one	draw	such	air
into	the	lungs?	Knowing	how	filled	with	death	it	was,	how	saturated	it	was	with
failure	and	surrender?
Such	air	choked	him,	burned	down	his	throat,	tasting	of	the	bitterest	acid.
Dissolving	and	devouring,	until	he	was	naught	but…residue.
They	were	so	young,	his	companions.	There	was	no	way	they	could
understand	the	filth	they	walked	on,	walked	in,	walked	through.	And	took	into
themselves,	only	to	fling	some	of	it	back	out	again,	now	flavoured	by	their
own	sordid	additions.	And	when	they	slept,	each	night,	they	were	as	empty
things.	While	Heboric	fought	on	against	the	knowledge	that	the	world	did	not
breathe,	not	any	more.	No,	now,	the	world	drowned.
And	I	drown	with	it.	Here	in	this	cursed	wasteland.	In	the	sand	and	heat	and
dust.	I	am	drowning.	Every	night.	Drowning.
What	could	Treach	give	him?	This	savage	god	with	its	overwhelming
hungers,	desires,	needs.	Its	mindless	ferocity,	as	if	it	could	pull	back	and
reclaim	every	breath	it	drew	into	its	bestial	lungs,	and	so	defy	the	world,	the
ageing	world	and	its	deluge	of	death.	He	was	wrongly	chosen,	so	every	ghost


told	him,	perhaps	not	in	words,	but	in	their	constant	crowding	him,	rising	up,
overwhelming	him	with	their	silent,	accusatory	regard.
And	there	was	more.	The	whisperings	in	his	dreams,	voices	emerging
from	a	sea	of	jade,	beseeching.	He	was	the	stranger	who	had	come	among
them;	he	had	done	what	none	other	had	done:	he	had	reached	through	the	green
prison.	And	they	prayed	to	him,	begging	for	his	return.	Why?	What	did	they
want?
No,	he	did	not	want	answers	to	such	questions.	He	would	return	this	cursed
gift	of	jade,	this	alien	power.	He	would	cast	it	back	into	the	void	and	be	done
with	it.
Holding	to	that,	clinging	to	that,	was	keeping	him	sane.	If	this	torment	of
living	could	be	called	sane.	Drowning,	I	am	drowning,	and	yet…these	damned
feline	gifts,	this	welter	of	senses,	so	sweet,	so	rich,	I	can	feel	them,	seeking	to
seduce	me.	Back	into	this	momentary	world.
In	the	east	the	sun	was	clawing	its	way	back	into	the	sky,	the	edge	of	some
vast	iron	blade,	just	pulled	from	the	forge.	He	watched	the	red	glow	cutting	the
darkness,	and	wondered	at	this	strange	sense	of	imminence	that	so	stilled	the
dawn	air.
A	groan	from	the	bundle	of	blankets	where	Scillara	slept,	then:	‘So	much
for	the	blissful	poison.’
Heboric	flinched,	then	drew	a	deep	breath,	released	a	slow	sigh.	‘Which
blissful	poison	would	that	be,	Scillara?’
Another	groan,	as	she	worked	her	way	into	a	sitting	position.	‘I	ache,	old
man.	My	back,	my	hips,	everywhere.	And	I	get	no	sleep	–	no	position	is
comfortable	and	I	have	to	pee	all	the	time.	This,	this	is	awful.	Gods,	why	do
women	do	it?	Again	and	again	and	again	–	are	they	all	mad?’
‘You’d	know	better	than	I,’	Heboric	said.	‘But	I	tell	you,	men	are	no	less
inexplicable.	In	what	they	think.	In	what	they	do.’
‘The	sooner	I	get	this	beast	out	the	better,’	she	said,	hands	on	her	swollen
belly.	‘Look	at	me,	I’m	sagging.	Everywhere.	Sagging.’
The	others	had	woken,	Felisin	staring	wide-eyed	at	Scillara	–	with	the
discovery	that	the	older	woman	was	pregnant,	there	had	been	a	time	of	worship
for	young	Felisin.	It	seemed	that	the	disillusionment	had	begun.	Cutter	had
thrown	back	his	blankets	and	was	already	resurrecting	last	night’s	fire.	The
demon,	Greyfrog,	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.	Off	hunting,	Heboric	supposed.
‘Your	hands,’	Scillara	noted,	‘are	looking	particularly	green	this	morning,
old	man.’
He	did	not	bother	confirming	this	observation.	He	could	feel	that	alien
pressure	well	enough.	‘Naught	but	ghosts,’	he	said,	‘the	ones	from	beyond	the


veil,	from	the	very	depths	of	the	Abyss.	Oh	how	they	cry	out.	I	was	blind	once.
Would	that	I	were	now	deaf.’
They	looked	at	him	strangely,	as	they	often	did	after	he’d	spoken.	Truths.
His	truths,	the	ones	they	couldn’t	see,	nor	understand.	It	didn’t	matter.	He	knew
what	he	knew.	‘There	is	a	vast	dead	city	awaiting	us	this	day,’	he	said.	‘Its
residents	were	slain.	All	of	them.	By	Icarium,	long	ago.	There	was	a	sister	city
to	the	north	–	when	they	heard	what	had	happened,	they	journeyed	here	to	see
for	themselves.	And	then,	my	young	companions,	they	chose	to	bury	E’napatha
N’apur.	The	entire	city.	They	buried	it	intact.	Thousands	of	years	have	passed,
and	now	the	winds	and	rains	have	rotted	away	that	solid	face.	Now,	the	old
truths	are	revealed	once	more.’
Cutter	poured	water	into	a	tin	pot	and	set	it	on	the	hook	slung	beneath	an
iron	tripod.	‘Icarium,’	he	said.	‘I	travelled	with	him	for	a	time.	With	Mappo,
and	Fiddler.’	He	then	made	a	face.	‘And	Iskaral	Pust,	that	insane	little	stoat	of	a
man.	Said	he	was	a	High	Priest	of	Shadow.	A	High	Priest!	Well,	if	that’s	the	best
Shadowthrone	can	do…’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Icarium…was	a…well,	he	was
tragic,	I	guess.	Yet,	he	would	not	have	attacked	that	city	without	a	reason,	I
think.’
Heboric	barked	a	laugh.	‘Aye,	no	shortage	of	reasons	in	this	world.	The
King	barred	the	gates,	would	not	permit	him	to	enter.	Too	many	dark	tales
surrounding	the	name	of	Icarium.	A	soldier	on	the	battlements	fired	a	warning
arrow.	It	ricocheted	off	a	rock	and	grazed	Icarium’s	left	leg,	then	sank	deep
into	the	throat	of	his	companion	–	the	poor	bastard	drowned	in	his	own	blood
–	and	so	Icarium’s	rage	was	unleashed.’
‘If	there	were	no	survivors,’	Scillara	said,	‘how	do	you	know	all	this?’
‘The	ghosts	wander	the	region,’	Heboric	replied.	He	gestured.	‘Farms	once
stood	here,	before	the	desert	arrived.’	He	smiled	at	the	others.	‘Indeed,	today	is
market	day,	and	the	roads	–	which	none	but	I	can	see	–	are	crowded	with	pushcarts,	oxen,	men	and	women.	And	children	and	dogs.	On	either	side,	drovers
whistle	and	tap	their	staves	to	keep	the	sheep	and	goats	moving.	From	the	poor
farms	this	close	to	the	city,	old	women	come	out	with	baskets	to	collect	the
dung	for	their	fields.’
Felisin	whispered,	‘You	see	all	this?’
‘Aye.’
‘Right	now?’
‘Only	fools	think	the	past	is	invisible.’
‘Do	those	ghosts,’	Felisin	asked,	‘do	they	see	you?’
‘Perhaps.	Those	that	do,	well,	they	know	they	are	dead.	The	others	do	not
know,	and	do	not	see	me.	The	realization	of	one’s	own	death	is	a	terrifying


thing;	they	flee	from	it,	returning	to	their	illusion	–	and	so	I	appear,	then
vanish,	and	I	am	naught	but	a	mirage.’	He	rose.	‘Soon,	we	will	approach	the
city	itself,	and	there	will	be	soldiers,	and	these	ghosts	see	me,	oh	yes,	and	call
out	to	me.	But	how	can	I	answer,	when	I	don’t	understand	what	they	want	of
me?	They	cry	out,	as	if	in	recognition—’
‘You	are	the	Destriant	of	Treach,	the	Tiger	of	Summer,’	Cutter	said.
‘Treach	was	a	First	Hero,’	Heboric	replied.	‘A	Soletaken	who	escaped	the
Slaughter.	Like	Ryllandaras	and	Rikkter,	Tholen	and	Denesmet.	Don’t	you	see?
These	ghost	soldiers	–	they	did	not	worship	Treach!	No,	their	god	of	war
belonged	to	the	Seven,	who	would	one	day	become	the	Holies.	A	single	visage
of	Dessimbelackis	–	that	and	nothing	more.	I	am	nothing	to	them,	Cutter,	yet
they	will	not	leave	me	alone!’
Both	Cutter	and	Felisin	had	recoiled	at	his	outburst,	but	Scillara	was
grinning.
‘You	find	all	this	amusing?’	he	demanded,	glaring	at	her.
‘I	do.	Look	at	you.	You	were	a	priest	of	Fener,	and	now	you’re	a	priest	of
Treach.	Both	gods	of	war.	Heboric,	how	many	faces	do	you	think	the	god	of
war	has?	Thousands.	And	in	ages	long	past?	Tens	of	thousands?	Every	damned
tribe,	old	man.	All	different,	but	all	the	same.’	She	lit	her	pipe,	smoke
wreathing	her	face,	then	said,	‘Wouldn’t	surprise	me	if	all	the	gods	are	just
aspects	of	one	god,	and	all	this	fighting	is	just	proof	that	that	one	god	is
insane.’
‘Insane?’	Heboric	was	trembling.	He	could	feel	his	heart	hammering	away
like	some	ghastly	demon	at	the	door	to	his	soul.
‘Or	maybe	just	confused.	All	those	bickering	worshippers,	each	one
convinced	their	version	is	the	right	one.	Imagine	getting	prayers	from	ten
million	believers,	not	one	of	them	believing	the	same	thing	as	the	one	kneeling
beside	him	or	her.	Imagine	all	those	Holy	Books,	not	one	of	them	agreeing	on
anything,	yet	all	of	them	purporting	to	be	the	word	of	that	one	god.	Imagine
two	armies	annihilating	each	other,	both	in	that	god’s	name.	Who	wouldn’t	be
driven	mad	by	all	that?’
‘Well,’	Cutter	said	into	the	silence	that	followed	Scillara’s	diatribe,	‘the
tea’s	ready.’

Greyfrog	squatted	atop	a	flat	rock,	looking	down	on	the	unhappy	group.	The
demon’s	belly	was	full,	although	the	wild	goat	still	kicked	on	occasion.
Morose.	They	are	not	getting	along.	Tragic	list,	listlessly	reiterated.	Child-


swollen	beauty	is	miserable	with	aches	and	discomfort.	Younger	beauty	feels
shocked,	frightened	and	alone.	Yet	likely	to	reject	soft	comfort	given	by	adoring
Greyfrog.	Troubled	assassin	beset	by	impatience,	for	what,	I	know	not.	And
terrible	priest.	Ah,	shivering	haunt!	So	much	displeasure!	Dismay!	Perhaps	I
could	regurgitate	the	goat,	and	we	could	share	said	fine	repast.	Fine,	still
kicking	repast.	Aai,	worst	kind	of	indigestion!
‘Greyfrog!’	Cutter	called	up.	‘What	are	you	doing	up	there?’
‘Friend	Cutter.	Discomfort.	Regretting	the	horns.’
	
Thus	far,	Samar	Dev	reflected,	the	notations	on	the	map	had	proved	accurate.
From	dry	scrubland	to	plains,	and	now,	finally,	patches	of	deciduous	forest,
arrayed	amidst	marshy	glades	and	stubborn	remnants	of	true	grassland.	Two,
perhaps	three	days	of	travel	northward	and	they	would	reach	boreal	forest.
Bhederin-hunters,	travelling	in	small	bands,	shared	this	wild,	unbroken
land.	They	had	seen	such	bands	from	a	distance	and	had	come	upon	signs	of
camps,	but	it	was	clear	that	these	nomadic	savages	had	no	interest	in	contacting
them.	Hardly	surprising	–	the	sight	of	Karsa	Orlong	was	frightening	enough,
astride	his	Jhag	horse,	weapons	bristling,	bloodstained	white	fur	riding	his
broad	shoulders.
The	bhederin	herds	had	broken	up	and	scattered	into	smaller	groups	upon
reaching	the	aspen	parkland.	There	seemed	little	sense,	as	far	as	Samar	Dev
could	determine,	to	the	migration	of	these	huge	beasts.	True,	the	dry,	hot
season	was	nearing	its	end,	and	the	nights	were	growing	cool,	sufficient	to	turn
rust-coloured	the	leaves	of	the	trees,	but	there	was	nothing	fierce	in	a	Seven
Cities	winter.	More	rain,	perhaps,	although	that	rarely	reached	far	inland	–	the
Jhag	Odhan	to	the	south	was	unchanging,	after	all.
‘I	think,’	she	said,	‘this	is	some	kind	of	ancient	memory.’
Karsa	grunted,	then	said,	‘Looks	like	forest	to	me,	woman.’
‘No,	these	bhederin	–	those	big	hulking	shapes	beneath	the	trees	over	there.
I	think	it’s	some	old	instinct	that	brings	them	north	into	these	forests.	From	a
time	when	winter	brought	snow	and	wind	to	the	Odhan.’
‘The	rains	will	make	the	grass	lush,	Samar	Dev,’	the	Teblor	said.	‘They
come	up	here	to	get	fat.’
‘All	right,	that	sounds	reasonable	enough.	I	suppose.	Good	for	the	hunters,
though.’	A	few	days	earlier	they	had	passed	a	place	of	great	slaughter.	Part	of	a
herd	had	been	separated	and	driven	off	a	cliff.	Four	or	five	dozen	hunters	had
gathered	and	were	butchering	the	meat,	women	among	them	tending	smokefires	and	pinning	strips	of	meat	to	racks.	Half-wild	dogs	–	more	wolf	than	dog,


in	truth	–	had	challenged	Samar	Dev	and	Karsa	when	they	rode	too	close,	and
she	had	seen	that	the	beasts	had	no	canines,	likely	cut	off	when	they	were
young,	although	they	presented	sufficient	threat	that	the	travellers	elected	to
draw	no	closer	to	the	kill-site.
She	was	fascinated	by	these	fringe	tribes	living	out	here	in	the	wastes,
suspecting	that	nothing	had	changed	for	them	in	thousands	of	years;	oh,	iron
weapons	and	tools,	evincing	some	form	of	trade	with	the	more	civilized
peoples	to	the	east,	but	they	used	no	horses,	which	she	found	odd.	Instead,	their
dogs	were	harnessed	to	travois.	And	mostly	basketry	instead	of	fired-clay	pots,
which	made	sense	given	that	the	bands	travelled	on	foot.
Here	and	there,	lone	trees	stood	tall	on	the	grasslands,	and	these	seemed	to
be	a	focal	point	for	some	kind	of	spirit	worship,	given	the	fetishes	tied	to
branches,	and	the	antlers	and	bhederin	skulls	set	in	notches	and	forks,	some	so
old	that	the	wood	had	grown	round	them.	Invariably,	near	such	sentinel	trees
there	would	be	a	cemetery,	signified	by	raised	platforms	housing	hide-wrapped
corpses,	and,	of	course,	the	crows	squabbling	over	every	perch.
Karsa	and	Samar	had	avoided	trespass	on	such	sites.	Though	Samar
suspected	that	the	Teblor	would	have	welcomed	a	succession	of	running	battles
and	skirmishes,	if	only	to	ease	the	boredom	of	the	journey.	Yet	for	all	his
ferocity,	Karsa	Orlong	had	proved	an	easy	man	to	travel	with,	albeit	somewhat
taciturn	and	inclined	to	brooding	–	but	whatever	haunted	him	had	nothing	to	do
with	her,	nor	was	he	inclined	to	take	it	out	on	her	–	a	true	virtue	rare	among
men.
‘I	am	thinking,’	he	said,	startling	her.
‘What	about,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘The	bhederin	and	those	hunters	at	the	base	of	the	cliff.	Two	hundred	dead
bhederin,	at	least,	and	they	were	stripping	them	down	to	the	bone,	then	boiling
the	bones	themselves.	Whilst	we	eat	nothing	but	rabbits	and	the	occasional	deer.
I	think,	Samar	Dev,	we	should	kill	ourselves	one	of	these	bhederin.’
‘Don’t	be	fooled	by	them,	Karsa	Orlong.	They	are	a	lot	faster	than	they
look.	And	agile.’
‘Yes,	but	they	are	herd	animals.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘The	bulls	care	more	about	protecting	ten	females	and	their	calves	than	one
female	separated	out	from	the	others.’
‘Probably	true.	So,	how	do	you	plan	on	separating	one	out?	And	don’t
forget,	that	female	won’t	be	a	docile	thing	–	it	could	knock	you	and	your	horse
down	given	the	chance.	Then	trample	you.’
‘I	am	not	the	one	to	worry	about	that.	It	is	you	who	must	worry,	Samar


Dev.’
‘Why	me?’
‘Because	you	will	be	the	bait,	the	lure.	And	so	you	must	be	sure	to	be	quick
and	alert.’
‘Bait?	Now	hold	on—’
‘Quick	and	alert.	I	will	take	care	of	the	rest.’
‘I	can’t	say	I	like	this	idea,	Karsa	Orlong.	I	am	in	fact	quite	content	with
rabbits	and	deer.’
‘Well,	I’m	not.	And	I	want	a	hide.’
‘What	for?	How	many	hides	do	you	plan	to	wear?’
‘Find	us	a	small	clump	of	the	beasts	–	they	are	not	frightened	by	your
horse	as	much	as	they	are	by	mine.’
‘That’s	because	Jhag	horses	will	take	calves	on	occasion.	So	I	read…
somewhere.’
The	Teblor	bared	his	teeth,	as	if	he	found	the	image	amusing.
Samar	Dev	sighed,	then	said,	‘There’s	a	small	herd	just	ahead	and	to	the
left	–	they	moved	out	of	this	glade	as	we	approached.’
‘Good.	When	we	reach	the	next	clearing	I	want	you	to	begin	a	canter
towards	them.’
‘That	will	draw	out	the	bull,	Karsa	–	how	close	do	you	expect	me	to	get?’
‘Close	enough	to	be	chased.’
‘I	will	not.	That	will	achieve	nothing—’
‘The	females	will	bolt,	woman.	And	from	them	I	shall	make	my	kill	–	how
far	do	you	think	the	bull	will	chase	you?	He	will	turn	about,	to	rejoin	his	harem
—’
‘And	so	become	your	problem.’
‘Enough	talk.’	They	were	picking	their	way	through	a	stand	of	poplar	and
aspen,	the	horses	pushing	through	chest-high	dogwood.	Just	beyond	was
another	glade,	this	one	long,	the	way	the	green	grasses	were	clumped
suggesting	wet	ground.	On	the	far	side,	perhaps	forty	paces	distant,	a	score	of
hulking	dark	shapes	loomed	beneath	the	branches	of	more	trees.
‘This	is	swamp,’	Samar	Dev	noted.	‘We	should	find	another—’
‘Ride,	Samar	Dev.’
She	halted	her	horse.	‘And	if	I	don’t?’
‘Stubborn	child.	I	shall	leave	you	here,	of	course	–	you	are	slowing	me
down	as	it	is.’
‘Was	that	supposed	to	hurt	my	feelings,	Karsa	Orlong?	You	want	to	kill	a
bhederin	just	to	prove	to	yourself	that	you	can	best	the	hunters.	So,	no	cliff,	no
blinds	or	corrals,	no	pack	of	wolf-dogs	to	flank	and	drive	the	bhederin.	No,


you	want	to	leap	off	your	horse	and	wrestle	one	to	the	ground,	then	choke	it	to
death,	or	maybe	throw	it	against	a	tree,	or	maybe	just	lift	it	up	and	spin	it	round
until	it	dies	of	dizziness.	And	you	dare	to	call	me	a	child?’	She	laughed.
Because,	as	she	well	knew,	laughter	would	sting.
Yet	no	sudden	rage	darkened	his	face,	and	his	eyes	were	calm	as	they
studied	her.	Then	he	smiled.	‘Witness.’
And	with	that	he	rode	out	into	the	clearing.	Inky	water	spraying	from	the
Jhag	horse’s	hoofs,	the	beast	voicing	something	like	a	snarl	as	it	galloped
towards	the	herd.	The	bhederin	scattered	in	a	thunderous	crash	of	bushes	and
snapping	branches.	Two	shot	out	directly	towards	Karsa.
A	mistake,	Samar	Dev	realized	in	that	moment,	to	assume	there	was	but
one	male.	One	was	clearly	younger	than	the	other,	yet	both	were	huge,	eyes
red-rimmed	with	rage,	water	exploding	round	them	as	they	charged	their
attacker.
The	Jhag	horse,	Havok,	swerved	suddenly,	legs	gathering	beneath	him,
then	the	young	stallion	launched	himself	over	the	back	of	the	larger	bull.	But
the	bhederin	was	quicker,	twisting	and	heaving	its	massive	head	upward,	horns
seeking	the	horse’s	exposed	underbelly.
That	upward	lunge	killed	the	bull,	for	the	beast’s	head	met	the	point	of
Karsa’s	stone	sword,	which	slid	into	the	brain	beneath	the	base	of	the	skull,
severing	most	of	its	spine	in	the	process.
Havok	landed	in	a	splash	and	spray	of	muck	on	the	far	side	of	the
collapsing	bull,	well	beyond	the	range	of	the	second	male	–	which	now
pivoted,	stunningly	fast,	and	set	off	in	pursuit	of	Karsa.
The	warrior	swung	his	horse	to	the	left,	hoofs	pounding	as	Havok	ran
parallel	to	the	edge	of	trees,	chasing	after	the	half-dozen	females	and	calves
that	had	lumbered	out	into	the	clearing.	The	second	bull	closed	fast	behind
them.
The	cows	and	calves	scattered	once	more,	one	bolting	in	a	direction
different	from	the	others.	Havok	swerved	into	its	wake,	and	a	heartbeat	later
was	galloping	alongside	the	beast.	Behind	them,	the	second	male	had	drawn	up
to	flank	the	other	females	–	and	one	and	all,	this	group	then	crashed	back	into
the	thicket.
Samar	Dev	watched	Karsa	Orlong	lean	far	to	one	side,	then	slash	down
with	his	sword,	taking	the	beast	in	the	spine	just	above	its	hips.
The	cow’s	back	legs	collapsed	under	the	blow,	sluicing	through	the	muck
as	the	creature	struggled	to	drag	them	forward.
Wheeling	round	in	front	of	the	bhederin,	Karsa	held	his	sword	poised	until
he	reached	the	cow’s	left	side,	then	he	lunged	down,	the	sword’s	point	driving


into	the	animal’s	heart.
Front	legs	buckled,	and	the	cow	sagged	to	one	side,	then	was	still.
Halting	his	horse,	Karsa	slid	off	and	approached	the	dead	cow.	‘Make	us	a
camp,’	he	said	to	Samar	Dev.
She	stared	at	him,	then	said,	‘Fine,	you	have	shown	me	that	I	am,	in	fact,
unnecessary.	As	far	as	you’re	concerned.	Now	what?	You	expect	me	to	set	up
camp,	and	then,	I	presume,	help	you	butcher	that	thing.	Shall	I	lie	beneath	you
tonight	just	to	round	things	out?’
He	had	drawn	a	knife	and	now	knelt	in	the	pooling	water	beside	the	cow.	‘If
you	like,’	he	said.
Barbarian	bastard…well,	I	should	not	have	expected	anything	else,	should
I?	‘All	right,	I	have	been	thinking,	we	will	need	this	meat	–	the	land	of	rocks
and	lakes	north	of	here	no	doubt	has	game,	but	far	less	plentiful	and	far	more
elusive.’
‘I	shall	take	the	bull’s	skin,’	Karsa	said,	slicing	open	the	bhederin’s	belly.
Entrails	tumbled	out	to	splash	in	the	swampy	water.	Already,	hundreds	of
insects	swarmed	the	kill-site.	‘Do	you	wish	this	cow’s	skin,	Samar	Dev?’
‘Why	not?	If	a	glacier	lands	on	us	we	won’t	freeze,	and	that’s	something.’
He	glanced	over	at	her.	‘Woman,	glaciers	don’t	jump.	They	crawl.’
‘That	depends	on	who	made	them	in	the	first	place,	Karsa	Orlong.’
He	bared	his	teeth.	‘Legends	of	the	Jaghut	do	not	impress	me.	Ice	is	ever	a
slow-moving	river.’
‘If	you	believe	that,	Karsa	Orlong,	you	know	far	less	than	you	think	you
do.’
‘Do	you	plan	on	sitting	on	that	horse	all	day,	woman?’
‘Until	I	find	high	ground	to	make	a	camp,	yes.’	And	she	gathered	the	reins.
Witness,	he	said.	He’s	said	that	before,	hasn’t	he?	Some	kind	of	tribal	thing,
I	suppose.	Well,	I	witnessed	all	right.	As	did	that	savage	hiding	in	the	shadows
at	the	far	end	of	the	glade.	I	pray	the	locals	do	not	feel	proprietary	towards
these	bhederin.	Or	we	will	find	excitement	unending,	which	Karsa	might	well
enjoy.	As	for	me,	I’ll	just	likely	end	up	dead.
Well,	too	late	to	worry	much	about	that.
She	then	wondered	how	many	of	Karsa	Orlong’s	past	companions	had	had
similar	thoughts.	In	those	times	just	before	the	Teblor	barbarian	found	himself,
once	again,	travelling	alone.
	
The	rough	crags	of	the	ridge	cast	a	maze	of	shadows	along	the	ledge	just
beneath,	and	in	these	shadows	five	sets	of	serpentine	eyes	stared	down	at	the


winding	wall	of	dust	on	the	plain	below.	A	trader ’s	caravan,	seven	wagons,	two
carriages,	twenty	guards	on	horses.	And	three	war-dogs.
There	had	been	six,	but	three	had	caught	Dejim	Nebrahl’s	scent	and,	stupid
creatures	that	they	were,	had	set	off	to	hunt	the	T’rolbarahl	down.	They	had
succeeded	in	finding	the	D’ivers,	and	their	blood	now	filled	the	bellies	of	the
five	remaining	beasts.
The	Trell	had	stunned	Dejim	Nebrahl.	To	snap	one	of	his	necks	–	not	even
a	Tartheno	could	manage	such	a	thing	–	and	one	had	tried,	long	ago.	Then,	to
drag	the	other	down,	over	the	cliff’s	edge,	to	plunge	to	its	death	among	the
jagged	rocks	below.	This	audacity	was…unforgivable.	Weak	and	wounded,
Dejim	Nebrahl	had	fled	the	scene	of	ambush,	wandering	half-crazed	with	anger
and	pain	until	stumbling	upon	the	trail	of	this	caravan.	How	many	days	and
nights	had	passed,	the	T’rolbarahl	had	no	idea.	There	was	hunger,	the	need	to
heal,	and	these	demands	filled	the	mind	of	the	D’ivers.
Before	Dejim	Nebrahl,	now,	waited	his	salvation.	Enough	blood	to	spawn
replacements	for	those	he	had	lost	in	the	ambush;	perhaps	enough	blood	to
fashion	yet	another,	an	eighth.
He	would	strike	at	dusk,	the	moment	the	caravan	halted	for	the	day.
Slaughter	the	guards	first,	then	the	remaining	dogs,	and	finally	the	fat
weaklings	riding	in	their	puny	carriages.	The	merchant	with	his	harem	of	silent
children,	each	one	chained	to	the	next	and	trailing	behind	the	carriage.	A	trader
in	mortal	flesh.
The	notion	sickened	Dejim	Nebrahl.	There	had	been	such	detestable
creatures	in	the	time	of	the	First	Empire,	and	depravity	never	went	extinct.
When	the	T’rolbarahl	ruled	this	land,	a	new	justice	would	descend	upon	the
despoilers	of	flesh.	Dejim	would	feed	upon	them	first,	and	then	all	other
criminals,	the	murderers,	the	beaters	of	the	helpless,	the	stone-throwers,	the
torturers	of	the	spirit.
His	creator	had	meant	him	and	his	kind	to	be	guardians	of	the	First	Empire.
Thus	the	conjoining	of	bloods,	making	the	sense	of	perfection	strong,	godlike.	Too	strong,	of	course.	The	T’rolbarahl	would	not	be	ruled	by	an
imperfect	master.	No,	they	would	rule,	for	only	then	could	true	justice	be
delivered.
Justice.	And…of	course…natural	hunger.	Necessity	carved	out	its	own
laws,	and	these	could	not	be	denied.	When	he	ruled,	Dejim	Nebrahl	would
fashion	a	true	balance	between	the	two	dominant	forces	in	his	D’ivers	soul,	and
if	the	mortal	fools	suffered	beneath	the	weight	of	his	justice,	then	so	be	it.	They
deserved	the	truth	of	their	own	beliefs.	Deserved	the	talon-sharp	edges	of	their
own	vaunted	virtues,	for	virtues	were	more	than	just	words,	they	were


weapons,	and	it	was	only	right	that	such	weapons	be	turned	upon	their	wielders.
The	shadows	had	descended	the	cliff-face	here	in	the	lee	of	the	setting
sun’s	light.	Dejim	Nebrahl	followed	those	shadows	downward	to	the	plain,	five
sets	of	eyes,	but	one	mind.	The	focus	of	all	absolute	and	unwavering.
Delicious	slaughter.	Splashing	red	to	celebrate	the	sun’s	lurid	fire.
As	he	flowed	out	onto	the	plain,	he	heard	the	dogs	begin	barking.
A	moment	of	pity	for	them.	Stupid	as	they	were,	they	knew	about	necessity.
	
Something	of	a	struggle,	but	he	managed	to	unfold	himself	and	descend,
groaning	with	stiffness,	from	the	mule’s	broad	back.	And,	despite	the	awkward
effort,	he	spilled	not	a	single	drop	from	his	cherished	bucket.	Humming
beneath	his	breath	some	chant	or	other	–	he’d	forgotten	where	in	the	vast	tome
of	Holy	Songs	it	had	come	from,	and	really,	did	it	actually	matter?	–	he
waddled	with	his	burden	to	the	simpering	waves	of	Raraku	Sea,	then	walked
out	amidst	the	softly	swirling	sands	and	eagerly	trembling	reeds.
Pausing	suddenly.
A	desperate	scan	of	the	area,	sniffing	the	humid,	sultry,	dusky	air.	Another
scan,	eyes	darting,	seeking	out	every	nearby	shadow,	every	wayward	rustle	of
reed	and	straggly	bush.	Then	he	ducked	lower,	soaking	his	frayed	robes	as	he
knelt	in	the	shallows.
Sweet,	sun-warmed	waters.
A	final,	suspicious	look	round,	all	sides	–	could	never	be	too	careful	–
then,	with	solemn	delight,	he	lowered	the	bucket	into	the	sea.
And	watched,	eyes	shining,	as	the	scores	of	tiny	fish	raced	out	in	all
directions.	Well,	not	exactly	raced,	more	like	sat	there,	for	a	time,	as	if	stunned
by	freedom.	Or	perhaps	some	temporary	shock	of	altered	temperature,	or	the
plethora	of	unseen	riches	upon	which	to	gorge,	to	grow	fat,	sleek	and
blissfully	energetic.
The	first	fish	of	Raraku	Sea.
Iskaral	Pust	left	the	shallows	then,	flinging	the	bucket	to	one	side.	‘Tense
thy	back,	mule!	I	shall	now	leap	astride,	oh	yes,	and	won’t	you	be	surprised,	to
find	yourself	suddenly	galloping	–	oh	believe	me,	mule,	you	know	how	to
gallop,	no	more	of	that	stupid	fast	trot	that	rattles	loose	my	poor	teeth!	Oh	no,
we	shall	be	as	the	wind!	Not	a	fitful,	gusting	wind,	but	a	steady,	roaring	wind,	a
stentorian	wind	that	races	across	the	entire	world,	the	very	wake	of	our
extraordinary	speed,	oh,	how	your	hoofs	shall	blur	to	all	eyes!’
Reaching	the	mule,	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	leapt	into	the	air.
Shying	in	alarm,	the	mule	sidestepped.


A	squeal	from	Iskaral	Pust,	then	a	grunt	and	muted	oof	as	he	struck	and
rolled	in	the	dust	and	stones,	wet	robes	flapping	heavily	and	spraying	sand
about,	while	the	mule	trotted	a	safe	distance	away	then	turned	to	regard	its
master,	long-lashed	eyes	blinking.
‘You	disgust	me,	beast!	And	I	bet	you	think	it’s	mutual,	too!	Yet	even	if	you
thought	that,	why,	then	I’d	agree	with	you!	Out	of	spite!	How	would	you	like
that,	horrid	creature?’	The	High	Priest	of	Shadow	picked	himself	up	and
brushed	sand	from	his	robes.	‘He	thinks	I	will	hit	him.	Strike	him,	with	a	large
stick.	Foolish	mule.	Oh	no,	I	am	much	more	cunning.	I	will	surprise	him	with
kindness…until	he	grows	calm	and	dispenses	with	all	watchfulness,	and	then…
ha!	I	shall	punch	him	in	the	nose!	Won’t	he	be	surprised!	No	mule	can	match
wits	with	me.	Oh	yes,	many	have	tried,	and	almost	all	have	failed!’
He	worked	a	kindly	smile	on	to	his	sun-wizened	face,	then	slowly
approached	the	mule.	‘We	must	ride,’	he	murmured,	‘you	and	I.	Fraught	with
haste,	my	friend,	lest	we	arrive	too	late	and	too	late	will	never	do.’	He	came
within	reach	of	the	reins	where	they	dangled	beneath	the	mule’s	head.	Paused	as
he	met	the	creature’s	eyes.	‘Oh	ho,	sweet	servant,	I	see	malice	in	that	so-placid
gaze,	yes?	You	want	to	bite	me.	Too	bad.	I’m	the	only	one	who	bites	around
here.’	He	snatched	up	the	reins,	narrowly	avoiding	the	snapping	teeth,	then
clambered	onto	the	mule’s	broad,	sloped	back.
Twenty	paces	from	the	shoreline	and	the	world	shifted	around	them,	a
miasmic	swirl	of	shadows	closing	on	all	sides.	Iskaral	Pust	cocked	his	head,
looked	round,	then,	satisfied,	settled	back	as	the	mule	plodded	on.
	
A	hundred	heartbeats	after	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	vanished	into	his	warren,
a	squat,	wild-haired	Dal	Honese	woman	crept	out	of	some	nearby	bushes,
dragging	a	large	ale	cask	behind	her.	It	held	water,	not	ale,	and	the	lid	had	been
pried	off.
Grunting	and	gasping	with	the	effort,	Mogora	struggled	to	bring	the	cask
down	into	the	shallows.	She	tipped	it	to	one	side	and	–	a	mostly	toothless	grin
on	her	wrinkled	features	–	watched	a	half-dozen	young	freshwater	sharks	slide
like	snakes	into	Raraku	Sea.
Then	she	kicked	the	cask	over	and	scrambled	out	of	the	water,	a	cackle
escaping	her	as,	with	a	flurry	of	gestures,	she	opened	a	warren	and	plunged
into	it.
	


Folding	one	shadow	upon	another,	Iskaral	Pust	swiftly	traversed	a	score	of
leagues.	He	could	half-see,	half-sense	the	desert,	buttes	and	chaotic	folds	of
arroyo	and	canyon	he	passed	through,	but	none	of	it	interested	him	much,	until,
after	almost	a	full	day’s	travel,	he	caught	sight	of	five	sleek	shapes	crossing	the
floor	of	a	valley	ahead	and	to	his	left.
He	halted	the	mule	on	the	ridge	and,	eyes	narrowing,	studied	the	distant
shapes.	In	the	midst	of	attacking	a	caravan.	‘Arrogant	pups,’	he	muttered,	then
drove	his	heels	into	the	mule’s	flanks.	‘Charge,	I	say!	Charge,	you	fat,
waddling	bastard!’
The	mule	trotted	down	the	slope,	braying	loudly.
The	five	shapes	caught	the	sound	and	their	heads	turned.	As	one,	the
T’rolbarahl	shifted	direction	and	now	raced	towards	Iskaral	Pust.
The	mule’s	cries	rose	in	pitch.
Spreading	out,	the	D’ivers	flowed	noiselessly	over	the	ground.	Rage	and
hunger	rushed	ahead	of	them	in	an	almost	visible	bow	wave,	the	power
crackling,	coruscating	between	the	Shadow	warren	and	the	world	beyond.
The	beasts	to	either	side	wheeled	out	to	come	in	from	a	flanking	position,
while	the	three	in	the	centre	staggered	their	timing,	intending	to	arrive	in	quick
succession.
Iskaral	Pust	was	having	trouble	focusing	on	them,	so	jolted	and	tossed
about	was	he	on	the	mule’s	back.	When	the	T’rolbarahl	had	closed	to	within
thirty	paces,	the	mule	suddenly	skidded	to	a	halt.	And	the	High	Priest	of
Shadow	was	thrown	forward,	lunging	over	the	animal’s	head.	Head	ducking,
somersaulting	over,	then	thumping	down	hard	on	his	back	in	a	spray	of	gravel
and	dust.
The	first	creature	reached	him,	forearms	lifting,	talons	unsheathed	as	it
sailed	through	the	air,	then	landing	on	the	spot	where	Iskaral	Pust	had	fallen	–
only	to	find	him	not	there.	The	second	and	third	beasts	experienced	a	moment
of	confusion	as	the	quarry	vanished,	then	they	sensed	a	presence	at	their	side.
Their	heads	snapped	round,	but	too	late,	as	a	wave	of	sorcery	hammered	into
them.	Shadow-wrought	power	cracked	like	lightning,	and	the	creatures	were
batted	into	the	air,	leaving	in	their	wakes	misty	clouds	of	blood.	Writhing,	they
both	struck	the	ground	fifteen	paces	away,	skidding	then	rolling.
The	two	flanking	D’ivers	attacked.	And,	as	Iskaral	Pust	vanished,	they
collided,	chests	reverberating	like	heavy	thunder,	teeth	and	talons	raking
through	hide.	Hissing	and	snarling,	they	scrambled	away	from	each	other.
Reappearing	twenty	paces	behind	the	T’rolbarahl,	Iskaral	Pust	unleashed
another	wave	of	sorcery,	watched	it	strike	each	of	the	five	beasts	in	turn,
watched	blood	spray	and	the	bodies	tumble	away,	kicking	frenziedly	as	the


magic	wove	flickering	nets	about	them.	Stones	popped	and	exploded	on	the
ground	beneath	them,	sand	shot	upward	in	spear-like	geysers,	and	everywhere
there	was	blood,	whipping	out	in	ragged	threads.
The	T’rolbarahl	vanished,	fleeing	the	warren	of	Shadow	–	out	into	the
world,	where	they	scattered,	all	thoughts	of	the	caravan	gone	as	panic	closed
on	their	throats	with	invisible	hands.
The	High	Priest	of	Shadow	brushed	dust	from	his	clothes,	then	walked
over	to	where	stood	the	mule.	‘Some	help	you	were!	We	could	be	hunting	each
one	down	right	now,	but	oh	no,	you’re	tired	of	running.	Whoever	thought
mules	deserved	four	legs	was	an	idiot!	You	are	most	useless!	Bah!’	He	paused,
then,	and	lifted	a	gnarled	finger	to	his	wrinkled	lips.	‘But	wait,	what	if	they	got
really	angry?	What	if	they	decided	to	make	a	fight	to	the	finish?	What	then?
Messy,	oh,	very	messy.	No,	best	leave	them	for	someone	else	to	deal	with.	I
must	not	get	distracted.	Imagine,	though!	Challenging	the	High	Priest	of
Shadow	of	all	Seven	Cities!	Dumber	than	cats,	that	T’rolbarahl.	I	am	entirely
without	sympathy.’
He	climbed	back	onto	the	mule.	‘Well,	that	was	fun,	wasn’t	it?	Stupid	mule.
I	think	we’ll	have	mule	for	supper	tonight,	what	do	you	think	of	that?	The
ultimate	sacrifice	is	called	for,	as	far	as	you’re	concerned,	don’t	you	think?
Well,	who	cares	what	you	think?	Where	to	now?	Thank	the	gods	at	least	one	of
us	knows	where	we’re	going.	That	way,	mule,	and	quickly	now.	Trot,	damn
you,	trot!’
Skirting	the	caravan,	where	dogs	still	barked,	Iskaral	Pust	began	shifting
shadows	once	more.
	
Dusk	had	arrived	in	the	world	beyond	when	he	reached	his	destination,	reining
in	the	plodding	mule	at	the	foot	of	a	cliff.
Vultures	clambered	amongst	the	tumbled	rocks,	crowding	a	fissure	but
unable	or,	as	yet,	unwilling	to	climb	down	into	it.	One	edge	of	that	crevasse
was	stained	with	dried	blood,	and	among	rocks	to	one	side	were	the	remains	of
a	dead	beast	–	devoured	to	bones	and	ragged	strips	by	the	scavengers,	it	was
nonetheless	easy	to	identify.	One	of	the	T’rolbarahl.
The	vultures	voiced	a	chorus	of	indignation	as	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow
dismounted	and	approached.	Spitting	curses,	he	chased	away	the	ugly,	Mogoralike	creatures,	then	eased	himself	down	into	the	fissure.	Deep,	the	close	air
smelling	of	blood	and	rotting	meat.
The	crevasse	narrowed	a	little	more	than	a	man’s	height	down,	and	into
this	was	wedged	a	body.	Iskaral	Pust	settled	down	beside	it.	He	laid	a	hand	on


the	figure’s	broad	shoulder,	well	away	from	the	obvious	breaks	in	that	arm.
‘How	many	days,	friend?	Ah,	only	a	Trell	would	survive	this.	First,	we	shall
have	to	get	you	out	of	here,	and	for	that	I	have	a	stalwart,	loyal	mule.	Then,
well,	then,	we	shall	see,	won’t	we?’
	
Neither	stalwart	nor	particularly	loyal,	the	mule’s	disinclination	towards
cooperation	slowed	down	the	task	of	extracting	Mappo	Runt	considerably,	and
it	was	full	dark	by	the	time	the	Trell	was	pulled	from	the	fissure	and	dragged
onto	a	flat	patch	of	wind-blown	sand.
The	two	compound	fractures	in	the	left	arm	were	the	least	of	the	huge
Trell’s	injuries.	Both	legs	had	broken,	and	one	edge	of	the	fissure	had	torn	a
large	flap	of	skin	and	flesh	from	Mappo’s	back	–	the	exposed	meat	was
swarming	with	maggots,	and	the	mostly	hanging	flap	of	tissue	was	clearly
unsalvageable,	grey	in	the	centre	and	blackening	round	the	edges,	smelling	of
rot.	Iskaral	Pust	cut	that	away	and	tossed	it	back	into	the	fissure.
He	then	leaned	close	and	listened	to	the	Trell’s	breathing.	Shallow,	yet	slow
–	another	day	without	attention	and	he	would	have	died.	As	it	was,	the
possibility	remained	distinct.	‘Herbs,	my	friend,’	the	High	Priest	said	as	he	set
to	cleaning	the	visible	wounds.	‘And	High	Denul	ointments,	elixirs,	tinctures,
salves,	poultices…have	I	forgotten	any?	No,	I	think	not.	Internal	injuries,	oh
yes,	crushed	ribs,	that	whole	side.	So,	much	bleeding	inside,	yet,	obviously,	not
enough	to	kill	you	outright.	Remarkable.	You	are	almost	as	stubborn	as	my
servant	here—’	He	looked	up.	‘You,	beast,	set	up	the	tent	and	start	us	a	fire!	Do
that	and	then	maybe	I’ll	feed	you	and	not,	hee	hee,	feed	on	you—’
‘You	are	an	idiot!’	This	cry	came	from	the	darkness	off	to	one	side,	and	a
moment	later	Mogora	appeared	from	the	gloom.
The	gloom,	yes,	that	explains	everything.	‘What	are	you	doing	here,	hag?’
‘Saving	Mappo,	of	course.’
‘What?	I	have	saved	him	already!’
‘Saving	him	from	you,	I	meant!’	She	scrabbled	closer.	‘What’s	that	vial	in
your	hand?	That’s	venom	of	paralt!	You	damned	idiot,	you	were	going	to	kill
him!	After	all	he’s	been	through!’
‘Paralt?	That’s	right,	wife,	it’s	paralt.	You	arrived,	so	I	was	about	to	drink
it.’
‘I	saw	you	deal	with	that	T’rolbarahl,	Iskaral	Pust.’
‘You	did?’	He	paused,	ducked	his	head.	‘Now	her	adoration	is	complete!
How	could	she	not	adore	me?	It	must	be	near	worship	by	now.	That’s	why	she
followed	me	all	the	way.	She	can’t	get	enough	of	me.	It’s	the	same	with


everyone	–	they	just	can’t	get	enough	of	me—’
‘The	most	powerful	High	Priest	of	Shadow,’	cut	in	Mogora	as	she
removed	various	healing	unguents	from	her	pack,	‘cannot	survive	without	a
good	woman	at	his	side.	Failing	that,	you	have	me,	so	get	used	to	it,	warlock.
Now,	get	out	of	my	way	so	I	can	tend	to	this	poor,	hapless	Trell.’
Iskaral	Pust	backed	away.	‘So	what	do	I	do	now?	You’ve	made	me	useless,
woman!’
‘That’s	not	hard,	husband.	Make	us	camp.’
‘I	already	told	my	mule	to	do	that.’
‘It’s	a	mule,	you	idiot…’	Her	words	trailed	away	as	she	noted	the	flicker	of
firelight	off	to	one	side.	Turning,	she	studied	the	large	canvas	tent,	expertly
erected,	and	the	stone-ringed	hearth	where	a	pot	of	water	already	steamed
beneath	a	tripod.	Nearby	stood	the	mule,	eating	from	its	bag	of	oats.	Mogora
frowned,	then	shook	her	head	and	returned	to	her	work.	‘Tend	to	the	tea,	then.
Be	useful.’
‘I	was	being	useful!	Until	you	arrived	and	messed	everything	up!	The	most
powerful	High	Priest	in	Seven	Cities	does	not	need	a	woman!	In	fact,	that’s	the
very	last	thing	he	needs!’
‘You	couldn’t	heal	a	hangnail,	Iskaral	Pust.	This	Trell	has	the	black	poison
in	his	veins,	the	glittering	vein-snake.	We	shall	need	more	than	High	Denul	for
this—’
‘Oh	here	we	go!	All	your	witchy	rubbish.	High	Denul	will	conquer	the
black	poison—’
‘Perhaps,	but	the	dead	flesh	will	remain	dead.	He	will	be	crippled,	halfmad,	his	hearts	will	weaken.’	She	paused	and	glared	over	at	him.
‘Shadowthrone	sent	you	to	find	him,	didn’t	he?	Why?’
Iskaral	Pust	smiled	sweetly.	‘Oh,	she’s	suspicious	now,	isn’t	she?	But	I
won’t	tell	her	anything.	Except	the	hint,	the	modest	hint,	of	my	vast	knowledge.
Yes	indeed,	I	know	my	dear	god’s	mind	–	and	a	twisted,	chaotic,	weaselly	mind
it	is.	In	fact,	I	know	so	much	I	am	speechless	–	hah,	look	at	her,	those	beetle
eyes	narrowing	suspiciously,	as	if	she	dares	grow	aware	of	my	profound
ignorance	in	all	matters	pertaining	to	my	cherished,	idiotic	god.	Dares,	and
would	challenge	me	openly.	I	would	crumble	before	that	onslaught,	of	course.’
He	paused,	reworked	his	smile,	then	spread	his	hands	and	said,	‘Sweet	Mogora,
the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	must	have	his	secrets,	kept	even	from	his	wife,	alas.
And	so	I	beg	you	not	to	press	me	on	this,	else	you	suffer	Shadowthrone’s
random	wrath—’
‘You	are	a	complete	fool,	Iskaral	Pust.’
‘Let	her	think	that,’	he	said,	then	added	a	chuckle.	‘Now	she’ll	wonder	why


I	have	laughed	–	no,	not	laughed,	but	chuckled,	which,	all	things	considered,	is
far	more	alarming.	I	mean,	it	sounded	like	a	chuckle	so	it	must	have	been	one,
though	it’s	the	first	I’ve	ever	tried,	or	heard,	for	that	matter.	Whereas	a	chortle,
well,	that’s	different.	I’m	not	fat	enough	to	chortle,	alas.	Sometimes	I	wish—’
‘Go	sit	by	your	mule’s	fire,’	Mogora	said.	‘I	must	prepare	my	ritual.’
‘See	how	that	chuckle	has	discomfited	her!	Of	course,	my	darling,	you	go
and	play	with	your	little	ritual,	that’s	a	dear.	Whilst	I	make	tea	for	myself	and
my	mule.’
	
Warmed	by	the	flames	and	his	tralb	tea,	Iskaral	Pust	watched	–	as	best	as	he	was
able	in	the	darkness	–	Mogora	at	work.	First,	she	assembled	large	chunks	of
stone,	each	one	broken,	cracked	or	otherwise	rough-edged,	and	set	them	down
in	the	sand,	creating	an	ellipse	that	encompassed	the	Trell.	She	then	urinated
over	these	rocks,	achieving	this	with	an	extraordinary	half-crab	half-chicken
wide-legged	waddle,	straddling	the	stones	and	proceeding	widdershins	until
returning	to	the	place	she	had	started.	Iskaral	marvelled	at	the	superior	muscle
control,	not	to	mention	the	sheer	volume,	that	Mogora	obviously	possessed.	In
the	last	few	years	his	own	efforts	at	urination	had	met	with	mixed	success,	until
even	starting	and	stopping	now	seemed	the	highest	of	visceral	challenges.
Satisfied	with	her	piddle,	Mogora	then	started	pulling	hairs	from	her	head.
She	didn’t	have	that	many	up	there,	and	those	she	selected	seemed	so	deeply
rooted	that	Iskaral	feared	she	would	deflate	her	skull	with	every	successful
yank.	His	anticipation	of	seeing	such	a	thing	yielded	only	disappointment,	as,
with	seven	long	wiry	grey	hairs	in	one	hand,	Mogora	stepped	into	the	ellipse,
one	foot	planted	to	either	side	of	the	Trell’s	torso.	Then,	muttering	some
witchly	thing,	she	flung	the	hairs	into	the	inky	blackness	overhead.
Instinct	guided	Iskaral’s	gaze	upward	after	those	silvery	threads,	and	he
was	somewhat	alarmed	to	see	that	the	stars	had	vanished	overhead.	Whereas,
out	on	the	horizons,	they	remained	sharp	and	bright.	‘Gods,	woman!	What
have	you	done?’
Ignoring	him,	she	stepped	back	out	of	the	ellipse	and	began	singing	in	the
Woman’s	Language,	which	was,	of	course,	unintelligible	to	Iskaral’s	ears.	Just
as	the	Man’s	Language	–	which	Mogora	called	gibberish	–	was	beyond	her
ability	to	understand.	The	reason	for	that,	Iskaral	Pust	knew,	was	that	the	Man’s
Language	was	gibberish,	designed	specifically	to	confound	women.	It’s	a	fact
that	men	don’t	need	words,	but	women	do.	We	have	penises,	after	all.	Who	needs
words	when	you	have	a	penis?	Whereas	with	women	there	are	two	breasts,
which	invites	conversation,	just	as	a	good	behind	presents	perfect	punctuation,


something	every	man	knows.
What’s	wrong	with	the	world?	You	ask	a	man	and	he	says,	‘Don’t	ask.’	Ask	a
woman	and	you’ll	be	dead	of	old	age	before	she’s	finished.	Hah.	Hah	ha.
Strange	streams	of	gossamer	began	descending	through	the	reflected	light
of	the	fire,	settling	upon	the	Trell’s	body.
‘What	are	those?’	Iskaral	asked.	Then	started	as	one	brushed	his	forearm
and	he	saw	that	it	was	a	spider ’s	silk,	and	there	was	the	spider	at	one	end,	tiny
as	a	mite.	He	looked	skyward	in	alarm.	‘There	are	spiders	up	there?	What
madness	is	this?	What	are	they	doing	up	there?’
‘Be	quiet.’
‘Answer	me!’
‘The	sky	is	filled	with	spiders,	husband.	They	float	on	the	winds.	Now	I’ve
answered	you,	so	close	that	mouth	of	yours	lest	I	send	a	few	thousand	of	my
sisters	into	it.’
His	teeth	clacked	and	he	edged	closer	to	the	hearth.	Burn,	you	horrid	things.
Burn!
The	strands	of	web	covered	the	Trell	now.	Thousands,	tens,	hundreds	of
thousands	–	the	spiders	were	wrapping	about	Mappo	Runt’s	entire	body.
‘And	now,’	Mogora	said,	‘time	for	the	moon.’
The	blackness	overhead	vanished	in	a	sudden	bloom	of	silver,
incandescent	light.	Squealing,	Iskaral	Pust	fell	onto	his	back,	so	alarming	was
the	transformation,	and	he	found	himself	staring	straight	up	at	a	massive,	full
moon,	hanging	so	low	it	seemed	within	reach.	If	he	but	dared.	Which	he	did
not.	‘You’ve	brought	the	moon	down!	Are	you	mad?	It’s	going	to	crash	on	us!’
‘Oh,	stop	it.	It	only	seems	that	way	–	well,	maybe	I	nudged	it	a	bit	–	but	I
told	you	this	was	a	serious	ritual,	didn’t	I?’
‘What	have	you	done	with	the	moon?’
She	crowed	with	manic	laughter.	‘It’s	just	my	little	ritual,	darling.	How	do
you	like	it?’
‘Make	it	go	away!’
‘Frightened?	You	should	be!	I’m	a	woman!	A	witch!	So	why	don’t	you	just
drag	that	scrawny	behind	of	yours	into	that	tent	and	cower,	dear	husband.	This
is	real	power,	here,	real	magic!’
‘No	it	isn’t!	I	mean,	it’s	not	witch	magic,	not	Dal	Honese	–	I	don’t	know
what	this	is—’
‘You’re	right,	you	don’t.	Now	be	a	good	little	boy	and	go	to	sleep,	Iskaral
Pust,	while	I	set	about	saving	this	Trell’s	miserable	life.’
Iskaral	thought	to	argue,	then	decided	against	it.	He	crawled	into	the	tent.
From	outside,	‘Is	that	you	gibbering,	Iskaral?’


Oh	be	quiet.
	
Lostara	Yil	opened	her	eyes,	then	slowly	sat	up.
A	grey-cloaked	figure	was	standing	near	a	stone-arched	portal,	his	back	to
her.	Rough-hewn	walls	to	either	side,	forming	a	circular	chamber	with	Lostara
–	who	had	been	lying	on	an	altar	–	in	the	centre.	Moonlight	was	flooding	in
from	in	front	of	the	figure,	yet	it	seemed	to	be	sliding	in	visible	motion.	As	if
the	moon	beyond	was	plunging	from	the	sky.
‘What—?’	she	asked,	then	began	to	cough	uncontrollably,	sharp	pain	biting
in	her	lungs.	Finally	recovering,	she	blinked	tears	from	her	eyes,	looked	up
once	again.
He	was	facing	her	now.
The	Shadow	Dancer.	The	god.	Cotillion.	Seemingly	in	answer	to	her	initial
question,	he	said,	‘I	am	not	sure.	Some	untoward	sorcery	is	at	work,
somewhere	in	the	desert.	The	moon’s	light	has	been…stolen.	I	admit	I	have
never	seen	anything	like	it	before.’
Even	as	he	was	speaking,	Lostara’s	memories	returned	in	a	rush.	Y’Ghatan.
Flames,	everywhere.	Blistering	heat.	Savage	burns	–	oh	how	her	flesh
screamed	its	pain	–	‘What	–	what	happened	to	me?’
‘Oh,	that	was	what	you	meant.	My	apologies,	Lostara	Yil.	Well,	in	short,	I
pulled	you	out	of	the	fire.	Granted,	it’s	very	rare	for	a	god	to	intervene,	but
T’riss	kicked	open	the	door—’
‘T’riss?’
‘The	Queen	of	Dreams.	Set	the	precedent,	as	it	were.	Most	of	your	clothes
had	burned	–	I	apologize	if	you	find	the	new	ones	not	to	your	liking.’
She	glanced	down	at	the	rough-woven	shift	covering	her.
‘A	neophyte’s	tunic,’	Cotillion	said.	‘You	are	in	a	Temple	of	Rashan,	a
secret	one.	Abandoned	with	the	rebellion,	I	believe.	We	are	a	league	and	a	half
from	what	used	to	be	Y’Ghatan,	forty	or	so	paces	north	of	the	Sotka	Road.	The
temple	is	well	concealed.’	He	gestured	with	one	gloved	hand	at	the	archway.
‘This	is	the	only	means	of	ingress	and	egress.’
‘Why	–	why	did	you	save	me?’
He	hesitated.	‘There	will	come	a	time,	Lostara	Yil,	when	you	will	be	faced
with	a	choice.	A	dire	one.’
‘What	kind	of	choice?’
He	studied	her	for	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘How	deep	are	your	feelings	for
Pearl?’
She	started,	then	shrugged.	‘A	momentary	infatuation.	Thankfully	passed.


Besides,	he’s	unpleasant	company	these	days.’
‘I	can	understand	that,’	Cotillion	said,	somewhat	enigmatically.	‘You	will
have	to	choose,	Lostara	Yil,	between	your	loyalty	to	the	Adjunct…and	all	that
Pearl	represents.’
‘Between	the	Adjunct	and	the	Empress?	That	makes	no	sense—’
He	stayed	her	with	a	raised	hand.	‘You	need	not	decide	immediately,
Lostara.	In	fact,	I	would	counsel	against	it.	All	I	ask	is	that	you	consider	the
question,	for	now.’
‘What	is	going	on?	What	do	you	know,	Cotillion?	Are	you	planning
vengeance	against	Laseen?’
His	brows	lifted.	‘No,	nothing	like	that.	In	fact,	I	am	not	directly	involved
in	this…uh,	matter.	At	the	moment,	anyway.	Indeed,	the	truth	is,	I	am	but
anticipating	certain	things,	some	of	which	may	come	to	pass,	some	of	which
may	not.’	He	faced	the	portalway	again.	‘There	is	food	near	the	altar.	Wait	until
dawn,	then	leave	here.	Down	to	the	road.	Where	you	will	find…welcome
company.	Your	story	is	this:	you	found	a	way	out	of	the	city,	then,	blinded	by
smoke,	you	stumbled,	struck	your	head	and	lost	consciousness.	When	you
awoke,	the	Fourteenth	was	gone.	Your	memory	is	patchy,	of	course.’
‘Yes,	it	is,	Cotillion.’
He	turned	at	her	tone,	half-smiled.	‘You	fear	that	you	are	now	in	my	debt,
Lostara	Yil.	And	that	I	will	one	day	return	to	you,	demanding	payment.’
‘It’s	how	gods	work,	isn’t	it?’
‘Some	of	them,	yes.	But	you	see,	Lostara	Yil,	what	I	did	for	you	in
Y’Ghatan	four	days	ago	was	my	repayment,	of	a	debt	that	I	owed	you.’
‘What	debt?’
Shadows	were	gathering	about	Cotillion	now,	and	she	barely	heard	his
reply,	‘You	forget,	I	once	watched	you	dance…’	And	then	he	was	gone.
Moonlight	streamed	into	his	wake	like	quicksilver.	And	she	sat	for	a	time,
bathed	in	its	light,	considering	his	words.
	
Snoring	from	the	tent.	Mogora	sat	on	a	flat	stone	five	paces	from	the	dying
fire.	Had	he	been	awake,	Iskaral	Pust	would	be	relieved.	The	moon	was	back
where	it	belonged,	after	all.	Not	that	she’d	actually	moved	it.	That	would	have
been	very	hard	indeed,	and	would	have	attracted	far	too	much	attention	besides.
But	she’d	drawn	away	its	power,	somewhat,	briefly,	enough	to	effect	the	more
thorough	healing	the	Trell	had	required.
Someone	stepped	from	the	shadows.	Walked	a	slow	circle	round	the
recumbent,	motionless	form	of	Mappo	Trell,	then	halted	and	looked	over	at


Mogora.
She	scowled,	then	jerked	a	nod	towards	the	tent.	‘Iskaral	Pust,	he’s	the	Magi
of	High	House	Shadow,	isn’t	he?’
‘Impressive	healing,	Mogora,’	Cotillion	observed.	‘You	do	understand,	of
course,	that	the	gift	may	in	truth	be	a	curse.’
‘You	sent	Pust	here	to	find	him!’
‘Shadowthrone,	actually,	not	me.	For	that	reason,	I	cannot	say	if	mercy
counted	for	anything	in	his	decision.’
Mogora	glanced	again	at	the	tent.	‘Magi…that	blathering	idiot.’
Cotillion	was	gazing	steadily	at	her,	then	he	said,	‘You’re	one	of	Ardata’s,
aren’t	you?’
She	veered	into	a	mass	of	spiders.
The	god	watched	as	they	fled	into	every	crack	and,	moments	later,	were
gone.	He	sighed,	took	one	last	look	round,	momentarily	meeting	the	placid
eyes	of	the	mule,	then	vanished	in	a	flowing	swirl	of	shadows.


Chapter	Ten
When	the	day	knew	only	darkness,
the	wind	a	mute	beggar	stirring	ashes	and	stars
in	the	discarded	pools	beneath	the	old
retaining	wall,	down	where	the	white	rivers
of	sand	slip	grain	by	grain	into	the	unseen,
and	every	foundation	is	but	a	moment
from	a	horizon’s	stagger,	I	found	myself
among	friends	and	so	was	made	at	ease
with	my	modest	list	of	farewells.
Soldier	Dying
Fisher	kel	Tath
They	emerged	from	the	warren	into	the	stench	of	smoke	and	ashes,	and	before
them,	in	the	growing	light	of	dawn,	reared	a	destroyed	city.	The	three	stood
unmoving	for	a	time,	silent,	each	seeking	to	comprehend	this	vista.
Stormy	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Looks	like	the	Imperial	Warren’s	spilled	out
here.’
Ash	and	dead	air,	the	light	seeming	listless	–	Kalam	was	not	surprised	by
the	marine’s	observation.	They	had	just	left	a	place	of	death	and	desolation,
only	to	find	themselves	in	another.	‘I	still	recognize	it,’	the	assassin	said.
‘Y’Ghatan.’
Stormy	coughed,	then	spat.	‘Some	siege.’
‘The	army’s	moved	on,’	Quick	Ben	observed,	studying	the	tracks	and
rubbish	where	the	main	encampment	had	been.	‘West.’
Stormy	grunted,	then	said,	‘Look	at	that	gap	in	the	wall.	Moranth
munitions,	a	whole	damned	wagon	of	’em,	I’d	say.’
A	viscous	river	had	flowed	out	through	that	gap,	and,	motionless	now,	it
glittered	in	the	morning	light.	Fused	glass	and	metals.	There	had	been	a
firestorm,	Kalam	realized.	Yet	another	one	to	afflict	poor	Y’Ghatan.	Had	the
sappers	set	that	off?
‘Olive	oil,’	said	Quick	Ben	suddenly.	‘The	oil	harvest	must	have	been	in


the	city.’	He	paused,	then	added,	‘Makes	me	wonder	if	it	was	an	accident.’
Kalam	glanced	over	at	the	wizard.	‘Seems	a	little	extreme,	Quick.	Besides,
from	what	I’ve	heard	of	Leoman,	he’s	not	the	kind	to	throw	his	own	life	away.’
‘Assuming	he	stayed	around	long	enough.’
‘We	took	losses	here,’	Stormy	said.	‘There’s	a	grave	mound	there,	under
that	ash.’	He	pointed.	‘Scary	big,	unless	they	included	rebel	dead.’
‘We	make	separate	holes	for	them,’	Kalam	said,	knowing	that	Stormy	knew
that	as	well.	None	of	this	looked	good,	and	they	were	reluctant	to	admit	that.
Not	out	loud.	‘The	tracks	look	a	few	days	old,	at	least.	I	suppose	we	should
catch	up	with	the	Fourteenth.’
‘Let’s	circle	this	first,’	Quick	Ben	said,	squinting	at	the	ruined	city.
‘There’s	something…some	residue…I	don’t	know.	Only…’
‘Sound	argument	from	the	High	Mage,’	Stormy	said.	‘I’m	convinced.’
Kalam	glanced	over	at	the	mass	burial	mound,	and	wondered	how	many	of
his	friends	were	lying	trapped	in	that	earth,	unmoving	in	the	eternal	dark,	the
maggots	and	worms	already	at	work	to	take	away	all	that	had	made	each	of
them	unique.	It	wasn’t	something	he	enjoyed	thinking	about,	but	if	he	did	not
stand	here	and	gift	them	a	few	more	moments	of	thought,	then	who	would?

Charred	rubbish	lay	strewn	on	the	road	and	in	the	flats	to	either	side.	Tent
stakes	still	in	place	gripped	burnt	fragments	of	canvas,	and	in	a	trench	beyond
the	road’s	bend	as	it	made	its	way	towards	what	used	to	be	the	city’s	gate,	a
dozen	bloated	horse	carcasses	had	been	dumped,	legs	upthrust	like	bony	treestumps	in	a	flyblown	swamp.	The	stench	of	burnt	things	hung	in	the	motionless
air.
Apsalar	reined	in	on	the	road	as	her	slow	scan	of	the	devastation	before
her	caught	movement	a	hundred	paces	ahead	and	to	her	left.	She	settled	back	in
the	saddle,	seeing	familiarity	in	the	gaits	and	demeanours	of	two	of	the	three
figures	now	walking	towards	what	remained	of	Y’Ghatan.	Telorast	and	Curdle
scampered	back	to	flank	her	horse.
‘Terrible	news,	Not-Apsalar!’	Telorast	cried.	‘Three	terrible	men	await	us,
should	we	continue	this	course.	If	you	seek	to	destroy	them,	well	then,	that	is
fine.	We	wish	you	well.	Otherwise,	I	suggest	we	escape.	Now.’
‘I	agree,’	Curdle	added,	small	skeletal	head	bobbing	as	the	creature	paced,
grovelled,	then	paced	again,	tail	spiking	the	air.
Her	horse	lifted	a	front	hoof	and	the	demonic	skeletons	scattered,	having
learned	that	near	proximity	to	the	beast	was	a	treacherous	thing.


‘I	know	two	of	them,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Besides,	they	have	seen	us.’	She
nudged	her	mount	forward,	walking	it	slowly	towards	the	mage,	his	assassin
companion,	and	the	Malazan	soldier,	all	of	whom	had	now	shifted	direction
and	approached	with	a	measured	pace.
‘They	will	annihilate	us!’	Telorast	hissed.	‘I	can	tell	–	oh,	that	mage,	he’s
not	nice,	not	at	all—’
The	two	small	creatures	raced	for	cover.
Annihilation.	The	possibility	existed,	Apsalar	allowed,	given	the	history
she	shared	with	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	Mekhar.	Then	again,	they	had	known	of
the	possession,	and	she	had	since	travelled	with	Kalam	for	months,	first	across
the	Seeker ’s	Deep,	from	Darujhistan	all	the	way	to	Ehrlitan,	during	which
nothing	untoward	had	occurred.	This	eased	her	mind	somewhat	as	she	waited
for	them	to	arrive.
Kalam	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘Few	things	in	the	world	make	sense,
Apsalar.’
She	shrugged.	‘We	have	each	had	our	journeys,	Kalam	Mekhar.	I,	for	one,
am	not	particularly	surprised	to	find	our	paths	converging	once	more.’
‘Now	that,’	said	Quick	Ben,	‘is	an	alarming	statement.	Unless	you’re	here
to	satisfy	Shadowthrone’s	desire	for	vengeance,	there	is	no	possible	reason	at
all	that	our	paths	should	converge.	Not	here.	Not	now.	I	certainly	haven’t	been
pushed	and	pulled	by	any	conniving	god—’
‘You	have	the	aura	of	Hood	about	you,	Quick	Ben,’	Apsalar	said,	an
observation	that	clearly	startled	Kalam	and	the	soldier.	‘Such	residue	comes
only	from	long	conversations	with	the	Lord	of	Death,	and	so,	while	you	might
claim	freedom	for	yourself,	perhaps	your	motives	for	what	you	do	and	where
you	choose	to	go	are	less	purely	your	own	than	you	would	have	others	believe.
Or,	for	that	matter,	than	what	you	yourself	would	like	to	believe.’	Her	gaze	slid
across	to	Kalam.	‘Whilst	the	assassin	has	known	the	presence	of	Cotillion,	only
a	short	while	ago.	And	as	for	this	Falari	soldier	here,	his	spirit	is	bound	to	a
T’lan	Imass,	and	to	the	Fire	of	Life	that	passes	for	worship	among	the	T’lan
Imass.	Thus,	fire,	shadow	and	death,	drawn	together	even	as	the	forces	and
gods	of	such	forces	find	alignment	against	a	single	foe.	Yet,	I	feel	I	should
warn	you	all	–	that	foe	is	no	longer	singular	and,	perhaps,	never	was.	And
present	alliances	may	not	last.’
‘What	is	it	about	all	this,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘that	I’m	not	enjoying?’
Kalam	rounded	on	the	wizard.	‘Maybe,	Quick,	you’re	sensing	something
of	my	desire	–	which	I	am	barely	restraining	–	to	plant	my	fist	in	your	face.
The	Lord	of	Death?	What	in	the	name	of	the	Abyss	happened	at	Black	Coral?’
‘Expedience,’	the	wizard	snapped,	eyes	still	on	Apsalar.	‘That’s	what


happened.	In	that	whole	damned	war	against	the	Pannion	Domin.	That	should
have	been	obvious	from	the	outset	–	Dujek	joining	forces	with	Caladan	Brood
was	simply	the	first	and	most	egregious	breaking	of	the	rules.’
‘So	now	you’re	working	for	Hood?’
‘Not	even	close,	Kalam.	To	stretch	a	pun,	Hood	knows,	he	was	working	for
me.’
‘Was?	And	now?’
‘And	now,’	he	nodded	towards	Apsalar,	‘as	she	says,	the	gods	are	at	war.’
He	shrugged,	but	it	was	an	uneasy	shrug.	‘I	need	to	get	a	sense	of	the	two	sides,
Kalam.	I	need	to	ask	questions.	I	need	answers.’
‘And	is	Hood	providing	them?’
The	glance	he	shot	the	assassin	was	skittish,	almost	diffident.	‘Slowly.’
‘And	what	is	Hood	getting	from	you?’
The	wizard	bridled.	‘Ever	try	twisting	a	dead	man’s	arm?	It	doesn’t	work!’
His	glare	switched	between	Kalam	and	Apsalar.	‘Listen.	Remember	those
games	Hedge	and	Fid	played?	With	the	Deck	of	Dragons?	Idiots,	but	never
mind	that.	The	point	is,	they	made	up	the	rules	as	they	went	along,	and	that’s
what	I’m	doing,	all	right?	Gods,	even	a	genius	like	me	has	limits!’
A	snort	from	the	Falari	soldier,	and	Apsalar	saw	him	bare	his	teeth.
The	wizard	stepped	towards	him.	‘Enough	of	that,	Stormy!	You	and	your
damned	stone	sword!’	He	waved	wildly	at	the	city	of	Y’Ghatan.	‘Does	this
smell	sweet	to	you?’
‘What	would	smell	even	sweeter	is	the	Adjunct’s	High	Mage	all	chopped
up	and	served	in	a	stew	to	Hood	himself.’	He	reached	for	the	Imass	sword,	his
grin	broadening.	‘And	I’m	just	the	man	to	do—’
‘Settle	down,	you	two,’	Kalam	said.	‘All	right,	Apsalar,	we’re	all	here	and
that’s	passing	strange	but	not	as	strange	maybe	as	it	should	be.	Doesn’t	matter.’
He	made	a	gesture	that	encompassed	himself,	Quick	Ben	and	Stormy.	‘We’re
returning	to	the	Fourteenth	Army.	Or,	we	will	be,	once	we’ve	circled	the	city
and	Quick’s	satisfied	it’s	as	dead	as	it	looks—’
‘Oh,’	the	wizard	cut	in,	‘it’s	dead	all	right.	Still,	we’re	circling	the	ruin.’	He
pointed	a	finger	at	Apsalar.	‘As	for	you,	woman,	you’re	not	travelling	alone,
are	you?	Where	are	they	hiding?	And	what	are	they?	Familiars?’
‘You	could	call	them	that,’	she	replied.
‘Where	are	they	hiding?’	Quick	Ben	demanded	again.
‘Not	sure.	Close	by,	I	suspect.	They’re…shy.’	And	she	added	nothing	more,
for	now,	satisfied	as	she	was	by	the	wizard’s	answering	scowl.
‘Where,’	Kalam	asked,	‘are	you	going,	Apsalar?’
Her	brows	rose.	‘Why,	with	you,	of	course.’


She	could	see	that	this	did	not	please	them	much,	yet	they	voiced	no	further
objections.	As	far	as	she	was	concerned,	this	was	a	perfect	conclusion	to	this
part	of	her	journey.	For	it	coincided	with	her	most	pressing	task	–	the	final
target	for	assassination.	The	only	one	that	could	not	be	ignored.
She’d	always	known	Cotillion	for	a	most	subtle	bastard.
	
‘All	right,	then,’	Sergeant	Hellian	said,	‘which	one	of	you	wants	to	be	my	new
corporal?’
Touchy	and	Brethless	exchanged	glances.
‘What?’	Touchy	asked.	‘Us?	But	you	got	Balgrid	and	Tavos	Pond,	now.	Or
even—’
‘It’s	my	new	squad	and	I	decide	these	things.’	She	squinted	over	at	the	other
soldiers.	‘Balgrid’s	a	mage.	So’s	Tavos	Pond.’	She	scowled	at	the	two	men.	‘I
don’t	like	mages,	they’re	always	disappearing,	right	when	you	want	to	ask
them	something.’	Her	gaze	slid	across	to	the	last	two	soldiers.	‘Maybe’s	a
sapper	and	enough	said	about	that,	and	Lutes	is	our	healer.	That	leaves…’
Hellian	returned	her	attention	to	the	twins,	‘you	two.’
‘Fine,’	said	Touchy.	‘I’ll	be	corporal.’
‘Hold	on,’	Brethless	said.	‘I	want	to	be	corporal!	I	ain’t	taking	no	orders
from	him,	Sergeant.	Not	a	chance.	I	got	the	brains,	you	know—’
Touchy	snorted.	‘Then,	since	you	didn’t	know	what	to	do	with	them,	you
threw	them	away.’
‘You’re	a	big	fat	liar,	Touchy—’
‘Quiet!’	Hellian	reached	for	her	sword.	But	then	remembered	and	drew	a
knife	instead.	‘Another	word	either	of	you	and	I’ll	cut	myself.’
The	squad	stared	at	her.
‘I’m	a	woman,	see,	and	with	women,	it’s	how	we	deal	with	men.	You’re	all
men.	Give	me	trouble	and	I’ll	stick	this	knife	in	my	arm.	Or	leg.	Or	maybe	I’ll
slice	a	nipple	off.	And	you	bastards	will	have	to	live	with	that.	For	the	rest	of
your	days,	you’ll	have	to	live	with	the	fact	that	you	were	being	such	assholes
that	Hellian	went	and	disfigured	herself.’
No-one	spoke.
Smiling,	Hellian	resheathed	the	knife.	‘Good.	Now,	Touchy	and	Brethless,
I’ve	decided.	You’re	both	corporals.	There.’
‘But	what	if	I	want	to	order	Brethless—’
‘Well	you	can’t.’
Brethless	raised	a	finger.	‘Wait,	what	if	we	give	different	orders	to	the
others?’


‘Don’t	worry	’bout	that,’	Maybe	said,	‘we	ain’t	gonna	listen	to	you
anyways.	You’re	both	idiots,	but	if	the	sergeant	wants	to	make	you	corporals,
that’s	fine.	We	don’t	care.	Idiots	make	good	corporals.’
‘All	right,’	Hellian	said,	rising,	‘it’s	settled.	Now,	nobody	wander	off,	since
the	captain	wants	us	ready	to	march.’	She	walked	away,	up	towards	the	ridge.
Thinking.
The	captain	had	dragged	off	Urb	and	made	him	a	sergeant.	Madness.	That
old	rule	about	idiots	making	good	corporals	obviously	extended	to	sergeants,
but	there	wasn’t	anything	she	could	do	about	it.	Besides,	she	might	go	and	kill
him	and	then	there’d	be	trouble.	Urb	was	big,	after	all,	and	there	wasn’t	much
in	the	way	of	places	to	hide	his	body.	Not	around	here,	anyway,	she	concluded,
scanning	the	broken	rocks,	bricks	and	potsherds	strewn	on	the	slope.
They	needed	to	find	a	village.	She	could	trade	her	knife	–	no,	that	wouldn’t
work,	since	it	would	mess	up	her	threat	and	the	squad	might	mutiny.	Unless,
next	time,	she	added	nails	to	the	possible	weapons	–	scratch	her	own	eyes	out,
something	like	that.	She	glanced	down	at	her	nails	–	oh,	mostly	gone.	What	a
mess…
	
‘Look	at	her,’	Maybe	said.	‘Tells	us	not	to	wander	off	then	what	does	she	do?
Wanders	off.	Finds	a	ridge	to	do	what?	Why,	check	out	her	nails.	Ooh,	they’re
chipped!	Gods,	we’ve	got	a	real	woman	for	our	Hood-damned	sergeant—’
‘She	ain’t	a	real	woman,’	Touchy	said.	‘You	don’t	know	her	at	all,	sapper.
Now,	me	and	Brethless,	we	were	two	of	the	poor	fools	who	came	first	to	the
temple	in	Kartool,	where	this	whole	nightmare	started.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’	Balgrid	demanded.
‘Someone	went	and	butchered	all	the	priests	in	the	D’rek	temple,	and	we
was	the	first	ones	on	the	scene.	Anyway,	you	know	how	this	goes.	That	was	our
quarter,	right?	Not	that	we	could	patrol	inside	temples,	of	course,	so	we
weren’t	to	blame.	But	since	when	does	common	sense	count	for	anything	in	the
empire?	So,	they	had	to	send	us	away.	Hopefully	to	get	killed,	so	none	of	it	gets
out—’
‘It	just	did,’	Tavos	Pond	said,	scratching	beneath	the	rough,	crusted
bandages	swathing	one	side	of	his	face.
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’	Balgrid	demanded	again.	‘And	what’s	the
sergeant	doing	over	there?’
Maybe	glared	at	Lutes.	‘He’s	still	deaf.	Do	something!’
‘It’ll	come	back,’	the	healer	replied,	shrugging.	‘Mostly.	It	takes	time,	that’s
all.’


‘Anyway,’	Touchy	resumed,	‘she	ain’t	a	real	woman.	She	drinks—’
‘Right,’	Brethless	cut	in,	‘and	why	does	she	drink?	Why,	she’s	scared	of
spiders!’
‘That	don’t	matter,’	his	brother	retorted.	‘And	now	she’s	stuck	sober	and
that’s	bad.	Listen,	all	of	you—’
‘What?’	Balgrid	asked.
‘Listen,	the	rest	of	you,	we	just	keep	her	drunk	and	everything’ll	be	fine—’
‘Idiot,’	Maybe	said.	‘Probably	you	didn’t	catch	whoever	killed	all	those
priests	because	your	sergeant	was	drunk.	She	did	good	in	Y’Ghatan,	or	have
you	forgotten?	You’re	alive	’cause	of	her.’
‘That’ll	wear	off,	sapper.	Just	you	wait.	I	mean,	look	at	her	–	she’s	fussing
over	her	nails!’
	
Adopting	heavies	into	a	squad	was	never	easy,	Gesler	knew.	They	didn’t	think
normally;	in	fact,	the	sergeant	wasn’t	even	sure	they	were	human.	Somewhere
between	a	flesh-and-blood	Imass	and	a	Barghast,	maybe.	And	now	he	had	four
of	them.	Shortnose,	Flashwit,	Uru	Hela	and	Mayfly.	Flashwit	could	probably
out-pull	an	ox,	and	she	was	Napan	besides,	though	those	stunning	green	eyes
came	from	somewhere	else;	and	Shortnose	seemed	in	the	habit	of	losing	body
parts,	and	there	was	no	telling	how	far	that	had	gone	beyond	the	missing	nose
and	ear.	Uru	was	a	damned	Korelri	who’d	probably	been	destined	for	the
Stormwall	before	stowing	aboard	a	Jakatakan	merchanter,	meaning	she	felt	she
didn’t	owe	anybody	anything.	Mayfly	was	just	easily	confused,	but	clearly	as
tough	as	they	came.
And	Heavies	came	tough.	He’d	have	to	adjust	his	thinking	on	how	to	work
the	squad.	But	if	he	ever	shows	up,	Stormy	will	love	these	ones.
Maybe	in	one	way	it	made	sense	to	reorganize	the	squads,	but	Gesler
wasn’t	sure	of	the	captain’s	timing.	It	was	Fist	Keneb’s	responsibility,	anyway,
and	he’d	likely	prefer	splitting	up	soldiers	who	were,	one	and	all	now,
veterans.	Well,	that	was	for	the	damned	officers	to	chew	over.	What	concerned
him	the	most	at	the	moment,	was	the	fact	that	they	were	mostly	unarmed	and
unarmoured.	A	score	of	raiders	or	even	bandits	happening	upon	them	and
there’d	be	more	Malazan	bones	bleaching	in	the	sun.	They	needed	to	get
moving,	catch	up	with	the	damned	army.
He	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	west	road,	up	on	the	ridge.	Hellian	was	there
already,	he	saw.	Lit	up	by	the	rising	sun.	Odd	woman,	but	she	must	have	done
something	right,	to	have	led	her	soldiers	through	that	mess.	Gesler	would	not
look	back	at	Y’Ghatan.	Every	time	he	had	done	that	before,	the	images


returned:	Truth	shouldering	the	munitions	packs,	running	into	the	smoke	and
flames.	Fiddler	and	Cuttle	racing	back,	away	from	what	was	coming.	No,	it
wasn’t	worth	any	last	looks	back	at	that	cursed	city.
What	could	you	take	from	it	that	was	worth	a	damned	thing,	anyway?
Leoman	had	drawn	them	right	in,	made	the	city	a	web	from	which	there	was	no
escape	–	only…we	made	it,	didn’t	we?	But,	how	many	didn’t?	The	captain	had
told	them.	Upwards	of	two	thousand,	wasn’t	it?	All	to	kill	a	few	hundred
fanatics	who	would	probably	have	been	just	as	satisfied	killing	themselves	and
no-one	else,	to	make	whatever	mad,	futile	point	they	felt	worth	dying	for.	It
was	how	fanatics	thought,	after	all.	Killing	Malazans	simply	sweetened	an
already	sweet	final	meal.	All	to	make	some	god’s	eyes	shine.
Mind	you,	polish	anything	long	enough	and	it’ll	start	to	shine.
The	sun	lifted	its	blistered	eye	above	the	horizon,	and	it	was	almost	time	to
begin	the	march.
	
Ten,	maybe	more	pups,	all	pink,	wrinkled	and	squirming	inside	an	old	martin’s
nest	that	had	dislodged	from	an	exploding	wall.	Bottle	peered	down	at	them,
the	nest	in	his	hands.	Their	mother	clung	to	his	left	shoulder,	nose	twitching	as
if	she	was	contemplating	a	sudden	leap	–	either	towards	her	helpless	brood	or
towards	Bottle’s	neck.
‘Relax,	my	dear,’	he	whispered.	‘They’re	as	much	mine	as	they	are	yours.’
A	half-choking	sound	nearby,	then	a	burst	of	laughter.
Bottle	glared	over	at	Smiles.	‘You	don’t	understand	a	thing,	you	miserable
cow.’
‘I	can’t	believe	you	want	to	take	that	filthy	thing	with	you.	All	right,	it	got
us	out,	so	now	leave	it	be.	Besides,	there’s	no	way	you	can	keep	them	alive	–
she’s	got	to	feed	’em,	right,	meaning	she	has	to	scrounge.	When’s	she	gonna
be	able	to	do	that?	We’re	about	to	march,	you	fool.’
‘We	can	manage,’	he	replied.	‘They’re	tribal	creatures,	rats.	Besides,	we’ve
already	scrounged	enough	food	–	it’s	only	Y’Ghatan	who	needs	to	eat	lots,	for
now.	The	pups	just	suckle.’
‘Stop,	you’re	making	me	sick.	There’s	enough	rats	in	the	world	already,
Bottle.	Take	the	big	one,	sure,	but	leave	the	others	for	the	birds.’
‘She’d	never	forgive	me.’
	
Sitting	nearby,	Koryk	studied	the	two	bickering	soldiers	a	moment	longer,	then


he	rose.
‘Don’t	go	far,’	Strings	said.
The	half-Seti	grunted	a	wordless	reply,	then	headed	towards	the	far,
northern	end	of	the	flats,	where	broad,	deep	pits	pockmarked	the	ground.	He
arrived	at	the	edge	of	one	and	looked	down.	Long	ago,	these	pits	had	yielded
clay	for	the	potters,	back	when	there	had	been	water	close	to	the	surface.	When
that	had	dried	up,	they	had	proved	useful	for	the	disposal	of	refuse,	including
the	bodies	of	paupers.
The	pits	nearest	the	city’s	walls	held	only	bones,	bleached	heaps,	suncracked	amidst	tattered	strips	of	burial	cloth.
He	stood	above	the	remains	for	a	moment	longer,	then	descended	the
crumbling	side.
The	soldiers	had	lost	most	of	the	bones	affixed	to	their	armour	and
uniforms.	It	seemed	only	fitting,	Koryk	thought,	that	these	long-dead	citizens
of	Y’Ghatan	offer	up	their	own.	After	all,	we	crawled	through	the	city’s	own
bones.	And	we	can’t	even	measure	what	we	left	behind.
Knee-deep	in	bones,	he	looked	round.	No	shortage	of	fetishes	here.
Satisfied,	he	began	collecting.

‘You	look	damn	near	naked	without	all	that	armour.’
Corporal	Tarr	grimaced.	‘I	am	damn	near	naked	without	all	my	armour,
Sergeant.’
Smiling,	Strings	looked	away,	searching	until	he	found	Koryk,	who	was	in
the	process	of	climbing	into	the	ground.	At	least,	it	looked	that	way	from	here.
Strange,	secretive	man.	Then	again,	if	he	wanted	to	crawl	into	the	earth,	that
was	his	business.	So	long	as	he	showed	up	for	the	call	to	march.
Cuttle	was	near	the	fire,	pouring	out	the	last	of	the	tea,	a	brew	concocted
from	a	half-dozen	local	plants	Bottle	had	identified	as	palatable,	although	he’d
been	a	little	cagey	on	toxicity.
After	a	moment	surveying	his	squad,	the	sergeant	returned	to	shaving	off
his	beard,	hacking	at	the	foul-smelling,	singed	hair	with	his	camp	knife	–	the
only	weapon	left	to	him.
One	of	the	foundling	children	had	attached	herself	to	him	and	sat	opposite,
watching	with	wide	eyes,	her	round	face	smeared	with	ash	and	two	wet,	dirty
streaks	running	down	from	her	nose.	She	had	licked	her	lips	raw.
Strings	paused,	squinted	at	her,	then	raised	one	eyebrow.	‘You	need	a	bath,
lass.	We’ll	have	to	toss	you	into	the	first	stream	we	run	across.’


She	made	a	face.
‘Can’t	be	helped,’	he	went	on.	‘Malazan	soldiers	in	the	Fourteenth	are
required	to	maintain	a	certain	level	of	cleanliness.	So	far,	the	captain’s	been
easy	about	it,	but	trust	me,	that	won’t	last…’	He	trailed	off	when	he	saw	that	she
wasn’t	listening	any	more.	Nor	was	she	looking	at	him,	but	at	something
beyond	his	left	shoulder.	Strings	twisted	round	to	follow	her	gaze.
And	saw	a	rider,	and	three	figures	on	foot.	Coming	down	from	the	road
that	encircled	Y’Ghatan.	Coming	towards	them.
From	a	short	distance	to	the	sergeant’s	right,	he	heard	Gesler	say,	‘That’s
Stormy	–	I’d	recognize	that	bludgeon	walk	anywhere.	And	Kalam	and	Quick.
Don’t	know	the	woman	on	the	horse,	though…’
But	I	do.	Strings	rose.	Walked	up	the	slope	to	meet	them.	He	heard	Gesler
behind	him,	following.
‘Hood	take	us,’	Strings	said,	studying	first	Apsalar,	then	Kalam	and	Quick
Ben,	‘half	the	old	squad.	All	here.’
Quick	Ben	was	squinting	at	Fiddler.	‘You	shaved,’	he	said.	‘Reminds	me
just	how	young	you	are	–	that	beard	turned	you	into	an	old	man.’
He	paused,	then	added,	‘Be	nice	to	have	Mallet	here	with	us.’
‘Forget	it,’	Strings	said,	‘he’s	getting	fat	in	Darujhistan	and	the	last	thing
he’d	want	to	do	is	see	our	ugly	faces	again.’	He	coughed.	‘And	I	suppose
Paran’s	there,	too,	feet	up	and	sipping	chilled	Saltoan	wine.’
‘Turned	out	to	be	a	good	captain,’	the	wizard	said	after	a	moment.	‘Who’d
have	thought	it,	huh?’
Strings	nodded	up	at	the	woman	on	the	horse.	‘Apsalar.	So	where’s	Crokus
Younghand?’
She	shrugged.	‘He	goes	by	the	name	of	Cutter,	now,	Fiddler.’
Oh.
‘In	any	case,’	she	continued,	‘we	parted	ways	some	time	ago.’
Stormy	stepped	closer	to	Gesler.	‘We	lost	him?’	he	asked.
Gesler	looked	away,	then	nodded.
‘What	happened?’
Strings	spoke	in	answer:	‘Truth	saved	all	our	skins,	Stormy.	He	did	what
we	couldn’t	do,	when	it	needed	to	be	done.	And	not	a	word	of	complaint.
Anyway,	he	gave	up	his	life	for	us.	I	wish	it	could	have	been	otherwise…’	He
shook	his	head.	‘I	know,	it’s	hard	when	they’re	so	young.’
There	were	tears	now,	running	down	the	huge	man’s	sun-burnt	face.
Saying	nothing,	he	walked	past	them	all,	down	onto	the	slope	towards	the
encamped	Malazans.	Gesler	watched,	then	followed.
No-one	spoke.


‘I	had	a	feeling,’	Quick	Ben	said	after	a	time.	‘You	made	it	out	of	Y’Ghatan
–	but	the	Fourteenth’s	marched	already.’
Fiddler	nodded.	‘They	had	to.	Plague’s	coming	from	the	east.	Besides,	it
must’ve	seemed	impossible	–	anyone	trapped	in	the	city	surviving	the
firestorm.’
‘How	did	you	pull	it	off?’	Kalam	demanded.
‘We’re	about	to	march,’	Fiddler	said	as	Faradan	Sort	appeared,	clambering
onto	the	road.	‘I’ll	tell	you	along	the	way.	And	Quick,	I’ve	got	a	mage	in	my
squad	I	want	you	to	meet	–	he	saved	us	all.’
‘What	do	you	want	me	to	do?’	the	wizard	asked.	‘Shake	his	hand?’
‘Not	unless	you	want	to	get	bit.’	Hah,	look	at	his	face.	That	was	worth	it.
	
The	bridge	was	made	of	black	stones,	each	one	roughly	carved	yet	perfectly
fitted.	Wide	enough	to	accommodate	two	wagons	side	by	side,	although	there
were	no	barriers	flanking	the	span	and	the	edges	looked	worn,	crumbly,
enough	to	make	Paran	uneasy.	Especially	since	there	was	nothing	beneath	the
bridge.	Nothing	at	all.	Grey	mists	in	a	depthless	sea	below.	Grey	mists
swallowing	the	bridge	itself	twenty	paces	distant;	grey	mists	refuting	the	sky
overhead.
A	realm	half-born,	dead	in	still-birth,	the	air	was	cold,	clammy,	smelling
of	tidal	pools.	Paran	drew	his	cloak	tighter	about	his	shoulders.	‘Well,’	he
muttered,	‘it’s	pretty	much	how	I	saw	it.’
The	ghostly	form	of	Hedge,	standing	at	the	very	edge	of	the	massive
bridge,	slowly	turned.	‘You’ve	been	here	before,	Captain?’
‘Visions,’	he	replied.	‘That’s	all.	We	need	to	cross	this—’
‘Aye,’	the	sapper	said.	‘Into	a	long	forgotten	world.	Does	it	belong	to
Hood?	Hard	to	say.’	The	ghost’s	hooded	eyes	seemed	to	shift,	fixing	on
Ganath.	‘You	should’ve	changed	your	mind,	Jaghut.’
Paran	glanced	over	at	her.	Impossible	to	read	her	expression,	but	there	was
a	stiffness	to	her	stance,	a	certain	febrility	to	the	hands	she	lifted	to	draw	up	the
hood	of	the	cape	she	had	conjured.
‘Yes,’	she	said.	‘I	should	have.’
‘This	is	older	than	the	Holds,	isn’t	it?’	Paran	asked	her.	‘And	you
recognize	it,	don’t	you,	Ganath?’
‘Yes,	in	answer	to	both	your	questions.	This	place	belongs	to	the	Jaghut	–
to	our	own	myths.	This	is	our	vision	of	the	underworld,	Master	of	the	Deck.
Verdith’anath,	the	Bridge	of	Death.	You	must	find	another	path,	Ganoes	Paran,
to	find	those	whom	you	seek.’


He	shook	his	head.	‘No,	this	is	the	one,	I’m	afraid.’
‘It	cannot	be.’
‘Why?’
She	did	not	reply.
Paran	hesitated,	then	said,	‘This	is	the	place	in	my	visions.	Where	I	have	to
begin.	But…well,	those	dreams	never	proceeded	from	here	–	I	could	not	see
what	lay	ahead,	on	this	bridge.	So,	I	had	this,	what	you	see	before	us,	and	the
knowledge	that	only	a	ghost	could	guide	me	across.’	He	studied	the	mists
engulfing	the	stone	path.	‘There’s	two	ways	of	seeing	it,	I	eventually
concluded.’
‘Of	seeing	what?’	Ganath	asked.
‘Well,	the	paucity	of	those	visions,	and	my	hunches	on	how	to	proceed.	I
could	discard	all	else	and	attempt	to	appease	them	with	precision,	never	once
straying	–	for	fear	that	it	would	prove	disastrous.	Or,	I	could	see	all	those
uncertainties	as	opportunities,	and	so	allow	my	imagination	fullest	rein.’
Hedge	made	a	motion	something	like	spitting,	although	nothing	left	his
mouth.	‘I	take	it	you	chose	the	latter,	Captain.’
Paran	nodded,	then	faced	the	Jaghut	again.	‘In	your	myths,	Ganath,	who	or
what	guards	this	bridge?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘This	place	lies	beneath	the	ground	beneath	Hood’s
feet.	He	may	well	know	of	this	realm,	but	would	not	presume	to	claim
dominance	over	it…or	its	inhabitants.	This	is	a	primal	place,	Master	of	the
Deck,	as	are	those	forces	that	call	it	home.	It	is	a	conceit	to	believe	that	death
has	but	a	single	manifestation.	As	with	all	things,	layer	settles	upon	layer,	and
in	time	the	deepest,	darkest	ones	become	forgotten	–	yet	they	have	shaped	all
that	lies	above.’	She	seemed	to	study	Paran	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘You	carry
an	otataral	sword.’
‘Reluctantly,’	he	admitted.	‘Most	of	the	time	I	keep	it	buried	by	the	back
wall	of	Coll’s	estate,	in	Darujhistan.	I	am	surprised	you	sensed	it	–	the	scabbard
is	made	of	iron	and	bronze	and	that	negates	its	effect.’
The	Jaghut	shrugged.	‘The	barrier	is	imperfect.	The	denizens	in	this	realm
–	if	the	myths	hold	truth	and	they	always	do	–	prefer	brute	force	over	sorcery.
The	sword	will	be	just	a	sword.’
‘Well,	I	wasn’t	planning	on	using	it,	anyway.’
‘So,’	Hedge	said,	‘we	just	start	on	our	way,	across	this	bridge,	and	see	what
comes	for	us?	Captain,	I	may	be	a	sapper,	and	a	dead	one	at	that,	but	even	I
don’t	think	that’s	a	good	idea.’
‘Of	course	not,’	Paran	said.	‘I	have	planned	for	something	else.’	He	drew
out	from	his	pack	a	small	object,	spoked	and	circular,	which	he	then	tossed	on


the	ground.	‘Shouldn’t	be	long,’	he	said.	‘They	were	told	to	stay	close.’
A	moment	later	sounds	came	through	the	mists	behind	them,	the	thunder	of
hoofs,	the	heavy	clatter	of	massive	wheels.	A	train	of	horses	appeared,	heads
tossing,	froth-flecked	and	wild-eyed,	and	behind	them	a	six-wheeled	carriage.
Guards	were	clinging	to	various	ornate	projections	on	the	carriage’s	flanks,
some	of	them	strapped	in	place	by	leather	harnesses.	Their	weapons	were	out,
and	they	glared	fiercely	into	the	mists	on	all	sides.
The	driver	leaned	back	on	the	reins,	voicing	a	weird	cry.	Hoofs	stamping,
the	train	reared	back,	slewing	the	huge	carriage	round	to	a	stone-snapping,
skidding	halt.
The	guards	unhitched	themselves	and	swarmed	off,	establishing	a
perimeter	with	crossbows	out	and	cocked.	On	the	bench	the	driver	set	the
brake,	looped	the	reins	about	the	handle,	then	pulled	out	a	flask	and	downed	its
contents	in	seven	successive	swallows.	Belched,	restoppered	the	flask,	pocketed
it,	then	clambered	down	the	carriage	side.	He	unlatched	the	side	door	even	as
Paran	caught	movement	through	its	barred	window.
The	man	pushing	his	way	through	was	huge,	dressed	in	sodden	silks,	his
pudgy	hands	and	round	face	sheathed	in	sweat.
Paran	spoke:	‘You	must	be	Karpolan	Demesand.	I	am	Ganoes	Paran.	Thank
you	for	arriving	so	quickly.	Knowing	the	reputation	of	the	Trygalle	Trade
Guild,	of	course,	I	am	not	at	all	surprised.’
‘Nor	should	you	be!’	the	huge	man	replied	with	a	broad	smile	that	revealed
gold-capped,	diamond-studded	teeth.	The	smile	slowly	faded	as	his	gaze	found
the	bridge.	‘Oh	dear.’	He	gestured	to	two	of	the	nearest	guards,	both	Pardu
women,	both	badly	scarred.	‘Nisstar,	Artara,	to	the	edge	of	the	mists	on	that
bridge,	if	you	please.	Examine	the	edges	carefully	–	without	a	retaining	wall
we	face	a	treacherous	path	indeed.’	The	small,	bright	eyes	fixed	on	Paran	once
more.	‘Master	of	the	Deck,	forgive	me,	I	am	fraught	with	exhaustion!	Oh,	how
this	dread	land	taxes	poor	old	Karpolan	Demesand!	After	this,	we	shall	hasten
our	return	to	our	most	cherished	native	continent	of	Genabackis!	Naught	but
tragedy	haunts	Seven	Cities	–	see	how	I	have	lost	weight!	The	stress!	The
misery!	The	bad	food!’	He	snapped	his	fingers	and	a	servant	emerged	from	the
carriage	behind	him,	somehow	managing	to	balance	a	tray	crowded	with
goblets	and	a	crystal	decanter	in	one	hand	while	navigating	his	egress	with	the
other.	‘Gather,	my	friends!	Not	you,	damned	shareholders!	Keep	a	watch	out,
fools!	There	are	things	out	there	and	you	know	what	happens	when	things
arrive!	Nay,	I	spoke	to	my	guests!	Ganoes	Paran,	Master	of	the	Deck,	his
ghostly	companion	and	the	Jaghut	sorceress	–	join	me,	fretful	three,	in	this	one
peaceable	toast…before	the	mayhem	begins!’


‘Thanks	for	the	invitation,’	Hedge	said,	‘but	since	I’m	a	ghost—’
‘Not	at	all,’	Karpolan	Demesand	cut	in,	‘know	that	in	close	proximity	to
my	contrivance	here,	you	are	not	cursed	insubstantial	–	not	at	all!	So,’	he
passed	a	goblet	to	the	sapper,	‘drink,	my	friend!	And	revel	once	more	in	the
delicious	sensation	of	taste,	not	to	mention	alcohol!’
‘If	you	say	so,’	Hedge	said,	accepting	the	goblet.	He	swallowed	a	mouthful,
and	his	hazy	expression	somehow	brightened.	‘Gods	below!	You’ve	done	it
now,	merchant!	I	think	I’ll	end	up	haunting	this	carriage	for	all	time!’
‘Alas,	my	friend,	the	effect	wears	off,	eventually.	Else	we	face	an
impossible	burden,	as	you	might	imagine!	Now	you,	Jaghut,	please,	the
significance	of	the	myriad	flavours	in	this	wine	shall	not	be	lost	on	you,	I’m
sure.’	Beaming,	he	handed	her	a	goblet.
She	drank,	then	bared	her	tusks	in	what	Paran	took	to	be	a	smile.	‘Bik’trara
–	ice	flowers	–	you	must	have	crossed	a	Jaghut	glacier	some	time	in	the	past,
to	have	harvested	such	rare	plants.’
‘Indeed,	my	dear!	Jaghut	glaciers,	and	much	more	besides,	I	assure	you!
To	explain,	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild	travels	the	warrens	–	a	claim	no	other
merchants	in	this	world	dare	make.	Accordingly,	we	are	very	expensive.’	He
gave	Paran	a	broad	wink.	‘Very,	as	the	Master	of	the	Deck	well	knows.
Speaking	of	which,	I	trust	you	have	your	payment	with	you?’
Paran	nodded.
Karpolan	proffered	the	third	goblet	to	Paran.	‘I	note	you	have	brought
your	horse,	Master	of	the	Deck.	Do	you	intend	to	ride	alongside	us,	then?’
‘I	think	so.	Is	that	a	problem?’
‘Hard	to	say	–	we	do	not	yet	know	what	we	shall	encounter	on	this	fell
bridge.	In	any	case,	you	must	ride	close,	unless	you	mean	to	assert	your	own
protection	–	in	which	case,	why	hire	us	at	all?’
‘No,	your	protection	I	shall	need,	I’m	sure,’	Paran	said.	‘And	yes,	that	is
why	I	contracted	with	your	guild	in	Darujhistan.’	He	sipped	at	the	wine,	and
found	his	head	swimming.	‘Although,’	he	added,	eyeing	the	golden	liquid,	‘if	I
drink	any	more	of	this,	I	might	have	trouble	staying	in	the	saddle.’
‘You	must	strap	yourself	tightly,	Ganoes	Paran.	In	the	stirrups,	and	to	the
saddle.	Trust	me	in	this,	such	a	journey	is	best	managed	drunk	–	or	filled	with
the	fumes	of	durhang.	Or	both.	Now,	I	must	begin	preparations	–	although	I
have	never	before	visited	this	warren,	I	am	beginning	to	suspect	we	will	be
sorely	tested	on	this	dread	bridge.’
‘If	you	are	amenable,’	Ganath	said,	‘I	would	ride	with	you	within.’
‘Delightful,	and	I	suggest	you	ready	yourself	to	access	your	warren,
Jaghut,	should	the	need	arise.’


Paran	watched	as	the	two	climbed	back	into	the	carriage,	then	he	turned	to
regard	Hedge.
The	sapper	finished	the	wine	in	his	goblet	and	set	it	back	down	on	the	tray,
which	was	being	held	still	by	the	servant	–	an	old	man	with	red-rimmed	eyes
and	grey	hair	that	looked	singed	at	its	ends.	‘How	many	of	these	journeys	have
you	made?’	Hedge	asked	him.
‘More’n	I	can	count,	sir.’
‘I	take	it	Karpolan	Demesand	is	a	High	Mage.’
‘That	he	be,	sir.	An’	for	that,	us	shareholders	bless	’im	every	day.’
‘No	doubt,’	Hedge	said,	then	turned	to	Paran.	‘If	you	ain’t	gonna	drink	that,
Captain,	put	it	down.	You	and	me	need	to	talk.’
Paran	risked	another	mouthful	then	replaced	the	goblet,	following	as,	with
a	gesture,	Hedge	set	off	towards	the	foot	of	the	bridge.
‘Something	on	your	ghostly	mind,	sapper?’
‘Plenty,	Captain,	but	first	things	first.	You	know,	when	I	tossed	that	cusser
back	in	Coral,	I	figured	that	was	it.	Hood	knows,	I	didn’t	have	a	choice,	so	I’d
do	the	same	thing	if	I	had	to	do	it	over	again.	Anyway	–’	he	paused,	then	said,
‘for	a	time	there	was,	well,	just	darkness.	The	occasional	flicker	of	something
like	light,	something	like	awareness.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘It	was	like,	well,’	he
met	Paran’s	eyes,	‘like	I	had	nowhere	to	go.	My	soul,	I	mean.	Nowhere	at	all.
And	trust	me	on	this,	that	ain’t	a	good	feeling.’
‘But	then	you	did,’	Paran	said.	‘Have	somewhere	to	go,	I	mean.’
Hedge	nodded,	eyes	once	more	on	the	mists	engulfing	the	way	ahead.
‘Heard	voices,	at	first.	Then…old	friends,	coming	outa	the	dark.	Faces	I	knew,
and	sure,	like	I	said,	friends.	But	some	who	weren’t.	You	got	to	understand,
Captain,	before	your	time,	a	lot	of	Bridgeburners	were	plain	bastards.	When	a
soldier	goes	through	what	we	went	through,	in	Raraku,	at	Black	Dog,	you
come	out	one	of	two	kinds	of	people.	Either	you’re	damned	humbled,	or	you
start	believing	the	Empress	worships	what	slides	outa	your	ass,	and	not	just	the
Empress,	but	everyone	else	besides.	Now,	I	never	had	time	for	those	bastards
when	I	was	alive	–	now	I’m	looking	at	spending	an	eternity	with	’em.’
Paran	was	silent	for	a	moment,	thoughtful,	then	he	said,	‘Go	on.’
‘Us	Bridgeburners,	we	got	work	ahead	of	us,	and	some	of	us	don’t	like	it.	I
mean,	we’re	dead,	right?	And	sure,	it’s	good	helping	friends	who	are	still
alive,	and	maybe	helping	all	of	humanity	if	it	comes	to	that	and	I’m	sorry	to
say,	it	will	come	to	that.	Still,	you	end	up	with	questions,	questions	that	can’t	be
answered.’
‘Such	as?’
The	sapper ’s	expression	twisted.	‘Damn,	sounds	awful,	but…what’s	in	it


for	us?	We	find	ourselves	in	an	army	of	the	dead	in	a	damned	sea	where	there
used	to	be	desert.	We’re	all	done	with	our	wars,	the	fighting’s	over,	and	now	it
looks	like	we’re	having	to	march	–	and	it’s	a	long	march,	longer	than	you’d
think	possible.	But	it’s	our	road,	now,	isn’t	it?’
‘And	where	does	it	lead,	Hedge?’
He	shook	his	head	again.	‘What’s	it	mean	to	die?	What’s	it	mean	to	ascend?
It’s	not	like	we’re	gonna	gather	ten	thousand	worshippers	among	the	living,	is
it?	I	mean,	the	only	thing	us	dead	soldiers	got	in	common	is	that	none	of	us
was	good	enough	or	lucky	enough	to	survive	the	fight.	We’re	a	host	of
failures.’	He	barked	a	laugh.	‘I	better	remember	that	one	for	the	bastards.	Just
to	get	under	their	skins.’
Paran	glanced	back	at	the	carriage.	Still	no	activity	there,	although	the
servant	had	disappeared	back	inside.	He	sighed.	‘Ascendants,	Hedge.	Not	an
easy	role	to	explain	–	in	fact,	I’ve	yet	to	find	a	worthwhile	explanation	for	what
ascendancy	is	–	among	all	the	scholarly	tracts	I’ve	pored	through	in
Darujhistan’s	libraries	and	archives.	So,	I’ve	had	to	come	up	with	my	own
theory.’
‘Let’s	hear	it,	Captain.’
‘All	right,	we’ll	start	with	this.	Ascendants	who	find	worshippers	become
gods,	and	that	binding	goes	both	ways.	Ascendants	without	worshippers	are,	in
a	sense,	unchained.	Unaligned,	in	the	language	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Now,
gods	who	once	had	worshippers	but	don’t	have	them	any	more	are	still
ascendant,	but	effectively	emasculated,	and	they	remain	so	unless	the	worship
is	somehow	renewed.	For	the	Elder	Gods,	that	means	the	spilling	of	blood	on
hallowed	or	once-hallowed	ground.	For	the	more	primitive	spirits	and	the	like,
it	could	be	as	simple	as	the	recollection	or	rediscovery	of	their	name,	or	some
other	form	of	awakening.	Mind	you,	none	of	that	matters	if	the	ascendant	in
question	has	been	well	and	truly	annihilated.
‘So,	to	backtrack	slightly,	ascendants,	whether	gods	or	not,	seem	to	possess
some	form	of	power.	Maybe	sorcery,	maybe	personality,	maybe	something
else.	And	what	that	seems	to	mean	is,	they	possess	an	unusual	degree	of
efficacy—’
‘Of	what?’
‘They’re	trouble	if	you	mess	with	them,	is	what	I’m	saying.	A	mortal	man
punches	someone	and	maybe	breaks	the	victim’s	nose.	An	ascendant	punches
someone	and	they	go	through	a	wall.	Now,	I	don’t	mean	that	literally	–
although	that’s	sometimes	the	case.	Not	necessarily	physical	strength,	but
strength	of	will.	When	an	ascendant	acts,	ripples	run	through…everything.	And
that’s	what	makes	them	so	dangerous.	For	example,	before	Fener ’s	expulsion,


Treach	was	a	First	Hero,	an	old	name	for	an	ascendant,	and	that’s	all	he	was.
Spent	most	of	his	time	either	battling	other	First	Heroes,	or,	towards	the	end,
wandering	around	in	his	Soletaken	form.	If	nothing	untoward	had	happened	to
Treach	in	that	form,	his	ascendancy	would	have	eventually	vanished,	lost	in	the
primitive	bestial	mind	of	an	oversized	tiger.	But	something	untoward	did
happen	–	actually,	two	things.	Fener ’s	expulsion,	and	Treach’s	unusual	death.
And	with	those	two	events,	everything	changed.’
‘All	right,’	Hedge	said,	‘that’s	all	just	fine.	When	are	you	getting	to	your
theory,	Captain?’
‘Every	mountain	has	a	peak,	Hedge,	and	throughout	history	there	have
been	mountains	and	mountains	–	more	than	we	could	imagine,	I	suspect	–
mountains	of	humanity,	of	Jaghut,	of	T’lan	Imass,	of	Eres’al,	Barghast,	Trell,
and	so	on.	Not	just	mountains,	but	whole	ranges.	I	believe	ascendancy	is	a
natural	phenomenon,	an	inevitable	law	of	probability.	Take	a	mass	of	people,
anywhere,	any	kind,	and	eventually	enough	pressure	will	build	and	a	mountain
will	rise,	and	it	will	have	a	peak.	Which	is	why	so	many	ascendants	become
gods	–	after	the	passing	of	generations,	the	great	hero’s	name	becomes	sacred,
representative	of	some	long-lost	golden	age,	and	so	it	goes.’
‘So	if	I	understand	you,	Captain	–	and	I	admit,	it’s	not	easy	and	it’s	never
been	easy	–	there’s	too	much	pressure	these	days	and	because	of	that	there’s
too	many	ascendants,	and	things	are	getting	hairy.’
Paran	shrugged.	‘It	might	feel	that	way.	It	probably	always	does.	But	these
things	shake	themselves	out,	eventually.	Mountains	collide,	peaks	fall,	are
forgotten,	crumble	to	dust.’
‘Captain,	are	you	planning	to	make	a	new	card	in	the	Deck	of	Dragons?’
Paran	studied	the	ghost	for	a	long	time,	then	he	said,	‘In	many	of	the
Houses,	the	role	of	Soldier	already	exists—’
‘But	not	unaligned	soldiers,	Captain.	Not…us.’
‘You	say	you	have	a	long	road	ahead,	sapper.	How	do	you	know	that?	Who
is	guiding	you?’
‘I	got	no	answer	to	that	one,	Captain.	That’s	why	we	figured	–	our	payment
for	this	bargain	–	that	you	constructing	a	card	for	us	would,	well,	be	like
shaking	a	handful	of	wheat	flour	over	an	invisible	web.’
‘Part	of	the	bargain?	You	might	have	mentioned	that	at	the	start,	Hedge.’
‘No,	better	when	it’s	too	late.’
‘For	you,	yes.	All	right,	I’ll	think	on	it.	I	admit,	you’ve	made	me	curious,
especially	since	I	don’t	think	you	and	your	ghostly	army	are	being	directly
manipulated.	I	suspect	that	what	calls	to	you	is	something	far	more	ephemeral,
more	primal.	A	force	of	nature,	as	if	some	long	lost	law	was	being	reasserted,


and	you’re	the	ones	who	will	deliver	it.	Eventually.’
‘An	interesting	thought,	Captain.	I	always	knew	you	had	brains,	now	I’m
finally	getting	a	hint	of	what	they’re	good	for.’
‘Now	let	me	ask	you	a	question,	Hedge.’
‘If	you	must.’
‘That	long	road	ahead	of	you.	Your	march	–	it’s	to	war,	isn’t	it?	Against
whom?’
‘More	like	what—’
Commotion	behind	them,	the	shareholders	rushing	back	to	the	carriage,
the	snap	of	leather	and	the	clunk	of	buckles	as	the	dozen	or	so	men	and	women
began	strapping	themselves	in	place.	The	horses,	suddenly	agitated,	tossed
their	heads	and	stamped,	nostrils	flaring.	The	driver	had	the	traces	in	his	hands
once	more.
‘You	two!’	he	said	in	a	growl.	‘It’s	time.’
‘Think	I’ll	sit	beside	the	driver,’	Hedge	said.	‘Captain,	like	the	High	Mage
said,	be	sure	you	ride	close.	I	knew	how	to	get	us	here,	but	I	ain’t	got	a	clue
what’s	coming.’
Nodding,	Paran	headed	towards	his	horse,	whilst	Hedge	clambered	up	the
side	of	the	carriage.	The	two	Pardu	women	returned	from	their	stations	on	the
bridge	and	climbed	up	to	take	flanking	positions	on	the	roof,	both	checking
their	heavy	crossbows	and	supply	of	broad-headed	quarrels.
Paran	swung	himself	into	the	saddle.
A	shutter	in	the	side	door	was	opened	and	the	captain	could	make	out
Karpolan’s	round,	shiny	face.	‘We	travel	perilously	fast,	Ganoes	Paran.	If	some
transformation	occurs	on	the	horse	you	ride,	consider	abandoning	it.’
‘And	if	some	transformation	besets	me?’
‘Well,	we	shall	do	our	best	not	to	abandon	you.’
‘That’s	reassuring,	Karpolan	Demesand.’
A	brief	smile,	then	the	shutter	snapped	shut	once	more.
Another	weird	cry	from	the	driver	and	a	snap	of	the	traces.	The	horses
lunged	forward,	carriage	slewing	straight	behind	them.	Rolling	forward.	Onto
the	stone	bridge.
Paran	rode	up	alongside	it,	opposite	one	of	the	shareholders.	The	man
threw	him	a	wild,	half-mad	grin,	gloved	hands	gripping	a	massive	Malazanmade	crossbow.
Climbing	the	slope,	then	into	the	mists.
That	closed	like	soft	walls	round	them.
A	dozen	heartbeats,	then	chaos.	Ochre-skinned	creatures	swarmed	in	from
both	sides,	as	if	they	had	been	clinging	beneath	the	bridge.	Long	arms,	clawed


at	the	ends,	short,	ape-like	legs,	small	heads	that	seemed	filled	with	fangs.	They
flung	themselves	at	the	carriage,	seeking	to	drag	off	the	shareholders.
Screams,	the	thud	of	quarrels	striking	bodies,	hissing	pain	from	the
creatures.	Paran’s	horse	reared,	forelegs	kicking	at	a	beast	scrambling	beneath
it.	Sword	out,	Paran	slashed	the	blade	into	the	back	of	the	creature	clinging	and
biting	fierce	chunks	of	meat	from	the	nearest	shareholder ’s	left	thigh.	He	saw
the	flesh	and	muscle	part,	revealing	ribs.	Then	blood	sluiced	out.	Squealing,
the	beast	fell	away.
More	had	reached	the	carriage,	and	Paran	saw	one	shareholder	torn	from
her	perch,	swearing	as	she	was	dragged	down	onto	the	stones,	then	vanishing
beneath	seething,	smooth-skinned	bodies.
The	captain	swung	his	horse	round	and	closed	on	the	writhing	mass.
No	skill	involved	–	it	was	simply	lean	down	and	hack	and	slash,	until	the
last	bleeding	body	fell	away.
The	woman	lying	on	the	bloody	stones	looked	as	though	she	had	been
chewed	by	a	shark,	then	spat	out.	Yet	she	lived.	Paran	sheathed	his	sword,
dismounted	and	threw	the	dazed,	bleeding	woman	over	a	shoulder.
Heavier	than	she’d	looked.	He	managed	to	settle	her	down	over	the	back	of
his	horse,	then	vaulted	once	more	into	the	saddle.
The	carriage	already	vanishing	into	the	mists,	ochre	bodies	tumbling	from
it.	The	back	wheels	both	rose	and	thumped	as	they	rolled	over	flopping
corpses.
And	between	Paran	and	the	carriage,	half	a	hundred	or	more	of	the
creatures,	now	wheeling	towards	him,	claws	raised	and	clicking.	He	drew	out
his	sword	again,	and	drove	his	heels	into	the	horse’s	flanks.	The	animal	voiced
an	indignant	grunt,	then	charged	forward.	Legs	and	chest	battering	bodies
aside,	Paran	slashing	right	and	left,	seeing	limbs	lopped	off,	skulls	opened
wide.	Hands	closed	on	the	shareholder	and	sought	to	pull	her	off.	Twisting
round,	Paran	cut	at	them	until	they	fell	away.
A	beast	landed	in	his	lap.
Hot	breath,	smelling	distinctly	of	over-ripe	peaches.	Hinged	fangs
spreading	wide	–	the	damned	thing	was	moments	from	biting	off	Paran’s	face.
He	head-butted	it,	the	rim	of	his	helm	smashing	nose	and	teeth,	blood
gushing	into	Paran’s	eyes,	nose	and	mouth.
The	creature	reeled	back.
Paran	swung	his	weapon	from	above,	hammering	the	sword’s	pommel	into
the	top	of	the	creature’s	skull.	Punching	through	with	twin	sprays	of	blood
from	its	tiny	ears.	Tugging	his	weapon	free,	he	shoved	the	dead	beast	to	the
side.


His	horse	was	still	pushing	forward,	squealing	as	talons	and	fangs	slashed
its	neck	and	chest.	Paran	leant	over	his	mount’s	neck,	flailing	with	his	sword	in
its	defence.
Then	they	were	through,	the	horse	lunging	into	a	canter,	then	a	gallop.	All
at	once,	the	carriage’s	battered,	swaying	and	pitching	back	reared	up	before
them.	Free	of	attackers.	Paran	dragged	on	his	reins	until	the	horse	slowed,	and
came	up	alongside.	He	gestured	at	the	nearest	shareholder.	‘She’s	still	alive	–
take	her—’
‘Is	she	now?’	the	man	replied,	then	turned	his	head	and	spat	out	a	gleaming
red	stream.
Paran	now	saw	that	blood	was	spurting	from	the	ragged	holes	in	the	man’s
left	leg,	and	those	spurts	were	slowing	down.	‘You	need	a	healer	and	fast—’
‘Too	late,’	the	man	replied,	leaning	out	to	drag	the	unconscious	woman
from	the	back	of	Paran’s	horse.	More	hands	reached	down	from	above	and
took	her	weight,	then	pulled	her	upwards.	The	dying	shareholder	sagged	back
against	the	carriage,	then	gave	Paran	a	red-stained	smile.	‘The	spike,’	he	said.
‘Doubles	my	worth	–	hope	the	damned	wife’s	grateful.’	As	he	spoke	he
fumbled	with	the	harness	buckle,	then	finally	pulled	it	loose.	With	a	final	nod	at
Paran,	he	let	go,	and	fell.
A	tumble	and	a	roll,	then…nothing.
Paran	looked	back,	stared	at	the	motionless	body	on	the	bridge.	Beasts
were	swarming	towards	it.	Gods,	these	people	have	all	lost	their	minds.
‘Stebar ’s	earned	the	spike!’	someone	said	from	the	carriage	roof.	‘Who’s
got	one	of	his	chips?’
Another	voice	said,	‘Here,	down	the	slot	–	how	bad	is	Thyrss?’
‘She’ll	make	it,	poor	girl,	ain’t	gonna	be	pretty	no	more.’
‘Knowing	her,	she’d	have	been	happier	with	the	spike—’
‘Not	a	chance,	got	no	kin,	Ephras.	What’s	the	point	of	a	spike	with	no	kin?’
‘Funny	man,	Yorad,	and	I	bet	you	don’t	even	know	it.’
‘What	did	I	say	now?’
The	carriage’s	wild	careening	had	slowed	as	more	and	more	detritus
appeared	on	the	bridge’s	road.	Pieces	of	corroding	armour,	broken	weapons,
bundles	of	nondescript	clothing.
Looking	down,	Paran	saw	a	slab	of	wood	that	looked	to	have	once	been	a
Troughs	game-board,	now	splintered	and	gnawed	down	one	side	as	if	some
creature	had	tried	to	eat	it.	So,	here	in	this	deathly	underworld,	there	are	things
that	still	need	food.	Meaning,	they’re	alive.	Meaning,	I	suppose,	they	don’t
belong.	Intruders,	like	us.	He	wondered	at	all	those	other	visitors	to	this	realm,
those	who’d	fallen	to	the	horde	of	ochre-hued	beast-men.	How	had	they	come


to	be	here?	An	accident,	or,	like	Paran,	seeking	to	cross	this	damned	bridge	for
a	reason?
‘Hedge!’
The	ghost,	perched	beside	the	driver,	leaned	forward.	‘Captain?’
‘This	realm	–	how	did	you	know	of	it?’
‘Well,	you	came	to	us,	didn’t	you?	Figured	you	was	the	one	who	knew
about	it.’
‘That	makes	no	sense.	You	led,	I	followed,	remember?’
‘You	wanted	to	go	where	the	ancient	things	went,	so	here	we	are.’
‘But	where	is	here?’
Shrugging,	the	sapper	leaned	back.
It	was	the	one	bad	thing	about	following	gut-feelings,	Paran	reflected.
Where	they	came	from	and	what	fed	them	was	anybody’s	guess.
After	perhaps	a	third	of	a	league,	the	slope	still	perceptibly	climbing,	the
road’s	surface	cleared,	and	although	the	mists	remained	thick,	they	seemed	to
have	lightened	around	them,	as	if	some	hidden	sun	of	white	fire	had	lifted	clear
of	the	horizon.	Assuming	there	was	such	a	horizon.	Not	every	warren	played
by	the	same	rules,	Paran	knew.
The	driver	cursed	suddenly	and	sawed	back	on	the	traces,	one	foot	pushing
the	brake	lever.	Paran	reined	in	alongside	as	the	train	lurched	to	a	halt.
Wreckage	ahead,	a	single,	large	heap	surrounded	by	scattered	pieces.
A	carriage.
Everyone	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	Karpolan	Demesand’s	voice
emerged	from	a	speak-tube	near	the	roof.	‘Nisstar,	Artara,	if	you	will,	examine
yon	barricade.’
Paran	dismounted,	his	sword	still	out,	and	joined	the	two	Pardu	women	as
they	crept	cautiously	towards	the	destroyed	carriage.
‘That’s	Trygalle	Trade	Guild,’	Paran	said	in	low	tones,	‘isn’t	it?’
‘Shhh.’
They	reached	the	scene.	Paran	held	back	as	the	shareholders,	exchanging
gestures,	each	went	to	one	side,	crossbows	held	at	the	ready.	In	moments,	they
moved	out	of	his	line	of	sight.
The	carriage	was	lying	on	its	side,	the	roof	facing	Paran.	One	back	wheel
was	missing.	The	copper	sheets	of	the	roof	looked	battered,	peeled	away	in
places,	cut	and	gouged	in	others.	On	two	of	the	visible	iron	attachment	loops,
strips	of	leather	remained.
One	of	the	Pardu	women	appeared	on	top,	perching	on	the	frame	of	the
side	door,	then	crouching	to	look	straight	down,	inside	the	carriage.	A	moment
later,	she	disappeared	inside.	The	other	shareholder	came	from	around	the


wreck.	Paran	studied	her.	Her	nose	had	been	shattered,	not	long	ago,	he	judged,
as	the	remnant	of	bruises	marred	the	area	beneath	her	eyes	with	faint	crescents.
The	eyes	above	those	bruises	were	now	filled	with	fear.
Behind	them,	Karpolan	Demesand	emerged	and,	the	Jaghut	at	his	side	and
Hedge	trailing,	they	slowly	approached.
Paran	turned,	studied	the	pale,	expressionless	visage	of	the	High	Mage.
‘Do	you	recognize	this	particular	carriage,	Karpolan?’
A	nod.	‘Trade	Mistress	Darpareth	Vayd.	Missing,	with	all	her	shareholders,
for	two	years.	Ganoes	Paran,	I	must	think	on	this,	for	she	was	my	superior	in
the	sorcerous	arts.	I	am	deeply	saddened	by	this	discovery,	for	she	was	my
friend.	Saddened,	and	alarmed.’
‘Do	you	recall	the	details	of	her	last	mission?’
‘Ah,	a	prescient	question.	Generally,’	he	paused,	folding	his	hands	on	his
lap,	‘such	details	remain	the	property	of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild,	for	as	you
must	realize,	confidentiality	is	a	quality	our	clients	pay	for,	in	fullest	trust	that
we	reveal	nothing.	In	this	instance,	however,	two	things	are	clear	that	mitigate
such	secrecy.	One:	it	seems,	if	we	continue	on,	we	shall	face	what	Darpareth
faced.	Two:	in	this,	her	last	mission,	she	failed.	And	presumably,	we	do	not
wish	to	share	her	fate.	Accordingly,	we	shall	here	and	now	pool	our	talents,
first,	to	determine	what	destroyed	her	mission,	and	secondly,	to	effect	a
reasonable	defence	against	the	enemy	responsible.’
The	other	Pardu	clambered	once	more	into	view.	Seeing	Karpolan	she
paused,	then	shook	her	head.
‘No	bodies,’	Paran	said.	‘Of	course,	those	hungry	beasts	we	ran	into	may
well	have	cleaned	up	afterwards—’
‘I	think	not,’	said	Ganath.	‘I	suspect	they	too	fear	what	lies	ahead,	and
would	not	venture	this	far	along	the	bridge.	In	any	case,	the	damage	on	that
carriage	came	from	something	far	larger,	stronger.	If	this	bridge	has	a	true
guardian,	then	I	suspect	these	poor	travellers	met	it.’
Paran	frowned.	‘Guardian.	Why	would	there	be	a	guardian?	That	kind	of
stuff	belongs	to	fairy	tales.	How	often	does	someone	or	something	try	to	cross
this	bridge?	It’s	got	to	be	rare,	meaning	there’s	some	guardian	with	a	lot	of
spare	time	on	its	hands.	Why	not	just	wander	off?	Unless	the	thing	has	no	brain
at	all,	such	a	geas	would	drive	it	mad—’
‘Mad	enough	to	tear	apart	whatever	shows	up,’	Hedge	said.
‘More	like	desperate	for	a	scratch	behind	the	ear,’	Paran	retorted.	‘It
doesn’t	make	sense.	Creatures	need	to	eat,	need	company—’
‘And	if	the	guardian	has	a	master?’	Ganath	asked.
‘This	isn’t	a	Hold,’	Paran	said.	‘It	has	no	ruler,	no	master.’


Karpolan	grunted,	then	said,	‘You	are	sure	of	this,	Ganoes	Paran?’
‘I	am.	More	or	less.	This	realm	is	buried,	forgotten.’
‘It	may	be,	then,’	Karpolan	mused,	‘that	someone	needs	to	inform	the
guardian	that	such	is	the	case	–	that	its	task	is	no	longer	relevant.	In	other
words,	we	must	release	it	from	its	geas.’
‘Assuming	such	a	guardian	exists,’	Paran	said,	‘rather	than	some	chance
meeting	of	two	forces,	both	heading	the	same	way.’
The	Trygalle	master ’s	small	eyes	narrowed.	‘You	know	more	of	this,
Ganoes	Paran?’
‘What	was	Darpareth	Vayd’s	mission	here?’
‘Ah,	we	are	to	exchange	secrets,	then.	Very	well.	As	I	recall,	the	client	was
from	Darujhistan.	Specifically,	the	House	of	Orr.	The	contact	was	a	woman,
niece	of	the	late	Turban	Orr.	Lady	Sedara.’
‘And	the	mission?’
‘It	seems	this	realm	is	home	to	numerous	entities,	powers	long	forgotten,
buried	in	antiquity.	The	mission	involved	an	assay	of	such	creatures.	Since
Lady	Sedara	was	accompanying	the	mission,	no	other	details	were	available.
Presumably,	she	knew	what	she	was	looking	for.	Now,	Ganoes	Paran,	it	is	your
turn.’
His	frown	deepening,	Paran	walked	closer	to	the	destroyed	carriage.	He
studied	the	tears	and	gouges	in	the	copper	sheathing	on	the	roof.	‘I’d	always
wondered	where	they	went,’	he	said,	‘and,	eventually,	I	realized	where	they
were	going.’	He	faced	Karpolan	Demesand.	‘I	don’t	think	there’s	a	guardian
here.	I	think	the	travellers	met	on	this	bridge,	all	headed	the	same	way,	and	the
misfortune	was	with	Darpareth	and	Sedara	Orr.	This	carriage	was	destroyed	by
two	Hounds	of	Shadow.’
‘You	are	certain?’
I	am.	I	can	smell	them.	My…kin.	‘We’ll	need	to	get	this	moved	to	one	side,
over	the	edge,	I	suppose.’
‘One	question,’	Karpolan	Demesand	said.	‘What	happened	to	the	bodies?’
‘Hounds	are	in	the	habit	of	dragging	and	throwing	their	victims.
Occasionally,	they	feed,	but	for	the	most	part	they	take	pleasure	in	the	killing	–
and	they	would,	at	that	time,	have	been	both	enraged	and	exuberant.	For	they
had	just	been	freed	from	Dragnipur,	the	sword	of	Anomander	Rake.’
‘Impossible,’	the	High	Mage	snapped.
‘No,	just	exceedingly	difficult.’
‘How	do	you	know	all	this?’	Karpolan	demanded.
‘Because	I	freed	them.’
‘Then…you	are	responsible	for	this.’


Paran	faced	the	huge	man,	his	now	hard,	dangerous	eyes.	‘Much	to	my
regret.	You	see,	they	should	never	have	been	there	in	the	first	place.	In
Dragnipur.	I	shouldn’t	have	been,	either.	And,	at	the	time,	I	didn’t	know	where
they	would	escape	to,	or	even	that	they	would	escape	at	all.	It	looked,	in	fact,	as
though	I’d	sent	them	to	oblivion	–	to	the	Abyss	itself.	As	it	turned	out,’	he
added	as	he	faced	the	wreckage	once	more,	‘I	needed	them	to	do	precisely	this
–	I	needed	them	to	blaze	the	trail.	Of	course,	it	would	have	been	better	if	they’d
met	no-one	on	the	way.	It’s	easy	to	forget	just	how	nasty	they	are…
Karpolan	Demesand	turned	to	his	shareholders.	‘Down,	all	of	you!	We
must	clear	the	road!’
‘Captain,’	Hedge	muttered,	‘you’re	really	starting	to	make	me	nervous.’
	
The	wreckage	groaned,	then	slid	over	the	edge,	vanishing	into	the	mists.	The
shareholders,	gathered	at	the	side	of	the	bridge,	all	waited	for	a	sound	from
below,	but	there	was	none.	At	a	command	from	Karpolan,	they	returned	to	their
positions	on	the	Trygalle	carriage.
It	seemed	the	High	Mage	was	in	no	mood	to	conduct	idle	conversation	with
Paran,	and	he	caught	the	Jaghut	sorceress	eyeing	him	sidelong	a	moment
before	she	climbed	into	the	carriage.	He	sighed.	Delivering	unpleasant	news
usually	did	this	–	he	suspected	if	trouble	arrived	there	wouldn’t	be	many
helping	hands	reaching	down	for	him.	He	climbed	into	the	saddle	once	more
and	gathered	the	reins.
They	resumed	their	journey.	Eventually,	they	began	on	the	downslope	–	the
bridge	was	at	least	a	league	long.	There	was	no	way	to	tell,	unless	one	sought
to	climb	beneath	the	span,	whether	pillars	or	buttressing	held	up	this	massive
edifice;	or	if	it	simply	hung,	suspended	and	unanchored,	above	a	vast	expanse
of	nothing.
Ahead,	something	took	shape	in	the	mists,	and	as	they	drew	closer,	they
could	make	out	a	vast	gateway	that	marked	the	bridge’s	end,	the	flanking
uprights	thick	at	the	base	and	tapering	as	they	angled	inward	to	take	–
precariously,	it	seemed	–	the	weight	of	a	huge	lintel	stone.	The	entire	structure
was	covered	with	moss.
Karpolan	halted	the	carriage	in	front	of	it	and,	as	was	his	custom,	sent	the
two	Pardu	shareholders	through	that	gateway.	When	nothing	untoward
happened	to	them	and	they	returned	to	report	that	the	way	beyond	was	clear	–
as	much	as	they	could	make	out,	anyway	–	the	carriage	was	driven	through.
Only	to	halt	just	beyond,	as	the	lead	horses	splashed	into	the	silty	water	of
a	lake	or	sea.


Paran	rode	his	horse	down	to	the	water ’s	edge.	Frowning,	he	looked	right,
then	left,	eyes	tracking	the	shoreline.
From	the	carriage,	Hedge	spoke:	‘Something	wrong,	Captain?’
‘Yes.	This	lake	is	what’s	wrong.’
‘Why?’
‘It’s	not	supposed	to	be	here.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
Dismounting,	Paran	crouched	by	the	water.	No	waves	–	perfect	calm.	He
cupped	his	hand	and	dipped	it	into	the	cool,	silty	liquid.	Raised	it	up,	sniffed.
‘Smells	like	rot.	This	is	flood	water—’
He	was	interrupted	by	an	eerie,	wailing	cry,	coming	from	somewhere
downshore.
‘Hood’s	breath!’	Hedge	hissed.	‘The	lungs	that	punched	that	out	are	huge.’
Straightening,	Paran	squinted	into	the	vague	mists	where	it	seemed	the
sound	had	come	from.	Then	he	pulled	himself	into	the	saddle	once	more.	‘I
think	I	was	wrong	about	there	being	no	guardian,’	he	said.
Dull	thunder,	rising	up	from	the	ground	beneath	them.	Whatever	it	was	was
on	its	way.	‘Let’s	get	going,’	Paran	said.	‘Up	the	shoreline,	and	fast.’


Chapter	Eleven
My	faith	in	the	gods	is	this:	they	are	indifferent	to	my	suffering.
Tomlos,	Destriant	of	Fener
?827	Burn’s	Sleep
His	hands	reached	into	another	world.	In,	then	out,	in,	then	out	again.	Taking,
giving	–	Heboric	could	not	tell	which,	if	either.	Perhaps	nothing	more	than	the
way	a	tongue	worried	a	loose	tooth,	the	unceasing	probing	that	triggered	stabs
of	confirmation	that	things	still	weren’t	quite	right.	He	reached	in,	and	touched
something,	the	impulsive	gesture	bitter	as	benediction,	as	if	he	could	not	help
but	repeat,	endlessly,	a	mocking	healer ’s	touch.
To	the	souls	lost	in	the	shattered	pieces	of	jade	giants,	Heboric	offered
only	lies.	Oh,	his	touch	told	them	of	his	presence,	his	attention,	and	they	in	turn
were	reminded	of	the	true	lives	they	once	possessed,	but	what	sort	of	gift	could
such	knowledge	provide?	He	voiced	no	promises,	yet	they	believed	in	him
nonetheless,	and	this	was	worse	than	torture,	for	both	him	and	them.
The	dead	city	was	two	days	behind	them	now,	yet	its	ignorant	complacency
haunted	him	still,	the	ghosts	and	their	insensate,	repetitive	lives	measured	out
stride	by	stride	again	and	again.	Too	many	truths	were	revealed	in	that	travail,
and	when	it	came	to	futility	Heboric	needed	no	reminders.
Unseasonal	clouds	painted	silver	the	sky,	behind	which	the	sun	slid	in	its
rut	virtually	unseen.	Biting	insects	swarmed	in	the	cooler	air,	danced	in	the
muted	light	on	the	old	traders’	road	on	which	Heboric	and	his	comrades
travelled,	rising	up	in	clouds	before	them.
The	horses	snorted	to	clear	their	nostrils,	rippled	the	skin	of	their	necks
and	flanks.	Scillara	worked	through	her	impressive	list	of	curses,	fending	off
the	insects	with	clouds	of	rustleaf	smoke	swirling	about	her	head.	Felisin
Younger	did	much	the	same,	but	without	the	blue	tirade.	Cutter	rode	ahead,	and
so,	Heboric	realized,	was	both	responsible	for	stirring	the	hordes	and	blessed
by	quickly	passing	through	them.
It	seemed	that	Scillara	too	had	noticed	the	same	thing.	‘Why	isn’t	he	back
here?	Then	the	bloodflies	and	chigger	fleas	would	be	chasing	all	of	us,	instead


of	this	–	this	nightmare!’
Heboric	said	nothing.	Greyfrog	was	bounding	along	on	the	south	side	of
the	road,	keeping	pace.	Unbroken	scrubland	stretched	out	beyond	the	demon,
whilst	to	the	north	ran	a	ridge	of	hills	–	the	tail	end	of	the	ancient	mountain
range	that	held	the	long-dead	city.
Icarium’s	legacy.	Like	a	god	loosed	and	walking	the	land,	Icarium	left
bloody	footprints.	Such	creatures	should	be	killed.	Such	creatures	are	an
abomination.	Whereas	Fener	–	Fener	had	simply	disappeared.	Dragged	as	the
Boar	God	had	been	into	this	realm,	most	of	its	power	had	been	stripped	away.
To	reveal	itself	would	be	to	invite	annihilation.	There	were	hunters	out	there.	I
need	to	find	a	way,	a	way	to	send	Fener	back.	And	if	Treach	didn’t	like	it,	too
bad.	The	Boar	and	the	Wolf	could	share	the	Throne	of	War.	In	fact,	it	made
sense.	There	were	always	two	sides	in	a	war.	Us	and	them,	and	neither	can
rightly	be	denied	their	faith.	Yes,	there	was	symmetry	in	such	a	notion.	‘It’s
true,’	he	said,	‘I	have	never	believed	in	single	answers,	never	believed	in	this…
this	divisive	clash	of	singularity.	Power	may	have	ten	thousand	faces,	but	the
look	in	the	eyes	of	every	one	of	them	is	the	same.’	He	glanced	over	to	see
Scillara	and	Felisin	staring	at	him.	‘There’s	no	difference,’	he	said,	‘between
speaking	aloud	or	in	one’s	own	head	–	either	way,	no-one	listens.’
‘Hard	to	listen,’	Scillara	said,	‘when	what	you	say	makes	no	sense.’
‘Sense	takes	effort.’
‘Oh,	I’ll	tell	you	what	makes	sense,	old	man.	Children	are	a	woman’s
curse.	They	start	with	weighing	you	down	from	the	inside,	then	they	weigh	you
down	from	the	outside.	For	how	long?	No,	not	days,	not	months,	not	even
years.	Decades.	Babies,	better	they	were	born	with	tails	and	four	legs	and	eager
to	run	away	and	crawl	into	some	hole	in	the	ground.	Better	they	could	fend	for
themselves	the	moment	they	scuttle	free.	Now,	that	would	make	sense.’
‘If	that	was	the	way	it	was,’	Felisin	said,	‘then	there’d	be	no	need	for
families,	for	villages,	for	towns	and	cities.	We’d	all	be	living	in	the
wilderness.’
‘Instead,’	Scillara	said,	‘we	live	in	a	prison.	Us	women,	anyway.’
‘It	can’t	be	as	bad	as	that,’	Felisin	insisted.
‘Nothing	can	be	done,’	Heboric	said.	‘We	each	fall	into	our	lives	and	that’s
that.	Some	choices	we	make,	but	most	are	made	for	us.’
‘Well,’	Scillara	retorted,	‘you	would	think	that,	wouldn’t	you?	But	look	at
this	stupid	journey	here,	Heboric.	True,	at	first	we	were	just	fleeing	Raraku,
that	damned	sea	rising	up	out	of	the	sands.	Then	it	was	that	idiot	priest	of
Shadow,	and	Cutter	there,	and	suddenly	we	were	following	you	–	where?	The
island	of	Otataral.	Why?	Who	knows,	but	it	has	something	to	do	with	those


ghost	hands	of	yours,	something	to	do	with	you	righting	a	wrong.	And	now
I’m	pregnant.’
‘How	does	that	last	detail	fit?’	Felisin	demanded,	clearly	exasperated.
‘It	just	does,	and	no,	I’m	not	interested	in	explaining.	Gods	below,	I’m
choking	on	these	damned	bugs!	Cutter!	Get	back	here,	you	brainless	oaf!’
Heboric	was	amused	by	the	stunned	surprise	in	the	young	man’s	face	as	he
turned	round	at	the	shout.
The	Daru	reined	in	and	waited.
By	the	time	the	others	arrived,	he	was	cursing	and	slapping	at	insects.
‘Now	you	know	how	we	feel,’	Scillara	snapped.
‘Then	we	should	pick	up	our	pace,’	Cutter	said.	‘Is	everyone	all	right	with
that?	It’d	be	good	for	the	horses,	besides.	They	need	some	stretching	out.’
I	think	we	all	need	that.	‘Set	the	pace,	Cutter.	I’m	sure	Greyfrog	can	keep
up.’
‘He	jumps	with	his	mouth	open,’	Scillara	said.
‘Maybe	we	should	all	try	that,’	Felisin	suggested.
‘Hah!	I’m	full	up	enough	as	it	is!’
No	god	truly	deserved	its	acolytes.	It	was	an	unequal	relationship	in	every
sense,	Heboric	told	himself.	Mortals	could	sacrifice	their	entire	adult	life	in	the
pursuit	of	communion	with	their	chosen	god,	and	what	was	paid	in	return	for
such	devotion?	Not	much	at	best;	often,	nothing	at	all.	Was	the	faint	touch	from
something,	someone,	far	greater	in	power	–	was	that	enough?
When	I	touched	Fener…
The	Boar	God	would	have	been	better	served,	he	realized,	with	Heboric’s
indifference.	The	thought	cut	into	him	like	a	saw-bladed,	blunt	knife	–	nothing
smooth,	nothing	precise	–	and,	as	Cutter	led	them	into	a	canter	down	the	track,
Heboric	could	only	bare	his	teeth	in	a	hard	grimace	against	the	spiritual	pain.
From	which	rose	a	susurration	of	voices,	all	begging	him,	pleading	with
him.	For	what	he	could	not	give.	Was	this	how	gods	felt?	Inundated	with
countless	prayers,	the	seeking	of	blessing,	the	gift	of	redemption	sought	by
myriad	lost	souls.	So	many	that	the	god	could	only	reel	back,	pummelled	and
stunned,	and	so	answer	every	beseeching	voice	with	nothing	but	silence.
But	redemption	was	not	a	gift.	Redemption	had	to	be	earned.
And	so	on	we	ride…
	
Scillara	drew	up	alongside	Cutter.	She	studied	him	until	he	became	aware	of
the	attention	and	swung	his	head	round.
‘What	is	it?	What’s	wrong?’


‘Who	said	anything	was	wrong?’
‘Well,	it’s	been	a	rather	long	list	of	complaints	from	you	of	late,	Scillara.’
‘No,	it’s	been	a	short	list.	I	just	like	repeating	myself.’
She	watched	him	sigh,	then	he	shrugged	and	said,	‘We’re	maybe	a	week
from	the	coast.	I’m	beginning	to	wonder	if	it	was	a	good	thing	to	take	this
overland	route…through	completely	unpopulated	areas.	We’re	always
rationing	our	food	and	we’re	all	suffering	from	that,	excepting	maybe	you	and
Greyfrog.	And	we’re	growing	increasingly	paranoid,	fleeing	from	every	dusttrail	and	journey-house.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Nothing’s	after	us.	We’re	not
being	hunted.	Nobody	gives	a	damn	what	we’re	up	to	or	where	we’re	going.’
‘What	if	you’re	wrong?’	Scillara	asked.	She	looped	the	reins	over	the
saddle	horn	and	began	repacking	her	pipe.	His	horse	misstepped,	momentarily
jolting	her.	She	winced.	‘Some	advice	for	you,	Cutter.	If	you	ever	get	pregnant,
don’t	ride	a	horse.’
‘I’ll	try	to	remember	that,’	he	said.	‘Anyway,	you’re	right.	I	might	be
wrong.	But	I	don’t	think	I	am.	It’s	not	like	we’ve	set	a	torrid	pace,	so	if	hunters
were	after	us,	they’d	have	caught	up	long	ago.’
She	had	an	obvious	reply	to	that,	but	let	it	go.	‘Have	you	been	looking
around,	Cutter?	As	we’ve	travelled?	All	these	weeks	in	this	seeming
wasteland?’
‘Only	as	much	as	I	need	to,	why?’
‘Heboric’s	chosen	this	path,	but	it’s	not	by	accident.	Sure,	it’s	a	wasteland
now,	but	it	wasn’t	always	one.	I’ve	started	noticing	things,	and	not	just	the
obvious	ones	like	that	ruined	city	we	passed	near.	We’ve	been	on	old	roads	–
roads	that	were	once	bigger,	level,	often	raised.	Roads	from	a	civilization
that’s	all	gone	now.	And	look	at	that	stretch	of	ground	over	there,’	she	pointed
southward.	‘See	the	ripples?	That’s	furrowing,	old,	almost	worn	away,	but
when	the	light	lengthens	you	can	start	to	make	it	out.	It	was	all	once	tilled.
Fertile.	I’ve	been	seeing	this	for	weeks,	Cutter.	Heboric’s	track	is	taking	us
through	the	bones	of	a	dead	age.	Why?’
‘Why	don’t	you	ask	him?’
‘I	don’t	want	to.’
‘Well,	since	he’s	right	behind	us,	he’s	probably	listening	right	now,
Scillara.’
‘I	don’t	care.	I	was	asking	you.’
‘Well,	I	don’t	know	why.’
‘I	do,’	she	said.
‘Oh.	All	right,	then,	why?’
‘Heboric	likes	his	nightmares.	That’s	why.’


Cutter	met	her	eyes,	then	the	Daru	twisted	in	his	saddle	and	looked	back	at
Heboric.
Who	said	nothing.
‘Death	and	dying,’	Scillara	continued.	‘The	way	we	suck	the	land	dry.	The
way	we	squeeze	all	colour	from	every	scene,	even	when	that	scene	shows	us
paradise.	And	what	we	do	to	the	land,	we	also	do	to	each	other.	We	cut	each
other	down.	Even	Sha’ik’s	camp	had	its	tiers,	its	hierarchy,	keeping	people	in
their	place.’
‘You	don’t	have	to	tell	me	about	that,’	Cutter	said.	‘I	lived	under	something
similar,	in	Darujhistan.’
‘I	wasn’t	finished.	It’s	why	Bidithal	found	followers	for	his	cult.	What	gave
it	its	strength	was	the	injustice,	the	unfairness,	and	the	way	bastards	always
seemed	to	win.	You	see,	Bidithal	had	been	one	of	those	bastards,	once.
Luxuriating	in	his	power	–	then	the	Malazans	arrived,	and	they	tore	it	all	apart,
and	Bidithal	found	himself	on	the	run,	just	one	more	hare	fleeing	the	wolves.
For	him,	well,	he	wanted	it	back,	all	that	power,	and	this	new	cult	he	created
was	for	that	purpose.	The	problem	was,	either	he	was	lucky	or	a	genius,
because	the	idea	behind	his	cult	–	not	the	vicious	rituals	he	imposed,	but	the
idea	–	it	struck	a	nerve.	It	reached	the	dispossessed,	and	that	was	its	brilliance
—’
‘It	wasn’t	his	idea,’	Heboric	said	behind	them.
‘Then	whose	was	it?’	Cutter	asked.
‘It	belongs	to	the	Crippled	God.	The	Chained	One.	A	broken	creature,
betrayed,	wounded,	imperfect	in	the	way	of	street	beggars,	abandoned	urchins,
the	physically	and	the	morally	damaged.	And	the	promise	of	something	better,
beyond	death	itself	–	the	very	paradise	Scillara	spoke	of,	but	one	we	could	not
deface.	In	other	words,	the	dream	of	a	place	immune	to	our	natural	excesses,	to
our	own	depravity,	and	accordingly,	to	exist	within	it	is	to	divest	oneself	of	all
those	excesses,	all	those	depravities.	You	just	have	to	die	first.’
‘Do	you	feel	fear,	Heboric?’	Scillara	asked.	‘You	describe	a	very	seductive
faith.’
‘Yes,	to	both.	If,	however,	its	heart	is	in	fact	a	lie,	then	we	must	make	the
truth	a	weapon,	a	weapon	that,	in	the	end,	must	reach	for	the	Crippled	God
himself.	To	shy	from	that	final	act	would	be	to	leave	unchallenged	the	greatest
injustice	of	all,	the	most	profound	unfairness,	and	the	deepest	betrayal
imaginable.’
‘If	it’s	a	lie,’	Scillara	said.	‘Is	it?	How	do	you	know?’
‘Woman,	if	absolution	is	free,	then	all	that	we	do	here	and	now	is
meaningless.’


‘Well,	maybe	it	is.’
‘Then	it	would	not	even	be	a	question	of	justifying	anything	–	justification
itself	would	be	irrelevant.	You	invite	anarchy	–	you	invite	chaos	itself.’
She	shook	her	head.	‘No,	because	there’s	one	force	more	powerful	than	all
of	that.’
‘Oh?’	Cutter	asked.	‘What?’
Scillara	laughed.	‘What	I	was	talking	about	earlier.’	She	gestured	once
more	at	the	ancient	signs	of	tillage.	‘Look	around,	Cutter,	look	around.’

Iskaral	Pust	plucked	at	the	thick	strands	of	web	covering	Mappo	Runt’s	massive
chest.	‘Get	rid	of	this!	Before	he	wakes	up,	you	damned	hag.	You	and	your
damned	moon	–	look,	it’s	going	to	rain.	This	is	a	desert	–	what’s	it	doing
raining?	It’s	all	your	fault.’	He	glanced	up,	smiling	evilly.	‘She	suspects
nothing,	the	miserable	cow.	Oh	I	can’t	wait.’	Straightening,	he	scurried	back	to
the	long	bamboo	stick	he’d	found	–	bamboo,	for	god’s	sake	–	and	resumed
drilling	the	tiny	fixing	holes	in	the	base.
Twisted	wire	eyelets,	bound	at	intervals	with	wet	gut	right	up	to	the	finely
tapered	end.	A	carved	and	polished	wooden	spool	and	half	a	league’s	worth	of
Mogora	hair,	spun	together	and	felted	or	something	similar,	strong	enough	to
reel	in	anything,	including	a	miserable	cow	flopping	about	in	the	shallows.
True,	he’d	have	to	wait	a	year	or	two,	until	the	little	wriggling	ones	grew	to	a
decent	size.	Maybe	he’d	add	a	few	bigger	ones	–	there	were	those	giant	catfish
he’d	seen	in	that	flooded	realm,	the	one	with	all	the	monsters	padding	the
shorelines.	Iskaral	Pust	shivered	at	the	recollection,	but	a	true	lover	of	fishing
would	understand	the	lengths	an	aficionado	would	go	to	in	the	hunt	for	worthy
spawn.	Even	the	extreme	necessity	of	killing	demons	and	such.	Granted,	that
particular	sojourn	had	been	a	little	hairy.	But	he’d	come	back	with	a	string	of
beauties.
As	a	child	he’d	wanted	to	learn	the	art	of	angling,	but	the	women	and
elders	in	the	tribe	weren’t	interested	in	that,	no,	just	weirs	and	collecting	pools
and	nets.	That	was	harvesting,	not	fishing,	but	young	Iskaral	Pust,	who’d	once
run	away	with	a	caravan	and	had	seen	the	sights	of	Li	Heng	–	for	a	day	and	a
half,	until	his	great-grandmother	had	come	to	retrieve	him	and	drag	him
screaming	like	a	gutted	piglet	back	to	the	tribe	–	well,	Iskaral	Pust	had
discovered	the	perfect	expression	of	creative	predation,	an	expression	which
was	–	as	everyone	knew	–	the	ideal	manly	endeavour.
Soon,	then,	and	he	and	his	mule	would	have	the	ultimate	excuse	to	leave	the


hoary	temple	of	home.	Going	fishing,	dear.	Ah,	how	he	longed	to	say	those
words.
‘You	are	an	idiot,’	Mogora	said.
‘A	clever	idiot,	woman,	and	that’s	a	lot	more	cleverer	than	you.’	He
paused,	eyeing	her,	then	said,	‘Now	all	I	need	to	do	is	wait	until	she’s	asleep,	so
I	can	cut	off	all	her	hair	–	she	won’t	notice,	it’s	not	like	we	have	silver	mirrors
hanging	about,	is	it?	I’ll	mix	it	all	up,	the	hair	from	her	head,	from	her	ears,
from	under	her	arms,	from—’
‘You	think	I	don’t	know	what	you’re	up	to?’	Mogora	asked,	then	cackled	as
only	an	old	woman	begotten	of	hyenas	could.	‘You	are	not	just	an	idiot.	You’re
also	a	fool.	And	deluded,	and	immature,	and	obsessive,	and	petty,	spiteful,
patronizing,	condescending,	defensive,	aggressive,	ignorant,	wilful,
inconsistent,	contradictory,	and	you’re	ugly	as	well.’
‘So	what	of	it?’
She	gaped	at	him	like	a	toothless	spider.	‘You	have	a	brain	like	pumice
stone	–	throw	stuff	at	it	and	it	just	sinks	in!	Disappears.	Vanishes.	Even	when	I
piss	on	it,	the	piss	just	poofs!	Gone!	Oh	how	I	hate	you,	husband.	With	all	your
obnoxious,	smelly	habits	–	gods,	picking	your	nose	for	breakfast	–	I	still	get
sick	thinking	about	it	–	a	sight	I	am	cursed	never	to	forget—’
‘Oh	be	quiet.	There’s	nutritious	pollen	entombed	in	snot,	as	everyone	well
knows—’
A	heavy	sigh	interrupted	him,	and	both	Dal	Honese	looked	down	at	Mappo.
Mogora	scrabbled	over	and	began	stripping	away	the	webs	from	the	Trell’s
seamed	face.
Iskaral	Pust	leaned	closer.	‘What’s	happened	to	his	skin?	It’s	all	lined	and
creased	–	what	did	you	do	to	him,	woman?’
‘The	mark	of	spiders,	Magi,’	she	replied.	‘The	price	for	healing.’
‘Every	strand’s	left	a	line!’
‘Well,	he	was	no	beauty	to	begin	with.’
A	groan,	then	Mappo	half-lifted	a	hand.	It	fell	back	and	he	groaned	again.
‘He’s	now	got	a	spider ’s	brain,	too,’	Iskaral	predicted.	‘He’ll	start	spitting
on	his	food	–	like	you	do,	and	you	dare	call	picking	my	nose	disgusting.’
‘No	self-respecting	creature	does	what	you	did	this	morning,	Iskaral	Pust.
You	won’t	get	no	spiders	picking	their	noses,	will	you?	Ha,	you	know	I’m
right.’
‘No	I	don’t.	I	was	just	picturing	a	spider	with	eight	legs	up	its	nose,	and	that
reminded	me	of	you.	You	need	a	haircut,	Mogora,	and	I’m	just	the	man	to	do
it.’
‘Come	near	me	with	intentions	other	than	amorous	and	I’ll	stick	you.’


‘Amorous.	What	a	horrible	thought—’
‘What	if	I	told	you	I	was	pregnant?’
‘I’d	kill	the	mule.’
She	leapt	at	him.
Squealing,	then	spitting	and	scratching,	they	rolled	in	the	dust.
The	mule	watched	them	with	placid	eyes.
	
Crushed	and	scattered,	the	tiles	that	had	once	made	the	mosaic	of	Mappo	Runt’s
life	were	little	more	than	faint	glimmers,	as	if	dispersed	at	the	bottom	of	a	deep
well.	Disparate	fragments	he	could	only	observe,	his	awareness	of	their
significance	remote,	and	for	a	seemingly	long	time	they	had	been	retreating
from	him,	as	if	he	was	slowly,	inexorably	floating	towards	some	unknown
surface.
Until	the	silver	threads	arrived,	descending	like	rain,	sleeting	through	the
thick,	murky	substance	surrounding	him.	And	he	felt	their	touch,	and	then	their
weight,	halting	his	upward	progress,	and,	after	a	time	of	motionlessness,
Mappo	began	sinking	back	down.	Towards	those	broken	pieces	far	below.
Where	pain	awaited	him.	Not	of	the	flesh	–	there	was	no	flesh,	not	yet	–	this
was	a	searing	of	the	soul,	the	manifold	wounds	of	betrayal,	of	failure,	of	selfrecrimination,	the	very	fists	that	had	shattered	all	that	he	had	been…before	the
fall.
Yet	still	the	threads	drew	the	pieces	together,	unmindful	of	agony,	ignoring
his	every	screamed	protest.
He	found	himself	standing	amidst	tall	pillars	of	stone	that	had	been	antlerchiselled	into	tapering	columns.	Heavy	wrought-iron	clouds	scudded	over	one
half	of	the	sky,	a	high	wind	spinning	strands	across	the	other	half,	filling	a
void	–	as	if	something	had	punched	through	from	the	heavens	and	the	hole	was
slow	in	healing.	The	pillars,	Mappo	saw,	rose	on	all	sides,	scores	of	them,
forming	some	pattern	indefinable	from	where	he	stood	in	their	midst.	They
cast	faint	shadows	across	the	battered	ground,	and	his	gaze	was	drawn	to	those
shadows,	blankly	at	first,	then	with	growing	realization.	Shadows	cast	in
impossible	directions,	forming	a	faint	array,	a	web,	reaching	out	on	all	sides.
And,	Mappo	now	understood,	he	stood	at	its	very	centre.
A	young	woman	stepped	into	view	from	behind	one	of	the	pillars.	Long
hair	the	colours	of	dying	flames,	eyes	the	hue	of	beaten	gold,	dressed	in
flowing	black	silks.	‘This,’	she	said	in	the	language	of	the	Trell,	‘is	long	ago.
Some	memories	are	better	left	alone.’
‘I	have	not	chosen	it,’	Mappo	said.	‘I	do	not	know	this	place.’


‘Jacuruku,	Mappo	Runt.	Four	or	five	years	since	the	Fall.	Yet	one	more
abject	lesson	in	the	dangers	that	come	with	pride.’	She	lifted	her	arms,	watched
as	the	silks	slid	free,	revealing	unblemished	skin,	smooth	hands.	‘Ah,	look	at
me.	I	am	young	again.	Extraordinary,	that	I	once	believed	myself	fat.	Does	it
afflict	us	all,	I	wonder,	the	way	one’s	sense	of	self	changes	over	time?	Or,	do
most	people	contend,	wilfully	or	otherwise,	a	changeless	persistence	in	their
staid	lives?	When	you	have	lived	as	long	as	I	have,	of	course,	no	such
delusions	survive.’	She	looked	up,	met	his	eyes.	‘But	you	know	this,	Trell,
don’t	you?	The	gift	of	the	Nameless	Ones	shrouds	you,	the	longevity	haunts
your	eyes	like	scratched	gemstones,	worn	far	past	beauty,	far	past	even	the
shimmer	of	conceit.’
‘Who	are	you?’	Mappo	asked.
‘A	queen	about	to	be	driven	from	her	throne,	banished	from	her	empire.
My	vanity	is	about	to	suffer	an	ignominious	defeat.’
‘Are	you	an	Elder	Goddess?	I	believe	I	know	you…’	He	gestured.	‘This
vast	web,	the	unseen	pattern	amidst	seeming	chaos.	Shall	I	name	you?’
‘Best	you	did	not.	I	have	since	learned	the	art	of	hiding.	Nor	am	I	inclined
to	grant	favours.	Mogora,	that	old	witch,	will	rue	this	day.	Mind	you,	perhaps
she	is	not	to	blame.	There	is	a	whisper	in	the	shadows	about	you,	Mappo.	Tell
me,	what	possible	interest	would	Shadowthrone	have	in	you?	Or	in	Icarium,
for	that	matter?’
He	started.	Icarium.	I	failed	him	–	Abyss	below,	what	has	happened?	‘Does
he	yet	live?’
‘He	does,	and	the	Nameless	Ones	have	gifted	him	with	a	new	companion.’
She	half-smiled.	‘You	have	been…discarded.	Why,	I	wonder?	Perhaps	some
failing	of	purpose,	a	faltering	–	you	have	lost	the	purity	of	your	vow,	haven’t
you?’
He	looked	away.	‘Why	have	they	not	killed	him,	then?’
She	shrugged.	‘Presumably,	they	foresee	a	use	for	his	talents.	Ah,	the
notion	terrifies	you,	doesn’t	it?	Can	it	be	true	that	you	have,	until	this	moment,
retained	your	faith	in	the	Nameless	Ones?’
‘No.	I	am	distressed	by	the	notion	of	what	they	will	release.	Icarium	is	not	a
weapon—’
‘Oh	you	fool,	of	course	he	is.	They	made	him,	and	now	they	will	use
him…ah,	now	I	understand	Shadowthrone.	Clever	bastard.	Of	course,	I	am
offended	that	he	would	so	blithely	assume	my	allegiance.	And	even	more
offended	to	realize	that,	in	this	matter,	his	assumption	was	correct.’	She	paused,
then	sighed.	‘It	is	time	to	send	you	back.’
‘Wait	–	you	said	something	–	the	Nameless	Ones,	that	they	made	Icarium.	I


thought—’
‘Forged	by	their	own	hands,	and	then,	through	the	succession	of	guardians
like	you,	Mappo,	honed	again	and	yet	again.	Was	he	as	deadly	when	he	first
crawled	from	the	wreckage	they’d	made	of	his	young	life?	As	deadly	as	he	is
now?	I	would	imagine	not.’	She	studied	him.	‘My	words	wound	you.	You	know,
I	dislike	Shadowthrone	more	and	more,	as	my	every	act	and	every	word	here
complies	with	his	nefarious	expectation.	I	wound	you,	then	realize	that	he	needs
you	wounded.	How	is	it	he	knows	us	so	well?’
‘Send	me	back.’
‘Icarium’s	trail	grows	cold.’
‘Now.’
‘Oh,	Mappo,	you	incite	me	unto	weeping.	I	did	that,	on	occasion,	when	I
was	young.	Although,	granted,	most	of	my	tears	were	inspired	by	self-pity.
And	so,	we	are	transformed.	Leave	now,	Mappo	Runt.	Do	what	you	must.’
	
He	found	himself	lying	on	the	ground,	bright	sun	overhead.	Two	beasts	were
fighting	nearby	–	no,	he	saw	as	he	turned	his	head,	two	people.	Slathered	in
dusty	spit,	dark	streaks	of	gritty	sweat,	tugging	handfuls	of	hair,	kicking	and
gouging.
‘Gods	below,’	Mappo	breathed.	‘Dal	Honese.’
They	ceased	scrapping,	looked	over.
‘Don’t	mind	us,’	Iskaral	Pust	said	with	a	blood-smeared	smile,	‘we’re
married.’
	
There	was	no	outrunning	it.	Scaled	and	bear-like,	the	beast	massed	as	much	as
the	Trygalle	carriage,	and	its	long,	loping	run	covered	more	ground	than	the
terrified	horses	could	manage,	exhausted	as	they	now	were.	The	red	and	black,
ridged	scales	covering	the	animal	were	each	the	size	of	bucklers,	and	mostly
impervious	to	missile	fire,	as	had	been	proved	by	the	countless	quarrels	that
had	skidded	from	its	hide	as	it	drew	ever	closer.	It	possessed	a	single,
overlarge	eye,	faceted	like	an	insect’s	and	surrounded	by	a	projecting	ridge	of
protective	bone.	Its	massive	jaws	held	double	rows	of	sabre	teeth,	each	one	as
long	as	a	man’s	forearm.	Old	battle-scars	had	marred	the	symmetry	of	the
beast’s	wide,	flat	head.
The	distance	between	the	pursuer	and	the	pursued	had	closed	to	less	than
two	hundred	paces.	Paran	abandoned	his	over-the-shoulder	study	of	the	beast


and	urged	his	horse	ahead.	They	were	pounding	along	a	rocky	shoreline.
Twice	they	had	clattered	over	the	bones	of	some	large	creature,	whale-like
although	many	of	the	bones	had	been	split	and	crushed.	Up	ahead	and	slightly
inland,	the	land	rose	into	something	like	a	hill	–	as	much	as	could	be	found	in
this	realm.	Paran	waved	towards	it.	‘That	way!’	he	shouted	to	the	driver.
‘What?’	the	man	shrieked.	‘Are	you	mad?’
‘One	last	push!	Then	halt	and	leave	the	rest	to	me!’
The	old	man	shook	his	head,	yet	steered	the	horses	up	onto	the	slope,	then
drove	them	hard	as,	hoofs	churning	in	the	mud,	they	strained	to	pull	the	huge
carriage	uphill.
Paran	slowed	his	horse	once	more,	caught	a	glimpse	of	shareholders
gathered	round	the	back	of	the	carriage,	all	staring	at	him	as	he	reined	in,
directly	in	the	beast’s	path.
One	hundred	paces.
Paran	fought	to	control	his	panicking	horse,	even	as	he	drew	a	wooden
card	from	his	saddlebag.	On	which	he	scored	a	half-dozen	lines	with	his
thumbnail.	A	moment	to	glance	up	–	fifty	paces,	head	lowering,	jaws	opening
wide.	Oh,	a	little	close—
Two	more	deeper	scores	into	the	wood,	then	he	flung	the	card	out,	into	the
path	of	the	charging	creature.
Four	soft	words	under	his	breath—
The	card	did	not	fall,	but	hung,	motionless.
The	scaled	bear	reached	it,	voicing	a	bellowing	roar	–	and	vanished.
Paran’s	horse	reared,	throwing	him	backward,	his	boots	leaving	the
stirrups	as	he	slid	onto	its	rump,	then	off,	landing	hard	to	skid	in	the	mud.	He
picked	himself	up,	rubbing	at	his	behind.
Shareholders	rushed	down	to	gather	round	him.
‘How’d	you	do	that?’
‘Where’d	it	go?’
‘Hey,	if	you	coulda	done	that	any	time	what	was	we	runnin’	for?’
Paran	shrugged.	‘Where	–	who	knows?	And	as	for	the	“how”,	well,	I	am
Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Might	as	well	make	the	grand	title
meaningful.’
Gloved	hands	slapped	his	shoulders	–	harder	than	necessary,	but	he	noted
their	relieved	expressions,	the	terror	draining	from	their	eyes.
Hedge	arrived.	‘Nice	one,	Captain.	I	didn’t	think	any	of	you’d	make	it.
From	what	I	saw,	though,	you	left	things	nearly	too	late	–	too	close.	Saw	your
mouth	moving	–	some	kind	of	spell	or	something?	Didn’t	know	you	were	a
mage—’


‘I’m	not.	I	was	saying	“I	hope	this	works”.’
Once	again,	everyone	stared	at	him.
Paran	walked	over	to	his	horse.
Hedge	said,	‘Anyway,	from	that	hilltop	you	can	see	our	destination.	The
High	Mage	thought	you	should	know.’
	
From	the	top	of	the	hill,	five	huge	black	statues	were	visible	in	the	distance,	the
intervening	ground	broken	by	small	lakes	and	marsh	grasses.	Paran	studied	the
rearing	edifices	for	a	time.	Bestial	hounds,	seated	on	their	haunches,	perfectly
rendered	yet	enormous	in	scale,	carved	entirely	of	black	stone.
‘About	what	you	had	expected?’	Hedge	asked,	clambering	back	aboard	the
carriage.
‘Wasn’t	sure,’	Paran	replied.	‘Five…or	seven.	Well,	now	I	know.	The	two
shadow	hounds	from	Dragnipur	found	their…counterparts,	and	so	were
reunited.	Then,	it	seems,	someone	freed	them.’
‘Something	paid	us	a	visit,’	Hedge	said,	‘the	night	us	ghosts	annihilated	the
Dogslayers.	Into	Sha’ik’s	camp.’
Paran	turned	to	regard	the	ghost.	‘You	haven’t	mentioned	this	before,
sapper.’
‘Well,	they	didn’t	last	long	anyway.’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	do	you	mean,	they	didn’t	last	long?’
‘I	mean,	someone	killed	them.’
‘Killed	them?	Who?	Did	a	god	visit	that	night?	One	of	the	First	Heroes?	Or
some	other	ascendant?’
Hedge	was	scowling.	‘This	is	all	second-hand,	mind	you,	but	from	what	I
gathered,	it	was	Toblakai.	One	of	Sha’ik’s	bodyguards,	a	friend	of	Leoman’s.
Afraid	I	don’t	know	much	about	him,	just	the	name,	or,	I	suppose,	title,	since
it’s	not	a	real	name—’
‘A	bodyguard	named	Toblakai	killed	two	Deragoth	Hounds?’
The	ghost	shrugged,	then	nodded.	‘Aye,	that’s	about	right,	Captain.’
Paran	drew	off	his	helm	and	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair	–	gods	below,	do	I
need	a	bath	–	then	returned	his	attention	to	the	distant	statues	and	the
intervening	lowlands.	‘Those	lakes	look	shallow	–	we	should	have	no	trouble
getting	there.’
The	carriage	door	opened	and	the	Jaghut	sorceress	Ganath	emerged.	She
eyed	the	black	stone	monuments.	‘Dessimbelackis.	One	soul	made	seven	–	he
believed	that	would	make	him	immortal.	An	ascendant	eager	to	become	a	god
—’


‘The	Deragoth	are	far	older	than	Dessimbelackis,’	Paran	said.
‘Convenient	vessels,’	she	said.	‘Their	kind	were	nearly	extinct.	He	found
the	few	last	survivors	and	made	use	of	them.’
Paran	grunted,	then	said,	‘That	was	a	mistake.	The	Deragoth	had	their	own
history,	their	own	story	and	it	was	not	told	in	isolation.’
‘Yes,’	Ganath	agreed,	‘the	Eres’al,	who	were	led	unto	domestication	by	the
Hounds	that	adopted	them.	The	Eres’al,	who	would	one	day	give	rise	to	the
Imass,	who	would	one	day	give	rise	to	humans.’
‘As	simple	as	that?’	Hedge	asked.
‘No,	far	more	complicated,’	the	Jaghut	replied,	‘but	for	our	purposes,	it
will	suffice.’
Paran	returned	to	his	horse.	‘Almost	there	–	I	don’t	want	any	more
interruptions	–	so	let’s	get	going,	shall	we?’
	
The	water	they	crossed	stank	with	decay,	the	lake	bottom	thick	with	black	mud
and,	it	turned	out,	starfish-shaped	leeches.	The	train	of	horses	struggled	hard	to
drag	the	carriage	through	the	sludge,	although	it	was	clear	to	Paran	that
Karpolan	Demesand	was	using	sorcery	to	lighten	the	vehicle	in	some	way.	Low
mudbanks	ribboning	the	lake	afforded	momentary	respite,	although	these	were
home	to	hordes	of	biting	insects	that	swarmed	hungrily	as	the	shareholders
came	down	from	the	carriage	to	pull	leeches	from	horse-legs.	One	such	bank
brought	them	close	to	the	far	shore,	separated	only	by	a	narrow	channel	of
sluggish	water	that	they	crossed	without	difficulty.
Before	them	was	a	long,	gentle	slope	of	mud-streaked	gravel.	Reaching	the
summit	slightly	ahead	of	the	carriage,	Paran	reined	in.
Nearest	him,	two	huge	pedestals	surrounded	in	rubble	marked	where
statues	had	once	been.	In	the	eternally	damp	mud	around	them	were	tracks,
footprints,	signs	of	some	kind	of	scuffle.	Immediately	beyond	rose	the	first	of
the	intact	monuments,	the	dull	black	stone	appallingly	lifelike	in	its	rendition
of	hide	and	muscle.	At	its	base	stood	a	structure	of	some	kind.
The	carriage	arrived,	and	Paran	heard	the	side	door	open.	Shareholders
were	leaping	down	to	establish	a	defensive	perimeter.
Dismounting,	Paran	walked	towards	the	structure,	Hedge	coming	up
alongside	him.
‘Someone	built	a	damned	house,’	the	sapper	said.
‘Doesn’t	look	lived	in.’
‘Not	now,	it	don’t.’
Constructed	entirely	from	driftwood,	the	building	was	roughly


rectangular,	the	long	sides	parallel	to	the	statue’s	pedestal.	No	windows	were
visible,	nor,	from	this	side,	any	entrance.	Paran	studied	it	for	a	time,	then
headed	towards	one	end.	‘I	don’t	think	this	was	meant	as	a	house,’	he	said.
‘More	like	a	temple.’
‘Might	be	right	–	that	driftwood	makes	no	joins	and	there	ain’t	no	chinking
or	anything	to	fill	the	gaps.	A	mason	would	look	at	this	and	say	it	was	for
occasional	use,	which	makes	it	sound	more	like	a	temple	or	a	corral…’
They	reached	one	end	and	saw	a	half-moon	doorway.	Branches	had	been
set	in	rows	in	the	loamy	ground	before	it,	creating	a	sort	of	walkway.	Muddy
feet	had	trod	its	length,	countless	sets,	but	none	very	recent.
‘Wore	leather	moccasins,’	Hedge	observed,	crouching	close	to	study	the
nearest	prints.	‘Seams	were	topside	except	at	the	back	of	the	heel	where	there’s
a	cross-stitch	pattern.	If	this	was	Genabackis,	I’d	say	Rhivi,	except	for	one
thing.’
‘What?’	Paran	asked.
‘Well,	these	folk	have	wide	feet.	Really	wide.’
The	ghost’s	head	slowly	turned	towards	the	building’s	entrance.	‘Captain,
someone	died	in	there.’
Paran	nodded.	‘I	can	smell	it.’
They	looked	over	as	Ganath	and	Karpolan	Demesand	–	the	latter	flanked
by	the	two	Pardu	shareholders	–	approached.	The	Trygalle	merchant-mage
made	a	face	as	the	foul	stench	of	rotting	meat	reached	him.	He	scowled	over	at
the	open	doorway.	‘The	ritual	spilling	of	blood,’	he	said,	then
uncharacteristically	spat.	‘These	Deragoth	have	found	worshippers.	Master	of
the	Deck,	will	this	detail	prove	problematic?’
‘Only	if	they	show	up,’	Paran	said.	‘After	that,	well,	they	might	end	up
having	to	reconsider	their	faith.	This	could	prove	tragic	for	them…’
‘Are	you	reconsidering?’	Karpolan	asked.
‘I	wish	I	had	that	luxury.	Ganath,	will	you	join	me	in	exploring	the	interior
of	the	temple?’
Her	brows	rose	fractionally,	then	she	nodded.	‘Of	course.	I	note	that
darkness	rules	within	–	do	you	have	need	for	light?’
‘It	wouldn’t	hurt.’
Leaving	the	others,	they	walked	side	by	side	towards	the	doorway.	In	a	low
voice,	Ganath	said,	‘You	suspect	as	I	do,	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘Yes.’
‘Karpolan	Demesand	is	no	fool.	He	will	realize	before	long.’
‘Yes.’
‘Then	we	should	display	brevity	in	our	examination.’


‘Agreed.’
Reaching	the	doorway,	Ganath	gestured	and	a	dull,	bluish	light	slowly	rose
in	the	chamber	beyond.
They	stepped	within.
A	single	room	–	no	inner	walls.	The	floor	was	mud,	packed	by	traffic.	A
shattered,	up-ended	tree-stump	dominated	the	centre,	the	roots	reaching	out
almost	horizontally,	as	if	the	tree	had	grown	on	flat	bedrock,	sending	its
tendrils	out	to	all	sides.	In	the	centre	of	this	makeshift	altar	the	core	of	the	bole
itself	had	been	carved	into	a	basin	shape,	filled	now	by	a	pool	of	black,	dried
blood.	Bound	spreadeagled	to	outstretched	roots	were	two	corpses,	both
women,	once	bloated	by	decay	but	now	rotted	into	gelatinous	consistency	as	if
melting,	bones	protruding	here	and	there.	Dead	maggots	lay	in	heaps	beneath
each	body.
‘Sedora	Orr,’	Paran	surmised,	‘and	Darpareth	Vayd.’
‘That	seems	a	reasonable	assumption,’	Ganath	said.	‘The	Trygalle
sorceress	must	have	been	injured	in	some	way,	given	her	stated	prowess.’
‘Well,	that	carriage	was	a	mess.’
‘Indeed.	Have	we	seen	enough,	Ganoes	Paran?’
‘Blood	ritual	–	an	Elder	propitiation.	I	would	think	the	Deragoth	have	been
drawn	near.’
‘Yes,	meaning	you	have	little	time	once	you	have	effected	their	release.’
‘I	hope	Karpolan	is	up	to	this.’	He	glanced	over	at	the	Jaghut.	‘In	a	true
emergency,	Ganath,	can	you…assist?’
‘Perhaps.	As	you	know,	I	am	not	pleased	with	what	you	intend	here.	What
would	please	me	even	less,	however,	is	being	torn	apart	by	Hounds	of
Darkness.’
‘I	share	that	aversion.	Good.	So,	if	I	call	upon	your	assistance,	Ganath,	you
will	know	what	to	do?’
‘Yes.’
Paran	turned	about.	‘It	may	sound	unreasonable,’	he	said,	‘but	my
sympathy	for	the	likely	plight	of	these	worshippers	has	diminished	somewhat.’
‘Yes,	that	is	unreasonable.	Your	kind	worship	from	fear,	after	all.	And	what
you	unleash	here	will	be	the	five	faces	of	that	fear.	And	so	shall	these	poor
people	suffer.’
‘If	they	weren’t	interested	in	the	attention	of	their	gods,	Ganath,	they	would
have	avoided	the	spilling	of	blood	on	consecrated	ground.’
‘Someone	among	them	sought	that	attention,	and	the	power	that	might
come	from	it.	A	High	Priest	or	shaman,	I	suspect.’
‘Well	then,	if	the	Hounds	don’t	kill	that	High	Priest,	his	followers	will.’


‘A	harsh	lesson,	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘Tell	that	to	these	two	dead	women.’
The	Jaghut	made	no	reply.
They	walked	from	the	temple,	the	light	fading	behind	them.
Paran	noted	Karpolan	Demesand’s	fixed	regard,	the	dread	plain,
undeniable,	and	he	slowly	nodded.	The	Trygalle	master	turned	away	and,
exhausted	as	he	had	been	earlier,	his	weariness	seemed	to	increase	tenfold.
Hedge	came	close.	‘Could’ve	been	shareholders,’	he	suggested.
‘No,’	said	Ganath.	‘Two	women,	both	expensively	attired.	One	must
presume	that	the	shareholders	met	their	fate	elsewhere.’
Paran	said	to	Hedge,	‘Now	comes	your	final	task,	sapper.	Summoning	the
Deragoth	–	but	consider	this	first	–	they’re	close,	and	we	need	time	to—’
‘Run	like	Hood’s	bowels,	aye.’	Hedge	lifted	a	satchel	into	view.	‘Now,
before	you	ask	me	where	I	been	hiding	this,	don’t	bother.	Here	in	this	place,
details	like	that	don’t	matter.’	He	grinned.	‘Some	people	would	like	to	take
gold	with	’em	when	they	go.	Me,	I’ll	take	Moranth	munitions	over	gold	any
day.	After	all,	you	don’t	know	what	you’re	going	to	meet	on	the	other	side,
right?	So,	it’s	always	better	holding	onto	the	option	of	blowing	things	up.’
‘Wise	counsel,	Hedge.	And	those	munitions	will	work	here?’
‘Absolutely,	Captain.	Death	once	called	this	home,	remember?’
Paran	studied	the	nearest	statue.	‘You	intend	to	shatter	them.’
‘Aye.’
‘Timed	charge.’
‘Aye.’
‘Only,	you	have	five	to	set,	and	the	farthest	one	looks	two,	three	hundred
paces	away.’
‘Aye.	That’s	going	to	be	a	problem	–	well,	let’s	call	it	a	challenge.	Granted,
Fid’s	better	at	this	finesse	stuff	than	me.	But	tell	me	something,	Captain	–
you’re	sure	these	Deragoth	ain’t	just	going	to	hang	round	here?’
‘I’m	sure.	They’ll	return	to	their	home	realm	–	that’s	what	the	first	two	did,
didn’t	they?’
‘Aye,	but	they	had	their	shadows.	Might	be	these	ones	will	go	hunting	their
own	first.’
Paran	frowned.	He’d	not	considered	that.	‘Oh,	I	see.	Into	the	Realm	of
Shadow,	then.’
‘If	that’s	where	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	are	at	the	moment,	aye.’
Damn.	‘All	right,	set	your	charges,	Hedge,	but	don’t	start	the	sand	grains
running	just	yet.’
‘Right.’


Paran	watched	the	sapper	head	off.	Then	he	drew	out	his	Deck	of	Dragons.
Paused,	glancing	over	at	Ganath,	then	Karpolan	Demesand.	Both	saw	what	he
held	in	his	hands.	The	Trygalle	master	visibly	blanched,	then	hurried	back	to
his	carriage.	After	a	moment	–	and	a	long,	unreadable	look	–	the	Jaghut
followed	suit.
Paran	allowed	himself	a	small	smile.	Yes,	why	announce	yourselves	to
whomever	I’m	about	to	call	upon?	He	squatted,	setting	the	deck	face-down	on
the	mudstained	walkway	of	branches.	Then	lifted	the	top	card	and	set	it	down	to
the	right.	High	House	Shadow	–	who’s	in	charge	here,	damned	Deck,	you	or	me?
‘Shadowthrone,’	he	murmured,	‘I	require	your	attention.’
The	murky	image	of	the	Shadow	House	remained	singularly	lifeless	on	the
lacquered	card.
‘All	right,’	Paran	said,	‘I’ll	revise	my	wording.	Shadowthrone,	talk	to	me
here	and	now	or	everything	you’ve	done	and	everything	you’re	planning	to	do
will	get,	quite	literally,	torn	to	pieces.’
A	shimmer,	further	obscuring	the	House,	then	something	like	a	vague
figure,	seated	on	a	black	throne.	A	voice	hissed	out	at	him,	‘This	had	better	be
important.	I’m	busy	and	besides,	even	the	idea	of	a	Master	of	the	Deck
nauseates	me,	so	get	on	with	it.’
‘The	Deragoth	are	about	to	be	released,	Shadowthrone.’
Obvious	agitation.	‘What	gnat-brained	idiot	would	do	that?’
‘Can’t	be	helped,	I’m	afraid—’
‘You!’
‘Look,	I	have	my	reasons,	and	they	will	be	found	in	Seven	Cities.’
‘Oh,’	the	figure	settled	back	down,	‘those	reasons.	Well,	yes.	Clever,	even.
But	still	profoundly	stupid.’
‘Shadowthrone,’	Paran	said,	‘the	two	Hounds	of	Shadow	that	Rake	killed.
The	two	taken	by	Dragnipur.’
‘What	about	them?’
‘I’m	not	sure	how	much	you	know,	but	I	freed	them	from	the	sword.’	He
waited	for	another	bout	of	histrionics,	but…nothing.	‘Ah,	so	you	know	that.
Good.	Well,	I	have	discovered	where	they	went…here,	where	they	conjoined
with	their	counterparts,	and	were	then	freed	–	no,	not	me.	Now,	I	understand
that	they	have	since	been	killed.	For	good,	this	time.’
Shadowthrone	raised	a	long-fingered	hand	that	filled	most	of	the	card.
Closed	it	into	a	fist.	‘Let	me	see,’	the	god’s	voice	purred,	‘if	I	understand	you.’
One	finger	snapped	upward.	‘The	Nameless	Idiots	go	and	release	Dejim
Nebrahl.	Why?	Because	they’re	idiots.	Their	own	lies	caught	up	with	them,	so
they	needed	to	get	rid	of	a	servant	who	was	doing	what	they	wanted	him	to	do


in	the	first	place,	only	doing	it	too	well!’	Shadowthrone’s	voice	was	steadily
climbing	in	pitch	and	volume.	A	second	finger	shot	into	view.	‘Then,	you,	the
Master	Idiot	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons,	decide	to	release	the	Deragoth,	to	get	rid
of	Dejim	Nebrahl.	But	wait,	even	better!’	A	third	finger.	‘Some	other	serious
nasty	wandering	Seven	Cities	just	killed	two	Deragoth,	and	maybe	that	nasty	is
still	close	by,	and	would	like	a	few	more	trophies	to	drag	behind	his	damned
horse!’	His	voice	was	now	a	shriek.	‘And	now!	Now!’	The	hand	closed	back
into	a	fist,	shaking	about.	‘You	want	me	to	send	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	to
Seven	Cities!	Because	it’s	finally	occurred	to	that	worm-ridden	walnut	you	call
a	brain	that	the	Deragoth	won’t	bother	with	Dejim	Nebrahl	until	they	find	my
Hounds!	And	if	they	come	looking	here	in	my	realm,	there’ll	be	no	stopping
them!’	He	halted	suddenly,	the	fist	motionless.	Then	various	fingers	sprang
into	view	in	an	increasingly	chaotic	pattern.	Shadowthrone	snarled	and	the
frenzied	hand	vanished.	A	whisper:	‘Pure	genius.	Why	didn’t	I	think	of	that?’
The	tone	began	rising	once	more.	‘Why?	Because	I’m	not	an	idiot!!’
With	that	the	god’s	presence	winked	out.
Paran	grunted,	then	said,	‘You	never	told	me	if	you	were	going	to	send	the
Hounds	of	Shadow	to	Seven	Cities.’
He	thought	then	that	he	heard	a	faint	scream	of	frustration,	but	perhaps	it
was	only	imagined.	Paran	returned	the	card	to	the	deck,	put	it	back	into	an
inside	pocket,	and	slowly	straightened.	‘Well,’	he	sighed,	‘that	wasn’t	nearly	as
bad	as	I	thought	it’d	be.’
	
By	the	time	Hedge	returned,	both	Ganath	and	Karpolan	had	reappeared,	their
glances	towards	Paran	decidedly	uneasy.
The	ghost	gestured	Paran	closer	and	said	quietly,	‘It	ain’t	going	to	work
the	way	we	wanted	it,	Captain.	Too	much	distance	between	them	–	by	the	time	I
get	to	the	closest	one,	the	farthest	one	will	have	gone	up,	and	if	those	Hounds
are	close,	well,	like	I	said,	it	ain’t	going	to	work.’
‘What	do	you	suggest?’
‘You	ain’t	going	to	like	it.	I	sure	don’t,	but	it’s	the	only	way.’
‘Out	with	it,	sapper.’
‘Leave	me	behind.	Get	going.	Now.’
‘Hedge—’
‘No,	listen,	it	makes	sense.	I’m	already	dead	–	I	can	find	my	own	way	out.’
‘Maybe	you	can	find	your	own	way	out,	Hedge.	More	likely	what’s	left	of
you	will	get	torn	to	pieces,	if	not	by	the	Deragoth,	then	any	of	a	host	of	other
local	nightmares.’


‘Captain,	I	don’t	need	this	body	–	it’s	just	for	show,	so’s	you	got	a	face	to
look	at.	Trust	me,	it’s	the	only	way	you	and	the	others	are	going	to	get	out	of
this	alive.’
‘Let’s	try	a	compromise,’	Paran	said.	‘We	wait	as	long	as	we	can.’
Hedge	shrugged.	‘As	you	like,	just	don’t	wait	too	long,	Captain.’
‘Get	on	your	way,	then,	Hedge.	And…thank	you.’
‘Always	an	even	trade,	Captain.’
The	ghost	headed	off.	Paran	turned	to	Karpolan	Demesand.	‘How	confident
are	you,’	he	asked,	‘about	getting	us	out	of	here	fast?’
‘This	part	should	be	relatively	simple,’	the	Trygalle	sorceror	replied.
‘Once	a	path	is	found	into	a	warren,	its	relationship	to	others	becomes	known.
The	Trygalle	Trade	Guild’s	success	is	dependent	entirely	upon	its	Surveyants	–
its	maps,	Ganoes	Paran.	With	each	mission,	those	maps	become	more
complete.’
‘Those	are	valuable	documents,’	Paran	observed.	‘I	trust	you	keep	them
well	protected.’
Karpolan	Demesand	smiled,	and	said	nothing.
‘Prepare	the	way,	then,’	Paran	said.
Hedge	was	already	out	of	sight,	lost	somewhere	in	the	gloom	beyond	the
nearest	statues.	Mists	had	settled	in	the	depressions,	but	the	mercurial	sky
overhead	seemed	as	remote	as	ever.	For	all	that,	Paran	noticed,	the	light	was
failing.	Had	their	sojourn	here	encompassed	but	a	single	day?	That	seemed…
unlikely.
The	bark	of	a	munition	reached	him	–	a	sharper.	‘That’s	the	signal,’	Paran
said,	striding	over	to	his	horse.	‘The	farthest	statue	will	go	first.’	He	swung
himself	into	the	saddle,	guided	his	horse	closer	to	the	carriage,	into	which
Karpolan	and	Ganath	had	already	disappeared.	The	shutter	on	the	window	slid
to	one	side	as	he	arrived.
‘Captain—’
A	thunderous	detonation	interrupted	him,	and	Paran	turned	to	see	a	column
of	smoke	and	dust	rising.
‘Captain,	it	seems	–	much	to	my	surprise—’
A	second	explosion,	closer	this	time,	and	another	statue	seemed	to	simply
vanish.
‘As	I	was	saying,	it	appears	my	options	are	far	more	limited	than	I	first—’
From	the	distance	came	a	deep,	bestial	roar.
The	first	Deragoth—
‘Ganoes	Paran!	As	I	was	saying—’
The	third	statue	detonated,	its	base	disappearing	within	an	expanding,


billowing	wave	of	smoke,	stone	and	dust.	Front	legs	shorn	through,	the	huge
edifice	pitched	forward,	jagged	cracks	sweeping	through	the	rock,	and	began
its	descent.	Then	struck.
The	carriage	jumped,	then	bounced	back	down	on	its	ribbed	stanchions.
Glass	broke	somewhere	inside.
The	reverberations	of	the	concussion	rippled	through	the	ground.
Horses	screamed	and	fought	their	bits,	eyes	rolling.
A	second	howl	shook	the	air.
Paran	squinted	through	the	dust	and	smoke,	seeking	Hedge	somewhere
between	the	last	statue	to	fall	and	the	ones	yet	to	be	destroyed.	But	in	the
gathering	darkness	he	saw	no	movement.	All	at	once,	the	fourth	statue	erupted.
Some	vagary	of	sequence	tilted	the	monument	to	one	side,	and	as	it	toppled,	it
struck	the	fifth.
‘We	must	leave!’
The	shriek	was	Karpolan	Demesand’s.
‘Hold	on—’
‘Ganoes	Paran,	I	am	no	longer	confident—’
‘Just	hold	it—’
A	third	howl,	echoed	by	the	Deragoth	that	had	already	arrived	–	and	those
last	two	roars	were…close.
‘Shit.’	He	could	not	see	Hedge	–	the	last	statue,	already	riven	with	impact
fissures,	suddenly	pitched	downward	as	the	munitions	at	its	base	exploded.
‘Paran!’
‘All	right	–	open	the	damned	gate!’
The	train	of	horses	reared,	then	surged	forward,	slewing	the	carriage
round	as	they	began	a	wild	descent	on	the	slope.	Swearing,	Paran	kicked	his
horse	into	motion,	risking	a	final	glance	back—
—to	see	a	huge,	hump-shouldered	beast	emerge	from	the	clouds	of	dust,
its	eyes	lambent	as	they	fixed	on	Paran	and	the	retreating	carriage.	The
Deragoth’s	massive,	broad	head	lowered,	and	it	began	a	savagely	fast	sprint.
‘Karpolan!’
The	portal	opened	like	a	popped	blister	–	watery	blood	or	some	other	fluid
spraying	from	its	edges	–	directly	in	front	of	them.	A	charnel	wind	battered
them.	‘Karpolan?	Where—’
The	train	of	horses,	screaming	one	and	all,	plunged	into	the	gate,	and	a
heartbeat	later	Paran	followed.	He	heard	it	sear	shut	behind	him,	and	then,	from
all	sides	–	madness.
Rotted	faces,	gnawed	hands	reaching	up,	long-dead	eyes	imploring	as
decayed	mouths	opened	–	‘Take	us!	Take	us	with	you!’


‘Don’t	leave!’
‘He’s	forgotten	us	–	please,	I	beg	you—’
‘Hood	cares	nothing—’
Bony	fingers	closed	on	Paran,	pulled,	tugged,	then	began	clawing	at	him.
Others	had	managed	to	grab	hold	of	projections	on	the	carriage	and	were
being	dragged	along.
The	pleas	shifted	into	anger	–	‘Take	us	–	or	we	will	tear	you	to	pieces!’
‘Cut	them	–	bite	them	–	tear	them	apart!’
Paran	struggled	to	free	his	right	arm,	managed	to	close	his	hand	on	the
grip	of	his	sword,	then	drag	it	free.	He	began	flailing	the	blade	on	each	side.
The	shrieks	from	the	horses	were	insanity’s	own	voice,	and	now
shareholders	were	screaming	as	well,	as	they	hacked	down	at	reaching	hands
and	arms.
Twisting	about	in	his	saddle	as	he	chopped	at	the	clawing	limbs,	Paran
glimpsed	a	sweeping	vista	–	a	plain	of	writhing	figures,	the	undead,	every	face
turned	now	towards	them	–	undead,	in	their	tens	of	thousands	–	undead,	so
crowding	the	land	that	they	could	but	stand,	out	to	every	horizon,	raising	now	a
chorus	of	despair—
‘Ganath!’	Paran	roared.	‘Get	us	out	of	here!’
A	sharp	retort,	as	of	cracking	ice.	Bitter	wind	swirled	round	them,	and	the
ground	pitched	down	on	one	side.
Snow,	ice,	the	undead	gone.
Wheeling	blue	sky.	Mountain	crags—
Horses	skidding,	legs	splaying,	their	screams	rising	in	pitch.	A	few
animated	corpses,	flailing	about.	The	carriage,	looming	in	front	of	Paran,	its
back	end	sliding	round.
They	were	on	a	glacier.	Skidding,	sliding	downward	at	ever	increasing
speed.
Distinctly,	Paran	heard	one	of	the	Pardu	shareholders:	‘Oh,	this	is	much
better.’
Then,	eyes	blurring,	horse	slewing	wildly	beneath	him,	there	was	only
time	for	the	plunging	descent	–	down,	it	turned	out,	an	entire	mountainside.
Ice,	then	snow,	then	slush,	the	latter	rising	like	a	bow	wave	before	horses
and	sideways-descending	carriage,	rising	and	building,	slowing	them	down.
All	at	once,	the	slush	gave	way	to	mud,	then	stone—
Flipping	the	carriage,	the	train	of	horses	dragged	with	it.
Paran’s	own	mount	fared	better,	managing	to	angle	itself	until	it	faced
downhill,	forelegs	punching	snow	and	slush,	seeking	purchase.	At	the	point	it
reached	the	mud,	and	having	seen	what	awaited	it,	the	horse	simply	launched


into	a	charge.	A	momentary	stumble,	then,	as	the	ground	levelled	out,	it
slowed,	flanks	heaving	–	and	Paran	turned	in	the	saddle,	in	time	to	see	the	huge
carriage	tumble	to	a	shattered	halt.	The	bodies	of	shareholders	were	sprawled
about,	upslope,	in	the	mud,	limp	and	motionless	on	the	scree	of	stones,	almost
indistinguishable	from	the	corpses.
The	train	of	horses	had	broken	loose,	yet	all	but	one	were	down,	legs
kicking	amidst	a	tangle	of	traces,	straps	and	buckles.
Heart	still	hammering	the	anvil	of	his	chest,	Paran	eased	his	horse	to	a
stop,	turning	it	to	face	upslope,	then	walking	the	exhausted,	shaky	beast	back
towards	the	wreckage.
A	few	shareholders	were	picking	themselves	up	here	and	there,	looking
dazed.	One	began	swearing,	sagging	back	down	above	a	broken	leg.
‘Thank	you,’	croaked	a	corpse,	flopping	about	in	the	mud.	‘How	much	do	I
owe	you?’
The	carriage	was	on	its	side.	The	three	wheels	that	had	clipped	the	mud	and
stone	had	shattered,	and	two	opposite	had	not	survived	the	tumbling.	Leaving
but	a	single	survivor,	spinning	like	a	mill-stone.	Back	storage	hatches	had
sprung	open,	spilling	their	contents	of	supplies.	On	the	roof,	still	strapped	in
place,	was	the	crushed	body	of	a	shareholder,	blood	running	like	meltwater
down	the	copper	tiles,	his	arms	and	legs	hanging	limp,	the	exposed	flesh
pummelled	and	grey	in	the	bright	sunlight.
One	of	the	Pardu	women	picked	herself	up	from	the	mud	and	limped	over
to	come	alongside	Paran	as	he	reined	in	near	the	carriage.
‘Captain,’	she	said,	‘I	think	we	should	make	camp.’
He	stared	down	at	her.	‘Are	you	all	right?’
She	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	turned	her	head	and	spat	out	a	red
stream.	Wiped	her	mouth,	then	shrugged.	‘Hood	knows,	we’ve	had	worse
trips…’
	
The	savage	wound	of	the	portal,	now	closed,	still	marred	the	dust-laden	air.
Hedge	stepped	out	from	where	he’d	been	hiding	near	one	of	the	pedestals.	The
Deragoth	were	gone	–	anything	but	eager	to	remain	overlong	in	this	deathly,
unpleasant	place.
So	he’d	stretched	things	a	little.	No	matter,	he’d	been	convincing	enough,
yielding	the	desired	result.
Here	I	am.	On	my	own,	in	Hood’s	own	Hood-forsaken	pit.	You	should’ve
thought	it	through,	Captain.	There	was	nothing	sweet	in	the	deal	for	us,	and
only	fools	agree	to	that.	Well,	being	fools	is	what	killed	us,	and	we	done	learned


that	lesson.
He	looked	round,	trying	to	get	his	bearings.	In	this	place,	one	direction	was
good	as	another.	Barring	the	damned	sea,	of	course.	So,	it’s	done.	Time	to
explore…
The	ghost	left	the	wreckage	of	the	destroyed	statues	behind,	a	lone,	mostly
insubstantial	figure	walking	the	denuded,	muddy	land.	As	bowlegged	as	he	had
been	in	life.
Dying	left	no	details	behind,	after	all.	And	most	certainly,	nothing	like
absolution	awaited	the	fallen.
Absolution	comes	from	the	living,	not	the	dead,	and,	as	Hedge	well	knew,
it	has	to	be	earned.
	
She	was	remembering	things.	Finally,	after	all	this	time.	Her	mother,	camp
follower,	spreading	her	legs	for	the	Ashok	Regiment	before	it	was	sent	to
Genabackis.	After	it	had	left,	she	just	went	and	died,	as	if	without	those	soldiers
she	could	only	breathe	out,	never	again	in	–	and	it	was	what	you	drew	in	that
gave	you	life.	So,	just	like	that.	Dead.	Her	offspring	was	left	to	fare	for	itself,
alone,	uncared	for,	unloved.
Mad	priests	and	sick	cults	and,	for	the	girl	born	of	the	mother,	a	new	camp
to	follow.	Every	path	of	independence	was	but	a	dead-end	side-track	off	that
more	deeply	rutted	road,	the	one	that	ran	from	parent	to	child	–	this	much	was
clear	to	her	now.
Then	Heboric,	Destriant	of	Treach,	had	dragged	her	away	–	before	she
found	herself	breathing	ever	out	–	but	no,	before	him,	there	had	been	Bidithal
and	his	numbing	gifts,	his	whispered	assurances	of	mortal	suffering	being
naught	more	than	a	layered	chrysalis,	and	upon	death	the	glory	would	break
loose,	unfolding	its	iridescent	wings.	Paradise.
Oh,	that	had	been	a	seductive	promise,	and	her	drowning	soul	had	clung	to
the	solace	of	its	plunging	weight	as	she	sank	deathward.	She	had	once	dreamed
of	wounding	young,	wide-eyed	acolytes,	of	taking	the	knife	in	her	own	hands
and	cutting	away	all	pleasure.	Misery	loves	–	needs	–	company;	there	is	nothing
altruistic	in	sharing.	Self-interest	feeds	on	malice	and	all	else	falls	to	the
wayside.
She	had	seen	too	much	in	her	short	life	to	believe	anyone	professing
otherwise.	Bidithal’s	love	of	pain	had	fed	his	need	to	deliver	numbness.	The
numbness	within	him	made	him	capable	of	delivering	pain.	And	the	broken
god	he	claimed	to	worship	–	well,	the	Crippled	One	knew	he	would	never	have
to	account	for	his	lies,	his	false	promises.	He	sought	out	lives	in	abeyance,	and


with	their	death	he	was	free	to	discard	those	whose	lives	he	had	used	up.	This
was,	she	realized,	exquisite	enslavement:	a	faith	whose	central	tenet	was
unprovable.	There	would	be	no	killing	this	faith.	The	Crippled	God	would	find
a	multitude	of	mortal	voices	to	proclaim	his	empty	promises,	and	within	the
arbitrary	strictures	of	his	cult,	evil	and	desecration	could	burgeon	unchecked.
A	faith	predicated	on	pain	and	guilt	could	proclaim	no	moral	purity.	A	faith
rooted	in	blood	and	suffering—
‘We	are	the	fallen,’	Heboric	said	suddenly.
Sneering,	Scillara	pushed	more	rustleaf	into	the	bowl	of	her	pipe	and	drew
hard.	‘A	priest	of	war	would	say	that,	wouldn’t	he?	But	what	of	the	great	glory
found	in	brutal	slaughter,	old	man?	Or	have	you	no	belief	in	the	necessity	of
balance?’
‘Balance?	An	illusion.	Like	trying	to	focus	on	a	single	mote	of	light	and
seeing	naught	of	the	stream	and	the	world	that	stream	reveals.	All	is	in	motion,
all	is	in	flux.’
‘Like	these	damned	flies,’	Scillara	muttered.
Cutter,	riding	directly	ahead,	glanced	back	at	her.	‘I	was	wondering	about
that,’	he	said.	‘Carrion	flies	–	are	we	heading	towards	a	site	of	battle,	do	you
think?	Heboric?’
He	shook	his	head,	amber	eyes	seeming	to	flare	in	the	afternoon	light.	‘I
sense	nothing	of	that.	The	land	ahead	is	as	you	see	it.’
They	were	approaching	a	broad	basin,	dotted	with	a	few	tufts	of	dead,
yellow	reeds.	The	ground	itself	was	almost	white,	cracked	like	a	broken
mosaic.	Some	larger	mounds	were	visible	here	and	there,	constructed,	it
seemed,	of	sticks	and	reeds.	Reaching	the	edge,	they	drew	to	a	halt.
Fish	bones	lay	in	a	heaped	carpet	along	the	fringe	of	the	dead	marsh’s
shoreline,	blown	there	by	the	winds.	On	one	of	the	closer	mounds	they	could
see	bird	bones	and	the	remnants	of	eggshells.	These	wetlands	had	died
suddenly,	in	the	season	of	nesting.
Flies	swarmed	the	basin,	swirling	about	in	droning	clouds.
‘Gods	below,’	Felisin	said,	‘do	we	have	to	cross	this?’
‘Shouldn’t	be	too	bad,’	Heboric	said.	‘It’s	not	far	across.	It’d	be	dark	long
before	we	finish	if	we	try	to	go	round	this.	Besides,’	he	waved	at	the	buzzing
flies,	‘we	haven’t	even	started	to	cross	yet	they’ve	found	us,	and	skirting	the
basin	won’t	escape	them.	At	least	they’re	not	the	biting	kind.’
‘Let’s	just	get	this	over	with,’	Scillara	said.
Greyfrog	bounded	down	into	the	basin,	as	if	to	blaze	a	trail	with	his
opened	mouth	and	snapping	tongue.
Cutter	nudged	his	horse	into	a	trot,	then,	as	flies	swarmed	him,	a	canter.


The	others	followed.
	
Flies	alighting	like	madness	on	his	skin.	Heboric	squinted	as	countless	hard,
frenzied	bodies	collided	with	his	face.	The	very	sunlight	had	dimmed	amidst
this	chaotic	cloud.	Trapped	in	his	sleeves,	inside	his	threadbare	leggings	and
down	the	back	of	his	neck	–	he	gritted	his	teeth,	resolving	to	weather	this
minor	irritation.
Balance.	Scillara’s	words	disturbed	him	for	some	reason	–	no,	perhaps	not
her	words,	but	the	sentiment	they	revealed.	Once	an	acolyte,	now	rejecting	all
forms	of	faith	–	something	he	himself	had	done,	and,	despite	Treach’s
intervention,	still	sought	to	achieve.	After	all,	the	gods	of	war	needed	no
servants	beyond	the	illimitable	legions	they	always	had	and	always	would
possess.
Destriant,	what	lies	beneath	this	name?	Harvester	of	souls,	possessing	the
power	–	and	the	right	–	to	slay	in	a	god’s	name.	To	slay,	to	heal,	to	deliver
justice.	But	justice	in	whose	eyes?	I	cannot	take	a	life.	Not	any	more.	Never
again.	You	chose	wrong,	Treach.
All	these	dead,	these	ghosts…
The	world	was	harsh	enough	–	it	did	not	need	him	and	his	kind.	There	was
no	end	to	the	fools	eager	to	lead	others	into	battle,	to	exult	in	mayhem	and
leave	behind	a	turgid,	sobbing	wake	of	misery	and	suffering	and	grief.
He’d	had	enough.
Deliverance	was	all	he	desired	now,	his	only	motive	for	staying	alive,	for
dragging	these	innocents	with	him	to	a	blasted,	wasted	island	that	had	been
scraped	clean	of	all	life	by	warring	gods.	Oh,	they	did	not	need	him.
Faith	and	zeal	for	retribution	lay	at	the	heart	of	the	true	armies,	the	fanatics
and	their	malicious,	cruel	certainties.	Breeding	like	fly-blow	in	every
community.	But	worthy	tears	come	from	courage,	not	cowardice,	and	those
armies,	they	are	filled	with	cowards.
Horses	carrying	them	from	the	basin,	the	flies	spinning	and	swirling	in
mindless	pursuit.
Onto	a	track	emerging	from	the	old	shoreline	beside	the	remnants	of	a
dock	and	mooring	poles.	Deep	ruts	climbing	a	higher	beach	ridge,	from	the
age	when	the	swamp	had	been	a	lake,	the	ruts	cut	ragged	by	the	claws	of
rainwater	that	found	no	refuge	in	roots	–	because	the	verdancy	of	centuries
past	was	gone,	cut	away,	devoured.
We	leave	naught	but	desert	in	our	wake.
Surmounting	the	crest,	where	the	road	levelled	out	and	wound	drunkenly


across	a	plain	flanked	by	limestone	hills,	and	in	the	distance,	a	third	of	a	league
away	directly	east,	a	small,	decrepit	hamlet.	Outbuildings	with	empty	corrals
and	paddocks.	To	one	side	of	the	road,	near	the	hamlet’s	edge,	a	half-hundred
or	more	heaped	tree-trunks,	the	wood	grey	as	stone	where	fires	had	not
charred	it	–	but	it	seemed	that	even	in	death,	this	wood	defied	efforts	at	its
destruction.
Heboric	understood	that	obdurate	defiance.	Yes,	make	yourself	useless	to
humankind.	Only	thus	will	you	survive,	even	when	what	survives	of	you	is
naught	but	your	bones.	Deliver	your	message,	dear	wood,	to	our	eternally	blind
eyes.
Greyfrog	had	dropped	back	and	now	leapt	ten	paces	to	Cutter ’s	right.	It
seemed	even	the	demon	had	reached	its	stomach’s	limit	of	flies,	for	its	broad
mouth	was	shut,	the	second	lids	of	its	eyes,	milky	white,	closed	until	the	barest
slits	were	visible.	And	the	huge	creature	was	very	nearly	black	with	those
crawling	insects.
As	was	Cutter ’s	youthful	back	before	him.	As	was	the	horse	the	Daru	rode.
And,	to	all	sides,	the	ground	seethed,	glittering	and	rabid	with	motion.
So	many	flies.
So	many…
‘Something	to	show	you,	now…’
Like	a	savage	beast	suddenly	awakened,	Heboric	straightened	in	his	saddle
—
	
Scillara’s	mount	cantered	a	stride	behind	the	Destriant’s,	a	little	to	the	old
man’s	left,	whilst	in	her	wake	rode	Felisin.	She	cursed	in	growing	alarm	as	the
flies	gathered	round	the	riders	like	midnight,	devouring	all	light,	the	buzzing
cadence	seeming	to	whisper	words	that	crawled	into	her	mind	on	ten	thousand
legs.	She	fought	back	a	scream—
As	her	horse	shrieked	in	mortal	pain,	dust	swirling	and	spinning	beneath	it,
dust	rising	and	finding	shape.
A	terrible,	wet,	grating	sound,	then	something	long	and	sharp	punched	up
between	her	mount’s	shoulder-blades,	blood	gouting	thick	and	bright	from	the
wound.	The	horse	staggered,	forelegs	buckling,	then	collapsed,	the	motion
flinging	Scillara	from	the	saddle—
She	found	herself	rolling	on	a	carpet	of	crushed	insects,	the	hoofs	of
Heboric’s	horse	pounding	down	around	her	as	the	creature	shrilled	in	agony,
pitching	to	the	left	–	something	snarling,	a	barbed	flash	of	skin,	feline	and
fluid,	leaping	from	the	dying	horse’s	back—


And	figures,	emerging	as	if	from	nowhere	amidst	spinning	dust,	blades	of
flint	flashing	–	a	bestial	scream	–	blood	slapping	the	ground	beside	her	in	a
thick	sheet,	instantly	blackened	by	flies	–	the	blades	chopping,	cutting,	slashing
into	flesh	–	a	piercing	shriek,	rising	in	a	conflagration	of	pain	and	rage	–
something	thudded	against	her	as	Scillara	sought	to	rise	on	her	hands	and
knees,	and	she	looked	over.	An	arm,	tattooed	in	a	tiger-stripe	pattern,	sliced
clean	midway	between	elbow	and	shoulder,	the	hand,	a	flash	of	fitful,	dying
green	beneath	swarming	flies.
She	staggered	upright,	stabbing	pain	in	her	belly,	choking	as	insects
crowded	into	her	mouth	with	her	involuntary	gasp.
A	figure	stepped	near	her,	long	stone	sword	dripping,	desiccated	skull-face
swinging	in	her	direction,	and	that	sword	casually	reached	out,	slid	like	fire
into	Scillara’s	chest,	ragged	edge	scoring	above	her	top	rib,	beneath	the
clavicle,	then	punching	out	her	back,	just	above	the	scapula.
Scillara	sagged,	felt	herself	sliding	from	that	weapon	as	she	fell	down	onto
her	back.
The	apparition	vanished	within	the	cloud	of	flies	once	more.
She	could	hear	nothing	but	buzzing,	could	see	nothing	but	a	chaotic,
glittering	clump	swelling	above	the	wound	in	her	chest,	through	which	blood
leaked	–	as	if	the	flies	had	become	a	fist,	squeezing	her	heart.	Squeezing…

Cutter	had	had	no	time	to	react.	The	bite	of	sudden	sand	and	dust,	then	his
horse’s	head	was	simply	gone,	ropes	of	blood	skirling	down	as	if	pursuing	its
flight.	Down	beneath	the	front	hoofs,	that	stumbled,	then	gave	way	as	the
decapitated	beast	collapsed.
Cutter	managed	to	roll	free,	gaining	his	feet	within	a	maelstrom	of	flies.
Someone	loomed	up	beside	him	and	he	spun,	one	knife	free	and	slashing
across	in	an	effort	to	block	a	broad,	hook-bladed	scimitar	of	rippled	flint.	The
weapons	collided,	and	that	sword	swept	through	Cutter ’s	knife,	the	strength
behind	the	blow	unstoppable—
He	watched	it	tear	into	his	belly,	watched	it	rip	its	way	free,	and	then	his
bowels	tumbled	into	view.
Reaching	down	to	catch	them	with	both	hands,	Cutter	sank	as	all	life	left	his
legs.	He	stared	down	at	the	flopping	mess	he	held,	disbelieving,	then	landed	on
one	side,	curling	round	the	terrible,	horrifying	damage	done	to	him.
He	heard	nothing.	Nothing	but	his	own	breathing,	and	the	cavorting	flies,
now	closing	in	as	if	they	had	known	all	along	that	this	was	going	to	happen.


	
The	attacker	had	risen	from	the	very	dust,	on	the	right	side	of	Greyfrog.
Savage	agony	as	a	huge	chalcedony	longsword	cut	through	the	demon’s
forelimb,	severing	it	clean	in	a	gush	of	green	blood.	A	second	cut	sliced
through	the	back	leg	on	the	same	side,	and	the	demon	struck	the	ground,
kicking	helplessly	with	its	remaining	limbs.
Grainy	with	flies	and	thundering	pain	–	a	momentary	scene	played	out
before	the	demon’s	eyes.	Broad,	bestial,	clad	in	furs,	a	creature	of	little	more
than	skin	and	bone,	stepping	placidly	over	Greyfrog’s	back	leg,	which	was
lying	five	paces	distant,	kicking	all	by	itself.	Stepping	into	the	black	cloud.
Dismay.	I	can	hop	no	more.

Even	as	he	had	leapt	from	the	back	of	his	horse,	two	flint	swords	had	caught
him,	one	slashing	through	muscle	and	bone,	severing	an	arm,	the	other
thrusting	point	first	into,	then	through,	his	chest.	Heboric,	throat	filled	with
animal	snarls,	twisted	in	mid-air	in	a	desperate	effort	to	pull	himself	free	of	the
impaling	weapon.	Yet	it	followed,	tearing	downward	–	snapping	ribs,	cleaving
through	lung,	then	liver	–	and	finally	ripping	out	from	his	side	in	an	explosion
of	bone	shards,	meat	and	blood.
The	Destriant’s	mouth	filled	with	hot	liquid,	spraying	as	he	struck	the
ground,	rolled,	then	came	to	a	stop.
Both	T’lan	Imass	walked	to	where	he	lay	sprawled	in	the	dust,	stone
weapons	slick	with	gore.
Heboric	stared	up	at	those	empty,	lifeless	eyes,	watched	as	the	tattered,
desiccated	warriors	stabbed	down,	rippled	points	punching	into	his	body	again
and	again.	He	watched	as	one	flashed	towards	his	face,	then	shot	down	into	his
neck—
Voices,	beseeching,	a	distant	chorus	of	dismay	and	despair	–	he	could
reach	them	no	longer	–	those	lost	souls	in	their	jade-swallowed	torment,
growing	fainter,	farther	and	farther	away	–	I	told	you,	look	not	to	me,	poor
creatures.	Do	you	see,	finally,	how	easy	it	was	to	fail	you?
I	have	heard	the	dead,	but	I	could	not	serve	them.	Just	as	I	have	lived,	yet
created	nothing.
He	remembered	clearly	now,	in	a	single	dread	moment	that	seemed
unending,	timeless,	a	thousand	images	–	so	many	pointless	acts,	empty	deeds,
so	many	faces	–	all	those	for	whom	he	did	nothing.	Baudin,	Kulp,	Felisin
Paran,	L’oric,	Scillara…Wandering	lost	in	this	foreign	land,	this	tired	desert


and	the	dust	of	gardens	filling	brutal,	sun-scorched	air	–	better	had	he	died	in
the	otataral	mines	of	Skullcup.	Then,	there	would	have	been	no	betrayals.	Fener
would	hold	his	throne.	The	despair	of	the	souls	in	their	vast	jade	prisons,
spinning	unchecked	through	the	Abyss,	that	terrible	despair	–	it	could	have
remained	unheard,	unwitnessed,	and	so	there	would	have	been	no	false
promises	of	salvation.
Baudin	would	not	have	been	so	slowed	down	in	his	flight	with	Felisin
Paran	–	oh,	I	have	done	nothing	worthwhile	in	this	all-too-long	life.	These
ghost	hands,	they	have	proved	the	illusion	of	their	touch	–	no	benediction,	no
salvation,	not	for	anyone	they	dared	touch.	And	these	reborn	eyes,	with	all	their
feline	acuity,	they	fade	now	into	their	senseless	stare,	a	look	every	hunter
yearns	for	in	the	eyes	of	their	fallen	foe.
So	many	warriors,	great	heroes	–	in	their	own	eyes	at	least	–	so	many	had
set	off	in	pursuit	of	the	giant	tiger	that	was	Treach	–	knowing	nothing	of	the
beast’s	true	identity.	Seeking	to	defeat	him,	to	stand	over	his	stilled	corpse,	and
look	down	into	his	blank	eyes,	yearning	to	capture	something,	anything,	of
majesty	and	exaltation	and	take	it	within	themselves.
But	truths	are	never	found	when	the	one	seeking	them	is	lost,	spiritually,
morally.	And	nobility	and	glory	cannot	be	stolen,	cannot	be	earned	in	the
violent	rape	of	a	life.	Gods,	such	pathetic,	flailing,	brutally	stupid	conceit…it
was	good,	then,	that	Treach	killed	every	damned	one	of	them.	Dispassionately.
Ah,	such	a	telling	message	in	that.
Yet	he	knew.	The	T’lan	Imass	who	had	killed	him	cared	nothing	for	all	of
that.	They	had	acted	out	of	exigency.	Perhaps	somewhere	in	their	ancient
memories,	of	the	time	when	they	were	mortal,	they	too	had	sought	to	steal	what
they	themselves	could	never	possess.	But	such	pointless	pursuits	no	longer
mattered	to	them.
Heboric	would	be	no	trophy.
And	that	was	well.
And	in	this	final	failure,	it	seemed	there	would	be	no	other	survivors,	and
in	some	ways	that	was	well,	too.	Appropriate.	So	much	for	glory	found	within
his	final	thoughts.
And	is	that	not	fitting?	In	this	last	thought,	I	fail	even	myself.
He	found	himself	reaching…for	something.	Reaching,	but	nothing
answered	his	touch.	Nothing	at	all.


Book	Three

Shadows	of	the	King


	

Who	can	say	where	divides	truth	and	the	host	of	desires	that,	together,
give	shape	to	memories?	There	are	deep	folds	in	every	legend,	and	the
visible,	outward	pattern	presents	a	false	unity	of	form	and	intention.	We
distort	with	deliberate	purpose;	we	confine	vast	meaning	into	the
strictures	of	imagined	necessity.	In	this	lies	both	failing	and	gift,	for	in
the	surrender	of	truth	we	fashion,	rightly	or	wrongly,	universal
significance.	Specific	gives	way	to	general;	detail	gives	way	to
grandiose	form,	and	in	the	telling	we	are	exalted	beyond	our	mundane
selves.	We	are,	in	truth,	bound	into	greater	humanity	by	this	skein	of
words…
Introduction	to	Among	the	Consigned
Heboric
	


Chapter	Twelve
‘He	spoke	of	those	who	would	fall,	and	in	his	cold	eyes	stood	naked
the	truth	that	it	was	we	of	whom	he	spoke.	Words	of	broken	reeds	and
covenants	of	despair,	of	surrender	given	as	gifts	and	slaughter	in	the
name	of	salvation.	He	spoke	of	the	spilling	of	war,	and	he	told	us	to
flee	into	unknown	lands,	so	that	we	might	be	spared	the	spoiling	of	our
lives…’
Words	of	the	Iron	Prophet	Iskar	Jarak
The	Anibar	(the	Wickerfolk)
One	moment	the	shadows	between	the	trees	were	empty,	the	next	moment	that
Samar	Dev	glanced	up,	her	breath	caught	upon	seeing	figures.	On	all	sides
where	the	sunlit	clearing	was	clawed	back	by	the	tangle	of	black	spruce,	ferns
and	ivy,	stood	savages…‘Karsa	Orlong,’	she	whispered,	‘we	have	visitors…’
The	Teblor,	his	hands	red	with	gore,	cut	away	another	slice	of	flesh	from
the	dead	bhederin’s	flank,	then	looked	up.	After	a	moment	he	grunted,	then
returned	to	his	butchering.
They	were	edging	forward,	emerging	from	the	gloom.	Small,	wiry,
wearing	tanned	hides,	strips	of	fur	bound	round	their	upper	arms,	their	skin	the
colour	of	bog	water,	stitched	with	ritual	scarring	on	exposed	chests	and
shoulders.	On	their	faces	grey	paint	or	wood	ash	covered	their	lower	jaws	and
above	the	lips,	like	beards.	Elongated	circles	of	icy	blue	and	grey	surrounded
their	dark	eyes.	Carrying	spears,	axes	at	hide	belts	along	with	an	assortment	of
knives,	they	were	bedecked	in	ornaments	of	cold-hammered	copper	that
seemed	shaped	to	mimic	the	phases	of	the	moon;	and	on	one	man	was	a
necklace	made	from	the	vertebrae	of	some	large	fish,	and	descending	from	it
was	a	gold-ringed,	black	copper	disc,	representing,	she	surmised,	a	total
eclipse.	This	man,	evidently	a	leader	of	some	kind,	stepped	forward.	Three
strides,	eyes	on	an	unmindful	Karsa	Orlong,	out	into	the	sunlight,	where	he
slowly	knelt.
Samar	now	saw	that	he	held	something	in	his	hands.	‘Karsa,	pay	attention.
What	you	do	now	will	determine	whether	we	pass	through	their	land	peaceably


or	ducking	spears	from	the	shadows.’
Karsa	reversed	grip	on	the	huge	skinning	knife	he	had	been	working	with,
and	stabbed	it	deep	into	the	bhederin	carcass.	Then	he	rose	to	face	the	kneeling
savage.
‘Get	up,’	he	said.
The	man	flinched,	lowering	his	head.
‘Karsa,	he’s	offering	you	a	gift.’
‘Then	he	should	do	so	standing.	His	people	are	hiding	here	in	the
wilderness	because	he	hasn’t	done	enough	of	that.	Tell	him	he	needs	to	stand.’
They	had	been	speaking	in	the	trader	tongue,	and	something	in	the
kneeling	warrior ’s	reactions	led	Samar	to	suspect	that	he	had	understood	the
exchange…and	the	demand,	for	he	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Man	of	the
Great	Trees,’	he	now	said,	his	accent	harsh	and	guttural	to	Samar ’s	ears.
‘Deliverer	of	Destruction,	the	Anibar	offer	you	this	gift,	and	ask	that	you	give
us	a	gift	in	return—’
‘Then	they	are	not	gifts,’	Karsa	replied.	‘What	you	seek	is	to	barter.’
Fear	flickered	in	the	warrior ’s	eyes.	The	others	of	his	tribe	–	the	Anibar	–
remained	silent	and	motionless	between	the	trees,	yet	Samar	sensed	a	palpable
dismay	spreading	among	them.	Their	leader	tried	again:	‘This	is	the	language
of	barter,	Deliverer,	yes.	Poison	that	we	must	swallow.	It	does	not	suit	what	we
seek.’
Scowling,	Karsa	turned	to	Samar	Dev.	‘Too	many	words	that	lead
nowhere,	witch.	Explain.’
‘This	tribe	follows	an	ancient	tradition	lost	among	most	peoples	of	Seven
Cities,’	she	said.	‘The	tradition	of	gift-giving.	The	gift	itself	is	a	measure	of	a
number	of	things,	with	subtle	and	often	confusing	ways	of	attributing	value.
These	Anibar	have	of	necessity	learned	about	trading,	but	they	do	not	ascribe
value	the	same	way	as	we	do,	and	so	they	usually	lose	in	the	deal.	I	suspect	they
generally	fare	poorly	when	dealing	with	canny,	unscrupulous	merchants	from
the	civilized	lands.	There	is—’
‘Enough,’	Karsa	interrupted.	He	gestured	towards	the	leader	–	who
flinched	once	more	–	and	said,	‘Show	me	this	gift.	But	first,	tell	me	your
name.’
‘I	am,	in	the	poison	tongue,	Boatfinder.’	He	held	up	the	object	in	his	hands.
‘The	courage	brand,’	he	said,	‘of	a	great	father	among	the	bhederin.’
Samar	Dev,	brows	lifting,	regarded	Karsa.	‘That	would	be	a	penis	bone,
Teblor.’
‘I	know	what	it	is,’	he	answered	in	a	growl.	‘Boatfinder,	what	in	turn	do
you	ask	of	me?’


‘Revenants	come	into	the	forest,	besetting	the	Anibar	clans	north	of	here.
They	slaughter	all	in	their	path,	without	cause.	They	do	not	die,	for	they
command	the	air	itself	and	so	turn	aside	every	spear	that	seeks	them.	Thus	we
hear.	We	lose	many	names.’
‘Names?’	Samar	asked.
His	gaze	flicked	to	her	and	he	nodded.	‘Kin.	Eight	hundred	and	forty-seven
names	woven	to	mine,	among	the	north	clans.’	He	gestured	to	the	silent
warriors	behind	him.	‘As	many	names	to	lose	among	these	here,	each	one.	We
know	grief	in	the	loss	for	ourselves,	but	more	for	our	children.	The	names	we
cannot	take	back	–	they	go	and	never	come	again,	and	so	we	diminish.’
Karsa	said,	‘You	want	me	to	kill	revenants,’	and	he	pointed	at	the	gift,	‘in
exchange	for	that.’
‘Yes.’
‘How	many	of	these	revenants	are	there?’
‘They	come	in	great	ships,	grey-winged,	and	set	out	into	the	forest	in
hunts,	each	hunt	numbering	twelve.	They	are	driven	by	anger,	yet	nothing	we
seek	to	do	appeases	that	anger.	We	do	not	know	what	we	do	to	offend	them	so.’
Probably	offered	them	a	damned	penis	bone.	But	Samar	Dev	kept	that
thought	to	herself.
‘How	many	hunts?’
‘A	score	thus	far,	yet	their	boats	do	not	depart.’
Karsa’s	entire	face	had	darkened.	Samar	Dev	had	never	seen	such	raw	fury
in	him	before.	She	suddenly	feared	he	would	tear	this	small	cowering	man
apart.	Instead,	he	said,	‘Cast	off	your	shame,	all	of	you.	Cast	it	off!	Slayers
need	no	reason	to	slay.	It	is	what	they	do.	That	you	exist	is	offence	enough	for
such	creatures.’	He	stepped	forward	and	snatched	the	bone	from	Boatfinder ’s
hands.	‘I	will	kill	them	all.	I	will	sink	their	damned	ships.	This	I—’
‘Karsa!’	Samar	cut	in.
He	swung	to	her,	eyes	blazing.
‘Before	you	vow	anything	so…extreme,	you	might	consider	something
more	achievable.’	At	his	expression,	she	hastened	on,	‘You	could,	for	example,
be	content	with	driving	them	from	the	land,	back	into	their	ships.	Make	the
forest…unpalatable.’
After	a	long,	tense	moment,	the	Teblor	sighed.	‘Yes.	That	would	suffice.
Although	I	am	tempted	to	swim	after	them.’
Boatfinder	was	looking	at	Karsa	with	eyes	wide	with	wonder	and	awe.
For	a	moment,	Samar	thought	that	the	Teblor	was	–	uncharacteristically	–
attempting	humour.	But	no,	the	huge	warrior	had	been	serious.	And,	to	her
dismay,	she	believed	him	and	so	found	nothing	funny	nor	absurd	in	his	words.


‘The	time	for	that	decision	can	wait,	can’t	it?’
‘Yes.’	He	scowled	once	more	at	Boatfinder.	‘Describe	these	revenants.’
‘Tall,	but	not	as	tall	as	you.	Their	flesh	is	the	hue	of	death.	Eyes	cold	as	ice.
They	bear	iron	weapons,	and	among	them	are	shamans	whose	very	breath	is
sickness	–	terrible	clouds	of	poisonous	vapour	–	all	whom	it	touches	die	in
great	pain.’
Samar	Dev	said	to	Karsa,	‘I	think	their	use	of	the	term	“revenant”	is	meant
for	anything	or	anyone	not	from	their	world.	But	the	foes	they	speak	of	come
from	ships.	That	seems	unlikely	were	they	in	truth	undead.	The	breath	of
shamans	sounds	like	sorcery.’
‘Boatfinder,’	Karsa	said,	‘when	I	am	done	here	you	will	lead	me	to	the
revenants.’
The	colour	drained	from	the	man’s	face.	‘It	is	many,	many	days	of	travel,
Deliverer.	I	think	to	send	word	that	you	are	coming	–	to	the	clans	of	the	north
—’
‘No.	You	will	accompany	us.’
‘But	–	but	why?’
Karsa	stepped	forward,	one	hand	snapping	out	to	clutch	Boatfinder	by	the
neck.	He	dragged	the	man	close.	‘You	shall	witness,	and	in	witnessing	you	will
become	more	than	what	you	are	now.	You	shall	be	prepared	–	for	all	that	is
coming,	to	you	and	your	miserable	people.’	He	released	the	man,	who
staggered	back,	gasping.	‘My	own	people	once	believed	they	could	hide,’	the
Teblor	said,	baring	his	teeth.	‘They	were	wrong.	This	I	have	learned,	and	this
you	will	now	learn.	You	believe	the	revenants	are	all	that	shall	afflict	you?
Fool.	They	are	but	the	first.’
Samar	watched	the	giant	warrior	walk	back	to	his	butchering.
Boatfinder	stared	after	him	with	glistening,	terror-filled	eyes.	Then	he
spun	about,	hissed	in	his	own	language.	Six	warriors	rushed	forward,	past	their
leader,	drawing	knives	as	they	approached	Karsa.
‘Teblor,’	Samar	warned.
Boatfinder	raised	his	hands.	‘No!	No	harm	is	sought	you,	Deliverer.	They
now	help	you	with	the	cutting,	that	is	all.	The	bounty	is	prepared	for	you,	so
that	we	need	waste	no	time—’
‘I	want	the	hides	cured,’	Karsa	said.
‘Yes.’
‘And	runners	to	deliver	to	us	those	hides	and	smoked	meat	from	this	kill.’
‘Yes.’
‘Then	we	can	leave	now.’
Boatfinder ’s	head	bobbed,	as	if	he	could	not	trust	his	own	voice	in	answer


to	that	final	demand.
Sneering,	Karsa	retrieved	his	knife	and	walked	over	to	a	nearby	pool	of
brackish	water,	where	he	began	washing	the	blood	from	the	blade,	then	from
his	hands	and	forearms.
Samar	Dev	drew	close	to	Boatfinder	as	the	half-dozen	warriors	fell	to
butchering	the	dead	bhederin.	‘Boatfinder.’
He	glanced	at	her	with	skittish	eyes.	‘You	are	a	witch	–	so	the	Deliverer
calls	you.’
‘I	am.	Where	are	your	womenfolk?	Your	children?’
‘Beyond	this	swamp,	west	and	north,’	he	replied.	‘The	land	rises,	and	there
are	lakes	and	rivers	where	we	find	the	black	grain,	and	among	the	flat-rock,
berries.	We	are	done	our	great	hunt	in	the	open	lands,	and	now	they	return	to
our	many	camps	with	winter ’s	meat.	Yet,’	he	gestured	at	his	warriors,	‘we
follow	you.	We	witness	the	Deliverer	slaying	the	bhederin.	He	rides	a	bonehorse	–	we	do	not	see	a	bone-horse	ridden.	He	carries	a	sword	of	birth-stone.
The	Iron	Prophet	tells	our	people	of	such	warriors	–	the	wielders	of	birthstone.	He	says	they	come.’
‘I	have	not	heard	of	this	Iron	Prophet,’	Samar	Dev	said,	frowning.
Boatfinder	made	a	gesture	and	faced	south.	‘To	speak	of	this,	it	is	the
frozen	time.’	He	closed	his	eyes,	and	his	tone	suddenly	changed.	‘In	the	Time
of	Great	Slaying,	which	is	the	frozen	time	of	the	past,	the	Anibar	dwelt	on	the
plains,	and	would	travel	almost	to	the	East	River,	where	the	great	walled	camps
of	the	Ugari	rose	from	the	land,	and	with	the	Ugari	the	Anibar	would	trade
meat	and	hides	for	iron	tools	and	weapons.	The	Great	Slaying	came	to	the
Ugari,	then,	and	many	fled	to	seek	refuge	among	the	Anibar.	Yet	the	Slayers
followed,	the	Mezla	they	were	called	by	the	Ugari,	and	a	terrible	battle	was
fought	and	all	those	who	had	sheltered	among	the	Anibar	fell	to	the	Mezla.
‘Fearing	retribution	for	the	aid	given	to	the	Ugari,	the	Anibar	prepared	to
flee	–	deeper	into	the	Odhan	–	but	the	leader	of	the	Mezla	found	them	first.
With	a	hundred	dark	warriors,	he	came,	yet	he	stayed	their	iron	weapons.	The
Anibar	were	not	his	enemy,	he	told	them,	and	then	he	gave	warning	–	others
were	coming,	and	they	would	be	without	mercy.	They	would	destroy	the
Anibar.	This	leader	was	the	Iron	Prophet,	King	Iskar	Jarak,	and	the	Anibar
heeded	his	words,	and	so	fled,	west	and	north,	until	these	lands	here	and	the
forests	and	lakes	beyond,	became	their	home.’	He	glanced	over	to	where
Karsa,	his	supplies	gathered,	sat	astride	his	Jhag	horse,	and	his	voice	changed
once	more.	‘The	Iron	Prophet	tells	us	there	is	a	time	when,	in	our	greatest
peril,	wielders	of	the	birth-stone	come	to	defend	us.	Thus,	when	we	see	who
travels	our	land,	and	the	sword	in	his	hands…this	time	is	soon	to	be	a	frozen


time.’
Samar	Dev	studied	Boatfinder	for	a	long	moment,	then	she	faced	Karsa.	‘I
don’t	think	you	will	be	able	to	ride	Havok,’	she	said.	‘We	are	about	to	head	into
difficult	terrain.’
‘Until	such	time	comes,	I	will	ride,’	the	Teblor	replied.	‘You	are	free	to
lead	your	own	horse.	Indeed,	you	are	free	to	carry	it	over	all	terrain	you	deem
difficult.’
Irritated,	she	headed	towards	her	own	horse.	‘Fine,	for	now	I	will	ride
behind	you,	Karsa	Orlong.	At	the	very	least	I	will	not	have	to	worry	about
being	whipped	by	branches,	since	you’ll	be	knocking	down	all	those	trees	in
your	path.’
Boatfinder	waited	until	both	were	ready,	then	he	set	out,	along	the	north
edge	of	the	boggy	glade,	until	he	reached	its	end	and	promptly	turned	to	vanish
into	the	forest.
Karsa	halted	Havok	and	glared	at	the	thick,	snarled	undergrowth	and	the
crowded	black	spruce.
Samar	Dev	laughed,	earning	her	a	savage	look	from	the	Teblor.
Then	he	slipped	down	from	his	stallion’s	back.
They	found	Boatfinder	waiting	for	them,	an	apologetic	look	on	his	greypainted	face.	‘Game	trails,	Deliverer.	In	these	forests	there	are	deer,	bear,	wolf
and	elk	–	even	the	bhederin	do	not	delve	deep	beyond	the	glades.	Moose	and
caribou	are	further	north.	These	game	trails,	as	you	see,	are	low.	Even	Anibar
stoop	in	swift	passage.	In	the	unfound	time	ahead	of	which	scant	can	be	said,
we	find	more	flat-rock	and	the	way	is	easier.’
Both	interminable	and	monotonous,	the	low	forest	was	a	journey	tangled
and	snarled,	rife	with	frustration,	as	if	it	lived	with	the	sole	purpose	of	denying
passage.	The	bedrock	was	close	to	the	surface,	a	battered	purple	and	black
rock,	shot	through	in	places	with	long	veins	of	quartzite,	yet	its	surface	was
bent,	tilted	and	folded,	forming	high-walled	basins,	sinkholes	and	ravines
filled	with	exfoliated	slabs	sheathed	in	slick,	emerald-green	moss.	Tree-falls
crowded	these	depressions,	the	black	spruce’s	bark	rough	as	sharkskin	and	the
needleless,	web-thick	branches	harsh	as	claws	and	unyielding.
Spears	of	sunlight	reached	down	here	and	there,	throwing	motes	of	intense
colour	into	an	otherwise	gloomy,	cavernous	world.
Towards	dusk,	Boatfinder	led	them	to	a	treacherous	scree,	up	which	he
scrambled.	Karsa	and	Samar	Dev,	leading	their	horses,	found	the	climb
perilous,	every	foothold	less	certain	than	the	last	–	moss	giving	way	like	rotted
skin	to	expose	sharp-edged	angular	rock	and	deep	holes,	any	one	of	which
could	have	snapped	a	horse-leg.


Sodden	with	grimy	sweat,	scratched	and	scraped,	Samar	Dev	finally
reached	the	summit,	turning	to	guide	her	horse	the	last	few	steps.	Before	them
wound	more	or	less	flat	bedrock,	grey	with	the	skin	of	lichen.	From	modest
depressions	here	and	there	rose	white	and	jack	pines,	the	occasional	straggly
oak,	fringed	in	juniper	and	swaths	of	blueberry	and	wintergreen	bushes.
Sparrow-sized	dragonflies	darted	through	spinning	clouds	of	smaller	insects
in	the	fading	sunlight.
Boatfinder	gestured	northward.	‘This	path	leads	to	a	lake.	We	camp	there.’
They	set	off.
No	higher	ground	was	visible	in	any	direction,	and	as	the	elongated
basolith	twisted	and	turned,	flanked	every	now	and	then	by	slightly	lower
platforms	and	snags,	Samar	Dev	quickly	realized	how	easy	it	would	be	to	get
lost	in	this	wild	land.	The	path	bifurcated	ahead	and,	approaching	the	junction,
Boatfinder	strode	along	the	east	edge,	looking	down	for	a	time,	then	chose	the
ridge	on	the	right.
Matching	his	route,	Samar	Dev	glanced	over	the	edge	and	saw	what	he	had
been	searching	for,	a	sinuous	line	of	smallish	boulders	lying	on	a	shelf	of
stone	slightly	below	them,	the	pattern	creating	something	like	a	snake,	the	head
consisting	of	a	wedge-shaped,	flattened	rock,	while	at	the	other	end	the	last
stone	of	the	tail	was	no	bigger	than	her	thumbnail.	Lichen	covered	the	stones,
bunching	round	each	one	to	suggest	that	the	trail-marker	was	very	old.	There
was	nothing	obvious	in	the	petroform	that	would	make	the	choice	of	routes
clear,	although	the	snake’s	head	was	aligned	in	the	direction	they	were	walking.
‘Boatfinder,’	she	called	out,	‘how	is	it	that	you	read	this	serpent	of
boulders?’
He	glanced	back	at	her.	‘A	snake	is	away	from	the	heart.	A	turtle	is	the
heart’s	path.’
‘All	right,	then	why	aren’t	they	on	this	higher	ground,	so	you	don’t	have	to
look	for	them?’
‘When	the	black	grain	is	carried	south,	we	are	burdened	–	neither	turtle
nor	snake	must	lose	shape	or	pattern.	We	run	these	stone	roads.	Burdened.’
‘Where	do	you	take	the	harvest?’
‘To	our	gather	camps	on	the	plains.	Each	band.	We	gather	the	harvest.	Into
one.	And	divide	it,	so	that	each	band	has	sufficient	grain.	Lakes	and	rivers	and
their	shores	cannot	be	trusted.	Some	harvest	yields	true.	Other	harvest	yields
weak.	As	water	rises	and	as	water	falls.	It	is	not	the	same.	The	flat-rock	seeks	to
be	level,	across	all	the	world,	but	it	cannot,	and	so	water	rises	and	water	falls.
We	do	not	kneel	before	inequity,	else	we	ourselves	discard	fairness	and	knife
finds	knife.’


‘Old	rules	to	deal	with	famine,’	Samar	said,	nodding.
‘Rules	in	the	frozen	time.’
Karsa	Orlong	looked	at	Samar	Dev.	‘What	is	this	frozen	time,	witch?’
‘The	past,	Teblor.’
She	watched	his	eyes	narrow	thoughtfully,	then	he	grunted	and	said,	‘And
the	unfound	time	is	the	future,	meaning	that	now	is	the	flowing	time—’
‘Yes!’	Boatfinder	cried.	‘You	speak	life’s	very	secret!’
Samar	Dev	pulled	herself	into	the	saddle	–	on	this	ridge	they	could	ride
their	horses	–	carefully.	She	watched	Karsa	Orlong	follow	suit,	as	a	strange
stillness	filled	her	being.	Born,	she	realized,	of	Boatfinder ’s	words.	‘Life’s	very
secret.’	This	flowing	time	not	yet	frozen	and	only	now	found	out	of	the	unfound.
‘Boatfinder,	the	Iron	Prophet	came	to	you	long	ago	–	in	the	frozen	time	–	yet
he	spoke	to	you	of	the	unfound	time.’
‘Yes,	you	understand,	witch.	Iskar	Jarak	speaks	but	one	language,	yet
within	it	is	each	and	all.	He	is	the	Iron	Prophet.	The	King.’
‘Your	king,	Boatfinder?’
‘No.	We	are	his	shadows.’
‘Because	you	exist	only	in	the	flowing	time.’
The	man	turned	and	made	a	reverent	bow	that	stirred	something	within
Samar	Dev.	‘Your	wisdom	honours	us,	witch,’	he	said.
‘Where,’	she	asked,	‘is	Iskar	Jarak’s	kingdom?’
Sudden	tears	in	the	man’s	eyes.	‘An	answer	we	yearn	to	find.	It	is	lost—’
‘In	the	unfound	time.’
‘Yes.’
‘Iskar	Jarak	was	a	Mezla.’
‘Yes.’
Samar	Dev	opened	her	mouth	for	one	more	question,	then	realized	that	it
wasn’t	necessary.	She	knew	its	answer.	Instead,	she	said,	‘Boatfinder,	tell	me,
from	the	frozen	time	into	the	flowing	time,	is	there	a	bridge?’
His	smile	was	wistful,	filled	with	longing.	‘There	is.’
‘But	you	cannot	cross	it.’
‘No.’
‘Because	it’s	burning.’
‘Yes,	witch,	the	bridge	burns.’
King	Iskar	Jarak,	and	the	unfound	kingdom…
	
Descending	like	massive,	raw	steps,	the	shelves	of	rock	marched	down	into
crashing	foam	and	spume.	A	fierce	wind	raked	the	northern	sea’s	dark	waves	to


the	very	horizon,	where	storm-clouds	commanded	the	sky,	the	colour	of
blackened	armour.	At	their	backs	and	stretching	the	western	length	of	coastline,
rose	a	bent-back	forest	of	pines,	firs	and	cedars,	their	branches	torn	and	made
ragged	by	the	battering	winds.
Shivering,	Taralack	Veed	drew	the	furs	closer,	then	turned	his	back	on	the
raging	seas.	‘We	now	travel	westward,’	he	said,	speaking	loud	enough	to	be
heard	above	the	gale.	‘Follow	this	coast	until	it	curls	north.	Then	we	strike
inland,	directly	west,	into	the	land	of	stone	and	lakes.	Difficult,	for	there	is	little
game	to	be	found	there,	although	we	will	be	able	to	fish.	Worse,	there	are
bloodthirsty	savages,	too	cowardly	to	attack	by	day.	Always	at	night.	We	must
be	ready	for	them.	We	must	deliver	slaughter.’
Icarium	said	nothing,	his	unhuman	gaze	still	fixed	on	that	closing	storm.
Scowling,	Taralack	moved	back	into	the	rock-walled	camp	they	had	made,
crouching	in	the	blessed	lee	and	holding	his	red,	cold-chafed	hands	over	the
driftwood	fire.	Few	glimmers	of	the	Jhag’s	legendary,	near	mythical
equanimity	remained.	Dark	and	dour,	now.	A	refashioning	of	Icarium,	by
Taralack	Veed’s	own	hands,	although	he	but	followed	the	precise	instructions
given	him	by	the	Nameless	Ones.	The	blade	has	grown	dull.	You	shall	be	the
whetstone,	Gral.
But	whetstones	were	insensate,	indifferent	to	the	blade	and	to	the	hand	that
held	it.	For	a	warrior	fuelled	by	passion,	such	immunity	was	difficult	to
achieve,	much	less	maintain.	He	could	feel	the	weight	now,	ever	building,	and
knew	he	would,	one	day,	grow	to	envy	the	merciful	death	that	had	come	to
Mappo	Runt.
They	had	made	good	time	thus	far.	Icarium	was	tireless.	Once	given
direction.	And	Taralack,	for	all	his	prowess	and	endurance,	was	exhausted.	I
am	no	Trell,	and	this	is	not	simple	wandering.	Not	any	more,	and	never	again
for	Icarium.
Nor,	it	seemed,	for	Taralack	Veed.
He	looked	up	when	he	heard	scrabbling,	and	watched	Icarium	descend.
‘These	savages	you	spoke	of,’	the	Jhag	said	without	preamble,	‘why	should
they	seek	to	challenge	us?’
‘Their	forsaken	forest	is	filled	with	sacred	sites,	Icarium.’
‘We	need	only	avoid	trespass,	then.’
‘Such	sites	are	not	easily	recognized.	Perhaps	a	line	of	boulders	on	the
bedrock,	mostly	buried	in	lichen	and	moss.	Or	the	remnant	of	an	antler	in	the
crotch	of	a	tree,	so	overgrown	as	to	be	virtually	invisible.	Or	a	vein	of
quartzite	glittering	with	flecks	of	gold.	Or	the	green	tool-stone	–	the	quarries
are	no	more	than	a	pale	gouge	in	vertical	rock,	the	green	stone	shorn	from	it


by	fire	and	cold	water.	Mayhap	little	more	than	a	bear	trail	on	bedrock,	trodden
by	the	miserable	beasts	for	countless	generations.	All	sacred.	There	is	no
fathoming	the	minds	of	such	savages.’
‘It	seems	you	know	much	of	them,	yet	you	have	told	me	you	have	never
before	travelled	their	lands.’
‘I	have	heard	of	them,	in	great	detail,	Icarium.’
A	sudden	edge	in	the	Jhag’s	eyes.	‘Who	was	it	that	informed	you	so,
Taralack	Veed	of	the	Gral?’
‘I	have	wandered	far,	my	friend.	I	have	mined	a	thousand	tales—’
‘You	were	being	prepared.	For	me.’
A	faint	smile	suited	the	moment	and	Taralack	found	it	easily	enough.
‘Much	of	that	wandering	was	in	your	company,	Icarium.	Would	that	I	could	gift
you	my	memories	of	the	time	we	have	shared.’
‘Would	that	you	could,’	Icarium	agreed,	staring	down	at	the	fire	now.
‘Of	course,’	Taralack	added,	‘there	would	be	much	darkness,	many	grim
and	unpleasant	deeds,	within	that	gift.	The	absence	within	you,	Icarium,	is	both
blessing	and	curse	–	you	do	understand	that,	don’t	you?’
‘There	is	no	blessing	in	that	absence,’	the	Jhag	said,	shaking	his	head.	‘All
that	I	have	done	cannot	demand	its	rightful	price.	Cannot	mark	my	soul.	And	so
I	remain	unchanging,	forever	naïve—’
‘Innocent—’
‘No,	not	innocent.	There	is	nothing	exculpatory	in	ignorance,	Taralack
Veed.’
You	call	me	by	name,	now,	not	as	‘friend’.	Has	mistrust	begun	to	poison
you?	‘And	so	it	is	my	task,	each	time,	to	return	to	you	all	that	you	have	lost.	It
is	arduous	and	wears	upon	me,	alas.	My	weakness	lies	in	my	desire	to	spare
you	the	most	heinous	of	memories.	There	is	too	much	pity	in	my	heart,	and	in
seeking	to	spare	you	I	now	find	that	I	but	wound.’	He	spat	on	his	hands	and
slicked	back	his	hair,	then	stretched	his	hands	out	once	more	close	to	the
flames.	‘Very	well,	my	friend.	Once,	long	ago,	you	were	driven	by	the	need	to
free	your	father,	who	had	been	taken	by	a	House	of	the	Azath.	Faced	with
terrible	failure,	a	deeper,	deadlier	force	was	born	–	your	rage.	You	shattered	a
wounded	warren,	and	you	destroyed	an	Azath,	releasing	into	the	world	a	host
of	demonic	entities,	all	of	whom	sought	only	domination	and	tyranny.	Some	of
those	you	killed,	but	many	escaped	your	wrath,	and	live	on	to	this	day,
scattered	about	the	world	like	so	many	evil	seeds.
‘The	most	bitter	irony	is	this:	your	father	sought	no	release.	He	had
elected,	of	his	own	will,	to	become	a	Guardian	of	an	Azath	House,	and	it	may
be	he	remains	so	to	this	day.


‘In	consequence	of	the	devastation	you	wrought,	Icarium,	a	cult,	devoted
since	time	began	to	the	Azath,	deemed	it	necessary	to	create	guardians	of	their
own.	Chosen	warriors	who	would	accompany	you,	no	matter	where	you	went	–
for	your	rage	and	the	destruction	of	the	warren	had	torn	from	you	all	memory
of	your	past	–	and	so	now	you	were	doomed,	for	all	time,	it	seemed,	to	seek
out	the	truth	of	all	that	you	have	done.	And	to	stumble	into	rage	again	and	yet
again,	wreaking	annihilation.
‘This	cult,	that	of	the	Nameless	Ones,	thus	contrived	to	bind	to	you	a
companion.	Such	as	I.	Yes,	my	friend,	there	have	been	others,	long	before	I	was
born,	and	each	has	been	imbued	with	sorcery,	slowing	the	rigours	of	ageing,
proof	against	all	manner	of	disease	and	poison	for	as	long	as	the	companion’s
service	held	true.	Our	task	is	to	guide	you	in	your	fury,	to	assert	a	moral	focus,
and	above	all,	to	be	your	friend,	and	this	latter	task	has	proved,	again	and
again,	the	simplest	and	indeed,	most	seductive	of	them	all,	for	it	is	easy	to	find
within	ourselves	a	deep	and	abiding	love	for	you.	For	your	earnestness,	your
loyalty,	and	for	the	unsullied	honour	within	you.
‘I	will	grant	you,	Icarium,	your	sense	of	justice	is	a	harsh	one.	Yet,
ultimately,	profound	in	its	nobility.	And	now,	awaiting	you,	there	is	an	enemy.
An	enemy	only	you,	my	friend,	are	powerful	enough	to	oppose.	And	so	we
now	journey,	and	all	who	seek	to	oppose	us,	for	whatever	reason,	must	be
swept	aside.	For	the	greater	good.’	He	allowed	himself	to	smile	again,	only	this
time	he	filled	it	with	a	hint	of	vast	yet	courageously	contained	anguish.	‘You
must	now	wonder,	are	the	Nameless	Ones	worthy	of	such	responsibility?	Can
their	moral	integrity	and	sense	of	honour	match	yours?	The	answer	lies	in
necessity,	and	above	that,	in	the	example	you	set.	You	guide	the	Nameless	Ones,
my	friend,	with	your	every	deed.	If	they	fail	in	their	calling,	it	will	be	because
you	have	failed	in	yours.’
Pleased	that	he	had	recalled	with	perfection	the	words	given	him,	Taralack
Veed	studied	the	great	warrior	who	stood	before	him,	firelit,	his	face	hidden
behind	his	hands.	Like	a	child	for	whom	blindness	imposed	obliteration.
Icarium	was	weeping,	he	realized.
Good.	Even	he.	Even	he	will	feed	upon	his	own	anguish	and	make	of	it	an
addictive	nectar,	a	sweet	opiate	of	self-recrimination	and	pain.
And	so	all	doubt,	all	distrust,	shall	vanish.
For	from	those	things,	no	sweet	bliss	can	be	wrung.
From	overhead,	a	spatter	of	cold	rain,	and	the	deep	rumble	of	thunder.	The
storm	would	soon	be	upon	them.	‘I	am	rested	enough,’	Taralack	said,	rising.	‘A
long	march	awaits	us—’
‘There	is	no	need,’	Icarium	said	behind	his	hands.


‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘The	sea.	It	is	filled	with	ships.’
	
The	lone	rider	came	down	from	the	hills	shortly	after	the	ambush.	Barathol
Mekhar,	his	huge,	scarred	and	pitted	forearms	spattered	with	blood,	rose	from
his	long,	silent	study	of	the	dead	demon.	He	was	wearing	his	armour	and	helm,
and	he	now	drew	out	his	axe.
Months	had	passed	since	the	T’lan	Imass	had	appeared	–	he’d	thought	them
long	gone,	gone	even	before	old	Kulat	wandered	off	in	his	newfound	madness.
He	had	not	realized	–	none	of	them	had	–	that	the	terrible,	undead	creatures	had
never	left.
The	party	of	travellers	had	been	slaughtered,	the	ambush	so	swiftly
executed	that	Barathol	had	not	even	known	of	its	occurrence	–	until	it	was	far
too	late.	Jhelim	and	Filiad	had	suddenly	burst	into	the	smithy,	screaming	of
murder	just	beyond	the	hamlet.	He	had	collected	his	weapon	and	run	with	them
to	the	western	road,	only	to	find	the	enemy	already	departed,	their	task	done,
and	upon	the	old	road,	dying	horses	and	motionless	bodies	sprawled	about	as
if	they	had	dropped	from	the	sky.
Sending	Filiad	to	find	the	old	woman	Nulliss	–	who	possessed	modest	skill
as	a	healer	–	Barathol	had	returned	to	his	smithy,	ignoring	Jhelim	who	trailed
behind	him	like	a	lost	pup.	He	had	donned	his	armour,	taking	his	time.	The
T’lan	Imass,	he	suspected,	would	have	been	thorough.	They	would	have	had
leisure	to	ensure	that	they	had	made	no	mistakes.	Nulliss	would	find	that
nothing	could	be	done	for	the	poor	victims.
Upon	returning	to	the	west	road,	however,	he	was	astonished	to	see	the
ancient	Semk	woman	shouting	orders	at	Filiad	from	where	she	knelt	at	the	side
of	one	figure.	It	seemed	to	Barathol’s	eyes	as	he	hurried	forward,	that	she	had
thrust	her	hands	into	the	man’s	body,	her	scrawny	arms	making	motions	as	if
she	was	kneading	bread	dough.	Even	as	she	did	this,	her	gaze	was	on	a	woman
lying	nearby,	who	had	begun	moaning,	legs	kicking	furrows	in	the	dirt.	From
her,	blood	had	spilled	out	everywhere.
Nulliss	saw	him	and	called	him	over.
Barathol	saw	that	the	man	she	knelt	beside	had	been	eviscerated.	Nulliss
was	pushing	the	intestines	back	inside.	‘For	Hood’s	sake,	woman,’	the
blacksmith	said	in	a	growl,	‘leave	him	be.	He’s	done.	You’ve	filled	his	cavity
with	dirt—’
‘Boiling	water	is	on	the	way,’	she	snapped.	‘I	mean	to	wash	it	out.’	She
nodded	towards	the	thrashing	woman.	‘That	one	is	stabbed	in	the	shoulder,	and


now	she’s	in	labour.’
‘Labour?	Gods	below.	Listen,	Nulliss,	boiling	water	won’t	do,	unless	you
mean	to	cook	his	liver	for	supper	tonight—’
‘Go	back	to	your	damned	anvil,	you	brainless	ape!	It	was	a	clean	cut	–	I’ve
seen	what	boars	can	do	with	their	tusks	and	that	was	a	whole	lot	worse.’
‘Might’ve	started	clean—’
‘I	said	I	mean	to	clean	it!	But	we	can’t	carry	him	back	with	his	guts	trailing
behind	us,	can	we?’
Nonplussed,	Barathol	looked	round.	He	wanted	to	kill	something.	A	simple
enough	desire,	but	he	already	knew	it	would	be	thwarted	and	this	soured	his
mood.	He	walked	over	to	the	third	body.	An	old	man,	tattooed	and	handless	–
the	T’lan	Imass	had	chopped	him	to	pieces.	So.	He	was	their	target.	The	others
were	simply	in	the	way.	Which	is	why	they	cared	nothing	whether	they	lived	or
died.	Whereas	this	poor	bastard	couldn’t	be	more	dead	than	he	was.
After	a	moment,	Barathol	made	his	way	towards	the	last	victim	in	sight.
From	the	hamlet,	more	people	were	on	the	way,	two	of	them	carrying	blankets
and	rags.	Storuk,	Fenar,	Hayrith,	Stuk,	all	looking	somehow	small,	diminished
and	pale	with	fear.	Nulliss	began	screaming	orders	once	more.
Before	him	was	sprawled	a	demon	of	some	kind.	Both	limbs	on	one	side
had	been	sliced	away.	Not	much	blood,	he	noted,	but	something	strange
appeared	to	have	afflicted	the	creature	upon	its	death.	It	looked…deflated,	as	if
the	flesh	beneath	the	skin	had	begun	to	dissolve,	melt	away	into	nothing.	Its	odd
eyes	had	already	dried	and	cracked.
‘Blacksmith!	Help	me	lift	this	one!’
Barathol	walked	back.
‘On	the	blanket.	Storuk,	you	and	your	brother	on	that	end,	one	corner	each.
Fenar,	you’re	with	me	on	the	other	end—’
Hayrith,	almost	as	old	as	Nulliss	herself,	held	in	her	arms	the	rags.	‘What
about	me?’	she	asked.
‘Go	sit	by	the	woman.	Stuff	a	cloth	into	the	wound	–	we’ll	sear	it	later,
unless	the	birth	gives	her	trouble—’
‘With	the	blood	loss,’	Hayrith	said,	eyes	narrowing,	‘she	probably	won’t
survive	it.’
‘Maybe.	For	now,	just	sit	with	her.	Hold	her	damned	hand	and	talk,	and—’
‘Yes,	yes,	witch,	you	ain’t	the	only	one	round	here	who	knows	about	all
that.’
‘Good.	So	get	going.’
‘You’ve	just	been	waiting	for	this,	haven’t	ya?’
‘Be	quiet,	you	udderless	cow.’


‘Queen	Nulliss,	High	Priestess	of	Bitchiness!’
‘Blacksmith,’	Nulliss	growled,	‘hit	her	with	that	axe,	will	you?’
Hissing,	Hayrith	scurried	off.
‘Help	me,’	Nulliss	said	to	him,	‘we’ve	got	to	lift	him	now.’
It	seemed	a	pointless	task,	but	he	did	as	she	asked,	and	was	surprised	to
hear	her	pronounce	that	the	young	man	still	lived	after	they’d	set	him	on	the
blanket.
As	Nulliss	and	the	others	carried	him	away,	Barathol	strode	back	to	the
dismembered	corpse	of	the	old,	tattooed	man.	And	crouched	at	his	side.	It
would	be	an	unpleasant	task,	but	it	was	possible	that	Barathol	could	learn
something	of	him	from	his	possessions.	He	rolled	the	body	over,	then	halted,
staring	down	into	those	lifeless	eyes.	A	cat’s	eyes.	He	looked	with	renewed
interest	at	the	pattern	of	tattoos,	then	slowly	sat	back.
And	only	then	noticed	all	the	dead	flies.	Covering	the	ground	on	all	sides,
more	flies	than	he	had	ever	seen	before.	Barathol	straightened,	walked	back	to
the	dead	demon.
Staring	down	thoughtfully,	until	distant	motion	and	the	sound	of	horse
hoofs	snared	his	attention.	Behind	him,	villagers	had	returned	to	retrieve	the
pregnant	woman.
And	now	he	watched	as	the	rider	rode	directly	towards	him.
On	a	lathered	horse	the	colour	of	sun-bleached	bone.	Wearing	dustsheathed	armour	lacquered	white.	The	man’s	face	pale	beneath	the	rim	of	his
helm,	drawn	with	grief.	Reining	in,	he	slipped	down	from	the	saddle	and,
ignoring	Barathol,	staggered	over	to	the	demon,	where	he	fell	to	his	knees.
‘Who	–	who	did	this?’	he	asked.
‘T’lan	Imass.	Five	of	them.	A	broken	lot,	even	as	T’lan	Imass	go.	An
ambush.’	Barathol	pointed	towards	the	body	of	the	tattooed	man.	‘They	were
after	him,	I	think.	A	priest,	from	a	cult	devoted	to	the	First	Hero	Treach.’
‘Treach	is	now	a	god.’
To	that,	Barathol	simply	grunted.	He	looked	back	at	the	ramshackle	hovels
of	the	hamlet	he	had	come	to	think	of	as	home.	‘There	were	two	others.	Both
still	alive,	although	one	will	not	last	much	longer.	The	other	is	pregnant	and
even	now	gives	birth—’
The	man	stared	up	at	him.	‘Two?	No,	there	should	have	been	three.	A
girl…’
Barathol	frowned.	‘I’d	thought	the	priest	was	their	target	–	they	were
thorough	with	him	–	but	now	I	see	that	they	struck	him	down	because	he	posed
the	greatest	threat.	They	must	have	come	for	the	girl	–	for	she	is	not	here.’
The	man	rose.	He	matched	Barathol	in	height,	if	not	breadth.	‘Perhaps	she


fled…into	the	hills.’
‘It’s	possible.	Although,’	he	added,	pointing	at	a	dead	horse	nearby,	‘I’d
wondered	at	that	extra	mount,	saddled	like	the	others.	Cut	down	on	the	trail.’
‘Ah,	yes.	I	see.’
‘Who	are	you?’	Barathol	asked.	‘And	what	was	this	missing	girl	to	you?’
Shock	was	still	writ	deep	into	the	lines	of	his	face,	and	he	blinked	at	the
questions,	then	nodded.	‘I	am	named	L’oric.	The	child	was…was	for	the	Queen
of	Dreams.	I	was	coming	to	collect	her	–	and	my	familiar.’	He	looked	down
once	more	at	the	demon,	and	anguish	tugged	at	his	features	yet	again.
‘Fortune	has	abandoned	you,	then,’	Barathol	said.	A	thought	occurred	to
him.	‘L’oric,	have	you	any	skill	in	healing?’
‘What?’
‘You	are	one	of	Sha’ik’s	High	Mages,	after	all—’
L’oric	looked	away,	as	if	stung.	‘Sha’ik	is	dead.	The	rebellion	is	crushed.’
Barathol	shrugged.
‘Yes,’	L’oric	said,	‘I	can	call	upon	Denul,	if	required.’
‘Is	the	life	of	that	girl	all	that	concerns	you?’	He	gestured	down	at	the
demon.	‘You	can	do	nothing	for	your	familiar	–	what	of	their	companions?
The	young	man	will	die	–	if	he	has	not	already	done	so.	Will	you	stand	here,
dwelling	only	on	what	you	have	lost?’
A	flash	of	anger.	‘I	advise	caution,’	L’oric	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘You	were
once	a	soldier	–	that	much	is	obvious	–	yet	here	you	have	hidden	yourself	away
like	a	coward,	whilst	the	rest	of	Seven	Cities	rose	up,	dreaming	of	freedom.	I
will	not	be	chastised	by	one	such	as	you.’
Barathol’s	dark	eyes	studied	L’oric	a	moment	longer,	then	he	turned	away
and	began	walking	towards	the	buildings.	‘Someone	will	come,’	he	said	over
his	shoulder,	‘to	dress	the	dead	for	burial.’
	
Nulliss	had	chosen	the	old	hostelry	to	deposit	her	charges.	A	cot	was	dragged
out	from	one	of	the	rooms	for	the	woman,	whilst	the	eviscerated	youth	was
laid	out	on	the	communal	dining	table.	A	cookpot	filled	with	water	steamed
above	the	hearth,	and	Filiad	was	using	a	prod	to	retrieve	soaked	strips	of	cloth
and	carry	them	over	to	where	the	Semk	woman	worked.
She	had	drawn	out	the	intestines	once	more	but	seemed	to	be	ignoring	that
pulsing	mass	for	the	moment,	both	of	her	hands	deep	in	the	cavity	of	his	gut.
‘Flies!’	she	hissed	as	Barathol	entered.	‘This	damned	hole	is	filled	with	dead
flies!’
‘You	will	not	save	him,’	Barathol	said,	walking	to	the	bar	counter	and


setting	down	his	axe	on	the	battered,	dusty	surface,	the	weapon	making	a	heavy
clunking	sound	on	the	wood.	He	began	removing	his	gauntlets,	glancing	over
at	Hayrith.	‘Has	she	given	birth?’	he	asked.
‘Aye.	A	girl.’	Hayrith	was	washing	her	hands	in	a	basin,	but	she	nodded
towards	a	small	bundled	shape	lying	on	the	woman’s	chest.	‘Already	suckling.
I’d	thought	things	were	gone	bad,	blacksmith.	Bad.	The	baby	came	out	blue.
Only	the	cord	weren’t	knotted	and	weren’t	round	its	neck.’
‘So	why	was	it	blue?’
‘Was?	Still	is.	Napan	father,	I’d	say.’
‘And	the	mother ’s	fate?’
‘She’ll	live.	I	didn’t	need	Nulliss.	I	know	how	to	clean	and	sear	a	wound.
Why,	I	followed	the	Falah’d	of	Hissar ’s	Holy	Army,	seen	plenty	a	battlefields
in	my	day.	Cleaned	plenty	a	wounds,	too.’	She	flung	water	from	her	hands,	then
dried	them	on	her	grubby	tunic.	‘She’ll	have	fever,	of	course,	but	if	she
survives	that,	she’ll	be	fine.’
‘Hayrith!’	called	out	Nulliss.	‘Get	over	here	and	rinse	out	these	rags!	Then
toss	’em	back	in	the	boiling	water	–	gods	below,	I’m	losing	him	–	his	heart,	it’s
fading.’
The	door	swung	open.	Heads	turned	to	stare	at	L’oric,	who	slowly	stepped
inside.
‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	is	that?’	Hayrith	asked.
Barathol	unstrapped	his	helm	as	he	said,	‘High	Mage	L’oric,	a	refugee
from	the	Apocalypse.’
Hayrith	cackled.	‘Well,	ain’t	he	found	the	right	place!	Welcome,	L’oric!
Grab	yourself	a	tankard	a	dust	an’	a	plate	of	ashes	an’	join	us!	Fenar,	stop
staring	and	go	find	Chaur	an’	Urdan	–	there’s	horse	meat	out	there	needs
butchering	–	we	don’t	want	none	a	them	wolves	in	the	hills	comin’	down	an’
gettin’	it	first.’
Barathol	watched	as	L’oric	strode	over	to	where	Nulliss	knelt	above	the
youth	on	the	table.	She	was	pushing	in	rags	then	pulling	them	out	again	–	there
was	far	too	much	blood	–	no	wonder	the	heart	was	fading.
‘Move	aside,’	L’oric	said	to	her.	‘I	do	not	command	High	Denul,	but	at	the
very	least	I	can	clean	and	seal	the	wound,	and	expunge	the	risk	of	infection.’
‘He’s	lost	too	much	blood,’	Nulliss	hissed.
‘Perhaps,’	L’oric	conceded,	‘but	let	us	at	least	give	his	heart	a	chance	to
recover.’
Nulliss	backed	away.	‘As	you	like,’	she	snapped.	‘I	can	do	no	more	for
him.’
Barathol	went	behind	the	bar,	crouched	opposite	a	panel	of	wood,	which	he


rapped	hard.	It	fell	away,	revealing	three	dusty	jugs.	Retrieving	one,	he
straightened,	setting	it	down	on	the	counter.	Finding	a	tankard,	he	wiped	it
clean,	then,	tugging	free	the	stopper,	poured	the	tankard	full.
Eyes	were	on	him	–	all	barring	those	of	L’oric	himself,	who	stood	beside
the	youth,	hands	settling	on	the	chest.	Hayrith	asked,	in	a	tone	of	reverence.
‘Where	did	that	come	from,	blacksmith?’
‘Old	Kulat’s	stash,’	Barathol	replied.	‘Don’t	expect	he’ll	be	coming	back
for	it.’
‘What’s	that	I	smell?’
‘Falari	rum.’
‘Blessed	gods	above	and	below!’
Suddenly	the	locals	present	in	the	room	were	one	and	all	crowding	the	bar.
Snarling,	Nulliss	pushed	Filiad	back.	‘Not	you	–	too	young—’
‘Too	young?	Woman,	I’ve	seen	twenty-six	years!’
‘You	heard	me!	Twenty-six	years?	Ain’t	enough	to	’preciate	Falari	rum,
you	scrawny	whelp.’
Barathol	sighed.	‘Don’t	be	greedy,	Nulliss.	Besides,	there’s	two	more	jugs
on	the	shelf	below.’	Collecting	his	tankard,	he	moved	away	from	them,	Filiad
and	Jhelim	both	fighting	as	they	scrabbled	round	the	counter.
A	livid	scar	was	all	that	remained	of	the	sword	slash	across	the	youth’s
belly,	apart	from	splashes	of	drying	blood.	L’oric	still	stood	beside	him,	hands
motionless	on	the	chest.
After	a	moment,	he	opened	his	eyes,	stepping	back.	‘It’s	a	strong	heart…
we’ll	see.	Where’s	the	other	one?’
‘Over	there.	Shoulder	wound.	It’s	been	seared,	but	I	can	guarantee	sepsis
will	set	in	and	probably	end	up	killing	her,	unless	you	do	something.
L’oric	nodded.	‘She	is	named	Scillara.	The	young	man	I	do	not	know.’	He
frowned.	‘Heboric	Ghost	Hands—’	he	rubbed	at	his	face	–	‘I	would	not	have
thought…’	He	glanced	over	at	Barathol.	‘When	Treach	chose	him	to	be	his
Destriant,	well,	there	was	so	much…power.	T’lan	Imass?	Five	broken	T’lan
Imass?’
Barathol	shrugged.	‘I	myself	did	not	see	the	ambush.	The	Imass	first
showed	up	months	past,	then	it	seemed	that	they’d	left.	After	all,	there	was
nothing	here	that	they	wanted.	Not	even	me.’
‘Servants	of	the	Crippled	God,’	L’oric	said.	‘The	Unbound,	of	High	House
of	Chains.’	He	headed	towards	the	woman	he’d	named	Scillara.	‘The	gods	are
indeed	at	war…’
Barathol	stared	after	him.	He	downed	half	the	rum	in	the	tankard,	then
joined	the	High	Mage	once	more.	‘The	gods,	you	say.’


‘Fever	already	whispers	within	her	–	this	will	not	do.’	He	closed	his	eyes
and	began	muttering	something	under	his	breath.	After	a	moment,	he	stepped
back,	met	Barathol’s	eyes.	‘This	is	what	comes.	The	blood	of	mortals	spilled.
Innocent	lives…destroyed.	Even	here,	in	this	rotted	hole	of	a	village,	you
cannot	hide	from	the	torment	–	it	will	find	you,	it	will	find	us	all.’
Barathol	finished	the	rum.	‘Will	you	now	hunt	for	the	girl?’
‘And	singlehanded	wrest	her	from	the	Unbound?	No.	Even	if	I	knew	where
to	look,	it	is	impossible.	The	Queen	of	Dreams’	gambit	has	failed	–	likely	she
already	knows	that.’	He	drew	a	deep,	ragged	breath,	and	Barathol	only	now
noticed	how	exhausted	the	man	was.	‘No,’	he	said	again,	with	a	vague,	then
wretched	look.	‘I	have	lost	my	familiar…yet…’	he	shook	his	head,	‘yet,	there
is	no	pain	–	with	the	severing	there	should	be	pain	–	I	do	not	understand…’
‘High	Mage,’	Barathol	said,	‘there	are	spare	rooms	here.	Rest.	I’ll	get
Hayrith	to	find	you	some	food,	and	Filiad	can	stable	your	horse.	Wait	here
until	I	return.’
The	blacksmith	spoke	to	Hayrith,	then	left	the	hostelry,	returning	once
more	to	the	west	road.	He	saw	Chaur,	Fenar	and	Urdan	stripping	saddles	and
tack	from	the	dead	horses.	‘Chaur!’	he	called,	‘step	away	from	that	one	–	no,
this	way,	there,	stand	still,	damn	you.	There.	Don’t	move.’	The	girl’s	horse.
Reaching	it,	he	moved	round	carefully,	seeking	tracks.
Chaur	fidgeted	–	a	big	man,	he	had	the	mind	of	a	child,	although	the	sight
of	blood	had	never	bothered	him.
Ignoring	him,	Barathol	continued	reading	the	scrapes,	furrows	and
dislodged	stones,	and	finally	found	a	small	footprint,	planted	but	once,	and
strangely	twisting	on	the	ball	of	the	foot.	To	either	side,	larger	prints,	skeletal
yet	bound	here	and	there	by	leather	strips	or	fragments	of	hide.
So.	She	had	leapt	clear	of	the	fatally	wounded	horse,	yet,	even	as	her	lead
foot	contacted	the	ground,	the	T’lan	Imass	snared	her,	lifting	her	–	no	doubt
she	struggled,	but	against	such	inhuman,	implacable	strength,	she	had	been
helpless.
And	then,	the	T’lan	Imass	had	vanished.	Fallen	to	dust.	Somehow	taking
her	with	them.	He	did	not	think	that	was	possible.	Yet…no	tracks	moved	away
from	the	area.
Frustrated,	Barathol	started	back	to	the	hostelry.
At	a	whining	sound	behind	him	he	turned.	‘It’s	all	right,	Chaur.	You	can	go
back	to	what	you	were	doing.’
A	bright	smile	answered	him.
	


As	he	entered,	Barathol	sensed	that	something	had	changed.	The	locals	were
backed	to	the	wall	behind	the	bar.	L’oric	stood	in	the	centre	of	the	chamber,
facing	the	black	smith	who	halted	just	inside	the	doorway.	The	High	Mage	had
drawn	his	sword,	a	blade	of	gleaming	white.
L’oric,	his	eyes	hard	on	Barathol,	spoke:	‘I	have	but	just	heard	your	name.’
The	blacksmith	shrugged.
A	sneer	twisted	L’oric’s	pale	face.	‘I	imagine	all	that	rum	loosened	their
tongues,	or	they	just	plain	forgot	your	commands	to	keep	such	details	secret.’
‘I’ve	made	no	commands,’	Barathol	replied.	‘These	people	here	know
nothing	of	the	outside	world,	and	care	even	less.	Speaking	of	rum…’	He	slid
his	gaze	to	the	crowd	behind	the	bar.	‘Nulliss,	any	of	it	left?’
Mute,	she	nodded.
‘On	the	counter	then,	if	you	please,’	Barathol	said.	‘Beside	my	axe	will	do.’
‘I	would	be	foolish	to	let	you	near	that	weapon,’	L’oric	said,	raising	the
sword	in	his	hand.
‘That	depends,’	replied	Barathol,	‘whether	you	intend	fighting	me,	doesn’t
it?’
‘I	can	think	of	a	hundred	names	of	those	who,	in	my	place	right	now,
would	not	hesitate.’
Barathol’s	brows	rose.	‘A	hundred	names,	you	say.	And	how	many	of	those
names	still	belong	to	the	living?’
L’oric’s	mouth	thinned	into	a	straight	line.
‘Do	you	believe,’	Barathol	went	on,	‘that	I	simply	walked	from	Aren	all
those	years	ago?	I	was	not	the	only	survivor,	High	Mage.	They	came	after	me.
It	was	damned	near	one	long	running	battle	from	Aren	Way	to	Karashimesh.
Before	I	left	the	last	one	bleeding	out	his	life	in	a	ditch.	You	may	know	my
name,	and	you	may	believe	you	know	my	crime…but	you	were	not	there.
Those	that	were	are	all	dead.	Now,	are	you	really	interested	in	picking	up	this
gauntlet?’
‘They	say	you	opened	the	gates—’
Barathol	snorted,	walked	over	towards	the	jug	of	rum	Nulliss	had	set	on
the	bar.	‘Ridiculous.	T’lan	Imass	don’t	need	gates.’	The	Semk	witch	found	an
empty	tankard	and	thunked	it	on	the	counter.	‘Oh,	I	opened	them	all	right	–	on
my	way	out,	on	the	fastest	horse	I	could	find.	By	that	time,	the	slaughter	had
already	begun.’
‘Yet	you	did	not	stay,	did	you?	You	did	not	fight,	Barathol	Mekhar!	Hood
take	you,	man,	they	rebelled	in	your	name!’
‘Too	bad	they	didn’t	think	to	ask	me	first,’	he	replied	in	a	growl,	filling	the
tankard.	‘Now,	put	that	damned	sword	away,	High	Mage.’


L’oric	hesitated,	then	he	sagged	where	he	stood	and	slowly	resheathed	the
weapon.	‘You	are	right.	I	am	too	tired	for	this.	Too	old.’	He	frowned,	then
straightened	again.	‘You	thought	those	T’lan	Imass	were	here	for	you,	didn’t
you?’
Barathol	studied	the	man	over	the	battered	rim	of	the	tankard,	and	said
nothing.
L’oric	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair,	looked	round	as	if	he’d	forgotten	where
he	was.
‘Hood’s	bones,	Nulliss,’	Barathol	said	in	a	sigh,	‘find	the	poor	bastard	a
chair,	will	you?’

The	grey	haze	and	its	blinding	motes	of	silver	slowly	faded,	and	all	at	once
Felisin	Younger	could	feel	her	own	body	again,	sharp	stones	digging	into	her
knees,	the	smell	of	dust,	sweat	and	fear	in	the	air.	Visions	of	chaos	and
slaughter	filled	her	mind.	She	felt	numbed,	and	it	was	all	she	could	do	to	see,	to
register	the	shape	of	things	about	her.	Before	her,	sunlight	flung	sharp-edged
shafts	against	a	rock	wall	rent	through	with	stress	fractures.	Heaps	of	windblown	sand	banked	what	used	to	be	broad,	shallow	stone	steps	that	seemed	to
lead	up	into	the	wall	itself.	Closer,	the	large	knuckles,	pale	beneath	thin,
weathered	skin,	of	the	hand	that	clutched	her	right	arm	above	the	elbow,	the
exposed	ligaments	of	the	wrist	stretching,	making	faint	sounds	like	twisting
leather.	A	grip	she	could	not	break	–	she	had	exhausted	herself	trying.	Close
and	fetid,	the	reek	of	ancient	decay,	and	visible	–	every	now	and	then	–	a	bloodsmeared,	rippled	blade,	broad	near	its	hooked	point,	narrowing	down	at	the
leather-wrapped	handle.	Black,	glassy	stone,	thinned	into	translucence	along
the	edge.
Others	stood	around	her,	more	of	the	dread	T’lan	Imass.	Spattered	with
blood,	some	with	missing	or	mangled	limbs,	and	one	with	half	its	face
smashed	away	–	but	this	was	old	damage,	she	realized.	Their	most	recent	battle,
no	more	than	a	skirmish,	had	cost	them	nothing.
The	wind	moaned	mournfully	along	the	rock	wall.	Felisin	pushed	herself
to	her	feet,	scraped	the	embedded	stones	from	her	knees.	They’re	dead.	They’re
all	dead.	She	told	herself	this	again	and	again,	as	if	the	words	were	newly
discovered	–	not	yet	meaningful	to	her,	not	yet	a	language	she	could
understand.	My	friends	are	all	dead.	What	was	the	point	of	saying	them?	Yet
they	returned	again	and	again,	as	if	desperate	to	elicit	a	response	–	any
response.


A	new	sound	reached	her.	Scrabbling,	seeming	to	come	from	the	cliff-face
in	front	of	them.	Blinking	the	stinging	sweat	from	her	eyes,	she	saw	that	one	of
the	fissures	looked	to	have	been	widened,	the	sides	chipped	away	as	if	by	a
pick,	and	it	was	from	this	that	a	bent	figure	emerged.	An	old	man,	wearing
little	more	than	rags,	covered	in	dust.	Suppurating	sores	wept	runny	liquid	on
his	forearms	and	the	backs	of	his	hands.
Seeing	her,	he	fell	to	his	knees.	‘You	have	come!	They	promised	–	but	why
would	they	lie?’	Amidst	the	words	issuing	from	his	mouth	were	odd	clicking
sounds.	‘I	will	take	you,	now	–	you’ll	see.	Everything	is	fine.	You	are	safe,
child,	for	you	have	been	chosen.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’	Felisin	demanded,	once	again	trying	to	tug
her	arm	free	–	and	this	time	she	succeeded,	as	the	deathly	hand	unclenched.	She
staggered.
The	old	man	leapt	to	his	feet	and	steadied	her.	‘You	are	exhausted	–	no
surprise.	So	many	rules	were	broken	to	bring	you	here—’
She	stepped	away	from	him	and	set	a	hand	against	the	sun-warmed	stone
wall.	‘Where	is	here?’
‘An	ancient	city,	Chosen	One.	Once	buried,	but	soon	to	live	once	more.	I
am	but	the	first	who	has	been	called	upon	to	serve	you.	Others	will	come	–	are
coming	even	now,	for	they	too	have	heard	the	Whispers.	You	see,	it	is	the	weak
who	hear	them,	and	oh	there	are	very	many,	very	many	of	the	weak.’	More
clicking	sounds	–	there	were	pebbles	in	his	mouth.
Turning,	Felisin	faced	away	from	the	cliff	wall,	studied	the	stretch	of
broken,	wasted	land	beyond.	Signs	of	an	old	road,	signs	of	tillage…‘We
walked	this	–	weeks	ago!’	She	glared	at	the	old	man.	‘You’ve	taken	me	back!’
He	smiled,	revealing	worn,	chipped	teeth.	‘This	city	belongs	to	you,	now,
Chosen	One—’
‘Stop	calling	me	that!’
‘Please	–	you	have	been	delivered	and	blood	has	been	spilled	in	that
deliverance	–	it	falls	to	you	to	give	such	sacrifice	meaning—’
‘Sacrifice?	That	was	murder!	They	killed	my	friends!’
‘I	will	help	you	grieve,	for	that	is	my	weakness,	you	see?	I	grieve	always	–
for	myself	–	because	of	drink,	and	the	thirst	always	within	me.	Weakness.
Kneel	before	it,	child.	Make	of	it	a	thing	to	worship.	There	is	no	point	in
fighting	–	the	world’s	sadness	is	far	more	powerful	than	you	can	ever	hope	to
be,	and	that	is	what	you	must	come	to	understand.’
‘I	want	to	leave.’
‘Impossible.	The	Unbound	have	delivered	you.	Where	could	you	go	even
if	you	might?	We	are	leagues	upon	leagues	from	anywhere.’	He	sucked	on	the


pebbles,	swallowed	spit,	then	continued,	‘You	would	have	no	food.	No	water.
Please,	Chosen	One,	a	temple	awaits	you	within	this	buried	city	–	I	have
worked	so	long,	so	hard	to	ready	it	for	you.	There	is	food,	and	water.	And
soon	there	will	be	more	servants,	all	desperate	to	answer	your	every	desire	–
once	you	accept	what	you	have	become.’	He	paused	to	smile	again,	and	she	saw
the	stones	–	black,	polished,	at	least	three,	each	the	size	of	a	knuckle	bone.
‘Soon,	you	shall	realize	what	you	have	become	–	leader	of	the	greatest	cult	of
Seven	Cities,	and	it	will	sweep	beyond,	across	every	sea	and	every	ocean	–	it
shall	claim	the	world—’
‘You	are	mad,’	Felisin	said.
‘The	Whispers	do	not	lie.’	He	reached	for	her	and	she	recoiled	at	that
glistening,	pustuled	hand.	‘Ah,	there	was	plague,	you	see.	Poliel,	the	goddess
herself,	she	bowed	before	the	Chained	One	–	as	must	we	all,	even	you	–	and
only	then	shall	you	come	into	your	rightful	power.	Plague	–	it	claimed	many,	it
left	entire	cities	filled	with	blackened	bodies	–	but	others	survived,	because	of
the	Whispers,	and	so	were	marked	–	by	sores	and	twisted	limbs,	by	blindness.
For	some	it	was	their	tongues.	Rotting	and	falling	off,	thus	leaving	them	mute.
Among	others,	their	ears	bled	and	all	sound	has	left	their	world.	Do	you
understand?	They	had	weakness,	and	the	Chained	One	–	he	has	shown	how
weakness	becomes	strength.	I	can	sense	them,	for	I	am	the	first.	Your	seneschal.
I	sense	them.	They	are	coming.’
She	continued	staring	down	at	his	sickly	hand,	and	after	a	moment	he
returned	it	to	his	side.
Clicking.	‘Please,	follow	me.	Let	me	show	you	all	that	I	have	done.’
Felisin	lifted	her	hands	to	her	face.	She	did	not	understand.	None	of	this
made	any	sense.	‘What,’	she	asked,	‘is	your	name?’
‘Kulat.’
‘And	what,’	she	said	in	a	whisper,	‘is	mine?’
He	bowed.	‘They	did	not	understand	–	none	of	them	did.	The	Apocalyptic	–
it	is	not	just	war,	not	just	rebellion.	It	is	devastation.	Not	just	of	the	land	–	that
is	but	what	follows	–	do	you	see?	The	Apocalypse,	it	is	of	the	spirit.	Crushed,
broken,	slave	to	its	own	weaknesses.	Only	from	such	a	tormented	soul	can	ruin
be	delivered	to	the	land	and	to	all	who	dwell	upon	it.	We	must	die	inside	to	kill
all	that	lies	outside.	Only	then,	once	death	takes	us	all,	only	then	shall	we	find
salvation.’	He	bowed	lower.	‘You	are	Sha’ik	Reborn,	Chosen	as	the	Hand	of	the
Apocalypse.’
	
‘Change	of	plans,’	muttered	Iskaral	Pust	as	he	scurried	about,	seemingly	at


random,	moving	into	and	out	of	the	campfire’s	light.	‘Look!’	he	hissed.	‘She’s
gone,	the	mangy	cow!	A	few	monstrous	shadows	in	the	night	and	poof!
Nothing	but	spiders,	hiding	in	every	crack	and	cranny.	Bah!	Snivelling	coward.
I	was	thinking,	Trell,	that	we	should	run.	Yes,	run.	You	go	that	way	and	I’ll	go
this	way	–	I	mean,	I’ll	be	right	behind	you,	of	course,	why	would	I	abandon
you	now?	Even	with	those	things	on	the	way…’	He	paused,	pulled	at	his	hair,
then	resumed	his	frantic	motion.	‘But	why	should	I	worry?	Have	I	not	been
loyal?	Effective?	Brilliant	as	ever?	So,	why	are	they	here?’
Mappo	drew	out	a	mace	from	his	sack.	‘I	see	nothing,’	he	said,	‘and	all	I
can	hear	is	you,	High	Priest.	Who	has	come?’
‘Did	I	say	anything	was	coming?’
‘Yes,	you	did.’
‘Can	I	help	it	if	you’ve	lost	your	mind?	But	why,	that’s	what	I	want	to	know,
yes,	why?	It’s	not	like	we	need	the	company.	Besides,	you’d	think	this	was	the
last	place	they’d	want	to	be,	if	what	I’m	smelling	is	what	I’m	smelling,	and	I
wouldn’t	be	smelling	what	I’m	smelling	if	something	wasn’t	there	that	didn’t
smell,	right?’	He	paused,	cocked	his	head.	‘What’s	that	smell?	Never	mind,
where	was	I?	Yes,	trying	to	conceive	of	the	inconceivable,	the	inconceivable
being	the	notion	that	Shadowthrone	is	actually	quite	sane.	Preposterous,	I	know.
Anyway,	if	that,	then	this,	this	being	he	knows	what	he’s	doing.	He	has	reasons
–	actual	reasons.’
‘Iskaral	Pust,’	Mappo	said,	rising	from	where	he	had	been	sitting	near	the
fire.	‘Are	we	in	danger?’
‘Has	Hood	seen	better	days?	Of	course	we’re	in	danger,	you	oafish	fool	–
oh,	I	must	keep	such	opinions	to	myself.	How	about	this?	Danger?	Haha,	my
friend,	of	course	not.	Haha.	Ha.	Oh,	here	they	are…’
Massive	shapes	emerged	from	the	darkness.	Red	ember	eyes	to	one	side,
lurid	green	eyes	on	another,	then	other	sets,	one	gold,	another	coppery.	Silent,
hulking	and	deadly.
The	Hounds	of	Shadow.
Somewhere	far	away	in	the	desert,	a	wolf	or	coyote	howled	as	if	it	had
caught	a	scent	from	the	Abyss	itself.	Closer	to	hand,	even	the	crickets	had
fallen	silent.
The	hairs	on	the	back	of	the	Trell’s	neck	stiffened.	He	too	could	now	smell
the	fell	beasts.	Acrid,	pungent.	With	that	reek	came	painful	memories.	‘What	do
they	want	with	us,	High	Priest?’
‘Be	quiet	–	I	need	to	think.’
‘No	need	to	tax	yourself,’	said	a	new	voice	from	the	darkness,	and	Mappo
turned	to	see	a	man	step	into	the	fire’s	light.	Grey-cloaked,	tallish,	and


otherwise	nondescript.	‘They	are	but…passing	through.’
Iskaral’s	face	brightened	with	false	pleasure	even	as	he	flinched.	‘Ah,
Cotillion	–	can	you	not	see?	I	have	achieved	all	Shadowthrone	asked	of	me—’
‘With	that	clash	you	had	with	Dejim	Nebrahl,’	Cotillion	said,	‘you	have	in
fact	exceeded	expectations	–	I	admit,	I	had	no	idea	you	possessed	such	prowess,
Iskaral	Pust.	Shadowthrone	chose	well	his	Magi.’
‘Yes,	he’s	full	of	surprises,	isn’t	he?’	The	High	Priest	crab-walked	over	to
crouch	by	the	fire,	then	he	cocked	his	head	and	said,	‘Now,	what	does	he	want?
To	put	me	at	ease?	He	never	puts	me	at	ease.	To	lead	the	Hounds	onto	some
poor	fool’s	trail?	Not	for	long,	I	hope.	For	that	fool’s	sake.	No,	none	of	these
things.	He’s	here	to	confound	me,	but	I	am	a	High	Priest	of	Shadow,	after	all,
and	so	cannot	be	confounded.	Why?	Because	I	serve	the	most	confounding	god
there	is,	that’s	why.	Thus,	need	I	worry?	Of	course,	but	he’ll	never	know,	will
he?	No,	I	need	only	smile	up	at	this	killer	god	and	say:	Would	you	like	some
cactus	tea,	Cotillion?’
‘Thank	you,’	Cotillion	replied,	‘I	would.’
Mappo	set	his	mace	down	and	resumed	his	seat	as	Iskaral	poured	out	the
tea.	The	Trell	struggled	against	the	desperation	growing	within	him.
Somewhere	to	the	north,	Icarium	sat	before	flames	likely	little	different	from
these	ones,	haunted	as	ever	by	what	he	could	not	remember.	Yet,	he	was	not
alone.	No,	another	has	taken	my	place.	That	should	have	been	cause	for	relief,
but	all	Mappo	could	feel	was	fear.	I	cannot	trust	the	Nameless	Ones	–	I	learned
that	a	long	time	ago.	No,	Icarium	was	now	being	led	by	someone	who	cared
nothing	for	the	Jhag—
‘It	pleases	me,	Mappo	Runt,’	said	Cotillion,	‘that	you	are	well.’
‘The	Hounds	of	Shadow	once	fought	at	our	sides,’	Mappo	said,	‘on	the
Path	of	Hands.’
Cotillion	nodded,	sipping	at	the	tea.	‘Yes,	you	and	Icarium	came	very
close,	then.’
‘Close?	What	do	you	mean?’
The	Patron	God	of	Assassins	was	a	long	time	in	replying.	Around	them,
just	beyond	the	camp,	the	huge	Hounds	seemed	to	have	settled	for	the	night.	‘It
is	less	a	curse,’	he	finally	said,	‘than	a…residue.	The	death	of	an	Azath	House
releases	all	manner	of	forces,	energies	–	not	just	those	belonging	to	the
denizens	in	their	earthen	tombs.	There	is,	burned	into	Icarium’s	soul,
something	like	an	infection,	or,	perhaps,	a	parasite.	Its	nature	is	chaos,	and	the
effect	is	one	of	discontinuity.	It	defies	progression,	of	thought,	of	spirit,	of	life
itself.	Mappo,	that	infection	must	be	expunged,	if	you	would	save	Icarium.’
The	Trell	could	barely	draw	breath.	In	all	the	centuries	at	the	Jhag’s	side,


among	all	the	words	given	him	by	the	Nameless	Ones,	by	scholars	and	sages
across	half	the	world,	he	had	never	before	heard	anything	like	this.	‘Are	–	are
you	certain?’
A	slow	nod.	‘As	much	as	is	possible.	Shadowthrone,	and	I,’	he	looked	up,
then	half-shrugged,	‘our	path	to	ascendancy	was	through	the	Houses	of	the
Azath.	There	were	years	–	a	good	number	of	them	–	in	which	neither	I	nor	the
man	who	at	that	time	was	known	as	Emperor	Kellanved	were	to	be	found
anywhere	within	the	Malazan	Empire.	For	we	had	begun	another	quest,	a
bolder	gambit.’	Firelight	gleamed	in	his	dark	eyes.	‘We	set	out	to	map	the
Azath.	Every	House,	across	this	entire	realm.	We	set	out	to	master	its	power—’
‘But	that	is	not	possible,’	Mappo	said.	‘You	failed	–	you	cannot	have	done
otherwise,	else	you	both	would	now	be	far	more	than	gods—’
‘True	enough,	as	far	as	it	goes.’	He	studied	the	tea	in	the	clay	cup	nestled	in
the	bowl	of	his	hands.	‘Certain	realizations	came	to	us,	however,	earned	from
hard	experience	and	somewhat	unrelenting	diligence.	The	first	was	this:	our
quest	would	demand	far	more	than	a	single,	mortal	lifespan.	The	other
realizations	–	well,	perhaps	I	had	best	leave	those	for	another	night,	another
time.	In	any	case,	in	comprehending	that	such	a	gambit	would	enforce	upon	us
demands	we	could	not	withstand	–	not	as	Emperor	and	Master	Assassin,	that	is
–	it	proved	necessary	to	make	use	of	what	we	had	learned	to	date.’
‘To	make	yourselves	gods.’
‘Yes.	And	in	so	doing,	we	learned	that	the	Azath	are	far	more	than	Houses
created	as	prisons	for	entities	of	power.	They	are	also	portals.	And	one	more
thing	for	certain	–	they	are	the	repositories	for	the	Lost	Elementals.’
Mappo	frowned.	‘I	have	not	heard	that	phrase	before.	Lost	Elementals?’
‘Scholars	tend	to	acknowledge	but	four,	generally:	water,	fire,	earth	and
air;	yet	others	exist.	And	it	is	from	these	others	that	comes	the	immense	power
of	the	Azath	Houses.	Mappo,	one	is	at	an	immediate	disadvantage	in	discerning
a	pattern,	when	one	has	but	four	points	of	reference,	with	an	unknown	number
of	others	as	yet	invisible,	unaccounted	for	in	the	scheme.’
‘Cotillion,	these	Lost	Elementals	–	are	they	perhaps	related	to	the	aspects
of	sorcery?	The	warrens	and	the	Deck	of	Dragons?	Or,	more	likely,	the	ancient
Holds?’
‘Life,	death,	dark,	light,	shadow…possibly,	but	even	that	seems	a	truncated
selection.	What	of,	for	example,	time?	Past,	present,	future?	What	of	desire,
and	deed?	Sound,	silence?	Or	are	the	latter	two	but	minor	aspects	of	air?	Does
time	belong	to	light?	Or	is	it	but	a	point	somewhere	between	light	and	dark,	yet
distinct	from	shadow?	What	of	faith	and	denial?	Can	you	now	understand,
Mappo,	the	potential	complexity	of	relationships?’


‘Assuming	they	exist	at	all,	beyond	the	notion	of	concepts.’
‘Granted.	Yet,	maybe	concepts	are	all	that’s	needed,	if	the	purpose	of	the
elements	is	to	give	shape	and	meaning	to	all	that	surrounds	us	on	the	outside,
and	all	that	guides	us	from	within.’
Mappo	leaned	back.	‘And	you	sought	to	master	such	power?’	He	stared	at
Cotillion,	wondering	if	even	a	god	was	capable	of	such	conceit,	such	ambition.
And	they	began	on	their	quest	long	before	they	became	gods…‘I	confess	that	I
hope	you	and	Shadowthrone	fail	–	for	what	you	describe	should	not	fall	into
anyone’s	hands,	not	a	god’s,	not	a	mortal’s.	No,	leave	it	to	the	Azath—’
‘And	so	we	would	have,	had	we	not	come	to	understand	that	the	Azath’s
control	was	failing.	The	Nameless	Ones,	I	suspect,	have	come	to	the	same
realization,	and	so	are	now	driven	to	desperation.	Alas,	we	believe	their	latest
decision	will,	if	anything,	further	pitch	the	Azath	towards	chaos	and
dissolution.’	He	nodded	towards	Iskaral	Pust,	who	crouched	nearby,	muttering
to	himself.	‘Hence,	our	decision	to…intervene.	Too	late,	unfortunately,	to
prevent	Dejim	Nebrahl’s	release,	and	the	ambush	itself.	But…you	are	alive,
Trell.’
And	so,	Cotillion,	in	seeking	to	master	the	Azath,	you	now	find	yourself
serving	it.	Desire	versus	deed…‘To	lift	Icarium’s	curse,’	Mappo	shook	his
head.	‘This	is	an	extraordinary	offer,	Cotillion.	I	find	myself	torn	between
doubt	and	hope.’	A	wry	smile	–	‘Ah,	I	begin	to	understand	how	mere	concepts
are	enough.’
‘Icarium	has	earned	an	end	to	his	torment,’	the	god	said,	‘has	he	not?’
‘What	must	I	do?’
‘For	now,	do	as	you	are	doing	–	pursue	your	friend.	Stay	on	that	trail,
Mappo.	A	convergence	is	coming,	of	a	magnitude	so	vast	it	will	very	likely
defy	comprehension.	The	gods	seem	oblivious	to	the	cliff-edge	they	are	all
approaching,	and	yes,	every	now	and	then	I	include	myself	among	them.’
‘You	hardly	seem	oblivious.’
‘Well	then,	perhaps	helpless	is	a	more	accurate	term.	In	any	event,	you	and
I	will	speak	again.	For	now,	do	not	doubt	that	you	are	needed.	By	us,	by	every
mortal	and	above	all,	by	Icarium.’	He	set	the	cup	down	and	rose.
The	faint	sound	of	the	Hounds	lifting	themselves	into	readiness	reached
Mappo’s	ears.
‘I	know	I	need	not	say	this,’	the	god	said,	‘but	I	shall	anyway.	Do	not	give
up	hope,	Mappo.	For	this,	despair	is	your	greatest	foe.	When	the	time	comes
for	you	to	stand	between	Icarium	and	all	that	the	Nameless	Ones	seek…well,	I
believe	that	you	will	not	fail.’
Mappo	watched	Cotillion	walk	into	the	darkness,	the	Hounds	slipping	into


the	god’s	wake.	After	a	moment,	the	Trell	glanced	over	at	Iskaral	Pust.	And
found	sharp,	glittering	eyes	fixed	on	him.	‘High	Priest,’	Mappo	asked,	‘do	you
intend	to	join	me	in	my	journey?’
‘Alas,	I	cannot.’	The	Dal	Honese	glanced	away.	‘The	Trell’s	insane!	He	will
fail!	Of	course	he	will	fail!	As	good	as	dead,	ah,	I	cannot	bear	now	to	even	so
much	as	look	at	him.	All	Mogora’s	healing	–	for	naught!	A	waste!’	Iskaral	Pust
rubbed	at	his	face,	then	leapt	to	his	feet.	‘Too	many	equally	important	tasks
await	me,	Mappo	Runt.	No,	you	and	I	shall	walk	momentarily	divergent	paths,
yet	side	by	side	to	glory	nonetheless!	As	Cotillion	has	said,	you	shall	not	fail.
Nor	will	I.	Victory	shall	be	ours!’	He	raised	a	bony	fist	and	shook	it	at	the	night
sky.	Then	hugged	himself.	‘Gods	below,	we’re	doomed.’
A	cackle	from	Mogora,	who	had	reappeared,	her	arms	loaded	down	with
firewood	implausibly	cut	and	split	as	if	by	a	master	woodsman.	She	dumped	it
beside	the	fire.	‘Stir	them	embers,	dear	pathetic	husband	of	mine.’
‘You	cannot	command	me,	hag!	Stir	them	yourself!	I	have	more	vital	tasks
before	me	right	now!’
‘Such	as?’
‘Well,	to	begin	with,	I	need	to	pee.’


Chapter	Thirteen
And	all	these	people	gathered
to	honour	the	one	who	had	died,
was	it	a	man,	a	woman,	a	warrior,
a	king,	a	fool,	and	where	were
the	statues,	the	likenesses	painted
on	plaster	and	stone?
yet	so	they	stood	or	sat,	the	wine
spilling	at	their	feet,	dripping	red
from	their	hands,	with	wasps
in	their	dying	season	spinning
about	in	sweet	thirst	and	drunken
voices	cried	out,	stung	awake
voices	blended	in	confused
profusion,	the	question	asked
again	then	again	–	why?	But	this
is	where	a	truth	finds	its	own	wonder,
for	the	question	was	not	why	did
this	one	die,	or	such	to	justify
for	in	their	heart	of	milling	lives
there	were	none	for	whom
this	gathering	was	naught
but	an	echo,	of	former	selves.
They	asked,	again	and	yet	again,
why	are	we	here?
The	one	who	died	had	no	name
but	every	name,	no	face	but	every
face	of	those	who	had	gathered,
and	so	it	was	we	who	learned
among	wasps	swept	past	living


yet	nerve-firing	one	last	piercing
that	we	were	the	dead
and	all	in	an	unseen	mind—
stood	or	sat	a	man,	or	a	woman,
a	warrior,	queen	or	fool,	who
in	drunken	leisure	gave	a	moment’s
thought	to	all	passed	by	in	life.
Fountain	Gathering
Fisher	Kel	Tath
Even	with	four	new	wheels,	the	Trygalle	carriage	was	a	battered,	decrepit
wreck.	Two	of	the	horses	had	died	in	the	fall.	Three	shareholders	had	been
crushed	and	a	fourth	had	broken	his	neck.	Karpolan	Demesand	sat	on	a	folding
camp-stool,	his	head	swathed	in	a	bloodstained	bandage,	sipping	herbal	tea	in
successive	winces.
They	had	left	Ganath’s	warren	of	Omtose	Phellack,	and	now	the	familiar
desert,	scrubland	and	barren	hills	of	Seven	Cities	surrounded	them,	the	sun
reaching	towards	noon	behind	a	ceiling	of	cloud.	The	smell	of	rain	tinged	the
unusually	humid	air.	Insects	spun	and	swirled	overhead.
‘This	comes,’	said	Ganath,	‘with	the	rebirth	of	the	inland	sea.’
Paran	glanced	over	at	her,	then	resumed	cinching	tight	the	girth	strap	on
his	horse	–	the	beast	had	taken	to	holding	its	breath,	chest	swollen	in	an	effort
to	keep	the	strap	loose,	likely	hoping	Paran	would	slide	off	from	its	back	at
some	perfectly	inopportune	moment.	Horses	were	reluctant	companions	in	so
many	human	escapades,	disasters	and	foibles	–	Paran	could	not	resent	the
animal’s	well-earned	belligerence.	‘Ganath,’	he	said,	‘do	you	know	precisely
where	we	are?’
‘This	valley	leads	west	to	Raraku	Sea,	beyond	the	inside	range;	and	east,
through	a	little-used	pass,	down	to	the	city	of	G’danisban.’	She	hesitated,	then
added,	‘It	has	been	a	long	time	since	I	have	been	this	far	east…this	close	to	the
cities	of	your	kind.’
‘G’danisban.	Well,	I	have	need	of	supplies.’
She	faced	him.	‘You	have	completed	your	task,	Master	of	the	Deck.	The
Deragoth	unleashed,	the	D’ivers	known	as	Dejim	Nebrahl,	the	hunter,	now	the
hunted.	Do	you	now	return	to	Darujhistan?’
He	grimaced.	‘Not	yet,	alas.’
‘There	are	still	more	forces	you	intend	to	release	upon	the	world?’


A	certain	edge	to	her	voice	brought	him	round.	‘Not	if	I	can	help	it,
Ganath.	Where	do	you	now	go?’
‘West.’
‘Ah,	yes,	to	repair	the	damage	to	that	ritual	of	yours.	I’m	curious,	what	did
it	imprison?’
‘A	sky	keep	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	And…other	things.’
A	sky	keep?	Gods	below.	‘Where	did	it	come	from?’
‘A	warren,	I	suppose,’	she	said.
She	knew	more	than	that,	he	suspected,	but	he	did	not	press	the	issue.	Paran
made	some	final	adjustments	to	the	saddle,	and	said,	‘Thank	you,	Ganath,	for
accompanying	us	–	we	would	not	have	survived	without	you.’
‘Perhaps,	some	day,	I	can	ask	of	you	a	favour	in	return.’
‘Agreed.’	He	drew	out	a	long,	cloth-wrapped	object	that	had	been	strapped
to	the	saddle,	carried	it	over	to	Karpolan	Demesand.
‘High	Mage,’	he	said.
The	corpulent	man	looked	up.	‘Ah,	our	payment.’
‘For	services	rendered,’	Paran	said.	‘Do	you	wish	me	to	unwrap	it?’
‘Hood	no,	Ganoes	Paran	–	sorcery’s	the	only	thing	keeping	my	skull	intact
right	now.	Even	scabbarded	and	bundled	as	that	sword	now	is,	I	can	feel	its
entropy.’
‘Yes,	it	is	an	unpleasant	weapon,’	Paran	said.
‘In	any	case,	there	is	yet	one	more	thing	to	be	done.’	A	gesture	from
Karpolan	and	one	of	the	Pardu	shareholders	came	over,	collected	the	otataral
sword	that	had	once	belonged	to	Adjunct	Lorn.	She	carried	it	a	short	distance,
then	set	it	on	the	ground	and	backed	away.	Another	shareholder	arrived,
cradling	in	his	arms	a	large	two-handed	mace.	He	positioned	himself	over	the
wrapped	weapon,	then	swung	the	mace	down.	And	again,	and	again.	Each	blow
further	shattered	the	otataral	blade.	Breathing	hard,	the	man	stepped	back	and
looked	over	at	Karpolan	Demesand.
Who	then	faced	Paran	once	more.	‘Collect	your	shard,	Master	of	the
Deck.’
‘Thank	you,’	the	Malazan	replied,	walking	over.	Crouching,	he	pulled
aside	the	cut	and	battered	hide.	He	stared	down	at	the	rust-hued	slivers	of	metal
for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	selected	a	shard	about	the	length	of	his	index
finger	and	not	much	wider.	Carefully	folding	it	inside	a	fragment	of	hide,	he
then	tucked	it	into	his	belt	pouch.	He	straightened	and	strode	back	to	the	High
Mage.
Karpolan	Demesand	sighed,	slowly	rose	from	the	stool.	‘It	is	time	for	us	to
go	home.’


‘Have	a	safe	journey,	High	Mage,’	Paran	said	with	a	bow.
The	man	attempted	a	smile,	and	the	effort	stole	all	colour	from	his	face.
Turning	away	and	helped	by	one	of	the	shareholders,	he	made	his	way	to	the
carriage.
‘Pray,’	Ganath	said	in	a	low	voice	at	Paran’s	side,	‘he	encounters	no
untoward	opposition	in	the	warrens.’
Paran	went	to	his	horse.	Then,	arms	resting	on	the	saddle,	he	looked	over
at	Ganath.	‘In	this	war,’	he	said,	‘Elder	forces	will	be	involved.	Are	involved.
The	T’lan	Imass	may	well	believe	that	they	have	annihilated	the	Jaghut,	but
clearly	that	isn’t	the	case.	Here	you	stand,	and	there	are	others,	aren’t	there?’
She	shrugged.
From	behind	them	came	the	tearing	sound	of	a	warren	opening.	Snapping
traces,	then	the	rumble	of	wheels.
‘Ganath—’
‘Jaghut	are	not	interested	in	war.’
Paran	studied	her	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	nodded.	Setting	a	foot	in
the	stirrup,	he	pulled	himself	onto	the	horse	and	collected	the	reins.	‘Like	you,’
he	said	to	the	Jaghut,	‘I’m	feeling	a	long	way	from	home.	Fare	well	in	your
travels,	Ganath.’
‘And	you,	Master	of	the	Deck.’
Eastward	Paran	rode	along	the	length	of	the	valley.	The	river	that	had	once
carved	through	this	land	was	long	gone,	although	the	winding	path	of	its
course	was	evident,	with	stands	of	brush	and	withered	trees	clustered	here	and
there	where	the	last	sinkholes	had	been,	old	oxbows	and	flats	of	alluvial	sands
fanning	out	on	the	bends.	After	a	league	the	valley	opened	out	into	a	shallow
basin,	raw	cliffs	to	the	north	and	long,	sloping	slides	of	rubble	to	the	south.
Directly	ahead,	a	trail	was	visible	climbing	between	deep-cut	runoff	channels.
Reaching	its	base,	Paran	dismounted	and	led	his	mount	up	the	track.	The
afternoon	heat	was	building,	all	the	more	cloying	for	its	unnatural	humidity.
Far	to	the	west,	likely	above	the	Raraku	Sea,	massive	clouds	were	building.	By
the	time	he	reached	the	summit,	those	clouds	had	devoured	the	sun	and	the
breeze	at	his	back	was	sweet	with	the	promise	of	rain.
Paran	found	himself	with	a	view	far	to	the	east,	down	onto	rolling	hills
dotted	with	domestic	goats,	the	path	leading	towards	a	more	substantial	road
that	cut	north–south	along	the	edge	of	the	plain,	the	southern	route	swinging
eastward	towards	a	distant	smudge	of	smoke	and	dust	that	was,	he	suspected,
G’danisban.
Astride	his	horse	once	more,	he	set	off	at	a	canter.
Before	long,	Paran	came	to	the	first	herder ’s	hovel,	burned	and	gutted,


where	goats	were	now	gathering,	driven	by	habit	alone	as	the	day’s	light	faded.
He	discerned	no	obvious	sign	of	graves,	and	was	not	inclined	to	search	among
the	ruins.	Plague,	the	silent,	invisible	breath	of	the	Grey	Goddess.	It	was	likely,
he	realized,	the	city	ahead	was	in	the	grip	of	that	terror.
The	first	spatters	of	rain	struck	his	back,	and	a	moment	later,	in	a	rushing
sizzle,	the	downpour	was	upon	him.	The	rocky	trail	was	suddenly	treacherous,
forcing	Paran	to	slow	his	horse	to	a	cautious	trot.	Visibility	reduced	to	a	dozen
paces	on	all	sides,	the	world	beyond	washed	away	behind	a	silver	wall.	Warm
water	trickling	beneath	his	clothes,	Paran	drew	up	the	tattered	hood	of	the
military	rain-cape	covering	his	shoulders,	then	hunched	over	as	the	rain
hammered	down.
The	worn	trail	became	a	stream,	muddy	water	sluicing	along	amidst	rocks
and	cobbles.	Horse	slowing	to	a	walk,	they	pressed	on.	Between	two	low	hills,
the	track	sprawling	out	into	a	shallow	lake,	and	Paran	found	himself	flanked	by
two	soldiers.
One	gauntleted	hand	reached	out	to	take	the	reins.	‘You’re	headed	the
wrong	way,	stranger,’	growled	the	man,	in	Malazan.
The	other	held	cradled	in	his	arms	a	crossbow,	but	it	wasn’t	loaded,	and	he
now	spoke	from	the	shadows	beneath	his	hood:	‘Is	that	cape	loot?	Dragged	it
from	the	body	of	a	Malazan	soldier,	did	you?’
‘No,’	Paran	replied.	‘Issued	to	me,	just	like	your	capes	were	to	you,
soldier.’	Ahead,	he	could	just	make	out	in	a	brief	easing	of	the	downpour,	was
an	encampment.	Two,	perhaps	three	legions,	the	tents	cloaking	a	series	of	hills
beneath	a	low	ceiling	of	smoke	from	cookfires	dying	in	the	rain.	Beyond	it,
with	the	road	winding	down	a	slope,	rose	the	walls	of	G’danisban.	He	returned
his	attention	to	the	soldiers.	‘Who	commands	this	army?’
The	one	with	the	crossbow	said,	‘How	’bout	you	answer	the	questions	to
start?	You	a	deserter?’
Well,	technically	speaking,	yes.	Then	again,	I’m	supposed	to	be	dead.	‘I
wish	to	speak	with	your	commanding	officer.’
‘You	pretty	much	ain’t	got	no	choice,	now.	Off	the	horse,	stranger.	We’re
arresting	you	on	suspicion	of	desertion.’
Paran	slipped	down	from	the	horse.	‘Fine.	Now	will	you	tell	me	whose
army	this	is?’
‘The	lad’s	push	for	you.	You’re	now	a	prisoner	of	Onearm’s	Host.’
	
For	all	the	outward	signs,	it	slowly	dawned	on	Paran	that	this	was	not	a	siege.
Companies	held	the	roads	leading	into	G’danisban,	and	the	camp	itself	formed


a	half-ring	cordon	along	the	north	and	west	sides,	no	pickets	closer	than	four
hundred	paces	from	the	unmanned	walls.
One	of	the	soldiers	led	Paran’s	horse	towards	the	temporary	stables,	whilst
the	other	one	guided	Paran	down	avenues	between	sodden	tents.	Figures	moved
about,	cloaked	and	hooded,	but	none	wearing	full	battle	regalia.
They	entered	an	officer ’s	tent.
‘Captain,’	the	soldier	said,	flipping	back	his	hood,	‘we	come	upon	this	man
trying	to	ride	into	G’danisban	from	the	Raraku	road.	You	see,	sir,	he’s	wearing
a	Malazan	military	rain-cape.	We	think	he’s	a	deserter,	probably	from	the
Adjunct’s	Fourteenth.’
The	woman	he	addressed	was	lying	on	her	back	on	a	cot	that	ran	parallel	to
the	back	wall.	She	was	fair-skinned,	her	petite	features	surrounded	by	a	mass	of
long	red	hair.	Head	tilting	to	take	in	her	soldier	and	Paran,	she	was	silent	for	a
moment,	then	resumed	her	stare	at	the	dipping	ceiling	above	her.	‘Take	him	to
the	stockade	–	we	have	a	stockade,	don’t	we?	Oh,	and	get	his	details	–	what
regiment,	which	legion	and	all	that.	So	it	can	be	recorded	somewhere	before
he’s	executed.	Now	get	out,	the	both	of	you,	you’re	dripping	water
everywhere.’
‘Just	a	moment,	Captain,’	Paran	said.	‘I	wish	to	speak	with	the	High	Fist.’
‘Not	possible,	and	I	don’t	recall	giving	you	permission	to	speak.	Pull	out
his	fingernails	for	that,	Futhgar,	will	you?	When	it’s	time,	of	course.’
Years	ago,	Paran	would	have	done…nothing.	Succumbed	to	the	rules,	the
written	ones	and	the	unwritten	ones.	He	would	have	simply	bided	his	time.	But
he	was	soaked	through,	in	need	of	a	hot	bath.	He	was	tired.	And,	he	had	gone
through	something	like	this	once	before,	long	ago	and	on	a	distant	continent.
Back	then,	of	course,	it	had	been	a	sergeant	–	same	red	hair,	but	a	moustache
under	the	nose	–	even	so,	the	similarity	was	there,	like	the	poke	of	an	assassin’s
knife.
The	soldier,	Futhgar,	was	standing	on	his	left,	half	a	pace	back.	Paran	gave
nothing	away,	simply	stepping	to	his	right	then	driving	his	left	elbow	into	the
soldier ’s	face.	Breaking	his	nose.	The	man	dropped	to	the	ground	like	a	sack
of	melons.
The	captain	sat	up,	legs	swinging	round,	and	was	on	her	feet	in	time	for
Paran	to	take	a	forward	step	and	punch	her	hard,	his	knuckles	cracking	against
her	jaw.	Eyes	rolling	up,	she	collapsed	back	down	onto	the	cot,	breaking	its
wooden	legs.
Massaging	his	hand,	Paran	looked	round.	Futhgar	was	out	cold,	as	was	the
captain.	The	steady	downpour	outside	had	ensured	that	no	sounds	from	the
brief	fight	had	been	heard	beyond	the	tent.


He	walked	over	to	the	captain’s	travel	chest.	Unlocked.	He	tilted	back	the
lid	and	began	rummaging	through	the	clothes	lying	atop	armour.	Before	long,
he	had	enough	lengths	of	material	suitable	to	gag	and	bind	the	two	soldiers.
Dragging	Futhgar	from	near	the	entrance,	he	removed	the	man’s	eating	knife,
his	sticker	and	a	broad-bladed	Kethra	gutting	knife,	then	his	sword	belt.	He
prepared	a	wad	of	cloth	for	a	gag,	then	bent	close	to	determine	if	enough	air
was	getting	through	the	man’s	broken	nose.	Not	even	close.	Leaving	that	for	the
moment,	he	tightly	bound	the	wrists	and	ankles,	using	a	harness	strap	to	link
the	two	behind	Futhgar ’s	back.	He	then	tied	a	strip	round	Futhgar ’s	head,	hard
against	the	gaping	mouth,	leaving	room	to	breathe	but	no	room	for	the	tongue
to	push	outward.	He’d	be	able	to	make	groaning	sounds,	but	not	much	more
than	that.
He	bound	the	captain	in	an	identical	manner,	then	added	the	wad	of	cloth
fixed	in	place	with	another	strip	of	material	torn	from	one	of	the	captain’s
shirts.	And,	finally,	he	tied	both	of	them	to	either	side	of	the	cot,	and	the	cot	to
the	tent’s	centre	pole,	to	hinder	their	squirming	from	the	tent	–	which	he	hoped
would	give	him	sufficient	time.	Satisfied,	he	took	one	last	look	round,	then,
drawing	up	his	hood,	he	stepped	back	outside.
He	found	the	main	avenue	and	made	his	way	towards	the	large	command
tent	at	the	centre	of	the	encampment.	Soldiers	walked	past,	paying	him	no	heed.
This	was	Onearm’s	Host,	but	he’d	yet	to	see	a	single	familiar	face,	which
wasn’t	too	surprising	–	he	had	commanded	the	Bridgeburners,	and	the
Bridgeburners	were	gone.	Most	of	these	soldiers	would	be	newcomers	to	the
army,	drawn	in	from	garrisons	at	Pale,	Genabaris	and	Nathilog.	They	would
have	arrived	since	the	Pannion	War.	Nonetheless,	he	expected	to	find	at	least
someone	from	the	original	force	that	had	marched	all	the	way	to	Coral,
someone	who	had	been	part	of	that	devastating	battle.
Four	soldiers	stood	guard	outside	Dujek’s	command	tent.	A	fifth	figure
was	nearby,	holding	the	reins	of	a	mud-spattered	horse.
Paran	walked	closer,	eyes	on	the	horseman.	Familiar	–	he’d	found	what	he
had	been	looking	for.	An	outrider	–	but	one	who’d	belonged	to	Caladan
Brood’s	army,	he	believed	–	though	I	might	be	wrong	in	that.	Now,	what	was
his	name?
The	man’s	pale	brown	eyes	fixed	on	him	as	Paran	approached.	From
within	the	shadow	of	the	hood,	there	came	the	flicker	of	recognition,	then
confusion.	The	outrider	straightened,	then	saluted.
Paran	shook	his	head,	but	it	was	too	late	for	that.	The	four	guards	all	stood
to	attention	as	well.	Paran	answered	the	salute	with	a	vague,	sloppy	gesture,
then	stepped	close	to	the	outrider.	‘Soldier,’	he	murmured,	‘do	you	know	me?


Make	your	answer	quiet,	if	you	please.’
A	nod.	‘Captain	Ganoes	Paran.	I	don’t	forget	faces	or	names,	sir,	but	we’d
heard	you	were—’
‘Aye,	and	that’s	how	it	stays.	Your	name?’
‘Hurlochel.’
‘Now	I	remember.	You	acted	as	chronicler	on	occasion,	didn’t	you?’
A	shrug.	‘I	keep	an	account	of	things,	yes,	sir.	What	are	you	doing	here?’
‘I	need	to	speak	with	Dujek.’
Hurlochel	glanced	over	at	the	guards,	then	scowled.	‘Walk	with	me,	sir.
Don’t	mind	them,	they’re	new	enough	not	to	know	all	the	officers.’
Leading	the	horse,	Hurlochel	guided	Paran	away,	down	a	side	alley	nearby,
where	he	halted.
‘Hurlochel,’	Paran	said,	‘why	is	Dujek’s	tent	guarded	by	green	soldiers?
That	doesn’t	make	sense	at	all.	What’s	happened	and	why	are	you	camped
outside	G’danisban?’
‘Yes,	sir,	we’ve	had	a	hard	time	of	it.	It’s	the	plague,	you	see	–	the	legion
healers	were	keeping	it	from	us,	but	what	it’s	done	to	Seven	Cities…gods,
Captain,	there’s	bodies	in	the	tens	of	thousands.	Maybe	hundreds	of	thousands.
Every	city.	Every	village.	Caravan	camps	–	everywhere,	sir.	We	had	a	Gold
Moranth	accompanying	us,	you	see,	a	renegade	of	sorts.	Anyway,	there’s	a
temple,	in	G’danisban.	The	Grand	Temple	of	Poliel,	and	it’s	where	this	foul
wind	is	coming	from,	and	it’s	getting	stronger.’	Hurlochel	paused	to	wipe	rain
from	his	eyes.
‘So	Dujek	decided	to	strike	at	the	heart,	didn’t	he?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Go	on,	Hurlochel.’
‘We	arrived,	a	month	back,	and	the	High	Fist	formed	up	companies	of	his
veterans,	along	with	the	Gold	Moranth.	They	planned	an	assault	on	that	damned
temple.	Well,	they	expected	at	least	a	High	Priestess	or	some	other	sort,	but
they	were	ready	for	it.	What	nobody	planned	on,	though,	was	the	Grey
Goddess	herself.’
Paran’s	eyes	widened.	‘Who	made	it	back	out?’
‘Most	of	them,	sir,	except	the	Gold	Moranth.	But…they’re	all	sick,	sir.	The
plague’s	got	hold	of	them	and	they’re	only	still	alive	because	of	the	healers…
only	the	healers	are	losing	the	battle.	So,	here	we	are.	Stuck,	and	nobody	skank
enough	to	take	real	command	and	make	some	real	decisions.’	Hurlochel
hesitated,	then	said,	‘Unless	that’s	why	you’re	here,	Captain.	I	sure	hope	so.’
Paran	looked	away.	‘I’m	officially	dead,	Outrider.	Dujek	threw	us	out	of
the	army,	myself	and	a	few	others—’


‘Bridgeburners.’
‘Yes.’
‘Well,	sir,	if	anybody	earned	their	days	in	the	sweet	sun…’
Paran	grimaced.	‘Aye,	I’m	sure	that	sun’s	around	somewhere.	Anyway,	I
can	hardly	take	command	–	besides,	I’m	just	a	captain—’
‘With	absolute	seniority,	sir.	Dujek	took	his	officers	with	him	–	they	were
the	veterans,	after	all.	So,	we	got	nearly	ten	thousand	soldiers	camped	here,	and
the	nearest	thing	to	a	commander	is	Captain	Sweetcreek,	who’s	a	Falari
princess,	if	you	can	believe	that.’
‘Red	hair?’
‘Wild	red,	aye,	and	a	pretty	face—’
‘With	a	swollen	jaw.	We’ve	met.’
‘A	swollen	jaw?’
‘It	wasn’t	a	pleasant	meeting.’	Still	Paran	hesitated,	then	he	swore	and
nodded.	‘All	right.	I’ll	keep	the	rank	of	captain…with	seniority.	But	I	need	a
new	name—’
‘Captain	Kindly,	sir.’
‘Kindly?’
‘Old	soldiers	talk	about	him	like	grandmothers	talk	monsters	to	the	brats,
to	keep	them	in	line,	sir.	Nobody	here’s	met	him	–	at	least	nobody	who’s	not
fevered	and	half	out	of	their	minds.’
‘Well,	where	was	Kindly	last	posted?’
‘Fourteenth,	sir.	The	Adjunct’s	army	out	west	of	Raraku.	Which	direction
did	you	come	in	from?’
‘West.’
‘That’ll	do,	sir,	I	think.	I’ll	make	it	so’s	I	recognize	you.	Nobody	knows	a
thing	about	me,	only	that	the	High	Fist	used	me	to	run	messages.’
‘So	why	would	I	let	two	soldiers	arrest	me	if	I’m	supposed	to	take	over
command?’
‘You	did?	Well,	maybe	you	wanted	to	see	how	we	were	running	things
here.’
‘All	right.	One	more	question,	Hurlochel.	Why	aren’t	you	still	with
Caladan	Brood	on	Genabackis?’
‘The	alliance	broke	up,	sir,	not	long	after	the	Tiste	Andii	settled	in	Black
Coral.	Rhivi	back	to	the	plains,	the	Barghast	back	to	their	hills.	The	Crimson
Guard,	who	were	up	north,	just	vanished	–	no-one	knows	where	they	went.
When	Onearm	shipped	out,	well,	seemed	like	they	were	headed	somewhere
interesting.’
‘Regrets?’


‘With	every	heartbeat,	sir.’	Hurlochel	then	frowned.	‘Captain	Sweetcreek’s
got	a	swollen	jaw,	you	said?’
‘I	punched	her.	Along	with	some	soldier	named	Futhgar.	They’re	bound
and	gagged	in	the	captain’s	tent.	They	might	have	come	round	by	now.’
The	man	grinned,	but	it	was	not	a	pleasant	grin.	‘Captain,	you	knocked	out
cold	a	Falari	princess	–	that’s	perfect.	It	fits	with	what	people	have	heard	about
Kindly.	That’s	brilliant.’
Paran	winced,	then	rubbed	at	his	face.	Gods	below,	what	is	it	with	me	and
royalty?
	
She	had	slowly	emerged	from	the	hidden	temple	to	see	a	straggling	line	of
battered	figures	walking	the	road	below.	Making	her	way	down	the	dusty,	stony
slope,	she	was	within	fifteen	paces	before	anyone	noticed	her.	There	was	a
strangeness	in	that	moment	of	meeting,	survivors	eye	to	eye,	both	recognition
and	disbelief.	Acceptance,	a	sense	of	something	shared,	and	beneath	it	the
ineffable	flow	of	sorrow.	Few	words	were	exchanged.
Joining	the	soldiers	in	their	march,	Lostara	Yil	found	herself	alongside
Captain	Faradan	Sort,	who	told	her	something	of	Y’Ghatan’s	aftermath.	‘Your
Fist,	Tene	Baralta,	was	hovering	on	the	edge	of	death,	if	not	of	the	flesh,	then
of	the	spirit.	He	has	lost	an	arm	–	it	was	burned	beyond	repair	–	and	there	was
other	damage…to	his	face.	I	believe	he	was	a	vain	man.’
Lostara	grunted.	‘That	damned	beard	of	his,	slick	with	oil.’	She	thought
about	Tene	Baralta	for	a	time.	She’d	never	liked	him	much.	More	than	just
vain.	Perhaps,	truth	be	told,	something	of	a	coward,	despite	all	his	belligerence
and	posturing.	She	remembered	the	way	he	had	led	the	retreat	following	her
assassination	of	the	elder	Sha’ik,	and	his	eagerness	to	take	credit	for	every
success	whilst	dancing	from	the	path	of	disaster.	There	had	been	a	sadistic
streak	in	the	man,	and	Lostara	now	feared	that	it	would	burgeon,	as	Tene
Baralta	sought	means	to	feed	all	that	was	wounded	within	him.	‘Why	did	the
army	leave	all	of	you	behind?’
Faradan	Sort	shrugged.	‘They	assumed	no-one	who	had	been	trapped
within	the	city	could	have	survived	the	firestorm.’	She	paused,	then	added,	‘It
was	a	reasonable	assumption.	Only	Sinn	knew	otherwise,	and	something	told
me	to	trust	the	girl.	So	we	kept	looking.’
‘They’re	all	wearing	rags…and	they’re	unarmed.’
‘Aye,	which	is	why	we	need	to	rejoin	the	army	as	soon	as	possible.’
‘Can	Sinn	magically	contact	the	Fourteenth?	Or	Quick	Ben?’
‘I	have	not	asked	her.	I	do	not	know	how	much	of	her	ability	is	unformed


talent	–	such	creatures	occur	occasionally,	and	without	the	discipline	of
schooling	as	an	apprentice,	they	tend	to	become	avatars	of	chaos.	Power,	yes,
but	undirected,	wild.	Even	so,	she	was	able	to	defeat	the	wall	of	fire	and	so	save
Fist	Keneb’s	companies…well,	some	of	them.’
Lostara	glanced	over	at	the	captain,	then	back	at	the	soldiers	in	their	wake
for	a	moment	before	saying,	‘You	are	Korelri?’
‘I	am.’
‘And	you	stood	the	Wall?’
A	tight	smile,	there	for	an	instant	then	gone.	‘None	are	permitted	to	leave
that	service.’
‘It’s	said	the	Stormriders	wield	terrible	sorcery	in	their	eternal	assault
upon	the	Wall.’
‘All	sorcery	is	terrible	–	to	kill	indiscriminately,	often	from	a	great
distance,	there	is	nothing	more	damaging	to	the	mortal	who	wields	such
power,	whether	it	is	human	or	something	else.’
‘Is	it	better	to	look	your	foe	in	the	eye	as	you	take	his	life?’
‘At	the	very	least,’	Faradan	replied,	‘you	gave	them	the	chance	to	defend
themselves.	And	Oponn	decides	in	the	end,	decides	in	which	set	of	eyes	the
light	shall	fade.’
‘Oponn	–	I	thought	it	was	skill.’
‘You’re	still	young,	Captain	Lostara	Yil.’
‘I	am?’
Faradan	Sort	smiled.	‘With	each	battle	I	find	myself	in,	my	faith	in	skill
diminishes.	No,	it	is	the	Lord’s	push	or	the	Lady’s	pull,	each	time,	every	time.’
Lostara	said	nothing.	She	could	not	agree	with	that	assessment,	even
disregarding	the	irritation	of	the	other	woman’s	condescension.	A	clever,
skilled	soldier	lived	where	dim-witted,	clumsy	soldiers	died.	Skill	was	a
currency	that	purchased	Oponn’s	favour	–	how	could	it	be	otherwise?
‘You	survived	Y’Ghatan,’	Faradan	Sort	said.	‘How	much	of	that	was	the
Lady’s	pull?’
Lostara	considered	for	a	moment,	then	replied,	‘None.’

Once,	years	ago,	a	few	score	soldiers	had	stumbled	clear	of	a	vast	swamp.
Bloodied,	half-mad,	their	very	skin	hanging	in	discoloured	strips	from	weeks
slogging	through	mud	and	black	water.	Kalam	Mekhar	had	been	among	them,
along	with	the	three	he	now	walked	beside,	and	it	seemed	that,	in	the	end,	only
the	details	had	changed.


Black	Dog	had	brutally	culled	the	Bridgeburners,	a	protracted	nightmare
war	conducted	in	black	spruce	stands,	in	lagoons	and	bogs,	clashing	with	the
Mott	Irregulars,	the	Nathii	First	Army	and	the	Crimson	Guard.	The	survivors
were	numbed	–	to	step	free	of	the	horror	was	to	cast	aside	despair,	yet
whatever	came	to	replace	it	was	slow	in	awakening.	Leaving…very	little.	Look
at	us,	he	remembered	Hedge	saying,	we’re	nothing	but	hollowed-out	logs.	We
done	rotted	from	the	inside	out,	just	like	every	other	damned	thing	in	that
swamp.	Well,	Hedge	had	never	been	one	for	optimism.
‘You’re	looking	thoughtful,’	Quick	Ben	observed	at	his	side.
Kalam	grunted,	then	glanced	over.	‘Was	wondering,	Quick.	You	ever	get
tired	of	your	own	memories?’
‘That’s	not	a	good	idea,’	the	wizard	replied.
‘No,	I	suppose	it	isn’t.	I’m	not	just	getting	old,	I’m	feeling	old.	I	look	at	all
those	soldiers	behind	us	–	gods	below,	they’re	young.	Except	in	their	eyes.	I
suppose	we	were	like	that,	once.	Only…from	then	till	now,	Quick,	what	have
we	done?	Damned	little	that	meant	anything.’
‘I	admit	I’ve	been	wondering	a	few	things	about	you	myself,’	Quick	Ben
said.	‘That	Claw,	Pearl,	for	example.’
‘The	one	that	stabbed	me	in	the	back?	What	about	him?’
‘Why	you	ain’t	killed	him	already,	Kalam.	I	mean,	it’s	not	something	you’d
normally	set	aside,	is	it?	Unless,	of	course,	you’re	not	sure	you	can	take	him.’
From	behind	the	two	men,	Fiddler	spoke:	‘It	was	Pearl	that	night	in	Malaz
City?	Hood’s	breath,	Kalam,	the	bastard’s	been	strutting	round	in	the
Fourteenth	since	Raraku,	no	wonder	he’s	wearing	a	sly	smile	every	time	he
sees	you.’
‘I	don’t	give	a	damn	about	Pearl,	not	about	killing	him,	anyway,’	Kalam
said	in	a	low	voice.	‘We	got	bigger	things	to	worry	about.	What’s	our	Adjunct
got	in	mind?	What’s	she	planning?’
‘Who	says	she’s	planning	anything?’	Fiddler	retorted.	He	was	carrying	one
of	the	children	in	his	arms,	a	girl,	fast	asleep	with	her	thumb	in	her	mouth.	‘She
went	after	Leoman,	and	now	she’s	fleeing	a	plague	and	trying	to	link	up	with
the	transport	fleet.	And	then?	My	guess	is,	we’re	on	our	way	back	to
Genabackis,	or	maybe	the	Korel	Peninsula.	It’s	more	of	the	same	’cause	that’s
what	soldiers	do,	that’s	how	soldiers	live.’
‘I	think	you’re	wrong,’	Kalam	said.	‘It’s	all	snarled,	now.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Pearl’s	the	key,	sapper,’	the	assassin	said.	‘Why	is	he	still	around?	What’s
the	point	of	spying	on	the	Adjunct?	What’s	the	point	of	dogging	the
Fourteenth’s	heels?	I’m	telling	you,	Fid,	what	the	Adjunct	does	next	depends	on


Empress	Laseen,	her	and	nobody	else.’
‘She	won’t	cut	us	all	loose,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Not	the	Adjunct,	not	the
Fourteenth.	We’re	her	only	mobile	army	worthy	of	the	name.	There	ain’t	no
more	commanders	out	there	–	well,	there	are,	but	the	only	salute	I’d	give	’em
is	point	first.	Bloody	or	not,	Tavore’s	put	an	end	to	the	rebellion	here,	and
that’s	got	to	count	for	something.’
‘Fid,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘the	war ’s	a	lot	bigger	than	you	might	think,	and	it’s
just	starting.	There’s	no	telling	which	side	the	Empress	is	on.’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	talking	about?’
Apsalar	spoke.	‘A	war	among	the	gods,	Sergeant.	Captain	Paran	talked	of
such	a	war,	at	length—’
Both	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	turned	at	this.
‘Ganoes	Paran?’	the	assassin	asked.	‘Quick	said	he	left	him	in	Darujhistan.
What’s	he	to	do	with	all	of	this?	And	when	did	you	speak	with	him?’
She	was	leading	her	horse	by	the	reins	three	paces	behind	Fiddler;	in	the
saddle	sat	three	children,	dull-eyed	in	the	heat.	At	Kalam’s	questions	she
shrugged,	then	said,	‘He	is	Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	In	that	capacity,	he
has	come	here,	to	Seven	Cities.	We	were	north	of	Raraku	when	we	parted	ways.
Kalam	Mekhar,	I	have	no	doubt	that	you	and	Quick	Ben	are	in	the	midst	of	yet
another	scheme.	For	what	it	is	worth,	I	would	advise	caution.	Too	many
unknown	forces	are	in	this	game,	and	among	them	will	be	found	Elder	Gods
and,	indeed,	Elder	Races.	Perhaps	you	believe	you	comprehend	the	ultimate
stakes,	but	I	suggest	that	you	do	not—’
‘And	you	do?’	Quick	Ben	demanded.
‘Not	entirely,	but	then,	I	have	constrained	my…goals…seeking	only	what
is	achievable.’
‘Now	you	got	me	curious,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Here	you	are,	marching	with	us
once	again,	Apsalar,	when	I’d	figured	you’d	be	settled	in	some	coastal	village
back	in	Itko	Kan,	knitting	greasy	sweaters	for	your	da.	Maybe	you	left	Crokus
behind,	but	it	seems	to	me	you	ain’t	left	nothing	else	behind.’
‘We	travel	this	same	road,’	she	said,	‘for	the	moment.	Sergeant,	you	need
fear	nothing	from	me.’
‘And	what	about	the	rest	of	us?’	Quick	Ben	asked.
She	did	not	reply.
Sudden	unease	whispered	through	Kalam.	He	met	Quick’s	eyes	for	a	brief
moment,	then	faced	forward	once	more.	‘Let’s	just	catch	up	with	that	damned
army	first.’
‘I’d	like	to	see	Pearl	disposed	of,’	Quick	Ben	said.
No-one	spoke	for	a	long	moment.	It	wasn’t	often	that	the	wizard	voiced	his


desire	so…brazenly,	and	Kalam	realized,	with	a	chill,	that	things	were	getting
bad.	Maybe	even	desperate.	But	it	wasn’t	that	easy.	Like	that	rooftop	in
Darujhistan	–	invisible	enemies	on	all	sides	–	you	look	and	look	but	see
nothing.
Pearl,	who	was	once	Salk	Elan.	Mockra	warren…and	a	blade	sliding	like
fire	into	my	back.	Everyone	thinks	Topper’s	the	master	in	the	Claw,	but	I
wonder…can	you	take	him,	Kalam?	Quick’s	got	his	doubts	–	he’s	just	offered	to
help.	Gods	below,	maybe	I	am	getting	old.	‘You	never	answered	me,	friend,’	the
assassin	said	to	Quick	Ben.
‘What	was	the	question	again?’
‘Ever	get	tired	of	your	own	memories?’
‘Oh,	that	one.’
‘Well?’
‘Kalam,	you	have	no	idea.’
	
Fiddler	didn’t	like	this	conversation.	In	fact,	he	hated	it,	and	was	relieved	as
everyone	fell	silent	once	more,	walking	the	dusty	track,	every	step	pushing	that
damned	ruin	of	a	city	further	behind	them.	He	knew	he	should	be	back	in	the
column,	with	his	squad,	or	maybe	up	ahead,	trying	to	pry	stuff	loose	from
Faradan	Sort	–	that	captain	was	full	of	surprises,	wasn’t	she	just.	She’d	saved
all	their	lives	–	there	was	no	doubting	that	–	but	that	didn’t	mean	that	he	had	to
trust	her.	Not	yet,	despite	the	truth	that	he	wanted	to,	for	some	arcane	reason
he’d	yet	to	comprehend.
The	little	girl	with	the	runny	nose	sniffled	in	her	sleep,	one	small	hand
clutching	his	left	shoulder.	Her	other	hand	was	at	her	mouth,	and	her	sucking
on	her	thumb	made	tiny	squeaking	sounds.	In	his	arms,	she	weighed	next	to
nothing.
His	squad	had	come	through	intact.	Only	Balm,	and	maybe	Hellian,	could
say	the	same.	So,	three	squads	out	of	what,	ten?	Eleven?	Thirty?	Moak’s
soldiers	had	been	entirely	wiped	out	–	the	Eleventh	Squad	was	gone,	and	that
was	a	number	that	would	never	be	resurrected	in	the	future	history	of	the
Fourteenth.	The	captain	had	settled	on	the	numbers,	adding	the	Thirteenth	for
Sergeant	Urb,	and	it	turned	out	that	Fiddler ’s	own,	the	Fourth,	was	the	lowest
number	on	the	rung.	This	part	of	Ninth	Company	had	taken	a	beating,	and
Fiddler	had	few	hopes	for	the	rest,	the	ones	that	hadn’t	made	it	to	the	Grand
Temple.	Worse	yet,	they’d	lost	too	many	sergeants.	Borduke,	Mosel,	Moak,
Sobelone,	Tugg.
Well,	all	right,	we’re	beaten	up,	but	we’re	alive.


He	dropped	back	a	few	paces,	resumed	his	march	alongside	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas.	The	last	survivor	of	Leoman’s	rebel	army	–	barring	Leoman
himself	–	had	said	little,	although	the	scowl	knotting	his	expression	suggested
his	thoughts	were	anything	but	calm.	A	scrawny	boy	was	riding	his	shoulders,
head	bobbing	and	dipping	as	he	dozed.
‘I	was	thinking,’	Fiddler	said,	‘of	attaching	you	to	my	squad.	We	were
always	one	short.’
‘Is	it	that	simple,	Sergeant?’	Corabb	asked.	‘You	Malazans	are	strange.	I
cannot	yet	be	a	soldier	in	your	army,	for	I	have	not	yet	impaled	a	babe	on	a
spear.’
‘Corabb,	the	sliding	bed	is	a	Seven	Cities	invention,	not	a	Malazan	one.’
‘What	has	that	to	do	with	it?’
‘I	mean,	Malazans	don’t	stick	babes	on	spears.’
‘Is	it	not	your	rite	of	passage?’
‘Who	has	been	telling	you	this	rubbish?	Leoman?’
The	man	frowned.	‘No.	But	such	beliefs	were	held	to	among	the	followers
of	the	Apocalypse.’
‘Isn’t	Leoman	one	such	follower?’
‘I	think	not.	No,	never.	I	was	blind	to	that.	Leoman	believed	in	himself	and
no	other.	Until	that	Mezla	bitch	he	found	in	Y’Ghatan.’
‘He	found	himself	a	woman,	did	he?	No	wonder	he	went	south.’
‘He	did	not	go	south,	Sergeant.	He	fled	into	a	warren.’
‘A	figure	of	speech.’
‘He	went	with	his	woman.	She	will	destroy	him,	I	am	sure	of	that,	and	now
I	say	that	is	only	what	Leoman	deserves.	Let	Dunsparrow	ruin	him,	utterly—’
‘Hold	on,’	Fiddler	cut	in,	as	an	uncanny	shiver	rose	through	him,	‘did	you
call	her	Dunsparrow?’
‘Yes,	for	such	she	named	herself.’
‘A	Malazan?’
‘Yes,	tall	and	miserable.	She	would	mock	me.	Me,	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas,	Leoman’s	Second,	until	I	became	his	Third,	the	one	he	was	content
to	leave	behind.	To	die	with	all	the	others.’
Fiddler	barely	heard	him.	‘Dunsparrow,’	he	repeated.
‘Do	you	know	the	hag?	The	witch?	The	seductress	and	corrupter?’
Gods,	I	once	tossed	her	on	my	knee.	He	realized	of	a	sudden	that	he	was
clawing	a	hand	through	the	remnants	of	his	singed,	snarled	hair,	unmindful	of
the	snags,	indifferent	to	the	tears	that	started	from	his	eyes.	The	girl	squirmed.
He	stared	over	at	Corabb,	unseeing,	then	hurried	ahead,	feeling	dizzy,
feeling…appalled.	Dunsparrow…she’d	be	in	her	twenties	now.	Middle	twenties,


I	suppose.	What	was	she	doing	in	Y’Ghatan?
He	pushed	between	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben,	startling	both	men.
‘Fid?’
‘Tug	Hood’s	snake	till	he	shrieks,’	the	sapper	said.	‘Drown	the	damned
Queen	of	Dreams	in	her	own	damned	pool.	Friends,	you	won’t	believe	who
went	with	Leoman	into	that	warren.	You	won’t	believe	who	shared	Leoman’s
bed	in	Y’Ghatan.	No,	you	won’t	believe	anything	I	say.’
‘Abyss	take	you,	Fid,’	Kalam	said	in	exasperation,	‘what	are	you	talking
about?’
‘Dunsparrow.	That’s	who’s	at	Leoman’s	side	right	now.	Dunsparrow.
Whiskeyjack’s	little	sister	and	I	don’t	know	–	I	don’t	know	anything	–	what	to
think,	only	I	want	to	scream	and	I	don’t	know	why	even	there,	no,	I	don’t	know
anything	any	more.	Gods,	Quick	–	Kalam	–	what	does	it	mean?	What	does	any
of	it	mean?’
‘Calm	down,’	Quick	Ben	said,	but	his	voice	was	strangely	high,	tight.	‘For
us,	for	us,	I	mean,	it	doesn’t	necessarily	mean	anything.	It’s	a	damned
coincidence	and	even	if	it	isn’t,	it’s	not	like	it	means	anything,	not	really.	It’s
just…peculiar,	that’s	all.	We	knew	she	was	a	stubborn,	wild	little	demon,	we
knew	that,	even	then	–	and	you	knew	her	better	than	us,	me	and	Kalam,	we	only
met	her	once,	in	Malaz	City.	But	you,	you	were	like	her	uncle,	which	means
you	got	some	explaining	to	do!’
Fiddler	stared	at	the	man,	at	his	wide	eyes.	‘Me?	You’ve	lost	your	mind,
Quick.	Listen	to	you!	Blaming	me,	for	her!	Wasn’t	nothing	to	do	with	me!’
‘Stop	it,	both	of	you,’	Kalam	said.	‘You’re	frightening	the	soldiers	behind
us.	Look,	we’re	all	too	nervous	right	now,	about	all	sorts	of	things,	to	be	able
to	make	sense	of	any	of	this,	assuming	there’s	any	sense	to	be	made.	People
choose	their	own	lives,	what	they	do,	where	they	end	up,	it	don’t	mean	some
god’s	playing	around.	So,	Whiskeyjack’s	little	sister	is	now	Leoman’s	lover,
and	they’re	both	hiding	out	in	the	Queen	of	Dreams’	warren.	All	right,	better
that	than	crumbling	bones	in	the	ashes	of	Y’Ghatan,	right?	Well?’
‘Maybe,	maybe	not,’	Fiddler	said.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	does	that	mean?’	Kalam	demanded.
Fiddler	drew	a	deep,	shaky	breath.	‘We	must	have	told	you,	it’s	not	like	it
was	secret	or	anything,	and	we	always	used	it	as	an	excuse,	to	explain	her,	the
way	she	was	and	all	that.	Never	so	she	could	hear,	of	course,	and	we	said	it	to
take	its	power	away—’
‘Fiddler!’
The	sapper	winced	at	Kalam’s	outburst.	‘Now	who’s	frightening	everyone
—’


‘You	are!	And	never	mind	everyone	else	–	you’re	frightening	me,	damn
you!’
‘All	right.	She	was	born	to	a	dead	woman	–	Whiskeyjack’s	stepmother,	she
died	that	morning,	and	the	baby	–	Dunsparrow	–	well,	she	was	long	in	coming
out,	she	should	have	died	inside,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.	That’s	why	the	town
elders	gave	her	up	to	the	temple,	to	Hood’s	own.	The	father	was	already	dead,
killed	outside	Quon,	and	Whiskeyjack,	well,	he	was	finishing	his	prenticeship.
We	was	young	then.	So	me	and	him,	we	had	to	break	in	and	steal	her	back,	but
she’d	already	been	consecrated,	blessed	in	Hood’s	name	–	so	we	took	its	power
away	by	talking	about	it,	ha	ha,	making	light	and	all	that,	and	she	grew	up
normal	enough.	More	or	less.	Sort	of…’	He	trailed	away,	refused	to	meet	the
two	sets	of	staring	eyes,	then	scratched	at	his	singed	face.	‘We	need	us	a	Deck
of	Dragons,	I	think…’
	
Apsalar,	four	paces	behind	the	trio,	smiled	as	the	wizard	and	assassin	both
simultaneously	cuffed	Sergeant	Fiddler.	A	short-lived	smile.	Such	revelations
were	troubling.	Whiskeyjack	had	always	been	more	than	a	little	reticent	about
where	he’d	come	from,	about	the	life	before	he	became	a	soldier.	Mysteries	as
locked	away	as	the	ruins	beneath	the	sands.	He’d	been	a	mason,	once,	a	worker
in	stone.	She	knew	that	much.	A	fraught	profession	among	the	arcana	of
divination	and	symbolism.	Builder	of	barrows,	the	one	who	could	make	solid
all	of	history,	every	monument	to	grandeur,	every	dolmen	raised	in	eternal
gestures	of	surrender.	There	were	masons	among	many	of	the	Houses	in	the
Deck	of	Dragons,	a	signifier	of	both	permanence	and	its	illusion.	Whiskeyjack,
a	mason	who	set	his	tools	down,	to	embrace	slaughter.	Was	it	Hood’s	own	hand
that	guided	him?
It	was	believed	by	many	that	Laseen	had	arranged	Dassem	Ultor ’s	death,
and	Dassem	had	been	the	Mortal	Sword	of	Hood	–	in	reality	if	not	in	name	–
and	the	centre	of	a	growing	cult	among	the	ranks	of	the	Malazan	armies.	The
empire	sought	no	patron	from	among	the	gods,	no	matter	how	seductive	the
invitation,	and	in	that	Laseen	had	acted	with	singular	wisdom,	and	quite
possibly	at	the	command	of	the	Emperor.	Had	Whiskeyjack	belonged	to
Dassem’s	cult?	Possibly	–	still,	she	had	seen	nothing	to	suggest	that	was	so.	If
anthing,	he	had	been	a	man	entirely	devoid	of	faith.
Nor	did	it	seem	likely	that	the	Queen	of	Dreams	would	knowingly	accept
the	presence	of	an	avatar	of	Hood	within	her	realm.	Unless	the	two	gods	are
now	allies	in	this	war.	The	very	notion	of	war	depressed	her,	for	gods	were	as
cruel	and	merciless	as	mortals.	Whiskeyjack’s	sister	may	be	as	much	an


unwitting	player	in	all	this	as	the	rest	of	us.	She	was	not	prepared	to	condemn
the	woman,	and	not	yet	ready	to	consider	her	an	ally,	either.
She	wondered	again	at	what	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	were	planning.	Both
were	formidable	in	their	own	right,	yet	intrinsic	in	their	methods	was	staying
low,	beneath	notice.	What	was	obvious	–	all	that	lay	on	the	surface	–	was
invariably	an	illusion,	a	deceit.	When	the	time	came	to	choose	sides,	out	in	the
open,	they	were	likely	to	surprise	everyone.
Two	men,	then,	whom	no-one	could	truly	trust.	Two	men	whom	not	even
the	gods	could	trust,	for	that	matter.
She	realized	that,	in	joining	this	column,	in	coming	among	these	soldiers,
she	had	become	ensnared	in	yet	another	web,	and	there	was	no	guarantee	she
would	be	able	to	cut	herself	free.	Not	in	time.
The	entanglement	worried	her.	She	could	not	be	certain	that	she’d	walk
away	from	a	fight	with	Kalam.	Not	a	fight	that	was	face	to	face,	that	is.	And
now	his	guard	was	up.	In	fact,	she’d	invited	it.	Partly	from	bravado,	and	partly
to	gauge	his	reaction.	And	just	a	little…misdirection.
Well,	there	was	plenty	of	that	going	round.
The	two	undead	lizards,	Curdle	and	Telorast,	were	maintaining	some
distance	from	the	party	of	soldiers,	although	Apsalar	sensed	that	they	were
keeping	pace,	somewhere	out	in	the	scrubland	south	of	the	raised	road.
Whatever	their	hidden	motives	in	accompanying	her,	they	were	for	the	moment
content	to	simply	follow.	That	they	possessed	secrets	and	a	hidden	purpose	was
obvious	to	her,	as	was	the	possibility	that	that	purpose	involved,	on	some	level,
betrayal.	And	that	too	is	something	that	we	all	share.
	
Sergeant	Balm	was	cursing	behind	Bottle	as	they	walked	the	stony	road.
Scorched	boots,	soles	flapping,	mere	rags	covering	the	man’s	shoulders
beneath	the	kiln-hot	sun,	Balm	was	giving	voice	to	the	miseries	afflicting
everyone	who	had	crawled	out	from	under	Y’Ghatan.	Their	pace	was	slowing,
as	feet	blistered	and	sharp	rocks	cut	into	tender	skin,	and	the	sun	raised	a
resisting	wall	of	blinding	heat	before	them.	Clawing	through	it	had	become	a
vicious,	enervating	struggle.
Where	others	among	the	squads	carried	children,	Bottle	found	himself
carrying	a	mother	rat	and	her	brood	of	pups,	the	former	perched	on	his
shoulder	and	the	latter	swathed	in	rags	in	the	crook	of	one	arm.	More	sordid
than	comic,	and	even	he	could	see	that,	but	he	would	not	relinquish	his	new…
allies.
Striding	at	Bottle’s	side	was	the	halfblood	Seti,	Koryk.	Freshly	adorned	in


human	finger	bones	and	not	much	else.	He’d	knotted	them	in	the	singed	strands
of	his	hair,	and	with	each	step	there	was	a	soft	clack	and	clatter,	the	music
grisly	to	Bottle’s	ears.
Koryk	carried	more	in	a	clay	pot	with	a	cracked	rim	that	he’d	found	in	the
pit	of	a	looted	grave.	No	doubt	he	planned	on	distributing	them	to	the	other
soldiers.	As	soon	as	we’ve	found	enough	clothes	to	wear.
He	caught	a	skittering	sound	off	among	the	withered	scrub	to	his	left.
Those	damned	lizard	skeletons.	Chasing	down	my	scouts.	He	wondered	to
whom	they	belonged.	Reasonable	to	assume	they	were	death-aspected,	which
possibly	made	them	servants	of	Hood.	He	knew	of	no	mages	among	the	squads
who	used	Hood’s	Warren	–	then	again	those	who	did	rarely	advertised	the	fact.
Maybe	that	healer,	Deadsmell,	but	why	would	he	want	familiars	now?	He	sure
didn’t	have	them	down	in	the	tunnels.	Besides,	you’d	need	to	be	a	powerful
mage	or	priest	to	be	able	to	conjure	up	and	bind	two	familiars.	No,	not
Deadsmell.	Who,	then?
Quick	Ben.	That	wizard	had	far	too	many	warrens	swirling	round	him.
Fiddler	had	vowed	to	drag	Bottle	up	to	the	man,	and	that	was	an	introduction
Bottle	had	no	desire	to	make.	Fortunately,	the	sergeant	seemed	to	have
forgotten	his	squad,	caught	up	as	he	was	in	this	sordid	reunion	of	old-timers.
‘Hungry	enough	yet?’	Koryk	asked.
Startled,	Bottle	glanced	over	at	the	man.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Skewered	pinkies	to	start,	then	braised	rat	–	it’s	why	you’ve	brought	them
along,	isn’t	it?’
‘You’re	sick.’
Just	ahead,	Smiles	turned	to	fling	back	a	nasty	laugh.	‘Good	one.	You	can
stop	now,	Koryk	–	you’ve	reached	your	quota	for	the	year.	Besides,	Bottle	ain’t
gonna	eat	them	rats.	He’s	married	the	momma	and	adopted	the	whelps	–	you
missed	the	ceremony,	Koryk,	when	you	was	off	hunting	bones.	Too	bad,	we	all
cried.’
‘We	missed	our	chance,’	Koryk	said	to	Bottle.	‘We	could’ve	beat	her
unconscious	and	left	her	in	the	tunnels.’
A	good	sign.	Things	are	getting	back	to	normal.	Everything	except	the
haunted	look	in	the	eyes.	It	was	there,	in	every	soldier	who’d	gone	through	the
buried	bones	of	Y’Ghatan.	Some	cultures,	he	knew,	used	a	ritual	of	burial	and
resurrection	to	mark	a	rite	of	passage.	But	if	this	was	a	rebirth,	it	was	a	dour
one.	They’d	not	emerged	innocent,	or	cleansed.	If	anything,	the	burdens
seemed	heavier.	The	elation	of	having	survived,	of	having	slipped	out	from	the
shadow	of	Hood’s	Gates,	had	proved	woefully	shortlived.
It	should	have	felt…different.	Something	was	missing.	The	Bridgeburners


had	been	forged	by	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku	–	so	for	us,	wasn’t	Y’Ghatan
enough?	It	seemed	that,	for	these	soldiers	here,	the	tempering	had	gone	too	far,
creating	something	pitted	and	brittle,	as	if	one	more	blow	would	shatter	them.
Up	ahead,	the	captain	called	out	a	halt,	her	voice	eliciting	a	chorus	of
curses	and	groans	of	relief.	Although	there	was	no	shade	to	be	found,	walking
through	this	furnace	was	far	worse	than	sitting	by	the	roadside	easing	burnt,
cut	and	blistered	feet.	Bottle	stumbled	down	into	the	ditch	and	sat	on	a	boulder.
He	watched,	sweat	stinging	his	eyes,	as	Deadsmell	and	Lutes	moved	among	the
soldiers,	doing	what	they	could	to	heal	the	wounds.
‘Did	you	see	that	Red	Blade	captain?’	Smiles	asked,	crouching	nearby.
‘Looking	like	she’d	just	come	from	a	parade	ground.’
‘No	she	didn’t,’	Corporal	Tarr	said.	‘She’s	smoke-stained	and	scorched,
just	like	you’d	expect.’
‘Only	she’s	got	all	her	hair.’
‘So	that’s	what’s	got	you	snarly,’	Koryk	observed.	‘Poor	Smiles.	You	know
it	won’t	grow	back,	don’t	you?	Never.	You’re	bald	now	for	the	rest	of	your	life
—’
‘Liar.’
Hearing	the	sudden	doubt	in	her	voice,	Bottle	said,	‘Yes,	he	is.’
‘I	knew	that.	And	what’s	with	the	black-haired	woman	on	the	horse?
Anybody	here	know	who	she	is?’
‘Fiddler	recognized	her,’	Tarr	said.	‘A	Bridgeburner,	I’d	guess.’
‘She	makes	me	nervous,’	Smiles	said.	‘She’s	like	that	assassin,	Kalam.
Eager	to	kill	someone.’
I	suspect	you’re	right.	And	Fid	wasn’t	exactly	thrilled	to	see	her,	either.
Tarr	spoke:	‘Koryk,	when	you	going	to	share	those	finger	bones	you
collected?’
‘Want	yours	now?’
‘Aye,	I	do.’
	
Her	throat	parched,	her	skin	layered	in	sweat	even	as	shivers	rippled	through
her,	Hellian	stood	on	the	road.	Too	tired	to	walk,	too	sick	to	sit	down	–	she
feared	she’d	never	get	up	again,	just	curl	into	a	little	juddering	ball	until	the
ants	under	her	skin	finished	their	work	and	all	that	skin	just	peeled	away	like
deer	hide,	whereupon	they’d	all	march	off	with	it,	singing	songs	of	triumph	in
tiny	squeaking	voices.
It	was	the	drink,	she	knew.	Or,	rather,	the	lack	of	it.	The	world	around	her
was	too	sharp,	too	clear;	none	of	it	looked	right,	not	right	at	all.	Faces	revealed


too	many	details,	all	the	flaws	and	wrinkles	unveiled	for	the	first	time.	She	was
shocked	to	realize	that	she	wasn’t	the	oldest	soldier	there	barring	that	ogre
Cuttle.	Well,	that	was	the	one	good	thing	that	had	come	of	this	enforced
sobriety.	Now,	if	only	those	damned	faces	could	disappear	just	like	the
wrinkles	on	them,	then	she’d	be	happier.	No,	wait,	it	was	the	opposite,	wasn’t
it?	No	wonder	she	wasn’t	happy.
Ugly	people	in	an	ugly	world.	That’s	what	came	from	seeing	it	all	the	way
it	really	was.	Better	when	it	was	blurred	–	all	farther	away	back	then,	it	had
seemed,	so	far	away	she’d	not	noticed	the	stinks,	the	stains,	the	errant	hairs
rising	from	volcanic	pores,	the	miserable	opinions	and	suspicious
expressions,	the	whisperings	behind	her	back.
Turning,	Hellian	glared	down	at	her	two	corporals.	‘You	think	I	can’t	hear
you?	Now	be	quiet,	or	I’ll	rip	one	of	my	ears	off	and	won’t	you	two	feel	bad.’
Touchy	and	Brethless	exchanged	a	glance,	then	Touchy	said,	‘We	ain’t	said
nothing,	Sergeant.’
‘Nice	try.’
The	problem	was,	the	world	was	a	lot	bigger	than	she	had	ever	imagined.
More	crannies	for	spiders	than	a	mortal	could	count	in	a	thousand	lifetimes.
Just	look	around	for	proof	of	that.	And	it	wasn’t	just	spiders	any	more.	No,
here	there	were	flies	that	bit	and	the	bite	sank	an	egg	under	the	skin.	And	giant
grey	moths	that	fluttered	in	the	night	and	liked	eating	scabs	from	sores	when
you	were	sleeping.	Waking	up	to	soft	crunching	way	too	close	by.	Scorpions
that	split	into	two	when	you	stepped	on	them.	Fleas	that	rode	the	winds.	Worms
that	showed	up	in	the	corners	of	your	eyes	and	made	red	swirling	patterns
through	your	eyelids,	and	when	they	got	big	enough	they	crawled	out	your
nostrils.	Sand	ticks	and	leather	leeches,	flying	lizards	and	beetles	living	in
dung.
Her	entire	body	was	crawling	with	parasites	–	she	could	feel	them.	Tiny
ants	and	slithering	worms	under	her	skin,	burrowing	into	her	flesh,	eating	her
brain.	And,	now	that	the	sweet	taste	of	alcohol	was	gone,	they	all	wanted	out.
She	expected,	at	any	moment,	to	suddenly	erupt	all	over,	all	the	horrid
creatures	clambering	out	and	her	body	deflating	like	a	punctured	bladder.	Ten
thousand	wriggling	things,	all	desperate	for	a	drink.
‘I’m	going	to	find	him,’	she	said.	‘One	day.’
‘Who?’	Touchy	asked.
‘That	priest,	the	one	who	ran	away.	I’m	going	to	find	him,	and	I’m	going
to	tie	him	up	and	fill	his	body	with	worms.	Push	’em	into	his	mouth,	his	nose,
his	eyes	and	ears	and	other	places,	too.’
No,	she	wouldn’t	let	herself	explode.	Not	yet.	This	sack	of	skin	was	going


to	stay	intact.	She’d	make	a	deal	with	all	the	worms	and	ants,	some	kind	of	deal.
A	truce.	Who	said	you	can’t	reason	with	bugs?
‘It	sure	is	hot,’	Touchy	said.
Everyone	looked	at	him.
	
Gesler	scanned	the	soldiers	where	they	sat	or	sprawled	alongside	the	track.
What	the	fire	hadn’t	burned	the	sun	now	had.	Soldiers	on	the	march	wore	their
clothes	like	skin,	and	for	those	whose	skin	wasn’t	dark,	the	burnished	bronze
of	hands,	faces	and	necks	contrasted	sharply	with	pallid	arms,	legs	and	torsos.
But	what	had	once	been	pale	was	now	bright	red.	Among	all	those	lightskinned	soldiers	who’d	survived	Y’Ghatan,	Gesler	himself	was	the	only
exception.	The	golden	hue	of	his	skin	seemed	unaffected	by	this	scorching
desert	sun.
‘Gods,	these	people	need	clothes,’	he	said.
Beside	him,	Stormy	grunted.	About	the	extent	of	his	communication	lately,
ever	since	he’d	heard	of	Truth’s	death.
‘They’ll	start	blistering	soon,’	Gesler	went	on,	‘and	Deadsmell	and	Lutes
can	only	do	so	much.	We	got	to	catch	up	with	the	Fourteenth.’	He	turned	his
head,	squinted	towards	the	front	of	the	column.	Then	he	rose.	‘Ain’t	nobody
thinking	straight,	not	even	the	captain.’
Gesler	made	his	way	up	the	track.	He	approached	the	gathering	of	old
Bridgeburners.	‘We	been	missing	the	obvious,’	he	said.
‘Nothing	new	in	that,’	Fiddler	said,	looking	miserable.
Gesler	nodded	towards	Apsalar.	‘She’s	got	to	ride	ahead	and	halt	the	army.
She’s	got	to	get	’em	to	bring	us	horses,	and	clothes	and	armour	and	weapons.
And	water	and	food.	We	won’t	even	catch	up	otherwise.’
Apsalar	slowly	straightened,	brushing	dust	from	her	leggings.	‘I	can	do
that,’	she	said	in	a	quiet	voice.
Kalam	rose	and	faced	Captain	Faradan	Sort,	who	stood	nearby.	‘The
sergeant’s	right.	We	missed	the	obvious.’
‘Except	that	there	is	no	guarantee	that	anyone	will	believe	her,’	the	captain
replied	after	a	moment.	‘Perhaps,	if	one	of	us	borrowed	her	horse.’
Apsalar	frowned,	then	shrugged.	‘As	you	like.’
‘Who’s	our	best	rider?’	Kalam	asked.
‘Masan	Gilani,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Sure,	she’s	heavy	infantry,	but	still…’
Faradan	Sort	squinted	down	the	road.	‘Which	squad?’
‘Urb’s,	the	Thirteenth.’	Fiddler	pointed.	‘The	one	who’s	standing,	the	tall
one,	the	Dal	Honese.’


	
Masan	Gilani’s	elongated,	almond-shaped	eyes	narrowed	as	she	watched	the
old	soldiers	approaching.
‘You’re	in	trouble,’	Scant	said.	‘You	did	something,	Gilani,	and	now	they
want	your	blood.’
It	certainly	looked	that	way,	so	Masan	made	no	reply	to	Scant’s	words.	She
thought	back	over	all	of	the	things	she	had	done	of	late.	Plenty	to	consider,	but
none	came	to	mind	that	anyone	might	find	out	about,	not	after	all	this	time.
‘Hey,	Scant,’	she	said.
The	soldier	looked	up.	‘What?’
‘You	know	that	big	hook-blade	I	keep	with	my	gear?’
Scant’s	eyes	brightened.	‘Yes?’
‘You	can’t	have	it,’	she	said.	‘Saltlick	can	have	it.’
‘Thanks,	Masan,’	Saltlick	said.
‘I	always	knew,’	Hanno	said,	‘you	had	designs	on	Salty.	I	could	tell,	you
know.’
‘No	I	don’t,	I	just	don’t	like	Scant,	that’s	all.’
‘Why	don’t	you	like	me?’
‘I	just	don’t,	that’s	all.’
They	fell	silent	as	the	veterans	arrived.	Sergeant	Gesler,	his	eyes	on	Masan,
said,	‘We	need	you,	soldier.’
‘That’s	nice.’	She	noted	the	way	his	eyes	travelled	her	mostly	naked	frame,
lingering	on	her	bared	breasts	with	their	large,	dark	nipples,	before,	with	a
rapid	blinking,	he	met	her	eyes	once	more.
‘We	want	you	to	take	Apsalar ’s	horse	and	catch	up	with	the	Fourteenth.’
This	was	from	Sergeant	Strings	or	Fiddler	or	whatever	his	name	was	these
days.	It	seemed	Gesler	had	forgotten	how	to	talk.
‘That’s	it?’
‘Aye.’
‘All	right.	It’s	a	nice	horse.’
‘We	need	you	to	convince	the	Adjunct	we’re	actually	alive,’	Fiddler	went
on.	‘Then	get	her	to	send	us	mounts	and	supplies.’
‘All	right.’
The	woman	presumably	named	Apsalar	led	her	horse	forward	and	handed
Masan	Gilani	the	reins.
She	swung	up	into	the	saddle,	then	said,	‘Anybody	got	a	spare	knife	or
something?’
Apsalar	produced	one	from	beneath	her	cloak	and	passed	it	up	to	her.


Masan	Gilani’s	fine	brows	rose.	‘A	Kethra.	That	will	do.	I’ll	give	it	back	to
you	when	we	meet	up	again.’
Apsalar	nodded.
The	Dal	Honese	set	off.
	
‘Shouldn’t	take	long,’	Gesler	said,	watching	as	the	woman,	riding	clear	of	the
column,	urged	her	horse	into	a	canter.
‘We’ll	rest	for	a	while	longer	here,’	Faradan	Sort	said,	‘then	resume	our
march.’
‘We	could	just	wait,’	Fiddler	said.
The	captain	shook	her	head,	but	offered	no	explanation.
	
The	sun	settled	on	the	horizon,	bleeding	red	out	to	the	sides	like	blood	beneath
flayed	skin.	The	sky	overhead	was	raucous	with	sound	and	motion	as
thousands	of	birds	winged	southward.	They	were	high	up,	mere	black	specks,
flying	without	formation,	yet	their	cries	reached	down	in	a	chorus	of	terror.
To	the	north,	beyond	the	range	of	broken,	lifeless	hills	and	steppe-land
ribboned	by	seasonal	run-off,	the	plain	descended	to	form	a	white-crusted	salt
marsh,	beyond	which	lay	the	sea.	The	marsh	had	once	been	a	modest	plateau,
subsiding	over	millennia	as	underground	streams	and	springs	gnawed	through
the	limestone.	The	caves,	once	high	and	vast,	were	now	crushed	flat	or
partially	collapsed,	and	those	cramped	remnants	were	flooded	or	packed	with
silts,	sealing	in	darkness	the	walls	and	vaulted	ceilings	crowded	with	paintings,
and	side	chambers	still	home	to	the	fossilized	bones	of	Imass.
Surmounting	this	plateau	there	had	been	a	walled	settlement,	small	and
modest,	a	chaotic	array	of	attached	residences	that	would	have	housed	perhaps
twenty	families	at	the	height	of	its	occupation.	The	defensive	walls	were	solid,
with	no	gates,	and	for	the	dwellers	within,	ingress	and	egress	came	via	the
rooftops	and	single-pole	ladders.
Yadeth	Garath,	the	first	human	city,	was	now	little	more	than	salt-rotted
rubble	swallowed	in	silts,	buried	deep	and	unseen	beneath	the	marsh.	No
history	beyond	the	countless	derivations	from	its	ancient	name	remained,	and
of	the	lives	and	deaths	and	tales	of	all	who	had	once	lived	there,	not	even	bones
survived.
Dejim	Nebrahl	recalled	the	fisher	folk	who	had	dwelt	upon	its	ruins,	living
in	their	squalid	huts	on	stilts,	plying	the	waters	in	their	round,	hide	boats,	and


walking	the	raised	wooden	platforms	that	crossed	the	natural	canals	wending
through	the	swamp.	They	were	not	descendants	of	Yadeth	Garath.	They	knew
nothing	of	what	swirled	beneath	the	black	silts,	and	this	itself	was	an
undeniable	truth,	that	memory	withered	and	died	in	the	end.	There	was	no
single	tree	of	life,	no	matter	how	unique	and	primary	this	Yadeth	Garath	–	no,
there	was	a	forest,	and	time	and	again,	a	tree,	its	bole	rotted	through,	toppled	to
swiftly	vanish	in	the	airless	muck.
Dejim	Nebrahl	recalled	those	fisher	folk,	the	way	their	blood	tasted	of	fish
and	molluscs,	dull	and	turgid	and	clouded	with	stupidity.	If	man	and	woman
cannot	–	will	not	–	remember,	then	they	deserved	all	that	was	delivered	upon
them.	Death,	destruction	and	devastation.	This	was	no	god’s	judgement	–	it	was
the	world’s,	nature’s	own.	Exacted	in	that	conspiracy	of	indifference	that	so
terrified	and	baffled	humankind.
Lands	subside.	Waters	rush	in.	The	rains	come,	then	never	come.	Forests
die,	rise	again,	then	die	once	more.	Men	and	women	huddle	with	their	broods
in	dark	rooms	in	all	their	belated	begging,	and	their	eyes	fill	with	dumb
failure,	and	now	they	are	crumbled	specks	of	grey	and	white	in	black	silt,
motionless	as	the	memory	of	stars	in	a	long-dead	night	sky.
Exacting	nature’s	judgement,	such	was	Dejim	Nebrahl’s	purpose.	For	the
forgetful,	their	very	shadows	stalk	them.	For	the	forgetful,	death	ever	arrives
unexpectedly.
The	T’rolbarahl	had	returned	to	the	site	of	Yadeth	Garath,	as	if	drawn	by
some	desperate	instinct.	Dejim	Nebrahl	was	starving.	Since	his	clash	with	the
mage	near	the	caravan,	his	wanderings	had	taken	him	through	lands	foul	with
rotted	death.	Nothing	but	bloated,	blackened	corpses,	redolent	with	disease.
Such	things	could	not	feed	him.
The	intelligence	within	the	D’ivers	had	succumbed	to	visceral	urgency,	a
terrible	geas	that	drove	him	onward	on	the	path	of	old	memories,	of	places
where	he	had	once	fed,	the	blood	hot	and	fresh	pouring	down	his	throats.
Kanarbar	Belid,	now	nothing	but	dust.	Vithan	Taur,	the	great	city	in	the
cliff-face	–	now	even	the	cliff	was	gone.	A	swath	of	potsherds	reduced	to
gravel	was	all	that	remained	of	Minikenar,	once	a	thriving	city	on	the	banks	of
a	river	now	extinct.	The	string	of	villages	north	of	Minikenar	revealed	no
signs	that	they	had	ever	existed.	Dejim	Nebrahl	had	begun	to	doubt	his	own
memories.
Driven	on,	across	the	gnawed	hills	and	into	the	fetid	marsh,	seeking	yet
another	village	of	fisher	folk.	But	he	had	been	too	thorough	the	last	time,	all
those	centuries	past,	and	none	had	come	to	take	the	place	of	the	slaughtered.
Perhaps	some	dark	recollection	held	true,	casting	a	haunted	pall	upon	the


swamp.	Perhaps	the	bubbling	gases	still	loosed	ancient	screams	and	shrieks
and	the	boatmen	from	the	isles,	passing	close,	made	warding	gestures	before
swinging	the	tiller	hard	about.
Fevered,	weakening,	Dejim	Nebrahl	wandered	the	rotted	landscape.
Until	a	faint	scent	reached	the	D’ivers.
Beast,	and	human.	Vibrant,	alive,	and	close.
The	T’rolbarahl,	five	shadow-thewed	creatures	of	nightmare,	lifted	heads
and	looked	south,	eyes	narrowing.	There,	just	beyond	the	hills,	on	the
crumbling	track	that	had	once	been	a	level	road	leading	to	Minikenar.	The
D’ivers	set	off,	as	dusk	settled	on	the	land.
	
Masan	Gilani	slowed	her	horse’s	canter	when	the	shadows	thickened	with	the
promise	of	night.	The	track	was	treacherous	with	loose	cobbles	and	narrow
gullies	formed	by	run-off.	It	had	been	years	since	she’d	last	ridden	wearing	so
little	–	nothing	more	than	a	wrap	about	her	hips	–	and	her	thoughts	travelled
far	back	to	her	life	on	the	Dal	Honese	plains.	She’d	carried	less	weight	back
then.	Tall,	lithe,	smooth-skinned	and	bright	with	innocence.	The	heaviness	of
her	full	breasts	and	the	swell	of	her	belly	and	hips	came	much	later,	after	the
two	children	she’d	left	behind	to	be	raised	by	her	mother	and	her	aunts	and
uncles.	It	was	the	right	of	all	adults,	man	or	woman,	to	take	the	path	of
wandering;	before	the	empire	conquered	the	Dal	Honese,	such	a	choice	had
been	rare	enough,	and	for	the	children,	raised	by	kin	on	all	sides,	their	health
tended	by	shamans,	midwives	and	shoulder-witches,	the	abandonment	of	a
parent	was	rarely	felt.
The	Malazan	Empire	had	changed	all	that,	of	course.	While	many	adults
among	the	tribes	stayed	put,	even	in	Masan	Gilani’s	time,	more	and	more	men
and	women	had	set	out	to	explore	the	world,	and	at	younger	ages.	Fewer
children	were	born;	mixed-bloods	were	more	common,	once	warriors
returned	home	with	new	husbands	or	wives,	and	new	ways	suffused	the	lives	of
the	Dal	Honese.	For	that	was	one	thing	that	had	not	changed	over	time	–	we
ever	return	home.	When	our	wandering	is	done.
She	missed	those	rich	grasslands	and	their	young,	fresh	winds.	The
heaving	clouds	of	the	coming	rains,	the	thunder	in	the	earth	as	wild	herds
passed	in	their	annual	migrations.	And	her	riding,	always	on	the	strong,	barely
tamed	crossbred	horses	of	the	Dal	Honese,	the	faint	streaks	of	their	zebra
heritage	as	subtle	on	their	hides	as	the	play	of	sunlight	on	reeds.	Beasts	as
likely	to	buck	as	gallop,	hungry	to	bite	with	pure	evil	in	their	red-rimmed	eyes.
Oh,	how	she	loved	those	horses.


Apsalar ’s	mount	was	a	far	finer	breed,	of	course.	Long-limbed	and
graceful,	and	Masan	Gilani	could	not	resist	admiring	the	play	of	sleek	muscles
beneath	her	and	the	intelligence	in	its	dark,	liquid	eyes.
The	horse	shied	suddenly	in	the	growing	gloom,	head	lifting.	Startled,
Masan	Gilani	reached	for	the	kethra	knife	she	had	slipped	into	a	fold	in	the
saddle.
Shadows	took	shape	on	all	sides,	lunged.	The	horse	reared,	screaming	as
blood	sprayed.
Masan	Gilani	rolled	backward	in	a	tight	somersault,	clearing	the	rump	of
the	staggering	beast	and	landing	lightly	in	a	half-crouch.	Slashing	the	heavy
knife	to	her	right	as	a	midnight-limbed	creature	rushed	her.	She	felt	the	blade
cut	deep,	scoring	across	two	out-thrust	forelimbs.	A	bestial	cry	of	pain,	then
the	thing	reared	back,	dropping	to	all	fours	–	and	stumbling	on	those	crippled
forelimbs.
Reversing	grip,	she	leapt	to	close	on	the	apparition,	and	drove	the	knife
down	into	the	back	of	its	scaled,	feline	neck.	The	beast	collapsed,	sagging
against	her	shins.
A	heavy	sound	to	her	left,	as	the	horse	fell	onto	its	side,	four	more	of	the
demons	tearing	into	it.	Legs	kicked	spasmodically,	then	swung	upward	as	the
horse	was	rolled	onto	its	back,	exposing	its	belly.	Terrible	snarling	sounds
accompanied	the	savage	evisceration.
Leaping	over	the	dead	demon,	Masan	Gilani	ran	into	the	darkness.
A	demon	pursued	her.
It	was	too	fast.	Footfalls	sounded	close	behind	her,	then	ceased.
She	threw	herself	down	into	a	hard,	bruising	roll,	saw	the	blur	of	the
demon’s	long	body	pass	over	her.	Masan	Gilani	slashed	out	with	the	knife,
cutting	through	a	tendon	on	the	creature’s	right	back	leg.
It	shrieked,	careening	in	mid-air,	the	cut-through	leg	folding	beneath	its
haunches	as	it	landed	and	its	hips	twisting	round	with	the	momentum.
Masan	Gilani	flung	the	knife.	The	weighted	blade	struck	its	shoulder,	point
and	edge	slicing	through	muscle	to	caroom	off	the	scapula	and	spin	into	the
night.
Regaining	her	feet,	the	Dal	Honese	plunged	after	it,	launching	herself	over
the	spitting	beast.
Talons	raked	down	her	left	thigh,	pitching	her	round,	off-balance.	She
landed	awkwardly	against	a	slope	of	stones,	the	impact	numbing	her	left
shoulder.	Sliding	downward,	back	towards	the	demon,	Masan	dug	her	feet	into
the	slope’s	side,	then	scrambled	up	the	incline,	flinging	out	handfuls	of	sand
and	gravel	into	her	wake.


A	sharp	edge	sliced	along	the	back	of	her	left	hand,	down	to	the	bone	–
she’d	found	the	kethra,	lying	on	the	slope.	Grasping	the	grip	with	suddenly
slick	fingers,	Masan	Gilani	continued	her	desperate	clamber	upward.
Another	leap	from	behind	brought	the	demon	close,	but	it	slid	back	down,
spitting	and	hissing	as	the	bank	sagged	in	a	clatter	of	stones	and	dust.
Reaching	the	crest,	Masan	pulled	herself	onto	her	feet,	then	ran,	half-blind
in	the	darkness.	She	heard	the	demon	make	another	attempt,	followed	by
another	shower	of	sliding	stones	and	rubble.	Ahead	she	could	make	out	a	gully
of	some	sort,	high-walled	and	narrow.	Two	strides	from	it,	she	threw	herself	to
the	ground	in	response	to	a	deafening	howl	that	tore	through	the	night.
Another	howl	answered	it,	reverberating	among	the	crags,	a	sound	like	a
thousand	souls	plunging	into	the	Abyss.	Gelid	terror	froze	Masan	Gilani’s
limbs,	drained	from	her	all	strength,	all	will.	She	lay	in	the	grit,	her	gasps
puffing	tiny	clouds	of	dust	before	her	face,	her	eyes	wide	and	seeing	nothing
but	the	scatter	of	rocks	marking	the	gully’s	fan.
From	somewhere	beyond	the	slope,	down	where	her	horse	had	died,	came
the	sound	of	hissing,	rising	from	three,	perhaps	four	throats.	Something	in
those	eerie,	almost-human	voices	whispered	terror	and	panic.
A	third	howl	filled	the	dark,	coming	from	somewhere	to	the	south,	close
enough	to	rattle	her	sanity.	She	found	her	forearms	reaching	out,	her	right
hand	clawing	furrows	in	the	scree,	the	kethra	knife	still	gripped	tight	as	she
could	manage	with	her	blood-smeared	left	hand.
Not	wolves.	Gods	below,	the	throats	that	loosed	those	howls—
A	sudden	heavy	gusting	sound,	to	her	right,	too	close.	She	twisted	her	head
round,	the	motion	involuntary,	and	cold	seeped	down	through	her	paralysed
body	as	if	sinking	roots	into	the	hard	ground.	A	wolf	but	not	a	wolf,	padding
down	a	steep	slope	to	land	silent	on	the	same	broad	ledge	Masan	Gilani	was
lying	on	–	a	wolf,	but	huge,	as	big	as	a	Dal	Honese	horse,	deep	grey	or	black	–
there	was	no	way	to	be	certain.	It	paused,	stood	motionless	for	a	moment	in	full
profile,	its	attention	clearly	fixed	on	something	ahead,	down	on	the	road.
Then	the	massive	beast’s	head	swung	round,	and	Masan	Gilani	found
herself	staring	into	lambent,	amber	eyes,	like	twin	pits	into	madness.
Her	heart	stopped	in	her	chest.	She	could	not	draw	breath,	could	not	pull
her	gaze	from	that	creature’s	deathly	regard.
Then,	a	slow	–	so	very	slow	–	closing	of	those	eyes,	down	to	the	thinnest
slits	–	and	the	head	swung	back.
The	beast	padded	towards	the	crest.	Stared	down	for	a	time,	then	slipped
down	over	the	edge.	And	vanished	from	sight.
Sudden	air	flooded	her	lungs,	thick	with	dust.	She	coughed	–	impossible


not	to	–	twisting	round	into	a	ball,	hacking	and	gagging,	spitting	out	gobs	of
gritty	phlegm.	Helpless,	giving	herself	–	giving	everything	–	away.	Still
coughing,	Masan	Gilani	waited	for	the	beast	to	return,	to	pick	her	up	in	its
huge	jaws,	to	shake	her	once,	hard,	hard	enough	to	snap	her	neck,	her	spine,	to
crunch	down	on	her	ribcage,	crushing	everything	inside.
She	slowly	regained	control	of	her	breathing,	still	lying	on	sweat-soaked
ground,	shivers	rippling	through	her.
From	somewhere	far	overhead,	in	that	dark	sky,	she	heard	birds,	crying
out.	A	thousand	voices,	ten	thousand.	She	did	not	know	that	birds	flew	at	night.
Celestial	voices,	winging	south	as	fast	as	unseen	wings	could	take	them.
Closer	by…no	sound	at	all.
Masan	Gilani	rolled	onto	her	back,	stared	unseeing	upward,	feeling	blood
streaming	down	her	slashed	thigh.	Wait	till	Saltlick	and	the	rest	hear	about	this
one…
	
Dejim	Nebrahl	raced	through	the	darkness,	three	beasts	in	full	flight,	a	fourth
limping	in	their	wake,	already	far	behind.	Too	weak,	made	mindless	with
hunger,	all	cunning	lost,	and	now	yet	one	more	D’ivers	kin	was	dead.	Killed
effortlessly	by	a	mere	human,	who	then	crippled	another	with	a	lazy	flick	of
that	knife.
The	T’rolbarahl	needed	to	feed.	The	horse’s	blood	had	barely	begun	to
slake	a	depthless	thirst,	yet	with	it	came	a	whisper	of	strength,	a	return	to	sanity.
Dejim	Nebrahl	was	being	hunted.	An	outrage,	that	such	a	thing	could	be.
The	stench	of	the	creatures	rode	the	wind,	seeming	to	gust	in	from	all	sides
except	directly	ahead.	Fierce,	ancient	life	and	deadly	desire,	bitter	to	the
T’rolbarahl’s	senses.	What	manner	of	beasts	were	these?
The	fourth	kin,	lagging	half	a	league	behind	now,	could	feel	the	nearness
of	the	pursuers,	loping	unseen,	seemingly	content	to	keep	pace,	almost
uninterested	in	closing,	in	finishing	off	this	wounded	D’ivers.	They	had
announced	themselves	with	their	howls,	but	since	then,	naught	but	silence,	and
the	palpable	nearness	of	their	presence.
They	were	but	toying	with	Dejim	Nebrahl.	A	truth	that	infuriated	the
T’rolbarahl,	that	burned	like	acid	through	their	thumping	hearts.	Were	they
fully	healed,	and	seven	once	again	rather	than	three	and	scant	more,	those
creatures	would	know	terror	and	pain.	Even	now,	Dejim	Nebrahl	contemplated
laying	an	ambush,	using	the	wounded	kin	as	bait.	But	the	risks	were	too	great	–
there	was	no	telling	how	many	of	these	hunters	were	out	there.
And	so	there	was	little	choice.	Flee,	desperate	as	hares,	helpless	in	this


absurd	game.
For	the	first	three	kin,	the	scent	of	the	hunters	had	begun	to	fade.	It	was	true
–	few	creatures	could	keep	pace	with	Dejim	Nebrahl	for	very	long.	It	seemed,
then,	that	they	would	content	themselves	with	the	crippled	trailer,	giving	the
D’ivers	an	opportunity	to	see	them	for	the	first	time,	to	mark	them	for	the
others,	until	such	time	as	vengeance	could	be	exacted.
And	yet,	the	mysterious	beasts	did	not	lunge	into	view,	did	not	tear	into	the
fourth	kin.	And	even	for	that	one,	the	scent	was	fading.
It	made	no	sense.
Dejim	Nebrahl	slowed	his	flight,	wondering,	curious,	and	not	yet	in	the
least	suspicious.

From	cool	relief	to	growing	chill,	the	night	descended	among	the	trudging
soldiers,	raising	a	mutter	of	new	complaints.	A	sleeping	child	in	his	arms,
Fiddler	walked	two	strides	behind	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben,	while	in	his	wake
strode	Apsalar,	her	footfalls	the	barest	of	whispers.
Better	than	scorching	sun	and	heat…but	not	much	better.	Burnt	and
blistered	skin	on	shoulders	now	radiated	away	all	the	warmth	the	flesh	could
create.	Among	the	worst	afflicted,	fever	awoke	like	a	child	lost	in	the	woods,
filling	shadows	with	apparitions.	Twice	in	the	past	hundred	paces	one	of	the
soldiers	had	cried	out	in	fear	–	seeing	great	moving	shapes	out	in	the	night.
Lumbering,	swaggering,	with	eyes	flashing	like	embers	the	hue	of	murky
blood.	Or	so	Mayfly	had	said,	surprising	everyone	with	the	poetic	turn	of
phrase.
But	like	the	monsters	conjured	from	the	imaginations	of	frightened	babes,
they	never	came	closer,	never	quite	revealed	themselves.	Both	Mayfly	and	Galt
swore	that	they	had	seen…something.	Moving	parallel	with	the	column,	but
quicker,	and	soon	past.	Fevered	minds,	Fiddler	told	himself	again,	that	and
nothing	more.
Yet,	he	felt	in	himself	a	growing	unease.	As	if	they	did	indeed	have
company	along	this	broken	track,	out	there	in	the	darkness,	among	the	trenches
and	gullies	and	jumbled	rockfalls.	A	short	time	earlier	he’d	thought	he	had
heard	voices,	distant	and	seeming	to	descend	from	the	night	sky,	but	that	had
since	faded.	Nonetheless,	his	nerves	were	growing	frayed	–	likely	weariness,
likely	an	awakening	fever	within	his	own	mind.
Ahead,	Quick	Ben’s	head	suddenly	turned,	stared	out	to	the	right,	scanned
the	darkness.


‘Something?’	Fiddler	asked	in	a	low	voice.
The	wizard	glanced	back	at	him,	then	away	again,	and	said	nothing.
Ten	paces	later,	Fiddler	saw	Kalam	loosen	the	long-knives	in	their
scabbards.
Shit.
He	dropped	back	until	he	was	alongside	Apsalar,	and	was	about	to	speak
when	she	cut	him	off.
‘Be	on	your	guard,	sapper,’	she	said	quietly.	‘I	believe	we	have	nothing	to
fear…but	I	cannot	be	certain.’
‘What’s	out	there?’	he	demanded.
‘Part	of	a	bargain.’
‘What	is	that	supposed	to	mean?’
She	suddenly	lifted	her	head,	as	if	testing	the	wind,	and	her	voice	hardened
as	she	said	in	a	loud	voice,	‘Everyone	off	the	road	–	south	side	only	–	now.’
At	the	command,	thin	fear	whispered	along	the	ancient	road.	Unarmed,
unarmoured	–	this	was	a	soldier ’s	worst	nightmare.	Crouching	down,	huddling
in	the	shadows,	eyes	wide	and	unblinking,	breaths	drawing	still,	the	Malazans
strained	for	any	telltale	sound	in	the	darkness	beyond.
Staying	low	to	the	ground,	Fiddler	made	his	way	along	to	rejoin	his	squad.
If	something	was	coming	for	them,	better	he	died	with	his	soldiers.	As	he
scrabbled	he	sensed	a	presence	catching	up	from	behind,	and	turned	to	see
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.	The	warrior	held	a	solid,	club-like	piece	of	wood,
too	thick	to	be	a	branch,	more	like	a	tap-root	from	some	ancient	guldindha.
‘Where	did	you	find	that?’	Fiddler	demanded	in	a	hiss.
A	shrug	was	the	only	answer.
Reaching	his	squad,	the	sergeant	halted	and	Bottle	crawled	over	to	him.
‘Demons,’	the	soldier	whispered,	‘out	there—’	a	jerk	of	the	head	indicated	the
north	side	of	the	road.	‘At	first	I	thought	it	was	the	pall	of	evil	offshore,	the	one
that	flushed	the	birds	from	the	salt-marshes	beyond	the	bay—’
‘The	pall	of	what?’	Fiddler	asked.
‘But	it	wasn’t	that.	Something	a	lot	closer.	Had	a	rhizan	wheeling	round	out
there	–	it	came	close	to	a	beast.	A	damned	big	beast,	Sergeant.	Halfway	between
wolf	and	bear,	only	the	size	of	a	bull	bhederin.	It	was	headed	west—’
‘You	still	linked	to	that	rhizan,	Bottle?’
‘No,	it	was	hungry	enough	to	break	loose	–	I’m	not	quite	recovered,
Sergeant—’
‘Never	mind.	It	was	a	good	try.	So,	the	bear-wolf	or	wolf-bhederin	was
heading	west…’
‘Aye,	not	fifty	paces	across	from	us	–	no	way	it	didn’t	know	we	were	here,’


Bottle	said.	‘It’s	not	like	we	was	sneaking	along,	was	it?’
‘So	it	ain’t	interested	in	us.’
‘Maybe	not	yet,	Sergeant.’
‘What	do	you	mean	by	that?’
‘Well,	I’d	sent	a	capemoth	ahead	of	us	up	the	road,	used	it	to	test	the	air	–
they	can	sense	things	when	those	things	are	moving,	stirring	the	air,	giving	off
heat	into	the	night	–	that	heat	is	sometimes	visible	from	a	long	way	away,
especially	the	colder	the	night	gets.	Capemoths	need	all	that	to	avoid	rhizan,
although	it	doesn’t	always—’
‘Bottle,	I	ain’t	no	naturalist	–	what	did	you	see	or	sense	or	hear	or
whatever	through	that	damned	capemoth?’
‘Well,	creatures	up	ahead,	closing	fast—’
‘Oh,	thanks	for	that	minor	detail,	Bottle!	Glad	you	finally	got	round	to	it!’
‘Shh,	uh,	Sergeant.	Please.	I	think	we	should	just	lie	low	–	whatever ’s	about
to	happen’s	got	nothing	to	do	with	us.’
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	spoke:	‘Are	you	certain	of	that?’
‘Well,	no,	but	it	stands	to	reason—’
‘Unless	they’re	all	working	together,	closing	a	trap—’
‘Sergeant,’	Bottle	said,	‘we	ain’t	that	important.’
‘Maybe	you	ain’t,	but	we	got	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben,	and	Sinn	and	Apsalar
—’
‘I	don’t	know	much	about	them,	Sergeant,’	Bottle	said,	‘but	you	might	want
to	warn	them	what’s	coming,	if	they	don’t	know	already.’
If	Quick	hasn’t	smelled	all	this	out	he	deserves	to	get	his	tiny	head	ripped
off.	‘Never	mind	them.’	Twisting	round,	Fiddler	squinted	into	the	darkness
south	of	them.	‘Any	chance	of	moving	to	better	cover?	This	ditch	ain’t	worth	a
damned	thing.’
‘Sergeant,’	Bottle	hissed,	his	voice	tightening,	‘we	ain’t	got	time.’
	
Ten	paces	apart	and	moving	now	parallel	along	the	route	of	the	old	road,	one
taking	the	centre	of	the	track,	the	flankers	in	the	rough	ditches	to	either	side,
Dejim	Nebrahl	glided	low	to	the	ground,	tipped	leathery	ears	pricked	forward,
eyes	scanning	the	way	ahead.
Something	wasn’t	right.	Half	a	league	behind	the	three	the	fourth	kin
limped	along,	weak	with	blood-loss	and	exhausted	by	fear,	and	if	the	hunters
remained	close,	they	were	now	stalking	in	absolute	silence.	The	kin	halted,
sinking	low,	head	swivelling	as	its	sharp	eyes	searched	the	night.	Nothing,	no
movement	beyond	the	flit	of	rhizan	and	capemoths.


The	three	on	the	road	caught	the	scent	of	humans,	not	far,	and	savage
hunger	engulfed	all	other	thoughts.	They	stank	of	terror	–	it	would	taint	their
blood	when	he	drank	deep,	a	taste	metallic	and	sour,	a	flavour	Dejim	Nebrahl
had	grown	to	cherish.
Something	lumbered	onto	the	track	thirty	strides	ahead.
Huge,	black,	familiar.
Deragoth.	Impossible	–	they	were	gone,	swallowed	by	a	nightmare	of	their
own	making.	This	was	all	wrong.
A	sudden	howl	from	far	to	the	south,	well	behind	the	fourth	kin,	who	spun,
snarling	at	the	sound.
The	first	three	D’ivers	spread	out,	eyes	on	the	lone	beast	padding	towards
them.	If	but	one,	then	she	is	doomed—
The	beast	surged	forward	in	a	charge,	voicing	a	bellowing	roar.
Dejim	Nebrahl	sprinted	to	meet	it.
The	flanking	D’ivers	twisted	outward	as	more	huge	shapes	pounded	to
close	with	them,	two	to	each	side.	Jaws	spread	wide,	lips	peeling	back,	the
Deragoth	reached	Dejim	Nebrahl,	giving	voice	to	thunder.	Massive	canines
sank	down	into	the	kin,	slicing	through	muscle,	crushing	bone.	Limbs	snapped,
ribs	splintered	and	tore	into	view	through	ruptured	flesh	and	hide.
Pain	–	such	pain	–	the	centre	D’ivers	sprang	into	the	air	to	meet	the	charge
of	the	Deragoth	ahead.	And	his	right	leg	was	caught	in	huge	jaws,	jolting
Dejim	Nebrahl	to	a	halt	in	mid-flight.	Joints	popped	even	as	the	leg	bones	were
crunched	into	shards.
Flung	hard	to	the	ground,	Dejim	sought	to	spin	round,	talons	lashing	out	at
his	attacker ’s	broad	head.	He	tore	into	one	eye	and	ripped	it	loose,	sending	it
whirling	off	into	the	darkness.
The	Deragoth	flinched	back	with	a	squeal	of	agony.
Then	a	second	set	of	jaws	closed	round	the	back	of	the	kin’s	neck.	Blood
sprayed	as	the	teeth	ground	and	cut	inward,	crushing	cartilage,	then	bone.
Blood	filled	Dejim	Nebrahl’s	throat.
No,	it	cannot	end	like	this—
The	other	two	kin	were	dying	as	well,	as	the	Deragoth	tore	them	to	pieces.
Far	to	the	west,	the	lone	survivor	crouched,	trembling.
The	Hounds	attacked,	three	appearing	in	front	of	the	last	D’ivers.	Moments
before	they	closed,	all	three	twisted	away	–	a	feint	–	which	meant—
Wolf	jaws	ripped	into	the	back	of	Dejim	Nebrahl’s	neck,	and	lifted	the
D’ivers	from	the	ground.
The	T’rolbarahl	waited	for	the	clenching,	the	killing,	but	it	never	came.
Instead,	the	beast	that	held	it	was	running	fast	over	the	ground,	others	of	its


kind	to	either	side.	West,	and	north,	then,	eventually,	swinging	southward,	out
into	the	wastes.
Untiring,	on	and	on	through	the	cold	night.
Helpless	in	the	grip	of	those	jaws,	the	last	D’ivers	of	Dejim	Nebrahl	did
not	struggle,	for	struggle	was	pointless.	There	would	be	no	quick	death,	for
these	creatures	had	some	other	purpose	in	mind	for	him.	Unlike	the	Deragoth,
he	realized,	these	Hounds	possessed	a	master.
A	master	who	found	reason	to	keep	Dejim	Nebrahl	alive.
A	curious,	fraught	salvation	–	but	I	still	live,	and	that	is	enough.	I	still	live.
	
The	fierce	battle	was	over.	Kalam,	lying	near	Quick	Ben,	narrowed	his	gaze,
just	barely	making	out	the	huge	shapes	of	the	demons	as	they	set	off,	without	a
backward	glance,	westward	along	the	track.
‘Looks	like	their	hunt’s	not	yet	over,’	the	assassin	muttered,	reaching	up	to
wipe	the	sweat	that	had	been	stinging	his	eyes.
‘Gods	below,’	Quick	Ben	said	in	a	whisper.
‘Did	you	hear	those	distant	howls?’	Kalam	asked,	sitting	up.	‘Hounds	of
Shadow	–	I’m	right,	aren’t	I,	Quick?	So,	we	got	lizard	cats,	and	giant	beardogs	like	the	one	Toblakai	killed	in	Raraku,	and	the	Hounds…wizard,	I	don’t
want	to	walk	this	road	no	more.’
‘Gods	below,’	the	man	at	his	side	whispered	again.
	
Lieutenant	Pores’s	cheerful	embrace	with	the	Lady	went	sour	with	an	ambush
of	a	patrol	he’d	led	inland	from	the	marching	army,	three	days	west	of
Y’Ghatan.	Starving	bandits,	of	all	things.	They’d	beaten	them	off,	but	he	had
taken	a	crossbow	quarrel	clean	through	his	upper	left	arm,	and	a	sword-slash
just	above	his	right	knee,	deep	enough	to	sever	muscle	down	to	the	bone.	The
healers	had	mended	the	damage,	sufficient	to	roughly	knit	torn	flesh	and	close
scar	tissue	over	the	wounds,	but	the	pain	remained	excruciating.	He	had	been
convalescing	on	the	back	of	a	crowded	wagon,	until	they	came	within	sight	of
the	north	sea	and	the	army	encamped,	whereupon	Captain	Kindly	had	appeared.
Saying	nothing,	Kindly	had	clambered	into	the	bed	of	the	wagon,	grasped
Pores	by	his	good	arm,	and	dragged	him	from	the	pallet.	Down	off	the	back,
the	lieutenant	nearly	buckling	under	his	weak	leg,	then	staggering	and
stumbling	as	the	captain	tugged	him	along.
Gasping,	Pores	had	asked,	‘What’s	the	emergency,	Captain?	I	heard	no


alarms—’
‘Then	you	ain’t	been	listening,’	Kindly	replied.
Pores	looked	round,	somewhat	wildly,	but	he	could	see	no-one	else
rushing	about,	no	general	call	to	arms	–	the	camp	was	settling	down,	cookfires
lit	and	figures	huddled	beneath	rain-capes	against	the	chill	carried	on	the	sea
breeze.	‘Captain—’
‘My	officers	don’t	lie	about	plucking	nose	hairs,	Lieutenant.	There’s	real
injured	soldiers	in	those	wagons,	and	you’re	just	in	their	way.	Healers	are	done
with	you.	Time	to	stretch	out	that	bad	leg.	Time	to	be	a	soldier	again	–	stop
limping,	damn	you	–	you’re	setting	a	miserable	example	here,	Lieutenant.’
‘Sorry,	sir.’	Sodden	with	sweat,	Pores	struggled	to	keep	up	with	his	captain.
‘Might	I	ask,	where	are	we	going?’
‘To	look	at	the	sea,’	Kindly	replied.	‘Then	you’re	taking	charge	of	the
inland	pickets,	first	watch,	and	I	strongly	suggest	you	do	a	weapons	and
armour	inspection,	Lieutenant,	since	there	is	the	chance	that	I	will	take	a	walk
along	those	posts.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
Up	ahead,	on	a	rise	overlooking	the	grey,	white-capped	sea,	stood	the
Fourteenth’s	command.	The	Adjunct,	Nil	and	Nether,	Fists	Blistig,	Temul	and
Keneb,	and,	slightly	apart	and	wrapped	in	a	long	leather	cloak,	T’amber.	Just
behind	them	stood	Warleader	Gall	and	his	ancient	aide	Imrahl,	along	with
captains	Ruthan	Gudd	and	Madan’Tul	Rada.	The	only	one	missing	was	Fist
Tene	Baralta,	but	Pores	had	heard	that	the	man	was	still	in	a	bad	way,	onearmed	and	one-eyed,	his	face	ravaged	by	burning	oil,	and	he	didn’t	have
Kindly	in	charge	of	him	either,	which	meant	he	was	being	left	to	heal	in	peace.
Ruthan	Gudd	was	speaking	in	a	low	voice,	his	audience	Madan’Tul	Rada
and	the	two	Khundryl	warriors,	‘…just	fell	into	the	sea	–	those	breakers,	that
tumult	in	the	middle	of	the	bay,	that’s	where	the	citadel	stood.	A	tier	of	raised
land	surrounded	it	–	the	island	itself	–	and	there	was	a	causeway	linking	it	to
this	shore	–	nothing	left	of	that	but	those	pillars	just	topping	the	sands	above
the	tideline.	It’s	said	the	shattering	of	a	Jaghut	enclave	far	to	the	north	was
responsible—’
‘How	could	that	sink	this	island?’	Gall	demanded.	‘You	make	no	sense,
Captain.’
‘The	T’lan	Imass	broke	the	Jaghut	sorcery	–	the	ice	lost	its	power,	melted
into	the	seas,	and	the	water	levels	rose.	Enough	to	eat	into	the	island,	deluging
the	tier,	then	devouring	the	feet	of	the	citadel	itself.	In	any	case,	this	was
thousands	of	years	ago—’
‘Are	you	an	historian	as	well	as	a	soldier?’	the	Warleader	asked,	glancing


over,	his	tear-tattooed	face	bathed	red	like	a	mask	in	the	setting	sun’s	lurid
light.
The	captain	shrugged.	‘The	first	map	I	ever	saw	of	Seven	Cities	was	Falari,
a	sea-current	map	marking	out	the	treacherous	areas	along	this	coast	–	and
every	other	coastline,	all	the	way	to	Nemil.	It	had	been	copied	countless	times,
but	the	original	dated	from	the	days	when	the	only	metals	being	traded	were
tin,	copper,	lead	and	gold.	Falar ’s	trade	with	Seven	Cities	goes	back	a	long
way,	Warleader	Gall.	Which	makes	sense,	since	Falar	is	halfway	between	Quon
Tali	and	Seven	Cities.’
Captain	Kindly	observed,	‘It’s	odd,	Ruthan	Gudd,	you	do	not	look	Falari.
Nor	is	your	name	Falari.’
‘I	am	from	the	island	of	Strike,	Kindly,	which	lies	against	the	Outer	Reach
Deeps.	Strike	is	the	most	isolated	of	all	the	islands	in	the	chain,	and	our	legends
hold	that	we	are	all	that	remains	of	the	original	inhabitants	of	Falar	–	the	redand	gold-haired	folk	you	see	and	think	of	as	Falari	were	in	fact	invaders	from
the	eastern	ocean,	from	the	other	side	of	Seeker ’s	Deep,	or	some	unknown
islands	well	away	from	the	charted	courses	across	that	ocean.	They	themselves
do	not	even	recall	their	homelands,	and	most	of	them	believe	they	have	always
lived	in	Falar.	But	our	old	maps	show	different	names,	Strike	names	for	all	the
islands	and	the	kingdoms	and	peoples,	and	the	word	“Falar”	does	not	appear
among	them.’
If	the	Adjunct	and	her	retinue	were	speaking,	Pores	could	hear	nothing.
Ruthan	Gudd’s	words	and	the	stiff	wind	drowned	out	all	else.	The	lieutenant’s
leg	throbbed	with	pain;	there	was	no	angle	at	which	he	could	hold	his	injured
arm	comfortably.	And	now	he	was	chilled,	the	old	sweat	like	ice	against	his
skin,	thinking	only	of	the	warm	blankets	he	had	left	behind.
There	were	times,	he	reflected	morosely,	when	he	wanted	to	kill	Captain
Kindly.
	
Keneb	stared	out	at	the	heaving	waters	of	the	Kokakal	Sea.	The	Fourteenth	had
circumvented	Sotka	and	were	now	thirteen	leagues	west	of	the	city.	He	could
make	out	snatches	of	conversation	from	the	officers	behind	them,	but	the	wind
swept	enough	words	away	to	make	comprehension	a	chore,	and	likely	not
worth	the	effort.	Among	the	foremost	line	of	officers	and	mages,	no-one	had
spoken	in	some	time.
Weariness,	and,	perhaps,	the	end	of	this	dread,	miserable	chapter	in	the
history	of	the	Fourteenth.
They	had	pushed	hard	on	the	march,	first	west	and	then	northward.


Somewhere	in	the	seas	beyond	was	the	transport	fleet	and	its	escort	of
dromons.	Gods,	an	intercept	must	be	possible,	and	with	that,	these	battered
legions	could	get	off	this	plague-ridden	continent.
To	sail	away…but	where?
Back	home,	he	hoped.	Quon	Tali,	at	least	for	a	time.	To	regroup,	to	take	on
replacements.	To	spit	out	the	last	grains	of	sand	from	this	Hood-taken	land.	He
could	return	to	his	wife	and	children,	with	all	the	confusion	and	trepidation
such	a	reunion	would	entail.	There’d	been	too	many	mistakes	in	their	lives
together,	and	even	those	few	moments	of	redemption	had	been	tainted	and
bitter.	Minala.	His	sister-in-law,	who	had	done	what	so	many	victims	did,
hidden	away	her	hurts,	finding	normality	in	brutal	abuse,	and	had	come	to
believe	the	fault	lay	with	her,	rather	than	the	madman	she	had	married.
Killing	the	bastard	hadn’t	been	enough,	as	far	as	Keneb	was	concerned.
What	still	needed	to	be	expunged	was	a	deeper,	more	pervasive	rot,	the	knots
and	threads	all	bound	in	a	chaotic	web	that	defined	the	time	at	that	fell	garrison.
One	life	tied	to	every	other	by	invisible,	thrumming	threads,	unspoken	hurts
and	unanswered	expectations,	the	constant	deceits	and	conceits	–	it	had	taken	a
continent-wide	uprising	to	shatter	all	of	that.	And	we	are	not	mended.
Not	so	long	a	reach,	to	see	how	the	Adjunct	and	this	damned	army	was
bound	in	the	same	tangled	net,	the	legacies	of	betrayal,	the	hard,	almost
unbearable	truth	that	some	things	could	not	be	answered.
Broad-bellied	pots	crowding	market	stalls,	their	flanks	a	mass	of
intricately	painted	yellow	butterflies,	swarming	barely	seen	figures	and	all
sweeping	down	the	currents	of	a	silt-laden	river.	Scabbards	bearing	black
feathers.	A	painted	line	of	dogs	along	a	city	wall,	each	beast	linked	to	the	next
by	a	chain	of	bones.	Bazaars	selling	reliquaries	purportedly	containing
remnants	of	great	heroes	of	the	Seventh	Army.	Bult,	Lull,	Chenned	and	Duiker.
And,	of	course,	Coltaine	himself.
When	one’s	enemy	embraces	the	heroes	of	one’s	own	side,	one	feels
strangely…cheated,	as	if	the	theft	of	life	was	but	the	beginning,	and	now	the
legends	themselves	have	been	stolen	away,	transformed	in	ways	beyond
control.	But	Coltaine	belongs	to	us.	How	dare	you	do	this?	Such	sentiments,
sprung	free	from	the	dark	knot	in	his	soul,	made	no	real	sense.	Even	voicing
them	felt	awkward,	absurd.	The	dead	are	ever	refashioned,	for	they	have	no
defence	against	those	who	would	use	or	abuse	them	–	who	they	were,	what
their	deeds	meant.	And	this	was	the	anguish…this…injustice.
These	new	cults	with	their	grisly	icons,	they	did	nothing	to	honour	the
Chain	of	Dogs.	They	were	never	intended	to.	Instead,	they	seemed	to	Keneb
pathetic	efforts	to	force	a	link	with	past	greatness,	with	a	time	and	a	place	of


momentous	significance.	He	had	no	doubt	that	the	Last	Siege	of	Y’Ghatan
would	soon	acquire	similar	mythical	status,	and	he	hated	the	thought,	wanted	to
be	as	far	away	from	the	land	birthing	and	nurturing	such	blasphemies	as	was
possible.
Blistig	was	speaking	now:	‘These	are	ugly	waters	to	anchor	a	fleet,
Adjunct,	perhaps	we	could	move	on	a	few	leagues—’
‘No,’	she	said.
Blistig	glanced	at	Keneb.
‘The	weather	shall	turn,’	Nil	said.
A	child	with	lines	on	his	face.	This	is	the	true	legacy	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs.
Lines	on	his	face,	and	hands	stained	red.
And	Temul,	the	young	Wickan	commanding	resentful,	embittered	elders
who	still	dreamed	of	vengeance	against	the	slayers	of	Coltaine.	He	rode
Duiker ’s	horse,	a	lean	mare	with	eyes	that	Keneb	could	have	sworn	were	filled
with	sorrow.	Temul	carried	scrolls,	presumably	containing	the	historian’s	own
writings,	although	he	would	not	show	them	to	anyone.	This	warrior	of	so	few
years,	carrying	the	burden	of	memory,	carrying	the	last	months	of	life	in	an
old	man	once	soldier	among	the	Old	Guard	who	had,	inexplicably,	somehow
touched	this	Wickan	youth.	That	alone,	Keneb	suspected,	was	a	worthy	story,
but	it	would	remain	forever	untold,	for	Temul	alone	understood	it,	holding
within	himself	each	and	every	detail,	and	Temul	was	not	one	to	explain,	not	a
teller	of	stories.	No,	he	just	lives	them.	And	this	is	what	those	cultists	yearn	for,
for	themselves,	and	what	they	will	never	truly	possess.
Keneb	could	hear	nothing	of	the	huge	encampment	behind	him.	Yet	one
tent	in	particular	within	that	makeshift	city	dominated	his	mind.	The	man	within
it	had	not	spoken	in	days.	His	lone	eye	seemingly	stared	at	nothing.	What
remained	of	Tene	Baralta	had	been	healed,	at	least	insofar	as	flesh	and	bone
was	concerned.	The	man’s	spirit	was,	alas,	another	matter.	The	Red	Blade’s
homeland	had	not	been	kind	to	him.	Keneb	wondered	if	the	man	was	as	eager
to	leave	Seven	Cities	as	he	was.
Nether	said,	‘The	plague	is	growing	more	virulent.	The	Grey	Goddess
hunts	us.’
The	Adjunct’s	head	turned	at	that.
Blistig	cursed,	then	said,	‘Since	when	is	Poliel	eager	to	side	with	some
damned	rebels	–	she’s	already	killed	most	of	them,	hasn’t	she?’
‘I	do	not	understand	this	need,’	Nether	replied,	shaking	her	head.	‘But	it
seems	she	has	set	her	deathly	eyes	upon	Malazans.	She	hunts	us,	and	comes
ever	closer.’
Keneb	closed	his	eyes.	Haven’t	we	been	hurt	enough?


	
They	came	upon	the	dead	horse	shortly	after	dawn.	Amidst	the	swarm	of
capemoths	feeding	on	the	carcass	were	two	skeletal	lizards,	standing	on	their
hind	legs,	heads	ducking	and	darting	as	they	crunched	and	flayed	the	bird-sized
insects.
‘Hood’s	breath,’	Lostara	muttered,	‘what	are	those?’
‘Telorast	and	Curdle,’	Apsalar	replied.	‘Ghosts	bound	to	those	small
frames.	They	have	been	my	companions	for	some	time	now.’
Kalam	moved	closer	and	crouched	beside	the	horse.	‘Those	lizard	cats,’	he
said.	‘Came	in	from	all	sides.’	He	straightened,	scanning	the	rocks.	‘I	can’t
imagine	Masan	Gilani	surviving	the	ambush.’
‘You’d	be	wrong,’	said	a	voice	from	the	slope	to	their	right.
The	soldier	sat	on	the	crest,	legs	sprawled	down	the	slope.	One	of	those
legs	was	crimson	from	upper	thigh	to	the	cracked	leather	boot.	Masan	Gilani’s
dark	skin	was	ashen,	her	eyes	dull.	‘Can’t	stop	the	bleeding,	but	I	got	one	of	the
bastards	and	wounded	another.	Then	the	Hounds	came…’
Captain	Faradan	Sort	turned	to	the	column.	‘Deadsmell!	Up	front,	quick!’
‘Thank	you	for	the	knife,’	Masan	Gilani	said	to	Apsalar.
‘Keep	it,’	the	Kanese	woman	said.
‘Sorry	about	your	horse.’
‘So	am	I,	but	you	are	not	to	blame.’
Kalam	said,	‘Well,	it	seems	we’re	in	for	a	long	walk	after	all.’
	
Bottle	made	his	way	to	the	front	of	the	column	in	Deadsmell’s	wake,	close
enough	to	look	long	and	hard	at	the	two	bird-like	reptile	skeletons	perched	on
the	horse	carcass	and	intent	on	killing	capemoths.	He	watched	their	darting
movements,	the	flicking	of	their	bony	tails,	the	way	the	darkness	of	their	souls
bled	out	like	smoke	from	a	cracked	water-pipe.
Someone	came	to	his	side	and	he	glanced	over.	Fiddler,	the	man’s	blue
eyes	fixed	on	the	undead	creatures.	‘What	do	you	see,	Bottle?’
‘Sergeant?’
Fiddler	took	him	by	the	arm	and	pulled	him	off	to	one	side.	‘Out	with	it.’
‘Ghosts,	possessing	those	bound-up	bones.’
The	sergeant	nodded.	‘Apsalar	said	as	much.	Now,	what	kind	of	ghosts?’
Frowning,	Bottle	hesitated.
Fiddler	hissed	a	curse.	‘Bottle.’
‘Well,	I	was	assuming	she	knows,	only	has	her	reasons	for	not	mentioning


it,	so	I	was	thinking,	it	wouldn’t	be	polite—’
‘Soldier—’
‘I	mean,	she	was	a	squad-mate	of	yours,	and—’
‘A	squad-mate	who	just	happened	to	have	been	possessed	herself,	by	the
Rope,	almost	all	the	time	that	I	knew	her.	So	if	she’s	not	talking,	it’s	no
surprise.	Tell	me,	Bottle,	what	manner	of	flesh	did	those	souls	call	home?’
‘Are	you	saying	you	don’t	trust	her?’
‘I	don’t	even	trust	you.’
Frowning,	Bottle	looked	away,	watched	Deadsmell	working	on	Masan
Gilani	on	the	slope,	sensed	the	whisper	of	Denul	sorcery…and	something	like
Hood’s	own	breath.	The	bastard	is	a	necromancer,	damn	him!
‘Bottle.’
‘Sergeant?	Oh,	sorry.	I	was	just	wondering.’
‘Wondering	what?’
‘Well,	why	Apsalar	has	two	dragons	in	tow.’
‘They’re	not	dragons.	They’re	tiny	lizards—’
‘No,	Sergeant,	they’re	dragons.’
Slowly,	Fiddler ’s	eyes	widened.
Bottle’d	known	he	wouldn’t	like	it.


Chapter	Fourteen
There	is	something	profoundly	cynical,	my	friends,	in	the	notion	of
paradise	after	death.	The	lure	is	evasion.	The	promise	is	excusative.
One	need	not	accept	responsibility	for	the	world	as	it	is,	and	by
extension,	one	need	do	nothing	about	it.	To	strive	for	change,	for	true
goodness	in	this	mortal	world,	one	must	acknowledge	and	accept,
within	one’s	own	soul,	that	this	mortal	reality	has	purpose	in	itself,	that
its	greatest	value	is	not	for	us,	but	for	our	children	and	their	children.
To	view	life	as	but	a	quick	passage	along	a	foul,	tortured	path	–	made
foul	and	tortured	by	our	own	indifference	–	is	to	excuse	all	manner	of
misery	and	depravity,	and	to	exact	cruel	punishment	upon	the	innocent
lives	to	come.
I	defy	this	notion	of	paradise	beyond	the	gates	of	bone.	If	the	soul
truly	survives	the	passage,	then	it	behooves	us	–	each	of	us,	my	friends
–	to	nurture	a	faith	in	similitude:	what	awaits	us	is	a	reflection	of	what
we	leave	behind,	and	in	the	squandering	of	our	mortal	existence,	we
surrender	the	opportunity	to	learn	the	ways	of	goodness,	the	practice
of	sympathy,	empathy,	compassion	and	healing	–	all	passed	by	in	our
rush	to	arrive	at	a	place	of	glory	and	beauty,	a	place	we	did	not	earn,
and	most	certainly	do	not	deserve.
The	Apocryphal	Teachings	of	Tanno	Spiritwalker	Kimloc
The	Decade	in	Ehrlitan
Chaur	held	out	the	baby	as	if	to	begin	bouncing	it	on	one	knee,	but	Barathol
reached	out	to	rest	a	hand	on	the	huge	man’s	wrist.	The	blacksmith	shook	his
head.	‘Not	old	enough	for	that	yet.	Hold	her	close,	Chaur,	so	as	not	to	break
anything.’
The	man	answered	with	a	broad	smile	and	resumed	cuddling	and	rocking
the	swaddled	infant.
Barathol	Mekhar	leaned	back	in	his	chair,	stretching	out	his	legs,	and
briefly	closed	his	eyes,	making	a	point	of	not	listening	to	the	argument	in	the
side	room	where	the	woman,	Scillara,	resisted	the	combined	efforts	of	L’oric,


Nulliss,	Filiad	and	Urdan,	all	of	whom	insisted	she	accept	the	baby,	as	was	a
mother ’s	responsibility,	a	mother ’s	duty	and	a	host	of	other	guilt-laden	terms
they	flung	at	her	like	stones.	Barathol	could	not	recall	the	last	time	the	villagers
in	question	had	displayed	such	vehement	zeal	over	anything.	Of	course,	in	this
instance,	their	virtue	came	easy,	for	it	cost	them	nothing.
The	blacksmith	admitted	to	a	certain	admiration	for	the	woman.	Children
were	indeed	burdensome,	and	as	this	one	was	clearly	not	the	creation	of	love,
Scillara’s	lack	of	attachment	seemed	wholly	reasonable.	On	the	opposite	side,
the	ferocity	of	his	fellow	townsfolk	was	leaving	him	disgusted	and	vaguely
nauseous.
Hayrith	appeared	in	the	main	room,	moments	earlier	a	silent	witness	to	the
tirade	in	the	side	chamber	where	they’d	set	Scillara’s	cot.	The	old	woman
shook	her	head.	‘Idiots.	Pompous,	prattling	twits!	Just	listen	to	all	that	piety,
Barathol!	You’d	think	this	babe	was	the	Emperor	reborn!’
‘Gods	forbid,’	the	blacksmith	muttered.
‘Jessa	last	house	on	the	east	road,	she’s	got	that	year-old	runt	with	the
withered	legs	that	ain’t	gonna	make	it.	She’d	not	refuse	the	gift,	and	everyone
here	knows	it.’
Barathol	nodded,	somewhat	haphazardly,	his	mind	on	other	matters.
‘There’s	even	Jessa	second	floor	of	the	old	factor	house,	though	she	ain’t
had	any	milk	t’give	in	fifteen	years.	Still,	she’d	be	a	good	mother	and	this
village	could	use	a	wailing	child	to	help	drown	out	all	the	wailing	grown-ups.
Get	the	Jessas	together	on	this	and	it’ll	be	fine.’
‘It’s	L’oric,’	Barathol	said.
‘What’s	that?’
‘L’oric.	He’s	so	proper	he	burns	to	the	touch.	Or,	rather,	he	burns
everything	he	touches.’
‘Well,	it	ain’t	his	business,	is	it?’
‘People	like	him	make	everything	their	business,	Hayrith.’
The	woman	dragged	a	chair	close	and	sat	down	across	from	the
blacksmith.	She	studied	him	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘How	long	you	going	to
wait?’	she	asked.
‘As	soon	as	the	lad,	Cutter,	is	able	to	travel,’	Barathol	said.	He	rubbed	at	his
face.	‘Thank	the	gods	all	that	rum’s	drunk.	I’d	forgotten	what	it	does	to	a	man’s
gut.’
‘It	was	L’oric,	wasn’t	it?’
He	raised	his	brows.
‘Him	showing	up	here	didn’t	just	burn	you	–	it	left	you	scorched,	Barathol.
Seems	you	did	some	bad	things	in	the	past’	–	she	snorted	–	‘as	if	that	makes


you	different	from	all	the	rest	of	us.	But	you	figured	you	could	hide	out	here
for	ever,	and	now	you	know	that	ain’t	going	to	be.	Unless,	of	course,’	her	eyes
narrowed	to	slits,	‘you	kill	L’oric.’
The	blacksmith	glanced	over	at	Chaur,	who	was	making	faces	and	cooing
sounds	down	at	the	baby,	while	it	in	turn	seemed	to	be	blowing	bubbles,	as	yet
blissfully	unaware	of	the	sheer	ugliness	of	the	monstrous	face	hovering	over
it.	Barathol	sighed.	‘I’m	not	interested	in	killing	anyone,	Hayrith.’
‘So	you’re	going	with	these	people	here?’
‘As	far	as	the	coast,	yes.’
‘Once	L’oric	gets	word	out,	they’ll	start	hunting	you	again.	You	reach	the
coast,	Barathol,	you	find	the	first	ship	off	this	damned	continent,	is	what	you
do.	’Course,	I’ll	miss	you	–	the	only	man	with	more	than	half	a	brain	in	this
whole	town.	But	Hood	knows,	nothing	ever	lasts.’
They	both	looked	over	as	L’oric	appeared.	The	High	Mage’s	colour	was
up,	his	expression	one	of	baffled	disbelief.	‘I	just	don’t	understand	it,’	he	said.
Barathol	grunted.	‘It’s	not	for	you	to	understand.’
‘This	is	what	civilization	has	come	to,’	the	man	said,	crossing	his	arms	and
glaring	at	the	blacksmith.
‘You	got	that	right.’	Barathol	drew	his	legs	in	and	stood.	‘I	don’t	recall
Scillara	inviting	you	into	her	life.’
‘My	concern	is	with	the	child.’
The	blacksmith	began	walking	towards	the	side	chamber.	‘No	it	isn’t.	Your
obsession	is	with	propriety.	Your	version	of	it,	to	which	everyone	else	must
bend	a	knee.	Only,	Scillara’s	not	impressed.	She’s	too	smart	to	be	impressed.’
Entering	the	room,	Barathol	grasped	Nulliss	by	the	scruff	of	her	tunic.
‘You,’	he	said	in	a	growl,	‘and	the	rest	of	you,	get	out.’	He	guided	the	spitting,
cursing	Semk	woman	out	through	the	doorway,	then	stood	to	one	side
watching	the	others	crowd	up	in	their	eagerness	to	escape.
A	moment	later,	Barathol	and	Scillara	were	alone.	The	blacksmith	faced
her.	‘How	is	the	wound?’
She	scowled.	‘The	one	that’s	turned	my	arm	into	a	withered	stick	or	the	one
that’ll	make	me	walk	like	a	crab	for	the	rest	of	my	life?’
‘The	shoulder.	I	doubt	the	crab-walk	is	permanent.’
‘And	how	would	you	know?’
He	shrugged.	‘Every	woman	in	this	hamlet	has	dropped	a	babe	or	three,
and	they	walk	just	fine.’
She	eyed	him	with	suspicion.	‘You’re	the	one	called	Barathol.	The
blacksmith.’
‘Yes.’


‘The	mayor	of	this	pit	you	call	a	hamlet.’
‘Mayor?	I	don’t	think	we	warrant	a	mayor.	No,	I’m	just	the	biggest	and
meanest	man	living	here,	which	to	most	minds	counts	for	far	too	much.’
‘L’oric	says	you	betrayed	Aren.	That	you’re	responsible	for	the	death	of
thousands,	when	the	T’lan	Imass	came	to	crush	the	rebellion.’
‘We	all	have	our	bad	days,	Scillara.’
She	laughed.	A	rather	nasty	laugh.	‘Well,	thank	you	for	driving	those	fools
away.	Unless	you	plan	on	picking	up	where	they	left	off.’
He	shook	his	head.	‘I	have	some	questions	about	your	friends,	the	ones	you
were	travelling	with.	The	T’lan	Imass	ambushed	you	with	the	aim,	it	seems,	of
stealing	the	young	woman	named	Felisin	Younger.’
‘L’oric	said	as	much,’	Scillara	replied,	sitting	up	straighter	in	the	bed	and
wincing	with	the	effort.	‘She	wasn’t	important	to	anybody.	It	doesn’t	make
sense.	I	think	they	came	to	kill	Heboric	more	than	steal	her.’
‘She	was	the	adopted	daughter	of	Sha’ik.’
The	woman	shrugged,	winced	again.	‘A	lot	of	foundlings	in	Raraku	were.’
‘The	one	named	Cutter,	where	is	he	from	again?’
‘Darujhistan.’
‘Is	that	where	all	of	you	were	headed?’
Scillara	closed	her	eyes.	‘It	doesn’t	matter	now,	does	it?	Tell	me,	have	you
buried	Heboric?’
‘Yes,	he	was	Malazan,	wasn’t	he?	Besides,	out	here	we’ve	a	problem	with
wild	dogs,	wolves	and	the	like.’
‘Might	as	well	dig	him	up,	Barathol.	I	don’t	think	Cutter	will	settle	for
leaving	him	here.’
‘Why	not?’
Her	only	answer	was	a	shake	of	her	head.
Barathol	turned	back	to	the	doorway.	‘Sleep	well,	Scillara.	Like	it	or	not,
you’re	the	only	one	here	who	can	feed	your	little	girl.	Unless	we	can	convince
Jessa	last	house	on	the	east	road.	At	all	events,	she’ll	be	hungry	soon	enough.’
‘Hungry,’	the	woman	muttered	behind	him.	‘Like	a	cat	with	worms.’
In	the	main	room	the	High	Mage	had	taken	the	babe	from	Chaur ’s	arms.
The	huge	simpleton	sat	with	tears	streaming	down	his	pocked	face,	this	detail
unnoticed	by	L’oric	as	he	paced	with	the	fidgeting	infant	in	his	arms.
‘A	question,’	Barathol	said	to	L’oric,	‘how	old	do	they	have	to	get	before
you	lose	all	sympathy	for	them?’
The	High	Mage	frowned.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
Ignoring	him,	the	blacksmith	walked	over	to	Chaur.	‘You	and	me,’	he	said,
‘we	have	a	corpse	to	dig	up.	More	shovelling,	Chaur,	you	like	that.’


Chaur	nodded	and	managed	a	half-smile	through	his	tears	and	runny	nose.
Outside,	Barathol	led	the	man	to	the	smithy	where	they	collected	a	pick	and
a	shovel,	then	they	set	off	for	the	stony	plain	west	of	the	hamlet.	There’d	been
an	unseasonal	spatter	of	rain	the	night	before,	but	little	evidence	of	that
remained	after	a	morning	of	fiercely	hot	sunlight.	The	grave	was	beside	a	halffilled	pit	containing	the	remnants	of	the	horses	after	Urdan	had	finished
butchering	them.	He	had	been	told	to	burn	those	remains	but	had	clearly
forgotten.	Wolves,	coyotes	and	vultures	had	all	found	the	bones	and	viscera,
and	the	pit	now	swarmed	with	flies	and	maggots.	Twenty	paces	further	west,	the
now	bloated,	shapeless	carcass	of	the	toad	demon	lay	untouched	by	any
scavenger.
As	Chaur	bent	to	the	task	of	disinterring	Heboric’s	wrapped	corpse,
Barathol	stared	across	at	that	demon’s	misshapen	body.	The	now-stretched	hide
was	creased	with	white	lines,	as	if	it	had	begun	cracking.	From	this	distance
Barathol	could	not	be	certain,	but	it	seemed	there	was	a	black	stain	ringing	the
ground	beneath	the	carcass,	as	if	something	had	leaked	out.
‘I’ll	be	right	back,	Chaur.’
The	man	smiled.
As	the	blacksmith	drew	closer,	his	frown	deepened.	The	black	stain	was
dead	flies,	in	their	thousands.	As	unpalatable,	then,	this	demon	as	the	handless
man	had	been.	His	steps	slowed,	then	halted,	still	five	paces	from	the	grisly
form.	He’d	seen	it	move	–	there,	again,	something	pushing	up	against	the
blistered	hide	from	within.
And	then	a	voice	spoke	in	Barathol’s	head.
‘Impatience.	Please,	be	so	kind,	a	blade	slicing	with	utmost	caution,	this
infernal	hide.’
The	blacksmith	unsheathed	his	knife	and	stepped	forward.	Reaching	the
demon’s	side,	he	crouched	down	and	ran	the	finely	honed	edge	along	one	of
the	cracks	in	the	thick,	leathery	skin.	It	parted	suddenly	and	Barathol	leapt	back,
cursing,	as	a	gush	of	yellow	liquid	spurted	from	the	cut.
Something	like	a	hand,	then	forearm	and	elbow	pushed	through,	widening
the	slice,	and	moments	later	the	entire	beast	slithered	into	view,	four	eyes
blinking	in	the	bright	light.	Where	the	carcass	had	had	two	limbs	missing,	there
were	now	new	ones,	smaller	and	paler,	but	clearly	functional.	‘Hunger.	Have
you	food,	stranger?	Are	you	food?’
Sheathing	his	knife,	Barathol	turned	about	and	walked	back	to	where	Chaur
was	dragging	free	Heboric’s	body.	He	heard	the	demon	following.
The	blacksmith	reached	the	pick	he	had	left	beside	the	grave	pit	and
collected	the	tool,	turning	and	hefting	it	in	his	hands.	‘Something	tells	me,’	he


said	to	the	demon,	‘you’re	not	likely	to	grow	a	new	brain	once	I	drive	this	pick
through	your	skull.’
‘Exaggeration.	I	quake	with	terror,	stranger.	Amused.	Greyfrog	was	but
joking,	encouraged	by	your	expression	of	terror.’
‘Not	terror.	Disgust.’
The	demon’s	bizarre	eyes	swivelled	in	their	sockets	and	the	head	twitched
to	look	past	Barathol.	‘My	brother	has	come.	He	is	there,	I	sense	him.’
‘You’d	better	hurry,’	Barathol	said.	‘He’s	about	to	adopt	a	new	familiar.’
The	blacksmith	lowered	the	pick	and	glanced	over	at	Chaur.
The	huge	man	stood	over	the	wrapped	corpse	of	Heboric,	staring	with
wide	eyes	at	the	demon.
‘It’s	all	right,	Chaur,’	said	Barathol.	‘Now,	let’s	carry	the	dead	man	to	the
tailings	heap	back	of	the	smithy.’
Smiling	again,	the	huge	man	picked	up	Heboric’s	body.	The	stench	of
decaying	flesh	reached	Barathol.
Shrugging,	the	blacksmith	collected	the	shovel.
Greyfrog	set	off	in	a	loping	gait	towards	the	hamlet’s	main	street.
	
Dozing,	Scillara’s	eyes	snapped	open	as	an	exultant	voice	filled	her	mind.	‘Joy!
Dearest	Scillara,	time	of	vigil	is	at	an	end!	Stalwart	and	brave	Greyfrog	has
defended	your	sanctity,	and	the	brood	even	now	squirms	in	Brother	L’oric’s
arms!’
‘Greyfrog?	But	they	said	you	were	dead!	What	are	you	doing	talking	to
me?	You	never	talk	to	me!’
‘Female	with	brood	must	be	sheathed	with	silence.	All	slivers	and	darts	of
irritation	fended	off	by	noble	Greyfrog.	And	now,	happily,	I	am	free	to	infuse
your	sweet	self	with	my	undying	love!’
‘Gods	below,	is	this	what	the	others	had	to	put	up	with?’	She	reached	for
her	pipe	and	pouch	of	rustleaf.
A	moment	later	the	demon	squeezed	through	the	doorway,	followed	by
L’oric,	who	held	in	his	arms	the	babe.
Scowling,	Scillara	struck	spark	to	her	pipe.
‘The	child	is	hungry,’	L’oric	said.
‘Fine.	Maybe	that	will	ease	the	pressure	and	stop	this	damned	leaking.	Go
on,	give	me	the	little	leech.’
The	High	Mage	came	closer	and	handed	the	infant	over.	‘You	must
acknowledge	that	this	girl	belongs	to	you,	Scillara.’
‘Oh	she’s	mine	all	right.	I	can	tell	by	the	greedy	look	in	her	eyes.	For	the


sake	of	the	world,	you	should	pray,	L’oric,	that	all	she	has	of	her	father	is	the
blue	skin.’
‘You	know,	then,	who	that	man	was?’
‘Korbolo	Dom.’
‘Ah.	He	is,	I	believe,	still	alive.	A	guest	of	the	Empress.’
‘Do	you	think	I	care,	L’oric?	I	was	drowning	in	durhang.	If	not	for
Heboric,	I’d	still	be	one	of	Bidithal’s	butchered	acolytes.	Heboric…’	She
looked	down	at	the	babe	suckling	from	her	left	breast,	squinting	through	the
smoke	of	the	pipe.	Then	she	glared	up	at	L’oric.	‘And	now	some	damned	T’lan
Imass	have	killed	him	–	why?’
‘He	was	a	servant	of	Treach.	Scillara,	there	is	war	now	among	the	gods.
And	it	is	us	mortals	who	shall	pay	the	price	for	that.	It	is	a	dangerous	time	to	be
a	true	worshipper	–	of	anyone	or	anything.	Except,	perhaps,	chaos	itself,	for	if
one	force	is	ascendant	in	this	modern	age,	it	is	surely	that.’
Greyfrog	was	busy	licking	itself,	concentrating,	it	seemed,	on	its	new
limbs.	The	entire	demon	looked…smaller.
Scillara	said,	‘So	you’re	reunited	with	your	familiar,	L’oric.	Which	means
you	can	go	now,	off	to	wherever	and	whatever	it	is	you	have	to	do.	You	can
leave,	and	get	as	far	away	from	here	as	possible.	I’ll	wait	for	Cutter	to	wake	up.
I	like	him.	I	think	I’ll	go	where	he	goes.	This	grand	quest	is	done.	So	go	away.’
‘Not	until	I	am	satisfied	that	you	will	not	surrender	your	child	to	an
unknown	future,	Scillara.’
‘It’s	not	unknown.	Or	at	least,	no	more	unknown	than	any	future.	There	are
two	women	here	both	named	Jessa	and	they’ll	take	care	of	it.	They’ll	raise	it
well	enough,	since	they	seem	to	like	that	sort	of	thing.	Good	for	them,	I	say.
Besides,	I’m	being	generous	here	–	I’m	not	selling	it,	am	I?	No,	like	a	damned
fool,	I’m	giving	the	thing	away.’
‘The	longer	and	the	more	often	you	hold	that	girl,’	L’oric	said,	‘the	less
likely	it	is	that	you	will	do	what	you	presently	plan	to	do.	Motherhood	is	a
spiritual	state	–	you	will	come	to	that	realization	before	too	long.’
‘That’s	good,	so	why	are	you	still	here?	Clearly,	I’m	already	doomed	to
enslavement,	no	matter	how	much	I	rail.’
‘Spiritual	epiphany	is	not	enslavement.’
‘Shows	how	much	you	know,	High	Mage.’
‘I	feel	obliged	to	tell	you,	your	words	have	crushed	Greyfrog.’
‘He’ll	survive	it	–	he	seems	able	to	survive	everything	else.	Well,	I’m	about
to	switch	tits	here,	you	two	eager	to	watch?’
L’oric	spun	on	his	heel	and	left.
Greyfrog’s	large	eyes	blinked	translucently	up	at	Scillara.	‘I	am	not


crushed.	Brother	of	mine	misapprehends.	Broods	climb	free	and	must	fend,	each
runtling	holds	to	its	own	life.	Recollection.	Many	dangers.	Transitional
thought.	Sorrow.	I	must	now	accompany	my	poor	brother,	for	he	is	well	and
truly	distressed	by	many	things	in	this	world.	Warmth.	I	shall	harbour	well	my
adoration	of	you,	for	it	is	a	pure	thing	by	virtue	of	being	ever	unattainable,	the
consummation	thereof.	Which	would,	you	must	admit,	be	awkward	indeed.’
‘Awkward	isn’t	the	first	word	that	comes	to	my	mind,	Greyfrog.	But	thank
you	for	the	sentiment,	as	sick	and	twisted	as	it	happens	to	be.	Listen,	try	and
teach	L’oric,	will	you?	Just	a	few	things,	like,	maybe,	humility.	And	all	that
terrible	certainty	–	beat	it	down,	beat	it	out	of	him.	It’s	making	him	obnoxious.’
‘Paternal	legacy,	alas.	L’oric’s	own	parents…ah,	never	mind.	Farewell,
Scillara.	Delicious	fantasies,	slow	and	exquisitely	unveiled	in	the	dark	swampy
waters	of	my	imagination.	All	that	need	sustain	me	in	fecund	spirit.’
The	demon	waddled	out.
Hard	gums	clamped	onto	her	right	nipple.	Pain	and	pleasure,	gods	what	a
miserable,	confusing	alliance.	Well,	at	least	all	the	lopsidedness	would	go	away
–	Nulliss	had	been	planting	the	babe	on	her	left	ever	since	it	had	come	out.	She
felt	like	a	badly	packed	mule.
More	voices	in	the	outer	room,	but	she	didn’t	bother	listening.
They’d	taken	Felisin	Younger.	That	was	the	cruellest	thing	of	all.	For
Heboric,	at	least,	there	was	now	some	peace,	an	end	to	whatever	had	tormented
him,	and	besides,	he’d	been	an	old	man.	Enough	had	been	asked	of	him.	But
Felisin…
Scillara	stared	down	at	the	creature	on	her	chest,	its	tiny	grasping	hands,
then	she	settled	her	head	against	the	back	wall	and	began	repacking	her	pipe.
	
Something	formless	filling	his	mind,	what	had	been	timeless	and	only	in	the
last	instants,	in	the	drawing	of	a	few	breaths,	did	awareness	arrive,	carrying
him	from	one	moment	to	the	next.	Whereupon	Cutter	opened	his	eyes.	Old
grey	tree-trunks	spanned	the	ceiling	overhead,	the	joins	thick	with	cobwebs
snarled	around	the	carcasses	of	moths	and	flies.	Two	lanterns	hung	from
hooks,	their	wicks	low.	He	struggled	to	recall	how	he	had	ended	up	here,	in	this
unfamiliar	room.
Darujhistan…a	bouncing	coin.	Assassins…
No,	that	was	long	ago.	Tremorlor,	the	Azath	House,	and	Moby…that	godpossessed	girl	–	Apsalar,	oh,	my	love…Hard	words	exchanged	with	Cotillion,
the	god	who	had,	once,	looked	through	her	eyes.	He	was	in	Seven	Cities;	he
had	been	travelling	with	Heboric	Ghost	Hands,	and	Felisin	Younger,	Scillara,


and	the	demon	Greyfrog.	He	had	become	a	man	with	knives,	a	killer,	given	the
chance.
Flies…
Cutter	groaned,	one	hand	reaching	tentatively	for	his	belly	beneath	the
ragged	blankets.	The	slash	was	naught	but	a	thin	seam.	He	had	seen…his
insides	spilling	out.	Had	felt	the	sudden	absence	of	weight,	the	tug	that	pulled
him	down	to	the	ground.	Cold,	so	very	cold.
The	others	were	dead.	They	had	to	be.	Then	again,	Cutter	realized,	he	too
should	be	dead.	They’d	cut	him	wide	open.	He	slowly	turned	his	head,	studying
the	narrow	room	he	found	himself	in.	A	storage	chamber	of	some	kind,	a
larder,	perhaps.	The	shelves	were	mostly	empty.	He	was	alone.
The	motion	left	him	exhausted	–	he	did	not	have	the	strength	to	draw	his
arm	back	from	where	it	rested	on	his	midsection.
He	closed	his	eyes.
A	dozen	slow,	even	breaths,	and	he	found	himself	standing,	in	some	other
place.	A	courtyard	garden,	unkempt	and	now	withered,	as	if	by	years	of
drought.	The	sky	overhead	was	white,	featureless.	A	stone-walled	pool	was
before	him,	the	water	smooth	and	unstirred.	The	air	was	close	and	unbearably
hot.
Cutter	willed	himself	forward,	but	found	he	could	not	move.	He	stood	as	if
rooted	to	the	ground.
To	his	left,	plants	began	crackling,	curling	black	as	a	ragged	hole	formed
in	the	air.	A	moment	later	two	figures	stumbled	through	that	gate.	A	woman,
then	a	man.	The	gate	snapped	shut	in	their	wake,	leaving	only	a	swirl	of	ash
and	a	ring	of	scorched	plants.
Cutter	tried	to	speak,	but	he	had	no	voice,	and	after	a	few	moments	it	was
clear	that	they	could	not	see	him.	He	was	as	a	ghost,	an	unseen	witness.
The	woman	was	as	tall	as	the	man,	a	Malazan	which	he	was	certainly	not.
Handsome	in	a	hard,	unyielding	way.	She	slowly	straightened.
Another	woman	now	sat	on	the	edge	of	the	pool.	Fair-skinned,	delicately
featured,	her	long	golden-hued	hair	drawn	up	and	bound	in	an	elaborate	mass
of	braids.	One	hand	was	immersed	in	the	pool,	yet	no	ripples	spanned	outward.
She	was	studying	the	water ’s	surface,	and	did	not	look	up	as	the	Malazan
woman	spoke.
‘Now	what?’
The	man,	two	vicious-looking	flails	tucked	in	his	belt,	had	the	look	of	a
desert	warrior,	his	face	dark	and	flat,	the	eyes	slitted	amidst	webs	of	squintlines.	He	was	armoured	as	if	for	battle.	At	his	companion’s	question	he	fixed
his	gaze	on	the	seated	woman	and	said,	‘You	were	never	clear	on	that,	Queen


of	Dreams.	The	only	part	of	this	bargain	I’m	uneasy	about.’
‘Too	late	for	regrets,’	the	seated	woman	murmured.
Cutter	stared	at	her	anew.	The	Queen	of	Dreams.	A	goddess.	It	seemed	that
she	too	had	no	inkling	that	Cutter	was	somehow	present,	witnessing	this	scene.
But	this	was	her	realm.	How	could	that	be?
The	man	had	scowled	at	the	Queen’s	mocking	observation.	‘You	seek	my
service.	To	do	what?	I	am	done	leading	armies,	done	with	prophecies.	Give	me
a	task	if	you	must,	but	make	it	straightforward.	Someone	to	kill,	someone	to
protect	–	no,	not	the	latter	–	I	am	done	with	that,	too.’
‘It	is	your…scepticism…I	most	value,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	I	admit,
however,	to	some	disappointment.	Your	companion	is	not	the	one	I
anticipated.’
The	man	named	Leoman	glanced	over	at	the	Malazan	woman,	but	said
nothing.	Then,	slowly,	his	eyes	widened	and	he	looked	back	at	the	goddess.
‘Corabb?’
‘Chosen	by	Oponn,’	the	Queen	of	Dreams	said.	‘Beloved	of	the	Lady.	His
presence	would	have	been	useful…’	A	faint	frown,	then	a	sigh,	and	still	she
would	not	look	up	as	she	said,	‘In	his	stead,	I	must	countenance	a	mortal	upon
whom	yet	another	god	has	cast	an	eye.	To	what	end,	I	wonder?	Will	this	god
finally	use	her?	In	the	manner	that	all	gods	do?’	She	frowned,	then	said,	‘I	do
not	refute	this…alliance.	I	trust	Hood	understands	this	well	enough.	Even	so,	I
see	something	unexpected	stirring…in	the	depths	of	these	waters.	Dunsparrow,
did	you	know	you	were	marked?	No,	I	gather	you	did	not	–	you	were	but
newborn	when	sanctified,	after	all.	And	then	stolen	away,	from	the	temple,	by
your	brother.	Hood	never	forgave	him	for	that,	and	took	in	the	end	a	most
satisfying	vengeance,	ever	turning	away	a	healer ’s	touch	when	nothing	else
was	needed,	when	that	touch	could	have	changed	the	world,	could	have
shattered	an	age-old	curse.’	She	paused	for	a	moment,	still	staring	down	into
the	pool.	‘I	believe	Hood	now	regrets	his	decision	–	his	lack	of	humility	stings
him	yet	again.	Dunsparrow,	with	you,	I	suspect,	he	may	seek	restitution…’
The	Malazan	woman	was	pale.	‘I	had	heard	of	my	brother ’s	death,’	she	said
in	a	low	voice.	‘But	all	death	comes	by	Hood’s	hand.	I	see	no	need	for
restitution	in	this.’
‘By	Hood’s	hand.	True	enough,	and	so	too	Hood	chooses	the	time	and	the
manner.	Only	on	the	rarest	of	occasions,	however,	does	he	manifestly
intervene	in	a	single	mortal’s	death.	Consider	his	usual…involvement…as	little
more	than	withered	fingers	ensuring	the	seamless	weave	of	life’s	fabric,	at
least	until	the	arrival	of	the	knot.’
Leoman	spoke:	‘Ponder	the	delicacies	of	dogma	some	other	time,	you	two,


I	already	grow	weary	of	this	place.	Send	us	somewhere,	Queen,	but	first	tell	us
what	services	you	require.’
She	finally	looked	up,	studied	the	desert	warrior	in	silence	for	a	half-dozen
heartbeats,	then	said,	‘For	now,	I	require	from	you…nothing.’
There	was	silence	then,	and	Cutter	eventually	realized	that	the	two	mortals
were	not	moving.	Not	even	the	rise	and	fall	of	breath	was	visible.	Frozen	in
place…just	like	me.
The	Queen	of	Dreams	slowly	turned	her	head,	met	Cutter ’s	eyes,	and
smiled.
Sudden,	spinning	retreat	–	he	awoke	with	a	start,	beneath	threadbare
blankets	and	a	cross-beamed	ceiling	layered	in	the	carcasses	of	sucked-dry
insects.	Yet	that	smile	lingered,	racing	like	scalded	blood	through	him.	She	had
known,	of	course	she	had	known,	had	brought	him	there,	to	that	moment,	to
witness.	But	why?	Leoman	of	the	Flails…the	renegade	commander	from
Sha’ik’s	army,	the	one	who	had	been	pursued	by	the	Adjunct	Tavore’s	army.
Clearly	he	found	a	way	to	escape,	but	at	a	price.	Maybe	that	was	the	lesson	–
never	bargain	with	gods.
A	faint	sound	reached	him.	The	wail	of	a	babe,	insistent,	demanding.
Then	a	closer	noise,	scuffling,	and	Cutter	twisted	his	head	round	to	see	the
curtain	covering	the	doorway	drawn	back	and	a	young,	unfamiliar	face	staring
in	at	him.	The	face	quickly	withdrew.	Voices,	heavy	footsteps,	then	the	curtain
was	thrown	aside.	A	huge,	midnight-skinned	man	strode	in.
Cutter	stared	at	him.	He	looked…familiar,	yet	he	knew	he’d	never	before
met	this	man.
‘Scillara	is	asking	after	you,’	the	stranger	said.
‘That	child	I’m	hearing	–	hers?’
‘Yes,	for	the	moment.	How	do	you	feel?’
‘Weak,	but	not	as	weak	as	before.	Hungry,	thirsty.	Who	are	you?’
‘The	local	blacksmith.	Barathol	Mekhar.’
Mekhar?	‘Kalam…’
A	grimace.	‘Cousin,	distant.	Mekhar	refers	to	the	tribe	–	it’s	gone	now,
slaughtered	by	Falah’d	Enezgura	of	Aren,	during	one	of	his	westward
conquests.	Most	of	us	survivors	scattered	far	and	wide.’	He	shrugged,	eyeing
Cutter.	‘I’ll	get	you	food	and	drink.	If	a	Semk	witch	comes	in	here	and	tries	to
enlist	you	in	her	cause,	tell	her	to	get	out.’
‘Cause?	What	cause?’
‘Your	friend	Scillara	wants	to	leave	the	child	here.’
‘Oh.’
‘Does	that	surprise	you?’


He	considered.	‘No,	not	really.	She	wasn’t	herself	back	then,	from	what	I
understood.	Back	in	Raraku.	I	expect	she	wants	to	leave	all	reminders	far
behind	her.’
Barathol	snorted	and	turned	back	to	the	doorway.	‘What	is	it	with	all	these
refugees	from	Raraku,	anyway?	I’ll	be	back	shortly,	Cutter.’
Mekhar.	The	Daru	managed	a	smile.	This	one	here	looked	big	enough	to
pick	up	Kalam	and	fling	him	across	a	room.	And,	if	Cutter	had	read	the	man’s
expression	aright,	in	that	single	unguarded	moment	when	he’d	said	Kalam’s
name,	this	Barathol	was	likely	inclined	to	do	just	that,	given	the	chance.
Thank	the	gods	I	have	no	brothers	or	sisters…or	cousins,	for	that	matter.
His	smile	suddenly	faded.	The	blacksmith	had	mentioned	Scillara,	but	noone	else.	Cutter	suspected	it	hadn’t	been	an	oversight.	Barathol	didn’t	seem	the
type	who	was	careless	with	his	words.	Beru	fend…
	
L’oric	stepped	outside.	His	gaze	worked	its	way	down	the	squalid	street,
building	to	building,	the	decrepit	remnants	of	what	had	once	been	a	thriving
community.	Intent	on	its	own	destruction,	even	then,	though	no	doubt	few
thought	that	way	at	the	time.	The	forest	must	have	seemed	endless,	or	at	least
immortal,	and	so	they	had	harvested	with	frenzied	abandon.	But	now	the	trees
were	gone,	and	all	those	hoarded	coins	of	profit	had	slipped	away,	leaving
hands	filled	with	nothing	but	sand.	Most	of	the	looters	would	have	moved	on,
sought	out	some	other	stand	of	ancient	trees,	to	persist	in	the	addiction	of
momentary	gain.	Making	one	desert	after	another…until	the	deserts	meet.
He	rubbed	at	his	face,	felt	the	grit	of	his	stay	here,	raw	as	crushed	glass	on
his	cheeks.	There	were	some	rewards,	at	least,	he	told	himself.	A	child	was
born.	Greyfrog	was	at	his	side	once	more,	and	he	had	succeeded	in	saving
Cutter ’s	life.	And	Barathol	Mekhar,	a	name	riding	ten	thousand	curses…well,
Barathol	was	nothing	like	L’oric	had	imagined	him	to	be,	given	his	crimes.
Men	like	Korbolo	Dom	better	fit	his	notions	of	a	betrayer,	or	the	twisted
madness	of	someone	like	Bidithal.	And	yet	Barathol,	an	officer	in	the	Red
Blades,	had	murdered	the	Fist	of	Aren.	He’d	been	arrested	and	gaoled,	stripped
of	his	rank	and	beaten	without	mercy	by	his	fellow	Red	Blades	–	the	first	and
deepest	stain	upon	their	honour,	fuelling	their	extreme	acts	of	zealotry	ever
since.
Barathol	was	to	have	been	crucified	on	Aren	Way.	Instead,	the	city	had
risen	in	rebellion,	slaughtering	the	Malazan	garrison	and	driving	the	Red
Blades	from	the	city.
And	then	the	T’lan	Imass	had	arrived,	delivering	the	harsh,	brutal	lesson	of


imperial	vengeance.	And	Barathol	Mekhar	had	been	seen,	by	scores	of
witnesses,	flinging	open	the	north	gate…
But	it	is	true.	T’lan	Imass	need	no	opened	gates…
The	question	no-one	had	asked	was:	why	would	an	officer	of	the	Red
Blades	murder	the	city’s	Fist?
L’oric	suspected	Barathol	was	not	one	to	give	him	the	satisfaction	of	an
answer.	The	man	was	well	past	defending	himself,	with	words	at	any	rate.	The
High	Mage	could	see	as	much	in	the	huge	man’s	dark	eyes	–	he	had	long	ago
given	up	on	humanity.	And	his	own	sense	of	his	place	in	it.	He	was	not	driven
to	justify	what	he	did;	no	sense	of	decency	nor	honour	compelled	the	man	to
state	his	case.	Only	a	soul	that	has	surrendered	utterly	gives	up	on	notions	of
redemption.	Something	had	happened,	once,	that	crushed	Barathol’s	faith,
leaving	unbarred	the	paths	of	betrayal.
Yet	these	local	folk	came	close	to	outright	worship	in	their	regard	for
Barathol	Mehkar,	and	it	was	this	that	L’oric	could	not	understand.	Even	now,
when	they	knew	the	truth,	when	they	knew	what	their	blacksmith	had	done	years
ago,	they	defied	the	High	Mage’s	expectations.	He	was	baffled,	left	feeling
strangely	helpless.
Then	again,	admit	it,	L’oric,	you	have	never	been	able	to	gather	followers,
no	matter	how	noble	your	cause.	Oh,	there	were	allies	here,	adding	their	voices
to	his	own	outrage	at	Scillara’s	appalling	indifference	regarding	her	child,	but
he	knew	well	enough	that	such	unity	was,	in	the	end,	transitory	and	ephemeral.
They	might	all	decry	Scillara’s	position,	but	they	would	do	nothing	about	it;
indeed,	all	but	Nulliss	had	already	come	to	accept	the	fact	that	the	child	was
going	to	be	passed	into	the	hands	of	two	women	both	named	Jessa.	There,
problem	solved.	But	in	truth	it	is	nothing	but	a	crime	accommodated.
The	demon	Greyfrog	ambled	to	his	side	and	settled	belly-down	in	the	dust
of	the	street.	Four	eyes	blinking	lazily,	it	offered	nothing	of	its	thoughts,	yet	an
ineffable	whisper	of	commiseration	calmed	L’oric’s	inner	tumult.
The	High	Mage	sighed.	‘I	know,	my	friend.	If	I	could	but	learn	to	simply
pass	through	a	place,	to	be	wilfully	unmindful	of	all	offences	against	nature,
both	small	and	large.	This	comes,	I	suspect,	of	successive	failures.	In	Raraku,
in	Kurald	Liosan,	with	Felisin	Younger,	gods	below,	what	a	depressing	list.
And	you,	Greyfrog,	I	failed	you	as	well…’
‘Modest	relevance,’	the	demon	said.	‘I	would	tell	you	a	tale,	brother.	Early
in	the	clan’s	history,	many	centuries	past,	there	arose,	like	a	breath	of	gas	from
the	deep,	a	new	cult.	Chosen	as	its	representative	god	was	the	most	remote,
most	distant	of	gods	among	the	pantheon.	A	god	that	was,	in	truth,	indifferent	to
the	clans	of	my	kind.	A	god	that	spoke	naught	to	any	mortal,	that	intervened


never	in	mortal	affairs.	Morbid.	The	leaders	of	the	cult	proclaimed	themselves
the	voice	of	that	god.	They	wrote	down	laws,	prohibitions,	ascribances,
propitiations,	blasphemies,	punishments	for	nonconformity,	for	dispute	and
derivations.	This	was	but	rumour,	said	details	maintained	in	vague	fugue,	until
such	time	as	the	cult	achieved	domination	and	with	domination,	absolute	power.
‘Terrible	enforcement,	terrible	crimes	committed	in	the	name	of	the	silent
god.	Leaders	came	and	went,	each	further	twisting	words	already	twisted	by
mundane	ambition	and	the	zeal	for	unity.	Entire	pools	were	poisoned.	Others
drained	and	the	silts	seeded	with	salt.	Eggs	were	crushed.	Mothers
dismembered.	And	our	people	were	plunged	into	a	paradise	of	fear,	the	laws
made	manifest	and	spilled	blood	the	tears	of	necessity.	False	regret	with
chilling	gleam	in	the	centre	eye.	No	relief	awaited,	and	each	generation
suffered	more	than	the	last.’
L’oric	studied	the	demon	at	his	side.	‘What	happened?’
‘Seven	great	warriors	from	seven	clans	set	out	to	find	the	Silent	God,	set
out	to	see	for	themselves	if	this	god	had	indeed	blessed	all	that	had	come	to
pass	in	its	name.’
‘And	did	they	find	the	silent	god?’
‘Yes,	and	too,	they	found	the	reason	for	its	silence.	The	god	was	dead.	It	had
died	with	the	first	drop	of	blood	spilled	in	its	name.’
‘I	see,	and	what	is	the	relevance	of	this	tale	of	yours,	however	modest?’
‘Perhaps	this.	The	existence	of	many	gods	conveys	true	complexity	of
mortal	life.	Conversely,	the	assertion	of	but	one	god	leads	to	a	denial	of
complexity,	and	encourages	the	need	to	make	the	world	simple.	Not	the	fault	of
the	god,	but	a	crime	committed	by	its	believers.’
‘If	a	god	does	not	like	what	is	done	in	its	name,	then	it	should	act.’
‘Yet,	if	each	crime	committed	in	its	name	weakens	it…very	soon,	I	think,	it
has	no	power	left	and	so	cannot	act,	and	so,	ultimately,	it	dies.’
‘You	come	from	a	strange	world,	Greyfrog.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	find	your	story	most	disturbing.’
‘Yes.’
‘We	must	undertake	a	long	journey	now,	Greyfrog.’
‘I	am	ready,	brother.’
‘In	the	world	I	know,’	L’oric	said,	‘many	gods	feed	on	blood.’
‘As	do	many	mortals.’
The	High	Mage	nodded.	‘Have	you	said	your	goodbyes,	Greyfrog?’
‘I	have.’
‘Then	let	us	leave	this	place.’


	
Filiad	appeared	at	the	entrance	to	the	smithy,	catching	Barathol’s	attention.	The
blacksmith	gave	two	more	pumps	of	the	bellows	feeding	the	forge,	then	drew
off	his	thick	leather	gloves	and	waved	the	youth	over.
‘The	High	Mage,’	Filiad	said,	‘he’s	left.	With	that	giant	toad.	I	saw	it,	a	hole
opening	in	the	air.	Blinding	yellow	light	poured	from	it,	and	they	just
disappeared	inside	it	and	then	the	hole	was	gone!’
Barathol	rummaged	through	a	collection	of	black	iron	bars	until	he	found
one	that	looked	right	for	the	task	he	had	in	mind.	He	set	it	on	the	anvil.	‘Did	he
leave	behind	his	horse?’
‘What?	No,	he	led	it	by	the	reins.’
‘Too	bad.’
‘What	do	we	do	now?’	Filiad	asked.
‘About	what?’
‘Well,	everything,	I	guess.’
‘Go	home,	Filiad.’
‘Really?	Oh.	All	right.	I	guess.	See	you	later,	then.’
‘No	doubt,’	Barathol	said,	drawing	on	the	gloves	once	more.
After	Filiad	left,	the	blacksmith	took	up	the	iron	bar	with	a	set	of	tongs	and
thrust	the	metal	into	the	forge,	pumping	one-legged	on	the	floor-bellows.	Four
months	back,	he	had	used	the	last	of	his	stolen	hoard	of	Aren	coins	on	a	huge
shipment	of	charcoal;	there	was	just	enough	left	for	this	final	task.
T’lan	Imass.	Nothing	but	bone	and	leathery	skin.	Fast	and	deadly,	masters
of	ambush.	Barathol	had	been	thinking	for	days	now	about	the	problem	they
represented,	about	devising	a	means	of	dealing	with	them.	For	he	suspected
he’d	meet	the	bastards	again.
His	axe	was	heavy	enough	to	do	damage,	if	he	hit	hard	enough.	Still,	those
stone	swords	were	long,	tapered	to	a	point	for	thrusting.	If	they	stayed	outside
his	reach…
To	all	of	that,	he	thought	he	had	found	a	solution.
He	pumped	some	more,	until	he	was	satisfied	with	the	white-hot	core	in	the
heart	of	the	forge,	and	watched	as	the	bar	of	iron	acquired	a	cherubic	gleam.
	
‘We	now	follow	the	snake,	which	takes	us	to	a	gather	camp	on	the	shores	of	a
black	grain	lake,	beyond	which	we	traverse	flat-rock	for	two	days,	to	another
gather	camp,	the	northernmost	one,	for	all	that	lies	beyond	it	is	both	flowing
and	unfound.’


Samar	Dev	studied	the	elongated,	sinuous	line	of	boulders	on	the	ledge	of
bedrock	below	and	to	their	left.	Skins	of	grey	and	green	lichen,	clumps	of
skeletal	dusty	green	moss,	studded	with	red	flowers,	surrounding	each	stone,
and	beyond	that	the	deeper	verdancy	of	another	kind	of	moss,	soft	and	sodden.
On	the	path	they	walked	the	bedrock	was	scoured	clean,	the	granite	pink	and
raw,	with	layers	falling	away	from	edges	in	large,	flat	plates.	Here	and	there,
black	lichen	the	texture	of	sharkskin	spilled	out	from	fissures	and	veins.	She
saw	a	deer	antler	lying	discarded	from	some	past	rutting	season,	the	tips	of	its
tines	gnawed	by	rodents,	and	was	reminded	how,	in	the	natural	world,	nothing
goes	to	waste.
Dips	in	the	high	ground	held	stands	of	black	spruce,	as	many	dead	as
living,	while	in	more	exposed	sections	of	the	bedrock	low-lying	juniper
formed	knee-high	islands	spreading	branches	over	the	stone,	each	island
bordered	by	shrubs	of	blueberry	and	wintergeen.	Jackpines	stood	as	lone
sentinels	atop	rises	in	the	strangely	folded,	amorphous	rock.
Harsh	and	forbidding,	this	was	a	landscape	that	would	never	yield	to
human	domination.	It	felt	ancient	in	ways	not	matched	by	any	place	Samar	Dev
had	seen	before,	not	even	by	the	wastelands	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.	It	was	said	that
beneath	every	manner	of	surface	on	this	world,	whether	sand	or	sea,	floodplain
or	forest,	there	was	solid	rock,	twisted	and	folded	by	unseen	pressures.	But
here,	all	other	possible	surfaces	had	been	scoured	away,	exposing	the	veined
muscle	itself.
This	land	suited	Karsa	Orlong.	A	warrior	scoured	clean	of	all	civil
trappings,	a	thing	of	muscle	and	will	and	hidden	pressures.	While,	in	strange
contrast,	the	Anibar,	Boatfinder,	seemed	an	interloper,	almost	a	parasite,	his
every	motion	furtive	and	oddly	guilt-laden.	From	this	broken,	rock-skinned
place	of	trees	and	clearwater	lakes,	Boatfinder	and	his	people	took	black	grain
and	the	skins	of	animals;	they	took	birch	bark	and	reeds	for	making	baskets
and	nets.	Not	enough	to	scar	this	landscape,	not	enough	to	claim	conquest.
As	for	her,	she	found	herself	viewing	her	surroundings	in	terms	of	trees
left	unharvested,	of	lakes	still	rich	with	fish,	of	more	efficient	ways	to	gather
the	elongated,	mudcoloured	grains	from	the	reed	beds	in	the	shallows	–	the	socalled	black	grain	that	needed	to	be	beaten	free	of	the	stalks,	gathered	in	the
hollow	of	the	long,	narrow-boats	the	Anibar	used,	beaten	down	with	sticks
amidst	webs	and	spinning	spiders	and	the	buzz	of	tiger-flies.	She	could	think
only	of	resources	and	the	best	means	of	exploiting	them.	It	felt	less	and	less
like	a	virtue	with	every	passing	day.
They	continued	along	the	trail,	Boatfinder	in	the	lead,	followed	by	Karsa
who	led	his	horse	by	the	reins,	leaving	Samar	Dev	with	a	view	of	the	animal’s


rump	and	swishing	tail.	Her	feet	hurt,	each	step	on	the	hard	stone	reverberating
up	into	her	spine	–	there	had	to	be	a	way	of	padding	such	impacts,	she	told
herself,	perhaps	some	kind	of	multilayering	technology	for	boot	soles	–	she
would	have	to	think	on	that.	And	these	biting	flies	–	Boatfinder	had	cut	juniper
branches,	threading	them	through	a	headscarf	so	that	the	green	stems	dangled
in	front	of	his	forehead	and	down	the	back	of	his	neck.	Presumably	this
worked,	although	the	man	looked	ridiculous.	She	contemplated	surrendering
her	vanity	and	following	suit,	but	would	hold	out	a	while	longer.
Karsa	Orlong	was	undertaking	this	journey	now	as	if	it	had	become	some
kind	of	quest.	Driven	by	the	need	to	deliver	judgement,	upon	whomsoever	he
chose,	no	matter	what	the	circumstances.	She	had	begun	to	understand	just	how
frightening	this	savage	could	be,	and	how	it	fed	her	own	growing	fascination
with	him.	She	half-believed	this	man	could	cut	a	swath	through	an	entire
pantheon	of	gods.
A	dip	in	the	trail	brought	them	onto	mossy	ground,	through	which	broken
branches	thrust	up	jagged	grey	fingers.	To	the	right	was	a	thick,	twisted	scrub
oak,	centuries	old	and	scarred	by	lightning	strikes;	all	the	lesser	trees	that	had
begun	growth	around	it	were	dead,	as	if	the	battered	sentinel	exuded	some
belligerent	poison.	To	the	left	was	the	earthen	wall	of	a	toppled	pine	tree’s
root-mat,	vertical	and	as	tall	as	Karsa,	rising	from	a	pool	of	black	water.
Havok	came	to	an	abrupt	halt	and	Samar	Dev	heard	a	grunt	from	Karsa
Orlong.	She	worked	her	way	round	the	Jhag	horse	until	she	could	clearly	see
that	wall	of	twisted	roots.	In	which	was	snared	a	withered	corpse,	the	flesh
wrinkled	and	blackened,	limbs	stretched	out,	neck	exposed	but	of	the	head	only
the	lower	jaw	line	visible.	The	chest	area	seemed	to	have	imploded,	the	hollow
space	reaching	up	into	the	heart	of	the	huge	tree	itself.	Boatfinder	stood
opposite,	his	left	hand	inscribing	gestures	in	the	air.
‘This	toppled	but	recently,’	Karsa	Orlong	said.	‘Yet	this	body,	it	has	been
there	a	long	time,	see	how	the	black	water	that	once	gathered	about	the	roots
has	stained	its	skin.	Samar	Dev,’	he	said,	facing	her,	‘there	is	a	hole	in	its	chest
–	how	did	such	a	thing	come	to	be?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	cannot	even	determine	what	manner	of	creature	this
is.’
‘Jaghut,’	the	Toblakai	replied.	‘I	have	seen	the	like	before.	Flesh	becomes
wood,	yet	the	spirit	remains	alive	within—’
‘You’re	saying	this	thing	is	still	alive?’
‘I	do	not	know	–	the	tree	has	fallen	over,	after	all,	and	so	it	is	dying—’
‘Death	is	not	sure,’	Boatfinder	cut	in,	his	eyes	wide	with	superstitious
terror.	‘Often,	the	tree	reaches	once	more	skyward.	But	this	dweller,	so	terribly


imprisoned,	it	cannot	be	alive.	It	has	no	heart.	It	has	no	head.’
Samar	Dev	stepped	closer	to	examine	the	body’s	sunken	chest.	After	a	time
she	backed	away,	made	uneasy	by	something	she	could	not	define.	‘The	bones
beneath	the	flesh	continued	growing,’	she	said,	‘but	not	as	bone.	Wood.	The
sorcery	belongs	to	D’riss,	I	suspect.	Boatfinder,	how	old	would	you	judge	this
tree?’
‘Frozen	time,	perhaps	thirty	generations.	Since	it	fell,	seven	days,	no	more.
And,	it	is	pushed	over.’
‘I	smell	something,’	Karsa	Orlong	said,	passing	the	reins	to	Boatfinder.
Samar	Dev	watched	the	giant	warrior	walk	ahead,	up	the	opposite	slope	of
the	depression,	halting	on	the	summit	of	the	basolith.	He	slowly	unslung	his
stone	sword.
And	now	she	too	caught	a	faint	sourness	in	the	air,	the	smell	of	death.	She
made	her	way	to	Karsa’s	side.
Beyond	the	dome	of	rock	the	trail	wound	quickly	downward	to	debouch	on
the	edge	of	a	small	boggy	lake.	To	one	side,	on	a	slight	shelf	above	the
shoreline,	was	a	clearing	in	which	sat	the	remnants	of	a	rough	camp	–	three
round	structures,	sapling-framed	and	hide-walled.	Two	were	half-burnt,	the
third	knocked	down	in	a	mass	of	shattered	wood	and	torn	buckskin.	She
counted	six	bodies	lying	motionless	here	and	there,	in	and	around	the	camp,
one	face-down,	torso,	shoulders	and	head	in	the	water,	long	hair	flowing	like
bleached	seaweed.	Three	canoes	formed	a	row	on	the	other	side	of	the	trail,
their	bark	hulls	stove	in.
Boatfinder	joined	her	and	Karsa	on	the	rise.	A	small	keening	sound	rose
from	him.
Karsa	took	the	lead	down	the	trail.	After	a	moment,	Samar	Dev	followed.
‘Stay	back	from	the	camp,’	Karsa	told	her.	‘I	must	read	the	tracks.’
She	watched	him	move	from	one	motionless	form	to	the	next,	his	eyes
scanning	the	scuffed	ground,	the	places	where	humus	had	been	kicked	aside.
He	went	to	the	hearth	and	ran	his	fingers	through	the	ash	and	coals,	down	to	the
stained	earth	beneath.	Somewhere	on	the	lake	beyond,	a	loon	called,	its	cry
mournful	and	haunting.	The	light	had	grown	steely,	the	sun	now	behind	the
forest	line	to	the	west.	On	the	rise	above	the	trail,	Boatfinder ’s	keening	rose	in
pitch.
‘Tell	him	to	be	quiet,’	Karsa	said	in	a	growl.
‘I	don’t	think	I	can	do	that,’	she	replied.	‘Leave	him	his	grief.’
‘His	grief	will	soon	be	ours.’
‘You	fear	this	unseen	enemy,	Karsa	Orlong?’
He	straightened	from	where	he	had	been	examining	the	holed	canoes.	‘A


four-legged	beast	has	passed	through	here	recently	–	a	large	one.	It	collected
one	of	the	corpses…but	I	do	not	think	it	has	gone	far.’
‘Then	it	has	already	heard	us,’	Samar	Dev	said.	‘What	is	it,	a	bear?’
Boatfinder	had	said	that	black	bears	used	the	same	trails	as	the	Anibar,	and	he’d
pointed	out	their	scat	on	the	path.	He	had	explained	that	they	were	not
dangerous,	normally.	Still,	wild	creatures	were	ever	unpredictable,	and	if	one
had	come	upon	these	bodies	it	might	well	now	view	the	kill-site	as	its	own.
‘A	bear?	Perhaps,	Samar	Dev.	Such	as	the	kind	from	my	homeland,	a
dweller	in	caves,	and	on	its	hind	legs	half	again	as	tall	as	a	Teblor.	But	this	one
is	yet	different,	for	the	pads	of	its	paws	are	sheathed	in	scales.’
‘Scales?’
‘And	I	judge	it	would	weigh	more	than	four	adult	warriors	of	the	Teblor.’
He	eyed	her.	‘A	formidable	creature.’
‘Boatfinder	has	said	nothing	of	such	beasts	in	this	forest.’
‘Not	the	only	intruder,’	the	Toblakai	said.	‘These	Anibar	were	murdered
with	spears	and	curved	blades.	They	were	then	stripped	of	all	ornaments,
weapons	and	tools.	There	was	a	child	among	them	but	it	was	dragged	away.
The	killers	came	from	the	lake,	in	wooden-keeled	longboats.	At	least	ten
adults,	two	of	them	wearing	boots	of	some	sort,	although	the	heel	pattern	is
unfamiliar.	The	others	wore	moccasins	made	of	sewn	strips,	each	one
overlapping	on	one	side.’
‘Overlapping?	Ridged	–	that	would	improve	purchase,	I	think.’
‘Samar	Dev,	I	know	who	these	intruders	are.’
‘Old	friends	of	yours?’
‘We	did	not	speak	of	friendship	at	the	time.	Call	down	Boatfinder,	I	have
questions	for	him—’
The	sentence	was	unfinished.	Samar	Dev	looked	over	to	find	Karsa
standing	stock-still,	his	gaze	on	the	trees	beyond	the	three	canoes.	She	turned
and	saw	a	massive	hulking	shape	pushing	its	forefront	clear	of	bending
saplings.	An	enormous,	scaled	head	lifted	from	steep	shoulders,	eyes	fixing	on
the	Toblakai.
Who	raised	his	stone	sword	in	a	two-handed	grip,	then	surged	forward.
The	giant	beast’s	roar	ended	in	a	high-pitched	squeal,	as	it	bolted	–
backward,	into	the	thicket.	Sudden	crashing,	heavy	thumps—
Karsa	plunged	into	the	stand,	pursuing.
Samar	Dev	found	that	she	was	holding	her	dagger	in	her	right	hand,
knuckles	white.
The	crashing	sounds	grew	more	distant,	as	did	the	frantic	squeals	of	the
scaled	bear.


She	turned	at	scrabbling	from	the	slope	and	watched	Boatfinder	come
down	to	huddle	at	her	side.	His	lips	were	moving	in	silent	prayers,	eyes	on	the
broken	hole	in	the	stand	of	trees.
Samar	sheathed	her	dagger	and	crossed	her	arms.	‘What	is	it	with	him	and
monsters?’	she	demanded.
Boatfinder	sat	down	in	the	damp	mulch,	began	rocking	back	and	forth.
	
Samar	Dev	was	just	completing	her	second	burial	when	Karsa	Orlong
returned.	He	walked	up	to	the	hearth	she	had	lit	earlier	and	beside	which
Boatfinder	sat	hunched	over	and	swathed	in	furs,	voicing	a	low	moaning	sound
of	intractable	sorrow.	The	Toblakai	set	his	sword	down.
‘Did	you	kill	it?’	she	asked.	‘Did	you	cut	its	paws	off,	skin	it	alive,	add	its
ears	to	your	belt	and	crush	its	chest	in	with	your	embrace?’
‘Escaped,’	he	said	in	a	grunt.
‘Probably	halfway	to	Ehrlitan	by	now.’
‘No,	it	is	hungry.	It	will	return,	but	not	before	we	have	moved	on.’	He
gestured	to	the	remaining	bodies.	‘There	is	no	point	–	it	will	dig	them	up.’
‘Hungry,	you	said.’
‘Starving.	It	is	not	from	this	world.	And	this	land	here,	it	offers	little	–	the
beast	would	do	better	on	the	plains	to	the	south.’
‘The	map	calls	this	the	Olphara	Mountains.	Many	lakes	are	marked,	and	I
believe	the	small	one	before	us	is	joined	to	others,	further	north,	by	a	river.’
‘These	are	not	mountains.’
‘They	once	were,	millennia	past.	They	have	been	worn	down.	We	are	on	a
much	higher	elevation	than	we	were	just	south	of	here.’
‘Nothing	can	gnaw	mountains	down	to	mere	stubs,	witch.’
‘Nonetheless.	We	should	see	if	we	can	repair	these	canoes	–	it	would	be
much	easier—’
‘I	shall	not	abandon	Havok.’
‘Then	we	will	never	catch	up	with	our	quarry,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘They	are	not	fleeing.	They	are	exploring.	Searching.’
‘For	what?’
The	Toblakai	did	not	answer.
Samar	Dev	wiped	dirt	from	her	hands,	then	walked	over	to	the	hearth.	‘I
think	this	hunt	we	are	on	is	a	mistake.	The	Anibar	should	simply	flee,	leave	this
broken	land,	at	least	until	the	intruders	have	left.’
‘You	are	a	strange	woman,’	Karsa	pronounced.	‘You	wished	to	explore	this
land,	yet	find	yourself	made	helpless	by	it.’


She	started.	‘Why	do	you	say	that?’
‘Here,	one	must	be	as	an	animal.	Passing	through,	quiet,	for	this	is	a	place
that	yields	little	and	speaks	in	silence.	Thrice	in	our	journey	we	have	been
tracked	by	a	bear,	silent	as	a	ghost	on	this	bedrock.	Crossing	and	re-crossing
our	trail.	You	would	think	such	a	large	beast	would	be	easy	to	see,	but	it	is	not.
There	are	omens	here,	Samar	Dev,	more	than	I	have	ever	seen	before	in	any
place,	even	my	homeland.	Hawks	circle	overhead.	Owls	watch	us	pass	from
hollows	in	dead	trees.	Tell	me,	witch,	what	is	happening	to	the	moon?’
She	stared	into	the	fire.	‘I	don’t	know.	It	seems	to	be	breaking	up.
Crumbling.	There	is	no	record	of	anything	like	that	happening	before,	neither
the	way	it	has	grown	larger,	nor	the	strange	corona	surrounding	it.’	She	shook
her	head.	‘If	it	is	an	omen,	it	is	one	all	the	world	can	see.’
‘The	desert	folk	believe	gods	dwell	there.	Perhaps	they	wage	war	among
themselves.’
‘Superstitious	nonsense,’	she	said.	‘The	moon	is	this	world’s	child,	the	last
child,	for	there	were	others,	once.’	She	hesitated.	‘It	may	be	that	two	have
collided,	but	it	is	difficult	to	be	sure	–	the	others	were	never	very	visible,	even
in	the	best	of	times.	Dark,	smudged,	distant,	always	in	the	shadow	cast	by	this
world,	or	that	of	the	largest	moon	–	the	one	we	see	most	clearly.	Of	late,	there
has	been	much	dust	in	the	air.’
‘There	are	more	fireswords	in	the	sky,’	Karsa	said.	‘Just	before	dawn,	you
may	see	ten	in	the	span	of	three	breaths,	each	slashing	down	through	the	dark.
Every	night.’
‘We	may	learn	more	when	we	reach	the	coast,	for	the	tides	will	have
changed.’
‘Changed,	how?’
‘The	moon’s	own	breath,’	she	replied.	‘We	can	measure	that	breath…in	the
ebb	and	flood	of	the	tides.	Such	are	the	laws	of	existence.’
The	Toblakai	snorted.	‘Laws	are	broken.	Existence	holds	to	no	laws.
Existence	is	what	persists,	and	to	persist	is	to	struggle.	In	the	end,	the	struggle
fails.’	He	was	removing	strips	of	smoked	bhederin	meat	from	his	pack.	‘That	is
the	only	law	worthy	of	the	name.’
She	studied	him.	‘Is	that	what	the	Teblor	believe?’
He	bared	his	teeth.	‘One	day	I	will	return	to	my	people.	And	I	will	shatter
all	that	they	believe.	And	I	will	say	to	my	father,	“Forgive	me.	You	were	right	to
disbelieve.	You	were	right	to	despise	the	laws	that	chained	us.”	And	to	my
grandfather,	I	shall	say	nothing	at	all.’
‘Have	you	a	wife	in	your	tribe?’
‘I	have	victims,	no	wives.’


A	brutal	admission,	she	reflected.	‘Do	you	intend	reparation,	Karsa
Orlong?’
‘That	would	be	seen	as	weakness.’
‘Then	the	chains	still	bind	you.’
‘There	was	a	Nathii	settlement,	beside	a	lake,	where	the	Nathii	had	made
slaves	of	my	people.	Each	night,	after	hauling	nets	on	the	lake,	those	slaves
were	all	shackled	to	a	single	chain.	Not	a	single	Teblor	so	bound	could	break
that	chain.	Together,	their	strengths	and	wills	combined,	no	chain	could	have
held	them.’
‘So,	for	all	your	claims	of	returning	to	your	people	and	shattering	all	that
they	believe,	you	will,	in	truth,	need	their	help	to	manage	such	a	thing.	It
sounds	as	if	it	is	not	just	your	father	from	whom	you	require	forgiveness,
Karsa	Orlong.’
‘I	shall	take	what	I	require,	witch.’
‘Were	you	one	of	those	slaves	in	the	Nathii	fishing	village?’
‘For	a	time.’
‘And,	to	escape	–	and	clearly	you	did	escape	–	you	ended	up	needing	the
help	of	your	fellow	Teblor.’	She	nodded.	‘I	can	see	how	that	might	gnaw	on
your	soul.’
He	eyed	her.	‘You	are	truly	clever,	Samar	Dev,	to	discover	how	all	things
fit	so	neatly	in	place.’
‘I	have	made	long	study	of	human	nature,	the	motivations	that	guide	us,	the
truths	that	haunt	us.	I	do	not	think	you	Teblor	are	much	different	from	us	in
such	things.’
‘Unless,	of	course,	you	begin	with	an	illusion	–	one	that	suits	the
conclusion	you	sought	from	the	start.’
‘I	try	not	to	assume	veracity,’	she	replied.
‘Indeed.’	He	handed	her	a	strip	of	meat.
She	crossed	her	arms,	refusing	the	offer	for	the	moment.	‘You	suggest	I
have	made	an	assumption,	an	erroneous	one,	and	so,	although	I	claim	to
understand	you,	in	truth	I	understand	nothing.	A	convenient	argument,	but	not
very	convincing,	unless	you	care	to	be	specific.’
‘I	am	Karsa	Orlong.	I	know	the	measure	of	each	step	I	have	taken	since	I
first	became	a	warrior.	Your	self-satisfaction	does	not	offend	me,	witch.’
‘The	savage	now	patronizes	me!	Gods	below!’
He	proffered	the	meat	again.	‘Eat,	Samar	Dev,	lest	you	grow	too	weak	for
outrage.’
She	glared	at	him,	then	accepted	the	strip	of	bhederin.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	your
people	live	with	a	lack	of	sophistication	similar	to	these	Anibar	here.	It	is	clear


that,	once,	the	citizens	of	the	great	civilizations	of	Seven	Cities	lived	in	a
similar	state	of	simplicity	and	stolid	ignorance,	haunted	by	omens	and	fleeing
the	unfathomable.	And	no	doubt	we	too	concocted	elaborate	belief	systems,
quaint	and	ridiculous,	to	justify	all	those	necessities	and	restrictions	imposed
upon	us	by	the	struggle	to	survive.	Fortunately,	however,	we	left	all	that	behind.
We	discovered	the	glory	of	civilization	–	and	you,	Teblor,	hold	still	to	your
misplaced	pride,	holding	up	your	ignorance	of	such	glory	as	a	virtue.	And	so
you	still	do	not	comprehend	the	great	gift	of	civilization—’
‘I	comprehend	it	fine,’	Karsa	Orlong	replied	around	a	mouthful	of	meat.
‘The	savage	proceeds	into	civilization	through	improvements—’
‘Yes!’
‘Improvements	in	the	manner	and	efficiency	of	killing	people.’
‘Hold	on—’
‘Improvements	in	the	unassailable	rules	of	degradation	and	misery.’
‘Karsa—’
‘Improvements	in	ways	to	humiliate,	impose	suffering	and	justify
slaughtering	those	savages	too	stupid	and	too	trusting	to	resist	what	you	hold
as	inevitable.	Namely,	their	extinction.	Between	you	and	me,	Samar	Dev,’	he
added,	swallowing,	‘who	should	the	Anibar	fear	more?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	she	said	through	gritted	teeth.	‘Why	don’t	we	ask	him?’
Boatfinder	lifted	his	head	and	studied	Samar	Dev	with	hooded	eyes.	‘In	the
frozen	time,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘Iskar	Jarak	spoke	of	the	Unfound.’
‘Iskar	Jarak	was	not	a	god,	Boatfinder.	He	was	a	mortal,	with	a	handful	of
wise	words	–	it’s	easy	to	voice	warnings.	Actually	staying	around	to	help
prepare	for	them	is	another	thing	altogether!’
‘Iskar	Jarak	gave	us	the	secrets,	Samar	Dev,	and	so	we	have	prepared	in	the
frozen	time,	and	prepare	now,	and	will	prepare	in	the	Unfound.’
Karsa	barked	a	laugh.	‘Would	that	I	had	travelled	here	with	Iskar	Jarak.	We
would	find	little	to	argue	over,	I	think.’
‘This	is	what	I	get,’	muttered	Samar	Dev,	‘in	the	company	of	barbarians.’
The	Toblakai’s	tone	suddenly	changed,	‘The	intruders	who	have	come
here,	witch,	believe	themselves	civilized.	And	so	they	kill	Anibar.	Why?
Because	they	can.	They	seek	no	other	reason.	To	them,	Samar	Dev,	Karsa
Orlong	will	give	answer.	This	savage	is	not	stupid,	not	trusting,	and	by	the
souls	of	my	sword,	I	shall	give	answer.’
All	at	once,	night	had	arrived,	and	there	in	that	silent	forest	it	was	cold.
From	somewhere	far	to	the	west,	rose	the	howl	of	wolves,	and	Samar	Dev
saw	Karsa	Orlong	smile.


	
Once,	long	ago,	Mappo	Runt	had	stood	with	a	thousand	other	Trell	warriors.
Surmounting	the	Orstanz	Ridge	overlooking	the	Valley	of	Bayen	Eckar,	so
named	for	the	shallow,	stony	river	that	flowed	northward	to	a	distant,	mythical
sea	–	mythical	for	the	Trell	at	least,	none	of	whom	had	ever	travelled	that	far
from	their	homeland	steppes	and	plains.	Arrayed	on	the	slope	opposite	and
down	on	the	river ’s	western	bank,	fifteen	hundred	paces	distant,	was	the	Nemil
army,	commanded	in	those	days	by	a	much-feared	general,	Saylan’mathas.
So	many	of	the	Trell	had	already	fallen,	not	in	battle,	but	to	the	weakness
of	life	encamped	around	the	trader	posts,	forts	and	settlements	that	now	made
the	borderlands	a	hazy,	ephemeral	notion	and	little	more.	Mappo	himself	had
fled	such	a	settlement,	finding	refuge	among	the	still-belligerent	hill	clans.
A	thousand	Trell	warriors,	facing	an	army	eight	times	their	number.	Mace,
axe	and	sword	hammering	shield-rims,	a	song	of	death-promise	rising	from
their	throats,	a	sound	like	earth-thunder	rolling	down	into	the	valley	where
birds	flew	low	and	strangely	frenzied,	as	if	in	terror	they	had	forgotten	the
sky’s	sanctuary	overhead,	instead	swooping	and	wheeling	between	the	greyleaved	trees	clumped	close	to	the	river	on	both	sides,	seeming	to	swarm
through	thickets	and	shrubs.
Upon	the	valley’s	other	side,	units	of	soldiers	moved	in	ever-shifting
presentation:	units	of	archers,	of	slingers,	of	pike-wielding	infantry	and	the
much	feared	Nemil	cataphracts	–	heavy	in	armour	atop	massive	horses,	roundshields	at	the	ready	although	their	lances	remained	at	rest	in	stirrup-sockets,	as
they	trooped	at	the	trot	to	the	far	wings,	making	plain	their	intention	to	flank
once	the	foot	soldiers	and	Trell	warriors	were	fully	engaged	in	the	basin	of	the
valley.
Bayen	Eckar,	the	river,	was	no	barrier,	barely	knee-deep.	The	cataphracts
would	cross	unimpeded.	Saylan’mathas	was	visible,	mounted	with	flanking
retainers,	traversing	the	distant	ridge.	Banners	streamed	above	the	terrible
commander,	serpentine	in	gold-trimmed	black	silk,	like	slashes	of	the	Abyss
clawing	through	the	air	itself.	As	the	train	presented	along	the	entire	ridge,
weapons	lifted	in	salute,	yet	no	cry	rose	heavenward,	for	such	was	not	the	habit
of	this	man’s	hand-picked	army.	That	silence	was	ominous,	murderous,
frightful.
Down	from	the	Trellish	steppes,	leading	this	defiant	army	of	warriors,	had
come	an	elder	named	Trynigarr,	to	this,	his	first	battle.	An	elder	for	whom	the
honorific	was	tainted	with	mockery,	for	this	was	one	old	man	whose	fount	of
wisdom	and	advice	seemed	long	since	dried	up;	an	old	man	who	said	little.


Silent	and	watchful,	is	Trynigarr,	like	a	hawk.	An	observation	followed	by	an
ungenerous	grin	or	worse	a	bark	of	laughter.
He	led	now	by	virtue	of	sobriety,	for	the	three	other	elders	had	all	partaken
five	nights	before	of	Weeping	Jegurra	cactus,	each	bead	sweated	out	on	a
prickly	blade	by	three	days	of	enforced	saturation	in	a	mixture	of	water	and
The	Eight	Spices,	the	latter	a	shamanistic	concoction	said	to	hold	the	voice	and
visions	of	earth-gods;	yet	this	time	the	brew	had	gone	foul,	a	detail	unnoticed	–
the	trench	dug	round	the	cactus	bole	had	inadvertently	captured	and	drowned	a
venomous	spider	known	as	the	Antelope,	and	the	addition	of	its	toxic	juices
had	flung	the	elders	into	a	deep	coma.	One	from	which,	it	turned	out,	they
would	never	awaken.
Scores	of	blooded	young	warriors	had	been	eager	to	take	command,	yet
the	old	ways	could	not	be	set	aside.	Indeed,	the	old	ways	of	the	Trell	were	at	the
heart	of	this	war	itself.	And	so	command	had	fallen	to	Trynigarr,	so	wise	he
has	nothing	to	say.
The	old	man	stood	before	the	warriors	now,	on	this	fated	ridge,	calm	and
silent	as	he	studied	the	enemy	presenting	one	alignment	after	another,	whilst
the	flanking	cavalry	–	three	thousand	paces	or	more	distant	to	north	and	south
–	finally	wheeled	and	began	the	descent	to	the	river.	Five	units	each,	each	unit	a
hundred	of	the	superbly	disciplined,	heavy-armoured	soldiers,	those	soldiers
being	nobleborn,	brothers	and	fathers	and	sons,	wild	daughters	and	savage
wives;	one	and	all	bound	to	the	lust	for	blood	that	was	the	Nemil	way	of	life.
That	there	were	entire	families	among	those	units,	and	that	each	unit	was	made
up	mostly	of	extended	families	and	led	by	a	captain	selected	by	acclamation
from	among	them,	made	them	the	most	feared	cavalry	west	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.
As	Trynigarr	watched	the	enemy,	so	Mappo	Runt	watched	his	warleader.
The	elder	did	nothing.
The	cataphracts	crossed	the	river	and	took	up	inward-facing	stations,
whereupon	they	waited.	On	the	slope	directly	opposite,	foot-soldiers	began	the
march	down,	whilst	advance	skirmishers	crossed	the	river,	followed	by
medium	and	then	heavy	infantry,	each	reinforcing	the	advance	bridgehead	on
this	side	of	the	river.
The	Trell	warriors	were	shouting	still,	throats	raw,	and	something	like	fear
growing	in	the	ever	longer	intervals	of	drawn	breath	and	pauses	between	beats
of	weapon	on	shield.	Their	battle-frenzy	was	waning,	and	all	that	it	had
succeeded	in	pushing	aside	–	all	the	mortal	terrors	and	doubts	that	anyone	sane
could	not	help	but	feel	at	the	edge	of	battle	–	were	now	returning.
The	bridgehead,	seeing	itself	unopposed,	fanned	out	to	accommodate	the
arrival	of	the	army’s	main	body	on	the	east	side	of	the	river.	As	they	moved,


deer	exploded	from	the	cover	of	the	thickets	and	raced	in	darts	this	way	and
that	between	the	armies.
Century	upon	century,	the	Trell	ever	fought	in	their	wild	frenzy.	Battle	after
battle,	in	circumstances	little	different	from	this	one,	they	would	have	charged
by	now,	gathering	speed	on	the	slope,	each	warrior	eager	to	outpace	the	others
and	so	claim	the	usually	fatal	glory	of	being	the	first	to	close	with	the	hated
enemy.	The	mass	would	arrive	like	an	avalanche,	the	Trell	making	full	use	of
their	greater	size	to	crash	into	and	knock	down	the	front	lines,	to	break	the
phalanx	and	so	begin	a	day	of	slaughter.
Sometimes	it	had	succeeded.	More	often	it	had	failed	–	oh,	the	initial
impact	had	often	knocked	from	their	feet	row	upon	row	of	enemy	soldiers,	had
on	occasion	sent	enemy	bodies	cartwheeling	through	the	air;	and	once,	almost
three	hundred	years	ago,	one	such	charge	had	knocked	an	entire	phalanx	on	its
ass.	But	the	Nemil	had	learned,	and	now	the	units	advanced	with	pikes	levelled
out.	A	Trell	charge	would	spit	itself	on	those	deadly	iron	points;	the	enemy
square,	trained	to	greater	mobility	and	accepting	backward	motion	as	easily	as
forward,	would	simply	absorb	the	collision.	And	the	Trell	would	break,	or	die
where	they	stood	locked	in	the	fangs	of	the	Nemil	pikes.
And	so,	as	the	Trell	did	nothing,	still	fixed	like	wind-plucked	scarecrows
upon	the	ridge,	Saylan’mathas	reappeared	on	his	charger,	this	time	before	the
river,	gaze	tilted	upward	as	if	to	pierce	the	stolid	mind	of	Trynigarr	as	he	rode
across	the	front	of	his	troops.	Clearly,	the	general	was	displeased;	for	now,	to
engage	with	the	Trell	he	would	have	to	send	his	infantry	upslope,	and	such
position	put	them	at	a	disadvantage	in	meeting	the	charge	that	would	surely
come	then.	Displeased,	Mappo	suspected,	but	not	unduly	worried.	The
phalanxes	were	superbly	trained;	they	could	divide	and	open	pathways	straight
down,	into	which	their	pikes	could	funnel	the	Trell,	driven	as	the	warriors
would	be	by	their	headlong	rush.	Still,	his	flanking	cavalry	had	just	lost	much
of	their	effectiveness,	assuming	he	left	them	at	their	present	stations,	and	now
Mappo	saw	messengers	riding	out	from	the	general’s	retinue,	one	down	and
the	other	up	the	valley’s	length.	The	cataphracts	would	now	proceed	upslope	to
take	the	same	ridge	the	Trell	occupied,	and	move	inward.	Twin	charges	would
force	the	Trell	to	turn	their	own	flanks.	Not	that	such	a	move	would	help	much,
for	the	warriors	knew	of	no	tactic	to	meet	a	cavalry	charge.
As	soon	as	the	cataphracts	swung	their	mounts	and	began	their	ascent,
Trynigarr	gestured,	each	hand	outward.	The	signal	was	passed	back	through
the	ranks,	down	to	the	ridge’s	backslope,	then	outward,	north	and	south,	to	the
hidden,	outlying	masses	of	Trell	warriors,	each	one	positioned	virtually
opposite	the	unsuspecting	cavalry	on	the	flanks.	Those	warriors	now	began


moving	up	towards	the	ridge	–	they	would	reach	it	well	before	the	cataphracts
and	their	armour-burdened	warhorses,	but	they	would	not	stop	on	the	summit,
instead	continuing	over	it,	onto	the	valley	slope	and	at	a	charge,	down	into	the
horse-soldiers.	Trell	cannot	meet	a	cavalry	charge,	but	they	can	charge	into
cavalry,	provided	the	momentum	is	theirs	–	as	it	would	be	on	this	day.
Dust	and	distant	sounds	of	slaughter	now,	from	the	baggage	camp	west	of
the	river,	as	the	fifteen	hundred	Trell	Trynigarr	had	sent	across	the	Bayen
Eckar	three	days	past	now	descended	upon	the	lightly	guarded	supply	camp.
Messengers	swarmed	in	the	valley	below,	and	Mappo	saw	the	general’s
train	halted,	horses	turning	every	which	way	as	if	to	match	the	confusion	of	the
officers	surrounding	Saylan’mathas.	On	the	distant	flanks,	the	Trell	had
appeared,	voicing	warcries,	over	the	ridge,	and	were	beginning	their	deadly
flow	downward	into	the	suddenly	confused,	churning	knot	of	riders.
Saylan’mathas,	who	moments	earlier	had	been	locked	in	the	mindset	of	the
attacker,	found	himself	shifting	stance,	his	thoughts	casting	away	all	notions	of
delivering	slaughter,	fixing	now	on	the	necessity	of	defence.	He	split	his	army
of	foot-soldiers,	half-legions	wheeling	out	and	moving	at	dog-trot	to	the	fartoo-distant	flanks,	horns	keening	to	alert	the	cavalry	that	an	avenue	of	retreat
now	existed.	Elements	of	light	cavalry	that	had	remained	on	the	other	side	of
the	river,	ready	to	be	cut	loose	to	run	down	fleeing	Trell,	the	general	now	sent
at	a	gallop	back	towards	the	unseen	baggage	camp,	but	their	horses	had	a	steep
slope	to	climb	first,	and	before	they	were	halfway	up,	eight	hundred	Trell
appeared	on	the	crest,	wielding	their	own	pikes,	these	ones	half	again	as	long
as	those	used	by	the	Nemil.	Taking	position	with	the	long	weapons	settled	and
angled	to	match	the	slope.	The	light	cavalry	reached	that	bristling	line	uneven
and	already	seeking	to	flinch	back.	Spitted	horses	reared	and	tumbled
downslope,	breaking	legs	of	the	horses	below	them.	Soldiers	spun	from	their
saddles,	all	advance	now	gone,	and	the	Trellish	line	began	marching	down	into
the	midst	of	the	enemy,	delivering	death.
The	general	had	halted	his	centre’s	advance	to	the	slope,	and	now
reordered	it	into	a	four-sided	defence,	the	pikes	a	glistening,	wavering	forest,
slowly	lifting	like	hackles	on	some	cornered	beast.
Motionless,	watching	for	a	time,	Trynigarr,	Wise	in	Silence,	now	halfturned	his	head,	gestured	in	a	small	wave	with	his	right	hand,	and	the	thousand
Trell	behind	him	formed	into	jostling	lines,	creating	avenues	through	which
the	columns	of	Trell	archers	came.
Archers	was	a	poor	description.	True,	there	were	some	warriors	carrying
recurved	longbows,	so	stiff	that	no	human	could	draw	them,	the	arrows
overlong	and	very	nearly	the	mass	of	javelins,	the	fletching	elongated,


stiffened	strips	of	leather.	Others,	however,	held	true	javelins	and	weighted
atlatls,	whilst	among	them	were	slingers,	including	those	with	sling-poles	and
two-wheeled	carts	behind	each	warrior,	loaded	down	with	the	large,	thin	sacks
they	would	fling	into	the	midst	of	the	enemy,	sacks	that	seethed	and	rippled.
Sixteen	hundred	archers,	then,	many	of	them	women,	who	later	joked	that
they	had	emptied	their	yurts	for	this	battle.	Moving	forward	onto	the	slope,
even	as	the	original	warriors,	now	aligned	in	columns,	moved	with	them.
Down,	to	meet	the	heart	of	the	Nemil	army.
Trynigarr	walked	in	their	midst,	suddenly	indistinguishable	from	any	other
warrior,	barring	his	age.	He	was	done	with	commanding,	for	the	moment.	Each
element	of	his	elaborate	plan	was	now	engaged,	the	outcome	left	to	the	bravery
and	ferocity	of	young	warriors	and	their	clan-leaders.	This	gesture	of
Trynigarr ’s	was	in	truth	the	finest	expression	of	confidence	and	assurance
possible.	The	battle	was	here,	it	was	now,	measured	in	the	rise	and	fall	of
weapons.	The	elder	had	done	what	he	could	to	speak	to	the	inherent	strengths
of	the	Trell,	while	deftly	emasculating	those	of	the	Nemil	and	their	vaunted
general.	And	so,	beneath	screeching	birds	and	in	sight	of	terrified	deer	still
running	and	bounding	along	the	valley	slopes,	the	day	and	its	battle	gloried	in
the	spilling	of	blood.
On	the	west	river	bank,	Nemil	archers,	arrayed	to	face	both	east	and	west,
sent	flights	of	deadly	arrows,	again	and	again,	the	shafts	descending	to	screams
and	the	thuds	of	wooden	shields,	until	the	advancing	warriors,	cutting	down	the
last	of	the	light	cavalry,	re-formed	beneath	the	missile	fire,	then	closed	at	a	trot
with	their	pikes,	the	first	touch	of	which	shattered	the	archers	and	their	meagre
guard	of	skirmishers.	The	ranks	who	had	faced	east,	sending	arrows	over	the
Nemil	square	into	the	Trell	marching	to	close,	were	now	struck	from	behind,
and	there	was	great	slaughter.
Trell	arrows	arced	out	to	land	within	the	phalanx,	the	heavy	shafts
punching	through	shield	and	armour.	Javelins	then	followed	as	the	Trell
moved	closer,	and	the	Nemil	front	ranks	grew	pocked,	porous	and	jostling	as
soldiers	moved	to	take	the	place	of	the	fallen.	Trellish	throwing	axes	met	them,
and,	at	last,	with	less	than	twenty	paces	between	the	forces,	the	pole-slings
whirled	above	the	massed	Trell,	the	huge	sacks	wheeling	ever	faster,	then
released,	out,	sailing	over	the	heads	of	the	front	ranks	of	Nemil,	down,	striking
pike-heads,	bursting	apart,	each	spike	spilling	out	hundreds	of	black	scorpions
–	and	thus	the	women	laughed,	saying	how	they	had	emptied	out	their	yurts	for
this	gift	to	the	hated	Nemil.
Small,	in	the	scheme	of	things,	yet,	that	day,	in	that	moment,	it	had	been
one	pebble	too	many	in	the	farmer ’s	field-cart,	and	the	axle	had	snapped.


Screaming	panic,	all	discipline	vanishing.	Hard,	cold	claws	of	the	scorpions…
on	the	neck,	slipping	down	beneath	breastplates,	the	cuffs	of	gauntlets,	down
onto	the	strapped	shield	arm…and	then	the	savage,	acid	sting,	puncturing	like	a
fang,	the	blaze	of	agony	surging	outward	–	it	was	enough,	it	was	more	than
enough.	The	phalanx	seemed	to	explode	before	Mappo’s	eyes,	figures	running,
shrieking,	writhing	in	wild	dances,	weapons	and	shields	flung	aside,	helms
torn	off,	armour	stripped	away.
Arrows	and	javelins	tore	into	the	heaving	mass,	and	those	that	raced	free
of	it	now	met	the	waiting	maces,	axes	and	swords	of	the	Trell.	And	Mappo,
along	with	his	fellow	warriors,	all	frenzy	driven	from	them,	delivered	cold
death.
The	great	general,	Saylan’mathas,	died	in	that	press,	trampled	underfoot	by
his	own	soldiers.	Why	he	had	dismounted	to	meet	the	Trell	advance	no-one
could	explain;	his	horse	had	been	recovered	as	it	trotted	back	into	the	baggage
camp,	its	reins	neatly	looped	about	the	hinged	horn	of	the	saddle,	the	stirrups
flipped	over	the	seat.
The	cataphracts,	those	feared	horse-soldiers,	born	of	pure	blood,	had	been
slaughtered,	as	had	the	half-legions	of	foot-soldiers	who	arrived	too	late	to	do
anything	but	die	amidst	flailing,	kicking	horses	and	the	bawling	of	the	mortally
wounded	nobles.
The	Nemil	had	looked	upon	a	thousand	warriors,	and	thought	those	Trell
the	only	ones	present.	Their	spies	had	failed	them	twice,	first	among	the	hill
tribes	when	rumours	of	the	alliance’s	break-up	had	been	deliberately	let	loose
to	the	ever	whispering	winds;	then	in	the	days	and	nights	leading	to	the	battle	at
Bayen	Eckar,	when	Trynigarr	had	sent	out	his	clans,	each	with	a	specific	task,
and	all	in	accordance	with	the	site	where	the	battle	would	take	place,	for	the
Trell	knew	this	land,	could	travel	unerring	on	moonless	nights,	and	could	hide
virtually	unseen	amidst	the	rumples	and	folds	of	these	valleys	during	the	day.
Trynigarr,	the	elder	who	had	led	his	first	battle,	would	come	to	fight	six
more,	each	time	throwing	back	the	Nemil	invaders,	until	the	treaty	was	signed
yielding	all	human	claim	on	the	Trell	steppes	and	hills,	and	the	old	man	who	so
rarely	spoke	would	die	drunk	in	an	alley	years	later,	long	after	the	last	clan	had
surrendered,	driven	from	their	wild-lands	by	the	starvation	that	came	from
sustained	slaughter	of	the	bhederin	herds	by	Nemil	and	their	half-breed
Trellish	scouts.
In	those	last	years,	Mappo	had	heard,	Trynigarr,	his	tongue	loosened	by
drink,	had	talked	often,	filling	the	air	with	slurred,	meaningless	words	and
fragmented	remembrances.	So	many	words,	not	one	wise,	to	fill	what	had	once
been	the	wisest	of	silences.


Three	strides	behind	Mappo	Runt,	Iskaral	Pust,	High	Priest	and	avowed
Magi	of	the	House	of	Shadow,	led	his	eerie	black-eyed	mule	and	spoke	without
cessation.	His	words	filled	the	air	like	dried	leaves	in	a	steady	wind,	and	held
all	the	significance	and	meaning	of	the	same;	punctuated	by	the	sob	of
moccasins	and	hoofs	dragging	free	of	swamp	mud	only	to	squelch	back	down,
the	occasional	slap	at	a	biting	insect,	and	the	sniffling	from	Pust’s	perpetually
runny	nose.
It	was	clear	to	Mappo	that	what	he	was	hearing	were	the	High	Priest’s
thoughts,	the	rambling,	directionless	interior	monologue	of	a	madman	vented
into	the	air	with	random	abandon.	And	every	hint	of	genius	was	but	a	chimera,
a	trail	as	false	as	the	one	they	now	walked	–	this	supposed	short-cut	that	was
now	threatening	to	swallow	them	whole,	to	drag	them	down	into	the	senseless,
dark	peat	that	would	be	forever	indifferent	to	their	sightless	eyes.
He	had	believed	that	Iskaral	Pust	had	decided	upon	taking	his	leave,
returning	with	Mogora	–	if	indeed	she	had	returned,	and	was	not	skittering
about	among	the	fetid	trees	and	curtains	of	moss	–	to	their	hidden	monastery	in
the	cliff.	But	something	as	yet	unexplained	had	changed	the	High	Priest’s	mind,
and	it	was	this	detail	more	than	any	other	that	made	Mappo	uneasy.
He’d	wanted	this	to	be	a	solitary	pursuit.	Icarium	was	the	Trell’s
responsibility,	no	matter	what	the	Nameless	Ones	asserted.	There	was	nothing
righteous	in	their	judgement	–	those	priests	had	betrayed	him	more	than	once.
They	had	earned	Mappo’s	eternal	enmity,	and	perhaps,	one	day,	he	would	visit
the	extremity	of	his	displeasure	upon	them.
Sorely	used	and	spiritually	abused,	Mappo	had	discovered	in	them	a	focus
for	his	hate.	He	was	Icarium’s	guardian.	His	friend.	And	it	was	clear,	as	well,
that	the	Jhag’s	new	companion	led	with	the	fevered	haste	of	a	fugitive,	a	man
knowing	well	he	was	now	hunted,	knowing	that	he	had	been	a	co-conspirator	in
a	vast	betrayal.	And	Mappo	would	not	relent.
Nor	was	he	in	need	of	Iskaral	Pust’s	help;	in	fact,	Mappo	had	begun	to
suspect	that	the	High	Priest’s	assistance	was	not	quite	as	honourable	as	it
seemed.	Traversing	this	marsh,	for	example,	a	journey	ostensibly	of	but	two
days,	Pust	insisted,	that	would	deliver	them	to	the	coast	days	in	advance	of	what
would	have	been	the	case	had	they	walked	the	high-ground	trail.	Two	days
were	now	five,	with	no	end	in	sight.	What	the	Trell	could	not	fathom,	however,
was	the	possible	motivation	Iskaral	–	and	by	extension,	the	House	of	Shadow	–
might	have	in	delaying	him.
Icarium	was	a	weapon	no	mortal	nor	god	could	risk	using.	That	the
Nameless	Ones	believed	otherwise	was	indicative	of	both	madness	and	outright
stupidity.	Not	so	long	ago,	they	had	set	Mappo	and	Icarium	on	a	path	to


Tremorlor,	an	Azath	House	capable	of	imprisoning	Icarium	for	all	eternity.
Such	imprisonment	had	been	their	design,	and	as	much	as	Mappo	railed	against
and	finally	defied	them,	he	had	understood,	even	then,	that	it	made	sense.	This
abrupt,	inexplicable	about-face	reinforced	the	Trell’s	belief	that	the	ancient	cult
had	lost	its	way,	or	had	been	usurped	by	some	rival	faction.
A	sudden	yelp	from	Iskaral	Pust	–	a	huge	shadow	slipped	over	the	two
travellers,	then	was	gone,	even	as	Mappo	looked	up,	his	eyes	searching
through	the	moss-bearded	branches	of	the	huge	trees	–	seeing	nothing,	yet
feeling	still	the	passage	of	a	cool	wind,	flowing	in	the	wake	of…something.
The	Trell	faced	the	High	Priest.	‘Iskaral	Pust,	are	there	enkar ’al	living	in	this
swamp?’
The	small	man’s	eyes	were	wide.	He	licked	his	lips,	inadvertently
collecting	the	smeared	remains	of	a	mosquito	with	his	tongue,	drawing	it
inward.	‘I	have	no	idea,’	he	said,	then	wiped	his	nose	with	the	back	of	his	hand,
looking	like	a	child	caught	out	in	some	horrible	crime.	‘We	should	go	back,
Mappo	Runt.	This	was	a	mistake.’	He	cocked	his	head.	‘Does	he	believe	me?
How	can	he	not?	It’s	been	five	days!	We’ve	not	crossed	this	arm	of	swamp,	this
northward	tendril,	no,	we’ve	walked	its	length!	Enkar ’al?	Gods	below,	they	eat
people!	Was	that	an	enkar ’al?	I	wish!	But	oh	no.	If	only.	Quick,	blessed	genius,
come	up	with	something	else	to	say!’	He	scratched	the	white	stubble	on	his
chin,	then	brightened.	‘It’s	Mogora’s	fault!	It	was	her	idea!	All	of	this!’
Mappo	looked	about.	A	northerly	arm	of	marshland?	They	had	cut
westward	to	find	it,	the	first	hint	that	something	was	awry,	but	Mappo	had	not
been	thinking	clearly	back	then.	He	was	not	even	certain	the	fog	had	lifted	from
his	spirit	in	the	time	since.	Yet	now	he	began	to	feel	something,	a	stirring	of	the
embers,	the	flicker	of	anger.	He	faced	right,	set	out.
‘Where	are	you	going?’	Iskaral	demanded,	hastening	to	catch	up,	the	mule
braying	a	complaint.
The	Trell	did	not	bother	replying.	He	was	fighting	the	desire	to	wring	the
little	man’s	scrawny	neck.
A	short	while	later	the	ground	perceptibly	rose,	becoming	drier,	and	open
pockets	of	sunlit	glades	appeared	ahead,	walled	beyond	by	stands	of	birch.
In	the	clearing	directly	ahead,	half-sitting	half-leaning	on	a	boulder,	was	a
woman.	Tall,	her	skin	the	colour	of	fine	ash,	long	black	hair	hanging	loose	and
straight.	She	wore	chain	armour,	glinting	silver,	over	a	grey,	hooded	shirt,	and
leggings	of	pale,	supple	leather.	High	boots	fashioned	from	some	black-scaled
creature	rose	to	her	knees.	Two	basket-hilted	rapiers	adorned	her	belt.
She	was	eating	an	apple,	its	skin	the	deep	hue	of	blood.
Her	eyes	were	large,	black,	with	elongated	epicanthic	folds	tilting	upward


at	the	corners,	and	they	were	fixed	on	Mappo	with	something	like	languid
disdain	and	mild	amusement.	‘Oh,’	she	murmured,	‘Ardata’s	hand	in	this,	I	see.
Healed	by	the	Queen	of	Spiders	–	you	foster	dangerous	alliances,	Guardian.’
Her	free	hand	pressed	against	her	lips,	eyes	widening.	‘How	rude	of	me!
Guardian	no	longer.	How	should	you	be	called	now,	Mappo	Runt?	Discarded
One?’	She	tossed	the	apple	to	one	side,	then	straightened.	‘We	have	much	to
talk	about,	you	and	I.’
‘I	do	not	know	you,’	the	Trell	replied.
‘My	name	is	Spite.’
‘Oh,’	said	Iskaral	Pust,	‘now	that’s	fitting,	since	I	hate	you	already.’
‘Allies	need	not	be	friends,’	she	replied,	gaze	flicking	with	contempt	to	the
High	Priest.	Her	eyes	narrowed	momentarily	on	the	mule,	then	she	said,	‘I	am
without	friends	and	I	seek	no	friendships.’
‘With	a	name	like	Spite,	is	it	any	wonder?’
‘Iskaral	Pust,	the	Hounds	have	done	well	in	disposing	of	Dejim	Nebrahl.
Or,	rather,	I	begin	to	comprehend	the	subtle	game	they	have	played,	given	the
proximity	of	the	Deragoth.	Your	master	is	clever.	I	give	him	that.’
‘My	master,’	hissed	Iskaral	Pust,	‘has	no	need	to	fashion	an	alliance	with
you.’
She	smiled,	and	it	was,	Mappo	judged,	a	most	beautiful	smile.	‘High	Priest,
from	you	and	your	master,	I	seek	nothing.’	Her	eyes	returned	once	more	to	rest
upon	the	Trell.	‘You,	Discarded	One,	have	need	of	me.	We	shall	travel	together,
you	and	I.	The	services	of	the	Magi	of	Shadow	are	no	longer	required.’
‘You’ll	not	get	rid	of	me	so	easily,’	Iskaral	Pust	said,	his	sudden	smile,
intended	to	be	unctuous,	sadly	marred	by	the	mosquito	carcass	squished	against
one	snaggled,	crooked	incisor.	‘Oh	no,	I	will	be	as	a	leech,	hidden	beneath	a
fold	in	your	clothing,	eagerly	engorging	upon	your	very	lifeblood.	I	shall	be
the	fanged	bat	hanging	beneath	your	udder,	lapping	lapping	lapping	your	sweet
exudence.	I	shall	be	the	fly	who	buzzes	straight	into	your	ear,	there	to	make	a
new	home	with	a	full	larder	at	my	beck	and	call.	I	shall	be	the	mosquito—’
‘Crushed	by	your	flapping	lips,	High	Priest,’	Spite	said	wearily,	dismissing
him.	‘Discarded	One,	the	coast	is	but	half	a	league	distant.	There	is	a	fishing
village,	sadly	devoid	of	life	now,	but	that	will	not	impede	us	at	all.’
Mappo	did	not	move.	‘What	cause	have	I,’	he	asked,	‘to	ally	myself	with
you?’
‘You	shall	need	the	knowledge	I	possess,	Mappo	Runt,	for	I	was	one	of	the
Nameless	Ones	who	freed	Dejim	Nebrahl,	with	the	aim	of	slaying	you,	so	that
the	new	Guardian	could	take	your	place	at	Icarium’s	side.	It	may	surprise	you,’
she	added,	‘that	I	am	pleased	the	T’rolbarahl	failed	in	the	former	task.	I	am


outlawed	from	the	Nameless	Ones,	a	fact	that	gives	me	no	small	amount	of
satisfaction,	if	not	pleasure.	Would	you	know	what	the	Nameless	Ones	intend?
Would	you	know	Icarium’s	fate?’
He	stared	at	her.	Then	asked,	‘What	awaits	us	in	the	village?’
‘A	ship.	Provisioned	and	crewed,	in	a	manner	of	speaking.	To	pursue	our
quarry,	we	must	cross	half	the	world,	Mappo	Runt.’
‘Don’t	listen	to	her!’
‘Be	quiet,	Iskaral	Pust,’	Mappo	said	in	a	growl.	‘Or	take	your	leave	of	us.’
‘Fool!	Very	well,	it	is	clear	to	me	that	my	presence	in	your	foul	company
is	not	only	necessary,	but	essential!	But	you,	Spite,	be	on	your	guard!	I	will
permit	no	betrayal	of	this	bold,	honourable	warrior!	And	watch	your	words,
lest	their	unleashing	haunt	him	unto	madness!’
‘If	he	has	withstood	yours	this	long,	priest,’	she	said,	‘then	he	is	proof	to
all	madness.’
‘You,	woman,	would	be	wise	to	be	silent.’
She	smiled.
Mappo	sighed.	Ah,	Pust,	would	that	you	heeded	your	own	admonishments…
	
The	boy	was	nine	years	old.	He	had	been	ill	for	a	time,	days	and	nights
unmeasured,	recalled	only	in	blurred	visions,	the	pain-filled	eyes	of	his
parents,	the	strange	calculation	in	those	of	his	two	younger	sisters,	as	if	they
had	begun	contemplating	life	without	an	older	brother,	a	life	freed	of	the
torments	and	teasings	and,	as	demanded,	his	stolid	reliability	in	the	face	of	the
other,	equally	cruel	children	in	the	village.
And	then	there	had	been	a	second	time,	one	he	was	able	to	imagine	distinct,
walled	on	all	sides,	roofed	in	black	night	where	stars	swam	like	boatmen
spiders	across	well-water.	In	this	time,	this	chamber,	the	boy	was	entirely
alone,	woken	only	by	the	needs	of	thirst,	finding	a	bucket	beside	his	bed,	filled
with	silty	water,	and	the	wood	and	horn	ladle	his	mother	used	only	on	feastnights.	Waking,	conjuring	the	strength	to	reach	out	and	collect	that	ladle,
dipping	it	into	the	bucket,	struggling	with	the	water ’s	weight,	drawing	the	tepid
fluid	in	through	cracked	lips,	to	ease	a	mouth	hot	and	dry	as	the	bowl	of	a	kiln.
One	day	he	awoke	yet	again,	and	knew	himself	in	the	third	time.	Though
weak,	he	was	able	to	crawl	from	the	bed,	to	lift	the	bucket	and	drink	down	the
last	of	the	water,	coughing	at	its	soupy	consistency,	tasting	the	flat	grit	of	the
silts.	Hunger ’s	nest	in	his	belly	was	now	filled	with	broken	eggs,	and	tiny	claws
and	beaks	nipped	at	his	insides.
A	long,	exhausting	journey	brought	him	outside,	blinking	in	the	harsh


sunlight	–	so	harsh	and	bright	he	could	not	see.	There	were	voices	all	around
him,	filling	the	street,	floating	down	from	the	roofs,	high-pitched	and	in	a
language	he	had	never	heard	before.	Laughter,	excitement,	yet	these	sounds
chilled	him.
He	needed	more	water.	He	needed	to	defeat	this	brightness,	so	that	he	could
see	once	more.	Discover	the	source	of	these	carnival	sounds	–	had	a	caravan
arrived	in	the	village?	A	troop	of	actors,	singers	and	musicians?
Did	no-one	see	him?	Here	on	his	hands	and	knees,	the	fever	gone,	his	life
returned	to	him?
He	was	nudged	on	one	side	and	his	groping	hand	reached	out	and	found
the	shoulder	and	nape	of	a	dog.	The	animal’s	wet	nose	slipped	along	his	upper
arm.	This	was	one	of	the	healthier	dogs,	he	judged,	his	hand	finding	a	thick
layer	of	fat	over	the	muscle	of	the	shoulder,	then,	moving	down,	the	huge	swell
of	the	beast’s	belly.	He	now	heard	other	dogs,	gathering,	pressing	close,
squirming	with	pleasure	at	the	touch	of	his	hands.	They	were	all	fat.	Had	there
been	a	feast?	The	slaughter	of	a	herd?
Vision	returned,	with	a	clarity	he	had	never	before	experienced.	Lifting	his
head,	he	looked	round.
The	chorus	of	voices	came	from	birds.	Rooks,	pigeons,	vultures	bounding
down	the	dusty	street,	screeching	at	the	bluff	rushes	from	the	village’s	dogs,
who	remained	possessive	of	the	remains	of	bodies	here	and	there,	mostly	little
more	than	bones	and	sun-blackened	tendons,	skulls	broken	open	by	canine
jaws,	the	insides	licked	clean.
The	boy	rose	to	his	feet,	tottering	with	sudden	dizziness	that	was	a	long
time	in	passing.	Eventually,	he	was	able	to	turn	and	look	back	at	his	family’s
house,	trying	to	recall	what	he	had	seen	when	crawling	through	the	rooms.
Nothing.	No-one.
The	dogs	circled	him,	all	seeming	desperate	to	make	him	their	master,	tails
wagging,	stepping	side	to	side	as	their	spines	twisted	back	and	forth,	ears
flicking	up	at	his	every	gesture,	noses	prodding	his	hands.	They	were	fat,	the
boy	realized,	because	they	had	eaten	everyone.
For	they	had	died.	His	mother,	his	father,	his	sisters,	everyone	else	in	the
village.	The	dogs,	owned	by	all	and	by	none	and	living	a	life	of	suffering,	of
vicious	hunger	and	rivalries,	had	all	fed	unto	indolence.	Their	joy	came	from
full	bellies,	all	rivalry	forgotten	now.	The	boy	understood	in	this	something
profound.	A	child’s	delusions	stripped	back,	revealing	the	truths	of	the	world.
He	began	wandering.
Some	time	later	he	found	himself	at	the	crossroads	just	beyond	the
northernmost	homestead,	standing	in	the	midst	of	his	newly	adopted	pets.	A


cairn	of	stones	had	been	raised	in	the	very	centre	of	the	conjoined	roads	and
tracks.
His	hunger	had	passed.	Looking	down	at	himself,	he	saw	how	thin	he	had
become,	and	saw	too	the	strange	purplish	nodules	thickening	his	joints,	wrist,
elbow,	knee	and	ankle,	not	in	the	least	painful.	Repositories,	it	seemed,	for
some	other	strength.
The	cairn’s	message	was	plain	to	him,	for	it	had	been	raised	by	a	shepherd
and	he	had	tended	enough	flocks	in	his	day.	It	told	him	to	go	north,	up	into	the
hills.	It	told	him	that	sanctuary	awaited	him	there.	There	had	been	survivors,
then.	That	they	had	left	him	behind	was	understandable	–	against	the	bluetongue
fever	nothing	could	be	done.	A	soul	lived	or	a	soul	died	of	its	own	resolve,	or
lack	thereof.
The	boy	saw	that	no	herds	remained	on	the	hillsides.	Wolves	had	come
down,	perhaps,	uncontested;	or	the	other	villagers	had	driven	the	beasts	with
them.	After	all,	a	sanctuary	would	have	such	needs	as	food	and	water,	milk	and
cheese.
He	set	off	on	the	north	trail,	the	dogs	accompanying	him.
They	were	happy,	he	saw.	Pleased	that	he	now	led	them.
And	the	sun	overhead,	that	had	been	blinding,	was	blinding	no	longer.	The
boy	had	come	to	and	now	crossed	a	threshold,	into	the	fourth	and	final	time.
He	knew	not	when	it	would	end.
	
With	languid	eyes,	Felisin	Younger	stared	at	the	scrawny	youth	who	had	been
brought	in	by	the	Unmanned	Acolytes.	Just	one	more	lost	survivor	looking	to
her	for	meaning,	guidance,	for	something	to	believe	in	that	could	not	be
crushed	down	and	swept	away	by	ill	winds.
He	was	a	Carrier	–	the	swellings	at	his	joints	told	her	that.	Likely,	he	had
infected	the	rest	of	his	village.	The	nodes	had	suppurated,	poisoning	the	air,
and	everyone	else	had	died.	He	had	arrived	at	the	gates	of	the	city	that	morning,
in	the	company	of	twelve	half-wild	dogs.	A	Carrier,	but	here,	in	this	place,	that
was	not	cause	for	banishment.	Indeed,	the	very	opposite.	Kulat	would	take	the
boy	under	his	wing,	for	teaching	in	the	ways	of	pilgrimage,	for	this	would	be
his	new	calling,	to	carry	plague	across	the	world,	and	so,	among	the	survivors
in	his	wake,	gather	yet	more	adherents	to	the	new	religion.	Faith	in	the	Broken,
the	Scarred,	the	Unmanned	–	all	manner	of	sects	were	being	formed,
membership	defined	by	the	damage	the	plague	had	delivered	to	each	survivor.
Rarest	and	most	precious	among	them,	the	Carriers.
All	that	Kulat	had	predicted	was	coming	to	pass.	Survivors	arrived,	at	first


a	trickle,	then	by	the	hundred,	drawn	here,	guided	by	the	hand	of	a	god.	They
began	excavating	the	long-buried	city,	making	for	themselves	homes	amidst
the	ghosts	of	long-dead	denizens	who	still	haunted	the	rooms,	the	hallways	and
the	streets,	silent	and	motionless,	spectres	witnessing	a	rebirth,	on	their	faint,
blurred	faces	a	riot	of	expressions	ranging	from	dismay	to	horror.	How	the
living	could	terrify	the	dead.
Herders	arrived	with	huge	flocks,	sheep	and	goats,	the	long-limbed	cattle
called	eraga	that	most	had	believed	extinct	for	a	thousand	years	–	Kulat	said
that	wild	herds	had	been	found	in	the	hills	–	and	here	the	dogs	recollected	what
they	had	been	bred	for	in	the	first	place	and	now	fended	the	beasts	against	the
wolves	and	the	grey	eagles	that	could	lift	a	newborn	calf	in	their	talons.
Artisans	had	arrived	and	had	begun	producing	images	that	had	been	born
in	their	sickness,	in	their	fevers:	the	God	in	Chains,	the	multitudes	of	the
Broken	and	the	Scarred	and	the	Unmanned.	Images	on	pottery,	on	walls	painted
in	the	ancient	mix	of	eraga	blood	and	red	ochre,	stone	statues	for	the	Carriers.
Fabrics	woven	with	large	knots	of	wool	to	represent	the	nodules,	scenes	of
fever	patterns	of	colour	surrounding	central	images	of	Felisin	herself,	Sha’ik
Reborn,	the	deliverer	of	the	true	Apocalypse.
She	did	not	know	what	to	make	of	all	this.	She	was	left	bewildered	again
and	again	by	what	she	witnessed,	every	gesture	of	worship	and	adoration.	The
horror	of	physical	disfigurement	assailed	her	on	all	sides,	until	she	felt	numb,
drugged	insensate.	Suffering	had	become	its	own	language,	life	itself	defined
as	punishment	and	imprisonment.	And	this	is	my	flock.
Her	followers	had,	thus	far,	answered	her	every	need	but	one,	and	that	was
the	growing	sexual	desire,	reflecting	the	changes	overtaking	her	body,	the
shape	of	womanhood,	the	start	of	blood	between	her	legs,	and	the	new	hunger
feeding	her	dreams	of	succour.	She	could	not	yearn	for	the	touch	of	slaves,	for
slavery	was	what	these	people	willingly	embraced,	here	and	now,	in	this	place
they	called	Hanar	Ara,	the	City	of	the	Fallen.
Around	a	mouthful	of	stones,	Kulat	said,	‘And	this	is	the	problem,
Highness.’
She	blinked.	She	hadn’t	been	listening.	‘What?	What	is	the	problem?’
‘This	Carrier,	who	arrived	but	this	morning	from	the	southwest	track.	With
his	dogs	that	answer	only	to	him.’
She	regarded	Kulat,	the	old	bastard	who	confessed	sexually	fraught	dreams
of	wine	as	if	the	utterance	was	itself	more	pleasure	than	he	could	bear,	as	if
confession	made	him	drunk.	‘Explain.’
Kulat	sucked	at	the	stones	in	his	mouth,	swallowed	spit,	then	gestured.
‘Look	upon	the	buds,	Highness,	the	buds	of	disease,	the	Many	Mouths	of


Bluetongue.	They	are	shrinking.	They	have	dried	up	and	are	fading.	He	has
said	as	much.	They	have	grown	smaller.	He	is	a	Carrier	who	shall,	one	day,
cease	being	a	Carrier.	This	child	shall	lose	his	usefulness.’
Usefulness.	She	looked	upon	him	again,	more	carefully	this	time,	and	saw
a	hard,	angular	face	older	than	its	years,	clear	eyes,	a	frame	that	needed	more
flesh	and	would	likely	find	it	once	again,	now	that	he	had	food	to	eat.	A	boy
still	young,	who	would	grow	into	a	man.	‘He	shall	reside	in	the	palace,’	she
said.
Kulat’s	eyes	widened.	‘Highness—’
‘I	have	spoken.	The	Open	Wing,	with	the	courtyard	and	stables,	where	he
can	keep	his	dogs—’
‘Highness,	there	are	plans	for	converting	the	Open	Wing	into	your	own
private	garden—’
‘Do	not	interrupt	me	again,	Kulat.	I	have	spoken.’
My	own	private	garden.	The	thought	now	amused	her,	as	she	reached	for
her	goblet	of	wine.	Yes,	and	we	shall	see	how	it	grows.
So	carried	on	her	unspoken	thoughts,	Felisin	saw	nothing	of	Kulat’s
sudden	dark	look,	the	moment	before	he	bowed	and	turned	away.
The	boy	had	a	name,	but	she	would	give	him	a	new	name.	One	better	suited
to	her	vision	of	the	future.	After	a	moment,	she	smiled.	Yes,	she	would	name
him	Crokus.


Chapter	Fifteen
An	old	man	past	soldiering
his	rivets	green,	his	eyes
rimmed	in	rust,
stood	as	if	heaved	awake
from	slaughter ’s	pit,	back-cut
from	broken	flight
when	young	blades	chased	him
from	the	field.
He	looks	like	a	promise	only	fools
could	dream	unfurled,
the	banners	of	glory
gesticulating
in	the	wind	over	his	head,
stripped	like	ghosts,
skulls	stove	in,	lips	flapping,
their	open	mouths	mute.
‘Oh	harken	to	me,’	cries	he
atop	his	imagined	summit,
‘and	I	shall	speak	–	of	riches
and	rewards,	of	my	greatness,
my	face	once	young	like	these
I	see	before	me	–	harken!’
While	here	I	sit	at	the	Tapu’s
table,	grease-fingered
with	skewered	meat,	cracked	goblet
pearled	in	the	hot	sun,	the	wine
watered	to	make,	in	the
alliance	of	thin	and	thick,
both	passing	palatable.
As	near	as	an	arm’s	reach
from	this	rabbler,	this


ravelling	trumpeter	who	once
might	have	stood	shield-locked
at	my	side,	red-hued,	masked
drunk,	coarse	with	fear,	in
the	moment	before	he	broke—
broke	and	ran—
and	now	he	would	call	a	new
generation	to	war,	to	battle-clamour,
and	why?	Well,	why	–	all
because	he	once	ran,	but	listen:
a	soldier	who	ran	once
ever	runs,	and	this,
honoured	magistrate,
is	the	reason—
the	sole	reason	I	say—
for	my	knife	finding	his	back.
He	was	a	soldier
whose	words	heaved	me
awake.
‘Bedura’s	Defence’	in	The	Slaying	of	King	Qualin	Tros	of	Bellid
(transcribed	as	song	by	Fisher,	Malaz	City,	last	year	of	Laseen’s	Reign)
Within	an	aura	redolent	and	reminiscent	of	a	crypt,	Noto	Boil,	company	cutter,
Kartoolian	by	birth	and	once	priest	of	Soliel,	long,	wispy,	colourless	hair
plucked	like	strands	of	web	by	the	wind,	his	skin	the	hue	of	tanned	goat	leather,
stood	like	a	bent	sapling	and	picked	at	his	green-furred	teeth	with	a	fish	spine.
It	had	been	a	habit	of	his	for	so	long	that	he	had	worn	round	holes	between
each	tooth,	and	the	gums	had	receded	far	back,	making	his	smile	skeletal.
He	had	smiled	but	once	thus	far,	by	way	of	greeting,	and	for	Ganoes	Paran,
that	had	been	once	too	many.
At	the	moment,	the	healer	seemed	at	best	pensive,	at	worst	distracted	by
boredom.	‘I	cannot	say	for	certain,	Captain	Kindly,’	the	man	finally	said.
‘About	what?’
A	flicker	of	the	eyes,	grey	floating	in	yellow	murk.	‘Well,	you	had	a
question	for	me,	did	you	not?’
‘No,’	Paran	replied,	‘I	had	for	you	an	order.’
‘Yes,	of	course,	that	is	what	I	meant.’


‘I	commanded	you	to	step	aside.’
‘The	High	Fist	is	very	ill,	Captain.	It	will	avail	you	nothing	to	disturb	his
dying.	More	pointedly,	you	might	well	become	infected	with	the	dread
contagion.’
‘No,	I	won’t.	And	it	is	his	dying	that	I	intend	to	do	something	about.	For
now,	however,	I	wish	to	see	him.	That	is	all.’
‘Captain	Sweetcreek	has—’
‘Captain	Sweetcreek	is	no	longer	in	command,	cutter.	I	am.	Now	get	out	of
my	way	before	I	reassign	you	to	irrigating	horse	bowels,	and	given	the	poor
quality	of	the	feed	they	have	been	provided	of	late…’
Noto	Boil	examined	the	fish	spine	in	his	hand.	‘I	will	make	note	of	this	in
my	company	log,	Captain	Kindly.	As	the	Host’s	ranking	healer,	there	is	some
question	regarding	chain	of	command	at	the	moment.	After	all,	under	normal
circumstances	I	far	outrank	captains—’
‘These	are	not	normal	circumstances.	I’m	losing	my	patience	here.’
An	expression	of	mild	distaste.	‘Yes,	I	have	first-hand	knowledge	of	what
happens	when	you	lose	patience,	no	matter	how	unjust	the	situation.	It	fell	to
me,	I	remind	you,	to	heal	Captain	Sweetcreek’s	fractured	cheekbone.’	The	man
stepped	to	one	side	of	the	entrance.	‘Please,	Captain,	be	welcome	within.’
Sighing,	Paran	strode	past	the	cutter,	pulled	aside	the	flap	and	entered	the
tent.
Gloom,	the	air	hot	and	thick	with	heavy	incense	that	could	only	just	mask
the	foul	reek	of	sickness.	In	this	first	chamber	were	four	cots,	each	occupied	by
a	company	commander,	only	two	of	whom	were	familiar	to	Paran.	All	slept	or
were	unconscious,	limbs	twisted	in	their	sweat-stained	blankets,	necks	swollen
by	infection,	each	drawn	breath	a	thin	wheeze	like	some	ghastly	chorus.
Shaken,	the	captain	moved	past	them	and	entered	the	tent’s	back	chamber,
where	there	was	but	one	occupant.
In	the	grainy,	crepuscular	air,	Paran	stared	down	at	the	figure	in	the	cot.
His	first	thought	was	that	Dujek	Onearm	was	already	dead.	An	aged,	bloodless
face	marred	by	dark	purple	blotches,	eyes	crusted	shut	by	mucus.	The	man’s
tongue,	the	colour	of	Aren	Steel,	was	so	swollen	it	had	forced	open	his	mouth,
splitting	the	parched	lips.	A	healer	–	probably	Noto	Boil	–	had	packed	Dujek’s
neck	in	a	mixture	of	mould,	ash	and	clay,	which	had	since	dried,	looking	like	a
slave	collar.
After	a	long	moment,	Paran	heard	Dujek	draw	breath,	the	sound	uneven,
catching	again	and	again	in	faint	convulsions	of	his	chest.	The	meagre	air	then
hissed	back	out	in	a	rattling	whistle.
Gods	below,	this	man	will	not	last	the	night.


The	captain	realized	that	his	lips	had	gone	numb,	and	he	was	having
trouble	focusing.	This	damned	incense,	it’s	d’bayang.	He	stood	for	another
half-dozen	heartbeats,	looking	down	on	the	shrunken,	frail	figure	of	the
Malazan	Empire’s	greatest	living	general,	then	he	turned	about	and	strode
from	the	chamber.
Two	steps	across	the	outer	room	and	a	hoarse	voice	halted	him.
‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you?’
Paran	faced	the	woman	who	had	spoken.	She	was	propped	up	on	her	bed,
enough	to	allow	her	a	level	gaze	on	the	captain.	Dark-skinned,	her	complexion
lacking	the	weathered	lines	of	desert	life,	her	eyes	large	and	very	dark.	Stringy,
sweat-plastered	black	hair,	cut	short	yet	nonetheless	betraying	a	natural	wave,
surrounded	her	round	face,	which	sickness	had	drawn,	making	her	eyes	seem
deeper,	more	hollow.
‘Captain	Kindly—’
‘By	the	Abyss	you	are.	I	served	under	Kindly	in	Nathilog.’
‘Well,	that’s	discouraging	news.	And	you	are?’
‘Fist	Rythe	Bude.’
‘One	of	Dujek’s	recent	promotions,	then,	for	I	have	never	heard	of	you.
Nor	can	I	fathom	where	you	hail	from.’
‘Shal-Morzinn.’
Paran	frowned.	‘West	of	Nemil?’
‘Southwest.’
‘How	did	you	come	to	be	in	Nathilog,	Fist?’
‘By	the	Three,	give	me	some	water,	damn	you.’
Paran	looked	round	until	he	found	a	bladder,	which	he	brought	to	her	side.
‘You’re	a	fool,’	she	said.	‘Coming	in	here.	Now	you	will	die	with	the	rest
of	us.	You’ll	have	to	pour	it	into	my	mouth.’
He	removed	the	stopper,	then	leaned	closer.
She	closed	her	remarkable,	luminous	eyes	and	tilted	her	head	back,	mouth
opening.	The	weals	on	her	neck	were	cracked,	leaking	clear	fluid	as	thick	as
tears.	Squeezing	the	bladder,	he	watched	the	water	stream	into	her	mouth.
She	swallowed	frantically,	gasped	then	coughed.
He	pulled	the	bladder	away.	‘Enough?’
She	managed	a	nod,	coughed	again,	then	swore	in	some	unknown
language.	‘This	damned	smoke,’	she	added	in	Malazan.	‘Numbs	the	throat	so
you	can’t	even	tell	when	you’re	swallowing.	Every	time	I	close	my	eyes,
d’bayang	dreams	rush	upon	me	like	the	Red	Winds.’
He	stood,	looking	down	upon	her.
‘I	left	Shal-Morzinn…in	haste.	On	a	Blue	Moranth	trader.	Money	for


passage	ran	out	in	a	town	called	Pitch,	on	the	Genabarii	coast.	From	there	I
made	it	to	Nathilog,	and	with	a	belly	too	empty	to	let	me	think	straight,	I	signed
up.’
‘Where	had	you	intended	to	go?’
She	made	a	face.	‘As	far	as	my	coin	would	take	me,	fool.	Crossing	the
Three	is	not	a	recipe	for	a	long	life.	Blessings	to	Oponn’s	kiss,	they	didn’t
come	after	me.’
‘The	Three?’
‘The	rulers	of	Shal-Morzinn…for	the	past	thousand	years.	You	seemed	to
recognize	the	empire’s	name,	which	is	more	than	most.’
‘I	know	nothing	beyond	the	name	itself,	which	is	found	on	certain	Malazan
maps.’
She	croaked	a	laugh.	‘Malazans.	Knew	enough	to	make	their	first	visit	their
last.’
‘I	wasn’t	aware	we’d	visited	at	all,’	Paran	said.
‘The	Emperor.	And	Dancer.	The	imperial	flagship,	Twist.	Gods,	that	craft
alone	was	sufficient	to	give	the	Three	pause.	Normally,	they	annihilate
strangers	as	a	matter	of	course	–	we	trade	with	no-one,	not	even	Nemil.	The
Three	despise	outsiders.	Were	they	so	inclined	they	would	have	conquered	the
entire	continent	by	now,	including	Seven	Cities.’
‘Not	expansionists,	then.	No	wonder	no-one’s	heard	of	them.’
‘More	water.’
He	complied.
When	she’d	finished	coughing,	she	met	his	eyes.	‘You	never	told	me	–	who
are	you	in	truth?’
‘Captain	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘He’s	dead.’
‘Not	yet.’
‘All	right.	So	why	the	lie?’
‘Dujek	decommissioned	me.	Officially,	I	am	without	rank.’
‘Then	what	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	doing	here?’
He	smiled.	‘That’s	a	long	story.	At	the	moment,	I	have	one	thing	I	need	to
do,	and	that	is,	repay	a	debt.	I	owe	Dujek	that	much.	Besides,	it’s	not	good	to
have	a	goddess	loose	in	the	mortal	realm,	especially	one	who	delights	in
misery.’
‘They	all	delight	in	misery.’
‘Yes,	well.’
She	bared	a	row	of	even	teeth,	stained	by	sickness.	‘Captain,	do	you	think,
had	we	known	Poliel	was	in	the	temple,	we	would	have	gone	in	at	all?	You,	on


the	other	hand,	don’t	have	that	excuse.	Leaving	me	to	conclude	that	you	have
lost	your	mind.’
‘Captain	Sweetcreek	certainly	agrees	with	you,	Fist,’	Paran	said,	setting	the
bladder	down.	‘I	must	take	my	leave.	I	would	appreciate	it,	Fist	Rythe	Bude,	if
you	refer	to	me	as	Captain	Kindly.’	He	walked	towards	the	tent’s	exit.
‘Ganoes	Paran.’
Something	in	her	tone	turned	him	round	even	as	he	reached	for	the	flap.
‘Burn	my	corpse,’	she	said.	‘Ideally,	fill	my	lungs	with	oil,	so	that	my	chest
bursts,	thus	freeing	to	flight	my	ravaged	soul.	It’s	how	it’s	done	in	ShalMorzinn.’
He	hesitated,	then	nodded.
Outside,	he	found	the	cutter	Noto	Boil	still	standing	at	his	station,
examining	the	bloodied	point	of	the	fish	spine	a	moment	before	slipping	it
back	into	his	mouth.
‘Captain	Kindly,’	the	man	said	in	greeting.	‘The	outrider	Hurlochel	was
just	here,	looking	for	you.	From	him,	I	gather	you	intend	something…rash.’
‘Cutter,	when	the	alternative	is	simply	waiting	for	them	to	die,	I	will	accept
the	risk	of	doing	something	rash.’
‘I	see.	How,	then,	have	you	planned	this	assault	of	yours?	Given	that	you
shall	face	the	Grey	Goddess	herself.	I	doubt	even	your	reputation	will	suffice
in	compelling	the	soldiers	to	assail	the	Grand	Temple	of	Poliel.	Indeed,	I	doubt
you	will	get	them	to	even	so	much	as	enter	G’danisban.’
‘I’m	not	taking	any	soldiers,	cutter.’
A	sage	nod	from	the	gaunt	man.	‘Ah,	an	army	of	one,	then,	is	it?	Granted,’
he	added,	eyeing	Paran	speculatively,	‘I	have	heard	tales	of	your
extraordinary…ferocity.	Is	it	true	you	once	dangled	a	Falah’d	over	the	edge	of
his	palace’s	tower	balcony?	Even	though	he	was	an	ally	of	the	empire	at	the
time.	What	was	his	crime	again?	Oh	yes,	a	clash	of	colours	in	his	attire,	on	the
first	day	of	the	Emperor ’s	Festival.	What	were	those	colours	he	had	the
effrontery	to	wear?’
Paran	studied	the	man	for	a	moment,	then	he	smiled.	‘Blue	and	green.’
‘But	those	colours	do	not	clash,	Captain.’
‘I	never	claimed	good	judgement	in	aesthetic	matters,	cutter.	Now,	what
were	we	talking	about?	Oh	yes,	my	army	of	one.	Indeed.	I	intend	to	lead	but
one	man.	Together,	the	two	of	us	shall	attack	the	Grey	Goddess,	with	the	aim	of
driving	her	from	this	realm.’
‘You	chose	wisely,	I	think,’	Noto	Boil	said.	‘Given	what	awaits	Hurlochel,
he	displayed	impressive	calm	a	few	moments	ago.’
‘And	well	he	should,’	Paran	said,	‘since	he’s	not	coming	with	me.	You	are.’


The	fish	spine	speared	through	the	cutter ’s	upper	lip.	A	look	of	agony
supplanted	disbelief.	He	tore	the	offending	needle	from	his	lip	and	flung	it
away,	then	brought	up	both	hands	to	clench	against	the	pain.	His	eyes	looked
ready	to	clamber	from	their	sockets.
Paran	patted	the	man	on	the	shoulder.	‘Get	that	seen	to,	will	you?	We	depart
in	half	a	bell,	cutter.’
	
He	sat	on	a	kit	chest,	settled	back	slowly,	until	the	give	of	the	tent	wall	ceased,
then	stretched	out	his	legs.	‘I	should	be	half-drunk	right	now,’	he	said,	‘given
what	I’m	about	to	do.’
Hurlochel	seemed	unable	to	muster	a	smile.	‘Please,	Captain.	We	should
decamp.	Cut	our	losses.	I	urge	you	to	abandon	this	course	of	action,	which	will
do	naught	but	result	in	the	death	of	yet	another	good	soldier,	not	to	mention	an
irritating	but	competent	company	cutter.’
‘Ah,	yes.	Noto	Boil.	Once	priest	to	Soliel,	sister	goddess	of	Poliel.’
‘Priest	no	longer,	Captain.	Disavowed	hold	no	weight	with	the	ascendant	so
abandoned.’
‘Soliel.	Mistress	of	Healing,	Beneficence,	the	Goddess	that	Weeps	Healing
Tears.	She	must	have	let	loose	an	ocean	of	them	by	now,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Is	it	wise	to	mock	her	at	this	threshold,	Captain?’
‘Why	not?	How	has	her	infamous,	unceasing	sorrow	for	the	plight	of
mortals	done	them	any	good,	any	at	all,	Hurlochel?	It’s	easy	to	weep	when
staying	far	away,	doing	nothing.	When	you	take	credit	for	every	survivor	out
there	–	those	whose	own	spirits	fought	the	battle,	whose	own	spirits	refused	to
yield	to	Hood’s	embrace.’	He	sneered	up	at	the	tent	roof.	‘It’s	the	so-called
friendly,	sympathetic	gods	who	have	the	most	to	answer	for.’	Paran	glared	at
the	man	standing	before	him.	‘Hood	knows,	the	other	ones	are	straightforward
and	damned	clear	on	their	own	infamy	–	grant	them	that.	But	to	proffer
succour,	salvation	and	all	the	rest,	whilst	leaving	true	fate	to	chance	and	chance
alone	–	damn	me,	Hurlochel,	to	that	they	will	give	answer!’
The	outrider ’s	eyes	were	wide,	unblinking.
Paran	looked	away.	‘Sorry.	Some	thoughts	I’d	do	better	to	keep	to	myself.
It’s	a	longstanding	fault	of	mine,	alas.’
‘Captain.	For	a	moment	there…your	eyes…they…flared.	Like	a	beast’s.’
Paran	studied	the	man.	‘Did	they	now?’
‘I’d	swear	it	with	one	heel	on	Hood’s	own	foreskin,	Captain.’
Ganoes	Paran	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.	‘Relay	these	orders	to	the
officers.	This	army	marches	in	four	days.	In	three	days’	time,	I	want	them	in


full	kit,	dressed	out	with	weapons	bared	for	inspection,	ready	at	noon.	And
when	we	depart,	I	want	to	leave	this	camp	clean,	every	latrine	filled	in,	the
refuse	burned.’	He	faced	Hurlochel.	‘Get	these	soldiers	busy	–	they’re	rotting
from	the	inside	out.	Do	you	have	all	that,	Hurlochel?’
The	outrider	smiled,	then	repeated	Paran’s	orders	word	for	word.
‘Good.	Be	sure	to	impress	on	the	officers	that	these	days	of	lying	round
moping	and	bitching	are	at	an	end.	Tell	them	the	order	of	march	will	place	to
the	lead	post	the	most	presentable	company	–	everyone	else	eats	their	dust.’
‘Captain,	where	do	we	march?’
‘No	idea.	I’ll	worry	about	that	then.’
‘What	of	the	High	Fist	and	the	others	in	that	tent?’
‘Chances	are,	they	won’t	be	up	to	much	for	a	while.	In	the	meantime—’
‘In	the	meantime,	you	command	the	Host,	sir.’
‘Aye,	I	do.’
Hurlochel’s	sudden	salute	was	sharp,	then	he	pivoted	and	strode	from	the
tent.
Paran	stared	after	him.	Fine,	at	least	someone’s	damned	pleased	about	it.
A	short	time	later,	he	and	Noto	Boil	sat	atop	their	horses	at	the	camp’s
edge,	looking	downslope	and	across	the	flat	killing-ground	to	the	city’s	walls,
its	bleached-limestone	facing	a	mass	of	scrawls,	painted	symbols,	hand-prints,
skeletal	figures.	This	close,	there	should	have	been	sounds	rising	from	the
other	side	of	those	walls,	the	haze	of	dust	and	smoke	overhead,	and	the	huge
gate	should	be	locked	open	for	a	steady	stream	of	traders	and	hawkers,	drovers
and	work	crews.	Soldiers	should	be	visible	in	the	windows	of	the	gate’s
flanking	square	towers.
The	only	movement	came	from	flocks	of	pigeons	lifting	into	view	then
dipping	back	down,	fitful	and	frantic	as	an	armada	of	kites	rejected	by	stormwinds;	and	from	the	blue-tinted	desert	starlings	and	croaking	crows	lined	up
like	some	nightmare	army	on	the	battlements.
‘Captain,’	the	cutter	said,	the	fish	spine	once	more	jutting	from	between	his
lips	–	the	hole	it	had	made	earlier	just	above	those	lips	was	a	red,	slightly
puckered	spot,	smeared	like	a	popped	pimple	–	‘you	believe	me	capable	of
assaulting	all	that	is	anathema	to	me?’
‘I	thought	you	were	disavowed,’	Paran	said.
‘My	point	precisely.	I	cannot	even	so	much	as	call	upon	Soliel	for	her
benign	protection.	Perhaps	your	eyes	are	blind	to	the	truth,	but	I	tell	you,
Captain,	I	can	see	the	air	roiling	up	behind	those	walls	–	it	is	the	breath	of
chaos.	Currents	swirl,	heave	–	even	to	look	upon	them,	as	I	do	now,	makes	me
ill.	We	shall	die,	you	and	I,	not	ten	paces	in	from	the	gate.’


Paran	checked	the	sword	at	his	belt,	then	adjusted	his	helm’s	strap.	‘I	am
not	as	blind	as	you	believe	me	to	be,	cutter.’	He	studied	the	city	for	a	moment,
then	gathered	his	reins.	‘Ride	close	to	my	side,	Noto	Boil.’
‘Captain,	the	gate	looks	closed,	locked	tight	–	we	are	not	welcome.’
‘Never	mind	the	damned	gate,’	Paran	said.	‘Are	you	ready?’
The	man	turned	wild	eyes	upon	him.	‘No,’	he	said	in	a	high	voice,	‘I	am
not.’
‘Let’s	get	this	over	with,’	Paran	said,	nudging	his	horse	into	motion.
Noto	Boil	spared	one	last	look	over	his	shoulder,	and	saw	soldiers
standing,	watching,	gathered	in	their	hundreds.	‘Gods,’	he	whispered,	‘why	am
I	not	among	them	right	now?’
Then	he	moved	to	catch	up	to	Captain	Kindly,	who	had	once	dangled	an
innocent	man	from	a	tower ’s	edge.	And	now	does	it	all	over	again	–	to	me!
	
She	had	once	been	sent	out	to	hunt	down	her	younger	brother,	tracking	him
through	half	the	city	–	oh,	he’d	known	she	was	after	him,	known	that	she	was
the	one	they’d	send,	the	only	one	capable	of	closing	a	hand	on	one	scrawny
ankle,	dragging	him	back,	then	shaking	him	until	his	brain	rattled	inside	his
skull.	He’d	led	her	a	wild	trail	that	night.	Ten	years	old	and	already	completely
out	of	control,	eyes	bright	as	marbles	polished	in	a	mouthful	of	spit,	the	white
smile	more	wicked	than	a	wolf’s	snarl,	all	gangly	limbs	and	cavorting	malice.
He	had	been	collecting…things.	In	secret.	Strands	of	hair,	nail	clippings,	a
rotted	tooth.	Something,	it	turned	out,	from	everyone	in	the	entire	extended
family.	Forty-two,	if	one	counted	four-month-old	Minarala	–	and	he	had,	the
little	bastard.	A	madness	less	imaginative	might	have	settled	for	a	host	of
horrid	dolls,	upon	which	he	could	deliver	minor	but	chronic	torment	to	feed
his	insatiable	evil,	but	not	her	brother,	who	clearly	believed	himself	destined
for	vast	infamy.	Not	content	with	dolls	fashioned	in	likenesses,	he	had
constructed,	from	twine,	sticks,	straw,	wool	and	horn,	a	tiny	flock	of	forty-two
sheep.	Penned	in	a	kraal	of	sticks	assembled	on	the	floor	of	the	estate’s	attic.
Then,	from	one	of	his	own	milk	teeth,	newly	plucked	from	his	mouth,	he	made
for	himself	the	likeness	of	a	wolf	fang	and	then,	with	tatters	of	fur,	the	wolf	to
which	it	belonged,	of	a	scale	to	permit	it	to	devour	a	sheep-doll	in	a	single
gulp.
In	skeins	of	demented	magic,	he	had	set	his	wolf	among	the	flock.
Screams	and	wails	in	the	night,	in	household	after	household,	unleashed
from	terrifying	nightmares	steeped	in	the	reek	of	panic	and	lanolin,	of
clopping	hoofs	and	surges	of	desperate,	hopeless	flight.	Nips	and	buffets	from


the	huge	roaring	wolf,	the	beast	toying	with	every	one	of	them	–	oh,	she	would
remember	the	torment	for	a	long,	long	time.
In	the	course	of	the	following	day,	as	uncles,	aunts,	nephews	and	the	like
gathered,	all	pale	and	trembling,	and	as	the	revelation	arrived	that	one	and	all
had	shared	their	night	of	terror,	few	were	slow	in	realizing	the	source	of	their
nightmares	–	of	course	he	had	already	lit	out,	off	to	one	of	his	countless	boltholes	in	the	city.	Where	he	would	hide	until	such	time	as	the	fury	and	outrage
should	pass.
For	the	crimes	committed	by	children,	all	fugue	eventually	faded,	as
concern	rose	in	its	stead.	For	most	children,	normal	children;	but	not	for	Ben
Adaephon	Delat,	who	had	gone	too	far.	Again.
And	so	Torahaval	Delat	had	been	dispatched	to	track	down	her	brother,	and
to	deliver	upon	him	an	appropriate	punishment.	Such	as,	she	had	considered	at
the	time,	flaying	him	alive.	Sheep,	were	they?	Well,	she	carried	in	her	pack	the
wolf	doll,	and	with	that	she	intended	most	dreadful	torture.	Though	nowhere
near	as	talented	as	her	younger	brother,	and	admittedly	far	less	imaginative,
she	had	managed	to	fashion	a	leash	of	sorts	for	the	creature,	and	now,	no
matter	where	her	brother	went,	she	could	follow.
He	was	able	to	stay	ahead	of	her	for	most	of	a	day	and	the	following	night,
until	a	bell	before	dawn	when,	on	a	rooftop	in	the	Prelid	Quarter	of	Aren,	she
caught	up	with	him,	holding	in	her	hands	the	wolf	doll,	gripping	the	back	legs
and	pulling	them	wide.
The	boy,	running	flat	out	one	moment,	flat	on	his	face	the	next.	Squealing
and	laughing,	and,	even	as	she	stumbled,	that	laughter	stung	so	that	she	gave
those	legs	an	extra	twist.
And,	screaming,	fell	onto	the	pebbled	roof,	her	hips	filling	with	agony.
Her	brother	shrieked	as	well,	yet	could	not	stop	laughing.
She	had	not	looked	too	closely	at	the	wolf	doll,	and	now,	gasping	and
wincing,	she	sought	to	do	so.	The	gloom	was	reluctant	to	yield,	but	at	last	she
made	out	the	beast’s	bound-up	body	beneath	the	tatter	of	fur	–	her	underclothes
–	the	ones	that	had	disappeared	from	the	clothesline	a	week	earlier	–	knotted
and	wrapped	tight	around	some	solid	core,	the	nature	of	which	she	chose	not	to
deliberate	overmuch.
He’d	known	she	would	come	after	him.	Had	known	she’d	find	his	stash	of
dolls	in	the	attic.	Had	known	she	would	make	use	of	the	wolf	doll,	his	own
anima	that	he	had	so	carelessly	left	behind.	He’d	known…everything.
That	night,	in	the	darkness	before	dawn,	Torahaval	decided	that	she	would
hate	him,	for	ever	more.	Passionately,	a	hatred	fierce	enough	to	scour	the	earth
in	its	entirety.


It’s	easy	to	hate	the	clever	ones,	even	if	they	happen	to	be	kin.	Perhaps
especially	then.
There	was	no	clear	path	from	that	recollection	to	her	life	now,	to	this
moment,	with	the	singular	exception	of	the	sensation	that	she	was	trapped
inside	a	nightmare;	one	from	which,	unlike	that	other	nightmare	all	those	years
ago,	she	would	never	awaken.
Her	brother	was	not	there,	laughing	and	gasping,	then	finally,	convulsed
with	glee	on	the	rooftop,	releasing	the	sorcery	within	the	wolf	doll.	Making	the
pain	go	away.	Her	brother,	dead	or	alive	–	by	now	more	probably	dead	–	was
very	far	away.	And	she	wished,	with	all	her	heart,	that	it	wasn’t	so.
Mumbling	like	a	drunk	beggar,	Bridthok	sat	before	the	stained	granitetopped	table	to	her	right,	his	long-nailed	fingers	pushing	the	strange
assortment	of	gold	and	silver	coins	back	and	forth	as	he	sought	to	force	upon
them	some	means	of	categorization,	a	task	at	which	he	was	clearly	failing.	The
vast	chests	of	coinage	in	Poliel’s	temple	were	bottomless	–	not	figuratively	but
literally,	they	had	discovered.	And	to	reach	down	into	the	ice-cold	darkness
was	to	close	hands	on	frost-rimed	gold	and	silver,	in	all	manner	of	currency.
Stamped	bars,	studded	teeth,	holed	spheres,	torcs	and	rings,	rolled	bolts	of
gold-threaded	silk	small	enough	to	fit	in	the	palm	of	one	hand,	and	coins	of	all
sorts:	square,	triangular,	crescent,	holed,	tubular,	along	with	intricate	folding
boxes,	chains,	beads,	spools,	honeycomb	wafers	and	ingots.	Not	one	of	which
was	familiar	to	any	of	them	gathered	here	–	trapped	here	–	in	the	G’danisban
temple	with	its	mad,	horrendous	goddess.	Torahaval	had	no	idea	there	were	so
many	languages	in	the	world,	such	as	she	saw	inscribed	upon	much	of	the
currency.	Letters	like	tiny	images,	letters	proceeding	diagonally,	or	vertically,
or	in	spiral	patterns,	some	letters	little	more	than	patterns	of	dots.
From	other	realms,	Bridthok	insisted.	The	more	mundane	coins	could	be
found	in	the	eastern	chamber	behind	the	altar,	an	entire	room	heaped	with	the
damned	things.	An	empire’s	treasury	in	that	room	alone,	the	man	claimed,	and
perhaps	he	was	right.	With	the	first	rumour	of	plague,	the	coffers	of	Poliel
filled	to	overflowing.	But	it	was	the	alien	coinage	that	most	interested	the	old
man.	It	had	since	become	Bridthok’s	obsession,	this	Cataloguing	of	Realms	that
he	claimed	would	be	his	final	glory	of	scholarship.
A	strange	contrast,	this	academic	bent,	in	a	man	for	whom	ambition	and
lust	for	power	seemed	everything,	the	very	reason	for	drawing	breath,	the	cage
in	which	his	murderous	heart	paced.
He	had	loosed	more	rumours	of	his	death	than	anyone	she	had	ever	known,
a	new	one	every	year	or	so,	to	keep	the	many	hunters	from	his	trail,	he
claimed.	She	suspected	he	simply	took	pleasure	in	the	challenge	of	invention.


Among	the	fools	–	her	co-conspirators	–	gathered	here,	Bridthok	was	perhaps
the	most	fascinating.	Neither	Septhune	Anabhin	nor	Sradal	Purthu	encouraged
her,	in	matters	of	trust	or	respect.	And	Sribin,	well,	Sribin	was	no	longer	even
recognizable.
The	fate,	it	seemed,	of	those	whom	the	Grey	Goddess	took	as	mortal	lover.
And	when	she	tired	of	the	rotted,	moaning	thing	that	had	once	been	Sribin,	the
bitch	would	select	another.	From	her	dwindling	store	of	terrified	prisoners.
Male,	female,	adult,	child,	it	mattered	naught	to	Poliel.
Bridthok	insisted	the	cult	of	Sha’ik	was	reborn,	invigorated	beyond	–	far
beyond	–	all	that	had	gone	before.	Somewhere,	out	there,	was	the	City	of	the
Fallen,	and	a	new	Sha’ik,	and	the	Grey	Goddess	was	harvesting	for	her	a
broken	legion	of	the	mad,	for	whom	all	that	was	mortal	belonged	to	misery
and	grief,	the	twin	offspring	of	Poliel’s	womb.	And,	grey	in	miasma	and
chaos,	blurred	by	distance,	there	lurked	the	Crippled	God,	twisted	and	cackling
in	his	chains,	ever	drawing	tighter	this	foul	alliance.
What	knew	Torahaval	of	wars	among	the	gods?	She	did	not	even	care,
beyond	the	deathly	repercussions	in	her	own	world,	her	own	life.
Her	younger	brother	had	long	ago	fallen	one	way;	and	she	another,	and
now	all	hope	of	escape	was	gone.
Bridthok’s	mumbling	ceased	in	a	sudden	gasp.	He	started	in	his	chair,	head
lifting,	eyes	widening.
A	tremor	ran	through	Torahaval	Delat.	‘What	is	it?’	she	demanded.
The	old	man	rose	from	behind	the	table.	‘She	summons	us.’
I	too	must	be	mad	–	what	is	there	left	in	life	to	love?	Why	do	I	still	grip	the
edge,	when	the	Abyss	offers	everything	I	now	yearn	for?	Oblivion.	An	end.
Gods…an	end.	‘More	than	that,	Bridthok,’	she	said.	‘You	look…aghast.’
Saying	nothing	and	not	meeting	her	eye,	he	headed	out	into	the	hallway.
Cursing	under	her	breath,	Torahaval	followed.
Once,	long	ago,	her	brother	–	no	more	than	four,	perhaps	five	years	old	at
the	time,	long	before	the	evil	within	him	had	fully	grown	into	itself	–	had
woken	screaming	in	the	night,	and	she	had	run	to	his	bedside	to	comfort	him.
In	child	words,	he	described	his	nightmare.	He	had	died,	yet	walked	the	world
still,	for	he	had	forgotten	something.	Forgotten,	and	no	matter	what	he	did,	no
recollection	was	possible.	And	so	his	corpse	wandered,	everywhere,	with	ever
the	same	question	on	his	lips,	a	question	delivered	to	every	single	person
cursed	to	cross	his	path.	What?	What	have	I	forgotten?
It	had	been	hard	to	reconcile	that	shivering,	wide-eyed	child	hiding	in	her
arms	that	night	with	the	conniving	trickster	of	only	a	few	years	later.
Perhaps,	she	now	thought	as	she	trailed	Bridthok	and	the	train	of	his


flapping,	threadbare	robes,	perhaps	in	the	interval	of	those	few	years,
Adaephon	Delat	had	remembered	what	it	was	he	had	forgotten.	Perhaps	it	was
nothing	more	than	what	a	corpse	still	striding	the	mortal	world	could	not	help
but	forget.
How	to	live.
	
‘I	thought	daytime	was	supposed	to	be	for	sleeping,’	Bottle	muttered	as	his
sergeant	tugged	on	his	arm	yet	again.	The	shade	of	the	boulder	he	had	been
curled	up	beside	was,	the	soldier	told	himself,	the	only	reason	he	was	still
alive.	This	day	had	been	the	hottest	yet.	Insects	crawling	on	stone	slabs	had
cooked	halfway	across,	shells	popping	like	seeds.	No-one	moved,	no-one	said
a	thing.	Thirst	and	visions	of	water	obsessed	the	entire	troop.	Bottle	had
eventually	fallen	into	a	sleep	that	still	pulled	at	him	with	torpid,	heavy	hands.
If	only	Fiddler	would	damned	well	leave	him	alone.
‘Come	with	me,	Bottle.	Up.	On	your	feet.’
‘If	you’ve	found	a	cask	of	spring	water,	Sergeant,	then	I’m	yours.
Otherwise…’
Fiddler	lifted	him	upright,	then	dragged	him	along.	Stumbling,	his	tongue
feeling	like	a	knot	of	leather	strips,	Bottle	was	barely	aware	of	the	path
underfoot.	Away	from	the	road,	among	wind-sculpted	rocks,	winding	this	way
and	that.	Half-blinded	by	the	glare,	it	was	a	moment	before	he	realized	that	they
had	stopped,	were	standing	on	a	clearing	of	flat	sand,	surrounded	by	boulders,
and	there	were	two	figures	awaiting	them.
Bottle	felt	his	heart	tighten	in	his	chest.	The	one	seated	cross-legged
opposite	was	Quick	Ben.	To	his	right	squatted	the	assassin	Kalam,	his	dark	face
glistening,	worn	black	gloves	on	his	hands	and	the	elongated	handles	of	his
twin	long-knives	jutting	out	from	beneath	his	arms.	The	man	looked	ready	to
kill	something,	although	Bottle	suspected	that	was	his	normal	expression.
Quick	Ben’s	eyes	were	fixed	on	him,	languid	yet	dangerous,	like	a	leopard
playing	with	a	maimed	hare.	But	there	was	something	else	in	that	regard,	Bottle
suspected.	Something	not	quite	hidden.	Fear?
After	a	moment	of	locked	gazes,	Bottle’s	attention	was	drawn	to	the
collection	of	dolls	perched	in	the	sand	before	the	wizard.	Professional	interest
helped	push	down	his	own	fear,	for	the	time	being,	at	least.	Involuntarily,	he
leaned	forward.
‘It’s	an	old	art,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘But	you	know	that,	don’t	you,	soldier?’
‘You’re	at	an	impasse,’	Bottle	said.
The	wizard’s	brows	lifted,	and	he	shot	Kalam	an	unreadable	glance	before


clearing	his	throat	and	saying,	‘Aye,	I	am.	How	did	you	see	it?	And	how	so…
quickly?’
Bottle	shrugged.
Quick	Ben	scowled	at	an	amused	grunt	from	Fiddler.	‘All	right,	you
damned	imp,	any	suggestions	on	what	to	do	about	it?’
Bottle	ran	a	hand	through	the	grimy	stubble	of	his	hair.	‘Tell	me	what
you’re	trying	to	do.’
‘What	I’m	trying	to	do,	soldier,	is	none	of	your	damned	business!’
Sighing,	Bottle	settled	onto	the	sand,	assuming	a	posture	to	match	that	of
the	man	opposite	him.	He	studied	the	figures,	then	pointed	to	one.	‘Who’s	she?’
Quick	Ben	started.	‘I	didn’t	know	it	was	a	“she”.’
‘First	one	you	set	down,	I’d	hazard.	You	probably	woke	from	a	bad	dream,
all	confused,	but	knowing	something	was	wrong,	something	somewhere,	and
this	one	–	this	woman	–	she’s	your	link	to	it.	Family,	I’d	hazard.	Mother?
Daughter?	Sister?	Sister,	yes.	She’s	been	thinking	about	you.	A	lot,	lately.	Look
at	the	skein	of	shadow	lines	around	her,	like	she	was	standing	in	a	thatch	of
grass,	only	there	ain’t	no	grass	nearby,	so	that	skein	belongs	to	something
else.’
‘Hood	squeeze	my	balls,’	Quick	Ben	hissed,	eyes	now	darting	among	the
figures	on	the	sand.	He	seemed	to	have	forgotten	his	belligerence.	‘Torahaval?
What	in	the	name	of	the	Abyss	has	she	got	herself	into	now?	And	how	come
not	one	of	the	others	can	reach	a	single	shadow	towards	her?’
Bottle	scratched	at	his	beard,	fingernails	trapping	a	nit.	He	pulled	it	loose
and	flicked	it	away.
Kalam	started,	then	cursed.	‘Watch	that!’
‘Sorry.’	Bottle	pointed	at	one	doll,	wrapped	in	black	silks.	The	shadow	the
doll	cast	seemed	to	reveal	two	projections	of	some	kind,	like	crows	perched	on
each	shoulder.	‘That’s	Apsalar,	yes?	She’s	part	of	this,	all	right,	though	not	at
the	moment.	I	think	her	path	was	meant	to	cross	your	sister ’s,	only	it	never
happened.	So,	there	was	intent,	unfulfilled,	and	be	glad	for	that.	That	one’s
Cotillion	and	aye,	he’s	dancing	his	infernal	dance	all	right,	but	his	only	role
was	in	starting	the	pebble	from	the	hilltop	–	how	it	rolled	and	what	it	picked	up
on	the	way	down	he	left	to	the	fates.	Still,	you’re	right	in	choosing	the	House
of	Shadows.	Was	that	instinct?	Never	mind.	Here’s	your	problem.’	He	pointed
at	another	doll,	this	one	hooded	and	cloaked	entirely	in	gauze-thin	black	linen.
Quick	Ben	blinked,	then	frowned.	‘Hardly.	That’s	Shadowthrone,	and	he’s
central	to	this.	It’s	all	got	to	do	with	him	and,	damn	you,	Bottle,	that’s	more
than	instinct!’
‘Oh,	he’s	central	all	right,	but	see	how	his	shadow	doesn’t	reach?’


‘I	know	it	doesn’t	reach!	But	that’s	where	he	stands,	damn	you!’
Bottle	reached	out	and	collected	the	doll.
Snarling,	Quick	Ben	half	rose,	but	Fiddler ’s	hand	snapped	out,	pushed	the
wizard	back	down.
‘Get	that	paw	off	me,	sapper,’	the	wizard	said,	his	tone	low,	even.
‘I	warned	you,’	the	sergeant	said,	‘didn’t	I?’	He	withdrew	his	hand,	and
Quick	Ben	settled	back	as	if	something	much	heavier	had	just	landed	on	his
shoulders.
In	the	meantime,	Bottle	was	busy	reworking	the	doll.	Bending	the	wires
within	the	arms	and	legs.	For	his	own	efforts,	he	rarely	used	wire	–	too
expensive	–	but	in	this	case	they	made	his	reconfiguring	the	doll	much	easier.
Finally	satisfied,	he	set	it	back,	in	precisely	the	same	position	as	before.
No-one	spoke,	all	eyes	fixed	on	the	doll	of	Shadowthrone	–	now	on	all
fours,	right	foreleg	and	left	rear	leg	raised,	the	entire	form	pitched	far
forward,	impossibly	balanced.	The	shadow	stretching	out	to	within	a	finger ’s
breadth	of	the	figure	that	was	Torahaval	Delat.
Shadowthrone…now	something	else…
Kalam	whispered,	‘Still	not	touching…’
Bottle	settled	back,	crossing	his	arms	as	he	lay	down	on	the	sand.	‘Wait,’	he
said,	then	closed	his	eyes,	and	a	moment	later	was	asleep	once	more.
Crouched	close	at	Quick	Ben’s	side,	Fiddler	let	out	a	long	breath.
The	wizard	pulled	his	stare	from	the	reconfigured	Shadowthrone,	his	eyes
bright	as	he	looked	over	at	the	sapper.	‘He	was	half	asleep,	Fid.’
The	sergeant	shrugged.
‘No,’	the	wizard	said,	‘you	don’t	understand.	Half	asleep.	Someone’s	with
him.	Was	with	him,	I	mean.	Do	you	have	any	idea	how	far	back	sympathetic
magic	like	this	goes?	To	the	very	beginning.	To	that	glimmer,	that	first
glimmer,	Fid.	The	birth	of	awareness.	Are	you	understanding	me?’
‘As	clear	as	the	moon	lately,’	Fiddler	said,	scowling.
‘The	Eres’al,	the	Tall	Ones	–	before	a	single	human	walked	this	world.
Before	the	Imass,	before	even	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Fiddler,	Eres	was	here.
Now.	Herself.	With	him.’
The	sapper	looked	back	down	at	the	doll	of	Shadowthrone.	Four-legged
now,	frozen	in	its	headlong	rush	–	and	the	shadow	it	cast	did	not	belong,	did
not	fit	at	all.	For	the	head	was	broad,	the	snout	prominent	and	wide,	jaws
opened	but	wrapped	about	something.	And	whatever	that	thing	was,	it	slithered
and	squirmed	like	a	trapped	snake.
What	in	Hood’s	name?	Oh.	Oh,	wait…


	
Atop	a	large	boulder	that	had	sheared,	creating	an	inclined	surface,	Apsalar
was	lying	flat	on	her	stomach,	watching	the	proceedings	in	the	clearing	twentyodd	paces	distant.	Disturbing	conversations,	those,	especially	that	last	part,
about	the	Eres.	Just	another	hoary	ancient	better	left	alone.	That	soldier,
Bottle,	needed	watching.
Torahaval	Delat…one	of	the	names	on	that	spy’s	–	Mebra’s	–	list	in
Ehrlitan.	Quick	Ben’s	sister.	Well,	that	was	indeed	unfortunate,	since	it	seemed
that	both	Cotillion	and	Shadowthrone	wanted	the	woman	dead,	and	they	usually
got	what	they	wanted.	Thanks	to	me…and	people	like	me.	The	gods	place	knives
into	our	mortal	hands,	and	need	do	nothing	more.
She	studied	Quick	Ben,	gauging	his	growing	agitation,	and	began	to
suspect	that	the	wizard	knew	something	of	the	extremity	that	his	sister	now
found	herself	in.	Knew,	and,	in	the	thickness	of	blood	that	bound	kin	no	matter
how	estranged,	the	foolish	man	had	decided	to	do	something	about	it.
Apsalar	waited	no	longer,	allowing	herself	to	slide	back	down	the	flat
rock,	landing	lightly	in	thick	wind-blown	sand,	well	in	shadow	and	thoroughly
out	of	sight	from	anyone.	She	adjusted	her	clothes,	scanned	the	level	ground
around	her,	then	drew	from	folds	in	her	clothing	two	daggers,	one	into	each
hand.
There	was	music	in	death.	Actors	and	musicians	knew	this	as	true.	And,	for
this	moment,	so	too	did	Apsalar.
To	a	chorus	of	woe	no-one	else	could	hear,	the	woman	in	black	began	the
Shadow	Dance.
	
Telorast	and	Curdle,	who	had	been	hiding	in	a	fissure	near	the	flat-topped
boulder,	now	edged	forward.
‘She’s	gone	into	her	own	world,’	Curdle	said,	nonetheless	whispering,	her
skeletal	head	bobbing	and	weaving,	tail	flicking	with	unease.	Before	them,	NotApsalar	danced,	so	infused	with	shadows	she	was	barely	visible.	Barely	in	this
world	at	all.
‘Never	cross	this	one,	Curdle,’	Telorast	hissed.	‘Never.’
‘Wasn’t	planning	to.	Not	like	you.’
‘Not	me.	Besides,	the	doom’s	come	upon	us	–	what	are	we	going	to	do?’
‘Don’t	know.’
‘I	say	we	cause	trouble,	Curdle.’
Tiny	jaws	clacked.	‘I	like	that.’


Quick	Ben	rose	suddenly.	‘I’ve	got	no	choice,’	he	said.
Kalam	swore,	then	said,	‘I	hate	it	when	you	say	that,	Quick.’
The	wizard	drew	out	another	doll,	this	one	trailing	long	threads.	He	set	it
down	a	forearm’s	reach	from	the	others,	then	looked	over	and	nodded	to
Kalam.
Scowling,	the	assassin	unsheathed	one	of	his	long-knives	and	stabbed	it
point-first	into	the	sand.
‘Not	the	otataral	one,	idiot.’
‘Sorry.’	Kalam	withdrew	the	weapon	and	resheathed	it,	then	drew	out	the
other	knife.	A	second	stab	into	the	sand.
Quick	Ben	knelt,	carefully	gathering	the	threads	and	leading	them	over	to
the	long-knife’s	grip,	where	he	fashioned	knots,	joining	the	doll	to	the	weapon.
‘See	these	go	taut—’
‘I	grab	the	knife	and	pull	you	back	here.	I	know,	Quick,	this	ain’t	the	first
time,	remember?’
‘Right.	Sorry.’
The	wizard	settled	back	into	his	cross-legged	position.
‘Hold	on,’	Fiddler	said	in	a	growl.	‘What’s	going	on	here?	You	ain’t
planning	something	stupid,	are	you?	You	are.	Damn	you,	Quick—’
‘Be	quiet,’	the	wizard	said,	closing	his	eyes.	‘Me	and	Shadowthrone,’	he
whispered,	‘we’re	old	friends.’	Then	he	smiled.
In	the	clearing,	Kalam	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	doll	that	was	now	the	only	link
between	Quick	Ben	and	his	soul.	‘He’s	gone,	Fid.	Don’t	say	nothing,	I	need	to
concentrate.	Those	strings	could	go	tight	at	any	time,	slow,	so	slow	you	can’t
even	see	it	happen,	but	suddenly…’
‘He	should’ve	waited,’	Fiddler	said.	‘I	wasn’t	finished	saying	what	I	was
planning	on	saying,	and	he	just	goes.	Kal,	I	got	a	bad	feeling.	Tell	me	Quick
and	Shadowthrone	really	are	old	friends.	Kalam?	Tell	me	Quick	wasn’t	being
sarcastic.’
The	assassin	flicked	a	momentary	look	up	at	the	sapper,	then	licked	his
lips,	returning	to	his	study	of	the	threads.	Had	they	moved?	No,	not	much
anyway.	‘He	wasn’t	being	sarcastic,	Fid.’
‘Good.’
‘No,	more	sardonic,	I	think.’
‘Not	good.	Listen,	can	you	pull	him	out	right	now?	I	think	you	should—’
‘Quiet,	damn	you!	I	need	to	watch.	I	need	to	concentrate.’	Fid’s	got	a	bad
feeling.	Shit.


	
Paran	and	Noto	Boil	rode	up	and	halted	in	the	shadow	cast	by	the	city	wall.	The
captain	dismounted	and	stepped	up	to	the	battered	façade.	With	his	dagger	he
etched	a	broad,	arched	line,	beginning	on	his	left	at	the	wall’s	base,	then	up,
over	–	taking	two	paces	–	and	down	again,	ending	at	the	right-side	base.	In	the
centre	he	slashed	a	pattern,	then	stepped	back,	slipping	the	knife	into	its
scabbard.
Remounting	the	horse,	he	gathered	the	reins	and	said,	‘Follow	me.’
And	he	rode	forward.	His	horse	tossed	its	head	and	stamped	its	forelegs	a
moment	before	plunging	into,	and	through,	the	wall.	They	emerged	moments
later	onto	a	litter-strewn	street.	The	faces	of	empty,	lifeless	buildings,	windows
stove	in.	A	place	of	devastation,	a	place	where	civilization	had	crumbled,
revealing	at	last	its	appallingly	weak	foundations.	Picked	white	bones	lay
scattered	here	and	there.	A	glutted	rat	wobbled	its	way	along	the	wall’s	gutter.
After	a	long	moment,	the	healer	appeared,	leading	his	mount	by	the	reins.
‘My	horse,’	he	said,	‘is	not	nearly	as	stupid	as	yours,	Captain.	Alas.’
‘Just	less	experienced,’	Paran	said,	looking	round.	‘Get	back	in	the	saddle.
We	may	be	alone	for	the	moment,	but	that	will	not	last.’
‘Gods	below,’	Noto	Boil	hissed,	scrambling	back	onto	his	horse.	‘What
has	happened	here?’
‘You	did	not	accompany	the	first	group?’
They	rode	slowly	onto	the	gate	avenue,	then	in	towards	the	heart	of
G’danisban.
‘Dujek’s	foray?	No,	of	course	not.	And	how	I	wish	the	High	Fist	was	still
in	command.’
Me	too.	‘The	Grand	Temple	is	near	the	central	square	–	where	is	Soliel’s
Temple?’
‘Soliel?	Captain	Kindly,	I	cannot	enter	that	place	–	not	ever	again.’
‘How	did	you	come	to	be	disavowed,	Boil?’
‘Noto	Boil,	sir.	There	was	a	disagreement…of	a	political	nature.	It	may	be
that	the	nefarious,	incestuous,	nepotistic	quagmire	of	a	priest’s	life	well	suits
the	majority	of	its	adherents.	Unfortunately,	I	discovered	too	late	that	I	could
not	adapt	to	such	an	existence.	You	must	understand,	actual	worship	was	the
least	among	daily	priorities.	I	made	the	error	of	objecting	to	this	unnatural,
nay,	unholy	inversion.’
‘Very	noble	of	you,’	Paran	remarked.	‘Oddly	enough,	I	heard	a	different
tale	about	your	priestly	demise.	More	specifically,	you	lost	a	power	struggle	at
the	temple	in	Kartool.	Something	about	the	disposition	of	the	treasury.’


‘Clearly,	such	events	are	open	to	interpretation.	Tell	me,	Captain,	since	you
can	walk	through	walls	thicker	than	a	man	is	tall,	do	you	possess	magical
sensitivities	as	well?	Can	you	feel	the	foul	hunger	in	the	air?	It	is	hateful.	It
wants	us,	our	flesh,	where	it	can	take	root	and	suck	from	us	every	essence	of
health.	This	is	Poliel’s	breath,	and	even	now	it	begins	to	claim	us.’
‘We	are	not	alone,	cutter.’
‘No.	I	would	be	surprised	if	we	were.	She	will	spare	her	followers,	her
carriers.	She	will—’
‘Quiet,’	Paran	said,	reining	in.	‘I	meant,	we	are	not	alone	right	now.’
Eyes	darting,	Noto	Boil	scanned	the	immediate	area.	‘There,’	he
whispered,	pointing	towards	an	alley	mouth.
They	watched	as	a	young	woman	stepped	out	from	the	shadows	of	the
alley.	She	was	naked,	frighteningly	thin,	her	eyes	dark,	large	and	luminous.
Her	lips	were	cracked	and	split,	her	hair	wild	and	braided	in	filth.	An	urchin
who	had	survived	in	the	streets,	a	harvester	of	the	discarded,	and	yet…
‘Not	a	carrier,’	Paran	said	in	a	murmur.	‘I	see	about	her…purest	health.’
Noto	Boil	nodded.	‘Aye.	In	spite	of	her	apparent	condition.	Captain	Kindly,
this	child	has	been	chosen…by	Soliel.’
‘I	take	it,	not	something	you	even	thought	possible,	back	when	you	were	a
priest.’
The	cutter	simply	shook	his	head.
The	girl	came	closer.	‘Malazans,’	she	said,	her	voice	rasping	as	if	from
lack	of	use.	‘Once.	Years	–	a	year?	Once,	there	were	other	Malazans.	One	of
them	pretended	he	was	a	Gral,	but	I	saw	the	armour	under	the	robes,	I	saw	the
sigil	of	the	Bridgeburners,	from	where	I	hid	beneath	a	wagon.	I	was	young,	but
not	too	young.	They	saved	me,	those	Malazans.	They	drew	away	the	hunters.
They	saved	me.’
Paran	cleared	his	throat.	‘And	so	now	Soliel	chooses	you…to	help	us.’
Noto	Boil	said,	‘For	she	has	always	blessed	those	who	repay	kindness.’
The	cutter ’s	voice	was	tremulous	with	wonder.	‘Soliel,’	he	whispered,	‘forgive
me.’
‘There	are	hunters,’	the	girl	said.	‘Coming.	They	know	you	are	here.
Strangers,	enemies	to	the	goddess.	Their	leader	holds	great	hatred,	for	all
things.	Bone-scarred,	broke-faced,	he	feeds	on	the	pain	he	delivers.	Come	with
me—’
‘Thank	you,’	Paran	said,	cutting	in,	‘but	no.	Know	that	your	warning	is
welcome,	but	I	intend	to	meet	these	hunters.	I	intend	to	have	them	lead	me	to	the
Grey	Goddess.’
‘Brokeface	will	not	permit	it.	He	will	kill	you,	and	your	horse.	Your	horse


first,	for	he	hates	such	creatures.’
Noto	Boil	hissed.	‘Captain,	please	–	this	is	an	offer	from	Soliel—’
‘The	offer	I	expect	from	Soliel,’	Paran	said,	tone	hardening,	‘will	come
later.	One	goddess	at	a	time.’	He	readied	his	horse	under	him,	then	hesitated,
glanced	over	at	the	cutter.	‘Go	with	her,	then.	We	will	meet	up	at	the	entrance	to
the	Grand	Temple.’
‘Captain,	what	is	it	you	expect	of	me?’
‘Me?	Nothing.	What	I	expect	is	for	Soliel	to	make	use	of	you,	but	not	as
she	has	done	this	child	here.	I	expect	something	a	lot	more	than	that.’	Paran
nudged	his	mount	forward.	‘And,’	he	added	amidst	clumping	hoofs,	‘I	won’t
take	no	for	an	answer.’
	
Noto	Boil	watched	the	madman	ride	off,	up	the	main	avenue,	then	the	healer
swung	his	horse	until	facing	the	girl.	He	drew	the	fish	spine	from	his	mouth
and	tucked	it	behind	an	ear.	Then	cleared	his	throat.	‘Goddess…child.	I	have	no
wish	to	die,	but	I	must	point	out,	that	man	does	not	speak	for	me.	Should	you
smite	him	down	for	his	disrespect,	I	most	certainly	will	not	see	in	that	anything
unjust	or	undeserving.	In	fact—’
‘Be	quiet,	mortal,’	the	girl	said	in	a	much	older	voice.	‘In	that	man	the
entire	world	hangs	in	balance,	and	I	shall	not	be	for	ever	known	as	the	one
responsible	for	altering	that	condition.	In	any	way	whatsoever.	Now,	prepare	to
ride	–	I	shall	lead,	but	I	shall	not	once	wait	for	you	should	you	lose	the	way.’
‘I	thought	you	offered	to	guide	me—’
‘Of	lesser	priority	now,’	she	said,	smirking.	‘Inverted	in	a	most	unholy
fashion,	you	might	say.	No,	what	I	seek	now	is	to	witness.	Do	you	understand?
To	witness!’	And	with	that	the	girl	spun	round	and	sped	off.
Swearing,	the	cutter	drove	heels	into	his	mount’s	flanks,	hard	on	the	girl’s
trail.
	
Paran	rode	at	a	canter	down	the	main	avenue	that	seemed	more	a	processional
route	into	a	necropolis	than	G’danisban’s	central	artery,	until	he	saw	ahead	a
mob	of	figures	fronted	by	a	single	man	–	in	his	hands	a	farmer ’s	scythe	from
which	dangled	a	blood-crusted	horse-tail.	The	motley	army	–	perhaps	thirty	or
forty	in	all	–	looked	as	if	they	had	been	recruited	from	a	paupers’	burial	pit.
Covered	in	sores	and	weals,	limbs	twisted,	faces	slack,	the	eyes	glittering	with
madness.	Some	carried	swords,	others	butcher ’s	cleavers	and	knives,	or


spears,	shepherd’s	crooks	or	stout	branches.	Most	seemed	barely	able	to	stand.
Such	was	not	the	case	with	their	leader,	the	one	the	girl	had	called
Brokeface.	The	man’s	visage	was	indeed	pinched	misshapen,	flesh	and	bones
folded	in	at	right	lower	jaw,	then	across	the	face,	diagonally,	to	the	right
cheekbone.	He	had	been	bitten,	the	captain	realized,	by	a	horse.
…your	horse	first.	For	he	hates	such	creatures…
In	that	ruined	face,	the	eyes,	misaligned	in	the	sunken	pits	of	their	sockets,
burned	bright	as	they	fixed	on	Paran’s	own.	Something	like	a	smile	appeared
on	the	collapsed	cave	of	the	man’s	mouth.
‘Her	breath	is	not	sweet	enough	for	you?	You	are	strong	to	so	resist	her.
She	would	know,	first,	who	you	are.	Before,’	his	smile	twisted	further,	‘before
we	kill	you.’
‘The	Grey	Goddess	does	not	know	who	I	am,’	Paran	said,	‘for	this	reason.
From	her,	I	have	turned	away.	From	me	she	can	compel	nothing.’
Brokeface	flinched.	‘There	is	a	beast…in	your	eyes.	Reveal	yourself,
Malazan.	You	are	not	as	the	others.’
‘Tell	her,’	Paran	said,	‘I	come	to	make	an	offering.’
The	head	cocked	to	one	side.	‘You	seek	to	appease	the	Grey	Goddess?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.	But	I	should	tell	you,	we	have	very	little	time.’
‘Very	little?	Why?’
‘Take	me	to	her	and	I	will	explain.	But	quickly.’
‘She	does	not	fear	you.’
‘Good.’
The	man	studied	Paran	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	gestured	with	his
scythe.	‘Follow,	then.’
	
There	had	been	plenty	of	altars	before	which	she	had	knelt	over	the	years,	and
from	them,	one	and	all,	Torahaval	Delat	had	discovered	something	she	now
held	to	be	true.	All	that	is	worshipped	is	but	a	reflection	of	the	worshipper.	A
single	god,	no	matter	how	benign,	is	tortured	into	a	multitude	of	masks,	each
shaped	by	the	secret	desires,	hungers,	fears	and	joys	of	the	individual	mortal,
who	but	plays	a	game	of	obsequious	approbation.
Believers	lunged	into	belief.	The	faithful	drowned	in	their	faith.
And	there	was	another	truth,	one	that	seemed	on	the	surface	to	contradict
the	first	one.	The	gentler	and	kinder	the	god,	the	more	harsh	and	cruel	its
worshippers,	for	they	hold	to	their	conviction	with	taut	certainty,	febrile	in	its
extremity,	and	so	cannot	abide	dissenters.	They	will	kill,	they	will	torture,	in
that	god’s	name.	And	see	in	themselves	no	conflict,	no	matter	how


bloodstained	their	hands.
Torahaval’s	hands	were	bloodstained,	figuratively	now	but	once	most
literally.	Driven	to	fill	some	vast,	empty	space	in	her	soul,	she	had	lunged,	she
had	drowned;	she	had	looked	for	some	external	hand	of	salvation	–	seeking
what	she	could	not	find	in	herself.	And,	whether	benign	and	love-swollen	or
brutal	and	painful,	every	god’s	touch	had	felt	the	same	to	her	–	barely	sensed
through	the	numbed	obsession	that	was	her	need.
She	had	stumbled	onto	this	present	path	the	same	way	she	had	stumbled
onto	so	many	others,	yet	this	time,	it	seemed	there	could	be	no	going	back.
Every	alternative,	every	choice,	had	vanished	before	her	eyes.	The	first	strands
of	the	web	had	been	spun	more	than	fourteen	months	ago,	in	her	chosen	home
city	Karashimesh,	on	the	shores	of	the	inland	Karas	Sea	–	a	web	she	had	since,
in	a	kind	of	lustful	wilfulness,	allowed	to	close	ever	tighter.
The	sweet	lure	from	the	Grey	Goddess,	in	spirit	now	the	poisoned	lover	of
the	Chained	One	–	the	seduction	of	the	flawed	had	proved	so	very	inviting.	And
deadly.	For	us	both.	This	was,	she	realized	as	she	trailed	Bridthok	down	the
Aisle	of	Glory	leading	to	the	transept,	no	more	than	the	spreading	of	legs
before	an	inevitable,	half-invited	rape.	Regret	would	come	later	if	at	all.
Perhaps,	then,	a	most	appropriate	end.
For	this	foolish	woman,	who	never	learned	how	to	live.
The	power	of	the	Grey	Goddess	swirled	in	thick	tendrils	through	the
battered-down	doorway,	so	virulent	as	to	rot	stone.
Awaiting	Bridthok	and	Torahaval	at	the	threshold	were	the	remaining
acolytes	of	this	desperate	faith.	Septhune	Anabhin	of	Omari;	and	Sradal	Purthu,
who	had	fled	Y’Ghatan	a	year	ago	after	a	failed	attempt	to	kill	that	Malazan
bitch,	Dunsparrow.	Both	looked	shrunken,	now,	some	essence	of	their	souls
drained	away,	dissolving	in	the	miasma	like	salt	in	water.	Pained	terror	in	their
eyes	as	both	turned	to	watch	Bridthok	and	Torahaval	arrive.
‘Sribin	is	dead,’	Septhune	whispered.	‘She	will	now	choose	another.’
And	so	she	did.
Invisible,	a	hand	huge	and	clawed	–	more	fingers	than	could	be	sanely
conceived	–	closed	about	Torahaval’s	chest,	spears	of	agony	sinking	deep.	A
choked	gasp	burst	from	her	throat	and	she	staggered	forward,	pushing	through
the	others,	all	of	whom	shrank	back,	gazes	swimming	with	relief	and	pity	–	the
relief	far	outweighing	the	pity.	Hatred	for	them	flashed	through	Torahaval,
even	as	she	staggered	into	the	altar	chamber;	eyes	burning	in	the	acid	fog	of
pestilence	she	lifted	her	head,	and	looked	upon	Poliel.
And	saw	the	hunger	that	was	desire.
The	pain	expanded,	filled	her	body	–	then	subsided	as	the	clawed	hand


withdrew,	the	crusted	talons	pulling	loose.
Torahaval	fell	to	her	knees,	slid	helplessly	in	her	own	sweat	that	had
pooled	on	the	mosaic	floor	beneath	her.
Ware	what	you	ask	for.	Ware	what	you	seek.
The	sound	of	horse	hoofs,	coming	from	the	Aisle	of	Glory,	getting	louder.
A	rider	comes.	A	rider?	What	–	who	dares	this	–	gods	below,	thank	you,
whoever	you	are.	Thank	you.	She	still	clung	to	the	edge.	A	few	breaths	more,	a
few	more…
	
Sneering,	Brokeface	pushed	past	the	cowering	priests	at	the	threshold.	Paran
scanned	the	three	withered,	trembling	figures,	and	frowned	as	they	each	in	turn
knelt	at	the	touch	of	his	regard,	heads	bowing.
‘What	ails	them?’	he	asked.
Brokeface’s	laugh	hacked	in	the	grainy	air.	‘Well	said,	stranger.	You	have
cold	iron	in	your	spine,	I’ll	give	you	that.’
Idiot.	I	wasn’t	trying	to	be	funny.
‘Get	off	that	damned	horse,’	Brokeface	said,	blocking	the	doorway.	He
licked	his	misshapen	lips,	both	hands	shifting	on	the	shaft	of	the	scythe.
‘Not	a	chance,’	Paran	said.	‘I	know	how	you	take	care	of	horses.’
‘You	cannot	ride	into	the	altar	chamber!’
‘Clear	the	way,’	Paran	said.	‘This	beast	does	not	bother	biting	–	it	prefers
to	kick	and	stamp.	Delights	in	the	sound	of	breaking	bones,	in	fact.’
As	the	horse,	nostrils	flared,	stepped	closer	to	the	doorway,	Brokeface
flinched,	edged	back.	Then	he	bared	his	crooked	teeth	and	hissed,	‘Can’t	you
feel	her	wrath?	Her	outrage?	Oh,	you	foolish	man!’
‘Can	she	feel	mine?’
Paran	ducked	as	his	horse	crossed	the	threshold.	He	straightened	a	moment
later.	A	woman	writhed	on	the	tiles	to	his	left,	her	dark	skin	streaked	in	sweat,
her	long	limbs	trembling	as	the	plague-fouled	air	stroked	and	slipped	round
her,	languid	as	a	lover ’s	caress.
Beyond	this	woman	rose	a	dais	atop	three	broad,	shallow	steps	on	which
were	scattered	the	broken	fragments	of	the	altarstone.	Centred	on	the	dais,
where	the	altar	had	once	stood,	was	a	throne	fashioned	of	twisted,	malformed
bones.	Commanding	this	seat,	a	figure	radiating	such	power	that	her	form	was
barely	discernible.	Long	limbs,	suppurating	with	venom,	a	bared	chest
androgynous	in	its	lack	of	definition,	its	shrunken	frailty;	the	legs	that	extended
outward	seemed	to	possess	too	many	joints,	and	the	feet	were	three-toed	and
taloned,	raptorial	yet	as	large	as	those	of	an	enkar ’al.	Poliel’s	eyes	were	but	the


faintest	of	sparks,	blurred	and	damp	at	the	centre	of	black	bowls.	Her	mouth,
broad	and	the	lips	cracked	and	oozing,	curled	now	into	a	smile.
‘Soletaken,’	she	said	in	a	thin	voice,	‘do	not	frighten	me.	I	had	thought,	for
a	moment…but	no,	you	are	nothing	to	me.’
‘Goddess,’	Paran	said,	settling	back	on	his	horse,	‘I	remain	turned	away.
The	choice	is	mine,	not	yours,	and	so	you	see	only	what	I	will	you	to	see.’
‘Who	are	you?	What	are	you?’
‘In	normal	circumstances,	Poliel,	I	am	but	an	arbiter.	I	have	come	to	make
an	offering.’
‘You	understand,	then,’	the	Grey	Goddess	said,	‘the	truth	beneath	the	veil.
Blood	was	their	path.	And	so	we	choose	to	poison	it.’
Paran	frowned,	then	he	shrugged	and	reached	into	the	folds	of	his	shirt.
‘Here	is	my	gift,’	he	said.	Then	hesitated.	‘I	regret,	Poliel,	that	these
circumstances…are	not	normal.’
The	Grey	Goddess	said,	‘I	do	not	understand—’
‘Catch!’
A	small,	gleaming	object	flashed	from	his	hand.
She	raised	hers	in	defence.
A	whispering,	strangely	thin	sound	marked	the	impact.	Impaling	her	hand,
a	shard	of	metal.	Otataral.
The	goddess	convulsed,	a	terrible,	animal	scream	bursting	from	her	throat,
ripping	the	air.	Chaotic	power,	shredding	into	tatters	and	spinning	away,	waves
of	grey	fire	charging	like	unleashed	creatures	of	rage,	mosaic	tiles	exploding
in	their	wake.
On	a	bridling,	skittish	horse,	Paran	watched	the	conflagration	of	agony,
and	wondered,	of	a	sudden,	whether	he	had	made	a	mistake.
He	looked	down	at	the	mortal	woman,	curled	up	on	the	floor.	Then	at	her
fragmented	shadow,	slashed	through	by…nothing.	Well,	I	knew	that	much.
Time’s	nearly	up.
	
A	different	throne,	this	one	so	faint	as	to	be	nothing	more	than	the	hint	of
slivered	shadows,	sketched	across	planes	of	dirty	ice	–	oddly	changed,	Quick
Ben	decided,	from	the	last	time	he	had	seen	it.
As	was	the	thin,	ghostly	god	reclining	on	that	throne.	Oh,	the	hood	was	the
same,	ever	hiding	the	face,	and	the	gnarled	black	hand	still	perched	on	the
knotted	top	of	the	bent	walking	stick	–	the	perch	of	a	scavenger,	like	a	onelegged	vulture	–	and	emanating	from	the	apparition	that	was	Shadowthrone,
like	some	oversweet	incense	reaching	out	to	brush	the	wizard’s	senses,	a


cloying,	infuriating…smugness.	Nothing	unusual	in	all	of	that.	Even	so,	there
was…something…
‘Delat,’	the	god	murmured,	as	if	tasting	every	letter	of	the	name	with	sweet
satisfaction.
‘We’re	not	enemies,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘not	any	longer,	Shadowthrone.	You
cannot	be	blind	to	that.’
‘Ah	but	you	wish	me	blind,	Delat!	Yes	yes	yes,	you	do.	Blind	to	the	past	–
to	every	betrayal,	every	lie,	every	vicious	insult	you	have	delivered	foul	as	spit
at	my	feet!’
‘Circumstances	change.’
‘Indeed	they	do!’
The	wizard	could	feel	sweat	trickling	beneath	his	clothes.	Something	here
was…what?
Was	very	wrong.
‘Do	you	know,’	Quick	Ben	asked,	‘why	I	am	here?’
‘She	has	earned	no	mercy,	wizard.	Not	even	from	you.’
‘I	am	her	brother.’
‘There	are	rituals	to	sever	such	ties,’	Shadowthrone	said,	‘and	your	sister
has	done	them	all!’
‘Done	them	all?	No,	tried	them	all.	There	are	threads	that	such	rituals
cannot	touch.	I	made	certain	of	that.	I	would	not	be	here	otherwise.’
A	snort.	‘Threads.	Such	as	those	you	take	greatest	pleasure	in	spinning,
Adaephon	Delat?	Of	course.	It	is	your	finest	talent,	the	weaving	of	impossible
skeins.’	The	hooded	head	seemed	to	wag	from	side	to	side	as	Shadowthrone
chanted,	‘Nets	and	snares	and	traps,	lines	and	hooks	and	bait,	nets	and	snares
and—’	Then	he	leaned	forward.	‘Tell	me,	why	should	your	sister	be	spared?
And	how	–	truly,	how	–	do	you	imagine	that	I	have	the	power	to	save	her?	She
is	not	mine,	is	she?	She’s	not	here	in	Shadow	Keep,	is	she?’	He	cocked	his
head.	‘Oh	my.	Even	now	she	draws	her	last	few	breaths…as	the	mortal	lover	of
the	Grey	Goddess	–	what,	pray	tell,	do	you	expect	me	to	do?’
Quick	Ben	stared.	The	Grey	Goddess?	Poliel?	Oh,	Torahaval…‘Wait,’	he
said,	‘Bottle	confirmed	it	–	more	than	instinct	–	you	are	involved.	Right	now,
wherever	they	are,	it	has	something	to	do	with	you!’
A	spasmodic	cackle	from	Shadowthrone,	enough	to	make	the	god’s	thin,
insubstantial	limbs	convulse	momentarily.	‘You	owe	me,	Adaephon	Delat!
Acknowledge	this	and	I	will	send	you	to	her!	This	instant!	Accept	the	debt!’
Dammit.	First	Kalam	and	now	me.	You	bastard,	Shadowthrone	–	‘All	right!
I	owe	you!	I	accept	the	debt!’
The	Shadow	God	gestured,	a	lazy	wave	of	one	hand.


And	Quick	Ben	vanished.
Alone	once	again,	Shadowthrone	settled	back	in	his	throne.	‘So	fraught,’
he	whispered.	‘So…careless,	unmindful	of	this	vast,	echoing,	mostly	empty
hall.	Poor	man.	Poor,	poor	man.	Ah,	what’s	this	I	find	in	my	hand?’	He	looked
over	to	see	a	short-handled	scythe	now	gripped	and	poised	before	him.	The
god	narrowed	his	gaze,	looked	about	in	the	gloomy	air,	then	said,	‘Well,	look
at	these!	Threads!	Worse	than	cobwebs,	these!	Getting	everywhere	–	grossly
indicative	of	sloppy…housekeeping.	No,	they	won’t	do,	won’t	do	at	all.’	He
swept	the	scythe’s	blade	through	the	sorcerous	tendrils,	watched	as	they	spun
away	into	nothingness.	‘There	now,’	he	said,	smiling,	‘I	feel	more	hygienic
already.’

Throttled	awake	by	gloved	hands	at	his	throat,	he	flailed	about,	then	was
dragged	to	his	knees.	Kalam’s	face	thrust	close	to	his	own,	and	in	that	face,
Bottle	saw	pure	terror.
‘The	threads!’	the	assassin	snarled.
Bottle	pushed	the	man’s	hands	away,	scanned	the	sandy	tableau,	then
grunted.	‘Cut	clean,	I’d	say.’
Standing	nearby,	Fiddler	said,	‘Go	get	him,	Bottle!	Find	him	–	bring	him
back!’
The	young	soldier	stared	at	the	two	men.	‘What?	How	am	I	supposed	to	do
that?	He	should	never	have	gone	in	the	first	place!’	Bottle	crawled	over	to	stare
at	the	wizard’s	blank	visage.	‘Gone,’	he	confirmed.	‘Straight	into
Shadowthrone’s	lair	–	what	was	he	thinking?’
‘Bottle!’
‘Oh,’	the	soldier	added,	something	else	catching	his	gaze,	‘look	at	that	–
what’s	she	up	to,	I	wonder?’
Kalam	pushed	Bottle	aside	and	fell	to	his	hands	and	knees,	glaring	down	at
the	dolls.	Then	he	shot	upright.	‘Apsalar!	Where	is	she?’
Fiddler	groaned.	‘No,	not	again.’
The	assassin	had	both	of	his	long-knives	in	his	hands.	‘Hood	take	her	–
where	is	that	bitch?’
Bottle,	bemused,	simply	shrugged	as	the	two	men	chose	directions	at
random	and	headed	off.	Idiots.	This	is	what	they	get,	though,	isn’t	it?	For
telling	nobody	nothing!	About	anything!	He	looked	back	down	at	the	dolls.	Oh
my,	this	is	going	to	be	interesting,	isn’t	it…?
	


‘The	fool’s	gone	and	killed	himself,’	Captain	Sweetcreek	said.	‘And	he	took
our	best	healer	with	him	–	right	through	Hood’s	damned	gate!’
Hurlochel	stood	with	crossed	arms.	‘I	don’t	think—’
‘Listen	to	me,’	Sweetcreek	snapped,	her	corporal	Futhgar	at	her	side
nodding	emphatically	as	she	continued.	‘I’m	now	in	command,	and	there’s	not
a	single	damned	thing	in	this	whole	damned	world	that’s	going	to	change—’
She	never	finished	that	sentence,	as	a	shriek	rang	out	from	the	north	side	of
the	camp,	then	the	air	split	with	thunderous	howls	–	so	close,	so	loud	that
Hurlochel	felt	as	if	his	skull	was	cracking	open.	Ducking,	he	spun	round	to	see,
cartwheeling	above	tent-roofs,	a	soldier,	his	weapon	whipping	away	–	and	now
the	sudden	snap	of	guy-ropes,	the	earth	trembling	underfoot—
And	a	monstrous,	black,	blurred	shape	appeared,	racing	like	lightning	over
the	ground	–	straight	for	them.
A	wave	of	charged	air	struck	the	three	like	a	battering	ram	a	moment
before	the	beast	reached	them.	Hurlochel,	all	breath	driven	from	his	lungs,
flew	through	the	air,	landing	hard	on	one	shoulder,	then	rolling	–	caught	a
glimpse	of	Captain	Sweetcreek	tossed	to	one	side,	limp	as	a	rag	doll,	and
Futhgar	seeming	to	vanish	into	the	dirt	as	the	midnight	creature	simply	ran
right	over	the	hapless	man—
The	Hound’s	eyes—
Other	beasts,	bursting	through	the	camp	–	horses	screaming,	soldiers
shrieking	in	terror,	wagons	flung	aside	before	waves	of	power	–	and
Hurlochel	saw	one	creature	–	no,	impossible—
The	world	darkened	alarmingly	as	he	lay	in	a	heap,	paralysed,	desperate	to
draw	a	breath.	The	spasm	clutching	his	chest	loosed	suddenly	and	sheer	joy
followed	the	sweet	dusty	air	down	into	his	lungs.
Nearby,	the	captain	was	coughing,	on	her	hands	and	knees,	spitting	blood.
From	Futhgar,	a	single	piteous	groan.
Pushing	himself	upright,	Hurlochel	turned	–	saw	the	Hounds	reach	the	wall
of	G’danisban	–	and	stared,	eyes	wide,	as	a	huge	section	of	that	massive	barrier
exploded,	stone	and	brick	facing	shooting	skyward	above	a	billowing	cloud	of
dust	–	then	the	concussion	rolled	over	them—
A	horse	galloped	past,	eyes	white	with	terror—
‘Not	us!’	Sweetcreek	gasped,	crawling	over.	‘Thank	the	gods	–	just	passing
through	–	just—’	She	began	coughing	again.
On	watery	legs,	Hurlochel	sank	down	onto	his	knees.	‘It	made	no	sense,’	he
whispered,	shaking	his	head,	as	buildings	in	the	city	beyond	rocked	and	blew
apart—
‘What?’


He	looked	across	at	Sweetcreek.	You	don’t	understand	–	I	looked	into	that
black	beast’s	eyes,	woman!	‘I	saw…I	saw—’
‘What?’
I	saw	pure	terror—
The	earth	rumbled	anew.	A	resurgence	of	screams	–	and	he	turned,	even	as
five	huge	shapes	appeared,	tearing	wide,	relentless	paths	through	the	encamped
army	–	big,	bigger	than	–	oh,	gods	below—
	
‘He	said	to	wait—’	Noto	Boil	began,	then	wailed	as	his	horse	flinched	so	hard
he	would	later	swear	he	heard	bones	breaking,	then	the	beast	wheeled	from	the
temple	entrance	and	bolted,	peeling	the	cutter	from	its	back	like	a	wood
shaving.
He	landed	awkwardly,	felt	and	heard	ribs	crack,	the	pain	vanishing	before	a
more	pressing	distress,	that	being	the	fish	spine	lodged	halfway	down	his
throat.
Choking,	sky	darkening,	eyes	bulging—
Then	the	girl	hovering	over	him.	Frowning	for	a	lifetime.
Stupid	stupid	stupid—
Before	she	reached	into	his	gaping	mouth,	then	gently	withdrew	the	spine.
Whimpering	behind	that	first	delicious	breath,	Noto	Boil	closed	his	eyes,
becoming	aware	once	again	that	those	indrawn	breaths	in	fact	delivered
stabbing	agony	across	his	entire	chest.	He	opened	tear-filled	eyes.
The	girl	still	loomed	over	him,	but	her	attention	was,	it	seemed,	elsewhere.
Not	even	towards	the	temple	entrance	–	but	down	the	main	avenue.
Where	someone	was	pounding	infernal	drums,	the	thunder	making	the
cobbles	shiver	and	jump	beneath	him	–	causing	yet	more	pain	–
And	this	day	started	so	well…

‘Not	Soletaken,’	Paran	was	saying	to	the	goddess	writhing	on	her	throne,	the
pierced	hand	and	its	otataral	spike	pinning	her	here,	to	this	realm,	to	this
dreadful	extremity,	‘not	Soletaken	at	all,	although	it	might	at	first	seem	so.
Alas,	Poliel,	more	complicated	than	that.	My	outrider ’s	comment	earlier,
regarding	my	eyes	–	well,	that	was	sufficient,	and	from	those	howls	we	just
heard,	it	turns	out	the	timing	is	about	right.’
The	captain	glanced	down	once	more	at	the	woman	on	the	tiles.
Unconscious,	perhaps	dead.	He	didn’t	think	the	Hounds	would	bother	with	her.


Gathering	the	reins,	he	straightened	in	his	saddle.	‘I	can’t	stay,	I’m	afraid.	But
let	me	leave	you	with	this:	you	made	a	terrible	mistake.	Fortunately,	you	won’t
have	long	to	regret	it.’
Concussions	in	the	city,	coming	ever	closer.
‘Mess	with	mortals,	Poliel,’	he	said,	wheeling	his	horse	round,	‘and	you
pay.’
	
The	man	named	Brokeface	–	who	had	once	possessed	another	name,	another
life	–	cowered	to	one	side	of	the	altar	chamber ’s	entranceway.	The	three	priests
had	fled	back	down	the	hallway.	He	was,	for	the	moment,	alone.	So	very	alone.
All	over	again.	A	poor	soldier	of	the	rebellion,	young	and	so	proud	back	then	–
shattered	in	one	single	moment.
A	Gral	horse,	a	breath	thick	with	the	reek	of	wet	grass,	teeth	like	chisels
driving	down	through	flesh,	through	bone,	taking	everything	away.	He	had
become	an	unwelcome	mirror	to	ugliness,	for	every	face	turning	upon	his	own
had	twisted	in	revulsion,	or	worse,	morbid	fascination.	And	new	fears	had	sunk
deep,	hungry	roots	into	his	soul,	flinching	terrors	that	ever	drove	him	forward,
seeking	to	witness	pain	and	suffering	in	others,	seeking	to	make	of	his	misery
a	legion,	soldiers	to	a	new	cause,	each	as	broken	as	he.
Poliel	had	arrived,	like	a	gift	–	and	now	that	bastard	had	killed	her,	was
killing	her	even	now	–	taking	everything	away.	Again.
Horse	hoofs	skidded	on	tiles	and	he	shrank	back	further	as	the	rider	and
his	mount	passed	through	the	doorway,	the	beast	lifting	from	trot	to	canter
down	the	wide	corridor.
Brokeface	stared	after	them	with	hatred	in	his	eyes.
Lost.	All	lost.
He	looked	into	the	altar	chamber—
	
Quick	Ben	landed	cat-like;	then,	in	the	cascade	of	virulent	agony	sloughing
from	the	imprisoned	goddess	not	three	paces	to	his	right,	he	collapsed	onto	his
stomach,	hands	over	his	head.	Oh,	very	funny,	Shadowthrone.	He	turned	his
head	and	saw	Torahaval,	lying	motionless	an	arm’s	reach	to	his	left.
Poor	girl	–	I	should	never	have	tormented	her	so.	But…show	me	a	merciful
child	and	I	will	truly	avow	a	belief	in	miracles,	and	I’ll	throw	in	my	back-pay
besides.	It	was	her	over-sensitivity	that	done	her	in.	Still,	what’s	life	without	a
few	thousand	regrets?


There	was	otataral	in	this	room.	He	needed	to	collect	her	and	drag	her
clear,	back	outside.	Not	so	hard,	once	he	was	out	of	this	chaotic	madhouse.	So,
it	turned	out	–	to	his	astonishment	–	that	Shadowthrone	had	played	it	true.
It	was	then	that	he	heard	the	howl	of	the	Hounds,	in	thundering	echo	from
the	hallway.
	
Paran	emerged	from	the	tunnel	then	sawed	his	horse	hard	to	the	left,	narrowly
avoiding	Shan	–	the	huge	black	beast	plunging	past,	straight	into	the	Grand
Temple.	Rood	followed,	then	Baran	–	and	in	Baran’s	enormous	jaws	a	hissing,
reptilian	panther,	seeking	to	slow	its	captor	down	with	unsheathed	talons
scoring	the	cobbles,	to	no	avail.	In	their	wake,	Blind	and	Gear.
As	Gear	raced	into	the	temple,	the	Hound	loosed	a	howl,	a	sound	savage
with	glee	–	as	of	some	long-awaited	vengeance	moments	from	consummation.
Paran	stared	after	them	for	a	moment,	then	saw	Noto	Boil,	lying	down,	the
nameless	girl	hovering	over	him.	‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	he	snapped.	‘There’s	no
time	for	that	–	get	him	on	his	feet.	Soliel,	we’re	now	going	to	your	temple.
Boil,	where	in	the	Abyss	is	your	horse?’
Straightening,	the	girl	looked	back	up	the	street.	‘My	sister ’s	death
approaches,’	she	said.
The	captain	followed	her	gaze.	And	saw	the	first	of	the	Deragoth.
Oh,	I	started	all	this,	didn’t	I?
Behind	them	the	temple	shook	to	a	massive,	wall-cracking	concussion.
‘Time	to	go!’
	
Quick	Ben	grasped	his	sister	by	the	hood	of	her	robe,	began	dragging	her
towards	the	back	of	the	chamber,	already	realizing	it	was	pointless.	The
Hounds	had	come	for	him,	and	he	was	in	a	chamber	suffused	with	otataral.
Shadowthrone	never	played	fair,	and	the	wizard	had	to	admit	he’d	been
outwitted	this	time.	And	this	time’s	about	to	be	my	last—
He	heard	claws	rushing	closer	down	the	hallway	and	looked	up—
	
Brokeface	stared	at	the	charging	beast.	A	demon.	A	thing	of	beauty,	of	purity.
And	for	him,	there	was	nothing	else,	nothing	left.	Yes,	let	beauty	slay	me.
He	stepped	into	the	creature’s	path—
And	was	shouldered	aside,	hard	enough	to	crack	his	head	against	the	wall,


momentarily	stunning	him.	He	lost	his	footing	and	fell	on	his	backside	–
darkness,	swirling,	billowing	shadows—
Even	as	the	demon	loomed	above	him,	he	saw	another	figure,	lithe,	clothed
entirely	in	black,	knife-blades	slashing	out,	cutting	deep	along	the	beast’s	right
shoulder.
The	demon	shrieked	–	pain,	outrage	–	as,	skidding,	it	twisted	round	to	face
this	new	attacker.
Who	was	no	longer	there,	who	was	somehow	now	on	its	opposite	side,
limbs	weaving,	every	motion	strangely	blurred	to	Brokeface’s	wide,	staring
eyes.	The	knives	licked	out	once	more.	Flinching	back,	the	demon	came	up
against	the	wall	opposite,	ember	eyes	flaring.
From	down	the	hallway,	more	demons	were	approaching,	yet	slowing	their
ferocious	pace,	claws	clattering—
As	the	figure	moved	suddenly	among	them.	The	gleam	of	the	blades,	now
red,	seemed	to	dance	in	the	air,	here,	there,	wheeling	motion	from	the	figure,
arms	writhing	like	serpents;	and	with	matching	grace,	he	saw	a	foot	lash	out,
connect	with	a	beast’s	head	–	which	was	as	big	as	a	horse’s,	only	wider	–	and
that	head	snapped	round	at	the	impact,	shoulders	following,	then	torso,	twisting
round	in	strange	elegance	as	the	entire	demon	was	lifted	into	the	air,	back-end
now	vertical,	head	down,	in	time	to	meet	the	side	wall.
Where	bricks	exploded,	the	wall	crumpling,	caving	in	to	some	room
beyond,	the	demon’s	body	following	into	the	cloud	of	dust.
Wild,	crowded	confusion	in	the	hallway,	and	suddenly	the	figure	stood
motionless	at	Brokeface’s	side,	daggers	still	out,	dripping	blood.
A	woman,	black-haired,	now	blocking	the	doorway.
Skittering	sounds	along	the	tiles,	and	he	looked	down	to	see	two	small,
bird-like	skeletons	flanking	her.	Their	snouts	were	open	and	hissing	sounds
emerged	from	those	empty	throats.	Spiny	tails	lashed	back	and	forth.	One
darted	forward,	a	single	hop,	head	dipping—
And	the	gathered	demons	flinched	back.
Another	reptilian	hiss,	this	one	louder	–	coming	from	a	creature	trapped	in
one	demon’s	jaws.	Brokeface	saw	in	its	terrible	eyes	a	deathly	fear,	rising	to
panic—
The	woman	spoke	quietly,	clearly	addressing	Brokeface:	‘Follow	the
wizard	and	his	sister	–	they	found	a	bolt-hole	behind	the	dais	–	enough	time,	I
think,	to	make	good	their	escape.	And	yours,	if	you	go	now.’
‘I	don’t	want	to,’	he	said,	unable	to	keep	from	weeping.	‘I	just	want	to	die.’
That	turned	her	gaze	from	the	demons	facing	her.
He	looked	up	into	exquisite,	elongated	eyes,	black	as	ebony.	And	in	her


face,	there	was	no	mirror,	no	twist	of	revulsion.	No,	naught	but	a	simple
regard,	and	then,	something	that	might	have	been…sorrow.
‘Go	to	the	Temple	of	Soliel,’	she	said.
‘She	is	ever	turned	away—’
‘Not	today	she	isn’t.	Not	with	Ganoes	Paran	holding	her	by	the	scruff	of
her	neck.	Go.	Be	healed.’
This	was	impossible,	but	how	could	he	deny	her?
‘Hurry,	I	don’t	know	how	Curdle	and	Telorast	are	managing	this	threat,
and	there’s	no	telling	how	long	it	will	last—’
Even	as	she	said	those	words,	a	bellowing	roar	came	from	further	down
the	hallway,	and	the	demons	bunched	close	before	the	threshold,	yelping	in
desperate	frenzy.
‘That’s	it,’	she	murmured,	lifting	her	knives.
Brokeface	leapt	to	his	feet	and	ran	into	the	altar	chamber.
	
Disbelief.	Quick	Ben	could	not	understand	what	had	held	the	Hounds	up	–	he’d
caught	sounds,	of	fighting,	fierce,	snapping	snarls,	squeals	of	pain,	and	in	one
glance	back,	moments	before	carrying	Torahaval	through	the	back	passage,
he’d	thought	he’d	seen…something.	Someone,	ghostly	in	shadows,
commanding	the	threshold.
Whatever	this	chance	clash,	it	had	purchased	his	life.	And	his	sister ’s.
Currency	Quick	Ben	would	not	squander.
Throwing	Torahaval	over	his	shoulder,	he	entered	the	narrow	corridor
and	ran	as	fast	as	he	could	manage.
Before	too	long	he	heard	someone	in	pursuit.	Swearing,	Quick	Ben	swung
round,	the	motion	crunching	Torahaval’s	head	against	a	wall	–	at	which	she
moaned.
A	man,	his	face	deformed	–	no,	horse-bitten,	the	wizard	realized	–	rushed
to	close.	‘I	will	help	you,’	he	said.	‘Quickly!	Doom	comes	into	this	temple!’
Had	it	been	this	man	facing	down	the	Hounds?	No	matter.	‘Take	her	legs
then,	friend.	As	soon	as	we’re	off	sanctified	ground,	we	can	get	the	Hood	out
of	here—’
	
As	the	Hounds	gathered	to	rush	Apsalar,	she	sheathed	her	knives	and	said,
‘Curdle,	Telorast,	stop	your	hissing.	Time	to	leave.’
‘You’re	no	fun,	Not-Apsalar!’	Curdle	cried.


‘No	she	isn’t,	is	she?’	Telorast	said,	head	bobbing	in	vague	threat	motions,
that	were	now	proving	less	effective.
‘Where	is	she?’	Curdle	demanded.
‘Gone!’
‘Without	us!’
‘After	her!’
	
Poliel,	Grey	Goddess	of	pestilence,	of	disease	and	suffering,	was	trapped	in
her	own	tortured	nightmare.	All	strength	gone,	all	will	bled	away.	The	shard	of
deadly	otataral	impaling	her	hand,	she	sat	on	her	throne,	convulsions	racking
her.
Betrayals,	too	many	betrayals	–	the	Crippled	God’s	power	had	fled,
abandoning	her	–	and	that	unknown	mortal,	that	cold-eyed	murderer,	who	had
understood	nothing.	In	whose	name?	For	whose	liberation	was	this	war	being
fought?	The	damned	fool.
What	curse	was	it,	in	the	end,	to	see	flaws	unveiled,	to	see	the	twisted
malice	of	mortals	dragged	to	the	surface,	exposed	to	day’s	light?	Who	among
these	followers	did	not	ever	seek,	wilful	or	mindless,	the	purity	of	selfdestruction?	In	obsession	they	took	death	into	themselves,	but	that	was	but	a
paltry	reflection	of	the	death	they	delivered	upon	the	land,	the	water,	the	very
air.	Self-destruction	making	victim	the	entire	world.
Apocalypse	is	rarely	sudden;	no,	among	these	mortals,	it	creeps	slow,	yet
inevitable,	relentless	in	its	thorough	obliteration	of	life,	of	health,	of	beauty.
Diseased	minds	and	foul	souls	had	drawn	her	into	this	world;	for	the	sake
of	the	land,	for	the	chance	that	it	might	heal	in	the	absence	of	its	cruellest
inflicters	of	pain	and	degradation,	she	sought	to	expunge	them	in	the	breath	of
plague	–	no	more	deserving	a	fate	was	imaginable	–	for	all	that,	she	would
now	die.
She	railed.	Betrayal!
Five	Hounds	of	Shadow	entered	the	chamber.
Her	death.	Shadowthrone,	you	fool.
A	Hound	flung	something	from	its	mouth,	something	that	skidded,	spitting
and	writhing,	up	against	the	first	step	of	the	dais.
Even	in	her	agony,	a	core	of	clarity	remained	within	Poliel.	She	looked
down,	seeking	to	comprehend	–	even	as	the	Hounds	fled	the	room,	round	the
dais,	into	the	priest-hole	–	comprehend	this	cowering,	scaled	panther,	one	limb
swollen	with	infection,	its	back	legs	and	hips	crushed	–	it	could	not	flee.	The
Hounds	had	abandoned	it	here	–	why?


Ah,	to	share	my	fate.
A	final	thought,	meekly	satisfying	in	itself,	as	the	Deragoth	arrived,
bristling	with	rage	and	hunger,	Elder	as	any	god,	deprived	of	one	quarry,	but
content	to	kill	what	remained.
A	broken	T’rolbarahl,	shrieking	its	terror	and	fury.
A	broken	goddess,	who	had	sought	to	heal	Burn.	For	such	was	the	true
purpose	of	fever,	such	was	the	cold	arbiter	of	disease.	Only	humans,	she
reminded	herself	–	her	last	thought	–	only	humans	centre	salvation	solely	upon
themselves.
And	then	the	Deragoth,	the	first	enslavers	of	humanity,	were	upon	her.
	
‘She’s	a	carrier	now,’	Brokeface	said,	‘and	more.	No	longer	protected,	the
plague	runs	wild	within	her,	no	matter	what	happens	to	Poliel.	Once	begun,
these	things	follow	their	own	course.	Please,’	he	added	as	he	watched	the	man
attempt	to	awaken	Torahaval,	‘come	with	me.’
The	stranger	looked	up	with	helpless	eyes.	‘Come?	Where?’
‘The	Temple	of	Soliel.’
‘That	indifferent	bitch—’
‘Please,’	Brokeface	insisted.	‘You	will	see.	I	cannot	help	but	believe	her
words.’
‘Whose	words?’
‘It’s	not	far.	She	must	be	healed.’	And	he	reached	down	once	more,
collecting	the	woman’s	legs.	‘As	before.	It’s	not	far.’
The	man	nodded.
Behind	them,	a	single	shriek	rose	from	the	temple,	piercing	enough	to
send	fissures	rippling	through	the	building’s	thick	walls,	dust	snapping	out
from	the	cracks.	Groaning	sounds	pushed	up	from	beneath	them	as	foundations
buckled,	tugging	at	the	surrounding	streets.
‘We	must	hurry	away!’	Brokeface	said.
	
Dismounting,	dragging	a	stumbling,	gasping	Noto	Boil	with	one	hand,	Paran
kicked	down	the	doors	to	the	Temple	of	Soliel	–	a	modest	but	most	satisfying
burst	of	power	that	was	sufficient,	he	trusted,	to	apprise	the	Sweet	Goddess	of
his	present	frame	of	mind.
The	girl	slipped	past	him	as	he	crossed	the	threshold	and	cast	him	a
surprisingly	delighted	glance	as	she	hurried	ahead	to	the	central	chamber.


On	the	corridor ’s	walls,	paintings	of	figures	kneeling,	heads	bowed	in
blessing,	beseeching	or	despair	–	likely	the	latter	with	this	damned	goddess,
Paran	decided.	Depending	in	folds	from	the	arched	ceiling	were	funeral
shrouds,	no	doubt	intended	to	prepare	worshippers	for	the	worst.
They	reached	the	central	chamber	even	as	the	ground	shook	–	the	Grand
Temple	was	collapsing.	Paran	pulled	Noto	Boil	to	his	side,	then	pushed	him
stumbling	towards	the	altar.	With	luck	it’ll	bury	the	damned	Deragoth.	But	I’m
not	holding	my	breath.
He	drew	out	a	card	and	tossed	it	onto	the	floor.	‘Soliel,	you	are
summoned.’
The	girl,	who	had	been	standing	to	the	right	of	the	altar,	suddenly	sagged,
then	looked	up,	blinking	owlishly.	Her	smile	broadened.
Paran	vowed,	then,	that	he	would	seek	to	recall	every	detail	of	the
goddess’s	upon	her	enforced	appearance,	so	exquisite	her	bridling	fury.	She
stood	behind	the	altar,	as	androgynous	as	her	now-dead	sister,	her	long	fingers
–	so	perfect	for	closing	eyelids	over	unseeing	eyes	–	clutching,	forming	fists
at	her	side,	as	she	said	in	a	grating	voice,	‘You	have	made	a	terrible	mistake—’
‘I’m	not	finished	yet,’	he	replied.	‘Unleash	your	power,	Soliel.	Begin	the
healing.	You	can	start	with	Noto	Boil	here,	in	whom	you	shall	place	a	residue
of	your	power,	sufficient	in	strength	and	duration	to	effect	the	healing	of	the
afflicted	in	the	encamped	army	outside	the	city.	Once	you	are	done	with	him,
others	will	arrive,	Poliel’s	cast-offs.	Heal	them	as	well,	and	send	them	out—’
His	voice	hardened.	‘Seven	Cities	has	suffered	enough,	Soliel.’
She	seemed	to	study	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	she	shrugged.	‘Very
well.	As	for	suffering,	I	leave	that	to	you,	and	through	no	choice	of	mine.’
Paran	frowned,	then	turned	at	a	surprised	shout	from	behind	them.
The	captain	blinked,	and	grinned.	‘Quick	Ben!’
The	wizard	and	Brokeface	were	dragging	a	woman	between	them	–	the	one
he	had	last	seen	in	the	altar	chamber	of	the	Grand	Temple	–	and	all	at	once,
Paran	understood.	Then,	immediately	thereafter,	realized	that	he	understood…
nothing.
Quick	Ben	looked	up	at	the	altar	and	his	eyes	narrowed.	‘That	her?	Hood’s
breath,	I	never	thought…never	mind.	Ganoes	Paran,	this	was	all	by	your	hand?
Did	you	know	the	Hounds	were	for	me?’
‘Not	entirely,	although	I	see	how	you	might	think	that	way.	You	bargained
with	Shadowthrone,	didn’t	you?	For,’	he	gestured	at	the	unconscious	woman,
‘her.’
The	wizard	scowled.	‘My	sister.’
‘He	has	released	the	Deragoth,’	Soliel	said,	harsh	and	accusory.	‘They	tore


her	apart!’
Quick	Ben’s	sister	moaned,	tried	gathering	her	legs	under	her.
‘Shit,’	the	wizard	muttered.	‘I’d	better	leave.	Back	to	the	others.	Before	she
comes	round.’
Paran	sighed	and	crossed	his	arms.	‘Really,	Quick—’
‘You	more	than	anybody	should	know	about	a	sister ’s	wrath!’	the	wizard
snapped,	stepping	away.	He	glanced	over	at	Brokeface,	who	stood,	transfixed,
staring	up	at	Soliel.	‘Go	on,’	he	said.	‘You	were	right.	Go	to	her.’
With	a	faint	whimper,	Brokeface	stumbled	forward.
Paran	watched	as	Quick	Ben	opened	a	warren.
The	wizard	hesitated,	looked	over	at	the	captain.	‘Ganoes,’	he	said,	‘tell	me
something.’
‘What?’
‘Tavore.	Can	we	trust	her?’
The	question	felt	like	a	slap,	stinging,	sudden.	He	blinked,	studied	the	man,
then	said,	‘Tavore	will	do,	wizard,	what	needs	to	be	done.’
‘To	suit	her	or	her	soldiers?’	Quick	Ben	demanded.
‘For	her,	friend,	there	is	no	distinction.’
Their	gazes	locked	for	a	moment	longer,	then	the	wizard	sighed.	‘I	owe
you	a	tankard	of	ale	when	it’s	all	over.’
‘I	will	hold	you	to	it,	Quick.’
The	wizard	flashed	that	memorable,	infuriating	grin,	and	vanished	into	the
portal.
As	it	whispered	shut	behind	him,	the	woman,	his	sister,	lifted	herself	to	her
hands	and	knees.	Her	hair	hung	down,	obscuring	her	face,	but	Paran	could	hear
her	clearly	as	she	said,	‘There	was	a	wolf.’
He	cocked	his	head.	‘A	Hound	of	Shadow.’
‘A	wolf,’	she	said	again.	‘The	loveliest,	sweetest	wolf	in	the	world…’
	
Quick	Ben	opened	his	eyes	and	looked	around.
Bottle	sat	across	from	him,	the	only	one	present	in	the	clearing.	From
somewhere	nearby	there	was	shouting,	angry,	sounds	of	rising	violence.
‘Nicely	done,’	Bottle	said.	‘Shadowthrone	threw	you	right	into	their	path,	so
much	of	you	that,	had	the	Hounds	caught	you,	I’d	now	be	burying	this	carcass
of	yours.	You	used	his	warren	to	get	here.	Very	nice	–	a	thread	must’ve
survived,	wizard,	one	even	Shadowthrone	didn’t	see.’
‘What’s	going	on?’
The	soldier	shrugged.	‘Old	argument,	I	think.	Kalam	and	Fiddler	found


Apsalar	–	with	blood	on	her	knives.	They	figure	you’re	dead,	you	see,	though
why—’
Quick	Ben	was	already	on	his	feet.	And	running.
The	scene	he	came	upon	moments	later	was	poised	on	the	very	edge	of
disaster.	Kalam	was	advancing	on	Apsalar,	his	long-knives	out,	the	otataral
blade	in	the	lead	position.	Fiddler	stood	to	one	side,	looking	both	angry	and
helpless.
And	Apsalar.	She	simply	faced	the	burly,	menacing	assassin.	No	knives	in
her	hands	and	something	like	resignation	in	her	expression.
‘Kalam!’
The	man	whirled,	as	did	Fiddler.
‘Quick!’	the	sapper	shouted.	‘We	found	her!	Blood	on	the	blades	–	and	you
—’
‘Enough	of	all	that,’	the	wizard	said.	‘Back	away	from	her,	Kalam.’
The	assassin	shrugged,	then	scabbarded	his	weapons.	‘She	wasn’t	big	on
explanations,’	he	said	in	a	frustrated	growl.	‘As	usual.	And	I	would	swear,
Quick,	she	was	wanting	this—’
‘Wanting	what?’	he	demanded.	‘Did	she	have	her	knives	out?	Is	she	in	a
fighting	stance,	Kalam?	Is	she	not	a	Shadow	Dancer?	You	damned	idiot!’	He
glared	at	Apsalar,	and	in	a	lower	voice,	added,	‘What	she	wants…ain’t	for	us	to
give…’
Boots	on	stones	sounded	behind	him,	and	Quick	Ben	swung	round	to	see
Bottle,	at	his	side	Captain	Faradan	Sort.
‘There	you	all	are,’	the	captain	said,	clearly	struggling	to	keep	her
curiosity	in	check.	‘We’re	about	to	march.	With	luck,	we’ll	reach	the
Fourteenth	this	night.	Sinn	seems	to	think	so,	anyway.’
‘That’s	good	news,’	Quick	Ben	said.	‘Lead	on,	Captain,	we’re	right	with
you.’
Yet	he	held	back,	until	Apsalar	walked	past	him,	then	he	reached	out	and
brushed	her	sleeved	arm.
She	looked	over.
Quick	Ben	hesitated,	then	nodded	and	said,	‘I	know	it	was	you,	Apsalar.
Thank	you.’
‘Wizard,’	she	said,	‘I	have	no	idea	what	you	are	talking	about.’
He	let	her	go.	No,	what	she	wants	ain’t	for	us	to	give.	She	wants	to	die.
	
Layered	in	dust,	wan	with	exhaustion,	Cotillion	strode	into	the	throne	room,
then	paused.


The	Hounds	were	gathered	before	the	Shadow	Throne,	two	lying	down,
panting	hard,	tongues	lolling.	Shan	paced	in	a	circle,	the	black	beast	twitching,
its	flanks	slashed	and	dripping	blood.	And,	Cotillion	realized,	there	were
wounds	on	the	others	as	well.
On	the	throne	sat	Shadowthrone,	his	form	blurred	as	if	within	a	roiling
storm-cloud.	‘Look	at	them,’	he	said	in	a	low,	menacing	voice.	‘Look	well,
Cotillion.’
‘The	Deragoth?’
‘No,	not	the	Deragoth.’
‘No,	I	suppose	not.	Those	look	like	knife	cuts.’
‘I	had	him.	Then	I	lost	him.’
‘Had	who?’
‘That	horrid	little	thousand-faced	wizard,	that’s	who!’	A	shadowy	hand
lifted,	long	fingers	curling.	‘I	had	him,	here	in	this	very	palm,	like	a	melting
piece	of	ice.’	A	sudden	snarl,	the	god	tilting	forward	on	the	throne.	‘It’s	all
your	fault!’
Cotillion	blinked.	‘Hold	on,	I	didn’t	attack	the	Hounds!’
‘That’s	what	you	think!’
‘What	is	that	supposed	to	mean?’	Cotillion	demanded.
The	other	hand	joined	the	first	one,	hovering,	clutching	the	air	in
spasmodic,	trembling	rage.	Then	another	snarl	–	and	the	god	vanished.
Cotillion	looked	down	at	Baran,	reached	out	towards	the	beast.
At	a	low	growl,	he	snatched	his	hand	back.	‘I	didn’t!’	he	shouted.
The	Hounds,	one	and	all	staring	at	him,	did	not	look	convinced.
	
Dusk	muted	the	dust	in	the	air	above	the	camp	as	Captain	Ganoes	Paran	–
leading	his	horse	–	and	the	cutter	Noto	Boil,	and	the	girl	–	whose	name	was
Naval	D’natha	–	climbed	the	slope	and	passed	through	the	first	line	of	pickets.
The	entire	camp	looked	as	if	it	had	been	struck	by	a	freak	storm.	Soldiers
worked	on	repairing	tents,	re-splicing	ropes,	carrying	stretchers.	Horses	loose
from	their	paddocks	still	wandered	about,	too	skittish	to	permit	anyone	close
enough	to	take	their	bits.
‘The	Hounds,’	Paran	said.	‘They	came	through	here.	As	did,	I	suspect,	the
Deragoth.	Damned	unfortunate	–	I	hope	there	weren’t	too	many	injuries.’
Noto	Boil	glanced	over	at	him,	then	sneered.	‘Captain	Kindly?	You	have
deceived	us.	Ganoes	Paran,	a	name	to	be	found	on	the	List	of	the	Fallen	in
Dujek’s	own	logs.’
‘A	name	with	too	many	questions	hanging	off	it,	cutter.’


‘Do	you	realize,	Captain,	that	the	two	remaining	Malazan	armies	in	Seven
Cities	are	commanded	by	brother	and	sister?	For	the	moment	at	least.	Once
Dujek’s	back	on	his	feet—’
‘A	moment,’	Paran	said.
Hurlochel	and	Sweetcreek	were	standing	outside	the	command	tent.	Both
had	seen	Paran	and	his	companions.
Something	in	the	outrider ’s	face…
They	reached	them.	‘Hurlochel?’	Paran	asked.
The	man	looked	down.
Sweetcreek	cleared	her	throat.	‘High	Fist	Dujek	Onearm	died	two	bells
ago,	Captain	Paran.’
‘As	for	suffering,	I	leave	that	to	you,	and	through	no	choice	of	mine.’
She	had	known.	Soliel	had	already	known.
Sweetcreek	was	still	talking,	‘…fever	broke	a	short	while	ago.	They’re
conscious,	they’ve	been	told	who	you	are	–	Ganoes	Paran,	are	you	listening	to
me?	They’ve	read	Dujek’s	logs	–	every	officer	among	us	has	read	them.	It	was
required.	Do	you	understand?	The	vote	was	unanimous.	We	have	proclaimed
you	High	Fist.	This	is	now	your	army.’
She	had	known.
All	he	had	done	here…too	late.
Dujek	Onearm	is	dead.


Chapter	Sixteen
The	privileged	waifs	are	here	now,
preening	behind	hired	armies,
and	the	legless	once-soldier
who	leans	crooked	against	a	wall
like	a	toppled,	broken	statue—
writ	on	his	empty	palm	the	warning
that	even	armies	cannot	eat	gold—
but	these	civil	younglings	cannot	see
so	far	and	for	their	own	children,
the	future’s	road	is	already	picked	clean,
cobbles	pried	free	to	build	rough	walls
and	decrepit	wastrel	shelters,
yet	this	is	a	wealthy	world	still
heaving	its	blood-streaked	treasures
at	their	silken	feet	–	they	are	here	now,
the	faces	of	civilization	and	oh	how
we	fallen	fools	yearn	to	be	among	them,
fellow	feasters	at	the	bottomless	trough.
What	is	to	come	of	this?	I	rest	crooked,
hard	stone	at	my	back,	and	this	lone
coin	settling	in	my	hand	has	a	face—
some	ancient	waif	privileged	in	his	time,
who	once	hid	behind	armies,	yes,	until	–
until	those	armies	awoke	one	day
with	empty	bellies	–	such	pride,
such	hauteur!	Look	on	the	road!
From	this	civil	strait	I	would	run,	and	run	–
if	only	I	had	not	fought,
defending	that	mindless	devourer
of	tomorrow,	if	only	I	had	legs—
so	watch	them	pass,	beneath	their	parasols
and	the	starving	multitudes	are	growing


sullen,	now	eyeing	me	in	their	avid	hunger—
I	would	run,	yes,	if	only	I	had	legs.
In	the	Last	Days	of	the	First	Empire
Sogruntes
A	single	strand	of	black	sand,	four	hundred	paces	long,	broke	the	unrelieved
basalt	ruin	of	the	coastline.	That	strip	was	now	obscured	beneath	ramps,
equipment,	horses	and	soldiers;	and	the	broad	loader	skiffs	rocked	through	the
shallows	on	their	heavy	draw-lines	out	to	the	anchored	transports	crowding	the
bay.	For	three	days	the	Fourteenth	Army	had	been	embarking,	making	their
escape	from	this	diseased	land.
Fist	Keneb	watched	the	seeming	chaos	down	below	for	a	moment	longer,
then,	drawing	his	cloak	tighter	about	himself	against	the	fierce	north	sea’s
wind,	he	turned	about	and	made	his	way	back	to	the	skeletal	remnants	of	the
encampment.
There	were	problems	–	almost	too	many	to	consider.	The	mood	among	the
soldiers	was	a	complex	mixture	of	relief,	bitterness,	anger	and	despondency.
Keneb	had	seriously	begun	to	fear	mutiny	during	the	wait	for	the	fleet	–	the
embers	of	frustration	fanned	by	dwindling	supplies	of	food	and	water.	It	was
likely	the	lack	of	options	that	had	kept	the	army	tractable,	if	sullen	–	word	from
every	city	and	settlement	west,	east	and	south	had	been	of	plague.	Bluetongue,
ferocious	in	its	virulence,	sparing	no-one.	The	only	escape	was	with	the	fleet.
Keneb	could	understand	something	of	the	soldiers’	sentiments.	The
Fourteenth’s	heart	had	been	cut	out	at	Y’Ghatan.	It	was	extraordinary	how	a
mere	handful	of	veterans	could	prove	the	lifeblood	of	thousands,	especially
when,	to	the	Fist’s	eyes,	they	had	done	nothing	to	earn	such	regard.
Perhaps	survival	alone	had	been	sufficiently	heroic.	Survival,	until
Y’Ghatan.	In	any	case,	there	was	a	palpable	absence	in	the	army,	a	hole	at	the
core,	gnawing	its	way	outward.
Compounding	all	this,	the	command	was	growing	increasingly	divided	–
for	we	have	our	own	core	of	rot.	Tene	Baralta.	The	Red	Blade…who	lusts	for	his
own	death.	There	were	no	healers	in	the	Fourteenth	skilled	enough	to	erase	the
terrible	damage	to	Baralta’s	visage;	it	would	take	High	Denul	to	regenerate	the
man’s	lost	eye	and	forearm,	and	that	was	a	talent	growing	ever	rarer	–	at	least
in	the	Malazan	Empire.	If	only	Tene	had	also	lost	the	capacity	for	speech.	Every
word	from	him	was	bitter	with	poison,	a	burgeoning	hatred	for	all	things,
beginning	with	himself.


Approaching	the	Adjunct’s	command	tent,	Keneb	saw	Nether	exit,	her
expression	dark,	bridling.	The	cattle-dog	Bent	appeared,	lumbering	towards
her	–	then,	sensing	her	state	of	mind,	the	huge	scarred	beast	halted,	ostensibly
to	scratch	itself,	and	moments	later	was	distracted	by	the	Hengese	lapdog
Roach.	The	two	trundled	off.
Drawing	a	deep	breath,	Keneb	walked	up	to	the	young	Wickan	witch.	‘I
take	it,’	he	said,	‘the	Adjunct	was	not	pleased	with	your	report.’
She	glared	at	him.	‘It	is	not	our	fault,	Fist.	This	plague	seethes	through	the
warrens.	We	have	lost	all	contact	with	Dujek	and	the	Host;	ever	since	they
arrived	outside	G’danisban.	And	as	for	Pearl,’	she	crossed	her	arms,	‘we
cannot	track	him	–	he	is	gone	and	that	is	that.	Besides,	if	the	fool	wants	to	brave
the	warrens	it’s	not	for	us	to	retrieve	his	bones.’
The	only	thing	worse	than	a	Claw	in	camp	was	the	sudden,	inexplicable
vanishing	of	that	selfsame	Claw.	Not	that	there	was	anything	that	could	be	done
about	it.	Keneb	asked,	‘How	many	days	has	it	been,	then,	since	you	were	able	to
speak	with	High	Fist	Dujek?’
The	young	Wickan	looked	away,	her	arms	still	crossed.	‘Since	before
Y’Ghatan.’
Keneb’s	brows	rose.	That	long?	Adjunct,	you	tell	us	so	little.	‘What	of
Admiral	Nok	–	have	his	mages	had	better	luck?’
‘Worse,’	she	snapped.	‘At	least	we’re	on	land.’
‘For	now,’	he	said,	eyeing	her.
Nether	scowled.	‘What	is	it?’
‘Nothing,	except…a	frown	like	that	can	become	permanent	–	you’re	too
young	to	have	such	deep	creases	there—’
Snarling,	the	witch	stalked	off.
Keneb	stared	after	her	a	moment,	then,	shrugging,	he	turned	and	entered
the	command	tent.
The	canvas	walls	still	reeked	of	smoke,	a	grim	reminder	of	Y’Ghatan.	The
map-table	remained	–	not	yet	loaded	out	onto	the	transports	–	and	around	it,
despite	the	fact	that	the	tabletop	was	bare	–	stood	the	Adjunct,	Blistig	and
Admiral	Nok.
‘Fist	Keneb,’	Tavore	said.
‘Two	more	days,	I	should	think,’	he	replied,	unclasping	his	cloak	now	that
he	was	out	of	the	wind.
The	Admiral	had	been	speaking,	it	seemed,	for	he	cleared	his	throat	and
said,	‘I	still	believe,	Adjunct,	that	there	is	nothing	untoward	to	the	command.
The	Empress	sees	no	further	need	for	the	Fourteenth’s	presence	here.	There	is
also	the	matter	of	the	plague	–	you	have	managed	to	keep	it	from	your	troops


thus	far,	true	enough,	but	that	will	not	last.	Particularly	once	your	stores	run
out	and	you	are	forced	to	forage.’
Blistig	grunted	sourly.	‘No	harvest	this	year.	Apart	from	abandoned
livestock	there	ain’t	much	to	forage	–	we’d	have	no	choice	but	to	march	to	a
city.’
‘Precisely,’	said	the	Admiral.
Keneb	glanced	at	Tavore.	‘Forgive	me,	Adjunct—’
‘After	I	sent	you	out	to	gauge	the	loading	of	troops,	the	subject	of
command	structure	was	concluded,	to	the	satisfaction	of	all.’	A	certain	dryness
to	that,	and	Blistig	snorted.	Tavore	continued,	‘Admiral	Nok	has	finally
relayed	to	us	the	command	of	the	Empress,	that	we	are	to	return	to	Unta.	The
difficulty	before	us	now	lies	in	deciding	our	return	route.’
Keneb	blinked.	‘Why,	east	and	then	south,	of	course.	The	other	way	would
take—’
‘Longer,	yes,’	Nok	interrupted.	‘Nonetheless,	at	this	time	of	year,	we	would
be	aided	by	currents	and	prevailing	winds.	Granted,	the	course	is	less	well
charted,	and	most	of	our	maps	for	the	western	coast	of	this	continent	are
derived	from	foreign	sources,	making	their	reliability	open	to	challenge.’	He
rubbed	at	his	weathered,	lined	face.	‘All	of	that	is,	alas,	not	relevant.	The	issue
is	the	plague.	Adjunct,	we	have	sought	one	port	after	another	on	our	way	to	this
rendezvous,	and	not	one	was	safe	to	enter.	Our	own	supplies	are	perilously
low.’
Blistig	asked,	‘So	where	do	you	believe	we	can	resupply	anywhere	west	of
here,	Admiral?’
‘Sepik,	to	begin	with.	The	island	is	remote,	sufficiently	so	that	I	believe	it
remains	plague-free.	South	of	that,	there	is	Nemil,	and	a	number	of	lesser
kingdoms	all	the	way	down	to	Shal-Morzinn.	From	the	southern	tip	of	the
continent	the	journey	down	to	the	northwest	coast	of	Quon	Tali	is	in	fact
shorter	than	the	Falar	lanes.	Once	we	have	cleared	the	risk	that	is	Drift	Avalii
we	will	find	ourselves	in	the	Genii	Straits,	with	the	coast	of	Dal	Hon	to	our
north.	At	that	time	the	currents	will	once	again	be	with	us.’
‘All	very	well,’	Blistig	said	in	a	growl,	‘but	what	happens	if	Nemil	and
those	other	“lesser	kingdoms”	decide	they’re	not	interested	in	selling	us	food
and	fresh	water?’
‘We	shall	have	to	convince	them,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘by	whatever	means
necessary.’
‘Let’s	hope	it’s	not	by	the	sword.’
As	soon	as	Blistig	said	that	his	regret	was	obvious	–	the	statement	should
have	sounded	reasonable;	instead,	it	simply	revealed	the	man’s	lack	of


confidence	in	the	Adjunct’s	army.
She	was	regarding	her	Fist	now,	expressionless,	yet	a	certain	chill	crept
into	the	chamber,	filling	the	silence.
On	Admiral	Nok’s	face,	a	look	of	disappointment.	Then	he	reached	for	his
sealskin	cloak.	‘I	must	return	now	to	my	flagship.	Thrice	on	our	journey	here,
the	outrider	escorts	sighted	an	unknown	fleet	to	the	north.	No	doubt	the
sightings	were	mutual	but	no	closer	contact	occurred,	so	I	believe	it	poses	no
threat	to	us.’
‘A	fleet,’	Keneb	said.	‘Nemil?’
‘Possibly.	There	was	said	to	be	a	Meckros	city	west	of	Sepik	Sea	–	that
report	is	a	few	years	old.	Then	again,’	he	glanced	over	at	the	Adjunct	as	he
reached	the	flap,	‘how	fast	can	a	floating	city	move?	In	any	case,	Meckros	raid
and	trade,	and	it	may	well	be	that	Nemil	has	dispatched	ships	to	ward	them
from	their	coast.’
They	watched	the	Admiral	leave.
Blistig	said,	‘Your	pardon,	Adjunct—’
‘Save	your	apology,’	she	cut	in,	turning	away	from	him.	‘One	day	I	shall
call	upon	you,	Blistig,	to	voice	it	again.	But	not	to	me;	rather,	to	your	soldiers.
Now,	please	visit	Fist	Tene	Baralta	and	relay	to	him	the	essence	of	this
meeting.’
‘He	has	no	interest—’
‘His	interests	do	not	concern	me,	Fist	Blistig.’
Lips	pressed	together,	the	man	saluted,	then	left.
‘A	moment,’	the	Adjunct	said	as	Keneb	prepared	to	follow	suit.	‘How	fare
the	soldiers,	Fist?’
He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘For	the	most	part,	Adjunct,	they	are	relieved.’
‘I	am	not	surprised,’	she	said.
‘Shall	I	inform	them	that	we	are	returning	home?’
She	half-smiled.	‘I	have	no	doubt	the	rumour	is	already	among	them.	By
all	means,	Fist.	There	is	no	reason	to	keep	it	a	secret.’
‘Unta,’	Keneb	mused,	‘my	wife	and	children	are	likely	there.	Of	course,	it
stands	to	reason	that	the	Fourteenth	will	not	stay	long	in	Unta.’
‘True.	Our	ranks	will	be	refilled.’
‘And	then?’
She	shrugged.	‘Korel,	I	expect.	Nok	thinks	the	assault	on	Theft	will	be
renewed.’
It	was	a	moment	before	Keneb	realized	that	she	did	not	believe	a	word	she
was	saying	to	him.	Why	not	Korel?	What	might	Laseen	have	in	store	for	us,	if
not	another	campaign?	What	does	Tavore	suspect?	He	hid	his	confusion	by


fumbling	over	the	cloak’s	clasps	for	a	few	heartbeats.
When	he	glanced	up	again,	the	Adjunct	seemed	to	be	staring	at	one	of	the
tent’s	mottled	walls.
Standing,	always	standing	–	he	could	not	recall	ever	having	seen	her
seated,	except	on	a	horse.	‘Adjunct?’
She	started,	then	nodded	and	said,	‘You	are	dismissed,	Keneb.’
He	felt	like	a	coward	as	he	made	his	way	outside,	angry	at	his	own	sense	of
relief.	Still,	a	new	unease	now	plagued	him.	Unta.	His	wife.	What	was,	is	no
longer.	I’m	old	enough	to	know	the	truth	of	that.	Things	change.	We	change—
‘Make	it	three	days.’
Keneb	blinked,	looked	down	to	see	Grub,	flanked	by	Bent	and	Roach.	The
huge	cattle-dog’s	attention	was	fixed	elsewhere	–	southeastward	–	while	the
lapdog	sniffed	at	one	of	Grub’s	worn	moccasins,	where	the	child’s	big	toe
protruded	from	a	split	in	the	upper	seam.	‘Make	what	three	days,	Grub?’
‘Until	we	leave.	Three	days.’	The	boy	wiped	his	nose.
‘Dig	into	one	of	the	spare	kits,’	Keneb	said,	‘and	find	some	warmer
clothes,	Grub.	This	sea	is	a	cold	one,	and	it’s	going	to	get	colder	yet.’
‘I’m	fine.	My	nose	runs,	but	so	does	Bent’s,	so	does	Roach’s.	We’re	fine.
Three	days.’
‘We’ll	be	gone	in	two.’
‘No.	It	has	to	be	three	days,	or	we	will	never	get	anywhere.	We’ll	die	in	the
sea,	two	days	after	we	leave	Sepik	Island.’
A	chill	rippled	through	the	Fist.	‘How	did	you	know	we	were	headed	west,
Grub?’
The	boy	looked	down,	watched	as	Roach	licked	clean	his	big	toe.	‘Sepik,
but	that	will	be	bad.	Nemil	will	be	good.	Then	bad.	And	after	that,	we	find
friends,	twice.	And	then	we	end	up	where	it	all	started,	and	that	will	be	very	bad.
But	that’s	when	she	realizes	everything,	almost	everything,	I	mean,	enough	of
everything	to	be	enough.	And	the	big	man	with	the	cut	hands	says	yes.’	He
looked	up,	eyes	bright.	‘I	found	a	bone	whistle	and	I’m	keeping	it	for	him
because	he’ll	want	it	back.	We’re	off	to	collect	seashells!’
With	that	all	three	ran	off,	down	towards	the	beach.
Three	days,	not	two.	Or	we	all	die.	‘Don’t	worry,	Grub,’	he	said	in	a
whisper,	‘not	all	grown-ups	are	stupid.’
	
Lieutenant	Pores	looked	down	at	the	soldier ’s	collection.	‘What	in	Hood’s
name	are	these?’
‘Bones,	sir,’	the	woman	replied.	‘Bird	bones.	They	was	coming	out	of	the


cliff	–	look,	they’re	hard	as	rock	–	we’re	going	to	add	them	to	our	collection,
us	heavies,	I	mean.	Hanfeno,	he’s	drilling	holes	in	’em	–	the	others,	I	mean,	we
got	hundreds.	You	want	us	to	make	you	some,	sir?’
‘Give	me	a	few,’	he	said,	reaching	out.
She	dropped	into	his	hand	two	leg	bones,	each	the	length	of	his	thumb,	then
another	that	looked	like	a	knuckle,	slightly	broader	than	his	own.	‘You	idiot.
This	one’s	not	from	a	bird.’
‘Well	I	don’t	know,	sir.	Could	be	a	skull?’
‘It’s	solid.’
‘A	woodpecker?’
‘Go	back	to	your	squad,	Senny.	When	are	you	on	the	ramp?’
‘Looks	like	tomorrow	now,	sir.	Fist	Keneb’s	soldiers	got	delayed	–	he
pulled	half	of	’em	back	off,	it	was	complete	chaos!	There’s	no	figuring
officers,	uh,	sir.’
A	wave	sent	the	woman	scurrying.	Lieutenant	Pores	nestled	the	small	bones
into	his	palm,	closing	his	fingers	over	to	hold	them	in	place,	then	he	walked
back	to	where	Captain	Kindly	stood	beside	the	four	trunks	that	comprised	his
camp	kit.	Two	retainers	were	busy	repacking	one	of	the	trunks,	and	Pores	saw,
arranged	on	a	camel-hair	blanket,	an	assortment	of	combs	–	two	dozen,	maybe
more,	no	two	alike.	Bone,	shell,	antler,	tortoiseshell,	ivory,	wood,	slate,	silver,
gold	and	blood-copper.	Clearly,	they	had	been	collected	over	years	of	travel,
the	captain’s	sojourn	as	a	soldier	laid	out,	the	succession	of	cultures,	the	tribes
and	peoples	he	had	either	befriended	or	annihilated.	Even	so…Pores	frowned.
Combs?
Kindly	was	mostly	bald.
The	captain	was	instructing	his	retainers	on	how	to	pack	the	items.	‘…those
cotton	buds,	and	the	goat	wool	or	whatever	you	call	it.	Each	one,	and	carefully
–	if	I	find	a	scratch,	a	nick	or	a	broken	tooth	I	will	have	no	choice	but	to	kill
you	both.	Ah,	Lieutenant,	I	trust	you	are	now	fully	recovered	from	your
wounds?	Good.	What’s	wrong,	man?	Are	you	choking?’
Gagging,	his	face	reddening,	Pores	waited	until	Kindly	stepped	closer,	then
he	let	loose	a	cough,	loud	and	bursting	and	from	his	right	hand	–	held	before
his	mouth	–	three	bones	were	spat	out	to	clunk	and	bounce	on	the	ground.
Pores	drew	in	a	deep	breath,	shook	his	head	and	cleared	his	throat.
‘Apologies,	Captain,’	he	said	in	a	rasp.	‘Some	broken	bones	still	in	me,	I
guess.	Been	wanting	to	come	out	for	a	while	now.’
‘Well,’	Kindly	said,	‘are	you	done?’
‘Yes	sir.’
The	two	retainers	were	staring	at	the	bones.	One	reached	over	and


collected	the	knuckle.
Pores	wiped	imaginary	sweat	from	his	brow.	‘That	was	some	cough,
wasn’t	it?	I’d	swear	someone	punched	me	in	the	gut.’
The	retainer	reached	over	with	the	knuckle.	‘He	left	you	this,	Lieutenant.’
‘Ah,	thank	you,	soldier.’
‘If	you	think	any	of	this	is	amusing,	Lieutenant,’	Kindly	said.	‘You	are
mistaken.	Now,	explain	to	me	this	damned	delay.’
‘I	can’t,	Captain.	Fist	Keneb’s	soldiers,	some	kind	of	recall.	There	doesn’t
seem	to	be	a	reasonable	explanation.’
‘Typical.	Armies	are	run	by	fools.	If	I	had	an	army	you’d	see	things	done
differently.	I	can’t	abide	lazy	soldiers.	I’ve	personally	killed	more	lazy	soldiers
than	enemies	of	the	empire.	If	this	was	my	army,	Lieutenant,	we	would	have
been	on	those	ships	in	two	days	flat,	and	anybody	still	on	shore	by	then	we’d
leave	behind,	stripped	naked	with	only	a	crust	of	bread	in	their	hands	and	the
order	to	march	to	Quon	Tali.’
‘Across	the	sea.’
‘I’m	glad	we’re	understood.	Now,	stand	here	and	guard	my	kit,	Lieutenant.
I	must	find	my	fellow	captains	Madan’Tul	Rada	and	Ruthan	Gudd	–	they’re
complete	idiots	but	I	mean	to	fix	that.’
Pores	watched	his	captain	walk	away,	then	he	looked	back	down	at	the
retainers	and	smiled.	‘Now	wouldn’t	that	be	something?	High	Fist	Kindly,
commanding	all	the	Malazan	armies.’
‘Leastways,’	one	of	the	men	said,	‘we’d	always	know	what	we	was	up	to.’
The	lieutenant’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘You	would	like	Kindly	doing	your
thinking	for	you?’
‘I’m	a	soldier,	ain’t	I?’
‘And	what	if	I	told	you	Captain	Kindly	was	insane?’
‘You	be	testing	us?	Anyway,	don’t	matter	if’n	he	is	or	not,	so	long	as	he
knows	what	he’s	doing	and	he	keeps	telling	us	what	we’re	supposed	to	be
doing.’	He	nudged	his	companion,	‘Ain’t	that	right,	Thikburd?’
‘Right	enough,’	the	other	mumbled,	examining	one	of	the	combs.
‘The	Malazan	soldier	is	trained	to	think,’	Pores	said.	‘That	tradition	has
been	with	us	since	Kellanved	and	Dassem	Ultor.	Have	you	forgotten	that?’
‘No,	sir,	we	ain’t.	There’s	thinkin’	and	there’s	thinkin’	and	that’s	jus’	the
way	it	is.	Soldiers	do	one	kind	and	leaders	do	the	other.	Ain’t	good	the	two
gettin’	mixed	up.’
‘Must	make	life	easy	for	you.’
A	nod.	‘Aye,	sir,	that	it	does.’
‘If	your	friend	scratches	that	comb	he’s	admiring,	Captain	Kindly	will	kill


you	both.’
‘Thikburd!	Put	that	down!’
‘But	it’s	pretty!’
‘So’s	a	mouthful	of	teeth	and	you	want	to	keep	yours,	don’t	ya?’
And	with	soldiers	like	these,	we	won	an	empire.
	
The	horses	were	past	their	prime,	but	they	would	have	to	do.	A	lone	mule
would	carry	the	bulk	of	their	supplies,	including	the	wrapped	corpse	of
Heboric	Ghost	Hands.	The	beasts	stood	waiting	on	the	east	end	of	the	main
street,	tails	flicking	to	fend	off	the	flies,	already	enervated	by	the	heat,	although
it	was	but	mid-morning.
Barathol	Mekhar	made	one	last	adjustment	to	his	weapons	belt,	bemused	to
find	that	he’d	put	on	weight	in	his	midriff,	then	he	squinted	over	as	Cutter	and
Scillara	emerged	from	the	inn	and	made	their	way	towards	the	horses.
The	woman’s	conversation	with	the	two	Jessas	had	been	an	admirable
display	of	brevity,	devoid	of	advice	and	ending	with	a	most	perfunctory	thanks.
So,	the	baby	was	now	the	youngest	resident	of	this	forgotten	hamlet.	The	girl
would	grow	up	playing	with	scorpions,	rhizan	and	meer	rats,	her	horizons
seemingly	limitless,	the	sun	overhead	the	harsh,	blinding	and	brutal	face	of	a
god.	But	all	in	all,	she	would	be	safe,	and	loved.
The	blacksmith	noted	a	figure	nearby,	hovering	in	the	shadow	of	a
doorway.	Ah,	well,	at	least	someone	will	miss	us.	Feeling	oddly	sad,	Barathol
made	his	way	over	to	the	others.
‘Your	horse	will	collapse	under	you,’	Cutter	said.	‘It’s	too	old	and	you’re
too	big,	Barathol.	That	axe	alone	would	stagger	a	mule.’
‘Who’s	that	standing	over	there?’	Scillara	asked.
‘Chaur.’	The	blacksmith	swung	himself	onto	his	horse,	the	beast	sidestepping	beneath	him	as	he	settled	his	weight	in	the	saddle.	‘Come	to	see	us	off,
I	expect.	Mount	up,	you	two.’
‘This	is	the	hottest	part	of	the	day,’	Cutter	said.	‘It	seems	we’re	always
travelling	through	the	worst	this	damned	land	can	throw	at	us.’
‘We	will	reach	a	spring	by	dusk,’	Barathol	said,	‘when	we’ll	all	need	it
most.	We	lie	over	there,	until	the	following	dusk,	because	the	next	leg	of	the
journey	will	be	a	long	one.’
They	set	out	on	the	road,	that	quickly	became	a	track.	A	short	while	later,
Scillara	said,	‘We	have	company,	Barathol.’
Glancing	back,	they	saw	Chaur,	carrying	a	canvas	bundle	against	his	chest.
There	was	a	dogged	expression	on	his	sweaty	face.


Sighing,	the	blacksmith	halted	his	horse.
‘Can	you	convince	him	to	go	home?’	Scillara	asked.
‘Not	likely,’	Barathol	admitted.	‘Simple	and	stubborn	–	that’s	a	miserable
combination.’	He	slipped	down	to	the	ground	and	walked	back	to	the	huge
young	man.	‘Here,	Chaur,	let’s	tie	your	kit	to	the	mule’s	pack.’
Smiling,	Chaur	handed	it	over.
‘We	have	a	long	way	to	go,	Chaur.	And	for	the	next	few	days	at	least,	you
will	have	to	walk	–	do	you	understand?	Now,	let’s	see	what	you’re	wearing	on
your	feet	–	Hood’s	breath—’
‘He’s	barefoot!’	Cutter	said,	incredulous.
‘Chaur,’	Barathol	tried	to	explain,	‘this	track	is	nothing	but	sharp	stones
and	hot	sand.’
‘There’s	some	thick	bhederin	hide	in	our	kit,’	Scillara	said,	lighting	her
pipe,	‘somewhere.	Tonight	I	can	make	him	sandals.	Unless	you	want	us	to	stop
right	now.’
The	blacksmith	unslung	his	axe,	then	crouched	and	began	pulling	at	his
boots.	‘Since	I’ll	be	riding,	he	can	wear	these	until	then.’
	
Cutter	watched	as	Chaur	struggled	to	pull	on	Barathol’s	boots.	Most	men,	he
knew,	would	have	left	Chaur	to	his	fate.	Just	a	child	in	a	giant’s	body,	after	all,
foolish	and	mostly	useless,	a	burden.	In	fact,	most	men	would	have	beaten	the
simpleton	until	he	fled	back	to	the	hamlet	–	a	beating	for	Chaur ’s	own	good,
and	in	some	ways	very	nearly	justifiable.	But	this	blacksmith…he	hardly
seemed	the	mass	murderer	he	was	purported	to	be.	The	betrayer	of	Aren,	the
man	who	assassinated	a	Fist.	And	now,	their	escort	to	the	coast.
Cutter	found	himself	oddly	comforted	by	that	notion.	Kalam’s
cousin…assassinations	must	run	in	the	family.	That	huge	double-bladed	axe
hardly	seemed	an	assassin’s	weapon.	He	considered	asking	Barathol	–	getting
from	him	his	version	of	what	had	happened	at	Aren	all	those	years	ago	–	but
the	blacksmith	was	a	reluctant	conversationalist,	and	besides,	if	he	had	his
secrets	he	was	within	his	right	to	hold	on	to	them.	The	way	I	hold	on	to	mine.
They	set	out	again,	Chaur	trailing,	stumbling	every	now	and	then	as	if
unfamiliar	with	footwear	of	any	kind.	But	he	was	smiling.
‘Damn	these	leaking	tits,’	Scillara	said	beside	him.
Cutter	stared	over	at	her,	not	knowing	how	he	should	reply	to	that
particular	complaint.
‘And	I’m	running	out	of	rustleaf,	too.’
‘I’m	sorry,’	he	said.


‘What	have	you	to	be	sorry	about?’
‘Well,	it	took	me	so	long	to	recover	from	my	wounds.’
‘Cutter,	you	had	your	guts	wrapped	round	your	ankles	–	how	do	you	feel,
by	the	way?’
‘Uncomfortable,	but	I	never	was	much	of	a	rider.	I	grew	up	in	a	city,	after
all.	Alleys,	rooftops,	taverns,	estate	balconies,	that	was	my	world	before	all
this.	Gods	below,	I	do	miss	Darujhistan.	You	would	love	it,	Scillara—’
‘You	must	be	mad.	I	don’t	remember	cities.	It’s	all	desert	and	dried-up	hills
for	me.	Tents	and	mud-brick	hovels.’
‘There	are	caverns	of	gas	beneath	Darujhistan,	and	that	gas	is	piped	up	to
light	the	streets	with	this	beautiful	blue	fire.	It’s	the	most	magnificent	city	in	the
world,	Scillara—’
‘Then	why	did	you	ever	leave	it?’
Cutter	fell	silent.
‘All	right,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘how	about	this?	We’re	taking
Heboric’s	body…where,	precisely?’
‘Otataral	Island.’
‘It’s	a	big	island,	Cutter.	Any	place	in	particular?’
‘Heboric	spoke	of	the	desert,	four	or	five	days	north	and	west	of	Dosin
Pali.	He	said	there’s	a	giant	temple	there,	or	at	least	the	statue	from	one.’
‘So	you	were	listening,	after	all.’
‘Sometimes	he	got	lucid,	yes.	Something	he	called	the	Jade,	a	power	both
gift	and	curse…and	he	wanted	to	give	it	back.	Somehow.’
‘Since	he’s	now	dead,’	Scillara	asked,	‘how	do	you	expect	him	to	do
anything	like	returning	power	to	some	statue?	Cutter,	how	do	we	find	a	statue
in	the	middle	of	a	desert?	You	might	want	to	consider	that	whatever	Heboric
wanted	doesn’t	mean	anything	any	more.	The	T’lan	Imass	killed	him,	and	so
Treach	needs	to	find	a	new	Destriant,	and	if	Heboric	had	any	other	kind	of
power,	it	must	have	dissipated	by	now,	or	followed	him	through	Hood’s	Gate	–
either	way,	there	is	nothing	we	can	do	about	it.’
‘His	hands	are	solid	now,	Scillara.’
She	started.	‘What?’
‘Solid	jade	–	not	pure,	filled	with…imperfections.	Flaws,	particles	buried
deep	inside.	Like	they	were	flecked	with	ash,	or	dirt.’
‘You	examined	his	corpse?’
Cutter	nodded.
‘Why?’
‘Greyfrog	came	back	to	life…’
‘So	you	thought	the	old	man	might	do	the	same.’


‘It	was	a	possibility,	but	it	doesn’t	look	like	it’s	going	to	happen.	He’s
mummifying	–	and	fast.’
Barathol	Mekhar	spoke:	‘His	funeral	shroud	was	soaked	in	salt	water	then
packed	in	even	more	salt,	Cutter.	Keeps	the	maggots	out.	A	fist-sized	bundle	of
rags	was	pushed	into	the	back	of	his	throat,	and	a	few	other	places	besides.	The
old	practice	was	to	remove	the	intestines,	but	the	locals	have	since	grown
lazier	–	there	were	arts	involved.	Skills,	mostly	forgotten.	What’s	done	is	to
dry	out	the	corpse	as	quickly	as	possible.’
Cutter	glanced	at	Scillara,	then	shrugged.	‘Heboric	was	chosen	by	a	god.’
‘But	he	failed	that	god,’	she	replied.
‘They	were	T’lan	Imass!’
A	flow	of	smoke	accompanied	Scillara’s	words	as	she	said,	‘Next	time	we
get	swarmed	by	flies,	we’ll	know	what’s	coming.’	She	met	his	eyes.	‘Look,
Cutter,	there’s	just	us,	now.	You	and	me,	and	until	the	coast,	Barathol.	If	you
want	to	drop	Heboric’s	body	off	on	the	island,	that’s	fine.	If	those	jade	hands
are	still	alive,	they	can	crawl	back	to	their	master	on	their	own.	We	just	bury
the	body	above	the	tideline	and	leave	it	at	that.’
‘And	then?’
‘Darujhistan.	I	think	I	want	to	see	this	magnificent	city	of	yours.	You	said
rooftops	and	alleys	–	what	were	you	there?	A	thief?	Must	have	been.	Who	else
knows	alleys	and	rooftops?	So,	you	can	teach	me	the	ways	of	a	thief,	Cutter.	I’ll
follow	in	your	shadow.	Hood	knows,	stealing	what	we	can	from	this	insane
world	makes	as	much	sense	as	anything	else.’
Cutter	looked	away.	‘It’s	not	good,’	he	said,	‘following	anyone’s	shadow.
There’s	better	people	there…for	you	to	get	along	with.	Murillio,	maybe,	or
even	Coll.’
‘Will	I	one	day	discover,’	she	asked,	‘that	you’ve	just	insulted	me?’
‘No!	Of	course	not.	I	like	Murillio!	And	Coll’s	a	Councilman.	He	owns	an
estate	and	everything.’
Barathol	said,	‘Ever	seen	an	animal	led	to	slaughter,	Cutter?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
But	the	big	man	simply	shook	his	head.
	
After	repacking	her	pipe,	Scillara	settled	back	in	her	saddle,	a	small	measure
of	mercy	silencing,	for	the	moment	at	least,	her	baiting	of	Cutter.	Mercy	and,
she	admitted,	Barathol’s	subtle	warning	to	ease	up	on	the	young	man.
That	old	killer	was	a	sharp	one.
It	wasn’t	that	she	held	anything	against	Cutter.	The	very	opposite,	in	fact.


That	small	glimmer	of	enthusiasm	–	when	he	spoke	of	Darujhistan	–	had
surprised	her.	Cutter	was	reaching	out	to	the	comfort	of	old	memories,
suggesting	to	her	that	he	was	suffering	from	loneliness.	That	woman	who	left
him.	The	one	for	whom	he	departed	Darujhistan	in	the	first	place,	I	suspect.
Loneliness,	then,	and	a	certain	loss	of	purpose,	now	that	Heboric	was	dead	and
Felisin	Younger	stolen	away.	Maybe	there	was	some	guilt	thrown	in	–	he’d
failed	in	protecting	Felisin,	after	all,	failed	in	protecting	Scillara	too,	for	that
matter	–	not	that	she	was	the	kind	to	hold	such	a	thing	against	him.	They’d	been
T’lan	Imass,	for	Hood’s	sake.
But	Cutter,	being	young	and	being	a	man,	would	see	it	differently.	A
multitude	of	swords	that	he	would	happily	fall	on,	with	a	nudge	from	the
wrong	person.	A	person	who	mattered	to	him.	Better	to	keep	him	away	from
such	notions,	and	a	little	flirtation	on	her	part,	yielding	charming	confusion	on
his,	should	suffice.
She	hoped	he	would	consider	her	advice	on	burying	Heboric.	She’d	had
enough	of	deserts.	Thoughts	of	a	city	lit	by	blue	fire,	a	place	filled	with	people,
none	of	whom	expected	anything	of	her,	and	the	possibility	of	new	friends	–
with	Cutter	at	her	side	–	were	in	truth	rather	enticing.	A	new	adventure,	and	a
civilized	one	at	that.	Exotic	foods,	plenty	of	rustleaf…
She	had	wondered,	briefly,	if	the	absence	of	regret	or	sorrow	within	her	at
the	surrendering	of	the	child	she	had	carried	inside	all	those	months	was	truly
indicative	of	some	essential	lack	of	morality	in	her	soul,	some	kind	of	flaw
that	would	bring	horror	into	the	eyes	of	mothers,	grandmothers	and	even	little
girls	as	they	looked	upon	her.	But	such	thoughts	had	not	lasted	long.	The	truth
of	the	matter	was,	she	didn’t	care	what	other	people	thought,	and	if	most	of
them	saw	that	as	a	threat	to…whatever…to	their	view	on	how	things	should
be…well,	that	was	just	too	bad,	wasn’t	it?	As	if	her	very	existence	could	lure
others	into	a	life	of	acts	without	consequence.
Now	that’s	a	laugh,	isn’t	it?	The	most	deadly	seducers	are	the	ones
encouraging	conformity.	If	you	can	only	feel	safe	when	everybody	else	feels,
thinks	and	looks	the	same	as	you,	then	you’re	a	Hood-damned	coward…not	to
mention	a	vicious	tyrant	in	the	making.
‘So,	Barathol	Mekhar,	what	awaits	you	on	the	coast?’
‘Probably	plague,’	he	said.
‘Oh	now	that’s	a	pleasant	thought.	And	if	you	survive	that?’
He	shrugged.	‘A	ship,	going	somewhere	else.	I’ve	never	been	to
Genabackis.	Nor	Falar.’
‘If	you	go	to	Falar,’	Scillara	said,	‘or	empire-held	Genabackis,	your	old
crimes	might	catch	up	with	you.’


‘They’ve	caught	up	with	me	before.’
‘So,	either	you’re	indifferent	to	your	own	death,	Barathol,	or	your
confidence	is	supreme	and	unassailable.	Which	is	it?’
‘Take	your	pick.’
A	sharp	one.	I	won’t	get	any	rise	from	him,	no	point	in	trying.	‘What	do	you
think	it	will	be	like,	crossing	an	ocean?’
‘Like	a	desert,’	Cutter	said,	‘only	wetter.’
She	probably	should	have	glared	at	him	for	that,	but	she	had	to	admit,	it
was	a	good	answer.	All	right,	so	maybe	they’re	both	sharp,	in	their	own	ways.	I
think	I’m	going	to	enjoy	this	journey.
They	rode	the	track,	the	heat	and	sunlight	burgeoning	into	a	conflagration,
and	in	their	wake	clumped	Chaur,	still	smiling.
	
The	Jaghut	Ganath	stood	looking	into	the	chasm.	The	sorcerous	weaving	she
had	set	upon	this…intrusion	had	shattered.	She	did	not	need	to	descend	that	vast
fissure,	nor	enter	the	buried	sky	keep	itself,	to	know	the	cause	of	that
shattering.	Draconean	blood	had	been	spilled,	although	that	in	itself	was	not
enough.	The	chaos	between	the	warrens	had	also	been	unleashed,	and	it	had
devoured	Omtose	Phellack	as	boiling	water	does	ice.
Yet	her	sense	of	the	sequence	of	events	necessary	for	such	a	thing	to
happen	remained	clouded,	as	if	time	itself	had	been	twisted	within	that	oncefloating	fortress.	There	was	outrage	locked	in	the	very	bedrock,	and	now,	a
most	peculiar	imposition	of…order.
She	wished	for	companions	here,	at	her	side.	Cynnigig,	especially.	And
Phyrlis.	As	it	was,	in	this	place,	alone	as	she	was,	she	felt	oddly	vulnerable.
Perhaps	most	of	all,	would	that	Ganoes	Paran,	Master	of	the	Deck,	was
with	me.	A	surprisingly	formidable	human.	A	little	too	prone	to	take	risks,
however,	and	there	was	something	here	that	invited	a	certain	caution.	She
would	need	to	heal	this	–	there	could	be	no	doubt	of	that.	Still…
Ganath	pulled	her	unhuman	gaze	from	the	dark	fissure	–	in	time	to	see,
flowing	across	the	flat	rock	to	either	side,	and	behind	her,	a	swarm	of	shadows
–	and	now	figures,	huge,	reptilian,	all	closing	in	on	where	she	stood.
She	cried	out,	her	warren	of	Omtose	Phellack	rising	within	her,	an
instinctive	response	to	panic,	as	the	creatures	closed.
There	was	no	escape	–	no	time—
Heavy	mattocks	slashed	down,	chopping	through	flesh,	then	bone.	The
blows	drove	her	to	the	ground	amidst	gushes	of	her	own	blood.	She	saw
before	her	the	edge	of	the	chasm,	sought	to	reach	out	towards	it.	To	drag


herself	over	it,	and	fall	–	a	better	death—
Massive	clawed	feet,	scaled,	wrapped	in	strips	of	thick	hide,	kicking	up
dust	close	to	her	face.	Unable	to	move,	feeling	her	life	drain	away,	she	watched
as	that	dust	settled	in	a	dull	patina	over	the	pool	of	her	blood,	coating	it	like	the
thinnest	skin.	Too	much	dirt,	the	blood	wouldn’t	like	that,	it	would	sicken	with
all	that	dirt.
She	needed	to	clean	it.	She	needed	to	gather	it	up,	somehow	pour	it	back
into	her	body,	back	in	through	these	gaping	wounds,	and	hope	that	her	heart
would	burn	clean	every	drop.
But	now	even	her	heart	was	failing,	and	blood	was	sputtering,	filled	with
froth,	from	her	nose	and	mouth.
She	understood,	suddenly,	that	strange	sense	of	order.	K’Chain	Che’Malle,
a	recollection	stirred	to	life	once	more,	after	all	this	time.	They	had	returned,
then.	But	not	the	truly	chaotic	ones.	No,	not	the	Long-Tails.	These	were	the
others,	servants	of	machines,	of	order	in	all	its	brutality.	Nah’Ruk.
They	had	returned.	Why?
The	pool	of	blood	was	sinking	down	into	the	white,	chalky	dust	where
furrows	had	been	carved	by	talons,	and	into	these	furrows	the	rest	of	the	blood
drained	in	turgid	rivulets.	The	inexorable	laws	of	erosion,	writ	small,	and	yet…
yes,	I	suppose,	most	poignant.
She	was	cold,	and	that	felt	good.	Comforting.	She	was,	after	all,	a	Jaghut.
And	now	I	leave.
	
The	woman	stood	facing	landwards,	strangely	alert.	Mappo	Runt	rubbed	at	his
face,	driven	to	exhaustion	by	Iskaral	Pust’s	manic	tirade	at	the	crew	of	the
broad-beamed	caravel	as	they	scurried	about	with	what	seemed	a	complete
absence	of	reason:	through	the	rigging,	bounding	wild	over	the	deck	and
clinging	–	with	frantic	screams	–	to	various	precarious	perches	here	and	there.
Yet	somehow	the	small	but	seaworthy	trader	craft	was	full	before	the	wind,
cutting	clean	on	a	northeasterly	course.
A	crew	–	an	entire	crew	–	of	bhok’arala.	It	should	have	been	impossible.	It
most	certainly	was	absurd.	Yet	these	creatures	had	been	awaiting	them	in	their
no-doubt	purloined	craft,	anchored	offshore,	when	Mappo,	Iskaral,	his	mule,
and	the	woman	named	Spite	pushed	through	the	last	of	the	brush	and	reached
the	broken	rocks	of	the	coast.
And	not	just	some	random	collection	of	the	ape-like,	pointy-eared	beasts,
but	–	as	Iskaral’s	shriek	of	fury	announced	–	the	High	Priest’s	very	own
menagerie,	the	once-residents	of	his	cliff-side	fastness	league	upon	league


eastward,	at	the	rim	of	the	distant	Raraku	Sea.	How	they	had	come	to	be	here,
with	this	caravel,	was	a	mystery,	and	one	unlikely	to	be	resolved	any	time	soon.
Heaps	of	fruit	and	shellfish	had	crowded	the	midship	deck,	fussed	over	like
votive	offerings	when	the	three	travellers	drew	the	dinghy	–	rowed	ashore	to
greet	them	by	a	half-dozen	bhok’arala	–	alongside	the	ship	and	clambered
aboard.	To	find	–	adding	to	Mappo’s	bemusement	–	that	Iskaral	Pust’s	blackeyed	mule	had	somehow	preceded	them.
Since	then	there	had	been	chaos.
If	bhok’arala	could	possess	faith	in	a	god,	then	their	god	had	just	arrived,
in	the	dubious	personage	of	Iskaral	Pust,	and	the	endless	mewling,	chittering,
dancing	about	the	High	Priest	was	clearly	driving	Pust	mad.	Or,	madder	than
he	already	was.
Spite	had	watched	in	amusement	for	a	time,	ignoring	Mappo’s	questions	–
How	did	this	come	to	be	here?	Where	will	they	be	taking	us?	Are	we	in	truth
still	pursuing	Icarium?	No	answers.
And	now,	as	the	coastline	crawled	past,	pitching	and	rolling	on	their	right,
the	tall	woman	stood,	her	balance	impressive,	and	stared	with	narrowed	eyes	to
the	south.
‘What	is	wrong?’	Mappo	asked,	not	expecting	an	answer.
She	surprised	him.	‘A	murder.	There	are	godless	ones	walking	the	sands	of
Seven	Cities	once	again.	I	believe	I	understand	the	nature	of	this	alliance.
Complexities	abound,	of	course,	and	you	are	but	a	Trell,	a	hut-dwelling
herder.’
‘Who	understands	nothing	of	complexities,	aye.	Even	so,	explain.	What
alliance?	Who	are	the	godless	ones?’
‘That	hardly	matters,	and	serves	little	by	way	of	explanation.	It	falls	to	the
nature	of	gods,	Mappo	Runt.	And	of	faith.’
‘I’m	listening.’
‘If	one	asserts	a	distinction	between	the	gifts	from	a	god	and	the	mortal,
mundane	world	in	which	exists	the	believer,’	she	said,	‘then	this	is	as	an	open
door	to	true	godlessness.	To	the	religion	of	disbelief,	if	you	will.’	She	glanced
over,	sauntered	closer.	‘Ah,	already	I	see	you	frowning	in	confusion—’
‘I	frown	at	the	implications	of	such	a	distinction,	Spite.’
‘Truly?	Well,	I	am	surprised.	Pleasantly	so.	Very	well.	You	must	understand
this,	then.	To	speak	of	war	among	the	gods,	it	is	not	simply	a	matter	of,	say,
this	goddess	here	scratching	out	the	eyes	of	that	god	over	there.	Nor,	even,	of
an	army	of	acolytes	from	this	temple	marching	upon	an	army	from	the	temple
across	the	street.	A	war	among	the	gods	is	not	fought	with	thunderbolts	and
earthquakes,	although	of	course	it	is	possible	–	but	improbable	–	that	it	could


come	to	that.	The	war	in	question,	then,	is	messy,	the	battle-lines	muddied,
unclear,	and	even	the	central	combatants	struggle	to	comprehend	what
constitutes	a	weapon,	what	wounds	and	what	is	harmless.	And	worse	still,	to
wield	such	weapons	proves	as	likely	to	harm	the	wielder	as	the	foe.’
‘Fanaticism	breeds	fanaticism,	aye,’	Mappo	said,	nodding.	‘“In
proclamation,	one	defines	his	enemy	for	his	enemy”.’
She	smiled	her	dazzling	smile.	‘A	quote?	From	whom?’
‘Kellanved,	the	founding	emperor	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’
‘Indeed,	you	grasp	the	essence	of	my	meaning.	Now,	the	nature	of
fanaticism	can	be	likened	to	that	of	a	tree	–	many	branches,	but	one	tap-root.’
‘Inequity.’
‘Or	at	least	the	comprehension	of	and	the	faith	in,	whether	such	inequity	is
but	imagined	or	exists	in	truth.	More	often	than	not,	of	course,	such	inequity
does	exist,	and	it	is	the	poison	that	breeds	the	darkest	fruit.	Mundane	wealth	is
usually	built	upon	bones,	piled	high	and	packed	deep.	Alas,	the	holders	of	that
wealth	misapprehend	the	nature	of	their	reward,	and	so	are	often	blithely
indifferent	in	their	ostentatious	display	of	their	wealth.	The	misapprehension	is
this:	that	those	who	do	not	possess	wealth	all	yearn	to,	and	so	seek	likeness,	and
this	yearning	occludes	all	feelings	of	resentment,	exploitation	and,	most
relevantly,	injustice.	To	some	extent	they	are	right,	but	mostly	they	are
woefully	wrong.	When	wealth	ascends	to	a	point	where	the	majority	of	the
poor	finally	comprehend	that	it	is,	for	each	of	them,	unattainable,	then	all
civility	collapses,	and	anarchy	prevails.	Now,	I	was	speaking	of	war	among	the
gods.	Do	you	grasp	the	connection,	Mappo	Runt?’
‘Not	entirely.’
‘I	appreciate	your	honesty,	Trell.	Consider	this:	when	inequity	burgeons
into	violent	conflagration,	the	gods	themselves	are	helpless.	The	gods	cease	to
lead	–	they	can	but	follow,	dragged	by	the	will	of	their	worshippers.	Now,
suppose	gods	to	be	essentially	moral	entities	–	that	is,	possessing	and	indeed
manifestly	representing	a	particular	ethos	–	well,	then,	such	moral
considerations	become	the	first	victim	in	the	war.	Unless	that	god	chooses	to
defend	him	or	herself	from	his	or	her	own	believers.	Allies,	enemies?	What
relevance	such	primitive,	simplistic	notions	in	that	scenario,	Mappo	Runt?’
The	Trell	gazed	out	at	the	heaving	waves,	this	tireless	succession	born	of
distant	convulsions,	the	broken	tug	of	tides,	hard	and	bitter	winds	and	all	that
moved	in	the	world.	And	yet,	staring	long	enough,	this	simple	undulating
motion…mesmerizing.	‘We	are,’	he	said,	‘as	the	soil	and	the	sea.’
‘Another	quote?’
He	shrugged.	‘Driven	by	unseen	forces,	forever	in	motion,	even	when	we


stand	still.’	He	struggled	against	a	surge	of	despair.	‘For	all	that	the	contestants
proclaim	that	they	are	but	soldiers	of	their	god…’
‘All	that	they	do	in	that	god’s	name	is	at	its	core	profoundly	godless.’
‘And	the	truly	godless	–	such	as	you	spoke	of	earlier	–	cannot	but	see	such
blasphemers	as	allies.’
She	studied	him	until	he	grew	uneasy,	then	she	said,	‘What	drives	Icarium
to	fight?’
‘When	under	control,	it	is…inequity.	Injustice.’
‘And	when	out	of	control?’
‘Then…nothing.’
‘And	the	difference	between	the	two	is	one	of	magnitude.’
He	glanced	away	once	more.	‘And	of	motivation.’
‘Are	you	sure?	Even	if	inequity,	in	triggering	his	violence,	then	ascends,
crossing	no	obvious	threshold,	into	all-destroying	annihilation?	Mappo	Trell,	I
believe	motivations	prove,	ultimately,	irrelevant.	Slaughter	is	slaughter.	Upon
either	side	of	the	battlefield	the	face	grins	with	blunt	stupidity,	even	as	smoke
fills	the	sky	from	horizon	to	horizon,	even	as	crops	wither	and	die,	even	as
sweet	land	turns	to	salt.	Inequity	ends,	Trell,	when	no-one	and	no	thing	is	left
standing.	Perhaps,’	she	added,	‘this	is	Icarium’s	true	purpose,	why	the
Nameless	Ones	seek	to	unleash	him.	It	is,	after	all,	one	sure	way	to	end	this
war.’
Mappo	Trell	stared	at	her,	then	said,	‘Next	time	we	speak	like	this,	Spite,
you	can	tell	me	your	reasons	for	opposing	the	Nameless	Ones.	For	helping
me.’
She	smiled	at	him.	‘Ah,	you	begin	to	doubt	our	alliance?’
‘How	can	I	not?’
‘Such	is	war	among	the	gods,	Trell.’
‘We	are	not	gods.’
‘We	are	their	hands,	their	feet,	wayward	and	wilful.	We	fight	for	reasons
that	are,	for	the	most	part,	essentially	nonsensical,	even	when	the	justification
seems	plain	and	straightforward.	Two	kingdoms,	one	upriver,	one	downriver.
The	kingdom	downriver	sees	the	water	arrive	befouled	and	sickly,	filled	with
silts	and	sewage.	The	kingdom	upriver,	being	on	higher	land,	sees	its	desperate
efforts	at	irrigation	failing,	as	the	topsoil	is	swept	away	each	time	the	rains
come	to	the	highlands	beyond.	The	two	kingdoms	quarrel,	until	there	is	war.
The	downriver	kingdom	marches,	terrible	battles	are	fought,	cities	are	burned
to	the	ground,	citizens	enslaved,	fields	salted	and	made	barren.	Ditches	and
dykes	are	broken.	In	the	end,	only	the	downriver	kingdom	remains.	But	the
erosion	does	not	cease.	Indeed,	now	that	there	is	no	irrigation	occurring


upriver,	the	waters	rush	down	in	full	flood,	distempered	and	wild,	and	they
carry	lime	and	salt	that	settles	on	the	fields	and	poisons	the	remaining	soil.
There	is	starvation,	disease,	and	the	desert	closes	in	on	all	sides.	The	once
victorious	leaders	are	cast	down.	Estates	are	looted.	Brigands	rove	unchecked,
and	within	a	single	generation	there	are	no	kingdoms,	neither	upriver	nor
downriver.	Was	the	justification	valid?	Of	course.	Did	that	validity	defend	the
victors	against	their	own	annihilation?	Of	course	not.
‘A	civilization	at	war	chooses	only	the	most	obvious	enemy,	and	often	also
the	one	perceived,	at	first,	to	be	the	most	easily	defeatable.	But	that	enemy	is
not	the	true	enemy,	nor	is	it	the	gravest	threat	to	that	civilization.	Thus,	a
civilization	at	war	often	chooses	the	wrong	enemy.	Tell	me,	Mappo	Runt,	for
my	two	hypothetical	kingdoms,	where	hid	the	truest	threat?’
He	shook	his	head.
‘Yes,	difficult	to	answer,	because	the	threats	were	many,	seemingly
disconnected,	and	they	appeared,	disappeared	then	reappeared	over	a	long
period	of	time.	The	game	that	was	hunted	to	extinction,	the	forests	that	were	cut
down,	the	goats	that	were	loosed	into	the	hills,	the	very	irrigation	ditches	that
were	dug.	And	yet	more:	the	surplus	of	food,	the	burgeoning	population	and	its
accumulating	wastes.	And	then	diseases,	soils	blown	or	washed	away;	and
kings	–	one	after	another	–	who	could	or	would	do	nothing,	or	indeed	saw
nothing	untoward	beyond	their	fanatical	focus	upon	the	ones	they	sought	to
blame.
‘Alas,’	she	said,	leaning	now	on	the	rail,	her	face	to	the	wind,	‘there	is
nothing	simple	in	seeking	to	oppose	such	a	host	of	threats.	First,	one	must
recognize	them,	and	to	achieve	that	one	must	think	in	the	long	term;	and	then
one	must	discern	the	intricate	linkages	that	exist	between	all	things,	the	manner
in	which	one	problem	feeds	into	another.	From	there,	one	must	devise
solutions	and	finally,	one	must	motivate	the	population	into	concerted	effort,
and	not	just	one’s	own	population,	but	that	of	the	neighbouring	kingdoms,	all
of	whom	are	participating	in	the	slow	self-destruction.	Tell	me,	can	you
imagine	such	a	leader	ever	coming	to	power?	Or	staying	there	for	long?	Me
neither.	The	hoarders	of	wealth	will	band	together	to	destroy	such	a	man	or
woman.	Besides,	it	is	much	easier	to	create	an	enemy	and	wage	war,	although
why	such	hoarders	of	wealth	actually	believe	that	they	would	survive	such	a
war	is	beyond	me.	But	they	do,	again	and	again.	Indeed,	it	seems	they	believe
they	will	outlive	civilization	itself.’
‘You	propose	little	hope	for	civilization,	Spite.’
‘Oh,	my	lack	of	hope	extends	far	beyond	mere	civilization.	The	Trell	were
pastoralists,	yes?	You	managed	the	half-wild	bhederin	herds	of	the	Masal


Plains.	Actually,	a	fairly	successful	way	of	living,	all	things	considered.’
‘Until	the	traders	and	settlers	came.’
‘Yes,	those	who	coveted	your	land,	driven	as	they	were	by	enterprise	or	the
wasting	of	their	own	lands,	or	the	poverty	in	their	cities.	Each	and	all	sought	a
new	source	of	wealth.	To	achieve	it,	alas,	they	first	had	to	destroy	your	people.’
Iskaral	Pust	scrambled	to	the	Trell’s	side.	‘Listen	to	you	two!	Poets	and
philosophers!	What	do	you	know?	You	go	on	and	on	whilst	I	am	hounded	unto
exhaustion	by	these	horrible	squirming	things!’
‘Your	acolytes,	High	Priest,’	Spite	said.	‘You	are	their	god.	Indicative,	I
might	add,	of	at	least	two	kinds	of	absurdity.’
‘I’m	not	impressed	by	you,	woman.	If	I	am	their	god,	why	don’t	they	listen
to	anything	I	say?’
‘Maybe,’	Mappo	replied,	‘they	are	but	waiting	for	you	to	say	the	right
thing.’
‘Really?	And	what	would	that	be,	you	fat	oaf?’
‘Well,	whatever	it	is	they	want	to	hear,	of	course.’
‘She’s	poisoned	you!’	The	High	Priest	backed	away,	eyes	wide.	He	clutched
and	pulled	at	what	remained	of	his	hair,	then	whirled	about	and	rushed	off
towards	the	cabin.	Three	bhok’arala	–	who	had	been	attending	him	–	raced
after	him,	chittering	and	making	tugging	gestures	above	their	ears.
Mappo	turned	back	to	Spite.	‘Where	are	we	going,	by	the	way?’
She	smiled	at	him.	‘To	start,	the	Otataral	Sea.’
‘Why?’
‘Isn’t	this	breeze	enlivening?’
‘It’s	damned	chilly.’
‘Yes.	Lovely,	isn’t	it?’
	
A	vast	oblong	pit,	lined	with	slabs	of	limestone,	then	walls	of	brick,	rising	to
form	a	domed	roof,	the	single	entrance	ramped	and	framed	in	limestone,
including	a	massive	lintel	stone	on	which	the	imperial	symbol	had	been	etched
above	the	name	Dujek	Onearm,	and	his	title,	High	Fist.	Within	the	barrow
lanterns	had	been	set	out	to	aid	in	drying	the	freshly	plastered	walls.
Just	outside,	in	a	broad,	shallow	bowl	half-filled	with	slimy	clay,	basked	a
large	toad,	blinking	sleepy	eyes	as	it	watched	its	companion,	the	imperial	artist,
Ormulogun,	mixing	paints.	Oils	by	the	dozen,	each	with	specific	qualities;	and
pigments	culled	from	crushed	minerals,	duck	eggs,	dried	inks	from	seacreatures,	leaves	and	roots	and	berries;	and	jars	of	other	mediums:	egg	whites
from	turtles,	snakes,	vultures;	masticated	grubs,	gull	brains,	cat	urine,	dog


drool,	the	snot	of	pimps—
All	right,	the	toad	reflected,	perhaps	not	the	snot	of	pimps,	although	given
the	baffling	arcanum	of	artists,	one	could	never	be	certain.	It	was	enough	to
know	that	people	who	delved	into	such	materials	were	mostly	mad,	if	not	to
start	with,	then	invariably	so	after	years	spent	handling	such	toxins.
And	yet,	this	fool	Ormulogun,	somehow	he	persisted,	with	his	stained
hands,	his	stained	lips	from	pointing	the	brushes,	his	stained	beard	from	that
bizarre	sputtering	technique	when	the	pigments	were	chewed	in	a	mouthful	of
spit	and	Hood	knew	what	else,	his	stained	nose	from	when	paint-smeared
fingers	prodded,	scratched	and	explored,	his	stained	breeches	from—
‘I	know	what	you’re	thinking,	Gumble,’	Ormulogun	said.
‘Indeed?	Please	proceed,	then,	in	describing	my	present	thoughts.’
‘The	earwax	of	whores	and	stained	this	and	stained	that,	the	commentary
swiftly	descending	into	the	absurd	as	befits	your	inability	to	think	without
exaggeration	and	puerile	hyperbole.	Now,	startled	as	you	no	doubt	are,	shift
that	puny,	predictable	brain	of	yours	and	tell	me	in	turn	what	I’m	thinking.	Can
you?	Hah,	I	thought	not!’
‘I	tell	you,	you	grubber	of	pastes,	my	thoughts	were	not	in	the	least	as	you
just	described	in	that	pathetic	paucity	of	pastiche	you	dare	call	communication,
such	failure	being	quite	unsurprising,	since	I	am	the	master	of	language	whilst
you	are	little	more	than	an	ever-failing	student	of	portraiture	bereft	of	both
cogent	instruction	of	craft	and,	alas,	talent.’
‘You	seek	to	communicate	to	the	intellectually	deaf,	do	you?’
‘Whilst	you	paint	to	enlighten	the	blind.	Yes	yes,’	Gumble	sighed,	the	effort
proving	alarmingly	deflating	–	alarming	even	to	himself.	He	quickly	drew	in
another	breath.	‘We	wage	our	ceaseless	war,	you	and	I.	What	will	adorn	the
walls	of	the	great	man’s	barrow?	Why,	from	you,	the	usual.	Propagandistic
pageantry,	the	politically	aligned	reaffirmation	of	the	status	quo.	Heroic	deeds
in	service	of	the	empire,	and	an	even	more	heroic	death,	for	in	this	age	as	in
every	other,	we	are	in	need	of	our	heroes	–	dead	ones,	that	is.	We	do	not
believe	in	living	ones,	after	all,	thanks	to	you—’
‘To	me?	To	me!?’
‘The	rendition	of	flaws	is	your	forte,	Ormulogun.	Oh,	consider	that
statement!	I	impress	even	myself	with	such	perfectly	resonating	irony.	Anyway,
such	flaws	in	the	subject	are	as	poison	darts	flung	into	heroism.	Your	avid
attention	destroys	as	it	always	must—’
‘No	no,	fool,	not	always.	And	with	me,	with	Ormulogun	the	Great,	never.
Why?	Well,	it	is	simple,	although	not	so	simple	you	will	ever	grasp	it	–	even
so,	it	is	this:	great	art	is	not	simply	rendition.	Great	art	is	transformation.	Great


art	is	exaltation	and	exaltation	is	spiritual	in	the	purest,	most	spiritual	sense—’
‘As	noted	earlier,’	Gumble	drawled,	‘comprehensive	erudition	and	brevity
eludes	the	poor	man.	Besides	which,	I	am	certain	I	have	heard	that	definition	of
great	art	before.	In	some	other	context,	likely	accompanied	by	a	pounding	of
the	fist	on	table-	or	skull-top,	or	at	the	very	least	a	knee	in	the	kidneys.	No
matter,	it	all	sounds	very	well.	Too	bad	you	so	consistently	fail	to	translate	it
into	actuality.’
‘I	have	a	mallet	with	which	I	could	translate	you	into	actuality,	Gumble.’
‘You	would	break	this	exquisite	bowl.’
‘Aye,	I’d	shed	a	few	tears	over	that.	But	then	I’d	get	better.’
‘Dujek	Onearm	standing	outside	the	shattered	gates	of	Black	Coral.	Dujek
Onearm	at	the	parley	with	Caladan	Brood	and	Anomander	Rake.	Dujek
Onearm	and	Tayschrenn	outside	Pale,	the	dawn	preceding	the	attack.	Three
primary	walls,	three	panels,	three	images.’
‘You’ve	looked	at	my	sketchings!	Gods	how	I	hate	you!’
‘There	was	no	need,’	Gumble	said,	‘to	do	something	so	crass,	not	to
mention	implicitly	depressing,	as	to	examine	your	sketchings.’
Ormulogun	quickly	gathered	up	his	chosen	paints,	styli	and	brushes,	then
made	his	way	down	into	the	barrow.
Gumble	stayed	where	he	was,	and	thought	about	eating	flies.
	
Ganoes	Paran	looked	down	at	the	armour	laid	out	on	the	cot.	A	High	Fist’s
armour,	one	sleeve	of	chain	newly	attached.	The	inheritance	left	a	sour,	bitter
taste	in	his	mouth.	Proclamation,	was	it?	As	if	anything	he’d	done	whilst	a
soldier	could	justify	such	a	thing.	Every	Fist	in	this	army	was	better	qualified
to	assume	command.	What	could	it	have	been,	there	in	Dujek’s	logs,	to	so
thoroughly	twist,	even	falsify,	Paran’s	legacy	as	the	captain	and	commander	of
the	Bridgeburners?	He	considered	finding	out	for	himself,	but	knew	he	would
do	no	such	thing.	He	already	felt	imposter	enough	without	seeing	proof	of	the
duplicity	before	his	own	eyes.	No	doubt	Dujek	had	good	reasons,	likely	having
to	do	with	protecting,	if	not	elevating,	the	reputation	of	House	Paran,	and
thereby	implicitly	supporting	his	sister	Tavore	in	her	new	command	of	the
Fourteenth.
Politics	dictated	such	official	logs,	of	course.	As,	I	suppose,	they	will
dictate	my	own	entries.	Or	not.	What	do	I	care?	Posterity	be	damned.	If	this	is
my	army,	then	so	be	it.	The	Empress	can	always	strip	me	of	the	command,	as	she
no	doubt	will	when	she	hears	about	this	field	promotion.	In	the	meantime,	he
would	do	as	he	pleased.


Behind	him,	Hurlochel	cleared	his	throat,	then	said,	‘High	Fist,	the	Fists
may	be	on	their	feet,	but	they’re	still	weak.’
‘You	mean	they’re	out	there	standing	at	attention?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘That’s	ridiculous.	Never	mind	the	armour,	then.’
They	walked	to	the	flap	and	Hurlochel	pulled	the	canvas	aside.	Paran
strode	outside,	blinking	in	sunlight.	The	entire	army	stood	in	formation,
standards	upright,	armour	glinting.	Directly	before	him	were	the	Fists,	Rythe
Bude	foremost	among	them.	She	was	wan,	painfully	thin	in	gear	that	seemed
oversized	for	her	frame.	She	saluted	and	said,	‘High	Fist	Ganoes	Paran,	the
Host	awaits	your	inspection.’
‘Thank	you,	Fist.	How	soon	will	they	be	ready	to	march?’
‘By	dawn	tomorrow,	High	Fist.’
Paran	scanned	the	ranks.	Not	a	sound	from	them,	not	even	the	rustle	of
armour.	They	stood	like	dusty	statues.	‘And	precisely	how,’	he	asked	in	a
whisper,	‘am	I	to	live	up	to	this?’
‘High	Fist,’	Hurlochel	murmured	at	his	side,	‘you	rode	with	one	healer
into	G’danisban	and	then	singlehandedly	struck	down	a	goddess.	Drove	her
from	this	realm.	You	then	forced	the	sister	of	that	goddess	to	gift	a	dozen
mortals	with	the	power	to	heal—’
‘That	power	will	not	last,’	Paran	said.
‘Nonetheless.	High	Fist,	you	have	killed	the	plague.	Something	even	Dujek
Onearm	could	not	achieve.	These	soldiers	are	yours,	Ganoes	Paran.	No	matter
what	the	Empress	decides.’
But	I	don’t	want	a	damned	army!
Fist	Rythe	Bude	said,	‘Given	the	losses	to	disease,	High	Fist,	we	are
sufficiently	supplied	to	march	for	six,	perhaps	seven	days,	assuming	we	do	not
resupply	en	route.	Of	course,’	she	added,	‘there	are	the	grain	stores	in
G’danisban,	and	with	the	population	virtually	non-existent—’
‘Yes,’	Paran	cut	in.	‘Virtually	non-existent.	Does	that	not	strike	you	as
strange,	Fist?’
‘The	goddess	herself—’
‘Hurlochel	reports	that	his	outriders	are	seeing	people,	survivors,	heading
north	and	east.	A	pilgrimage.’
‘Yes,	High	Fist.’
She	was	wavering,	he	saw.	‘We	will	follow	those	pilgrims,	Fist,’	Paran
said.	‘We	will	delay	another	two	days,	during	which	the	stores	of	G’danisban
will	be	used	to	establish	a	full	resupply	–	but	only	if	enough	remains	to	sustain
the	population	still	in	the	city.	Commandeer	wagons	and	carts	as	needed.


Further,	invite	those	citizens	the	soldiers	come	upon	to	join	our	train.	At	the
very	least,	they	will	find	a	livelihood	accompanying	us,	and	food,	water	and
protection.	Now,	inform	the	captains	that	I	will	address	the	troops	the	morning
of	our	departure	–	at	the	consecration	and	sealing	of	the	barrow.	In	the
meantime,	you	are	all	dismissed.’
The	Fists	saluted.	Shouts	from	the	captains	stirred	the	ranks	into	motion	as
soldiers	relaxed	and	began	splitting	up.
I	should	have	said	something	to	them	here	and	now.	Warned	them	not	to
expect	too	much.	No,	that	wouldn’t	do.	What	does	a	new	commander	say?
Especially	after	the	death	of	a	great	leader,	a	true	hero?	Dammit,	Ganoes,
you’re	better	off	saying	nothing.	Not	now,	and	not	much	when	we	seal	the
barrow	and	leave	the	old	man	in	peace.	‘We’re	following	pilgrims.	Why?
Because	I	want	to	know	where	they’re	going,	that’s	why.’	That	should	do.
Mentally	shrugging,	Paran	set	off.	In	his	wake	followed	Hurlochel	and	then,
ten	paces	back,	the	young	G’danii	woman	Naval	D’natha,	who	was	now,	it
seemed,	a	part	of	his	entourage.
‘High	Fist?’
‘What	is	it,	Hurlochel?’
‘Where	are	we	going?’
‘To	visit	the	imperial	artist.’
‘Oh,	him.	May	I	ask	why?’
‘Why	suffer	such	torment,	you	mean?	Well,	I	have	a	request	to	make	of
him.’
‘High	Fist?’
I	need	a	new	Deck	of	Dragons.	‘Is	he	skilled,	do	you	know?’
‘A	subject	of	constant	debate,	High	Fist.’
‘Really?	Among	whom?	The	soldiers?	I	find	that	hard	to	believe.’
‘Ormulogun	has,	accompanying	him	everywhere,	a	critic.’
Oh,	the	poor	man.
	
The	body	was	lying	on	the	trail,	the	limbs	lacerated,	the	tanned-hide	shirt	stiff
and	black	with	dried	blood.	Boatfinder	crouched	beside	it.	‘Stonefinder,’	he
said.	‘In	the	frozen	time	now.	We	shared	tales.’
‘Someone	cut	off	one	of	his	fingers,’	Karsa	Orlong	said.	‘The	rest	of	the
wounds,	they	came	from	torture,	except	that	spear-thrust,	beneath	the	left
shoulder	blade.	See	the	tracks	–	the	killer	stepped	out	from	cover	as	the	man
passed	–	he	was	not	running,	but	staggering.	They	but	played	with	him.’
Samar	Dev	settled	a	hand	on	Boatfinder ’s	shoulder,	and	felt	the	Anibar


trembling	with	grief.	‘How	long	ago?’	she	asked	Karsa.
The	Teblor	shrugged.	‘It	does	not	matter.	They	are	close.’
She	straightened	in	alarm.	‘How	close?’
‘They	have	made	camp	and	they	are	careless	with	its	wastes.’	He	unslung
his	flint	sword.	‘They	have	more	prisoners.’
‘How	do	you	know	that?’
‘I	smell	their	suffering.’
Not	possible.	Is	such	a	thing	possible?	She	looked	round,	seeking	more
obvious	signs	of	all	that	the	Toblakai	claimed	to	know.	A	peat-filled	basin	was
to	their	right,	a	short	descent	from	the	bedrock	path	on	which	they	stood.	Greyboled	black	spruce	trees	rose	from	it,	leaning	this	way	and	that,	most	of	their
branches	bereft	of	needles.	Glinting	strands	of	spider ’s	web	spanned	the	spaces
in	between,	like	scratches	on	transparent	glass.	To	the	left,	flattened	sprawls	of
juniper	occupied	a	fold	in	the	bedrock	that	ran	parallel	to	the	trail.	Samar
frowned.
‘What	cover?’	she	asked.	‘You	said	the	killer	stepped	out	from	cover	to
drive	that	spear	into	the	Anibar ’s	back.	But	there	isn’t	any,	Karsa.’
‘None	that	remains,’	he	said.
Her	frown	deepened	into	a	scowl.	‘Are	they	swathed	in	branches	and
leaves,	then?’
‘There	are	other	ways	of	hiding,	woman.’
‘Such	as?’
Karsa	shrugged	off	his	fur	cloak.	‘Sorcery,’	he	said.	‘Wait	here.’
Like	Hood	I	will.	She	set	off	after	Karsa	as	the	Toblakai,	sword	held	before
him	in	both	hands,	moved	forward	in	a	gliding	half-run.	Four	strides	later	and
she	had	to	sprint	in	an	effort	to	keep	up.
The	jog,	silent,	grew	swifter.	Became	lightning	fast.
Gasping,	she	scrambled	after	the	huge	warrior,	but	he	was	already	lost	to
sight.
At	the	sound	of	a	sudden	shriek	to	her	left,	Samar	skidded	to	a	halt	–	Karsa
had	left	the	trail	somewhere	behind	her,	had	plunged	into	the	forest,	over
jumbled,	moss-slick	boulders,	fallen	trees,	thick	skeins	of	dead	branches	–
leaving	in	his	wake	no	sign.	More	screams.
Heart	hammering	in	her	chest,	Samar	Dev	pushed	into	the	stand,	clawing
aside	undergrowth,	webs	pulling	against	her	before	snapping,	dust	and	bark
flakes	cascading	down—
—while	the	slaughter	somewhere	ahead	continued.
Weapons	clashed,	iron	against	stone.	The	crunch	of	splintered	wood	–
blurred	motion	between	trees	ahead	of	her,	figures	running	–	a	body,


cartwheeling	in	a	mist	of	crimson	–	she	reached	the	edge	of	the	encampment—
And	saw	Karsa	Orlong	–	and	a	half	hundred,	maybe	more,	tall	greyskinned	warriors,	wielding	spears,	cutlasses,	long-knives	and	axes,	now
closing	in	on	the	Toblakai.
Karsa’s	path	into	their	midst	was	marked	by	a	grisly	corridor	of	corpses
and	fallen,	mortally	wounded	foes.
But	there	were	too	many—
The	huge	flint	sword	burst	into	view	at	the	end	of	a	sweeping	upswing,
amid	fragments	of	bone	and	thick,	whipping	threads	of	gore.	Two	figures
reeled	back,	a	third	struck	so	hard	that	his	moccasined	feet	flashed	up	and	over
at	Karsa’s	eye-level,	and,	falling	back,	dragged	down	the	spear-shafts	of	two
more	warriors	–	and	into	that	opening	the	Toblakai	surged,	evading	a	halfdozen	thrusts	and	swings,	most	of	them	appearing	in	his	wake,	for	the	giant’s
speed	was	extraordinary	–	no,	more,	it	was	appalling.
The	two	foes,	weapons	snagged,	sought	to	launch	themselves	back,	beyond
the	reach	of	Karsa	–	but	his	sword,	lashing	out,	caught	the	neck	of	the	one	on
the	left	–	the	head	leapt	free	of	the	body	–	then	the	blade	angled	down	to	chop
clean	through	the	other	warrior ’s	right	shoulder,	severing	the	arm.
Karsa’s	left	hand	released	its	grip	on	his	sword,	intercepting	the	shaft	of	a
thrusting	spear,	then	pulling	both	weapon	and	wielder	close,	the	hand	releasing
the	haft	to	snap	up	and	round	the	man’s	neck.	Fluids	burst	from	the	victim’s
eyes,	nose	and	mouth	as	the	Toblakai	crushed	that	neck	as	if	it	were	little	more
than	a	tube	of	parchment.	A	hard	push	flung	the	twitching	body	into	the
pressing	mass,	fouling	yet	more	weapons—
Samar	Dev	could	barely	track	what	her	eyes	saw,	for	even	as	Karsa’s	left
hand	had	moved	away	from	the	sword’s	grip,	the	blade	itself	was	slashing	to
the	right,	batting	aside	enemy	weapons,	then	wheeling	up	and	over,	and,	while
the	warrior ’s	throat	was	collapsing	in	that	savage	clutch,	the	sword	crashed
down	through	an	up-flung	cutlass	and	into	flesh	and	bone,	shattering	clavicle,
then	a	host	of	ribs—
Tearing	the	sword	loose	burst	the	ribcage,	and	Samar	stared	to	see	the
victim’s	heart,	still	beating,	pitch	free	of	its	broken	nest,	dangling	for	a
moment	from	torn	arteries	and	veins,	before	the	warrior	fell	from	sight.
Someone	was	screaming	–	away	from	the	battle	–	off	to	the	far	left,	where
there	was	a	shoreline	of	rocks,	and,	beyond,	open	water	–	a	row	of	low-slung,
broad-beamed	wooden	canoes	–	and	she	saw	there	a	woman,	slight,	goldenhaired	–	a	human	–	casting	spells.
Yet	whatever	sorcery	she	worked	seemed	to	achieve	nothing.	Impossibly,
Karsa	Orlong	had	somehow	carved	his	way	through	to	the	other	side	of	the


press,	where	he	spun	round,	his	back	to	a	huge	pine,	the	flint	sword	almost
contemptuous	in	its	batting	aside	attacks	–	as	the	Toblakai	paused	for	a	rest.
Samar	could	not	believe	what	she	was	seeing.
More	shouts	now,	a	single	warrior,	standing	well	beyond	the	jostling	mob,
bellowing	at	his	companions	–	who	began	to	draw	back,	disengaging	from
Karsa	Orlong.
Seeing	the	Toblakai	draw	a	deep,	chest-swelling	breath,	then	raise	his
sword,	Samar	Dev	yelled,	‘Karsa!	Wait!	Do	not	attack,	damn	you!’
The	cold	glare	that	met	her	gaze	made	Samar	flinch.
The	giant	gestured	with	the	sword.	‘See	what’s	left	of	the	Anibar,	woman?’
His	voice	was	deep	in	tone,	the	beat	of	words	like	a	drum	of	war.
She	nodded,	refusing	to	look	once	more	at	the	row	of	prisoners,	bound
head-down	and	spreadeagled	to	wooden	frames	along	the	inland	edge	of	the
encampment,	their	naked	forms	painted	red	in	blood,	and	before	each	victim	a
heap	of	live	embers,	filling	the	air	with	the	stench	of	burnt	hair	and	meat.	Karsa
Orlong,	she	realized,	had	been	driven	by	rage,	yet	such	fury	set	no	tremble	in
the	huge	warrior,	the	sword	was	motionless,	now,	held	at	the	ready,	the	very
stillness	of	that	blade	seeming	to	vow	a	tide	of	destruction.	‘I	know,’	she	said.
‘But	listen	to	me,	Karsa.	If	you	kill	them	all	–	and	I	see	that	you	mean	to	do	just
that	–	but	listen!	If	you	do,	more	will	come,	seeking	to	find	their	vanished	kin.
More	will	come,	Toblakai,	and	this	will	never	end	–	until	you	make	a	mistake,
until	there	are	so	many	of	them	that	even	you	cannot	hope	to	prevail.	Nor	can
you	be	everywhere	at	once,	so	more	Anibar	will	die.’
‘What	do	you	suggest,	then,	woman?’
She	strode	forward,	ignoring,	for	the	moment,	the	grey-skinned	warriors
and	the	yellow-haired	witch.	‘They	fear	you	now,	Karsa,	and	you	must	use	that
fear—’	She	paused,	distracted	by	a	commotion	from	among	the	half-tent-halfhuts	near	the	beached	canoes.	Two	warriors	were	dragging	someone	into	view.
Another	human.	His	face	was	swollen	by	constant	beatings,	but	he	seemed
otherwise	undamaged.	Samar	Dev	studied	the	new	arrival	with	narrowed	eyes,
then	quickly	approached	Karsa,	lowering	her	voice	to	a	harsh	whisper.	‘They
now	have	an	interpreter,	Karsa.	The	tattoos	on	his	forearms.	He	is	Taxilian.
Listen	to	me.	Quickly.	Use	that	fear.	Tell	them	there	are	more	of	your	kind,
allies	to	the	Anibar,	and	that	you	are	but	the	first	of	a	horde,	coming	in	answer
to	a	plea	for	help.	Karsa,	tell	them	to	get	the	Hood	off	this	land!’
‘If	they	leave	I	cannot	kill	more	of	them.’
An	argument	was	going	on	among	the	raiders.	The	warrior	who	had	issued
commands	was	rejecting	–	in	an	obvious	fashion	–	the	frantic	pleas	of	the
yellow-haired	human.	The	Taxilian,	held	by	the	arms	off	to	one	side,	was


clearly	following	the	debate,	but	his	face	was	too	mangled	to	reveal	any
expression.	Samar	saw	the	man’s	eyes	flick	over	to	her	and	Karsa,	then	back	to
her,	and,	with	slow	deliberation,	the	Taxilian	winked.
Gods	below.	Good.	She	nodded.	Then,	to	spare	him	any	retribution,	she
averted	her	gaze,	and	found	herself	looking	upon	a	scene	of	terrible	carnage.
Figures	lay	moaning	in	blood-drenched	humus.	Broken	spear-shafts	were
everywhere	like	scattered	kindling	from	an	overturned	cart.	But	mostly,	there
were	motionless	corpses,	severed	limbs,	exposed	bones	and	spilled	intestines.
And	Karsa	Orlong	was	barely	out	of	breath.
Were	these	tall,	unhuman	strangers	such	poor	fighters?	She	did	not	believe
so.	By	their	garb,	theirs	was	a	warrior	society.	But	many	such	societies,	if
stagnant	–	or	isolated	–	for	a	long	enough	period	of	time,	bound	their	martial
arts	into	ritualized	forms	and	techniques.	They	would	have	but	one	way	of
fighting,	perhaps	with	a	few	variations,	and	would	have	difficulty	adjusting	to
the	unexpected…such	as	a	lone	Toblakai	with	an	unbreakable	flint	sword	nearly
as	long	as	he	is	tall	–	a	Toblakai	possessing	mind-numbing	speed	and	the	cold,
detached	precision	of	a	natural	killer.
And	Karsa	had	said	that	he	had	fought	this	enemy	once	before.
The	commander	of	the	grey-skinned	raiders	was	approaching,	the	Taxilian
being	dragged	along	in	his	wake,	the	yellow-haired	witch	hurrying	to	come	up
alongside	the	leader	–	who	then	straight-armed	her	back	a	step.
Samar	saw	the	flash	of	unbridled	hatred	the	small	woman	directed	at	the
commander ’s	back.	There	was	something	dangling	from	the	witch’s	neck,
blackened	and	oblong	–	a	severed	finger.	A	witch	indeed,	of	the	old	arts,	the
lost	ways	of	spiritual	magic	–	well,	not	entirely	lost,	for	I	have	made	of	that	my
own	speciality,	atavistic	bitch	that	I	am.	By	her	hair	and	heart-shaped	features
–	and	those	blue	eyes	–	she	reminded	Samar	Dev	of	the	small,	mostly
subjugated	peoples	who	could	be	found	near	the	centre	of	the	subcontinent,	in
such	ancient	cities	as	Halaf,	Guran	and	Karashimesh;	and	as	far	west	as	Omari.
Some	remnant	population,	perhaps.	And	yet,	her	words	earlier	had	been	in	a
language	Samar	had	not	recognized.
The	commander	spoke,	clearly	addressing	the	yellow-haired	witch,	who
then	in	turn	relayed	his	words	–	in	yet	another	language	–	to	the	Taxilian.	At
that	latter	exchange,	Samar	Dev’s	eyes	widened,	for	she	recognized	certain
words	–	though	she	had	never	before	heard	them	spoken,	had	only	read	them,
in	the	most	ancient	tomes.	Remnants,	in	fact,	from	the	First	Empire.
The	Taxilian	nodded	when	the	witch	was	done.	He	faced	first	Karsa,	then
Samar	Dev,	and	finally	said,	‘To	which	of	you	should	I	convey	the	Preda’s
words?’


‘Why	not	to	both?’	Samar	responded.	‘We	can	both	understand	you,
Taxilian.’
‘Very	well.	The	Preda	asks	what	reason	this	Tarthenal	had	for	his
unwarranted	attack	on	his	Merude	warriors.’
Tarthenal?	‘Vengeance,’	Samar	Dev	said	quickly	before	Karsa	Orlong
triggered	yet	another	bloody	clash.	She	pointed	towards	the	pathetic	forms	on
the	racks	at	the	camp’s	edge.	‘These	Anibar,	suffering	your	predations,	have
called	upon	their	longstanding	allies,	the	Toblakai—’
At	that	word	the	yellow-haired	witch	started,	and	the	Preda’s	elongated
eyes	widened	slightly.
‘—and	this	warrior,	a	lowly	hunter	among	the	twenty-thousand-strong	clan
of	the	Toblakai,	was,	by	chance,	close	by,	and	so	he	represents	only	the
beginning	of	what	will	be,	I	am	afraid,	a	most	thorough	retribution.	Assuming
the	Preda	is,	of	course,	foolish	enough	to	await	their	arrival.’
A	certain	measure	of	amusement	glittered	in	the	Taxilian’s	eyes,	quickly
veiled	as	he	turned	to	relay	Samar ’s	words	to	the	yellow-haired	witch.
Whatever	she	in	turn	said	to	the	Preda	was	twice	as	long	as	the	Taxilian’s
version.
Preda.	Would	that	be	a	variation	on	Predal’atr,	I	wonder?	A	unit
commander	in	a	legion	of	the	First	Empire,	Middle	Period.	Yet…this	makes	no
sense.	These	warriors	are	not	even	human,	after	all.
The	witch’s	translation	was	cut	short	by	a	gesture	from	the	Preda,	who	then
spoke	once	more.
When	the	Taxilian	at	last	translated,	there	was	something	like	admiration	in
his	tone.	‘The	Preda	wishes	to	express	his	appreciation	for	this	warrior ’s
formidable	skills.	Further,	he	enquires	if	the	warrior ’s	desire	for	vengeance	is
yet	abated.’
‘It	is	not,’	Karsa	Orlong	replied.
The	tone	was	sufficient	for	the	Preda,	who	spoke	again.	The	yellow-haired
witch’s	expression	suddenly	closed,	and	she	related	his	words	to	the	Taxilian	in
a	strangely	flat	monotone.
She	hides	glee.
Suspicion	rose	within	Samar	Dev.	What	comes	now?
The	Taxilian	said,	‘The	Preda	well	understands	the…Toblakai’s	position.
Indeed,	he	empathizes,	for	the	Preda	himself	abhors	what	he	has	been
commanded	to	do,	along	this	entire	foreign	coastline.	Yet	he	must	follow	the
needs	of	his	Emperor.	That	said,	the	Preda	will	order	a	complete	withdrawal	of
his	Tiste	Edur	forces,	back	to	the	fleet.	Is	the	Toblakai	satisfied	with	this?’
‘No.’


The	Taxilian	nodded	at	Karsa’s	blunt	reply,	as	the	Preda	spoke	again.
Now	what?
‘The	Preda	again	has	no	choice	but	to	follow	the	commands	of	his
Emperor,	a	standing	order,	if	you	will.	The	Emperor	is	the	greatest	warrior
this	world	has	seen,	and	he	ever	defends	that	claim	in	personal	combat.	He	has
faced	a	thousand	or	more	fighters,	drawn	from	virtually	every	land,	and	yet
still	he	lives,	triumphant	and	unvanquished.	It	is	the	Emperor ’s	command	that
his	soldiers,	no	matter	where	they	are,	no	matter	with	whom	they	speak,	are	to
relate	the	Emperor ’s	challenge.	Indeed,	the	Emperor	invites	any	and	every
warrior	to	a	duel,	always	to	the	death	–	a	duel	in	which	no-one	can	interfere,	no
matter	the	consequences,	and	all	rights	of	Guest	are	accorded	the	challenger.
Further,	the	soldiers	of	the	Emperor	are	instructed	to	provide	transportation
and	to	meet	every	need	and	desire	of	such	warriors	who	would	so	face	the
Emperor	in	duel.’
More	words	from	the	Preda.
A	deep	chill	was	settling	in	Samar	Dev,	a	dread	she	could	not	identify	–	but
there	was	something	here…something	vastly	wrong.
The	Taxilian	resumed.	‘Thus,	if	this	Toblakai	hunter	seeks	the	sweetest
vengeance	of	all,	he	must	face	the	one	who	has	so	commanded	that	his	soldiers
inflict	atrocities	upon	all	strangers	they	encounter.	Accordingly,	the	Preda
invites	the	Toblakai	–	and,	if	desired,	his	companion	–	to	be	Guest	of	the	Tiste
Edur	on	this,	their	return	journey	to	the	Lether	Empire.	Do	you	accept?’
Karsa	blinked,	then	looked	down	at	Samar	Dev.	‘They	invite	me	to	kill
their	Emperor?’
‘It	seems	so.	But,	Karsa,	there	is—’
‘Tell	the	Preda,’	the	Toblakai	said,	‘that	I	accept.’
She	saw	the	commander	smile.
The	Taxilian	said,	‘Preda	Hanradi	Khalag	then	welcomes	you	among	the
Tiste	Edur.’
Samar	Dev	looked	back	at	the	bodies	lying	sprawled	through	the	camp.
And	for	these	fallen	kin,	Preda	Hanradi	Khalag,	you	care	nothing?	No,	gods
below,	something	is	very	wrong	here—
‘Samar	Dev,’	Karsa	said,	‘will	you	stay	here?’
She	shook	her	head.
‘Good,’	he	grunted.	‘Go	get	Havok.’
‘Get	him	yourself,	Toblakai.’
The	giant	grinned.	‘It	was	worth	a	try.’
‘Stop	looking	so	damned	pleased,	Karsa	Orlong.	I	don’t	think	you	have
any	idea	to	what	you	are	now	bound.	Can	you	not	hear	the	shackles	snapping


shut?	Chaining	you	to	this…this	absurd	challenge	and	these	damned	bloodless
Tiste	Edur?’
Karsa’s	expression	darkened.	‘Chains	cannot	hold	me,	witch.’
Fool,	they	are	holding	you	right	now.
Glancing	across,	she	saw	the	yellow-haired	witch	appraising	Karsa	Orlong
with	avid	eyes.
And	what	does	that	mean,	I	wonder,	and	why	does	it	frighten	me	so?
	
‘Fist	Temul,’	Keneb	asked,	‘how	does	it	feel,	to	be	going	home?’
The	young,	tall	Wickan	–	who	had	recently	acquired	full-body	blue
tattooing	in	the	style	of	the	Crow	Clan,	an	intricate	geometric	design	that	made
his	face	look	like	a	portrait	fashioned	of	tesserae	–	was	watching	as	his
soldiers	led	their	horses	onto	the	ramps	down	on	the	strand	below.	At	Keneb’s
question	he	shrugged.	‘Among	my	people,	I	shall	face	yet	again	all	that	I	have
faced	here.’
‘But	not	alone	any	more,’	Keneb	pointed	out.	‘Those	warriors	down	there,
they	are	yours,	now.’
‘Are	they?’
‘So	I	was	led	to	understand.	They	no	longer	challenge	your	orders,	or
your	right	to	command,	do	they?’
‘I	believe,’	Temul	said,	‘that	most	of	these	Wickans	will	choose	to	leave	the
army	once	we	disembark	at	Unta.	They	will	return	to	their	families,	and	when
they	are	asked	to	recount	their	adventures	in	Seven	Cities,	they	will	say
nothing.	It	is	in	my	mind,	Fist	Keneb,	that	my	warriors	are	shamed.	Not
because	of	how	they	have	shown	me	little	respect.	No,	they	are	shamed	by	this
army’s	list	of	failures.’	He	fixed	dark,	hard	eyes	on	Keneb.	‘They	are	too	old,
or	too	young,	and	both	are	drawn	to	glory	as	if	she	was	a	forbidden	lover.’
Temul	was	not	one	for	speeches,	and	Keneb	could	not	recall	ever
managing	to	pull	so	many	words	from	the	haunted	young	man.	‘They	sought
death,	then.’
‘Yes.	They	would	join	with	Coltaine,	Bult	and	the	others,	in	the	only	way
still	possible.	To	die	in	battle,	against	the	very	same	enemy.	It	is	why	they
crossed	the	ocean,	why	they	left	their	villages.	They	did	not	expect	ever	to
return	home,	and	so	this	final	journey,	back	to	Quon	Tali,	will	break	them.’
‘Damned	fools.	Forgive	me—’
A	bitter	smile	from	Temul	as	he	shook	his	head.	‘No	need	for	that.	They
are	fools,	and	even	had	I	wisdom,	I	would	fail	in	its	sharing.’
From	the	remnants	of	the	camp	behind	them,	cattle-dogs	began	howling.


Both	men	turned	in	surprise.	Keneb	glanced	over	at	Temul.	‘What	is	it?	Why
—’
‘I	don’t	know.’
They	set	off,	back	towards	the	camp.
	
Lieutenant	Pores	watched	Bent	race	up	the	track,	skirls	of	dust	rising	in	the
dog’s	wake.	He	caught	a	momentary	glimpse	of	wild	half-mad	eyes	above	that
mangled	snout,	then	the	beast	was	past.	So	only	now	we	find	out	that	they’re
terrified	of	water.	Well,	good.	We	can	leave	the	ugly	things	behind.	He	squinted
towards	the	file	of	Wickans	and	Seti	overseeing	the	loading	of	their	scrawny
horses	–	not	many	of	those	animals	would	survive	this	journey,	he	suspected,
which	made	them	valuable	sources	of	meat.	Anything	to	liven	up	the	deck-wash
and	bilge-crud	sailors	call	food.	Oh,	those	horse-warriors	might	complain,	but
that	wouldn’t	keep	them	from	lining	up	with	their	bowls	when	the	bell	tolled.
Kindly	had	made	sure	the	Adjunct	knew,	in	torrid	detail,	his	displeasure
with	Fist	Keneb’s	incompetence.	There	was	no	question	of	Kindly	lacking
courage,	or	at	least	raging	megalomania.	But	this	time,	dammit,	the	old	bastard
had	had	a	point.	An	entire	day	and	half	a	night	had	been	wasted	by	Keneb.	A
Hood-damned	kit	inspection,	presented	squad	by	squad	–	and	right	in	the
middle	of	boarding	assembly	–	gods,	the	chaos	that	ensued.	‘Has	Keneb	lost	his
mind?’	Oh	yes,	Kindly’s	first	question	to	the	Adjunct,	and	something	in	her
answering	scowl	told	Pores	that	the	miserable	woman	had	known	nothing
about	any	of	it,	and	clearly	could	not	comprehend	why	Keneb	would	have
ordered	such	a	thing.
Well,	no	surprise,	that,	with	her	moping	around	in	her	damned	tent	doing
who	knew	what	with	that	cold	beauty	T’amber.	Even	the	Admiral’s	frustration
had	been	obvious.	Word	was	going	through	the	ranks	that	Tavore	was	likely	in
line	for	demotion	–	Y’Ghatan	could	have	been	handled	better.	Every	damned
soldier	turned	out	to	be	a	tactical	genius	when	it	came	to	that,	and	more	than
once	Pores	had	bitten	out	a	chunk	of	soldier	meat	for	some	treasonous
comment.	It	didn’t	matter	that	Nok	and	Tavore	were	feuding;	it	didn’t	matter
that	Tene	Baralta	was	a	seething	cauldron	of	sedition	among	the	officers;	it
didn’t	even	matter	that	Pores	himself	was	undecided	whether	the	Adjunct	could
have	done	better	at	Y’Ghatan	–	the	rumours	alone	were	as	poisonous	as	any
plague	the	Grey	Goddess	could	spit	out.
He	was	both	looking	forward	to	and	dreading	boarding	the	transports,	and
the	long,	tedious	journey	ahead.	Bored	soldiers	were	worse	than	woodworm	in
the	keel	–	or	so	the	sailors	kept	saying,	as	they	cast	jaded	eyes	on	the	dusty,


swearing	men	and	women	who	ascended	the	ramps	only	to	fall	silent,	huddling
like	shorn	sheep	in	the	raft-like	scuttles	as	the	heave	and	haul	chant	rang	out
over	the	choppy	water.	Worse	still,	seas	and	oceans	were	nasty	things.	Soldiers
would	face	death	with	nary	a	blink	if	they	knew	they	could	fight	back,	maybe
even	fight	their	way	out	of	it,	but	the	sea	was	immune	to	swinging	swords,
whistling	arrows	and	shield-walls.	And	Hood	knows,	we’ve	been	swallowing
that	lumpy	helpless	thing	enough	as	it	is.
Damned	cattle-dogs	were	all	letting	loose	now.
Now	what?	Unsure	of	his	own	reasons,	Pores	set	off	in	the	direction	Bent
had	gone.	East	on	the	track,	past	the	command	tent,	then	the	inner	ring	of
pickets,	and	out	towards	the	latrine	trenches	–	and	the	lieutenant	saw	the	racing
figures	of	a	dozen	or	so	cattle-dogs,	their	mottled,	tanned	shapes	converging,
then	circling	with	wild	barking	–	and	on	the	road,	the	subjects	of	their
excitement,	a	troop	approaching	on	foot.
So	who	in	the	Queen’s	name	are	they?	The	outriders	were	all	in	–	he	was
sure	of	that	–	he’d	seen	the	Seti	practising	heaving	their	guts	up	on	the	ramps	–
they	got	seasick	standing	in	a	puddle.	And	the	Wickans	had	already	surrendered
their	mounts	to	the	harried	transport	crews.
Pores	glanced	round,	saw	a	soldier	leading	three	horses	towards	the	strand.
‘Hey!	Hold	up	there.’	He	walked	over.	‘Give	me	one	of	those.’
‘They	ain’t	saddled,	sir.’
‘Really?	How	can	you	tell?’
The	man	started	pointing	at	the	horse’s	back—
‘Idiot,’	Pores	said,	‘give	me	those	reins,	no,	those	ones.’
‘That’s	the	Adjunct’s—’
‘Thought	I	recognized	it.’	He	pulled	the	beast	away	then	vaulted	onto	its
back.	Then	set	off	onto	the	road.	The	foundling,	Grub,	was	walking	out	from
the	camp,	at	one	ankle	that	yipping	mutt	that	looked	like	what	a	cow	would
regurgitate	after	eating	a	mohair	rug.	Ignoring	them,	Pores	angled	his	mount
eastward,	and	kicked	it	into	a	canter.
He	could	already	put	a	name	to	the	one	in	the	lead.	Captain	Faradan	Sort.
And	there	was	that	High	Mage,	Quick	Ben,	and	that	scary	assassin	Kalam,	and	–
gods	below,	but	they’re	all	–	no,	they	weren’t.	Marines!	Damned	marines!
He	heard	shouts	from	the	camp	behind	him	now,	an	alarm	being	raised
outside	the	command	tent.
Pores	could	not	believe	his	own	eyes.	Survivors	–	from	the	firestorm	–	that
was	impossible.	Granted,	they	look	rough,	half-dead	in	fact.	Like	Hood	used
’em	to	clean	out	his	hoary	ears.	There’s	Lostara	Yil	–	well,	she	ain’t	as	bad	as
the	rest—


Lieutenant	Pores	reined	in	before	Faradan	Sort.	‘Captain—’
‘We	need	water,’	she	said,	the	words	barely	making	it	out	between	chapped,
cracked	and	blistered	lips.
Gods,	they	look	awful.	Pores	wheeled	his	horse	round,	nearly	slipping	off
the	animal’s	back	in	the	process.	Righting	himself,	he	rode	back	towards	the
camp.
	
As	Keneb	and	Temul	reached	the	main	track,	thirty	paces	from	the	command
tent,	they	saw	the	Adjunct	appear,	and,	a	moment	later,	Blistig,	and	then
T’amber.	Soldiers	were	shouting	something	as	yet	incomprehensible	from	the
eastern	end	of	the	camp.
The	Adjunct	turned	towards	her	two	approaching	Fists.	‘It	seems	my	horse
has	gone	missing.’
Keneb’s	brows	rose.	‘Thus	the	alarms?	Adjunct—’
‘No,	Keneb.	A	troop	has	been	spotted	on	the	east	road.’
‘A	troop?	We’re	being	attacked?’
‘I	do	not	think	so.	Well,	accompany	me,	then.	It	seems	we	shall	have	to
walk.	And	this	will	permit	you,	Fist	Keneb,	to	explain	the	fiasco	that	occurred
regarding	the	boarding	of	your	company.’
‘Adjunct?’
‘I	find	your	sudden	incompetence	unconvincing.’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	There	was	the	hint	of	an	emotion,	there	on	that
plain,	drawn	visage.	A	hint,	no	more,	not	enough	that	he	could	identify	it.
‘Grub,’	he	said.
The	Adjunct’s	brows	rose.	‘I	believe	you	will	need	to	elaborate	on	that,	Fist
Keneb.’
‘He	said	we	should	take	an	extra	day	boarding,	Adjunct.’
‘And	this	child’s	advice,	a	barely	literate,	half-wild	child	at	that,	is
sufficient	justification	for	you	to	confound	your	Adjunct’s	instructions?’
‘Not	normally,	no,’	Keneb	replied.	‘It’s	difficult	to	explain…but	he	knows
things.	Things	he	shouldn’t,	I	mean.	He	knew	we	were	sailing	west,	for
example.	He	knew	our	planned	ports	of	call—’
‘Hiding	behind	the	command	tent,’	Blistig	said.
‘Have	you	ever	seen	the	boy	hide,	Blistig?	Ever?’
The	man	scowled.	‘Must	be	he’s	good	at	it,	then.’
‘Adjunct,	Grub	said	we	needed	to	delay	one	day	–	or	we	would	all	die.	At
sea.	I	am	beginning	to	believe—’
She	held	up	a	gloved	hand,	the	gesture	sharp	enough	to	silence	him,	and	he


saw	that	her	eyes	were	narrowed	now,	fixed	on	what	was	ahead—
A	rider,	bareback,	coming	at	full	gallop.
‘That’s	Kindly’s	lieutenant,’	Blistig	said.
When	it	became	obvious	that	the	man	had	no	intention	of	slowing	down,
nor	of	changing	course,	everyone	quickly	moved	to	the	sides	of	the	road.
The	lieutenant	sketched	a	hasty	salute,	barely	seen	through	the	dust,	as	he
plunged	past,	shouting	something	like:	‘They	need	water!’
‘And,’	Blistig	added,	waving	at	clouds	of	dust	as	they	all	set	out	again,	‘that
was	your	horse,	Adjunct.’
Keneb	looked	down	the	road,	blinking	to	get	the	grit	from	his	eyes.
Figures	wavered	into	view.	Indistinct…no,	that	was	Faradan	Sort…wasn’t	it?
‘Your	deserter	is	returning,’	Blistig	said.	‘Stupid	of	her,	really,	since
desertion	is	punishable	by	execution.	But	who	are	those	people	behind	her?
What	are	they	carrying?’
The	Adjunct	halted	suddenly,	the	motion	almost	a	stagger.
Quick	Ben.	Kalam.	More	faces,	covered	in	dust,	so	white	they	looked	like
ghosts	–	and	so	they	are.	What	else	could	they	be?	Fiddler.	Gesler,	Lostara	Yil,
Stormy	–	Keneb	saw	one	familiar,	impossible	face	after	another.	Sun-ravaged,
stumbling,	like	creatures	trapped	in	delirium.	And	in	their	arms,	children,	dulleyed,	shrunken…
The	boy	knows	things…Grub…
And	there	he	stood,	flanked	by	his	ecstatic	dogs,	talking,	it	seemed,	with
Sinn.
Sinn,	we’d	thought	her	mad	with	grief	–	she’d	lost	a	brother,	after	all…lost,
and	now	found	again.
But	Faradan	Sort	had	suspected,	rightly,	that	something	else	had	possessed
Sinn.	A	suspicion	strong	enough	to	drive	her	into	desertion.
Gods,	we	gave	up	too	easily	–	but	no	–	the	city,	the	firestorm	–	we	waited
for	days,	waited	until	the	whole	damned	ruin	had	cooled.	We	picked	through	the
ashes.	No-one	could	have	lived	through	that.
The	troop	arrived	to	where	the	Adjunct	stood.
Captain	Faradan	Sort	straightened	with	only	a	slight	waver,	then	saluted,
fist	to	left	side	of	her	chest.	‘Adjunct,’	she	rasped,	‘I	have	taken	the	liberty	of
re-forming	the	squads,	pending	approval—’
‘That	approval	is	Fist	Keneb’s	responsibility,’	the	Adjunct	said,	her	voice
strangely	flat.	‘Captain,	I	did	not	expect	to	see	you	again.’
A	nod.	‘I	understand	the	necessities	of	maintaining	military	discipline,
Adjunct.	And	so,	I	now	surrender	myself	to	you.	I	ask,	however,	that	leniency
be	granted	Sinn	–	her	youth,	her	state	of	mind	at	the	time…’


Horses	from	up	the	road.	Lieutenant	Pores	returning,	more	riders	behind
him.	Bladders	filled	with	water,	swinging	and	bouncing	like	huge	udders.	The
other	riders	–	healers,	one	and	all,	including	the	Wickans	Nil	and	Nether.
Keneb	stared	at	their	expressions	of	growing	disbelief	as	they	drew	closer.
Fiddler	had	come	forward,	a	scrawny	child	sleeping	or	unconscious	in	his
arms.	‘Adjunct,’	he	said	through	cracked	lips,	‘without	the	captain,	digging
with	her	own	hands,	not	one	of	us	trapped	under	that	damned	city	would	have
ever	left	it.	We’d	be	mouldering	bones	right	now.’	He	stepped	closer,	but	his
effort	at	lowering	his	voice	to	a	whisper	failed,	as	Keneb	heard	him	say,
‘Adjunct,	you	hang	the	captain	for	desertion	and	you	better	get	a	lot	more
nooses,	’cause	we’ll	leave	this	miserable	world	when	she	does.’
‘Sergeant,’	the	Adjunct	said,	seemingly	unperturbed,	‘am	I	to	understand
that	you	and	those	squads	behind	you	burrowed	beneath	Y’Ghatan	in	the	midst
of	the	firestorm,	somehow	managing	not	to	get	cooked	in	the	process,	and	then
dug	your	way	clear?’
Fiddler	turned	his	head	and	spat	blood,	then	he	smiled	a	chilling,	ghastly
smile,	the	flaking	lips	splitting	in	twin	rows	of	red,	glistening	fissures.	‘Aye,’
he	said	in	a	rasp,	‘we	went	hunting…through	the	bones	of	the	damned	city.	And
then,	with	the	captain’s	help,	we	crawled	outa	that	grave.’
The	Adjunct’s	gaze	left	the	ragged	man,	travelled	slowly	along	the	line,	the
gaunt	faces,	the	deathly	eyes	staring	out	from	dust-caked	faces,	the	naked,
blistered	skin.	‘Bonehunters	in	truth,	then.’	She	paused,	as	Pores	led	his	healers
forward	with	their	waterskins,	then	said,	‘Welcome	back,	soldiers.’


Book	Four

The	Bonehunters


	

Who	will	deny	that	it	is	our	nature	to	believe	the	very	worst	in	our
fellow	kind?	Even	as	cults	rose	and	indeed	coalesced	into	a	patronomic
worship	–	not	just	of	Coltaine,	the	Winged	One,	the	Black	Feather,	but
too	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs	itself	–	throughout	Seven	Cities,	with	shrines
seeming	to	grow	from	the	very	wastes	along	that	ill-fated	trail,	shrines
in	propitiation	to	one	dead	hero	after	another:	Bult,	Lull,	Mincer,
Sormo	E’nath,	even	Baria	and	Mesker	Setral	of	the	Red	Blades;	and	to
the	Foolish	Dog	clan,	the	Weasel	clan	and	of	course	the	Crow	and	the
Seventh	Army	itself;	while	at	Gelor	Ridge,	in	an	ancient	monastery
overlooking	the	old	battle	site,	a	new	cult	centred	on	horses	was	born	–
even	as	this	vast	fever	of	veneration	gripped	Seven	Cities,	so	certain
agents	in	the	heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire	set	loose,	among	the
commonry,	tales	purporting	the	very	opposite:	that	Coltaine	had
betrayed	the	empire;	that	he	had	been	a	renegade,	secretly	allied	with
Sha’ik.	After	all,	had	the	countless	refugees	simply	stayed	in	their
cities,	accepting	the	rebellion’s	dominion;	had	they	not	been	dragged
out	by	Coltaine	and	his	bloodthirsty	Wickans;	and	had	the	Seventh’s
Mage	Cadre	leader,	Kulp,	not	so	mysteriously	disappeared,	thus
leaving	the	Malazan	Army	vulnerable	to	the	sorcerous	machinations
and	indeed	manipulations	of	the	Wickan	witches	and	warlocks	–	had
not	all	this	occurred,	there	would	have	been	no	slaughter,	no	terrible
ordeal	of	crossing	half	a	continent	exposed	to	every	predating	halfwild	tribe	in	the	wastes.	And,	most	heinous	of	all,	Coltaine	had	then,	in
league	with	the	traitorous	Imperial	Historian,	Duiker,	connived	to
effect	the	subsequent	betrayal	and	annihilation	of	the	Aren	Army,	led
by	the	naïve	High	Fist	Pormqual	who	was	the	first	victim	of	that	dread
betrayal.	Why	else,	after	all,	would	those	very	rebels	of	Seven	Cities
take	to	the	worship	of	such	figures,	if	not	seeing	in	Coltaine	and	the
rest	heroic	allies…
…In	any	case,	whether	officially	approved	or	otherwise,	the
persecution	of	Wickans	within	the	empire	flared	hot	and	allconsuming,	given	such	ample	fuel…


The	Year	of	Ten	Thousand	Lies
Kayessan
	


Chapter	Seventeen
What	is	there	left	to	understand?	Choice	is	an	illusion.	Freedom	is
conceit.	The	hands	that	reach	out	to	guide	your	every	step,	your	every
thought,	come	not	from	the	gods,	for	they	are	no	less	deluded	than	we
–	no,	my	friends,	those	hands	come	to	each	of	us…from	each	of	us.
You	may	believe	that	civilization	deafens	us	with	tens	of	thousands
of	voices,	but	listen	well	to	that	clamour,	for	with	each	renewed	burst
so	disparate	and	myriad,	an	ancient	force	awakens,	drawing	each	noise
ever	closer,	until	the	chorus	forms	but	two	sides,	each	battling	the
other.	The	bloody	lines	are	drawn,	fought	in	the	turning	away	of	faces,
in	the	stoppering	of	ears,	the	cold	denial,	and	all	discourse,	at	the	last,
is	revealed	as	futile	and	worthless.
Will	you	yet	hold,	my	friends,	to	the	faith	that	change	is	within	our
grasp?	That	will	and	reason	shall	overcome	the	will	of	denial?
There	is	nothing	left	to	understand.	This	mad	whirlpool	holds	us
all	in	a	grasp	that	cannot	be	broken;	and	you	with	your	spears	and
battle-masks;	you	with	your	tears	and	soft	touch;	you	with	the	sardonic
grin	behind	which	screams	fear	and	self-hatred;	even	you	who	stand
aside	in	silent	witness	to	our	catastrophe	of	dissolution,	too	numb	to
act	–	it	is	all	one.	You	are	all	one.	We	are	all	one.
So	now	come	closer,	my	friends,	and	see	in	this	modest	cart	before
you	my	most	precious	wares.	Elixir	of	Oblivion,	Tincture	of	Frenzied
Dancing,	and	here,	my	favourite,	Unguent	of	Male	Prowess	Unending,
where	I	guarantee	your	soldier	will	remain	standing	through	battle
after	battle…
Hawker’s	Harangue,
recounted	by	Vaylan	Winder,
Malaz	City,	the	year	the	city	overflowed	with	sewage	(1123	Burn’s
Sleep)
Rivulets	of	water,	reeking	of	urine,	trickled	down	the	steps	leading	to	Coop’s
Hanged	Man	Inn,	one	of	the	score	of	disreputable	taverns	in	the	Docks	Quarter


of	Malaz	City	that	Banaschar,	once	a	priest	of	D’rek,	was	now	in	the	habit	of
frequenting.	Whatever	details	had	once	existed	in	his	mind	to	distinguish	one
such	place	from	another	had	since	faded,	the	dyke	of	his	resolve	rotted	through
by	frustration	and	a	growing	panic,	poisonous	enough	to	immobilize	him	–	in
spirit	if	not	in	flesh.	And	the	ensuing	deluge	was	surprisingly	comforting,	even
as	the	waters	rose	ever	higher.
Little	different,	he	observed	as	he	negotiated	the	treacherous,	mouldslimed	steps,	from	this	cursed	rain,	or	so	the	long-time	locals	called	it,	despite
the	clear	sky	overhead.	Mostly	rain	comes	down,	they	said,	but	occasionally	it
comes	up,	seeping	through	the	crumbling	cobbles	of	the	quarter,	transforming
such	beneath-ground	establishments	as	Coop’s	into	a	swampy	quagmire,	the
entrance	guarded	by	a	whining	cloud	of	mosquitoes,	and	the	stench	of
overflowed	sewers	wafting	about	so	thick	the	old-timers	announce	its	arrival
as	they	would	an	actual	person	miserably	named	Stink	–	greeted	if	not
welcomed	into	already	sordid	company.
And	most	sordid	was	Banaschar ’s	company	these	days.	Veterans	who
avoided	sobriety	as	if	it	was	a	curse;	whores	who’d	long	since	hawked	their
hearts	of	gold	–	if	they’d	ever	had	them	in	the	first	place;	scrawny	youths	with
a	host	of	appropriately	modest	ambitions	–	meanest	thug	in	this	skein	of	fetid
streets	and	alleys;	master	thief	of	those	few	belongings	the	poor	possessed;
nastiest	backstabber	with	at	least	fifty	knots	on	their	wrist	strings,	each	knot
honouring	someone	foolish	enough	to	trust	them;	and	of	course	the	usual
assortment	of	bodyguards	and	muscle	whose	brains	had	been	deprived	of	air	at
some	point	in	their	lives;	smugglers	and	would-be	smugglers,	informants	and
the	imperial	spies	to	whom	they	informed,	spies	spying	on	the	spies,	hawkers
of	innumerable	substances,	users	of	selfsame	substances	on	their	way	to	the
oblivion	of	the	Abyss;	and	here	and	there,	people	for	whom	no	category	was
possible,	since	they	gave	away	nothing	of	their	lives,	their	histories,	their
secrets.
In	a	way,	Banaschar	was	one	such	person,	on	his	better	days.	Other	times,
such	as	this	one,	he	could	make	no	claim	to	possible	–	if	improbable	–
grandiosity.	This	afternoon,	then,	he	had	come	early	to	Coop’s,	with	the	aim	of
stretching	the	night	ahead	as	far	as	he	could,	well	lubricated	of	course,	which
would	in	turn	achieve	an	overlong	and	hopefully	entirely	blissful	period	of
unconsciousness	in	one	of	the	lice-infested	rat-traps	above	the	tavern.
It	would	be	easy,	he	reflected	as	he	ducked	through	the	doorway	and
paused	just	within,	blinking	in	the	gloom,	easy	to	think	of	clamour	as	a	single
entity,	one	sporting	countless	mouths,	and	to	reckon	the	din	as	meaningless	as
the	rush	of	brown	water	from	a	sewer	pipe.	Yet	Banaschar	had	come	to	a	new


appreciation	of	the	vagaries	of	the	noise	erupting	from	human	throats.	Most
spoke	to	keep	from	thinking,	but	others	spoke	as	if	casting	lifelines	even	as
they	drowned	in	whatever	despairing	recognition	they	had	arrived	at	–	perhaps
during	some	unwelcome	pause,	filled	with	the	horror	of	silence.	A	few	others
fit	neither	category.	These	were	the	ones	who	used	the	clamour	surrounding
them	as	a	barrier,	creating	in	its	midst	a	place	in	which	to	hide,	mute	and
indifferent,	fending	off	the	outside	world.
More	often	than	not,	Banaschar	–	who	had	once	been	a	priest,	who	had
once	immersed	himself	within	a	drone	of	voices	singing	the	cadence	of	prayer
and	chant	–	sought	out	such	denizens	for	the	dubious	pleasure	of	their
company.
Through	the	haze	of	durhang	and	rustleaf	smoke,	the	acrid	black-tail
swirls	from	the	lamp	wicks,	and	something	that	might	have	been	mist	gathered
just	beneath	the	ceiling,	he	saw,	hunched	in	a	booth	along	the	back	wall,	a
familiar	figure.	Familiar	in	the	sense	that	Banaschar	had	more	than	a	few	times
shared	a	table	with	the	man,	although	Banaschar	was	ignorant	of	virtually
everything	about	him,	including	his	given	name,	knowing	him	only	as
Foreigner.
A	foreigner	in	truth,	who	spoke	Malazan	with	an	accent	Banaschar	did	not
recognize	–	in	itself	curious	since	the	ex-priest’s	travels	had	been	extensive,
from	Korel	to	Theft	to	Mare	in	the	south;	from	Nathilog	to	Callows	on
Genabackis	in	the	east;	and,	northward,	from	Falar	to	Aren	to	Yath	Alban.	And
in	those	travels	he	had	met	other	travellers,	hailing	from	places	Banaschar
could	not	even	find	on	any	temple	map.	Nemil,	Perish,	Shal-Morzinn,
Elingarth,	Torment,	Jacuruku	and	Stratem.	Yet	this	man,	whom	he	now
approached,	weaving	and	pushing	through	the	afternoon	crowd	of	sailors	and
the	local	murder	of	veterans,	this	man	had	an	accent	unlike	any	Banaschar	had
ever	heard.
Yet	the	truth	of	things	was	never	as	interesting	as	the	mystery	preceding	the
revelation,	and	Banaschar	had	come	to	appreciate	his	own	ignorance.	In	other
matters,	after	all,	he	knew	far	too	much	–	and	what	had	that	availed	him?
Sliding	onto	the	greasy	bench	opposite	the	huge	foreigner,	the	ex-priest
released	the	clasp	on	his	tattered	cloak	and	shrugged	free	from	its	folds	–	once,
long	ago	it	seemed	now,	such	lack	of	consideration	for	the	unsightly	creases
that	would	result	would	have	horrified	him	–	but	he	had	done	his	share	since	of
sleeping	in	that	cloak,	senseless	on	a	vomit-spattered	floor	and,	twice,	on	the
cobbles	of	an	alley	–	correct	comportment,	alas,	had	ceased	being	a	moral
necessity.
He	leaned	back	now,	the	rough	cloth	bunching	behind	him,	as	one	of


Coop’s	serving	wenches	arrived	with	a	tankard	of	Coop’s	own	Leech	Swill,	a
weak,	gassy	ale	that	had	acquired	its	name	in	an	appropriately	literal	fashion.
Warranting	the	now	customary	affectation	of	a	one-eyed	squint	into	the	brasshued	brew	before	the	first	mouthful.
The	foreigner	had	glanced	up	once,	upon	Banaschar ’s	arrival,	punctuating
the	gesture	with	a	sardonic	half-grin	before	returning	his	attention	to	the	firedclay	mug	of	wine	in	his	hands.
‘Oh,	Jakatakan	grapes	are	all	very	well,’	the	ex-priest	said,	‘it’s	the	local
water	that	turns	that	wine	you	like	so	much	into	snake’s	piss.’
‘Aye,	bad	hangovers,’	Foreigner	said.
‘And	that	is	desirable?’
‘Aye,	it	is.	Wakes	me	up	again	and	again	through	the	night,	almost	every
bell,	with	a	pounding	skull	and	a	bladder	ready	to	explode	–	but	if	I	didn’t	wake
up	that	bladder	would	explode.	See?’
Banaschar	nodded,	glanced	round.	‘More	heads	than	usual	for	an
afternoon.’
‘You	only	think	that	because	you	ain’t	been	here	roun’	this	time	lately.
Three	transports	and	an	escort	come	in	three	nights	past,	from	Korel.’
The	ex-priest	studied	the	other	customers	a	little	more	carefully	this	time.
‘They	talking	much?’
‘Sounds	it	to	me.’
‘About	the	campaign	down	there?’
Foreigner	shrugged.	‘Go	ask	’em	if	you	like.’
‘No.	Too	much	effort.	The	bad	thing	about	asking	questions—’
‘Is	gettin’	answers,	aye	–	you’ve	said	that	before.’
‘That	is	another	bad	thing	–	the	way	we	all	end	up	saying	the	same	things
over	and	over	again.’
‘That’s	you,	not	me.	And,	you’re	gettin’	worse.’
Banaschar	swallowed	two	mouthfuls,	then	wiped	his	lips	with	the	back	of
his	hand.	‘Worse.	Yes	indeed.’
‘Never	good,’	Foreigner	observed,	‘seeing	a	man	in	a	hurry.’
‘It’s	a	race,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Do	I	reach	the	edge	and	plunge	over	or	does
my	salvation	arrive	in	time?	Lay	down	a	few	coins	on	the	outcome	–	I’d
suggest	the	former	but	that’s	just	between	you	and	me.’
The	huge	man	–	who	rarely	met	anyone’s	eyes	while	talking,	and	whose
massive	hands	and	wrists	were	scarred	and	puckered	with	weals	–	shook	his
head	and	said,	‘If	that	salvation’s	a	woman,	only	a	fool	would	wager	agin	me.’
Banaschar	grimaced	and	lifted	his	tankard.	‘A	fine	idea.	Let’s	toast	all	the
lost	loves	in	the	world,	friend.	What	happened	to	yours	or	is	that	too	personal	a


question	for	this	dubious	relationship	of	ours?’
‘You	jumped	on	the	wrong	stone,’	the	man	said.	‘My	love	ain’t	lost,	an’
maybe	some	days	I’d	think	of	swapping	places	wi’	you,	but	not	today.	Not
yesterday	neither,	nor	the	day	afore	that.	Come	to	think	of	it—’
‘No	need	to	continue.	My	salvation	is	not	a	woman,	or	if	she	was,	it
wouldn’t	be	because	she’s	a	woman,	if	you	understand	me.’
‘So,	we	just	had	one	of	them	hypothetical	conversations?’
‘Learned	Malazan	from	an	educated	sailor,	did	you?	In	any	case,
hypothetical	is	the	wrong	word	for	what	you	mean,	I	think.	More	like,
metaphorical.’
‘You	sure	of	that?’
‘Of	course	not,	but	that’s	not	the	point,	is	it?	The	woman’s	a	broken	heart,
or	maybe	just	a	mud	slide	you	ride	until	it	buries	you,	until	it	buries	all	of	us.’
Banaschar	finished	his	ale,	waved	the	tankard	in	the	air	for	a	moment,	then
settled	back	with	a	belch.	‘Heard	about	a	Napan	sailor,	drank	a	keg’s	worth	of
Leech	Swill,	then,	standing	too	close	to	a	lit	wick,	went	and	blew	off	most	of
his	backside.	How	does	that	illuminate	matters,	I	wonder?’
‘Momentarily,	I’d	imagine.’
Satisfied	with	that	answer,	Banaschar	said	nothing.	A	server	arrived	with	a
pitcher	with	which	she	refilled	the	ex-priest’s	tankard.	He	watched	her	leave,
swaying	through	the	press,	a	woman	with	things	that	needed	doing.
It	was	easy	to	think	of	an	island	as	isolated	–	certainly	most	islanders
shared	a	narrow	perspective,	a	blend	of	smug	arrogance	and	self-obsession	–
but	the	isolation	was	superficial,	a	mere	conceit.	Drain	the	seas	and	the	rocky
ground	linking	everything	was	revealed;	the	followers	of	D’rek,	the	Worm	of
Autumn,	understood	this	well	enough.	Rumours,	attitudes,	styles,	beliefs
rattling	chains	of	conviction,	all	rolled	over	the	waves	as	easily	as	the	wind,
and	those	that	fitted	comfortably	soon	became	to	the	islanders	their	own	–	and
indeed,	as	far	as	they	were	concerned,	had	originated	with	them	in	the	first
place.
There	had	been	a	purge,	and	the	air	still	smelled	of	ash	from	the	Mouse
Quarter,	where	mobs	had	descended	on	the	few	dislocated	Wickan	families
resident	there	–	stablers,	stitchers	and	riveters	of	leather	tack,	weavers	of
saddle	blankets,	an	old	woman	who	healed	dray	horses	and	mules	–	and	had,
with	appalling	zeal,	dragged	them	from	their	hovels	and	shacks,	children	and
elders	and	all	in	between;	then,	after	looting	them	of	their	scant	possessions,
the	mob	had	set	fire	to	those	homes.	Herded	into	the	street	and	surrounded,	the
Wickans	had	then	been	stoned	to	death.
Coltaine	wasn’t	dead,	people	said.	That	entire	tale	was	a	lie,	as	was	the


more	recent	rumour	that	Sha’ik	had	been	killed	by	the	Adjunct.	An	imposter,	it
was	said,	a	sacrificial	victim	to	deflect	the	avenging	army.	And	as	for	the
rebellion	itself,	well,	it	had	not	been	crushed.	It	had	simply	disappeared,	the
traitors	ducking	low	once	more,	weapons	sheathed	and	hidden	beneath	telaba.
True	enough,	the	Adjunct	had	even	now	chased	down	Leoman	of	the	Flails,
trapping	him	in	Y’Ghatan,	but	even	that	was	but	a	feint.	The	Red	Blades	were
once	more	free	in	Aren,	the	bones	of	the	betrayed	High	Fist	Pormqual	broken
and	scattered	along	Aren	Way,	the	grasses	already	growing	thick	on	the
barrows	holding	Pormqual’s	betrayed	army.
Had	not	concerned	residents	of	Aren	journeyed	out	to	the	hill	known	as
The	Fall?	And	there	dug	holes	into	the	barrow	in	search	of	the	cursed
Coltaine’s	bones?	And	Bult’s,	Mincer ’s,	Lull’s?	Had	they	not	found	nothing?
All	lies.	The	traitors	had	one	and	all	disappeared,	including	Duiker,	the
imperial	historian	whose	betrayal	of	his	Empress	–	and	of	the	empire	itself	–
was	perhaps	the	foulest	moment	of	them	all.
And	finally,	the	latest	news.	Of	a	disastrous	siege.	Of	terrible	plague	in
Seven	Cities.	Disparate,	disconnected,	yet	like	pokers	thrust	into	the	fire,
sending	sparks	bursting	into	the	dark.	And,	in	whispers	harsh	with	the
conviction	of	truth,	Sha’ik	Reborn	had	reappeared,	and	now	called	to	her	more
followers.
The	last	pebbles	on	the	cart.
Down	in	the	Mouse,	the	mob	had	acted	on	its	own.	The	mob	needed	no
leaders,	no	imperial	directives	–	the	mob	understood	justice,	and	on	this	island
–	this	birthplace	of	the	empire	–	justice	was	held	in	red	hands.	The	battered,
pulped	corpses	were	dumped	in	the	river,	which	was	too	turgid,	too	thick	with
sewage	and	refuse,	the	culverts	beneath	the	bridges	too	narrow	to	carry	those
bodies	through	and	out	into	the	bay.
And	this	too	was	seen	as	an	omen.	The	ancient	sea	god	had	rejected	those
corpses.	Mael,	empowered	by	the	enlivening	of	faith	here	on	the	island,	would
not	accept	them	into	the	salty	bay	of	Malaz	Harbour	–	what	greater	proof	was
needed?
The	Emperor ’s	ghost	had	been	seen,	in	the	overgrown	yard	of	the
Deadhouse,	a	ghost	feeding	on	the	souls	of	the	slaughtered	Wickans.
In	the	D’rek	temples	in	Jakata	and	here	in	Malaz	City,	the	priests	and
priestesses	had	vanished,	sent	out	at	night,	it	was	whispered,	to	hunt	down	the
rest	of	the	Wickans	left	on	the	island	–	the	ones	who’d	fled	upon	hearing	of	the
purge	in	Malaz	City	–	for	the	Worm	of	Autumn	herself	hungered	for	Wickan
blood.
An	army	of	citizens	was	said	to	be	massing	on	the	old	borders,	at	the	edge


of	the	Wickan	Plains	on	the	mainland,	and	was	about	to	march,	with	the	aim	of
destroying	every	last	damned	betrayer	in	their	squalid,	stinking	huts.	And	had
the	Empress	sent	out	her	legions	to	disperse	that	army?	No,	of	course	not,	for
she	approved.
The	Imperial	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	was	in	Malaz	City,	ensconced	in
Mock’s	Hold.	What	had	brought	him	here?	And	why	so	public	a	visit	–	the
strange	sorceror	was	legendary	for	moving	unseen,	for	acting	behind	the
scenes	to	ensure	the	health	of	the	empire.	He	was	the	very	foundation	of
Laseen’s	power,	after	all,	her	left	hand	where	the	right	belonged	to	the	Claw.	If
he	was	here,	it	was	to	oversee—
He	is	here.	Banaschar	could	feel	the	bastard,	an	aura	brooding	and
ominous	drifting	down	from	Mock’s	Hold.	Day	upon	day,	night	after	night.
And	why?	Oh,	all	you	fools.
For	the	same	reason	I	am	here.
Six	messengers	thus	far.	Six,	all	paid	enough	to	be	reliable,	all	swearing
afterwards	that	they	had	passed	the	urgent	missive	on	–	to	the	Hold’s	gate
watchman,	that	bent	creature	said	to	be	as	old	as	Mock’s	Hold	itself,	who	had	in
turn	nodded	each	time,	saying	he	would	deliver	the	missive	to	the	High	Mage.
And	yet,	no	reply.	No	summons.
Someone	is	intercepting	my	messages.	There	can	be	no	other	possibility.
True,	I	was	coy	in	what	I	said	–	how	could	I	not	be?	But	Tayschrenn	would
recognize	my	sigil,	and	he	would	understand…with	heart	suddenly	pounding,
cold	sweat	on	the	skin,	with	trembling	hands…he	would	have	understood.
Instantly.
Banaschar	did	not	know	what	to	do.	The	last	messenger	had	been	three
weeks	ago.
‘It’s	that	desperate	glint	in	your	eye,’	the	man	opposite	him	said,	halfgrinning	once	again,	though	his	gaze	slid	away	as	soon	as	Banaschar	focused
on	him.
‘Enamoured,	are	you?’
‘No,	but	close	to	curious.	Been	watching	you	these	weeks.	Giving	up,	but
slowly.	Most	people	do	that	in	an	instant.	Rising	from	bed,	walking	to	the
window,	then	standing	there,	motionless,	seeing	nothing,	as	inside	it	all	falls
down	with	nary	a	whisper,	nary	a	cloud	of	dust	to	mark	its	collapse,	its
vanishing	into	nothingness.’
‘You	do	better	talking	and	thinking	like	a	damned	sailor,’	Banaschar	said.
‘The	more	I	drink,	the	clearer	and	steadier	I	get.’
‘That’s	a	bad	sign,	friend.’
‘I	collect	those.	You	ain’t	the	only	one	cursed	with	waiting.’


‘Months!’
‘Years	for	me,’	the	man	said,	dipping	into	his	cup	with	one	blunt	finger,
fishing	out	a	moth	that	had	landed	in	the	wine.
‘Sounds	like	you’re	the	one	who	should	have	given	up	long	ago.’
‘Maybe,	but	I’ve	come	to	a	kind	of	faith.	Not	long	now,	I’d	swear	it.	Not
long.’
Banaschar	snorted.	‘The	drowning	man	converses	with	the	fool,	a	night	to
beggar	acrobats,	jugglers	and	dancers,	come	one	come	all,	two	silvers	buys
you	endless	–	and	I	do	mean	endless	–	entertainment.’
‘I	ain’t	too	unfamiliar	with	drowning,	friend.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Something	tells	me,	when	it	comes	to	fools,	you	might	say	the	same
thing.’
Banaschar	looked	away.	Saw	another	familiar	face,	another	huge	man	–
shorter	than	the	foreigner	opposite	but	equally	as	wide,	his	hairless	pate
marked	with	liver	spots,	scars	seaming	every	part	of	his	body.	He	was	just
collecting	a	tankard	of	Coop’s	Old	Malazan	Dark.	The	ex-priest	raised	his
voice.	‘Hey,	Temper!	There’s	room	to	sit	here!’	He	sidled	along	the	bench,
watched	as	the	old	yet	still	formidable	man	–	a	veteran	without	doubt	–	made
his	way	over.
At	least	now	the	conversation	could	slip	back	into	the	meaningless.
Still.	Another	bastard	waiting…for	something.	Only,	with	him,	I	suspect	it’d
be	a	bad	thing	if	it	ever	arrived.
	
Somewhere	in	the	vaults	of	a	city	far,	far	away,	rotted	a	wall	hanging.	Rolled
up,	home	to	nesting	mice,	the	genius	of	the	hands	that	had	woven	it	slowly
losing	its	unwitnessed	war	to	the	scurry-beetle	grub,	tawryn	worms	and	ash
moths.	Yet,	for	all	that,	the	darkness	of	its	abandonment	hid	colours	still
vibrant	here	and	there,	and	the	scene	depicted	on	that	huge	tapestry	retained
enough	elements	of	the	narrative	that	meaning	was	not	lost.	It	might	survive
another	fifty	years	before	finally	surrendering	to	the	ravages	of	neglect.
The	world,	Ahlrada	Ahn	knew,	was	indifferent	to	the	necessity	of
preservation.	Of	histories,	of	stories	layered	with	meaning	and	import.	It	cared
nothing	for	what	was	forgotten,	for	memory	and	knowledge	had	never	been
able	to	halt	the	endless	repetition	of	wilful	stupidity	that	so	bound	peoples	and
civilizations.
The	tapestry	had	once	commanded	an	entire	wall,	to	the	right	when	facing
the	Obsidian	Throne	–	from	which,	before	the	annexation,	the	High	King	of


Bluerose,	Supreme	Servant	to	the	Black	Winged	Lord,	had	ruled,	and	flanking
the	dais,	the	Council	of	the	Onyx	Wizards,	all	attired	in	their	magnificent
cloaks	of	supple,	liquid	stone	–	but	no,	it	was	the	tapestry	that	so	haunted
Ahlrada	Ahn.
The	narrative	began	at	the	end	furthest	from	the	throne.	Three	figures
against	a	midnight	background.	Three	brothers,	born	in	pure	Darkness	and
most	cherished	by	their	mother.	All	cast	out,	now,	although	each	had	come	to
that	in	his	own	time.	Andarist,	whom	she	saw	as	the	first	betrayer,	an	accusation
all	knew	was	mistaken,	yet	the	knot	of	falsehoods	had	closed	tight	round	him
and	none	could	pry	it	loose	except	Andarist	himself	–	and	that	he	could	or
would	not	do.	Filled	with	unbearable	grief,	he	had	accepted	his	banishment,
making	his	final	words	these:	welcome	or	not,	he	would	continue	his
guardianship	of	Mother	Dark,	in	isolation,	and	in	this	would	be	found	the
measure	of	his	life.	Yet	even	to	that	promise,	she	had	turned	away.	His	brothers
could	not	but	recognize	the	crime	of	this,	and	it	was	Anomandaris	Purake	who
was	first	to	confront	Mother	Dark.	What	words	passed	between	them	only	they
knew,	although	the	dire	consequence	was	witnessed	by	all	–	Anomander	turned
his	back	on	her.	He	walked	away,	denying	the	Darkness	in	his	blood	and
seeking	out,	in	its	stead,	the	Chaos	that	ever	warred	in	his	veins.	Silchas	Ruin,
the	most	enigmatic	of	the	brothers,	had	seemed	a	man	riven	by	indecision,
trapped	by	impossible	efforts	at	mitigation,	at	reconciliation,	until	all
constraint	was	sundered,	and	so	he	committed	the	greatest	crime	of	all.
Alliance	with	Shadow.	Even	as	war	broke	out	among	the	Tiste	–	a	war	that
continues	unchecked	to	this	day.
There	had	been	victories,	defeats,	great	slaughters,	then,	in	that	final
gesture	of	despair,	Silchas	Ruin	and	his	followers	joined	with	the	legions	of
Shadow	and	their	cruel	commander	Scabandari	–	who	would	come	to	be
known	as	Bloodeye	–	in	their	flight	through	the	gates.	To	this	world.	But
betrayal	ever	haunts	those	three	brothers.	And	so,	in	the	moment	of	supreme
victory	against	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Silchas	Ruin	had	fallen	to	Scabandari’s
knife,	and	his	followers	had	in	turn	fallen	to	Tiste	Edur	swords.
Such	was	the	second	scene	in	the	tapestry.	The	betrayal,	the	slaughter.	But
that	slaughter	had	not	been	as	thorough	as	the	Edur	believed.	Tiste	Andii	had
survived	–	the	wounded,	the	stragglers,	the	elders	and	mothers	and	children	left
well	behind	the	field	of	battle.	They	had	witnessed.	They	had	fled.
The	third	scene	portrayed	their	fraught	flight,	the	desperate	defence	against
their	pursuers	by	four	barely	grown	sorcerors	–	who	would	become	the
founders	of	the	Onyx	Order	–	the	victory	that	gave	them	respite,	enough	to
make	good	their	escape	and,	through	new	unfoldings	of	magic,	elude	the


hunters	and	so	fashion	a	sanctuary—
In	caves	buried	beneath	mountains	on	the	shore	of	the	inland	sea,	caves	in
which	grew	flowers	of	sapphire,	intricate	as	roses,	from	which	kingdom,
mountains	and	sea	derived	their	common	name.	Bluerose,	and	so,	the	last	and
most	poignant	scene,	closest	to	the	throne,	closest	to	my	heart.
His	people,	the	few	thousand	that	remained,	once	more	hid	in	those	deep
caves,	as	the	tyranny	of	the	Edur	raged	like	madness	over	all	of	Lether.	A
madness	that	has	devoured	me.
The	Hiroth	bireme	drummed	like	thunder	in	the	heaving	swells	of	this
fierce	north	sea	the	locals	called	Kokakal,	and	Ahlrada	gripped	the	rail	with
both	hands	as	bitter	cold	spray	repeatedly	struck	his	face,	as	if	he	was	the
subject	of	an	enraged	god’s	wrath.	And	perhaps	he	was,	and	if	so,	then	it	was
well-earned	as	far	as	he	was	concerned.
He	had	been	born	the	child	of	spies,	and	through	generation	after
generation,	his	bloodline	had	dwelt	in	the	midst	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	thriving
without	suspicion	in	the	chaos	of	the	seemingly	endless	internecine	disputes
between	the	tribes.	Hannan	Mosag	had	ended	that,	of	course,	but	by	then	the
Watchers,	such	as	Ahlrada	Ahn	and	others,	were	well	in	place,	their	blood
histories	thoroughly	mixed	and	inseparable	from	the	Edur.
Bleaches	for	the	skin,	the	secret	gestures	of	communication	shared	among
the	hidden	Andii,	the	subtle	manipulations	to	ensure	a	presence	among	eminent
gatherings	–	this	was	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	life	–	and	had	the	tribes	remained	in	their
northern	fastness,	it	would	have	been…palatable,	until	such	time	as	he	set	out
on	a	hunting	expedition,	from	which	he	would	never	return	–	his	loss	mourned
by	his	adopted	tribe,	while	in	truth	Ahlrada	would	have	crossed	the	south	edge
of	the	ice	wastes,	would	have	walked	the	countless	leagues	until	he	reached
Bluerose.	Until	he	came	home.
That	home	was…not	as	it	had	once	been.	The	sanctuary	was	under	siege	–
true,	by	an	unsuspecting	enemy,	who	as	yet	knew	nothing	of	the	catacombs
beneath	their	feet,	but	they	now	ruled,	the	chosen	elites	in	their	positions	of
supreme	power,	from	which	all	manner	of	depravity	and	cruelty	descended.
From	the	Emperor,	the	foul	blood	flows	down,	and	down…No	Letherii	reign
had	ever	fallen	as	far	as	had	Rhulad’s	and	that	of	his	Edur	‘nobles’.	Pray	that	it
ends.	Pray	that,	one	day,	historians	will	write	of	this	dark	period	in	the	history
of	Letheras	as	The	Nightmare	Age,	a	title	of	truth	to	warn	the	future.
He	did	not	believe	it.	Not	a	word	of	the	prayer	he	had	voiced	in	his	head	ten
thousand	times.	We	saw	the	path	Rhulad	would	take.	Saw	it	when	the	Emperor
banished	his	own	brother	–	Gods,	I	was	there,	in	the	Nascent.	I	was	one	of	the
‘brothers’	of	Rhulad,	his	new	extended	family	of	cowering	fawners.	May	the


Black	Winged	Lord	preserve	me,	I	watched	as	the	one	Edur	I	admired,	the	one
Edur	I	respected,	was	broken	down.	No,	I	did	more	than	watch.	I	added	my	voice
to	Rhulad’s	ritual	shorning	of	Trull.	And	Trull’s	crime?	Why,	nothing	more	than
yet	one	more	desperate	attempt	to	bring	Rhulad	home.	Ah,	by	the	Dark	Mother
herself…but	Ahlrada	Ahn	had	never	dared,	not	once,	not	even	in	those	early
days	when	Trull	struggled	to	turn	the	tide,	no,	he	had	himself	turned	away,
rejecting	every	opportunity	to	unveil	words	that	he	knew	Trull	had	needed,	and
would	see	and	cherish	as	gifts.	I	was	a	coward.	My	soul	fled	the	risk,	and	there
is	no	going	back.
In	the	days	following	Rhulad’s	ascension	to	the	Letherii	crown,	Ahlrada
had	led	a	company	of	Arapay	warriors	out	of	Letheras,	seeking	the	trail	of	the
new	Emperor ’s	betrayers	–	his	brother	Fear,	and	that	slave	Udinaas.	They	had
failed	to	discover	any	sign	of	them,	and	in	that	Ahlrada	had	found	some	small
measure	of	victory.	Rhulad’s	rage	had	nearly	resulted	in	mass	executions,
Ahlrada	and	his	searchers	foremost	among	them,	but	the	wreckage	that
remained	of	Hannan	Mosag	had	managed	to	impose	some	control	on	Rhulad	–
the	Emperor	had	great	need	for	Tiste	Edur	warriors,	not	just	in	the	occupation
and	rule	of	the	empire,	but	yet	more	in	the	vast	expeditions	that	were	even	then
being	planned.
Expeditions	such	as	this	one.	Had	he	known	what	these	journeys	would
entail,	Ahlrada	might	well	have	elected	for	the	execution	Rhulad	had	been	so
eager	to	provide	in	those	early	days	in	Letheras.
Since	that	time…all	that	we	have	done	in	his	cursed	name…
We	follow	him	–	what	has	that	made	of	us?	Oh,	Trull,	you	were	right,	and
not	one	of	us	was	brave	enough	to	stand	at	your	side	when	it	mattered	most.
His	memories	of	Trull	Sengar	haunted	Ahlrada	Ahn.	No,	his	memories	of
everything	haunted	him,	yet	they	had	converged,	found	focus	in	one	lone,
honourable	warrior	of	the	Tiste	Edur.
He	stood	on	the	huge	ship,	eyes	on	the	tumultuous	seas,	his	face	long	since
grown	numb	from	the	icy	spray.	Whilst	in	the	waters	to	all	sides	more	ships
rolled	in	the	heavy	waves,	one	half	of	the	Third	Edur	Imperial	Fleet	seeking	a
way	round	this	enormous	continent.	Below	decks	and	in	the	rigging,	on	each
and	every	ship,	laboured	Letherii	crews,	even	the	lesser	marines.	While	their
overlords	did	nothing,	beyond	consuming	wine	and	the	endless	courses	of
meals;	or	took	to	their	sumptuous	beds	Letherii	slave	women,	and	those	that
they	used	up,	left	broken	and	raving	with	the	poison	of	Edur	seed,	were	simply
flung	over	the	rail	for	the	ever-following	huge	grey	sharks	and	the	pods	of
yearling	dhenrabi.
One	half	of	the	fleet	in	these	seas.	Commanded	by	Tomad	Sengar,	the


Emperor ’s	father.
And	how	well	have	we	done	thus	far,	dear	Tomad?	A	bare	handful	of
dubious	champions,	challengers	to	deliver	home	and	into	the	cast	of	your
youngest	son’s	manic	gaze.
And	let	us	not	forget	the	fallen	kin	we	have	found.	Where	have	they	come
from?	Even	they	don’t	know.	Yet	do	we	treat	them	as	long-lost	kin?	Do	our	arms
open	wide	for	them?	No,	they	are	lesser	creatures,	blood	befouled	by	failure,	by
destitution.	Our	gift	is	contempt,	though	we	proclaim	it	liberation.
But,	I	was	thinking	of	champions…and	Rhulad’s	insatiable	hunger	that
sends	out	into	this	world	fleet	upon	fleet.	Tomad.	How	well	have	we	done?
He	thought	to	their	latest	Guests,	down	below,	and	there	was	the	sense,	no
more	than	a	whisper	in	the	murk	of	his	rolled-up,	rotted,	moth-eaten	soul,	that
perhaps,	this	time,	they	had	found	someone	truly	formidable.	Someone	who
just	might	make	Rhulad	choke	on	his	own	blood,	even	more	than	once…
although,	as	always,	there	would	come	that	terrible	scream…
We	are	made,	and	unmade,	and	so	it	goes	on.	For	ever.
And	I	will	never	see	my	home.
	
With	eyes	the	colour	of	weathered	granite,	the	Letherii	Marine	Commander,
Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis,	known	to	her	soldiers	as	Twilight,	looked	down	upon
the	sickly	man.	The	gloomy	hold	of	the	ship	was	fetid	and	damp,	the	walkway
above	the	keel	smeared	with	puke	and	slimy	mould.	Creaks	and	thumps	filled
the	air	with	the	impact	of	every	wave	against	the	hull.	The	muted	light	of
lanterns	pitched	about,	making	riotous	the	shadows.	‘Here,’	she	said.	‘Drink
this.’
The	man	looked	up,	red-rimmed	eyes	set	in	a	face	the	hue	of	whale	fat.
‘Drink?’	Even	the	word	seemed	nearly	sufficient	to	double	him	over	yet	again,
but	she	saw	him	struggle	mightily	against	the	impulse.
‘I	speak	your	language	not	well,’	she	said.	‘Drink.	Two	swallows.	Wait,
then	more.’
‘I’ll	not	keep	it	down,’	the	man	said.
‘No	matter.	Two,	you	feel	better.	Then	more.	Sick	goes.’
With	a	trembling	hand,	he	accepted	the	small	patinated	glass	bottle.
‘Ceda	make,’	Twilight	said.	‘Made,	generations	ago.	Sick	goes.’
He	swallowed	once,	then	twice,	was	motionless	for	a	moment,	then	he
lunged	to	one	side.	Spitting,	coughing,	gasping,	then,	‘Spirits	take	me,	yes.’
‘Better?’
A	nod.


‘Drink	rest.	It	will	stay.’
He	did	so,	then	settled	back,	eyes	closed.	‘Better.	Better,	yes.’
‘Good.	Now,	go	to	him.’	She	pointed	towards	the	bow,	twenty	paces	further
along	the	walkway,	where	a	figure	leaned,	huddled	against	the	prow’s	uplift.
‘Preda	Tomad	Sengar	has	doubts.	Champion	will	not	survive	voyage.	Will	not
eat,	drink.	Wastes	away.	Go	to	him.	You	claim	much,	his	prowess.	We	see
otherwise.	We	see	only	weakness.’
The	man	lying	on	the	walkway	would	not	meet	her	eyes,	but	he	slowly	sat
up,	then	climbed	awkwardly,	unevenly	to	his	feet.	Legs	wide	to	maintain	his
balance,	he	straightened.
Spat	into	the	palms	of	his	hands,	rubbed	his	palms	together	for	a	moment,
then	swept	both	hands	back	through	his	hair.
Taralack	Veed	met	the	woman’s	eyes.	‘Now,	you	are	the	one	looking	ill,’
he	said,	frowning.	‘What	is	wrong?’
Twilight	simply	shook	her	head.	‘Go.	The	Preda	must	be	convinced.	Else
we	throw	you	both	over	side.’
The	Gral	warrior	turned	about	and	made	his	way,	crab-like,	up	the
walkway.	To	either	side	of	him,	pressed	together	between	crates	and	casks,
were	chained	figures.	Grey-skinned	like	their	captors,	almost	as	tall,	with	many
bearing	facial	traits	that	revealed	Edur	blood.	Yet,	here	they	were,	rotting	in
their	own	filth,	their	dull,	owlish	gazes	following	Taralack	as	he	made	his	way
forward.
The	Gral	crouched	before	Icarium,	reached	out	a	hand	to	rest	it	on	the
warrior ’s	shoulder.
Icarium	flinched	at	the	contact.
‘My	friend,’	Taralack	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘I	know	this	is	not	illness	of	the
flesh	that	so	afflicts	you.	It	is	illness	of	the	spirit.	You	must	struggle	against	it,
Icarium.’
The	Jhag	was	drawn	up,	knees	to	his	chest,	arms	wrapped	tight,	the
position	reminding	the	Gral	of	the	burial	style	practised	by	the	Ehrlii.	For	a
long	moment,	there	was	no	response	to	his	words,	then	a	shudder	racked	the
figure	curled	up	before	him.	‘I	cannot	do	this,’	Icarium	said,	lifting	his	head	to
fix	despairing	eyes	upon	Taralack.	‘I	do	not	wish…I	do	not	wish	to	kill
anyone!’
Taralack	rubbed	at	his	face.	Spirits	below,	that	draught	from	Twilight	had
done	wonders.	I	can	do	this.	‘Icarium.	Look	down	this	walkway.	Look	upon
these	filthy	creatures	–	who	were	told	they	were	being	liberated	from	their
oppressors.	Who	came	to	believe	that	in	these	Edur	was	their	salvation.	But	no.
Their	blood	is	not	pure.	It	is	muddied	–	they	were	slaves!	Fallen	so	far,


knowing	nothing	of	their	own	history,	the	glory	of	their	past	–	yes,	I	know,
what	glory?	But	look	upon	them!	What	manner	of	demons	are	these	Tiste	Edur
and	their	damned	empire?	To	so	treat	their	own	kind?	Now	tell	me,	Icarium,
what	have	I	procured	for	you?	Tell	me!’
The	warrior ’s	expression	was	ravaged,	horror	swimming	in	his	eyes	–	and
something	else,	a	light	of	wildness.	‘For	what	we	witnessed,’	the	Jhag
whispered.	‘For	what	we	saw	them	do…’
‘Vengeance,’	Taralack	Veed	said,	nodding.
Icarium	stared	at	him	like	a	drowning	man.	‘Vengeance…’
‘But	you	will	not	be	given	that	chance,	Icarium.	The	Preda	loses	faith	in
you	–	in	me	–	and	we	are	in	grave	peril	of	being	thrown	to	the	sharks—’
‘They	ask	me	to	kill	their	emperor,	Taralack	Veed.	It	makes	no	sense—’
‘What	they	ask,’	the	Gral	said,	baring	his	teeth,	‘and	what	you	shall	deliver,
are	two	entirely	different	things.’
‘Vengeance,’	Icarium	said	again,	as	if	tasting	the	word,	then	he	brought
both	hands	to	his	face.	‘No,	no,	it	is	not	for	me.	Already	too	much	blood	–
more	can	achieve	nothing.	I	will	be	no	different	than	them!’	He	reached	out
suddenly	and	grasped	Taralack,	dragging	him	close.	‘Don’t	you	see	that?	More
innocent	lives—’
‘Innocent?	You	fool,	Icarium	–	can’t	you	understand?	Innocence	is	a	lie!
None	of	us	is	innocent!	Not	one!	Show	me	one,	please,	I	beg	you	–	show	me
that	I	am	wrong!’	He	twisted	round	in	the	Jhag’s	iron	grip,	jabbed	a	finger
towards	the	huddled	forms	of	the	slaves.	‘We	both	witnessed,	did	we	not?
Yesterday!	Two	of	those	pathetic	fools,	choking	the	life	out	of	a	third	one	–	all
three	in	chains,	Icarium,	all	three	starving,	dying!	Yet,	some	old	quarrel,	some
old	stupidity,	unleashed	one	last	time!	Victims?	Oh	yes,	no	doubt	of	that.
Innocent?	Hah!	And	may	the	spirits	above	and	below	strike	me	down	if	my
judgement	is	false!’
Icarium	stared	at	him,	then,	slowly,	his	long	fingers	relaxed	their	grip	on
the	Gral’s	hide	shirt.
‘My	friend,’	Taralack	said,	‘you	must	eat.	You	must	keep	your	strength.
This	empire	of	the	Tiste	Edur,	it	is	an	abomination,	ruled	by	a	madman	whose
only	talent	is	with	a	sword,	and	to	that	the	weak	and	strong	must	bow,	for	such
is	the	cast	of	the	world.	To	defy	the	powerful	is	to	invite	subjugation	and
annihilation	–	you	know	this,	Icarium.	Yet	you	and	you	alone,	friend,	possess
what	is	necessary	to	destroy	that	abomination.	This	is	what	you	were	born	to
do.	You	are	the	final	weapon	of	justice	–	do	not	waver	before	this	flood	of
inequity.	Feed	upon	what	you	have	witnessed	–	what	we	have	witnessed	–	and
all	that	we	shall	see	on	the	voyage	ahead.	Feed	on	it,	to	fuel	the	justice	within


you	–	until	it	is	blinding	with	power.	Icarium,	do	not	let	these	terrible	Edur
defeat	you	–	as	they	are	doing	now.’
A	voice	spoke	behind	him.	Twilight.	‘The	Preda	considers	a	test.	For	this
warrior.’
Taralack	Veed	turned,	looked	up	at	the	woman.	‘What	do	you	mean?	What
sort	of	test?’
‘We	fight	many	wars.	We	walk	paths	of	Chaos	and	Shadow.’
The	Gral’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘We?’
She	grimaced.	‘The	Edur	now	rule	Lether.	Where	they	lead,	Letherii	must
follow.	Edur	swords	make	river	of	blood,	and	from	river	of	blood,	there	is
river	of	gold.	The	loyal	have	grown	rich,	so	very	rich.’
‘And	the	disloyal?’
‘They	tend	the	oars.	Indebted.	It	is	so.’
‘And	you,	Atri-Preda?	Are	you	loyal?’
She	studied	him,	silent	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	she	said,	‘Each
champion	believes.	By	their	sword	the	Emperor	shall	die.	What	is	believed	and
what	is	true	is	not	same,’	she	said,	strangely	twisting	Taralack’s	own	words.
‘To	what	is	true,	I	am	loyal.	The	Preda	considers	a	test.’
‘Very	well,’	the	Gral	said,	then	held	his	breath,	dreading	a	refusal	from
Icarium.	But	none	came.	Ah,	that	is	good.
The	woman	walked	away,	armour	rustling	like	coins	spilling	onto	gravel.
Taralack	Veed	stared	after	her.
‘She	hides	herself,’	Icarium	said	in	a	low,	sad	voice.	‘Yet	her	soul	dies
from	within.’
‘Do	you	believe,	my	friend,’	the	Gral	said,	turning	back	to	the	Jhag	once
more,	‘that	she	alone	suffers	in	silence?	That	she	alone	cowers,	her	honour
besieged	by	what	she	must	do?’
Icarium	shook	his	head.
‘Then	think	of	her	when	your	resolve	falters,	friend.	Think	of	Twilight.
And	all	the	others	like	her.’
A	wan	smile.	‘Yet	you	say	there	is	no	innocence.’
‘An	observation	that	does	not	obviate	the	demand	for	justice,	Icarium.’
The	Jhag’s	gaze	shifted,	down	and	away,	and	seemed	to	focus	on	the	slimeladen	planks	of	the	hull	to	his	right.	‘No,’	he	whispered	in	a	hollow	tone,	‘I
suppose	it	doesn’t.’
	
Sweat	glistened	on	the	rock	walls,	as	if	the	pressure	of	the	world	had	grown
unbearable.	The	man	who	had	just	appeared,	as	if	from	nowhere,	stood


motionless	for	a	time,	the	dark	grey	of	his	cloak	and	hood	making	him
indistinct	in	the	gloom,	but	the	only	witnesses	to	this	peculiarity	were	both
indifferent	and	blind	–	the	maggots	writhing	in	torn,	rotting	flesh	among	the
sprawl	of	bodies	that	stretched	before	him	down	the	chasm’s	elongated,	rough
floor.
The	stench	was	overpowering,	and	Cotillion	could	feel	himself	engulfed	in
grief-laden	familiarity,	as	if	this	was	the	true	scent	of	existence.	There	had	been
times	–	he	was	almost	certain	–	when	he’d	known	unmitigated	joy,	but	so	faded
were	they	to	his	recollection	that	he	had	begun	to	suspect	the	fictional
conjuring	of	nostalgia.	As	with	civilizations	and	their	golden	ages,	so	too	with
people:	each	individual	ever	longing	for	that	golden	past	moment	of	true	peace
and	wellness.
So	often	it	was	rooted	in	childhood,	in	a	time	before	the	strictures	of
enlightenment	had	afflicted	the	soul,	when	what	had	seemed	simple	unfolded	its
complexity	like	the	petals	of	a	poison	flower,	to	waft	its	miasma	of	decay.
The	bodies	were	of	young	men	and	women	–	too	young	in	truth	to	be
soldiers,	although	soldiers	they	had	been.	Their	memories	of	solace	would
likely	have	been	scoured	from	their	minds	back	when,	in	a	place	and	a	world
they	had	once	called	home,	they	hung	nailed	by	iron	spikes	to	wooden	crosses,
uncomprehending	of	their	crimes.	Of	course	there	had	been	no	such	crimes.
And	the	blood,	which	they	had	shed	so	profusely,	had	yielded	no	evidence	of
its	taint,	for	neither	the	name	of	a	people	nor	the	hue	of	their	skin,	nor	indeed
the	cast	of	their	features,	could	make	life’s	blood	any	less	pure,	or	precious.
Wilful	fools	with	murder	in	their	rotted	hearts	believed	otherwise.	They
divided	the	dead	into	innocent	victim	and	the	rightfully	punished,	and	knew
with	unassailable	conviction	upon	which	side	they	themselves	stood.	With	such
conviction,	the	plunging	of	knives	proved	so	very	easy.
Here	they	had	fought	hard,	he	observed	as	he	pushed	himself	into	motion.
A	pitched	battle,	then	an	engaged	withdrawal.	Proof	of	superior	training,
discipline	and	a	fierce	unwillingness	to	yield	without	exacting	a	price.	The
enemy	had	taken	their	own	fallen	away,	but	for	these	young	dead,	the	chasm
itself	was	now	their	crypt.	Saved	from	their	crucifixions…for	this.
There	had	been	so	many…pressing	tasks.	Essential	necessities.	That	we
neglected	this	company,	a	company	we	ourselves	ensconced	here,	to	defend
what	we	claimed	our	own.	And	then,	it	must	have	seemed,	we	abandoned	them.
And	in	that	grim	conclusion	they	would,	he	admitted	sourly,	not	be	far	wrong.
But	we	are	assailed	on	all	sides,	now.	We	are	in	our	most	desperate	moment.
Right	now…oh,	my	fallen	friends,	I	am	sorry	for	this…
A	conceit	among	the	living,	that	their	words	could	ease	the	dead.	Worse,	to


voice	words	seeking	forgiveness	from	those	dead.	The	fallen	had	but	one
message	to	deliver	to	the	living,	and	it	had	nothing	to	do	with	forgiveness.
Remind	yourself	of	that,	Cotillion.	Be	ever	mindful	of	what	the	dead	tell	you
and	everyone	else,	over	and	over	again.
He	heard	noises	ahead.	Muted,	a	rhythmic	rasping	sound,	like	iron	edges
licking	leather,	then	the	soft	pad	of	moccasined	feet.
The	natural	corridor	of	the	chasm	narrowed,	and	blocking	the	choke-point
was	a	T’lan	Imass,	sword-point	resting	on	the	rock	before	it,	watching
Cotillion’s	approach.	Beyond	the	undead	warrior	there	was	the	dull	yellow
glow	of	lanterns,	a	passing	shadow,	another,	then	a	figure	stepped	into	view.
‘Stand	aside,	Ibra	Gholan,’	Minala	said,	her	eyes	on	Cotillion.
Her	armour	was	in	tatters.	A	spear-point	had	punctured	chain	and	leather
high	on	her	chest,	the	left	side,	just	beneath	the	shoulder.	Old	blood	crusted	the
edges.	One	side	of	her	helm’s	cheek-guard	was	gone	and	the	area	of	her	face
made	visible	by	its	absence	was	swollen	and	mottled	with	bruises.	Her
extraordinary	light	grey	eyes	were	fixed	on	Cotillion’s	own	as	she	moved	past
the	T’lan	Imass.	‘They	arrive	through	a	gate,’	she	said.	‘A	warren	lit	by	silver
fire.’
‘Chaos,’	he	said.	‘Proof	of	the	alliance	we	had	feared	would	come	to	pass.
Minala,	how	many	attacks	have	you	repulsed?’
‘Four.’	She	hesitated,	then	reached	up	and	worked	her	helm	loose,	lifting	it
clear.	Sweat-matted,	filthy	black	hair	snaked	down.	‘My	children…the	losses
have	been	heavy.’
Cotillion	could	not	hold	her	gaze	any	longer.	Not	with	that	admission.
She	went	on.	‘If	not	for	the	T’lan	Imass…and	Apt,	and	the	Tiste	Edur
renegade,	this	damned	First	Throne	would	now	be	in	the	possession	of	an
army	of	blood-hungry	barbarians.’
‘Thus	far,	then,’	Cotillion	ventured,	‘your	attackers	have	been	exclusively
Tiste	Edur?’
‘Yes.’	She	studied	him	for	a	long	moment.	‘That	will	not	last,	will	it?’
Cotillion’s	eyes	focused	once	again	on	Ibra	Gholan.
Minala	continued,	‘The	Edur	are	but	skirmishers,	aren’t	they?	And	even
they	have	not	fully	committed	themselves	to	this	cause.	Why?’
‘They	are	as	thinly	stretched	as	we	are,	Minala.’
‘Ah,	then	I	cannot	expect	more	Aptorians.	What	of	the	other	demons	of
your	realm,	Cotillion?	Azalan?	Dinal?	Can	you	give	us	nothing?’
‘We	can,’	he	said.	‘But	not	now.’
‘When?’
He	looked	at	her.	‘When	the	need	is	greatest.’


Minala	stepped	close.	‘You	bastard.	I	had	thirteen	hundred.	Now	I	have	four
hundred	still	capable	of	fighting.’	She	jabbed	a	finger	towards	the	area	beyond
the	choke-point.	‘Almost	three	hundred	more	lie	dying	of	wounds	–	and	there
is	nothing	I	can	do	for	them!’
‘Shadowthrone	will	be	informed,’	Cotillion	said.	‘He	will	come.	He	will
heal	your	wounded—’
‘When?’
The	word	was	nearly	a	snarl.
‘When	I	leave	here,’	he	replied,	‘I	am	returning	directly	to	Shadowkeep.
Minala,	I	would	speak	with	the	others.’
‘Who?	Why?’
Cotillion	frowned,	then	said,	‘The	renegade.	Your	Tiste	Edur.	I	have…
questions.’
‘I	have	never	seen	such	skill	with	the	spear.	Trull	Sengar	kills,	and	kills,
and	then,	when	it	is	done	and	he	kneels	in	the	blood	of	the	kin	he	has	slain,	he
weeps.’
‘Do	they	know	him?’	Cotillion	asked.	‘Do	they	call	him	by	name?’
‘No.	He	says	they	are	Den-Ratha,	and	young.	Newly	blooded.	But	he	then
says,	it	is	only	a	matter	of	time.	Those	Edur	that	succeed	in	withdrawing,	they
must	be	reporting	the	presence	of	an	Edur	among	the	defenders	of	the	First
Throne.	Trull	says	that	one	of	his	own	tribe	will	be	among	the	attackers,	and	he
will	be	recognized	–	and	it	is	then,	he	says,	that	they	will	come	in	force,	with
warlocks.	He	says,	Cotillion,	that	he	will	bring	ruin	upon	us	all.’
‘Does	he	contemplate	leaving?’	Cotillion	asked.
She	scowled.	‘To	that	he	gives	no	answer.	If	he	did,	I	would	not	blame	him.
And,’	she	added,	‘if	he	chooses	to	stay,	I	may	well	die	with	his	name	the	last
curse	I	voice	in	this	world.	Or,	more	likely,	the	second	last	name.’
He	nodded,	understanding.	‘Trull	Sengar	remains,	then,	out	of	honour.’
‘And	that	honour	spells	our	doom.’
Cotillion	ran	a	hand	through	his	hair,	mildly	surprised	to	discover	how
long	it	had	grown.	I	need	to	find	a	hair	hacker.	One	trustworthy	enough	with	a
blade	at	my	neck.	He	considered	that.	Well,	is	it	any	wonder	gods	must	do	such
mundane	tasks	for	themselves?	Listen	to	yourself,	Cotillion	–	your	mind	would
flee	from	this	moment.	Meet	this	woman’s	courage	with	your	own.	‘The	arrival
of	warlocks	among	the	Tiste	Edur	will	prove	a	difficult	force	to	counter—’
‘We	have	the	bonecaster,’	she	said.	‘As	yet	he	has	remained	hidden.
Inactive.	For,	like	Trull	Sengar,	he	is	a	lodestone.’
Cotillion	nodded.	‘Will	you	lead	me	in,	Minala?’
In	answer	she	turned	about	and	gestured	that	he	follow.


The	cavern	beyond	was	a	nightmare	vision.	The	air	was	fetid,	thick	as	that
of	a	slaughterhouse.	Dried	blood	covered	the	stone	floor	like	a	crumbling,
pasty	carpet.	Pale	faces	–	too	young	by	far	–	turned	to	look	upon	Cotillion	with
ancient	eyes	drained	of	all	hope.	The	god	saw	Apt,	the	demon’s	black	hide
ribboned	with	grey,	barely	healed	scars,	and	crouched	at	her	lone	forefoot,
Panek,	his	huge,	faceted	eye	glittering.	The	forehead	above	that	ridged	eye
displayed	a	poorly	stitched	slice,	result	of	a	blow	that	had	peeled	back	his	scalp
from	just	above	one	side	of	the	eye’s	orbital,	across	to	the	temple	opposite.
Three	figures	rose,	emerging	from	gloom	as	they	walked	towards
Cotillion.	The	Patron	God	of	Assassins	halted.	Monok	Ochem,	the	clanless
T’lan	Imass	known	as	Onrack	the	Broken,	and	the	renegade	Tiste	Edur,	Trull
Sengar.	I	wonder,	would	these	three,	along	with	Ibra	Gholan,	have	been
enough?	Did	we	need	to	fling	Minala	and	her	young	charges	into	this	horror?
Then,	as	they	drew	closer,	Cotillion	saw	Onrack	and	Trull	more	clearly.
Beaten	down,	slashed,	cut.	Half	of	Onrack’s	skeletal	head	was	shorn	away.	Ribs
had	caved	in	from	some	savage	blow,	and	the	upper	ridge	of	his	hip,	on	the	left
side,	had	been	chopped	away,	revealing	the	porous	interior	of	the	bone.	Trull
was	without	armour,	and	had	clearly	entered	battle	lacking	such	protection.	The
majority	of	his	wounds	–	deep	gashes,	puncture	holes	–	were	on	his	thighs,
beneath	the	hips	and	to	the	outside	–	signs	of	a	spear-wielder ’s	style	of
parrying	with	the	middle-haft	of	the	weapon.	The	Edur	could	barely	walk,
leaning	heavily	on	the	battered	spear	in	his	hands.
Cotillion	found	it	difficult	to	meet	the	Edur ’s	exhausted,	despair-filled
eyes.	‘When	the	time	comes,’	he	said	to	the	grey-skinned	warrior,	‘help	shall
arrive.’
Onrack	the	Broken	spoke.	‘When	they	win	the	First	Throne,	they	will
realize	the	truth.	That	it	is	not	for	them.	They	can	hold	it,	but	they	cannot	use	it.
Why,	then,	Cotillion	of	Shadow,	do	these	brave	mortals	surrender	their	lives
here?’
‘Perhaps	we	but	provide	a	feint,’	Monok	Ochem	said,	the	bonecaster ’s	tone
as	inflectionless	as	Onrack’s	had	been.
‘No,’	Cotillion	said.	‘More	than	that.	It	is	what	they	would	do	upon	making
that	discovery.	They	will	unleash	the	warren	of	Chaos	in	this	place	–	in	the
chamber	where	resides	the	First	Throne.	Monok	Ochem,	they	shall	destroy	it,
and	so	destroy	its	power.’
‘Is	such	a	deed	cause	for	regret?’	Onrack	asked.
Shaken,	Cotillion	had	no	reply.
Monok	Ochem	pivoted	to	regard	Onrack	the	Broken.	‘This	one	speaks	the
words	of	the	Unbound.	He	fights	not	to	defend	the	First	Throne.	He	fights	only


to	defend	Trull	Sengar.	He	alone	is	the	reason	the	Tiste	Edur	still	lives.’
‘This	is	true,’	Onrack	replied.	‘I	accept	no	authority	other	than	my	own
will,	the	desires	I	choose	to	act	upon,	and	the	judgements	I	make	for	myself.
This,	Monok	Ochem,	is	the	meaning	of	freedom.’
‘Don’t—’	Trull	Sengar	said,	turning	away.
‘Trull	Sengar?’
‘No,	Onrack.	Do	you	not	see?	You	invite	your	own	annihilation,	and	all
because	I	do	not	know	what	to	do,	all	because	I	cannot	decide	–	anything.	And
so	here	I	remain,	as	chained	as	I	was	when	you	first	found	me	in	the	Nascent.’
‘Trull	Sengar,’	Onrack	said	after	a	moment,	‘you	fight	to	save	lives.	The
lives	of	these	youths	here.	You	stand	in	their	stead,	again	and	again.	This	is	a
noble	choice.	Through	you,	I	discover	the	gift	of	fighting	in	defence	of
honour,	the	gift	of	a	cause	that	is	worthy.	I	am	not	as	I	once	was.	I	am	not	as
Monok	Ochem	and	Ibra	Gholan.	Expedience	is	no	longer	enough.	Expedience
is	the	murderer ’s	lie.’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	Cotillion	said	to	Monok	Ochem,	feeling	exasperated,
brittle	with	frustration,	‘can	you	not	call	upon	kin?	A	few	hundred	T’lan	Imass
–	there	must	be	some	lying	around	somewhere,	doing	nothing	as	is	their
wont?’
The	empty	eyes	remained…empty.	‘Cotillion	of	Shadow.	Your	companion
claimed	the	First	Throne—’
‘Then	he	need	only	command	the	T’lan	Imass	to	attend—’
‘No.	The	others	journey	to	a	war.	A	war	of	self-preservation—’
‘To	Hood	with	Assail!’	Cotillion	shouted,	his	voice	echoing	wildly	in	the
cavern.	‘This	is	nothing	but	damned	pride!	You	cannot	win	there!	You	send
clan	after	clan,	all	into	the	same	destructive	maw!	You	damned	fools	–
disengage!	There	is	nothing	worth	fighting	for	on	that	miserable	nightmare	of
a	continent!	Don’t	you	see?	Among	the	Tyrants	there,	it	is	nothing	but	a	game!’
‘It	is	the	nature	of	my	people,’	Onrack	said	–	and	Cotillion	could	detect	a
certain	tone	in	the	words,	something	like	vicious	irony	–	‘to	believe	in	their
own	supreme	efficacy.	They	mean	to	win	that	game,	Cotillion	of	Shadow,	or
greet	oblivion.	They	accept	no	alternatives.	Pride?	It	is	not	pride.	It	is	the	very
reason	to	exist.’
‘We	face	greater	threats—’
‘And	they	do	not	care,’	Onrack	cut	in.	‘This	you	must	understand,	Cotillion
of	Shadow.	Once,	long	ago	by	mortal	standards,	now,	your	companion	found
the	First	Throne.	He	occupied	it	and	so	gained	command	over	the	T’lan	Imass.
Even	then,	it	was	a	tenuous	grasp,	for	the	power	of	the	First	Throne	is	ancient.
Indeed,	its	power	wanes.	Shadowthrone	was	able	to	awaken	Logros	T’lan


Imass	–	a	lone	army,	finding	itself	still	bound	to	the	First	Throne’s	remnant
power	due	to	little	more	than	mere	proximity.	He	could	not	command	Kron
T’lan	Imass,	nor	Bentract,	nor	Ifayle,	nor	the	others	that	remained,	for	they
were	too	distant.	When	Shadowthrone	last	sat	upon	the	First	Throne,	he	was
mortal,	he	was	bound	to	no	other	aspect.	He	had	not	ascended.	But	now,	he	is
impure,	and	this	impurity	ever	weakens	his	command.	Cotillion,	as	your
companion	loses	ever	more	substance,	so	too	does	he	lose…veracity.’
Cotillion	stared	at	the	broken	warrior,	then	looked	over	at	Monok	Ochem
and	Ibra	Gholan.	‘And	these,	then,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘represent…token
obedience.’
The	bonecaster	said,	‘We	must	seek	to	preserve	our	own	kind,	Cotillion	of
Shadow.’
‘And	if	the	First	Throne	is	lost?’
A	clattering	shrug.
Gods	below.	Now,	at	last,	I	understand	why	we	lost	Logros’s	undead	army	in
the	middle	of	the	Seven	Cities	campaign.	Why	they	just…left.	He	shifted	his
gaze	back	to	Onrack	the	Broken.	‘Is	it	possible,’	he	asked,	‘to	restore	the	power
of	the	First	Throne?’
‘Say	nothing,’	Monok	Ochem	commanded.
Onrack’s	half-shattered	head	slowly	turned	to	regard	the	bonecaster.	‘You
do	not	compel	me.	I	am	unbound.’
At	some	silent	order,	Ibra	Gholan	lifted	his	stone	weapon	and	faced
Onrack.
Cotillion	raised	his	hands.	‘Wait!	Onrack,	do	not	answer	my	question.	Let’s
forget	I	ever	asked	it.	There’s	no	need	for	this	–	haven’t	we	enough	enemies	as
it	is?’
‘You,’	said	Monok	Ochem	to	the	god,	‘are	dangerous.	You	think	what	must
not	be	thought,	you	speak	aloud	what	must	not	be	said.	You	are	as	a	hunter	who
walks	a	path	no-one	else	can	see.	We	must	consider	the	implications.’	The
bonecaster	turned	away,	bony	feet	scraping	as	he	walked	towards	the	chamber
of	the	First	Throne.	After	a	moment,	Ibra	Gholan	lowered	his	blade	and
thumped	off	in	Monok	Ochem’s	wake.
Cotillion	reached	up	to	run	his	hand	through	his	hair	once	again,	and
found	his	brow	slick	with	sweat.
‘And	so,’	Trull	Sengar	said,	with	a	hint	of	a	smile,	‘you	have	taken	our
measure,	Cotillion.	And	from	this	visit,	we	in	turn	receive	equally	bitter	gifts.
Namely,	the	suggestion	that	all	we	do	here,	in	defence	of	this	First	Throne,	is
without	meaning.	So,	do	you	now	elect	to	withdraw	us	from	this	place?’	His
eyes	narrowed	on	the	god,	and	the	ironic	half-smile	gave	way	to…something


else.	‘I	thought	not.’
Perhaps	indeed	I	walk	an	unseen	path	–	one	even	I	am	blind	to	–	but	now
the	necessity	of	following	it	could	not	be	greater.	‘We	will	not	abandon	you,’	he
said.
‘So	you	claim,’	muttered	Minala	behind	him.
Cotillion	stepped	to	one	side.	‘I	have	summoned	Shadowthrone,’	he	said	to
her.
A	wry	expression.	‘Summoned?’
‘We	grant	each	other	leave	to	do	such	things,	Minala,	as	demands	dictate.’
‘Companions	in	truth,	then.	I	thought	that	you	were	subservient	to
Shadowthrone,	Cotillion.	Do	you	now	claim	otherwise?’
He	managed	a	smile.	‘We	are	fully	aware	of	each	other ’s	complementary
talents,’	he	replied,	and	left	it	at	that.
‘There	wasn’t	enough	time,’	she	said.
‘For	what?’
‘For	training.	For	the	years	needed…for	them.	To	grow	up.	To	live.’
He	said	nothing,	for	she	was	right.
‘Take	them	with	you,’	Minala	said.	‘Now.	I	will	remain,	as	will	Apt	and
Panek.	Cotillion,	please,	take	them	with	you.’
‘I	cannot.’
‘Why?’
He	glanced	over	at	Onrack.	‘Because,	Minala,	I	am	not	returning	to	the
Realm	of	Shadow—’
‘Wherever	you	are	going,’	she	said	in	a	suddenly	harsh	voice,	‘it	must	be
better	than	this!’
‘Alas,	would	that	I	could	make	such	a	promise.’
‘He	cannot,’	said	Onrack.	‘Minala,	he	now	in	truth	sets	out	on	an	unseen
path.	It	is	my	belief	that	we	shall	not	see	him	again.’
‘Thank	you	for	the	vote	of	confidence,’	Cotillion	said.
‘My	friend	has	seen	better	days,’	Trull	Sengar	said,	reaching	out	to	slap
Onrack	on	the	back.	The	thump	the	blow	made	was	hollow,	raising	dust,	and
something	clattered	down	within	the	warrior ’s	chest.	‘Oh,’	said	the	Tiste	Edur,
‘did	that	do	something	bad?’
‘No,’	Onrack	replied.	‘The	broken	point	of	a	spear.	It	had	been	lodged	in
bone.’
‘Was	it	irritating	you?’
‘Only	the	modest	sound	it	made	when	I	walked.	Thank	you,	Trull	Sengar.’
Cotillion	eyed	the	two.	What	mortal	would	call	a	T’lan	Imass	friend?	And,
they	fight	side	by	side.	I	would	know	more	of	this	Trull	Sengar.	But,	as	with	so


many	things	lately,	there	was	no	time	for	that.	Sighing,	he	turned,	and	saw	that
the	youth	Panek	now	guarded	the	choke-point,	in	Ibra	Gholan’s	absence.
The	god	headed	that	way.
Panek	swung	to	face	him.	‘I	miss	him,’	he	said.
‘Who?’
‘Edgewalker.’
‘Why?	I	doubt	that	sack	of	bones	could	fight	his	way	out	of	a	birch-bark
coffin.’
‘Not	to	fight	at	our	sides,	Uncle.	We	will	hold	here.	Mother	worries	too
much.’
‘Which	mother?’
A	hideous,	sharp-toothed	smile.	‘Both.’
‘Why	do	you	miss	Edgewalker,	then?’
‘For	his	stories.’
‘Oh,	those.’
‘The	dragons.	The	foolish	ones,	the	wise	ones,	the	living	ones	and	the	dead
ones.	If	every	world	were	but	a	place	on	the	board,	they	would	be	the	game
pieces.	Yet	no	single	hand	directs	them.	Each	is	wild,	a	will	unto	itself.	And	then
there	are	the	shadows	–	Edgewalker	explained	about	those	–	the	ones	you	can’t
see.’
‘He	explained,	did	he?	Well,	clearly	the	hoary	bastard	likes	you	more	than
he	does	me.’
‘They	all	cast	shadows,	Uncle,’	Panek	said.	‘Into	your	realm.	Every	one	of
them.	That’s	why	there’s	so	many…prisoners.’
Cotillion	frowned,	then,	slowly,	inexorably	as	comprehension	dawned,	the
god’s	eyes	widened.

Trull	Sengar	watched	the	god	move	past	Panek,	one	hand	tracking	along	the
stone	wall,	as	if	Cotillion	were	suddenly	drunk.	‘I	wonder	what	that	was	all
about?	You’d	think	Panek	just	kneed	him	between	the	legs.’
‘He’d	earn	a	kiss	from	me	if	he	did	that,’	Minala	said.
‘You’re	too	harsh,’	Trull	said.	‘I	feel	sorry	for	Cotillion.’
‘Then	you’re	an	idiot,	but	of	course	I’ve	known	the	truth	of	that	for
months.’
He	smiled	across	at	her,	said	nothing.
Minala	now	eyed	the	uneven	entrance	to	the	chamber	of	the	First	Throne.
‘What	are	they	doing	in	there?	They	never	go	in	there.’


‘Considering	implications,	I	suppose,’	Trull	said.
‘And	where’s	Shadowthrone?	He’s	supposed	to	be	here	by	now.	If	we	get
attacked	right	now…’
We’re	dead.	Trull	leaned	more	heavily	on	the	spear,	to	ease	the	weight	on
his	left	leg,	which	was	hurting	more	–	marginally	–	than	his	right.	Or	at	least	I
am.	But	that’s	likely	whether	or	not	I	get	healed,	once	my	kin	decide	to	take	this
seriously.	He	did	not	understand	their	half-hearted	skirmishing,	the	tentative
probing	by	the	Den-Ratha.	And	why	were	they	bothering	at	all?	If	they
hungered	for	a	throne,	it	would	be	that	of	Shadow,	not	this	petrified	bone
monstrosity	they	call	the	First	Throne.	But,	thinking	on	it,	maybe	this	does
indeed	make	sense.	They	have	allied	themselves	with	the	Crippled	God,	and
with	the	Unbound	T’lan	Imass	who	now	serve	the	Chained	One.	But	my	Tiste
Edur	place	little	weight	on	alliances	with	non-Edur.	Maybe	that’s	why	all
they’ve	done	thus	far	is	token	blood-letting.	A	single	warlock	and	veteran
warriors	and	this	little	fête	would	be	over.
And	they	would	come	–	they	will	come,	once	I	am	recognized.	Yet	he	could
not	hide	himself	from	their	eyes;	he	could	not	stand	back	whilst	they
slaughtered	these	young	humans	who	knew	nothing	of	life,	who	were	soldiers
in	name	only.	These	lessons	of	cruelty	and	brutality	did	not	belong	in	what	a
child	needed	to	learn,	in	what	a	child	should	learn.	And	a	world	in	which
children	were	subjected	to	such	things	was	a	world	in	which	compassion	was	a
hollow	word,	its	echoes	a	chorus	of	mockery	and	cold	contempt.
Four	skirmishes.	Four,	and	Minala	was	now	mother	to	seven	hundred
destroyed	lives,	almost	half	of	them	facing	the	mercy	of	death…until
Shadowthrone	appears,	with	his	edged	gift,	in	itself	cold	and	heartless.
‘Your	face	betrays	you,	Trull	Sengar.	You	are	driven	to	weeping	yet	again.’
The	Edur	looked	across	at	Onrack,	then	over	to	where	Minala	now	stood
with	Panek.	‘Her	rage	is	her	armour,	friend.	And	that	is	my	greatest	weakness,
that	I	cannot	conjure	the	same	within	myself.	Instead,	I	stand	here,	waiting.	For
the	next	attack,	for	the	return	of	the	terrible	music	–	the	screams,	the	pain	and
the	dying,	the	deafening	roar	of	the	futility	our	battle-lust	creates…with	every
clash	of	sword	and	spear.’
‘Yet,	you	do	not	surrender,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said.
‘I	cannot.’
‘The	music	you	hear	in	battle	is	incomplete,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Even	as	I	stand	at	your	side,	I	can	hear	Minala’s	prayers,	whether	she	is
near	us	or	not.	Even	when	she	drags	wounded	and	dying	children	back,	away
from	danger,	I	hear	her.	She	prays,	Trull	Sengar,	that	you	do	not	fall.	That	you


fight	on,	that	the	miracle	that	is	you	and	the	spear	you	wield	shall	never	fail
her.	Never	fail	her	and	her	children.’
Trull	Sengar	turned	away.
‘Ah,’	Onrack	said,	‘with	your	tears	suddenly	loosed,	friend,	I	see	my	error.
Where	I	sought	by	my	words	to	instil	pride	in	you,	I	defeat	your	own	armour
and	wound	you	deeply.	With	despair.	I	am	sorry.	There	remains	so	much	of
what	it	is	to	live	that	I	have	forgotten.’	The	battered	warrior	regarded	Trull	in
silence	for	a	moment,	then	added,	‘Perhaps	I	can	give	you	something	else,
something	more…hopeful.’
‘Please	try,’	Trull	said	in	a	whisper.
‘At	times,	down	in	this	chasm,	I	smell	something,	a	presence.	It	is	faint,
animal.	It…comforts	me,	although	I	do	not	know	why,	for	I	cannot
comprehend	its	source.	In	those	times,	Trull	Sengar,	I	feel	as	if	we	are	being
observed.	We	are	being	watched	by	unseen	eyes,	and	in	those	eyes	there	is	vast
compassion.’
‘Do	you	say	this	only	to	ease	my	pain,	Onrack?’
‘No,	I	would	not	so	deceive	you.’
‘What	–	who	does	it	come	from?’
‘I	do	not	know	–	but	I	have	seen	that	it	affects	Monok	Ochem.	Even	Ibra
Gholan.	I	sense	their	disquiet,	and	this,	too,	comforts	me.’
‘Well,’	rasped	a	voice	beside	them,	‘it	isn’t	me.’	Shadows	coalescing,
creating	a	hunched,	hooded	shape,	wavering	indistinct,	as	if	reluctant	to
commit	itself	to	any	particular	existence,	any	single	reality.
‘Shadowthrone.’
‘Healing,	yes?	Very	well.	But	I	have	little	time.	We	must	hurry,	do	you
understand?	Hurry!’
Renewed,	once	again,	to	face	what	will	come.	Would	that	I	had	my	own
prayers.	Comforting	words	in	my	mind…to	drown	out	the	screams	all	around
me.	To	drown	out	my	own.
	
Somewhere	down	below,	Karsa	Orlong	struggled	to	calm	Havok,	and	the
sudden	hammer	of	hoofs	against	wood,	sending	trembles	through	the	deck
beneath	Samar	Dev’s	feet,	indicated	that	it	would	be	some	time	before	the
animal	quieted.	She	did	not	blame	the	Jhag	horse.	The	air	below	was	foul,
reeking	with	the	sick	and	the	dying,	with	the	sour	stench	that	came	from
hopelessness.
But	we	are	spared	that	fate.	We	are	Guests,	because	my	giant	companion
would	kill	the	Emperor.	The	fool.	The	arrogant,	self-obsessed	idiot.	I	should


have	stayed	with	Boatfinder,	there	on	that	wild	shore.	I	should	have	then	turned
around	and	walked	home.	She	had	so	wanted	this	to	be	a	journey	of	exploration
and	discovery,	the	lure	of	wonders	waiting	somewhere	ahead.	Instead,	she
found	herself	imprisoned	by	an	empire	gone	mad	with	obsession.	Selfrighteous,	seeing	its	own	might	as	if	it	was	a	gift	bestowing	piety.	As	if	power
projected	its	own	ethos,	and	the	capability	to	do	something	was	justification
enough	for	doing	it.	The	mindset	of	the	street-corner	bully,	in	his	head	two	or
three	rules	by	which	he	guided	his	own	existence,	and	by	which	he	sought	to
shape	his	world.	The	ones	he	must	fear,	the	ones	he	could	drive	to	their	knees,
and	maybe	ones	he	hungered	to	be	like,	or	ones	he	lusted	after,	but	even	there
the	relationship	was	one	of	power.	Samar	Dev	felt	sick	with	disgust,	fighting	a
tide	of	tumultuous	panic	rising	within	her	–	and	no	dry	deck	beneath	her	boots
could	keep	her	from	that	sort	of	drowning.
She	had	tried	to	keep	out	of	the	way	of	the	human	crew	who	worked	the
huge	ship’s	sails,	and	finally	found	a	place	where	she	wouldn’t	be	pushed	aside
or	cursed,	at	the	very	prow,	holding	tight	to	rat-lines	as	the	waves	lifted	and
dropped	the	lumbering	craft.	In	a	strange	way,	each	plunge	that	stole	her	own
weight	proved	satisfying,	almost	comforting.
Someone	came	to	her	side,	and	she	was	not	surprised	to	see	the	blonde,
blue-eyed	witch.	No	taller	than	Samar ’s	shoulder,	her	arms	exposed	to	reveal
the	lean,	cabled	muscles	of	someone	familiar	with	hard,	repetitive	work.
Indicative	as	well,	she	believed,	of	a	particular	personality.	Hard-edged,
judgemental,	perhaps	even	untrustworthy	–	muscles	like	wires	were	ever
stretched	taut	by	some	inner	extremity,	a	nervous	agitation	devoured	like	fuel,
unending	in	its	acrid	supply.
‘I	am	named	Feather	Witch,’	the	woman	said,	and	Samar	Dev	noted,	with
faint	surprise,	that	she	was	young.	‘You	understand	me	words?’
‘My	words.’
‘My	words.	He	teaches	not	well,’	she	added.
She	means	the	Taxilian.	It’s	no	surprise.	He	knows	what	will	happen	when
he	outlives	his	usefulness.
‘You	teach	me,’	Feather	Witch	said.
Samar	Dev	reached	out	and	flicked	the	withered	finger	hanging	from	the
young	woman’s	neck,	eliciting	both	a	flinch	and	a	curse.	‘I	teach	you…
nothing.’
‘I	make	Hanradi	Khalag	kill	you.’
‘Then	Karsa	Orlong	kills	every	damned	person	on	this	ship.	Except	the
chained	ones.’
Feather	Witch,	scowling,	was	clearly	struggling	to	understand,	then,	with	a


snarl,	she	spun	round	and	walked	away.
Samar	Dev	returned	her	gaze	to	the	heaving	seas	ahead.	A	witch	indeed,
and	one	that	did	not	play	fair	with	the	spirits.	One	who	did	not	recognize
honour.	Dangerous.	She	will…attempt	things.	She	may	even	try	to	kill	me,	make
it	look	like	an	accident.	There’s	a	chance	she	will	succeed,	which	means	I	had
better	warn	Karsa.	If	I	die,	he	will	understand	that	it	will	have	been	no
accident.	And	so	he	will	destroy	every	one	of	these	foul	creatures.
Her	own	thoughts	shocked	her.	Ah,	shame	on	me.	I,	too,	begin	to	think	of
Karsa	Orlong	as	a	weapon.	To	be	wielded,	manipulated,	and	in	the	name	of
some	imagined	vengeance,	no	less.	But,	she	suspected,	someone	or	something
else	was	already	playing	that	game.	With	Karsa	Orlong.	And	it	was	that
mystery	she	needed	to	pursue,	until	she	had	an	answer.	And	then?	Am	I	not
assuming	that	the	Toblakai	is	unaware	of	how	he	is	being	used?	What	if	he
already	knows?	Think	on	that,	woman…
All	right.	He	accepts	it…for	now.	But,	whenever	he	deems	it	expedient	to
turn	on	those	unseen	manipulators,	he	will	–	and	they	will	regret	ever	having
involved	themselves	in	his	life.	Yes,	that	well	suits	Karsa’s	own	arrogance,	his
unshakeable	confidence.	In	fact,	the	more	I	think	on	it,	the	more	I	am	convinced
that	I	am	right.	I’ve	stumbled	onto	the	first	steps	of	the	path	that	will	lead	me	to
solving	the	mystery.	Good.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	did	you	say	to	her?’
Startled,	Samar	Dev	looked	over,	to	see	the	Taxilian	arrive	at	her	side.
‘Who?	What?	Oh,	her.’
‘Be	careful,’	the	man	said.	He	waved	a	filthy	hand	in	front	of	his	bruised,
misshapen	face.	‘See	this?	Feather	Witch.	I	dare	not	fight	back.	I	dare	not	even
defend	myself.	See	it	in	her	eyes	–	I	think	she	was	beaten	herself,	when	a	child.
That	is	how	these	things	breed	generation	after	generation.’
‘Yes,’	Samar	said,	surprised,	‘I	believe	you	are	right.’
He	managed	something	like	a	grin.	‘I	was	foolish	enough	to	be	captured,
yes,	but	that	does	not	make	me	always	a	fool.’
‘What	happened?’
‘Pilgrimage,	of	sorts.	I	paid	for	passage	on	a	drake	–	back	to	Rutu	Jelba	–
trying	to	flee	the	plague,	and	believe	me,	I	paid	a	lot.’
Samar	Dev	nodded.	Drakes	were	Tanno	pilgrim	ships,	heavy	and	stolid	and
safe	against	all	but	the	fiercest	storms,	and	on	board	there	would	be	a	Tanno
Spiritwalker	or	at	the	very	least	a	Tanno	Mendicant.	No	plague	could	thrive	on
such	a	ship	–	it	had	been	a	clever	gamble,	and	drakes	were	usually	half-empty
on	their	return	journeys.
‘Dawn	broke,	a	mere	two	days	away	from	Rutu	Jelba,’	the	Taxilian


continued,	‘and	we	were	surrounded	by	foreign	ships	–	this	fleet.	The
Spiritwalker	sought	to	communicate,	then	when	it	became	evident	that	these
Edur	viewed	us	as	a	prize,	to	negotiate.	Gods	below,	woman,	the	sorcery	they
unleashed	upon	him!	Awful,	it	sickened	the	very	air.	He	resisted	–	a	lot	longer
than	they	expected,	I’ve	since	learned	–	long	enough	to	cause	them
considerable	consternation	–	but	he	fell	in	the	end,	the	poor	bastard.	The	Edur
chose	one	of	us,	me	as	it	turned	out,	and	cut	open	the	others	and	flung	them	to
the	sharks.	They	needed	a	translator,	you	see.’
‘And	what,	if	I	may	ask,	is	your	profession?’
‘Architect,	in	Taxila.	No,	not	famous.	Struggling.’	He	shrugged.	‘A
struggle	I	would	willingly	embrace	right	now.’
‘You	are	working	deceit	when	teaching	Feather	Witch.’
He	nodded.
‘She	knows.’
‘Yes,	but	for	the	moment	she	can	do	nothing	about	it.	This	part	of	the	fleet
is	resupplied	–	we’ll	not	be	heading	landward	for	some	time,	and	as	for	Seven
Cities	ships	to	capture,	well,	the	plague’s	emptied	the	seas,	hasn’t	it?	Besides,
we	will	be	sailing	west.	For	now,	I’m	safe.	And,	unless	Feather	Witch	is	a	lot
smarter	than	I	think	she	is,	it	will	be	a	long	time	before	she	comes	to
comprehension.’
‘How	are	you	managing	it?’
‘I	am	teaching	her	four	languages,	all	at	once,	and	making	no	distinction
among	them,	not	even	the	rules	of	syntax.	For	each	word	I	give	her	four	in
translation,	then	think	up	bizarre	rules	for	selecting	one	over	another	given	the
context.	She’s	caught	me	out	but	once.	So.	Malazan,	the	Taxilii	Scholar ’s
Dialect,	the	Ehrlii	variant	of	the	common	tongue,	and,	from	my	grandfather ’s
sister,	tribal	Rangala.’
‘Rangala?	I	thought	that	was	extinct.’
‘Not	until	she	dies,	and	I’d	swear	that	old	hag’s	going	to	live	for	ever.’
‘What	is	your	name?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘There	is	power	in	names	–	no,	I	do	not	distrust	you	–	it
is	these	Tiste	Edur.	And	Feather	Witch	–	if	she	discovers	my	name—’
‘She	can	compel	you.	I	understand.	Well,	in	my	mind	I	think	of	you	as	the
Taxilian.’
‘That	will	suffice.’
‘I	am	Samar	Dev,	and	the	warrior	I	came	with	is	Toblakai…Sha’ik’s
Toblakai.	He	calls	himself	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘You	risk	much,	revealing	your	names—’
‘The	risk	belongs	to	Feather	Witch.	I	surpass	her	in	the	old	arts.	As	for


Karsa,	well,	she	is	welcome	to	try.’	She	glanced	at	him.	‘You	said	we	were
sailing	west?’
He	nodded.	‘Hanradi	Khalag	commands	just	under	half	the	fleet	–	the	rest
is	somewhere	east	of	here.	They	have	both	been	sailing	back	and	forth	along
this	coast	for	some	months,	almost	half	a	year,	in	fact.	Like	fisher	fleets,	but	the
catch	they	seek	walks	on	two	legs	and	wields	a	sword.	Discovering	remnant	kin
was	unexpected,	and	the	state	those	poor	creatures	were	in	simply	enraged
these	Edur.	I	do	not	know	where	the	two	fleets	intend	to	merge	–	somewhere
west	of	Sepik,	I	think.	Once	that	happens,’	he	shrugged,	‘we	set	a	course	for
their	empire.’
‘And	where	is	that?’
Another	shrug.	‘Far	away,	and	beyond	that,	I	can	tell	you	nothing.’
‘Far	away	indeed.	I	have	never	heard	of	an	empire	of	humans	ruled	by
Tiste	Edur.	And	yet,	this	Letherii	language.	As	you	noted	it	is	somehow	related
to	many	of	the	languages	here	in	Seven	Cities,	those	that	are	but	branches	from
the	same	tree,	and	that	tree	is	the	First	Empire.’
‘Ah,	that	explains	it,	then,	for	I	can	mostly	understand	the	Letherii,	now.
They	use	a	different	dialect	when	conversing	with	the	Edur	–	a	mix	of	the	two.
A	trader	tongue,	and	even	there	I	begin	to	comprehend.’
‘I	suggest	you	keep	such	knowledge	to	yourself,	Taxilian.’
‘I	will.	Samar	Dev,	is	your	companion	truly	the	same	Toblakai	as	the	one
so	named	who	guarded	Sha’ik?	It	is	said	he	killed	two	demons	the	night	before
she	was	slain,	one	of	them	with	his	bare	hands.’
‘Until	recently,’	Samar	Dev	said,	‘he	carried	with	him	the	rotted	heads	of
those	demons.	He	gifted	them	to	Boatfinder	–	to	the	Anibari	shaman	who
accompanied	us.	The	white	fur	Karsa	wears	is	from	a	Soletaken.	He	killed	a
third	demon	just	outside	Ugarat,	and	chased	off	another	in	the	Anibar	forest.
He	singlehandedly	killed	a	bhederin	bull	–	and	that	I	witnessed	with	my	own
eyes.’
The	Taxilian	shook	his	head.	‘The	Edur	Emperor…he	too	is	a	demon.
Every	cruelty	committed	by	these	grey-skinned	bastards,	they	claim	is	by	their
Emperor ’s	command.	And	so	too	this	search	for	warriors.	An	emperor	who
invites	his	own	death	–	how	can	this	be?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	she	admitted.	And	not	knowing	is	what	frightens	me	the
most.	‘As	you	say,	it	makes	no	sense.’
‘One	thing	is	known,’	the	man	said.	‘Their	Emperor	has	never	been
defeated.	Else	his	rule	would	have	ended.	Perhaps	indeed	that	tyrant	is	the
greatest	warrior	of	all.	Perhaps	there	is	no-one,	no-one	anywhere	in	this	world,
who	can	best	him.	Not	even	Toblakai.’


She	thought	about	that,	as	the	huge	Edur	fleet,	filling	the	seas	around	her,
worked	northward,	the	untamed	wilds	of	the	Olphara	Peninsula	a	jagged	line
on	the	horizon	to	port.	North,	then	west,	into	the	Sepik	Sea.
Samar	Dev	slowly	frowned.	Oh,	they	have	done	this	before.	Sepik,	the
island	kingdom,	the	vassal	to	the	Malazan	Empire.	A	peculiar,	isolated	people,
with	their	two-tiered	society.	The	indigenous	tribe,	subjugated	and	enslaved.
Rulhun’tal	ven’or	–	the	Mudskins…‘Taxilian,	these	Edur	slaves	below.	Where
did	they	find	them?’
‘I	don’t	know.’	The	bruised	face	twisted	into	a	bitter	smile.	‘They	liberated
them.	The	sweet	lie	of	that	word,	Samar	Dev.	No,	I	will	think	no	more	on	that.’
You	are	lying	to	me,	Taxilian,	I	think.
There	was	a	shout	from	the	crow’s	nest,	picked	up	by	sailors	in	the	rigging
and	passed	on	below.	Samar	Dev	saw	heads	turn,	saw	Tiste	Edur	appear	and
make	their	way	astern.
‘Ships	have	been	sighted	in	our	wake,’	the	Taxilian	said.
‘The	rest	of	the	fleet?’
‘No.’	He	lifted	his	head	and	continued	listening	as	the	lookout	called	down
ever	more	details.	‘Foreigners.	Lots	of	ships.	Mostly	transports	–	two-thirds
transports,	one-third	dromon	escort.’	He	grunted.	‘The	third	time	we’ve
sighted	them	since	I	came	on	board.	Sighted,	then	evaded,	each	time.’
‘Have	you	identified	those	foreigners	for	them,	Taxilian?’
He	shook	his	head.
The	Malazan	Imperial	Fleet.	Admiral	Nok.	It	has	to	be.	She	saw	a	certain
tension	now	among	the	Tiste	Edur.	‘What	is	it?	What	are	they	so	excited
about?’
‘Those	poor	Malazans,’	the	man	said	with	a	savage	grin.	‘It’s	the
positioning	now,	you	see.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘If	they	stay	in	our	wake,	if	they	keep	sailing	northward	to	skirt	this
peninsula,	they	are	doomed.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	now,	Samar	Dev,	the	rest	of	the	Edur	fleet	–	Tomad	Sengar ’s
mass	of	warships	–	is	behind	the	Malazans.’
All	at	once,	the	cold	wind	seemed	to	cut	through	all	of	Samar	Dev’s
clothing.	‘They	mean	to	attack	them?’
‘They	mean	to	annihilate	them,’	the	Taxilian	said.	‘And	I	have	seen	Edur
sorcery	and	I	tell	you	this	–	the	Malazan	Empire	is	about	to	lose	its	entire
Imperial	Fleet.	It	will	die.	And	with	it,	every	damned	man	and	woman	on
board.’	He	leaned	forward	as	if	to	spit,	then,	realizing	the	wind	was	in	his	face,


he	simply	grinned	all	the	harder.	‘Except,	maybe,	one	or	two…champions.’
	
This	was	something	new,	Banaschar	reflected	as	he	hurried	beneath	sheets	of
rain	towards	Coop’s.	He	was	being	followed.	Once,	such	a	discovery	would
have	set	a	fury	alight	inside	him,	and	he	would	have	made	short	work	of	the
fool,	then,	after	extracting	the	necessary	details,	even	shorter	work	of	whoever
had	hired	that	fool.	But	now,	the	best	he	could	muster	was	a	sour	laugh	under
his	breath.	‘Aye,	Master	(or	Mistress),	he	wakes	up	in	the	afternoon,	without
fail,	and	after	a	sixth	of	a	bell	or	so	of	coughing	and	scratching	and	clicking
nits,	he	heads	out,	onto	the	street,	and	sets	off,	Mistress	(or	Master),	for	one	of
six	or	so	disreputable	establishments,	and	once	ensconced	among	the	regulars,
he	argues	about	the	nature	of	religion	–	or	is	it	taxation	and	the	rise	in	port
tithes?	Or	the	sudden	drop-off	in	the	coraval	schools	off	the	Jakatakan	shoals?
Or	the	poor	workmanship	of	that	cobbler	who’d	sworn	he	could	re-stitch	that
sole	on	this	here	left	boot	–	what?	True	enough,	Master	(or	Mistress),	it’s	all
nefarious	code,	sure	as	I	can	slink	wi’	the	best	slinkers,	and	I’m	as	near	to
crackin’	it	as	can	be…’
His	lone	source	of	entertainment	these	nights,	these	imagined
conversations.	Gods,	now	that	is	pathetic.	Then	again,	pathos	ever	amuses	me.
And	long	before	it	could	cease	amusing	him,	he’d	be	drunk,	and	so	went
another	passage	of	the	sun	and	stars	in	that	meaningless	heaven	overhead.
Assuming	it	still	existed	–	who	could	tell	with	this	solid	ceiling	of	grey	that	had
settled	on	the	island	for	almost	a	week	now,	with	no	sign	of	breaking?	Much
more	of	this	rain	and	we’ll	simply	sink	beneath	the	waves.	Traders	arriving
from	the	mainland	will	circle	and	circle	where	Malaz	Island	used	to	be.	Circle
and	circle,	the	pilots	scratching	their	heads…There	he	went	again,	yet	another
conjured	scene	with	its	subtle	weft	of	contempt	for	all	things	human	–	the	sheer
incompetence,	stupidity,	sloth	and	bad	workmanship	–	look	at	this,	after	all,	he
limped	like	some	one-footed	shark	baiter	–	the	cobbler	met	him	at	the	door
barefooted	–	he	should	have	started	up	with	the	suspicion	thing	about	then.
Don’t	you	think?
‘Well,	Empress,	it’s	like	this.	The	poor	sod	was	half-Wickan,	and	he’d	paid
for	that,	thanks	to	your	refusal	to	rein	in	the	mobs.	He’d	been	herded,	oh	Great
One,	with	bricks	and	clubs,	about	as	far	as	he	could	go	without	diving	headfirst
into	the	harbour.	Lost	all	his	cobbler	tools	and	stuff	–	his	livelihood,	you	see.
And	me,	well,	I	am	cursed	with	pity	–	aye,	Empress,	it’s	not	an	affliction	that
plagues	you	much	and	all	the	good	to	you,	I	say,	but	where	was	I?	Oh	yes,
racked	with	pity,	prodded	into	mercy.	Hood	knows,	the	poor	broken	man	needed


that	coin	more	than	I	did,	if	only	to	bury	that	little	son	of	his	he	was	still
carrying	round,	aye,	the	one	with	the	caved-in	skull—’	No,	stop	this,	Banaschar.
Stop.
Meaningless	mind	games,	right?	Devoid	of	significance.	Nothing	but	selfindulgence,	and	for	that	vast	audience	out	there	–	the	whispering	ghosts	and
their	intimations,	their	suppositions	and	veiled	insults	and	their	so	easily	bored
minds	–	that	audience	–	they	are	my	witnesses,	yes,	that	sea	of	murky	faces	in
the	pit,	for	whom	my	desperate	performance,	ever	seeking	to	reach	out	with	a
human	touch,	yields	nothing	but	impatience	and	agitation,	the	restless	waiting
for	the	cue	to	laugh.	Well	enough,	this	oratory	pageant	served	only	himself,
Banaschar	knew,	and	all	the	rest	was	a	lie.
The	child	with	the	caved-in	skull	showed	more	than	one	face,	tilted	askew
and	flaccid	in	death.	More	than	one,	more	than	ten,	more	than	ten	thousand.
Faces	he	could	not	afford	to	think	about	in	his	day-to-day,	night-through-night
stumble	of	existence.	For	they	were	as	nails	driven	deep	into	the	ground,
pinning	down	whatever	train	he	dragged	in	his	wake,	and	with	each	forward
step	the	resistance	grew,	the	constriction	round	his	neck	stretching	ever	tighter
–	and	no	mortal	could	weather	that	–	we	choke	on	what	we	witness,	we	are
strangled	by	headlong	flight,	that	will	not	do,	not	do	at	all.	Don’t	mind	me,	dear
Empress.	I	see	how	clean	is	your	throne.
Ah,	here	were	the	steps	leading	down.	Coop’s	dear	old	Hanged	Man,	the
stone	scaffold	streaming	with	gritty	tears	underfoot	and	a	challenge	to	oddfooted	descent,	the	rickety	uncertainty	–	was	this	truly	nothing	more	than	steps
down	into	a	tavern?	Or	now	transformed,	my	temple	of	draughts,	echoing	to	the
vacuous	moaning	of	my	fellow-kind,	oh,	how	welcome	this	embrace—
He	pushed	through	the	doorway	and	paused	in	the	gloom,	just	inside	the
dripping	eaves,	his	feet	planted	in	a	puddle	where	the	pavestones	sagged,	water
running	down	him	to	add	to	its	depth;	and	a	half-dozen	faces,	pale	and	dirty	as
the	moon	after	a	dust	storm,	swung	towards	him…for	but	a	moment,	then	away
again.
My	adoring	public.	Yes,	the	tragic	mummer	has	returned.
And	there,	seated	alone	at	a	table,	was	a	monstrosity	of	a	man.	Hunched
over,	tiny	black	eyes	glittering	beneath	the	shadow	of	a	jutting	brow.	Hairy
beyond	reason.	Twisted	snarls	exploding	out	from	both	ears,	the	ebon-hued
curls	wending	down	to	merge	with	the	vast	gull’s	nest	that	was	his	beard,	which
in	turn	engulfed	his	neck	and	continued	downward,	unabated,	to	what	was
visible	of	the	man’s	bulging	chest;	and,	too,	climbed	upward	to	fur	his	cheeks	–
conjoining	on	the	way	with	the	twin	juts	of	nostril	hairs,	as	if	the	man	had
thrust	tiny	uprooted	trees	up	his	nose	–	only	to	then	merge	uninterrupted	with


the	sprung	hemp	ropes	that	were	the	man’s	eyebrows,	which	in	turn	blended
neatly	into	the	appallingly	low	hairline	that	thoroughly	disguised	what	had	to
be	a	meagre,	sloping	forehead.	And,	despite	the	man’s	absurd	age	–	rumoured
age,	actually,	since	no	one	knew	for	certain	–	that	mass	of	hair	was	dyed	squidink	black.
He	was	drinking	red-vine	tea,	a	local	concoction	sometimes	used	to	kill
ants.
Banaschar	made	his	way	over	and	sat	down	opposite	the	man.	‘If	I’d
thought	about	it,	I’d	say	I’ve	been	looking	for	you	all	this	time,	Master
Sergeant	Braven	Tooth.’
‘But	you	ain’t	much	of	a	thinker,	are	you?’	The	huge	man	did	not	bother
looking	up.	‘Can’t	be,	if	you	were	looking	for	me.	What	you’re	seeing	here	is
an	escape	–	no,	outright	flight	–	Hood	knows	who’s	deciding	these	pathetic
nitwits	they	keep	sending	me	deserve	the	name	of	recruits.	In	the	Malazan
Army,	by	the	Abyss!	The	world’s	gone	mad.	Entirely	mad.’
‘The	gatekeeper,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Top	of	the	stairs,	Mock’s	Hold.	The
gate	watchman,	Braven	Tooth,	I	assume	you	know	him.	Seems	he’s	been	there
as	long	as	you’ve	been	training	soldiers.’
‘There’s	knowing	and	there’s	knowing.	That	bell-backed	old	crab,	now,	let
me	tell	you	something	about	him.	I	could	send	legion	after	legion	of	my
cuddly	little	recruits	up	them	stairs,	with	every	weapon	at	their	disposal,	and
they’d	never	get	past	him.	Why?	I’ll	tell	you	why.	It	ain’t	that	Lubben’s	some
champion	or	Mortal	Sword	or	something.	No,	it’s	that	I	got	more	brains
lodged	up	my	left	nostril	waitin’	for	my	finger	than	all	my	so-called	recruits
got	put	together.’
‘That	doesn’t	tell	me	anything	about	Lubben,	Braven	Tooth,	only	your
opinion	of	your	recruits,	which	it	seems	I	already	surmised.’
‘Just	so,’	said	the	man,	nodding.
Banaschar	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘Lubben.	Listen,	I	need	to	talk	with	someone,
someone	holed	up	in	Mock’s.	I	send	messages,	they	get	into	Lubben’s	hands,
and	then…nothing.’
‘So	who’s	that	you	want	to	talk	to?’
‘I’d	rather	not	say.’
‘Oh,	him.’
‘So,	is	Lubben	dropping	those	messages	down	that	slimy	chute	the
effluence	of	which	so	decorously	paints	the	cliff-side?’
‘Efflu-what?	No.	Tell	you	what,	how	about	I	head	up	there	and	take	that
You’d	rather	not	say	by	the	overlong	out-of-style	braid	on	top	of	his	head	and
give	’im	a	shake	or	three?’


‘I	don’t	see	how	that	would	help.’
‘Well,	it’d	cheer	me	up,	not	for	any	particular	gripe,	mind	you,	but	just	on
principle.	Maybe	You’d	rather	not	say’d	rather	not	talk	to	you,	have	you
thought	of	that?	Or	maybe	you’d	rather	not.’
‘I	have	to	talk	to	him.’
‘Important,	huh?’
‘Yes.’
‘Imperial	interest?’
‘No,	at	least	I	don’t	think	so.’
‘Tell	you	what,	I’ll	grab	him	by	his	cute	braid	and	dangle	him	from	the
tower.	You	can	signal	from	below.	I	swing	him	back	and	forth	and	it	means	he
says	“Sure,	come	on	up,	old	friend”.	And	if	I	just	drop	’im	it	means	the	other
thing.	That,	or	my	hands	got	tired	and	maybe	slipped.’
‘You’re	not	helpful	at	all,	Braven	Tooth.’
‘Wasn’t	me	sitting	at	your	table,	was	you	sitting	at	mine.’
Banaschar	leaned	back,	sighing.	‘Fine.	Here,	I’ll	buy	you	some	more	tea
—’
‘What,	you	trying	to	poison	me	now?’
‘All	right,	how	about	we	share	a	pitcher	of	Malazan	Dark?’
The	huge	man	leaned	forward,	meeting	Banaschar ’s	eyes	for	the	first	time.
‘Better.	Y’see,	I’m	in	mourning.’
‘Oh?’
‘The	news	from	Y’Ghatan.’	He	snorted.	‘It’s	always	the	news	from
Y’Ghatan,	ain’t	it?	Anyway,	I’ve	lost	some	friends.’
‘Ah.’
‘So,	tonight,’	Braven	Tooth	said,	‘I	plan	on	getting	drunk.	For	them.	I	can’t
cry	unless	I’m	drunk,	you	see.’
‘So	why	the	red-vine	tea?’
Braven	Tooth	looked	up	as	someone	arrived,	and	gave	the	man	an	ugly
smile.	‘Ask	Temper	here.	Why	the	red-vine	tea,	you	old	hunkered-down
bastard?’
‘Plan	on	crying	tonight,	Braven	Tooth?’
The	Master	Sergeant	nodded.
Temper	levered	himself	into	a	chair	that	creaked	alarmingly	beneath	him.
Red-shot	eyes	fixed	on	Banaschar.	‘Makes	his	tears	the	colour	of	blood.	Story
goes,	he’s	only	done	it	once	before,	and	that	was	when	Dassem	Ultor	died.’
Gods	below,	must	I	witness	this	tonight?
‘It’s	what	I	get,’	Braven	Tooth	muttered,	head	down	once	more,	‘for
believin’	everything	I	hear.’


Banaschar	frowned	at	the	man	opposite	him.	Now	what	does	that	mean?
The	pitcher	of	ale	arrived,	as	if	conjured	by	their	silent	desires,	and
Banaschar,	relieved	of	further	contemplation	–	and	every	other	demanding
stricture	of	thought	–	settled	back,	content	to	weather	yet	another	night.
‘Aye,	Master	(or	Mistress),	he	sat	with	them	veterans,	pretending	he
belonged,	but	really	he’s	just	an	imposter.	Sat	there	all	night,	until	Coop	had	to
carry	him	out.	Where	is	he	now?	Why,	in	his	smelly,	filthy	room,	dead	to	the
world.	Yes	indeed,	Banaschar	is	dead	to	the	world.’
	
The	rain	descended	in	torrents,	streaming	over	the	battlements,	down	along	the
blood-gutters,	and	the	cloud	overhead	had	lowered	in	the	past	twenty
heartbeats,	swallowing	the	top	of	the	old	tower.	The	window	Pearl	looked
through	had	once	represented	the	pinnacle	of	island	technology,	a	fusing	of
sand	to	achieve	a	bubbled,	mottled	but	mostly	transparent	glass.	Now,	a	century
later,	its	surface	was	patinated	in	rainbow	patterns,	and	the	world	beyond	was
patchy,	like	an	incomplete	mosaic,	the	tesserae	melting	in	some	worldconsuming	fire.	Although	sight	of	the	flames	eluded	Pearl,	he	knew,	with
fearful	certainty,	that	they	were	there,	and	no	amount	of	rain	from	the	skies
could	change	that.
It	had	been	flames,	after	all,	that	had	destroyed	his	world.	Flames	that	took
her,	the	only	woman	he	had	ever	loved.	And	there	had	been	no	parting
embrace,	no	words	of	comfort	and	assurance	exchanged.	No,	just	that	edgy
dance	round	each	other,	and	neither	he	nor	Lostara	had	seemed	capable	of
deciding	whether	that	dance	was	desire	or	spite.
Even	here,	behind	this	small	window	and	the	thick	stone	walls,	he	could
hear	the	battered,	encrusted	weather	vane	somewhere	overhead,	creaking	and
squealing	in	the	buffeting	gusts	of	wind	assailing	Mock’s	Hold.	And	he	and
Lostara	had	been	no	different	from	that	weather	vane,	spinning,	tossed	this	way
and	that,	helpless	victim	to	forces	ever	beyond	their	control.	Beyond,	even,
their	comprehension.	And	didn’t	that	sound	convincing?	Hardly.
The	Adjunct	had	sent	them	on	a	quest,	and	when	its	grisly	end	arrived,
Pearl	had	realized	that	the	entire	journey	had	been	but	a	prelude	–	as	far	as	his
own	life	was	concerned	–	and	that	his	own	quest	yet	awaited	him.	Maybe	it	had
been	simple	enough	–	the	object	of	his	desire	would	proclaim	to	his	soul	the
consummation	of	that	quest.	Maybe	she	had	been	what	he	sought.	But	Pearl	was
not	certain	of	that,	not	any	more.	Lostara	Yil	was	dead,	and	that	which	drove
him,	hounded	him,	was	unabated.	Was	in	fact	growing.
Hood	take	this	damned,	foul	city	anyway.	Why	must	imperial	events	ever


converge	here?	Because,	he	answered	himself,	Genabackis	had	Pale.	Korel	had
the	Stormwall.	Seven	Cities	has	Y’Ghatan.	In	the	heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire,
we	have	Malaz	City.	Where	it	began,	so	it	returns,	again	and	again.	And	again.
Festering	sores	that	never	heal,	and	when	the	fever	rises,	the	blood	wells	forth,
sudden,	a	deluge.
He	imagined	that	blood	sweeping	over	the	city	below,	climbing	the	cliffside,	lapping	against	the	very	stones	of	Mock’s	Hold.	Would	it	rise	higher?
‘It	is	my	dream,’	said	the	man	sitting	cross-legged	in	the	room	behind	him.
Pearl	did	not	turn.	‘What	is?’
‘Not	understanding	this	reluctance	of	yours,	Claw.’
‘I	assure	you,’	Pearl	said,	‘the	nature	of	my	report	to	the	Empress	will
upend	this	tidy	cart	of	yours.	I	was	there,	I	saw—’
‘You	saw	what	you	wanted	to	see.	No	witness	in	truth	but	myself,	regarding
the	events	now	being	revisited.	Revised,	yes?	As	all	events	are,	for	such	is	the
exercise	of	quill-clawed	carrion	who	title	themselves	historians.	Revisiting,
thirsting	for	a	taste,	just	a	taste,	of	what	it	is	to	know	trauma	in	one’s	quailing
soul.	Pronouncing	with	authority,	yes,	on	that	in	which	the	proclaimant	in	truth
has	no	authority.	I	alone	survive	as	witness.	I	alone	saw,	breathed	the	air,	tasted
the	treachery.’
Pearl	would	not	turn	to	face	the	fat,	unctuous	man.	He	dare	not,	lest	his
impulse	overwhelm	him	–	an	impulse	to	lift	an	arm,	to	flex	the	muscles	of	his
wrist	just	so,	and	launch	a	poison-sheathed	quarrel	into	the	flabby	neck	of
Mallick	Rel,	the	Jhistal	priest	of	Mael.
He	knew	he	would	likely	fail.	He	would	be	dead	before	he	finished	raising
that	arm.	This	was	Mallick	Rel’s	chamber,	after	all,	his	residence.	Wards
carved	into	the	floor,	rituals	suspended	in	the	damp	air,	enough	sorcery	to	set
teeth	on	edge	and	raise	hairs	on	the	nape	of	the	neck.	Oh,	officially	this	wellfurnished	room	might	be	referred	to	as	a	cell,	but	that	euphemistic	absurdity
would	not	last	much	longer.
The	bastard’s	agents	were	everywhere.	Whispering	their	stories	in	taverns,
on	street	corners,	beneath	the	straddled	legs	of	whores	and	noblewomen.	The
Jhistal	priest	was	fast	becoming	a	hero	–	the	lone	survivor	of	the	Fall	at	Aren,
the	only	loyal	one,	that	is.	The	one	who	managed	to	escape	the	clutches	of	the
traitors,	be	they	Sha’ik’s	own,	or	the	betrayers	in	the	city	of	Aren	itself.	Mallick
Rel,	who	alone	professes	to	know	the	truth.
There	were	seeds	from	a	certain	grass	that	grew	on	the	Seti	Plains,	Pearl
recalled,	that	were	cleverly	barbed,	so	that	when	they	snagged	on	something,
or	someone,	they	were	almost	impossible	to	remove.	Barbed	husks,	that
weakened	and	cracked	apart	only	after	the	host	had	travelled	far.	Such	were


rumours,	carried	on	breaths	from	one	host	to	the	next,	the	barbs	holding	fast.
And	when	the	necessary	time	has	passed,	when	every	seed	is	in	place,	what
then?	What	shall	unfold	at	Mallick	Rel’s	command?	Pearl	did	not	want	to	think
about	it.
Nor	did	he	want	to	think	about	this:	he	was	very	frightened.
‘Claw,	speak	with	him.’
‘Him.	I	admit,	I	cannot	yet	decide	which	“him”	you	are	referring	to,	priest.
In	neither	case,	alas,	can	I	fathom	your	reasons	for	making	such	a	request	of
me.	Tayschrenn	is	no	friend	of	yours—’
‘Nor	is	he	a	fool,	Claw.	He	sees	far	ahead,	does	Tayschrenn.	No,	there	is
no	reason	I	would	urge	you	to	speak	with	the	Imperial	High	Mage.	His	position
grows	ever	more	precarious	as	it	is.	You	seek,	yes,	to	confabulate?	Plainly,
then,	I	urge	you,	Claw,	to	descend	to	the	catacombs,	and	there	speak	with
Korbolo	Dom.	You	have	not	heard	his	story,	and	in	humility	I	would	advise,	it
is	time	that	you	did.’
Pearl	closed	his	eyes	on	the	rain-lashed	scene	through	the	window.	‘Of
course.	He	was	in	truth	an	agent	of	Laseen’s,	even	when	he	fought	on	behalf	of
Sha’ik.	His	Dogslayers,	they	were	in	place	to	turn	upon	Sha’ik	and	crush	her
utterly,	including	killing	both	Toblakai	and	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	But	there,
during	the	Chain	of	Dogs,	he	stumbled	upon	a	greater	betrayal	in	the	making.
Oh	yes,	Mallick	Rel,	I	can	see	how	you	and	he	will	twist	this	–	I	imagine	you
two	have	worked	long	and	hard,	during	those	countless	“illegal”	sojourns	of
yours	down	in	the	catacombs	–	indeed,	I	know	of	them	–	the	Claw	remain
outside	your	grasp,	and	that	will	not	change,	I	assure	you.’
‘It	is	best,’	the	man	said	in	his	sibilant	voice,	‘that	you	consider	my	humble
suggestion,	Claw,	for	the	good	of	your	sect.’
‘For	the	good	of…’	Gods	below,	he	feels	ready	to	threaten	the	Claw!	How
far	has	all	this	madness	gone?	I	must	speak	with	Topper	–	maybe	it’s	not	too
late…
‘This	rain,’	Mallick	Rel	continued	behind	him,	‘it	shall	make	the	seas	rise,
yes?’


Chapter	Eighteen
Truth	is	a	pressure,	and	I	see	us	all	shying	away.	But,	my	friends,
from	truth	there	can	be	no	escape.
The	Year	of	Ten	Thousand	Lies
Kayessan
Arhizan,	clinging	to	the	limp	folds	of	the	imperial	standard,	its	hunger
forgotten,	its	own	life	but	a	quiescent	spark	within	its	tiny	body,	had	listened
intently	to	the	entire	conversation.
A	dromon	was	easing	its	way	among	the	nearest	transports,	towing	a	sleek,
black-hulled	warship;	and	from	the	shoreline	watched	the	Adjunct	and	Admiral
Nok,	along	with	Fist	Keneb,	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	Mekhar.	Few	words	were
exchanged	among	them,	until	the	arrival	of	Sergeant	Gesler	and	Corporal
Stormy.	At	that	point,	things	got	interesting.
‘Adjunct,’	Gesler	said	in	greeting.	‘That’s	our	ship.	That’s	the	Silanda.’
Admiral	Nok	was	studying	the	gold-hued	marine.	‘Sergeant,	I	understand
you	claim	that	you	can	sail	that	unpleasant	craft.’
A	nod.	‘With	a	couple	squads,	aye,	and	that’s	it.	As	for	the	crew	below
manning	the	oars,	well,	when	we	need	’em	to	row,	they’ll	row.’
Stormy	added,	‘We	lived	with	’em	long	enough	they	don’t	scare	us	no
more,	sir,	not	even	Gesler	here	an’	he	jumps	every	time	he	looks	in	that	fancy
silver	mirror	of	his.	An’	those	heads,	they	don’t	make	our	skins	crawl	neither,
no	more—’
‘Stop	talking	like	a	sailor,	Adjutant	Stormy,’	Nok	said.
A	smile	amidst	the	red,	bristling	beard.	‘Ain’t	no	Adjutant	any	more,
Admiral.’
Thin	brows	rose,	and	Nok	said,	‘Title	alone	gifts	the	bearer	with
intelligence?’
Stormy	nodded.	‘That	it	does,	sir.	Which	is	why	Gesler ’s	a	sergeant	and
I’m	a	corporal.	We	get	stupider	every	year	that	passes.’
‘And	Stormy’s	proud	of	that,’	Gesler	said,	slapping	his	companion	on	the
back.


The	Adjunct	rubbed	at	her	eyes.	She	examined	the	tips	of	her	leather
gloves,	then	slowly	began	removing	the	gauntlets.	‘I	see	by	the	waterline	she’s
fully	provisioned…’
‘Food	does	not	spoil	in	that	hold,’	Nok	said.	‘That	much	my	mages	have
determined.	Furthermore,	there	are	no	rats	or	other	vermin.’	He	hesitated,	then
sighed.	‘In	any	case,	I	could	find	no	sailors	who	would	volunteer	to	crew	the
Silanda.	And	I	have	no	intention	of	forcing	the	issue.’	He	shrugged.	‘Adjunct,	if
they	truly	want	it…’
‘Very	well.	Sergeant	Gesler,	your	own	squad	and	two	others.’
‘The	Fourth	and	Ninth,	Adjunct.’
Her	gaze	narrowed	on	the	man,	then	she	turned	to	Keneb.	‘Fist?	They’re
your	resurrected	squads.’
‘The	Fourth	–	that	would	be	Strings’s—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘His	name	is	Fiddler.	It	is	the	worstkept	secret	in	this	army,	Keneb.’
‘Of	course.	My	apologies,	Adjunct.	Fiddler ’s,	then,	and	the	Ninth	–	let’s
see,	Sergeant	Balm’s	squad.	Abyss	take	us,	Gesler,	what	a	snarly	bunch	of
malcontents	you’ve	selected.’
‘Yes	sir.’
‘All	right.’	Keneb	hesitated,	then	turned	to	Tavore.	‘Adjunct,	may	I	suggest
that	the	Silanda	hold	a	flanking	position	to	your	own	flagship	at	all	times.’
Mock	dismay	on	Gesler ’s	face	and	he	punched	Stormy	in	the	arm	and	said,
‘They	don’t	trust	us,	Stormy.’
‘Shows	what	they	know,	don’t	it?’
‘Aye,	it	does.	Damn	me,	they’re	smarter	than	we	thought.’
‘Sergeant	Gesler,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘take	your	corporal	and	get	out	of
here.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’
The	two	marines	hurried	off.
After	a	moment,	Admiral	Nok	laughed,	briefly,	under	his	breath,	then	said,
‘Adjunct,	I	must	tell	you,	I	am…relieved.’
‘To	leave	the	Silanda	to	those	idiots?’
‘No,	Tavore.	The	unexpected	arrival	of	more	survivors	from	Y’Ghatan,
with	soldiers	such	as	Fiddler,	Cuttle,	Gesler	and	Stormy	among	them	–	and—’
he	turned	to	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam,	‘you	two	as	well.	The	transformation
within	your	army,	Adjunct,	has	been…palpable.	It	is	often	forgotten	by
commanders,	the	significance	of	storied	veterans,	especially	among	young,
untried	soldiers.	Added	to	that,	the	extraordinary	tale	of	their	survival	beneath
the	streets	of	Y’Ghatan,’	he	shook	his	head.	‘In	all,	a	most	encouraging


development.’
‘I	agree,’	Tavore	said,	glancing	at	Keneb.	‘It	was,	for	the	most	part,	these
soldiers	who	at	the	very	beginning	embraced	what	could	have	been	seen	as	a
terrible	omen,	and	made	of	it	a	thing	of	strength.	None	of	us	were	fully
cognizant	of	it	at	the	time,	but	it	was	there,	in	Aren,	at	that	first	parade,	that	the
Bonehunters	were	born.’
The	others	were	all	staring	at	her.
Her	brows	lifted	fractionally.
Keneb	cleared	his	throat.	‘Adjunct,	the	Bonehunters	may	well	have	been
birthed	that	day	in	Aren,	but	it	only	drew	its	first	breath	yesterday.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘We	were	wondering,’	Kalam	said	to	her,	‘where	that	decoration	came
from.	The	one	you	presented,	with	your	own	hand,	to	Captain	Faradan	Sort	and
the	witch	Sinn.’
‘Ah,	yes.	Well,	I	can	make	no	claim	regarding	that.	The	design	of	that	sigil
was	by	T’amber ’s	hand.	There	were	jewelsmiths	in	her	family,	I	understand,
and	she	passed	a	few	years	of	her	youth	as	an	apprentice.	Nonetheless,	I	do	not
see	how	that	ceremony	achieved	little	more	than	a	confirmation	of	what
already	existed.’
‘Adjunct,’	Fist	Keneb	said,	‘it	was	your	confirmation	that	was	needed.	To
make	it	real.	I	do	not	wish	to	offend	you,	but	before	then,	you	were	the	Adjunct.
You	were	Laseen’s.	Her	property.’
Her	expression	was	suddenly	flat,	dangerous.	‘And	now,	Fist?’
But	it	was	Kalam	who	answered.	‘Now,	you	belong	to	the	Fourteenth.’
‘You	belong	to	us,’	Keneb	said.
The	moment	should	have	ended	there,	and	all	would	have	been	well.	Better
than	well.	It	would	have	been	perfect.	Instead,	they	saw,	upon	Tavore’s
expression,	a	growing…dismay.	And	fear.	And	at	first,	neither	emotion	made
any	sense.
Unless…
Unless	she	was	unable	to	return	such	loyalty.
And	so	the	doubt	twisted	free,	like	newborn	vipers	slithering	from	their
clutch	of	eggs,	and	tiny,	deadly	fangs	sank	into	every	figure	standing	there,
witness	to	what	her	face	revealed.
Revealed.	And	this	from	a	woman	whose	self-control	was	damned	near
inhuman.
Startled	into	life,	the	rhizan	lizard	dropped	free	of	its	perch,	wheeled	once
then	flitted	off,	down	along	the	strand,	where	it	alighted	on	the	white	flank	of	a
huge	tree-trunk	some	past	storm	had	flung	ashore,	the	creature’s	legs	spread


wide,	belly	to	the	wood,	its	tiny	sides	palpitating.	Distracted	and	frightened,
Bottle	reached	out	to	brush	one	fingertip	between	the	rhizan’s	eyes,	a	gesture
intended	to	offer	comfort,	even	as	he	released	his	hold	upon	its	life-spark.	The
creature	fled	in	a	flurry	of	wings	and	whipping	tail.
And	now,	five	days	later,	Bottle	found	himself	on	the	foredeck	of	the
Silanda,	staring	back	down	the	ship	to	that	tarp-covered	heap	of	severed	heads
that	Stormy	called	his	brain’s	trust.	Amusing,	yes,	but	Bottle	knew	those
undying	eyes	were	piercing	the	frayed	fabric	of	the	canvas,	watching	him.	In
expectation.	Of	what?	Damn	you,	I	can’t	help	you	poor	fools.	You	have	to	see
that!
Besides,	he	had	plenty	of	other	things	to	worry	over	right	now.	So	many,	in
fact,	that	he	did	not	know	where	to	start.
He	had	seen	the	sigil,	the	decoration	the	Adjunct	had	presented	to	Faradan
Sort	at	what	should	have	been	her	courtmartial,	and	to	the	mute	child	Sinn	–	not
that	she	was	in	truth	mute,	Bottle	knew.	The	urchin	just	had	very	little	to	say	to
anyone,	barring	her	brother	Shard.	The	sigil…in	silver,	a	city	wall	over	which
rose	ruby	flames,	and	the	sloped	tel	beneath	that	wall,	a	mass	of	gold	human
skulls.	The	echo	of	the	Bridgeburners’	old	sigil	was	not	accident	–	no,	it	was
sheer	genius.	T’amber’s	genius.
By	the	end	of	that	same	day,	iron	needles	and	silk	threads	were	out	as
blunted	fingers	worked	with	varying	degrees	of	talent,	and	military-issue
cloaks	found	a	new	decoration	among	the	soldiers	of	the	Fourteenth	Army.	To
go	along	with	dangling	finger	bones,	the	occasional	bird	skull	and	drilled
teeth.
All	well	and	good,	as	far	as	it	went.	For	much	of	the	first	day,	as	Bottle	and
the	others	recovered,	soldiers	would	come	by	just	to	look	at	them.	It	had	been
unnerving,	all	that	attention,	and	he	still	struggled	to	understand	what	he	saw	in
those	staring	eyes.	Yes,	we’re	alive.	Unlikely,	granted,	but	true	nonetheless.
Now,	what	is	it	that	you	see?
The	memories	of	that	time	beneath	the	city	were	a	haunting	refrain	behind
every	spoken	word	shared	between	Bottle	and	his	fellow	survivors.	It	fuelled
their	terrible	dreams	at	night	–	he	had	grown	used	to	awakening	to	some
muffled	cry	from	a	squad	member;	from	Smiles,	or	Cuttle,	or	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas.	Cries	dimly	echoed	from	where	other	squads	slept	on	the	stony
ground.
Their	kits	had	been	rifled	through	in	their	absence,	items	and	gear
redistributed	as	was	the	custom,	and	on	that	first	day	soldiers	arrived	to	return
what	they	had	taken.	By	dusk,	each	survivor	had	more	than	they	had	ever	begun
with	–	and	could	only	look	on	in	bemusement	at	the	heaped	trinkets,	buckles,


clasps	and	charms;	the	mended	tunics,	the	scrubbed-clean	quilted	underpadding,	the	buffed	leather	straps	and	weapon-rigging.	And	daggers.	Lots	of
daggers,	the	most	personal	and	precious	of	all	weapons	–	the	fighter’s	last
resort.	The	weapon	that,	if	necessary,	would	be	used	to	take	one’s	own	life	in	the
face	of	something	far	worse.	Now,	what	significance	are	we	to	take	from	that?
Crouched	nearby	on	the	foredeck,	Koryk	and	Tarr	were	playing	a	game	of
Bones	that	the	former	had	found	among	the	offerings	in	his	kit.	A	sailor ’s
version,	the	cribbed	box	deep	to	prevent	the	playing	pieces	bouncing	out	of	the
field,	the	underside	made	stable	by	iron-tipped	eagle	talons	at	each	corner,
sharp	enough	to	bite	into	the	wood	of	a	galley	bench	or	deck.	Tarr	had	lost
every	game	thus	far	–	over	twenty	–	both	to	Koryk	and	Smiles,	yet	he	kept
coming	back.	Bottle	had	never	seen	a	man	so	willing	to	suffer	punishment.
In	the	captain’s	cabin	lounged	Gesler,	Stormy,	Fiddler	and	Balm,	their
conversation	sporadic	and	desultory.	Deep	in	shadows	beneath	the	elongated
map-table	huddled	Y’Ghatan,	Bottle’s	rat	–	my	eyes,	my	ears…my	aching	teats.
No	other	rats	on	board,	and	without	his	control	over	Y’Ghatan	and	her
brood,	they	would	have	flung	themselves	overboard	long	ago.	Bottle
sympathized.	The	sorcery	engulfing	this	ship	was	foul,	redolent	with	madness.
It	disliked	anything	alive	that	was	not	bound	by	its	chaotic	will.	And	it
especially	disliked…me.
Only…Gesler	and	Stormy,	they	seem	immune	to	it.	The	bastards	–	forcing	us
to	join	them	on	this	eerie,	unwelcome	floating	barrow.
Bottle	considered	talking	to	Fiddler	about	it,	then	dismissed	the	idea.
Fiddler	was	like	Kalam,	who	was	like	Apsalar,	who	was	like	Quick	Ben.
All…evil.
All	right,	not	evil,	but	something.	I	don’t	know.	That	stuff	in	Shadow	–	what
were	they	up	to?	And	Kalam,	ready	to	stick	his	knives	in	Apsalar.	And	Apsalar,
looking	like	she	wanted	just	that.	Then	Quick	Ben	waking	up,	getting	between
the	two	as	if	this	was	all	some	old	argument,	old	wounds	ripped	open.
Tavore	had	claimed	Quick	Ben,	Kalam	and	Apsalar	for	her	own	retinue	on
the	Adjunct’s	flagship,	Froth	Wolf	–	a	Quon-built	dromon,	its	workmanship
Mapau,	its	keel	and	metalwork	from	somewhere	else	entirely.	Fenn	–	can’t	be
more	than	a	handful	of	keel-carvers	and	blacksmiths	left	among	the	squalid
remnants…but	they	made	that	keel	and	they	made	those	fittings,	and	there’s
nothing	insensate	or	inert	about	them.	In	any	case,	Bottle	was	glad	they	were
on	that	ship	riding	the	swells	three	reaches	to	starboard.	Not	quite	far	enough
away	for	his	comfort,	but	it	would	have	to	do.	He	could	picture	those	two
skeletal	reptiles	scurrying	around	in	the	hold	below,	hunting	rats…
‘So	it	was	Grub	who	held	onto	that	whistle?’	Fiddler	asked	Gesler	in	the


cabin.
Beneath	the	table,	Y’Ghatan’s	tattered	ears	perked	up.
‘Aye.	Keneb’s	lad.	Now	there’s	a	strange	one	for	ya.	Said	he	knew	we	were
coming.	Now,	maybe	I	believe	that.	Maybe	I	don’t.	But	it	was	the	first	thing	I
got	back.’
‘Good	thing,	too,’	Stormy	said,	audibly	scratching	his	beard.	‘I’m	feeling
right	at	home—’
‘That’s	a	joke,’	Gesler	cut	in.	‘Last	time	we	was	on	this	damned	ship,
Stormy,	you	spent	most	of	the	time	cowering	in	a	corner.’
‘Just	took	a	while	getting	used	to	it,	that’s	all.’
Fiddler	said,	‘Look	what	some	bright	spark	left	in	my	loot.’	Something
thumped	onto	the	table.
‘Gods	below,’	Sergeant	Balm	muttered.	‘Is	it	complete?’
‘Hard	to	say.	There	are	cards	in	there	I’ve	never	seen	before.	One	for	the
Apocalyptic	–	it’s	an	Unaligned	–	and	there’s	something	called	the	House	of
War,	showing	as	its	ranked	card	a	bone	throne,	unoccupied,	flanked	by	two
wolves.	And	in	that	House	there’s	a	card	called	the	Mercenary,	and	another	–
done	by	a	different	hand	–	that	I	think	is	named	something	like	Guardians	of
the	Dead,	and	it	shows	ghostly	soldiers	standing	in	the	middle	of	a	burning
bridge…’
A	moment	of	silence,	then	Gesler:	‘Recognize	any	faces,	Fid?’
‘Didn’t	want	to	look	too	closely	at	that	one.	There’s	the	House	of	Chains,
and	the	King	of	that	House	–	the	King	in	Chains	–	is	sitting	on	a	throne.	The
scene	is	very	dark,	swallowed	in	shadows,	except	I’d	swear	that	poor	bastard	is
screaming.	And	the	look	in	his	eyes…’
‘What	else?’	Balm	asked.
‘Stop	sounding	so	eager,	you	Dal	Honese	rock-toad.’
‘All	right,	if	you	don’t	like	your	new	present,	Fiddler,	give	it	to	me.’
‘Right,	and	you’d	probably	lay	a	field	right	here,	on	this	ship.’
‘So?’
‘So,	you	want	to	open	a	door	to	this	Tiste	and	Tellann	nightmare	of
warrens?	To	the	Crippled	God,	too?’
‘Oh.’
‘Anyway,	there’s	more	Unaligned.	Master	of	the	Deck,	and	aye,	him	I
recognize.	And	Chain	–	a	knot	in	the	centre,	with	links	stretching	out	in	all
directions.	Don’t	like	the	look	of	that	one.’
‘Some	gift,	Fid.’
‘Aye,	like	a	rock	thrown	to	a	drowning	sailor.’
‘Put	it	away,’	Gesler	said.


The	rat	listened	as	the	Deck	was	dragged	back	from	the	centre	of	the	table.
‘We	got	us	a	problem,’	Gesler	continued.
‘Only,’	Stormy	added,	‘we	don’t	know	what	it	is.	We	only	know	that
something’s	rattled	Keneb,	and	that	assassin	friend	of	yours,	Fid.	And	Quick
Ben.	Rattled	them	all.’
‘The	Adjunct,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Kalam	and	Quick	weren’t	talking,	but	they’re
not	happy.’	A	pause,	then,	‘Could	be	it’s	the	way	Pearl	just	vanished,	right	after
Y’Ghatan,	likely	straight	back	to	the	Empress.	Just	a	Claw	operative	delivering
his	report?	Maybe.	But	even	that	leaves	a	sour	taste	in	the	mouth	–	he	was	too
quick	to	act,	too	quick	to	reach	conclusions	–	as	if	what	he	thought	happened	at
Y’Ghatan	was	only	confirming	suspicions	he	already	held.	Think	on	it	–	do
you	really	suppose	a	report	like	that	has	anything	good	to	say?’
‘She	killed	Sha’ik,’	Balm	said,	exasperated.	‘She	broke	open	that	wasp	nest
in	Raraku	and	damned	nothing	came	buzzing	out.	She	nabbed	Korbolo	Dom
and	sent	him	back	in	shackles.	And	she	did	all	that	with	us	not	losing	nobody,
or	almost	nobody	–	the	scraps	on	the	way	were	expected,	and	not	nearly	so	bad
as	they	could’ve	been.	Then	she	chases	Leoman	to	Y’Ghatan.	Unless	you	got
someone	on	the	inside	to	crack	open	the	gate,	sieges	are	costly,	especially
when	the	attackers	got	no	time	to	wait	it	out.	And	we	didn’t,	did	we?	There	was
a	damned	plague	on	the	way!’
‘Calm	down,’	Fiddler	said,	‘we	lived	through	all	that,	too,	remember?’
‘Aye,	and	did	any	one	of	us	really	think	Leoman	would	broil	his	own
people?	That	he’d	turn	a	whole	city	into	a	heap	of	ashes	and	rivers	of	lead?	All
I’m	saying,	Fid,	is	we	ain’t	done	too	bad,	have	we?	When	you	think	on	it.’
‘Balm’s	right,’	Stormy	said,	scratching	again.	‘Fiddler,	in	that	Deck	you
got,	that	House	of	War	–	did	you	smell	Treach	there?	Those	wolves,	they	got
me	wondering.’
‘I	have	real	doubt	about	that	version,’	Fiddler	replied.	‘That	whole	House,
in	fact.	I’m	thinking	the	maker	was	confused,	or	maybe	what	she	saw	was
confused—’
‘She?’
‘I	think	so,	except	the	rogue	one,	the	Guardians	of	the	Dead.	That’s	a	man’s
hand	for	sure.’
There	was	a	sudden	tension	in	Stormy’s	voice.	‘Pull	’em	out	again,	Fid.
Let’s	see	that	House	of	War	–	all	the	cards	in	that	House.’
Shuffling	noises.	‘I’ll	show	each	one,	then.	Not	on	the	table,	but	still	in	my
hand,	all	right?	One	at	a	time.	Okay.	As	for	titles,	I’m	just	reading	what’s	in	the
borders.’	A	moment,	then,	‘The	Lords	of	War.	Two	wolves,	one	male,	one
female.	Suggests	to	me	the	name	for	this	one	is	wrong.	But	it’s	the	plural	that


counts,	meaning	the	unoccupied	throne	isn’t	that	important.	All	right,
everybody	had	a	look?	Good,	next	one.	The	Hunter,	and	aye,	that’s	Treach—’
‘What’s	with	the	striped	corpse	in	the	foreground?	That	old	man	with	no
hands?’
‘No	idea,	Gesler.’
‘Next	one,’	said	Stormy.
‘Guardians	of	the	Dead—’
‘Let	me	get	a	closer…good.	Wait…’
‘Stormy,’	said	Balm,	‘what	do	you	think	you’re	seeing?’
‘What’s	next?’	the	Falari	corporal	demanded.	‘Quick!’
‘The	Army	and	the	Soldier	–	I	don’t	know	–	two	names	for	this,	which	may
be	determined	by	context	or	something.’
‘Any	more?’
‘Two,	and	I	don’t	like	these	ones	at	all.	Here,	Life	Slayer…’
‘Jaghut?’
‘Half-Jaghut,’	Fiddler	said	in	a	dull	voice.	‘I	know	who	this	is	–	the	horn
bow,	the	single-edged	sword.	Life	Slayer	is	Icarium.	And	his	protector,	Mappo
Runt,	is	nowhere	in	sight.’
‘Never	mind	all	that,’	Stormy	said.	‘What’s	the	last	card?’
‘Icarium’s	counterpoint,	of	sorts.	Death	Slayer.’
‘Who	in	the	Abyss	is	that	supposed	to	be?	That’s	impossible.’
A	sour	grunt	from	Fiddler,	then	he	said,	‘Who?	Well,	let’s	see.	Squalid	hut
of	skins	and	sticks,	brazier	coughing	out	smoke,	a	hooded	thing	inside	the	hut,
broken	limbed,	shackles	sunk	into	the	earth.	Now,	who	might	that	be?’
‘That’s	impossible,’	Gesler	said,	echoing	Stormy’s	assertion.	‘He	can’t	be
two	things	at	once!’
‘Why	not?’	Fiddler	said,	then	sighed.	‘That’s	it.	Now,	Stormy,	what’s	lit	that
fire	in	your	eyes?’
‘I	know	who	made	these	cards.’
‘Really?’	Fiddler	sounded	unconvinced.	‘And	how	did	you	come	by	that?’
‘The	Guardians	card,	something	about	the	stonework	on	the	bridge.	Then
those	last	two,	the	skulls	–	I	got	a	damned	good	look	at	Faradan	Sort’s	medal.
So’s	I	could	sew	the	like,	you	see.’
There	was	a	long,	long	silence.
And	Bottle	stared,	unseeing,	as	implications	settled	in	his	mind	–	settled
momentarily,	then	burst	up	and	out,	like	dust-devils,	one	after	another.	The
Adjunct	wants	that	Deck	of	Dragons	in	Fiddler’s	hands.	And	either	she	or
T’amber	–	or	maybe	Nether	and	Nil,	or	someone	–	is	boiling	over	with	arcane
knowledge,	and	isn’t	afraid	to	use	it.	Now,	Fid,	he	never	lays	a	field	with	those


cards.	No.	He	makes	up	games.
The	Adjunct	knows	something.	Just	like	she	knew	about	the	ghosts	at
Raraku…and	the	flood.	But	she	carries	an	otataral	sword.	And	the	two	Wickans
are	nothing	like	they	once	were,	or	so	goes	the	consensus.	It	must	be	T’amber.
What	awaits	us?
Is	this	what’s	got	Quick	Ben	and	the	others	so	rattled?
What	if—
‘Something	just	nudged	my	foot	–	what?	Is	that	a	rat?	Right	under	our
table?’
‘Ain’t	no	rats	on	the	Silanda,	Stormy—’
‘I’m	telling	you,	Ges	–	there!’
Fiddler	swore,	then	said,	‘That’s	Bottle’s	rat!	Get	it!’
‘After	it!’
Skidding	chairs,	the	crash	of	crockery,	grunts	and	stamping	boots.
‘It’s	getting	away!’
There	were	so	many	places,	Bottle	knew,	on	a	ship,	where	only	a	rat	could
go.	Y’Ghatan	made	her	escape,	despite	all	the	cursing	and	thumping.
Moments	later,	Bottle	saw	Fiddler	appear	on	deck	amidships	–	the	soldier
looked	away	a	moment	before	the	sergeant’s	searching	gaze	found	him,	and
Bottle	listened	–	staring	out	to	sea	–	as	the	man,	pushing	past	lounging
soldiers,	approached.
Thump	thump	thump	up	the	steps	to	the	foredeck.
‘Bottle!’
Blinking,	he	looked	over.	‘Sergeant?’
‘Oh	no	I	ain’t	fooled	–	you	was	spying!	Listening	in!’
Bottle	gestured	over	at	Koryk	and	Tarr,	who	had	looked	up	from	their
game	and	were	now	staring.	‘Ask	them.	I’ve	been	sitting	here,	not	doing	a
thing,	for	more	than	a	bell.	Ask	them.’
‘Your	rat!’
‘Her?	I	lost	track	of	her	last	night,	Sergeant.	Haven’t	bothered	trying	to
hunt	her	down	since	–	what	would	be	the	point?	She’s	not	going	anywhere,	not
with	her	pups	to	take	care	of.’
Gesler,	Stormy	and	Balm	were	now	crowding	up	behind	Fiddler,	who
looked	ready	to	rip	off	his	own	stubbly	beard	in	frustration.
‘If	you’re	lying…’	Fiddler	hissed.
‘Of	course	he’s	lying,’	Balm	said.	‘If	I	was	him,	I’d	be	lying	right	now,
too.’
‘Well,	Sergeant	Balm,’	Bottle	said,	‘you’re	not	me,	and	that	is	the	crucial
difference.	Because	I	happen	to	be	telling	the	truth.’


With	a	snarl,	Fiddler	turned	round	and	pushed	his	way	back	down	to	the
mid	deck.	A	moment	later	the	others	followed,	Balm	casting	one	last	glare	at
Bottle	–	as	if	only	now	comprehending	that	he’d	just	been	insulted.
A	low	snort	from	Koryk	after	they’d	left.	‘Bottle,	I	happened	to	glance	up	a
while	back	–	before	Fiddler	came	out	–	and,	Hood	take	me,	there	must	have
been	fifty	expressions	crossing	your	face,	one	after	the	other.’
‘Really?’	Bottle	asked	mildly.	‘Probably	clouds	passing	the	sun,	Koryk.’
Tarr	said,	‘Your	rat	still	has	those	pups?	You	must’ve	carried	them	on	the
march,	then.	If	I’d	been	the	one	carrying	them,	I	would’ve	eaten	them	one	by
one.	Pop	into	the	mouth,	crunch,	chew.	Sweet	and	delicious.’
‘Well,	it	was	me,	not	you,	wasn’t	it?	Why	does	everyone	want	to	be	me,
anyway?’
‘We	don’t,’	Tarr	said,	returning	to	study	the	game.	‘We’re	just	all	trying	to
tell	you	we	think	you’re	a	raving	idiot,	Bottle.’
Bottle	grunted.	‘All	right.	Then,	I	suppose,	you	two	aren’t	interested	in
what	they	were	talking	about	in	that	cabin	just	a	little	while	ago.’
‘Get	over	here,’	Koryk	said	in	a	growl.	‘Watch	us	play,	and	start	talking,
Bottle,	else	we	go	and	tell	the	sergeant.’
‘No	thanks,’	Bottle	said,	stretching	his	arms.	‘I	think	I’m	in	need	of	a	nap.
Maybe	later.	Besides,	that	game	bores	me.’
‘You	think	we	won’t	tell	Fiddler?’
‘Of	course	you	won’t.’
‘Why	not?’
‘Because	then	this	would	be	the	last	time	–	the	last	time	ever	–	you	got	any
inside	information	from	me.’
‘You	lying,	snivelling,	snake	of	a	bastard—’
‘Now	now,’	Bottle	said,	‘be	nice.’
‘You’re	getting	worse	than	Smiles,’	Koryk	said.
‘Smiles?’	Bottle	paused	at	the	steps.	‘Where	is	she,	by	the	way?’
‘Mooning	away	with	Corabb,	I	expect,’	Tarr	said.
Really?	‘She	shouldn’t	do	that.’
‘Why?’
‘Corabb’s	luck	doesn’t	necessarily	extend	to	people	around	him,	that’s
why.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
It	means	I	talk	too	much.	‘Never	mind.’
Koryk	called	out,	‘They’ll	get	that	rat,	you	know,	Bottle!	Sooner	or	later.’
Nobody’s	thinking	straight	around	here.	Gods,	Koryk,	you	still	think	those
pups	are	little	helpless	pinkies.	Alas,	they	are	all	now	quite	capable	of	getting


around	all	by	themselves.	So,	I	haven’t	got	just	one	extra	set	of	eyes	and	ears,
friends.	No.	There’s	Baby	Koryk,	Baby	Smiles,	Baby	Tarr,	Baby…oh,	you	know
the	rest…
He	was	halfway	to	the	hatch	when	the	alarms	sounded,	drifting	like
demonic	cries	across	the	swollen	waves,	and	on	the	wind	there	arrived	a
scent…no,	a	stench.
	
Hood	take	me,	I	hate	not	knowing.	Kalam	swung	himself	up	into	the	rigging,
ignoring	the	pitching	and	swaying	as	the	Froth	Wolf	heeled	hard	about	on	a
new	course,	northeast,	towards	the	gap	that	had	–	through	incompetence	or
carelessness	–	opened	between	two	dromons	of	the	escort.	As	the	assassin
quickly	worked	his	way	upward,	he	caught	momentary	glimpses	of	the	foreign
ships	that	had	appeared	just	outside	that	gap.	Sails	that	might	have	been	black,
once,	but	were	now	grey,	bleached	by	sun	and	salt.
Amidst	the	sudden	confusion	of	signals	and	alarms,	one	truth	was
becomingly	appallingly	evident:	they	had	sailed	into	an	ambush.	Ships	to	the
north,	forming	an	arc	with	killing	lanes	between	each	one.	Another	crescent,
this	one	bulging	towards	the	Malazans,	was	fast	approaching	before	the	wind
from	the	northeast.	Whilst	another	line	of	ships	formed	a	bristling	barrier	to
the	south,	from	the	shallows	along	the	coast	to	the	west,	then	out	in	a	sawtoothed	formation	eastward	until	the	arc	curled	north.
Our	escorts	are	woefully	outnumbered.	Transports	loaded	down	with
soldiers,	like	bleating	sheep	trapped	in	a	slaughter	pen.
Kalam	stopped	climbing.	He	had	seen	enough.	Whoever	they	are,	they’ve
got	us	in	their	jaws.	He	began	making	his	way	down	once	more,	an	effort
almost	as	perilous	as	had	been	the	ascent.	Below,	figures	were	scrambling
about	on	the	decks,	sailors	and	marines,	officers	shouting	back	and	forth.
The	Adjunct’s	flagship,	flanked	still	to	starboard	by	the	Silanda,	was
tacking	a	course	towards	that	gap.	It	was	clear	that	Tavore	meant	to	engage	that
closing	crescent.	In	truth,	they	had	little	choice.	With	the	wind	behind	those
attackers,	they	could	drive	like	a	spear-point	into	the	midst	of	the	cumbersome
transports.	Admiral	Nok	was	commanding	the	lead	escorts	to	the	north,	and
they	would	have	to	seek	to	push	through	the	enemy	blocking	the	way,	with	as
many	of	the	transports	following	as	were	able	–	but	all	the	enemy	ships	have	to
do	is	drive	them	into	the	coast,	onto	whatever	uncharted	reefs	lurk	in	the
shallows.
Kalam	dropped	the	last	distance	to	the	deck,	landed	in	a	crouch.	He	heard
more	shouts	from	somewhere	far	above	as	he	made	his	way	forward.


Positioned	near	the	pitching	prow,	the	Adjunct	and	Quick	Ben	stood	side	by
side,	the	wind	whipping	at	Tavore’s	cloak.	The	High	Mage	glanced	over	as
Kalam	reached	them.
‘They’ve	shortened	their	sails,	drawn	up	or	whatever	it	is	sailors	call
slowing	down.’
‘Now	why	would	they	do	that?’	Kalam	asked.	‘That	makes	no	sense.	Those
bastards	should	be	driving	hard	straight	at	us.’
Quick	Ben	nodded,	but	said	nothing.
The	assassin	glanced	over	at	the	Adjunct,	but	of	her	state	of	mind	as	she
stared	at	the	opposing	line	of	ships	he	could	sense	nothing.	‘Adjunct,’	he	said,
‘perhaps	you	should	strap	on	your	sword.’
‘Not	yet,’	she	said.	‘Something	is	happening.’
He	followed	her	gaze.
‘Gods	below,	what	is	that?’
	
On	the	Silanda,	Sergeant	Gesler	had	made	use	of	the	bone	whistle,	and	now
banks	of	oars	swept	out	and	back	with	steady	indifference	to	the	heaving
swells,	and	the	ship	groaned	with	each	surge,	easily	keeping	pace	with	the
Adjunct’s	dromon.	The	squads	had	finished	reefing	the	sails	and	were	now
amidships,	readying	armour	and	weapons.
Fiddler	crouched	over	a	wooden	crate,	trying	to	quell	his	ever-present
nausea	–	gods,	I	hate	the	sea,	the	damned	back	and	forth	and	up	and	down.	No,
when	I	die	I	want	my	feet	to	be	dry.	That	and	nothing	more.	No	other
stipulations.	Just	dry	feet,	dammit	–	as	he	worked	the	straps	loose	and	lifted	the
lid.	He	stared	down	at	the	Moranth	munitions	nestled	in	their	beds	of	padding.
‘Who	can	throw?’	he	demanded,	glaring	over	at	his	squad,	then	something	cold
slithered	in	his	gut.
‘I	can,’	both	Koryk	and	Smiles	said.
‘Why	ask?’	said	Cuttle.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	sat	nearby,	knees	drawn	up,	too	sick	to	move,
much	less	respond	to	Fiddler ’s	question.
Tarr	said,	shrugging,	‘If	it’s	right	in	front	of	me,	maybe	I	can	hit	it,
Sergeant.’
But	Fiddler	barely	heard	any	of	this	–	his	eyes	were	fixed	on	Bottle,	who
stood,	motionless,	staring	at	the	enemy	line	of	ships.	‘Bottle?	What	is	it?’
An	ashen	face	turned	to	regard	him.	‘It’s	bad,	Sergeant.
They’re…conjuring.’


	
Samar	Dev	shrank	away	until	hard,	insensate	wood	pressed	against	her	back.
Before	her,	to	either	side	of	the	main	mast,	stood	four	Tiste	Edur,	from	whom
burgeoned	crackling,	savage	sorcery,	whipping	like	chains	between	them,
fulminating	with	blooms	and	gouts	of	grey	flames	–	and,	beyond	the	rocking
prow,	a	tumbling	wave	was	rising,	thrashing	as	if	held	taut,	lifting	skyward—
Bristling	chains	of	power	snapped	out	from	the	four	warlocks,	arcing	left
and	right,	out	to	conjoin	with	identical	kin	from	the	ships	to	either	side	of
Hanradi	Khalag’s	command	ship,	and	then	onward	to	other	ships,	one	after
another,	and	the	air	Samar	Dev	drew	into	her	lungs	seemed	dead,	some
essential	necessity	utterly	destroyed.	She	gasped,	sank	down	to	the	deck,
drawing	up	her	knees.	A	cough,	then	trembles	racked	through	her	in	waves—
Sudden	air,	life	flooding	her	lungs	–	someone	stood	to	her	left.	She	looked
over,	then	up.
Karsa	Orlong,	motionless,	staring	at	the	billowing,	surging	wall	of	magic.
‘What	is	this?’	he	demanded.
‘Elder,’	she	said	in	a	ragged	voice.	‘They	mean	to	destroy	them.	They
mean	to	tear	ten	thousand	souls	and	more…into	pieces.’
‘Who	is	the	enemy?’
Karsa,	what	is	this	breath	of	life	you	deliver?
‘The	Malazan	Imperial	Fleet,’	Samar	heard	the	Taxilian	answer,	and	she
saw	that	he	had	appeared	on	deck,	along	with	Feather	Witch	and	the	Preda,
Hanradi	Khalag,	and	all	were	staring	upward	at	the	terrible,	chained	storm	of
power.
The	Toblakai	crossed	his	arms.	‘Malazans,’	he	said.	‘They	are	not	my
enemy.’
In	a	harsh,	halting	accent,	Hanradi	Khalag	turned	to	Karsa	Orlong	and	said,
‘Are	they	Tiste	Edur?’
The	giant’s	eyes	thinned	to	slits	as	he	continued	studying	the	conjuration,
from	which	there	now	came	a	growing	roar,	as	of	a	million	enraged	voices.
‘No,’	he	said.
‘Then,’	replied	the	Preda,	‘they	are	enemy.’
‘If	you	destroy	these	Malazans,’	Karsa	said,	‘more	of	them	will	come	after
you.’
‘We	do	not	fear.’
The	Toblakai	warrior	finally	glanced	over	at	the	Preda,	and	Samar	Dev
could	read,	with	something	fluttering	inside	her,	his	contempt.	Yet	he	said
nothing,	simply	turned	about	and	crouched	down	at	Samar	Dev’s	side.


She	whispered,	‘You	were	going	to	call	him	a	fool.	I’m	glad	you	didn’t	–
these	Tiste	Edur	don’t	manage	criticism	too	well.’
‘Which	makes	them	even	bigger	fools,’	the	giant	rumbled.	‘But	we	knew
that,	Samar	Dev.	They	believe	their	Emperor	can	defeat	me.’
‘Karsa—’
A	strange	chorus	of	cries	erupted	from	the	warlocks,	and	they	all
convulsed,	as	if	some	fiery	hand	had	reached	into	their	bodies,	closed	tight	and
cruel	about	their	spines	–	Samar	Dev’s	eyes	widened	–	this	ritual,	it	twists
them,	oh	–	such	pain—
The	enormous	wall	lifted	free	of	the	sea’s	suddenly	becalmed	surface.
Rose	higher,	then	higher	still	–	and	in	the	space	beneath	it,	a	horizontal	strip
mocking	normality,	the	Malazan	ships	were	visible,	their	sails	awry,	each	one
losing	way	as	panic	raced	through	the	poor	bastards	–	except	for	those	two,	in
the	lead,	a	dromon	warship,	and	on	its	seaward	flank,	a	black-hulled	craft,	its
oars	flashing	to	either	side.
What?
Hanradi	Khalag	had	stepped	forward	upon	seeing	that	odd	black	ship,	but
from	where	Samar	sat	curled	up	she	could	not	see	his	expression,	only	the
back	of	his	head	–	the	suddenly	taut	posture	of	his	tall	form.
And	then,	something	else	began	to	happen…
	
The	wall	of	magic	was	pulling	free	from	the	surface,	drawing	with	it	spouts	of
white,	churning	water	that	fragmented	and	fell	away	like	toppling	spears	as	the
grey-shot,	raging	manifestation	lifted	ever	higher.	The	roar	of	sound	rolled
forward,	loud	and	fierce	as	a	charging	army.
The	Adjunct’s	voice	was	low,	flat.	‘Quick	Ben.’
‘Not	warrens,’	the	wizard	replied,	as	if	awed.	‘Elder.	Not	warrens.	Holds,
but	shot	through	with	Chaos,	with	rot—’
‘The	Crippled	God.’
Both	the	wizard	and	Kalam	looked	over	at	her.
‘You’re	full	of	surprises,	Adjunct,’	Quick	Ben	observed.
‘Can	you	answer	it?’
‘Adjunct?’
‘This	Elder	sorcery,	High	Mage	–	can	you	answer	it?’
The	glance	that	Quick	Ben	cast	at	Kalam	startled	the	assassin,	yet	it
matched	his	reply	perfectly:	‘If	I	cannot,	Adjunct,	then	we	are	all	dead.’
You	bastard	–	you’ve	got	something—
‘You	do	not	have	long,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘If	you	fail,’	she	added	as	she


turned	away,	‘I	have	my	sword.’
Kalam	watched	her	make	her	way	down	the	length	of	the	ship.	Then,	heart
pounding	hard	in	his	chest,	he	faced	the	tumbling,	foaming	conjuration	that
filled	the	north	sky.	‘Quick,	you	ain’t	got	long	here,	you	know	–	once	she
comes	back	with	her	sword—’
‘I	doubt	it’ll	be	enough,’	the	wizard	cut	in.	‘Oh,	maybe	for	this	ship	and	this
ship	alone.	As	for	everybody	else,	forget	it.’
‘Then	do	something!’
And	Quick	Ben	turned	on	Kalam	a	grin	the	assassin	had	seen	before,
hundreds	of	times,	and	that	light	in	his	eyes	–	so	familiar,	so—
The	wizard	spat	on	his	hands	and	rubbed	them	together,	facing	the	Elder
sorcery	once	more.	‘They	want	to	mess	with	Holds…so	will	I.’
Kalam	bared	his	teeth.	‘You’ve	got	some	nerve.’
‘What?’
‘“Full	of	surprises”,	you	said	to	her.’
‘Yes,	well,	best	give	me	some	room.	It’s	been	a	while.	I	may	be	a	little…
rusty.’	And	he	raised	his	arms.
So	familiar…so…alarming.
	
On	the	Silanda	four	reaches	to	seaward,	Bottle	felt	something	jolt	all	his
senses.	His	head	whipped	round,	to	fix	his	eyes	on	the	forecastle	of	the	Froth
Wolf.	Quick	Ben,	alone,	standing	tall	at	the	prow,	arms	stretched	out	to	the
sides,	like	some	damned	offering—
—and	around	the	High	Mage,	fire	the	colour	of	gold-flecked	mud
billowed	awake,	rushed	outward,	upward,	fast	–	so	fast,	so	fierce	–	gods	take
me	–	no,	more	patience,	you	fool!	If	they—
Whispering	a	prayer,	Bottle	flung	all	his	will	at	the	High	Mage’s
conjuration	–	slower,	you	fool.	Slower!	Here,	deepen	the	hue,	thicker,	fling	it
out	to	the	sides,	it’s	just	a	reverse	mudslide,	yes,	all	going	back	up	the	slope,
flames	like	rain,	tongues	of	gold	nastiness,	yes,	like	that—
No,	stop	fighting	me,	damn	you.	I	don’t	care	how	terrified	you	are	–	panic
will	ruin	everything.	Pay	attention!
Suddenly,	filling	Bottle’s	head,	a	scent…of	fur.	The	soft	brush	of	not-quitehuman	hands	–	and	Bottle’s	flailing	efforts	to	quell	Quick	Ben’s	manic
enthusiasm	all	at	once	ceased	to	matter,	as	his	will	was	brushed	aside	like	a
cobweb—
	


Kalam,	crouched	down	on	the	forecastle’s	wooden	steps,	watched	as	Quick
Ben,	legs	spread	wide,	slowly	lifted	from	the	deck,	as	if	some	outside	force
had	closed	invisible	hands	on	the	front	of	his	tunic,	drawing	him	close,	then
giving	him	a	shake.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name—’
The	magic	rising	in	answer	to	that	grey	seething	storm	opposite	was	like	a
wall	of	earth,	shot	through	with	burning	roots,	churning	and	heaving	and
tumbling	back	into	itself,	its	wild,	explosive	will	bound	tighter	to	something
more	powerful	–	and	when	he	releases	it,	into	that	other	one…Hood	below,
nobody’s	going	to	survive	this—
	
Hanradi	Khalag	had	stared,	frozen	in	place	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	as	the	wild
chaos	of	Elder	magic	rose	in	appalling	challenge	to	that	of	the	Edur	warlocks
–	to	that	of	nearly	a	hundred	Edur	warlocks	–	and,	Samar	Dev	realized	as	she
stared	at	the	lead	Malazan	dromon,	all	from	that	one	man,	that	black-skinned
man	floating	above	the	ship’s	prow,	his	limbs	spread	wide.
The	Preda	seemed	to	stagger,	then	he	straightened,	and	screamed	orders	–
the	same	phrase	repeated,	again	and	again,	as	he	lurched	drunkenly	towards	his
warlocks.
They	collapsed,	flung	to	the	deck	as	if	knocked	down	one	after	another	by
a	giant’s	blows,	then	they	lay	writhing,	mouths	foaming,	liquids	spilling	from
them—
As	the	looming,	roaring	grey	wall	seemed	to	implode,	tendrils	whipping
off	to	vanish	in	the	air	or	strike	the	now	churning	surface	of	the	sea,	sending
gouts	skyward	that	shot	into	view	from	clouds	of	billowing	steam.	The	roaring
sound	shattered,	fell	away.
The	sorcery	collapsed,	the	chains	linking	wielders	on	each	ship	flickering
out,	or	breaking	explosively	as	if	they	were	in	truth	links	of	iron.
The	deck	pitched	drunkenly	beneath	them,	and	all	but	Karsa	Orlong
staggered.
Samar	Dev	dragged	her	eyes	away	from	him	and	looked	out	once	more
upon	that	dark,	earthen	wall	of	magic	–	it	too	was	subsiding	–	yes,	maybe	these
Edur	fools	feel	no	compunction	about	unleashing	such	things	when
unopposed…but	the	same	stupidity	cannot	be	said	of	you,	Malazan,	whoever
you	are.
Hanradi	Khalag,	ignoring	the	warlocks	thrashing	about	in	their	own	filth,
was	calling	out	commands,	and	Letherii	sailors	–	white-faced	and	chanting
prayers	–	scrambled	to	bring	the	ship	about,	eastward.


We’re	withdrawing.	The	Malazan	called	their	bluff.	He	faced	them	down	–
oh,	wizard,	I	could	kiss	you	–	I	could	do	more	than	that.	Gods,	I’d—
‘What	are	the	Edur	saying?’	Karsa	Orlong	demanded.
The	Taxilian,	frowning,	shrugged,	then	said,	‘They’re	disbelieving—’
‘Disbelieving?’	Samar	Dev	croaked.	‘They’re	shaken,	Taxilian.	Badly.’
The	man	nodded,	glancing	over	at	Feather	Witch,	who	was	watching	all
three	of	them.	‘Toblakai,	the	Edur	are	saying	that	these	Malazans	–	they	have	a
Ceda	on	board.’
Karsa	scowled.	‘I	do	not	know	that	word.’
‘I	do,’	Samar	Dev	said.	She	smiled	as	a	sudden	shaft	of	sunlight	broke
through	the	tumult	overhead	and	bathed	her	face	with	unexpected	warmth.	‘Tell
them,	Taxilian,	that	they	are	right.	They	do.	A	Ceda.	The	Malazans	have	a	Ceda,
and	for	all	the	Edur	expected	from	this	day,	in	their	arrogance,	these	Malazans
were	not	afraid.	Tell	them	that,	Taxilian.	Tell	them!’

Kalam	knelt	beside	Quick	Ben,	studied	the	man’s	face	for	a	moment,	the	slack
expression,	the	closed	eyes.	Then	he	slapped	the	wizard.	Hard.
Quick	Ben	swore,	then	glared	up	at	the	assassin.	‘I	should	crush	you	like	a
bug,	Kalam.’
‘Right	now,	I	think,’	he	rumbled	in	reply,	‘a	bug’s	fart	might	blow	you
right	off	this	ship,	Quick.’
‘Be	quiet.	Can’t	I	just	lie	here	for	a	while	longer?’
‘The	Adjunct’s	coming.	Slowly,	I’ll	grant	you.	Idiot,	you	gave	too	much
away—’
‘Enough,	Kalam.	I	need	to	think,	and	think	hard.’
‘Since	when	did	you	play	with	Elder	magic?’
Quick	Ben	met	Kalam’s	eyes.	‘When?	Never,	you	idiot.’
‘What?’
‘That	was	a	Hood-damned	illusion.	Thank	the	gods	cowering	in	their
outhouses	right	now	that	the	idiots	swallowed	the	hook	–	but	listen,	it	wasn’t
just	that.	I	had	help.	And	then	I	had	help!’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘I	don’t	know!	Let	me	think!’
‘No	time	for	that,’	Kalam	said,	sitting	back,	‘the	Adjunct’s	here.’
Quick	Ben’s	hand	snapped	up	and	grasped	Kalam’s	shirt,	tugged	him	close.
‘Gods,	friend,’	he	whispered,	‘I’ve	never	been	so	scared	in	my	entire	life!
Don’t	you	see?	It	started	out	as	an	illusion.	Yes,	but	then—’


The	Adjunct’s	voice:	‘High	Mage,	you	and	I	must	talk.’
‘It	wasn’t—’
‘Ben	Adaephon	Delat,	you	and	I	will	talk.	Now.’
Straightening,	Kalam	backed	away,	then	halted	at	a	gesture	from	Tavore.
‘Oh	no,	assassin.	You	as	well.’
Kalam	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Adjunct,	this	conversation	you	propose…it
cannot	be	one-sided.’
She	frowned,	then,	slowly,	nodded.

Fiddler	stood	next	to	Bottle	where	he	lay	on	the	deck.	‘You,	soldier.’
The	man’s	eyes	were	closed,	and	at	Fiddler ’s	words	the	eyes	scrunched
tight.	‘Not	now,	Sergeant.	Please.’
‘Soldier,’	Fiddler	repeated,	‘you	have,	uh,	made	something	of	a	mess	of
yourself.	You	know,	around	your	crotch.’
Bottle	groaned.
Fiddler	glanced	over	at	the	others	of	the	squad.	Still	busy	with	themselves
for	the	moment.	Good.	He	crouched	down.	‘Dammit,	Bottle,	crawl	off	and	get
yourself	cleaned	up	–	if	the	others	see	this	–	but	hold	on,	I	need	to	know
something.	I	need	to	know	what	you	found	so	exciting	about	all	that?’
Bottle	rolled	onto	his	side.	‘You	don’t	understand,’	he	mumbled.	‘She	likes
doing	that.	When	she	gets	the	chance.	I	don’t	know	why.	I	don’t	know.’
‘She?	Who?	Nobody’s	been	near	you,	Bottle!’
‘She	plays	with	me.	With…it.’
‘Somebody	sure	does,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Now	get	below	and	clean	yourself	up.
Smiles	sees	this	and	you’re	looking	at	a	life	of	torment.’
The	sergeant	watched	the	man	crawl	away.	Excited.	Here	we	were,	about	to
get	annihilated.	Every	damned	one	of	us.	And	he	fantasizes	about	some	old
sweetheart.
Hood’s	breath.
	
Taralack	Veed	studied	the	confusion	on	the	deck	for	a	time,	frowning	as	he
watched	the	commander,	Tomad	Sengar,	pacing	back	and	forth	whilst	Edur
warriors	came	and	went	with	messages	somehow	signalled	across	from	the
seemingly	countless	other	Edur	ships.	Something	had	struck	Tomad	Sengar	an
almost	physical	blow	–	not	the	ritual	sorcery	that	had	challenged	their	own,	but
some	news	that	arrived	a	short	time	later,	as	the	Malazan	fleet	worked	to


extricate	itself	from	the	encirclement.	Ships	were	passing	within	a	quarrel’s
flight	of	each	other,	faces	turned	and	staring	across	the	gap,	something	like
relief	connecting	that	regard	–	Taralack	had	even	seen	a	Malazan	soldier	wave.
Before	a	fellow	soldier	had	batted	the	man	in	the	side	of	the	head	with	a	fist.
Meanwhile,	the	two	Edur	fleets	were	conjoining	into	one	–	no	simple	task,
given	the	unsettled	waters	and	the	vast	number	of	craft	involved,	and	the	fading
light	as	the	day	waned.
And,	there	in	the	face	of	Tomad	Sengar,	the	admiral	of	this	massive
floating	army,	the	haunting	that	could	only	come	with	news	of	a	very	personal
tragedy.	A	loss,	a	terrible	loss.	Curious	indeed.
The	air	hung	close	about	the	ship,	still	befouled	with	Elder	sorcery.	These
Edur	were	abominations,	to	so	flagrantly	unleash	such	power.	Thinking	they
would	wield	it	as	if	it	were	a	weapon	of	cold,	indifferent	iron.	But	with	Elder
powers	–	with	chaos	–	it	was	those	powers	that	did	the	wielding.
And	the	Malazans	had	answered	in	kind.	A	stunning	revelation,	a	most
unexpected	unveiling	of	arcane	knowledge.	Yet,	if	anything,	the	power	of	the
Malazan	ritual	surpassed	that	of	the	scores	of	Edur	warlocks.	Extraordinary.
Had	not	Taralack	Veed	witnessed	it	with	his	own	eyes,	he	would	have
considered	such	ability	in	the	hands	of	the	Malazan	Empire	simply
unbelievable.	Else,	why	had	they	never	before	exploited	it?
Ah,	a	moment’s	thought	and	he	had	the	answer	to	that.	The	Malazans	might
be	bloodthirsty	tyrants,	but	they	are	not	insane.	They	understand	caution.
Restraint.
These	Tiste	Edur,	unfortunately,	do	not.
Unfortunate,	that	is,	for	them.
He	saw	Twilight,	the	Atri-Preda,	moving	among	her	Letherii	soldiers,
voicing	a	calming	word	or	two,	the	occasional	low-toned	command,	and	it
seemed	the	distraught	eddies	calmed	in	her	wake.
The	Gral	headed	over.
She	met	his	eyes	and	greeted	him	with	a	faint	nod.
‘How	fares	your	companion	below?’	she	asked,	and	Taralack	was
impressed	by	her	growing	facility	with	the	language.
‘He	eats.	His	fortitude	returns,	Atri-Preda.	But,	as	to	this	day	and	its	strange
events,	he	is	indifferent.’
‘He	will	be	tested	soon.’
Taralack	shrugged.	‘This	does	not	concern	him.	What	assails	Tomad
Sengar?’	he	asked	under	his	breath,	stepping	closer	as	he	did	so.
She	hesitated	for	a	long	moment,	then	said,	‘Word	has	come	that	among
the	Malazan	fleet	was	a	craft	that	had	been	captured,	some	time	back	and	an


ocean	away,	by	the	Edur.	And	that	ship	was	gifted	to	one	of	Tomad’s	sons	to
command	–	a	journey	into	the	Nascent,	a	mission	the	nature	of	which	Emperor
Rhulad	would	not	be	told.’
‘Tomad	now	believes	that	son	is	dead.’
‘There	can	be	no	other	possibility.	And	in	losing	one	son,	he	in	truth	has
lost	two.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
She	glanced	at	him,	then	shook	her	head.	‘It	is	no	matter.	But	what	has	been
born	in	Tomad	Sengar	this	day,	Taralack	Veed,	is	a	consuming	hatred.	For
these	Malazans.’
The	Gral	shrugged.	‘They	have	faced	many	enemies	in	their	day,	AtriPreda.	Caladan	Brood,	Sorrel	Tawrith,	K’azz	D’Avore,	Anomander	Rake—’
At	the	last	name	Twilight’s	eyes	widened,	and	as	she	was	about	to	speak	her
gaze	shifted	fractionally,	to	just	past	Taralack	Veed’s	left	shoulder.	A	male
voice	spoke	from	behind	him.
‘That	is	impossible.’
The	Gral	stepped	to	one	side	to	take	in	the	newcomer.
An	Edur.
‘This	one	is	named	Ahlrada	Ahn,’	Twilight	said,	and	he	sensed	some
hidden	knowledge	between	the	two	in	her	voicing	of	the	Edur ’s	name.	‘Like
me,	he	has	learned	your	language	–	swifter	than	I.’
‘Anomander	Rake,’	the	Edur	said,	‘the	Black	Winged	Lord,	dwells	at	the
Gates	of	Darkness.’
‘The	last	I	heard,’	Taralack	Veed	said,	‘he	dwelt	in	a	floating	fortress
called	Moon’s	Spawn.	He	fought	a	sorcerous	battle	with	the	Malazans	on	a
distant	continent,	above	a	city	named	Pale.	And	Anomander	Rake	was	defeated.
But	not	killed.’
Shock	and	disbelief	warred	on	the	Edur	warrior ’s	weathered,	lined	visage.
‘You	must	tell	me	more	of	this.	The	one	you	call	Anomander	Rake,	how	is	he
described?’
‘I	know	little	of	that.	Tall,	black-skinned,	silver	hair.	He	carries	a	cursed
two-handed	sword.	Are	these	details	accurate?	I	know	not…but	I	see	by	the
look	in	your	eyes,	Ahlrada	Ahn,	that	they	must	be.’	Taralack	paused,
considering	how	much	he	should	reveal	–	his	next	statement	would	involve
arcane	knowledge	–	information	not	known	by	many.	Still…let	us	see	how	this
plays	out.	His	shifted	his	language,	to	that	of	the	Letherii,	and	said,
‘Anomander	Rake	is	Tiste	Andii.	Not	Edur.	Yet,	by	your	reaction,	warrior,	I
might	think	that,	as	with	Tomad	Sengar,	you	are	wounded	by	some	manner	of
unwelcome	revelation.’


A	sudden	skittish	look	in	the	warrior ’s	eyes.	He	glanced	at	Twilight,	then
pivoted	about	and	strode	away.
‘There	are	matters,’	the	Atri-Preda	said	to	Taralack	Veed,	‘that	you	are
unaware	of,	and	it	is	best	that	it	remain	so.	Ignorance	protects	you.	It	was	not
wise,’	she	added,	‘that	you	revealed	your	facility	with	the	Letherii	language.’
‘I	believe,’	the	Gral	replied,	‘that	Ahlrada	Ahn	will	prove	disinclined	to
report	our	conversation	to	anyone.’	He	met	her	eyes	then,	and	smiled.	‘As	will
you,	Atri-Preda.’
‘You	are	careless,	Taralack	Veed.’
He	spat	on	his	hands	and	swept	them	through	his	hair,	wondering	again	at
her	sudden	look	of	distaste.	‘Tell	Tomad	Sengar	this,	Atri-Preda.	It	is	he	who
risks	much,	with	his	demand	that	Icarium’s	prowess	be	tested.’
‘You	seem	so	certain,’	she	said.
‘Of	what?’
‘That	your	companion	represents	the	most	formidable	threat	Emperor
Rhulad	has	ever	faced.	Alas,	as	has	invariably	proved	the	case,	all	others	who
believed	the	same	are	now	dead.	And,	Taralack	Veed,	there	have	been	so	many.
Tomad	Sengar	must	know	for	certain.	He	must	be	made	to	believe,	before	he
will	guide	your	friend	to	stand	before	his	son.’
‘His	son?’
‘Yes.	Emperor	Rhulad	is	Tomad	Sengar ’s	youngest	son.	Indeed,	now,	the
only	son	he	has	left.	The	other	three	are	gone,	or	dead.	Likely	they	are	all
dead.’
‘Then	it	strikes	me,’	the	Gral	said,	‘that	what	Tomad	seeks	to	measure	is
not	Icarium’s	prowess,	but	his	lack	thereof.	After	all,	what	father	would	wish
death	upon	his	last	surviving	son?’
In	answer,	Twilight	simply	stared	at	him	for	a	long	moment.	Then	she
turned	away.
Leaving	Taralack	Veed	alone,	a	frown	growing	ever	more	troubled	on	his
face.
	
Sergeant	Hellian	had	found	a	supply	of	sailor ’s	rum	and	now	walked	round	the
decks,	a	benign	smile	on	her	face.	Not	half	a	bell	earlier,	she’d	been	singing
some	Kartoolian	death	dirge	as	the	very	Abyss	was	being	unleashed	in	the
skies	overhead.
Masan	Gilani,	her	armour	off	once	more	and	a	heavy	woollen	cloak
wrapped	about	her	against	the	chill	wind,	sat	among	a	handful	of	other
soldiers,	more	or	less	out	of	the	way	of	the	sailors.	The	enemy	fleet	was


somewhere	to	the	south	now,	lost	in	the	deepening	dusk,	and	good	riddance	to
them.
We’ve	got	us	a	High	Mage	now.	A	real	one.	That	Quick	Ben,	he	was	a
Bridgeburner,	after	all.	A	real	High	Mage,	who	just	saved	all	our	skins.	That’s
good.
A	new	badge	adorned	her	cloak,	in	silver,	crimson	and	gold	thread	–	she
was	quite	proud	of	her	handiwork.	The	Bonehunters.	Yes,	I	can	live	with	that
name.	True,	it	wasn’t	as	poignant	as	Bridgeburners.	In	fact,	its	meaning	was	a
little	bit	obscure,	but	that	was	fine,	since,	thus	far,	the	Fourteenth’s	history	was
equally	obscure.	Or	at	least	muddied	up	enough	to	make	things	confused	and
uncertain.
Like	where	we’re	going.	What’s	next?	Why	has	the	Empress	recalled	us?	It’s
not	as	if	Seven	Cities	don’t	need	rebuilding,	or	Malazans	filling	all	those	empty
garrisons.	Then	again,	the	plague	now	held	the	land	by	the	throat	and	was	still
choking	the	life	from	it.
But	we	got	us	a	High	Mage.
The	young	girl,	Sinn,	crawled	near,	shivering	in	the	chill,	and	Masan
Gilani	opened	one	side	of	her	cloak.	Sinn	slipped	within	that	enveloping
embrace,	snuggled	closer	then	settled	her	head	on	Masan’s	chest.
Nearby,	Sergeant	Cord	was	still	cursing	at	Crump,	who	had	stupidly	waved
at	one	of	the	passing	enemy	ships,	just	after	the	battle	that	wasn’t.	Crump	had
been	the	one	who’d	messed	things	badly	at	the	wall	of	Y’Ghatan,	she	recalled.
The	one	who	ran	with	his	knees	up	to	either	side	of	his	big	ears.	And	who	was
now	listening	to	his	sergeant	with	a	broad,	mindless	smile,	his	expression
twitching	to	sheer	delight	every	time	Cord’s	tirade	reached	new	heights	of
imagination.
If	all	of	that	went	on	much	longer,	Masan	Gilani	suspected,	the	sergeant
might	well	launch	himself	at	Crump,	hands	closing	on	that	long,	scrawny	neck
with	its	bobbing	fist-sized	apple.	Just	to	strangle	that	smile	from	the	fool’s
horsey	face.
Sinn’s	small	hand	began	playing	with	one	of	Masan’s	breasts,	the	index
finger	circling	the	nipple.
What	kind	of	company	has	this	imp	been	keeping?	She	gently	pushed	the
hand	away,	but	it	came	back.	Fine.	What	of	it,	but	damn,	that’s	one	cold	hand
she’s	got	there.
‘All	dead,’	Sinn	murmured.
‘What?	Who’s	all	dead,	girl?’
‘They’re	all	dead	–	you	like	this?	I	think	you	like	this.’
‘Your	finger	is	cold.	Who	is	all	dead?’


‘Big.’
The	finger	went	away,	was	replaced	by	a	warm,	wet	mouth.	A	dancing
tongue.
Hood’s	breath!	Well,	I	can	think	of	worse	ways	to	end	this	terrifying	day.
‘Is	that	my	sister	hiding	in	there?’
Masan	Gilani	looked	up	at	Corporal	Shard.	‘Yes.’
A	slightly	pained	expression	on	his	face.	‘She	won’t	tell	me…what
happened	at	the	estate.	What	happened…to	her.’	He	hesitated,	then	added,
‘Yours	isn’t	the	first	cloak	of	the	night	she’s	crawled	under,	Masan	Gilani.
Though	you’re	the	first	woman.’
‘Ah,	I	see.’
‘I	want	to	know	what	happened.	You	understand	that?	I	need	to	know.’
Masan	Gilani	nodded.
‘I	can	see	how	it	is,’	Shard	went	on,	looking	away	and	rubbing	at	his	face.
‘We	all	cope	in	our	own	ways…’
‘But	you’re	her	brother,’	she	said,	still	nodding.	‘And	you’ve	been
following	her	around.	To	make	sure	nobody	does	anything	with	her	they
shouldn’t	do.’
His	sigh	was	heavy.	‘Thanks,	Masan	Gilani.	I	wasn’t	really	worried	about
you—’
‘I	doubt	you’d	need	worry	about	any	of	us,’	she	replied.	‘Not	the	squads
here.’
‘You	know,’	he	said,	and	she	saw	tears	trickle	down	his	cheeks,	‘that’s
what’s	surprised	me.	Here,	with	these	people	–	all	of	us,	who	came	out	from
under	the	city	–	they’ve	all	said	the	same	thing	as	you	just	did.’
‘Shard,’	she	said	gently,	‘you	still	Ashok	Regiment?	You	and	the	rest?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘No.	We’re	Bonehunters	now.’
That’s	good.	‘I	got	some	extra	thread,’	she	noted.	‘Might	be	I	could	borrow
your	cloaks…on	a	warm	day…’
‘You’ve	got	a	good	hand,	Masan	Gilani.	I’ll	tell	the	others,	if	that’s	okay.’
‘It	is.	Not	much	else	for	us	to	do	now	anyway,	on	these	bloated	hippos.’
‘Still,	I	appreciate	it.	I	mean,	everything,	that	is.’
‘Go	get	some	sleep,	Corporal.	From	your	sister ’s	breathing,	that’s	what
she’s	doing	right	now.’
Nodding,	he	moved	away.
And	if	some	soldier	who	doesn’t	get	it	tries	to	take	advantage	of	this	broken
thing,	all	forty-odd	of	us	will	skin	him	or	her	alive.	Add	one	more.	Faradan
Sort.
Four	children	scrambled	across	the	deck,	one	squealing	with	laughter.


Tucked	in	Masan	Gilani’s	arms,	Sinn	stirred	slightly,	then	settled	in	once	more,
her	mouth	planted	firm	on	the	woman’s	nipple.	The	Dal	Honese	woman	stared
after	the	children,	pleased	to	see	that	they’d	recovered	from	the	march,	that
they’d	begun	their	own	healing.	We	all	cope	in	our	own	ways,	aye.
So	who	was	Sinn	seeing,	when	she	said	that	they	were	all	dead?
Gods	below,	I	don’t	think	I	want	to	know.	Not	tonight,	anyway.	Let	her
sleep.	Let	those	others	play,	then	curl	up	beneath	blankets	somewhere	below.
Let	us	all	sleep	to	this	beast’s	swaying.	Quick	Ben’s	gift	to	us,	all	of	this.
	
Brother	and	sister	stood	at	the	prow,	wrapped	against	the	chill,	and	watched	as
stars	filled	the	darkness	of	the	north	sky.	Creaking	cordage,	the	strain	of	sails
canted	over	as	the	ship	made	yet	another	tack.	Westward,	a	ridge	of	mountains
blacker	than	the	heavens	marked	the	Olphara	Peninsula.
The	sister	broke	the	long	silence	between	them.	‘It	should	have	been
impossible.’
Her	brother	snorted,	then	said,	‘It	was.	That’s	the	whole	point.’
‘Tavore	won’t	get	what	she	wants.’
‘I	know.’
‘She’s	used	to	that.’
‘She’s	had	to	deal	with	us,	yes.’
‘You	know,	Nil,	he	saved	us	all.’
A	nod,	unseen	beneath	the	heavy	hood	of	Wickan	wool.
‘Especially	Quick	Ben.’
‘Agreed.	So,’	Nil	continued,	‘we	are	also	agreed	that	it	is	a	good	thing	he
is	with	us.’
‘I	suppose,’	Nether	replied.
‘You’re	only	sounding	like	that	because	you	like	him,	sister.	Like	him	the
way	a	woman	likes	a	man.’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.	It’s	those	dreams…and	what	she	does…’
Nil	snorted	again.	‘Quickens	your	breath,	does	it?	That	animal	hand,
gripping	him	hard—’
‘Enough!	That’s	not	what	I	meant.	It’s	just…yes,	it’s	a	good	thing	he’s	with
this	army.	But	her,	with	him,	well,	I’m	not	so	sure.’
‘You’re	jealous,	you	mean.’
‘Brother,	I	grow	weary	of	this	childish	teasing.	There’s	something,	well,
compulsive	about	it,	the	way	she	uses	him.’
‘All	right,	on	that	I	would	agree.	But	for	you	and	me,	sister,	there	is	one
vital	question	remaining.	The	Eres’al	has	taken	an	interest.	She	follows	us	like


a	jackal.’
‘Not	us.	Him.’
‘Exactly.	And	that	is	at	the	heart	of	the	question	here.	Do	we	tell	her?	Do	we
tell	the	Adjunct?’
‘Tell	her	what?	That	some	wet-crotched	soldier	in	Fiddler ’s	squad	is	more
important	to	her	and	her	army	than	Quick	Ben,	Kalam	and	Apsalar	all	put
together?	Listen,	we	wait	until	we	discover	what	the	High	Mage	tells	the
Adjunct	–	about	what	just	happened.’
‘Meaning,	if	he	says	little,	or	even	claims	complete	ignorance—’
‘Or	takes	credit	and	struts	around	like	a	First	Hero	–	that’s	when	we	decide
on	our	answer,	Nil.’
‘All	right.’
They	were	silent	then	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	until	Nil	said,	‘You	shouldn’t
worry	overmuch,	Nether.	A	half-woman	half-animal	all	covered	in	smelly	fur
isn’t	much	competition	for	his	heart,	I’d	imagine.’
‘But	it	wasn’t	my	hand—’	Abruptly,	she	shut	up,	then	offered	up	a	most
ferocious	string	of	Wickan	curses.
In	the	dark,	Nil	was	smiling.	Thankful,	nonetheless,	that	his	sister	could	not
see	it.
	
Marines	crowded	the	hold,	sprawled	or	curled	up	beneath	blankets,	so	many
bodies	Apsalar	was	made	uneasy,	as	if	she’d	found	herself	in	a	soldier	barrow.
Drawing	her	own	coverings	to	one	side,	she	rose.	Two	lanterns	swung	from
timbers,	their	wicks	low.	The	air	was	growing	foul.	She	clasped	on	her	cloak
and	made	her	way	towards	the	hatch.
Climbing	free,	she	stepped	onto	the	mid	deck.	The	night	air	was	bitter	cold
but	blissfully	fresh	in	her	lungs.	She	saw	two	figures	at	the	prow.	Nil	and
Nether.	So	turned	instead	and	ascended	to	the	stern	castle,	only	to	find	yet
another	figure,	leaning	on	the	stern	rail.	A	soldier,	short,	squat,	his	head	left
bare	despite	the	icy	wind.	Bald,	with	a	fringe	of	long,	grey,	ratty	strands	that
whipped	about	in	the	frigid	blasts.	She	did	not	recognize	the	man.
Apsalar	hesitated,	then,	shrugging,	walked	over.	His	head	turned	when	she
reached	the	rail	at	his	side.	‘You	invite	illness,	soldier,’	she	said.	‘At	the	least,
draw	up	your	hood.’
The	old	man	grunted,	said	nothing.
‘I	am	named	Apsalar.’
‘So	you	want	my	name	back,	do	you?	But	if	I	do	that,	then	it	ends.	Just
silence.	It’s	always	that	way.’


She	looked	down	on	the	churning	wake	twisting	away	from	the	ship’s
stern.	Phosphorescence	lit	the	foam.	‘I	am	a	stranger	to	the	Fourteenth	Army,’
she	said.
‘Doubt	it’ll	make	a	difference,’	he	said.	‘What	I	did	ain’t	no	secret	to
nobody.’
‘I	have	but	recently	returned	to	Seven	Cities.’	She	paused,	then	said,	‘In	any
case,	you	are	not	alone	with	the	burden	of	things	you	once	did.’
He	glanced	over	again.	‘You’re	too	young	to	be	haunted	by	your	past.’
‘And	you,	soldier,	are	too	old	to	care	so	much	about	your	own.’
He	barked	a	laugh,	returned	his	attention	to	the	sea.
To	the	east	clouds	skidded	from	the	face	of	the	moon,	yet	the	light	cast
down	was	muted,	dull.
‘Look	at	that,’	he	said.	‘I	got	good	eyes,	but	that	moon’s	nothing	but	a	blur.
Not	the	haze	of	cloud,	neither.	It’s	a	distant	world,	ain’t	it?	Another	realm,	with
other	armies	crawling	around	in	the	fog,	killing	each	other,	draggin’	children
into	the	streets,	red	swords	flashing	down	over ’n	over.	And	I	bet	they	look	up
every	now	and	then,	wonderin’	at	all	the	dust	they	kicked	up,	makin’	it	hard	to
see	that	other	world	overhead.’
‘When	I	was	a	child,’	Apsalar	said,	‘I	believed	that	there	were	cities	there,
but	no	wars.	Just	beautiful	gardens,	and	the	flowers	were	ever	in	bloom,	every
season,	day	and	night,	filling	the	air	with	wondrous	scents…you	know,	I	told
all	of	that	to	someone,	once.	He	later	said	to	me	that	he	fell	in	love	with	me	that
night.	With	that	story.	He	was	young,	you	see.’
‘And	now	he’s	just	that	emptiness	in	your	eyes,	Apsalar.’
She	flinched.	‘If	you	are	going	to	make	observations	like	that,	I	will	know
your	name.’
‘But	that	would	ruin	it.	Everything.	Right	now,	I’m	just	me,	just	a	soldier
like	all	the	others.	You	find	out	who	I	am	and	it	all	falls	apart.’	He	grimaced,
then	spat	down	into	the	sea.	‘Very	well.	Nothing	ever	lasts,	not	even	ignorance.
My	name’s	Squint.’
‘I	hate	to	puncture	your	ego	–	as	tortured	as	it	is	–	but	no	vast	revelation
follows	your	name.’
‘Do	you	lie?	No,	I	see	you	don’t.	Well,	never	expected	that,	Apsalar.’
‘Nothing	changes,	then,	does	it?	You	know	nothing	of	me	and	I	know
nothing	of	you.’
‘I’d	forgotten	what	that	was	like.	That	young	man,	what	happened	to	him?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	left	him.’
‘You	didn’t	love	him?’
She	sighed.	‘Squint,	it’s	complicated.	I’ve	hinted	at	my	own	past.	The	truth


is,	I	loved	him	too	much	to	see	him	fall	so	far	into	my	life,	into	what	I	was	–
and	still	am.	He	deserves	better.’
‘You	damned	fool,	woman.	Look	at	me.	I’m	alone.	Once,	I	wasn’t	in	no
hurry	to	change	that.	And	then,	one	day	I	woke	up,	and	it	was	too	late.	Now,
alone	gives	me	my	only	peace,	but	it	ain’t	a	pleasant	peace.	You	two	loved	each
other	–	any	idea	how	rare	and	precious	that	is?	You	broke	yourself	and	broke
him	too,	I’d	think.	Listen	to	me	–	go	find	him,	Apsalar.	Find	him	and	hold	onto
him	–	now	whose	ego	tortures	itself,	eh?	There	you	are,	thinking	that	change
can	only	go	one	way.’
Her	heart	was	thudding	hard.	She	was	unable	to	speak,	every	counter
argument,	every	refutation	seeming	to	melt	away.	Sweat	cooled	on	her	skin.
Squint	turned	away.	‘Gods	below,	a	real	conversation.	All	edges	and	life…
I’d	forgotten.	I’m	going	below	–	my	head’s	gone	numb.’	He	paused.	‘Don’t
suppose	you’d	ever	care	to	talk	again?	Just	Squint	and	Apsalar,	who	ain’t	got
nothing	in	common	except	what	they	don’t	know	about	each	other.’
She	managed	a	nod,	and	said,	‘I	would…welcome	that,	Squint.’
‘Good.’
She	listened	to	his	footsteps	dwindle	behind	her.	Poor	man.	He	did	the	right
thing	taking	Coltaine’s	life,	but	he’s	the	only	one	who	can’t	live	with	that.
	
Climbing	down	into	the	hold,	Squint	stopped	for	a	moment,	hands	on	the	rope
rails	to	either	side	of	the	steep	steps.	He	could	have	said	more,	he	knew,	but	he
had	no	idea	he’d	slice	so	easily	through	her	defences.	That	vulnerability	was…
unexpected.
You’d	think,	wouldn’t	you,	that	someone	who’d	been	possessed	by	a	god
would	be	tougher	than	that.

‘Apsalar.’
She	knew	the	voice	and	so	did	not	turn.	‘Hello,	Cotillion.’
The	god	moved	up	to	lean	against	the	rail	at	her	side.	‘It	was	not	easy	to
find	you.’
‘I	am	surprised.	I	am	doing	as	you	ask,	after	all.’
‘Into	the	heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	That	detail	was	not	something	we
had	anticipated.’
‘Victims	do	not	stand	still,	awaiting	the	knife.	Even	unsuspecting,	they	are
capable	of	changing	everything.’


He	said	nothing	for	a	time,	and	Apsalar	could	feel	a	renewal	of	tension
within	her.	In	the	muted	moonlight	his	face	looked	tired,	and	in	his	eyes	as	he
looked	at	her,	something	febrile.
‘Apsalar,	I	was…complacent—’
‘Cotillion,	you	are	many	things,	but	complacency	is	not	one	of	them.’
‘Careless,	then.	Something	has	happened	–	it	is	difficult	to	piece	together.
As	if	the	necessary	details	have	been	flung	into	a	muddy	pool,	and	I	have	been
able	to	do	little	more	than	grope,	half-blind	and	not	even	certain	what	it	is	I	am
looking	for.’
‘Cutter.’
He	nodded.	‘There	was	an	attack.	An	ambush,	I	think	–	even	the	memories
held	in	the	ground,	where	the	blood	spilled,	were	all	fragmented	–	I	could	read
so	little.’
What	has	happened?	She	wanted	to	ask	that	question.	Now,	cutting	through
his	slow,	cautious	approach	–	not	caution	–	he	is	hedging—
‘A	small	settlement	is	near	the	scene	–	they	were	the	ones	who	cleaned
things	up.’
‘He	is	dead.’
‘I	don’t	know	–	there	were	no	bodies,	except	for	horses.	One	grave,	but	it
had	been	opened	and	the	occupant	exhumed	–	no,	I	don’t	why	anyone	would	do
that.	In	any	case,	I	have	lost	contact	with	Cutter,	and	that	more	than	anything
else	is	what	disturbs	me.’
‘Lost	contact,’	she	repeated	dully.	‘Then	he	is	dead,	Cotillion.’
‘I	honestly	do	not	know.	There	are	two	things,	however,	of	which	I	am
certain.	Do	you	wish	to	hear	them?’
‘Are	they	relevant?’
‘That	is	for	you	to	decide.’
‘Very	well.’
‘One	of	the	women,	Scillara—’
‘Yes.’
‘She	gave	birth	–	she	survived	to	do	that	at	least,	and	the	child	is	now	in	the
care	of	the	villagers.’
‘That	is	good.	What	else?’
‘Heboric	Light	Touch	is	dead.’
She	turned	at	that	–	but	away	from	him	–	staring	out	over	the	seas,	to	that
distant,	murky	moon.	‘Ghost	Hands.’
‘Yes.	The	power	–	the	aura	–	of	that	old	man	–	it	burned	like	green	fire,	it
had	the	wild	rage	of	Treach.	It	was	unmistakable,	undeniable—’
‘And	now	it	is	gone.’


‘Yes.’
‘There	was	another	woman,	a	young	girl.’
‘Yes.	We	wanted	her,	Shadowthrone	and	I.	As	it	turns	out,	I	know	she	lives,
and	indeed	she	appears	to	be	precisely	where	we	wanted	her	to	be,	with	one
crucial	difference—’
‘It	is	not	you	and	Shadowthrone	who	control	her.’
‘Guide,	not	control	–	we	would	not	have	presumed	control,	Apsalar.
Unfortunately,	the	same	cannot	be	said	of	her	new	master.	The	Crippled	God.’
He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Felisin	Younger	is	Sha’ik	Reborn.’
Apsalar	nodded.	‘Like	a	sword	that	kills	its	maker…there	are	cycles	to
justice.’
‘Justice?	Abyss	below,	Apsalar,	justice	is	nowhere	to	be	seen	in	any	of
this.’
‘Isn’t	it?’	She	faced	him	again.	‘I	sent	Cutter	away,	because	I	feared	he
would	die	if	he	stayed	with	me.	I	sent	him	away	and	that	is	what	killed	him.	You
sought	to	use	Felisin	Younger,	and	now	she	finds	herself	a	pawn	in	another
god’s	hand.	Treach	wanted	a	Destriant	to	lead	his	followers	into	war,	but
Heboric	is	killed	in	the	middle	of	nowhere,	having	achieved	nothing.	Like	a
tiger	cub	getting	its	skull	crushed	–	all	that	potential,	that	possibility,	gone.	Tell
me,	Cotillion,	what	task	did	you	set	Cutter	in	that	company?’
He	did	not	answer.
‘You	charged	him	to	protect	Felisin	Younger,	didn’t	you?	And	he	failed.	Is
he	alive?	For	his	own	sake,	perhaps	it	is	best	that	he	is	not.’
‘You	cannot	mean	that,	Apsalar.’
She	closed	her	eyes.	No,	I	do	not	mean	that.	Gods,	what	am	I	to	do…with
this	pain?	What	am	I	to	do?
Cotillion	slowly	reached	up,	his	hand	–	the	black	leather	glove	removed	–
nearing	the	side	of	her	face.	She	felt	his	finger	brush	her	cheek,	felt	the	cold
thread	that	was	all	that	was	left	of	the	tear	he	wiped	away.	A	tear	she	had	not
known	was	there.
‘You	are	frozen,’	he	said	in	a	soft	voice.
She	nodded,	then	shook	her	head	suddenly	as	everything	crumbled	inside	–
and	she	was	in	his	arms,	weeping	uncontrollably.
And	the	god	spoke,	‘I’ll	find	him,	Apsalar.	I	swear	it.	I’ll	find	the	truth.’
Truths,	yes.	One	after	another,	one	boulder	settling	down,	then	another.	And
another.	Blotting	out	the	light,	darkness	closing	in,	grit	and	sand	sifting	down,
a	solid	silence	when	the	last	one	is	in	place.	Now,	dear	fool,	try	drawing	a
breath.	A	single	breath.
There	were	clouds	closed	fast	round	the	moon.	And	one	by	one,	gardens


died.


Chapter	Nineteen
Cruel	misapprehension,	you	choose	the	shape
and	cast	of	this	wet	clay	in	your	hands,	as	the	wheel
ever	spins
Tempered	in	granite,	this	fired	shell	hardens
into	the	scarred	shield	of	your	deeds,	and	the	dark
decisions	within
Settle	hidden	in	suspension,	unseen	in	banded	strata
awaiting	death’s	weary	arrival,	the	journey’s	repast
to	close	you	out
We	blind	grievers	raise	you	high,	honouring	all
you	never	were	and	what	rots	sealed	inside	follows	you
to	the	grave
I	stand	now	among	the	mourners,	displeased
by	my	suspicions	as	the	vessel’s	dust	drifts—
oh	how	I	despise	funerals.
The	Secrets	of	Clay
Panith	Fanal
His	eyes	opened	in	the	darkness.	Lying	motionless,	he	waited	until	his	mind
separated	the	sounds	that	had	awakened	him.	Two	sources,	Barathol	decided.
One	distant,	one	close	at	hand.	Caution	dictated	he	concentrate	on	the	latter.
Bedclothes	rustling,	pulled	and	tugged	by	adjusting	hands,	a	faint	scrape	of
sandy	gravel,	then	a	muted	murmur.	A	long	exhaled	breath,	then	some	more
shifting	of	positions,	until	the	sounds	became	rhythmic,	and	two	sets	of
breathing	conjoined.
It	was	well.	Hood	knew,	Barathol	wasn’t	the	one	with	a	chance	of	easing	the
haunted	look	in	the	Daru’s	eyes.	He	then	added	another	silent	prayer,	that
Scillara	not	damage	the	man	with	some	future	betrayal.	If	that	happened,	he


suspected	Cutter	would	retreat	so	far	from	life	there	would	be	no	return.
In	any	case,	such	matters	were	out	of	his	hands,	and	that,	too,	was	well.
And	so…the	other,	more	distant	sound.	A	susurration,	more	patient	in	its
rhythm	than	the	now	quickening	lovemaking	on	the	opposite	side	of	the
smouldering	firepit.	Like	wind	stroking	treetops…but	there	were	no	trees.	And
no	wind.
It	is	the	sea.
Dawn	was	approaching,	paling	the	eastern	sky.	Barathol	heard	Scillara	roll
to	one	side,	her	gasps	low	but	long	in	settling	down.	From	Cutter,	a	drawing	up
of	coverings,	and	he	then	turned	onto	one	side	and	moments	later	fell	into
sleep	once	more.
Scillara	sat	up.	Flint	and	iron,	a	patter	of	sparks,	as	she	awakened	her	pipe.
She	had	used	the	last	of	her	coins	to	resupply	herself	with	rustleaf	the	day
before,	when	they	passed	a	modest	caravan	working	its	way	inland.	The
meeting	had	been	sudden,	as	the	parties	virtually	collided	on	a	bend	in	the
rocky	trail.	An	exchange	of	wary	looks,	and	something	like	relief	arriving	in
the	faces	of	the	traders.
The	plague	was	broken.	Tanno	Spiritwalkers	had	so	pronounced	it,	lifting
the	self-imposed	isolation	of	the	island	of	Otataral.
But	Barathol	and	his	companions	were	the	first	living	people	this	troop	had
encountered	since	leaving	the	small,	empty	village	on	the	coast	where	their
ship	had	delivered	them.	The	merchants,	transporting	basic	staples	from	Rutu
Jelba,	had	begun	to	fear	they	were	entering	a	ghost	land.
Two	days	of	withdrawal	for	Scillara	had	had	Barathol	regretting	ever
leaving	his	smithy.	Rustleaf	and	now	lovemaking	–	the	woman	is	at	peace	once
more,	thank	Hood.
Scillara	spoke:	‘You	want	I	should	prepare	breakfast,	Barathol?’
He	rolled	onto	his	back	and	sat	up,	studied	her	in	the	faint	light.
She	shrugged.	‘A	woman	knows.	Are	you	upset?’
‘Why	would	I	be?’	he	replied	in	a	rumble.	He	looked	over	at	the	still
motionless	form	of	Cutter.	‘Is	he	truly	asleep	once	more?’
Scillara	nodded.	‘Most	nights	he	hardly	sleeps	at	all	–	nightmares,	and	his
fear	of	them.	An	added	benefit	to	a	roll	with	him	–	breaks	loose	his	exhaustion
afterwards.’
‘I	applaud	your	altruism,’	Barathol	said,	moving	closer	to	the	firepit	and
prodding	at	the	dim	coals	with	the	point	of	his	cook-knife.	From	the	gloom	to
his	right,	Chaur	appeared,	smiling.
‘You	should	at	that,’	Scillara	said	in	reply	to	Barathol’s	comment.
He	glanced	up.	‘And	is	that	all	there	is?	For	you?’


She	looked	away,	drew	hard	on	her	pipe.
‘Don’t	hurt	him,	Scillara.’
‘Fool,	don’t	you	see?	I’m	doing	the	opposite.’
‘That’s	what	I	concluded.	But	what	if	he	falls	in	love	with	you?’
‘He	won’t.	He	can’t.’
‘Why	not?’
She	rose	and	walked	over	to	the	packs.	‘Get	that	fire	going,	Barathol.	Some
hot	tea	should	take	away	the	chill	in	our	bones.’
Unless	that’s	all	you	have	in	them,	woman.
Chaur	went	to	Scillara’s	side,	crouching	to	stroke	her	hair	as,	ignoring
him,	she	drew	out	wrapped	foodstuffs.
Chaur	watched,	with	avid	fascination,	every	stream	of	smoke	Scillara
exhaled.
Aye,	lad,	like	the	legends	say,	some	demons	breathe	fire.
	
They	let	Cutter	sleep,	and	he	did	not	awaken	until	mid-morning	–	bolting	into	a
sitting	position	with	a	confused,	then	guilty	expression	on	his	face.	The	sun
was	finally	warm,	tempered	by	a	pleasantly	cool	breeze	coming	in	from	the
east.
Barathol	watched	as	Cutter ’s	scanning	gaze	found	Scillara,	who	sat	with
her	back	to	a	boulder,	and	the	Daru	flinched	slightly	at	her	greeting	wink	and
blown	kiss.
Chaur	was	circling	the	camp	like	an	excited	dog	–	the	roar	of	surf	was
much	louder	now,	carried	on	the	wind,	and	he	could	not	contain	his	eagerness
to	discover	the	source	of	that	sound.
Cutter	pulled	his	attention	from	Scillara	and	watched	Chaur	for	a	time.
‘What’s	with	him?’
‘The	sea,’	Barathol	said.	‘He’s	never	seen	it.	He	probably	doesn’t	even
know	what	it	is.	There’s	still	some	tea,	Cutter,	and	those	packets	in	front	of
Scillara	are	your	breakfast.’
‘It’s	late,’	he	said,	rising.	‘You	should’ve	woken	me.’	Then	he	halted.	‘The
sea?	Beru	fend,	we’re	that	close?’
‘Can’t	you	smell	it?	Hear	it?’
Cutter	suddenly	smiled	–	and	it	was	a	true	smile	–	the	first	Barathol	had
seen	on	the	young	man.
‘Did	anyone	see	the	moon	last	night?’	Scillara	asked.	‘It	was	mottled.
Strange,	like	holes	had	been	poked	through	it.’
‘Some	of	those	holes,’	Barathol	observed,	‘seem	to	be	getting	bigger.’


She	looked	over,	nodding.	‘Good,	I	thought	so,	too,	but	I	couldn’t	be	sure.
What	do	you	think	it	means?’
Barathol	shrugged.	‘It’s	said	the	moon	is	another	realm,	like	ours,	with
people	on	its	surface.	Sometimes	things	fall	from	our	sky.	Rocks.	Balls	of	fire.
The	Fall	of	the	Crippled	God	was	said	to	be	like	that.	Whole	mountains
plunging	down,	obliterating	most	of	a	continent	and	filling	half	the	sky	with
smoke	and	ash.’	He	glanced	across	at	Scillara,	then	over	at	Cutter.	‘I	was
thinking,	maybe,	that	something	hit	the	moon	in	the	same	way.’
‘Like	a	god	being	pulled	down?’
‘Yes,	like	that.’
‘So	what	are	those	dark	blotches?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Could	be	smoke	and	ash.	Could	be	pieces	of	the	world	that
broke	away.’
‘Getting	bigger…’
‘Yes.’	Barathol	shrugged	again.	‘Smoke	and	ash	spreads.	It	stands	to
reason,	then,	doesn’t	it?’
Cutter	was	quickly	breaking	his	fast.	‘Sorry	to	make	you	all	wait.	We
should	get	going.	I	want	to	see	what’s	in	that	abandoned	village.’
‘Anything	seaworthy	is	all	we	need,’	Barathol	said.
‘That	is	what	I’m	hoping	we’ll	find.’	Cutter	brushed	crumbs	from	his
hands,	tossed	one	last	dried	fig	into	his	mouth,	then	rose.	‘I’m	ready,’	he	said
around	a	mouthful.
All	right,	Scillara,	you	did	well.
	
There	were	sun-bleached,	dog-gnawed	bones	in	the	back	street	of	the	fisher
village.	Doors	to	the	residences	within	sight,	the	inn	and	the	Malazan
assessor ’s	building	were	all	open,	drifts	of	fine	sand	heaped	in	the
entranceways.	Moored	on	both	sides	of	the	stone	jetty	were	half-submerged
fisher	craft,	the	ropes	holding	them	fast	stretched	to	unravelling,	while	in	the
shallow	bay	beyond,	two	slightly	larger	carracks	waited	at	anchor	next	to
mooring	poles.
Chaur	still	stood	on	the	spot	where	he	had	first	come	in	sight	of	the	sea	and
its	rolling,	white-edged	waves.	His	smile	was	unchanged,	but	tears	streamed
unchecked	and	unabating	from	his	eyes,	and	it	seemed	he	was	trying	to	sing,
without	opening	his	mouth:	strange	mewling	sounds	emerged.	What	had	run
down	from	his	nose	was	now	caked	with	wind-blown	sand.
Scillara	wandered	through	the	village,	looking	for	whatever	might	prove
useful	on	the	voyage	they	now	planned.	Rope,	baskets,	casks,	dried	foodstuffs,


nets,	gaffs,	salt	for	storing	fish	–	anything.	Mostly	what	she	found	were	the
remnants	of	villagers	–	all	worried	by	dogs.	Two	squat	storage	buildings
flanked	the	avenue	that	ran	inward	from	the	jetty,	and	these	were	both	locked.
With	Barathol’s	help,	both	buildings	were	broken	into,	and	in	these	structures
they	found	more	supplies	than	they	could	ever	use.
Cutter	swam	out	to	examine	the	carracks,	returning	after	a	time	to	report
that	both	remained	sound	and	neither	was	particularly	more	seaworthy	than	the
other.	Of	matching	length	and	beam,	the	craft	were	like	twins.
‘Made	by	the	same	hands,’	Cutter	said.	‘I	think.	You	could	judge	that	better
than	me,	Barathol,	if	you’re	at	all	interested.’
‘I	will	take	your	word	for	it,	Cutter.	So,	we	can	choose	either	one,	then.’
‘Yes.	Of	course,	maybe	they	belong	to	the	traders	we	met.’
‘No,	they’re	not	Jelban.	What	are	their	names?’
‘Dhenrabi’s	Tail	is	the	one	on	the	left.	The	other ’s	called	Sanal’s	Grief.	I
wonder	who	Sanal	was?’
‘We’ll	take	Grief,’	Barathol	said,	‘and	before	you	ask,	don’t.’
Scillara	laughed.
Cutter	waded	alongside	one	of	the	swamped	sculls	beside	the	jetty.	‘We
should	bail	one	of	these,	to	move	our	supplies	out	to	her.’
Barathol	rose.	‘I’ll	start	bringing	those	supplies	down	from	the
warehouse.’
Scillara	watched	the	huge	man	make	his	way	up	the	avenue,	then	turned	her
attention	to	the	Daru,	who	had	found	a	half-gourd	bailer	and	was	scooping
water	from	one	of	the	sculls.	‘Want	me	to	help?’	she	asked.
‘It’s	all	right.	Finally,	I’ve	got	something	to	do.’
‘Day	and	night	now.’
The	glance	he	threw	her	was	shy.	‘I’ve	never	tasted	milk	before.’
Laughing,	she	repacked	her	pipe.	‘Yes	you	have.	You	just	don’t	remember
it.’
‘Ah.	I	suppose	you’re	right.’
‘Anyway,	you’re	a	lot	gentler	than	that	little	sweet-faced	bloodfly	was.’
‘You’ve	not	given	her	a	name?’
‘No.	Leave	that	to	her	new	mothers	to	fight	over.’
‘Not	even	in	your	own	mind?	I	mean,	apart	from	bloodfly	and	leech	and
horse	tick.’
‘Cutter,’	she	said,	‘you	don’t	understand.	I	give	her	a	real	name	I’ll	end	up
having	to	turn	round	and	head	back.	I’ll	have	to	take	her,	then.’
‘Oh.	I	am	sorry,	Scillara.	You’re	right.	There’s	not	much	I	understand
about	anything.’


‘You	need	to	trust	yourself	more.’
‘No.’	He	paused,	eyes	on	the	sea	to	the	east.	‘There’s	nothing	I’ve	done	to
make	that…possible.	Look	at	what	happened	when	Felisin	Younger	trusted	me
–	to	protect	her.	Even	Heboric	–	he	said	I	was	showing	leadership,	he	said	that
was	good.	So,	he	too	trusted	me.’
‘You	damned	idiot.	We	were	ambushed	by	T’lan	Imass.	What	do	you	think
you	could	have	done?’
‘I	don’t	know,	and	that’s	my	point.’
‘Heboric	was	the	Destriant	of	Treach.	They	killed	him	as	if	he	was	nothing
more	than	a	lame	dog.	They	lopped	limbs	off	Greyfrog	like	they	were	getting
ready	to	cook	a	feast.	Cutter,	people	like	you	and	me,	we	can’t	stop	creatures
like	that.	They	cut	us	down	then	step	over	us	and	that’s	that	as	far	as	they’re
concerned.	Yes,	it’s	a	hard	thing	to	take,	for	anyone.	The	fact	that	we’re
insignificant,	irrelevant.	Nothing	is	expected	of	us,	so	better	we	just	hunch
down	and	stay	out	of	sight,	stay	beneath	the	notice	of	things	like	T’lan	Imass,
things	like	gods	and	goddesses.	You	and	me,	Cutter,	and	Barathol	there.	And
Chaur.	We’re	the	ones	who,	if	we’re	lucky,	stay	alive	long	enough	to	clean	up
the	mess,	put	things	back	together.	To	reassert	the	normal	world.	That’s	what	we
do,	when	we	can	–	look	at	you,	you’ve	just	resurrected	a	dead	boat	–	you	gave
it	its	function	again	–	look	at	it,	Cutter,	it	finally	looks	the	way	it	should,	and
that’s	satisfying,	isn’t	it?’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	Cutter	said,	shaking	his	head,	‘Scillara,	we’re	not	just
worker	termites	clearing	a	tunnel	after	a	god’s	careless	footfall.	That’s	not
enough.’
‘I’m	not	suggesting	it’s	enough,’	she	said.	‘I’m	telling	you	it’s	what	we
have	to	start	with,	when	we’re	rebuilding	–	rebuilding	villages	and	rebuilding
our	lives.’
Barathol	had	been	trudging	back	and	forth	during	this	conversation,	and
now	Chaur	had	come	down,	timidly,	closer	to	the	water.	The	mute	had
unpacked	the	supplies	from	the	horses,	including	Heboric’s	wrapped	corpse,
and	the	beasts	–	unsaddled,	their	bits	removed	–	now	wandered	along	the
grassy	fringe	beyond	the	tideline,	tails	swishing.
Cutter	began	loading	the	scull.
He	paused	at	one	point	and	grinned	wryly.	‘Lighting	a	pipe’s	a	good	way
of	getting	out	of	work,	isn’t	it?’
‘You	said	you	didn’t	need	any	help.’
‘With	the	bailing,	yes.’
‘What	you	don’t	understand,	Cutter,	is	the	spiritual	necessity	for	reward,
not	to	mention	the	clarity	that	comes	to	one’s	mind	during	such	repasts.	And	in


not	understanding,	you	instead	feel	resentment,	which	sours	the	blood	in	your
heart	and	makes	you	bitter.	It’s	that	bitterness	that	kills	people,	you	know,	it	eats
them	up	inside.’
He	studied	her.	‘Meaning,	I’m	actually	jealous?’
‘Of	course	you	are,	but	because	I	can	empathize	with	you,	I	am
comfortable	withholding	judgement.	Tell	me,	can	you	say	the	same	for
yourself?’
Barathol	arrived	with	a	pair	of	casks	under	his	arms.	‘Get	off	your	ass,
woman.	We’ve	got	a	good	wind	and	the	sooner	we’re	on	our	way	the	better.’
She	threw	him	a	salute	as	she	rose.	‘There	you	go,	Cutter,	a	man	who	takes
charge.	Watch	him,	listen,	and	learn.’
The	Daru	stared	at	her,	bemused.
She	read	his	face:	But	you	just	said…
So	I	did,	my	young	lover.	We	are	contrary	creatures,	us	humans,	but	that
isn’t	something	we	need	be	afraid	of,	or	even	much	troubled	by.	And	if	you	make
a	list	of	those	people	who	worship	consistency,	you’ll	find	they’re	one	and	all
tyrants	or	would-be	tyrants.	Ruling	over	thousands,	or	over	a	husband	or	a
wife,	or	some	cowering	child.	Never	fear	contradiction,	Cutter,	it	is	the	very
heart	of	diversity.
	
Chaur	held	on	to	the	steering	oar	whilst	Cutter	and	Barathol	worked	the	sails.
The	day	was	bright,	the	wind	fresh	and	the	carrack	rode	the	swells	as	if	its	very
wood	was	alive.	Every	now	and	then	the	bow	pitched	down,	raising	spray,	and
Chaur	would	laugh,	the	sound	child-like,	a	thing	of	pure	joy.
Scillara	settled	down	amidships,	the	sun	on	her	face	warm,	not	hot,	and
stretched	out.
We	sail	a	carrack	named	Grief,	with	a	corpse	on	board.	That	Cutter	means
to	deliver	to	its	final	place	of	rest.	Heboric,	did	you	know	such	loyalty	could
exist,	there	in	your	shadow?
Barathol	moved	past	her	at	one	point,	and,	as	Chaur	laughed	once	more,
she	saw	an	answering	smile	on	his	battered,	scarified	face.
Oh	yes,	it	is	indeed	blessed	music.	So	unexpected,	and	in	its	innocence,	so
needed…
	
The	return	of	certain	mortal	traits,	Onrack	the	Broken	realized,	reminded	one
that	life	was	far	from	perfect.	Not	that	he	had	held	many	illusions	in	that


regard.	In	truth,	he	held	no	illusions	at	all.	About	anything.	Even	so,	some	time
passed	–	in	something	like	a	state	of	fugue	–	before	Onrack	recognized	that
what	he	was	feeling	was…impatience.
The	enemy	would	come	again.	These	caverns	would	echo	with	screams,
with	the	clangour	of	weapons,	with	voices	raised	in	rage.	And	Onrack	would
stand	at	Trull	Sengar ’s	side,	and	with	him	witness,	in	helpless	fury,	the	death	of
still	more	of	Minala’s	children.
Of	course,	children	was	a	term	that	no	longer	fit.	Had	they	been	Imass,	they
would	have	survived	the	ordeal	of	the	passage	into	adulthood	by	now.	They
would	be	taking	mates,	leading	hunting	parties,	and	joining	their	voices	to	the
night	songs	of	the	clan,	when	the	darkness	returned	to	remind	them	all	that
death	waited,	there	at	the	end	of	life’s	path.
Lying	with	lovers	also	belonged	to	night,	and	that	made	sense,	for	it	was	in
the	midst	of	true	darkness	that	the	first	fire	of	life	was	born,	flickering	awake
to	drive	back	the	unchanging	absence	of	light.	To	lie	with	a	lover	was	to
celebrate	the	creation	of	fire.	From	this	in	the	flesh	to	the	world	beyond.
Here,	in	the	chasm,	night	reigned	eternal,	and	there	was	no	fire	in	the	soul,
no	heat	of	lovemaking.	There	was	only	the	promise	of	death.
And	Onrack	was	impatient	with	that.	There	was	no	glory	in	waiting	for
oblivion.	No,	in	an	existence	bound	with	true	meaning	and	purpose,	oblivion
should	ever	arrive	unexpected,	unanticipated	and	unseen.	One	moment	racing
full	tilt,	the	next,	gone.
As	a	T’lan	Imass	of	Logros,	Onrack	had	known	the	terrible	cost	borne	in
wars	of	attrition.	The	spirit	exhausted	beyond	reason,	with	no	salvation
awaiting	it,	only	more	of	the	same.	The	kin	falling	to	the	wayside,	shattered
and	motionless,	eyes	fixed	on	some	skewed	vista	–	a	scene	to	be	watched	for
eternity,	the	minute	changes	measuring	the	centuries	of	indifference.	Some
timid	creature	scampering	through,	a	plant’s	exuberant	green	pushing	up	from
the	earth	after	a	rain,	birds	pecking	at	seeds,	insects	building	empires…
Trull	Sengar	came	to	his	side	where	Onrack	stood	guarding	the	chokepoint.	‘Monok	Ochem	says	the	Edur ’s	presence	has…contracted,	away	from	us.
For	now.	As	if	something	made	my	kin	retreat.	I	feel,	my	friend,	that	we	have
been	granted	a	reprieve	–	one	that	is	not	welcome.	I	don’t	know	how	much
longer	I	can	fight.’
‘When	you	can	no	longer	fight	in	truth,	Trull	Sengar,	the	failure	will	cease
to	matter.’
‘I	did	not	think	they	would	defy	her,	you	know,	but	now,	I	see	that	it	makes
sense.	She	expected	them	to	just	abandon	this,	leaving	the	handful	remaining
here	to	their	fate.	Our	fate,	I	mean.’	He	shrugged.	‘Panek	was	not	surprised.’


‘The	other	children	look	to	him,’	Onrack	said.	‘They	would	not	abandon
him.	Nor	their	mothers.’
‘And,	in	staying,	they	will	break	the	hearts	of	us	all.’
‘Yes.’
The	Tiste	Edur	looked	over.	‘Have	you	come	to	regret	the	awakening	of
emotions	within	you,	Onrack?’
‘This	awakening	serves	to	remind	me,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘Of	what?’
‘Of	why	I	am	called	“The	Broken”.’
‘As	broken	as	the	rest	of	us.’
‘Not	Monok	Ochem,	nor	Ibra	Gholan.’
‘No,	not	them.’
‘Trull	Sengar,	when	the	attackers	come,	I	would	you	know	–	I	intend	to
leave	your	side.’
‘Indeed?’
‘Yes.	I	intend	to	challenge	their	leader.	To	slay	him	or	be	destroyed	in	the
attempt.	Perhaps,	if	I	can	deliver	a	truly	frightful	cost,	they	will	reconsider
their	alliance	with	the	Crippled	God.	At	the	very	least,	they	may	withdraw	and
not	return	for	a	long	time.’
‘I	understand.’	Trull	then	smiled	in	the	gloom.	‘I	will	miss	your	presence	at
my	side	in	those	final	moments,	my	friend.’
‘Should	I	succeed	in	what	I	intend,	Trull	Sengar,	I	shall	return	to	your
side.’
‘Then	you	had	better	be	quick	killing	that	leader.’
‘Such	is	my	intention.’
‘Onrack,	I	hear	something	new	in	your	voice.’
‘Yes.’
‘What	does	it	mean?’
‘It	means,	Trull	Sengar,	that	Onrack	the	Broken,	in	discovering	impatience,
has	discovered	something	else.’
‘What?’
‘This:	I	am	done	with	defending	the	indefensible.	I	am	done	with
witnessing	the	fall	of	friends.	In	the	battle	to	come,	you	shall	see	in	me
something	terrible.	Something	neither	Ibra	Gholan	nor	Monok	Ochem	can
achieve.	Trull	Sengar,	you	shall	see	a	T’lan	Imass,	awakened	to	anger.’
	
Banaschar	opened	the	door,	wavered	for	a	moment,	leaning	with	one	hand
against	the	frame,	then	staggered	into	his	decrepit	room.	The	rank	smell	of


sweat	and	unclean	bedding,	stale	food	left	on	the	small	table	beneath	the	barred
window.	He	paused,	considering	whether	or	not	to	light	the	lantern	–	but	the	oil
was	low	and	he’d	forgotten	to	buy	more.	He	rubbed	at	the	bristle	on	his	chin,
more	vigorously	than	normal	since	it	seemed	his	face	had	gone	numb.
A	creak	from	the	chair	against	the	far	wall,	six	paces	distant.	Banaschar
froze	in	place,	seeking	to	pierce	the	darkness.	‘Who’s	there?’	he	demanded.
‘There	are	few	things	in	this	world,’	said	the	figure	seated	in	the	chair,
‘more	pathetic	than	a	once-Demidrek	fallen	into	such	disrepair,	Banaschar.
Stumbling	drunk	into	this	vermin-filled	hovel	every	night	–	why	are	you
here?’
Banaschar	stepped	to	his	right	and	sank	heavily	onto	the	cot.	‘I	don’t	know
who	you	are,’	he	said,	‘so	I	see	no	reason	to	answer	you.’
A	sigh,	then,	‘You	send,	one	after	another	for	a	while	there,	cryptic
messages.	Pleading,	with	increasing	desperation,	to	meet	with	the	Imperial
High	Mage.’
‘Then	you	must	realize,’	Banaschar	said,	struggling	to	force	sobriety	into
his	thoughts	–	the	terror	was	helping	–	‘that	the	matter	concerns	only	devotees
of	D’rek—’
‘A	description	that	no	longer	fits	either	you	or	Tayschrenn.’
‘There	are	things,’	Banaschar	said,	‘that	cannot	be	left	behind.	Tayschrenn
knows	this,	as	much	as	I—’
‘Actually,	the	Imperial	High	Mage	knows	nothing.’	A	pause,	accompanying
a	gesture	that	Banaschar	interpreted	as	the	man	studying	his	fingernails,	and
something	in	his	tone	changed.	‘Not	yet,	that	is.	Perhaps	not	at	all.	You	see,
Banaschar,	the	decision	is	mine.’
‘Who	are	you?’
‘You	are	not	ready	yet	to	know	that.’
‘Why	are	you	intercepting	my	missives	to	Tayschrenn?’
‘Well,	to	be	precise,	I	have	said	no	such	thing.’
Banaschar	frowned.	‘You	just	said	the	decision	was	yours.’
‘Yes	I	did.	That	decision	centres	on	whether	I	remain	inactive	in	this	matter,
as	I	have	been	thus	far,	or	–	given	sufficient	cause	–	I	elect	to,	um,	intervene.’
‘Then	who	is	blocking	my	efforts?’
‘You	must	understand,	Banaschar,	Tayschrenn	is	the	Imperial	High	Mage
first	and	foremost.	Whatever	else	he	once	was	is	now	irrelevant—’
‘No,	it	isn’t.	Not	given	what	I	have	discovered—’
‘Tell	me.’
‘No.’
‘Better	yet,	Banaschar,	convince	me.’


‘I	cannot,’	he	replied,	hands	clutching	the	grimy	bedding	to	either	side.
‘An	imperial	matter?’
‘No.’
‘Well,	that	is	a	start.	As	you	said,	then,	the	subject	pertains	to	oncefollowers	of	D’rek.	A	subject,	one	presumes,	related	to	the	succession	of
mysterious	deaths	within	the	cult	of	the	Worm.	Succession?	More	like
slaughter,	yes?	Tell	me,	is	there	anyone	left?	Anyone	at	all?’
Banaschar	said	nothing.
‘Except,	of	course,’	the	stranger	added,	‘those	few	who	have,	at	some	time
in	the	past	and	for	whatever	reasons,	fallen	away	from	the	cult.	From	worship.’
‘You	know	too	much	of	this,’	Banaschar	said.	He	should	never	have	stayed
in	this	room.	He	should	have	been	finding	different	hovels	every	night.	He
hadn’t	thought	there’d	be	anyone,	anyone	left,	who’d	remember	him.	After	all,
those	who	might	have	were	now	all	dead.	And	I	know	why.	Gods	below,	how	I
wish	I	didn’t.
‘Tayschrenn,’	said	the	man	after	a	moment,	‘is	being	isolated.	Thoroughly
and	most	efficiently.	In	my	professional	standing,	I	admit	to	considerable
admiration,	in	fact.	Alas,	in	that	same	capacity,	I	am	also	experiencing
considerable	alarm.’
‘You	are	a	Claw.’
‘Very	good	–	at	least	some	intelligence	is	sifting	through	that	drunken
haze,	Banaschar.	Yes,	my	name	is	Pearl.’
‘How	did	you	find	me?’
‘Does	that	make	a	difference?’
‘It	does.	To	me,	it	does,	Pearl.’
Another	sigh	and	a	wave	of	one	hand.	‘Oh,	I	was	bored.	I	followed
someone,	who,	it	turned	out,	was	keeping	track	of	you	–	with	whom	you	spoke,
where	you	went,	you	know,	the	usual	things	required.’
‘Required?	For	what?’
‘Why,	preparatory,	I	imagine,	to	assassination,	when	that	killer ’s	master
deems	it	expedient.’
Banaschar	was	suddenly	shivering,	the	sweat	cold	and	clammy	beneath	his
clothes.	‘There	is	nothing	political,’	he	whispered,	‘nothing	that	has	anything	to
do	with	the	empire.	There	is	no	reason—’
‘Oh,	but	you	have	made	it	so,	Banaschar.	Do	you	forget?	Tayschrenn	is
being	isolated.	You	are	seeking	to	break	that,	to	awaken	the	Imperial	High
Mage—’
‘Why	is	he	permitting	it?’	Banaschar	demanded.	‘He’s	no	fool—’
A	soft	laugh.	‘Oh	no,	Tayschrenn	is	no	fool.	And	in	that,	you	may	well


have	your	answer.’
Banaschar	blinked	in	the	gloom.	‘I	must	meet	with	him,	Pearl.’
‘You	have	not	yet	convinced	me.’
A	long	silence,	in	which	Banaschar	closed	his	eyes,	then	placed	his	hands
over	them,	as	if	that	would	achieve	some	kind	of	absolution.	But	only	words
could	do	that.	Words,	uttered	now,	to	this	man.	Oh,	how	he	wanted	to	believe	it
would…suffice.	A	Claw,	who	would	be	my	ally.	Why?	Because	the	Claw	has…
rivals.	A	new	organization	that	has	deemed	it	expedient	to	raise	impenetrable
walls	around	the	Imperial	High	Mage.	What	does	that	reveal	of	that	new
organization?	They	see	Tayschrenn	as	an	enemy,	or	they	would	so	exclude	him
as	to	make	his	inaction	desirable,	even	to	himself.	They	know	he	knows,	and
wait	to	see	if	he	finally	objects.	But	he	has	not	yet	done	so,	leading	them	to
believe	that	he	might	not	–	during	whatever	is	coming.	Abyss	take	me,	what	are
we	dealing	with	here?
Banaschar	spoke	from	behind	his	hands.	‘I	would	ask	you	something,
Pearl.’
‘Very	well.’
‘Consider	the	most	grand	of	schemes,’	he	said.	‘Consider	time	measured	in
millennia.	Consider	the	ageing	faces	of	gods,	goddesses,	beliefs	and
civilizations…’
‘Go	on.	What	is	it	you	would	ask?’
Still	he	hesitated.	Then	he	slowly	lowered	his	hands,	and	looked	across,	to
that	grey,	ghostly	face	opposite	him.	‘Which	is	the	greater	crime,	Pearl,	a	god
betraying	its	followers,	or	its	followers	betraying	their	god?	Followers	who
then	choose	to	commit	atrocities	in	that	god’s	name.	Which,	Pearl?	Tell	me,
please.’
The	Claw	was	silent	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	he	shrugged.	‘You	ask	a
man	without	faith,	Banaschar.’
‘Who	better	to	judge?’
‘Gods	betray	their	followers	all	the	time,	as	far	as	I	can	tell.	Every
unanswered	prayer,	every	unmet	plea	for	salvation.	The	very	things	that	define
faith,	I	might	add.’
‘Failure,	silence	and	indifference?	These	are	the	definitions	of	faith,
Pearl?’
‘As	I	said,	I	am	not	the	man	for	this	discussion.’
‘But	are	those	things	true	betrayal?’
‘That	depends,	I	suppose.	On	whether	the	god	worshipped	is,	by	virtue	of
being	worshipped,	in	turn	beholden	to	the	worshipper.	If	that	god	isn’t	–	if
there	is	no	moral	compact	–	then	your	answer	is	“no”,	it’s	not	betrayal.’


‘To	whom	–	for	whom	–	does	a	god	act?’	Banaschar	asked.
‘If	we	proceed	on	the	aforementioned	assertion,	the	god	acts	and	answers
only	to	him	or	herself.’
‘After	all,’	Banaschar	said,	his	voice	rasping	as	he	leaned	forward,	‘who
are	we	to	judge?’
‘As	you	say.’
‘Yes.’
‘If,’	Pearl	said,	‘on	the	other	hand,	a	moral	compact	does	exist	between
god	and	worshipper,	then	each	and	every	denial	represents	a	betrayal—’
‘Assuming	that	which	is	asked	of	that	god	is	in	itself	bound	to	a	certain
morality.’
‘True.	A	husband	praying	his	wife	dies	in	some	terrible	accident	so	that	he
can	marry	his	mistress,	for	example,	is	hardly	something	any	self-respecting
god	would	acquiesce	to,	or	assist	in.’
Banaschar	heard	the	mockery	in	the	man’s	voice,	but	chose	to	ignore	it.
‘And	if	the	wife	is	a	tyrant	who	beats	their	children?’
‘Then	a	truly	just	god	would	act	without	the	necessity	for	prayer.’
‘Meaning	the	prayer	itself,	voiced	by	that	husband,	is	also	implicitly	evil,
regardless	of	his	motive?’
‘Well,	Banaschar,	in	my	scenario,	his	motive	is	made	suspect	by	the
presence	of	the	mistress.’
‘And	if	that	mistress	would	be	a	most	loving	and	adoring	stepmother?’
Pearl	snarled,	chopping	with	one	hand.	‘Enough	of	this,	damn	you	–	you
can	wallow	in	this	moral	quandary	all	you	want.	I	don’t	see	the	relevance…’
His	voice	fell	away.
His	heart	smothered	in	a	bed	of	ashes,	Banaschar	waited,	willing	himself
not	to	sob	aloud,	not	to	cry	out.
‘They	prayed	but	did	not	ask,	nor	beseech,	nor	plead,’	Pearl	said.	‘Their
prayers	were	a	demand.	The	betrayal…was	theirs,	wasn’t	it?’	The	Claw	sat
forward.	‘Banaschar.	Are	you	telling	me	that	D’rek	killed	them	all?	Her	entire
priesthood?	They	betrayed	her!	In	what	way?	What	did	they	demand?’
‘There	is	war,’	he	said	in	a	dull	voice.
‘Yes.	War	among	the	gods,	yes	–	gods	below	–	those	worshippers	chose
the	wrong	side!’
‘She	heard	them,’	Banaschar	said,	forcing	the	words	out.	‘She	heard	them
choose.	The	Crippled	God.	And	the	power	they	demanded	was	the	power	of
blood.	Well,	she	decided,	if	they	so	lusted	for	blood…she	would	give	them	all
they	wanted.’	His	voice	dropped	to	a	whisper.	‘All	they	wanted.’
‘Banaschar…hold	on	a	moment…why	would	D’rek’s	followers	choose


blood,	the	power	of	blood?	That	is	an	Elder	way.	What	you	are	saying	makes
no	sense.’
‘The	Cult	of	the	Worm	is	ancient,	Pearl.	Even	we	cannot	determine	just
how	old.	There	is	mention	of	a	goddess,	the	Matron	of	Decay,	the	Mistress	of
Worms	–	a	half-dozen	titles	–	in	Gothos’s	Folly	–	in	the	fragments	possessed	by
the	temple.	Or	at	least,	once	in	the	temple’s	possession	–	those	scrolls
disappeared—’
‘When?’
Banaschar	managed	a	bitter	smile.	‘On	the	night	of	Tayschrenn’s	flight
from	the	Grand	Temple	in	Kartool.	He	has	them.	He	must	have	them.	Don’t	you
see?	Something	is	wrong!	With	all	of	this!	The	knowledge	that	I	hold,	and	the
knowledge	that	Tayschrenn	must	possess	–	with	his	access	to	Gothos’s	Folly	–
we	must	speak,	we	must	make	sense	of	what	has	happened,	and	what	it	means.
This	goes	beyond	the	Imperium	–	yet	this	war	among	the	gods	–	tell	me,	whose
blood	do	you	think	will	be	spilled?	What	happened	in	the	cult	of	D’rek,	that	is
but	the	beginning!’
‘The	gods	will	betray	us?’	Pearl	asked,	leaning	back.	‘Us	…mortals.
Whether	we	worship	or	not,	it	is	mortal	blood	that	will	soak	the	earth.’	He
paused,	then	said,	‘Perhaps,	given	the	opportunity,	you	will	be	able	to	persuade
Tayschrenn.	But	what	of	the	other	priesthoods	–	do	you	truly	believe	you	can
convince	them	–	and	what	will	you	say	to	them?	Will	you	plead	for	some	kind
of	reformation,	Banaschar?	Some	revolution	among	believers?	They	will
laugh	in	your	face.’
Banaschar	looked	away.	‘In	my	face,	perhaps.	But…Tayschrenn…’
The	man	opposite	him	said	nothing	for	a	time.	A	graininess	filled	the
gloom	–	dawn	was	coming,	and	with	it	a	dull	chill.	Finally,	Pearl	rose,	the
motion	fluid	and	silent.	‘This	is	a	matter	for	the	Empress—’
‘Her?	Don’t	be	a	fool—’
‘Careful,’	the	Claw	warned	in	a	soft	voice.
Banaschar	thought	quickly,	in	desperation.	‘She	only	comes	into	play	with
regard	to	releasing	Tayschrenn	from	his	position	as	High	Mage,	in	freeing
him	to	act.	And	besides,	if	the	rumours	are	true	about	the	Grey	Mistress
stalking	Seven	Cities,	then	it	is	clear	that	the	pantheonic	war	has	already	begun
in	its	myriad	manipulations	of	the	mortal	realm.	She	would	be	wise	to	heed	that
threat.’
‘Banaschar,’	Pearl	said,	‘the	rumours	do	not	even	come	close	to	the	truth.
Hundreds	of	thousands	have	died.	Perhaps	millions.’
Millions?
‘I	shall	speak	with	the	Empress,’	Pearl	repeated.


‘When	do	you	leave?’	Banaschar	asked.	And	what	of	those	who	are
isolating	Tayschrenn?	What	of	those	who	contemplate	killing	me?
‘There	will	be	no	need	for	that,’	the	Claw	said,	walking	to	the	door.	‘She	is
coming	here.’
‘Here?	When?’
‘Soon.’
Why?	But	he	did	not	voice	that	question,	for	the	man	had	gone.

Saying	it	needed	the	exercise,	Iskaral	Pust	was	sitting	atop	his	mule,	struggling
to	guide	it	in	circles	on	the	mid	deck.	From	the	looks	of	it,	he	was	working	far
harder	than	the	strange	beast	as	it	was	cajoled	into	a	step	every	fifty	heartbeats
or	so.
Red-eyed	and	sickly,	Mappo	sat	with	his	back	to	the	cabin	wall.	Each	night,
in	his	dreams,	he	wept,	and	would	awaken	to	find	that	what	had	plagued	his
dreams	had	pushed	through	the	barrier	of	sleep,	and	he	would	lie	beneath	the
furs,	shivering	with	something	like	a	fever.	A	sickness	in	truth,	born	of	dread,
guilt	and	shame.	Too	many	failures,	too	many	bad	judgements;	he	had	been
stumbling,	blind,	for	so	long.
Out	of	friendship	he	had	betrayed	his	only	friend.
I	will	make	amends	for	all	of	this.	So	I	vow,	before	all	the	Trell	spirits.
Standing	at	the	prow,	the	woman	named	Spite	was	barely	visible	within	the
gritty,	mud-brown	haze	that	engulfed	her.	Not	one	of	the	bhok’arala,
scrambling	about	in	the	rigging	or	back	and	forth	on	the	decks,	would	come
near	her.
She	was	in	conversation.	So	Iskaral	Pust	had	claimed.	With	a	spirit	that
didn’t	belong.	Not	here	in	the	sea,	and	that	wavering	haze,	like	dust	skirling
through	yellow	grasses	–	even	to	Mappo’s	dull	eyes,	blatantly	out	of	place.
An	intruder,	but	one	of	power,	and	that	power	seemed	to	be	growing.
‘Mael,’	Iskaral	Pust	had	said	with	a	manic	laugh,	‘he’s	resisting,	and	getting
his	nose	bloodied.	Do	you	sense	his	fury,	Trell?	His	spitting	outrage?	Hee.	Hee
hee.	But	she’s	not	afraid	of	him,	oh	no,	she’s	not	afraid	of	anyone!’
Mappo	had	no	idea	who	that	‘she’	was,	and	had	not	the	energy	to	ask.	At
first,	he	had	thought	the	High	Priest	had	been	referring	to	Spite,	but	no,	it
became	increasingly	apparent	that	the	power	manifesting	itself	over	the	bow	of
the	ship	was	nothing	like	Spite’s.	No	draconean	stink,	no	cold	brutality.	No,	the
sighs	of	wind	reaching	the	Trell	were	warm,	dry,	smelling	of	grasslands.
The	conversation	had	begun	at	dawn,	and	now	the	sun	was	directly


overhead.	It	seemed	there	was	much	to	discuss…about	something.
Mappo	saw	two	spiders	scuttle	past	his	moccasined	feet.	You	damned	witch,
I	don’t	think	you’re	fooling	anyone.
Was	there	a	connection?	Here,	on	this	nameless	ship,	two	shamans	from
Dal	Hon,	a	land	of	yellow	grasses,	acacias,	huge	herds	and	big	cats	–	savannah
–	and	now,	this…visitor,	striding	across	foreign	seas.
‘Outraged,	yes,’	Iskaral	Pust	had	said.	‘Yet,	do	you	sense	his	reluctance?
Oh,	he	struggles,	but	he	knows	too	that	she,	who	chooses	to	be	in	one	place	and
not	many,	she	is	more	than	his	match.	Dare	he	focus?	He	doesn’t	even	want	this
stupid	war,	hah!	But	oh,	it	is	that	very	ambivalence	that	so	frees	his	followers	to
do	as	they	please!’
A	snarling	cry	as	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	fell	from	the	back	of	the	mule.
The	animal	brayed,	dancing	away	and	wheeling	round	to	stare	down	at	the
thrashing	old	man.	It	brayed	again,	and	in	that	sound	Mappo	imagined	he	could
hear	laughter.
Iskaral	Pust	ceased	moving,	then	lifted	his	head.	‘She’s	gone.’
The	wind	that	had	been	driving	them	steady	and	hard,	ever	on	course,	grew
fitful.
Mappo	saw	Spite	making	her	way	down	the	forecastle	steps,	looking	weary
and	somewhat	dismayed.
‘Well?’	Iskaral	demanded.
Spite’s	gaze	dropped	to	regard	the	High	Priest	where	he	lay	on	the	deck.
‘She	must	leave	us	for	a	time.	I	sought	to	dissuade	her,	and,	alas,	I	failed.	This
places	us…at	risk.’
‘From	what?’	Mappo	asked.
She	glanced	over	at	him.	‘Why,	the	vagaries	of	the	natural	world,	Trell.
Which	can,	at	times,	prove	alarming	and	most	random.’	Her	attention	returned
to	Iskaral	Pust.	‘High	Priest,	please,	assert	some	control	over	your	bhok’arala.
They	keep	undoing	knots	that	should	remain	fast,	not	to	mention	leaving	those
unsightly	offerings	to	you	everywhere	underfoot.’
‘Assert	some	control?’	Iskaral	asked,	sitting	up	with	a	bewildered	look	on
his	face.	‘But	they’re	crewing	this	ship!’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,’	Spite	said.	‘This	ship	is	being	crewed	by	ghosts.	Tiste
Andii	ghosts,	specifically.	True,	it	was	amusing	to	think	otherwise,	but	now
your	little	small-brained	worshippers	are	becoming	troublesome.’
‘Troublesome?	You	have	no	idea,	Spite!	Hah!’	He	cocked	his	head.	‘Yes,	let
her	think	on	that	for	a	while.	That	tiny	frown	wrinkling	her	brow	is	so
endearing.	More	than	that,	admit	it,	it	inspires	lust	–	oh	yes,	I’m	not	as
shrivelled	up	as	they	no	doubt	think	and	in	so	thinking	perforce	nearly


convince	me!	Besides,	she	wants	me.	I	can	tell.	After	all,	I	had	a	wife,	didn’t	I?
Not	like	Mappo	there,	with	his	bestial	no	doubt	burgeoning	traits,	no,	he	has
no-one!	Indeed,	am	I	not	experienced?	Am	I	not	capable	of	delicious,	enticing
subtlety?	Am	I	not	favoured	by	my	idiotic,	endlessly	miscalculating	god?’
Shaking	her	head,	Spite	walked	past	him,	and	halted	before	Mappo.	‘Would
that	I	could	convince	you,	Trell,	of	the	necessity	for	patience,	and	faith.	We
have	stumbled	upon	a	most	extraordinary	ally.’
Allies.	They	ever	fail	you	in	the	end.	Motives	clash,	divisive	violence
follows,	and	friend	betrays	friend.
‘Will	you	devour	your	own	soul,	Mappo	Runt?’
‘I	do	not	understand	you,’	he	said.	‘Why	do	you	involve	yourself	with	my
purpose,	my	quest?’
‘Because,’	she	said,	‘I	know	where	it	shall	lead.’
‘The	future	unfolds	before	you,	does	it?’
‘Never	clearly,	never	completely.	But	I	can	well	sense	the	convergence
ahead	–	it	shall	be	vast,	Mappo,	more	terrible	than	this	or	any	other	realm	has
ever	seen	before.	The	Fall	of	the	Crippled	God,	the	Rage	of	Kallor,	the
Wounding	at	Morn,	the	Chainings	–	they	all	shall	be	dwarfed	by	what	is
coming.	And	you	shall	be	there,	for	you	are	part	of	that	convergence.	As	is
Icarium.	Just	as	I	will	come	face	to	face	with	my	evil	sister	at	the	very	end,	a
meeting	from	which	but	one	of	us	will	walk	away	when	all	is	done	between	us.’
Mappo	stared	at	her.	‘Will	I,’	he	whispered,	‘will	I	stop	him?	In	the	end?
Or,	is	he	the	end	–	of	everything?’
‘I	do	not	know.	Perhaps	the	possibilities,	Mappo	Runt,	depend	entirely	on
how	prepared	you	are	at	that	moment,	at	your	readiness,	your	faith,	if	you
will.’
He	slowly	sighed,	closed	his	eyes,	then	nodded.	‘I	understand.’
And,	not	seeing,	he	did	not	witness	her	flinch,	and	was	himself	unaware	of
the	pathos	filling	the	tone	of	that	admission.
When	he	looked	upon	her	once	more,	he	saw	naught	but	a	calm,	patient
expression.	Cool,	gauging.	Mappo	nodded.	‘As	you	say.	I	shall…try.’
‘I	would	expect	no	less,	Trell.’
‘Quiet!’	Iskaral	Pust	hissed,	still	lying	on	the	deck,	but	now	on	his	belly.	He
was	sniffing	the	air.	‘Smell	her?	I	do.	I	smell	her!	On	this	ship!	That	udderknotted	cow!	Where	is	she!?’
The	mule	brayed	once	more.
	
Taralack	Veed	crouched	before	Icarium.	The	Jhag	was	paler	than	he	had	ever


seen	him	before,	the	consequence	of	day	after	day	in	this	hold,	giving	his	skin
a	ghoulish	green	cast.	The	soft	hiss	of	iron	blade	against	whetstone	was	the
only	sound	between	them	for	a	moment,	then	the	Gral	cleared	his	throat	and
said,	‘A	week	away	at	the	least	–	these	Edur	take	their	time.	Like	you,	Icarium,
they	have	already	begun	their	preparations.’
‘Why	do	they	force	an	enemy	upon	me,	Taralack	Veed?’
The	question	was	so	lifeless	that	for	a	moment	the	Gral	wondered	if	it	had
been	rhetorical.	He	sighed,	reaching	up	to	ensure	that	his	hair	was	as	it	should
be	–	the	winds	upside	were	fierce	–	then	said,	‘My	friend,	they	must	be	shown
the	extent	of	your…martial	prowess.	The	enemy	with	which	they	have	clashed
–	a	number	of	times,	apparently	–	has	proved	both	resilient	and	ferocious.	The
Edur	have	lost	warriors.’
Icarium	continued	working	the	sword’s	single,	notched	edge.	Then	he
paused,	his	eyes	fixed	on	the	weapon	in	his	hands.	‘I	feel,’	he	said,	‘I	feel…they
are	making	a	mistake.	This	notion…of	testing	me	–	if	what	you	have	told	me	is
true.	Those	tales	of	my	anger…unleashed.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Who	are	those
I	will	face,	do	you	know?’
Taralack	Veed	shrugged.	‘No,	I	know	very	little	–	they	do	not	trust	me,	and
why	should	they?	I	am	not	an	ally	–	indeed,	we	are	not	allies—’
‘And	yet	we	shall	soon	fight	for	them.	Do	you	not	see	the	contradictions,
Taralack	Veed?’
‘There	is	no	good	side	in	the	battle	to	come,	my	friend.	They	fight	each
other	endlessly,	for	both	sides	lack	the	capacity,	or	the	will,	to	do	anything	else.
Both	thirst	for	the	blood	of	their	enemies.	You	and	I,	we	have	seen	all	of	this
before,	the	manner	in	which	two	opposing	forces	–	no	matter	how	disparate
their	origins,	no	matter	how	righteously	one	begins	the	conflict	–	end	up
becoming	virtually	identical	to	each	other.	Brutality	matches	brutality,	stupidity
matches	stupidity.	You	would	have	me	ask	the	Tiste	Edur?	About	their	terrible,
evil	enemies?	What	is	the	point?	This,	my	friend,	is	a	matter	of	killing.	That
and	nothing	more,	now.	Do	you	see	that?’
‘A	matter	of	killing,’	Icarium	repeated,	his	words	a	whisper.	After	a
moment,	he	resumed	honing	the	edge	of	his	sword.
‘And	such	a	matter,’	Taralack	Veed	said,	‘belongs	to	you.’
‘To	me.’
‘You	must	show	them	that.	By	ending	the	battle.	Utterly.’
‘Ending	it.	All	the	killing.	Ending	it,	for	ever.’
‘Yes,	my	friend.	It	is	your	purpose.’
‘With	my	sword,	I	can	deliver	peace.’
‘Oh	yes,	Icarium,	you	can	and	you	will.’	Mappo	Runt,	you	were	a	fool.	How


you	might	have	made	use	of	this	Jhag.	For	the	good	of	all.	Icarium	is	the	sword,
after	all.	Forged	to	be	used,	as	all	weapons	are.
The	weapon,	then,	that	promises	peace.	Why,	you	foolish	Trell,	did	you	ever
flee	from	this?
	
North	of	the	Olphara	Peninsula,	the	winds	freshened,	filling	the	sails,	and	the
ships	seemed	to	surge	like	migrating	dhenrabi	across	the	midnight	blue	of	the
seas.	Despite	her	shallow	draught,	the	Silanda	struggled	to	keep	pace	with	the
dromons	and	enormous	transports.
Almost	as	bored	as	the	other	marines,	Bottle	walked	up	and	down	the	deck,
trying	to	ignore	their	bickering,	trying	to	nail	down	this	sense	of	unease
growing	within	him.	Something…in	this	wind…something…
‘Bone	monger,’	Smiles	said,	pointing	her	knife	at	Koryk.	‘That’s	what	you
remind	me	of,	with	all	those	bones	hanging	from	you.	I	remember	one	who
used	to	come	through	the	village	–	the	village	outside	our	estate,	I	mean.
Collecting	from	kitchen	middens.	Grinding	up	all	kinds	and	sticking	them	in
flasks.	With	labels.	Dog	jaws	for	toothaches,	horse	hips	for	making	babies,
bird	skulls	for	failing	eyes—’
‘Penis	bones	for	homely	little	girls,’	Koryk	cut	in.
In	a	blur,	the	knife	in	Smiles’s	hand	reversed	grip	and	she	held	the	point
between	thumb	and	fingers.
‘Don’t	even	think	it,’	Cuttle	said	in	a	growl.
‘Besides,’	Tarr	observed,	‘Koryk	ain’t	the	only	one	wearing	lots	of	bones
–	Hood’s	breath,	Smiles,	you’re	wearing	your	own—’
‘Tastefully,’	she	retorted,	still	holding	the	knife	by	its	point.	‘It’s	the	excess
that	makes	it	crass.’
‘Latest	court	fashion	in	Unta,	you	mean?’	Cuttle	asked,	one	brow	lifting.
Tarr	laughed.	‘Subtle	and	understated,	that	modest	tiny	finger	bone,
dangling	just	so	–	the	ladies	swooned	with	envy.’
In	all	of	this,	Bottle	noted	in	passing,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	simply
stared,	from	one	soldier	to	the	next	as	they	bantered.	On	the	man’s	face	baffled
incomprehension.
From	the	cabin	house,	voices	rising	in	argument.	Again.	Gesler,	Balm,
Stormy	and	Fiddler.
One	of	Y’Ghatan’s	pups	was	listening,	but	Bottle	paid	little	attention,	since
the	clash	was	an	old	one,	as	both	Stormy	and	Balm	sought	to	convince	Fiddler
to	play	games	with	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Besides,	what	was	important	was	out
here,	a	whisper	in	the	air,	in	this	steady,	unceasing	near-gale,	a	scent	mostly


obscured	by	the	salty	seaspray…
Pausing	at	the	port	rail,	Bottle	looked	out	at	that	distant	ridge	of	land	to	the
south.	Hazy,	strangely	blurred,	it	seemed	to	be	visibly	sweeping	by,	although	at
this	distance	such	a	perception	should	have	been	impossible.	The	wind	itself
was	brown-tinged,	as	if	it	had	skirled	out	from	some	desert.
We	have	left	Seven	Cities.	Thank	the	gods.	He	never	wanted	to	set	foot	on
that	land	again.	Its	sand	was	a	gritty	patina	on	his	soul,	fused	by	heat,	storms,
and	uncounted	people	whose	bodies	had	been	incinerated	–	remnants	of	them
were	in	him	now,	and	would	never	be	fully	expunged	from	his	flesh,	his	lungs.
He	could	taste	their	death,	hear	the	echo	of	their	screams.
Shortnose	and	Flashwit	were	wrestling	over	the	deck,	growling	and	biting
like	a	pair	of	dogs.	Some	festering	argument	–	Bottle	wondered	what	part	of
Shortnose	would	get	bitten	off	this	time	–	and	there	were	shouts	and	curses	as
the	two	rolled	into	soldiers	of	Balm’s	squad	who	had	been	throwing	bones,
scattering	the	cast.	Moments	later	fights	were	erupting	everywhere.
As	Bottle	turned,	Mayfly	had	picked	up	Lobe	and	he	saw	the	hapless
soldier	flung	through	the	air	–	to	crash	up	against	the	mound	of	severed	heads.
Screams,	as	the	ghastly	things	rolled	about,	eyes	blinking	in	the	sudden
light—
And	the	fight	was	over,	soldiers	hurrying	to	return	the	trophies	to	their	pile
beneath	the	tarpaulin.
Fiddler	emerged	from	the	cabin,	looking	harried.	He	paused,	scanning	the
scene,	then,	shaking	his	head,	he	walked	over	to	where	Bottle	leaned	on	the
rail.
‘Corabb	should’ve	left	me	in	the	tunnel,’	the	sergeant	said,	scratching	at	his
beard.	‘At	least	then	I’d	get	some	peace.’
‘It’s	just	Balm,’	Bottle	said,	then	snapped	his	mouth	shut	–	but	too	late.
‘I	knew	it,	you	damned	bastard.	Fine,	it	stays	between	you	and	me,	but	in
exchange	I	want	to	hear	your	thoughts.	What	about	Balm?’
‘He’s	Dal	Honese.’
‘I	know	that,	idiot.’
‘Well,	his	skin’s	crawling,	is	my	guess.’
‘So’s	mine,	Bottle.’
Ah,	that	explains	it,	then.	‘She’s	with	us,	now.	Again,	I	mean.’
‘She?’
‘You	know	who.’
‘The	one	who	plays	with	your—’
‘The	one	who	also	healed	you,	Sergeant.’
‘What’s	she	got	to	do	with	Balm?’


‘I’m	not	sure.	More	like	where	his	people	live,	I	think.’
‘Why	is	she	helping	us?’
‘Is	she,	Sergeant?’	Bottle	turned	to	study	Fiddler.	‘Helping	us,	I	mean.	True,
the	last	time…Quick	Ben’s	illusion	that	chased	off	that	enemy	fleet.	But	so
what?	Now	we’ve	got	this	gale	at	our	backs,	and	it’s	driving	us	west,	fast,
maybe	faster	than	should	be	possible	–	look	at	that	coast	–	our	lead	ships	must
be	due	south	of	Monkan	by	now.	At	this	pace,	we’ll	reach	Sepik	before	night
falls.	We’re	being	pushed,	and	that	makes	me	very	nervous	–	what’s	the
damned	hurry?’
‘Maybe	just	putting	distance	between	us	and	those	grey-skinned
barbarians.’
‘Tiste	Edur.	Hardly	barbarians,	Sergeant.’
Fiddler	grunted.	‘I’ve	clashed	with	the	Tiste	Andii,	and	they	used	Elder
magic	–	Kurald	Galain	–	and	it	was	nothing	like	what	we	saw	a	week	ago.’
‘No,	that	wasn’t	warrens.	It	was	Holds	–	older,	raw,	way	too	close	to
chaos.’
‘What	it	was,’	Fiddler	said,	‘doesn’t	belong	in	war.’
Bottle	laughed.	He	could	not	help	it.	‘You	mean,	a	little	bit	of	wholesale
slaughter	is	all	right,	Sergeant?	Like	what	we	do	on	the	battlefield?	Chasing
down	fleeing	soldiers	and	caving	their	skulls	in	from	behind,	that’s	all	right?’
‘Never	said	I	was	making	sense,	Bottle,’	Fiddler	retorted.	‘It’s	just	what	my
gut	tells	me.	I’ve	been	in	battles	where	sorcery	was	let	loose	–	really	let	loose	–
and	it	was	nothing	like	what	those	Edur	were	up	to.	They	want	to	win	wars
without	drawing	a	sword.’
‘And	that	makes	a	difference?’
‘It	makes	victory	unearned,	is	what	it	does.’
‘And	does	the	Empress	earn	her	victories,	Sergeant?’
‘Careful,	Bottle.’
‘Well,’	he	persisted,	‘she’s	just	sitting	there	on	her	throne,	while	we’re	out
here—’
‘You	think	I	fight	for	her,	Bottle?’
‘Well—’
‘If	that’s	what	you	think,	you	wasn’t	taught	a	damned	thing	at	Y’Ghatan.’
He	turned	and	strode	off.
Bottle	stared	after	him	a	moment,	then	returned	his	attention	to	the	distant
horizon.	Fine,	he’s	right.	But	still,	what	we’re	earning	is	her	currency	and	that’s
that.
	


‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	doing	down	here?’
‘Hiding,	what’s	it	look	like?	That’s	always	been	your	problem,	Kal,	your
lack	of	subtlety.	Sooner	or	later	it’s	going	to	get	you	into	trouble.	Is	it	dark
yet?’
‘No.	Listen,	what’s	with	this	damned	gale	up	top?	It’s	all	wrong—’
‘You	just	noticed?’
Kalam	scowled	in	the	gloom.	Well,	at	least	he’d	found	the	wizard.	The	High
Mage	of	the	Fourteenth,	hiding	between	crates	and	casks	and	bales.	Oh,	how
bloody	encouraging	is	that?	‘The	Adjunct	wants	to	talk	to	you.’
‘Of	course	she	does.	I	would	too	if	I	was	her.	But	I’m	not	her,	am	I?	No,
she’s	a	mystery	–	you	notice	how	she	almost	never	wears	that	sword?	Now,	I’ll
grant	you,	I’m	glad,	now	that	I’ve	been	chained	to	this	damned	army.
Remember	those	sky	keeps?	We’re	in	the	midst	of	something,	Kal.	And	the
Adjunct	knows	more	than	she’s	letting	on.	A	lot	more.	Somehow.	The	Empress
has	recalled	us.	Why?	What	now?’
‘You’re	babbling,	Quick.	It’s	embarrassing.’
‘You	want	babbling,	try	this.	Has	it	not	occurred	to	you	that	we	lost	this
one?’
‘What?’
‘Dryjhna,	the	Apocalyptic,	the	whole	prophecy	–	we	didn’t	get	it,	we	never
did	–	and	you	and	me,	Kal,	we	should	have,	you	know.	The	Uprising,	what	did
it	achieve?	How	about	slaughter,	anarchy,	rotting	corpses	everywhere.	And
what	arrived	in	the	wake	of	that?	Plague.	The	apocalypse,	Kalam,	wasn’t	the
war,	it	was	the	plague.	So	maybe	we	won	and	maybe	we	lost.	Both,	do	you
see?’
‘Dryjhna	never	belonged	to	the	Crippled	God.	Nor	Poliel—’
‘Hardly	matters.	It’s	ended	up	serving	them	both,	hasn’t	it?’
‘We	can’t	fight	all	that,	Quick,’	Kalam	said.	‘We	had	a	rebellion.	We	put	it
down.	What	these	damned	gods	and	goddesses	are	up	to	–	it’s	not	our	fight.	Not
the	empire’s	fight,	and	that	includes	Laseen.	She’s	not	going	to	see	all	this	as
some	kind	of	failure.	Tavore	did	what	she	had	to	do,	and	now	we’re	going
back,	and	then	we’ll	get	sent	elsewhere.	That’s	the	way	it	is.’
‘Tavore	sent	us	into	the	Imperial	Warren,	Kal.	Why?’
The	assassin	shrugged.	‘All	right,	like	you	said,	she’s	a	mystery.’
Quick	Ben	moved	further	into	the	narrow	space	between	cargo.	‘Here,
there’s	room.’
After	a	moment,	Kalam	joined	him.	‘You	got	anything	to	eat?	Drink?’
‘Naturally.’
‘Good.’


As	the	lookouts	cried	out	the	sighting	of	Sepik,	Apsalar	made	her	way	forward.
The	Adjunct,	Nil,	Keneb	and	Nether	were	already	on	the	forecastle.	The	sun,
low	on	the	horizon	to	the	west,	lit	the	rising	mass	of	land	two	pegs	to	starboard
with	a	golden	glow.	Ahead,	the	lead	ships	of	the	fleet,	two	dromons,	were
drawing	near.
Reaching	the	rail,	Apsalar	found	she	could	now	make	out	the	harbour	city
tucked	in	its	halfmoon	bay.	No	smoke	rose	from	the	tiers,	and	in	the	harbour
itself,	a	mere	handful	of	ships	rode	at	anchor;	the	nearest	one	had	clearly	lost
its	bow	anchor	–	some	snag	had	hung	the	trader	craft	up,	heeling	it	to	one	side
so	that	its	starboard	rail	was	very	nearly	under	water.
Keneb	was	speaking,	‘Sighting	Sepik,’	he	said	in	a	tone	that	suggested	he
was	repeating	himself,	‘should	have	been	four,	maybe	five	days	away.’
Apsalar	watched	the	two	dromons	work	into	the	city’s	bay.	One	of	them
was	Nok’s	own	flagship.
‘Something	is	wrong,’	Nether	said.
‘Fist	Keneb,’	the	Adjunct	said	quietly,	‘stand	down	the	marines.’
‘Adjunct?’
‘We	shall	be	making	no	landfall—’
At	that	moment,	Apsalar	saw	the	foremost	dromon	suddenly	balk,	as	if	it
had	inexplicably	lost	headway	–	and	its	crew	raced	like	frenzied	ants,	sails
buckling	overhead.	A	moment	later	the	same	activity	struck	Nok’s	ship,	and	a
signal	flag	began	working	its	way	upward.
Beyond	the	two	warcraft,	the	city	of	Sepik	exploded	into	life.
Gulls.	Tens	of	thousands,	rising	from	the	streets,	the	buildings.	In	their
midst,	the	black	tatters	of	crows,	island	vultures,	lifting	like	flakes	of	ash
amidst	the	swirling	smoke	of	the	white	gulls.	Rising,	billowing,	casting	a
chaotic	shadow	over	the	city.
Nether	whispered,	‘They’re	all	dead.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur	have	visited,’	Apsalar	said.
Tavore	faced	her.	‘Is	slaughter	their	answer	to	everything?’
‘They	found	their	own	kind,	Adjunct,	a	remnant	population.	Subject,	little
more	than	slaves.	They	are	not	reluctant	to	unleash	their	fury,	these	Edur.’
‘How	do	you	know	this,	Bridgeburner?’
She	eyed	the	woman.	‘How	did	you	know,	Adjunct?’
At	that,	Tavore	turned	away.
Keneb	stood	looking	at	the	two	women,	one	to	the	other,	then	back	again.
Apsalar	fixed	her	gaze	back	upon	the	harbour,	the	gulls	settling	again	to


their	feast	as	the	two	lead	dromons	worked	clear	of	the	bay,	sails	filling	once
more.	The	ships	in	their	immediate	wake	also	began	changing	course.
‘We	shall	seek	resupply	with	Nemil,’	the	Adjunct	said.	As	she	turned	away,
she	paused.	‘Apsalar,	find	Quick	Ben.	Use	your	skeletal	servants	if	you	must.’
‘The	High	Mage	hides	among	the	cargo	below,’	she	replied.
Tavore’s	brows	lifted.	‘Nothing	sorcerous,	then?’
‘No.’
As	the	sound	of	the	Adjunct’s	boots	receded,	Fist	Keneb	stepped	closer	to
Apsalar.	‘The	Edur	fleet	–	do	you	think	it	pursues	us	even	now,	Apsalar?’
‘No.	They’re	going	home.’
‘And	how	do	you	come	by	this	knowledge?’
Nether	spoke:	‘Because	a	god	visits	her,	Fist.	He	comes	to	break	her	heart.
Again	and	again.’
Apsalar	felt	as	if	she	had	been	punched	in	the	chest,	the	impact
reverberating	through	her	bones,	the	beat	inside	suddenly	erratic,	tightening	as
heat	flooded	through	her	veins.	Yet,	outwardly,	she	revealed	nothing.
Keneb’s	voice	was	taut	with	fury.	‘Was	that	necessary,	Nether?’
‘Don’t	mind	my	sister,’	Nil	said.	‘She	lusts	after	someone—’
‘Bastard!’
The	young	Wickan	woman	rushed	off.	Nil	watched	her	for	a	moment,	then
he	looked	over	at	Keneb	and	Apsalar,	and	shrugged.
A	moment	later	he	too	left.
‘My	apologies,’	Keneb	said	to	Apsalar.	‘I	would	never	have	invited	such	a
cruel	answer	–	had	I	known	what	Nether	would	say—’
‘No	matter,	Fist.	You	need	not	apologize.’
‘Even	so,	I	shall	not	pry	again.’
She	studied	him	for	a	moment.
Looking	uncomfortable,	he	managed	a	nod,	then	walked	away.
The	island	was	now	on	the	ship’s	starboard,	almost	five	pegs	along.	‘He
comes	to	break	her	heart.	Again	and	again.’	Oh,	there	could	be	so	few	secrets
on	a	ship	such	as	this	one.	And	yet,	it	seemed,	the	Adjunct	was	defying	that
notion.
No	wonder	Quick	Ben	is	hiding.
	
‘They	killed	everyone,’	Bottle	said,	shivering.	‘A	whole	damned	island’s	worth
of	people.	And	Monkan	Isle,	too	–	it’s	in	the	wind,	now,	the	truth	of	that.’
‘Be	glad	for	that	wind,’	Koryk	said.	‘We’ve	left	that	nightmare	behind	fast,
damned	fast,	and	that’s	good,	isn’t	it?’


Cuttle	sat	straighter	and	looked	at	Fiddler.	‘Sergeant,	wasn’t	Sepik	an
Imperial	principality?’
Fiddler	nodded.
‘So,	what	these	Tiste	Edur	did,	it’s	an	act	of	war,	isn’t	it?’
Bottle	and	the	others	looked	over	at	the	sergeant,	who	was	scowling	–	and
clearly	chewing	over	Cuttle’s	words.	Then	he	said,	‘Technically,	aye.	Is	the
Empress	going	to	see	it	that	way?	Or	even	care?	We	got	us	enough	enemies	as
it	is.’
‘The	Adjunct,’	Tarr	said,	‘she’ll	have	to	report	it	even	so.	And	the	fact	that
we	already	clashed	once	with	that	damned	fleet	of	theirs.’
‘It’s	probably	tracking	us	right	now,’	Cuttle	said,	grimacing.	‘And	we’re
going	to	lead	it	straight	back	to	the	heart	of	the	empire.’
‘Good,’	Tarr	said.	‘Then	we	can	crush	the	bastards.’
‘That,’	Bottle	muttered,	‘or	they	crush	us.	What	Quick	Ben	did,	it	wasn’t
real—’
‘To	start,’	Fiddler	said.
Bottle	said	nothing.	Then,	‘Some	allies	you’re	better	off	without.’
‘Why?’	the	sergeant	demanded.
‘Well,’	Bottle	elaborated,	‘the	allies	that	can’t	be	figured	out,	the	ones	with
motives	and	goals	that	stay	forever	outside	our	comprehension	–	that’s	what
we’re	talking	about	here,	Sergeant.	And	believe	me,	we	don’t	want	a	war
fought	with	the	sorcery	of	the	Holds.	We	don’t.’
The	others	were	staring	at	him.
Bottle	looked	away.
‘Drag	’im	round	the	hull,’	Cuttle	said.	‘That’ll	get	him	to	cough	it	all	up.’
‘Tempting,’	Fiddler	said,	‘but	we	got	time.	Lots	of	time.’
You	fools.	Time	is	the	last	thing	we	got.	That’s	what	she’s	trying	to	tell	us.
With	this	eerie	wind,	thrusting	like	a	fist	through	Mael’s	realm	–	and	there’s	not
a	thing	he	can	do	about	it.	Take	that,	Mael,	you	crusty	barnacle!
Time?	Forget	it.	She’s	driving	us	into	the	heart	of	a	storm.


Chapter	Twenty
Discipline	is	the	greatest	weapon	against	the	self-righteous.	We	must
measure	the	virtue	of	our	own	controlled	response	when	answering	the
atrocities	of	fanatics.	And	yet,	let	it	not	be	claimed,	in	our	own	oratory
of	piety,	that	we	are	without	our	own	fanatics;	for	the	self-righteous
breed	wherever	tradition	holds,	and	most	often	when	there	exists	the
perception	that	tradition	is	under	assault.	Fanatics	can	be	created	as
easily	in	an	environment	of	moral	decay	(whether	real	or	imagined)	as
in	an	environment	of	legitimate	inequity	or	under	the	banner	of	a
common	cause.
Discipline	is	as	much	facing	the	enemy	within	as	the	enemy	before
you;	for	without	critical	judgement,	the	weapon	you	wield	delivers	–
and	let	us	not	be	coy	here	–	naught	but	murder.
And	its	first	victim	is	the	moral	probity	of	your	cause.
(Words	to	the	Adherents)
Mortal	Sword	Brukhalian
The	Grey	Swords
It	was	growing	harder,	Ganoes	Paran	realized,	not	to	regret	certain	choices	he
had	made.	While	scouts	reported	that	the	Deragoth	were	not	trailing	his	army
as	it	marched	north	and	east	across	virtually	empty	lands,	this	very	absence	led
to	suspicion	and	trepidation.	After	all,	if	those	hoary	beasts	were	not	following
them,	what	were	they	up	to?
Ganath,	the	Jaghut	sorceress,	had	more	or	less	intimated	that	Paran’s
decision	to	unleash	those	beasts	was	a	terrible	mistake.	He	probably	should
have	listened	to	her.	It	was	a	conceit	to	imagine	he	could	manipulate
indefinitely	all	the	forces	he	had	let	loose	to	deal	with	the	T’rolbarahl.	And,
perhaps,	there	had	been	a	lack	of	confidence	in	the	capabilities	of	ascendants
already	active	in	this	realm.	The	Deragoth	were	primal,	but	sometimes,	that
which	was	primal	found	itself	assailed	by	a	world	that	no	longer	permitted	its
unmitigated	freedom.
Well,	enough	of	that.	It’s	done,	isn’t	it.	Let	someone	else	clean	up	the	mess	I


made,	just	for	a	change.
Then	he	frowned.	Granted,	that’s	probably	not	the	proper	attitude	for	the
Master	of	the	Deck.	But	I	didn’t	ask	for	the	title,	did	I?
Paran	rode	in	the	company	of	soldiers,	somewhere	in	the	middle	of	the
column.	He	didn’t	like	the	notion	of	an	entourage,	or	a	vanguard.	Fist	Rythe
Bude	was	leading	the	way	at	the	moment,	although	that	position	rotated	among
the	Fists.	While	Paran	remained	where	he	was,	with	only	Noto	Boil	beside	him
and,	occasionally,	Hurlochel,	who	appeared	when	there	was	some	message	to
deliver	–	and	there	were,	blissfully,	scant	few	of	those.
‘You	were	more	forceful,	you	know,’	Noto	Boil	said	beside	him,	‘when
you	were	Captain	Kindly.’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,’	Paran	said.
‘An	observation,	High	Fist,	not	a	complaint.’
‘Your	every	observation	is	a	complaint,	healer.’
‘That’s	hurtful,	sir.’
‘See	what	I	mean?	Tell	me	something	interesting.	Kartoolian,	right?	Were
you	a	follower	of	D’rek,	then?’
‘Hood,	no!	Very	well,	if	you	wish	to	hear	something	interesting,	I	shall	tell
you	of	my	own	history.	As	a	youth,	I	was	a	leg-breaker—’
‘A	what?’
‘I	broke	dog	legs.	Just	one	per	mongrel,	mind	you.	Lame	dogs	were
important	for	the	festival—’
‘Ah,	you	mean	the	D’rek	festival!	That	disgusting,	barbaric,	filth-strewn
day	of	sordid	celebration!	So,	you	broke	the	legs	of	poor,	bemused	animals,	so
they	could	be	stoned	to	death	in	alleys	by	psychotic	little	children.’
‘What	is	your	point,	High	Fist?	Yes,	that	is	precisely	what	I	did.	Three
crescents	a	dog.	It	was	a	living.	Alas,	I	eventually	tired	of	that—’
‘The	Malazans	outlawed	the	festival—’
‘Yes,	that	too.	A	most	unfortunate	decision.	It	has	made	my	people
moribund,	forcing	us	to	search	elsewhere	for	our—’
‘For	your	sick,	obnoxious	tastes	in	delivering	misery	and	suffering.’
‘Well,	yes.	Whose	story	is	this?’
‘Abyss	take	me,	please	accept	my	apologies.	Do	go	on	–	assuming	I	can
stomach	it.’
Noto	Boil	tilted	his	nose	skyward.	‘I	was	not	busy	running	around
skewering	goddesses	in	my	youth—’
‘Neither	was	I,	although	I	suppose,	like	any	healthy	young	non-legbreaking	boy,	I	lusted	after	a	few.	At	least,	based	on	their	statues	and	the	like.
Take	Soliel,	for	instance—’


‘Soliel!	A	likeness	expressly	visualized	to	encourage	notions	of
motherhood!’
‘Oh,	really?	My,	that’s	a	little	too	revealing,	isn’t	it?’
‘Mind	you,’	Noto	Boil	said	in	a	commiserating	tone,	‘you	were	a	young
boy…’
‘So	I	was,	now	let’s	forget	all	that.	You	were	saying?	After	your	legbreaker	career	died	with	a	whimper,	then	what?’
‘Oh,	how	very	droll,	sir.	I	should	also	point	out,	the	manifestation	of	Soliel
back	in	G’danisban—’
‘Damned	disappointing,’	Paran	agreed.	‘You’ve	no	idea	how	many
adolescent	fantasies	were	obliterated	by	that.’
‘I	thought	you	had	no	desire	to	discuss	that	subject	any	further?’
‘Fine.	Go	on.’
‘I	was	apprenticed	for	a	short	time	to	a	local	healer—’
‘Healing	lame	dogs?’
‘Not	our	primary	source	of	income,	sir.	There	was	a	misunderstanding,	as
a	consequence	of	which	I	was	forced	to	depart	his	company,	in	some	haste.	A
local	recruiting	drive	proved	opportune,	especially	since	such	efforts	by	the
Malazans	rarely	garnered	more	than	a	handful	of	Kartoolians	–	and	most	of
those	either	destitute	or	criminal—’
‘And	you	were	both.’
‘The	principal	source	of	their	delight	at	my	joining	the	ranks	derived	from
my	skills	as	a	healer.	Anyway	my	first	campaign	was	in	Korel,	the	Theftian
Campaigns,	where	I	was	fortunate	to	acquire	further	tutelage	from	a	healer
who	would	later	become	infamous.	Ipshank.’
‘Truly?’
‘Indeed,	none	other.	And	yes,	I	met	Manask	as	well.	It	must	be	said	–	and
you,	High	Fist,	will	comprehend	more	than	most	the	necessity	of	this	–	it	must
be	said,	both	Ipshank	and	Manask	remained	loyal	to	Greymane…to	the	last.
Well,	as	far	as	I	knew,	that	is	–	I	was	healer	to	a	full	legion	by	then,	and	we
were	sent	to	Genabackis.	In	due	course—’
‘Noto	Boil,’	Paran	interrupted,	‘it	seems	you	have	a	singular	talent	for
consorting	with	the	famous	and	the	infamous.’
‘Why,	yes,	sir.	I	suppose	I	have	at	that.	And	now,	I	suspect,	you	are
wondering	into	which	category	I	place	you?’
‘Me?	No,	don’t	bother.’
The	healer	prepared	to	speak	again	but	was	interrupted	by	the	arrival	of
Hurlochel.
‘High	Fist.’


‘Outrider.’
‘The	trail	ahead,	sir,	has	up	until	now	revealed	little	more	than	a	scattering
of	your	so-called	pilgrims.	But	it	seems	that	a	troop	of	riders	have	joined	the
migration.’
‘Any	idea	how	many?’
‘More	than	five	hundred,	High	Fist.	Could	be	as	many	as	a	thousand	–	they
are	riding	in	formation	so	it’s	difficult	to	tell.’
‘Formation.	Now,	who	might	they	be,	I	wonder?	All	right,	Hurlochel,
advance	your	scouts	and	flanking	outriders	–	how	far	ahead	are	they?’
‘Four	or	five	days,	sir.	Riding	at	a	collected	canter	for	the	most	part.’
‘Very	good.	Thank	you,	Hurlochel.’
The	outrider	rode	back	out	of	the	column.
‘What	do	you	think	this	means,	High	Fist?’
Paran	shrugged	at	the	healer ’s	question.	‘I	imagine	we’ll	discover	soon
enough,	Boil.’
‘Noto	Boil,	sir.	Please.’
‘Good	thing,’	Paran	continued,	unable	to	help	himself,	‘you	became	a
healer	and	not	a	lancer.’
‘If	you	don’t	mind,	sir,	I	think	I	hear	someone	complaining	up	ahead	about
saddle	sores.’	The	man	clucked	his	mount	forward.
Oh	my,	he	prefers	saddle	sores	to	my	company.	Well,	to	each	his	own…
	
‘High	Fist	Paran,’	Captain	Sweetcreek	muttered.	‘What’s	he	doing	riding	back
there,	and	what’s	all	that	about	no	saluting?	It’s	bad	for	discipline.	I	don’t	care
what	the	soldiers	think	–	I	don’t	even	care	that	he	once	commanded	the
Bridgeburners	–	after	all,	he	took	them	over	only	to	see	them	obliterated.	It’s
not	proper,	I’m	saying.	None	of	it.’
Fist	Rythe	Bude	glanced	over	at	the	woman.	Her	colour	was	up,	the	Fist
observed,	eyes	flashing.	Clearly,	the	captain	was	not	prepared	to	forget	that
punch	in	the	jaw.	Mind	you,	I	probably	wouldn’t	forgive	something	like	that
either.
‘I	think	the	Fists	need	to	organize	a	meeting—’
‘Captain,’	Rythe	Bude	warned,	‘you	forget	yourself.’
‘My	apologies,	sir.	But,	now	that	we’re	trailing	some	kind	of	army,	well,	I
don’t	want	to	end	up	like	the	Bridgeburners.	That’s	all.’
‘Dujek	Onearm’s	confidence	in	Paran,	and	his	admiration	for	the	man,
Captain,	is	sufficient	for	me.	And	my	fellow	Fists.	I	strongly	advise	you	to
suppress	your	anger	and	recall	your	own	discipline.	As	for	the	army	ahead	of


us,	even	a	thousand	mounted	warriors	hardly	represents	a	significant	threat	to
the	Host.	This	rebellion	is	over	–	there’s	no-one	left	to	rebel,	after	all.	And
little	left	to	fight	over.’	She	gestured	forward	with	one	gauntleted	hand.	‘Even
these	pilgrims	keep	falling	to	the	wayside.’
A	low	mound	of	stones	was	visible	to	one	side	of	the	rough	track	–	another
sad	victim	of	this	pilgrimage	–	and	from	this	one	rose	a	staff	bedecked	in	crow
feathers.
‘That’s	eerie,	too,’	Sweetcreek	said.	‘All	these	Coltaine	worshippers…’
‘This	land	breeds	cults	like	maggots	in	a	corpse,	Captain.’
Sweetcreek	grunted.	‘A	most	appropriate	image,	Fist,	in	this	instance.’
Rythe	Bude	grunted.	Aye,	I	stumble	on	those	every	now	and	then.
Behind	the	two	riders,	Corporal	Futhgar	said,	‘Sirs,	what	are	those?’
They	twisted	round	in	their	saddles,	then	looked	to	where	the	man	was
pointing.	The	eastern	sky.	Voices	were	rising	among	the	soldiers	now,	invoked
prayers,	a	few	shouts	of	surprise.
A	string	of	suns,	a	dozen	in	all,	each	small	but	bright	enough	to	burn
blinding	holes	in	the	blue	sky.	From	two	stretched	tails	of	fiery	mist.	The	row
of	suns	curved	like	a	longbow,	the	ends	higher,	and	above	it	was	the	blurred,
misshapen	face	of	the	moon.
‘An	omen	of	death!’	someone	shouted.
‘Captain,’	Rythe	Bude	snapped,	‘get	that	fool	to	shut	his	mouth.’
‘Aye,	sir.’

‘The	sky	falls,’	Noto	Boil	said	as	he	fell	back	in	beside	the	High	Fist.
Scowling,	Paran	continued	studying	the	strange	appearance	in	the	eastern
sky,	seeking	some	sense	of	what	it	was	they	were	witnessing.	Whatever	it	is,	I
don’t	like	it.
‘You	doubt	me?’	the	healer	asked.	‘High	Fist,	I	have	walked	the	lands	of
Korel.	I	have	seen	the	craters	left	behind	by	all	that	descended	from	the	sky.
Have	you	ever	perused	a	map	of	Korel?	The	entire	northern	subcontinent	and
its	host	of	islands?	Fling	a	handful	of	gravel	into	mud,	then	wait	whilst	water
fills	the	pocks.	That	is	Korel,	sir.	The	people	still	tell	tales	of	the	countless	fires
that	fell	from	the	sky,	in	the	bringing	down	of	the	Crippled	God.’
‘Ride	to	the	head	of	the	column,	Noto	Boil,’	Paran	said.
‘Sir?’
‘Call	a	halt.	Right	now.	And	get	me	Hurlochel	and	his	outriders.	I	need	a
sense	of	the	surrounding	area.	We	may	need	to	find	cover.’


For	once,	the	healer	made	no	complaint.
Paran	stared	at	the	string	of	fires,	growing	like	a	salvo	from	the	Abyss.
Damn,	where’s	Ormulogun?	I	need	to	find	him,	and	he’d	better	have	that	Deck
ready	–	or	at	least	the	cards	etched	out,	preferably	scribed	and	ready	for	the
threads	of	paint.	Gods	below,	he’d	better	have	something,	because	I	don’t	have
time	to…his	thoughts	trailed	away.
He	could	feel	them	now,	coming	ever	closer	–	he	could	feel	their	heat	–
was	that	even	possible?
The	damned	moon	–	I	should	have	paid	attention.	I	should	have	quested,
found	out	what	has	happened	up	there,	to	that	forlorn	world.	And	then	another
thought	struck	him,	and	he	went	cold.
War	among	the	gods.
Is	this	an	attack?	A	salvo	in	truth?
Paran	bared	his	teeth.	‘If	you’re	out	there,’	he	whispered,	glaring	at	the
eastern	sky	as	his	horse	shied	nervously	beneath	him,	‘you’re	not	playing	fair.
And…I	don’t	like	that.’	He	straightened,	stood	in	his	stirrups,	and	looked	about.
‘Ormulogun!	Where	in	Hood’s	name	are	you!’
	
‘Against	this,’	Iskaral	Pust	muttered,	‘I	can	do	nothing.’	He	hugged	himself.	‘I
think	I	should	start	gibbering,	now.	Yes,	that	would	be	highly	appropriate.	A
crazed	look	in	my	eyes.	Drool,	then	froth,	yes.	Who	could	blame	me?	We’re	all
going	to	die!’
These	last	words	were	a	shriek,	sufficient	to	shake	Mappo	from	his
insensate	lethargy.	Lifting	his	head,	he	looked	across	at	the	High	Priest	of
Shadow.	The	Dal	Honese	was	huddled	beside	his	mule,	and	both	were	bathed	in
a	strange	light,	green-hued	–	no,	the	Trell	realized,	that	light	was	everywhere.
Spite	descended	from	the	forecastle,	and	Mappo	saw	in	her	expression	cold
rage.	‘We	are	in	trouble,’	she	said	in	a	grating	voice.	‘Out	of	time	–	I	had
hoped…never	mind—’	Suddenly	her	head	snapped	round	and	she	stared
southwestward.	Her	eyes	narrowed.	Then	she	said,	‘Oh…who	in	Hood’s	name
are	you?	And	what	do	you	think	you	are	up	to?’	Falling	silent	once	more,	her
frown	deepening.
Blinking,	Mappo	Runt	pushed	himself	upright,	and	saw	that	the	sky	was	on
fire	–	almost	directly	above	them.	As	if	the	sun	had	spawned	a	host	of	children,
a	string	of	incandescent	pearls,	their	flames	wreathed	in	haloes	of	jade.
Growing…descending.	What	are	those?
The	sea	seemed	to	tremble	around	them,	the	waves	choppy,	clashing	in
confusion.	The	air	felt	brittle,	hot,	and	all	wind	had	fallen	away.	And	there,


above	the	mass	of	land	to	the	east	that	was	Otataral	Island…Mappo	looked	back
at	Iskaral	Pust.	The	High	Priest,	crouching	now,	had	his	hands	covering	his
head.	Bhoka’rala	were	converging	around	him,	mewling	and	whimpering,
reaching	out	to	touch	the	shivering	old	man.	As	he	babbled,	‘We	didn’t	plan	for
this,	did	we?	I	don’t	remember	–	gods,	I	don’t	remember	anything!	Mogora,
my	dear	hag,	where	are	you?	This	is	my	moment	of	greatest	need.	I	want	sex!
Even	with	you!	I’ll	drink	the	white	paralt	later	–	what	choice?	It’s	that,	or	the
memory	of	most	regrettable	weakness	on	my	part!	There	is	only	so	much	I	can
suffer.	Stop	touching	me,	you	vile	apes!	Shadowthrone,	you	miserable	insane
shade	–	where	are	you	hiding	and	is	there	room	for	me,	your	most	devoted
servant,	your	Magus?	There’d	better	be!	Come	get	me,	damn	you	–	never	mind
anyone	else!	Just	me!	Of	course	there’s	room!	You	mucus-smeared	knee-inthe-groin	fart-cloud!	Save	me!’
‘Spirits	below,’	Mogora	muttered	at	Mappo’s	side,	‘listen	to	that	pathetic
creature!	And	to	think,	I	married	him!’
Spite	suddenly	wheeled	and	ran	back	to	the	bow,	bhok’arala	scattering
from	her	path.	Once	there,	she	spun	round	and	shouted.	‘I	see	them!	Make	for
them,	fools!	Quickly!’
And	then	she	veered,	rising	above	the	wallowing,	rocking	ship,	silveretched	wings	spreading	wide.	Swirling	mists,	writhing,	growing	solid,	until	an
enormous	dragon	hovered	before	the	ship,	dwarfing	the	craft	in	its	immensity.
Lambent	eyes	flared	like	quicksilver	in	the	eerie,	emerald	light.	The	creature’s
long,	sinuous	tail	slithered	down,	snake-like,	and	coiled	round	the	upthrust
prow.	The	dragon	then	twisted	in	the	air,	a	savage	beat	of	the	wings—
—and	with	an	alarming	jolt	the	ship	lunged	forward.
Mappo	was	flung	back	into	the	cabin	wall,	wood	splintering	behind	him.
Gasping,	the	Trell	regained	his	feet	and	clambered	towards	the	bows.
She	sees	them?	Who?
The	sky	was	filling	with	spears	of	green	fire,	plunging	towards	them.
Iskaral	Pust	screamed.
	
Over	a	thousand	leagues	away,	westward,	Bottle	stood	with	the	others	and
stared	at	the	eastern	horizon	–	where	darkness	should	have	been,	crawling
heavenward	to	announce	the	unending	cycle	of	day’s	death	and	night’s	birth.
Instead	they	could	see	distinctly	a	dozen	motes	of	fire,	descending,	filling	a
third	of	the	sky	with	a	lurid,	incandescent,	greenish	glow.
‘Oh,’	Bottle	whispered,	‘this	is	bad.’
Fiddler	clutched	at	his	sleeve,	pulled	him	close.	‘Do	you	understand	this?’


the	sergeant	demanded	in	a	harsh	whisper.
Bottle	shook	his	head.
‘Is	this	–	is	this	another	Crippled	God?’
Bottle	stared	at	Fiddler,	eyes	widening.	Another?	‘Gods	below!’
‘Is	it?’
‘I	don’t	know!’
Swearing,	Fiddler	pushed	him	away.	Bottle	staggered	back,	shouldering
into	Sergeant	Balm	–	who	barely	reacted	–	then	he	twisted	through	the	press,
stumbling	as	he	made	his	way	clear,	looked	across	the	waters.	To	the	south,	the
Nemil	ships	–	war	biremes	and	supply	transports	–	had	every	sheet	to	the	wind
as	they	raced	back	towards	their	homeland,	the	former	swiftly	outdistancing
the	latter,	many	of	the	transports	still	half-filled	with	cargo	–	the	resupply
abandoned.
Aye,	it’s	every	fool	for	himself	now.	But	when	those	things	hit,	that	shock
wave	will	roll	fast.	It	will	smash	us	all	into	kindling.	Poor	bastards,	you’ll
never	make	it.	Not	even	those	ugly	biremes.
The	unceasing	wind	seemed	to	pause,	as	if	gathering	breath,	then	returned
with	redoubled	force,	sending	everyone	on	deck	staggering.	Sailcloth	bucked,
mast	and	spars	creaking	–	the	Silanda	groaned	beneath	them.
Quick	Ben?	Best	make	your	escape	now,	and	take	whoever	you	can	with
you.	Against	what’s	coming…there	is	no	illusion	that	will	dissuade	it.	As	for
those	Tiste	Edur,	well,	they’re	as	finished	as	we	are.	I	will	accept	that	as
consolation.
Well,	Grandma,	you	always	said	the	sea	will	be	the	death	of	me.
	
Sergeant	Hellian	wandered	across	the	deck,	marvelling	at	the	green	world	she
had	found.	This	Nemil	brandy	packed	a	punch,	didn’t	it	just?	People	were
screaming,	or	just	standing,	as	if	frozen	in	place,	but	that’s	how	things	usually
were,	those	times	she	accidentally	–	oops	–	slipped	over	that	blurry	line	of	notquite	drunk.	Still,	this	green	was	making	her	a	little	sick.
Hood-damned	Nemil	brandy	–	what	idiots	drank	this	rubbish?	Well,	she
could	trade	it	for	some	Falari	sailor ’s	rum.	There	were	enough	idiots	on	this
ship	who	didn’t	know	better,	she	just	had	to	find	one.	A	sailor,	like	that	one
there.
‘Hey.	Look,	I	got	N’m’l	brandy,	but	I’m	thirsty	for	rum,	right?	Paid	ten
crescents	for	this,	I	know,	it’s	a	lot,	but	my	squad,	they	love	me	y’see.	Took	up
a	c’lection.	So’s,	I’m	thinking,	how	’bout	we	trade.	Straight	across,	baw’ll	for
baw’ll.	Sure,	I	drunk	most	a	this,	but	it’s	worth	more,	right.	Which,	as	you	can


see,	e’ens	thingzup.’	Then	she	waited.
The	man	was	a	tall	bastard.	Kind	of	severe	looking.	Other	people	were
staring	–	what	was	their	problem,	anyway?
Then	the	man	took	the	bottle,	swished	it	back	and	forth	and	frowned.	He
drank	it	down,	three	quick	swallows.
‘Hey—’
And	reached	beneath	his	fancy	cloak,	drawing	out	a	flask,	which	he	passed
across	to	her.	‘Here,	soldier,’	he	said.	‘Now	get	below	and	drink	until	you	pass
out.’
She	collected	the	flask	with	both	hands,	marvelling	at	its	polished	silver
surface,	even	the	gouge	that	ran	diagonally	across	one	side,	and	the	sigils
stamped	into	it,	very	nice.	The	Imperial	Sceptre,	and	four	old	ones	–	the	ones
that	used	to	identify	flagships	–	she’d	seen	those	before.	There,	that	was
Cartheron	Crust’s,	and	that	one	was	Urko’s,	and	that	one	she	didn’t	know,	but
the	last	one	was	the	same	as	on	the	flag	up	top	of	this	ship	she	was	on.	That’s	a
coincidence	now,	ain’t	it?	She	blinked	at	the	man.	‘Can’t,’	she	said.	‘I	got
orders—’
‘I	am	countermanding	those	orders,	Sergeant.’
‘You	can	do	that?’
‘Under	these	circumstances,	yes.’
‘Well	then,	I’ll	never	forget	you,	sailor.	Promise.	Now,	where’s	the
hatch…?’
He	guided	her,	with	one	firm	hand	on	her	shoulder,	in	the	right	direction.
Clutching	the	beautiful	and	beautifully	swishing	flask	against	her	chest,	Hellian
made	her	way	along,	through	the	green	murk,	and	all	the	staring	faces.	She
stuck	out	her	tongue.
They	can	get	their	own.
	
Apsalar	turned	at	the	sigh	from	the	Adjunct.
Tavore’s	expression	was…philosophic,	as	she	stared	at	the	eastern
horizon.	‘Humbling,	is	it	not?’
‘Yes,	Adjunct,	I	suppose	it	is.’
‘All	of	our	plans…our	conceits…as	if	the	sheer	force	of	our	wills,	each	of
us,	can	somehow	ensure	that	all	else	remains	unchanged	around	us,	awaiting
naught	but	what	we	do,	what	we	say.’
‘The	gods—’
‘Yes,	I	know.	But	that’	–	she	nodded	eastward	–	‘does	not	belong	to	them.’
‘No?’


‘It	is	too	devastating,	soldier.	Neither	side	is	that	desperate…yet.	And	now,’
she	shrugged,	‘even	their	games	dwindle	into	insignificance.’
‘Adjunct,’	Apsalar	said,	‘you	lack	confidence.’
‘Do	I?	In	what?’
‘Our	resilience.’
‘Perhaps.’
But	Apsalar	could	feel	her	own	confidence	crumbling,	clinging	to	a	single
thought	–	and	the	resolve	behind	that	thought	was	itself	weakening.	Even	so.	A
single	thought.	This	–	this	was	anticipated.	By	someone.	It	had	to	be.
Someone	saw	this	coming.
Most	people	were	blind,	wilfully	or	otherwise.	But,	there	were	some	who
weren’t.
So	now,	my	prescient	friend,	you	had	better	do	something	about	it.	And
quick.

Ormulogun,	trailed	by	his	toad,	stumbled	into	view,	an	overflowing	leather
satchel	in	his	arms.	The	toad	was	bleating	something	about	delusional	artists
and	the	brutal	world	in	a	tone	of	pessimistic	satisfaction.	Ormulogun	tripped
and	fell	almost	at	Paran’s	feet,	the	satchel	tipping	and	spilling	its	contents	–
including	scores	of	wooden	cards,	most	of	them	blank.
‘You’ve	barely	started!	You	damned	fool!’
‘Perfection!’	Ormulogun	shrieked.	‘You	said—’
‘Never	mind,’	Paran	snarled.	He	looked	back	at	the	eastern	sky.	Spears	of
fire	were	descending	like	rain.	‘Mainland?	Into	the	sea?’	he	wondered	aloud.
‘Or	Otataral	Island?’
‘Maybe	all	three,’	Noto	Boil	said,	licking	his	lips.
‘Well,’	Paran	said,	crouching	down	and	clearing	a	space	in	the	sand	before
him,	‘sea’s	worse.	That	means…’	He	began	drawing	with	his	index	finger.
‘I	have	some!’	Ormulogun	whimpered,	fumbling	through	the	cards.
Mael.	I	hope	you’re	paying	attention	–	I	hope	you’re	ready	to	do	what	needs
doing.	He	studied	the	streaks	he	had	etched	in	the	sand.	Enough?	It	has	to	be.
Closing	his	eyes,	he	focused	his	will.	The	Gate	is	before	me—
‘I	have	this	one!’
The	shout	was	loud	in	Paran’s	right	ear,	and	even	as	the	force	of	his	will
was	unleashed,	he	opened	his	eyes	–	and	saw,	hovering	before	him,	another
card—
And	all	of	his	power	rushed	into	it—


Onto	his	knees,	skidding	on	clay	that	deformed	beneath	him,	hands
thrusting	out	to	catch	himself.	Grey	air,	a	charnel	stench,	and	Paran	lifted	his
head.	Before	him	stood	a	gate,	a	mass	of	twisted	bones	and	pale,	bruised	flesh,
dangling	strands	of	hair,	innumerable	staring	eyes,	and	beyond	it	was	grey,
murky	oblivion.
‘Oh,	Hood.’
He	was	at	the	very	threshold.	He	had	damned	near	flung	himself	right
through—
A	figure	appeared	in	the	portal,	black-cloaked,	cowled,	tall.	This	isn’t	one
of	his	servants.	This	is	the	hoary	old	bastard	himself—
‘Is	there	time	for	such	unpleasant	thoughts,	mortal?’	The	voice	was	mild,
only	faintly	rasping.	‘With	what	is	about	to	happen…well,	Ganoes	Paran,
Master	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons,	you	have	positioned	yourself	in	a	most
unfortunate	place,	unless	you	wish	to	be	trampled	by	the	multitudes	who	shall
momentarily	find	themselves	on	this	path.’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,	Hood,’	Paran	hissed,	trying	to	climb	to	his	feet,	then
stopping	when	he	realized	that	doing	so	would	not	be	a	good	idea.	‘Help	me.
Us.	Stop	what’s	coming	–	it’ll	destroy—’
‘Far	too	much,	yes.	Too	many	plans.	I	can	do	little,	however.	You	have
sought	out	the	wrong	god.’
‘I	know.	I	was	trying	for	Mael.’
‘Pointless…’	Yet,	even	as	Hood	spoke	that	word,	Paran	detected	a	certain…
hesitation.
Ah,	you’ve	had	a	thought.
‘I	have.	Very	well,	Ganoes	Paran,	bargain.’
‘Abyss	take	us	–	there’s	no	time	for	that!’
‘Think	quickly,	then.’
‘What	do	you	want?	More	than	anything	else,	Hood.	What	do	you	want?’
And	so	Hood	told	him.	And,	among	the	corpses,	limbs	and	staring	faces	in
the	gate,	one	face	in	particular	suddenly	grew	animate,	its	eyes	opening	very
wide	–	a	detail	neither	noticed.
Paran	stared	at	the	god,	disbelieving.	‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
‘Death	is	always	serious.’
‘Oh,	enough	with	the	portentous	crap!	Are	you	certain?’
‘Can	you	achieve	what	I	ask,	Ganoes	Paran?’
‘I	will.	Somehow.’
‘Do	you	so	vow?’
‘I	do.’
‘Very	well.	Leave	here.	I	must	open	this	gate.’


‘What?	It	is	open!’
But	the	god	had	turned	away,	and	Paran	barely	heard	Hood’s	reply:	‘Not
from	this	side.’
	
Chaur	squealed	as	a	hail	of	firestones	struck	the	roiling	waters	barely	a	ship’sbreadth	away.	Explosions	of	steam,	a	terrible	shrieking	sound	tearing	through
the	air.	Cutter	pushed	hard	on	the	steering	oar,	trying	to	scull	the	wallowing
craft	–	but	he	didn’t	have	the	strength	for	that.	The	Grief	wasn’t	going
anywhere.	Except,	I	fear,	to	the	bottom.
Something	struck	the	deck;	a	thud,	splintering,	reverberations	trembling
the	entire	hull,	then	steam	was	billowing	from	the	fist-sized	hole.	The	Grief
seemed	to	sag	beneath	them.
Cursing,	Barathol	scrambled	to	the	breach,	dragging	a	bundle	of	spare
sailcloth.	Even	as	he	sought	to	push	it	down	into	the	hole,	two	more	stones
struck	the	craft,	one	up	front	tearing	away	the	prow,	another	–	a	flash	of	heat
against	Cutter ’s	left	thigh	and	he	looked	down	to	see	steam	then	water	gushing
up.
The	air	seethed	like	the	breath	from	a	forge.	The	entire	sky	overhead
seemed	to	be	on	fire.
The	sail	above	them	was	burning,	ripped	through.
Another	concussion,	and	more	than	half	of	the	port	rail	was	simply	gone,
pulverized	wood	a	mist	drifting	away,	flaring	with	motes	of	flame.
‘We’re	sinking!’	Scillara	shouted,	grasping	hold	of	the	opposite	rail	as	the
Grief’s	deck	tilted	alarmingly.
Cargo	shifted	–	too	many	supplies	–	we	got	greedy	–	making	the	dying	craft
lean	further.
The	wrapped	corpse	of	Heboric	rolled	towards	the	choppy	waves.
Crying	out,	Cutter	sought	to	make	his	way	towards	it,	but	he	was	too	far
away	–	the	cloth-wrapped	form	slid	down	into	the	water—
And,	wailing,	Chaur	followed	it.
‘No!’	Barathol	yelled.	‘Chaur	–	no!’
The	mute	giant’s	huge	arms	closed	about	the	corpse,	a	moment	before	both
simply	slipped	from	sight.
	
Sea.	Bara	called	it	sea.	Warm	now,	wet.	Was	so	nice.	Now,	sky	bad,	and	sea	bad
–	up	there	–	but	nice	now.	Here.	Dark,	night,	night	is	coming,	ears	hurt.	Ears


hurt.	Hurt.	Bara	said	never	breathe	in	sea.	Need	to	breathe	now.	Oh,	hurt!
Breathe!
He	filled	his	lungs,	and	fire	burst	through	his	chest,	then…cool,	calm,	the
spasms	slowing.	Darkness	closed	in	round	him,	but	Chaur	was	no	longer
frightened	by	that.	The	cold	was	gone,	the	heat	was	gone,	and	numbness	filled
his	head.
He	had	so	loved	the	sea.
The	wrapped	body	in	his	arms	pulled	ever	down,	and	the	limbs	that	had
been	severed	and	that	he	had	collected	when	Bara	told	him	to,	seemed	to	move
about	within	as	the	canvas	stretched,	lost	shape.
Darkness,	now,	inside	and	out.	Something	hot	and	savage	tore	past	him,
racing	downward	like	a	spear	of	light,	and	Chaur	flinched.	And	he	closed	his
eyes	to	make	those	things	go	away.	The	ache	was	finally	gone	from	his	lungs.
I	sleep	now.
	
Geysers	of	steam	shooting	skyward,	thunderous	concussions	racking	the	air
and	visibly	battering	the	sea	so	that	it	shook,	trembled,	and	Cutter	saw	Barathol
dive	into	the	churning	water,	into	Chaur ’s	wake.	The	body.	Heboric	–	Chaur,	oh
gods…
He	reached	Scillara’s	side	and	pulled	her	close,	into	his	arms.	She	clutched
his	sodden	shirt.	‘I’m	so	glad,’	she	whispered,	as	the	Grief	groaned	and	canted
further	onto	its	side.
‘About	what?’
‘That	I	left	her.	Back	there.	I	left	her.’
Cutter	hugged	her	all	the	tighter.
I’m	sorry,	Apsalar.	For	everything—
Sudden	buffeting	winds,	a	sweeping	shadow.	He	looked	up	and	his	eyes
widened	at	the	monstrous	shape	occluding	the	sky,	descending—
A	dragon.	What	now?
And	then	he	heard	shouts	–	and	at	that	moment,	the	Grief	seemed	to
explode.
Cutter	found	himself	in	the	water,	thrashing,	panic	awakened	within	him,
like	a	fist	closing	round	his	heart.
	
…Reaching…reaching…
What	is	this	sound?	Where	am	I?


A	million	voices	–	screaming,	plunging	into	terrible	death	–	oh,	they	had
travelled	the	dark	span	for	so	long,	weightless,	seeing	before	them	that	vast…
emptiness.	Unmindful	of	their	arguing,	their	discussions,	their	fierce	debates,	it
swallowed	them.	Utterly.	Then,	out,	through	to	the	other	side…a	net	of	power
spreading	out,	something	eager	for	mass,	something	that	grew	ever	stronger,
and	the	journey	was	suddenly	in	crazed,	violent	motion	–	a	world	beneath	–	so
many	lost	then	–	and	beyond	it,	another,	this	one	larger—
‘Oh,	hear	us,	so	many…annihilated.	Mountains	struck	to	dust,	rock
spinning	away	into	dark,	blinding	clouds	that	scintillated	in	harsh	sunlight	–
and	now,	this	beast	world	that	fills	our	vision	–	is	this	home?
‘Have	we	come	home?’
Reaching…hands	of	jade,	dusty,	raw,	not	yet	polished	into	lurid	brightness.
I	remember…you	had	to	die,	Treach,	didn’t	you?	Before	ascendancy,	before	true
godhood.	You	had	to	die	first.
Was	I	ever	your	Destriant?
Did	that	title	ever	belong	to	me?
Did	I	need	to	be	killed?
Reaching	–	these	hands,	these	unknown,	unknowable	hands	–	how	can	I
answer	these	screams?	These	millions	in	their	shattered	prisons	–	I	touched,
once,	fingertip	to	fingertip,	I	touched,	oh…the	voices—
‘This	is	not	salvation.	We	simply	die.	Destruction—’
‘No,	no,	you	fool.	Home.	We	have	come	home—’
‘Annihilation	is	not	salvation.	Where	is	he?	Where	is	our	god?’
‘I	tell	you,	the	search	ends!’
‘No	argument	there.’
Listen	to	me.
‘Who	is	that?’
‘He	returns!	The	one	outside	–	the	brother!’
Listen	to	me,	please.	I	–	I’m	not	your	brother.	I’m	no-one.	I	thought…
Destriant…did	I	know	it	for	certain?	Have	I	been	lied	to?	Destriant…well,
maybe,	maybe	not.	Maybe	we	all	got	it	wrong,	every	one	of	us.	Maybe	even
Treach	got	it	wrong.
‘He	has	lost	his	mind.’
‘Forget	him	–	look,	death,	terrible	death,	it	comes—’
‘Mad?	So	what.	I’d	rather	listen	to	him	than	any	of	you.	He	said	listen,	he
said	that,	and	so	I	shall.’
‘We	will	all	listen,	idiot	–	we	have	no	choice,	have	we?’
Destriant.	We	got	it	all	wrong.	Don’t	you	see?	All	I	have	done…cannot	be
forgiven.	Can	never	be	forgiven	–	he’s	sent	me	back.	Even	Hood	–	he’s	rejected


me,	flung	me	back.	But…it’s	slipping	away,	so	tenuous,	I	am	failing—
‘Failing,	falling,	what’s	the	difference?’
Reaching.
‘What?’
My	hands	–	do	you	see	them?	Cut	loose,	that’s	what	happened.	The	hands…
cut	loose.	Freed.	I	can’t	do	this…but	I	think	they	can.	Don’t	you	see?
‘Senseless	words.’
‘No,	wait—’
Not	Destriant.
Shield	Anvil.
Reaching…look	upon	me	–	all	of	you!	Reach!	See	my	hands!	See	them!
They’re	reaching	–	reaching	out	for	you!
They…are…reaching…

Barathol	swam	down	into	darkness.	He	could	see…nothing.	No-one.	Chaur,	oh
gods,	what	have	I	done?	He	continued	clawing	his	way	downward.	Better	he
drowned	as	well	–	he	could	not	live	with	this,	not	with	that	poor	man-child’s
death	on	his	hands	–	he	could	not—
His	own	breath	was	failing,	the	pressure	closing	in,	pounding	in	his	skull.
He	was	blind—
A	flash	of	emerald	green	below,	blooming,	incandescent,	billowing	out	–
and	at	its	core	–	Oh	gods,	wait	–	wait	for	me—
Limp,	snagged	in	unravelled	folds	of	canvas,	Chaur	was	sinking,	arms	out
to	the	sides,	his	eyes	closed,	his	mouth…open.
No!	No,	no!
From	the	pulsing	glow,	heat	–	such	heat	–	Barathol	fought	closer,	his	chest
ready	to	explode	–	and	reached	down,	down—
	
A	section	of	the	aft	deck	floated	free	from	what	was	now	little	more	than
pummelled	wreckage.	The	firestones	tore	down	on	all	sides	as	Cutter	struggled
to	help	Scillara	clamber	onto	the	pitching	fragment.	Those	firestones	–	they
were	smaller	than	pebbles,	despite	the	fist-sized	holes	they	had	punched
through	the	Grief.	Smaller	than	pebbles	–	more	like	grains	of	sand,	glowing
bright	green,	like	spatters	of	glass,	their	colour	changing,	almost	instantly,	into
rust	red	as	they	plummeted	into	the	depths.
Scillara	cried	out.


‘Are	you	hit?	Oh,	gods	–	no—’
She	twisted	round.	‘Look!	Hood	take	us	–	look!’	And	she	lifted	an	arm,
pointed	as	a	swelling	wave	lifted	them	–	pointed	eastward—
Towards	Otataral	Island.
It	had…ignited.	Jade	green,	a	glowing	dome	that	might	have	spanned	the
entire	island,	writhing,	lifting	skyward,	and,	rising	up	through	it…hands.	Of
jade.	Like…like	Heboric’s.	Rising,	like	trees.	Arms	–	huge	–	dozens	of	them	–
rising,	fingers	spreading,	green	light	spiralling	out	–	from	their	upturned
palms,	from	the	fingers,	from	the	veins	and	arteries	cabling	their	muscled
lengths	–	green	light,	slashing	into	the	heavens	like	sword-blades.	Those	arms
were	too	big	to	comprehend,	reaching	upward	like	pillars	through	the	dome—
—as	the	fires	filling	the	sky	seemed	to	flinch…tremble…and	then	began	to
converge.
Above	the	island,	above	the	hands	of	jade	reaching	up,	through	the
billowing	green	light.
The	first	falling	sun	struck	the	glowing	dome.
The	sound	was	like	a	drum	beat,	on	a	scale	to	deafen	the	gods.	Its	pulse
rippled	through	the	dome’s	burgeoning	flanks,	racing	outward	and	seeming	to
strip	the	surface	of	the	sea,	shivering	through	Cutter ’s	bones,	a	concussion	that
triggered	bursting	agony	in	his	ears	–	then	another,	and	another	as	sun	after
sun	plunged	into	that	buckling,	pocked	dome.	He	was	screaming,	yet	unable	to
hear	himself.	Red	mist	filled	his	eyes	–	he	felt	himself	sliding	from	the	raft,
down	into	the	foam-laden	waves—
Even	as	an	enormous	clawed	foot	reached	down,	spread	wide	over	Cutter	–
and	Scillara,	who	was	grasping	him	by	an	arm,	seeking	to	drag	him	back	onto
the	raft	–	and	talons	the	size	of	scimitars	closed	round	them	both.	They	were
lifted	from	the	thrashing	water,	upward,	up—
	
Reaching…yes.	For	me,	closer,	closer.
Never	mind	the	pain.
It	will	not	last.	I	promise.	I	know,	because	I	remember.
No,	I	cannot	be	forgiven.
But	maybe	you	can,	maybe	I	can	do	that,	if	you	feel	it’s	needed	–	I	don’t
know	–	I	was	the	wrong	one,	to	have	touched…there	in	that	desert.	I	didn’t
understand,	and	Baudin	could	never	have	guessed	what	would	happen,	how	I
would	be	marked.
Marked,	yes,	I	see	now,	for	this,	this	need.
Can	you	hear	me?	Closer	–	do	you	see	the	darkness?	There,	that	is	where	I


am.
Millions	of	voices,	weeping,	crying	out,	voices,	filled	with	yearning	–	he
could	hear	them—
Ah	gods,	who	am	I?	I	cannot	remember.
Only	this.	The	darkness	that	surrounds	me.	We,	yes,	all	of	you	–	we	can	all
wait	here,	in	this	darkness.
Never	mind	the	pain.
Wait	with	me.	In	this	darkness.
And	the	voices,	in	their	millions,	in	their	vast,	unbearable	need,	rushed
towards	him.
Shield	Anvil,	who	would	take	their	pain,	for	he	could	remember	such	pain.
The	darkness	took	them,	and	it	was	then	that	Heboric	Ghost	Hands,	Shield
Anvil,	realized	a	most	terrible	truth.
One	cannot,	in	any	real	measure,	remember	pain.
	
Two	bodies	tumbling	like	broken	dolls	onto	the	deck.	Mappo	struggled
towards	them,	even	as	Spite	wheeled	away	one	more	time	–	he	could	feel	the
dragon’s	agony	with	every	ragged	breath	she	drew,	and	the	air	was	foul	with
the	reek	of	scorched	scales	and	flesh.
The	rain	of	fire	had	descended	in	a	torrent	all	round	them,	wild	as	a
hailstorm	and	far	deadlier;	yet	not	one	particle	had	struck	their	ship	–
protection	gifted,	Mappo	realized,	not	by	Spite,	nor	indeed	by	Iskaral	Pust	or
Mogora.	No,	as	the	High	Priest’s	fawning,	wet	kisses	gave	proof,	some	power
born	in	that	damned	black-eyed	mule	was	responsible.	Somehow.
The	beast	simply	stood,	unmoving	and	seemingly	indifferent,	tail	flicking
the	absence	of	flies.	Slowly	blinking,	as	if	half-asleep,	its	lips	twitching	every
now	and	then.
While	the	world	went	mad	around	them;	while	it	tore	that	other	ship	to
pieces—
Mappo	rolled	the	nearer	figure	over.	Blood-smeared	face,	streams	from
the	ears,	the	nose,	the	corners	of	the	eyes	–	yet	he	knew	this	man.	He	knew	him.
Crokus,	the	Daru.	Oh,	lad,	what	has	brought	you	to	this?
Then	the	young	man’s	eyes	opened.	Filled	with	fear	and	apprehension.
‘Be	at	ease,’	Mappo	said,	‘you	are	safe	now.’
The	other	figure,	a	woman,	was	coughing	up	seawater,	and	there	was
blood	flowing	down	from	her	left	ear	to	track	the	underside	of	her	jaw	before
dripping	from	her	chin.	On	her	hands	and	knees,	she	lifted	her	head	and	met
the	Trell’s	gaze.


‘Are	you	all	right?’	Mappo	asked.
She	nodded,	crawled	closer	to	Crokus.
‘He	will	live,’	the	Trell	assured	her.	‘It	seems	we	all	shall	live…I	had	not
believed—’
Iskaral	Pust	screamed.
Pointed.
A	large,	scarred,	black-skinned	arm	had	appeared	over	the	port	rail,	like
some	slithering	eel,	the	hand	grasping	hard	on	the	slick	wood,	the	muscles
straining.
Mappo	clambered	over.
The	man	he	looked	down	upon	was	holding	onto	another	body,	a	man
easily	as	large	as	he	was,	and	it	was	clear	that	the	former	was	fast	losing	his
strength.	Mappo	reached	down	and	dragged	them	both	onto	the	deck.
‘Barathol,’	the	woman	gasped.
Mappo	watched	as	the	man	named	Barathol	quickly	rolled	his	companion
over	and	began	pushing	the	water	from	his	lungs.
‘Barathol—’
‘Quiet,	Scillara—’
‘He	was	under	too	long—’
‘Quiet!’
Mappo	watched,	trying	to	remember	what	such	ferocity,	such	loyalty,	felt
like.	He	could	almost	recall…almost.	He	has	drowned,	this	one.	See	all	that
water?	Yet	Barathol	would	not	cease	in	his	efforts,	pulling	the	limp,	flopping
body	about	this	way	and	that,	rocking	the	arms,	then,	finally,	dragging	the	head
and	shoulders	onto	his	lap,	where	he	cradled	the	face	as	if	it	was	a	newborn
babe.
The	man’s	expression	twisted,	terrible	in	its	grief.	‘Chaur!	Listen	to	me!
This	is	Barathol.	Listen!	I	want	you	to…to	bury	the	horses!	Do	you	hear	me?
You	have	to	bury	the	horses!	Before	the	wolves	come	down!	I’m	not	asking,
Chaur,	do	you	understand?	I’m	telling	you!’
He	has	lost	his	mind.	From	this,	there	is	no	recovery.	I	know,	I	know—
‘Chaur!	I	will	get	angry,	do	you	understand?	Angry…with	you!	With	you,
Chaur!	Do	you	want	Barathol	angry	at	you,	Chaur?	Do	you	want—’
A	cough,	gouting	water,	a	convulsion,	then	the	huge	man	held	so	tenderly
in	Barathol’s	arms	seemed	to	curl	up,	one	hand	reaching	up,	and	a	wailing	cry
worked	its	way	through	the	mucus	and	froth.
‘No,	no	my	friend,’	Barathol	gasped,	pulling	the	man	into	a	tight,	rocking
embrace.	‘I’m	not	angry.	No,	I’m	not.	Never	mind	the	horses.	You	did	that
already.	Remember?	Oh,	Chaur,	I’m	not	angry.’


But	the	man	bawled,	clutching	at	Barathol	like	a	child.
He	is	a	simpleton.	Otherwise,	this	Barathol,	he	would	not	have	spoken	to
him	in	such	a	manner.	He	is	a	child	in	a	man’s	body,	this	Chaur…
Mappo	watched.	As	the	two	huge	men	wept	in	each	other ’s	arms.
Spite	now	stood	beside	the	Trell,	and	as	soon	as	Mappo	became	aware	of
her,	he	sensed	her	pain	–	and	then	her	will,	pushing	it	away	with	such	ferocity	–
he	dragged	his	gaze	from	the	two	men	on	the	deck	and	stared	at	her.
Pushing,	pushing	away	all	that	pain—
‘How?	How	did	you	do	that?’	he	demanded.
‘Are	you	blind,	Mappo	Runt?’	she	asked.	‘Look	–	look	at	them,	Trell.
Chaur,	his	fear	is	gone,	now.	He	believes	Barathol,	he	believes	him.	Utterly,
without	question.	You	cannot	be	blind	to	this,	to	what	it	means.
‘You	are	looking	upon	joy,	Mappo	Runt.	In	the	face	of	this,	I	will	not
obsess	on	my	own	pain,	my	own	suffering.	Do	you	understand?	I	will	not.’
Ah,	spirits	below,	you	break	my	heart,	woman.	He	looked	back	at	the	two
men,	then	across	to	where	Scillara	held	Crokus	in	her	arms,	stroking	the	man’s
hair	as	he	came	round.	Broken,	by	all	this.	Again.
I	had…forgotten.
Iskaral	Pust	was	dancing	round	Mogora,	who	watched	him	with	a	sour
expression,	her	face	contracting	until	it	resembled	a	dried-up	prune.	Then,	in	a
moment	when	the	High	Priest	drew	too	close,	she	lashed	out	with	a	kick	that
swept	his	feet	out	from	beneath	him.	He	thumped	hard	onto	the	deck,	then
began	swearing.	‘Despicable	woman!	Woman,	did	I	say	woman?	Hah!	You’re
what	a	shedding	snake	leaves	behind!	A	sickly	snake!	With	scabs	and	pustules
and	weals	and	bunions—’
‘I	heard	you	lusting	after	me,	you	disgusting	creep!’
‘I	tried	to,	you	mean!	In	desperation,	but	even	imminent	death	was	not
enough!	Do	you	understand?	Not	enough!’
Mogora	advanced	on	him.
Iskaral	Pust	squealed,	then	slithered	his	way	beneath	the	mule.	‘Come	any
closer,	hag,	and	my	servant	will	kick	you!	Do	you	know	how	many	fools	die
each	year	from	a	mule	kick?	You’d	be	surprised.’
The	Dal	Honese	witch	hissed	at	him,	then	promptly	collapsed	into	a	swarm
of	spiders	–	that	raced	everywhere,	and	moments	later	not	one	remained	in
sight.
The	High	Priest,	his	eyes	wide,	looked	about	frantically,	then	began
scratching	beneath	his	clothes.	‘Oh!	You	awful	creature!’
Mappo’s	bemused	attention	was	drawn	away	by	Crokus,	who	had	moved
towards	Barathol	and	Chaur.


‘Barathol,’	the	Daru	said.	‘There	was	no	chance?’
The	man	looked	over,	then	shook	his	head.	‘I’m	sorry,	Cutter.	But,	he	saved
Chaur ’s	life.	Even	dead,	he	saved	Chaur.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘The	body	was	glowing,’	Barathol	said.	‘Bright	green.	It’s	how	I	saw	them.
Chaur	was	snagged	in	the	bolt	cloth	–	I	had	to	cut	him	free.	I	could	not	carry
both	of	them	to	the	surface	–	I	barely	made	it—’
‘It’s	all	right,’	Crokus	said.
‘He	sank,	down	and	down,	and	the	glow	ebbed.	The	darkness	swallowed
him.	But	listen,	you	got	him	close	enough	–	do	you	understand?	Not	all	the
way,	but	close	enough.	Whatever	happened,	whatever	saved	us	all,	it	came
from	him.’
Mappo	spoke:	‘Crokus	–	it	is	Cutter,	now,	yes?	Cutter,	who	are	you
speaking	about?	Did	someone	else	drown?’
‘No,	Mappo.	I	mean,	not	really.	A	friend,	he	died	–	I,	well,	I	was	trying	to
take	his	body	to	the	island	–	it’s	where	he	wanted	to	go,	you	see.	To	give
something	back.’
Something.	‘I	believe	your	friend	here	is	right,	then,’	the	Trell	said.	‘You
brought	him	close	enough.	To	make	a	difference,	to	do	what	even	death	could
not	prevent	him	doing.’
‘He	was	named	Heboric	Ghost	Hands.’
‘I	will	remember	that	name,	then,’	Mappo	said.	‘With	gratitude.’
‘You…you	look	different.’	Cutter	was	frowning.	‘Those	tattoos.’	Then	his
eyes	widened,	and	he	asked	what	Mappo	feared	he	would	ask.	‘Where?	Where
is	he?’
Doors	within	the	Trell	that	had	cracked	open	suddenly	slammed	shut	once
more.	He	looked	away.	‘I	lost	him.’
‘You	lost	him?’
‘Gone.’	Yes,	I	failed	him.	I	failed	us	all.	He	could	not	look	at	the	Daru.	He
could	not	bear	it.	My	shame…
‘Oh,	Mappo,	I	am	sorry.’
You	are…what?
A	hand	settled	on	his	shoulder,	and	that	was	too	much.	He	could	feel	the
tears,	the	grief	flooding	his	eyes,	running	down.	He	flinched	away.	‘My	fault…
my	fault…’
	
Spite	stood	watching	for	a	moment	longer.	Mappo,	the	Trell.	Who	walked	with
Icarium.	Ah,	he	now	blames	himself.	I	understand.	My…that	is…unfortunate.


But	such	was	our	intent,	after	all.	And,	there	is	the	chance	–	the	one	chance	I
most	cherish.	Icarium,	he	may	well	encounter	my	sister,	before	all	of	this	is
done.	Yes,	that	would	be	sweet,	delicious,	a	taste	I	could	savour	for	a	long,	long
time.	Are	you	close	enough,	Envy,	to	sense	my	thoughts?	My…desire?	I	hope	so.
But	no,	this	was	not	the	time	for	such	notions,	alluring	as	they	were.
Aching	still	with	wounds,	she	turned	and	studied	the	wild,	roiling	clouds
above	Otataral	Island.	Blooms	of	colour,	as	if	flames	ravaged	the	land,	tongues
of	fire	flickering	up	those	gargantuan	jade	arms,	spinning	from	the	fingers.
Above	the	seething	dome,	night	was	dimming	the	penumbra	of	dust	and	smoke,
where	slashes	of	falling	matter	still	cut	through	every	now	and	then.
Spite	then	faced	the	west,	the	mainland.	Whoever	you	are…thank	you.
	
With	a	gasp,	Paran	opened	his	eyes,	to	find	himself	pitching	forward	–	sandy
gravel	rising	fast	–	then	he	struck,	grunting	with	the	impact.	His	arms	felt	like
unravelled	ropes	as	he	slowly	dragged	them	up,	sufficiently	to	push	himself
onto	his	side,	which	let	him	roll	onto	his	back.
Above	him,	a	ring	of	faces,	all	looking	down.
‘High	Fist,’	Rythe	Bude	asked,	‘did	you	just	save	the	world?’
‘And	us	with	it?’	Noto	Boil	added,	then	frowned.	‘Never	mind	that	one,	sir.
After	all,	in	answering	the	Fist’s	query,	the	second	is	implicitly—’
‘Be	quiet,’	Paran	said.	‘If	I	saved	the	world	–	and	by	no	means	would	I
make	such	a	claim	–	I	am	already	regretting	it.	Does	anyone	have	some	water?
With	where	I’ve	just	come	back	from,	I’ve	got	a	rather	unpleasant	taste	in	my
mouth.’
Skins	sloshed	into	view.
But	Paran	held	up	a	hand.	‘The	east	–	how	bad	does	it	look?’
‘Should	have	been	much,	much	worse,	sir,’	Fist	Rythe	Bude	said.	‘There’s	a
real	ruckus	over	there,	but	nothing’s	actually	coming	out,	if	you	understand
me.’
‘Good.’	Good.
Oh,	Hood.	Did	you	truly	mean	it?
Gods,	me	and	my	promises…
	
Night	to	the	east	was	a	lurid,	silent	storm.	Standing	near	the	Adjunct,	with	Nil
and	Nether	a	few	strides	off	to	one	side,	Fist	Keneb	shivered	beneath	his	heavy
cloak,	despite	the	peculiar,	dry	sultriness	of	the	steady	wind.	He	could	not


comprehend	what	had	happened	beyond	that	eastern	horizon,	not	before,	not
now.	The	descent	of	green-flamed	suns,	the	raging	maelstrom.	And,	for	a	time
there,	a	pervasive	malaise	enshrouding	everyone	–	from	what	was	coming,	it
had	seemed,	there	would	be	no	reprieve,	no	escape,	no	hope	of	survival.
Such	a	notion	had,	oddly	enough,	calmed	Keneb.	When	struggle	was
meaningless,	all	pressure	simply	drained	away.	It	struck	him,	now,	that	there
was	something	to	be	said	for	holding	on	to	such	sentiments.	After	all,	death
was	itself	inevitable,	wasn’t	it?	Inescapable	–	what	point	scratching	and	clawing
in	a	doomed	effort	to	evade	it?
The	comfort	of	that	was	momentary,	alas.	Death	took	care	of	itself	–	it	was
in	life,	in	living,	that	things	mattered.	Acts,	desires,	motives,	fears,	the	gifts	of
joy	and	the	bitter	taste	of	failure	–	a	feast	we	must	all	attend.
At	least	until	we	leave.
Stars	wavered	overhead,	streaks	of	cloud	clung	to	the	north,	the	kind	that
made	Keneb	think	of	snow.	And	yet	here	I	stand	sweating,	the	sweat	cooling,
this	chill	fashioned	not	by	night	or	the	wind,	but	by	exhaustion.	Nether	had	said
something	about	this	wind,	its	urgency,	the	will	behind	it.	Thus,	not	natural.	A
god,	then,	manipulating	us	yet	again.
The	fleets	of	Nemil	patrolled	a	vast	stretch	of	this	coast.	Their	war	biremes
were	primitive,	awkward-looking,	never	straying	far	from	the	rocky	shoreline.
That	shoreline	traditionally	belonged	to	the	Trell,	but	there	had	been	wars,
generations	of	wars,	and	now	Nemil	settlements	dotted	the	bays	and	inlets,	and
the	Trell,	who	had	never	been	seafarers,	had	been	driven	far	inland,	into	the
hills,	a	dwindling	enclave	surrounded	by	settlers.	Keneb	had	seen	mixedbloods	among	the	Nemil	crews	in	the	trader	ships	that	sailed	out	with	supplies.
Belligerent	as	the	Nemil	were	towards	the	Trell,	they	were	not	similarly
inclined	when	facing	a	huge	Malazan	fleet	entering	their	territorial	waters.
Sages	among	them	had	foretold	this	arrival,	and	the	lure	of	profit	had
triggered	a	flotilla	of	merchant	craft	setting	forth	from	the	harbours,
accompanied	by	a	disorganized	collection	of	escorts,	some	private,	others
royal.	The	resupply	had	resembled	a	feeding	frenzy	for	a	time	there,	until,	that
is,	the	eastern	sky	suddenly	burst	into	savage	light.
Not	a	single	Nemil	ship	remained	now,	and	that	coastline	had	been	left
behind,	as	the	second	bell	after	midnight	tolled	dully	at	the	sand-watcher ’s	hand
–	the	sound	taken	up	by	nearby	ships,	rippling	outward	through	the	imperial
fleet.
From	a	Nemil	captain,	earlier	in	the	day,	had	come	interesting	news,	and	it
was	that	information	that,	despite	the	lateness,	the	Adjunct	continued	to	discuss
with	her	two	Wickan	companions.


‘Are	there	any	details	from	Malazan	sources,’	Nether	was	asking	Tavore,
‘of	the	peoples	beyond	the	Catal	Sea?’
‘No	more	than	a	name,’	the	Adjunct	replied,	then	said	to	Keneb,	‘Fist,	do
you	recall	it?’
‘Perish.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	nothing	more	is	known	of	them?’	Nether	asked.
There	was	no	answer	forthcoming	from	the	others.	And	it	seemed	that	the
Wickans	then	waited.
‘An	interesting	suggestion,’	the	Adjunct	said	after	a	moment.	‘And,	given
this	near-gale,	we	shall	discover	for	ourselves	soon	enough	what	manner	of
people	are	these	Perish.’
The	Nemil	captain	had	reported	–	second-hand	–	that	another	Edur	fleet
had	been	sighted	the	day	before.	Well	to	the	north,	less	than	a	score	of	ships,
struggling	eastward	in	the	face	of	this	unceasing	wind.	Those	ships	were	in	a
bad	way,	the	captain	had	said.	Damaged,	limping.	Struck	by	a	storm,	perhaps,
or	they	had	seen	battle.	Whatever	the	cause,	they	were	not	eager	to	challenge
the	Nemil	ships,	which	in	itself	was	sufficient	matter	for	comment	–	apparently,
the	roving	Edur	ships	had	been	preying	on	Nemil	traders	for	nearly	two	years,
and	on	those	instances	when	Nemil	escorts	were	close	enough	to	engage,	the
results	had	been	disastrous	for	the	antiquated	biremes.
Curious	news.	The	Adjunct	had	pressed	the	Nemil	captain	on	information
regarding	the	Perish,	the	inhabitants	of	the	vast,	mountain-girdled	peninsula	on
the	western	side	of	the	Catal	Sea,	which	was	itself	a	substantial,	southwardjutting	inlet,	at	the	very	bottom	of	which	was	the	heart	of	the	Nemil	Kingdom.
But	the	man	had	simply	shaken	his	head,	suddenly	mute.
Nether	had,	moments	earlier,	suggested	that	perhaps	the	Edur	fleet	had
clashed	with	these	Perish.	And	suffered	in	consequence.
The	Malazan	fleet	was	cutting	across	the	mouth	of	the	Catal	Inlet	now	–	as
it	was	called	on	the	Malazan	maps	–	a	distance	the	captain	had	claimed	was	a
journey	of	four	days’	sailing	under	ideal	conditions.	The	lead	ships	were
already	a	fourth	of	the	way	across.
There	was	more	than	wind,	magic	or	otherwise	–	the	way	the	horizons
looked	blurry,	especially	headlands…
‘The	Nemil,’	Nil	said,	‘were	not	reluctant	to	speak	of	the	Edur.’
‘Yet	they	would	say	nothing	at	all	of	the	Perish,’	Nether	added.
‘History	between	them,’	Keneb	suggested.
The	others	turned	to	him.
Keneb	shrugged.	‘Just	a	thought.	The	Nemil	are	clearly	expansionist,	and


that	entails	a	certain…arrogance.	They	devoured	the	Trell	peoples,	providing	a
reassuring	symbol	of	Nemil	prowess	and	righteousness.	It	may	be	that	the
Perish	delivered	an	opposing	symbol,	something	that	both	shocked	and
humbled	the	Nemil	–	neither	sentiment	quite	fitting	with	their	own	notions	of
grandiosity.	And	so	they	will	not	speak	of	it.’
‘Your	theory	makes	sense,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘Thank	you,	Fist.’	She	turned
and	studied	the	riotous	eastern	sky.	‘Humbled,	yes,’	she	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘In
the	writings	of	Duiker,	he	speaks	of	the	manifold	scales	to	be	found	in	war,
from	the	soldier	facing	another	soldier,	to	the	very	gods	themselves	locked	in
mortal	combat.	At	first	glance,	it	seems	an	outrage	to	consider	that	such
extremes	can	coexist,	yet	Duiker	then	claims	that	the	potential	for	cause	and
effect	can	proceed	in	both	directions.’
‘It	would	be	comforting	to	think	so,’	Keneb	said.	‘I	can	think	of	a	few	gods
that	I’d	love	to	trip	up	right	now.’
‘It	may	be,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘that	someone	has	preceded	you.’
Keneb	frowned.	‘Do	you	know	who,	Adjunct?’
She	glanced	at	him,	said	nothing.
Thus	ends	her	momentary	loquaciousness.	Well.	And	what	did	it	tell	me?
She’s	well	read,	but	I	already	knew	that.	Anything	else?
No.
	
Kalam	pushed	his	way	forward,	slumped	once	more	at	Quick	Ben’s	side.	‘It’s
official,’	he	said	in	the	gloom	of	the	musty	hold.
‘What	is?’
‘We’re	still	alive.’
‘Oh,	that’s	good,	Kal.	I	was	sitting	on	coals	down	here	waiting	for	that
news.’
‘I	prefer	that	image	to	the	reality,	Quick.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Well,	the	idea	that	you	were	hiding,	your	loincloth	suddenly	baggy	and	a
puddle	spreading	beneath	you.’
‘You	don’t	know	anything.	I	do.	I	know	more	than	I’d	ever	want	to—’
‘Impossible.	You	drink	in	secrets	like	Hellian	does	rum.	The	more	you
know	the	drunker	and	more	obnoxious	you	get.’
‘Oh	yeah?	Well,	I	know	things	you’d	want	to	know,	and	I	was	going	to	tell
you,	but	now	I	think	I’ll	change	my	mind—’
‘Out	with	it,	wizard,	before	I	go	back	up	and	tell	the	Adjunct	where	she	can
find	you.’


‘You	can’t	do	that.	I	need	time	to	think,	damn	you.’
‘So	talk.	You	can	think	while	you’re	doing	that,	since	with	you	the	two
activities	are	clearly	distinct	and	mostly	unrelated.’
‘What’s	got	you	so	miserable?’
‘You.’
‘Liar.’
‘All	right,	me.’
‘That’s	better.	Anyway,	I	know	who	saved	us.’
‘Really?’
‘Well,	sort	of	–	he	started	the	big	rock	rolling,	at	least.’
‘Who?’
‘Ganoes	Paran.’
Kalam	scowled.	‘All	right,	I’m	less	surprised	than	I	should	be.’
‘Then	you’re	an	idiot.	He	did	it	by	having	a	conversation	with	Hood.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
‘I	was	there,	listening	in.	At	Hood’s	Gate.’
‘What	were	you	doing	hanging	around	there?’
‘We	were	all	going	to	die,	weren’t	we?’
‘Oh,	so	you	wanted	to	beat	the	rush?’
‘Hilarious,	Kalam.	No,	I	was	planning	on	doing	some	bargaining,	but
that’s	irrelevant	now.	Ended	up,	it	was	Paran	who	did	the	bargaining.	Hood	said
something.	He	wants	something	–	by	his	own	damned	breath,	it	shocked	me,	let
me	tell	you—’
‘So	do	that.’
‘No.	I	need	to	think.’
Kalam	closed	his	eyes	and	leaned	back	against	the	bale.	It	smelled	of	oats.
‘Ganoes	Paran.’	A	pause,	then,	‘Do	you	think	she	knows?’
‘Who,	Tavore?’
‘Yes,	who	else?’
‘I	have	no	idea.	Wouldn’t	surprise	me.	Nothing	about	her	would	surprise
me,	in	fact.	She	might	even	be	listening	in	right	now—’
‘Wouldn’t	you	sense	that?’
‘Kalam,	something’s	wandering	through	this	fleet	tonight,	and	it	isn’t
pleasant,	whatever	it	is.	I	keep	feeling	it	brush	by…close,	then,	before	I	can
grab	it	by	the	throat,	it	whispers	away	again.’
‘So,	you	are	hiding	down	here!’
‘Of	course	not.	Not	any	more,	I	mean.	Now	I’m	staying	here,	in	order	to
lay	a	trap.’
‘A	trap.	Right.	Very	clever,	High	Mage.’


‘It	is.	For	the	next	time	it	sidles	close.’
‘Do	you	really	expect	me	to	believe	that?’
‘Believe	what	you	like,	Kalam.	What	do	I	care,	even	if	it’s	my	oldest	friend
who	no	longer	trusts	me—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	Quick	Ben,	I’ve	never	trusted	you!’
‘Now	that’s	hurtful.	Wise,	but	still	hurtful.’
‘Tell	me	something,	Quick,	exactly	how	did	you	manage	hiding	at	Hood’s
Gate,	with	both	Paran	and	the	god	himself	standing	there?’
A	sniff.	‘They	were	distracted,	of	course.	Sometimes	the	best	place	to	hide
is	in	plain	sight.’
‘And	between	them,	they	saved	the	world.’
‘Gave	the	rock	a	nudge,	Kal.	The	rest	belonged	to	someone	else.	Don’t
know	who,	or	what.	But	I	will	tell	you	one	thing,	those	falling	suns,	they	were
filled	with	voices.’
‘Voices?’
‘Enormous	pieces	of	stone.	Jade,	sailing	down	from	the	stars.	And	in	those
broken	mountains	or	whatever	they	were,	there	were	souls.	Millions	of	souls,
Kalam.	I	heard	them.’
Gods,	no	wonder	you	hid	down	here,	Quick.	‘That’s…uncanny.	You’re
sending	shivers	all	through	me.’
‘I	know.	I	feel	the	same	way.’
‘So,	how	did	you	hide	from	Hood?’
‘I	was	part	of	the	Gate,	of	course.	Just	another	corpse,	just	another	staring
face.’
‘Hey,	now	that	was	clever.’
‘Wasn’t	it?’
‘What	was	it	like,	among	all	those	bones	and	bodies	and	stuff?’
‘Kind	of…comforting…’
I	can	see	that.	Kalam	scowled	again.	Hold	on…I	wonder…is	there	maybe
something	wrong	with	us?	‘Quick,	you	and	me.’
‘Yes?’
‘I	think	we’re	insane.’
‘You’re	not.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘You’re	too	slow.	You	can’t	be	insane	if	you	only	just	realized	that	we’re
insane.	Understand?’
‘No.’
‘As	I	said,	then.’
‘Well,’	the	assassin	grunted,	‘that’s	a	relief.’


‘For	you,	yes.	Shh!’	The	wizard’s	hand	clutched	Kalam’s	arm.	‘It’s	back!’
he	hissed.	‘Close!’
‘Within	reach?’	Kalam	asked	in	a	whisper.
‘Gods,	I	hope	not!’
	
A	solitary	resident	in	this	cabin,	and	in	the	surrounding	alcoves	and	cubby
berths,	a	cordon	of	Red	Blades,	fiercely	protective	of	their	embittered,	broken
commander,	although	none	elected	to	share	the	Fist’s	quarters,	despite	the
ship’s	crowded	conditions.	Beyond	those	soldiers,	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears,
seasick	one	and	all,	filling	the	air	below-decks	with	the	sour	reek	of	bile.
And	so	he	remained	alone.	Wreathed	by	his	own	close,	fetid	air,	no	lantern
light	to	beat	back	the	dark,	and	this	was	well.	For	all	that	was	outside	matched
what	was	inside,	and	Fist	Tene	Baralta	told	himself,	again	and	again,	that	this
was	well.
Y’Ghatan.	The	Adjunct	had	sent	them	in,	under	strength,	knowing	there
would	be	slaughter.	She	didn’t	want	the	damned	veterans	and	their	constant
gnawing	at	her	command.	She	wanted	to	be	rid	of	the	Red	Blades,	and	the
marines	–	soldiers	like	Cuttle	and	Fiddler.	She	had	probably	worked	it	out,
conspiring	with	Leoman	himself.	That	conflagration,	its	execution	had	been
too	perfect,	too	well-timed.	There	had	been	signals	–	those	fools	with	the
lanterns	on	the	rooftops,	along	the	wall’s	battlements.
And	the	season	itself	–	a	city	filled	with	olive	oil,	an	entire	year ’s	harvest	–
she	hadn’t	rushed	the	army	after	Leoman,	she	hadn’t	shown	any	haste	at	all,
when	any	truly	loyal	commander	would	have…would	have	chased	that	bastard
down,	long	before	he	reached	Y’Ghatan.
No,	the	timing	was…diabolical.
And	here	he	was,	maimed	and	trapped	in	the	midst	of	damned	traitors.	Yet,
again	and	again,	events	had	transpired	to	befoul	the	Adjunct	and	her
treasonous,	murderous	plans.	The	survival	of	the	marines	–	Lostara	among
them.	Then,	Quick	Ben’s	unexpected	countering	of	those	Edur	mages.	Oh	yes,
his	soldiers	reported	to	him,	every	morsel	of	news.	They	understood	–
although	they	revealed	nothing	of	their	suspicions	–	he	could	well	see	it	in
their	eyes,	they	understood.	That	necessary	things	were	coming.	Soon.
And	it	would	be	Fist	Tene	Baralta	himself	who	would	lead	them.	Tene
Baralta,	the	Maimed,	the	Betrayed.	Oh	yes,	there	would	be	names	for	him.
There	would	be	cults	to	worship	him,	just	as	there	were	cults	worshipping
other	great	heroes	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	Like	Coltaine.	Bult.	Baria	Setral	and
his	brother,	Mesker,	of	the	Red	Blades.


In	such	company,	Tene	Baralta	would	belong.	Such	company,	he	told
himself,	was	his	only	worthy	company.
One	eye	left,	capable	of	seeing…almost…In	daylight	a	blurred	haze
swarmed	before	his	vision,	and	there	was	pain,	so	much	pain,	until	he	could
not	even	so	much	as	turn	his	head	–	oh	yes,	the	healers	had	worked	on	him	–
with	orders,	he	now	knew,	to	fail	him	again	and	again,	to	leave	him	with	a
plague	of	senseless	scars	and	phantom	agonies.	And,	once	out	of	his	room,
they	would	laugh,	at	the	imagined	success	of	their	charade.
Well,	he	would	deliver	their	gifts	back	into	their	laps,	all	those	healers.
In	this	soft,	warm	darkness,	he	stared	upward	from	where	he	lay	on	the	cot.
Things	unseen	creaked	and	groaned.	A	rat	scuttled	back	and	forth	along	one
side	of	the	cramped	chamber.	His	sentinel,	his	bodyguard,	his	caged	soul.
A	strange	smell	reached	him,	sweet,	cloying,	numbing,	and	he	felt	his
aches	fading,	the	shrieking	nerves	falling	quiescent.
‘Who’s	there?’	he	croaked.
A	rasping	reply,	‘A	friend,	Tene	Baralta.	One,	indeed,	whose	visage
matches	your	own.	Like	you,	assaulted	by	betrayal.	You	and	I,	we	are	torn	and
twisted	to	remind	us,	again	and	again,	that	one	who	bears	no	scars	cannot	be
trusted.	Ever.	It	is	a	truth,	my	friend,	that	only	a	mortal	who	has	been	broken
can	emerge	from	the	other	side,	whole	once	more.	Complete,	and	to	all	his
victims,	arrayed	before	him,	blindingly	bright,	yes?	The	searing	white	fires	of
his	righteousness.	Oh,	I	promise	you,	that	moment	shall	taste	sweet.’
‘An	apparition,’	Tene	Baralta	gasped.	‘Who	has	sent	you?	The	Adjunct,
yes?	A	demonic	assassin,	to	end	this—’
‘Of	course	not	–	and	even	as	you	make	such	accusations,	Tene	Baralta,	you
know	them	to	be	false.	She	could	kill	you	at	any	time—’
‘My	soldiers	protect	me—’
‘She	will	not	kill	you,’	the	voice	said.	‘She	has	no	need.	She	has	already
cast	you	away,	a	useless,	pathetic	victim	of	Y’Ghatan.	She	has	no	realization,
Tene	Baralta,	that	your	mind	lives	on,	as	sharp	as	it	has	ever	been,	its
judgement	honed	and	eager	to	draw	foul	blood.	She	is	complacent.’
‘Who	are	you?’
‘I	am	named	Gethol.	I	am	the	Herald	of	the	House	of	Chains.	And	I	am
here,	for	you.	You	alone,	for	we	have	sensed,	oh	yes,	we	have	sensed	that	you
are	destined	for	greatness.’
Ah,	such	emotion	here,	at	his	words…no,	hold	it	back.	Be	strong…show	this
Gethol	your	strength.	‘Greatness,’	he	said.	‘Yes,	of	that	I	have	always	been
aware,	Herald.’
‘And	the	time	has	come,	Tene	Baralta.’


‘Yes?’
‘Do	you	feel	our	gift	within	you?	Diminishing	your	pain,	yes?’
‘I	do.’
‘Good.	That	gift	is	yours,	and	there	is	more	to	come.’
‘More?’
‘Your	lone	eye,	Tene	Baralta,	deserves	more	than	a	clouded,	uncertain
world,	don’t	you	think?	You	need	a	sharpness	of	vision	to	match	the	sharpness
of	your	mind.	That	seems	reasonable,	indeed,	just.’
‘Yes.’
‘That	will	be	your	reward,	Tene	Baralta.’
‘If	I	do	what?’
‘Later.	Such	details	are	not	for	tonight.	Until	we	speak	again,	follow	your
conscience,	Tene	Baralta.	Make	your	plans	for	what	will	come.	You	are
returning	to	the	Malazan	Empire,	yes?	That	is	good.	Know	this,	the	Empress
awaits	you.	You,	Tene	Baralta,	more	than	anyone	else	in	this	army.	Be	ready
for	her.’
‘Oh,	I	shall,	Gethol.’
‘I	must	leave	you	now,	lest	this	visitation	be	discovered	–	there	are	many
powers	hiding	in	this	army.	Be	careful.	Trust	no-one—’
‘I	trust	my	Red	Blades.’
‘If	you	must,	yes,	you	will	need	them.	Goodbye,	Tene	Baralta.’
Silence	once	more,	and	the	gloom,	unchanged	and	unchanging,	inside	and
out.	Destined,	yes,	for	greatness.	They	shall	see	that.	When	I	speak	with	the
Empress.	They	shall	all	see	that.
	
Lying	in	her	bunk,	the	underside	of	the	one	above	a	mere	hand’s-breadth	away,
knotted	twine	and	murky	tufts	of	bedding,	Lostara	Yil	kept	her	breathing	slow,
even.	She	could	hear	the	beat	of	her	own	heart,	the	swish	of	blood	in	her	ears.
The	soldier	in	the	bunk	beneath	her	grunted,	then	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘He’s
now	talking	to	himself.	Not	good.’
The	voice	from	within	Tene	Baralta’s	cabin	had	been	murmuring	through
the	wall	for	the	past	fifty	heartbeats,	but	had	now,	it	seemed,	stopped.
Talking	to	himself?	Hardly,	that	was	a	damned	conversation.	She	closed	her
eyes	at	the	thought,	wishing	she	had	been	asleep	and	unmindful	of	the	ever
more	sordid	nightmare	that	was	her	commander ’s	world:	the	viscous	light	in
his	eye	when	she	looked	upon	him,	the	muscles	of	his	frame	sagging	into	fat,
the	twisted	face	beginning	to	droop,	growing	flaccid	where	there	were	no	taut
scars.	Pallid	skin,	strands	of	hair	thick	with	old	sweat.


What	has	burned	away	is	what	tempered	his	soul.	Now,	there	is	only	malice,
a	mottled	collection	of	stains,	fused	impurities.
And	I	am	his	captain	once	more,	by	his	own	command.	What	does	he	want
with	me?	What	does	he	expect?
Tene	Baralta	had	ceased	speaking.	And	now	she	could	sleep,	if	only	her
mind	would	cease	its	frantic	racing.
Oh	Cotillion,	you	knew,	didn’t	you?	You	knew	this	would	come.	Yet,	you	left
the	choice	to	me.	And	now	freedom	feels	like	a	curse.
Cotillion,	you	never	play	fair.
	
The	western	coast	of	the	Catal	Sea	was	jagged	with	fjords,	high	black	cliffs	and
tumbled	boulders.	The	mountains	rising	almost	immediately	behind	the
shoreline	were	thick	with	coniferous	trees,	their	green	needles	so	dark	as	to	be
almost	black.	Huge	red-tailed	ravens	wheeled	overhead,	voicing	strange,	harsh
laughter	as	they	banked	and	pitched	towards	the	fleet	of	ominous	ships	that
approached	the	Malazans,	swooping	low	only	to	lift	with	heavy,	languid	beats
of	their	wings.
The	Adjunct’s	flagship	was	now	alongside	Nok’s	own,	and	the	Admiral
had	just	crossed	over	to	join	Tavore	as	they	awaited	the	arrival	of	the	Perish.
Keneb	stared	with	fascination	at	the	massive	warships	drawing	ever	nearer.
Each	was	in	fact	two	dromons	linked	by	arching	spans,	creating	a	catamaran	of
cyclopean	proportions.	The	sudden	dying	of	the	wind	had	forced	oars	into	the
becalmed	waters,	and	this	included	a	double	bank	of	oars	on	the	inward	side	of
each	dromon,	foreshortened	by	the	spans.
The	Fist	had	counted	thirty-one	of	the	giant	craft,	arrayed	in	a	broad,
flattened	wedge.	He	could	see	ballistae	mounted	to	either	side	of	the	wolf-head
prows,	and	attached	to	the	outer	rails	along	the	length	of	the	ships	was	a	double
row	of	overlapping	rectangular	shields,	their	bronze	facings	polished	and
glinting	in	the	muted	sunlight.
As	the	lead	ship	closed,	oars	were	lifted,	shipped.
One	of	Nok’s	officers	said,	‘Look	beneath	the	surface	between	the	hulls,
Admiral.	The	spans	above	are	matched	by	ones	below	the	waterline…and	those
possess	rams.’
‘It	would	be	unwise	indeed,’	Nok	said,	‘to	invite	battle	with	these	Perish.’
‘Yet	someone	had	done	just	that,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘Mage-fire	damage,
there,	on	the	one	flanking	the	flagship.	Admiral,	what	do	you	imagine	to	be	the
complement	of	soldiers	aboard	each	of	these	catamarans?’
‘Could	be	as	many	as	two	hundred	marines	or	the	equivalent	for	each


dromon.	Four	hundred	per	craft	–	I	wonder	if	some	of	them	are	at	the	oars.
Unless,	of	course,	there	are	slaves.’
The	flag	visible	beneath	the	crow’s	nest	on	the	lead	ship’s	mainmast
showed	a	wolf’s	head	on	a	black	field	bordered	in	grey.
They	watched	as	a	long	craft	resembling	a	war	canoe	was	lowered	between
the	flagship’s	two	hulls,	then	armoured	soldiers	descended,	taking	up	paddles.
Three	more	figures	joined	them.	All	but	one	wore	iron	helms,	camailed	at	the
back,	with	sweeping	cheek-guards.	Grey	cloaks,	leather	gauntlets.	The	lone
exception	was	a	man,	tall,	gaunt	and	bald,	wearing	a	heavy	woollen	robe	of
dark	grey.	Their	skins	were	fair,	but	all	other	characteristics	remained	unseen
beneath	armour.
‘That’s	a	whole	lot	of	chain	weighing	down	that	canoe,’	the	same	officer
muttered.	‘If	she	rolls,	a	score	lumps	rusting	on	the	bottom…’
The	craft	slid	over	the	submerged	ram,	swiftly	propelled	by	the	paddlers
whose	blades	flashed	in	perfect	unison.	Moments	later	a	soft-voiced	command
triggered	a	withdrawal	of	the	paddles,	barring	that	of	the	soldier	at	the	very
stern,	who	ruddered,	bringing	the	canoe	around	to	draw	up	alongside	the
Malazan	flagship.
At	Nok’s	command,	sailors	rushed	over	to	help	the	Perish	contingent
aboard.
First	to	appear	was	a	tall,	broad-shouldered	figure,	black-cloaked.	Beneath
the	thick	wool	was	a	surcoat	of	blackened	chain	that	glistened	with	oil.	The
longsword	at	the	left	hip	revealed	a	silver	wolf’s-head	pommel.	The	Perish
paused,	looked	round,	then	approached	the	Adjunct	as	others	appeared	from
the	rail.	Among	them	was	the	robed	man,	who	called	out	something	to	the	one
Keneb	surmised	was	the	commander.	That	person	halted,	half-turned,	and	the
voice	that	emerged	from	behind	the	visored	helm	startled	Keneb,	for	it	was	a
woman’s.
She’s	a	damned	giant	–	even	the	women	heavies	in	our	army	would	hesitate
facing	this	one.
Her	question	was	short.
The	bald	man	replied	with	a	single	word,	at	which	the	woman	in	armour
bowed	and	stepped	to	one	side.
Keneb	watched	the	robed	man	stride	forward,	eyes	on	the	Adjunct.	‘Mezla,’
he	said.	‘Welcome.’
He	speaks	Malazan.	Well,	that	should	make	this	easier.
The	Adjunct	nodded.	‘Welcome	in	return,	Perish.	I	am	Adjunct	Tavore
Paran,	and	this	is	Admiral	Nok—’
‘Ah,	yes,	that	name	is	known	to	us,	sir.’	A	low	bow	towards	Nok,	who


seemed	startled	for	a	moment,	before	replying	in	kind.
‘You	speak	our	language	well,’	Tavore	said.
‘Forgive	me,	Adjunct.	I	am	Destriant	Run’Thurvian.’	He	gestured	to	the
huge	woman	beside	him.	‘This	is	the	Mortal	Sword	Krughava.’	And	then,
stepping	to	one	side,	he	bowed	to	another	soldier	standing	two	steps	behind	the
Mortal	Sword.	‘Shield	Anvil	Tanakalian.’	The	Destriant	added	something	in	his
own	language,	and	in	response	both	the	Mortal	Sword	and	the	Shield	Anvil
removed	their	helms.
Ah,	these	are	hard,	hard	soldiers.	Krughava,	iron-haired,	was	blue-eyed,
her	weathered	face	seamed	with	scars,	yet	the	bones	beneath	her	stern,	angular
features	were	robust	and	even.	The	Shield	Anvil	was,	in	contrast,	quite	young,
and	if	anything	broader	of	shoulder,	although	not	as	tall	as	the	Mortal	Sword.
His	hair	was	yellow,	the	colour	of	stalks	of	wheat;	his	eyes	deep	grey.
‘Your	ships	have	seen	fighting,’	Admiral	Nok	said	to	the	Destriant.
‘Yes	sir.	We	lost	four	in	the	engagement.’
‘And	the	Tiste	Edur,’	the	Adjunct	asked,	‘how	many	did	they	lose?’
The	Destriant	suddenly	deferred	to	the	Mortal	Sword,	bowing,	and	the
woman	replied	in	fluent	Malazan,	‘Uncertain.	Perhaps	twenty,	once	their
sorcery	was	fended	aside.	Although	nimble,	the	ships	were	under-strength.
Nonetheless,	they	fought	well,	without	quarter.’
‘Are	you	in	pursuit	of	the	surviving	ships?’
‘No,	sir,’	Krughava	replied,	then	fell	silent.
The	Destriant	said,	‘Noble	sirs,	we	have	been	waiting	for	you.	For	the
Mezla.’
He	turned	then	and	walked	to	stand	at	the	Shield	Anvil’s	side.
Krughava	positioned	herself	directly	opposite	the	Adjunct.	‘Admiral	Nok,
forgive	me,’	she	said,	holding	her	gaze	on	Tavore.	The	Mortal	Sword	then
drew	her	sword.
As	with	every	other	Malazan	officer	witness	to	this,	Keneb	tensed,	reaching
for	his	own	weapon.
But	the	Adjunct	did	not	flinch.	She	wore	no	weapon	at	all.
The	length	of	blue	iron	sliding	from	the	scabbard	was	etched	from	tip	to
hilt,	two	wolves	stretched	in	full	charge,	every	swirl	of	fur	visible,	their	fangs
polished	brighter	than	all	else,	gleaming,	the	eyes	blackened	smears.	The
artisan-ship	was	superb,	yet	that	blade’s	edge	was	notched	and	battered.	Its
length	gleamed	with	oil.
The	Mortal	Sword	held	the	sword	horizontally,	against	her	own	chest,	and
there	was	a	formal	rigidity	to	her	words	as	she	said,	‘I	am	Krughava,	Mortal
Sword	of	the	Grey	Helms	of	the	Perish,	sworn	to	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	In


solemn	acceptance	of	all	that	shall	soon	come	to	pass,	I	pledge	my	army	to
your	service,	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran.	Our	complement:	thirty-one	Thrones	of
War.	Thirteen	thousand	and	seventy-nine	brothers	and	sisters	of	the	Order.
Before	us,	Adjunct	Tavore,	awaits	the	end	of	the	world.	In	the	name	of	Togg
and	Fanderay,	we	shall	fight	until	we	die.’
No-one	spoke.
The	Mortal	Sword	settled	onto	one	knee,	and	laid	the	sword	at	Tavore’s
feet.
	
On	the	forecastle,	Kalam	stood	beside	Quick	Ben,	watching	the	ceremony	on
the	mid	deck.	The	wizard	beside	the	assassin	was	muttering	under	his	breath,
the	sound	finally	irritating	Kalam	enough	to	draw	his	gaze	from	the	scene
below,	even	as	the	Adjunct,	with	a	solemnity	to	match	the	Mortal	Sword’s,
picked	up	the	sword	and	returned	it	to	Krughava.
‘Will	you	be	quiet,	Quick!’	Kalam	hissed.	‘What’s	wrong	with	you?’
The	wizard	stared	at	him	with	a	half-wild	look	in	his	dark	eyes.	‘I
recognize	these…these	Perish.	Those	titles,	the	damned	formality	and	high
diction	–	I	recognize	these	people!’
‘And?’
‘And…nothing.	But	I	will	say	this,	Kal.	If	we	ever	end	up	besieged,	woe	to
the	attackers.’
The	assassin	grunted.	‘Grey	Helms—’
‘Grey	Helms,	Swords…gods	below,	Kalam	–	I	need	to	talk	to	Tavore.’
‘Finally!’
‘I	really	need	to	talk	to	her.’
‘Go	on	down	and	introduce	yourself,	High	Mage.’
‘You	must	be	mad…’
Quick	Ben’s	sudden	trailing	away	brought	Kalam’s	gaze	back	round	to	the
crowd	below,	and	he	saw	the	Destriant,	Run’Thurvian,	looking	up,	eyes	locked
with	Quick’s	own.	Then	the	robed	man	smiled,	and	bowed	low	in	greeting.
Heads	turned.
‘Shit,’	Quick	Ben	said	at	his	side.
Kalam	scowled.	‘High	Mage	Ben	Adaephon	Delat,’	he	said	under	his
breath,	‘the	Lord	of	High	Diction.’


Chapter	Twenty-one
A	Book	of	Prophecy	opens	the	door.	You	need	a	second	book	to
close	it.
Tanno	Spiritwalker	Kimloc
With	silver	tongs,	the	servant	set	another	disk	of	ground	rustleaf	atop	the
waterpipe.	Felisin	Younger	drew	on	the	mouthpiece,	waving	the	servant	away,
watching	bemused	as	the	old	woman	–	head	bowed	so	low	her	forehead	was
almost	scraping	the	floor	–	backed	away	on	her	hands	and	knees.	More	of
Kulat’s	rules	of	propriety	when	in	the	presence	of	Sha’ik	Reborn.	She	was	tired
of	arguing	about	it	–	if	the	fools	felt	the	need	to	worship	her,	then	so	be	it.
After	all,	for	the	first	time	in	her	life,	she	found	that	her	every	need	was	met,
attended	to	with	fierce	diligence,	and	those	needs	–	much	to	her	surprise	–	were
growing	in	count	with	every	day	that	passed.
As	if	her	soul	was	a	vast	cauldron,	one	that	demanded	filling,	yet	was	in
truth	bottomless.	They	fed	her,	constantly,	and	she	was	growing	heavy,	clumsy
with	folds	of	soft	fat	–	beneath	her	breasts,	and	on	her	hips	and	behind,	the
underside	of	her	arms,	her	belly	and	thighs.	And,	no	doubt,	her	face	as	well,
although	she	had	outlawed	the	presence	of	mirrors	in	her	throne	room	and
private	chambers.
Food	was	not	her	only	excess.	There	was	wine,	and	rustleaf,	and,	now,
there	was	lovemaking.	There	were	a	dozen	servants	among	those	attending	her
whose	task	it	was	to	deliver	pleasure	of	the	flesh.	At	first,	Felisin	had	been
shocked,	even	outraged,	but	persistence	had	won	out.	More	of	Kulat’s	twisted
rules	–	she	understood	that	now.	His	desires	were	all	of	the	voyeuristic	variety,
and	many	times	she	had	heard	the	wet	click	of	the	stones	in	his	mouth	from
behind	a	curtain	or	painted	panel,	as	he	spied	on	her	with	lascivious	pathos.
She	understood	her	new	god,	now.	Finally.	Bidithal	had	been	entirely
wrong	–	this	was	not	a	faith	of	abstinence.	Apocalypse	was	announced	in
excess.	The	world	ended	in	a	glut,	and	just	as	her	own	soul	was	a	bottomless
cauldron,	so	too	was	the	need	of	all	humanity,	and	in	this	she	was	the	perfect
representative.	As	they	devoured	all	that	surrounded	them,	so	too	would	she.


As	Sha’ik	Reborn,	her	task	was	to	blaze	bright,	and	quick	–	and	then	die.
Into	death,	where	lay	the	true	salvation,	the	paradise	Kulat	spoke	of	again	and
again.	Oddly	enough,	Felisin	Younger	struggled	to	imagine	that	paradise	–	she
could	only	conjure	visions	that	matched	what	now	embraced	her,	her	every
want	answered	without	hesitation,	without	judgement.	Perhaps	it	would	be	like
that	–	for	everyone.	But	if	everyone	would	know	such	an	existence,	then	where
were	the	servants?
No,	she	told	Kulat,	there	needed	to	be	levels	of	salvation.	Pure	service	in
this	world	was	rewarded	with	absolute	indolence	in	the	other.	Humility,	selfsacrifice,	abject	servitude,	these	were	the	ways	of	living	that	would	be
measured,	judged.	The	only	difficulty	with	this	notion	–	which	Kulat	had
readily	accepted	and	converted	into	edicts	–	was	the	position	of	Felisin	herself.
After	all,	was	her	present	indolence	–	her	luxuriating	in	all	the	excesses
promised	to	others	only	following	their	deaths	–	to	be	rewarded	by	an	afterlife
of	brutal	slavery,	serving	the	needs	of	everyone	else?
Kulat	assured	her	she	had	no	need	to	be	concerned.	In	life,	she	was	the
embodiment	of	paradise,	she	was	the	symbol	of	promise.	Yet,	upon	her	death,
there	would	be	absolution.	She	was	Sha’ik	Reborn,	after	all,	and	that	was	a	role
she	had	not	assumed	by	choice.	It	had	been	thrust	upon	her,	and	this	was	the
most	profound	form	of	servitude	of	them	all.
He	was	convincing,	although	a	tiny	sliver	of	doubt	lodged	deep	inside	her,
a	few	thoughts,	one	tumbling	after	the	next:	without	excess	I	might	feel	better,
about	myself.	I	would	be	as	I	once	was,	when	I	walked	in	the	wild-lands	with
Cutter	and	Scillara,	with	Greyfrog	and	Heboric	Ghost	Hands.	Without	all	these
servants,	I	would	be	able	to	fend	for	myself,	and	to	see	clearly	that	a	measured
life,	a	life	tempered	in	moderation,	is	better	than	all	this.	I	would	see	that	this	is
a	mortal	paradise	that	cultivates	flaws	like	flowers,	that	feeds	only	deathly
roots,	that	chokes	all	life	from	me	until	I	am	left	with…with	this.
This.	This	wandering	mind.	Felisin	Younger	struggled	to	focus.	Two	men
were	standing	before	her.	They	had	been	standing	there	for	some	time,	she
realized.	Kulat	had	announced	them,	although	that	had	not	been	entirely
necessary,	for	she	knew	that	they	were	coming;	indeed,	she	recognized	both	of
them.	Those	hard,	weathered	faces,	the	streaks	of	sweat	through	a	layer	of	dust,
the	worn	leather	armour,	round	shields	and	scimitars	at	their	hips.
The	one	closest	to	her	–	tall,	fierce.	Mathok,	who	commanded	the	desert
tribes	in	the	Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	Mathok,	Leoman’s	friend.
And,	one	pace	behind	the	commander,	Mathok’s	bodyguard	T’morol,
looking	like	some	upright,	hairless	wolf,	his	eyes	a	hunter ’s	eyes,	cold,
intense.


They	had	brought	their	army,	their	warriors.
They	had	brought	that,	and	more…
Felisin	the	Younger	lowered	her	gaze	from	Mathok’s	face,	down	to	the
tattered	hide-bound	book	in	his	hands.	The	Holy	Book	of	Dryjhna	the
Apocalyptic.	Whilst	Leoman	had	led	the	Malazans	on	a	wild	chase,	into	the	trap
that	was	Y’Ghatan,	Mathok	and	his	desert	warriors	had	travelled	quietly,
secretly,	evading	all	contact.	There	had	been	intent,	Mathok	had	explained,	to
rendezvous	at	Y’Ghatan,	but	then	the	plague	had	struck,	and	the	shamans	in	his
troop	had	been	beset	by	visions.
Of	Hanar	Ara,	the	City	of	the	Fallen.	Of	Sha’ik,	reborn	yet	again.	Leoman
and	Y’Ghatan,	they	told	Mathok,	was	a	dead	end	in	every	sense	of	the	phrase.	A
feint,	punctuated	by	annihilation.	And	so	the	commander	had	turned	away	with
his	army,	and	had	set	out	on	the	long	journey	to	find	the	City	of	the	Fallen.	To
find	her.	To	deliver	the	Holy	Book	into	her	hands.
A	difficult	journey,	one	worthy	of	its	own	epic,	no	doubt.
And	now,	Mathok	stood	before	her,	and	his	army	was	encamping	in	the	city
and	Felisin	sat	amidst	the	cushions	of	her	own	fat,	wreathed	in	smoke,	and
considered	how	she	would	tell	him	what	he	needed	to	hear	–	what	they	all
needed	to	hear,	Kulat	included.
Well,	she	would	be…direct.	‘Thank	you,	Mathok,	for	delivering	the	Book
of	Dryjhna.	Thank	you,	as	well,	for	delivering	your	army.	Alas,	I	have	no	need
of	either	gift.’
Mathok’s	brows	rose	fractionally.	‘Sha’ik	Reborn,	with	the	Book,	you	can
do	as	you	like.	For	my	warriors,	however,	you	have	great	need.	A	Malazan
army	approaches—’
‘I	know.	But	you	are	not	enough.	Besides,	I	have	no	need	for	warriors.	My
army	does	not	march	in	rank.	My	army	carries	no	weapons,	wears	no	armour.
In	conquering,	my	army	kills	not	a	single	foe,	enslaves	no-one,	rapes	no	child.
That	which	my	army	wields	is	salvation,	Mathok.	Its	promise.	Its	invitation.’
‘And	the	Malazans?’	T’morol	demanded	in	his	grating	voice,	baring	his
teeth.	‘That	army	does	carry	weapons	and	wear	armour.	That	army,	Holy	One,
marches	in	rank,	and	right	now	they’re	marching	right	up	our	ass!’
‘Kulat,’	Felisin	said.	‘Find	a	place	for	the	Holy	Book.	Have	the	artisans
prepare	a	new	one,	the	pages	blank.	There	will	be	a	second	holy	book.	My
Book	of	Salvation.	On	its	first	page,	Kulat,	record	what	has	been	said	here,	this
day,	and	accord	all	present	with	the	honour	they	have	earned.	Mathok,	and
T’morol,	you	are	most	welcome	here,	in	the	City	of	the	Fallen.	As	are	your
warriors.	But	understand,	your	days	of	war,	of	slaughter,	are	done.	Put	away
your	scimitars	and	your	shields,	your	bows.	Unsaddle	your	horses	and	loose


them	to	the	high	pastures	in	the	hills	at	Denet’inar	Spring.	They	shall	live	out
their	lives	there,	well	and	in	peace.	Mathok,	T’morol,	do	you	accept?’
The	commander	stared	down	at	the	ancient	tome	in	his	hands,	and	Felisin
saw	a	sneer	emerge	on	his	features.	He	spread	his	hands.	The	book	fell	to	the
floor,	landing	on	its	spine.	The	impact	broke	it.	Ancient	pages	skirled	out.
Ignoring	Felisin,	Mathok	turned	to	T’morol.	‘Gather	the	warriors.	We	will
resupply	as	needed.	Then	we	leave.’
T’morol	faced	the	throne,	and	spat	onto	the	floor	before	the	dais.	Then	he
wheeled	and	strode	from	the	chamber.
Mathok	hesitated,	then	he	faced	Felisin	once	more.	‘Sha’ik	Reborn,	you
will	no	doubt	receive	my	shamans	without	the	dishonour	witnessed	here.	I
leave	them	with	you.	To	you.	As	for	your	world,	your	bloated,	disgusting
world	and	its	poisonous	salvation,	I	leave	that	to	you	as	well.	For	all	of	this,
Leoman	died.	For	all	of	this,	Y’Ghatan	burned.’	He	studied	her	a	moment
longer,	then	he	spun	about	and	walked	from	the	throne	room.
Kulat	scurried	to	kneel	beside	the	broken	book.	‘It	is	ruined!’	he	said	in	a
voice	filled	with	horror.
Felisin	nodded.	‘Utterly.’	Then	she	smiled	at	her	own	joke.
	
‘I	judge	four	thousand,’	Fist	Rythe	Bude	said.
The	rebel	army	was	positioned	along	a	ridge.	Horse-warriors,	lancers,
archers,	yet	none	had	readied	weapons.	Round	shields	remained	strapped	to
backs,	quivers	lidded,	bows	unstrung	and	holstered	on	saddles.	Two	riders	had
moved	out	from	the	line	and	were	working	their	horses	down	the	steep	slope	to
where	Paran	and	his	officers	waited.
‘What	do	you	think,	High	Fist?’	Hurlochel	asked.	‘This	has	the	look	of	a
surrender.’
Paran	nodded.
The	two	men	reached	the	base	of	the	slope	and	cantered	up	to	halt	four
paces	from	the	Host’s	vanguard.
‘I	am	Mathok,’	the	one	on	the	left	said.	‘Once	of	Sha’ik’s	Army	of	the
Apocalypse.’
‘And	now?’	Paran	asked.
A	shrug.	‘We	dwelt	in	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku,	a	desert	now	a	sea.	We
fought	as	rebels,	but	the	rebellion	has	ended.	We	believed.	We	believe	no
longer.’	He	unsheathed	his	scimitar	and	flung	it	onto	the	ground.	‘Do	with	us	as
you	will.’
Paran	settled	back	in	his	saddle.	He	drew	a	deep	breath	and	released	it	in	a


long	sigh.	‘Mathok,’	he	said,	‘you	and	your	warriors	are	free	to	go	where	you
please.	I	am	High	Fist	Ganoes	Paran,	and	I	hereby	release	you.	As	you	said,	the
war	is	over,	and	I	for	one	am	not	interested	in	reparation,	nor	punishment.
Nothing	is	gained	by	inflicting	yet	more	atrocities	in	answer	to	past	ones.’
The	grizzled	warrior	beside	Mathok	threw	a	leg	over	his	horse’s	neck	and
slipped	down	to	the	ground.	The	impact	made	him	wince	and	arch	his	lower
back,	grimacing,	then	he	hobbled	over	to	his	commander ’s	scimitar.	Collecting
it,	he	wiped	the	dust	from	the	blade	and	the	grip,	then	delivered	it	back	to
Mathok.
Paran	spoke	again:	‘You	have	come	from	the	place	of	pilgrimage.’
‘The	City	of	the	Fallen,	yes.	Do	you	intend	to	destroy	them,	High	Fist?
They	are	defenceless.’
‘I	would	speak	with	their	leader.’
‘Then	you	waste	your	time.	She	claims	she	is	Sha’ik	Reborn.	If	that	is	true,
then	the	cult	has	seen	a	degradation	from	which	it	will	never	recover.	She	is	fat,
poisoned.	I	barely	recognized	her.	She	is	indeed	fallen.	Her	followers	are
sycophants,	more	interested	in	orgies	and	gluttony	than	anything	else.	They	are
disease-scarred	and	half-mad.	Her	High	Priest	watches	her	sex	acts	from
behind	curtains	and	masturbates,	and	in	both	their	energy	is	unbounded	and
insatiable.’
‘Nonetheless,’	Paran	said	after	a	moment,	‘I	sense	power	there.’
‘No	doubt,’	Mathok	replied,	leaning	to	one	side	and	spitting.	‘Slaughter
them,	then,	High	Fist,	and	you	will	rid	the	world	of	a	new	kind	of	plague.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘A	religion	of	the	maimed	and	broken.	A	religion	proffering	salvation…
you	just	have	to	die	first.	I	predict	the	cult	will	prove	highly	contagious.’
He’s	probably	right.	‘I	cannot	slaughter	innocents,	Mathok.’
‘Then,	one	day,	the	most	faithful	and	zealous	among	them	will	slaughter
you,	High	Fist.’
‘Perhaps.	If	so,	I	will	worry	about	it	then.	In	the	meantime,	I	have	other
tasks	before	me.’
‘You	will	speak	with	Sha’ik	Reborn?’
Paran	considered,	then	he	shook	his	head.	‘No.	As	you	suggest,	there	is
little	point.	While	I	see	the	possible	wisdom	of	expunging	this	cult	before	it
gains	a	foothold,	I	admit	I	find	the	notion	reprehensible.’
‘Then	where,	if	I	may	ask,	High	Fist,	will	you	go	now?’
Paran	hesitated.	Dare	I	answer?	Well,	now	is	as	good	as	later	for	everyone
to	hear.	‘We	turn	round,	Mathok.	The	Host	marches	to	Aren.’
‘Do	you	march	to	war?’	the	commander	asked.


Paran	frowned.	‘We’re	an	army,	Mathok.	Eventually,	yes,	there	will	be
fighting.’
‘Will	you	accept	our	service,	High	Fist?’
‘What?’
‘We	are	a	wandering	people,’	Mathok	explained.	‘But	we	have	lost	our
home.	Our	families	are	scattered	and	no	doubt	many	are	dead	of	plague.	We
have	nowhere	to	go,	and	no-one	to	fight.	If	you	should	reject	us	now,	and	free
us	to	go,	we	shall	ride	into	dissolution.	We	shall	die	with	our	backs	covered	in
straw	and	sand	in	our	gauntlets.	Or	warrior	will	turn	upon	warrior,	and	blood
will	be	shed	that	is	without	meaning.	Accept	us	into	your	army,	High	Fist
Ganoes	Paran,	and	we	will	fight	at	your	side	and	die	with	honour.’
‘You	have	no	idea	where	I	intend	to	lead	the	Host,	Mathok.’
The	old	warrior	beside	Mathok	barked	a	laugh.	‘The	wasteland	back	of
camp,	or	the	wasteland	few	have	ever	seen	before,	what’s	the	difference?’	He
turned	to	his	commander.	‘Mathok,	my	friend,	the	shamans	said	this	one	here
killed	Poliel.	For	that	alone,	I	would	follow	him	into	the	Abyss,	so	long	as	he
promises	us	heads	to	lop	off	and	maybe	a	woman	or	two	to	ride	on	the	way.
That’s	all	we’re	looking	for,	right,	before	we	dance	in	a	god’s	lap	one	last
time.	Besides,	I’m	tired	of	running.’
To	all	of	this,	Mathok	simply	nodded,	his	gaze	fixed	on	Paran.
Four	thousand	or	so	of	this	continent’s	finest	light	cavalry	just	volunteered,
veterans	one	and	all.	‘Hurlochel,’	he	said,	‘attach	yourself	as	liaison	to
Commander	Mathok.	Commander,	you	are	now	a	Fist,	and	Hurlochel	will
require	a	written	compilation	of	your	officers	or	potential	officers.	The
Malazan	army	employs	mounted	troops	in	units	of	fifty,	a	hundred	and	three
hundred.	Adjust	your	command	structure	accordingly.’
‘It	shall	be	done,	High	Fist.’
‘Fist	Rythe	Bude,	see	the	Host	turned	round.	And	Noto	Boil,	find	me
Ormulogun.’
‘Again?’	the	healer	asked.
‘Go.’
Yes,	again.	I	think	I	need	a	new	card.	I	think	I’ll	call	it	Salvation.	At	the
moment	it	is	in	the	House	of	Chains’	sphere	of	influence.	But	something	tells	me
it	will	claw	free	of	that	eventually.	Such	a	taint	will	not	last.	This	card	is	an
Unaligned.	In	every	sense	of	the	word.	Unaligned,	and	likely	destined	to	be	the
most	dangerous	force	in	the	world.
Damn,	I	wish	I	was	more	ruthless.	That	Sha’ik	Reborn,	and	all	her	twisted
followers	–	I	should	ride	up	there	and	slaughter	them	all	–	which	is	precisely
what	Mathok	wanted	me	to	do.


To	do	what	he	himself	couldn’t	–	we’re	the	same	in	that.	In	our…weakness.
No	wonder	I	already	like	the	man.
	
As	Hurlochel	led	his	horse	alongside	Mathok,	back	up	towards	the	desert
warriors	on	the	ridge,	the	outrider	glanced	over	at	the	new	Fist.	‘Sir,	when	you
spoke	of	Sha’ik	Reborn,	you	said	something…about	barely	recognizing
her…’
‘I	did.	She	was	one	of	Sha’ik’s	adopted	daughters,	in	Raraku.	Of	course,	as
Leoman	and	I	well	knew,	even	that	one	was…not	as	she	seemed.	Oh,	chosen	by
the	Whirlwind	Goddess,	well	enough,	but	she	was	not	a	child	of	the	desert.’
‘She	wasn’t?’
‘No,	she	was	Malazan.’
‘What?’
The	commander ’s	companion	grunted	and	spat.	‘Mezla,	yes.	And	the
Adjunct	never	knew	–	or	so	we	heard.	She	cut	down	a	helmed,	armoured
woman.	And	then	walked	away.	The	corpse	then	vanished.	A	Mezla	killing	a
Mezla	–	oh	how	the	gods	must	have	laughed…’
‘Or,’	said	Hurlochel	in	a	low	voice,	‘wept.’	He	thought	to	ask	more
questions	regarding	this	new	Sha’ik	Reborn,	but	a	succession	of	tragic	images,
variants	on	that	fated	duel	at	Raraku,	before	the	seas	rose	from	the	desert,
raced	through	his	mind.	And	so	he	rode	in	silence	up	the	slope,	beside	the
warriors,	and	before	long	was	thoroughly	consumed	with	the	necessities	of
reorganizing	Mathok’s	horse-warriors.
So	preoccupied,	he	did	not	report	his	conversation	to	the	High	Fist.
Three	leagues	from	the	City	of	the	Fallen,	Paran	turned	the	Host	away,	and
set	them	on	their	path	for	distant	Aren.	The	road	that	would	take	them	from
Seven	Cities.
Never	to	return.

Saur	Bathrada	and	Kholb	Harat	had	walked	into	an	upland	village	four	leagues
inland	from	the	harbour	city	of	Sepik.	Leading	twenty	Edur	warriors	and	forty
Letherii	marines,	they	had	gathered	the	enslaved	degenerate	mixed-bloods,
ritually	freeing	the	uncomprehending	primitives	from	their	symbolic	chains,
then	chaining	them	in	truth	for	the	march	back	to	the	city	and	the	Edur	ships.
Following	this,	Saur	and	Kholb	had	driven	the	Sepik	humans	into	a	sheep	pen
where	a	bonfire	was	built.	One	by	one,	mothers	were	forced	to	throw	their


babes	and	children	into	the	roaring	flames.	Those	women	were	then	raped	and,
finally,	beheaded.	Husbands,	brothers	and	fathers	were	made	to	watch.	When
they	alone	remained	alive,	they	were	systematically	dismembered	and	left,
armless	and	legless,	to	bleed	out	among	bleating,	blood-splashed	sheep.
A	scream	had	been	birthed	that	day	in	the	heart	of	Ahlrada	Ahn,	and	it	had
not	ceased	its	desperate,	terrible	cry.	Rhulad’s	shadow	covered	the	Tiste	Edur,
no	matter	how	distant	that	throne	and	the	insane	creature	seated	upon	it.	And	in
that	shadow	roiled	a	nightmare	from	which	there	could	be	no	awakening.
That	scream	was	echoed	in	his	memories	of	that	day,	the	shrieks	wrung
from	the	throats	of	burning	children,	the	writhing	forms	in	their	bundled
flames,	the	fires	reflected	on	the	impassive	faces	of	Edur	warriors.	Even	the
Letherii	had	turned	away,	overcome	with	horror.	Would	that	Ahlrada	Ahn
could	have	done	the	same,	without	losing	face.	Instead	he	stood,	one	among	the
many,	and	revealed	nothing	of	what	raged	inside.	Raged,	breaking…
everything.	Within	me,	he	told	himself	that	night,	back	in	Sepik	where	the
sounds	of	slaughter	continued	beyond	the	room	he	had	found,	within	me,
nothing	is	left	standing.	On	that	night,	for	the	first	time	ever,	he	considered
taking	his	own	life.
A	statement	of	weakness.	The	others	would	have	seen	it	in	no	other	way	–
they	could	not	afford	to	–	so,	not	a	protest,	but	a	surrender,	and	they	would	line
up	to	spit	upon	his	corpse.	And	warriors	like	Saur	Bathrada	and	Kholb	Harat
would	draw	their	knives	and	crouch	down,	and	with	pleasure	in	their	eyes	they
would	disfigure	the	senseless	body.	For	these	two	Edur	had	grown	to	love
blood	and	pain,	and	in	that	they	were	not	alone.
The	king	of	Sepik	was	the	last	to	die.	He	had	been	made	to	witness	the
obliteration	of	his	cherished	people.	It	was	said	that	he	was	a	benign	ruler	–	oh
how	the	Edur	despised	that	statement,	as	if	it	was	an	insult,	a	grievous,	vicious
insult.	That	wretched	man	collapsing	between	two	warriors	who	struggled	to
hold	him	upright,	grasping	his	grey	hair	to	force	his	head	up,	to	see.	Oh,	how
he’d	shrieked	and	wailed.	Until	Tomad	Sengar	wearied	of	those	cries	and
ordered	the	king	flung	from	the	tower.	And,	as	he	fell,	his	wail	became	a	sound
filled	with	relief.	He	looked	upon	those	cobbles,	rising	fast	to	meet	him,	as
salvation.	And	this	is	our	gift.	Our	only	gift.
Ahlrada	Ahn	drew	out	his	Merude	cutlasses	once	again,	studied	their
deadly	sharp	edges.	The	grips	felt	good,	felt	proper,	nestled	in	his	large	hands.
He	heard	a	stirring	among	the	warriors	gathered	on	the	deck	and	looked	up	to
see	the	one	named	Taralack	Veed	pushing	through	the	crowd,	at	his	side	AtriPreda	Yan	Tovis	and	in	their	wake	the	Jhag	known	as	Icarium.
Taller	than	most	Edur,	the	silent,	sad-faced	warrior	carried	naught	but	his


old,	single-edged	sword.	No	bow,	no	scabbard	for	the	weapon	in	his	right
hand,	no	armour	of	any	kind.	Yet	Ahlrada	Ahn	felt	a	chill	whisper	through	him.
Is	he	in	truth	a	champion?	What	will	we	see	this	day,	beyond	the	gate?
Two	hundred	Edur	warriors,	the	Arapay	warlock	Sathbaro	Rangar	–	now
dragging	his	malformed	hulk	on	a	route	that	would	intercept	Icarium	–	and
sixty	Letherii	archers.	All	ready,	all	eager	to	begin	the	killing.
The	warlock	squinted	up	at	the	Jhag,	who	halted	before	him	–	not	out	of
deference	or	even	much	in	the	way	of	attentiveness;	rather,	because	the	twisted
old	man	blocked	his	path.	‘I	see,’	Sathbaro	Rangar	said	in	a	rasp,	‘in	you…
nothing.	Vast	emptiness,	as	if	you	are	not	even	here.	And	your	companion
claims	you	to	be	a	great	warrior?	I	think	we	are	deceived.’
Icarium	said	nothing.
The	human	named	Taralack	Veed	stepped	forward,	pausing	to	spit	on	his
hands	and	sweep	them	back	through	his	hair.	‘Warlock,’	he	said	in	passable
trader ’s	tongue,	‘when	the	fight	begins,	you	shall	see	the	birth	of	all	that	waits
within	him.	This	I	promise.	Icarium	exists	to	destroy,	exists	to	fight,	I	mean	to
say,	and	that	is	all—’
‘Then	why	does	he	weep	at	your	words?’	Tomad	Sengar	asked	from
behind	Ahlrada	Ahn.
Taralack	Veed	turned,	then	bowed	low.	‘Preda,	he	grieves	for	what	is	lost
within	him,	for	all	that	your	warlock	perceives…the	absence,	the	empty	vessel.
It	is	no	matter.’
‘It	is	no	matter.’	Ahlrada	Ahn	did	not	believe	that.	He	could	not.	You	fools!
Look	at	him!	What	you	see,	Sathbaro	Rangar,	is	nothing	more	than	loss.	Do
none	of	you	grasp	the	significance	of	that?	What	do	we	invite	among	us?	And
this	Taralack	Veed,	this	foul-smelling	savage,	see	how	nervous	he	looks,	as	if
he	himself	dreads	what	is	coming	–	no,	I	am	not	blind	to	the	eager	light	in	his
eyes,	but	I	see	fear	there,	too.	It	cries	out	in	his	every	gesture.
What	are	we	about	to	do	here?
Tomad	Sengar	said,	‘Warlock,	prepare	the	path.’
At	that,	everyone	readied	their	weapons.	Saur	Bathrada	and	Kholb	Harat
would	lead,	followed	by	Sathbaro	Rangar	himself,	and	then	Taralack	and	his
charge,	with	the	bulk	of	the	Edur	behind	them,	and	the	Letherii	appearing	last,
arrows	nocked.
This	would	be	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	first	foray	against	the	guardians	of	the
throne.	But	he	had	heard	enough	tales.	Battle	without	quarter.	Battle	as	vicious
as	any	the	Edur	had	experienced.	He	adjusted	his	grip	on	the	cutlasses	and
moved	into	position,	in	the	front	line	of	the	main	body.	Low-voiced	greetings
reached	him	–	every	Edur	warrior	emboldened	by	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	presence	in


their	ranks.	Spearbreaker.	Fearless,	as	if	eager	for	death.
Oh	yes,	I	am	that	indeed.	Death.	My	own.
And	yet…do	I	not	still	dream	of	going	home?
He	watched	the	ragged	gate	blister	the	air,	then	split	wide,	limned	in	grey
flames,	its	maw	nothing	but	blurred	darkness.
The	warlock	stepped	to	one	side,	and	Saur	and	Kholb	lunged	into	it,
vanished	into	the	gloom.	Sathbaro	Rangar	followed,	then	Taralack	and
Icarium.	And	it	was	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	turn.	He	pushed	himself	forward,	into	the
void—
—and	stumbled	onto	crackling	loam,	the	air	sweet	with	forest	scents.	As
with	the	world	they	had	just	left,	it	was	late	afternoon.	Continuing	to	move
forward,	Ahlrada	Ahn	looked	around.	They	were	alone,	unopposed.
He	heard	Icarium	ask,	‘Where	are	we?’
And	the	Arapay	warlock	turned.	‘Drift	Avalii,	warrior.	Where	resides	the
Throne	of	Shadow.’
‘And	who	guards	it?’	Taralack	Veed	demanded.	‘Where	is	this	fierce
enemy	of	yours?’
Sathbaro	Rangar	lifted	his	head,	as	if	sniffing	the	air,	then	he	grunted	in
surprise.	‘The	demons	have	fled.	They	have	fled!	Why?	Why	did	they	yield	us
the	throne?	After	all	those	battles?	I	do	not	understand.’
Ahlrada	Ahn	glanced	over	at	Icarium.	Demons…fleeing.
‘I	do	not	understand	this,’	the	warlock	said	again.
Perhaps	I	do.	Oh	Sisters,	who	now	walks	among	us?
He	was	startled,	then,	by	a	faint	whispering	sound,	and	he	whirled,	weapons
lifting.
But	it	was	naught	but	an	owl,	gliding	away	down	the	wide	path	before	them.
He	saw	a	flicker	of	motion	among	the	humus,	and	the	raptor ’s	talons
snapped	down.	The	owl	then	flapped	upward	once	more,	a	tiny	broken	form
clutched	in	its	reptilian	grip.
‘No	matter,’	the	Arapay	warlock	was	saying.	‘Let	us	go	claim	our	throne.’
And	he	set	off,	hobbling,	dragging	one	bent	leg,	down	the	trail.
	
Baffled,	Taralack	Veed	faced	Icarium.	‘What	do	you	sense?	Of	this	place?’
The	eyes	that	regarded	him	were	flat.	‘The	Shadow	demons	left	with	our
arrival.	There	was…someone…a	man,	but	he	too	is	gone.	Some	time	past.	He
is	the	one	I	would	have	faced.’
‘Skilled	enough	to	unleash	you,	Icarium?’
‘Skilled	enough,	perhaps,	to	kill	me,	Taralack	Veed.’


‘Impossible.’
‘Nothing	is	impossible,’	Icarium	said.
They	set	off	after	the	half-dozen	Edur	who	had	hastened	ahead	to	join
Sathbaro	Rangar.
Fifteen	paces	down	the	path	they	came	upon	the	first	signs	of	past	battle.
Bloated	bodies	of	dead	aptorians	and	azalan	demons.	They	would	not	have
fallen	easily,	Taralack	Veed	knew.	He	had	heard	of	egregious	losses	among	the
Edur	and,	especially,	the	Letherii.	Those	bodies	had	been	recovered.
A	short	distance	beyond	rose	the	walls	of	an	overgrown	courtyard.	The
gate	had	been	shattered.	Icarium	trailing	a	step	behind,	Taralack	Veed	followed
the	others	into	the	compound,	then	the	Jhag	reached	out	and	halted	the	Gral.
‘No	further.’
‘What?’
There	was	an	odd	expression	on	Icarium’s	face.	‘There	is	no	need.’
	
Ahlrada	Ahn,	along	with	Saur	and	Kholb,	accompanied	the	Arapay	warlock
into	the	shadowy,	refuse-filled	chamber	of	the	throne	room.	The	Seat	of
Shadow,	the	soul	of	Kurald	Emurlahn,	the	throne	that	needed	to	be	claimed,
before	the	sundered	realm	could	be	returned	to	what	it	once	was,	a	warren
whole,	seething	with	power.
Perhaps,	with	this,	Rhulad	could	break	the—
Sathbaro	Rangar	cried	out,	a	terrible	sound,	and	he	staggered.
Ahlrada	Ahn’s	thoughts	fell	away.	He	stared.
The	Throne	of	Shadow,	there	on	a	raised	dais	at	the	far	end	of	the	room…
It	has	been	destroyed.
Smashed	to	pieces,	the	black	wood	splintered	to	reveal	its	blood-red
heartwood.	The	demons	yielded	us…nothing.	The	Throne	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	is
lost	to	us.
The	warlock	was	on	his	knees,	shrieking	at	the	stained	ceiling.	Saur	and
Kholb	stood,	weapons	out,	yet	seemingly	frozen	in	place.
Ahlrada	Ahn	strode	up	to	Sathbaro	Rangar	and	grasped	the	warlock	by	the
collar,	then	pulled	him	onto	his	feet.	‘Enough	of	this,’	he	said.	‘Gather
yourself.	We	may	be	done	here,	but	we	are	not	done	–	you	know	this.	The
warriors	will	be	thirsting	for	slaughter,	now.	You	must	return	to	the	gate	–
there	is	another	throne	to	be	won,	and	those	defending	it	will	not	flee	as	these
ones	have	done	here.	Attend	to	yourself,	Sathbaro	Rangar!’
‘Yes,’	the	warlock	gasped,	tugging	free	from	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	grip.	‘Yes,
you	speak	truth,	warrior.	Slaughter,	yes,	that	is	what	is	needed.	Come,	let	us


depart	–	ah,	in	the	name	of	Father	Bloodeye,	let	us	leave	this	place!’
	
‘They	return,’	Taralack	Veed	said,	as	the	Tiste	Edur	reappeared	at	the	entrance
to	the	temple.	‘The	warlock,	he	looks…aggrieved.	What	has	happened?’
Icarium	said	nothing,	but	something	glittered	in	his	eyes.
‘Jhag,’	snarled	Sathbaro	Rangar	as	he	limped	past,	‘gather	yourself.	A	true
battle	awaits	us.’
Confusion	among	the	ranks	of	Edur,	words	exchanged,	then	an	outcry,
curses,	bellows	of	fury.	The	anger	spread	out,	a	wildfire	suddenly	eager	to
devour	all	that	would	dare	oppose	it.	Wheeling	about,	hastening	towards	the
flickering	gate.
They	were	not	returning	to	the	ships.
Taralack	Veed	had	heard,	from	Twilight,	that	an	Edur	commander	named
Hanradi	Khalag	had	been	sending	his	warriors	against	another	foe,	through	a
gate	–	one	that	led,	in	a	journey	of	days,	to	yet	another	private	war.	And	it	was
these	enemies	who	would	now	face	the	wrath	of	these	Edur	here.	And	that	of
Icarium.
So	they	shall	see,	after	all.	That	is	good.
At	his	side	there	came	a	sound	from	the	Jhag	that	drew	Taralack	Veed
around	in	surprise.	Low	laughter.
‘You	are	amused?’	he	asked	Icarium	in	a	hoarse	whisper.
‘Of	Shadow	both,’	the	Jhag	said	enigmatically,	‘the	weaver	deceives	the
worshipper.	But	I	will	say	nothing.	I	am,	after	all,	empty.’
‘I	do	not	understand.’
‘No	matter,	Taralack	Veed.	No	matter.’
	
The	throne	room	was	abandoned	once	more,	dust	settling,	shadows	slinking
back	to	their	predictable	haunts.	And,	from	the	shattered	throne	itself,	there
grew	a	faint	shimmering,	a	blurring	of	edges,	then	a	wavering	that	would	have
alarmed	any	who	witnessed	it	–	but	of	such	sentient	creatures	there	were	none.
The	broken,	crushed	fragments	of	wood	melted	away.
And	once	more	there	on	the	dais	stood	the	Throne	of	Shadow.	And
stepping	free	of	it,	a	shadowy	form	more	solid	than	any	other.	Hunched,	short,
shrouded	in	folds	of	midnight	gauze.	From	the	indistinct	smudge	where	a	face
belonged,	only	the	eyes	were	visible,	momentarily,	a	glinting	flash.
The	figure	moved	away	from	the	throne,	towards	the	doorway…silver	and


ebony	cane	tapping	on	the	pavestones.
A	short	while	later	it	reached	the	temple’s	entrance	and	looked	out.	There,
at	the	gate,	walked	the	last	of	them.	A	Gral,	and	the	chilling,	dread	apparition
that	was	Icarium.
A	catch	of	breath	from	the	huddling	shadow	beneath	the	arched	frame,	as
the	Jhag	paused	once	to	glance	back.
And	Shadowthrone	caught,	in	Icarium’s	expression,	something	like	a
smile,	then	the	faintest	of	nods,	before	the	Jhag	turned	away.
The	god	cocked	his	head,	listening	to	the	party	hurry	back	up	the	path.
A	short	time	later	and	they	were	gone,	back	through	their	gate.
Meticulous	illusion,	crafted	with	genius,	triggered	by	the	arrival	of
strangers	–	of,	indeed,	any	but	Shadowthrone	himself	–	triggered	to	transform
into	a	shattered,	powerless	wreck.	Meanas,	bound	with	Mockra,	flung	across
the	span	of	the	chamber,	invisible	strands	webbing	the	formal	entrance.
Mockra,	filaments	of	suggestion,	invitation,	the	surrendering	of	natural
scepticism,	easing	the	way	to	witness	the	broken	throne.
Lesser	warrens,	yet	manipulated	by	a	god’s	hands,	and	not	any	god’s
hands,	either.	No…mine!
The	Edur	were	gone.
‘Idiots.’
	
‘Three	sorceror	kings,’	Destriant	Run’Thurvian	said,	‘rule	Shal-Morzinn.
They	will	contest	our	passage,	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran,	and	this	cannot	be
permitted.’
‘We	would	seek	to	negotiate,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘Indeed,	to	purchase
supplies	from	them.	Why	would	they	oppose	this?’
‘Because	it	pleases	them	to	do	so.’
‘And	they	are	formidable?’
‘Formidable?	It	may	well	prove,’	the	Destriant	said,	‘that	even	with	the
assistance	of	your	sorcerors,	including	your	High	Mage	here,	we	will	suffer
severe,	perhaps	devastating	losses	should	we	clash	with	them.	Losses	sufficient
to	drive	us	back,	even	to	destroy	us	utterly.’
The	Adjunct	frowned	across	at	Admiral	Nok,	then	at	Quick	Ben.
The	latter	shrugged.	‘I	don’t	even	know	who	they	are	and	I	hate	them
already.’
Keneb	grunted.	Some	High	Mage.
‘What,	Destriant	Run’Thurvian,	do	you	suggest?’
‘We	have	prepared	for	this,	Adjunct,	and	with	the	assistance	of	your


sorcerors,	we	believe	we	can	succeed	in	our	intention.’
‘A	gate,’	Quick	Ben	said.
‘Yes.	The	Realm	of	Fanderay	and	Togg	possesses	seas.	Harsh,	fierce	seas,
but	navigable	nonetheless.	It	would	not	be	wise	to	extend	our	journey	in	that
realm	overlong	–	the	risks	are	too	vast	–	but	I	believe	we	can	survive	them
long	enough	to,	upon	re-emerging,	find	ourselves	off	the	Dal	Honese	Horn	of
Quon	Tali.’
‘How	long	will	that	take?’	Admiral	Nok	asked.
‘Days	instead	of	months,	sir,’	the	Destriant	replied.
‘Risks,	you	said,’	Keneb	ventured.	‘What	kind	of	risks?’
‘Natural	forces,	Fist.	Storms,	submerged	ice;	in	that	realm	the	sea	levels
have	plunged,	for	ice	grips	many	lands.	It	is	a	world	caught	in	the	midst	of
catastrophic	changes.	Even	so,	the	season	we	shall	enter	is	the	least	violent	–	in
that,	we	are	most	fortunate.’
Quick	Ben	snorted.	‘Forgive	me,	Destriant,	but	I	sense	nothing	fortuitous
in	all	this.	We	have	some	savanna	spirit	driving	us	along	with	these	winds,	as	if
every	moment	gained	is	somehow	crucial.	A	savannah	spirit,	for	Hood’s	sake.
And	now,	you’ve	worked	a	ritual	to	fashion	an	enormous	gate	on	the	seas.	That
ritual	must	have	been	begun	months	ago—’
‘Two	years,	High	Mage.’
‘Two	years!	You	said	you	were	waiting	for	us	–	you	knew	we	were	coming
–	two	years	ago?	Just	how	many	spirits	and	gods	are	pushing	us	around	here?’
The	Destriant	said	nothing,	folding	his	hands	together	before	him	on	the
map-table.
‘Two	years,’	Quick	Ben	muttered.
‘From	you,	High	Mage,	we	require	raw	power	–	taxing,	yes,	but	not	so
arduous	as	to	leave	you	damaged.’
‘Oh,	that’s	nice.’
‘High	Mage,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘you	will	make	yourself	available	to	the
Grey	Helms.’
He	sighed,	then	nodded.
‘How	soon,	Destriant?’	Admiral	Nok	asked.	‘And	how	shall	we	align	the
fleet?’
‘Three	ships	across	at	the	most,	two	cables	apart,	no	more	–	the	span	of	a
shortbow	arrow’s	flight	between	each.	I	suggest	you	begin	readying	your	fleet
immediately,	sir.	The	gate	shall	be	opened	at	dawn	tomorrow.’
Nok	rose.	‘Then	I	must	take	my	leave.	Adjunct.’
Keneb	studied	Quick	Ben	on	the	other	side	of	the	table.	The	High	Mage
looked	miserable.


	
Kalam	waited	until	Quick	Ben	emerged	onto	the	mid	deck,	then	made	his	way
over.	‘What’s	got	you	shaking	in	your	boots?’	he	asked.
‘Never	mind.	If	you’re	here	to	badger	me	about	something	–	anything	–
I’m	not	in	the	mood.’
‘I	just	had	a	question,’	the	assassin	said,	‘but	I	need	to	ask	it	in	private.’
‘Our	hole	in	the	knuckle	below.’
‘Good	idea.’
A	short	time	later	they	crouched	once	more	in	the	narrow	unlit	aisle
between	crates	and	bales.	‘It’s	this,’	Kalam	said,	dispensing	with	any	small	talk.
‘The	Adjunct.’
‘What	about	her?’
‘I’m	nervous.’
‘Oh,	how	sad	for	you.	Take	it	from	me,	it	beats	being	scared	witless,
Kalam.’
‘The	Adjunct.’
‘What	is	that?	A	question?’
‘I	need	to	know,	Quick.	Are	you	with	her?’
‘With	her?	In	what?	In	bed?	No.	T’amber	would	kill	me.	Now,	maybe	if	she
decided	to	join	in	it’d	be	a	different	matter—’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	going	on	about,	Quick?’
‘Sorry.	With	her,	you	asked.’	He	paused,	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘Things	are
going	to	get	ugly.’
‘I	know	that!	That’s	why	I’m	asking,	idiot!’
‘Calm	down.	No	reason	to	panic—’
‘Isn’t	there?’
Quick	Ben	shifted	from	rubbing	his	face	to	scratching	it,	then	he	pulled	his
hands	away	and	blinked	tearily	at	the	assassin.	‘Look	what’s	happening	to	me,
and	it’s	all	your	damned	fault—’
‘Mine?’
‘Well,	it’s	somebody’s,	is	what	I’m	saying.	You’re	here	so	it	might	as	well
be	you,	Kal.’
‘Fine,	have	it	that	way.	You	haven’t	answered	me	yet.’
‘Are	you?’	the	wizard	countered.
‘With	her?	I	don’t	know.	That’s	the	problem.’
‘Me	neither.	I	don’t	know.	She’s	a	hard	one	to	like,	almost	as	hard	to	hate,
since	if	you	look	back,	there’s	nothing	really	to	do	either	with,	right?’
‘You’re	starting	to	not	make	sense,	Quick.’


‘So	what?’
‘So	you	don’t	know,	and	I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	know	about	you,’	Kalam
said,	‘but	I	hate	not	knowing.	I	even	hate	you	not	knowing.’
‘That’s	because,	back	then,	Laseen	talked	you	onto	her	side.	You	went	to
kill	her,	remember?	And	she	turned	you	round.	But	now	you’re	here,	with	the
Adjunct,	and	we’re	on	our	way	back,	to	her.	And	you	don’t	know	if	anything’s
changed,	or	if	it’s	all	changed.	It	was	one	thing	standing	with	Whiskeyjack.
Even	Dujek.	We	knew	them.	But	the	Adjunct…well…things	aren’t	so	simple.’
‘Thank	you,	Quick,	for	reiterating	everything	I’ve	just	been	telling	you.’
‘My	pleasure.	Now,	are	we	done	here?’
‘Sorry,	in	need	of	changing	your	loincloth	again,	are	you?’
‘You	have	no	idea	what	we’re	about	to	do,	Kal.	What	I	suggest	is,	come
tomorrow	morning,	you	head	back	down	here,	close	your	eyes	and	wait.	Wait,
and	wait.	Don’t	move.	Or	try	not	to.	You	might	get	tossed	round	a	bit,	and
maybe	these	bales	will	come	down	on	you.	In	fact,	you	might	end	up	getting
crushed	like	a	gnat,	so	better	you	stay	up	top.	Eyes	closed,	though.	Closed	until
I	say	otherwise.’
‘I	don’t	believe	you.’
The	High	Mage	scowled.	‘All	right.	Maybe	I	was	trying	to	scare	you.	It’ll
be	rough,	though.	That	much	is	true.	And	over	on	the	Silanda,	Fiddler	will	be
heaving	his	guts	out.’
Kalam,	thinking	on	it,	suddenly	smiled.	‘That	cheers	me	up.’
‘Me	too.’
	
Like	a	tidal	flow	clashing	at	the	mouth	of	a	raging	river,	walls	of	water	rose	in
white,	churning	explosions	on	all	sides	as	the	Silanda	lunged,	prow	plunging,
into	the	maelstrom	of	the	massive	gate.	Beyond	was	a	sky	transformed,	steel,
silver	and	grey,	the	tumult	of	atmospheric	convulsions	seeming	to	tumble
down,	as	if	but	moments	from	crushing	the	score	of	ships	already	through.	The
scale	to	Bottle’s	eyes	was	all	wrong.	Moments	earlier	their	warship	had	been
but	a	cable	behind	the	Froth	Wolf,	and	now	the	Adjunct’s	flagship	was	a	third	of
a	league	distant,	dwarfed	by	the	looming	clouds	and	heaving	swells.
Huddled	beside	Bottle,	hands	gripping	the	rail,	Fiddler	spat	out	the	last	of
his	breakfast,	too	sick	to	curse,	too	miserable	to	even	so	much	as	look	up—
Which	was	likely	a	good	thing,	Bottle	decided,	as	he	listened	to	other
marines	being	sick	all	around	him,	and	the	shouts	–	close	to	panic	–	from	the
scrambling	sailors	on	the	transport	wallowing	in	their	wake.
Gesler	began	blasting	on	that	damned	whistle	as	the	ship	rose	above	a	huge


swell	–	and	Bottle	almost	cried	out	to	see	the	stern	of	the	Froth	Wolf	rearing
immediately	in	front	of	them.	Twisting	round,	he	looked	back,	to	see	the
sorcerous	gate	far	away,	its	raging	mouth	filled	with	ships	–	that	worked	clear,
then	plunged,	suddenly	close,	behind	the	Silanda.
By	the	Abyss!	We’re	damned	near	flying	here!
He	could	see,	to	starboard,	a	mass	of	icebergs	spilling	out	from	the	whitelined	horizon	–	a	wall	of	ice,	he	realized.	Whilst	to	port	rose	a	wind-battered
coastline,	thrashing	deciduous	trees	–	oak,	arbutus	–	and	here	and	there	clumps
of	white	pine,	their	tall	trunks	rocking	back	and	forth	with	every	savage	gust.
Between	the	fleet	and	that	shore,	there	were	seals,	their	heads	dotting	the	waves,
the	rocky	beaches	crowded	with	the	beasts.
‘Bottle,’	Fiddler	croaked,	still	not	looking	up,	‘tell	me	some	good	news.’
‘We’re	through	the	gate,	Sergeant.	It’s	rough,	and	it	looks	like	we	got	a	sea
full	of	icebergs	closing	in	to	starboard	–	no,	not	that	close	yet,	I	think	we’ll
outrun	them.	I’ll	wager	the	whole	fleet’s	through	now.	Gods,	those	Perish
catamarans	look	like	they	were	made	for	this.	Lucky	bastards.	Anyway,	rumour
is	this	won’t	be	long,	here	in	this	realm	–	Sergeant?’
But	the	man	was	crawling	away,	heading	for	the	hatch.
‘Sergeant?’
‘I	said	good	news,	Bottle.	Like,	we’re	all	about	to	drop	off	the	world’s
edge.	Something	like	that.’
‘Oh.	Well,’	he	called	out	as	the	man	slithered	across	the	deck,	‘there’s
seals!’
	
The	night	of	the	green	storm	far	to	the	north,	four	Malazan	dromons	slid	into
the	harbour	of	Malaz	City,	the	flags	upon	their	masts	indicating	that	they	were
from	the	Jakatakan	Fleet,	whose	task	it	was	to	patrol	the	seas	from	Malaz	Island
west,	to	the	island	of	Geni	and	on	to	the	Horn	of	the	mainland.	There	had	been
clashes	a	few	months	past	with	some	unknown	fleet,	but	the	invaders	had	been
driven	away,	albeit	at	some	cost.	At	full	strength,	the	Jakatakan	Fleet	sailed
twenty-seven	dromons	and	sixteen	resupply	ships.	It	was	rumoured	that	eleven
dromons	had	been	lost	in	the	multiple	skirmishes	with	the	foreign	barbarians,
although	Banaschar,	upon	hearing	all	this,	suspected	that	the	numbers	were
either	an	exaggeration	or	–	in	accordance	with	the	policy	of	minimizing
imperial	losses	–	the	opposite.	The	truth	of	the	matter	was,	he	didn’t	believe
much	of	anything	any	more,	no	matter	the	source.
Coop’s	was	crowded,	with	a	lot	of	in	and	out	as	denizens	repeatedly
tramped	outside	to	watch	the	northern	night	sky	–	where	there	was	no	night	at


all	–	then	returned	with	still	more	expostulations,	which	in	turn	triggered	yet
another	exodus.	And	so	on.
Banaschar	was	indifferent	to	the	rushing	about	–	like	dogs	on	the	trail,
darting	from	master	to	home	and	back	again.	Endless	and	brainless,	really.
Whatever	was	going	on	up	there	was	well	beyond	the	horizon.	Although,
given	that,	Banaschar	reluctantly	concluded,	it	was	big.
But	far	away,	so	far	away	he	quickly	lost	interest,	at	least	after	the	first
pitcher	of	ale	had	been	drained.	In	any	case,	the	four	dromons	that	had	just
arrived	had	delivered	a	score	of	castaways.	Found	on	a	remote	reef	island
southwest	of	the	Horn	(and	what,	Banaschar	wondered	briefly,	were	the
dromons	doing	out	there?),	they	had	been	picked	up,	brought	to	Malaz	Island
with	four	ships	that	had	been	losing	a	battle	with	shipping	water,	and	this	very
night	the	castaways	had	disembarked	into	the	glorious	city	of	Malaz.
Now	finding	castaways	was	not	entirely	uncommon,	but	what	made	these
ones	interesting	was	that	only	two	of	them	were	Malazans.	As	for	the	others…
Banaschar	lifted	his	head	from	his	cup,	frowned	across	at	his	now	regular
drinking	partner,	Master	Sergeant	Braven	Tooth,	then	over	at	the	newcomers
huddled	round	the	long	table	at	the	back.	The	ex-priest	wasn’t	alone	in	casting
glances	in	that	direction,	but	the	castaways	clearly	weren’t	interested	in
conversation	with	anyone	but	themselves	–	and	there	didn’t	seem	to	be	much	of
that,	either,	Banaschar	noted.
The	two	Malazans	were	both	drunk,	the	quiet	kind,	the	miserable	kind.	The
others	were	not	drinking	much	–	seven	in	all	to	share	a	single	carafe	of	wine.
Damned	unnatural,	as	far	as	Banaschar	was	concerned.	But	that	in	itself
was	hardly	surprising,	was	it?	Those	seven	were	Tiste	Andii.
‘I	know	one	of	those	two,	you	know,’	Braven	Tooth	said.
‘What?’
‘Them	Malazans.	They	saw	me.	Earlier,	when	they	came	in.	One	of	them
went	white.	That’s	how	I	could	tell.’
Banaschar	grunted.	‘Most	veterans	who	come	in	here	do	that	the	first	time
they	see	you,	Braven	Tooth.	Some	of	them	do	that	every	time.	How’s	that	feel,
b’the	way?	Striking	terror	in	everyone	you	ever	trained?’
‘Feels	good.	Besides,	it’s	not	everyone	I	trained.	Jus’	most	of	’em.	I’m	used
to	it.’
‘Why	don’t	you	drag	them	two	over	here,	then?	Get	their	story	–	what	in
Hood’s	name	are	they	doing	with	damned	Tiste	Andii,	anyway?	Of	course,	with
the	feel	in	the	air	outside,	there’s	a	good	chance	those	fools	won’t	last	the
night.	Wickans,	Seven	Cities,	Korelri,	Tiste	Andii	–	foreigners	one	and	all.	And
the	mob’s	got	its	nose	up	and	hackles	rising.	This	city	is	about	to	explode.’


‘Ain’t	never	seen	this	afore,’	Braven	Tooth	muttered.	‘This…hate.	The	old
empire	was	never	like	that.	Damn,	it	was	the	bloody	opposite.	Look	around,
Banaschar,	if	y’can	focus	past	that	drink	in	your	hand,	and	you’ll	see	it.	Fear,
paranoia,	closed	minds	and	bared	teeth.	You	voice	a	complaint	out	loud	these
days	and	you’ll	end	up	cut	to	pieces	in	some	alley.	Was	never	like	this	afore,
Banaschar.	Never.’
‘Drag	one	over.’
‘I	heard	the	story	already.’
‘Really?	Wasn’t	you	sitting	here	wi’me	all	night	tonight?’
‘No,	I	was	over	there	for	most	of	a	bell	–	you	never	noticed	–	I	don’t	even
think	you	looked	up.	You’re	a	big	sea	sponge,	Banaschar,	and	the	more	you
pour	in	the	thirstier	you	get.’
‘I’m	being	followed.’
‘So	you	keep	saying.’
‘They’re	going	to	kill	me.’
‘Why?	They	can	just	sit	back	and	wait	for	you	to	kill	yourself.’
‘They’re	impatient.’
‘So	I	ask	again,	Banaschar,	why?’
‘They	don’t	want	me	to	reach	through	to	him.	To	Tayschrenn,	you	see.	It’s
all	about	Tayschrenn,	locked	up	there	in	Mock’s	Hold.	They	brought	the
bricks,	but	he’s	mixed	the	mortar.	I	got	to	talk	to	him,	and	they	won’t	let	me.
They’ll	kill	me	if	I	even	try.’	He	waved	wildly	towards	the	door.	‘I	head	out,
right	now,	and	start	walking	to	the	Stairs,	and	I’m	dead.’
‘That	damned	secret	of	yours,	that’s	what’s	going	to	kill	you,	Banaschar.
It’s	what’s	killing	you	right	now.’
‘She’s	cursed	me.’
‘Who	has?’
‘D’rek,	of	course.	The	Worm	in	my	gut,	in	my	brain,	the	worm	that’s
eating	me	from	the	inside	out.	So	what	was	the	story?’
Braven	Tooth	scratched	the	bristling	hair	beneath	his	throat,	then	leaned
back.	‘Marine	recruit	Mudslinger.	Forget	the	name	he	started	with,	Mudslinger
is	the	one	I	gave	’im.	It	fits,	’course.	They	always	fit.	He	was	a	tough	one,
though,	a	survivor,	and	tonight’s	proof	of	that.	The	other	one’s	named	Gentur.
Kanese,	I	think	–	not	one	of	mine.	Anyway,	they	was	shipwrecked	after	a	battle
with	the	grey-skinned	barbarians.	Ended	up	on	Drift	Avalii,	where	things	got
real	messy.	Seems	those	barbarians,	they	was	looking	for	Drift	Avalii	all
along.	Well,	there	were	Tiste	Andii	living	on	it,	and	before	anyone	could	spit
there	was	a	huge	fight	between	them	and	the	barbarians.	An	ugly	one.	Before
long	Mudslinger	and	the	others	with	’im	were	fighting	alongside	those	Tiste


Andii,	along	with	someone	named	Traveller.	The	short	of	it	is,	Traveller	told
them	all	to	leave,	said	he’d	take	on	the	barbarians	by	’imself	and	anybody	else
around	was	jus’	in	the	way.	So	they	did.	Leave,	I	mean.	Only	t’get	hit	by	a
damned	storm,	and	what	was	left	of	’em	fetched	up	on	an	atoll,	where	they
spent	months	drinking	coconut	milk	and	eating	clams.’	Braven	Tooth	reached
for	his	tankard.	‘And	that’s	Mudslinger ’s	story,	when	he	was	sober,	which	he’s
not	any	more.	The	one	named	Traveller,	he’s	the	one	that	interests	me…
something	familiar	about	him,	the	way	’Slinger	d’scribes	’im,	the	way	he
fought	–	killing	everything	fast,	wi’out	breaking	a	sweat.	Too	bad	he	didn’t
come	wi’	these	ones.’
Banaschar	stared	at	the	huge	man	opposite	him.	What	was	he	talking	about?
Whatever	it	was,	it	went	on,	and	on,	and	on.	Travelling	fast?	Slingers	and	fights
with	barbarians.	The	man	was	drunk.	Drunk	and	incomprehensible.	‘So,	what
was	Mud’s	story	again?’
‘I	just	told	you.’
‘And	what	about	those	Tiste	Andii,	Braven	Tooth?	They’re	going	to	get
killed—’
‘No	they	ain’t.	See	the	tallest	one	there,	with	the	long	white	hair.	His	name
is	Nimander	Golit.	And	that	pretty	woman	beside	him,	that’s	Phaed,	his	first
daughter.	All	seven	of	’em	are	cousins,	sisters,	brothers,	but	it’s	Nimander	who
leads,	since	he’s	the	oldest.	Nimander	says	he	is	the	first	son	of	the	Son.’
‘The	what?’
‘The	Son	of	Darkness,	Banaschar.	Know	who	that	is?	That’s	Anomander
Rake.	Look	at	’em,	they’re	all	Rake’s	brood	–	grandchildren	mostly,	except	for
Nimander,	who’s	father	to	a	lot	of	’em,	but	not	all.	Now,	maybe	someone’s	got
a	hate	on	for	foreigners	–	you	really	think	that	someone	would	be	stupid
enough	to	go	after	the	whelps	of	Anomander	Rake?’
Banaschar	turned	slightly,	stared	over	at	the	figures.	He	slowly	blinked,
then	shook	his	head.	‘Not	unless	they’re	suicidal.’
‘Right,	and	that’s	something	you’d	know	all	about,	ain’t	it?’
‘So,	if	Anomander	Rake	is	Nimander ’s	father,	who	was	the	mother?’
‘Ah,	you’re	not	completely	blind,	then.	You	can	see,	can’t	you?	Different
mothers,	for	some	of	’em.	And	one	of	those	mothers	wasn’t	no	Tiste	Andii,
was	she?	Look	at	Phaed—’
‘I	can	only	see	the	back	of	her	head.’
‘Whatever.	I	looked	at	her,	and	I	asked	her	that	very	same	question	you	just
asked	me.’
‘What?’
‘“Who	was	your	mother?”’


‘Mine?’
‘And	she	smiled	–	and	I	nearly	died,	Banaschar,	and	I	mean	it.	Nearly	died.
Bursting	blood	vessels	in	my	brain,	toppling	over	nearly	died.	Anyway,	she
told	me,	and	it	wasn’t	no	Tiste	Andii	kind	of	name,	and	from	the	looks	of	her
I’d	say	the	other	half	was	human,	but	then	again,	can	you	really	tell	with	these
things?	Not	really.’
‘No,	really,	what	was	the	name?’
‘Lady	Envy,	who	used	to	know	Anomander	Rake	himself,	and	got	her
revenge	taking	his	son	as	a	lover.	Messy,	eh?	But	if	she	was	anything	like	that
Phaed	there,	with	that	smile,	well,	envy’s	the	only	word	–	for	every	other
woman	in	the	world.	Gods	below…hey,	Banaschar,	what’s	wrong?	You
suddenly	look	real	sick.	The	ale’s	not	that	bad,	not	like	what	we	had	last	night,
anyway.	Look,	if	you’re	thinking	of	fillin’	a	plate	on	the	tabletop,	there	ain’t	no
plate,	right?	And	the	boards	are	warped,	and	that	means	it’ll	sluice	onto	my
legs,	and	that’ll	get	me	very	annoyed	–	for	Hood’s	sake,	man,	draw	a	damned
breath!’
	
Leaning	on	the	scarred,	stained	bartop	fifteen	paces	away,	the	man	Banaschar
called	Foreigner	nursed	a	flagon	of	Malaz	Dark,	a	brew	for	which	he	had
acquired	a	taste,	despite	the	expense.	He	heard	the	ex-priest	and	the	Master
Sergeant	arguing	back	and	forth	at	a	table	behind	him,	something	they	had
been	doing	a	lot	of	lately.	On	other	nights,	Foreigner	reflected,	he	would	have
joined	them,	leaning	back	to	enjoy	what	would	be	an	entertaining	–	if
occasionally	sad	–	performance.
But	not	tonight.
Not	with	them,	sitting	back	there.
He	needed	to	think,	now,	and	think	hard.	He	needed	to	come	to	a	decision,
and	he	sensed,	with	a	tremor	of	fear,	that	upon	that	decision	rode	his	destiny.
‘Coop,	another	Dark	here,	will	you?’
	
The	carrack	Drowned	Rat	looked	eager	to	pull	away	from	the	stone	pier	south
of	the	rivermouth	as	the	tide	tugged	fitfully	on	its	way	out.	Scrubbed	hull,	fresh
paint,	and	a	bizarre	lateen	rig	and	centre-stern	steering	oar	had	garnered	the
curious	attention	of	more	than	a	few	sailors	and	fisher	folk	who’d	wandered
past	in	the	last	few	days.	Irritating	enough,	the	captain	mused,	but	Oponn	was
still	smiling	nice	twin	smiles,	and	before	long	they’d	be	on	their	way,	finally.


Out	of	this	damned	city	and	the	sooner	the	better.
First	Mate	Palet	was	lying	curled	up	on	the	mid	deck,	still	nursing	the
bruises	and	knocks	he’d	taken	from	a	drunken	mob	the	night	before.	The
captain’s	lizard	gaze	settled	on	him	for	a	moment,	before	moving	on.	They
were	docked,	trussed	up	neat,	and	Vole	was	perched	in	his	oversized	crow’s
nest	–	the	man	was	mad	as	a	squirrel	with	a	broken	tail	–	and	everything
seemed	about	right,	so	right,	in	fact,	that	the	captain’s	nerves	were	a	taut,
tangled	mess.
It	wasn’t	just	the	fever	of	malice	afflicting	damned	near	everyone	–	with	all
those	acid	rumours	of	betrayal	and	murder	in	Seven	Cities,	and	now	the
unofficial	pogrom	unleashed	against	the	Wickans	–	there	was,	in	addition,	all
that	other	stuff.
Scratching	at	the	stubble	on	his	scalp,	Cartheron	Crust	turned	and	fixed
narrow	eyes	on	Mock’s	Hold.	Mostly	dark,	of	course.	Faint	glow	from	the
gatehouse	top	of	the	Stairs	–	that	would	be	Lubben,	the	old	hunchback	keeper,
probably	passed	out	by	now	as	was	his	wont	whenever	the	Hold	had	uninvited
guests.	Of	course,	all	guests	were	uninvited,	and	even	though	a	new	Fist	had
arrived	a	month	ago,	that	man	Aragan	had	been	posted	here	before	and	so	he
knew	the	way	things	worked	best	–	and	that	was	lying	as	low	as	you	could,	not
once	lifting	your	head	above	the	parapet.	Who	knows?	Aragan’s	probably
sharing	that	bottle	with	Lubben.
Uninvited	guests…like	High	Mage	Tayschrenn.	Long	ago,	now,	Crust	had
found	himself	in	that	snake’s	company	all	too	often,	and	he’d	struggled	hard
not	to	do	something	somebody’d	probably	regret.	Not	me,	though.	The
Emperor,	maybe.	Tayschrenn	himself,	definitely,	but	not	me.	He	would	dream	of
a	moment	alone,	just	the	two	of	them.	A	moment,	that	was	all	he’d	need.	Both
hands	on	that	scrawny	neck,	squeeze	and	twist.	Done.	Simple.	Problem	solved.
What	problem?	That’s	what	Kellanved	would	have	asked,	in	his	usual
apoplectic	way.	And	Crust	had	an	answer	waiting.	No	idea,	Emperor,	but	I’m
sure	there	was	one,	maybe	two,	maybe	plenty.	A	good	enough	reply,	he	figured,
although	Kellanved	might	not	have	agreed.	Dancer	would’ve,	though.	Hah.
‘Four	dromons!’	Vole	called	down	suddenly.
Crust	stared	up	at	the	idiot.	‘We’re	in	the	harbour!	What	did	you	expect?
That’s	it,	Vole,	no	more	sending	your	meals	up	there	–	haul	your	carcass	down
here!’
‘Cutting	in	from	the	north,	Captain.	’Top	the	masts…something	glinting
silver…’
Crust’s	scowl	deepened.	It	was	damned	dark	out	there.	But	Vole	was	never
wrong.	Silver…that’s	not	good.	No,	that’s	plain	awful.	He	strode	over	to	Palet


and	nudged	the	man.	‘Get	up.	Send	what’s	left	of	the	crew	back	to	those
warehouses	–	I	don’t	care	who’s	guarding	them,	bribe	the	bastards.	I	want	us
low	in	the	water	and	scuttling	outa	here	like	a	three-legged	crab.’
The	man	looked	up	at	him	with	owlish	eyes.	‘Captain?’
‘Did	they	knock	all	sense	from	your	brain,	Palet?	Trouble’s	coming.’
Sitting	up,	the	First	Mate	looked	round.	‘Guards?’
‘No,	a	whole	lot	troubler.’
‘Like	what?’
‘Like	the	Empress,	you	fool.’
Palet	was	suddenly	on	his	feet.	‘Supplies,	aye,	sir.	We’re	on	our	way!’
Crust	watched	the	fool	scamper.	The	crew	was	drunk.	Too	bad	for	them.
They	were	sorely	undermanned,	too.	It’d	been	a	bad	idea,	diving	into	the	bay
when	old	Ragstopper	went	down,	what	with	all	those	sharks.	Four	good	sailors
had	been	lost	that	night.	Good	sailors,	bad	swimmers.	Funny	how	that	goes
together.
He	looked	round	once	more.	Damn,	done	forgot	again,	didn’t	I?	No
dinghies.	Well,	there’s	always	something.
Four	dromons,	visible	now,	rounding	into	the	bay,	backlit	by	one	of	the
ugliest	storms	he’d	ever	seen.	Well,	not	entirely	true	–	he’d	seen	the	like	once
before,	hadn’t	he?	And	what	had	come	of	it?	Not	a	whole	lot…except,	that	is,	a
mountain	of	otataral…
The	lead	dromon	–	Laseen’s	flagship,	The	Surly.	Three	in	her	wake.	Three,
that	was	a	lot	–	who	in	Hood’s	name	has	she	brought	with	her?	A	damned	army?
Uninvited	guests.
Poor	Aragan.


Chapter	Twenty-two
Who	are	these	strangers,	then,	with	their	familiar	faces?
Emerging	from	the	crowd	with	those	indifferent	eyes,
and	the	blood	streaming	down	from	their	hands.
It	is	what	was	hidden	before,	masked	by	the	common
and	the	harmless,	now	wrenching	features	revealed
in	a	conflagration	of	hate	and	victims	tumble	underfoot.
Who	led	and	who	followed	and	why	do	flames	thrive
in	darkness	and	all	gaze,	insensate	and	uncomprehending,
come	the	morning	light,	upon	the	legacy	of	unleashed
spite?	I	am	not	fooled	by	wails	of	horror.	I	am	not	moved
by	expostulations	of	grief.	For	I	remember	the	lurid	night,
the	visage	flashing	in	firelit	puddles	of	blood	was	my	own.
Who	was	this	stranger,	then,	with	that	familiar	face?
Melting	into	the	crowd	in	the	fraught,	chaotic	heave,
and	the	blood	raging	in	the	storm	of	my	skull	boils	frantic
as	I	plunge	down	and	lay	waste	all	these	innocent	lives,
my	hate	at	their	weakness	a	cauldron	overturned,	whilst
drowning	in	my	own,	this	stranger,	this	stranger…
On	the	Dawn	I	Take	My	Life
The	Wickan	Pogrom
Kayessan
As	the	longboat	from	the	Jakatakan	fleet’s	flagship	drew	up	alongside,	the
commander	and	four	marines	quickly	clambered	aboard	the	Froth	Wolf.
They	were	Untan,	one	and	all,	bedecked	in	elaborate,	expensive	armour,
the	commander	tall,	weak-chinned	with	a	watery,	uneasy	look	in	his	pale	eyes.
He	saluted	Admiral	Nok	first,	and	then	the	Adjunct.
‘We	were	not	expecting	you	for	months,	Adjunct	Tavore.’
Arms	crossed,	Fist	Keneb	stood	a	short	distance	away,	leaning	against	the


mainmast.	After	the	commander ’s	words,	Keneb	shifted	his	attention	to	the
marines.	Is	that	parade	kit	you’re	wearing?	And	then	he	noticed	their
expressions	of	disdain	and	hatred	as	the	soldiers	stared	over	to	where	stood	Nil
and	Nether.	Keneb	glanced	round,	then	hesitated.
The	Adjunct	spoke,	‘Your	name,	Commander?’
A	slight	bow.	‘My	apologies,	Adjunct.	I	am	Exent	Hadar,	of	House	Hadar	in
Unta,	firstborn—’
‘I	know	the	family,’	Tavore	cut	in,	rather	sharply.	‘Commander	Hadar,	tell
your	marines	to	stand	down	immediately	–	if	I	see	one	more	hand	casually
touch	a	sword	grip	they	can	swim	back	to	your	ship.’
The	commander ’s	pale	eyes	flicked	to	Admiral	Nok,	who	said	nothing.
Keneb	relaxed	–	he	had	been	about	to	walk	over	to	strip	the	hides	from
those	fools.	Adjunct	Tavore,	you	miss	nothing,	do	you?	Ever.	Why	do	you
continue	to	surprise	me?	No,	wrong	way	of	putting	that	–	why	am	I	constantly
surprised?
‘Apologies	again,’	Hadar	said,	his	insincerity	obvious	as	he	gestured	to	his
guards.	‘There	have	been	a	succession	of,	uh,	revelations—’
‘Regarding	what?’
‘Wickan	complicity	in	the	slaughter	of	Pormqual’s	Loyal	Army	at	Aren,
Adjunct.’
Keneb	stared	at	the	man,	dumbfounded.	‘Complicity?’	His	voice	was
hoarse	and	the	word	barely	made	it	out.
The	Adjunct’s	expression	was	as	fierce	as	Keneb	had	ever	seen	on	the
woman,	but	it	was	Admiral	Nok	who	spoke	first.	‘What	insanity	is	this,
Commander	Hadar?	The	loyalty	and	service	of	the	Wickans	was	and	remains
beyond	reproach.’
A	shrug.	‘As	I	said,	Admiral.	Revelations.’
‘Never	mind	that,’	the	Adjunct	snapped.	‘Commander,	what	are	you	doing
patrolling	these	waters?’
‘The	Empress	commanded	that	we	extend	our	range,’	Hadar	replied,	‘for
two	reasons.	Foremost,	there	have	been	incursions	from	an	unknown	enemy	in
black	warships.	We	have	had	six	engagements	thus	far.	Initially,	our	ship	mages
were	not	able	to	contend	with	the	sorcery	the	black	ships	employed,	and
accordingly	we	suffered	in	the	exchanges.	Since	then,	however,	we	have
increased	the	complement	and	the	calibre	of	our	own	cadres.	Negating	the
sorcery	in	the	battles	evened	matters	considerably.’
‘When	was	the	last	encounter?’
‘Two	months	past,	Adjunct.’
‘And	the	other	reason?’


Another	slight	bow.	‘Intercepting	you,	Adjunct.	As	I	said,	however,	we
were	not	expecting	you	for	some	time.	Oddly	enough,	our	precise	position
right	now	came	by	direct	command	from	the	Empress	herself,	four	days	ago.
Needless	to	say,	against	this	unseasonal	gale,	we	were	hard	pressed	to	make	it
here	in	time.’
‘In	time	for	what?’
Another	shrug.	‘Why,	it	turns	out,	to	meet	you.	It	seems	obvious,’	he	added
with	condescension,	‘that	the	Empress	detected	your	early	arrival.	In	such
matters,	she	is	all-knowing,	and	that	is,	of	course,	only	to	be	expected.’
Keneb	watched	as	the	Adjunct	mulled	on	these	developments,	then	she	said,
‘And	you	are	to	be	our	escort	to	Unta?’
‘No,	Adjunct.	I	am	to	instruct	you	to	change	the	course	of	the	imperial
fleet.’
‘To	where?’
‘Malaz	City.’
‘Why?’
Commander	Hadar	shook	his	head.
‘Tell	me,	if	you	know,’	Tavore	said,	‘where	is	the	Empress	right	now?’
‘Well,	Malaz	City,	I	would	think,	Adjunct.’
	
‘See	that	marine	on	the	left?’	Kalam	asked	in	a	low	whisper.
‘What	of	him?’	Quick	Ben	asked	with	a	shrug.
‘He’s	a	Claw.’
They	stood	on	the	forecastle	deck,	watching	the	proceedings	below.	The
air	was	fresh,	warm,	the	seas	surprisingly	gentle	despite	the	hard,	steady	wind.
Damned	near	paradise,	the	assassin	considered,	after	that	wild	three	days	in	the
raw,	tumultuous	warren	of	Togg	and	Fanderay.	The	ships	of	the	fleet,	barring
those	of	the	Perish,	were	badly	battered,	especially	the	transports.	None	had
gone	down,	fortunately,	nor	had	any	sailor	or	marine	been	lost.	A	few	dozen
horses,	alas,	had	broken	legs	during	the	storms,	but	such	attrition	was
expected,	and	no-one	begrudged	fresh	meat	in	the	stew-pots.	Now,	assuming
this	wind	stayed	at	their	backs,	Malaz	Island	was	only	two	days	away,	maybe	a
touch	more.
With	his	message	delivered,	Commander	Hadar ’s	haste	to	leave	was
pathetically	obvious,	and	it	seemed	neither	the	Adjunct	nor	the	Admiral	was
inclined	to	stretch	out	his	stay.
As	the	visitors	returned	to	their	longboat,	a	voice	spoke	quietly	behind
Kalam	and	Quick	Ben.	‘Did	I	hear	correctly?	We	are	now	sailing	for	Malaz


City?’
Kalam	fought	down	a	shiver	–	he’d	heard	nothing.	Again.	‘Aye,	Apsalar—’
But	Quick	Ben	had	wheeled	round	in	alarm	and,	now,	anger.	‘The	damned
steps	up	here	are	right	in	front	of	us!	How	in	Hood’s	name	did	you	get	there,
Apsalar?	Breathing	down	our	damned	backs!’
‘Clearly,’	the	Kanese	woman	replied,	her	almond-shaped	eyes	blinking
languidly,	‘you	were	both	distracted.	Tell	me,	Kalam	Mekhar,	have	you	any
theories	as	to	why	an	agent	of	the	Claw	accompanied	the	Jakatakan
commander?’
‘Plenty,	but	I’m	not	sharing	any	of	them	with	you.’
She	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘You	are	still	undecided,	aren’t
you?’
Oh	how	I	want	to	hit	her.	Right	here,	right	now.	‘You	don’t	know	what
you’re	talking	about,	Apsalar.	And	I	don’t,	neither.’
‘Well,	that	hardly	makes	sense—’
‘You’re	right,’	Quick	Ben	snapped,	‘it	doesn’t.	Now	get	out	of	our
shadows,	damn	you!’
‘High	Mage,	it	occurs	to	me	that	you	are	under	a	certain	misapprehension.
The	Hounds	of	Shadow,	in	G’danisban,	were	after	you.’
‘Opportunistic!’
‘Certainly,	if	you	care	to	believe	that.	In	any	case,	it	should	then	follow	–
even	for	one	as	immune	to	logic	as	you	–	that	I	acted	then.	Alone.	The	choice
was	mine,	High	Mage,	and	mine	alone.’
‘What’s	she	talking	about,	Quick?’	Kalam	demanded.
But	his	friend	was	silent,	studying	the	woman	before	him.	Then	he	asked,
‘Why?’
She	smiled.	‘I	have	my	reasons,	but	at	the	moment,	I	see	no	reason	to	share
any	of	them	with	you.’
Apsalar	then	turned	away,	walked	towards	the	prow.
‘It’s	just	that,	isn’t	it?’	Quick	Ben	muttered	under	his	breath.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Undecided,	Kal.	We’re	all	undecided.	Aren’t	we?’	Then	he	swung	round
and	looked	back	down	at	the	Adjunct.
The	assassin	did	the	same.
Tavore	and	Nok	were	talking,	but	quietly,	their	words	stolen	by	the	wind.
‘Now,’	Quick	Ben	continued,	‘is	she?’
Undecided?	Not	about	anything,	it	seems.	Kalam	grimaced.	‘Malaz	City.	I
didn’t	have	much	fun	the	last	time	I	visited.	Your	skin	crawling,	Quick?	Mine
is.	Crawling	bad.’


‘You	notice	something?’	the	wizard	asked.	‘That	commander	–	he	didn’t
ask	a	damned	thing	about	the	Perish	ships	with	us.	Now,	that	Claw,	he	must
have	made	his	report	already,	by	warren,	to	Topper	or	the	Empress	herself.
So…’
‘So,	she	knows	we’ve	got	guests.	Maybe	that’s	why	she	doesn’t	want	us
sailing	into	Unta’s	harbour.’
‘Right,	Laseen’s	rattled.’
Then	Kalam	grunted.	‘I	just	realized	something	else,’	he	said	in	a	low
voice.
‘What?’
‘The	Adjunct,	she	sent	the	Destriant	to	her	cabin.	And	she	made	no	formal
invitation	to	the	commander	the	way	she’s	supposed	to	–	no,	she	made	them	all
discuss	things	out	here,	in	the	open.	Anyway,	maybe	the	Adjunct	didn’t	want	the
commander	or	that	Claw	to	see	Run’Thurvian,	or	talk	to	him,	about	anything.’
‘She’s	no	fool.’
‘A	damned	game	of	Troughs	between	them,	isn’t	it?	Quick	Ben,	what	is
going	on	here?’
‘We’ll	find	out,	Kal.’
‘When?’
The	High	Mage	scowled,	then	said,	‘The	moment,	friend,	we	stop	being
undecided.’
	
Aboard	the	Silanda,	Fiddler	had	crawled	from	the	hold	like	a	crippled	rat,
dishevelled,	pale	and	greasy.	He	spied	Bottle	and	slowly,	agonizingly,	made	his
way	over.	Bottle	was	feeding	out	line.	There	were	shoals	out	there,	and	he’d
seen	fish	leaping	clear	of	whatever	chased	them	beneath	the	surface.	One	of	the
Jakatakan	dromons	was	sidling	past	to	port,	a	rock’s	throw	away,	and	the	rest
of	the	squad	had	lined	up	to	give	them	a	show.
Bottle	shook	his	head,	then	glanced	over	as	his	sergeant	arrived.	‘Feeling
any	better?’
‘I	think	so.	Gods,	I	think	that	nightmare	realm	cured	me.’
‘You	don’t	look	any	better.’
‘Thanks,	Bottle.’	Fiddler	pulled	himself	into	a	sitting	position,	then	looked
over	at	the	rest	of	the	squad.	‘Hood’s	breath!’	he	exploded.	‘What	are	you
doing?!’
Koryk,	Smiles,	Cuttle	and	Tarr	had	joined	up	with	Deadsmell,	Throatslitter
and	Widdershins,	standing	in	a	row	at	the	rail,	looking	across	at	the	passing
dromon,	and	under	each	soldier ’s	left	arm	was	a	Tiste	Andii	head.


At	Fiddler ’s	outburst,	Gesler	and	Stormy	appeared	on	deck.
Bottle	watched	them	take	it	all	in,	then	Gesler	called	out,	‘Give	’em	a
wave!’
The	soldiers	complied,	began	waving	cheerfully	across	at	what	seemed	to
be	a	mass	of	staring	sailors	and	marines	and	–	Bottle	squinted	–	officers.
Smiles	said,	‘It’s	all	right,	Sergeant.	We	just	thought	they’d	appreciate	a
change	of	scenery.’
‘Who?’
‘Why,	these	heads,	of	course.’
Then	Stormy	was	running	past,	towards	the	stern,	where	he	dragged	down
his	breeches	and	sat	over	the	rail,	his	back	end	hanging	open,	exposed.	With	a
savage	grunt,	he	began	defecating.
And	while	his	comrades	lining	the	rail	all	turned	to	stare	at	the	mad
corporal,	Bottle	was	transfixed	by	the	ghastly	expressions	of	delight	on	those
severed	heads.	Those	smiles	–	the	line	in	Bottle’s	hands	kept	spinning	out,	then
vanished,	unnoticed,	as	sudden	nausea	clenched	his	gut.
And	he	bolted	for	the	opposite	rail.
	
Captain	Kindly	made	a	gagging	sound.	‘That	is	disgusting.’
Lieutenant	Pores	nodded.	‘I’ll	say.	Gods,	what	did	that	man	eat	to	produce
those?’
A	crowd	was	gathering	on	the	deck	as	laughing	marines	and	sailors	all
watched	the	antics	proceeding	apace	on	the	Silanda	half	a	cable	ahead.	The
Jakatakan	dromon	was	now	to	port,	a	mass	of	onlookers	on	the	decks,	silent,
watching.
‘That	is	highly	unusual,’	Pores	commented.	‘They’re	not	rising	to	the	bait.’
‘They	look	scared	witless,’	Kindly	said.
‘So	those	marines	have	got	themselves	a	collection	of	heads,’	Pores	said,
shrugging.
‘You	idiot.	Those	heads	are	still	alive.’
‘They’re	what?’
‘Alive,	Lieutenant.	I	have	this	from	reliable	sources.’
‘Even	so,	sir,	since	when	did	Malazans	get	so	soft?’
Kindly	regarded	him	as	he	would	a	skewered	grub.	‘Your	powers	of
observation	are	truly	pathetic.	That	ship	is	filled	with	Untans.	Coddled
nobleborn	pups.	Look	at	those	damned	uniforms,	will	you?	The	only	stains
they	got	on	’em	is	gull	shit,	and	that’s	because	the	gulls	keep	mistaking	them
for	dead,	bloated	seals.’


‘Nice	one,	sir.’
‘Another	comment	like	that,’	Kindly	said,	‘and	I’ll	get	the	stitcher	to	sew	up
your	mouth,	Lieutenant.	Ha,	we’re	changing	course.’
‘Sir?’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,	what	are	those	fools	doing?’
Pores	followed	his	captain’s	glare,	to	the	stern	of	their	own	ship,	where
two	heavy	infantry	soldiers	were	seated	side	by	side,	their	leggings	round	their
ankles.	‘I	would	hazard	a	guess,	sir,	that	Hanfeno	and	Senny	are	adding	their
stone’s	worth.’
‘Get	back	there	and	make	them	stop,	Lieutenant.	Now!’
‘Sir?’
‘You	heard	me!	And	I	want	those	two	on	report!’
‘Stop	them,	sir?	How	do	I	do	that?’
‘I	suggest	corks.	Now	move!’
Pores	scrambled.
Oh	please,	please	be	finished	before	I	arrive.	Please…
	
The	send-off	to	the	Jakatakan	Fleet	encompassed	every	Malazan	ship,	a
cavalcade	of	defecation	that	brought	seagulls	for	leagues	round	with	mad
shrieks	and	wheeling	plunges.	The	Adjunct	had	not	remained	on	deck	for	very
long,	but	issued	no	orders	to	halt	the	proceedings.	Nor	did	Admiral	Nok,
although	Keneb	noticed	that	the	sailors	of	the	dromon	escorts	and	the
transports	did	not	participate.	This	gesture	belonged	exclusively	to	the
Fourteenth	Army.
And	maybe	it	had	some	value.	Hard	to	tell	with	things	like	this,	Keneb
knew.
The	wind	drove	them	onward,	east	by	southeast	now,	and	before	a	quarter
bell	was	sounded,	the	Jakatakans	were	far	behind.
Destriant	Run’Thurvian	had	appeared	earlier,	and	had	watched	the
escapades	of	the	marines	on	the	surrounding	ships.	Frowning	for	some	time,
he	eventually	spotted	Keneb	and	approached.	‘Sir,’	he	said,	‘I	am	somewhat
confused.	Is	there	no	honour	between	elements	of	the	Mezla	military?’
‘Honour?	Not	really,	Destriant.	Rivalries	provide	the	lifeblood,	although	in
this	case	matters	proved	somewhat	one-sided,	and	for	the	reason	for	that	you
will	have	to	look	to	the	Silanda.’
A	sage	nod.	‘Of	course,	the	ship	woven	in	sorceries,	where	time	itself	is
denied.’
‘Do	you	know	the	manner	of	those	sorceries,	Destriant?’


‘Kurald	Emurlahn,	Tellann,	Telas	and	a	residue	of	Toblakai,	although	in
this	latter	case	the	nature	of	the	power	is…uncertain.	Of	course,’	he	added,
‘there	is	nothing	unusual	in	that.	Among	the	ancient	Toblakai	–	according	to
our	own	histories	–	there	could	arise	individuals,	warriors,	who	became
something	of	a	warren	unto	themselves.	Such	power	varies	in	its	efficacy,	and
it	would	appear	that	this	sort	of	blood	talent	was	waning	in	the	last	generations
of	the	Toblakai	civilization,	growing	ever	weaker.	In	any	case,’	the	Destriant
added,	shrugging,	‘as	I	said,	a	residue	remains	on	this	Silanda.	Toblakai.
Which	is	rather	interesting,	since	it	was	believed	that	the	giant	race	was
extinct.’
‘There	are	said	to	be	remnants,’	Keneb	offered,	‘in	the	Fenn	Range	of
north	Quon	Tali.	Primitive,	reclusive…’
‘Oh	yes,’	Run’Thurvian	said,	‘of	mixed	bloods	there	are	known	examples,
vastly	diminished,	of	course.	The	Trell,	for	example,	and	a	tribe	known	as	the
Barghast.	Ignorant	of	past	glories,	as	you	suggest.	Fist,	may	I	ask	you	a
question?’
‘Of	course.’
‘The	Adjunct	Tavore.	It	appears	that	the	relationship	with	her	Empress	has
become	strained.	Have	I	surmised	correctly?	This	is	disturbing	news,	given
what	awaits	us.’
Keneb	looked	away,	then	he	cleared	his	throat.	‘Destriant,	I	have	no	idea
what	awaits	us,	although	it	seems	that	you	do.	As	for	the	Empress,	again,	there
is	nothing	I	can	imagine	to	give	rise	to	mutual	distrust.	The	Adjunct	is	the	Hand
of	the	Empress.	An	extension	of	Laseen’s	will.’
‘The	Empress	would	not	be	inclined,	therefore,’	Run’Thurvian	said,	‘to
sever	that	hand,	yes?	I	am	relieved	to	hear	this.’
‘Good…why?’
‘Because,’	the	Destriant	said,	turning	away,	‘your	Fourteenth	Army	will	not
be	enough.’
	
If	wood	could	be	exhausted	by	unceasing	strain,	the	ships	of	the	imperial	fleet
were	at	their	very	limits,	two	bells	out	from	Malaz	Island	on	the	night	of	the
second	day,	when	the	wind	suddenly	fell	away,	a	coolness	coming	into	the	air,
and	it	seemed	that	every	ship	sagged,	settling	deeper	into	the	swells,	and	now,
in	place	of	the	hot	dry	gale,	a	softer	breeze	arrived.
Kalam	Mekhar	had	taken	to	pacing	the	deck,	restless,	his	appetite	gone	and
a	tightness	gripping	his	guts.	As	he	made	his	way	aft	for	the	thirtieth	time	since
dusk,	Quick	Ben	appeared	alongside	him.


‘Laseen’s	waiting	for	us,’	the	High	Mage	said.	‘And	Tayschrenn’s	there,
like	a	scorpion	under	a	rock.	Kal,	everything	I’m	feeling…’
‘I	know,	friend.’
‘Like	I	did	back	outside	Pale.’
They	turned	about	and	slowly	walked	forward.	Kalam	scratched	at	his
beard.	‘We	had	Whiskeyjack,	back	then.	Even	Dujek.	But	now…’	He	growled
under	his	breath,	then	rolled	his	shoulders.
‘Ain’t	seen	you	do	that	in	a	long	time,	Kal,	that	shrug	of	yours.’
‘Well.’
‘That’s	what	I	thought.’	The	High	Mage	sighed,	then	he	reached	out	and
grasped	the	assassin’s	arm	as	a	figure	emerged	from	the	gloom	before	them.
The	Adjunct.	‘High	Mage,’	she	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘I	want	you	to	cross
over	to	the	Silanda,	by	warren.’
‘Now?’
‘Yes.	Is	that	a	problem?’
Kalam	sensed	his	friend’s	unease,	and	the	assassin	cleared	his	throat.
‘Adjunct.	The	Imperial	High	Mage	Tayschrenn	is,	uh,	dead	ahead.’
‘He	does	not	quest,’	she	replied.	‘Does	he,	Quick	Ben?’
‘No.	How	did	you	know	that?’
She	ignored	the	question.	‘By	warren,	immediately,	High	Mage.	You	are	to
collect	Fiddler,	and	the	soldier	named	Bottle.	Inform	the	sergeant	that	the	time
has	come.’
‘Adjunct?’
‘For	a	game.	He	will	understand.	Then,	the	three	of	you	are	to	return	here,
where	you	will	join	myself,	Kalam,	Fist	Keneb,	T’amber	and	Apsalar,	in	my
cabin.	You	have	a	quarter	of	a	bell,	High	Mage.	Kalam,	come	with	me	now,
please.’
One	of	Fiddler’s	games.
Gods	below,	a	game!
	
A	moccasined	foot	thumped	into	Bottle’s	side.	Grunting,	he	sat	up,	still	mostly
asleep.	‘That	you,	Smiles?	Not	now…’	but	no,	it	wasn’t	Smiles.	His	heart
thumped	awake	in	a	savage	drumbeat.	‘Oh,	High	Mage,	uh.	Um.	What	is	it?’
‘On	your	feet,’	Quick	Ben	hissed.	‘And	quietly,	damn	you.’
‘Too	late,’	muttered	Koryk	from	his	bedroll	nearby.
‘It	had	better	not	be,	soldier,’	the	wizard	said.	‘Another	sound	from	you
and	I’ll	push	your	head	up	the	next	soldier ’s	backside.’
A	head	lifted	from	blankets.	‘That’d	beat	the	view	I	got	now…sir.’	Then	he


settled	back	down.
Bottle	climbed	to	his	feet,	chilled	yet	sweating.
And	found	himself	looking	at	Fiddler ’s	miserable	face,	hovering	there
behind	the	High	Mage.	‘Sergeant?’
‘Just	follow	us	aft,	Bottle.’
The	three	of	them	picked	their	way	clear	of	the	sleeping	forms	on	the	mid
deck.
There	was	a	strange	scent	in	the	air,	Bottle	realized.	Familiar,
yet…‘Sergeant,	you’re	carrying	that	new	Deck	of	yours…’
‘You	and	your	damned	rat,’	muttered	Fiddler.	‘I	knew	it,	you	lying	bastard.’
‘Wasn’t	me,’	Bottle	began,	then	fell	quiet.	Gods	below,	even	for	me	that	was
lame.	Try	something	better.	‘Just	looking	out	for	you,	Sergeant.	Your	shaved
knuckle	in	the	hole,	that’s	me.’
‘Hah,	where	have	I	heard	that	before,	eh	Quick?’
‘Quiet,	you	two.	We’re	going	across	now.	Grab	belts…’
Bottle	blinked,	and	found	himself	on	another	deck,	and	directly	ahead,
steps	leading	down.	Abyss	take	me,	that	was	fast.	Fast	and…appalling.	Quick
Ben	waved	them	into	his	wake	as	he	descended,	ducking	the	frame,	then	halting
three	strides	down	the	corridor,	knocking	upon	a	door	to	his	left.	It	opened	at
once.
T’amber,	the	eyes	that	gave	her	her	name	scanning	the	three	men	cramped
in	the	narrow	corridor.	Then	she	stepped	back.
The	Adjunct	stood	behind	her	chair	at	the	map-table.	The	rest	were	seated,
and	Bottle	stared	wildly	from	one	to	the	next.	Fist	Keneb.	Apsalar.	Kalam
Mekhar.
A	low	moan	from	Fiddler.
‘Sergeant,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘you	have	your	players.’
Players?
Oh.
Oh	no.
	
‘I	really	don’t	think	this	is	a	good	idea,’	the	sergeant	said.
‘Perhaps,’	the	Adjunct	replied.
‘I	agree,’	T’amber	said.	‘Or,	rather,	my	participation…as	a	player.	As	I
said	earlier,	Tavore—’
‘Nonetheless,’	the	Adjunct	cut	in,	drawing	out	the	empty	chair	opposite	the
one	reserved	for	Fiddler	and	sitting	herself	down	on	Keneb’s	left.	She	pulled
her	gloves	free.	‘Explain	the	rules,	please.’


Keneb	watched	as	Fiddler	cast	helpless,	desperate	looks	to	both	Kalam	and
Quick	Ben,	but	neither	would	meet	his	eyes,	and	both	were	clearly	miserable.
Then	the	sergeant	slowly	walked	over	to	the	last	chair.	He	settled	into	it.	‘That’s
just	it,	Adjunct,	there	ain’t	no	rules,	except	those	I	make	up	as	I	go.’
‘Very	well.	Begin.’
Fiddler	scratched	at	his	greying	beard,	his	eyes	fixing	on	T’amber	who	sat
to	the	Adjunct’s	left,	directly	opposite	Keneb.	‘This	is	your	Deck,’	he	said,
lifting	it	into	view	and	setting	it	down	on	the	tabletop.	‘It	has	new	cards	in	it.’
‘Your	point?’	the	young	woman	demanded.
‘Just	this.	Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you?’
A	shrug.	‘Does	it	matter?’
A	grunt	from	Kalam	Mekhar	on	Keneb’s	right.	Beyond	the	assassin,	on	the
same	side	and	immediately	to	Fiddler ’s	left	was	Apsalar.	Bottle	was	on	the
sergeant’s	right,	with	the	High	Mage	beside	him.	The	only	one	who	really
doesn’t	belong	is	me.	Where’s	Blistig?	Nok?	Temul,	Nil	and	Nether?
‘Last	chance,’	Fiddler	said	to	the	Adjunct.	‘We	stop	this	now—’
‘Begin,	Sergeant.’
‘Bottle,	find	us	some	wine.’
‘Sergeant?’
‘First	rule.	Wine.	Everybody	gets	a	cup.	Except	the	dealer,	he	gets	rum.	Go
to	it,	Bottle.’
As	the	young	soldier	rose	Fiddler	collected	the	cards.	‘Player	on	dealer ’s
right	has	to	serve	drinks	during	the	first	hand.’	He	flung	out	a	card,	face-down,
and	it	slid	crookedly	to	halt	in	front	of	Quick	Ben.	‘High	Mage	has	last	card.
Last	card’s	dealt	out	first,	but	not	shown	until	the	end.’
Bottle	came	back	with	cups.	He	set	the	first	one	down	in	front	of	the
Adjunct,	then	T’amber,	Keneb,	Quick,	Kalam,	Apsalar,	Fiddler	and	finally	one
into	the	place	before	his	empty	chair.	As	he	returned	with	two	jugs,	one	of	wine
and	the	other	Falari	rum,	Fiddler	held	up	a	hand	and	halted	him.
In	quick	succession	the	sergeant	flung	out	cards,	matching	the	order	Bottle
had	used	in	setting	down	the	cups.
Suddenly,	eight	face-up	cards	marked	the	field,	and	Fiddler,	gesturing
Bottle	over	with	the	rum,	began	talking.	‘Dealer	gets	Soldier	of	High	House
Life	but	it’s	bittersweet,	meaning	it’s	for	him	and	him	alone,	given	this	late
hour.	Empty	chair	gets	Weaver	of	Life	and	she	needs	a	bath	but	nobody’s
surprised	by	that.	So	we	got	two	Life’s	to	start.’	Fiddler	watched	as	Bottle
poured	rum	into	his	cup.	‘And	that’s	why	Kalam’s	looking	at	an	Unaligned.
Obelisk,	the	Sleeping	Goddess	–	you’re	getting	a	reversed	field,	Kal,	sorry	but
there’s	nothing	to	be	done	for	it.’	He	downed	his	rum	and	held	out	his	cup


again,	interrupting	Bottle’s	efforts	to	fill	the	others	with	wine.	‘Apsalar ’s	got
Assassin	of	High	House	Shadow,	oh,	isn’t	that	a	surprise.	It’s	the	only	card	she
gets—’
‘You	mean	I	win?’	she	asked,	one	brow	lifting	sardonically.
‘And	lose,	too.	Nice	move,	interrupting	me	like	that,	you’re	catching	on.
Now,	nobody	else	say	a	damned	thing	unless	you	want	to	up	the	ante.’	He	drank
down	his	second	cupful.	‘Poor	Quick	Ben,	he’s	got	Lifeslayer	to	deal	with,	and
that	puts	him	in	a	hole,	but	not	the	hole	he	thinks	he’s	in	–	a	different	hole.	Now
T’amber,	she’s	opened	the	game	with	that	card.	Throne,	and	it’s	shifting	every
which	way.	The	pivot	card,	then—’
‘What’s	a	pivot	card?’	Bottle	asked,	finally	sitting	down.
‘Bastard	–	knew	I	couldn’t	trust	you.	It’s	the	hinge,	of	course.	Finish	that
wine	–	you	got	to	drink	rum	now.	You’re	a	sharp	one,	ain’t	you?	Now	Fist
Keneb,	well,	that’s	a	curious	one.	Lord	of	Wolves,	the	throne	card	of	High
House	War,	and	aren’t	they	looking	baleful	–	Fist,	where’s	Grub	hiding	these
days?’
‘On	Nok’s	ship,’	Keneb	replied,	bewildered	and	strangely	frightened.
‘Well,	that	knocks	you	outa	the	game,	though	you	still	get	four	more	cards,
since	we’ve	made	a	course	correction	and	the	northeast	headland’s	rising	up
two	pegs	to	starboard.	In	seventy	heartbeats	we’ll	be	sliding	closest	to	that
rocky	coast,	and	Nok’s	ship	will	be	even	closer,	and	Grub	will	dive	overboard.
He’s	got	three	friends	living	in	the	caves	in	the	cliff	and	here	are	their	cards—’
Three	more	skidded	out	to	just	beyond	the	centre	of	the	table.	‘Crown,	Sceptre,
Orb.	Hmm,	let’s	ignore	those	for	now.’
Keneb	half-rose.	‘Diving	overboard?’
‘Relax,	he’ll	be	back.	So,	we	get	to	the	Adjunct’s	card.	House	of	War,
Guardians	of	the	Road,	or	the	Dead	–	title’s	uncertain	so	take	your	pick.’	He
threw	another	card	and	it	slid	up	beside	it.	‘Oponn.	As	I	thought.	Decisions	yet
to	be	made.	Will	it	be	the	Push	or	the	Pull?	And	what’s	that	got	to	do	with	this
one?’	A	skitter,	ending	up	in	the	middle,	opposite	both	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	–
‘Herald	of	High	House	Death.	A	distinctly	inactive	and	out-of-date	card	in	this
field,	but	I	see	a	Rusty	Gauntlet—’
‘A	what?’	demanded	Kalam	Mekhar.
‘Right	here	before	me.	A	new	drink	that	Bottle	in	his	inebriated	state	just
invented.	Rum	and	wine	–	half	and	half,	soldier,	fill	us	up	–	you	too,	that’s	what
you	get	for	making	that	face.’
Keneb	rubbed	at	his	own	face.	He’d	taken	but	a	single	mouthful	of	the
wine,	but	he	felt	drunk.	Hot	in	here.	He	started	as	four	cards	appeared	in	a	row
in	front	of	the	one	already	before	him.


‘Spinner	of	Death,	Queen	of	Dark,	Queen	of	Life	and,	ho,	the	King	in
Chains.	Like	hopping	stones	across	a	stream,	isn’t	it?	Expecting	to	see	your
wife	any	time	soon,	Fist?	Forget	it.	She’s	set	you	aside	for	an	Untan	noble,	and
my,	if	it	isn’t	Exent	Hadar	–	I	bet	he	kept	his	gaze	averted	back	then,	probably
ignored	you	outright,	that’s	both	guilt	and	smugness,	you	know.	Must	have
been	the	weak	chin	that	stole	her	heart	–	but	look	at	you,	sir,	you	look	damned
relieved	and	that’s	a	hand	that	tops	us	all	and	even	though	you	were	out	when	it
comes	to	winning	you’re	back	in	when	it	comes	to	losing,	but	in	this	case	you
win	when	you	lose,	so	relax.’
‘Well,’	muttered	Bottle,	‘hope	I	nev’win	one	a	theez’ands.’
‘No,’	Fiddler	said	to	him,	‘you	got	it	easy.	She	plays	and	she	takes,	and	so
—’	A	card	clattered	before	the	owl-eyed	soldier.	‘Deathslayer.	You	can	sleep
now,	Bottle,	you’re	done	as	done	for	the	night.’
The	man’s	eyes	promptly	closed	and	he	slid	down	from	his	chair,	the	piece
of	furniture	scraping	back.	Keneb	heard	the	man’s	head	thump	on	the	boards,
once.
Yes,	that’d	be	nice.	Exent	Hadar.	Gods,	woman,	really!
‘So	how	does	Kalam	get	from	Herald	Death	to	Obelisk?	Let’s	see.	Ah,
King	of	High	House	Shadows!	That	shifty	slime	bung,	oh,	doesn’t	he	look
smug!	Despite	the	sweat	on	his	upper	lip	–	who’s	gone	all	chilled	in	here?
Hands	up,	please.’
Reluctantly…Kalam,	T’amber,	then	Apsalar	all	lifted	hands.
‘Well,	that’s	ugly	as	ugly	gets	–	you’ve	got	the	bottles	now,	Apsalar,	now
that	Bottle’s	corked.	This	one’s	for	you,	T’amber.	Virgin	of	Death,	as	far	as
you	go.	You’re	out,	so	relax.	Kalam’s	cold,	but	he	don’t	get	another	card
’cause	he	don’t	need	one	and	now	I	know	who	gets	pushed	and	who	gets	pulled
and	I’ll	add	the	name	to	the	dirge	to	come.	Now	for	the	hot	bloods.	Quick	Ben
gets	the	Consort	in	Chains	but	he’s	from	Seven	Cities	and	he	just	saved	his
sister ’s	life	so	it’s	not	as	bad	as	it	could’ve	been.	Anyway,	that’s	it	for	you.	And
so,	who	does	that	leave?’
Silence	for	a	moment.	Keneb	managed	to	lift	his	leaden	head,	frowning
confusedly	at	the	scatter	of	cards	all	over	the	table.
‘That	would	be	me	and	you,	Sergeant,’	the	Adjunct	said	in	a	low	voice.
‘You	cold?’	Fiddler	asked	her,	drinking	down	yet	another	cup	of	Rusty
Gauntlet.
‘No.’
‘Hot?’
‘No.’
Fiddler	nodded,	slamming	his	empty	cup	down	for	Apsalar	to	refill	with


wine	and	rum.	‘Aye,’	He	floated	a	card	down	the	length	of	the	table.	It	landed
atop	the	first	card.	‘Master	of	the	Deck.	Ganoes	Paran,	Adjunct.	Your	brother.
Even	cold	iron,	Tavore	Paran,	needs	tempering.’	He	lifted	up	another	card	and
set	it	down	before	him.	‘Priest	of	Life,	hah,	now	that’s	a	good	one.	Game’s
done.’
‘Who	wins?’	the	Adjunct,	her	face	pale	as	candlewax,	asked	in	a	whisper.
‘Nobody,’	Fiddler	replied.	‘That’s	Life	for	you.’	He	suddenly	rose,
tottered,	then	staggered	for	the	door.
‘Hold	it!’	Quick	Ben	demanded	behind	him.	‘There’s	this	face-down	card
in	front	of	me!	You	said	it	closes	the	game!’
‘It	just	did,’	mumbled	the	sergeant	as	he	struggled	with	the	latch.
‘Do	I	turn	it	over,	then?’
‘No.’
Fiddler	stumbled	out	into	the	corridor	and	Keneb	listened	to	the	man’s
ragged	footsteps	receding	towards	the	stairs	leading	to	the	deck.	The	Fist,
shaking	his	head,	pushed	himself	upright.	He	looked	at	the	others.
No-one	else	had	moved.
Then,	with	a	snort,	Apsalar	rose	and	walked	out.	If	she	was	as	drunk	as
Keneb	felt,	she	did	not	show	any	signs	of	it.
A	moment	later	both	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam	followed.
Under	the	table,	Bottle	was	snoring.
The	Adjunct	and	T’amber,	Keneb	slowly	realized,	were	both	looking	at	the
unturned	card.	Then,	with	a	hiss	of	frustration,	Tavore	reached	out	and	flipped
it	over.	After	a	moment,	she	half-rose	and	leaned	forward	on	the	table	to	read
its	title.	‘Knight	of	Shadow.	I	have	never	heard	of	such	a	card.	T’amber,	who,
what	did	you—’
‘I	didn’t,’	T’amber	interrupted.
‘You	didn’t	what?’
She	looked	up	at	the	Adjunct.	‘Tavore,	I	have	never	seen	that	card	before,
and	I	certainly	didn’t	paint	it.’
Both	women	were	silent	again,	both	staring	down	at	the	strange	card.
Keneb	struggled	to	focus	on	its	murky	image.	‘That’s	one	of	those	Greyskins,’
he	said.
‘Tiste	Edur,’	T’amber	murmured.
‘With	a	spear,’	the	Fist	continued.	‘A	Greyskin,	like	the	ones	we	saw	on
those	black	ships…’	Keneb	leaned	back,	his	head	swimming.	‘I	don’t	feel	very
well.’
‘Please	stay	for	a	moment,	Fist.	T’amber,	what	just	happened	here?’
The	other	woman	shook	her	head.	‘I	have	never	seen	a	field	laid	in	such	a


manner.	It	was…chaotic	–	sorry,	I	did	not	mean	that	in	an	elemental	sense.	Like
a	rock	bouncing	down	a	gorge,	ricocheting	from	this	and	that,	yet,	everywhere
it	struck,	it	struck	true.’
‘Can	you	make	sense	of	it?’
‘Not	much.	Not	yet.’	She	hesitated,	scanning	the	cards	scattered	all	over	the
map-table.	‘Oponn’s	presence	was…unexpected.’
‘The	push	or	the	pull,’	Keneb	said.	‘Someone’s	undecided	about
something,	that’s	what	Fiddler	said.	Who	was	it	again?’
‘Kalam	Mekhar,’	the	Adjunct	replied.	‘But	the	Herald	of	Death	intervenes
—’
‘Not	the	Herald,’	cut	in	T’amber,	‘but	an	inactive	version,	a	detail	I	believe
is	crucial.’
Muted	shouts	from	beyond	announced	the	sighting	of	Malaz	Harbour.	The
Adjunct	faced	Keneb.	‘Fist,	these	are	your	orders	for	this	night.	You	are	in
command	of	the	Fourteenth.	No-one	is	to	disembark,	barring	those	I	will
dispatch	on	my	own	behalf.	With	the	exception	of	the	Froth	Wolf	all	other	ships
are	to	remain	in	the	harbour	itself	–	all	commands	directing	the	fleet	to	tie	up
at	a	pier	or	jetty	are	to	be	ignored	until	I	inform	you	otherwise.’
‘Adjunct,	any	such	orders,	if	they	reach	me,	will	be	from	the	Empress
herself.	I	am	to	ignore	those?’
‘You	are	to	misunderstand,	Fist.	I	leave	the	details	of	that	misunderstanding
to	your	imagination.’
‘Adjunct,	where	will	you	be?’
The	woman	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	it	seemed	she	reached	a
decision.	‘Fist	Keneb,	the	Empress	awaits	me	in	Mock’s	Hold.	I	expect	she	will
not	wait	until	morning	to	issue	her	summons.’	A	flicker	of	emotion	in	her	face.
‘The	soldiers	of	the	Fourteenth	Army	do	not	return	as	heroes,	it	would	appear.
I	will	not	expose	their	lives	to	unnecessary	risks.	In	particular	I	speak	of	the
Wickans	and	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears.	As	for	the	Perish,	the	nature	of	their
alliance	depends	upon	my	conversation	with	the	Empress.	Unless
circumstances	warrant	a	change,	I	assume	their	disposition	rests	with	Laseen,
but	I	must	await	her	word	on	that.	Ultimately,	Fist,	it	is	for	Mortal	Sword
Krughava	–	do	the	Perish	disembark	and	present	to	the	Empress	as	they	did
with	us,	or,	if	events	turn	unfortunate,	do	they	leave?	My	point	is	this,	Keneb,
they	must	be	free	to	choose.’
‘And	Admiral	Nok’s	view	on	that?’
‘We	are	agreed.’
‘Adjunct,’	said	Keneb,	‘if	the	Empress	decides	to	attempt	to	stay	the	Perish,
we	could	end	up	with	a	battle	in	Malaz	Harbour.	Malazan	against	Malazan.	This


could	start	a	damned	civil	war.’
Tavore	frowned.	‘I	do	not	anticipate	anything	so	extreme,	Fist.’
But	Keneb	persisted.	‘Forgive	me,	but	I	believe	it	is	you	who
misunderstands.	The	Perish	swore	service	to	you,	not	the	Empress.’
‘She	will	not	listen	to	that,’	T’amber	said,	with	an	unexpected	tone	of
frustration	in	her	voice,	even	as	she	walked	to	where	Bottle	slept.	A	kick	elicted
a	grunt,	then	a	cough.	‘Up,	soldier,’	T’amber	said,	seemingly	unmindful	of	the
glare	the	Adjunct	had	fixed	upon	her.
No	you	fool,	Keneb,	hardly	unmindful.
‘You	have	your	orders,	Fist,’	Tavore	said.
‘Aye,	Adjunct.	Do	you	wish	me	to	drag	this	marine	here	out	with	me?’
‘No.	I	must	speak	with	Bottle	in	private.	Go	now,	Keneb.	And	thank	you	for
attending	this	night.’
I’m	fairly	certain	I	had	no	choice.	At	the	doorway	he	looked	back	once
more	at	the	cards.	Lord	of	Wolves,	Spinner	of	Death,	Queens	of	Dark	and	Life,
and	the	King	in	Chains.	Lord	of	Wolves…that	has	to	be	the	Perish.
Gods	below,	I	think	it’s	begun.
	
On	the	harbour-facing	wall	of	Mock’s	Hold,	Pearl	stood	at	the	parapet,
watching	the	dark	shapes	of	the	imperial	fleet	slowly	swing	round	into	the
calm	waters	of	the	bay.	Huge	transports,	like	oversized	bhederin,	and	the
dromon	escorts	on	the	flanks	lean	as	wolves.	The	Claw’s	eyes	narrowed	as	he
attempted	to	make	out	the	foreign	ships	in	the	midst	of	the	others.	Enormous,
twin-hulled…formidable.	There	seemed	to	be	a	lot	of	them.
How	had	they	come	here	so	quickly?	And	how	did	the	Empress	know	that
they	would?	The	only	possibility	in	answer	to	the	first	question	was:	by	warren.
Yet,	who	among	the	Adjunct’s	retinue	could	fashion	a	gate	of	such	power	and
breadth?	Quick	Ben?	Pearl	did	not	think	that	likely.	That	bastard	liked	his
secrets,	and	he	liked	playing	both	a	weakling	and	something	considerably
deadlier,	but	neither	conceit	impressed	Pearl.	No,	Tavore’s	High	Mage	didn’t
have	what	was	necessary	to	open	such	a	massive	rift.
Leaving	those	damned	foreigners.	And	that	was	very	troubling	indeed.
Perhaps	it	might	prove	a	propitious	moment	for	some	kind	of	pre-emptive,
covert	action.	Which	would,	now	that	the	Empress	had	arrived,	be	possible
after	all.	And	expedient	–	for	we	have	no	idea	who	has	now	come	among	us,
right	to	the	heart	of	the	empire.	A	foreign	navy,	arriving	virtually	unopposed…
within	striking	distance	of	the	Empress	herself.
It	was	going	to	be	a	busy	night.


‘Pearl.’
The	voice	was	low,	yet	he	did	not	need	to	turn	round	to	know	who	had
spoken.	He	knew,	as	well,	that	Empress	Laseen	would	frown	disapprovingly
should	he	turn	to	face	her.	Odd	habits,	that	way.	No,	just	paranoia.	‘Good
evening,	Empress.’
‘Does	this	view	please	you?’
Pearl	grimaced.	‘She	has	arrived.	In	all,	well	timed	for	everyone
concerned.’
‘Do	you	look	forward	to	seeing	her	again?’
‘I	travelled	in	her	company	for	some	time,	Empress.’
‘And?’
‘And,	to	answer	your	question,	I	am…indifferent.’
‘My	Adjunct	does	not	inspire	loyalty?’
‘Not	with	me,	Empress.	Nor,	I	think,	with	the	soldiers	of	the	Fourteenth
Army.’
‘And	yet,	Pearl,	has	she	failed	them?	Even	once?’
‘Y’Ghatan—’
The	seemingly	disembodied	voice	interrupted	him.	‘Do	not	be	a	fool.	This
is	you	and	I,	Pearl,	speaking	here.	In	absolute	private.	What	occurred	at
Y’Ghatan	could	not	have	been	anticipated,	by	anyone.	Given	that,	Adjunct
Tavore’s	actions	were	proper	and,	indeed,	laudable.’
‘Very	well,’	Pearl	said,	remembering	that	night	of	flames…the	distant
screams	he	could	hear	from	inside	his	tent	–	when	in	my	anger	and	hurt,	I	hid,
like	some	child.	‘Facts	aside,	Empress,	the	matter	hinges	upon	how	one	is
perceived.’
‘Assuredly	so.’
‘Adjunct	Tavore	rarely	emerges	from	an	event	–	no	matter	how	benign	or
fortuitous	–	untarnished.	And	no,	I	do	not	understand	why	this	should	be	so.’
‘The	legacy	of	Coltaine.’
Pearl	nodded	in	the	darkness.	Then,	he	frowned.	Ah,	Empress,	now	I
see…‘And	so,	the	dead	hero	is…unmanned.	His	name	becomes	a	curse.	His
deeds,	a	lie.’	No,	damn	you,	I	was	close	enough	to	know	otherwise.	No.
‘Empress,	it	will	not	work.’
‘Will	it	not?’
‘No.	Instead,	we	all	are	tainted.	Faith	and	loyalty	vanish.	All	that	gifts	us
with	pride	becomes	stained.	The	Malazan	Empire	ceases	to	have	heroes,	and
without	heroes,	Empress,	we	will	self-destruct.’
‘You	lack	faith,	Pearl.’
‘In	what,	precisely?’


‘The	resilience	of	a	civilization.’
‘The	faith	you	suggest	seems	more	a	wilful	denial,	Empress.	Refusing	to
acknowledge	the	symptoms	because	it’s	easier	that	way.	Complacency	serves
nothing	but	dissolution.’
‘I	may	be	many	things,’	Laseen	said,	‘but	complacent	is	not	one	of	them.’
‘Forgive	me,	Empress,	I	did	not	mean	to	suggest	that.’
‘That	fleet	of	catamarans,’	she	said	after	a	moment,	‘looks	rather	ominous.
Can	you	sense	the	power	emanating	from	it?’
‘Somewhat.’
‘Does	it	not	follow,	given	their	appearance,	Pearl,	that	in	allying
themselves	with	Adjunct	Tavore,	these	foreigners	perceived	in	her	something
we	do	not?	I	wonder	what	it	might	be.’
‘I	cannot	imagine	their	motives,	Empress,	for	I	have	yet	to	meet	them.’
‘Do	you	wish	to,	Pearl?’
As	I	anticipated.	‘In	truth,	those	motives	are	of	little	interest	to	me.’
‘It	would	seem	that	not	much	is	these	days,	Pearl.	With	you.’
And	who	has	made	that	particular	report,	Empress?	He	shrugged,	said
nothing.
‘The	fleet	is	anchoring	in	the	bay,’	the	Empress	suddenly	said,	and	she
stepped	up	to	stand	beside	Pearl,	her	gloved	hands	resting	on	the	battered	stone.
‘There,	two	ships	only,	sliding	forward	to	dock.	What	does	she	believe,	to	have
issued	such	orders?	And,	perhaps	more	significantly,	why	has	Admiral	Nok
not	countermanded	her	–	the	signal	flags	are	lit,	after	all.	There	can	be	no
mistaking	my	command.’
‘Empress,’	said	Pearl,	‘there	are	not	enough	berths	for	this	fleet	in	the
entire	harbour.	It	may	be	that	the	ships	will	dock	in	a	particular	order—’
‘No.’
He	fell	silent,	but	he	could	feel	sweat	prickling	beneath	his	clothes.
‘Her	first	move,’	the	Empress	whispered,	and	there	was	something	like
excitement	–	or	dark	satisfaction	–	in	her	tone.
A	squeal	sounded	from	the	weather	vane	atop	the	tower	behind	them,	and
Pearl	shivered.	Aye,	on	a	night	with	no	wind…He	looked	down	upon	the	city,
and	saw	torchlight	in	the	streets.	Sparks	to	tinder,	the	word	of	the	arrival	in	the
bay	races	from	mouth	to	mouth,	eager	as	lust.	The	Wickans	have	returned,	and
now	the	mob	gathers…the	rage	awakens.
Thus,	Empress	–	you	need	those	ships	to	close,	you	need	the	lines	drawn
fast.
You	need	the	victims	to	disembark,	to	bring	the	flames	to	a	roar.
She	turned	about	then.	‘Follow	me.’


Back	along	the	watch-mount,	across	the	causeway	span	to	the	keep	itself.
Her	strides	sure,	almost	eager.	Beneath	the	arched	entranceway,	between	the
two	cloaked,	hooded	forms	of	Claws	–	he	felt	their	warrens	held	open,	power
roiling	invisibly	from	their	unseen	hands.
A	long,	poorly	lit	corridor,	the	pavestones	humped	where	subsurface
settling	had	occurred,	marking	where	an	enormous	crack	was	riven	through
the	entire	fortress.	One	day,	this	whole	damned	place	will	tumble	into	the	bay,
and	good	riddance.	Of	course,	the	engineers	and	mages	had	assured	everyone
that	such	a	risk	was	half	a	century	away,	or	longer.	Too	bad.
An	intersection,	the	Empress	leading	him	to	the	left	–	oh	yes,	she	was
familiar	with	this	place.	Where	she	had,	years	ago,	assassinated	the	Emperor
and	Dancer.	Assassination.	If	you	could	call	it	that.	More	like	inadvertently
aided	and	abetted.	Along	another	canted	corridor,	and	finally	to	the	doors	of	a
meeting	chamber.	Where	stood	two	more	Claws,	the	one	on	the	left	turning
upon	sighting	them	and	tugging	open	the	left	door,	in	time	for	the	Empress	to
pass	within	without	change	of	pace.
Pearl	followed,	his	steps	suddenly	slowing	as	soon	as	he	stepped	into	the
room.
Before	him,	a	long	T-shaped	table.	A	tribunal	arrangement.	He	found
himself	at	its	intersection.	A	raised	chair	marked	the	head,	up	the	length	of	the
axis,	and	that	modest	throne	was	flanked	by	figures	already	seated,	although
they	both	rose	with	Laseen’s	arrival.
Mallick	Rel.
And	Korbolo	Dom.
Pearl	struggled	to	keep	the	disgust	from	his	face.	Immediately	before	him
were	the	backs	of	three	chairs	along	the	horizontal	span.	He	hesitated.	‘Where,
Empress,’	he	asked,	‘shall	I	sit?’
Settling	into	the	throne,	she	regarded	him	for	a	moment,	then	one	thin
brow	rose.	‘Pearl,	I	do	not	expect	you	to	be	present.	After	all,	you	indicated
you	had	no	particular	interest	in	seeing	the	Adjunct	again,	and	so	I	shall	relieve
you	of	that	burden.’
‘I	see.	Then	what	would	you	have	me	do?’
The	Jhistal	priest	on	her	right	cleared	his	throat,	then	said,	‘A	burdensome
but	essential	mission,	Pearl,	falls	upon	you.	Organization	is	required,	yes?	The
dispatch	of	a	Hand,	which	you	will	find	assembled	at	the	Gate.	A	solitary
killing.	A	drunkard	who	frequents	Coop’s	Hanged	Man	Inn.	His	name:
Banaschar.	Thereafter,	you	may	return	to	your	quarters	to	await	further
instruction.’
Pearl’s	eyes	remained	fixed	on	the	Empress,	locked	with	her	own,	but	she


gave	nothing	away,	as	if	daring	him	to	ask	what	he	so	longed	to:	Does	a	Claw
take	his	orders	from	a	Jhistal	priest	of	Mael	now?	A	man	delivered	here	in
chains	not	so	long	ago?	But,	he	knew,	her	silence	gave	him	his	answer.	He
broke	his	gaze	from	her	and	studied	Korbolo	Dom.	The	Napan	bastard	was
wearing	the	regalia	of	a	High	Fist.	Seeing	the	man’s	smug,	contemptuous
expression,	Pearl’s	palms	itched.	Two	knives,	my	favourite	ones,	slowly	slicing
that	face	away	–	all	of	it	–	gods,	never	mind	that	–	I	could	bury	a	blade	in	his
damned	throat	right	now	–	maybe	I’d	be	fast	enough,	maybe	not.	That’s	the
problem.	The	hidden	Claw	in	this	room	will	take	me	down,	of	course,	but	maybe
they’re	not	anticipating…no,	don’t	be	a	fool,	Pearl.	He	glanced	once	more	at
the	Empress	and	something	in	her	look	told	him	she	had	comprehended,	in
full,	the	desires	with	which	he	struggled…and	was	amused.
Still,	he	hesitated.	Now	was	the	time,	he	realized,	to	speak	out	against	this.
To	seek	to	convince	her	that	she’d	invited	two	vultures,	perched	now	on	each
shoulder,	and	what	they	hungered	for	was	not	the	ones	who	would	in	a	short
time	be	seated	before	them	–	no,	they	wanted	the	throne	they	flanked.	And	they
will	kill	you,	Laseen.	They	will	kill	you.
‘You	may	now	go,’	Mallick	Rel	said	in	a	sibilant	voice.
‘Empress,’	Pearl	forced	himself	to	say,	‘please,	consider	well	Tavore’s
words	this	night.	She	is	your	Adjunct,	and	nothing	has	changed	that.	No-one
can	change	that—’
‘Thank	you	for	the	advice,	Pearl,’	Laseen	said.
He	opened	his	mouth	to	add	more,	then	closed	it	again.	He	bowed	to	his
Empress,	turned	about	and	strode	from	the	chamber.	And	so,	Pearl,	you	fling	it
into	Tavore’s	lap.	All	of	it.	You	damned	coward.
Still,	who	killed	Lostara	Yil?	Well,	Adjunct,	such	disregard	ever	comes
home	to	roost.
So	be	it.	Tonight	belonged	to	them.	Korbolo	Dom	he	could	take	another
night,	at	his	leisure,	and	yes	indeed,	he	would	do	just	that.	And	maybe	that
grinning	lizard	of	a	priest	as	well.	Why	not?	Topper	was	missing,	probably
dead.	So,	Pearl	would	act,	in	the	name	of	the	empire.	Not	in	Laseen’s	name,	but
in	the	empire’s,	and	this	was	one	instance	–	clearer	than	any	other	he	could
think	of	–	where	the	two	loyalties	clashed.	But,	as	ever	with	the	Claw,	as	with
you	once,	long	ago,	Empress,	the	choice	is	obvious.	And	necessary.
For	all	the	bravado	of	his	thoughts,	as	he	made	his	way	down	to	the
courtyard,	another	voice	whispered	over	and	over,	cutting	through	again	and
again.	One	word,	burning	like	acid,	one	word…
Coward.
Scowling,	Pearl	descended	the	levels	of	the	keep.	A	Hand	was	waiting,	to


be	given	the	task	of	assassinating	a	drunk	ex-priest.	And	in	this,	as	well,	Pearl
had	waited	too	long.	He	could	have	forced	things	into	the	open,	reached
through	to	Tayschrenn	–	that	bastard	had	virtually	entombed	himself,	never
mind	that	nest	of	hidden	helpers.	Oh,	the	Imperial	High	Mage	wanted	to	be
close	to	things.	Just	not	involved.
Poor	Banaschar,	a	haunted,	befuddled	scholar	who	simply	wanted	to	talk	to
an	old	friend.	But	Mallick	Rel	did	not	want	Tayschrenn	disturbed.	Because	the
Jhistal	priest	has	plans.
Was	Laseen	truly	a	fool?	There	was	no	possible	way	she	trusted	them.	So,
what	was	the	value	in	placing	those	two	men	in	that	chamber?	To	unbalance
Tavore?	Unbalance?	More	like	a	slap	in	the	face.	Is	that	really	necessary,
Empress?	Never	mind	Tavore,	you	cannot	just	use	men	like	Mallick	Rel	and
Korbolo	Dom.	They	will	turn	on	you,	like	the	vipers	they	are.
The	risk	in	unleashing	false	rumours	was	when	they	proved	too	successful,
trapping	the	liar	in	the	lie,	and	Pearl	began	to	realize	something…a	possibility.
To	ruin	the	name	of	Coltaine,	that	of	his	enemy	must	be	raised.	Korbolo	Dom,
from	traitor	to	hero.	Somehow…no,	I	don’t	want	to	know	the	details.	Laseen
could	not	then	execute	or	even	imprison	a	hero,	could	she?	Indeed,	she’d	have
to	promote	him.	Empress,	you	have	trapped	yourself.	Now,	I	cannot	believe	you
are	not	aware	of	it…
His	steps	slowed.	He	had	reached	the	main	floor,	was	ten	paces	from	the
postern	door	that	would	take	him	out	along	the	base	of	the	wall,	a	path	of
shadows	leading	him	to	the	Gate.
What	do	you	seek	to	tell	your	Adjunct,	then?	The	extremity	of	the	danger
you	are	in?	Do	you	ask	Tavore…for	help?	Will	she,	upon	walking	into	that
chamber,	be	in	any	condition	to	see	and	understand	your	plea?	For	Hood’s
sake,	Laseen,	this	could	go	very,	very	wrong.
Pearl	halted.	He	could	do	what	was	necessary,	right	now.	Walk	to	the	east
tower	and	kick	down	Tayschrenn’s	door.	And	tell	the	fool	what	he	needed	to
hear.	He	could—
Two	hooded	figures	stepped	into	view	before	him.	Claws.	Both	bowed,
then	the	one	on	the	left	spoke.	‘Claw,	we	are	informed	that	our	target	is
ensconced	in	the	Hanged	Man	Inn.	There	is	a	piss	trough	in	the	alley	behind	it,
which	he	will	frequent	throughout	the	night.’
‘Yes,’	Pearl	said,	suddenly	exhausted.	‘That	would	be	ideal.’
The	two	cowled	figures	before	him	waited.
‘There	is	more?’	Pearl	asked.
‘Such	matters	are	for	you	to	command.’
‘What	matters?’


‘Sir,	killing	undesirables.’
‘Yes.	Go	on.’
‘Just	that,	sir.	This	target	was	delivered	to	us…from	elsewhere.	From	one
who	expected	unquestioned	compliance.’
Pearl’s	eyes	narrowed,	then	he	said,	‘This	assassination	tonight…you
would	not	accede	to	it	without	my	direct	command.’
‘We	seek…affirmation.’
‘Did	not	the	Empress	herself	confirm	the	Jhistal’s	words?’
‘Sir,	she	did	not.	She…said	nothing.’
‘Yet	she	was	present.’
‘She	was.’
Now	what	am	I	to	make	of	that?	Was	she	just	feeding	out	enough	rope?	Or
was	she,	too,	frightened	of	Tayschrenn	and	so	was	pleased	to	unleash	Mallick
Rel	on	Banaschar?	Damn!	I	don’t	know	enough	about	all	of	this.	No	choice,
then,	for	now.	‘Very	well.	The	command	is	given.’
The	Claw,	Mallick	Rel,	are	not	yours.	And	the	Empress	has…abstained.	No,
it	seems	that,	until	–	or	if	–	Topper	returns,	the	Claw	are	mine.	Convenient	as
well,	Laseen,	that	you	brought	six	hundred	with	you…
The	two	assassins	bowed,	then	departed	through	the	postern	door.
Then	again,	why	did	it	feel	as	if	he	was	the	one	being	used?	And	worse,
why	did	it	seem	that	he	no	longer	cared?	No,	it	was	well.	Tonight	he	would	not
think,	simply	obey.	Tomorrow,	well,	that	was	another	matter,	wasn’t	it?
Tomorrow,	then,	I	will	kick	through	what’s	left.	And	decide	what	needs	to	be
decided.	There	you	have	it,	Empress.	Tomorrow,	the	new	Clawmaster	once	more
cleans	house.	And	maybe…maybe	that	is	what	you	ask	from	me.	Or	you	have
asked	it	already,	for	it	wasn’t	just	the	Adjunct	for	whom	you	assembled	that
tribunal,	was	it?	You	just	gave	me	command	of	six	hundred	assassin-mages,
didn’t	you?	What	else	would	they	be	for?
The	truth	was,	he	could	not	guess	the	mind	of	Empress	Laseen,	and	in	that
he	most	certainly	was	not	alone.
Nerves	slithered	awake	in	his	stomach,	born	of	sudden	fears	he	could	not
comprehend.	Six	hundred…
Face	it,	Pearl.	The	Adjunct	did	not	kill	Lostara.	You	did.	You	sent	her	away,
and	she	died.	And	that’s	that.
But	that	changes	nothing.	It	makes	no	real	difference	what	I	do	now.
Let	them	all	die.
Pearl	turned	about	and	made	his	way	to	his	rooms.	To	await	more	orders.
Six	hundred	killers	to	unleash…but	upon	whom?


	
Hellian	decided	she	hated	rum.	She	wanted	something	else,	something	not	so
sweet,	something	better	suited	to	her	nature.	It	was	dark,	the	wind	warm	and
humid	but	falling	off,	and	the	harbourfront	of	Malaz	seemed	to	whisper	an
invitation,	like	a	lover ’s	breath	on	the	back	of	her	neck.
The	sergeant	stood	watching	as	the	Froth	Wolf	moved	ahead	of	the	rest	of
the	ships,	the	Silanda	following	in	its	wake.	Yet,	from	all	around	now	came	the
liquid	rattle	of	anchor	chains	sliding	down,	and	the	craft	beneath	her	was
tugged	to	a	halt.	Staring	wildly	about,	Hellian	cursed.	‘Corporal,’	she	said.
‘Me?’	asked	Touchy	behind	her.
‘Me?’	asked	Brethless.
‘That’s	right,	you.	What’s	going	on	here?	Look,	there’s	soldiers	on	the
jetties,	and	well-wishers.	Why	aren’t	we	heading	in?	They’re	waving.’	Hellian
waved	back,	but	it	was	unlikely	they	could	see	that	–	there	were	hardly	any
lights	from	the	fleet	at	all.	‘Gloom	and	gloom,’	she	muttered,	‘like	we	was
some	beaten	dog	creeping	home.’
‘Or	like	it’s	real	late,’	Brethless	said,	‘and	you	was	never	supposed	to	be
with	your	mother ’s	friend	at	all	especially	when	Ma	knows	and	she’s	waiting
up	with	that	dented	skillet	but	sometimes,	you	know,	older	women,	they	come
at	you	like	a	fiend	and	what	can	you	do?’
‘Not	like	that	at	all,	you	idiot,’	Touchy	hissed.	‘More	like	that	daughter	of
that	priest	and	gods	below	you’re	running	but	there	ain’t	no	escaping	curses
like	those,	not	ones	from	a	priest,	anyway,	which	means	your	life	is	doomed
for	ever	and	ever,	as	if	Burn	cares	a	whit	she’s	sleeping	anyway,	right?’
Hellian	turned	round	and	stared	at	a	space	directly	between	the	two	men.
‘Listen,	Corporal,	make	up	your	damned	mind,	but	then	again	don’t	bother.	I
wasn’t	interested.	I	was	asking	you	a	question,	and	if	you	can’t	answer	then
don’t	say	nothing.’
The	two	men	exchanged	glances,	then	Brethless	shrugged.	‘We	ain’t
disembarking,	Sergeant,’	he	said.	‘Word’s	just	come.’
‘Are	they	mad?	Of	course	we’re	disembarking	–	we’ve	just	sailed	a
million	leagues.	Five	million,	even.	We	been	through	fires	and	storms	and
green	lights	in	the	sky	and	nights	with	the	shakes	and	broken	jaws	and	that
damned	rhizan	piss	they	called	wine.	That’s	Malaz	City	there,	right	there,	and
that’s	where	I’m	going,	Corporal	Brethy	Touchless,	and	I	don’t	care	how	many
arms	you	got,	I’m	going	and	that’s	that.’	She	swung	about,	walked	forward,
reached	the	rail,	pitched	over	and	was	suddenly	gone.
Brethless	and	Touchy	stared	at	each	other	again,	as	a	heavy	splash	sounded.


‘Now	what?’	Touchy	demanded.
‘She’s	done	drowned	herself,	hasn’t	she?’
‘We’d	better	report	it	to	somebody.’
‘We	do	that	and	we’re	in	real	trouble.	We	was	standing	right	here,	after	all.
They’ll	say	we	pushed	her.’
‘But	we	didn’t!’
‘That	don’t	matter.	We’re	not	even	trying	to	save	her,	are	we?’
‘I	can’t	swim!’
‘Me	neither.’
‘Then	we	should	shout	an	alarm	or	something.’
‘You	do	it.’
‘No,	you.’
‘Maybe	we	should	just	go	below,	tell	people	we	went	looking	for	her	but
we	didn’t	never	find	her.’
At	that	they	both	paused	and	looked	round.	A	few	figures	moving	in	the
gloom,	sailors	doing	sailor	things.
‘Nobody	saw	or	heard	nothing.’
‘Looks	like.	Well,	that’s	good.’
‘Isn’t	it.	So,	we	go	below	now,	right?	Throw	up	our	hands	and	say
nothing.’
‘Not	nothing.	We	say	we	couldn’t	find	her	nowhere.’
‘Right,	that’s	what	I	mean.	Nothing	is	what	I	mean,	I	mean,	about	her	going
over	the	side,	that	sort	of	nothing.’
A	new	voice	from	behind	them:	‘You	two,	what	are	you	doing	on	deck?’
Both	corporals	turned.	‘Nothing,’	they	said	in	unison.
‘Get	below,	and	stay	there.’
They	hurried	off.
	
‘Three	ashore,’	the	young,	foppishly	attired	figure	said,	his	eyes	fixed	on	the
knuckle	dice	where	they	came	to	a	rest	on	the	weathered	stone.
His	twin	stood	facing	the	distant,	looming	bulk	of	Mock’s	Hold,	the	night’s
wind	caressing	the	gaudy	silks	about	her	slim	form.
‘You	see	how	it	plays	out?’	her	brother	asked,	collecting	the	dice	with	a
sweep	of	one	hand.	‘Tell	me	truly,	have	you	any	idea	–	any	idea	at	all	–	of	how
mightily	I	struggled	to	retain	our	card	during	that	horrendous	game?	I’m	still
weak,	dizzy.	He	wanted	to	drag	us	out,	again	and	again	and	again.	It	was
horrifying.’
‘Heroic	indeed,’	she	murmured	without	turning.


‘Three	ashore,’	he	said	again.	‘How	very…unexpected.	Do	you	think	that
dreadful	descent	above	Otataral	Island	was	responsible?	I	mean,	for	the	one
that’s	even	now	on	its	way?’	Straightening,	he	moved	to	join	his	sister.
They	were	standing	on	a	convenient	tower	rising	from	the	city	of	Malaz,
south	of	the	river.	To	most	citizens	of	the	city,	the	tower	appeared	to	be	in
ruins,	but	that	was	an	illusion,	maintained	by	the	sorceror	who	occupied	its
lower	chambers,	a	sorceror	who	seemed	to	be	sleeping.	The	twin	god	and
goddess	known	as	Oponn	had	the	platform	–	and	the	view	–	entirely	to
themselves.
‘Certainly	possible,’	she	conceded,	‘but	is	that	not	the	charm	of	our	games,
beloved?’	She	gestured	towards	the	bay	to	their	right.	‘They	have	arrived,	and
even	now	there	is	a	stirring	among	those	abject	mortals	in	those	ships,
especially	the	Silanda.	Whilst,	in	the	fell	Hold	opposite,	the	nest	slithers	awake.
There	will	be	work	for	us,	this	night.’
‘Oh	yes.	Both	you	and	me.	Pull,	push,	pull,	push.’	He	rubbed	his	hands
together.	‘I	can	hardly	wait.’
She	faced	him	suddenly.	‘Can	we	be	so	sure,	brother,	that	we	comprehend
all	the	players?	All	of	them?	What	if	one	hides	from	us?	Just	one…wild,
unexpected,	so	very	terrible…we	could	end	up	in	trouble.	We	could	end	up…
dead.’
‘It	was	that	damned	soldier,’	her	brother	snarled.	‘Stealing	our	power!	The
arrogance,	to	usurp	us	in	our	very	own	game!	I	want	his	blood!’
She	smiled	in	the	darkness.	‘Ah,	such	fire	in	your	voice.	So	be	it.	Cast	the
knuckles,	then,	on	his	fate.	Go	on.	Cast	them!’
He	stared	across	at	her,	then	grinned.	Whirled	about,	one	hand	flinging	out
and	down	–	knuckles	struck,	bounced,	struck	again,	then	spun	and	skidded,	and
finally	fell	still.
The	twins,	breathing	hard	in	perfect	unison,	hurried	over	and	crouched
down	to	study	the	cast.
And	then,	had	there	been	anyone	present	to	see	them,	they	would	have
witnessed	on	their	perfect	faces	bemused	expressions.	Frowns	deepening,
confusion	reigning	in	immortal	eyes,	and,	before	this	night	was	done,	pure
terror.
The	non-existent	witness	would	then	shake	his	or	her	head.	Never,	dear
gods.	Never	mess	with	mortals.
	
‘Grub	and	three	friends,	playing	in	a	cave.	A	Soletaken	with	a	stolen	sword.
Togg	and	Fanderay	and	damned	castaways…’


Trapped	since	Fiddler ’s	reading	in	a	small	closet-sized	cabin	on	the	Froth
Wolf,	Bottle	worked	the	finishing	touches	on	the	doll	nestled	in	his	lap.	The
Adjunct’s	commands	made	no	sense	–	but	no,	he	corrected	with	a	scowl,	not
the	Adjunct’s.	This	–	all	of	this	–	belonged	to	that	tawny-eyed	beauty,	T’amber.
Who	in	Hood’s	name	is	she?	Oh,	never	mind.	Only	the	thousandth	time	I’ve
asked	myself	that	question.	But	it’s	that	look,	you	see,	in	her	eyes.	That	knowing
look,	like	she’s	plunged	through,	right	into	my	heart.
And	she	doesn’t	even	like	men,	does	she?
He	studied	the	doll,	and	his	scowl	deepened.	‘You,’	he	muttered,	‘I’ve	never
seen	you	before,	you	know	that?	But	here	you	are,	with	a	sliver	of	iron	in	your
gut	–	gods	but	that	must	hurt,	cutting	away,	always	cutting	away	inside.	You,	sir,
are	somewhere	in	Malaz	City,	and	she	wants	me	to	find	you,	and	that’s	that.	A
whole	city,	mind	you,	and	I’ve	got	till	dawn	to	track	you	down.’	Of	course,	this
doll	would	help,	somewhat,	once	the	poor	man	was	close	enough	for	Bottle	to
stare	into	his	eyes	and	see	the	same	pain	that	now	marked	these	uneven	chips	of
oyster	shell.	That,	and	the	seams	of	old	scars	on	the	forearms	–	but	there	were
plenty	of	people	with	those,	weren’t	there?
‘I	need	help,’	he	said	under	his	breath.
From	above,	the	voices	of	sailors	as	the	ship	angled	in	towards	the	jetty,
and	some	deeper,	more	distant	sound,	from	the	dockfront	itself.	And	that	one
felt…unpleasant.
We’ve	been	betrayed.	All	of	us.
The	door	squealed	open	behind	him.
Bottle	closed	his	eyes.
The	Adjunct	spoke.	‘We’re	close.	The	High	Mage	is	ready	to	send	you
across	–	you	will	find	him	in	my	cabin.	I	trust	you	are	ready,	soldier.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’	He	turned,	studied	her	face	in	the	gloom	of	the	corridor
where	she	stood.	The	extremity	of	emotion	within	her	was	revealed	only	in	a
tightness	around	her	eyes.	Desperate.
‘You	must	not	fail,	Bottle.’
‘Adjunct,	the	odds	are	against	me—’
‘T’amber	says	you	must	seek	help.	She	says	you	know	who.’
T’amber,	the	woman	with	those	damned	eyes.	Like	a	lioness.	What	is	it,
damn	it,	about	those	eyes?	‘Who	is	she,	Adjunct?’
A	flicker	of	something	like	sympathy	in	the	woman’s	gaze.	‘Someone…a
lot	more	than	she	once	was,	soldier.’
‘And	you	trust	her?’
‘Trust.’	She	smiled	slightly.	‘You	must	know,	as	young	as	you	are,	Bottle,
that	truth	is	found	in	the	touch.	Always.’


No,	he	did	not	know.	He	did	not	understand.	Not	any	of	it.	Sighing,	he	rose,
stuffing	the	limp	doll	beneath	his	jerkin,	where	it	sat	nestled	alongside	the
sheathed	knife	under	his	left	arm.	No	uniform,	no	markings	whatsoever	that
would	suggest	he	was	a	soldier	of	the	Fourteenth	–	the	absence	of	fetishes
made	him	feel	naked,	vulnerable.	‘All	right,’	he	said.
She	led	him	to	her	cabin,	then	halted	at	the	doorway.	‘Go	on.	I	must	be	on
deck,	now.’
Bottle	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Be	careful,	Adjunct.’
A	faint	widening	of	the	eyes,	then	she	turned	and	walked	away.
	
Kalam	stood	at	the	stern,	squinting	into	the	darkness	beyond	where	transports
were	anchoring.	He’d	thought	he’d	heard	the	winching	of	a	longboat,
somewhere	a	few	cables	distant	from	shore.	Against	every	damned	order	the
Adjunct’s	given	this	night.
Well,	even	he	wasn’t	pleased	with	those	orders.	Quick	Ben	slicing	open	a
sliver	of	a	gate	–	even	that	sliver	might	get	detected,	and	that	would	be	bad
news	for	poor	Bottle.	He’d	step	out	into	a	nest	of	Claw.	He	wouldn’t	stand	a
chance.	And	who	might	come	through	the	other	way?
All	too	risky.	All	too…extreme.
He	rolled	his	shoulders,	lifting	then	shrugging	off	the	tension.	But	the
tautness	came	back	only	moments	later.	The	palms	of	the	assassin’s	hands	were
itching	beneath	the	worn	leather	of	his	gloves.	Decide,	damn	you.	Just	decide.
Something	skittered	on	the	planks	to	his	right	and	he	turned	to	see	a	shinhigh	reptilian	skeleton,	its	long-snouted	head	tilting	as	the	empty	eye	sockets
regarded	him.	The	segmented	tail	flicked.
‘Don’t	you	smell	nice?’	the	creature	hissed,	jaws	clacking	out	of	sequence.
‘Doesn’t	he	smell	nice,	Curdle?’
‘Oh	yes,’	said	another	thin	voice,	this	time	to	Kalam’s	left,	and	he	glanced
over	to	see	a	matching	skeleton	perched	on	the	stern	rail,	almost	within	reach.
‘Blood	and	strength	and	will	and	mindfulness,	nearly	a	match	to	our
sweetheart.	Imagine	the	fight	between	them,	Telorast.	Wouldn’t	that	be
something	to	see?’
‘And	where	is	she?’	Kalam	asked	in	a	rumble.	‘Where’s	Apsalar	hiding?’
‘She’s	gone,’	Curdle	said,	head	bobbing.
‘What?’
‘Gone,’	chimed	in	Telorast	with	another	flick	of	the	tail.	‘It’s	only	me	and
Curdle	who	are	hiding	right	now.	Not	that	we	have	to,	of	course.’
‘Expedience,’	explained	Curdle.	‘It’s	scary	out	there	tonight.	You	have	no


idea.	None.’
‘We	know	who’s	here,	you	see.	All	of	them.’
Now,	from	the	dark	waters,	Kalam	could	hear	the	creak	of	oars.	Someone
had	indeed	dropped	a	longboat	and	was	making	for	shore.	Damned	fools	–	that
mob	will	tear	them	to	pieces.	He	turned	about	and	set	off	for	the	mid	deck.
The	huge	jetty	appeared	to	starboard	as	the	ship	seemed	to	curl	round,	its
flank	sidling	ever	closer.	The	assassin	saw	the	Adjunct	arrive	from	below	and
he	approached	her.
‘We’ve	got	trouble,’	he	said	without	preamble.	‘Someone’s	going	ashore,
in	a	longboat.’
Tavore	nodded.	‘So	I	have	been	informed.’
‘Oh.	Who,	then?’
From	nearby	T’amber	said,	‘There	is	a	certain…symmetry	to	this.	A	rather
bitter	one,	alas.	In	the	longboat,	Kalam	Mekhar,	are	Fist	Tene	Baralta	and	his
Red	Blades.’
The	assassin	frowned.
‘Deeming	it	probable,	perhaps,’	T’amber	continued,	‘that	our	escort
coming	down	from	Mock’s	Hold	will	prove	insufficient	against	the	mob.’	Yet
there	seemed	to	be	little	conviction	in	the	woman’s	tone,	as	if	she	was	aware	of
a	deeper	truth,	and	was	inviting	Kalam	to	seek	it	for	himself.
‘The	Red	Blades,’	said	the	Adjunct,	‘ever	have	great	need	to	assert	their
loyalty.’
…their	loyalty…
‘Kalam	Mekhar,’	Tavore	continued,	stepping	closer,	her	eyes	now	fixed	on
his	own,	‘I	expect	I	will	be	permitted	but	a	minimal	escort	of	my	own
choosing.	T’amber,	of	course,	and,	if	you	would	accede,	you.’
‘Not	an	order,	Adjunct?’
‘No,’	she	answered	quietly,	almost	tremulously.	And	then	she	waited.
Kalam	looked	away.	Dragon’s	got	Hood	by	the	nose	hairs…one	of	Fid’s
observations	during	one	of	his	games.	Years	ago,	now.	Blackdog,	was	it?
Probably.	Why	had	he	thought	of	that	statement	now?	Because	I	know	how
Hood	must	have	felt,	that’s	why.
Wait,	I	can	decide	on	this	without	deciding	on	anything	else.	Can’t	I?	Of
course	I	can.	‘Very	well,	Adjunct.	I	will	be	part	of	your	escort.	We’ll	get	you	to
Mock’s	Hold.’
‘To	the	Hold,	yes,	that	is	what	I	have	asked	of	you	here.’
As	she	turned	away,	Kalam	frowned,	then	glanced	over	at	T’amber,	who
was	regarding	him	flatly,	as	if	disappointed.	‘Something	wrong?’	he	asked	the
young	woman.


‘There	are	times,’	she	said,	‘when	the	Adjunct’s	patience	surpasses	even
mine.	And,	you	may	not	know	this,	but	that	is	saying	something.’
Froth	Wolf	edged	closer	to	the	jetty.
	
On	the	other	side	of	the	same	stone	pier,	the	longboat	scraped	up	against	the
slimy	foundation	boulders.	Lines	were	made	fast	to	the	rings	set	in	the	mortar,
and	Lostara	Yil	watched	as	one	of	the	more	nimble	Red	Blades	hauled	himself
upward	from	ring	to	ring,	trailing	a	knot-ladder.	Moments	later,	he	had
reached	the	top	of	the	jetty,	where	he	attached	the	ladder ’s	hooks	to	still	more
rings.
Tene	Baralta	was	the	first	to	ascend,	slowly,	awkward,	using	his	one	arm
and	grunting	with	each	upward	heave	on	the	rungs.
Feeling	sick	to	her	stomach,	Lostara	followed,	ready	to	catch	the	man
should	he	falter	or	slip.
This	is	a	lie.	All	of	it.
She	reached	the	top,	clambered	upright	and	paused,	adjusting	her	weapon
belt	and	her	cloak.
‘Captain,’	Tene	Baralta	said,	‘form	up	to	await	the	Adjunct.’
She	glanced	to	the	right	and	saw	a	contingent	of	Imperial	Guard	pushing
through	the	milling	crowd,	an	officer	in	their	midst.
Tene	Baralta	noticed	them	as	well.	‘Not	enough,	as	I	suspected.	If	this	mob
smells	blood…’
Turning	to	the	company	of	Red	Blades,	Lostara	kept	her	face	impassive,
even	as	a	sneering	thought	silently	slithered	through	her	mind:	Whatever	you
say,	Fist.	Just	don’t	expect	me	to	believe	any	of	this.
At	that	moment	a	deeper	roaring	sound	filled	the	air,	and	the	sky	above	the
bay	suddenly	blazed	bright.
	
Banaschar	squinted	through	the	haze	of	smoke,	scanning	the	crowd,	then	he
grunted.	‘He’s	not	here,’	he	said.	‘In	fact,	I	haven’t	seen	him	in	days…I	think.
How	about	you,	Master	Sergeant?’
Braven	Tooth	simply	shrugged,	his	only	reponse	to	Mudslinger ’s	question.
The	soldier	glanced	at	Gentur,	his	silent	companion,	then	said,	‘It’s	just
this,	Master	Sergeant.	First	we	lose	them,	then	we	hear	something	about	him,
and	we	put	it	together,	you	see?’
The	hairy	old	man	bared	his	teeth.	‘Oh	yeah,	Mudslinger.	Now	go	away


before	I	tie	a	full	cask	to	your	back	and	send	you	round	the	harbourfront	at
double-time.’
‘He	can’t	do	that,	can	he?’	Gentur	asked	his	fellow	soldier.
But	Mudslinger	had	paled.	‘You	never	forget,	do	you,	sir?’
‘Explain	it	to	your	friend.	But	not	here.	Try	the	alley.’
The	two	soldiers	backed	off,	exchanging	whispers	as	they	made	their	way
back	to	their	table.
‘I	always	like	to	think,’	Banaschar	said,	‘that	a	nasty	reputation	is	usually
mostly	undeserved.	Benefit	of	the	doubt,	and	maybe	I’ve	got	some	glimmer	of
faith	in	humanity	clawing	its	way	free	every	now	and	again.	But,	with	you,
Braven	Tooth,	alas,	such	optimism	is	revealed	for	the	delusion	it	truly	is.’
‘Got	that	right.	What	about	it?’
‘Nothing.’
They	heard	shouting	in	the	street	outside,	a	clamour	of	voices	that	then
died	away.	This	had	been	going	on	all	evening.	Roving	bands	of	idiots	looking
for	someone	to	terrorize.	The	mood	in	the	city	was	dark	and	ugly	and	getting
worse	with	every	bell	that	chimed,	and	there	seemed	to	be	no	reason	for	it,
although,	Banaschar	reminded	himself,	that	had	now	changed.
Well,	maybe	there	was	still	no	reason	as	such.	Only,	there	had	arrived…a
target.
‘Someone’s	poking	with	a	knife,’	Braven	Tooth	said.
‘It’s	the	imperial	fleet,’	Banaschar	said.	‘Bad	timing,	given	all	the	Wickans
in	those	ships,	and	the	other	foreigners	with	them,	too,	I	imagine.’
‘You	ain’t	drinking	much,	Banaschar.	You	sick	or	something?’
‘Worse	than	that,’	he	replied.	‘I	have	reached	a	decision.	Autumn	has
arrived.	You	can	feel	it	in	the	wind.	The	worms	are	swarming	to	shore.	It’s
D’rek’s	season.	Tonight,	I	talk	with	the	Imperial	High	Mage.’
The	Master	Sergeant	scowled	across	at	him.	‘Thought	you	said	trying	that
would	get	you	dead	quick.	Unless,	of	course,	that’s	what	you	want.’
‘I	plan	on	losing	my	follower	in	the	crowd,’	Banaschar	said	in	a	low	voice,
leaning	over	the	table.	‘I’ll	take	the	waterfront	way,	at	least	to	the	bridge.	I	hear
there’s	City	Watch	there,	pushing	the	brainless	dolts	back	from	the	jetties	–
gods,	how	stupid	can	people	be?	That’s	an	army	out	on	those	ships!’
‘Like	I	said,	someone’s	poking.	Be	nice	to	meet	that	someone.	So’s	I	can
put	my	fist	into	his	face	and	watch	it	come	out	the	back	of	his	head.	Messy	way
to	go,	but	fast,	which	is	more	than	the	bastard	deserves.’
‘What	are	you	going	on	about?’	Banaschar	asked.
‘Never	mind.’
‘Well,’	the	ex-priest	said	with	more	bravado	in	his	voice	than	he	in	truth


felt,	‘it’s	now	or	never.	Come	tomorrow	night	I’ll	buy	you	a	pitcher	of	Malaz
Dark—’
‘That	reminds	me	–	you	always	seem	to	find	enough	coin	–	how	is	that?’
‘Temple	coffers,	Braven	Tooth.’
‘You	stole	from	the	D’rek	Temple	here?’
‘Here?	That’s	good.	Yes,	here,	and	all	the	others	I	visited,	too.	Got	it	all
squirrelled	away,	where	no-one	but	me	can	get	to	it.	Problem	is,	I	feel	guilty
every	time	I	pinch	from	it.	I	never	take	much	–	no	point	in	inviting	a	mugging,
after	all.	But	that’s	just	the	excuse	I	use.	Like	I	said,	it’s	guilt.’
‘So,	if	you	get	yourself	killed	tonight…’
Banaschar	grinned	and	flung	up	his	hands.	‘Phoof!	All	of	it.	Gone.	For
ever.’
‘Nice	trick,	that.’
‘You	want	I	should	leave	it	to	you?’
‘Hood	no!	What	would	I	do	with	chests	of	coin?’
‘Chests?	Dear	Master	Sergeant,	more	like	roomfuls.	In	any	case,	I’ll	see
you	tomorrow…or	not.	And	if	not,	then,	well	met,	Braven	Tooth.’
‘Forget	that.	Tomorrow,	like	you	said.’
Nodding,	Banaschar	backed	away,	then	began	threading	his	way	towards
the	front	door.
	
Alone	at	the	table	now,	Braven	Tooth	slowly	raised	his	tankard	for	a	drink,	his
eyes	almost	closed	–	and	to	anyone	more	than	a	pace	or	two	away	they	would
have	seemed	closed	indeed	–	and	so	the	figure	who	hastily	rose,	slipping	like
an	adder	into	Banaschar ’s	wake,	noticed	nothing	of	the	Master	Sergeant’s	fixed
attention,	the	small	eyes	tracking	for	a	moment,	before	Braven	Tooth	finished
the	ale	in	three	quick	swallows.	Then	the	huge,	hairy	man	climbed	gustily	to
his	feet,	weaving	slightly,	one	hand	reaching	to	the	table	for	balance.
He	staggered	over	to	Mudslinger	and	Gentur,	both	of	whom	looked	up	in
guilt	and	fear	–	as	if	they’d	been	discussing	bad	things.	Braven	Tooth	leaned
between	them.	‘Listen,	you	fools,’	he	said	under	his	breath.
‘We’re	just	waiting	for	Foreigner,’	Mudslinger	said,	eyes	wide.	‘That’s	all.
We	never—’
‘Quiet.	See	that	snake	at	the	steps	up	front	–	quickly!’
‘Just…gone,’	Gentur	observed,	squinting.	‘Snake,	you	said.	I’d	say	more
like	a—’
‘And	you’d	be	right.	And	the	target	is	none	other	than	Banaschar.	Now,	are
you	two	up	for	surprising	a	Claw	tonight?	Do	this	and	I’ll	think	nice	thoughts


about	the	both	of	you.’
The	two	men	were	already	on	their	feet.
Gentur	spat	onto	his	hands	and	rubbed	them	together.	‘I	used	to	dream	of
nights	like	this,’	he	said.	‘Let’s	go,	Mudder.	Before	we	lose	’im.’
‘Heading	towards	the	waterfront,’	Braven	Tooth	said.	‘Northering	t’the
Stairs,	right?’
He	watched	the	two	soldiers	hurry	to	the	back	door.	Out	they	went,	looking
far	too	eager.
Mudslinger,	he	knew,	was	a	lot	tougher	than	he	looked.	Besides,	he	didn’t
think	that	Claw	would	be	thinking	about	anyone	on	his	own	trail.	And	with	the
crowds…well,	they	shouldn’t	have	too	much	trouble.	Soldiers	love	killing
assassins…
Someone	threw	a	handful	of	knuckle	dice	at	the	back	of	the	low-ceilinged
room.
And	Braven	Tooth	suddenly	shivered.
I	must	be	getting	soft.
	
There	were	plenty	of	well-armed	figures	among	the	crowd	gathering	along	the
harbourfront,	although,	for	the	moment,	those	weapons	remained	beneath
heavy	cloaks,	as	these	selected	agents	moved	into	designated	positions.	Faint
nods	passing	between	them,	a	few	whispered	words	here	and	there.
The	City	Watch	stood	in	a	ragged	line,	pikes	shifting	nervously	as	the
bolder	thugs	edged	forward	with	taunts	and	threats.
There	were	Wickans	in	those	ships	out	there.
And	we	want	them.
Traitors,	one	and	all,	and	dealing	with	traitors	was	a	punishment	that
belonged	to	the	people.	Wasn’t	the	Empress	herself	up	there	at	Mock’s	Hold?
Here	to	witness	imperial	wrath	–	she’s	done	it	before,	right,	back	when	she
commanded	the	Claw.
Never	mind	you’re	waiting	for	an	officer,	you	fools,	the	signals	are	lit	and
we	ain’t	stupid	–	they’re	telling	those	bastards	to	come	in.	Tie	up.	Disembark.
Look	at	’em,	the	cowards!	They	know	the	time’s	come	to	answer	their	betrayal!
Believe	us,	we’re	gonna	fill	this	bay	with	Wickan	heads	–	won’t	that	be	a
pretty	sight	come	morning?
Gods	below!	What’s	that?
A	chorus	of	voices	shouted	that,	or	something	similar,	and	hands	lifted,
fingers	pointing,	eyes	tracking	a	blazing	ball	of	fire	that	slanted	down	across
half	the	sky	to	the	west,	trailing	a	blue-grey	plume	of	smoke	like	the	track	of


an	eel	on	black	sand.	Growing	in	size	with	alarming	swiftness.
Then…gone…and	a	moment	later,	a	savage	crack	rolled	in	from	beyond
the	bay,	where	rose	a	tumbling	cloud	of	steam.
Close!	A	third	of	a	league,	you	think?
Less.
Not	much	impact,	though.
Must’ve	been	small.	Smaller	than	it	looked.
Went	right	overhead—
It’s	an	omen!	An	omen!
A	Wickan	head!	Did	you	see	it?	It	was	a	Wickan	head!	Sent	down	by	the
gods!

Momentarily	distracted	by	the	plunging	fireball	that	seemed	to	land	just	beyond
the	bay,	the	Claw	Saygen	Maral	pushed	himself	forward	once	more.	The
assassin	was	pleased	with	the	heaving	press	he	moved	through,	a	press	settling
down	once	again,	although	at	a	higher	pitch	of	anticipation	than	before.
Up	ahead,	the	crowd	had	slowed	the	ex-priest’s	pace,	which	was	good,
since	already	nothing	was	going	as	planned.	The	target	should	have	been
settled	in	for	the	night	at	Coop’s,	and	the	Hand	was	likely	closing	in	on	the
alley	behind	the	inn,	there	to	await	his	contacting	them	with	the	necessary
details.
Pointing	the	Skull,	they	used	to	call	it.	Identifying	the	target	right	there,
right	then,	in	person.	A	proper	reward	for	following	the	fool	around	for
sometimes	weeks	on	end	–	seeing	the	actual	assassination.	Be	that	as	it	may,	as
things	were	turning	out	he	would	be	bloodying	his	own	hands	with	this	target
tonight,	now	that	the	decision	had	been	made	to	kill	the	drunkard.
A	convenient	conjoining	of	Saygen	Maral’s	divided	loyalties.	Trained
from	childhood	in	the	Imperial	Claw	–	ever	since	he	had	been	taken	from	his
dead	mother ’s	side,	aged	fourteen,	at	the	Cull	of	the	Wax	Witches	in	the	Mouse
Quarter	all	those	years	ago	–	his	disaffection	with	the	Empress	had	taken	a
long	time	to	emerge,	and	even	then,	if	not	for	the	Jhistal	Master	it	would	never
have	found	focus,	or	indeed	purpose.	Of	course,	discovering	precisely	how	his
mother	had	died	had	helped	considerably.
The	empire	was	rotten	through	and	through,	and	he	knew	he	wasn’t	the
only	Claw	to	realize	this;	just	as	he	wasn’t	the	only	one	who	now	followed	the
commands	of	the	Jhistal	Master	–	most	of	the	Hand	on	its	way	down	from
Mock’s	Hold	belonged	to	the	phantom	Black	Glove	that	was	the	name	of


Mallick	Rel’s	spectral	organization.	In	truth,	there	was	no	way	of	telling	just
how	many	of	the	Imperial	Claw	had	been	turned	–	each	agent	was	aware	of	but
three	others,	forming	a	discrete	cell	–	in	itself	a	classic	Claw	structure.
In	any	case,	Clawmaster	Pearl	had	confirmed	the	order	to	kill	Banaschar.
Comforting,	that.
He	remained	ten	paces	behind	the	ex-priest,	acutely	aware	of	the	seething
violence	in	this	mob	–	encouraged	by	the	idiotic	cries	of	‘An	omen!’	and	‘A
Wickan	head!’	–	but	he	carried	on	his	person	certain	items,	invested	with
sorcery,	that	encouraged	a	lack	of	attention	from	everyone	he	pushed	past,	that
dampened	their	ire	momentarily	no	matter	how	rude	and	painful	his	jabbing
elbows.
They	were	close	to	the	docks	now,	and	agents	of	the	Jhistal	Master	were	in
the	milling	crowd,	working	them	ever	nastier	and	more	belligerent	with	welltimed	shouts	and	exhortations.	No	more	than	fifty	City	Watch	soldiers	faced	a
mass	now	numbering	in	the	high	hundreds,	an	under-strength	presence	that	had
been	carefully	coordinated	by	selective	incompetence	among	the	officers	at	the
nearby	barracks.
He	noted	a	retinue	of	more	heavily	armed	and	armoured	soldiers	escorting
a	ranking	officer	towards	the	centre	dock,	before	which	now	loomed	the
Adjunct’s	flagship.	The	captain,	Saygen	Maral	knew,	was	delivering	a	most
auspicious	set	of	imperial	commands.	And	those,	in	turn,	would	lead
inexorably	to	a	night	of	slaughter	such	as	this	city	had	never	before
experienced.	Not	even	the	Cull	in	the	Mouse	would	compare.
The	assassin	smiled.
Welcome	home,	Adjunct.
His	breath	caught	suddenly	as	a	prickling	sensation	awoke	on	his	left
shoulder	beneath	his	clothes.	A	small	sliver	of	metal	threaded	under	his	skin
had	awakened,	informing	him	that	he	was	being	followed	by	someone	with
murderous	intent.	Clumsy.	A	killer	should	ever	mask	such	thoughts.	After	all,
Mockra	is	the	most	common	natural	talent,	needing	no	formal	training	–	that
whispering	unease,	the	hair	rising	on	the	back	of	the	neck	–	far	too	many
people	possess	such	things.
Nonetheless,	even	a	clumsy	killer	could	know	the	Lady’s	Pull	on	occasion,
just	as	Saygen	Maral,	for	all	his	skills	and	preparation,	could	stumble	–	fatally
–	to	the	Lord’s	Push.
Ahead,	now	fifteen	paces	away,	Banaschar	was	working	free	of	the	crowd,
and	Saygen	sensed	the	man’s	warren	–	Mockra,	yes,	achieving	what	my	own
invested	items	have	done.	Uninterest,	sudden	fugue,	confusion	–	the	sharper	the
mind,	after	all,	the	more	vulnerable	it	proves	to	such	passive	assaults.	To	be	a


killer,	of	course,	one	needed	to	fend	off	such	sorcery.	Simple	awareness	of	the
trap	sufficed,	and	so	Saygen	Maral	was	not	concerned.	His	intent	was	most
singular.
Of	course	he	would	have	to	eliminate	his	own	hunters	first.
Banaschar	was	heading	for	the	Stairs.	There	was	little	risk	in	Saygen
effecting	a	slight	delay.	He	saw	an	alley	mouth	off	to	the	left,	where	the	crowd
was	thin.	The	assassin	angled	himself	towards	it,	and,	as	he	stepped	past	the	last
figure,	quickly	turned	left	and	slipped	into	the	alley.
Gloom,	rubbish	under	foot,	a	tortured,	winding	route	before	him.	He
continued	on	five	more	steps,	found	an	alcove	and	edged	into	it.
	
‘He’s	getting	ready	to	take	the	drunk,’	Gentur	hissed.	‘He’ll	circle	round—’
‘Then	let’s	get	after	’im,’	Mudslinger	whispered,	pushing	his	friend	on.
They	entered	the	alley,	padded	forward.
The	shadows	swallowing	the	niche	were	too	deep,	too	opaque	to	be
natural,	and	both	soldiers	went	right	past	without	a	second	thought.
A	faint	sound,	whistling	past	Mudslinger ’s	left	shoulder,	and	Gentur
grunted,	flinging	up	his	hands	as	he	staggered	forward,	then	collapsed.
Whirling,	Mudslinger	ducked	low,	but	not	low	enough,	as	a	second	tiny
quarrel	struck	him	on	his	chest,	directly	over	his	heart,	and,	still	spinning
round	with	his	own	momentum,	the	soldier ’s	feet	skidded	out	beneath	him.	He
fell	hard,	the	back	of	his	head	crunching	on	the	greasy	cobbles.
	
Saygen	Maral	studied	the	two	motionless	bodies	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he
reloaded	the	corkscrew	crossbows	strapped	to	his	wrists.	First	shot,	base	of	the
skull.	Second	shot,	heart	–	that	was	a	lucky	one,	since	I	was	aiming	for	low	in
the	gut.	Guess	he	didn’t	want	all	that	pain.	Too	bad.	Anyway…What	were	they
thinking	of	doing?	Mugging	me?	No	matter,	it’s	done.	Adjusting	his	sleeves,
hiding	the	weapons	once	more,	he	set	off	after	Banaschar.
A	sixth	of	a	bell	later,	the	Claw	realized	that	he	had	lost	the	man.	In	rising
panic,	he	began	backtracking,	down	alleys	and	streets,	as	a	cool	breeze	lifted
withered	leaves	that	spun	random	paths	across	cobbles.
Making	clicking	sounds,	like	the	skittering	of	dice.
	
The	huge	wheels	of	twisted	rope	suspended	on	the	side	of	the	stone	jetty


compressed	as	the	Froth	Wolf	shouldered	its	bulk	against	them,	then	the	craft
slid	away	again,	momentarily,	until	the	lines,	made	fast	to	the	dock’s	huge
bollards,	drew	taut.	The	gangplank	rattled	and	thumped	into	place	even	as	the
garrison	captain	and	his	guards	approached	along	the	jetty’s	length.	Pointedly
ignoring	the	troop	of	Red	Blades	standing	at	attention	opposite	the	plank	with
their	one-armed,	one-eyed	commander.
Something	had	just	struck	the	sea	beyond	the	anchored	fleet,	and	the
thunderous	sound	of	its	impact	still	echoed,	even	as	darkness	swept	back	into
the	wake	of	the	bright,	blazing	fireball.	The	smell	of	steam	was	heavy	in	the
air.
It	had	seemed	to	Keneb	that	there	was	a	peculiar	lack	of	reaction	to	this
event,	from	the	Adjunct	and	T’amber,	at	any	rate.	There	had	been	plenty	of
shouts,	warding	gestures	then	animated	talk	among	the	sailors,	but	that	was	to
be	expected.
Let’s	face	it,	Keneb	admitted,	the	timing	was	less	than	auspicious.	It	was	no
wonder	that	thousand-strong	mob	awaiting	them	were	shouting	about	omens.
The	Fist’s	attention	was	drawn	once	more	to	the	approaching	contingent.
‘They	mean	to	come	aboard,	Adjunct,’	Keneb	said	as	she	prepared	to
disembark.
Tavore	frowned,	then	nodded	and	stepped	back.	T’amber	positioned
herself	to	the	Adjunct’s	left.
Boots	thumped	on	the	plank,	and	the	captain	halted	one	step	from	the	ship’s
deck.	He	looked	round,	as	if	deciding	what	to	do	next.
Moving	forward,	Keneb	said,	‘Good	evening,	Captain,	I	am	Fist	Keneb,
Eighth	Legion,	Fourteenth	Army.’
A	moment’s	hesitation,	then	a	salute.	‘Fist	Keneb.	I	have	orders	for	the
Adjunct	Tavore	Paran.	May	I	come	on	deck?’
‘Of	course,’	Keneb	said.
Mostly	unintelligible	shouts	and	curses	reached	them	from	the	crowds
massing	behind	a	line	of	soldiers	on	the	waterfront,	many	of	them	taunts
directed	at	the	Red	Blades.	At	these	sounds,	the	captain	winced	slightly,	then	he
moved	forward	until	he	faced	the	Adjunct.	‘The	Empress	awaits	you,’	he	said,
‘in	Mock’s	Hold.	In	your	absence,	command	of	the	Fourteenth	Army
temporarily	falls	to	me,	with	respect	to	disembarking	and	standing	down.’
‘I	see,’	Tavore	said.
The	captain	shifted	uneasily,	as	if	he	had	been	expecting	some	kind	of
protest,	as	if	her	lack	of	reaction	to	his	words	was	the	very	last	thing	he
anticipated.	‘It	appears	that	the	transports	are	anchoring	in	the	bay,	Adjunct.’
‘Yes,	it	does	appear	so,	Captain.’


‘That	will	need	to	be	countermanded	immediately.’
‘Captain,	what	is	your	name?’
‘Adjunct?	My	apologies.	It	is	Rynag.	Captain	Rynag	of	the	Untan	Imperial
Guard.’
‘Ah,	then	you	have	accompanied	the	Empress	to	the	island.	Your	normal
posting	is	as	an	officer	in	the	Palace	Guard.’
Rynag	cleared	his	throat.	‘Correct,	Adjunct,	although	as	a	matter	of	course
my	responsibilities	have	expand—’
‘T’amber,’	the	Adjunct	cut	in.	‘Please	collect	Kalam	Mekhar.	He	is,	I
believe,	once	more	at	the	stern.’	She	studied	the	captain	for	a	moment	longer,
then	asked	him,	‘The	Empress	commands	that	I	meet	her	alone?’
‘Uh,	she	was	not	specific—’
‘Very	well—’
‘Excuse	me,	Adjunct.	Not	specific,	as	I	said,	with	one	exception.’
‘Oh?’
‘Yes.	The	High	Mage	Adaephon	Delat	is	to	remain	on	board	until	such	time
as	directed	otherwise.’
Tavore	frowned	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Very	well.’
‘I	believe	I	was	speaking	about	countermanding	the	order	to	drop	anchor
—’
‘I	leave	that	to	you,	Captain	Rynag,’	the	Adjunct	said	as	T’amber
reappeared,	Kalam	trailing	a	step	behind.	‘We	will	make	use	of	your	escort,	as
well	as	that	of	Fist	Baralta’s	Red	Blades,	to	ensure	our	passage	through	that
mob.’	With	that,	and	a	gesture	to	T’amber	and	the	assassin	to	follow,	she
disembarked.
Bemused,	the	captain	watched	them	cross	over	to	the	jetty.	A	few	curt
commands	to	the	Imperial	Guards	assembled	there	and	a	careless	gesture	to
Tene	Baralta	and	his	soldiers	to	fall	in,	and	the	two	groups	moved	out	in
uneasy	company	to	flank	Tavore	and	her	two	companions.	Then	the	party	set
off.
Rynag	swung	back	to	Keneb.	‘Fist?’
‘Yes?’
‘Well…’
‘Things	aren’t	going	as	planned,	Captain?’	Keneb	stepped	close	and
slapped	a	hand	on	the	man’s	shoulder.	‘Consider	this,	it	could	be	worse.
Correct	that.	It	is	much	worse.’
‘No	longer,’	the	man	snapped,	finally	angry.	‘I	am	now	in	command	of	the
Fourteenth	Army,	Fist	Keneb,	and	these	are	my	orders.	Signal	flag	to	Admiral
Nok.	The	escorts	are	to	withdraw	and	set	sail	without	delay	for	Unta.	Signal


flag	to	the	foreign	fleet,	they	are	to	anchor	outside	the	bay,	this	side	of	the
shoals	on	the	headland	north	of	Mock’s	Hold.	A	pilot	ship	will	guide	them.
Finally,	signal	flag	to	the	transports	–	we	will	establish	a	number	system;	and
thereafter	in	sets	of	fifteen	they	will	weigh	anchor	and	draw	in	to	the
designated	moorings.	The	disembarking	will	begin	as	soon	as	possible,	Fist.
Furthermore,	the	soldiers	are	to	be	unarmed,	their	kits	secured	for
transportation.’
Keneb	scratched	his	stubbly	jaw.
‘Why	are	you	just	standing	there,	Fist	Keneb?’
‘I	am	trying	to	decide,	Captain,	where	to	begin.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘All	right,	never	mind.	First	of	all,	whether	you	are	in	command	of	the
Fourteenth	Army	or	not,	you	do	not	outrank	Admiral	Nok.	Signal	him	all	you
want.	He	will	do	precisely	as	he	pleases.’
‘I	am	instructed	by	the	Empress—’
‘He	will	need	to	see	those	orders,	Captain.	In	person.	The	Admiral	is	very
precise	with	such	protocol.	I	assume	you	have	said	orders?’
‘Of	course	I	have!	Very	well,	signal	him	aboard!’
‘Alas,	he	will	not	comply.’
‘What?’
‘Now,	as	for	the	Perish	–	the	foreign	fleet,	Captain	Rynag	–	the	only
command	they	acknowledge,	under	the	circumstances,	is	their	own.	By	all
means,	make	your	request,	but	be	certain	that	it	is	a	request.	Lest	they	take
offence,	and	Captain,	you	truly	do	not	want	them	to	take	offence.’
‘You	are	leaving	me	no	choice	but	to	relieve	you	of	command,	Fist.’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘I	have	given	you	my	orders,	yet	still	you	stand	here—’
‘Well	that	is	precisely	the	problem,	Captain.	Not	one	of	your	orders	can	be
carried	out,	for	the	imperative	overriding	them	cannot	be	challenged,	not	by
you,	not	even	by	the	Empress	herself.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
Keneb	said,	‘Follow	me,	please,	Captain.’
They	walked	to	the	stern.	In	the	bay	beyond,	the	huge	transports	loomed	a
short	distance	away	like	gigantic,	slumbering	beasts.
‘Granted,’	Keneb	said,	‘darkness	obscures,	and	for	this	reason	it	is
understandable	that	you	do	not	as	yet	comprehend.	But,	allow	me	to	direct	your
gaze,	Captain,	to	the	topmost	signal	flag	on	those	near	ships,	a	flag	identical	to
those	on	Nok’s	dromons.	In	a	moment,	when	that	cloud	passes	by	the	moon,
with	Oponn’s	blessing	there	will	be	enough	light	with	which	to	see.	There	is	an


edict,	Captain,	pertaining	to	survival	itself.	You	seem	to	forget,	both	the
Fourteenth	Army	and	the	imperial	fleet	have	come	from	Seven	Cities.’
The	cloud	slid	away	from	the	blurred,	hazy	moon,	and	enough	light	licked
waves,	ships,	and	flags	for	Rynag	to	see.	The	captain’s	breath	caught	in	a	halfchoke.	‘Gods	below!’	he	whispered.
‘And	Seven	Cities,’	Keneb	continued	in	a	calm	voice,	‘was	struck	by	a	most
virulent	plague.	Which,	as	you	can	now	see,	we	inadvertently	brought	with	us.
So,	Captain,	do	you	now	understand	why	we	cannot	comply	with	your
commands?’
The	man	spun	to	face	him,	his	eyes	filled	with	terror	and	panic.	‘And	this
damned	ship?’	he	demanded	in	a	hoarse	voice.	‘And	the	other	one	that	just
docked?	Fist	Keneb—’
‘Plague-free,	both	of	them,	Captain,	as	was	the	ship	from	whence	came	the
Red	Blades.	We	would	not	have	moored	alongside	were	it	otherwise.	Anyway,
beyond	signal	flags,	there	is	no	contact	between	ships.	For	obvious	reasons.	I
suppose,	if	you	believe	the	Empress	would	nonetheless	insist	we	one	and	all
disembark	regardless	of	the	slaughter	our	presence	would	deliver	to	Malaz
Island	–	and,	inevitably,	to	the	entire	mainland	–	you	can	insist	on
countermanding	our	collective	gesture	of	compassion	and	mercy.
Unquestionably,	the	name	of	Captain	Rynag	will	acquire	legendary	status,	at
least	among	devotees	to	Poliel	–	nothing	wrong	with	seeing	the	positives,	don’t
you	think?’
	
The	group	marched	ever	closer	to	the	wall	of	belligerence	blocking	the	streets.
Kalam	loosened	the	long-knives	in	their	scabbards.	Glancing	over,	he	found
himself	walking	alongside	Captain	Lostara	Yil,	who	looked	profoundly
unhappy.
‘Suggest	you	all	draw	your	weapons	any	time	now,’	the	assassin	said	to
her.	‘That	should	be	enough	to	make	them	back	off.’
She	grunted.	‘Until	they	start	throwing	bricks.’
‘I	doubt	it.	We’re	for	the	Empress,	not	them.	The	ones	these	people	are
hungry	to	sink	their	teeth	into	are	out	there	in	the	transports.	The	Wickans.	The
Khundryl	Burned	Tears.’
‘Clever	ruse,’	Lostara	said	under	her	breath,	‘those	flags.’
‘Fist	Keneb.’
‘Indeed?’
‘Aye.’	Then	Kalam	smiled.	‘Spinner	of	Death.	A	prettier	lie	you	won’t	find.
Fid	must	be	grinning	ear	to	ear,	if	he	ain’t	drowning.’


‘Drowning?’
‘He	was	over	the	side	before	the	Silanda	shipped	oars,	is	my	guess	–
probably	Gesler	and	Stormy	went	with	him,	too.’
Just	then	they	reached	the	line	of	City	Watch,	who	parted	to	let	them	pass.
Weapons	hissed	from	scabbards	and	shields	were	brought	round	by	the
Red	Blades.
And,	as	Kalam	had	predicted,	the	crowds	fell	silent,	watchful,	and	backed
away	to	each	side	to	let	the	party	make	its	way	through.
‘So,’	the	assassin	said	under	his	breath,	‘we’ve	got	ourselves	a	long,	dull
walk.	Sound	idea,	by	the	way,	Captain,	your	Fist	deciding	to	act	on	his	own.’
The	look	she	shot	him	started	sweat	beneath	Kalam’s	clothing,	as	she
asked,	‘Was	it,	Kalam	Mekhar?’
‘Well—’
She	faced	straight	ahead	again.	‘The	Fist,’	she	said	in	a	whisper,	‘hasn’t
even	begun.’
Well…oh,	that’s	not	good	at	all.
Behind	the	troop,	the	mob	closed	in	once	again,	and	there	arose	new
shouts,	this	time	of	horror.
‘Plague	flags!	On	the	transports	in	the	bay!	Plague	flags!’
In	moments	belligerence	drained	away	like	piss	down	a	leg,	and	terror
grabbed	hold	between	those	legs	–	squeezing	hard	–	and	people	began
swarming	in	every	direction,	but	a	heartbeat	away	from	pure,	frenzied	panic.
Kalam	kept	his	smile	to	himself.
	
Ever	so	faint,	the	clatter	of	knuckles	bouncing	and	skidding	had	alerted
Banaschar.	This	night	the	Worm	was	awake,	and	with	it	the	return	of	the	expriest’s	old	sensitivities	to	the	whisper	of	magic.	In	rapid	succession	thereafter,
as	he	shifted	from	his	path	and	found	a	dead-end	alley	in	which	to	crouch,	heart
pounding,	he	felt	multiple	pulses	of	sorcery	–	a	gate,	slicing	open	the	thinnest
rent,	the	sudden,	violent	unravelling	of	some	unseen	tapestry,	and	then,	finally,
a	trembling	underfoot,	as	if	something	terrible	and	vast	had	just	stepped	onto
the	dry	land	of	this	island.
Dizzy	from	the	successive	waves	of	virulent	power,	Banaschar
straightened	once	more,	one	hand	against	a	grimy	wall	for	support,	then	he
headed	off	–	back,	back	towards	the	harbourfront.
No	choice,	no	choice.	I	need	to	see…to	understand…
As	he	drew	nearer,	he	could	smell	panic	in	the	air,	acrid	and	bitter,	and	all
at	once	there	were	mute	figures	hurrying	past	him	–	the	beginnings	of	an


exodus.	Faces	twisted	in	fear	blurred	by,	and	others	dark	with	rage	–	as	if	their
plans	had	been	suddenly	knocked	awry,	and	there	was	not	yet	time	to	find	a
means	to	regroup,	nor	yet	the	opportunity	to	think	things	through.
Something’s	happened.
Maybe	to	do	with	that	falling	rock	or	whatever	it	was.
In	the	old	days,	such	an	occurrence,	on	the	eve	of	autumn,	the	eve	of
D’rek’s	arrival	upon	the	mortal	earth…well,	we’d	have	flooded	the	streets.	Out
from	the	temples,	raising	our	voices	to	the	heavens.	And	the	coffers	would
overflow,	because	there	could	be	no	mistaking…
The	thoughts	trailed	away,	vanished,	leaving	naught	but	a	taste	of	ashes	in
his	mouth.	We	were	such	fools.	The	sky	casts	down,	the	world	heaves	up,	the
waters	wash	it	all	away.	None	of	this	–	none	of	it!	–	has	anything	to	do	with	our
precious	gods!
He	reached	the	broad	avenue	fronting	the	docks.	People	moving	about	here
and	there.	If	anger	remained	it	was	roiling	about,	all	direction	lost.	Some	vast
desire	had	been…blunted.
Passing	an	old	woman	Banaschar	reached	out	to	her.	‘Here,’	he	said.	‘What
has	happened?’
She	glared	up	at	him,	pulling	free	as	if	his	touch	was	a	contaminant.
‘Plague	ships!’	she	hissed.	‘Get	away	from	me!’
He	let	her	go,	halted,	stared	out	at	the	ships	filling	the	bay.
Ah,	the	flags…
Banaschar	sniffed	the	air.
Poliel?	I	can’t	sense	you	at	all…out	there.	Or	anywhere	else,	come	to	think
of	it.	His	eyes	narrowed.	Then,	slowly,	he	smiled.
At	that	moment,	a	heavy	hand	thumped	down	on	his	left	shoulder,	spun	him
round—
And	someone	screamed.
	
Lifting	clear	of	the	swirling	black,	filthy	waters.	Straightening,	slime	and	grit
streaming	off,	blood-sucking	eels	flapping	down	to	writhe	on	the	muddy
rocks,	the	broken	pottery	and	the	brick	fragments	beneath	the	wooden	dock.
One	step	forward,	then	another,	heavy,	scraping.
A	rough	wall	directly	ahead,	revealing	layers	of	street	levels,	bulwarks,
old	drainage	holes	dating	back	to	the	city’s	youth	–	before	iron	was	first
forged	by	humans	–	when	the	sewer	system	was	a	superb,	efficient
subterranean	web	beneath	level	streets.	In	all,	plenty	of	hand-	and	foot-holds,
given	sufficient	determination,	strength	and	will.


Of	all	three,	the	one	standing	facing	that	wall	had	been	given	plenty.
More	steps.
Then,	climbing.	A	stranger	had	come	to	Malaz	City.
	
Gasping,	she	leaned	against	a	wall.	What	a	mistake,	trying	to	swim	in	all	that
armour.	And	then,	all	those	damned	eels!	She’d	emerged	from	the	water
covered	in	the	damned	things.	Hands,	arms,	legs,	neck,	head,	face,	dangling
and	squirming	and	probably	getting	drunk	every	one	of	them	and	it	wasn’t	no
fun	anyway,	pulling	them	off.	Squeeze	too	hard	and	they	sprayed	blood,	black
stuff,	smelly	stuff.	But	you	had	to	squeeze,	to	get	a	good	grip,	because	those
mouths,	they	held	fast,	leaving	huge	circular	weals	on	her	flesh,	puckered	and
oozing.
Stumbling	ashore	like	some	kind	of	worm	witch,	or	demon	–	ha,	that
mongrel	dog	that	sniffled	up	to	her	sure	did	run,	didn’t	it?	Stupid	dog.
Sewer	ramp,	pretty	steep,	but	there	were	rungs	on	the	sides	and	she	was
able	to	work	her	way	along	it,	then	the	climb	which	had	damn	near	killed	her
but	no	chance	of	that.	Thirst	was	a	demanding	master.	The	most	demanding
master.	But	she’d	dumped	her	armour,	down	there	knee-deep	in	the	muck	of	the
bottom	with	the	keel	of	the	damned	ship	nearly	taking	her	head	off	–	took	the
helmet,	didn’t	it?	And	if	that	strap	hadn’t	broke	so	conveniently…anyway,
she’d	even	dropped	her	weapon	belt.	Nothing	to	pawn,	and	that	was	bad.	Except
for	this	knife,	but	it	was	the	only	knife	she	got,	the	only	one	left.
Still,	she	was	thirsty.	She	needed	to	get	the	taste	of	the	harbour	soup	out	of
her	mouth,	especially	that	first	gasp	after	struggling	back	up	to	the	surface,
sucking	in	head-first	the	bloated	corpse	of	a	disgusting	rat	–	that	had	come	as
close	to	killing	her	as	anything	so	far	–	what	if	it’d	been	alive,	and	eager	to
climb	down	her	throat?	She’d	had	nightmares	like	that,	once.	During	a	dry
spell,	it	was,	but	that’s	what	dry	spells	did	–	they	reminded	you	that	the	world
was	awful	and	ugly	and	miserable	and	there	were	things	out	there	that	wanted
to	get	you.	Spiders,	rats,	eels,	caterpillars.
Had	there	been	a	crowd	up	here?	Not	many	left	now,	and	those	that	came
close	to	her	kept	crying	out	and	running	away	in	some	weird	blind	panic.	She
wiped	at	the	stinging	weals	on	her	face,	blinked	more	muck	from	her	eyes,
lifted	her	head	and	looked	around.
And	now,	who	is	that?
Sudden	sobriety,	sudden	intent,	a	blast	of	white	incandescence	purging	her
brain	and	who	knew	what	else.
And	now	now	now,	just	who	oh	who	is	that?	Right	there	–	no,	don’t	turn


your	back,	too	late.	Hee	hee,	too	too	too	late	late	late!
Hellian	crept	forward,	as	quiet	as	could	be,	came	up	right	behind	him.
Drew	her	knife	with	her	right	hand,	reached	out	with	her	left.	Five	more	paces
to	go…
	
Saygen	Maral	stepped	out	from	the	alley.	The	target	had	doubled	back,	the
bastard.	But	there	he	was,	not	ten	paces	away,	and	few	people	around	him.
Convenient.	He	would	cease	being	subtle.	Sometimes,	it	paid	to	remind	citizens
that	the	Claw	was	ever	present,	ever	ready	to	do	what	was	necessary.
The	assassin	drew	out	from	beneath	his	cloak	a	paralt-smeared	dagger,
gingerly	adjusting	his	grip	on	the	weapon	as	he	moved	forward.
Some	woman	was	staring	at	Banaschar	–	a	hoary,	sodden	thing,	with	an	eel
dangling	from	under	her	left	ear	and	round	sores	all	over	her	exposed	flesh	–
people,	upon	seeing	her,	were	running	away.	Aye,	she	looks	like	she’s	got	the
plague,	but	she	doesn’t.	Must’ve	fallen	in	or	something.	No	matter.
He	returned	his	attention	to	his	target’s	back,	moved	lithely	forward,	his
footsteps	making	no	sound.	He’d	spin	the	fool	around,	to	catch	the	death	in	the
man’s	eyes.	Always	more	pleasurable	that	way,	the	rush	of	power	that	raced
through	the	killer	when	the	eyes	locked,	and	recognition	blossomed,	along
with	pain	and	the	sudden	knowledge	of	impending	death.
He	was	addicted	to	it,	he	knew.	But	he	was	hardly	alone	in	that,	now,	was
he?
With	a	half-smile,	Saygen	Maral	drew	up	behind	the	drunkard,	reached	out
and	gripped	the	man’s	shoulder,	then	spun	him	round,	even	as	the	knife	in	his
other	hand	rustled	free	of	the	cloak,	darted	forward—
	
A	scream	sounded	from	down	the	avenue.
As	Banaschar	was	pulled	around,	he	saw	–	on	the	face	of	the	man	opposite
him	–	a	look	of	shock,	then	consternation—
A	woman	had	grasped	the	man’s	forearm	–	an	arm	at	the	end	of	which	was
a	gleaming,	stained	knife	–	and,	as	Banaschar	stared,	still	not	quite
comprehending,	he	saw	her	drive	the	heel	of	a	palm	into	the	elbow	joint	of	that
arm,	snapping	it	clean.	The	knife,	sprung	loose,	spun	away	to	clatter	on	the
cobbles,	even	as	the	woman,	snarling	something	under	her	breath,	tugged	the
broken	arm	down	and	drove	her	knee	into	the	man’s	face.
A	savage	cracking	sound,	blood	spraying	as	the	head	rocked	back,	eyes


wide,	and	the	woman	twisted	the	arm	round,	forcing	the	man	face-first	onto	the
cobbles.	She	descended	onto	him,	grasped	him	by	the	hair	with	both	hands	and
began	systematically	pounding	his	skull	into	the	street.
And,	between	each	cracking	impact,	words	grated	from	her:
‘No—’
crunch
‘you—’
crunch
‘don’t!’
crunch
‘This	one’s—’
CRUNCH!
‘mine!’
Appalled,	Banaschar	reached	down,	grasped	the	terrible	apparition	by	her
sodden	jerkin,	and	dragged	her	back.	‘For	Hood’s	sake,	woman!	You’ve
shattered	his	skull!	It’s	all	pulp!	Stop!	Stop!’
She	twisted	free,	turned	on	him	and,	with	smooth	precision,	set	the	tip	of	a
knife	just	beneath	his	right	eye.	Her	pocked,	blood-smeared,	filthy	face	shifted
into	a	sneer,	as	she	snarled,	‘You!	Finally!	You’re	under	arrest!’
And	someone	screamed	from	down	the	avenue.	Again.
	
Thirty	paces	away,	Fiddler,	Gesler	and	Stormy	all	stared	at	the	commotion	not
far	from	an	alley	mouth.	An	attempted	assassination,	interrupted	–	with	fatal
ferocity	–	by	some	woman—
Gesler	suddenly	gripped	Fiddler ’s	arm.	‘Hey,	that’s	Hellian	there!’
Hellian?	Sergeant	Hellian?
They	then	heard	her	pronounce	an	arrest.
Even	as	screams	ripped	the	air	from	farther	down,	and	figures	began
racing	away	from	the	waterfront.	Now,	what’s	all	that	about?	Never	mind.	His
eyes	still	fixed	on	Hellian,	who	was	now	struggling	with	the	poor	man	who
looked	as	drunk	as	she	was	–	her	husband?	–	Fiddler	hesitated,	then	he	shook
his	head.	‘Not	a	chance.’
‘You	got	that	right,’	Gesler	said.	‘So,	Fid,	meet	you	in	a	bell,	right?’
‘Aye.	Until	then.’
The	three	soldiers	set	off,	then	almost	immediately	parted	ways,	Gesler
and	Stormy	turning	south	on	a	route	that	would	take	them	across	the	river	on
the	first	bridge,	Fiddler	continuing	west,	into	the	heart	of	the	Centre	District.
Leaving	behind	those	frantic,	terrified	cries	from	the	north	end	of	the


Centre	Docks	harbourfront,	which	seemed,	despite	Fiddler ’s	pace,	to	be
drawing	ever	nearer.
Plague.	Smart	man,	Keneb.	Wonder	how	long	the	ruse	will	last?
Then,	as	he	reached	very	familiar	streets	on	the	bay	side	of	Raven	Hill
Park,	there	came	a	surge	of	pleasure.
Hey.	I’m	home.	Imagine	that.	I’m	home!
And	there,	ten	paces	ahead,	a	small	shopfront,	little	more	than	a	narrow
door	beneath	a	crumbling	overhang	from	which	dangled	a	polished	tin	disc,	on
its	surface	an	acid-etched	symbol.	A	burning	mouse.	Fiddler	halted	before	it,
then	thumped	on	the	door.	It	was	a	lot	more	solid	than	it	looked.	He	pounded
some	more,	until	he	heard	a	scratching	of	latches	being	drawn	back	on	the
other	side.	The	door	opened	a	crack.	A	small	rheumy	eye	regarded	him	for	a
moment,	then	withdrew.
A	push	and	the	door	swung	back.
Fiddler	stepped	inside.	A	landing,	with	stairs	leading	upward.	The	owner
was	already	halfway	up	them,	dragging	one	stiff	leg	beneath	misaligned	hips,
his	midnight-blue	night-robe	trailing	like	some	imperial	train.	In	one	hand	was
a	lantern,	swinging	back	and	forth	and	casting	wild	shadows.	The	sergeant
followed.
The	shop	on	the	next	floor	was	cluttered,	a	looter ’s	haul	from	a	hundred
battles,	a	hundred	overrun	cities.	Weapons,	armour,	jewellery,	tapestries,	bolts
of	precious	silk,	the	standards	of	fallen	armies,	statues	of	unknown	heroes,
kings	and	queens,	of	gods,	goddesses	and	demonic	spirits.	Looking	round	as
the	old	man	lit	two	more	lanterns,	Fiddler	said,	‘You’ve	done	well,	Tak.’
‘You	lost	it,	didn’t	you?’
The	sergeant	winced.	‘Sorry.’
Tak	moved	behind	a	broad,	lacquered	table	and	sat	down,	gingerly,	in	a
plush	chair	that	might	have	been	the	throne	of	some	minor	Quon	king.	‘You
careless	runt,	Fiddler.	You	know	I	only	make	one	at	a	time.	No	market,	you	see
–	aye,	I	keep	my	promises	there.	Labours	of	love,	every	time,	but	that	kind	of
love	don’t	fill	the	belly,	don’t	feed	the	wives	and	all	those	urchins	not	one	of
’em	looking	like	me.’	The	small	eyes	were	like	barrow	coins.	‘Where	is	it,
then?’
Fiddler	scowled.	‘Under	Y’Ghatan.’
‘Y’Ghatan.	Better	it	than	you.’
‘I	certainly	thought	so.’
‘Changed	your	mind	since?’
‘Look,	Tak,	I’m	no	wide-eyed	recruit	any	more.	You	can	stop	treating	me
like	I	was	a	damned	apprentice	and	you	my	master.’


Gnarled	brows	rose.	‘Why,	Fiddler,	I	wasn’t	doing	nothing	of	the	sort.	You
feel	that	way,	it’s	because	of	what’s	been	stirred	awake	inside	that	knobby	skull
of	yours.	Old	habits	and	all	that.	I	meant	what	I	said.	Better	it	than	you.	Even	so,
how	many	is	it	now?’
‘Never	mind,’	the	sergeant	growled,	finding	a	chair	and	dragging	it	over.
He	slumped	down	into	it.	‘Like	I	said,	you’ve	done	well,	Tak.	So	how	come
you	never	got	that	hip	fixed?’
‘I	gauge	it	this	way,’	the	old	man	said,	‘the	limp	earns	sympathy,	near	five
per	cent.	Better	still,	since	I	don’t	say	nothing	about	nothing	they	all	think	I’m
some	kind	of	veteran.	For	my	soldiering	customers,	that’s	another	five	per
cent.	Then	there’s	the	domestic.	Wives	are	happier	since	they	all	know	I	can’t
catch	them—’
‘Wives.	Why	did	you	agree	to	that	in	the	first	place?’
‘Well,	four	women	get	together	and	decide	they	want	to	marry	you,	it’s
kinda	hard	to	say	no,	right?	Sure,	wasn’t	my	manly	looks,	wasn’t	even	that
crooked	baby-maker	between	my	legs.	It	was	this	new	shop,	and	all	that
mysterious	coin	that	helped	me	set	up	again.	It	was	the	house	here	in	the	Centre
District.	You	think	I	was	the	only	one	who	ended	up	losing	everything	in	the
Mouse?’
‘All	right,	if	it	makes	you	happy.	So,	you	kept	the	limp.	And	you	kept	the
promise.	Well?’
Tak	smiled,	then	reached	under	the	table,	released	two	latches	and	Fiddler
heard	the	clunk	of	a	hidden	drawer	dropping	down	onto	its	rails.	Pushing	the
throne	back,	the	old	man	slid	open	the	large	drawer,	then	carefully	removed	a
cloth-wrapped	object.	He	set	it	down	on	the	table	and	pulled	the	cloth	away.	‘A
few	improvements,’	he	purred.	‘Better	range	for	one.’
His	eyes	on	the	extraordinary	crossbow	between	them,	Fiddler	asked,
‘How	much	better?’
‘Add	fifty	paces,	I	figure.	Never	tested	that,	though.	But	look	at	the	ribs.
That’s	ten	strips	of	iron	folded	together.	Inside	band	has	the	most	spring,
grading	less	and	less	as	you	go	out.	The	cable’s	four	hundred	strands	into
twenty,	then	wound	in	bhederin-gut	and	soaked	in	dhenrabi	oil.	Your	old	one
was	two	hundred	strands	into	ten.	Now,	look	at	the	cradle	–	I	only	had	clay
mock-ups	of	cussers	and	sharpers	and	burners,	weighted	as	close	as	I	could
figure—’
‘Sharpers	and	burners?’
An	eager	nod.	‘Why	just	cussers,	I	asked?	Well,	because	that’s	what	was
wanted	and	that’s	how	we	did	the	cradle,	right?	But	the	mock-ups	gave	me	an
idea.’	He	reached	back	into	the	drawer	and	lifted	free	a	clay	cusser-sized


grenado.	‘So,	I	made	cradles	inside	this,	to	fit	five	sharpers	or	three	burners	–
the	weight’s	close	on	all	three	configurations,	by	the	way	–	the	Moranth	were
always	precise	on	these	sort	of	things,	you	know.’	As	he	was	speaking,	he	took
the	clay	object,	one	hand	on	top,	the	other	beneath,	and	pushed	in	opposite
directions	until	there	was	a	grating	click,	then	he	was	holding	two	halves	of	the
hollow	mock-up.	‘Like	I	said,	improvements.	You	can	load	up	how	you	like,
without	ever	having	to	change	the	bow’s	cradle.	I	got	ten	of	these	made.	Empty,
they’re	nice	and	light	and	you	won’t	fly	through	Hood’s	Gate	if	one	of	’em
breaks	by	accident	in	your	satchel.’
‘You	are	a	genius,	Tak.’
‘Tell	me	something	I	don’t	know.’
‘How	much	do	you	want	for	all	of	this?’
A	frown.	‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,	Fiddler.	You	saved	my	life,	you	and	Dujek	got
me	out	of	the	Mouse	with	only	a	crushed	hip.	You	gave	me	money—’
‘Tak,	we	wanted	you	to	make	crossbows,	like	that	old	jeweller	did	before
you.	But	he	was	dead	and	you	weren’t.’
‘That	don’t	matter.	Call	it	a	replacement	guarantee,	for	life.’
Fiddler	shook	his	head,	then	he	reached	into	his	pack	and	withdrew	a	real
cusser.	‘Let’s	see	how	it	fits,	shall	we?’
Tak’s	eyes	glittered.	‘Oh	yes,	do	that!	Then	heft	the	weapon,	check	the
balance	–	see	that	over-shoulder	clamp	there?	It’s	a	brace	for	steadying	aim
and	evening	out	the	weight.	Your	arms	won’t	get	tired	holding	and	aiming.’	He
rose.	‘I	will	be	right	back.’
Distracted,	Fiddler	nodded.	He	set	the	cusser	down	into	the	weapon’s	cradle
and	clamped	in	place	the	open-ended,	padded	basket.	That	motion	in	turn	raised
from	the	forward	base	of	the	cradle	a	denticulate	bar	to	prevent	the	cusser
slipping	out	when	the	weapon	was	held	point-down.	That	bar	was	in	turn	linked
to	the	release	trigger,	dropping	it	flush	with	the	cradle	in	time	for	the	projectile
to	fly	clear.	‘Oh,’	the	sapper	murmured,	‘very	clever,	Tak.’	With	this	weapon,
there	was	no	need	for	a	shaft.	The	cradle	was	the	launcher.
The	old	man	was	rummaging	in	a	chest	at	the	back	of	the	shop.
‘So	tell	me,’	Fiddler	said,	‘how	many	more	of	these	have	you	made?’
‘That’s	it.	The	only	one.’
‘Right.	So	where	are	the	others?’
‘In	a	crate	above	your	head.’
Fiddler	glanced	up	to	see	a	long	box	balanced	across	two	blackened	beams.
‘How	many	in	there?’
‘Four.’
‘Identical	to	this	one?’


‘More	or	less.’
‘Any	more?’
‘Lots.	For	when	you	lose	these	ones.’
‘I	want	those	four	above	me,	Tak,	and	I’ll	pay	for	them—’
‘Take	’em,	I	don’t	want	your	coin.	Take	’em	and	go	blow	up	people	you
don’t	like.’	The	old	man	straightened	and	made	his	way	back	to	the	table.
In	his	hands	was	something	that	made	Fiddler ’s	eyes	widen.	‘Gods	below,
Tak…’
‘Found	it	a	year	ago.	Thought	to	myself,	oh	yes,	there’s	always	the	chance.
Cost	me	four	copper	crescents.’
Tak	reached	out	to	set	the	fiddle	in	the	sergeant’s	hands.
‘You	were	robbed,’	Fiddler	said.	‘This	is	the	ugliest	piece	of	junk	I’ve	ever
seen.’
‘What’s	the	difference?	You	never	play	the	damned	things	anyway!’
‘Good	point.	I’ll	take	it.’
‘Two	thousand	gold.’
‘Got	twelve	diamonds	with	me.’
‘Worth?’
‘Maybe	four	thousand.’
‘All	right,	six	then	for	the	fiddle.	You	want	to	buy	the	bow	as	well?’
‘Why	not?’
‘That’s	another	two	thousand.	See	the	horsehair?	It’s	white.	I	knew	this
horse.	Used	to	pull	carts	of	rubbish	from	Hood’s	own	temple	in	Old	Upper.
Then	one	day	the	hauler	had	his	heart	burst	and	he	stumbled	down	under	the
animal’s	hoofs.	It	panicked	and	bolted,	right	through	the	webbed	window	wall
this	side	of	the	fourth	bridge—’
‘Wait!	That	huge	lead	window?	Fourth	Bridge?’
‘Fronting	the	recruiting	kit	store,	aye—’
‘That’s	it!	That	old	temple—’
‘And	you	won’t	believe	who	was	standing	there	with	a	half-dozen	knockkneed	recruits	when	that	insane	horse	exploded	into	the	room—’
‘Braven	Tooth!’
Tak	nodded.	‘And	he	turned	right	round,	took	one	look,	then	hammered	his
fist	right	between	the	beast’s	eyes.	It	dropped	dead	right	there.	Only,	the	animal
lands	half	on	one	lad’s	leg,	snapping	it	clean,	and	he	starts	screaming.	Then,
ignoring	all	that,	Master	Sergeant	he	just	turns	round	again	and	says	to	the
wide-eyed	supply	clerk	–	I	swear,	I	heard	all	this	from	one	of	those	recruits	–
he	said:	“These	pathetic	meer-rats	are	heading	back	up	to	Ashok	to	rejoin	their
regiment.	You	make	sure	they	got	waterskins	that	don’t	leak.”	And	he	looks


down	at	that	screaming	broke-leg	recruit,	and	he	says,	“Your	name’s	now
Limp.	Aye,	not	very	imaginative,	but	it’s	like	this.	If	you	can’t	hear	Hood
laughing,	well,	I	can.”	And	so,	that’s	where	this	horsehair	come	from.’
‘Two	thousand	gold	for	the	bow?’
‘With	a	story	like	that,	aye,	and	it’s	a	bargain.’
‘Done.	Now,	let’s	get	that	crate	down	–	I	don’t	want	the	box.	I’ll	just	sling
‘em	all	on	my	back.’
‘They	ain’t	strung,	and	neither	is	this	one.’
‘So	we’ll	string	’em.	You	got	extra	cables?’
‘Three	for	each.	You	want	those	mock-ups,	too?’
‘Absolutely,	and	I’ve	got	sharpers	and	burners	in	this	pack,	so	let’s	load
’em	up	and	check	the	weight	and	all	that.	But	let’s	be	quick.’
‘Fiddler,	it’s	not	nice	out	there	any	more,	you	know?	Especially	tonight.
Smells	like	the	old	Mouse.’
‘I	know,	and	that’s	why	I	don’t	want	to	head	back	out	without	this	cusser
nestled	in.’
‘Just	be	glad	you’re	not	Wickan.’
‘First	Wickan-hater	I	come	across	gets	this	egg	up	his	dark	dining	hall.
Tell	me,	Braven	Tooth	still	live	in	the	same	house	down	in	Lower?	Near	Obo’s
Tower?’
‘That	he	does.’

Hellian	dragged	Banaschar	down	the	winding	alley	–	at	least,	it	seemed	to	be
winding,	the	way	they	kept	careening	off	grimy	walls.	And	she	talked.	‘Sure,
you	thought	you	got	away	clean.	Not	a	chance.	No,	this	is	Sergeant	Hellian
you’re	dealing	with	here.	Think	I	wouldn’t	chase	you	across	half	the	damned
world?	Damned	fool—’
‘You	idiot.	Half	the	damned	world?	I	went	straight	back	down	to	the	docks
and	sailed	back	to	Malaz	City.’
‘And	you	thought	that’d	fool	me?	Forget	it.	Sure,	the	trail	was	cold,	but	not
cold	enough.	And	now	I	got	you,	a	suspect	wanted	for	questioning.’
The	alley	opened	out	onto	a	wider	street.	Off	to	their	left	was	a	bridge.
Scowling,	Hellian	yanked	her	prisoner	towards	it.
‘I	told	you	the	first	time,	Sergeant!’	Banaschar	snapped.	‘I	had	nothing	to
do	with	that	slaughter	–	the	same	thing	had	happened	in	every	damned	temple
of	D’rek,	at	precisely	the	same	time.	You	don’t	understand	–	I	have	to	get	to
Mock’s	Hold.	I	have	to	see	the	Imperial	High	Mage—’


‘That	snake!	I	knew	it,	a	conspiracy!	Well,	I’ll	deal	with	him	later.	One
mass-murderer	at	a	time,	I	always	say.’
‘This	is	madness,	Sergeant!	Let	go	of	me	–	I	can	explain—’
‘Save	your	explanations.	I	got	some	questions	for	you	first	and	you’d
better	answer	them!’
‘With	what?’	he	sneered.	‘Explanations?’
‘No.	Answers.	There’s	a	difference—’
‘Really?	How?	What	difference?’
‘Explanations	are	what	people	use	when	they	need	to	lie.	Y’can	always	tell
those,	’cause	those	explanations	don’t	explain	nothing	and	then	they	look	at
you	like	they	just	cleared	things	up	when	really	they	did	the	opposite	and	they
know	it	and	you	know	it	and	they	know	you	know	and	you	know	they	know	that
you	know	and	they	know	you	and	you	know	them	and	maybe	you	go	out	for	a
pitcher	later	but	who	picks	up	the	tab?	That’s	what	I	want	to	know.’
‘Right,	and	answers?’
‘Answers	is	what	I	get	when	I	ask	questions.	Answers	is	when	you	got	no
choice.	I	ask,	you	tell.	I	ask	again,	you	tell	some	more.	Then	I	break	your
fingers,	’cause	I	don’t	like	what	you’re	telling	me,	because	those	answers	don’t
explain	nothing!’
‘Ah!	So	you	really	want	explanations!’
‘Not	till	you	give	me	the	answers!’
‘So	what	are	your	questions?’
‘Who	said	I	got	questions?	I	already	know	what	your	answers	are,	anyway.
No	point	in	questions,	really.’
‘And	there’s	no	need	to	break	my	fingers,	Sergeant,	I	give	up	already.’
‘Nice	try.	I	don’t	believe	you.’
‘Gods	below—’
Hellian	dragged	him	back.	Halting,	looking	about.	The	sergeant	scowled.
‘Where	are	we?’
‘That	depends.	Where	were	you	taking	me?’
‘Back	to	the	ships.’
‘You	idiot	–	we	went	the	wrong	way	–	all	you	had	to	do	was	turn	around
back	there,	when	you	first	caught	me—’
‘Well	I	didn’t,	did	I?	What’s	that?’	She	pointed.
Banaschar	frowned	at	the	brooding,	unlit	structure	just	beyond	the	low	wall
they	had	been	walking	along.	Then	he	cursed	under	his	breath	and	said,	‘That’s
the	Deadhouse.’
‘What,	some	kind	of	bar?’
‘No,	and	don’t	even	think	of	dragging	me	in	there.’


‘I’m	thirsty.’
‘I	have	an	idea,	then,	Sergeant.	We	can	go	to	Coop’s—’
‘How	far	is	that?’
‘Straight	ahead—’
‘Forget	it.	It’s	a	trap.’	She	tugged	him	right	and	they	made	their	way	along
the	front	of	the	Deadhouse,	then	through	a	short	alley	with	uneven	walls,	where
Hellian	guided	her	prisoner	left	once	more.	Then	she	halted	and	pointed	across
the	way.	‘What	place	is	that	one?’
‘That’s	Smiley’s.	You	don’t	want	to	go	in	there,	it’s	where	rats	go	to	die—’
‘Perfect.	You’re	buying	me	a	drink.	Then	we’re	heading	back	to	the	ships.’
Banaschar	ran	a	hand	across	his	scalp.	‘As	you	like.	They	say	the	ale
brewed	in	there	uses	water	run	off	from	the	Deadhouse	–	and	then	there’s	the
proprietor—’
‘What	about	him?’
‘Related,	it’s	rumoured,	to	the	old	dead	Emperor	himself	–	that	place	used
to	be	Kellanved’s,	you	know.’
‘The	Emperor	owned	a	tavern?’
‘He	did,	partnered	with	Dancer.	And	there	was	a	serving	wench,	named
Surly—’
She	shook	him.	‘Just	because	I	asked	questions	don’t	mean	I	wanted
answers,	especially	not	those	kinda	answers,	so	be	quiet!’
‘Sorry.’
‘One	drink,	then	we	go	back	to	the	ships	and	take	a	swim—’
‘A	what?’
‘Easy.	Ain’t	no	drowned	spiders	in	this	bay.’
‘No,	just	blood-sucking	eels!	Like	the	one	dangling	from	behind	your	ear.
It’s	already	sucked	all	the	blood	from	half	of	your	face.	Tell	me,	is	your	scalp
getting	numb	on	one	side?’
She	glared	at	him.	‘I	never	gave	you	no	permission	to	ask	questions.	That’s
my	task.	Remember	that.’	Then	she	shook	her	head.	Something	long	and
bloated	bumped	against	her	neck.	Hellian	reached	up	and	grasped	the	eel.	She
yanked	it	off.	‘Ow!’	Glared	at	the	writhing	creature	in	her	hand,	then	dropped	it
and	crushed	it	under	a	heel.	Black	goo	spattered	out	to	the	sides.	‘See	that,
Banaschar?	Give	me	trouble	and	you	get	the	same	treatment.’
‘If	I	hang	from	your	ear?	Really,	Sergeant,	this	is	ridiculous—’
They	turned	at	murmuring	sounds	from	the	street	behind	them.	Thirty	or
forty	locals	came	into	view,	heading	for	Front	Street.	Some	of	them	were	now
carrying	bows,	and	canisters	of	burning	pitch	swinging	from	straps.	‘What	are
they	about?’	Hellian	asked.


‘They	think	the	fleet’s	rotten	with	plague,’	the	ex-priest	said.	‘I	expect	they
mean	to	set	a	few	transports	on	fire.’
‘Plague?	There	ain’t	no	plague—’
‘I	know	that	and	you	know	that.	Now,	there’s	another	problem,’	he	added	as
the	mob	saw	them	and	a	half-dozen	thugs	split	away,	then	slowly,	ominously
approached.	‘Those	weals	all	over	you,	Sergeant	–	easily	mistaken	for	signs	of
plague.’
‘What?	Gods	below,	let’s	get	into	that	tavern.’
They	hurried	forward,	pushed	through	the	doors.
Inside,	inky	gloom	broken	only	by	a	few	tallow	candles	on	blackened
tabletops.	There	was	but	one	other	customer,	seated	near	the	back	wall.	The
ceiling	was	low,	the	floor	underfoot	littered	with	rubbish.	The	thick	air
reminded	Hellian	of	a	cheese-sock.
From	the	right	appeared	the	proprietor,	a	pike-thin	Dal	Honese	of
indeterminate	age,	each	eye	looking	in	a	different	direction	–	neither	one
fixing	on	Hellian	or	Banaschar	as	he	smiled	unctuously,	hands	wringing.
‘Ah,	most	sweet	tryst,	yes?	Come!	I	have	a	table,	yes!	Reserved	for	such	as
you!’
‘Close	that	ugly	mouth	or	I’ll	sew	it	up	myself,’	Hellian	said.	‘Jus’	show	us
the	damned	table	then	get	us	a	pitcher	of	anything	you	got	that	won’t	come
back	up	through	our	noses.’
Head	bobbing,	the	man	hobbled	over	to	a	table	and,	reaching	out	multiple
times	he	finally	grasped	hold	of	the	chairs	and	made	a	show	of	dragging	them
back	through	the	filth.
Banaschar	made	to	sit,	then	he	recoiled.	‘Gods	below,	that	candle—’
‘Oh	yes!’	said	the	Dal	Honese	gleefully,	‘the	few	wax	witches	left	are	most
generous	with	Smiley’s.	It’s	the	history,	yes?’
Sudden	loud	voices	outside	the	entrance	and	the	proprietor	winced.
‘Uninvited	guests.	A	moment	whilst	I	send	them	on	their	way.’	He	headed	off.
Hellian	finally	released	her	grip	on	the	ex-priest	and	slumped	down	in	the
chair	opposite.	‘Don’t	try	nothing,’	she	said	in	a	growl.	‘I	ain’t	in	the	mood.’
Behind	her	the	door	was	pulled	back	by	the	owner.	A	few	quiet	words,	then
louder	threats.
Hellian	saw	Banaschar ’s	gaze	flick	past	her	–	he	had	a	good	view	of	what
was	going	on	out	front	–	and	then	he	bolted	back	in	his	chair,	eyes	widening	–
as	shrieks	erupted	from	the	mob,	followed	by	the	sounds	of	panicked	flight.
Scowling,	Hellian	twisted	round	in	her	chair.
The	proprietor	was	gone,	and	in	the	man’s	place	stood	a	demon,	its	back	to
them,	big	enough	to	fill	the	entire	doorway.	A	thrashing	victim	was	in	its	huge


hands	and,	as	the	sergeant	watched,	the	demon	tore	off	the	screaming	man’s
head,	leaned	through	the	doorway	and	threw	it	after	the	fleeing	citizens.	Then	it
flung	the	headless	corpse	in	the	same	direction.
A	strange	blurring,	and	a	sweet,	spicy	scent	drifted	back	into	the	tavern,
and	then	the	demon	was	gone,	in	its	place	the	old	Dal	Honese,	brushing	clean
his	hands,	then	the	front	of	his	grimy	tunic.	He	turned	about	and	walked	back	to
the	table.
Another	smile	beneath	skewed	eyes.	‘Finest	ale,	then,	a	pitcher,	coming
right	up!’
Hellian	swung	back	round	in	her	chair.	Her	gaze	flicked	over	to	the	other
customer	at	the	back	wall.	A	woman,	a	whore.	The	sergeant	grunted,	then
called	to	her,	‘You!	Get	much	business?’
A	snort	in	reply,	then,	‘Who	cares?’
‘Well,	you	got	a	point	there,	you	do.’
‘Both	of	you	be	quiet!’	Banaschar	shouted,	his	voice	sounding	halfstrangled.	‘That	was	a	Kenryll’ah	demon!’
‘He’s	not	so	bad,’	said	the	whore,	‘once	you	get	to	know	’im.’
From	behind	the	bar	came	the	sound	of	crashing	crockery,	then	a	curse.
	
In	clumps,	in	bands,	in	ragged	troops,	the	crowds	began	reappearing	along	the
Centre	Docks	harbourfront.	More	weapons	among	them	now,	and	here	and
there	bows.	Torches	flared	in	the	dark,	and	voices	rose,	delivering	commands.
Leaning	against	the	prow	of	the	Silanda	–	moored	just	behind	the	longboat
the	Red	Blades	had	used	–	Koryk	watched	the	proceedings	on	the	front	street
for	a	time,	then	he	turned	about	and	made	his	way	back	down	to	the	mid	deck.
‘Sergeant	Balm.’
‘What?’
‘We	could	be	in	for	some	trouble	soon.’
‘Typical,’	Balm	hissed,	rising	to	begin	pacing.	‘Fid	vanishes.	Gesler
vanishes.	Leaving	just	me,	and	I	ain’t	got	no	whistle,	do	I?	Deadsmell,	get
up’n’over,	talk	to	Fist	Keneb.	See	what	they	want	us	to	do	about	it.’
The	corporal	shrugged,	then	made	his	way	to	the	boarding	ladder.
Tarr	was	climbing	into	his	armour.	‘Sergeant,’	he	said,	‘we	got	Fid’s	crate
of	munitions	below—’
‘Hood’s	balls,	you’re	right!	Cuttle,	get	down	there.	Sharpers	and	burners,
all	you	can	lay	hands	on.	Throatslitter	–	what	are	you	doing	there?’
‘Was	thinking	of	sneaking	into	that	crowd,’	the	man	said	from	the	rail,
where	he’d	thrown	one	leg	over	and	was	about	to	climb	down	into	the	murky


water.	‘It	doesn’t	sound	right,	does	it?	There’s	ringleaders	up	there	–	Claws,
maybe,	and	you	know	how	I	like	killing	those.	I	could	make	things	more
confused,	like	they	should	be—’
‘You’ll	get	torn	to	pieces,	you	idiot.	No,	you	stay	here,	we’re	undermanned
enough	as	it	is.’
Koryk	crouched	down	near	Tarr	and	Smiles.	‘Fid	keeps	doing	this,	doesn’t
he?’
‘Relax,’	Tarr	said.	‘If	need	be,	me	and	Gesler ’s	heavies	will	hold	the	jetty.’
‘You’re	looking	forward	to	that!’	Smiles	accused.
‘Why	not?	Since	when	did	the	Wickans	deserve	all	this	hate?	That	mob’s
hungry	for	the	Fourteenth,	fine,	why	disappoint	them?’
‘’Cause	we	was	ordered	to	stay	aboard	here,’	Smiles	said.
‘Easier	holding	the	jetty	than	letting	the	bastards	jump	down	onto	this
deck.’
‘They’d	jump	right	back	off,’	Koryk	predicted,	‘once	they	see	those	heads.’
‘I’m	itching	for	a	fight,	Koryk.’
‘Fine,	Tarr,	you	go	up	and	get	yourself	ready.	Me,	Smiles	and	Cuttle	will
be	right	behind	you,	with	a	few	dozen	sharpers.’
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	joined	them.	The	man	was	strapping	on	a
round-shield.	‘I	will	flank	you,	Corporal	Tarr,’	he	said.	‘I	have	found	a	cutlass
and	I	have	some	skill	with	that	weapon.’
‘Appreciate	the	company,’	Tarr	said,	then	looked	over	to	where	Shortnose,
Flashwit,	Uru	Hela	and	Mayfly	were	donning	armour.	‘Six	in	all,	front	line.	Let
them	try	and	get	past	us.’
Cuttle	reappeared,	dragging	a	crate.
‘Pass	’em	out,	sapper,’	Balm	ordered.	‘Then	we	all	go	up	top	and	give	that
mob	a	wave	over.’
Koryk	loaded	his	crossbow,	then	pounded	Tarr	on	the	shoulder.	‘Let’s	go
take	a	look.	I’m	in	the	mood	to	kill	someone,	too.’
The	corporal	straightened,	then	spat	over	the	side.	‘Aren’t	we	all?’


Chapter	Twenty-three
The	Twins	stood	on	their	tower	as	the	slaughter	began	below	and
the	knuckles	bouncing	wild	to	their	delight,	now	turned	sudden
sudden	and	sour	and	this	game	they	played	–	the	mortals
bleeding	and	crying	in	the	dark	–	they	saw	it	turn	and	the	game
they	played	tossed	to	a	new	wind,	a	gale	not	their	own	–	and	so
the	Twins	were	played,	oh	how	they	were	played.
Slayer’s	Moon
Vatan	Urot
Within	sight	of	Rampart	Way	–	the	stairs	leading	up	to	Mock’s	Hold	–	Kalam
Mekhar	glanced	behind	them	yet	again.	Furtive	crowds	were	closing	in,
moving	one	and	all,	it	seemed,	back	towards	the	harbourfront.	Who	was	behind
all	of	this?	What	possible	reason	could	there	be?
The	Fourteenth	would	not	be	dragged	down	into	slaughter.	In	fact,	the	only
realistic	outcome	was	the	very	opposite.	Hundreds	of	citizens	could	well	die
tonight,	before	the	rest	broke	and	fled.	True,	there	were	but	a	handful	of
marines	at	the	jetty,	but,	Kalam	well	knew,	they	had	Moranth	munitions.	And
then,	of	course,	there	was	Quick	Ben.
Just	don’t	use	yourself	up,	friend.	I	think…The	assassin	reached	beneath	the
folds	of	his	cloak,	reassured	himself	once	again	that	he	still	carried	the	acorn
the	High	Mage	had	prepared	for	him.	My	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole.	If	it	came
to	it,	he	could	summon	Quick.	And	I’m	thinking…
The	Adjunct	did	not	hesitate,	beginning	her	ascent	of	Rampart	Way.	The
others	followed.
A	long	climb	ahead,	a	tiring	one,	rows	upon	rows	of	steps	that	had	seen
more	than	their	share	of	spilled	blood.	Kalam	had	few	pleasant	memories	of
Rampart	Way.	She’s	up	there,	and	so	it	flows	down,	ever	down.	They	were
above	the	level	of	the	Upper	Estates	now,	passing	through	a	roiling	updraught
of	mists	bitter	with	woodsmoke.	Condensation	clung	to	the	stone	wall	on	their
left,	as	if	the	promontory	itself	had	begun	to	sweat.
There	was	torchlight	weaving	through	the	streets	below.	City	Watch	alarms


sounded	here	and	there,	and	suddenly	an	estate	was	in	flames,	black	smoke
rising,	eerily	lit	from	beneath.	Faint	screams	reached	them.
And	they	climbed	without	pause,	not	a	single	word	shared	among	them.
Naught	but	the	muted	clunk	and	rustle	of	armour,	the	scrape	of	boots,	heavier
breaths	drawn	with	each	step.	The	blurred	moon	emerged	to	throw	a	sickly
light	upon	the	city	below	and	the	bay,	illuminating	Old	Lookout	Island	at	the
very	outside	edge	of	the	harbour,	the	silvery	reeds	of	Mud	Island	and,	further
south,	opposite	the	mouth	of	Redcave	River,	Worm	Island,	where	stood	the
ruins	of	a	long	abandoned	temple	of	D’rek.	The	clear	water	this	side	of	Mud
Island	was	crowded	with	the	transports,	while	Nok’s	escorts	were	positioned
between	those	transports	and	the	four	Quon	dromons	of	Empress	Laseen’s
entourage,	the	latter	still	moored	alongside	the	Imperial	Docks	directly	beneath
Mock’s	Hold.
The	world	suddenly	seemed	etched	small	to	Kalam’s	eyes,	an	elaborate
arrangement	of	some	child’s	toys.	If	not	for	the	masses	of	torchlight	closing	in
on	the	Centre	Docks,	the	faintly	seen	running	figures	in	various	streets	and
avenues,	and	the	distant	cries	of	a	city	convulsing	upon	itself,	the	panorama
would	look	almost	picturesque.
Was	he	seeing	the	Malazan	Empire’s	death-throes?	On	the	island	where	it
began,	so	too,	perhaps,	would	its	fall	be	announced,	here,	this	night,	in	a
chaotic,	senseless	maelstrom	of	violence.	The	Adjunct	crushed	the	rebellion	in
Seven	Cities.	This	should	be	a	triumphal	return.	Laseen,	what	have	you	done?	Is
this	mad	beast	now	broken	free	of	your	control?
Civilization’s	veil	was	so	very	thin,	he	well	knew.	Casting	it	aside	required
little	effort,	and	even	less	instigation.	There	were	enough	thugs	in	the	world	–
and	those	thugs	could	well	be	wearing	the	raiment	of	a	noble,	or	a	Fist,	or
indeed	a	priest’s	robes	or	a	scholar ’s	vestments	–	enough	of	them,	without
question,	who	lusted	for	chaos	and	the	opportunities	it	provided.	For	senseless
cruelty,	for	the	unleashing	of	hatred,	for	killing	and	rape.	Any	excuse	would
suffice,	or	even	none	at	all.
Ahead	of	him,	the	Adjunct	ascended	without	hesitation,	as	though	she	was
climbing	a	scaffold,	at	peace	with	what	the	fates	had	decreed.	Was	he	reading
her	true?	Kalam	did	not	know.
But	the	time	was	coming,	very	soon	now,	when	he	would	need	to	decide.
And	he	hoped.	He	prayed.	That	the	moment,	when	it	arrived,	would	make
his	choice	obvious,	indeed,	inevitable.	Yet,	a	suspicion	lurked	that	the	choice
would	prove	far	harsher	than	he	now	dared	admit.
Do	I	choose	to	live,	or	do	I	choose	to	die?
He	looked	down	to	his	right,	at	those	four	ships	directly	below.


She	brought	a	lot	of	people	with	her,	didn’t	she?
	
Halfway	to	Raven	Hill	Park,	Bottle	drew	up	against	a	door,	his	heart	pounding,
sweat	dripping	from	his	face.	Sorcery	was	roiling	through	every	street.
Mockra.	Twisting	the	thoughts	of	the	unsuspecting	and	the	gullible,	filling
skulls	with	the	hunger	for	violence.	And	lone	figures	making	their	way	against
the	tide	were	victims	in	the	waiting	–	he	had	been	forced	to	take	a	roundabout
route	to	this	door,	along	narrow	choking	alleys,	down	beneath	North
Riverwalk,	buried	up	to	his	ankles	in	the	filthy	mud	of	Malaz	River,	where
insects	rose	in	voracious	swarms.	But	at	last,	he	had	arrived.
He	drew	a	knife	and,	fearful	of	making	a	louder	noise,	scratched	against
the	door.	At	the	moment	the	street	behind	him	was	empty,	but	he	could	hear
riots	beginning,	the	splintering	of	wood,	the	shrill	cry	of	a	dying	horse,	and
everywhere	throughout	the	city,	dogs	were	now	barking,	as	if	some	ancient
wolf	memory	had	been	awakened.	He	scratched	again.
The	door	suddenly	swung	open.	A	tall,	grey-haired	woman	stared	down	at
him,	expressionless.
‘Agayla,’	Bottle	said.	‘My	uncle	married	your	aunt’s	husband’s	sister.
We’re	family!’
She	stepped	back.	‘Get	in	here,	unless	you’re	of	a	mind	to	get	torn	to
pieces!’
‘I’m	Bottle,’	he	said,	following	her	into	an	apothecary	thick	with	the	scents
of	herbs,	‘that’s	not	my	real	name,	but—’
‘Oh,	never	mind	all	that.	Your	boots	are	filthy.	Where	have	you	come	from
and	why	did	you	choose	this	night	of	all	nights	to	visit	Malaz	City?	Tea?’
Blinking,	Bottle	nodded.	‘I’m	from	the	Fourteenth	Army,	Agayla—’
‘Well,	that	was	silly	of	you,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘You	should	be	hiding	in	the	boats	with	all	the	rest,	dear	boy.’
‘I	can’t.	I	mean,	the	Adjunct	sent	me—’
She	turned.	‘To	see	me?	Whatever	for?’
‘No,	it’s	not	that.	It	was	my	idea	to	find	you.	I’m	looking	for	someone.	It’s
important	–	I	need	your	help.’
Her	back	to	him	once	more,	she	poured	the	herbal	brew	into	two	cups.
‘Come	get	your	tea,	Bottle.’
As	he	stepped	forward,	Agayla	quickly	faced	him	again,	reached	into	the
folds	of	his	cloak	and	snatched	free	the	doll.	She	studied	it	for	a	moment,	then,
with	a	scowl,	shook	the	doll	in	front	of	Bottle’s	face.	‘And	what	is	this?	Have


you	any	idea	what	you	are	dabbling	in,	child?’
‘Child?	Hold	on—’
‘Is	this	the	man	you	need	to	find?’
‘Well,	yes—’
‘Then	you	leave	me	no	choice,	do	you?’
‘Sorry?’
She	stuffed	the	doll	back	into	the	folds	of	his	cloak	and	turned	away	once
more.	‘Drink	your	tea.	Then	we’ll	talk.’
‘You	can	help	me?’
‘Save	the	world?	Well,	yes,	of	course.’
Save	the	world?	Now,	Adjunct,	you	never	mentioned	that	part.
	
Koryk	rolled	his	shoulders	to	adjust	the	weight	of	the	heavy	chain	armour.
Longsword	and	shield	were	positioned	on	the	damp	stones	behind	him.	In	his
gauntleted	hands	he	held	his	crossbow.	Three	paces	to	his	left	stood	Smiles,	a
sharper	in	her	right	hand,	her	bared	teeth	gleaming	in	the	dull	moonlight.	To
his	right	was	Cuttle,	crouched	down	over	a	collection	of	munitions	laid	out	on
a	rain-cape.	Among	them	was	a	cusser.
‘Hold	on,	Cuttle,’	Koryk	said	upon	seeing	that	oversized	grenado.	‘Pass
that	cusser	right	back	down,	will	you?	Unless	you’re	planning	on	blowing	up
everyone	here,	not	to	mention	the	Silanda	and	the	Froth	Wolf.’
The	sapper	squinted	up	at	him.	‘If	it	takes	a	hundred	of	’em	with	us,	I’m
happy,	Koryk.	Don’t	mind	that	one	–	it’s	for	the	last	thing	left	–	you’ll	probably
be	all	down	by	then,	anyway.’
‘But	maybe	still	alive—’
‘Try	and	avoid	that,	soldier.	Unless	you’re	happy	with	the	mob	having	fun
with	what’s	left	of	you.’
Scowling,	Koryk	returned	his	attention	to	the	massing	crowd	opposite.
Twenty	paces	away,	milling,	shouting	threats	and	ugly	promises.	Plenty	of
serious	weapons	among	them.	The	City	Guard	had	vanished,	and	all	that
seemed	to	be	holding	the	fools	back	for	the	moment	was	the	solid	line	of
shield-locked	soldiers	facing	them.	Tarr,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	Uru	Hela,
Mayfly,	Shortnose	and	Flashwit.	A	few	rocks	and	brick	fragments	had	been
thrown	across	the	killing	ground,	and	those	that	came	close	were	met	by
shields	lifting	almost	languidly	to	fend	them	off.
Burning	arrows	were	being	readied	along	the	flanks	of	the	mob.
They’ll	try	to	fire	the	ships	here	first,	and	that	is	not	good.	He	didn’t	think
the	Silanda	would	burn,	not	after	what	Gesler	had	told	them.	But	the	Froth	Wolf


was	another	matter.	He	glanced	over	to	see	Corporal	Deadsmell	cross	the
gangplank	back	to	the	jetty,	and	behind	him	was	Fist	Keneb,	who	then	spoke.
‘Sergeant	Balm.’
‘Aye,	Fist?’
Keneb	looked	around.	‘Where’re	Gesler	and	Fiddler?’
‘Scouting,	sir.’
‘Scouting.	I	see.	So,	you’re	it,	are	you?’
‘Those	arrows,	sir—’
‘Destriant	Run’Thurvian	assures	me	our	moored	craft	will	be	safe.	The
transports,	alas,	are	another	matter.	We	have	signalled	the	nearest	ones,	with	the
command	that	they	withdraw	until	out	of	range.	What	this	means,	Sergeant,	is
that	you	and	your	soldiers	are	on	your	own.	The	bow	ballista	on	Froth	Wolf
will	provide	support.’
‘Appreciate	that,	sir,’	Balm	said,	a	strangely	bewildered	look	in	his	eyes.
‘Where’s	the	siege?’
‘Excuse	me?’
Deadsmell	cleared	his	throat	and	said	to	Keneb,	‘Don’t	mind	him,	sir.	Once
the	fighting	starts	he’ll	be	fine.	Fist,	you’re	saying	those	arrows	won’t	light	up
the	ships	–	once	they	see	that	they’ll	turn	’em	on	us.’
Nodding,	Keneb	looked	over	at	Cuttle.	‘Sapper,	I	want	you	to	hit	those
archers	on	the	flanks.	Don’t	wait	for	their	first	move.	Sharpers,	assuming
they’re	within	range.’
Straightening,	Cuttle	looked	over.	‘Easy,	sir.	Galt,	Lobe,	get	over	here	and
collect	yourselves	a	couple	sharpers	–	not	the	cusser,	Galt,	you	idiot	–	those
small	round	ones,	right?	Two,	damn	you,	no	more	than	that.	Come	back	if	you
need	more—’
‘Maybe	three—’
‘No!	Think	on	it,	Lobe.	How	many	hands	you	got?	Where	you	gonna	hold
the	third	one	–	between	your	cheeks?	Two,	and	don’t	drop	’em	or	this	whole
jetty	will	vanish	and	us	with	it.’	He	turned.	‘Fist,	you	want	us	to	hit	’em	now?’
‘Might	as	well,’	Keneb	replied.	‘With	luck,	the	rest	will	scatter.’
Flaming	arrows	hissed	out,	seeking	the	rigging	of	the	Froth	Wolf.	The
sizzling	arcs	suddenly	disappeared.
Koryk	grunted.	‘Cute.	Better	get	to	it,	Cuttle.	The	next	salvo’s	coming	our
way,	I’d	wager.’
Cuttle	on	the	right,	Galt	and	Lobe	on	the	left.	Hefting	sharpers,	then	at
Cuttle’s	command	they	threw	the	clay	grenados.
Detonations,	snapping	like	cracks	in	brittle	stone,	and	bodies	were	down,
writhing,	screaming—


The	centre	mob,	with	a	guttural	roar,	charged.
‘Shit,’	from	one	of	the	heavies	up	front.
Smiles	launched	her	sharper	into	that	onrushing	midst.
Another	explosion,	this	one	ten	paces	in	front	of	the	shield-wall,	which
instinctively	flinched	back,	heads	ducking	beneath	raised	shields.	Shrieks,
tumbling	figures,	blood	and	bits	of	meat,	bodies	underfoot	tripping	the
attackers	–	the	front	of	that	charge	had	become	a	chaotic	mess,	but	those	behind
it	pushed	on.
Koryk	moved	along	to	the	right	–	he	could	hear	someone	shouting	orders,
a	heavy	voice,	authoritarian	–	the	cadence	of	a	Malazan	officer	–	and	Koryk
wanted	the	bastard.
The	ballista	mounted	on	the	prow	of	the	Froth	Wolf	bucked,	the	oversized
missile	speeding	out,	ripping	through	the	crowd	in	a	streak	of	spraying	blood.
A	quarrel	designed	to	knock	holes	in	hulls	punched	through	flesh	and	bone
effortlessly,	one	body	after	another.
A	few	arrows	raced	towards	the	soldiers	on	the	jetty,	and	then	the	mob
reached	the	front	line.
Undisciplined,	convinced	that	the	weight	of	impetus	alone	would	suffice	in
shattering	the	shield-wall,	they	were	not	prepared	for	the	perfectly	timed
answering	push	from	the	heavies,	the	large	shields	hammering	into	them,
blades	lashing	out.
The	only	soldier	untrained	in	holding	a	wall	was	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas,	and	Koryk	saw	Smiles	move	up	behind	the	man	as	he	chopped
away	at	a	foe	with	his	cutlass.	The	man	before	him	was	huge,	wielding
shortswords,	one	thrusting	the	other	slashing,	and	Corabb	dropped	into	a
sustained	defence	with	his	round	shield	and	his	weapon	–	even	as	Smiles,
seeing	an	opening,	threw	a	knife	that	took	the	attacker	in	the	throat.	As	the	man
crumpled,	Corabb	swung	and	the	cutlass	crunched	down	into	the	unprotected
head.
‘Back	into	the	gap!’	Smiles	screamed,	pushing	Corabb	forward.
Koryk	caught	sight	of	a	figure	off	to	one	side	–	not	the	commander	–	gods,
that’s	a	mage,	and	he’s	readying	a	warren	–	he	raised	his	crossbow,	depressed
the	trigger.
The	quarrel	sent	the	man	spinning.
Three	more	sharpers	detonated	further	back	in	the	pressing	mob.	All	at
once	the	attack	crumpled,	and	the	shield-wall	advanced	a	step,	then	another,
weapons	slashing	down	to	finish	off	the	wounded.	Figures	raced	away,	and
Koryk	heard	someone	in	the	distance	shouting,	calling	out	a	rallying	point	–
for	the	moment,	he	saw,	few	were	listening.


One	down.
On	the	broad	loading	platform	and	to	either	side,	scores	of	bodies	littered
the	cobbles,	faint	voices	crying	with	sorrow	and	pain.
Gods	below,	we’re	killing	our	own	here.
	
On	the	foredeck	of	the	Froth	Wolf,	Keneb	turned	to	Captain	Rynag.	He
struggled	to	contain	his	fury	as	he	said,	‘Captain,	there	were	soldiers	in	that
mob.	Out	of	uniform.’
The	man	was	pale.	‘I	know	nothing	of	that,	Fist.’
‘What	is	the	point	of	this?	They	won’t	get	their	hands	on	the	Fourteenth.’
‘I	–	I	don’t	know.	It’s	the	Wickans	–	they	want	them.	A	pogrom’s	begun	and
there’s	no	way	of	stopping	it.	A	crusade’s	been	launched,	there’s	an	army
marching	onto	the	Wickan	Plains—’
‘An	army?	What	kind	of	army?’
‘Well,	a	rabble,	but	they	say	it’s	ten	thousand	strong,	and	there’s	veterans
among	them.’
‘The	Empress	approves?	Never	mind.’	Keneb	turned	once	more	and
regarded	the	city.	The	bastards	were	regrouping.	‘All	right,’	he	said,	‘if	this
goes	on	long	enough	I	may	defy	the	orders	given	me	by	the	Adjunct.	And	land
the	whole	damned	army—’
‘Fist,	you	cannot	do	that—’
Keneb	spun	round.	‘Not	long	ago	you	were	insisting	on	it!’
‘Plague,	Fist!	You	would	unleash	devastation—’
‘So	what?	I’d	rather	give	than	receive,	under	the	circumstances.	Now,
unless	the	Empress	has	a	whole	army	hidden	here	in	the	city,	the	Fourteenth	can
put	an	end	to	this	uprising	–	the	gods	know,	we’ve	got	enough	experience	when
it	comes	to	those.	And	I	admit,	I	am	now	of	a	mind	to	do	just	that.’
‘Fist—’
‘Get	off	this	ship,	Captain.	Now.’
The	man	stared.	‘You	are	threatening	me?’
‘Threatening?	Coltaine	was	pinned	spreadeagled	to	a	cross	outside	Aren.
While	Pormqual’s	army	hid	behind	the	city’s	walls.	I	am	sorely	tempted,
Captain,	to	nail	you	to	something	similar,	right	here	and	now.	A	gift	for	the
unbelievers	out	there,	just	to	remind	them	that	some	of	us	remember	the	truth.	I
am	going	to	draw	three	breaths	and	if	you’re	still	here	when	I’m	done—’
The	captain	scrambled.
	


Koryk	watched	the	officer	rush	down	the	gangplank,	then	edge	round	the
heavies	in	their	line.	He	seemed	to	be	making	for	the	nearest	crowd	that	was
rallying	at	the	mouth	of	a	broad	street.
Had	Koryk	considered,	he	would	have	found	that	array	of	dark	thoughts	in
his	mind	–	each	and	every	one	ready	to	find	voice	–	to	give	him	the	excuses	he
needed.	But	he	did	not	consider,	and	as	for	excuses,	there	was,	for	him,	no
need,	no	need	at	all.
He	raised	his	crossbow.
Loosed	the	quarrel.
Watched	it	strike	the	captain	between	the	shoulder-blades,	watched	the	man
sprawl	forward,	arms	flung	out	to	the	sides.
Tarr	and	others	in	that	front	line	turned	to	study	him,	silent,	expressions
blank	beneath	the	rims	of	helms.
Smiles	voiced	a	disbelieving	laugh.
Heavy	boots	on	the	gangplank,	then	Keneb’s	harsh	demand:	‘Who	was
responsible	for	that?’
Koryk	faced	the	Fist.	‘I	was,	sir.’
‘You	just	murdered	a	captain	of	the	Untan	Palace	Guard,	soldier.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
From	Tarr:	‘They’re	coming	back	for	another	try!	Looks	like	you	got	’em
mad,	Koryk.’
‘Proof	enough	for	me,’	the	half-blood	Seti	said	in	a	growl,	as	he	began
reloading	his	crossbow.	As	he	waited	for	Keneb	to	speak.	Waited	for	the
command	to	Balm	to	arrest	him.
Instead,	the	Fist	said	nothing.	He	turned	about	and	walked	back	to	the	Froth
Wolf.
A	hiss	from	Smiles.	‘Look	out,	Koryk.	Wait	till	Fid	hears	about	this.’
‘Fid?’	snapped	Sergeant	Balm.	‘What	about	the	Adjunct?	You’re	gonna	get
strung	up,	Koryk.’
‘If	I	am	then	I	am.	But	I’d	do	it	all	over	again.	Bastard	wanted	us	to	hand
them	the	Wickans.’
	
Numbed,	Keneb	stepped	back	onto	the	mid	deck.	‘…wanted	us	to	hand	them	the
Wickans…’	Marines	and	sailors	were	all	looking	at	him,	and	the	Destriant
Run’Thurvian	had	appeared	from	below	and	now	approached.
‘Fist	Keneb,	this	night	is	not	proceeding	well,	is	it?’
Keneb	blinked.	‘Destriant?’
‘A	most	grievous	breach	of	discipline—’


‘I	am	sorry,’	Keneb	cut	in,	‘it’s	clear	you	misunderstand.	Some	time	ago,
the	Adjunct	proclaimed	the	birth	of	the	Bonehunters.	What	did	she	see	then?	I
had	but	a	sense	of	it	–	barely	a	sense.	More	like	a	suspicion.	But	now…’	he
shook	his	head.	‘Three	squads	on	the	jetty	standing	their	ground,	and	why?’
‘Fist,	the	threat	is	perceived,	and	must	be	answered.’
‘We	could	cast	lines	and	sail	out.	Instead,	here	we	are.	Here	they	are,	ready
to	bloody	the	noses	of	anyone	who	dares	come	close.	Ready	to	answer	blood
with	blood.	Betrayal,	Destriant,	stalks	this	night	like	a	god,	right	here	in	Malaz
City.’	He	strode	past	the	others,	back	to	the	forecastle.	‘That	ballista	loaded?’	he
demanded.
One	of	the	crew	nodded.	‘Aye,	Fist.’
‘Good.	They’re	closing	fast.’
The	Destriant	moved	up	beside	Keneb.	‘Fist,	I	do	not	understand.’
Keneb	pulled	his	attention	from	the	hundreds	edging	ever	closer.	‘But	I	do.
I’ve	seen.	We’re	holding	the	jetty,	and	not	one	damned	soldier	down	there
gives	a	damn	about	anything	else!	Why?’	He	thumped	the	rail.	‘Because	we’re
waiting.	We’re	waiting	for	the	Adjunct.	Destriant,	we’re	hers,	now.	It’s	done,
and	the	damned	empire	can	rot!’
The	other	man’s	eyes	slowly	widened	at	this	outburst,	and	then,	with	a	faint
smile,	he	bowed.	‘As	you	say,	Fist.	As	you	say.’
	
Last	door	down	the	tenement	hall,	uppermost	floor.	Typical.	The	knife-edge
slipped	easily	between	the	door	and	the	frame,	lifted	the	latch.	A	slow,	even
push	moved	the	door	back	with	but	the	faintest	moan	from	the	leather	hinges.
Fiddler	slipped	inside,	looked	round	in	the	gloom.
Loud	animal	snoring	and	grunts	from	the	cot,	a	smell	of	stale	beer
pervading	the	turgid	air.
Moving	in	the	tiniest	increments,	Fiddler	lowered	his	collection	of
crossbows	to	the	floor,	a	procedure	taking	nearly	thirty	heartbeats,	yet	not	once
did	the	stentorian	notes	of	slumber	pause	from	the	figure	on	the	cot.
Unburdened	now,	Fiddler	crept	closer,	breathing	nice	and	slow,	until	he
hovered	right	above	his	unsuspecting	victim’s	shaggy	head.
Then	he	began	whispering	in	a	singsong	voice,	‘Your	ghosts	–	we’re	back	–
never	to	leave	you	alone,	never	to	give	you	a	moment’s	rest	–	oh	yes,	dear
Braven	Tooth,	it’s	me,	Fiddler,	dead	but	not	gone	–	a	ghost,	returning	to	haunt
you	until	your	last—’
The	fist	came	out	of	nowhere,	connecting	solidly	with	Fiddler ’s	midriff.
All	air	driven	from	him,	the	sergeant	collapsed	backward,	onto	the	floor,


where	he	curled	up	round	the	agony—
As	Braven	Tooth	climbed	upright.	‘That	wasn’t	funny,	Fiddler,’	he	said,
looking	down.	‘But	you,	squirming	round	down	there	on	the	floor,	now	that’s
funny.’
‘Shut	that	mouth,’	gasped	Fiddler,	‘and	find	me	a	chair.’
The	Master	Sergeant	helped	him	to	his	feet.	Leaning	heavily,	Fiddler
carefully	straightened,	the	effort	punctuated	with	winces	and	the	hiss	of	breath
between	his	teeth.
‘You’ll	live?’
A	nod,	and	Fiddler	managed	to	step	back.	‘All	right,	I	deserved	that—’
‘Goes	without	saying,’	Braven	Tooth	replied.
They	faced	each	other	in	the	darkness	for	a	moment,	and	then	they
embraced.	And	said	nothing.
A	moment	later	the	door	swung	open	behind	them.	They	parted	to	see
Gesler	and	Stormy,	the	former	carrying	two	bottles	of	wine	and	the	latter	three
loaves	of	bread.
‘Hood’s	breath!’	Braven	Tooth	laughed.	‘The	old	bastards	one	and	all
come	home!’
As	Gesler	and	Stormy	set	their	victuals	down	on	a	small	table,	Fiddler
examined	the	fiddle	that	had	been	strapped	to	his	back.	No	damage	beyond	the
old	damage,	he	was	pleased	to	see.	He	drew	out	the	bow,	looked	round	as
Braven	Tooth	ignited	a	lantern,	then	walked	over	to	a	chair	and	sat	down.
A	moment,	then	all	three	men	were	staring	across	at	him.
‘I	know,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Braven	Tooth,	you	remember	the	last	time	I	played
—’
‘That	was	the	last	time?’
‘It	was,	and	there’s	been	a	lot	who’ve	fallen	since	then.	Friends.	People	we
grew	to	love,	and	now	miss,	like	holes	in	the	heart.’	He	drew	a	deep	breath,
then	continued,	‘It’s	been	waiting,	inside,	for	a	long	time.	So,	my	old,	old
friends,	let’s	hear	some	names.’
Braven	Tooth	sat	down	on	the	cot,	scratching	at	his	beard.	‘Got	a	new	one
for	you.	A	soldier	I	sent	off	this	very	night	who	got	himself	killed.	Name	of
Gentur.	His	friend	Mudslinger	nearly	died	himself	but	it	looks	like	the	Lady
pulled.	And	we	found	him	in	time	to	help	things	along.’
Fiddler	nodded.	‘Gentur.	All	right.	Gesler?’
‘Kulp.	Baudin.	And,	I	think,	Felisin	Paran	–	she	had	no	luck	at	all,	and	when
good	things	showed	up,	rare	as	that	was,	well,	she	didn’t	know	what	to	do	or
say.’	He	shrugged.	‘A	person	hurts	enough	inside,	all	they	can	do	is	hurt	back.
So,	her	as	well.’	He	paused,	then	added,	‘Pella,	Truth.’


‘And	Coltaine,’	Stormy	said.	‘And	Duiker,	and	the	Seventh.’
Fiddler	began	tuning	the	instrument.	‘Good	names,	one	and	all.	I’ll	add	a
few	more.	Whiskeyjack.	Hedge.	Trotts.	And	one	more	–	no	name	yet,	and	it’s
not	so	bad	as	that.	One	more…’	He	grimaced.	‘Could	sound	a	little	rough,	no
matter	how	much	rosin	I	use.	No	matter.	Got	a	sad	dirge	in	my	head	that	needs
to	come	out—’
‘All	sad,	Fid?’
‘No,	not	all.	I	leave	the	good	memories	to	you	–	but	I’ll	give	you	a	whisper
every	now	and	then,	to	tell	you	I	know	what	you’re	feeling.	Now,	settle	down	–
pour	them	cups	full,	Gesler	–	this’ll	take	a	while,	I	expect.’
And	he	began	to	play.
	
The	heavy	door	at	the	top	of	Rampart	Way	opened	with	a	squeal,	revealing	a
massive,	humped	form	silhouetted	on	the	threshold.	As	the	Adjunct	reached	the
level,	the	figure	stepped	back.	She	strode	into	the	gatehouse,	followed	by
T’amber,	then	Fist	Tene	Baralta.	Kalam	entered	the	musty	room.	The	air	was
sweet	with	the	cloying	fumes	of	rum.
The	assassin	paused	opposite	the	keeper.	‘Lubben.’
A	heavy,	rumbling	reply,	‘Kalam	Mekhar.’
‘Busy	night?’
‘Not	everybody	uses	the	door,’	Lubben	replied.
Kalam	nodded,	and	said	nothing	more.	He	continued	on,	emerging	out	into
the	keep’s	courtyard,	tilted	flagstones	underfoot,	the	old	tower	off	to	the	left,
the	hold	itself	slightly	to	his	right.	The	Adjunct	had	already	traversed	half	the
length	of	the	concourse.	Behind	Kalam	the	escort	of	Untan	Guard	now
separated	themselves	from	the	group,	making	for	the	barracks	near	the	north
wall.
Kalam	squinted	up	at	the	murky	moon.	A	faint	wind	brushed	across	his
face,	warm,	sultry	and	dry,	plucking	at	the	sweat	on	his	brow.	Somewhere
overhead,	a	weather	vane	squealed	momentarily.	The	assassin	set	off	after	the
others.
Two	Claws	flanked	the	keep	entrance	–	not	the	usual	guard.	Kalam
wondered	where	the	resident	Fist	and	his	garrison	were	this	night.	Probably	in
the	storehouse	cellars,	blind	drunk.	Hood	knows,	it’s	where	I	would	be	in	their
boots.	Not	old	Lubben,	of	course.	That	hoary	hunchback	was	as	old	as	the
Rampart	Gate	itself	–	he’d	always	been	there,	as	far	back	as	the	Emperor ’s	time
and	even,	if	rumours	were	true,	back	to	Mock’s	rule	of	the	island.
As	Kalam	passed	between	the	two	assassins,	both	tilted	their	hooded	heads


in	his	direction.	A	mocking	acknowledgement,	he	concluded,	or	something
worse.	He	made	no	response,	continuing	on	into	the	broad	hallway.
Another	Claw	had	been	awaiting	them,	and	this	cowled	figure	now	led
them	towards	the	staircase.
Ascending	two	levels,	then	down	a	corridor,	into	an	antechamber,	where
Tene	Baralta	ordered	his	Red	Blades	to	remain,	barring	his	captain,	Lostara
Yil.	The	Fist	then	sent	off	two	of	his	soldiers	after	a	brief	whispered	set	of
instructions.	The	Adjunct	watched	all	of	this	without	expression,	although
Kalam	was	tempted	to	call	Baralta	out	on	what	was	obviously	an	act	of	pointed
independence	–	as	if	Tene	Baralta	was	divesting	himself	and	his	Red	Blades	of
any	association	with	the	Adjunct	and	the	Fourteenth	Army.
After	a	moment,	the	Claw	led	them	onward,	through	another	portal,	into
another	corridor,	then	down	its	length	to	a	set	of	double	doors.	Not	the	usual
room	for	official	meetings,	Kalam	knew.	This	one	was	smaller	–	if	the
approach	was	any	indication	–	and	situated	in	a	quarter	of	the	keep	rarely
frequented.	Two	more	Claws	stood	guard	at	the	entrance,	and	both	turned	to
open	the	doors.
Kalam	watched	the	Adjunct	stride	in,	then	halt.	As	did	T’amber	and	Tene
Baralta.	Beside	the	assassin,	Lostara	Yil’s	breath	caught.
A	tribunal	awaited	them,	and	seated	opposite	them	were	Empress	Laseen,
Korbolo	Dom	–	attired	as	a	High	Fist	–	and	another	person	Kalam	did	not
recognize.	Round-faced	and	full-featured,	corpulent,	wearing	blue	silks.	His
hair	was	colourless,	cut	short	and	oiled.	Sleepy	eyes	regarded	the	Adjunct	with
an	executioner ’s	avarice.
The	tables	were	arranged	in	an	inverted	T,	and	three	chairs	waited,	their
high	backs	to	the	newcomers.
After	a	long	moment,	the	Adjunct	stepped	forward,	drew	out	the	centre
chair,	and	sat,	her	back	straight.	T’amber	took	the	chair	to	Tavore’s	left.	Tene
Baralta	gestured	Lostara	Yil	to	accompany	him	and	moved	off	to	the	far	right
side,	where	he	stood	at	attention,	facing	the	Empress.
Kalam	slowly	sighed,	then	walked	to	the	remaining	chair.	Sitting	down,	he
settled	both	gloved	hands	on	the	scarred	tabletop	before	him.
The	oily	fat	man	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	assassin	and	leaned	forward	slightly.
‘Kalam	Mekhar,	yes?	Great	pleasure,’	he	murmured,	‘in	meeting	you	at	last.’
‘Is	it?	I’m	happy	for	you…whoever	you	are.’
‘Mallick	Rel.’
‘Here	in	what	capacity?’	Kalam	asked.	‘Chief	snake?’
‘That	will	be	enough	from	you,’	the	Empress	said.	‘Sit	if	you	must,	Kalam,
but	be	silent.	And	understand,	I	did	not	request	your	presence	here	this	night.’


Kalam	sensed	a	hidden	question	in	that	statement,	to	which	he	but	shrugged.
No,	Laseen,	I’m	not	ready	to	give	you	anything.
Laseen	shifted	her	attention	to	the	commander	of	the	Red	Blades.	‘Tene
Baralta,	I	understand	you	assisted	in	escorting	the	Adjunct	and	her	retinue
through	the	city.	Noble	of	you.	I	assume	the	Adjunct	did	not	invite	you,	nor
compel	you	in	any	manner.	Accordingly,	it	seems	clear	that	you	wish	to	speak
to	me	on	behalf	of	the	Red	Blades.’
The	man	with	the	ravaged	face	bowed,	then	said,	‘Yes,	Empress.’
‘Go	on.’
‘The	Red	Blades	were	conscripted	by	the	Adjunct	in	Aren,	Empress,
whereupon	I	was	made	a	Fist	in	the	Fourteenth	Army.	I	respectfully	request	that
you	countermand	that	order.	The	Red	Blades	have	ever	served	the	Malazan
Empire	in	an	independent	capacity,	as	befitting	our	unique	status	the	first	and
foremost	Imperial	Guardians	in	Seven	Cities.’
The	Empress	nodded.	‘I	see	no	reason	not	to	grant	your	request,
Commander.	Does	the	Adjunct	wish	to	make	comment?’
‘No.’
‘Very	well.	Commander	Tene	Baralta,	the	Red	Blades	can	be	quartered
here	in	Mock’s	Hold	for	the	time	being.	You	may	leave.’
The	man	bowed	again,	then,	turning	about,	he	marched	from	the	chamber.
His	captain	followed.
The	doors	closed	once	more	behind	them.
Laseen	fixed	her	attention	on	the	Adjunct.	‘Welcome	home,	Tavore,’	she
said.
‘Thank	you,	Empress.’
‘The	transports	in	the	harbour	display	the	flag	of	plague	–	you	and	I	both
know	that	no	plague	is	present	among	the	soldiers	of	your	army.’	She	tilted	her
head.	‘What	am	I	to	make	of	this	attempt	at	deception?’
‘Empress,	Fist	Keneb	has	evidently	concluded	that,	regardless	of	Captain
Rynag’s	views,	Malaz	City	is	in	a	state	of	civil	unrest,	sufficient	to	make	Keneb
fear	for	the	well-being	of	the	Fourteenth,	should	the	army	disembark.	After	all,
I	have	with	me	Wickans	–	whose	loyalty	to	the	Empire,	I	might	add,	is	beyond
reproach.	In	addition,	we	have	a	substantial	force	of	Khundryl	Burned	Tears,
who	have	also	served	with	distinction.	To	land	such	troops	could	invite	a
bloodbath.’
‘A	bloodbath,	Adjunct?’	Laseen’s	brows	rose.	‘Captain	Rynag	was	given
specific	orders	to	ensure	that	the	soldiers	of	the	Fourteenth	disarm	prior	to
disembarking.’
‘Thus	leaving	them	at	the	mercy	of	an	enflamed	mob,	Empress.’


Laseen	waved	dismissively.
‘Empress,’	the	Adjunct	continued,	‘I	believe	there	is	now	the
misapprehension,	here	in	the	heart	of	the	empire,	that	the	events	commonly
known	as	the	Chain	of	Dogs	–	and	those	that	followed	at	Aren	–	are	somehow
suspect.’	She	paused,	then	resumed,	‘I	see	that	Korbolo	Dom,	who	commanded
the	renegade	Dogslayers,	and	who	was	captured	and	arrested	in	Raraku,	is
once	more	a	free	man,	and,	indeed,	a	High	Fist.	Furthermore,	the	Jhistal	priest
and	likely	instigator	in	the	slaughter	of	the	Aren	Army,	Mallick	Rel,	now	sits
as	your	adviser	in	these	proceedings.	Needless	to	say,	I	am	confused	by	this.
Unless,	of	course,	the	Seven	Cities	Rebellion	has	succeeded	beyond	its	wildest
dreams,	regardless	of	my	own	successes	in	Seven	Cities.’
‘My	dear	Tavore,’	Laseen	said,	‘I	admit	to	some	embarrassment	on	your
behalf.	You	appear	to	hold	to	the	childish	notion	that	some	truths	are
intransigent	and	undeniable.	Alas,	the	adult	world	is	never	so	simple.	All	truths
are	malleable.	Subject,	by	necessity,	to	revision.	Have	you	not	yet	observed,
Tavore,	that	in	the	minds	of	the	people	in	this	empire,	truth	is	without
relevance?	It	has	lost	its	power.	It	no	longer	effects	change	and	indeed,	the	very
will	of	the	people	–	born	of	fear	and	ignorance,	granted	–	the	very	will,	as	I
said,	can	in	turn	revise	those	truths,	can	transform,	if	you	like,	the	lies	of
convenience	into	faith,	and	that	faith	in	turn	is	not	open	to	challenge.’
‘In	challenging,’	the	Adjunct	said	after	a	moment,	‘one	commits	treason.’
The	Empress	smiled.	‘I	see	you	grow	older	with	every	heartbeat,	Tavore.
Perhaps	we	might	mourn	the	loss	of	innocence,	but	not	for	long,	I’m	afraid.
The	Malazan	Empire	is	at	its	most	precarious	moment,	and	all	is	uncertain,
hovering	on	the	cusp.	We	have	lost	Dujek	Onearm	to	plague	–	and	his	army
appears	to	have	vanished	entirely,	likely	also	victims	of	that	plague.	Events
have	taken	a	turn	for	the	worse	in	Korel.	The	decimation	of	Seven	Cities	has
struck	us	a	near-mortal	blow	with	respect	to	our	economy	and,	specifically,	the
harvests.	We	may	find	ourselves	facing	starvation	before	the	subcontinent	can
recover.	It	becomes	imperative,	Tavore,	to	force	a	new	shape	upon	our
empire.’
‘And	what,	Empress,	does	this	new	shape	entail?’
Mallick	Rel	spoke:	‘Victims,	alas.	Spilled	blood,	to	slacken	the	thirst,	the
need.	Unfortunate,	but	no	other	path	presents.	All	are	saddened	here.’
Tavore	slowly	blinked.	‘You	wish	me	to	hand	over	the	Wickans.’
‘And,’	Mallick	Rel	said,	‘the	Khundryl.’
Korbolo	Dom	suddenly	leaned	forward.	‘One	other	matter,	Tavore	Paran.
Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	on	those	catamarans?’
‘Soldiers	of	a	people	known	as	the	Perish.’


‘Why	are	they	here?’	the	Napan	demanded,	baring	his	teeth.
‘They	have	pledged	allegiance,	High	Fist.’
‘To	the	Malazan	Empire?’
The	Adjunct	hesitated,	then	fixed	her	gaze	once	more	upon	Laseen.
‘Empress,	I	must	speak	with	you.	In	private.	There	are	matters	that	belong
exclusively	to	the	Empress	and	her	Adjunct.’
Mallick	Rel	hissed,	then	said,	‘Matters	unleashed	by	an	otataral	sword,	you
mean!	It	is	as	I	feared,	Empress!	She	serves	another,	now,	and	would	draw	cold
iron	across	the	throat	of	the	Malazan	Empire!’
Tavore’s	expression	twisted,	unveiling	disgust	as	she	looked	upon	the
Jhistal	priest.	‘The	empire	has	ever	refused	an	immortal	patron,	Mallick	Rel.
For	this	reason	more	than	any	other,	we	have	survived	and,	indeed,	grown	ever
stronger.	What	are	you	doing	here,	priest?’
‘Who	do	you	now	serve,	woman?’	Mallick	Rel	demanded.
‘I	am	the	Adjunct	to	the	Empress.’
‘Then	you	must	do	as	she	commands!	Give	us	the	Wickans!’
‘Us?	Ah,	now	I	see.	You	were	cheated	of	some	of	your	glory	outside	Aren.
Tell	me,	how	long	before	an	arrest	writ	is	issued	for	Fist	Blistig,	the	oncecommander	of	the	Aren	Guard	who	defied	the	order	to	leave	the	city?	Because
of	him	and	him	alone,	Aren	did	not	fall.’
Laseen	asked,	‘Were	not	the	Red	Blades	in	Aren	arrested	by	Blistig,
Tavore?’
‘At	Pormqual’s	command.	Please,	Empress,	we	must	speak,	you	and	I,
alone.’
And	Kalam	saw	then,	in	Laseen’s	eyes,	something	he	thought	he	would
never	see.	A	flicker	of	fear.
But	it	was	Korbolo	Dom	who	spoke.	‘Adjunct	Tavore,	I	am	now	High	Fist.
And,	with	Dujek’s	death,	I	am	ranking	High	Fist.	Furthermore,	I	have	assumed
the	title	and	responsibilities	of	First	Sword	of	the	Empire,	a	post	sadly	vacant
since	Dassem	Ultor ’s	untimely	death.	Accordingly,	I	now	assume	command	of
the	Fourteenth	Army.’
‘Tavore,’	Laseen	said	quietly,	‘it	was	never	the	function	of	an	Adjunct	to
command	armies.	Necessity	forced	my	hand	with	the	rebellion	in	Seven	Cities,
but	that	is	now	over.	You	have	completed	all	that	I	asked	of	you,	and	I	am	not
blind	to	your	loyalty.	It	grieves	me	that	this	meeting	has	become	so	overtly
hostile	–	you	are	the	extension	of	my	will,	Tavore,	and	I	do	not	regret	my
choice.	No,	not	even	now.	It	seems	I	must	make	the	details	of	my	will	clear	to
you.	I	want	you	at	my	side	once	more,	in	Unta.	Mallick	Rel	may	well	possess
talents	in	many	areas	of	administration,	but	he	lacks	in	others	–	I	need	you	for


those,	Tavore,	I	need	you	at	my	side	to	complement	the	Jhistal	priest.	You	see
before	you	the	restructuring	of	the	imperial	high	command.	A	new	First	Sword
now	assumes	overall	command	of	the	Malazan	Armies.	The	time	has	come,
Tavore,	to	set	aside	your	own	sword.’
Silence.	From	Tavore,	no	movement,	not	a	single	twitch	of	emotion.	‘As
you	command,	Empress.’
Beneath	his	clothes,	Kalam	felt	his	skin	grow	hot,	as	if	close	to	blistering
flames.	Sweat	ran	down	his	body;	he	could	feel	it	beading	on	his	face	and	neck.
He	stared	down	at	his	leather-clad	hands,	motionless	on	the	worn	wood	of	the
tabletop.
‘I	am	pleased,’	Laseen	said.
‘It	will	be	necessary,’	Tavore	said,	‘for	me	to	return,	briefly,	to	the	docks.	I
believe	Fist	Keneb	will	doubt	the	veracity	of	the	change	of	command	if
informed	by	anyone	but	me.’
‘A	most	loyal	man,’	Mallick	Rel	murmured.
‘Yes,	he	is	that.’
‘And	these	Perish?’	Korbolo	Dom	demanded.	‘Are	they	worth	the	trouble?
Will	they	submit	to	my	authority?’
‘I	cannot	speak	for	them	in	that	matter,’	Tavore	said	tonelessly.	‘But	they
will	not	reject	any	overtures	out	of	hand.	As	for	their	prowess,	I	believe	it	will
suffice,	at	least	in	an	auxiliary	function	to	our	regulars.’
‘There	is	nothing	more	to	them?’
The	Adjunct’s	shrug	was	careless.	‘They	are	foreigners,	First	Sword.
Barbarians.’
Barbarians	sailing	the	finest	warships	on	the	damned	ocean,	aye.
But	Korbolo	Dom,	in	all	his	percipience	and	razor-honed	judgement,
simply	nodded.
Another	moment	of	silence,	in	which	so	many	things	could	have	been	said,
in	which	the	course	of	the	Malazan	Empire	could	have	found	firmer	footing.
Silence,	and	yet	to	Kalam	it	seemed	he	could	hear	the	slamming	of	doors,	the
clatter	and	crunch	of	portcullis	dropping,	and	he	saw	hallways,	avenues,	where
the	flickering	light	dimmed,	then	vanished.
If	the	Empress	were	to	speak	then,	with	words	for	the	Adjunct	alone	–
anything,	any	overture	that	did	not	ring	false—
Mallick	Rel	said,	‘Adjunct,	there	is	the	matter	of	two	Wickans,	a	warlock
and	a	witch.’
Tavore’s	eyes	remained	on	Laseen.	‘Of	course.	Fortunately,	they	are
ineffectual,	a	consequence	of	the	trauma	they	experienced	with	Coltaine’s
death.’


‘Nonetheless,	the	Claw	will	effect	their	arrest.’
The	Empress	said,	‘It	cannot	be	helped,	Tavore.	Even	with	a	remnant	of
their	old	power,	they	could	unleash	slaughter	upon	the	citizens	of	Malaz	City,
and	that	we	cannot	have.’
‘The	blood	this	night	belongs	to	the	Wickans	and	the	Khundryl.’	A
statement	from	the	Adjunct,	devoid	of	all	emotion.
‘It	must	be	so,’	the	Jhistal	priest	murmured,	as	if	struck	anew	by	grief.
‘Tavore,’	Laseen	said,	‘will	the	Khundryl	prove	recalcitrant	in	yielding
their	arms	and	armour?	Do	they	not	number	two	thousand,	or	more?’
‘A	word	from	me	will	suffice,’	the	Adjunct	said.
‘I	am	greatly	relieved,’	the	Empress	said,	with	a	faint	smile,	‘that	you	now
comprehend	the	necessity	of	what	will	occur	this	night.	In	the	broader	scheme
of	things,	Tavore,	the	sacrifice	is	modest.	It	is	also	clear	that	the	Wickans	have
outlived	their	usefulness	–	the	old	covenants	with	the	tribes	must	be	dispensed
with,	now	that	Seven	Cities	and	its	harvest	have	become	so	thoroughly
disrupted.	In	other	words,	we	need	the	Wickan	Plains.	The	herds	must	be
slaughtered	and	the	earth	broken,	crops	planted.	Seven	Cities	has	provided	us	a
harsh	lesson	when	it	comes	to	relying	upon	distant	lands	for	the	resources	the
empire	consumes.’
‘In	this	way,’	Mallick	Rel	said,	spreading	his	hands,	‘necessity	is	an
economic	matter,	yes?	That	an	ignorant	and	backward	people	must	be
eradicated	is	sad,	indeed,	but	alas,	inevitable.’
‘You	would	well	know	of	that,’	Tavore	said	to	him.	‘The	Gedorian	Falari
cult	of	the	Jhistal	was	eradicated	in	a	similar	manner	by	Emperor	Kellanved,
after	all.	Presumably	you	are	among	the	very	few	survivors	from	that	time.’
Mallick	Rel’s	round,	oiled	face	slowly	drained	of	what	little	colour	it	had
possessed.
The	Adjunct	continued,	‘A	very	minor	note	in	the	imperial	histories,
difficult	to	find.	I	believe,	however,	should	you	peruse	the	works	of	Duiker,
you	will	find	suitable	references.	Of	course,	“minor”	is	a	relative	term,	just	as,
I	suppose,	this	Wickan	Pogrom	will	be	seen	in	later	histories.	For	the	Wickans
themselves,	of	course,	it	will	be	anything	but	minor.’
‘Your	point,	woman?’	Mallick	Rel	asked.
‘It	is	useful,	on	occasion,	to	halt	upon	a	path,	and	to	turn	and	walk	back
some	distance.’
‘Achieving	what?’
‘An	understanding	of	motivations,	Jhistal.	It	seems	that	this	is	a	night	of
unravelling,	after	all.	Covenants,	treaties,	and	memories—’
‘This	debate,’	the	Empress	cut	in,	‘can	be	conducted	another	time.	The	mob


in	the	city	below	will	soon	turn	upon	itself	if	the	proper	victims	are	not
delivered.	Are	you	ready,	Adjunct?’
Kalam	found	he	was	holding	his	breath.	He	could	not	see	Tavore’s	eyes,
but	something	in	Laseen’s	told	him	that	the	Adjunct	had	locked	gazes	with	the
Empress,	and	in	that	moment	something	passed	between	them,	and	slowly,	in
increments,	the	eyes	of	Laseen	went	flat,	strangely	colourless.
The	Adjunct	rose.	‘I	am,	Empress.’
T’amber	also	stood,	and,	before	anyone	could	shift	their	attention	to
Kalam,	the	assassin	climbed	to	his	feet.
‘Adjunct,’	he	said	in	a	weary	rumble,	‘I	will	see	you	out.’
‘When	you	are	done	that	courtesy,’	the	Empress	said,	‘please	return	here.	I
have	never	accepted	your	resignation	from	the	Claw,	Kalam	Mekhar,	and
indeed,	it	is	in	my	mind	that	worthy	promotions	are	long	overdue.	The
apparent	loss	of	Topper	in	the	Imperial	Warren	has	left	vacant	the	command	of
the	Claw.	I	can	think	of	no-one	more	deserving	of	that	position.’
Kalam’s	brows	lifted.	‘And	do	you	imagine,	Empress,	that	I	would	assume
that	mantle	and	just	settle	back	in	Unta’s	West	Tower,	surrounding	myself	with
whores	and	sycophants?	Do	you	expect	another	Topper?’
Now	it	was	Laseen’s	turn	to	speak	without	inflection.	‘Most	certainly	not,
Kalam	Mekhar.’
The	entire	Claw,	under	my	control.	Gods,	who	would	fall	first?	Mallick	Rel.
Korbolo	Dom…
And	she	knows	that.	She	offers	that.	I	can	cut	the	cancers	out	of	the	flesh…
but	first,	some	Wickans	need	to	die.	And…not	just	Wickans.
Not	trusting	himself	to	speak,	and	not	knowing	what	he	might	say	if	he	did,
Kalam	simply	bowed	to	the	Empress,	then	followed	Tavore	and	T’amber	as
they	strode	from	the	chamber.
Into	the	corridor.
Twenty-three	paces	to	the	antechamber	–	no	Red	Blades	remained	–	where
Tavore	paused,	gesturing	to	T’amber	who	moved	past	and	positioned	herself	at
the	far	door.	The	Adjunct	then	shut	the	one	behind	them.
And	faced	Kalam.
But	it	was	T’amber	who	spoke.	‘Kalam	Mekhar.	How	many	Hands	await
us?’
He	looked	away.	‘Each	Hand	is	trained	to	work	as	a	unit.	Both	a	strength
and	a	flaw.’
‘How	many?’
‘Four	ships	moored	below.	Could	be	as	many	as	eighty.’
‘Eighty?’


The	assassin	nodded.	You	are	dead,	Adjunct.	So	are	you,	T’amber.	‘She	will
not	let	you	get	back	to	the	ships,’	he	said,	still	not	meeting	their	gazes.	‘To	do
so	invites	a	civil	war—’
‘No,’	Tavore	said.
Kalam	frowned,	glanced	at	her.
‘We	are	leaving	the	Malazan	Empire.	And	in	all	likelihood,	we	will	never
return.’
He	walked	to	a	wall,	leaned	his	back	against	it,	and	closed	his	eyes.	Sweat
streamed	down	his	face.	‘Don’t	you	understand	what	she	just	offered	me?	I	can
walk	right	back	into	that	room	and	do	precisely	what	she	wants	me	to	do	–	what
she	needs	me	to	do.	She	and	I	will	then	walk	out	of	there,	leaving	two	corpses,
their	heads	sawed	off	and	planted	on	that	damned	table.	Damn	this,	Tavore.
Eighty	Hands!’
‘I	understand,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘Go	then.	I	will	not	think	less	of	you,
Kalam	Mekhar.	You	are	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	Now	serve	it.’
Still	he	did	not	move,	nor	open	his	eyes.	‘So	it	means	nothing	to	you,	now,
Tavore?’
‘I	have	other	concerns.’
‘Explain	them.’
‘No.’
‘Why	not?’
T’amber	said,	‘There	is	a	convergence	this	night,	Kalam,	here	in	Malaz
City.	The	game	is	in	a	frenzy	of	move	and	countermove,	and	yes,	Mallick	Rel
is	a	participant,	although	the	hand	that	guides	him	remains	remote,	unseen.
Removing	him,	as	you	intend	to	do,	will	prove	a	deadly	blow	and	may	well
shift	the	entire	balance.	It	may	well	save	not	just	the	Malazan	Empire,	but	the
world	itself.	How	can	we	object	to	your	desire?’
‘And	yet…’
‘Yes,’	T’amber	said.	‘We	are	asking	you.	Kalam,	without	you	we	stand	no
chance	at	all—’
‘Six	hundred	assassins,	damn	you!’	He	set	his	head	against	the	wall,
unwilling,	unable	to	look	upon	these	two	women,	to	see	the	need	in	their	eyes.
‘I’m	not	enough.	You	have	to	see	that.	We	all	go	down,	and	Mallick	Rel	lives.’
‘As	you	say,’	Tavore	replied.
He	waited	for	her	to	add	something	more,	a	final	plea.	He	waited	for	a	new
tack	from	T’amber.	But	there	was	only	silence.
‘Is	it	worth	it,	Adjunct?’
‘Win	this	battle,	Kalam,	or	win	the	war.’
‘I’m	just	one	man.’


‘Yes.’
With	a	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole.
His	palms	itched	against	the	damp	leather	of	his	gloves.	‘That	Jhistal	priest
holds	a	grudge.’
‘A	prolonged	one,	yes,’	said	T’amber.	‘That,	and	a	lust	for	power.’
‘Laseen	is	desperate.’
‘Yes,	Kalam,	she	is.’
‘Why	not	stay	right	here,	the	both	of	you?	Wait	for	me	to	kill	them.	Wait,
and	I	will	convince	the	Empress	that	this	pogrom	needs	to	be	stopped.	Right
now.	No	more	blood	spilled.	There’s	six	hundred	assassins	in	the	city	below	–
we	can	crush	this	madness,	scour	away	this	fever—’
‘No	more	blood,	Kalam	Mekhar?’
T’amber ’s	question	stung	him,	then	he	shook	his	head.	‘Ringleaders,
nothing	more	will	be	required.’
‘It	is	clear	that	something	has	not	occurred	to	you,’	T’amber	said.
‘What	hasn’t?’
‘The	Claw.	They	are	infiltrated.	Extensively.	The	Jhistal	priest	has	not	been
idle.’
‘How	do	you	know	this?’
Silence	once	more.
Kalam	rubbed	at	his	face	with	both	hands.	‘Gods	below…’
‘May	I	ask	you	a	question?’
He	snorted.	‘Go	ahead,	T’amber.’
‘You	once	railed	at	the	purging	of	the	Old	Guard.	In	fact,	you	came	to	this
very	city	not	so	long	ago,	intending	to	assassinate	the	Empress.’
How	does	she	know	this?	How	could	she	know	any	of	this?	Who	is	she?	‘Go
on.’
‘You	were	driven	by	outrage,	by	indignation.	Your	own	memories	had
been	proclaimed	nothing	but	lies,	and	you	wanted	to	defy	those	revisionists
who	so	sullied	all	that	you	valued.	You	wanted	to	look	into	the	eyes	of	the	one
who	decided	the	Bridgeburners	had	to	die	–	you	needed	to	see	the	truth	there,
and,	if	you	found	it,	you	would	act.	But	she	talked	you	out	of	it—’
‘She	wasn’t	even	here.’
‘Ah,	you	knew	that,	then.	Well,	no	matter.	Would	that	alone	have	stopped
you	from	crossing	to	Unta?	From	chasing	her	down?’
He	shook	his	head.
‘In	any	case,	where	now	is	your	indignation,	Kalam	Mekhar?	Coltaine	of
the	Crow	Clan.	The	Imperial	Historian	Duiker.	The	Seventh	Army.	And	now,
the	Wickans	of	the	Fourteenth.	Fist	Temul.	Nil,	Nether.	Gall	of	the	Khundryl


Burned	Tears,	who	threw	back	Korbolo	Dom	at	Sanimon	–	cheating	Korbolo’s
victory	long	before	Aren.	The	betrayers	are	in	the	throne	room—’
‘I	can	make	that	stay	shortlived.’
‘You	can.	And	if	you	so	choose,	the	Adjunct	and	I	will	die	possessing	at
least	that	measure	of	satisfaction.	But	in	dying,	so	too	will	many,	many	others.
More	than	any	of	us	can	comprehend.’
‘You	ask	where	is	my	indignation,	but	you	have	the	answer	before	you.	It
lives.	Within	me.	And	it	is	ready	to	kill.	Right	now.’
‘Killing	Mallick	Rel	and	Korbolo	Dom	this	night,’	T’amber	said,	‘will	not
save	the	Wickans,	nor	the	Khundryl.	Will	not	prevent	war	with	the	Perish.	Or
the	destruction	of	the	Wickan	Plains.	The	Empress	is	indeed	desperate,	so
desperate	that	she	will	sacrifice	her	Adjunct	in	exchange	for	the	slaying	of	the
two	betrayers	in	her	midst.	But	tell	me,	do	you	not	think	Mallick	Rel
understood	the	essence	of	Laseen’s	offer	to	you?’
‘Is	that	your	question?’
‘Yes.’
‘Korbolo	Dom	is	a	fool.	Likely	he	comprehends	nothing.	The	Jhistal	priest
is,	unfortunately,	not	a	fool.	So,	he	is	prepared.’	Kalam	fell	silent,	although	his
thoughts	continued,	following	countless	tracks.	Potentials,	possibilities.	‘He
may	not	know	I	possess	an	otataral	weapon—’
‘The	power	he	can	draw	upon	is	Elder,’	T’amber	said.
‘So,	after	all	we’ve	said	here,	I	may	fail.’
‘You	may.’
‘And	if	I	do,	then	we	all	lose.’
‘Yes.’
Kalam	opened	his	eyes,	and	found	that	the	Adjunct	had	turned	away.
T’amber	alone	faced	him,	her	gold-hued	eyes	unwavering	in	their	uncanny
regard.
Six	hundred.	‘Tell	me	this,	T’amber:	between	you	and	the	Adjunct,	whose
life	matters	more?’
The	reply	was	immediate.	‘The	Adjunct’s.’
It	seemed	that	Tavore	flinched	then,	but	would	not	face	them.
‘And,’	Kalam	asked,	‘between	you	and	me?’
‘Yours.’
Ah.	‘Adjunct.	Choose,	if	you	will,	between	yourself	and	the	Fourteenth.’
‘What	is	the	purpose	of	all	this?’	Tavore	demanded,	her	voice	ragged.
‘Choose.’
‘Fist	Keneb	has	his	orders,’	she	said.
Kalam	slowly	closed	his	eyes	once	more.	Somewhere,	at	the	back	of	his


mind,	a	faint,	ever	faint	sound.	Music.	Filled	with	sorrow.	‘Warrens	in	the	city,’
he	said	in	a	soft	voice.	‘Many,	seething	with	power	–	Quick	Ben	will	be	hardpressed	even	if	I	can	get	through	to	him,	and	there’s	no	chance	of	using	gates.
Adjunct,	you	will	need	your	sword.	Otataral	out	front…and	to	the	rear.’
Strange	music,	the	tune	unfamiliar	and	yet…he	knew	it.
Kalam	opened	his	eyes,	even	as	the	Adjunct	slowly	turned.
The	pain	in	her	gaze	was	like	a	blow	against	his	heart.
‘Thank	you,’	she	said.
The	assassin	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	rolled	his	shoulders.	‘All	right,	no
point	in	keeping	them	waiting.’
	
Pearl	stepped	into	the	chamber.	Mallick	Rel	was	pacing,	and	Korbolo	Dom	had
uncorked	a	bottle	of	wine	and	was	pouring	himself	a	goblet.	The	Empress
remained	in	her	chair.
She	wasted	no	time	on	small	talk.	‘The	three	are	nearing	the	Gate.’
‘I	see.	So,	Kalam	Mekhar	made	his	choice,	then.’
A	flicker	of	something	like	disappointment.	‘Yes,	he	is	out	of	your	way
now,	Pearl.’
You	bitch.	Offered	him	the	Claw,	did	you?	And	where	would	that	have	left
me?	‘He	and	I	have	unfinished	business,	Empress.’
‘Do	not	let	that	interfere	with	what	must	be	done.	Kalam	is	the	least
relevant	target,	do	you	understand	me?	Get	him	out	of	the	way,	of	course,	but
then	complete	what	is	commanded	of	you.’
‘Of	course,	Empress.’
‘When	you	return,’	Laseen	said,	with	a	small	smile	on	her	plain	features,	‘I
have	a	surprise	for	you.	A	pleasant	one.’
‘I	doubt	I	shall	be	gone	long—’
‘It	is	that	overconfidence	that	I	find	most	irritating	in	you,	Pearl.’
‘Empress,	he	is	one	man!’
‘Do	you	imagine	the	Adjunct	helpless?	She	wields	an	otataral	sword,	Pearl
–	the	sorcery	by	which	the	Claw	conduct	their	ambushes	will	not	work.	This
will	be	brutal.	Furthermore,	there	is	T’amber,	and	she	remains	–	to	all	of	us	–	a
mystery.	I	do	not	want	you	to	return	to	me	at	dawn	to	inform	me	that	success
has	left	two	hundred	dead	Claws	in	the	streets	and	alleys	below.’
Pearl	bowed.
‘Go,	then.’
Mallick	Rel	turned	at	that	moment,	‘Clawmaster,’	he	said,	‘when	the	task	is
done,	be	sure	to	dispatch	two	Hands	to	the	ship,	Froth	Wolf,	with	instructions	to


kill	Nil	and	Nether.	If	opportunity	arrives	thereafter,	they	are	to	kill	Fist	Keneb
as	well.’
Pearl	frowned.	‘Quick	Ben	is	on	that	ship.’
‘Leave	him	be,’	the	Empress	said.
‘He	will	not	act	to	defend	the	targets?’
‘His	power	is	an	illusion,’	Mallik	Rel	said	dismissively.	‘His	title	as	High
Mage	is	unearned,	yet	I	suspect	he	enjoys	the	status,	and	so	will	do	nothing	to
reveal	the	paucity	of	his	talents.’
Pearl	slowly	cocked	his	head.	Really,	Mallick	Rel?
‘Send	out	the	commands,’	Laseen	said.
The	Clawmaster	bowed	again,	then	left	the	chamber.
Kalam	Mekhar.	Finally,	we	can	end	this.	For	that,	Empress,	thank	you.
	
They	entered	the	gatehouse	at	the	top	of	Rampart	Way.	Lubben	was	a	shadow
hunched	over	a	small	table	off	to	one	side.	The	keeper	glanced	up,	then	down
again.	A	large	bronze	tankard	was	nestled	in	his	huge,	battered	hands.
Kalam	paused.	‘Tilt	that	back	once	for	us,	will	you?’
A	nod.	‘Count	on	it.’
They	moved	to	the	opposite	gate.
Behind	them,	Lubben	said,	‘Mind	that	last	step	down	there.’
‘We	will.’
And	thanks	for	that,	Lubben.
They	stepped	out	onto	the	landing.
Below,	buildings	were	burning	here	and	there	across	the	city.	Torches
scurried	back	and	forth	like	glow-worms	in	rotted	flesh.	Faint	shouts,	screams.
Centre	Docks	was	a	mass	of	humanity.
‘Marines	on	the	jetty,’	the	Adjunct	said.
‘They’re	holding,’	T’amber	noted,	as	if	to	reassure	Tavore.
Gods	below,	there	must	be	a	thousand	or	more	in	that	mob.	‘There’s	barely
three	squads	there,	Adjunct.’
She	said	nothing,	and	began	the	descent.	T’amber	followed,	and	finally,
with	a	last	glance	at	the	seething	battle	at	Centre	Docks,	Kalam	set	off	in	their
wake.
	
Tene	Baralta	strode	into	the	well-furnished	room,	paused	to	look	around	for	a
moment,	then	made	his	way	to	a	plush	high-backed	chair.	‘By	the	Seven,’	he


said	with	a	loud	sigh,	‘at	last	we	are	done	with	the	cold-eyed	bitch.’	He	sat
down,	stretched	out	his	legs.	‘Pour	us	some	wine,	Captain.’
Lostara	Yil	approached	her	commander.	‘That	can	wait.	Allow	me	to	help
you	out	of	your	armour,	sir.’
‘Good	idea.	The	ghost	of	my	arm	pains	me	so	–	my	neck	muscles	are	like
twisted	bars	of	iron.’
She	drew	the	lone	gauntlet	off	his	remaining	hand	and	set	it	on	the	table.
Then	moved	to	behind	the	chair,	reached	over	and	unclasped	the	man’s	cloak.
He	half-rose,	allowing	her	to	pull	it	away.	She	folded	it	carefully	and	set	it	on
top	of	a	wooden	chest	near	the	large,	cushion-piled	bed.	Returning	to	Tene
Baralta	she	said,	‘Stand	for	a	moment,	sir,	if	you	will.	We	will	remove	the
chain.’
Nodding,	he	straightened.	It	was	awkward,	but	they	finally	managed	to
draw	the	heavy	armour	away.	She	placed	it	in	a	heap	at	the	foot	of	the	bed.
Baralta’s	under-quilting	was	damp	with	sweat,	pungent	and	stained	under	the
arms.	She	pulled	it	away,	leaving	the	man	bare	above	the	hips.	The	scars	of	old
burns	were	livid	weals.	His	muscles	had	softened	with	disuse	beneath	a	layer	of
fat.
‘High	Denul,’	Lostara	said,	‘the	Empress	will	not	hesitate	in	seeing	you
properly	mended.’
‘That	she	will,’	he	said,	settling	back	into	the	chair.	‘And	then,	Lostara	Yil,
you	will	not	flinch	when	looking	upon	me.	I	have	had	many	thoughts,	of	you
and	me.’
‘Indeed.’	She	moved	up	behind	him	yet	again,	and	began	kneading	the
rock-hard	tension	gripping	the	muscles	to	either	side	of	his	neck.
‘Yes.	It	is,	I	believe	now,	meant	to	be.’
‘Do	you	recall,	sir,’	she	said,	‘a	visit	I	made,	long	ago	now,	when	on
Kalam	Mekhar ’s	trail.	A	visit	to	a	garrison	keep.	I	sat	at	the	very	same	table	as
the	assassin.	A	Deck	was	unveiled,	rather	unexpectedly.	Death	and	Shadow
predominated	the	field,	if	my	memory	serves	–	and	that,	I	admit,	I	cannot
guarantee.	In	any	case,	following	your	instructions	precisely,	I	later	conducted
a	thorough	slaughter	of	everyone	present	–	after	Kalam’s	departure,	of
course.’
‘You	have	always	followed	orders	with	impressive	precision,	Lostara	Yil.’
She	brought	her	left	hand	up	along	his	jaw-line,	stroking	softly.	‘That
morning	of	murder,	Commander,	remains	my	greatest	regret.	They	were
innocents,	one	and	all.’
‘Do	not	let	such	errors	weigh	on	you,	my	love.’
‘That	is	a	difficult	task,	sir.	Achieving	the	necessary	coldness.’


‘You	have	singular	talents	in	such	matters.’
‘I	suppose	I	have,’	she	said,	as	her	palm	brushed	his	mangled	lips,	then
settled	there,	against	his	mouth.	And	the	knife	in	her	other	hand	slid	into	the
side	of	his	neck,	behind	the	windpipe,	then	slashed	out	and	down.
Blood	flooded	against	the	palm	of	her	hand,	along	with	gurgling	sounds
and	bubbles	of	escaping	air.	The	body	in	the	chair	twitched	a	few	times,	then
slumped	down.
Lostara	Yil	stepped	away.	She	wiped	the	knife	and	her	hands	on	the	silk
bedding.	Sheathing	the	weapon	once	more,	she	collected	her	gloves,	and
walked	to	the	door.
She	opened	it	only	wide	enough	to	permit	her	passage	through,	and	to	the
two	Red	Blades	standing	guard	outside,	she	said,	‘The	commander	sleeps	now.
Do	not	disturb	him.’
The	soldiers	saluted.
Lostara	closed	the	door,	then	strode	down	the	corridor.
Very	well,	Cotillion,	you	were	right	about	him	after	all.
And	once	again,	the	necessary	coldness	was	achieved.
	
Uru	Hela	was	down,	screaming	and	curling	up	round	the	spear	transfixing	her
torso.	Swearing,	Koryk	pushed	hard	with	his	shield,	driving	the	attackers	back
until	he	could	step	over	her.	Smiles	edged	in	behind	him,	grasped	the	downed
soldier	by	the	belt	and	pulled	Uru	Hela	back.
Another	sharper	exploded,	bodies	whirling	away	in	sheets	of	blood,	the
spray	striking	Koryk’s	face	beneath	the	helm.	He	blinked	stinging	heat	from
his	eyes,	took	a	mace	blow	against	his	shield,	then	thrust	upward	from	beneath
it,	the	sword-point	ripping	into	a	groin.	The	shriek	that	exploded	from	the
crippled	attacker	nearly	deafened	him.	He	tugged	the	sword	loose.
There	were	shouts	behind	him,	but	he	could	make	little	sense	of	them.	With
Uru	Hela	out	of	the	fight,	and	Shortnose	getting	crippled	by	a	sword	through	a
thigh	in	the	last	rush,	the	front	line	was	desperately	thin.	Both	Galt	and	Lobe
had	joined	it	now.	Deadsmell	worked	on	Shortnose’s	bleeder,	and	Widdershins
was	frantically	trying	to	deflect	assaults	of	Mockra	–	the	sorcerous	attacks
seeking	to	incite	confusion	and	panic	–	and	the	squad	mage	was	fast
weakening.
What	in	Hood’s	name	was	Quick	Ben	up	to?	Where	was	he?	Why	hadn’t	he
emerged	onto	the	deck	of	the	Froth	Wolf?
Koryk	found	himself	swearing	in	every	language	he	knew.	They	couldn’t
hold.


And	who	was	playing	that	damned	music,	anyway?
He	fought	on.
And	saw	nothing	of	what	was	happening	behind	him,	the	sliding	out	of
darkness	of	the	enormous	wolf-headed	catamaran,	closing	on	the	end	of	the
jetty.	The	broad	platforms	scraping	outward,	thumping	down	on	the	solid
stone.	Units	of	heavily	armoured	soldiers	marching	across	those	platforms,
archers	among	them,	long	arrows	nocked	to	bowstrings.
Koryk	slashed	with	his	sword,	saw	some	poor	Malazan	citizen’s	face	split
in	half,	the	jaw	torn	away,	a	torrent	of	blood	–	the	white	gleam	of	exposed
bone	beneath	each	ear	–	then,	reeling	away,	eyes	filled	with	disbelief,	horror—
Killing	our	own	–	gods	below	–	our	own—
A	sudden	ringing	command	from	Sergeant	Balm	behind	him.	‘Disengage!
Marines	disengage!’
And	discipline	took	hold	–	that	command,	echoing	a	hairy	Master
Sergeant’s	bawled	orders	on	a	drill	field	years	ago	–	Koryk,	snarling,	lurched
back,	bringing	up	his	shield	to	fend	off	an	out-thrust	spear—
All	at	once,	soldiers	were	moving	past	him	on	either	side,	a	new	shieldwall	clashing	closed	in	front	of	him.
A	chorus	of	screams	as	arrows	whispered	into	the	heaving	mob,	thudding
into	flesh.
Wheeling	away,	sword’s	point	dragging	then	skipping	across	the	uneven
cobbles,	Koryk	staggered	back.
The	Perish.
They’re	here.
And	that’s	that.
Galt	was	laughing.	‘Our	first	real	scrap,	Sergeant.	And	it’s	against
Malazans!’
‘Well,’	Balm	said,	‘laughing’s	better ’n	crying.	But	shut	that	mouth
anyway.’
As	the	fighting	intensified	at	the	foot	of	the	jetty,	the	marines	sagged	down
onto	the	cobbles	or	staggered	off	in	search	of	water.	Wiping	spattered	blood
from	his	eyes,	Koryk	looked	round,	bewildered,	numbed.	He	saw	two	cloaked
figures	standing	near	the	plank	to	the	Froth	Wolf.	The	Wickan	witch	and	her
warlock	brother.
‘Koryk	of	the	Seti,’	Nether	said.	‘Where	is	Bottle?’
‘No	idea,’	he	replied,	squinting	at	the	young	woman.	‘Somewhere’	–	he
nodded	towards	the	city	behind	him	–	‘in	there.’
Nil	said,	‘He	cannot	get	back.	Not	through	that	horde.’
Koryk	spat	onto	the	cobbles.	‘He’ll	find	a	way,’	he	said.


‘No	worries	about	that,’	Smiles	added,	walking	up	to	the	half-blood	with	a
waterskin	in	her	hands.
Nether	spoke:	‘You	are	all	very	confident.’
As	Smiles	handed	Koryk	the	waterskin	she	said,	‘Your	heart’s	desire	will
be	fine,	is	what	I’m	saying,	Nether.	He	took	his	rat	with	him,	didn’t	he?’
‘His	what?’
‘Keeps	it	tucked	in	most	of	the	time,	it’s	true,	but	I	seen	it	out	more	than
once—’
‘Enough,’	Koryk	growled	under	his	breath.
Smile	made	a	face	at	him.	‘Spoilsport.’
‘You	two	should	get	back	onto	the	ship,’	Koryk	said	to	Nil	and	Nether.	‘It’s
safer	there	–	any	stray	arrow—’
‘Soldier,’	Nil	cut	in.	‘You	fight	for	the	Wickans	and	for	the	Khundryl
Burned	Tears	this	night.	We	choose	to	witness.’
‘Fine,	just	do	it	from	the	deck.	What’s	the	point	of	all	this	if	you	drop	with
an	arrow	through	the	throat?’
After	a	moment,	the	brother	and	sister	both	bowed	–	to	Koryk	and	the	other
marines	–	then	they	turned	about	and	made	their	way	back	up	the	plank.
Gods	below,	I’ve	never	seen	them	bow	before.	To	anyone.
	
‘Mind	that	last	step…’
Kalam	moved	up	directly	behind	the	Adjunct.	Twenty	steps	remained.	‘With
six	left,’	the	assassin	murmured,	‘slow	down	and	move	to	your	left.’
She	nodded.
The	four	moored	dromons	were	off	to	one	side,	no	guards	present	on	the
jetties.	Directly	ahead,	at	the	foot	of	Rampart	Way,	stretched	out	a	concourse.
Opposite	the	clearing	stood	three	imperial	buildings,	one	a	blockhouse	and
gaol,	another	a	customs	and	tithes	building	and	the	third	a	solid,	heavily
fortified	armoury	for	the	City	Watch.	None	of	the	usual	guards	were	present,
and	the	blockhouse	was	unlit.
Seven	steps	from	the	bottom.	Kalam	unsheathed	his	long-knives	beneath
his	rain-cape.
The	Adjunct	edged	to	her	left	and	hesitated.
In	a	blur	Kalam	swept	past	her,	leading	with	his	otataral	weapon,	and
launched	himself	into	the	air,	down,	sailing	over	the	last	six	steps.
Five	figures	seemed	to	materialize	from	nothing	at	the	base	of	Rampart
Way.	One	was	crouched	in	Kalam’s	path,	but	twisted	away	to	avoid	a	crushing
collision.	The	otataral	long-knife	slashed	out,	the	edge	biting	deep	into	the


Claw’s	neck,	dragging	free	to	loose	a	jet	of	arterial	blood.
Landing	in	a	crouch,	Kalam	parried	an	attack	from	his	left	twice,	as	the
Claw	closed	with	a	dagger	in	each	hand.	Blackened	iron	flickered	between
them,	the	snick	of	blade	catching	blade	as,	pivoting	on	his	inside	leg,	Kalam
dropped	lower,	lashing	out	with	his	other	leg	to	sweep	the	Claw	from	his	feet.
The	killer	landed	hard	on	his	left	hip.	Kalam	locked	both	dagger	blades	hard
against	the	hilts	of	his	long-knives,	pushed	them	to	either	side,	then	drove	his
knee	down	into	the	centre	of	the	Claw’s	chest.	The	sternum	was	punched
inward	with	a	sickening	crunch,	ribs	to	either	side	bowing	outward.	Even	as	he
landed,	Kalam	threw	his	weight	forward,	over	the	downed	man,	the	tip	of	one
of	his	long-knives	sinking	deep	into	the	Claw’s	right	eye	socket	as	he	passed.
He	felt	a	dagger-blade	cut	through	the	rain-cape	on	his	back,	then	skitter
along	the	chain	beneath,	and	then	he	was	out	of	range,	shoulder	dipping,
rolling	back	into	a	crouch	and	spinning	round.
The	attacker	had	followed,	almost	as	quick,	and	Kalam	grunted	as	the	Claw
slammed	into	him.	A	dagger-point	plunged	through	chain	links	above	his	left
hip	and,	twisting	hard,	he	felt	a	shallow	opening	of	his	flesh,	then	the	point
struck	more	chain,	and	was	suddenly	snagged.	In	the	midst	of	this	movement,
and	as	the	attacker	seemed	to	bounce	back	from	the	impact	–	Kalam	far
outweighing	him,	or	her	–	another	dagger	descended	from	overhead.	An
upward	stop-thrust	impaled	that	arm.	The	dagger	spilled	from	a	spasming
hand.	Leaving	his	long-knife	there,	Kalam	slashed	down	against	the	other	arm,
severing	tendons	below	the	elbow.	He	then	dropped	that	weapon	as	well,	left
hand	inverting	as	it	snapped	up	to	grasp	the	front	of	the	Claw’s	jerkin;	his	other
hand	closing	on	a	handful	down	at	the	killer ’s	crotch	–	male	–	and	Kalam
heaved	the	figure	upward,	over	his	left	shoulder,	then,	spinning	round,	he
hammered	the	Claw	headfirst	onto	the	pavestones.
Skull	and	entire	head	seemed	to	vanish	within	folds	of	hood	and	cloak.
White	matter	spattered	out.
Releasing	the	flopping	body,	Kalam	collected	both	long-knives,	then
turned	to	face	the	last	two	of	the	Hand.
Both	were	already	down.	The	Adjunct	stood	above	one,	her	sword	out	and
slick	with	blood.	T’amber	appeared	to	have	closed	to	hand-to-hand	with	the
other	Claw,	somehow	breaking	the	man’s	neck	even	as	he	plunged	both
daggers	into	her.	Kalam	stared	as	she	tugged	the	weapons	free	–	lower	right
shoulder,	just	beneath	a	clavicle,	and	her	right	waist	–	and	flung	them	aside	as
if	they	were	mere	slivers.
He	met	the	young	woman’s	eyes,	and	it	seemed	the	gold	flared	for	a
moment,	before	she	casually	turned	away.	‘Stuff	those	holes,’	Kalam	said,	‘or


you’ll	bleed	out.’
‘Never	mind	me,’	she	replied.	‘Where	to,	now?’
There	was	anguish	on	the	Adjunct’s	face	as	she	looked	upon	her	lover,	and
it	seemed	she	was	struggling	not	to	reach	out.
Kalam	collected	his	other	long-knife.	‘Where	to	now,	T’amber?	Ambushes
set	for	every	direct	approach	to	Centre	Docks.	Let’s	force	them	to	pull	up	and
move	to	intercept	us.	West,	Adjunct,	deeper	into	the	city.	We	then	swing	south
and	keep	going,	right	through	Centre	District,	then	take	one	of	the	inland
bridges	across	to	the	Mouse	–	I	know	that	area	well	–	and,	if	we	get	that	far,	we
head	to	the	shoreline	and	back	up	north	again.	If	necessary	we	can	steal	a	fisher
boat	and	scull	our	way	over	to	the	Froth	Wolf.’
‘Presumably	we	are	being	observed	right	now,’	the	Adjunct	said.
Kalam	nodded.
‘And	they	understand	that	their	sorcery	will	fail	them.’
‘Aye.’
‘Forcing	them	to	be	more…direct.’
‘Before	too	long,’	Kalam	said,	‘more	than	one	Hand	will	have	to	come	at
us	at	once.	That’s	when	we’re	in	real	trouble.’
A	faint	smile.
Kalam	faced	T’amber	again.	‘We	have	to	move	fast—’
‘I	can	keep	up.’
‘Why	didn’t	you	use	your	sword	on	that	fool?’
‘He	was	too	close	to	the	Adjunct.	I	got	him	from	behind	but	he	was	skilled
enough	to	strike	anyway.’
Damn,	talk	about	a	bad	start.	‘Well,	neither	wound	looks	like	much	of	a
bleeder.	We	should	get	going.’
As	they	set	out,	westward,	the	cliff-face	of	the	promontory	to	their	right,
the	Adjunct	said,	‘Do	most	grown	men	bounce	off	when	they	run	into	you,
Kalam	Mekhar?’
‘Quick	always	said	I	was	the	densest	man	he	ever	knew.’
‘A	Hand	has	broken	cover,’	T’amber	said.	‘They’re	moving	parallel	to	us.’
Kalam	glanced	to	his	left.	Seeing	nothing,	no-one.	How	does	she	know
that?	Do	I	doubt	her?	Not	for	a	moment.	‘Are	they	converging	on	our	path?’
‘Not	yet.’
More	official	buildings,	and	then	the	first	of	the	major	estates	of	the
Lightings	District.	No	marauding	riots	up	here.	Naurally.	‘At	least	we’ve	got
the	streets	to	ourselves,’	he	muttered.	More	or	less.
‘There	are	but	three	gates	leading	down	to	Old	Upper	Estates,’	the	Adjunct
said	after	a	moment,	‘and	we	are	fast	coming	opposite	the	last	of	them.’


‘Aye,	any	further	west	and	it’s	all	wall,	an	ever	higher	drop	the	farther	we
go.	But	there’s	an	old	estate,	abandoned	for	years	and	hopefully	still	empty.
There’s	a	way	down,	and	if	we’re	lucky	the	Claw	don’t	know	about	it.’
‘Another	Hand’s	just	come	up	through	the	last	gate,’	T’amber	said.
‘They’re	linking	up	with	the	other	one.’
‘Just	the	two	here	in	Lightings?’
‘So	far.’
‘Are	you	sure?’
She	glanced	across	at	him.	‘I	have	a	keen	sense	of	smell,	Kalam	Mekhar.’
Smell?	‘I	didn’t	know	Claw	assassins	have	stopped	bathing.’
‘Not	that	kind	of	smell.	Aggression,	and	fear.’
‘Fear?	There’s	only	the	three	of	us,	for	Hood’s	sake!’
‘And	one	of	them	is	you,	Kalam.	Even	so,	they	all	want	to	be	the	Hand	that
takes	you	down.	They	will	compete	for	that	honour.’
‘Idiots.’	He	gestured	ahead.	‘That	one,	with	the	high	walls.	I	see	no	lights
—’
‘The	gate	is	ajar,’	the	Adjunct	said	as	they	drew	closer.
‘Never	mind	that,’	T’amber	said.	‘Here	they	come.’
All	three	spun	round.
The	deadening	effect	of	the	Adjunct’s	unsheathed	sword	was	far	more
efficacious	than	that	of	Kalam’s	long-knife,	and	its	range	was	revealed	as,
thirty	paces	up	the	street,	ten	cloaked	figures	shimmered	into	existence.	‘Take
cover!’	Kalam	hissed,	ducking	down.
Silvery	quarrels	flashed,	barbed	heads	flickering	in	the	faint	moonlight	as
they	corkscrewed	in	flight.	Multiple	impacts	on	the	moss-stained	wall	behind
them.	Straightening,	Kalam	cursed	to	see	T’amber	rushing	the	killers.
There’s	ten	of	them,	you	fool!
He	raced	forward.
Five	paces	from	the	fast-closing	Claws,	T’amber	drew	her	sword.
There	was	an	old	saying,	that	for	all	the	terror	waiting	in	the	gloved	hands
of	an	assassin,	it	was	as	nothing	against	a	professional	soldier.	T’amber	did	not
even	slow	down,	her	blade	weaving	to	either	side	in	a	blur.	Bodies	sprawled	in
her	wake,	blood	splashing	out,	knives	clattering	on	the	cobbles.	A	dagger
hissed	through	the	air,	caught	the	woman	on	the	right	side	of	her	chest,	sinking
deep.	She	ignored	it	–	Kalam’s	eyes	widened	as	he	saw	a	severed	head	tumble
away	from	what	seemed	the	lightest	slash	of	T’amber ’s	longsword,	and	then	he
joined	the	fight.
Two	Claws	had	darted	past,	out	of	T’amber ’s	reach,	and	set	off	towards	the
Adjunct.	Kalam	shifted	to	come	at	them	from	their	left.	The	nearer	one	leapt


into	his	path,	seeking	to	hold	Kalam	long	enough	for	the	other	killer	to	close
on	Tavore.
A	dancing	flurry	of	parries	from	the	Claw	had	begun	even	before	Kalam
engaged	with	his	own	weapons	–	and	he	recognized	that	form	–	the	Web	–
‘Gods	below,	you	fool,’	he	said	in	a	snarl	as	he	reached	both	long-knives	into
the	skein	of	parries,	feinted	with	minute	jabs	then,	breaking	his	timing,	evaded
the	knife-blades	as	they	snapped	across,	and	neatly	impaled	both	hands.
The	man	screamed	as	Kalam	closed	in,	pushing	both	stuck	hands	out	to	the
sides,	and	head-butted	him.	Hooded	head	snapped	back	–	and	met	the	point	of
Kalam’s	right-hand	long-knife	as	it	completed	its	disengage	to	come	up	behind
the	Claw.	A	grating	crunch	as	the	point	drove	up	into	the	base	of	his	brain.
Even	as	he	crumpled	Kalam	was	stepping	over	him,	into	the	wake	of	the	last
killer.
The	Adjunct	watched	calmly	as	the	Claw	launched	himself	at	her.	Her	stopthrust	took	him	in	the	cup	of	his	throat,	between	the	breastbones,	the	heavy
blade	punching	through	windpipe,	then	spine,	and	out	the	back,	stretching	but
not	cutting	the	cloak.
The	Claw	had	thrown	both	daggers	a	heartbeat	before	spitting	himself	on
the	sword,	and	the	Adjunct	had	lithely	evaded	both	as	she	turned	her	body
sideways	in	extending	the	stop-thrust.
Kalam	slowed	down,	turned	round,	to	see	T’amber	walking	back	towards
them.
Eight	dead	Claws.	Damned	impressive.	Even	if	it	took	a	knife	in	the	lung	to
do	it.
There	was	frothy	blood	trickling	onto	T’amber ’s	chin.	She	had	pulled	out
the	knife	and	more	blood	soaked	her	tunic.	Yet	her	strides	were	steady.
‘Through	the	gate,	then,’	Kalam	said.
They	entered	the	courtyard.	Overgrown,	filled	with	rubbish.	A	fountain
commanded	the	centre,	the	pool	entirely	sheathed	in	gleaming	algae.	Insects
rose	from	it	in	a	cloud	that	spun	and	whirled	towards	them.	Kalam	pointed	with
one	weapon	to	the	far	wall.	‘That	old	well.	There	was	once	a	natural	cistern	in
the	limestone	under	all	of	this.	Some	enterprising	thief	broke	into	it	from
below.	Stole	an	entire	fortune	from	the	family	living	here.	Left	them	destitute.
This	was	long	ago	–	that	hoard	of	wealth	bankrolled	Kellanved’s	early
ventures	in	piracy	on	the	lanes	between	here	and	the	Napan	Isles.’
The	Adjunct	glanced	over.	‘Kellanved	was	the	enterprising	thief?’
‘More	likely	Dancer.	The	estate	was	Mock’s	family,	and,	accordingly,	the
hoard	was	takings	from	twenty	years	of	piracy.	Not	long	after,	Kellanved
usurped	Mock	and	annexed	the	whole	island.	Birth	of	the	Malazan	Empire.


Among	the	few	who	know	about	it,	this	is	called	the	Well	of	Plenty.’
A	cough	from	T’amber,	and	she	spat	out	a	gout	of	blood.
Kalam	eyed	her	in	the	gloom.	That	perfect	face	had	grown	very	pale.	He
faced	the	well	once	more.	‘I’ll	go	first.	The	drop	is	about	two	and	half	manheights	–	if	you	can,	use	the	side	walls	to	work	your	way	down	as	far	as
possible.	Adjunct,	do	you	hear	music?’
‘Yes.	Faint.’
Nodding,	Kalam	vaulted	onto	the	lip	of	the	well,	then	worked	his	way
down.	Not	just	me,	then.	Fiddler,	you’re	breaking	my	heart.
	
Four	Hands,	weapons	out,	hooded	eyes	scanning	in	every	direction.	Pearl
stood	above	a	body.	The	poor	man’s	head	had	been	driven	into	the	street,	hard
enough	to	turn	it	into	pulp,	to	push	the	jaw	and	the	base	of	the	skull	into	the
column	of	the	neck	between	the	shoulders,	turing	the	spine	into	a	coiled,
splintered	mess.
That	was	the	one	thing	about	Kalam	Mekhar	that	one	tended	to	forget,	or
even	more	erroneously,	disregard.	The	bastard’s	animal	strength.
‘Westward,’	one	of	his	lieutenants	said	in	a	whisper.	‘Along	Lightings,
likely	to	the	last	gate.	They	will	seek	to	circle	round,	pulling	loose	our
established	ambushes—’
‘Not	all	of	them,’	Pearl	murmured.	‘I	did	not	for	a	moment	believe	he
would	attempt	the	direct	route.	In	fact,	he’s	about	to	run	into	the	bulk	of	my
small	army.’
The	lieutenant	actually	chuckled	–	Pearl	faced	him,	stared	for	a	long
moment,	then	said,	‘Take	two	Hands	and	trail	him.	Don’t	close,	just	get	in	sight
every	now	and	then.	Push	them	onward.’
‘They’ll	turn	and	ambush	us,	Clawmaster—’
‘Probably.	Enjoy	your	evening.	Now	go.’
An	evil	snicker	would	have	been	worse,	but	the	chuckle	was	bad	enough.
Pearl	drew	back	the	left	sleeve	of	his	loose	silk	shirt.	The	head	of	the
quarrel	set	in	the	wrist-strapped	crossbow	was	sheathed	in	thick	wax.	Easily
pulled	off	when	the	time	was	propitious.	In	the	meantime,	he	would	not	risk
any	possible	contact	with	the	paralt	smeared	on	the	head’s	edges.	No,	this	taste
is	for	you,	Kalam.
You’ve	eliminated	sorcery,	after	all.	So,	you	leave	me	little	choice,	and	no,	I
do	not	care	about	the	Code.
He	rolled	the	sleeve	back	down,	looked	over	at	his	two	chosen	Hands,	his
favoured,	elite	assassins.	Not	one	of	them	a	mage.	Theirs	was	the	most	direct


kind	of	talent.	Tall,	well-muscled,	a	match	for	Kalam’s	brawn.	‘We	position
ourselves	south	of	Admiral	Bridge,	at	the	edge	of	the	Mouse.’
One	spoke:	‘You	believe	they	will	get	that	far,	Clawmaster?’
Pearl	simply	turned	away.	‘Let’s	go.’
	
Kalam	edged	down	the	low,	narrow	tunnel.	He	could	see	the	brush	of	the
garden	disguising	the	cave	mouth	ahead.	There	were	broken	branches	among
it,	and	the	air	stank	of	bile	and	blood.	What’s	this,	then?	Weapons	out,	he	drew
closer,	came	to	the	threshold.
There	had	been	a	Hand,	positioned	around	the	tunnel	entrance.	Five
corpses,	limbs	sprawled.	Kalam	pushed	through	the	brush.
They	had	been	cut	to	pieces.	Arms	broken.	Legs	snapped.	Blood
everywhere,	still	dripping	from	some	low	branches	on	the	tree	commanding
the	abandoned	orchard.	Two	had	been	cleanly	eviscerated,	their	intestines
tumbled	out,	trailing	across	the	leaf-littered	ground	like	bloated	worms.
Movement	behind	him	and	he	turned.	The	Adjunct	and	T’amber	pushed
their	way	into	the	clearing.
‘That	was	fast,’	Tavore	said	in	a	whisper.
‘Not	me,	Adjunct.’
‘I’m	sorry.	I	realized	that.	We	have	friends,	it	seems.’
‘Don’t	count	on	it,’	Kalam	said.	‘This	has	the	look	of	vendetta	–	someone
or	ones	took	out	a	whole	lot	of	anger	on	these	poor	bastards.	I	don’t	think	it
has	anything	to	do	with	us.	As	you	said,	the	Claw	is	a	compromised
organization.’
‘Have	they	turned	on	themselves?’
‘Certainly	looks	that	way.’
‘Still	in	our	favour,	Kalam.’
‘Well,’	he	muttered	after	a	moment,	‘that’s	not	as	important	as	the
revelation	that	taking	the	long	way	round	was	anticipated.	We’ve	real	trouble
ahead,	Adjunct.’
‘There	are	sounds,’	T’amber	said,	‘from	the	top	of	the	well,	I	think.	Hands.
Two.’
‘Fast,’	said	Kalam,	baring	his	teeth.	‘They	want	to	flush	us	forward.	To
Hood	with	that.	Stay	here,	you	two.’	He	set	off	back	into	the	tunnel.	Top	of	the
well.	Meaning	you’ve	got	to	come	down…one	at	a	time.	You	were	impatient,
fools.	And	now	it’s	going	to	cost	you.
Reaching	the	cistern,	he	saw	the	first	set	of	moccasined	feet	appear,
dangling	from	the	hole	in	the	ceiling.	Kalam	moved	closer.


The	Claw	dropped,	landed	lightly,	and	died	with	a	knife-blade	through	an
eye	socket.	Kalam	tugged	his	weapon	free	and	pulled	the	slumping	corpse	to
one	side.	Looking	up,	he	waited	for	the	next	one.
Then	he	heard,	echoing	down,	a	voice.
	
Gathered	round	the	well,	the	two	Hands	hesitated,	looking	down	into	the
darkness.	‘Lieutenant	said	he’d	call	up,’	one	of	them	hissed.	‘I	don’t	hear	a
thing	down	there.’
There	then	came	a	faint	call,	three	fast	clicks.	A	recognized	signal.	The
assassins	relaxed.	‘Was	checking	out	the	entrance,	I	guess	–	Kalam	must	have
got	past	the	ambush	in	the	orchard.’
‘They	say	he’s	the	meanest	Claw	there	ever	was.	Not	even	Dancer	wanted
to	mess	with	him.’
‘Enough	of	that.	Go	on,	Sturtho,	get	down	there	and	give	the	lieutenant
company	and	be	sure	to	wipe	up	the	puddle	around	his	feet	while	you’re	at	it	–
wouldn’t	want	any	of	us	to	slip.’
The	one	named	Sturtho	clambered	onto	the	well.
	
A	short	time	later,	Kalam	emerged	from	the	tunnel	mouth.	T’amber,	sitting
with	her	back	to	a	tree,	looked	up,	then	nodded	and	began	to	rise.	Blood	had
pooled	in	her	lap	and	now	streaked	down	onto	her	thighs.
‘Which	way	ahead?’	the	Adjunct	asked	Kalam.
‘We	follow	the	old	orchard	wall,	west,	until	we	hit	Raven	Hill	Road,	then
straight	south	to	the	hill	itself	–	it’s	a	wide	track,	with	plenty	of	barred	or
barricaded	alleys.	We’ll	skirt	the	hill	on	the	east	side,	along	the	Old	City	Wall,
and	then	across	Admiral	Bridge.’	Kalam	hesitated,	then	said,	‘We’ve	got	to
move	fast,	at	a	run,	never	straight	but	never	stopping	either.	Now,	there’s	mobs
out	there,	thugs	looking	for	trouble	–	we	need	to	avoid	getting	snagged	up	by
those.	So	when	I	say	we	move	fast	and	keep	moving	that’s	exactly	what	I	mean.
T’amber—’
‘I	can	keep	up.’
‘Listen—’
‘I	said	I	can	keep	up.’
‘You	shouldn’t	even	be	conscious,	damn	you!’
She	hefted	her	sword.	‘Let’s	go	find	the	next	ambush,	shall	we?’
	


Tears	glistened	beneath	Stormy’s	eyes	as	the	sorrow-filled	music	born	of
strings	filled	the	small	room,	and	names	and	faces	slowly	resolved,	one	after
another,	in	the	minds	of	the	four	soldiers	as	the	candles	guttered	down.	Muted,
from	the	streets	of	the	city	outside,	there	rose	and	fell	the	sounds	of	fighting,
of	dying,	a	chorus	like	the	accumulated	voices	of	history,	of	human	failure	and
its	echoes	reaching	them	from	every	place	in	this	world.	Fiddler ’s	struggle	to
evade	the	grim	monotony	of	a	dirge	forced	hesitation	into	the	music,	a	seeking
of	hope	and	faith	and	the	solid	meaning	of	friendship	–	not	just	with	those	who
had	fallen,	but	with	the	three	other	men	in	the	room	–	but	it	was	a	struggle	he
knew	he	was	losing.
It	seemed	so	easy	for	so	many	people	to	divide	war	from	peace,	to	confine
their	definitions	to	the	unambivalent.	Marching	soldiers,	pitched	battles	and
slaughter.	Locked	armouries,	treaties,	fêtes	and	city	gates	opened	wide.	But
Fiddler	knew	that	suffering	thrived	in	both	realms	of	existence	–	he’d
witnessed	too	many	faces	of	the	poor,	ancient	crones	and	babes	in	a	mother ’s
arms,	figures	lying	motionless	on	the	roadside	or	in	the	gutters	of	streets	–
where	the	sewage	flowed	unceasing	like	rivers	gathering	their	spent	souls.	And
he	had	come	to	a	conviction,	lodged	like	an	iron	nail	in	his	heart,	and	with	its
burning,	searing	realization,	he	could	no	longer	look	upon	things	the	way	he
used	to,	he	could	no	longer	walk	and	see	what	he	saw	with	a	neatly	partitioned
mind,	replete	with	its	host	of	judgements	–	that	critical	act	of	moral	relativity	–
this	is	less,	that	is	more.	The	truth	in	his	heart	was	this:	he	no	longer	believed
in	peace.
It	did	not	exist	except	as	an	ideal	to	which	endless	lofty	words	paid	service,
a	litany	offering	up	the	delusion	that	the	absence	of	overt	violence	was
sufficient	in	itself,	was	proof	that	one	was	better	than	the	other.	There	was	no
dichotomy	between	war	and	peace	–	no	true	opposition	except	in	their
particular	expressions	of	a	ubiquitous	inequity.	Suffering	was	all-pervasive.
Children	starved	at	the	feet	of	wealthy	lords	no	matter	how	secure	and
unchallenged	their	rule.
There	was	too	much	compassion	within	him	–	he	knew	that,	for	he	could
feel	the	pain,	the	helplessness,	the	invitation	to	despair,	and	from	that	despair
came	the	desire	–	the	need	–	to	disengage,	to	throw	up	his	hands	and	simply
walk	away,	turn	his	back	on	all	that	he	saw,	all	that	he	knew.	If	he	could	do
nothing,	then,	dammit,	he	would	see	nothing.	What	other	choice	was	there?
And	so	we	weep	for	the	fallen.	We	weep	for	those	yet	to	fall,	and	in	war	the
screams	are	loud	and	harsh	and	in	peace	the	wail	is	so	drawn-out	we	tell
ourselves	we	hear	nothing.
And	so	this	music	is	a	lament,	and	I	am	doomed	to	hear	its	bittersweet	notes


for	a	lifetime.
Show	me	a	god	that	does	not	demand	mortal	suffering.
Show	me	a	god	that	celebrates	diversity,	a	celebration	that	embraces	even
non-believers	and	is	not	threatened	by	them.
Show	me	a	god	who	understands	the	meaning	of	peace.	In	life,	not	in	death.
Show—
‘Stop,’	Gesler	said	in	a	grating	voice.
Blinking,	Fiddler	lowered	the	instrument.	‘What?’
‘You	cannot	end	with	such	anger,	Fid.	Please.’
Anger?	I	am	sorry.	He	would	have	spoken	that	aloud,	but	suddenly	he	could
not.	His	gaze	lowered,	and	he	found	himself	studying	the	littered	floor	at	his
feet.	Someone,	in	passing	–	perhaps	Fiddler	himself	–	had	inadvertently
stepped	on	a	cockroach.	Half-crushed,	smeared	into	the	warped	wood,	its	legs
kicked	feebly.	He	stared	at	it	in	fascination.
Dear	creature,	do	you	now	curse	an	indifferent	god?
‘You’re	right,’	he	said.	‘I	can’t	end	it	there.’	He	raised	the	fiddle	again.
‘Here’s	a	different	song	for	you,	one	of	the	few	I’ve	actually	learned.	From
Kartool.	It’s	called	“The	Paralt’s	Dance”.’	He	rested	the	bow	on	the	strings,
then	began.
Wild,	frantic,	amusing.	Its	final	notes	recounted	the	triumphant	female
eating	her	lover.	And	even	without	words,	the	details	of	that	closing	flourish
could	not	be	mistaken.
The	four	men	laughed.
Then	fell	silent	once	more.

It	could	have	been	worse,	Bottle	reflected	as	he	hurried	along	the	dark	alley.
Agayla	could	have	reached	in	to	the	left	instead	of	to	the	right,	there	under	his
shirt,	pulling	out	not	a	doll	but	a	live	rat	–	who	would	probably	have	bitten	her,
since	that	was	what	it	seemed	Y’Ghatan	liked	to	do	most.	Would	their
subsequent	conversation	have	taken	another	track?	he	wondered.	Probably.
The	alleys	of	the	Mouse	twisted	and	turned,	narrow	and	choking	and	unlit,
and	stumbling	over	a	body	in	the	gloom	was	not	nearly	as	uncommon	as	one
would	like…but	not	five	bodies.	Heart	pounding,	Bottle	halted	in	his	tracks.
The	stench	of	death	engulfed	him.	Bile	and	blood.
Five	corpses,	all	clothed	in	black,	hooded,	they	appeared	to	have	been	cut
to	pieces.	Perhaps	only	moments	earlier.
He	heard	screams	erupt	from	a	street	nearby,	cries	filled	with	terror.	Gods,


what’s	out	there?	He	contemplated	releasing	Y’Ghatan,	then	decided	against	it
–	he	would	need	the	rat’s	eyes	later,	he	was	certain	of	it,	and	risking	the
creature	now	invited	potential	disaster.	Besides,	I’m	not	far	from	my
destination.	I	think.	I	hope.
He	picked	his	way	gingerly	past	the	bodies,	approached	the	alley	mouth
beyond.
Whatever	had	elicited	the	shrieks	had	gone	another	way,	although	Bottle
saw	a	few	running	figures	flash	past,	heading	towards	the	docks.	Reaching	the
street	he	turned	right	and	set	off	in	the	same	direction.
Until	he	came	opposite	the	entrance	to	a	tavern.	Saddle-backed	stairs,
leading	down.	The	prickle	of	sweat	stole	over	his	body.	In	here.	Thank	you,
Agayla.
Bottle	made	his	way	down	the	steps,	pushed	through	the	doorway,	and
entered	Coop’s	Hanged	Man	Inn.
The	cramped,	low-ceilinged	den	was	crowded,	yet	strangely	quiet.	Pale
faces	turned	in	his	direction,	hard	eyes	fixing	on	him	as	he	paused	just	inside
the	threshold,	looking	round.
Damned	veterans.	Well,	at	least	you’re	not	all	out	there,	trying	to	kill
marines.
Bottle	made	his	way	to	the	bar.	Beneath	the	folds	of	his	cloak	he	felt	the
doll	move	slightly,	a	limb	twitching	–	the	right	arm	–	and	then	he	saw	a	figure
before	him,	facing	in	the	other	direction.	Broad	back	and	shoulders,	lifting	a
tankard	with	his	right	hand	as	he	leaned	on	the	counter.	The	ragged	sleeve	on
that	arm	slipped	down,	revealing	a	skein	of	scars.
Bottle	reached	the	man.	Tapped	him	on	the	shoulder.
A	slow	turn,	eyes	dark	as	cold	forges.
‘You’re	the	one	called	Foreigner?’
The	man	frowned.	‘Not	many	call	me	that,	and	you’re	not	one	of	them.’
‘I	have	a	message	to	deliver,’	Bottle	said.
‘From	who?’
‘I	can’t	say.	Not	here,	anyway.’
‘What’s	the	message?’
‘Your	long	wait	is	at	an	end.’
The	faintest	gleam	in	those	eyes,	as	of	embers	fanned	to	life	once	more.	‘Is
that	it?’
Bottle	nodded.	‘If	there’s	things	you	need	to	gather	up,	I	can	wait	here	for
you.	But	not	for	long.	We	need	to	move,	fast.’
Foreigner	turned	his	head,	called	out	to	a	huge	figure	behind	the	bar	who
had	just	driven	a	spigot	into	a	cask.	‘Temper!’


The	older	man	looked	over.
‘Keep	an	eye	on	this	one,’	Foreigner	said,	‘until	I’m	back.’
‘You	want	me	to	tie	him	up?	Knock	him	senseless?’
‘No,	just	make	sure	he	stays	breathing.’
‘He’s	safe	enough	in	here,’	Temper	replied,	stepping	closer,	his	eyes	on
Bottle.	‘We	know	the	Fourteenth	did	well,	soldier.	That’s	why	we’re	all	in	here
and	not	out	there.’
Foreigner ’s	regard	seemed	to	undergo	some	subtle	alteration	as	he	looked
upon	Bottle	once	more.	‘Ah,’	he	said	under	his	breath,	‘now	it’s	making	more
sense.	Wait,	I	won’t	be	long.’
Bottle	watched	the	man	push	his	way	through	the	crowd,	then	he	glanced
back	at	Temper.	‘He	got	a	real	name?’
‘I’m	sure	of	it,’	Temper	replied,	turning	away.
	
Three	shadows	huddled	round	a	table	in	the	far	corner.	They	hadn’t	been	there
a	moment	earlier,	Sergeant	Hellian	was	sure	of	that.	Maybe.	They	didn’t	look
to	be	drinking	anything,	which	was	suspicious	enough,	and	those	black	murky
heads	drawn	together	whispered	of	conspiracy,	nefarious	plans,	malicious
intentions,	but	if	they	were	speaking	she	could	hear	nothing	of	it	and	the	gloom
was	such	that	she	could	not	see	their	mouths	move.	Assuming	they	had	mouths.
The	whore	at	the	other	table	was	playing	a	game	of	Troughs.	With	no-one.
Hellian	leaned	closer	to	her	prisoner.	‘This	place	is	strange,	if	you	ask
me.’
Brows	lifted	marginally.	‘Really?	Wraiths	and	ghosts,	one	haggardly
whore	and	a	demon	behind	the	bar—’
‘Watch	who	you’re	callin’	haggardly,’	the	woman	growled	as	black	round
stones	bounced	in	the	trough	of	their	own	accord.	She	scowled	at	the	result	and
muttered,	‘You’re	cheatin’,	aren’t	ya?	I	swear	it	and	I	meant	what	I	said	–	if	I
catch	you	at	it,	Hormul,	I’m	buying	a	candle	wi’	your	name	on	it.’
Hellian	looked	over	at	the	bar.	The	demonic	owner,	back	into	his	scrawny,
puny	shape,	was	moving	back	and	forth	behind	the	counter,	only	his	head
visible.	He	seemed	to	be	eating	wedges	of	some	kind	of	yellow	fruit,	his	face
twisting	as	he	sucked	all	the	juice	from	each	wedge,	then	flung	the	rind	over	a
shoulder.	Back	and	forth,	wedge	after	wedge.	‘So	who	let	him	loose?’	she
demanded.	‘Ain’t	there	supposed	to	be	some	master	nearby?	Don’t	they	get
summoned	and	then	bound?	You’re	a	priest,	you’re	supposed	to	know	about
this	stuff.’
‘It	so	happens	that	I	do,’	Banaschar	replied.	‘And	yes,	normally	it’s	how


you	d’scribed.’	He	rubbed	at	his	face,	then	continued,	‘Here’s	my	guess,
Sergeant.	Was	Kellanved	’imself	conjured	this	demon,	probbly	as	a	bodyguard,
or	e’en	a	bouncer.	Then	he	left,	and	the	demon	took	over	the	business.’
‘Ridiculous.	What	do	demons	know	’bout	running	a	business?	You’re
lying.	Now	drink	up,	suspect,	an’	then	we’ll	have	one	more	an’	then	we	leave
this	madhouse.’
‘How	can	I	c’nvince	you,	Sergeant?	I	need	to	get	to	Mock’s	Hold.	The	fate
of	the	world	depends	on	it—’
‘Ha,	that’s	a	good	one.	Let	me	tell	you	’bout	the	fate	o’	the	world.	Hey,
barkeep!	You,	head,	more	ale,	damn	you!	Look	at	them	shadows,	suspect,
they’re	what	it’s	all	about.	Hidin’	behind	every	scene,	behind	every	throne,
behind	every	bath-tub.	Making	plans	and	nothing	but	plans	and	plans	while	the
rest	of	us,	we	go	down	the	drain,	chokin’	along	leaking	lead	pipes	and	out	into
the	swill,	where	we	drown.	Countin’	coin,	that’s	what	they	do.	Coin	we	can’t
e’en	see,	but	it’s	how	they	measure	us,	the	scales,	I	mean,	a	sliver	in	the	dish	a
soul	in	the	other	one,	evened	out,	you	see.	What’s	the	fate	o’	the	world,
suspect?’	She	made	a	gesture	with	her	hand,	index	finger	corkscrewing,
spiralling	round	and	round,	then	downward.	‘Wi’	them	in	charge,	it’s	all	goin’
down.	An’	the	joke	on	’em	is	this	–	they’re	goin’	with	it.’
‘Listen,	woman.	Those	are	wraiths.	Creatures	of	shadow.	They’re	not
making	plans.	They’re	not	counting	coins.	They’re	just	hanging	around—’
As	if	on	cue,	the	three	shadows	rose,	chairs	audibly	scraping	back,	drew
cloaks	tight,	hooded	faces	hidden	in	darkness,	then	filed	out	the	door.
Hellian	snorted.
The	barkeep	arrived	with	another	pitcher.
‘All	right,’	sighed	Banaschar,	closing	his	eyes.	‘Arrest	me.	Throw	me	in
some	dungeon.	Let	me	rot	with	the	worms	and	rats.	You’re	abs’lutely	right,
Sergeant.	Headfirst	down	the	drain	–	here,	lemme	top	you	up.’
‘Now	you’re	talkin’,	suspect.’

Kalam’s	forearm	hammered	into	the	Claw’s	veiled	face,	shattering	the	nose
and	driving	the	head	against	the	wall.	Bone	collapsed	with	a	crunch	and	the
attacker	slumped.	Spinning	round,	Kalam	made	his	way	quickly	along	the	wall
of	the	building,	tracked	by	a	half-dozen	crossbow	quarrels	that	struck	the
bricks	with	snaps	and	sounds	of	splintering.	He	could	hear	weapons	clashing	in
the	alley	ahead	and	to	his	right	–	where	the	Adjunct	and	T’amber	had	retreated
under	a	fusillade	of	missiles	from	across	the	street	–	they	had	been	shepherded


into	an	ambush.
Three	Hands	were	rushing	to	close	the	trap.	Swearing,	Kalam	reached	the
mouth	of	the	alley.	A	quick	glance	revealed	the	two	women	locked	in	a	vicious
close-in	battle	with	four	assassins	–	and	in	that	momentary	glance	one	of	those
four	fell	to	T’amber ’s	sword.	Kalam	turned	his	back	on	that	fight,	preparing	to
meet	the	Hands	approaching	from	the	street.
Daggers	flickered	through	the	air	towards	him.	He	threw	himself	down	and
to	the	right,	regaining	his	feet	in	time	to	meet	the	first	four	Claws.	A	flurry	of
parries	as	Kalam	worked	his	way	further	right,	pulling	himself	beyond	the
range	of	two	of	the	attackers.	Long-knife	lashed	out,	opening	one	man’s	face,
and	as	the	man	reeled	back,	Kalam	stepped	close,	impaling	the	man’s	left	thigh
whilst	blocking	a	frenzied	attack	from	the	other	Claw.	Pivoting	on	the	first
Claw’s	pinned	thigh,	he	twisted	behind	the	man	and	thrust	with	his	free	weapon
over	his	victim’s	right	shoulder,	the	point	tearing	into	the	second	attacker ’s
neck.
Tugging	free	the	blade	impaling	the	thigh,	Kalam	brought	that	arm	up	to
lock	beneath	the	first	Claw’s	chin,	where	he	flexed	hard	and,	with	a	single,
savage	wrenching	motion,	snapped	the	man’s	neck.
The	one	stabbed	in	the	throat	had	stumbled,	his	jugular	severed	and	blood
spraying	through	the	fingers	grasping	futilely	at	the	wound.	The	last	two	of	the
four	assassins	were	coming	up	fast.	Beyond	them,	Kalam	saw,	the	other	Hands
were	racing	for	the	Adjunct	and	T’amber.
Snarling	his	rage,	Kalam	launched	himself	past	the	two	Claws,	taking	their
attacks	on	his	long-knives,	slamming	his	foot	into	the	nearer	one’s	right	leg,
midway	between	knee	and	ankle,	breaking	bones.	As	the	assassin	shrieked	her
pain,	the	second	attacker,	seeking	to	move	past	her,	collided	with	the	falling
woman,	then	lost	balance	entirely	as	both	feet	slid	out	on	spilled	blood.
Kalam’s	wild	sprint	struck	the	first	group	of	Claws	charging	the	Adjunct
and	Tavore.	Coming	from	their	left	and	slightly	behind	them,	his	sudden
arrival	forced	a	half-dozen	attackers	to	swing	round	to	meet	him.	Taking
counterattacks	with	parries,	he	threw	his	shoulder	into	the	chest	of	the	nearest
Claw.	The	crack	of	ribs,	a	whoosh	of	breath	driven	from	the	lungs,	and	the
attacker	left	his	feet,	flung	backward	to	foul	two	Claws	directly	behind	him.
One	of	these	stumbled	too	close	to	Kalam	as	he	surged	past,	within	reach	of	his
left	long-knife,	and	the	cut	he	delivered	into	the	victim’s	neck	nearly	severed
the	head.
Only	two	of	the	remaining	four	were	close	enough	to	spring	at	him.	One
came	low	from	the	left,	the	other	high	from	the	right.	Kalam	slashed	across	the
path	of	the	first	attacker,	felt	his	blade	scrape	along	both	knives	in	the	Claw’s


hands.	He	followed	that	with	a	knee	between	the	figure’s	eyes.	The	second
attacker	he	forced	back	with	a	fully	extended	arm	and	long-knife,	and	the	Claw,
leaning	back	in	desperation,	left	both	feet	planted	–	Kalam	dropped	the	high
feint	and	cut	vertically	down	through	the	attacker ’s	stomach	to	the	crotch.
The	Claw	squealed	as	intestines	tumbled	out	between	his	knees.	Tearing	his
long-knife	loose,	Kalam	continued	his	charge	–	and	heard	someone	closing	on
him	from	behind.	Dropping	into	a	crouch,	Kalam	skidded	to	a	halt,	then	threw
himself	backward.	A	dagger	sank	into	his	left	waist,	just	beneath	the	ribcage,
the	point	angled	upward	–	seeking	his	heart	–	and	then	the	two	assassins
collided,	Kalam	flinging	his	head	back,	connecting	with	the	Claw’s	forehead.	A
second	dagger	skidded	along	mail	beneath	his	right	arm.	Twisting	away	from
the	knife	impaling	him,	he	spun	round	and	punched	his	elbow	into	the	side	of
the	Claw’s	head,	crushing	the	cheekbone.	The	attacker	sprawled,	losing	his
grip	on	the	knife	in	Kalam’s	side.
Gasping,	Kalam	forced	himself	forward	once	more.	Every	motion	sent	the
fierce	fire	of	agony	through	his	chest,	but	he	had	no	time	to	pull	out	the	knife,
as	the	last	two	Claws	who	had	turned	to	meet	him	now	rushed	him.
But	too	close	together,	almost	side	by	side	–	Kalam	leapt	to	his	right	to
take	himself	beyond	the	range	of	one	of	them.	He	ducked	a	horizontal	slash
seeking	his	throat,	caught	the	second	knife	with	an	edge-on-bone	parry	of	the
Claw’s	forearm,	then	back-hand	thrust	into	the	attacker ’s	throat.	Even	as	that
victim	began	pitching	forward,	Kalam	settled	his	left	shoulder	against	the	chest
–	and	pushed	hard,	following	the	body	as	it	slammed	into	the	other	assassin.
All	three	went	down,	with	Kalam	on	top.	The	corpse	between	him	and	the	live
Claw	snagged	one	of	his	long-knives	–	pulling	that	hand	free,	Kalam	stabbed
thumb	and	index	finger	into	the	assassin’s	eyes,	hooking	with	the	thumb	and
pushing	ever	deeper	with	the	finger,	until	the	body	ceased	spasming.
Hearing	more	fighting	from	the	alley,	Kalam	pushed	himself	to	his	feet,
paused	to	ease	free	the	knife	in	his	side,	cursing	at	the	blood	that	gushed	in	the
wake	of	the	blade.	He	collected	the	snagged	long-knife,	then	staggered	into	the
alley.
Only	three	Claws	remained,	and	T’amber	had	engaged	two	of	them,
driving	both	back,	step	by	step,	into	Kalam’s	path.
He	moved	up,	thrust	once,	then	twice,	and	two	bodies	writhed	at	his	feet.
T’amber	had	already	turned	and	rushed	to	take	the	last	assassin	from	behind,
crushing	the	skull	with	the	edge	of	her	sword.
One	of	the	Claws	below	heaved	to	one	side,	lifting	a	weapon	–	Kalam
stamped	his	heel	into	the	assassin’s	neck.
Sudden	silence	beyond	the	gasping	of	breaths.


He	stared	at	the	two	women.	T’amber	was	a	mass	of	wounds	–	frothy	blood
was	streaming	from	her	nose	and	mouth	and	he	saw	the	shuddering,	frantic
rise	and	fall	of	her	chest.	Grimacing	against	his	own	pain,	Kalam	turned	to
study	the	street	he	had	just	left.
Bodies	moving	here	and	there,	but	none	seemed	inclined	to	renew	the	fight.
The	Adjunct	moved	up	beside	him.	Blood	had	splashed	her	face,	mingling
with	grimy	sweat.	‘Kalam	Mekhar.	I	watch	you.	It	seems…’	She	shook	her
head.	‘It	seems	you	move	faster	than	them.	And	for	all	their	training,	their
skills,	they	cannot	keep	up	with	you.’
He	wiped	stinging	sweat	from	his	eyes.	His	hands,	clenching	the	grips	of
the	long-knives,	ached,	but	he	could	not	relax	them.	‘It	all	slows	down,
Adjunct,’	he	said	in	a	rumble.	‘In	my	mind,	they	just	slow	down.’	He	shook
himself,	forcing	loose	the	muscles	of	his	back	and	shoulders.	He	had	managed
to	stem	the	bleeding,	although	he	could	feel	the	heat	of	blood	down	the	outside
of	his	leg,	beneath	the	heavy	cloth,	forming	a	glue	between	the	fabric	and	his
skin.	He	was	exhausted,	a	sour	taste	on	his	tongue.	‘We	can’t	stop,’	he	said.
‘There’s	plenty	more.	We’re	close	to	Admiral	Bridge,	almost	there.’
‘There?’
‘The	Mouse.’
‘I	hear	riots	–	there’s	fires	there,	and	smoke,	Kalam.’
He	nodded.	‘Aye.	Confusion.	That’s	good.’	He	glanced	back	at	T’amber.
She	was	leaning	with	her	back	against	a	wall,	sheathed	in	blood,	her	eyes
closed.	Kalam	lowered	his	voice.	‘Adjunct,	she	needs	healing,	before	it’s	too
late.’
But	T’amber	heard.	Eyes	opening,	a	gleam	like	tiger-eyes,	and	she
straightened.	‘I’m	ready.’
The	Adjunct	took	a	half-step	towards	her	lover,	then	was	forced	to	turn	as
T’amber	moved	past	her	to	the	alley	mouth.
Kalam	saw	the	anguish	in	Tavore’s	gaze,	and	he	looked	away.
And	saw	thirty	or	more	Claws	shimmer	into	view	not	forty	paces	up	the
street.	‘Shit!	Run!’
They	emerged	from	the	alley	and	set	off.	Kalam	slowed	his	pace	to	allow
the	Adjunct	past	him.	Somehow,	T’amber	stayed	ahead	of	them,	taking	point.
There’ll	be	another	ambush.	Waiting	for	us.	She’ll	stumble	right	into	it—
Behind	them,	the	assassins	were	in	full	pursuit,	the	faster	sprinters	among
them	closing	the	distance.	Beyond	the	sound	of	soft	footfalls,	the	thump	of
boots,	and	a	chorus	of	fierce	gasps,	it	seemed	the	cobbles	beneath	them,	the
buildings	to	either	side,	and	even	the	lowering	sky	overhead,	all	conspired	to
close	in	upon	them	–	upon	this	desperate	scene	–	deadening	the	air,	making	it


thicker,	muffled.	If	eyes	witnessed,	the	faces	quickly	turned	away.	If	there	were
figures	in	the	alleys	they	passed,	they	melted	back	into	the	darkness.
The	street	angled	westward,	now	opposite	Raven	Hill	Park.	Up	ahead	it
would	link	up	with	another	street	that	bordered	the	park	on	the	west	side,
before	striking	southward	to	the	bridge.	As	they	neared	that	intersection,
Kalam	saw	T’amber	suddenly	shift	direction,	leading	them	into	an	alley	on	the
left,	and	then	he	saw	the	reason	for	the	unexpected	detour	–	more	Hands,
massing	in	the	intersection,	and	now	surging	forward.
They’re	herding	us.	To	the	bridge.	What’s	waiting	for	us	on	the	other	side?
The	alley	widened	into	something	like	a	street	just	past	the	first	flanking
buildings,	and	directly	before	them	was	the	low	wall	encircling	the	park.
T’amber	slowed,	as	if	unsure	whether	to	skirt	that	wall	to	the	left	or	the
right,	then	she	staggered,	lifting	her	sword	as	attackers	closed	in	on	her	from
both	sides.
The	Adjunct	cried	out.
Blades	clashed,	a	body	tumbled	to	one	side,	the	others	swarming	round
T’amber	–	Kalam	saw	two	knives	sink	into	the	woman’s	torso,	yet	still	she
remained	on	her	feet,	slashing	out	with	her	sword.	As	Tavore	reached	them	–
thrusting	her	otataral	blade	into	the	side	of	an	assassin’s	head,	a	savage	lateral
tug	freeing	it,	the	rust-hued	weapon	hissing	into	the	path	of	an	arm,	slicing
through	flesh	and	bone,	the	arm	flying	away—
Kalam	saw,	in	the	heartbeat	before	he	joined	the	fight,	T’amber	reaching
out	with	her	free	hand	to	take	a	Claw	by	the	throat,	then	pull	the	attacker	into
the	air,	pivoting	to	throw	the	Claw	against	the	stone	wall.	Even	as	the	figure
repeatedly	stabbed	the	woman	in	the	chest,	shoulders	and	upper	arms.
Gods	below!
Kalam	arrived	like	a	charging	bhederin,	long-knives	licking	out	even	as	he
hammered	his	weight	into	one	Claw,	then	another,	sending	both	sprawling.
There	in	the	gloom	before	the	wall	of	Raven	Hill	Park,	a	savage	frenzy	of
close-in	fighting,	a	second	Hand	joining	what	was	left	of	the	first.	A	dozen
rapid	heartbeats,	and	it	was	over.
And	there	was	no	time	to	pause,	no	time	for	a	breath	to	recover,	as	quarrels
began	pounding	into	the	wall.
Kalam	waved	mutely	to	run	along	the	wall,	westward,	and	somehow	–
impossibly	–	T’amber	once	more	took	the	lead.
Screams	erupted	behind	them,	but	there	was	no	time	to	look.	The	wall
curved	southward,	forming	one	side	of	the	street	leading	to	Admiral	Bridge,
and	there	stood	the	stone	span,	unlit,	so	buried	in	shadows	that	it	might	have
been	at	the	base	of	a	pit.	As	they	drew	closer,	that	sorcery	wavered,	then	died.


Revealing…nothing.	No-one	in	sight.
‘T’amber!’	Kalam	hissed.	‘Hold	up!’
Whatever	had	struck	in	their	wake	had	snared	the	attention	of	the	pursuing
Claws	–	at	least	for	the	moment.	‘Adjunct,	listen	to	me.	You	and	T’amber,	get
down	into	the	river.	Follow	it	straight	to	the	harbour.’
‘What	about	you?’	Tavore	demanded.
‘We	haven’t	yet	encountered	a	third	of	the	Hands	in	the	city,	Adjunct.’	He
nodded	towards	the	Mouse.	‘They’re	in	there.	I	plan	on	leading	them	a	merry
chase.’	He	paused,	then	spat	out	a	mouthful	of	phlegm	and	blood.	‘I	can	lose
them	eventually	–	I	know	the	Mouse,	Tavore.	I’ll	take	to	the	rooftops.’
‘There’s	no	point	in	splitting	up—’
‘Yes,	Adjunct.	There	is.’	Kalam	studied	T’amber	for	a	moment.	Yes,	despite
everything,	not	much	longer	for	you.	‘T’amber	agrees	with	me.	She’ll	get	you
to	the	harbour.’
From	the	streets	and	alleys	behind	them,	ominous	silence,	now.	Closing	in.
‘Go.’
The	Adjunct	met	his	eyes.	‘Kalam—’
‘Just	go,	Tavore.’
He	watched	as	they	moved	to	the	edge	of	the	river,	the	old	sagging	stone
retaining	wall	at	their	feet.	T’amber	climbed	down	first.	The	river	was
befouled,	sluggish	and	shallow.	It	would	be	slow	going,	but	the	darkness	would
hide	them.	And	when	they	get	to	the	harbour…well,	it’ll	be	time	to	improvise.
Kalam	adjusted	his	grips	on	the	long-knives.	A	last	glance	behind	him.	Still
nothing	there.	Odd.	He	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	bridge.	All	right.	Let’s	get	this	over
with.
	
Lostara	Yil	made	her	way	across	the	concourse,	leaving	Rampart	Way	and	the
bodies	at	its	foot	behind	her.	The	sounds	of	rioting	were	still	distant	–	coming
from	the	harbour	and	beyond	–	while	the	nearby	buildings	and	estates	were
silent	and	unlit,	as	if	she	had	found	herself	in	a	necropolis,	a	fitting	monument
to	imperial	glory.
The	small	figure	that	stepped	out	before	her	was	thus	all	the	more	startling,
and	her	disquiet	only	increased	upon	recognizing	him.	‘Grub,’	she	said,
approaching,	‘what	are	you	doing	here?’
‘Waiting	for	you,’	the	boy	replied,	wiping	at	a	runny	nose.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I’ll	take	you	where	you	need	to	go.	It’s	a	sad	night,	but	it	will	be	all	right,
you’ll	see	that	one	day.’	With	that	he	turned	around	and	headed	off	along	the


avenue,	southward.	‘We	don’t	need	to	stay	on	the	path,	not	yet.	We	can	take	the
first	bridge.	Lostara	Yil—’	a	glance	back,	‘you’re	very	pretty.’
Suddenly	chilled	despite	the	sultry	air,	she	set	off	after	him.	‘What	path?’
‘Doesn’t	matter.’
Skittering	sounds	in	the	shadows	off	to	her	left.	She	closed	a	hand	on	her
sword.	‘Something’s	there—’
‘That’s	okay,’	Grub	said.	‘They’re	my	friends.	There	won’t	be	any	trouble.
But	we	should	hurry.’
Before	long	they	reached	the	bridge	leading	into	Centre	District,
whereupon	Grub	angled	them	westward	for	a	short	time,	before	turning	south
once	more.
They	soon	came	upon	the	first	of	the	bodies.	Claws,	sprawled	in	small
groups	at	first	–	where	rats	and	wild	dogs	had	already	come	out	to	feed	–	and
then,	as	they	neared	Raven	Hill	Park,	the	street	was	literally	filled	with	corpses.
Lostara	slowed	her	pace	as	she	approached	the	elongated	scene	of	slaughter	–
heading	southward,	as	if	a	bladed	whirlwind	had	raced	through	a	hundred	or
more	imperial	assassins	–	and,	slowly,	Lostara	Yil	realized	something,	as	she
looked	upon	one	cut-up	figure	after	another…a	pattern	to	the	wounds,	to	their
placements,	to	the	smooth	precision	of	every	mortal	blow.
Her	chill	deepened,	stole	into	her	bones.
Three	paces	ahead,	Grub	was	humming	a	Wickan	drover ’s	song.
	
Halfway	across	Admiral	Bridge,	Kalam	lodged	one	weapon	under	an	arm	and
reached	for	the	acorn	tucked	into	the	folds	of	his	sash.	Smooth,	warm	even
through	the	leather	of	his	tattered	glove,	as	if	welcoming.	And…impatient.
Ducking	into	a	crouch	along	one	of	the	low	retaining	walls	on	the	bridge,
Kalam	flung	the	acorn	to	the	pavestones.	It	cracked,	spun	in	place	for	a
moment,	then	stilled.
‘All	right,	Quick,’	Kalam	muttered,	‘any	time	now.’

In	a	cabin	on	the	Froth	Wolf,	Adaephon	Delat,	seated	cross-legged	on	the	floor,
his	eyes	closed,	flinched	at	that	distant	summons.	Closer	to	hand,	he	could	hear
more	fighting	along	the	harbourfront,	and	he	knew	the	Perish	were	being
pushed	back,	step	by	step,	battered	by	sorcery	and	an	ever-growing	mass	of
frenzied	attackers.	Whilst	above	decks	Destriant	Run’Thurvian	was
maintaining	a	barrier	against	every	magical	assault	on	the	ship	itself.	Quick


Ben	sensed	that	the	man	was	not	exactly	hard-pressed,	but	clearly	distracted	by
something,	and	so	there	was	a	hesitation	in	him,	as	if	he	but	awaited	a	far	more
taxing	calling	–	a	moment	that	was	fast	approaching.
Well,	we	got	trouble	everywhere,	don’t	we	just?
It	would	not	be	easy	slipping	through	the	maze	of	warrens	unleashed	in	the
streets	of	the	city	this	night.	Pockets	of	virulent	sorcery	wandered	here	and
there,	mobile	traps	eager	to	deliver	agonizing	death,	and	Quick	Ben
recognized	those.	Ruse,	the	path	of	the	sea.	Those	traps	are	water,	stolen	from
deep	oceans	and	retaining	that	savage	pressure	–	they	crush	everything	they
envelop.	This	is	High	Ruse,	and	it’s	damned	ugly.
Someone	out	there	was	waiting	for	him.	To	make	his	move.	And	whoever
it	was,	they	wanted	Quick	Ben	to	remain	precisely	where	he	was,	in	a	cabin	on
the	Froth	Wolf.	Remain,	doing	nothing,	staying	out	of	the	fight.
Well.	He	had	unveiled	four	warrens,	woven	an	even	dozen	sorcerous
spells,	all	eager	to	be	sprung	loose	–	his	hands	itched,	then	burned,	as	if	he	was
repeatedly	dipping	them	in	acid.
Kalam’s	out	there,	and	he	needs	my	help.
The	High	Mage	allowed	himself	the	briefest	of	nods,	and	the	rent	of	a
warren	opened	before	him.	He	slowly	rose	to	his	feet,	joints	protesting	the
motion	–	gods,	I	think	I’m	getting	old.	Who’d	have	thought?	He	drew	a	deep
breath,	then,	blinking	to	clear	his	vision,	he	lunged	forward	–	into	the	rent—
—and,	even	as	he	vanished	he	heard	a	soft	giggle,	then	a	sibilant	voice:
‘You	said	you	owed	me,	remember?	Well,	my	dear	Snake,	it’s	time.’
	
Twenty	heartbeats.	Twenty-five.	Thirty.	Hood’s	breath!	Kalam	stared	down	at
the	broken	acorn.	Shit.	Shit	shit	shit.	Forty.	Cursing	under	his	breath,	he	set	off.
That’s	the	problem	with	the	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole.	Sometimes	it	doesn’t
work.	So,	I’m	on	my	own.	Well,	so	be	it,	I’ve	been	getting	sick	of	this	life
anyway.	Murder	was	overrated,	he	decided.	It	achieved	nothing,	nothing	of	real
value.	There	wasn’t	an	assassin	out	there	who	didn’t	deserve	to	have	his	or	her
head	cut	off	and	stuck	on	a	spike.	Skill,	talent,	opportunity	–	none	of	them
justified	the	taking	of	a	life.
How	many	of	us	–	yes	you	–	how	many	of	you	hate	what	you	are?	It’s	not
worth	it,	you	know.	Hood	take	all	those	blistering	egos,	let’s	flash	our	pathetic
light	one	last	time,	then	surrender	to	the	darkness.	I’m	done	with	this.	I’m	done.
He	reached	the	end	of	the	bridge	and	paused	once	more.	Another	backward
glance.	Well,	it	ain’t	burning,	except	here	in	my	mind.	Closing	the	circle,	right?
Hedge,	Trotts,	Whiskeyjack…


The	dark,	pitted	and	broken	face	of	the	Mouse	beckoned.	A	decayed	grin,
destitution	and	degradation,	the	misery	that	haunted	so	much	life.	It	was,	Kalam
Mekhar	decided,	the	right	place.	The	assassin	burst	into	motion,	a	diagonal
sprint,	hard	and	as	low	to	the	ground	as	he	could	manage,	up	to	the	leaning
façade	of	a	remnant	of	some	estate	wall,	surging	upward,	one	foot	jamming	in
a	cluttered	murder	hole	–	dislodging	a	bird’s	nest	–	up,	forearm	wrapping
round	the	top	edge,	broken	shards	of	cemented	crockery	cutting	through	the
sleeve,	puncturing	skin	–	then	over,	one	foot	gaining	purchase	on	the	ragged
row,	launching	himself	forward,	through	the	air,	onto	an	angled	roof	that
exploded	with	guano	dust	as	he	struck	it,	scrambling	along	the	incline,	two
long	strides	taking	him	to	the	peak,	then	down	the	other	side—
And	onto	the	wild	maze,	the	crackled,	disjointed	back	of	the	vast	Mouse—
Claws,	crouched	and	waiting,	lunged	in	from	all	sides.	Big,	the	biggest
assassins	Kalam	had	seen	yet,	each	wielding	long-knives	in	both	hands.	Fast,
like	vipers,	lashing	out.
Kalam	did	not	slow	down	–	he	needed	to	push	right	through	them,	he
needed	to	keep	going	–	he	caught	weapons	against	his	own,	felt	blade	edges
gouge	tracks	along	his	armour,	links	parting,	and	one	point,	thrust	hard,	sank
deep	into	his	left	thigh,	twisting,	cutting	in	an	upward	motion	–	snarling,	he
writhed	in	the	midst	of	the	flashing	weapons,	wrapped	an	arm	about	the	man’s
face	and	head,	then,	as	he	pushed	through	with	all	his	strength,	he	pulled	that
head	in	a	twisting	wrench,	hearing	the	vertebrae	pop.	Kalam	half-dragged	the
flopping	corpse	by	its	wobbly	head,	into	his	wake,	where	he	dropped	it.
A	long-knife	from	the	right	slashed	into	the	side	of	his	head,	slicing	down
to	sever	his	ear.	He	counter-thrust	and	felt	his	weapon	skid	along	chain.
Hood	take	them!	Someone	used	me	to	make	more	of	me—
Continuing	down,	to	the	edge,	Kalam	then	launched	himself	through	the
air,	over	the	gap	of	an	alley.	He	landed,	pitching	and	rolling,	on	the	flat	roof	of
a	sagging	tenement,	centuries	old,	the	surface	beneath	him	layered	with	the
gravel	of	broken	pottery.	Multiple	impacts	followed,	trembling	along	the
rooftop,	as	his	hunters	came	after	him.	Two,	five,	seven—
Kalam	regained	his	feet	and	turned,	at	bay,	as	nine	assassins,	spread	into	a
half-circle,	rushed	him.
Nine	Kalams	against	one.
Hardly.
He	surged	forward,	straight	ahead,	to	the	centre	of	that	half-circle.	The
man	before	him	raised	his	weapons	in	alarm,	caught	by	surprise.	He	managed
to	parry	twice	with	one	long-knife,	once	with	the	other	as	he	desperately	backpedalled,	before	Kalam’s	succession	of	attacks	broke	through.	A	blade	sinking


into	the	man’s	chest,	impaling	his	heart,	the	second	one	stabbing	beneath	the
jaw-line,	then	twisting	upward	and	pushing	hard	into	the	brain.
Using	both	jammed	weapons,	Kalam	yanked	the	man	around,	into	the	path
of	two	more	Claws,	then	he	tore	free	his	long-knives	and	charged	into	one
flank	of	attackers	with	blinding	speed.	A	blade-edge	sliced	into	his	left	calf
from	one	of	the	pursuers	–	not	deep	enough	to	slow	him	down	–	as	he	feinted
low	at	the	Claw	closest	to	him,	then	thrust	high	with	his	other	weapon	–	into	the
eye	socket	of	the	man	a	step	beyond	the	first	assassin.	The	long-knife	jammed.
Releasing	his	grip,	Kalam	dipped	a	shoulder	and	flung	himself	into	the
midsection	of	the	next	attacker.	The	impact	jolted	through	his	bones	–	this
Hood-cursed	bastard’s	huge	–	yet	he	sank	even	lower,	his	freed	arm	sliding	up
between	the	man’s	legs,	up	behind.	Blades	tore	down	along	his	back,	links
popping	like	ticks	on	hot	stones,	and	he	felt	the	Claw	seeking	to	shift	the	angle
of	those	weapons,	to	push	them	inward	–	as,	legs	bunching	beneath	him,	Kalam
then	heaved	the	hunter	upward,	off	his	feet	–	up,	Kalam	loosing	a	roar	that	tore
the	lining	of	his	throat,	using	his	weapon-hand	to	grasp	the	front	of	the	man’s
shirt	–	up	–	and	over.
Legs	kicking,	the	Claw’s	head	pitched	forward,	colliding	with	the	chest	of
a	pursuing	assassin.	Both	went	down.	Kalam	leapt	after	them,	pounding	an
elbow	into	the	forehead	of	the	second	Claw	–	collapsing	it	like	a	melon	husk	–
while	he	sank	his	remaining	long-knife	into	the	back	of	the	first	man’s	neck.
A	blade	jammed	into	his	right	thigh,	the	point	bursting	through	the	other
side.	Kalam	twisted	fast	to	pull	the	weapon	from	the	attacker ’s	hand,	drew	both
legs	up	as	he	rolled	onto	his	back,	then	kicked	hard	into	the	Claw’s	belly,
sending	the	figure	flying.	Another	long-knife	thrust	at	his	face	–	he	flung	up	a
forearm	and	blocked	the	weapon,	brought	his	hand	round	and	grasped	the
Claw’s	wrist,	pulled	him	closer	and	gutted	him	with	his	own	long-knife,	the
intestines	spilling	out	to	land	in	Kalam’s	lap.
Scrambling	upright,	he	pulled	out	the	weapon	impaling	his	thigh	–	in	time
to	parry	a	slash	with	it,	then,	backing	away	–	his	slashed	and	punctured	legs
almost	failing	beneath	him	–	he	fell	into	a	sustained	defence.	Three	hunters
faced	him,	with	the	one	he	had	kicked	now	regaining	his	feet,	slowly,
struggling	to	draw	breath.
Too	much	blood-loss;	Kalam	felt	himself	weakening.	If	any	more	Hands
arrived…
He	leapt	back,	almost	to	the	edge	of	the	roof,	and	threw	both	long-knives,	a
move	unexpected,	particularly	given	the	top-heavy	imbalance	of	the	weapons	–
but	Kalam	had	practised	short-range	throwing	with	them,	year	after	year.	One
buried	itself	deep	in	the	chest	of	the	Claw	to	his	right;	the	other	struck	the


breastbone	of	the	Claw	on	the	left	with	a	solid	thud	and	remained	in	place,
quivering.	Even	as	he	threw	the	weapons,	Kalam	launched	himself,	barehanded,
at	the	man	in	the	middle.
Caught	one	forearm	in	both	hands,	pushed	it	back	then	across	–	the	hunter
attempted	an	upthrust	from	low	with	his	other	long-knife,	but	Kalam	kneed	it
aside.	A	savage	wrench	dislocated	the	arm	in	his	hands,	then	he	pushed	it	back
up,	grinding	the	dislodged	bones	into	the	ruptured	socket	–	the	man	shrieked.
Releasing	the	arm,	he	brought	both	hands	up	behind	the	Claw’s	head,	then,
leaving	his	own	feet,	he	drove	that	head	downward,	using	all	of	his	weight,
downward,	face-first	into	the	roof.
A	crunch,	a	loud	crack,	and	the	entire	rooftop	sagged	–	explosions	of	old
rotted	timber	beams,	crumbling	mortar	and	plaster.
Swearing,	Kalam	rolled	over	the	man	–	whose	face	was	buried	in	the	roof,
amidst	bubbling	blood	–	and	saw,	through	an	ever	widening	fissure,	a	darkened
room	below.	He	slid	himself	forward—
Time	to	leave.
	
Ten	paces	away,	Pearl	stood	and	watched.	Shaken,	disbelieving.	On	the	slanting
rooftop	all	round	him	lay	bodies.	The	finest	assassins	of	the	Malazan	Empire.
He	cut	through	them	all.	Just…cut	through	them.	And,	in	his	heart,	there	was
terror	–	a	sensation	new	to	him,	filling	him	with	trembling	weakness.
He	watched	as	Kalam	Mekhar,	streaming	blood,	weaponless,	dragged
himself	towards	that	hole	in	the	roof.	And	Pearl	drew	back	the	sleeve	of	his	left
arm,	extended	it,	aimed	and	released	the	quarrel.
A	grunt	with	the	impact,	the	quarrel	sinking	deep	just	under	Kalam’s
outstretched	left	arm,	even	as	the	man	slid	forward,	down,	and	vanished	from
sight.
I	am	sorry,	Kalam	Mekhar.	But	you…I	cannot	accept…your	existence.	I
cannot…
He	then	made	his	way	forward,	joined	now	by	the	lone	survivor	of	the	two
Hands,	and	collected	Kalam’s	weapons.
My…trophies.
He	turned	to	the	Claw.	‘Find	the	others—’
‘But	what	of	Kalam—’
‘He’s	finished.	Gather	the	Hands	here	in	the	Mouse	–	we’re	paying	a	visit
to	the	Centre	Docks,	now.	If	the	Adjunct	makes	it	that	far,	well,	we	have	to	take
her	down	there.’
‘Understood,	Clawmaster.’


Clawmaster.	Yes.	It’s	done,	Empress	Laseen.	Yes,	he’s	dead.	By	my	own
hand.	I	am	without	an	equal	in	the	Malazan	Empire.
Where	would	he	begin?
Mallick	Rel.
Korbolo	Dom.
Neither	of	you	will	see	the	dawn.	I	swear	it.
The	other	Claw	spoke	from	the	edge	of	the	hole	in	the	roof:	‘I	don’t	see
him,	Clawmaster.’
‘He’s	crawling	off	to	die,’	Pearl	said.	‘Kartoolian	paralt.’
The	man’s	head	snapped	round.	‘Not	the	snake?	The	spider ’s…?	Gods
below!’
Aye,	a	most	painful,	protracted	death.	And	there’s	not	a	priest	left	on	the
island	who	can	neutralize	that	poison.
Two	weapons	clunked	on	the	roof.	Pearl	looked	over.	‘What	are	you
doing?’	he	demanded.
The	man	was	staring	at	him.	‘Enough.	How	much	dishonour	will	you	set	at
the	feet	of	the	Claw?	I	am	done	with	you.’	And	he	turned	away.	‘Find	the
Adjunct	yourself,	Pearl,	give	her	one	of	your	damned	spider	bites—’
Pearl	raised	his	right	arm,	sent	a	second	quarrel	flying	across	the	rooftop.
Striking	the	man	between	the	shoulder-blades.	Arms	flung	out	to	the	sides,	the
Claw	toppled.
‘That,	regrettably,	was	white	paralt.	Much	quicker.’
Now,	as	he	had	intended	all	along,	there	were	no	witnesses	left.	And	it	was
time	to	gather	the	remaining	Hands.
He	wished	it	could	have	been	different.	All	of	it.	But	this	was	a	new
Malazan	Empire,	with	new	rules.	Rules	I	can	manage	well	enough.	After	all,	I
have	nothing	left.	No-one	left…
	
Closing	his	eyes,	Fiddler	set	down	his	fiddle.	He	said	nothing,	for	there	was
nothing	to	say.	The	reprise	that	had	taken	him	was	done.	The	music	had	left	his
hands,	had	left	his	mind,	his	heart.	He	felt	empty	inside,	his	soul	riven,	lifeless.
He	had	known	this	was	coming,	a	truth	that	neither	diminished	the	pain	of	loss
nor	intensified	it	–	a	burden,	that	was	all.	Just	one	more	burden.
Screams	from	the	street	below,	then	the	sound	of	a	door	smashing	into
kindling.
Braven	Tooth	glanced	up,	wiped	at	his	eyes.
Heavy	footsteps	on	the	stairs.
Gesler	collected	the	wine	jug	from	the	table	and	slowly	refilled	the	cups.


No-one	had	touched	the	bread.
Thumping	steps	coming	up	the	corridor.	Scraping,	dragging.
Halting	before	the	Master	Sergeant’s	door.
Then	a	heavy,	splintering	knock,	like	claws	gouging	the	wood.
Gesler	rose	and	walked	over.
Fiddler	watched	as	the	sergeant	opened	the	door,	stood	motionless	for	a
long	moment,	staring	at	whoever	was	in	the	corridor,	then	Gesler	said,
‘Stormy,	it’s	for	you.’
The	huge	man	slowly	rose	as	Gesler	turned	about	and	walked	back	to	his
chair.
A	shape	filled	the	entrance.	Broad-shouldered,	wearing	tattered,	dripping
furs.	A	flat	face,	the	skin	betel	brown	and	stretched	taut	over	robust	bones.	Pits
for	eyes.	Long	arms	hanging	to	the	sides.	Fiddler ’s	brows	rose.	A	T’lan	Imass.
Stormy	cleared	his	throat.	‘Legana	Breed,’	he	said,	his	voice	oddly	high.
The	reply	that	rasped	from	the	apparition	was	like	the	grating	of	barrow
stones.	‘I	have	come	for	my	sword,	mortal.’
Gesler	collapsed	into	his	chair	and	collected	his	cup.	‘A	long,	wet	walk,
was	it,	Breed?’
The	head	swivelled	with	a	creak,	but	the	T’lan	Imass	said	nothing.
Stormy	collected	the	flint	sword	and	walked	over	to	Legana	Breed.	‘You
been	scaring	a	lot	of	people	below,’	he	said.
‘Sensitive	souls,	you	mortals.’
The	marine	held	the	sword	out,	horizontally.	‘Took	your	time	getting	out
of	that	portal.’
Legana	Breed	grasped	it.	‘Nothing	is	ever	as	easy	as	it	seems,	Shield	Anvil.
Carry	the	pain	in	your	heart	and	know	this:	you	are	far	from	finished	with	this
world.’
Fiddler	glanced	across	at	Braven	Tooth.	Shield	Anvil?
The	Master	Sergeant	simply	shook	his	head.
Legana	Breed	was	studying	the	weapon	in	his	skeletal	hands.	‘It’s
scratched.’
‘What?	Oh,	but	I	–	oh,	well—’
‘Humour	is	extinct,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said,	turning	back	to	the	doorway.
Gesler	suddenly	straightened.	‘A	moment,	Legana	Breed!’
The	creature	paused.
‘Stormy	did	all	that	you	asked	of	him.	Now,	we	need	repayment.’
Sweat	sprang	out	on	Fiddler ’s	skin.	Gesler!
The	T’lan	Imass	faced	them	again.	‘Repayment.	Shield	Anvil,	did	not	my
weapon	serve	you	well?’


‘Aye,	well	enough.’
‘Then	there	is	no	debt—’
‘Not	true!’	Gesler	said	in	a	growl.	‘We	saw	you	take	that	Tiste	Andii	head
with	you!	But	we	told	your	fellow	T’lan	Imass	nothing	–	we	kept	your	secret,
Legana	Breed!	When	we	could	have	bargained	with	it,	gotten	ourselves	right
out	of	that	damned	mess	we	were	in!	There	is	a	debt!’
Silence	from	the	ancient	undead	warrior,	then,	‘What	do	you	demand	of
me?’
‘We	–	me,	Stormy	and	Fiddler	here	–	we	need	an	escort.	Back	to	our	ship.
It	could	mean	a	fight.’
‘There	are	four	thousand	mortals	between	us	and	the	docks,’	Legana	Breed
said.	‘One	and	all	driven	into	madness	by	chaotic	sorcery.’
‘And?’	Gesler	sneered.	‘Are	you	afraid,	T’lan	Imass?’
‘Afraid.’	A	declarative	statement.	Then	the	head	cocked.	‘Humour?’
‘So	what’s	the	problem?’
‘The	docks.’	Hesitation,	then,	‘I	just	came	from	there.’
Fiddler	began	collecting	his	gear.	‘With	answers	like	that	one,	Legana
Breed,’	he	said,	‘you	belong	in	the	marines.’	He	glanced	over	at	Braven	Tooth.
‘Well	met,	old	friend.’
The	Master	Sergeant	nodded.	‘And	with	you.	The	three	of	you.	Sorry	about
punching	you	in	the	gut,	Fid.’
‘Like	Hood	you	are.’
‘I	didn’t	know	it	was	you—’
‘To	Hood	you	didn’t.’
‘All	right,	I	heard	you	come	in.	Heard	cloth	against	fiddle	strings.	Smelled
Moranth	munitions.	Not	hard	with	all	that.’
‘So	you	punched	me	anyway?’
Braven	Tooth	smiled.	The	particular	smile	that	gave	the	bastard	his	name.
Legana	Breed	spoke:	‘You	are	all	marines?’
‘Aye,’	Fiddler	said.
‘Tonight,	then,	I	too	am	a	marine.	Let	us	go	kill	people.’
	
Throatslitter	clambered	up	the	gangplank,	stumbled	down	onto	the	deck.	‘Fist,’
he	gasped,	‘we	need	to	call	more	in	–	we	none	of	us	can	hold	much	longer—’
‘No,	soldier,’	Keneb	replied,	his	gaze	fixed	on	the	vicious	fighting	on	the
concourse	before	them,	the	ever-contracting	Perish	lines,	the	ever-growing
mass	of	frenzied	attackers	pouring	in	from	every	street	and	alley	mouth
between	warehouse	buildings.	Don’t	you	see?	We	commit	more	and	we	get


pulled	deeper	into	this	mess,	deeper	and	deeper	–	until	we	cannot	extricate
ourselves.	There’s	too	much	sorcery	out	there	–	gods	below,	my	head	feels	ready
to	explode.	He	so	wanted	to	explain	all	of	this	to	the	desperate	marine,	but	that
was	not	what	a	commander	did.
Just	like	the	Adjunct.	You	want	to,	gods	how	you	want	to,	if	only	to	see	the
understanding	in	their	eyes.	But	you	cannot.	All	right,	so	I’m	starting	to
comprehend…
‘Attend,	Fist	Keneb!’	The	warning	came	from	the	Destriant.	‘Assassins,
seeking	to	penetrate	our	defences—’
A	hiss	from	Throatslitter,	and	he	turned,	called	down	to	the	marines	on	the
jetty.	‘Sergeant!	Get	the	squads	up	here!	We	got	Claws	on	the	way!’
Keneb	faced	Run’Thurvian.	‘Can	you	block	them?’
A	slow	nod	of	the	suddenly	pallid	face.	‘This	time,	yes	–	at	the	last	moment
–	but	they	are	persistent,	and	clever.	When	they	breach,	they	will	appear,
suddenly,	all	about	us.’
‘Who	is	their	target?	Do	you	know?’
‘All	of	us,	I	believe.	Perhaps,	most	of	all,’	the	Destriant	glanced	over	at	Nil
and	Nether,	who	stood	on	the	foredeck,	silent	witnesses	to	the	defence,	‘those
two.	Their	power	sleeps.	For	now,	it	cannot	be	awakened	–	it	is	not	for	us,	you
see.	Not	for	us.’
Hood’s	breath.	He	turned	to	see	the	first	marines	arrive.	Koryk,	Tarr,
Smiles	–	damn	you,	Fiddler,	where	are	you?	–	then	Cuttle	and	Corabb	Bhilan
Thenu’alas.	A	moment	later	Sergeant	Balm	appeared,	followed	by	Galt	and
Lobe.	‘Sergeant,	where	is	your	healer	–	and	your	mage?’
‘Used	up,’	the	Dal	Honese	replied.	‘They’re	recovering	on	the	Silanda,
sir.’
‘Very	well.	I	want	you	to	form	a	cordon	around	Nil	and	Nether	–	the	Claw
will	go	for	them	first	and	foremost.’	As	the	soldiers	scrambled	he	turned	to
Run’Thurvian,	and	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘I	assume	you	can	protect	yourself,
Destriant.’
‘Yes,	I	have	held	myself	in	abeyance,	anticipating	such	a	moment.	But	what
of	you,	Fist	Keneb?’
‘I	doubt	I’m	important	enough.’	Then	something	occurred	to	him	and	he
called	over	to	the	marines.	‘Smiles!	Head	down	to	the	First	Mate’s	cabin	–	warn
Quick	Ben	and	if	you	can,	convince	him	to	get	up	here.’	He	made	his	way	to	the
starboard	rail,	leaned	out	to	study	the	fighting	at	the	base	of	the	jetty.
There	were	uniformed	Malazan	soldiers	amidst	the	mob,	now,	all	pretence
gone.	Armoured,	many	with	shields,	others	holding	back	with	crossbows,
sending	one	quarrel	after	another	into	the	line	of	Perish.	The	foreign	allies	had


been	pushed	back	almost	to	the	jetty	itself.
Cuttle	was	on	the	foredeck,	yelling	at	the	ballista	crew	–	the	sapper	held	a
handful	of	fishing	net	in	one	hand	and	a	large	round	object	in	the	other.	A
cusser.	After	a	moment	the	crew	stepped	back	and	Cuttle	set	to	affixing	the
munition	just	behind	the	head	of	the	oversized	dart.
Nice	thinking.	A	messy	way	to	clear	a	space,	but	there’s	little	choice.
Smiles	returned,	hurried	up	to	Keneb.	‘Fist,	he’s	not	there.’
‘What?’
‘He’s	gone!’
‘Very	well.	Never	mind.	Go	join	your	squad,	soldier.’
From	somewhere	in	Malaz	City,	a	bell	sounded,	the	sonorous	tones
ringing	four	times.	Gods	below,	is	that	all?
	
Lieutenant	Pores	stood	beside	his	captain,	staring	across	the	dark	water	to	the
mayhem	at	Centre	Docks.	‘We’re	losing,	sir,’	he	said.
‘That’s	precisely	why	I	made	you	an	officer,’	Kindly	replied.	‘Your
extraordinary	perceptiveness.	And	no,	Lieutenant,	we	will	not	disobey	our
orders.	We	remain	here.’
‘It’s	not	proper,	sir,’	Pores	persisted.	‘Our	allies	are	dying	there	–	it’s	not
even	their	fight.’
‘What	they	choose	to	do	is	their	business.’
‘Still	not	proper,	sir.’
‘Lieutenant,	are	you	truly	that	eager	to	kill	fellow	Malazans?	If	so,	get	out
of	that	armour	and	you	can	swim	ashore.	With	Oponn’s	luck	the	sharks	won’t
find	you,	despite	my	fervent	prayers	to	the	contrary.	And	you’ll	arrive	just	in
time	to	get	your	head	lopped	off,	forcing	me	to	find	myself	a	new	lieutenant,
which,	I	grant	you,	will	not	be	hard,	all	things	considered.	Maybe	Hanfeno,
now	there’s	officer	material	–	to	the	level	of	lieutenant	and	no	higher,	of
course.	Almost	as	thick	and	pig-headed	as	you.	Now	go	on,	climb	out	of	that
armour,	so	Senny	can	start	laying	bets.’
‘Thank	you,	sir,	but	I’d	rather	not.’
‘Very	well.	But	one	more	complaint	from	you,	Lieutenant,	and	I’ll	throw
you	over	the	side	myself.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘In	your	armour.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘After	docking	your	pay	for	the	loss	of	equipment.’
‘Of	course,	Captain.’


‘And	if	you	keep	trying	to	get	the	last	word	here	I	think	I	will	kill	you
outright.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Lieutenant.’
Pores	clamped	his	jaws	shut,	and	held	off.	For	the	moment.
	
With	barely	a	whisper,	the	figure	landed	on	the	sundered,	pitched	rooftop.
Paused	to	look	round	at	the	sprawl	of	corpses.	Then	approached	the	gaping
hole	near	one	end.
As	it	neared,	another	figure	seemed	to	materialize	as	if	from	nowhere,
crouched	down	on	one	knee	above	a	body	lying	face-down	near	the	breach.	A
quarrel	was	buried	deep	in	that	body’s	back,	the	fletching	fashioned	of	fish
bone	–	the	cheek	sections	of	some	large	sea-dwelling	species,	pale	and	semitranslucent.	The	newcomer	swung	a	ghostly	face	up	to	regard	the	one	who
approached.
‘The	Clawmaster	killed	me,’	the	apparition	said	in	a	rasp,	gesturing	to	its
own	body	beneath	it.	‘Even	as	I	cursed	his	name	with	my	last	breath.	I	think…
yes,	I	think	that	is	why	I	am	still	here,	not	yet	ready	to	walk	through	Hood’s
Gate.	It	is	a	gift…to	you.	He	killed	Kalam	Mekhar.	With	Kartoolian	paralt.’	The
ghost	turned	slightly	and	gestured	to	the	edge	of	the	hole.	‘Kalam	–	he	pulled
the	quarrel	loose…no	point	of	course,	it	makes	no	difference	since	the	paralt’s
in	his	blood.	But	I	did	not	tell	Pearl	–	it’s	right	there,	balanced	on	the	very	lip.
Take	it.	There	is	plenty	of	poison	left.	Take	it.	For	the	Clawmaster.’
A	moment	later	the	ghost	was	gone.
The	cloth-wrapped	figure	crouched	down	and	collected	the	blood-smeared
quarrel	in	one	gloved	hand.	Tucked	it	into	a	fold	of	the	sash	belt,	then
straightened,	and	set	off.
	
Through	skeins	of	vicious	sorcery,	the	lone	figure	moved	with	blinding	speed
down	the	street,	deftly	avoiding	every	snare	–	the	coruscating	pockets	of	High
Ruse,	the	whispering	invitations	of	Mockra	–	and	then	into	the	light-stealing
paths	of	Rashan	where	assassins	of	the	Claw	had	raced	along	only	moments
earlier	–	and	onto	their	trail,	fast	closing,	a	dagger	in	each	leather-clad	hand.
Near	the	harbourfront	the	Claws	began	emerging	from	their	warrens,
massing	by	the	score,	moments	from	launching	an	all-out	assault	on	the
foreign	soldiers,	on	everyone	aboard	the	two	moored	ships.


Approaching	fast	from	behind,	the	figure’s	movements	acquired	a	fluidity,
sinuous,	weaving	a	flow	of	shadows,	and	the	approach	that	had	been	quick
transformed	into	something	else	–	faster	than	a	mortal	eye	could	perceive	in
this	night	of	gloom	and	smoke	–	and	then	the	lone	attacker	struck	the	first	of
the	Hands.
Blood	sprayed,	sheeted	into	the	air,	bodies	spun	to	either	side	from	its	path,
a	whirlwind	of	death	tearing	into	the	ranks.	Claws	spun	round,	shouted,
screamed,	and	died.
	
Clawmaster	Pearl	turned	at	the	sounds.	He	was	positioned	over	twenty	Hands
from	the	rearguard	–	a	rearguard	now	down,	writhing	or	motionless	on	the
cobbles,	as	something	–	someone	–	tore	through	them.	Gods	below.	A	Shadow
Dancer.	Who	–	Cotillion?	Cold	terror	seized	his	chest	with	piercing	talons.	The
god.	The	Patron	of	Assassins	–	coming	for	me.
In	Kalam	Mekhar’s	name,	coming	for	me!
He	spun	round,	eyes	searching	frantically	for	a	bolt-hole.	To	Hood	with	the
Hands!	Pearl	pushed	his	way	clear,	then	ran.
An	alley,	narrow	between	two	warehouses,	swallowed	in	darkness.
Moments	to	go,	then	he	would	open	his	warren,	force	a	rent,	plunge	through	–
through,	and	away.
Weapons	in	his	hands	now.	If	I	go	down,	it	will	be	fighting	–	god	or	no	god
—
Into	the	alley,	embraced	by	darkness	–	behind	him	more	screams,	coming
closer	–	Pearl	reached	in	his	mind	like	a	drowning	man	for	his	warren.
Mockra.	Use	it.	Twist	reality,	cut	into	another	warren	–	Rashan,	and	then	the
Imperial,	and	then—
Nothing	answered	his	quest.	A	ragged	gasp	burst	from	Pearl’s	throat	as	he
sprinted	onward,	up	the	alley—
Something	behind	him	–	right	behind—
Strokes	of	agony,	slicing	through	both	Achilles	tendons	–	Pearl	shrieked
as	the	severed	ligaments	rolled	up	beneath	the	skin,	stumbled	on	feet	that	felt
like	clods	of	mud,	shifting	hopelessly	beneath	him.	Sprawling,	refusing	to
release	his	weapons,	still	grasping	out	for	his	warren—
Blade-edges	licking	like	tongues	of	acid.	Hamstrings,	elbows	–	then	he	was
lifted	from	the	blackened	cobbles	by	a	single	hand,	and	thrown	into	a	wall.	The
impact	shattered	half	his	face,	and	as	he	fell	backward,	that	hand	returned,
fingers	digging	in,	forcing	his	head	back.	Cold	iron	slashed	into	his	mouth,
slicing,	severing	his	tongue.	Choking	on	blood,	Pearl	twisted	his	head	around


–	he	was	grasped	again,	thrown	into	the	opposite	wall,	breaking	his	left	arm.
Landing	on	his	side	–	a	foot	hammered	down	on	the	point	of	his	hip,	the	bone
cradle	collapsing	into	a	splintered	mess	beneath	it	–	gods,	the	pain,	sweeping
up	through	his	mind,	overwhelming	him	–	his	warren	–	where?
All	motion	ceased.
His	attacker	was	standing	over	him.	Crouching	down.
Pearl	could	see	nothing	–	blood	filled	his	eyes	–	a	savage	ringing	filled	his
head,	nausea	rising	up	his	throat,	spilling	out	in	racking	heaves,	streaked	with
gore	from	the	gouting	stub	of	his	tongue.	Lostara,	my	love,	come	close	to	the
gate	–	and	you	will	see	me.	Walking.
A	voice,	soft	and	low,	cut	through	it	all,	brutally	clear,	brutally	close.	‘My
final	target.	You,	Pearl.	I	had	planned	to	make	it	quick.’	A	long	pause,	in	which
he	heard	slow,	even	breathing.	‘But	for	Kalam	Mekhar.’
Something	stabbed	into	his	stomach,	was	pushed	deep.
‘I	give	you	back	the	quarrel	that	killed	him,	Pearl.’	And	the	figure
straightened	once	more,	walked	a	few	paces	away,	then	returned,	even	as	the
first	horrifying	pulses	of	fire	began	to	sear	his	veins,	gathering	behind	his	eyes
–	a	poison	that	would	keep	him	alive	for	as	long	as	possible,	feeding	his	heart
with	everything	it	needed,	even	as	vessels	throughout	his	body	burst,	again	and
again	and	again—
‘Kalam’s	long-knives,	Pearl.	You	weren’t	thinking.	You	cannot	open	a
warren	with	otataral	in	your	hand.	And	so,	he	and	I	together,	we	have	killed
you.	Fitting.’
Fires!	Gods!	Fire!
As	Apsalar	walked	away.	Continuing	up	the	alley,	away	from	the
harbourfront.	Away,	from	everything.
	
A	scrawny,	shadowy	apparition	appeared	before	her	near	the	far	end,	where	the
alley	reached	a	side	street	just	this	side	of	a	bridge	leading	across	the	river	and
into	the	Mouse.	Apsalar	halted	before	it.
‘Tell	Cotillion,	I	have	done	as	he	asked.’
Shadowthrone	made	a	whispering	sound,	like	sighing,	and	one	almost
formless	hand	emerged	from	the	folds	of	his	ghostly	cloak,	gripping	the	silver
head	of	a	cane,	that	tapped	once	on	the	cobbles.	‘I	watched,	my	dear.	Your
Shadow	Dance.	From	the	foot	of	Rampart	Way	and	onward,	I	was	witness.’
She	said	nothing.
Shadowthrone	resumed.	‘Not	even	Cotillion.	Not	even	Cotillion.’
Still,	Apsalar	did	not	speak.


The	god	suddenly	giggled.	‘Too	many	bad	judgements,	the	poor	woman.
As	we	feared.’	A	pause,	then	another	giggle.	‘Tonight,	the	Clawmaster,	and
three	hundred	and	seven	Claws	–	all	by	your	hands,	dear	lass.	I	still…
disbelieve.	No	matter.	She’s	on	her	own,	now.	Too	bad	for	her.’	The	barely
substantial	hooded	head	cocked	slightly.	‘Ah.	Yes,	Apsalar.	We	keep	our
promises.	You	are	free.	Go.’
She	held	out	the	two	long-knives,	handles	first.
A	bow,	and	the	god	accepted	Kalam	Mekhar ’s	weapons.
Then	Apsalar	moved	past	Shadowthrone,	and	walked	on.
He	watched	her	cross	the	bridge.
Another	sigh.	A	sudden	lifting	of	the	cowled	head,	sniffing	the	air.	‘Oh,
happy	news.	But	for	me,	not	yet.	First,	a	modest	detour,	yes.	My,	what	a	night!’
The	god	began	to	fade,	then	wavered,	then	re-formed.	Shadowthrone
looked	down	at	the	long-knives	in	his	right	hand.	‘Absurd!	I	must	walk.	And,
perforce,	quickly!’
He	scurried	off,	cane	rapping	on	the	stones.
	
A	short	time	later,	Shadowthrone	reached	the	base	of	a	tower	that	was	not
nearly	as	ruined	as	it	looked.	Lifted	the	cane	and	tapped	on	the	door.	Waited	for
a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	repeated	the	effort.
The	door	was	yanked	open.
Dark	eyes	stared	down	at	him,	and	in	them	was	a	growing	fury.
‘Now	now,	Obo,’	Shadowthrone	said.	‘This	is	a	courtesy,	I	assure	you.
Two	most	meddling	twins	have	commandeered	the	top	of	your	tower.	I	humbly
suggest	you	oust	them,	in	your	usual	kindly	manner.’	The	god	then	sketched	a
salute	with	his	cane,	turned	about	and	departed.
The	door	slammed	shut	after	two	strides.
And	now,	Shadowthrone	began	to	quicken	his	pace	once	more.	For	one	last
rendezvous	this	night,	a	most	precious	one.	The	cane	rapped	swift	as	a
soldier ’s	drum.
Halfway	to	his	destination,	the	top	of	Obo’s	tower	erupted	in	a	thunderous
fireball	that	sent	pieces	of	brick	and	tile	flying.	Amidst	that	eruption	there	came
two	outraged	screams.
Recovering	from	his	instinctive	duck,	Shadowthrone	murmured.	‘Most
kindly,	Obo.	Most	kindly	indeed.’
And	the	god	walked	the	streets	of	Malaz	City.	Once	more	with
uncharacteristic	haste.


	
They	moved	quickly	along	the	street,	keeping	to	the	shadows,	ten	paces	behind
Legana	Breed,	who	walked	down	the	centre,	sword	tip	clattering	along	the
cobbles.	The	few	figures	who	had	crossed	their	path	had	hurriedly	fled	upon
sighting	the	tattered	apparition	of	the	T’lan	Imass.
Fiddler	had	given	Gesler	and	Stormy	crossbows,	both	fitted	with	the
sharper-packed	grenados,	whilst	his	own	weapon	held	a	cusser.	They
approached	a	wider	street	that	ran	parallel	to	the	harbourfront,	still	south	of	the
bridge	leading	over	to	Centre	Docks.	Familiar	buildings	for	Fiddler,	on	all
sides,	yet	a	surreal	quality	had	come	to	the	air,	as	if	the	master	hand	of	some
mad	artist	had	lifted	every	detail	into	something	more	profound	than	it	should
have	been.
From	the	docks	came	the	roar	of	battle,	punctuated	with	the	occasional
crackle	of	Moranth	munitions.	Sharpers,	mostly.	Cuttle.	He’s	using	up	my
supply!
They	reached	the	intersection.	Legana	Breed	paused	in	the	middle,	slowly
faced	the	sagging	façade	of	a	tavern	opposite.	Where	the	door	slammed	open
and	two	figures	stumbled	out.	Reeling,	negotiating	the	cobbles	beneath	them	as
if	traversing	stepping	stones	across	a	raging	river,	one	grasping	the	other	by
an	arm,	tugging,	pulling,	then	leaning	against	him,	causing	both	to	stagger.
Swearing	under	his	breath,	Fiddler	headed	towards	them.	‘Sergeant
Hellian,	what	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	doing	ashore?’
Both	figures	hitched	up	at	the	voice,	turned.
And	Hellian’s	eyes	fixed	on	the	T’lan	Imass.	‘Fiddler,’	she	said,	‘you	look
awful.’
‘Over	here,	you	drunken	idiot.’	He	waved	Gesler	and	Stormy	ahead	as	he
came	closer.	‘Who’s	that	with	you?’
Hellian	turned	and	regarded	the	man	she	held	by	an	arm,	for	what	seemed	a
long	time.
‘Your	priz’ner,’	the	man	said	by	way	of	encouragement.
‘Thaz	right.’	Hellian	straightened	as	she	faced	Fiddler	again.	‘He’s	wanted
for	questioning.’
‘By	whom?’
‘Me,	thazoo.	So’s	anyway,	where’s	the	boat?’
Gesler	and	Stormy	were	making	their	way	towards	the	bridge.	‘Go	with
them,’	Fiddler	said	to	Legana	Breed,	and	the	T’lan	Imass	set	off,	feet	scraping.
The	sapper	turned	back	to	Hellian.	‘Stay	close,	we’re	heading	back	to	the	ships
right	now.’


‘Good.	Glad	you	could	make	it,	Fid,	in	case	thiz	one	tries	an’	’scapes,
right?	Y’got	my	p’mission	to	shoot	’im	down.	But	only	in	the	foot.	I	wan’
answers	from	’im	an’	I’m	gonna	get	’em.’
‘Hellian,’	Fiddler	said,	‘could	be	we’ll	need	to	make	a	run	for	it.’
‘We	can	do	that.	Right,	Banash?’
‘Fool,’	Fiddler	muttered.	‘That’s	Smiley’s	there.	The	demon	doesn’t	serve
regular	ale.	Any	other	place…’	He	then	shook	his	head.	‘Come	on,	you	two.’
Up	ahead,	Gesler	and	Stormy	had	reached	the	bridge.	Crouched	low,	they
moved	across	its	span.
Fiddler	heard	Gesler	shout,	a	cry	of	surprise	and	alarm	–	and	all	at	once
both	he	and	Stormy	were	running	–	straight	for	a	heaving	crowd	that	loomed
up	before	them.
‘Shit!’	Fiddler	sprinted	forward.
	
A	winding	trench	swallowed	in	gloom,	a	vein	that	seemed	to	run	beneath	the
level	where	the	frenzy	of	slaughter	commanded	every	street,	every	alley	to
either	side.	The	woman	behind	her	coughing	gouts	of	blood	as	she	sloshed
along,	the	Adjunct,	Tavore	Paran,	waded	through	a	turgid	stream	of	sewage.
Ever	closer	to	the	sounds	of	fighting	at	Centre	Docks.
It	had	seemed	impossible	–	the	Claws	had	not	found	them,	had	not	plunged
down	the	rotted	brick	walls	to	deliver	murder	in	the	foul	soup	that	was	Malaz
River.	Oh,	Tavore	and	T’amber	had	pushed	past	enough	corpses	on	their
journey,	but	the	only	sounds	embracing	them	were	the	swirl	of	water,	the
skittering	of	rats	along	the	ledges	to	either	side,	and	the	whine	of	biting	insects.
That	all	changed	when	they	reached	the	edge	of	the	concourse.	The
concussion	of	a	sharper,	startlingly	close,	then	the	tumbling	of	a	half-dozen
bodies	as	a	section	of	the	retaining	wall	collapsed	directly	ahead.	More	figures
sliding	down,	screaming,	weapons	waving	in	the	air—
—and	a	soldier	turned,	saw	them—
As	he	bellowed	his	discovery,	T’amber	pushed	past	the	Adjunct.
Longsword	arced	across,	diagonally,	and	cut	off	the	top	third	of	the	man’s
head,	helm	and	bone,	white	matter	spraying	out.
Then	T’amber	reached	back,	closed	a	bloody	hand	on	the	Adjunct’s	cloak,
dragged	her	forward,	onto	the	sunken	bank	of	dislodged	brick,	sand	and
gravel.
The	strength	in	that	grip	stunned	Tavore,	as	T’amber	assailed	the	slope,
dragging	the	Adjunct	from	her	feet,	up,	up	onto	the	level	of	the	concourse.
Stumbling	onto	her	knees,	even	as	that	hand	left	her	and	the	sounds	of	fighting


erupted	around	them—
City	Guard,	three	squads	at	least	–	detonations	had	pushed	them	to	this	side
of	the	concourse,	and	they	turned	upon	the	two	women	like	rabid	wolves—
Tavore	pushed	herself	upright,	caught	a	sword-thrust	reaching	for	her
midsection	with	a	desperate	parry,	the	weapons	ringing.	She	instinctively
counter-attacked,	and	felt	the	tip	of	her	sword	tear	through	chain	and	gouge	the
muscles	of	a	shoulder.	Her	opponent	grunted,	flinched	back.	Tavore	chopped
down	onto	the	knee	of	his	lead	leg,	cutting	in	two	the	patella.	He	shrieked	and
fell.
To	her	left,	T’amber	cut,	slashed,	parried	and	lunged,	and	bodies	were
falling	all	around	her.	Even	as	swords	sank	into	the	woman	–	and	she
staggered.
Tavore	cried	out,	twisting	to	move	towards	T’amber—
And	saw,	less	than	twenty	paces	away,	a	score	or	more	Claws,	rushing	to
join	the	fray.
A	sword	burst	from	T’amber ’s	back,	between	the	shoulder-blades,	and	the
soldier	gripping	the	weapon	pushed	close	to	the	woman	and	heaved	her	from
her	feet,	throwing	her	backward,	where	she	slid	off	the	length	of	iron,	landing
hard	on	the	cobbles,	her	own	sword	leaving	her	hand,	clattering	away.
Six	paces	between	the	Adjunct	and	a	dozen	Guards	–	and	behind	them	and
closing	fast,	the	Claws.	Tavore	backed	away	–	faces	turned	to	her,	faces	twisted
in	blind	rage,	eyes	cold	and	hard,	inhuman.	The	Adjunct	raised	her	sword,	both
hands	on	the	grip	now,	took	a	step	back—
The	Guards	rushed	forward—
Then,	a	blinding	flash,	immediately	behind	them,	and	that	rush	became	a
mass	of	torn	bodies,	severed	limbs,	sheets	of	blood	–	the	roar	of	the	detonation
seemed	to	ignite	in	the	centre	of	Tavore’s	skull.	The	world	pitched,	she	saw
night	sky,	wheeling,	stars	seeming	to	race	outward	in	all	directions	–	her	head
cracking	on	the	cobbles,	dislodging	her	helm,	and	she	was	on	her	back,	staring
up,	confused	by	the	tumbling	smoke,	the	red	mist,	the	thundering	protest	of
every	muscle	and	bone	in	her	body.
A	second	explosion	lifted	her	from	the	cobbles,	pounded	her	back	down	on
a	surface	suddenly	heaved	askew.	More	blood	rained	down—
Someone	skidded	up	against	her,	a	hand	reaching	down	to	rest	lightly	on
her	sternum,	a	face,	blurred,	looming	close.	She	watched	the	mouth	move	but
heard	nothing.
A	flash,	recognition.	Sergeant	Fiddler.
What?	What	are	you	doing?
And	then	she	was	being	dragged	along,	boots	pulling	loose	at	the	ends	of


senseless	legs.	The	right	one	dislodging,	left	behind.	She	stared	at	her	clothwrapped	foot,	soaked	in	river-slime	and	blood.
She	could	now	see	behind	her	as	the	sergeant	continued	pulling	her
towards	the	jetty.	Two	more	marines,	covering	their	retreat	with	strange,
oversized	crossbows	in	their	hands.	But	no-one	was	coming	after	them	–	they
were	busy	dying	beneath	a	stone	sword	in	the	desiccated	hands	of	a	T’lan	Imass
–	the	creature	punched	at	by	virulent	sorcery,	yet	pushing	ever	forward,
killing,	killing.
What	was	happening?	Where	had	the	marines	come	from?	She	saw	another
one,	struggling	with	a	prisoner	–	he	wasn’t	trying	to	escape,	however,	just	stay
on	his	feet.	They’re	drunk,	the	both	of	them	–	well,	on	this	night,	I	think	I’ll	let
it	pass.
Oh,	T’amber…
More	figures	surrounding	them	now.	Bloodied	soldiers.	The	Perish.
People	were	shouting	–	she	could	see	that	–	but	the	roaring	in	her	head	was
unabated,	drowning	out	all	else.	She	half-lifted	one	arm,	stared	at	her
gauntleted	hand	–	my	sword.	Where	is	my	sword?
Never	mind.	Just	sleep,	now.	Sleep.
	
Grub	led	her	into	the	alley,	to	where	a	body	was	lying,	curled	up,	racked	with
spasms	and	voicing	a	dreadful	moaning.	As	she	drew	closer,	Lostara
recognized	him.	Anguish	rose	up	within	her	and	she	lunged	past	Grub,	fell	to
her	knees.
Pearl	was	covered	in	wounds,	as	if	he	had	been	systematically	tortured.
And	pain	was	consuming	him.	‘Oh,	my	love…’
Grub	spoke	behind	her.	‘The	poison	has	him,	Lostara	Yil.	You	must	take
his	life.’
What?
‘He	thought	you	were	dead,’	the	boy	continued.	‘He’d	given	up.	On
everything.	Except	revenge.	Against	the	Adjunct.’
‘Who	did	this?’
‘I	won’t	tell	you,’	Grub	said.	‘Pearl	hungered	for	vengeance,	and
vengeance	was	repaid	him.	That’s	all.’
That’s	all.
‘Kill	him	now,	Lostara.	He	can’t	hear	you,	he	can’t	see	you.	There’s	only
the	pain.	It’s	the	spiders,	you	see,	they	breathe	the	blood	of	their	victims,	they
need	it	rich,	bright	red.	And	so	the	venom,	it	doesn’t	let	go.	And	then,	there’s
the	acid	in	the	stomach,	leaking	out,	eating	everything	up.’


Numbed,	she	drew	out	her	knife.
‘Make	the	heart	stop.’
Yes,	there,	behind	and	beneath	the	shoulder-blade.	Push	deep,	work	the
edges.	Pull	it	loose,	look,	how	the	body	stills,	how	the	muscles	cease	their
clenching.	It’s	quiet,	now.	He’s	gone.
‘Come	along,	there’s	more.	Quickly.’
He	set	off,	and	she	rose	and	followed.	You’ve	left	me.	You	were	there,	in
Mock’s	Hold,	but	I	didn’t	know.	You	didn’t	know.
Past	a	tumbled	mass	of	corpses	now.	Claws.	The	alley	was	filled	with	them.
Ahead,	Centre	Docks,	the	clearing—
Sudden	detonations,	rocking	the	buildings.	Screams.
At	the	alley	mouth,	between	warehouses,	Grub	crouched	and	waved	her
down	to	his	side.
People	were	fleeing	–	those	still	on	their	feet,	and	they	were	scant	few.	At
least	two	cussers	had	exploded	in	the	midst	of	the	mobs.	Cussers	and	sharpers,
and	there	a	Hood-damned	T’lan	Imass,	cutting	down	the	last	ones	within	reach.
‘Gods,’	Lostara	muttered,	‘there	must	be	a	thousand	dead	out	there.’
‘Yes.	But	look,	you	must	see	this.’	He	pointed	to	their	right,	near	the	river.
‘What?’
‘Oh.’	Grub	reached	out	and	settled	a	hand	on	her	forearm.
And	the	scene	seemed	to	somehow	shift,	a	new	illumination	–	it	was
gathered	about	a	single	body,	too	distant	to	make	out	details—
‘T’amber,’	Grub	said.	‘Only	you	and	me	can	see.	So	watch,	Lostara.
Watch.’
The	golden	glow	was	coalescing,	rising	up	from	the	corpse.	A	faint	wind
flowed	past	Lostara	and	Grub,	familiar	now,	heady	with	the	scent	of	savannah
grasses,	warm	and	dry.
‘She	stayed	with	us	a	long	time,’	Grub	whispered.	‘She	used	T’amber.	A
lot.	There	wasn’t	any	choice.	The	Fourteenth,	it’s	going	to	war,	and	we’re
going	with	it.	We	have	to.’
A	figure	now	stood	at	a	half-crouch	over	the	body.	Furred,	tall,	and	female.
No	clothing,	no	ornamentation	of	any	kind.
Lostara	saw	the	T’lan	Imass,	thirty	or	more	paces	away,	slowly	turn	to
regard	the	apparition.	And	then,	head	bowing,	the	undead	warrior	slowly
settled	onto	one	knee.	‘I	thought	you	said	we	were	the	only	ones	who	could	see,
Grub.’
‘I	was	wrong.	She	has	that	effect.’
‘Who	–	what	is	she?’
‘The	Eres’al.	Lostara,	you	must	never	tell	the	Adjunct.	Never.’


The	Red	Blade	captain	scowled.	‘Another	damned	secret	to	keep	from	her.’
‘Just	the	two,’	Grub	said.	‘You	can	do	that.’
Lostara	glanced	over	at	the	boy.	‘Two,	you	said.’
Grub	nodded.	‘Her	sister,	yes.	That	one,	and	this	one.	Two	secrets.	Never	to
tell.’
‘That	won’t	be	hard,’	she	said,	straightening.	‘I’m	not	going	with	them.’
‘Yes	you	are.	Look!	Look	at	the	Eres’al!’
The	strange	female	was	lowering	her	head	towards	the	body	of	T’amber.
‘What’s	she	doing?’
‘Just	a	kiss.	On	the	forehead.	A	thank-you.’
The	apparition	straightened	once	more,	seemed	to	sniff	the	air,	then,	in	a
blur,	vanished.
‘Oh!’	said	Grub.	Yet	added	nothing.	Instead,	taking	her	hand	in	his.
‘Lostara.	The	Adjunct,	she’s	lost	T’amber	now.	You	need	to	take	that	place—’
‘I’m	done	with	lovers,	male	or	female—’
‘No,	not	that.	Just…at	her	side.	You	have	to.	She	cannot	do	this	alone.’
‘Do	what?’
‘We	have	to	go	–	no,	not	that	way.	To	the	Mouse	Docks—’
‘Grub	–	they’re	casting	off!’
‘Never	mind	that!	Come	on!’
	
Deadsmell	pushed	Fiddler	out	of	the	way	and	knelt	beside	the	body	of	the
Adjunct.	He	set	a	hand	on	her	begrimed	forehead,	then	snatched	it	back.
‘Hood’s	breath!	She	doesn’t	need	me.’	He	backed	away,	shaking	his	head,
‘Damned	otataral	–	I	never	could	get	that,	what	it	does…’
Tavore’s	eyes	opened.	After	a	moment,	she	struggled	into	a	sitting
position,	then	accepted	Fiddler ’s	hand	in	helping	her	to	her	feet.
The	Froth	Wolf	was	edging	away	from	the	jetty.	The	Silanda	had	pulled
further	out,	the	oars	sweeping	and	sliding	into	the	water.
Blinking,	the	Adjunct	looked	round,	then	she	turned	to	Fiddler.	‘Sergeant,
where	is	Bottle?’
‘I	don’t	know.	He	never	made	it	back.	Seems	we	lost	Quick	Ben,	too.	And
Kalam.’
At	the	last	name,	she	flinched.
But	Fiddler	had	already	known.	The	game…‘Adjunct—’
‘I	have	never	seen	a	man	fight	as	he	did,’	she	said.	‘Him,	and	T’amber,	the
two	of	them	–	cutting	through	an	entire	city—’
‘Adjunct.	There’s	signals	from	the	other	ships.	Where	are	we	going?’


But	she	turned	away.	‘Bottle	–	we	have	failed,	Sergeant.	He	was	to	retrieve
someone.’
‘Someone?	Who?’
‘It	doesn’t	matter,	now.	We	have	failed.’
All	of	this?	All	of	the	fallen	this	night	–	for	one	person?	‘Adjunct,	we	can
wait	here	in	the	bay	until	light,	send	a	detachment	into	the	city	looking—’
‘No.	Admiral	Nok’s	escorts	will	be	ordered	to	sink	the	transports	–	the
Perish	will	intervene,	and	more	will	die.	We	must	leave.’
‘They	can	chase	us	down—’
‘But	they	won’t	find	us.	The	Admiral	has	assured	me	of	his	impending
incompetence.’
‘So,	we	signal	the	others	to	ship	their	anchors	and	make	sail?’
‘Yes.’
A	shout	from	one	of	the	crew.	‘Ship	closing	to	starboard!’
Fiddler	followed	the	Adjunct	to	the	rail.	Where	Fist	Keneb	already	stood.
A	small	craft	was	approaching	on	an	intercept	course.	A	lantern	appeared
at	its	bow,	flashing.
‘They	got	passengers	to	drop	off,’	the	lookout	called	down.
The	ship	came	alongside	with	a	crunch	and	grinding	of	hulls.	Lines	were
thrown,	rope	ladders	dropped	down.
Fiddler	nodded.	‘Bottle.’	Then	he	scowled.	‘I	thought	you	said	one	person	–
the	fool’s	brought	a	damned	score	with	him.’
The	first	to	arrive	over	the	rail,	however,	was	Grub.
A	bright	grin.	‘Hello,	father,’	he	said	as	Keneb	reached	out	and	lifted	the
boy,	setting	him	on	the	deck.	‘I	brought	Captain	Lostara	Yil.	And	Bottle’s
brought	lots	of	people—’
A	stranger	then	clambered	aboard,	landing	lightly	on	the	deck	and	pausing,
hands	on	hips,	to	look	round.	‘A	damned	mess,’	he	said.
As	soon	as	he	spoke,	Fiddler	stepped	forward.	‘Cartheron	Crust.	I	thought
you	were—’
‘Nobody	here	by	that	name,’	the	man	said	in	a	growl,	one	hand	settling	on
the	knife	handle	jutting	from	his	belt.
Fiddler	stepped	back.
More	figures	were	arriving,	strangers	one	and	all:	the	first	a	huge	man,	his
expression	flat,	cautious,	and	on	his	forearms	were	scars	and	old	weals	that
Fiddler	recognized.	He	was	about	to	speak	when	Crust	–	who	was	not	Crust	–
spoke.
‘Adjunct	Tavore,	right?	Well,	I’m	charging	you	sixteen	gold	imperials	for
delivering	this	mob	of	fools	to	your	ship.’


‘Very	well.’
‘So	get	it,	because	we’re	not	hanging	round	this	damned	harbour	any
longer	than	we	have	to.’
Tavore	turned	to	Keneb.	‘Fist,	go	to	the	legion	paychest	and	extract	two
hundred	gold	imperials.’
‘I	said	sixteen—’
‘Two	hundred,’	the	Adjunct	repeated.
Keneb	set	off	for	below.
‘Captain,’	the	Adjunct	began,	then	fell	silent.
The	figures	now	climbing	aboard	were,	one	and	all,	tall,	black-skinned.
One,	a	woman,	stood	very	near	the	scarred	man,	and	this	one	now	faced	the
Adjunct.
And	in	rough	Malazan,	she	said,	‘My	husband	has	been	waiting	for	you	a
long	time.	But	don’t	think	I	am	just	letting	you	take	him	away.	What	is	to	come
belongs	to	us	–	to	the	Tiste	Andii	–	as	much	and	perhaps	more	than	it	does	to
you.’
After	a	moment,	the	Adjunct	nodded,	then	bowed.	‘Welcome	aboard,	then,
Tiste	Andii.’
Three	small	black	shapes	scrambled	over	the	rail,	made	immediately	for
the	rigging.
‘Gods	below,’	Fiddler	muttered.	‘Nachts.	I	hate	those	things—’
‘Mine,’	the	scarred	stranger	said.
‘What	is	your	name?’	Tavore	asked	him.
‘Withal.	And	this	is	my	wife,	Sandalath	Drukorlat.	Aye,	a	handful	of	a	name
and	more	than	a	handful	of	a—’
‘Quiet,	husband.’
Fiddler	saw	Bottle	trying	to	sneak	off	to	one	side	and	he	set	off	after	the
soldier.	‘You.’
Bottle	winced,	then	turned.	‘Sergeant.’
‘How	in	Hood’s	name	did	you	find	Cartheron	Crust?’
‘That	Crust?	Well,	I	just	followed	my	rat.	We	couldn’t	hope	to	get	through
the	battle	on	the	concourse,	so	we	found	us	a	ship—’
‘But	Cartheron	Crust?’
Bottle	shrugged.
Keneb	had	reappeared,	and	Fiddler	saw	the	Adjunct	and	Crust	arguing,	but
he	could	not	hear	the	exchange.	After	a	moment,	Crust	nodded,	collected	the
small	chest	of	coins.	And	the	Adjunct	walked	towards	the	bow.
Where	stood	Nil	and	Nether.
‘Sergeant?’


‘Go	get	some	rest,	Bottle.’
‘Aye,	thank	you,	Sergeant.’
Fiddler	walked	up	behind	the	Adjunct	to	listen	in	on	the	conversation.
Tavore	was	speaking,	‘…pogrom.	The	Wickans	of	your	homeland	need
you	both.	And	Temul.	Alas,	you	won’t	be	able	to	take	your	horses	–	the
captain’s	ship	is	not	large	enough	–	but	we	can	crowd	every	Wickan	aboard.
Please,	make	yourself	ready,	and,	for	all	that	you	have	done	for	me,	thank	you
both.’
Nil	was	the	first	to	descend	to	the	mid	deck.	Nether	followed	a	moment
later,	but	made	for	Bottle,	who	was	slumped	into	a	sitting	position,	his	back	to
the	railing.	She	glared	down	at	him	until,	some	instinct	warning	him,	he
opened	his	eyes	and	looked	up	at	her.
‘When	you	are	done,’	Nether	said,	‘come	back.’
Then	she	set	off.	Bottle	stared	after	her,	a	dumbfounded	expression	on	his
face.
Fiddler	turned	away.	Lucky	bastard.
Or	not.
He	ascended	to	the	forecastle.	Stared	across	at	Malaz	City.	Fires	here	and
there,	smoke	and	the	reek	of	death.
Kalam	Mekhar,	my	friend.
Farewell.
	
Blood	loss,	ironically,	had	kept	him	alive	this	far.	Blood	and	poison,	streaming
out	from	his	wounds	as	he	staggered	along,	almost	blind	with	the	agony
exploding	in	his	muscles,	the	hammering	of	his	heart	deafening	in	his	skull.
And	he	continued	fighting	his	way.	One	step,	then	another,	doubling	over
as	the	pain	clenched	suddenly,	excruciating	in	its	intensity	before	easing	a
fraction	–	enough	to	let	him	draw	breath,	and	force	one	foot	forward	yet	again.
Then	another.
He	reached	a	corner,	struggled	to	lift	his	head.	But	fire	consumed	his	eyes,
he	could	make	out	nothing	of	the	world	beyond.	This	far…on	instinct,
following	a	map	in	his	head,	a	map	now	torn	into	ribbons	by	the	pain.
He	was	close.	He	could	feel	it.
Kalam	Mekhar	reached	out	to	steady	himself	on	a	wall	–	but	there	was	no
wall,	and	he	toppled,	thudded	hard	onto	the	cobbles,	where,	unable	to	prevent
it,	his	limbs	drew	inward	and	he	curled	up	round	the	seething,	lashing	agony.
Lost.	There	should	have	been	a	wall,	a	corner,	right	there.	His	map	had
failed	him.	And	now	it	was	too	late.	He	could	feel	his	legs	dying.	His	arms,	his


spine	a	spear	of	molten	fire.
He	felt	one	temple	resting	on	the	hard,	damp	stone.
Well,	dying	was	dying.	The	assassin’s	art	ever	turns	on	its	wielder.	Nothing
in	the	world	could	be	more	just,	more	proper—
	
Ten	paces	away,	Shadowthrone	bared	his	teeth.	‘Get	up,	you	fool.	You’re	very
nearly	there.	Get	up!’
But	the	body	did	not	stir.
Hissing	in	fury,	the	god	slipped	forward.	A	gesture	and	the	three	shadowwraiths	in	his	wake	rushed	forward,	gathered	round	the	motionless	form	of
Kalam	Mekhar.
One	rasped,	‘He’s	dead.’
Shadowthrone	snarled,	pushed	his	servants	aside	and	crouched	down.	‘Not
yet,’	he	said	after	a	moment.	‘But	oh	so	very	close.’	He	lurched	back	a	step.
‘Pick	him	up,	you	damned	idiots!	We’re	going	to	drag	him!’
‘We?’	one	asked.
‘Careful,’	the	god	murmured.	Then	watched	as	the	wraiths	reached	down,
grasped	limbs,	and	lifted	the	assassin.	‘Good,	now	follow	me,	and	quickly.’
To	the	gate,	the	barrier	squealing	as	Shadowthrone	pushed	it	aside.
Onto	the	rough	path,	its	tilted	stones	and	snarls	of	dead	grass.
Mounds	to	either	side,	the	humps	beginning	to	steam.	Dawn’s	arrival?
Hardly.	No,	the	ones	within…sensed	him.	The	god	allowed	himself	a	small,
dry	laugh.	Then	ducked	as	it	came	out	louder	than	he	had	intended.
Approaching	the	front	door.
Shadowthrone	halted,	edged	as	close	as	he	could	to	one	side	of	the	path,
then	waved	the	wraiths	forward.	‘Quickly!	Drop	him	there,	at	the	threshold!
Oh,	and	here,	you,	take	his	long-knives.	Back	in	the	sheaths,	yes.	Now,	all	of
you,	get	out	of	here	–	and	stay	on	the	path,	you	brainless	worms!	Who	are	you
trying	to	awaken?’
Another	step,	closer	to	that	dark,	dew-beaded	door.	Lifting	the	cane.	A
single	rap	with	the	silver	head.
Then	the	god	turned	about	and	hurried	down	the	path.
Reaching	the	gate,	then	spinning	round	as	that	door	groaned	open.
A	huge	armoured	figure	filled	the	portal,	looking	down.
Shadowthrone	whispered,	‘Take	him,	you	oaf!	Take	him!’
Then,	with	infuriating	slowness,	the	enormous	guardian	of	the	Deadhouse
reached	down,	collected	the	assassin	by	the	scruff	of	the	neck,	and	dragged	him
across	the	threshold.


The	god,	crouched	at	the	gate,	watched	as	Kalam’s	feet	vanished	into	the
gloom.
Then	the	door	slammed	shut.
In	time?	‘No	way	of	knowing.	Not	for	a	while…my,	Shadowthrone’s
collection	is	most	impressive,	yes?’	And	he	turned	away,	to	see	his	wraiths
fleeing	down	the	street,	even	as	a	nearby	tavern	door	thundered	open.
And	the	god	winced,	ducking	still	lower.	‘Uh	oh,	time	to	leave,	I	think.’
A	swirl	of	shadows.
And	then	Shadowthrone	was	gone.
	
Master	Sergeant	Braven	Tooth	neared	the	entrance	to	Coop’s.	Not	yet	dawn.
And	the	damned	night	was	now	quiet	as	a	tomb.	He	shivered,	as	if	he	had	just
crossed	the	path	of	some	hoary	ghost,	passing	invisible	yet	pausing	to	give
him	a	hungry	glance.
Coop’s	door	opened	and	closed,	hard,	the	object	of	some	anger,	and
Braven	Tooth	slowed.
An	armoured	monstrosity	ascended	into	view.
Braven	Tooth	blinked,	then	grunted	under	his	breath	and	approached.
‘Evening,	Temper.’
The	helmed	head	turned	to	him,	as	if	distracted	by	the	Master	Sergeant’s
sudden	presence.
‘Braven	Tooth.’
‘What	brings	you	out?’
Temper	seemed	to	sniff	the	air,	then	glanced	across	at	the	old	Deadhouse.
A	softly	clattering	shrug	as	he	said,	‘Thought	I’d	take	a	walk.’
Braven	Tooth	nodded.	‘I	see	you	dressed	appropriately.’
Both	men	stepped	back	as	a	woman	emerged	from	a	nearby	alley	and	came
right	past	them,	descended	the	steps	and	vanished	into	the	maw	of	Coop’s.
‘Now	that	was	some	swaying	walk,’	the	Master	Sergeant	muttered	in
appreciation.	But	Temper ’s	attention	was	on	the	cobbles,	and	Braven	Tooth
looked	down.
She’d	left	footprints.	Dark	red.
‘So,	Temper.	I	suppose	we	can’t	hope	that’s	mud,	now	can	we?’
‘I	think	not,	Brav.’
‘Well,	think	I’ll	plant	myself	in	Coop’s.	You	done	with	your	walk?’
A	final	glance	across	at	the	Deadhouse,	then	the	huge	man	nodded.	‘So	it
seems.’
The	two	went	down	into	the	murky	confines	of	the	Hanged	Man.


	
An	auspicious	guest	had	holed	up	in	Coop’s	this	night.	Fist	Aragan,	who’d
taken	the	cramped	booth	farthest	from	the	door,	in	the	darkest	corner,	where	he
sat	alone,	nursing	a	tankard	of	ale	as	bell	after	bell	tolled	outside,	amidst	a
distant	and	sometimes	not-so-distant	chorus	of	riotous	mayhem.
He	was	not	alone	in	looking	up,	then	holding	his	gaze	fixed	in	admiration
for	the	unknown	black-haired	Kanese	woman	who	walked	in	moments	before
dawn.	He	watched	from	beneath	hooded	brows,	as	she	headed	to	the	bar	and
ordered	Kanese	rice	wine,	forcing	Coop	to	scramble	in	desperate	search
before	coming	up	with	a	dusty	amber-hued	glass	bottle	–	in	itself	worth	a	small
fortune.
Moments	later	Temper	–	weighed	down	in	a	heap	of	archaic	armour	–
entered	the	tavern,	followed	by	Master	Sergeant	Braven	Tooth.	And	Aragan
hunched	down	deep	in	his	seat,	averting	his	gaze.
No	company	for	him	this	night.
He’d	been	battling	a	headache	since	dusk,	and	he’d	thought	it	beaten	–	but
suddenly	the	pounding	in	his	skull	returned,	redoubled	in	intensity,	and	a	small
groan	escaped	him.
Braven	Tooth	tried	talking	to	the	woman,	but	got	a	knife-point	pressed
beneath	his	eye	for	the	effort,	and	the	woman	then	paid	for	the	entire	bottle,
claimed	a	room	upstairs,	and	headed	up.	Entirely	on	her	own.	And	no-one
followed.
The	Master	Sergeant,	swearing,	wiped	sweat	from	his	face,	then	roared	for
ale.
Strange	goings-on	at	Coop’s,	but,	as	always,	ale	and	wine	soon	muddied
the	waters,	and	as	for	dawn	stealing	into	life	outside,	well,	that	belonged	to
another	world,	didn’t	it?


Chapter	Twenty-four
Draw	a	breath,
a	deep	breath,
now	hold	it,	my	friends,
hold	it	long
for	the	world
the	world	drowns.
Wu
There	were	many	faces	to	chaos,	to	the	realm	between	the	realms,	and	this	path
they	had	taken,	Taralack	Veed	reflected,	was	truly	horrific.	Defoliated	trees
rose	here	and	there,	broken-fingered	branches	slowly	spinning	in	the	chill,
desultory	wind,	wreaths	of	smoke	drifting	across	the	blasted	landscape	of	mud
and,	everywhere,	corpses.	Sheathed	in	clay,	limbs	jutting	from	the	ground,
huddled	forms	caked	and	half-submerged.
In	the	distance	was	the	flash	of	sorcery,	signs	of	a	battle	still	underway,	but
the	place	where	they	walked	was	lifeless,	silence	like	a	shroud	on	all	sides,	the
only	sounds	tremulously	close	by	–	the	sob	of	boots	pulling	free	of	the	grey
slime,	the	rustle	of	weapons	and	armour,	and	the	occasional	soft-voiced	curse
in	both	Letherii	and	Edur.
Days	of	this	madness,	this	brutal	reminder	of	what	was	possible,	the	way
things	could	slide	down,	ever	down,	until	warriors	fought	without	meaning	and
lives	rushed	away	to	fill	muddy	pools,	cold	flesh	giving	way	underfoot.
And	we	march	to	our	own	battle,	pretending	indifference	to	all	that
surrounds	us.	He	was	no	fool.	He	had	been	born	to	a	tribe	that	most	called
primitive,	backward.	Warrior	castes,	cults	of	blood	and	ceaseless	vendetta.	The
Gral	were	without	sophistication,	driven	by	shallow	desires	and	baseless
convictions.	Worshippers	of	violence.	Yet,	was	there	not	wisdom	in	imposing
rules	to	keep	madness	in	check,	to	never	go	too	far	in	the	bloodletting?
Taralack	Veed	realized	now	that	he	had	absorbed	something	of	civilized
ways;	like	fever	from	bad	water,	his	thoughts	had	been	twisted	with	dreams	of
annihilation	–	an	entire	clan,	he’d	wanted	every	person	in	it	killed,	preferably


by	his	own	hand.	Man,	woman,	child,	babe.	And	then,	in	a	measure	of	modest
tempering,	he	had	imagined	a	lesser	whirlwind	of	slaughter,	one	that	would
give	him	enough	kin	over	which	he	could	rule,	unopposed,	free	to	do	with
them	as	he	pleased.	He	would	be	the	male	wolf	in	its	prime,	commanding	with
a	look	in	its	eye,	proving	with	a	simple	gesture	its	absolute	domination.
None	of	it	made	sense	any	more.
Up	ahead,	the	Edur	warrior	Ahlrada	Ahn	called	out	a	rest,	and	Taralack
Veed	sank	down	against	the	sloped,	sodden	wall	of	a	trench,	stared	down	at	his
legs,	which	seemed	to	end	just	beneath	his	knees,	the	rest	invisible	beneath	an
opaque	pool	of	water	reflecting	the	grey	sludge	of	sky.
The	dark-skinned	Tiste	Edur	made	his	way	back	along	the	line,	halted
before	the	Gral	and	the	Jhag	warrior	behind	him.	‘Sathbaro	Rangar	says	we
are	close,’	he	said.	‘He	will	open	the	gate	soon	–	we	have	outstayed	our
welcome	in	this	realm	in	any	case.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’	Taralack	asked.
‘It	would	not	do	to	be	seen	here,	by	its	inhabitants.	True,	we	would	be	as
apparitions	to	them,	ghostly,	simply	one	more	trudging	line	of	soldiers.	Even
so,	such	witnessing	could	create…ripples.’
‘Ripples?’
Ahlrada	Ahn	shook	his	head.	‘I	myself	am	unclear,	but	our	warlock	is
insistent.	This	realm	is	like	the	Nascent	–	to	open	the	way	is	to	invite
devastation.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘I	have	seen	the	Nascent.’
Taralack	Veed	watched	the	Edur	walk	on,	halting	to	speak	every	now	and
then	with	an	Edur	or	Letherii.
‘He	commands	with	honour,’	Icarium	said.
‘He	is	a	fool,’	the	Gral	said	under	his	breath.
‘You	are	harsh	in	your	judgement,	Taralack	Veed.’
‘He	plays	at	deceit,	Slayer,	and	they	are	all	taken	in,	but	I	am	not.	Can	you
not	see	it?	He	is	different	from	the	others.’
‘I	am	sorry,’	Icarium	said,	‘but	I	do	not	see	as	you	do.	Different	–	how?’
Taralack	Veed	shrugged.	‘He	fades	his	skin.	I	can	smell	the	compound	he
uses,	it	reminds	me	of	gothar	flowers,	which	my	people	use	to	whiten	deer
hide.’
‘Fades…’	Icarium	slowly	straightened	and	looked	back	down	the	line.
Then	he	sighed.	‘Yes,	now	I	see.	I	have	been	careless—’
‘You	have	been	lost	inside	yourself,	my	friend.’
‘Yes.’
‘It	is	not	good.	You	must	ready	yourself,	you	must	remain	mindful,	Slayer
—’


‘Do	not	call	me	that.’
‘This	too	is	inside	yourself,	this	resistance	to	the	truth.	Yes,	it	is	a	harsh
truth,	but	only	a	coward	would	not	face	it,	would	turn	away	and	pretend	to	a
more	comforting	falsehood.	Such	cowardice	is	beneath	you.’
‘Perhaps	not,	Taralack	Veed.	I	believe	I	am	indeed	a	coward.	And	yet,	this
is	the	least	of	my	crimes,	if	all	that	you	say	of	me	is	true—’
‘Do	you	doubt	me?’
‘There	is	no	hunger	within	me,’	the	Jhag	said.	‘No	lust	to	kill.	And	all	that
you	set	at	my	feet,	all	that	you	say	I	have	done	–	I	recall	nothing	of	it.’
‘So	is	the	nature	of	your	curse,	my	friend.	Would	that	I	could	confess,	here
and	now,	that	I	have	deceived	you.	There	have	been	changes	in	my	soul,	and
now	I	feel	as	if	we	are	trapped,	doomed	to	our	fate.	I	have	come	to	know	you
better	than	I	ever	have	before,	and	I	grieve	for	you,	Icarium.’
The	pale	grey	eyes	regarded	him.	‘You	have	told	me	that	we	have	travelled
together	a	long	time,	that	we	have	made	these	journeys	of	the	spirit	before.	And
you	have	been	fierce	in	your	zeal,	your	desire	to	see	me…unleashed.	Taralack
Veed,	if	we	have	been	together	for	many	years…what	you	now	say	makes	no
sense.’
Sweat	prickled	beneath	the	Gral’s	clothes	and	he	looked	away.
‘You	claim	Ahlrada	Ahn	is	the	deceiver	among	us.	Perhaps	it	takes	a
deceiver	to	know	his	kin.’
‘Unkind	words	from	you,	my	friend—’
‘I	no	longer	believe	we	are	friends.	I	now	suspect	you	are	my	keeper,	and
that	I	am	little	more	than	your	weapon.	And	now	you	voice	words	of	doubt	as
to	its	sharpness,	as	if	through	mutual	uncertainty	we	may	step	closer	to	one
another.	But	I	will	take	no	such	step,	Taralack	Veed,	except	back	–	away	from
you.’
Bastard.	He	has	pretended	to	be	oblivious.	But	all	the	while,	he	has
listened,	he	has	observed.	And	now	closes	upon	the	truth.	The	weapon	is	clever
–	I	have	been	careless,	invited	into	being	dismissive,	and	if	my	words	were
themselves	weapons,	I	forgot	that	this	Jhag	knows	how	to	defend	himself,	that
he	possesses	centuries	of	armour.
He	looked	up	as	Ahlrada	Ahn	strode	past	them	again,	heading	for	the	front
of	the	column.	‘Soon,’	the	warrior	reminded	them.
The	journey	resumed.
	
Captain	Varat	Taun,	second	to	Atri-Preda	Yan	Tovis,	Twilight,	waved	his
Letherii	archers	forward.	He	spat	in	an	effort	to	get	the	taste	of	mud	from	his


mouth,	but	it	was	hopeless.	The	sorcery	of	the	Holds	had	been	let	loose	here,	in
coruscating	waves	of	annihilation	–	the	air	stank	of	it,	and	in	the	wind	he	could
hear	the	echoes	of	ten	thousand	soldiers	dying,	and	the	mud	on	his	tongue	was
that	of	pulverized	flesh,	gritty	with	fragments	of	bone.
Yet	perhaps	there	was	a	kind	of	gift	in	all	of	this,	a	measure	providing
perspective.	For,	grim	as	the	Letherii	Empire	under	the	rule	of	the	Tiste	Edur
had	become,	well,	there	were	still	green	hills,	farms,	and	blue	sky	overhead.
Children	were	born	to	mothers	and	joyous	tears	flowed	easy	down	warm,	soft
cheeks,	the	eyes	brimming	with	love…ah,	my	darling	wife,	these	memories	of
you	are	all	that	hold	me	together,	all	that	keep	me	sane.	You	and	our	precious
daughter.	I	will	see	you	again.	I	promise	that.	Perhaps	soon.
Ahlrada	Ahn	was,	once	more,	at	the	head	of	the	column.	Poor	man.	His
facial	features	gave	him	away	quickly	enough,	to	a	soldier	hailing	from
Bluerose,	such	as	Varat	Taun.	An	imposter	–	what	were	the	reasons	for	such
deception?	Survival,	maybe.	That	and	nothing	more.	Yet	he	had	heard	from
Letherii	slaves	serving	the	Tiste	Edur	there	was	an	ancient	enmity	between	the
Edur	and	the	Tiste	Andii,	and	if	the	Edur	knew	of	the	hidden	enclaves	in
Bluerose,	of	their	hated	dark-skinned	kin,	well…
And	so	Ahlrada	Ahn	was	among	them	here.	A	spy.	Varat	Taun	wished	him
success.	The	Onyx	Order	had	been	benign	rulers,	after	all	–	of	course,	under
the	present	circumstances,	the	past	was	an	invitation	to	romantic	idealism.
Even	considering	that,	it	could	not	have	been	worse	than	now.
Another	pointless	battle	awaited	them.	More	Letherii	dead.	He	so	wanted
Twilight’s	respect,	and	this	command	could	prove	a	true	testing	ground.	Could
Varat	command	well?	Could	he	show	that	fine	balance	between	ferocity	and
caution?	Ah,	but	I	have	apprenticed	myself	to	the	best	commander	of	the
Letherii	armies	since	Preda	Unnutal	Hebaz,	have	I	not?
That	thought	alone	seemed	to	redouble	the	pressure	he	felt.
The	trench	they	had	been	trudging	along	debouched	onto	a	muddy	plain,
the	surface	chewed	by	horse	hoofs	and	cart	wheels	and	the	craters	of	sorcerous
detonations.	Here,	the	reek	of	rotting	flesh	hung	like	a	mist.	Gravestones	were
visible	here	and	there,	pitched	askew	or	broken,	and	there	was	splintered	wood
–	black	with	sodden	decay	–	and	thin	white	bones	amidst	the	dead	still	clothed
in	flesh.
Perhaps	half	a	league	away	ran	a	ridge,	possibly	a	raised	road,	and	figures
were	visible	there,	in	a	ragged	line,	marching	towards	the	distant	battle,	pikes
on	their	backs.
‘Quickly!’	Sathbaro	Rangar	hissed,	hobbling	forward.	‘Stay	low,	gather
round	–	no,	there!	Crouch,	you	fools!	We	must	leave!’


	
Steth	and	Aystar,	brother	and	sister,	who	had	shared	memories	of	pain,	hands
and	feet	nailed	to	wood,	ravens	at	their	faces	tearing	at	their	eyes	–	terrible
nightmares,	the	conjurings	of	creative	imaginations,	said	their	mother,	Minala
–	crept	forward	through	the	gloom	of	the	fissure,	the	rocky	floor	beneath	them
slick,	sharp-edged,	treacherous.
Neither	had	yet	fought,	although	both	voiced	their	zeal,	for	they	were	still
too	young,	or	so	Mother	had	decided.	But	Steth	was	ten	years	of	age,	and
Aystar	his	sister	was	nine;	and	they	wore	the	armour	of	the	Company	of
Shadow,	weapons	at	their	belts,	and	they	had	trained	with	the	others,	as	hard
and	diligently	as	any	of	them.	And	somewhere	ahead	stood	their	favourite
sentinel,	guarding	the	passage.	They	were	sneaking	up	on	him,	their	favourite
game	of	all.
Crouching,	they	drew	closer	to	where	he	usually	stood.
And	then	a	grating	voice	spoke	from	their	left.	‘You	two	breathe	too	loud.’
Aystar	squealed	in	frustration,	jumping	up.	‘It’s	Steth!	I	don’t	breathe	at	all!
I’m	just	like	you!’	She	advanced	on	the	hulking	T’lan	Imass	who	stood	with	his
back	to	the	crevasse	wall.	Then	she	flung	herself	at	him,	arms	wrapping	about
his	midsection.
Onrack’s	dark,	empty	gaze	settled	upon	her.	Then	the	withered	hand	not
holding	the	sword	reached	up	and	gingerly	patted	her	on	the	head.	‘You	are
breathing	now,’	the	warrior	said.
‘And	you	smell	like	dust	and	worse.’
Steth	moved	two	paces	past	Onrack’s	position	and	perched	himself	atop	a
boulder,	squinting	into	the	gloom	beyond.	‘I	saw	a	rat	today,’	he	said.	‘Shot	two
arrows	at	it.	One	came	close.	Really	close.’
‘Climb	down	from	there,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said,	prying	Aystar ’s	arms	from
his	waist.	‘You	present	a	target	in	silhouette.’
‘Nobody’s	coming	any	more,	Onrack,’	the	boy	said,	twisting	round	as	the
undead	warrior	approached.	‘They’ve	given	up	–	we	were	too	nasty	for	them.
Mother	was	talking	about	leaving—’
The	arrow	took	him	full	on	the	side	of	the	head,	in	the	temple,	punching
through	bone	and	spinning	the	boy	round,	legs	sliding	out	onto	a	side	of	the
boulder,	then,	with	a	limp	roll,	Steth	fell	to	the	ground.
Aystar	began	screaming,	a	piercing	cry	that	rang	up	and	down	the	fissure,
as	Onrack	shoved	her	behind	him	and	said,	‘Run.	Back,	stay	along	a	wall.	Run.’
More	arrows	hissed	down	the	length	of	the	crevasse,	two	of	them	thudding
into	Onrack	with	puffs	of	dust.	He	pulled	them	loose	and	dropped	them	to	the


floor,	striding	forward	and	taking	his	sword	into	both	hands.
	
Minala’s	face	looked	old,	drawn	with	days	and	nights	of	fear	and	worry,	the
relentless	pressure	of	waiting,	of	looking	upon	her	adopted	children,	rank	on
rank,	and	seeing	naught	but	soldiers,	who	had	learned	to	kill,	who	had	learned
to	watch	their	comrades	die.
All	to	defend	a	vacant	throne.
Trull	Sengar	could	comprehend	the	mocking	absurdity	of	this	stand.	A
ghost	had	claimed	the	First	Throne,	a	thing	of	shadows	so	faded	from	this
world	even	the	undead	T’lan	Imass	looked	bloated	with	excess	beside	it.	A
ghost,	a	god,	a	gauze-thin	web-tracing	of	desire,	possessiveness	and	nefarious
designs	–	this	is	what	had	claimed	the	seat	of	power,	over	all	the	T’lan	Imass,
and	would	now	see	it	held,	blocked	against	intruders.
There	were	broken	T’lan	Imass	out	there,	somewhere,	who	sought	to	usurp
the	First	Throne,	to	take	its	power	and	gift	it	to	the	Crippled	God	–	to	the	force
that	now	chained	all	of	the	Tiste	Edur.	The	Crippled	God,	who	had	given
Rhulad	a	sword	riven	with	a	terrible	curse.	Yet,	for	that	fallen	creature,	an
army	of	Edur	was	not	enough.	An	army	of	Letherii	was	not	enough.	No,	it
wanted	the	T’lan	Imass.
And	we	would	stop	him,	this	Crippled	God.	This	pathetic	little	army	of	ours.
Onrack	had	promised	anger,	with	the	battle	that	would,	inevitably,	come	at
last.	But	Trull	knew	that	anger	would	not	be	enough,	nor	what	he	himself	felt:
desperation.	Nor	Minala’s	harsh	terror,	nor,	he	now	believed,	the	stolid
insensibility	of	Monok	Ochem	and	Ibra	Gholan	–	that	too,	was	doomed	to	fail.
What	a	menagerie	we	are.
He	pulled	his	gaze	from	Minala,	glanced	over	to	where	stood	Monok
Ochem,	motionless	before	the	arched	entranceway	leading	into	the	throne
room.	The	bonecaster	had	not	moved	in	at	least	three	cycles	of	sleeping	and
waking.	The	silver-tipped	fur	on	his	shoulders	shimmered	vaguely	in	the
lantern	light.	Then,	as	Trull	studied	the	figure,	he	saw	the	head	cock	slightly.
Well—
A	child’s	shrieking,	echoing	from	up	the	passage,	brought	Trull	Sengar	to
his	feet.	His	spear	leaned	against	a	wall	–	snatching	it	in	one	hand	he	rushed
towards	the	cries.
Aystar	suddenly	appeared,	arms	outflung,	her	face	a	blur	of	white	–	‘Steth’s
dead!	He’s	been	killed!	He’s	dead—’
And	then	Minala	was	in	the	child’s	path,	wrapping	her	in	a	fierce	hug	then
twisting	round.	‘Panek!	Gather	the	soldiers!’


The	second	line	of	defence,	halfway	between	Onrack’s	position	and	the
main	encampment,	was	held	by	Ibra	Gholan,	and	this	T’lan	Imass	turned	as
Trull	Sengar	approached.
‘Onrack	battles,’	Ibra	Gholan	said.	‘To	slow	their	advance.	There	are	many
Tiste	Edur	this	time.	And	humans.	A	shaman	is	among	them,	an	Edur,	wielding
chaotic	power.	This	time,	Trull	Sengar,	they	mean	to	take	the	First	Throne.’
He	could	hear	sounds	of	fighting	now.	Onrack,	alone	against	a	mass	of
Trull’s	own	kin.	And	a	damned	warlock.	‘Get	Monok	Ochem	up	here,	then!	If
that	warlock	decides	to	unleash	a	wave	of	sorcery,	we’re	finished.’
‘Perhaps	you	are—’
‘You	don’t	understand,	you	sack	of	bones!	Chaotic	sorcery!	We	need	to	kill
that	bastard!’	And	Trull	moved	forward,	leaving	Ibra	Gholan	behind.
	
Ahlrada	Ahn	watched	three	of	his	warriors	fall	to	the	T’lan	Imass’s	huge	stone
sword	–	the	undead	bastard	had	yet	to	take	a	step	back	from	the	narrow	chokepoint	in	the	passage.	Ahlrada	Ahn	turned	to	Sathbaro	Rangar.	‘We	need	to	drive
that	thing	back!	It	won’t	tire	–	it	can	hold	that	position	for	ever!’
Taralack	Veed	pushed	into	view.	‘Send	Icarium	against	it!’
‘The	Jhag	is	empty,’	the	warlock	said	dismissively.	‘Withdraw	your
warriors,	Ahlrada	Ahn.	And	get	those	Letherii	to	cease	with	their	arrows	–	I	do
not	want	an	errant	shaft	in	the	back.’	Sathbaro	Rangar	then	moved	forward.
And	Ahlrada	Ahn	saw	a	figure	coming	up	behind	the	T’lan	Imass,	a	figure
wielding	a	spear	–	tall,	hidden	in	shadows,	yet…a	familiar	silhouette,	the	fluid
movement	–	he	saw	an	arrow	hiss	past	the	undead’s	shoulder,	then	saw	that
spear	shaft	flick	it	aside.
No.	This	cannot	be.	I	am	mistaken.	‘Sathbaro!’
The	T’lan	Imass	suddenly	yielded	its	position,	stepping	back	into	darkness,
and	then	it	and	the	other	figure	moved	away,	up	the	passage—
Sathbaro	Rangar	hobbled	closer	to	the	choke-point,	power	building	round
him,	a	silver-etched	rising	wave,	flickering	argent.	The	damp	stone	of	the
fissure’s	walls	began	snapping,	a	strange	percussive	sound	as	water	burst	into
steam.	A	large	sheet	of	rock	near	the	narrowed	portal	suddenly	exfoliated,
crashing	down	to	shatter	on	the	floor.
The	sorcery	lifted	higher,	fuller,	spreading	out	to	the	sides,	then	over
Sathbaro’s	head,	a	standing	wave	of	power	that	crackled	and	hissed	like	a
thousand	serpents.
Ahlrada	Ahn	moved	forward.	‘Sathbaro!	Wait!’
But	the	warlock	ignored	him,	and	with	a	roar	the	seething	wave	of	magic


plunged	into	the	choke-point,	blistering	a	path	up	the	channel—
—where	it	suddenly	shattered.
The	concussion	pushed	Ahlrada	Ahn	back	three	steps,	a	wave	of	heat
striking	him	like	a	fist.
Sathbaro	Rangar	screamed.
As	something	huge	appeared	in	the	choke-point,	humped	shoulders
pushing	through	the	aperture.	Gaunt	with	undeath,	its	skin	a	mottled	map	of
grey	and	black,	silver-tipped	fur	on	the	neck	and	reaching	along	the	shoulders
like	hackles,	the	creature	emerged	from	the	choke-point	and	rushed	on	its
knuckles	and	hand-like	hind	feet	–	straight	for	Sathbaro	Rangar.
Ahlrada	Ahn	shouted	out	a	warning—
—too	late,	for	the	beast	reached	out	and	closed	enormous	hands	on	the
warlock,	lifted	him	into	the	air,	tore	off	one	arm,	then	the	other,	blood	gouting
as	the	apparition	then	twisted	the	shrieking	Sathbaro	round	and	bit	into	the	back
of	the	Edur ’s	neck,	huge	canines	sinking	deep.	As	the	jaws	clenched,	the
undead	demon’s	head	snapped	back	–	and	ripped	half	the	neck	away	–
Sathbaro’s	spine	racing	out	like	an	anchor-chain,	whipping	bloody	in	the	air—
The	beast	then	flung	the	corpse	aside,	and	advanced	on	Ahlrada	Ahn.
	
Icarium	stood	over	the	corpse	of	a	child,	stared	down	at	the	fluids	leaking
from	the	broken	skull,	at	the	glazed	eyes	and	half-open	mouth.	The	Jhag	stood
as	if	rooted,	trembling.
Taralack	Veed	was	before	him.	‘Now,	Slayer.	Now	is	the	time!’
‘No	need,’	Icarium	muttered.	‘No	need	for	this.’
‘Listen	to	me—’
‘Be	silent.	I	will	not	kill	children.	I	will	have	none	of	this—’
A	detonation	of	sorcery	ahead,	the	concussion	rolling	back,	rocking	them
both.	Shouts,	then	screams.	And	a	bestial	snarl.	Shrieks,	cries	of	horror	from
the	Letherii	and	Edur,	then	the	sound	of	fear.
‘Icarium!	A	demon	is	upon	us!	A	demon!	No	child,	no	children	–	do	you
see?	You	must	act	–	now!	Show	them!	Show	the	Edur	what	is	within	you!’
Taralack	was	dragging	at	his	arm.	Frowning,	Icarium	allowed	himself	to
be	pulled	forward,	through	a	mass	of	cowering	Edur.	No,	I	do	not	want	this	–
yet	he	could	feel	the	pounding	of	his	hearts,	rising	like	war	drums	with	songs
of	fire	–
The	stench	of	spilled	blood	and	waste,	and	both	warriors	arrived	to	witness
the	savage	death	of	Sathbaro	Rangar.
And	the	Soletaken	then	surged	into	a	charge	–	and	Ahlrada	Ahn	–	the	brave


warrior,	seeking	to	protect	his	soldiers	–	stepped	into	the	creature’s	path.
Icarium	found	his	single-edged	sword	in	his	right	hand	–	he	did	not	recall
unsheathing	it	–	and	he	was	moving	forward,	every	motion	seeming
improbably	slow,	disjointed,	as	he	reached	out,	grasping	the	Tiste	Edur	and
throwing	him	back	as	if	he	weighed	little	more	than	a	cloth	hanging;	and	then
the	Jhag	advanced	to	meet	the	undead	ape.
He	saw	it	suddenly	recoil.
Another	step	forward,	as	a	strange	humming	filled	Icarium’s	skull,	and	the
beast	backed	further	away,	into	the	choke-point,	then	beyond,	where	it	whirled
round	and	fled	up	the	passage.
Icarium	staggered,	gasped,	threw	one	hand	up	against	one	edge	of	the
narrowed	portal	–	felt	its	brittle	surface	beneath	his	palm.	The	eerie	song	in	his
mind	faded—
And	then	Edur	were	plunging	past	him,	rushing	through	the	breach.	And
once	more,	ahead,	the	sounds	of	battle.	Hard	iron	clashing,	all	scent	of	sorcery
gone—
	
Beyond	the	choke-point,	Ahlrada	Ahn	saw	before	him	a	widening	of	the
fissure,	and	there,	in	a	ragged	line	at	least	three	deep,	stood	soldiers	of	some
kind,	weapons	wavering,	pale	smudged	faces	beneath	helms	–	Sisters	take	me,
they	are	so	young!	What	is	this?	Children	face	us!
And	then	he	saw	the	two	T’lan	Imass,	and	between	them	a	tall,	grey-skinned
figure	–	no.	No,	it	cannot	be	–	we	left	him,	we—
A	savage	war-cry	from	Kholb	Harat,	echoed	almost	immediately	by	Saur
Bathrada.	‘Trull	Sengar!	The	traitor	is	before	us!’
‘You	are	mine!’
Despite	Saur ’s	bold	claim,	both	he	and	Kholb	lunged	together,	closing	on
Trull	Sengar.
Then	the	remaining	Edur	were	spreading	out,	rushing	the	line	of	armoured
children,	and	the	two	forces	collided	in	a	cacophony	of	ringing	weapons	and
shields.	Screams	of	pain	and	rage	rebounded	off	the	battered	stone	walls.
And	Ahlrada	Ahn	stood,	frozen	in	place,	watching,	disbelieving.
Trull	Sengar	fought	a	frantic	defence	with	his	spear,	as	weapons	slashed
and	thrust	at	him	from	both	Saur	and	Kholb.	They	were	forcing	him	back	–	and
Ahlrada	Ahn	could	see,	could	understand	–	Trull	was	seeking	to	protect	these
children	–	the	ones	behind	him—
Edur	screams	–	the	two	T’lan	Imass	were	pushing	forward	in	counterattack,	one	to	either	side,	and	it	seemed	nothing	could	stop	them.


Yet	still	he	stood,	and	then,	with	a	brutal,	hoarse	cry,	he	sprang	forward.
	
Trull	Sengar	knew	these	two	warriors.	He	could	see	the	hatred	in	their	eyes,
felt	their	fury	in	the	weight	of	their	blows	as	they	sought	to	batter	through	his
guard	–	he	could	not	hold	them	much	longer.	And	when	he	fell,	he	knew	the
pitifully	young	soldiers	behind	would	come	face	to	face	with	these	Edur
killers.
Where	was	Apt?	Why	was	Minala	holding	the	demon	back	–	what	more
could	assail	them?
Someone	else	was	shouting	his	name	now,	from	among	the	packed	Edur.	A
name	voiced,	not	in	rage,	but	in	anguish	–	but	Trull	had	no	time	to	look,	no
time	even	to	wonder	–	Kholb	had	laid	a	blade	along	his	left	wrist,	opening	the
flesh	wide,	and	blood	was	streaming	along	the	underneath	of	that	forearm,
seeping	into	the	hand’s	grip	on	the	shaft.
Not	much	longer.	They’ve	improved,	the	both	of	them—
He	then	saw	a	Merude	cutlass	slash	inward	from	behind	Kholb,	taking	the
warrior	solidly	in	the	neck,	through	–	and	Kholb	Harat’s	head	rolled	on	its
side,	tumbled	down.	The	body	wavered	a	moment,	then	crumpled.
A	snarling	curse	from	Saur	Bathrada,	who	spun	round,	stabbing	low,	his
sword	digging	deep	into	the	newcomer ’s	right	thigh—
And	Trull	lunged,	sinking	the	point	of	his	spear	into	Saur ’s	forehead,	just
beneath	the	rim	of	the	helmet.	And	saw,	with	horror,	both	of	the	warrior ’s	eyes
leap	from	their	sockets	as	if	on	strings	as	the	head	pitched	back.
Trull	dragged	his	weapon	free	as	an	Edur	staggered	into	him,	gasping,
‘Trull!	Trull	Sengar!’
‘Ahlrada?’
The	warrior	twisted	round,	raising	both	cutlasses.	‘I	fight	at	your	side,
Trull!	Amends	–	please,	I	beg	you!’
Amends?	‘I	don’t	understand	–	but	I	do	not	doubt.	Welcome—’
A	sound	was	building	in	Trull’s	head,	seeming	to	assail	him	from	every
direction.	He	saw	a	child	clamp	hands	to	ears	off	to	his	left,	then	another	one—
‘Trull	Sengar!	It	is	the	Jhag!	Sisters	take	us,	he	is	coming!’
Who?	What?
What	is	that	sound?
	
Onrack	the	Broken	saw	the	Jhag,	felt	the	power	growing	in	the	figure	that


staggered	forward	as	if	drunk,	and	the	T’lan	Imass	moved	into	his	path.	Is	this
their	leader?	Jaghut	blood,	yes.	Oh,	how	the	old	bitterness	and	fury	rises	again
—
The	Jhag	suddenly	straightened,	raising	his	sword,	and	the	high-pitched
moaning	burgeoned	with	physical	force,	pummelling	Onrack	back	a	step,	and
the	T’lan	Imass	saw,	at	last,	the	Jhag’s	eyes.
Flat,	lifeless,	then	seeming	to	light,	all	at	once,	with	a	dreadful	rage.
The	tall,	olive-hued	warrior	surged	at	him,	weapon	flashing	with	blinding
speed.
Onrack	caught	that	blade	on	his	sword,	slashed	high	in	riposte,	intending	to
take	off	the	Jhag’s	head	–	and,	impossibly,	that	sword	was	there	to	meet	his
own,	with	a	force	that	rocked	the	T’lan	Imass.	A	hand	punched	outward,	caught
the	undead	warrior	on	the	chest,	lifting	him	clear	from	the	rock	floor—
A	heavy	crash	against	a	wall,	ribs	splintering.	Sliding	down,	Onrack	landed
on	his	feet,	crouching	to	gather	himself,	then	he	launched	himself	forward
once	more—
The	Jhag	was	moving	past,	straight	for	Minala’s	front	line	of	young
soldiers,	the	keening	sound	now	deafening—
Onrack	collided	with	the	half-blood,	indurate	bone	and	the	weight	of	a
mule	behind	the	force	hammering	into	the	Jhag’s	midsection.
And	the	T’lan	Imass	was	thrown	back,	thumping	hard	to	the	floor.
His	target	had	been	staggered	as	well,	and	Onrack	saw	its	bared	teeth	as	it
whirled	and,	shimmering	fast,	closed	on	the	undead	warrior	–	before	he	could
even	rise	–	that	free	hand	snapping	down,	fingers	pushing	through	thick,
desiccated	hide,	wrapping	round	his	sternum,	lifting	Onrack	into	the	air,	then
flinging	the	T’lan	Imass	away	–	into	the	wall	once	again,	this	time	with	a	force
that	shattered	both	bone	and	the	stone	flank	of	the	fissure.
Onrack	crumpled	in	a	heap,	amidst	shards	of	rock,	and	did	not	move.
But	the	Jhag	had	been	turned	round	by	the	effort,	and	now	faced	a	mass	of
Tiste	Edur	and	Letherii.
	
Trull	Sengar	saw	the	green-skinned	monstrosity	–	who	had	crushed	Onrack
against	a	wall	as	if	he	had	been	a	sack	of	melons	–	suddenly	plunge	among	the
Edur	crowded	behind	him,	and	begin	a	terrible	slaughter.
The	keening	sound	rose	yet	higher,	bringing	with	it	a	swirling,	cavorting
wind	of	raw	power.	Building	–	flailing	the	flesh	from	those	Edur	and	Letherii
closest	to	him	–	a	nightmare	had	arrived,	roaring	a	promise	of	obliteration.
Trull	stared,	disbelieving,	as	blood	blossomed	in	the	air	in	a	dreadful	mist,	as


bodies	fell	–	two,	three	at	a	time,	then	four,	five	–	the	warriors	seemed	to	melt
away,	toppling,	spun	round	by	savage	impacts—
A	stained	hand	grasped	his	left	forearm,	drew	him	round.	And,	through	the
terrible	keening:	‘Trull	–	we	shall	die	now,	all	of	us	–	but,	I	have	found	you.
Trull	Sengar,	I	am	sorry	–	for	the	Shorning,	for	all…all	the	rest—’
Minala	stumbled	close.	‘Where	is	Monok	Ochem?’	she	demanded,	spitting
blood	–	a	spear	had	thrust	into	her	chest,	just	beneath	the	right	clavicle,	and	her
face	was	deathly	white.	‘Where	is	the	bonecaster?’
Trull	pointed,	back	towards	the	entranceway	to	the	throne	room.	‘He	went
through	there	–	like	a	knife-stuck	dog—’	And	then	he	stared,	for	Ibra	Gholan
now	stood	in	that	archway,	as	if	waiting.
All	at	once	words	were	impossible,	and	they	were	pushed	back	by	a	raging
wind,	spinning,	buffeting,	so	strong	it	lifted	dead	children	into	the	air,	whirled
them	round,	limbs	flailing	about.	The	Jhag	stood,	twenty	paces	away,	amidst
heaps	of	corpses	–	and	beyond	him,	Trull	could	see	now,	shimmered	a	gate;
wavering	as	if	jarred	loose,	unanchored	to	the	rock	floor,	it	appeared	to	be
edging	ever	closer,	as	if	pulled	forward	by	the	storm	of	power.	Beyond	it	was	a
tunnel,	seeming	to	spin,	revealing	flashes	of	a	vast	killing	field,	then,	at	the
centre	and	impossibly	distant,	something	like	a	rocking	ship	on	rough	seas.
Minala	had	staggered	past,	edging	round	Ibra	Gholan	and	vanishing	into
the	throne	room—
The	Jhag,	silver	light	blazing	from	his	eyes,	then	turned	round—
And,	leaning	forward,	with	stilted	overlong	strides	–	as	if	his	own	flesh
and	bone	had	become	impediments	to	the	rage	within	him	–	he	marched	closer.
Spirits	bless	me	–	Trull	launched	himself	to	meet	the	apparition.
The	sword	seemed	to	come	at	him	from	everywhere	at	once.	Trull	had	no
opportunity	for	counter-attack,	the	shaft	of	the	spear	ringing,	jumping	in	his
hands	with	every	blow	he	desperately	shunted	aside—
And	then	Ahlrada	Ahn	attacked	from	the	Jhag’s	right	–	two	lightning
clashes	as	the	lone	single-edged	sword	batted	aside	both	Merude	cutlasses,	then
licked	out,	and	blood	exploded	from	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	chest,	an	impact	hard
enough	to	fling	the	warrior	from	the	ground,	legs	wheeling	over	his	head,	the
body	then	sailing,	wind-tossed	and	loosing	sheets	of	crimson,	through	the	air.
The	Jhag	redoubled	his	attack	on	Trull,	the	keening	sound	bursting	from
his	mouth	in	a	wail	of	outrage.	Blurring	sword,	bone-jarring	blocks,	one	after
another	–	and	still	the	Jhag	could	not	get	past.


Mostly	buried	beneath	leaking	corpses,	Varat	Taun	lay	motionless,	one	eye
fixed	on	the	battle	between	the	two	figures,	Icarium	and	a	Tiste	Edur	–	it	could
not	last,	against	the	Jhag	no-one	could,	yet	that	spear-wielder	held	on,	defiant,
displaying	a	skill	so	profound,	so	absolute,	that	the	Letherii	found	himself
unable	to	even	draw	breath.
Behind	the	Tiste	Edur,	children	were	retreating	towards	a	rough-carved
doorway	at	the	apex	of	the	chasm	tunnel.
The	storm	was	a	whirlwind	now,	circling	the	two	battling	figures	–	gods,
they	moved	faster	than	Varat’s	eye	could	follow,	but	now,	finally,	that	spear
began	to	splinter	amidst	the	frenzy	of	parries—
Varat	Taun	heard	weeping,	closer	to	hand,	and	he	shifted	his	gaze	a
fraction,	to	see	Taralack	Veed	huddled	against	a	wall,	curled	up	and	sobbing	in
terror.	He	had	been	clawing	at	the	stone,	as	if	seeking	to	dig	his	way	out,	and
bloody	streaks	glistened	on	the	latticed	rock.	You	wanted	this,	you	bastard.	Now
live	with	it.
Another	splintering	sound	brought	his	gaze	round	once	more,	and	he	saw
that	the	spear	had	shattered	–	the	Edur	flung	himself	backward,	somehow
avoiding	a	lateral	slash	of	the	sword	that	would	have	decapitated	him.	Roaring,
Icarium	advanced	to	finish	off	his	foe,	then	suddenly	ducked,	twisted	and	threw
himself	to	one	side—
—as	a	midnight-hued	demon	swirled	from	shadows,	the	wide-mawed	head
on	its	sinuous	neck	darting	out,	jaws	closing	on	Icarium’s	right	shoulder,
single	foreleg	raking	huge	talons	down	the	front	of	the	Jhag,	along	his	ribs,
seeking	the	softer	flesh	of	his	belly.	The	demon	reared,	dragging	the	Jhag	into
the	air—
But	the	single-edged	sword	would	not	be	denied,	slashing	down,	cutting
through	the	demon’s	neck.	Black	blood	sprayed	as	the	huge	body	pitched
sideways,	legs	kicking	spasmodically.	Icarium	landed	into	a	crouch,	then
struggled	to	loosen	the	death-grip	of	those	jaws	clamped	round	his	shoulder.
Beyond	Icarium,	the	Tiste	Edur	was	dragging	Ahlrada	Ahn’s	body	back,
retreating	towards	the	archway—
No	point.	No	point	at	all	–	once	he’s	free—
The	roaring	wind	was	abrading	the	stone	wall,	filling	the	blood-laden	air
with	glittering	pieces	of	granite.	Cracks	travelled	the	stone	in	a	crazed	web	–
the	storm’s	roar	grew	yet	louder,	and	all	at	once	Varat’s	left	eardrum	shattered
in	a	burst	of	agony.
	
Staggering,	his	forearms	bloody	ribbons	of	flailed	flesh,	Trull	pulled	Ahlrada


Ahn	closer	to	the	portal.	Ibra	Gholan	no	longer	stood	guard	–	in	fact,	the	Edur
saw	no-one,	no-one	at	all.
Have	they	fled?	Surrendered	the	throne?	Please,	Sisters,	please.	Let	them
escape,	out	of	here,	away	from	this—
He	reached	the	entranceway,	and	saw,	just	within,	Ibra	Gholan	–	the
warrior ’s	back	to	Trull,	facing	the	First	Throne	–	no,	Trull	saw,	facing	what
was	left	of	Monok	Ochem.	The	sorcerous	windstorm	must	have	raced	into	the
chamber,	with	a	power	the	bonecaster	could	not	withstand	–	the	T’lan	Imass
had	been	thrown	back,	colliding	with	the	right	side	of	the	throne,	where,	Trull
saw	with	growing	horror,	Monok	Ochem	had	melted.	Fused,	destroyed	and
twisted	as	its	body	was	melded	into	the	First	Throne.	Barely	half	of	the
bonecaster ’s	face	was	visible,	one	eye	surrounded	by	its	cracked,	collapsed
socket.
To	either	side	and	against	the	wall	crouched	the	pitifully	few	children	still
alive,	Panek	kneeling	beside	the	prone,	motionless	form	of	Minala,	who	lay	in
a	slowly	spreading	pool	of	blood.
Ibra	Gholan	turned	as	Trull	dragged	Ahlrada	into	the	chamber.
‘Monok	Ochem	has	failed,’	the	undead	warrior	intoned.	‘Move	from	the
portal,	Trull	Sengar.	I	will	now	meet	the	Lifestealer.’
Trull	pulled	his	friend	to	one	side,	then	knelt	and	settled	a	hand	on	Ahlrada
Ahn’s	spattered	forehead.	To	his	surprise,	the	eyes	flickered	open.
‘Ahlrada…’
The	dying	warrior	sought	to	speak,	mouth	opening	then	filling	with
bubbles	of	blood.	A	savage	cough	sprayed	it	into	Trull’s	face,	then	a	single
word	slurred	free,	a	moment	before	Ahlrada	Ahn	died.
A	single	word.
‘Home.’
	
Ibra	Gholan	strode	out	to	meet	the	one	he	called	Lifestealer.	Four	paces	from
the	Jhag,	who	had	finally	managed	to	tear	free	the	Aptorian’s	death-grip,	the
T’lan	Imass	charged.
Stone	and	iron,	sparks	at	the	heart	of	the	roaring	winds,	and	on	those	winds
spun	fragments	of	flesh,	bone	splinters,	clumps	of	sodden	hair	and	pieces	of
armour.
Collecting	a	spear	from	the	scatter	of	weapons	on	the	floor,	Trull	limped
to	place	himself	in	the	entranceway.
Ibra	Gholan’s	attack	had	driven	the	Jhag	back	a	step,	then	another—
A	harsh	cracking	sound	and	the	T’lan	Imass	reeled,	its	flint	sword


shattered.	Lifestealer ’s	weapon	whirled	down,	tore	through	the	undead
warrior ’s	left	shoulder	–	another	chop,	ribs	bursting,	pieces	caught	on	the	wind
–	Ibra	Gholan	staggered	back—
And	the	sword	connected	with	the	side	of	the	warrior ’s	head.
The	skull	exploded	into	a	mass	of	shards—
Another	swing	ripped	through	the	body,	just	above	the	hip,	straight	across,
through	the	spine,	out	the	other	side,	severing	the	T’lan	Imass	in	half.	Four
more	blows	before	what	was	left	of	the	undead	warrior	could	even	reach	the
floor.	Bone	fragments	skirling	in	every	direction.
Lifestealer	tilted	his	head	back	and	roared,	the	sound	slamming	Trull	to	the
ground,	driving	all	breath	from	his	lungs	–	he	stared,	helpless,	as	the
monstrosity	took	a	step	closer,	then	another.

A	flash,	solid	ripping	of	the	air,	and	a	figure	stumbled	as	if	from	nowhere	into
the	Jhag’s	path.	A	figure	who	hissed,	‘Damn	you,	Shadowthrone!’	Trull	saw	it
look	up,	take	in	the	approaching	apparition,	manage	a	single	step	back,	then,	as
the	Jhag	raised	his	sword,	sorcery	burst	from	the	figure	–	blinding	–	and	when
it	dispelled,	the	wind	was	racing	with	a	banshee	shriek	back	down	the	ragged
corridor	–	and	Lifestealer	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
	
Varat	Taun	watched	Icarium	annihilate	the	T’lan	Imass,	and	saw	once	more	the
lone	Tiste	Edur,	readying	a	spear	moments	before	that	triumphant	roar	battered
the	warrior	from	his	feet.
The	captain	saw	a	gate	open	before	Icarium,	saw	the	unleashing	of	magic,
and	then	Varat	Taun	ducked,	as	if	to	squeeze	beneath	more	bodies,	as	the
concussion	that	erupted	when	the	sorcery	struck	the	Jhag	shook	the	very	stone
–	the	floor,	the	walls	–	and	in	an	instant,	a	momentary	flash,	he	saw	Icarium
wheeling	through	the	air,	towards	him,	then	over,	then	past	–	and	the	furious
wind	plunged	into	the	Jhag’s	wake.
Only	to	return	with	renewed	force,	and	Varat	felt	the	sodden	bodies	around
him	jostle	and	press	down,	as	Icarium	strode	back	over	the	dead,	tilted
forward,	raising	his	sword	once	more.
The	Ceda,	dark-skinned,	lithe,	watched	the	Jhag’s	approach,	and	then
released	another	thunderous	gout	of	magic—
—and	Icarium	flew	back—


	
The	storm	winds	seemed	to	twist	as	if	in	berserker	rage,	howling,	tearing	at	the
stone	walls,	ripping	huge	chunks	away.	The	bodies	of	the	fallen	were	plucked
into	the	air,	the	flesh	scouring	away	from	the	bones,	the	bones	thinning	then
splitting	apart	–	weapons	sailed	past,	withering	into	nothing.
And	Trull	Sengar,	on	his	knees,	watched	as	the	stranger	hammered
Lifestealer.	Again	and	again,	each	trembling	detonation	punching	the	Jhag	back
through	the	air,	spinning,	flailing,	striking	some	distant	obstruction	with	deep,
rattling	impacts.
And	then,	each	time,	the	terrible	slayer	regained	his	feet,	and	marched
forward	once	more.
Only	to	be	struck	again.
In	the	interval	following	the	last	one,	the	stranger	turned	and	saw	Trull
Sengar,	and,	in	Malazan,	he	yelled,	‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	is	that	man?’
Trull	blinked,	shook	his	head.
Wrong	question.	Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you?
Roaring,	Lifestealer	clambered	closer,	and	this	time,	he	withstood	the
sorcerous	blast,	was	pushed	back	but	a	few	steps,	and	as	the	wild	blaze	faded,
he	shook	his	head,	and	lifted	his	sword.	And	came	forward	again.
Another	eruption,	but	the	Jhag	leaned	against	it—
And	Trull	saw	the	mage	jolt	as	if	he	had	been	punched.	Skin	split	on	the
back	of	the	man’s	hands,	blood	spurting.
Lifestealer	stepped	back,	then	surged	forward	yet	again.
And	the	mage	seemed	to	half-vanish	in	a	mist	of	blood,	flung	back,
stumbling,	then,	with	a	snarl,	finding	his	balance	once	more—
In	time	for	the	Jhag’s	next	assault.
And	Trull	found	the	mage	skidding	to	a	halt	directly	in	front	of	him.	No
skin	was	visible	that	was	not	sheathed	in	blood.	Ruptures	marred	every	limb,
the	face,	the	neck;	the	eyes	were	deep	red,	streaming	crimson	tears.	One
trembling	hand	lifted,	and	through	torn	lips,	the	mage	seemed	to	smile	as	he
said,	‘That’s	it	for	me.	All	yours,	Edur,	and	tell	Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion,
I’ll	be	waiting	for	them	on	the	other	side	of	Hood’s	Gate.’
Trull	looked	up,	then	straightened,	readying	his	spear.
Lifestealer ’s	eyes	blazed,	and	in	that	incandescence,	Trull	imagined	he	saw
recognition.	Yes,	me	again.
All	at	once	the	roaring	wind	stuttered,	seemed	to	rip	into	itself,	sending
fragments	of	detritus	flying	against	the	walls	–	and	there	was	heat,	warm,	sultry
heat,	flowing	from	behind	the	Jhag	–	who	raised	his	sword	and	tottered	closer


—
	
Clawing	part-way	free	of	the	bodies,	Varat	Taun	felt	the	shattering	of	the	storm.
His	breath	caught,	as	a	golden	glow	seemed	to	rise,	suffusing	the	air	–	and	in
that	glow,	warmth,	life.
Furtive	movement	to	his	left	and	he	twisted	his	head	round	–	a	figure,
furred,	as	if	wearing	a	skin-tight	brown	pelt	–	no,	naked,	a	woman	–	no,	a
female	–	not	human	at	all.	Yet—
In	a	half-crouch,	moving	lithe,	sinuous,	filled	with	trepidation,
approaching	Icarium	from	behind,	as	the	Jhag	began	walking	towards	the	lone
Tiste	Edur.
Then,	a	swift	dart	forward	–	Icarium	heard	and	began	his	spin	round	–	but
she	had	reached	out,	a	long-fingered	hand	–	no	weapon,	reaching	out,	and
Varat	Taun	saw	the	fingertips	brush	Icarium,	just	above	the	Jhag’s	right	hip	–
the	slightest	of	touches—
And	the	Slayer	crumpled	to	the	ground.
Behind	Varat,	a	wordless	cry,	and	the	Letherii	flinched	as	someone
scrambled	past	him	–	Taralack	Veed—
The	unhuman	female	had	crouched	beside	the	fallen	form	of	Icarium.
Softly	stroking	the	slayer ’s	forehead,	as	the	amber	glow	began	to	fade,	and
with	that	fading,	the	female	herself	grew	indistinct,	then	dissolved	into	gold
light,	which	flickered,	then	vanished.
Taralack	Veed	turned	his	head	and	met	Varat’s	eyes.	‘Help	me!’	he	hissed.
‘Do	what?’	the	Letherii	demanded.
‘The	gate	behind	you	–	it	fades!	We	need	to	drag	Icarium	back	through!	We
need	to	get	him	out	of	here!’
‘Are	you	insane?’
The	Gral’s	face	twisted.	‘Don’t	you	understand?	Icarium	–	he	is	for	your
Emperor!’
A	sudden	chill,	sweeping	away	the	last	vestiges	of	that	healing	warmth,	and
then,	in	its	wake,	a	flood	of	emotion	–	scalding	his	mind.	Varat	Taun	pushed
himself	upright,	clambered	to	join	Taralack	Veed.
For	Rhulad.	Gods.	Yes,	I	see	now.	Yes.	For	Rhulad	–	even	Rhulad	–	even
that	sword	–	yes,	I	see,	I	see!
The	entranceway	to	the	throne	room	was	unoccupied	once	more,	as	the
Tiste	Edur	had	pulled	the	Ceda	into	the	sanctity	of	that	chamber	–	now	was	their
chance	–	he	and	Taralack	reached	the	prostrate	form	of	Icarium.
The	Gral	collected	the	sword	and	sheathed	it	beneath	his	belt,	then	grasped


one	arm.	‘Take	the	other,’	he	commanded	in	a	hiss.	‘Hurry!	Before	they	realize
–	before	that	damned	gate	slams	shut!’
And	Varat	grasped	the	other	arm,	and	they	began	dragging	Icarium	back.
The	slickness	of	what	lay	beneath	the	Jhag	made	it	easier	than	expected.
	
Kneeling,	Trull	Sengar	wiped	blood	from	the	mage’s	face,	cautiously,	gentle
round	the	closed	eyes.	From	beyond	the	archway,	a	profound	silence.	Within
this	chamber,	the	sounds	of	weeping,	muted,	hopeless.
‘Will	he	live?’
The	Tiste	Edur	started,	then	looked	up.	‘Cotillion.	You	said	you’d	send
help.	Is	this	him?’
The	god	nodded.
‘He	wasn’t	enough.’
‘I	know	that.’
‘So	who	would	you	have	sent	next?’
‘Myself,	Trull	Sengar.’
Ah.	He	looked	back	down	at	the	unconscious	mage.	‘The	Eres’al…she	did
what	no-one	else	could	do.’
‘So	it	would	seem.’
‘Unanticipated,	her	arrival,	I	presume.’
‘Most	unexpected,	Trull.	It	is	unfortunate,	nonetheless,	that	her	power	of
healing	did	not	reach	through,	into	this	chamber.’
The	Tiste	Edur	frowned,	then	looked	back	up	at	the	god.	‘What	do	you
mean?’
Cotillion	could	not	meet	his	eyes.	‘Onrack.	Even	now	he	rises.	Mended,
more	or	less.	I	think	she	feels	for	him…’
‘And	who	feels	for	us?’	Trull	demanded.	He	turned	his	head	aside	and	spat
out	blood.
There	was	no	answer	from	the	god.
The	Tiste	Edur	slumped	down	into	a	ragged	sitting	position.	‘I’m	sorry,
Cotillion.	I	don’t	know	if	you	deserved	that.	Probably	not.’
‘It	has	been	an	eventful	night,’	the	god	said.	Then	sighed.	‘Such	is
convergence.	I	asked	you	earlier,	will	Quick	Ben	live?’
Quick	Ben.	Trull	nodded.	‘I	think	so.	The	blood’s	stopped	flowing.’
‘I	have	called	Shadowthrone.	There	will	be	healing.’
Trull	Sengar	glanced	over	to	where	Panek	sat	beside	his	mother	–	one	of
his	mothers	–	‘Shadowthrone	had	best	hurry,	before	those	children	become
orphans	once	again.’


A	scuffling	sound	from	the	portal,	and	Onrack	shuffled	into	view.
‘Trull	Sengar.’
He	nodded,	managed	a	broken	smile.	‘Onrack.	It	seems	you	and	I	are
cursed	to	continue	our	pathetic	existence	for	a	while	longer.’
‘I	am	pleased.’
No-one	spoke	for	a	moment,	and	then	the	T’lan	Imass	said,	‘Lifestealer	is
gone.	He	was	taken	away,	back	through	the	gate.’
Cotillion	hissed	in	frustration.	‘The	damned	Nameless	Ones!	They	never
learn,	do	they?’
Trull	was	staring	at	Onrack.	‘Taken?	He	lives?	Why	–	how?	Taken?’
But	it	was	the	god	who	answered.	‘Icarium	–	Lifestealer	–	is	their	finest
weapon,	Trull	Sengar.	The	Nameless	Ones	intend	to	fling	him	against	your
brother,	the	Emperor	of	Lether.’
As	comprehension	reached	through	the	numbness	of	exhaustion,	Trull
slowly	closed	his	eyes.	Oh	no,	please…‘I	see.	What	will	happen	then,
Cotillion?’
‘I	don’t	know.	No-one	does.	Not	even	the	Nameless	Ones,	although	in	their
arrogance	they	would	never	admit	to	it.’
A	squeal	from	Panek	drew	their	attention	–	and	there	was	Shadowthrone,
crouching	down	over	Minala,	settling	a	hand	on	her	forehead.
Trull	spat	again	–	the	insides	of	his	mouth	were	lacerated	–	then	grunted
and	squinted	up	at	Cotillion.	‘I	will	not	fight	here	again,’	he	said.	‘Nor	Onrack,
nor	these	children	–	Cotillion,	please—’
The	god	turned	away.	‘Of	course	not,	Trull	Sengar.’
Trull	watched	Cotillion	walk	through	the	archway,	and	the	Tiste	Edur ’s
gaze	fell	once	more	on	the	body	of	Ahlrada	Ahn.	As	Shadowthrone
approached	Quick	Ben,	Trull	climbed	to	his	feet	and	made	his	way	to	where	his
friend	was	lying.	Ahlrada	Ahn.	I	do	not	understand	you	–	I	have	never
understood	you	–	but	I	thank	you	nonetheless.	I	thank	you…
He	stepped	to	the	entranceway,	looked	out,	and	saw	Cotillion,	the	Patron	of
Assassins,	the	god,	sitting	on	a	shelf	of	stone	that	had	slipped	down	from	one
wall,	sitting,	alone,	with	his	head	in	his	hands.


Epilogue

In	a	journey	through	the	wastes,	I	found	a	god
kneeling	as	it	pushed	its	hands	into	the	sand
again	and	again,	each	time	lifting	them	up
to	watch	the	lifeless	grains	stream	down.
Dismounting	from	my	weary	horse,	I	walked
to	stand	before	this	apparition	and	its	dusty	hands
and	watched	for	a	time	the	cycles	of	their	motion
when	at	last	up	it	looked,	eyes	beseeching.
‘Where,’	asked	this	god,	‘are	my	children?’
The	Lost	Believers
Fisher
The	bite,	then	the	blessed	numbness	of	smoke	in	her	lungs,	slowly	released	as
Scillara	moved	up	to	lean	on	the	rail	at	Cutter ’s	side.	‘You	look	far	away,’	she
said,	scanning	the	endless	seas.
He	sighed,	then	nodded.
‘Thinking	of	her,	were	you?	What	was	her	name	again?’
‘Apsalar.’
She	smiled,	mostly	to	herself,	drew	in	more	smoke,	watched	it	whirl	away
from	her	nostrils	and	her	pursed	lips,	three	streams	becoming	one.	‘Tell	me
about	her.’
Cutter	glanced	back	over	a	shoulder,	and	Scillara,	to	be	companionable,
did	the	same.	Barathol	was	at	the	stern,	Chaur	seated	almost	at	the	huge
blacksmith’s	boots.	Iskaral	Pust	and	Mogora	were	nowhere	in	sight,	likely	in
the	cabin	below,	arguing	over	supper ’s	mysterious	ingredients.	The	black	mule
had	vanished	days	ago,	probably	over	the	side	although	Iskaral	simply	smiled
at	their	enquiries.
Mappo	was	at	the	bow,	crouched	down,	knees	drawn	up.	Rocking,	weeping.
He	had	been	that	way	since	morning	and	no-one	seemed	able	to	get	through	to


find	out	what	assailed	him.
Cutter	turned	and	stared	back	over	the	seas.	Scillara	happily	did	the	same,
pulling	hard	on	her	pipe.
And	the	Daru	spoke.	‘I	was	remembering	back.	After	the	big	fête	in
Darujhistan,	there	was	another	one,	a	smaller	one,	celebrating	the	withdrawal
of	Malazan	interests…for	the	time	being.	Anyway,	it	was	in	Coll’s	estate,	just
before	we	left	the	city	–	gods	below,	it	seems	so	long	ago	now…’
‘You’d	just	met,	then.’
‘Yes.	Well,	there	was	music.	And	Apsalar…she	danced.’	He	looked	across
at	her.	‘She	danced	so	beautifully,	all	conversation	stopped,	everyone	watched.’
Cutter	shook	his	head.	‘I	couldn’t	even	draw	breath,	Scillara…’
And	yours	is	a	love	that	will	not	die.
So	be	it.
‘A	good	memory,	Cutter.	Hold	on	to	it.	Me,	I	could	never	dance	well,
unless	drunk	or	otherwise	softened	up.’
‘Do	you	miss	those	days,	Scillara?’
‘No.	It’s	more	fun	this	way.’
‘What	way?’
‘Well	now,	you	see,	I	don’t	miss	a	thing	any	more.	Not	a	thing.	That’s
very…satisfying.’
‘You	know,	Scillara,	I	do	envy	your	happiness.’
She	smiled	across	at	him	once	more,	a	simple	act	that	took	all	her	will,	all
her	strength.	So	be	it.
Cutter	said,	‘I	think…I	think	I	need	to	lie	in	your	arms	right	now,	Scillara.’
For	all	the	wrong	reasons.	But	there’s	this	–	in	this	Hood-damned	world,	it’s
worth	taking	what	you	can	get.	Whatever	you	can	get.
Three	streams.
Into	one.
	
Karsa	Orlong	turned	about	as	Samar	Dev	moved	up	beside	him	and	settled
down	–	a	fierce	gale	was	busy	ripping	off	the	surface	of	the	waves	in	the	sea
beyond,	and	the	hammering	against	the	hull	was	incessant,	as	if	eager	spirits
sought	to	tear	the	craft	to	pieces.	‘Well,	woman,	what	has	got	you	looking	so
excited?’
‘Something’s	happened,’	she	said.	‘Here,	give	me	some	of	that	fur	cloak,
I’m	chilled	to	the	bone.’
He	yielded	the	bear	fur.	‘Take	it.’
‘I	bless	your	martyrdom,	Karsa	Orlong.’


‘A	wasted	effort,	then,’	he	rumbled	in	reply.	‘I	will	be	martyr	to	no-one,	not
even	the	gods.’
‘Just	a	saying,	you	thick-skulled	oaf.	But	listen,	something	happened.	There
was	an	assault.	Hundreds	of	Edur	warriors	and	Letherii	auxiliaries.	And,
another	champion.’
Karsa	grunted.	‘Plenty	of	those	in	this	fleet.’
‘But	only	that	champion	and	his	servant	returned.	And	one	Letherii.	The
rest	were	slaughtered.’
‘Where	was	this	battle?	We	have	seen	no	other	ships.’
‘Through	a	warren,	Karsa	Orlong.	In	any	case,	I	heard	the	name	of	the
champion.	And	this	is	why	you	have	to	listen	to	me.	We	have	to	get	off	this
damned	ship	–	if	we	even	come	in	sight	of	land	between	here	and	that	empire,
we	should	go	over	the	side.	You	said	I	was	excited?	Wrong.	I	am	terrified.’
‘And	who	is	this	terrifying	champion,	then?’
‘He	is	named	Icarium.	The	Slayer—’
‘Whose	servant	is	a	Trell.’
She	frowned.	‘No,	a	Gral.	Do	you	know	Icarium?	Do	you	know	the	awful
legends	surrounding	him?’
‘I	know	nothing	of	legends,	Samar	Dev.	But	we	fought,	once,	Icarium	and
I.	It	was	interrupted	before	I	could	kill	him.’
‘Karsa—’
But	the	Toblakai	was	smiling.	‘Your	words	please	me,	woman.	I	will	face
him	again,	then.’
She	stared	at	him	in	the	gloom	of	the	hold,	but	said	nothing.
	
On	another	ship	in	the	fleet,	Taralack	Veed	was	curled	up	in	the	hold,	back	to
the	sloping,	sweating	hull,	as	shivers	racked	through	him.
Icarium	stood	before	him,	and	was	speaking:	‘…difficult	to	understand.
The	Letherii	seemed	so	contemptuous	of	me	before,	so	what	has	changed?
Now	I	see	worship	and	hope	in	their	eyes,	their	deference	unnerves	me,
Taralack	Veed.’
‘Go	away,’	the	Gral	mumbled.	‘I’m	not	well.	Leave	me.’
‘What	ails	you	is	not	physical,	I	fear,	my	friend.	Please,	come	up	on	deck,
breathe	deep	this	enlivening	air	–	it	will	soothe	you,	I	am	certain	of	it.’
‘No.’
Icarium	slowly	crouched	until	his	grey	eyes	were	level	with	Taralack’s
belligerent	stare.	‘I	awoke	that	morning	more	refreshed,	more	hopeful	than	I
have	ever	been	–	I	feel	the	truth	of	that	claim.	A	warmth,	deep	within	me,	soft


and	welcoming.	And	it	has	not	diminished	since	that	time.	I	do	not	understand
it,	friend—’
‘Then,’	the	Gral	said	in	a	grating	voice,	bitter	with	venom,	‘I	must	tell	you
once	more.	Who,	what	you	are.	I	must	tell	you,	prepare	you	for	what	you	must
do.	You	leave	me	no	choice.’
‘There	is	no	need,’	Icarium	said	in	a	soft	tone,	reaching	out	one	hand	and
resting	it	on	Taralack	Veed’s	shoulder.
‘You	fool!’	the	Gral	hissed,	twisting	away	from	that	touch.	‘Unlike	you,’	he
spat,	‘I	remember!’
Icarium	straightened,	looked	down	on	his	old	friend.	‘There	is	no	need,’	he
said	again,	then	turned	away.	You	do	not	understand.
There	is	no	need.
	
He	stood	on	the	highest	tower	of	Mock’s	Hold,	expressionless	eyes	on	the
chaos	in	the	city	below.	The	Adjunct’s	ships	were	drawing	away	from	the
harbour,	out	into	the	unlit	waters	of	the	bay	beyond.
To	his	right,	less	than	three	strides	away,	was	the	fissure	that	gave	the	far
side	of	the	platform	an	alarming	cant.	The	crack	was	recent,	no	more	than	a
year	old,	reaching	all	the	way	down	the	keep	into	the	cellars	below,	and	the
repairs	by	the	engineers	seemed	desultory,	verging	on	incompetent.	The	old
heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire	was	wounded,	and	he	did	not	expect	it	to	survive
much	longer.
After	a	time,	he	sensed	a	presence	behind	him,	but	did	not	turn.	‘Emperor,’
he	said	in	his	quiet	voice,	‘it	has	been	a	long	time,	hasn’t	it?’
Shadowthrone’s	whisper	reached	out	to	him,	like	a	chilling	caress.	‘Must
this	be	your	way,	Tayschrenn?	Each	and	every	time.’	A	soft	snort,	the	voice
drawing	closer	as	it	continued,	‘You’ve	let	yourself	be	caged.	Again.	You	drive
me	mad.’
‘You	have	had	a	busy	night,’	the	Imperial	High	Mage	observed.
‘Ah,	you	sensed	my…activities?	Of	course	you	did.	So,	not	as	caged	as	it
would	seem.’
‘I	endeavour,’	said	Tayschrenn,	‘to	take	the	long	view	on	such	matters.’	He
paused,	then	added,	‘As	do	you.’	He	glanced	over	at	the	insubstantial	smear	of
darkness	at	his	side.	‘Your	new	role	would	not	have	changed	you	that	much,	I
suspect.’
‘You	schemed	with	Quick	Ben	and	Kalam,’	Shadowthrone	said.	‘You
travelled	all	the	way	to	Seven	Cities	to	do	it,	yet	what	have	your	plans
achieved?	The	Empress	on	shifting	sands,	a	Jhistal	priest	waddling	unfettered


in	the	corridors	of	power,	the	Claw	infiltrated	and	decimated	and	my	loyal
Wickans	assailed	–	but	tell	me	this,	Tayschrenn,	could	you	have	ever	predicted
D’rek’s	answer	to	the	betrayal	of	the	priests	and	priestesses?’
‘Betrayal?’
‘D’rek	slaughtered	your	kin!	Every	temple!’
The	High	Mage	was	silent	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	as	the	god	at	his	side
grew	ever	more	agitated.	Then	Tayschrenn	said,	‘A	year	ago,	an	old	friend	of
mine	set	out,	in	haste,	from	here	–	sailing	to	the	Grand	Temple	of	D’rek	in
Kartool	City.’
‘You	knew	all	that?’
Tayschrenn	half-smiled.	‘The	ship	he	hired	was	mine.	Alas,	he	was
unaware	of	that	detail.’
‘I	knew	it!’	Shadowthrone	hissed.	‘You	never	left	the	cult!’
‘The	Worm	of	Autumn	is	the	harbinger	of	death,	and	death	comes	to	us	all.
Us	mortals,	that	is.	How	can	one	leave	the	acceptance	of	that?	What	would	be
the	point?’
‘This	empire	was	mine!	Not	D’rek’s!	Not	yours!’
‘Emperor,	your	paranoia	always	disturbed	me	more	than	your
acquisitiveness.	In	any	case,	Laseen	now	rules…for	the	moment.	Unless,’	he
squinted	at	the	god,	‘you	are	planning	a	triumphant	return?’
‘To	save	everyone	from	themselves?	I	think	not.	Hate	is	the	world’s	most
pernicious	weed…especially	when	people	like	you	do	nothing.’
‘Every	garden	I	have	tended	is	either	dead	or	wild,	Emperor.’
‘Why	did	you	agree	to	be	Quick	Ben’s	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole,
Tayschrenn?’
The	High	Mage	blinked	in	surprise.
‘And	why	didn’t	he	call	on	you	when	I	sent	him	into	that	nightmare?’
‘I	would	have	been	disappointed	indeed,’	Tayschrenn	slowly	said,	‘had	he
called	on	me	so	soon.	As	I	said	earlier,	Emperor,	I	hold	to	the	long	view	on
matters	of	this	realm.’
‘Why	didn’t	D’rek	kill	you?’
‘She	tried.’
‘What?’
‘I	talked	her	out	of	it.’
‘Abyss	take	me,	how	I	hate	you!’
‘Even	gods	must	learn	to	control	their	tempers,’	Tayschrenn	said,	‘lest	they
set	a	bad	example.’
‘You	said	that	to	D’rek?’
‘I	am	saying	that	to	you,	Shadowthrone.’


‘My	temper	is	fine!	I	am	perfectly	calm	–	seething	with	fury	and	hatred,
mind	you,	but	calm!’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time	after	that,	until	the	god	murmured,	‘My	poor
Wickans…’
‘They	are	not	as	vulnerable	as	you	fear,	Emperor.	They	will	have	Nil	and
Nether.	They	will	have	Temul,	and	when	Temul	is	old,	decades	from	now,	he
will	have	a	young	warrior	to	teach,	whose	name	shall	be	Coltaine.’	He	clasped
his	hands	behind	his	back,	frowning	down	at	the	smoke-wreathed	city	as	the
first	greying	of	dawn	approached.	‘If	you	would	fear,’	he	said,	‘fear	for	your
own	child.’
‘I	fear	nothing—’
‘Liar.	You	heard	Temper	step	out	of	Coop’s	–	and	you	fled.’
‘Expedience!’
‘Unquestionably.’
‘You’re	in	a	nest	of	vipers	here	–	I	am	happy	to	leave	you	to	it.’
Tayschrenn	sketched	a	modest	bow.	‘Emperor.	Please	convey	my	greetings
to	Cotillion.’
‘Tell	him	yourself,	if	you	dare.’
‘It	was	not	me	who	stole	Kalam	from	him	–	tell	me,	does	the	assassin
live?’
‘He’s	in	the	Deadhouse	–	isn’t	that	answer	enough?’
‘Not	really.’
‘I	know!’	Shadowthrone	cackled	in	glee,	then	vanished	like	mist	in	the
wind.

The	morning	was	bright,	the	sun	already	warm,	as	the	Master	Investigator
paused	outside	the	Imperial	Domicile	in	the	city	of	Kartool.	He	adjusted	his
uniform,	ensuring	that	every	wrinkle	was	smoothed	away.	Then	he	licked	the
palms	of	his	hands	and	carefully,	tenderly,	eased	back	his	unruly	hair	–	unruly
in	his	own	mind,	at	least.	A	last	glance	down	at	his	boots,	reassured	by	their
unmarred	polish,	then	he	smartly	ascended	the	steps	and	entered	the	squat
building.
A	nod	rather	than	an	answering	salute	to	the	guards	stationed	just	within,
then	down	the	hallway	to	the	door	of	the	Commander ’s	office.	A	knock,	sharp
and	sure,	and,	upon	hearing	a	muffled	invitation	to	enter,	he	opened	the	door
and	marched	inside,	halting	before	the	desk,	behind	which	sat	the	Commander.
Who	now	looked	up,	and	scowled.	‘All	right,	you	pompous	ass,	let’s	have


it.’
The	slight	deflation	was	involuntary	on	the	Master	Investigator ’s	part,	but
he	managed	to	mask	it	as	best	as	possible.	‘I	have	the	following	to	report,	sir,
regarding	the	investigation	I	rigorously	undertook	on	the	mysterious	deaths	of
the	acolytes	and	priests	of	the	temple	dedicated	to	D’rek	on	the	Street	of—’
‘Will	you	shut	up!	You	want	to	report	your	conclusions,	yes?	Then	do	just
that!’
‘Of	course,	sir.	Given	lack	of	evidence	to	the	contrary,	sir,	only	one
conclusion	is	possible.	The	devotees	of	D’rek	have,	one	and	all,	committed	a
thorough	orgy	of	suicide	in	the	span	of	a	single	night.’
Lizard	eyes	regarded	him	for	an	uncomfortably	long	time.	Then	he	said,
‘Sergeant	Hellian,	the	original	investigator,	said	precisely	the	same	thing.’
‘Clearly	a	perceptive	woman,	sir.’
‘A	drunk.	I	shipped	her	to	the	Fourteenth.’
‘The…Fourteenth…?’
‘Write	up	your	conclusions,’	the	Commander	then	said,	‘and	close	the
investigation.	Now	get	out	of	here.’
The	Master	Investigator	saluted	and	escaped	with	as	much	dignity	as	he
could	manage.	Along	the	corridor,	another	nod	to	the	guards,	then	out	through
the	main	doors,	onto	the	landing,	then	down	the	steps.
Where	he	paused,	looked	up.	The	sunlight	was	glistening	from	the
magnificent	webs	of	the	paralt	spiders	now	resident	in	the	towers	of	Kartool.	A
skein	of	crystal	beauty,	scintillating	like	threads	of	diamond	against	the
stunning	blue	sky.
Optimism	returning,	he	sighed,	deciding	that	he	had	never	before	seen
such	a	wondrous,	breathtaking	sight.	And	so	he	set	off	with	a	lighter	step,	boots
ringing	smartly	on	the	cobbles.
While	a	score	of	huge	spiders,	crouched	in	their	small	caves	dug	into	the
walls	of	the	towers,	looked	with	cold,	multifaceted	eyes.	Looked	down	upon	all
that	crawled	below,	occasionally	curious,	ever	patient,	even	as	the	sweet
whispers	of	hunger	flitted	through	their	liquid	brains.
The	webs	were	set.
And	the	traps,	in	their	elaborate	elegance,	were	never	empty	for	long.
	
This	ends	the	sixth	tale	of	the
Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen


Glossary
Ascendants
Anomander	Rake:	Son	of	Darkness
Apsalar:	Lady	of	Thieves
Beru:	Lord	of	Storms
Bridgeburners
Burn:	The	Sleeping	Goddess
Cotillion:	The	Rope,	Patron	of	Assassins,	High	House	Shadow
Dessembrae:	Lord	of	Tears
Draconus:	an	Elder	God	and	forger	of	the	sword	Dragnipur
D’rek:	The	Worm	of	Autumn,	worshipped	as	either	male	or	female
Eres/Eres’al:	a	progenitor	spirit/goddess
Fener:	the	Bereft,	the	Boar	of	Five	Tusks
Gedderone:	Lady	of	Spring	and	Rebirth
Grizzin	Farl:	an	Elder	God
Hood:	King	of	High	House	Death
Jhess:	Queen	of	Weaving
Kilmandaros:	an	Elder	God
K’rul:	an	Elder	God	of	the	Warrens
Mael:	an	Elder	God	of	the	Seas
Mowri:	Lady	of	Beggars,	Slaves	and	Serfs
Nerruse:	Lady	of	Calm	Seas	and	Fair	Winds
Oponn:	Twin	Jesters	of	Chance
Osserc/Osseric/Osric:	Lord	of	the	Sky
Poliel:	Mistress	of	Pestilence	and	Disease
Queen	of	Dreams:	Queen	of	High	House	Life
Scalissara:	a	discredited	goddess	of	olive	oil,	ruling	over	Y’Ghatan
Shadowthrone:	Ammanas,	King	of	High	House	Shadow
Sha’ik:	The	Whirlwind	Goddess
Sister	of	Cold	Nights:	an	Elder	Goddess
Soliel:	Lady	of	Health
The	Azath:	the	Houses


The	Crippled	God:	The	Chained	One,	Lord	of	High	House	of	Chains
The	Deragoth:	of	the	First	Empire	of	Dessimbelackis,	The	Seven	Hounds	of
Darkness
Togg	and	Fanderay:	The	Wolves	of	Winter
Treach/Trake:	The	Tiger	of	Summer	and	Lord	of	War

The	Deck	of	Dragons
High	House	Life
King
Queen	(Queen	of	Dreams)
Champion
Priest
Herald
Soldier
Weaver
	
High	House	Death
King	(Hood)
Queen
Knight	(once	Dassem	Ultor,	now	Baudin)
Magi
Herald
Soldier
Spinner
Mason
Virgin
	
High	House	Light
King
Queen
Champion	(Osseric)
Priest
Captain
Soldier
Seamstress


Builder
Maiden
	
High	House	Dark
King
Queen
Knight	(Anomander	Rake)
Magi
Captain
Soldier
Weaver
Mason
Wife
	
High	House	Shadow
King	(Shadowthrone/Ammanas)
Queen
Assassin	(The	Rope/Cotillion)
Magi
Hound
	
High	House	of	Chains
The	King	in	Chains
The	Consort	(Poliel)
Reaver	(Kallor)
Knight	(Toblakai)
The	Seven	of	the	Dead	Fires	(The	Unbound)
Cripple
Leper
Fool
	
Unaligned
Oponn
Obelisk	(Burn)


Crown
Sceptre
Orb
Throne
Chain
Master	of	the	Deck	(Ganoes	Paran)

Elder	Races
Tiste	Andii:	Children	of	Darkness
Tiste	Edur:	Children	of	Shadow
Tiste	Liosan:	Children	of	Light
T’lan	Imass
Eres/Eres’al
Trell
Jaghut
Forkrul	Assail
K’Chain	Che’Malle
The	Eleint
The	Barghast
The	Thelomen	Toblakai
The	Teblor

The	Warrens
Kurald	Galain:	The	Elder	Warren	of	Darkness
Kurald	Emurlahn:	The	Elder	Warren	of	Shadow,	the	Shattered	Warren
Kurald	Liosan
Kurald	Thyrllan:	The	Elder	Warren	of	Light
Omtose	Phellack:	The	Elder	Jaghut	Warren	of	Ice
Tellann:	The	Elder	Imass	Warren	of	Fire
Starvald	Demelain:	The	Eleint	Warren
Thyr:	The	Path	of	Light
Denul:	The	Path	of	Healing
Hood’s	Path:	The	Path	of	Death
Serc:	The	Path	of	the	Sky
Meanas:	The	Path	of	Shadow	and	Illusion
D’riss:	The	Path	of	the	Earth
Ruse:	The	Path	of	the	Sea


Rashan:	The	Path	of	Darkness
Mockra:	The	Path	of	the	Mind
Telas:	The	Path	of	Fire

Peoples	and	Places
Anibar:	a	tribe	dwelling	in	Shield	lands	north	of	the	Jhag	Odhan,	Seven	Cities
Ehrlitan:	a	port	city	in	Seven	Cities
G’danisban:	a	city	in	Seven	Cities
Gral:	a	tribe	of	Seven	Cities
Hanar	Ara:	an	ancient	city,	City	of	the	Fallen
Hatra:	a	city	in	Seven	Cities
Hedori	Kwil:	extinct	city,	Seven	Cities
Inath’an	Mersin:	old	name	for	Mersin,	Seven	Cities
Kanarbar	Belid:	old	name	for	Belid,	city	in	Seven	Cities
Karashimesh:	a	city	of	Seven	Cities
Kartool:	city	and	island	off	Quon	Tali	mainland
Malaz	City:	birthplace	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	on	Malaz	Island,	off	the	Quon
Tali	mainland
Minikenar:	extinct	city	of	the	First	Empire,	Seven	Cities
Mock’s	Hold	–	old	keep	overlooking	Malaz	City
Monkan:	sister	island	of	Sepik	(smaller)
Nemil:	an	expansionist	kingdom	northwest	of	the	Jhag	Odhan
N’Karaphal:	extinct	city,	Seven	Cities
Pan’potsun:	a	city	in	Seven	Cities
Pardu:	a	tribe	of	Seven	Cities
Perish:	a	kingdom	west	of	Nemil
Rampart	Way:	descent	from	Mock’s	Hold,	Malaz	City
Raven	Hill	Park:	a	park	in	Malaz	City
Sepik	Island:	an	island	kingdom,	Seven	Cities
Septarch	District:	the	temple	district	of	Kartool	City
Shal-Morzinn:	an	empire	southwest	of	Nemil
Tramara:	extinct	city,	Seven	Cities
Trebur:	extinct	city,	Seven	Cities	(City	of	Domes)
Ugarat:	a	city	in	Seven	Cities
Vedanik:	a	tribe	of	the	Thalas	Mountains,	Seven	Cities
Vinith:	extinct	city,	Seven	Cities
Vithan	Taur:	extinct	city	of	the	First	Empire,	Seven	Cities
Y’Ghatan:	a	city	of	Seven	Cities


Terms
Aptorian:	a	species	of	demon	native	to	the	Shadow	Realm
Ashok	Regiment:	old	regiment,	now	in	the	Fourteenth	Army
Atri-Preda:	equivalent	of	Commander	or	Fist	among	the	Letherii
Avower:	term	for	Royal	Torturer	in	Ugarat
Azalan:	a	species	of	demon	native	to	the	Shadow	Realm
Bhederin:	a	large	semi-domesticated	or	wild	ungulate
Black	Glove	(The):	a	secret	cult	within	the	Claw
Blackwood:	a	rare	seaworthy	wood
Bloodwood:	a	rare	wood	used	by	the	Tiste	Edur
Bokh’aral:	a	small	rock-dwelling	ape
Bonecaster:	T’lan	Imass	term	for	a	shaman	of	their	kind
Capemoth:	a	large	scavenging	insect	of	Seven	Cities
Carelbarra:	a	honey	also	known	as	the	God	Bringer	for	its	hallucinogenic
qualities
Carrier:	a	vector	for	plague
Chigger	fleas:	a	wind-borne	insect	of	Seven	Cities
Child	Death	Song:	a	Seti	rite	of	passage	into	adulthood	involving	ritual	burial
Coraval:	a	type	of	fish,	the	primary	harvest	around	Malaz	Island
D’bayang:	an	opiate
D’ivers:	a	form	of	shape-shifting	into	multiple	animals
Demidrek:	a	high	priest	or	priestess	of	D’rek
Destriant:	a	mortal	representative	for	a	particular	faith
Dinal:	a	species	of	demon	in	the	Shadow	Realm
Drake:	a	Tanno	pilgrim	ship
Dromon:	a	warship
Eleint:	another	term	for	pure-blood	dragons
Enkar’al:	a	large	predator	of	Seven	Cities	(now	extinct)
Eraga:	a	breed	of	cattle	thought	to	be	extinct	on	Seven	Cities
Escura:	a	plant	used	to	kill	chigger	fleas
Goldfinch:	a	tree	native	to	Seven	Cities
Gothar	flower:	used	as	a	bleaching	agent
Grey	Helms:	a	military	religious	order
Imbrules:	an	unspecified	animal	native	to	Starvald	Demelain
Jhistal:	a	high	priest	of	an	Elder	God	who	employs	human	blood	in	ritual
magic	(Elder	equivalent	of	Destriant)
Kethra	knife:	a	large	wide-bladed	knife	from	Seven	Cities
Long-tails:	another	name	for	K’Chain	Che’Malle


Luthuras:	an	unspecified	animal	native	to	Starvald	Demelain
Maethgara:	Y’Ghanii	name	for	buildings	used	to	store	olive	oil
Mahybe:	ancient	term	meaning	vessel	(now	known	as	Mhybe	among	the	Rhivi)
Meer-rat:	a	reptilian	rodent
Mortal	Sword:	a	martial	champion	to	a	god
Nameless	Ones	(The):	an	ancient	cult	devoted	to	the	Azath	Houses
Obsidian	Throne:	traditional	seat	of	power	of	Bluerose
Onyx	Wizards/Council:	traditional	rulers	in	Bluerose
Paralt:	the	name	for	a	spider	and	a	snake,	both	venomous	(also	the	name	for
the	poison	itself)
Preda:	Letherii	equivalent	to	Captain
Purlith:	a	species	of	bat	native	to	Starvald	Demelain
Rhizan:	a	small	winged,	insectivorous	reptile
Shield	Anvil:	mortal	repository	for	the	fallen	(dead),	sworn	to	a	particular	god
Short-Tails:	another	name	for	K’Chain	Nah’ruk
Soletaken:	shape-shifting
Stantars:	an	unspecified	animal	native	to	Starvald	Demelain
Stormriders:	an	ocean-dwelling	species
Stormwall:	a	barrier	to	the	predations	of	the	Stormriders	on	Korel
Surveyants:	a	maker	of	maps	among	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild
Telaba:	a	traditional	outer	garment	worn	in	Seven	Cities
T’rolbarahl:	an	ancient	form	of	D’ivers	from	the	period	of	the	First	Empire
Thrones	of	War:	name	for	the	war	catamarans	used	by	the	Perish
Trell	Wars	(The):	wars	of	genocide	against	the	Trell	conducted	by	the	Nemil
Troughs:	a	board	game	popular	among	Malazans
Verdith’anath:	The	Bridge	of	Death	(Jaghut	underworld)
Watcher:	a	Tiste	Andii	agent	hidden	among	the	Tiste	Edur	of	the	Lether
Continent
Whispers	(The):	voices	of	guidance	in	the	cult	of	Sha’ik	Reborn

