	TOLL	THE
HOUNDS
BOOK	EIGHT	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	of	the	characters,	organizations,	and	events
portrayed	in	this	novel	are	either	products	of	the	author ’s	imagination	or	are
used	fictitiously.
TOLL	THE	HOUNDS:	BOOK	EIGHT	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE
FALLEN
Copyright	©	2008	by	Steven	Erikson
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	in	2008	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers.
All	rights	reserved.
Maps	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor ® 	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
eISBN	9781429926997


Praise	for	Steven	Erikson’s
Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen	series
“I	stand	slack-jawed	in	awe	of	The	Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen.	This
masterwork	of	the	imagination	may	be	the	high-water	mark	of	epic	fantasy—
accomplished	with	none	of	the	customary	riffs	on	Tolkein.	This	marathon	of
ambition	has	a	depth	and	breadth	and	sense	of	vast	reaches	of	inimical	time
unlike	anything	else	available	today.”
—Glen	Cook
“Steven	Erikson	is	an	extraordinary	writer….	My	advice	to	anyone	who	might
listen	to	me:	Treat	yourself.”
—Stephen	R.	Donaldson
“[Erikson’s]	knack	for	drawing	well-drawn	exotic	characters,	no	matter	how
fleeting,	and	mastery	of	world-building	cannot	be	denied.”
—Booklist
“Gripping,	fast-moving,	delightfully	dark,	with	a	masterful	and	unapologetic
brutality	reminiscent	of	George	R.	R.	Martin.”
—Elizabeth	Haydon
“Erikson’s	world	is	richly	envisioned,	dense	and	gritty,	rife	with	magic,	and
filled	with	complex	political	and	military	intrigue.”
—Jacqueline	Carey
“A	multilayered	tale	of	magic	and	war,	loyalty	and	betrayal.	Complexly	drawn
characters	occupy	a	richly	detailed	world	in	this	panoramic	saga.”
—Library	Journal


This	novel	is	dedicated
to	the	memory	of	my	father,
R.	S.	Lundin,	1931–2007.
You	are	missed.


Acknowledgments
Gratitude	as	always	goes	to	my	advance	readers:	Bowen,	Rick,	Mark,	and
Chris,	with	special	thanks	to	Bill	and	Hazel	for	their	kind	words	and	support
over	the	course	of	what	proved	to	be	a	difficult	year.	Appreciation	also	goes	to
the	staff	of	the	Black	Stilt	Café	and	the	Pacific	Union	Café	for	their	generous
loan	of	office	space.
Love	to	Clare	and	Bowen,	for	everything.




Dramatis	Personae

Cutter,	an	assassin
Scillara,	his	companion
Iskaral	Pust,	High	Priest	of	Shadow,	the	Magi,	God	of	the	Bhokarala
Sister	Spite,	a	Soletaken
Mogora,	Iskaral’s	occasional	wife
Barathol	Mekhar,	a	tourist
Chaur,	a	gentle	man
Mappo	Runt,	a	Trell
Picker,	a	retired	Bridgeburner	and	partner	in	K’rul’s	Bar
Blend,	a	retired	Bridgeburner	and	partner	in	K’rul’s	Bar
Antsy,	a	retired	Bridgeburner	and	partner	in	K’rul’s	Bar
Mallet,	a	retired	Bridgeburner	and	healer
Bluepearl,	a	retired	Bridgeburner
Fisher,	a	bard,	a	regular	at	K’rul’s	Bar
Duiker,	once	the	Malazan	Empire’s	Imperial	Historian
Bellam	Nom,	a	young	man
Rallick	Nom,	an	awakened	assassin
Torvald	Nom,	a	cousin	of	Rallick
Tiserra,	Torvald’s	wife
Coll,	a	Council	Member	in	Darujhistan
Estraysian	D’Arle,	a	Council	Member	in	Darujhistan
Hanut	Orr,	a	Council	Member	in	Darujhistan,	nephew	of	the	late	Turban
Orr
Shardan	Lim,	a	Council	Member	in	Darujhistan
Murillio,	a	consort
Kruppe,	a	round	little	man
Meese,	proprietor	of	the	Phoenix	Inn
Irilta,	a	regular	at	the	Phoenix	Inn
Scurve,	barkeep	at	the	Phoenix	Inn


Sulty,	server	at	the	Phoenix	Inn
Challice,	wife	of	Vidikas,	daughter	of	Estraysian	D’Arle
Gorlas	Vidikas,	newest	Council	Member	in	Darujhistan,	past	Hero	of	the
Fete
Krute	of	Talient,	an	agent	of	the	Assassins’	Guild
Gaz,	a	killer
Thordy,	Gaz’s	wife
Master	Quell,	Trygalle	Trade	Guild	navigator	and	sorceror
Faint,	a	shareholder
Reccanto	Ilk,	a	shareholder
Sweetest	Sufferance,	a	shareholder
Glanno	Tarp,	a	shareholder
Amby	Bole,	a	retired	Mott	Irregular	and	newfound	shareholder
Jula	Bole,	a	retired	Mott	Irregular	and	newfound	shareholder
Precious	Thimble,	a	retired	Mott	Irregular	and	newfound	shareholder
Gruntle,	a	caravan	guard	on	extended	leave
Stonny	Menackis,	owner	of	duelling	school
Harllo,	a	child
Bedek,	Harllo’s	‘uncle’
Myrla,	Harllo’s	‘aunt’
Snell,	a	child
Bainisk,	a	worker	in	the	mines
Venaz,	a	worker	in	the	mines
Scorch,	a	newly	hired	bodyguard
Leff,	a	newly	hired	bodyguard
Madrun,	a	newly	hired	compound	guard
Lazan	Door,	a	newly	hired	compound	guard
Studlock	(or	Studious	Lock),	a	castellan
Humble	Measure,	a	mysterious	presence	in	Darujhistan’s	criminal
underworld
Chillbais,	a	demon
Baruk,	a	member	of	the	T’orrud	Cabal
Vorcan,	Mistress	of	the	Assassins’	Guild
Seba	Krafar,	Master	of	the	Assassins’	Guild
Apsal’ara,	one	of	the	Slain	in	Dragnipur
Kadaspala,	one	of	the	Slain	in	Dragnipur


Derudan,	a	witch	of	Tennes
K’rul,	an	Elder	God
Draconus,	one	of	the	Slain	within	Dragnipur
Korlat,	a	Tiste	Andii	Soletaken
Orfantal,	a	Tiste	Andii	Soletaken,	Korlat’s	brother
Kallor,	a	challenger
Lady	Envy,	a	bystander
Anomander	Rake,	Son	of	Darkness,	Knight	of	Darkness,	Ruler	of	Black
Coral
Spinnock	Durav,	a	Tiste	Andii
Endest	Silann,	a	Tiste	Andii	wizard
Caladan	Brood,	a	warlord
Hood,	the	God	of	Death
Ditch,	one	of	the	Slain	in	Dragnipur
Samar	Dev,	a	witch
Karsa	Orlong,	a	Teblor	Toblakai	warrior
Traveller,	a	stranger
Shadowthrone,	the	God	of	Shadow
Cotillion,	The	Rope,	Patron	God	of	Assassins
Prophet	Seech,	the	High	Priest	of	the	Fallen	One,	once	a	middling	artist
named	Munug
Silanah,	an	Eleint
Crone,	a	Great	Raven
Raest,	a	Jaghut	Tyrant	(retired)
Clip,	Mortal	Sword	of	Darkness
Nimander	Golit,	a	Tiste	Andii
Skintick,	a	Tiste	Andii
Nenanda,	a	Tiste	Andii
Aranatha,	a	Tiste	Andii
Kedeviss,	a	Tiste	Andii
Desra,	a	Tiste	Andii
Sordiko	Qualm,	a	High	Priestess
Salind,	a	High	Priestess
Seerdomin,	a	resident	of	Black	Coral
Gradithan,	a	thug
Monkrat,	a	mage
Baran,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Gear,	a	Hound	of	Shadow


Blind,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Rood,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Shan,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Pallid,	a	new	Hound	of	Shadow
Lock,	a	new	Hound	of	Shadow
Edgewalker,	a	wanderer
Dog	walkers,	two	witnesses


Prologue

Speak	truth,	grow	still,	until	the	water	is	clear	between	us.
Meditations	of	the	Tiste	Andii

‘I	have	no	name	for	this	town,’	the	ragged	man	said,	hands	plucking	at	the
frayed	hems	of	what	had	once	been	an	opulent	cloak.	Coiled	and	tucked	into	his
braided	belt	was	a	length	of	leather	leash,	rotting	and	tattered.	‘It	needs	a	name,
I	think,’	he	continued,	voice	raised	to	be	heard	above	the	vicious	fighting	of	the
dogs,	‘yet	I	find	a	certain	failing	of	imagination,	and	no	one	seems	much
interested.’
The	woman	standing	now	at	his	side,	to	whom	he	companionably
addressed	these	remarks,	had	but	newly	arrived.	Of	her	life	in	the	time	before,
very	little	remained.	She	had	not	owned	a	dog,	yet	she	had	found	herself
staggering	down	the	high	street	of	this	decrepit,	strange	town	clutching	a	leash
against	which	a	foul-tempered	brute	tugged	and	lunged	at	every	passer-by.	The
rotted	leather	had	finally	parted,	freeing	the	beast	to	bolt	forward,	launching	an
attack	upon	this	man’s	own	dog.
The	two	animals	were	now	trying	to	kill	each	other	in	the	middle	of	the
street,	their	audience	none	but	their	presumed	owners.	Dust	had	given	way	to
blood	and	tufts	of	hide.
‘There	was	a	garrison,	once,	three	soldiers	who	didn’t	know	each	other,’
the	man	said.	‘But	one	by	one	they	left.’
‘I	never	owned	a	dog	before,’	she	replied,	and	it	was	with	a	start	that	she
realized	that	these	were	the	first	words	she	had	uttered	since…well,	since	the
time	before.
‘Nor	I,’	admitted	the	man.	‘And	until	now,	mine	was	the	only	dog	in	town.
Oddly	enough,	I	never	grew	fond	of	the	wretched	beast.’
‘How	long	have	you…er,	been	here?’
‘I	have	no	idea,	but	it	seems	like	for	ever.’
She	looked	round,	then	nodded.	‘Me	too.’


‘Alas,	I	believe	your	pet	has	died.’
‘Oh!	So	it	has.’	She	frowned	down	at	the	broken	leash	in	her	hand.	‘I
suppose	I	won’t	be	needing	a	new	one,	then.’
‘Don’t	be	too	certain	of	that,’	the	man	said.	‘We	seem	to	repeat	things	here.
Day	after	day.	But	listen,	you	can	have	mine	–	I	never	use	it,	as	you	can	see.’
She	accepted	the	coiled	leash.	‘Thank	you.’	She	took	it	out	to	where	her
dead	dog	was	lying,	more	or	less	torn	to	pieces.	The	victor	was	crawling	back
towards	its	master	leaving	a	trail	of	blood.
Everything	seemed	knocked	strangely	askew,	including,	she	realized,	her
own	impulses.	She	crouched	down	and	gently	lifted	her	dead	dog’s	mangled
head,	working	the	loop	over	until	it	encircled	the	torn	neck.	Then	she	lowered
the	bloody,	spit-lathered	head	back	to	the	ground	and	straightened,	holding	the
frayed	leash	loose	in	her	right	hand.
The	man	joined	her.	‘Aye,	it’s	all	rather	confusing,	isn’t	it?’
‘Yes.’
‘And	we	thought	life	was	confusing.’
She	shot	him	a	glance.	‘So	we	are	dead?’
‘I	think	so.’
‘Then	I	don’t	understand.	I	was	to	have	been	interred	in	a	crypt.	A	fine,
solid	crypt	–	I	saw	it	myself.	Richly	appointed	and	proof	against	thieves,	with
casks	of	wine	and	seasoned	meats	and	fruit	for	the	journey—’	She	gestured
down	at	the	rags	she	was	wearing.	‘I	was	to	be	dressed	in	my	finest	clothes,
wearing	all	my	jewellery.’
He	was	watching	her.	‘Wealthy,	then.’
‘Yes.’	She	looked	back	down	at	the	dead	dog	on	the	end	of	the	leash.
‘Not	any	more.’
She	glared	across	at	him,	then	realized	that	such	anger	was,	well,	pointless.
‘I	have	never	seen	this	town	before.	It	looks	to	be	falling	apart.’
‘Aye,	it’s	all	falling	apart.	You	have	that	right.’
‘I	don’t	know	where	I	live	–	oh,	that	sounds	odd,	doesn’t	it?’	She	looked
round	again.	‘It’s	all	dust	and	rot,	and	is	that	a	storm	coming?’	She	pointed
down	the	main	street	towards	the	horizon,	where	heavy,	strangely	luminous
clouds	now	gathered	above	denuded	hills.
They	stared	at	them	for	a	time.	The	clouds	seemed	to	be	raining	tears	of
jade.
‘I	was	once	a	priest,’	the	man	said,	as	his	dog	edged	up	against	his	feet	and
lay	there,	gasping,	with	blood	dripping	from	its	mouth.	‘Every	time	we	saw	a
storm	coming,	we	closed	our	eyes	and	sang	all	the	louder.’
She	regarded	him	in	some	surprise.	‘You	were	a	priest?	Then…why	are


you	not	with	your	god?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘If	I	knew	the	answer	to	that,	the	delusion	I	once
possessed	–	of	enlightenment	–	would	in	truth	be	mine.’	He	suddenly
straightened.	‘Look,	we	have	a	visitor.’
Approaching	with	a	hitched	gait	was	a	tall	figure,	so	desiccated	that	its
limbs	seemed	little	more	than	tree	roots,	its	face	naught	but	rotted,	weathered
skin	stretched	over	bone.	Long	grey	hair	drifted	out	unbound	from	a	pallid,
peeling	scalp.
‘I	suppose,’	the	woman	muttered,	‘I	need	to	get	used	to	such	sights.’
Her	companion	said	nothing,	and	they	both	watched	as	the	gaunt,	limping
creature	staggered	past,	and	as	they	turned	to	follow	its	progress	they	saw
another	stranger,	cloaked	in	frayed	dark	grey,	hooded,	of	a	height	to	match	the
other.
Neither	seemed	to	take	note	of	their	audience,	as	the	hooded	one	said,
‘Edgewalker.’
‘You	have	called	me	here,’	said	the	one	named	Edgewalker,	‘to…mitigate.’
‘I	have.’
‘This	has	been	a	long	time	in	coming.’
‘You	might	think	that	way,	Edgewalker.’
The	grey-haired	man	–	who	was	clearly	long	dead	–	cocked	his	head	and
asked,	‘Why	now?’
The	hooded	figure	turned	slightly,	and	the	woman	thought	he	might	be
looking	down	on	the	dead	dog.	‘Disgust,’	he	replied.
A	soft	rasping	laugh	from	Edgewalker.
‘What	ghastly	place	is	this?’	hissed	a	new	voice,	and	the	woman	saw	a
shape	–	no	more	than	a	smeared	blur	of	shadows	–	whisper	out	from	an	alley,
though	he	seemed	to	be	hobbling	on	a	cane,	and	all	at	once	there	were	huge
beasts,	two,	four,	five,	padding	out	around	the	newcomer.
A	grunt	from	the	priest	beside	the	woman.	‘Hounds	of	Shadow.	Could	my
god	but	witness	this!’
‘Perhaps	it	does,	through	your	eyes.’
‘Oh,	I	doubt	that.’
Edgewalker	and	his	hooded	companion	watched	the	shadowy	form
approach.	Short;	wavering,	then	growing	more	solid.	Black-stick	cane
thumping	on	the	dirt	street,	raising	puffs	of	dust.	The	Hounds	wandered	away,
heads	lowered	as	they	sniffed	the	ground.	None	approached	the	carcass	of	the
woman’s	dog,	nor	the	gasping	beast	at	the	feet	of	her	newfound	friend.
The	hooded	one	said,	‘Ghastly?	I	suppose	it	is.	A	necropolis	of	sorts,
Shadowthrone.	A	village	of	the	discarded.	Both	timeless	and,	yes,	useless.	Such


places,’	he	continued,	‘are	ubiquitous.’
‘Speak	for	yourself,’	said	Shadowthrone.	‘Look	at	us,	waiting.	Waiting.
Oh,	if	I	were	one	for	decorum	and	propriety!’	A	sudden	giggle.	‘If	any	of	us
were!’
All	at	once	the	Hounds	returned,	hackles	raised,	gazes	keen	on	something
far	up	the	main	street.
‘One	more,’	whispered	the	priest.	‘One	more	and	the	last,	yes.’
‘Will	all	this	happen	again?’	the	woman	asked	him,	as	sudden	fear	ripped
through	her.	Someone	is	coming.	Oh,	gods,	someone	is	coming.	‘Tomorrow?
Tell	me!’
‘I	would	imagine	not,’	the	priest	said	after	a	moment.	He	swung	his	gaze	to
the	dog	carcass	lying	in	the	dust.	‘No,’	he	said	again,	‘I	imagine	not.’
From	the	hills,	thunder	and	jade	rain	slashing	down	like	the	arrows	from
ten	thousand	battles.	From	down	the	street,	the	sudden	rumble	of	carriage
wheels.
She	turned	at	that	latter	sound	and	smiled.	‘Oh,’	she	said	in	relief,	‘here
comes	my	ride.’
	
He	had	once	been	a	wizard	of	Pale,	driven	by	desperation	into	betrayal.	But
Anomander	Rake	had	not	been	interested	in	desperation,	or	any	other	excuse
Ditch	and	his	comrades	might	have	proffered.	Betrayers	of	the	Son	of
Darkness	kissed	the	sword	Dragnipur,	and	somewhere	among	this	legion
toiling	in	the	perpetual	gloom	there	were	faces	he	would	recognize,	eyes	that
could	meet	his	own.	And	what	would	he	see	in	them?
Only	what	he	gave	back.	Desperation	was	not	enough.
These	were	rare	thoughts,	no	more	or	less	unwelcome	than	any	others,
mocking	him	as	in	their	freedom	they	drifted	in	and	out;	and	when	nowhere
close,	why,	they	perhaps	floated	through	alien	skies,	riding	warm	winds	soft	as
laughter.	What	could	not	escape	was	Ditch	himself	and	that	which	he	could	see
on	all	sides.	This	oily	mud	and	its	sharp	black	stones	that	cut	through	the	rotted
soles	of	his	boots;	the	deathly	damp	air	that	layered	a	grimy	film	upon	the	skin,
as	if	the	world	itself	was	fevered	and	slick	with	sweat.	The	faint	cries	–
strangely	ever	distant	to	Ditch’s	ears	–	and,	much	nearer,	the	groan	and	crunch
of	the	massive	engine	of	wood	and	bronze,	the	muted	squeal	of	chains.
Onward,	onward,	even	as	the	storm	behind	them	drew	closer,	cloud	piling
on	cloud,	silver	and	roiling	and	shot	through	with	twisting	spears	of	iron.	Ash
had	begun	to	rain	down	on	them,	unceasing	now,	each	flake	cold	as	snow,	yet
this	was	a	sludge	that	did	not	melt,	instead	churning	into	the	mud	until	it


seemed	they	walked	through	a	field	of	slag	and	tailings.
Although	a	wizard,	Ditch	was	neither	small	nor	frail.	There	was	a
roughness	to	him	that	had	made	others	think	of	thugs	and	alley-pouncers,	back
in	the	life	that	had	been	before.	His	features	were	heavy,	angular	and,	indeed,
brutish.	He	had	been	a	strong	man,	but	this	was	no	reward,	not	here,	not
chained	to	the	Burden.	Not	within	the	dark	soul	of	Dragnipur.
The	strain	was	unbearable,	yet	bear	it	he	did.	The	way	ahead	was	infinite,
screaming	of	madness,	yet	he	held	on	to	his	own	sanity	as	a	drowning	man
might	cling	to	a	frayed	rope,	and	he	dragged	himself	onward,	step	by	step.	Iron
shackles	made	his	limbs	weep	blood,	with	no	hope	of	surcease.	Figures	caked
in	mud	plodded	to	either	side,	and	beyond	them,	vague	in	the	gloom,	countless
others.
Was	there	comfort	in	shared	fate?	The	question	alone	invited	hysterical
laughter,	a	plunge	into	insanity’s	precious	oblivion.	No,	surely	there	was	no
such	comfort,	beyond	the	mutual	recognition	of	folly,	ill	luck	and	obstinate
stupidity,	and	these	traits	could	not	serve	camaraderie.	Besides,	one’s
companions	to	either	side	were	in	the	habit	of	changing	at	a	moment’s	notice,
one	hapless	fool	replacing	another	in	a	grainy,	blurred	swirl.
Heaving	on	the	chains,	to	keep	the	Burden	in	motion,	this	nightmarish
flight	left	no	energy,	no	time,	for	conversation.	And	so	Ditch	ignored	the	hand
buffeting	his	shoulder	the	first	time,	the	second	time.	The	third	time,	however,
was	hard	enough	to	send	the	wizard	staggering	to	one	side.	Swearing,	he
twisted	round	to	glare	at	the	one	now	walking	at	his	side.
Once,	long	ago,	he	might	have	flinched	back	upon	seeing	such	an
apparition.	His	heart	would	have	lurched	in	terror.
The	demon	was	huge,	hulking.	Its	once	royal	blood	availed	it	no	privilege
here	in	Dragnipur.	Ditch	saw	that	the	creature	was	carrying	the	fallen,	the
failed,	gathering	to	itself	a	score	or	more	bodies	and	the	chains	attached	to
them.	Muscles	strained,	bunched	and	twisted	as	the	demon	pulled	itself	forward.
Scrawny	bodies	hanging	limp,	crowded	like	cordwood	under	each	arm.	One,
still	conscious	though	her	head	lolled,	rode	its	broad	back	like	a	newborn	ape,
glazed	eyes	sliding	across	the	wizard’s	face.
‘You	fool,’	Ditch	snarled.	‘Throw	’em	into	the	bed!’
‘No	room,’	piped	the	demon	in	a	high,	childish	voice.
But	the	wizard	had	used	up	his	sympathy.	For	the	demon’s	sake,	it	should
have	left	the	fallen	behind,	but	then,	of	course,	they	would	all	feel	the	added
weight,	the	pathetic	drag	on	the	chains.	Still,	what	if	this	one	fell?	What	if	that
extraordinary	strength	and	will	gave	way?	‘Curse	the	fool!’	Ditch	growled.
‘Why	doesn’t	he	kill	a	few	more	dragons,	damn	him!’


‘We	fail,’	said	the	demon.
Ditch	wanted	to	howl	at	that.	Was	it	not	obvious	to	them	all?	But	that
quavering	voice	was	both	bemused	and	forlorn,	and	it	struck	through	to	his
heart.	‘I	know,	friend.	Not	long	now.’
‘And	then?’
Ditch	shook	his	head.	‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Who	does?’
Again	the	wizard	had	no	answer.
The	demon	persisted.	‘We	must	find	one	who	does.	I	am	going	now.	But	I
will	return.	Do	not	pity	me,	please.’
A	sudden	swirl,	grey	and	black,	and	now	some	bear-like	beast	was	beside
him,	too	weary,	too	mindless,	to	even	lunge	at	him	–	as	some	creatures	still
did.
‘You’ve	been	here	too	long,	friend,’	Ditch	said	to	it.
Who	does?
An	interesting	question.	Did	anyone	know	what	would	happen	when	the
chaos	caught	them?	Anyone	here	in	Dragnipur?
In	his	first	moments	following	his	kissing	the	sword,	in	between	his
frenzied	attempts	at	escape,	his	shrieks	of	despair,	he	had	flung	questions	at
everyone	–	why,	he’d	even	sought	to	accost	a	Hound,	but	it	had	been	too	busy
lunging	at	its	own	chains,	froth	fizzing	from	its	massive	jaws,	and	had	very
nearly	trampled	him,	and	he’d	never	seen	it	again.
But	someone	had	replied,	someone	had	spoken	to	him.	About	something…
oh,	he	could	not	recall	much	more	than	a	name.	A	single	name.
Draconus.
	
She	had	witnessed	many	things	in	this	interminable	interlude	in	her	career,	but
none	more	frustrating	than	the	escape	of	two	Hounds	of	Shadow.	It	was	not	for
one	such	as	Apsal’ara,	Lady	of	Thieves,	to	besmirch	her	existence	with	the
laborious	indignity	of	tugging	on	a	chain	for	all	eternity.	Shackles	were	to	be
escaped,	burdens	deftly	avoided.
From	the	moment	of	her	first	stumbling	arrival,	she	had	set	upon	herself
the	task	of	breaking	the	chains	binding	her	in	this	dread	realm,	but	this	task	was
virtually	impossible	if	one	were	cursed	to	ever	pull	the	damned	wagon.	And
she	had	no	desire	to	witness	again	the	horrible	train	at	the	very	end	of	the
chains,	the	abraded	lumps	of	still	living	meat	dragging	across	the	gouged
muddy	ground,	the	flash	of	an	open	eye,	a	flopping	nub	of	a	limb	straining
towards	her,	a	terrible	army	of	the	failed,	the	ones	who	surrendered	and	the


ones	whose	strength	gave	out.
No,	Apsal’ara	had	worked	her	way	closer	to	the	enormous	wagon,
eventually	finding	herself	trudging	beside	one	of	the	huge	wooden	wheels.
Then	she	had	lagged	in	her	pace	until	just	behind	that	wheel.	From	there,	she
moved	inward,	slipping	beneath	the	creaking	bed	with	its	incessant	rain	of
brown	water,	blood	and	the	wastes	that	came	of	rotting	but	still	living	flesh.
Dragging	the	chain	behind	her	she	had	worked	her	way	on	to	a	shelf	of	the
undercarriage,	just	above	the	front	axle,	wedging	herself	in	tight,	legs	drawn
up,	her	back	against	slimy	wood.
Fire	had	been	the	gift,	the	stolen	gift,	but	there	could	be	no	flame	in	this
sodden	underworld.	Failing	that,	there	was…friction.	She	had	begun	working
one	length	of	chain	across	another.
How	many	years	had	it	been?	She	had	no	idea.	There	was	no	hunger,	no
thirst.	The	chain	sawed	back	and	forth.	There	was	a	hint	of	heat,	climbing	link
by	link	and	into	her	hands.	Had	the	iron	softened?	Was	the	metal	worn	with
new,	silvery	grooves?	She	had	long	since	stopped	checking.	The	effort	was
enough.	For	so	long,	it	had	been	enough.
Until	those	damned	Hounds.
That,	and	the	inescapable	truth	that	the	wagon	had	slowed,	that	now	there
were	as	many	lying	on	its	bed	as	there	were	still	out	in	the	gloom	beyond,
heaving	desperate	on	their	chains.	She	could	hear	the	piteous	groans,	seeping
down	from	the	bed	directly	above	her,	of	those	trapped	beneath	the	weight	of
countless	others.
The	Hounds	had	thundered	against	the	sides	of	the	wagon.	The	Hounds	had
plunged	into	the	maw	of	darkness	at	the	very	centre.
There	had	been	a	stranger,	an	unchained	stranger.	Taunting	the	Hounds	–
the	Hounds!	She	remembered	his	face,	oh	yes,	his	face.	Even	after	he	had
vanished…
In	the	wake	of	all	that,	Apsal’ara	had	attempted	to	follow	the	beasts,	only	to
be	driven	back	by	the	immense	cold	of	that	portal	–	cold	so	fierce	it	destroyed
flesh,	colder	even	than	Omtose	Phellack.	The	cold	of	negation.	Denial.
No	greater	curse	than	hope.	A	lesser	creature	would	have	wept	then,	would
have	surrendered,	throwing	herself	beneath	one	of	the	wheels	to	be	left
dragging	in	the	wagon’s	wake,	nothing	more	than	one	more	piece	of	wreckage
of	crushed	bone	and	mangled	flesh,	scraping	and	tumbling	in	the	stony	mud.
Instead,	she	had	returned	to	her	private	perch,	resumed	working	the	chains.
She	had	stolen	the	moon	once.
She	had	stolen	fire.
She	had	padded	the	silent	arching	halls	of	the	city	within	Moon’s	Spawn.


She	was	the	Lady	of	Thieves.
And	a	sword	had	stolen	her	life.
This	will	not	do.	This	will	not	do.
	
Lying	in	its	usual	place	on	the	flat	rock	beside	the	stream,	the	mangy	dog	lifted
its	head,	the	motion	stirring	insects	into	buzzing	flight.	A	moment	later,	the
beast	rose.	Scars	covered	its	back,	some	deep	enough	to	twist	the	muscles
beneath.	The	dog	lived	in	the	village	but	was	not	of	it.	Nor	was	the	animal	one
among	the	village’s	pack.	It	did	not	sleep	outside	the	entrance	to	any	hut;	it
allowed	no	one	to	come	close.	Even	the	tribe’s	horses	would	not	draw	near	it.
There	was,	it	was	agreed,	a	deep	bitterness	in	its	eyes,	and	an	even	deeper
sorrow.	God-touched,	the	Uryd	elders	said,	and	this	claim	ensured	that	the	dog
would	never	starve	and	would	never	be	driven	away.	It	would	be	tolerated,	in
the	manner	of	all	things	god-touched.
Surprisingly	lithe	despite	its	mangled	hip,	the	dog	now	trotted	through	the
village,	down	the	length	of	the	main	avenue.	When	it	came	to	the	south	end,	it
kept	on	going,	downslope,	wending	through	the	moss-backed	boulders	and	the
bone-piles	that	marked	the	refuse	of	the	Uryd.
Its	departure	was	noted	by	two	girls	still	a	year	or	more	from	their	nights
of	passage	into	adulthood.	There	was	a	similarity	to	their	features,	and	in	their
ages	they	were	a	close	match,	the	times	of	their	births	mere	days	apart.	Neither
could	be	said	to	be	loquacious.	They	shared	the	silent	language	common
among	twins,	although	they	were	not	twins,	and	it	seemed	that,	for	them,	this
language	was	enough.	And	so,	upon	seeing	the	dog	leave	the	village,	they
exchanged	a	glance,	set	about	gathering	what	supplies	and	weapons	were	near
at	hand,	and	then	set	out	on	the	beast’s	trail.
Their	departure	was	noted,	but	that	was	all.
South,	down	from	the	great	mountains	of	home,	where	condors	wheeled
between	the	peaks	and	wolves	howled	when	the	winter	winds	came.
South,	towards	the	lands	of	the	hated	children	of	the	Nathii,	where	dwelt	the
bringers	of	war	and	pestilence,	the	slayers	and	enslavers	of	the	Teblor.	Where
the	Nathii	bred	like	lemmings	until	it	seemed	there	would	be	no	place	left	in	the
world	for	anyone	or	anything	but	them.
Like	the	dog,	the	two	girls	were	fearless	and	resolute.	Though	they	did	not
know	it,	such	traits	came	from	their	father,	whom	they	had	never	met.
The	dog	did	not	look	back,	and	when	the	girls	caught	up	to	it	the	beast
maintained	its	indifference.	It	was,	as	the	elders	had	said,	god-touched.
Back	in	the	village,	a	mother	and	daughter	were	told	of	the	flight	of	their


children.	The	daughter	wept.	The	mother	did	not.	Instead,	there	was	heat	in	a
low	place	of	her	body,	and,	for	a	time,	she	was	lost	in	remembrances.
	
‘Oh	frail	city,	where	strangers	arrive…’
An	empty	plain	beneath	an	empty	night	sky.	A	lone	fire,	so	weak	as	to	be
nearly	swallowed	by	the	blackened,	cracked	stones	encircling	it.	Seated	on	one
of	the	two	flat	stones	close	to	the	hearth,	a	short,	round	man	with	sparse,
greasy	hair.	Faded	red	waistcoat,	over	a	linen	shirt	with	stained	once-white
blousy	cuffs	erupting	around	the	pudgy	hands.	The	round	face	was	flushed,
reflecting	the	flickering	flames.	From	the	small	knuckled	chin	dangled	long
black	hairs	–	not	enough	to	braid,	alas	–	a	new	affectation	he	had	taken	to
twirling	and	stroking	when	deep	in	thought,	or	even	shallowly	so.	Indeed,	when
not	thinking	at	all,	but	wishing	to	convey	an	impression	of	serious	cogitation,
should	anyone	regard	him	thoughtfully.
He	stroked	and	twirled	now	as	he	frowned	down	into	the	fire	before	him.
What	had	that	grey-haired	bard	sung?	There	on	the	modest	stage	in	K’rul’s
Bar	earlier	in	the	night,	when	he	had	watched	on,	content	with	his	place	in	the
glorious	city	he	had	saved	more	than	once?
‘Oh	frail	city,	where	strangers	arrive…’
‘I	need	to	tell	you	something,	Kruppe.’
The	round	man	glanced	up	to	find	a	shrouded	figure	seated	on	the	other
flat	stone,	reaching	thin	pale	hands	out	to	the	flames.	Kruppe	cleared	his	throat,
then	said,	‘It	has	been	a	long	time	since	Kruppe	last	found	himself	perched	as
you	see	him	now.	Accordingly,	Kruppe	had	long	since	concluded	that	you
wished	to	tell	him	something	of	such	vast	import	that	none	but	Kruppe	is
worthy	to	hear.’
A	faint	glitter	from	the	darkness	within	the	hood.	‘I	am	not	in	this	war.’
Kruppe	stroked	the	rat-tails	of	his	beard,	delighting	himself	by	saying
nothing.
‘This	surprises	you?’	the	Elder	God	asked.
‘Kruppe	ever	expects	the	unexpected,	old	friend.	Why,	could	you	ever
expect	otherwise?	Kruppe	is	shocked.	Yet,	a	thought	arrives,	launched
brainward	by	a	tug	on	this	handsome	beard.	K’rul	states	he	is	not	in	the	war.
Yet,	Kruppe	suspects,	he	is	nevertheless	its	prize.’
‘Only	you	understand	this,	my	friend,’	the	Elder	God	said,	sighing.	Then
cocked	its	head.	‘I	had	not	noticed	before,	but	you	seem	sad.’
‘Sadness	has	many	flavours,	and	it	seems	Kruppe	has	tasted	them	all.’
‘Will	you	speak	now	of	such	matters?	I	am,	I	believe,	a	good	listener.’


‘Kruppe	sees	that	you	are	sorely	beset.	Perhaps	now	is	not	the	time.’
‘That	is	no	matter.’
‘It	is	to	Kruppe.’
K’rul	glanced	to	one	side,	and	saw	a	figure	approaching,	grey-haired,
gaunt.
Kruppe	sang,	‘“Oh	frail	city,	where	strangers	arrive”…and	the	rest?’
The	newcomer	answered	in	a	deep	voice,	‘“…pushing	into	cracks,	there	to
abide.”’
And	the	Elder	God	sighed.
‘Join	us,	friend,’	said	Kruppe.	‘Sit	here	by	this	fire:	this	scene	paints	the
history	of	our	kind,	as	you	well	know.	A	night,	a	hearth,	and	a	tale	to	spin.	Dear
K’rul,	dearest	friend	of	Kruppe,	hast	thou	ever	seen	Kruppe	dance?’
The	stranger	sat.	A	wan	face,	an	expression	of	sorrow	and	pain.
‘No,’	said	K’rul.	‘I	think	not.	Not	by	limb,	not	by	word.’
Kruppe’s	smile	was	muted,	and	something	glistened	in	his	eyes.	‘Then,	my
friends,	settle	yourselves	for	this	night.	And	witness.’


Book	One

Vow	to	the	Sun


	

This	creature	of	words	cuts
To	the	quick	and	gasp,	dart	away
The	spray	of	red	rain
Beneath	a	clear	blue	sky
Shock	at	all	that	is	revealed
What	use	now	this	armour
When	words	so	easy	slant	between?
This	god	of	promises	laughs
At	the	wrong	things,	wrongly	timed
Unmaking	all	these	sacrifices
In	deliberate	malice
Recoil	like	a	soldier	routed
Even	as	retreat	is	denied
Before	corpses	heaped	high	in	walls
You	knew	this	would	come
At	last	and	feign	nothing,	no	surprise
To	find	this	cup	filled
With	someone	else’s	pain
It’s	never	as	bad	as	it	seems
The	taste	sweeter	than	expected
When	you	squat	in	a	fool’s	dream
So	take	this	belligerence
Where	you	will,	the	dogged	cur
Is	the	charge	of	my	soul
To	the	centre	of	the	street
Spinning	round	all	fangs	bared
Snapping	at	thirsty	spears
Thrust	cold	and	purged	of	your	hands
Hunting	Words


Brathos	of	Black	Coral
	


Chapter	One

Oh	frail	city!
Where	strangers	arrive
Pushing	into	cracks
There	to	abide
Oh	blue	city!
Old	friends	gather	sighs
At	the	foot	of	docks
After	the	tide
Uncrowned	city!
Where	sparrows	alight
In	spider	tracks
On	sills	well	high
Doomed	city!
Closing	comes	the	night
History	awakens
Here	to	abide
Frail	Age
Fisher	kel	Tath

Surrounded	in	a	city	of	blue	fire,	she	stood	alone	on	the	balcony.	The	sky’s
darkness	was	pushed	away,	an	unwelcome	guest	on	this	the	first	night	of	the
Gedderone	Fete.	Throngs	filled	the	streets	of	Darujhistan,	happily	riotous,
good-natured	in	the	calamity	of	one	year ’s	ending	and	another ’s	beginning.
The	night	air	was	humid	and	pungent	with	countless	scents.
There	had	been	banquets.	There	had	been	unveilings	of	eligible	young	men
and	maidens.	Tables	laden	with	exotic	foods,	ladies	wrapped	in	silks,	men	and


women	in	preposterous	uniforms	all	glittering	gilt	–	a	city	with	no	standing
army	bred	a	plethora	of	private	militias	and	a	chaotic	proliferation	of	high
ranks	held,	more	or	less	exclusively,	by	the	nobility.
Among	the	celebrations	she	had	attended	this	evening,	on	the	arm	of	her
husband,	she	had	not	once	seen	a	real	officer	of	Darujhistan’s	City	Watch,	not
one	genuine	soldier	with	a	dusty	cloak-hem,	with	polished	boots	bearing	scars,
with	a	sword-grip	of	plain	leather	and	a	pommel	gouged	and	burnished	by
wear.	Yet	she	had	seen,	bound	high	on	soft,	well-fed	arms,	torcs	in	the	manner
of	decorated	soldiers	among	the	Malazan	army	–	soldiers	from	an	empire	that
had,	not	so	long	ago,	provided	for	Darujhistan	mothers	chilling	threats	to
belligerent	children.	‘Malazans,	child!	Skulking	in	the	night	to	steal	foolish
children!	To	make	you	slaves	for	their	terrible	Empress	–	yes!	Here	in	this	very
city!’
But	the	torcs	she	had	seen	this	night	were	not	the	plain	bronze	or	faintly
etched	silver	of	genuine	Malazan	decorations	and	signifiers	of	rank,	such	as
appeared	like	relics	from	some	long-dead	cult	in	the	city’s	market	stalls.	No,
these	had	been	gold,	studded	with	gems,	the	blue	of	sapphire	being	the
commonest	hue	even	among	the	coloured	glass,	blue	like	the	blue	fire	for
which	the	city	was	famous,	blue	to	proclaim	some	great	and	brave	service	to
Darujhistan	itself.
Her	fingers	had	pressed	upon	one	such	torc,	there	on	her	husband’s	arm,
although	there	was	real	muscle	beneath	it,	a	hardness	to	match	the
contemptuous	look	in	his	eyes	as	he	surveyed	the	clusters	of	nobility	in	the	vast
humming	hall,	with	the	proprietary	air	he	had	acquired	since	attaining	the
Council.	The	contempt	had	been	there	long	before	and	if	anything	had	grown
since	his	latest	and	most	triumphant	victory.
Daru	gestures	of	congratulation	and	respect	had	swirled	round	them	in
their	stately	passage	through	the	crowds,	and	with	each	acknowledgement	her
husband’s	face	had	grown	yet	harder,	the	arm	beneath	her	fingers	drawing	ever
tauter,	the	knuckles	of	his	hands	whitening	above	his	sword-belt	where	the
thumbs	were	tucked	into	braided	loops	in	the	latest	fashion	among	duellists.
Oh,	he	revelled	in	being	among	them	now;	indeed,	in	being	above	many	of
them.	But	for	Gorlas	Vidikas,	this	did	not	mean	he	had	to	like	any	of	them.	The
more	they	fawned,	the	deeper	his	contempt,	and	that	he	would	have	been
offended	without	their	obsequy	was	a	contradiction,	she	suspected,	that	a	man
like	her	husband	was	not	wont	to	entertain.
The	nobles	had	eaten	and	drunk,	and	stood	and	posed	and	wandered	and
paraded	and	danced	themselves	into	swift	exhaustion,	and	now	the	banquet
halls	and	staterooms	echoed	with	naught	but	the	desultory	ministrations	of


servants.	Beyond	the	high	walls	of	the	estates,	however,	the	common	folk
rollicked	still	in	the	streets.	Masked	and	half	naked,	they	danced	on	the	cobbles
–	the	riotous	whirling	steps	of	the	Flaying	of	Fander	–	as	if	dawn	would	never
come,	as	if	the	hazy	moon	itself	would	stand	motionless	in	the	abyss	in
astonished	witness	to	their	revelry.	City	Watch	patrols	simply	stood	back	and
observed,	drawing	dusty	cloaks	about	their	bodies,	gauntlets	rustling	as	they
rested	hands	on	truncheons	and	swords.
Directly	below	the	balcony	where	she	stood,	the	fountain	of	the	unlit
garden	chirped	and	gurgled	to	itself,	buffered	by	the	estate’s	high,	solid	walls
from	the	raucous	festivities	they	had	witnessed	during	the	tortured	carriage
ride	back	home.	Smeared	moonlight	struggled	in	the	softly	swirling	pool
surrounding	the	fountain.
The	blue	fire	was	too	strong	this	night,	too	strong	even	for	the	mournful
moon.	Darujhistan	itself	was	a	sapphire,	blazing	in	the	torc	of	the	world.
And	yet	its	beauty,	and	all	its	delighted	pride	and	its	multitudinous	voice,
could	not	reach	her	tonight.
This	night,	Lady	Vidikas	had	seen	her	future.	Each	and	every	year	of	it.
There	on	her	husband’s	hard	arm.	And	the	moon,	well,	it	looked	like	a	thing	of
the	past,	a	memory	dimmed	by	time,	yet	it	had	taken	her	back.
To	a	balcony	much	like	this	one	in	a	time	that	now	seemed	very	long	ago.
Lady	Vidikas,	who	had	once	been	Challice	Estraysian,	had	just	seen	her
future.	And	was	discovering,	here	in	this	night	and	standing	against	this	rail,
that	the	past	was	a	better	place	to	be.
	
Talk	about	the	worst	night	yet	to	run	out	of	Rhivi	flatbread.	Swearing	under	her
breath,	Picker	pushed	her	way	through	the	crowds	of	the	Lakefront	market,	the
mobs	of	ferociously	hungry,	drunk	revellers,	using	her	elbows	when	she
needed	to	and	glowering	at	every	delirious	smile	swung	her	way,	and	came	out
eventually	at	the	mouth	of	a	dingy	alley	heaped	ankle-deep	in	rubbish.
Somewhere	just	to	the	south	of	Borthen	Park.	Not	quite	the	route	back	to	the
bar	she	would	have	preferred,	but	the	fête	was	in	full	frenzy.
Wrapped	package	of	flatbread	tucked	under	her	left	arm,	she	paused	to	tug
loose	the	tangles	of	her	heavy	cloak,	scowled	on	seeing	a	fresh	stain	from	a
careless	passer-by	–	some	grotesque	Gadrobi	sweetcake	–	tried	wiping	it	off
which	only	made	it	worse,	then,	her	mood	even	fouler,	set	out	through	the
detritus.
With	the	Lady’s	pull,	Bluepearl	and	Antsy	had	no	doubt	fared	better	in
finding	Saltoan	wine	and	were	probably	even	now	back	at	K’rul’s.	And	here


she	was,	twelve	streets	and	two	wall	passages	away	with	twenty	or	thirty
thousand	mad	fools	in	between.	Would	her	companions	wait	for	her?	Not	a
chance.	Damn	Blend	and	her	addiction	to	Rhivi	flatbread!	That	and	her
sprained	ankle	had	conspired	to	force	Picker	out	here	on	the	first	night	of	the
fête	–	if	that	ankle	truly	was	sprained,	and	she	had	her	doubts	since	Mallet	had
just	squinted	down	at	the	offending	appendage,	then	shrugged.
Mind	you,	that	was	about	as	much	as	anyone	had	come	to	expect	from
Mallet.	He’d	been	miserable	since	the	retirement,	and	the	chance	of	the	sun’s
rising	any	time	in	the	healer ’s	future	was	about	as	likely	as	Hood’s	forgetting
to	tally	the	count.	And	it	wasn’t	as	if	he	was	alone	in	his	misery,	was	it?
But	where	was	the	value	in	feeding	her	ill	temper	with	all	these	wellchewed	thoughts?
Well,	it	made	her	feel	better,	that’s	what.
	
Dester	Thrin,	wrapped	tight	in	black	cloak	and	hood,	watched	the	big-arsed
woman	kicking	her	way	through	the	rubbish	at	the	other	end	of	the	alley.	He’d
picked	her	up	coming	out	of	the	back	door	of	K’rul’s	Bar,	the	culmination	of
four	nights	positioned	in	the	carefully	chosen,	darkness-shrouded	vantage
point	from	which	he	could	observe	that	narrow	postern.
His	clan-master	had	warned	that	the	targets	were	all	ex-soldiers,	but	Dester
Thrin	had	seen	little	to	suggest	that	any	of	them	had	kept	fit	and	trim.	They
were	old,	sagging,	rarely	sober,	and	this	one,	well,	she	wore	that	huge,	thick
woollen	cloak	because	she	was	getting	heavy	and	it	clearly	made	her	selfconscious.
Following	her	through	the	crowds	had	been	relatively	easy	–	she	was	a
head	taller	than	the	average	Gadrobi,	and	the	route	she	took	to	this	decrepit
Rhivi	market	in	Lakefront	seemed	to	deliberately	avoid	the	Daru	streets,	some
strange	affectation	that	would,	in	a	very	short	time,	prove	fatal.
Dester ’s	own	Daru	blood	had	permitted	him	a	clear	view	of	his	target,
pushing	purposefully	through	the	heaving	press	of	celebrants.
He	set	out	to	traverse	the	alley	once	his	target	exited	at	the	far	end.	Swiftly
padding	at	a	hunter ’s	pace,	he	reached	the	alley	mouth	and	edged	out,	in	time	to
see	the	woman	move	into	the	passageway	through	Second	Tier	Wall,	with	the
tunnel	through	Third	just	beyond.
The	Guild’s	succession	wars,	following	the	disappearance	of	Vorcan,	had
finally	been	settled,	with	only	a	minimum	amount	of	spilled	blood.	And	Dester
was	more	or	less	pleased	with	the	new	Grand	Master,	who	was	both	vicious
and	clever	where	most	of	the	other	aspirants	had	been	simply	vicious.	At	last,


an	assassin	of	the	Guild	did	not	have	to	be	a	fool	to	feel	some	optimism
regarding	the	future.
This	contract	was	a	case	in	point.	Straightforward,	yet	one	sure	to	earn
Dester	and	the	others	of	his	clan	considerable	prestige	upon	its	summary
completion.
He	brushed	his	gloved	hands	across	the	pommels	of	his	daggers,	the
weapons	slung	on	baldrics	beneath	his	arms.	Ever	reassuring,	those	twin	blades
of	Daru	steel	with	their	ferules	filled	with	the	thick,	pasty	poison	of	Moranth
tralb.
Poison	was	now	the	preferred	insurance	for	a	majority	of	the	Guild’s	street
killers,	and	indeed	for	more	than	a	few	who	scuttled	Thieves’	Road	across	the
rooftops.	There’d	been	an	assassin,	close	to	Vorcan	herself,	who	had,	on	a
night	of	betrayal	against	his	own	clan,	demonstrated	the	deadliness	of	fighting
without	magic.	Using	poison,	the	assassin	had	proved	the	superiority	of	such
mundane	substances	in	a	single,	now	legendary	night	of	blood.
Dester	had	heard	that	some	initiates	in	some	clans	had	raised	hidden
shrines	to	honour	Rallick	Nom,	creating	a	kind	of	cult	whose	adherents
employed	secret	gestures	of	mutual	recognition	within	the	Guild.	Of	course,
Seba	Krafar,	the	new	Grand	Master,	had	in	one	of	his	very	first
pronouncements	outlawed	the	cult,	and	there	had	been	a	cull	of	sorts,	with	five
suspected	cult	leaders	greeting	the	dawn	with	smiling	throats.
Still,	Dester	had	since	heard	enough	hints	to	suggest	that	the	cult	was	far
from	dead.	It	had	just	burrowed	deeper.
In	truth,	no	one	knew	which	poisons	Rallick	Nom	had	used,	but	Dester
believed	it	was	Moranth	tralb,	since	even	the	smallest	amount	in	the
bloodstream	brought	unconsciousness,	then	a	deeper	coma	that	usually	led	to
death.	Larger	quantities	simply	speeded	up	the	process	and	were	a	sure	path
through	Hood’s	Gate.
The	big-arsed	woman	lumbered	on.
Four	streets	from	K’rul’s	Bar	–	if	she	was	taking	the	route	he	believed	she
was	taking	–	there’d	be	a	long,	narrow	alley	to	walk	up,	the	inside	face	of
Third	Tier	Wall	Armoury	on	the	left,	and	on	the	right	the	high	wall	of	the	bathhouse	thick	and	solid	with	but	a	few	scattered,	small	windows	on	upper	floors,
making	the	unlit	passage	dark.
He	would	kill	her	there.
	
Perched	on	a	corner	post’s	finial	at	one	end	of	the	high	wall,	Chillbais	stared
with	stony	eyes	on	the	tattered	wilds	beyond.	Behind	him	was	an	overgrown


garden	with	a	shallow	pond	recently	rebuilt	but	already	unkempt,	and	toppled
columns	scattered	about,	bearded	in	moss.	Before	him,	twisted	trees	and
straggly	branches	with	crumpled	dark	leaves	dangling	like	insect	carcasses,	the
ground	beneath	rumpled	and	matted	with	greasy	grasses;	a	snaking	path	of
tilted	pavestones	leading	up	to	a	squat,	brooding	house	bearing	no	architectural
similarity	to	any	other	edifice	in	all	of	Darujhistan.
Light	was	rare	from	the	cracks	between	those	knotted	shutters,	and	when	it
did	show	it	was	dull,	desultory.	The	door	never	opened.
Among	his	kin,	Chillbais	was	a	giant.	Heavy	as	a	badger,	with	sculpted
muscles	beneath	the	prickly	hide.	His	folded	wings	were	very	nearly	too	small
to	lift	him	skyward,	and	each	sweep	of	those	leathery	fans	forced	a	grunt	from
the	demon’s	throat.
This	time	would	be	worse	than	most.	It	had	been	months	since	he’d	last
moved,	hidden	as	he	was	from	prying	eyes	in	the	gloom	of	an	overhanging
branch	from	the	ash	tree	in	the	estate	garden	at	his	back.	But	when	he	saw	that
flash	of	movement	before	him,	that	whispering	flow	of	motion,	out	from	the
gnarled,	black	house	and	across	the	path,	even	as	earth	erupted	in	its	wake	to
open	a	succession	of	hungry	pits,	even	as	roots	writhed	out	seeking	to	ensnare
this	fugitive,	Chillbais	knew	his	vigil	was	at	an	end.
The	shadow	slid	out	to	crouch	against	the	low	wall	of	the	Azath	House,
seemed	to	watch	those	roots	snaking	closer	for	a	long	moment,	then	rose	and,
flowing	like	liquid	night	over	the	stone	wall,	was	gone.
Grunting,	Chillbais	spread	his	creaking	wings,	shook	the	creases	loose
from	the	sheets	of	membrane	between	the	rib-like	fingers,	then	leapt	forward,
out	from	beneath	the	branch,	catching	what	air	he	could,	then	flapping
frenziedly	–	his	grunts	growing	savage	–	until	he	slammed	hard	into	the
mulched	ground.
Spitting	twigs	and	leaves,	the	demon	scrambled	back	for	the	estate	wall,
hearing	how	those	roots	spun	round,	lashing	out	for	him.	Claws	digging	into
mortar,	Chillbais	scrabbled	back	on	to	his	original	perch.	Of	course,	there	had
been	no	real	reason	to	fear.	The	roots	never	reached	beyond	the	Azath’s	own
wall,	and	a	glance	back	assured	him—
Squealing,	Chillbais	launched	back	into	the	air,	this	time	out	over	the	estate
garden.
Oh,	no	one	ever	liked	demons!
Cool	air	above	the	overgrown	fountain,	then,	wings	thudding	hard,
heaving	upward,	up	into	the	night.
A	word,	yes,	for	his	master.	A	most	extraordinary	word.	So	unexpected,	so
incendiary,	so	fraught!


Chillbais	thumped	his	wings	as	hard	as	he	could,	an	obese	demon	in	the
darkness	above	the	blue,	blue	city.

Zechan	Throw	and	Giddyn	the	Quick	had	found	the	perfect	place	for	the
ambush.	Twenty	paces	down	a	narrow	street	two	recessed	doorways	faced	each
other.	Four	drunks	had	staggered	past	a	few	moments	earlier,	and	none	had
seen	the	assassins	standing	motionless	in	the	inky	darkness.	And	now	that	they
were	past	and	the	way	was	clear…a	simple	step	forward	and	blood	would	flow.
The	two	targets	approached.	Both	carried	clay	jugs	and	were	weaving
slightly.	They	seemed	to	be	arguing,	but	not	in	a	language	Zechan	understood.
Malazan,	likely.	A	quick	glance	to	the	left.	The	four	drunks	were	just	leaving
the	far	end,	plunging	into	a	motley	crowd	of	revellers.
Zechan	and	Giddyn	had	followed	the	two	out	from	K’rul’s	Bar,	watching
on	as	they	found	a	wine	merchant,	haggled	over	what	the	woman	demanded	for
the	jugs	of	wine,	settled	on	a	price,	then	set	out	on	their	return	leg	of	the
journey.
Somewhere	along	the	way	they	must	have	pulled	the	stoppers	on	the	jugs,
for	now	they	were	loud	in	their	argument,	the	slightly	taller	one,	who	walked
pigeon-toed	and	was	blue-skinned	–	Zechan	could	just	make	him	out	from
where	he	stood	–	pausing	to	lean	against	a	wall	as	if	moments	from	losing	his
supper.
He	soon	righted	himself,	and	it	seemed	the	argument	was	suddenly	over.
Straightening,	the	taller	one	joined	the	other	and,	from	the	sounds	of	their
boots	in	the	rubbish,	set	out	by	his	side.
Simply	perfect.
Nothing	messy,	nothing	at	all	messy.	Zechan	lived	for	nights	like	this.
	
Dester	moved	quickly,	his	moccasins	noiseless	on	the	cobbles,	rushing	for	the
woman	striding	oblivious	ahead	of	him.	Twelve	paces,	eight,	four—
She	spun,	cloak	whirling	out.
A	blurred	sliver	of	blued	steel,	flickering	a	slashing	arc.	Dester	skidded,
seeking	to	pull	back	from	the	path	of	that	weapon	–	a	longsword,	Beru	fend!	–
and	something	clipped	his	throat.	He	twisted	and	ducked	down	to	his	left,	both
daggers	thrust	out	to	ward	her	off	should	she	seek	to	close.
A	longsword!
Heat	was	spilling	down	his	neck,	down	his	chest	beneath	his	deerhide	shirt.


The	alley	seemed	to	waver	before	his	eyes,	darkness	curling	in.	Dester	Thrin
staggered,	flailing	with	his	daggers.	A	boot	or	mailed	fist	slammed	into	the
side	of	his	head	and	there	was	more	splashing	on	to	the	cobbles.	He	could	no
longer	grip	the	daggers.	He	heard	them	skitter	on	stone.
Blind,	stunned,	lying	on	the	hard	ground.	It	was	cold.
A	strange	lassitude	filled	his	thoughts,	spreading	out,	rising	up,	taking	him
away.
	
Picker	stood	over	the	corpse.	The	red	smear	on	the	tip	of	her	sword	glistened,
drawing	her	gaze,	and	she	was	reminded,	oddly	enough,	of	poppies	after	a
rain.	She	grunted.	The	bastard	had	been	quick,	almost	quick	enough	to	evade
her	slash.	Had	he	done	so,	she	might	have	had	some	work	to	do.	Still,	unless
the	fool	was	skilled	in	throwing	those	puny	daggers,	she	would	have	cut	him
down	eventually.
Pushing	through	Gadrobi	crowds	risked	little	more	than	cut-purses.	As	a
people	they	were	singularly	gentle.	In	any	case,	it	made	such	things	as	picking
up	someone	trailing	her	that	much	easier	–	when	that	someone	wasn’t	Gadrobi,
of	course.
The	man	dead	at	her	feet	was	Daru.	Might	as	well	have	worn	a	lantern	on
his	hooded	head,	the	way	it	bobbed	above	the	crowd	in	her	wake.
Even	so…she	frowned	down	at	him.	You	wasn’t	no	thug.	Not	with	daggers
like	those.
Hound’s	Breath.
Sheathing	her	sword	and	pulling	her	cloak	about	her	once	more,	ensuring
that	it	well	hid	the	scabbarded	weapon	which,	if	discovered	by	a	Watch,	would
see	her	in	a	cell	with	a	damned	huge	fine	to	pay,	Picker	pushed	the	wrapped
stack	of	flatbread	tighter	under	her	left	arm,	then	set	out	once	more.
Blend,	she	decided,	was	in	a	lot	of	trouble.
	
Zechan	and	Giddyn,	in	perfect	unison,	launched	themselves	out	from	the
alcoves,	daggers	raised	then	thrusting	down.
A	yelp	from	the	taller	one	as	Giddyn’s	blades	plunged	deep.	The	Malazan’s
knees	buckled	and	vomit	sprayed	from	his	mouth	as	he	sank	down,	the	jug
crashing	to	a	rush	of	wine.
Zechan’s	own	weapons	punched	through	leather,	edges	grating	along	ribs.
One	for	each	lung.	Tearing	the	daggers	loose,	the	assassin	stepped	back	to


watch	the	red-haired	one	fall.
A	shortsword	plunged	into	the	side	of	Zechan’s	neck.
He	was	dead	before	he	hit	the	cobbles.
Giddyn,	looming	over	the	kneeling	Malazan,	looked	up.
Two	hands	closed	round	his	head.	One	clamped	tight	over	his	mouth,	and
all	at	once	his	lungs	were	full	of	water.	He	was	drowning.	The	hand	tightened,
fingers	pinching	his	nostrils	shut.	Darkness	rose	within	him,	and	the	world
slowly	went	away.
	
Antsy	snorted	as	he	tugged	his	weapon	free,	then	added	a	kick	to	the	assassin’s
face	to	punctuate	its	frozen	expression	of	surprise.
Bluepearl	grinned	across	at	him.	‘See	the	way	I	made	the	puke	spray	out?	If
that	ain’t	genius	I	don’t	know	what—’
‘Shut	up,’	Antsy	snapped.	‘These	weren’t	muggers	looking	for	a	free
drink,	in	case	you	hadn’t	noticed.’
Frowning,	Bluepearl	looked	down	at	the	body	before	him	with	the	water
leaking	from	its	mouth	and	nose.	The	Napan	ran	a	hand	over	his	shaved	pate.
‘Aye.	But	they	was	amateurs	anyway.	Hood,	we	saw	those	breath	plumes	from
halfway	down	the	street.	Which	stopped	when	those	drunks	crossed,	telling	us
they	wasn’t	the	target.	Meaning—’
‘We	were.	Aye,	and	that’s	my	point.’
‘Let’s	get	back,’	Bluepearl	said,	suddenly	nervous.
Antsy	tugged	at	his	moustache,	then	nodded.	‘Work	up	that	illusion	again,
Bluepearl.	Us	ten	paces	ahead.’
‘Easy,	Sergeant—’
‘I	ain’t	no	sergeant	no	more.’
‘Yeah?	Then	why	you	still	barking	orders?’
	
By	the	time	Picker	arrived	within	sight	of	the	front	entrance	to	K’rul’s	Bar,	her
rage	was	incandescent.	She	paused,	scanned	the	area.	Spotted	someone	leaning
in	shadows	across	from	the	bar ’s	door.	Hood	drawn	up,	hands	hidden.
Picker	set	off	towards	the	figure.
She	was	noticed	with	ten	paces	between	them,	and	she	saw	the	man
straighten,	saw	the	growing	unease	betrayed	by	a	shift	of	those	covered	arms,
the	cloak	rippling.	A	half-dozen	celebrants	careened	between	them,	and	as	they
passed	Picker	took	the	last	stride	needed	to	reach	the	man.


Whatever	he	had	been	expecting	–	perhaps	her	accosting	him	with	some
loud	accusation	–	it	was	clear	that	he	was	unprepared	for	the	savage	kick	she
delivered	between	his	legs.	As	he	was	going	down	she	stepped	closer	and
slapped	her	right	hand	against	the	back	of	his	head,	adding	momentum	to	the
man’s	collapse.	When	his	forehead	cracked	against	the	cobbles	there	was	a
sickly	crunch.	The	body	began	to	spasm	where	it	lay.
A	passer-by	paused,	peered	down	at	the	twitching	body.
‘You!’	Picker	snarled.	‘What’s	your	damned	problem?’
Surprise,	then	a	shrug.	‘Nothing,	sweetie.	Served	’im	right,	standin’	there
like	that.	Say,	would	you	marry	me?’
‘Go	away.’
As	the	stranger	ambled	on,	bemoaning	his	failure	at	love,	Picker	looked
around,	waiting	to	see	if	there	was	someone	else	bolting	from	some	hidden
place	nearby.	If	it	had	already	happened,	then	she	had	missed	it.	More	likely,	the
unseen	eyes	watching	all	of	this	were	peering	down	from	a	rooftop
somewhere.
The	man	on	the	ground	had	stopped	twitching.
Spinning	round,	she	headed	for	the	entrance	to	K’rul’s	Bar.
‘Pick!’
Two	strides	from	the	battered	door,	she	turned,	and	saw	Antsy	and
Bluepearl	–	lugging	jugs	of	Saltoan	wine	–	hurrying	up	to	join	her.	Antsy’s
expression	was	fierce.	Bluepearl	lagged	half	a	step	behind,	eyes	on	the
motionless	body	on	the	other	side	of	the	street,	where	a	Gadrobi	urchin	was
now	busy	stealing	whatever	she	could	find.
‘Get	over	here,’	Picker	snapped,	‘both	of	you!	Keep	your	eyes	open.’
‘Shopping’s	gettin’	murderous,’	Antsy	said.	‘Bluepearl	had	us	illusioned
most	of	the	way	back,	after	we	sniffed	out	an	ambush—’
With	one	last	glare	back	out	on	to	the	street,	Picker	took	them	both	by	their
arms	and	pulled	them	unceremoniously	towards	the	door.	‘Inside,	idiots.’
Unbelievable,	a	night	like	this,	making	me	so	foul	of	temper	I	went	and
turned	down	the	first	decent	marriage	proposal	I’ve	had	in	twenty	years.
Blend	was	sitting	in	the	place	she	sat	in	whenever	she	smelled	trouble.	A
small	table	in	shadows	right	beside	the	door,	doing	her	blending	thing,	except
this	time	her	legs	were	stretched	out,	just	enough	to	force	a	stumble	from
anyone	coming	inside.
Stepping	through	the	doorway,	Picker	gave	those	black	boots	a	solid	kick.
‘Ow,	my	ankle!’
Picker	dropped	the	stack	of	flatbread	on	to	Blend’s	lap.
‘Oof!’


Antsy	and	Bluepearl	pushed	past.	The	ex-sergeant	snorted.	‘Now	there’s
our	scary	minder	at	the	door.	“Ow,	oof!”	she	says.’
But	Blend	had	already	recovered	and	was	unwrapping	the	flatbread.
‘You	know,	Blend,’	Picker	said	as	she	settled	at	the	bar,	‘the	old	Rhivi	hags
who	make	those	spit	on	the	pan	before	they	slap	down	the	dough.	Some	ancient
spirit	blessing—’
‘It’s	not	that,’	Blend	cut	in,	folding	back	the	flaps	of	the	wrapper.	‘The
sizzle	tells	them	the	pan’s	hot	enough.’
‘Ain’t	it	just,’	Bluepearl	muttered.
Picker	scowled,	then	nodded.	‘Aye.	Let’s	all	head	to	our	office,	all	of	us	–
Blend,	go	find	Mallet,	too.’
‘Bad	timing,’	Blend	observed.
‘What?’
‘Spindle	taking	that	pilgrimage.’
‘Lucky	for	him.’
Blend	slowly	rose	and	said	round	a	mouthful	of	flatbread,	‘Duiker?’
Picker	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Ask	him.	If	he	wants,	aye.’
Blend	slowly	blinked.	‘You	kill	somebody	tonight,	Pick?’
No	answer	was	a	good	enough	answer.	Picker	peered	suspiciously	at	the
small	crowd	in	the	bar,	those	too	drunk	to	have	reeled	out	into	the	street	at	the
twelfth	bell,	as	was	the	custom.	Regulars	one	and	all.	That’ll	do.	Waving	for	the
others	to	follow,	Picker	set	out	for	the	stairs.
At	the	far	end	of	the	main	room,	that	damned	bard	was	bleating	on	with
one	of	the	more	obscure	verses	of	Anomandaris,	but	nobody	was	listening.
	
The	three	of	them	saw	themselves	as	the	new	breed	on	Darujhistan’s	Council.
Shardan	Lim	was	the	thinnest	and	tallest,	with	a	parched	face	and	washed-out
blue	eyes.	Hook-nosed,	a	lipless	slash	of	a	mouth	perpetually	turned	down	as	if
he	could	not	restrain	his	contempt	for	the	world.	The	muscles	of	his	left	wrist
were	twice	the	size	of	those	of	the	right,	criss-crossed	with	proudly	displayed
scars.	He	met	Challice’s	eyes	like	a	man	about	to	ask	her	husband	if	his	own
turn	with	her	was	imminent,	and	she	felt	that	regard	like	the	cold	hand	of
possession	round	her	throat.	A	moment	later	his	bleached	eyes	slid	away	and
there	was	the	flicker	of	a	half-smile	as	he	reached	for	his	goblet	where	it	rested
on	the	mantel.
Standing	opposite	Shardan	Lim,	on	the	other	side	of	the	nearly	dead	fire,
with	long	fingers	caressing	the	ancient	ground	hammerstones	mortared	into
the	fireplace,	was	Hanut	Orr.	Plaything	to	half	the	noble	women	in	the	city,	so


long	as	they	were	married	or	otherwise	divested	of	maidenhood,	he	did	indeed
present	that	most	enticing	combination	of	dangerous	charm	and	dominating
arrogance	–	traits	that	seduced	otherwise	intelligent	women	–	and	it	was	well
known	how	he	delighted	in	seeing	his	lovers	crawl	on	their	knees	towards	him,
begging	a	morsel	of	his	attention.
Challice’s	husband	was	sprawled	in	his	favourite	chair	to	Hanut	Orr ’s	left,
legs	stretched	out,	looking	thoughtfully	into	his	goblet,	the	wine	with	its	hue	of
blue	blood	slowly	swirling	as	he	tilted	his	hand	in	lazy	circles.
‘Dear	wife,’	he	now	said	in	his	usual	drawl,	‘has	the	balcony	air	revived
you?’
‘Wine?’	asked	Shardan	Lim,	brows	lifting	as	if	serving	her	was	his	life’s
calling.
Should	a	husband	take	umbrage	with	such	barely	constrained	leering	from
his	so-called	friends?	Gorlas	seemed	indifferent.
‘No	thank	you,	Councillor	Lim.	I	have	just	come	to	wish	you	all	a	good
night.	Gorlas,	will	you	be	much	longer	here?’
He	did	not	look	up	from	his	wine,	though	his	mouth	moved	as	if	he	was
tasting	his	last	sip	all	over	again,	finding	the	remnants	faintly	sour	on	his
palate.	‘There	is	no	need	to	wait	for	me,	wife.’
An	involuntary	glance	over	at	Shardan	revealed	both	amusement	and	the
clear	statement	that	he	would	not	be	so	dismissive	of	her.
And,	with	sudden,	dark	perverseness,	she	found	herself	meeting	his	eyes
and	smiling	in	answer.
If	it	could	be	said,	without	uncertainty,	that	Gorlas	Vidikas	did	not	witness
this	exchange,	Hanut	Orr	did,	although	his	amusement	was	of	the	more	savage,
contemptuous	kind.
Feeling	sullied,	Challice	turned	away.
Her	handmaid	trailed	her	out	and	up	the	broad	flight	of	stairs,	the	only
witness	to	the	stiffness	of	her	back	as	she	made	her	way	to	the	bedroom.
Once	the	door	was	closed	she	threw	off	her	half-cloak.	‘Lay	out	my
jewellery,’	she	said.
‘Mistress?’
She	spun	to	the	old	woman.	‘I	wish	to	see	my	jewellery!’
Ducking,	the	woman	hurried	off	to	do	her	bidding.
‘The	old	pieces,’	Challice	called	after	her.	From	the	time	before	all	this.
When	she	had	been	little	more	than	a	child,	marvelling	over	the	gifts	of
suitors,	all	the	bribes	for	her	affection	still	clammy	from	sweaty	hands.	Oh,
there	had	been	so	many	possibilities	then.
Her	eyes	narrowed	as	she	stood	before	her	vanity.


Well,	perhaps	not	only	then.	Did	it	mean	anything?	Did	it	even	matter	any
more?
Her	husband	had	what	he	wanted	now.	Three	duellists,	three	hard	men	with
hard	voices	in	the	Council.	One	of	the	three	now,	yes,	all	he	wanted.
Well,	what	about	what	she	wanted?
But…what	is	it	that	I	want?
She	didn’t	know.
‘Mistress.’
Challice	turned.
Laid	out	on	the	vanity’s	worn	surface,	the	treasure	of	her	maidenhood
looked…cheap.	Gaudy.	The	very	sight	of	those	baubles	made	her	sick	in	the	pit
of	her	stomach.	‘Put	them	in	a	box,’	she	said	to	her	servant.	‘Tomorrow	we	sell
them.’
	
He	should	never	have	lingered	in	the	garden.	His	amorous	host,	the	widow
Sepharla,	had	fallen	into	a	drunken	slumber	on	the	marble	bench,	one	hand	still
holding	her	goblet	as,	head	tilted	back	and	mouth	hanging	open,	loud	snores
groaned	out	into	the	sultry	night	air.	The	failed	enterprise	had	amused
Murillio,	and	he	had	stood	for	a	time,	sipping	at	his	own	wine	and	smelling	the
fragrant	scents	of	the	blossoms,	until	a	sound	alerted	him	to	someone’s	quiet
arrival.
Turning,	he	found	himself	looking	upon	the	widow’s	daughter.
He	should	never	have	done	that,	either.
Half	his	age,	but	that	delineation	no	longer	distinguished	unseemly	from
otherwise.	She	was	past	her	rite	of	passage	by	three,	perhaps	four	years,	just
nearing	that	age	among	young	women	when	it	was	impossible	for	a	man	to	tell
whether	she	was	twenty	or	thirty.	And	by	that	point,	all	such	judgement	was
born	of	wilful	self-delusion	and	hardly	mattered	anyway.
He’d	had,	perhaps,	too	much	wine.	Enough	to	weaken	a	certain	resolve,	the
one	having	to	do	with	recognizing	his	own	maturity,	that	host	of	years	behind
him	of	which	he	was	constantly	reminded	by	the	dwindling	number	of
covetous	glances	flung	his	way.	True,	one	might	call	it	experience,	settling	for
those	women	who	knew	enough	to	appreciate	such	traits.	But	a	man’s	mind	was
quick	to	flit	from	how	things	were	to	how	he	wanted	them	to	be,	or,	even
worse,	to	how	they	used	to	be.	As	the	saying	went,	when	it	came	to	the	truth,
every	man	was	a	duellist	sheathed	in	the	blood	of	ten	thousand	cuts.
None	of	this	passed	through	Murillio’s	mind	in	the	moment	his	eyes
locked	gazes	with	Delish,	the	unwed	daughter	of	widow	Sepharla.	The	wine,	he


would	later	conclude.	The	heat	and	steam	of	the	fête,	the	sweet	blossom	scents
on	the	moist,	warm	air.	The	fact	that	she	was	virtually	naked,	wearing	but	a
shift	of	thin	silk.	Her	light	brown	hair	was	cut	incredibly	short	in	the	latest
fashion	among	maidens.	Face	pale	as	cream,	with	full	lips	and	the	faintest	slope
to	her	nose.	Liquid	brown	eyes	big	as	a	waif’s,	but	there	was	no	cracked	bowl
begging	alms	in	her	hands.	This	urchin’s	need	belonged	elsewhere.
Reassured	by	the	snoring	from	the	marble	bench	–	and	horrified	by	his
own	relief	–	Murillio	bowed	low	before	her.	‘Well	timed,	my	dear,’	he	said,
straightening.	‘I	was	considering	how	best	to	assist	your	mother	to	her	bed.
Suggestions?’
A	shake	of	that	perfectly	shaped	head.	‘She	sleeps	there	most	nights.	Just
like	that.’
The	voice	was	young	yet	neither	nasal	nor	high-pitched	as	seemed	the	style
among	so	many	maidens	these	days,	and	so	it	failed	in	reminding	him	of	that
vast	chasm	of	years	between	them.
Oh,	in	retrospect,	so	many	regrets	this	night!
‘She	never	thought	you’d	accept	her	invitation,’	Delish	went	on,	glancing
down	to	where	she	had	kicked	off	one	of	her	sandals	and	was	now	prodding	it
with	a	delicate	toe.	‘Desirable	as	you	are.	In	demand,	I	mean,	on	this	night
especially.’
Too	clever	by	far,	this	stroking	of	his	vaguely	creped	and	nearly	flaccid
ego.	‘But	dear,	why	are	you	here?	Your	list	of	suitors	must	be	legion,	and
among	them—’
‘Among	them,	not	a	single	one	worth	calling	a	man.’
Did	a	thousand	hormone-soaked	hearts	break	with	that	dismissive
utterance?	Did	beds	lurch	in	the	night,	feet	kicking	clear	of	sweaty	sheets?	He
could	almost	believe	it.
‘And	that	includes	Prelick.’
‘Excuse	me,	who?’
‘The	drunk,	useless	fool	now	passed	out	in	the	foyer.	Tripping	over	his
sword	all	night.	It	was	execrable.’
Execrable.	Yes,	now	I	see.
‘The	young	are	prone	to	excessive	enthusiasm,’	Murillio	observed.	‘I	have
no	doubt	poor	Prelick	has	been	anticipating	this	night	for	weeks,	if	not	months.
Naturally,	he	succumbed	to	nervous	agitation,	brought	on	by	proximity	to	your
lovely	self.	Pity	such	young	men,	Delish;	they	deserve	that	much	at	least.’
‘I’m	not	interested	in	pity,	Murillio.’
She	should	never	have	said	his	name	in	just	that	way.	He	should	never	have
listened	to	her	say	anything	at	all.


‘Delish,	can	you	stomach	advice	on	this	night,	from	one	such	as	myself?’
Her	expression	was	one	of	barely	maintained	forbearance,	but	she	nodded.
‘Seek	out	the	quiet	ones.	Not	the	ones	who	preen,	or	display	undue
arrogance.	The	quiet	ones,	Delish,	prone	to	watchfulness.’
‘You	describe	no	one	I	know.’
‘Oh,	they	are	there.	It	just	takes	a	second	glance	to	notice	them.’
She	had	both	sandals	off	now,	and	she	dismissed	his	words	with	a	wave	of
one	pale	hand	that	somehow	brought	her	a	step	closer.	Looking	up	as	if
suddenly	shy,	yet	holding	his	gaze	too	long	for	there	to	be	any	real	temerity.
‘Not	quiet	ones.	Not	ones	to	pity.	No…children!	Not	tonight,	Murillio.	Not
under	this	moon.’
And	he	found	her	in	his	arms,	a	soft	body	all	too	eager	with	naught	but
filmy	silk	covering	it	and	she	seemed	to	be	sliding	all	over	him,	a	sylph,	and
he	thought:	Under	this	moon?
Her	last	gesture	at	the	poetic,	alas,	since	she	was	already	tearing	at	his
clothes,	her	mouth	with	those	full	lips	wet	and	parted	and	a	tongue	flickering	as
she	bit	at	his	own	lips.	And	here	he	was	with	one	hand	on	one	of	her	breasts,
his	other	hand	slipping	round	to	her	behind,	hitching	her	up	as	she	spread	her
legs	and	climbed	to	anchor	herself	on	his	hips,	and	he	heard	his	belt	buckle
clack	on	the	pavestone	between	his	boots.
She	was	not	a	large	woman.	Not	at	all	heavy,	but	surprisingly	athletic,	and
she	rode	him	with	such	violence	that	he	felt	his	lower	spine	creak	with	every
frenzied	plunge.	He	sank	into	his	usual	detachment	at	this	point,	the	kind	that
assured	impressive	endurance,	and	took	a	moment	to	confirm	that	the	snoring
continued	behind	him.	All	at	once	that	sonorous	sound	struck	him	with	a	sense
of	prophetic	dissolution,	surrender	to	the	years	of	struggle	that	was	life’s	own
chorus	–	and	so	we	shall	all	end	our	days	–	a	momentary	pang	that,	had	he
permitted	it	to	linger,	would	have	unmanned	him	utterly.	Delish,	meanwhile,
was	wearing	herself	out,	her	gasps	harsher,	quicker,	as	shudders	rose	through
her,	and	so	he	surrendered	–	not	a	moment	too	soon	–	to	sensation.	And	joined
her	in	one	final,	helpless	gasp.
She	held	on	to	him	and	he	could	feel	her	pounding	heart	as	he	slowly
lowered	her	back	on	to	her	feet,	gently	pulling	away.
It	was,	all	things	considered,	the	worst	moment	to	witness	the	blur	of	an
iron	blade	flashing	before	his	eyes.	Burning	agony	as	the	sword	thrust	into	his
chest,	the	point	pushing	entirely	through,	making	the	drunken	fool	wielding	it
stumble	forward,	almost	into	the	arms	of	Murillio.
Who	was	then	falling	back,	the	sword	sliding	out	with	a	reluctant	sob.
Delish	screamed,	and	the	look	on	Prelick’s	face	was	triumphant.


‘Hah!	The	rapist	dies!’
More	footsteps,	then,	rushing	out	from	the	house.	Voices	clamouring.
Bemused,	Murillio	picked	himself	back	up,	tugging	at	his	pantaloons,	cinching
tight	his	belt.	His	lime	green	silk	shirt	was	turning	purple	in	blotches.	There
was	blood	on	his	chin,	frothing	up	in	soft,	rattling	coughs.	Hands	pulled	at	him
and	he	pushed	them	all	away,	staggering	for	the	gate.
Regrets,	yes,	jostling	with	the	oblivious	crowds	on	the	street.	Moments	of
lucidity,	unknown	periods	of	dim,	red	haze,	standing	with	one	hand	on	a	stone
wall,	spitting	down	streams	of	blood.	Oh,	plenty	of	regrets.
Fortunately,	he	did	not	think	they	would	hound	him	for	much	longer.

Was	it	habit	or	some	peculiar	twist	in	family	traits	that	gave	Scorch	his
expression	of	perpetual	surprise?	There	was	no	telling,	since	every	word	the
man	uttered	was	delivered	in	tones	of	bewildered	disbelief,	as	if	Scorch	could
never	be	sure	of	what	his	senses	told	him	of	the	outside	world,	and	was	even
less	certain	of	whatever	thoughts	clamoured	in	his	head.	He	stared	now	at	Leff,
eyes	wide	and	mouth	gaping	in	between	nervous	licks	of	his	lips,	while	Leff	in
turn	squinted	at	Scorch	as	if	chronically	suspicious	of	his	friend’s	apparent
idiocy.
‘All	them	ain’t	gonna	wait	for	ever,	Leff!	We	should	never	have	signed	on
to	this.	I	say	we	hitch	on	the	next	trader	shippin’	out.	Down	to	Dhavran,	maybe
all	the	way	t’the	coast!	Ain’t	you	got	a	cousin	in	Mengal?’
Leff	slowly	blinked.	‘Aye,	Scorch.	They	let	’im	furnish	his	cell	himself,
he’s	in	there	so	much.	You	want	us	go	up	there	and	take	on	his	mess	too?
Besides,	then	we’d	end	up	on	the	list.’
Astonishment	and	dread	filled	Scorch’s	face.	He	looked	away,	whispered,
‘It’s	the	list	that’s	done	us	in.	The	list…’
‘We	knew	it	wouldn’t	be	easy,’	Leff	said	in	a	possible	attempt	at
mollification.	‘Things	like	that	never	are.’
‘But	we	ain’t	gotten	nowhere!’
‘It’s	only	been	a	week,	Scorch.’
The	time	had	come	for	a	modest	clearing	of	the	throat,	a	dab	of	the	silk
handkerchief	on	oily	brow,	a	musing	tug	on	the	mouse-tail	beard.	‘Gentlemen!’
Ah,	now	he	had	their	attention.	‘Witness	the	Skirmishers	on	the	field	and	yon
Mercenary’s	Coin,	glinting	ever	as	golden	lures	are	wont	to	glint…
everywhere.	But	here	especially,	and	the	knuckles	still	reside	in	sweaty	hand	of
surprised	Scorch,	too	long	clutched	and	uncast.	Interminable	has	this	game


grown,	with	Kruppe	patient	as	he	perches	on	very	edge	of	glorious	victory!’
Leff	scowled.	‘You	ain’t	winning	nothing,	Kruppe!	You’re	losing,	and	bad,
Coin	or	no	Coin!	And	what	use	is	it	anyway	–	I	don’t	see	no	mercenary
anywhere	on	the	field,	so	who’s	it	paying	for?	Nobody!’
Smiling,	Kruppe	leaned	back.
The	crowd	was	noisome	this	night	at	the	Phoenix	Inn,	as	more	and	more
drunks	stumbled	back	in	after	their	pleasing	foray	in	the	dusty,	grimy	streets.
Kruppe,	of	course,	felt	magnanimous	towards	them	all,	as	suited	his	naturally
magnanimous	nature.
Scorch	cast	the	knuckles,	then	stared	at	the	half-dozen	etched	bones	as	if
they	spelled	out	his	doom.
And	so	they	had.	Kruppe	leaned	forward	once	again.	‘Ho,	the	Straight
Road	reveals	itself,	and	see	how	these	six	Mercenaries	march	on	to	the	field!
Slaying	left	and	right!	One	cast	of	the	knuckles,	and	the	universe	changes!
Behold	this	grim	lesson,	dear	companions	of	Kruppe.	When	the	Coin	is
revealed,	how	long	before	a	hand	reaches	for	it?’
Virtually	no	cast	in	the	Riposte	Round	could	save	the	two	hapless	Kings
and	their	equally	hapless	players,	Scorch	and	Leff.	Snarling,	Leff	swept	an	arm
through	the	field,	scattering	pieces	everywhere.	As	he	did	so	he	palmed	the
Coin	and	would	have	slipped	it	into	his	waistband	if	not	for	a	wag	of	Kruppe’s
head	and	the	pudgy	hand	reaching	out	palm	up.
Cursing	under	his	breath,	Leff	dropped	the	Coin	into	that	hand.
‘To	the	spoiler,	the	victory,’	Kruppe	said,	smiling.	‘Alas	for	poor	Scorch
and	Leff,	this	single	coin	is	but	a	fraction	of	riches	now	belonging	to
triumphant	Kruppe.	Two	councils	each,	yes?’
‘That’s	a	week’s	wages	for	a	week	that	ain’t	come	yet,’	Leff	said.	‘We’ll
have	to	owe	you,	friend.’
‘Egregious	precedent!	Kruppe,	however,	understands	how	such	reversals
can	catch	one	unawares,	which	makes	perfect	sense,	since	they	are	reversals.
Accordingly,	given	the	necessity	for	a	week’s	noble	labour,	Kruppe	is	happy	to
extend	deadline	for	said	payment	to	one	week	from	today.’
Groaning,	Scorch	sat	back.	‘The	list,	Leff.	We’re	back	to	that	damned	list.’
‘Many	are	the	defaulters,’	Kruppe	said,	sighing.	‘And	eager	those
demanding	recompense,	so	much	so	that	they	assemble	a	dread	list,	and	upon
diminishment	of	names	therein	remit	handsomely	to	those	who	would	enforce
collection,	yes?’
The	two	men	stared.	Scorch’s	expression	suggested	that	he	had	just	taken	a
sharp	blow	to	the	head	and	was	yet	to	find	his	wits.	Leff	simply	scowled.	‘Aye,
that	list,	Kruppe.	We	took	the	job	on	since	we	didn’t	have	nothing	else	to	do


since	Boc’s	sudden…demise.	And	now	it	looks	like	our	names	might	end	up	on
it!’
‘Nonsense!	Or,	rather,	Kruppe	elaborates,	not	if	such	a	threat	looms	as	a
result	of	some	future	defaultment	on	monies	owed	Kruppe.	Lists	of	that	nature
are	indeed	pernicious	and	probably	counterproductive	and	Kruppe	finds	their
very	existence	reprehensible.	Wise	advice	is	to	relax	somewhat	on	that	matter.
Unless,	of	course,	one	finds	the	deadline	fast	approaching	with	naught	but	lint
in	one’s	pouch.	Further	advice,	achieve	a	victory	on	the	list,	receive	due
reward,	repair	immediately	to	Kruppe	and	clear	the	modest	debt.	The
alternative,	alas,	is	that	we	proceed	with	an	entirely	different	solution.’
Leff	licked	his	lips.	‘What	solution	would	that	be?’
‘Why,	Kruppe’s	modest	assistance	regarding	said	list,	of	course.	For	a
minuscule	percentage.’
‘For	a	cut	you’d	help	us	hunt	down	them	that’s	on	the	list?’
‘To	do	so	would	be	in	Kruppe’s	best	interests,	given	this	debt	between	him
and	you	two.’
‘What’s	the	percentage?’
‘Why,	thirty-three,	of	course.’
‘And	you	call	that	modest?’
‘No,	I	called	it	minuscule.	Dearest	partners,	have	you	found	any	of	the
people	on	that	list?’
Miserable	silence	answered	him,	although	Scorch	was	still	looking	rather
confused.
‘There	is,’	Kruppe	said	with	an	expansive	swell	of	his	chest	that	threatened
the	two	stalwart	buttons	of	his	vest,	‘no	one	in	Darujhistan	that	Kruppe	cannot
find.’	He	settled	back,	and	the	brave	buttons	gleamed	with	victory.
Shouting,	a	commotion	at	the	door,	then	Meese	crying	out	Kruppe’s	name.
Startled,	Kruppe	rose,	but	could	not	see	over	the	heads	of	all	these
peculiarly	tall	patrons	–	how	annoying	–	and	so	he	edged	round	his	table	and
pushed	his	grunting,	gasping	way	through	to	the	bar,	where	Irilta	was	half
dragging	a	blood-drenched	Murillio	on	to	the	counter,	knocking	aside	tankards
and	goblets.
Oh	my.	Kruppe	met	Meese’s	eyes,	noted	the	fear	and	alarm.	‘Meese,	go	to
Coll	at	once.’
Pale,	she	nodded.
The	crowd	parted	before	her.	Because,	as	the	Gadrobi	are	wont	to	say,	even
a	drunk	knows	a	fool,	and,	drunk	or	not,	no	one	was	fool	enough	to	get	in	that
woman’s	way.


	
Picker ’s	sword	lay	on	the	table,	its	tip	smeared	in	drying	blood.	Antsy	had
added	his	shortsword,	its	blade	far	messier.	Together,	mute	testaments	to	this
impromptu	meeting’s	agenda.
Bluepearl	sat	at	one	end	of	the	long	table,	nursing	his	headache	with	a
tankard	of	ale;	Blend	was	by	the	door,	arms	folded	as	she	leaned	against	the
frame.	Mallet	sat	in	a	chair	to	Bluepearl’s	left,	with	all	his	nerves	pushed	into
one	jumpy	leg,	the	thigh	and	knee	jittering,	while	his	face	remained	closed	as
he	refused	to	meet	anyone’s	eyes.	Near	the	ratty	tapestry	dating	back	to	the	time
when	this	place	was	still	a	temple	stood	Duiker,	once	Imperial	Historian,	now	a
broken	old	man.
In	fact,	Picker	was	mildly	surprised	that	he’d	accepted	the	invitation	to	join
them.	Perhaps	some	remnant	of	curiosity	flickered	still	in	the	ashes	of	Duiker ’s
soul,	although	he	seemed	more	interested	in	the	faded	scene	on	the	tapestry
with	its	aerial	flotilla	of	dragons	approaching	a	temple	much	like	the	one	they
were	in.
Nobody	seemed	ready	to	start	talking.	Typical.	The	task	always	fell	at	her
feet,	like	some	wounded	dove.	‘Assassins’	Guild’s	taken	on	a	contract,’	she
said,	deliberately	harsh.	‘Target?	At	the	very	least,	me,	Antsy	and	Bluepearl.
More	likely,	all	us	partners.’	She	paused,	waiting	to	hear	some	objection.
Nothing.	‘Antsy,	we	turn	down	any	offers	on	this	place?’
‘Picker,’	the	Falari	said	in	an	identical	tone,	‘ain’t	nobody’s	ever	made	an
offer	on	this	place.’
‘Fine,’	she	replied.	‘So,	anyone	catch	a	rumour	that	the	old	K’rul	cult	has
been	resurrected?	Some	High	Priest	somewhere	in	the	city	wanting	the	old
temple	back?’
Bluepearl	snorted.
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	tell	us?’	Picker	demanded,	glaring	at	him.
‘Nothing,’	the	Napan	mage	muttered.	‘I	ain’t	heard	nothing	like	that,	Pick.
Now	if	Ganoes	Paran	ever	comes	back	from	wherever	he’s	gone,	we	could	get
ourselves	a	sure	answer.	Still,	I	don’t	think	there’s	any	cult	trying	to	move	back
in.’
‘How	do	you	know?’	Antsy	demanded.	‘Can	you	smell	’em	or	something?’
‘Oh,	not	now,’	Bluepearl	complained.	‘No	more	questions	tonight.	That
Mockra’s	chewed	everything	in	my	skull	to	pulp.	I	hate	Mockra.’
‘It’s	the	ghosts,’	said	Mallet	in	that	odd,	gentle	voice	of	his.	He	glanced
across	at	Bluepearl.	‘Right?	They’re	not	whispering	anything	they	haven’t	been
whispering	since	we	moved	in.	Just	the	usual	moans	and	begging	for	blood.’


His	gaze	shifted	to	the	swords	on	the	table	before	him.	‘Blood	spilled	here,	that
is.	Stuff	brought	in	from	outside	doesn’t	count.	Luckily.’
Blend	said,	‘So	try	not	cutting	yourself	shaving,	Antsy.’
‘There’s	been	the	odd	scrap	downstairs,’	Picker	said,	frowning	at	Mallet.
‘Are	you	saying	that’s	been	feeding	the	damned	ghosts?’
The	healer	shrugged.	‘Never	enough	to	make	a	difference.’
‘We	need	us	a	necromancer,’	Bluepearl	announced.
‘We’re	getting	off	track,’	Picker	said.	‘It’s	the	damned	contract	we	got	to
worry	about.	We	need	to	find	out	who’s	behind	it.	We	find	out	who,	we	throw	a
cusser	through	his	bedroom	window	and	that’s	that.	So,’	she	continued,
looking	at	the	others,	‘we	need	to	come	up	with	a	plan	of	attack.	Information	to
start.	Let’s	hear	some	ideas	on	that.’
More	silence.
Blend	stepped	away	from	the	door.	‘Someone’s	coming,’	she	said.
Now	they	could	all	hear	the	boots	thumping	up	the	stairs,	hissed
protestations	in	their	wake.
Antsy	collected	his	sword	and	Bluepearl	slowly	rose	and	Picker	could
smell	the	sudden	awakening	of	sorcery.	She	held	up	a	hand.	‘Wait,	for	Hood’s
sake.’
The	door	was	flung	open.
In	strode	a	large,	well-dressed	man,	out	of	breath,	his	light	blue	eyes
scanning	faces	until	they	alighted	on	Mallet,	who	rose.
‘Councillor	Coll.	What	is	wrong?’
‘I	need	your	help,’	the	Daru	noble	said,	and	Picker	could	hear	the	distress
in	the	man’s	voice.	‘High	Denul.	I	need	you,	now.’
Before	Mallet	could	reply,	Picker	stepped	forward.	‘Councillor	Coll,	did
you	come	here	alone?’
The	man	frowned.	Then	a	vague	gesture	behind	him.	‘A	modest	escort.
Two	guards.’	Only	then	did	he	note	the	sword	on	the	table.	‘What	is	happening
here?’
‘Picker,’	said	Mallet,	‘I’ll	take	Bluepearl.’
‘I	don’t	like—’
But	the	healer	cut	her	off.	‘We	need	information,	don’t	we?	Coll	can	help
us.	Besides,	they	wouldn’t	have	set	more	than	one	clan	on	us	to	start	and	you
took	care	of	that	one.	The	Guild	needs	to	recover,	reassess	–	we’ve	got	a	day	at
least.’
Picker	looked	across	at	the	councillor,	who,	if	he	didn’t	quite	grasp	what
was	going	on,	now	had	enough	for	a	fair	guess.	Sighing,	she	said	to	him,
‘Seems	there’s	someone	wants	us	dead.	You	might	not	want	to	get	involved


with	us	right	now—’
But	he	shook	his	head,	fixed	his	gaze	once	more	on	Mallet.	‘Healer,
please.’
Mallet	nodded	to	a	scowling	Bluepearl.	‘Lead	on,	Councillor.	We’re	with
ya.’
	
‘…came	upon	Osserick,	stalwart	ally,	broken	and	with	blood	on	his	face,	struck
into	unconsciousness.	And	Anomander	fell	to	his	knees	and	called	upon	the
Thousand	Gods	who	looked	down	upon	Osserick	and	saw	the	blood	on	his	face.
With	mercy	they	struck	him	awakened	and	so	he	stood.
‘And	so	stood	Anomander	and	they	faced	one	another,	Light	upon	Dark,
Dark	upon	Light.
‘Now	there	was	rage	in	Anomander.	“Where	is	Draconnus?”	he	demanded
of	his	stalwart	ally.	For	when	Anomander	had	departed,	the	evil	tyrant
Draconnus,	Slayer	of	Eleint,	had	been	by	Anomander’s	own	hand	struck	into
unconsciousness	and	there	was	blood	on	his	face.	Osserick,	who	had	taken	the
charge	of	guarding	Draconnus,	fell	to	his	knees	and	called	upon	the	Thousand
Gods,	seeking	their	mercy	before	Anomander’s	fury.	“I	was	bested!”	cried
Osserick	in	answer.	“Caught	by	Sister	Spite	unawares!	Oh,	the	Thousand	Gods
were	turned	away,	and	so	was	I	struck	into	unconsciousness	and	see	there	is
blood	on	my	face!”
‘“One	day,”	vowed	Anomander,	and	he	was	then	the	darkness	of	a	terrible
storm,	and	Osserick	quailed	like	a	sun	behind	a	cloud,	“this	alliance	of	ours
shall	end.	Our	enmity	shall	be	renewed,	O	Son	of	Light,	Child	of	Light.	We	shall
contest	every	span	of	ground,	every	reach	of	sky,	every	spring	of	sweet	water.
We	shall	battle	a	thousand	times	and	there	shall	be	no	mercy	between	us.	I	shall
send	misery	upon	your	kin,	your	daughters.	I	shall	blight	their	minds	with
Unknowing	Dark.	I	shall	scatter	them	confused	on	realms	unknown	and	there
shall	be	no	mercy	in	their	hearts,	for	between	them	and	the	Thousand	Gods
there	shall	ever	be	a	cloud	of	darkness.”
‘Such	was	Anomander’s	fury,	and	though	he	stood	alone,	Dark	upon	Light,
there	was	sweetness	lingering	in	the	palm	of	one	hand,	from	the	deceiving	touch
of	Lady	Envy.	Light	upon	Dark,	Dark	upon	Light,	two	men,	wielded	as	weapons
by	two	sisters,	children	of	Draconnus.	Who	stood	unseen	by	any	and	were
pleased	by	what	they	saw	and	all	that	they	heard.
‘It	was	decided	then	that	Anomander	would	set	out	once	more,	to	hunt	down
the	evil	tyrant.	To	destroy	him	and	his	cursed	sword	which	is	an	abomination	in
the	eyes	of	the	Thousand	Gods	and	all	who	kneel	to	them.	Osserick,	it	was


decided,	would	set	out	to	hunt	Spite	and	exact	righteous	vengeance.
‘Of	the	vow	spoken	by	Anomander,	Osserick	knew	the	rage	from	which	it
was	spawned,	and	in	silence	he	made	vow	to	answer	it	in	his	own	time.	To	spar,
to	duel,	to	contest	every	span	of	ground,	every	reach	of	sky,	and	every	spring	of
sweet	water.	But	such	matters	must	needs	lie	upon	calm	earth,	a	seed	awaiting
life.
‘This	issue	with	Draconnus	remained	before	them,	after	all,	and	now	Spite
as	well.	Did	not	the	Children	of	Tiam	demand	punishment?	There	was	blood	on
the	faces	of	too	many	Eleint,	and	so	Anomander	and	so	Osserick	had	taken	on
themselves	this	fated	hunt.
‘Could	the	Eleint	have	known	all	that	would	come	of	this,	they	would	have
withdrawn	their	storm-breath,	from	both	Anomander	and	Osserick.	But	these
fates	were	not	to	be	known	then,	and	this	is	why	the	Thousand	Gods	wept…’
	
Rubbing	his	eyes,	High	Alchemist	Baruk	leaned	back.	The	original	version	of
this,	he	suspected,	was	not	the	mannered	shambles	he	had	just	read	through.
Those	quaint	but	overused	phrases	belonged	to	an	interim	age	when	the	style
among	historians	sought	to	resurrect	some	oral	legacy	in	an	effort	to	reinforce
the	veracity	of	eyewitnesses	to	the	events	described.	The	result	had	given	him	a
headache.
He	had	never	heard	of	the	Thousand	Gods,	and	this	pantheon	could	not	be
found	in	any	other	compendium	but	Dillat’s	Dark	and	Light.	Baruk	suspected
Dillat	had	simply	made	them	up,	which	prompted	the	question:	how	much	else
did	she	invent?
Leaning	forward	once	more,	he	adjusted	the	lantern’s	wick,	then	leafed
through	the	brittle	sheets	until	another	section	caught	his	interest.
	
‘In	this	day	there	was	war	among	the	dragons.	The	First	Born	had	all	but	one
bowed	necks	to	K’rul’s	bargain.	Their	children,	bereft	of	all	that	they	would
have	inherited,	burst	skyward	from	the	towers	in	great	flurry	yet	even	these
were	not	united	beyond	rejecting	the	First	Born.	Factions	arose	and	red	rain
descended	upon	all	the	Realms.	Jaws	fastened	upon	necks.	Talons	opened
bellies.	The	breath	of	chaos	melted	flesh	from	bones.
‘Anomander,	Osserick	and	others	had	already	tasted	the	blood	of	Tiam,	and
now	there	came	more	with	raging	thirst	and	many	a	demonic	abomination	was
spawned	of	this	crimson	nectar.	So	long	as	the	Gates	of	Starvald	Demelain


remained	open,	unguarded	and	held	by	none,	the	war	would	not	end,	and	so	the
red	rain	descended	upon	all	the	Realms.
‘Kurald	Liosan	was	the	first	Realm	to	seal	the	portal	between	itself	and
Starvald	Demelain,	and	the	tale	that	follows	recounts	the	slaughter	committed
by	Osserick	in	cleansing	his	world	of	all	the	pretenders	and	rivals,	the
Soletaken	and	feral	purebloods,	even	unto	driving	the	very	first	D’ivers	from
his	land.
‘This	begins	at	the	time	when	Osserick	fought	Anomander	for	the	sixteenth
time	and	both	had	blood	on	their	faces	before	Kilmandaros,	she	who	speaks
with	her	fists,	took	upon	herself	the	task	of	driving	them	apart…’
	
Baruk	looked	up,	then	twisted	in	his	chair	to	regard	his	guest,	who	was
busy	preening	herself	on	his	map-table.	‘Crone,	the	inconsistencies	in	this	text
are	infuriating.’
The	Great	Raven	cocked	her	head,	beak	gaping	for	a	moment	in	laughter,
then	said,	‘So	what?	Show	me	a	written	history	that	makes	sense,	and	I	will
show	you	true	fiction.	If	that	is	all	you	want,	then	look	elsewhere!	My	master
concluded	that	Dillat’s	nonsense	would	make	a	fine	gift	for	your	collection.	If
you	are	truly	displeased,	there	are	plenty	of	other	idiocies	in	his	library,	those
that	he	bothered	to	extract	from	Moon’s	Spawn,	that	is.	He	left	whole	rooms
crammed	with	the	rubbish,	you	know.’
Baruk	blinked	slowly,	struggling	to	keep	his	horror	from	his	voice	as	he
said,	‘No,	I	did	not	know	that.’
Undeceived,	Crone	cackled.	Then	she	said,	‘My	master	was	most	amused	at
the	notion	of	falling	to	his	knees	and	crying	out	to	the	Hundred	Gods—’
‘Thousand.	The	Thousand	Gods.’
‘Whatever.’	A	duck	of	the	head	and	the	wings	half	spread.	‘Or	even	making
a	vow	to	battle	Osserc.	Their	alliance	fell	apart	because	of	a	growing	mutual
dislike.	The	disaster	with	Draconus	probably	delivered	the	death-blow.
Imagine,	falling	for	a	woman’s	wiles	–	and	a	daughter	of	Draconus	at	that!	Was
Osserc	not	even	remotely	suspicious	of	her	motives?	Hah!	The	males	among
every	species	in	existence	are	so…predictable!’
Baruk	smiled.	‘If	I	recall	Fisher ’s	Anomandaris,	Lady	Envy	managed	pretty
much	the	same	with	your	master,	Crone.’
‘Nothing	he	was	unaware	of	at	the	time,’	the	Great	Raven	said	with	a
strange	clucking	sound	to	punctuate	the	statement.	‘My	master	has	always
understood	the	necessity	of	certain	sacrifices.’	She	fluffed	up	her	onyx
feathers.	‘Consider	the	outcome,	after	all!’


Baruk	grimaced.
‘I’m	hungry!’	Crone	announced.
‘I	didn’t	finish	my	supper,’	Baruk	said.	‘On	that	plate—’
‘I	know,	I	know!	What	do	you	think	made	me	hungry	in	the	first	place?	Sit
in	wonder	at	my	patience,	High	Alchemist!	Even	as	you	read	on	interminably!’
‘Eat	now	and	quickly,	old	friend,’	Baruk	said,	‘lest	you	die	of
malnutrition.’
‘You	were	never	such	a	careless	host	before,’	the	Great	Raven	observed,
hopping	over	to	the	plate	and	spearing	a	sliver	of	meat.	‘You	are	troubled,
High	Alchemist.’
‘By	many	things,	yes.	The	Rhivi	claim	that	the	White	Face	Barghast	have
disappeared.	Utterly.’
‘Indeed,’	Crone	replied.	‘Almost	immediately	after	the	fall	of	Coral	and	the
Tiste	Andii	investiture.’
‘Crone,	you	are	a	Great	Raven.	Your	children	ride	the	winds	and	see	all.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Why	then	will	you	not	tell	me	where	they	went?’
‘Well,	the	Grey	Swordsas	you	know	marched	south,	down	to	Elingarth,’
Crone	said,	circling	the	plate	in	short	hops.	‘And	there	they	purchased	ships.’	A
pause	and	cock	of	the	head.	‘Could	they	see	the	wake	before	them?	Did	they
know	to	follow?	Or	is	there	perhaps	a	great	hole	in	the	world’s	ocean,	drawing
every	ship	into	its	deadly	maw?’
‘The	White	Face	took	to	the	seas?	Extraordinary.	And	the	Grey	Swords
followed	them.’
‘None	of	this	is	relevant,	High	Alchemist.’
‘Relevant	to	what?’
‘Your	unease,	of	course.	You	fling	queries	at	your	poor	bedraggled	guest
in	order	to	distract	yourself.’
It	had	been	months	since	Crone’s	previous	visit,	and	Baruk	had	come	to
believe,	with	some	regret,	that	his	cordial	relations	with	the	Son	of	Darkness
were	drawing	to	a	close,	not	out	of	any	dispute,	simply	the	chronic	ennui	of	the
Tiste	Andii.	It	was	said	the	permanent	gloom	that	was	Black	Coral	well	suited
the	city’s	denizens,	both	Andii	and	human.
‘Crone,	please	extend	to	your	master	my	sincerest	thanks	for	this	gift.	It
was	most	unexpected	and	generous.	But	I	would	ask	him,	if	it	is	not	too
forward	of	me,	if	he	is	reconsidering	the	Council’s	official	request	to	open
diplomatic	relations	between	our	two	cities.	Delegates	but	await	your	master ’s
invitation,	and	a	suitable	site	has	been	set	aside	for	the	construction	of	an
embassy	–	not	far	from	here,	in	fact.’


‘The	estate	crushed	by	a	Soletaken	demon’s	inglorious	descent,’	Crone
said,	pausing	to	laugh	before	spearing	another	chunk	of	food.	‘Aagh,	this	is
vegetable!	Disgusting!’
‘Indeed,	Crone,	the	very	same	estate.	As	I	said,	not	far	from	here.’
‘Master	is	considering	said	request,	and	will	continue	considering	it,	I
suspect.’
‘For	how	much	longer?’
‘I	have	no	idea.’
‘Does	he	have	concerns?’
The	Great	Raven,	leaning	over	the	plate,	tilted	her	head	and	regarded
Baruk	for	a	long	moment.
Baruk	felt	vaguely	sickened	and	he	looked	away.	‘So,	I	have	reason	to	be…
troubled.’
‘Master	asks:	when	will	it	begin?’
The	High	Alchemist	eyed	the	stack	of	loosely	bound	parchment	that	was
Anomander ’s	gift,	and	nodded.	But	he	did	not	answer.
‘Master	asks:	do	you	wish	for	assistance?’
Baruk	winced.
‘Master	asks,’	Crone	went	on,	relentless,	‘would	said	assistance	better
serve	you	if	it	was	covert,	rather	than	official?’
Gods	below.
‘Master	asks:	should	sweet	Crone	stay	the	night	as	Baruk’s	guest,	awaiting
answers	to	these	queries?’
Clattering	at	the	window.	Baruk	swiftly	rose	and	approached	it.
‘A	demon!’	cried	Crone,	half	spreading	her	enormous	wings.
‘One	of	mine,’	said	Baruk,	unlatching	the	iron	frame	and	then	stepping
back	as	Chillbais	clambered	awkwardly	into	view,	grunting	as	he	squeezed
through.	‘Master	Baruk!’	he	squealed.	‘Out!	Out!	Out!’
Baruk	had	felt	ill	a	moment	earlier.	Now	he	was	suddenly	chilled	in	his
very	bones.	He	slowly	shut	the	window,	then	faced	the	Great	Raven.	‘Crone,	it
has	begun.’
The	demon	saw	her	and	bared	needle	fangs	as	he	hissed,	‘Grotesque
monstrosity!’
Crone	made	stabbing	motions	with	her	beak.	‘Bloated	toad!’
‘Be	quiet,	both	of	you!’	Baruk	snapped.	‘Crone,	you	will	indeed	stay	the
night	as	my	guest.	Chillbais,	find	somewhere	to	be.	I	have	more	work	for	you
and	I	will	collect	you	when	it’s	time.’
Flickering	a	forked	tongue	out	at	Crone,	the	squat	demon	waddled	towards
the	fireplace.	It	clambered	on	to	the	glowing	coals,	then	disappeared	up	the


chimney.	Black	clouds	of	soot	rained	down,	billowing	out	from	the	hearth.
Crone	coughed.	‘Ill-mannered	servants	you	have,	High	Alchemist.’
But	Baruk	was	not	listening.	Out.
Out!
That	lone	word	rang	through	his	mind,	loud	as	a	temple	bell,	drowning	out
everything	else,	although	he	caught	a	fast-fading	echo…
‘…stalwart	ally,	broken	and	with	blood	on	his	face…’


Chapter	Two

Anomander	would	tell	no	lie,	nor	live	one,
and	would	that	deafness	could
bless	him	in	the	days	and	nights
beyond	the	black	rains	of	Black	Coral.
Alas,	this	was	not	to	be.
…
And	so	we	choose	to	hear	nothing
Of	the	dreaded	creak,	the	slip	and	snap
Of	wooden	wheels,	the	shudder	on	stone
And	the	chiding	rattle	of	chains,	as	if
Upon	some	other	world	is	where	darkness
Beats	out	from	a	cursedly	ethereal	forge
And	no	sun	rises	above	horizon’s	rippled
Cant	–	some	other	world	not	ours	indeed	–
Yes	bless	us	so,	Anomander,	with	this
Sanctimony,	this	lie	and	soft	comfort,
And	the	slaves	are	not	us,	this	weight
But	an	illusion,	these	shackles	could	break
With	a	thought,	and	all	these	cries	and
Moans	are	less	than	the	murmurs
Of	a	quiescent	heart	–	it’s	all	but	a	tale,
My	friends,	this	tall	denier	of	worship
And	the	sword	he	carries	holds	nothing,
No	memory	at	all,	and	if	there	be	a	place
In	the	cosy	scheme	for	lost	souls
Pulling	onward	an	uprooted	temple
It	but	resides	in	an	imagination	flawed
And	unaligned	with	sober	intricacy	–
Nothing	is	as	messy	as	that	messy	world
And	that	comfort	leaves	us	abiding
Deaf	and	blind	and	senseless	in	peace


Within	our	imagined	place,	this	precious	order…
Soliloquy
Anomandaris,	Book	IV
Fisher	kel	Tath

Dragon	tower	stood	like	a	torch	above	Black	Coral.	The	spire,	rising	from	the
northwest	corner	of	the	New	Andiian	Palace,	was	solid	black	basalt,	dressed	in
fractured,	faceted	obsidian	that	glistened	in	the	eternal	gloom	enshrouding	the
city.	Atop	its	flat	roof	crouched	a	crimson-scaled	dragon,	wings	folded,	its
wedge	head	hanging	over	one	side	so	that	it	seemed	to	stare	down	on	the
crazed	shadowy	patchwork	of	buildings,	alleys	and	streets	far	below.
There	were	citizens	still	in	Black	Coral	–	among	the	humans	–	who
believed	that	the	ferocious	sentinel	was	the	stone	creation	of	some	master
artisan	among	the	ruling	Tiste	Andii,	and	this	notion	left	Endest	Silann	sourly
amused.	True,	he	understood	how	wilful	such	ignorance	could	be.	The	thought
of	a	real,	live	dragon	casting	its	baleful	regard	down	on	the	city	and	its
multitude	of	scurrying	lives	was	to	most	truly	terrifying,	and	indeed,	had	they
been	close	enough	to	see	the	gleaming	hunger	in	Silanah’s	multifaceted	eyes,
they	would	have	long	fled	Black	Coral	in	blind	panic.
For	the	Eleint	to	remain	so,	virtually	motionless,	day	and	night,	weeks	into
months	and	now	very	nearly	an	entire	year,	was	not	unusual.	And	Endest	Silann
knew	this	better	than	most.
The	Tiste	Andii,	once	a	formidable,	if	aged,	sorceror	in	Moon’s	Spawn,
now	a	barely	competent	castellan	to	the	New	Andiian	Palace,	slowly	walked
Sword	Street	as	it	bent	south	of	the	treeless	park	known	as	Grey	Hill.	He	had
left	the	fiercely	lit	district	of	Fish,	where	the	Outwater	Market	so	crowded
every	avenue	and	lane	that	those	who	brought	two-wheeled	carts	in	which	to
load	purchases	were	forced	to	leave	them	in	a	square	just	north	of	Grey	Hill.
The	endless	streams	of	porters	for	hire	–	who	gathered	every	dawn	near	the
Cart	Square	–	always	added	to	the	chaos	between	the	stalls,	pushing	through
with	wrapped	bundles	towards	the	carts	and	slipping,	dodging	and	sliding	like
eels	back	into	the	press.	Although	the	Outwater	Market	acquired	its	name
because	the	preponderance	of	fish	sold	there	came	from	the	seas	beyond	Night
–	the	perpetual	darkness	cloaking	the	city	and	the	surrounding	area	for	almost
a	third	of	a	league	–	there	could	also	be	found	the	pale,	gem-eyed	creatures	of
Coral	Bay’s	Nightwater.


Endest	Silann	had	arranged	the	next	week’s	order	of	cadaver	eels	from	a
new	supplier,	since	the	last	one’s	trawler	had	been	pulled	down	by	something
too	big	for	its	net,	with	the	loss	of	all	hands.	Nightwater	was	not	simply	an	unlit
span	of	sea	in	the	bay,	unfortunately.	It	was	Kurald	Galain,	a	true	manifestation
of	the	warren,	quite	possibly	depthless,	and	on	occasion	untoward	beasts
loomed	into	the	waters	of	Coral	Bay.	Something	was	down	there	now,	forcing
the	fishers	to	use	hooks	and	lines	rather	than	nets,	a	method	possible	only
because	the	eels	foamed	just	beneath	the	surface	in	the	tens	of	thousands,
driven	there	by	terror.	Most	of	the	eels	pulled	aboard	were	snags.
South	of	Grey	Hill,	the	street	lanterns	grew	scarcer	as	Endest	Silann	made
his	way	into	the	Andiian	district.	Typically,	there	were	few	Tiste	Andii	on	the
streets.	Nowhere	could	be	seen	figures	seated	on	tenement	steps,	or	in	stalls
leaning	on	countertops	to	call	out	their	wares	or	simply	watch	passers-by.
Instead,	the	rare	figures	crossing	Endest’s	path	were	one	and	all	on	their	way
somewhere,	probably	the	home	of	some	friend	or	relation,	there	to	participate
in	the	few	remaining	rituals	of	society.	Or	returning	home	from	such	ordeals,
as	tenuous	as	smoke	from	a	dying	fire.
No	fellow	Tiste	Andii	met	Endest	Silann’s	eyes	as	they	slipped	ghostly	past.
This,	of	course,	was	more	than	the	usual	indifference,	but	he	had	grown	used
to	it.	An	old	man	must	needs	have	a	thick	skin,	and	was	he	not	the	oldest	by	far?
Excepting	Anomander	Dragnipurake.
Yet	Endest	could	recall	his	youth,	a	vision	of	himself	vaguely	blurred	by
time,	setting	foot	upon	this	world	on	a	wild	night	with	storms	ravaging	the	sky.
Oh,	the	storms	of	that	night,	the	cold	water	on	the	face…that	moment,	I	see	it
still.
They	stood	facing	a	new	world.	His	lord’s	rage	ebbing,	but	slowly,
trickling	down	like	the	rain.	Blood	leaked	from	a	sword	wound	in
Anomander ’s	left	shoulder.	And	there	had	been	a	look	in	his	eyes…
Endest	sighed	as	he	worked	his	way	up	the	street’s	slope,	but	it	was	an
uneven,	harsh	sigh.	Off	to	his	left	was	the	heaped	rubble	of	the	old	palace.	A
few	jagged	walls	rose	here	and	there,	and	crews	had	carved	paths	into	the	mass
of	wreckage,	salvaging	stone	and	the	occasional	timber	that	had	not	burned.
The	deafening	collapse	of	that	edifice	still	shivered	in	Endest’s	bones,	and	he
slowed	in	his	climb,	one	hand	reaching	out	to	lean	against	a	wall.	The	pressure
was	returning,	making	his	jaw	creak	as	he	clenched	his	teeth,	and	pain	shot
through	his	skull.
Not	again,	please.
No,	this	would	not	do.	That	time	was	done,	over	with.	He	had	survived.	He
had	done	as	his	lord	had	commanded	and	he	had	not	failed.	No,	this	would	not


do	at	all.
Endest	Silann	stood,	sweat	now	on	his	face,	with	his	eyes	squeezed	shut.
No	one	ever	met	his	gaze,	and	this	was	why.	This…weakness.
Anomander	Dragnipurake	had	led	his	score	of	surviving	followers	on	to
the	strand	of	a	new	world.	Behind	the	flaring	rage	in	his	eyes	there	had	been
triumph.
This,	Endest	Silann	told	himself,	was	worth	remembering.	Was	worth
holding	on	to.
We	assume	the	burden	as	we	must.	We	win	through.	And	life	goes	on.
A	more	recent	memory,	heaving	into	his	mind.	The	unbearable	pressure	of
the	deep,	the	water	pushing	in	on	all	sides.	‘You	are	my	last	High	Mage,	Endest
Silann.	Can	you	do	this	for	me?’
The	sea,	my	lord?	Beneath	the	sea?
‘Can	you	do	this,	old	friend?’
My	lord,	I	shall	try.
But	the	sea	had	wanted	Moon’s	Spawn,	oh,	yes,	wanted	it	with	savage,
relentless	hunger.	It	had	railed	against	the	stone,	it	had	besieged	the	sky	keep
with	its	crushing	embrace,	and	in	the	end	there	was	no	throwing	back	its	dark
swirling	legions.
Oh,	Endest	Silann	had	kept	them	alive	for	just	long	enough,	but	the	walls
were	collapsing	even	as	his	lord	had	summoned	the	sky	keep’s	last	reserves	of
power,	to	raise	it	up	from	the	depths,	raise	it	up,	yes,	back	into	the	sky.
So	heavy,	the	weight,	so	vast—
Injured	beyond	recovery,	Moon’s	Spawn	was	already	dead,	as	dead	as
Endest	Silann’s	own	power.	We	both	drowned	that	day.	We	both	died.
Raging	falls	of	black	water	thundering	down,	a	rain	of	tears	from	stone,
oh,	how	Moon’s	Spawn	wept.	Cracks	widening,	the	internal	thunder	of	beauty’s
collapse…
I	should	have	gone	with	Moon’s	Spawn	when	at	last	he	sent	it	drifting	away,
yes,	I	should	have.	Squatting	among	the	interred	dead.	My	lord	honours	me	for
my	sacrifice,	but	his	every	word	is	like	ashes	drifting	down	on	my	face.	Abyss
below,	I	felt	the	sundering	of	every	room!	The	fissures	bursting	through	were
sword	slashes	in	my	soul,	and	how	we	bled,	how	we	groaned,	how	we	fell	inward
with	our	mortal	wounds!
The	pressure	would	not	relent.	It	was	within	him	now.	The	sea	sought
vengeance,	and	now	could	assail	him	no	matter	where	he	stood.	Hubris	had
delivered	a	curse,	searing	a	brand	on	his	soul.	A	brand	that	had	grown	septic.
He	was	too	broken	to	fight	it	off	any	more.
I	am	Moon’s	Spawn,	now.	Crushed	in	the	deep,	unable	to	reach	the	surface.


I	descend,	and	the	pressure	builds.	How	it	builds!
No,	this	would	not	do.	Breath	hissing,	he	pushed	himself	from	the	wall,
staggered	onward.	He	was	a	High	Mage	no	longer.	He	was	nothing.	A	mere
castellan,	fretting	over	kitchen	supplies	and	foodstuffs,	watch	schedules	and
cords	of	wood	for	the	hearths.	Wax	for	the	yellow-eyed	candle-makers.	Squid
ink	for	the	stained	scribes…
Now,	when	he	stood	before	his	lord,	he	spoke	of	paltry	things,	and	this	was
his	legacy,	all	that	remained.
Yet	did	I	not	stand	with	him	on	that	strand?	Am	I	not	the	last	one	left	to
share	with	my	lord	that	memory?
The	pressure	slowly	eased.	And	once	again,	he	had	survived	the	embrace.
And	the	next	time?	There	was	no	telling,	but	he	did	not	believe	he	could	last
much	longer.	The	pain	clutching	his	chest,	the	thunder	in	his	skull.
We	have	found	a	new	supply	of	cadaver	eels.	That	is	what	I	will	tell	him.
And	he	will	smile	and	nod,	and	perhaps	settle	one	hand	on	my	shoulder.	A
gentle,	cautious	squeeze,	light	enough	to	ensure	that	nothing	breaks.	He	will
speak	his	gratitude.
For	the	eels.
	
It	was	a	measure	of	his	courage	and	fortitude	that	the	man	had	never	once
denied	that	he	had	been	a	Seerdomin	of	the	Pannion	Domin;	that,	indeed,	he	had
served	the	mad	tyrant	in	the	very	keep	now	reduced	to	rubble	barely	a	stone’s
throw	behind	the	Scour	Tavern.	That	he	held	on	to	the	title	was	not	evidence	of
some	misplaced	sense	of	manic	loyalty.	The	man	with	the	expressive	eyes
understood	irony,	and	if	on	occasion	some	fellow	human	in	the	city	took
umbrage	upon	hearing	him	identify	himself	thus,	well,	the	Seerdomin	could
take	care	of	himself	and	that	was	one	legacy	that	was	no	cause	for	shame.
This	much	and	little	more	was	what	Spinnock	Durav	knew	of	the	man,
beyond	his	impressive	talent	in	the	game	they	now	played:	an	ancient	game	of
the	Tiste	Andii,	known	as	Kef	Tanar,	that	had	spread	throughout	the	population
of	Black	Coral	and	indeed,	so	he	had	heard,	to	cities	far	beyond	–	even
Darujhistan	itself.
As	many	kings	or	queens	as	there	were	players.	A	field	of	battle	that
expanded	with	each	round	and	was	never	twice	the	same.	Soldiers	and
mercenaries	and	mages,	assassins,	spies.	Spinnock	Durav	knew	that	the
original	inspiration	for	Kef	Tanar	could	be	found	in	the	succession	wars
among	the	First	Children	of	Mother	Dark,	and	indeed	one	of	the	king	figures
bore	a	slash	of	silver	paint	on	its	mane,	whilst	another	was	of	bleached


bonewood.	There	was	a	queen	of	white	fire,	opal-crowned;	and	others
Spinnock	could,	if	he	bothered,	have	named,	assuming	anyone	was	remotely
interested,	which	he	suspected	they	were	not.
Most	held	that	the	white	mane	was	a	recent	affectation,	like	some	mocking
salute	to	Black	Coral’s	remote	ruler.	The	tiles	of	the	field	themselves	were	all
flavoured	in	aspects	of	Dark,	Light	and	Shadow.	The	Grand	City	and	Keep	tiles
were	seen	as	corresponding	to	Black	Coral,	although	Spinnock	Durav	knew
that	the	field’s	ever-expanding	Grand	City	(there	were	over	fifty	tiles	for	the
City	alone	and	a	player	could	make	more,	if	desired)	was	in	fact	Kharkanas,
the	First	City	of	Dark.
But	no	matter.	It	was	the	game	that	counted.
The	lone	Tiste	Andii	in	all	of	the	Scour,	Spinnock	Durav	sat	with	four
other	players,	with	a	crowd	now	gathered	round	to	watch	this	titanic	battle
which	had	gone	on	for	five	bells.	Smoke	hung	in	wreaths	just	overhead,
obscuring	the	low	rafters	of	the	tavern’s	main	room,	blunting	the	light	of	the
torches	and	candles.	Rough	pillars	here	and	there	held	up	the	ceiling,
constructed	from	fragments	of	the	old	palace	and	Moon’s	Spawn	itself,	all
inexpertly	fitted	together,	some	leaning	ominously	and	displaying	cracks	in	the
mortar.	Spilled	ale	puddled	the	uneven	flagstones	of	the	floor,	where	hardbacked	salamanders	slithered	about,	drunkenly	attempting	to	mate	with
people’s	feet	and	needing	to	be	kicked	off	again	and	again.
The	Seerdomin	sat	across	the	table	from	Spinnock.	Two	of	the	other
players	had	succumbed	to	vassal	roles,	both	now	subject	to	Seerdomin’s	opalcrowned	queen.	The	third	player ’s	forces	had	been	backed	into	one	corner	of
the	field,	and	he	was	contemplating	throwing	in	his	lot	with	either	Seerdomin
or	Spinnock	Durav.
If	the	former,	then	Spinnock	was	in	trouble,	although	by	no	means	finished.
He	was,	after	all,	a	veteran	player	whose	experience	spanned	nearly	twenty
thousand	years.
Spinnock	was	large	for	a	Tiste	Andii,	wide-shouldered	and	strangely
bearish.	There	was	a	faint	reddish	tinge	to	his	long,	unbound	hair.	His	eyes
were	set	wide	apart	on	a	broad,	somewhat	flat	face,	the	cheekbones	prominent
and	flaring.	The	slash	that	was	his	mouth	was	fixed	in	a	grin,	an	expression	that
rarely	wavered.
‘Seerdomin,’	he	now	said,	whilst	the	cornered	player	prevaricated,
besieged	by	advice	from	friends	crowded	behind	his	chair,	‘you	have	a
singular	talent	for	Kef	Tanar.’
The	man	simply	smiled.
In	the	previous	round	a	cast	of	the	knuckles	had	delivered	a	mercenary’s


coin	into	the	Seerdomin’s	royal	vaults.	Spinnock	was	expecting	a	flanking
foray	with	the	four	remaining	mercenary	figures,	either	to	bring	pressure	on
the	third	king	if	he	elected	to	remain	independent	or	threw	in	his	lot	with
Spinnock,	or	to	drive	them	deep	into	Spinnock’s	own	territory.	However,	with
but	a	handful	of	field	tiles	remaining	and	the	Gate	not	yet	selected,	Seerdomin
would	be	wiser	to	hold	back.
Breaths	were	held	as	the	third	player	reached	into	the	pouch	to	collect	a
field	tile.	He	drew	out	his	hand	closed	in	a	fist,	then	met	Spinnock’s	eyes.
Nerves	and	avarice.	‘Three	coins,	Tiste,	and	I’m	your	vassal.’
Spinnock’s	grin	hardened,	and	he	shook	his	head.	‘I	don’t	buy	vassals,
Garsten.’
‘Then	you	will	lose.’
‘I	doubt	Seerdomin	will	buy	your	allegiance	either.’
‘Come	to	me	now,’	Seerdomin	said	to	the	man,	‘and	do	so	on	your	hands
and	knees.’
Garsten’s	eyes	flicked	back	and	forth,	gauging	which	viper	was	likely	to
carry	the	least	painful	bite.	After	a	moment	he	snarled	under	his	breath	and
revealed	the	tile.
‘Gate!’
‘Delighted	to	find	you	sitting	on	my	right,’	Spinnock	said.
‘I	retreat	through!’
Cowardly,	but	predictable.	This	was	the	only	path	left	to	Garsten	that
allowed	him	to	hold	on	to	the	coins	in	his	vault.	Spinnock	and	Seerdomin
watched	as	Garsten	marched	his	pieces	from	the	field.
And	then	it	was	Spinnock’s	turn.	With	the	Gate	in	play	he	could	summon
the	five	dragons	he	had	amassed.	They	sailed	high	over	Seerdomin’s	elaborate
ground	defences,	weathering	them	with	but	the	loss	of	one	from	the	frantic
sorcery	of	the	two	High	Mages	atop	the	towers	of	Seerdomin’s	High	Keep.
The	assault	struck	down	two-thirds	of	Seerdomin’s	Inner	Court,	virtually
isolating	his	queen.
With	the	ground	defences	in	sudden	disarray	on	the	collapse	of	command,
Spinnock	advanced	a	spearhead	of	his	own	mercenaries	as	well	as	his	regiment
of	Elite	Cavalry,	neatly	bisecting	the	enemy	forces.	Both	vassals	subsequently
broke	in	uprising,	each	remaining	on	the	field	long	enough	to	further	savage
Seerdomin’s	beleaguered	forces	before	retreating	through	the	Gate.	By	the
time	the	game’s	round	reached	him,	Seerdomin	had	no	choice	but	to	reach	out
one	hand	and	topple	his	queen.
Voices	rose	on	all	sides,	as	wagers	were	settled.
Spinnock	Durav	leaned	forward	to	collect	his	winnings.	‘Resto!	A	pitcher


of	ale	for	the	table	here!’
‘You	are	ever	generous	with	my	money,’	Seerdomin	said	in	sour
amusement.
‘The	secret	of	generosity,	friend.’
‘I	appreciate	the	salve.’
‘I	know.’
As	was	customary,	the	other	three	players,	having	retreated,	could	not
partake	of	any	gesture	of	celebration	by	the	game’s	victor.	Accordingly,
Spinnock	and	Seerdomin	were	free	to	share	the	pitcher	of	ale	between	them,
and	this	seemed	a	most	satisfying	conclusion	to	such	a	skilfully	waged
campaign.	The	crowd	had	moved	off,	fragmenting	on	all	sides,	and	the	servers
were	suddenly	busy	once	more.
‘The	problem	with	us	night-owls…’	said	Seerdomin,	hunching	down	over
his	flagon.	When	it	seemed	he	would	say	no	more	he	added,	‘Not	once	does	a
glance	to	yon	smudged	pane	over	there	reveal	the	poppy-kiss	of	dawn.’
‘Dawn?	Ah,	to	announce	night’s	closure,’	Spinnock	said,	nodding.	‘It	is	a
constant	source	of	surprise	among	us	Tiste	Andii	that	so	many	humans	have
remained.	Such	unrelieved	darkness	is	a	weight	upon	your	souls,	or	so	I	have
heard.’
‘If	there	is	no	escape,	aye,	it	can	twist	a	mind	into	madness.	But	a	short	ride
beyond	the	north	gate,	out	to	the	Barrow,	and	bright	day	beckons.	Same	for	the
fishers	sailing	Outwater.	Without	such	options,	Spinnock,	you	Andii	would
indeed	be	alone	in	Black	Coral.	Moon’s	Spawn	casts	a	shadow	long	after	its
death,	or	so	the	poets	sing.	But	I	tell	you	this,’	Seerdomin	leaned	forward	to
refill	his	flagon,	‘I	welcome	this	eternal	darkness.’
Spinnock	knew	as	much,	for	the	man	seated	opposite	him	carried	a	sorrow
heavier	than	any	shadow,	and	far	darker;	and	in	this	he	was	perhaps	more	Tiste
Andii	than	human,	but	for	one	thing,	and	it	was	this	one	thing	that	made	it	easy
for	Spinnock	Durav	to	call	the	man	friend.	Seerdomin,	for	all	his	grief,	was
somehow	holding	despair	back,	defying	the	siege	that	had	long	ago	defeated
the	Tiste	Andii.	A	human	trait,	to	be	sure.	More	than	a	trait,	a	quality	profound
in	its	resilience,	a	virtue	that,	although	Spinnock	could	not	find	it	within
himself	–	nor,	it	was	true,	among	any	fellow	Tiste	Andii	–	he	could	draw	a	kind
of	sustenance	from	none	the	less.	At	times,	he	felt	like	a	parasite,	so	vital	had
this	vicarious	feeding	become,	and	he	sometimes	feared	that	it	was	the	only
thing	keeping	him	alive.
Seerdomin	had	enough	burdens,	and	Spinnock	was	determined	that	his
friend	should	never	comprehend	the	necessity	he	had	become	–	these	games,
these	nights	among	the	eternal	Night,	this	squalid	tavern	and	the	pitchers	of


cheap,	gassy	ale.
‘This	one	has	worn	me	out,’	the	man	now	said,	setting	down	his	empty
flagon.	‘I	thought	I	had	you	–	aye,	I	knew	the	Gate	tile	was	still	unplayed.	Two
tiles	to	get	past	you,	though,	and	everything	would	have	been	mine.’
There	wasn’t	much	to	say	to	that.	Both	understood	how	that	single	gamble
had	decided	the	game.	What	was	unusual	was	Seerdomin’s	uncharacteristic
need	to	explain	himself.	‘Get	some	sleep,’	Spinnock	said.
Seerdomin’s	smile	was	wry.	He	hesitated,	as	if	undecided	whether	or	not	to
say	something,	or	simply	follow	Spinnock’s	advice	and	stumble	off	to	his
home.
Speak	not	to	me	of	weakness.	Please.
‘I	have	acquired	the	habit,’	the	man	said,	squinting	as	he	followed	some
minor	ruckus	near	the	bar,	‘of	ascending	the	ruins.	To	look	out	over	the
Nightwater.	Remembering	the	old	cat-men	and	their	families	–	aye,	it	seems
they	are	breeding	anew,	but	of	course	it	will	not	be	the	same,	not	at	all	the
same.’	He	fell	silent	for	a	moment,	then	shot	Spinnock	a	quick,	uneasy	glance.
‘I	see	your	lord.’
The	Tiste	Andii’s	brows	lifted.	‘Anomander	Rake?’
A	nod.	‘First	time	was	a	couple	of	weeks	ago.	And	now…every	time,	at
about	the	twelfth	bell.	He	stands	on	the	wall	of	the	new	keep.	And,	like	me,	he
stares	out	to	sea.’
‘He	favours…solitude,’	Spinnock	said.
‘I	am	always	suspicious	of	that	statement,’	Seerdomin	said.
Yes,	I	can	see	how	you	might	be.	‘It	is	what	comes	from	lordship,	from
rule.	Most	of	his	original	court	is	gone.	Korlat,	Orfantal,	Sorrit,	Pra’iran.
Vanished	or	dead.	That	doesn’t	make	it	any	easier.	Still,	there	are	some	who
remain.	Endest	Silann,	for	one.’
‘When	I	see	him,	standing	alone	like	that…’	Seerdomin	looked	away.	‘It
unnerves	me.’
‘It	is	my	understanding,’	observed	Spinnock,	‘that	we	all	manage	to	do	that,
for	you	humans.	The	way	we	seem	to	haunt	this	city.’
‘Sentinels	with	nothing	to	guard.’
Spinnock	thought	about	that,	then	asked,	‘And	so	too	the	Son	of	Darkness?
Do	you	people	chafe	under	his	indifferent	rule?’
Seerdomin	grimaced.	‘Would	that	all	rulers	were	as	indifferent.	No,
“indifferent”	is	not	quite	the	right	word.	He	is	there	where	it	matters.	The
administration	and	the	authority	–	neither	can	be	challenged,	nor	is	there	any
reason	to	do	so.	The	Son	of	Darkness	is…benign.’
Spinnock	thought	of	the	sword	strapped	to	his	lord’s	back,	adding	the	tart


flavour	of	inadvertent	irony	to	his	friend’s	words.	And	then	he	thought	of	the
dead	cities	to	the	north.	Maurik,	Setta,	Lest.	‘It’s	not	as	if	any	neighbouring
kingdoms	are	eyeing	the	prize	that	is	Black	Coral.	They’re	either	dead	or,	as	in
the	south,	in	complete	disarray.	Thus,	the	threat	of	war	is	absent.	Accordingly,
what’s	left	for	a	ruler?	As	you	say,	administration	and	authority.’
‘You	do	not	convince	me,	friend,’	Seerdomin	said,	his	eyes	narrowing.
‘The	Son	of	Darkness,	now	is	that	a	title	for	a	bureaucrat?	Hardly.	Knight	of
Darkness	to	keep	the	thugs	off	the	streets?’
‘It	is	the	curse	of	a	long	life,’	Spinnock	said,	‘that	in	eminence	one	both
rises	and	falls,	again	and	again.	Before	this,	there	was	a	vast	and	costly	war
against	the	Pannion	Domin.	Before	that,	an	even	deadlier	and	far	longer	feud
with	the	Malazan	Empire.	Before	that,	Jacuruku.	Seerdomin,	Anomander	Rake
has	earned	his	rest.	This	peace.’
‘Then	perhaps	he	is	the	one	who	chafes.	Staring	out	upon	the	harsh	waters
of	the	Cut,	the	twelfth	bell	tolling	like	a	dirge	in	the	gloom.’
‘Poetic,’	Spinnock	said,	smiling,	but	there	was	something	cold	in	his	heart,
as	if	the	image	conjured	by	his	friend’s	words	was	somehow	too	poignant.	The
notion	sobered	him.	‘I	do	not	know	if	my	lord	chafes.	I	have	never	been	that
important;	little	more	than	one	warrior	among	thousands.	I	do	not	think	we
have	spoken	in	centuries.’
Seerdomin’s	look	was	incredulous.	‘But	that	is	absurd!’
‘Is	it?	See	me,	Seerdomin,	I	am	too	capricious.	It	is	my	eternal	curse.	I	was
never	one	for	command,	not	even	a	squad.	I	got	lost	in	Mott	Wood,	five	days
stumbling	through	briar	and	brush.’	Spinnock	laughed,	waved	one	hand.	‘A
hopeless	cause	long	ago,	friend.’
‘It’s	commonly	held,	Spinnock,	that	all	you	remaining	Tiste	Andii	–
survivors	from	all	those	wars	–	are	perforce	the	élite,	the	most	formidable	of
all.’
‘You	were	a	soldier,	so	you	know	better	than	that.	Oh,	there	are	heroes
aplenty	among	the	Andii	ranks.	But	just	as	many	of	us	who	were	simply	lucky.
It’s	the	way	of	things.	We	lost	many	great	heroes	in	our	battles	against	the
Malazans.’
‘A	hopeless	cause,	you	claim	to	be.’	Seerdomin	grimaced.	‘Yet	a	master
campaigner	in	Kef	Tanar.’
‘With	soldiers	of	carved	wood,	I	am	most	formidable.	Living	ones	are
another	matter	entirely.’
The	man	grunted,	and	seemed	content	to	leave	that	one	alone.
They	sat	in	companionable	silence	for	a	time,	as	Resto	delivered	another
pitcher	of	ale,	and	Spinnock	was	relieved,	as	the	ale	flowed	from	pitcher	to


flagon	to	mouth,	that	no	more	talk	of	past	deeds	in	distant	fields	of	battle	arose
that	might	unhinge	the	half-truths	and	outright	lies	he	had	just	uttered.
And	when	the	moment	came	when	dawn	unfurled	its	poppy	blush	upon	the
far	eastern	horizon,	a	moment	unseen	by	any	within	the	city	of	Black	Coral,
Spinnock	Durav	nodded,	but	mostly	to	himself.	Eternal	darkness	or	not,	a	Tiste
Andii	knew	when	light	arrived.	Another	irony,	then,	that	only	the	humans
within	Night	were	oblivious	of	the	day’s	beginning,	of	the	passage	of	the
unseen	sun	beyond	the	gloom,	of	its	endless	journey	across	the	sky.
Before	they	both	got	too	drunk,	they	agreed	upon	the	time	for	a	new	game.
And	when	Seerdomin	finally	rose	unsteadily	to	his	feet,	flinging	a	careless
wave	in	Spinnock’s	direction	before	weaving	out	through	the	tavern	door,
Spinnock	found	himself	wishing	the	man	a	safe	journey	home.
A	most	generous	send-off,	then,	even	if	delivered	in	silence.
Anomander	Rake	would	be	setting	out	for	the	throne	room	by	now,	where
he	would	steel	himself	to	face	the	brutal	demands	of	the	day,	the	allocation	of
stipends,	the	merchant	grievances	to	be	adjudicated,	reports	on	the	status	of
supplies,	one	or	two	emissaries	from	distant	free	cities	seeking	trade
agreements	and	mutual	protection	pacts	(yes,	plenty	of	those).
Oh,	the	Knight	of	Darkness	fought	all	manner	of	beasts	and	demons,	did	he
not?
	
Darkness	surrendered.	But	then,	it	always	did.	There	was	no	telling	how	long
the	journey	took	in	that	time	within	Kurald	Galain,	nor	the	vast	distances
covered,	stride	by	stride	by	stride.	All	was	in	discord,	all	was	unrelieved	and
unrelieving.	Again	and	again,	Nimander	Golit	seemed	to	startle	awake,
realizing	with	a	shiver	that	he	had	been	walking,	an	automaton	in	the	midst	of
his	comrades,	all	of	whom	glowed	dully	and	appeared	to	float	in	an	ethereal
void,	with	the	one	named	Clip	a	few	paces	ahead,	striding	with	a	purpose	none
of	them	could	emulate.	Nimander	would	then	comprehend	that,	once	more,	he
had	lost	himself.
Rediscovering	where	he	was	elicited	no	satisfaction.	Rediscovering	who	he
was	proved	even	worse.	The	young	man	named	Nimander	Golit	was	little
more	than	an	accretion	of	memories,	numbed	by	a	concatenation	of
remembered	sensations	–	a	beautiful	woman	dying	in	his	arms.	Another
woman	dying	beneath	his	hands,	her	face	turning	dark,	like	a	storm	cloud	that
could	not	burst,	her	eyes	bulging,	and	still	his	hands	squeezed.	A	flailing	body
flung	through	the	air,	crashing	through	a	window,	vanishing	into	the	rain.
Chains	could	spin	for	eternity,	rings	glittering	with	some	kind	of	life.


Worn	boots	could	swing	forward,	one	after	another	like	the	blades	of	a	pair	of
shears.	Promises	could	be	uttered,	acquiescence	forced	like	a	swollen	hand
pushing	into	a	tight	glove.	All	could	stand	wearing	their	certainty.	Or	feeling	it
drive	them	forward	like	a	wind	that	knew	where	it	was	going.	All	could	wish
for	warmth	within	that	embrace.
But	these	were	empty	things,	bobbing	before	his	eyes	like	puppets	on
tangled	strings.	As	soon	as	he	reached	out,	seeking	to	untangle	those	strings,	to
make	sense	out	of	it	all,	they	would	swing	away,	for	ever	beyond	his	reach.
Skintick,	who	seemed	ready	with	a	smile	for	everything,	walked	at	his	side
yet	half	a	step	ahead.	Nimander	could	not	see	enough	of	his	cousin’s	face	to
know	how	Skintick	had	greeted	the	darkness	that	had	stretched	ever	before
them,	but	as	that	impenetrable	abyss	faded,	and	from	the	way	ahead	emerged
the	boles	of	pine	trees,	his	cousin	turned	with	a	smile	decidedly	wry.
‘That	wasn’t	so	bad,’	he	murmured,	making	every	word	a	lie	and	clearly
delighting	in	his	own	mockery.
Damp	air	swirled	round	them	now,	cool	in	its	caress,	and	Clip’s	steps	had
slowed.	When	he	turned	they	could	see	the	extent	of	his	exhaustion.	The	rings
spun	once	round	on	the	chain	in	his	hand,	then	snapped	taut.	‘We	will	camp
here,’	he	said	in	a	hoarse	voice.
Some	previous	battle	had	left	Clip’s	armour	and	clothes	in	tatters,	with	old
bloodstains	on	the	dark	leather.	So	many	wounds	that,	if	delivered	all	at	once,
they	should	probably	have	killed	him.	Little	of	this	had	been	visible	that	night
on	the	street	in	Second	Maiden	Fort,	when	he	had	first	summoned	them.
Nimander	and	Skintick	watched	their	kin	settle	down	on	the	soft	loam	of
the	forest	floor	wherever	they	happened	to	be	standing,	blank-eyed	and
looking	lost.	Yes,	‘explanations	are	ephemeral.	They	are	the	sword	and	shield
of	the	attack,	and	behind	them	hides	motivation.	Explanations	strive	to	find
weakness,	and	from	the	exploitation	of	weakness	comes	compliance	and	the
potential	of	absolute	surrender.’	So	Andarist	had	written,	long	ago,	in	a	treatise
entitled	Combat	and	Negotiation.
Skintick,	his	long	jester ’s	face	faintly	pinched	with	weariness,	plucked	at
Nimander ’s	sleeve,	gestured	with	a	nod	of	his	head	then	set	out	to	one	side,
threading	between	trees.	After	a	moment,	Nimander	followed.
His	cousin	halted	some	thirty	paces	from	the	makeshift	camp,	where	he
settled	on	to	his	haunches.
Across	from	him,	Nimander	did	the	same.
The	sun	was	beginning	to	rise,	bleeding	light	into	the	gloom	of	this	forest.
With	it	came	the	faint	smell	of	the	sea.
‘Herald	of	Mother	Dark,’	Skintick	said	quietly,	as	if	measuring	the	worth


of	the	words.	‘Mortal	Sword.	Bold	titles,	Nimander.	Why,	I’ve	thought	of	one
for	each	of	us	too	–	not	much	else	to	occupy	my	time	on	that	endless	walk.
Skintick,	the	Blind	Jester	of	House	Dark.	Do	you	like	it?’
‘You’re	not	blind.’
‘I’m	not?’
‘What	is	it	you	wished	to	talk	about?’	Nimander	asked.	‘Not	silly	titles,	I
should	think.’
‘That	depends.	This	Clip	proudly	asserts	his	own,	after	all.’
‘You	do	not	believe	him?’
A	half-smile.	‘Cousin,	there	is	very	little	I	truly	believe.	Beyond	the
oxymoronic	fact	that	supposedly	intelligent	people	seem	to	revel	in	being
stupid.	For	this,	I	blame	the	chaotic	tumult	of	emotions	that	devour	reason	as
water	devours	snow.’
‘“Emotions	are	the	spawn	of	true	motivations,	whether	those	motivations
be	conscious	or	otherwise”,’	said	Nimander.
‘The	man	remembers	what	he	reads.	Making	him	decidedly	dangerous,	not
to	mention	occasionally	tedious.’
‘What	are	we	to	discuss?’	Nimander	asked,	in	some	exasperation.	‘He	can
claim	any	title	he	wishes	–	we	can	do	nothing	about	it,	can	we?’
‘Well,	we	can	choose	to	follow,	or	not	follow.’
‘Even	that	is	too	late.	We	have	followed.	Into	Kurald	Galain,	and	now	here.
And	in	the	time	ahead,	to	the	journey’s	very	end.’
‘To	stand	before	Anomander	Rake,	yes.’	Skintick	gestured	at	the
surrounding	forest.	‘Or	we	could	just	walk	away.	Leave	Clip	to	his	dramatic
accounting	with	the	Son	of	Darkness.’
‘Where	would	we	go,	then,	Skintick?	We	don’t	even	know	where	we	are.
What	realm	is	this?	What	world	lies	beyond	this	forest?	Cousin,	we	have
nowhere	else	to	go.’
‘Nowhere,	and	anywhere.	In	the	circumstances,	Nimander,	the	former	leads
to	the	latter,	like	reaching	a	door	everyone	believes	barred,	locked	tight,	and
lo,	it	opens	wide	at	the	touch.	Nowhere	and	anywhere	are	states	of	mind.	See
this	forest	around	us?	Is	it	a	barrier,	or	ten	thousand	paths	leading	into	mystery
and	wonder?	Whichever	you	decide,	the	forest	itself	remains	unchanged.	It
does	not	transform	to	suit	your	decision.’
‘And	where	is	the	joke	in	that,	cousin?’
‘Laugh	or	cry,	simple	states	of	mind.’
‘And?’
Skintick	glanced	away,	back	towards	the	camp.	‘I	find	Clip…amusing.’
‘Why	does	that	not	surprise	me?’


‘He	has	created	a	vast,	portentous	moment,	the	moment	when	he	finally
stands	face	to	face	with	the	Son	of	Darkness.	He	hears	martial	music,	the
thunder	of	drums,	or	the	howl	of	horns	sweeping	round	the	high,	swaying
tower	where	this	fated	meeting	no	doubt	will	occur.	He	sees	fear	in	Anomander
Rake’s	eyes,	in	answer	to	his	own	fury.’
‘Then	he	is	a	fool.’
‘Us	young	folk	commonly	are.	We	should	tell	him.’
‘Tell	him	what?	That	he	is	a	fool?’
Skintick’s	smile	broadened	briefly,	then	he	met	Nimander ’s	eyes	once
more.	‘Something	more	subtle,	I	should	think.’
‘Such	as?’
‘The	forest	does	not	change.’
Now	it	was	Nimander ’s	turn	to	glance	away,	to	squint	into	the	greyness	of
dawn,	the	misty	wreaths	shrouding	the	ankles	of	the	trees.	She	died	in	my	arms.
Then	Andarist	died,	bleeding	out	on	to	the	cobbles.	And	Phaed	was	pulled	from
my	hands.	Thrown	through	a	window,	down	to	her	death.	I	met	the	eyes	of	her
killer,	and	saw	that	he	had	killed	her…for	me.
The	forest	does	not	change.
‘There	are,’	Skintick	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘things	worth	considering,
Nimander.	We	are	six	Tiste	Andii,	and	Clip.	So,	seven.	Wherever	we	now	are,	it
is	not	our	world.	Yet,	I	am	certain,	it	is	the	same	world	we	have	come	to	know,
to	even	think	of,	as	our	own.	The	world	of	Drift	Avalii,	our	first	island	prison.
The	world	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	Adjunct	Tavore,	and	the	Isle	that	was	our
second	prison.	The	same	world.	Perhaps	this	here	is	the	very	land	where	waits
Anomander	Rake	–	why	would	Clip	take	us	through	Kurald	Galain	to	some
place	far	from	the	Son	of	Darkness?	We	might	find	him	another	league	onward
through	this	forest.’
‘Why	not	to	his	front	door?’
Skintick	grinned	his	pleased	grin.	‘Indeed,	why	not?	In	any	case,
Anomander	Rake	will	not	be	alone.	There	will	be	other	Tiste	Andii	with	him.	A
community.	Nimander,	we	have	earned	such	a	gift,	haven’t	we?’
To	that,	Nimander	wanted	to	weep.	I	have	earned	nothing.	Beyond
remonstration.	Condemnation.	The	contempt	of	every	one	of	them.	Of
Anomander	Rake	himself.	For	all	my	failures,	the	community	will	judge	me,	and
that	will	be	that.	Self-pity	tugged	at	him	yet	further,	but	he	shook	it	off.	For
these	who	followed	him,	for	Skintick	and	Desra	and	Nenanda,	Kedeviss	and
Aranatha,	yes,	he	could	give	them	this	last	gift.
Which	was	not	even	his	to	give,	but	Clip’s.	Clip,	my	usurper.
‘And	so,’	he	finally	said,	‘we	come	back	to	the	beginning.	We	will	follow


Clip,	until	he	takes	us	to	our	people.’
‘I	suppose	you	are	right,’	Skintick	said,	as	if	satisfied	with	the	circular
nature	of	their	conversation,	as	if	something	had	indeed	been	achieved	by	the
effort	–	though	Nimander	could	not	imagine	what	that	might	be.
Birdsong	to	awaken	the	sky	to	light,	a	musty	warmth	hinted	at	in	the	soft
breaths	rising	from	the	humus.	The	air	smelled	impossibly	clean.	Nimander
rubbed	at	his	face,	then	saw	Skintick’s	almond-shaped	eyes	shift	their	gaze	to
over	his	shoulder,	and	so	he	turned,	even	as	a	fallen	branch	crackled	underfoot
to	announce	someone’s	arrival.
Skintick	raised	his	voice,	‘Join	us,	cousin.’
Aranatha	moved	like	a	lost	child,	ever	tremulous,	ever	diffident.	Eyes
widening	–	as	they	always	did	whenever	she	awakened	to	the	outside	world	–
she	edged	forward.	‘I	couldn’t	sleep,’	she	said.	‘Nenanda	was	asking	Clip	about
all	sorts	of	things,	until	Desra	told	him	to	go	away.’
Skintick’s	brows	lifted.	‘Desra?	Stalking	Clip	now,	is	she?	Well,	my	only
surprise	is	that	it’s	taken	this	long	–	not	that	there	was	much	chance	within
Kurald	Galain.’
Nimander	asked	her,	‘Did	Nenanda	manage	to	get	an	explanation	from
Clip	about	where	we	are?	And	how	far	we	still	have	to	go?’
She	continued	creeping	forward.	The	muted	dawn	light	made	her	seem	a
thing	of	obsidian	and	silver,	her	long	black	hair	glistening,	her	black	skin
faintly	dusted,	her	silver	eyes	hinting	of	iron	that	never	appeared.	Like	some
Goddess	of	Hope.	But	one	whose	only	strength	lay	in	an	optimism	immune	to
defeat.	Immune	to	all	reality,	in	fact.	‘We	have	emerged	somewhere	south	of
where	we	were	supposed	to.	There	are,	Clip	explained,	“layers	of	resistance”.’
She	shrugged.	‘I	don’t	understand	what	that	means,	but	those	were	his	words.’
Nimander	briefly	met	Skintick’s	eyes,	then	smiled	up	at	Aranatha.	‘Did
Clip	say	how	much	farther?’
‘Farther	than	he’d	hoped.	Tell	me,	do	either	of	you	smell	the	sea?’
‘Yes,’	Nimander	replied.	‘Can’t	be	far,	either.	East,	I	think.’
‘We	should	go	there	–	perhaps	there	will	be	villages.’
‘You	possess	impressive	reserves,	Aranatha,’	said	Skintick.
‘If	it’s	not	far…’
With	a	wry	smile,	Skintick	straightened.
Nimander	did	the	same.
It	was	simple	enough	to	walk	in	the	direction	of	the	rising	sun,	clambering
over	tree-falls	and	skirting	sinkholes.	The	only	trails	they	crossed	were	those
left	by	game	–	nothing	taller	than	deer	and	so	branches	hung	low	over	them	–
and	none	led	to	the	sea.	The	air	grew	warmer,	then,	all	at	once,	cooler,	and


ahead	was	the	sound	of	wind	singing	through	branches	and	leaves,	and	then	the
crashing	of	surf.	Slanting	bedrock	pushed	up	between	trees,	forcing	them	to
climb,	scrambling	up	a	sharply	rising	cant.
They	emerged	to	find	themselves	atop	a	cliff	of	wind-scoured	rock	and
stunted,	twisted	trees.	The	sea	was	before	them,	glittering	fierce	in	the	sun.
Enormous	swells	rolled	in,	pounding	the	jagged,	unforgiving	shoreline	far
below.	The	coast	to	the	north	and	the	south	was	virtually	identical	as	far	as
could	be	seen.	Well	out	from	shore,	explosions	of	spume	betrayed	the	presence
of	submerged	reefs	and	shallows.
‘Won’t	find	any	villages	here,’	Skintick	said.	‘I	doubt	we’d	find	much	of
anything,	and	as	for	skirting	this	coast,	well,	that	looks	to	be	virtually
impossible.	Unless,	of	course,’	he	added	with	a	smile,	‘our	glorious	leader	can
kick	rock	to	rubble	to	make	us	a	beach.	Or	summon	winged	demons	to	carry
us	over	all	this.	Failing	that,	I	suggest	we	return	to	our	camp,	burrow	down
into	the	pine	needles,	and	go	to	sleep.’
No	one	objected,	so	they	turned	about	to	retrace	their	route.
	
Seeing	the	rage	ever	bridling	and	boiling	beneath	the	surface	of	the	young
warrior	named	Nenanda	was	a	constant	comfort	to	Clip.	This	one	he	could
work	with.	This	one	he	could	shape.	His	confidence	in	Nimander,	on	the	other
hand,	was	virtually	non-existent.	The	man	had	been	thrust	into	a	leader ’s	role
and	it	clearly	did	not	suit	him.	Too	sensitive	by	far,	Nimander	was	of	the	type
that	the	world	and	all	its	brutal	realities	usually	destroyed,	and	it	was
something	of	a	miracle	that	it	had	not	yet	done	so.	Clip	had	seen	such	pathetic
creatures	before;	perhaps	indeed	it	was	a	trait	among	the	Tiste	Andii.	Centuries
of	life	became	a	travail,	an	impossible	burden.	Such	creatures	burned	out	fast.
No,	Nimander	was	not	worth	his	time.	And	Nimander ’s	closest	companion,
Skintick,	was	no	better.	Clip	admitted	he	saw	something	of	himself	in	Skintick
–	that	wry	mockery,	the	quick	sarcasm	–	yes,	other	traits	common	among	the
Andii.	What	Skintick	lacked,	however,	was	the	hard	vicious	core	that	he
himself	possessed	in	abundance.
Necessities	existed.	Necessities	had	to	be	recognized,	and	in	that
recognition	so	too	must	be	understood	all	the	tasks	required	to	achieve
precisely	what	was	necessary.	Hard	choices	were	the	only	choices	that	could	be
deemed	virtuous.	Clip	was	well	familiar	with	hard	choices,	and	with	the
acceptable	burden	that	was	virtue.	He	was	prepared	to	carry	such	a	burden	for
the	rest	of	what	he	anticipated	would	be	a	very,	very	long	life.
Nenanda	might	well	be	worthy	to	stand	at	his	side,	through	all	that	was	to


come.
Among	the	young	women	in	this	entourage,	only	Desra	seemed	potentially
useful.	Ambitious	and	no	doubt	ruthless,	she	could	be	the	knife	in	his	hidden
scabbard.	Besides,	an	attractive	woman’s	attentions	delivered	their	own	reward,
did	they	not?	Kedeviss	was	too	frail,	broken	inside	just	like	Nimander,	and	Clip
could	already	see	death	in	her	shadow.	Aranatha	was	still	a	child	behind	those
startled	eyes,	and	perhaps	always	would	be.	No,	of	this	entire	group	he	had
recruited	from	the	Isle,	only	Nenanda	and	Desra	were	of	any	use	to	him.
He	had	hoped	for	better.	After	all,	these	were	the	survivors	of	Drift	Avalii.
They	had	stood	at	the	side	of	Andarist	himself,	crossing	blades	with	Tiste	Edur
warriors.	With	demons.	They	had	tasted	their	share	of	blood,	of	triumph	and
grief.	They	should	now	be	hardened	veterans.
Well,	he	had	managed	with	worse.
Alone	for	the	moment,	with	Aranatha	wandering	off	and	probably	already
lost;	with	Nenanda,	Desra	and	Kedeviss	finally	asleep;	and	with	Nimander	and
Skintick	somewhere	in	the	woods	–	no	doubt	discussing	portentous	decisions
on	things	relevant	only	to	them	–	Clip	loosened	once	again	the	chain	and	rings
wrapped	about	his	hand.	There	was	a	soft	clink	as	the	gleaming	rings	met	at	the
ends	of	the	dangling	chain,	each	now	spinning	slowly,	one	counter	to	the	other
as	proof	of	the	power	they	held.	Miniature	portals	appearing	and	disappearing,
then	reappearing	once	more,	all	bounded	in	cold	metal.
The	fashioning	of	these	items	had	devoured	most	of	the	powers	of	the
Andii	dwelling	in	the	subterranean	fastness	that	was	–	or	had	been	–	the
Andara.	Leaving	his	kin,	as	it	turned	out,	fatally	vulnerable	to	their	Letherii
hunters.	The	cacophony	of	souls	residing	within	these	rings	was	now	all	that
remained	of	those	people,	his	pathetic	family	of	misfits.	And	his	to	control.
Sometimes,	it	seemed,	even	when	things	didn’t	go	as	planned,	Clip	found
himself	reaping	rewards.
Proof,	yes,	that	I	am	chosen.
The	chain	swung,	rings	lifting	up	and	out.	Spun	into	a	whine	like	the	cries
of	a	thousand	trapped	souls,	and	Clip	smiled.
	
The	journey	from	the	Scour	Tavern	back	to	the	New	Palace	skirted	the	ruins	of
the	great	fortress,	the	collapse	of	which	had	brought	to	an	end	the	Pannion
Domin.	Unlit	and	now	perpetually	shrouded	in	gloom,	the	heaped	rubble	of
black	stone	still	smelled	of	fire	and	death.	The	ragged	edge	of	this	shattered
monument	was	on	Spinnock	Durav’s	left	as	he	walked	the	street	now	called
Fringe	Stagger.	Ahead	and	slightly	to	the	right	rose	Dragon	Tower,	and	he


could	feel	Silanah’s	crimson	eyes	on	him	from	atop	its	great	height.	The
regard	of	an	Eleint	was	never	welcome,	no	matter	how	familiar	Silanah’s
presence	among	Rake’s	Tiste	Andii.
Spinnock	could	well	recall	the	last	few	times	he	had	been	witness	to	the
dragon	unleashed.	Flames	ripping	through	the	forest	that	was	Mott	Wood,
crashing	down	in	a	deluge,	with	a	deafening	concussion	that	drowned	out
every	death-cry	as	countless	unseen	creatures	died.	Among	them,	perhaps	a
handful	of	Crimson	Guard,	a	dozen	or	so	Mott	Irregulars.	Like	using	an	axe	to
kill	ants.
Then,	from	the	very	heart	of	that	fiery	maelstrom,	virulent	sorcery	lashed
out,	striking	Silanah	in	a	coruscating	wave.	Thunder	hammering	the	air,	the
dragon’s	scream	of	pain.	The	enormous	beast	writhing,	slashing	her	way	free,
then,	trailing	ropes	of	blood,	flying	back	towards	Moon’s	Spawn.
He	recalled	Anomander	Rake’s	rage,	and	how	he	could	hold	it	in	his	eyes
like	a	demon	chained	to	his	will,	even	as	he	stood	motionless,	even	as	he	spoke
in	a	calm,	almost	bored	tone.	A	single	word,	a	name.
Cowl.
And	with	that	name,	oh,	how	the	rage	flared	in	those	draconean	eyes.
There	had	begun,	then,	a	hunt.	The	kind	only	a	fool	would	choose	to	join.
Rake,	seeking	out	the	deadliest	wizard	among	the	Crimson	Guard.	At	one
point,	Spinnock	remembered	standing	on	the	high	ledge	on	the	face	of	Moon’s
Spawn,	watching	the	mage-storms	fill	half	the	northern	night	sky.	Flashes,	the
knight	charge	of	thunder	through	a	smoke-wreathed	sky.	He	had	wondered,
then,	if	the	world	was	on	the	very	edge	of	being	torn	apart,	and	from	the	depths
of	his	soul	had	risen	a	twisted,	malignant	thought.	Again…
When	great	powers	strode	on	to	the	field	of	battle,	things	had	a	way	of
getting	out	of	hand.
Had	it	been	Cowl	who	first	blinked?	Bowing	out,	yielding	ground,	fleeing?
Or	had	it	been	the	Son	of	Darkness?
Spinnock	doubted	he	would	ever	find	out.	Such	questions	were	not	asked
of	Anomander	Rake.	Some	time	later,	it	was	discovered	by	the	Tiste	Andii,
Cowl	had	resurfaced,	this	time	in	Darujhistan.	Causing	more	trouble.	His	stay
there	had	been	blessedly	brief.
Another	vision	of	Silanah,	laying	the	trap	for	the	Jaghut	Tyrant	in	the
Gadrobi	Hills.	More	wounds,	more	ferocious	magic.	Wheeling	over	the
ravaged	plain.	Five	Soletaken	Tiste	Andii	whirling	round	her	like	crows
escorting	an	eagle.
Perhaps	he	was	alone,	Spinnock	reflected,	in	his	unease	with	the	alliance
between	the	Tiste	Andii	and	the	Eleint.	There	had	been	a	time,	after	all,	when


Anomander	Rake	had	warred	against	the	pure-blood	dragons.	When	such
creatures	broke	loose	from	their	long-standing	servitude	to	K’rul;	when	they
had	sought	to	grasp	power	for	themselves.	The	motivation	for	Rake’s
opposition	to	them	was,	typically,	obscure.	Silanah’s	arrival	–	much	later	–	was
yet	another	event	shrouded	in	mystery.
No,	Spinnock	Durav	was	far	from	thrilled	by	Silanah’s	bloodless	regard.
He	approached	the	arched	entrance	to	the	New	Palace,	ascending	the
flagstone	ramp.	There	were	no	guards	standing	outside.	There	never	were.
Pushing	open	one	of	the	twin	doors,	he	strode	inside.	Before	him,	a	buttressed
corridor	that	humans	would	find	unnaturally	narrow.	Twenty	paces	in,	another
archway,	opening	out	into	a	spacious	domed	chamber	with	a	floor	of	polished
blackwood	inset	with	the	twenty-eight	spiralling	terondai	of	Mother	Dark,	all
in	black	silver.	The	inside	of	the	dome	overhead	was	a	mirror	image.	This
homage	to	the	goddess	who	had	turned	away	was,	to	Spinnock’s	mind,
extraordinary;	appallingly	out	of	place.
Oh,	sages	might	well	debate	who	had	done	the	turning	away	back	then,	but
none	would	dismiss	the	terrible	vastness	of	the	schism.	Was	this	some	belated
effort	at	healing	the	ancient	wound?	Spinnock	found	that	notion	unfathomable.
And	yet,	Anomander	Rake	himself	had	commissioned	the	terondai,	the
Invisible	Sun	and	its	whirling,	wild	rays	of	onyx	flame.
If	Kurald	Galain	had	a	heart	in	this	realm’s	manifestation	of	the	warren,	it
was	here,	in	this	chamber.	Yet	he	felt	no	presence,	no	ghostly	breath	of	power,
as	he	made	his	way	across	the	floor	to	the	curling	bone-white	staircase.	Just
beyond	the	turn	above	wavered	a	pool	of	lantern	light.
Two	human	servants	were	scrubbing	the	alabaster	steps.	At	his	arrival	they
ducked	away.
‘Mind	the	wet,’	one	muttered.
‘I’m	surprised,’	Spinnock	said	as	he	edged	past,	‘there’s	need	to	clean	these
at	all.	There	are	all	of	fifteen	people	living	in	this	palace.’
‘You’ve	that,	sir,’	the	man	replied,	nodding.
The	Tiste	Andii	paused	and	glanced	back.	‘Then	why	are	you	bothering?	I
can	hardly	believe	the	castellan	set	you	upon	this	task.’
‘No	sir,	he	never	did.	We	was	just,	er,	bored.’
After	a	bemused	moment,	Spinnock	resumed	his	ascent.	These	shortlived
creatures	baffled	him.
The	journey	to	the	chambers	where	dwelt	the	Son	of	Darkness	was	a
lengthy	traverse	made	in	solitude.	Echoing	corridors,	unlocked,	unguarded
doors.	The	castellan’s	modest	collection	of	scribes	and	sundry	bureaucrats
worked	in	offices	on	the	main	floor;	kitchen	staff,	clothes-scrubbers	and


wringers,	hearth-keepers	and	taper-lighters,	all	lived	and	worked	in	the	lower
levels.	Here,	on	the	higher	floors,	darkness	ruled	a	realm	virtually	unoccupied.
Reaching	the	elongated	room	that	faced	the	Nightwater,	Spinnock	Durav
found	his	lord.
Facing	the	crystal	window	that	ran	the	entire	length	of	the	Nightwater	wall,
his	long	silver-white	hair	was	faintly	luminous	in	the	muted,	refracted	light
cast	into	the	room	by	the	faceted	quartz.	The	sword	Dragnipur	was	nowhere	in
sight.
Three	steps	into	the	chamber	and	Spinnock	halted.
Without	turning,	Anomander	Rake	said,	‘The	game,	Spinnock?’
‘You	won	again,	Lord.	But	it	was	close.’
‘The	Gate?’
Spinnock	smiled	wryly.	‘When	all	else	seems	lost…’
Perhaps	Anomander	Rake	nodded	at	that,	or	his	gaze,	fixed	somewhere	out
on	the	waves	of	Nightwater,	shifted	downward	to	something	closer	by.	A	fisher
boat,	or	the	crest	of	some	leviathan	rising	momentarily	from	the	abyss.	Either
way,	the	sigh	that	followed	was	audible.	‘Spinnock,	old	friend,	it	is	good	that
you	have	returned.’
‘Thank	you,	Lord.	I,	too,	am	pleased	to	see	an	end	to	my	wandering.’
‘Wandering?	Yes,	I	imagine	you	might	have	seen	it	that	way.’
‘You	sent	me	to	a	continent,	Lord.	Discovering	the	myriad	truths	upon	it
necessitated…fair	wandering.’
‘I	have	thought	long	on	the	details	of	your	tale,	Spinnock	Durav.’	Still	Rake
did	not	turn	round.	‘Yielding	a	single	question.	Must	I	journey	there?’
Spinnock	frowned.	‘Assail?	Lord,	the	situation	there…’
‘Yes,	I	understand.’	At	last,	the	Son	of	Darkness	slowly	swung	about,	and	it
seemed	his	eyes	had	stolen	something	from	the	crystal	window,	flaring	then
dimming	like	a	memory.	‘Soon,	then.’
‘Lord,	on	my	last	day,	a	league	from	the	sea…’
‘Yes?’
‘I	lost	count	of	those	I	killed	to	reach	that	desolate	strand.	Lord,	by	the	time
I	waded	into	the	deep,	enough	to	vanish	beneath	the	waves,	the	very	bay	was
crimson.	That	I	lived	at	all	in	the	face	of	that	is—’
‘Unsurprising,’	Anomander	Rake	cut	in	with	a	faint	smile,	‘as	far	as	your
Lord	is	concerned.’	The	smile	faded.	‘Ah,	but	I	have	sorely	abused	your	skills,
friend.’
Spinnock	could	not	help	but	cock	his	head	and	say,	‘And	so,	I	am	given
leave	to	wield	soldiers	of	wood	and	stone	on	a	wine-stained	table?	Day	after
day,	my	muscles	growing	soft,	the	ambition	draining	away.’


‘Is	this	what	you	call	a	well-earned	rest?’
‘Some	nights	are	worse	than	others,	Lord.’
‘To	hear	you	speak	of	ambition,	Spinnock,	recalls	to	my	mind	another
place,	long,	long	ago.	You	and	I…’
‘Where	I	learned,	at	last,’	Spinnock	said,	with	no	bitterness	at	all,	‘my
destiny.’
‘Unseen	by	anyone.	Deeds	unwitnessed.	Heroic	efforts	earning	naught	but
one	man’s	gratitude.’
‘A	weapon	must	be	used,	Lord,	lest	it	rust.’
‘A	weapon	overused,	Spinnock,	grows	blunt,	notched.’
To	that,	the	burly	Tiste	Andii	bowed.	‘Perhaps,	then,	Lord,	such	a	weapon
must	be	put	away.	A	new	one	found.’
‘That	time	is	yet	to	arrive,	Spinnock	Durav.’
Spinnock	bowed	again.	‘There	is,	in	my	opinion,	Lord,	no	time	in	the
foreseeable	future	when	you	must	journey	to	Assail.	The	madness	there	seems
quite…self-contained.’
Anomander	Rake	studied	Spinnock’s	face	for	a	time,	then	nodded.	‘Play
on,	my	friend.	See	the	king	through.	Until…’	and	he	turned	once	more	back	to
the	crystal	window.
There	was	no	need	to	voice	the	completion	of	that	sentence,	Spinnock	well
knew.	He	bowed	a	third	time,	then	walked	from	the	chamber,	closing	the	door
behind	him.
Endest	Silann	was	slowly	hobbling	up	the	corridor.	At	Spinnock’s
appearance	the	old	castellan	glanced	up.	‘Ah,’	he	said,	‘is	our	Lord	within?’
‘He	is.’
The	elder	Tiste	Andii’s	answering	smile	was	no	gift	to	Spinnock,	so
strained	was	it,	a	thing	of	sorrow	and	shame.	And	while	perhaps	Endest	had
earned	the	right	to	the	first	sentiment	–	a	once	powerful	mage	now	broken	–	he
had	not	to	the	second.	Yet	what	could	Spinnock	say	that	might	ease	that	burden?
Nothing	that	would	not	sound	trite.	Perhaps	something	more…acerbic,
something	to	challenge	that	self-pity—
‘I	must	speak	to	him,’	Endest	said,	reaching	for	the	door.
‘He	will	welcome	that,’	Spinnock	managed.
Again	the	smile.	‘I	am	sure.’	A	pause,	a	glance	up	into	Spinnock’s	eyes.	‘I
have	great	news.’
‘Yes?’
Endest	Silann	lifted	the	latch.	‘Yes.	I	have	found	a	new	supplier	of	cadaver
eels.’


	
‘Lord	of	this,	Son	of	that,	it’s	no	matter,	izzit?’	The	man	peeled	the	last	of	the
rind	from	the	fruit	with	his	thumb-knife,	then	flung	it	out	on	to	the	cobbles.
‘Point	is,’	he	continued	to	his	companions,	‘he	ain’t	even	human,	is	he?	Just
another	of	’em	hoary	black-skinned	demons,	as	dead-eyed	as	all	the	rest.’
‘Big	on	husking	the	world,	aren’t	ya?’	the	second	man	at	the	table	said,
winking	across	at	the	third	man,	who’d	yet	to	say	a	thing.
‘Big	on	lotsa	things,	you	better	believe	it,’	the	first	man	muttered,	now
cutting	slices	of	the	fruit	and	lifting	each	one	to	his	mouth	balanced	on	the
blade.
The	waiter	drew	close	at	that	moment	to	edge	up	the	wick	in	the	lantern	on
the	table,	then	vanished	into	the	gloom	once	more.
The	three	were	seated	at	one	of	the	new	street-side	restaurants,	although
‘restaurant’	was	perhaps	too	noble	a	word	for	this	rough	line	of	tables	and
unmatched	wooden	chairs.	The	kitchen	was	little	more	than	a	converted	cart
and	a	stretch	of	canvas	roof	beneath	which	a	family	laboured	round	a	grill	that
had	once	been	a	horse	trough.
Of	the	four	tables,	three	were	occupied.	All	humans	–	the	Tiste	Andii	were
not	wont	to	take	meals	in	public,	much	less	engage	in	idle	chatter	over
steaming	mugs	of	Bastion	kelyk,	a	pungent	brew	growing	in	popularity	in
Black	Coral.
‘You	like	to	talk,’	the	second	man	prodded,	reaching	for	his	cup.	‘But
words	never	dug	a	ditch.’
‘I	ain’t	alone	in	being	in	the	right	about	this,’	the	first	man	retorted.	‘Ain’t
alone	at	all.	It’s	plain	that	if	the	Lord	Son	was	dead	and	gone,	all	this	damned
darkness	would	go	away,	an’	we’d	be	back	to	normal	wi’	day	’n’	night	again.’
‘No	guarantees	of	that,’	the	third	man	said,	his	tone	that	of	someone	half
asleep.
‘It’s	plain,	I	said.	Plain,	an’	if	you	can’t	see	that,	it’s	your	problem,	not
ours.’
‘Ours?’
‘Aye,	just	that.’
‘Plan	on	sticking	that	rind-snicker	through	his	heart,	then?’
The	second	man	grunted	a	laugh.
‘They	may	live	long,’	the	first	man	said	in	a	low	grumble,	‘but	they	bleed
like	anybody	else.’
‘Don’t	tell	me,’	the	third	man	said,	fighting	a	yawn,	‘you’re	the
mastermind	behind	what	you’re	talking	about,	Bucch.’


‘Not	me,’	the	first	man,	Bucch,	allowed,	‘but	I	was	among	the	first	t’give
my	word	an’	swear	on	it.’
‘So	who	is?’
‘Can’t	say.	Don’t	know.	That’s	how	they	organize	these	things.’
The	second	man	was	now	scratching	the	stubble	on	his	jaw.	‘Y’know,’	he
ventured,	‘it’s	not	like	there’s	a	million	of	’em,	is	it?	Why,	half	the	adults
among	us	was	soldiers	in	the	Domin,	or	even	before.	And	nobody	took	our
weapons	or	armour,	did	they?’
‘Bigger	fools	them,’	Bucch	said,	nodding.	‘Arrogance	like	that,	they
should	pay	for,	I	say.’
‘When’s	the	next	meeting?’	the	second	man	asked.
The	third	man	stirred	from	his	slouch	on	his	chair.	‘We	were	just	off	for
that,	Harak.	You	want	to	come	along?’
As	the	three	men	rose	and	walked	off,	Seerdomin	finished	the	last	of	his
kelyk,	waited	another	half-dozen	heartbeats,	and	then	rose,	drawing	his	cloak
round	him,	even	as	he	reached	beneath	it	and	loosened	the	sword	in	its
scabbard.
He	paused,	then,	and	formally	faced	north.	Closing	his	eyes,	he	spoke	a
soft	prayer.
Then,	walking	with	a	careless	stride,	he	set	off,	more	or	less	in	the
direction	the	three	men	were	taking.
	
High	on	the	tower,	a	red-scaled	dragon’s	eyes	looked	down	upon	all,	facets
reflecting	scenes	from	every	street,	every	alley,	the	flurry	of	activity	in	the
markets,	the	women	and	children	appearing	on	flat	rooftops	to	hang	laundry,
figures	wandering	here	and	there	between	buildings.	In	those	eyes,	the	city
seethed.
Somewhere,	beyond	Night,	the	sun	unleashed	a	morning	of	brazen,	heady
heat.	It	gave	form	to	the	smoke	of	hearth	fires	in	the	makeshift	camps
alongside	the	beaten	tracks	wending	down	from	the	north,	until	the	pilgrims
emerged	to	form	an	unbroken	line	on	the	trails,	and	then	it	lit	into	bright	gold	a
serpent	of	dust	that	rode	the	winds	all	the	way	to	the	Great	Barrow.
The	destitute	among	them	carried	shiny	shells	collected	from	shoreline
and	tidal	pools,	or	polished	stones	or	nuggets	of	raw	copper.	The	better	off
carried	jewellery,	gem-studded	scabbards,	strips	of	rare	silk,	Delantine	linen,
Daru	councils	of	silver	and	gold,	loot	collected	from	corpses	on	battlefields,
locks	of	hair	from	revered	relatives	and	imagined	heroes,	or	any	of	countless
other	items	of	value.	Now	within	a	day’s	march	of	the	Great	Barrow,	the	threat


of	bandits	and	thieves	had	vanished,	and	the	pilgrims	sang	as	they	walked
towards	the	vast,	descended	cloud	of	darkness	to	the	south.
Beneath	that	enormous	barrow	of	treasure,	they	all	knew,	lay	the	mortal
remains	of	the	Redeemer.
Protected	for	ever	more	by	Night	and	its	grim,	silent	sentinels.
The	serpent	of	dust	journeyed,	then,	to	a	place	of	salvation.
Among	the	Rhivi	of	North	Genabackis,	there	was	a	saying.	A	man	who	stirs
awake	the	serpent	is	a	man	without	fear.	A	man	without	fear	has	forgotten	the
rules	of	life.
Silanah	heard	their	songs	and	prayers.
And	she	watched.
Sometimes,	mortals	did	indeed	forget.	Sometimes,	mortals	needed…
reminding.


Chapter	Three

And	he	knew	to	stand	there
Would	be	a	task	unforgiving
Relentless	as	sacrifices	made
And	blood	vows	given
He	knew	enough	to	wait	alone
Before	the	charge	of	fury’s	heat
The	chants	of	vengeance
Where	swords	will	meet
And	where	once	were	mortals
Still	remain	dreams	of	home
If	but	one	gilded	door
Could	be	pried	open.
Did	he	waste	breath	in	bargain
Or	turn	aside	on	the	moment
Did	he	smile	in	pleasure
Seeking	chastisement?
(See	him	still,	he	stands	there
While	you	remain,	unforgiving
The	poet	damns	you
The	artist	cries	out
The	one	who	weeps
Turns	his	face	away
Your	mind	is	crowded
By	the	inconsequential
Listing	the	details
Of	the	minuscule
And	every	measure
Of	what	means	nothing
To	anyone


He	takes	from	you	every	rage
Every	crime…
Whether	you	like	it
Or	you	do	not…
Sacrifices	made
Vows	given
He	stands	alone
Because	none	of	you	dare
Stand	with	him)
Fisher ’s	challenge	to	his	listeners,
breaking	the	telling	of	The	Mane	of	Chaos

On	this	morning,	so	fair	and	fresh	with	the	warm	breeze	coming	down	off	the
lake,	there	were	arrivals.	Was	a	city	a	living	thing?	Did	it	possess	eyes?	Could
its	senses	be	lit	awake	by	the	touch	of	footsteps?	Did	Darujhistan,	on	that	fine
morning,	look	in	turn	upon	those	who	set	their	gazes	upon	it?	Arrivals,	grand
and	modest,	footsteps	less	than	a	whisper,	whilst	others	trembled	to	the	very
bones	of	the	Sleeping	Goddess.	Were	such	things	the	beat	of	the	city’s	heart?
But	no,	cities	did	not	possess	eyes,	or	any	other	senses.	Cut	stone	and
hardened	plaster,	wood	beams	and	corniced	façades,	walled	gardens	and
quiescent	pools	beneath	trickling	fountains,	all	was	insensate	to	the	weathering
traffic	of	its	denizens.	A	city	could	know	no	hunger,	could	not	rise	from	sleep,
nor	even	twist	uneasy	in	its	grave.
Leave	such	things,	then,	to	a	short	rotund	man,	seated	at	a	table	at	the	back
of	the	Phoenix	Inn,	in	the	midst	of	an	expansive	breakfast	–	to	pause	with	a
mouth	crammed	full	of	pastry	and	spiced	apple,	to	suddenly	choke.	Eyes
bulging,	face	flushing	scarlet,	then	launching	a	spray	of	pie	across	the	table,
into	the	face	of	a	regretfully	hungover	Meese,	who,	now	wearing	the	very	pie
she	had	baked	the	day	before,	simply	lifted	her	bleary	gaze	and	settled	a
basilisk	regard	upon	the	hacking,	wheezing	man	opposite	her.
If	words	were	necessary,	then,	she	would	have	used	them.
The	man	coughed	on,	tears	streaming	from	his	eyes.
Sulty	arrived	with	a	cloth	and	began	wiping,	gently,	the	mess	from	a
motionless,	almost	statuesque	Meese.
	


On	the	narrow,	sloped	street	to	the	right	of	the	entrance	to	Quip’s	Bar,	the
detritus	of	last	night’s	revelry	skirled	into	the	air	on	a	rush	of	wild	wind.
Where	a	moment	before	there	had	been	no	traffic	of	any	sort	on	the	cobbled
track,	now	there	were	screaming,	froth-streaked	horses,	hoofs	cracking	like
iron	mallets	on	the	uneven	stone.	Horses	–	two,	four,	six	–	and	behind	them,	in
a	half-sideways	rattling	skid,	an	enormous	carriage,	its	back	end	crashing	into
the	face	of	a	building	in	a	shattering	explosion	of	plaster,	awning	and	window
casement.	Figures	flew	from	the	careering	monstrosity	as	it	tilted,	almost
tipping,	then	righted	itself	with	the	sound	of	a	house	falling	over.	Bodies	were
thumping	on	to	the	street,	rolling	desperately	to	avoid	the	man-high	wheels.
The	horses	plunged	on,	dragging	the	contraption	some	further	distance
down	the	slope,	trailing	broken	pieces,	plaster	fragments	and	other	more
unsightly	things,	before	the	animals	managed	to	slow,	then	halt,	the
momentum,	aided	in	no	small	part	by	a	sudden	clenching	of	wooden	brakes
upon	all	six	wheels.
Perched	atop	the	carriage,	the	driver	was	thrown	forward,	sailing	through
the	air	well	above	the	tossing	heads	of	the	horses,	landing	in	a	rubbish	cart
almost	buried	in	the	fête’s	leavings.	This	refuse	probably	saved	his	life,
although,	as	all	grew	still	once	more,	only	the	soles	of	his	boots	were	visible,
temporarily	motionless	as	befitted	an	unconscious	man.
Strewn	in	the	carriage’s	wake,	amidst	mundane	detritus,	were	human
remains	in	various	stages	of	decay;	some	plump	with	rotting	flesh,	others	mere
skin	stretched	over	bone.	A	few	of	these	still	twitched	or	groped	aimlessly	on
the	cobbles,	like	the	plucked	limbs	of	insects.	Jammed	into	the	partly	crushed
wall	of	the	shop	the	conveyance’s	rear	right-side	corner	had	clipped	was	a
corpse’s	head,	driven	so	deep	as	to	leave	visible	but	one	eye,	a	cheek	and	one
side	of	the	jaw.	The	eye	rolled	ponderously.	The	mouth	twitched,	as	if	words
were	struggling	to	escape,	then	curled	in	an	odd	smile.
Those	more	complete	figures,	who	had	been	thrown	in	various	directions,
were	now	slowly	picking	themselves	up,	or,	in	the	case	of	two	of	them,	not
moving	at	all	–	and	by	the	twist	of	limbs	and	neck	it	was	clear	that	never	again
would	their	unfortunate	owners	move	of	their	own	accord,	not	even	to	draw
breath.
From	a	window	on	the	second	level	of	a	tenement,	an	old	woman	leaned
out	for	a	brief	glance	down	on	the	carnage	below,	then	retreated,	hands
snapping	closed	the	wooden	shutters.
Clattering	sounds	came	from	within	the	partly	ruined	shop,	then	a	muted
shriek	that	was	not	repeated	within	the	range	of	human	hearing,	although	in	the
next	street	over	a	dog	began	howling.


The	carriage	door	squealed	open,	swung	once	on	its	hinges,	then	fell	off,
landing	with	a	rattle	on	the	cobbles.
On	her	hands	and	knees	fifteen	paces	away,	Shareholder	Faint	lifted	her
aching	head	and	gingerly	turned	it	towards	the	carriage,	in	time	to	see	Master
Quell	lunge	into	view,	tumbling	like	a	Rhivi	doll	on	to	the	street.	Smoke	drifted
out	in	his	wake.
Closer	to	hand,	Reccanto	Ilk	stood,	reeling,	blinking	stupidly	around
before	his	eyes	lit	on	the	battered	sign	above	the	door	to	Quip’s	Bar.	He
staggered	in	that	direction.
Faint	pushed	herself	upright,	brushed	dust	from	her	meat-spattered	clothes,
and	scowled	as	scales	of	armour	clinked	down	like	coins	on	to	the	stones.
From	one	such	breach	in	her	hauberk	she	prised	loose	a	taloned	finger,	which
she	peered	at	for	a	moment,	then	tossed	aside	as	she	set	out	after	Reccanto.
Before	she	reached	the	door	she	was	joined	by	Sweetest	Sufferance,	the
short,	plump	woman	waddling	but	determined	none	the	less	as	both	her	small
hands	reached	out	for	the	taproom’s	door.
From	the	rubbish	cart,	Glanno	Tarp	was	digging	himself	free.
Master	Quell,	on	his	hands	and	knees,	looked	up,	then	said,	‘This	isn’t	our
street.’
Ducking	into	the	gloom	of	Quip’s	Bar,	Faint	paused	briefly	until	she	heard
a	commotion	at	the	far	end,	where	Reccanto	had	collapsed	into	a	chair,	one
arm	sweeping	someone’s	leavings	from	the	table.	Sweetest	Sufferance	dragged
up	another	chair	and	thumped	down	on	it.
The	three	drunks	who	were	the	other	customers	watched	Faint	walk	across
the	room,	each	of	them	earning	a	scowl	from	her.
Quip	Younger	–	whose	father	had	opened	this	place	in	a	fit	of	ambition	and
optimism	that	had	lasted	about	a	week	–	was	shambling	over	from	the	bar	the
same	way	his	old	man	used	to,	and	reached	the	table	the	same	time	as	Faint.
No	one	spoke.
The	keep	frowned,	then	turned	round	and	made	his	way	back	to	the	bar.
Master	Quell	arrived,	along	with	Glanno	Tarp,	still	stinking	of	refuse.
Moments	later,	the	four	shareholders	and	one	High	Mage	navigator	of	the
Trygalle	Trade	Guild	sat	round	the	table.	No	exchange	of	glances.	No	words.
Quip	Younger	–	who	had	once	loved	Faint,	long	before	anyone	ever	heard
of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild	and	long	before	she	hooked	up	with	this	mad	lot	–
delivered	five	tankards	and	the	first	pitcher	of	ale.
Five	trembling	hands	reached	for	those	tankards,	gripping	them	tight.
Quip	hesitated;	then,	rolling	his	eyes,	he	lifted	the	pitcher	and	began
pouring	out	the	sour,	cheap	brew.


	
Kruppe	took	a	mouthful	of	the	dark	magenta	wine	–	a	council	a	bottle,	no	less
–	and	swirled	it	in	his	mouth	until	all	the	various	bits	of	pie	were	dislodged
from	the	innumerable	crevasses	between	his	teeth,	whereupon	he	leaned	to	one
side	and	spat	on	to	the	floor.	‘Ah.’	He	smiled	across	at	Meese.	‘Much	better,
yes?’
‘I’ll	take	payment	for	that	bottle	right	now,’	she	said.	‘That	way	I	can	leave
before	I	have	to	witness	one	more	abuse	of	such	an	exquisite	vintage.’
‘Why,	has	Kruppe’s	credit	so	swiftly	vanished?	Decided	entirely	upon	an
untoward	breaking	of	fast	this	particular	morning?’
‘It’s	the	insults,	you	fat	pig,	piled	one	on	another	until	it	feels	I’m
drowning	in	offal.’	She	bared	her	teeth.	‘Offal	in	a	red	waistcoat.’
‘Aaii,	vicious	jab.	Kruppe	is	struck	to	the	heart…and,’	he	added,	reaching
once	more	for	the	dusty	bottle,	‘has	no	choice	but	to	loosen	said	constricture
of	the	soul,	with	yet	another	tender	mouthful.’
Meese	leaned	forward.	‘If	you	spit	that	one	out,	Kruppe,	I	will	wring	your
neck.’
He	hastily	swallowed,	then	gasped.	‘Kruppe	very	nearly	choked	once	more.
Such	a	morning!	Portents	and	pastry,	wails	and	wine!’
Heavy	steps	descending	from	the	upper	floor.
‘Ah,	here	comes	yon	Malazan	saviour.	Mallet,	dear	friend	of	Kruppe,	will
Murillio	–	sweet	Prince	of	Disenchantment	–	recover	to	his	fullest	self?	Come,
join	me	in	this	passing	ferment.	Meese,	sweet	lass,	will	you	not	find	Mallet	a
goblet?’
Her	eyes	narrowed	into	thin	slits.	‘How	about	one	for	yourself,	Kruppe?’
‘Delightful	suggestion.’	Kruppe	wiped	at	the	bottle’s	mouth	with	one	grimy
sleeve,	then	beamed	across	at	her.
She	rose,	stalked	off.
The	Malazan	healer	sat	down	with	a	heavy	sigh,	closed	his	eyes	and	rubbed
vigorously	at	his	round,	pallid	face,	then	looked	round	the	bar.	‘Where	is
everyone?’
‘Your	companion	of	the	night	just	past	Kruppe	has	sent	home,	with	the
assurance	that	your	self	is	safe	from	all	harm.	’Tis	dawn,	friend,	or	rather
morning’s	fresh	stumping	on	dawn’s	gilt	heels.	Ships	draw	in	alongside	berths,
gangplanks	clatter	and	thump	to	form	momentous	bridges	from	one	world	to
the	next.	Roads	take	sudden	turns	and	out	trundle	macabre	mechanisms
scattering	bits	of	flesh	like	dark	seeds	of	doom!	Hooded	eyes	scan	strangers,
shrikes	cry	out	above	the	lake’s	steaming	flats,	dogs	scratch	vigorously	behind


the	ears	–	ah,	Meese	has	brought	us	her	finest	goblets!	A	moment,	whilst
Kruppe	sweeps	out	cobwebs,	insect	husks	and	other	assorted	proofs	of	said
goblets’	treasured	value	–	there,	now,	let	us	sit	back	and	watch,	with	pleased
eyes,	as	Meese	fills	our	cups	to	brimming	glory.	Why—’
‘For	Hood’s	sake,’	Mallet	cut	in,	‘it’s	too	early	for	your	company,	Kruppe.
Let	me	drink	this	wine	and	then	escape	with	my	sanity,	I	beg	you.’
‘Why,	friend	Mallet,	we	await	your	assessment	of	Murillio’s	physical
state.’
‘He’ll	live.	But	no	dancing	for	a	week	or	two.’	He	hesitated,	frowning
down	into	his	goblet,	as	if	surprised	to	find	it	suddenly	empty	once	more.
‘Assuming	he	comes	out	of	his	funk,	that	is.	A	mired	mind	can	slow	the	body’s
recovery.	Can	reverse	it,	in	fact.’
‘Fret	not	over	Murillio’s	small	but	precise	mind,	friend,’	Kruppe	said.
‘Such	matters	ever	find	solution	through	Kruppe’s	wise	ministrations.	Does
Coll	remain	at	bedside?’
Mallet	nodded,	set	the	goblet	down	and	rose.	‘I’m	going	home.’	He
glowered	across	at	Kruppe.	‘And	with	Oponn’s	pull,	I	might	even	get	there.’
‘Nefarious	nuisances	thrive	best	in	night’s	noisome	chaos,	dear	healer.
Kruppe	confidently	assures	you	a	most	uneventful	return	to	your	atypical
abode.’
Mallet	grunted,	then	said,	‘And	how	do	you	plan	on	assuring	that?’
‘Why,	with	worthy	escort,	of	course!’	He	poured	himself	the	last	of	the
wine	and	smiled	up	at	the	Malazan.	‘See	yon	door	and	illimitable	Irilta
positioned	before	it?	Dastardly	contracts	seeking	your	sad	deaths	cannot
indeed	be	permitted.	Kruppe	extends	his	formidable	resources	to	guarantee
your	lives!’
The	healer	continued	staring	down	at	him.	‘Kruppe,	do	you	know	who
offered	this	contract?’
‘Ringing	revelations	are	imminent,	treasured	friend.	Kruppe	promises.’
Another	grunt,	then	Mallet	wheeled	and	walked	towards	the	door	and	his
escort,	who	stood	smiling	with	brawny	arms	crossed.
Kruppe	watched	them	leave	and	weren’t	they	just	quite	the	pair.
Meese	slouched	down	in	the	chair	Mallet	had	vacated.	‘Guild	contract,’	she
muttered.	‘Could	simply	be	some	imperial	cleaning	up,	you	know.	New
embassy’s	now	up	and	running	after	all.	Could	be	somebody	in	it	caught	word
of	Malazan	deserters	running	a	damned	bar.	Desertion’s	a	death	sentence,	ain’t
it?’
‘Too	great	a	risk,	sweet	Meese,’	Kruppe	replied,	drawing	out	his	silk
handkerchief	and	blotting	at	his	brow.	‘The	Malazan	Empire,	alas,	has	its	own


assassins,	of	which	two	are	present	in	said	embassy.	Yet,	by	all	accounts,	’twas
a	Hand	of	Krafar ’s	Guild	that	made	the	attempt	last	night.’	He	raised	a	pudgy
finger.	‘A	mystery,	this	one	who	so	seeks	the	death	of	inoffensive	Malazan
deserters,	but	not	a	mystery	for	long,	oh	no!	Kruppe	will	discover	all	that
needs	discovering!’
‘Fine,’	Meese	said,	‘now	discover	that	council,	Kruppe,	for	the	bottle.’
Sighing,	Kruppe	reached	into	the	small	purse	strapped	to	his	belt,	probed
within	the	leather	pouch,	then,	brows	lifted	in	sudden	dismay:	‘Dearest	Meese,
yet	another	discovery…’
	
Grainy-eyed,	Scorch	scowled	at	the	teeming	quayside.	‘It’s	the	morning	fisher
boats,’	he	said,	‘comin’	in	right	now.	Ain’t	no	point	in	hangin’	round,	Leff.’
‘People	on	the	run	will	be	coming	here	early,’	Leff	pointed	out,	scooping
out	with	his	knife	the	freshwater	conch	he	had	purchased	a	moment	ago.	He
slithered	down	a	mouthful	of	white,	gleaming	meat.	‘T’be	waitin’	for	the	first
ships	in	from	Gredfallan.	Midmorning,	right?	The	new	locks	at	Dhavran	have
made	it	all	regular,	predictable,	I	mean.	A	day	through	with	a	final	scoot	to
Gredfallan,	overnight	there,	then	on	with	the	dawn	to	here.	Desperate	folk	line
up	first,	Scorch,	’cause	they’re	desperate.’
‘I	hate	sitting	anywhere	my	feet	have	to	dangle,’	Scorch	complained,
shifting	uncomfortably	on	the	stack	of	crates.
‘Decent	line	of	sight,’	Leff	said.	‘I’ll	join	ya	up	there	anon.’
‘Don’t	know	how	you	can	eat	that.	Meat	should	have	blood	in	it.	Any	meat
without	blood	in	it	ain’t	meat.’
‘Aye,	it’s	conch.’
‘It’s	a	thing	with	eyes	on	the	ends	of	its	tentacles,	watching	as	you	cut	its
body	apart	–	see	how	the	stalks	swivel,	following	up	to	your	mouth,	tracking
every	swallow?	It’s	watching	you	eat	it!’
‘So	what?’
Gulls	shrieked	in	swarming	clouds	over	the	low	jetties	where	the	fishers
were	heaving	baskets	of	sliverfish	on	to	the	slimy	stone,	children	scurrying
about	in	the	hopes	of	being	hired	to	slip	the	wriggling	fish	on	to	mongerstrings	in	time	for	the	morning	market.	Grey-backed	Gadrobi	cats,	feral	now
for	a	thousand	generations,	leapt	out	in	ambush	to	kill	gulls.	Frenzied	battles
ensued,	feathers	skirling,	tufts	of	cat	hair	drifting	on	the	breeze	like	thistle
heads.
Below	the	inside	docks	old	women	wandered	in	the	gloom	between	pylons,
using	long,	thin,	barbed	pokers	to	collect	up	the	small,	hand’s-length	sliverfish


that	managed	to	slip	through	the	baskets	and	fall	in	gleaming	rain	as	the	catch
was	carried	ashore.	When	the	harvest	was	small,	the	old	hags	were	wont	to	use
those	toothed	pokers	on	each	other.
Scorch	could	see	them	from	where	he	was	perched,	muffled	forms	moving
this	way	and	that,	pokers	darting	in	the	perpetual	shadows.	‘I	swore	to	never
again	eat	anything	this	lake	gave	up,’	he	muttered.	‘Gran	above,’	he	added	in	a
hoarse	whisper,	‘y’see	I	remember	them	cuts	an’	holes	in	your	scrawny	arms.	I
remember	’em,	Gran,	an’	so	I	swore.’
‘What’s	that?’	Leff	asked	from	below.
‘Nothing,	only	we’re	wasting	our	time—’
‘Patience,	Scorch.	We	got	us	a	list.	We	got	us	trouble.	Didn’t	we	hear	that
Brokul	might	be	making	a	run?’
‘The	place	is	a	damned	mob,	Leff.’
‘We	just	need	to	concentrate	on	the	lines	forming	up.’
‘Ain’t	no	lines,	Leff.’
Leff	tossed	the	shell	over	the	end	of	the	lake	wall,	where	it	clattered	down
below	on	to	ten	thousand	others.	‘Not	yet,’	he	said.	‘Soon.’
	
Just	past	the	fork	at	Urs,	the	battered	remnants	of	the	caravan	headed	up
towards	South	Worrytown.	Herders	and	quarry	workers	on	their	way	out	to	the
Ravens	edged	to	the	sides	of	the	road,	then	stopped	and	stared	at	the	four
charred	and	smoke-streaked	trader-wagons	rocking	past.	A	single	horse
struggled	in	a	makeshift	yoke	before	each	wain.
Of	the	usual	assortment	of	guards	that	might	be	expected,	even	for	a
caravan	as	small	as	this	one	seemed	to	be,	only	one	was	visible,	slouched	down
in	a	Gadrobi	saddle	and	almost	entirely	hidden	beneath	a	dusty,	hooded	cloak.
From	seamed	slits	in	the	faded	brown	cape,	just	above	the	man’s	shoulder
blades,	jutted	the	worn	grips	and	pommels	of	twin	cutlasses.	The	leather
gauntlets	covering	his	hands	where	they	rested	on	the	high	saddle	horn	were
stained	and	mostly	in	shreds,	revealing	to	those	close	enough	to	see	skin
tattooed	to	very	nearly	solid	black.
From	the	shadow	of	the	hood,	strangely	feline	eyes	held	fixed	on	the	road
ahead.	The	first	decrepit	shanties	of	South	Worrytown	emerged	from	the
morning	mist	like	the	dishevelled	nests	of	some	oversized	carrion	bird,	lining
the	dirt	track	to	either	side.	From	cracks	and	holes	in	the	leaning	walls,	liquid
eyes	peered	out	as	the	guard	led	his	clattering	train	past.
Before	long,	they	were	well	and	truly	within	the	maze	and	its	crowds	of
life’s	refugees,	rising	like	ghosts	from	the	shadows,	raising	faint	voices	to	beg


for	coin	and	food.	Few	caravans	coming	up	from	the	south	chose	this	route
into	Darujhistan,	since	the	track	through	the	city’s	shabby	outskirts	was	both
narrow	and	twisting.	And	those	that	proved	insufficiently	defended	could
become	victims	of	the	raw,	desperate	need	drawing	ever	closer	on	all	sides.
A	hundred	paces	still	south	of	the	main	road	known	as	Jatem’s	Worry,	it
seemed	that	such	a	fate	would	befall	this	hapless	caravan	and	its	guardian	of
one.
As	grasping,	grimy	hands	reached	out	to	close	round	spokes	in	wagon
wheels,	and	others	snatched	at	the	traces	of	the	horses,	the	hooded	man	glanced
back	at	the	growing	boldness	and	reined	in.	As	he	did	so	he	seemed	to	suddenly
fill	out	as	he	straightened	in	his	saddle.
Eyes	fixed	on	him,	furtive	and	wary	and	with	fading	diffidence.	One	ragclad	man	swung	up	beside	the	first	wagon’s	driver	who,	like	the	guard,	was
hooded	and	wrapped	in	a	leather	cape.	As	the	Worrier	clutched	the	driver ’s
shoulder	and	yanked	him	round,	the	hood	fell	back.
Revealing	a	dead	man’s	withered	face.	The	mostly	hairless	head	turned,
hollow	sockets	settling	on	the	man	crouched	on	the	bench.
Even	as	the	Worrier	shrieked,	twisting	to	fling	himself	from	the	wagon,	the
lone	caravan	guard	drew	his	cutlasses,	revealing	broad	iron	blades	stained	in	a
pattern	of	flaring	barbs	of	black	and	pale	orange.	The	hood	dropped	back	to
unveil	a	broad	face	tattooed	in	an	identical	fashion,	the	mouth	opening	to
reveal	long	canines	as	the	guard	smiled.	There	was	no	humour	in	that	smile,
just	the	promise	of	mayhem.
That	was	enough	for	the	crowd.	Screaming,	flinching	back,	they	fled.
Moments	later,	the	four	wagons	and	their	lone	guard	resumed	their
journey.
On	to	Jatem’s	Worry,	edging	into	the	traffic	slowly	working	towards	the
city	gate,	where	the	lone,	tattooed	guard	resheathed	his	weapons.
The	unhooded	corpse	guiding	the	lead	wagon	seemed	disinclined	to
readjust	its	head	covering,	and	before	too	long	the	lifeless	driver	acquired	a
flapping,	squawking	escort	of	three	crows,	each	fighting	to	find	purchase	on
the	grey,	tattered	pate.	By	the	time	the	caravan	reached	the	gate,	the	driver
sported	one	crow	on	its	head	and	one	on	each	shoulder,	all	busy	tearing	strips
of	desiccated	meat	from	its	face.
A	gate-watcher	stepped	out	to	squint	up	at	the	barbed,	bestial	guard	as	he
drew	rein	beneath	the	arch.
‘Gruntle,	ain’t	it?	You	been	in	a	fight,	man.	Is	this	Sirik’s	caravan	–	gods
below!’	This	last	cry	announced	the	watcher ’s	discovery	of	the	first	wagon
driver.


‘Best	just	let	us	past,’	Gruntle	said	in	a	low,	rasping	voice.	‘I’m	in	no	mood
for	more	than	one	conversation,	and	that	one	belongs	to	Sirik.	I	take	it	he’s
done	his	move	into	his	new	estate?’
The	man	nodded,	his	face	pale	and	his	eyes	a	little	wild.	Stepping	back,	he
waved	Gruntle	on.
The	journey	to	Sirik’s	estate	was	blessedly	brief.	Past	Despot’s	Barbican,
then	left,	skirting	High	Gallows	Hill	before	reaching	the	freshly	plastered	wall
and	broad,	high-arched	gate	leading	into	the	merchant’s	compound.
Word	must	have	gone	in	advance	for	Sirik	himself	stood	waiting,	shaded
from	the	morning	sun	by	a	servant	with	a	parasol.	A	half-dozen	armoured	men
from	his	private	bodyguard	were	clustered	round	him.	The	merchant’s
expression	descended	in	swift	collapse	upon	seeing	a	mere	four	wagons	roll
into	the	compound.	Curses	rode	the	dusty	air	from	the	guards	when	they	spied
the	first	driver,	whose	centre	crow	at	that	moment	decided	to	half	spread	its
wings	to	regain	balance	as	the	withered	hands	twitched	the	traces,	halting	the
wagon.
Gruntle	reined	in	and	slowly	dismounted.
Sirik	waved	his	hands	in	a	helpless	gesture.	‘But	–	but—’
Drawing	off	his	cloak	revealed	the	damage	on	Gruntle’s	chain	hauberk,	the
slashes	through	the	black	iron	links,	the	gouges	and	punctures,	the	crusted
blood.	‘Dwell	raiders,’	he	said	in	a	rumble,	grinning	once	more.
‘But—’
‘We	gave	good	account,’	Gruntle	resumed,	squinting	at	the	guards	behind
the	merchant.	‘And	if	you’d	let	loose	a	few	more	of	your	precious	preeners
there,	we	might	ha’	done	better	still.	The	raiding	party	was	a	big	one,	a	hundred
shrieking	savages.	The	fools	torched	the	other	wagons	even	as	they	looted
’em.’
One	of	the	bodyguard,	Sirik’s	scar-faced	captain,	stepped	forward,
scowling	at	the	wagons.	‘A	hundred,	was	it?	Against	what,	eight	guards	under
your	command,	Gruntle?	Do	you	take	us	for	idiots?	A	hundred	Dwell	and
you’d	not	be	here.’
‘No,	Kest,	you’re	not	an	idiot,’	Gruntle	allowed.	‘Thick-skulled	and	a
bully,	but	not	an	idiot.’
As	the	captain	and	his	men	bridled,	Sirik	held	up	a	trembling	hand.
‘Gruntle,	Gisp	sits	that	wagon	but	he’s	dead.’
‘He	is.	So	are	the	other	three.’
‘But	–	but	how?’
Gruntle’s	shrug	was	an	ominous	roll	of	his	massive	shoulders.	‘Not	sure,’
he	admitted,	‘but	they	took	my	orders	anyway	–	granted,	I	was	desperate	and


yelling	things	I	normally	wouldn’t,	but	by	then	I	was	the	last	one	left,	and	with
four	surviving	wagons	and	as	many	horses…’	He	shrugged	again,	then	said,
‘I’ll	take	my	pay	now,	Sirik.	You’ve	got	half	the	Bastion	kelyk	you	wanted	and
that’s	better	than	none.’
‘And	what	am	I	to	do	with	four	undead	drivers?’	Sirik	shrieked.
Gruntle	turned,	glared	up	at	Gisp.	‘Go	to	Hood,	you	four.	Now.’
The	drivers	promptly	slumped,	sliding	or	tottering	from	their	perches.	The
three	crows	picking	at	Gisp’s	shredded	face	set	up	an	indignant	squall,	then
flapped	down	to	resume	their	meal	once	the	body	settled	on	the	dust	of	the
compound.
Sirik	had	recovered	enough	to	show	irritation.	‘As	for	payment—’
‘In	full,’	Gruntle	cut	in.	‘I	warned	you	we	didn’t	have	enough.	Kest	may	not
be	an	idiot,	but	you	are,	Sirik.	And	sixteen	people	died	for	it,	not	to	mention	a
hundred	Dwell.	I’m	about	to	visit	the	Guild,	as	required.	I	get	my	pay	in	full
and	I’ll	keep	my	opinions	to	myself.	Otherwise…’	Gruntle	shook	his	head,
‘you	won’t	be	hiring	any	more	caravan	guards.	Ever	again.’
Sirik’s	sweat-sheathed	face	worked	for	a	time,	until	his	eyes	found	a	look
of	resignation.	‘Captain	Kest,	pay	the	man.’
	
A	short	time	later,	Gruntle	stepped	out	on	to	the	street.	Pausing,	he	glanced	up
at	the	morning	sky,	then	set	out	for	home.	Despite	the	heat,	he	donned	his	cloak
and	drew	up	the	hood	once	more.	The	damned	markings	on	his	skin	rose	flush
with	battle,	and	took	weeks	to	fade	back	into	a	ghostly	tint.	In	the	meantime,	the
less	conspicuous	he	could	make	himself	the	better.	He	suspected	that	the	hovel
he	called	home	was	already	barricaded	by	a	murder	of	acolytes	awaiting	his
return.	The	tiger-skinned	woman	who	proclaimed	herself	High	Priestess	of	the
local	temple	would	have	heard	the	fierce	battle	cry	of	Trake’s	Mortal	Sword,
even	at	a	distance	of	thirty	or	so	leagues	out	on	the	Dwelling	Plain.	And	she
would	be	in	a	frenzy…again,	desperate	as	ever	for	his	attention.
But	Gruntle	didn’t	give	a	damn	about	her	and	the	mangy	losers	she’d
gathered	to	her	temple.	Killing	those	raiders	had	not	been	a	task	he	had
welcomed.	No	pleasure	in	spilling	blood,	no	delight	in	his	own	savage	rage.
He’d	lost	friends	that	day,	including	the	last	pair	who	had	been	with	him	ever
since	Capustan.	Such	wounds	were	far	deeper	than	those	his	flesh	still	carried,
and	they	would	take	much	longer	to	heal.
Mood	foul	despite	the	bulging	purse	of	councils	at	his	belt,	he	was
disinclined	to	suffer	the	normal	jostling	necessary	to	navigate	the	city’s	major
avenues	and	streets	–	one	push	or	snarl	too	many	and	he’d	be	likely	to	draw


blades	and	set	about	carving	a	path	through	the	crowds,	and	then	he’d	have	no
choice	but	to	flee	Darujhistan	or	risk	dangling	from	High	Gallows	Hill	–	and
so	once	through	the	Estates	Gate	just	south	of	Borthen	Park,	and	down	the
ramp	into	Lakefront	District,	Gruntle	took	a	roundabout	route,	along	narrow,
twisting	alleys	and	rubbish-filled	wends	between	buildings.
The	few	figures	he	met	as	he	walked	were	quick	to	edge	aside,	as	if	struck
meek	by	some	instinct	of	self-preservation.
He	turned	on	to	one	slightly	wider	track	only	to	find	it	blocked	by	a	tall
carriage	that	looked	as	if	it	had	been	through	a	riot	–	reminding	Gruntle	that
the	fête	was	still	on	–	although,	as	he	drew	closer	and	found	himself	stepping
over	withered,	dismembered	limbs	and	streaks	of	slowly	drying	blood,	and
when	he	saw	the	gaping	hole	in	the	carriage	where	a	door	should	have	been,
with	the	dark	interior	still	and	grey	with	motionless	haze,	and	the	horses
standing	with	hides	crusted	in	dried	sweat	and	froth	–	the	entire	mess
unattended	and	seemingly	immune	to	looting	–	he	recognized	that	this	was	one
of	those	damned	Trygalle	Guild	carriages,	well	and	truly	infamous	for	sudden,
inexplicable	and	invariably	violent	arrivals.
Just	as	irritating,	the	Trygalle	was	a	clear	rival	to	the	city’s	own
Caravanserai	Guild,	with	its	unprecedented	shareholding	system.	Something
the	Caravanserai	should	have	thought	of	long	ago,	although	if	what	Gruntle
had	heard	was	anywhere	near	the	truth,	then	the	attrition	rate	among	the
Trygalle’s	shareholders	was	appallingly	high	–	higher	than	any	sane	guard
would	accept.
Then	again,	he	reconsidered,	here	he	was,	the	lone	survivor	of	Sirik’s
caravan,	and	despite	the	councils	he	now	carried	his	financial	return	was
virtually	nothing	compared	to	the	profits	Sirik	would	harvest	from	the	kelyk,
especially	now	that	he	didn’t	have	to	pay	his	drivers.	Of	course,	he’d	need	to
purchase	new	wagons	and	repair	the	ones	Gruntle	had	delivered,	but	there	was
insurance	to	offset	some	of	that.
As	he	edged	round	the	carriage	in	the	street,	he	was	afforded	a	closer	look,
concluding,	sourly,	that	the	Trygalle	built	the	bastards	to	weather	just	about
anything.	Scorched,	gouged	as	if	by	the	talons	of	plains	bears,	bitten	and
chopped	at,	gaudy	paint	peeled	away	as	if	splashed	with	acid.	As	battered	as	a
war	wagon.
He	walked	past	the	horses.	Then,	five	strides	onward,	Gruntle	turned	about
in	surprise.	That	close	and	the	beasts	should	have	panicked	–	they	always
panicked.	Even	ones	he	had	broken	to	his	scent	shivered	uncontrollably
beneath	him	until	sheer	nervous	exhaustion	dulled	their	fright.	But	here…he
scowled,	meeting	the	eyes	of	one	of	the	leaders	and	seeing	naught	but	jaded


disinterest.
Shaking	his	head,	Gruntle	resumed	his	journey.
Damned	curious.	Then	again,	he	could	do	with	a	horse	like	one	of	those.
Better	yet,	how	about	a	dead	one?	Dead	as	Gisp?
The	thought	brought	him	back	to	certain	unpleasantries	he	didn’t	much
want	to	think	about	at	the	moment.	Like	my	being	able	to	command	the	dead.
He	was,	he	considered,	too	old	to	be	discovering	new	talents.
	
The	walrus-skin	coracle	bobbed	perilously	in	the	chop	between	two	trader
barges,	at	risk	of	being	crushed	between	them	before	a	frantic	scull	by	the	lone
occupant	squirted	the	craft	through,	to	draw	up	moments	later	alongside	a
mud-smeared	landing	crowded	with	crayfish	traps.	The	man	who	clambered	up
from	the	coracle	was	soaked	from	the	hips	down,	and	the	knapsack	he	slung	on
to	one	shoulder	sloshed,	then	began	to	drain	incontinently	as	he	worked	his
way	up	the	dock	to	the	worn	stone	steps	that	climbed	to	the	quayside.
He	was	unkempt,	his	beard	two	or	three	days	old,	and	the	leathers	he	wore
seemed	a	strange	mix	of	those	normally	worn	beneath	armour	and	those	a
Nathii	fisher	might	wear	in	a	squall.	The	floppy	sealskin	hat	covering	his	head
was	misshapen,	sun-faded	and	salt-rimed.	In	addition	to	his	knapsack	he	carried
an	odd-looking	scimitar	in	a	split	scabbard	bound	together	by	frayed	strips	of
leather.	The	serpent-head	pommel	revealed	empty	sockets	where	gems	had
once	resided	for	eyes,	fangs	and	collar.	Tall,	wiry,	he	moved	with	a	vaguely
furtive	haste	once	he	reached	the	quay,	cutting	through	the	crowds	towards	one
of	the	feeder	alleys	on	the	other	side	of	Front	Street.
From	the	landing	down	on	the	water,	someone	was	yelling,	demanding	to
know	who	had	left	a	half-awash	coracle	beside	his	cages.
Reaching	the	alley	mouth,	the	man	walked	in	a	few	paces,	then	paused	in
the	shadow	between	the	high-walled	warehouses.	He	drew	off	his	floppy	hat
and	wiped	the	grime	from	his	brow.	His	black	hair,	while	thinning	from	the
front,	hung	in	a	long	ponytail	that	had	been	tucked	up	beneath	the	hat	but	now
fell	to	the	small	of	his	back.	His	forehead	and	face	were	seamed	in	scars,	and
most	of	his	left	ear	was	missing,	slashed	away	some	time	past.	Scratching	a
moment	at	his	beard,	he	settled	the	hat	back	on,	and	headed	off	down	the	alley.
He	was	set	upon	less	than	ten	paces	later,	as	two	figures	closed	on	him
from	alcoves,	one	to	either	side.	The	one	on	his	left	jammed	the	point	of	a
dagger	against	his	ribs,	while	the	other	waved	a	shortsword	in	front	of	his
eyes,	using	it	to	direct	the	man	against	a	grimy	wall.
Mute,	the	man	complied.	In	the	gloom	he	squinted	at	the	one	with	the


sword,	then	scowled.	‘Leff.’
A	stained	grin.	‘Hey,	old	partner,	fancy	you	showing	up.’
The	one	with	the	knife	snorted.	‘Thought	we’d	never	spy	you	out	wi’	that
stupid	hat,	did	you?’
‘Scorch!	Why,	I	can’t	tell	you	how	glad	I	am	to	see	you	both.	Gods	below,	I
would’ve	thought	you	two	would	have	met	grisly	ends	long	ago.	But	this	is	a
great	discovery,	friends!	Had	I	any	coin	–	any	at	all	–	why,	I’d	buy	you	both	a
drink—’
‘Enough	of	that,’	Leff	said	in	a	growl,	still	waving	the	sword	in	front	of	the
man’s	face.	‘You’re	on	our	list,	Torvald	Nom.	Aye,	way	down	on	it	since	most
people	figured	you	were	long	gone	and	almost	as	long	dead.	But	you	ran	out
on	a	debt	–	a	big	one	and	bigger	now,	aye	–	not	to	mention	running	out	on	me
and	Scorch—’
‘Hardly!	I	seem	to	recall	we	formally	absolved	our	partnership,	after	that
night	when—’
Scorch	hissed,	‘Quiet,	damn	you!	Nobody	knows	nothing	about	none	of
that!’
‘My	point	was,’	Torvald	hastily	explained,	‘I	never	ran	out	on	you	two.’
‘Don’t	matter,’	Leff	said,	‘since	that	ain’t	why	you’re	on	the	list	now,	is	it?’
‘You	two	must	be	desperate,	to	take	on	one	of	those—’
‘Maybe	we	are,’	said	Scorch,	‘and	maybe	we	ain’t.	Now,	you	saying	you’re
broke	is	bad	news,	Torvald.	For	you	more’n	us,	since	we	now	got	to	deliver
you.	And	my,	won’t	Lender	Gareb	be	pleased.’
‘Wait!	I	can	get	that	money	–	I	can	clear	that	debt.	But	I	need	time—’
‘No	time	to	give	ya,’	Leff	said,	shaking	his	head.	‘Sorry,	old	friend.’
‘One	night,	that’s	all	I’m	asking.’
‘One	night,	for	you	to	run	as	far	as	you	can.’
‘No,	I	swear	it.	Gods,	I’ve	just	returned!	Here	to	honour	all	my	debts!’
‘Really,	and	how	are	you	planning	to	do	that?’
‘Best	leave	the	details	to	me,	Scorch,	just	to	keep	you	and	Leff	innocent.
Now,	I’m	way	down	on	that	list	–	I’d	have	to	be,	since	it’s	been	years.	That
means	nobody’s	expecting	you	to	come	up	with	me,	right?	Give	me	a	night,
just	one,	that’s	all	I’m	asking.	We	can	meet	again	right	here,	this	time
tomorrow.	I	won’t	run	out	on	you	two,	I	promise.’
‘You	must	think	we’re	idiots,’	Leff	said.
‘Listen,	once	I’ve	cleared	Gareb’s	debt,	I	can	help	you.	With	that	list.	Who’s
better	than	me	at	that	kind	of	stuff?’
Scorch’s	disbelieving	expression	stretched	his	face	until	it	seemed	his	eyes
would	fall	out	of	their	sockets.	He	licked	his	lips,	shot	Leff	a	glance.


Torvald	Nom	saw	all	this	and	nodded.	‘Aye,	you	two	are	in	trouble,	all
right.	Those	lists	chew	up	whoever	takes	’em	on.	I	must	tell	you,	I’m	amazed
and,	well,	deeply	disappointed	to	find	that	you	two	have	sunk	that	far	since	I
left.	Gods,	if	I’d	known,	well,	I	might’ve	considered	staying—’
Leff	snorted.	‘Now	that’s	a	damned	lie.’
‘All	right,	perhaps	an	exaggeration.	So	what	is	Gareb	saying	I’m	owing
him	now?’
‘A	thousand	silver	councils.’
Torvald	Nom	gaped,	the	colour	leaving	his	face.	‘For	Hood’s	sake,	he	just
bought	me	a	supper	and	a	pitcher	or	two!	And	even	then,	I	figured	he	was
simply	being	generous.	Wanted	me	to	do	some	work	for	him	or	something.	I
was	insulted	when	he	sent	me	a	bill	for	that	night—’
‘Interest,	Torvald,’	said	Leff.	‘You	know	how	it	is.’
‘Besides,’	added	Scorch,	‘you	just	up	and	ran.	Where	ya	been	all	this
time?’
‘You’d	never	believe	me.’
‘Is	that	shackle	scars	on	your	wrists?’
‘Aye,	and	worse.	Nathii	slave	pens.	Malazan	slavers	–	all	the	way	to	Seven
Cities.	Beru	fend,	my	friends,	none	of	it	was	pretty.	And	as	for	the	long	journey
back,	why,	if	I	was	a	bard	I’d	make	a	fortune	spinning	that	tale!’
The	sword	hovering	in	front	of	his	face	had	wavered,	dipped,	and	now
finally	fell	away,	while	the	knife	point	jabbing	his	ribs	eased	back.	Torvald
looked	quickly	into	both	faces	before	him,	and	said,	‘One	night,	old	friends,
and	all	this	will	be	cleared	up.	And	I	can	start	helping	you	with	that	list.’
‘We	already	got	us	help,’	Leff	said,	although	he	didn’t	seem	pleased	by	that
admission.
‘Oh?	Who?’
‘Kruppe.	Remember	him?’
‘That	oily,	fat	fence	always	hanging	out	at	the	Phoenix	Inn?	Are	you	two
mad?’
Scorch	said,	‘It’s	our	new	taproom,	Torvald,	ever	since	Bormen	threw	us
out	for—’
‘Don’t	tell	him	stuff	like	that,	Scorch!’
‘One	night,’	Torvald	said,	nodding.	‘Agreed?	Good,	you	won’t	regret	it.’
Stepping	back,	Leff	sheathed	his	shortsword.	‘I	already	do.	Listen,	Torvald.
You	run	and	we’ll	chase	you,	no	matter	where	you	go.	You	can	jump	straight
back	into	the	Nathii	slave	pens	and	we’ll	be	there	right	beside	you.	You
understanding	me?’
Torvald	frowned	at	the	man	for	a	moment,	then	nodded.	‘That	I	do,	Leff.


But	I’m	back,	now,	and	I’m	not	going	anywhere,	not	ever	again.’
‘One	night.’
‘Aye.	Now,	you	two	better	head	back	to	watching	the	quay	–	who	knows
who	might	be	readying	to	flee	on	the	next	outbound	ship.’
Both	men	suddenly	looked	nervous.	Leff	gave	Torvald	a	push	as	he
worked	past,	Scorch	on	his	heels.	Torvald	watched	them	scurry	to	the	alley
mouth,	then	plunge	into	the	crowd	on	Front	Street.
‘How	is	it,’	he	asked	under	his	breath,	of	no	one,	‘that	complete	idiots	just
live	on,	and	on?	And	on?’
He	adjusted	his	Moranth	raincape,	making	certain	that	none	of	the	items
secreted	in	the	underside	pockets	had	been	jostled	loose	or,	gods	forbid,
broken.	Nothing	dripping.	No	burning	sensations,	no	slithering	presence	of…
whatever.	Good.	Tugging	down	his	floppy	hat,	he	set	off	once	more.
This	thing	with	Gareb	was	damned	irritating.	Well,	he’d	just	have	to	do
something	about	it,	wouldn’t	he?	One	night.	Fine.	So	be	it.	The	rest	can	wait.
I	hope.
	
Born	in	the	city	of	One	Eye	Cat	twenty-seven	years	ago,	Humble	Measure	was
of	mixed	blood.	A	Rhivi	woman,	sold	to	a	local	merchant	in	exchange	for	a
dozen	bars	of	quenched	iron,	gave	birth	to	a	bastard	son	a	year	later.	Adopted
into	his	father ’s	household	eight	years	on,	the	boy	was	apprenticed	in	the
profession	of	ironmongery	and	would	have	inherited	the	enterprise	if	not	for
one	terrible	night	when	his	sheltered,	stable	world	ended.
A	foreign	army	had	arrived,	investing	the	city	in	a	siege.	Days	and	nights
of	high	excitement	for	the	young	man,	then,	with	the	streets	aflame	with
rumours	of	the	glory	promised	by	the	city’s	membership	in	the	great,	rich
Malazan	Empire	–	if	only	the	fools	in	the	palace	would	capitulate.	His	father ’s
eyes	had	glowed	with	that	imagined	promise,	and	no	doubt	it	was	on	the	rising
tide	of	such	visions	that	the	elderly	trader	conspired	with	agents	of	the	Empire
to	open	the	city	gates	one	night	–	an	attempt	that	ended	in	catastrophic	failure,
with	the	merchant	suffering	arrest	and	then	execution,	and	his	estate	invaded	by
city	garrison	soldiers	with	swords	drawn.
That	assault	had	left	nightmare	memories	that	would	never	leave	Humble
Measure.	Witnessing	his	mother ’s	rape	and	murder,	and	that	of	his	half-sisters.
Screams,	smoke	and	blood,	everywhere	blood,	like	the	bitter	gift	of	some	dark
god	–	oh,	he	would	remember	that	blood.	Beaten	and	in	chains,	he	had	been
dragged	into	the	street	and	would	have	suffered	the	same	fate	as	the	others	if
not	for	the	presence	of	a	mercenary	company	allied	with	the	city.	Its


commander,	a	tall,	fierce	warrior	named	Jorrick	Sharplance,	had	taken
command	of	the	handful	of	surviving	prisoners.
That	company	was	subsequently	driven	from	One	Eye	Cat	by	the	city’s
paranoid	rulers,	sailing	out	on	ships	across	Old	King	Lake,	shortly	before	yet
another	act	of	treachery	proved	more	successful	than	the	first	attempt.	Another
night	of	slaughter,	this	time	at	the	bloodied	hands	of	Claw	assassins,	and	One
Eye	Cat	fell	to	the	Malazan	Empire.
Jorrick	Sharplance	had	taken	his	prisoners	with	him,	setting	them	free	on
the	wild	south	shore	of	the	lake,	at	the	very	feet	of	One	Eye	Range,	with
sufficient	supplies	to	take	them	through	the	mountain	passes	on	to	the	Old	King
Plateau.	From	there,	Humble	Measure	had	led	his	household’s	survivors,
slaves	and	free	citizens	alike,	down	the	trader	tracks	to	the	city	of	Bear.	A	brief
stay	there,	then	southward	to	Patch	and	on	to	the	Rhivi	Trail.
A	short	stay	in	Pale,	until,	fleeing	yet	another	Malazan	siege,	down	to
Darujhistan	in	the	midst	of	a	decrepit	column	of	refugees.
Whereupon	Humble	Measure	had	settled	in	the	last	surviving	office	of	his
father ’s	business,	there	to	begin	a	long,	careful	rebuilding	process	that	honed
his	tactical	skills	and,	indeed,	his	fortitude.
Such	a	long,	fraught	journey	had	ensured	the	loyalty	of	his	staff.	The
slaves	were	rewarded	with	emancipation,	and	not	one	refused	his	offer	of
employment.	His	trade	in	iron	burgeoned.	For	a	time,	it	seemed	that	the	curse
that	was	the	Malazan	Empire	might	well	track	him	down	once	more,	but	there
had	been	a	gift,	a	gift	of	blood	that	he	well	understood	now,	and	the	city’s	life
had	been	spared.
For	how	long?	Humble	Measure	was	well	acquainted	with	how	the	Empire
got	things	done.	Infiltration,	clever	acts	of	destabilization,	assassinations,	the
fomenting	of	panic	and	the	dissolution	of	order.	That	they	now	had	an	embassy
in	the	city	was	no	more	than	a	means	of	bringing	their	deadly	agents	into
Darujhistan.	Well,	he	was	done	running.
His	father ’s	ancestors	had	traded	in	iron	for	twelve	generations.	Here	in
the	office	in	the	Gadrobi	District	of	Darujhistan,	in	the	vaults	far	below	street
level,	he	had	found	written	records	reaching	back	almost	six	hundred	years.
And	among	the	most	ancient	of	those	vellum	scrolls,	Humble	Measure	had
made	a	discovery.
Darujhistan	would	not	fall	to	the	Malazan	Empire	–	he	had	found	the	means
to	ensure	that.	To	ensure,	indeed,	that	no	foreign	power	could	ever	again
threaten	the	city	he	now	called	home,	ever	again	endanger	his	family,	his	loved
ones.
To	achieve	this,	Humble	Measure	well	understood	that	he	would	need	all


his	acumen	in	bringing	complicated	plans	to	fruition.	He	would	need	vast	sums
of	coin,	which	he	now	had	at	his	disposal.	And,	alas,	he	would	need	to	be
ruthless.
Unpleasant,	yes,	but	a	necessary	sacrifice.
The	central	office	of	Eldra	Iron	Mongers	was	a	sprawling	collection	of
buildings,	warehouses	and	work	yards	just	north	of	Two-Ox	Gate.	The	entire
complex	was	walled	and	virtually	self-contained.	Three	sets	of	forges	fronted
an	elongated,	single-storey	foundry	resting	against	the	west	wall.	Beneath	it	ran
a	subterranean	stream	that	provided	outflow	into	the	Maiten	River,	the	effluent
and	wastes	issuing	from	that	stream	giving	the	bay	beyond	its	name	of
Brownrun,	and	most	days	the	stain	spread	out	far	on	to	Lake	Azure,	an
unfortunate	consequence	of	working	iron,	as	he	said	often	to	city	officials
when	the	complaints	of	the	Gadrobi	fishers	grew	too	strident	to	ignore.	Offers
of	recompense	usually	sufficed	to	silence	such	objections,	and	as	for	the
faintly	bitter	irony	Humble	Measure	felt	when	paying	out	these	sums	–	an	irony
founded	on	the	cold	fact	that	iron	was	needed	by	all,	the	demand	unending,
from	fish-hooks	to	gaffs	to	armour	and	swords	–	well,	he	wisely	kept	that	to
himself.
The	administration	building	rose	against	the	south	wall	of	the	compound,
both	office	and	residence.	Staff	quarters	dominated	the	wing	nearest	the	south
end	of	the	foundry.	The	central	block	housed	the	records	and	clerical
chambers.	The	final	wing	was	the	oldest	part	of	the	structure,	its	foundations
dating	back	to	an	age	when	bronze	was	the	primary	metal,	and	civilization	was
still	a	raw	promise.	Far	beneath	the	ground	level	of	this	wing,	ancient	stairs
wound	down	through	layers	of	limestone,	opening	out	on	to	a	succession	of
rough-hewn	vaults	that	had	been	used	as	storage	rooms	for	generations.	Long
before	such	mundane	usage,	Humble	Measure	suspected,	these	crypts	had	held
a	darker	purpose.
He	had	recently	converted	one	such	chamber	into	a	secret	office,	wherein
he	could	work	alone,	protected	by	a	skein	of	long-dormant	wards,	and	here	he
would	remain	for	most	of	each	night,	strangely	tireless,	as	if	the	very	nobility
of	his	cause	blessed	him	with	inhuman	reserves	–	further	proof	to	his	mind	that
his	efforts	had	begun	to	yield	gifts,	a	recognition	of	sorts,	from	powers	few
even	suspected	still	existed.
His	thoughts	were	on	such	matters	even	during	the	day,	and	this	day	in
particular,	when	his	most	loyal	servant	–	the	only	man	who	knew	of	the	secret
crypts	and,	indeed,	of	Humble	Measure’s	master	plan	–	entered	his	office	and
placed	a	small	wax	book	on	his	desk,	then	departed.
A	sudden	quickening	of	anticipation,	quickly	crushed	once	he	opened	the


book	and	read	the	message	scribed	into	the	wax.
Most	unfortunate.	Four	assassins,	all	failing.	The	Guild	assured	him	that
such	failure	would	not	be	repeated.
So,	the	targets	had	proved	themselves	to	be	truly	as	dangerous	as	Humble
Measure	had	suspected.	Sour	consolation,	alas.	He	set	the	book	down	and
reached	for	the	roller	on	its	heated	plate.	Carefully	melted	away	the	message.
The	Guild	would	have	to	do	better.	Lest	he	lose	faith	and	seek…other
means.
In	the	yards	beyond,	bars	of	iron	clanged	as	they	were	rolled	from	pallets
on	to	the	rail-beds	leading	to	the	warehouse,	like	the	sudden	clash	of	armies	on
a	field	of	battle.	The	sound	made	Humble	Measure	wince.
Whatever	was	necessary.	Whatever	was	necessary.
	
In	a	very	short	time	the	foreign	ship	edging	ever	closer	to	the	Lowstone	Pier
captured	the	attention	of	the	crowds	on	the	quayside,	sufficient	to	dampen	the
constant	roar	of	the	hawkers,	stevedores,	fortune-tellers,	prostitutes,	carters,
and	fisherfolk.	Eyes	widened.	Conversations	died	as	lungs	snatched	air	and
held	it	taut	in	numbed	shock.	A	sudden	laugh	yelped,	swiftly	followed	by
others.
Standing	at	the	bow	of	the	low-slung	ship,	one	pale,	perfect	hand	resting	on
the	carved	neck	of	the	horsehead	prow,	was	a	woman.	If	not	for	her	stunning,
ethereal	beauty,	her	poise	was	so	regal,	so	haughty,	that	it	would	have	verged
on	caricature.	She	was	swathed	in	a	diaphanous	blouse	of	emerald	green	that
flowed	like	water	in	a	glacial	stream.	She	wore	a	broad	black	leather	belt	in
which	were	thrust	three	naked-bladed	daggers,	and	beneath	that,	tight-fitting,
tanned	leather	breeches	down	to	rawhide	leggings.	Behind	her,	on	the	deck	and
in	the	rigging,	swarmed	a	score	of	bhokarala,	while	three	more	fought	over
the	steering	oar.
All	harbours	the	world	over	possessed	tales	of	outrageously	strange
arrivals,	but	none	matched	this,	or	so	it	would	be	claimed	by	the	witnesses	in
homes	and	bars	for	years	to	come.	As	the	ship	glided	closer	to	the	pier,
disaster	seemed	imminent.	Bhokarala	were	mere	apes,	after	all,	perhaps	as
smart	as	the	average	dog.	Crewing	a	ship?	Ridiculous.	Drawing	into	berth	with
deft	precision?	Impossible.	Yet,	at	the	last	moment,	the	three	creatures
struggling	for	control	of	the	steering	oar	miraculously	heeled	the	ship	over.
The	straw	bumpers	barely	squeezed	between	hull	and	stone	as	the	craft	nudged
the	pier.	Lines	sailed	out	in	chaotic	profusion,	only	a	few	within	reach	of	the
dockside	handlers	–	but	enough	to	make	the	ship	fast.	High	on	the	main	mast,


the	topsail	luffed	and	snapped,	then	the	yard	loosened	and	the	canvas	folded	as
it	dropped	down,	temporarily	trapping	a	bhokaral	within	it,	where	the	creature
squawked	and	struggled	mightily	to	free	itself.
Down	on	the	main	deck,	bhokarala	rushed	from	all	directions	to	fight	over
the	gangplank,	and	all	on	the	quayside	watched	as	the	grey,	warped	board	jutted
and	jerked	on	its	way	down	to	clatter	on	the	pier ’s	stones,	a	task	that	resulted	in
three	or	four	of	the	black,	winged	beasts	falling	into	the	water	with	piteous
squeals.
A	dozen	paces	away	stood	a	clerk	of	the	harbour	master ’s	office,	hesitating
overlong	on	his	approach	to	demand	moorage	fees.	The	dunked	bhokarala
clambered	back	on	to	the	deck,	one	with	a	large	fish	in	its	mouth,	enticing
others	to	rush	in	to	fight	over	the	prize.
The	woman	had	stepped	back	from	her	perch	alongside	the	prow,	but
instead	of	crossing	the	main	deck	to	disembark,	she	vanished	down	through	the
cabin	hatch.
The	clerk	edged	forward	then	quickly	retreated	as	a	half-dozen	bhokarala
crowding	the	rail	near	the	gangplank	bared	their	fangs	at	him.
Common	among	all	crowds,	fascination	at	novelty	was	shortlived,	and
before	too	long,	as	nothing	else	of	note	occurred	beyond	the	futile	attempts	by
the	clerk	to	extract	moorage	fees	from	a	score	of	winged	apes	that	did	little
more	than	snarl	and	make	faces	at	him	–	one	going	so	far	as	to	pelt	him	with	a
fresh	fish-head	–	fixed	regard	wavered	and	drifted	away,	back	to	whatever
tasks	and	whatever	demands	had	required	attention	before	the	ship’s
appearance.	Word	of	the	glorious	woman	and	her	absurd	crew	raced	outward
to	infest	the	city,	swift	as	starlings	swirling	from	street	to	street,	as	the
afternoon	stretched	on.
	
In	the	captain’s	cabin	aboard	the	ship,	Scillara	watched	as	Sister	Spite,	a	faint
smile	on	her	full	lips,	poured	out	goblets	of	wine	and	set	them	down	before	her
guests	seated	round	the	map-table.	That	smile	collapsed	into	a	sad	frown	–	only
slightly	exaggerated	–	when	Cutter	twisted	in	his	chair,	too	frustrated	to	accept
the	peaceable	gesture.
‘Oh,	really,’	Spite	said,	‘some	maturity	from	you	would	be	a	relief	right
now.	Our	journey	has	been	long,	yes,	but	I	do	reiterate	that	delaying	our
disembarkation	until	dusk	remains	the	wisest	course.’
‘I	have	no	enemies	here,’	Cutter	said	in	a	belligerent	growl.	‘Only	friends.’
‘Perhaps	that	is	true,’	Spite	conceded,	‘but	I	assure	you,	young	assassin,
Darujhistan	is	not	the	city	you	left	behind	years	past.	Fraught,	poised	on	the


very	edge	of	great	danger—’
‘I	know	that!	I	feel	it	–	I	felt	it	before	I	ever	came	aboard	your	cursed	ship!
Why	do	you	think	just	sitting	here,	doing	nothing,	strikes	me	as	the	worst
decision	possible?	I	need	to	see	people,	I	need	to	warn—’
‘Oh	dear,’	Spite	cut	in,	‘do	you	truly	believe	that	you	alone	are	aware	of
the	danger?	That	all	hangs	in	the	balance	right	there	at	your	fingertips?	The
arrogance	of	youth!’
Scillara	filled	her	pipe	with	rustleaf	and	spent	a	moment	sparking	it	alight.
Heavy,	brooding	emotions	filled	the	cabin.	Nothing	new	in	that,	of	course.	This
entire	journey	had	been	chaotic	and	contrary	from	the	moment	she,	Cutter,
Barathol	and	Chaur	had	been	fished	from	the	seas	even	as	the	sky	flung	giant
gobbets	of	fire	down	on	all	sides.	Worshipful	bhokarala,	a	miserable	mule,	an
old	hag	who	collapsed	into	a	heap	of	spiders	if	one	so	much	as	looked	askance
in	her	direction.	A	scrawny,	entirely	mad	High	Priest	of	Shadow,	and	a	brokenhearted	Trell.	And	while	Spite	comported	herself	with	all	the	airs	of	a	coddled
princess,	she	was	in	truth	a	Soletaken	sorceress,	dreadfully	powerful	and	as
dangerously	fey	as	some	Elder	Goddess.	No,	a	more	motley	shipload	of
passengers	and	crew	Scillara	could	not	imagine.
And	now	here	we	are.	Poor	Darujhistan!	‘Won’t	be	long	now,’	she	said	to
Cutter.	‘We’re	better	off	trying	to	stay	as	far	beneath	notice	as	possible.’
Iskaral	Pust,	seated	on	his	chair	with	his	legs	drawn	up	so	that	his	toad-like
face	was	between	his	knees,	seemed	to	choke	on	that	comment;	then,	reddening
and	eyes	bulging,	he	scowled	at	the	table.	‘We	have	a	crew	of	mad	apes!’	His
head	tilted	and	he	stared	agog	at	Scillara.	‘We	could	smoke	dried	fish	with	her
–	just	hang	’em	in	her	hair!	Of	course,	the	fish’d	end	up	poisoning	us	all,
which	might	be	her	plan	all	along!	Keep	her	away	from	food	and	drink	–	oh
yes,	I	have	figured	her	out.	No	High	Priest	of	Shadow	can	be	fooled	so	easily!
Oh,	no.	Now,	where	was	I?’	His	brows	knitted,	then	suddenly	rose	threateningly
as	he	glared	at	her.	‘Beneath	notice!	Why	not	just	sneak	out	in	that	cloud	of
yours,	woman?’
She	blew	him	a	smoky	kiss.
Spite	set	her	goblet	down.	‘The	dispositions	facing	us	now	are	probably
worth	discussing,	don’t	you	think?’
This	question,	addressed	to	everyone,	yielded	only	blank	stares.
Spite	sighed.	‘Mappo	Runt,	the	one	you	seek	is	not	on	this	continent.	Even
so,	I	would	advise	you	cross	overland	here,	perhaps	as	far	as	Lamatath,	where
you	should	be	able	to	procure	passage	to	the	fell	empire	of	Lether.’
The	Trell	studied	her	from	beneath	his	heavy	brows.	‘Then	I	shall	not
linger.’


‘Oh,	he	mustn’t	linger,’	Iskaral	Pust	whispered.	‘No	no	no.	Too	much	rage,
too	much	grief.	The	giant	oaf	cannot	linger,	or	worse	malinger.	Malingering
would	be	terrible,	and	probably	against	the	law	anyway.	Yes,	perhaps	I	could
get	him	arrested.	Locked	up,	forgotten	in	some	nefarious	dungeon.	Oh,	I	must
cogitate	on	this	possibility,	all	the	while	smiling	benignly!’	And	he	smiled.
Mogora	snorted.	‘Husband,’	she	said	sweetly,	‘I	have	divined	your	fate.	In
Darujhistan	you	shall	find	your	nemesis,	a	catastrophic	clash.	Devastation,
misery	for	all,	the	unleashing	of	horrible	curses	and	ferocious	powers.	Ruin,
such	ruin	that	I	dream	each	night	of	blessed	peace,	assured	that	the	universe	is
in	balance	once	more.’
‘I	can	hardly	imagine,’	Spite	said,	‘Shadow	imposing	balance	of	any	sort.
This	husband	of	yours	serves	a	diabolical	god,	a	most	unpleasant	god.	As	for
your	divination,	Mogora,	I	happen	to	know	that	you	possess	no	such	talents—’
‘But	I	can	hope,	can’t	I?’
‘This	is	not	the	world	for	wishful	thinking,	dear.’
‘Don’t	you	“dear”	me!	You’re	the	worst	kind	of	witch,	a	good-looking
one!	Proof	that	charm	is	naught	but	a	glamour—’
‘Oh,	wife,’	Iskaral	Pust	crooned,	‘would	that	you	could	glamour	yourself.
Why,	an	end	to	my	nausea—’
With	a	snarl	Mogora	veered	into	a	seething	mass	of	spiders,	spilling	down
over	the	chair	and	on	to	the	plank	floor,	then	scattering	in	all	directions.
Iskaral	Pust	snickered	at	the	others.	‘That’s	why	I	sit	like	this,	you	fools.
She’ll	bite	you	all,	at	every	chance!’	He	jabbed	a	gnarled	finger	at	Scillara.
‘Except	you,	of	course,	because	you	make	her	sick!’
‘Good,’	she	replied,	then	glanced	across	at	Barathol.	The	huge	blackskinned	man	was	half	smiling	as	he	observed	the	others.	Behind	him	stood
Chaur,	his	foolish	grin	unwavering	even	as	he	tried	stamping	on	spiders.	‘And
what	of	you,	blacksmith?	Eager	to	explore	this	grand	city	of	blue	fire?’
Barathol	shrugged.	‘I	believe	I	am,	although	it	has	been	some	time	since	I
last	found	myself	among	crowds.	I	imagine	I	might	even	enjoy	the	anonymity.’
He	seemed	to	take	note	of	his	hands	where	they	rested	on	the	table	before	him,
and	saw	something	in	their	skein	of	scars	that	made	him	frown,	then	slowly
withdraw	them	from	view.	His	dark	eyes	shifted	from	hers,	almost	shyly.
Not	one	for	grand	confessions,	Scillara	well	knew.	A	single	regret	could
crush	a	thousand	proud	deeds,	and	Barathol	Mekhar	had	more	regrets	than
most	mortals	could	stomach.	Nor	was	he	young	enough	to	brazen	his	way
through	them,	assuming,	of	course,	that	youth	was	indeed	a	time	of	bold
fearlessness,	that	precious	disregard	for	the	future	that	permitted,	well,	almost
anything,	so	long	as	it	served	an	immediate	need.


‘I	admit,’	said	Spite,	‘to	a	certain	melancholy	when	visiting	vibrant	cities,
as	is	this	Darujhistan.	A	long	life	teaches	one	just	how	ephemeral	is	such
thriving	glory.	Why,	I	have	come	again	upon	cities	I	knew	well	in	the	age	of
their	greatness,	only	to	find	crumbled	walls,	dust	and	desolation.’
Cutter	bared	his	teeth	and	said,	‘Darujhistan	has	stood	for	two	thousand
years	and	it	will	stand	for	another	two	thousand	–	even	longer.’
Spite	nodded.	‘Precisely.’
‘Well,	we	hardly	have	the	leisure	of	living	for	millennia,	Spite—’
‘You	clearly	weren’t	listening,’	she	cut	in.	‘Leisure	is	not	a	relevant	notion.
Consider	the	weariness	that	often	afflicts	your	kind,	late	in	their	lives.	Then
multiply	that	countless	times.	This	is	the	burden	of	being	long-lived.’
‘A	moment,	then,	while	I	weep	for	you,’	Cutter	said.
‘Such	ingratitude!	Very	well,	young	man,	please	do	leave	us	now,	and	if
this	be	the	last	I	see	of	you	then	I	will	indeed	know	the	reward	of	leisurely
comportment!’
Cutter	rubbed	at	his	face	and	seemed	but	moments	from	pulling	at	his	own
hair.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	slowly	released	it.	‘I’ll	wait,’	he	muttered.
‘Really?’	Spite’s	thin,	perfect	brows	rose.	‘Then	perhaps	an	apology	is
forthcoming?’
‘Sorry,’	Cutter	said	in	a	mumble.	‘It’s	just	that,	with	what	I	fear	is	about	to
happen	to	my	city,	then	wasting	time	–	any	time	at	all	–	well,	it’s	not	easy.’	He
shrugged.
‘Apologies	with	caveats	are	worthless,	you	know,’	Spite	said,	rising.	‘Is	it
dusk	yet?	Can’t	you	all	crawl	off	to	your	bunks	for	a	time?	Or	wander	the	hold
or	something?	For	all	that	rude	Cutter	frets	over	things	he	cannot	control,	I
myself	sense	the	presence	of…personages,	residing	in	Darujhistan,	of	a	nature
to	alarm	even	me.	Accordingly,	I	must	think	for	a	time…preferably	alone.’
Scillara	rose.	‘Let’s	go,	Cutter,’	she	said,	taking	his	arm.
	
Trailed	by	Chaur,	Barathol	followed	the	Trell	warrior	down	into	the	hold.
There	were	no	berths	aboard	large	enough	to	accommodate	Mappo,	so	he	had
fashioned	an	abode	of	sorts	amidst	bales	of	supplies.	Barathol	saw	that	the
Trell	had	already	packed	his	kit,	hammock,	armour	and	weapons	all	stuffed
into	a	lone	sack	knotted	at	the	mouth	by	a	rawhide	cord,	and	now	he	sat	on	a
crate,	glancing	up	to	regard	the	blacksmith.
‘You	wish	to	speak	of	something,	Barathol?’
‘Spite	tells	me	that	the	Trell	were	driven	from	this	continent	long	ago.’
‘My	people	have	been	assailed	for	thousands	of	years.’	He	shrugged	his


massive	shoulders.	‘Perhaps	we	are	so	ugly	to	others	that	our	very	existence	is
unacceptable.’
‘You	have	a	long	journey	ahead,’	Barathol	said.	‘My	thought	is—’
But	Mappo	raised	a	hand.	‘No,	my	friend.	I	must	do	this	alone.’
‘To	cross	an	entire	continent,	in	the	face	of	hostility	–	possibly	on	all	sides
–	Mappo,	someone	must	guard	your	back.’
The	Trell’s	dark,	deep-set	eyes	studied	him	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.
‘Barathol	Mekhar,	we	have	come	to	know	each	other	well	on	this	journey.	I
could	not	imagine	anyone	better	to	guard	my	back	than	you.’	He	shook	his
head.	‘I	do	not	intend	to	cross	the	continent.	There	are…other	paths.	Perhaps
indeed	more	perilous,	but	I	assure	you	I	am	not	easy	to	kill.	The	failure	was
mine	and	to	make	it	right,	well,	the	responsibility	is	mine	and	mine	alone.	I	will
not	–	I	cannot	–	accept	that	others	risk	their	lives	on	my	behalf.	Not	you,	friend.
Not	blessed	Chaur.	Please,	leave	me	to	this.’
Barathol	sighed.	‘You	force	upon	me	an	even	more	terrible	choice,	then.’
‘Oh?’
A	wry	grin.	‘Aye.	What	to	do	with	my	life.’
Mappo	grunted	a	laugh.	‘I	would	not	call	that	terrible,	at	least	from	my
own	point	of	view.’
‘I	understand	what	it	is	to	be	driven,’	Barathol	said.	‘I	think	that	is	all	that	I
understand.	Back	in	Seven	Cities,	well,	I’d	almost	convinced	myself	that	what
I’d	found	was	all	I	needed,	but	I	was	lying	to	myself.	Some	people,	I	now
believe,	cannot	just…retire.	It	feels	too	much	like	surrender.’
‘You	were	a	blacksmith—’
‘By	default.	I	was	a	soldier,	Mappo.	A	Red	Blade.’
‘Even	so,	to	work	iron	is	a	worthy	profession.	Perhaps	you	were	a	soldier,
once,	but	to	set	down	your	weapons	and	find	another	profession	is	not
surrender.	Yet	if	it	feels	so	to	you,	well,	this	city	is	no	doubt	crowded	with
estates,	many	of	which	would	welcome	a	guard	of	your	experience.	And	there
will	be	merchants,	operating	caravans.	Indeed,	the	city	must	have	its	own
garrison	–	no	warrior	ever	fears	unemployment,	for	their	skills	are	ever	in
demand.’
‘A	sad	admission,	Mappo.’
The	Trell	shrugged	again.	‘I	would	think,	now,	Barathol,	that	if	anyone
needs	his	back	guarded,	it	is	Cutter.’
Barathol	sighed	in	frustration.	‘He	says	little	of	what	he	plans	to	do.	In	any
case,	this	is	his	city.	He	will	find	those	who	know	enough	to	protect	him.
Besides,	I	must	admit,	having	seen	Cutter	practise	with	those	knives	of	his,
well,	perhaps	it	is	Darujhistan	that	must	fear	his	return.’


‘He	is	too	precipitous.’
‘I	trust	Scillara	to	rein	him	in.’
‘Barathol,	let	us	now	make	our	farewells.	I	intend	to	depart	soon.’
‘And	had	I	not	followed	you	down	here?’
‘I	do	poorly	saying	goodbye.’	His	gaze	shied	away.
‘Then	I	will	convey	such	to	the	others,	on	your	behalf.	Cutter	will	be…
upset.	For	he	has	known	you	the	longest	among	us	all.’
‘I	know,	and	I	am	sorry	–	in	so	many	ways	I	am	a	coward.’
But	Barathol	well	understood.	This	was	not	cowardice.	It	was	some	sort	of
shame,	twisted	past	any	possible	reason,	any	conceivable	justification.	The	loss
of	Icarium	was	a	wound	so	raw,	so	irreconcilable,	that	its	spreading	stain	swept
all	from	its	path.	Friends,	loyalties,	lives	and	histories.	And	Mappo	could	not
fight	against	that	onrushing	tide	and	the	fate	he	sought	at	its	very	end.	There
would	be	grief	at	that	conclusion,	Barathol	suspected,	of	incalculable	measure.
If	Icarium	Lifestealer	was	not	yet	unleashed,	he	would	be	soon.	Mappo
would	be	too	late	to	prevent	that.	It	was	difficult,	then,	to	leave	the	Trell	to	all
that	awaited	him,	to	simply	turn	away,	yet	what	else	could	he	do,	when	Mappo’s
own	desires	were	so	clear?	‘I	will	leave	you	to	your…paths,	then,	Mappo.	And
I	wish	you	the	best:	a	peaceful	journey,	its	satisfactory	conclusion.’
‘Thank	you,	my	friend.	I	hope	you	will	find	Darujhistan	a	worthy	home.’
He	rose	to	clasp	the	blacksmith’s	hand,	then	moved	past	to	embrace	Chaur,	who
laughed	in	delight	and	tried	to	begin	a	dance	with	the	Trell.	Grimacing,	Mappo
stepped	back.	‘Goodbye,	Chaur.	Take	care	of	Barathol	here.’
When	Chaur	finally	understood	that	he	would	not	see	Mappo	again,	there
would	be	tears.	There	was	a	simple	beauty	to	such	open,	child-like	responses.
Perhaps,	Barathol	considered,	Chaur	alone	walked	the	truest	path	in	life.
Settling	a	hand	on	Chaur ’s	muscled	shoulder,	he	smiled	at	Mappo.	‘He	is	a
gift	I	do	not	deserve.’
The	Trell	nodded.	‘A	gift	this	world	does	not	deserve.	Now,	I	would	be
alone,	in	these	final	moments.’
Barathol	bowed,	then	guided	Chaur	back	to	the	ladder	leading	up	to	the
hatch.
	
Iskaral	Pust	clambered	on	to	his	bunk,	the	middle	of	three	stacked	against	the
curving	hull.	He	scraped	his	head	against	the	underside	of	the	top	one	and
cursed	under	his	breath,	then	cursed	some	more	as	he	had	to	fish	out	a	handful
of	disgusting	offerings	left	beneath	his	pillow	by	the	bhokarala.	Rotting	fishheads,	clumps	of	scaly	faeces,	baubles	stolen	from	Spite	and	a	cracked	kaolin


pipe	filched	from	Scillara.	Flung	off,	they	clumped	and	clattered	on	the	twoplank-wide	walkway	at	the	very	hoofs	of	his	mule,	which	had	taken	to	standing
beside	his	berth	at	random	intervals	–	each	one	proving	succinctly
inconvenient,	as	befitted	a	thoroughly	brainless	but	quaintly	loyal	animal.
From	the	bunk	above	came	a	rattling	snort.	‘The	hatch	is	too	small,	you
know,’	said	Mogora.	‘You	make	it	too	obvious,	husband.’
‘Maybe	obvious	is	my	middle	name,	did	you	think	that?	No,	of	course	not.
She	never	thinks	at	all.	She	has	ten	thousand	eyes	and	not	one	of	them	can	see
past	her	nose-hairs.	Listen	well,	woman.	Everyone	knows	mules	are	superior
to	horses	in	every	way.	Including	the	navigation	of	hatches.	Why,	my	blessed
servant	here	prefers	using	outhouses	over	just	plopping	any	which	where
along	the	roadside.	She	possesses	decorum,	which	can	hardly	be	said	for	you
now,	can	it?’
‘Shouldn’t	you	be	picking	your	nose	or	something?	Your	worshippers	are
praying	for	a	sign,	you	know.’
‘At	least	I	have	worshippers.	You	just	scare	’em.	You	scare	everybody.’
‘Even	you?’
‘Of	course	not.	Gods	below,	she	terrifies	me!	Better	not	let	her	know,
though.	That	would	be	bad.	I	need	to	do	something	soon.	Twist	off	her	legs,
maybe!	Yes,	that	would	do	it.	Leave	her	lying	on	her	back	scratching	at	the	air
and	making	pathetic	mewling	sounds.	Oh,	the	imagination	is	a	wonderful	thing,
is	it	not?’
‘When	it’s	all	you	have.’
‘When	what’s	all	I	have?	What	idiocy	are	you	blabbering	about	now?	That
was	uncanny.	Almost	as	if	she	can	read	my	mind.	Good	thing	she	can’t,
though.’
‘Hold	on,’	hissed	Mogora.	‘That	mule	was	male!	I’d	swear	it!’
‘Checking	him	out,	were	you?’
‘One	more	step	on	that	track,	husband,	and	I	will	kill	you	with	my	own
hands.’
‘Hee	hee.	What	a	terrible,	disgusting	mind	you	have,	wife.’
‘No,	you	won’t	distract	me	this	time.	Your	mule	has	just	changed	sex	and
knowing	you	I	might	be	looking	at	a	rival,	but	you	know	what?	She	can	have
you.	With	my	blessing	she	can,	oh	yes!’
‘Popularity	is	a	curse,’	Iskaral	said,	stretching	out	with	his	hands	behind	his
head	and	staring	up	at	the	taut	ropes	of	the	mattress	above	him.	‘Not	that	she’d
know	anything	about	that.	I’d	better	visit	the	local	temple,	assert	my	tyrannical
dominance	over	all	the	local	acolytes	and	fakir	priests	and	priestesses.
Priestesses!	Might	be	a	pretty	one	or	two.	As	High	Priest,	I	could	have	my	pick


as	is	my	right.	Make	offerings	in	the	shadow	between	her	legs,	yes—’
‘I’d	know,	Iskaral	Pust,’	Mogora	snapped,	moving	about	on	the	bed	above.
‘I’d	just	know,	and	then	I’d	take	my	knife,	one	night	when	you’re	sleeping,	and
I’d	snick	snick	and	you’d	be	singing	like	a	child	and	squatting	t’piss	and	what
woman	or	mule	would	want	you	then?’
‘Get	out	of	my	head,	woman!’
‘It’s	not	hard	to	know	what	you’re	thinking.’
‘That’s	what	you	think!	She’s	getting	more	dangerous,	we	need	a	divorce.
But	isn’t	it	why	most	mates	break	up?	When	the	woman	gets	too	dangerous?
Must	be.	I’m	sure	of	it.	Well,	I’d	be	free	then,	wouldn’t	I?	Free!’
The	mule	brayed.
Mogora	laughed	so	hard	she	wet	herself,	if	the	rank	dribbles	from	above
were	any	indication.
	
Scillara	and	Cutter	had	taken	the	berths	closest	to	the	stern	in	an	effort	to
achieve	some	sort	of	privacy,	and	had	rigged	a	section	of	spare	canvas	across
the	walkway.	Despite	this,	Mogora’s	half-mad	laughter	reached	through,
triggering	yet	another	scowl	from	Cutter.
‘If	those	two	just	realized	how	perfect	they	are	for	each	other,	we’d	finally
get	some	peace.’
Scillara	smiled.	‘I’m	sure	they	do.	Most	marriages	involve	mutual	thoughts
of	murder	on	occasion.’
He	glanced	over	at	her.	‘You’ve	some	strange	ideas,	Scillara.	About	all
sorts	of	things.’
‘I	was	wondering,	when	you	head	out	tonight,	will	you	want	my	company?
Or	would	you	rather	go	on	your	own?’
He	could	not	hold	her	gaze	and	made	a	show	of	stretching	his	back	before
reclining	on	his	bunk.	‘Of	course	not,’	he	said.	‘You’ll	like	the	Phoenix	Inn.
Meese,	Irilta,	Murillio,	Coll	and	Kruppe.	Well,	maybe	not	Kruppe,	who	rubs
some	people	the	wrong	way,	but	he’s	harmless	enough…I	suppose.’	He
rummaged	in	the	pouch	at	his	belt	for	a	moment,	then	drew	out	a	single	coin.	A
Blue	Moranth	silver	sceptre,	which	he	began	deftly	working	through	his
fingers.	‘Won’t	they	be	surprised	to	see	me.’
She	managed	a	smile.	‘Cutter ’s	belated	return.’
‘Well,	“Cutter”	isn’t	the	name	they	know	me	by.	I	was	Crokus	Younghand
back	then.’
‘And	where	is	he	now?	This	Crokus	Younghand.’
He	spent	a	moment	squinting	at	the	coin	before	replying,	‘Dead.	Long


dead.’
‘And	what	will	your	friends	make	of	that?’
He	sat	up,	suddenly	restless	and	still	unwilling	to	meet	her	eyes.	‘I	don’t
know.	They	won’t	be	happy.’
‘I	think	I	will	leave	you	to	it,	Cutter,’	Scillara	said.	‘I’ll	join	Barathol	and
Chaur	wandering	the	night	markets	and	such	–	there’s	a	fête	going	on,	yes?
That	sounds	inviting.	As	for	my	meeting	your	friends,	best	it	wait	a	day	or
two.’
He	glanced	at	her.	‘Are	you	sure?	You	don’t—’
‘I’m	sure,’	she	cut	in.	‘You	need	this	night	to	yourself.	You’ll	have	enough
questions	to	answer	without	my	presence	confusing	things	even	more.’
‘All	right,’	and	despite	his	efforts	his	relief	was	palpable.	‘But	come
tomorrow	–	everyone	knows	where	the	Phoenix	is,	so	all	you	need	do	is	ask.’
‘Of	course,’	she	replied,	rising	from	where	she	sat	on	the	edge	of	her	own
berth.	‘I’d	best	hunt	Barathol	down,	so	he	doesn’t	leave	without	me.’
‘Must	be	nearing	dusk.’
‘So	it	is,	Cutter.	Lady’s	pull	on	you	this	night.’
‘Thanks.’	But	it	was	a	distracted	response.
As	she	made	her	way	forward,	forced	to	shove	the	damned	mule	to	one
side,	Scillara	told	herself	that	the	hurt	she	was	feeling	was	unwarranted.	He’d
found	comfort	in	her	arms,	because	there	was	no	one	else.	No	love	was
involved.	Not	once	mentioned,	not	even	whispered	nor	murmured	in	the	thick,
sleepy	moments	after	lovemaking.	Little	more	than	mutual	satisfaction,
comfort	and	convenience.	And	now,	well,	that	time	had	passed.	Reunion	with
friends	beckoned	Cutter	–	that	old	world	in	which	he	had	known	his	place.
Difficult	enough	that	he	might	no	longer	fit	–	explaining	the	overweight,	pipesucking	ex-whore	at	his	side	would	only	embarrass	him.
He	had	changed	her,	she	realized,	pausing	just	inside	the	hatch.	As	if	she’d
absorbed	some	essence	of	his	uncertainty,	his	lack	of	confidence.	She	no
longer	felt	her	usual	brazen,	bridling	self.	No	longer	ready	with	a	sneer,	no
longer	armoured	against	the	vagaries	of	this	damned	world.	Here,	a	dozen
strides	from	the	largest	city	she	had	ever	seen,	was	neither	the	time	nor	the
place	for	such	weakness.
Well,	Barathol’s	solid	presence	could	answer	her	need.	For	a	time,	anyway.
Emerging	on	to	the	main	deck,	she	found	herself	in	the	midst	of	a	growing
storm.	The	bhokarala	crowded	the	dockside	rail	and	scampered	back	and	forth
along	its	length,	while	at	the	other	end	of	the	gangplank	stood	an	agent	of	the
harbour	master	along	with	a	half-dozen	city	guards	even	now	drawing	their
batons,	readying	to	assault	the	ship.


Barathol	and	Chaur	had	just	climbed	up	from	the	hold	and	the	blacksmith
began	pushing	his	way	through	the	screeching,	spitting	apes.
She	well	understood	his	desire	to	prevent	an	escalation	of	the	situation.
Spite	was	not	the	most	evenly	tempered	woman	Scillara	had	known.	An
argument	gone	awry	could	well	result	in	an	enraged	dragon’s	devastating	the
quayside	and	half	the	city	beyond.	All	for	a	misunderstanding	on	moorage
fees.
So	much	for	a	quiet	arrival.
Scillara	hurried	forward,	kicking	aside	bhokarala	and	pulling	loose	her
coin-pouch.
	
A	blow	to	the	side	of	his	head	and	he	rolled,	suddenly	awake,	both	knives
coming	into	his	hands	and	blades	scraping	across	the	gritty	flagstoned	floor
beneath	him.	His	shoulder	struck	a	wall	and	he	blinked	in	the	gloom.
A	tall	figure	stood	over	him,	black	leather	and	banded	iron	in	tatters,	the
dull	gleam	of	snapped	ribs	showing	through	torn,	green	skin.	A	face	in
shadows,	pitted	eye-sockets,	a	broad	slash	of	mouth	hinting	at	up-thrust	tusks.
Rallick	Nom	studied	the	apparition,	the	knives	feeling	useless	in	his	gloved
hands.	The	side	of	his	head	still	rang.	His	gaze	dropped	to	the	stiffened	leather
toes	of	the	demon’s	half-rotted	moccasins.	‘You	kicked	me.’
‘Yes,’	came	the	rasping	reply.
‘Why?’
The	demon	hesitated,	then	said,	‘It	seemed	the	thing	to	do.’
They	were	in	a	narrow	corridor.	A	solid	door	of	black	wood	and	bronze
fittings	was	to	Rallick’s	left.	To	his	right,	just	beyond	the	demon,	there	was	a	Tintersection	and	double	doors	facing	on	to	the	conjunction.	The	light	cast	by
the	lantern	the	creature	held	in	one	withered,	long-fingered	hand	seemed	both
pale	and	cold,	throwing	diffused,	indifferent	shadows	against	the	stone	walls.
Overhead,	the	ceiling	was	roughly	arched,	the	stones	thinner	and	smaller
towards	the	peak,	seemingly	fitted	without	mortar.	The	air	smelled	of	dust	and
decay,	lifeless	and	dry.
‘It	seems…I	remember	nothing,’	Rallick	said.
‘In	time.’
Every	joint	was	stiff;	even	sitting	up	with	his	back	against	the	wall	left
Rallick’s	muscles	trembling.	His	head	ached	with	more	than	just	the	echoes	of
that	damned	kick.	‘I’m	thirsty	–	if	you’re	not	going	to	beat	me	to	death,	demon,
then	find	me	something	to	drink.’
‘I	am	not	a	demon.’


‘Such	things	are	never	easy	to	tell,’	Rallick	replied	in	a	growl.
‘I	am	Jaghut.	Raest,	once	a	tyrant,	now	a	prisoner.	“He	who	rises	shall	fall.
He	who	falls	shall	be	forgotten.”	So	said	Gothos,	although,	alas,	it	seems	we
must	all	wait	for	ever	before	his	name	fades	into	oblivion.’
Some	strength	was	returning	to	his	limbs.	‘I	recall	something…a	night	of
blood,	the	Gedderone	Fête.	Malazans	in	the	city…’
‘Portentous	events	as	bereft	of	meaning	now	as	they	were	then.	You	have
slept,	assassin,	for	some	time.	Even	the	poison	on	your	weapons	has	lost	all
potency.	Although	the	otataral	within	your	veins	courses	unabated	by	time	–
few	would	have	done	as	you	did,	which	is,	I	suppose,	just	as	well.’
Rallick	sheathed	his	knives	and	slowly	pushed	himself	upright.	The	scene
spun	sickeningly	and	he	closed	his	eyes	until	the	vertigo	passed.
Raest	continued,	‘I	wander	in	this	house…rarely.	Perhaps	some	time	had
passed	before	I	realized	that	she	was	missing.’
Rallick	squinted	at	the	tall,	hunched	Jaghut.	‘She?	Who?’
‘A	demon	in	truth.	Vorcan	is	her	name	now,	I	believe.	You	lay	beside	her,
immune	to	the	passage	of	time.	But	now	she	has	awakened.	She	has,	indeed,
escaped.	One	might	consider	this…perturbing.	If	one	cared,	that	is.’
Vorcan,	Mistress	of	the	Assassins’	Guild,	yes,	now	he	remembered.	She
was	wounded,	dying,	and	he	struggled	to	carry	her,	not	knowing	why,	not
knowing	what	he	sought.	To	the	house,	the	house	that	had	grown	from	the	very
earth.	The	house	the	Malazans	called	an	Azath.	Born	of	the	tyrant’s	Finnest	–
Rallick	frowned	at	Raest.	‘The	house,’	he	said,	‘it	is	your	prison,	too.’
A	desiccated	shrug	that	made	bones	squeak.	‘The	stresses	of	owning
property.’
‘So	you	have	been	here	since	then.	Alone,	not	even	wandering	about.	With
two	near-corpses	cluttering	your	hallway.	How	long,	Raest?’
‘I	am	not	the	one	to	ask.	Does	the	sun	lift	into	the	sky	outside	then	collapse
once	more?	Do	bells	sound	to	proclaim	a	control	where	none	truly	exists?	Do
mortal	fools	still	measure	the	increments	leading	to	their	deaths,	wagering
pleasures	against	costs,	persisting	in	the	delusion	that	deeds	have	value,	that	the
world	and	all	the	gods	sit	in	judgement	over	every	decision	made	or	not	made?
Do—’
‘Enough,’	interrupted	Rallick,	straightening	with	only	one	hand	against	the
wall.	‘I	asked	“how	long?”	not	“why?”	or	“what	point?”	If	you	don’t	know	the
answer	just	say	so.’
‘I	don’t	know	the	answer.	But	I	should	correct	one	of	your	assumptions.	I
did	not	dwell	in	here	alone,	although	I	do	so	now,	excepting	you,	of	course,	but
your	company	I	do	not	expect	to	last.	That	legion	of	headlong	fools	you	call


your	people	no	doubt	pine	for	your	return.	Blood	awaits	your	daggers,	your
pouch	thirsts	for	the	coins	that	will	fill	it	with	every	life	you	steal.	And	so	on.’
‘If	you	weren’t	alone	before,	Raest…’
‘Ah,	yes,	I	distracted	myself	with	notions	of	human	futility.	The	Master	of
the	Deck	of	Dragons	was,	in	the	common	language,	a	squatter	here	in	the
house,	for	a	time.’
‘And	then?’
‘He	left.’
‘Not	a	prisoner,	then,	this	Master.’
‘No.	Like	you,	indifferent	to	my	miserable	fate.	Will	you	now	exploit	your
privilege,	assassin?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Will	you	now	leave,	never	to	return?	Abandoning	me	to	eternal	solitude,
with	naught	but	cobwebs	in	my	bed	and	bare	cupboards	in	the	kitchen,	with
mocking	draughts	and	the	occasional	faint	clatter	of	dead	branches	against
shutters?	And	the	odd	scream	or	two	as	something	unpleasant	is	devoured	by
earth	and	root	in	the	yard.	Will	you	simply	leave	me	to	this	world,	assassin?’
Rallick	Nom	stared	at	the	Jaghut.	‘I	had	no	idea	my	unconscious	presence
so	eased	your	loneliness,	Raest.’
‘Such	insensitivity	on	your	part	should	not	surprise	me.’
‘My	answer	is	yes,	I	will	indeed	leave	you	to	your	world.’
‘You	lack	gratitude.’
Rallick	drew	his	cloak	round	his	shoulders	and	checked	his	gear.	There
was	old	blood	but	it	simply	flaked	off	like	black	snow.	‘Forgive	me.	Thank
you,	Raest,	for	the	kick	in	the	head.’
‘You	are	welcome.	Now	leave	–	I	grow	bored.’
The	door	opened	with	a	loud,	groaning	creak.	Beyond	was	night,	yet
darkness	was	driven	back,	pushed	skyward,	by	the	defiant	blue	fires	of
Darujhistan.	Somewhere	out	of	sight	from	where	he	stood	at	the	landing,
streets	seethed	and	churned	with	drunken	revelry.	Another	fête,	another	halfmindless	celebration	of	survival.
The	thought	stirred	some	anticipation	in	Rallick	Nom’s	soul,	blowing
aside	the	last	dust	of	what	he	suspected	had	been	a	long,	long	sleep.	Before	the
door	behind	him	was	closed	he	turned	about	and	could	just	make	out	Raest’s
elongated	form,	still	standing	in	the	corridor.	‘Why	did	you	wake	me?’	he
asked.
In	answer,	the	Jaghut	stepped	forward	and	shut	the	door	with	a	thunderous
slam	that	woke	birds	to	panic	and	sent	them	bolting	into	the	night.
Rallick	turned	back	to	the	path,	saw	roots	writhing	like	serpents	in	the


mulch	to	either	side.
Checking	his	knives	once	more,	he	drew	yet	tighter	his	cloak,	then	set	out
to	rediscover	his	city.
	
And	so	the	denizens	of	Darujhistan	grew	raucous,	enough	to	give	the	city	itself
a	kind	of	life.	Headlong	indeed,	with	nary	a	thought	for	the	future,	be	that	the
next	moment	or	a	year	hence.	Gas	hissed	into	blue	flame,	acrobats	and
mummers	whirled	through	crowds,	a	hundred	thousand	musical	instruments
waged	war	on	the	plains	of	song,	and	if	it	was	said	by	some	scholars	that	sound
itself	was	undying,	that	it	rode	unending	currents	that	struck	no	fatal	shore,
neither	in	space	nor	through	time,	then	life	itself	could	be	measured	by	its	cry.
In	the	times	of	free,	blue	clarity,	and	in	the	times	of	gathering	clouds,	in	the
chorus	of	pronouncements	that	sang	out…arrivals,	worlds	lived	on,	as
immortal	as	a	dream.
On	the	rooftop	of	a	bastion	tower,	on	this	night,	there	stood	a	woman	all	in
black.	Eyes	cold	as	a	raptor ’s	looked	down	upon	the	sprawl	of	rooftops,	sparklit	chimneys	in	the	distant	slums	of	the	Gadrobi	District,	and,	drifting	silent
over	all,	this	woman	thought	long	and	thought	hard	of	the	future.
On	a	street	close	to	Coll’s	estate,	a	cloaked	man	paused,	stood	rooted	like	a
stone	whilst	the	fête	swirled	round	him,	and	even	as	he	concluded	that	a	public
return,	such	as	had	first	occurred	to	him,	might	prove	unwise,	so	walked
another	man	–	younger	but	with	the	same	look	in	his	hardened	eyes	–	on	his
way	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.
Far	in	this	one’s	wake,	down	at	the	quayside,	a	blacksmith,	his	halfwit
servant,	and	a	woman	whose	generous	curves	drew	admiring	glances	from	all
sides,	ambled	their	way	towards	the	night	markets	of	the	Gadrobi,	seeing	all
with	the	wonder	and	pleasure	only	foreigners	could	achieve	when	coming	for
the	first	time	upon	one	of	the	greatest	cities	in	the	world.
Closer	to	the	ship	from	which	they	had	disembarked,	a	High	Priest	of
Shadow	scurried	for	the	nearest	shadows,	pursued	mostly	unseen	by	spiders
drifting	on	the	lake	breeze,	and	on	the	trail	of	both	scampered	a	score	of
bhokarala	–	many	burdened	with	new	offerings	and	whatever	baubles	they
claimed	as	rightful	possessions	–	a	fang-bearing	squall	that	flowed	through
crowds	accompanied	by	shouts	of	surprise,	terror	and	curses	(as	their
collection	of	possessions	burgeoned	with	every	pouch,	purse	and	jewel	within
reach	of	their	clawed	hands).
Aboard	the	ship	itself,	the	captain	remained.	Now	she	was	wearing	loose,
flowing	robes	of	black	and	crimson	silks,	her	face	white	as	moonlight	as	she


frowned	at	the	city	before	her.	A	scent	on	the	air,	some	lingering	perfume
redolent	with	memories…oh,	of	all	places,	but	was	this	truly	an	accident?	Spite
did	not	believe	in	accidents.
And	so	she	hesitated,	knowing	what	her	first	step	on	to	solid	stone	would
reveal	–	perhaps,	she	decided,	it	would	do	to	wait	for	a	time.
Not	long.
Just	long	enough.
In	another	part	of	Darujhistan,	a	merchant	of	iron	dispatched	yet	another
message	to	the	Master	of	the	Assassins’	Guild,	then	retired	to	his	secret	library
to	pore	once	more	over	ancient,	fraught	literature.	Whilst	not	too	far	away	sat
a	merchant	guard	with	fading	barbed	tattoos,	frowning	down	at	a	cup	of	spiced,
hot	wine	in	his	huge,	scarred	hands;	and	from	the	next	room	came	a	child’s
laughter,	and	this	sound	made	him	wince.
Down	among	the	new	estates	of	certain	once-criminal	moneylenders	who
had	since	purchased	respectability,	a	destitute	Torvald	Nom	stealthily
approached	the	high,	spike-topped	wall	of	one	such	estate.	Debts,	was	it?	Well,
fine,	easily	solved.	Had	he	lost	any	of	his	skills?	Of	course	not.	If	anything,
such	talents	had	been	honed	by	the	rigours	of	a	legendary	journey	across	half
the	damned	world.	His	glorious	return	to	Darujhistan	still	awaited	him.	Come
the	morning,	aye,	come	the	morning…
At	this	moment,	in	a	small	chamber	above	the	taproom	of	the	Phoenix	Inn,
a	man	was	lying	on	his	back	on	a	bed,	still	weak	from	blood	loss,	and	in	his
thoughts	he	walked	the	cemetery	of	his	past,	fingers	brushing	the	tops	of
weathered	tombstones	and	grave	markers,	seeing	the	knots	of	tangled	grass
climbing	the	sides	of	dusty	urns,	while	stretching	away	in	his	wake	was	the
shadow	of	his	youth	–	fainter,	longer,	fraying	now	at	the	very	edges.	He	would
not	lift	his	hand	yet	to	feel	his	own	face,	to	feel	the	wrinkles	and	creases	that
wrote	out	in	tired	glyphs	his	age,	his	waning	life.
Oh,	flesh	could	be	healed,	yes…
Below,	amidst	a	mob	of	bellowing,	reeling	drunks	and	screeching	whores
of	both	sexes,	a	small	round	man,	seated	as	ever	at	his	private	table,	paused
with	his	mouth	stuffed	full	of	honeyed	bread,	and,	upon	hearing	the	tenth	bell
sound	through	the	city,	cocked	his	head	and	settled	his	tiny,	beady	eyes	upon
the	door	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.
Arrivals.
Glory	and	portent,	delightful	reunion	and	terrible	imminence,	winged	this
and	winged	that	and	escapes	and	releases	and	pending	clashes	and	nefarious
demands	for	recompense	over	a	single	mouthful	of	spat	wine,	such	a	night!
Such	a	night!


Chapter	Four

We	were	drowning	amidst	petals	and	leaves
On	the	Plain	of	Sethangar
Where	dreams	stirred	like	armies	on	the	flatland
And	to	sing	of	the	beauty	of	all	these	blossoms
Was	to	forget	the	blood	that	fed	every	root
On	the	Plain	of	Sethangar
We	cried	out	for	shelter	from	this	fecund	storm
The	thrust	and	heave	of	life	on	the	scouring	winds
Was	dry	as	a	priest’s	voice	in	fiery	torment
On	the	Plain	of	Sethangar
And	no	wise	words	could	be	heard	in	the	roar
Of	the	laughing	flowers	reaching	out	to	the	horizon
As	the	pungent	breath	left	us	drunk	and	stagger ’d
On	the	Plain	of	Sethangar
Must	we	ever	die	in	the	riches	of	our	profligacy
Succumbing	to	the	earth	cold	and	dark	each	time
Only	to	burst	free	wide-eyed	in	innocent	birth
On	the	Plain	of	Sethangar?
Which	god	strides	this	field	scythe	in	hand
To	sever	the	grandiose	mime	with	edged	judgement
Taking	from	our	souls	all	will	in	bundled	sheaves
On	the	Plain	of	Sethangar
To	feed	as	befits	all	burdensome	beasts?
Flowers	will	worship	the	tree’s	fickle	blessing	of	light
Forests	reach	into	the	sweetness	of	a	sky	beyond	touch
Even	as	streams	make	pilgrimage	to	the	sea
And	the	rain	seeks	union	with	all	flesh	and	blood
Hills	will	hold	fast	over	every	plain,	even	Sethangar
And	so	we	dream	of	inequity’s	end
As	if	it	lay	within	our	power


There	in	the	plainness	of	our	regard
So	poorly	blinded	to	beauty…
Declamation	(fragment)
		(?)	Keneviss	Brot
First	Century	Burn’s	Sleep

Groaning	like	a	beast	in	its	death-throes,	the	ship	seemed	to	clamber	up	on	to
the	black	rocks	before	the	keel	snapped	and	the	hull	split	with	a	splintering	cry.
Cut	and	bloodless	corpses	rolled	and	slid	from	the	deck,	spilling	into	the
thrashing	foam	where	pale	limbs	flopped	and	waved	in	the	tumult	before	the
riptide	dragged	them	tumbling	over	the	broken	sea	floor,	out	and	down	into	the
depths.	The	lone	living	figure,	who	had	tied	himself	to	the	tiller,	was	now
tangled	in	frayed	ropes	at	the	stern,	scrabbling	to	reach	his	knife	before	the
next	huge	wave	exploded	over	the	wreck.	A	salt-bleached	hand	–	the	skin	of	the
palm	hanging	in	blighted	strips	–	tugged	the	broad-bladed	weapon	free.	He
slashed	at	the	ropes	binding	him	to	the	up-thrust	tiller	as	the	hull	thundered	to
the	impact	of	another	wave	and	white	spume	cascaded	over	him.
As	the	last	strand	parted	he	fell	on	to	his	side	and	slid	to	the	crushed	rail,
the	collision	driving	the	air	from	his	lungs	as	he	pitched	across	the	encrusted
rock,	then	sagged,	limp	as	any	corpse,	into	the	churning	water.
Another	wave	descended	on	to	the	wreck	like	an	enormous	fist,	crushing
the	deck	beneath	its	senseless	power,	then	dragging	the	entire	hull	back	into	the
deeper	water,	leaving	a	wake	of	splintered	wood,	lines	and	tattered	sail.
Where	the	man	had	vanished,	the	inrushing	seas	swirled	round	the	black
rock,	and	nothing	emerged	from	that	thrashing	current.
In	the	sky	overhead	dark	clouds	clashed,	spun	sickly	arms	into	a	mutual
embrace,	and	though	on	this	coast	no	trees	rose	from	the	ravaged	ground,	and
naught	but	wind-stripped	grasses	emerged	from	pockets	here	and	there	among
the	rock	and	gravel	and	sand,	from	the	wounded	sky	dried,	autumnal	leaves
skirled	down	like	rain.
Closer	to	the	shore	heaved	a	stretch	of	water	mostly	sheltered	from	the
raging	seas	beyond	the	reef.	Its	bottom	was	a	sweep	of	coral	sand,	agitated
enough	to	cloud	the	shallows.
The	man	rose	into	view,	water	streaming.	He	rolled	his	shoulders,	spat	out
a	mouthful	thick	with	grit	and	blood,	then	waded	on	to	the	strand.	He	no	longer
carried	his	knife,	but	in	his	left	hand	was	a	sword	in	a	scabbard.	Made	from


two	long	strips	of	pale	wood	reinforced	with	blackened	iron,	the	scabbard
revealed	that	it	was	riven	through	with	cracks,	as	water	drained	out	from	a
score	of	fissures.
Leaves	raining	on	all	sides,	he	walked	up	beyond	the	tide	line,	crunched
down	on	to	a	heap	of	broken	shells	and	sat,	forearms	on	his	knees,	head	hung
down.	The	bizarre	deluge	thickened	into	flurries	of	rotting	vegetation,	like
black	sleet.
The	massive	beast	that	slammed	into	him	would	have	been	thrice	his
weight	if	it	was	not	starved.	Nor	would	it	have	attacked	at	all,	ever	shy	of
humans,	but	it	had	become	lost	in	a	dust	storm,	and	was	then	driven	from	the
grasslands	leagues	inland	on	to	this	barren,	lifeless	coast.	Had	any	of	the
corpses	from	the	ship	reached	the	beach,	the	plains	bear	would	have	elected	to
scavenge	its	meal.	Alas,	its	plague	of	misfortunes	was	unending.
Enormous	jaws	snapped	close	round	the	back	of	the	man’s	head,	canines
tearing	through	scalp	and	gouging	into	skull,	yet	the	man	was	already	ducking,
twisting,	his	sodden	hair	and	the	sudden	welter	of	blood	proving	slick	enough
to	enable	him	to	wrest	free	of	the	bear ’s	bite.
The	sword	was	lying,	still	in	its	cracked	scabbard,	two	paces	away,	and
even	as	he	lunged	towards	it	the	bear ’s	enormous	weight	crashed	down	on	to
him.	Claws	raked	against	his	chain	hauberk,	rings	snapping	away	like	torn
scales.	He	half	twisted	round,	hammering	his	right	elbow	into	the	side	of	the
bear ’s	head,	hard	enough	to	foul	its	second	attempt	to	bite	into	the	back	of	his
neck.	The	blow	sprayed	blood	from	the	beast’s	torn	lip	along	the	side	of	its
jaw.
The	man	drove	his	elbow	again,	this	time	into	the	bear ’s	right	eye.	A	bleat
of	pain	and	the	animal	lunged	to	the	left.	Continuing	his	twist,	the	man	drew	up
both	legs,	then	drove	them	heels	first	into	its	ribs.	Bones	snapped.
Another	cry	of	agony.	Frothing	blood	sprayed	out	from	its	mouth.
Kicking	himself	away,	the	man	reached	his	sword.	His	motions	a	blur	of
speed,	he	drew	the	weapon,	alighted	on	his	feet	in	a	crouch,	and	slashed	the
sword	into	the	side	of	the	bear ’s	neck.	The	ancient	watermarked	blade	slid
through	thick	muscle,	then	bit	into	bone,	and	through,	bursting	free	on	the
opposite	side.	Blood	and	bile	gushed	as	the	bear ’s	severed	head	thumped	on	to
the	sand.	The	body	sat	down	on	its	haunches,	still	spewing	liquid,	then	toppled
to	one	side,	legs	twitching.
Blazing	heat	seethed	at	the	back	of	the	man’s	head,	his	ears	filled	with	a
strange	buzzing	sound,	and	the	braids	of	his	black,	kinked	hair	dripped	thick
threads	of	bloody	saliva	as	he	staggered	upright.
On	the	sword’s	blade,	blood	boiled,	turned	black,	then	shed	in	flakes.


Still	the	sky	rained	dead	leaves.
He	staggered	back	down	to	the	sea,	fell	on	to	his	knees	in	the	shallows	and
plunged	his	head	into	the	vaguely	warm	water.
Numbness	flowed	out	along	the	back	of	his	skull.	When	he	straightened
once	more,	he	saw	the	bloom	of	blood	in	the	water,	a	smear	stretching	into
some	draw	of	current	–	an	appalling	amount.	He	could	feel	more,	streaming
down	his	back	now.
He	quickly	tugged	off	the	chain	hauberk,	then	the	filthy,	salt-rimed	shirt
beneath.	He	tore	loose	the	shirt’s	left	sleeve,	folded	it	into	a	broad	bandanna
and	bound	it	tight	round	his	head,	as	much	against	the	torn	skin	and	flesh	as	he
could	manage	by	feel.
The	buzzing	sound	was	fading.	A	dreadful	ache	filled	the	muscles	of	his
neck	and	shoulders,	and	in	his	head	there	now	pounded	a	drum,	each	beat
pulsating	until	the	bones	of	his	skull	seemed	to	reverberate.	He	attempted	to
spit	again,	but	his	parched	throat	yielded	nothing	–	almost	three	days	now
without	water.	A	juddering	effect	assailed	his	vision,	as	if	he	stood	in	the	midst
of	an	earthquake.	Stumbling,	he	made	his	way	back	up	the	beach,	collecting	his
sword	on	the	way.
On	to	his	knees	once	more,	this	time	at	the	headless	carcass.	Using	his
sword	to	carve	into	the	torso,	then	reaching	in	to	grasp	the	bear ’s	warm	heart.
He	tore	and	cut	it	loose,	raised	it	in	one	hand	and	held	it	over	his	mouth,	then
squeezed	it	as	if	it	was	a	sponge.	From	the	largest	of	the	arteries	blood	gushed
into	his	mouth.
He	drank	deep,	finally	closing	his	lips	round	the	artery	and	sucking	the	last
drop	of	blood	from	the	organ.
When	that	was	done	he	bit	into	the	muscle	and	began	to	eat	it.
Slowly,	his	vision	steadied,	and	he	noticed	for	the	first	time	the	raining
leaves,	the	torrent	only	now	diminishing,	as	the	heavy,	warring	clouds	edged
away,	out	over	the	sea.
Finished	eating	the	heart,	he	licked	his	fingers.	He	roughly	skinned	the
bear	and	then	rose	once	more	and	retrieved	the	scabbard,	sheathing	the	sword.
The	drumbeat	was	fading,	although	pain	still	tormented	his	neck,	shoulders	and
back	–	muscles	and	tendons	that	had	only	begun	their	complaint	at	the	savage
abuse	they	had	suffered.	He	washed	the	one-sleeved	shirt	then	wrung	it	–
tenderly,	since	it	was	threadbare	and	liable	to	fall	apart	under	too	rigorous	a
ministration.	Slipping	it	on,	he	then	rinsed	out	the	chain	hauberk	before	rolling
it	up	and	settling	it	down	over	one	shoulder.
Then	he	set	out,	inland.
Above	the	crest	of	the	shoreline,	he	found	before	him	a	wasteland.	Rock,


scrub,	drifts	of	ash	and,	in	the	distance,	ravines	and	outcrops	of	broken
bedrock,	a	rumpling	of	the	landscape	into	chaotic	folds	that	lifted	into	raw,
jagged	hills.
Far	to	his	left	–	northward	–	a	grainy,	diffuse	haze	marred	the	sky	above	or
beyond	more	hills.
He	squinted,	studied	that	haze	for	thirty	heartbeats.
Patches	of	dusty	blue	above	him	now,	as	the	storm	rolled	westward	over
the	sea,	its	downpour	of	leaves	trailing	like	claw	marks	in	the	air,	staining	the
whitecaps	beyond	the	reef.	The	wind	lost	some	of	its	chill	bite	as	the	sun	finally
broke	through,	promising	its	own	assault	on	mortal	flesh.
The	man’s	skin	was	dark,	for	he	had	been	born	on	a	savannah.	His	was	a
warrior ’s	build,	the	muscles	lean	and	sharply	defined	on	his	frame.	His	height
was	average,	though	something	in	his	posture	made	him	seem	taller.	His	even
features	were	ravaged	by	depredation,	but	already	the	rich	meat	of	the	bear ’s
heart	had	begun	to	fill	that	expression	with	stolid,	indomitable	strength.
Still,	the	wounds	blazed	with	ferocious	heat.	And	he	knew,	then,	that	fever
was	not	far	off.	He	could	see	nothing	nearby	in	which	to	take	shelter,	to	hole	up
out	of	the	sun.	Among	the	ravines,	perhaps,	the	chance	of	caves,	overhangs.
Yet…fifteen	hundred	paces	away,	if	not	more.
Could	he	make	it	that	far?
He	would	have	to.
Dying	was	unthinkable,	and	that	was	no	exaggeration.	When	a	man	has
forsaken	Hood,	the	final	gate	is	closed.	Oblivion	or	the	torment	of	a	journey
without	end	–	there	was	no	telling	what	fate	awaited	such	a	man.
In	any	case,	Traveller	was	in	no	hurry	to	discover	an	answer.	No,	he	would
invite	Hood	to	find	it	himself.
It	was	the	least	he	could	do.
Slinging	the	scabbard’s	rope-belt	over	his	left	shoulder,	checking	that	the
sword	named	Vengeance	was	snug	within	it,	its	plain	grip	within	easy	reach,	he
set	out	across	the	barren	plain.
In	his	wake,	stripped	branches	spun	and	twisted	down	from	the	heaving
clouds,	plunging	into	the	waves,	as	if	torn	from	the	moon	itself.
	
The	clearing	bore	the	unmistakable	furrows	of	ploughs	beneath	the	waist-high
marsh	grasses,	each	ribbon	catching	at	their	feet	as	they	pushed	through	the
thick	stalks.	The	wreckage	of	a	grain	shed	rose	from	brush	at	the	far	end,	its
roof	collapsed	with	a	sapling	rising	from	the	floor,	as	exuberant	as	any
conqueror.	Yet	such	signs	were,	thus	far,	all	that	remained	of	whatever	tribe


had	once	dwelt	in	this	forest.	Fragments	of	deliberate	will	gouged	into	the
wilderness,	but	the	will	had	failed.	In	another	hundred	years,	Nimander	knew,
all	evidence	would	be	entirely	erased.	Was	the	ephemeral	visage	of	civilization
reason	for	fear?	Or,	perhaps,	relief?	That	all	victories	were	ultimately
transitory	in	the	face	of	patient	nature	might	well	be	cause	for	optimism.	No
wound	was	too	deep	to	heal.	No	outrage	too	horrendous	to	one	day	be
irrelevant.
Nimander	wondered	if	he	had	discovered	the	face	of	the	one	true	god.
Naught	else	but	time,	this	ever	changing	and	yet	changeless	tyrant	against
whom	no	creature	could	win.	Before	whom	even	trees,	stone	and	air	must	one
day	bow.	There	would	be	a	last	dawn,	a	last	sunset,	each	kneeling	in	final
surrender.	Yes,	time	was	indeed	god,	playing	the	same	games	with	lowly
insects	as	it	did	with	mountains	and	the	fools	who	would	carve	fastnesses	into
them.	At	peace	with	every	scale,	pleased	by	the	rapid	patter	of	a	rat’s	heart	and
the	slow	sighing	of	devouring	wind	against	stone.	Content	with	a	star ’s
burgeoning	light	and	the	swift	death	of	a	rain-drop	on	a	desert	floor.
‘What	has	earned	the	smile,	cousin?’
He	glanced	over	at	Skintick.	‘Blessed	with	revelation,	I	think.’
‘A	miracle,	then.	I	think	that	I	too	am	converted.’
‘You	might	want	to	change	your	mind	–	I	do	not	believe	my	newfound	god
cares	for	worship,	or	answers	any	prayers	no	matter	how	fervent.’
‘What’s	so	unique	about	that?’
Nimander	grunted.	‘Perhaps	I	deserved	that.’
‘Oh,	you	are	too	quick	to	jump	into	the	path	of	what	might	wound	–	even
when	wounding	was	never	the	intention.	I	am	still	open	to	tossing	in	with	your
worship	of	your	newfound	god,	Nimander.	Why	not?’
Behind	them,	Desra	snorted.	‘I	will	tell	you	two	what	to	worship.	Power.
When	it	is	of	such	magnitude	as	to	leave	you	free	to	do	as	you	will.’
‘Such	freedom	is	ever	a	delusion,	sister,’	Skintick	said.
‘It	is	the	only	freedom	that	is	not	a	delusion,	fool.’
Grimacing,	Nimander	said,	‘I	don’t	recall	Andarist	being	very	free.’
‘Because	his	brother	was	more	powerful,	Nimander.	Anomander	was	free
to	leave	us,	was	he	not?	Which	life	would	you	choose?’
‘How	about	neither?’	Skintick	said.
Although	she	walked	behind	them,	Nimander	could	see	in	his	mind’s	eye
his	sister ’s	face,	and	the	contempt	in	it	as	she	no	doubt	sneered	at	Skintick.
Clip	walked	somewhere	ahead,	visible	only	occasionally;	whenever	they
strode	into	another	half-overgrown	clearing,	they	would	see	him	waiting	at	the
far	end,	as	if	impatient	with	lagging,	wayward	children.


Behind	Nimander,	Skintick	and	Desra	walked	the	others,	Nenanda	electing
to	guard	the	rear	as	if	this	was	some	sort	of	raid	into	enemy	territory.
Surrounded	by	suspicious	songbirds,	nervous	rodents,	irritated	insects,
Nenanda	padded	along	with	one	hand	resting	on	the	pommel	of	his	sword,	a
glower	for	every	shadow.	He	would	be	like	that	all	day,	Nimander	knew,
storing	up	his	disgust	and	anger	for	when	they	all	sat	by	the	fire	at	night,	a	fire
Nenanda	deemed	careless	and	dangerous	and	would	only	tolerate	because	Clip
said	nothing,	Clip	with	his	half-smile	and	spinning	rings	who	fed	Nenanda
morsels	of	approval	until	the	young	warrior	was	consumed	by	an	addict’s
need,	desperate	for	the	next	paltry	feeding.
Without	it,	he	might	crumble,	collapse	inward	like	a	deflated	bladder.	Or
lash	out,	yes,	at	every	one	of	his	kin.	At	Desra,	who	had	been	his	lover.	At
Kedeviss	and	Aranatha	who	were	useless.	At	Skintick	who	mocked	to	hide	his
cowardice.	And	at	Nimander,	who	was	to	blame	for	–	well,	no	need	to	go	into
that,	was	there?
‘Do	not	fret,	beloved.	I	wait	for	you.	For	ever.	Be	strong	and	know	this:	you
are	stronger	than	you	know.	Think—’
And	all	at	once	another	voice	sounded	in	his	mind,	harder,	sour	with
venom,	‘She	knows	nothing.	She	lies	to	you.’
Phaed.
‘Yes,	you	cannot	be	rid	of	me,	brother.	Not	when	your	hands	still	burn.	Still
feel	the	heat	of	my	throat.	Not	when	my	bulging	eyes	stay	fixed	on	you,	like
nails,	yes?	The	iron	tips	slowly	pushing	into	your	own	eyes,	so	cold,	such	pain,
and	you	cannot	pull	loose,	can	never	escape.’
Do	I	deny	my	guilt?	Do	I	even	flinch	from	such	truths?
‘That	is	not	courage,	brother.	That	is	despair.	Pathetic	surrender.
Remember	Withal?	How	he	took	upon	himself	what	needed	doing?	He	picked	me
up	like	a	rag	doll	–	impressive	strength,	yes!	The	memory	heats	me,	Nimander!
Would	you	lick	my	lips?’	and	she	laughed.	‘Withal,	yes,	he	knew	what	to	do,
because	you	left	him	no	choice.	Because	you	failed.	So	weak	you	could	not
murder	your	sister.	I	saw	as	much	in	your	eyes;	at	that	last	moment,	I	saw	it!’
Some	sound	must	have	risen	from	Nimander,	for	Skintick	turned	with
brows	raised.
‘What	is	wrong?’
Nimander	shook	his	head.
They	walked	round	pale-barked	trees,	on	soft	loam	between	splayed	roots.
Dappled	sunlight	and	the	chattering	alarm	of	a	flying	squirrel	on	a	bony
branch	overhead.	Leaves	making	voices	–	yes,	that	was	all	it	was,	whispering
leaves	and	his	overwrought	imagination—


Phaed	snorted.	‘“Sometimes	being	bad	feels	good.	Sometimes	dark	lust
burns	like	parched	wood.	Sometimes,	my	love,	you	awaken	desire	in	someone
else’s	pain.”	Recall	that	poet,	Nimander?	That	woman	of	Kharkanas?	Andarist
was	reluctant	to	speak	of	her,	but	I	found	in	the	Old	Scrolls	all	her	writings.
“And	with	the	tips	of	your	fingers,	all	this	you	can	train.”	Hah!	She	knew!	And
they	all	feared	her,	and	now	they	will	not	speak	her	name,	a	name	forbidden,	but
I	know	it	–	shall	I—’
No!
And	Nimander ’s	hands	clutched,	as	if	once	more	crushing	Phaed’s	throat.
And	he	saw	her	eyes,	yes,	round	and	swollen	huge	and	ready	to	burst.	In	his
mind,	yes,	once	more	he	choked	the	life	from	her.
And	from	the	leaves	came	the	whisper	of	dark	pleasure.
Suddenly	cold,	suddenly	terrified,	he	heard	Phaed’s	knowing	laugh.
‘You	look	ill,’	Skintick	said.	‘Should	we	halt	for	a	rest?’
Nimander	shook	his	head.	‘No,	let	Clip’s	impatience	drag	us	ever	onward,
Skintick.	The	sooner	we	are	done…’	But	he	could	not	go	on,	would	not	finish
that	thought.
‘See	ahead,’	Desra	said.	‘Clip	has	reached	the	forest	edge,	and	not	a
moment	too	soon.’
There	was	no	cause	for	her	impatience,	merely	a	distorted,	murky
reflection	of	Clip’s	own.	This	was	how	she	seduced	men,	by	giving	back	to
them	versions	of	themselves,	promising	her	protean	self	like	a	precious	gift	to
feed	their	narcissistic	pleasures.	She	seemed	able	to	steal	hearts	almost	without
effort,	but	Nimander	suspected	that	Clip’s	self-obsession	would	prove	too
powerful,	too	well	armoured	against	any	incursions.	He	would	not	let	her	into
his	places	of	weakness.	No,	he	would	simply	use	her,	as	she	had	so	often	used
men,	and	from	this	would	be	born	a	most	deadly	venom.
Nimander	had	no	thought	to	warn	Clip.	Leave	them	their	games,	and	all	the
wounds	to	come.
‘Yes,	leave	them	to	it,	brother.	We	have	our	own,	after	all.’
Must	I	choke	you	silent	once	more,	Phaed?
‘If	it	pleases	you.’
The	clearing	ahead	stretched	out,	rolling	downward	towards	a	distant	river
or	stream.	The	fields	on	the	opposite	bank	had	been	planted	with	rows	of	some
strange,	purplish,	broad-leafed	crop.	Scarecrows	hung	from	crosses	in	such
profusion	that	it	seemed	they	stood	like	a	cohort	of	soldiers	in	ranks.
Motionless,	rag-bound	figures	in	each	row,	only	a	few	paces	apart.	The	effect
was	chilling.
Clip’s	eyes	thinned	as	he	studied	the	distant	field	and	its	tattered	sentinels.


Chain	snapped	out,	rings	spun	in	a	gleaming	blur.
‘There’s	a	track,	I	think,’	Skintick	said,	‘up	and	over	the	far	side.’
‘What	plants	are	those?’	Aranatha	asked.
No	one	had	an	answer.
‘Why	are	there	so	many	scarecrows?’
Again,	no	suggestions	were	forthcoming.
Clip	once	more	in	the	lead,	they	set	out.
The	water	of	the	stream	was	dark	green,	almost	black,	so	sickly	in
appearance	that	none	stopped	for	a	drink,	and	each	found	stones	to	step	on
rather	than	simply	splash	across	the	shallow	span.	They	ascended	towards	the
field	where	clouds	of	insects	hovered	round	the	centre	stalk	of	each	plant,
swarming	the	pale	green	flowers	before	rising	in	a	gust	to	plunge	down	on	to
the	next.
As	they	drew	closer,	their	steps	slowed.	Even	Clip	finally	halted.
The	scarecrows	had	once	been	living	people.	The	rags	were	bound	tightly,
covering	the	entire	bodies;	arms,	legs,	necks,	faces,	all	swathed	in	rough	cloth
that	seemed	to	drip	black	fluids,	soaking	the	earth.	As	the	wrapped	heads	were
forward	slung,	threads	of	the	thick	dark	substance	stretched	down	from	the
gauze	covering	the	victims’	noses.
‘Feeding	the	plants,	I	think,’	Skintick	said	quietly.
‘Blood?’	Nimander	asked.
‘Doesn’t	look	like	blood,	although	there	may	be	blood	in	it.’
‘Then	they’re	still	alive.’
Yet	that	seemed	unlikely.	None	of	the	forms	moved,	none	lifted	a	bound
head	at	the	sound	of	their	voices.	The	air	itself	stank	of	death.
‘They	are	not	still	alive,’	Clip	said.	He	had	stopped	spinning	the	chain.
‘Then	what	leaks	from	them?’
Clip	moved	on	to	the	narrow	track	running	up	through	the	field.	Nimander
forced	himself	to	follow,	and	heard	the	others	fall	in	behind	him.	Once	they
were	in	the	field,	surrounded	by	the	corpses	and	the	man-high	plants,	the
pungent	air	was	suddenly	thick	with	the	tiny,	wrinkle-winged	insects,	slithering
wet	and	cool	against	their	faces.
They	hurried	forward,	gagging,	coughing.
The	furrows	were	sodden	underfoot,	black	mud	clinging	to	their
moccasins,	a	growing	weight	that	made	them	stumble	and	slip	as	they
scrambled	upslope.	Reaching	the	ridge	at	last,	out	from	the	rows,	down	into	a
ditch	and	then	on	to	a	road.	Beyond	it,	more	fields	to	either	side	of	a	track,	and,
rising	from	them	like	an	army,	more	corpses.	A	thousand	hung	heads,	a
ceaseless	flow	of	black	tears.


‘Mother	bless	us,’	Kedeviss	whispered,	‘who	could	do	such	a	thing?’
‘“All	possible	cruelties	are	inevitable”,’	Nimander	said.	‘“Every
conceivable	crime	has	been	committed”.’	Quoting	Andarist	yet	again.
‘Try	thinking	your	own	thoughts	on	occasion,’	Desra	said	drily.
‘He	saw	truly—’
‘Andarist	surrendered	his	soul	and	thought	it	earned	him	wisdom,’	Clip	cut
in,	punctuating	his	statement	with	a	snap	of	rings.	‘In	this	case,	though,	he
probably	struck	true.	Even	so,	this	has	the	flavour	of…necessity.’
Skintick	snorted.	‘Necessity,	now	there’s	a	word	to	feed	every	outrage	on
decency.’
Beyond	the	ghastly	army	and	the	ghoulish	purple-leaved	plants	squatted	a
town,	quaint	and	idyllic	against	a	backdrop	of	low,	forested	hills.	Smoke	rose
above	thatched	roofs.	A	few	figures	were	visible	on	the	high	street.
‘I	think	we	should	avoid	meeting	anyone,’	Nimander	said.	‘I	do	not	relish
the	notion	of	ending	up	staked	above	a	plant.’
‘That	will	not	occur,’	said	Clip.	‘We	need	supplies	and	we	can	pay	for
them.	In	any	case,	we	have	already	been	seen.	Come,	with	luck	there	will	be	a
hostel	or	inn.’
A	man	in	a	burgundy	robe	was	approaching,	up	the	track	that	met	the	raised
road.	Below	the	tattered	hem	of	the	robe	his	legs	were	bare	and	pale,	but	his
feet	were	stained	black.	Long	grey	hair	floated	out	from	his	head,	unkempt	and
tangled.	His	hands	were	almost	comically	oversized,	and	these	too	were	dyed
black.
The	face	was	lined,	the	pale	blue	eyes	wide	as	they	took	in	the	Tiste	Andii
on	the	road.	Hands	waving,	he	began	shouting,	in	a	language	Nimander	had
never	heard	before.	After	a	moment,	he	clearly	cursed,	then	said	in	broken
Andii,	‘Traders	of	Black	Coral	ever	welcome!	Morsko	town	happy	of	guests
and	kin	of	Son	of	Darkness!	Come!’
Clip	gestured	for	his	troupe	to	follow.
The	robed	man,	still	smiling	like	a	crazed	fool,	whirled	and	hurried	back
down	the	track.
Townsfolk	were	gathering	on	the	high	street,	watching	in	silence	as	they
drew	nearer.	The	score	or	so	parted	when	they	reached	the	edge	of	the	town.
Nimander	saw	in	their	faces	a	bleak	lifelessness,	in	their	eyes	the	wastelands	of
scorched	souls,	so	exposed,	so	unguarded,	that	he	had	to	look	away.
Hands	and	feet	were	stained,	and	on	more	than	a	few	the	blackness	rimmed
their	gaping	mouths,	making	the	hole	in	their	faces	too	large,	too	seemingly
empty	and	far	too	depthless.
The	robed	man	was	talking.	‘A	new	age,	traders.	Wealth!	Bastion.	Heath.


Even	Outlook	rises	from	ash	and	bones.	Saemankelyk,	glory	of	the	Dying
God.	Many	the	sacrifices.	Of	the	willing,	oh	yes,	the	willing.	And	such	thirst!’
They	came	to	a	broad	square	with	a	bricked	well	on	a	centre	platform	of
water-worn	limestone	slabs.	On	all	sides	stood	racks	from	which	harvested
plants	hung	drying	upside	down,	their	skull-sized	rootballs	lined	like	rows	of
children’s	heads,	faces	deformed	by	the	sun.	Old	women	were	at	the	well,
drawing	water	in	a	chain	that	wended	between	racks	to	a	low,	squat	temple,
empty	buckets	returning.
The	robed	man	pointed	at	the	temple	–	probably	the	only	stone	building	in
the	town	–	and	said,	‘Once	sanctified	in	name	of	Pannion.	No	more!	The	Dying
God	now,	whose	body,	yes,	lies	in	Bastion.	I	have	looked	upon	it.	Into	its	eyes.
Will	you	taste	the	Dying	God’s	tears,	my	friends?	Such	demand!’
‘What	horrid	nightmare	rules	here?’	Skintick	asked	in	a	whisper.
Nimander	shook	his	head.
‘Tell	me,	do	we	look	like	traders?’
‘How	should	I	know?’
‘Black	Coral,	Nimander.	Son	of	Darkness	–	our	kinfolk	have	become
merchants!’
‘Yes,	but	merchants	of	what?’
The	robed	man	–	a	priest	of	some	sort	–	now	led	them	to	an	inn	to	the	left
of	the	temple	that	looked	half	dilapidated.	‘Few	traders	this	far	east,	you	see.
But	roof	is	sound.	I	will	send	for	maids,	cook.	There	is	tavern.	Opens	of
midnight.’
The	ground	floor	of	the	inn	was	layered	in	dust,	the	planks	underfoot
creaking	and	strewn	with	pellets	of	mouse	droppings.	The	priest	stood	beside
the	front	door,	large	hands	entwined,	head	bobbing	as	he	held	his	smile.
Clip	faced	the	man.	‘This	will	do,’	he	said.	‘No	need	for	maids,	but	find	a
cook.’
‘Yes,	a	cook.	Come	midnight	to	tavern!’
‘Very	well.’
The	priest	left.
Nenanda	began	pacing,	kicking	detritus	away	from	his	path.	‘I	do	not	like
this,	Herald.	There	aren’t	enough	people	for	this	town	–	you	must	have	seen
that.’
‘Enough,’	muttered	Skintick	as	he	set	his	pack	down	on	a	dusty	tabletop,
‘for	planting	and	harvesting.’
‘Saemankelyk,’	said	Nimander.	‘Is	that	the	name	of	this	dying	god?’
‘I	would	like	to	see	it,’	Clip	said,	chain	spinning	once	more	as	he	looked
out	through	the	smeared	lead-paned	window.	‘This	dying	god.’


‘Is	this	place	called	Bastion	on	the	way	to	Black	Coral?’
Clip	glanced	across	at	Nimander,	disdain	heavy	in	his	eyes.	‘I	said	I	wish	to
see	this	dying	god.	That	is	enough.’
‘I	thought—’	began	Nenanda,	but	Clip	turned	on	him	sharply.
‘That	is	your	mistake,	warrior.	Thinking.	There	is	time.	There	is	always
time.’
Nimander	glanced	across	at	Skintick.	His	cousin	shrugged;	then,	eyes
narrowing,	he	suddenly	smiled.
‘Your	god,	Nimander?’
‘Yes.’
‘Not	likely	to	die	any	time	soon,	then.’
‘No,	never	that.’
‘What	are	you	two	talking	about?’	Clip	demanded,	then,	dismissing	any
possible	reply,	he	faced	the	window	once	more.	‘A	dying	god	needs	to	die
sometime.’
‘Notions	of	mercy,	Great	One?’	Skintick	asked.
‘Not	where	you	are	concerned.’
‘Just	as	well,	since	I	could	never	suffer	the	gratitude.’
Nimander	watched	as	Desra	glided	up	to	stand	beside	Clip.	They	stood
looking	out	through	the	pane,	like	husband	and	wife,	like	allies	against	the
world.	Her	left	arm	almost	touching	him,	up	near	her	elbow,	but	she	would	not
draw	any	closer.	The	spinning	rings	prevented	that,	whirling	a	metal	barrier.
‘Tonight,’	Clip	said	loudly,	‘no	one	drinks.’
Nimander	thought	back	to	those	black-stained	mouths	and	the	ravaged	eyes
above	them,	and	he	shivered.
	
Mist	drifted	down	from	the	park-like	forest	north	of	the	Great	Barrow,
merging	with	the	smoke	of	cookfires	from	the	pilgrims	encamped	like	an
army	around	the	enormous,	circular	mound.	Dawn	was	paling	the	sky,	seeming
to	push	against	the	unnatural	darkness	to	the	south,	but	this	was	a	war	the	sun
could	not	win.
From	the	city	gate	the	cobbled	road	ran	between	lesser	barrows	where
hundreds	of	corpses	had	been	interred	following	the	conquest.	Malazans,	Grey
Swords,	Rhivi,	Tiste	Andii	and	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	Farther	to	the	west	rose
longer	barrows,	final	home	to	the	fallen	citizens	and	soldiers	of	the	city.
Seerdomin	walked	the	road	through	the	gloom.	A	path	through	ghosts	–
too	many	to	even	comprehend	–	but	he	thought	he	could	hear	the	echoes	of
their	death-cries,	their	voices	of	pain,	their	desperate	pleas	for	mothers	and


loved	ones.	Once	he	was	past	this	place,	who	was	there	to	hear	those	echoes?
No	one,	and	it	was	this	truth	that	struck	him	the	hardest.	They	would	entwine
with	naught	but	themselves,	falling	unheeded	to	the	dew-flattened	grass.
He	emerged	into	morning	light,	like	passing	through	a	curtain,	suddenly
brushed	with	warmth,	and	made	his	way	up	the	slope	towards	the	sprawled
encampment.	For	this,	he	wore	his	old	uniform,	a	kind	of	penance,	a	kind	of
self-flagellation.	There	was	need,	in	his	mind,	to	bear	his	guilt	openly,
brazenly,	to	leave	himself	undefended	and	indefensible.	This	was	how	he	saw
his	daily	pilgrimage	to	the	Great	Barrow,	although	he	well	knew	that	some
things	could	never	be	purged,	and	that	redemption	was	a	dream	of	the	deluded.
Eyes	fixed	on	him	from	the	camps	to	either	side	as	he	continued	on
towards	that	massive	heap	of	treasure	–	wealth	of	such	measure	that	it	could
only	belong	to	a	dead	man,	who	could	not	cast	covetous	eyes	upon	his	hoard,
who	would	not	feel	its	immense	weight	night	and	day,	who	would	not	suffer
beneath	its	terrible	curse.	He	was	tracked,	then,	by	no	doubt	hardening	eyes,	the
fixation	of	hatred,	contempt,	perhaps	even	the	desire	of	murder.	No	matter.	He
understood	such	sentiments,	the	purity	of	such	desires.
Armour	clanking,	chain	rustling	across	the	fronts	of	his	thighs	as	he	drew
ever	closer.
The	greater	vastness	of	wealth	now	lay	buried	beneath	more	mundane
trinkets,	yet	it	was	these	meagre	offerings	that	seemed	most	potent	in	their
significance	to	Seerdomin.	Their	comparative	value	was	so	much	greater,	after
all.	Sacrifice	must	be	weighed	by	the	pain	of	what	is	surrendered,	and	this
alone	was	the	true	measure	of	a	virtue’s	worth.
He	saw	now	the	glitter	of	sunlight	in	the	dew	clinging	to	copper	coins,	the
slick	glimmer	on	sea-polished	stones	in	an	array	of	muted	colours	and
patterns.	The	fragments	of	glazed	ceramics	from	some	past	golden	age	of	high
culture.	Feathers	now	bedraggled,	knotted	strips	of	leather	from	which	dangled
fetishes,	gourd	rattles	to	bless	newborn	babes	and	sick	children.	And	now,	here
and	there,	the	picked-clean	skulls	of	the	recent	dead	–	a	sub-cult,	he	had
learned,	centred	on	the	T’lan	Imass,	who	knelt	before	the	Redeemer	and	so
made	themselves	his	immortal	servants.	Seerdomin	knew	that	the	truth	was
more	profound	than	that,	more	breathtaking,	and	that	servitude	was	not	a	vow
T’lan	Imass	could	make,	not	to	anyone	but	the	woman	known	as	Silverfox.	No,
they	had	knelt	in	gratitude.
That	notion	could	still	leave	him	chilled,	wonder	awakened	in	his	heart	like
a	gust	of	surprised	breath.
Still,	these	staring	skulls	seemed	almost	profane.
He	stepped	into	the	slightly	rutted	avenue	and	drew	closer.	Other	pilgrims


were	placing	their	offerings	ahead,	then	turning	about	and	making	their	way
back,	edging	round	him	with	furtive	glances.	Seerdomin	heard	more	in	his
wake,	a	susurration	of	whispered	prayers	and	low	chanting	that	seemed	like	a
gentle	wave	carrying	him	forward.
Reaching	the	barrow’s	ragged,	cluttered	edge,	he	moved	to	one	side,	off
the	main	approach,	then	settled	down	into	a	kneeling	position	before	the	shrine,
lowering	his	head	and	closing	his	eyes.
He	heard	someone	move	up	alongside	him,	heard	the	soft	breathing	but
nothing	else.
Seerdomin	prayed	in	silence.	The	same	prayer,	every	day,	every	time,
always	the	same.
Redeemer.	I	do	not	seek	your	blessing.	Redemption	will	never	be	mine,	nor
should	it,	not	by	your	touch,	nor	that	of	anyone	else.	Redeemer,	I	bring	no	gift
to	set	upon	your	barrow.	I	bring	to	you	naught	but	myself.	Worshippers	and
pilgrims	will	hear	nothing	of	your	loneliness.	They	armour	you	against	all	that
is	human,	for	that	is	how	they	make	you	into	a	god.	But	you	were	once	a	mortal
soul.	And	so	I	come,	my	only	gift	my	company.	It	is	paltry,	I	know,	but	it	is	all	I
have	and	all	I	would	offer.
Redeemer,	bless	these	pilgrims	around	me.
Bless	them	with	peace	in	their	need.
He	opened	his	eyes,	then	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.
Beside	him	spoke	a	woman.	‘Benighted.’
He	started,	but	did	not	face	her.	‘I	have	no	such	title,’	he	said.
There	was	faint	amusement	in	her	reply,	‘Seerdomin,	then.	We	speak	of
you	often,	at	night,	from	fire	to	fire.’
‘I	do	not	flee	your	venom,	and	should	it	one	day	take	my	life,	so	it	will	be.’
All	humour	vanished	from	her	voice	as	she	seemed	to	draw	a	gasp,	then
said,	‘We	speak	of	you,	yes,	but	not	with	venom.	Redeemer	bless	us,	not	that.’
Bemused,	he	finally	glanced	her	way.	Was	surprised	to	see	a	young,
unlined	face	–	the	voice	had	seemed	older,	deep	of	timbre,	almost	husky	–
framed	in	glistening	black	hair,	chopped	short	and	angled	downward	to	her
shoulders.	Her	large	eyes	were	of	darkest	brown,	the	outer	corners	creased	in
lines	that	did	not	belong	to	one	of	her	few	years.	She	wore	a	woollen	robe	of
russet	in	which	green	strands	threaded	down,	but	the	robe	hung	open,	unbelted,
revealing	a	pale	green	linen	blouse	cut	short	enough	to	expose	a	faintly
bulging	belly.	From	her	undersized	breasts	he	judged	that	she	was	not	with
child,	simply	not	yet	past	the	rounded	softness	of	adolescence.
She	met	his	eyes	in	a	shy	manner	that	once	again	startled	him.	‘We	call	you
the	Benighted,	out	of	respect.	And	all	who	arrive	are	told	of	you,	and	by	this


means	we	ensure	that	there	is	no	theft,	no	rape,	no	crime	at	all.	The	Redeemer
has	chosen	you	to	guard	his	children.’
‘That	is	untrue.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘I	had	heard	that	no	harm	befell	the	pilgrims	this	close	to	the	Great
Barrow.’
‘Now	you	know	why.’
Seerdomin	was	dumbfounded.	He	could	think	of	nothing	to	say	to	such	a
notion.	It	was	madness.	It	was,	yes,	unfair.
‘Is	it	not	the	Redeemer	who	shows	us,’	said	the	woman,	‘that	burdens	are
the	lot	of	us	all?	That	we	must	embrace	such	demands	upon	our	souls,	yet	stand
fearless,	open	and	welcoming?’
‘I	do	not	know	what	the	Redeemer	shows	–	to	anyone.’	His	tone	was
harsher	than	he’d	intended.	‘I	have	enough	burdens	of	my	own.	I	will	not	accept
yours	–	I	will	not	be	responsible	for	your	safety,	or	that	of	any	other	pilgrim.
This	–	this…’	This	is	not	why	I	am	here!	Yet,	much	as	he	wanted	to	shout	that
out	loud,	instead	he	turned	away,	marched	back	to	the	avenue.
Pilgrims	flinched	from	his	path,	deepening	his	anger.
Through	the	camp,	eyes	set	on	the	darkness	ahead,	wanting	to	be	once
more	within	its	chill	embrace,	and	the	city,	too.	The	damp	grey	walls,	the	gritty
cobbles	of	the	streets,	the	musty	cave	of	a	tavern	with	its	surround	of	pale,
miserable	faces	–	yes,	back	to	his	own	world.	Where	nothing	was	asked	of
him,	nothing	demanded,	not	a	single	expectation	beyond	that	of	sitting	at	a
table	with	the	game	arrayed	before	him,	the	twist	and	dance	of	a	pointless
contest.
On	to	the	road,	into	the	swirl	of	lost	voices	from	countless	useless	ghosts,
his	boots	ringing	on	the	stones.
Damned	fools!
	
Down	at	the	causeway	spanning	the	Citadel’s	moat,	blood	leaked	out	from
bodies	sprawled	along	its	length,	and	in	the	north	sky	something	terrible	was
happening.	Lurid	slashes	like	a	rainbow	gone	mad,	spreading	in	waves	that
devoured	darkness.	Was	it	pain	that	strangled	the	very	air?	Was	it	something
else	burgeoning	to	life,	shattering	the	universe	itself?
Endest	Silann,	a	simple	acolyte	in	the	Temple	of	Mother	Dark,	wove
drunkenly	round	the	bodies	towards	the	Outer	Gate,	skidding	on	pools	of	gore.
Through	the	gate’s	peaked	arch	he	could	see	the	city,	the	roofs	like	the	gears	of
countless	mechanisms,	gears	that	could	lock	with	the	sky	itself,	with	all


creation.	Such	was	Kharkanas,	First	Born	of	all	cities.	But	the	sky	had	changed.
The	perfect	machine	of	existence	was	broken	–	see	the	sky!
The	city	trembled,	the	roofs	now	ragged-edged.	A	wind	had	begun	to	howl,
the	voice	of	the	multihued	light-storm	as	it	lashed	out,	flared	with	thunderous
fire.
Forsaken.	We	are	forsaken!
He	reached	the	gate,	fell	against	one	pillar	and	clawed	at	the	tears
streaming	from	his	eyes.	The	High	Priestess,	cruel	poet,	was	shrieking	in	the
nave	of	the	Temple,	shrieking	like	a	woman	being	raped.	Others	–	women	all	–
were	writhing	on	the	marble	floor,	convulsing	in	unison,	a	prostrate	dance	of
macabre	sensuality.	The	priests	and	male	acolytes	had	sought	to	still	the
thrashing	limbs,	to	ease	the	ravaged	cries	erupting	from	tortured	throats	with
empty	assurances,	but	then,	one	by	one,	they	began	to	recoil	as	the	tiles	grew
slick	beneath	the	women,	the	so-called	Nectar	of	Ecstasy	–	and	no,	no	man
could	now	pretend	otherwise,	could	not	but	see	this	the	way	it	was,	the	truth	of
it.
They	fled.	Crazed	with	horror,	yes,	but	driven	away	by	something	else,	and
was	it	not	envy?
Civil	war	had	ignited,	deadly	as	that	storm	in	the	sky.	Families	were	being
torn	asunder,	from	the	Citadel	itself	down	to	the	meanest	homes	of	the
commonry.	Andii	blood	painted	Kharkanas	and	there	was	nowhere	to	run.
Through	the	gate,	and	then,	even	as	despair	choked	all	life	from	Endest
Silann,	he	saw	him	approaching.	From	the	city	below.	His	forearms	sheathed	in
black	glistening	scales,	his	bared	chest	made	a	thing	of	natural	armour.	The
blood	of	Tiam	ran	riot	through	him,	fired	to	life	by	the	conflation	of	chaotic
sorcery,	and	his	eyes	glowed	with	ferocious	will.
Endest	fell	to	his	knees	in	Anomander ’s	path.	‘Lord!	The	world	falls!’
‘Rise,	priest,’	he	replied.	‘The	world	does	not	fall.	It	but	changes.	I	need
you.	Come.’
And	so	he	walked	past,	and	Endest	found	himself	on	his	feet,	as	Lord
Anomander ’s	will	closed	about	his	heart	like	an	iron	gauntlet,	pulling	him
round	and	into	the	great	warrior ’s	wake.
He	wiped	at	his	eyes.	‘Lord,	where	are	we	going?’
‘The	Temple.’
‘We	cannot!	They	have	gone	mad	–	the	women!	They	are—’
‘I	know	what	assails	them,	priest.’
‘The	High	Priestess—’
‘Is	of	no	interest	to	me.’	Anomander	paused,	glanced	back	at	him.	‘Tell	me
your	name.’


‘Endest	Silann,	Third	Level	Acolyte.	Lord,	please—’
But	the	warrior	continued	on,	silencing	Endest	with	a	gesture	from	one
scaled,	taloned	hand.	‘The	crime	of	this	day,	Endest	Silann,	rests	with	Mother
Dark	herself.’
And	then,	at	that	precise	moment,	the	young	acolyte	understood	what	the
Lord	intended.	And	yes,	Anomander	would	indeed	need	him.	His	very	soul	–
Mother	forgive	me	–	to	open	the	way,	to	lead	the	Lord	on	to	the	Unseen	Road.
And	he	will	stand	before	her,	yes.	Tall,	unyielding,	a	son	who	is	not	afraid.
Not	of	her.	Not	of	his	own	anger.	The	storm,	oh,	the	storm	is	just	beginning.
	
Endest	Silann	sat	alone	in	his	room,	the	bare	stone	walls	as	solid	and	cold	as
those	of	a	tomb.	A	small	oil	lamp	sat	on	the	lone	table,	testament	to	his	failing
eyes,	to	the	stain	of	Light	upon	his	soul,	a	stain	so	old	now,	so	deeply
embedded	in	the	scar	tissue	of	his	heart,	that	it	felt	like	tough	leather	within
him.
Being	old,	it	was	his	privilege	to	relive	ancient	memories,	to	resurrect	in
his	flesh	and	his	bones	the	recollection	of	youth	–	the	time	before	the	aches
seeped	into	joints,	before	brittle	truths	weakened	his	frame	to	leave	him	bent
and	tottering.
‘Hold	the	way	open,	Endest	Silann.	She	will	rage	against	you.	She	will	seek
to	drive	me	away,	to	close	herself	to	me.	Hold.	Do	not	relent.’
‘But	Lord,	I	have	sworn	my	life	to	her.’
‘What	value	is	that	if	she	will	not	be	held	to	account	for	her	deeds?’
‘She	is	the	creator	of	us	all,	Lord!’
‘Yes,	and	she	will	answer	for	it.’
Youth	was	a	time	for	harsh	judgement.	Such	fires	ebbed	with	age.	Certainty
itself	withered.	Dreams	of	salvation	died	on	the	vine	and	who	could	challenge
that	blighted	truth?	They	had	walked	through	a	citadel	peopled	by	the	dead,	the
broken	open,	the	spilled	out.	Like	the	violent	opening	of	bodies,	the	tensions,
rivalries	and	feuds	could	no	longer	be	contained.	Chaos	delivered	in	a	raw	and
bloody	birth,	and	now	the	child	squatted	amidst	its	mangled	playthings,	with
eyes	that	burned.
The	fool	fell	into	line.	The	fool	always	did.	The	fool	followed	the	first
who	called.	The	fool	gave	away	–	with	cowardly	relief	–	all	rights	to	think,	to
choose,	to	find	his	own	path.	And	so	Endest	Silann	walked	the	crimson
corridors,	the	stench-filled	hallways,	there	but	two	strides	behind	Anomander.
‘Will	you	do	as	I	ask,	Endest	Silann?’
‘Yes,	Lord.’


‘Will	you	hold?’
‘I	shall	hold.’
‘Will	you	await	me	the	day?’
‘Which	day,	Lord?’
‘The	day	at	the	very	end,	Endest	Silann.	Will	you	await	me	on	that	day?’
‘I	said	I	would	hold,	Lord,	and	so	I	shall.’
‘Hold,	old	friend,	until	then.	Until	then.	Until	the	moment	when	you	must
betray	me.	No	–	no	protestations,	Endest.	You	will	know	the	time,	you	will	know
it	and	know	it	well.’
It	was	what	kept	him	alive,	he	suspected.	This	fraught	waiting,	so	long	all
was	encrusted,	stiff	and	made	almost	shapeless	by	the	accretion	of	centuries.
‘Tell	me,	Endest,	what	stirs	in	the	Great	Barrow?’
‘Lord?’
‘Is	it	Itkovian?	Do	we	witness	in	truth	the	birth	of	a	new	god?’
‘I	do	not	know,	Lord.	I	am	closed	to	such	things.’	As	I	have	been	since	that
day	in	the	Temple.
‘Ah,	yes,	I	had	forgotten.	I	apologize,	old	friend.	Mayhap	I	will	speak	to
Spinnock,	then.	Certain	quiet	enquiries,	perhaps.’
‘He	will	serve	you	as	always,	Lord.’
‘Yes,	one	of	my	burdens.’
‘Lord,	you	bear	them	well.’
‘Endest,	you	lie	poorly.’
‘Yes,	Lord.’
‘Spinnock	it	shall	be,	then.	When	you	leave,	please	send	for	him	–	not	with
haste,	when	he	has	the	time.’
‘Lord,	expect	him	at	once.’
And	so	Anomander	sighed,	because	no	other	response	was	possible,	was
it?	And	I,	too,	am	your	burden,	Lord.	But	we	best	not	speak	of	that.
See	me,	Lord,	see	how	I	still	wait.
	
Incandescent	light	was	spilling	from	the	half-open	doors	of	the	temple,	rolling
in	waves	out	over	the	concourse	like	the	wash	of	a	flood,	sufficient	in	strength
to	shift	corpses	about,	milky	eyes	staring	as	the	heads	pitched	and	lolled.
As	they	set	out	across	the	expanse,	that	light	flowed	up	round	their	shins,
startlingly	cold.	Endest	Silann	recognized	the	nearest	dead	Andii.	Priests	who
had	lingered	too	long,	caught	in	the	conflagration	that	Endest	had	felt	but	not
seen	as	he	rushed	through	the	Citadel’s	corridors.	Among	them,	followers
from	various	factions.	Silchas	Ruin’s.	Andarist’s,	and	Anomander ’s	own.


Drethdenan’s,	Hish	Tulla’s,	Vanut	Degalla’s	–	oh,	there	had	been	waves	of
fighting	on	this	concourse,	these	sanctified	flagstones.
In	birth	there	shall	be	blood.	In	death	there	shall	be	light.	Yes,	this	was	the
day	for	both	birth	and	death,	for	both	blood	and	light.
They	drew	closer	to	the	doors	of	the	temple,	slowed	to	observe	the	waves
of	light	tumbling	down	the	broad	steps.	Their	hue	had	deepened,	as	if	smeared
with	old	blood,	but	the	power	was	waning.	Yet	Endest	Silann	sensed	a	presence
within,	something	contained,	someone	waiting.
For	us.
The	High	Priestess?	No.	Of	her,	the	acolyte	sensed	nothing.
Anomander	took	his	first	step	on	to	the	stone	stairs.
And	was	held	there,	as	her	voice	filled	them.
No.	Be	warned,	Anomander,	dear	son,	from	Andii	blood	is	born	a	new
world.	Understand	me.	You	and	your	kin	are	no	longer	alone,	no	longer	free	to
play	your	vicious	games.	There	are	now…others.
Anomander	spoke.	‘Mother,	did	you	imagine	I	would	be	surprised?
Horrified?	It	could	never	be	enough,	to	be	naught	but	a	mother,	to	create	with
hands	closed	upon	no	one.	To	yield	so	much	of	yourself,	only	to	find	us	your
only	reward	–	us	slayers,	us	betrayers.’
There	is	new	blood	within	you.
‘Yes.’
My	son,	what	have	you	done?
‘Like	you,	Mother,	I	have	chosen	to	embrace	change.	Yes,	there	are	others
now.	I	sense	them.	There	will	be	wars	between	us,	and	so	I	shall	unite	the	Andii.
Resistance	is	ending.	Andarist,	Drethdenan,	Vanut	Degalla.	Silchas	is	fleeing,
and	so	too	Hish	Tulla	and	Manalle.	Civil	strife	is	now	over,	Mother.’
You	have	killed	Tiam.	My	son,	do	you	realize	what	you	have	begun?	Silchas
flees,	yes,	and	where	do	you	think	he	goes?	And	the	newborn,	the	others,	what
scent	will	draw	them	now,	what	taste	of	chaotic	power?	Anomander,	in	murder
you	seek	peace,	and	now	the	blood	flows	and	there	shall	be	no	peace,	not	ever
again.
I	forsake	you,	Anomander	Blood	of	Tiam.	I	deny	my	first	children	all.	You
shall	wander	the	realms,	bereft	of	purpose.	Your	deeds	shall	avail	you	nothing.
Your	lives	shall	spawn	death	unending.	The	Dark	–	my	heart	–	is	closed	to	you,
to	you	all.
And,	as	Anomander	stood	unmoving,	Endest	Silann	cried	out	behind	him,
falling	to	his	knees	in	bruising	collapse.	A	hand	of	power	reached	into	him,
tore	something	loose,	then	was	gone	–	something,	yes,	that	he	would	one	day
call	by	its	name:	Hope.


	
He	sat	staring	at	the	flickering	flame	of	the	lamp.	Wondering	what	it	was,	that
loyalty	should	so	simply	take	the	place	of	despair,	as	if	to	set	such	despair	upon
another,	a	chosen	leader,	was	to	absolve	oneself	of	all	that	might	cause	pain.
Loyalty,	aye,	the	exchange	that	was	surrender	in	both	directions.	From	one,	all
will,	from	the	other,	all	freedom.
From	one,	all	will.
From	the	other…

The	sword,	an	arm’s	length	of	copper-hued	iron,	had	been	forged	in	Darkness,
in	Kharkanas	itself.	Sole	heirloom	of	House	Durav,	the	weapon	had	known
three	wielders	since	the	day	of	quenching	at	the	Hust	Forge,	but	of	those	kin
who	held	the	weapon	before	Spinnock	Durav,	nothing	remained	–	no	ill-fitting,
worn	ridges	in	the	horn	grip,	no	added	twists	of	wire	at	the	neck	of	the	pommel
adjusting	weight	or	balance;	no	quirk	of	honing	on	the	edges.	The	sword
seemed	to	have	been	made,	by	a	master	weaponsmith,	specifically	for
Spinnock,	for	his	every	habit,	his	every	peculiarity	of	style	and	preference.
So	in	his	kin,	therefore,	he	saw	versions	of	himself,	and	like	the	weapon	he
was	but	one	in	a	continuum,	unchanging,	even	as	he	knew	that	he	would	be	the
last.	And	that	one	day,	perhaps	not	far	off,	some	stranger	would	bend	down	and
tug	the	sword	from	senseless	fingers,	would	lift	it	for	a	closer	examination.
The	water-etched	blade,	the	almost-crimson	edges	with	the	back-edge	sharply
angled	and	the	down-edge	more	tapering.	Would	squint,	then,	and	see	the	faint
glyphs	nested	in	the	ferule	along	the	entire	blade’s	length.	And	might	wonder	at
the	foreign	marks.	Or	not.
The	weapon	would	be	kept,	as	a	trophy,	as	booty	to	sell	in	some	smoky
market,	or	it	would	rest	once	more	in	a	scabbard	at	the	hip	or	slung	from	a
baldric,	resuming	its	purpose	which	was	to	take	life,	to	spill	blood,	to	tear	the
breath	from	mortal	souls.	And	generations	of	wielders	might	curse	the	illfitting	horn	grip,	the	strange	ridges	of	wear	and	the	once-perfect	honing	that
no	local	smith	could	match.
Inconceivable,	for	Spinnock,	was	the	image	of	the	sword	lying	lost,	woven
out	of	sight	by	grasses,	the	iron’s	sheath	of	oil	fading	and	dull	with	dust,	and
then	the	rust	blotting	the	blade	like	open	sores;	until,	like	the	nearby
mouldering,	rotting	bones	of	its	last	wielder,	the	sword	sank	into	the	ground,
crumbling,	decaying	into	a	black,	encrusted	and	shapeless	mass.
Seated	on	his	bed	with	the	weapon	across	his	thighs,	Spinnock	Durav


rubbed	the	last	of	the	oil	into	the	iron,	watched	the	glyphs	glisten	as	if	alive,	as
ancient,	minor	sorcery	awakened,	armouring	the	blade	against	corrosion.	Old
magic,	slowly	losing	its	efficacy.	Just	like	me.	Smiling,	he	rose	and	slid	the
sword	into	the	scabbard,	then	hung	the	leather	baldric	on	a	hook	by	the	door.
‘Clothes	do	you	no	justice,	Spin.’
He	turned,	eyed	the	sleek	woman	sprawled	atop	the	blanket,	her	arms	out	to
the	sides,	her	legs	still	spread	wide.	‘You’re	back.’
She	grunted.	‘Such	arrogance.	My	temporary…absence	had	nothing	to	do
with	you,	as	you	well	know.’
‘Nothing?’
‘Well,	little,	then.	You	know	I	walk	in	Darkness,	and	when	it	takes	me,	I
travel	far	indeed.’
He	eyed	her	for	a	half-dozen	heartbeats.	‘More	often	of	late,’	he	said.
‘Yes.’	The	High	Priestess	sat	up,	wincing	at	some	pain	in	her	lower	back
and	rubbing	at	the	spot.	‘Do	you	remember,	Spin,	how	all	of	this	was	so	easy,
once?	Our	young	bodies	seemed	made	for	just	that	one	thing,	beauty	woven
round	a	knot	of	need.	How	we	displayed	our	readiness,	how	we	preened,	like
the	flowers	of	carnivorous	plants?	How	it	made	each	of	us,	to	ourselves,	the
most	important	thing	in	the	world,	such	was	the	seduction	of	that	knot	of	need,
seducing	first	ourselves	and	then	others,	so	many	others—’
‘Speak	for	yourself,’	Spinnock	said,	laughing,	even	as	her	words	prodded
something	deep	inside	him,	a	hint	of	pain	there	was	no	point	paying	attention
to,	or	so	he	told	himself,	still	holding	his	easy	smile	as	he	drew	closer	to	the
bed.	‘Those	journeys	into	Kurald	Galain	were	denied	you	for	so	long,	until	the
rituals	of	opening	seemed	devoid	of	purpose.	Beyond	the	raw	pleasure	of	sex.’
She	studied	him	a	moment	from	beneath	heavy	lids.	‘Yes.’
‘Has	she	forgiven	us,	then?’
Her	laugh	was	bitter.	‘You	ask	it	so	plain,	as	if	enquiring	after	a	miffed
relative!	How	can	you	do	such	things,	Spin?	It	should	have	taken	you	half	the
night	to	broach	that	question.’
‘Perhaps	age	has	made	me	impatient.’
‘After	the	torture	you	just	put	me	through?	You	have	the	patience	of
lichen.’
‘But	rather	more	interesting,	I	hope.’
She	moved	to	the	edge	of	the	bed,	set	her	bare	feet	on	the	floor	and	hissed
at	the	stone’s	chill.	‘Where	are	my	clothes?’
‘They	burned	to	ash	in	the	heat	of	your	desire.’
‘There	–	bring	them	over,	if	you	please.’
‘Now	who	is	impatient?’	But	he	collected	up	her	priestly	robes.


‘The	visions	are	growing	more…fraught.’
Nodding,	he	held	out	her	robe.
She	rose,	turned	round	and	slipped	her	arms	into	the	sleeves,	then	settled
back	into	his	embrace.	‘Thank	you,	Spinnock	Durav,	for	acceding	to	my…
need.’
‘The	ritual	cannot	be	denied,’	he	replied,	stroking	her	cut-short,	midnightblack	hair.	‘Besides,	did	you	think	I	would	refuse	such	a	request	from	you?’
‘I	grow	tired	of	the	priests.	Their	ennui	is	such	that	most	of	them	must
imbibe	foul	herbs	to	awaken	them	to	life.	More	often,	of	late,	we	have	them
simply	service	us,	while	they	lie	there,	limp	as	rotting	bananas.’
He	laughed,	stepping	away	to	find	his	own	clothes.	‘Bananas,	yes,	a	most
wondrous	fruit	to	reward	us	in	this	strange	world.	That	and	kelyk.	In	any	case,
the	image	you	describe	is	unfairly	unappetizing.’
‘I	agree,	and	so,	thank	you	again,	Spinnock	Durav.’
‘No	more	gratitude,	please.	Unless	you	would	have	me	voice	my	own	and
so	overwhelm	you	with	the	pathos	of	my	plight.’
To	that,	she	but	smiled.	‘Stay	naked,	Spin,	until	I	leave.’
‘Another	part	of	the	ritual?’	he	asked.
‘Would	I	have	so	humbly	asked	if	it	was?’
	
When	she	was	gone,	Spinnock	Durav	drew	on	his	clothing	once	more,	thinking
back	to	his	own	ritual,	servicing	his	sword	with	a	lover ’s	touch,	as	if	to	remind
the	weapon	that	the	woman	he	had	just	made	love	to	was	but	a	diversion,	a
temporary	distraction,	and	that	there	was	place	for	but	one	love	in	his	heart,	as
befitted	a	warrior.
True,	an	absurd	ritual,	a	conceit	that	was	indeed	pathetic.	But	with	so	little
to	hold	on	to,	well,	Tiste	Andii	clung	tight	and	fierce	to	anything	with	meaning,
no	matter	how	dubious	or	ultimately	nonsensical.
Dressed	once	more,	he	set	out.
The	game	awaited	him.	The	haunted	gaze	of	Seerdomin,	there	across	from
him,	with	artfully	carved	but	essentially	inert	lumps	of	wood,	antler	and	bone
on	the	table	between	them.	Ghostly,	irrelevant	players	to	each	side.
And	when	it	was	done,	when	victory	and	defeat	had	been	played	out,	they
would	sit	for	a	time,	drinking	from	the	pitcher,	and	Seerdomin	might	again
speak	of	something	without	quite	saying	what	it	was,	might	slide	round	what
bothered	him	with	every	word,	with	every	ambiguous	comment	and
observation.	And	all	Spinnock	would	glean	was	that	it	had	something	to	do
with	the	Great	Barrow	north	of	Black	Coral.	With	his	recent	refusal	to	journey


out	there,	ending	his	own	pilgrimage,	leaving	Spinnock	to	wonder	at	the	man’s
crisis	of	faith,	to	dread	the	arrival	of	true	despair,	when	all	that	Spinnock
needed	from	his	friend	might	wither,	even	die.
And	where	then	would	he	find	hope?
He	walked	the	gloomy	streets,	closing	in	on	the	tavern,	and	wondered	if
there	was	something	he	could	do	for	Seerdomin.	The	thought	slowed	his	steps
and	made	him	alter	his	course.	Down	an	alley,	out	on	to	another	street,	this	one
the	side	of	a	modest	hill,	with	the	buildings	stepping	down	level	by	level	on
each	side,	a	cascade	of	once	brightly	painted	doors	–	but	who	bothered	with
such	things	now	in	this	eternal	Night?
He	came	to	one	door	on	his	left,	its	flaked	surface	gouged	with	a	rough
sigil,	the	outline	of	the	Great	Barrow	in	profile,	beneath	it	the	ragged	imprint
of	an	open	hand.
Where	worship	was	born,	priests	and	priestesses	appeared	with	the
spontaneity	of	mould	on	bread.
Spinnock	pounded	on	the	door.
After	a	moment	it	opened	a	crack	and	he	looked	down	to	see	a	single	eye
peering	up	at	him.
‘I	would	speak	to	her,’	he	said.
The	door	creaked	back.	A	young	girl	in	a	threadbare	tunic	stood	in	the
narrow	hallway,	now	curtseying	repeatedly.	‘L-lord,’	she	stammered,	‘she	is	up
the	stairs	–	it	is	late—’
‘Is	it?	And	I	am	not	a	“lord”.	Is	she	awake?’
A	hesitant	nod.
‘I	will	not	take	much	of	her	time.	Tell	her	it	is	the	Tiste	Andii	warrior	she
once	met	in	the	ruins.	She	was	collecting	wood.	I	was…doing	very	little.	Go,	I
will	wait.’
Up	the	stairs	the	girl	raced,	two	steps	at	a	time,	the	dirty	soles	of	her	feet
flashing	with	each	upward	leap.
He	heard	a	door	open,	close,	then	open	again,	and	the	girl	reappeared	at
the	top	of	the	stairs.	‘Come!’	she	hissed.
The	wood	creaked	beneath	him	as	he	climbed	to	the	next	level.
The	priestess	–	ancient,	immensely	obese	–	had	positioned	herself	on	a
once	plush	chair	before	an	altar	of	heaped	trinkets.	Braziers	bled	orange	light
to	either	side,	shedding	tendrils	of	smoke	that	hung	thick	and	acrid	beneath	the
ceiling.	The	old	woman’s	eyes	reflected	that	muted	glow,	murky	with	cataracts.
As	soon	as	Spinnock	entered	the	small	room,	the	girl	left,	closing	the	door
behind	her.
‘You	do	not	come,’	said	the	priestess,	‘to	embrace	the	new	faith,	Spinnock


Durav.’
‘I	don’t	recall	ever	giving	you	my	name,	Priestess.’
‘We	all	know	the	one	who	alone	among	all	the	Tiste	Andii	consorts	with	us
lowly	humans.	Beyond	the	old	one	who	bargains	for	goods	in	the	markets	and
you	are	not	Endest	Silann,	who	would	have	struggled	on	the	stairs,	and	bowed
each	one	near	to	breaking	with	his	weight.’
‘Notoriety	makes	me	uneasy.’
‘Of	course	it	does.	What	do	you	want	with	me,	warrior?’
‘I	would	ask	you	something.	Is	there	a	crisis	among	the	faithful?’
‘Ah.	You	speak	of	Seerdomin,	who	now	denies	us	in	our	need.’
‘He	does?	How?	What	need?’
‘It	is	not	your	concern.	Not	that	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	nor	the	Son	of
Darkness.’
‘Anomander	Rake	rules	Black	Coral,	Priestess,	and	we	Tiste	Andii	serve
him.’
‘The	Great	Barrow	lies	outside	Night.	The	Redeemer	does	not	kneel
before	the	Son	of	Darkness.’
‘I	am	worried	for	my	friend,	Priestess.	That	is	all.’
‘You	cannot	help	him.	Nor,	it	is	now	clear,	can	he	help	us.’
‘Why	do	you	need	help?’
‘We	await	the	Redeemer,	to	end	that	which	afflicts	his	followers.’
‘And	how	will	the	Redeemer	achieve	such	a	thing,	except	through	chosen
mortals?’
She	cocked	her	head,	as	if	startled	by	his	question,	then	she	smiled.	‘Ask
that	question	of	your	friend,	Spinnock	Durav.	When	the	game	is	done	and	your
Lord	is	victorious	yet	again,	and	you	call	out	for	beer,	and	the	two	of	you	–	so
much	more	alike	than	you	might	imagine	–	drink	and	take	ease	in	each	other ’s
company.’
‘Your	knowledge	dismays	me.’
‘The	Redeemer	is	not	afraid	of	the	Dark.’
Spinnock	started,	his	eyes	widening.	‘Embracing	the	grief	of	the	T’lan
Imass	is	one	thing,	Priestess.	That	of	the	Tiste	Andii	–	no,	there	may	be	no	fear
in	the	Redeemer,	but	his	soul	had	best	awaken	to	wisdom.	Priestess,	make	this
plain	in	your	prayers.	The	Tiste	Andii	are	not	for	the	Redeemer.	God	or	no,
such	an	embrace	will	destroy	him.	Utterly.’	And,	by	Mother’s	own	breath,	it
would	destroy	us	as	well.
‘Seerdomin	awaits	you,’	she	said,	‘and	wonders,	since	you	are	ever
punctual.’
Spinnock	Durav	hesitated,	then	nodded.	Hoping	that	this	woman’s	god	had


more	wisdom	than	she	did;	hoping,	too,	that	the	power	of	prayer	could	not
bend	the	Redeemer	into	ill-conceived	desires	to	reach	too	far,	to	seek	what
could	only	destroy	him,	all	in	that	fervent	fever	of	gushing	generosity	so
common	to	new	believers.
‘Priestess,	your	claim	that	the	Great	Barrow	lies	beyond	my	Lord’s
responsibilities	is	in	error.	If	the	pilgrims	are	in	need,	the	Son	of	Darkness	will
give	answer—’
‘And	so	lay	claim	to	what	is	not	his.’
‘You	do	not	know	Anomander	Rake.’
‘We	need	nothing	from	your	Lord.’
‘Then	perhaps	I	can	help.’
‘No.	Leave	now,	Tiste	Andii.’
Well,	he	had	tried,	hadn’t	he?	Nor	did	he	expect	to	gain	more	ground	with
Seerdomin.	Perhaps	something	more	extreme	was	required.	No,	Seerdomin	is	a
private	man.	Let	him	be.	Remain	watchful,	yes,	as	any	friend	would.	And	wait.
	
If	he	had	walked	from	the	nearest	coast,	the	lone	figure	crossing	the	grasslands
of	north	Lamatath	had	travelled	a	hundred	leagues	of	unsettled	prairie.
Nowhere	to	find	food	beyond	hunting	the	sparse	game,	all	of	it	notoriously
fleet	of	foot	and	hoof.	He	was	gaunt,	but	then,	he	had	always	been	gaunt.	His
thin,	grey	hair	was	unkempt,	drifting	out	long	in	his	wake.	His	beard	was
matted,	knotted	with	filth.	His	eyes,	icy	blue,	were	as	feral	as	any	beast	of	the
plain.
A	long	coat	of	chain	rustled,	swinging	clear	of	his	shins	with	each	stride.
The	shadow	he	cast	was	narrow	as	a	sword.
In	the	cloudless	sky	wheeled	vultures	or	ravens,	or	both,	so	high	as	to	be
nothing	but	specks,	yet	they	tracked	the	solitary	figure	far	below.	Or	perhaps
they	but	skirled	in	the	blue	emptiness	scanning	the	wastes	for	some	dying,
weakening	creature.
But	this	man	was	neither	dying	nor	weak.	He	walked	with	the	stiff	purpose
characteristic	of	the	mad,	the	deranged.	Madness,	he	would	have	noted,	does
not	belong	to	the	soul	engaged	with	the	world,	with	every	hummock	and	tuft	of
grass,	with	the	old	beach	ridges	with	their	cobbles	of	limestone	pushing
through	the	thin,	patched	skin	of	lichen	and	brittle	moss.	With	the	mocking	stab
of	shadow	that	slowly	wheeled	as	the	sun	dragged	itself	across	the	sky.	With	the
sounds	of	his	own	breath	that	were	proof	that	he	remained	alive,	that	the	world
had	yet	to	take	him,	pull	him	down,	steal	the	warmth	from	his	ancient	flesh.
Madness	stalked	only	an	inner	torment,	and	Kallor,	the	High	King,	supreme


emperor	of	a	dozen	terrible	empires,	was,	in	his	heart,	a	man	at	peace.
For	the	moment.	But	what	mattered	beyond	just	that?	This	single	moment,
pitching	headlong	into	the	next	one,	over	and	over	again,	as	firm	and	true	as
each	step	he	took,	the	hard	ground	reverberating	up	through	the	worn	heels	of
his	boots.	The	tactile	affirmed	reality,	and	nothing	else	mattered	and	never
would.
A	man	at	peace,	yes	indeed.	And	that	he	had	once	ruled	the	lives	of
hundreds	of	thousands,	ruled	over	their	useless,	petty	existences;	that	he	had
once,	with	a	single	gesture,	condemned	a	surrendered	army	of	fifteen	thousand
to	their	deaths;	that	he	had	sat	a	throne	of	gold,	silver	and	onyx,	like	a	glutton
stuffed	to	overflowing	with	such	material	wealth	that	it	had	lost	all	meaning,	all
value…ah	well,	all	that	remained	of	such	times,	such	glory,	was	the	man
himself,	his	sword,	his	armour,	and	a	handful	of	antiquated	coins	in	his	pouch.
Endless	betrayals,	a	sea	of	faces	made	blurry	and	vague	by	centuries,	with
naught	but	the	avaricious,	envious	glitter	of	their	eyes	remaining	sharp	in	his
mind;	the	sweep	of	smoke	and	fire	and	faint	screams	as	empires	toppled,	one
after	another;	the	chaos	of	brutal	nights	fleeing	a	palace	in	flames,	fleeing	such
a	tide	of	vengeful	fools	that	even	Kallor	could	not	kill	them	all	–	much	as	he
wanted	to,	oh,	yes	–	none	of	these	things	awakened	bitter	ire	in	his	soul.	Here
in	this	wasteland	that	no	one	wanted,	he	was	a	man	at	peace.
Such	truth	could	not	be	challenged,	and	were	someone	to	rise	up	from	the
very	earth	now	and	stand	in	such	challenge,	why,	he	would	cut	him	to	pieces.
Smiling	all	the	while	to	evince	his	calm	repose.
Too	much	weight	was	given	to	history,	as	far	as	Kallor	was	concerned.
One’s	own	history;	that	of	peoples,	cultures,	landscapes.	What	value	peering	at
past	errors	in	judgement,	at	mischance	and	carelessness,	when	the	only	reward
after	all	that	effort	was	regret?	Bah!	Regret	was	the	refuge	of	fools,	and	Kallor
was	no	fool.	He	had	lived	out	his	every	ambition,	after	all,	lived	each	one	out
until	all	colour	was	drained	away,	leaving	a	bleached,	wan	knowledge	that
there	wasn’t	much	in	life	truly	worth	the	effort	to	achieve	it.	That	the	rewards
proved	ephemeral;	nay,	worthless.
Every	emperor	in	every	realm,	through	all	of	time	itself,	soon	found	that
the	lofty	title	and	all	its	power	was	an	existence	devoid	of	humour.	Even	excess
and	indulgences	palled,	eventually.	And	the	faces	of	the	dying,	the	tortured,
well,	they	were	all	the	same,	and	not	one	of	those	twisted	expressions
vouchsafed	a	glimmer	of	revelation,	the	discovery	of	some	profound,	lastbreath	secret	that	answered	all	the	great	questions.	No,	every	face	simply	pulled
into	itself,	shrank	and	recoiled	even	as	agony	tugged	and	stretched,	and
whatever	the	bulging	eyes	saw	at	the	last	moment	was,	Kallor	now	understood,


something	utterly…banal.
Now	there	was	an	enemy	–	banality.	The	demesne	of	the	witless,	the	proud
tower	of	the	stupid.	One	did	not	need	to	be	an	emperor	to	witness	it	–	scan	the
faces	of	people	encircling	an	overturned	carriage,	the	gleam	of	their	eyes	as
they	strain	and	stretch	to	catch	a	glimpse	of	blood,	of	broken	limbs,	relishing
some	pointless	tragedy	that	tops	up	their	murky	inkwells	of	life.	Watch,	yes,
those	vultures	of	grief,	and	then	speak	of	noble	humanity,	so	wise	and	so
virtuous.
Unseen	by	the	ravens	or	condors,	Kallor	had	now	bared	his	teeth	in	a	bleak
smile,	as	if	seeking	to	emulate	the	face	of	that	tragically	fallen	idiot,	pinned
there	beneath	the	carriage	wheel,	seeing	the	last	thing	he	would	see,	and
finding	it	in	the	faces	of	the	gawkers,	and	thinking,	Oh,	look	at	you	all.	So
banal.	So…banal.
He	startled	a	hare	from	some	scrub,	twenty	paces	away,	and	his	left	hand
flashed	out,	underhand,	and	a	knife	sped	in	a	blur,	catching	the	hare	in	midleap,	flipping	it	round	in	the	air	before	it	fell.
A	slight	tack,	and	he	halted	to	stand	over	the	small,	motionless	body,
looking	down	at	the	tiny	droplets	of	spilled	blood.	The	knife	sunk	to	the	hilt,
driven	right	through	just	in	front	of	the	hips	–	the	gut,	then,	not	good.	Sloppy.
He	crouched,	pulled	loose	the	knife	then	quickly	sliced	open	the	belly	and
tugged	and	tore	out	the	hare’s	warm	intestines.	He	held	the	glistening	ropes	up
in	one	hand,	studied	them	and	whispered,	‘Banal.’
An	eye	of	the	hare	stared	up	sightlessly,	everything	behind	it	closed	up,
gone	away.
But	he’d	seen	all	that	before.	More	times	than	he	could	count.	Hares,
people,	all	the	same.	In	that	last	moment,	yes,	there	was	nothing	to	see,	so	what
else	to	do	but	go	away?
He	flung	the	guts	to	one	side,	picked	up	the	carcass	by	its	elongated	hind
limbs	and	resumed	his	journey.	The	hare	was	coming	with	him.	Not	that	it
cared.	Later,	they’d	sit	down	for	dinner.
High	in	the	sky	overhead,	the	black	specks	began	a	descent.	Their	equally
empty	eyes	had	spied	the	entrails,	spread	in	lumpy	grey	ropes	on	the	yellow
grasses,	now	in	the	lone	man’s	wake.	Empty	eyes,	but	a	different	kind	of
emptiness.	Not	that	of	death’s	banality,	no,	but	that	of	life’s	banality.
The	same	kind	of	eyes	as	Kallor ’s	own.
And	this	was	the	mercy	in	the	hare’s	swift	death,	for	unlike	countless
hundreds	of	thousands	of	humans,	the	creature’s	last	glimpse	was	not	of
Kallor ’s	profoundly	empty	eyes	–	a	sight	that	brought	terror	into	the	face	of
every	victim.


The	world,	someone	once	said,	gives	back	what	is	given.	In	abundance.	But
then,	as	Kallor	would	point	out,	someone	was	always	saying	something.	Until
he	got	fed	up	and	had	them	executed.


Chapter	Five

Pray,	do	not	speak	to	me	of	weather
Not	sun,	not	cloud,	not	of	the	places
Where	storms	are	born
I	would	not	know	of	wind	shivering	the	heather
Nor	sleet,	nor	rain,	nor	of	ancient	traces
On	stone	grey	and	worn
Pray,	do	not	regale	the	troubles	of	ill	health
Not	self,	not	kin,	not	of	the	old	woman
At	the	road’s	end
I	will	spare	no	time	nor	in	mercy	yield	wealth
Nor	thought,	nor	feeling,	nor	shrouds	woven
To	tempt	luck’s	send
Pray,	tell	me	of	deep	chasms	crossed
Not	left,	not	turned,	not	of	the	betrayals
Breeding	like	worms
I	would	you	cry	out	your	rage	’gainst	what	is	lost
Now	strong,	now	to	weep,	now	to	make	fist	and	rail
On	earth	so	firm
Pray,	sing	loud	the	wretched	glories	of	love
Now	pain,	now	drunken,	now	torn	from	all	reason
In	laughter	and	tears
I	would	you	bargain	with	the	fey	gods	above
Nor	care,	nor	cost,	nor	turn	of	season
To	wintry	fears
Sing	to	me	this	and	I	will	find	you	unflinching
Now	knowing,	now	seeing,	now	in	the	face
Of	the	howling	storm
Sing	your	life	as	if	a	life	without	ending


And	your	love,	sun’s	bright	fire,	on	its	celestial	pace
To	where	truth	is	born
Pray,	An	End	to	Inconsequential	Things
Baedisk	of	Nathilog

Darujhistan.	Glories	unending!	Who	could	call	a	single	deed	inconsequential?
This	scurrying	youth	with	his	arms	full	of	vegetables,	the	shouts	from	the	stall
in	his	wake,	the	gauging	eye	of	a	guard	thirty	paces	away,	assessing	the	poor
likelihood	of	catching	the	urchin.	Insignificant?	Nonsense!	Hungry	mouths	fed,
glowing	pride,	some	fewer	coins	for	the	hawker,	perhaps,	but	it	seemed	all
profit	did	was	fill	a	drunken	husband’s	tankard	anyway	so	the	bastard	could	die
of	thirst	for	all	she	cared!	A	guard’s	congenitally	flawed	heart	beat	on,	not	yet
pushed	to	bursting	by	hard	pursuit	through	the	crowded	market,	and	so	he	lives
a	few	weeks	longer,	enough	to	complete	his	full	twenty	years’	service	and	so
guarantee	his	wife	and	children	a	pension.	And	of	course	the	one	last	kiss	was
yet	to	come,	the	kiss	that	whispered	volumes	of	devotion	and	all	the	rest.
The	pot-thrower	in	the	hut	behind	the	shop,	hands	and	forearms	slick	with
clay,	dreaming,	yes,	of	the	years	in	which	a	life	took	shape,	when	each	press	of
a	fingertip	sent	a	deep	track	across	a	once	smooth	surface,	changing	the	future,
reshaping	the	past,	and	was	this	not	as	much	chance	as	design?	For	all	that
intent	could	score	a	path,	that	the	ripples	sent	up	and	down	and	outward	could
be	surmised	by	decades	of	experience,	was	the	outcome	ever	truly	predictable?
Oh,	of	course	she	wasn’t	thinking	any	such	thing.	An	ache	in	her	left	wrist
obliterated	all	thoughts	beyond	the	persistent	ache	itself,	and	what	it	might
portend	and	what	herbs	she	would	need	to	brew	to	ease	her	discomfort	–	and
how	could	such	concerns	be	inconsequential?
What	of	the	child	sitting	staring	into	the	doleful	eye	of	a	yoked	ox	outside
Corb’s	Womanly	Charms	where	her	mother	was	inside	and	had	been	for	near	a
bell	now,	though	of	course	Mother	had	Uncle-Doruth-who-was-a-secret	for
company	which	was	better	than	an	ox	that	did	nothing	but	moan?	The	giant,
soft,	dark-so-dark	brown	eye	stared	back	and	to	think	in	both	directions	was
obvious	but	what	was	the	ox	thinking	except	that	the	yoke	was	heavy	and	the
cart	even	heavier	and	it’d	be	nice	to	lie	down	and	what	could	the	child	be
thinking	about	but	beef	stew	and	so	no	little	philosopher	was	born,	although	in
years	to	come,	why,	she’d	have	her	own	uncle-who-was-a-secret	and	thus	like
her	mother	enjoy	all	the	fruits	of	marriage	with	few	of	the	niggling	pits.


And	what	of	the	sun	high	overhead,	bursting	with	joyous	light	to	bathe	the
wondrous	city	like	a	benediction	of	all	things	consequential?	Great	is	the	need,
so	sudden,	so	pressing,	to	reach	up,	close	fingers	about	the	fiery	orb,	to	drag	it
back	–	and	back!	–	into	night	and	its	sprawled	darkness,	where	all	manner	of
things	of	import	have	trembled	the	heavens	and	the	very	roots	of	the	earth,	or
nearly	so.
Back,	then,	the	short	round	man	demands,	for	this	is	his	telling,	his
knowing,	his	cry	of	Witness!	echoing	still,	and	still.	The	night	of	arrivals,	the
deeds	of	the	arrived,	even	as	night	arrives!	Let	nothing	of	consequence	be
forgot.	Let	nothing	of	inconsequence	be	deemed	so	and	who	now	could	even
imagine	such	things	to	exist,	recalling	with	wise	nod	the	urchin	thief,	the
hawker,	the	guard.	The	thrower	of	pots	and	the	child	and	the	ox	and	Uncle
Doruth	with	his	face	between	the	legs	of	another	man’s	wife,	all	to	come
(excuse!)	in	the	day	ahead.
Mark,	too,	this	teller	of	the	tale,	with	his	sage	wink.	We	are	in	the	midst!
	
Night,	shadows	overlapping,	a	most	indifferent	blur	that	would	attract	no	one’s
notice,	barring	that	nuisance	of	a	cat	on	the	sill	of	the	estate,	amber	eyes
tracking	now	as	one	shadow	moves	out	from	its	place	of	temporary
concealment.	Out	goes	this	errant	shadow,	across	the	courtyard,	into	deeper
shadows	against	the	estate’s	wall.
Crouching,	Torvald	Nom	looked	up	to	see	the	cat’s	head	and	those	damned
eyes,	peering	down	at	him.	A	moment	later	the	head	withdrew,	taking	its	wide
gaze	with	it.	He	made	his	stealthy	way	to	the	back	corner,	paused	once	more.
He	could	hear	the	gate	guards,	a	pair	of	them,	arguing	over	something,	tones
of	suspicion	leading	to	accusation	answered	by	protestations	of	denial	but
Damn	you,	Doruth,	I	just	don’t	trust	you—
—No	reason	not	to,	Milok.	I	ever	give	you	one?	No—
—To	Hood	you	ain’t.	My	first	wife—
—Wouldn’t	leave	me	alone,	I	swear!	She	stalked	me	like	a	cat	a	rat—
—A	rat!	Aye,	that’s	about	right—
—I	swear,	Milok,	she	very	nearly	raped	me—
—The	first	time!	I	know,	she	told	me	all	about	it,	with	eyes	so	bright!—
—Heard	it	made	you	horny	as	Hood’s	black	sceptre—
—That	ain’t	any	of	your	business,	Doruth—
And	something	soft	brushed	against	Torvald’s	leg.	The	cat,	purring	like
soft	gravel,	back	bowed,	tail	writhing.	He	lifted	his	foot,	held	it	hovering	over
the	creature.	Hesitated,	then	settled	it	back	down.	By	Apsalar ’s	sweet	kiss,	the


kit’s	eyes	and	ears	might	be	a	boon,	come	to	think	of	it.	Assuming	it	had	the
nerve	to	follow	him.
Torvald	eyed	the	wall,	the	cornices,	the	scrollwork	metopes,	the	braided
false	columns.	He	wiped	sweat	from	his	hands,	dusted	them	with	the	grit	at	the
wall’s	base,	then	reached	up	for	handholds,	and	began	to	climb.
He	gained	the	sill	of	the	window	on	the	upper	floor,	pulled	himself	on	to	it,
balanced	on	his	knees.	True,	never	wise,	but	the	fall	wouldn’t	kill	him,
wouldn’t	even	sprain	an	ankle,	would	it?	Drawing	a	dagger	he	slipped	the
blade	in	between	the	shutters,	carefully	felt	for	the	latch.
The	cat,	alighting	beside	him,	nearly	pitched	him	from	the	sill,	but	he
managed	to	recover,	swearing	softly	under	his	breath	as	he	resumed	working
the	lock.
—She	still	loves	you,	you	know—
—What—
—She	does.	She	just	likes	some	variety.	I	tell	you,	Milok,	this	last	one	of
yours	was	no	easy	conquest—
—You	swore!—
—You’re	my	bestest,	oldest	friend.	No	more	secrets	between	us!	And	when	I
swear	to	that,	as	I’m	doing	now,	I	mean	it	true.	She’s	got	an	appetite	so	sharing
shouldn’t	be	a	problem.	I	ain’t	better	than	you,	just	different,	that’s	all.	Different
—
—How	many	times	a	week,	Duroth?	Tell	me	true!—
—Oh,	every	second	day	or	so—
—But	I’m	every	second	day,	too!—
—Odd,	even,	I	guess.	Like	I	said,	an	appetite—
—I’ll	say—
—After	shift,	let’s	go	get	drunk—
—Aye,	we	can	compare	and	contrast—
—I	love	it.	Just	that,	hah!…Hey,	Milok…—
—Aye?—
—How	old’s	your	daughter?—
The	latch	clicked,	springing	free	the	shutters	just	as	a	sword	hissed	from	a
scabbard	and,	amidst	wild	shouting,	a	fight	was	underway	at	the	gate.
—A	joke!	Honest!	Just	a	joke,	Milok!—
Voices	now	from	the	front	of	the	house,	as	Torvald	slid	his	dagger	blade
between	the	lead	windows	and	lifted	the	inside	latch.	He	quickly	edged	into	the
dark	room,	as	boots	rapped	on	the	compound	and	more	shouting	erupted	at	the
front	gate.	A	lantern	crashed	and	someone’s	sword	went	flying	to	skitter	away
on	the	cobbles.


Torvald	quickly	closed	the	shutters,	then	the	window.
The	infernal	purring	was	beside	him,	a	soft	jaw	rubbing	against	a	knee.	He
reached	for	the	cat,	fingers	twitching,	hesitated,	then	withdrew	his	hand.	Pay
attention	to	the	damned	thing,	right,	so	when	it	hears	what	can’t	be	heard	and
when	it	sees	what	can’t	be	seen,	yes…
Pivoting	in	his	crouch,	he	scanned	the	room.	Some	sort	of	study,	though
most	of	the	shelves	were	bare.	Overreaching	ambition,	this	room,	a	sudden
lurch	towards	culture	and	sophistication,	but	of	course	it	was	doomed	to
failure.	Money	wasn’t	enough.	Intelligence	helped.	Taste,	an	inquisitive	mind,
an	interest	in	other	stuff	–	stuff	out	of	immediate	sight,	stuff	having	nothing	to
do	with	whatever.	Wasn’t	enough	to	simply	send	some	servant	to	scour	some
scrollmonger ’s	shop	and	say	‘I’ll	take	that	shelf’s	worth,	and	that	one,	too.’
Master ’s	not	too	discriminating,	yes.	Master	probably	can’t	even	read	so	what
difference	does	it	make?
He	crept	over	to	the	one	shelf	on	which	were	heaped	a	score	or	so	scrolls,
along	with	one	leather-bound	book.	Each	scroll	was	rolled	tight,	tied	with
some	seller ’s	label	–	just	as	he	had	suspected.	Torvald	began	reading	through
them.
Treatise	on	Drainage	Grooves	in	Stone	Gutters	of	Gadrobi	District,
Nineteenth	Report	in	the	Year	of	the	Shrew,	Extraordinary	Subjects,	Guild	of
Quarry	Engineering.	Author:	Member	322.
Tales	of	Pamby	Doughty	and	the	World	Inside	the	Trunk	(with	illustrations
by	some	dead	man).
The	Lost	Verses	of	Anomandaris,	with	annotation.	Torvald’s	brows	rose,
since	this	one	might	actually	be	worth	something.	He	quickly	slipped	the	string
off	and	unfurled	the	scroll.	The	vellum	was	blank,	barring	a	short	annotation	at
the	bottom	that	read:	No	scholarly	erudition	is	possible	at	the	moment.	And	a
publisher ’s	mark	denoting	this	scroll	as	part	of	a	series	of	Lost	Works,
published	by	the	Vellum	Makers’	Guild	of	Pale.
He	rolled	the	useless	thing	back	up,	plucked	out	one	more.
An	Illustrated	Guide	to	Headgear	of	Cobblers	of	Genabaris	in	the	fourth
century,	Burn’s	Sleep,	by	Cracktooth	Filcher,	self-avowed	serial	collector	and
scourge	of	cobblers,	imprisoned	for	life.	A	publication	of	Prisoner’s	Pit
Library,	Nathilog.
He	had	no	doubt	the	illustrations	were	lavish	and	meticulous,	detailed	to
excess,	but	somehow	his	curiosity	was	not	up	to	the	challenge	of	perusal.
By	now	the	commotion	at	the	gate	had	been	settled.	Various	members	of
the	guard	had	returned	from	the	fracas,	with	much	muttering	and	cursing	that
fell	away	abruptly	as	soon	as	they	entered	the	main	house	on	their	way	to	their


rooms,	telling	Torvald	that	the	master	was	indeed	home	and	probably	asleep.
Which	was	something	of	a	problem,	given	just	how	paranoid	the	bastard	was
and	as	the	likely	hiding	place	of	his	trove	was	somewhere	in	his	damned
bedroom.	Well,	the	world	presented	its	challenges,	and	without	challenges	life
was	worthless	and	pointless	and,	most	crucially,	devoid	of	interest.
He	moved	to	the	door	leading	to	the	hallway,	pausing	to	wrap	a	cloth	about
his	face,	leaving	only	his	eyes	free.	The	cat	watched	intently.	Lifting	the	latch
he	tugged	the	door	open	and	peered	out	into	the	corridor.	Left,	the	outer,	back
wall	not	three	paces	away.	Right,	the	aisle	reaching	all	the	way	through	the
house.	Doors	and	a	central	landing	for	the	staircase.	And	a	guard,	seated	facing
that	landing.	Black	hair,	red,	bulbous	nose,	protruding	lower	lip,	and	enough
muscles	slabbed	on	to	a	gigantic	frame	to	fill	out	two	or	three	Torvald	Noms.
The	fool	was	knitting,	his	mouth	moving	and	brow	knotting	as	he	counted
stitches.
And	there	was	the	horrid	cat,	padding	straight	for	him.
Torvald	quietly	closed	the	door.
He	should	have	strangled	the	thing.
From	the	corridor	he	heard	a	grunting	curse,	then	boots	thumping	down
the	stairs.
Opening	the	door	once	more	he	looked	out.	The	guard	was	gone,	the
knitting	lying	on	the	floor	with	one	strand	leading	off	down	the	stairs.
Hah!	Brilliant	cat!	Why,	if	he	met	it	again	he’d	kiss	it	–	but	nowhere	near
where	it	licked	itself	because	there	were	limits,	after	all,	and	anywhere	a	cat
could	lick	itself	was	nowhere	he’d	kiss.
Torvald	quickly	closed	the	door	behind	him	and	tiptoed	up	the	corridor.	A
cautious	glance	down	the	wide,	central	staircase.	Wherever	the	cat	had	run	off
with	the	ball	of	wool,	it	was	out	of	sight,	and	so	too	the	guard.	He	faced	the
ornate	double	doors	directly	behind	the	vacated	wooden	chair.
Locked?
Yes.
He	drew	his	dagger	and	slid	the	thin	blade	between	the	doors.
Ornate	decoration	was	often	accompanied	by	neglect	of	the	necessary
mechanisms,	and	this	lock	followed	the	rule,	as	he	felt	the	latch	lift	away.	Boots
sounded	downstairs.	He	tugged	open	the	door	and	quickly	slipped	inside,
crouching	once	more.	A	front	room,	an	office	of	sorts,	with	a	single	lantern	on
a	short	wick	casting	faint	light	across	the	desk	and	its	strewn	heap	of	papyrus
sheets.	A	second	door,	smaller,	narrow,	behind	the	desk’s	high-backed	plush
chair.
Torvald	Nom	tiptoed	towards	it.


Pausing	at	the	desk	to	douse	the	lantern,	waiting	for	his	eyes	to	adjust	to	the
darkness,	crouching	yet	lower	to	squint	at	the	crack	beneath	the	bedroom	door,
pleased	to	find	no	thread	of	light.	Drawing	up	against	the	panelled	wood	with
its	gold-leaf	insets	now	dull	in	the	gloom.	No	lock	this	time.	Hinges	feeling
well	oiled.	He	slowly	worked	the	door	open.
Inside,	quietly	shutting	the	door	behind	him.
Soft	breathing	from	the	huge	four-poster	bed.	Then	a	sigh.	‘Sweet
sliverfishy,	is	that	you?’
A	woman’s	husky,	whispering	voice,	and	now	stirring	sounds	from	the
bed.
‘The	night	stalker	this	time?	Ooh,	that	one’s	fun	–	I’ll	keep	my	eyes	closed
and	whimper	lots	when	you	threaten	me	to	stay	quiet.	Hurry,	I’m	lying	here,
petrified.	Someone’s	in	my	room!’
Torvald	Nom	hesitated,	truly	torn	between	necessity	and…well,	necessity.
He	untied	his	rope	belt.	And,	in	a	hissing	voice,	demanded,	‘First,	the
treasure.	Where	is	it,	woman?’
She	gasped.	‘That’s	a	good	voice!	A	new	one!	The	treasure,	ah!	You	know
where	it	is,	you	horrible	creature!	Right	here	between	my	legs!’
Torvald	rolled	his	eyes.	‘Not	that	one.	The	other	one.’
‘If	I	don’t	tell	you?’
‘Then	I	will	have	my	way	with	you.’
‘Oh!	I	say	nothing!	Please!’
Damn,	he	sure	messed	that	one	up.	There	was	no	way	she’d	not	know	he
wasn’t	who	he	was	pretending	to	be,	even	when	that	someone	was	pretending	to
be	someone	else.	How	to	solve	this?
‘Get	on	your	stomach.	Now,	on	your	hands	and	knees.	Yes,	like	that.’
‘You’re	worse	than	an	animal!’
Torvald	paused	at	the	foot	of	the	bed.	Worse	than	an	animal?	What	did	that
mean?	Shaking	his	head,	he	climbed	on	to	the	bed.	Well,	here	goes	nothing.
A	short	time	later:	‘Sliverfishy!	The	new	elixir?	Gods,	it’s	spectacular!
Why,	I	can’t	call	you	sliverfishy	any	more,	can	I?	More	like…a	salmon!
Charging	upstream!	Oh!’
‘The	treasure,	or	I’ll	use	this	knife.’	And	he	pressed	the	cold	blade	of	the
dagger	against	the	outside	of	her	right	thigh.
She	gasped	again.	‘Under	the	bed!	Don’t	hurt	me!	Keep	pushing,	damn
you!	Harder!	This	one’s	going	to	make	a	baby	–	I	know	it!	This	time,	a	baby!’
Well,	he	did	his	part	anyway,	feeding	his	coins	into	the	temple’s	cup	and	all
that,	and	may	her	prayers	guide	her	true	into	motherhood’s	blissful	heaven.
She	collapsed	on	to	the	bed,	groaning,	while	he	backed	off,	knelt	on	the	cold


wooden	floor	and	reached	under	the	bed,	knuckles	skinning	against	a	large,
low	longbox.	Groping,	he	found	one	handle	and	dragged	it	out.
She	moaned.	‘Oh,	don’t	start	counting	again,	darling.	Please.	You	ruin
everything	when	you	do	that!’
‘Not	counting,	woman.	Stealing.	Stay	where	you	are.	Eyes	closed.	Don’t
move.’
‘It	just	sounds	silly	now,	you	know	that.’
‘Shut	up,	or	I’ll	do	you	again.’
‘Ah!	What	was	that	elixir	again?’
He	prised	open	the	lock	with	the	tip	of	the	dagger.	Inside,	conveniently
stored	in	burlap	sacks	tagged	with	precise	amounts,	a	fortune	of	gems,	jewels
and	high	councils.	He	quickly	collected	the	loot.
‘You	are	counting!’
‘I	warned	you.’	He	climbed	back	on	to	the	bed.	Looked	down	and	saw	that
promises	weren’t	quite	enough.	Gods	below,	if	you	only	were.	‘Listen,’	he	said,
‘I	need	more	elixir.	In	the	office.	Don’t	move.’
‘I	won’t.	I	promise.’
He	hurried	out,	crept	across	the	outer	room	and	paused	at	the	doors	to	the
corridor	to	press	his	ear	against	the	panel.
Softly,	the	slither-click	of	bamboo	knitting	needles.
Torvald	slid	the	dagger	into	its	scabbard,	reversed	grip,	opened	the	door,
looked	down	at	the	top	of	the	guard’s	hairy	head,	and	swung	hard.	The	pommel
crunched.	The	man	sagged	in	his	chair,	then	folded	into	a	heap	at	the	foot	of	the
chair.
The	cat	was	waiting	by	the	library	door.

Uncle	One,	Uncle	Two,	Father	None.	Aunt	One,	Aunt	Two,	Mother	None.
Present	and	on	duty,	Uncle	One,	Aunt	One	and	Cousins	One,	Two,	Three.
Cousin	One	edging	closer,	almost	close	enough	for	another	hard,	sharp	jab
with	an	elbow	as	One	made	to	collect	another	onion	from	the	heap	on	the	table.
But	he	knew	One’s	games,	had	a	year ’s	list	of	bruises	to	prove	it,	and	so,	just
as	accidentally,	he	took	a	half-step	away,	keeping	on	his	face	a	beaming	smile
as	Aunt	One	cooed	her	delight	at	this	sudden	bounty,	and	Uncle	One	sat
opposite,	ready	to	deliver	his	wink	as	soon	as	he	glanced	over	–	which	he
wouldn’t	do	yet	because	timing,	as	Uncle	Two	always	told	him,	was
everything.	Besides,	he	needed	to	be	aware	of	Cousin	One	especially	now	that
the	first	plan	had	been	thwarted.


One,	whose	name	was	Snell,	would	have	to	work	harder	in	his	head,	work
that	cunning	which	seemed	to	come	from	nowhere	and	wasn’t	part	of	the	dull
stupidity	that	was	One’s	actual	brain,	so	maybe	it	was	demons	after	all,
clattering	and	chittering	all	their	cruel	ideas.	Snell	wouldn’t	let	this	rest,	he
knew.	No,	he’d	remember	and	start	planning.	And	the	hurt	would	be	all	the
worse	for	that.
But	right	now	he	didn’t	care,	not	about	Cousin	One,	not	about	anything	that
might	come	later	tonight	or	tomorrow.	He’d	brought	food	home,	after	all,	an
armload	of	food,	delivering	his	treasure	to	joyous	cries	of	relief.
And	the	man	whose	name	he’d	been	given,	the	man	long	dead	who	was
neither	Uncle	One	nor	Uncle	Two	but	had	been	Uncle	Three	and	not,	of	course,
Father	One,	well,	that	man	would	be	proud	that	the	boy	with	his	name	was
doing	what	was	needed	to	keep	the	family	together.
Collecting	his	own	onion,	the	child	named	Harllo	made	his	way	to	a	safe
corner	of	the	single	room,	and,	moments	before	taking	a	bite,	glanced	up	to
meet	Uncle	One’s	eyes,	to	catch	the	wink	and	then	nod	in	answer.
Just	like	Uncle	Two	always	said,	timing	was	how	a	man	measured	the
world,	and	his	place	in	it.	Timing	wasn’t	a	maybe	world,	it	was	a	world	of	yes
and	no,	this,	not	that.	Now,	not	later.	Timing	belonged	to	all	the	beasts	of	nature
that	hunted	other	creatures.	It	belonged	to	the	tiger	and	its	fixed,	watching	eyes.
It	belonged,	too,	to	the	prey,	when	the	hunter	became	hunted,	like	with	Cousin
One,	each	moment	a	contest,	a	battle,	a	duel.	But	Harllo	was	learning	the	tiger ’s
way,	thanks	to	Uncle	Two,	whose	very	skin	could	change	into	that	of	a	tiger,
when	anger	awakened	cold	and	deadly.	Who	had	a	tiger ’s	eyes	and	was	the
bravest,	wisest	man	in	all	of	Darujhistan.
And	the	only	one,	apart	from	young	Harllo	himself,	who	knew	the	truth	of
Aunt	Two,	who	wasn’t	Aunt	Two	at	all,	but	Mother	One.	Even	if	she	wouldn’t
admit	it,	wouldn’t	ever	say	it,	and	wouldn’t	have	hardly	nothing	to	do	with	her
only	child,	her	son	of	Rape.	Once,	Harllo	had	thought	that	Rape	was	his
father ’s	name,	but	now	he	knew	it	was	a	thing	people	did	to	other	people,	as
mean	as	an	elbow	in	the	ribs,	maybe	meaner.	And	that	was	why	Mother	One
stayed	Aunt	Two,	and	why	on	those	rare	occasions	she	visited	she	wouldn’t
meet	Harllo’s	eyes	no	matter	how	he	tried,	and	why	she	wouldn’t	say	anything
about	nothing	except	with	a	voice	that	was	all	anger.
‘Aunt	Stonny	hates	words,	Harllo,’	Gruntle	had	explained,	‘but	only	when
those	words	creep	too	close	to	her,	to	where	she	hides,	you	see?’
Yes,	he	saw.	He	saw	plenty.
Snell	caught	his	eye	and	made	a	wicked	face,	mouthing	vicious	promises.
His	little	sister,	Cousin	Two,	whose	name	was	Mew,	was	watching	from	where


she	held	on	to	the	table	edge,	seeing	but	not	understanding	because	how	could
she,	being	only	three	years	old;	while	Cousin	Three,	another	girl	but	this	one
named	Hinty,	was	all	swathed	in	the	cradle	and	safe	in	there,	safe	from
everything,	which	was	how	it	should	be	for	the	littlest	ones.
Harllo	was	five,	maybe	close	to	six,	but	already	tall	–	stretched,	laughed
Gruntle,	stretched	and	scrawny	because	that’s	how	boys	grow.
Aunt	Myrla	had	the	rest	of	the	vegetables	in	a	steaming	pot	over	the	hearth,
and	Harllo	saw	her	flick	a	knowing	look	at	her	husband,	who	nodded,	not
pausing	in	massaging	the	stumps	below	his	knees,	where	most	people	had	shins
and	ankles	and	then	feet,	but	Uncle	Bedek	had	had	an	accident	–	which	was
something	like	Rape	only	not	on	purpose	–	and	so	he	couldn’t	walk	any	more
which	made	life	hard	for	them	all,	and	meant	Harllo	had	to	do	what	was	needed
since	Snell	didn’t	seem	interested	in	doing	anything.	Except	torment	Harllo,	of
course.
The	air	in	the	cramped	room	was	smelling	earthy	and	sweet	now,	as	Myrla
fed	more	dung	on	to	the	small	hearth	beneath	the	pot.	Harllo	knew	he’d	have	to
go	out	and	collect	more	come	the	morrow	and	that	might	mean	right	out	of	the
city,	up	along	the	West	Shore	of	the	lake,	which	was	an	adventure.
Snell	finished	his	onion	and	crept	closer	to	Harllo,	hands	tightening	into
fists.
But	Harllo	had	already	heard	the	boots	in	the	alley	outside,	crackling	on
the	dead	fronds	from	the	collapsed	roof	opposite,	and	a	moment	later	Uncle
Two	swept	the	hanging	aside	and	leaned	into	the	room,	the	barbs	on	his	face
looking	freshly	painted,	so	stark	were	they,	and	his	eyes	glowed	like	candle
flames.	His	smile	revealed	fangs.
Bedek	waved.	‘Gruntle!	Do	come	in,	old	friend!	See	how	Myrla	readies	a
feast!’
‘Well	timed,	then,’	the	huge	man	replied,	entering	the	room,	‘for	I	have
brought	smoked	horse.’	Seeing	Harllo,	he	waved	the	boy	over.	‘Need	to	put
some	muscle	on	this	one.’
‘Oh,’	said	Myrla,	‘he	never	sits	still,	that’s	his	problem.	Not	for	a	moment!’
Snell	was	scowling,	scuttling	in	retreat	and	looking	upon	Gruntle	with
hatred	and	fear.
Gruntle	picked	up	Harllo,	then	held	him	squirming	under	one	arm	as	he
took	the	two	steps	to	the	hearth	to	hand	Myrla	a	burlap-wrapped	package.
Bedek	was	eyeing	Gruntle.	‘Glad	you	made	it	back,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice.
‘Heard	about	you	at	the	gate	and	that	moment	in	Worrytown	–	damn,	but	I	wish
I	wasn’t	so…useless.’
Setting	Harllo	down,	Gruntle	sighed.	‘Maybe	your	days	of	riding	with


caravans	are	done,	but	that	doesn’t	make	you	useless.	You’re	raising	a	fine
family,	Bedek,	a	fine	family.’
‘I	ain’t	raising	nothing,’	Bedek	muttered,	and	Harllo	knew	that	tone,	knew
it	all	too	well,	and	it	might	be	days,	maybe	even	a	week,	before	Uncle	One
climbed	back	up	from	the	dark,	deep	hole	he	was	now	in.	The	problem	was,
Bedek	liked	that	place,	liked	the	way	Myrla	closed	round	him,	all	caresses	and
embraces	and	soft	murmurings,	and	it’d	go	on	like	that	until	the	night	came
when	they	made	noises	in	their	bed,	and	come	the	next	morning,	why,	Bedek
would	be	smiling.
When	Myrla	was	like	that,	though,	when	she	was	all	for	her	husband	and
nothing	else,	it	fell	to	Harllo	to	tend	to	the	girls	and	do	everything	that	was
needed,	and	worst	of	all,	it	meant	no	one	was	holding	back	Snell.	The	beatings
would	get	bad,	then.
Myrla	couldn’t	work	much,	not	since	the	last	baby,	when	she’d	hurt
something	in	her	belly	and	now	she	got	tired	too	easy,	and	even	this	glorious
supper	she	was	creating	would	leave	her	exhausted	and	weak	with	a	headache.
When	able,	she’d	mend	clothes,	but	that	wasn’t	happening	much	of	late,	which
made	Harllo’s	raiding	the	local	markets	all	the	more	important.
He	stayed	close	to	Gruntle,	who	now	sat	opposite	Uncle	Bedek	and	had
produced	a	jar	of	wine,	and	this	kept	Snell	away	for	now,	which	of	course	only
made	things	worse	later	but	that	was	all	right.	You	couldn’t	choose	your
family,	after	all,	not	your	cousins,	not	anyone.	They	were	there	and	that	was
that.
Besides,	he	could	leave	early	tomorrow	morning,	so	early	Snell	wouldn’t
even	be	awake,	and	he’d	make	his	way	out	of	the	city,	out	along	the	lake	shore
where	the	world	stretched	away,	where	beyond	the	shanties	there	were	hills
with	nothing	but	goats	and	shepherds	and	beyond	even	them	there	was	nothing
but	empty	land.	That	such	a	thing	could	exist	whispered	to	Harllo	of
possibilities,	ones	that	he	couldn’t	hope	to	name	or	put	into	words,	but	were	all
out	in	the	future	life	that	seemed	blurry,	ghostly,	but	a	promise	even	so.	As
bright	as	Gruntle’s	eyes,	that	promise,	and	it	was	that	promise	that	Harllo	held
on	to,	when	Snell’s	fists	were	coming	down.
Bedek	and	Gruntle	talked	about	the	old	days,	when	they’d	both	worked	the
same	caravans,	and	it	seemed	to	Harllo	that	the	past	–	a	world	he’d	never	seen
because	it	was	before	the	Rape	–	was	a	place	of	great	deeds,	a	place	thick	with
life	where	the	sun	was	brighter,	the	sunsets	were	deeper,	the	stars	blazed	in	a
black	sky	and	the	moon	was	free	of	mists,	and	men	stood	taller	and	prouder
and	nobody	had	to	talk	about	the	past	back	then,	because	it	was	happening	right
now.


Maybe	that	was	how	he	would	find	the	future,	a	new	time	in	which	to	stand
tall.	A	time	he	could	stretch	into.
Across	from	Harllo,	Snell	crouched	in	a	gloomy	corner,	his	eyes	filled
with	their	own	promise	as	he	grinned	at	Harllo.
Myrla	brought	them	plates	heaped	with	food.
	
The	papyrus	sheets,	torn	into	shreds,	lit	quickly,	sending	black	flakes	upward
in	the	chimney’s	draught,	and	Duiker	watched	them	go,	seeing	crows,
thousands	of	crows.	Thieves	of	memory,	stealing	everything	else	he	might
have	thought	about,	might	have	resurrected	to	ease	the	uselessness	of	his
present	life.	All	the	struggles	to	recall	faces	had	been	surrendered,	and	his
every	effort	to	write	down	this	dread	history	had	failed.	Words	flat	and	lifeless,
scenes	described	in	the	voice	of	the	dead.
Who	were	those	comrades	at	his	side	back	then?	Who	were	those	Wickans
and	Malazans,	those	warlocks	and	warriors,	those	soldiers	and	sacrificial
victims	who	perched	above	the	road,	like	sentinels	of	futility,	staring	down	at
their	own	marching	shadows?
Bult.	Lull.	Sormo	Enath.
Coltaine.
Names,	then,	but	no	faces.	The	chaos	and	terror	of	fighting,	of	reeling	in
exhaustion,	of	wounds	slashed	open	and	bleeding,	of	dust	and	the	reek	of
spilled	wastes	–	no,	he	could	not	write	of	that,	could	not	relate	the	truth	of	it,
any	of	it.
Memory	fails.	For	ever	doomed	as	we	seek	to	fashion	scenes,	framed,	each
act	described,	reasoned	and	reasonable,	irrational	and	mad,	but	somewhere
beneath	there	must	be	the	thick,	solid	sludge	of	motivation,	of	significance,	of
meaning	–	there	must	be.	The	alternative	is…unacceptable.
But	this	was	where	his	attempts	delivered	him,	again	and	again.	The
unacceptable	truths,	the	ones	no	sane	person	could	ever	face,	could	ever	meet
eye	to	eye.	That	nothing	was	worth	revering,	not	even	the	simple	fact	of
survival,	and	certainly	not	that	endless	cascade	of	failures,	of	deaths	beyond
counting.
Even	here,	in	this	city	of	peace,	he	watched	the	citizens	in	all	their	daily
dances,	and	with	each	moment	that	passed,	his	disdain	deepened.	He	disliked
the	way	his	thoughts	grew	ever	more	uncharitable,	ever	more	baffled	by	the
endless	scenes	of	seemingly	mindless,	pointless	existence,	but	there	seemed	no
way	out	of	that	progression	as	his	observations	unveiled	the	pettiness	of	life,
the	battles	silent	and	otherwise	with	wives,	husbands,	friends,	children,	parents,


with	the	very	crush	on	a	crowded	street,	each	life	closed	round	itself,	righteous
and	uncaring	of	strangers	–	people	fully	inside	their	own	lives.	Yet	should	he
not	revel	in	such	things?	In	their	profound	freedom,	in	their	extraordinary
luxury	of	imagining	themselves	in	control	of	their	own	lives?
Of	course,	they	weren’t.	In	freedom,	such	as	each	might	possess,	they
raised	their	own	barriers,	carried	shackles	fashioned	by	their	own	hands.
Rattling	the	chains	of	emotions,	of	fears	and	worries,	of	need	and	spite,	of	the
belligerence	that	railed	against	the	essential	anonymity	that	gripped	a	person.
Aye,	a	most	unacceptable	truth.
Was	this	the	driving	force	behind	the	quest	for	power?	To	tear	away
anonymity,	to	raise	fame	and	infamy	up	like	a	blazing	shield	and	shining
sword?	To	voice	a	cry	that	would	be	heard	beyond	the	gates	of	one’s	own	life?
But	oh,	Duiker	had	heard	enough	such	cries.	He	had	stood,	cowering,	in
the	midst	of	howls	of	defiance	and	triumph,	all	turning	sour	with	despair,	with
senseless	rage.	The	echoes	of	power	were	uniform,	yes,	in	their	essential
emptiness.	Any	historian	worthy	of	the	title	could	see	that.
No,	there	was	no	value	in	writing.	No	more	effect	than	a	babe’s	fists
battering	at	the	silence	that	ignored	every	cry.	History	meant	nothing,	because
the	only	continuity	was	human	stupidity.	Oh,	there	were	moments	of	greatness,
of	bright	deeds,	but	how	long	did	the	light	of	such	glory	last?	From	one	breath
to	the	next,	aye,	and	no	more	than	that.	No	more	than	that.	As	for	the	rest,	kick
through	the	bones	and	wreckage	for	they	are	what	remain,	what	lasts	until	all
turns	to	dust.
‘You	are	looking	thoughtful,’	Mallet	observed,	leaning	forward	with	a
grunt	to	top	up	Duiker ’s	tankard.	‘Which,	I	suppose,	should	not	come	as	a
surprise,	since	you	just	burned	the	efforts	of	most	of	a	year,	not	to	mention	a
high	council’s	worth	of	papyrus.’
‘I	will	reimburse	you	the	cost,’	Duiker	said.
‘Don’t	be	ridiculous,’	the	healer	said,	leaning	back.	‘I	only	said	you	looked
thoughtful.’
‘Appearances	deceive,	Mallet.	I	am	not	interested	in	thinking	any	more.
About	anything.’
‘Good,	then	this	is	a	true	meeting	of	minds.’
Duiker	continued	studying	the	fire,	continued	watching	the	black	crows
wing	up	the	chimney.	‘For	you,	unwise,’	he	said.	‘You	have	assassins	to
consider.’
Mallet	snorted.	‘Assassins.	Antsy’s	already	talking	about	digging	up	a
dozen	cussers.	Blend’s	out	hunting	down	the	Guild’s	headquarters,	while
Picker	and	Bluepearl	work	with	Councillor	Coll	to	sniff	out	the	source	of	the


contract.	Give	it	all	a	week	and	the	problem	will	cease	being	a	problem.
Permanently.’
Duiker	half	smiled.	‘Don’t	mess	with	Malazan	marines,	retired	or
otherwise.’
‘You’d	think	people	would	know	by	now,	wouldn’t	you?’
‘People	are	stupid,	Mallet.’
The	healer	winced.	‘Not	all	of	us.’
‘True.	But	Hood	waits	for	everyone,	stupid,	smart,	witty,	witless.	Waits	with
the	same	knowing	smile.’
‘No	wonder	you	burned	your	book,	Duiker.’
‘Yes.’
‘So,	since	you’re	no	longer	writing	history,	what	will	you	do?’
‘Do?	Why,	nothing.’
‘Now	that’s	something	I	know	all	about	–	oh,	don’t	even	try	to	object.	Aye,
I	heal	someone	every	now	and	then,	but	I	was	a	soldier,	once.	And	now	I’m	not.
Now	I	sit	around	getting	fat,	and	it’s	fat	poisoned	through	and	through	with
some	kind	of	cynical	bile.	I	lost	all	my	friends,	Duiker.	No	different	from	you.
Lost	’em	all,	and	for	what?	Damned	if	I	know,	damned	and	damned	again,	but
no,	I	don’t	know	the	why	of	it,	the	why	of	anything.’
‘A	meeting	of	minds,	indeed,’	Duiker	said.	‘Then	again,	Mallet,	it	seems
you	are	at	war	once	more.	Against	the	usual	implacable,	deadly	enemy.’
‘The	Guild?	I	suppose	you’re	right.	But	it	won’t	last	long,	will	it?	I	don’t
like	being	retired.	It’s	like	announcing	an	end	to	your	worth,	whatever	that
worth	was,	and	the	longer	you	go	on,	the	more	you	realize	that	that	worth
wasn’t	worth	anything	like	you	once	thought	it	was,	and	that	just	makes	it
worse.’
Duiker	set	down	his	tankard	and	rose.	‘The	High	Alchemist	has	invited	me
to	lunch	on	the	morrow.	I’d	best	go	to	bed	and	get	some	sleep.	Watch	your
back,	healer.	Sometimes	the	lad	pushes	and	the	lady’s	nowhere	in	sight.’
Mallet	simply	nodded,	having	assumed	the	burden	of	staring	at	the	fire
now	that	Duiker	was	leaving.
The	historian	walked	away	from	the	warmth,	passing	through	draughts	and
layers	of	chill	air	on	his	way	to	his	room.	Colder	and	colder,	with	every	step.
Somewhere	above	this	foul	temple,	crows	danced	with	sparks	above	the
mouth	of	a	chimney,	virtually	unseen	in	the	darkness.	Each	one	carried	a	word,
but	the	sparks	were	deaf.	Too	busy	with	the	ecstasy	of	their	own	bright,
blinding	fire.	At	least,	until	they	went	out.
	


Gaz	stormed	out	early,	as	soon	as	he	realized	he	wasn’t	going	to	get	enough
coin	from	the	day’s	take	to	buy	a	worthwhile	night	of	drinking.	Thordy
watched	her	husband	go,	that	pathetic	forward	tilt	of	the	man’s	walk	which
always	came	when	he	was	enraged,	the	jerky	strides	as	he	marched	out	into	the
night.	Where	he	went	she	had	no	idea,	nor,	truth	be	told,	did	she	even	care.
Twice	now	in	the	past	week	that	skinny	mite	of	an	urchin	had	raided	her
vegetable	stand.	Gods,	what	were	parents	up	to	these	days?	The	runt	was
probably	five	years	old,	no	older	that’s	for	sure,	and	already	fast	as	an	eel	in
the	shallows	–	and	why	wasn’t	he	leashed	as	a	child	should	be?	Especially	at
that	age	when	there	were	plenty	of	people	who’d	snatch	him,	use	him	or	sell
him	quick	as	can	be.	And	if	they	used	him	in	that	bad	way,	then	they’d	wring	his
neck	afterwards,	which	Thordy	might	not	mind	so	much	except	that	it	was	a
cruel	thought	and	a	cruel	picture	and	more	like	something	her	husband	would
think	than	her.	Though	he’d	only	be	thinking	in	terms	of	how	much	money	she
might	make	without	the	thieving	going	on.	And	maybe	what	he	might	do	if	he
ever	got	his	hands	on	the	runt.
She	shivered	at	that	thought,	then	was	distracted	by	Nou	the	watchdog	in	the
garden	next	to	hers,	an	unusual	eruption	of	barking	–	but	then	she	remembered
her	husband	and	his	walk	and	how	Nou	hated	Gaz	especially	when	he	walked
like	that.	When	Gaz	stumbled	back	home,	drunk	and	useless,	the	mangy	dog
never	made	a	sound,	ignored	Gaz	straight	out,	in	fact.
Dogs,	she	knew,	could	smell	bad	intentions.	Other	animals	too,	but
especially	dogs.
Gaz	never	touched	Thordy,	not	even	a	shove	or	a	slap,	because	without	her
and	the	garden	she	tended	he	was	in	trouble,	and	he	knew	that	well	enough.
He’d	been	tempted,	many	times,	oh,	yes,	but	there’d	be,	all	of	a	sudden,	a	glint
in	his	eyes,	a	surprise,	flickering	alight.	And	he’d	smile	and	turn	away,	saving
that	mangled	fist	and	all	that	was	behind	it	for	someone	else.	Gaz	liked	a	good
fight,	in	some	alley	behind	a	tavern.	Liked	kicking	faces	in,	so	long	as	the
victim	was	smaller	than	he	was,	and	more	drunk.	And	without	any	friends	who
might	step	in	or	come	up	from	behind.	It	was	how	he	dealt	with	the	misery	of
his	life,	or	so	he	said	often	enough.
Thordy	wasn’t	sure	what	all	that	misery	was	about,	though	she	had	some
ideas.	Her,	for	one.	The	pathetic	patch	of	ground	she	had	for	her	vegetables.
Her	barren	womb.	The	way	age	and	hard	work	was	wearing	her	down,	stealing
the	glow	she’d	once	had.	Oh,	there	was	plenty	about	her	that	made	him
miserable.	And,	all	things	considered,	she’d	been	lucky	to	have	him	for	so
long,	especially	when	he’d	worked	the	nets	on	that	fisher	boat,	the	nets	that,
alas,	had	taken	all	his	fingers	that	night	when	something	big	had	waited	down


below,	motionless	and	so	unnoticed	as	the	crew	hauled	the	net	aboard.	Then	it
exploded	in	savage	power,	making	for	the	river	like	a	battering	ram.	Gaz’s
fingers,	all	entwined,	sprang	like	topped	carrots,	and	now	he	had	thumbs	and
rows	of	knuckles	and	nothing	else.
Fists	made	for	fighting,	he’d	say	with	an	unconscious	baring	of	his	teeth.
That	and	nothing	more.
And	that	was	true	enough	and	good	reason,	she	supposed,	for	getting
drunk	every	chance	he	could.
Lately,	however,	she’d	been	feeling	a	little	less	generous	–	no,	she’d	been
feeling	not	much	of	anything	at	all.	Even	pity	had	dwindled,	whispered	away
like	a	dry	leaf	on	the	autumn	wind.	And	it	was	as	if	he	had	changed,	right	in
front	of	her	eyes,	though	she	now	understood	that	what	had	changed	was
behind	her	eyes	–	not	the	one	looked	at,	but	the	one	doing	the	looking.	She	no
longer	recoiled	in	the	face	of	his	fury.	No	longer	shied	from	that	marching	tilt
and	all	its	useless	anger,	and	would	now	study	it,	seeing	its	futility,	seeing	the
self-pity	in	that	wounded	pitch.
She	was	empty,	then,	and	she	had	first	thought	she	would	remain	so,
probably	for	the	rest	of	her	life.	Instead,	something	had	begun	to	fill	the	void.
At	first,	it	arrived	with	a	start,	a	twinge	of	guilt,	but	not	any	more.	Now,	when
thoughts	of	murder	filled	her	head,	it	was	like	immersing	herself	in	a	scented
bath.
Gaz	was	miserable.	He	said	so.	He’d	be	happier	if	he	were	dead.
And,	truth	be	told,	so	would	she.
	
All	this	love,	all	this	desperate	need,	and	he	was	useless.	She	should	have
driven	him	out	of	her	life	long	ago,	and	he	knew	it.	Holding	on	to	him	the	way
she	was	doing	was	torture.	He’d	told	her	he	only	fought	weaklings.	Fools	and
worse.	He	told	her	he	did	it	to	keep	his	arms	strong,	to	harden	his	knuckles,	to
hold	on	to	(hah,	that	was	a	good	one)	some	kind	of	reason	for	staying	alive.	A
man	needs	a	skill,	aye,	and	no	matter	if	it	was	good	or	bad,	no	matter	at	all.	But
the	truth	was,	he	chose	the	meanest,	biggest	bastards	he	could	find.	Proving	he
could,	proving	those	knuckles	and	their	killing	ways.
Killing,	aye.	Four	so	far,	that	he	was	sure	of.
Sooner	or	later,	Gaz	knew,	the	coin	would	flip,	and	it	would	be	his	cold
corpse	lying	face	down	in	some	alley.	Well	enough.	When	you	pay	out	more
than	you’re	worth,	again	and	again,	eventually	somebody	comes	to	collect.
She’d	not	mourn	him,	he	knew.	A	man	in	love	could	see	when	the	one	he
loved	stopped	loving	him	back.	He	did	not	blame	her,	and	did	not	love	her	any


less;	no,	his	need	just	got	worse.
The	Blue	Ball	Tavern	occupied	one	corner	of	a	massive,	decrepit	heap	of
tenements	that	stank	of	urine	and	rotting	rubbish.	In	the	midst	of	the	fête,	the
nightly	anarchy	on	these	back	streets	up	from	the	docks	reached	new	heights,
and	Gaz	was	not	alone	in	hunting	the	alleys	for	trouble.
It	occurred	to	him	that	maybe	he	wasn’t	as	unusual	as	he	might	have	once
believed.	That	maybe	he	was	just	one	among	thousands	of	useless	thugs	in	this
city,	all	of	them	hating	themselves	and	out	sniffing	trails	like	so	many	mangy
dogs.	Those	who	knew	him	gave	him	space,	slinking	back	from	his	path	as	he
stalked	towards	his	chosen	fighting	grounds,	behind	the	Blue	Ball.	That	brief
thought	–	about	other	people,	about	the	shadowed	faces	he	saw	around	him	–
was	shortlived,	flitting	away	with	the	first	smell	of	blood	in	the	damp,	sultry
air.
Someone	had	beaten	him	to	it,	and	might	even	now	be	swaggering	out	the
opposite	end	of	the	alley.	Well,	maybe	the	fool	might	circle	back,	and	he	could
deliver	to	the	bastard	what	he’d	done	to	somebody	else	–	and	there	was	the
body,	the	huddled,	motionless	shape.	Walking	up,	Gaz	nudged	it	with	one	boot.
Heard	a	blood-frothed	wheeze.	Slammed	his	heel	down	on	the	ribcage,	just	to
hear	the	snap	and	crunch.	A	cough,	spraying	blood,	a	low	groan,	then	a	final
exhalation.
Done,	easy	as	that.
‘Are	you	pleased,	Gaz?’
He	spun	round	at	the	soft,	deep	voice,	forearms	lifting	into	a	guard	he
expected	to	fail	–	but	the	fist	he	thought	was	coming	never	arrived,	and,
swearing,	he	stepped	back	until	his	shoulders	thudded	against	the	wall,	glared
in	growing	fear	at	the	tall,	shrouded	figure	standing	before	him.	‘I	ain’t	afraid,’
he	said	in	a	belligerent	growl.
Amusement	washed	up	against	him	like	a	wave.	‘Open	yourself,	Gaz.	Your
soul.	Welcome	your	god.’
Gaz	could	feel	the	air	on	his	teeth,	could	feel	his	lips	stretching	until	cracks
split	to	ooze	blood.	His	heart	hammered	at	his	chest.	‘I	ain’t	got	no	god.	I’m
nothing	but	curses,	and	I	don’t	know	you.	Not	at	all.’
‘Of	course	you	do,	Gaz.	You	have	made	sacrifice	to	me,	six	times	now.
And	counting.’
Gaz	could	not	see	the	face	within	the	hood,	but	the	air	between	them	was
suddenly	thick	with	some	pungent,	cloying	scent.	Like	cold	mud,	the	kind	that
ran	in	turgid	streams	behind	slaughterhouses.	He	thought	he	heard	the	buzz	of
flies,	but	the	sound	was	coming	from	somewhere	inside	his	own	head.	‘I	don’t
kill	for	you,’	he	said,	his	voice	thin	and	weak.


‘You	don’t	have	to.	I	do	not	demand	sacrifices.	There	is…no	need.	You
mortals	consecrate	any	ground	you	choose,	even	this	alley.	You	drain	a	life	on
to	it.	Nothing	more	is	required.	Not	intent,	not	prayer,	nor	invocation.	I	am
summoned,	without	end.’
‘What	do	you	want	from	me?’
‘For	now,	only	that	you	continue	harvesting	souls.	When	the	time	comes
for	more	than	that,	Gaz	of	the	Gadrobi,	you	will	be	shown	what	must	be	done.’
‘And	if	I	don’t	want—’
‘Your	wants	are	not	relevant.’
He	couldn’t	get	that	infernal	buzzing	out	of	his	skull.	He	shook	his	head,
squeezed	shut	his	eyes	for	a	moment.	When	he	opened	them	again	the	god	was
gone.
The	flies.	The	flies	are	in	my	head.	Gods,	get	out!
Someone	had	wandered	into	the	alley,	weaving,	mumbling,	one	hand	held
out	to	fend	off	any	obstacles.
I	can	get	them	out.	Yes!	And,	all	at	once,	he	knew	the	truth	of	that,	knew	that
killing	would	silence	those	cursed	flies.	Swinging	round,	he	pitched	forward,
hands	lifting,	and	fast-marched	towards	the	drunken	fool.
Who	looked	up	at	the	last	moment,	in	time	to	meet	those	terrible	knuckles.

Krute	of	Talient	slowed	as	he	approached	the	recessed	entrance	to	the	tenement
where	he	now	lived.	Someone	was	standing	in	the	shadows,	blocking	the	door.
He	halted	ten	paces	away.	‘That	was	good	work,’	he	said.	‘You	was	behind	me
most	of	the	way,	making	me	think	you	wasn’t	good	at	all,	but	now	here	you
are.’
‘Hello,	Krute.’
At	that	voice	Krute	started,	then	leaned	forward,	trying	to	pierce	the	gloom.
Nothing	but	a	shape,	but	it	was,	he	concluded,	the	right	shape.	‘Gods	below,	I
never	thought	you’d	come	back.	Do	you	have	any	idea	what’s	happened	since
you	vanished?’
‘No.	Why	don’t	you	tell	me?’
Krute	grinned.	‘I	can	do	that,	but	not	out	here.’
‘You	once	lived	in	a	better	neighbourhood,	Krute.’
He	watched	Rallick	Nom	step	out	from	the	alcove	and	his	grin	broadened.
‘You	ain’t	changed	at	all.	And	yes,	I’ve	known	better	times	–	and	I	hate	to	say	it,
but	you’re	to	blame,	Rallick.’
The	tall,	gaunt	assassin	turned	to	study	the	tenement	building.	‘You	live


here?	And	it’s	my	fault?’
‘Come	on,’	Krute	said,	‘let’s	get	inside.	Top	floor,	of	course,	an	alley
corner	–	easy	to	the	roof,	dark	as	Hood’s	armpit.	You’ll	love	it.’
A	short	time	later	they	sat	in	the	larger	of	the	two	rooms,	a	scarred	table
between	them	on	which	sat	a	stubby	candle	with	a	badly	smoking	wick,	and	a
clay	jug	of	sour	ale.	The	two	assassins	held	tin	cups,	both	of	which	leaked.
Since	pouring	the	ale,	Krute	had	said	nothing,	but	now	he	grunted	in
amused	surprise.	‘I	just	thought	of	something.	You	showing	up,	alive	and	hale,
has	just	done	what	Krafar	couldn’t	do.	We	had	a	cult,	Rallick	Nom,
worshipping	the	memory	of	you.	Krafar	outlawed	it	in	the	Guild,	then	tried	to
eradicate	it	–	forced	us	deeper.	Not	deep	enough	for	me	–	I’m	under	suspicion
and	they’ve	gone	and	isolated	me,	like	I	was	already	dead.	Old	contacts…look
right	through	me,	Rallick.	It’s	been	damned	hard.’
‘Krafar?’
‘Seba,	Talo’s	brood.	In	the	squabble	over	who	was	gonna	take	over	after
Vorcan,	he’s	the	one	got	through	unscathed	–	still	breathing,	I	mean.	The
Guild’s	decimated,	Rallick.	Infighting,	lots	of	good	killers	getting	disgusted
and	just	up	and	leaving.	Down	to	Elingarth,	mostly,	with	a	few	to	Black	Coral,
if	you	can	believe	that.	Even	heard	rumours	that	some	went	to	Pale,	to	join	the
Malazan	Claws.’
Rallick	held	up	a	red-stained	hand.	‘A	moment,	damn	you.	What	idiot
decided	on	a	cult?’
Krute	shrugged.	‘Just	sort	of	happened,	Rallick.	Not	really	worship	–	that
was	the	wrong	word.	It’s	more	like	a…a	philosophy.	A	philosophy	of
assassination.	No	magic,	for	one.	Poisons,	lots	of	poisons.	And	otataral	dust	if
we	can	get	it.	But	Seba	Krafar	wants	to	take	us	back	to	all	that	magic,	even
though	you	made	it	obvious	which	way	was	the	better	one,	the	surer	one.	The
man’s	stubborn	–	it’s	in	the	blood	with	them,	eh?’	Krute	slapped	the	table,
momentarily	knocking	over	the	candle,	which	he	hastened	to	right	before	the
paltry	flame	went	out.	‘Can’t	wait	to	see	Krafar ’s	face	when	you	walk	in—’
‘You	will	have	to,’	Rallick	replied.	‘Something	else,	friend.	You	don’t	say	a
word,	to	anyone.’
Krute	smiled	knowingly.	‘You	plan	on	an	ambush,	don’t	you?	You,
stepping	over	Krafar ’s	body,	to	take	mastery	of	the	Guild.	And	you	need	to
make	plans	–	and	I	can	help	you	there,	tell	you	the	ones	sure	to	be	loyal	to	you,
sure	to	back	you—’
‘Be	quiet,’	Rallick	said.	‘There’s	something	you	need	to	know.’
‘What?’
‘The	night	I	disappeared,	recall	it?’


‘Of	course.’
‘Someone	else	vanished	that	night	too.’
Krute	blinked.	‘Well,	yes—’
‘And	now	I	am	back.’
‘You	are.’
Rallick	drank	down	a	mouthful	of	ale.	Then	another.
Krute	stared,	then	swore.	‘Her,	too?’
‘Yes.’
Draining	his	cup,	Krute	quickly	refilled	it,	then	leaned	back.	‘Gods	below.
Poor	Krafar.	You	working	with	her	on	this,	Rallick?’
‘No.’
‘Not	that	she’d	need	help—’
‘I	don’t	know	where	she	is,	Krute.	I	don’t	know	what	she’s	planning.	If
anything.	I	don’t	know,	and	can’t	guess,	and	neither	can	you.’
‘So,	what	do	we	do,	Rallick?’
‘You	change	nothing,	stay	with	your	routine.’
Krute	snorted.	‘What	routine?	Slow	starvation?’
‘I	have	coin,	enough	for	both	of	us.	Hidden	here	and	there.’	Rallick	rose.	‘I
assume	the	rooftops	are	quiet	these	nights.’
‘Except	for	thieves,	coming	out	like	mice	with	not	an	owl	to	be	seen	–	like
I	said,	the	Guild’s	on	its	knees.’
‘All	right.	I	will	return	before	dawn.	For	now,	Krute,	we	do	nothing.’
‘I’m	good	at	that.’
Rallick	grimaced,	but	said	nothing	as	he	turned	to	the	window	and
unlocked	the	shutters.
He	didn’t	need	to	say	anything,	as	far	as	Krute	was	concerned.	True
enough,	Krute	was	good	at	doing	nothing.	But	Rallick	Nom	wasn’t.	He	wasn’t
good	at	that	at	all.	Oh,	this	is	going	to	be	fun,	isn’t	it?
	
The	murmurings	chased	him	down	the	alley,	guttural	noises	issuing	from	a
score	of	fanged	mouths,	tongues	wiggling,	black	lips	lifting	clear.	The
glimmer	and	flash	of	rolling	eyes	in	the	gloom.	Looking	back	over	one
shoulder,	Iskaral	Pust,	Magus	and	High	Priest	of	Shadow,	bhokaral	god,	made
faces	at	his	worshippers.	He	cursed	them	in	twitters.	He	waggled	his	tongue.	He
bared	his	teeth	and	bulged	his	eyes.
And	did	this	frighten	them	off?	Why,	no!	The	very	opposite,	if	such
madness	could	be	believed.	They	scrabbled	ever	closer,	still	clutching	their
loot	from	hapless	victims	in	the	markets,	their	faces	writhing	in	constipated


anguish	or	something	equally	dire.	Infuriating!
‘Never	mind,	never	mind	them.	I	have	tasks,	missions,	deeds	of	great
import.	I	have	stuff	to	do.’
And	so	he	hurried	on,	kicking	through	rubbish,	listening	to	the	creatures
behind	him	kicking	through	the	same	rubbish.	He	paused	at	each	alley	mouth,
shot	quick	glances	up	and	down	the	streets,	then	darted	across	to	the	next
opening.	In	his	wake,	the	bhokarala	gathered	in	a	clump	at	the	alley	mouths,
looked	one	way,	looked	the	other,	and	then	tore	off	in	pursuit.
A	short	time	later	he	skidded	to	a	halt,	the	sound	of	his	heels	echoed	a
moment	later	by	countless	claws	gouging	cobblestones.	Iskaral	Pust	pulled	at
his	hair	and	whirled.	The	crouching	bhokarala	all	had	their	knobby	fists	up	to
either	side	of	their	tiny	skulls.
‘Leave	me	be!’	he	hissed.
They	hissed	back	at	him.
He	spat.
And	was	sprayed	with	gobs	of	foul	saliva.
He	beat	at	his	head.
They	pounded	their	own	heads	with	fistfuls	of	jewellery	and	globes	of
fruit.
Eyes	narrowing	(eyes	narrowing),	Iskaral	Pust	slowly	stood	on	one	leg.
Watched	the	bhokarala	stand	tottering	on	single	legs.
‘Gods	below,’	he	muttered,	‘they’ve	all	gone	entirely	insane.’
Spinning	round	once	more,	he	glared	across	at	the	squat,	octagonal	temple
fifty	paces	down	the	street	to	his	right.	Its	walls	were	a	chaotic	collection	of
niches	and	misshapen	angles,	a	veritable	plethora	of	shadows.	Iskaral	Pust
sighed.	‘My	new	abode.	A	modest	hovel,	but	it	suits	my	needs.	I	plan	to	do	it	up,
of	course,	when	there’s	time.	Oh,	you	like	the	gold	place	settings	and	silk
napkins?	Just	something	I	threw	together,	mind,	but	it	pleases	me	well	enough.
Spiders?	No,	no	spiders	round	here,	oh,	no.	Simply	not	allowed.	Ghastly
creatures,	yes,	disgusting.	Never	bathe,	don’t	you	know.	Ghastly.’
Wordless	singsong	at	his	back.
‘Oh,	don’t	mind	them.	My	ex-wife’s	relations	–	if	I’d	have	known,	well	of
course	I’d	never	have	taken	the	leap,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.	But	that’s	how	it
is	–	get	married	and	you	end	up	saddled	with	the	whole	family	menagerie.	And
even	though	she’s	gone	now,	nothing	but	a	dried-out	husk	with	her	legs
sticking	up	in	the	air,	well,	I	admit	to	feeling	responsible	for	her	hapless	kin.
No,	no,	she	looked	nothing	like	them.	Worse,	actually.	I	confess	to	a
momentary	insanity.	The	curse	of	being	young,	I	suppose.	When	did	we	get
married?	Why,	four,	five	years	ago	now,	yes.	Only	seems	like	a	lifetime	and


I’m	glad,	so	glad,	to	be	done	with	it	now.	More	wine,	sweetness?’
Smiling,	Iskaral	Pust	set	out	for	the	temple.
Shadowed	steps,	leading	to	a	shadowed	landing	beneath	a	pitted	lintel
stone;	oh,	this	was	all	very	well	done.	The	twin	doors	were	huge,	very	nearly
gates,	panelled	in	polished	bronze	moulded	into	an	enormous	image	of
charging	Hounds.	Delicious	touch!	Lovingly	rendered,	all	that	snarling	terror.
‘Yes,	the	doors	were	my	idea,	by	my	own	hand	in	fact	–	I	dabble.	Sculpture,
tapestry,	portraiture,	caricature,	potterature	–	pottery,	I	mean,	I	was	simply
using	the	technical	term.	See	this	funerary	urn,	exquisite,	yes.	She’s	inside.	Yes,
my	beloved	departed,	my	belovedly	departed,	my	blessedly	departed,	hee	hee	–
oh,	folding	up	her	limbs	was	no	easy	task,	let	me	tell	you,	quite	a	tight	fit.	I
know,	hard	to	believe	she’s	in	there,	in	an	urn	barely	larger	than	a	jar	of	wine.	I
have	many	skills,	yes,	as	befits	the	most	glorious	mortal	servant	of	High
House	Shadow.	But	I’ll	tell	you	this,	she	fought	hard	all	the	way	in!’
He	crouched	in	front	of	the	bronze	doors,	glowering	into	the	gaping	jaws
of	the	Hounds.	Reached	up	one	knuckled	hand,	and	rapped	Baran’s	nose.
A	faint,	hollow	reverberation.
‘I	knew	it,’	he	said,	nodding.
The	bhokarala	fidgeted	on	the	steps,	knocking	each	other	on	their	snouts,
then	sagely	nodding.
The	door	to	the	left	opened	a	crack.	A	hood-shrouded	head	poked	out	at
about	chest	height,	the	face	peering	up	vague	and	blurry.	‘We	don’t	want	any,’
said	a	thin,	whispery	woman’s	voice.
‘You	don’t	want	any	what?’
‘They’ll	soil	the	furniture.’
Iskaral	Pust	scowled.	‘She’s	insane.	Why	is	everyone	I	meet	insane?	Listen,
wretched	acolyte,	step	aside.	Scrape	your	pimply	forehead	on	the	tiles	and	kiss
my	precious	feet.	I	am	none	other	than	Iskaral	Pust.’
‘Who?’
‘Iskaral	Pust!	High	Priest	of	Shadow.	Magus	of	the	High	House.	Our	god’s
most	trusted,	favoured,	valued	servant!	Now,	move	aside,	let	me	in!	I	claim	this
temple	by	right	of	seniority,	by	right	of	rightful	hierarchy,	by	right	of	natural
superiority!	I	will	speak	with	the	High	Priestess	immediately!	Wake	her	up,
clean	her	up,	prop	her	up	–	whatever	you	need	to	do	to	get	her	ready	for	me.’
The	door	creaked	back	and	all	at	once	the	acolyte	straightened,	revealing
herself	to	be	ridiculously	tall.	She	swept	her	hood	back	to	display	an
exquisitely	moulded	face	surrounded	by	long,	straight,	rust-red	hair.	In	a	deep,
melodic	voice	she	said,	‘I	am	High	Priestess	Sordiko	Qualm	of	the	Darujhistan
Temple	of	Shadow.’


‘Ah,	a	master	of	disguise.	Just	like	me.’
‘Yes,	I	can	see	that.’
‘You	can?’
‘Yes.’
‘Oh,	isn’t	that	funny.’	He	tilted	his	head.	‘Not	funny	at	all.’	Then	smiled
winningly	up	at	her.	‘And	what	do	you	think	I	am,	dear?’
‘Some	sort	of	sunburned	toad,	I	believe.’
‘Just	what	I	want	you	to	think.	Now,	invite	me	in,	before	I	lose	my
temperature.’
‘Temper,	you	mean.’
‘No,	temperature.	It’s	getting	chilly.’
Her	amber	eyes	shifted	to	the	steps	behind	him.	‘What	of	your	offspring?’
‘Ha	ha.	Offspring	they	are	not.	Never	mind	them.	They	can	weep,	they	can
whimper,	they	can	grovel,	they	can—’
‘Right	now	they	are	all	waving	their	hands	about	in	perfect	mimicry	of
you,	Iskaral	Pust.	Why	would	they	do	that?’
‘Forget	them,	I	said.’
Shrugging,	she	stepped	back.
Iskaral	Pust	scrambled	inside.
Sordiko	Qualm	shut	the	door	and	locked	it.	‘Now,	you	claim	to	be	a	High
Priest.	From	where?’
‘Seven	Cities,	the	secret	monastery.’
‘What	monastery?’
‘The	one	that’s	a	secret,	of	course.	You	don’t	need	to	know	and	I	don’t	need
to	tell	you.	Show	me	to	my	chambers,	I’m	tired.	And	hungry.	I	want	a	sevencourse	supper,	plenty	of	expensive,	suitably	delicate	wine,	and	nubile	female
servants	eager	to	appease	my	delighted	whim.’
‘I	cannot,	alas,	think	of	a	single	servant	here	who	would	touch	your	whim,
as	you	so	quaintly	call	it.	As	for	the	rest,	let	it	not	be	said	I	am	remiss	in
according	fellow	seneschals	every	courtesy	as	befits	a	guest	of	my	temple.’
‘Your	temple,	is	it?’	Iskaral	Pust	sniggered.	‘Not	for	long,	but	say	nothing
at	the	moment.	Leave	her	such	pathetic	delusions.	Smile,	yes,	and	nod	–	and
how	in	the	Abyss	did	they	get	inside?’
The	bhokarala	were	now	crowding	behind	the	High	Priestess,	heads
bobbing.
She	swung	about.	‘I	don’t	know.	There	are	wards…should	be	impossible.
Most	disturbing	indeed.’
‘Never	mind,’	Iskaral	Pust	said.	‘Lead	on,	underling.’
One	fine	eyebrow	lifted.	‘You	claim	to	be	the	Magus	of	High	House


Shadow	–	that	is	quite	an	assertion.	Have	you	proof?’
‘Proof?	I	am	what	I	am	and	that	is	that.	Pray,	pray.	Pray,	I	mean,	do	pray
and	perchance	all	manner	of	revelation	will	afflict	you,	humble	you,	reduce
you	to	wondering	adoration.	Oh,’	he	added,	‘wait	until	she	does	just	that!	Oh,
the	song	will	change	then,	won’t	it	just!	Never	mind	servants	servicing	my
whim,	it	will	be	this	glorious	woman!’
She	stared	at	him	a	moment	longer,	then,	in	a	whirl	of	robes,	swung	about
and	gestured	that	he	follow.	The	grace	she	no	doubt	sought	was	fouled	almost
immediately	as	she	had	to	kick	and	stumble	her	way	through	the	squall	of
bhokarala,	each	of	which	bared	teeth	in	rollicking	but	silent	laughter.	She	shot
a	glance	back	at	Iskaral	Pust,	but	not,	he	was	certain,	in	time	to	see	his	noiseless
laugh.
Into	the	sanctum	they	went.
‘Not	long,’	Iskaral	Pust	whispered.	‘Those	doors	need	paint,	yes.	Not	long
now	at	all…’
	
‘Gods	below,’	the	guard	gasped,	‘you’re	bigger	than	a	Barghast!’
Mappo	Runt	ducked	his	head,	embarrassed	that	he	had	so	shocked	this
passing	watchman.	The	guard	had	staggered	back,	clutching	momentarily	at	his
chest	–	yes,	he	was	past	his	prime,	but	it	seemed	that	the	gesture	had	been	just
that,	a	gesture,	and	the	Trell’s	sudden	dread	that	he	had	inadvertently	sent	the
first	citizen	he	met	stumbling	through	Hood’s	Gate	slowly	gave	way	to	shame.
‘I	am	sorry,	sir,’	he	now	said.	‘I	thought	to	ask	you	a	question	–	nothing	more.’
The	guard	lifted	his	lantern	higher	between	them.	‘Are	you	a	demon,	then?’
‘You	regularly	encounter	demons	on	your	patrols?	A	truly	extraordinary
city.’
‘Of	course	not.	I	mean,	it’s	rare.’
‘Ah.	I	am	a	Trell,	from	the	plains	and	hills	east	of	Nemil,	which	lies	west
of	the	Jhag	Odhan	in	Seven	Cities.’
‘What,	then,	was	your	question?’
‘I	seek	the	Temple	of	Burn,	sir.’
‘I	think	it	best	that	I	escort	you	there,	Trell.	You	have	been	keeping	to	the
alleys	this	night,	haven’t	you?’
‘I	thought	it	best.’
‘Rightly	so.	And	you	and	I	shall	do	the	same.	In	any	case,	you	are	in	the
Gadrobi	District,	while	the	temple	you	want	is	in	the	Daru	District.	We	have
some	way	to	go.’
‘You	are	very	generous	with	your	time,	sir.’


The	guard	smiled.	‘Trell,	you	plunging	into	any	crowded	street	is	likely	to
cause	a	riot.	By	taking	charge	of	you,	I	hope	to	prevent	that.	Thus,	not
generous.	Simply	doing	my	duty.’
Mappo	bowed	again.	‘I	thank	you	even	so.’
‘A	moment,	while	I	douse	this	light,	then	follow	me	–	closely,	please.’
The	fete’s	celebrants	in	this	quarter	seemed	to	be	concentrated	in	the	main
streets,	bathed	in	the	blue	glow	of	the	gas	lamps.	It	was	not	difficult	to	avoid
such	places	with	the	watchman	guiding	him	down	narrow,	twisting	and	turning
alleys	and	lanes.	And	those	few	figures	they	encountered	quickly	slunk	away
upon	seeing	the	guard’s	uniform	(and,	perhaps,	Mappo’s	massive	bulk).
Until,	behind	a	decrepit	tavern	of	some	sort,	they	came	upon	two	corpses.
Swearing	under	his	breath,	the	guard	crouched	down	beside	one,	fumbling	to
relight	his	lantern.	‘This	is	becoming	a	problem,’	he	muttered,	as	he	cranked
the	wick	high	and	a	golden	glow	filled	the	area,	revealing	filth-smeared
cobblestones	and	the	gleam	of	pooled	blood.	Mappo	watched	as	he	rolled	over
the	first	body.	‘This	one’s	a	plain	beating.	Fists	and	boots	–	I	knew	him,	poor
man.	Losing	a	battle	with	spirits…well,	the	battle’s	over	now,	Beru	bless	his
soul.’	He	moved	on	to	the	next	one.	‘Ah,	yes.	Hood	take	the	one	that	did	this	–
four	others	just	the	same.	That	we	know	of.	We	still	cannot	fathom	the	weapon
he	uses…perhaps	a	shovel	handle.	Gods,	but	it’s	brutal.’
‘Sir,’	ventured	Mappo,	‘it	seems	you	have	more	pressing	tasks	this	night.
Directions—’
‘No,	I	will	take	you,	Trell.	Both	have	been	dead	for	a	couple	of	bells	now	–
a	little	longer	won’t	matter.	I	think	it’s	time,’	he	added,	straightening,	‘for	a
mage	or	a	priest	to	be	brought	into	this.’
‘I	wish	you	success,’	Mappo	said.
‘I	can	never	figure	it,’	the	guard	said	as	he	led	the	Trell	onward.	‘It’s	as	if
peace	is	not	good	enough	–	someone	needs	to	crawl	out	of	the	pit	with	blood
dripping	from	his	hands.	Delivering	strife.	Misery.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Could
I	but	shake	reason	into	such	abominations.	There’s	no	need.	No	one	wants	them
and	no	one	wants	what	they	do.	What’s	needed?	That’s	what	I	wish	I	knew.	For
them,	I	mean.	What	do	they	need,	what	do	they	want?	Is	it	just	that	sweet	sip	of
power?	Domination?	The	sense	of	control,	over	who	lives	and	who	dies?
Gods,	I	wish	I	knew	what	fills	their	brains.’
‘No,	sir,’	said	Mappo,	‘be	glad	you	do	not.	Even	the	beasts	succumb	to	such
aggression.	Killers	among	your	kind,	among	my	kind,	are	just	that	–	the
savagery	of	beasts	mated	with	intelligence,	or	what	passes	for	intelligence.
They	dwell	in	a	murky	world,	sir,	confused	and	fearful,	stained	dark	with	envy
and	malice.	And	in	the	end,	they	die	as	they	lived.	Frightened	and	alone,	with


every	memory	of	power	revealed	as	illusion,	as	farce.’
The	guard	had	halted,	had	turned	to	regard	the	Trell	as	he	spoke.	Just
beyond	the	alley’s	mouth	was	a	wall	and,	to	the	left,	the	unlit	cave	of	a	tunnel	or
a	gate.	After	a	moment	the	man	grunted,	then	led	Mappo	on,	into	the	reeking
passageway	through	the	wall,	where	the	Trell	warrior	was	forced	to	duck.
‘You	must	be	a	formidable	tribe	back	in	your	homeland,’	the	guard
observed,	‘if	your	kin	are	as	big	and	broad	as	you	are.’
‘Alas,	we	are,	generally,	not	killers,	sir.	If	we	had	been,	perhaps	we	would
have	fared	better.	As	it	is,	the	glory	of	my	people	has	waned.’	Mappo	then
halted	and	looked	back	at	the	gate	they	had	just	passed	through.	He	could	see
that	the	wall	was	but	a	fragment,	a	stretch	no	more	than	fifty	paces	in	length.	At
both	ends	leaning	buildings	thrust	into	the	spaces	where	it	should	have
continued	on.
The	guard	laughed.	‘Aye,	not	much	left	of	the	Gadrobi	Wall.	Just	this	one
gate,	and	it’s	used	mostly	by	thieves	and	the	like.	Come,	not	much	further.’
The	Temple	of	Burn	had	seen	better	days.	Graffiti	covered	the	plain
limestone	walls,	some	the	blockish	list	of	prayers,	others	elliptical	sigils	and
obscure	local	symbols.	A	few	raw	curses,	or	so	Mappo	suspected	from	the
efforts	made	to	deface	the	messages.	Rubbish	clogged	the	gutter	surrounding
the	foundations,	through	which	rats	ambled.
The	guard	led	him	along	the	wall	and	to	the	right,	where	they	came	out	on
to	a	slightly	wider	thoroughfare.	The	temple’s	formal	entrance	was	a
descending	set	of	stairs,	down	to	a	landing	that	looked	ankle	deep	in	rainwater.
Mappo	regarded	it	in	some	dismay.
The	guard	seemed	to	notice.	‘Yes,	the	cult	is	fading.	She	has	slept	too	long,
I	suppose.	I	know	I	have	no	business	asking,	but	what	do	you	seek	here?’
‘I	am	not	sure,’	Mappo	admitted.
‘Ah.	Well,	Burn’s	blessings	on	you,	then.’
‘Thank	you,	sir.’
The	guard	set	out	to	retrace	his	route,	no	doubt	returning	to	the	alley	with
the	corpses.	The	memory	of	them	remained	with	Mappo,	leaving	him	with	a
gnawing	disquiet.	He	had	glimpsed	something	of	the	mysterious	wounds	on	the
second	body.	Brutal	indeed.	Would	there	could	be	an	end	to	such	things,	yes.	A
true	blessing	of	peace.
He	made	his	way	down	the	steps.	Splashed	through	the	pool	to	the	doors.
They	opened	before	he	could	knock.
A	gaunt,	sad-faced	man	stood	before	him.	‘You	had	to	know,	Mappo	Runt
of	the	Trell,	that	it	could	not	last.	You	stand	before	me	like	a	severed	limb,	and
all	that	you	bleed	stains	the	ether,	a	flow	seeming	without	end.’


‘There	will	be	an	end,’	Mappo	replied.	‘When	I	have	found	him	once
more.’
‘He	is	not	here.’
‘I	know.’
‘Would	you	walk	the	veins	of	the	earth,	Mappo	Runt?	Is	that	why	you	have
come	to	this	temple?’
‘Yes.’
‘You	choose	a	most	perilous	path.	There	is	poison.	There	is	bitter	cold.	Ice,
stained	with	foreign	blood.	There	is	fire	that	blinds	those	who	wield	it.	There	is
wind	that	cries	out	an	eternal	death	cry.	There	is	darkness	and	it	is	crowded.
There	is	grief,	more	than	even	you	can	withstand.	There	is	yielding	and	that
which	will	not	yield.	Pressures	too	vast	even	for	one	such	as	you.	Will	you	still
walk	Burn’s	Path,	Mappo	Runt?’
‘I	must.’
The	sad	face	looked	even	sadder.	‘I	thought	as	much.	I	could	have	made	my
list	of	warnings	even	longer,	you	know.	We	could	have	stood	in	our	places	for
the	rest	of	the	night,	you	in	that	sodden	pool,	me	standing	here	uttering	dire
details.	And	still,	at	long	last,	you	would	say	“I	must”	and	we	would	have
wasted	all	that	time.	Me	hoarse	and	you	asleep	on	your	feet.’
‘You	sound	almost	regretful,	Priest.’
‘Perhaps	I	am	at	that.	It	was	a	most	poetic	list.’
‘Then	by	all	means	record	it	in	full	when	you	write	your	log	of	this	fell
night.’
‘I	like	that	notion.	Thank	you.	Now,	come	inside,	and	wipe	your	feet.	But
hurry	–	we	have	been	preparing	the	ritual	since	your	ship	docked.’
‘The	breadth	of	your	knowledge	is	impressive,’	Mappo	said	as,	ducking,
he	stepped	inside.
‘Yes,	it	is.	Now,	follow	me.’
A	short	corridor,	ceiling	dripping,	into	a	broader	transept,	across	a	dingy
mosaic	floor,	down	a	second	corridor,	this	one	lined	with	niches,	each	home	to
a	holy	object	–	misshapen	chunks	of	raw	ore,	crystals	of	white,	rose	and	purple
quartz	and	amethyst,	starstones,	amber,	copper,	flint	and	petrified	wood	and
bones.	At	the	end	of	this	passage	the	corridor	opened	out	into	a	wider
colonnaded	main	chamber,	and	here,	arrayed	in	two	rows,	waited	acolytes,
each	wearing	brown	robes	and	holding	aloft	a	torch.
The	acolytes	chanted	in	some	arcane	tongue	as	the	High	Priest	led	Mappo
down	between	the	rows.
Where	an	altar	should	have	been,	at	the	far	end,	there	was	instead	a
crevasse	in	the	floor,	as	if	the	very	earth	had	opened	up	beneath	the	altar,


swallowing	it	and	the	dais	it	stood	on.	From	the	fissure	rose	bitter,	hot	smoke.
The	sad-faced	High	Priest	walked	up	to	its	very	edge	then	turned	to	face
Mappo.	‘Burn’s	Gate	awaits	you,	Trell.’
Mappo	approached	and	looked	down.
To	see	molten	rock	twenty	spans	below,	a	seething	river	sweeping	past.
‘Of	course,’	the	High	Priest	said,	‘what	you	see	is	not	in	this	realm.	Were	it
so,	Darujhistan	would	now	be	a	ball	of	fire	bright	as	a	newborn	sun.	The
caverns	of	gas	and	all	that.’
‘If	I	jump	down	there,’	Mappo	said,	‘I	will	be	roasted	to	a	crisp.’
‘Yes.	I	know	what	you	must	be	thinking.’
‘Oh?’
‘Some	gate.’
‘Ah,	yes.	Accurate	enough.’
‘You	must	be	armoured	against	such	forces.	This	is	the	ritual	I	mentioned
earlier.	Are	you	ready,	Mappo	Runt?’
‘You	wish	to	cast	some	sort	of	protective	spell	on	me?’
‘No,’	he	replied,	with	an	expression	near	to	weeping,	‘we	wish	to	bathe	you
in	blood.’

Barathol	Mekhar	could	see	the	pain	in	Scillara’s	eyes,	when	they	turned	inward
in	a	private	moment,	and	he	saw	how	Chaur	held	himself	close	to	her,
protective	in	some	instinctive	fashion	as	might	be	a	dog	with	a	wounded
master.	When	she	caught	Barathol	studying	her,	she	was	quick	with	a	broad
smile,	and	each	time	he	felt	as	if	something	struck	his	heart,	like	a	fist	against	a
closed	door.	She	was	indeed	a	most	beautiful	woman,	the	kind	of	beauty	that
emerged	after	a	second	look,	or	even	a	third,	unfolding	like	a	dark	flower	in
jungle	shadows.	The	pain	in	those	eyes	only	deepened	his	anguish.
Cutter	was	a	damned	fool.	Yes,	there	had	been	another	woman	–	his	first
love,	most	likely	–	but	she	was	gone.	Time	had	come	to	cut	the	anchor	chain.
No	one	could	drown	for	ever.	This	was	what	came	of	being	so	young,	and
deftness	with	knives	was	a	poor	replacement	for	the	skill	of	surviving
everything	the	world	could	throw	in	the	way.	Longing	for	what	could	never	be
found	was	pointless,	a	waste	of	time.
Barathol	had	left	his	longing	behind,	somewhere	in	the	sands	of	Seven
Cities.	A	sprawl	of	motionless	bodies,	mocking	laughter	disguised	as
unceasing	wind,	a	lizard	perched	like	a	gift	on	a	senseless	black-crusted	hand.
Moments	of	madness	–	oh,	long	before	the	madness	of	the	T’lan	Imass	in	Aren


–	when	he	had	railed	at	remorseless	time,	at	how	too	late	was	something	that
could	not	be	changed	–	not	with	blood	spilled	at	the	foot	of	a	god,	not	with	a
knife	poised	to	carve	out	his	own	heart.	Too	late	simply	grinned	at	him,
lifeless,	too	poignant	for	sanity.
Those	two	words	had	begun	a	chant,	then	stride	by	stride	a	gleeful	echo,
and	they	had	lifted	to	a	roar	in	the	raiders’	camp,	amidst	screams	and	the	clash
of	iron;	lifted,	yes,	into	a	deafening	maelstrom	that	crashed	inside	Barathol’s
skull,	a	surging	tide	with	nowhere	to	go.	Too	late	cannot	be	escaped.	It	crooned
with	every	failed	parry,	every	failed	dodge	from	a	scything	weapon.	It
exploded	in	eyes	as	death	hammered	home,	exploded	along	with	blood	and
fluids.	It	lunged	in	the	wake	of	toppling	bodies.	It	scrawled	messages	(ever	the
same	message)	in	the	sands	dying	men	crawled	across.
He	could	have	chanted	for	ever,	but	he	had	left	no	one	alive.	Oh,	a	dozen
horses	that	he	gave	away	to	a	caravan	some	days	later,	a	gift	for	taking	in	the
half-dead	warrior,	for	treating	his	raging	fever,	for	cleaning	his	wounds	and
burning	out	infection.	They	would	accept	no	payment	for	their	efforts	–	they
could	do	nothing	for	the	bleak	anguish	in	his	soul,	they	explained,	and	so	to
ask	for	anything	would	be	dishonourable.	Now	a	gift,	well,	that	was	different.
In	the	desert	nothing	disguised	time’s	cruel	face.	Its	skin	was	stretched	to
the	bone.	Its	lone	eye	burned	the	sky	and	its	gaping	mouth	was	cold	and	airless
as	a	mountain	peak.	The	traders	understood	this.	They	were	as	much	a	tribe	of
the	desert	as	anyone,	after	all.	They	gave	him	bladders	of	water	–	enough	to
take	him	to	the	nearest	garrison	outpost	–	‘Aye,	give	the	Mezla	that	–	they	know
how	to	build	waystations	and	equip	them	well.	They	turn	no	one	away,	friend.’
They	gave	him	the	strongest	of	the	raiders’	horses,	a	fine	saddle,	jerked
meat	and	dried	fruit.	They	gave	him	feed	for	the	mount	to	last	four	days	and,
finally,	they	showed	him	the	track	he	would	take,	the	path	that	cheated	death	and
yes,	it	was	the	only	one.
Death	stalked	him,	they	said.	Waited,	for	now,	out	beyond	the	glare	of	the
dung-fires,	but	when	Barathol	finally	rode	out	the	reaper	with	the	long	legs
would	set	out	after	him,	singing	of	time,	singing	of	the	hunger	that	never
ended,	never	slowed,	never	did	anything	but	devour	all	in	its	path.
‘When	longing	comes	to	you,	friend,	step	not	into	its	snare,	for	longing	is
the	fatal	bait	–	find	yourself	in	its	snare	and	you	will	be	dragged,	dragged
through	all	the	time	allotted	you,	Barathol	Mekhar,	and	nothing	you	grasp	will
remain,	all	torn	from	your	fingers.	All	that	you	see	will	race	past	in	a	blur.	All
that	you	taste	will	be	less	than	a	droplet,	quickly	stripped	away.	Longing	will
drag	you	into	the	stalker’s	bony	arms,	and	you	will	have	but	a	single,	last	look
back,	on	to	your	life	–	a	moment	of	clarity	that	can	only	be	some	unknown	god’s


most	bitter	gift	–	and	you	will	understand,	all	at	once,	all	that	you	have	wasted,
all	that	you	let	escape,	all	that	you	might	have	had.
‘Now	ride,	friend.	And	’ware	the	traps	of	your	mind.’
Too	late.	Those	two	words	haunted	him,	would	perhaps	for	ever	haunt	him.
The	cruel	chant	had	filled	his	head	when	he’d	looked	down	upon	Chaur ’s
drowned	face.	Too	late!
But	he’d	spat	into	that	gleeful	cry.	That	time,	yes,	he	had.	He	had	said	no
and	he	had	won.
Such	victories	were	without	measure.
Enough	to	hold	a	man	up	for	a	while	longer.	Enough	to	give	him	the
courage	to	meet	a	woman’s	eyes,	to	meet	unflinching	what	he	saw	there…
In	cavorting,	clashing	light,	faces	smeared	past	as	they	walked	through	the
crowd.	Rollicking	songs	in	the	local	tongue,	jars	and	flasks	thrust	at	them	in
drunken	generosity.	Shouted	greetings,	strangers	in	clutches	by	walls,	hands
groping	beneath	disordered	clothing.	The	smell	of	sex	everywhere	–	Barathol
slowed	and	half	turned.
Scillara	was	laughing.	‘You	lead	us	into	most	unusual	places,	Barathol.
This	street	called	out	to	you,	did	it?’
Chaur	was	staring	at	the	nearest	pair,	mouth	hanging	open	as	his	head
unconsciously	began	bobbing	in	time	with	their	rhythmic	thrusts.
‘Gods	below,’	Barathol	muttered.	‘I	wasn’t	paying	much	attention.’
‘So	you	say.	Of	course,	you	were	on	that	boat	for	a	long	time,	pretty	much
alone,	I’d	wager	–	unless	Spite	decided—’
‘No,’	he	cut	in	firmly.	‘Spite	decided	nothing	of	the	sort.’
‘Well	then,	the	city	beckons	with	all	its	carnal	delights!	This	very	street,	in
fact—’
‘Enough	of	that,	please.’
‘You	can’t	think	I’ll	ease	up	on	you,	Barathol?’
Grimacing,	he	squinted	at	Chaur.	‘This	is	disturbing	him—’
‘It	is	not!	It’s	exciting	him,	and	why	wouldn’t	it?’
‘Scillara,	he	may	have	a	man’s	body,	but	his	is	a	child’s	mind.’
Her	smile	went	away	and	she	nodded	thoughtfully.	‘I	know.	Awkward.’
‘Best	we	leave	this,’	Barathol	said.
‘Right.	Let	us	find	somewhere	to	eat	supper	–	we	can	make	plans	there.	But
the	issue	won’t	go	away,	I	suspect	–	he’s	caught	the	scent,	after	all.’
Moving	to	either	side	of	Chaur,	they	turned	him	about	and	began	guiding
him	away.	He	resisted	briefly,	but	then	fell	in	step,	joining	in	with	a	nearby
chorus	of	singers	with	loud,	wordless	sounds	not	quite	matching	their
somewhat	better	efforts.


‘We	really	are	the	lost	ones,	aren’t	we?’	Scillara	said.	‘We	need	to	find
ourselves	a	purpose…in	life.	Aye,	let’s	grasp	our	biggest,	most	glaring	flaw,
shall	we?	Never	mind	what	to	do	tomorrow	or	the	day	after.	What	to	do	with
the	rest	of	our	lives,	now	there’s	a	worthy	question.’
He	groaned.
‘Seriously.	If	you	could	have	anything,	anything	at	all,	Barathol,	what
would	it	be?’
A	second	chance.	‘There’s	no	point	in	that	question,	Scillara.	I’ll	settle	for	a
smithy	and	a	good	day’s	work,	each	and	every	day.	I’ll	settle	for	an	honest	life.’
‘Then	that’s	where	we’ll	start.	A	list	of	necessary	tasks.	Equipment,
location,	Guild	fees	and	all	that.’
She	was	trying	hard,	he	could	see.	Trying	hard	to	keep	her	own	feelings
away	from	this	moment,	and	each	moment	to	come,	for	as	long	as	she	could.
I	accept	no	payment,	Scillara,	but	I	will	take	your	gift.	And	give	you	one	in
turn.	‘Very	well.	I	can	certainly	use	your	help	in	all	that.’
‘Good.	Look,	there’s	a	crowded	courtyard	with	tables	and	I	see	food	and
people	eating.	We	can	stand	over	a	table	until	the	poor	fool	sitting	at	it	leaves.
Shouldn’t	take	long.’
	
Blend	withdrew	her	bared	foot	from	Picker ’s	crotch	and	slowly	sat	straight.
‘Be	subtle,’	she	murmured,	‘but	take	a	look	at	the	trio	that	just	showed	up.’
Picker	scowled.	‘Do	you	always	have	to	make	me	uncomfortable	in	public,
Blend?’
‘Don’t	be	silly.	You’re	positively	glowing—’
‘With	embarrassment,	yes!	And	look	at	Antsy	–	his	face	is	like	a	sun-baked
crabshell.’
‘It’s	always	like	that,’	Blend	said.
‘I	don’t	mind,’	Antsy	said,	licking	his	lips.	‘I	don’t	mind	at	all	what	you	two
get	up	to,	in	public	or	in	that	favourite	room	you	use,	the	one	with	the	thin
walls	and	creaking	floor	and	ill-fitting	door—’
‘A	door	you	were	supposed	to	fix,’	snapped	Picker,	only	now	half	turning
to	take	in	the	newcomers.	She	flinched,	then	huddled	down	over	the	table.
‘Gods	below.	Now,	don’t	that	grizzled	one	look	familiar.’
‘I	been	trying	to	fix	it,	honest.	I	work	on	it	all	the	time—’
‘You	work	all	right,	with	one	eye	pressed	to	the	crack,’	Blend	said.	‘You
think	we	don’t	know	you’re	there,	sweating	and	grunting	as	you—’
‘Be	quiet!’	Picker	hissed.	‘Didn’t	you	two	hear	me?	I	said—’
‘He	looks	just	like	Kalam	Mekhar,	aye,’	Antsy	said,	poking	with	his	knife


at	the	chicken	carcass	on	the	platter	in	the	centre	of	the	table.	‘But	he’s	not
Kalam,	is	he?	Too	tall,	too	big,	too	friendly-looking.’	He	frowned	and	tugged
at	his	moustache.	‘Who	was	it	said	we	should	eat	here	tonight?’
‘That	bard,’	said	Picker.
‘Our	bard?’
‘For	the	rest	of	the	week,	aye.’
‘He	recommended	it?’
‘He	said	we	should	eat	here	tonight,	is	what	he	said.	Is	that	a
recommendation?	Might	be.	But	maybe	not.	He’s	an	odd	one.	Anyway,	he	said
it	would	be	open	till	dawn.’
‘The	chicken	was	too	scrawny.	And	I	don’t	know	who	they	got	to	pluck	the
damned	thing,	but	I’m	still	chewing	on	feathers.’
‘You	were	supposed	to	avoid	the	feet,	Antsy,’	said	Blend.	‘They	didn’t	even
wash	those.’
‘Of	course	they	did!’	Antsy	protested.	‘That	was	sauce—’
‘The	sauce	was	red.	The	stuff	on	the	feet	was	dark	brown.	Want	something
to	get	embarrassed	about,	Picker,	just	drag	Antsy	along	to	supper.’
‘The	feet	was	the	best	part,’	the	Falari	said.
‘He’s	Seven	Cities	for	sure,’	Picker	noted.	‘All	three	of	them,	I’d	wager.’
‘The	fat	one	likes	her	rustleaf.’
‘If	she’s	fat,	Antsy,	then	so	am	I.’
Antsy	looked	away.
Picker	cuffed	him	on	the	side	of	the	head.
‘Ow,	what	was	that	for?’
‘I	wear	armour	and	quilted	underpadding,	remember?’
‘Well,	she’s	not,	is	she?’
‘She’s	delicious,’	Blend	observed.	‘And	I	bet	she	don’t	get	embarrassed	by
anything	much.’
Picker	offered	her	a	sweet	smile.	‘Why	not	go	stick	your	foot	in	and	see?’
‘Ooh,	jealous.’
Antsy	sat	up,	suddenly	excited.	‘If	your	legs	was	long	enough,	Blend,	you
could	do	both!	And	I	could—’
Two	knives	slammed	point	first	into	the	table	in	front	of	the	ex-sergeant.
His	bushy	brows	shot	upward,	eyes	bulging.	‘Just	an	idea,’	he	muttered.	‘No
reason	to	get	all	uppity,	you	two.’
‘Could	be	he’s	another	Kalam,’	Picker	said.	‘A	Claw.’
Antsy	choked	on	something,	coughed,	hacked,	then	managed	a	breath.	He
leaned	forward	until	he	was	very	nearly	lying	on	the	table	from	the	chest	up.
He	chewed	on	his	moustache	for	a	moment,	eyes	darting	between	Picker	and


Blend.	‘Listen,	if	he	is,	then	we	should	kill	him.’
‘Why?’
‘Could	be	he’s	hunting	us,	Picker.	Could	be	he’s	come	to	finish	off	the
Bridgeburners	once	and	for	all.’
‘Why	would	any	of	them	care?’	Picker	asked.
‘Maybe	the	bard	set	us	up,	did	you	think	of	that?’
Blend	sighed	and	rose.	‘How	about	I	just	go	up	and	ask	him?’
‘You	want	to	take	a	grab	at	a	tit,’	Picker	said,	smiling	again.	‘So,	go	ahead,
Blend.	Go	on.	See	if	she	blows	you	a	kiss.’
Shrugging,	Blend	set	out	to	where	the	three	newcomers	had	just	acquired	a
table.
Antsy	choked	again,	plucked	at	Picker ’s	sleeve	and	gasped,	‘She’s	heading
straight	over!’
Picker	licked	her	lips.	‘I	didn’t	really	mean—’
‘She’s	almost	there	–	they	seen	her	–	don’t	turn	round!’
	
Barathol	saw	the	Malazan	threading	her	way	to	where	they	now	sat.	By	hue	of
skin,	by	cast	of	features,	by	any	obvious	measure	one	might	find,	there	was
nothing	that	differentiated	the	woman	from	any	local	Daru	or	Genabarii;	yet	he
knew,	instantly.	A	Malazan,	and	a	veteran.	A	damned	marine.
Scillara	noted	his	attention	and	half	turned	in	her	chair.	‘Good	taste,
Barathol	–	and	it	seems	she	likes—’
‘Quiet,’	Barathol	muttered.
The	slim	woman	came	up,	soft	brown	eyes	fixed	on	Barathol.	And	in
Malazan,	she	said,	‘I	knew	Kalam.’
He	snorted.	‘Yes,	he’s	a	popular	man.’
‘Cousin?’
He	shrugged.	‘That	will	do.	Are	you	with	the	embassy?’
‘No.	Are	you?’
Barathol’s	eyes	narrowed.	Then	he	shook	his	head.	‘We	arrived	today.	I
never	directly	served	in	your	empire.’
She	seemed	to	think	about	that.	Then	she	nodded.	‘We’re	retired.	Causing
no	trouble	to	anyone.’
‘Sounds	retired	indeed.’
‘We	run	a	bar.	K’rul’s,	in	the	Estates	District,	near	Worry	Gate.’
‘And	how	does	it	fare?’
‘Slow	to	start,	but	we’re	settled	in	now.	Getting	by.’
‘That’s	good.’


‘Come	by,	I’ll	set	you	the	first	round.’
‘We	just	might.’
She	glanced	down	at	Scillara	then,	and	winked.	Then	turned	away	and
walked	back	to	her	table.
‘What	just	happened?’	Scillara	asked	after	a	moment.
Barathol	smiled.	‘Do	you	mean	the	wink	or	all	the	rest?’
‘I	figured	out	the	wink,	thank	you.	The	rest.’
‘They’re	deserters,	I’d	wager.	Worried	that	we	might	be	imperial.	That	I
might	be	a	Claw,	come	to	deliver	a	message	from	the	Empress	–	the	usual
message	to	deserters.	They	knew	Kalam	Mekhar,	a	relation	of	mine,	who	was
once	a	Claw,	and	then	a	Bridgeburner.’
‘A	Bridgeburner.	I’ve	heard	about	them.	The	nastiest	company	ever.	Started
in	Seven	Cities	and	then	left	with	Dujek.’
‘The	same.’
‘So	they	thought	you	were	here	to	kill	them.’
‘Yes.’
‘So	one	of	them	just	decided	to	walk	up	and	talk	to	you.	That	seems	either
incredibly	brave	or	profoundly	stupid.’
‘The	former,’	said	Barathol.	‘About	what	you’d	expect	from	a
Bridgeburner,	deserter	or	otherwise.’
Scillara	twisted	round,	quite	deliberately,	to	study	the	two	women	and	the
red-bearded	man	at	the	table	on	the	other	side	of	the	plaza.	And	did	not	flinch
from	the	steady	regard	they	then	fixed	on	her.
Amused,	Barathol	waited	until	Scillara	slowly	swung	back	and	reached	for
her	jar	of	wine,	before	saying,	‘Speaking	of	brave…’
‘Oh,	I	just	don’t	go	for	that	kowtowing	stuff.’
‘I	know.’
‘So	do	they,	now.’
‘Right.	Shall	we	join	them,	then?’
Scillara	suddenly	grinned.	‘Tell	you	what,	let’s	buy	them	a	pitcher,	then
watch	and	see	if	they	drink	from	it.’
‘Gods,	woman,	you	play	sharp	games.’
‘Nah,	it’s	just	flirting.’
‘With	what?’
Her	smile	broadened,	and	she	gestured	over	a	nearby	server.
	
‘Now	what?’	Antsy	demanded.
‘Guess	they’re	thirsty,’	Picker	said.


‘It’s	that	quiet	one	who	worries	me,’	Antsy	continued.	‘He’s	got	that	blank
look,	like	the	worst	kinda	killer.’
‘He’s	a	simpleton,	Antsy,’	said	Blend.
‘Worst	kinda	killer	there	is.’
‘Oh,	really.	He’s	addled,	a	child’s	brain	–	look	how	he	looks	round	at
everything.	Look	at	that	silly	grin.’
‘It’s	probably	an	act,	Blend.	Tell	her,	Pick,	it’s	an	act.	That’s	your	Claw,
right	there,	the	one	that’s	gonna	kill	us	starting	with	me,	since	I	ain’t	never	had
no	luck,	except	the	pushin’	kind.	My	skin’s	all	clammy	already,	like	I	was
practising	being	a	corpse.	It’s	no	fun,	being	a	corpse	–	take	it	from	me.’
‘That	explains	the	fingernails,’	Blend	said.
Antsy	frowned	at	her.
The	server	who	had	just	been	at	the	other	table	now	arrived,	delivering	a
large	clay	jar.	‘Wine,’	she	said.	‘Compliments	of	them	three	o’er	there.’
Picker	snorted.	‘Oh,	that’s	cute.	And	now	they	want	to	see	if	we	drink	from
it.	Get	that	wench	back	here,	Blend.	Buy	them	a	bottle	of	white	apricot	nectar.
Returning	the	favour,	like.’
Blend	rolled	her	eyes.	‘This	could	get	expensive,’	she	said	as	she	rose.
‘I	ain’t	drinkin’	from	nothing	I	didn’t	buy	myself,’	Antsy	said.	‘We	shoulda
brought	Bluepearl,	he	could’ve	sniffed	out	whatever.	Or	Mallet.	They	got
poisons	so	secret	here	there’s	no	taste,	no	smell,	the	one	drop	that	kills	ya	don’t
even	feel	wet.	Why,	all	you	need	to	do	is	look	in	its	direction!’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	going	on	about,	Antsy?’
‘You	heard	me,	Pick—’
‘Pour	me	some	of	this	wine,	then.	Let’s	see	if	they	got	good	taste.’
‘I	ain’t	touching	that	jar,	could	be	powdered	with	something—’
‘Only	if	the	wench	was	in	on	it.	If	she	wasn’t	and	there	was,	she’d	be	dead,
right?’
‘She	don’t	look	too	healthy	to	me.’
‘You’d	look	pretty	rough	too	with	all	the	cysts	she’s	got	on	her	head	and
neck.’
‘Some	Daru	poisons	show	up	as	knobby	lumps—’
‘Gods	below,	Antsy!’	Picker	reached	across	and	collected	the	jar,	filled	her
goblet.	Drank	down	a	mouthful	of	the	amber	liquid.	‘There.	Not	half	bad.	We
got	better	in	our	cellar,	I’m	pleased	to	say.’
Antsy	was	studying	her	with	slightly	bulging	eyes.
Blend	returned,	sank	into	a	slouch	in	her	chair.	‘On	its	way,’	she	said.	‘How
was	the	wine,	Pick?’
‘Passing.	Want	some?’


‘All	this	trudging	back	and	forth	has	worked	up	a	fierce	thirst,	so	fill	it	up,
darling.’
‘You’re	both	suicidal,’	Antsy	said.
‘We’re	not	the	ones	feeling	clammy,	are	we?’
‘There	are	some	poisons,’	Picker	said,	‘that	kill	the	person	next	to	the	one
who	took	it.’
The	ex-sergeant	lurched	back	in	his	chair.	‘Damn	you	–	I	heard	of	those	–
you	killed	me!’
‘Calm	down,’	Blend	interjected.	‘She	was	teasing	you,	Antsy.	Honest.
Right,	Picker?’
‘Well…’
‘If	you	don’t	want	his	knife	in	your	throat,	Pick,	tell	him	quick.’
‘Aye,	a	jibe.	A	jest.	Teasing,	nothing	more.	Besides,	if	you’re	naturally
clammy,	you’re	immune.’
‘You	must	think	me	an	idiot,	Pick.	Both	of	you!’	When	neither	objected	to
that	assertion	the	Falari	snarled	and	took	the	jar	from	Blend,	raised	it	defiantly
to	his	mouth	and	downed	the	rest	of	the	contents	in	a	cascade	of	gulps,	his
oversized	apple	bobbing	as	if	he	was	trying	to	swallow	a	cork.
‘A	fearless	idiot,’	Blend	said,	shaking	her	head.
Antsy	sucked	on	his	moustache	ends	for	a	moment,	then	thumped	the	empty
jar	on	to	the	tabletop.	He	belched.
They	watched	as	the	wench	delivered	the	bottle	of	white	apricot	nectar.	A
brief	conversation	with	the	woman	ensued,	whereupon	she	flounced	off	with	a
toss	of	her	knobby	head.	The	pleasantly	plump	woman	and	the	Mekhar	both
poured	a	healthy	measure	of	the	liquor.	With	a	bold	toast	in	the	Malazans’
direction,	they	sipped.
‘Look	at	that,’	Blend	said,	smiling,	‘such	handsome	shades	of	green.’
And	the	woman	was	on	her	feet,	was	marching	over.
Antsy	set	a	hand	on	the	grip	of	his	shortsword.
In	Malazan	tainted	with	the	accent	of	Seven	Cities,	the	woman	–	with	a	hard
frown	–	said,	‘You	trying	to	kill	us	or	something?	That	was	awful!’
‘It	gets	better,’	Blend	said	with	an	innocent	blink.
‘Really?	And	when	would	that	be?’
‘Well,	embalmers	swear	by	it.’
The	woman	snorted.	‘Damned	Mezla.	This	is	war,	you	know.’	And	she	spun
about	and	walked,	a	little	unsteadily,	back	to	her	table.
The	server	was	simply	waiting	in	the	wings,	it	turned	out,	as	she	arrived	at
the	table	moments	after	the	Seven	Cities	woman	sank	down	into	her	chair.
More	conversation.	Another	toss	of	the	head,	and	off	she	trundled.


The	bottle	she	showed	up	with	was	of	exquisite	multihued	glass,	shaped
like	some	giant	insect.
‘This	is	for	you!’	the	server	snapped.	‘And	I	ain’t	playing	no	more	no
matter	how	much	you	tip	me.	Think	I	can’t	work	this	out?	Two	women	and	a
man	here,	one	woman	and	two	men	o’er	there!	You	are	all	disgusting	and	when
I	tell	the	manager,	well,	banning	the	likes	of	you	won’t	hurt	us	none,	will	it?’	A
whirl,	nose	in	the	air,	and	a	most	impressive	stalk	to	the	restaurant’s	nether
regions	or	wherever	it	was	managers	squatted	in	the	nervous	gloom	common
to	their	kind.
The	three	Malazans	said	nothing	for	a	long	time,	each	with	eyes	fixed	upon
that	misshapen	bottle.
Then	Picker,	licking	dry	lips,	asked,	‘Male	or	female?’
‘Female,’	Antsy	said	in	a	thin,	grating	voice,	as	if	being	squeezed	from
below.	‘Should	smell…sweet.’
Clearing	her	throat,	Blend	said,	‘They	just	won	the	war,	didn’t	they?’
Picker	looked	at	her.	‘A	damned	slaughter,	too.’
Antsy	moaned.	‘We	got	to	drink	it,	don’t	we?’
The	two	women	nodded.
‘Well,’	he	said,	‘I	once	plunged	straight	into	a	squad	of	Crimson	Guard—’
‘You	fell	out	of	the	tree—’
‘—and	made	it	out	alive.	And	I	once	stood	down	a	charging	wild	boar—’
‘Wasn’t	wild,	Antsy.	It	was	Trotts’s	pet,	and	you	made	a	grunt	that	sounded
just	like	a	sow.’
‘—and	at	the	last	moment	I	jumped	right	over	it—’
‘It	threw	you	into	a	wall.’
‘—so	if	anyone	here’s	got	the	guts	to	start,	it’s	me.’	And	with	that	he
reached	for	the	bottle	of	Quorl	Milk.	Paused	to	study	the	sigil	on	the	stopper.
‘Green	Moranth.	The	cheap	brand.	Figures.’
The	normal	dosage	was	a	thimbleful.	Sold	exclusively	to	women	who
wanted	to	get	pregnant.	Maybe	it	worked,	maybe	it	didn’t.	Maybe	all	it	did	was
shock	the	body	into	pregnancy	–	anything	to	avoid	another	taste	of	that	stuff.
Picker	drew	out	a	pale	handkerchief	and	waved	it	over	her	head.	They’d
have	to	offer	them	rooms	now,	at	least	a	week’s	stay,	she	judged.	Us	Mezla	just
got	trounced.	Gods,	it’s	about	time	we	met	folk	worth	meeting.
Makes	it	almost	worth	drinking	Quorl	Milk.
Antsy	drank	down	a	mouthful	then	set	the	bottle	down.	And	promptly
passed	out.	Crumpling	like	a	man	without	bones,	except	for	his	head	which
crunched	audibly	on	the	cobbles.
Almost	worth	it.	Sighing,	she	reached	for	the	bottle.	To	Blend	she	said,


‘Good	thing	your	foot’s	been	neutered,	love.’
‘Don’t	you	mean	sterile?’
‘I	ain’t	that	delusional,’	Picker	replied.	‘Be	sure	they	promise	to	hire	us	all
a	carriage,	before	you	drink,	Blend.’
‘I	will.	See	you	tomorrow,	sweetie.’
‘Aye.’
	
Crone	circled	the	edge,	fixing	one	eye	then	the	other	on	the	strange	apparition
swirling	above	the	enchanted	dais.	The	power	of	the	High	Alchemist’s	sorcery
was	as	sweet	and	intoxicating	as	the	pollen	of	d’bayang	poppies,	but	that	which
came	from	the	demon	was	foul,	alien	–	yet,	the	Great	Raven	knew,	not	quite	as
alien	as	it	should	be.	Not	to	her	and	her	kind,	that	is.
‘You	are	bold,’	she	said	to	Baruk,	who	stood	facing	the	dais	with	hands
folded.	‘And	the	reach	of	your	power,	and	will,	is	most	impressive.’
‘Thank	you,’	replied	the	High	Alchemist,	squinting	at	the	demon	he	had
conjured	and	then	trapped.	‘Our	conversations	have	been…most	enlightening.
Of	course,	what	we	see	here	is	not	a	true	physical	manifestation.	A	soul,	I
believe,	disconnected	from	its	corporeal	self.’
‘With	eyes	of	jade,’	Crone	noted,	beak	opening	in	silent	laughter.	She
hesitated,	then	asked,	‘What	has	it	told	you?’
Baruk	smiled.
From	the	mantel	above	the	fireplace	Chillbais	wheezed	derisively	and
made	insulting	gestures	with	its	stubby	hands.
‘You	should	spike	that	thing	to	a	wall,’	Crone	hissed.	‘At	the	very	least	send
it	back	up	the	chimney	and	thus	out	of	my	sight.’
Baruk	spoke	as	if	he	had	not	heard	Crone’s	complaining:	‘Its	body	is	very
far	away	indeed.	I	was	granted	an	image	of	the	flesh	–	a	human,	as	far	as	I
could	tell,	which	is	in	itself	rather	extraordinary.	I	was	able	to	capture	the	soul
due	to	its	heightened	meditative	state,	one	in	which	the	detachment	is	very
nearly	absolute.	I	doubt	the	original	body	draws	breath	ten	times	a	bell.	A	most
spiritual	individual,	Crone.’
The	Great	Raven	returned	her	attention	to	the	apparition.	Studied	its	jade
eyes,	its	jagged	traceries	of	crackling	filaments,	pulsing	like	a	slowed	heart.
‘And	you	know,	then,’	she	said.
‘Yes.	The	demon	is	from	the	realm	of	the	Fallen	One.	His	birthplace.’
‘Meditating,	you	say.	Seeking	its	god?’
‘That	seems	likely,’	Baruk	murmured.	‘Reaching,	touching…recoiling.’
‘From	the	agony,	from	the	ferocious	fires	of	pain.’


‘I	will	send	it	home,	soon.’
Crone	half	spread	her	wings	and	hopped	down	on	to	the	tiles.	Cocking	her
head,	she	fixed	an	eye	upon	the	High	Alchemist.	‘This	is	not	simple	curiosity.’
Baruk	blinked,	then	turned	away.	‘I	had	a	guest,	not	so	long	ago.’
‘In	truth?’
The	High	Alchemist	paused,	then	shook	his	head.	‘Half-truth.’
‘Did	he	sit	in	a	chair?’
‘Well	now,	that	would	hardly	be	appropriate,	Crone.’
She	laughed.	‘Shadowthrone.’
‘Please,	do	not	act	surprised,’	Baruk	said.	‘Your	master	is	well	aware	of
such	matters.	Tell	me,	where	are	the	rest	of	them?’
‘Them?’
‘The	gods	and	goddesses.	The	ones	cringing	every	time	the	Crippled	God
clears	his	throat.	So	eager	for	this	war,	as	long	as	someone	else	does	the
fighting.	None	of	this	should	be	set	at	your	Lord’s	feet.	I	don’t	know	what
Shadowthrone	has	offered	Anomander	Rake,	but	you	would	do	well	to	warn
your	master,	Crone.	With	Shadow,	nothing	is	as	it	seems.	Nothing.’
The	Great	Raven	cackled,	then	said,	‘So	true,	so	true.’	And	now	it	was	his
turn,	she	noted,	to	regard	her	with	growing	suspicion.	‘Oh,	Baruk,	people	raise
standing	stones,	one	after	another,	only	to	topple	them	down	one	by	one.	Is	it
not	always	the	way?	They	dig	holes	only	to	fill	them	in	again.	As	for	us	Great
Ravens,	why,	we	build	nests	only	to	tear	them	apart	next	season,	all	because	the
mad	lizard	in	our	skulls	demands	it.	See	your	demon	on	the	dais.	It	pays
nothing	to	be	spiritual,	when	it	is	the	flesh	that	ever	clamours	for	attention.	So
send	him	back,	yes,	that	he	can	begin	to	repair	all	the	severed	tendons	–	whilst
his	comrades	witness	the	distance	of	his	gaze,	and	wonder,	and	yearn	to	find
the	same	otherworldliness	for	themselves,	fools	that	they	all	are.
‘Have	you	exhorted	him	to	pray	all	the	harder,	Baruk?	I	thought	as	much,
but	it’s	no	use,	I	tell	you,	and	who	better	to	make	such	judgement?	And
consider	this:	my	master	is	not	blind.	He	has	never	been	blind.	He	stands	before
a	towering	stone,	yes,	and	would	see	it	toppled.	So,	old	friend,	be	sure	to	stay	a
safe	distance.’
‘How	can	I?’	the	High	Alchemist	retorted.
‘Send	the	soul	home,’	Crone	said	again.	‘Look	to	the	threat	that	even	now
creeps	closer	in	the	night,	that	is	but	moments	from	plucking	the	strands	of
your	highest	wards	–	to	announce	her	arrival,	yes,	to	evince	her…desperation.’
She	hopped	towards	the	nearest	window	sill.	‘For	myself,	I	must	now	depart,
yes,	winging	away	most	quickly.’
‘A	moment.	You	have	lingered,	Crone,	in	search	of	something.	And	it


seems	you	have	found	it.’
‘I	have,’	she	replied,	cackling	again.
‘Well?’
‘Only	confirmation,	to	ease	my	master ’s	mind.’
‘Confirmation?	Ah,	that	Shadowthrone	spoke	true.’
A	third	cackle	from	the	sill	–	as	threes	were	ever	preferable	to	pairs,	not
that	Crone	was	superstitious	of	course	–	but	if	only	two,	then	a	third	would
sound	somewhere,	and	might	that	one	not	be	at	her	own	expense?	Not	to	be,	oh
no,	not	to	be!	‘Farewell,	Baruk!’
	
Moments	after	he	closed	the	window	in	the	wake	of	that	oily	black-tarred	hen,
Chillbais	lifted	his	head	and	cried	out:	‘She	comes!	She	comes!’
‘Yes,’	Baruk	sighed.
‘Deadly	woman!’
‘Not	this	time,	little	one.	Fly	to	Derudan,	and	quickly.	Tell	her,	from	me,
that	the	one	who	once	hunted	us	has	returned.	To	discuss	matters.	Further,
Chillbais,	invite	Derudan	to	join	us	as	soon	as	she	is	able.	She	will	understand,
I	am	sure,	the	need.’
Chillbais	flapped	(well,	mostly	fell)	to	the	floor	in	front	of	the	fireplace,
then	scrambled	into	the	embers	and	vanished	up	the	chimney.
Baruk	frowned	at	the	conjured	demon	spinning	above	the	dais;	then,	with	a
single	gesture,	he	released	the	spirit,	watching	as	the	swirling	energy	dwindled,
then	winked	out.	Go	home,	lost	one.	With	my	blessing.
And	then	he	stood,	facing	the	wall	she	would	come	through.
Stood,	awaiting	Vorcan.
No	longer	afraid	of	her.
No,	the	terror	he	was	feeling	belonged	instead	to	her	reason	for	coming.
As	for	the	Mistress	of	Assassins	herself,	damn	but	he	had	harsh	words	awaiting
her.
You	killed	the	others,	woman.	All	but	myself	and	Derudan.	Yes,	only	the
three	of	us	left.	Only	three.
To	stop,	if	we	can,	the	return	of	the	Tyrant.
Oh,	Vorcan,	you	toppled	far	too	many	stones	that	night.
Should	he	have	asked	Anomander	Rake	for	help?	Gods	below,	it	had	been
as	close	to	offered	him	as	it	could	have	been,	if	he	understood	Crone	and	he
was	sure	that	he	did	–	at	least	in	that	matter.	And	if	he	chose	to	accept	that	offer,
should	he	tell	Derudan	and	Vorcan?	How	could	he	not?
Neither	would	be	pleased,	he	was	sure.	Especially	Vorcan.	And	their	fragile


(and	yes,	it	would	be	most	fragile)	alliance	might	die	in	the	very	moments	of
its	birth.
Oh,	Baruk,	be	open,	be	honest	with	them	both.	Ask	them.	Simple	as	that.
Yet,	even	as	he	saw	the	wall	before	him	blurring,	seeming	to	melt,	a	figure
slowly,	cautiously	stepping	through,	he	knew	he	would	not.	Could	not.
There	were	but	three	of	them	left,	now.	Not	enough	to	stop	the	Tyrant’s
return.	Even	with	Rake’s	help…not	enough.
Which	means	one	of	us	will	choose	to	betray	the	others.	Currying	favour
for	when	He	returns.	Favour,	well.	Bargaining	to	stay	alive	would	be	more
accurate.
One	of	us	will	betray	the	others.
Maybe	Derudan.	Maybe	this	one	here.
Gods,	maybe	me.
	
He	stood	thirty	paces	up	the	street.	Beneath	the	hood	his	eyes	held	unwavering
on	the	ill-lit	entrance	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.	On	the	old	steps,	on	the	tattered	sign
still	hanging	misaligned	above	the	inset	door.	For	a	hundred	heartbeats	he	had
watched,	as	figures	entered,	others	left	–	no	one	as	yet	familiar	to	him,	as	if	in
his	absence	all	that	he	had	known	had	vanished,	melted	away,	and	now
strangers	sat	where	he	had	once	sat.	Held	tankards	he	had	once	held.	Smiled	at
the	servers	and	flung	out	over-familiar	suggestions	as	they	swayed	past.
Cutter	imagined	himself	inside,	imagined	the	resentment	there	on	his	face
as	he	looked	upon	a	score	or	more	intruders,	invaders	into	his	own	memories,
each	one	crowding	him,	trying	to	push	him	out.	And	on,	to	whatever	new	life
he	had	found,	which	was	not	in	the	Phoenix	Inn.	Not	even	in	Darujhistan.
There	was	no	returning.	He	had	known	that	all	along,	at	least	intellectually,
but	only	now,	as	he	stood	here,	did	the	full	realization	descend	upon	him,	a
burden	of	such	emotion	that	he	felt	crushed	by	it.	And	was	it	not	equally	true
that	the	man	behind	the	eyes	was	not	the	same	man	from	those	years	past?	How
could	he	not	see	it	differently,	with	all	that	he	had	been	through,	with	all	that	he
had	seen	and	felt?
His	heart	thundered	in	his	chest.	Each	drumming	thud,	he	now	understood,
was,	once	done,	never	to	return.	Even	the	repetition	was	in	truth	nothing	but	an
illusion,	a	sleight	of	similitude.	It	might	be	a	comfort	to	pretend	that	the
machinery	never	changed,	that	each	pulse	and	swirl	was	identical,	that	a	man
could	leap	back	and	then	forward	in	his	mind	and	no	matter	where	he	ended	up
all	that	he	saw	would	remain	the	same.	Fixed	like	certainty.
The	rough	stones	of	the	dank	walls.	The	quality	of	the	yellow	light


bleeding	from	the	pitted	glass	window.	Even	the	susurration	of	sound,	the
voices,	the	clank	of	pewter	and	fired	clay,	the	very	laughter	spilling	out	as	the
door	was	opened,	spilling	out	sour	as	bile	as	far	as	Cutter	was	concerned.
Who	was	left	in	there	that	he	might	recognize?	The	faces	tugged	a	little
older,	shoulders	a	fraction	more	hunched,	eyes	framed	in	the	wrinkled	map	of
the	weary.	Would	they	light	upon	seeing	him?	Would	they	even	know	him?	And
even	then,	after	the	slapped	backs	and	embraces,	would	he	see	something
gauging	come	into	their	eyes,	painting	colourless	their	words,	a	certain
distance	widening	with	every	drawn-out	moment	that	followed?
The	faintest	scrape	of	a	boot	two	paces	behind	him.	Spinning	round,
ducking	low	as	he	did	so,	daggers	flashing	in	both	hands.	Left	blade	half
raised,	point	downward,	into	a	guard	position.	Right	blade	darting	out	in	a
stop-thrust—
—and	the	figure	leaned	back	with	a	soft	grunt	of	surprise,	tjaluk	knife
snapping	out	from	beneath	a	cloak	to	block	the	dagger—
Cutter	twisted	his	wrist	to	fold	into	that	parry,	flicking	his	blade’s	edge	into
a	deep	slice	across	the	base	of	the	attacker ’s	gloved	palm,	even	as	he	lunged
forward	–	staying	low	–	and	slashed	his	left-hand	dagger	for	the	indent	beneath
his	foe’s	right	kneecap.
Avoiding	that	attack	very	nearly	toppled	the	man	straight	into	Cutter ’s
arms,	but	Cutter	had	already	slipped	past,	slicing	both	blades	for	thigh,	then
hip,	as	he	darted	by	on	the	man’s	left.
Amazingly,	that	heavy	tjaluk	caught	every	slash	–	and	another	of	the
oversized,	hooked	knives	now	appeared	in	the	man’s	other	hand,	straightening
in	a	back-flung	stop-thrust	in	case	Cutter	pivoted	round	to	take	him	from
behind.	Cutter	was	forced	to	pitch	hard	to	evade	that	damned	fend,	and,
balanced	on	one	leg,	he	threw	the	dagger	in	his	left	hand,	side-arm,	launching
the	weapon	straight	for	the	man’s	shadowed	face—
Sparks	as	–	impossibly	–	the	man	batted	the	flying	weapon	aside.
A	new	knife	already	in	that	hand,	Cutter	made	to	launch	yet	another	attack	–
then	he	skidded	on	his	heels	and	leaned	back	into	an	all-out	defence	as	the	man
came	forward,	his	heavy	knives	whirling	a	skein	before	him.
Two	of	those?	Two?
‘Wait!’	Cutter	cried	out.	‘Wait!	Rallick?	Rallick?’
The	tjaluks	withdrew.	Blood	spattered	down	from	the	one	in	the	right	hand
–	where	the	palm	had	been	laid	open.	Dark	eyes	glittered	from	beneath	the
hood.
‘Rallick	–	it’s	me.	Cut—Crokus!	Crokus	Younghand!’
‘As	I’d	first	thought,’	came	the	rumbling	reply,	‘only	to	change	my	mind,


in	a	hurry.	But	now,	yes,	it	is	you.	Older	–	gods,	I	have	indeed	been	away	a
long	time.’
‘I	cut	your	hand	–	I’m	sorry—’
‘Not	half	as	sorry	as	me,	Crokus.	You	are	in	the	Guild	now,	aren’t	you?
Who	has	trained	you?	Not	Seba	Krafar,	that’s	for	sure.	I	don’t	recognize	the
style	at	all—’
‘What?	No,	no	Guild.	Not	anything	like	that,	Rallick.	I’ve	been	–	wait,	you
said	you’ve	been	gone?	From	Darujhistan?	Where?	How	long?	Not	since	that
night	behind	Coll’s?	But—’
‘Aye,’	Rallick	cut	in,	‘it’s	you	all	right.’
‘Gods	below,’	Cutter	said,	‘but	it’s	so	good	to	see	you,	Rallick	Nom.	I
mean,	if	I’d	known	it	was	you	at	first	–	you	shouldn’t	come	up	on	a	man	from
behind	like	that.	I	could’ve	killed	you!’
The	assassin	stood	studying	him.
Suddenly	trembling,	Cutter	sheathed	his	knives,	then	began	looking	around
for	the	one	he’d	thrown.	‘Two	of	those	pig-choppers	–	who	else	would	use
those?	I	should’ve	realized	when	I	saw	the	first	one.	I’m	so	sorry,	Rallick.
Instincts	took	over.	They	just…took	over.’
‘You	did	not	heed	my	warning,	then.’
Years	ago,	those	dark,	angry	words,	but	Cutter	did	not	need	to	ask	what
warning?	He	remembered	it	all	too	well.	‘I	would	have,’	he	said,	pausing	in	his
search.	‘Truly,	Rallick.	I	went	with	the	Malazans,	you	see,	and	Apsalar.	Fiddler,
Kalam,	the	four	of	us,	to	Seven	Cities.	Where	everything…changed.’
‘When	did	you	return,	Crokus?’
‘Today.	Tonight.’	He	glanced	ruefully	at	the	entrance	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.
‘I’ve	not	even	gone	inside	yet.	It’s…changed	–	aye,	that	word	is	already
starting	to	haunt	me.’	He	resumed	his	hunt.	‘I	suppose	I	should	have	expected	it
–	where	in	Hood’s	name	did	that	knife	go,	dammit?’
Rallick	leaned	back	against	a	wall.	‘The	one	you	aimed	at	my	throat?’
‘Yes	–	I’m	so—’
‘Yes,	you’re	sorry.	Well,	you	won’t	find	it	down	there.	Try	my	left
shoulder.’
	
‘Oh,	the	thickness	of	blood!	Darujhistan	and	her	hundred	thousand	hearts	and
each	and	every	one	beats	for	none	other	than	this	hale,	most	generous	resident
of	the	Phoenix	Inn!	Seated	here	at	this	most	grand	of	tables	–	although	surely
Meese	should	attend	to	this	wobbly	leg	–	nay,	not	mine,	though	that	would	be
delicious	indeed	and	well	beyond	common	service	in	said	establishment	–	with


–	where	was	Kruppe?	Oh	yes,	with	nary	fell	company	to	jiggle	awake	the
night!	Tell	prescient	Kruppe,	yon	friends,	why	the	glowing	faces	belied	by
fretful	eyes?	Did	Kruppe	not	promise	boons	galore?	Pressures	eased?	Panics
prevented?	Purses	packed	with	precious	baubles	all	aglitter?	Drink	up	–	oh,
humble	apologies,	we	shall	order	more	anon,	’tis	a	promise	most	pertinent
should	one	elect	to	toast	this,	that	and,	perchance,	t’other!’
‘We	got	news,’	Scorch	said,	looking	surprised	by	his	own	words,	‘and	if
you’d	just	shut	your	trap,	you’d	hear	about	it	too.’
‘News!	Why,	Kruppe	is	news	personified.	Details,	analysis,	reactions	from
common	folk	in	the	street,	all	in	the	blink	of	an	eye	and	the	puff	of	a	single
breath,	who	needs	more?	This	new	madness	we	must	witness	now	weekly	and
all	the	bolts	of	burlap	wasted	on	which	some	purple	fool	blathers	all	manner	of
foul	gossip,	why,	’tis	nothing	but	rags	for	the	ragman,	or	wipes	for	the	arsewipes	or	indeed	blots	for	the	blotters	bless	their	feminine	wiles	–	Kruppe	rails
at	this	elevation	of	circumstance	and	incidence!	A	profession,	the	fops	now
claim,	as	if	baying	hounds	need	certification	to	justify	their	slavering	barks
and	snarls!	Whatever	happened	to	common	decency?	To	decent	commonry?
What’s	decent	is	rarely	common	–	that	is	true	enough,	while	the	obverse	is
perverse	in	all	prickly	irony,	would	you	not	agree?	Kruppe	would,	being	such
an	agreeable	sort—’
‘We	found	Torvald	Nom!’
Kruppe	blinked	at	Leff,	then	at	Scorch,	then	–	seeing	perhaps	the	disbelief
mirrored	in	the	face	of	the	latter	–	back	to	Leff.	‘Extraordinary!	And	did	you
horribly	hand	him	over	to	hirsute	Gareb	the	Lender?’
Scorch	growled	under	his	breath.
‘We	worked	out	a	better	deal,’	said	Leff,	licking	his	lips.	‘Torvald	will	pay
Gareb	back,	in	full,	and,	you	see,	to	do	so	he	had	to	pay	us	for	the	privilege,
right?	So,	Torvald	pays	us,	Gareb	pays	us.	We	get	paid	twice!’
Kruppe	lifted	one	pudgy	finger	–	on	which,	he	saw	with	momentary
dismay,	there	was	a	smear	of	something	unrecognizable	–	‘A	moment,	please.
Torvald	has	both	returned	and,	bought	you	off?	Then	why	is	it	Kruppe	buying
the	drinks	this	night?	Ah,	allow	Kruppe	to	answer	his	own	question!	Why,
because	Torvald	is	yet	to	pay	off	trusting	Leff	and	Scorch,	yes?	He	begged,
yes,	for	one	night.	One	night!	And	all	would	be	well	and	such!’
‘How’d	you	guess?’
Kruppe	smiled.	‘Dear	foolish	friends,	should	Gareb	hear	of	this	any	time
soon	–	should	he,	yes,	learn	that	you	had	the	notorious	Torvald	Nom	in	your
very	grasp,	why,	you	will	find	your	names	on	the	very	list	you	hold,	thus
forcing	you	to	turn	in	yourselves	to	great	reward,	which	will	avail	you	nothing


when	Gareb	hides	and	quarters	poor	Scorch	and	Leff.	Ah,	calamities	await!’
‘Torvald	Nom	was	once	our	partner,’	said	Leff,	though	now	sweating	in
earnest.	‘He	gave	us	his	word,	he	did.	And	if	he	goes	back	on	it,	well,	doing
wrong	to	Scorch	and	Leff	is	never	a	good	idea,	for	anybody.	So	you	keep	that
in	mind,	too,	Kruppe,	if	you	go	blabbing	to	Gareb	or	some	such	thing.’
‘Beru	forbid.	Kruppe	would	do	no	such	thing,	dearest	temperamental
friends!	Nay,	Kruppe’s	fear	relates	back	to	those	new	rags	abounding	in	the
grubby	hands	of	urchins	at	every	street	corner	these	days,	such	a	plague	upon
Darujhistan!	Said	rags	are	nefariously	quick	and	diabolical	with	their	gossip,
and	who	can	know	the	multitude	of	dubious	sources?	Kruppe	worries	what	the
morrow’s	rag	will	proclaim!’
‘Damned	well	better	proclaim	nothing,’	snarled	Scorch,	looking	terrified
and	belligerent	all	at	once.
‘Now,	blessed	friends,’	Kruppe	said	with	a	perfunctory	but	flourished	wave
of	his	hands,	‘we	must	end	this	debacle	for	tonight!	Dread	circumstance
hovers.	Kruppe	senses	stupendous	events	imminently…imminent.	A	taste	upon
the	air,	a	flutter	in	the	wind,	a	flicker	in	the	lantern	light,	a	waver	in	watery
pools	of	ale,	a	thump	upon	the	stairs…a	rattling	exposure	of	front	doors	–	ho!
Noms	and	flowers!	Knives	and	bleeders!	Faces	most	ashen	and	dismayed!
Begone	from	Kruppe’s	table,	recent	wumplings	of	desultory	concourse!
Reunion	most	precious	awaits!’
	
Rallick	was	leaning	heavily	against	Cutter	by	the	time	they	reached	the	entrance
to	the	Phoenix	Inn.	Gods,	if	I’ve	killed	him	–	my	friend	–	gods,	no—
Pushing	open	the	door	he	half	dragged	Rallick	inside.
And	saw,	behind	the	counter,	Meese.	Beyond	her,	Irilta.	And	there,	to	his
left,	frozen	in	mid-step	and	staring	with	wide	eyes—
‘Sulty!	Rallick’s	hurt	–	we	need	a	room	–	and	help—’
All	at	once	Meese	was	pulling	the	assassin	from	Cutter ’s	arms.	‘Hood’s
breath,	he’s	cut	to	pieces!’
‘I’m	sorry—’	Cutter	began.
But	Irilta	was	now	there,	taking	his	face	between	hands	that	smelled	of	ale
and	chopped	garlic.	Lips	suddenly	looming	large	as	she	planted	a	full	kiss	on
his	mouth,	tongue	briefly	writhing	in	like	a	worm	down	a	hole.
Cutter	reeled	back,	then	found	Sulty	in	his	arms,	grasping	him	tight	–	tight
with	arms	astonishingly	strong	after	a	dozen	or	so	years	of	trays	and	pitchers	–
so	tight	all	the	air	was	pushed	from	his	lungs.
‘He’ll	live,’	pronounced	Meese	from	where	she	crouched	over	Rallick,


who	was	lying	on	the	floor	behind	the	counter.	‘Once	we	stop	the	bleeding.	He
musta	been	jumped	by	three	or	four,	by	the	looks.’	Straightening,	she	dropped
the	bloody	dagger	on	the	counter.	A	crowd	was	gathering,	and	heads	now	tilted
in	for	a	closer	look	at	that	foreign-made	weapon.
‘Malazan!’	hissed	someone.
Pulling	himself	from	Sulty’s	arms,	Cutter	pushed	through.	‘Give	me	room!
Don’t	touch	that	knife!	It’s	mine.’
‘Yours?’	demanded	Irilta.	‘What’s	that	supposed	t’mean,	Crokus?’
‘He	came	up	on	me	from	behind	–	all	quiet	–	like	a	killer.	I	thought	I	was
defending	myself	–	it	was	all	a	mistake	–	you	sure	he’s	going	to	be	all	right,
Meese?’
‘You	was	that	scrawny	thief	years	back!’	said	a	man	with	a	vaguely	familiar
face,	his	expression	flitting	between	disbelief	and	accusation.
‘Crokus,	Irilta	said,’	added	the	man	beside	him.	‘Did	something	the	night
the	Moon	came	down,	I	heard.	Knocked	over	a	pillar	or	something.	You
remember,	Scorch,	don’t	you?’
‘I	make	a	point	of	remembering	only	what	I	need	to,	Leff.	Though
sometimes	other	stuff	sticks,	too.	Anyway,	he	was	a	pickpocket,	one	of
Kruppe’s	lads.’
‘Well	he	ain’t	any	more,	is	he?’	Leff	said	in	a	half-snarl.	‘Now	he’s	a	Guild
assassin!’
‘No	I’m	not!’	shouted	Cutter	–	all	at	once	feeling	like	the	ungainly	youth	he
had	been	years	ago.	Furious	at	his	own	burning	face	he	swung	to	Meese.
‘Where’s	everybody	else?	I	mean—’
Meese	held	up	a	hand	–	on	which	there	was	some	of	Rallick’s	blood	–	and
said,	‘He’s	waiting,	Crokus.	At	his	usual	table	–	go	on.	Hey,’	she	shouted	to	the
crowd,	‘give	him	a	way	through!	Go	back	t’your	tables!’
Just	like	that,	Cutter	reflected,	he	had	made	things	a	shambles.	His	grand
return.	Everything.	Reaching	out	as	he	passed,	he	retrieved	his	knife	–	not
meeting	Meese’s	eyes	as	he	did	so.	Then,	as	bodies	pulled	back,	he	saw—
There,	at	his	usual	table,	the	small	round	man	with	greasy	hair	and
beaming,	cherubic	smile.	Filthy	frilly	cuffs,	a	faded	and	stained	red	waistcoat.
A	glistening	pitcher	on	the	puddled	tabletop,	two	tankards.
Just	a	thief.	A	pickpocket.	A	raider	of	girls’	bedrooms.	Wasn’t	I	the
breathless	one?	A	wide-eyed	fool.	Oh,	Kruppe,	look	at	you.	If	anybody	wasn’t
going	to	change,	it’s	you.
Cutter	found	himself	at	the	table,	collapsing	into	the	waiting	chair,
reaching	for	the	tankard.	‘I	gave	up	on	my	old	name,	Kruppe.	It’s	now	Cutter.
Better	suited,	don’t	you	think?’	Then	why	do	I	feel	like	weeping?	‘Especially


after	what	I	did	to	Rallick	just	now.’
Kruppe’s	brows	lifted.	‘Kruppe	sympathizes,	oh	yes	he	does.	Life	stumbles
on	–	although	the	exception	is	none	other	than	Kruppe	himself,	for	whom	life
dances.	Extraordinary,	how	such	truth	rubs	so	many	so	wrongly;	why,	can
one’s	very	existence	prove	sufficient	for	such	inimical	outrage?	Seems	it	can,
oh	yes,	most	certainly.	There	are	always	those,	dear	friend,	for	whom	a	wink	is
an	insult,	a	smile	a	taunt.	For	whom	humour	alone	is	cause	for	suspicion,	as	if
laughter	was	sly	contempt.	Tell	Kruppe,	dear	Cutter,	do	you	believe	that	we	are
all	equal?’
‘Equal?	Well—’
‘A	laudable	notion,	we	can	both	agree,	yes?	Yet’	–	and	he	raised	one	rather
unclean	finger	–	‘is	it	not	true	that,	from	one	year	to	the	next,	we	each
ourselves	are	capable	of	changes	so	fundamental	that	our	present	selves	can	in
no	reasonable	way	be	considered	equal	to	our	past	selves?	If	the	rule	does	not
apply	even	within	our	own	individual	lives,	how	can	one	dare	hope	to	believe
that	it	pertains	collectively?’
‘Kruppe,	what	has	all	this—’
‘Years	past,	Cutter	who	was	once	named	Crokus,	we	would	not	have	a
discussion	such	as	this,	yes?	Kruppe	sees	and	sees	very	well.	He	sees	sorrow
and	wisdom	both.	Pain	and	still	open	wounds.	Love	found	and	love	lost.	A
certain	desperation	that	still	spins	like	a	coin	–	which	way	will	it	fall?	Question
as	yet	unanswered,	a	future	as	yet	undecided.	So,	old	friend	now	returned,	let	us
drink,	thus	yielding	the	next	few	moments	to	companionable	silence.’	And	with
that	Kruppe	collected	his	tankard	and	lifted	it	high.
Sighing,	Cutter	did	the	same.
‘The	spinning	coin!’
And	he	blanched.	‘Gods	below,	Kruppe!’
‘Drink,	friend!	Drink	deep	the	unknown	and	unknowable	future!’
And	so	he	did.
	
The	wheel	had	stopped	spinning,	milky	water	dripping	down	its	sides	to	gather
in	the	gutter	surrounding	it.	The	bright	lanterns	had	been	turned	well	down,
sinking	the	room	into	soft	light,	and	she	now	walked	towards	her	bed,	drying
her	hands	with	a	towel.
In	a	day	or	two	she	would	fire	up	the	kiln.
It	was	late	and	this	was	no	time	to	be	thinking	the	heavy,	turgid	thoughts
that	now	threatened	to	reach	up	and	take	hold	of	her	weary	mind.	Regret	has	a
flavour	and	it	is	stale,	and	all	the	cups	of	tea	in	the	world	could	do	nothing	to


wash	it	away.
The	scratching	at	the	door	brought	her	round	–	some	drunk	at	the	wrong
house,	no	doubt.	She	was	in	no	mood	to	answer.
Now	knuckles,	tapping	with	muted	urgency.
Tiserra	tossed	the	towel	down,	rubbed	absently	at	her	aching	wrist,	then
collected	one	of	the	heavier	stirring	sticks	from	the	glaze	table	and	approached
the	door.	‘Wrong	house,’	she	said	loudly.	‘Go	on,	now!’
A	fist	thumped.
Raising	the	stick,	Tiserra	unlatched	the	door	and	swung	it	back.
The	man	stepping	on	to	the	threshold	was	wearing	a	stupid	grin.
One	she	knew	well,	had	known	for	years,	although	it	had	been	some	time
since	she	had	last	seen	it.	Lowering	the	stick,	she	sighed.	‘Torvald	Nom.	You’re
late.’
‘Sorry,	love,’	he	replied.	‘I	got	waylaid.	Slavers.	Ocean	voyages.	Toblakai,
dhenrabi,	torture	and	crucifixion,	a	sinking	ship.’
‘I	had	no	idea	going	out	for	a	loaf	of	bread	could	be	so	dangerous.’
‘Well,’	he	said,	‘the	whole	mess	started	with	me	hearing	about	a	debt.	One	I
didn’t	know	I	had.	That	bastard	Gareb	set	me	up,	said	I	owed	him	when	I	didn’t,
but	that’s	not	something	one	can	argue,	not	without	an	advocate	–	which	we
couldn’t	afford—’
‘I	know	all	about	Gareb,’	Tiserra	replied.	‘His	thugs	visited	here	often
enough	once	you	disappeared,	and	yes,	I	did	need	an	advocate	–	to	get	Gareb	to
back	off.’
‘He	was	threatening	you?’
‘He	claimed	that	your	debt	was	my	debt,	dear	husband.	Of	course	that’s
nonsense.	Even	after	I	won	that	challenge,	he	had	me	followed	around.	For
months.	Suspected	you	were	in	hiding	somewhere	and	I	was	delivering	food
and	the	like,	I	suppose.	I	can’t	tell	you	how	much	fun	that	was.	Why	can’t	I,
Torvald?	Because	it	wasn’t.	Fun,	that	is.	Not	fun	at	all.’
‘I’m	home	now,’	Torvald	said,	trying	the	smile	again.	‘Wealthy,	too.	No
more	debt	–	I’m	clearing	that	in	the	morning,	straight	away.	And	no	more	lowgrade	temper	for	your	clay	either.	And	a	complete	replenishment	of	your
herbs,	tinctures	and	such	–	speaking	of	which,	just	to	be	safe	we	should
probably	put	together	a	ritual	or	two—’
‘Oh,	really?	You’ve	been	stealing	again,	haven’t	you?	Tripped	a	few
wards,	did	you?	Got	a	bag	of	coins	all	glowing	with	magic,	have	you?’
‘And	gems	and	diamonds.	It	was	only	proper,	love,	honest.	A	wrongful
debt	dealt	with	wrongfully,	the	two	happily	cancelling	each	other	out,	leaving
everything	rightful!’


She	snorted,	then	stepped	back	and	let	him	inside.	‘I	don’t	believe	I’m
buying	all	this.’
‘You	know	I	never	lie	to	you,	Tis.	Never.’
‘So	who	did	you	rob	tonight?’
‘Why,	Gareb,	of	course.	Cleaned	him	out,	in	fact.’
Tiserra	stared	at	him.	‘Oh,	husband.’
‘I	know,	I’m	a	genius.	Now,	about	those	wards	–	as	soon	as	he	can,	he’ll
bring	in	some	mages	to	sniff	out	the	whereabouts	of	his	loot.’
‘Yes,	Torvald,	I	grasp	the	situation	well	enough.	You	know	where	the
secret	hole	is	–	drop	the	bag	in	there,	if	you	please,	while	I	get	started	on	the
rest.’
But	he	had	not	moved.	‘Still	love	me?’	he	asked.
Tiserra	turned	and	met	his	eyes.	‘Always,	y’damned	fool.	Now	hurry.’
	
Glories	unending	this	night	in	Darujhistan!	And	now	the	dawn	stirs	awake,	a
light	to	sweep	aside	the	blue	glow	of	the	unsleeping	city.	See	the	revellers
stumbling	towards	their	beds	or	the	beds	of	newfound	friends	or	even	a
stranger ’s	bed,	what	matter	the	provenance	of	love?	What	matter	the	tangled
threads	of	friendship	so	stretched	and	knotted?
What	matter	the	burdens	of	life,	when	the	sun	blazes	into	the	sky	and	the
gulls	stir	from	their	posts	in	the	bay,	when	crabs	scuttle	for	deep	and	dark
waters?	Not	every	path	is	well	trod,	dearest	friends,	not	every	path	is	set	out
with	even	pavestones	and	unambiguous	signs.
Rest	eyes	in	the	manner	of	a	thief	who	is	a	thief	no	longer,	as	he	looks	with
deepest	compassion	down	upon	the	sleeping	face	of	an	old	friend,	there	in	a
small	room	on	the	upper	floor	of	the	Phoenix	Inn;	and	sees	too	a	noble
councilman	snoring	slouched	in	yon	chair.	While	in	the	very	next	room	sits	an
assassin	who	is,	perhaps,	an	assassin	no	longer,	dull-eyed	with	pain	as	he
ponders	all	manner	of	things,	in	fashions	sure	to	be	mysterious	and	startling,
were	any	able	to	peek	into	his	dark	mind.
Elsewhere,	a	child	long	ago	abandoned	by	his	mother	frets	in	his	sleep,
pursued	by	a	nightmare	face	with	the	absurd	name	of	Snell	attached	to	it.
And	two	guards	run,	hearts	pounding,	from	the	gate	to	the	estate	as	alarms
ring	loud	and	urgent,	for	an	evil	man	has	lost	all	his	ill-won	wealth	–	a	fact	as
sure	to	pluck	his	talons	as	a	torturer ’s	pliers,	since	evil	only	thrives	in	a	well	of
power,	and	when	the	coin	of	cruelty	is	stolen	away,	why,	so	too	vanishes	the
power.
A	fingerless	man	stumbles	home,	god-blessed	and	blood	oozing	from


battered	knuckles,	while	his	wife	sleeps	without	dreams,	her	expression	so
peaceful	even	the	most	unsentimental	sculptor	could	do	naught	but	weep.
And,	in	a	street	unworthy	of	any	particular	notice,	stands	an	ox,	thinking
about	breakfast.	What	else	is	there,	after	all,	when	love	and	friendship	and
power,	and	regret	and	loss	and	reunion	fierce	enough	to	tear	away	all	that
might	have	been	bittersweet,	when	all	–	all	–	is	gone	and	done	with,	what	else
is	there,	but	the	needs	of	the	stomach?
Eat!	Dine	on	pleasures	and	taste	sweet	life!
Inconsequential?	Bah!
As	Kruppe	ever	says,	it	is	a	wise	ox	that	gets	the	yoke.


Chapter	Six

‘The	miracle	of	hindsight	is	how	it	transforms	great	military
geniuses	of	the	past	into	incompetent	idiots,	and	incompetent
idiots	of	the	present	into	great	military	geniuses.	There	is	the
door,	and	be	sure	to	take	all	your	pompous	second-guessing
delusions	with	you…’
Emperor	Kellanved
On	the	occasion	of	the	conquest	of
Falari’s	Grand	Council	(the	Trial	of	Crust)

There	had	been	an	earthquake.	A	spine	of	rock	nearly	a	league	long	had	simply
dropped	away,	opening	an	inlet	to	the	sea.	There	were	no	silts	churned	up	by
this	cataclysm,	for	the	spine	was	a	lifeless	conglomeration	of	obsidian	and
pumice,	legacy	of	past	eruptions.	At	its	apex,	the	inlet	was	sharply	angled,	the
sides	sheer	rock.	That	angle	widened	on	its	way	out	to	the	sea,	flanked	at	the
mouth	by	twin	upthrusts	of	rock	a	quarter-league	apart.
The	inlet’s	floor	was	inclined.	The	water	at	the	apex	was	no	more	than
fifteen	spans	deep,	crystal	clear,	revealing	a	jumble	of	blockish	stones	and
white	bones	cluttering	the	bottom	–	remnants	of	tholos	tombs	and	the	K’Chain
Che’Malle	that	had	been	interred	within	them.
Ruins	were	visible	on	both	sides	of	the	cut,	including	a	mostly	toppled
Jaghut	tower.	In	the	sky	above	a	tortured	rack	of	hills,	just	to	the	north,	hovered
the	stain	of	a	gate,	a	mottled	scar	in	the	air	itself.	All	that	bled	from	it	now	was
pain,	a	sour,	unyielding	stench	that	seemed	as	thirsty	as	the	ravaged	landscape
stretching	out	on	all	sides.
Traveller	stood	staring	up	at	the	gate	for	a	long	time.	Two	days	now	from
the	spot	where	he	had	washed	up	and	he	had	yet	to	find	fresh	water.	The	blood
of	the	bear	that	had	attacked	him	had	sustained	him	for	a	time,	but	that	had	been
salty	nectar,	and	now	he	suffered.
There	had	been	enough	conspiracies	intent	on	achieving	his	death,	over	the


course	of	his	life	thus	far,	to	have	made	a	lesser	man	long	since	despair,
tumbling	into	madness	or	suicide	in	one	last	surrender	to	the	hunger	of	gods
and	mortals.	It	would	be,	perhaps,	rather	just	if	he	was	to	fail	now	for	lack	of
the	most	basic	staples	needed	to	keep	one	alive.
But	he	would	not	surrender,	for	he	could	hear	a	god’s	laughter,	as	ironic	as
a	loving	whisper	in	his	ear.	Somewhere	inland,	he	was	sure,	this	blasted	waste
would	crumble	into	sweeps	of	dusty	earth,	and	then	grasses,	a	wind-stirred
prairie	and	steppes.	If	only	he	could	hold	on	long	enough	to	reach	it.
He	had	skinned	the	bear	and	now	carried	the	hide	in	a	wrapped	bundle
slung	from	one	shoulder.	Although	not	particularly	attractive,	it	provided	a
scent	disguising	his	own,	and	one	that	would	send	most	carnivores	scurrying.
Conversely,	he	would	need	to	stalk	game	–	assuming	he	ever	found	any	–	from
upwind,	but	that	would	have	been	true	even	without	the	skin.
He	was	on	the	coast	of	Morn.	Far	from	where	he	had	intended	to	make
landfall	here	on	the	Genabackan	continent.	A	long	walk	awaited	him,	but	there
was	nothing	new	in	that	prospect.	Nor,	he	had	to	admit,	in	the	threat	of	failure.
Facing	inland,	Traveller	set	out,	boots	crunching	on	black,	bubbled	glass.
The	morning	sun	reflected	from	the	mottled	surface	in	blinding	flashes,	and
the	heat	swirled	up	around	him	until	he	was	sheathed	in	sweat.	He	could	see	the
far	end,	a	few	thousand	paces	distant	–	or	thought	he	could,	knowing	well	how
the	eyes	could	be	deceived	–	a	darker	stretch,	like	a	raised	beach	of	black	sand
drawn	across	the	horizon,	with	nothing	visible	beyond.
Some	time	later	he	was	certain	that	the	ridge	was	not	an	illusion.	A	windbanked,	undulating	heap	of	crushed	obsidian,	a	diamond	glitter	that	cut	into	his
eyes.	As	he	drew	closer,	he	thought	he	could	hear	faint	moaning,	as	of	some	as
yet	unfelt	wind.	And	now	he	could	see	beyond,	another	vast	stretch	of
featureless	plain,	with	no	end	visible	through	the	shimmering	heat.
Ascending	the	rise,	boots	sinking	deep	into	the	sand,	Traveller	heard	the
moaning	wind	once	more,	and	he	looked	up	to	see	that	something	had
appeared	on	the	plain	directly	ahead.	A	high-backed	throne,	the	figure	seated
upon	it	a	blurred	cast	of	shadows.	Standing	perhaps	ten	paces	to	the	right	was	a
second	figure,	this	one	wrapped	in	a	dark	grey	cloak,	the	hood	pulled	back	to
reveal	a	wind-burned	profile	and	a	shock	of	black	hair	cut	short.
From	behind	the	throne	now	emerged	Hounds,	padding	forward,	their
paws	kicking	up	puffs	of	dust	that	drifted	in	their	wake.	Baran,	Gear,	Blind.
Shan	and	Rood	and	two	others	Traveller	had	never	seen	before.	Bone-white,
both	of	them,	with	onyx	eyes.	Leaner	than	the	others,	longer-necked,	and
covered	in	scars	that	displayed	a	startling	dark	blue	skin	beneath	the	short
white	hair.	Moving	as	a	pair,	they	ranged	out	to	the	far	right	–	inland	–	and


lifted	noses	to	the	air.	The	other	Hounds	came	straight	for	Traveller.
He	walked	down	to	meet	them.
Shan	was	the	first	to	arrive,	pulling	up	along	one	side,	then	slinking	like	a
cat	around	his	back	to	come	up	on	the	other.	He	settled	his	left	hand	on	her
sleek	black	neck.	Ancient	Baran	was	next,	and	Traveller	reached	out	to	set	his
other	hand	against	one	muscled	cheek,	feeling	the	skein	of	seamed	scars	from
centuries	of	savage	combat,	the	hint	of	crushing	molars	beneath	the	ragged	but
soft	skin.	Looking	into	the	beast’s	light	brown	eyes,	he	found	he	could	not	hold
the	gaze	for	long	–	too	much	sorrow,	too	much	longing	for	peace	for	which	he
could	give	no	benison.	Baran	leaned	his	head	into	that	caress,	and	then	rasped	a
thick	tongue	against	Traveller ’s	forearm.
With	the	huge	beasts	all	round	him	now	–	excepting	the	two	white	ones	–
Traveller	approached	the	throne.	As	he	drew	nearer,	Cotillion	finally	faced
him.
‘You	look	terrible,	old	friend.’
Traveller	smiled,	not	bothering	to	respond	in	kind.	Cotillion’s	face
betrayed	exhaustion,	beyond	anything	he	had	ever	seen	when	the	man	had	been
mortal,	when	he	had	been	named	Dancer,	when	he	had	shared	the	rule	of	an
empire.	Where	were	the	gifts	of	godhood?	What	was	their	value,	when	to	grasp
each	one	was	to	flinch	in	pain	and	leak	blood	from	the	hands?
‘You	two,’	Traveller	said,	eyes	settling	now	on	Shadowthrone,	‘banish	my
every	regret.’
‘That	won’t	last,	I’m	sure,’	hissed	the	god	on	his	throne.	‘Where	is	your
army,	First	Sword?	I	see	only	dust	in	your	wake.’
‘While	you	sit	here,	claiming	dominion	over	a	wasteland.’
‘Enough	of	the	mutual	appreciation.	You	are	beset,	old	friend	–	hee	hee,
how	often	do	I	use	those	words,	eh?	Old	friends,	oh,	where	are	they	now?	How
far	fallen?	Scattered	to	the	winds,	stumbling	hopelessly	unguided	and	blind—’
‘You	never	had	that	many	friends,	Kellanved.’
‘Beset,	I	was	saying.	By	nightfall	you	will	be	dead	of	dehydration	–	it	is
four	days	or	more	to	the	first	spring	on	the	Lamatath	Plain.’
‘I	see.’
‘Of	course,	no	matter	where	you	happen	to	be	when	you	finally	die,	your
old	friend	is	bound	to	come	find	you.’
‘Yes,	I	am	sure	he	will.’
‘To	gloat	in	victory.’
‘Hood	does	not	gloat.’
‘Well,	that’s	a	disappointing	notion.	So,	he	will	come	to	not	gloat,	then.	No
matter.	The	point	is,	you	will	have	lost.’


‘And	my	success	or	lack	thereof	matters	to	you,	Kellanved?’
Cotillion	replied.	‘Surprisingly,	yes	it	does.’
‘Why?’
That	blunt	question	seemed	to	take	both	gods	aback	for	a	moment.	Then
Shadowthrone	snorted.	‘Does	it	matter?	Hardly.	Not	at	all,	in	fact.	We	are	here
to	help	you,	you	damned	oaf.	You	stubborn,	obstinate,	belligerent	fool.	Why	I
ever	considered	you	an	old	friend	entirely	escapes	me!	You	are	too	stupid	to
have	been	one,	ever!	Look,	even	Cotillion	is	exasperated	by	your
dimwittedness.’
‘Mostly	amused,	actually,’	Cotillion	corrected,	now	grinning	at	Traveller.
‘I	was	just	reminded	of	our,	ah,	discussions	in	the	command	tent	when	on
campaign.	Perhaps	the	most	telling	truth	of	old	friendships	is	in	how	their
dynamics	never	change.’
‘Including	your	smarmy	postulations,’	said	Shadowthrone	drily.	‘Listen,
you,	Traveller	or	however	you	call	yourself	now.	My	Hounds	will	guide	you
to	your	salvation	–	hah,	how	often	has	that	been	said?	In	the	meantime,	we	will
give	you	skins	of	water,	dried	fruit	and	the	like	–	the	myriad	irritating	needs	of
mortality,	I	seem	to	recall.	Vaguely.	Whatever.’
‘And	what	do	you	seek	in	return	for	this	gift?’
A	dozen	heartbeats	passed	with	no	reply	forthcoming.
Traveller ’s	face	slowly	descended	into	a	dangerous	frown.	‘I	will	not	be
swayed	from	my	task.	Not	even	delayed—’
‘No,	of	course	not.’	Shadowthrone	waved	an	ephemeral	hand.	‘The	very
opposite,	in	fact.	We	urge	you.	We	exhort	you.	Make	haste,	set	true	your
course,	seek	out	your	confrontation.	Let	nothing	and	no	one	stand	in	your
way.’
Traveller ’s	frown	deepened.
A	soft	laugh	from	Cotillion.	‘No	need.	He	speaks	true,	First	Sword.	It	is
our	pleasure	to	enable	you,	in	this	particular	matter.’
‘I	will	not	bargain	with	him.’
‘We	know.’
‘I	am	not	sure	you	fully	understand—’
‘We	do.’
‘I	mean	to	kill	Hood.	I	mean	to	kill	the	God	of	Death.’
‘Best	of	luck	to	you!’	said	Shadowthrone.
More	silence.
Cotillion	then	came	forward,	carrying	supplies	that	had	not	been	there	a
moment	ago.	He	set	them	down.	‘Shan	will	lead	the	way,’	he	said	quietly,
stepping	back.


Traveller	glanced	over	at	the	two	new	Hounds.	‘And	those	ones?’
Cotillion	followed	his	gaze,	looking	momentarily	troubled	before	he
shrugged.	‘Hard	to	say.	They	just	sort’f…showed	up—’
‘I	summoned	them,	of	course!’	said	Shadowthrone.	‘The	white	one	is
named	Pallid.	The	whiter	one	is	named	Lock.	Seven	is	the	desired	number,	the
necessary	number.’
‘Shadowthrone,’	Cotillion	said,	‘you	did	not	summon	them.’
‘I	must	have!	Why	else	would	they	be	here?	I’m	sure	I	did,	at	some	point.	A
wish,	perhaps,	whilst	staring	upward	at	the	stars.	Or	a	desire,	yes,	of	such
overwhelming	power	that	even	the	Abyss	could	not	deny	me!’
‘The	others	seem	to	have	accepted	them,’	Cotillion	noted,	shrugging	again.
‘Has	it	occurred	to	you,’	said	Traveller,	softly,	to	the	god	standing	before
him,	‘that	they	might	be	the	fabled	Hounds	of	Light?’
‘Really?	Why	would	you	think	that?’	And	in	that	moment,	when	Cotillion
met	his	eyes	and	winked,	all	the	exhaustion	–	the	very	immortality	of
ascendancy	itself	–	vanished,	and	Traveller	saw	once	more	–	after	what	seemed
a	lifetime	–	the	man	he	had	once	called	his	friend.
Yet	he	could	not	bring	himself	to	smile,	to	yield	any	response	at	all	to	that
gesture	and	the	invitation	it	offered.	He	could	not	afford	such…weakness.	Not
now,	perhaps	never	again.	Certainly,	not	with	what	these	two	old	friends	had
become.	They	are	gods,	and	gods	are	not	to	be	trusted.
Reaching	down,	he	collected	the	skins	and	the	knapsack.	‘Which	one	drove
the	bear	to	the	coast?’	he	asked.
‘Gear.	You	needed	food,	or	you	would	not	have	got	even	this	far.’
‘I	was	very	nearly	its	supper,	Cotillion.’
‘We	have	always	had	faith	in	you,	First	Sword.’
The	next	–	and	probably	last	–	question	Traveller	had	for	the	god	was	the
most	difficult	one	to	voice.	‘And	which	of	you	wrecked	my	ship	and	killed	my
crew?’
Cotillion’s	brows	lifted.	‘Not	us.	Dassem,	we	would	not	do	that.’
Traveller	studied	the	god’s	eyes	–	always	softer	than	one	might	have
expected,	but	he	had	long	since	grown	used	to	that	–	and	then	he	turned	away.
‘All	right.’
	
Pallid	and	Lock	fell	in	as	reluctant,	desultory	rearguard	as	the	Hounds	escorted
Traveller	inland.	Shadowthrone	had	managed	to	turn	his	throne	round	so	that
he	could	watch	the	First	Sword	and	his	entourage	slowly	dwindle	into	the
northeast.


Standing	nearby,	Cotillion	lifted	his	hands	and	looked	down	upon	the
palms,	seeing	the	glistening	sweat	pooling	there.	‘That	was	close.’
‘Eh?	What	was?’
‘If	he	had	decided	we	were	behind	the	shipwreck,	well,	I	don’t	like	to	think
what	would	have	happened	here.’
‘Simple,	Cotillion.	He	would	have	killed	us.’
‘And	the	Hounds	would	not	have	interceded.’
‘Except	perhaps	my	newest	pets!	No	old	loyalties	there!	Hee	hee!’
‘Close,’	said	Cotillion	again.
‘You	could	have	just	told	him	the	truth.	That	Mael	wanted	him	and	wanted
him	badly.	That	we	had	to	reach	in	and	drag	him	out	–	he	would	have	been	far
more	thankful	with	all	that.’
‘Gratitude	is	a	useless	luxury	in	this	instance,	Shadowthrone.	No
distractions,	remember?	Nothing	and	no	one	to	turn	Traveller	from	his	fated
destiny.	Leave	Mael	for	another	time.’
‘Yes,	very	good.	A	detail	we	can	offer	Traveller	when	our	need	for	him	is
immediate	and,	er,	pressing.	We	delved,	following	the	suggestion	he	set	us	this
day,	in	this	place,	and	lo!	Why,	none	other	than	the	Elder	God	of	the	Seas	was
to	blame!	Now	get	over	here	and	draw	that	damned	sword	and	hack	these
enemies	to	pieces!’
‘That	is	not	the	delving	we	need	to	do	right	now,’	Cotillion	said.
‘Well,	of	course	not.	We	already	know!	What	need	delving?’
Cotillion	faced	Shadowthrone.	‘Mael	could	have	killed	him	easily	enough,
don’t	you	think?	Instead,	he	set	out	to	delay	Traveller.	We	need	to	think	on	that.
We	need	to	figure	out	why.’
‘Yes,	I	am	beginning	to	see.	Suspicions	awakened	–	I	was	momentarily
careless,	unmindful.	Delay,	yes,	why?	What	value?’
‘I	just	realized	something.’
‘What?	Quick,	tell	me!’
‘It	doesn’t	matter	what	Mael	had	in	mind.	It	won’t	work.’
‘Explain!’
‘Mael	assumes	a	quarry	on	the	run,	after	all…’
‘Yes,	he	must,	of	course,	no	other	possibility.	Mael	doesn’t	get	it!	The
idiot!	Hee	hee!	Now,	let’s	get	out	of	this	ash-heap,	my	throat’s	getting	sore.’
Cotillion	stared	after	the	Hounds	and	their	charge,	squinting	against	the
bright	sunlight.	‘Timing,	Shadowthrone…’
‘Perfection.’
‘So	far.’
‘We	will	not	fail.’


‘We’d	better	not.’
‘Which	among	our	newfound	allies	do	you	imagine	the	weak	link?’
Cotillion	glanced	back	at	Shadowthrone.	‘Well,	you,	of	course.’
‘Apart	from	me,	I	mean.’
Cotillion	stared.	Shadowthrone	waited.	Fidgeting	on	his	throne.
	
Midnight	at	the	lone	tavern	of	Morsko	provided	Nimander	with	memories	he
would	never	lose.	Slack-eyed,	black-mouthed	villagers	staggering	forward,
colliding	with	him	and	the	others.	Stained	bottles	thrust	into	their	faces.	Eyes
smeared	with	something	murky	and	yellowed.	The	drink	was	potent	enough	to
numb	tongues,	if	the	exhorting	moans	were	in	truth	invitations	to	imbibe.
Even	without	Clip’s	earlier	warning,	Nimander	was	not	inclined	to	accept
such	hospitality;	nor,	he	saw	with	some	relief,	were	any	of	his	kin.	They	stood,
still	crowded	at	the	entrance,	bemused	and	uneasy.	The	pungent	air	of	the	lowceilinged	chamber	was	sweet,	overlying	strains	of	acrid	sweat	and	something
like	living	decay.
Skintick	moved	up	alongside	Nimander	and	they	both	watched	as	Clip	–
Desra	at	his	side	–	made	his	way	to	the	counter.	‘A	simple	jug	of	wine?
Anywhere	in	this	place?	Not	likely.’
Nimander	suspected	Skintick	was	right.	All	he	could	see,	at	every	table,	in
every	hand,	was	the	same	long-necked	flask	with	its	blackened	mouth.
The	moans	were	louder	now,	cacophonous	like	the	lowing	of	beasts	in	an
abattoir.	Nimander	saw	one	man	–	an	ancient,	bent,	emaciated	creature	–	topple
face	first	on	to	the	wood-slatted	floor,	audibly	smashing	his	nose.	Someone
close	by	stepped	back,	crushing	the	hapless	man’s	fingers	under	a	heel.
‘So,	where	is	the	priest?’	Nenanda	asked	from	behind	Nimander	and
Skintick.	‘It	was	his	invitation,	after	all.’
‘For	once,	Nenanda,’	Skintick	said	without	turning,	‘I	am	pleased	to	have
you	standing	here,	hand	on	sword.	I	don’t	like	this.’
‘None	here	can	hurt	us,’	Nenanda	pronounced,	yet	his	tone	made	it	plain	he
was	pleased	by	Skintick’s	words.	‘Listen	to	me,’	he	said,	‘while	Clip	is	not
close	by	–	he	holds	us	all	in	contempt.’
Nimander	slowly	turned	round,	as	Skintick	said,	‘We’d	noticed.	What	do
you	make	of	that,	brother?’
‘He	sees	what	he	chooses	to	see.’
Nimander	saw	that	Kedeviss	and	Aranatha	were	listening,	and	the	faint	doelike	expression	on	the	latter ’s	face	was	suddenly	gone,	replaced	by	a	chilling
emptiness	that	Nimander	knew	well.	‘It	is	no	matter,’	Nimander	said,	sudden


sweat	prickling	awake	beneath	his	clothes.	‘Leave	it,	Nenanda.	It	is	no	matter.’
‘But	it	is,’	Nenanda	retorted.	‘He	needs	to	know.	Why	we	survived	our
battles,	when	all	the	others	fell.	He	needs	to	understand.’
‘That’s	over	with,	now,’	Nimander	insisted.
‘No,’	said	Skintick,	‘Nenanda	is	right	this	time,	Nimander.	He	is	right.	Clip
wants	to	take	us	to	this	dying	god,	after	all.	Whatever	he	plans	disregards	us,	as
if	we	did	not	exist.	Voiceless—’
‘Useless,’	cut	in	Nenanda.
Nimander	looked	away.	More	villagers	were	collapsing,	and	those	on	the
floorboards	had	begun	twitching,	writhing	in	pools	of	their	own	waste.
Sightless	eyes	rolled	ecstatically	in	sunken	sockets.	‘If	I	have	made	us…
voiceless,	I	am	sorry.’
‘Enough	of	that	rubbish,’	Skintick	said	conversationally.
‘I	agree,’	said	Nenanda.	‘I	didn’t	before	–	I	was	angry	with	you,	Nimander,
for	not	telling	this	so-called	Mortal	Sword	of	Darkness.	Telling	him	about	us,
who	we	were.	What	we’ve	been	through.	So	I	tried	to	do	it	myself,	but	it’s	no
use.	Clip	doesn’t	listen.	Not	to	anyone	but	himself.’
‘What	of	Desra?’	Nimander	asked.
Nenanda	snorted.	‘She	covets	her	own	mystery.’
That	was	a	sharp	observation	from	Nenanda,	surprising	Nimander.	But	it
was	not	an	answer	to	what	he	had	meant	with	his	question.
Skintick,	however,	understood.	‘She	remains	one	of	us,	Nimander.	When
the	need	arrives,	you	need	not	doubt	her	loyalty.’
Kedeviss	spoke	then,	with	dry	contempt.	‘Loyalty	is	not	one	of	Desra’s
virtues,	brothers.	Set	no	weight	upon	it.’
Skintick	sounded	amused	when	he	asked,	‘Which	of	Desra’s	virtues	should
we	set	weight	upon,	then,	Kedeviss?’
‘When	it	comes	to	self-preservation,’	she	replied,	‘Desra’s	judgement	is
precise.	Never	wrong,	in	fact.	She	makes	surviving	the	result	of	profound
clarity	–	Desra	sees	better	and	sharper	than	any	of	us.	That	is	her	virtue.’
Clip	was	on	his	way	back,	Desra	now	clinging	to	his	left	arm	as	might	a
woman	struggling	against	terror.
‘The	Dying	God	is	about	to	arrive,’	Clip	said.	He	had	put	away	his	chain
and	rings,	and	from	his	palpable	unease	there	now	rose,	like	a	dark	cloud,	the
promise	of	violence.	‘You	should	all	leave.	I	don’t	want	to	have	to	cover	you,
if	this	turns	bad.	I	won’t	have	the	time,	nor	will	I	accept	blame	if	you	start
dying.	So,	for	all	our	sakes,	get	out	of	here.’
It	was,	Nimander	would	recall	later,	the	moment	when	he	could	have
stepped	forward,	could	have	looked	into	Clip’s	eyes,	unwavering,	revealing	his


own	defiance	and	the	promise	behind	it.	Instead,	he	turned	to	the	others.	‘Let’s
go,’	he	said.
Nenanda’s	eyes	widened,	a	muscle	twitching	one	cheek.	Then	he	spun	about
and	marched	out	of	the	tavern.
With	an	expression	that	might	have	been	shame,	Skintick	reached	out	to
prise	Desra	away	from	Clip,	then	guided	her	out.	Aranatha	met	Nimander ’s
eyes	and	nodded	–	but	the	meaning	of	the	gesture	eluded	him,	given	the	vast
emptiness	in	her	eyes	–	then	she	and	Kedeviss	exited	the	taproom.
Leaving	Nimander	and	Clip.
‘It	pleases	me,’	said	Clip,	‘that	you	take	orders	as	well	as	you	do,
Nimander.	And	that	the	others	still	choose	to	listen	to	you.	Not,’	he	added,	‘that
I	think	that	will	last	much	longer.’
‘Do	not	confront	this	dying	god,’	Nimander	said.	‘Not	here,	not	now.’
‘Excellent	advice.	I	have	no	intention	of	doing	so.	I	simply	would	see	it.’
‘And	if	it	is	not	pleased	at	being	seen	by	one	such	as	you,	Clip?’
He	grinned.	‘Why	do	you	think	I	sent	you	to	safety?	Now,	go,	Nimander.
Back	to	our	rooms.	Comfort	your	frightened	rabbits.’
Outside,	beneath	a	glorious	sweep	of	bright	stars,	Nimander	found	his	kin
in	a	tight	huddle	in	the	centre	of	the	main	street.	Rabbits?	Yes,	it	might	look	that
way.	From	the	tavern	they	could	hear	the	frenzied	moaning	reach	a	fierce	pitch,
and	the	sound	was	now	echoing,	seeming	to	roll	back	in	from	the	hills	and
fields	surrounding	the	village.
‘Do	you	hear	that?’	Skintick	asked.	‘Nimander?	Do	you	hear	it?	The
scarecrows	–	they	are	singing.’
‘Mother	Dark,’	breathed	Kedeviss	in	horror.
‘I	want	to	see	one	of	those	fields,’	Skintick	suddenly	said.	‘Now.	Who	is
with	me?’
When	no	one	spoke,	Nimander	said,	‘You	and	me,	Skintick.	The	rest	to	our
rooms	–	Nenanda,	stand	vigil	until	we	return.’
Nimander	and	Skintick	watched	as	Nenanda	purposefully	led	the	others
away.
Then	they	set	out	into	a	side	alley,	feet	thumping	on	the	dusty,	hard-packed
ground.	Another	voice	had	joined	all	the	others,	emerging	from	the	temple,	a
cry	of	escalating	pain,	a	cry	of	such	suffering	that	Nimander	staggered,	his
legs	like	water	beneath	him.	He	saw	Skintick	stumble,	fall	on	to	his	knees,	then
push	himself	upright	once	more.
Tears	squeezed	from	his	eyes,	Nimander	forced	himself	to	follow.
Old	house	gardens	to	either	side,	filled	with	abandoned	yokes,	ploughs	and
other	tools,	the	furrows	overgrown	with	weeds	like	bleached	hair	in	the


starlight.	Gods,	they’ve	stopped	eating.	All	is	in	the	drink.	It	feeds	them	even	as
it	kills	them.
That	sepulchral	wail	was	dwindling	now,	but	it	would	rise	again,	he	knew,
with	the	next	breath.	Midnight	in	the	tavern,	the	foul	nectar	was	drunk	down,
and	the	god	in	terrible	pain	was	summoned	–	the	gate	to	his	tormented	soul
forced	open.	Fed	by	immortal	pain,	the	prostrate	worshippers	spasmed	in
ecstasy	–	he	could	see	their	blackened	mouths,	the	writhing	black	tongues,	the
eyes	in	their	smudge-pits;	he	could	see	that	old	man	with	the	smashed	nose	and
the	broken	fingers—
And	Clip	remained	inside.	Witness	to	the	madness,	to	its	twisted	face,	and
when	the	eyes	opened	and	fixed	on	his	own—
‘Hurry,’	groaned	Nimander	as	he	came	up	against	Skintick,	but	as	he
moved	past	his	cousin	reached	out	and	grasped	hold	of	his	tunic,	drawing
Nimander	to	a	halt.
They	were	at	the	edge	of	a	field.
Before	them,	in	the	cold	silver	light,	the	rows	of	scarecrows	were	all	in
motion,	limbs	writhing	like	gauze-wrapped	serpents	or	blind	worms.	Black
blood	was	streaming	down.	The	flowers	of	the	horrid	plants	had	opened,
exuding	clouds	of	pollen	that	flashed	like	phosphorescence,	riding	the	currents
of	night	air.
And	Nimander	wanted	to	rush	into	that	field,	into	the	midst	of	the	crucified
victims.	He	wanted	to	taste	that	pollen	on	his	tongue,	on	the	back	of	his	throat.
He	wanted	to	dance	in	the	god’s	pain.
Skintick,	weeping,	was	dragging	him	back	–	though	it	seemed	he	was
fighting	his	own	battle,	so	taut	were	his	muscles,	so	contradictory	their	efforts
that	they	fell	against	one	another.	On	to	the	ground.
Clawing	on	their	bellies	now,	back	down	the	dirt	track.
The	pollen	–	the	pollen	is	in	the	air.	We	have	breathed	it,	and	now	–	gods
below	–	now	we	hunger	for	more.
Another	terrible	shriek,	the	voice	a	physical	thing,	trying	to	climb	into	the
sky	–	but	there	was	nothing	to	grasp,	no	handholds,	no	footholds,	and	so	it	shot
out	to	the	sides,	closing	icy	cold	grips	upon	throats.	And	a	voice,	screaming
into	their	faces.
You	dance!	You	drink	deep	my	agony!	What	manner	of	vermin	are	you?
Cease!	Leave	me!	Release	me!
A	thousand	footsteps	charging	through	Nimander ’s	brain,	dancers
unending,	unable	to	stop	even	had	they	wanted	to,	which	they	did	not,	no,	let	it
go	on,	and	on	–	gods,	for	ever!
There,	in	the	trap	of	his	mind,	he	saw	the	old	man	and	his	blood-	and


nectar-smeared	face,	saw	the	joy	in	the	eyes,	saw	the	suppleness	of	his	limbs,
his	straightened	back	–	every	crippling	knob	and	protuberance	gone.	Tumours
vanished.	He	danced	in	the	crowd,	one	with	all	the	others,	exalted	and	lost	in
that	exaltation.
Nimander	realized	that	he	and	Skintick	had	reached	the	main	street.	As	the
god’s	second	cry	died	away,	some	sanity	crept	back	into	his	mind.	He	pushed
himself	on	to	his	feet,	dragging	Skintick	up	with	him.	Together,	they	ran,
staggering,	headlong	for	the	inn	–	did	salvation	beckon?	Or	had	Nenanda	and
the	others	fallen	as	well?	Were	they	now	dancing	in	the	fields,	selves	torn
away,	flung	into	that	black,	turgid	river?
A	third	cry,	yet	more	powerful,	more	demanding.
Nimander	fell,	pulled	down	by	Skintick’s	weight.	Too	late	–	they	would
turn	about,	rise,	set	out	for	the	field	–	the	pain	held	him	in	its	deadly,	delicious
embrace	–	too	late,	now—
He	heard	the	inn’s	door	slam	open	behind	them.
Then	Aranatha	was	there,	blank-eyed,	dark	skin	almost	blue,	reaching
down	to	grasp	them	both	by	their	cloaks.	The	strength	she	kept	hidden	was
unveiled	suddenly,	and	they	were	being	dragged	towards	the	door	–	where
more	hands	took	them,	tugged	them	inside—
And	all	at	once	the	compulsion	vanished.
Gasping,	Nimander	found	himself	lying	on	his	back,	staring	up	at
Kedeviss’s	face,	wondering	at	her	calculating,	thoughtful	expression.
A	cough	from	Skintick	at	his	side.	‘Mother	Dark	save	us!’
‘Not	her,’	said	Kedeviss.	‘Just	Aranatha.’
Aranatha,	who	flinches	at	shadows,	ducks	beneath	the	cry	of	a	hunting
hawk.	She	hides	her	other	self	behind	a	wall	no	power	can	surmount.	Hides	it.
Until	it’s	needed.
Yes,	he	could	feel	her	now,	an	emanation	of	will	filling	the	entire	chamber.
Assailed,	but	holding.	As	it	would.
As	it	must.
Another	cough	from	Skintick.	‘Oh,	dear…’
And	Nimander	understood.	Clip	was	out	there.	Clip,	face	to	face	with	the
Dying	God.	Unprotected.
Mortal	Sword	of	Darkness.	Is	that	protection	enough?
But	he	feared	it	was	not.	Feared	it,	because	he	did	not	believe	Clip	was	the
Mortal	Sword	of	anything.	He	faced	Skintick.	‘What	do	we	do?’
‘I	don’t	know.	He	may	already	be…lost.’
Nimander	glanced	over	at	Aranatha.	‘Can	we	make	it	to	the	tavern?’
She	shook	her	head.


‘We	should	never	have	left	him,’	announced	Nenanda.
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot,’	Kedeviss	snapped.
Skintick	still	sat	on	the	floor,	clawing	periodically	at	his	face,	wracked
with	shivers.	‘What	manner	of	sorcery	afflicts	this	place?	How	can	a	god’s
blood	do	this?’
Nimander	shook	his	head.	‘I	have	never	heard	of	anything	like	what	is
happening	here,	Skintick.	The	Dying	God.	It	bleeds	poison.’	He	struggled	to
keep	from	weeping.	Everything	seemed	stretched	thin,	moments	from	tearing
to	pieces,	a	reality	all	at	once	in	tatters,	whipped	away	on	mad	winds.
Skintick’s	sigh	was	ragged.	‘Poison.	Then	why	do	I	thirst	for	more?’
There	was	no	answer	for	that.	Is	this	a	truth	made	manifest?	Do	we	all	feed
on	the	pain	of	others?	Do	we	laugh	and	dance	upon	suffering,	simply	because	it
is	not	our	own?	Can	such	a	thing	become	addictive?	An	insatiable	need?
All	at	once	the	distant	moaning	changed	pitch,	became	screams.	Terrible,
raw	–	the	sounds	of	slaughter.	Nenanda	was	suddenly	at	the	door,	his	sword
out.
‘Wait!’	cried	Kedeviss.	‘Listen!	That’s	not	him.	That’s	them!	He’s
murdering	them	all	–	do	you	want	to	help,	Nenanda?	Do	you?’
Nenanda	seemed	to	slump.	He	stepped	back,	shaken,	lost.
The	shrieks	did	not	last	long.	And	when	the	last	one	wavered,	sank	into
silence,	even	the	Dying	God’s	cries	had	stilled.	Beyond	the	door	of	the	inn,
there	was	nothing,	as	if	the	village	–	the	entire	outside	world	–	had	been	torn
away.
Inside,	none	slept.	Each	had	pulled	away	from	the	others,	coveting	naught
but	their	own	thoughts,	listening	only	to	the	all	too	familiar	voice	that	was	a
soul’s	conversation	with	itself.	On	the	faces	of	his	kin,	Nimander	saw,	there
was	dull	shock,	a	bleakness	to	the	staring,	unseeing	eyes.	He	felt	the	surrender
of	Aranatha’s	will,	her	power,	as	the	threat	passed,	as	she	withdrew	once	more
so	far	inward	that	her	expression	grew	slack,	almost	lifeless,	the	shy,	skittering
look	not	ready	to	awaken	once	more.
Desra	stood	at	the	window,	the	inside	shutters	pulled	to	either	side,	staring
out	upon	an	empty	main	street	as	the	night	crawled	on,	leaving	Nimander	to
wonder	at	the	nature	of	her	internal	dialogue	–	if	such	a	thing	existed,	if	she
was	not	just	a	creature	of	sensation,	riding	currents	of	instinct,	every	choice
reframed	into	simple	demands	of	necessity.
‘There	is	cruelty	in	your	thoughts.’
Phaed.	Leave	me	alone,	ghost.
‘Don’t	get	me	wrong.	I	approve.	Desra	is	a	slut.	She	has	a	slut’s	brain,	the
kind	that	confuses	giving	with	taking,	gift	with	loss,	invitation	with	surrender.


She	is	power’s	whore,	Nimander,	and	so	she	stands	there,	waiting	to	see	him,
waiting	to	see	this	strutting	murderer	that	she	would	take	to	her	bed.
Confusions,	yes.	Death	with	life.	Desperation	with	celebration.	Fear	with	need
and	lust	with	love.’
Go	away.
‘But	you	don’t	really	want	that,	because	then	it	would	leave	you	vulnerable
to	that	other	voice	in	your	head.	The	sweet	woman	murmuring	all	those
endearing	words	–	do	I	recall	ever	hearing	such	when	she	was	alive?’
Stop.
‘In	the	cage	of	your	imagination,	blissfully	immune	to	all	that	was	real	–
the	cruel	indifferences,	yes	–	you	make	so	much	of	so	little,	Nimander.	A	chance
smile.	A	look.	In	your	cage	she	lies	in	your	arms,	and	this	is	the	purest	love,
isn’t	it?	Unsullied,	eternal—’
Stop,	Phaed.	You	know	nothing.	You	were	too	young,	too	self-obsessed,	to
see	anything	of	anyone	else,	unless	it	threatened	you.
‘And	she	was	not	a	threat?’
You	never	wanted	me	that	way	–	don’t	be	absurd,	ghost.	Don’t	invent—
‘I	invent	nothing!	You	were	just	too	blinded	to	see	what	was	right	in	front	of
you!	And	did	she	die	at	the	spear	of	a	Tiste	Edur?	Did	she	truly?	Where	was	I	at
that	moment,	Nimander?	Do	you	recall	seeing	me	at	all?’
No,	this	was	too	much.
But	she	would	not	relent.	‘Why	do	you	think	the	idea	of	killing	Sandalath
was	so	easy	for	me?	My	hands	were	already	stained—’
Stop!
Laughter,	ringing	through	his	head.
He	willed	himself	to	say	nothing,	waited	for	those	chilling	peals	of	mirth
to	dwindle,	grow	ever	fainter.
When	she	spoke	again	in	his	mind	there	was	no	humour	at	all	in	her	tone.
‘Nenanda	wants	to	replace	you.	He	wants	the	command	you	possess,	the	respect
the	others	hold	for	you.	He	will	take	it,	when	he	sees	his	chance.	Do	not	trust
him,	Nimander.	Strike	first.	A	knife	in	the	back	–	just	as	you	acted	to	stop	me,	so
you	must	do	again,	and	this	time	you	cannot	fail.	There	will	be	no	Withal	there
to	finish	the	task.	You	will	have	to	do	it	yourself.’
Nimander	lifted	his	gaze,	looked	upon	Nenanda,	the	straight	back,	the	hand
resting	on	pommel.	No,	you	are	lying.
‘Delude	yourself	if	you	must	–	but	not	for	much	longer.	The	luxury	must	be
shortlived.	You	will	need	to	show	your…decisiveness,	and	soon.’
And	how	many	more	kin	do	you	want	to	see	dead,	Phaed?
‘My	games	are	done	with.	You	ended	them	once	and	for	all.	You	and	the


swordsmith.	Hate	me	if	you	will,	but	I	have	talents,	and	I	gift	them	to	you,
Nimander	–	you	were	the	only	one	to	ever	listen	to	me,	the	only	one	to	whom	I
opened	my	heart—’
Heart?	That	vile	pool	of	spite	you	so	loved	to	swim	in	–	that	was	your
heart?
‘You	need	me.	I	give	strength	where	you	are	weakest.	Oh,	make	the	bitch
murmur	of	love,	fill	her	mouth	with	all	the	right	words.	If	it	helps.	But	she
cannot	help	you	with	the	hard	choices	a	leader	must	make.	Nenanda	believes	he
can	do	better	–	see	it	in	his	eyes,	so	quick	to	challenge.’
‘It’s	growing	light,’	Desra	said	from	the	window.	She	turned.	‘I	think	we
should	go	out.	To	the	tavern.	It	may	be	he	is	wounded.	It	may	be	he	needs	our
help.’
‘I	recall	him	not	asking	for	it,’	growled	Nenanda.
‘He	is	not	all-powerful,’	said	Desra,	‘though	he	might	affect	such	–	it
comes	with	being	so	young.’
Nimander	stared	across	at	her.	Where	did	that	insight	come	from?
‘Clip	is	vulnerable?’	Kedeviss	asked	in	mock	surprise.	‘Be	quick	to	take
advantage	of	that,	Desra.’
‘The	endless	siege	that	is	your	envy	grows	wearisome,	Kedeviss.’
Kedeviss	paled	at	that	and	said	nothing.
Oh,	we	are	a	vicious	bunch,	are	we	not?	Nimander	rubbed	at	his	face,	then
said,	‘Let’s	go,	then,	and	see	for	ourselves	what	has	become	of	him.’
Desra	was	first	through	the	door.
Out	into	pale	silvery	light,	a	cerulean	sky	devoid	of	clouds,	looking
somehow	speckled	with	grit.	The	harvested	plants	drooped	in	their	racks,
sodden	with	dew,	the	bulbs	like	swollen	heads	lined	up	in	rows	above	the
latticework.	Nimander	saw,	as	he	paused	out	on	the	street,	that	the	temple’s
doors	were	ajar.
Clip	was	lying	on	the	wooden	sidewalk	in	front	of	the	tavern,	curled	up,	so
covered	in	dried	blood	that	he	might	have	been	a	figure	moulded	in	black	mud.
They	set	out	towards	him.
Clip’s	eyes	were	open,	staring	–	Nimander	wondered	if	he	was	dead,	until
he	saw	the	slow	rise	and	fall	of	his	chest	–	but	showing	no	awareness	of
anything,	even	as	they	closed	round	him,	even	as	Nimander	knelt	in	front	of
him.
Skintick	moved	up	to	the	tavern	doors,	pushed	them	open	and	stepped
inside.	He	staggered	out	a	moment	later,	both	hands	covering	his	face	as	he
stumbled	out	into	the	middle	of	the	street	and	stood	there,	back	to	the	others.
Slaughter.	He	slaughtered	them	all.	Clip’s	sword	was	lying	nearby,	thick


with	gore,	as	if	the	entire	weapon	had	been	dragged	through	some	enormous
beast.
‘They	took	something	from	him,’	Aranatha	said.	‘Gone.	Gone	away.’
Nenanda	broke	into	a	jog,	straight	for	the	temple	opposite.
‘Gone	for	good?’	Nimander	asked	Aranatha.
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘How	long	can	he	live	this	way?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘Force	food	and	water	into	him,	keep	his	wounds
clean…’
Long	moments	when	no	one	spoke,	when	it	seemed	not	a	single	question
could	be	found,	could	be	cleaned	off	and	uttered	in	the	name	of	normality.
Nenanda	returned.	‘They’ve	fled,	the	priests,	all	fled.	Where	was	the	Dying
God	supposed	to	be?’
‘A	place	named	Bastion,’	said	Kedeviss.	‘West	of	here,	I	think.’
‘We	need	to	go	there,’	Nimander	said,	straightening	to	face	the	others.
Nenanda	bared	his	teeth.	‘To	avenge	him.’
‘To	get	him	back,’	Nimander	retorted.	‘To	get	back	to	him	whatever	they
took.’
Aranatha	sighed.	‘Nimander…’
‘No,	we	go	to	Bastion.	Nenanda,	see	if	there’re	any	horses,	or	better	yet,	an
ox	and	wagon	–	there	was	a	large	stable	behind	the	inn.’	He	looked	down	at
Clip.	‘I	don’t	think	we	have	the	time	to	walk.’
As	the	three	women	set	out	to	collect	the	party’s	gear,	followed	for	the
moment	by	Nenanda,	Nimander	turned	to	study	the	tavern’s	entrance.	He
hesitated	–	even	from	here	he	could	see	something:	dark	sprawled	shapes,
toppled	chairs;	and	now	the	buzz	of	flies	spun	out	from	the	gloom	within.
‘Don’t,’	said	Skintick	behind	him.	‘Nimander.	Don’t.’
‘I	have	seen	dead	people	before.’
‘Not	like	these.’
‘Why?’
‘They	are	all	smiling.’
Nimander	faced	his	closest	friend,	studied	his	ravaged	face,	and	then
nodded.	After	a	moment	he	asked,	‘What	made	the	priests	flee?’
‘Aranatha,	I	think,’	answered	Skintick.
Nimander	nodded,	believing	the	same.	They	had	taken	Clip	–	even	with	all
the	dead	villagers,	the	priests	had	taken	Clip,	perhaps	his	very	soul,	as	a	gift	to
the	Dying	God.	But	they	could	do	nothing	against	the	rest	of	them	–	not	while
Aranatha	resisted.	Fearing	retribution,	they	fled	in	the	night	–	away,	probably
to	Bastion,	to	the	protection	of	their	god.


‘Nimander,’	said	Skintick	in	a	low,	hollow	voice,	‘we	are	forced.’
‘Yes.’
‘Awakened	once	more.’
‘Yes.’
‘I	had	hoped…never	again.’
I	know,	Skintick.	You	would	rather	smile	and	jest,	as	befits	your	blessed
nature.	Instead,	the	face	you	will	turn	towards	what	is	to	come…it	will	be	no
different	from	ours,	and	have	we	not	all	looked	upon	one	another	in	those
times?	Have	we	not	seen	the	mirrors	we	became	to	each	other?	Have	we	not
recoiled?
Awakened.
What	lay	in	the	tavern	was	only	the	beginning.	Merely	Clip	and	his
momentary,	failing	frenzy.
From	this	point	on,	what	comes	belongs	to	us.
To	that,	even	Phaed	was	silent.	While	somewhere	in	the	mists	of	his	mind,
so	faint	as	to	be	almost	lost,	a	woman	wept.
	
It	was	a	quirk	of	blind	optimism	that	held	that	someone	broken	could,	in	time,
heal,	could	reassemble	all	the	pieces	and	emerge	whole,	perhaps	even	stronger
for	the	ordeal.	Certainly	wiser,	for	what	else	could	be	the	reward	for
suffering?	The	notion	that	did	not	sit	well,	with	anyone,	was	that	one	so	broken
might	remain	that	way	–	neither	dying	(and	so	removing	the	egregious
example	of	failure	from	all	mortal	eyes)	nor	improving.	A	ruined	soul	should
not	be	stubborn,	should	not	cling	to	what	was	clearly	a	miserable	existence.
Friends	recoil.	Acquaintances	drift	away.	And	the	one	who	fell	finds	a
solitary	world,	a	place	where	no	refuge	could	be	found	from	loneliness	when
loneliness	was	the	true	reward	of	surviving	for	ever	maimed,	for	ever
weakened.	Yet	who	would	not	choose	that	fate,	when	the	alternative	was	pity?
Of	course,	pity	was	a	virtually	extinct	sentiment	among	the	Tiste	Andii,	and
this	Endest	Silann	saw	as	a	rare	blessing	among	his	kind.	He	could	not	have
suffered	such	regard	for	very	long.	As	for	the	torment	of	his	memories,	well,
it	was	truly	extraordinary	how	long	one	could	weather	that	assault.	Yet	he	knew
he	was	not	unique	in	this	matter	–	it	was	the	burden	of	his	entire	people,	after
all.	Sufficient	to	mitigate	his	loneliness?	Perhaps.
Darkness	had	been	silent	for	so	long	now,	his	dreams	of	hearing	the
whisper	of	his	realm	–	of	his	birthplace	–	were	less	than	ashes.	It	was	no
wonder,	then,	was	it,	that	he	now	sat	in	the	gloom	of	his	chamber,	sheathed	in
sweat,	each	trickle	seeming	to	drink	all	warmth	from	his	flesh.	Yes,	they	had


manifested	Kurald	Galain	here	in	this	city,	an	act	of	collective	will.	Yet	it	was	a
faceless	power	–	Mother	Dark	had	left	them,	and	no	amount	of	desire	on	their
part	could	change	that.
So,	then,	what	is	this?
Who	speaks	with	such	power?
Not	a	whisper	but	a	shout,	a	cry	that	bristled	with…what?	With	affront.
Indignation.	Outrage.	Who	is	this?
He	knew	that	he	was	not	alone	in	sensing	this	assault	–	others	must	be
feeling	it,	throughout	Black	Coral.	Every	Tiste	Andii	probably	sat	or	stood
motionless	at	this	moment,	heart	pounding,	eyes	wide	with	fear	and	wonder.
And,	perhaps,	hope.
Could	it	be?
He	thought	to	visit	the	temple,	to	hear	from	the	High	Priestess	herself…
something,	a	pronouncement,	a	recognition	proclaimed.	Instead,	he	found
himself	staggering	out	of	his	room,	hurrying	up	the	corridor,	and	then
ascending	the	stairs,	round	and	round	as	if	caught	in	a	swirling	fever.	Out	into
his	Lord’s	south-facing	demesne	–	stumbling	in	to	find	Anomander	Rake
seated	in	his	high-backed	chair,	facing	the	elongated	window	and,	far	below,
crashing	seas	painted	black	and	silver	as	deep,	unknown	currents	thrashed.
‘My	Lord,’	Endest	gasped.
‘Did	I	have	a	choice?’	Anomander	Rake	asked,	gaze	still	on	the	distant
tumult.
‘My	Lord?’
‘Kharkanas.	Did	you	agree	with	her…assessment?	Endest	Silann?	Did	I	not
see	true	what	was	to	come?	Before	Light’s	arrival,	we	were	in	a	civil	war.
Vulnerable	to	the	forces	soon	to	be	born.	Without	the	blood	of	Tiamatha,	I
could	never	have	enforced…peace.	Unification.’
‘Sire,’	said	Endest	Silann,	then	found	he	could	not	go	on.
Rake	seemed	to	understand,	for	he	sighed	and	said,	‘Yes,	a	most	dubious
peace.	For	so	many,	the	peace	of	death.	As	for	unification,	well,	that	proved
woefully	shortlived,	did	it	not?	Still,	I	wonder,	if	I	had	succeeded	–	truly
succeeded	–	would	that	have	changed	her	mind?’
‘My	Lord	–	something	is	happening.’
‘Yes.’
‘What	must	we	do?’
‘Ah,	my	friend,	you	are	right	to	ask	that.	Never	mind	the	High	Priestess
and	her	answer	–	always	the	same	one	with	her,	yes?	Who	cries	the	war	cry	of
Kurald	Galain?	Let	us	seek	the	answer	between	her	legs.	Even	that	can	grow
tiresome,	eventually.	Although	do	not	repeat	my	words	to	Spinnock	Durav	–	I


would	not	disaffect	his	occasional	pleasure.’
Endest	Silann	wanted	to	shriek,	wanted	to	lunge	against	his	Lord,	grasp
him	by	the	neck,	and	force	out	–	force	out	what?	He	did	not	know.	The	Son	of
Darkness	was,	to	his	mind,	the	smartest	creature	–	mortal,	immortal,	it
mattered	not	–	that	he	had	ever	met.	His	thoughts	travelled	a	thousand	tracks
simultaneously,	and	no	conversation	with	him	could	be	predicted,	no	path
deemed	certain.
‘I	cannot	give	answer	this	time,’	Anomander	Rake	then	said.	‘Nor,	I	am
afraid,	can	Spinnock.	He	will	be	needed…elsewhere.’	And	now	his	head	turned,
and	his	eyes	fixed	upon	Endest	Silann.	‘It	must	fall	to	you,	again.	Once	more.’
Endest	felt	his	soul	recoil	in	horror,	shrink	back	into	whatever	cave	it	had
clawed	out	for	itself	somewhere	down	in	the	mined-out	pit	of	his	heart.	‘Sire,	I
cannot.’
Anomander	seemed	to	consider	that	for	a	time,	ten	thousand	tracks	danced
across,	on	to	something	new	that	triggered	faint	surprise	on	his	features.	And
he	smiled.	‘I	understand.	I	will	not	ask	again,	then.’
‘Then…then	what	–	who?	Sire	–	I	do	not—’
The	wryness	of	Anomander	Rake’s	tone	jarred	terribly	with	his	words,
‘Reborn	into	fury,	oh,	would	that	I	could	see	that.’	Then	his	voice	grew	sober.
‘You	were	right	–	you	cannot	stand	in	my	stead.	Do	not	intercede	in	any	way,
Endest	Silann.	Do	not	set	yourself	between	two	forces,	neither	of	which	you
can	withstand.	You	may	well	feel	the	need,	but	defy	it	with	all	your	will.	You
must	not	be	lost.’
‘Sire,	I	do	not	understand.’
But	Anomander	Rake	raised	one	hand.
And	yes,	the	emanation	was	gone.	Darkness	was	silent	once	more.
Whatever	had	come	into	their	world	had	vanished.
Endest	found	he	was	trembling.	‘Will	–	will	it	return,	my	Lord?’
The	Son	of	Darkness	studied	him	with	strangely	veiled	eyes,	then	rose	and
walked	over	to	the	window.	‘Look,	the	seas	grow	calm	once	more.	A	most
worthy	lesson,	I	think.	Nothing	lasts	for	ever.	Not	violence,	not	peace.	Not
sorrow,	old	friend,	nor	rage.	Look	well	upon	this	black	sea,	Endest	Silann,	in
the	nights	ahead.	To	calm	your	fears.	To	offer	you	guidance.’
And,	just	like	that,	he	knew	he	was	dismissed.
Bemused,	frightened	of	a	future	he	knew	he	was	not	intelligent	enough	to
yet	comprehend,	he	bowed,	then	departed.	Corridors	and	stairs,	and	not	so
much	as	an	echo	remained.	He	recalled	an	old	prayer,	the	one	whispered
before	battle.


Let	Darkness	receive	my	every	breath
With	her	own.
Let	our	lives	speak	in	answer	unto	death
Never	alone.
But	now,	at	this	moment,	he	had	never	felt	more	alone.	The	warriors	no
longer	voiced	that	prayer,	he	well	knew.	Darkness	did	not	wait	to	receive	a
breath,	nor	the	last	breath	that	bridged	life	and	death.	A	Tiste	Andii	warrior
fought	in	silence,	and	when	he	or	she	fell,	they	fell	alone.	More	profoundly
alone	than	anyone	who	was	not	Tiste	Andii	could	comprehend.
A	new	vision	entered	his	head	then,	jarring	him,	halting	him	halfway	down
the	stairs.	The	High	Priestess,	back	arching,	crying	out	in	ecstasy	–	or
desperation,	was	there	truly	a	difference?
Her	search.	Her	answer	that	was	no	answer	at	all.
Yes,	she	speaks	for	us,	does	she	not?
	
‘He	is	troubled,’	Salind	murmured,	only	now	shaking	off	the	violent	cold	that
had	gripped	her.	‘The	Redeemer	stirred	awake	then,	for	some	reason	unknown
and,	to	us,	unknowable.	But	I	felt	him.	He	is	most	troubled…’
The	half-dozen	pilgrims	gathered	round	the	fire	all	nodded,	although	none
possessed	her	percipience	in	these	matters,	too	bound	up	still	in	the	confused
obstinacy	of	mortality’s	incessant	demands,	and,	of	course,	there	was	the
dread,	now,	the	one	that	had	stalked	them	every	moment	since	the	Benighted’s
abandonment,	an	abandonment	they	saw	as	a	turning	away,	which	was	deemed
just,	because	none	there	had	proved	worthy	of	Seerdomin	and	the	protection	he
offered.	Yes,	he	was	right	in	denying	them.	They	had	all	failed	him.	In	some
way	as	yet	undetermined.
Salind	understood	all	these	notions,	and	even,	to	some	extent	–	this	alone
surprising	given	her	few	years	–	comprehended	the	nature	of	self-abnegation
that	could	give	rise	to	them.	People	in	great	need	were	quick	to	find	blame	in
themselves,	quick	to	assume	the	burden	of	guilt	for	things	they	in	truth	had	no
control	over	and	could	not	hope	to	change.	It	was,	she	had	begun	to	understand,
integral	to	the	very	nature	of	belief,	of	faith.	A	need	that	could	not	be	answered
by	the	self	was	then	given	over	to	someone	or	something	greater	than	oneself,
and	this	form	of	surrender	was	a	lifting	of	a	vast,	terrible	weight.
In	faith	could	be	found	release.	Relief.
And	so	this	enormous	contradiction	is	laid	bare.	The	believers	yield	all,


into	the	arms	of	the	Redeemer	–	who	by	his	very	nature	can	release	nothing,	can
find	nothing	in	the	way	of	relief,	and	so	can	never	surrender.
Where	then	the	Redeemer’s	reward?
Such	questions	were	not	for	her.	Perhaps	indeed	they	were	beyond
answering.	For	now,	there	was	before	her	a	mundane	concern,	of	the	most
sordid	kind.	A	dozen	ex-soldiers,	probably	from	the	Pannion	Tenebrii,	now
terrorized	the	pilgrim	encampment.	Robbing	the	new	arrivals	before	they
could	set	their	treasures	upon	the	barrow.	There	had	been	beatings,	and	now	a
rape.
This	informal	gathering,	presumably	the	camp’s	representatives,	had
sought	her	out,	pleading	for	help,	but	what	could	she	say	to	them?	We	were
wrong	to	believe	in	the	Benighted.	I	am	sorry.	He	was	not	what	we	thought	he
was.	He	looked	into	my	eyes	and	he	refused.	I	am	sorry.	I	cannot	help	you.
‘You	say	the	Redeemer	is	troubled,	Priestess,’	said	the	spokesman,	a	wiry
middle-aged	man	who	had	once	been	a	merchant	in	Capustan	–	fleeing	west
before	the	siege,	a	refugee	in	Saltoan	who	had	seen	with	his	own	eyes	the
Expulsion,	the	night	when	the	advance	agents	of	the	Pannion	Domin	were
driven	out	of	that	city.	He	had	been	among	the	first	of	the	pilgrims	to	arrive	at
the	Great	Barrow	and	now	it	seemed	he	would	stay,	perhaps	for	the	rest	of	his
life.	Whatever	wealth	he	had	once	possessed	was	now	part	of	the	barrow,	now	a
gift	to	a	god	who	had	been	a	man,	a	man	he	had	once	seen	with	his	own	eyes.
‘Surely	this	is	because	of	Gradithan	and	his	thugs.	The	Redeemer	was	a	soldier
in	his	life.	Will	he	not	reach	out	and	smite	those	who	prey	upon	his	followers?’
Salind	held	out	her	hands,	palms	up.	‘Friend,	we	do	not	converse.	My	only
gift	is	this…sensitivity.	But	I	do	not	believe	that	the	source	of	the	Redeemer ’s
disquiet	lies	in	the	deeds	of	Gradithan	and	his	cohorts.	There	was	a	burgeoning
of…something.	Not	close	at	hand,	yet	of	such	power	to	make	the	ether
tremble.’	She	hesitated,	then	said,	‘It	had	the	flavour	of	Kurald	Galain	–	the
warren	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	And,’	she	frowned,	‘something	else	that	I	have	felt
before.	Many	times,	in	fact.	As	if	a	storm	raged	far	to	the	south,	one	that
returns	again	and	again.’
Blank	faces	stared	at	her.
Salind	sighed.	‘See	the	clouds	roll	in	from	the	sea	–	can	we	halt	their
progress?	Can	we	–	any	of	us	–	drive	back	the	winds	and	rain,	the	hail?	No.
Such	forces	are	far	above	us,	far	beyond	our	reach,	and	they	rage	as	they	will,
fighting	wars	in	the	heavens.	This,	my	friends,	is	what	I	am	feeling	–	when
something	ripples	through	the	ether,	when	a	storm	awakens	to	the	south,	when
the	Redeemer	shifts	uneasy	and	is	troubled.’
‘Then	we	are	nothing	to	him,’	said	the	merchant,	sorrow	brimming	in	his


eyes.	‘I	surrendered	everything,	all	my	wealth,	for	yet	another	indifferent	god.
If	he	cannot	protect	us,	what	is	the	point?’
She	wished	that	she	had	an	answer	to	such	questions.	Were	these	not	the
very	grist	of	priestly	endeavours?	To	grind	out	palatable	answers,	to	hint	of
promising	paths	to	true	salvation?	To	show	a	benign	countenance	gifted	by
god-given	wisdom,	glowing	as	if	fanned	by	sacred	breath?	‘It	is	my	feeling,’
she	said,	haltingly,	‘that	a	faith	that	delivers	perfect	answers	to	every	question
is	not	a	true	faith,	for	its	only	purpose	is	to	satisfy,	to	ease	the	mind	and	so	end
its	questing.’	She	held	up	a	hand	to	still	the	objections	she	saw	awakened
among	these	six	honest,	serious	believers.	‘Is	it	for	faith	to	deliver	peace,	when
on	all	sides	inequity	thrives?	For	it	shall	indeed	thrive,	when	the	blessed	walk
past	blissfully	blind,	content	in	their	own	moral	purity,	in	the	peace	filling	their
souls.	Oh,	you	might	then	reach	out	a	hand	to	the	wretched	by	the	roadside,
offering	them	your	own	footprints,	and	you	may	see	the	blessed	burgeon	in
number,	grow	into	a	multitude,	until	you	are	as	an	army.	But	there	will	be,	will
ever	be,	those	who	turn	away	from	your	hand.	The	ones	who	quest	because	it	is
in	their	nature	to	quest,	who	fear	the	seduction	of	self-satisfaction,	who
mistrust	easy	answers.	Are	these	ones	then	to	be	your	enemy?	Does	the	army
grow	angered	now?	Does	it	strike	out	at	the	unbelievers?	Does	it	crush	them
underfoot?
‘My	friends,	is	this	not	describing	the	terror	this	land	has	just	survived?’
Her	eyes	fixed	on	the	merchant.	‘Is	this	not	what	destroyed	Capustan?	Is	this	not
what	the	rulers	of	Saltoan	so	violently	rejected	when	they	drove	out	the
Pannion	monks?	Is	this	not	what	the	Redeemer	died	fighting	against?’
‘None	of	this,’	growled	a	woman,	‘eases	my	daughter ’s	pain.	She	was
raped,	and	now	there	is	nothing	to	be	seen	in	her	eyes.	She	has	fled	herself	and
may	never	return.	Gradithan	took	her	and	destroyed	her.	Will	he	escape	all
punishment	for	such	a	thing?	He	laughed	at	me,	when	I	picked	up	my	daughter.
When	I	stood	before	him	with	her	limp	in	my	arms,	he	laughed	at	me.’
‘The	Benighted	must	return,’	said	the	merchant.	‘He	must	defend	us.	He
must	explain	to	us	how	we	failed	him.’
Salind	studied	the	faces	before	her,	seeing	the	fear	and	the	anger,	the	pain
and	the	growing	despair.	It	was	not	in	her	to	turn	them	away,	yet	what	could	she
do?	She	did	not	ask	to	become	a	priestess	–	she	was	not	quite	sure	how	it	even
happened.	And	what	of	her	own	pain?	Her	own	broken	history?	What	of	the
flesh	she	had	once	taken	into	her	mouth?	Not	the	bloody	meat	of	a	stranger,	no.
The	First	Born	of	the	Tenescowri,	Children	of	the	Dead	Seed,	ah,	they	were	to
be	special,	yes,	so	special	–	willing	to	eat	their	own	kin,	and	was	that	not	proof
of	how	special	they	were?	What,	then,	of	the	terrible	need	that	had	brought	her


here?
‘You	must	go	to	him,’	said	the	merchant.	‘We	know	where	to	find	him,	in
Black	Coral	–	I	can	lead	you	to	him,	Priestess.	Together,	we	will	demand	his
help	–	he	was	a	Seerdomin,	a	chosen	sword	of	the	tyrant.	He	owes	us!	He	owes
us	all!’
‘I	have	tried—’
‘I	will	help	you,’	insisted	the	merchant.	‘I	will	show	him	our	desire	to
mend	our	ways.	To	accord	the	Benighted	the	proper	respect.’
Others	nodded,	and	the	merchant	took	this	in	and	went	on,	‘We	will	help.
All	of	us	here,	we	will	stand	with	you,	Priestess.	Once	he	is	made	to	understand
what	is	happening,	once	we	confront	him	–	there	in	that	damned	tavern	with
that	damned	Tiste	Andii	he	games	with	–	how	can	he	turn	away	from	us	yet
again?’
But	what	of	fairness?	What	of	Seerdomin	and	his	own	wounds?	See	the	zeal
in	your	fellows	–	see	it	in	yourself,	then	ask:	where	is	my	compassion	when	I
stand	before	him,	shouting	my	demands?
Why	will	none	of	you	defend	yourselves?
‘Priestess!’
‘Very	well.’	And	she	rose,	drawing	her	woollen	robe	tight	about	herself.
‘Lead	on,	then,	merchant,	to	where	he	may	be	found.’
	
A	man	huddled	against	the	counter,	sneezing	fiercely	enough	to	loosen	his
teeth,	and	while	this	barrage	went	on	none	at	the	table	attempted	to	speak.
Hands	reached	for	tankards,	kelyk	glistened	on	lips	and	eyes	shone	murky	and
fixed	with	intent	upon	the	field	of	battle.
Spinnock	Durav	waited	for	Seerdomin	to	make	a	move,	to	attempt
something	unexpected	in	the	shoring	up	of	his	buckling	defences	–	the	man
was	always	good	for	a	surprise	or	two,	a	flash	of	tactical	genius	that	could	well
halt	Spinnock	in	his	tracks,	even	make	him	stagger.	And	was	this	not	the	very
heart	of	the	contest,	its	bright	hint	of	glory?
The	sneezing	fit	ended	–	something	that,	evidently,	came	of	too	much
kelyk.	A	sudden	flux	of	the	sinuses,	followed	by	an	alarmingly	dark	discharge
–	he’d	begun	to	see	stains,	on	walls	and	pavestones	and	cobbles,	all	over	the
city	now.	This	foreign	drink	was	outselling	even	ale	and	wine.	And	among	the
drinkers	there	were	now	emerging	abusers,	stumbling	glaze-eyed,	mouths
hanging,	tongues	like	black	worms.	As	yet,	Spinnock	had	not	seen	such	among
the	Tiste	Andii,	but	perhaps	it	was	only	a	matter	of	time.
He	sipped	at	his	cup	of	wine,	pleased	to	note	that	the	trembling	in	his


fingers	had	finally	ceased.	The	eruption	of	power	from	Kurald	Galain	that	had
taken	him	so	unawares	had	vanished,	leaving	little	more	than	a	vague	unease
that	only	slightly	soured	the	taste	of	the	wine.	Strange	disturbances	these	nights;
who	could	say	their	portent?
The	High	Priestess	might	have	an	idea	or	two,	he	suspected,	although	the
punctuation	of	every	statement	from	her	never	changed,	now,	did	it?	Half
smiling,	he	sipped	again	at	his	drink.
Seerdomin	frowned	and	sat	back.	‘This	is	an	assault	I	cannot	survive,’	he
pronounced.	‘The	Jester ’s	deceit	was	well	played,	Spinnock.	There	was	no
anticipating	that.’
‘Truly?’	Spinnock	asked.	‘With	these	allies	here?’
Seerdomin	grimaced	at	the	other	two	players,	then	grunted	a	sour	laugh.
‘Ah,	yes,	I	see	your	point.	That	kelyk	takes	their	minds,	I	think.’
‘Sharpens,	just	so	you	know,’	said	Garsten,	licking	his	stained	lips.
‘Although	I’d	swear,	some	nights	it’s	more	potent	than	other	times,	wouldn’t
you	say	so,	Fuldit?’
‘Eh?	Yah,	s’pose	so.	When	you	gonna	move	den,	Seerdomin?	Eh?	Resto,
bring	us	another	bottle!’
‘Perhaps,’	muttered	Seerdomin,	‘it’s	my	mind	that’s	not	sharp.	I	believe	I
must	surrender.’
Spinnock	said	nothing,	although	he	was	disappointed	–	no,	he	was	shaken.
He	could	see	a	decent	counter,	had	been	assuming	his	opponent	had	seen	it
immediately,	but	had	been	busy	seeking	something	better,	something	wilder.
Other	nights,	Seerdomin’s	talent	would	burst	through	at	moments	like	these	–	a
fearless	gambit	that	seemed	to	pivot	the	world	on	this	very	tabletop.
Perhaps	if	I	wait	a	little	longer—
‘I	yield,’	said	Seerdomin.
Words	uttered,	a	crisis	pronounced.
‘Resto,	bring	us	a	pitcher,	if	you’d	be	so—’	Seerdomin	got	no	further.	He
seemed	to	jolt	back	into	his	chair,	as	if	an	invisible	hand	had	just	slammed	into
his	chest.	His	eyes	were	on	the	tavern	door.
Spinnock	twisted	in	his	seat	to	see	that	strangers	had	arrived	at	the	Scour.	A
young	woman	wearing	a	rough-woven	russet	robe,	her	hair	cut	short	–	shorter
even	than	the	High	Priestess’s	–	yet	the	same	midnight	black.	A	pale	face	both
soft	and	exquisite,	eyes	of	deep	brown,	now	searching	through	the	gloom,
finding	at	last	the	one	she	sought:	Seerdomin.	Behind	her	crowded	others,	all
wearing	little	more	than	rags,	their	wan	faces	tight	with	something	like	panic.
The	woman	in	the	lead	walked	over.
Seerdomin	sat	like	a	man	nailed	to	his	chair.	All	colour	had	left	his	face	a


moment	earlier,	but	now	it	was	darkening,	his	eyes	flaring	with	hard	anger.
‘Benighted—’
‘This	is	my	refuge,’	he	said.	‘Leave.	Now.’
‘We—’
‘“We”?	Look	at	your	followers,	Priestess.’
She	turned,	in	time	to	see	the	last	of	them	rush	out	of	the	tavern	door.
Seerdomin	snorted.
Impressively,	the	young	woman	held	her	ground.	The	robe	fell	open	–
lacking	a	belt	–	and	Spinnock	Durav	judged	she	was	barely	adolescent.	A
priestess?	Ah,	the	Great	Barrow,	the	Redeemer.	‘Benighted,’	she	resumed,	in	a
voice	that	few	would	find	hard	to	listen	to,	indeed,	at	length,	‘I	am	not	here	for
myself.	Those	who	were	with	me	insisted,	and	even	if	their	courage	failed	them
at	the	end,	this	makes	their	need	no	less	valid.’
‘They	came	with	demands,’	Seerdomin	said.	‘They	have	no	right,	and	they
realized	the	truth	of	that	as	soon	as	they	saw	me.	You	should	now	do	the	same,
and	leave	as	they	have.’
‘I	must	try—’
Seerdomin	surged	to	his	feet,	suddenly	enough	to	startle	Garsten	and	Fuldit
despite	their	addled	senses,	and	both	stared	up	wide-eyed	and	frightened.
The	priestess	did	not	even	flinch.	‘I	must	try,’	she	repeated,	‘for	their	sake,
and	for	my	own.	We	are	beset	in	the	camp—’
‘No,’	cut	in	Seerdomin.	‘You	have	no	right.’
‘Please,	will	you	just	listen?’
The	hard	edge	of	those	words	clearly	surprised	Seerdomin.	Garsten	and
Fuldit,	collecting	their	tankards	and	bottles,	quickly	left	the	table.
Spinnock	Durav	rose,	bowed	slightly	to	both,	and	made	for	the	exit.	As	he
passed	Resto	–	who	stood	motionless	with	a	pitcher	in	his	hand	–	he	said	under
his	breath,	‘On	my	tab,	please	–	this	entire	night.	Seerdomin	will	have	no
thought	of	you	when	he	leaves.’
Resto	blinked	up	at	him,	then	nodded.
	
In	the	darkness	opposite	the	Scour ’s	door,	Spinnock	Durav	waited.	He	had	half
expected	to	see	the	pilgrims	waiting	outside,	but	the	street	was	empty	–	they	had
fled	indeed,	at	a	run,	probably	all	the	way	back	to	the	camp.	There	was	little
spine	in	the	followers	of	the	Redeemer.
With	at	least	one	exception,	he	corrected	himself	as	the	priestess	stepped
outside.
Even	from	ten	paces	away,	he	saw	her	sag	slightly,	as	if	finding	herself	on


suddenly	watery	legs.	Tugging	the	robe	tight	round	herself,	she	set	off,	three,
four	strides,	then	slowed	and	finally	halted	to	turn	and	face	Spinnock	Durav.
Who	came	forward.	‘My	pardon,	Priestess,’	he	said.
‘Your	friend	took	that	pitcher	for	himself,’	she	said.	‘Expect	a	long	night.	If
you	have	a	care	you	can	collect	him	in	a	few	bells	–	I’d	rather	he	not	spend	a
senseless	night	lying	on	that	filthy	floor.’
‘I	would	have	thought	the	possibility	might	please	you,’	Spinnock	said.
She	frowned.	‘No.	He	is	the	Benighted.’
‘And	what	does	that	mean?’
She	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Each	day,	until	recently,	he	came	to	the	Great
Barrow	and	knelt	before	it.	Not	to	pray,	not	to	deliver	a	trinket.’
Confused,	Spinnock	Durav	asked,	‘What,	then?’
‘He	would	rather	that	remain	a	secret,	I	suspect.’
‘Priestess,	he	is	my	friend.	I	see	well	his	distress—’
‘And	why	does	that	bother	you	so?	More	than	a	friend	might	feel	–	I	can
sense	that.	Most	friends	might	offer	sympathy,	even	more,	but	within	them
remains	the	stone	thought	that	they	are	thankful	that	they	themselves	do	not
share	their	friend’s	plight.	But	that	is	not	within	you,	not	with	this	Seerdomin.
No,’	she	drew	a	step	closer,	eyes	searching,	‘he	answers	a	need,	and	so
wounded	as	he	now	is,	you	begin	to	bleed.’
‘Mother	Dark,	woman!’
She	retreated	at	his	outburst	and	looked	away.	‘I	am	sorry.	Sir,	the
Benighted	kneels	before	the	Great	Barrow	and	delivers	unto	the	Redeemer	the
most	precious	gift	of	all.	Company.	Asking	for	nothing.	He	comes	to	relieve
the	Redeemer ’s	loneliness.’	She	ran	a	hand	back	through	her	short	hair.	‘I
sought	to	tell	him	something,	but	he	would	not	hear	me.’
‘Can	I—’
‘I	doubt	it.	I	tried	to	tell	him	what	I	am	sensing	from	the	Redeemer.	Sir,
your	friend	is	missed.’	She	sighed,	turning	away.	‘If	all	who	worship	did	so
without	need.	If	all	came	to	their	saviour	unmindful	of	that	title	and	its	burden,
if	they	came	as	friends—’	she	glanced	back	at	him,	‘what	would	happen	then,
do	you	think?	I	wonder…’
He	watched	her	walk	away,	feeling	humbled,	too	shaken	to	pursue,	to	root
out	the	answers	–	the	details	–	he	needed	most.	To	find	out	what	he	could	do.
For	Seerdomin.	For	her.
For	her?
Now,	why	should	she	matter?	By	the	Abyss,	what	has	she	done	to	me?
And	how	in	the	Mother’s	name	can	Seerdomin	resist	her?


	
How	many	women	had	there	been?	He	had	lost	count.	It	would	have	been	better,
perhaps,	if	he’d	at	least	once	elected	to	share	his	gift	of	longevity.	Better,	yes,
than	watching	those	few	who’d	remained	with	him	for	any	length	of	time	lose
all	their	beauty,	surrendering	their	youth,	until	there	was	no	choice	but	for
Kallor	to	discard	them,	to	lock	them	away,	one	by	one,	in	some	tower	on	some
windswept	knoll.	What	else	could	he	have	done?	They	hobbled	into	lives	of
misery,	and	that	misery	was	an	affront	to	his	sensibilities.	Too	much	bitterness,
too	much	malice	in	those	hot,	ageing	eyes	ever	fixing	upon	him.	Did	he	not
age	as	well?	True,	a	year	for	them	was	but	a	heartbeat	for	Kallor,	but	see	the
lines	of	his	face,	see	the	slow	wasting	of	muscle,	the	iron	hue	of	his	hair…
It	was	not	just	a	matter	of	choosing	the	slowest	burning	wood,	after	all,
was	it?	And	with	that	thought	he	kicked	at	the	coals	of	the	fire,	watched	sparks
roil	nightward.	Sometimes,	the	urgent	flames	of	the	quick	and	the	shortlived
delivered	their	own	kind	of	heat.	Hard	wood	and	slow	burn,	soft	wood	and
smouldering	reluctance	before	ashen	collapse.	Resinous	wood	and	oh	how	she
flared!	Blinding,	yes,	a	glory	no	man	could	turn	from.
Too	bad	he’d	had	to	kill	every	child	he	begat.	No	doubt	that	left	most	of	his
wives	and	lovers	somewhat	disaffected.	But	he	had	not	been	so	cruel	as	to
hesitate,	had	he?	No.	Why,	he’d	tear	those	ghastly	babes	from	their	mothers’
arms	not	moments	after	they’d	tumbled	free	of	the	womb,	and	was	that	not	a
true	sign	of	mercy?	No	one	grows	attached	to	dead	things,	not	even	mothers.
Attachments,	yes,	now	they	were	indeed	a	waste	of	time	and,	more
relevantly,	a	weakness.	To	rule	an	empire	–	to	rule	a	hundred	empires	–	one
needed	a	certain	objectivity.	All	was	to	be	used,	to	be	remade	howsoever	he
pleased.	Why,	he	had	launched	vast	construction	projects	to	glorify	his	rule,
but	few	understood	that	it	was	not	the	completion	that	mattered,	but	the	work
itself	and	all	that	it	implied	–	his	command	over	their	lives,	their	loyalty,	their
labour.	Why,	he	could	work	them	for	decades,	see	generations	of	the	fools	pass
one	by	one,	all	working	each	and	every	day	of	their	lives,	and	still	they	did	not
understand	what	it	meant	for	them	to	give	to	him	–	to	Kallor	–	so	many	years
of	their	mortal	existence,	so	much	of	it,	truly,	that	any	rational	soul	would
howl	at	the	cruel	injustice	of	such	a	life.
This	was,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned,	the	real	mystery	of	civilization	–	and
for	all	that	he	exploited	it	he	was,	by	the	end,	no	closer	to	understanding	it.
This	willingness	of	otherwise	intelligent	(well,	reasonably	intelligent)	people
to	parcel	up	and	then	bargain	away	appalling	percentages	of	their	very	limited
lives,	all	in	service	to	someone	else.	And	the	rewards?	Ah,	some	security,


perhaps.	The	cement	that	is	stability.	A	sound	roof,	something	on	the	plate,	the
beloved	offspring	each	one	destined	to	repeat	the	whole	travail.	And	was	that
an	even	exchange?
It	would	not	have	been	so,	for	him.	He	knew	that,	had	known	it	from	the
very	first.	He	would	bargain	away	nothing	of	his	life.	He	would	serve	no	one,
yield	none	of	his	labour	to	the	edification	and	ever-expanding	wealth	of	some
fool	who	imagined	that	his	or	her	own	part	of	the	bargain	was	profound	in	its
generosity,	was	indeed	the	most	precious	of	gifts.	That	to	work	for	him	or	her
was	a	privilege	–	gods!	The	conceit	of	that!	The	lie,	so	bristling	and	charged	in
its	brazen	display!
Just	how	many	rules	of	civil	behaviour	were	designed	to	perpetuate	such
egregious	schemes	of	power	and	control	of	the	few	over	the	many?	Rules
defended	to	the	death	(usually	the	death	of	the	many,	rarely	that	of	the	few)	with
laws	and	wars,	with	threats	and	brutal	repression	–	ah,	those	were	the	days,
were	they	not?	How	he	had	gloried	in	that	outrage!
He	would	never	be	one	of	the	multitude.	And	he	had	proved	it,	again	and
again,	and	again.	And	he	would	continue	to	prove	it.
A	crown	was	within	reach.	A	kingship	waited	to	be	claimed.	Mastery	not
over	something	as	mundane	as	an	empire	–	that	game	had	grown	stale	long
ago	–	but	over	a	realm.	An	entity	consisting	of	all	the	possible	forces	of
existence.	The	power	of	earthly	flesh,	every	element	unbound,	the	coruscating
will	of	belief,	the	skein	of	politics,	religion,	social	accord,	sensibilities,	woven
from	the	usual	tragic	roots	of	past	ages	golden	and	free	of	pain	and	new	ages
bright	with	absurd	promise.	While	through	it	all	fell	the	rains	of	oblivion,	the
cascading	torrent	of	failure	and	death,	suffering	and	misery,	a	god	broken	and
for	ever	doomed	to	remain	so	–	oh,	Kallor	knew	he	could	usurp	such	a
creature,	leave	it	as	powerless	as	his	most	abject	subject.
All	–	all	of	it	–	within	his	reach.
He	kicked	again	at	the	embers,	the	too-small	branches	that	had	made	up	this
shortlived	fire,	saw	countless	twigs	fall	into	white	ash.	A	few	picked	bones
were	visible	amidst	the	coals,	all	that	remained	of	the	pathetic	creature	he	had
devoured	earlier	this	night.
A	smear	of	clouds	cut	a	swath	across	the	face	of	the	stars	and	the	dustveiled	moon	had	yet	to	rise.	Somewhere	out	on	the	plain	coyotes	bickered	with
the	night.	He	had	found	trader	tracks	this	past	day,	angling	northwest-southeast.
Well-worn	wagon	ruts,	the	tramping	of	yoked	oxen.	Garbage	strewn	to	either
side.	Rather	disappointing,	all	things	considered;	he	had	grown	used	to
solitude,	where	the	only	sign	of	human	activity	had	been	the	occasional
grassfire	on	the	western	horizon	–	plains	nomads	and	their	mysterious	ways	–


something	to	do	with	the	bhederin	herds	and	the	needs	for	various	grasses,	he
suspected.	If	they	spied	him	they	wisely	kept	their	distance.	His	passing	through
places	had	a	way	of	agitating	ancient	spirits,	a	detail	he	had	once	found
irritating	enough	to	hunt	the	things	down	and	kill	them,	but	no	longer.	Let	them
whine	and	twitch,	thrash	and	moan	in	the	grip	of	timorous	nightmares,	and	all
that.	Let	their	mortal	children	cower	in	the	high	grasses	until	he	was	well	and
gone.
The	High	King	had	other	concerns.	And	other	matters	with	which	he	could
occupy	his	mind.
He	sat	straighter,	every	sense	stung	awake	by	a	burgeoning	of	power	to	the
north.	Slowly	rising	to	his	feet,	Kallor	stared	into	the	darkness.	Yes,	something
foaming	awake,	what	might	it	be?	And…yes,	another	force,	and	that	one	he
well	recognized	–	Tiste	Andii.
Breath	hissed	between	worn	teeth.	Of	course,	if	he	continued	on	this	path
he	would	have	come	full	circle,	back	to	that	horrid	place	–	what	was	its	name?
Yes,	Coral.	The	whole	mess	with	the	Pannion	Domin,	oh,	the	stupidity!	The
pathetic,	squalid	idiocy	of	that	day!
Could	this	be	those	two	accursed	hunters?	Had	they	somehow	swept	round
him?	Were	they	now	striking	south	to	finally	face	him?	Well,	he	might
welcome	that.	He’d	killed	his	share	of	dragons,	both	pure	and	Soletaken.	One
at	a	time,	of	course.	Two	at	once…that	could	be	a	challenge.
For	all	this	time,	their	pursuit	had	been	a	clumsy,	witless	thing.	So	easily
fooled,	led	astray	–	he	could	have	ambushed	them	countless	times,	and	perhaps
he	should	have	done	just	that.	At	the	very	least,	he	might	have	come	to
understand	the	source	of	their	persistent	–	yes,	pathological	–	relentlessness.
Had	he	truly	angered	Rake	that	much?	It	seemed	ridiculous.	The	Son	of
Darkness	was	not	one	to	become	so	obsessed;	indeed,	none	of	the	Tiste	Andii
were,	and	was	that	not	their	fundamental	weakness?	This	failing	of	will?
How	had	he	so	angered	Korlat	and	Orfantal?	Was	it	because	he	did	not
stay,	did	not	elect	to	fight	alongside	all	the	doomed	fools	on	that	day?	Let	the
Malazans	bleed!	They	were	our	enemies!	Let	the	T’lan	Imass	betray	Silverfox	–
she	deserved	it!
It	was	not	our	war,	Brood.	Not	our	war,	Rake.	Why	didn’t	you	listen	to	me?
Bah,	come	and	face	me,	then,	Korlat.	Orfantal.	Come,	let	us	be	done	with
this	rubbish!
The	twin	flaring	of	powers	ebbed	suddenly.
Somewhere	far	to	the	east	the	coyotes	resumed	their	frantic	cries.
He	looked	skyward,	saw	the	gleam	of	the	rising	moon,	its	ravaged	scowl
of	reflected	sunlight	and	the	blighted	dust	of	its	stirred	slumber.	Look	at	you.


Your	face	is	my	face,	let	us	be	truthful	about	that.	Beaten	and	boxed	about,	yet
we	climb	upright	time	and	again,	to	resume	our	trek.
The	sky	cares	nothing	for	you,	dear	one.	The	stars	don’t	even	see	you.
But	you	will	march	on,	because	it	is	what	you	do.
A	final	kick	at	the	coals.	Let	the	grasses	burn	to	scar	his	wake,	he	cared	not.
No,	he	would	not	come	full	circle	–	he	never	did,	which	was	what	had	kept	him
alive	for	this	long.	No	point	in	changing	anything,	was	there?
Kallor	set	out.	Northward.	There	were,	if	he	recalled,	settlements,	and
roads,	and	a	main	trader	track	skirling	west	and	north,	out	across	the
Cinnamon	Wastes,	all	the	way	to	Darujhistan.
Where	he	had	an	appointment	to	keep.	A	destiny	to	claim	by	right	of	sword
and	indomitable	will.
The	moon’s	light	took	hold	of	his	shadow	and	made	a	mess	of	it.	Kallor
walked	on,	oblivious	of	such	details.

Three	scrawny	horses,	one	neglected	ox	and	a	wagon	with	a	bent	axle	and	a
cracked	brake:	the	amassed	inherited	wealth	of	the	village	of	Morsko
comprised	only	these.	Bodies	left	to	rot	on	the	tavern	floor	–	they	should	have
set	fire	to	the	place,	Nimander	realized.	Too	late	now,	too	hard	the	shove	away
from	that	horrid	scene.	And	what	of	the	victims	on	their	crosses,	wrapped	and
leaking	black	ichors	into	the	muddy	earth?	They	had	left	them	as	well.
Motionless	beneath	a	blanket	in	the	bed	of	the	wagon,	Clip	stared
sightlessly	at	the	sideboards.	Flecks	of	the	porridge	they	had	forced	down	his
throat	that	morning	studded	his	chin.	Flies	crawled	and	buzzed	round	his
mouth.	Every	now	and	then,	faint	trembling	rippled	through	his	body.
Stolen	away.
Noon,	the	third	day	now	on	this	well-made	cobbled,	guttered	road.	They
had	just	passed	south	of	the	town	of	Heath,	which	had	once	been	a	larger
settlement,	perhaps	a	city,	and	might	well	return	to	such	past	glory,	this	time	on
the	riches	of	kelyk,	a	dilute	form	of	saemankelyk,	the	Blood	of	the	Dying	God.
These	details	and	more	they	had	learned	from	the	merchant	trains	rolling	up
and	down	this	road,	scores	of	wagons	setting	out	virtually	empty	to	villages
and	towns	east	of	Bastion	–	to	Outlook	itself	–	then	returning	loaded	with
amphorae	of	the	foul	drink,	wagons	groaning	beneath	the	weight,	back	to	some
form	of	central	distribution	hub	in	Bastion.
The	road	itself	ran	south	of	these	settlements	–	all	of	which	nested	above
the	shoreline	of	Pilgrim	Lake.	When	it	came	opposite	a	village	there	would	be


a	junction,	with	a	track	or	wend	leading	north.	A	more	substantial	crossroads
marked	the	intersection	of	levelled	roads	to	the	reviving	cities	of	Heath,	Kel
Tor	and,	somewhere	still	ahead,	Sarn.
Nimander	and	his	group	did	not	travel	disguised,	did	not	pretend	to	be
other	than	what	they	were,	and	it	was	clear	that	the	priests,	fleeing	ahead	of
them,	had	delivered	word	to	all	their	kin	on	the	road	and,	from	there,
presumably	into	the	towns	and	villages.	At	the	junctions,	in	the	ramshackle
waystations	and	storage	sheds,	food	and	water	and	forage	for	the	animals
awaited	them.
The	Dying	God	–	or	his	priests	–	had	blessed	them,	apparently,	and	now
awaited	their	pleasure	in	Bastion.	The	one	who	had	sacrificed	his	soul	to	the
Dying	God	was	doubly	blessed,	and	some	final	consummation	was	anticipated,
probably	leading	to	Clip’s	soul’s	being	thoroughly	devoured	by	an	entity	who
was	cursed	to	suffer	for	eternity.	Thus	accursed,	it	was	little	wonder	the
creature	welcomed	company.
All	things	considered,	it	was	well	that	their	journey	had	been	one	of	ease
and	accommodation.	Nimander	suspected	that	his	troupe	would	have	been
rather	more	pleased	to	carve	their	way	through	hordes	of	frenzied	fanatics,
assuming	they	could	manage	such	a	thing.
Having	confirmed	that	Clip’s	comatose	condition	was	unchanged,	he
climbed	down	from	the	wagon	and	returned	to	the	scruffy	mare	he	had	been
riding	since	Morsko.	The	poor	beast’s	ribs	had	been	like	the	bars	of	a	cage
under	tattered	vellum,	its	eyes	listless	and	its	tan	coat	patchy	and	dull.	In	the
three	days	since,	despite	the	steady	riding,	the	animal	had	recovered	somewhat
under	Nimander ’s	ministrations.	He	was	not	particularly	enamoured	of	horses
in	general,	but	no	creature	deserved	to	suffer.
As	he	climbed	into	the	worn	saddle	he	saw	Skintick	standing,	stepping	up
on	to	the	wagon’s	bench	where	Nenanda	sat	holding	the	reins,	and	shading	his
eyes	to	look	southward	across	the	empty	plain.
‘See	something?’
A	moment,	then,	‘Yes.	Someone…walking.’
Up	from	the	south?	‘But	there’s	nothing	out	there.’
Kedeviss	and	Aranatha	rose	in	their	stirrups.
‘Let’s	get	going,’	Desra	said	from	the	wagon	bed.	‘It’s	too	hot	to	be	just
sitting	here.’
Nimander	could	see	the	figure	now,	tall	for	a	human.	Unkempt	straggly
grey	hair	fanned	out	round	his	head	like	an	aura.	He	seemed	to	be	wearing	a
long	coat	of	chain,	down	to	halfway	between	his	knees	and	ankles,	slitted	in
front.	The	hand-and-a-half	grip	of	a	greatsword	rose	above	his	left	shoulder.


‘An	old	bastard,’	muttered	Skintick,	‘to	be	walking	like	that.’
‘Could	be	he	lost	his	horse,’	said	Nenanda	disinterestedly.	‘Desra	is	right	–
we	should	be	going.’
Striding	like	one	fevered	under	the	sun,	the	stranger	came	ever	closer.
Something	about	him	compelled	Nimander ’s	attention,	a	kind	of	dark
fascination	–	for	what,	he	couldn’t	quite	name.	A	cascade	of	images	tumbled
through	his	mind.	As	if	he	was	watching	an	apparition	bludgeoning	its	way	out
from	some	hoary	legend,	from	a	time	when	gods	struggled,	hands	about	each
other ’s	throats,	when	blood	fell	as	rain	and	the	sky	itself	rolled	and	crashed
against	the	shores	of	the	Abyss.	All	this,	riding	across	the	dusty	air	between
them	as	the	old	man	came	up	to	the	road.	All	this,	written	in	the	deep	lines	of
his	gaunt	visage,	in	the	bleak	wastelands	of	his	grey	eyes.
‘He	is	as	winter,’	murmured	Skintick.
Yes,	and	something…colder.
‘What	city	lies	beyond?’	the	man	asked.
A	startled	moment	when	Nimander	realized	that	the	stranger	had	spoken
Tiste	Andii.	‘Heath.’
The	man	turned,	faced	west.	‘This	way,	then,	lies	Bastion	and	the	Cinnamon
Track.’
Nimander	shrugged.
‘You	are	from	Coral?’	the	stranger	asked,	scanning	the	group.	‘Is	he	still
camped	there,	then?	But	no,	I	recognize	none	of	you,	and	that	would	not	be
possible.	Even	so,	tell	me	why	I	should	not	kill	you	all.’
That	got	Nenanda’s	attention,	and	he	twisted	in	his	seat	to	sneer	down	at	the
old	man.
But	Nimander ’s	blood	had	turned	to	ice.	‘Because,	sir,	you	do	not	know
us.’
Pale	eyes	settled	on	him.	‘You	have	a	point,	actually.	Very	well,	instead,	I
would	travel	with	you.	Ride,	yes,	in	your	wagon	–	I	have	worn	my	boots
through	crossing	this	wretched	plain.	Tell	me,	have	you	water,	decent	food?’
Nenanda	twisted	further	to	glare	at	Nimander.	‘Turn	this	fool	away.	He	can
drink	our	dust.’
The	old	man	regarded	Nenanda	for	a	moment,	then	turned	back	to
Nimander.	‘Tie	a	leash	on	this	one	and	we	should	be	fine.’	And	he	stepped	up	to
the	wagon	and,	setting	a	foot	on	a	spoke	of	the	rear	wheel,	pulled	himself	up.
Where	he	paused,	frowning	as	he	studied	the	prostrate	form	of	Clip.	‘Is	he	ill?’
he	asked	Desra.	‘Are	you	caught	with	plague?	No,	not	that	–	your	kind	rarely
succumb	to	such	things.	Stop	staring,	child,	and	tell	me	what	is	wrong	with	this
one.’


‘None	of	your	business,’	she	snapped,	as	Nimander	had	known	she	would.
‘If	you’re	going	to	crowd	in	then	sit	there,	to	give	him	some	shade.’
Thin	brows	lifted,	then	a	faint	smile	flickered	across	his	withered,	cracked
lips.	And	without	another	word	he	moved	to	where	Desra	had	indicated	and
settled	down,	stretching	out	his	legs.	‘Some	water,	darling,	if	you	please.’
She	stared	at	him	for	a	moment,	then	pulled	loose	a	skin	and	slid	it	over.
‘That	one’s	not	water,’	she	said	with	a	sweet	smile.	‘It’s	called	kelyk.	A	local
brew.	Very	popular.’
Nimander	sat	motionless,	watching	all	this.	He	saw	that	Skintick	and
Nenanda	were	both	doing	the	same.
At	Desra’s	words,	the	old	man	grimaced.	‘I’d	rather	water,’	he	said,	but
reached	for	the	skin	anyway.	Tugged	free	the	stopper,	then	sniffed.
And	recoiled.	‘Imperial	dust!’	he	said	in	a	growl.	He	replaced	the	stopper
and	flung	the	skin	to	the	back	of	the	wagon.	‘If	you	won’t	spare	water	then
never	mind,	bitch.	We	can	settle	your	inhospitality	later.’
‘Desra,’	said	Nimander	as	he	gathered	his	reins,	‘give	the	man	some
water.’
‘After	he	called	me	a	bitch?’
‘After	you	tried	poisoning	him	with	kelyk,	yes.’
They	set	out	on	the	road,	westward.	Two	more	days,	said	the	last	trader
they	had	passed	that	morning.	Past	Sarn	and	the	lesser	lake.	To	Bastion,	the	city
by	the	inland	sea,	a	sea	so	filled	with	salt	no	sailor	or	fisher	could	drown	in	it,
and	where	no	fish	could	be	found	barring	an	enormous	eel	with	the	jaws	of	a
wolf.	Salt	that	had	not	been	there	a	generation	ago,	but	the	world	will	change,
amen.
The	Abject	Temple	of	Saemenkelyk	awaited	them	in	Bastion.
Two	days,	then,	to	meet	the	Dying	God.	And,	one	way	or	another,	to	wrest
from	it	Clip’s	soul.	Nimander	did	not	think	the	priests	would	just	step	aside	for
that.
Riding	his	mount	alongside	the	wagon,	Nimander	spoke	to	the	old	man.	‘If
you	are	going	to	Bastion,	sir,	you	might	want	to	reconsider	staying	with	us.’
‘And	why	is	that.’	There	was	little	in	that	tone	even	remotely	interrogative.
‘I	don’t	think	I	can	adequately	explain	why,’	Nimander	replied.	‘You’ll	just
have	to	take	me	at	my	word.’
Instead	the	old	man	unslung	his	weapon	and	set	it	between	him	and	Clip,
then	he	laced	his	long-fingered	hands	behind	his	head	and	settled	back,	closing
his	eyes.	‘Wake	me	when	it’s	time	to	eat,’	he	said.
The	worn	grip	and	nicked	pommel	of	the	greatsword,	the	broad	cross-hilt
and	the	scarred	wooden	scabbard	all	drew	Nimander ’s	attention.	He	can	still


use	that	damned	weapon,	ancient	as	he	is.
Grim	legends,	the	clangour	of	warring	gods,	yes,	this	gaunt	warrior
belonged	to	such	things.
He	collected	his	reins.	‘As	you	like,	stranger.’	Nudging	the	mare	into	a	trot,
he	glanced	up	to	meet	Skintick’s	gaze	as	he	rode	past.	And	saw	none	of	the
usual	mocking	pleasure.	Instead,	something	wan,	distraught.
True,	there	was	not	much	to	laugh	about,	was	there?
My	unhappy	kin.
Onward,	then,	to	Bastion.

A	succession	of	ridges	stepped	down	towards	the	basin	of	the	valley,	each
marking	a	time	when	the	river	had	been	wider,	its	cold	waters	churning	away
from	dying	glaciers	and	meltwater	lakes.	Now,	a	narrow	twisting	gully
threaded	along	the	distant	floor,	fringed	by	cottonwoods.	Standing	upon	the
highest	ridge,	Traveller	looked	down	to	the	next	level,	where	a	half-dozen	tipis
rose,	not	quite	breaking	the	high	ground	skyline.	Figures	moving	about,
clothed	in	tanned	hides	and	skins,	a	few	dogs,	the	latter	now	padding	out	to	the
camp’s	edge	closest	to	the	slope,	sharp	ears	and	lifted	noses	alerted	to	his
presence	although	not	one	barked.
A	herd	of	horses	foraged	further	down,	a	small,	stocky	steppe	breed	that
Traveller	had	never	seen	before.	Ochre	flanks	deepening	to	brown	on	the
haunches,	manes	and	tails	almost	black.
Down	on	the	valley	floor,	some	distance	to	the	right,	carrion	birds	were	on
the	ground,	perched	on	islands	of	dead	flesh	beneath	the	branches	of
cottonwoods.	Other	horses	wandered	there,	these	ones	more	familiar,	trailing
reins	as	they	cropped	the	high	grasses.
Two	men	walked	out	to	the	base	of	the	slope.	Traveller	set	out	down
towards	them.	His	own	escort	of	Hounds	had	left	him	this	morning,	either	off
on	a	hunt	or	gone	for	good	–	there	was	no	telling	which.
Sun-burnished	faces	watched	him	approach.	Eyes	nestled	in	wind-stretched
epicanthic	folds.	Midnight-black	hair	in	loosely	bound	manes,	through	which
were	threaded	–	rather	sweetly	–	white	blossoms.	Long,	narrow-bladed	curved
knives	in	beaded	belts,	the	iron	black	except	along	the	honed	edges.	Their
clothing	was	beautifully	sewn	with	red-dyed	gut	thread,	studded	here	and	there
with	bronze	rivets.
The	elder	one,	on	the	right,	now	held	up	both	hands,	palms	outward,	and
said	in	archaic	Daru,	‘Master	of	the	Wolf-Horses,	welcome.	Do	not	kill	us.	Do


not	rape	our	women.	Do	not	steal	our	children.	Leave	us	with	no	diseases.
Leave	us	our	g’athend	horses-of-the-rock,	our	mute	dogs,	our	food	and	our
shelters,	our	weapons	and	our	tools.	Eat	what	we	give	you.	Drink	what	we	give
you.	Smoke	what	we	give	you.	Thank	us	for	all	three.	Grant	your	seed	if	a
woman	comes	to	you	in	the	night,	kill	all	vermin	you	find.	Kiss	with	passion,
caress	with	tenderness,	gift	us	with	the	wisdom	of	your	years	but	none	of	their
bitterness.	Do	not	judge	and	you	will	not	be	judged.	Do	not	hate,	do	not	fear,
and	neither	will	we	hate	or	fear	you.	Do	not	invite	your	wolf-horses	into	our
camp,	lest	they	devour	us	and	all	our	beasts.	Welcome,	then,	wanderer,	and	we
will	tell	you	of	matters,	and	show	you	other	matters.	We	are	the	Kindaru,
keepers	of	the	horses-of-the-rock,	the	last	clan	left	in	all	Lama	Teth	Andath	–
the	grasses	we	have	made	so	that	trees	do	not	reach	high	to	steal	the	sky.
Welcome.	You	need	a	bath.’
To	such	a	greeting,	Traveller	could	only	stand,	silent,	bemused,	torn
between	laughter	and	weeping.
The	younger	of	the	two	men	–	perhaps	in	his	mid-twenties	–	smiled	wryly
and	said,	‘The	more	strangers	we	meet,	the	more	we	add	to	our	words	of
welcome.	This	is	born	of	experience,	most	of	it	sad,	unpleasant.	If	you	mean	us
harm,	we	ask	that	you	heed	the	words	given	you,	and	so	turn	away.	Of	course,
if	you	mean	to	betray	us,	then	there	is	nothing	we	can	do.	Deceit	is	not	our
way.’
Traveller	grimaced.	‘Deceit	is	everyone’s	way.’
Twin	expressions	of	dismay,	so	similar	that	it	was	made	clear	they	were
father	and	son.	‘Yes,’	said	the	son,	‘that	is	true.	If	we	saw	that	you	would	enter
our	camp	and	be	with	us,	yet	plan	betrayal,	why,	we	would	plan	the	same,	and
seek	to	deliver	unto	you	first	what	you	thought	to	deliver	unto	us.’
‘You	are	truly	the	last	camp	left?’
‘Yes,	we	are	waiting	to	die.	Our	ways,	our	memories.	And	the	g’athend	will
run	free	once	more,	until	they	too	are	gone	–	for	the	horses	we	keep	are	the
last	of	their	kind,	too.’
‘Do	you	ride	them?’
‘No,	we	worship	them.’
Yet	they	spoke	Daru	–	what	strange	history	twisted	and	isolated	these	ones
from	all	the	others?	What	turned	them	away	from	farms	and	villages,	from
cities	and	riches?	‘Kindaru,	I	humbly	accept	your	welcome	and	will	strive	to	be
a	worthy	guest.’
Both	men	now	smiled.	And	the	younger	one	gestured	with	one	hand.
A	faint	sound	behind	him	made	Traveller	turn,	to	see	four	nomads	rising
as	if	from	nowhere	on	the	slope,	armed	with	spears.


Traveller	looked	back	at	the	father	and	son.	‘You	are	all	too	familiar	with
strangers,	I	think.’
They	walked	down	into	the	camp.	The	silent	dogs,	ranging	ahead,	were	met
by	a	small	group	of	children	all	bedecked	in	white	flowers.	Bright	smiles
flashed	up	at	Traveller,	tiny	hands	taking	his	to	lead	him	onward	to	the
hearthfires,	where	women	were	now	preparing	a	midday	meal.	Iron	pots	filled
with	some	milky	substance	steamed,	the	smell	pungent,	sweet	and	vaguely
alcoholic.
A	low	bench	was	set	out,	four-legged	and	padded,	the	woven	coverlet	a
rainbow	of	coloured	threads	in	zigzag	patterns.	The	wooden	legs	were	carved
into	horse	heads,	noses	almost	touching	in	the	middle,	the	manes	flowing	in
sweeping	curves,	all	stained	a	lustrous	ochre	and	deep	brown.	The	artistry	was
superb,	the	heads	so	detailed	Traveller	could	see	the	veins	along	the	cheeks,	the
lines	of	the	eyelids	and	the	dusty	eyes	both	opaque	and	depthless.	There	was
only	one	such	bench,	and	it	was,	he	knew,	to	be	his	for	the	duration	of	his	stay.
The	father	and	son,	and	three	others	of	the	band,	two	women	and	a	very	old
man,	all	sat	cross-legged	in	a	half-circle,	facing	him	across	the	fire.	The
children	finally	released	his	hands	and	a	woman	gave	him	a	gourd	filled	with
the	scalded	milk,	in	which	floated	strips	of	meat.
‘Skathandi,’	said	the	father.	‘Camped	down	by	the	water.	Here	to	ambush	us
and	steal	our	horses,	for	the	meat	of	the	g’athend	is	highly	prized	by	people	in
the	cities.	There	were	thirty	in	all,	raiders	and	murderers	–	we	will	eat	their
horses,	but	you	may	have	one	to	ride	if	you	desire	so.’
Traveller	sipped	the	milk,	and	as	the	steam	filled	his	face	his	eyes	widened.
Fire	in	his	throat,	then	blissful	numbness.	Blinking	tears	from	his	eyes,	he	tried
to	focus	on	the	man	who	had	spoken.	‘You	sprang	the	ambush,	then.	Thirty?
You	must	be	formidable	warriors.’
‘This	was	the	second	such	camp	we	found.	All	slain.	Not	by	us,	friend.
Someone,	it	seems,	likes	the	Skathandi	even	less	than	we	do.’
The	father	hesitated,	and	in	the	pause	his	son	said,	‘It	was	our	thought	that
you	were	following	that	someone.’
‘Ah.’	Traveller	frowned.	‘Someone?	There	is	but	one	–	one	who	attacks
Skathandi	camps	and	slaughters	everyone?’
Nods	answered	him.
‘A	demon,	we	think,	who	walks	like	a	storm,	dark	with	terrible	rage.	One
who	covers	well	his	tracks.’	The	son	made	an	odd	gesture	with	one	hand,	a
rippling	of	the	fingers.	‘Like	a	ghost.’
‘How	long	ago	did	this	demon	travel	past	here?’
‘Three	days.’


‘Are	these	Skathandi	a	rival	tribe?’
‘No.	Raiders,	preying	on	caravans	and	all	who	dwell	on	the	Plain.	Sworn,	it
is	said,	to	a	most	evil	man,	known	only	as	the	Captain.	If	you	see	an	eightwheeled	carriage,	so	high	there	is	one	floor	above	and	a	balcony	with	a	golden
rail	–	drawn,	it	is	said,	by	a	thousand	slaves	–	then	you	will	have	found	the
palace	of	this	Captain.	He	sends	out	his	raiders,	and	grows	fat	on	the	trade	of
his	spoils.’
‘I	am	not	following	this	demon,’	said	Traveller.	‘I	know	nothing	of	it.’
‘That	is	probably	well.’
‘It	heads	north?’
‘Yes.’
Traveller	thought	about	that	as	he	took	another	sip	of	the	appallingly	foul
drink.	With	a	horse	under	him	he	would	begin	to	make	good	time,	but	that
might	well	take	him	right	on	to	that	demon,	and	he	did	not	relish	a	fight	with	a
creature	that	could	slay	thirty	bandits	and	leave	nary	a	footprint.
One	child,	who	had	been	kneeling	beside	him,	piling	handfuls	of	dirt	on	to
Traveller ’s	boot-top,	now	clambered	up	on	to	his	thigh,	reached	into	the	gourd
and	plucked	out	a	sliver	of	meat,	and	waved	it	in	front	of	Traveller ’s	mouth.
‘Eat,’	said	the	son.	‘The	meat	is	from	a	turtle	that	tunnels,	very	tender.	The
miska	milk	softens	it	and	removes	the	poison.	One	generally	does	not	drink	the
miska,	as	it	can	send	the	mind	travelling	so	far	that	it	never	returns.	Too	much
and	it	will	eat	holes	in	your	stomach	and	you	will	die	in	great	pain.’
‘Ah.	You	could	have	mentioned	that	earlier.’	Traveller	took	the	meat	from
the	child.	He	was	about	to	plop	it	into	his	mouth	when	he	paused.	‘Anything
else	I	should	know	before	I	begin	chewing?’
‘No.	You	will	dream	tonight	of	tunnelling	through	earth.	Harmless	enough.
All	food	has	memory,	so	the	miska	proves	–	we	cook	everything	in	it,	else	we
taste	the	bitterness	of	death.’
Traveller	sighed.	‘This	miska,	it	is	mare’s	milk?’
Laughter	erupted.
‘No,	no!’	cried	the	father.	‘A	plant.	A	root	bulb.	Mare	milk	belongs	to	foals
and	colts,	of	course.	Humans	have	their	own	milk,	after	all,	and	it	is	not	drunk
by	adults,	only	babes.	Yours,	stranger,	is	a	strange	world!’	And	he	laughed
some	more.
Traveller	ate	the	sliver	of	meat.
Most	tender	–	indeed,	delicious.	That	night,	sleeping	beneath	furs	in	a	tipi,
he	dreamt	of	tunnelling	through	hard-packed,	stony	earth,	pleased	by	its
surrounding	warmth,	the	safety	of	darkness.
He	was	woken	shortly	before	dawn	by	a	young	woman,	soft	of	limb	and


damp	with	desire,	who	wrapped	herself	tight	about	him.	He	was	startled	when
she	prised	open	his	mouth	with	her	own	and	deposited	a	full	mouthful	of	spit,
strongly	spiced	with	something,	and	would	not	pull	away	until	he	swallowed	it
down.	By	the	time	she	and	the	drug	she	had	given	him	were	done,	there	was	not
a	seed	left	in	his	body.
In	the	morning,	Traveller	and	the	father	went	down	to	the	abandoned
Skathandi	horses.	With	help	from	the	mute	dogs	they	were	able	to	capture	one
of	the	animals,	a	solid	piebald	gelding	of	sixteen	or	so	hands	with	mischief	in
its	eyes.
The	dead	raiders,	he	noted	as	his	companion	went	in	search	among	the
camp’s	wreckage	for	a	worthy	saddle,	had	indeed	been	cut	to	pieces.	Although
the	work	of	the	scavengers	had	reduced	most	of	the	corpses	to	tufts	of	hair,
torn	sinew	and	broken	bones,	there	was	enough	evidence	of	severed	limbs	and
decapitations	to	suggest	some	massive	edged	weapon	at	work.	Where	bones
had	been	sliced	through,	the	cut	was	sharp	with	no	sign	of	crushing.
The	father	brought	over	the	best	of	the	tack,	and	Traveller	saw	with
surprise	that	it	was	a	Seven	Cities	saddle,	with	Malazan	military	brands	on	the
leather	girth-straps.
He	was	just	finishing	cinching	the	straps	tight	–	after	the	gelding	could
hold	its	breath	no	longer	–	when	he	heard	shouting	from	the	Kindaru	camp,
and	both	he	and	the	father	turned.
A	rider	had	appeared	on	the	same	ridge	that	Traveller	had	come	to
yesterday,	pausing	for	but	a	moment	before	guiding	the	mount	down	into	the
camp.
Traveller	swung	himself	on	to	his	horse	and	gathered	the	reins.
‘See	the	beast	she	rides!’	gasped	the	man	beside	him.	‘It	is	a	Jhag’athend!
We	are	blessed!	Blessed!’	And	all	at	once	he	was	running	back	to	the	camp.
Traveller	set	heels	to	his	gelding	and	rode	after	the	man.
The	rider	was	indeed	a	woman,	and	Traveller	saw	almost	immediately	that
she	was	of	Seven	Cities	stock.	She	looked	harried,	threadbare	and	worn,	but	a
ferocious	fire	blazed	in	her	eyes	when	they	fell	upon	Traveller	as	he	rode	into
the	camp.
‘Is	there	anywhere	in	the	world	where	I	won’t	run	into	damned	Malazans?’
she	demanded.
Traveller	shrugged.	‘And	I	hardly	expected	to	encounter	an	Ugari	woman
on	the	back	of	a	Jhag	stallion	here	on	the	Lamatath	Plain.’
Her	scowl	deepened.	‘I	am	told	there’s	a	demon	travelling	through	here,
heading	north.	Killing	everyone	in	his	path	and	no	doubt	enjoying	every
moment	of	it.’


‘So	it	seems.’
‘Good,’	snapped	the	woman.
‘Why?’	Traveller	asked.
She	scowled.	‘So	I	can	give	him	his	damned	horse	back,	that’s	why!’


Book	Two

Cold-Eyed	Virtues


	

From	her	ribs	and	from	the	hair	of	women
Seen	swimming	sun-warmed	rivers	in	summer ’s	light,
From	untroubled	brows	and	eyes	clear	and	driven
Gazing	out	from	tower	windows	when	falls	the	night
From	hands	cupped	round	pipe	bowls	alabaster	carved
When	veiled	invitations	coy	as	blossoms	under	shade
Invite	a	virgin’s	dance	a	rose-dappled	love	so	starved
Where	seen	a	coarse	matron	not	yet	ready	to	fade
And	the	tall	bones	of	legs	’neath	rounded	vessels	perched
Swaying	lusty	as	a	tropical	storm	above	white	coral	sands
Where	in	all	these	gathered	recollections	I	have	searched
To	fashion	this	love	anew	from	soil	worked	well	by	my	hands
And	into	the	bower	garland-woven	petals	fluttering	down
Hovers	the	newfound	woman’s	familiar	unknown	face
For	on	this	earth	no	solitude	is	welcomed	when	found
And	she	who	is	gone	must	be	in	turn	replaced
And	by	the	look	in	her	eye	I	am	a	composite	man
Assembled	alike	from	stone,	twig	and	stirred	sediments
Lovers	lost	and	all	those	who	might	have	been
We	neither	should	rail	nor	stoke	searing	resentments
For	all	the	rivers	this	world	over	do	flow	in	but	one
Direction
Love	of	the	Broken
Breneth
	


Chapter	Seven

‘I	can	see	your	reasons,	my	love.	But	won’t	you	get	thirsty?’
Inscription	found	beneath
capstone	of	household	well,
Lakefront	District,	Darujhistan

As	fast	as	his	small	feet	could	carry	him,	the	small	boy	rushed	through	TwoOx	Gate	and	out	on	to	the	raised	cobble	road	that,	if	he	elected	to	simply	hurry
on,	and	on,	would	take	him	to	the	very	edge	of	the	world,	where	he	could	stand
on	the	shore	staring	out	upon	a	trackless	ocean,	so	vast	it	swallowed	the	sun
every	night.	Alas,	he	wasn’t	going	that	far.	Out	to	the	hills	just	past	the	shanty
town	to	collect	dung,	a	bag	full,	as	much	as	he	could	carry	balanced	on	his
head.
It	is	said	by	wise	and	sentimental	poets	that	a	child’s	eyes	see	farther	than
an	adult’s,	and	who	would	–	with	even	less	than	a	moment’s	thought	–	claim
otherwise?	Beyond	the	ridge	awaits	a	vista	crowded	with	possibilities,	each	one
deemed	more	improbable	than	the	last	by	teeth-grinding	codgers	eager	to
assert	a	litany	of	personal	failures	should	anyone	care	to	hear,	but	no	one	does
and	if	that	isn’t	proof	the	world’s	gone	to	ruin	then	what	is?	But	improbabilities
is	a	word	few	children	know,	and	even	if	they	did,	why,	they	would	dismiss	the
notion	with	a	single	hand	fluttering	overhead	as	they	danced	to	the	horizon.
Because	it	will	not	do	to	creep	timorously	into	the	future,	no,	one	should	leap,
sail	singing	through	the	air,	and	who	can	say	where	one’s	feet	will	finally	set
down	on	this	solid,	unknown	land?
The	boy	hurried	on,	tracked	by	the	dull	eyes	of	the	lepers	in	front	of	their
hovels,	squatting	forlorn	and	forgotten	each	in	a	nest	of	flies	when	flies	with
singular	poignancy	expound	the	proof	of	cold-legged	indifference.	And	the
scrawny	half-wild	dogs	crept	out	to	follow	him	for	a	time,	gauging	with
animal	hunger	if	this	one	might	be	weakened,	a	thing	to	be	taken	down.	But	the
boy	collected	rocks	and	when	a	dog	drew	too	close	he	let	fly.	Ducked	tails	and


startled	yelps	and	now	the	dogs	vanished	like	ghosts	beneath	stilted	shacks	and
down	narrow,	twisting	lanes	off	the	main	road.
Overhead,	the	sun	regarded	all	with	its	unblinking	omnipotence,	and	went
on	stealing	moisture	from	every	surface	to	feed	its	unquenchable	thirst.	And
there	were	long-legged	birds	prancing	on	the	sewage	flats	just	past	Brownrun
Bay,	beaks	darting	down	to	snatch	up	fleas	and	whatnot,	while	lizard-ducks
nested	on	floating	shit	islands	further	out,	calling	to	one	another	their	hissing
announcement	of	each	bell	in	perfect	cadence	with	the	city’s	water	clocks	and
those	sonorous	chimes	drifting	out	over	the	lake,	although	why	lizard-ducks
were	obsessed	with	such	artificial	segmentation	of	time	was	a	question	as	yet
unanswered	even	after	centuries	of	scholarly	pursuit	–	not	that	the	foulsmelling	creatures	gave	a	whit	for	the	careers	they	had	spawned,	more
concerned	as	they	were	with	enticing	up	from	the	soupy	water	eels	that	would
swallow	their	eggs,	only	to	find	the	shells	impervious	to	all	forms	of
digestion,	whilst	the	scaled	monstrosities	within	prepared	to	peck	their	way
free	and	then	feed	on	eel	insides	unto	gluttony.
What	significance,	then,	such	details	of	the	natural	world,	when	the	boy
simply	walked	on,	his	long	hair	bleached	by	the	sun	and	stirred	like	a	mane	by
the	freshening	breeze?	Why,	none	other	than	the	value	of	indifference,	beneath
which	a	child	may	pass	unnoticed,	may	pass	by	free	as	a	fluffed	seed	on	the
warm	currents	of	summer	air.	With	only	a	faint	memory	of	his	dream	the	night
before	(and	yes,	the	one	before	that,	too,	and	so	on)	of	that	face	so	vicious	and
the	eyes	so	caustic	as	to	burn	him	with	their	dark	intentions,	the	face	that	might
pursue	him	through	each	day	with	the	very	opposite	of	indifference,	and	see
how	deadly	that	forgetfulness	might	be	for	the	child	who	hurried	on,	now	on	a
dirt	track	winding	its	way	up	into	the	modest	hills	where	baleful	goats	gathered
beneath	the	occasional	tree.
For	the	blessing	of	indifference	might	be	spun	on	end,	momentarily
offering	the	grim	option	of	curse,	because	one	child’s	gift	can	well	be
another ’s	hurt.	Spare	then	a	moment	for	the	frightened	beast	named	Snell,	and
all	the	cruel	urges	driving	him	to	lash	out,	to	torment	the	brother	he	never
wanted.	He	too	thrives	on	indifference,	this	squat,	round-shouldered,
swaggering	tyrant	before	whom	the	wild	dogs	in	the	shanty	town	cowered	in
instinctive	recognition	that	he	was	one	of	their	own,	and	the	meanest	of	the	lot
besides;	while	the	boy,	chest	swelled	with	power,	continued	on,	trailing	his
intended	victim	with	something	in	his	soul	that	went	far	beyond	a	simple
beating	this	time,	oh,	yes.	The	thing	inside,	it	spread	black,	hairy	legs	like	a
spider,	his	hands	transformed	there	at	the	end	of	his	wrists,	oh,	spiders,	yes,
hook-taloned	and	fanged	and	onyx-eyed,	and	they	could	close	into	bony	fists	if


they	so	desired,	or	they	could	stab	with	venom	–	why	not	both?
He	carried	rocks	as	well.	To	wing	at	the	lepers	he	passed,	then	laugh	as
they	flinched	or	cried	out	in	pain,	and	he	rode	their	ineffectual	curses	all	the
way	up	the	road.
While,	all	along	the	hillside,	the	sun	had	done	its	work,	and	the	boy	filled
his	bag	with	tinder-dry	dung	for	this	night’s	hearthfire.	Bent	over	like	an	old
man,	he	roved	this	way	and	that.	This	bounty	would	please	the	woman-whowas-not-his-mother,	who	mothered	him	as	a	mother	should	–	although,	it	must
be	said,	lacking	something	essential,	some	maternal	instinct	to	awaken	cogent
realization	that	her	adopted	son	lived	in	grave	danger	–	and	as	the	sack	bulked
in	his	grip,	he	thought	to	pause	and	rest	for	a	time,	there,	up	on	the	summit	of
the	hill.	So	that	he	could	look	out	over	the	lake,	watch	the	beautiful	sails	of	the
feluccas	and	fisher	boats.
Set	free	his	mind	to	wander	–	oh,	memories	are	made	of	moments	such	as
this	one.
And,	alas,	of	the	one	soon	to	come.
But	give	him	these	moments	of	freedom,	so	precious	for	their	rarity.
Begrudge	not	this	gift	of	indifference.
It	could,	after	all,	very	well	be	his	last	day	of	such	freedom.
Down	on	the	track	at	the	base	of	the	hill,	Snell	has	spied	his	quarry.	The
spiders	at	the	ends	of	his	wrists	opened	and	closed	their	terrible	black	legs.
And	like	a	monster	that	wrings	goats’	necks	for	the	pleasure	of	it,	he	clambers
upward,	eyes	fixed	on	that	small	back	and	tousled	head	there	at	the	edge	of	the
ridge.
	
In	a	temple	slowly	drowning	there	sat	a	Trell	entirely	covered	in	drying,
blackening	blood,	and	in	his	soul	there	was	enough	compassion	to	encompass
an	entire	world,	yet	he	sat	with	eyes	of	stone.	When	it	is	all	one	can	do	to
simply	hold	on,	then	to	suffer	is	to	weather	a	deluge	no	god	can	ease.
Beneath	the	blood,	faint	traceries	of	spider ’s	web	tattooing	etched	his	dark
brown	hide.	These	stung	like	hot	wires	wrapped	about	his	body,	his	limbs;
wrapped	everywhere	and	seeming	to	tighten	incrementally	with	every	shiver
that	took	him.
Three	times	now	he	had	been	painted	in	the	blood	of	Burn,	the	Sleeping
Goddess.	The	web	was	proving	a	skein	of	resistance,	a	net	trapping	him	on	the
inside,	and	keeping	out	the	blessed	gift	of	the	goddess.
He	would	pass	through	Burn’s	Gate,	into	the	molten	fires	of	the
underworld,	and	the	priests	had	prepared	for	that,	yet	now	it	seemed	they


would	fail	in	fashioning	a	means	of	protecting	his	mortal	flesh.	What	then
could	he	do?
Well,	he	could	walk	away	from	this	place	and	its	huddled,	doleful	priests.
Find	another	way	to	cross	a	continent,	and	then	an	ocean.	He	could	perhaps	try
another	temple,	try	to	bargain	with	another	god	or	goddess.	He	could—
‘We	have	failed	you,	Mappo	Runt.’
He	glanced	over	to	meet	the	anguished	eyes	of	the	High	Priest.
‘I	am	sorry,’	the	old	man	went	on.	‘The	web	that	once	healed	you	is
proving	most…selfish.	Claiming	you	for	its	own	–	Ardatha	never	yields	her
prizes.	She	has	snared	you,	for	purposes	unknown	to	any	but	her.	She	is	most
hateful,	I	think.’
‘Then	I	will	wash	this	off,’	Mappo	said,	climbing	to	his	feet,	feeling	the
blood	crack,	pluck	hairs	from	his	skin.	The	web	sang	agony	through	him.	‘The
one	who	healed	me	in	Ardatha’s	name	is	here	in	the	city	–	I	think	I	had	better
seek	her	out.	Perhaps	I	can	glean	from	her	the	spider	goddess’s	intent	–	what	it
is	she	would	have	me	do.’
‘I	would	not	recommend	that,’	the	High	Priest	said.	‘In	fact,	Mappo,	I
would	run	away.	Soon	as	you	can.	For	now,	at	least,	Ardatha’s	web	does	not
seek	to	hold	you	back	from	the	path	you	have	chosen.	Why	risk	a	confrontation
with	her?	No,	you	must	find	another	way,	and	quickly.’
Mappo	considered	this	advice	for	a	time,	then	grunted	and	said,	‘I	see	the
wisdom	in	your	words;	thank	you.	Have	you	any	suggestions?’
The	expression	drooped.	‘Unfortunately,	I	have.’	He	gestured	and	three
young	acolytes	crept	forward.	‘These	ones	will	assist	in	scrubbing	the	blood
from	you.	In	the	meantime,	I	will	send	a	runner	and,	perchance,	an
arrangement	can	be	fashioned.	Tell	me,	Mappo	Runt,	are	you	rich?’

Sweetest	Sufferance,	who	had	been	so	named	by	a	mother	either	resigned	to	the
rigours	of	motherhood	or,	conversely,	poisoned	by	irony,	blinked	rapidly	as
she	was	wont	to	do	when	returning	to	reality.	She	looked	round	bemusedly,
saw	her	fellow	survivors	seated	with	her,	the	table	in	their	midst	a	chaotic
clutter	of	cups,	tankards,	plates,	utensils	and	the	remnants	of	at	least	three
meals.	Her	soft	brown	eyes	flicked	from	one	item	to	the	next,	then	slowly
lifted,	out	past	the	blank-eyed	faces	of	her	companions,	and	took	in	the
taproom	of	Quip’s	Bar.
Quip	Younger	was	barely	visible	on	the	counter,	sprawled	across	it	with
his	upper	body	and	head	resting	on	one	forearm.	He	slept	with	his	mouth


hanging	open	and	slick	with	drool.	Almost	within	reach	of	the	man	there
squatted	a	rat	on	the	counter,	one	front	paw	lifting	every	now	and	then	as	it
seemed	to	study	the	face	opposite	and	especially	the	gaping	dark	hole	of	Quip
Younger ’s	mouth.
A	drunk	was	lying	just	inside	the	door,	passed	out	or	dead,	the	only	other
patron	present	this	early	in	the	morning	(excepting	the	rat).
When	she	finally	brought	her	attention	back	to	her	companions,	she	saw
Faint	studying	her,	one	brow	lifting.
Sweetest	Sufferance	rubbed	at	her	round	face,	her	cheeks	reminding	her,
oddly	enough,	of	the	dough	her	mother	used	to	knead	just	before	the	harvest
festival,	those	big	round	cakes	all	glittering	with	painted	honey	that	used	to	trap
ants	and	it	was	her	task	to	pick	them	off	but	that	was	all	right	because	they
tasted	wonderful.
‘Hungry	again,	aren’t	ya?’
‘You	can	always	tell,’	Sweetest	Sufferance	replied.
‘When	you	rub	your	cheeks,	there’s	a	look	comes	into	your	eyes,	Sweetie.’
	
Faint	watched	as	Master	Quell	hissed	awake	with	a	sound	no	different	from	the
noise	an	alligator	might	make	when	one	stepped	too	close.	And	glared	round	a
moment	before	relaxing	into	a	relieved	slump.	‘I	was	dreaming—’
‘Yah,’	cut	in	Faint,	‘you’re	always	dreaming,	and	when	you	ain’t	dreaming,
you’re	doing,	and	now	if	only	those	two	things	were	any	different	from	each
other,	why,	you’d	actually	get	some	rest,	Master.	Which	we’d	like	to	see,
wouldn’t	we	just.’
‘Got	you	through,	didn’t	I?’
‘Losing	five	shareholders	in	the	process.’
‘That’s	the	risks	y’take,’	Quell	said,	grimacing.	‘Hey,	who’s	paying	for	all
this?’
‘You	might’ve	asked	that	once	before.	You	are,	of	course.’
‘How	long	we	been	here?	Gods,	my	bladder	feels	like	I’m	about	to	pass	a
papaya.’	And	with	that	he	reeled	–	wincing	–	upright,	and	tottered	for	the	closet
behind	the	bar.
The	rat	watched	him	pass	with	suspicious	eyes,	then	crept	a	few	waddles
closer	to	Quip	Younger ’s	mouth.
Glanno	Tarp	jerked	alive	in	his	chair.	‘No	more	bargains!’	he	snarled.
‘Oh,’	he	then	said,	slouching	back	down.	‘Somebody	stopped	bringing	beer	–
can	they	do	that?	Sweetest,	darling,	I	dreamt	we	was	making	love—’
‘Me	too,’	she	said.	‘Only	it	wasn’t	a	dream.’


Glanno’s	eyes	widened.	‘Really?’
‘No,	it	was	a	nightmare.	If	you	want	another	round,	you’ll	have	t’wake	up
Quip	Younger.’
Glanno	squinted	over.	‘He’ll	wake	up	when	he	can’t	breathe,	soon	as	the	rat
goes	for	it.	A	silver	council	says	he	swallows	instead	of	spitting	out.’
At	the	voicing	of	a	wager	Reccanto	Ilk’s	watery	grey	eyes	sharpened	and
he	said,	‘I’ll	take	that	one.	Only	what	if	he	does	both?	Swallows	then	chokes
and	spits	out?	When	you	say	“swallows”	you	got	to	mean	he	chews	if	he	has
to.’
‘Now	that’s	quibblering	again	and	when	you	never	done	that,	Ilk?	It’s
pointless	you	saying	you	want	to	wager	when	you	keep	rectivifying	things.’
‘The	point	is	you’re	always	too	vague,	Glanno,	with	these	bets	of	yours.
Y’need	precision—’
‘What	I	need	is…well,	I	don’t	know	what	I	need,	but	whatever	it	is	you	ain’t
got	it.’
‘I	got	it	but	I	ain’t	giving	it,’	said	Sweetest	Sufferance.	‘Not	to	none	of	you,
anyhow.	There’s	a	man	out	there,	oh,	yes,	and	I’ll	find	him	one	day	and	I’ll	put
him	in	shackles	and	lock	him	in	my	room	and	I’ll	reduce	him	to	a	pathetic
wreck.	Then	we’ll	get	married.’
‘The	marriage	prediceeds	the	wrecking,’	Glanno	said.	‘So	I	might	dream
of	you,	darling,	but	that’s	as	far	as	it’ll	ever	go.	That’s	called	selfprevarication.’
‘Are	you	sure?’	Faint	asked	him,	then,	as	the	front	door	squealed	open,	she
turned	in	her	chair.	An	adolescent	boy	in	a	voluminous	brown	robe	edged	in
warily,	eyes	like	freshly	laid	turtle	eggs.	Lifting	the	robe	he	stepped	gingerly
over	the	drunk	and	padded	across	to	their	table	and	if	he	had	a	tail,	why,	Faint
told	herself,	it’d	be	half	wagging	half	slipping	down	between	his	legs.
‘Mmm.	Mmmm.’
‘Would	that	be	“Master”?’	Faint	asked.
The	youth	nodded,	drew	a	deep	breath,	and	tried	again.	‘Negotiation,	for	a
delivery,	yes?’
‘Master	Quell	is	peremptorily	predispossessed,’	Glanno	Tarp	said.
‘Predisposed,	he	means,’	Faint	explained.	‘What	needs	delivering,	and
where?’
‘Not	what.	Who.	Don’t	know	where.’
‘Tell	you	what,’	Faint	said,	‘go	get	the	who	and	bring	him	or	her	here	and
we’ll	take	it	from	there,	all	right?	There	now,	watch	your	step	on	your	way
out.’
Bobbing	head,	hurried	departure.


‘Since	when	you	did	the	negotiating?’	Reccanto	asked	her,	squinting.
‘You	know,’	Faint	observed,	‘any	half-decent	Denul	healer	could	fix	your
bad	eyes,	Ilk.’
‘What’s	it	to	you?’
‘What	it	is	to	me	is	you	nearly	lopped	my	head	off,	you	damned	blind	idiot
–	do	I	look	like	a	snarling	corpse?’
‘Sometimes.	Anyway,	I	figured	it	out	at	the	last	moment—’
‘After	I	ducked	and	kicked	you	between	the	legs.’
‘Right,	corpses	ain’t	that	smart,	so	now	that’s	settled.	I	was	asking	you	a
question.’
‘He	was,’	chimed	in	Glanno	Tarp.	‘Look	at	us,	we’re	short	maybe	six,
seven	–	we	can’t	be	going	nowhere	any	time	soon.’
‘Maybe	not,	but	maybe	it’ll	be	a	quick,	easy	one.’
The	others	all	stared	at	her.
Faint	relented.	‘Fine.	Besides,	I	was	just	standing	in	for	Quell,	who	might
never	leave	that	closet.’
‘Could	be	he’s	dead,’	Sweetest	Sufferance	suggested.
‘Internally	explodicated,’	said	Glanno	Tarp,	‘and	don’t	think	I’m	going	in
for	a	look.’
‘There	goes	the	rat!’	hissed	Reccanto	Ilk.
They	looked,	watched,	breathless.
A	pause,	nose	twitching,	then	a	scurry	of	small	steps.	Close	now,	close
enough	to	flinch	back	at	the	reeking	breath.
‘Two	councils	it	falls	over	dead.’
‘Be	more	precise	–	it’s	gonna	fall	over	dead	some	day,	ain’t	it?’
‘Gods	below!’
The	rat	held	its	ground,	edged	a	mite	closer.	Then	gathered	itself,	stretched
out	its	neck,	and	began	drinking	from	the	pool	of	slime	with	tiny,	flickering
laps	of	its	slivery	tongue.
‘That’s	what	I	was	thinking	it	was	gonna	do,’	said	Sweetest	Sufferance.
‘Liar.’
‘So	now	he	ain’t	never	going	to	wake	up,’	said	Reccanto,	‘and	I’m	going	to
die	here	of	thirst.’
The	closet	door	creaked	open	and	out	staggered	Master	Quell,	not	looking
at	all	refreshed.	He	hobbled	over.	‘That	papaya’s	stuck	–	I	need	a	healer—’
‘Or	a	fruit	seller,’	Faint	said.	‘Listen,	could	be	we	got	us	a	new	contract.’
Quell’s	eyes	bugged	slightly,	then	he	spun	round	and	staggered	back	into
the	closet.
‘Now	see	what	you	did!’	snapped	Reccanto.


‘It’s	not	my	papaya,	is	it?’
	
So	early	in	the	morning,	the	streets	of	Darujhistan,	barring	those	of	markets,
were	ghostly,	strewn	with	rubbish	and	yet	somehow	magical.	The	sun’s	golden
light	stroked	every	surface	with	a	gentle	artist’s	hand.	The	faint	mists	that	had
drifted	in	from	the	lake	during	the	night	now	retreated	once	more,	leaving	the
air	crisp.	In	the	poorer	quarters,	shutters	opened	on	upper	storeys	and	moments
later	the	contents	of	chamber	pots	sailed	out,	splashing	the	alleys	and	any
hapless	denizen	still	lying	drunk	to	the	world,	and	moments	later	rats	and	such
crept	out	to	sample	the	fresh	offerings.
The	dolorous	High	Priest	led	Mappo	Runt	away	from	the	temple	quarter
and	down	into	the	Lakefront	District,	skirting	Second	Tier	Wall	before	cutting
across	towards	the	Gadrobi	District	–	in	essence	taking	the	Trell	back	the	way
he	had	come	the	night	before.	As	they	walked,	the	city	awoke	around	them,
rubbed	sleep	from	its	eyes,	then	gawked	at	the	shambling	priest	and	his
enormous,	barbaric	companion.
They	eventually	arrived	upon	a	narrow,	sloped	street	in	which	sat	a
massive,	ornate	carriage	of	a	sort	that	Mappo	had	seen	before,	though	he	could
not	for	the	moment	recall	where.	Six	horses	stood	in	their	traces,	looking
bored.	Someone	had	dumped	feed	all	round	them,	and	there	was	enough	fresh
dung	scattered	about	to	suggest	that	the	animals	had	been	left	there	a	while.
The	priest	directed	Mappo	towards	a	nearby	tavern.	‘In	there,’	he	said.	‘The
Trygalle	Trade	Guild	has	made	a	specialty	of	journeys	such	as	the	one	you
require.	Of	course,	they	are	expensive,	but	that	is	hardly	surprising,	is	it?’
‘And	one	simply	seeks	out	one	such	caravan,	wherever	one	might	find
them?	That	sounds	to	be	an	ineffective	business	plan.’
‘No,	they	have	offices.	Somewhere	–	not	a	detail	I	possess,	I’m	afraid.	I
only	knew	of	this	carriage	because	its	arrival	destroyed	the	front	of	my
cousin’s	shop.’	And,	pointing	to	a	nearby	ruin,	he	smiled	like	a	man	who	had
forgotten	what	real	smiling	signified.	Then	he	shrugged.	‘All	these	twists	of
fate.	Blessed	by	serendipity	and	all	that.	If	you	fail	here,	Mappo	Runt,	you	will
have	a	long,	tedious	walk	ahead	of	you.	So	do	not	fail.’	He	then	bowed,	turned
and	walked	away.
Mappo	eyed	the	front	of	the	tavern.	And	recalled	when	he	had	last	seen	that
sort	of	carriage.
Tremorlor.
	


Shareholder	Faint	had	just	stood,	stretching	out	all	the	alarming	kinks	in	her
back,	when	the	tavern	door	opened	and	a	monstrous	figure	pushed	its	way	in,
shoulders	squeezing	through	the	frame,	head	ducking.	A	misshapen	sack	slung
over	one	shoulder,	a	wicked	knife	tucked	in	its	belt.	A	damned	Trell.
‘Glanno,’	she	said,	‘better	get	Master	Quell.’
Scowling,	the	last	driver	left	alive	in	their	troupe	rose	and	limped	away.
She	watched	as	the	huge	barbarian	stepped	over	the	drunk	and	made	his
way	to	the	bar.	The	rat	looked	up	and	hastily	retreated	down	the	length	of	the
counter.	The	Trell	nudged	Quip	Younger ’s	head.	The	barkeep	coughed	and
slowly	straightened,	wiping	at	his	mouth,	blinking	myopically	as	he	lifted	his
gaze	to	take	in	the	figure	looming	over	him.
With	a	bleat	he	reeled	back	a	step.
‘Never	mind	him,’	Faint	called	out.	‘You	want	us,	over	here.’
‘What	I	want,’	the	Trell	replied	in	passable	Daru,	‘is	breakfast.’
Head	bobbing,	Quip	bolted	for	the	kitchen,	where	he	was	met	by	a
screeching	woman,	the	piercing	tirade	dimming	as	soon	as	the	door	closed
behind	him.
Faint	dragged	a	bench	from	the	nearby	wall	–	no	chair	in	this	dump	would
survive	–	and	waved	to	it	with	a	glance	over	to	the	barbarian.	‘Come	over,	then.
Sit,	but	just	so	you	know,	we’re	avoiding	Seven	Cities.	There	was	a	terrible
plague	there;	no	telling	if	it’s	run	its	course.’
‘No,’	the	Trell	rumbled	as	he	approached,	‘I	have	no	desire	to	return	to
Seven	Cities,	or	Nemil.’
The	bench	groaned	as	he	settled	on	to	it.
Sweetest	Sufferance	was	eyeing	the	newcomer	with	a	strangely	avid
intensity.	Reccanto	Ilk	simply	stared,	mouth	open,	odd	twitches	of	his	scalp
shifting	his	hairline	up	and	down.
Faint	said	to	the	Trell,	‘The	truth	of	it	is,	we’re	really	in	no	shape	for
anything…ambitious.	Master	Quell	needs	to	put	out	a	call	for	more
shareholders,	and	that	could	hold	us	back	for	days,	maybe	a	week.’
‘Oh,	that	is	unfortunate.	It	is	said	your	Guild	has	an	office	here	in
Darujhistan—’
‘It	does,	but	I	happen	to	know	we’re	the	only	carriage	available,	for	the
next	while.	Where	were	you	hoping	to	go,	and	how	quickly?’
‘Where	is	your	Master,	or	are	you	the	one	who	does	the	negotiating?’
At	that	moment	Glanno	finally	succeeded	in	dragging	Quell	out	from	the
water	closet.	The	Master	was	pale,	and	shiny	with	sweat,	and	it	seemed	his	legs
weren’t	working	very	well.	Faint	met	his	slightly	wild	gaze.	‘Better?’	she
asked.


‘Better,’	he	replied	in	a	gasp,	as	Glanno	more	or	less	carried	him	over	to
his	chair.	‘It	was	a	damned	kidney	stone,	it	was.	Size	of	a	knuckle	–	I	never
thought…well,	never	mind.	Gods,	who	is	this?’
The	Trell	half	rose	to	bow.	‘Apologies.	My	name	is	Mappo	Runt.’	And	he
sat	back	down.
Faint	saw	Quell	lick	dry	lips,	and	with	a	trembling	hand	reach	for	a
tankard.	He	scowled	to	find	it	empty	and	set	it	back	down.	‘The	most	infamous
Trell	of	them	all.	You	lost	him,	didn’t	you?’
The	barbarian’s	dark	eyes	narrowed.	‘Ah,	I	see.’
‘Where?’	Quell’s	voice	sounded	half	strangled.
‘I	need	to	get	to	a	continent	named	Lether.	To	an	empire	ruled	by	Tiste
Edur,	and	a	cursed	emperor.	And	yes,	I	can	pay	you	for	the	trouble.’
Faint	had	never	seen	her	master	so	rattled.	It	was	fascinating.	Clearly,	Quell
had	recognized	the	Trell’s	name,	which	signified…well,	something.
‘And,	er,	did	he	face	that	emperor,	Mappo?	In	ritual	combat?’
‘I	do	not	think	so.’
‘Why?’
‘I	believe	I	would	have…sensed	such	a	thing—’
‘The	end	of	the	world,	you	mean.’
‘Perhaps.	No,	something	else	happened.	I	cannot	say	what,	Master	Quell.	I
need	to	know,	will	you	take	me	there?’
‘We’re	under-crewed,’	Quell	said,	‘but	I	can	drop	by	the	office,	see	if
there’s	a	list	of	waiting	prospects.	A	quick	interview	process.	Say	by	this	time
tomorrow,	I	can	have	an	answer.’
The	huge	warrior	sighed.	He	glanced	round.	‘I	have	nowhere	else	to	go,	so
I	will	stay	here	until	then.’
‘Sounds	wise,’	Quell	said.	‘Faint,	you’re	with	me.	The	rest	of	you,	get
cleaned	up,	see	to	the	horses,	carriage	and	all	that.	Then	stay	close	by,	keep
Mappo	company	–	he	might	have	nasty	tusks	but	he	don’t	bite.’
‘But	I	do,’	said	Sweetest	Sufferance,	offering	the	Trell	an	inviting	smile.
Mappo	stared	at	her	a	moment,	then,	rubbing	at	his	face,	he	rose.	‘Where’s
that	breakfast,	anyway?’
‘Let’s	go,	Faint,’	said	Quell,	pushing	himself	upright	with	another	wince.
‘Can	you	make	it?’	she	asked	him.
A	nod.	‘Haradas	is	handling	the	office	these	days	–	she	can	heal	me	quick
enough.’
‘Good	point.	Hands	on?’


There	is,	as	a	legion	of	morose	poets	well	know,	nothing	inconsequential
about	love.	Nor	all	those	peculiarities	of	related	appetites	often	confused	for
love,	for	example	lust,	possession,	amorous	worship,	appalling	notions	of
abject	surrender	where	one’s	own	will	is	bled	out	in	sacrifice,	obsessions	of
the	fetishistic	sort	that	might	include	earlobes	or	toenails	or	regurgitated
foodstuffs,	and	indeed	that	adolescent	competitiveness	which	in	adults	–	adults
who	should	of	course	know	better	but	don’t	–	is	manifested	as	insane	jealousy.
Such	lack	of	restraint	has	launched	and	no	doubt	sunk	an	equal	number	of
ships,	if	one	takes	the	long	view	of	such	matters,	which	in	retrospect	is	not
only	advisable	but,	for	all	the	sighs	of	worldly	wind,	probably	the	most
essential	survival	trait	of	them	all	–	but	pray,	let	not	this	rounded	self	wallow
unthinkingly	into	recounting	a	host	of	lurid	tales	of	woe,	loss	and	the	like,	nor
bemoan	his	present	solitude	as	anything	other	than	a	voluntary	state	of	being!
Cast	attention,	then	(with	audible	relief),	upon	these	three	for	whom	love
heaves	each	moment	like	a	volcano	about	to	erupt,	amidst	the	groan	of
continents,	the	convulsion	of	valleys	and	the	furrowing	of	furrows	–	but	no,
honesty	demands	a	certain	revision	to	what	steams	and	churns	beneath	the
surface.	Only	two	of	the	three	thrash	and	writhe	in	the	delicious	agony	of	thatwhich-might-be-love,	and	the	subject	of	their	fixed	attention	is	none	other	than
the	third	in	their	quaint	trio,	who,	being	of	feminine	nature,	is	yet	to	decide
and,	now	that	she	basks	in	extraordinary	attention,	may	indeed	never	decide.
And	should	the	two	ever	vying	for	her	heart	both	immolate	themselves	at	some
future	point,	ah	well,	there	are	plenty	of	eels	in	the	muck,	aren’t	there?
And	these	three,	then,	bound	together	in	war	and	bound	yet	tighter	in	the
calamity	of	desire	long	after	the	war	was	done	with,	now	find	themselves	in	the
fair	city	of	Darujhistan,	two	pursuing	one	and	where	the	one	goes	so	too	will
they,	but	she	wonders,	yes,	just	how	far	she	can	take	them	and	let’s	see,	shall
we?
Being	illiterate,	she	has	scrawled	her	name	on	to	a	list,	assuming	her	name
can	be	pictographically	rendered	into	something	like	a	chicken	heart’s	spasm
the	moment	before	death,	and	lo,	did	not	her	two	suitors	follow	suit,	competing
even	here	in	their	expressions	of	illiterate	extravagance,	with	the	first	devising
a	most	elaborate	sigil	of	self	that	might	lead	one	to	imagine	his	name’s	being
Smear	of	Snail	in	Ecstasy,	whilst	the	other,	upon	seeing	this,	set	to	with	brush,
scrivener ’s	dust	and	fingernails	to	fashion	a	scrawl	reminiscent	of	a	serpent
trying	to	cross	a	dance	floor	whilst	a	tribe	importuned	the	fickle	gods	of	rain.
Both	men	then	stood,	beaming	with	pride	in	between	mutual	baring	of	teeth,
while	their	love	sauntered	off	to	find	a	nearby	stall	where	an	old	woman
wearing	seaweed	on	her	head	was	cooking	stuffed	voles	over	a	brazier	of


coals.
The	two	men	hastened	after	her,	both	desperate	to	pay	for	her	breakfast,	or
beat	the	old	woman	senseless,	whichever	their	darling	preferred.
Thus	it	was	that	High	Marshal	Jula	Bole	and	High	Marshal	Amby	Bole,
along	with	the	swamp	witch	named	Precious	Thimble,	all	late	of	the	Mott
Irregulars,	were	close	at	hand	and,	indeed,	ready	and	willing	newfound
shareholders	when	Master	Quell	and	Faint	arrived	at	the	office	of	the	Trygalle
Trade	Guild.	And	while	three	was	not	quite	the	number	Quell	sought	by	way	of
replacements,	they	would	just	have	to	do,	given	Mappo	Runt’s	terrible	need.
So	they	would	not	have	to	wait	until	the	morrow	after	all.	Most
consequential	indeed.
Happy	days!
	
Conspiracies	are	the	way	of	the	civilized	world,	both	those	real	and	those
imagined,	and	in	all	the	perambulations	of	move	and	countermove,	why,	the
veracity	of	such	schemes	is	irrelevant.	In	a	subterranean,	most	private	chamber
in	the	estate	of	Councilman	Gorlas	Vidikas	sat	fellow	Council	members
Shardan	Lim	and	Hanut	Orr	in	the	company	of	their	worthy	host,	and	the	wine
had	flowed	like	the	fount	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams	–	or	if	not	dreams	then	at
least	irresponsible	aspirations	–	throughout	the	course	of	the	night	just	past.
Still	somewhat	inebriated	and	perhaps	exhausted	unto	satiation	by	selfsatisfaction,	they	were	comfortably	silent,	each	feeling	wiser	than	their	years,
each	feeling	that	well-spring	of	power	against	which	reason	was	helpless.	In
their	half-lidded	eyes	something	was	swollen	and	nothing	in	the	world	was
unattainable.	Not	for	these	three.
‘Coll	will	be	a	problem,’	Hanut	said.
‘Nothing	new	there,’	Shardan	muttered,	and	the	other	two	granted	him	soft,
muted	laughter.	‘Although,’	he	added	as	he	played	with	a	silver	candle	snuffer,
‘unless	we	give	him	cause	for	suspicion,	there	is	no	real	objection	he	can
legitimately	make.	Our	nominee	is	well	enough	respected,	not	to	mention
harmless,	at	least	physically.’
‘It’s	just	that,’	Hanut	said,	shaking	his	head,	‘by	virtue	of	us	as	nominators,
Coll	will	be	made	suspicious.’
‘We	play	it	as	we	discussed,	then,’	Shardan	responded,	taunting	with	death
the	nearest	candle’s	flame.	‘Bright-eyed	and	full	of	ourselves	and	brazenly
awkward,	eager	to	express	our	newly	acquired	privilege	to	propose	new
Council	members.	We’d	hardly	be	the	first	to	be	so	clumsy	and	silly,	would
we?’


Gorlas	Vidikas	found	his	attention	wandering	–	they’d	gone	through	all
this	before,	he	seemed	to	recall.	Again	and	again,	in	fact,	through	the	course	of
the	night,	and	now	a	new	day	had	come,	and	still	they	chewed	the	same	tasteless
grist.	Oh,	these	two	companions	of	his	liked	the	sound	of	their	own	voices	all
too	well.	Converting	dialogue	into	an	argument	even	when	both	were	in
agreement,	and	all	that	distinguished	the	two	was	the	word	choices	concocted
in	each	reiteration.
Well,	they	had	their	uses	none	the	less.	And	this	thing	he	had	fashioned	here
was	proof	enough	of	that.
And	now,	of	course,	Hanut	once	more	fixed	eyes	upon	him	and	asked	yet
again	the	same	question,	‘Is	this	fool	of	yours	worth	it,	Gorlas?	Why	him?	It’s
not	as	if	we	aren’t	approached	almost	every	week	by	some	new	prospect
wanting	to	buy	our	votes	on	to	the	Council.	Naturally,	it	serves	us	better	to
string	the	fools	along,	gaining	favour	upon	favour,	and	maybe	one	day
deciding	we	own	so	much	of	them	that	it	will	be	worth	our	while	to	bring	them
forward.	In	the	meantime,	of	course,	we	just	get	richer	and	more	influential
outside	the	Council.	The	gods	know,	we	can	get	pretty	damned	rich	with	this
one.’
‘He	is	not	the	type	who	will	play	the	whore	to	our	pimp,	Hanut.’
A	frown	of	distaste.	‘Hardly	a	suitable	analogy,	Gorlas.	You	forget	that	you
are	the	junior	among	us	here.’
The	one	who	happens	to	own	the	woman	you	both	want	in	your	beds.	Don’t
chide	me	about	whores	and	pimps,	when	you	know	what	you’ll	pay	for	her.	Such
thoughts	remained	well	hidden	behind	his	momentarily	chastened	expression.
‘He’ll	not	play	the	game,	then.	He	wants	to	attain	the	Council,	and	in	return	we
shall	be	guaranteed	his	support	when	we	make	our	move	to	shove	aside	the
elder	statesmen	and	their	fossilized	ways,	and	take	the	real	power.’
Shardan	grunted.	‘Seems	a	reasonable	arrangement,	Hanut.	I’m	tired,	I
need	some	sleep.’	And	he	doused	the	candle	before	him	as	he	rose.	‘Hanut,	I
know	a	new	place	for	breakfast.’	He	smiled	at	Gorlas.	‘I	am	not	being	rude	in
not	inviting	you,	friend.	Rather,	I	imagine	your	wife	will	wish	to	greet	you	this
morning,	with	a	breakfast	you	can	share.	The	Council	does	not	meet	until	midafternoon,	after	all.	Take	your	leisure,	Gorlas,	when	you	can.’
‘I	will	walk	you	both	out,’	he	replied,	a	smile	fixed	upon	his	face.
	
Most	of	the	magic	Lady	Challice	Vidikas	was	familiar	with	was	of	the	useless
sort.	As	a	child	she	had	heard	tales	of	great	and	terrible	sorcery,	of	course,	and
had	she	not	seen	for	herself	Moon’s	Spawn?	On	the	night	when	it	sank	so	low


its	raw	underside	very	nearly	brushed	the	highest	rooftops,	and	there	had	been
dragons	in	the	sky	then,	and	a	storm	to	the	east	that	was	said	to	have	been	fierce
magic	born	of	some	demonic	war	out	in	the	Gadrobi	Hills,	and	then	the
confused	madness	behind	Lady	Simtal’s	estate.	But	none	of	this	had	actually
affected	her	directly.	Her	life	had	slipped	through	the	world	so	far	as	most
people’s	did,	rarely	touched	by	anything	beyond	the	occasional	ministrations
of	a	healer.	All	she	had	in	her	possession	was	a	scattering	of	ensorcelled	items
intended	to	do	little	more	than	entrance	and	amuse.
One	such	object	was	before	her	now,	on	her	dresser,	a	hemisphere	of	nearperfect	glass	in	which	floated	a	semblance	of	the	moon,	shining	as	bright	as	it
would	in	the	night	sky.	The	details	on	its	face	were	exact,	at	least	from	the	time
when	the	real	moon’s	visage	had	been	visible,	instead	of	blurred	and	uncertain
as	it	was	now.
A	wedding	gift,	she	recalled,	although	she’d	forgotten	from	whom	it	had
come.	One	of	the	less	obnoxious	guests,	she	suspected,	someone	with	an	eye	to
romance	in	the	old-fashioned	sense,	perhaps.	A	dreamer,	a	genuine	wellwisher.	At	night,	if	she	desired	darkness	in	the	room,	the	half-globe	needed
covering,	for	its	refulgent	glow	was	bright	enough	to	read	by.	Despite	this
inconvenience,	Challice	kept	the	gift,	and	indeed	kept	it	close.
Was	it	because	Gorlas	despised	it?	Was	it	because,	while	it	had	once
seemed	to	offer	her	a	kind	of	promise,	it	had,	over	time,	transformed	into	a
symbol	of	something	entirely	different?	A	tiny	moon,	yes,	shining	ever	so
bright,	yet	there	it	remained,	trapped	with	nowhere	to	go.	Blazing	its	beacon
like	a	cry	for	help,	with	an	optimism	that	never	waned,	a	hope	that	never	died.
Now,	when	she	looked	upon	the	object,	she	found	herself	feeling
claustrophobic,	as	if	she	was	somehow	sharing	its	fate.	But	she	could	not	shine
for	ever,	could	she?	No,	her	glow	would	fade,	was	fading	even	now.	And	so,
although	she	possessed	this	symbol	of	what	might	be,	her	sense	of	it	had
grown	into	a	kind	of	fascinated	resentment,	and	even	to	look	upon	it,	as	she
was	doing	now,	was	to	feel	its	burning	touch,	searing	her	mind	with	a	pain	that
was	almost	delicious.
All	because	it	had	begun	feeding	a	desire,	and	perhaps	this	was	a	far	more
powerful	sorcery	than	she	had	first	imagined;	indeed,	an	enchantment	tottering
on	the	edge	of	a	curse.	The	burnished	light	breathed	into	her,	filled	her	mind
with	strange	thoughts	and	hungers	growing	ever	more	desperate	for
appeasement.	She	was	being	enticed	into	a	darker	world,	a	place	of	hedonistic
indulgences,	a	place	unmindful	of	the	future	and	dismissive	of	the	past.
It	beckoned	to	her,	promising	the	bliss	of	the	ever-present	moment,	and	it
was	to	be	found,	she	knew,	somewhere	out	there.


She	could	hear	her	husband	on	the	stairs,	finally	deigning	to	honour	her
with	his	company,	although	after	a	night’s	worth	of	drinking	and	all	the	manly
mutual	raising	of	hackles,	verbal	strutting	and	preening,	he	would	be
unbearable.	She	had	not	slept	well	and	was,	truth	be	told,	in	no	mood	for	him
(but	then,	she	realized,	she	had	been	in	no	mood	for	him	for	some	time,	now	–
shock!),	so	she	swiftly	rose	and	went	to	her	private	changing	room.	A	journey
out	into	the	city	would	suit	her	restlessness.	Yes,	to	walk	without	purpose	and
gaze	upon	the	detritus	of	the	night’s	festivities,	to	be	amused	by	the	bleary	eyes
and	unshaven	faces	and	the	last	snarl	of	exhausted	arguments.
And	she	would	take	her	breakfast	upon	a	terrace	balcony	in	one	of	the
more	elegant	restaurants,	perhaps	Kathada’s	or	the	Oblong	Pearl,	permitting
her	a	view	of	the	square	and	Borthen	Park	where	servants	walked	watchdogs
and	nannies	pushed	two-wheeled	prams	in	which	huddled	a	new	generation	of
the	privileged,	tucked	inside	nests	of	fine	cotton	and	silk.
There,	with	fresh	fruits	and	a	carafe	of	delicate	white	wine,	and	perhaps
even	a	pipe	bowl,	she	would	observe	all	the	life	meandering	below,	sparing	a
thought	(just	once	and	then	done	with)	for	the	dogs	she	didn’t	want	and	the
children	she	didn’t	have	and	probably	would	never	have,	given	Gorlas’s
predilections.	To	think,	for	a	time,	in	a	musing	way,	of	his	parents	and	their
dislike	of	her	–	convinced	that	she	was	barren,	no	doubt,	but	no	woman	ever
got	pregnant	from	that	place,	did	she?	–	and	of	her	own	father,	now	a	widower,
with	his	sad	eyes	and	the	smile	he	struggled	to	fashion	every	time	he	looked
upon	her.	To	contemplate,	yet	again,	the	notion	of	pulling	her	father	aside	and
warning	him	–	about	what?	Well,	her	husband,	for	one,	and	Hanut	Orr	and
Shardan	Lim	for	that	matter.	Dreaming	of	a	great	triumvirate	of	tyranny	and
undoubtedly	scheming	to	bring	it	about.	But	then,	he	would	laugh,	wouldn’t	he?
And	say	how	the	young	Council	members	were	all	the	same,	blazing	with
ambition	and	conviction,	and	that	their	ascension	was	but	a	matter	of	time,	as
unstoppable	as	an	ocean	tide,	and	soon	they	would	come	to	realize	that	and
cease	their	endless	plans	of	usurpation.	Patience,	he	would	tell	her,	is	the	last
virtue	learned.	Yes,	but	often	too	late	to	be	of	any	value,	dear	Father.	Look	at
you,	a	lifetime	spent	with	a	woman	you	never	liked,	and	now,	free	at	last,	you
find	yourself	grey,	a	fresh	stoop	to	your	shoulders,	and	you	sleep	ten	bells	every
night—
Such	thoughts	and	others	whilst	she	refreshed	herself	and	began	selecting
her	attire	for	the	day.	And	in	the	bedroom	beyond	she	heard	Gorlas	sit	on	the
bed,	no	doubt	unlacing	his	boots,	knowing	well	that	she	was	here	in	the	tiny
chamber	and	clearly	not	caring.
And	what	then	would	Darujhistan	offer	up	to	her	this	bright	day?	Well,	she


would	see,	wouldn’t	she?
	
She	turned	from	watching	her	students	in	the	compound	and,	eyes	alighting
upon	him,	she	scowled.	‘Oh,	it’s	you.’
‘This	is	the	new	crop,	then?	Apsalar ’s	sweet	kiss,	Stonny.’
Her	scowl	turned	wry	and	she	walked	past	him	into	the	shade	of	the
colonnade,	where	she	sat	down	on	the	bench	beside	the	archway,	stretching	out
her	legs.	‘I	won’t	deny	it,	Gruntle.	But	it’s	something	I’ve	been	noticing	–	the
noble-born	children	are	all	arriving	lazy,	overweight	and	uninterested.	Sword
skill	is	something	their	fathers	want	for	them,	as	obnoxious	to	them	as	lyre
lessons	or	learning	numbers.	Most	of	them	can’t	even	hold	up	the	practice
swords	for	longer	than	fifty	heartbeats,	and	here	it’s	expected	I	can	work	them
into	something	worth	more	than	snot	in	eight	months.	Apsalar ’s	sweet	kiss?
Yes,	I’ll	accept	that.	It	is	theft,	all	right.’
‘And	you’re	doing	well	by	it,	I	see.’
She	ran	one	gloved	hand	along	her	right	thigh.	‘The	new	leggings?
Gorgeous,	aren’t	they?’
‘Stunning.’
‘Black	velvet	doesn’t	work	on	any	old	legs,	you	know.’
‘Not	mine,	anyway.’
‘What	do	you	want,	Gruntle?	I	see	the	barbs	have	faded,	at	least.	News	was
you	were	positively	glowing	when	you	came	back.’
‘A	disaster.	I	need	a	new	line	of	work.’
‘Don’t	be	ridiculous.	It’s	the	only	thing	you’re	remotely	good	at.	Oafs	like
you	need	to	be	out	there,	chopping	through	the	thick	skulls	of	bandits	and
whatnot.	Once	you	start	staying	put	this	city	is	doomed	and	it	just	so	happens
that	I	like	living	here,	so	the	sooner	you’re	back	out	on	the	trails	the	better.’
‘I	missed	you	too,	Stonny.’
She	snorted.
‘Bedek	and	Myrla	are	well,	by	the	way.’
‘Stop	right	there.’
He	sighed,	rubbed	at	his	face.
‘I	mean	it,	Gruntle.’
‘Look,	an	occasional	visit	is	all	I’m	asking—’
‘I	send	money.’
‘You	do?	That’s	the	first	I’ve	heard	of	that.	Not	a	mention	from	Bedek	and
from	how	they’re	doing,	well,	you	can’t	be	sending	much,	or	very	often.’
She	glared	at	him.	‘Snell	meets	me	outside	the	door	and	the	coins	go	right


into	his	hands	–	I	make	sure,	Gruntle.	Anyway,	how	dare	you?	I	made	the
adoption	legal	and	so	I	don’t	owe	them	anything,	damn	you.’
‘Snell.	Well,	that	probably	explains	it.	Next	time	try	Myrla	or	Bedek,
anyone	but	Snell.’
‘You’re	saying	the	little	shit	is	stealing	it?’
‘Stonny,	they’re	barely	scraping	by,	and,	thinking	on	it,	well,	I	know	you
well	enough	to	know	that,	adoption	or	no,	you	won’t	see	them	starve	–	any	of
them,	especially	not	your	son.’
‘Don’t	call	him	that.’
‘Stonny—’
‘The	spawn	of	rape	–	I	can	see	his	face,	right	there	in	Harllo’s	own,
looking	up	at	me.	I	can	see	it	clear,	Gruntle.’	And	she	shook	her	head,	refusing
to	meet	his	eyes,	and	her	legs	had	drawn	up,	tightly	clenched,	and	all	the
bravado	was	gone	as	she	clasped	her	arms	tight	about	herself,	and	Gruntle	felt
his	heart	breaking	yet	again	and	there	was	nothing	he	could	do,	nothing	he
could	say	to	make	it	any	better,	only	worse.
‘You’d	better	go,’	she	said	in	a	tight	voice.	‘Come	back	when	the	world
dies,	Gruntle.’
‘I	was	thinking	about	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild.’
Her	head	snapped	round.	‘Are	you	mad?	Got	a	damned	death	wish?’
‘Maybe	I	do.’
‘Get	out	of	my	sight,	then.	Go	on,	run	off	and	get	yourself	killed.’
‘Your	students	look	ready	to	keel	over,’	Gruntle	observed.	‘Repeated
lunges	aren’t	easy	for	anyone	–	I	doubt	any	of	them	will	be	able	to	walk	come
the	morrow.’
‘Never	mind	them.	If	you’re	really	thinking	of	signing	on	with	the
Trygalle,	say	it	plain.’
‘I	thought	you	might	talk	me	out	of	it.’
‘Why	would	I	bother?	You	got	your	life	just	like	I	got	mine.	We	aren’t
married.	We	aren’t	even	lovers—’
‘Had	any	success	in	that	area,	Stonny?	Someone	might—’
‘Stop	this.	Stop	all	of	it.	You’re	like	this	every	time	you	come	back	from	a
bad	one.	All	full	of	pity	and	damn	near	dripping	with	sanctimony	while	you	try
and	try	to	convince	me.’
‘Convince	you	of	what?’
‘Being	human,	but	I’m	done	with	that.	Stonny	Menackis	died	years	ago.
What	you’re	seeing	now	is	a	thief	running	a	school	teaching	nothing	to	imps
with	piss	in	their	veins.	I’m	just	here	to	suck	fools	dry	of	their	coin.	I’m	just
here	to	lie	to	them	about	how	their	son	or	daughter	is	a	champion	duellist	in


the	making.’
‘So	you	won’t	be	talking	me	out	of	signing	with	the	Trygalle,	then.’
Gruntle	turned	to	the	archway.	‘I	see	I	do	nothing	good	here.	I’m	sorry.’
But	she	reached	out	and	grasped	his	forearm	as	he	was	about	to	leave.
‘Don’t,’	she	said.
‘Don’t	what?’
‘Take	it	from	me,	Gruntle,	there’s	nothing	good	in	a	death	wish.’
‘Fine,’	he	said,	then	left.
Well,	he’d	messed	it	all	up	again.	Nothing	new	in	that,	alas.	Should	hunt
down	Snell,	give	him	a	shake	or	two.	At	the	very	least,	scare	the	crap	out	of	him.
Get	him	to	spill	where	he’s	been	burying	his	hoard.	No	wonder	he	likes	sitting
on	the	threshold.	Keeping	an	eye	out,	I	suppose.
Still,	Gruntle	kept	coming	back	to	all	these	unpleasant	truths,	the	life	he
was	busy	wasting,	the	pointlessness	of	all	the	things	he	chose	to	care	about	–
well,	not	entirely	true.	There	was	the	boy,	but	then,	the	role	of	an	occasional
uncle	could	hardly	be	worth	much,	could	it?	What	wisdom	could	he	impart?
Very	little,	if	he	looked	back	on	the	ruin	of	his	life	so	far.	Companions	dead	or
lost,	followers	all	rotting	in	the	ground,	the	ash-heaps	of	past	battles	and
decades	spent	risking	his	life	to	protect	the	possessions	of	someone	else,
someone	who	got	rich	without	chancing	anything	worthwhile.	Oh,	Gruntle
might	charge	for	his	services,	he	might	even	bleed	his	employers	on	occasion,
and	why	not?
Which	was	why,	come	to	think	on	it,	the	whole	thing	with	the	Trygalle
Trade	Guild	was	starting	to	make	sense	to	him.	A	shareholder	was	just	that,
someone	with	a	stake	in	the	venture,	profiting	by	their	own	efforts	with	no	fat
fool	in	the	wings	waiting	with	sweaty	hands.
Was	this	a	death	wish?	Hardly.	Plenty	of	shareholders	survived,	and	the
smart	ones	made	sure	they	got	out	before	it	was	too	late,	got	out	with	enough
wealth	to	buy	an	estate,	to	retire	into	a	life	of	blissful	luxury.	Oh,	that	was	just
for	him,	wasn’t	it?	Well,	when	you’re	only	good	at	one	thing,	then	you	stop
doing	it,	what’s	left	but	doing	nothing?
With	some	snivelling	acolyte	of	Treach	scratching	at	his	door	every	night.
‘The	Tiger	of	Summer	would	roar,	Chosen	One.	Yet	here	you	lie	indolent	in	silk
bedding.	What	of	battle?	What	of	blood	and	the	cries	of	the	dying?	What	of
chaos	and	the	reek	of	spilled	wastes,	the	curling	up	round	mortal	wounds	in	the
slime	and	mud?	What	of	the	terrible	strife	from	which	you	emerge	feeling	so
impossibly	alive?’
Yes,	what	of	it?	Let	me	lie	here,	rumbling	this	deep,	satisfied	purr.	Until
war	finds	me,	and	if	it	never	does,	well,	that’s	fine	by	me.


Bah,	he	was	fooling	nobody,	especially	not	himself.	He	was	no	soldier,
true	enough,	but	it	seemed	mayhem	found	him	none	the	less.	The	tiger ’s	curse,
that	even	when	it	is	minding	its	own	business	a	mob	of	beady-eyed	fools	come
chanting	into	the	jungle,	beating	the	ground.	Was	that	true?	Probably	not,	since
there	was	no	reason	for	hunting	tigers,	was	there?	He	must	have	invented	the
scene,	or	caught	a	glimpse	of	Treach’s	own	dreaming.	Then	again,	did	not
hunters	beard	beasts	of	all	sorts	in	their	dens	and	caves	and	burrows?	After
some	fatuous	excuse	about	perils	to	livestock	or	whatever,	off	the	mob	went,
eager	for	blood.
Beard	me,	will	you?	Oh,	please	do	–	and	all	at	once,	he	found	his	mood
changed,	mercurial	and	suddenly	seething	with	rage.
He	was	walking	along	a	street,	close	now	to	his	abode,	yet	the	passers-by
had	all	lost	their	faces,	had	become	nothing	more	than	mobile	pieces	of	meat,
and	he	wanted	to	kill	them	all.
A	glance	down	at	his	hands	and	he	saw	the	black	slashes	of	the	tiger ’s
barbs	deep	as	dusty	jet,	and	he	knew	then	that	his	eyes	blazed,	that	his	teeth
were	bared,	the	canines	glistening,	and	he	knew,	too,	why	the	amorphous
shapes	he	passed	were	shrinking	from	his	path.	If	only	one	would	come	close,
he	could	lash	out,	open	a	throat	and	taste	the	salty	chalk	of	blood	on	his	tongue.
Instead,	the	fools	were	rushing	off,	cringing	in	doorways	or	bolting	down
alleys.
Unimpressed,	disappointed,	he	found	himself	at	his	door.
She	didn’t	understand,	or	maybe	she	did	all	too	well.	Either	way,	she’d
been	right	in	saying	he	did	not	belong	in	this	city,	or	any	other.	They	were	all
cages,	and	the	trick	he’d	never	learned	was	how	to	be	at	peace	living	in	a	cage.
In	any	case,	peace	was	overrated	–	look	at	Stonny,	after	all.	I	take	my	share,
my	fortune,	and	I	buy	them	a	new	life	–	a	life	with	servants	and	such,	a	house
with	an	enclosed	garden	where	he	can	be	carried	out	and	sit	in	the	sun.	The
children	properly	schooled;	yes,	some	vicious	tutor	to	take	Snell	by	the	throat
and	teach	him	some	respect.	Or	if	not	respect,	then	healthy	terror.	And	for
Harllo,	a	chance	at	a	future.
One	should	be	all	I	need,	and	I	can	survive	one,	can’t	I?	It’s	the	least	I	can
do	for	them.	In	the	meantime,	Stonny	will	take	care	of	things	–	making	sure	the
coin	reaches	Myrla.
Where	did	I	see	that	damned	carriage	anyway?
He	was	at	his	door	again,	this	time	facing	the	street.	Loaded	with	travel
gear,	with	weapons	and	his	fur-lined	rain-cloak	–	the	new	one	that	smelled	like
sheep	–	and	so	it	was	clear	that	some	time	had	passed,	but	the	sort	that	was
inconsequential,	that	did	nothing	but	what	needed	doing,	with	no	wasted


thought.	Nothing	like	hesitation,	or	the	stolid	weighing	of	possibilities,	or	the
moaning	back-and-forth	that	some	might	call	wise	deliberation.
Walking	now,	this	too	of	little	significance.	Why,	nothing	had	significance,
until	the	moment	when	the	claws	are	unsheathed,	and	the	smell	of	blood	gives
bite	to	the	air.	And	that	moment	waited	somewhere	ahead	and	he	drew	closer,
step	by	step,	because	when	a	tiger	decides	it’s	time	to	hunt,	it	is	time	to	hunt.
	
Snell	came	up	behind	his	quarry,	delighted	by	his	own	skill	at	stealth,	at
stalking	the	creature	who	sat	in	the	high	grasses	all	unknowing,	proving	that
Harllo	wasn’t	fit	for	the	real	world,	the	world	where	everything	was	a	threat
and	needed	taking	care	of	lest	it	take	care	of	you.	It	was	the	right	kind	of	lesson
for	Snell	to	deliver,	out	here	in	the	wilds.
He	held	in	one	hand	a	sack	filled	with	the	silver	councils	Aunt	Stonny	had
brought,	two	linings	of	burlap	and	the	neck	well	knotted	so	he	could	grip	it
tight.	The	sound	the	coins	made	when	they	struck	the	side	of	Harllo’s	head	was
most	satisfying,	sending	a	shock	of	thrill	through	Snell.	And	the	way	that
hateful	head	snapped	to	one	side,	the	small	body	pitching	to	the	ground,	well,
that	was	a	sight	he	would	cherish.
He	kicked	at	the	unconscious	form	for	a	while,	but	without	the	grunts	and
whimpers	it	wasn’t	as	much	fun,	so	he	left	off.	Then,	collecting	the	hefty	sack
of	dung,	he	set	out	for	home.	His	mother	would	be	pleased	at	the	haul,	and
she’d	plant	a	kiss	on	his	forehead	and	he	could	bask	for	a	time,	and	when
someone	wondered	where	Harllo	had	got	to,	why,	he’d	tell	them	he’d	seen	him
down	at	the	docks,	talking	with	some	sailor.	When	the	boy	didn’t	come	home
tonight,	Myrla	might	send	for	Gruntle	to	go	down	and	check	the	waterfront,
where	he’d	find	out	that	two	ships	had	sailed	that	day,	or	three,	and	was	there	a
new	cabin	boy	on	one	of	them?	Maybe	so,	maybe	not,	who	paid	attention	to
such	things?
Dismay,	then,	and	worries,	and	mourning,	but	none	of	that	would	last	long.
Snell	would	become	the	precious	one,	the	one	still	with	them,	the	one	they
needed	to	take	care	of,	protect	and	coddle.	The	way	it	used	to	be,	the	way	it	was
supposed	to	be.
Smiling	under	the	bright	morning	sun,	with	long-legged	birds	pecking
mud	on	the	flats	out	on	the	lake	to	his	left,	Snell	ambled	his	way	back	home.	A
good	day,	a	day	of	feeling	so	alive,	so	free.	He	had	righted	the	world,	the
whole	world.
	


The	shepherd	who	found	the	small	boy	in	the	grasses	of	the	summit
overlooking	the	road	into	Maiten	and	the	Two-Ox	Gate	was	an	old	man	with
arthritic	knees	who	knew	his	usefulness	was	coming	to	an	end,	and	very	soon
indeed	he	would	find	himself	out	of	work,	the	way	the	herdmaster	watched	him
hobbling	and	leaning	too	much	on	his	staff.	Examining	the	boy,	he	was
surprised	to	find	him	still	alive,	and	this	brought	thoughts	of	what	he	might	do
with	such	an	urchin	in	his	care.
Worth	the	effort?	He	could	bring	his	wife	back	here,	with	the	cart,	and
together	they	could	lift	the	body	into	the	bed	and	wheel	him	back	to	their	shack
on	the	shore	of	the	lake.	Tend	to	him	and	see	if	he	lived	or	died,	feed	him
enough	if	it	came	to	that,	and	then?
Well,	he	had	thoughts,	yes,	plenty	of	thoughts	on	that.	None	of	them
pleasant,	but	then,	whoever	said	the	world	was	a	pleasant	place?	Foundlings
were	fair	game	and	that	was	a	rule	somewhere,	he	was	sure	of	it,	a	rule,	just
like	finding	salvage	on	the	beach.	What	you	found	you	owned,	and	the	money
would	do	them	good,	besides.
He	too	concluded	that	it	was	a	good	day.
	
He	remembered	his	childhood,	running	wild	in	the	streets	and	alleys,
clambering	on	to	the	rooftops	at	night	to	stare	about	in	wonder	at	the	infamous
Thieves’	Road.	So	inviting	this	romance	of	adventure	under	the	moon’s	secret
light,	whilst	slept	all	the	dullards	and	might-be	victims	in	the	unlit	rooms
below.
Running	wild,	and	for	the	child	one	road	was	as	good	as	another,	perhaps
better	so	long	as	there	was	mystery	and	danger	every	step	of	the	way.	Even
later,	when	that	danger	had	become	all	too	real,	it	had	been	for	Cutter	a	life
unfurling,	revealing	a	heart	saturated	with	wonder.
Romance	was	for	fools,	he	now	knew.	No	one	valued	the	given	heart,	no
one	saw	that	sacrifice	for	the	precious	gift	it	was.	No,	just	a	thing	to	be
grasped,	twisted	by	uncaring	hands,	then	wrung	dry	and	discarded.	Or	a
commodity	and	nothing	more,	never	as	desirable	as	the	next	one,	the	one	in
waiting,	or	the	one	held	by	someone	else.	Or,	something	far	worse,	a	gift	too
precious	to	accept.
The	nature	of	the	rejection,	he	told	himself,	was	irrelevant.	Pain	and	grief
arrived	in	singular	flavours,	bitter	and	lifeless,	and	too	much	of	them	rotted	the
soul.	He	could	have	taken	other	roads.	Should	have.	Maybe	walked	Murillio’s
path,	a	new	love	every	night,	the	adoration	of	desperate	women,	elegant
brunches	on	balconies	and	discreet	rendezvous	beneath	whispering	leaves	in


some	private	garden.
Or	how	about	Kruppe?	A	most	wily	master	to	whom	he	could	have
apprenticed	himself	yet	further	than	he	already	had,	in	the	art	of	high	thievery,
in	the	disposition	of	stolen	items,	in	the	acquisition	of	valuable	information
available	to	whoever	was	willing	to	pay	and	pay	well.	In	the	proper
appreciation	of	wines,	pastries	and	inappropriate	attire.	A	lifetime	of	cherubic
delight,	but	was	there	really	room	in	the	world	for	more	than	one	Kruppe?
Assuredly	not!
Was	it	preferable,	then,	this	path	of	daggers,	this	dance	of	shadows	and	the
taking	of	lives	for	coin	without	even	a	soldier ’s	sanction	(as	if	that	mattered)?
Rallick	would	not	agree.	And	Murillio	would	shake	his	head,	and	Kruppe
waggle	his	eyebrows,	and	Meese	might	grin	and	make	another	grab	for	his
crotch,	with	Irilta	looking	on	with	motherly	regard.	And	there’d	be	that	glow	in
Sulty’s	eyes,	tinged	now	with	the	bitter	truth	that	she	was	no	longer	enough	for
one	such	as	him,	that	she	could	only	dream,	that	somehow	his	being	an	assassin
set	him	upon	such	a	high	station	that	her	lowly	existence	as	a	serving	wench
was	beneath	all	notice.	Where	even	his	efforts	at	friendship	were	perceived	as
pity	and	condescension,	sufficient	to	pitch	her	into	tears	at	the	wrong	word,	the
missed	glance.
How	the	time	for	dreams	of	the	future	seemed	to	slip	past	unnoticed,	until
in	reviving	them	a	man	realized,	with	a	shock,	that	the	privilege	was	no	longer
his	to	entertain,	that	it	belonged	to	those	younger	faces	he	saw	on	all	sides,
laughing	in	the	tavern	and	on	the	streets,	running	wild.
‘You	have	changed,’	Murillio	said	from	the	bed	where	he	reclined,
propped	up	on	pillows,	his	hair	hanging	unbound	and	unwashed,	‘and	I’m	not
sure	it’s	for	the	better.’
Cutter	regarded	his	old	friend	for	a	moment,	then	asked,	‘What’s	better?’
‘What’s	better.	You	wouldn’t	have	asked	that	question,	and	certainly	not	in
that	way,	the	last	time	I	saw	you.	Someone	broke	your	heart,	Crokus	–	not
Challice	D’Arle,	I	hope!’
Smiling,	Cutter	shook	his	head.	‘No,	and	what	do	you	know,	I’d	almost
forgotten	her	name.	Her	face,	certainly…and	the	name	is	Cutter	now,	Murillio.’
‘If	you	say	so.’
He	just	had,	but	clearly	Murillio	was	worse	for	wear,	not	up	to	his	usual
standard	of	conversation.	If	he’d	been	making	a	point	by	saying	that,	well,
maybe	Crokus	would’ve	snatched	the	bait.	It’s	the	darkness	in	my	soul…no,
never	mind.
‘Seven	Cities,	was	it?	Took	your	time	coming	home.’
‘A	long	journey,	for	the	ship	I	was	on.	The	north	route,	along	the	island


chains,	stuck	in	a	miserable	hovel	of	a	port	for	two	whole	seasons	–	first
winter	storms,	which	we’d	expected,	then	a	spring	filled	with	treacherous	ice
rafts,	which	we	didn’t	–	no	one	did,	in	fact.’
‘Should	have	booked	passage	on	a	Moranth	trader.’
Cutter	glanced	away.	‘Didn’t	have	a	choice,	not	for	the	ship,	nor	for	the
company	on	it.’
‘So	you	had	a	miserable	time	aboard?’
He	sighed.	‘Not	their	fault,	any	of	them.	In	fact,	I	made	good	friends—’
‘Where	are	they	now,	then?’
Cutter	shrugged.	‘Scattered	about,	I	imagine.’
‘Will	we	meet	them?’	Murillio	asked.
He	wondered	at	this	line	of	questioning,	found	himself	strangely	irritated
by	Murillio’s	apparent	interest	in	the	people	he	had	come	back	with.	‘A	few,
maybe.	Some	stepped	ashore	only	to	leave	again,	by	whatever	means	possible
–	so,	not	any	of	those.	The	others…we’ll	see.’
‘Ah,	I	was	just	curious.’
‘About	what?’
‘Well,	which	of	your	groups	of	friends	you	considered	more
embarrassing,	I	suppose.’
‘Neither!’
‘Sorry,	I	didn’t	mean	to	offend…Cutter.	You’re	just	seeming	somewhat…
restless,	as	if	you’d	rather	be	elsewhere.’
It’s	not	that	easy.	‘It	all	feels…different.	That’s	all.	Bit	of	a	shock,	finding
you	nearly	dead.’
‘I	imagine	besting	Rallick	in	a	knife	fight	was	rather	shocking,	as	well.’
Cutter	didn’t	much	want	to	think	about	that.	‘I	could	never	have	imagined
that	you’d	lose	a	duel,	Murillio.’
‘Easy	to	do,	when	you’re	drunk	and	wearing	no	breeches.’
‘Oh.’
‘Actually,	neither	of	those	is	relevant	to	my	present	situation.	I	was
careless.	Why	was	I	careless?	Because	I’m	getting	old.	Because	it’s	all	slowing
down.	I’m	slowing	down.	Look	at	me,	lying	here,	healed	up	but	full	of	aches,
old	pains,	and	nothing	but	cold	ashes	in	my	soul.	I’ve	been	granted	a	second
chance	and	I	intend	to	take	it.’
‘Meaning?’
Murillio	shot	him	a	look.	Seemed	about	to	say	something,	then	changed	his
mind	and	said	something	else.	‘I’m	going	to	retire.	True,	I’ve	not	saved	up
much,	but	then,	I	should	be	able	to	live	with	more	modest	expectations,
shouldn’t	I?	There’s	a	new	duelling	school	in	the	Daru.	I’ve	heard	it’s	doing


rather	well,	long	lists	of	applicants	and	all	that.	I	could	help	out,	a	couple	of
days	a	week.’
‘No	more	widows.	No	more	clandestine	trysts.’
‘Precisely.’
‘You’ll	make	a	good	instructor.’
‘Not	likely,’	he	replied	with	a	grimace,	‘but	I	have	no	aspirations	to	be	one,
either.	It’s	work,	that’s	all.	Footwork,	forms,	balance	and	timing	–	the	more
serious	stuff	they	can	get	from	someone	else.’
‘If	you	go	in	there	talking	like	that,’	Cutter	said,	‘you’ll	never	get	hired.’
‘I’ve	lost	my	ability	to	charm?’
Cutter	sighed	and	rose	from	his	chair.	‘I	doubt	it.’
‘What	brought	you	back?’	Murillio	asked.
The	question	stopped	him.	‘A	conceit,	maybe.’
‘What	kind	of	conceit?’
The	city	is	in	danger.	It	needs	me.	‘Oh,’	he	said,	turning	to	the	door,	‘the
childish	kind.	Be	well,	Murillio	–	I	think	your	idea	is	a	good	one,	by	the	way.	If
Rallick	drops	by	looking	for	me,	tell	him	I’ll	be	back	later.’
He	took	the	back	stairs,	went	through	the	dank,	narrow	kitchen,	and	out
into	the	alley,	where	the	chill	of	the	night	just	past	remained	in	the	air.	He	did
need	to	speak	to	Rallick	Nom,	but	not	right	now.	He	felt	slightly	punch-drunk.
The	shock	of	his	return,	he	supposed,	the	clash	inside	himself	between	who	he
had	once	been	and	who	he	was	now.	He	needed	to	get	settled,	to	get	the
confusion	from	his	mind.	If	he	could	begin	to	see	clearly	again,	he’d	know
what	to	do.
Out	into	the	city,	then,	to	wander.	Not	quite	running	wild,	was	it?
No,	those	days	were	long	gone.
	
The	wound	had	healed	quickly,	reminding	him	that	there	had	been	changes	–
the	powder	of	otataral	he	had	rubbed	into	his	skin	only	a	few	days	ago,	or	so	it
seemed.	To	begin	a	night	of	murder	now	years	past.	The	other	changes,
however,	were	proving	far	more	disconcerting.	He	had	lost	so	much	time.
Vanished	from	the	world,	and	the	world	just	went	on	without	him.	As	if	Rallick
Nom	had	been	dead,	yes	–	no	different	from	that,	only	now	he	was	back,	which
wasn’t	how	things	should	be.	Pull	a	stick	from	the	mud	and	the	mud	closes	in	to
swallow	up	the	hole,	until	no	sign	remains	that	the	stick	ever	existed.
Was	he	still	an	assassin	of	the	Guild?	Not	at	the	moment,	and	this	truth
opened	to	him	so	many	possibilities	that	his	mind	reeled,	staggered	back	to	the
simpler	notion	of	descending	into	the	catacombs,	walking	up	to	Seba	Krafar


and	announcing	his	return;	resuming,	yes,	his	old	life.
And	if	Seba	was	anything	like	old	Talo,	he	would	smile	and	say	welcome
back,	Rallick	Nom.	From	that	moment	the	chances	that	Rallick	would	make	it
back	out	alive	were	virtually	nonexistent.	Seba	would	see	at	once	the	threat
standing	before	him.	Vorcan	had	favoured	Rallick	and	that	alone	was	sufficient
justification	for	getting	rid	of	him.	Seba	wanted	no	rivals	–	he’d	had	enough	of
those	if	Krute’s	tale	of	the	faction	war	was	accurate.
He	had	another	option	when	it	came	to	the	Guild.	Rallick	could	walk	in	and
kill	Seba	Krafar,	then	announce	he	was	interim	Master,	awaiting	Vorcan’s
return.	Or	he	could	stay	in	hiding	for	as	long	as	possible,	waiting	for	Vorcan	to
make	her	own	move.	Then,	with	her	ruling	the	nest	once	again,	he	could
emerge	out	of	the	woodwork	and	those	missing	years	would	be	as	nothing,
would	be	without	meaning.	That	much	he	shared	with	Vorcan,	and	because	of
that	she	would	trust	no	one	but	Rallick.	He’d	be	second	in	command,	and	how
could	he	not	be	satisfied	with	that?
Oh,	this	was	an	old	crisis	–	years	old	now.	His	thought	that	Turban	Orr
would	be	the	last	person	he	killed	had	been	as	foolish	then	as	it	was	now.
He	sat	on	the	edge	of	the	bed	in	his	room.	From	the	taproom	below	he
could	hear	Kruppe	expounding	on	the	glories	of	breakfast,	punctuated	by	some
muted	no	doubt	savage	commentary	by	Meese,	and	with	those	two	it	was
indeed	as	if	nothing	had	changed.	The	same	could	not	be	said	for	Murillio,
alas.	Nor	for	Crokus,	who	was	now	named	Cutter	–	an	assassin’s	name	for
certain,	all	too	well	suited	to	the	man	Crokus	had	become.	Now	who	taught	him
to	fight	with	knives	like	that?	Something	of	the	Malazan	style	–	the	Claw,	in
fact.
Rallick	had	been	expecting	Cutter	to	visit,	had	been	anticipating	the	launch
of	a	siege	of	questions.	He	would	want	to	explain,	wouldn’t	he?	Try	to	justify
his	decisions	to	Rallick,	even	when	there	was	no	possible	justification.	He
didn’t	listen	to	me,	did	he?	Ignored	my	warnings.	Only	fools	think	they	can
make	a	difference.	So,	where	was	he?	With	Murillio,	I	expect,	holding	off	on	the
inevitable.
A	brief	knock	at	the	door	and	Irilta	entered	–	she’d	been	living	hard	of	late,
he	could	see,	and	such	things	seemed	to	catch	up	faster	with	women	than	with
men	–	though	when	men	went	they	went	quickly.	‘Brought	you	breakfast,’	she
said,	carrying	a	tray	over.	‘See?	I	remembered	it	all,	right	down	to	the	honeysoaked	figs.’
Honey-soaked	figs?	‘Thank	you,	Irilta.	Let	Cro—er,	Cutter	know	that	I’d
like	to	see	him	now.’
‘He	went	out.’


‘He	did?	When?’
She	shrugged.	‘Not	so	long	ago,	according	to	Murillio.’	She	paused	for	a
hacking	cough	that	reddened	her	broad	face.
‘Find	yourself	a	healer,’	Rallick	said	when	she	was	done.
‘Listen,’	she	said,	opening	the	door	behind	her,	‘I	ain’t	got	no	regrets,
Rallick.	I	ain’t	expecting	any	god’s	kiss	on	the	other	side,	and	ain’t	nobody
gonna	say	of	Irilta	she	didn’t	have	no	fun	when	she	was	alive,	no	sir.’
She	added	something	else	but	since	she	was	in	the	corridor	and	closing	the
door	Rallick	didn’t	quite	catch	it.	Might	have	been	something	like	‘try	chewin’
on	that	lesson	some…’,	but	then,	she’d	never	been	the	edgy	one,	had	she?
He	looked	down	at	the	tray,	frowned,	then	picked	it	up	and	rose.
Out	into	the	corridor,	balancing	it	one-handed	while	he	lifted	the	latch	of
the	next	door	along	and	walked	into	Murillio’s	room.
‘This	is	yours,’	Rallick	said.	‘Honey-soaked	figs,	your	favourite.’
A	grunt	from	Murillio	on	the	bed.	‘Explains	these	strips	of	spiced	jerky	–
you	are	what	you	eat,	right?’
‘You’re	not	nearly	as	sweet	as	you	think,	then,’	Rallick	said,	setting	the	tray
down.	‘Poor	Irilta.’
‘Poor	Irilta	nothing	–	that	woman’s	crowded	more	into	her	years	than	all
the	rest	of	us	combined,	and	so	now	she’s	dying	but	won’t	bother	with	any
healer	because,	I	think,	she’s	ready	to	leave.’	He	shook	his	head	as	he	reached
for	the	first	glazed	fig.	‘If	she	knew	you	were	pitying	her,	she’d	probably	kill
you	for	real,	Rallick.’
‘Missed	me,	did	you?’
A	pause,	a	searching	glance,	then	Murillio	bit	into	the	fig.
Rallick	went	and	sat	down	in	one	of	the	two	chairs	crowding	the	room
along	with	the	bed.	‘You	spoke	to	Cutter?’
‘Somewhat.’
‘I	thought	he’d	come	to	see	me.’
‘Did	you	now?’
‘The	fact	that	he	didn’t	shouldn’t	make	me	think	he	got	scared,	should	it?’
Murillio	slowly	shook	his	head.
Rallick	sighed.	Then	he	said,	‘Saw	Coll	last	night	–	so	our	plan	worked.	He
got	his	estate	back,	got	his	name	back,	his	self-respect.	You	know,	Murillio,	I
didn’t	think	anything	could	work	out	so	well.	So…perfectly.	How	in	Hood’s
name	did	we	ever	manage	such	a	thing?’
‘That	was	a	night	for	miracles	all	right.’
‘I	feel…lost.’
‘Not	surprising,’	Murillio	replied,	reaching	for	another	fig.	‘Eat	some	of


that	jerky	–	the	reek	is	making	me	nauseated.’
‘Better	on	my	breath?’
‘Well,	I	don’t	see	us	kissing	any	time	soon.’
‘I’m	not	hungry,’	Rallick	said.	‘I	was	when	I	first	woke	up,	I	think,	but	that
faded.’
‘Woke	up	–	you	slept	all	that	time	in	the	Finnest	House?	All	tucked	up	in
bed?’
‘On	stone,	just	inside	the	door.	With	Vorcan	lying	right	beside	me,
apparently.	She	wasn’t	there	when	I	came	round.	Just	an	undead	Jaghut.’
Murillio	seemed	to	think	about	that	for	a	while,	then	said,	‘So,	what	now,
Rallick	Nom?’
‘Wish	I	knew.’
‘Baruk	might	need	things	done,	like	before.’
‘You	mean,	like	guarding	Cutter ’s	back?	Keeping	an	eye	on	Coll?	And
how	long	before	the	Guild	learns	I’m	back?	How	long	before	they	take	me
down?’
‘Ah,	the	Guild.	Well,	I’d	figured	you’d	just	head	straight	in,	toss	a	few
dozen	lifeless	bodies	around	and	resume	your	rightful	place.	With	Vorcan
back…well,	it	seems	obvious	to	me	what	needs	doing.’
‘That	was	never	my	style,	Murillio.’
‘I	know,	but	circumstances	change.’
‘Don’t	they	just.’
‘He’ll	be	back,’	Murillio	said.	‘When	he’s	ready	to	talk	to	you.	Keep	in
mind,	he’s	gone	and	collected	some	new	scars,	deep	ones.	Some	of	them	still
bleeding,	I	think.’	He	paused,	then	said,	‘If	Mammot	hadn’t	died,	well,	who
knows	what	might	have	happened.	Instead,	he	went	off	with	the	Malazans,	to
return	Apsalar	to	her	home	–	oh,	I	see	you	have	no	idea	what	I’m	talking	about.
All	right,	let	me	tell	you	the	story	of	how	that	night	ended	–	after	you	left.	Just
eat	that	damned	jerky,	please!’
‘You	drive	a	damned	hard	bargain,	friend.’
And	for	the	first	time	that	morning,	he	saw	Murillio	smile.
	
Her	scent	clung	to	the	bedding,	sweet	enough	to	make	him	want	to	weep,	and
even	some	of	her	warmth	remained,	or	maybe	that	was	just	the	sun,	the	golden
light	streaming	in	from	the	window	and	carrying	with	it	the	vaguely	disturbing
sound	of	birds	mating	in	the	tree	in	the	back	yard.	No	need	to	be	so	frantic,
little	ones.	There’s	all	the	time	in	the	world.	Well,	he	would	be	feeling	that	right
now,	wouldn’t	he?


She	was	working	the	wheel	in	the	outer	room,	a	sound	that	had	once	filled
his	life,	only	to	vanish	and	now,	at	long	last,	return.	As	if	there	had	been	no
sordid	crimes	of	banditry	and	the	slavery	that	came	as	reasonable	punishment,
as	if	there	had	been	no	rotting	trench	lying	shackled	alongside	Teblor
barbarians.	No	huge	warrior	hanging	from	a	cross	amidships,	with	Torvald
trickling	brackish	water	between	the	fool’s	cracked	lips.	No	sorcerous	storms,
no	sharks,	no	twisted	realms	to	crawl	in	and	out	of.	No	dreams	of	drowning	–
no,	all	that	had	been	someone	else’s	life,	a	tale	sung	by	a	half-drunk	bard,	the
audience	so	incredulous	they	were	moments	from	rage,	ready	to	tear	the	idiot
to	pieces	at	the	recounting	of	just	one	more	unlikely	exploit.	Yes,	someone
else’s	life.	The	wheel	was	spinning,	as	it	always	did,	and	she	was	working	clay
and	giving	it	form,	symmetry,	beauty.	Of	course,	she	never	did	her	best	work
the	day	after	a	night	of	lovemaking,	as	if	she’d	used	up	something	essential,
whatever	it	was	that	fed	creativity,	and	sometimes	he	felt	bad	about	that.	She’d
laugh	and	shake	her	head,	dismissing	his	concerns,	spinning	the	wheel	yet
harder.
He’d	seen,	on	the	shelves	of	the	outer	room,	scores	of	mediocre	pots.
Should	this	fact	bother	him?	It	might	have,	once,	but	no	longer.	He	had
vanished	from	her	life	–	no	reason,	however,	for	her	to	waste	away	in	some
lonely	vigil	or	prolonged	period	of	mourning.	People	got	on	with	things,	and
so	they	should.	Of	course	she’d	taken	lovers.	Might	still	have	them,	in	fact,	and
it	had	been	something	of	a	miracle	that	she’d	been	alone	when	he	showed	up	–
he’d	half	expected	some	over-muscled	godling	with	tousled	golden	locks	and
the	kind	of	jaw	that	just	begged	to	be	punched	to	answer	the	door.
‘Maybe	he’s	visiting	his	mother,’	Torvald	mumbled.
He	sat	up,	swung	his	legs	round	and	settled	feet	on	the	woven	mat	covering
the	floor.	Noticed	that	flat	pillows	had	been	sewn	on	to	the	mat,	stuffed	with
lavender	that	crackled	under	his	feet.	‘No	wonder	her	feet	smell	nice.’	Anyway,
he	didn’t	mind	what	she’d	been	up	to	all	that	time.	Didn’t	even	mind	if	she	was
still	up	to	a	few	things	now,	though	those	things	might	make	things	a	little
crowded.	‘Things,	right.’
The	day	had	begun,	and	all	he	needed	to	do	was	settle	up	certain	matters
and	then	he	could	resume	his	life	as	a	citizen	of	Darujhistan.	Maybe	visit	a	few
old	friends,	some	members	of	his	estranged	family	(the	ones	who’d	talk	to
him,	anyway),	see	the	sights	that’d	make	him	the	most	nostalgic,	and	give	some
thought	to	what	he	was	going	to	do	with	the	rest	of	his	life.
But	first	things	first.	Pulling	on	his	foreign-cut	clothes	(the	clean	set,	that
had	dried	in	a	rather	wrinkled	state,	alas),	Torvald	Nom	made	his	way	to	the
outer	room.	Her	back	was	to	him	as	she	hunched	over	the	wheel,	legs	pumping


the	pedals.	He	saw	the	large	bowl	of	clean	water	where	it	always	was,	went
over	and	splashed	his	face.	Was	reminded	that	he	needed	a	shave	–	but	now	he
could	actually	pay	someone	else	to	do	such	things.	To	the	opportunistic	shall
come	rewards.	Someone	had	said	that,	once,	he	was	sure.
‘My	sweetness!’
She	half	turned	and	grinned	at	him.	‘Look	how	bad	this	is,	Tor.	See	what
you’ve	done?’
‘It’s	the	temper,	of	course—’
‘It’s	tired	thighs,’	she	said.
‘A	common	complaint?’	he	asked,	walking	alongside	the	shelves	and
leaning	in	to	study	a	stack	of	misaligned	plates.
‘Pretty	rare,	actually.	What	you	think	you’re	seeing	up	there,	husband,	isn’t.
It’s	the	new	style	everyone	wants	these	days.	Symmetry	is	dead,	long	live	the
clumsy	and	crooked.	Every	noble	lady	wants	a	poor	cousin	in	the	country,
some	aunt	or	great-aunt	with	stubby	fingers	who	makes	crockery	for	her	kin,
in	between	wringing	chicken	necks	and	husking	gourds.’
‘That’s	a	complicated	lie.’
‘Oh,	it’s	never	actually	stated,	Tor,	only	implied.’
‘I	was	never	good	at	inferring	what’s	implied.	Unless	it’s	implicitly
inferred.’
‘I’ve	had	precisely	two	lovers,	Tor,	and	neither	one	lasted	more	than	a	few
months.	Want	their	names?’
‘Do	I	know	them?’
When	she	didn’t	reply	he	glanced	over	and	found	her	looking	at	him.	‘Ah,’
he	said	wisely.
‘Well,	so	long	as	you	don’t	start	squinting	at	everyone	who	comes	in	here
or	says	hello	to	me	on	the	street	–	if	that’s	going	to	be	the	case,	then	I’d	better
tell	you—’
‘No,	no,	darling.	In	fact,	the	mystery	is…intriguing.	But	that	won’t	survive
my	actually	knowing.’
‘That’s	true.	Which	is	why	I	won’t	be	asking	you	about	anything.	Where
you’ve	been,	what	you’ve	done.’
‘But	that’s	different!’
Her	brows	rose.
‘No,	really,’	Torvald	said,	walking	over.	‘What	I	told	you	last	night,	I
wasn’t	exaggerating.’
‘If	you	say	so.’
He	could	see	that	she	didn’t	believe	him.	‘I	am	stung.	Crushed.’
‘You’d	better	get	going,’	Tiserra	said,	returning	once	more	to	the	lump	of


clay	on	the	wheel.	‘You’ve	got	a	debt	to	clear.’
‘The	loot’s	not	sticky?’
‘It’s	all	clean	as	can	be,	I	made	sure.	Unless	Gareb’s	scratched	secret	sigils
on	every	coin	he	owned	he	won’t	know	either	way.	He	might	suspect,	though.’
‘I’ve	got	a	good	tale	to	explain	all	that,	if	necessary,’	Torvald	said.
‘Foreign	investments,	unexpected	wealth,	a	triumphant	return.’
‘Well,	I’d	tone	down	the	new	version,	Tor.’
He	regarded	her,	noting	her	amusement,	and	said	nothing.	What	was	the
point?	That	giant	whose	life	I	saved	more	than	once,	his	name	was	Karsa
Orlong.	Do	you	think	I	could	make	up	a	name	like	that,	Tis?	And	what	about
these	shackle	scars?	Oh,	it’s	the	new	style	among	the	highborn,	enforced
humility	and	all	that.
Oh,	it	didn’t	matter	anyway.	‘I	don’t	plan	on	meeting	Gareb	in	person,’	he
said	as	he	walked	to	the	front	door.	‘I’ll	work	through	Scorch	and	Leff.’
The	lump	of	wet	clay	slid	off	the	wheel	and	splatted	on	the	wall,	where	it
clung	for	a	moment,	then	oozed	down	to	glom	on	to	the	floor.
Surprised,	Torvald	turned	to	his	wife	and	saw	the	expression	that	he	hadn’t
seen	in…in…well,	in	quite	a	while.	‘Wait!’	he	cried.	‘That	partnership	is	over
with,	I	swear	it!	Darling,	they’re	just	acting	as	my	go-between,	that’s	all—’
‘You	start	scheming	with	those	two	again,	Torvald	Nom,	and	I’ll	take	out	a
contract	on	you	myself.’
‘They	always	liked	you,	you	know.’
‘Torvald—’
‘I	know,	my	love,	I	know.	Don’t	worry.	No	more	scheming	with	Scorch
and	Leff.	That’s	a	promise.	We’re	rich	now,	remember?’
	
‘The	problem	with	lists,’	Scorch	said,	‘is	all	the	names	on	’em.’
Leff	nodded.	‘That’s	the	problem,	all	right.	You	got	it	dead	on	there,
Scorch.	All	them	names.	They	must’ve	had	some	kind	of	meeting,	don’t	you
think?	All	the	loansharks	in	some	crowded,	smoky	room,	lounging	about	with
nubile	women	dropping	grapes	in	their	mouths,	and	some	scribe	with	stained
lips	scratching	away.	Names,	people	down	on	their	luck,	people	so	stupid
they’d	sign	anything,	grab	the	coin	no	matter	how	insane	the	interest.	Names,
you	got	it,	Scorch,	a	list	of	fools.	Poor,	dumb,	desperate	fools.’
‘And	then,’	Scorch	said,	‘when	the	list	is	done,	out	it	goes,	for	some	other
poor,	dumb,	desperate	fools	to	take	on.’
‘Hey	now,	we	ain’t	poor.’
‘Yes	we	are.	We	been	poor	ever	since	Torvald	Nom	vanished	on	us.	He	was


the	brains	–	admit	it,	Leff.	Now,	you	tried	being	the	brains	ever	since	and	look
where	it’s	got	us,	with	a	damned	list	and	all	those	names.’
Leff	raised	a	finger.	‘We	got	Kruppe,	though,	and	he’s	already	given	us	six
of	’em.’
‘Which	we	passed	on	and	you	know	what	that	means?	It	means	thugs
kicking	in	the	door	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	delivering	threats	and	maybe
worse.	People	got	hurt	’cause	of	us,	Leff.	Bad	hurt.’
‘They	got	hurt	because	they	couldn’t	pay	up.	Unless	you	decide	to	run,	and
I	do	mean	run,	as	in	out	of	the	city,	as	in	hundreds	of	leagues	away	to	some
town	or	city	with	no	connections	to	here,	but	people	don’t	do	that	and	why	not?
Because	they’re	all	caught	up,	tangled	in	the	nets,	and	they	can’t	see	their	way
clear	because	they	got	husbands	and	wives	and	children	and	maybe	it’s	hard	but
at	least	it’s	familiar,	you	know	what	I	mean?’
‘No.’
Leff	blinked.	‘I	was	just	saying—’
‘What	did	they	think	they	were	doing,	to	get	caught	up	in	nets	–	swimmin’
the	lake?	Besides,	not	all	of	it’s	loans,	is	it?	There’s	blackmail,	too,	which
gives	me	a	thought	or	two—’
‘No	way,	Scorch.	I	don’t	want	in	on	anything	like	that.’
‘I’m	just	suggesting	we	talk	to	Tor	about	it,	that’s	all.	See	what	he	conjures
up	in	the	way	of	plans	and	such.’
‘Assuming	Tor	ever	shows	up.’
‘He	will,	you’ll	see,	Leff.	He	was	our	partner,	wasn’t	he?	And	he’s	back.’
The	conversation	ended	abruptly,	for	no	reason	obvious	to	either	of	them,
and	they	stood	looking	at	each	other	for	a	dozen	heartbeats.	They	were
opposite	the	entrance	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.	It	was	morning,	when	they	did	their
best	thinking,	but	that	had	a	way	of	dying	quick,	so	that	by	late	afternoon	they
would	find	themselves	sitting	somewhere,	sluggish	as	tortoises	in	a	hailstorm,
arguing	about	nothing	in	particular	with	monosyllabic	brevity	and	getting
angrier	by	the	moment.
Without	another	word	they	both	went	into	the	Phoenix	Inn.
Clumped	inside,	looking	round	–	just	to	be	sure	–	then	heading	over	to
where	sat	Kruppe,	plump	hands	upraised	and	hovering	like	hooded	snakes,
then	striking	down	to	one	of	dozens	of	pastries	heaped	on	numerous	platters	in
front	of	him.	Fingertip	fangs	spearing	hapless	sweets	right	and	left,	each	one
moving	in	a	blur	up	to	his	mouth,	gobbled	up	in	a	shower	of	crumbs	one	after
another.
Mere	moments	later	and	half	the	offerings	were	gone.	Kruppe’s	cheeks
bulged,	his	jam-smeared	lips	struggling	to	close	as	he	chewed	and	frantically


swallowed,	pausing	to	breathe	loudly	through	his	nose.	Seeing	Scorch	and	Leff
approaching,	he	waved	mutely,	gesturing	them	into	their	seats.
‘You’re	going	to	explode	one	day,	Kruppe,’	said	Leff.
Scorch	stared	with	his	usual	expression	of	rapt	disbelief.
Kruppe	finally	managed	to	swallow	everything	down,	and	he	raised	his
hands	once	more,	left	them	to	hover	whilst	he	eyed	his	two	guests.	‘Blessed
partners,	is	this	not	a	wondrous	morning?’
‘We	ain’t	decided	yet,’	Leff	said.	‘We’re	still	waiting	for	Torvald	–	he	had
a	runner	find	us	down	at	the	docks	and	said	he’d	meet	us	here.	He’s	already
changing	things	all	round,	like	maybe	he	don’t	trust	us.	It’s	a	blow,	I	tell	you,
Kruppe.	A	real	blow.’
‘Conflagration	of	suspicions	climbing	high	into	yon	blue	sky	is	quite
unnecessary,	shifty-eyed	friends	of	wise	Kruppe.	Why,	infamous	and	almost
familiar	offspring	of	House	Nom	is	true	to	his	word,	and	Kruppe	asserts	–	with
vast	confidence	–	that	the	first	name	is	about	to	be	struck	from	dire	list!’
‘First?	What	about	the	six—’
‘You’ve	not	heard?	Oh,	my.	Each	had	flown,	only	moments	before	the
cruel	night-beaters	closed	in.	Most	extraordinary	ill-luck.’
Scorch	clawed	at	his	face.	‘Gods,	we’re	back	where	we	began!’
‘That’s	impossible,	Kruppe!	Someone	must’ve	tipped	’em	off!’
Kruppe’s	gnarled	brows	lifted,	then	waggled.	‘Veracity	of	your	discoveries
is	not	in	doubt,	you	will	be	pleased	to	hear.	Thusly,	you	have	succeeded	in	your
task	with	said	six,	whilst	they	who	compiled	the	list	have,	alas,	not	quite
matched	your	rate	of	success.	And	so,	how	many	remain?	Twelve,	yes?	Not
counting	sleep-addled	Torvald	Nom,	that	is.’
‘He	ain’t	no	sleep-addered	or	whatever,’	Scorch	said.	‘In	fact,	he	looked
just	fine	yesterday.’
‘Perhaps	glorious	reunion	has	sapped	all	verve,	then.	Kruppe	assumed
sleep-addered	indeed,	given	the	man’s	hapless	and	ineffectual	perusal	of	this
taproom	–	ah,	at	last	he	sees	us!’
And	both	Scorch	and	Leff	twisted	round	in	their	chairs	to	see	Torvald	Nom
sauntering	up	and,	noting	the	man’s	broad	smile,	they	were	instantly	relieved
and	then,	just	as	quickly,	nervous.
‘My	apologies	for	being	late,’	Torvald	said,	dragging	up	another	chair.	‘I
got	a	shave	and	the	old	woman	threw	in	the	buffing	of	my	nails	for	free	–	said	I
was	surprisingly	handsome	under	all	those	whiskers	and	if	that’s	not	a	good
start	to	a	day	then	what	is?	True,	she	was	about	a	thousand	years	old,	but	hey,
compliments	don’t	have	to	be	pretty,	do	they?	And	you’re	Kruppe.	You	must	be
–	who	else	in	this	city	tries	to	eat	with	his	nose	when	his	mouth	is	filled?	I’m


Torvald	Nom.’
‘Sit,	newfound	friend.	Kruppe	is	generous	enough	this	morning	to
disregard	dubious	observation	regarding	his	eating	habits	and	the	habits	of	his
orifices.	Kruppe	further	observes	that	you,	while	once	a	poor	destitute	man,
have	suddenly	acquired	impressive	wealth,	so	finely	attired	and	groomed	are
you,	and	that	with	great	relief	friends	Scorch	and	Leff	are	soon	to	pay	a	most
propitious	visit	to	one	Gareb	the	Lender.	And	on	this	of	all	days,	one	suspects
Gareb	to	be	most	gracious	at	repayment	of	said	debt,	yes?’
Torvald	stared	at	Kruppe,	evidently	speechless	with	admiration.
Kruppe’s	left	hand	darted	down,	captured	a	puff	pastry	that	indeed	might
have	been	trying	to	escape,	and	pushed	it	whole	into	his	mouth.	Beaming,	he
chewed.
‘You	got	the	money?’	Leff	asked	Torvald.
‘What?	Oh.	Here,’	and	he	drew	out	a	pouch.	‘In	full.	Kruppe,	you	are
witness	to	this,	so	don’t	try	anything,	Leff.	Nor	you	either,	Scorch.	Walk	it
straight	over	to	Gareb’s.	Get	the	chit	saying	I’m	cleared,	too.	Then	come
straight	back	here	and	I’ll	buy	you	all	lunch.’
Scorch	was	looking	back	and	forth	between	Torvald	and	Kruppe,	and
finally	of	the	latter	he	asked,	‘What	was	that	you	said	about	Gareb?’
Kruppe	swallowed,	licked	his	lips,	and	said,	‘Why,	only	that	a	dastardly
thief	broke	into	his	estate	last	night	and	stole	his	entire	hoard.	The	poor	man!
And	’tis	said	the	thief	stole	much	more	than	that	–	why,	the	wife’s	dignity,	too,
or	at	least	her	innocence	in	so	far	as	nonmarital	intercourse	is	concerned.’
‘Hold	on,’	Leff	said.	‘The	thief	slept	with	Gareb’s	wife?	Where	was
Gareb?’
‘At	a	moneylenders’	meeting,	Kruppe	understands,	discussing	important
matters	and,	no	doubt,	eating	his	fill	of	grapes	and	whatnot.’
‘Well	then,’	Torvald	Nom	said,	‘won’t	he	be	happy	I’ve	returned	to	repay
my	debt.’
‘Won’t	he	just!’	said	Kruppe,	beaming	once	more.
Leff	took	the	bag	of	coins	and	peered	inside.	‘All	there?’
‘All	there,’	Torvald	replied.
Leff	rose	and	said,	‘Let’s	get	this	done	with,	Scorch.’
When	the	two	were	gone,	Torvald	Nom	sat	back	in	his	chair	and	smiled	at
Kruppe.
Who	smiled	back.
And	when	that	was	done	with,	Kruppe	collected	another	pastry	and	held	it
before	his	mouth,	in	order	to	more	closely	observe	its	delight,	and	perhaps
torture	it	a	moment	before	his	mouth	opened	like	a	bear ’s	jagged	maw.	Poised


thus,	he	paused	to	glance	over	at	Torvald	Nom.	‘Upstairs,	dear	sir,	you	shall
find,	if	you	so	desire,	a	cousin	of	renown.	Like	you,	suddenly	returned	to	fair
Darujhistan.	None	other	than	Rallick,	among	the	Noms	of	House	Nom	one
might	presume	a	sheep	blacker	than	you.	Indeed,	the	very	black	of	nadir,	the
Abyss,	whilst	you	might	reveal	a	lesser	black,	such	as	charcoal.	Two	sheep,
then,	in	this	very	inn,	of	a	very	dark	hue	–	why,	could	Kruppe	but	witness	such
a	meeting!’	And	time	now	to	lift	an	admonishing	finger.	‘But	listen,	dear	friend
Torvald	Nom,	most	clandestine	is	Rallick’s	return,	yes?	Seal	thy	lips,	I	beg
you!’
‘He’s	in	hiding?	Who	from?’
A	flutter	of	pudgy	fingers,	like	worms	in	a	reef-bed.	‘Quick,	then,	lest	he
depart	on	some	fell	errand.	Kruppe	will	save	your	seat	here	against	your	return
–	he	so	looks	forward	to	the	sumptuous	lunch	for	which	Torvald	will	pay	and
pay	happily!’
Torvald	was	suddenly	sweating,	and	he	fidgeted	in	the	chair.	‘The	reunion
can,	er,	wait.	Really,	why	would	I	want	to	bother	him	right	now?	No,	honest,
Kruppe,	and	as	for	secret,	well,	I’ll	keep	it	just	fine,	provided	you,	er,	do	the
same.	Say	nothing	to	Rallick,	I	mean.	Let	me…surprise	him!’
‘Rallick	has	little	love	for	surprises,	Torvald	Nom,	as	you	must	surely
know.	Why,	just	last	night	he—’
‘Just	don’t	say	anything,	all	right?’
‘Oh,	aren’t	conspiracies	delicious?	Kruppe	will	say	nothing	to	no	one,
none	to	worry	no	matter	what.	This	is	a	most	solemn	promise	most	solemnly
promised!	Now,	old	friend,	be	so	good	as	to	accost	yon	Meese	o’er	there	–
some	wine	to	loosen	the	throats	prior	to	vast	meal,	yes?	Kruppe’s	mouth
salivates	and,	perhaps,	so	too	sniffles	his	nose	–	all	in	anticipation,	yes?’
	
‘If	this	is	what	I	want,	then	I	don’t	want	it.’
‘Oh,	now	that	makes	sense,	Antsy.	And	if	you	happen	to	be	a	short	bowlegged	red-faced	crab	of	a	man,	well,	you’d	rather	be	a	short	bow-legged	redfaced	crab	of	a—’
‘You’re	an	idiot,	Bluepearl,	and	that	don’t	change	no	matter	what	you	want.
What	I’m	saying	is	simple,	right?	Even	you	should	grasp	the	meaning.	A
soldier	retires,	right?	And	looks	to	a	life	all	simple	and	peaceful,	but	is	it?’
‘Is	it	which?’
‘What?’
‘Is	it	simple	or	is	it	peaceful?’
‘It	isn’t	and	that’s	my	point!’


‘That	wasn’t	your	point.	Your	point	was	you	don’t	want	it	and	if	that’s	the
case,	then	head	on	over	to	the	Malazan	Embassy	and	throw	yourself	on	the
mercy	of	whoever	and	if	they	don’t	hang	you	they’ll	sign	you	up	all	over
again.’
‘The	point	was,	I’d	like	being	retired	if	I	only	could	be!’
‘I’m	going	to	the	cellar	to	check	on	stock.’
Antsy	watched	him	leave,	then	snorted	and	shook	his	head.	‘That	man
needs	help.’
‘So	go	help	him,’	Blend	said	from	the	next	table	over.
Antsy	jumped	in	his	seat,	then	glared	at	her.	‘Stop	doing	that!	Anyway,	I
didn’t	mean	that	kind	of	help.	Oh,	gods,	my	head	aches.’
‘Sometimes,’	Blend	said,	‘I	try	to	make	myself	as	quiet	as	possible	because
that	way	the	military	marching	band	in	my	skull	maybe	won’t	find	me.’
‘Huh,’	said	Antsy,	brows	knitting.	‘Never	knew	you	played	an	instrument,
Blend.	Which	one?’
‘Pipes,	drums,	flute,	rattle,	horn,	waxstring.’
‘Really?	All	at	once?’
‘Of	course.	You	know,	I	think	I’d	be	annoyed	if	I	headed	upstairs	and	found
Picker	creeping	out	of	Scillara’s	room	right	about	now.’
‘So	stay	sitting	right	there.’
‘Well,	it’s	only	my	imagination	inventing	the	scene.’
‘You	sure?’
She	lasted	four	or	five	heartbeats	before	swearing	under	her	breath	and
rising.
Antsy	watched	her	leave,	then	smiled.	‘It’s	better,’	he	said	to	no	one,	‘when
you	don’t	have	an	imagination.	Like	me.’	He	paused,	scowled.	‘Mind,	could	be
I	could	use	one	right	about	now,	so	I	could	figure	out	how	and	when	them
assassins	are	gonna	try	again.	Poison.	Magic.	Knives.	Crossbow	quarrels	in	the
night,	through	the	window,	right	through	the	shutters,	a	perfect	shot.	Thump	to
the	floor	goes	Antsy,	the	Hero	of	Mott	Wood.	A	spear	up	through	that	floor	just
to	finish	him	off,	since	they	been	tunnelling	for	weeks	and	was	waiting,
knowing	he’d	fall	right	there	right	then,	aye.’
He	sat,	eyes	wide,	red	moustache	twitching.
Sitting	in	the	shadows	in	the	far	corner,	back	resting	against	the	wall,
Duiker	watched	with	wry	amusement.	Extraordinary,	how	some	people
survived	and	others	didn’t.	The	soldier ’s	face	was	always	the	same	once	the
mask	fell	away	–	a	look	of	bemusement,	the	faint	bewildered	surprise	to	find
oneself	still	alive,	knowing	all	too	well	there	was	no	good	reason	for	it,
nothing	at	all	but	the	nudge	of	luck,	the	emptiness	of	chance	and	circumstance.


And	all	the	unfairness	of	the	world	made	a	bitter	pool	of	the	eyes.
A	commotion	from	the	back	room	and	a	moment	later	the	narrow	door
opened	and	out	walked	the	bard,	grey	hair	tousled	by	sleep,	eyes	red	even	at
this	distance.	A	glance	over	at	Antsy.	‘There’s	lice	in	the	mattress,’	he	said.
‘I	doubt	they	mind	the	company,’	the	ex-sergeant	replied,	levering	himself
upright	and	making	for	the	stairs.
The	bard	stared	after	him	for	a	moment,	then	headed	over	to	the	bar,	where
he	poured	himself	a	tankard	of	pungent,	dark	Rhivi	beer.	And	came	over	to
where	sat	Duiker.
‘Historians	and	bards	both,’	he	said,	sitting	down.
Duiker	nodded,	understanding	well	enough.
‘But	what	you	observe	and	what	I	observe,	well,	that	can	turn	out	quite
differently.	Then	again,	maybe	the	distinction	is	merely	superficial.	The	older	I
get,	the	more	I	suspect	just	that.	You	describe	events,	seeing	the	great	sweep	of
things.	I	look	at	the	faces,	rushing	by	so	fast	they	might	be	no	more	than	a	blur
if	I	don’t	take	care.	To	see	them	true,	to	remember	them	all.’
‘Where	are	you	from?’	Duiker	asked.
The	bard	drank	down	a	mouthful	and	set	the	tankard	carefully	before	him.
‘Korel,	originally.	But	that	was	a	long	time	ago.’
‘Malazan	invasion?’
An	odd	smile	as	the	man	studied	the	tankard	on	the	table	before	him.	His
hands,	however,	remained	in	his	lap.	‘If	you	mean	Greymane,	then	yes.’
‘So	which	of	the	countless	contradictory	tales	are	true?	About	him,	I
mean.’
The	bard	shrugged.	‘Never	ask	that	of	a	bard.	I	sing	them	all.	Lies,	truths,
the	words	make	no	distinction	in	what	they	tell,	nor	even	the	order	they	come
in.	We	do	as	we	please	with	them.’
‘I’ve	been	listening	to	you	these	past	few	nights,’	said	Duiker.
‘Ah,	an	audience	of	one.	Thank	you.’
‘You’ve	sung	verses	of	Anomandaris	I’ve	never	heard	before.’
‘The	unfinished	ones?’	The	bard	nodded	and	reached	for	the	tankard.
‘“Black	Coral,	where	stand	the	Tiste	Andii…”’	He	drank	another	mouthful.
‘Have	you	come	from	there,	then?’
‘Did	you	know	that	there	is	no	god	or	goddess	in	all	the	pantheon	that
claims	to	be	the	patron	–	or	matron	–	of	bards?	It’s	as	if	we’ve	been	forgotten,
left	to	our	own	devices.	That	used	to	bother	me,	for	some	reason,	but	now	I	see
it	for	the	true	honour	it	represents.	We	have	been	made	unique,	in	our	freedom,
in	our	responsibility.	Is	there	a	patron	of	historians?’
‘Not	that	I’m	aware	of.	Does	this	mean	I’m	free,	too?’


‘It’s	said	you	told	the	tale	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs	once,	here	in	this	very
room.’
‘Once.’
‘And	that	you	have	been	trying	to	write	it	down	ever	since.’
‘And	failing.	What	of	it?’
‘It	may	be	that	expositional	prose	isn’t	right	for	the	telling	of	that	story,
Duiker.’
‘Oh?’
The	bard	set	the	tankard	to	one	side	and	slowly	leaned	forward,	fixing	the
historian	with	grey	eyes.	‘Because,	sir,	you	see	their	faces.’
Anguish	welled	up	inside	Duiker	and	he	looked	away,	hiding	his	suddenly
trembling	hands.	‘You	don’t	know	me	well	enough	for	such	matters,’	he	said	in
a	rasp.
‘Rubbish.	This	isn’t	a	personal	theme	here,	historian.	It’s	two	professionals
discussing	their	craft.	It’s	me,	a	humble	bard,	offering	my	skills	to	unlock	your
soul	and	all	it	contains	–	everything	that’s	killing	it,	moment	by	moment.	You
can’t	find	your	voice	for	this.	Use	mine.’
‘Is	that	why	you’re	here?’	Duiker	asked.	‘Like	some	vulture	eager	to	lap	up
my	tears?’
Brows	lifted.	‘You	are	an	accident.	My	reasons	for	being	here	lie…
elsewhere.	Even	if	I	could	explain	more,	I	would	not.	I	cannot.	In	the	meantime,
Duiker,	let	us	fashion	an	epic	to	crush	the	hearts	of	a	thousand	generations.’
And	now,	yes,	tears	rolled	down	the	lined	tracks	of	the	historian’s	face.
And	it	took	all	the	courage	he	still	possessed	to	then	nod.
The	bard	leaned	back,	retrieving	his	tankard.	‘It	begins	with	you,’	he	said.
‘And	it	ends	with	you.	Your	eyes	to	witness,	your	thoughts	alone.	Tell	me	of	no
one’s	mind,	presume	nothing	of	their	workings.	You	and	I,	we	tell	nothing,	we
but	show.’
‘Yes.’	Duiker	looked	up,	back	into	those	eyes	that	seemed	to	contain	–	and
hold	sure	–	the	grief	of	the	world.	‘What’s	your	name,	bard?’
‘Call	me	Fisher.’
	
Chaur	was	curled	up	at	the	foot	of	the	bed,	snoring,	twitching	like	a	dreaming
dog.	Picker	observed	him	for	a	moment	before	settling	back	on	the	mattress.
How	had	she	got	here?	Was	that	raw	tenderness	between	her	legs	what	she
thought	it	was	and	if	so	then	did	Barathol	remember	as	little	of	it	as	she	did?
Oh,	too	complicated	to	work	out.	She	wasn’t	ready	to	be	thinking	of	all	those
things,	she	wasn’t	ready	to	be	thinking	at	all.


She	heard	someone	moving	down	the	hall.	Then	a	muted	conversation,
punctuated	by	a	throaty	laugh	that	did	not	belong	to	Blend	or	anyone	else
Picker	knew,	meaning	it	was	probably	that	woman,	Scillara.	Picker	gasped
slightly	at	a	sudden	recollection	of	holding	the	woman’s	breasts	in	her	hands
and	hearing	that	laugh	but	up	close	and	a	lot	more	triumphant.
Gods,	did	I	sleep	with	them	all?	Damn	that	Quorl	Milk!
A	wheeze	from	Chaur	and	she	started	guiltily	–	but	no,	she’d	not	do	any
such	thing	to	an	innocent	like	him.	There	were	limits	–	there	had	to	be	limits.
A	muffled	knock	on	the	door.
‘Oh,	come	in,	Blend.’
And	in	she	came,	light-footed	as	a	cat,	and	her	expression	seemed	filled	up
with	something,	on	the	verge	of	bursting.
No,	not	tears,	please.	‘I	don’t	remember	nothing,	Blend,	so	don’t	start	on
me.’
Blend	held	back	a	moment	longer,	then	erupted.
In	howling	laughter,	bending	over	in	convulsions.
Chaur	sat	up	on	the	floor,	blinking	and	smiling,	then	he	too	was	laughing.
Picker	glared	at	Blend,	wanting	to	kill	her.	‘What’s	so	damned	funny?’
Blend	managed	to	regain	control	over	herself.	‘They	pretty	much	carried
us	all	the	way	back.	But	then	we	woke	up	and	we	all	had	one	thing	and	one
thing	only	on	our	minds.	They	didn’t	stand	a	chance!’
‘Gods	below.’	Then	she	stiffened.	‘Not	Chaur—’
‘No,	Scillara	got	him	in	here	first.’
Chaur	was	still	laughing,	tears	rolling	down	his	face.	He	seemed	to	be
losing	control	and	all	at	once	Picker	felt	alarmed.	‘Stop	now,	Chaur!	Stop!’
The	wide	empty	eyes	fixed	on	her,	and	all	mirth	vanished.
‘Sorry,’	she	said.	‘It’s	all	right.	Go	down	to	the	kitchen	and	get	something
to	eat,	Chaur,	there’s	a	lad.’
He	rose,	stretched,	scratched	himself,	then	left	the	room.	He	barked	one
last	laugh	somewhere	near	the	stairs.
Picker	rubbed	at	her	face.	‘Not	Antsy,	too.	Don’t	tell	me…’
Blend	shrugged.	‘Lust	is	blind,	I	suppose.	And	let’s	hope	all	memory	of	it
stays	that	way.	I	fear	all	his	fantasies	came	true	last	night…only	he	can’t
remember	any	of	it!’
‘I	feel	sick.’
‘Oh,	relax,	it’s	what	all	those	parts	are	made	for,	after	all.’
‘Where	is	Barathol?’
‘Went	out	early.	With	Mallet	for	company.	Looking	for	the	Blacksmiths’
Guild.	You	must	remember	his	big,	er,	hands.’


‘My	kitten	remembers,	all	right.’
Another	snort	from	Blend.	‘Meow.’
	
The	grey	gloom	of	the	cellar	seemed	to	defy	the	lantern’s	light,	but	Bluepearl
was	used	to	that,	and	he	was	only	marginally	surprised	when	the	ghost	shuffled
out	from	the	wall	at	the	far	end	where	rested	a	half-dozen	casks	still	sealed	by
the	monks’	sigil.	Sunk	to	his	hips	in	the	floor,	the	ghost	paused	and	looked
round,	finally	spying	the	Malazan	standing	near	the	steep	stone	steps.
The	ghost	waded	closer.	‘Is	that	you,	Fellurkanath?’
‘Fella	what?	You’re	dead,	monk,	and	you’ve	been	dead	for	some	time,	I’d
wager	–	who	wears	tri-cornered	hats	these	days?’
‘Oh,’	the	ghost	moaned,	clutching	his	face,	‘K’rul	has	coughed	me	out.
Why?	Why	now?	I’ve	nothing	useful	to	tell,	especially	not	to	any	foreigner.
But	he’s	stirring	below,	isn’t	he?	Is	that	why?	Am	I	to	be	the	voice	of	dire
warning?	What	do	you	care?	It’s	already	too	late	anyway.’
‘Someone’s	trying	to	murder	us.’
‘Of	course	they	are.	You’re	squatting	and	they	don’t	want	company.	You
should	broach	a	cask,	one	of	these.	That	will	tell	you	everything	you	need	to
know.’
‘Oh,	really	now.	Go	away.’
‘Who	raised	the	floor	and	why?	And	look	at	this.’	The	ghost	pushed	his
head	back	to	reveal	that	his	throat	had	been	sliced	open,	all	the	way	back	to	his
spine.	Gory,	bloodless	flesh	and	slashed	veins	and	arteries	vaguely	silver	in	the
dim	light.	‘Was	this	the	ultimate	sacrifice?	Little	do	you	know.’
‘Do	I	need	to	get	a	necromancer	down	here?’	Bluepearl	demanded.	‘Go
away!’
‘The	living	never	heed	the	dead,’	muttered	the	ghost,	lowering	his	head	and
turning	round	to	walk	back	towards	the	far	wall.	‘And	that’s	just	it.	If	we	didn’t
know	better,	why,	we’d	be	still	alive.	Think	about	that,	if	you	dare.’
Vanishing	into	the	heavy	stones,	and	gone.
Bluepearl	sighed,	looked	round	until	he	found	the	bottle	he	was	looking
for.	‘Hah,	I	knew	we	had	one.	Quorl	Milk.	Why	should	they	get	all	the	fun?’
	
The	two	men	trundled	just	behind	the	woman,	so	eager	they	trod	on	her	heels
as	they	fought	for	some	imagined	dominant	position.	Faint	had	never	seen
anything	so	pathetic,	and	the	way	the	witch	played	all	innocent,	even	when	she


worked	her	two	men	just	to	keep	trouble	stirred	up	–	all	of	it	seemingly
accidental,	of	course,	but	it	wasn’t	accidental	because	Precious	Thimble	knew
precisely	what	she	was	up	to	and	as	far	as	Faint	was	concerned	that	was	cruel
beyond	all	reason.
It	didn’t	help,	either,	that	the	two	men	–	evidently	brothers	–	looked	so
much	alike.	With	the	same	way	of	walking,	the	same	facial	expressions,	the
same	tone	of	voice.	If	they	were	no	different	from	each	other,	then	why	not	just
choose	one	and	be	done	with	it?
Well,	she	didn’t	expect	any	of	them	to	last	very	long	in	any	case.	For	most
shareholders,	the	first	trip	was	the	deadliest	one.	It	came	with	not	knowing	what
to	expect,	with	not	reacting	fast	enough	or	just	the	right	way.	The	first	journey
into	the	warrens	killed	over	half	first-timers.	Which	meant	that	Precious
Thimble	(who	struck	Faint	as	a	survivor)	might	well	have	her	choice	taken
from	her,	when	either	Jula	or	Amby	Bole	went	down	somewhere	on	the	trail.
As	they	rounded	the	corner	and	came	within	sight	of	the	carriage,	Faint
saw	that	Glanno	Tarp	was	already	seated	up	top.	Various	rituals	had	been
triggered	to	effect	repairs	to	the	huge	conveyance;	the	horses	looked	restless
and	eager	to	be	away	–	as	mad	as	the	rest	of	them,	they	were.	Off	to	one	side
and	now	watching	Faint,	Quell	and	their	new	shareholders	approaching,	stood
Reccanto	Ilk	and	Sweetest	Sufferance,	and	a	third	man	–	huge,	roundshouldered,	and	tattooed	in	a	pattern	of—
‘Uh	oh,’	said	Master	Quell.
That’s	the	one,	isn’t	it?	The	caravan	guard,	the	one	who	survived	the	Siege
of	Capustan.	What	was	his	name	again?
‘This	is	not	for	you,	Gruntle,’	Master	Quell	said.
‘Why	not?’
‘I’ve	got	some	damned	good	reasons	for	saying	no	to	you,	and	if	you	just
give	me	a	moment	I’ll	come	up	with	them.’
The	man’s	feral	smile	revealed	elongated	canines.
‘The	Trell	is	inside,’	Reccanto	said.	‘Want	me	to	get	him,	Quell?	We
should	get	going,	right?’
‘Gruntle—’
‘I’d	like	to	sign	on,’	the	caravan	guard	said,	‘as	a	shareholder.	Just	like
those	recruits	there	behind	you.	Same	stakes.	Same	rules.’
‘When	did	you	last	take	an	order,	Gruntle?	You’ve	been	commanding
guards	for	years	now.	You	really	think	I	want	arguments	with	everything	I
say?’
‘No	arguments.	I’m	not	interested	in	second-guessing	you.	As	a
shareholder,	just	another	shareholder.’


The	tavern	door	opened	then	and	out	walked	Mappo	Runt.
His	glance	slipped	past	Gruntle	then	swung	back,	eyes	narrowing.	Then	he
faced	Master	Quell.	‘Is	this	one	accompanying	us?	Good.’
‘Well—’
The	Trell	moved	up	to	the	wagon	and	clambered	up	its	side	in	a	racket	of
squealing	springs	to	take	position	behind	Glanno	Tarp.	He	looked	back	down.
‘We’ll	probably	need	someone	like	him.’
‘Like	what?’	asked	the	witch,	Precious	Thimble.
‘Soletaken,’	Mappo	replied,	shrugging.
‘It’s	not	quite	like	that,’	Gruntle	said	quietly	as	he	moved	to	join	Mappo
atop	the	carriage.
Master	Quell	stared	after	him,	then,	shaking	himself,	said,	‘Everyone	get
aboard,	then.	You	two	Boles,	you’re	facing	astern.	Witch,	inside	with	me,
where	we	can	have	ourselves	a	conversation.	And	you	too,	Mappo.	We	don’t
put	passengers	up	top.	Too	risky.’
Faint	swung	herself	up	to	sit	beside	Glanno	Tarp.
Brakes	were	released.	Glanno	glanced	back	to	scan	the	crowd	clinging	to
various	handholds	on	the	roof	behind	him.	Grinned,	then	snapped	the	reins.
The	horses	screamed,	lunged.
The	world	exploded	around	them.
	
Blaze	down,	blessed	sun,	on	this	city	of	wonders	where	all	is	of	consequence.
Cast	your	fiery	eye	on	the	crowds,	the	multitudes	moving	to	and	fro	on	their
ways	of	life.	Flow	warmth	into	the	rising	miasma	of	dreams,	hopes,	fears	and
loves	that	ever	seethe	skyward,	rising	in	the	breaths	expelled,	the	sighs
released,	reflected	from	restive	glances	and	sidelong	regard,	echoing	eternal
from	voices	in	clamour.
See	then	this	street	where	walks	a	man	who	had	been	young	the	last	time	he
walked	this	street.	He	is	young	no	longer,	oh,	no.	And	there	in	the	next	street,
wandering	a	line	of	market	stalls	crowded	with	icons,	figurines	and	fetishes
from	a	thousand	cults	–	most	of	them	long	extinct	–	walks	a	woman	whose	path
had,	years	ago	now,	crossed	that	of	the	man.	She	too	no	longer	feels	young,
and	if	desire	possessed	tendrils	that	could	pass	through	stone	and	brick,	that
could	wend	through	mobs	of	senseless	people,	why,	might	they	then	meet	in
some	fateful	place	and	there	intertwine,	weaving	something	new	and	precious
as	a	deadly	flower?
In	another	quarter	of	the	city	strides	a	foreigner,	an	impressive	creature,
tall	and	prominently	muscled,	very	nearly	sculpted,	aye,	with	skin	the	perfect


hue	of	polished	onyx	and	eyes	in	which	glitter	flecks	of	hazel	and	gold,	and
many	were	the	glances	sliding	over	him	as	he	passed.	But	he	was	not	mindful
of	such	things,	for	he	was	looking	for	a	new	life	and	might	well	find	it	here	in
this	glorious,	exotic	city.
In	a	poor	stretch	of	the	Gadrobi	District	a	withered,	weathered	woman,	tall
and	thin,	knelt	in	her	narrow	strip	of	garden	and	began	placing	flatstones	into	a
pattern	in	the	dark	earth.	So	much	of	what	the	soil	could	give	must	first	be
prepared,	and	these	ways	were	most	arcane	and	mysterious,	and	she	worked	as
if	in	a	dream,	while	in	the	small	house	behind	her	still	slept	her	husband,	a
knuckled	monster	filled	with	fear	and	hate,	and	his	dreams	were	dark	indeed
for	the	sun	could	not	reach	the	places	in	his	soul.
A	woman	lounged	on	the	deck	of	a	moored	ship	in	the	harbour.	Sensing
fell	kin	somewhere	in	the	city	and,	annoyed,	giving	much	thought	to	what	she
would	do	about	it.	If	anything,	anything	at	all.	Something	was	coming,
however,	and	was	she	not	cursed	with	curiosity?
An	ironmonger	held	a	conversation	with	his	latest	investor,	who	was	none
other	than	a	noble	Councillor	and	reputedly	the	finest	duellist	in	all
Darujhistan,	and	therein	it	was	decided	that	young	and	most	ambitious	Gorlas
Vidikas	would	take	charge	of	the	iron	mines	six	leagues	to	the	west	of	the	city.
A	rickety	wagon	rocked	along	the	road	well	past	Maiten	yet	still	skirting
the	lake,	and	in	its	bed	amidst	filthy	blankets	was	the	small	battered	form	of	a
child,	still	unconscious	but	judged,	rightly	so,	that	he	would	live.	The	poor
thing.
This	track,	you	see,	led	to	but	one	place,	one	fate.	The	old	shepherd	had
done	well	and	had	already	buried	his	cache	of	coins	beneath	the	stoop	behind
the	shack	where	he	lived	with	his	sickly	wife,	who	had	been	worn	out	by	seven
failed	pregnancies,	and	if	there	was	bitter	spite	in	the	eyes	she	fixed	upon	the
world	is	it	any	wonder?	But	he	would	do	good	by	her	in	these	last	tired	years,
yes,	he	would,	and	he	set	to	one	side	one	copper	coin	that	he	would	fling	to	the
lake	spirits	at	dusk	–	an	ancient,	black-stained	coin	bearing	the	head	of	a	man
the	shepherd	didn’t	recognize	–	not	that	he	would,	for	that	face	belonged	to	the
last	Tyrant	of	Darujhistan.
The	wagon	rolled	on,	on	its	way	to	the	mines.
Harllo,	who	so	loved	the	sun,	was	destined	to	wake	in	darkness,	and
mayhap	he	was	never	again	to	see	the	day’s	blessed	light.
Out	on	the	lake	the	water	glittered	with	golden	tears.
As	if	the	sun	might	relinquish	its	hard	glare	and,	for	just	this	one	moment,
weep	for	the	fate	of	a	child.


Chapter	Eight

When	can	he	not	stand	alone
Where	in	darkness	no	shadows	are	cast
Whose	most	precious	selves	deny	the	throne
While	nothing	held	in	life	will	last	a	moment	longer
Than	what’s	carved	into	the	very	bones
But	this	is	where	you	would	stand
In	his	place	and	see	all	bleak	and	bridled
An	array	of	weapons	each	one	forged
For	violence
When	can	he	not	stand	alone
Where	darkness	bleeds	into	the	abyss	so	vast
Whose	every	yearning	seeks	a	new	home
While	each	struggle	leaves	the	meek	to	the	stronger
And	the	fallen	lie	scattered	like	stones
But	this	is	the	life	you	would	take	in	hand
To	guide	him	’cross	the	path	so	broken	so	riddled
Like	the	weapon	of	your	will	now	charged
In	cold	balance
When	can	he	not	stand	alone
Where	in	darkness	every	shadow	is	lost
Whose	weary	selves	cut	away	and	will	roam
While	nothing	is	left	but	this	shielded	stranger
Standing	against	the	wind’s	eternal	moans
But	this	is	your	hero	who	must	stand
Guarding	your	broken	desires	the	ragged	flag	unfurled
Rising	above	the	bastion	to	see	your	spite	purged
In	his	silence
Anomandaris,	Book	III,	verses	7–10


Fisher	kel	Tath

The	swath	of	ground	where	all	the	grasses	had	been	worn	away	might	have
marked	the	passing	of	a	herd	of	bhederin,	if	not	for	the	impossibly	wide	ruts
left	behind	by	the	enormous	studded	wheels	of	a	wagon,	and	the	rubbish	and
occasional	withered	corpse	scattered	to	either	side.	Vultures	and	crows	danced
among	the	detritus.
Traveller	sat	slouched	in	the	Seven	Cities	saddle	atop	the	piebald	gelding.
Nearby,	at	the	minimum	distance	that	his	horse	would	accept,	was	the	witch,
Samar	Dev,	perched	like	a	child	above	the	long-legged,	gaunt	and	fierce	Jhag
horse	whose	name	was,	she	had	said,	Havok.	The	beast’s	true	owner	was
somewhere	ahead,	perhaps	behind	the	Skathandi	and	the	Captain’s	monstrous
carriage,	or	beyond	it.	Either	way,	she	was	certain	a	clash	was	imminent.
‘He	dislikes	slavers,’	she	had	said	earlier,	as	if	this	explained	everything.
No	demon,	then,	but	a	Toblakai	of	true	blood,	a	detail	that	sent	pangs	of
regret	and	pain	through	Traveller,	for	reasons	he	kept	to	himself	–	and	though
she	had	seen	something	of	that	anguish	in	his	face	it	appeared	she	would
respect	his	privacy.	Or	perhaps	feared	its	surrender,	for	Samar	Dev	was	a
woman,	he	suspected,	prone	to	plunging	into	vast	depths	of	emotion.
She	had,	after	all,	travelled	through	warrens	to	find	the	trail	of	the	one
ahead	of	them	on	this	plain,	and	such	an	undertaking	was	not	embraced	on	a
whim.	All	to	deliver	a	horse.	He	knew	enough	to	leave	it	at	that,	poor	as	it
might	be	as	justification	for	such	extremity.	The	Kindaru	had	accepted	the
reason	with	sage	nods,	seeing	nothing	at	all	unusual	in	any	of	it	–	the	horse	was
a	sacred	beast,	after	all,	a	Jhag,	brother	to	their	cherished	horses-of-the-rock.
They	possessed	legends	with	similar	themes,	and	indeed	they	had	spent	half	the
night	recounting	many	of	them	–	and	now	they	had	found	themselves	a	new
one.	Master	of	the	Wolf-Horses	met	a	woman	so	driven	as	to	be	his	own
reflection,	and	together	they	rode	into	the	north,	having	drawn	their	threads
through	the	last	camp	of	the	Kindaru,	and	were	now	entwined	each	with	the
other	and	both	with	the	Kindaru,	and	though	this	was	a	tale	not	yet	done	it
would	nevertheless	live	on,	for	as	long	as	lived	the	Kindaru	themselves.
He	had	noted	the	grief	in	Samar	Dev’s	weary,	weathered	face,	as	the	many
wounds	delivered	–	in	all	innocence	–	by	the	Kindaru	slowly	sank	deeper,
piercing	her	heart,	and	now	compassion	swirled	dark	and	raw	in	her	eyes,
although	the	Kindaru	were	far	behind	them	now.	It	was	clear,	brutally	so,	that
both	she	and	Traveller	had	collected	a	new	thread	to	twist	into	their	lives.


‘How	far	ahead?’	she	asked.
‘Two	days	at	the	most.’
‘Then	he	might	have	found	them	by	now,	or	they	him.’
‘Yes,	it’s	possible.	If	this	Skathandi	Captain	has	an	army,	well,	even	a
Toblakai	can	die.’
‘I	know	that,’	she	replied.	Then	added,	‘Maybe.’
‘And	there	are	but	two	of	us,	Samar	Dev.’
‘If	you’d	rather	cut	away	from	this	trail,	Traveller,	I	will	not	question	your
decision.	But	I	need	to	find	him.’
He	glanced	away.	‘His	horse,	yes.’
‘And	other	things.’
Traveller	considered	for	a	time.	He	studied	the	broad,	churned-up	track.	A
thousand	or	five	thousand;	when	people	were	moving	in	column	it	was	always
difficult	to	tell.	The	carriage	itself	would	be	a	thing	worth	seeing,	however,	and
the	direction	just	happened	to	be	the	one	he	needed	to	take.	The	prospect	of
being	forced	into	a	detour	was	unacceptable.	‘If	your	friend	is	smart,	he	won’t
do	anything	overt.	He’ll	hide,	as	best	one	can	on	these	plains,	until	he	sees	an
advantage	–	though	what	that	advantage	might	be,	against	so	many,	I	can’t
imagine.’
‘So	you	will	stay	with	me	for	a	while	longer?’
He	nodded.
‘Then	I	should	tell	you	some	things,	I	think.’
They	guided	their	horses	on	to	the	track	and	rode	at	the	trot.
Traveller	waited	for	her	to	continue.
The	sun’s	heat	reminded	him	of	his	homeland,	the	savannahs	of	Dal	Hon,
although	in	this	landscape	there	were	fewer	flies	and	of	the	enormous	herds	of
countless	kinds	of	beasts	–	and	the	ones	that	hunted	them	–	there	was	little	sign.
Here	on	the	Lamatath	there	were	bhederin,	a	lone	species	of	antelope,	hares,
wolves,	coyotes,	bears	and	not	much	else.	Plenty	of	hawks	and	falcon
overhead,	of	course	–	but	this	place	did	not	teem	as	one	might	expect	and	he
wondered	about	that.
Had	the	conflagration	at	Morn	wiped	everything	out?	Left	a	blasted
landscape	slow	to	recover,	into	which	only	a	few	species	drifted	down	from	the
north?	Or	were	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	rabid	hunters,	indulging	in	a	slaughterfest	that	did	not	end	until	they	themselves	were	extinct?
‘What	do	you	know	of	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths?’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘Not	much.	Only	that	he	cannot	be	killed.’
‘Right.’
He	waited.


Locusts	crawled	across	the	dusty	track	amidst	shredded	blades	of	grass,	as
if	wondering	who	had	beaten	them	to	it.	Somewhere	high	above	a	raptor
loosed	a	piercing	cry,	the	kind	intended	to	panic	a	bird	in	flight.
‘His	sword	was	forged	by	the	power	of	the	Crippled	God.	Possessing
levels	of	sorcery	which	the	wielder	can	reach,	each	time,	only	by	dying	–
fighting	and	dying	with	that	weapon	in	his	hands.	The	Emperor,	a	poor	ravaged
creature,	a	Tiste	Edur,	knew	that	death	was	but	an	illusion.	He	knew,	I	am
certain	of	it,	that	he	was	cursed,	so	terribly	cursed.	That	sword	had	driven	him
mad.’
Traveller	imagined	that	such	a	weapon	would	indeed	drive	its	wielder
insane.	He	could	feel	sweat	on	the	palms	of	his	hands	and	shifted	the	reins	into
his	right	hand,	settling	the	other	on	his	thigh.	His	mouth	felt	unaccountably	dry.
‘He	needed	champions.	Challengers.	Sometimes	they	would	kill	him.
Sometimes	more	than	once.	But	as	he	came	back	again	and	again,	ever
stronger,	in	the	end	the	challenger	would	fall.	And	so	it	went.’
‘A	terrible	fate,’	Traveller	muttered.
‘Until	one	day	some	ships	arrived.	On	board,	yet	more	champions	from
distant	lands.	Among	them,	Karsa	Orlong,	the	Toblakai.	I	happened	to	be	with
him,	then.’
‘I	would	hear	the	story	behind	such	a	partnership.’
‘Maybe	later.	There	was	someone	else,	another	champion.	His	name	was
Icarium.’
Traveller	slowly	twisted	in	his	saddle,	studied	the	woman	across	from	him.
Some	unconscious	message	told	the	gelding	to	halt.
Samar ’s	Jhag	horse	continued	on	for	a	few	steps,	then	she	reined	it	in	and
turned	to	meet	Traveller ’s	eyes.	‘I	believe,	if	Icarium	had	met	the	Emperor,
well,	the	dying	would	still	be	going	on,	spreading	like	a	wildfire.	An	entire
continent…pretty	much	incinerated.	Who	knows,	perhaps	the	entire	world.’
He	nodded,	not	trusting	himself	to	speak.
‘Instead,’	Samar	Dev	said,	‘Karsa	was	sent	for	first.’
‘What	happened?’
Her	smile	was	sad.	‘They	fought.’
‘Samar	Dev,’	Traveller	said,	‘that	makes	no	sense.	The	Toblakai	still	lives.’
‘Karsa	killed	the	Emperor.	With	finality.’
‘How?’
‘I	have	some	suspicions.	I	believe	that,	somewhere,	somehow,	Karsa
Orlong	spoke	with	the	Crippled	God	–	not	a	pleasant	conversation,	I’m	sure.
Karsa	rarely	has	those.’
‘Then	the	Emperor	of	a	Thousand	Deaths—’


‘Gone,	delivered	unto	a	final	death.	I	like	to	believe	Rhulad	thanked	Karsa
with	his	last	breath.’
If	there	was	need	for	such	a	thought	she	was	welcome	to	it.	‘And	the
sword?	Does	the	Toblakai	now	carry	it	as	his	own?’
She	collected	her	reins	and	nudged	her	mount	onward.	‘I	don’t	know,’	she
said.	‘Another	reason	why	I	have	to	find	him.’
You	are	not	alone	in	that,	woman.	‘He	bargained	with	the	Crippled	God.	He
replaced	the	Emperor.’
‘Did	he?’
He	urged	his	horse	forward,	came	up	alongside	her	once	more.	‘What
other	possibility	is	there?’
And	to	that	she	grinned.	‘Ah,	but	that	is	where	I	know	something	you	don’t,
Traveller.	I	know	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘What	does	that	mean?’
‘It’s	his	favourite	game,	you	see,	pretending	to	be	so…obvious.	Blunt,
lacking	all	subtlety,	all	decorum.	Just	a	savage,	after	all.	The	only	possibility	is
the	obvious	one,	isn’t	it?	That’s	why	I	don’t	believe	that’s	what	he’s	done.’
‘You	don’t	wish	to	believe,	you	mean.	Now	I	will	speak	plain,	Samar	Dev.
If	your	Toblakai	wields	the	sword	of	the	Crippled	God,	he	shall	have	to	either
yield	it	or	draw	it	against	me.	Such	a	weapon	must	be	destroyed.’
‘You	set	yourself	as	an	enemy	of	the	Crippled	God?	Well,	you’re	hardly
alone	in	that,	are	you?’
He	frowned.	‘I	did	not	then,’	he	said,	‘nor	do	I	desire	to	do	so	now.	But	he
goes	too	far.’
‘Who	are	you,	Traveller?’
‘I	played	the	game	of	civilization,	once,	Samar	Dev.	But	in	the	end	I	remain
as	I	am,	a	savage.’
‘Too	many	have	put	themselves	into	Karsa	Orlong’s	path,’	she	said.	‘They
do	not	stand	there	long.’	A	pause,	and	then,	‘Civilized	or	barbarian	–	those	are
but	words	–	the	cruel	killer	can	wear	all	the	costumes	he	wants,	can	pretend	to
great	causes	and	hard	necessities.	Gods	below,	it	all	sickens	me,	the	way	you
fools	carry	on.	Over	the	whole	damned	world	it’s	ever	the	same.’
He	answered	this	rant	with	silence,	for	he	believed	it	was	ever	the	same,
and	that	it	would	never	change.	Animals	remained	just	that,	whether	sentient	or
not,	and	they	fought,	they	killed,	they	died.	Life	was	suffered	until	it	was	over,
and	then…then	what?
An	end.	It	had	to	be	that.	It	must	be	that.
Riding	on,	now,	no	words	between	them.	Already	past	the	telling	of	stories,
the	recounting	of	adventures.	All	that	mattered,	for	each	of	them,	was	what	lay


ahead.
With	the	Toblakai	named	Karsa	Orlong.
	
Some	time	in	his	past,	the	man	known	as	the	Captain	had	been	a	prisoner	to
someone.	At	some	point	he	had	outlived	his	usefulness	and	had	been	staked	out
on	the	plain,	wooden	spikes	driven	through	his	hands,	his	feet,	hammered	to
the	hard	earth	to	feed	the	ants,	to	feed	all	the	carrion	hunters	of	Lamatath.	But
he’d	not	been	ready	to	die	just	then.	He	had	pulled	his	hands	through	the	spikes,
had	worked	his	feet	free,	and	had	crawled	on	elbows	and	knees	half	a	league,
down	into	a	valley	where	a	once-mighty	river	had	dwindled	to	a	stream	fringed
by	cottonwoods.
His	hands	were	ruined.	His	feet	could	not	bear	his	weight.	And,	he	was
convinced,	the	ants	that	had	crawled	into	his	ears	had	never	left,	trapped	in	the
tunnels	of	his	skull,	making	of	his	brain	a	veritable	nest	–	he	could	taste	their
acidic	exudations	on	his	swollen,	blackened	tongue.
If	the	legend	was	true,	and	it	was,	hoary	long-forgotten	river	spirits	had
squirmed	up	from	the	mud	beneath	the	exposed	bank’s	cracked	skin,	clawing
like	vermin	to	where	he	huddled	fevered	and	shivering.	To	give	life	was	no
gift	for	such	creatures;	no,	to	give	was	in	turn	to	take.	As	the	king	feeds	his
heir	all	he	needs	to	survive,	so	the	heir	feeds	the	king	with	the	illusion	of
immortality.	And	the	hand	reaches	between	the	bars	of	one	cage,	out	to	the
hand	reaching	between	the	bars	of	the	other	cage.	They	exchange	more	than
just	touch.
The	spirits	fed	him	life.	And	he	took	them	into	his	soul	and	gave	them	a
new	home.	They	proved,	alas,	restless,	uncivil	guests.
The	journey	and	the	transformation	into	a	nomadic	tyrant	of	the	Lamatath
Plains	was	long,	difficult,	and	miraculous	to	any	who	could	have	seen	the
wretched,	maimed	creature	the	Captain	had	once	been.	Countless	tales	spun	like
dust-devils	about	him,	many	invented,	some	barely	brushing	the	truth.
His	ruined	feet	made	walking	an	ordeal.	His	fingers	had	curled	into	hooklike	things,	the	bones	beneath	calcifying	into	unsightly	knobs	and	protrusions.
To	see	his	hands	was	to	be	reminded	of	the	feet	of	vultures	clutched	in	death.
He	rode	on	a	throne	set	on	the	forward-facing	balcony	of	the	carriage’s
second	tier,	protected	from	the	midday	sun	by	a	faded	red	canvas	awning.
Before	him	walked	somewhere	between	four	hundred	and	five	hundred	slaves,
yoked	to	the	carriage,	each	one	leaning	forward	as	they	strained	to	pull	the
enormous	wheeled	palace	over	the	rough	ground.	An	equal	number	rested	in
the	wagons	of	the	entourage,	helping	the	cooks	and	the	weavers	and	the


carpenters	until	their	turn	came	in	the	harnesses.
The	Captain	did	not	believe	in	stopping.	No	camps	were	established.
Motion	was	everything.	Motion	was	eternal.	His	two	wings	of	cavalry,	each	a
hundred	knights	strong,	rode	in	flanking	positions,	caparisoned	in	full	banded
armour	and	ebony	cloaks,	helmed	and	carrying	barbed	lances,	the	heads
glinting	in	the	sunlight.	Behind	the	palace	was	a	mobile	kraal	of	three	hundred
horses,	his	greatest	pride,	for	the	bloodlines	were	strong	and	much	of	his
wealth	(that	which	he	did	not	attain	through	raiding)	came	from	them.	Horsetraders	from	far	to	the	south	sought	him	out	on	this	wasteland,	and	paid	solid
gold	for	the	robust	destriers.
A	third	troop	of	horse	warriors,	lighter-armoured,	ranged	far	and	wide	on
all	sides	of	his	caravan,	ensuring	that	no	enemy	threatened,	and	seeking	out
possible	targets	–	this	was	the	season,	after	all,	and	there	were	–	rarely	these
days,	true	enough	–	bands	of	savages	eking	out	a	meagre	existence	on	the
grasslands,	including	those	who	bred	grotesque	mockeries	of	horses,	widerumped	and	bristlemaned,	that	if	nothing	else	proved	good	eating.	These
ranging	troops	included	raiding	parties	of	thirty	or	more,	and	at	any	one	time
the	Captain	had	four	or	five	such	groups	out	scouring	the	plains.
Merchants	had	begun	hiring	mercenary	troops,	setting	out	to	hunt	him
down.	But	those	he	could	not	buy	off	he	destroyed.	His	knights	were	terrible	in
battle.
The	Captain’s	kingdom	had	been	on	the	move	for	seven	years	now,	rolling
in	a	vast	circle	that	encompassed	most	of	the	Lamatath.	This	territory	he
claimed	as	his	own,	and	to	this	end	he	had	recently	dispatched	emissaries	to	all
the	bordering	cities	–	Darujhistan,	Kurl	and	Saltoan	to	the	north,	New	Callows
to	the	southwest,	Bastion	and	Sarn	to	the	northeast	–	Elingarth	to	the	south	was
in	the	midst	of	civil	war,	so	he	would	wait	that	out.
In	all,	the	Captain	was	pleased	with	his	kingdom.	His	slaves	were	breeding,
providing	what	would	be	the	next	generation	to	draw	his	palace.	Hunting
parties	carried	in	bhederin	and	antelope	to	supplement	the	finer	foodstuffs
looted	from	passing	caravans.	The	husbands	and	wives	of	his	soldiers	brought
with	them	all	the	necessary	skills	to	maintain	his	court	and	his	people,	and	they
too	were	thriving.
So	like	a	river,	meandering	over	the	land,	this	kingdom	of	his.	The	ancient,
half-mad	spirits	were	most	pleased.
Though	he	never	much	thought	about	it,	the	nature	of	his	tyranny	was,	as
far	as	he	was	concerned,	relatively	benign.	Not	with	respect	to	foreigners,	of
course,	but	then	who	gave	a	damn	for	them?	Not	his	blood,	not	his	adopted	kin,
not	his	responsibility.	And	if	they	could	not	withstand	his	kingdom’s	appetites,


then	whose	fault	was	that?	Not	his.
Creation	demands	destruction.	Survival	demands	that	something	else	fails
to	survive.	No	existence	was	truly	benign.
Still,	the	Captain	often	dreamed	of	finding	those	who	had	nailed	him	to	the
ground	all	those	years	ago	–	his	memories	of	that	time	were	maddeningly
vague.	He	could	not	make	out	their	faces,	or	their	garb.	He	could	not	recall	the
details	of	their	camp,	and	as	for	who	and	what	he	had	been	before	that	time,
well,	he	had	no	memory	at	all.	Reborn	in	a	riverbed.	He	would,	when	drunk,
laugh	and	proclaim	that	he	was	but	eleven	years	old,	eleven	from	that	day	of
rebirth,	that	day	of	beginning	anew.
He	noted	the	lone	rider	coming	in	from	the	southwest,	the	man	pushing	his
horse	hard,	and	the	Captain	frowned	–	the	fool	had	better	have	a	good	reason
for	abusing	the	beast	in	that	manner.	He	didn’t	appreciate	his	soldiers	posturing
and	seeking	to	make	bold	impressions.	He	decided	that,	if	the	reason	was
insufficient,	he	would	have	the	man	executed	in	the	traditional	manner	–
trampled	into	bloody	ruin	beneath	the	hoofs	of	his	horses.
The	rider	drew	up	alongside	the	palace,	a	servant	on	the	side	platform
taking	the	reins	of	the	horse	as	the	man	stepped	aboard.	An	exchange	of	words
with	the	Master	Sergeant,	and	then	the	man	was	climbing	the	steep	steps	to	the
ledge	surrounding	the	balcony.	Where,	his	head	level	with	the	Captain’s	knees,
he	bowed.
‘Sire,	Fourth	Troop,	adjudged	ablest	rider	to	deliver	this	message.’
‘Go	on,’	said	the	Captain.
‘Another	raiding	party	was	found,	sire,	all	slain	in	the	same	manner	as	the
first	one.	Near	a	Kindaru	camp	this	time.’
‘The	Kindaru?	They	are	useless.	Against	thirty	of	my	soldiers?	That	cannot
be.’
‘Troop	Leader	Uludan	agrees,	sire.	The	proximity	of	the	Kindaru	was	but
coincidental	–	or	it	was	the	raiding	party’s	plan	to	ambush	them.’
Yes,	that	was	likely.	The	damned	Kindaru	and	their	delicious	horses	were
getting	hard	to	find	of	late.	‘Does	Uludan	now	track	the	murderers?’
‘Difficult,	sire.	They	seem	to	possess	impressive	lore	and	are	able	to
thoroughly	hide	their	trail.	It	may	be	that	they	are	aided	by	sorcery.’
‘Your	thought	or	Uludan’s?’
A	faint	flush	of	the	man’s	face.	‘Mine,	sire.’
‘I	did	not	invite	your	opinion,	soldier.’
‘No,	sire.	I	apologize.’
Sorcery	–	the	spirits	within	should	have	sensed	such	a	thing	anywhere	on
his	territory.	Which	tribes	were	capable	of	assembling	such	skilled	and	no


doubt	numerous	warriors?	Well,	one	obvious	answer	was	the	Barghast	–	but
they	did	not	travel	the	Lamatath.	They	dwelt	far	to	the	north,	along	the	edges	of
the	Rhivi	Plain,	in	fact,	and	north	of	Capustan.	There	should	be	no	Barghast
this	far	south.	And	if,	somehow,	there	were…the	Captain	scowled.	‘Twenty
knights	shall	accompany	you	back	to	the	place	of	slaughter.	You	will	then	lead
them	to	Uludan’s	troop.	Find	the	trail	no	matter	what.’
‘We	shall,	sire.’
‘Be	sure	Uludan	understands.’
‘Yes,	sire.’
And	understand	he	would.	The	knights	were	there	not	just	to	provide	a
heavier	adjunct	to	the	troop.	They	were	to	exact	whatever	punishment	the
sergeant	deemed	necessary	should	Uludan	fail.
The	Captain	had	just	lost	sixty	soldiers.	Almost	a	fifth	of	his	total	number
of	light	cavalry.
‘Go	now,’	he	said	to	the	rider,	‘and	find	Sergeant	Teven	and	send	him	to
me	at	once.’
‘Yes,	sire.’
As	the	man	climbed	back	down,	the	Captain	leaned	back	in	his	throne,
staring	down	at	the	dusty	backs	of	the	yoked	slaves.	Kindaru	there,	yes.	And
Sinbarl	and	the	last	seven	or	so	Gandaru,	slope-browed	cousins	of	the	Kindaru
soon	to	be	entirely	extinct.	A	shame,	that	–	they	were	strong	bastards,	hardworking,	never	complaining.	He’d	set	aside	the	two	surviving	women	and	they
now	rode	a	wagon,	bellies	swollen	with	child,	eating	fat	grubs,	the	yolk	of
snake	eggs	and	other	bizarre	foods	the	Gandaru	were	inclined	towards.	Were
the	children	on	the	way	pure	Gandaru?	He	did	not	think	so	–	their	women
rutted	anything	with	a	third	leg,	and	far	less	submissively	than	he	thought
prudent.	Even	so,	one	or	both	of	those	children	might	well	be	his.
Not	as	heirs,	of	course.	His	bastard	children	held	no	special	rights.	He	did
not	even	acknowledge	them.	No,	he	would	adopt	an	heir	when	the	time	came	–
and,	if	the	whispered	promises	of	the	spirits	were	true,	that	could	be	centuries
away.
His	mind	had	stepped	off	the	path,	he	realized.
Sixty	slain	soldiers.	Was	the	kingdom	of	Skathandi	at	war?	Perhaps	so.
Yet	the	enemy	clearly	did	not	dare	face	him	here,	with	his	knights	and	the
entire	mass	of	his	army	ready	and	able	to	take	the	field	of	battle.	Thus,
whatever	army	would	fight	him	was	small—
Shouts	from	ahead.
The	Captain’s	eyes	narrowed.	From	his	raised	vantage	point	he	could	see
without	obstruction	that	a	lone	figure	was	approaching	from	the	northwest.	A


skin	of	white	fur	flapped	in	the	breeze	like	the	wing	of	a	ghost-moth,	spreading
out	from	the	broad	shoulders.	A	longsword	was	strapped	to	the	man’s	back,	its
edges	oddly	rippled,	the	blade	itself	a	colour	unlike	any	metal	the	Captain
knew.
As	the	figure	came	closer,	as	if	expecting	the	massed	slaves	to	simply	part
before	him,	the	Captain’s	sense	of	scale	was	jarred.	The	warrior	was
enormous,	easily	half	again	as	tall	as	the	tallest	Skathandi	–	taller	even	than	a
Barghast.	A	face	seemingly	masked	–	no,	tattooed,	in	a	crazed	broken	glass	or
tattered	web	pattern.	Beneath	that	barbaric	visage,	the	torso	was	covered	in
some	kind	of	shell	armour,	pretty	but	probably	useless.
Well,	the	fool	–	huge	or	not	–	was	about	to	be	trampled	or	pushed	aside.
Motion	was	eternal.	Motion	was	–	a	sudden	spasm	clutched	at	the	Captain’s
mind,	digging	fingers	into	his	brain	–	the	spirits,	thrashing	in	terror	–
shrieking—
A	taste	of	acid	on	his	tongue—
Gasping,	the	Captain	gestured.
A	servant,	who	sat	behind	him	in	an	upright	coffin-shaped	box,	watching
through	a	slit	in	the	wood,	saw	the	signal	and	pulled	hard	on	a	braided	rope.	A
horn	blared,	followed	by	three	more.
And,	for	the	first	time	in	seven	years,	the	kingdom	of	Skathandi	ground	to
a	halt.
The	giant	warrior	strode	for	the	head	of	the	slave	column.	He	drew	his
sword.	As	he	swung	down	with	that	savage	weapon,	the	slaves	began
screaming.
From	both	flanks,	the	ground	shook	as	knights	charged	inward.
More	frantic	gestures	from	the	Captain.	Horns	sounded	again	and	the
knights	shifted	en	masse,	swung	out	wide	to	avoid	the	giant.
The	sword’s	downward	stroke	had	struck	the	centre	spar	linking	the	yoke
harnesses.	Edge	on	blunt	end,	splitting	the	spar	for	half	its	twenty-man	length.
Bolts	scattered,	chains	rushed	through	iron	loops	to	coil	and	slither	on	to	the
ground.
The	Captain	was	on	his	feet,	tottering,	gripping	the	bollards	of	the	balcony
rail.	He	could	see,	as	his	knights	drew	up	into	ranks	once	more,	all	heads
turned	towards	him,	watching,	waiting	for	the	command.	But	he	could	not
move.	Pain	lanced	up	his	legs	from	the	misshapen	bones	of	his	feet.	He	held	on
to	the	ornate	posts	with	his	feeble	hands.	Ants	swarmed	in	his	skull.
The	spirits	were	gone.
Fled.
He	was	alone.	He	was	empty.


Reeling	back,	falling	into	his	throne.
He	saw	one	of	his	sergeants	ride	out,	drawing	closer	to	the	giant,	who	now
stood	leaning	on	his	sword.	The	screams	of	the	slaves	sank	away	and	those
suddenly	free	of	their	bindings	staggered	to	either	side,	some	falling	to	their
knees	as	if	subjecting	themselves	before	a	new	king,	a	usurper.	The	sergeant
reined	in	and,	eyes	level	with	the	giant’s	own,	began	speaking.
The	Captain	was	too	far	away.	He	could	not	hear,	and	he	needed	to	–	sweat
poured	from	him,	soaking	his	fine	silks.	He	shivered	as	fever	rose	through
him.	He	looked	down	at	his	hands	and	saw	blood	welling	from	the	old	wounds
–	opened	once	more	–	and	from	his	feet	as	well,	pooling	in	the	soft	padded
slippers.	He	remembered,	suddenly,	what	it	was	like	to	think	about	dying,
letting	go,	surrendering.	There,	yes,	beneath	the	shade	of	the	cottonwoods—
The	sergeant	collected	his	reins	and	rode	at	the	canter	for	the	palace.
He	drew	up,	dismounted	in	a	clatter	of	armour	and	reached	up	to	remove
his	visored	helm.	Then	he	ascended	the	steps.
‘Captain,	sir.	The	fool	claims	that	the	slaves	are	now	free.’
Staring	into	the	soldier ’s	blue	eyes,	the	grizzled	expression	now	widened
by	disbelief,	by	utter	amazement,	the	Captain	felt	a	pang	of	pity.	‘He	is	the	one,
isn’t	he?’
‘Sir?’
‘The	enemy.	The	slayer	of	my	subjects.	I	feel	it.	The	truth	–	I	see	it,	I	feel	it.
I	taste	it!’
The	sergeant	said	nothing.
‘He	wants	my	throne,’	the	Captain	whispered,	holding	up	his	bleeding
hands.	‘Was	that	all	this	was	for,	do	you	think?	All	I’ve	done,	just	for	him?’
‘Captain,’	the	sergeant	said	in	a	harsh	growl.	‘He	has	ensorcelled	you.	We
will	cut	him	down.’
‘No.	You	do	not	understand.	They’re	gone!’
‘Sir—’
‘Make	camp,	Sergeant.	Tell	him	–	tell	him	he	is	to	be	my	guest	at	dinner.
My	guest.	Tell	him…tell	him…my	guest,	yes,	just	that.’
The	sergeant,	a	fine	soldier	indeed,	saluted	and	set	off.
Another	gesture	with	one	stained,	dripping,	mangled	hand.	Two	maids
crept	out	to	help	him	to	his	feet.	He	looked	down	at	one.	A	Kindaru,	round	and
plump	and	snouted	like	a	fox	–	he	saw	her	eyes	fix	upon	the	bleeding
appendage	at	the	end	of	the	arm	she	supported,	and	she	licked	her	lips.
I	am	dying.
Not	centuries.	Before	this	day	is	done.	Before	this	day	is	done,	I	will	be
dead.	‘Make	me	presentable,’	he	gasped.	‘There	shall	be	no	shame	upon	him,


do	you	see?	I	want	no	pity.	He	is	my	heir.	He	has	come.	At	last,	he	has	come.’
The	maids,	both	wide-eyed	with	fear	now,	helped	him	inside.
And	still	the	ants	swarmed.
	
The	horses	stood	in	a	circle	facing	inward,	tails	flicking	at	flies,	heads	lowered
as	they	cropped	grass.	The	oxen	stood	nearby,	still	yoked,	and	watched	them.
Kedeviss,	who	leaned	with	crossed	arms	against	one	of	the	wagon’s	wheels,
seemed	to	be	watching	the	grey-haired	foreigner	with	the	same	placid,	empty
regard.
Nimander	knew	just	how	deceptive	that	look	could	be.	Of	them	all	–	these
paltry	few	left	–	she	saw	the	clearest,	with	acuity	so	sharp	it	intimidated	almost
everyone	subject	to	it.	The	emptiness	–	if	the	one	being	watched	finally	turned
to	meet	those	eyes	–	would	slowly	fade,	and	something	hard,	unyielding	and
immune	to	obfuscation	would	slowly	rise	in	its	place.	Unwavering,	ever
sharpening	until	it	seemed	to	pierce	the	victim	like	nails	being	hammered	into
wood.	And	then	she’d	casually	look	away,	unmindful	of	the	thumping	heart,	the
pale	face	and	the	beads	of	sweat	on	the	brow,	and	the	one	so	assailed	was	left
with	but	two	choices:	to	fear	this	woman,	or	to	love	her	with	such	savage,
demanding	desire	that	it	could	crush	the	heart.
Nimander	feared	Kedeviss.	And	loved	her	as	well.	He	was	never	good	with
choices.
If	Kallor	sensed	that	regard	–	and	Nimander	was	certain	he	did	–	he	was
indifferent	to	it,	preferring	to	divide	his	attention	between	the	empty	sky	and
the	empty	landscape	surrounding	them.	When	he	wasn’t	sleeping	or	eating.	An
unpleasant	guest,	peremptory	and	imperious.	He	would	not	cook,	nor	bother
cleansing	his	plate	afterwards.	He	was	a	man	with	six	servants.
Nenanda	was	all	for	banishing	the	old	man,	driving	him	away	with	stones
and	pieces	of	dung,	but	Nimander	found	something	incongruous	in	that	image,
as	if	it	was	such	an	absurd	impossibility	that	it	had	no	place	even	in	his
imagination.
‘He’s	weakening,’	Desra	said	at	his	side.
‘We’re	soon	there,	I	think,’	Nimander	replied.	They	were	just	south	of
Sarn,	which	had	once	been	a	sizeable	city.	The	road	leading	to	it	had	been
settled	all	along	its	length,	ribbon	farms	behind	stalls,	shops	and	taverns.	The
few	residents	left	were	an	impoverished	lot,	skittish	as	whipped	dogs,	hacking
at	hard	ground	that	had	been	fallow	too	long	–	at	least	until	they	saw	the
travellers	on	the	main	road,	whereupon	they	dropped	their	hoes	and	hurried
away.


The	supplies	left	at	the	T-intersection	had	been	meticulously	packed	into
wooden	crates,	the	entire	pile	covered	in	a	tarp	with	its	corners	staked.	Ripe
fruits,	candied	sugar-rocks	dusted	in	salt,	heavy	loaves	of	dark	bread,	strips	of
dried	eel,	watered	wine	and	three	kinds	of	cheese	–	where	all	this	had	come
from,	given	the	wretched	state	of	the	farms	they’d	passed,	was	a	mystery.
‘He	would	kill	us	as	soon	as	look	at	us,’	Desra	said,	her	eyes	now	on
Kallor.
‘Skintick	agrees.’
‘What	manner	of	man	is	he?’
Nimander	shrugged.	‘An	unhappy	one.	We	should	get	going.’
‘Wait,’	said	Desra.	‘I	think	we	should	get	Aranatha	to	look	at	Clip.’
‘Aranatha?’	He	looked	round,	found	the	woman	sitting,	legs	folded	under
her	like	a	fawn’s,	plucking	flowers	from	the	sloped	bank	of	the	road.	‘Why?
What	can	she	do?’
Desra	shook	her	head,	as	if	unable	to	give	her	reasons.	Or	unwilling.
Sighing,	Nimander	said,	‘Go	ahead,	ask	her,	then.’
‘It	needs	to	come	from	you.’
Why?	‘Very	well.’	He	set	out,	a	dozen	strides	taking	him	to	where	Aranatha
sat.	As	his	shadow	slipped	over	her	she	glanced	up	and	smiled.
Smiles	so	lacking	in	caution,	in	diffidence	or	wry	reluctance,	always	struck
him	as	a	sign	of	madness.	But	the	eyes	above	it,	this	time,	were	not	at	all
vacuous.	‘Do	you	feel	me,	Nimander?’
‘I	don’t	know	what	you	mean	by	that,	Aranatha.	Desra	would	like	you	to
examine	Clip.	I	don’t	know	why,’	he	added,	‘since	I	don’t	recall	you	possessing
any	specific	skills	in	healing.’
‘Perhaps	she	wants	company,’	Aranatha	said,	rising	gracefully	to	her	feet.
And	he	was	struck,	as	if	slapped	across	the	face,	by	her	beauty.	Standing
now	so	close,	her	breath	so	warm	and	so	strangely	dark.	What	is	happening	to
me?	Kedeviss	and	now	Aranatha.
‘Are	you	all	right,	Nimander?’
‘Yes.’	No.	‘I’m	fine.’	What	awakens	in	me?	To	deliver	both	anguish	and
exaltation?
She	placed	a	half-dozen	white	flowers	in	his	hand,	smiled	again,	then
walked	over	to	the	wagon.	A	soft	laugh	from	Skintick	brought	him	round.
‘There’s	more	of	that	these	days,’	his	cousin	said,	gazing	after	Aranatha.
‘If	we	are	to	be	an	incongruous	lot,	and	it	seems	we	are,	then	it	follows	that	we
confound	each	other	at	every	turn.’
‘You	are	speaking	nonsense,	Skintick.’
‘That	is	my	task,	isn’t	it?	I	have	no	sense	of	where	it	is	we’re	heading	–	no,


I	don’t	mean	Bastion,	nor	even	the	confrontation	that	I	think	is	coming.	I	mean
us,	Nimander.	Especially	you.	The	less	control	you	have,	the	greater	your
talent	for	leadership	seems	to	become,	the	qualities	demanded	of	such	a	person
–	like	those	flowers	in	your	hand,	petals	unfolding.’
Nimander	grimaced	at	this	and	scowled	down	at	the	blossoms.	‘They’ll	be
dead	shortly.’
‘So	may	we	all,’	Skintick	responded.	‘But…pretty	while	it	lasts.’
Kallor	joined	them	as	they	prepared	to	resume	the	journey.	His	weathered
face	was	strangely	colourless,	as	if	drained	of	blood	by	the	incessant	wind.	Or
whatever	memories	haunted	him.	The	flatness	in	his	eyes	suggested	to
Nimander	that	the	man	was	without	humour,	that	the	notion	was	as	alien	to	him
as	mending	the	rips	in	his	own	clothes.	‘Are	you	all	finally	done	with	your
rest?’	Kallor	asked,	noting	the	flowers	still	in	Nimander ’s	hand	with	a	faint
sneer.
‘The	horses	needed	it,’	Nimander	said.	‘Are	you	in	a	hurry?	If	so,	you
could	always	go	ahead	of	us.	When	you	stop	for	the	night	we’ll	either	catch	up
with	you	or	we	won’t.’
‘Who	would	feed	me,	then?’
‘You	could	always	feed	yourself,’	Skintick	said.	‘Presumably	you’ve	had	to
do	that	on	occasion.’
Kallor	shrugged.	‘I	will	ride	the	wagon,’	he	said,	heading	off.
Nenanda	had	collected	the	horses	and	now	led	them	over.	‘They	all	need
re-shoeing,’	he	said,	‘and	this	damned	road	isn’t	helping	any.’
A	sudden	commotion	at	the	wagon	brought	them	all	round,	in	time	to	see
Kallor	flung	backward	from	the	side	rail,	crashing	heavily	on	the	cobbles,	the
look	on	his	face	one	of	stunned	surprise.	Above	him,	standing	on	the	bed,	was
Aranatha,	and	even	at	that	distance	they	could	see	something	dark	and	savage
blazing	from	her	eyes.
Desra	stood	near	her,	mouth	hanging	open.
On	the	road,	lying	on	his	back,	Kallor	began	to	laugh.	A	rasping,	breathy
kind	of	laugh.
With	a	bemused	glance	at	Skintick	and	Nenanda,	Nimander	walked	over.
Aranatha	had	turned	away,	resuming	her	ministrations	to	Clip,	trickling
water	between	the	unconscious	man’s	lips.	Tucking	the	flowers	under	his	belt,
Nimander	pulled	himself	on	to	the	wagon	and	met	Desra’s	eyes.	‘What
happened?’
‘He	helped	himself	to	a	handful,’	Desra	replied	tonelessly,	nodding
towards	Aranatha.	‘She,	er,	pushed	him	away.’
‘He	was	balanced	on	a	wheel	spoke?’	Skintick	asked	from	behind


Nimander.
Desra	shook	her	head.	‘One	hand	on	the	rail.	She	just…sent	him	flying.’
The	old	man,	his	laughter	fading	away,	was	climbing	to	his	feet.	‘You
damned	Tiste	Andii,’	he	said,	‘no	sense	of	adventure.’
But	Nimander	could	see	that,	despite	Kallor ’s	seeming	mirth,	the	grizzled
warrior	was	somewhat	shaken.	Drawing	a	deep	breath	and	wincing	at	some
pain	in	his	ribs,	he	moved	round	to	the	back	of	the	wagon	and	once	more
climbed	aboard,	this	time	keeping	his	distance	from	Aranatha.
Nimander	leaned	on	the	rail,	close	to	Aranatha.	‘Are	you	all	right?’	he
asked.
Glancing	up,	she	gave	him	another	one	of	those	appallingly	innocent
smiles.	‘Can	you	feel	me	now,	Nimander?’
	
Was	the	idea	of	water	enough	to	create	an	illusion	so	perfect	that	every	sense
was	deceived?	The	serpent	curl	of	the	One	River,	known	as	Dorssan	Ryl,
encircled	half	the	First	City	of	Kharkanas.	Before	the	coming	of	light	there	was
no	reflection	from	its	midnight	surface,	and	to	settle	one’s	hand	in	its	ceaseless
flow	was	to	feel	naught	but	a	cooler	breath	against	the	skin	as	the	current
sighed	round	the	intrusion.	‘Water	in	Darkness,	dreams	in	sleep’	–	or	so	wrote
one	of	the	Mad	Poets	of	the	ninety-third	century,	during	the	stylistic	trend	in
poetry	characterized	by	brevity,	a	style	that	crashed	in	the	following	century
during	the	period	of	art	and	oratory	known	as	the	Flowering	Bright.
Water	in	perfect	illusion…was	this	fundamentally	no	different	from	real
water?	If	the	senses	provide	all	that	defines	the	world,	then	were	they	not	the
arbiters	of	reality?	As	a	young	acolyte,	fired	with	passions	of	all	sorts,	Endest
Silann	had	argued	bell	after	bell	with	his	fellow	students	over	such	matters.	All
those	‘Essence	of	truth,	senses	will	lie’	themes	that	seemed	so	important	then,
before	every	universe	exploded	in	the	conflagration	of	creation,	shoving	all
those	bright,	flaring	candles	over	the	table	edge,	down	into	the	swirling	sea	of
wax	where	every	notion,	every	idea,	melted	into	one	and	none,	into	the
scalding	sludge	that	drowned	everyone	no	matter	how	clever,	how	wise,	how
poetic.
What	am	I	thinking	of	these	days?	Naught	but	the	nonsense	of	my	wasted
youth.	‘Certainty	scours,	a	world	without	wonder.’	Ah,	then,	perhaps	those	terse
poets	had	stumbled	on	to	something	after	all.	Is	this	what	obsesses	me	now?	A
suspicion	that	all	the	truths	that	matter	lie	somewhere	in	a	soul’s	youth,	in	those
heady	days	when	words	and	thoughts	could	still	shine	–	as	if	born	from	nothing
solely	for	our	personal	edification.


Generation	upon	generation,	this	does	not	change.	Or	so	it	comforts	us	to
believe.	Yet	I	wonder,	now,	does	that	stretch	of	delight	grow	shorter?	Is	it
tightening,	cursed	into	a	new	kind	of	brevity,	the	one	with	ignorance	preceding
and	cynicism	succeeding,	each	crowding	the	precious	moment?
What	then	the	next	generation?	Starved	of	wonder,	indifferent	to	the	reality
or	the	unreality	of	the	water	flowing	past,	caring	only	whether	they	might	drift
or	drown.	And	then,	alas,	losing	the	sense	of	difference	between	the	two.
There	was	no	one,	here	in	his	modest	chamber,	to	hear	his	thoughts.	No
one,	indeed,	who	even	cared.	Deeds	must	tumble	forward,	lest	all	these
witnesses	grow	bored	and	restless.	And	if	secrets	dwelt	in	the	lightless	swirl	of
some	unseen,	unimagined	river,	what	matter	when	the	effort	to	delve	deep	was
simply	too	much?	No,	better	to…drift.
But	worries	over	the	mere	score	of	young	Tiste	Andii	growing	now	in
Black	Coral	was	wasted	energy.	He	had	no	wisdom	to	offer,	even	if	any	of
them	was	inclined	to	listen,	which	they	weren’t.	The	old	possessed	naught	but
the	single	virtue	of	surviving,	and	when	nothing	changed,	it	was	indeed	an
empty	virtue.
He	remembered	the	great	river,	its	profound	mystery	of	existence.	Dorssan
Ryl,	into	which	the	sewers	poured	the	gritty,	rain-diluted	blood	of	the	dead	and
dying.	The	river,	proclaiming	its	reality	in	a	roar	as	the	rain	lashed	down	in
torrents,	as	clouds,	groaning,	fell	like	beasts	on	to	their	knees,	only	to	fold	into
the	now-raging	currents	and	twist	down	into	the	black	depths.	All	this,
swallowed	by	an	illusion.
There	had	been	a	woman,	once,	and	yes,	he	might	have	loved	her.	Like	the
hand	plunged	into	the	cool	water,	he	might	have	been	brushed	by	this	heady
emotion,	this	blood-whispered	obsession	that	poets	died	for	and	over	which
people	murdered	their	dearest.	And	he	recalled	that	the	last	time	he	set	eyes
upon	her,	down	beside	Dorssan	Ryl,	driven	mad	by	Mother ’s	abandonment
(many	were),	there	was	nothing	he	recognized	in	her	eyes.	To	see,	there	in	a
face	he	had	known,	had	adored,	that	appalling	absence	–	she	was	gone,	never	to
return.
So	I	held	her	head	under,	watched	those	staring,	uncomprehending	eyes
grow	ever	wider,	filling	with	blind	panic	–	and	there!	At	the	last	moment,	did	I
not	see	–	a	sudden	light,	a	sudden—
Oh,	this	was	a	nightmare.	He	had	done	nothing,	he	had	been	too	much	the
coward.	And	he	had	watched	her	leave,	with	all	the	others	so	struck	by	loss,	as
they	set	out	on	a	hopeless	pilgrimage,	a	fatal	search	to	find	Her	once	again.
What	a	journey	that	must	have	been!	Before	the	last	crazed	one	fell	for	the	final
time,	punctuating	a	trail	of	corpses	leagues	long.	A	crusade	of	the	insane,


wandering	into	the	nowhere.
Kharkanas	was	virtually	an	empty	city	after	they’d	gone.	Anomander
Rake’s	first	lordship	over	echoing	chambers,	empty	houses.	There	would	be
many	more.
A	calm,	then,	drifting	on	like	flotsam	in	the	stream,	not	yet	caught	by	the
rushes,	not	yet	so	waterlogged	that	it	vanished,	tumbled	like	a	severed	moon
into	the	muddy	bed.	Of	course	it	couldn’t	last.	One	more	betrayal	was	needed,
to	shatter	the	world	once	and	for	all.
The	night	just	past	Endest	Silann,	making	his	way	to	a	back	storeroom	on
the	upper	level,	came	upon	the	Son	of	Darkness	in	a	corridor.	Some	human,
thinking	the	deed	one	of	honour,	had	hung	a	series	of	ancient	Andii	tapestries
down	both	walls	of	the	passage.	Scenes	of	Kharkanas,	and	one	indeed	showing
Dorssan	Ryl	–	although	none	would	know	if	not	familiar	with	that	particular
vantage	point,	for	the	river	was	but	a	dark	slash,	a	talon	curled	round	the	city’s
heart.	There	was	no	particular	order,	arrayed	so	in	ignorance,	and	to	walk	this
corridor	was	to	be	struck	by	a	collage	of	images,	distinct	as	memories	not	one
tethered	to	the	next.
Anomander	Rake	had	been	standing	before	one,	his	eyes	a	deep	shade	of
amber.	Predatory,	fixed	as	a	lion’s	before	a	killing	charge.	On	the	faded
tapestry	a	figure	stood	tall	amidst	carnage.	The	bodies	tumbled	before	him	all
bled	from	wounds	to	the	back.	Nothing	subtle	here,	the	weaver ’s	outrage
dripped	from	every	thread.	White-skinned,	onyx-eyed,	sweat-blackened	hair
braided	like	hanging	ropes.	Slick	swords	in	his	hands,	he	looked	out	upon	the
viewer,	defiant	and	cold.	In	the	wracked	sky	behind	him	wheeled	Locqui	Wyval
with	women’s	heads,	their	mouths	open	in	screams	almost	audible.
‘He	did	not	mean	it,’	said	Anomander	Rake.
But	he	did.	‘Your	ability	to	forgive	far	surpasses	mine,	Lord.’
‘The	body	follows	the	head,	but	sometimes	it’s	the	other	way	round.	There
was	a	cabal.	Ambitious,	hungry.	They	used	him,	Endest,	they	used	him	badly.’
‘They	paid	for	it,	didn’t	they?’
‘We	all	did,	old	friend.’
Endest	Silann	looked	away.	‘I	so	dislike	this	hallway,	Lord.	When	I	must
walk	it,	I	look	neither	left	nor	right.’
Rake	grunted.	‘It	is	indeed	a	gauntlet	of	recrimination.’
‘Reminders,	Lord,	of	the	fact	that	some	things	never	change.’
‘You	must	wrest	yourself	loose,	Endest.	This	despondency	can…ravage	the
soul.’
‘I	have	heard,	there	is	a	river	that	empties	into	Coral	Bay.	Eryn	or	Maurik.
Which	seems	depthless.’


Anomander	Rake,	still	studying	the	tapestry,	nodded.
‘Spinnock	Durav	has	seen	it,	walked	its	shores.	He	says	it	reminds	him	of
Dorssan	Ryl…his	childhood.’
‘Yes,	there	are	some	similarities.’
‘I	was	thinking,	if	I	could	be	spared…’
His	Lord	glanced	over	and	smiled.	‘A	pilgrimage?	Of	course,	Endest.	If,
that	is,	you	can	return	before	a	month	passes.’
Ah,	are	we	so	close,	then?	‘I	will	not	stay	long,	Lord.	Only	to	see,	with	my
own	eyes,	that	is	all.’
The	glance	had	become	something	more	focused,	and	the	amber	glare	had
dimmed	to	something	like…like	mud.	‘I	fear	you	may	be	disappointed.	It	is	but
a	deep	river.	We	cannot	touch	the	past,	old	friend.’	He	looked	back	once	more
on	the	tapestry.	‘And	the	echoes	we	imagine	we	hear,	well,	they	deceive.	Do	not
be	surprised,	Endest,	if	you	find	nothing	you	seek,	and	everything	you	fear.’
And	what	is	it,	Lord,	that	you	think	I	seek?	I	would	not	ask	what	you	think	I
fear	for	you	know	the	answer	to	that	one.	‘I	thought	the	walk	might	do	me	some
good.’
‘And	so	it	shall.’
Now,	the	next	day,	he	sat	in	his	chamber.	A	small	leather	pack	of	supplies
rested	beside	the	door.	And	the	thought	of	a	walk,	a	long	one,	up	rugged
mountainsides	beneath	hard	sunlight,	no	longer	seemed	so	appetizing.	Age	did
such	things,	feeding	the	desire	then	starving	the	will.	And	what,	after	all,	would
seeing	the	river	achieve?
A	reminder	of	illusions,	perhaps,	a	reminder	that,	in	a	realm	for	ever
beyond	reach,	there	stood	the	ruin	of	a	once-great	city,	and,	flowing	round	it,
Dorssan	Ryl,	living	on,	ceaseless	in	its	perfect	absence,	in	playing	its	game	of
existence.	A	river	of	purest	darkness,	the	life	water	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	and	if	the
children	were	gone,	well,	what	difference	did	that	make?
Children	will	leave.	Children	will	abandon	the	old	ways,	and	the	old	fools
with	all	their	pointless	advice	can	mutter	and	grumble	to	empty	spaces	and	nod
at	the	answering	echoes.	Stone	and	brickwork	make	ideal	audiences.
No,	he	would	make	this	journey.	He	would	defy	the	follies	of	old	age,
unmeasured	and	unmocked	under	the	eyes	of	the	young.	A	solitary	pilgrimage.
And	all	these	thoughts,	seeming	so	indulgent	and	wayward,	will	perhaps
reveal	their	worth	then,	driving	dire	echoes	forward	to	that	future	moment	of
revelation.	Hah.	Did	he	believe	such	things?	Did	he	possess	the	necessary	faith?
‘Ask	no	question,	the	river	shall	answer.’
‘Question	the	river,	find	the	answer.’
The	Mad	Poets	spent	lifetimes	waging	profound	wars	in	their	rendered


prose.	Achieving	what?	Why,	the	implosive	obliteration	of	their	tradition.
Summarize	that	in	two	clauses.
	
‘I	need	you	to	make	a	journey.’
Spinnock	Durav	managed	a	smile.	‘When,	Lord?’
Anomander	Rake	stretched	out	his	legs	until	his	boots	were	very	nearly	in
the	flames	of	the	hearth.	‘Soon,	I	think.	Tell	me,	how	goes	the	game?’
He	squinted	at	the	fire.	‘Not	well.	Oh,	I	win	each	time.	It’s	just	that	my	finest
opponent	does	poorly	of	late.	His	mind	is	on	other	matters,	unfortunately.	I	am
not	pressed,	and	this	removes	much	of	the	pleasure.’
‘This	would	be	Seerdomin.’
Spinnock	glanced	up,	momentarily	surprised.	But	of	course,	he	told
himself,	he	is	the	Son	of	Darkness,	after	all.	They	may	well	call	him	the	Ghost
King,	but	I	doubt	there	is	a	single	detail	he	does	not	know	in	Black	Coral.	They
will	not	heed	that	until	they	make	a	terrible	mistake	and	then	it	will	be	too	late.
‘Seerdomin,	yes.	The	Benighted.’
A	faint	smile	from	Anomander	Rake.	‘Itkovian	was	a	most	extraordinary
man.	This	newborn	cult	interests	me,	and	I	am	not	so	sure	it	would	have
pleased	him.	He	saw	himself	as	a	soldier,	a	failed	one	at	that	–	the	fall	of
Capustan	devastated	him.’	He	paused	for	a	moment,	clearly	remembering,	then
he	said,	‘They	were	but	a	mercenary	company,	modest	in	complement	–
nothing	like	the	Crimson	Guard.	I	dare	say	even	the	Crimson	Guard	would
have	failed	to	hold	Capustan.’
Spinnock	Durav	remained	silent,	attentive.	He	had	been	away	during	that
time.	Another	journey	on	behalf	of	his	Lord.	Hunting	a	dragon,	of	all	things.
Conversations	like	the	one	he’d	found	at	the	end	of	that	quest	were	not	worth
repeating.
‘He	could	forgive	everyone	but	himself.’
No	wonder	you	liked	him.
Anomander	Rake	sighed.	‘I	cannot	say	how	long	you	will	need,	Spinnock.
As	long,	perhaps,	as	you	can	manage.’
As	the	significance	of	that	statement	settled	into	Spinnock	Durav	he	felt	an
uncharacteristic	flash	of	dismay.	Angry	at	himself,	he	slowly	settled	his	hands
on	the	arms	of	the	chair,	fingers	curling	round	the	smooth	wood,	hoping	he’d
left	nothing	in	his	expression.	This	is	what	I	do	and	will	do.	Until	my	end.	She
is	young,	so	young	–	oh,	there’s	no	point	in	thinking	about…about	any	of	that.
About	her	at	all.	Was	he	able	to	keep	the	anguish	from	his	eyes?	What	thoughts
–	doubts	–	rustled	through	his	Lord	now	as	he	watched	his	old	friend?	Feeling


defeated,	Spinnock	Durav	glanced	over	at	Anomander	Rake.
The	ruler	of	Black	Coral	sat	frowning	at	his	smouldering	boots.
So,	how	long	has	he	been	thus?	‘I	have	always…managed,	Lord.’
‘Yes,	you	have.	I	am	curious.	What	so	afflicts	Seerdomin?’
‘A	crisis	of	faith,	I	think.’	Life	like	Kef	Tanar,	this	skipping	across	paths.	He
does	it	so	well,	this	man	whom	I	have	never	defeated	in	our	tabletop	wars,	not
in	ten	thousand	years.	But	I	can	stay	with	you,	Lord,	at	least	this	far.	‘He	has
ceased	making	his	daily	pilgrimage.	Among	those	living	out	there,	there	have
grown…expectations.	Which,	it	seems,	he	is	unable	to	meet.’
‘You	tread	carefully,	Spinnock	Durav.	That	is	unlike	you.’
‘I	do	not	possess	all	the	details	yet.’
‘But	you	shall.’
‘Eventually,	yes.’
‘And	then?’
Spinnock	looked	across	at	Rake.	‘I	will	do	what	needs	doing.’
‘Best	hurry,	then.’
Ah,	yes,	I	see	now.
‘The	Redeemer	is	a	most	helpless	god,’	Anomander	Rake	said	after	a	time.
‘Unable	to	refuse,	unable	to	give.	A	sea	sponge	swallowing	the	entire	sea.	Then
the	next	one	and	the	one	after	that.	Can	it	simply	go	on	for	ever?	But	for
Itkovian,	I	would	think	not.’
‘Is	that	a	sort	of	faith,	Lord?’
‘Perhaps	it	is.	Is	his	ability	to	forgive	truly	endless?	To	take	on	the	pain	and
guilt	of	others	for	all	eternity?	I	admit,	I	have	some	serious	difficulties	with
this	cult’s	root	tenets	–	oh,	as	I	said,	I	greatly	admired	Itkovian,	the	Shield
Anvil	of	the	Grey	Swords.	I	even	understand,	to	some	extent,	his	gesture	with
the	Kron	T’lan	Imass.	As	the	Redeemer,	however…I	cannot	but	wonder	at	a
god	so	willing	to	assume	the	crimes	and	moral	flaws	of	its	followers,	while	in
turn	demanding	nothing	–	no	expectation	of	a	change	in	behaviour,	no	threat	of
punishment	should	they	continue	to	transgress.	Absolution	–	yes,	I	grasp	the
notion,	but	absolution	is	not	the	same	as	redemption,	is	it?	The	former	is
passive.	The	latter	demands	an	effort,	one	with	implicit	sacrifice	and	hardship,
one	demanding	all	the	higher	qualities	of	what	we	call	virtues.’
‘Yet	he	is	called	the	Redeemer.’
‘Because	he	takes	on	the	task	of	redemption	for	all	who	come	to	him,	all
who	pray	to	him.	And	yes,	it	is	an	act	of	profound	courage.	But	he	does	not
expect	the	same	of	his	people	–	he	appears	to	possess	no	expectations
whatsoever.’
This	was	most	loquacious	of	his	Lord,	evidence	of	a	long,	careful


condensation	of	thought,	of	considerable	energy	devoted	to	the	nature	of	the
cult	clinging	to	the	very	edge	of	Black	Coral	and	Night,	all	of	which	seemed…
unusual.	‘He	leads	by	example,	then.’
A	sudden	glitter	of	interest	in	Anomander	Rake’s	eyes	and	he	studied
Spinnock	Durav	intently.	‘Has	any	one	follower	stumbled	on	to	that	possibility,
Spinnock	Durav?’
‘I	do	not	know.	I,	er,	don’t	think	so	–	but,	Lord,	I	am	too	far	outside	all	of	it
at	the	moment.’
‘If	the	Redeemer	cannot	deny,	then	he	is	trapped	in	a	state	of	imbalance.	I
wonder,	what	would	be	needed	to	redress	that	imbalance?’
Spinnock	Durav	found	his	mouth	dry,	and	if	he’d	built	proud	castles	of
comprehension,	if	he’d	raised	sound	fortifications	to	guard	his	assumptions,
and	arrayed	vast	armies	to	argue	his	case	and	to	shift	and	align	and	manoeuvre
to	defend	his	cherished	notions	–	if	he	had	done	all	this	to	then	sit	in	comfort,
secure	in	his	place	in	this	conversation	–	if	this	was	indeed	a	game	of	Kef
Tanar,	then	in	one	simple	question	posed,	his	foe	had	crashed	his	empire	to
ruin.
What	would	be	needed	to	redress	that	imbalance?
A	man	who	refuses.
You	tell	me	time	is	short,	my	Lord.	You	lead	me	to	elucidate	what	bothers	me
–	for	you	can	see	that	something	does	–	and	then,	amidst	the	lofty	clouds	of
religious	discussion,	you	lash	a	lightning	bolt	down,	striking	my	very	heart.
If	I	am	to	do	something,	I	must	do	it	soon.
My	Lord,	my	awe	of	you	is	unbounded.	My	love	for	you	and	the	compassion
you	so	delicately	unveil	leads	me	into	this	willingness,	to	storm	without
hesitation	what	you	would	have	me	storm,	to	stand	for	as	long	as	needed,	for	it
is	what	you	need.
‘It	is	well	I	am	immune	to	heat,’	Anomander	Rake	said,	‘for	I	have
scorched	my	boots	most	severely.’
And	so	the	fire	grows	round	you,	yet	you	do	not	flinch.
I	will	not	fail	you,	my	Lord.
‘Endest	Silann	is	upon	the	mountain	road	now,’	Anomander	Rake	said,
rising.	‘And	Crone	has	returned	but	soon	must	wing	away	again.	I	shall	ask	her
to	send	a	few	grandchildren	to	guard	him	on	his	journey.	Unless,	of	course,
you	think	it	might	offend	Endest	Silann	should	he	see	them	wheeling
overhead?’
‘It	might,	Lord,	but	that	should	not	change	your	decision.’
A	faint	smile.	‘Agreed.	Send	my	regards	to	the	priestess,	Spinnock.’
Until	that	moment,	he	had	not	known	he	was	going	to	visit	the	High


Priestess	–	who	had	scoured	away	her	very	name	in	service	to	her	role	in	the
Temple	of	Darkness,	to	make	of	her	ever-open	legs	an	impersonal	act,	that
made	her	body	a	vessel	and	nothing	more	–	but	he	now	knew	that	he	needed	to
do	just	that.	Kurald	Galain	was	a	most	troubled	warren	right	now.	Storms
rumbled	within	it,	drumming	every	thread	of	power.	Energies	crackled.
Making	her	insatiable.	So,	she	will	want	me	–	but	that	is	not	what	concerns
Anomander	Rake.	There	is	something	else.	I	must	go	to	her,	and	I	don’t	even
know	why.
But	he	does.
Spinnock	Durav	found	himself	sitting	alone	in	the	small	chamber.	The	fire
was	down	to	coals.	The	air	smelled	of	burned	leather.
	
The	High	Priestess	of	the	Temple	of	Dark	had	cut	her	hair	even	shorter,
making	her	disturbingly	boyish	as	she	pushed	him	on	to	his	back,	straddling
him	with	her	usual	eagerness.	Normally,	he	would	now	begin	to	slow	her
down,	providing	a	force	of	resistance	defying	her	impatience,	and	so	drawing
out	her	pleasure.	This	time,	however,	he	let	her	have	her	way.	This	was	all
incidental.	Since	that	unknown	force	had	trembled	through	Kurald	Galain,	all
the	priestesses	had	been	frantic	in	their	desire,	forcing	male	Tiste	Andii	into
the	temple	and	the	rooms	with	the	plush	beds.	If	the	rumours	were	true,	then
even	the	occasional	human	was	dragged	in	for	the	same	needful	interrogation.
But	no	answers	could	be	found	in	the	indulgences	of	the	flesh,	and	perhaps
all	this	was	a	kind	of	metaphorical	revelation	of	that	raw	truth,	one	that
extended	far	beyond	the	temple	and	the	prescriptions	of	priestesses.	Yet,	did	he
not	want	answers	from	Salind?	From	that	young	human	woman	who	could	not
be	more	than	twenty	years	of	age?	From	another	High	Priestess?
He	had	seen	too	much,	had	lived	too	long.	All	she	faced	ahead	and	all	the
experiences	still	awaiting	her	–	they	belonged	to	her	age,	and	should	indeed	be
shared	–	if	at	all	–	by	one	of	similar	years.	He	had	no	desire	to	be	a	mentor,	for
the	student	soon	grows	past	the	need	of	one	(if	the	mentor	has	done	his	job
well),	and	then	it	is	the	mentor	who	rails	against	the	notion	of	equality,	or	of
being	surpassed.	But	the	impossibility	of	the	notion	went	further.	She	would
never	surpass	him.	Instead,	she	would	grow	old	all	too	quickly,	and	the
sensibilities	of	her	life,	a	life	so	truncated,	could	never	match	his.
Korlat	had	not	hesitated	with	the	Malazan	sergeant	Whiskeyjack	–
Spinnock	had	heard	the	tragic	tale,	bound	up	as	it	was	in	the	conquest	of	Black
Coral	and	the	fall	of	the	Pannion	Domin.	And	the	prolonged	absence	of	both
Korlat	and	her	brother,	Orfantal.	Nevertheless,	Whiskeyjack	had	been	a	man	in


his	late	forties	–	he	had	lived	most	of	a	life.	And	who	could	say	if	the	union
could	have	lasted?	When,	in	a	terribly	short	span	of	years,	Korlat	would	have
seen	her	beloved	descend	into	decay,	his	back	bent,	hands	atremble,	memory
failing.
Spinnock	could	almost	imagine	the	end	of	that,	as,	broken-hearted,	Korlat
would	face	a	moment	with	a	knife	in	her	hands,	contemplating	the	mercy	of
ending	her	husband’s	life.	Was	this	a	thing	to	look	forward	to?	Do	we	not
possess	enough	burdens	as	it	is?
‘If	not	for	your	desire	I	could	feel	in	my	nest,’	said	the	woman	now	lying
beneath	him,	‘I	would	think	you	disinterested,	Spinnock	Durav.	You	have	not
been	with	me	here,	it	seems,	and	while	it’s	said	a	man’s	sword	never	lies,	now	I
truly	wonder	if	that	is	so.’
Blinking,	he	looked	down	into	her	face.	A	most	attractive	face,	one	that
both	suited	the	nature	of	her	devotion	and	yet	seemed	far	too	innocent	–	too
open	–	for	this	life	of	uninhibited	indulgence.	‘I	am	sorry,’	he	said.	‘I	waited
for	you	to…leave.’
She	pushed	out	from	under	him,	sat	up	and	ran	her	long-fingered	hands
through	the	brush	of	her	hair.	‘We	fail	in	that	of	late,’	she	said.
Ah,	so	that	is	the	reason	for	your	desperation,	your	avidness.
‘It	will	return,’	she	said.	‘It	must.	Something…changes,	Spin.’
He	stared	at	her	unblemished	back,	the	graceful	curve	of	her	spine,	the
slight	rounding	on	her	hips	that	he	knew	to	be	soft	and	cool	to	the	touch.	The
angle	of	her	shoulders	bespoke	either	temporary	satiation	or	a	more
prolonged	weariness.	‘Our	Lord	sends	his	regards.’
She	turned	to	look	down	at	him,	brows	lifted	in	surprise.	‘He	does?	That
would	be	a	first.’
Spinnock	frowned.	Yes,	it	would.	I	hadn’t	thought	of	that.	‘I	will	be	leaving
soon.’
Her	eyes	hardened.	‘Why	does	he	treat	you	so?	As	if	he	possessed	you,	to
do	with	as	he	pleases.’
‘I	stand	in	his	stead.’
‘But	you	are	not	the	Son	of	Darkness.’
‘No,	that	is	true.’
‘One	day	you	are	going	to	die	in	his	stead.’
‘I	am.’
‘And	then	he	will	need	to	find	another	fool.’
‘Yes.’
She	glared	down	at	him,	then	turned	and	swiftly	rose.	Black	skin	polished
in	the	glow	of	the	lanterns	–	nothing	boy-like	now,	a	figure	all	curves	and


softened	planes.	Spinnock	smiled.	‘I	will	miss	you	as	well.’
Faint	surrender	as	she	sighed.	And	when	she	faced	him	again,	there	was
nothing	veiled	in	her	eyes.	‘We	do	what	we	can.’
‘Yes.’
‘No,	you	don’t	understand.	The	Temple	–	my	priestesses.	We	try	as
Anomander	Rake	tries,	both	of	us,	seeking	to	hold	on	to	some	meaning,	some
purpose.	He	imagines	it	can	be	found	in	the	struggles	of	lesser	folk	–	of
humans	and	all	their	miserable	squabbles.	He	is	wrong.	We	know	this	and	so
too	does	he.	The	Temple,	Spin,	chooses	another	way.	The	rebirth	of	our	Gate,
the	return	of	Mother	Dark,	into	our	lives,	our	souls.’
‘Yes.	And?’
Something	crumpled	in	her	expression.	‘We	fail	as	he	does.	We	know	and
he	knows.	The	Son	of	Darkness	does	not	send	me	his	regards.’
Then…he	said	‘priestess’.
But	he	didn’t	mean	this	one.	Spinnock	sat	up,	reached	down	to	the	floor
where	his	clothes	were	lying.	‘High	Priestess,’	he	said,	‘what	can	you	tell	me	of
the	Cult	of	the	Redeemer?’
‘What?’
He	looked	up,	wondered	at	the	alarm	in	her	eyes.	After	a	moment	he	shook
his	head.	‘No,	I	am	not	interested	in	forgiveness.	Embracing	the	T’lan	Imass
killed	the	man	–	what	would	embracing	us	do	to	his	soul?’
‘I	care	not	to	think,	Spin.	Oh,	he	was	glorious	in	his	way	–	for	all	the	blood
that	was	needlessly	spilled	because	of	it	–	still…glorious.	If	you	speak	not	of
our	burdens,	then	I	do	not	understand	your	question.’
‘It	is	newborn,	this	cult.	What	shape	will	it	take?’
She	sighed	again	–	most	extraordinary	and	further	proof	of	her	exhaustion.
‘As	you	say,	very	young	indeed.	And	like	all	religions,	its	shape	–	its	future	–
will	be	found	in	what	happens	now,	in	these	first	moments.	And	that	is	a	cause
for	concern,	for	although	pilgrims	gather	and	give	gifts	and	pray,	no
organization	exists.	Nothing	has	been	formulated	–	no	doctrine	–	and	all
religions	need	such	things.’
He	rubbed	at	his	jaw,	considering,	and	then	nodded.
‘Why	does	this	interest	you?’	she	asked.
‘I’m	not	sure,	but	I	appreciate	your	expertise.’	He	paused,	stared	down	at
the	clothes	in	his	hands.	He	had	forgotten	something,	something	important	–
what	might	it	be?
‘I	was	not	wrong,’	she	observed,	still	watching	him.	‘You	are	not	yourself,
Spin.	Have	you	finally	come	to	resent	your	Lord’s	demands?’
‘No.’	Perhaps,	but	that	is	not	worthy	of	consideration	–	the	flaw	would	be


mine,	after	all.	‘I	am	fine,	High	Priestess.’
She	snorted.	‘None	of	us	are	that,	Spin,’	she	said	as	she	turned	away.
As	his	gaze	dropped	he	saw	his	sword	and	belt	lying	on	the	floor.	Of
course	–	he	had	forgotten	his	ritual.	He	collected	the	weapon	and,	as	the	High
Priestess	threw	on	her	robes,	carried	it	over	to	the	table	and	set	it	down.	From
the	belt’s	stiff	leather	pouch	he	removed	a	small	sponge,	a	metal	flask	of	eel
oil,	and	a	much-stained	pad	of	sharkskin.
‘Ah,’	said	the	High	Priestess	from	the	doorway,	‘all	is	right	with	the	world
again.	Later,	Spin.’
‘Yes,	High	Priestess,’	he	replied,	electing	to	ignore	her	sarcasm.	And	the
need	it	so	poorly	disguised.
	
Rain	had	rushed	in	from	the	sea,	turning	the	paths	into	rivers	of	mud.	Salind	sat
in	the	makeshift	shed,	legs	curled	up	beneath	her,	shivering	as	water	dripped
down	through	holes	in	the	roof.	More	people	had	come	scratching	at	her	door,
but	she	had	turned	them	all	away.
She’d	had	enough	of	being	a	High	Priestess.	All	her	heightened
sensitivities	to	the	whims	of	the	Redeemer	were	proving	little	more	than	a
curse.	What	matter	all	these	vague	emotions	she	sensed	from	the	god?	She
could	do	nothing	for	him.
This	should	not	have	surprised	her,	and	she	told	herself	that	what	she	was
feeling	wasn’t	hurt,	but	something	else,	something	more	impersonal.	Perhaps	it
was	her	grieving	for	the	growing	list	of	victims	as	Gradithan	and	his	sadistic
mob	continued	to	terrorize	the	camp	–	so	much	so	that	some	were	planning	to
leave	as	soon	as	the	road	dried	out.	Or	her	failure	with	the	Benighted.	The
expectations	settling	upon	her,	in	the	eyes	of	so	many	people,	were	too	vast,
too	crushing.	She	could	not	hope	to	answer	them	all.	And	she	was	finding	that,
in	truth,	she	could	answer	none	of	them.
Words	were	empty	in	the	face	of	brutal	will.	They	were	helpless	to	defend
whatever	sanctity	might	be	claimed,	for	a	person’s	self,	for	their	freedom	to
choose	how	they	would	live,	and	with	whom.	Empathy	haunted	her.
Compassion	opened	wounds	which	only	a	hardening	of	the	soul	could	in	the
future	prevent,	and	this	she	did	not	want	–	she	had	seen	too	many	faces,	looked
into	too	many	eyes,	and	recoiled	from	their	coldness,	their	delight	in	vicious
judgement.
The	righteous	will	claim	sole	domain	on	judgement.	The	righteous	are	the
first	to	make	hands	into	fists,	the	first	to	shout	down	dissenters,	the	first	to
bully	others	into	compliance.


I	live	in	a	village	of	the	meek,	and	I	am	the	meekest	of	them	all.	There	is	no
glory	in	being	helpless.	Nor	is	there	hope.
Rain	lashing	down,	a	drumming	roar	on	the	slatted,	angled	roof,	the	sound
of	a	deluge	that	filled	her	skull.	That	the	Redeemer	will	embrace	is	neither	just
nor	unjust.	No	mortal	can	sanction	their	behaviour	in	the	Redeemer’s	name.
How	dare	they	so	presume?	Miserable	faces	marching	past,	peering	in	through
the	cracks	in	her	door.	And	she	wanted	to	rail	at	them	all.	You	damned	fools.
Absolution	is	not	enough!	But	they	would	then	look	upon	her,	moon-eyed	and
doleful,	desperate	that	every	question	yield	an	answer,	clinging	to	the	notion
that	one	suffered	for	a	reason	and	knowledge	of	that	reason	would	ease	the
suffering.
Knowledge,	Salind	told	herself,	eases	nothing.	It	just	fills	spaces	that	might
otherwise	flood	with	despair.
Can	you	live	without	answers?	All	of	you,	ask	that	of	yourself.	Can	you	live
without	answers?	Because	if	you	cannot,	then	most	assuredly	you	will	invent
your	own	answers	and	they	will	comfort	you.	And	all	those	who	do	not	share
your	view	will	by	their	very	existence	strike	fear	and	hatred	into	your	heart.
What	god	blesses	this?
‘I	am	no	High	Priestess,’	she	croaked,	as	water	trickled	down	her	face.
Heavy	boots	splashing	in	the	mud	outside.	The	door	was	tugged	back	and	a
dark	shape	blotted	out	the	pale	grey	light.	‘Salind.’
She	blinked,	trying	to	discern	who	so	spoke	to	her	with	such…such
compassion.	‘Ask	me	nothing,’	she	said.	‘Tell	me	less.’
The	figure	moved,	closing	the	door	in	a	scrape	of	sodden	grit	that	filled
the	shed	with	gloom	once	more.	Pausing,	standing,	water	dripping	from	a	long
leather	cloak.	‘This	will	not	do.’
‘Whoever	you	are,’	Salind	said,	‘I	did	not	invite	you	in.	This	is	my	home.’
‘My	apologies,	High	Priestess.’
‘You	smell	of	sex.’
‘Yes,	I	imagine	so.’
‘Do	not	touch	me.	I	am	poison.’
‘I	–	I	have	no	desire	to…touch	you,	High	Priestess.	I	have	walked	this
village	–	the	conditions	are	deplorable.	The	Son	of	Darkness,	I	well	know,	will
not	long	abide	such	poverty.’
She	squinted	up	at	him.	‘You	are	the	Benighted’s	friend.	The	only	Tiste
Andii	for	whom	humans	are	not	beneath	notice.’
‘Is	this	what	you	believe	of	us,	then?	That	is…unfortunate.’
‘I	am	ill.	Please	go	away,	sir.’
‘My	name	is	Spinnock	Durav.	I	might	have	told	you	that	when	last	we	met	–


I	do	not	recall	and	clearly	neither	do	you.	You…challenged	me,	High
Priestess.’
‘No,	I	rejected	you,	Spinnock	Durav.’
There	might	have	been	something	like	wry	amusement	in	his	tone	as	he
replied,	‘Perhaps	the	two	are	one	and	the	same.’
She	snorted.	‘Oh,	no,	a	perennial	optimist.’
He	reached	down	suddenly	and	his	warm	palm	pressed	against	her
forehead.	She	jerked	back.	Straightening,	he	said,	‘You	are	fevered.’
‘Just	go.’
‘I	will,	but	I	intend	to	take	you	with	me—’
‘And	what	of	everyone	else	so	afflicted	in	this	camp?	Will	you	carry	them
all	out?	Or	just	me,	just	the	one	upon	whom	you	take	pity?	Unless	it	is	not	pity
that	drives	you.’
‘I	will	have	healers	attend	the	camp—’
‘Do	that,	yes.	I	can	wait	with	the	others.’
‘Salind—’
‘That’s	not	my	name.’
‘It	isn’t?	But	I	was—’
‘I	simply	chose	it.	I	had	no	name.	Not	as	a	child,	not	until	just	a	few	months
ago.	I	had	no	name	at	all,	Spinnock	Durav.	Do	you	know	why	I	haven’t	been
raped	yet?	Most	of	the	other	women	have.	Most	of	the	children,	too.	But	not
me.	Am	I	so	ugly?	No,	not	in	the	flesh	–	even	I	know	that.	It’s	because	I	was	a
Child	of	the	Dead	Seed	–	do	you	know	the	meaning	of	that,	Tiste	Andii?	My
mother	crawled	half-mad	on	a	battlefield,	reaching	beneath	the	jerkins	of	dead
soldiers	until	she	found	a	member	solid	and	hard.	Then	she	took	it	into	herself
and,	if	she	were	blessed,	it	would	spill	into	her.	A	dead	man’s	seed.	I	had	plenty
of	brothers	and	sisters,	a	family	of	aunts	and	a	mother	who	in	the	end	rotted
with	some	terrible	disease	that	ate	her	flesh	–	her	brain	was	long	gone	by	then.
I	have	not	been	raped,	because	I	am	untouchable.’
He	stared	down	at	her,	evidently	shocked,	horrified	into	dumb	silence.
She	coughed,	wishing	she	did	not	get	sick	so	often	–	but	it	had	always	been
this	way.	‘You	can	go	now,	Spinnock	Durav.’
‘This	place	festers.’	And	he	moved	forward	to	pick	her	up.
She	recoiled.	‘You	don’t	understand!	I’m	sick	because	he’s	sick!’
He	halted	and	she	finally	could	make	out	his	eyes,	forest	green	and	tilted	at
the	corners,	and	far	too	much	compassion	gleamed	in	that	regard.	‘The
Redeemer?	Yes,	I	imagine	he	is.	Come,’	and	he	took	her	up,	effortlessly,	and
she	should	have	struggled	–	should	have	been	free	to	choose	–	but	she	was	too
weak.	Pushing	him	away	with	her	hands	was	a	gesture,	a	desire,	transformed


into	clutching	helplessly	at	his	cloak.	Like	a	child.
A	child.
‘When	the	rains	stop,’	he	murmured,	his	breath	no	doubt	warm	but
scalding	against	her	fevered	cheek,	‘we	shall	rebuild.	Make	all	this	new.	Dry,
warm.’
‘Do	not	rape	me.’
‘No	more	talk	of	rape.	Fever	will	awaken	many	terrors.	Rest	now.’
I	will	not	judge.	Not	even	this	life	of	mine.	I	will	not	–	there	is	weakness	in
the	world.	Of	all	sorts.	All	sorts…

Stepping	outside	with	the	now	unconscious	woman	in	his	arms,	Spinnock
Durav	looked	round.	Figures	on	all	sides,	both	hooded	and	bare-headed	in	the
rain,	water	streaming	down.
‘She	is	sick,’	he	said	to	them.	‘She	needs	healing.’
No	one	spoke	in	reply.
He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘The	Son	of	Darkness	will	be	informed	of	your…
difficulties.’
They	began	turning	away,	melting	into	the	grey	sheets.	In	moments
Spinnock	found	himself	alone.
He	set	out	for	the	city.
The	Son	of	Darkness	will	be	informed…but	he	knows	already,	doesn’t	he?
He	knows,	but	leaves	it	all	to…to	whom?	Me?	Seerdomin?	The	Redeemer
himself?
‘Give	my	regards	to	the	priestess.’
Her,	then,	this	frail	thing	in	my	arms.	I	will	attend	to	her,	because	within
her	lies	the	answer.
Gods,	the	answer	to	what?
Boots	uncertain	in	the	slime	and	mud,	he	made	his	careful	way	back.	Night
awaited.
And,	rising	up	from	the	depths	of	his	memories,	the	fragment	of	some	old
poem,	‘The	moon	does	not	rain,	but	it	weeps.’	A	fragment,	yes,	it	must	be	that.
Alas,	he	could	not	recall	the	rest	and	so	he	would	have	to	settle	with	the	phrase
–	although	in	truth	it	was	anything	but	settling.
I	could	ask	Endest	–	ah,	no,	he	is	gone	from	us	for	the	time	being.	The	High
Priestess,	perhaps.	She	knows	every	Tiste	Andii	poem	ever	written,	for	the	sole
purpose	of	sneering	at	every	one	of	them.	Still.
The	words	haunted	him,	mocked	him	with	their	ambiguity.	He	preferred


things	simple	and	straightforward.	Solid	like	heroic	sculpture	–	those	marble
and	alabaster	monuments	to	some	great	person	who,	if	truth	be	known,	was
nowhere	near	as	great	as	believed	or	proclaimed,	and	indeed	looked	nothing
like	the	white	polished	face	above	the	godlike	body	–	oh,	Abyss	take	me,
enough	of	this!

In	the	camp,	in	the	wake	of	the	Tiste	Andii’s	departure	with	the	High	Priestess
half	dead	in	his	arms,	the	bald	priest,	short	and	bandy-legged	and	sodden	under
rain-soaked	woollen	robes,	hobbled	up	to	Gradithan.	‘You	saw?’
The	ex-soldier	grunted.	‘I	was	tempted,	you	know.	A	sword	point,	right	up
back	of	his	skull.	Shit-spawned	Tiste	Andii	bastard,	what	in	Hood’s	name	did
he	think,	comin’	here?’
The	priest	–	a	priest	of	some	unknown	god	somewhere	to	the	south,
Bastion,	perhaps	–	made	tsk-tsking	sounds,	then	said,	‘The	point	is,	Urdo—’
‘Shut	that	mouth	of	yours!	That	rank	ain’t	for	nobody	no	more,	you
understand?	Never	mind	the	arsehole	thinkin’	he’s	the	only	one	left,	so’s	he	can
use	it	like	it	was	his	damned	name	or	something.	Never	mind,	cos	he’ll	pay	for
that	soon	enough.’
‘Humble	apologies,	sir.	My	point	was,	she’s	gone	now.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘She	was	the	Redeemer ’s	eyes	–	his	ears,	his	everything	in	the	mortal
world	–	and	now	that	Tiste	Andii’s	gone	and	taken	her	away.	Meaning	we	can
do,	er,	as	we	please.’
At	that,	Gradithan	slowly	smiled.	Then	said	in	a	low,	easy	voice,	‘What’ve
we	been	doin’	up	to	now,	Monkrat?’
‘While	she	was	here,	the	chance	remained	of	awakening	the	Benighted	to
his	holy	role.	Now	we	need	not	worry	about	either	of	them.’
‘I	was	never	worried	in	the	first	place,’	the	once-Urdomen	said	in	a	halfsnarl.	‘Go	crawl	back	into	your	hole,	and	take	whoever	with	you	as	you	fancy
–	like	you	say,	nothing	stopping	us	now.’
After	the	horrid	creature	scurried	off,	Gradithan	gestured	to	one	of	his
lieutenants.	‘Follow	that	Andii	pig	back	into	Night,’	he	said.	‘But	keep	your
distance.	Then	get	word	to	our	friends	in	the	city.	It’s	all	taken	care	of	at	the
Barrow	–	that’s	the	message	you	tell	’em,	right?	Go	on	and	get	back	here
before	dawn	and	you	can	take	your	pick	of	the	women	–	one	you	want	to	keep
for	a	while	if	you	care	to,	or	strangle	beneath	you	for	all	I	give	a	shit.	Go!’
He	stood	in	the	rain,	feeling	satisfied.	Everything	was	looking	up,	and	up.


And	by	squinting,	why,	he	could	almost	make	out	that	cursed	tower	with	its
disgusting	dragon	edifice	–	aye,	soon	it	would	all	come	down.	Nice	and
bloody,	like.
	
And	though	he	was	not	aware	of	it	–	not	enough	to	find	cause	for	the	sudden
shiver	that	took	him	–	he	turned	away	from	that	unseeing	regard,	and	so
unknowingly	broke	contact	with	sleepy,	cold,	reptilian	eyes	that	could	see	far
indeed,	through	rain,	through	smoke,	through	–	if	so	desired	–	stone	walls.
Carved	edifice	Silanah	was	not.	Sleepless,	all-seeing	protector	and	sentinel,
beloved	of	the	Son	of	Darkness,	and	possessed	of	absolute,	obsidian-sharp
judgement,	most	assuredly	she	was	all	that.	And	terrible	in	wrath?	Few	mortals
could	even	conceive	the	truth	and	the	capacity	of	the	implacably	just.
Which	was	probably	just	as	well.
‘Mercy	in	compassion,	no	dragon	lives.’
	
When	skill	with	a	sword	was	but	passing,	something	else	was	needed.	Rage.
The	curse	was	that	rage	broke	its	vessel,	sent	fissures	through	the	brittle	clay,
sought	out	every	weakness	in	the	temper,	the	mica	grit	that	only	revealed	itself
in	the	edges	of	the	broken	shards.	No	repairs	were	possible,	no	glue	creeping
out	when	the	fragments	were	pressed	back	together,	to	be	wiped	smooth	with	a
fingertip.
Nimander	was	thinking	about	pottery.	Web-slung	amphorae	clanking	from
the	sides	of	the	wagon,	the	horrid	nectar	within	–	a	species	of	rage,	perhaps,
little	different	from	what	had	coursed	through	his	veins	when	he	fought.	Rage
in	battle	was	said	to	be	a	gift	of	the	gods	–	he	had	heard	that	belief	uttered	by
that	Malazan	marine,	Deadsmell,	down	in	the	hold	of	the	Adjunct’s	flagship,
during	one	of	those	many	nights	when	the	man	had	made	his	way	down	into	the
dark	belly,	jug	of	rum	swinging	by	an	ear	in	one	hand.
At	first	Nimander	had	resented	the	company	–	as	much	as	did	his	kin	–	but
the	Malazan	had	persisted,	like	a	sapper	undermining	walls.	The	rum	had
trickled	down	throats,	loosened	the	hinges	of	tongues,	and	after	a	time	all	those
fortifications	and	bastions	had	stretched	open	their	doorways	and	portals.
The	rum	had	lit	a	fire	in	Nimander ’s	brain,	casting	flickering	red	light	on	a
host	of	memories	gathered	ghostly	round	the	unwelcoming	hearth.	There	had
been	a	keep,	somewhere,	a	place	of	childhood	secure	and	protected	by	the	one
they	all	called	Father.	Ridged	spines	of	snow	lining	the	cobbled	track	leading


to	the	embrasure	gate,	a	wind	howling	down	from	grey	mountains	–	a
momentary	abode	where	scores	of	children	scurried	about	wild	as	rats,	with
the	tall	figure	of	Anomander	Rake	wandering	the	corridors	in	godlike
indifference.
What	had	there	been	before	that?	Where	were	all	the	mothers?	That
memory	was	lost,	entirely	lost.
There	had	been	a	priest,	an	ancient	companion	of	the	Son	of	Darkness,
whose	task	it	had	been	to	keep	the	brood	fed,	clothed,	and	healthy.	He	had
looked	upon	them	all	with	eyes	filled	with	dismay,	no	doubt	understanding	–
long	before	any	of	them	did	–	the	future	that	awaited	them.	Understanding	well
enough	to	withhold	his	warmth	–	oh,	he	had	been	like	an	ogre	to	them	all,
certainly,	but	one	who,	for	all	his	bluster,	would	never,	ever	do	them	harm.
Knowing	this,	they	had	abused	their	freedom	often.	They	had,	more	than
once,	mocked	that	poor	old	man.	They	had	rolled	beakers	into	his	path	when	he
walked	past,	squealing	with	delight	when	his	feet	sent	them	flying	to	bounce
and	shatter,	or,	better	yet,	when	he	lost	his	balance	and	thumped	down	on	his
backside,	wincing	in	pain.
Such	a	cruel	fire,	lighting	up	all	these	ghastly	recollections.	Deadsmell,	in
his	sleepy,	seemingly	careless	way,	had	drawn	out	their	tale.	From	that	keep
hidden	in	the	fastness	of	some	remote	range	of	mountains	to	the	sudden,
startling	arrival	of	a	stranger	–	the	aged,	stooped	Tiste	Andii	who	was,	it	was
learned	with	a	shock,	Anomander ’s	very	own	brother.	And	the	arguments
echoing	from	their	father ’s	private	chambers,	as	brothers	fought	over
unknown	things	–	decisions	past,	decisions	to	come,	the	precise	unfolding	of
crimes	of	the	soul	that	led	to	harsh	accusations	and	cold,	cold	silences.
Days	later,	peace	was	struck,	somehow,	in	the	dark	of	night.	Their	father
came	to	them	then,	to	tell	them	how	Andarist	was	taking	them	all	away.	To	an
island,	a	place	of	warmth,	of	stretches	of	soft	sand	and	pellucid	waters,	of	trees
crowded	with	fruit.	And	there,	standing	in	the	background	during	this
imparting	of	a	new	future,	was	old	Endest	Silann,	his	face	ravaged	by	some
extremity	of	emotion	–	no	more	beakers	underfoot,	no	more	taunts	and	elusive
imps	racing	to	escape	imagined	pursuits	(he	never	pursued,	never	once
reached	to	snatch	one	of	them,	never	raised	a	hand,	never	even	raised	his
voice;	he	was	nothing	but	a	focus	for	their	irreverence	–	an	irreverence	they
would	not	dare	turn	upon	their	father).	He	had	had	his	purpose	and	he	had
weathered	it	and	now	he	wept	as	the	children	were	drawn	together	and	a	warren
was	opened,	a	portalway	into	an	unknown,	mysterious	new	world	where
anything	was	possible.
Andarist	led	them	through.


They	would	learn	new	things.	The	weapons	awaiting	them.
A	stern	teacher,	not	one	to	mock,	oh	no,	that	was	quickly	made	clear	when
a	casual	cuff	against	the	side	of	Skintick’s	head	sent	him	flying	–	a	cuff	to
answer	some	muttered	derision,	no	doubt.
The	games	ended.	The	world	turned	suddenly	serious.
They	came	to	love	that	old	man.	Loved	him	far	too	much,	as	it	turned	out,
for	where	Anomander	might	well	have	proved	capable	of	pushing	back	the
horrors	of	adulthood	and	its	terrible	world,	Andarist	was	not.
Children	made	perfect	soldiers,	perfect	killers.	They	had	no	sense	of
mortality.	They	did	not	fear	death.	They	took	bright	pleasure	in	destruction,
even	when	that	destruction	involved	taking	a	life.	They	played	with	cruelty	to
watch	the	results.	They	understood	the	simplicity	of	power	found	there	in	the
weapon	held	in	the	hand.
See	a	bored	child	with	a	stick	–	and	see	how	every	beast	nearby	flees,
understanding	well	what	is	now	possible	and,	indeed,	probable.	See	the	child,
eyes	scanning	the	ground,	swinging	the	stick	down	to	crush	insects,	to	thrash
flowers,	to	wage	a	war	of	mayhem.	Replace	the	stick	with	a	sword.	Explain	how
guilt	need	not	be	considered	when	the	ones	who	must	die	are	the	enemy.
Unleash	them,	these	children	with	the	avid	eyes.
Good	soldiers.	Andarist	had	made	them	good	soldiers.	What	child,	after
all,	does	not	know	rage?
But	the	vessel	breaks.
The	vessel	breaks.
The	Dying	God,	Nimander	now	believed,	was	a	child.	The	mad	priests
poured	him	full,	knowing	the	vessel	leaked,	and	then	drank	of	that	puerile
seepage.	Because	he	was	a	child,	the	Dying	God’s	thirst	and	need	were	without
end,	never	satiated.
As	they	journeyed	along	the	road,	ever	westward,	they	found	themselves
between	planted	fields.	Here	the	scarecrows	were	truly	dead,	used	up.	Withered,
webbed	in	black	scraps	of	cloth,	stiffly	rocking	in	the	wind.	Poured	out,	these
lives,	and	Nimander	now	saw	these	fields	as	bizarre	cemeteries,	where	some
local	aberration	of	belief	insisted	that	the	dead	be	staked	upright,	that	they	ever
stand	ready	for	whatever	may	come.
Watchers	of	this	road	and	all	the	fools	who	travelled	it.
Once,	on	Drift	Avalii,	almost	a	year	before	the	first	attacks,	two	half-dead
Dal	Honese	had	washed	up	on	the	rocky	coast.	They	had	been	paddling	to	the
island	of	Geni,	for	reasons	unexplained,	in	an	ancient	dugout.	Both	were
naked,	as	they	had	used	up	every	scrap	of	cloth	from	their	garments	to	stuff
into	the	cracks	in	the	hull	–	too	many	cracks,	it	turned	out,	and	the	beleaguered


craft	eventually	sank,	forcing	the	two	men	to	swim.
The	Lord’s	nudge	brought	them	to	Drift	Avalii,	and	somehow	they	avoided
the	murderous	reefs	and	rocks	girdling	the	island.
Dwellers	in	the	dark	jungles	of	their	homeland,	they	were	from	a	tribe
obsessed	with	its	own	ancestors.	The	dead	were	not	buried.	The	dead	were
made	part	of	the	mud	walls	of	the	village’s	huts.	When	one	in	a	family	died,	a
new	room	would	be	begun,	at	first	nothing	but	a	single	wall	projecting
outward.	And	in	that	wall	was	the	corpse,	clay-filled	eye	sockets,	nose,	ears,
mouth.	Clay	like	a	new	skin	upon	face,	limbs,	torso.	Upright,	in	cavorting
poses	as	if	frozen	in	a	dance.	Two	more	kin	needed	to	die	before	the	room	was
complete	and	ready	to	be	roofed	with	palm	fronds	and	the	like.
Some	houses	were	big	as	castles,	sprawled	out	at	ground	level	in	a	maze	of
chambers,	hundreds	of	them	dark	and	airless.	In	this	way,	the	dead	never	left.
They	remained,	witnessing	all,	eternal	in	judgement	–	this	pressure,	said	the
two	refugees,	could	drive	one	insane,	and	often	did.
The	jungle	resisted	farming.	Its	soil	disliked	taming.	The	huge	trees	were
impervious	to	fire	and	could	turn	the	edge	of	an	iron	axe.	Villages	were
growing	too	massive,	devouring	land,	while	every	cleared	area	around	them
was	exhausted.	Rival	tribes	suffered	the	same,	and	before	too	long	wars	were
unleashed.	The	dead	ancestors	demanded	vengeance	for	transgressions.
Murdered	kin	–	whose	bodies	had	been	stolen	and	so	could	not	be	properly
taken	care	of	–	represented	an	open	wound,	a	crime	that	needed	answering.
Blood	back	and	forth,	said	the	two	refugees.	Blood	back	and	forth,	that	is
all.	And	when	the	enemy	began	destroying	villages,	burning	them	to	the
ground…
No	answer	to	the	madness	but	flight.
Nimander	thought	about	all	this	as	he	led	his	mare	by	the	reins	along	the
dusty	road.	He	had	no	ancestors	to	haunt	him,	no	ancestors	to	demand	that	he
do	this	and	that,	that	he	behave	in	this	way	but	not	in	that	way.	Perhaps	this	was
freedom,	but	it	left	him	feeling	strangely…lost.
The	two	Dal	Honese	had	built	a	new	boat	and	paddled	away	–	not	back
home,	but	to	some	unknown	place,	a	place	devoid	of	unblinking	ghosts	staring
out	from	every	wall.
Rocking	sounds	came	from	the	wagon	and	he	turned	to	see	Kallor
swinging	down	on	the	near	side,	pausing	to	adjust	his	cloak	of	chain,	then
walking	until	he	was	alongside	Nimander.
‘Interesting	use	of	corpses,’	he	said.
‘What	use	would	that	be?’	Skintick	asked	with	a	glance	back	towards	them.
‘To	frighten	the	crows?	Not	that	any	right-minded	crow	would	look	twice


at	those	foul	plants	–	they’re	not	even	native	to	this	world,	after	all.’
Nimander	saw	Skintick’s	brows	rise.	‘They	aren’t?’
Kallor	scratched	at	his	beard	and,	since	it	seemed	he	wasn’t	in	any	hurry	to
reply,	Skintick	faced	forward	once	more.
‘Saemankelyk,’	said	Nimander.	‘The	Dying	God…who	will	be	found	in
Bastion.’
The	grey-haired	warrior	grunted.	‘Nothing	changes.’
‘Of	course	it	changes,’	Skintick	retorted	without	turning	round.	‘It	keeps
getting	worse.’
‘That	is	an	illusion,’	Kallor	replied.	‘You	Tiste	Andii	should	know	that.
Your	sense	of	things	getting	worse	comes	from	growing	older.	You	see	more,
and	what	you	see	wars	with	your	memories	of	how	things	used	to	be.’
‘Rubbish.	Old	farts	like	you	say	that	because	it	suits	you.	You	hope	it
freezes	us	in	our	tracks	so	we	end	up	doing	nothing,	which	means	your
precious	status	quo	persists	just	that	much	longer	–	enough	for	you	to	live	out
your	life	in	whatever	comfort	you	think	you’ve	earned.	You	won’t	accept
culpability	for	anything,	so	you	tell	us	that	nothing	ever	changes.’
‘Ah,	the	fire	of	youth.	Perhaps	one	day,	pup,	you’ll	be	old	–	assuming	your
stupidity	doesn’t	get	you	killed	first	–	and	I’ll	find	you,	somewhere.	You’ll	be
sitting	on	the	stone	steps	of	some	abandoned	temple	or,	worse,	some	dead
king’s	glorious	monument.	Watching	the	young	people	rush	by.	And	I’ll	settle
down	beside	you	and	ask	you:	“What’s	changed,	old	man?”	And	you	will
squint,	chew	your	gums	for	a	time,	then	spit	on	to	the	cobbles	shaking	your
head.’
‘Plan	on	living	for	ever,	Kallor?’
‘Yes,	I	do.’
‘What	if	your	stupidity	gets	you	killed?’
Kallor ’s	grin	was	feral.	‘It	hasn’t	yet.’
Skintick	glanced	back	again,	eyes	bright,	and	all	at	once	he	laughed.	‘I	am
changing	my	mind	about	you.’
‘The	Dying	God	has	stolen	Clip’s	soul,’	Nimander	said.	‘We’re	going	to
get	it	back.’
‘Good	luck.’
‘I	suppose	we	will	need	it.’
‘I’m	not	the	kind	who	helps,	Nimander,’	Kallor	said.	‘Even	kin	of	Rake.
Maybe,’	he	added,	‘especially	kin	of	Rake.’
‘What	makes	you	think—’
The	man	interrupted	with	a	snort.	‘I	see	him	in	all	of	you	–	excepting	the
empty	one	you	call	Clip.	You	are	heading	to	Coral.	Or	you	were,	before	this


detour	was	forced	upon	you.	Tell	me,	what	do	you	imagine	will	happen	when
you	find	your	glorious	patron?	Will	he	reach	out	one	perfect	hand	to	brush
your	brows,	to	bless	the	gift	of	your	existence?	Will	you	thank	him	for	the
privilege	of	being	alive?’
‘What	do	you	know	about	it?’	Nimander	demanded,	feeling	the	heat	rise	to
flush	his	face.
‘Anomander	Rake	is	a	genius	at	beginning	things.	It’s	finishing	them	he
has	trouble	with.’
Ah,	that	stings	of	truth.	Kallor,	you	have	just	prodded	my	own	soul.	A	trait	I
inherited	from	him,	then?	That	makes	too	much	sense.	‘So,	when	I	speak	to	him
of	you,	Kallor,	he	will	know	your	name?’
‘Were	we	acquaintances?	Yes,	we	were.	Did	we	delight	in	each	other ’s
company?	You	will	have	to	ask	him	that	one.	Caladan	Brood	was	simpler,
easier	to	manage.	Nothing	but	earth	and	stone.	As	for	K’azz,	well,	I’ll	know
more	when	I	finally	meet	the	bastard.’
‘I	do	not	know	those	names,’	Nimander	said.	‘Caladan	Brood.	K’azz.’
‘It’s	of	no	real	significance.	We	were	allies	in	a	war	or	three,	that	is	all.
And	perhaps	one	day	we	will	be	allies	once	more,	who	can	say?	When	some
vast	enemy	forces	us	once	again	into	the	same	camp,	all	on	the	same	side.’	He
seemed	to	think	about	that	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Nothing	changes.’
‘Are	you	then	returning	to	Coral	–	where	waits	our	father?’
‘No.	The	dust	I	kicked	up	last	time	will	need	a	few	centuries	to	settle,	I
expect.’	He	was	about	to	add	something	more	when	his	attention	was	pulled
away,	and	he	stepped	across	Nimander ’s	path	–	forcing	him	to	halt	–	to	walk	to
the	road’s	edge,	facing	north.
‘I’d	spotted	that,’	Skintick	muttered,	also	stopping.
Fifty	or	so	paces	from	the	road,	just	beyond	a	strip	of	the	alien	plants	and
its	row	of	wrapped	effigies,	was	a	ruin.	Only	one	of	the	walls	of	the	squarish,
tower-like	structure	rose	above	man-height.	The	stones	were	enormous,	fitted
without	mortar.	Trees	of	a	species	Nimander	had	never	seen	before	had	rooted
on	top	of	the	walls,	snaking	long,	thick	ropes	down	to	the	ground.	The
branches	were	skeletal,	reaching	horizontally	out	to	the	sides,	clutching	mere
handfuls	of	dark,	leathery	leaves.
Nenanda	had	stopped	the	wagon	and	all	were	now	studying	the	ruin	that
had	so	captured	Kallor ’s	attention.
‘Looks	old,’	Skintick	said,	catching	Nimander ’s	eye	and	winking.
‘Jaghut,’	Kallor	said.	And	he	set	out	towards	it.	Nimander	and	Skintick
followed.
In	the	field,	the	furrows	of	earth	were	bleached,	dead,	and	so	too	the


ghastly	plants.	Even	the	terrible	clouds	of	insects	had	vanished.
Kallor	stepped	between	two	corpses,	but	there	was	not	enough	room	so	he
reached	out	to	either	side	and	pushed	the	stakes	over.	Dust	spat	from	the	bases
as	the	scarecrows	sagged,	then,	pulling	free,	fell	to	the	ground.	The	warrior
continued	on.
‘We	can	hope,’	said	Skintick	under	his	breath	as	he	and	Nimander	followed
through	the	gap.
‘For	what?’	Nimander	asked.
‘That	he	decides	he	doesn’t	like	this	Dying	God.	And	makes	up	his	mind	to
do	something	about	it.’
‘You	believe	he	is	that	formidable?’
Skintick	shot	him	a	glance.	‘When	he	said	he	was	allied	with	Anomander
and	those	others,	it	didn’t	sound	as	though	he	meant	he	was	a	soldier	or	minor
officer	in	some	army,	did	it?’
Nimander	frowned,	then	shook	his	head.
Skintick	hissed	wordlessly	through	his	teeth,	and	then	said,	‘Like…equals.’
‘Yes,	like	that.	But	it	doesn’t	matter,	Skin	–	he	won’t	help	us.’
‘I	wasn’t	hoping	for	that.	More	like	him	deciding	to	do	something	for	his
own	reasons,	but	something	that	ends	up	solving	our	problem.’
‘I’d	wager	no	coins	on	that,	Skin.’
Drawing	closer	to	the	ruin,	they	fell	silent.	Decrepit	as	it	was,	the	tower
was	imposing.	The	air	around	it	seemed	grainy,	somehow	brittle,	ominously
cold	despite	the	sun’s	fierce	heat.
The	highest	of	the	walls	revealed	a	section	of	ceiling	just	below	the
uppermost	set	of	stones,	projecting	without	any	other	obvious	support	to	cast	a
deep	shadow	upon	the	ground	floor	beneath	it.	The	facing	wall	reached	only
high	enough	to	encompass	a	narrow,	steeply	arched	doorway.	Just	outside	this
entrance	and	to	one	side	was	a	belly-shaped	pot	in	which	grew	a	few	straggly
plants	with	drooping	flowers,	so	incongruous	amid	the	air	of	abandonment	that
Nimander	simply	stared	down	at	them,	disbelieving.
Kallor	walked	up	to	the	entrance,	drew	off	a	scaled	gauntlet	and	rapped	it
against	the	root-tracked	frame.	‘Will	you	greet	us?’	he	demanded	in	a	loud
voice.
From	within	a	faint	shuffling	sound,	and	then	a	thin,	rasping	reply:	‘Must
I?’
‘The	ice	is	long	gone,	Jaghut.	The	plains	beyond	are	dry	and	empty.	Even
the	dust	of	the	T’lan	Imass	has	blown	away.	Would	you	know	something	of	the
world	you	have	ignored	for	so	long?’
‘Why?	Nothing	changes.’


Kallor	turned	a	pleased	smirk	upon	Nimander	and	Skintick	and	then	faced
the	dark	doorway	once	more.	‘Will	you	invite	us	in,	Jaghut?	I	am	the	High—’
‘I	know	who	you	are,	O	Lord	of	Futility.	King	of	Ashes.	Ruler	of	Dead
Lands.	Born	to	glory	and	cursed	to	destroy	it	every	time.	Killer	of	Dreams.
Despoiler	of—’
‘All	right,	enough	of	all	that.	I’m	not	the	one	living	in	ruins.’
‘No,	but	you	ever	leave	them	in	your	wake,	Kallor.	Come	in,	then,	you	and
your	two	Others.	I	greet	you	as	guests	and	so	will	not	crush	the	life	from	you
and	devour	your	souls	with	peals	of	laughter.	No,	instead,	I	will	make	some
tea.’
Nimander	and	Skintick	followed	Kallor	into	the	darkness	within.
The	air	of	the	two-walled	chamber	was	frigid,	the	stones	sheathed	in
amber-streaked	hoarfrost.	Where	the	other	two	walls	should	have	been	rose
black,	glimmering	barriers	of	some	unknown	substance,	and	to	look	upon
them	too	long	was	to	feel	vertiginous	–	Nimander	almost	pitched	forward,
drawn	up	only	by	Skintick’s	sudden	grip,	and	his	friend	whispered,	‘Never
mind	the	ice,	cousin.’
Ice,	yes,	it	was	just	that.	Astonishingly	transparent	ice—
A	figure	crouched	at	a	small	hearth,	long-fingered	hands	working	a
blackened	kettle	on	to	an	iron	hook	above	the	coals.	‘I	ate	the	last	batch	of
cookies,	I’m	afraid.’	The	words	drifted	out	inflectionless	from	beneath	a
broad-brimmed	black	felt	hat.	‘Most	people	pass	by,	when	they	pass	by.	Seeing
nothing	of	interest.	None	draw	close	to	admire	my	garden.’
‘Your	garden?’	Skintick	asked.
‘Yes.	Small,	I	know.	Modest.’
‘The	pot	with	the	two	flowers.’
‘Just	so.	Manageable	–	anything	larger	and	the	weeding	would	drive	me
mad,	you	see.’
‘Taking	up	all	your	time,’	Kallor	commented,	looking	round.
‘Just	so.’
A	long	stone	altar	provided	the	Jaghut	with	his	bed,	on	which	pale	furs
were	neatly	folded.	A	desk	sat	nearby,	the	wood	stained	black,	the	chair	before
it	high-backed	and	padded	in	deerskin.	On	a	niche	set	in	the	highest	wall
squatted	a	three-legged	silver	candlestick,	oxidized	black.	Beeswax	candles
flickered	in	guttered	pools.	Leaning	near	the	altar	was	an	enormous
scabbarded	greatsword,	the	cross-hilt	as	long	as	a	child’s	arm.	Cobwebs	coated
the	weapon.
‘You	know	my	name,’	Kallor	said.	‘But	I	have	not	yet	heard	yours.’
‘That	is	true.’


Something	dangerous	edged	into	Kallor ’s	voice	as	he	said,	‘I	would	know
the	name	of	my	host.’
‘Once,	long	ago,	a	wolf	god	came	before	me.	Tell	me,	Kallor,	do	you
understand	the	nature	of	beast	gods?	Of	course	not.	You	are	only	a	beast	in	the
unfairly	pejorative	sense	–	unfair	to	beasts,	that	is.	How	is	it,	then,	that	the	most
ancient	gods	of	this	world	were,	one	and	all,	beasts?’
‘The	question	does	not	interest	me,	Jaghut.’
‘What	of	the	answer?’
‘You	possess	one?’
The	hands	reached	out	and	lifted	the	kettle	from	the	hook	as	steam	rushed
up	round	the	long	fingers.	‘This	must	now	steep	for	a	time.	Am	I	unusual	in	my
penchant	for	evading	such	direct	questions?	A	trait	exclusive	to	Jaghut?	Hardly.
Knowledge	may	be	free;	my	voice	is	not.	I	am	a	miser,	alas,	although	I	was	not
always	this	way.’
‘Since	I	see	little	value	in	this	particular	matter,’	said	Kallor,	‘I	would	not
bargain	with	you.’
‘Ah,	and	what	of	the	Others	with	you?	Might	not	they	be	interested?’
Clearing	his	throat,	Skintick	said,	‘Venerable	one,	we	possess	nothing	of
worth	to	one	such	as	you.’
‘You	are	too	modest,	Tiste	Andii.’
‘I	am?’
‘Each	creature	is	born	from	one	not	its	kind.	This	is	a	wonder,	a	miracle
forged	in	the	fires	of	chaos,	for	chaos	indeed	whispers	in	our	blood,	no	matter
its	particular	hue.	If	I	but	scrape	your	skin,	so	lightly	as	to	leave	but	a
momentary	streak,	that	which	I	take	from	you	beneath	my	nail	contains	every
truth	of	you,	your	life,	even	your	death,	assuming	violence	does	not	claim	you.
A	code,	if	you	will,	seemingly	precise	and	so	very	ordered.	Yet	chaos	churns.
For	all	your	similarities	to	your	father,	neither	you	nor	the	one	named
Nimander	–	nor	any	of	your	brothers	and	sisters	–	is	identical	to	Anomander
Dragnipurake.	Do	you	refute	this?’
‘Of	course	not—’
‘For	each	kind	of	beast	there	is	a	first	such	beast,	more	different	from	its
parents	than	the	rest	of	its	kin,	from	which	a	new	breed	in	due	course	emerges.
Is	this	firstborn	then	a	god?’
‘You	spoke	of	a	wolf	god,’	Skintick	said.	‘You	began	to	tell	us	a	story.’
‘So	I	did.	But	you	must	be	made	to	understand.	It	is	a	question	of	essences.
To	see	a	wolf	and	know	it	as	pure,	one	must	possess	an	image	in	oneself	of	a
pure	wolf,	a	perfect	wolf.’
‘Ridiculous,’	Kallor	grunted.	‘See	a	strange	beast	and	someone	tells	you	it


is	a	wolf	–	and	from	this	one	memory,	and	perhaps	a	few	more	to	follow,	you
have	fashioned	your	image	of	a	wolf.	In	my	empires,	philosophers	spewed
such	rubbish	for	centuries,	until,	of	course,	I	grew	tired	of	them	and	had	them
tortured	and	executed.’
A	strange	muffled	noise	came	from	the	hunched-over	Jaghut.	Nimander
saw	the	shoulders	shaking	and	realized	the	ancient	was	laughing.
‘I	have	killed	a	few	Jaghut,’	Kallor	said;	not	a	boast,	simply	a	statement.	A
warning.
‘The	tea	is	ready,’	the	Jaghut	said,	pouring	dark	liquid	into	four	clay	cups
that	Nimander	had	not	noticed	before.	‘You	might	wonder	what	I	was	doing
when	the	wolf	god	found	me.	I	was	fleeing.	In	disguise.	We	had	gathered	to
imprison	a	tyrant,	until	our	allies	turned	upon	us	and	resumed	the	slaughter.	I
believe	I	may	be	cursed	ever	to	be	in	the	wrong	place	at	the	wrong	time.’
‘T’lan	Imass	allies,’	Kallor	said.	‘Too	bad	they	never	found	you.’
‘Kron,	the	clan	of	Bek’athana	Ilk	who	dwelt	in	the	Cliffs	Above	the	Angry
Sea.	Forty-three	hunters	and	a	Bonecaster.	They	found	me.’
Skintick	squatted	to	pick	up	two	of	the	cups,	straightening	to	hand	one	to
Nimander.	The	steam	rising	from	the	tea	was	heady,	hinting	of	mint	and	cloves
and	something	else.	The	taste	numbed	his	tongue.
‘Where	is	mine?’	Kallor	demanded.	‘If	I	must	listen	to	this	creature	I	will
drink	his	tea.’
Smiling,	Skintick	pointed	down	to	where	the	cups	waited	on	the	ground.
Another	soft	laugh	from	the	Jaghut.	‘Raest	was	the	name	of	the	Tyrant	we
defeated.	One	of	my	more	obnoxiously	arrogant	offspring.	I	did	not	mourn	his
fall.	In	any	case,	unlike	Raest,	I	was	never	the	strutting	kind.	It	is	a	sign	of
weakness	to	shine	blinding	bright	with	one’s	own	power.	Pathetic	diffidence.	A
need	that	undermines.	I	was	more…secure.’
He	had	Kallor ’s	attention	now.	‘You	killed	forty-three	T’lan	Imass	and	a
Bonecaster?’
‘I	killed	them	all.’	The	Jaghut	sipped	from	his	own	cup.	‘I	have	killed	a	few
T’lan	Imass,’	he	said,	the	intonation	a	perfect	mimicry	of	Kallor ’s	own	claim	a
few	moments	past.	‘Tell	me,	then,	do	you	like	my	abode?	My	garden?’
‘Solitude	has	driven	you	mad,’	Kallor	said.
‘You	would	know	all	about	that	now,	wouldn’t	you,	O	Lord	of	Failures?
Partake	of	the	tea,	lest	I	take	offence.’
Teeth	bared,	Kallor	bent	down	to	retrieve	his	cup.
The	Jaghut’s	left	hand	shot	out,	closing	about	Kallor ’s	wrist.	‘You
wounded	that	wolf	god,’	he	said.
Nimander	stared	as	he	saw	the	old	man	struggle	to	twist	free	of	that	grip.


Veins	standing	out	on	his	temple,	jaw	muscles	bunching	beneath	the	beard.	But
there	was	no	pulling	loose.	There	was	no	movement	at	all	from	that	withered,
green	hand.
‘When	you	laid	waste	to	your	realm,’	the	Jaghut	continued.	‘You	wounded
it	terribly.’
‘Release	me,’	Kallor	said	in	a	rasp.	And	with	his	other	hand	he	reached
back	for	the	grip	of	his	sword.
All	at	once	the	Jaghut’s	hand	fell	away.
Kallor	staggered	back	and	Nimander	saw	a	white	impression	of	fingers
encircling	the	old	warrior ’s	wrist.	‘This	is	not	how	a	host	behaves.	You	force
me	to	kill	you.’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,	Kallor.	This	tower	was	an	Azath	once.	Shall	I	awaken	it	for
you?’
Wondering,	Nimander	watched	as	Kallor	backed	towards	the	entrance,	eyes
wide	in	that	weathered,	pallid	face,	the	look	of	raw	recognition	dawning.
‘Gothos,	what	are	you	doing	here?’
‘Where	else	should	I	be?	Now	remain	outside	–	these	two	Tiste	Andii	must
go	away	for	a	while.’
Heat	was	spreading	fast,	out	from	Nimander ’s	stomach.	He	cast	a	wild	look
at	Skintick,	saw	his	friend	sinking	slowly	to	his	knees.	The	empty	cup	in	his
hand	fell	away,	rolled	briefly	on	the	damp	ground.	Nimander	stared	at	the
Jaghut.	‘What	have	you	done?’
‘Only	what	was	necessary.’
With	a	snarl	Kallor	spun	round	and	stalked	from	the	chamber.	Over	his
shoulder	he	said,	‘I	will	not	wait	long.’
Nimander ’s	eyes	were	drawn	once	more	to	the	walls	of	ice.	Black	depths,
shapes	moving	within.	He	staggered,	reached	out	his	hands—
‘Oh,	don’t	step	in	there—’
And	then	he	was	falling	forward,	his	hands	passing	into	the	wall	before
him,	no	resistance	at	all.
‘Nimander,	do	not—’
Blackness.
	
Desra	wandered	round	the	wagon,	drawing	up	to	halt	beside	the	ox.	She	set	a
hand	on	its	back,	felt	the	beast’s	heat,	the	rippling	with	every	twitch	shedding
the	biting	flies.	She	looked	down	into	the	animal’s	eye,	saw	with	a	start	how
delicate	its	lashes.	‘You	must	take	the	world	as	it	is.’	Andarist’s	last	words	to
her,	before	the	world	took	him.


It	wasn’t	hard.	People	either	had	strength	or	they	didn’t.	The	weak	ones	left
her	disgusted,	welling	with	dark	contempt.	If	they	chose	at	all	it	was	ever	the
wrong	choice.	They	let	the	world	break	them	time	and	again,	then	wondered	–
dull-eyed	as	this	ox	–	why	it	was	so	cruel.	But	it	wasn’t	the	world	that	was	the
problem,	was	it?	It	was	stepping	into	the	stampede’s	path	over	and	over	again.
It	was	learning	nothing	from	anything.	Nothing.
There	were	more	weak	people	than	strong	ones.	The	weak	were	legion.
Some	just	weren’t	smart	enough	to	cope	with	anything	beyond	meeting
immediate	needs:	the	field	to	sow,	the	harvest	to	bring	on	to	the	threshing
floor,	the	beasts	of	burden	to	feed.	The	child	to	raise,	the	coin	for	the	next	jug
of	ale,	the	next	knuckle	bag	of	d’bayang.	They	didn’t	see	beyond	the	horizon.
They	didn’t	even	see	the	next	valley	over.	The	world	outside	was	where	things
came	from,	things	that	caused	trouble,	that	jarred	the	proper	order	of	life.	They
weren’t	interested	in	thinking.	Depths	were	frightening,	long	roads	a	journey
without	purpose	where	one	could	end	up	lost,	curling	up	to	die	in	the	ditch.
She	had	seen	so	many	of	the	weak	ones.	They	died	unjustly	in	their
thousands.	Tens	of	thousands.	They	died	because	they	worshipped	ignorance
and	believed	this	blind	god	could	make	them	safe.
Among	the	strong,	only	a	few	were	worth	paying	attention	to.	Most	were
bullies.	Their	threats	were	physical	or	they	were	emotional,	but	the	effect	was
the	same	–	to	make	the	victim	feel	weak.	And	it	was	the	self-appointed	task	of
these	bullies	to	convince	as	many	people	as	possible	that	they	were	inherently
weak,	and	their	lives	ones	of	pathetic	misery.	Once	this	was	done,	the	bully
would	then	say:	do	as	I	say	and	I	will	keep	you	safe.	I	will	be	your	strength…
unless	you	anger	me.	If	you	anger	me	I	will	terrorize	you.	I	might	even	kill	you.
There	were	plenty	of	these	bastards,	pig-eyed	and	blustery	little	boys	in	big
bodies.	Or	fish-eyed	nasty	bitches	–	although	these	ones,	after	proving	to	their
victims	how	weak	they	were,	would	then	lap	up	all	the	spilled	blood.	Delicate
tongues	flicking	in	and	out.	You	had	the	physical	bullies	and	the	emotional
bullies,	and	they	both	revelled	in	destroying	lives.
No,	she	had	no	time	for	them.	But	there	were	others	whose	strength	was	of
a	much	rarer	kind.	Not	easy	to	find,	because	they	revealed	nothing.	They	were
quiet.	They	often	believed	themselves	to	be	much	weaker	than	they	were.	But
when	pushed	too	hard,	they	surprised	themselves,	finding	that	they	would	not
back	away	another	step,	that	a	wall	had	risen	in	their	souls,	unyielding,	a
barrier	that	could	not	be	passed.	To	find	one	such	as	this	was	the	most	precious
of	discoveries.
Desra	had	played	the	bully	more	than	once,	as	much	from	boredom	as
from	anything	else.	She’d	lapped	up	her	share	of	blood.


She	might	well	do	the	same	with	this	one	named	Clip	–	if	he	ever	returned
to	them,	and	there	was	no	guarantee	of	that.	Yes,	she	would	use	him	and	people
like	him,	who	imagined	themselves	strong	but	were,	in	truth,	weak	–	or	so	she
would	prove,	eventually.	Certainly,	their	blood	didn’t	taste	any	purer,	any
sweeter.
She	had	made	her	discovery,	after	all,	of	one	whose	strength	was	absolute.
Before	whom	she	herself	felt	weak	but	in	a	most	pleasant,	most	satisfying	way
–	one	to	whom	she	might	surrender	whatever	she	chose	without	fearing	he
would	one	day	use	it	against	her.	Not	this	one.
Not	Nimander	Golit.
	
Desra	saw	Kallor	emerge	from	the	ruin,	his	agitation	plain	to	see.	Armour
rustling,	he	marched	between	the	scarecrows	and	up	on	to	the	road.	Reaching
the	wagon,	he	pulled	himself	up	with	a	worn	boot	on	a	wooden	spoke,	then
paused	to	stare	down	at	Clip.	‘You	should	throw	this	fool	away,’	he	said	to
Aranatha,	who	sat	holding	a	thin	cloth	stretched	out	over	the	unconscious
figure.
She	smiled	in	answer	and	said	nothing.
Desra	frowned	at	Kallor.	‘Where	are	the	others?’
‘Yes,’	he	replied	with	a	sneer,	‘the	others.’
‘Well?’
He	lifted	himself	over	the	slats.	‘The	Jaghut	decided	to	use	them	–
unfortunately	for	them.’
Use?
Nenanda	swung	round	from	where	he	sat	on	the	bench.	‘What	Jaghut?’	he
demanded.
But	Desra	was	already	turning	away,	rushing	down	through	the	ditch	and
on	to	the	withered	field.	Between	the	toppled	scarecrows—
	
So	who	is	this	Dying	God?
Skintick,	who	knew	himself	well,	who	knew	that	his	imagination	was	the
deadliest	weapon	he	used	against	himself,	who	knew	how,	in	any	situation,	he
might	laugh	–	a	plunge	into	the	depths	of	absurdity,	a	desperate	attempt	to	save
his	sanity	–	now	found	himself	awakening	on	a	dusty	platform,	no	more	than
twelve	paces	across,	of	limestone.	It	was	surrounded	by	olive	trees,	a	grove	of
ancient	twisted	boles	and	dark	leathery	leaves,	the	fruit	clustered	in	abundance.


A	warm	wind	slid	over	his	naked	form,	making	the	sun’s	heat	–	at	least	to
begin	with	–	less	oppressive	than	it	should	have	been.	The	air	smelled	of	salt.
The	stumps	of	columns	encircled	the	platform.	They	had	been	painted	the
deep	hue	of	wine,	but	that	had	begun	to	flake	away,	exposing	raw	yellow	rock.
Who	is	this	Dying	God?
His	head	aching,	Skintick	slowly	sat	up,	shielding	his	eyes	from	the	glare,
but	the	sun’s	light	rebounded	from	the	stone	and	there	was	no	relief.	Groaning,
he	pushed	himself	to	his	feet,	stood	tottering.	Gods,	the	pain	in	his	head!
Pulsing,	exploding	in	blinding	flashes	behind	his	eyes.
Who	is	this	Dying—
There	were	corpses	huddled	beneath	the	trees	–	mostly	bones	and	rotted
cloth,	tufts	of	hair,	skin-stretched	skulls.	Once	brightly	coloured	clothes,
strange	shoes,	the	glitter	of	buttons	and	jewellery,	gold	on	bared	teeth.
The	sun	felt…evil.	As	if	its	heat,	its	light,	was	somehow	killing	him,
lancing	through	his	flesh,	tearing	through	his	brain.	He	was	growing	ever
sicker.
There	was,	he	suddenly	understood,	no	one	left	alive	on	this	world.	Even
the	trees	were	dying.	The	oceans	were	burning	away	and	death	was
everywhere.	It	could	not	be	escaped.	The	sun	had	become	a	murderer.
Who	is	this—
You	could	dream	of	the	future.	You	could	see	it	as	but	a	recognizable
continuation	of	what	can	be	seen	around	you	at	this	moment.	See	it	as	progress,
a	driven	force	with	blinding	glory	at	the	very	end.	Or	each	moment	as	the
pinnacle,	at	least	until	the	next	higher	peak	resolved	itself.	A	farmer	sows	to
feed	the	vision	of	fruition,	of	abundance,	and	the	comfort	that	comes	with	a
predictable	universe	reduced	to	this	upcoming	season.	Drip	libations	to	remind
the	gods	that	order	exists.
You	could	dream	of,	at	least,	a	place	for	your	son,	your	daughter.	Who
would	wish	to	deliver	a	child	into	a	world	of	mayhem,	of	inescapable
annihilation?	And	did	it	matter	if	death	arrived	as	a	force	beyond	the	control	of
anyone,	or	as	the	logical	consequence	of	wilful	stupidity?	No	it	did	not,	when
there	was	no	one	left	to	ponder	such	questions.
Fury	and	folly.	Someone	here	had	played	the	ultimate	practical	joke.
Seeded	a	world	with	life,	witnessed	its	burgeoning,	and	then	nudged	the	sun	to
anger.	Into	a	deadly	storm,	a	momentary	cough	of	poison	light,	and	the	season
of	life	ended.	Just	so.
Who	is—
The	god	dies	when	the	last	believer	dies.	Rising	up	bloated	and	white,
sinking	down	into	unseen	depths.	Crumbling	into	dust.	Expelled	in	a	gust	of	hot


wind.
Venomous	spears	lanced	through	Skintick’s	brain,	shearing	through	every
last	tether	that	remained.	And	suddenly	he	was	free,	launching	skyward.	Free,
yes,	because	nothing	mattered	any	more.	The	hoarders	of	wealth,	the	slayers	of
children,	the	rapists	of	the	innocent,	all	gone.	The	decriers	of	injustice,	the
addicts	of	victimization,	the	endlessly	offended,	gone.
Nothing	was	fair.	Nothing.	And	that	is	why	you	are	dying,	dear	god.	That	is
why.	How	can	you	do	anything	else?	The	sun	rages!
Meaningless!
We	all	die.	Meaningless!
Who—
A	hard	slap	and	he	was	jolted	awake.	A	seamed,	tusked	face	hovered	over
him.	Vertical	pupils	set	in	grey,	the	whites	barely	visible.	Like	a	damned	goat.
‘You,’	the	Jaghut	said,	‘are	a	bad	choice	for	this.	Answering	despair	with
laughter	like	that.’
Skintick	stared	up	at	the	creature.	He	couldn’t	think	of	anything	to	say.
‘There	is	a	last	moment,’	Gothos	continued,	‘when	every	sentient	creature
alive	realizes	that	it’s	over,	that	not	enough	was	done,	that	hindsight	doesn’t
survive	dying.	Not	enough	was	done	–	you	Tiste	Andii	understood	that.
Anomander	Rake	did.	He	realized	that	to	dwell	in	but	one	world	was	madness.
To	survive,	you	must	spread	like	vermin.	Rake	tore	his	people	loose	from	their
complacency.	And	for	this	he	was	cursed.’
‘I	saw	–	I	saw	a	world	dying.’
‘If	that	is	what	you	saw,	then	so	it	is.	Somewhere,	somewhen.	On	the	paths
of	the	Azath,	a	distant	world	slides	into	oblivion.	Potential	snuffed	out.	What
did	you	feel,	Skintick?’
‘I	felt…free.’
The	Jaghut	straightened.	‘As	I	said,	a	bad	choice.’
‘Where	–	where	is	Nimander?’
Sounds	at	the	doorway—
	
Desra	rushed	into	the	chamber.	She	saw	Skintick,	saw	him	slowly	sitting	up.
She	saw	what	must	be	the	Jaghut,	the	hood	drawn	back	to	reveal	that	greenish,
unhuman	visage,	the	hairless	pate	so	mottled	it	might	have	been	a	mariner ’s
map	of	islands,	a	tortured	coastline,	reefs.	He	stood	tall	in	his	woollen	robes.
But	nowhere	could	she	find	Nimander.
The	Jaghut’s	eyes	fixed	on	her	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	faced	one	of	the
walls	of	ice.


She	followed	that	gaze.
	
Staggering	into	darkness	he	was	struck	countless	times.	Fists	pounded,	fingers
raked	ragged	furrows	through	his	skin.	Hands	closed	about	his	limbs	and
pulled.
‘This	one	is	mine!’
‘No,	mine!’
All	at	once	voices	cried	out	on	all	sides	and	a	hand	closed	about
Nimander ’s	waist,	plucked	him	into	the	air.	The	giant	figure	carrying	him	ran,
feet	thumping	like	thunder,	up	a	steep	slope,	rocks	scurrying	down,	first	a
trickle,	then	a	roar	of	cascading	stones,	with	screams	in	their	wake.
Choking	dust	blinded	him.
A	sharp-edged	crest	crunching	underfoot,	and	then	a	sudden	even	steeper
descent,	down	into	a	caldera.	Grey	clouds	rising	in	plumes,	sudden	coruscating
heat	foul	with	gases	that	stung	his	eyes,	burned	in	his	throat.
He	was	flung	on	to	hot	ash.
The	giant	creature	loomed	over	him.
Through	tears	Nimander	looked	up,	saw	a	strangely	child-like	face
peering	down.	The	forehead	sloped	back	behind	an	undulating	brow-ridge
from	which	the	eyebrows	streamed	down	in	thick	snarls	of	pale,	almost	white
hair.	Round,	smooth	cheeks,	thick	lips,	a	pug	nose,	a	pale	bulging	wattle
beneath	the	rounded	chin.	Its	skin	was	bright	yellow,	its	eyes	emerald	green.
It	spoke	in	the	language	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	‘I	am	like	you.	I	too	do	not
belong	here.’
The	voice	was	soft,	a	child’s	voice.	The	giant	slowly	blinked,	and	then
smiled,	revealing	a	row	of	dagger-like	fangs.
Nimander	struggled	to	speak.	‘Where	–	who	–	all	those	people…’
‘Spirits.	Trapped	like	ants	in	amber.	But	it	is	not	amber.	It	is	the	blood	of
dragons.’
‘Are	you	a	spirit?’
The	huge	head	shook	in	a	negative.	‘I	am	an	Elder,	and	I	am	lost.’
‘Elder.’	Nimander	frowned.	‘You	call	yourself	that.	Why?’
A	shrug	like	hills	in	motion.	‘The	spirits	have	so	named	me.’
‘How	did	you	come	to	be	here?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	am	lost,	you	see.’
‘And	before	this	place?’
‘Somewhere	else.	I	built	things.	Of	stone.	But	each	house	I	built	then
vanished	–	I	know	not	where.	It	was	most…frustrating.’


‘Do	you	have	a	name?’
‘Elder?’
‘Nothing	else?’
‘Sometimes,	I	would	carve	the	stone.	To	make	it	look	like	wood.	Or	bone.	I
remember…sunsets.	Different	suns,	each	night,	different	suns.	Sometimes	two.
Sometimes	three,	one	fierce,	the	others	like	children.	I	would	build	another
house,	if	I	could.	I	think,	if	I	could	do	that,	I	would	stop	being	lost.’
Nimander	sat	up.	He	was	covered	in	volcanic	dust,	so	fine	it	shed	from	him
like	liquid.	‘Build	your	house,	then.’
‘Whenever	I	begin,	the	spirits	attack	me.	Hundreds,	then	thousands.	Too
many.’
‘I	stepped	through	a	wall	of	ice.’	The	memory	was	suddenly	strong.
‘Omtose	Phellack—’
‘Oh,	ice	is	like	blood	and	blood	is	like	ice.	There	are	many	ways	in.	None
out.	You	do	not	belong	here	because	you	are	not	yet	dead.	You	are	lost,	like	me.
We	should	be	friends,	I	think.’
‘I	can’t	stay—’
‘I	am	sorry.’
Panic	seethed	to	life	in	Nimander.	He	stood,	sinking	to	his	shins	in	the	hot
ash.	‘I	can’t	–	Gothos.	Find	me.	Gothos!’
‘I	remember	Gothos.’	A	terrible	frown	lowered	the	Elder ’s	brows.	‘He
would	appear,	just	before	the	last	stone	was	set.	He	would	look	upon	my	house
and	pronounce	it	adequate.	Adequate!	Oh,	how	I	hated	that	word!	My	sweat,	my
blood,	and	he	called	them	adequate!	And	then	he	would	walk	inside	and	close
the	door,	and	I	would	place	the	last	stone,	and	the	house	would	vanish!	I	don’t
think	I	like	Gothos.’
‘I	don’t	blame	you,’	Nimander	said,	unwilling	to	voice	his	suspicion	that
Gothos’s	arrival	and	the	vanishing	of	the	houses	were	in	fact	connected;	that
indeed	the	Jaghut	came	to	collect	them.	This	Elder	builds	the	Houses	of	the
Azath.
And	he	is	lost.
‘Tell	me,’	Nimander	said,	‘do	you	think	there	are	others	like	you?	Others,
out	there,	building	houses?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
Nimander	looked	round.	The	jagged	walls	of	the	cone	enclosed	the	space.
Enormous	chunks	of	pumice	and	obsidian	lay	half	buried	in	the	grey	dust.
‘Elder,	do	the	spirits	ever	assail	you	here?’
‘In	my	pit?	No,	they	cannot	climb	the	sides.’
‘Build	your	house	here.’


‘But—’
‘Use	the	rim	as	your	foundation.’
‘But	houses	have	corners!’
‘Make	it	a	tower.’
‘A	house…within	the	blood	of	dragons?	But	there	are	no	sunsets.’
A	house	within	the	blood	of	dragons.	What	would	happen?	What	would
change?	Why	do	the	spirits	deny	him	this?	‘If	you	are	tired	of	being	lost,’
Nimander	said,	‘build	a	house.	But	before	you	are	done,	before	you	set	that	last
stone,	walk	into	it.’	He	paused	and	looked	round,	then	grunted	a	laugh.	‘You
won’t	have	any	choice;	you	will	be	building	the	thing	from	the	inside	out.’
‘But	then	who	will	finish	it?’
Nimander	looked	away.	He	was	trapped	here,	possibly	for	ever.	If	he	did	as
Gothos	did,	if	he	remained	inside	the	house	to	await	its	completion,	he	might
find	a	way	out.	He	might	walk	those	hidden	pathways.	And	in	so	doing,	he
would	doom	this	creature	to	eternity	here.	This	child,	this	mason.
And	that	I	cannot	do.	I	am	not	like	Gothos.	I	am	not	that	cruel.
He	heard	laughter	in	his	head.	Phaed,	shrieking	with	laughter.	Then	she
said,	‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.	Take	the	way	out.	Leave	this	fool	to	his	building	blocks!
He’s	pathetic!’
‘I	will	set	the	last	stone,’	Nimander	said.	‘Just	make	sure	it’s	small	enough
for	me	to	lift	and	push	into	place.’	And	he	looked	up,	and	he	saw	that	the	giant
was	smiling,	and	no,	it	no	longer	looked	like	a	child,	and	in	its	eyes	something
shone	and	its	light	flowed	down,	bathed	Nimander.
‘I	am	different,’	the	Elder	said	in	a	deep,	warm	voice,	‘when	I	build.’
	
‘Get	him	out,’	Desra	said.
‘I	cannot.’
‘Why?’
The	Jaghut	blinked	like	a	lizard.	‘I	don’t	know	how.	The	gate	is	Omtose
Phellack,	but	the	realm	beyond	is	something	else,	something	I	want	nothing	to
do	with.’
‘But	you	made	this	gate	–	and	gates	open	from	both	sides.’
‘I	doubt	he	could	ever	find	it,’	the	Jaghut	said.	‘Even	assuming	anyone	lets
him	get	close.’
‘Anyone?	Who’s	in	there	with	him?’
‘A	few	million	miserable	wretches.’
Desra	glared	at	Skintick.	‘How	could	you	let	this	happen?’
He	was	weeping	and	could	only	shake	his	head.


‘Do	not	blame	this	one,’	the	Jaghut	said.	‘Do	not	blame	anyone.	Accidents
happen.’
‘You	drugged	us,’	Skintick	suddenly	accused	him,	his	voice	harsh	with
grief.
‘Alas,	I	did.	And	I	had	my	reasons	for	doing	so…which	seem	to	have
failed.	Therefore	I	must	be	more…direct,	and	oh	how	I	dislike	being	direct.
When	next	you	see	Anomander,	tell	him	this	from	me:	he	chose	wisely.	Each
time,	he	chose	wisely.	Tell	him,	then,	that	of	all	whom	I	ever	met,	there	is	but
one	who	has	earned	my	respect,	and	he	is	that	one.’
A	sudden	sob	from	Skintick.
Desra	felt	strangely	shaken	by	the	Jaghut’s	words.
‘And,’	the	Jaghut	then	added,	‘for	you.	Do	not	trust	Kallor.’
Feeling	helpless,	useless,	she	stepped	closer	to	the	wall	of	ice,	squinted	into
its	dark	depths.
‘Careful,	woman.	That	blood	pulls	hard	on	you	Tiste.’
And	yes,	she	could	feel	that,	but	it	was	nothing	to	trust,	nothing	to	even	pay
attention	to	–	it	was	the	lie	she	had	always	known,	the	lie	of	something	better
just	ahead,	of	all	the	questions	answered,	just	ahead.	Another	step,	one	more.
One	more.	Time’s	dialogue	with	the	living,	and	time	was	a	deceitful	creature,	a
liar.	Time	promised	everything	and	delivered	nothing.
She	stared	into	the	darkness,	and	thought	she	saw	movement,	deep,	deep
within.
	
‘No	Jaghut	is	to	be	trusted,’	Kallor	said,	glaring	at	the	lowering	sun.
‘Especially	not	Gothos.’
Aranatha	studied	the	ancient	warrior	with	an	unwavering	gaze,	and	though
he	would	not	meet	her	sister ’s	eyes,	it	was	clear	to	Kedeviss	that	Kallor	felt
himself	under	siege.	A	woman’s	attention,	devastating	barrage	of	inexorable
calculation	–	even	a	warrior	flinched	back.
But	these	were	momentary	distractions,	she	knew.	Something	had
happened.	Desra	had	rushed	into	the	ruin	and	not	returned.	Nenanda	stood
fidgeting,	eyes	on	the	crumbled	edifice.
‘Some	gods	are	born	to	suffer,’	Kallor	said.	‘You’d	be	better	off	heading
straight	to	Coral.	Unleash	Anomander	Rake	against	that	Dying	God,	if	getting
this	Clip	back	is	so	important	to	you.	At	the	very	least	you’ll	have	your
vengeance.’
‘And	is	vengeance	so	important?’	Kedeviss	asked.
‘Often	it’s	all	there	is,’	Kallor	replied,	still	squinting	westward.


‘Is	that	why	they’re	after	you?’
He	turned,	studied	her.	‘And	who	would	be	after	me?’
‘Someone.	That	much	seems	obvious.	Am	I	wrong?’
Aranatha	spoke	from	the	wagon,	‘You	are	not,	sister.	But	then,	he	has
always	been	hunted.	You	can	see	it	in	his	eyes.’
‘Be	glad	that	you	remain	marginally	useful	to	me,’	Kallor	said,	turning
away	once	more.
Kedeviss	saw	Nenanda	glaring	at	the	warrior ’s	back.
	
How	much	time	had	passed?	Days,	perhaps	weeks.	Nimander	stood,	watching
the	mason	build	his	tower.	Shaping	stone	with	fists,	with	round	hammerstones
found	somewhere,	with	leather-wrapped	wooden	mallets	to	edge	the	pumice
facing	he	had	decided	to	add	to	‘lighten	the	walls’.
To	accommodate	the	giant,	the	tower	needed	to	be	huge,	four	storeys	or
more	to	the	ceiling.	‘Made	with	the	blood	of	dragons,	the	glass	of	what	flowed,
the	pumice	of	what	foamed	with	dying	breaths.	A	tower,	yes,	but	also	a
monument,	a	grave	marker.	What	will	come	of	this?	I	know	not.	You	were	clever,
Nimander,	with	this	idea.	Too	clever	to	stay	here.	You	must	leave,	when	the
tower	vanishes,	you	must	be	within	it.	I	will	stay.’
They	repeated	that	argument	again	and	again,	and	each	time	Nimander
prevailed,	not	through	brilliant	reasoning,	not	through	appealing	to	the	Elder ’s
selfish	desires	(because	it	turned	out	he	didn’t	have	any),	but	only	through	his
refusal	to	surrender.
He	had	nothing	awaiting	him,	after	all.	Nenanda	could	lead	the	others
through	–	he	was	finding	his	own	kind	of	wisdom,	his	restraint,	and	with
Skintick	and	Kedeviss	to	guide	him,	he	would	do	well.	Until	such	time	as	they
reached	Coral.
Nimander	had	lost	too	many	battles	–	he	could	see	that	in	himself.	Could
feel	every	scar,	still	fresh,	still	wounding.	This	place	would	give	him	time	to
heal,	if	such	a	thing	were	possible.	How	long?	Why	not	eternity?
A	chorus	of	wails	surrounded	them,	an	army	of	spirits	grovelling	in	the
ash	and	dust	at	the	base	of	the	volcanic	cone.	Bemoaning	the	end	of	the	world	–
as	if	this	world	suited	them	just	fine,	when	clearly	it	didn’t,	when	each	one
dreamed	of	reclaiming	flesh	and	bone,	blood	and	breath.	They	sought	to	assail
the	slope	but	somehow	failed	again	and	again.
Nimander	helped	when	he	could,	carrying	tools	here	and	there,	but	mostly
he	sat	in	the	soft	dust,	seeing	nothing,	hearing	only	the	cries	from	beyond	the
tower ’s	growing	wall,	feeling	neither	thirst	nor	hunger,	slowly	emptying	of


desire,	ambition,	everything	that	might	once	have	mattered.
Around	him	the	darkness	deepened,	until	the	only	light	came	from	some
preternatural	glow	from	the	pumice.	The	world	closing	in…
Until—
‘One	stone	remains.	This	stone.	The	base	of	this	low	window,	Nimander,
within	your	reach.	I	will	help	you	climb	outside	–	then	push	the	stone	through,
like	this	–	but	tell	me,	please,	why	can	we	not	both	leave	here?	I	am	within	the
tower.	So	are	you.	If	I	set	the	stone—’
‘Elder,’	cut	in	Nimander.	‘You	are	almost	done	here.	Where	is	Gothos?’
A	look	of	surprise.	‘I	don’t	know.’
‘He	does	not	dare	this	realm,	I	think.’
‘Perhaps	that	is	true.’
‘I	don’t	even	know	if	this	will	work	–	if	it	will	create	for	you	a	way	out.’
‘I	understand,	Nimander.	Remain	inside	with	me.	Let	me	set	this	stone.’
‘I	don’t	know	where	this	tower	will	take	you,’	Nimander	replied.	‘Back	to
your	realm,	wherever	that	is,	perhaps	–	but	not	my	home.	Nothing	I	know.
Besides,	you	carved	this	to	be	pushed	into	place	from	outside	–	the	angles—’
‘I	can	reshape	it,	Nimander.’
I	cannot	go	with	you.	‘In	finding	out	where	you	are,	Elder,	I	become	lost.
You	are	the	mason,	the	maker	of	the	houses.	It	is	your	task.	You	do	not	belong
here.’
‘Nor	do	you.’
‘Don’t	I?	There	are	Tiste	Andii	spirits	out	there.	And	Tiste	Edur.	Even
Liosan.	The	ones	who	fell	in	the	first	wars,	when	dragons	burst	through	every
gate	to	slay,	to	die.	Listen	to	them	out	there!	They	have	made	peace	with	one
another	–	a	miracle,	and	one	I	would	be	happy	to	share.’
‘You	are	not	a	ghost.	They	will	take	you.	They	will	fight	over	you,	a
beginning	of	a	new	war,	Nimander.	They	will	tear	you	to	pieces.’
‘No,	I	will	reason	with	them—’
‘You	cannot.’
Despair	stirred	awake	in	Nimander,	as	he	saw	the	truth	of	the	Elder ’s
words.	Even	here,	he	was	not	welcome.	Even	here	he	would	bring	destruction.
Yet,	when	they	tear	me	limb	from	limb,	I	will	die.	I	will	become	just	like	them.	A
short	war.	‘Help	me	through	the	window,’	he	said,	pulling	himself	up	on	to	the
rough	ledge.
‘As	you	wish.	I	understand,	Nimander.’
Yes,	perhaps	you	do.
‘Nimander.’
‘Yes?’


‘Thank	you.	For	this	gift	of	creation.’
‘Next	time	you	meet	Gothos,’	Nimander	said	as	his	friend	pushed	him
through	the	portal,	‘punch	him	in	the	face	for	me,	will	you?’
‘Yes,	another	good	idea.	I	will	miss	you.	You	and	your	good	ideas.’
He	fell	through	on	to	a	thick	powdery	slope,	hastily	reaching	up	to	grip	the
window’s	edge	to	keep	from	sliding.	Behind	and	below	voices	cried	out	in
sudden	hunger.	He	could	feel	their	will	churning	up	to	engulf	him.
A	heavy	scrape	from	the	window	and	out	came	the	final	stone,	end	first,
grinding	as	it	was	forced	through.	Catching	Nimander	by	surprise.	The	weight
pushed	against	his	fingers	where	he	held	tight	and	he	swore	in	pain	as	the	tips
were	crushed,	pinned	–	tearing	one	hand	free	left	nails	behind,	droplets	of
blood	spattering.	He	scrabbled	for	another	handhold,	then,	voicing	a	scream,
he	tore	loose	his	other	arm.
Gods,	how	was	he	going	to	manage	this?	With	two	mangled	hands,	with	no
firm	footing,	with	a	mob	surging	frantic	up	the	slope	behind	him?
Inexorable,	the	stone	ground	its	way	out.	He	brought	a	shoulder	beneath	it,
felt	the	massive	weight	settling.	His	arms	began	to	tremble.
Far	enough	now,	yes,	and	he	reached	with	one	hand,	began	pushing	to	one
side	the	nearest	end	of	the	blood-slick	chunk	of	obsidian.	He	could	see	the
clever	angles	now,	the	planes	and	how	everything	would	somehow,	seemingly
impossibly,	slide	into	perfect	position.	Push,	some	more	–	not	much	–	almost
in	place—
Thousands,	hundreds	of	thousands	–	a	storm	of	voices,	screams	of
desperation,	of	dismay,	of	terrible	horror	–	too	much!	Please,	stop!	Stop!
He	was	weakening	–	he	would	not	make	it	–	he	could	not	hold	on	any
longer	–	with	a	sob	he	released	his	grip	and	in	the	last	moment,	tottering,	he
pushed	with	both	hands,	setting	the	stone	–	and	then	he	was	falling,	back,	down,
swallowed	in	cascading	ash,	stones,	scouring	chunks	of	rough	pumice.	Down
the	slope	he	tumbled,	buried	beneath	ever	more	rubble.	Hot.	Suffocating.	Blind.
Drowning	–	and	one	flailing	hand	was	grasped,	hard,	by	one	and	then	two
hands	–	small	–	a	woman’s	hands.
His	shoulder	flared	in	pain	as	that	grip	tightened,	pulled	him	round.	The
collapsing	hillside	tugged	at	him,	eager	to	take	him	–	he	understood	its	need,
he	sympathized,	yes,	and	wanted	to	relent,	to	let	go,	to	vanish	in	the	crushing
darkness.
The	hands	dragged	him	free.	Dragged	him	by	one	bloody	arm.	The	storm
of	voices	raged	anew,	closer	now	and	closing	fast.	Cold	fingertips	scrabbled
against	his	boots,	nails	clawing	at	his	ankles	and	oh	he	didn’t	care,	let	them
take	him,	let	them—


He	tumbled	down	on	to	damp	earth.	Gloom,	silence	but	for	harsh	breaths,	a
surprised	grunt	from	nearby.
Rolling	on	to	his	back,	coughing	through	a	mouth	caked	in	ash.	Eyes
burning—
Desra	knelt	over	him,	her	head	down,	her	face	twisted	in	pain	as	she	held
her	arms	like	two	broken	wings	in	her	lap.	Skintick,	rushing	close	to	crouch
beside	him.
‘I	thought	–	she—’
‘How	long?’	Nimander	demanded.	‘How	could	you	have	waited	so	long?
Clip—’
‘What?	It’s	been	but	moments,	Nimander.	Desra	–	she	came	in,	she	saw	into
the	ice	–	saw	you—’
Fire	burned	his	fingers,	flicked	flames	up	his	hands	and	into	his	wrists,
sizzling	fierce	along	the	bones.	Fresh	blood	dripped	from	dust-caked	wounds
where	nails	had	been.	‘Desra,’	he	moaned.	‘Why?’
She	looked	up,	fixed	him	with	hard	eyes.	‘We’re	not	finished	with	you	yet,
Nimander,’	she	said	in	a	rasp.	‘Oh	no,	not	yet.’
‘You	damned	fool,’	Gothos	said.	‘I	was	saving	that	one	for	later.	And	now
he’s	free.’
Nimander	twisted	round.	‘You	cannot	just	collect	people!	Like	shiny
stones!’
‘Why	not?	My	point	is,	I	needed	that	one.	There	is	now	an	Azath	in	the
blood	of	dragons—’
‘The	spilled	blood	–	the	blood	of	dead	dragons—’
‘And	you	think	the	distinction	is	important?	Oh,	me	and	my	endless	folly!’
With	sharp	gestures	he	raised	his	hood	once	more,	then	turned	to	settle	down
on	a	stool,	facing	the	hearth,	his	position	a	perfect	match	to	the	moment
Nimander,	Skintick	and	Kallor	had	first	entered	this	place.	‘You	idiot,
Nimander.	Dragons	don’t	play	games.	Do	you	understand	me?	Dragons	play	no
games.	Ah,	I	despair,	or	I	would	if	I	cared	enough.	No,	instead,	I	will	make
some	ashcakes.	Which	I	will	not	share.’
‘It’s	time	to	leave,’	Skintick	said.
Yes,	that	much	was	obvious.

‘They’re	coming	now,’	Kallor	said.
Kedeviss	looked	but	could	not	see	any	movement	in	the	gloom	of	the
ruin’s	entrance.


‘It’s	too	late	to	travel	–	we’ll	have	to	camp	here.	Make	us	a	fine	meal,
Aranatha.	Nenanda,	build	a	fire.	A	house	of	sticks	to	set	aflame	–	that’ll	make
Gothos	wince,	I	hope.	Yes,	entice	him	out	here	tonight,	so	that	I	can	kill	him.’
‘You	can’t	kill	him,’	Aranatha	said,	straightening	in	the	wagon	bed.
‘Oh,	and	why	not?’
‘I	need	to	talk	to	him.’
Kedeviss	watched	her	kin	descend	from	the	wagon,	adjust	her	robes,	then
stride	towards	the	ruin	–	where	Skintick	had	appeared,	helping	Nimander,
whose	hands	were	dark	with	blood.	Behind	them,	Desra.
‘That	bitch	sister	of	yours	is	uncanny,’	Kallor	said	in	a	growl.
Kedeviss	saw	no	need	to	comment	on	that.
‘She	speaks	with	Gothos	–	why?	What	could	they	possibly	say	to	each
other?’
Shrugging,	Kedeviss	turned	away.	‘I	think	I	will	do	the	cooking	tonight,’
she	said.
	
Dying,	the	Captain	stared	across	at	the	giant	warrior	with	the	shattered	face.
Woven	carpets	beneath	each	of	them,	the	one	on	which	sat	the	Captain	now
sodden	with	blood	–	blood	that	seemed	to	flow	for	ever,	as	if	his	body	was	but
a	valve,	broken,	jammed	open,	and	out	it	came,	trickling	down	from	wounds
that	would	never	close.	He	was,	he	realized,	back	where	he	began.	Opulence
surrounded	him	this	time,	rather	than	grit	and	mud	and	dust	on	the	edge	of	a
dried	riverbed,	but	did	that	make	any	real	difference?	Clearly	it	didn’t.
Only	the	dying	could	laugh	at	that	truth.	There	were	many	things,	he	now
understood,	to	which	only	the	dying	could	respond	with	honest	mirth.	Like	this
nemesis	warrior	sitting	cross-legged,	hunched	and	glowering	opposite	him.
A	small	brazier	smouldered	between	them,	perched	on	three	legs.	On	the
coals	rested	a	squat	kettle,	and	the	spiced	wine	within	steamed	to	sweeten	the	air
of	the	chamber.
‘You	shall	have	to	knock	out	some	of	the	inner	walls,’	the	Captain	said.
‘Have	the	slaves	make	you	a	new	bed,	one	long	enough,	and	other	furniture
besides.’
‘You	are	not	listening,’	the	giant	said.	‘I	lose	my	temper	when	people	do
not	listen.’
‘You	are	my	heir—’
‘No.	I	am	not.	Slavery	is	an	abomination.	Slavery	is	what	people	who	hate
do	to	others.	They	hate	themselves.	They	hate	in	order	to	make	themselves
different,	better.	You.	You	told	yourself	you	had	the	right	to	own	other	people.


You	told	yourself	they	were	less	than	you,	and	you	thought	shackles	could
prove	it.’
‘I	loved	my	slaves.	I	took	care	of	them.’
‘There	is	plenty	of	room	for	guilt	in	the	heart	of	hate,’	the	warrior	replied.
‘This	is	my	gift—’
‘Everyone	seeks	to	give	me	gifts.	I	reject	them	all.	You	believe	yours	is
wondrous.	Generous.	You	are	nothing.	Your	empire	is	pathetic.	I	knew	village
dogs	who	were	greater	tyrants	than	you.’
‘Why	do	you	torment	me	with	such	words?	I	am	dying.	You	have	killed
me.	And	yet	I	do	not	despise	you	for	that.	No,	I	make	you	my	heir.	I	give	you
my	kingdom.	My	army	will	take	your	commands.	Everything	is	yours	now.’
‘I	don’t	want	it.’
‘If	you	do	not	take	it,	one	of	my	officers	will.’
‘This	kingdom	cannot	exist	without	the	slaves.	Your	army	will	become
nothing	more	than	one	more	band	of	raiders,	and	so	someone	will	hunt	them
down	and	destroy	them.	And	all	you	sought	to	build	will	be	forgotten.’
‘You	torment	me.’
‘I	tell	you	the	truth.	Let	your	officers	come	to	kill	me.	I	will	destroy	them
all.	And	I	will	scatter	your	army.	Blood	to	the	grass.’
The	Captain	stared	at	this	monster,	and	knew	he	could	do	nothing.	He	was
sinking	back	against	his	heap	of	pillows,	every	breath	shallower	than	the	last.
Swathed	in	robes	and	furs,	he	was	none	the	less	cold.	‘You	could	have	lied,’	he
whispered.
	
The	man’s	last	words.	Karsa	studied	the	dead	face	for	a	moment	longer.	Then
he	thumped	against	the	panel	door	to	his	left.
It	opened	a	crack.
‘Everyone	leave	this	carriage,’	Karsa	commanded.	‘Take	whatever	you
want	–	but	you	do	not	have	much	time.’
Then	he	settled	back	once	more.	Scanned	the	remnants	of	the	lavish	feast
he	had	devoured	–	while	the	Captain	had	simply	watched,	smug	as	a	rich	father
even	as	he	died.	But	Karsa	was	not	his	son.	Not	his	heir,	no	matter	what	the	fool
desired.	He	was	Toblakai.	A	Teblor,	and	far	to	the	north	waited	his	people.
Was	he	ready	for	them?
He	was.
Would	they	be	ready	for	him?	Probably	not.
A	long	walk	awaited	him	–	there	was	not	a	single	horse	in	this	paltry
kingdom	that	could	accommodate	him.	He	thought	back	to	his	youth,	to	those


bright	days	of	hard	drama,	crowded	with	omens,	when	every	blade	of	grass
was	saturated	with	significance	–	but	it	was	the	young	mind	that	fashioned	such
things.	Not	yet	bleached	by	the	sun,	not	yet	worn	down	by	the	wind.	Vistas	were
to	be	crossed.	Foes	were	to	be	vanquished	with	harsh	barks	of	fierce	triumph,
blood	spraying	in	the	air.
Once,	long	ago	it	seemed	now,	he	had	set	out	to	find	glory,	only	to
discover	that	it	was	nothing	like	what	he	had	imagined	it	to	be.	It	was	a	brutal
truth	that	his	companions	then	had	understood	so	much	better	than	he	had,
despite	his	being	War	Leader.	Nevertheless,	they	had	let	themselves	be	pulled
into	his	wake,	and	for	this	they	had	died.	The	power	of	Karsa’s	own	will	had
overwhelmed	them.	What	could	be	learned	from	that?
Followers	will	follow,	even	unto	their	own	deaths.	There	was	a	flaw	to
such	people	–	the	willingness	to	override	one’s	own	instinct	for	selfpreservation.	And	this	flaw	invited	exploitation,	perhaps	even	required	it.
Confusion	and	uncertainty	surrendered	to	simplicity,	so	comforting,	so	deadly.
Without	followers	this	Captain	would	have	achieved	nothing.	The	same	the
world	over.	Wars	would	disintegrate	into	the	chaos	of	raids,	skirmishes,
massacres	of	the	innocent,	the	vendetta	of	blood-feuds,	and	little	else.
Monuments	would	never	be	raised.	No	temples,	no	streets	and	roads,	no	cities.
No	ships,	no	bridges.	Every	patch	of	ploughed	land	would	shrink	to	what	a	few
could	manage.	Without	followers,	civilization	would	never	have	been	born.
He	would	tell	his	people	all	this.	He	would	make	them	not	his	followers,
but	his	companions.	And	together	they	would	bring	civilization	to	ruin,
whenever	and	wherever	they	found	it.	Because,	for	all	the	good	it	created,	its
sole	purpose	was	to	breed	followers	–	enough	to	heave	into	motion	forces	of
destruction,	spreading	a	tide	of	blood	at	the	whim	of	those	few	cynical	tyrants
born	to	lead.	Lead,	yes,	with	lies,	with	iron	words	–	duty,	honour,	patriotism,
freedom	–	that	fed	the	wilfully	stupid	with	grand	purpose,	with	reason	for
misery	and	delivering	misery	in	kind.
He	had	seen	the	enemy’s	face,	its	twin	masks	of	abject	self-sacrifice	and
cold-eyed	command.	He	had	seen	leaders	feed	on	the	flesh	of	the	bravely
fallen.	And	this	is	not	the	Teblor	way.	It	shall	not	be	my	way.
The	sounds	of	looting	from	the	rooms	around	him	were	gone	now.	Silence
on	all	sides.	Karsa	reached	down	and	used	a	hook	to	lift	the	kettle	from	the
coals	and	set	it	down	on	the	small	table	amidst	the	foodstuffs,	the	silver	plates
and	the	polished	goblets.
Then	he	kicked	the	brazier	over,	scattering	coals	on	to	the	beautifully
woven	carpets,	into	the	silks	and	woollen	blankets,	the	furs.	He	waited	to	see
flames	ignite.


When	the	first	ones	began,	Karsa	Orlong	rose	and,	hunched	over	to	clear
the	panel	door,	made	his	way	out.
	
Darkness	in	the	world	beyond	the	camp’s	cookfires.	A	mad	profusion	of	stars
overhead.	Arrayed	in	a	vast	semicircle	facing	the	enormous	carriage	was	the
kingdom	of	the	Captain.	Karsa	Orlong	stood	in	front	of	the	throne	on	the
balcony.
‘The	slaves	are	free,’	he	said	in	a	loud	voice	that	carried	to	everyone.	‘The
officers	will	divide	the	loot,	the	horses	and	all	the	rest	–	an	equal	share	for	all,
slaves	and	free,	soldier	and	crafter.	Cheat	anyone	and	I	will	kill	you.’
Behind	him	on	the	carriage,	flames	licked	out	from	the	countless	windows
and	vents.	Black	smoke	rose	in	a	thickening	column.	He	could	feel	the	heat
gusting	against	his	back.
‘Come	the	dawn,’	he	said,	‘everyone	will	leave.	Go	home.	Those	without	a
home	–	go	find	one.	And	know	that	the	time	I	give	you	now	is	all	that	you	will
ever	have.	For	when	next	you	see	me,	when	you	are	hiding	there	in	your	cities,
I	will	come	as	a	destroyer.	Five	years	or	twenty	–	it	is	what	you	have,	what	I
give	you.	Use	it	well.	All	of	you,	live	well.’
And	that	such	a	farewell	should	be	received,	not	as	a	benediction,	but	as	a
threat,	marked	well	how	these	people	understood	Karsa	Orlong	–	who	came
from	the	north,	immune	to	all	weapons.	Who	slew	the	Captain	without	even
touching	him.	Who	freed	the	slaves	and	scattered	the	knights	of	the	realm	with
not	a	single	clash	of	swords.
The	god	of	the	Broken	Face	came	among	them,	as	each	would	tell	others
for	the	years	left	to	them.	And,	so	telling,	with	eyes	wide	and	licking	dry	lips,
they	would	reach	in	haste	for	the	tankard	and	its	nectar	of	forgetfulness.
Some,	you	cannot	kill.	Some	are	deliverers	of	death	and	judgement.	Some,
in	wishing	you	a	full	life,	promise	you	death.	There	is	no	lie	in	that	promise,	for
does	not	death	come	to	us	all?	And	yet,	how	rare	the	one	to	say	so.	No	sweet
euphemism,	no	quaint	colloquialism.	No	metaphor,	no	analogy.	There	is	but	one
true	poet	in	the	world,	and	he	speaks	the	truth.
Flee,	my	friends,	but	there	is	nowhere	to	hide.	Nowhere	at	all.
See	your	fate,	there	in	his	Broken	Face.
See	it	well.
	
Horses	drawn	to	a	halt	on	a	low	hilltop,	grasses	whispering	unseen	on	all	sides.


‘I	once	led	armies,’	Traveller	said.	‘I	was	once	the	will	of	the	Emperor	of
Malaz.’
Samar	Dev	tasted	bitterness	and	leaned	to	one	side	and	spat.
The	man	beside	her	grunted,	as	if	acknowledging	the	gesture	as
commentary.	‘We	served	death,	of	course,	in	all	that	we	did.	For	all	our	claims
otherwise.	Imposing	peace,	ending	stupid	feuds	and	tribal	rivalries.	Opening
roads	to	merchants	without	fear	of	banditry.	Coin	flowed	like	blood	in	veins,
such	was	the	gift	of	those	roads	and	the	peace	we	enforced.	And	yet,	behind	it
all,	he	waited.’
‘All	hail	civilization,’	Samar	Dev	said.	‘Like	a	beacon	in	the	dark
wilderness.’
‘With	a	cold	smile,’	Traveller	continued,	as	if	not	hearing	her,	‘he	waits.
Where	all	the	roads	converge,	where	every	path	ends.	He	waits.’
A	dozen	heartbeats	passed,	with	nothing	more	said.
To	the	north	something	burned,	lancing	bright	orange	flames	into	the	sky,
lighting	the	bellies	of	churning	clouds	of	black	smoke.	Like	a	beacon…
‘What	burns?’	Traveller	wondered.
Samar	Dev	spat	again.	She	just	couldn’t	get	that	foul	taste	out	of	her	mouth.
‘Karsa	Orlong,’	she	replied.	‘Karsa	Orlong	burns,	Traveller.	Because	that	is
what	he	does.’
‘I	do	not	understand	you.’
‘It’s	a	pyre,’	she	said.	‘And	he	does	not	grieve.	The	Skathandi	are	no
more.’
‘When	you	speak	of	Karsa	Orlong,’	Traveller	said,	‘I	am	frightened.’
She	nodded	at	that	admission	–	a	response	he	probably	could	not	even	see.
The	man	beside	her	was	an	honest	one.	In	many	ways	as	honest	as	Karsa
Orlong.
And	on	the	morrow	these	two	would	meet.
Samar	Dev	well	understood	Traveller ’s	fear.


Chapter	Nine

The	bulls	ever	walk	alone	to	the	solitude
Of	their	selves
Swaggering	in	their	coats	of	sweaty	felt
Every	vein	swollen
Defiant	and	proud	in	their	beastly	need
Thunderous	in	step
Make	way	make	way	the	spurting	swords
Slay	damsel	hearts
Cloven	the	cut	gaping	wide	–	so	tender	an	attitude!
And	we	must	swoon
Before	red-rimmed	eyes	you’ll	find	no	guilt
In	the	self	so	proven
And	the	fiery	charge	of	most	fertile	seed
Sings	like	gods’	rain
Make	way	make	way	another	bold	word
The	dancer ’s	sure	to	misstep
In	the	rushing	drums	of	the	multitude
Dandies	of	the	Promenade
Seglora

Expectation	is	the	hoary	curse	of	humanity.	One	can	listen	to	words,	and	see
them	as	the	unfolding	of	a	petal	or,	indeed,	the	very	opposite:	each	word	bent
and	pushed	tighter,	smaller,	until	the	very	packet	of	meaning	vanishes	with	a
flip	of	deft	fingers.	Poets	and	tellers	of	tales	can	be	tugged	by	either	current,
into	the	riotous	conflagration	of	beauteous	language	or	the	pithy	reduction	of
the	tersely	colourless.
As	with	art,	so	too	with	life.	See	a	man	without	fingers	standing	at	the	back
of	his	house.	He	is	grainy	with	sleep	that	yields	no	rest,	no	relief	from	a
burdensome	world	(and	all	that),	and	his	eyes	are	strangely	blank	and	might	be


shuttered	too	as	he	stares	out	on	the	huddled	form	of	his	wife	as	she	works
some	oddity	in	her	vegetable	patch.
This	one	is	terse.	Existence	is	a	most	narrow	aperture	indeed.	His	failing	is
not	in	being	inarticulate	through	some	lack	of	intellect.	No,	this	mind	is	most
finely	honed.	But	he	views	his	paucity	of	words	–	in	both	thought	and	dialogue
–	as	a	virtue,	sigil	of	rigid	manhood.	He	has	made	brevity	an	obsession,	an
addiction,	and	in	his	endless	paring	down	he	strips	away	all	hope	of	emotion
and	with	it	empathy.	When	language	is	lifeless	what	does	it	serve?	When
meaning	is	rendered	down	what	veracity	holds	to	the	illusion	of	depth?
Bah!	to	such	conceits!	Such	anal	self-serving	affectation!	Wax	extravagant
and	let	the	world	swirl	thick	and	pungent	about	you!	Tell	the	tale	of	your	life	as
you	would	live	it!
A	delighted	waggle	of	fingers	now	might	signal	mocking	cruelty	when
you	are	observing	this	fingerless	man	who	stands	silent	and	expressionless	as
he	studies	his	woman.	Decide	as	you	will.	His	woman.	Yes,	the	notion	belongs
to	him,	artfully	whittled	from	his	world	view	(one	of	expectation	and	fury	at	its
perpetual	failure).	Possession	has	its	rules	and	she	must	behave	within	the
limits	those	rules	prescribe.	This	was,	to	Gaz,	self-evident,	a	detail	that	did	not
survive	his	own	manic	editing.
But	what	was	Thordy	doing	with	all	those	flat	stones?	With	that	peculiar
pattern	she	was	building	there	in	the	dark	loamy	soil?	One	could	plant	nothing
beneath	stone,	could	one?	No,	she	was	sacrificing	fertile	ground,	and	for	what?
He	didn’t	know.	And	he	knew	that	he	might	never	know.	As	an	activity,
however,	Thordy’s	diligent	pursuit	was	a	clear	transgression	of	the	rules,	and
he	might	have	to	do	something	about	that.	Soon.
Tonight	he	would	beat	a	man	to	death.	Exultation,	yes,	but	a	cold	kind.	Flies
buzzing	in	his	head,	the	sound	rising	like	a	wave,	filling	his	skull	with	a
hundred	thousand	icy	legs.	He	would	do	that,	yes,	and	this	meant	he	didn’t	have
to	beat	his	wife	–	not	yet,	anyway;	a	few	more	days,	maybe	a	week	or	so	–	he
would	have	to	see	how	things	went.
Keep	things	simple,	give	the	flies	not	much	to	land	on,	that	was	the	secret.
The	secret	to	staying	sane.
The	wedges	of	his	battered	fingerless	hands	burned	with	eager	fire.
But	he	wasn’t	thinking	much	of	anything	at	all,	was	he?	Nothing	to	reach
his	face,	his	eyes,	the	flat	line	of	his	mouth.	Sigil	of	manhood,	this	blank
façade,	and	when	a	man	has	nothing	else	at	least	he	could	have	that.	And	he
would	prove	it	to	himself	again	and	again.	Night	after	night.
Because	this	is	what	artists	did.


	
Thordy	was	thinking	of	many	things,	none	of	them	particularly	relevant	–	or
so	she	would	have	judged	if	pressed	to	examination,	although	of	course	there
was	no	one	who	might	voice	such	a	challenge,	which	was	just	as	well.	Here	in
her	garden	she	could	float,	as	aimless	as	a	leaf	blown	down	on	to	a	slow,	lazy
river.
She	was	thinking	about	freedom.	She	was	thinking	about	how	a	mind	could
turn	to	stone,	the	patterns	solid	and	immovable	in	the	face	of	seemingly
unbearable	pressures,	and	the	way	dust	trickled	down	faint	as	whispers,
unnoticed	by	any.	And	she	was	thinking	of	the	cool,	polished	surface	of	these
slate	slabs,	the	waxy	feel	of	them,	and	the	way	the	sun	reflected	soft,	milky
white	and	not	at	all	painful	to	rest	eyes	upon.	And	she	was	remembering	the
way	her	husband	talked	in	his	sleep,	a	pouring	forth	of	words	as	if	whatever
dam	held	them	back	in	his	wakefulness	was	kicked	down	and	out	gushed	tales
of	gods	and	promises,	invitations	and	bloodlust,	the	pain	of	maimed	hands	and
the	pain	of	maiming	that	those	hands	delivered.
And	she	noted	the	butterflies	dancing	above	the	row	of	greens	just	off	to
her	left,	almost	within	reach	if	she	stretched	out	a	dirt-stained	hand,	but	then
those	orange-winged	sprites	would	wing	away	though	she	posed	them	no
threat.	Because	life	was	uncertain	and	danger	waited	in	the	guise	of	peaceful
repose.
And	her	knees	ached	and	nowhere	in	her	thoughts	could	be	found
expectation	–	nowhere	could	be	found	such	hard-edged	proof	of	reality	as	the
framework	of	what	waited	somewhere	ahead.	No	hint	at	all,	even	as	she	laid
down	stone	after	stone.	It	was	all	outside,	you	see,	all	outside.
	
The	clerk	at	the	office	of	the	Guild	of	Blacksmiths	had	never	once	in	his	life
wielded	hammer	and	tongs.	What	he	did	wield	demanded	no	muscles,	no
weight	of	impetus	atop	oaken	legs,	no	sweat	streaming	down	to	sting	the	eyes,
no	gusts	of	scalding	heat	to	singe	the	hairs	on	the	forearms.	And	so,	in	the	face
of	a	true	blacksmith,	the	clerk	gloried	in	his	power.
That	pleasure	could	be	seen	in	his	small	pursed	lips	turned	well	down	at
each	end,	could	be	caught	in	his	watery	eyes	that	rested	everywhere	and
nowhere;	in	his	pale	hands	holding	a	wooden	stylus	like	an	assassin’s	dagger,
the	tip	stained	blue	by	ink	and	wax.	He	sat	on	his	stool	behind	the	broad	counter
that	divided	the	front	room	as	if	guarding	the	world’s	wealth	and	every
promise	of	paradise	that	membership	in	this	most	noble	Guild	offered	its


hallowed,	upright	members	(and	the	fat	man	winks).
So	he	sat,	and	so	Barathol	Mekhar	wanted	to	reach	over	the	counter,	pluck
the	clerk	into	the	air,	and	break	him	in	half.	Over	and	over	again,	until	little
more	than	a	pile	of	brittle	tailings	remained	heaped	on	the	scarred	counter,
with	the	stylus	thrust	into	it	like	a	warrior ’s	sword	stabbing	a	barrow.
Dark	was	the	amusement	in	Barathol’s	thoughts	as	the	clerk	shook	his	head
yet	again.
‘It	is	simple	–	even	for	you,	I’m	sure.	The	Guild	demands	credentials,
specifically	the	sponsorship	of	an	accredited	Guild	member.	Without	this,	your
coin	is	so	much	dross.’	And	he	smiled	at	this	clever	pun	voiced	to	a	smith.
‘I	am	new	to	Darujhistan,’	Barathol	said,	again,	‘and	so	such	sponsorship
is	impossible.’
‘Yes	it	is.’
‘As	for	apprenticeship—’
‘Also	impossible.	You	say	you	have	been	a	blacksmith	for	many	years	now
and	I	do	not	doubt	such	a	claim	–	the	evidence	is	plain	before	me.	This	of
course	makes	you	over-qualified	as	an	apprentice	and	too	old	besides.’
‘If	I	cannot	be	apprenticed	how	can	I	get	a	sponsor?’
A	smile	of	the	lips	and	shake	of	the	head.	A	holding	up	of	the	palms.	‘I
don’t	make	the	rules,	you	understand.’
‘Can	I	speak	to	anyone	who	might	have	been	involved	in	devising	these
rules?’
‘A	blacksmith?	No,	alas,	they	are	all	off	doing	smithy	things,	as	befits	their
profession.’
‘I	can	visit	one	at	his	or	her	place	of	work,	then.	Can	you	direct	me	to	the
nearest	one?’
‘Absolutely	not.	They	have	entrusted	me	with	the	responsibilities	of
operating	the	administration	of	the	Guild.	If	I	were	to	do	something	like	that	I
would	be	disciplined	for	dereliction	of	duty,	and	I	am	sure	you	do	not	want	that
on	your	conscience,	do	you?’
‘Actually,’	said	Barathol,	‘that	is	a	guilt	I	can	live	with.’
The	expression	hardened.	‘Honourable	character	is	an	essential
prerequisite	to	becoming	a	member	of	the	Guild.’
‘More	than	sponsorship?’
‘They	are	balanced	virtues,	sir.	Now,	I	am	very	busy	today—’
‘You	were	sleeping	when	I	stepped	in.’
‘It	may	have	appeared	that	way.’
‘It	appeared	that	way	because	it	was	that	way.’
‘I	have	no	time	to	argue	with	you	over	what	you	may	or	may	not	have


perceived	when	you	stepped	into	my	office—’
‘You	were	asleep.’
‘You	might	have	concluded	such	a	thing.’
‘I	did	conclude	it,	because	that	is	what	you	were.	I	suppose	that	too	might
result	in	disciplinary	measures,	once	it	becomes	known	to	the	members.’
‘Your	word	against	mine,	and	clearly	you	possess	an	agenda,	one	that
reflects	poorly	on	your	sense	of	honour—’
‘Since	when	does	honesty	reflect	poorly	on	one’s	sense	of	honour?’
The	clerk	blinked.	‘Why,	when	it	is	vindictive,	of	course.’
Now	it	was	Barathol’s	turn	to	pause.	And	attempt	a	new	tack.	‘I	can	pay	an
advance	on	my	dues	–	a	year ’s	worth	or	more,	if	necessary.’
‘Without	sponsorship	such	payment	would	be	construed	as	a	donation.
There	is	legal	precedent	to	back	that	interpretation.’
‘You’d	take	my	coin	and	give	me	nothing	in	return?’
‘That	is	the	essence	of	a	charitable	donation,	is	it	not?’
‘I	don’t	think	it	is,	but	never	mind	that.	What	you	are	telling	me	is	that	I
cannot	become	a	member	of	the	Guild	of	Blacksmiths.’
‘Membership	is	open	to	all	blacksmiths	wishing	to	work	in	the	city,	I
assure	you.	Once	you	have	been	sponsored.’
‘Which	makes	it	a	closed	shop.’
‘A	what?’
‘The	Malazan	Empire	encountered	closed	shops	in	Seven	Cities.	They
broke	them	wide	open.	I	think	even	some	blood	was	spilled.	The	Emperor	was
not	one	to	cringe	before	professional	monopolies	of	any	sort.’
‘Well,’	the	clerk	said,	licking	his	slivery	lips,	‘thank	all	the	gods	the
Malazans	never	conquered	Darujhistan!’
	
Barathol	stepped	outside	and	saw	Mallet	waiting	across	the	street,	eating	some
kind	of	flavoured	ice	in	a	broad-leaf	cone.	The	morning’s	heat	was	fast
melting	the	confection,	and	purple	water	was	trickling	down	the	healer ’s	pudgy
hand.	His	lips	were	similarly	stained.
Mallet’s	thin	brows	rose	as	the	blacksmith	approached.	‘Are	you	now	a
proud	if	somewhat	poorer	member	of	the	Guild?’
‘No.	They	refused	me.’
‘But	why?	Can	you	not	take	some	kind	of	exam—’
‘No.’
‘Oh…so	now	what,	Barathol?’
‘What?	Oh,	I’ll	open	up	a	smithy	anyway.	Independent.’


‘Are	you	mad?	They’ll	burn	you	out.	Smash	up	your	equipment.	Descend
on	you	in	a	mob	and	beat	you	to	death.	And	that’s	just	on	opening	day.’
Barathol	smiled.	He	liked	Malazans.	Despite	everything,	despite	the
countless	mistakes	the	Empire	had	made,	all	the	blood	spilled,	he	liked	the
bastards.	Hood	knew,	they	weren’t	nearly	as	fickle	as	the	natives	of	his
homeland.	Or,	he	added	wryly,	the	citizens	of	Darujhistan.	To	Mallet’s
predictions	he	said,	‘I’ve	handled	worse.	Don’t	worry	about	me.	I	plan	on
working	here	as	a	blacksmith,	whether	the	Guild	likes	it	or	not.	And	eventually
they	will	have	to	accept	me	as	a	member.’
‘That	won’t	feel	very	triumphant	if	you’re	dead.’
‘I	won’t	be.	Dead,	that	is.’
‘They’ll	try	to	stop	anyone	doing	business	with	you.’
‘I	am	very	familiar	with	Malazan	weapons	and	armour,	Mallet.	My	work
meets	military	standards	in	your	old	empire,	and	as	you	know,	those	are	set
high.’	He	glanced	across	at	the	healer.	‘Will	the	Guild	scare	you	off?	Your
friends?’
‘Of	course	not.	But	remember,	we’re	retired.’
‘And	being	hunted	by	assassins.’
‘Ah,	I’d	forgotten	about	that.	You	have	a	point.	Even	so,	Barathol,	I	doubt
us	few	Malazans	can	keep	you	in	business	for	very	long.’
‘The	new	embassy	has	a	company	of	guards.’
‘True.’
‘And	there	are	other	Malazans	living	here.	Deserters	from	the	campaigns
up	north—’
‘That’s	true,	too,	though	they	tend	to	hide	from	us	–	not	that	we	care.	In
fact,	we’d	rather	get	their	business	at	the	bar.	What’s	the	point	in	grudges?’
‘Those	that	come	to	me	will	be	told	just	that,	then,	and	so	we	can	help	each
other.’
Mallet	tossed	the	sodden	cone	away	and	wiped	his	hands	on	his	leggings.
‘They	tasted	better	when	I	was	a	young	brat	–	although	they	were	more
expensive	since	a	witch	was	needed	to	make	the	ice	in	the	first	place.	Here,	of
course,	it’s	to	do	with	some	of	the	gases	in	the	caverns	below.’
Barathol	thought	about	that	for	a	moment	as	he	looked	upon	the	healer
with	his	purple	lips	and	saw,	for	the	briefest	moment,	how	this	man	had	been
when	he	was	a	child,	and	then	he	smiled	once	more.	‘I	need	to	find	a	suitable
location	for	my	smithy.	Will	you	walk	with	me,	Mallet?’
‘Glad	to,’	the	healer	replied.	‘Now,	I	know	the	city	–	what	precisely	are	you
looking	for?’
And	so	Barathol	told	him.


And	oh	how	Mallet	laughed	and	off	they	went	into	the	city’s	dark	chambers
of	the	heart,	where	blood	flowed	in	a	roar	and	all	manner	of	deviousness	was
possible.	If	the	mind	was	so	inclined.	A	mind	such	as	Barathol	Mekhar ’s	when
down	–	down!	–	was	thrown	the	ghastly	gauntlet!
	
The	ox,	the	selfsame	ox,	swung	its	head	back	and	forth	as	it	pulled	the	cartload
of	masonry	into	the	arched	gateway,	into	blessed	shade	for	a	few	clumping
strides,	and	then	out	into	the	bright	heat	once	more	–	delicate	blond	lashes
fluttering	–	to	find	itself	in	a	courtyard	and	somewhere	close	was	sweet	cool
water,	the	sound	as	it	trickled	an	invitation,	the	smell	soft	as	a	kiss	upon	the
broad	glistening	nose	with	its	even	more	delicate	blond	hairs,	and	up	rose	the
beast’s	massive	head	and	would	not	the	man	with	the	switch	have	pity	on	this
weary,	thirsty	ox?
He	would	not.	The	cart	needed	unloading	first	and	so	the	ox	must	stand,
silently	yearning,	jaws	working	the	cud	of	breakfast	with	loud,	thick	sounds	of
suction	and	wetly	clunking	molars,	and	the	flies	were	maddening	but	what
could	be	done	about	flies?	Nothing	at	all,	not	until	the	chill	of	night	sent	them
away	and	so	left	the	ox	to	sleep,	upright	in	bovine	majesty	beneath	stars	(if	one
was	lucky)	which,	perhaps,	was	where	the	flies	slept.
Of	course,	to	know	the	mind	of	an	ox	is	to	waste	inordinate	amounts	of
time	before	recognizing	the	placid	civility	of	a	herbivore’s	sensibilities.	Lift
gaze,	then,	to	the	two	vaguely	shifty	characters	edging	in	through	the	gate	–	not
workers	struggling	to	and	fro	in	the	midst	of	the	old	estate’s	refurbishment;	not
clerks	nor	servants;	not	masons	nor	engineers	nor	inspectors	nor	weightgaugers	nor	measurers.	To	all	appearances	malingerers,	skulkers,	but	in	truth
even	worse	than	that—
Twelve	names	on	the	list.	One	happily	struck	off.	Eleven	others	found	and
then	escaped	like	the	slippery	eels	they	no	doubt	were,	being	hunted	by	debt,	ill
luck	and	the	vagaries	of	a	clearly	malicious	universe	intent	on	delivering
misery	and	whatnot.	But	no	matter	such	failure	among	the	thugs	sent	out	to
enforce	collection	or	deliver	punishment	–	not	the	problem	of	these	men,	now,
was	it?
Bereft	of	all	burdens,	blessed	with	exquisite	freedom,	Scorch	and	Leff
were	here,	in	this	soon-to-be-opulent	estate	that	was	even	now	rising	from	the
dust	of	neglect	and	decay	to	enshroud	like	a	cloak	of	jewels	the	mysterious
arrival	of	a	nobleborn	–	a	woman,	it	was	rumoured,	all	veiled,	but	see	the	eyes!
Eyes	of	such	beauty!	Why,	imagine	them	widening	as	I	reach	down—
Scorch	and	Leff,	edging	in	nervously,	barely	emerging	from	the	shadow


of	the	arched	gate.	Peering	round,	as	if	lost,	as	if	moments	from	running	off
with	stolen	chunks	of	masonry	or	an	armload	of	bricks	or	even	a	bag	of	iron
wedges—
‘Ho	–	you	two!	What	do	you	want	here?’
Starting	guiltily.	Scorch	staring	wide-eyed	at	the	grizzled	foreman	walking
up	to	them	–	a	Gadrobi	so	bowlegged	he	looked	to	be	wading	hip-deep
through	mud.	Leff	ducking	his	head	as	if	instinctively	dodging	an	axe	–	which
said	a	lot	about	his	life	thus	far,	didn’t	it	–	and	then	stepping	one	small	pace
forward	and	attempting	a	smile	that	fared	so	poorly	it	could	not	even	be
described	as	a	grimace.
‘Is	there	a	castellan	we	could	talk	to?’	Leff	asked.
‘About	what?’
‘Gate	guards,’	Leff	said.	‘We	got	lots	of	qualifications.’
‘Oh.	Any	of	them	relevant?’
‘What?’
Leff	looked	at	Scorch	and	saw	the	panic	spreading	like	a	wildfire	on	his
friend’s	face.	A	match	to	his	own	growing	dismay	–	madness,	thinking	they
could	just	step	up	another	rung	on	the	ladder.	Madness!	‘We…we	could	walk
her	dogs,	I	mean?’
‘You	could?	I	suppose	you	could,	if	the	Mistress	had	any.’
‘Does	she?’	Leff	asked.
‘Does	she	what?’
‘Have	any.	Dogs	we	could	walk.’
‘Not	even	ones	you	can’t	walk.’
‘We	can	guard	the	gate!’	Scorch	shouted.	‘That’s	what	we’re	here	for!	To
get	hired	on,	you	see,	as	estate	guards.	And	if	you	don’t	think	we	can	swing	a
sword	or	use	a	crossbow,	why,	you	don’t	know	us	at	all,	do	you?’
‘No,	you’re	right,’	the	foreman	replied.	‘I	don’t.’
Leff	scowled.	‘You	don’t	what?’
‘Stay	here,’	the	old	man	said,	turning	away,	‘while	I	get	Castellan
Studlock.’
As	the	foreman	waded	away	through	the	dust	–	watched	with	longing	by	the
ox	beside	the	rubble	heap	–	Leff	turned	on	Scorch.	‘Studlock?’
Scorch	shrugged	helplessly.	‘I	ain’t	never	heard	of	him.	Why,	have	you?’
‘No.	Of	course	not.	I’d	have	remembered.’
‘Why?’
‘Why?	Are	you	a	Hood-damned	idiot?’
‘What	are	we	doing	here,	Leff?’
‘Torvald	said	no,	remember?	To	everything.	He’s	too	good	for	us	now.	So


we’ll	show	him.	We’ll	get	hired	on	this	fancy	estate.	As	guards.	With	uniforms
and	polished	buckles	and	those	braided	peace-straps	for	our	swords.	And	so
he’ll	curse	himself	that	he	didn’t	want	us	no	more,	as	partners	or	anything.	It’s
his	wife,	I	bet	–	she	never	liked	us	at	all,	especially	you,	Scorch,	so	that’s	what
you’ve	done	to	us	and	I	won’t	forget	any	time	soon	neither	so	don’t	even	think
otherwise.’
He	shut	his	mouth	then	and	stood	at	attention	since	the	foreman	was
returning	and	at	his	side	pitter-pattered	a	figure	so	wrapped	up	in	swaddles	of
cotton	it	took	three	steps	for	every	pendulum	pitch	forward	from	the	foreman.
The	feet	beneath	the	ragged	hem	were	small	enough	to	be	cloven	hoofs.	A
hood	covered	the	castellan’s	head	and	in	the	shadow	of	the	hood’s	broad	mouth
there	was	something	that	might	have	been	a	mask.	Gloved	hands	were	drawn
up	in	a	way	that	reminded	Leff	–	and,	a	moment	later,	Scorch	–	of	a	praying
mantis,	and	if	this	was	the	estate	castellan	then	someone	had	knocked	the	world
askew	in	ways	unimaginable	to	either	Leff	or	Scorch.
The	foreman	said,	‘Here	they	are,	sir.’
Were	there	eyes	in	the	holes	of	that	smooth	mask?	Who	could	tell?	But	the
head	shifted	and	something	told	both	men	–	like	spider	legs	dancing	up	their
spines	–	that	they	were	under	scrutiny.
‘So	true,’	Castellan	Studlock	said	in	a	voice	that	made	Leff	think	of	gravel
under	the	fingernails	while	Scorch	thought	about	the	way	there	was	always	one
gull	that	bullied	all	the	rest	and	if	the	others	just	ganged	up,	why,	equality	and
freedom	would	belong	to	everyone!	‘So	true,’	said	the	swaddled,	masked	man
(or	woman,	but	then	the	foreman	had	said	‘sir ’,	hadn’t	he),	‘there	is	need	for
estate	guards.	The	Mistress	will	be	arriving	today,	in	fact,	from	the	out-country.
Proper	presentation	is	desired.’	The	castellan	paused	and	then	leaned	forward
from	the	waist	and	Leff	saw	the	red	glint	of	unhuman	eyes	in	the	holes	of	the
mask.	‘You,	what	is	your	name?’
‘Leff	Bahan,	sir,	is	my	name.’
‘You	have	been	eating	raw	lake	conch?’
‘What?	Er,	not	recently.’
A	wrapped	finger	darted	upward	and	wagged	slowly	back	and	forth.
‘Risky.	Please,	open	your	mouth	and	stick	out	your	tongue.’
‘What?	Er,	like	this?’
‘That	is	fine,	very	fine,	yes.	So.’	The	castellan	leaned	back.	‘Greva	worms.
You	are	infected.	Pustules	on	your	tongue.	Dripping	sinuses,	yes?	Itchy	eyelids
–	the	eggs	do	that,	and	when	they	hatch,	why,	the	worms	will	crawl	out	from
the	corners	of	your	eyes.	Raw	lake	conch,	tsk	tsk.’
Leff	clawed	at	his	face.	‘Gods,	I	need	a	healer!	I	gotta	go—’


‘No	need.	I	will	happily	see	your	ailment	treated	–	you	must	be	presentable
to	the	Mistress,	yes,	each	standing	at	attention	on	either	side	of	the	gate.	Well
attired,	hale	of	complexion	and	parasite-free.	A	small	barracks	is	being
readied.	It	will	be	necessary	to	hire	at	least	three	more	to	complete	the
requirements	–	do	you	have	reliable	friends	capable	of	such	work?’
‘Er,’	said	Scorch	when	it	was	obvious	that	Leff	had	momentarily	lost	his
facility	for	speech,	‘we	might.	I	could	go	and	see…’
‘Excellent,	and	your	name	is?’
‘Scorch.	Er,	we	got	references—’
‘No	need.	I	am	confident	in	my	ability	to	judge	character,	and	I	have
concluded	that	you	two,	while	not	to	be	considered	vast	of	intellect,	are
nevertheless	inclined	to	loyalty.	This	here	will	mark	an	advancement	in	your
careers,	I	am	sure,	and	so	you	will	be	diligent	as	befits	your	secret	suspicion
that	you	have	exceeded	your	competence.	All	this	is	well.	Also,	I	am	pleased	to
note	that	you	do	not	possess	any	parasites	of	a	debilitating,	unsightly	sort.	So,
Scorch,	go	yonder	and	find	us	one,	two	or	three	additional	guards.	In	the
meantime,	I	will	attend	to	Leff	Bahan.’
‘Right.	Yes	sir,	I	will	do	just	that!’
The	foreman	was	standing	nearby,	smirking.	Neither	Scorch	nor	a	stunned
Leff	noticed	this	detail,	and	yes,	they	should	have.
	
‘A	woman	needs	her	secrets,’	said	Tiserra,	lifting	up	an	eggshell-thin	porcelain
cup	and	holding	it	in	front	of	the	bright	sunlight.	‘This	one	is	good,	darling.
No	flaws.’	And	the	hag	in	the	stall	grinned,	head	bobbing.
Torvald	Nom	nodded	happily,	then	licked	his	lips.	‘Isn’t	this	fun?’	he	said.
‘Fine	crockery	to	go	into	our	new	kitchen	and	the	fancy	oven	on	its	four	legs
and	all.	Real	drapes.	Plush	furniture,	colourful	rugs.	We	can	get	the	storage
shed	rebuilt,	too.	Bigger,	solid—’
Tiserra	set	the	cup	down	and	moved	directly	in	front	of	him.	‘Husband.’
‘Yes?’
‘You’re	trying	too	hard.’
‘I	am?	Well,	it’s	like	a	dream,	you	see,	being	able	to	come	back	home.	Do
all	these	things	for	you,	for	us.	It	still	doesn’t	feel	real.’
‘Oh,	that’s	not	the	problem,’	she	said.	‘You	are	already	getting	bored,
Torvald	Nom.	You	need	more	than	just	tagging	along	at	my	side.	And	the	coin
won’t	last	for	ever	–	Beru	knows	I	don’t	make	enough	for	the	both	of	us.’
‘You’re	saying	I	need	to	get	a	job.’
‘I	will	tell	you	a	secret	–	just	one,	and	keep	in	mind	what	I	said	earlier:	we


women	have	many	secrets.	I’m	feeling	generous	today,	so	listen	well.	A	woman
is	well	pleased	with	a	mate.	He	is	her	island,	if	you	will,	solid,	secure.	But
sometimes	she	likes	to	swim	offshore,	out	a	way,	floating	facing	the	sun	if	you
will.	And	she	might	even	dive	from	sight,	down	to	collect	pretty	shells	and	the
like.	And	when	she’s	done,	why,	she’ll	swim	back	to	the	island.	The	point	is,
husband,	she	doesn’t	want	her	mate’s	company	when	swimming.	She	needs
only	to	know	the	island	waits	there.’
Torvald	blinked,	then	frowned.	‘You’re	telling	me	to	get	lost.’
‘Leave	me	my	traipsing	through	the	market,	darling.	No	doubt	you	have
manly	tasks	to	pursue,	perhaps	at	a	nearby	tavern.	I’ll	see	you	at	home	this
evening.’
‘If	that’s	how	you	want	it,	then	of	course	I	will	leave	you	to	it,	sweetness	–
and	yes,	I	could	do	with	a	wander.	A	man	has	secrets,	too!’
‘Indeed.’	And	she	smiled.	‘Provided	they’re	not	the	kind	that,	if	I	find	out,	I
will	have	to	hunt	you	down	and	kill	you.’
He	blanched.	‘No,	of	course	not!	Nothing	like	that!’
‘Good.	See	you	later,	then.’
And,	being	a	brave	man,	a	contented	man	(more	or	less),	Torvald	Nom
happily	fled	his	wife,	as	brave,	contented	men	are	wont	to	do	the	world	over.
Need	to	plough	that	field	behind	the	windbreak,	love.	Going	to	head	out	now
and	drop	the	nets.	Better	sand	down	that	tabletop.	Time	to	go	out	and	rob
somebody,	sweetness.	Yes,	men	did	as	they	did,	just	as	women	did	as	they	did	–
mysterious	and	inexplicable	as	those	doings	might	be.
And,	so	thinking,	it	was	not	long	before	Torvald	Nom	found	himself
walking	into	the	Phoenix	Inn.	A	man	looking	for	work	in	all	the	wrong	places.
Scorch	arrived	a	short	time	later,	pride	and	panic	warring	in	his	face,	and
my,	how	that	pride	blazed	as	he	strutted	up	to	where	Torvald	Nom	was	sitting.
	
Back	at	the	estate	Castellan	Studlock	brought	Leff	into	an	annexe	to	one	side	of
the	main	building,	where	after	some	rummaging	in	crates	stuffed	with	straw
the	muffled	figure	found	a	small	glass	bottle	and	presented	it	to	Leff.
‘Two	drops	into	each	eye.	Two	more	on	to	the	tongue.	Repeat	two	more
times	today	and	three	times	a	day	until	the	bottle	is	empty.’
‘That	will	kill	them	worms	in	my	head?’
‘The	Greva	worms,	yes.	I	cannot	vouch	for	any	others.’
‘I	got	more	worms	in	my	head?’
‘Who	can	say?	Do	your	thoughts	squirm?’
‘Sometimes!	Gods	below!’


‘Two	possibilities,’	Studlock	said.	‘Suspicion	worms	or	guilt	worms.’
Leff	scowled.	‘You	saying	it’s	worms	cause	those	things?	Guilt	and
suspicion?	I	ain’t	never	heard	anything	like	that.’
‘Are	you	sometimes	gnawed	with	doubt?	Do	notions	take	root	in	your
mind?	Do	strange	ideas	slither	into	your	head?	Are	you	unaccountably
frightened	at	the	sight	of	a	fisher ’s	barbed	hook?’
‘Are	you	some	kind	of	healer?’
‘I	am	what	one	needs	me	to	be.	Now,	let	us	find	you	a	uniform.’
	
Torvald	Nom	was	rehearsing	what	he	would	tell	his	wife.	Carefully	weighing
each	word,	trying	out	in	his	mind	the	necessary	nonchalance	required	to	deftly
avoid	certain	details	of	his	newfound	employment.
‘It’s	great	that	we’re	all	working	together	again,’	Scorch	said,	ambling
happily	at	his	side.	‘As	estate	guards,	no	less!	No	more	strong-arm	work	for
smelly	criminals.	No	more	hunting	down	losers	to	please	some	vicious
piranha.	No	more—’
‘Did	this	castellan	mention	the	wages?’
‘Huh?	No,	but	it’s	bound	to	be	good.	Must	be.	It’s	demanding	work—’
‘Scorch,	it	may	be	lots	of	things,	but	“demanding”	isn’t	one	of	them.	We’re
there	to	keep	thieves	out.	And	since	all	three	of	us	have	been	thieves	ourselves
at	one	time	or	another,	we	should	be	pretty	damned	good	at	it.	We’d	better	be,
or	we’ll	get	fired.’
‘We	need	two	more	people.	He	wanted	three	more	and	all	I	got	was	you.
So,	two	more.	Can	you	think	of	anybody?’
‘No.	What	family?’
‘What?’
‘This	Mistress	–	what	House	does	she	belong	to?’
‘Don’t	know.’
‘What’s	her	name?’
‘No	idea.’
‘She’s	from	the	countryside?’
‘Think	so.’
‘Well,	has	any	noble	died	recently	that	might	have	pulled	her	in?
Inheritance,	I	mean?’
‘How	should	I	know?	You	think	I	bother	keeping	track	of	who’s	dead	in
that	crowd?	They	ain’t	nothing	to	me,	is	my	point.’
‘We	should’ve	asked	Kruppe	–	he’d	know.’
‘Well	we	didn’t	and	it	don’t	matter	at	all.	We	got	us	legitimate	work,	the


three	of	us.	We’re	on	our	way	to	being,	well,	legitimate.	So	just	stop
questioning	everything,	Tor!	You’re	going	to	ruin	it!’
‘How	can	a	few	reasonable	questions	ruin	anything?’
‘It	just	makes	me	nervous,’	Scorch	replied.	‘Oh,	by	the	way,	you	can’t	see
the	castellan.’
‘Why?	Who	else	would	I	talk	to	about	getting	hired?’
‘No,	that’s	not	what	I	mean.	I	mean	you	can’t	see	him.	All	wrapped	up	in
rags.	With	a	hood,	and	gloves,	and	a	mask.	That’s	what	I	mean.	His	name	is
Studlock.’
‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
‘Why	not?	That’s	his	name.’
‘The	castellan	is	bundled	like	a	corpse	and	you	don’t	find	that	somewhat
unusual?’
‘Could	be	afraid	of	the	sun	or	something.	No	reason	to	be	suspicious.	You
never	met	any	strange	people	in	your	day,	Tor?’
And	Torvald	Nom	glanced	across	at	Scorch,	and	found	he	had	no	reply	to
that	at	all.
	
‘I	see	you	have	found	another	candidate,’	Studlock	said.	‘Excellent.	And	yes,	he
will	do	nicely.	Perhaps	as	the	Captain	of	the	House	Guard?’
Torvald	started.	‘I	haven’t	said	a	word	yet	and	already	I’m	promoted?’
‘Comparative	exercise	yields	confidence	in	this	assessment.	Your	name
is?’
‘Torvald	Nom.’
‘Of	House	Nom.	Might	this	not	prove	a	conflict	of	interest?’
‘Might	it?	Why?’
‘The	Mistress	is	about	to	assume	the	vacant	seat	on	the	Council.’
‘Oh.	Well,	I	have	virtually	no	standing	in	the	affairs	of	House	Nom.	There
are	scores	of	us	in	the	city,	of	course,	with	ties	stretching	everywhere,
including	off-continent.	I,	however,	am	not	involved	in	any	of	that.’
‘Were	you	cast	out?’
‘No,	nothing	so,	er,	extreme.	It	was	more	a	question	of…interests.’
‘You	lack	ambition.’
‘Precisely.’
‘That	is	a	fine	manicure,	Torvald	Nom.’
‘Er,	thank	you.	I	could	recommend…’	but	that	notion	dwindled	into	a
painful	silence	and	Torvald	tried	hard	not	to	glance	down	at	the	castellan’s
bandaged	fingers.


At	this	moment	Leff	appeared	from	round	the	other	side	of	the	main	house.
His	lips	and	his	eyes	were	bright	orange.
Scorch	grunted.	‘Hey,	Leff.	Remember	that	cat	you	sat	on	in	that	bar	once?’
‘What	of	it?’
‘Nothing.	Was	just	reminded,	the	way	its	eyes	went	all	bulgy	and	crazed.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
‘Nothing.	Was	just	reminded,	is	all.	Look,	I	brought	Tor.’
‘I	see	that,’	snarled	Leff.	‘I	can	see	just	fine,	thank	you.’
‘What’s	wrong	with	your	eyes?’	Torvald	Nom	asked.
‘Tincture,’	said	Leff.	‘I	got	me	a	case	of	Greva	worms.’
Torvald	Nom	frowned.	‘Humans	can’t	get	Greva	worms.	Fish	get	Greva
worms,	from	eating	infected	conch.’
Leff’s	bulging	orange	eyes	bulged	even	more.	Then	he	spun	to	face	the
castellan.
Who	shrugged	and	said,	‘Jurben	worms?’
Torvald	Nom	snorted.	‘The	ones	that	live	in	the	caverns	below?	In	pockets
of	green	gas?	They’re	as	long	as	a	man’s	leg	and	nearly	as	thick.’
The	castellan	sighed.	‘The	spectre	of	misdiagnosis	haunts	us	all.	I	do
apologize,	Leff.	Perhaps	your	ailments	are	due	to	some	other	malady.	No
matter,	the	drops	will	wash	out	in	a	month	or	two.’
‘I’m	gonna	have	squished	cat	eyes	for	another	month?’
‘Preferable	to	Greva	worms,	I	should	think.	Now,	gentlemen,	let	us	find	the
house	clothier.	Something	black	and	brocaded	in	gold	thread,	I	should	imagine.
House	colours	and	all	that.	And	then,	a	brief	summary	of	your	duties,	shifts,
days	off	and	the	like.’
‘Would	that	summary	include	wages?’	Torvald	Nom	asked.
‘Naturally.	As	captain	you	will	be	paid	twenty	silver	councils	per	week,
Torvald	Nom.	Scorch	and	Leff,	as	guards,	at	fifteen.	Acceptable?’
All	three	quickly	nodded.
	
He	felt	slightly	shaky	on	his	feet,	but	Murillio	knew	that	had	nothing	to	do	with
any	residue	of	weakness	left	by	his	wound.	This	weakness	belonged	to	his
spirit.	As	if	age	had	sprung	on	to	his	back	with	claws	digging	into	every	joint
and	now	hung	there,	growing	heavier	by	the	moment.	He	walked	hunched	at	the
shoulders	and	this	seemed	to	have	arrived	like	a	new	habit,	or	perhaps	it	was
always	there	and	only	now,	in	his	extremity,	had	he	become	aware	of	it.
That	drunken	pup’s	sword	thrust	had	pierced	something	vital	indeed,	and
no	Malazan	healer	or	any	other	kind	of	healer	could	mend	it.


He	tried	forcing	confidence	into	his	stride	as	he	made	his	way	down	the
crowded	street,	but	it	was	not	an	easy	task.	Half	drunk.	Breeches	at	my	ankles.
Worthwhile	excuses	for	what	happened	that	night.	The	widow	Sepharla	spitting
venom	once	she	sobered	up	enough	to	realize	what	had	happened,	and	spitting
it	still,	it	seems.	What	had	happened,	yes.	With	her	daughter.	Oh,	not	rape	–	too
much	triumph	in	the	girl’s	eyes	for	that,	though	her	face	glowed	with	delight	at
her	escort’s	charge	to	defend	her	honour.	Once	the	shock	wore	off.	I	should
never	have	gone	back	to	explain—
But	that	was	yesterday’s	nightmare,	all	those	sparks	raining	down	on	the
domestic	scene	with	its	airs	of	concern,	every	cagey	word	painting	over	the
cracks	in	savage,	short	jabs	of	the	brush.	What	had	he	expected?	What	had	he
gone	there	to	find?	Reassurance?
Maybe.	I	guess	I	arrived	with	my	own	brush.
Years	ago,	he	would	have	smoothed	everything	over,	almost	effortlessly.	A
murmur	here,	a	meeting	of	gazes	there.	Soft	touch	with	one	hand,	the	barest
hint	of	pressure.	Then	again,	years	ago,	it	would	never	have	happened	in	the
first	place.	That	drunken	fool!
Oh,	he’d	growled	those	three	words	often	in	his	head.	But	did	they	refer	to
the	young	man	with	the	sword,	or	to	himself?
Arriving	at	the	large	duelling	school,	he	made	his	way	through	the	open
gate	and	emerged	into	the	bright	sunlight	of	the	training	ground.	A	score	of
young,	sweating,	overweight	students	scraped	about	in	the	dust,	wooden
weapons	clattering.	Most,	he	saw	at	once,	lacked	the	necessary	aggression,	the
killer ’s	instinct.	They	danced	to	avoid,	prodding	the	stick	points	forward	with
lack	of	any	commitment.	Their	footwork,	he	saw,	was	abysmal.
The	class	instructor	was	standing	in	the	shade	of	a	column	in	the
colonnaded	corridor	just	beyond.	She	was	not	even	observing	the	mayhem	in
the	compound,	intent,	it	seemed,	on	some	loose	stitching	or	tear	in	one	of	her
leather	gauntlets.
Making	his	way	along	one	side	of	the	mob	getting	lost	in	clouds	of	white
dust,	Murillio	approached	the	instructor.	She	noted	him	briefly	then	returned
her	attention	to	the	gauntlet.
‘Excuse	me,’	Murillio	said	as	he	arrived.	‘Are	you	the	duelling	mistress?’
‘I	am.’	She	nodded	without	looking	at	the	students,	where	a	couple	of	fights
had	started	for	real.	‘How	am	I	doing	so	far?’
Murillio	glanced	over	and	studied	the	fracas	for	a	moment.	‘That	depends,’
he	said.
She	grunted.	‘Good	answer.	What	can	I	do	for	you?	Do	you	have	some
grandson	or	daughter	you	want	thrown	in	there?	Your	clothes	were


expensive…once.	As	it	looks,	I	doubt	you	can	afford	this	school,	unless	of
course	you’re	one	of	those	stinking	rich	who	make	a	point	of	dressing	all
threadbare.	Old	money	and	all	that.’
‘Quite	a	sales	pitch,’	Murillio	observed.	‘Does	it	actually	work?’
‘Classes	are	full.	There’s	a	waiting	list.’
‘I	was	wondering	if	you	need	help.	With	basic	instruction.’
‘What	school	trained	you	then?’
‘Carpala.’
She	snorted.	‘He	took	one	student	every	three	years.’
‘Yes.’
And	now	she	looked	at	him	with	an	intensity	he’d	not	seen	before.	‘Last	I
heard,	there	were	seven	students	of	his	left	in	the	city.’
‘Five,	actually.	Fedel	tumbled	down	a	flight	of	stairs	and	broke	his	neck.
He	was	drunk.	Santbala—’
‘Was	stabbed	through	the	heart	by	Gorlas	Vidikas	–	the	brat’s	first	serious
victory.’
Murillio	grimaced.	‘Not	much	of	a	duel.	Santbala	had	gone	mostly	blind
but	was	too	proud	to	admit	it.	A	cut	on	the	wrist	would	have	given	Gorlas	his
triumph.’
‘The	young	ones	prefer	killing	to	wounding.’
‘It’s	what	duelling	has	come	to,	yes.	Fortunately,	most	of	your	students
here	are	more	likely	to	stab	themselves	than	any	opponent	they	might	one	day
face,	and	such	wounds	are	rarely	fatal.’
‘Your	name?’
‘Murillio.’
She	nodded	as	if	she’d	already	guessed.	‘And	you’re	here	because	you
want	to	teach.	If	you’d	taken	up	teaching	when	Carpala	was	still	alive—’
‘He	would	have	hunted	me	down	and	killed	me,	yes.	He	despised	schools.
In	fact,	he	despised	duelling.	He	once	said	teaching	the	rapier	was	like	putting	a
poisonous	snake	into	a	child’s	hand.	He	drew	no	pleasure	from	instruction	and
was	not	at	all	surprised	when	very	nearly	every	one	of	his	prize	students	either
got	themselves	killed	or	wasted	away	as	drunkards	or	worse.’
‘You	did	neither.’
‘No,	that’s	true.	I	chased	women.’
‘Only	now	they’re	too	fast	for	you?’
‘Something	like	that.’
‘I	am	Stonny	Menackis.	This	school	exists	to	make	me	rich,	and	yes,	it’s
working.	Tell	me,	will	you	be	sharing	your	old	master ’s	hatred	of	teaching?’
‘Not	as	vehemently,	I	imagine.	I	don’t	expect	to	take	any	pleasure	in	it,	but	I


will	do	what’s	needed.’
‘Footwork.’
He	nodded.	‘Footwork.	The	art	of	running	away.	And	forms,	the	defensive
cage,	since	that	will	keep	them	alive.	Stop-hits	to	the	wrist,	knee,	foot.’
‘Non-lethal.’
‘Yes.’
She	sighed	and	straightened.	‘All	right.	Assuming	I	can	afford	you.’
‘I’m	sure	you	can.’
She	shot	him	a	quizzical	glance,	and	then	added,	‘Don’t	think	about	chasing
me,	by	the	way.’
‘I	am	finished	with	all	that,	or,	rather,	it’s	finished	with	me.’
‘Good—’
At	this	moment	they	both	noticed	that	a	woman	had	come	up	to	them.
Stonny’s	voice	was	suddenly…different,	as	she	said,	‘Myrla.	What	are	you
doing	here?’
‘I’ve	been	looking	for	Gruntle—’
‘That	fool	went	off	with	the	Trygalle	–	I	warned	him	and	now	he’s	going	to
get	himself	killed	for	no	good	reason!’
‘Oh.	It’s	Harllo,	you	see…’
‘What	about	him?’
The	woman	was	flinching	at	everything	Stonny	said	and	Murillio	suspected
he	would	have	done	the	same	in	the	face	of	such	a	tone.	‘He’s	gone	missing.’
‘What?	For	how	long?’
‘Snell	said	he	saw	him,	two	days	back.	Down	at	the	docks.	He’s	never	not
come	home	at	day’s	end	–	he’s	only	five—’
‘Two	days!’
Murillio	saw	that	Stonny’s	face	had	gone	white	as	death	and	a	sudden
terror	was	growing	in	her	eyes.	‘Two	days!’
‘Snell	says—’
‘You	stupid	woman	–	Snell	is	a	liar!	A	damned	thief!’
Myrla	stepped	back	under	the	onslaught.	‘He	gave	us	the	coin	you	brought
—’
‘After	I	nearly	had	to	strangle	him,	yes!	What’s	Snell	done	to	Harllo?
What’s	he	done?’
Myrla	was	weeping	now,	wringing	her	chapped	hands.	‘Said	he	done
nothing,	Stonny—’
‘A	moment,’	cut	in	Murillio,	physically	stepping	between	the	two	women
as	he	saw	Stonny	about	to	move	forward,	gloved	hand	lifting.	‘A	child’s	gone
missing?	I	can	put	out	the	word	–	I	know	all	sorts	of	people.	Please,	we	can	do


this	logically	–	down	at	the	docks,	you	said?	We’ll	need	to	find	out	which	ships
left	harbour	in	the	last	two	days	–	the	trading	season’s	only	just	starting,	so
there	shouldn’t	be	many.	His	name	is	Harllo,	and	he’s	five	years	old—’	Gods
below,	you	send	him	out	into	the	streets	and	he’s	only	five?	‘Can	you	give	me	a
description?	Hair,	eyes,	the	like.’
Myrla	was	nodding,	even	as	tears	streamed	down	her	lined	cheeks	and	her
entire	body	trembled.	She	nodded	and	kept	on	nodding.
Stonny	spun	round	and	rushed	away,	boots	echoing	harshly	down	the
corridor.
Murillio	stared	after	her	in	astonishment.	‘Where	–	what?’
‘It’s	her	son,	you	see,’	said	Myrla	between	sobs.	‘Her	only	son,	only	she
don’t	want	him	and	so	he’s	with	us	but	Snell,	he	has	bad	thoughts	and	does	bad
things	sometimes	only	not	this,	never	this	bad,	he	wouldn’t	do	anything	this
bad	to	Harllo,	he	wouldn’t!’
‘We’ll	find	him,’	said	Murillio.	One	way	or	the	other,	Lady’s	pull	bless	us,
and	bless	the	lad.	‘Now,	please,	describe	him	and	describe	him	well	–	what	he
normally	does	each	day	–	I	need	to	know	that,	too.	Everything	you	can	tell	me,
Myrla.	Everything.’
	
Snell	understood,	in	a	dim	but	accurate	way,	how	others,	wishing	only	the	best
in	him,	could	have	their	faith	abused	at	will,	and	even	should	some	truth	be
dragged	into	the	light,	well,	it	was	then	a	matter	of	displaying	crushed	self-pity,
and	the	great	defender	would	take	him	into	her	arms	–	as	mothers	do.
Can	we	hope	that	on	rare	occasions,	perhaps	late	at	night	when	the	terrors
crept	close,	he	would	think	about	how	things	he’d	done	could	damage	his
mother ’s	faith,	and	not	just	in	him,	but	in	herself	as	well?	The	son,	after	all,	is
but	an	extension	of	the	mother	–	at	least	so	the	mother	believed,	there	in	some
inarticulate	part	of	her	soul,	unseen	yet	solid	as	an	iron	chain.	Assail	the	child
and	so	too	the	mother	is	assailed,	for	what	is	challenged	is	her	life	as	a	mother,
the	lessons	she	taught	or	didn’t	teach,	the	things	she	chose	not	to	see,	to	explain
away,	to	pretend	were	otherwise	than	what	they	were.
Weep	for	the	mother.	Snell	won’t	and	he	never	would,	saving	all	his	future
to	weep	exclusively	for	himself.	The	creeping	terrors	awakened	startling
glimmers	of	thought,	of	near-empathy,	but	they	never	went	so	far	as	to	lead	to
any	self-recognition,	or	compassion	for	the	mother	who	loved	him
unconditionally.	His	nature	was	the	kind	that	took	whatever	was	given	to	him	as
if	it	was	a	birthright,	all	of	it,	for	ever	and	ever	more.
Rage	at	injustice	came	when	something	–	anything	–	was	withheld.	Things


he	righteously	deserved,	and	of	course	he	deserved	everything	he	wanted.	All
that	he	wanted	he	reached	for,	and	oh	such	fury	if	those	things	eluded	his	grasp
or	were	then	taken	away!
In	the	absence	of	what	might	be	imposed,	a	child	will	fashion	the	structure
of	the	world	to	suit	itself.	Created	from	a	mind	barely	awake	–	and	clearly	not
even	that	when	it	came	to	introspection	–	that	world	becomes	a	strange	place
indeed.	But	let	us	not	rail	at	the	failings	of	nearby	adults	tied	by	blood	or
whatever.	Some	children	are	born	in	a	cage	–	it’s	already	there,	in	their	skulls	–
and	it’s	a	dark	cage.
He	was	wandering	the	streets,	fleeing	all	the	cruel	questions	being	flung	at
him.	They	had	no	right	to	accuse	him	like	that.	Oh,	when	he	was	all	grown	up,
nobody	would	be	allowed	to	get	after	him	like	this.	He’d	break	their	faces.
He’d	step	on	their	heads.	He’d	make	them	afraid,	every	one	of	them,	so	he
could	go	on	doing	whatever	he	liked.	He	couldn’t	wait	to	get	older	and	that	was
the	truth.
And	yet,	he	found	himself	heading	for	Two-Ox	Gate.	He	needed	to	know,
after	all.	Was	Harllo	still	lying	there?	He	hadn’t	hit	him	so	hard,	had	he?
Enough	to	kill	him?	Only	if	Harllo	had	been	born	weak,	only	if	something	was
wrong	with	him	from	the	start.	And	that	wouldn’t	be	a	surprise,	would	it?
Harllo’s	own	mother	had	thrown	him	away,	after	all.	So,	if	Harllo	was	lying
dead	in	the	grasses	on	that	hilltop,	why,	it	wasn’t	Snell’s	fault,	was	it?
Something	would	have	killed	him	sooner	or	later.
So	that	was	a	relief,	but	he’d	better	go	and	find	out	for	sure.	What	if	Harllo
hadn’t	died	at	all?	What	if	he	was	out	there	somewhere,	planning	murder?	He
could	be	spying	on	Snell	right	now!	With	a	knife	he’d	found,	or	a	knotted	stick.
Quick,	cunning,	able	to	dart	out	of	sight	no	matter	how	fast	Snell	spun	round
on	the	street	–	he	was	out	there!	Waiting,	stalking.
Snell	needed	to	prove	things,	and	that	was	why	he	was	running	through
Maiten,	where	the	stink	of	Brownrun	Bay	and	the	lepers	was	nearly	enough	to
make	him	retch	–	and	hah!	Listen	to	them	scream	when	struck	by	the	bigger
stones	he	threw	at	them!	He	was	tempted	to	tarry	for	a	time,	to	find	one	of	the
uglier	ones	he	could	stone	again	and	again	until	the	cries	just	went	away,	and
wouldn’t	that	be	a	mercy?	Better	than	rotting	away.
But	no,	not	yet,	maybe	on	the	way	back,	after	he’d	stood	for	a	time,
looking	down	at	the	flyblown	corpse	of	Harllo	–	that	would	be	the	perfect
conclusion	to	this	day,	after	all.	His	problems	solved.	Nobody	hunting	him	in
the	shadows.	He’d	throw	stones	fast	and	hard	then,	a	human	catapult	–	smack!
Crush	the	flimsy	skull!
Maybe	he	wasn’t	grown	up	yet,	but	he	could	still	do	things.	He	could	take


lives.
He	left	the	road,	made	his	way	up	the	hill.	This	was	the	place	all	right	–
how	could	he	forget?	Every	detail	was	burned	into	his	brain.	The	first	giant
tapestry	in	the	history	of	Snell.	Slaying	his	evil	rival,	and	see	the	dragons
wheeling	in	the	sky	above	the	lake	–	witnesses!
The	slope	unaccountably	tired	him,	brought	a	tremble	to	his	legs.	Just
nervousness,	of	course.	His	shins	stung	as	he	rushed	through	the	grasses,	and
came	to	the	place.
No	body.
Sudden	terror.	Snell	looked	round,	on	all	sides	–	he	was	out	there!	Wasn’t
hurt	at	all!	He’d	probably	faked	the	whole	thing,	biting	down	on	his	pain	with
every	kick.	Hiding,	yes,	just	to	get	Snell	in	trouble	and	when	Gruntle	came
back	there’d	be	Hood	to	pay!	Gruntle	who	made	Harllo	his	favourite	because
Harllo	did	things	to	help	out	but	wasn’t	it	Snell	who	brought	back	that	last	sack
of	fuel?	It	was!	Of	course	Gruntle	wasn’t	there	to	see	that,	was	he?	So	he	didn’t
know	anything	because	if	he	did—
If	he	did	he’d	kill	me.
Cold,	shivering	in	the	lake	wind,	Snell	ran	back	down	the	hill.	He	needed	to
get	home,	maybe	not	right	home,	but	somewhere	close	–	so	he	could	jump
Harllo	when	he	showed	up	to	tell	his	lies	about	what	had	happened.	Lies	–	Snell
had	no	bag	of	coins,	did	he?	Harllo’s	mother ’s	coins,	hah,	wasn’t	that	funny?
She	was	rich	enough	anyway	and	Snell	deserved	that	money	as	much	as	anyone
else	–	he	reached	up	and	tenderly	touched	the	swelling	on	his	left	cheek.	The
bitch	had	hit	him,	all	to	steal	back	the	money.	Well,	she’d	pay	one	day,	yes,	she
would.
One	day,	yes,	he’d	be	all	grown	up.	And	then…look	out!
	
It	had	taken	the	death	of	a	once-famous	duellist	before	people	started	treating
Gorlas	Vidikas	as	an	adult,	but	now	he	was	a	man	indeed,	a	feared	one,	a
member	of	the	Council.	He	was	wealthy	but	not	yet	disgustingly	rich,	although
that	was	only	a	matter	of	time.
Fools	the	world	over	worshipped	gods	and	goddesses.	But	coin	was	the
only	thing	worth	worshipping,	because	to	worship	it	was	to	see	it	grow	–	more
and	ever	more	–	and	all	that	he	took	for	himself	he	took	from	someone	else
and	this	was	where	the	real	conquest	happened.	Day	by	day,	deal	by	deal,	and
winning	these	games	was	proof	of	true	faith	and	worship,	and	oh	how
deliciously	satisfying.
Fools	dropped	coins	into	collection	bowls.	The	rich	cleaned	those	bowls


out	and	this	was	the	true	division	of	humanity.	But	more	than	that:	the	rich
decided	how	many	coins	the	fools	had	to	spare	and	how	did	that	rate	as	power?
Which	side	was	preferable?	As	if	the	question	needed	asking.
Coin	purchased	power,	like	a	god	blessing	the	devout,	but	of	both	power
and	wealth	there	could	never	be	enough.	As	for	the	victims,	well,	there	could
never	be	enough	of	them	either.	Someone	was	needed	to	clean	the	streets	of	the
Estate	District.	Someone	was	needed	to	wash	clothes,	bedding	and	the	like.
Someone	was	needed	to	make	the	damned	things	in	the	first	place!	And
someone	was	needed	to	fight	the	wars	when	the	rich	decided	they	wanted	still
more	of	whatever	was	out	there.
Gorlas	Vidikas,	born	to	wealth	and	bred	to	title,	found	life	to	be	good.	But
it	could	be	better	still	and	the	steps	to	improvement	were	simple	enough.
‘Darling	wife,’	he	now	said	as	she	was	rising	to	leave,	‘I	must	take	a	trip
and	will	not	return	until	tomorrow	or	even	the	day	after.’
She	paused,	watching	in	a	distracted	way	as	the	servants	closed	in	to	collect
the	dishes	from	the	late	breakfast	–	calloused	hands	darting	in	like	featherless
birds	–	and	said,	‘Oh?’
‘Yes.	I	have	been	granted	the	overseer	title	of	an	operation	out	of	the	city,
and	I	must	visit	the	workings.	Thereafter,	I	must	take	ship	to	Gredfallan	Annexe
to	finalize	a	contract.’
‘Very	well,	husband.’
‘There	was	no	advance	notice	of	any	of	this,’	Gorlas	added,	‘and,	alas,	I
had	extended	invitations	to	both	Shardan	and	Hanut	to	dine	with	us	this
evening.’	He	paused	to	smile	at	her.	‘I	leave	them	in	your	capable	hands	–
please	do	extend	my	apologies.’
She	was	staring	down	at	him	in	a	somewhat	disconcerting	way.	‘You	wish
me	to	host	your	two	friends	tonight?’
‘Of	course.’
‘I	see.’
And	perhaps	she	did	at	that	–	yet	was	she	railing	at	him?	No.	And	was	there
perhaps	the	flush	of	excitement	on	her	cheeks	now?	But	she	was	turning	away
so	he	could	not	be	sure.	And	walking,	hips	swaying	in	that	admirable	way	of
hers,	right	out	of	the	room.
And	there,	what	was	done…was	done.
He	rose	and	gestured	to	his	manservant.	‘Make	ready	the	carriage,	I	am
leaving	immediately.’
Head	bobbing,	the	man	hurried	off.
Someone	was	needed	to	groom	the	horses,	to	check	the	tack,	to	keep	the
carriage	clean	and	the	brakes	in	working	order.	Someone	was	needed	to	ensure


he	had	all	he	required	in	the	travel	trunks.	And,	as	it	happened,	someone	was
needed	for	other	things	besides.	Like	spreading	the	legs	as	a	reward	for	past
favours,	and	as	a	future	debt	when	it	was	time	to	turn	everything	round.
They	could	take	his	wife.	He	would	take	them,	one	day	–	everything	they
owned,	everything	they	dreamed	of	owning.	After	tonight,	he	would	own	one
of	them	or	both	of	them	–	both	for	certain	in	the	weeks	to	come.	Which	one
would	produce	Gorlas’s	heir?	He	didn’t	care	–	Challice’s	getting	pregnant
would	get	his	parents	off	his	back	at	the	very	least,	and	might	well	add	the
reward	of	satisfying	her	–	and	so	wiping	that	faint	misery	from	her	face	and
bringing	an	end	to	all	those	irritating	sighs	and	longing	faraway	looks	out	of
the	windows.
Besides,	she	worshipped	money	too.	Hood	knew	she	spent	enough	of	it,	on
precious	trinkets	and	useless	indulgences.	Give	her	a	child	and	then	three	or
four	more	and	she’d	be	no	further	trouble	and	content	besides.
Sacrifices	needed	to	be	made.	So	make	it,	wife,	and	who	knows	you	might
even	be	smiling	when	it’s	done	with.
	
A	bell	and	a	half	later	the	Vidikas	carriage	was	finally	clearing	Two-Ox	Gate
and	the	horses	picked	up	their	pace	as	the	road	opened	out,	cutting	through	the
misery	of	Maiten	(and	where	else	should	the	lost	and	the	hopeless	go	but
outside	the	city	walls?)	which	Gorlas	suffered	with	closed	shutters	and	a	scent
ball	held	to	his	nose.
When	he	ruled	he’d	order	a	massive	pit	dug	out	on	the	Dwelling	Plain	and
they	would	drag	all	these	wasted	creatures	out	there	and	bury	the	lot	of	them.	It
was	simple	enough	–	can’t	pay	for	a	healer	and	that’s	just	too	bad,	but	look,	we
won’t	charge	for	the	burial.
Luxuriating	in	such	thoughts,	and	other	civic	improvements,	Gorlas	dozed
as	the	carriage	rumbled	onward.
	
Challice	stood	alone	in	her	private	chambers,	staring	at	the	hemisphere	of
glass	with	its	trapped	moon.	What	would	she	lose?	Her	reputation.	Or,	rather,
that	reputation	would	change.	Hanut	grinning,	Shardan	strutting	in	that
knowing	way	of	his,	making	sure	his	secret	oozed	from	every	pore	so	that	it
was	anything	but	a	secret.	Other	men	would	come	to	her,	expecting	pretty	much
the	same.	And	maybe,	by	then,	there	would	be	no	stopping	her.	And	maybe,
before	too	long,	she’d	find	one	man	who	decided	that	what	he	felt	was	love,


and	she	would	then	begin	to	unveil	her	plan	–	the	only	plan	she	had	and	it
certainly	made	sense.	Eminently	logical,	even	reasonable.	Justifiable.
Sometimes	the	beast	on	its	chain	turns	on	its	master.	Sometimes	it	goes	for
his	throat,	and	sometimes	it	gets	there.
But	it	would	take	time.	Neither	Shardan	Lim	nor	Hanut	Orr	would	do	–
both	needed	Gorlas	even	though	their	triumvirate	was	a	partnership	of
convenience.	Any	one	of	them	would	turn	on	the	other	if	the	situation	presented
itself	–	but	not	yet,	not	for	a	long	while,	she	suspected.
Could	she	do	this?
What	is	my	life?	Here,	look	around	–	what	is	it?	She	had	no	answer	to	that
question.	She	was	like	a	jeweller	blind	to	the	notion	of	value.	Shiny	or	dull,	it
didn’t	matter.	Rare	or	abundant,	the	only	difference	lay	in	desire	and	how	could
one	weigh	that,	when	the	need	behind	it	was	the	same?	The	same,	yes,	in	all	its
sordid	hunger.
She	could	reduce	all	her	needs	to	but	one.	She	could	do	that.	She	would
have	to,	to	stomach	what	was	to	come.
She	felt	cold,	could	see	the	purple	tracks	through	the	pallid	white	skin	of
her	arms	as	her	blood	flowed	turgidly	on.	She	needed	to	walk	in	sunlight,	to
feel	the	heat,	and	know	that	people	would	look	upon	her	as	she	passed	–	on	her
fine	cape	of	ermine	with	its	borders	of	black	silk	sewn	with	silvered	thread;	on
the	bracelets	on	her	wrists	and	down	at	her	ankles	–	too	much	jewellery	invited
the	thief’s	snatching	hand,	after	all,	and	was	crass	besides.	And	her	long	hair
would	glisten	with	its	scented	oils,	and	there	would	be	a	certain	look	in	her
eyes,	lazy,	satiated,	seductively	sealed	away	so	that	it	seemed	she	took	notice	of
nothing	and	no	one,	and	this	was,	she	well	knew,	a	most	enticing	look	in	what
were	still	beautiful	eyes—
She	found	herself	looking	into	them,	there	in	the	mirror,	still	clear	even
after	half	a	carafe	of	wine	at	breakfast	and	then	the	pipe	of	rustleaf	afterwards,
and	she	had	a	sudden	sense	that	the	next	time	she	stood	thus,	the	face	staring
back	at	her	would	belong	to	someone	else,	another	woman	wearing	her	skin,
her	face.	A	stranger	far	more	knowing,	far	wiser	in	the	world’s	dismal	ways
than	this	one	before	her	now.
Was	she	looking	forward	to	making	her	acquaintance?
It	was	possible.
The	day	beckoned	and	she	turned	away	–	before	she	saw	too	much	of	the
woman	she	was	leaving	behind	–	and	set	about	dressing	for	the	city.
	
‘So,	you’re	the	historian	who	survived	the	Chain	of	Dogs.’


The	old	man	sitting	at	the	table	looked	up	and	frowned.	‘Actually,	I	didn’t.’
‘Oh,’	said	Scillara,	settling	down	into	the	chair	opposite	him	–	her	body
felt	strange	today,	as	if	even	fat	could	be	weightless.	Granted,	she	wasn’t
getting	any	heavier,	but	her	bones	were	wearing	plenty	and	there	was	a	sense	of
fullness,	of	roundness,	and	for	some	reason	all	of	this	was	making	her	feel
sexually	charged,	very	nearly	brimming	over	with	a	slow,	sultry	indolence.
She	drew	out	her	pipe	and	eyed	the	Malazan	opposite.	‘Well,	I’m	sorry	to	hear
that.’
‘It’s	a	long	story,’	he	said.
‘Which	you’re	relating	to	that	ponytailed	bard.’
He	grunted.	‘So	much	for	privacy.’
‘Sounds	to	be	a	good	thing,	getting	it	all	out.	When	he	found	out	I	was	in
Sha’ik’s	camp	in	Raraku,	he	thought	to	cajole	details	out	of	me.	But	I	was
barely	conscious	most	of	that	time,	so	I	wasn’t	much	help.	I	told	him	about
Heboric,	though.’
And	Duiker	slowly	straightened,	a	sudden	glint	in	his	eyes	burning	away
all	the	sadness,	all	the	weariness.	‘Heboric?’
Scillara	smiled.	‘Fisher	said	you	might	be	interested	in	that.’
‘I	am.	Or,’	he	hesitated,	‘I	think	I	am.’
‘He	died,	I’m	afraid.	But	I	will	tell	you	of	it,	if	you’d	like.	From	the	night
we	fled	Sha’ik.’
The	light	had	dimmed	in	Duiker ’s	eyes	and	he	looked	away.	‘Hood	seems
determined	to	leave	me	the	last	one	standing.	All	my	friends…’
‘Old	friends,	maybe,’	she	said,	pulling	flame	into	the	bowl.	‘Plenty	of
room	for	new	ones.’
‘That’s	a	bitter	consolation.’
‘We	need	to	walk,	I	think.’
‘I’m	not	in	the	mood—’
‘But	I	am	and	Barathol	is	gone	and	your	partners	are	upstairs	chewing	on
conspiracies.	Chaur	is	in	the	kitchen	eating	everything	in	sight	and	Blend’s
fallen	in	love	with	me	and	sure,	that’s	amusing	and	even	enjoyable	for	a	time,
but	for	me	it’s	not	the	real	thing.	Only	she’s	not	listening.	Anyway,	I	want	an
escort	and	you’re	elected.’
‘Really,	Scillara—’
‘Being	old	doesn’t	mean	you	can	be	rude.	I	want	you	to	take	me	to	the
Phoenix	Inn.’
He	stared	at	her	for	a	long	moment.
She	drew	hard	on	her	pipe,	swelled	her	lungs	to	thrust	her	ample	breasts
out	and	saw	how	his	gaze	dropped	a	fraction	or	two.	‘I’m	looking	to	embarrass


a	friend,	you	see,’	she	said,	then	released	the	lungful	of	smoke	towards	the
black-stained	rafters.
‘Well,’	he	sourly	drawled,	‘in	that	case…’
	
‘Rallick’s	furious,’	Cutter	said	as	he	sat	down,	reaching	for	the	brick	of	cheese
to	break	off	a	sizeable	chunk	which	he	held	in	his	left	hand,	an	apple	in	his
right.	A	bite	from	the	apple	was	quickly	followed	by	one	from	the	cheese.
‘Kruppe	commiserates.	Tragedy	of	destiny,	when	destiny	is	that	which	one
chooses	given	what	one	is	given.	Dear	Cutter	might	have	retained	original
name	had	he	elected	a	life	in,	say,	Murillio’s	shadow.	Alas,	Cutter	in	name	is
cutter	in	deed.’
Cutter	swallowed	and	said,	‘Hold	on.	I	wasn’t	making	a	point	of	walking	in
Rallick’s	shadow.	Not	anybody’s	shadow	–	in	fact,	the	whole	idea	of	“shadow”
makes	me	sick.	If	one	god	out	there	has	truly	cursed	me,	it’s	Shadowthrone.’
‘Shifty	Shadowthrone,	he	of	the	sourceless	shade,	a	most	conniving,
dastardly	god	indeed!	Chill	is	his	shadow,	cruel	and	uncomfortable	is	his
throne,	horrid	his	Hounds,	tangled	his	Rope,	sweet	and	seductive	his	innocent
servants!	But!’	And	Kruppe	held	aloft	one	plump	finger.	‘Cutter	would	not
speak	of	walking	in	shadows,	why,	not	anyone’s!	Even	one	which	sways	most
swayingly,	that	cleaves	most	cleavingly,	that	flutters	in	fluttering	eyelashes
framing	depthless	dark	eyes	that	are	not	eyes	at	all,	but	pools	of	unfathomable
depth	–	and	is	she	sorry?	By	Apsalar	she	is	not!’
‘I	hate	you	sometimes,’	Cutter	said	in	a	grumble,	eyes	on	the	table,	cheese
and	apple	temporarily	forgotten	in	his	hands.
‘Poor	Cutter.	See	his	heart	carved	loose	from	yon	chest,	flopping	down
like	so	much	bloodied	meat	on	this	tabletop.	Kruppe	sighs	and	sighs	again	in
the	deep	of	sympathy	and	extends,	yes,	this	warm	cloak	of	companionship
against	the	cold	harsh	light	of	truth	this	day	and	on	every	other	day!	Now,
kindly	pour	us	more	of	this	herbal	concoction	which,	whilst	tasting	somewhat
reminiscent	of	the	straw	and	mud	used	to	make	bricks,	is	assured	by	Meese	to
aid	in	all	matters	of	digestion,	including	bad	news.’
Cutter	poured,	and	then	took	another	two	bites,	apple	and	cheese.	He
chewed	for	a	time,	then	scowled.	‘What	bad	news?’
‘That	which	is	yet	to	arrive,	of	course.	Will	honey	aid	this	digestive	aid?
Probably	not.	It	will,	one	suspects,	curdle	and	recoil.	Why	is	it,	Kruppe
wonders,	that	those	who	claim	all	healthy	amends	via	rank	brews,	gritty	grey
repasts	of	the	raw	and	unrefined,	and	unpalatable	potions,	and	this	amidst	a
regime	of	activities	invented	solely	to	erode	bone	and	wear	out	muscle	–	all


these	purveyors	of	the	pure	and	good	life	are	revealed	one	and	all	as	wan,
parched	well	nigh	bloodless,	with	vast	fists	bobbing	up	and	down	in	the	throat
and	watery	eyes	savage	in	righteous	smugitude,	walking	like	energized	storks
and	urinating	water	pure	enough	to	drink	all	over	again?	And	pass	if	you
please	to	dear	beatific	Kruppe,	then,	that	last	pastry	squatting	forlorn	and	alone
on	yon	pewter	plate.’
Cutter	blinked.	‘Sorry.	Pass	what?’
‘Pastry,	dear	lad!	Sweet	pleasures	to	confound	the	pious	worshippers	of
suffering!	How	many	lives	do	each	of	us	have,	Kruppe	wonders	rhetorically,	to
so	constrain	this	one	with	desultory	disciplines	so	efficacious	that	Hood
himself	must	bend	over	convulsed	in	laughter?	This	evening,	dear	friend	of
Kruppe,	you	and	I	will	walk	the	cemetery	and	wager	which	buried	bones
belong	to	the	healthy	ones	and	which	to	the	wild	cavorting	headlong	maniacs
who	danced	bright	with	smiles	each	and	every	day!’
‘The	healthy	bones	would	be	the	ones	left	by	old	people,	I’d	wager.’
‘No	doubt	no	doubt,	friend	Cutter,	a	most	stolid	truth.	Why,	Kruppe	daily
encounters	ancient	folk	and	delights	in	their	wide	smiles	and	cheery	wellmets.’
‘They’re	not	all	miserable,	Kruppe.’
‘True,	here	and	there	totters	a	wide-eyed	one,	wide-eyed	because	a	life	of
raucous	abandon	is	behind	one	and	the	fool	went	and	survived	it	all!	Now	what,
this	creature	wonders?	Why	am	I	not	dead?	And	you,	with	your	three	paltry
decades	of	pristine	boredom,	why	don’t	you	just	go	somewhere	and	die!’
‘Are	you	being	hounded	by	the	aged,	Kruppe?’
‘Worse.	Dear	Murillio	moans	crabby	and	toothless	and	now	ponders	a	life
of	inactivity.	Promise	Kruppe	this,	dear	Cutter	–	when	you	see	this	beaming
paragon	here	before	you	falter,	dribble	at	the	mouth,	mutter	at	the	clouds,
wheeze	and	fart	and	trickle	and	all	the	rest,	do	bundle	Kruppe	up	tight	in	some
thick	impervious	sack	of	burlap,	find	a	nearby	cliff	and	send	him	sailing	out!
Through	the	air!	Down	on	to	the	thrashing	seas	and	crashing	rocks	and	filmy
foams	–	Kruppe	implores	you!	And	listen,	whilst	you	do	so,	friend	Cutter,	sing
and	laugh,	spit	into	my	wake!	Do	you	so	promise?’
‘If	I’m	around,	Kruppe,	I’ll	do	precisely	as	you	ask.’
‘Kruppe	is	relieved,	so	relieved.	Aaii,	last	pastry	revolts	in	nether	gut	–
more	of	this	tea,	then,	to	yield	the	bitumen	belch	of	tasteless	misery	on	earth.
And	then,	shortly	anon,	it	will	be	time	for	lunch!	And	see	who	enters,	why,
none	other	than	Murillio,	newly	employed	and	flush	and	so	eager	with
generosity!’


	
Iskaral	Pust’s	love	was	pure	and	perfect,	except	that	his	wife	kept	getting	in	the
way.	When	he	leaned	left	she	leaned	right;	when	he	leaned	right	she	leaned	left.
When	he	stretched	his	neck	she	stretched	hers	and	all	he	could	see	was	the
mangled	net	of	her	tangled	hair	and	beneath	that	those	steely	black	eyes	too
knowing	for	her	own	good	and	for	his,	too,	come	to	that.
‘The	foolish	hag,’	he	muttered.	‘Can’t	she	see	I’m	leaning	this	way	and	that
and	bobbing	up	and	down	only	because	I	feel	like	it	and	not	because	the	High
Priestess	is	over	there	amply	presenting	her	deliciously	ample	backside	–
knowing	well,	yes	she	does,	how	I	squirm	and	drool,	pant	and	palpitate,	the
temptress,	the	wilful	vixen!	But	no!	Every	angle	and	this	horrid	nemesis	heaves
into	view,	damning	my	eyes!	Maybe	I	can	cleverly	send	her	off	on	an	errand,
now	there’s	an	idea.’	He	smiled	and	leaned	forward,	all	the	armour	of	his
charm	trembling	and	creaking	in	the	face	of	the	onslaught	of	her	baleful	stare.
‘Sweet	raisin	crumpet,	the	mule	needs	grooming	and	tender	care	in	the	temple
stables.’
‘Does	it	now?’
‘Yes.	And	since	you’re	clearly	not	busy	with	anything	at	the	moment,	you
could	instead	do	something	useful.’
‘But	I	am	doing	something	useful,	dearest	husband.’
‘Oh,	and	what’s	that,	tender	trollop?’
‘Why,	I	am	sacrificing	my	time	to	keep	you	from	making	a	bigger	fool	of
yourself	than	is	normal,	which	is	quite	a	challenge,	I	assure	you.’
‘What	stupidity	is	she	talking	about?	Love	oyster,	whatever	are	you	talking
about?’
‘She’s	made	her	concession	that	you	are	who	you	claim	to	be.	And	that’s
the	only	thing	keeping	her	from	tossing	us	both	out	on	our	scrawny	behinds.
You	and	me	and	the	mule	and	the	gibbering	bhokarala	–	assuming	she	can	ever
manage	to	get	them	out	of	the	cellar.	I’m	a	witch	of	the	spider	goddess	and	the
High	Priestess	back	there	is	not	at	all	happy	about	that.	So	I’m	telling	you,	O
rotted	apple	of	my	eye,	if	I	let	you	try	and	jump	her	we’re	all	done	for.’
‘She	talks	so	much	it’s	a	wonder	her	teeth	don’t	fall	out.	But	wait!	Most	of
them	already	have!	Shh,	don’t	laugh,	don’t	even	smile.	Am	I	smiling?	Maybe,
but	it’s	the	indulgent	kind,	the	kind	that	means	well	or	if	not	well	then	nothing
at	all	though	wives	the	world	over,	when	seeing	it,	go	into	apoplectic	rage	for
no	good	reason	at	all,	the	cute,	loveable	dearies.’	He	sighed	and	leaned	back,
trying	to	peer	under	her	right	armpit,	but	the	peripheral	vision	thing	turned	that
into	a	hairy	nightmare.	Flinching,	he	sighed	again	and	rubbed	at	his	eyes.	‘Go


on,	wife,	the	mule	is	pining	and	your	sweet	face	is	all	he	longs	for	–	to	kick!
Hee	hee!	Shh,	don’t	laugh!	Don’t	even	smile!’	He	looked	up.	‘Delicious
wrinkled	date,	why	not	take	a	walk,	out	into	the	sunshine	in	the	streets?	The
gutters,	more	like,	hah!	The	runnels	of	runny	sewage	–	take	a	bath!	Piss	up	one
of	those	lamp	posts	and	not	a	dog	in	Darujhistan	would	dare	the	challenge!
Hah!	But	this	smile	is	the	caring	kind,	yes,	see?’
The	High	Priestess	Sordiko	Qualm	cavorted	up	to	where	they	sat	–	this
woman	didn’t	walk,	she	went	as	much	sideways	as	forward,	a	snake	of
seduction,	an	enchantress	of	nonchalance;	gods,	a	man	could	die	just	watching!
Was	that	a	whimper	escaping	him?	Of	course	not,	more	likely	Mogora’s
armpit	coming	up	for	air	made	that	gasping,	squelching	sound.
‘I	would	be	most	pleased,’	the	High	Priestess	said	in	that	well-deep	voice
that	purred	like	every	temptation	imaginable	all	blended	into	one	steaming
stew	of	invitation,	‘if	you	two	indulged	in	mutual	suicide.’
‘I	could	fake	mine,’	Iskaral	Pust	whispered.	‘Then	she’d	be	out	of	our	way
–	I	know,	High	Priestess	of	all	my	fantasies,	I	can	see	how	you	wage	war
against	your	natural	desires,	your	blazing	hunger	to	get	your	hands	on	me!	Oh,
I	know	I’m	not	as	handsome	as	some	people,	but	I	have	power!’
Sighing,	Sordiko	Qualm	cavorted	away	–	but	no,	from	behind	it	was	more
a	saunter.	Approaching	was	a	cavort,	leaving	was	a	saunter.	‘Sordiko	Saunter
Qualm	Cavort,	she	comes	and	goes	but	never	quite	leaves,	my	love	of	loves,
my	better	love	than	that	excuse	for	love	I	once	thought	was	real	love	but	let’s
face	it	love	it	wasn’t,	not	like	this	love.	Why,	this	love	is	the	big	kind,	the
swollen	kind,	the	towering	kind,	the	rutting	gasping	pumping	exploding	kind!
Oh,	I	hurt	myself.’
Mogora	snorted.	‘You	wouldn’t	know	real	love	if	it	bit	you	in	the	face.’
‘Keep	that	armpit	away	from	me,	woman!’
‘You’ve	turned	this	temple	into	a	madhouse,	Iskaral	Pust.	You	turn	every
temple	you	live	in	into	a	madhouse!	So	here	we	are,	contemplating	mutual
murder,	and	what	does	your	god	want	from	us?	Why,	nothing!	Nothing	but
waiting,	always	waiting!	Bah,	I’m	going	shopping!’
‘At	last!’	Iskaral	crowed.
‘And	you’re	coming	with	me,	to	carry	my	purchases.’
‘Not	a	chance.	Use	the	mule.’
‘Stand	up	or	I’ll	have	my	way	with	you	right	here.’
‘In	the	holy	vestry?	Are	you	insane?’
‘Rutting	blasphemy.	Will	Shadowthrone	be	pleased?’
‘Fine!	Shopping,	then.	Only	no	leash	this	time.’
‘Then	don’t	get	lost.’


‘I	wasn’t	lost,	you	water	buffalo,	I	was	escaping.’
‘I’d	better	get	the	leash	again.’
‘And	I’ll	get	my	knife!’
Oh,	how	marriage	got	in	the	way	of	love!	The	bonds	of	mutual	contempt
drawn	tight	until	the	victims	squeal,	but	is	it	in	pain	or	pleasure?	Is	there	a
difference?	But	that	is	a	question	not	to	be	asked	of	married	folk,	oh	no.
And	in	the	stables	the	mule	winks	at	the	horse	and	the	horse	feels	breakfast
twisting	in	her	gut	and	the	flies,	well,	they	fly	from	one	lump	of	dung	to
another,	convinced	that	each	is	different	from	the	last,	fickle	creatures	that	they
are,	and	there	is	no	wisdom	among	the	fickle,	only	longing	and	frustration,
and	the	buzz	invites	the	next	dubious	conquest	smelling	so	fragrant	in	the	damp
straw.
Buzz	buzz.
	
Amidst	masses	of	granite	and	feverish	folds	of	bedrock	veined	with	glittering
streaks,	the	mining	operation	owned	by	Humble	Measure	was	an	enormous	pit
facing	a	cliff	gouged	with	caves	and	tunnels.	Situated	equidistant	between
Darujhistan	and	Gredfallan	Annexe	and	linked	by	solid	raised	roads,	the	mine
and	its	town-sized	settlement	had	a	population	of	eight	hundred.	Indentured
workers,	slaves,	prisoners,	work	chiefs,	security	guards,	cooks,	carpenters,
potters,	rope	makers,	clothes	makers	and	menders,	charcoal	makers,	cutters
and	nurses,	butchers	and	bakers	–	the	enterprise	seethed	with	activity.	Smoke
filled	the	air.	Old	women	with	bleeding	hands	clambered	through	the	heaps	of
tailings	collecting	shreds	of	slag	and	low-quality	chunks	of	coal.	Gulls	and
crows	danced	round	these	rag-clad,	hunched	figures.
Not	a	single	tree	was	left	standing	anywhere	within	half	a	league	of	the
mine.	Down	on	a	slope	on	the	lakeside	was	a	humped	cemetery	in	which	sat	a
few	hundred	shallow	graves.	The	water	just	offshore	was	lifeless	and	stained
red,	with	a	muddy	bottom	bright	orange	in	colour.
Scented	cloth	held	to	his	face,	Gorlas	Vidikas	observed	the	operation
which	he	now	managed,	although	perhaps	‘managed’	was	the	wrong	word.	The
day	to	day	necessities	were	the	responsibility	of	the	camp	workmaster,	a
scarred	and	pock-faced	man	in	his	fifties	with	decades-old	scraps	of	raw	metal
still	embedded	in	his	hands.	He	hacked	out	a	cough	after	every	ten	words	or	so,
and	spat	thick	yellow	mucus	down	between	his	bronze-capped	boots.
‘The	young	’uns	go	the	fastest,	of	course.’	Cough,	spit.	‘Our	moles	or	so
we	call	’em,	since	they	can	squeeze	inta	cracks	no	grown-up	can	get	through,’
cough,	spit,	‘and	this	way	if	there’s	bad	air	it’s	none	of	our	stronger	workers


get	killed.’	Cough…	‘We	was	havin’	trouble	gettin’	enough	young	’uns	for	a
time	there,	until	we	started	buyin’	’em	from	the	poorer	fam’lies	both	in	and
outa	the	city	–	they	got	too	many	runts	t’feed,	ye	see?	An’	we	got	special	rules
for	the	young	’uns	–	nobody	gets	their	hands	on	’em,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.
‘From	them	it	goes	on	up.	A	miner	lasts	maybe	five	years,	barring	falls
and	the	like.	When	they	get	too	sick	we	move	’em	outa	the	tunnels,	make	’em
shift	captains.	A	few	might	get	old	enough	for	foreman	–	I	was	one	of	them,	ye
see.	Got	my	hands	dirty	as	a	lad	and	’ere	I	am	and	if	that’s	not	freedom	I	don’t
know	what	is,	hey?’
This	workmaster,	Gorlas	Vidikas	silently	predicted,	would	be	dead	inside
three	years.	‘Any	trouble	with	the	prisoners?’	he	asked.
‘Nah,	most	don’t	live	long	enough	to	cause	trouble.	We	make	’em	work	the
deadlier	veins.	It’s	the	arsenic	what	kills	’em,	mostly	–	we’re	pullin’	gold	out
too,	you	know.	Profit’s	gone	up	three	thousand	per	cent	in	the	past	year.	E’en
my	share	I’m	looking	at	maybe	buying	a	small	estate.’
Gorlas	glanced	across	at	this	odious	creature.	‘You	married?’
Cough,	spit.	‘Not	yet,’	and	he	grinned,	‘but	you	know	what	a	rich	man	can
buy,	hey?’
‘As	part	of	what	I	am	sure	will	be	an	exceptional	relationship,’	Gorlas	said,
where	I	profit	from	your	work,	‘I	am	prepared	to	finance	you	on	such	an	estate.
A	modest	down	payment	on	your	part,	at	low	interest…’
‘Really?	Why,	noble	sir,	that	would	be	fine.	Yessy,	very	fine.	We	can	do	that
all	right.’
And	when	you	kick	off	with	no	heirs	I	acquire	yet	another	property	in	the
Estate	District.	‘It	is	my	pleasure,’	he	said	with	a	smile.	‘Those	of	us	who	have
done	well	in	our	lives	need	to	help	each	other	whenever	we	can.’
‘My	thoughts	too,	’bout	all	that.	My	thoughts	exactly.’
Smoke	and	stenches,	voices	ringing	through	dust,	oxen	lowing	as	they
strained	with	overloaded	wagons.	Gorlas	Vidikas	and	the	dying	workmaster
looked	down	on	the	scene,	feeling	very	pleased	with	themselves.
	
Harllo	squirmed	his	way	out	from	the	fissure,	the	hand	holding	the	candle
stretched	out	in	front	of	him,	and	felt	a	calloused	grip	wrap	round	his	narrow
wrist.	The	candle	was	taken	and	then	Bainisk	was	pulling	Harllo	out,
surprisingly	tender	but	that	was	Bainisk,	a	wise	veteran	all	of	sixteen	years	old,
half	his	face	a	streak	of	shiny	scar	tissue	through	which	peered	the	glittering
blue	of	his	eyes	–	both	of	which	had	miraculously	escaped	damage.	He	was
grinning	now	as	he	helped	Harllo	on	to	his	feet.


‘Well,	Mole?’
‘Iron,	raw	and	cold	and	wide	across	as	three	of	my	hands	laid	flat.’
‘The	air?’
‘I’m	here,	aren’t	I?’
Laughing,	Bainisk	slapped	him	on	the	back.	‘You’ve	earned	the	afternoon.
Back	to	Chuffs	you	go.’
Harllo	frowned.	‘Please,	can’t	I	stay	on	here?’
‘Venaz	giving	you	more	trouble?’
‘Bullies	don’t	like	me,’	Harllo	said.
‘That’s	’cause	you’re	smart.	Now	listen,	I	warned	him	off	once	already	and
once	is	all	the	warning	I	give	and	he	knows	that	so	he	won’t	be	bothering	you.
We	need	our	moles	happy	and	in	one	piece.	It’s	a	camp	law.	I’m	in	charge	of
Chuffs,	right?’
Harllo	nodded.	‘Only	you	won’t	be	there,	will	you?	Not	this	afternoon.’
‘Venaz	is	in	the	kitchen	today.	It’ll	be	all	right.’
Nodding,	Harllo	collected	his	small	sack	of	gear,	which	was	a	little	heavier
than	usual,	and	set	out	for	upside.	He	liked	the	tunnels,	at	least	when	the	air
wasn’t	foul	and	burning	his	throat.	Surrounded	by	so	much	solid	stone	made
him	feel	safe,	protected,	and	he	loved	most	those	narrowest	of	cracks	that	only
he	could	get	through	–	or	the	few	others	like	him,	still	fit	with	no	broken	bones
and	still	small	enough.	He’d	only	cracked	one	finger	so	far	and	that	was	on	his
right	hand	which	he	used	to	hold	the	candle	and	not	much	else.	He	could	pull
himself	along	with	his	left,	his	half-naked	body	slick	with	sweat	despite	the
damp	stone	and	the	trickles	of	icy	water.
Exploring	places	no	one	had	ever	seen	before.	Or	dragging	the	thick
snaking	hoses	down	into	the	icy	pools	then	calling	out	for	the	men	on	the
pumps	to	get	started,	and	in	the	candle’s	fitful	flickering	light	he’d	watch	the
water	level	descend	and	see,	sometimes,	the	strange	growths	on	the	stone,	and
in	the	crevices	the	tiny	blind	fish	that	–	if	he	could	reach	–	he	slid	into	his
mouth	and	chewed	and	swallowed,	so	taking	something	of	this	underworld	into
himself,	and,	just	like	those	fish,	at	times	he	didn’t	even	need	his	eyes,	only	his
probing	fingers,	the	taste	and	smell	of	the	air	and	stone,	the	echoes	of	water
droplets	and	the	click-click	of	the	white	roaches	skittering	away.
Earlier	this	morning	he’d	been	sent	down	a	crevasse,	ropes	tied	to	his
ankles	as	he	was	lowered	like	a	dead	weight,	down,	down,	three	then	four	knots
of	rope,	before	his	outstretched	hands	found	warm,	dry	rock,	and	here,	so	far
below	ground,	the	air	was	hot	and	sulphurous	and	the	candle	when	he	lit	it
flared	in	a	crossflow	of	sweet	rich	air.
In	the	yellow	light	he	looked	round	and	saw,	sitting	up	against	a	wall	of	the


crevasse	not	three	paces	away,	a	corpse.	Desiccated,	the	face	collapsed	and	the
eye	sockets	shrunken	holes.	Both	legs	were	shattered,	clearly	from	a	fall,	the
shards	sticking	through	the	leathery	skin.
Furs	drawn	up	like	a	blanket;	and	within	reach	of	one	motionless,	skeletal
hand	was	a	rotted	bag	now	split	open,	revealing	two	antler	picks,	a	bone	punch
and	a	ground-stone	mallet.	A	miner,	Harllo	realized,	just	like	him.	A	miner	of
long,	long	ago.
Another	step	closer,	eyes	on	those	wonderful	tools	which	he’d	like	to	take,
and	the	corpse	spoke.
‘As	you	please,	cub.’
Harllo	lunged	backward.	His	heart	pounded	wild	in	the	cage	of	his	chest.
‘A	demon!’
‘Patron	of	miners,	perhaps.	Not	a	demon,	cub,	not	a	demon.’
The	candle	had	gone	out	with	Harllo’s	panicked	retreat.	The	corpse’s
voice,	sonorous,	with	a	rhythm	like	waves	on	a	sandy	beach,	echoed	out	from
the	pitch	black	darkness.
‘I	am	Dev’ad	Anan	Tol,	of	the	Irynthal	Clan	of	the	Imass,	who	once	lived
on	the	shores	of	the	Jhagra	Til	until	the	Tyrant	Raest	came	to	enslave	us.	Sent
us	down	into	the	rock,	where	we	all	died.	Yet	see,	I	did	not	die.	Alone	of	all	my
kin,	I	did	not	die.’
Harllo	shakily	fumbled	with	the	candle,	forcing	the	oiled	wick	into	the
spring	spark	tube.	Three	quick	hissing	pumps	of	the	sparker	and	flame	darted
up.
‘Nice	trick,	that.’
‘The	tube’s	got	blue	gas,	not	much	and	runs	out	fast	so	it	needs	refilling.
There’s	bladders	upside.	Why	didn’t	you	die?’
‘I	have	had	some	time	to	ponder	that	question,	cub.	I	have	reached	but	one
conclusion	that	explains	my	condition.	The	Ritual	of	Tellann.’
‘What	made	the	evil	T’lan	Imass!	I	heard	about	that	from	Uncle	Gruntle!
Undead	warriors	at	Black	Coral	–	Gruntle	saw	them	with	his	own	eyes!	And
they	kneeled	and	all	their	pain	was	taken	from	them	by	a	man	who	then	died
since	there	was	so	much	pain	he	took	from	them	and	so	they	built	a	barrow	and
it’s	still	there	and	Gruntle	said	he	wept	but	I	don’t	believe	that	because	Gruntle
is	big	and	the	best	warrior	in	the	whole	world	and	nothing	could	make	him
weep	nothing	at	all!’	And	Harllo	had	to	stop	then	so	that	he	could	regain	his
breath.	And	still	his	heart	hammered	like	hailstones	on	a	tin	roof.
From	the	Imass	named	Dev’ad	Anan	Tol,	silence.
‘You	still	there?’	Harllo	asked.
‘Cub.	Take	my	tools.	The	first	ever	made	and	by	my	own	hand.	I	was	an


inventor.	In	my	mind	ideas	bred	with	such	frenzy	that	I	lived	in	a	fever.	At
times,	at	night,	I	went	half	mad.	So	many	thoughts,	so	many	notions	–	my	clan
feared	me.	The	Bonecaster	feared	me.	Raest	himself	feared	me,	and	so	he	had
me	thrown	down	here.	To	die.	And	my	ideas	with	me.’
‘Should	I	tell	everyone	about	you?	They	might	decide	to	lift	you	out,	so
you	can	see	the	world	again.’
‘The	world?	That	tiny	flame	you	hold	has	shown	me	more	of	the	world
than	I	can	comprehend.	The	sun…oh,	the	sun…that	would	destroy	me,	I	think.
To	see	it	again.’
‘We	have	metal	picks	now,’	Harllo	said.	‘Iron.’
‘Skystone.	Yes,	I	saw	much	of	it	in	the	tunnels.	The	Jaghut	used	sorcery	to
bring	it	forth	and	shape	it	–	we	were	not	permitted	to	witness	such	things.	But	I
thought,	even	then,	how	it	might	be	drawn	free,	without	magic.	With	heat.
Drawn	out,	given	shape,	made	into	useful	things.	Does	Raest	still	rule?’
‘Never	heard	of	any	Raest,’	said	Harllo.	‘Bainisk	rules	Chuffs	and
Workmaster	rules	the	mine	and	in	the	city	there’s	a	council	of	nobles	and	in
faraway	lands	there’re	kings	and	queens	and	emperors	and	empresses.’
‘And	T’lan	Imass	who	kneel.’
Harllo	glanced	up	the	shaft	–	he	could	hear	faint	voices,	echoing	down.
‘They	want	to	pull	me	back	up.	What	should	I	tell	them	about	this	place?’
‘The	wrong	rock,	the	white	grit	that	sickens	people.	Foul	air.’
‘So	no	one	else	comes	down	here.’
‘Yes.’
‘But	then	you’ll	be	alone	again.’
‘Yes.	Tell	them,	too,	that	a	ghost	haunts	this	place.	Show	them	the	ghost’s
magical	tools.’
‘I	will.	Listen,	could	be	I	might	sneak	back	down	here,	if	you	like.’
‘Cub,	that	would	be	most	welcome.’
‘Can	I	bring	you	anything?’
‘Yes.’
‘What?’
‘Splints.’
And	now	Harllo	was	making	his	way	back	to	daylight,	and	in	his	extraheavy	bag	there	clunked	the	tools	of	the	corpse.	Antler	and	bone	hardened	into
stone,	tines	jabbing	at	his	hip.
If	Venaz	found	out	about	them	he	might	take	them,	so	Harllo	knew	he	had
to	be	careful.	He	had	to	hide	them	somewhere.	Where	nobody	went	or	looked
or	picked	through	things.	Plenty	to	think	about,	he	had.
And	he	needed	to	find	something	called	‘splints’.	Whatever	they	were.


	
She	insisted	on	taking	his	arm	as	they	walked	towards	the	Phoenix	Inn,	down
from	the	Estate	District,	through	Third	Tier	Wall,	and	into	the	Daru	District.
‘So	many	people,’	she	was	saying.	‘This	is	by	far	the	biggest	city	I’ve	ever
been	in.	I	think	what	strikes	me	is	how	many	familiar	faces	I	see	–	not	people	I
actually	know,	just	people	who	look	like	people	I’ve	known.’
Duiker	thought	about	that,	and	then	nodded.	‘The	world	is	like	that,	aye.’
‘Is	it	now?	Why?’
‘I	have	no	idea,	Scillara.’
‘Is	this	all	the	wisdom	you	can	offer?’
‘I	even	struggled	with	that	one,’	he	replied.
‘All	right.	Let’s	try	something	else.	I	take	it	you	see	no	point	in	history.’
He	grunted.	‘If	by	that	you	mean	that	there	is	no	progress,	that	even	the
notion	of	progress	is	a	delusion,	and	that	history	is	nothing	more	than	a	host	of
lessons	nobody	wants	to	pay	attention	to,	then	yes,	there	is	no	point.	Not	in
writing	it	down,	not	in	teaching	it.’
‘Never	mind,	then.	You	choose.’
‘Choose	what?’
‘Something	to	talk	about.’
‘I	don’t	think	I	can	–	nothing	comes	to	mind,	Scillara.	Well,	I	suppose	I’d
like	to	know	about	Heboric.’
‘He	was	losing	his	mind.	We	were	trying	to	get	to	Otataral	Island,	where	he
wanted	to	give	something	back,	something	he	once	stole.	But	we	never	made	it.
Ambushed	by	T’lan	Imass.	They	were	going	after	him	and	the	rest	of	us	just
got	in	the	way.	Me,	Cutter,	Greyfrog.	Well,	they	also	stole	Felisin	Younger	–
that	seemed	to	be	part	of	the	plan,	too.’
‘Felisin	Younger.’
‘That’s	the	name	Sha’ik	gave	her.’
‘Do	you	know	why?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	liked	her,	though.’
‘Sha’ik?’
‘Felisin	Younger.	I	was	training	her	to	be	just	like	me,	so	it’s	no	wonder	I
liked	her.’	And	she	gave	him	a	wide	smile.
Duiker	answered	with	a	faint	one	of	his	own	–	hard	indeed	to	be	miserable
around	this	woman.	Better	if	he	avoided	her	company	in	the	future.	‘Why	the
Phoenix	Inn,	Scillara?’
‘As	I	said	earlier,	I	want	to	embarrass	someone.	Cutter,	in	fact.	I	had	to
listen	to	him	for	months	and	months,	about	how	wonderful	Darujhistan	is,	and


how	he	would	show	me	this	and	that.	Then	as	soon	as	we	arrive	he	ducks	away,
wanting	nothing	to	do	with	us.	Back	to	his	old	friends,	I	suppose.’
She	was	being	offhand,	but	Duiker	sensed	the	underlying	hurt.	Perhaps	she
and	Cutter	had	been	more	than	just	companions.	‘Instead,’	he	said,	‘you	found
us	Malazans.’
‘Oh,	we	could	have	done	much	worse.’
‘Barathol	had	kin,’	said	Duiker.	‘In	the	Bridgeburners.	An	assassin.	Seeing
your	friend	was	like	seeing	a	ghost.	For	Picker,	Antsy…Blend.	Bluepearl.	The
old	marines.’
‘One	of	those	familiar	faces	belonging	to	someone	you	don’t	know.’
He	smiled	again.	‘Yes.’	Oh,	yes,	Scillara,	you	are	clever	indeed.
‘And	before	you	know	it,	some	old	marine	healer	is	out	doing	whatever	he
can	to	help	Barathol	Mekhar.	Only	there’s	this	history	–	the	stuff	that	doesn’t
matter	–	with	our	blacksmith	friend.	Having	to	do	with	Aren	and	the—’
‘Red	Blades,	aye.’
She	shot	him	a	look.	‘You	knew?’
‘We	all	know.	The	poor	bastard.	Getting	such	a	raw	deal	in	his	own
homeland.	Things	like	that,	well,	we	can	sympathize	with,	because	we	have	our
histories.	The	kind	that	can’t	be	ignored	because	they’ve	put	us	right	where	we
are,	right	here,	a	continent	away	from	our	home.’
‘Progress?’
‘That	remains	to	be	seen.	And	here	we	are.	Phoenix	Inn.’
She	stood	studying	the	decrepit	sign	for	a	long	moment.	‘That’s	it?	It’s	a
dump.’
‘If	the	story	is	accurate,	Kalam	Mekhar	himself	went	in	there	once	or	twice.
So	did	Sorry,	who	later	took	the	name	of	Apsalar,	and	that	was	where	young
Crokus	met	her	–	who	is	now	known	as	Cutter,	right?	Putting	it	all	together
isn’t	easy.	Mallet	was	there	for	most	of	that.	In	there,’	he	added,	‘you	might
even	find	a	man	named	Kruppe.’
She	snorted.	‘Cutter	talked	about	him.	Some	oily	fence	and	ex-thief.’
‘Ambassador	at	large	during	the	Pannion	War.	The	man	who	stood	down
Caladan	Brood.	Single-handedly	confounding	most	of	the	great	leaders	on	the
continent.’
Her	eyes	had	widened	slightly.	‘Really?	All	that?	Cutter	never	mentioned
any	of	that.’
‘He	wouldn’t	have	known,	Scillara.	He	went	off	with	Fiddler,	Kalam	and
Apsalar.’
‘That’s	a	tale	I’m	slowly	putting	together	myself,’	she	said.	‘Apsalar.	The
woman	Cutter	loves.’


Ah.
‘Let’s	go,	then.’
And	they	set	out	across	the	street.
	
‘The	kid’s	been	snatched,	is	my	guess,’	Murillio	concluded,	settling	back	in	his
chair.	‘I	know,	Kruppe,	it’s	one	of	those	things	that	just	happens.	Tanners	grab
children,	trader	ships,	fishing	crews,	pimps	and	temples,	they	all	do	given	the
chance.	So	I	know,	there	may	not	be	much	hope—’
‘Nonsense,	Murillio	loyal	friend	of	Kruppe.	In	appealing	to	this	round	self
you	have	displayed	utmost	wisdom.	Moreover,	Kruppe	applauds	this	new
profession	of	yours.	Instructor	yes,	in	all	fine	points	of	fine	pointiness	–	the	art
of	duelling	is	writ	bold	in	blood,	yes?	Bold	too	is	this	Stonny	Menackis,	old
partner	to	none	other	than	Gruntle	of	the	Barbs,	and	was	there	not	a	third?	A
long-armed	man	who	did	not	return	from	Capustan?	And	was	his	name	not
Harllo?	Kruppe	must	plumb	deeper	depths	of	memory	to	be	certain	of	such
details,	yet	his	instinct	cries	out	true!	And	how	can	such	a	voice	be	denied?’
Cutter	rubbed	at	the	bristle	on	his	chin.	‘I	could	head	back	down	to	the	ship
I	came	in	on,	Murillio.	Talk	to	the	dock	waifs	and	the	old	women	under	the
piers.’
‘I’d	appreciate	that,	Cutter.’
‘Kruppe	suspects	a	whispery	warming	of	heart	in	dear	Murillio	for	his	new
employer	–	ah,	does	Kruppe	flinch	at	vehement	expostulation?	Does	he	wince
at	savage	denial?	Why,	the	answer	is	no	to	both!’
‘Leave	off	that,	Kruppe,’	Murillio	said.	‘The	lad’s	her	son.’
‘Left	in	the	care	of	others	–	is	she	so	cold	of	heart,	then?	Do	you	rise	to
extraordinary	challenge,	mayhap?	The	best	kind,	of	course,	ever	the	best	kind.’
‘There’s	a	story	there,’	Murillio	said.	‘Not	all	women	make	good	mothers,
true	enough.	But	she	doesn’t	seem	that	kind.	I	mean,	well,	she	struck	me	as
someone	with	fierce	loyalties.	Maybe.	Oh,	I	don’t	know.	It’d	be	nice	to	find	the
runt,	that’s	all.’
‘We	understand,	Murillio,’	Cutter	said.
‘Rely	upon	Kruppe,	dearest	friend.	All	truths	will	yield	themselves	in	the
fullness	of	revelatory	revelation,	anon.	But	wait,	fortuitous	reunion	of	another
sort	beckons,’	and	he	leaned	forward,	small	eyes	fixing	upon	Cutter.	Eyebrows
waggled.
‘You’re	scaring	me—’
‘Terror	shall	burgeon	imminently	for	poor	Cutter.’
‘What	are	you—’


A	hand	settled	on	his	shoulder,	soft,	plump.
Cutter	closed	his	eyes	and	said,	‘I’ve	got	to	stop	sitting	with	my	back	to	the
door.’
Murillio	rose,	suddenly	formal	as	he	bowed	to	someone	standing	behind
Cutter.	‘Historian.	We	have	met	once	or—’
‘I	recall,’	the	man	replied,	moving	round	into	Cutter ’s	sight	as	he	collected
two	chairs	from	a	nearby	table.	Thank	the	gods,	not	his	hand.
‘Please	do	thank	Mallet	again—’
‘I	will,’	the	historian	replied.	‘In	the	meantime,	I’m	not	the	one	who	should
be	doing	the	introductions.’	Those	weary,	ancient	eyes	fixed	on	Cutter.	‘You’re
Cutter,	yes?’
He	twisted	to	look	at	the	woman	standing	behind	his	chair.	Seated	as	he
was,	his	eyes	were	level	with	a	pair	of	breasts	covered	in	tight-fitting	linen.
And	he	knew	them	well.	It	was	a	struggle	to	lift	his	gaze	higher.	‘Scillara.’
‘You	call	that	an	introduction?’	she	asked,	dragging	up	the	other	chair	the
historian	had	pulled	close.	She	wedged	herself	in	on	Cutter ’s	right	and	sat
down.	‘I’ve	never	seen	bones	picked	so	clean	on	a	plate	before,’	she	observed,
her	eyes	on	the	leavings	of	lunch.
Kruppe	wheezed	upright.	He	began	waving	his	hands.	‘Kruppe	hastens	with
proper	welcome	to	this	grand	company	to	already	beloved	Scillara	of	the
Knowing	Eyes	and	other	assorted	accoutrements	of	charm	Kruppe	would
dearly	wish	to	knowingly	eye,	if	not	for	the	dastardly	demands	of	decorum.
Welcome,	cries	Kruppe,	even	as	he	slumps	back	–	oof!	–	exhausted	by	his
enthusiasm	and	dimpled	with	desire.’
Murillio	bowed	to	Scillara.	‘I	won’t	be	as	crass	as	dimpled	Kruppe.	I	am
Murillio,	an	old	friend	of	Cro—Cutter ’s.’
She	began	repacking	her	pipe	with	rustleaf.	‘Cutter	spoke	often	of	your
charm,	Murillio,	when	it	comes	to	women,’	and	she	paused	to	smile.
Murillio	sat	back	down	a	tad	hard	and	Cutter	saw,	wryly	amused,	that	he
looked	more	awake	now	than	he	had	in	days,	perhaps	since	the	stabbing.
Kruppe	was	fanning	his	flushed	face.	Then	he	raised	a	hand.	‘Sulty!	Sweet
creature,	the	finest	wine	in	the	house!	No,	wait!	Go	down	the	street	to	the
Peacock	and	buy	us	a	bottle	of	their	finest	wine!	The	finest	wine	in	their	house,
yes!	Is	something	wrong,	Meese?	Kruppe	meant	no	insult,	honest!	Sulty,	be	on
with	you,	child!	Meese,	why—’
‘No	more,’	cut	in	Murillio,	‘unless	you	want	to	pile	on	ever	more	insults	to
our	faithful	proprietor,	until	she	comes	over	here	and	kills	you	outright.’
‘Dire	misunderstanding!	Enthusiasm	and—’
‘Dimples,	we	know.’


Cutter	spoke	up,	‘Scillara	was	a	camp	follower	in	Sha’ik’s	rebel	city	in
Raraku.	Er,	not	a	follower	like	that,	I	mean—’
‘Yes	I	was,’	she	said.	‘Just	that.’	She	struck	sparks	to	the	bowl.	‘Plaything	to
soldiers.	In	particular,	Malazans.	Renegades	from	Korbolo	Dom’s	turncoat
army.	His	Dogslayers.	I	was	then	plucked	from	what	would	have	been	a	short,
benumbed	existence	by	a	Malazan	priest	with	no	hands,	who	dragged	me
across	half	of	Seven	Cities,	along	with	Cutter	here.’	She	sent	a	stream	of	smoke
upward,	then	continued.	‘Just	inland	of	the	Otataral	Sea,	we	got	jumped.	The
priest	was	cut	down.	Cutter	got	disembowelled	and	I	had	a	baby	–	no	real
connection	between	the	two,	by	the	way,	apart	from	bad	timing.	Some	villagers
found	us	and	saved	us	–	the	son	of	Osserc	showed	up	for	that	–	and	that’s	how
we	collected	Barathol	Mekhar	and	Chaur,	making	up	for	the	two	we’d	lost	in
the	ambush.
‘Now,	normally	I	don’t	tell	long-winded	tales	like	this	one,	but	what	I	gave
you	was	necessary	for	you	to	understand	a	few	important	things.	One:	I	left	the
baby	in	the	village,	with	no	regrets.	Two:	Cutter,	who	was	with	us	because	The
Rope	thought	Felisin	Younger	needed	protecting,	nearly	died	and	is	now	living
with	a	feeling	of	having	failed	at	his	task,	since	Felisin	was	taken	from	us.
Three:	Cutter	also	has	a	broken	heart,	and	no	matter	how	much	fun	we
eventually	had,	him	and	me,	it’s	clear	that	I	can’t	help	him	with	that.	And
finally,	four:	he’s	embarrassed	by	me	because	he	probably	thinks	I’m	too	fat
and	he	thinks	you’ll	all	be	thinking	the	same	thing,	too.’
All	three	men	facing	her	fervently	shook	their	heads	at	that,	while	Cutter
sat	head	in	hands.
Sulty	arrived	to	slam	down	a	thick-based	dusty	clay	bottle	and	two	more
goblets.	‘Three	councils,	Kruppe!’
Kruppe	set	three	silver	coins	into	her	hand	without	a	whimper.
After	a	long	moment,	the	historian	sighed,	reached	out	and	uncorked	the
bottle.	He	sniffed	the	mouth.	Brows	lifted.	‘Empty	the	rubbish	in	your	cups,
please.’
They	did	and	Duiker	poured.
‘Cutter,’	said	Murillio.
‘What?’
‘You	were	disembowelled?	Gods	below,	man!’
‘Kruppe	struggles	to	taste	the	wonder	of	this	wondrous	vintage,	so	gasted
of	flabber	is	he	at	said	horrendous	tale.	The	world	is	most	cruel,	yet	salvation
unfolds	at	the	last,	blessed	be	all	the	gods,	goddesses,	spirits,	marsupials	and
amphibians	and	indeed	all	the	rest.	Made	drunk	by	punches	is	poor	Kruppe,
rocked	this	way,	knocked	that,	buffeted	askew	in	every	direction	at	once	very


nearly	unto	exploding.	Beloved	Scillara,	you	tell	a	most	awkward	tale,	and	tell
it	badly.	Despite	this,	see	us	here,	each	one	reeling	at	said	poorly	told
revelations!’
‘Perhaps	excessive	in	my	efforts	at	summarizing,	I’ll	grant	you,’	Scillara
allowed.	‘But	I	thought:	best	to	push	through	the	uncomfortable	stage,	and	now
here	we	are,	relaxed	and	eager	to	quaff	down	this	fine	wine.	I	have	decided	I
like	the	Phoenix	Inn.’
Duiker	rose.	‘My	task	complete,	I	shall—’
‘Sit	back	down,	old	man,’	she	said.	‘If	I	have	to	slap	the	life	back	into	you	I
will.	Less	painful,	one	hopes,	partaking	of	our	company	this	day,	don’t	you
think?’
The	historian	slowly	sat	back	down.
Kruppe	gusted	out	a	sigh.	‘Pity	us	men	at	this	table,	we	are	outnumbered!’
‘I	take	it	Cutter ’s	told	nothing,’	Scillara	observed.	‘Not	even	how	we
almost	drowned	when	the	moon	broke	up	and	fell	out	of	the	sky.	Saved	by	a
dragon.’
‘I	will	indeed	stay,’	said	Duiker,	‘provided	you	back	up	and	tell	us	all	this
properly,	Scillara.’
‘As	you	like.’
‘From	the	moment	you	first	met	Heboric.’
‘This	will	take	all	night,’	she	said.	‘And	I’m	hungry.’
‘Murillio	will	be	delighted	to	purchase	our	suppers,’	declared	Kruppe.
‘For	once	you	are	right,’	Murillio	said.
‘I	don’t	think	you’re	too	fat,’	said	Cutter.	‘I	don’t	think	anything	like	that,
Scillara.’	Too	good,	yes.	And	why	don’t	you	see	how	Barathol	looks	at	you?	As
for	me,	well,	Apsalar	was	smart	enough	to	get	away	and	I	won’t	begrudge	her
that.	In	fact,	I	doubt	there’s	a	woman	low	enough	for	me	anywhere	in	the	world.
Was	that	too	self-pitying?	No,	just	realistic,	he	decided.
Oh,	and	by	the	way,	everyone,	that	dragon	is	wearing	silks	and	biding	her
time	aboard	her	damned	ship,	right	there	in	Darujhistan	harbour…Oh,	and	did
I	mention	that	the	city	is	in	imminent	danger?
The	bottle	of	wine	was	done	and	Sulty	was	sent	off	for	another	one.	Meese
was	quickly	appeased	by	the	orders	for	supper	and	the	knowledge	that,
eventually,	the	swill	she	stocked	would	be	broached	and	consumed	to	excess.
As	Scillara	told	her	tale.
While	Cutter ’s	mind,	sodden	with	alcohol,	wandered	through	all	those
thoughts	that	were	anything	but	self-pitying.	Not	a	woman	anywhere…
	


Lady	Challice	Vidikas	sat	at	one	end	of	the	table,	Shardan	Lim	on	her	left,
Hanut	Orr	to	her	right.	For	this	night	she	wore	emerald	green	silks,	the	short
coat	tight-fitting,	collarless	to	expose	her	unadorned,	powdered	throat	and
low-cut	to	reveal	her	scented	breasts.	Her	hair	was	tied	up,	speared	through
with	silver	pins.	Rouge	blushed	her	cheeks.	Kohl	thickened	her	lashes.	Earrings
depended	from	her	ears	in	tumbling,	glittering	array,	the	green	of	emerald	and
the	blue	of	sapphire.	The	coat’s	short	sleeves	revealed	her	bared	arms,	the	skin
soft,	smooth,	slightly	plump,	unstained	by	the	sun.	Leggings	of	brushed	kid
leather	covered	her	lower	limbs	and	on	her	feet	was	the	latest	style	of	sandals,
the	one	with	a	high	peg-like	heel.
Amber	wine	glimmered	in	crystal	goblets.	Candlelight	painted	soft	and
gold	every	detail	in	a	pool	that	faded	into	gloom	beyond	the	three	at	the	table,
so	that	the	servants	moved	in	shadows,	appearing	only	to	clear	dishes,
rearrange	settings,	and	deliver	yet	more	food.
She	but	picked	at	her	meal,	wanting	to	be	somewhat	drunk	for	what	would
come	at	the	end	of	this	night.	The	only	question	she	was	unable	to	answer
was…which	one	first?
Oh,	there	was	sexual	excitement	–	she	could	not	deny	that.	Both	men	were
hale	and	attractive,	though	in	very	different	ways.	And	both	equally	obnoxious,
but	she	thought	she	could	live	with	that.	For	certain,	her	heart	would	play	no
role	in	what	was	to	come,	no	giving	over,	no	confusion	that	might	lead	to
conflicted	feelings,	or	feelings	of	any	sort.
She	could	keep	this	simple.	Everyone	made	use	of	what	they	had,	didn’t
they,	especially	when	what	they	had	proved	desirable	to	others.	This	was	how
power	accrued,	after	all.	One	man	here,	right	or	left,	would	have	her	this	night
–	had	they	already	decided	which	one	between	them?	A	toss	of	the	knuckles.	A
wager	in	flesh.	She	was	not	sure	–	the	evening	was	early	yet	and	thus	far	she’d
seen	no	overt	signs	of	competition.
Hanut	spoke,	‘Shardan	and	I	have	been	discussing	you	all	afternoon,	Lady
Challice.’
‘Oh?	How	flattering.’
‘It	was	on	the	night	of	my	uncle’s	murder,	wasn’t	it?	At	Lady	Simtal’s
estate	–	you	were	there.’
‘I	was,	yes,	Hanut.’
‘That	night,	young	Gorlas	Vidikas	saved	your	life.’
‘Yes.’
‘And	so	won	your	heart,’	said	Shardan	Lim,	smiling	behind	his	goblet	as
he	sipped.
‘You	make	it	sound	an	easy	thing,’	she	said,	‘winning	my	heart.’


‘Then	gratitude	made	a	good	start,’	Shardan	observed	as	Hanut	settled	back
as	if	willing	to	listen	and	venture	nothing	else	–	at	least	for	now.	‘He	was	very
young,	as	were	you.	An	age	when	charms	seemed	to	flash	blindingly	bright.’
‘And	I	was	dazzled,’	she	said.
‘Gorlas	did	very	well	by	it,	I	should	say.	One	hopes	he	daily	expresses	his
gratitude…when	he	is	here,	I	mean.	All	the	proper,	entirely	unambiguous
gestures	and	the	like.’
Hanut	Orr	stirred.	‘For	too	long,	Lady	Vidikas,	the	House	of	Orr	and	the
House	of	D’Arle	have	been	at	odds	on	the	Council.	Generations	of	that,	and,	as
far	as	I	am	concerned,	for	no	good	reason.	I	find	myself	wishing,	often,	that
your	father	would	meet	me,	to	make	amends,	to	forge	something	new	and
lasting.	An	alliance,	in	fact.’
‘An	ambitious	goal,	Hanut	Orr,’	said	Challice.	Unfortunately,	my	father
thinks	you	are	a	preening,	fatuous	ass.	A	true	Orr,	in	other	words.	‘And	you	are
most	welcome,	I’m	sure,	to	make	such	an	overture.	I	wish	you	the	Lady’s	tug.’
‘Ah,	then	I	have	your	blessing	in	such	an	endeavour?’
‘Of	course.	Will	that	impress	my	father?	That	remains	to	be	seen.’
‘Surely	he	cherishes	you	dearly,’	Shardan	Lim	murmured.	‘How	could	he
not?’
I	have	this	list…	‘The	House	of	Vidikas	was	ever	a	modest	presence	in	the
Council,’	she	said.	‘A	long,	unbroken	succession	of	weak	men	and	women
singularly	lacking	in	ambition.’
Hanut	Orr	snorted	and	reached	for	his	goblet.	‘Excepting	the	latest,	of
course.’
‘Of	course.	My	point	is,	my	father	ascribes	little	weight	to	the	desires	of
House	Vidikas,	and	I	am	now	part	of	that	house.’
‘Do	you	chafe?’
She	fixed	her	gaze	on	Shardan	Lim.	‘A	bold	question,	sir.’
‘My	apologies,	Lady	Vidikas.	Yet	I	have	come	to	cherish	you	and	so	only
wish	you	happiness	and	contentment.’
‘Why	would	you	imagine	I	felt	otherwise?’
‘Because,’	Hanut	Orr	drawled,	‘you’ve	been	knocking	back	the	wine	this
night	like	a	tavern	harlot.’	And	he	rose.	‘Thank	you,	Lady	Vidikas,	for	a	most
enjoyable	evening.	I	must,	alas,	take	my	leave.’
Struggling	against	anger,	she	managed	a	nod.	‘Of	course,	Councillor	Orr.
Forgive	me	if	I	do	not	see	you	out.’
He	smiled.	‘Easily	done,	milady.’
When	he	was	gone,	Shardan	swore	softly	under	his	breath.	‘He	was	angry
with	you.’


‘Oh?’	The	hand	that	raised	the	goblet	to	her	lips	was,	she	saw,	trembling.
‘Hanut	wants	your	father	to	come	to	him,	not	the	other	way	round.	He
won’t	be	a	squirming	pup	to	anyone.’
‘A	pup	is	never	strong	enough	to	make	the	first	move,	Shardan	Lim.	He
misunderstood	my	challenge.’
‘Because	it	implies	a	present	failing	on	his	part.	A	failing	of	his	nerve.’
‘Perhaps	it	does,	and	that	should	make	him	angry	with	me?	How,	precisely,
does	that	work?’
Shardan	Lim	laughed	and	as	he	stretched	out	it	was	clear	that,	free	now	of
Hanut	Orr ’s	shadow,	he	was	like	a	deadly	flower	opening	to	the	night.	‘You
showed	him	up	for	the	self-important	but	weak-willed	bully	that	he	is.’
‘Unkind	words	for	your	friend.’
Shardan	Lim	stared	down	at	his	goblet	as	he	drank	a	mouthful.	Then	he
said	in	a	growl,	‘Hanut	Orr	is	no	friend	of	mine.’
The	wine	was	making	her	brain	feel	strangely	loose,	untethered.	She	no
longer	even	tasted	each	sip,	there	had	been	so	many	of	them,	the	servant	a
silent	ghost	slipping	in	to	refill	her	goblet.	‘I	think	he	believes	otherwise.’
‘I	doubt	it.	It	was	some	damned	conspiracy	with	House	Orr	that	saw	my
father	assassinated.	And	now	it	seems	my	family	is	snared,	trapped,	and	the
games	just	go	on	and	on.’
This	was	a	most	unexpected	side	of	the	man	and	she	did	not	know	how	to
respond	to	it.	‘Such	honesty	humbles	me,	Shardan	Lim.	For	what	it	is	worth,	I
will	keep	what	I	have	heard	this	night	to	myself.’
‘No	need,	but	thank	you	anyway.	In	fact,	I’d	rather	your	husband	well
understood	how	things	stand.	Hanut	Orr	is	a	dangerous	man.	House	Lim	and
House	Vidikas	share	many	things,	principal	among	them	the	stigma	of
disrespect	on	the	Council.	Contempt,	even.	I	have	been	curious,’	and	now	the
look	he	turned	upon	her	was	sharp,	searching.	‘This	venture	of	your	husband’s,
ever	pushing	for	this	ironmonger	of	his	to	attain	membership	in	the	Council	–
what	does	Gorlas	play	at?’
She	blinked	in	confusion.	‘I’m	sorry,	I	have	no	idea.’
‘Might	you	find	out?	For	me?’
‘I	am	not	sure	if	I	can	–	Gorlas	does	not	confide	in	me	on	such	matters.’
‘Does	he	confide	in	you	at	all?’	He	went	on	without	waiting	for	her	reply
(not	that	she	had	one).	‘Lady	Vidikas	–	Challice	–	he	is	wasting	you,	do	you
understand?	I	see	this	–	gods,	it	leaves	me	furious!	You	are	an	intelligent
woman,	a	beautiful	woman,	and	he	treats	you	like	one	of	these	silver	plates.
Just	one	more	possession,	one	more	piece	in	his	hoard.’
She	set	her	goblet	down.	‘What	do	you	want	from	me,	Shardan	Lim?	Is	this


some	sort	of	invitation?	A	conspiracy	of	love?	Trysts	behind	my	husband’s
back?	While	he	travels	here	and	there,	you	and	I	meeting	up	in	some	squalid
inn?	Getting	intimate	with	each	other ’s	bodies,	then	lying	back	and	making
pointless	plans,	endlessly	lying	to	each	other	about	a	future	together?’
He	stared	across	at	her.
All	the	servants	had	with	uncharacteristic	discreetness	vanished	into	the
side	chambers,	the	kitchens,	anywhere	but	this	dining	room.	Even	the	wine
server	had	disappeared.	It	occurred	to	Challice	that	Shardan’s	manservant	had
probably	been	free	with	coin	among	the	house	staff	and	that	sly,	silent	man	was
now	outside	in	the	courtyard,	passing	a	pipe	to	eager-eyed	menials,	and	they
were	all	laughing,	snickering,	rolling	their	eyes	and	worse.
Too	late,	she	realized,	to	change	any	of	that.	To	scour	the	lurid	thoughts
from	their	petty	minds.
‘You	describe,’	Shardan	Lim	finally	said,	‘a	most	sordid	arrangement,	with
all	the	cynicism	of	a	veteran	in	such	matters.	And	that	I	do	not	believe.	You
have	been	faithful,	Challice.	I	would	not	so	care	for	you	otherwise.’
‘Oh?	Have	you	been	spying	on	me,	then?’	It	was	a	mocking	question	that
lost	its	carefree	aura	as	the	man	voiced	no	denial,	and	she	suddenly	felt	chilled
to	the	bone.	‘Following	another	man’s	wife	around	does	not	seem	an
honourable	thing	to	do,	Shardan	Lim.’
‘Love	has	no	honour.’
‘Love?	Or	obsession?	Is	it	not	your	own	hunger	for	possession	that	has
you	coveting	a	woman	owned	by	another	man?’
‘He	does	not	own	you.	That	is	my	point,	Challice.	Such	notions	of
ownership	are	nothing	but	twisted	lies	disguised	as	love.	I	have	no	interest	in
owning	you.	Nor	in	stealing	you	away	–	if	I	had	I	would	have	found	an	excuse
to	duel	your	husband	long	ago,	and	I	would	have	killed	him	without
compunction.	For	you.	To	give	you	back	your	life.’
‘With	you	at	the	grieving	widow’s	side?	Oh,	that	would	look	odd	now,
wouldn’t	it?	Me	leaning	on	the	arm	of	the	man	who	murdered	my	husband.
And	you	talk	to	me	of	freedom?’	She	was,	she	realized,	shocked	sober.	By	what
this	man	was	revealing	to	her;	by	the	stunning	depth	of	his	depraved	desire.
‘Giving	you	back	your	life,	I	said.’
‘I	will	ask	you	again:	what	do	you	want?’
‘To	show	you	what	it	means	to	be	free.	To	cut	your	chains.	Take	me	to
your	bed	if	you	so	desire.	Or	don’t.	Send	me	out	of	here	with	your	boot	to	my
backside.	The	choice	is	yours.	I	want	you	to	feel	your	freedom,	Challice.	In
your	soul	–	let	it	burn,	bright	or	dark	as	you	like,	but	let	it	burn!	Filling	you
entirely.’


Her	breaths	came	fast,	shallow.	Oh,	this	was	a	most	unanticipated	tactic	of
his.	Give	me	nothing,	woman.	No,	give	it	to	yourself	instead.	Make	use	of	me.	As
proof.	Of	your	freedom.	Tonight	you	can	make	yourself	free	again.	The	way	it
felt	when	you	were	younger,	when	there	was	no	husband	weighing	down	your
arm.	Before	the	solemn	shackles	were	slipped	on.	A	most	extraordinary
invitation	indeed.	‘Where	are	my	servants?’
‘Away	for	the	rest	of	the	night,	Lady	Vidikas.’
‘Just	like	Hanut	Orr.	Does	he	sit	in	some	tavern	right	now,	telling	everyone
—’
‘I	arranged	nothing	with	that	bastard.	And	you	must	realize,	he	will	talk
whether	anything	happens	or	not.	To	wound	you.	Your	reputation.’
‘My	husband	will	then	hear	of	it,	even	though	nothing	has	happened.’
‘And	should	you	stand	before	Gorlas	and	deny	the	rumours,	will	he
believe	you,	Challice?’
No.	He	wouldn’t	want	to.	‘He	will	not	accept	being	cuckolded.’
‘He	will	smile	because	he	doesn’t	care.	Until	it	serves	him	to	challenge	one
of	us,	me	or	Hanut,	to	a	duel.	On	a	point	of	honour.	He	is	a	fine	duellist.	A
cruel	one	at	that.	He	disregards	all	rules,	all	propriety.	Victory	is	all	that
matters	and	if	that	means	flinging	sand	into	his	opponent’s	eyes	he	will	do	just
that.	A	very	dangerous	man,	Challice.	I	would	not	want	to	face	him	with	rapiers
bared.	But	I	will	if	I	have	to.’	Then	he	shook	his	head.	‘But	it	won’t	be	me.’
‘No?’
‘It	will	be	Hanut	Orr.	That	is	the	man	he	wants	for	you.	He’s	given	you	to
Hanut	Orr	–	another	reason	he	stormed	off,	since	he	finally	understood	that	I
would	not	permit	it.’
‘So	in	Gorlas’s	stead	this	night	you	have	defended	my	honour.’
‘And	failed,	because	Hanut	is	skewering	your	reputation	even	as	we	speak.
When	I	said	you	can	make	use	of	me,	Challice,	I	meant	it.	Even	now,	here,	you
can	tell	me	to	seek	out	Hanut	–	yes,	I	can	guess	where	he	is	right	now	–	and	call
him	out.	I	can	kill	him	for	you.’
‘My	reputation…’
‘Is	already	ruined,	Lady	Vidikas,	and	I	am	truly	sorry	for	that.	Tell	me	what
you	would	have	me	do.	Please.’
She	was	silent.	It	was	getting	difficult	to	think	clearly.	Consequences	were
crashing	down	like	an	avalanche	and	she	was	buried,	all	air	driven	from	her
lungs.	Buried,	yes,	in	what	had	not	even	happened.
Yet.
‘I	will	try	this	freedom	of	yours,	Shardan	Lim.’
He	rose,	one	hand	settling	on	the	grip	of	his	rapier.	‘Milady.’


Oh,	how	noble.	Snorting,	she	rose.	‘You’ve	taken	hold	of	the	wrong
weapon.’
His	eyes	widened.	Was	the	surprise	real	or	feigned?	Was	there	a	glimmer
of	triumph	in	those	blue,	blue	eyes?	She	couldn’t	find	it	at	all.
And	that	frightened	her.
‘Shardan…’
‘Milady?’
‘Make	no	wishes	for	a	future.	Do	you	understand	me?’
‘I	do.’
‘I	will	not	free	my	heart	only	to	chain	it	anew.’
‘Of	course	you	won’t.	That	would	be	madness.’
She	studied	him	a	moment	longer,	and	received	nothing	new	for	that	effort.
‘I	am	glad	I	am	not	drunk,’	she	said.
And	he	bowed.
Making,	in	that	one	gesture,	this	night	of	adultery	so	very…noble.

Night	seeps	into	Darujhistan,	a	thick	blinding	fog	in	which	people	stumble	or
hide	as	they	walk	the	alleys	and	streets.	Some	are	drawn	like	moths	to	the	lit
areas	and	the	welcoming	eternal	hiss	of	gas	from	the	wrought	iron	poles.
Others	seek	to	move	as	one	with	the	darkness,	at	least	until	some	damned	piece
of	crockery	snaps	underfoot,	or	a	pebble	is	sent	skittering.	And	everywhere
can	be	seen	the	small	glitter	of	rodent	eyes,	or	heard	the	slither	of	tails.
Light	glows	through	shutters	and	bubbled	glass	windows,	but	never	mind
the	light	and	all	peaceful	slumber	and	discourse	and	all	the	rest	such
illumination	might	reveal!	Dull	and	witless	the	expectations	so	quickly	and
predictably	surrendered!
A	woman	in	whose	soul	burned	freedom	black	and	blazing	arches	her	back
as	only	the	second	man	in	her	life	slides	deep	into	her	and	something	ignites	in
her	mind	–	Gorlas	ever	used	his	fingers	in	this	place,	after	all,	and	fingers
cannot	match	–	gods	below!
But	leave	that	now	–	truly,	imagination	suffices	to	make	eloquent	all	the
clumsy	shifting	about	and	strange	sounds	and	the	fumbling	for	this	and	that,
and	then	that	–	no	more!	Out	into	the	true	darkness,	yes,	to	the	fingerless	man
stalking	his	next	victim.
To	a	new	estate	and	Captain	Torvald	Nom	of	the	House	Guard,	moments
from	leaving	for	the	night	with	all	security	in	the	so-capable	hands	of	Scorch
and	Leff	(yes,	he	worked	hard	on	that),	who	pauses	to	watch	a	black	two-


person	carriage	trundle	into	the	courtyard,	and	whose	eyes	thin	to	verymost
slits	of	suspicion	and	curiosity	and	a	niggling	feeling	of…something,	as	a
cloaked,	hooded	figure	steps	into	view	and	slides	like	a	bad	thought	up	the
stairs	and	into	the	main	house.	Who…	ponder	no	longer,	Torvald	Nom!	On
your	way,	yes,	back	home	to	your	loving	and	suitably	impressed	wife.	Think	of
nothing	but	that	and	that	alone	and	be	on	your	way!
A	guard	with	occasional	chest	pains	is	questioning	patrons	of	a	bar,
seeking	witnesses	who	might	have	seen	someone	set	out	to	follow	that	local
man	into	the	alley	in	order	to	beat	him	to	death	and	would	no	one	step	forward
on	behalf	of	that	hapless	victim?	Might	do,	aye,	if’n	any	of	us	liked	him,
y’see…
In	a	crypt	(irrationally	well	lit,	of	course)	sits	a	man	plotting	the	downfall
of	the	city,	starting	with	a	handful	of	Malazans,	and	he	sits	most	contented	in
the	absence	of	shadows	or	any	other	ambivalence	imposed	upon	reality.
Out	in	Chuffs,	as	moles	sleep	in	their	tiny	cots,	Bainisk	sits	down	beside
Harllo’s	bed	to	hear	more	stories	about	Darujhistan,	for	Bainisk	was	born	in
Chuffs	and	has	never	left	it,	you	see,	and	his	eyes	glow	as	Harllo	whispers
about	riches	and	all	sorts	of	wonderful	foods	and	great	monuments	and	statues
and	blue	fire	everywhere	and	before	long	both	are	asleep,	Harllo	in	his	lumpy
bed	and	Bainisk	on	the	floor	beside	it,	and	across	the	way	Venaz	sees	this	and
sneers	to	display	his	hatred	of	both	Bainisk	and	Bainisk’s	new	favourite	when
Venaz	used	to	be	his	best,	but	Bainisk	was	a	betrayer,	a	liar	and	worse	and
someday	Harllo	would	pay	for	that—
Because	Harllo	was	right.	He	was	a	boy	who	drew	bullies	like	a	lodestone
and	this	was	a	cruel	fact	and	his	kind	were	legion	and	it	was	a	godly	blessing
how	so	many	survived	and	grew	up	to	wreak	vengeance	upon	all	those	people
not	as	smart	as	they	were,	but	even	that	is	a	bitter	reward	and	never	quite	as
satisfying	as	it	might	be.
Back	to	Darujhistan,	with	relief,	as	a	Great	Raven	launches	herself	skyward
from	the	tower	of	Baruk’s	estate,	watched	with	evil	satisfaction	by	a	squat,
overweight	demon	staring	out	from	a	spark-spitting	chimney	mouth.
And	this	was	a	night	like	any	other,	a	skein	of	expectations	and
anticipations,	revelations	and	perturbations.	Look	around.	Look	around!	On	all
sides,	day	and	night,	light	and	dark!	Every	step	taken	with	the	firm	resolve	to
believe	in	the	solid	ground	awaiting	it.	Every	step,	one	after	another,	again	and
again,	and	no	perilous	ledge	yawns	ahead,	oh	no.
Step	and	step,	now,	step	and	step—


Chapter	Ten

Will	you	come	and	tell	me	when	the	music	ends
When	the	musicians	are	swallowed	in	flames
Every	instrument	blackening	and	crumbling	to	ash
When	the	dancers	stumble	and	sprawl	their	diseased	limbs
rotting	off	and	twitching	the	skin	sloughing	away
Will	you	come	and	tell	me	when	the	music	ends
When	the	stars	we	pushed	into	the	sky	loose	their	roars
And	the	clouds	we	built	into	visible	rage	do	now	explode
When	the	bright	princes	of	privilege	march	past	with	dead
smiles
falling	from	their	faces	a	host	of	deceiving	masks
Will	you	come	and	tell	me	when	the	music	ends
When	reason	sinks	into	the	morass	of	superstition
Waging	a	war	of	ten	thousand	armies	stung	to	the	lash
When	we	stop	looking	up	even	as	we	begin	our	mad	running
into	stupidity’s	nothingness	with	heavenly	choirs	screaming
Will	you	come	and	tell	me	when	the	music	ends
When	the	musicians	are	no	more	than	black	grinning	sticks
Every	instrument	wailing	its	frantic	death	cry	down	the	road
When	the	ones	left	standing	have	had	their	mouths	cut	off
leaving	holes	from	which	a	charnel	wind	eternally	blows
Will	you	come	and	tell	me	when	the	music	ends
The	fire	is	eating	my	breath	and	agony	fills	this	song
When	my	fingers	crack	on	the	strings	and	fall	from	my	hands
And	this	dance	twists	every	muscle	like	burning	rope
while	your	laughter	follows	down	my	crumpling	corpse
Won’t	you	come	and	tell	me	when	the	music	ends


When	I	can	leap	away	and	face	one	god	or	a	thousand
Or	nothing	at	all	into	this	blessed	bliss	of	oblivion
When	I	can	prise	open	this	box	and	release	cruel	and	bitter	fury
at	all	the	mad	fools	crowding	the	door	in	panicked	flight
Watch	me	and	watch	me	with	eyes	wide	and	shocked
With	disbelief	with	horror	with	indignant	umbrage	to	upbraid
And	the	shouted	Nays	are	like	drumbeats	announcing	a	truth
The	music	ends	my	friends,	my	vile,	despicable	friends,	and
see	me	–
see	me	slam	the	door	slam	it	hard	–	in	all	your	faces!
The	Music	Ends
Fisher	kel	Tath

His	boots	crunched	on	water-worn	stones	slick	with	mist	as	he	made	his	way	to
the	water ’s	edge.	The	steep	slopes	of	the	surrounding	mountainsides	were
verdant,	thick	rainforest,	crimson-barked	trees	towering	high,	beards	of	moss
hanging	from	toppled	trunks.
Endest	Silann	leaned	on	his	stolid	walking	stick,	the	muscles	of	his	legs
trembling.	He	looked	round	as	he	slowly	regained	his	breath.	It	was	chilly,	the
sun’s	arc	just	slipping	past	the	western	peaks,	and	shadow	swallowed	the	river
valley.
Black	water	rushed	by	and	he	felt	its	cold	–	no	need	to	squat	down,	no	need
to	slide	a	hand	into	the	tugging	current.	This	dark	river	was,	he	could	see	now,
nothing	like	Dorssan	Ryl.	How	could	he	have	expected	otherwise?	The	new	is
ever	but	a	mangled	echo	of	the	old	and	whatever	whispers	of	similarity	one
imagined	do	naught	but	sting	with	pain,	leaving	one	blistered	with	loss.	Oh,	he
had	been	a	fool,	to	have	journeyed	all	this	way.	Seeking	what?	Even	that	he
could	not	answer.
No,	perhaps	he	could.	Escape.	Brief,	yes,	but	escape	none	the	less.	The
coward	flees,	knowing	he	must	return,	wishing	that	the	return	journey	might
kill	him,	take	his	life	as	it	did	the	old	everywhere.	But	listen!	You	can	shape
your	soul	–	make	it	a	bucket,	a	leaking	one	that	you	carry	about.	Or	your	soul
can	be	a	rope,	thick	and	twisted,	refusing	to	break	even	as	it	buckles	to	one	knot
after	another.	Choose	your	image,	Endest	Silann.	You	are	here,	you’ve	made	it
this	far,	haven’t	you?	And	as	he	told	you…not	much	farther	to	go.	Not	much


farther	at	all.
He	smelled	woodsmoke.
Startled,	alarmed,	he	turned	away	from	the	rush	of	the	river.	Faced
upstream	whence	came	the	late	afternoon	breeze.	There,	in	distant	gloom,	the
muted	glow	of	a	campfire.
Ah,	no	escape	after	all.	He’d	wanted	solitude,	face	to	face	with	intractable,
indifferent	nature.	He’d	wanted	to	feel…irrelevant.	He’d	wanted	the	wildness	to
punch	him	senseless,	leave	him	humiliated,	reduced	to	a	wretch.	Oh,	he	had
wanted	plenty,	hadn’t	he?
With	a	sour	grunt,	Endest	Silann	began	walking	upstream.	At	the	very	least,
the	fire	would	warm	his	hands.
Thirty	paces	away,	he	could	see	the	lone	figure	facing	the	smoky	flames.
Huge,	round-shouldered,	seated	on	a	fallen	log.	And	Endest	Silann	smiled	in
recognition.
Two	trout	speared	on	skewers	cooked	above	the	fire.	A	pot	of	simmering
tea	sat	with	one	blackened	shoulder	banked	in	coals.	Two	tin	cups	warmed	on
the	flat	rock	making	up	one	side	of	the	hearth.
Another	log	waited	opposite	the	one	on	which	sat	the	warlord,	Caladan
Brood,	who	slowly	twisted	round	to	watch	Endest	Silann	approach.	The	broad,
oddly	bestial	face	split	into	a	wry	smile.	‘Of	all	the	guests	I	imagined	this	night,
old	friend,	you	did	not	come	to	mind.	Forgive	me.	You	took	your	time	since
beginning	your	descent	into	this	valley,	but	for	that	I	will	happily	make
allowances	–	but	do	not	complain	if	the	fish	is	overcooked.’
‘Complaints	are	far	away	and	will	remain	so,	Caladan.	You	have	awakened
my	appetite	–	for	food,	drink	and,	most	of	all,	company.’
‘Then	sit,	make	yourself	comfortable.’
‘So	you	did	indeed	disband	your	army	after	the	siege,’	said	Endest	Silann,
making	his	way	over	to	settle	himself	down.	‘There	were	rumours.	Of	course,
my	master	said	nothing.’
‘See	me	now,’	said	the	warlord,	‘commanding	an	army	of	wet	stones,	and
yes,	it	proves	far	less	troublesome	than	the	last	one.	Finally,	I	can	sleep	soundly
at	night.	Although,	matching	wits	with	these	trout	has	challenged	me	mightily.
There,	take	one	of	those	plates,	and	here	–	beware	the	bones,	though,’	he	added
as	he	set	a	fish	on	the	plate.
‘Alone	here,	Caladan	Brood	–	it	makes	me	wonder	if	you	are	hiding.’
‘It	may	be	that	I	am,	Endest	Silann.	Unfortunately,	hiding	never	works.’
‘No,	it	never	does.’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time	as	they	ate	their	supper.	The	trout	was	indeed
overdone	but	Endest	Silann	said	nothing,	for	it	was	delicious	none	the	less.


If	Anomander	Rake	was	a	mystery	shrouded	in	darkness,	then	Caladan
Brood	was	one	clothed	in	geniality.	Spare	with	words,	he	nevertheless	could
make	virtually	anyone	feel	welcome	and,	indeed,	appreciated.	Or	rather,	he
could	when	the	pressures	of	command	weren’t	crouched	on	his	shoulders	like
a	damned	mountain.	This	night,	then,	Endest	Silann	well	understood,	was	a	gift,
all	the	more	precious	in	that	it	was	wholly	unexpected.
When	the	meal	was	done,	night’s	arrival	closed	out	the	world	beyond	the
fire’s	light.	The	rush	of	the	river	was	a	voice,	a	presence.	Water	flowed
indifferent	to	the	heave	and	plunge	of	the	sun,	the	shrouded	moon	and	the	slow
spin	of	the	stars.	The	sound	reached	them	in	a	song	without	words,	and	all
effort	to	grasp	its	meaning	was	hopeless,	for,	like	the	water	itself,	one	could
not	grasp	hold	of	sound.	The	flow	was	ceaseless	and	immeasurable	and	just	as
stillness	did	not	in	fact	exist,	so	neither	did	true,	absolute	silence.
‘Why	are	you	here?’	Endest	Silann	asked	after	a	time.
‘I	wish	I	could	answer	you,	old	friend,	and	Burn	knows	the	desire	to	ease
the	burden	is	almost	overwhelming.’
‘You	are	assuming,	Caladan,	that	I	am	ignorant	of	what	awaits	us.’
‘No,	I	do	not	do	that	–	after	all,	you	have	sought	a	pilgrimage,	out	to	this
river	–	and	among	the	Tiste	Andii,	this	place	has	proved	a	mysterious	lure.	Yet
you	ask	why	I	am	here,	and	so	your	knowledge	must	be…incomplete.	Endest
Silann,	I	cannot	say	more.	I	cannot	help	you.’
The	old	Tiste	Andii	looked	away,	off	into	the	dark	where	the	river	sang	to
the	night.	So,	others	had	come	here,	then.	Some	instinctive	need	drawing	them,
yes,	to	the	ghost	of	Dorssan	Ryl.	He	wondered	if	they	had	felt	the	same
disappointment	as	he	had	upon	seeing	these	black	(but	not	black	enough)
waters.	It	is	not	the	same.	Nothing	ever	is,	beginning	with	ourselves.	‘I	do	not,’
he	said,	‘believe	much	in	forgiveness.’
‘What	of	restitution?’
The	question	stunned	him,	stole	his	breath.	The	river	rushed	with	the	sound
of	ten	thousand	voices	and	those	cries	filled	his	head,	spread	into	his	chest	to
grip	his	heart.	Cold	pooled	in	his	gut.	By	the	Abyss…such…ambition.	He	felt
the	icy	trickle	of	tears	on	his	fire-warmed	cheeks.	‘I	will	do	all	I	can.’
‘He	knows	that,’	Caladan	Brood	said	with	such	compassion	that	Endest
Silann	almost	cried	out.	‘You	might	not	believe	this	now,’	the	huge	warrior
continued,	‘but	you	will	find	this	pilgrimage	worthwhile.	A	remembrance	to
give	strength	when	you	need	it	most.’
No,	he	did	not	believe	that	now,	and	could	not	imagine	ever	believing	it.
Even	so…the	ambition.	So	appalling,	so	breathtaking.
Caladan	Brood	poured	the	tea	and	set	a	cup	into	Endest’s	hands.	The	tin


shot	heat	into	his	chilled	fingers.	The	warlord	was	standing	beside	him	now.
‘Listen	to	the	river,	Endest	Silann.	Such	a	peaceful	sound…’
But	in	the	ancient	Tiste	Andii’s	mind	that	sound	was	a	wailing	chorus,	an
overwhelming	flood	of	loss	and	despair.	The	ghost	of	Dorssan	Ryl?	No,	this
was	where	that	long	dead	river	emptied	out,	feeding	the	midnight	madness	of
its	history	into	a	torrent	where	it	swirled	with	a	thousand	other	currents.
Endless	variations	on	the	same	bitter	flavour.
And	as	he	stared	into	the	flames	he	saw	once	more	the	city	dying	in	a
conflagration.	Kharkanas	beneath	the	raging	sky.	Blinding	ash	like	sand	in	the
eyes,	smoke	like	poison	in	the	lungs.	Mother	Darkness	in	her	fury,	denying	her
children,	turning	away	as	they	died	and	died.	And	died.
Listen	to	the	river.	Remember	the	voices.
Wait,	as	does	the	warlord	here.	Wait,	to	see	what	comes.
	
The	smell	of	the	smoke	remained	long	after	the	fire	was	done.	They	rode	in	on
to	charred	ground	and	blackened	wreckage.	Collapsed,	crumbled	inward,	the
enormous	carriage	still	reared	like	a	malignant	smoking	pyre	in	the	centre	of
stained	earth.	Detritus	was	scattered	about	to	mark	the	disintegration	of	the
community.	Yet,	although	the	scene	was	one	of	slaughter,	there	were	no	bodies.
Trails	set	off	in	all	directions,	some	broader	than	others.
Samar	Dev	studied	the	scene	for	a	time,	then	watched	as	Traveller
dismounted	to	walk	over	to	the	edge	of	the	camp,	where	he	began	examining
some	of	the	tracks	leading	away.	He	was	an	odd	man,	she	decided.	Quiet,	selfcontained,	a	man	used	to	being	alone,	yet	beneath	it	all	was	a	current	of…yes,
mayhem.	As	if	it	was	his	own	solitude	that	kept	the	world	safe.
Once,	long	ago	now,	she	had	found	herself	in	the	company	of	another
warrior	equally	familiar	with	that	concept.	But	there	the	similarity	ended.	Karsa
Orlong,	notwithstanding	that	first	journey	into	the	besieged	fortress	outside
Ugarat,	thrived	on	an	audience.	Witness,	he	would	say,	in	full	expectation	of
just	that.	He	wanted	his	every	deed	observed,	as	if	each	set	of	eyes	existed
solely	to	mark	Karsa	Orlong,	and	the	minds	behind	them	served,	to	the
exclusion	of	all	else,	to	recount	to	all	what	he	had	done,	what	he	had	said,	what
he	had	begun	and	what	he	had	ended.	He	makes	us	his	history.	Every	witness
contributes	to	the	narrative	–	the	life,	the	deeds	of	Toblakai	–	a	narrative	to
which	we	are,	each	of	us,	bound.
Chains	and	shackles	snaked	out	from	the	burned	carriage.	Empty,	of
course.	And	yet,	despite	this,	Samar	Dev	understood	that	the	survivors	of	this
place	remained	slaves.	Chained	to	Karsa	Orlong,	their	liberator,	chained	to	yet


another	grim	episode	in	his	history.	He	gives	us	freedom	and	enslaves	us	all.
Oh,	now	there	is	irony.	All	the	sweeter	for	that	he	does	not	mean	to,	no,	the	very
opposite	each	and	every	time.	The	damned	fool.
‘Many	took	horses,	loaded	down	with	loot,’	Traveller	said,	returning	to	his
mount.	‘One	trail	heads	north,	the	least	marked	–	I	believe	it	belongs	to	your
friend.’
My	friend.
‘He	is	not	far	ahead	of	us	now,	and	still	on	foot.	We	should	catch	up	to	him
today.’
She	nodded.
Traveller	studied	her	for	a	moment.	He	then	swung	himself	on	to	his	horse
and	collected	the	reins.	‘Samar	Dev,	I	cannot	work	out	what	happened	here.’
‘He	did,’	she	replied.	‘He	happened	here.’
‘He	killed	no	one.	From	what	you	have	told	me,	well,	I	thought	to	find
something	else.	It	is	as	if	he	simply	walked	up	to	them	and	said,	“It’s	over”.’	He
frowned	across	at	her.	‘How	can	that	be?’
She	shook	her	head.
He	grunted,	guiding	his	horse	round.	‘The	scourge	of	the	Skathandi	has
ended.’
‘It	has.’
‘My	fear	of	your	companion	has…deepened.	I	am	ever	more	reluctant	to
find	him.’
‘But	that	will	not	stop	you,	will	it?	If	he	carries	the	Emperor ’s	Sword…’
He	did	not	reply.	He	didn’t	need	to.
They	set	out	at	the	canter.	Northward.
The	wind	cut	across	from	the	west,	sun-warmed	and	dry.	The	few	clouds
scudding	past	overhead	were	thin	and	shredded.	Ravens	or	hawks	circled,
wheeling	specks,	and	Samar	Dev	thought	of	flies	buzzing	the	corpse	of	the
earth.
She	spat	to	clear	away	the	taste	of	woodsmoke.
	
A	short	time	later	they	came	upon	a	small	camp.	Three	men,	two	pregnant
women.	The	fear	in	their	eyes	warred	with	abject	resignation	as	Samar	Dev	and
Traveller	came	up	and	reined	in.	The	men	had	not	sought	to	flee,	proof	of	the
rarest	kind	of	courage	–	the	women	were	too	burdened	to	run,	so	the	men	had
stayed	and	if	that	meant	death,	then	so	be	it.
Details	like	these	ever	humbled	Samar	Dev.
‘You	are	following	the	Toblakai,’	Traveller	said,	dismounting.	They


stared,	saying	nothing.	Traveller	half	turned	and	gestured	for	Samar	Dev.
Curious,	she	slipped	down.
‘Can	you	see	to	the	health	of	the	women?’	he	asked	her	in	a	low	voice.
‘All	right,’	she	said,	then	watched	as	the	Dal	Honese	warrior	led	the	three
men	off	to	one	side.	Bemused,	Samar	Dev	approached	the	women.	Both,	she
saw,	were	far	along	in	their	pregnancies,	and	then	she	noted	that	both	seemed…
not	quite	human.	Furtive	eyes	the	hue	of	tawny	grasses,	a	kind	of	animal
wariness	along	with	the	resignation	she	had	noted	earlier,	but	now	she
understood	it	as	the	fatalism	of	the	victim,	the	hunted,	the	prey.	Yes,	she	could
imagine	seeing	such	eyes	in	the	antelope	with	the	leopard’s	jaws	closed	on	its
throat.	The	image	left	her	feeling	rattled.
‘I	am	a	witch,’	she	said.	‘Shoulder	Woman.’
Both	remained	sitting.	They	stared	in	silence.
She	edged	closer	and	crouched	down	opposite	them.	They	bore	features
both	human	and	animal,	as	if	they	represented	some	alternative	version	of
human	beings.	Dark-skinned,	slope-browed,	with	broad	mouths	full-lipped	and
probably	–	when	not	taut	with	anxiety	–	unusually	expressive.	Both	looked	well
fed,	essentially	healthy.	Both	emanated	that	strange	completeness	that	only
pregnant	women	possessed.	When	everything	outward	faced	inward.	In	a	less
generous	moment	she	might	call	it	smugness	but	this	was	not	such	a	moment.
Besides,	there	was	in	those	auras	something	animal	that	made	it	all	seem
proper,	natural,	as	if	this	was	exclusively	and	precisely	what	women	were	for.
Now	that	notion	irritated	her.
She	straightened	and	walked	over	to	where	Traveller	stood	with	the	men.
‘They	are	fine,’	she	said.
His	brows	rose	at	her	tone,	but	he	said	nothing.
‘So,’	she	asked,	‘what	secrets	have	they	revealed?’
‘The	sword	he	carries	was	made	of	flint,	or	obsidian.	Stone.’
‘Then	he	rejected	the	Crippled	God.	No,	I’m	not	surprised.	He	won’t	do
what’s	expected.	Ever.	It’s	part	of	his	damned	religion,	I	suspect.	What	now,
Traveller?’
He	sighed.	‘We	will	catch	up	with	him	anyway.’	A	brief	smile.	‘With	less
trepidation	now.’
‘There’s	still	the	risk,’	she	said,	‘of	an…argument.’
They	returned	to	their	horses.
‘The	Skathandi	king	was	dying,’	Traveller	explained	as	they	both	rode	out
from	the	camp.	‘He	bequeathed	his	kingdom	to	your	friend.	Who	then
dissolved	it,	freeing	all	the	slaves,	warning	off	the	soldiers.	Taking	nothing	for
himself.	Nothing	at	all.’


She	grunted.
Traveller	was	silent	for	a	moment	and	then	he	said,	‘A	man	like	that…well,
I	am	curious.	I	would	like	to	meet	him.’
‘Don’t	expect	hugs	and	kisses,’	she	said.
‘He	will	not	be	pleased	to	see	you?’
‘I	have	no	idea,	although	I	am	bringing	him	his	horse,	which	should	count
for	something.’
‘Does	he	know	how	you	feel	about	him?’
She	shot	him	a	look,	and	then	snorted.	‘He	may	think	he	does	but	the	truth
is	I	don’t	know	how	I	feel	about	him,	so	whatever	he’s	thinking	it’s	bound	to	be
wrong.	Now	that	we’re	closing	in,	I’m	the	one	getting	more	nervous.	It’s
ridiculous,	I	know.’
‘It	seems	your	examination	of	those	two	women	has	soured	your	mood.
Why?’
‘I	don’t	know	what	you	wanted	me	to	do	about	them.	They	were	pregnant,
not	in	labour.	They	looked	hale	enough,	better	than	I	expected	in	fact.	They
didn’t	need	me	poking	and	prodding.	The	babies	will	be	born	and	they	will	live
or	they	will	die.	Same	for	the	mothers.	It’s	just	how	things	are.’
‘My	apologies,	Samar	Dev.	I	should	not	have	so	ordered	you	about.	Were	I
in	your	place,	I	too	would	have	been	offended	by	the	presumption.’
Was	that	what	had	annoyed	her?	Possibly.	Equally	likely,	her	mute
acquiescence,	the	doe-eyed	ease	with	which	she	had	fallen	into	that	subservient
role.	As	when	I	was	with	Karsa	Orlong.	Oh,	I	think	I	now	step	on	to	the	thinnest
crust	of	sand	above	some	bottomless	pit.	Samar	Dev	discovers	her	very	own
secret	weaknesses.	Was	she	foul	of	mood	earlier?	See	her	now.
A	talent,	a	sensitivity	–	something	–	clearly	told	Traveller	to	say	nothing
more.
They	rode	on,	the	horses’	hoofs	thumping	the	taut	drum	of	the	earth.	The
warm	wind	slid	dry	as	sand.	In	a	low,	broad	depression	on	their	left	stood	six
pronghorn	antelope,	watching	them	pass.	Rust-red	slabs	of	flat	rock	tilted	up
through	the	thin	ground	along	the	spines	of	hills.	Long-billed	birds	of	some
kind	perched	on	them,	their	plumage	the	same	mix	of	hues.	‘It	is	all	the	same,’
she	murmured.
‘Samar	Dev?	Did	you	speak?’
She	shrugged.	‘The	way	so	many	animals	are	made	to	match	their
surroundings.	I	wonder,	if	all	this	grass	suddenly	grew	blood	red,	how	long
before	the	markings	on	those	antelope	shift	into	patterns	of	red?	You’d	think	it
could	never	be	the	other	way	round,	but	you	would	be	wrong.	See	those
flowers	–	the	bright	colours	to	attract	the	right	insects.	If	the	right	insects	don’t


come	to	collect	the	pollen	the	flower	dies.	So,	brighter	is	better.	Plants	and
animals,	it	goes	back	and	forth,	the	whole	thing	inseparable	and	dependent.
Despite	this,	nothing	stays	the	same.’
‘True,	nothing	ever	stays	the	same.’
‘Those	women	back	there…’
‘Gandaru.	Kin	to	the	Kindaru	and	Sinbarl	–	so	the	men	explained.’
‘Not	true	humans.’
‘No.’
‘Yet	true	to	themselves	none	the	less.’
‘I	imagine	so,	Samar	Dev.’
‘They	broke	my	heart,	Traveller.	Against	us,	they	don’t	stand	a	chance.’
He	glanced	across	at	her.	‘That	is	quite	a	presumption.’
‘It	is?’
‘We	are	riding	towards	a	Tartheno	Toblakai,	belonging	to	a	remnant	tribe
isolated	somewhere	in	northern	Genabackis.	You	tell	me	that	Karsa	Orlong
intends	to	deliver	destruction	to	all	the	“children”	of	the	world	–	to	us,	in	other
words.	When	you	speak	of	this,	I	see	fear	in	your	eyes.	A	conviction	that	he
will	succeed.	So	now,	tell	me,	against	one	such	as	Karsa	Orlong	and	his	kind,
do	we	stand	a	chance?’
‘Of	course	we	do,	because	we	can	fight	back.	What	can	these	gentle
Gandaru	manage?	Nothing.	They	can	hide,	and	when	that	fails	they	are	killed,
or	enslaved.	Those	two	women	were	probably	raped.	Used.	Vessels	for	human
seed.’
‘Barring	the	rape,	every	animal	we	hunt	for	food	possesses	the	same	few
choices.	Hide	or	flee.’
‘Until	there	is	no	place	left	to	hide.’
‘And	when	the	animals	go,	so	too	will	we.’
She	barked	a	laugh.	‘You	might	believe	so,	Traveller.	No,	we	won’t	go	that
way.	We’ll	just	fill	the	empty	lands	with	cattle,	with	sheep	and	goats.	Or	break
up	the	ground	and	plant	corn.	There	is	no	stopping	us.’
‘Except,	perhaps,	for	Karsa	Orlong.’
And	there,	then,	was	the	truth	of	all	this.	Karsa	Orlong	pronounced	a	future
of	destruction,	extinction.	And	she	wished	him	well.
‘There,’	Traveller	said	in	a	different	voice,	and	he	rose	in	his	stirrups.	‘He
didn’t	travel	too	far	after	all—’
From	Havok’s	saddle,	Samar	Dev	could	now	see	him.	He	had	halted	and
was	facing	them,	a	thousand	paces	distant.	Two	horses	stood	near	him,	and
there	were	humps	in	the	grass	of	the	knoll,	scattered	like	ant	hills	or	boulders
but,	she	knew,	neither	of	those.	‘He	was	attacked,’	she	said.	‘The	idiots	should


have	left	well	enough	alone.’
‘I’m	sure	their	ghosts	concur,’	Traveller	said.
They	cantered	closer.
The	Toblakai	looked	no	different	from	the	last	time	she	had	seen	him	–
there	on	the	sands	of	the	arena	in	Letheras.	As	sure,	as	solid,	as	undeniable	as
ever.	‘I	shall	kill	him…once.’	And	so	he	did.	Defying…everything.	Oh,	he	was
looking	at	her	now,	and	at	Havok,	with	the	air	of	a	master	summoning	his
favourite	hunting	dog.
And	suddenly	she	was	furious.	‘This	wasn’t	obligation!’	she	snapped,
savagely	reining	in	directly	in	front	of	him.	‘You	abandoned	us	–	there	in	that
damned	foreign	city!	“Do	this	when	the	time	is	right”,	and	so	I	did!	Where	the
Hood	did	you	go?	And—’
And	then	she	yelped,	as	the	huge	warrior	swept	her	off	the	saddle	with	one
massive	arm,	and	closed	her	in	a	suffocating	embrace,	and	the	bastard	was
laughing	and	even	Traveller	–	curse	the	fool	–	was	grinning,	although	to	be
sure	it	was	a	hard	grin,	mindful	as	he	clearly	was	of	the	half-dozen	bodies
lying	amidst	blood	and	entrails	in	the	grasses.
‘Witch!’
‘Set	me	down!’
‘I	am	amazed,’	he	bellowed,	‘that	Havok	suffered	you	all	this	way!’
‘Down!’
So	he	dropped	her.	Jarring	her	knees,	sending	her	down	with	a	thump	on
her	backside,	every	bone	rattled.	She	glared	up	at	him.
But	Karsa	Orlong	had	already	turned	away	and	was	eyeing	Traveller,	who
remained	on	his	horse.	‘You	–	are	you	her	husband	then?	She	must	have	had
one	somewhere	–	no	other	reason	for	her	forever	refusing	me.	Very	well,	we
shall	fight	for	her,	you	and	me—’
‘Be	quiet,	Karsa!	He’s	not	my	husband	and	no	one’s	fighting	for	me.
Because	I	belong	to	no	one	but	me!	Do	you	understand?	Will	you	ever
understand?’
‘Samar	Dev	has	spoken,’	said	Traveller.	‘We	met	not	long	ago,	both
journeying	on	this	plain.	We	chose	to	ride	as	companions.	I	am	from	Dal	Hon,
on	the	continent	of	Quon	Tali—’
Karsa	grunted.	‘Malazan.’
An	answering	nod.	‘I	am	called	Traveller.’
‘You	hide	your	name.’
‘What	I	hide	merely	begins	with	my	name,	Karsa	Orlong.’
The	Toblakai’s	eyes	thinned	at	that.
‘You	bear	the	tattoos,’	Traveller	went	on,	‘of	an	escaped	slave	of	Seven


Cities.	Or,	rather,	a	recaptured	one.	Clearly,	the	chains	did	not	hold	you	for
long.’
Samar	Dev	had	picked	herself	up	and	was	now	brushing	the	dust	from	her
clothes.	‘Are	these	Skathandi?’	she	asked,	gesturing	at	the	bodies.	‘Karsa?’
The	giant	turned	away	from	his	study	of	the	Malazan.	‘Idiots,’	he	said.
‘Seeking	vengeance	for	the	dead	king	–	as	if	I	killed	him.’
‘Did	you?’
‘No.’
‘Well,’	she	said,	‘at	least	now	I	will	have	a	horse	of	my	own.’
Karsa	walked	over	to	Havok	and	settled	a	hand	on	his	neck.	The	beast’s
nostrils	flared	and	the	lips	peeled	back	to	reveal	the	overlong	fangs.	Karsa
laughed.	‘Yes,	old	friend,	I	smell	of	death.	When	was	it	never	thus?’	And	he
laughed	again.
‘Hood	take	you,	Karsa	Orlong	–	what	happened?’
He	frowned	at	her.	‘What	do	you	mean,	witch?’
‘You	killed	the	Emperor.’
‘I	said	I	would,	and	so	I	did.’	He	paused,	and	then	said,	‘And	now	this
Malazan	speaks	as	if	he	would	make	me	a	slave	once	more.’
‘Not	at	all,’	said	Traveller.	‘It	just	seems	as	if	you	have	lived	an	eventful
life,	Toblakai.	I	only	regret	that	I	will	probably	never	hear	your	tale,	for	I
gather	that	you	are	not	the	talkative	type.’
Karsa	Orlong	bared	his	teeth,	and	then	swung	up	into	the	saddle.	‘I	am
riding	north,’	he	said.
‘As	am	I,’	replied	Traveller.
Samar	Dev	collected	both	horses	and	tied	a	long	lead	to	the	one	she
decided	she	would	not	ride,	then	climbed	into	the	saddle	of	the	other	–	a	russet
gelding	with	a	broad	back	and	disinterested	eyes.	‘I	think	I	want	to	go	home,’
she	pronounced.	‘Meaning	I	need	to	find	a	port,	presumably	on	the	western
coast	of	this	continent.’
Traveller	said,	‘I	ride	to	Darujhistan.	Ships	ply	the	lake	and	the	river	that
flows	to	the	coast	you	seek.	I	would	welcome	the	company,	Samar	Dev.’
‘Darujhistan,’	said	Karsa	Orlong.	‘I	have	heard	of	that	city.	Defied	the
Malazan	Empire	and	so	still	free.	I	will	see	it	for	myself.’
‘Fine	then,’	Samar	Dev	snapped.	‘Let’s	ride	on,	to	the	next	pile	of	corpses	–
and	with	you	for	company,	Karsa	Orlong,	that	shouldn’t	be	long	–	and	then
we’ll	ride	to	the	next	one	and	so	on,	right	across	this	entire	continent.	To
Darujhistan!	Wherever	in	Hood’s	name	that	is.’
‘I	will	see	it,’	Karsa	said	again.	‘But	I	will	not	stay	long.’	And	he	looked	at
her	with	suddenly	fierce	eyes.	‘I	am	returning	home,	witch.’


‘To	forge	your	army,’	she	said,	nodding,	sudden	nerves	tingling	in	her	gut.
‘And	then	the	world	shall	witness.’
‘Yes.’
After	a	moment,	the	three	set	out,	Karsa	Orlong	on	her	left,	Traveller	on
her	right,	neither	speaking,	yet	they	were	histories,	tomes	of	past,	present	and
future.	Between	them,	she	felt	like	a	crumpled	page	of	parchment,	her	life	a
minor	scrawl.
High,	high	above	them,	a	Great	Raven	fixed	preternatural	eyes	upon	the
three	figures	far	below,	and	loosed	a	piercing	cry,	then	tilted	its	broad	blacksail	wings	and	raced	on	a	current	of	chill	wind,	rushing	east.
	
She	thought	she	might	be	dead.	Every	step	she	took	was	effortless,	a	product	of
will	and	nothing	else	–	no	shifting	of	weight,	no	swing	of	legs	nor	flexing	of
knees.	Will	carried	her	where	she	sought	to	go,	to	that	place	of	formless	light
where	the	white	sand	glowed	blindingly	bright	beneath	her,	at	the	proper
distance	had	she	been	standing.	Yet,	looking	down,	she	saw	nothing	of	her	own
body.	No	limbs,	no	torso,	and	nowhere	to	any	side	could	she	see	her	shadow.
Voices	droned	somewhere	ahead,	but	she	was	not	yet	ready	for	them,	so
she	remained	where	she	was,	surrounded	in	warmth	and	light.
Pulses,	as	from	torches	flaring	through	thick	mist,	slowly	approached,
disconnected	from	the	droning	voices,	and	she	now	saw	a	line	of	figures
drawing	towards	her.	Women,	heads	tilted	down,	long	hair	over	their	faces,
naked,	each	one	heavy	with	pregnancy.	The	torch	fires	hovered	over	each	one,
fist-sized	suns	in	which	rainbow	flames	flickered	and	spun.
Salind	wanted	to	recoil.	She	was	a	Child	of	a	Dead	Seed,	after	all.	Born
from	a	womb	of	madness.	She	had	nothing	for	these	women.	She	was	no
longer	a	priestess,	no	longer	able	to	confer	the	blessing	of	anyone,	no	god	and
least	of	all	herself,	upon	any	child	waiting	to	tumble	into	the	world.
Yet	those	seething	orbs	of	flame	–	she	knew	they	were	the	souls	of	the
unborn,	the	not-yet-born,	and	these	mothers	were	walking	towards	her,	with
purpose,	with	need.
I	can	give	you	nothing!	Go	away!
Still	they	came	on,	faces	lifting,	revealing	eyes	dark	and	empty,	and
seemed	not	to	see	her	even	as,	one	by	one,	they	walked	through	Salind.
Gods,	some	of	these	women	were	not	even	human.
And	as	each	one	passed	through	her,	she	felt	the	life	of	the	child	within.	She
saw	the	birth	unfolding,	saw	the	small	creature	with	those	strangely	wise	eyes
that	seemed	to	belong	to	every	newborn	(except,	perhaps,	her	own).	And	then


the	years	rushing	on,	the	child	growing,	faces	taking	the	shape	they	would
carry	into	old	age—
But	not	all.	As	mother	after	mother	stepped	through	her,	futures	flashed
bright,	and	some	died	quickly	indeed.	Fraught,	flickering	sparks,	ebbing,
winking	out,	darkness	rushing	in.	And	at	these	she	cried	out,	filled	with	anguish
even	as	she	understood	that	souls	travelled	countless	journeys,	of	which	only
one	could	be	known	by	a	mortal	–	so	many,	in	countless	perturbations	–	and
that	the	loss	belonged	only	to	others,	never	to	the	child	itself,	for	in	its
inarticulate,	ineffable	wisdom,	understanding	was	absolute;	the	passage	of	life
that	seemed	tragically	short	could	well	be	the	perfect	duration,	the	experience
complete—
Others,	however,	died	in	violence,	and	this	was	a	crime,	an	outrage	against
life	itself.	Here,	among	these	souls,	there	was	fury,	shock,	denial.	There	was
railing,	struggling,	bitter	defiance.	No,	some	deaths	were	as	they	should	be,	but
others	were	not.	From	somewhere	a	woman’s	voice	began	speaking.
‘Bless	them,	that	they	not	be	taken.
‘Bless	them,	that	they	begin	in	their	time	and	that	they	end	in	its	fullness.
‘Bless	them,	in	the	name	of	the	Redeemer,	against	the	cruel	harvesters	of
souls,	the	takers	of	life.
‘Bless	them,	Daughter	of	Death,	that	each	life	shall	be	as	it	is	written,	for
peace	is	born	of	completion,	and	completion	denied	–	completion	of	all
potential,	all	promised	in	life	–	is	a	crime,	a	sin,	a	consignation	to	eternal
damnation.	Beware	the	takers,	the	users!	The	blight	of	killers!
‘They	are	coming!	Again	and	again,	they	harvest	the	souls—’
That	strange	voice	was	shrieking	now,	and	Salind	sought	to	flee	but	all	will
had	vanished.	She	was	trapped	in	this	one	place,	as	mother	after	mother
plunged	into	her,	eyes	black	and	wide,	mouths	gaping	in	a	chorus	of	screams,
wailing	terror,	heart-crushing	fear	for	their	unborn	children—
All	at	once	she	heard	the	droning	voices	again,	summoning	her,	inviting
her	into…into	what?
Sanctuary.
With	a	cry	tearing	loose	from	her	throat,	Salind	pulled	away,	raced
towards	those	voices—
And	opened	her	eyes.	Low	candlelight	surrounded	her.	She	was	lying	on	a
bed.	The	voices	embraced	her	from	all	sides	and,	blinking,	she	sought	to	sit	up.
So	weak—
An	arm	slipped	behind	her	shoulders,	helped	her	rise	as	pillows	were
pushed	underneath.	She	stared	up	at	a	familiar,	alien	face.	‘Spinnock	Durav.’
He	nodded.


Others	were	rising	into	view	now.	Tiste	Andii	women,	all	in	dark	shapeless
robes,	eyes	averted	as	they	began	filing	out	of	the	chamber,	taking	their
chanting	song	with	them.
Those	voices	–	so	heavy,	so	solid	–	they	truly	belonged	to	these	women?
She	was	astonished,	half	disbelieving,	and	yet…
‘You	almost	died,’	Spinnock	Durav	said.	‘The	healers	called	you	back	–	the
priestesses.’
‘But	–	why?’
His	smile	was	wry.	‘I	called	in	a	favour	or	two.	But	I	think,	once	they
attended	you,	there	was	more	to	it.	An	obligation,	perhaps.	You	are,	after	all,	a
sister	priestess	–	oh,	betrothed	to	a	different	ascendant,	true	enough,	but	that
did	not	matter.	Or,’	and	he	smiled	again,	‘so	it	turned	out.’
Yes,	but	why?	Why	did	you	bring	me	back?	I	don’t	want—oh,	she	could	not
complete	that	thought.	Understanding	now,	at	last,	how	vast	the	sin	of	suicide	–
of	course,	it	would	not	have	been	that,	would	it?	To	have	simply	slipped	away,
taken	by	whatever	sickness	afflicted	her.	Was	it	not	a	kind	of	wisdom	to
surrender?
‘No,’	she	mumbled,	‘it	isn’t.’
‘Salind?’
‘To	bless,’	she	said,	‘is	to	confer	a	hope.	Is	that	enough?	To	make	sacred
the	wish	for	good	fortune,	a	fulfilled	life?	What	can	it	achieve?’
He	was	studying	her	face.	‘High	Priestess,’	he	now	said,	haltingly,	as	if
truly	attempting	an	answer,	‘in	blessing,	you	purchase	a	moment	of	peace,	in
the	one	being	blessed,	in	the	one	for	whom	blessing	is	asked.	Perhaps	it	does
not	last,	but	the	gift	you	provide,	well,	its	value	never	fades.’
She	turned	her	head,	looked	away.	Beyond	the	candles,	she	saw	a	wall
crowded	with	Andiian	hieroglyphs	and	a	procession	of	painted	figures,	all
facing	one	way,	to	where	stood	the	image	of	a	woman	whose	back	was	turned,
denying	all	those	beseeching	her.	A	mother	rejecting	her	children	–	she	could
see	how	the	artist	had	struggled	with	all	those	upturned	faces,	the	despair	and
anguish	twisting	them	–	painted	in	tears,	yes.
‘I	must	go	back,’	she	said.
‘Back?	Where?’
‘The	camp,	the	place	of	the	pilgrims.’
‘You	are	not	yet	strong	enough,	High	Priestess.’
Her	words	to	him	had	stripped	away	his	using	her	chosen	name.	He	was
seeing	her	now	as	a	High	Priestess.	She	felt	a	twinge	of	loss	at	that.	But	now
was	not	the	time	to	contemplate	the	significance	of	such	things.	Spinnock
Durav	was	right	–	she	was	too	weak.	Even	these	thoughts	exhausted	her.	‘As


soon	as	I	can,’	she	said.
‘Of	course.’
‘They	are	in	danger.’
‘What	would	you	have	me	do?’
She	finally	looked	back	at	him.	‘Nothing.	This	belongs	to	me.	And
Seerdomin.’
At	the	mention	of	that	name	the	Tiste	Andii	winced.	‘High	Priestess—’
‘He	will	not	reject	me	again.’
‘He	is	missing.’
‘What?’
‘I	cannot	find	him.	I	am	sorry,	but	I	am	fairly	certain	he	is	no	longer	in
Black	Coral.’
‘No	matter,’	she	said,	struggling	to	believe	her	own	words.	‘No	matter.	He
will	come	when	he	is	needed.’	She	could	see	that	Spinnock	Durav	was
sceptical,	but	she	would	not	berate	him	for	that.	‘The	Redeemer	brought	me	to
the	edge	of	death,’	she	said,	‘to	show	me	what	was	needed.	To	show	me	why	I
was	needed.’	She	paused.	‘Does	that	sound	arrogant?	It	does,	doesn’t	it?’
His	sigh	was	ragged.	He	stood.	‘I	will	return	to	check	on	you,	High
Priestess.	For	now,	sleep.’
Oh,	she	had	offended	him,	but	how?	‘Wait,	Spinnock	Durav—’
‘It	is	all	right,’	he	said.	‘You	have	misread	me.	Well,	perhaps	not	entirely.
You	spoke	of	your	god	showing	you	what	was	needed	–	something	we	Tiste
Andii	ever	yearn	for	but	will	not	ever	achieve.	Then	you	doubt	yourself.
Arrogance?	Abyss	below,	High	Priestess.	Is	this	how	you	feel	when	the
Redeemer	blesses	you?’
Then	she	was	alone	in	the	chamber.	Candle	flames	wavering	in	the	wake	of
Spinnock	Durav’s	departure,	the	agitated	light	making	the	figures	writhe	on	the
walls.
Still	the	mother	stood,	turned	away.
Salind	felt	a	twist	of	anger.	Bless	your	children,	Mother	Dark.	They	have
suffered	long	enough.	I	say	this	in	gratitude	to	your	own	priestesses,	who	have
given	me	back	my	life.	I	say	it	in	the	name	of	redemption.	Bless	your	children,
woman.
The	candles	settled	once	more,	flames	standing	tall,	immune	to	Salind’s
meek	agitations.	Nowhere	in	this	room	was	there	darkness	and	that,	she
realized,	was	answer	enough.
	
The	old	blood	splashed	on	the	walls	was	black,	eager	to	swallow	the	lantern’s


light.	Dust	still	trickled	down	from	stress	fractures	in	the	canted	ceiling,
reminding	Seerdomin	that	half	a	mountain	stood	above	him.	The	keep’s	upper
levels	were	crushed,	collapsed,	yet	still	settling	even	after	all	this	time.
Perhaps,	some	time	soon,	these	lower	tunnels	would	give	away,	and	the
massive	ruin	atop	the	hollowed-out	cliff	would	simply	tilt	and	slide	into	the
sea.
In	the	meantime,	there	were	these	unlit,	wending,	buckled	corridors,	a
chaotic	maze	where	no	one	belonged,	and	yet	boot	prints	tracked	the	thick,
gritty	dust.	Looters?	Perhaps,	although	Seerdomin	well	knew	there	was	little	to
be	found	in	these	lower	levels.	He	had	walked	these	routes	many	times,	doing
what	he	could	for	the	various	prisoners	of	the	Pannion	Seer,	though	it	was
never	enough	–	no,	never	enough.
If	there	was	a	curse,	a	most	vicious	kind	of	curse,	whereby	a	decent	person
found	him	or	herself	in	inescapable	servitude	to	a	creature	of	pure,
unmitigated	evil,	then	Seerdomin	had	lived	it.	Decency	did	not	exculpate.
Honour	purchased	no	abeyance	on	crimes	against	humanity.	And	as	for	duty,
well,	it	increasingly	seemed	the	sole	excuse	of	the	morally	despicable.	He
would	offer	up	none	of	these	in	defence	of	the	things	he	had	done	at	his
master ’s	behest.	Nor	would	he	speak	of	duress,	of	the	understandable	desire	to
stay	alive	under	the	threat	of	deadly	coercion.	None	of	these	was	sufficient.
When	undeniable	crimes	had	been	committed,	justification	was	the	act	of	a
coward.	And	it	was	our	cowardice	that	permitted	such	crimes	in	the	first	place.
No	tyrant	could	thrive	where	every	subject	said	no.
The	tyrant	thrives	when	the	first	fucking	fool	salutes.
He	well	understood	that	many	people	delighted	in	such	societies	–	there
had	been	fellow	Seerdomin,	most	of	them	in	fact,	who	revelled	in	the	fear	and
the	obedience	that	fear	commanded.	And	this	was	what	had	led	him	here,
trailing	an	old	palace	retainer	of	the	Seer	who	had	made	his	furtive	way	into
the	ruins	of	the	old	keep.	No,	not	a	looter.	A	sordid	conspiracy	was	afoot,
Seerdomin	was	certain	of	that.	Survivors	of	one	nightmare	seeking	to	nurture
yet	another.	That	man	would	not	be	alone	once	he	reached	his	destination.
He	closed	the	shutter	to	the	lantern	once	more	and	continued	on.
Malazan	soldiers	had	died	here,	along	with	the	Pannion’s	own.	Seguleh	had
carved	through	the	ranks	of	palace	guard.	Seerdomin	could	almost	hear	the
echoes	of	that	slaughter,	the	cries	of	the	dying,	the	desperate	pleading	against
cruel	mischance,	the	stinging	clash	of	weapons.	He	came	to	a	set	of	steps
leading	down.	Rubble	had	been	cleared	away.	From	somewhere	below	came
the	murmur	of	voices.
They	had	set	no	guard,	proof	of	their	confidence,	and	as	he	stealthily


descended	he	could	make	out	the	glow	of	lanterns	emanating	from	the	cell
down	below.
This	chamber	had	once	been	home	to	the	one	called	Toc	the	Younger.
Chained	against	one	wall,	well	within	reach	of	the	Seer ’s	monstrous	mother.
Seerdomin’s	paltry	gifts	of	mercy	had	probably	stung	like	droplets	of	acid	on
the	poor	man.	Better	to	have	left	him	to	go	entirely	mad,	escaping	into	that
oblivious	world	where	everything	was	so	thoroughly	broken	that	repair	was
impossible.	He	could	still	smell	the	reek	of	the	K’Chain	matron.
The	voices	were	becoming	distinguishable	–	three,	maybe	four
conspirators.	He	could	hear	the	excitement,	the	sweet	glee,	along	with	the	usual
self-importance,	the	songs	of	those	who	played	games	with	lives	–	it	was	the
same	the	world	over,	in	every	history,	ever	the	same.
He	had	crushed	down	his	outrage	so	long	ago,	it	was	a	struggle	to	stir	it
into	life	once	more,	but	he	would	need	it.	Sizzling,	yet	hard,	controlled,
peremptory.	Three	steps	from	the	floor,	still	in	darkness,	he	slowly	drew	out
his	tulwar.	It	did	not	matter	what	they	were	discussing.	It	did	not	even	matter	if
their	plans	were	pathetic,	doomed	to	fail.	It	was	the	very	act	that	awakened	in
Seerdomin	the	heart	of	murder,	so	that	it	now	drummed	through	him,
thunderous	with	contempt	and	disgust,	ready	to	do	what	was	needed.
When	he	first	stepped	into	the	chamber,	none	of	the	four	seated	at	the	table
even	noticed,	permitting	him	to	take	another	stride,	close	enough	to	send	his
broad-bladed	weapon	through	the	first	face	that	lifted	towards	him,	cutting	it	in
half.	His	return	attack	was	a	looping	backswing,	chopping	through	the	neck	of
the	man	to	the	right,	who,	in	lurching	upright,	seemed	to	offer	his	throat	to	that
slashing	edge	like	a	willing	sacrifice.	As	his	head	tumbled	away,	the	body
stumbling	as	it	backed	over	the	chair,	Seerdomin	grasped	one	edge	of	the	table
and	flipped	it	into	the	air,	hammering	it	into	the	man	on	the	left,	who	fell
beneath	the	table’s	weight.	Leaving	one	man	directly	opposite	Seerdomin.
Pleading	eyes,	a	hand	scrabbling	at	the	ornate	dagger	at	the	belt,	backing
away—
Not	nearly	fast	enough,	as	Seerdomin	moved	forward	and	swung	his	heavy
tulwar	down,	cutting	through	the	upraised	forearms	and	carving	into	the	man’s
upper	chest,	through	clavicle	and	down	one	side	of	the	sternum.	The	edge
jammed	at	the	fourth	rib,	forcing	Seerdomin	to	kick	the	corpse	loose.	He	then
turned	to	the	last	conspirator.
The	old	palace	retainer.	Spittle	on	his	lips,	the	reek	of	urine	rising	like
steam.	‘No,	please—’
‘Do	you	know	me,	Hegest?’
A	quick	nod.	‘A	man	of	honour	–	what	you	have	done	here—’


‘Defies	what	you	would	expect	of	an	honourable	man,	and	it	is	that	very
expectation	that	frees	you	to	scheme	and	plot.	Alas,	Hegest,	your	expectation
was	wrong.	Fatally	so.	Black	Coral	is	at	peace,	for	the	first	time	in	decades	–
freed	of	terror.	And	yet	you	chafe,	dreaming	no	doubt	of	your	old	station,	of
all	the	excesses	you	were	privileged	to	possess.’
‘I	throw	myself	upon	the	mercy	of	the	Son	of	Darkness—’
‘You	can’t	throw	yourself	that	far,	Hegest.	I	am	going	to	kill	you,	here,
now.	I	can	do	it	quick,	or	slow.	If	you	answer	my	questions,	I	will	grant	you	the
mercy	you	have	never	spared	others.	If	you	refuse,	I	will	do	to	you	as	you	have
done	to	many,	many	victims	–	and	yes,	I	well	remember.	Which	fate	will	it	be,
Hegest?’
‘I	will	tell	you	everything,	Seerdomin.	In	exchange	for	my	life.’
‘Your	life	is	not	the	coin	of	this	deal.’
The	man	began	weeping.
‘Enough	of	that,’	Seerdomin	growled.	‘Today,	I	am	as	you	once	were,
Hegest.	Tell	me,	did	the	tears	of	your	victims	soften	your	heart?	No,	not	once.
So	wipe	your	face.	And	give	me	your	answer.’
And	so	the	man	did,	and	Seerdomin	began	asking	his	questions.
	
Later,	and	true	to	his	word,	Seerdomin	showed	mercy,	in	so	far	as	that	word
meant	anything	when	taking	someone	else’s	life,	and	he	well	knew	it	didn’t
mean	much.	He	cleaned	his	weapon	on	Hegest’s	cloak.
Was	he	any	different,	then,	from	these	fools?	There	were	countless	avenues
he	could	take	that	would	lead	him	to	assert	otherwise,	each	one	tortured	and
malign	with	deceit.	Without	doubt,	he	told	himself	as	he	made	his	way	out,	what
he	had	done	ended	something,	whereas	what	these	fools	had	been	planning	was
the	beginning	of	something	else,	something	foul	and	sure	to	spill	innocent
blood.	By	this	measure,	his	crime	was	far	the	lesser	of	the	two.	So	why,	then,
did	his	soul	feel	stained,	damaged?
Cogent	reasoning	could	lead	a	man,	step	by	logical	step,	into	horror.	He
now	carried	with	him	a	list	of	names,	the	sordid	details	of	a	scheme	to	drive
out	the	Tiste	Andii,	and	while	he	knew	it	was	destined	to	fail,	to	leave	it	free
was	to	invite	chaos	and	misery.	And	so	he	would	have	to	kill	again.	Quietly,
revealing	nothing	to	anyone,	for	this	was	an	act	of	shame.	For	his	kind,	for
humans	and	their	stupid,	vicious	inclinations.
Yet	he	did	not	want	to	be	the	hand	of	justice,	for	that	hand	was	ever	bloody
and	often	indiscriminate,	prone	to	excesses	of	all	sorts.
The	cruellest	detail	among	all	that	he	had	learned	this	night	was	that	this


web	of	conspiracy	reached	out	to	the	pilgrim	camp.	Hegest	had	not	known	who
the	players	were	out	there,	but	it	was	clear	that	they	were	important,	perhaps
even	essential.	Seerdomin	would	have	to	go	back	to	the	camp	and	the	very
thought	sickened	him.
Salind,	the	High	Priestess,	was	she	one	of	the	conspirators?	Was	this	act	of
usurpation	at	its	heart	a	religious	one?	It	would	not	be	the	first	time	that	a
religion	or	cult	ignited	with	the	fires	of	self-righteous	certainty	and	puritanical
zeal,	leading	to	ghastly	conflict,	and	had	he	not	heard	–	more	than	once	–	the
bold	assertion	that	the	Son	of	Darkness	held	no	claim	upon	the	region	outside
Night?	An	absurd	notion,	yes,	an	indefensible	one,	the	very	kind	fanatics
converged	upon,	clenched	fists	held	high	in	the	air.
He	had,	for	a	time,	nurtured	the	belief	that	he	was	not	unique	in	his
appreciation	of	the	rule	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	and	his	respect	for	the	wisdom
displayed	again	and	again	by	the	Son	of	Darkness.	The	gift	of	peace	and
stability,	the	sure,	unambiguous	rules	of	law	imposed	by	a	people	whose	own
civilization	spanned	tens	of	thousands	of	years	–	even	longer	if	the	rumours
were	at	all	accurate.	How	could	any	human	begrudge	this	gift?
Many	did,	it	was	now	clear.	The	notion	of	freedom	could	make	even	peace
and	order	seem	oppressive,	generate	the	suspicion	of	some	hidden	purpose,
some	vast	deceit,	some	unspecified	crime	being	perpetrated	beyond	human
ken.	That	was	a	generous	way	of	looking	at	it;	the	alternative	was	to
acknowledge	that	humans	were	intrinsically	conflicted,	cursed	with	acquisitive
addictions	of	the	spirit.
He	reached	the	steep	ramp	leading	to	the	well-hidden	entrance	to	the
tunnels,	rats	skittering	from	his	path,	and	emerged	into	the	warmer,	drier	air	of
Night.	Yes,	he	would	have	to	go	to	the	pilgrim	camp,	but	not	now.	This	would
demand	some	planning.	Besides,	if	he	could	excise	the	cancer	in	the	city,	then
the	conspirators	out	there	would	find	themselves	isolated,	helpless	and
incapable	of	achieving	anything.	He	could	then	deal	with	them	at	his	leisure.
Yes,	that	was	a	better	course.	Reasonable	and	methodical,	as	justice	should
be.	He	was	not	deliberately	avoiding	such	a	journey.
Satisfied	with	these	arguments,	Seerdomin	set	out	to	begin	his	night	of
slaughter,	and	here,	in	this	city,	night	was	without	end.
	
The	rats	watched	him	set	off.	They	could	smell	the	blood	on	him,	and	more
than	one	had	been	witness	to	the	slaughter	far	below,	and	certain	of	these	now
ambled	away	from	the	ruin,	heading	for	the	world	of	daylight	beyond	the
shroud.


Summoned,	yes,	by	their	master,	the	one	known	as	Monkrat,	an	amusing
enough	name,	implicitly	contemptuous	and	derisive.	What	none	of	the	man’s
associates	truly	understood	was	the	truth	underlying	that	name.	Monkrat,	yes.
The	Monk	of	Rats,	priest	and	wizard,	conjuror	and	binder	of	spirits.	Laugh	and
snicker	if	you	like…at	your	peril.
The	liberators	had	found	an	enemy,	and	something	would	have	to	be	done
about	that.
	
The	city	of	Bastion	crouched	above	the	vast	dying	lake,	its	stolid,	squat	walls
blackened	and	streaked	with	some	kind	of	oil.	The	shanties	and	hovels
surrounding	the	wall	had	been	burned	and	then	razed,	the	charred	wreckage
strewn	down	the	slope	leading	to	the	cobbled	road.	Smoke	hung	above	the
battlements,	thick	and	surly.
Cradling	his	battered	hands	–	the	reins	looped	loose	about	them	–
Nimander	squinted	up	at	the	city	and	its	yawning	gates.	No	guards	in	sight,	not
a	single	figure	on	the	walls.	Except	for	the	smoke	the	city	looked	lifeless,
abandoned.
Riding	at	his	side	in	the	front	of	their	modest	column,	Skintick	said,	‘A
name	like	“Bastion”	invites	images	of	ferocious	defenders,	bristling	with	all
manner	of	weapons,	suspicious	of	every	foreigner	climbing	towards	the	gates.
So,’	he	added	with	a	sigh,	‘we	must	be	witness	here	to	the	blessed	indolence	of
saemankelyk,	the	Dying	God’s	sweet	blood.’
Memories	of	his	time	in	the	company	of	the	giant	mason	still	haunted
Nimander.	It	seemed	he	was	cursed	with	occurrences	devoid	of	resolution,
every	life	crossing	his	path	leaving	a	swirling	wake	of	mysteries	in	which	he
flailed	about,	half	drowning.	The	Jaghut,	Gothos,	only	worsened	matters,	a
creature	of	vast	antiquity	seeking	to	make	use	of	them,	somehow,	for	reasons
he	had	been	too	uninterested	to	explain.
Since	we	failed	him.
The	smell	of	rotting	salt	filled	the	air	and	they	could	see	the	bleached	flats
stretching	out	from	the	old	shoreline,	stilted	docks	high	and	dry	above
struggling	weeds,	fisher	boats	lying	on	their	sides	farther	out.	Off	to	their	left,
inland,	farmsteads	were	visible	amidst	rows	of	scarecrows,	but	it	looked	as	if
there	was	nothing	still	living	out	there	–	the	plants	were	black	and	withered,	the
hundreds	of	wrapped	figures	motionless.
They	drew	closer	to	the	archway,	and	still	there	was	no	one	in	sight.
‘We’re	being	watched,’	Skintick	said.
Nimander	nodded.	He	felt	the	same.	Hidden	eyes,	avid	eyes.


‘As	if	we’ve	done	just	what	they	wanted,’	Skintick	went	on,	his	voice	low,
‘by	delivering	Clip,	straight	to	their	damned	Abject	Temple.’
That	was	certainly	possible.	‘I	have	no	intention	of	surrendering	him	–	you
know	that.’
‘So	we	prepare	to	wage	war	against	an	entire	city?	A	fanatic	priesthood
and	a	god?’
‘Yes.’
Grinning,	Skintick	loosened	the	sword	at	his	side.
Nimander	frowned	at	him.	‘Cousin,	I	don’t	recall	you	possessing	such
bloodlust.’
‘Oh,	I	am	as	reluctant	as	you,	Nimander.	But	I	feel	we’ve	been	pushed	long
enough.	It’s	time	to	push	back,	that’s	all.	Still,	that	damage	to	your	hands
worries	me.’
‘Aranatha	did	what	she	could	–	I	will	be	fine.’	He	did	not	explain	how	the
wounding	felt	more	spiritual	than	physical.	Aranatha	had	indeed	healed	the
crushed	bones,	the	mangled	flesh.	Yet	he	still	cradled	them	as	if	crippled,	and
in	his	dreams	at	night	he	found	himself	trapped	in	memories	of	that	heavy
block	of	obsidian	sliding	over	his	fingertips,	the	pain,	the	spurting	blood	–	and
he’d	awaken	slick	with	sweat,	hands	throbbing.
The	very	same	hands	that	had	strangled	Phaed	–	almost	taking	her	life.	The
pain	felt	like	punishment,	and	now,	in	the	city	before	them,	he	believed	that
once	more	they	would	know	violence,	delivering	death	with	terrible	grace.
They	reined	in	before	the	gate’s	archway.	Sigils	crowded	the	wooden
doors,	painted	in	the	same	thick,	black	dye	that	marred	the	walls	to	either	side.
Nenanda	spoke	from	the	wagon’s	bench.	‘What	are	we	waiting	for?
Nimander?	Let’s	get	this	over	with.’
Skintick	twisted	in	the	saddle	and	said,	‘Patience,	brother.	We’re	waiting
for	the	official	welcoming	party.	The	killing	will	have	to	come	later.’
Kallor	climbed	down	from	the	back	of	the	wagon	and	walked	up	to	the
gate.	‘I	hear	singing,’	he	said.
Nimander	nodded.	The	voices	were	distant,	reaching	them	in	faint	waves
rippling	out	from	the	city’s	heart.	There	were	no	other	sounds,	such	as	one
would	expect	from	a	crowded,	thriving	settlement.	And	through	the	archway	he
could	see	naught	but	empty	streets	and	the	dull	faces	of	blockish	buildings,
shutters	closed	on	every	window.
Kallor	had	continued	on,	into	the	shadow	of	the	gate	and	then	out	to	the
wide	street	beyond,	where	he	paused,	his	gaze	fixed	on	something	to	his	left.
‘So	much	for	the	welcoming	party,’	Skintick	said,	sighing.	‘Shall	we	enter,
Nimander?’


From	behind	them	came	Aranatha’s	melodic	voice.	‘Be	warned,	cousins.
This	entire	city	is	the	Abject	Temple.’
Nimander	and	Skintick	both	turned	at	that.
‘Mother	bless	us,’	Skintick	whispered.
‘What	effect	will	that	have	on	us?’	Nimander	asked	her.	‘Will	it	be	the	same
as	in	the	village	that	night?’
‘No,	nothing	like	that	has	awakened	yet.’	Then	she	shook	her	head.	‘But	it
will	come.’
‘And	can	you	defend	us?’	Nenanda	asked.
‘We	will	see.’
Skintick	hissed	under	his	breath	and	then	said,	‘Now	that’s	reassuring.’
‘Never	mind,’	Nimander	replied.	Wincing,	he	tightened	his	grip	on	the
reins	and	with	a	slight	pressure	of	his	legs	he	guided	his	horse	into	the	city.
The	others	lurched	into	motion	behind	him.
Coming	to	Kallor ’s	side	Nimander	followed	the	old	man’s	gaze	down	the
side	street	and	saw	what	had	so	captured	his	attention.	The	ruin	of	an	enormous
mechanism	filled	the	street	a	hundred	paces	down.	It	seemed	to	have	come
from	the	sky,	or	toppled	down	from	the	roof	of	the	building	nearest	the	outer
wall	–	taking	most	of	the	facing	wall	with	it.	Twisted	iron	filled	its	gaping
belly,	where	flattened,	riveted	sheets	had	been	torn	away.	Smaller	pieces	of	the
machine	littered	the	cobbles,	like	fragments	of	armour,	the	iron	strangely	blue,
almost	gleaming.
‘What	in	the	Abyss	is	that?’	Skintick	asked.
‘Looks	K’Chain	Che’Malle,’	Kallor	said.	‘But	they	would	offer	up	no
gods,	dying	or	otherwise.	Now	I	am	curious,’	and	so	saying	he	bared	his	teeth
in	a	smile	not	directed	at	anyone	present	–	which	was,	Nimander	decided,	a
good	thing.
‘Aranatha	says	the	entire	city	is	sanctified.’
Kallor	glanced	over.	‘I	once	attempted	that	for	an	entire	empire.’
Skintick	snorted.	‘With	you	as	the	focus	of	worship?’
‘Of	course.’
‘And	it	failed?’
Kallor	shrugged.	‘Everything	fails,	eventually.’	And	he	set	out	for	a	closer
examination	of	the	ruined	machine.
‘Even	conversation,’	muttered	Skintick.	‘Should	we	follow	him?’
Nimander	shook	his	head.	‘Leave	him.	If	the	city	is	a	temple,	then	there
must	be	an	altar	–	presumably	somewhere	in	the	middle.’
‘Nimander,	we	could	well	be	doing	everything	they	want	us	to	do,
especially	by	bringing	Clip	to	that	altar.	I	think	we	should	find	an	inn,


somewhere	to	rest	up.	We	can	then	reconnoitre	and	see	what	awaits	us.’
He	thought	about	that	for	a	moment,	and	then	nodded.	‘Good	idea.	Lead	the
way,	Skin,	see	what	you	can	find.’
They	continued	on	down	the	main	street	leading	from	the	gate.	The
tenements	looked	lifeless,	the	shops	on	the	ground	level	empty,	abandoned.
Glyphs	covered	every	wall	and	door,	spread	out	from	every	shuttered	window
to	as	far	as	a	hand	could	reach	if	someone	was	leaning	out.	The	writing	seemed
to	record	a	frenzy	of	revelation,	or	madness,	or	both.
A	half-dozen	buildings	along,	Skintick	found	an	inn,	closed	up	like
everything	else,	but	he	dismounted	and	approached	the	courtyard	gates.	A	push
swung	them	wide	and	Skintick	looked	back	with	a	smile.
The	wagon’s	hubs	squealed	in	well-worn	grooves	in	the	frame	of	the	gate
as	Nenanda	guided	it	in.	The	compound	beyond	was	barely	large	enough	to
accommodate	a	single	carriage	on	its	circular	lane	that	went	past,	first,	the
stables,	and	then	the	front	three-stepped	entrance	to	the	hostelry.	A	partly
subterranean	doorway	to	the	left	of	the	main	doors	probably	led	into	the
taproom.	In	the	centre	of	the	round	was	a	stone-lined	well	–	stuffed	solid	with
bloating	corpses.
Skintick’s	smile	faded	upon	seeing	this	detail.	Dead	maggots	ringed	the
well.	‘Let’s	hope,’	he	said	to	Nimander,	‘there’s	another	pump	inside…drawing
from	a	different	source.’
Nenanda	had	set	the	brake	and	he	now	dropped	down,	eyeing	the	bodies.
‘Previous	guests?’
‘It’s	what	happens	when	you	don’t	pay	up.’
Nimander	dismounted	and	shot	Skintick	a	warning	look,	but	his	cousin	did
not	notice	–	or	chose	not	to,	for	he	then	continued,	‘Or	all	the	beds	were	taken.
Or	some	prohibition	against	drinking	anything	but	kelyk	–	it	clearly	doesn’t
pay	to	complain.’
‘Enough,’	said	Nimander.	‘Nenanda,	can	you	check	the	stables	–	see	if
there’s	feed	and	clean	water.	Skintick,	let’s	you	and	I	head	inside.’
A	spacious,	well-furnished	foyer	greeted	them,	with	a	booth	immediately
to	the	right,	bridged	by	a	polished	counter.	The	narrow	panel	door	set	in	its
back	wall	was	shut.	To	the	left	was	a	two-sided	cloakroom	and	beside	that	the
sunken	entranceway	into	the	taproom.	A	corridor	was	directly	ahead,	leading
to	rooms,	and	a	steep	staircase	climbed	to	the	next	level	where,	presumably,
more	rooms	could	be	found.	Heaped	on	the	floor	at	the	foot	of	the	stairs	was
bedding,	most	of	it	rather	darkly	stained.
‘They	stripped	the	rooms,’	observed	Skintick.	‘That	was	considerate.’
‘You	suspect	they’ve	prepared	this	place	for	us?’


‘With	bodies	in	the	well	and	ichor-stained	sheets?	Probably.	It’s	reasonable
that	we	would	stay	on	the	main	street	leading	in,	and	this	was	the	first	inn	we’d
reach.’	He	paused,	looking	round.	‘Obviously,	there	are	many	ways	of
readying	for	guests.	Who	can	fathom	human	cultures,	anyway?’
Outside,	Nenanda	and	the	others	were	unpacking	the	wagon.
Nimander	walked	to	the	taproom	entrance	and	ducked	to	look	inside.	Dark,
the	air	thick	with	the	pungent,	bittersweet	scent	of	kelyk.	He	could	hear	Skintick
making	his	way	up	the	stairs,	decided	to	leave	him	to	it.	One	step	down,	on	to
the	sawdust	floor.	The	tables	and	chairs	had	all	been	pushed	to	one	side	in	a
haphazard	pile.	In	the	open	space	left	behind	the	floor	was	thick	with	stains	and
coagulated	clumps	that	reminded	Nimander	of	dung	in	a	stall.	Not	dung,
however;	he	knew	that.
He	explored	behind	the	bar	and	found	rows	of	dusty	clay	bottles	and	jugs,
wine	and	ale.	The	beakers	that	had	contained	kelyk	were	scattered	on	the	floor,
some	of	them	broken,	others	still	weeping	dark	fluid.
The	outer	door	swung	open	and	Nenanda	stepped	inside,	one	hand	on	the
grip	of	his	sword.	A	quick	look	round,	then	he	met	Nimander ’s	gaze	and
shrugged.	‘Was	you	I	heard,	I	guess.’
‘The	stables?’
‘Well	enough	supplied,	for	a	few	days	at	least.	There’s	a	hand	pump	and
spout	over	the	troughs.	The	water	smelled	sour	but	otherwise	fine	–	the	horses
didn’t	hesitate,	at	any	rate.’	He	strode	in.	‘I	think	those	bodies	in	the	well,
Nimander	–	dead	of	too	much	kelyk.	I	suspect	that	well	was	in	fact	dry.	They
just	used	it	to	dump	the	ones	that	died,	as	they	died.’
Nimander	walked	back	to	the	doorway	leading	into	the	foyer.
Desra	and	Kedeviss	had	carried	Clip	inside,	setting	him	on	the	floor.
Skintick	was	on	the	stairs,	a	few	steps	up	from	the	mound	of	soiled	bedding.	He
was	leaning	on	one	rail,	watching	as	the	two	women	attended	to	Clip.	Seeing
Nimander,	he	said,	‘Nothing	but	cockroaches	and	bedbugs	in	the	rooms.	Still,	I
don’t	think	we	should	use	them	–	there’s	an	odd	smell	up	there,	not	at	all
pleasant.’
‘This	room	should	do,’	Nimander	said	as	he	went	over	to	look	down	at
Clip.	‘Any	change?’	he	asked.
Desra	glanced	up.	‘No.	The	same	slight	fever,	the	same	shallow	breathing.’
Aranatha	entered,	looked	round,	then	went	to	the	booth,	lifted	the	hinged
counter	and	stepped	through.	She	tried	the	latch	on	the	panel	door	and	when	it
opened,	she	disappeared	into	the	back	room.
A	grunt	from	Skintick.	‘In	need	of	the	water	closet?’
Nimander	rubbed	at	his	face,	flexed	his	fingers	to	ease	the	ache,	and	then,


as	Nenanda	arrived,	he	said,	‘Skintick	and	I	will	head	out	now.	The	rest	of
you…well,	we	could	run	into	trouble	at	any	time.	And	if	we	do	one	of	us	will
try	to	get	back	here—’
‘If	you	run	into	trouble,’	Aranatha	said	from	the	booth,	‘we	will	know	it.’
Oh?	How?	‘All	right.	We	shouldn’t	be	long.’
They	had	brought	all	their	gear	into	the	room	and	Nimander	now	watched
as	first	Desra	and	then	the	other	women	began	unpacking	their	weapons,	their
fine	chain	hauberks	and	mail	gauntlets.	He	watched	as	they	readied	for	battle,
and	said	nothing	as	anguish	filled	him.	None	of	this	was	right.	It	had	never
been	right.	And	he	could	do	nothing	about	it.
Skintick	edged	his	way	round	the	bedding	and,	with	a	tug	on	Nimander ’s
arm,	led	him	back	outside.	‘They	will	be	all	right,’	he	said.	‘It’s	us	I’m	worried
about.’
‘Us?	Why?’
Skintick	only	smiled.
They	passed	through	the	gate	and	came	out	on	to	the	main	street	once
more.	The	mid-afternoon	heat	made	the	air	sluggish,	enervating.	The	faint
singing	seemed	to	invite	them	into	the	city’s	heart.	An	exchanged	glance;	then,
with	a	shrug	from	Skintick,	they	set	out.
‘That	machine.’
‘What	about	it,	Skin?’
‘Where	do	you	think	it	came	from?	It	looked	as	if	it	just…appeared,	just
above	one	of	the	buildings,	and	then	dropped,	smashing	everything	in	its	path,
ending	with	itself.	Do	you	recall	those	old	pumps,	the	ones	beneath	Dreth	Street
in	Malaz	City?	Withal	found	them	in	those	tunnels	he	explored?	Well,	he	took
us	on	a	tour—’
‘I	remember,	Skin.’
‘I’m	reminded	of	those	machines	–	all	the	gears	and	rods,	the	way	the
metal	components	all	meshed	so	cleverly,	ingeniously	–	I	cannot	imagine	the
mind	that	could	think	up	such	constructs.’
‘What	is	all	this	about,	Skin?’
‘Nothing	much.	I	just	wonder	if	that	thing	is	somehow	connected	with	the
arrival	of	the	Dying	God.’
‘Connected	how?’
‘What	if	it	was	like	a	skykeep?	A	smaller	version,	obviously.	What	if	the
Dying	God	was	inside	it?	Some	accident	brought	it	down,	the	locals	pulled	him
out.	What	if	that	machine	was	a	kind	of	throne?’
Nimander	thought	about	that.	A	curious	idea.	Andarist	had	once	explained
that	skykeeps	–	such	as	the	one	Anomander	Rake	claimed	as	his	own	–	were


not	a	creation	of	sorcery,	and	indeed	the	floating	fortresses	were	held	aloft
through	arcane	manipulations	of	technology.
K’Chain	Che’Malle,	Kallor	had	said.	Clearly,	he	had	made	the	same
connection	as	had	Skintick.
‘Why	would	a	god	need	a	machine?’	Nimander	asked.
‘How	should	I	know?	Anyway,	it’s	broken	now.’
They	came	to	a	broad	intersection.	Public	buildings	commanded	each
corner,	the	architecture	peculiarly	utilitarian,	as	if	the	culture	that	had	bred	it
was	singularly	devoid	of	creative	flair.	Glyphs	made	a	mad	scrawl	on
otherwise	unadorned	walls,	some	of	the	symbols	now	striking	Nimander	as
resembling	that	destroyed	mechanism.
The	main	thoroughfare	continued	on	another	two	hundred	paces,	they
could	see,	opening	out	on	to	an	expansive	round.	At	the	far	end	rose	the	most
imposing	structure	they	had	seen	yet.
‘There	it	is,’	Skintick	said.	‘The	Abject…altar.	It’s	where	the	singing	is
coming	from,	I	think.’
Nimander	nodded.
‘Should	we	take	a	closer	look?’
He	nodded	again.	‘Until	something	happens.’
‘Does	being	attacked	by	a	raving	mob	count?’	Skintick	asked.
Figures	were	racing	into	the	round,	threadbare	but	with	weapons	in	their
hands	that	they	waved	about	over	their	heads,	their	song	suddenly	ferocious,	as
they	began	marching	towards	the	two	Tiste	Andii.
‘Here	was	I	thinking	we	were	going	to	be	left	alone,’	Nimander	said.	‘If	we
run,	we’ll	just	lead	them	back	to	the	inn.’
‘True,	but	holding	the	gate	should	be	manageable,	two	of	us	at	a	time,
spelling	each	other.’
Nimander	was	the	first	to	hear	a	sound	behind	him	and	he	spun	round,
sword	hissing	from	the	scabbard.
Kallor.
The	old	warrior	walked	towards	them.	‘You	kicked	them	awake,’	he	said.
‘We	were	sightseeing,’	said	Skintick,	‘and	though	this	place	is	miserable
we	kept	our	opinions	to	ourselves.	In	any	case,	we	were	just	discussing	what	to
do	now.’
‘You	could	stand	and	fight.’
‘We	could,’	agreed	Nimander,	glancing	back	at	the	mob.	Now	fifty	paces
away	and	closing	fast.	‘Or	we	could	beat	a	retreat.’
‘They’re	brave	right	now,’	Kallor	observed,	stepping	past	and	drawing	his
two-handed	sword.	As	he	walked	he	looped	the	plain,	battered	weapon	over	his


head,	a	few	passes,	as	if	loosening	up	his	shoulders.	Suddenly	he	did	not	seem
very	old	at	all.
Skintick	asked,	‘Should	we	help	him?’
‘Did	he	ask	for	help,	Skin?’
‘No,	you’re	right,	he	didn’t.’
They	watched	as	Kallor	marched	directly	into	the	face	of	the	mob.
And	all	at	once	that	mob	blew	apart,	people	scattering,	crowding	out	to	the
sides	as	the	singing	broke	up	into	wails	of	dismay.	Kallor	hesitated	for	but	a
moment,	before	resuming	his	march.	In	the	centre	of	a	corridor	now	that	had
opened	up	to	let	him	pass.
‘He	just	wants	to	see	that	altar,’	Skintick	said,	‘and	he’s	not	the	one	they’re
bothered	with.	Too	bad,’	he	added,	‘it	might	have	been	interesting	to	see	the	old
badger	fight.’
‘Let’s	head	back,’	Nimander	said,	‘while	they’re	distracted.’
‘If	they	let	us.’
They	turned	and	set	off,	at	an	even,	unhurried	pace.	After	a	dozen	or	so
strides	Skintick	half	turned.	He	grunted,	then	said,	‘They’ve	left	us	to	it.
Nimander,	the	message	seems	clear.	To	get	to	that	altar,	we	will	have	to	go
through	them.’
‘So	it	seems.’
‘Things	will	get	messy	yet.’
Yes,	they	would.
‘So,	do	you	think	Kallor	and	the	Dying	God	will	have	a	nice	conversation?
Observations	on	the	weather.	Reminiscing	on	the	old	tyrannical	days	when
everything	was	all	fun	and	games.	Back	when	the	blood	was	redder,	its	taste
sweeter.	Do	you	think?’
Nimander	said	nothing,	thinking	instead	of	those	faces	in	that	mob,	the
black	stains	smeared	round	their	mouths,	the	pits	of	their	eyes.	Clothed	in	rags,
caked	with	filth,	few	children	among	them,	as	if	the	kelyk	made	them	all	equal,
regardless	of	age,	regardless	of	any	sort	of	readiness	to	manage	the	world	and
the	demands	of	living.	They	drank	and	they	starved	and	the	present	was	the
future,	until	death	stole	away	that	future.	A	simple	trajectory.	No	worries,	no
ambitions,	no	dreams.
Would	any	of	that	make	killing	them	easier?	No.
‘I	do	not	want	to	do	this,’	Nimander	said.
‘No,’	Skintick	agreed.	‘But	what	of	Clip?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘This	kelyk	is	worse	than	a	plague,	because	its	victims	invite	it	into	their
lives,	and	then	are	indifferent	to	their	own	suffering.	It	forces	the	question	–


have	we	any	right	to	seek	to	put	an	end	to	it,	to	destroy	it?’
‘Maybe	not,’	Nimander	conceded.
‘But	there	is	another	issue,	and	that	is	mercy.’
He	shot	his	cousin	a	hard	look.	‘We	kill	them	all	for	their	own	good?
Abyss	take	us,	Skin—’
‘Not	them	–	of	course	not.	I	was	thinking	of	the	Dying	God.’
Ah…well.	Yes,	he	could	see	how	that	would	work,	how	it	could,	in	fact,
make	this	palatable.	If	they	could	get	to	the	Dying	God	without	the	need	to
slaughter	hundreds	of	worshippers.	‘Thank	you,	Skin.’
‘For	what?’
‘We	will	sneak	past	them.’
‘Carrying	Clip?’
‘Yes.’
‘That	won’t	be	easy	–	it	might	be	impossible,	in	fact.	If	this	city	is	the
temple,	and	the	power	of	the	Dying	God	grants	gifts	to	the	priests,	then	they
will	sense	our	approach	no	matter	what	we	do.’
‘We	are	children	of	Darkness,	Skintick.	Let	us	see	if	that	still	means
something.’
	
Desra	pulled	her	hand	from	Clip’s	brow.	‘I	was	wrong.	He’s	getting	worse.’
And	she	straightened	and	looked	across	to	Aranatha.	‘How	are	they?’
A	languid	blink.	‘Coming	back,	unharmed.’
Something	was	wrong	with	Aranatha.	Too	calm,	too…empty.	Desra	always
considered	her	sister	to	be	vapid	–	oh,	she	wielded	a	sword	with	consummate
elegance,	as	cold	a	killer	as	the	rest	of	them	when	necessity	so	demanded	–	but
there	was	a	kind	of	pervasive	disengagement	in	Aranatha.	Often	descending
upon	her	in	the	midst	of	calamity	and	chaos,	as	if	the	world	in	its	bolder
mayhem	could	bludgeon	her	senseless.
Making	her	unreliable	as	far	as	Desra	was	concerned.	She	studied	Aranatha
for	a	moment	longer,	their	eyes	meeting,	and	when	her	sister	smiled	Desra
answered	with	a	scowl	and	turned	to	Nenanda.	‘Did	you	find	anything	to	eat	in
the	taproom?	Or	drink?’
The	warrior	was	standing	by	the	front	door,	which	he	held	open	with	one
hand.	At	Desra’s	questions	he	glanced	back.	‘Plenty,	as	if	they’d	just	left	–	or
maybe	it	was	a	delivery,	like	the	kind	we	got	on	the	road.’
‘Someone	must	be	growing	proper	food,	then,’	said	Kedeviss.	‘Or
arranging	its	purchase	from	other	towns	and	the	like.’
‘They’ve	gone	to	a	lot	of	trouble	for	us,’	Nenanda	observed.	‘And	that


makes	me	uneasy.’
‘Clip	is	dying,	Aranatha,’	Desra	said.
‘Yes.’
‘They’re	back,’	Nenanda	announced.
‘Nimander	will	know	what	to	do,’	Desra	pronounced.
‘Yes,’	said	Aranatha.
	
She	circled	once,	high	above	the	city,	and	even	her	preternatural	sight
struggled	against	the	eternal	darkness	below.	Kurald	Galain	was	a	most	alien
warren,	even	in	this	diffused,	weakened	state.	Passing	directly	over	the
slumbering	mass	of	Silanah,	Crone	cackled	out	an	ironic	greeting.	Of	course
there	was	no	visible	response	from	the	crimson	dragon,	yet	the	Great	Raven
well	knew	that	Silanah	sensed	her	wheeling	overhead.	And	no	doubt	permitted,
in	a	flash	of	imagery,	the	vision	of	jaws	snapping,	bones	and	feathers
crunching	as	delicious	fluids	spurted	–	Crone	cackled	again,	louder	this	time,
and	was	rewarded	with	a	twitch	of	that	long,	serpentine	tail.
She	slid	on	to	an	updraught	from	the	cliff’s	edge,	then	angled	down
through	it	on	a	steep	dive	towards	the	low-walled	balcony	of	the	keep.
He	stood	alone,	something	she	had	come	to	expect	of	late.	The	Son	of
Darkness	was	closing	in,	like	an	onyx	flower	as	the	bells	of	midnight	rang	on,
chime	by	chime	to	the	twelfth	and	last,	and	then	there	would	be	naught	but
echoes,	until	even	these	faded,	leaving	silence.	She	crooked	her	wings	to	slow
her	plummet,	the	keep	still	rushing	up	to	meet	her.	A	flurry	of	beating	wings
and	she	settled	atop	the	stone	wall,	talons	crunching	into	the	granite.
‘And	does	the	view	ever	change?’	Crone	asked.
Anomander	Rake	looked	down,	regarded	her	for	a	time.
She	opened	her	beak	to	laugh	in	silence	for	a	few	heartbeats.	‘The	Tiste
Andii	are	not	a	people	prone	to	sudden	attacks	of	joy,	are	they?	Dancing	into
darkness?	The	wild	cheerful	cavort	into	the	future?	Do	you	imagine	that	our
flight	from	his	rotting	flesh	was	not	one	of	rapturous	glee?	Pleasure	at	being
born,	delight	at	being	alive?	Oh,	I	have	run	out	of	questions	for	you	–	it	is
indeed	now	a	sad	time.’
‘Does	Baruk	understand,	Crone?’
‘He	does.	More	or	less.	Perhaps.	We’ll	see.’
‘Something	is	happening	to	the	south.’
She	bobbed	her	head	in	agreement.	‘Something,	oh	yes,	something	all
right.	Are	the	priestesses	in	a	wild	orgy	yet?	The	plunge	that	answers
everything!	Or,	rather,	postpones	the	need	for	answers	for	a	time,	a	time	of


corresponding	bliss,	no	doubt.	But	then…reality	returns.	Damn	reality,	damn	it
to	the	Abyss!	Time	for	another	plunge!’
‘Travel	has	soured	your	mood,	Crone.’
‘It	is	not	in	my	nature	to	grieve.	I	despise	it,	in	fact.	I	rail	against	it!	My
sphincter	explodes	upon	it!	And	yet,	what	is	it	you	force	upon	me,	your	old
companion,	your	beloved	servant?’
‘I	have	no	such	intention,’	he	replied.	‘Clearly,	you	fear	the	worst.	Tell	me,
what	have	your	kin	seen?’
‘Oh,	they	are	scattered	about,	here	and	there,	ever	high	above	the	petty
machinations	of	the	surface	crawlers.	We	watch	as	they	crawl	this	way	and	that.
We	watch,	we	laugh,	we	sing	their	tales	to	our	sisters,	our	brothers.’
‘And?’
She	ducked	her	head,	fixed	one	eye	upon	the	tumultuous	black	seas	below.
‘This	darkness	of	yours,	Master,	breeds	fierce	storms.’
‘So	it	does.’
‘I	will	fly	high	above	the	twisting	clouds,	into	air	clear	and	cold.’
‘And	so	you	shall,	Crone,	so	you	shall.’
‘I	dislike	it	when	you	are	generous,	Master.	When	that	soft	regard	steals
into	your	eyes.	It	is	not	for	you	to	reveal	compassion.	Stand	here,	yes,	unseen,
unknowable,	that	I	might	hold	this	in	my	mind.	Let	me	think	of	the	ice	of	true
justice,	the	kind	that	never	shatters	–	listen,	I	hear	the	bells	below!	How	sure
that	music,	how	true	the	cry	of	iron.’
‘You	are	most	poetic	this	day,	Crone.’
‘It	is	how	Great	Ravens	rail	at	grief,	Master.	Now,	what	would	you	have	me
do?’
‘Endest	Silann	is	at	the	deep	river.’
‘Hardly	alone,	I	should	think.’
‘He	must	return.’
She	was	silent	for	a	moment,	head	cocked.	Then	she	said,	‘Ten	bells	have
sounded.’
‘Ten.’
‘I	shall	be	on	my	way,	then.’
‘Fly	true,	Crone.’
‘I	pray	you	tell	your	beloved	the	same,	Master,	when	the	time	is	nigh.’
He	smiled.	‘There	is	no	need	for	that.’


Chapter	Eleven

Who	are	you	to	judge	whether	she	is	old
or	young,	and	if	she	is	lifting	the	bucket
or	lowering	it	down	into	this	well?
And	is	she	pretty	or	plain	as	undyed	linen,
is	she	a	sail	riding	the	summer	wind
bright	as	a	maiden’s	eye	above	waves	of	blue?
Does	her	walk	sway	in	pleasure	and	promise
of	bracing	dreams	as	if	the	earth	could	sing
fertile	as	joyous	butterflies	in	a	flowered	field,
or	has	this	saddle	stretched	slack	in	cascades
of	ripe	fruit	and	rides	no	more	through
blossomed	orchards?	Who	then	are	you
to	cage	in	presumptuous	iron	the	very
mystery	that	calls	us	to	life	where	hovers
the	brimming	bucket,	ever	poised	between
dark	depths	and	choral	sunlight	–	she	is	beauty
and	this	too	is	a	criminal	exhortation,	and
nothing	worthwhile	is	to	be	found	in	your
regard	that	does	little	more	than	stretch
this	frayed	rope	–	so	shame!
Dismissal	delivers	vicious	wounds	and	she
walks	away	or	walks	to	with	inner	cringing.
Dare	not	speak	of	fairness,	dare	not	indulge
cruel	judgement	when	here	I	sit	watching
and	all	the	calculations	between	blinks
invite	the	multitude	to	heavy	scorn	and	see
that	dwindling	sail	passing	for	ever	beyond	you
as	is	her	privilege	there	on	the	sea	of	flowers
all	sweet	fragrance	swirling	in	her	wake	–
it	will	never	ever	reach	you	–	and	this	is
balance,	this	is	measure,	this	is	the	observance


of	strangers	who	hide	their	tears
when	turning	away.
Young	Men	Against	a	Wall
Nekath	of	One	Eye	Cat

No	purer	artist	exists	or	has	ever	existed	than	a	child	freed	to	imagine.	This
scattering	of	sticks	in	the	dust,	that	any	adult	might	kick	through	without	a
moment’s	thought,	is	in	truth	the	bones	of	a	vast	world,	clothed,	fleshed,	a
fortress,	a	forest,	a	great	wall	against	which	terrible	hordes	surge	and	are
thrown	back	by	a	handful	of	grim	heroes.	A	nest	for	dragons,	and	these	shiny
smooth	pebbles	are	their	eggs,	each	one	home	to	a	furious,	glorious	future.	No
creation	was	ever	raised	as	fulfilled,	as	brimming,	as	joyously	triumphant,	and
all	the	machinations	and	manipulations	of	adults	are	the	ghostly	recollections
of	childhood	and	its	wonders,	the	awkward	mating	to	cogent	function,
reasonable	purpose;	and	each	façade	has	a	tale	to	recount,	a	legend	to	behold	in
stylized	propriety.	Statues	in	alcoves	fix	sombre	expressions,	indifferent	to
every	passer-by.	Regimentation	rules	these	creaking,	stiff	minds	so	settled	in
habit	and	fear.
To	drive	children	into	labour	is	to	slaughter	artists,	to	scour	deathly	all
wonder,	the	flickering	dart	of	imagination	eager	as	finches	flitting	from
branch	to	branch	–	all	crushed	to	serve	grown-up	needs	and	heartless
expectations.	The	adult	who	demands	such	a	thing	is	dead	inside,	devoid	of
nostalgia’s	bright	dancing	colours,	so	smooth,	so	delicious,	so	replete	with
longing	both	sweet	and	bitter	–	dead	inside,	yes,	and	dead	outside,	too.	Corpses
in	motion,	cold	with	the	resentment	the	undead	bear	towards	all	things	still
alive,	all	things	still	warm,	still	breathing.
Pity	these	ones?	Nay,	never,	never	so	long	as	they	drive	on	hordes	of
children	into	grisly	labour,	then	sup	languid	of	air	upon	the	myriad	rewards.
Dare	this	round	self	descend	into	hard	judgement?	This	round	self	does
dare!	A	world	built	of	a	handful	of	sticks	can	start	tears	in	the	eyes,	as	the	artist
on	hands	and	knees	sings	a	score	of	wordless	songs,	speaks	in	a	hundred
voices,	and	moves	unseen	figures	across	the	vast	panorama	of	the	mind’s
canvas	(pausing	but	once	to	wipe	nose	on	sleeve).	He	does	so	dare	this!	And
would	hasten	the	demise	of	such	cruel	abuse.
Even	a	serpent	has	grandiose	designs,	yet	must	slither	in	minute
increments,	struggling	for	distances	a	giant	or	god	would	scorn.	Tongue


flicking	for	the	scent,	this	way	and	that.	Salvation	is	the	succulent	fruit	at	hunt’s
end,	the	sun-warmed	bird’s	egg,	the	soft	cuddly	rat	trapped	in	the	jaws.
So	searches	the	serpent,	friend	to	the	righteous.	So	slides	the	eel	through
the	world’s	stirred	muck,	whiskers	a-probing.	Soon,	one	hopes,	soon!
	
Young	Harllo	was	not	thinking	of	justice,	nor	of	righteous	freedom,	nor	was
he	idly	fashioning	glittering	worlds	from	the	glistening	veins	of	raw	iron,	or
the	flecks	of	gold	in	the	midst	of	cold,	sharp	quartzite.	He	had	no	time	to	kneel
in	some	overgrown	city	garden	building	tiny	forts	and	reed	bridges	over	runoff	tracks	left	by	yesterday’s	downpour.	No,	for	Harllo	childhood	was	over.
Aged	six.
At	this	moment,	then,	he	was	lying	on	a	shelf	of	hard,	black	stone,
devoured	by	darkness.	He	could	barely	hear	the	workers	far	above,	although
rocks	bounced	their	way	down	the	crevasse	every	now	and	then,	echoing	with
harsh	barks	from	the	floor	far	below.
The	last	time	here	he	had	dangled	from	a	rope,	and	there	had	been	no
careless	rain	of	stones	–	any	one	of	which	could	crush	his	skull.	And	on	his
descent	back	then,	his	outstretched	arms	had	encountered	no	walls,	leading	him
to	believe	the	crevasse	was	vast,	opening	out	perhaps	into	a	cavern.	This	time,
of	course,	there	was	no	rope	–	Harllo	should	not	even	be	here	and	would
probably	be	switched	once	he	was	found	out.
Bainisk	had	sent	him	back	to	Chuffs	at	shift’s	end.	And	that	was	where	he
ought	now	to	be,	hurriedly	devouring	his	bowl	of	watery	soup	and	husk	of
black	bread,	before	stumbling	off	to	his	cot.	Instead,	he	was	climbing	down	this
wall,	without	light	to	ensure	that	he	would	not	be	discovered	by	those	working
above.
Not	a	cavern	after	all.	Instead,	a	pocked,	sheer	cliff-face	–	and	those	gaping
holes	were	all	oddly	regular,	rectangular,	although	not	until	Harllo	reached
this	balcony	ledge	did	he	comprehend	that	he	was	climbing	down	the	face	of
some	buried	building.	He	wanted	to	slip	into	one	of	these	windows	and
explore,	but	he	had	promised	to	deliver	splints	to	the	Bone	Miner	below,	and
that	was	what	he	would	do.
Careful	questioning	had	led	him	to	a	definition	of	‘splints’,	but	he	could
not	find	sticks	suitable	for	the	purpose	of	fixing	the	Miner ’s	shattered	legs.
Either	too	feeble	and	small,	or	not	straight	enough;	and	besides,	all	the	wood
brought	to	the	camp	was	too	well	guarded.	Instead,	he	had	gone	to	the	tailings
heaps,	where	all	manner	of	garbage	was	thrown.	Eyed	suspiciously	by	the	old
women	who’d	sold	children	and	grandchildren	to	the	mine	yet	found	they


could	not	sever	their	ties	–	thus	dooming	themselves	to	this	fringe-world	at
camp’s	edge	–	Harllo	had	picked	through	the	rubbish.
Often,	and	especially	from	the	run-off	tunnels	pumped	through	layers	of
sandstone,	miners	would	find	piles	of	bones	from	long-dead	creatures.	Bones
heavy	and	solid	and	almost	impossible	to	break.	Skulls	and	the	like	were	sold
to	collectors	–	scholars	with	squinty	eyes	and	too	much	coin	and	time	for	their
own	good.	The	pieces	already	fractured	off,	broken	up	and	forming	a	kind	of
gravel,	went	to	the	herbalists	for	their	gardens	and	the	mock-healers	for
potions	and	pastes	–	or	so	Bainisk	called	them,	mock-healers,	with	a	sneer	–
ground-up	bone’s	good	only	for	constipation!	This	left	the	oversized	long
bones	–	which	for	some	reason	were	believed	to	be	cursed.
Out	on	the	heaps	he	found	two	that	seemed	to	have	been	from	the	same
kind	of	beast.	After	some	examination	and	comparison,	he	confirmed	that	he
had	a	right	one	and	a	left	one.	They	were	heavy,	thick	and	ridged,	and	he	hoped
they	would	do.
Between	shifts	at	the	main	tunnel	there	was	a	half-bell	when	no	one	was
under	rock,	and	Harllo,	sweating	beneath	the	weight	of	the	bones,	hurriedly
carried	them	in;	then,	finding	an	abandoned	side-passage,	he	stashed	them
along	with	some	lengths	of	rope	and	leather	laces.	That	had	been	before	his
shift,	and	now	here	he	was,	trying	to	do	what	he	had	promised.
Those	long	leg	bones	were	strapped	to	his	back.	His	neck	and	shoulders
were	raw	from	the	ropes	and	more	than	once	he	had	thought	the	swinging	of
the	heavy	bones	would	tug	him	away	from	the	wall,	but	he	had	held	on,	this	far
at	least.
And	now,	lying	on	this	balcony	ledge,	Harllo	rested.
If	someone	went	looking	for	him	and	didn’t	find	him,	an	alarm	would	be
raised.	Always	two	possibilities	when	someone	went	missing.	Flight,	or	lost	in
the	tunnels.	Searches	would	set	out	in	both	directions,	and	some	old	woman
would	say	how	she	saw	him	at	the	heaps,	collecting	bones	and	who	knew	what
else.	Then	someone	else	would	recall	seeing	Harllo	carrying	something	back
to	the	main	tunnel	mouth	in	between	shifts	–	and	Venaz	would	say	that	Harllo
was	clearly	up	to	something,	since	he	never	came	back	for	his	meal.
Something	against	the	rules!	Which	would	put	Bainisk	in	a	bad	situation,	since
Bainisk	had	favoured	him	more	than	once.	Oh,	this	was	all	a	mistake!
Groaning,	he	slipped	over	the	edge,	cautious	with	his	handholds,	and
resumed	his	journey	down.
And,	not	two	man-heights	down	from	the	balcony,	his	groping	feet	found
another	ledge,	followed	immediately	by	another	–	a	staircase,	angling	steeply
down	the	wall.	One	hand	maintaining	contact	with	the	seamless	stone,	Harllo


worked	his	way	down,	step	by	step.
He	did	not	recall	noticing	any	of	this	his	first	time	down	here.	Of	course,
the	candle	light	had	been	feeble	–	which	made	easier	catching	the	glitter	of
gold	and	the	like	–	and	he	had	gone	straight	back	to	the	rope.	And	hadn’t	his
mind	been	awhirl?	A	talking	Imass!	Down	here	for	maybe	hundreds	of	years	–
with	no	one	to	talk	to	and	nothing	to	look	at,	oh,	how	miserable	that	must	have
been.
So.	He	should	not	be	resenting	doing	all	this	for	the	Bone	Miner.	A	few
switches	to	the	back	wasn’t	much	to	pay	for	this	mercy.
He	reached	the	floor	and	paused.	So	dark!	‘Hello?	It’s	me!	Dev’ad	Anan
Tol,	can	you	hear	me?’
‘I	can.	Follow,	then,	the	sound	of	my	voice.	If	such	a	thing	is	possible—’
‘It	is…I	think.	Scratch	the	rock	you’re	sitting	on	–	I’ll	feel	that	under	my
feet—’
‘That,’	said	the	Imass,	‘is	an	impressive	talent.’
‘I’m	good	when	I	can’t	see.	Vibrations,	it’s	called.’
‘Yes.	Can	you	feel	this	then?’
‘I’m	getting	closer,	yes.	I	think	I	can	start	a	lantern	here.	Shuttered	so	it
won’t	spread	out.’	He	crouched	down,	the	ends	of	the	long	bones	thunking
behind	him,	and	untied	the	small	tin	lantern	from	his	belt.	‘This	one’s	called	a
pusher.	You	can	fix	it	on	to	a	pole	and	push	it	ahead.	If	the	wick	dims	fast	then
you	know	it’s	bad	air.	Wait.’	A	moment	later	and	soft	golden	light	slanted	like	a
path,	straight	to	where	sat	the	Bone	Miner.	Harllo	grinned.	‘See,	I	was	almost
there,	wasn’t	I?’
‘What	is	it	that	you	carry,	cub?’
‘Your	splints.	And	rope	and	string.’
‘Let	me	see	those…bones.	Yes,	give	them	to	me—’	And	he	reached	out
skeletal	hands	to	grasp	the	splints	as	soon	as	Harllo	came	close	enough.	A	low
grating	gasp	from	the	Imass,	then	soft	muttering.	‘By	the	Shore	of	Jaghra	Til,	I
had	not	thought	to	see…Cub,	my	tools…for	this.	The	gift	is	not	in	balance.’
‘I	can	try	to	find	some	better	ones—’
‘No,	child.	The	imbalance	is	the	other	way.	These	are	emlava,	a	male,	his
hind	long	bones.	True,	they	twist	and	cant.	Still…yes…possible.’
‘Will	they	work	as	splints	then?’
‘No.’
Harllo	sagged.
The	Imass	rumbled	a	low	laugh.	‘Ah,	cub.	Not	splints.	No.	Legs.’
‘So	you	can	walk	again?	Oh,	I’m	glad!’
‘If	indeed	I	was	somehow	caught	in	the	Ritual	of	Tellann,	yes,	I	think	I	can


fashion…from	these…why	do	you	fret	so,	cub?’
‘I	had	to	sneak	down	here.	If	they	find	out	I’m	missing…’
‘What	will	happen?’
‘I	might	be	beaten	–	not	so	much	as	to	make	me	useless.	It	won’t	be	so	bad.’
‘You	should	go,	then,	quickly.’
Harllo	nodded,	yet	still	he	hesitated.	‘I	found	a	building,	a	buried	building.
Was	that	where	you	lived?’
‘No.	It	was	a	mystery	even	to	the	Jaghut	Tyrant.	Countless	empty	rooms,
windows	looking	out	upon	nothing	–	blank	rock,	pitted	sandstone.	Corridors
leading	nowhere	–	we	explored	most	of	it,	I	recall,	and	found	nothing.	Do	not
attempt	the	same,	cub.	It	is	very	easy	to	get	lost	in	there.’
‘I	better	go,’	said	Harllo.	‘If	I	can	come	down	here	again—’
‘Not	at	risk	of	your	hide.	Soon,	perhaps,	I	will	come	to	you.’
Harllo	thought	of	the	consternation	such	an	event	would	bring,	and	he
smiled.	A	moment	later	he	shuttered	the	lantern	and	set	off	for	the	stairs.
From	sticks	a	fortress,	a	forest,	a	great	wall.	From	sticks,	a	giant,	rising	up
in	the	darkness,	and	to	look	into	the	pits	of	its	eyes	is	to	see	twin	tunnels	into
rock,	reaching	down	and	down,	reaching	back	and	back,	to	the	very	bones	of
the	earth.
And	so	he	rises,	to	look	upon	you	–	Harllo	imagines	this	but	none	of	it	in
quite	this	way.	Such	visions	and	their	deadly	promise	belong	to	the	adults	of	the
world.	To	answer	what’s	been	done.	What’s	been	done.
	
And	in	the	city	every	building	wears	a	rictus	grin,	or	so	it	might	seem,	when
the	stone,	brick,	plaster	and	wood	breathe	in	the	gloom	of	dusk,	and	the	gas
lanterns	are	yet	to	be	set	alight,	and	all	the	world	is	ebbing	with	shadows
drawing	together	to	take	away	all	certainty.	The	city,	this	artifice	of	cliffs	and
caves,	whispers	of	madness.	Figures	scurry	for	cover,	rats	and	worse	peer	out
curious	and	hungry,	voices	grow	raucous	in	taverns	and	other	fiery
sanctuaries.
Is	this	the	city	of	the	day	just	past?	No,	it	is	transformed,	nightmare-tinged,
into	a	netherworld	so	well	suited	to	the	two	figures	walking	–	with	comfort	and
ease	–	towards	the	gate	of	an	estate.	Where	stand	two	guards,	nervous,
moments	from	warning	the	strangers	off	–	for	the	Lady	of	the	House	was	in
residence	and	she	valued	her	privacy,	yes,	she	did.	Or	so	it	must	be	assumed,
and	Scorch	and	Leff,	having	discussed	the	matter	at	length,	were	indeed
convinced	that,	being	a	Lady,	she	valued	all	those	things	few	others	could
afford,	including…er,	privacy.


They	held	crossbows	because	who	could	say	what	might	creep	into	view
and	besides,	the	heavy	weapons	were	so	comforting	to	cradle	when	clouds
devoured	the	stars	and	the	moon	had	forgotten	to	rise	and	the	damned	lanterns
still	weren’t	lit.	True	enough,	torches	in	sconces	framed	the	arched	gateway	but
this	did	little	more	than	blind	the	two	guards	to	the	horrors	lurking	just	beyond
the	pool	of	light.
Two	such	horrors	drew	closer.	One	was	enormous,	broad-shouldered	and
oddly	short-legged,	his	hair	shaggy	as	a	yak’s.	He	was	smiling	–	or,	that	is,	his
teeth	gleamed	and	perhaps	it	was	indeed	a	smile,	perhaps	not.	His	companion
was	almost	as	tall,	but	much	thinner,	almost	skeletal.	Bald,	the	high	dome	of	his
forehead	bore	a	tattooed	scene	of	some	sort	within	an	elaborate	oval	frame	of
threaded	gold	stitched	through	the	skin.	His	teeth,	also	visible,	were	all	capped
in	silver-tipped	gold,	like	a	row	of	fangs.	He	wore	a	cloak	of	threadbare	linen
so	long	it	dragged	behind	him,	while	his	looming	companion	was	dressed	like
a	court	jester	–	bright	greens,	oranges	and	reds	and	yellows	–	and	these	were
just	the	colours	of	his	undersized	vest.	He	wore	a	billowy	blouse	of	sky-blue
silk	beneath	the	vest,	the	cuffs	of	the	sleeves	stiff	and	reaching	halfway	between
wrist	and	elbow.	A	shimmering	black	kerchief	encircled	his	ox-like	neck.	He
wore	vermilion	pantaloons	drawn	tight	just	beneath	the	knees,	and	calf-high
snug	moccasins.
‘I	think,’	muttered	Scorch,	‘I’m	going	to	be	sick.’
‘Stop	there!’	Leff	barked.	‘State	your	business	if	you	have	any	–	but	know
this,	the	Mistress	is	seeing	no	one.’
‘Excellent!’	said	the	huge	one	in	a	thunderous	voice.	‘There	will	be	no
delay	then	in	her	granting	us	audience.	If	you	please,	O	orange-eyed	one,	do
inform	the	Mistress	that	Lazan	Door	and	Madrun	have	finally	arrived,	at	her
service.’
Leff	sneered,	but	he	was	wishing	that	Torvald	Nom	hadn’t	gone	off	for
supper	or	a	roll	with	his	wife	or	whatever,	so	he	could	pass	all	this	on	to	him
and	not	have	to	worry	about	it	any	more.	Standing	here	at	the	gate,	yes,	that	was
within	his	abilities.	‘Train	your	weapon	on	’em,	Scorch,’	he	said.	‘I’ll	go	find
the	castellan.’
Scorch	shot	him	a	look	of	raw	terror.	‘There’s	two,	Leff,	but	only	one
quarrel!	Leave	me	yours.’
‘Fine,	but	I’d	like	to	see	you	get	two	off	with	them	only	ten	paces	away.	If
they	rushed	you,	why,	you’d	be	lucky	to	get	just	one	off.’
‘Still,	it’ll	make	me	feel	better.’
‘Now	now,	gentlemen,’	the	big	one	said,	all	too	smoothly,	‘there’s	no	need
for	concern.	I	assure	you,	we	are	expected.	Is	this	not	the	estate	of	Lady


Varada?	I	do	believe	it	is.’
‘Varada?’	hissed	Scorch	to	Leff.	‘Is	that	her	name?’
‘Shut	it,’	Leff	snapped	under	his	breath.	‘You’re	making	us	look	like
idiots!’	He	carefully	set	his	crossbow	down	and	drew	out	the	gate	key.	‘Nobody
move	unless	it’s	to	go	away	–	not	you,	Scorch!	Stay	right	there.	I’ll	be	right
back.’
After	Leff	slipped	out	of	sight,	closing	and	locking	the	gate	behind	him,
Scorch	faced	the	two	strangers	once	more.	He	managed	a	smile.	‘Nice	get-up,
that,’	he	said	to	the	jester.	‘You	a	court	clown	or	something?	Sing	us	a	song.
How	’bout	a	riddle?	I	ain’t	any	good	at	riddles	but	I	like	hearing	’em	and	the
way	when	I	do	my	thinking,	trying	to	figure	’em	out,	my	whole	brain	just	goes
white,	sorta.	Can	you	juggle?	I	like	juggling,	tried	it	once,	got	up	to	two	at	a
time	–	that	took	weeks,	let	me	tell	you.	Weeks.	Juggling	demands	discipline	all
right,	and	maybe	it	looks	easier	to	other	people,	but	you	and	I	know,	well,	just
how	talented	you	have	to	be	to	do	it.	Do	you	dance,	too,	or	stand	on	your	head
—’
‘Sir,’	the	giant	cut	in,	‘I	am	not	a	jester.	Nor	a	juggler.	Nor	a	riddler,	nor
singer,	nor	dancer.’
‘Oh.	Colour-blind?’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘The	guard,’	said	the	other	man,	the	thin	one,	in	a	voice	even	thinner,	‘has
misconstrued	your	attire,	Madrun.	Local	fashion	is	characteristically	mundane,
unimaginative.	Did	you	not	so	observe	earlier?’
‘So	I	did.	Of	course.	A	clash	of	cultures—’
‘Just	so!’	cried	Scorch.	‘Your	clothes,	yes,	a	clash	of	cultures	all	right	–
good	way	of	describing	it.	You	a	puppetmaster,	maybe?	I	like	puppet	shows,	the
way	they	look	so	lifelike,	even	the	ones	with	wrinkled	apples	for	heads—’
‘Not	a	puppeteer,	alas,’	cut	in	Madrun	with	a	heavy	sigh.
The	gate	creaked	open	behind	Scorch	and	he	turned	to	see	Leff	and
Studlock	step	through.	The	castellan	floated	past	and	hovered	directly	in	front
of	the	two	strangers.
‘Well,	you	two	took	your	time!’
Madrun	snorted.	‘You	try	digging	your	way	out	of	a	collapsed	mountain,
Studious.	Damned	earthquake	came	from	nowhere—’
‘Not	quite,’	said	Studlock.	‘A	certain	hammer	was	involved.	I	admit,	in	the
immediate	aftermath	I	concluded	that	never	again	would	I	see	your	miser—
your	memorable	faces.	Imagine	my	surprise	when	I	heard	from	a	caravan
merchant	that—’
‘Such	rumours,’	interjected	the	one	Scorch	rightly	assumed	was	named


Lazan	Door,	‘whilst	no	doubt	egregiously	exaggerated	and	so	potentially
entertaining,	can	wait,	yes?	Dear	Studious,	who	dreamed	of	never	again	seeing
our	pretty	faces,	you	have	a	new	Mistress,	and	she	is	in	need	of	compound
guards.	And,	as	we	are	presently	under-employed,	why,	destinies	can	prove
seamless	on	occasion,	can’t	they?’
‘So	they	can,	Lazan.	Yes,	compound	guards.	You	see,	we	have	gate	guards
already.	And	a	captain	as	well,	who	is	presently	elsewhere.	Now,	if	you	two
will	follow	me,	we	can	meet	the	Mistress.’
‘Excellent,’	said	Madrun.
Scorch	and	Leff	moved	well	aside	as	the	trio	filed	in	through	the	gate.	Leff
then	locked	it	and	turned	to	Scorch.
‘We	never	got	no	audience	with	the	Mistress!’
‘We	been	snubbed!’
Leff	collected	his	crossbow	again.	‘It’s	because	we’re	on	the	lowest	rung,
that’s	why.	The	lowest…again!	And	here	we	thought	we	were	climbing!	Sure,
Tor	did	some	climbing,	captain	and	all.	But	look	at	us	–	not	even	compound
guards	and	we	got	here	first!’
‘Well,’	said	Scorch,	‘if	we’d	a	known	there	was	a	difference	–	gate	and
compound	–	we	would’ve	pushed	for	that,	right?	We	was	ill-informed	–	look	at
you,	after	all.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
‘You	got	orange	eyes,	Leff!’
‘That	was	a	different	kind	of	ill-informed.’
‘That’s	what	you	think.’
‘If	you’re	so	smart,	Scorch,	you	coulda	asked	about	being	compound
guards!’
‘If	it	was	just	me,	I	would	have!’
‘If	it	was	just	you,	Studlock	never	would’ve	hired	you	at	all,	except	maybe
to	clean	out	the	latrines!’
‘At	least	then	I’d	be	inside	the	gate!’
Well,	he	had	a	point	there.	Leff	sighed,	stared	out	on	the	street.	‘Look,
there’s	the	lantern	crew.’
‘Let’s	shoot	’em!’
‘Sure,	if	you	want	us	to	get	fired,	Scorch,	is	that	what	you	want?’
‘I	was	only	joking,	Leff.’
	
There	were	looks	that	killed,	and	then	there	were	looks	that	conducted	torture.
Excoriating	skin	with	incremental,	exquisite	slices	that	left	blood	welling	to	the


surface.	That	plucked	eyeballs	and	pulled	until	all	the	tendons	stretched,	upon
which	those	long	wet	ligaments	were	knotted	together	so	that	both	eyes	sat	on
the	bridge	of	the	nose.	Torture,	yes,	delivered	in	cold	pleasure,	in	clinical
regard.
It	was	hardly	surprising,	then,	that	Torvald	Nom	devoured	his	supper	in
haste,	forgetting	to	chew,	and	so	was	now	afflicted	with	terrible	indigestion,
struggling	to	keep	from	groaning	as	he	helped	Tiserra	clean	the	plates	and
whatnot;	and	the	ominous	silence	stretched	on,	even	as	she	cast	sidelong	looks
of	blood-curdling	excision	all	unconvincingly	dressed	up	as	companionable,
loving	glances.
It	was	time	to	return	to	the	estate	for	the	evening.	These	precious	deadly
moments	of	domestic	tranquillity	–	fraught	as	all	such	moments	were	with	all
that	was	left	unspoken,	the	topics	unbidden	yet	ever	lurking,	the	hidden	pitfalls
and	explosive	nuances	or	even	more	explosive	lack	thereof	–	why,	they	had	to
come,	alas,	to	an	end,	as	considerations	of	career	and	professional
responsibility	returned	once	more	to	the	fore.
‘My	sweet,	I	must	leave	you	now.’
‘Oh,	must	you?’
‘Yes.	Until	midnight,	but	don’t	feel	the	need	to	wait	up.’
‘I’ve	had	a	busy	day.	Two	new	orders.	I	doubt	I’ll	be	awake	when	you
return,	darling.’
‘I’ll	try	to	be	quiet.’
‘Of	course	you	will.’
Perfunctory	kiss.
Just	so,	the	pleasant	exchanges	to	conclude	the	repast	just	past,	but	of
course	such	words	were	the	flourishes	of	feint	and	cunning	sleight	of	hand.
Beneath	the	innocence,	Torvald	well	understood,	there	was	this:	‘My	sweet,	I
will	run	not	walk	back	to	the	estate	now.’
‘Oh,	your	stomach	is	upset?	Let’s	hope	you	heave	all	over	your	two	gate
guards	when	you	get	there.’
‘Yes.	And	suddenly	it’ll	be	midnight	and	like	a	doomed	man	I	will	count
the	steps	to	the	gallows	awaiting	me	at	home.	Pray	to	Beru	and	every	other
ascendant	the	world	over	that	you’re	asleep	when	I	get	here,	or	at	least	feigning
sleep.’
‘I’ve	had	a	busy	day,	husband,	just	thinking	of	all	the	things	I’d	like	to	do	to
you	for	breaking	that	promise.	And	when	you	get	home,	why,	I’ll	be	dreaming
dreadful	scenes,	each	one	adding	to	that	pleasant	smile	on	my	slumbering
visage.’
‘I	shall	attempt	to	sleep	on	no	more	than	a	hand’s	span	of	bed,	stiff	as	a


planed	board,	not	making	a	sound.’
‘Yes,	you	will.	Darling.’
And	the	perfunctory	kiss,	smooch	smooch.
Blue	light	painted	the	streets	through	which	Torvald	Nom	now	hurried
along,	blue	light	and	black	thoughts,	a	veritable	bruising	of	dismay,	and	so	the
buildings	to	each	side	crowded,	leaned	in	upon	him,	until	he	felt	he	was
squirting	–	like	an	especially	foul	lump	of	excrement	–	through	a	sewer	pipe.
Terrible	indeed,	a	wife’s	disappointment	and,	mayhap,	disgust.
The	princely	wages	were	without	relevance.	The	flexible	shifts	could
barely	earn	a	begrudging	nod.	The	sheer	impressive	legality	of	the	thing
yielded	little	more	than	a	sour	grunt.	And	even	the	fact	that	Torvald	Nom	now
held	the	title	of	Captain	of	the	House	Guard,	while	Scorch	and	Leff	were	but
underlings	among	a	menagerie	of	underlings	(yes,	he	had	exaggerated
somewhat),	had	but	granted	him	a	temporary	abeyance	of	the	shrill	fury	he
clearly	deserved	–	and	it	waited,	oh,	it	waited.	He	knew	it.	She	knew	it.	And	he
knew	she	was	holding	on	to	it,	like	a	giant	axe,	poised	above	his	acorn	of	a
head.
Yes,	he’d	given	up	slavery	for	this.
Such	was	the	power	of	love,	the	lure	of	domestic	tranquillity	and	the
fending	off	of	lonely	solitude.	Would	he	have	it	any	other	way?
Ask	him	later.
Onward,	and	there	before	him	the	estate’s	modest	but	suitably	maintained
wall,	and	the	formal	gate	entranceway,	its	twin	torches	flaring	and	flickering,
enough	to	make	the	two	shapes	of	his	redoubtable	underlings	look	almost…
attentive.
Not	that	either	of	them	was	watching	the	street.	Instead,	it	seemed	they	were
arguing.
‘Stay	sharp	there,	you	two!’	Torvald	Nom	said	in	his	most	stentorian	voice,
undermined	by	the	punctuation	of	a	loud,	gassy	belch.
‘Gods,	Tor ’s	drunk!’
‘I	wish.	Supper	didn’t	agree	with	me.	Now,	what’s	your	problem?	I	heard
you	two	snapping	and	snarling	from	the	other	side	of	the	street.’
‘We	got	two	new	compound	guards,’	said	Leff.
‘Compound	guards?	Oh,	you	mean	guarding	the	compound—’
‘That’s	what	I	said.	What	else	do	compound	guards	guard	if	not
compounds?	Captains	should	know	that	kind	of	stuff,	Tor.’
‘And	I	do.	It’s	just	the	title	confused	me.	Compound	needs	guarding,	yes,
since	the	likelihood	of	someone	getting	past	you	two	is	so…likely.	Well.	So,
you’ve	met	them?	What	are	they	like?’


‘They’re	friends	of	Studlock	–	who	they	call	Studious,’	said	Scorch,	his
eyes	widening	briefly	before	he	looked	away	and	squinted.	‘Old	friends,	from
under	some	mountain.’
‘Oh,’	said	Torvald	Nom.
‘That	collapsed,’	Scorch	added.
‘The	friendship?	Oh,	the	mountain,	you	mean.	It	collapsed.’
Leff	stepped	closer	and	sniffed.	‘You	sure	you’re	not	drunk,	Tor?’
‘Of	course	I’m	not	drunk!	Scorch	is	talking	a	lot	of	rubbish,	that’s	all.’
‘Rubble,	not	rubbish.’
‘Like	that,	yes!	Oh,	look,	Leff,	just	open	the	damned	gate,	will	you?	So	I
can	meet	the	new	compound	guards.’
‘Look	for	them	in	the	compound,’	Scorch	advised.
Oh,	maybe	his	wife	was	right,	after	all.	Maybe?	Of	course	she	was.	These
two	were	idiots	and	they	were	also	his	friends	and	what	did	that	say	about
Torvald	Nom?	No,	don’t	think	about	that.	Besides,	she’s	already	done	the
necessary	thinking	about	that,	hasn’t	she?
Torvald	hastened	through	the	gateway.	Two	strides	into	the	compound	and
he	halted.	Studious?	Studious	Lock?	The	Landless?	Studious	Lock	the	Landless,
of	One	Eye	Cat?
‘Ah,	Captain,	well	timed.	Permit	me	to	introduce	our	two	new	estate
guards.’
Torvald	flinched	as	Studlock	drifted	towards	him.	Hood,	mask,	eerie	eyes,
all	bound	up	in	rags	to	cover	up	what	had	been	done	to	him	back	in	his	adopted
city	–	yes,	but	then,	infamy	never	stayed	hidden	for	long,	did	it?	‘Ah,	good
evening,	Castellan.’	This	modest,	civil	greeting	was	barely	managed,	croaking
out	from	an	all	too	dry	mouth.	And	he	saw,	with	growing	trepidation,	the	two
figures	trailing	in	Studlock’s	wake.
‘Captain	Torvald	Nom,	this	gaily	clad	gentleman	is	Madrun,	and	his
ephemerally	garbed	companion	is	Lazan	Door.	Both	hail	from	the	north	and	so
have	no	local	interests	that	might	conflict	with	their	loyalties	–	a	most
important	requirement,	as	you	have	been	made	aware,	for	Lady	Varada	of
House	Varada.	Now,	I	have	seen	to	their	kit	and	assigned	quarters.	Captain,	is
something	wrong?’
Torvald	Nom	shook	his	head.	Then,	before	he	could	think	–	before	his
finely	honed	sense	of	propriety	could	kick	in	–	he	blurted	out:	‘But	where	are
their	masks?’
The	shaggy	haired	giant	frowned.	‘Oh,’	he	said,	‘that	is	most	unfortunate.
Reassure	me	once	more,	Studious,	please.’
The	castellan’s	pause	was	long,	and	then	one	rag-tied	hand	fluttered.


‘Reputations,	alas,	are	what	they	are,	Madrun.	Evidently,	our	captain	here	has
travelled	some.	One	Eye	Cat?	Let	us	hope	he	never	wandered	close	to	that	foul,
treacherous	den	of	thieves,	murderers	and	worse—’
‘Never	been	there,’	Torvald	Nom	said,	hastily,	licking	his	lips.	‘But	the
tales	of	the,	er,	the	ones	hired	to	oust	the	Malazan	Fist…and,	er,	what	happened
afterwards—’
‘Outrageous	lies,’	said	Lazan	Door	in	his	breathy,	wispy	voice,	‘such	as
are	invariably	perpetrated	by	those	with	a	vested	interest	in	the	illusion	of
righteousness.	All	lies,	Captain.	Foul,	despicable,	ruinous	lies.	I	assure	you	we
completed	our	task,	even	unto	pursuing	the	Fist	and	his	cadre	into	the	very
heart	of	a	mountain—’
‘You	and	Madrun	Badrun,	you	mean.	Studious	Lock,	on	the	other	hand,
was…’	And	only	then	did	Torvald	Nom	decide	that	he	probably	shouldn’t	be
speaking,	probably	shouldn’t	be	revealing	quite	the	extent	of	his	knowledge.
‘The	tale	I	heard,’	he	added,	‘was	garbled,	second	and	maybe	even	third	hand,	a
jumble	of	details	and	who	can	separate	truth	from	fancy	in	such	things?’
‘Who	indeed,’	said	the	castellan	with	another	wave	of	one	hand.	‘Captain,
we	must	trust	that	the	subject	of	our	past	misadventures	will	not	arise	again,	in
any	company	and	in	particular	that	of	our	two	intrepid	gate	guards.’
‘The	subject	is	now	and	for	ever	more	closed,’	affirmed	Torvald	Nom.
‘Well,	I’d	best	get	to	my	office.	To	work	on,	um,	shift	scheduling	–	it	seems	we
now	have	our	night	shift	pretty	much	filled.	As	for	the	daytime—’
‘As	stated	earlier,’	cut	in	the	castellan,	‘the	necessity	for	armed	vigilance
during	the	day	is	simply	nonexistent.	Risk	assessment	and	so	forth.	No,
Captain,	we	have	no	need	for	more	guards.	Four	will	suffice.’
‘Good,	that	will	make	scheduling	easier.	Now,	it	was	a	pleasure	meeting
you,	Lazan	Door,	Madrun	Badrun.’	And,	with	disciplined	march,	Torvald	Nom
crossed	the	compound,	making	for	his	tiny	office	in	the	barracks	annexe.
Where	he	shut	the	flimsy	door	and	sat	down	in	the	chair	behind	the	desk	which,
in	order	to	reach	it,	demanded	that	he	climb	over	the	desk	itself.	Slumping
down,	hands	holding	up	his	head,	he	sat.	Sweating.
Was	Lady	Varada	aware	of	any	of	this…this	background,	back	there	where
the	ground	still	steamed	with	blood	and	worse?	Well,	she’d	hired	Studlock,
hadn’t	she?	But	that	didn’t	mean	anything,	did	it?	He’d	crunched	down	his
name,	and	even	that	name	wasn’t	his	real	name,	just	something	the	idiots	in
One	Eye	Cat	gave	him,	same	as	Madrun	Badrun.	As	for	Lazan	Door,	well,	that
one	might	be	real,	original	even.	And	only	one	of	them	was	wearing	a	mask
and	that	mask	was	some	local	make,	generic,	not	painted	with	any	relevant
sigils	or	whatever.	So,	she	might	not	know	a	thing!	She	might	be	completely


blind,	unsuspecting,	unaware,	unprepared,	uneverything!
He	climbed	back	over	his	desk,	straightened	and	smoothed	out	his	clothing
as	best	he	could.	It	shouldn’t	be	so	hard,	the	captain	seeking	audience	with	the
Mistress.	Perfectly	reasonable.	Except	that	the	official	route	was	through	the
castellan,	and	that	wouldn’t	do.	No,	he	needed	to	be	cleverer	than	that.	In	fact,
he	needed	to…break	in.
More	sweat,	sudden,	chilling	him	as	he	stood	between	the	desk	and	the
office	door,	a	span	barely	wide	enough	to	turn	round	in.
So,	Lazan	Door	and	Madrun	Badrun	would	be	patrolling	the	compound.
And	Studious	Lock	the	Landless,	well,	he’d	be	in	his	own	office,	there	on	the
main	floor.	Or	even	in	his	private	chambers,	sitting	there	slowly	unravelling	or
undressing	or	whatever	one	wanted	to	call	it.
There	was	a	window	on	the	back	wall	of	the	annexe.	Plain	shutters	and
simple	inside	latch.	From	there	he	could	clamber	on	to	the	roof,	which	was
close	enough	to	the	side	wall	of	the	main	building	to	enable	him	to	leap	across
and	maybe	find	a	handhold	or	two,	and	then	he	could	scramble	up	to	the	next
and	final	level,	where	dwelt	the	Lady.	It	was	still	early	so	she	wouldn’t	be
asleep	or	in	any	particular	state	of	undress.
Still,	how	would	she	react	to	her	captain’s	intruding	so	on	her	privacy?
Well,	he	could	explain	he	was	testing	the	innermost	security	of	the	estate	(and,
in	finding	it	so	lacking,	why,	he	could	press	for	hiring	yet	more	guards.
Normal,	reasonable,	sane	guards	this	time.	No	mass	murderers.	No	sadists.	No
one	whose	humanness	was	questionable	and	open	to	interpretation.	He	could,
then,	provide	a	subtle	counterbalance	to	the	guards	they	already	had).
It	all	sounded	very	reasonable,	and	diligent,	as	befitted	a	captain.
He	worked	his	way	round	and	opened	the	office	door.	Leaned	out	to	make
sure	the	barracks	remained	empty	–	of	course	it	did,	they	were	out	there
guarding	things!	He	padded	across	to	the	back	window.	Unlatched	it	and	eased
out	the	shutters.	Another	quick,	darting	look,	outside	this	time.	Estate	wall	not
ten	paces	opposite.	Main	building	to	his	left,	stables	to	his	right.	Was	this	area
part	of	their	rounds?	It	certainly	should	be.	Well,	if	he	moved	fast	enough,
right	this	moment—
Hitching	himself	up	on	to	the	window	sill,	Torvald	Nom	edged	out	and
reached	up	for	the	eaves-trough.	He	tested	his	weight	on	it	and,	satisfied	at	the
modest	creak,	quickly	pulled	himself	up	and	on	to	the	sloped	roof.	Reached
back	down	and	carefully	closed	the	shutters.
He	rolled	on	to	his	back	and	waited.	He’d	wait,	yes,	until	the	two	monsters
tramped	past.
The	clay	tiles	dug	into	his	shoulder	blades.	Was	that	the	scuff	of	boots?


Was	that	the	whisper	of	linen	sweeping	the	cobbles?	Was	that	–	no,	it	wasn’t,	he
wasn’t	hearing	a	damned	thing.	Where	had	his	damned	compound	guards
gone?	He	sat	up,	crept	his	way	to	the	peak	of	the	roof.	Peered	out	on	to	the
grounds	–	and	there	they	were,	playing	dice	against	the	wall	to	one	side	of	the
gate.
He	could	fire	them	for	that!	Why,	even	Studlock	wouldn’t	be	able	to—
And	there	he	was,	Studious	himself,	floating	across	towards	his	two
cohorts.	And	his	voice	drifted	back	to	Torvald	Nom.
‘Any	change	in	the	knuckles,	Lazan?’
‘Oh	yes,’	the	man	replied.	‘Getting	worse.	Options	fast	diminishing.’
‘How	unfortunate.’
Madrun	Badrun	grunted	and	then	said,	‘We	had	our	chance.	Go	north	or	go
south.	We	should’ve	gone	north.’
‘That	would	not	work,	as	you	well	know,’	said	Studious	Lock.	‘Where	are
your	masks?’
Lazan	Door	flung	the	bone	dice	against	the	wall	again,	bent	to	study	the
results.
‘We	tossed	’em,’	answered	Madrun.
‘Make	new	ones.’
‘We	don’t	want	to,	Studious,	we	really	don’t.’
‘That	goes	without	saying,	but	it	changes	nothing.’
Oh,	Torvald	suspected	he	could	crouch	here	and	listen	to	the	idiots	all
night.	Instead,	he	needed	to	take	advantage	of	their	carelessness.	He	eased	back
down	the	slope	of	the	roof,	lifted	himself	into	a	crouch,	and	eyed	the	main
building	–	and,	look,	a	balcony.	Well,	that	wasn’t	wise,	was	it?
Now,	could	he	make	the	leap	without	making	any	noise?	Of	course	he
could	–	he’d	been	a	thief	for	years,	a	successful	thief,	too,	if	not	for	all	the
arrests	and	fines	and	prison	time	and	slavery	and	the	like.	He	paused,	gauging
the	distance,	deciding	which	part	of	the	rail	he’d	reach	for,	then	launched
himself	across	the	gap.
Success!	And	virtually	no	noise	at	all.	He	dangled	for	a	moment,	then
pulled	himself	on	to	the	balcony.	It	was	narrow	and	crowded	with	clay	pots
snarled	with	dead	plants.	Now,	he	could	work	the	locks	and	slip	in	on	this
floor,	taking	the	inside	route	to	the	level	above.	That	would	be	simplest,
wouldn’t	it?	Riskier	scaling	the	outside	wall,	where	a	chance	glance	from	any
of	the	three	fools	still	jabbering	away	just	inside	the	gate	might	alight	upon
him.	And	the	last	thing	he	wanted	was	to	see	any	of	them	draw	swords	(not	that
he	recalled	seeing	them	wearing	any).
He	tested	the	balcony	door.	Unlocked!	Oh,	things	would	indeed	have	to


change.	Why,	he	could	just	saunter	inside	and	find	himself—
‘Please,	Captain,	take	a	seat.’
She	was	lounging	in	a	plush	chair,	barely	visible	in	the	dark	room.	Veiled?
Yes,	veiled.	Dressed	in	some	long	loose	thing,	silk	perhaps.	One	long-fingered
hand,	snug	in	a	grey	leather	glove,	held	a	goblet.	There	was	a	matching	chair
opposite	her.
‘Pour	yourself	some	wine	–	yes,	there	on	the	table.	The	failure	of	that
route,	from	the	roof	of	the	annexe,	is	that	the	roof	is	entirely	visible	from	the
window	of	any	room	on	this	side	of	the	house.	I	assume,	Captain,	you	were
either	testing	the	security	of	the	estate,	or	that	you	wished	to	speak	with	me	in
private.	Any	other	alternatives,	alas,	would	be	unfortunate.’
‘Indeed,	Mistress.	And	yes,	I	was	testing…things.	And	yes,’	he	added	as,
summoning	as	much	aplomb	as	he	could	manage,	he	went	over	to	pour	himself
a	goblet	full	of	the	amber	wine,	‘I	wished	to	speak	with	you	in	private.
Concerning	your	castellan	and	the	two	new	compound	guards.’
‘Do	they	seem…excessive?’
‘That’s	one	way	of	putting	it.’
‘I	would	not	want	to	be	discouraging.’
He	sat	down.	‘Discouraging,	Mistress?’
‘Tell	me,	are	my	two	gate	guards	as	incompetent	as	they	appear	to	be?’
‘That	would	be	quite	an	achievement,	Mistress.’
‘It	would,	yes.’
‘It	may	surprise	you,’	Torvald	Nom	said,	‘but	they	actually	possess	a	nasty
streak.	And	considerable	experience.	They	have	been	caravan	guards,
enforcers,	Guild	thugs	and	bounty	hunters.	It’s	the	formality	of	this	present	job
that	has	them	so…awkward.	They	will	adjust	in	time.’
‘Not	too	well,	I	hope.’
All	right,	Torvald	Nom	decided,	she	was	talking	about	something	and	he
had	no	idea	what	that	something	was.	‘Mistress,	regarding	Studlock,	Lazan	and
Madrun—’
‘Captain,	I	understand	you	are	estranged	from	House	Nom.	That	is
unfortunate.	I	always	advise	that	such	past	errors	be	mended	whenever
possible.	Reconciliation	is	essential	to	well-being.’
‘I	will	give	that	some	thought,	Mistress.’
‘Do	so.	Now,	please	make	your	way	out	using	the	stairs.	Inform	the
castellan	that	I	wish	to	speak	to	him	–	no,	there	will	be	no	repercussions
regarding	your	seeking	a	private	conversation	with	me.	In	fact,	I	am	heartened
by	your	concern.	Loyalty	was	ever	the	foremost	trait	of	the	family	Nom.	Oh,
now,	do	finish	your	wine,	Captain.’


He	did,	rather	quickly.	Then	walked	over	and	locked	the	balcony	doors.	A
bow	to	Lady	Varada,	and	then	out	into	the	corridor,	closing	the	door	behind
him.	A	moment	to	figure	out	where	the	stairs	were,	and,	feeling	slightly
numbed	–	was	it	the	wine?	No,	it	wasn’t	the	wine	–	he	descended	to	the	ground
floor	and	out	through	the	formal	entrance,	striding	across	the	compound	to
where	stood	the	castellan	and	his	two	friends.
‘Castellan	Studlock,’	Torvald	Nom	called	out,	pleased	to	see	how	all	three
looked	up	guiltily	from	their	game.	‘The	Mistress	wishes	to	see	you
immediately.’
‘Oh?	Of	course.	Thank	you,	Captain.’
Torvald	watched	him	flit	away,	and	then	turned	to	Lazan	Door	and	Madrun.
‘Interesting	technique	you	have	here.	I	feel	the	need	to	describe	your	duties,
since	it	appears	the	castellan	forgot	to.	You	are	to	patrol	the	compound,
preferably	at	random	intervals,	employing	a	variety	of	routes	to	ensure	that
you	avoid	predictability.	Be	especially	mindful	of	unlit	areas,	although	I	do	not
recommend	you	carry	torches	or	lanterns.	Any	questions?’
Madrun	was	smiling.	He	bowed.	‘Sound	instruction,	Captain,	thank	you.	We
shall	commence	our	duties	immediately.	Lazan,	collect	up	your	scrying	dice.
We	must	attend	to	the	necessary	formalities	of	diligent	patrol.’
Scrying	dice?	Gods	below.	‘Is	it	wise,’	he	asked,	‘to	rely	upon	the	hoary
gods	to	determine	the	night’s	flavour?’
Lazan	Door	cleared	his	throat	then	bared	his	metal	fangs.	‘As	you	say,
Captain.	Divination	is	ever	an	imprecise	science.	We	shall	be	sure	to	avoid
relying	overmuch	on	such	things.’
‘Er,	right.	Good,	well,	I’ll	be	in	my	office,	then.’
‘Again,’	Madrun	said,	his	smile	broadening.
There	was,	Torvald	decided	as	he	walked	away,	nothing	pleasant	about	that
smile.	About	either	of	their	smiles,	in	fact.	Or	anything	else	about	those	two.
Or	Studious	Lock,	for	that	matter	–	Blood	Drinker,	Bile	Spitter,	Poisoner,	oh,
they	had	so	many	names	for	that	one.	How	soon	before	he	earns	a	few	more?
And	Madrun	Badrun?	And	Lazan	Door?	What	is	Lady	Varada	up	to?
Never	mind,	never	mind.	He	had	an	office,	after	all.	And	once	he	crawled
over	the	desk	and	settled	down	in	the	chair,	why,	he	felt	almost	important.
The	sensation	lasted	a	few	heartbeats,	which	was	actually	something	of	an
achievement.	Any	few	precious	moments,	yes,	of	not	thinking	about	those
three.	Any	at	all.
Make	new	masks	–	now	why	should	they	do	that?	Renegade	Seguleh	are
renegade	–	they	can’t	ever	go	back.	Supposedly,	but	then,	what	do	any	of	us
really	know	about	the	Seguleh?	Make	new	masks,	he	said	to	them.	Why?


What’s	wrong	with	normal	advice?	Wash	that	robe,	Lazan	Door,	before	the
spiders	start	laying	eggs.	Choose	no	more	than	two	colours,	Madrun,	and	not
ones	that	clash.	Please.	And	what’s	with	those	moccasins?
Masks?	Never	mind	the	masks.
His	stomach	gurgled	and	he	felt	another	rise	of	bilious	gas.	‘Always	chew
your	food,	Tor,	why	such	a	hurry?	There’s	plenty	of	daylight	left	to	play.	Chew,
Tor,	chew!	Nice	and	slow,	like	a	cow,	yes.	This	way	nothing	will	disagree	with
you.	Nothing	disagrees	with	cows,	after	all.’
So	true,	at	least	until	the	axe	swings	down.
He	sat	in	his	office,	squeezed	in	behind	the	desk,	in	a	most	disagreeable
state.
	
‘She’s	poisoning	him,	is	my	guess.’
Scorch	stared,	as	if	amazed	at	such	a	suggestion.	‘Why	would	she	do	that?’
‘Because	of	you,’	said	Leff.	‘She	hates	you,	Scorch,	because	of	the	way
you	always	got	Tor	into	trouble,	and	now	she	thinks	you’re	going	to	do	it	all
over	again,	so	that’s	why	she’s	poisoning	him.’
‘That	don’t	make	any	sense.	If	she	was	worried	she	wouldn’t	be	killing
him!’
‘Not	killing,	just	making	sickly.	You	forget,	she’s	a	witch,	she	can	do
things	like	that.	Of	course,	she’d	do	better	by	poisoning	you.’
‘I	ain’t	touching	nothing	she	cooks,	that’s	for	sure.’
‘It	won’t	help	if	she	decides	you’re	better	off	dead,	Scorch.	Gods,	I	am	so
glad	I’m	not	you.’
‘Me	too.’
‘What?’
‘I’d	have	orange	eyes	and	that’d	be	awful	because	then	we’d	both	have
orange	eyes	so	looking	at	each	other	would	be	like	looking	at	yourself,	which
I	have	to	do	all	the	time	anyway	but	imagine	double	that!	No	thanks,	is	what	I
say.’
‘Is	that	what	you	say?’
‘I	just	said	it,	didn’t	I?’
‘I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	know	what	you	just	said,	Scorch,	and	that’s	the	truth.’
‘Good,	since	what	I	had	to	say	wasn’t	meant	for	you	anyway.’
Leff	looked	round	and	no,	he	didn’t	see	anyone	else.	Of	course	he	didn’t,
there	was	no	point	in	looking.
‘Besides,’	said	Scorch,	‘you’re	the	one	who’s	been	poisoned.’
‘It	wasn’t	no	poison,	Scorch.	It	was	a	mistake,	a	misdiagnosis.	And	it’s


fading—’
‘No	it	ain’t.’
‘Yes.	It	is.’
‘No.	It	ain’t.’
‘I’d	stop	saying	that	if	I	was	you—’
‘Don’t	start	that	one	again!’
Blessed	fates!	Leave	them	to	it,	thy	round	self	begs!	The	night	stretches	on,
the	city	wears	its	granite	grin	and	shadows	dance	on	the	edge	of	darkness.	Latenight	hawkers	call	out	their	wares,	their	services	both	proper	and	dubious.
Singers	sing	and	the	drunk	drink	and	thieves	do	their	thieving	and	mysteries
thrive	wherever	you	do	not	belong	and	that,	friends,	is	the	hard	truth.
Like	rats	we	skitter	away	from	the	pools	of	light,	seeking	other	matters,
other	scenes	both	tranquil	and	foul.
Follow,	oh,	follow	me!
	
Benefactor	of	all	things	cosmopolitan,	bestower	of	blessings	upon	all	matters
human	and	humane	(bless	their	hearts	both	squalid	and	generous,	bless	their
dreams	and	bless	their	nightmares,	bless	their	fears	and	their	loves	and	their
fears	of	love	and	love	of	fears	and	bless,	well,	bless	their	shoes,	sandals,	boots
and	slippers	and	to	walk	in	each,	in	turn,	ah,	such	wonders!	Such	peculiar
follies!),	Kruppe	of	Darujhistan	walked	the	Great	Avenue	of	sordid
acquisitiveness,	casting	a	most	enormous,	indeed	gigantic	shadow	that	rolled
sure	as	a	tide	past	all	these	shops	and	their	wares,	past	the	wary	eyes	of	shop
owners,	past	the	stands	of	fruit	and	succulent	pastries,	past	the	baskets	of
berries	and	the	dried	fish	and	the	strange	leafy	things	some	people	ate
believing	themselves	to	be	masticators	of	wholesomeness,	past	the	loaves	of
bread	and	rounds	of	cheese,	past	the	vessels	of	wine	and	liquors	in	all	assorted
sizes,	past	the	weavers	and	dressmakers,	past	the	crone	harpist	with	nubs	for
fingers	and	only	three	strings	left	on	her	harp	and	her	song	about	the	peg	and
the	hole	and	the	honey	on	the	nightstand	–	ducking	the	flung	coins	and	so
quickly	past!	–	and	the	bolts	of	cloth	going	nowhere	and	the	breeches	blocking
the	doorway	and	the	shirts	for	men-at-arms	and	shoes	for	the	soulless	and	the
headstone	makers	and	urn-pissers	and	the	old	thrice-divorced	man	who	tied
knots	for	a	living	with	a	gaggle	of	children	in	tow	surely	bound	by	blood	and
thicker	stuff.	Past	the	wax-drippers	and	wick-twisters,	the	fire-eaters	and
ashcake-makers,	past	the	prostitutes	–	oozing	each	languorous	step	with	smiles
of	appreciation	and	fingers	all	aflutter	and	unbidden	mysterious	sensations	of
caresses	in	hidden	or	at	least	out-of-reach	places	and	see	eyes	widen	and


appreciation	flood	through	like	the	rush	of	lost	youth	and	princely	dreams	and
they	sigh	and	call	out	Kruppe,	you	darling	man!	Kruppe,	ain’t	you	gonna	pay
for	that?	Kruppe,	marry	every	one	of	us	and	make	us	honest	women!	Kruppe	–
rushing	quickly	past,	now,	aaii,	frightening	prospect	to	imagine!	A	bludgeon	of
wives	(surely	that	must	be	the	plural	assignation)!	A	prattle	of	prostitutes!
Past	this	gate,	thank	the	gods,	and	into	the	tunnel	and	out	again	and	now
civilization	loomed	austere	and	proper	and	this	bodacious	shadow	strode
alone,	animated	in	its	solitude,	and	yet	this	moment	proved	ample	time	to
partake	of	past	passages	through	life	itself.
Out	from	one	sleeve	a	berry-studded	pastry,	a	ripe	pompfruit,	and	a	flask
of	minty	wine;	out	from	the	other	a	new	silver	dinner	knife	with	the	Varada
House	monogram	(my,	where	did	this	come	from?),	the	polished	blade	–
astonishing!	–	already	glistening	with	a	healthy	dollop	of	butter	streaked	with
honey	–	and	so	many	things	crowding	these	ample	but	nimble	hands	but	see
how	one	thing	after	another	simply	vanishes	into	inviting	mouth	and
appreciative	palate	as	befitting	all	culinary	arts	when	the	subtle	merging	of
flavours	yielded	exquisite	masterpiece	–	butter,	honey,	and	–	oh!	–	jam,	and
pastry	and	cheese	and	fruit	and	smoked	eel	–	agh!	Voluminous	sleeve	betrays
self!	Wine	to	wash	away	disreputable	(and	most	cruel)	taste.
Hands	temporarily	free	once	more,	to	permit	examination	of	new	shirt,
array	of	scented	candles,	knotted	strings	of	silk,	handsome	breeches	and	giltthreaded	sandals	soft	as	any	one	of	Kruppe’s	four	cheeks,	and	here	a	kid-gut
condom	–	gods,	where	did	that	come	from?	Well,	an	end	to	admiration	of	the
night’s	most	successful	shopping	venture,	and	if	that	crone	discovered	but	two
strings	left	on	her	harp,	well,	imagine	how	the	horse	felt!
Standing	now,	at	last,	before	most	austere	of	austere	estates.	The	gate
creaked	open,	inviting	invitation	and	so	invited	Kruppe	invited	himself	in.
Steps	and	ornate	formal	entranceway	and	corridor	and	more	steps	these
ones	carpeted	and	wending	upward	and	another	corridor	and	now	the	darkstained	door	and	–	oh,	fling	aside	those	wards,	goodness	–	inside.
‘How	did	you	–	never	mind.	Sit,	Kruppe,	make	yourself	comfortable.’
‘Master	Baruk	is	so	kind,	Kruppe	shall	do	as	bid,	with	possibly	measurable
relief	does	he	so	oof!	into	this	chair	and	stretch	out	legs,	yes	they	are	indeed
stretched	out,	the	detail	subtle.	Ah,	an	exhausting	journey,	Baruk	beloved	friend
of	Kruppe!’
A	toad-like	obese	demon	crawled	up	to	nest	at	his	feet,	snuffling.	Kruppe
produced	a	strip	of	dried	eel	and	offered	it.	The	demon	sniffed,	then	gingerly
accepted	the	morsel.
‘Are	things	truly	as	dire	as	I	believe,	Kruppe?’


Kruppe	waggled	his	brows.	‘Such	journeys	leave	self	puckered	with
dryness,	gasping	with	thirst.’
Sighing,	the	High	Alchemist	said,	‘Help	yourself.’
Beaming	a	smile,	Kruppe	drew	out	from	a	sleeve	a	large	dusty	bottle,
already	uncorked.	He	examined	the	stamp	on	the	dark	green	glass.	‘My,	your
cellar	is	indeed	well	equipped!’	A	crystal	goblet	appeared	from	the	other
sleeve.	He	poured.	Downed	a	mouthful	then	smacked	his	lips.	‘Exquisite!’
‘Certain	arrangements	have	been	finalized,’	said	Baruk.
‘Most	impressive,	Baruk	friend	of	Kruppe.	How	can	such	portentous
events	be	measured,	one	wonders.	If	one	was	the	wondering	type.	Yet	listen	–
the	buried	gate	creaks,	dust	sifts	down,	stones	groan!	Humble	as	we	are,	can	we
hope	to	halt	such	inevitable	inevitabilities?	Alas,	time	grinds	on.	All	fates	spin
and	not	even	the	gods	can	guess	how	each	will	topple.	The	moon	itself	rises
uncertain	on	these	nights.	The	stars	waver,	rocks	fall	upward,	wronged	wives
forgive	and	forget	–	oh,	this	is	a	time	for	miracles!’
‘And	is	that	what	we	need,	Kruppe?	Miracles?’
‘Each	moment	may	indeed	seem	in	flux,	chaotic	and	fraught,	yet	–	and
Kruppe	knows	this	most	surely	–	when	all	is	set	out,	moment	upon	moment,
then	every	aberration	is	but	a	modest	crease,	a	feeble	fold,	a	crinkled	memento.
The	great	forces	of	the	universe	are	as	a	weight-stone	upon	the	fabric	of	our
lives.	Rich	and	poor,	modest	and	ambitious,	generous	and	greedy,	honest	and
deceitful,	why,	all	is	flattened!	Splat!	Crunch,	smear,	ooze!	What	cares	Nature
for	jewelled	crowns,	coins	a-stacked	perilously	high,	great	estates	and	lofty
towers?	Kings	and	queens,	tyrants	and	devourers	–	all	are	as	midges	on	the
forehead	of	the	world!’
‘You	advise	an	extended	perspective.	That	is	all	very	well,	from	an
historian’s	point	of	view,	and	in	retrospect.	Unfortunately,	Kruppe,	to	those	of
us	who	must	live	it,	in	the	midst,	as	it	were,	it	provides	scant	relief.’
‘Alas,	Baruk	speaks	true.	Lives	in,	lives	out.	The	sobs	of	death	are	the
sodden	songs	of	the	world.	So	true,	so	sad.	Kruppe	asks	this:	witness	two
scenes.	In	one,	an	angry,	bitter	man	beats	another	man	to	death	in	an	alley	in	the
Gadrobi	District.	In	the	other,	a	man	of	vast	wealth	conspires	with	equally
wealthy	compatriots	to	raise	yet	again	the	price	of	grain,	making	the	cost	of
simple	bread	so	prohibitive	that	families	starve,	are	led	into	lives	of	crime,	and
die	young.	Are	both	acts	of	violence?’
The	High	Alchemist	stood	looking	down	at	Kruppe.	‘In	only	one	of	those
examples	will	you	find	blood	on	a	man’s	hands.’
‘True,	deplorable	as	such	stains	are.’	He	poured	himself	some	more	wine.
‘There	are,’	said	Baruk,	‘countless	constructs	whereby	the	wealthy	man


might	claim	innocence.	Mitigating	circumstances,	unexpected	costs	of
production,	the	law	of	supply	and	demand,	and	so	on.’
‘Indeed,	a	plethora	of	justifications,	making	the	waters	so	very	murky,	and
who	then	sees	the	blood?’
‘And	yet,	destitution	results,	with	all	its	misery,	its	stresses	and	anxieties,	its
foul	vapours	of	the	soul.	It	can	be	said	that	the	wealthy	grain	merchant	wages
subtle	war.’
Kruppe	studied	the	wine	through	the	crystal.	‘And	so	the	poor	remain	poor
and,	mayhap,	even	poorer.	The	employed	but	scarcely	getting	by	cling	all	the
harder	to	their	jobs,	even	unto	accepting	despicable	working	conditions	–
which	in	turn	permits	the	employers	to	fill	their	purses	unto	bulging,	thus
satisfying	whatever	hidden	pathetic	inadequacies	they	harbour.	A	balance	can
be	said	to	exist,	one	never	iterated,	whereby	the	eternal	war	is	held	in	check,	so
as	to	avoid	anarchy.	Should	the	grain	merchant	charge	too	high,	then
revolution	may	well	explode	into	life.’
‘Whereupon	everyone	loses.’
‘For	a	time.	Until	the	new	generation	of	the	wealthy	emerge,	to	begin	once
again	their	predations	on	the	poor.	Balance	is	framed	by	imbalances	and	so	it
seems	such	things	might	persist	for	all	eternity.	Alas,	in	any	long	view,	one
sees	that	this	is	not	so.	The	structure	of	society	is	far	more	fragile	than	most
believe.	To	set	too	much	faith	in	its	resilience	is	to	know	a	moment	of	pristine
astonishment	at	the	instant	of	its	utter	collapse	–	before	the	wolves	close	in.’
Kruppe	raised	one	finger.
‘Yet,	witness	all	these	who	would	grasp	hold	of	the	crown,	to	make
themselves	the	freest	and	the	wealthiest	of	them	all.	Oh,	they	are	most
dangerous	in	the	moment,	as	one	might	expect.	Most	dangerous	indeed.	One	is
encouraged	to	pray.	Pray	for	dust.’
‘An	end	to	it	all.’
‘And	a	new	beginning.’
‘I	somehow	expected	more	from	you,	my	friend.’
Kruppe	smiled,	reached	down	and	patted	the	demon’s	pebbly	head.	It
blinked	languidly.	‘Kruppe	maintains	a	perspective	as	broad	as	his	waistline,
which,	as	you	know,	is	unceasing.	After	all,	where	does	it	begin	and	where
does	it	end?’
‘Any	other	momentous	news?’
‘Cities	live	in	haste.	Ever	headlong.	Nothing	changes	and	everything
changes.	A	murderer	stalks	Gadrobi	District,	but	Kruppe	suspects	you	know	of
that.	Assassins	plot.	You	know	this	too,	friend	Baruk.	Lovers	tryst	or	dream	of
said	trysts.	Children	belabour	unknown	futures.	People	retire	and	others	are


retired,	new	careers	abound	and	old	nemeses	lurk.	Friendships	unfold	while
others	unravel.	All	in	its	time,	most	High	Alchemist,	all	in	its	time.’
‘You	do	not	put	me	at	ease,	Kruppe.’
‘Join	me	in	a	glass	of	this	exquisite	vintage!’
‘There	are	a	dozen	wards	sealing	the	cellar	–	twice	as	many	as	at	your	last
visit.’
‘Indeed?’
‘You	did	not	trip	a	single	one.’
‘Extraordinary!’
‘Yes,	it	is.’
The	demon	belched	and	the	heady	fragrance	of	smoked	eel	wafted	through
the	chamber.	Even	the	demon	wrinkled	its	nostril	slits.
Kruppe	produced,	with	a	flourish,	some	scented	candles.
	
An	intestinal	confusion	of	pipes,	valves,	copper	globes,	joins	and	vents
dominated	one	entire	end	of	the	building’s	main	front	room.	From	this	bizarre
mechanism	came	rhythmic	gasps	(most	suggestive),	wheezes	(inserting,	as	it
were,	a	more	realistic	contribution)	and	murmurs	and	hissing	undertones.	Six
nozzles	jutted	out,	each	one	ready	for	a	hose	attachment	or	extension,	but	at	the
moment	all	shot	out	steady	blue	flame	and	this	heated	the	crackling	dry	air	of
the	chamber	so	that	both	Chaur	and	Barathol	–	working	barebacked	as	they	had
been	the	entire	day	just	done	–	were	slick	with	sweat.
Most	of	the	clutter	in	this	decrepit	bakery	had	now	been	removed,	or,
rather,	transferred	from	inside	to	the	narrow	high-walled	yard	out	at	the	back,
and	Chaur	was	on	his	hands	and	knees	using	wet	rags	to	wipe	dust	and	old
flour	from	the	well-set	pavestone	floor.	Barathol	was	examining	the	brick
bases	of	the	three	humped	ovens,	surprised	and	pleased	to	find,	sandwiched
between	layers	of	brick,	vast	slabs	of	pumice-stone.	The	interior	back	walls	of
the	ovens	each	contained	fixtures	for	the	gas	that	had	been	used	as	fuel,	with
elongated	perforated	tubes	projecting	out	beneath	the	racks.	Could	he	convert
these	ovens	to	low-heat	forges?	Perhaps.
The	old	copper	mixing	drums	remained,	lining	one	half	of	the	room’s
back	wall,	and	would	serve	for	quenching.	He	had	purchased	an	anvil	from	an
inbound	caravan	from	Pale,	the	original	buyer	having,	alas,	died	whilst	the
object	was	en	route.	A	plains	design,	intended	for	portability	–	Rhivi,	he	had
been	informed	–	it	was	not	quite	the	size	he	wanted	or	needed,	but	it	would
suffice	for	now.	Various	tongs	and	other	tools	came	from	the	scrap	markets	on
the	west	side	of	the	city,	including	a	very	fine	hammer	of	Aren	steel	(no	doubt


stolen	from	a	Malazan	army’s	weaponsmith).
On	the	morrow	he	would	put	in	his	first	orders	for	wood,	coke,	coal,	and
raw	copper,	tin	and	iron.
It	was	getting	late.	Barathol	straightened	from	his	examination	of	the	ovens
and	said	to	Chaur,	‘Leave	off	now,	my	friend.	We’re	grimy,	true,	but	perhaps
an	outside	restaurant	would	accommodate	us,	once	we	show	our	coin.	I	don’t
know	about	you,	but	some	chilled	beer	would	sit	well	right	now.’
Looking	up,	Chaur ’s	smeared	and	smudged	face	split	into	a	wide	smile.
The	front	door	was	kicked	open	and	both	turned	as	a	half-dozen
disreputable	men	pushed	in,	spreading	out.	Clubs	and	mallets	in	their	hands,
they	began	eyeing	the	equipment.	A	moment	later	and	a	finely	dressed	woman
strode	through	the	milling	press,	eyes	settling	on	Barathol,	upon	which	she
smiled.
‘Dear	sir,	you	are	engaged	in	an	illegal	activity—’
‘Illegal?	That	is	a	reach,	I’m	sure.	Now,	before	you	send	your	thugs	on	a
rampage	of	destruction,	might	I	point	out	that	the	valves	are	not	only	open	but
the	threads	have	been	cut.	In	other	words,	for	now,	the	flow	of	gas	from	the
chambers	beneath	this	structure	cannot	be	stopped.	Any	sort	of	damage	will
result	in,	well,	a	ball	of	fire,	probably	of	sufficient	size	to	incinerate	a	sizeable
area	of	the	district.’	He	paused,	then	added,	‘Such	wilful	destruction	on	your
part	will	be	viewed	by	most	as,	um,	illegal.	Now,	you	won’t	face	any	charges
since	you	will	be	dead,	but	the	Guild	that	hired	you	will	face	dire	retribution.
The	fines	alone	will	bankrupt	it.’
The	woman’s	smile	was	long	gone	by	now.	‘Oh,	aren’t	you	the	clever	one.
Since	we	cannot	discourage	you	by	dismantling	your	shop,	we	have	no	choice
then	but	to	focus	our	attention	on	yourselves.’
Barathol	walked	to	the	kneading	counter	and	reached	into	a	leather	satchel,
withdrawing	a	large	round	ball	of	fired	clay.	He	faced	the	woman	and	her	mob,
saw	a	few	expressions	drain	of	blood,	and	was	pleased.	‘Yes,	a	Moranth
grenado.	Cusser,	the	Malazans	call	this	one.	Threaten	me	or	my	companion
here,	and	I	will	be	delighted	to	commit	suicide	–	after	all,	what	have	we	to	lose
that	you	would	not	happily	take	from	us,	given	the	chance?’
‘You	have	lost	your	mind.’
‘You	are	welcome	to	that	opinion.	Now,	the	question	is,	have	you?’
She	hesitated,	then	snarled	and	spun	on	her	heel.	Waving	her	crew	to
follow	her,	out	she	went.
Sighing,	Barathol	returned	the	cusser	to	the	satchel.	‘In	every	thirteenth
crate	of	twelve	cussers	each,’	Mallet	had	told	him,	‘there	is	a	thirteenth	cusser.
Empty.	Why?	Who	knows?	The	Moranth	are	strange	folk.’


‘It	worked	this	time,’	he	said	to	Chaur,	‘but	I	doubt	it	will	last.	So,	the	first
order	of	business	is	to	outfit	you.	Armour,	weapons.’
Chaur	stared	at	him	as	if	uncomprehending.
‘Remember	the	smell	of	blood,	Chaur?	Corpses,	the	dead	and
dismembered?’
Sudden	brightening	of	expression,	and	Chaur	nodded	vigorously.
Sighing	again,	Barathol	said,	‘Let’s	climb	out	over	the	back	wall	and	find
us	that	beer.’
He	took	the	satchel	with	him.
	
Elsewhere	in	the	city,	as	the	tenth	bell	of	the	night	sounded,	a	fingerless	man	set
out	for	a	new	tavern,	murder	on	his	mind.	His	wife	went	out	to	her	garden	to
kneel	on	stone,	which	she	polished	using	oiled	sand	and	a	thick	pad	of	leather.
A	buxom,	curvaceous	woman	–	who	drew	admiring	regard	along	with
curdling	spite	depending	on	gender	and	gender	preference	–	walked	with	one
rounded	arm	hooked	in	the	rather	thinner	seamed	arm	of	a	Malazan	historian,
who	bore	an	expression	wavering	between	disbelief	and	dismay.	They	strolled
as	lovers	would,	and	since	they	were	not	lovers,	the	historian’s	bemusement
only	grew.
In	the	High	Markets	of	the	Estates	District,	south	of	the	gallows,	sauntered
Lady	Challice.	Bored,	stung	with	longing	and	possibly	despoiled	(in	her	own
mind)	beyond	all	hope	of	redemption,	she	perused	the	host	of	objects	and
items,	none	of	which	were	truly	needed,	and	watched	as	women	just	like	her
(though	most	were	trailed	by	servants	who	carried	whatever	was	purchased)
picked	through	the	expensive	and	often	finely	made	rubbish	eager	as	jackdaws
(and	as	mindless?	Ah,	beware	cruel	assumptions!),	and	she	saw	herself	as	so
very	different	from	them.	So…changed.
Not	three	hundred	paces	away	from	Lady	Challice,	wandering	unmindful
of	where	his	steps	took	him,	was	Cutter,	who	had	once	been	a	thief	named
Crokus	Younghand,	who	had	once	stolen	something	he	shouldn’t	have,	and,
finding	that	he	could	not	truly	give	it	back,	had	then	confused	guilt	and
sympathy	with	the	bliss	of	adoration	(such	errors	are	common),	only	to	be
released	in	the	end	by	a	young	woman’s	open	contempt	for	his	heartfelt,	honest
admissions.
Well,	times	and	people	change,	don’t	they	just.
On	a	rooftop	half	a	city	away,	Rallick	Nom	stood	looking	out	upon	the
choppy	sea	of	blue	lights,	at	his	side	Krute	of	Talient,	and	they	had	much	to
discuss	and	this	meant,	given	Rallick	Nom’s	taciturnity,	a	long	session	indeed.


Krute	had	too	much	to	say.	Rallick	weighed	every	morsel	he	fed	back,	not
out	of	distrust,	simply	habit.
In	a	duelling	school,	long	after	the	last	of	the	young	students	had	toddled
out,	Murillio	sat	under	moonlight	with	Stonny	Menackis	as,	weeping,	she
unburdened	herself	to	this	veritable	stranger	–	which	perhaps	is	what	made	it
all	so	easy	–	but	Stonny	had	no	experience	with	a	man	such	as	Murillio,	who
understood	what	it	was	to	listen,	to	bestow	rapt,	thorough	and	most	genuine
attention	solely	upon	one	woman,	to	draw	all	of	her	essence	–	so	pouring	out	–
into	his	own	being,	as	might	a	hummingbird	drink	nectar,	or	a	bat	a	cow’s
ankle	blood	(although	this	analogy	ill	serves	the	tender	moment).
And	so	between	them	unseen	vapours	waft,	animal	and	undeniable,	and	so
much	seeps	into	flesh	and	bone	and	self	that	stunning	recognition	comes	–
when	it	comes	–	like	the	unlocking	of	a	door	once	thought	sealed	for	ever
more.
She	wept	and	she	wept	often,	and	each	time	it	was	somehow	easier,
somehow	more	natural,	more	comfortable	and	acceptable,	no	different,	truly,
from	the	soft	stroke	of	his	fingers	through	her	short	hair,	the	way	the	tips
brushed	her	cheek	to	smooth	away	the	tears	–	and	oh,	who	then	could	be
surprised	by	all	this?
To	the	present,	then,	as	the	blurred	moon,	now	risen,	squints	down	upon
three	dozen	figures	gathering	on	a	rooftop.	Exchanging	hand	signals	and
muttering	instructions	and	advice.	Checking	weapons.	Three	dozen,	for	the
targets	were	tough,	mean	veterans	with	foreign	ways.	And	the	assault	to	come,
well,	it	would	be	brutal,	unsubtle,	and,	without	doubt,	thorough.
	
The	usual	crowd	in	K’rul’s	Bar,	a	dozen	or	so	denizens	choosing	to	be
unmindful	of	the	temple	that	once	was	–	these	quarried	stone	walls,	stained	with
smoke	and	mute	repositories	for	human	voices	generation	upon	generation,
from	droning	chants	and	choral	music	to	the	howl	of	drunken	laughter	and	the
squeals	of	pinched	women,	these	walls,	then,	thick	and	solid,	ever	hold	to
indifference	in	the	face	of	drama.
Lives	play	out,	lives	parcel	out	portions	framed	by	stone	and	wood,	by	tile
and	rafter,	and	all	of	these	insensate	forms	have,	in	their	time,	tasted	blood.
The	vast,	low-ceilinged	main	taproom	with	its	sunken	floor	was	once	a
transept	or	perhaps	a	congregation	area.	The	narrow	corridor	between	inset
pillars	along	the	back	was	once	a	colonnade	bearing	niches	on	which,	long
ago,	stood	funerary	urns	containing	the	charred,	ashen	remains	of	High	Priests
and	Priestesses.	The	kitchen	and	the	three	storerooms	behind	it	had	once


supplied	sustenance	to	monks	and	the	sanctioned	blade-wielders,	scribes	and
acolytes.	Now	they	fed	patrons,	staff	and	owners.
Up	the	steep,	saddled,	stone	steps	to	the	landing	on	the	upper	floor,	from
which	ran	passages	with	sharply	angled	ceilings,	three	sides	of	a	square	with
the	fourth	interrupted	by	the	front	façade	of	the	building.	Eight	cell-like	rooms
fed	off	each	of	these	passages,	those	on	the	back	side	projecting	inward
(supported	by	the	pillars	of	the	main	floor	colonnade)	while	the	two	to	either
side	had	their	rooms	against	the	building’s	outer	walls	(thus	providing
windows).
The	cells	looking	out	on	to	the	taproom	had	had	inside	walls	knocked	out,
so	that	eight	rooms	were	now	three	rooms,	constituting	the	offices.	The
interior	windows	were	now	shuttered	–	no	glass	or	skin	–	and	Picker	was	in	the
habit	of	throwing	them	wide	open	when	she	sat	at	her	desk,	giving	her	a	clear
view	of	the	front	third	of	the	taproom,	including	the	entranceway.
On	this	night,	there	were	few	guests	resident	in	the	inn’s	rooms.	Barathol
and	Chaur	had	not	yet	returned.	Scillara	had	taken	Duiker	into	the	Daru
District.	The	bard	was	on	the	low	dais	in	the	taproom,	plunking	some	airy,
despondent	melody	that	few	of	the	twenty	or	so	patrons	listened	to	with
anything	approaching	attention.	A	stranger	from	Pale	had	taken	a	corner	room
on	the	northeast	corner	and	had	retired	early	after	a	meagre	meal	and	a	single
pint	of	Gredfallan	ale.
Picker	could	see	Blend	at	her	station	beside	the	front	door,	sunk	in
shadows	as	she	sat,	legs	outstretched,	her	hands	cradling	a	mug	of	hot	cider	–
bizarre	tastes,	that	woman,	since	it	was	sultry	and	steamy	this	night.	People
entering	rarely	even	noticed	her,	marching	right	past	without	a	glance	down.
Blend’s	talent,	aye,	and	who	could	say	if	it	was	natural	or	something	else.
Antsy	was	yelling	in	the	kitchen.	He’d	gone	in	there	to	calm	down	the	two
cooks	–	who	despised	each	other	–	and	it	turned	out	as	it	usually	did,	with
Antsy	at	war	with	everyone,	including	the	scullions	and	the	rats	cowering
beneath	the	counter.	In	a	short	while	utensils	would	start	flying	and	Picker
would	have	to	drag	herself	down	there.
Bluepearl	was…somewhere.	It	was	his	habit	to	wander	off,	exploring	the
darker	crooks	and	crannies	of	the	old	temple.
A	night,	then,	no	different	from	any	other.
	
Bluepearl	found	himself	in	the	cellar.	Funny	how	often	that	happened.	He	had
dragged	out	the	fourth	dusty	cask	from	the	crawlspace	behind	the	wooden
shelves.	The	first	three	he	had	sampled	earlier	in	the	week.	Two	had	been


vinegar,	from	which	he	could	manage	only	a	few	swallows	at	a	time.	The	other
had	been	something	thick	and	tarry,	smelling	of	cedar	or	perhaps	pine	sap	–	in
any	case,	he’d	done	little	more	than	dip	a	finger	in,	finding	the	taste	even
fouler	than	the	smell.
This	time,	however,	he	felt	lucky.	Broaching	the	cask,	he	bent	close	and
tried	a	few	tentative	sniffs.	Ale?	Beer?	But	of	course,	neither	lasted,	did	they?
Yet	this	cask	bore	the	sigil	of	the	temple	on	the	thick	red	wax	coating	the	lid.
He	sniffed	again.	Definitely	yeasty,	but	fresh,	which	meant…sorcery.	He
sniffed	a	third	time.
He’d	danced	with	all	kinds	of	magic	as	a	squad	mage	in	the	Bridgeburners.
Aye,	he	had	so	many	stories	that	even	that	sour-faced	bard	upstairs	would	gape
in	wonder	just	to	hear	half	of	them.	Why,	he’d	ducked	and	rolled	under	the
nastiest	kinds,	the	sorceries	that	ripped	flesh	from	bones,	that	boiled	the	blood,
that	made	a	man’s	balls	swell	up	big	as	melons	–	oh,	that	time	had	been	before
he’d	joined,	hadn’t	it?	Yah,	the	witch	and	the	witch’s	daughter	–	never	mind.
What	he	was	was	an	old	hand.
And	this	stuff	–	Bluepearl	dipped	a	finger	in	and	then	poked	it	into	his
mouth	–	oh,	it	was	magic	indeed.	Something	elder,	hinting	of	blood	(aye,	he’d
tasted	the	like	before).
‘Is	that	you,	Brother	Cuven?’
He	twisted	round	and	scowled	at	the	ghost	whose	head	and	shoulders	lifted
into	view	through	the	floor.	‘Do	I	look	like	Brother	Cuven?	You’re	dead,	long
dead.	It’s	all	gone,	you	hear?	So	why	don’t	you	go	and	do	the	same?’
‘I	smelled	the	blade,’	murmured	the	ghost,	beginning	to	sink	back	down.	‘I
smelled	it…’
No,	Bluepearl	decided,	it	probably	wasn’t	a	good	thing	to	be	drinking	this
stuff.	Not	before	some	kind	of	analysis	was	made.	Could	be	Mallet	might	help
on	that.	Now,	had	he	messed	it	up	by	opening	the	cask?	Probably	it	would	go
bad	now.	So,	he’d	better	take	it	upstairs.
Sighing,	Bluepearl	replaced	the	wooden	stopper	and	picked	up	the	cask.
	
In	the	corner	room	on	the	second	level,	the	stranger	who’d	booked	the	room
for	this	night	finished	digging	out	the	last	of	the	bars	on	the	window.	He	then
doused	the	lantern	and	moved	across	to	the	hallway	door,	where	he	crouched
down,	listening.
From	the	window	behind	him	the	first	of	the	assassins	climbed	in.
	


Blend,	her	eyes	half	closed,	watched	as	five	men	came	in,	moving	in	a	halfdrunken	clump	and	arguing	loudly	about	the	latest	jump	in	the	price	of	bread,
slurred	statements	punctuated	by	shoves	and	buffets,	and	wasn’t	it	a	wonder,
Blend	reflected	as	they	staggered	into	the	taproom,	how	people	could	complain
about	very	nearly	anything	as	if	their	lives	depended	on	it.
These	ones	she	didn’t	know,	meaning	they’d	probably	spied	the	torchlit
sign	on	their	way	back	from	some	other	place,	deciding	that	this	drunk	wasn’t
drunk	enough,	and	she	noted	that	they	were	better	dressed	than	most	–	nobles,
most	likely,	with	all	the	usual	bluster	and	airs	of	invincibility	and	all	that.	Well,
they’d	be	spending	coin	here	and	that	was	what	counted.
She	took	another	sip	of	cider.

Antsy	had	his	shortsword	out	as	he	crept	towards	the	back	of	the	smallest	of	the
three	storerooms.	That	damned	two-headed	rat	was	back.	Sure,	nobody	else
believed	him	except	maybe	the	cooks	now	since	they’d	both	seen	the	horrid
thing,	but	the	only	way	to	prove	it	to	the	others	was	to	kill	the	bugger	and	then
show	it	to	everyone.
They	could	then	pickle	it	in	a	giant	jar	and	make	of	it	a	curio	for	the	bar.	It
would	be	sure	to	pull	’em	in.	Two-headed	rat	caught	in	the	kitchen	of	K’rul’s
Bar!	Come	see!
Oh,	hold	on…was	that	the	best	kind	of	advertising?	He’d	have	to	ask
Picker	about	that.
First,	of	course,	he	needed	to	kill	the	thing.
He	crept	closer,	eyes	fixed	on	the	dark	gap	behind	the	last	crate	to	the	left.
Kill	the	thing,	aye.	Just	don’t	chop	either	head	off.
	
Eleven	figures	crowded	the	corner	room	on	the	upper	floor.	Three	held
daggers,	including	the	man	crouched	at	the	door.	Four	cradled	crossbows,
quarrels	set.	The	last	four	–	big	men	all	–	wielded	swords	and	bucklers,	and
beneath	their	loose	shirts	there	was	fine	chain.
The	one	at	the	door	could	now	hear	the	argument	in	the	taproom
downstairs,	accusations	regarding	the	price	of	bread	–	a	ridiculous	subject,	the
man	thought	yet	again,	given	how	these	ones	were	dressed	like	second	and
thirdborn	nobles	–	but	clearly	no	one	had	taken	note	of	the	peculiarity.	Loud
voices,	especially	drunk-sounding	ones,	had	a	way	of	filling	the	heads	of
people	around	them.	Filling	them	with	the	wrong	things.


So	now	everyone’s	attention	was	on	the	loud,	obnoxious	newcomers,	and
at	least	some	of	the	targets	were	likely	to	be	converging,	having	it	in	mind	to
maybe	toss	the	fools	out	or	at	least	ask	them	to	tone	it	down	and	all	that.
Almost	time	then…

Sitting	on	the	stool	on	the	dais,	the	bard	let	his	fingers	trail	away	from	the	last
notes	he	had	played,	and	slowly	leaned	back	as	the	nobles	now	argued	over
which	table	to	take.	There	were	plenty	to	choose	from	so	the	issue	was	hardly
worth	all	that	energy.
He	watched	them	for	a	long	moment,	and	then	set	his	instrument	down	and
went	over	to	the	pitcher	and	tankard	waiting	to	one	side	of	the	modest	stage.	He
poured	himself	some	ale,	and	then	leaned	against	the	wall,	taking	sips.
	
Picker	rose	from	her	chair	as	the	door	opened	behind	her.	She	turned.	‘Mallet,
that	bunch	of	idiots	who	just	came	in.’
The	healer	nodded.	‘There’ll	be	trouble	with	them.	Have	you	seen	Barathol
or	Chaur?	They	were	supposed	to	be	coming	back	here	–	the	Guild’s	probably
caught	wind	of	what	he’s	up	to	by	now.	I’m	thinking	of	maybe	heading	over,	in
case—’
Picker	held	up	her	hand,	two	quick	signals	that	silenced	Mallet.	‘Listen	to
them,’	she	said,	frowning.	‘It’s	not	sounding	right.’
After	a	moment,	Mallet	nodded.	‘We’d	better	head	down.’
Picker	turned	and	leaned	on	the	sill,	squinting	at	the	shadows	where	sat
Blend	–	and	she	saw	those	outstretched	legs	slowly	draw	back.	‘Shit.’
	
It	was	an	act.	That	conclusion	arrived	sudden	and	cold	as	a	winter	wind.
Alarmed,	Blend	rose	from	her	chair,	hands	slipping	beneath	her	raincape.
As	the	outside	door	opened	once	more.
	
That	damned	rat	had	slipped	beneath	the	door	leading	to	the	cellar	–	Antsy	saw
its	slithery	tail	wriggle	out	of	sight	and	swore	under	his	breath.	He	could	catch
it	on	the	stairs—
The	cellar	door	swung	open	and	there	stood	Bluepearl,	carrying	a	dusty
cask	as	if	it	was	a	newborn	child.


‘Did	you	see	it?’	Antsy	demanded.
‘See	what?’
‘The	two-headed	rat!	It	just	went	under	the	door!’
‘Gods	below,	Antsy.	Please,	no	more.	There’s	no	two-headed	rat.	Move
aside,	will	you?	This	thing’s	heavy.’
And	he	shouldered	past	Antsy,	out	into	the	kitchen.
	
Three	cloaked	figures	stepped	in	from	outside	K’rul’s	Bar,	crossbows	at	the
ready.	The	bolts	snapped	out.	Behind	the	bar,	Skevos,	who	was	handling	the
shift	this	night,	was	driven	back	as	a	quarrel	thudded	into	his	chest,	shattering
his	sternum.	A	second	quarrel	shot	up	towards	the	office	window	where	Picker
was	leaning	out	and	she	lunged	back,	either	struck	or	dodging	there	was	no
way	to	tell.	The	third	quarrel	caught	Hedry,	a	serving	girl	of	fifteen	years	of
age,	and	spun	her	round,	her	tray	of	mugs	tumbling	over.
From	closer	to	the	dais,	the	five	drunks	drew	knives	and	swords	from
beneath	their	cloaks	and	fanned	out,	hacking	at	everyone	within	reach.
Shrieks	filled	the	air.
Stepping	out	from	her	table,	Blend	slid	like	smoke	into	the	midst	of	the
three	figures	at	the	doorway.	Her	knives	flickered,	slashed,	opening	the	throat
of	the	man	directly	in	front	of	her,	severing	the	tendons	of	the	nearer	arm	of
the	man	to	her	left.	Ducking	beneath	the	first	man	as	he	toppled	forward,	she
thrust	one	of	her	daggers	into	the	chest	of	the	third	assassin.	The	point	punched
through	chain	and	the	blade	snapped.	She	brought	the	other	one	forward	in	an
upper	cut,	stabbing	between	the	man’s	legs.	As	he	went	down,	Blend	tore	the
knife	free	and	spun	to	slash	at	the	face	of	the	second	assassin.	Throwing	his
head	back	to	avoid	the	blade	drove	it	into	a	low	rafter.	There	was	a	heavy
crunch	and	the	man	sagged	on	watery	knees.	Blend	stabbed	him	through	an	eye.
She	heard	a	fourth	crossbow	release	and	something	punched	her	left
shoulder,	flinging	her	round.	The	arm	below	that	shoulder	seemed	to	have
vanished	–	she	could	feel	nothing	–	and	she	heard	the	knife	clunk	on	the	floor,
even	as	the	assassin	who	had	held	back	in	the	doorway	now	rushed	towards
her,	crossbow	discarded	and	daggers	drawn.
	
Mallet	had	opened	the	door	at	the	moment	that	Picker	–	leaning	out	of	the
window	–	gave	a	startled	yelp.	A	quarrel	slammed	into	the	wall	not	an	arm’s
reach	from	the	healer ’s	head.	Ducking,	he	threw	himself	out	into	the	corridor.


As	he	half	straightened,	he	saw	figures	pouring	from	round	the	corner	to
his	left.	Cords	thrummed.	One	bolt	punched	into	his	stomach.	The	other	ripped
through	his	throat.	He	fell	backward	in	a	wash	of	blood	and	pain.
Lying	on	his	back,	hearing	footfalls	fast	approach,	Mallet	reached	up	to	his
neck	–	he	couldn’t	breathe	–	blood	gushed	down	into	his	lungs,	hot	and
numbing.	Frantic,	he	summoned	High	Denul—
A	shadow	descended	over	him	and	he	looked	up	into	a	passive	young	face,
the	eyes	blank	as	a	dagger	lifted	into	view.
Kick	open	the	gate,	Whiskeyjack—
Mallet	watched	the	point	flash	down.
A	sting	in	his	right	eye,	and	then	darkness.
	
Mallet’s	killer	straightened,	withdrawing	the	dagger,	and	he	wondered,	briefly,
at	the	odd	smile	on	the	dead	man’s	face.
	
Emerging	from	the	kitchen,	ducking	beneath	the	low	cross-beam	of	the
doorway	leading	into	the	taproom,	Bluepearl	heard	crossbows	loose,	heard
screams,	and	then	the	hiss	of	swords	whipped	free	of	scabbards.	He	looked	up.
A	flung	dagger	pinned	his	right	hand	to	the	cask.	Shouting	at	the	fiery
agony,	he	staggered	back	as	two	assassins	rushed	towards	him.	One	with	a
knife,	the	other	with	a	long,	thin-bladed	sword.
The	attacker	with	the	knife	was	in	the	lead,	his	weapon	raised.
Bluepearl	spat	at	him.
That	pearlescent	globule	transmogrified	in	the	air,	expanding	into	a
writhing	ball	of	serpents.	A	dozen	fanged	jaws	struck	the	assassin	in	the	face.
He	screamed	in	horror,	slashing	at	his	own	face	with	his	knife.
Bluepearl	sought	to	drop	the	cask,	only	to	have	its	weight	tug	his	arm
downward	–	his	hand	still	pinned	–	and	he	shrieked	at	the	burst	of	agony.
He	had	time	to	look	up	and	see	the	sword	as	it	was	thrust	into	his	face.	Into
the	side	of	his	nose,	the	point	punching	deeper,	upward,	driving	into	his
forebrain.
	
At	the	threshold	to	the	cellar,	Antsy	heard	the	scrap	erupt	in	the	taproom.
Whirling	round,	loosing	twenty	curses	in	fourteen	different	languages,
readjusting	his	grip	on	his	shortsword.	Gods,	it	sounded	like	unholy	slaughter


out	there.	He	needed	a	damned	shield!
The	cooks	and	scullions	were	rushing	for	the	back	door	–	and	all	at	once
there	were	screams	from	the	alley	beyond.
Antsy	plunged	into	the	storeroom	on	the	left.	To	the	crate	at	the	far	end,
beneath	the	folds	of	burlap.	He	jimmied	the	lid	open	and	plucked	out	three,
four	sharpers,	stuffing	them	beneath	his	shirt.	A	fifth	one	for	his	left	hand.
Then	he	rushed	back	out	into	the	kitchen.
One	cook	and	two	scullions	–	both	girls	–	were	running	back	inside,	and
Antsy	saw	cloaked	forms	crowding	the	back	door.	‘Down!’	he	screamed,
throwing	the	sharper	overhand,	hard,	straight	past	the	two	assassins	in	the
doorway.	The	sharper	struck	the	alley	wall	and	exploded.
He	saw	red	mist	burst	round	the	two	visible	assassins,	like	Hood’s	own
haloes.	They	both	slammed	down	face	first.	From	the	alley	beyond,	a	chorus	of
terrible	shrieks.	Antsy	drew	out	another	sharper,	ran	to	the	doorway.	Standing
on	the	backs	of	the	dead	assassins,	he	leaned	out	and	threw	the	grenado	into	the
alley.	Another	snapping,	fierce	detonation.	And	there	were	no	more	cries	out
there.
‘Chew	on	that,	you	fuckin’	arseholes!’

Picker	rolled	across	the	floor	in	the	wake	of	that	first	quarrel.	She	saw	Mallet
lunge	into	the	corridor,	saw	the	bolts	take	him	down.	Scrambling	–	knowing
the	healer	was	a	dead	man	–	she	threw	herself	at	the	office	door,	slamming	it
shut	even	as	footfalls	rushed	closer.	Dropping	the	latch,	a	heartbeat	before	a
heavy	weight	pounded	into	the	solid	barrier,	she	went	to	the	crate	at	the	foot	of
the	desk.
Fumbled	with	the	key	for	a	moment	–	thundering	thumps	from	the	door
behind	her,	mayhem	in	the	taproom	below	–	before	working	the	lock	free	and
flinging	back	the	lid.	She	drew	out	her	heavy	crossbow	and	a	clutch	of
quarrels.
She	heard	the	echo	of	sharpers	from	the	kitchen	and	grinned,	but	it	was	a
cold	grin.
On	her	feet	once	more,	even	as	wood	splintered	on	the	door,	she	rushed
back	to	the	window	–	in	time	to	see	Blend	knocked	back	by	a	bolt	in	her
shoulder,	and	an	assassin	lunging	after	her	from	the	doorway.
It	was	a	damned	good	shot,	her	quarrel	striking	the	man	in	the	forehead,
snapping	his	head	back	in	a	burst	of	blood,	skull	and	brains.
Whirling	round,	she	went	back	to	the	crate,	found	the	lone	sharper	she’d


stashed	there,	then	back	to	the	window,	where	she	leapt	up	on	to	the	sill,
balanced	in	a	crouch.	Directly	below	was	a	table.	Two	bodies	bled	out	beside	it,
legs	tangled	in	the	knocked-over	chairs	–	two	innocent	patrons,	two	regulars
who	never	did	nobody	any	harm,	good	with	tips,	always	a	smile—
The	door	crashed	open	behind	her.	She	twisted	and	threw	the	sharper,	then
dropped	down	from	the	sill.	The	crack	of	the	grenado	in	the	office,	a	gout	of
flames	and	smoke,	as	Picker	landed	on	the	tabletop.
It	exploded	beneath	her.	One	of	her	knees	slammed	into	her	chin	and	she
felt	teeth	crack	as	she	fell	to	one	side,	thumping	down	on	one	of	the	corpses.
She	managed	to	hold	on	to	the	crossbow,	although	the	quarrels	scattered	across
the	floor.
Spitting	blood,	she	sat	up.

Blend	saw	her	attacker	flung	back,	saw	his	head	cave	inward	above	his	eyes.
She	crouched	down,	reaching	up	for	the	quarrel	embedded	in	her	left	shoulder.
The	point	was	jammed	into	the	cartilage	between	the	bone	of	the	upper	arm	and
the	shoulder ’s	socket.	Leaving	it	in	there	was	probably	worse	than	pulling	the
damned	thing	out.	Gritting	her	teeth,	she	tugged	the	bolt	free.
That	made	her	pass	out.
	
After	pushing	the	surviving	crew	in	the	kitchen	back	out	into	the	alley	–	now
crowded	with	a	dozen	torn-up	corpses	–	Antsy	crossed	the	room,	collecting	the
iron	lid	of	a	large	cauldron	along	the	way.	At	the	entrance	leading	to	the
taproom	he	found	Bluepearl,	dead	as	dead	could	be	in	a	pool	of	ale,	and	just
beyond	him	knelt	an	assassin	who	seemed	to	have	taken	his	dagger	to	his	own
face,	which	was	now	a	sliced,	shredded,	eyeless	mess.	He	was	crooning	some
wordless	melody	from	deep	in	his	throat.
Antsy’s	backslash	split	the	bastard’s	skull.	Tugging	the	sword	loose,	he
edged	forward.
There’d	been	another	sharper,	from	upstairs,	and	the	crashing	of	furniture,
but	little	else	now.	Moving	in	a	crouch,	sword	ready,	lid	held	like	a	shield,	he
worked	his	way	round	the	near	end	of	the	bar.
There	was	Picker,	on	her	knees	directly	ahead,	reaching	out	for	a	quarrel
on	the	floor	and	quickly	loading	her	marine-issue	weapon.	Blend	was	lying
motionless	near	the	bar	entrance.
Antsy	hissed.


Picker	looked	up,	met	his	eyes.	She	signalled	with	one	hand,	six	gestures,
and	he	nodded,	answering	with	two.
Dripping	ale	and	blood,	a	few	soft	groans	here	and	there.
Soft	footfalls	on	the	landing	at	the	top	of	the	stairs.
Antsy	set	down	his	sword,	drew	out	a	sharper	and	showed	it	to	Picker,	who
nodded	and	then	quietly	moved	round,	using	the	wreckage	of	the	table	for
cover,	and	trained	her	crossbow	on	the	stairs.
When	he	saw	she	was	ready,	Antsy	lifted	his	makeshift	shield	to	cover
shoulder	and	head,	then	quickly	stepped	round	to	the	foot	of	the	stairs.	And
threw	the	grenado	upward.
Two	quarrels	clanged	off	the	cauldron	lid,	with	enough	force	to	knock	it
from	his	hand.	At	the	same	moment	an	assassin,	having	launched	herself	from
halfway	down	the	stairs,	sailed	down	towards	him.
Picker ’s	quarrel	caught	the	attacker	somewhere	in	the	midsection,
convulsing	her	in	mid-flight.	She	crashed	down	just	as	the	sharper	detonated
near	the	landing.
And	then	Antsy,	sword	in	hand	once	more,	was	rushing	up	those	steps.
Picker	raced	into	his	wake,	drawing	out	her	own	sword.	‘Get	outa	the	way	with
that	pigsticker!’	she	snarled.	‘Cover	me	in	close!’	She	pulled	him	back	and
round	by	one	shoulder	and	pushed	past.
Limbs	twitching	from	a	heap	of	bodies	on	the	landing,	and	splashed	blood
on	the	walls	–	and	movement	beyond,	somewhere	in	the	corridor.
She	scrambled	over	the	dead	and	dying	on	the	landing,	pitched	into	the
corridor	and,	seeing	three	assassins	slowly	picking	themselves	up	from	the
floor,	charged	forward.
Short	work	cutting	down	the	stunned	attackers,	with	Antsy	guarding	her
back.
	
Blend	opened	her	eyes	and	wondered	why	she	was	lying	on	the	floor.	She
attempted	to	lift	her	left	arm	and	gasped	as	pain	blossomed	red	and	hot,	leaving
her	half	blind	in	its	aftermath.	Oh,	now	she	remembered.	With	a	low	moan,	she
rolled	on	to	her	good	side	and	worked	herself	into	a	sitting	position,	blinking
sweat	and	worse	from	her	eyes.
The	bar	door	was	open,	one	of	the	hinges	broken.
In	the	street	beyond,	she	saw	at	least	a	half-dozen	cloaked	figures,	gathered
and	creeping	closer.
Shit.
Desperate,	she	looked	round	for	the	nearest	discarded	weapon.	Knowing


she	wouldn’t	have	time,	knowing	they	were	going	to	cut	her	down	once	and	for
all.	Still	–	she	saw	a	knife	and	reached	out	for	it.
The	six	assassins	came	at	a	sprint.
Someone	slammed	into	them	from	one	side,	loosing	a	bellowing	bawl	like
a	wounded	bull,	and	Blend	stared	as	the	huge	man	–	Chaur	–	swung	his
enormous	fists.	Heads	snapped	back	on	broken	necks,	faces	crumpled	in	sprays
of	blood—
And	then	Barathol	was	there,	with	nothing	more	than	a	knife,	slashing	into
the	reeling	assassins,	and	Blend	could	see	the	fear	in	the	blacksmith’s	eyes	–
fear	for	Chaur,	dread	for	what	might	happen	if	the	assassins	recovered—
As	they	were	now	doing.
Blend	pushed	herself	to	her	feet,	collecting	the	dagger	from	the	floor	as
she	staggered	forward—
And	was	shoved	aside	by	Antsy.	Hacking	at	the	nearest	assassin	with	his
shortsword,	a	dented	cauldron	lid	shielding	his	left	side.
Chaur,	his	forearms	slashed	by	desperate	daggers,	picked	up	an	assassin
and	threw	him	down	on	to	the	cobbles.	Bones	snapped.	Still	bawling,	he	picked
the	broken	form	up	by	an	ankle	and	swung	him	into	the	air,	round,	then	loose	–
to	collide	with	another	assassin,	and	both	went	down.	Barathol	was	suddenly
above	the	first	man,	driving	his	boot	heel	down	on	his	temple.	Limbs	spasmed.
Antsy	pulled	his	sword	from	an	assassin’s	chest	and	readied	himself	for	his
next	target,	then	slowly	straightened.
Leaning	against	the	doorframe,	Blend	spat	and	said,	‘All	down,	Sergeant.’
Barathol	wrapped	Chaur	in	a	hug	to	calm	the	man	down.	Tears	streaked
Chaur ’s	broad	cheeks,	and	his	fists	were	still	closed,	like	massive	bloody
mauls	at	the	ends	of	his	arms.	He	had	wet	himself.
Blend	and	Antsy	watched	as	the	blacksmith	hugged	his	friend	tightly,	with
need	and	with	raw	relief,	so	exposed	that	both	Malazans	had	to	look	away.
Picker	came	up	behind	Blend.	‘You	gonna	live?’	she	asked.
‘Good	as	new,	as	soon	as	Mallet—’
‘No.	Not	Mallet,	love.’
Blend	squeezed	shut	her	eyes.	‘They	caught	us,	Pick,’	she	said.	‘They
caught	us	good.’
‘Aye.’
She	glanced	over.	‘You	got	’em	all	in	the	taproom?	Damned	impressive—’
‘No,	I	didn’t,	but	they’re	all	down.	Four	of	’em,	right	at	the	foot	of	the
stage.	Looked	like	they	rushed	it.’
Rushed	it?	But	who	was	up	there…	‘We	lose	our	bard,	then?’
‘Don’t	know,’	Picker	said.	‘Didn’t	see	him.’


Rushed	the	stage…
‘We	lost	Bluepearl,	too.’
Blend	slowly	closed	her	eyes	a	second	time.	Oh,	she	was	hurting,	and	a	lot
of	that	hurt	couldn’t	get	sewn	up.	They	caught	us.	‘Picker.’
‘They	slaughtered	everyone,	Blend.	People	with	nothing	but	bad	luck	being
here	tonight.	Skevos.	Hedry,	Larmas,	little	Boothal.	All	to	take	us	down.’
From	up	the	street	came	a	squad	of	City	Guard,	lanterns	swinging.
For	a	scene	such	as	Blend	was	looking	out	on	right	now,	there	should	be	a
crowd	of	onlookers,	the	ones	hungry	to	see	injured,	dying	people,	the	ones
who	fed	on	such	things.	But	there	was	no	one.
Because	this	was	Guild	work.
‘Some	of	us	are	still	breathing,’	Blend	said.	‘It’s	not	good	to	do	that.	Leave
some	marines	still	breathing.’
‘No,	it’s	not	good	at	all.’
Blend	knew	that	tone.	Still,	she	wondered.	Are	we	enough?	Is	there	enough
in	us	to	do	this?	Do	we	still	have	what’s	needed?	They’d	lost	a	healer	and	a
mage	this	night.	They’d	lost	the	best	of	them.	Because	we	were	careless.
Antsy	joined	them	as	the	guards	closed	in	round	Barathol	and	Chaur.	‘Pick,
Blend,’	he	said,	‘I	don’t	know	about	you	two,	but	right	now,	gods	below,	I’m
feeling	old.’
A	sergeant	of	the	guard	approached.	‘How	bad	is	it	inside?’
No	one	seemed	eager	to	reply.
	
Six	streets	away,	a	world	away,	Cutter	stood	in	the	front	yard	of	a	store	selling
headstones	and	crypt	façades.	An	array	of	stylized	deities,	none	of	them
temple-sanctioned	as	yet,	beseeching	blessings	upon	the	future	dead.	Beru	and
Burn,	Soliel	and	Nerruse,	Treach	and	the	Fallen	One,	Hood	and	Fanderay,
Hound	and	tiger,	boar	and	worm.	The	shop	was	closed	and	he	looked	upon
stones	still	uncarved,	awaiting	names	of	loved	ones.	Against	one	of	the	low
yard	walls	stood	a	row	of	marble	sarcophagi,	and	against	the	wall	opposite
there	were	tall	urns	with	their	flared	mouths,	narrow	necks	and	swollen	bellies,
reminding	him	of	pregnant	women…birth	into	death,	wombs	to	hold	all	that
remained	of	mortal	flesh,	homes	to	those	who	would	answer	the	final	question,
the	last	question:	what	lies	beyond?	What	awaits	us	all?	What	shape	the	gate
before	me?	There	were	plenty	of	ways	of	asking	it,	but	they	all	meant	the	same
thing,	and	all	sought	the	one	answer.
One	spoke	of	death	often.	The	death	of	a	friendship.	The	death	of	love.
Each	echoed	with	the	finality	that	waited	at	the	very	end,	but	they	were	faint


echoes,	ghostly,	acting	out	scenes	in	puppet	shows	swallowed	in	flickering
shadows.	Kill	a	love.	What	lies	beyond?	Emptiness,	cold,	drifting	ashes,	yet
does	it	not	prove	fertile?	A	place	where	a	new	seed	is	planted,	finding	life,
growing	into	itself?	Is	this	how	true	death	is,	as	well?
From	the	dust,	a	new	seed…
A	pleasing	thought.	A	comforting	thought.
The	street	behind	him	was	modestly	crowded,	the	last	of	the	late	night
shoppers	reluctant	to	close	out	this	day.	Maybe	they	had	nothing	to	go	home	to.
Maybe	they	hungered	for	one	more	purchase,	in	the	forlorn	hope	that	it	would
fill	whatever	emptiness	gnawed	deep	inside.
None	wandered	into	this	yard,	none	wanted	the	reminder	of	what	waited
for	them	all.	Why,	then,	had	he	found	himself	here?	Was	he	seeking	some	kind
of	comfort,	some	reminder	that	for	each	and	every	person,	no	matter	where,
the	same	conclusion	was	on	its	way?	One	could	walk,	one	could	crawl,	one
could	run	headlong,	but	one	could	never	turn	round	and	head	the	other	way,
could	never	escape.	Even	with	the	truism	that	all	grief	belonged	to	the	living,
the	ones	left	behind	–	facing	empty	spaces	where	someone	once	stood	–	there
could	be	found	a	kind	of	calm	repose.	We	walk	the	same	path,	some	farther
along,	some	farther	back,	but	still	and	for	ever	more	the	same	path.
There	was,	then,	the	death	of	love.
And	there	was,	alas,	its	murder.
‘Crokus	Younghand.’
He	slowly	turned	round.	A	woman	stood	before	him,	exquisitely	dressed,	a
cloak	of	ermine	about	her	shoulders.	A	heart-shaped	face,	languid	eyes,	painted
lips,	and	yes,	he	knew	this	face.	Had	known	it,	a	younger	version,	a	child’s
version,	perhaps,	but	now	there	was	nothing	of	that	child	–	not	in	the	eyes,	not
even	in	the	sad	smile	on	those	full	lips.	‘Challice	D’Arle.’
Later,	he	would	look	back	on	this	moment,	on	the	dark	warning	contained
in	the	fact	that,	when	he	spoke	her	name	of	old,	she	did	not	correct	him.
Would	such	percipience	have	changed	things?	All	that	was	to	come?
Death	and	murder,	seeds	in	the	ashes,	one	does	as	one	does.	Sarcophagi
gaped.	Urns	echoed	hollow	and	dark.	Stone	faces	awaited	names,	grief
crouching	at	the	gate.
Such	was	this	night	in	the	city	of	Darujhistan.
Such	is	this	night,	everywhere.


Chapter	Twelve

Where	will	I	stand
When	the	walls	come	down
East	to	the	sun’s	rise
North	to	winter ’s	face
South	to	where	stars	are	born
West	to	the	road	of	death
Where	will	I	stand
When	the	winds	wage	war
Fleeing	the	dawn
Howling	the	breath	of	ice
Blistered	with	desert’s	smile
Dusty	from	crypts
Where	will	I	stand
When	the	world	crashes	down
And	on	all	sides
I	am	left	exposed
To	weapons	illimitable
From	the	vented	host
Will	I	stand	at	all
Against	such	forces	unbarred
Reeling	to	every	blow
Blinded	by	storms	of	pain
As	all	is	taken	from	me
So	cruelly	taken	away
Let	us	not	talk	of	courage
Nor	steel	fortitude
The	gifts	of	wisdom
Burn	too	hot	to	touch


The	hunger	for	peace
Breaks	the	heart
Where	will	I	stand
In	the	dust	of	a	done	life
Face	bared	to	regrets
That	flail	the	known	visage
Until	none	but	strangers
Watch	my	fall
None	but	Strangers
Fisher	kel	Tath

The	stately	trees	with	their	black	trunks	and	midnight	leaves	formed	a	rough
ring	encircling	Suruth	Common.	From	the	centre	of	the	vast	clearing,	one
could,	upon	facing	north,	see	the	towers	of	the	Citadel,	their	slim	lines	echoing
these	sacred	trees.	Autumn	had	arrived,	and	the	air	was	filled	with	the	drifting
filaments	from	the	blackwood.
The	great	forges	to	the	west	lit	crimson	the	foul	clouds	hanging	over	them,
so	that	it	seemed	that	one	side	of	Kharkanas	was	ablaze.	An	eternal	rain	of	ash
plagued	the	massive,	sprawling	factories,	nothing	as	sweet	as	the	curled
filaments	to	mark	the	coming	of	the	cold	season.
Within	the	refuge	of	Suruth	Common,	the	blasted	realm	of	the	factories
seemed	worlds	away.	Thick	beds	of	moss	cloaked	the	pavestones	of	the
clearing,	muting	Endest	Silann’s	boots	as	he	walked	to	the	concave	altar	stone
at	the	very	heart.	He	could	see	no	one	else	about	–	this	was	not	the	season	for
festivity.	This	was	not	a	time	for	celebration	of	any	sort.	He	wondered	if	the
trees	sensed	him,	if	they	were	capable	of	focusing	some	kind	of	attention	upon
him,	made	aware	by	the	eddies	of	air,	the	exudation	of	heat	and	breath.
He	had	read	once	a	scholar ’s	treatise	describing	the	chemical	relationship
between	plants	and	animals.	The	language	had	been	clinical	in	the	fashion	of
such	academic	efforts,	and	yet	Endest	recalled	closing	the	book	and	sitting
back	in	his	chair.	The	notion	that	he	could	walk	up	to	a	plant,	a	tree,	even	a
blackwood,	and	bless	it	with	his	own	breath	–	a	gift	of	lung-soured	air	that
could	enliven	that	tree,	that	could	in	truth	deliver	health	and	vigour,	deliver	life
itself…ah,	but	that	was	a	wonder	indeed,	one	that,	for	a	time,	calmed	the
churning	maelstrom	that	was	a	young	man’s	soul.


So	long	ago,	now,	and	he	felt,	at	times,	that	he	was	done	with	giving	gifts.
He	stood	alone	in	front	of	the	ancient	altar.	The	past	night’s	modest	rain
had	formed	a	shallow	pool	in	the	cup	of	the	basalt.	It	was	said	the	Andii	came
from	the	forests	and	their	natural	clearings,	born	to	give	breath	to	the	sacred
wood,	and	that	the	first	fall	of	his	people	occurred	the	moment	they	walked	out,
to	set	down	the	first	shaped	stone	of	this	city.
How	many	failings	had	there	been	since?	Suruth	Common	was	the	last
fragment	of	the	old	forest	left	in	all	Kharkanas.	Blackwood	itself	had	fed	the
great	forges.
He	had	no	desire	to	look	westward.	More	than	the	fiery	glow	disturbed
him.	The	frenzy	in	those	factories	–	they	were	making	weapons.	Armour.	They
were	readying	for	war.
He	had	been	sent	here	by	the	High	Priestess.	‘Witness,’	she	had	said.	And	so
he	would.	The	eyes	of	the	Temple,	the	priesthood,	must	remain	open,	aware,
missing	nothing	in	these	fraught	times.	That	she	had	chosen	him	over	others	–
or	even	herself	–	was	not	a	measure	of	respect.	His	presence	was	political,	his
modest	rank	a	deliberate	expression	of	the	Temple’s	contempt.
‘Witness,	Endest	Silann.	But	remain	silent.	You	are	a	presence,	do	you
understand?’
He	did.
They	appeared	almost	simultaneously,	one	from	the	north,	one	from	the
east	and	one	from	the	south.	Three	brothers.	Three	sons.	This	was	to	be	a
meeting	of	blood	and	yes,	they	would	resent	him,	for	he	did	not	belong.
Indeed,	the	Temple	did	not	belong.	Would	they	send	him	away?
The	trees	wept	their	promise	of	a	new	season	of	life	–	a	season	that	would
never	come,	for	there	was	nowhere	left	for	the	filaments	to	take	root	–	not	for
scores	of	leagues	in	any	direction.	The	river	would	take	millions,	but	even
those	fine	black	threads	could	not	float	on	its	waters,	and	so	what	the	river	took
the	river	kept,	buried	in	the	dead	silts	of	Dorssan	Ryl.	Our	breath	was	meant	to
give	life,	not	take	it	away.	Our	breath	was	a	gift,	and	in	that	gift	the	blackwood
found	betrayal.
This	was	and	is	our	crime,	and	it	was	and	remains	unforgivable.
‘Good	evening,	priest,’	said	Andarist,	who	then	added,	‘Anomander,	it
seems	you	were	right.’
‘An	easy	prediction,’	Anomander	replied.	‘The	Temple	watches	me	the
way	a	rove	of	rhotes	watch	a	dying	ginaf.’
Endest	blinked.	The	last	wild	ginaf	had	vanished	a	century	past	and	no
longer	did	the	silver-backed	herds	thunder	across	the	south	plains;	and	these
days	roves	of	rhotes	winged	above	battlefields	and	nowhere	else	–	and	no,	they


did	not	starve.	Are	you	the	last,	Lord?	Is	this	what	you	are	saying?	Mother	bless
me,	I	never	know	what	you	are	saying.	No	one	does.	We	share	language	but	not
meaning.
The	third	brother	was	silent,	his	red	eyes	fixed	upon	the	forges	beneath	the
western	sky.
‘The	clash	between	Drethdenan	and	Vanut	Degalla	draws	to	an	end,’	said
Andarist.	‘It	may	be	time—’
‘Should	we	be	speaking	of	this?’	Silchas	Ruin	cut	in,	finally	turning	to	face
Endest	Silann.	‘None	of	this	is	for	the	Temple.	Especially	not	some	pathetic
third	level	acolyte.’
Anomander	seemed	uninterested	in	settling	his	attention	upon	Endest
Silann.	In	the	face	of	his	brother ’s	belligerence,	he	shrugged.	‘This	way,
Silchas,	perhaps	we	can	ensure	the	Temple	remains…neutral.’
‘By	unveiling	to	it	all	that	we	intend?	Why	should	the	Temple	hold	to	any
particular	faith	in	us?	What	makes	the	three	of	us	more	worthy	of	trust	than,
say,	Manalle,	or	Hish	Tulla?’
‘There	is	an	obvious	answer	to	that,’	said	Andarist.	‘Priest?’
He	could	refuse	a	reply.	He	could	feign	ignorance.	He	was	naught	but	a
third	level	acolyte,	after	all.	Instead,	he	said,	‘You	three	are	not	standing	here
trying	to	kill	each	other.’
Andarist	smiled	at	Silchas	Ruin.
Who	scowled	and	looked	away	once	again.
‘We	have	things	to	discuss,’	said	Anomander.	‘Andarist?’
‘I	have	already	sent	representatives	to	both	camps.	An	offer	to	mediate.
Veiled	hints	of	potential	alliances	against	the	rest	of	you.	The	key	will	be	in
getting	Drethdenan	and	Vanut	into	the	same	room,	weapons	sheathed.’
‘Silchas?’
‘Both	Hish	and	Manalle	have	agreed	to	our	pact.	Manalle	still	worries	me,
brothers.	She	is	no	fool—’
‘And	Hish	is?’	laughed	Andarist	–	a	maddeningly	easy	laugh,	given	the
treachery	they	were	discussing.
‘Hish	Tulla	is	not	subtle.	Her	desires	are	plain.	It	is	as	they	all	say:	she	does
not	lie.	No,	Manalle	is	suspicious.	After	all,	I	am	speaking	of	the	greatest	crime
of	all,	the	spilling	of	kin’s	blood.’	He	paused,	then	faced	Anomander,	and
suddenly	his	expression	was	transformed.	Unease,	something	bewildered	and
lit	with	horror.	‘Anomander,’	he	whispered,	‘what	are	we	doing?’
Anomander ’s	features	hardened.	‘We	are	strong	enough	to	survive	this.
You	will	see.’	Then	he	looked	at	Andarist.	‘The	one	who	will	break	our	hearts
stands	before	us.	Andarist,	who	chooses	to	turn	away.’


‘A	choice,	was	it?’	At	the	heavy	silence	that	followed,	he	laughed	again.
‘Yes,	it	was.	One	of	us…it	must	be,	at	least	one	of	us,	and	I	have	no	desire	to
walk	your	path.	I	have	not	the	courage	for	such	a	thing.	The	courage,	and	the…
cruel	madness.	No,	brothers,	mine	is	the	easiest	task	–	I	am	to	do	nothing.’
‘Until	I	betray	you,’	said	Silchas,	and	Endest	was	shocked	to	see	the	whiteskinned	Lord’s	wet	eyes.
‘There	is	no	other	way	through,’	said	Andarist.
Centuries	into	millennia,	Endest	Silann	would	wonder	–	and	never	truly
know	–	if	all	that	followed	was	as	these	three	had	planned.	Courage,	Andarist
had	called	it.	And…cruel	madness	–	by	the	Mother,	yes	–	such	destruction,	the
sheer	audacity	of	the	treachery	–	could	they	have	meant	all	of	that?
The	next	time	Anomander	had	met	Endest	Silann	had	been	on	the	bridge	at
the	foot	of	the	Citadel,	and	in	his	words	he	made	it	clear	that	he	had	not
recognized	him	as	the	same	man	as	the	one	sent	to	witness	his	meeting	with	his
brothers.	A	strange	carelessness	for	one	such	as	Anomander.	Although,
unquestionably,	the	Lord	had	other	things	on	his	mind	at	that	moment.
Endest	Silann	had	delivered	to	the	High	Priestess	his	account	of	that	fell
meeting.	And	in	relating	the	details	of	the	betrayal,	such	as	could	be	culled
from	what	he	had	heard	–	all	the	implications	–	he	had	expected	to	see	outrage
in	her	face.	Instead	–	and,	he	would	think	later,	with	prescient	symbolism	–	she
had	but	turned	away.
There	had	been	no	storms	in	the	sky	then.	Nothing	to	hint	of	what	would
come.	The	blackwood	trees	of	Suruth	Common	had	lived	for	two	millennia,
maybe	longer,	and	each	season	they	shed	their	elongated	seeds	to	the	wind.	Yet,
when	next	he	looked	upon	those	stately	trees,	they	would	be	on	fire.
	
‘You	have	grown	far	too	quiet,	old	friend.’
Endest	Silann	looked	up	from	the	dying	flames.	Dawn	was	fast
approaching.	‘I	was	reminded…the	way	that	wood	crumbles	into	dissolution.’
‘The	release	of	energy.	Perhaps	a	better	way	of	seeing	it.’
‘Such	release	is	ever	fatal.’
‘Among	plants,	yes,’	said	Caladan	Brood.
Among	plants…	‘I	think	of	the	breath	we	give	them	–	our	gift.’
‘And	the	breath	they	give	back,’	said	the	warlord,	‘that	burns	if	touched.	I
am	fortunate,	I	think,’	he	continued,	‘that	I	have	no	appreciation	of	irony.’
‘It	is	a	false	gift,	for	with	it	we	claim	ownership.	Like	crooked	merchants,
every	one	of	us.	We	give	so	that	we	can	then	justify	taking	it	back.	I	have	come
to	believe	that	this	exchange	is	the	central	tenet	of	our	relationship…with


everything	in	the	world.	Any	world.	Human,	Andii,	Edur,	Liosan.	Imass,
Barghast,	Jaghut—’
‘Not	Jaghut,’	cut	in	Caladan	Brood.
‘Ah,’	said	Endest	Silann.	‘I	know	little	of	them,	in	truth.	What	then	was	their
bargain?’
‘Between	them	and	the	world?	I	don’t	even	know	if	an	explanation	is
possible,	or	at	least	within	the	limits	of	my	sorry	wit.	Until	the	forging	of	the
ice	–	defending	against	the	Imass	–	the	Jaghut	gave	far	more	than	they	took.
Excepting	the	Tyrants,	of	course,	which	is	what	made	such	tyranny	all	the	more
reprehensible	in	the	eyes	of	other	Jaghut.’
‘So,	they	were	stewards.’
‘No.	The	notion	of	stewardship	implies	superiority.	A	certain	arrogance.’
‘An	earned	one,	surely,	since	the	power	to	destroy	exists.’
‘Well,	the	illusion	of	power,	I	would	say,	Endest.	After	all,	if	you	destroy
the	things	around	you,	eventually	you	destroy	yourself.	It	is	arrogance	that
asserts	a	kind	of	separation,	and	from	that	the	notion	that	we	can	shape	and
reshape	the	world	to	suit	our	purposes,	and	that	we	can	use	it,	as	if	it	was	no
more	than	a	living	tool	composed	of	a	million	parts.’	He	paused	and	shook	his
head.	‘See?	Already	my	skull	aches.’
‘Only	with	the	truth,	I	think,’	said	Endest	Silann.	‘So,	the	Jaghut	did	not
think	of	themselves	as	stewards.	Nor	as	parasites.	They	were	without
arrogance?	I	find	that	an	extraordinary	thing,	Warlord.	Beyond
comprehension,	in	fact.’
‘They	shared	this	world	with	the	Forkrul	Assail,	who	were	their	opposites.
They	were	witnesses	to	the	purest	manifestation	of	arrogance	and	separation.’
‘Was	there	war?’
Caladan	Brood	was	silent	for	so	long	that	Endest	began	to	believe	that	no
answer	was	forthcoming,	and	then	he	glanced	up	with	his	bestial	eyes	glittering
in	the	ebbing	flames	of	the	hearth.	‘“Was”?’
Endest	Silann	stared	across	at	his	old	friend,	and	the	breath	slowly	hissed
from	him.	‘Gods	below,	Caladan.	No	war	can	last	that	long.’
‘It	can,	when	the	face	of	the	army	is	without	relevance.’
The	revelation	was…monstrous.	Insane.	‘Where?’
The	warlord’s	smile	was	without	humour.	‘Far	away	from	here,	friend,
which	is	well.	Imagine	what	your	Lord	might	elect	to	do,	if	it	was	otherwise.’
He	would	intervene.	He	would	not	be	able	to	stop	himself.
Caladan	Brood	rose	then.	‘We	have	company.’
A	moment	later	the	heavy	thud	of	wings	sounded	in	the	fading	darkness
above	them,	and	Endest	Silann	looked	up	to	see	Crone,	wings	crooked	now,


riding	shifting	currents	of	air	as	she	descended,	landing	with	a	scatter	of	stones
just	beyond	the	edge	of	firelight.
‘I	smell	fish!’
‘Wasn’t	aware	your	kind	could	smell	at	all,’	Caladan	Brood	said.
‘Funny	oaf,	although	it	must	be	acknowledged	that	our	eyes	are	the	true
gift	of	perfection	–	among	many,	of	course.	Why,	Great	Ravens	are	plagued
with	excellence	–	and	do	I	see	picked	bones?	I	do,	with	despondent	certainty	–
you	rude	creatures	have	left	me	nothing!’
She	hopped	closer,	regarding	the	two	men	with	first	one	eye	and	then	the
other.	‘Grim	conversation?	Glad	I	interrupted.	Endest	Silann,	your	Lord
summons	you.	Caladan	Brood,	not	you.	There,	messages	delivered!	Now	I
want	food!’
	
Harak	fled	through	Night.	Old	tumbled	streets,	the	wreckage	of	the	siege
picked	clean	save	for	shattered	blocks	of	quarried	stone;	into	narrow,	tortured
alleys	where	the	garbage	was	heaped	knee-high;	across	collapsed	buildings,
scrambling	like	a	spider.	He	knew	Thove	was	dead.	He	knew	Bucch	was	dead,
and	a	half-dozen	other	conspirators.	All	dead.	Killers	had	pounced.	Tiste	Andii,
he	suspected,	some	kind	of	secret	police,	penetrating	the	cells	and	now
slaughtering	every	liberator	they	could	hunt	down.
He’d	always	known	that	the	unhuman	demon-spawn	were	far	from	the
innocent,	benign	occupiers	they	played	at	being,	oh,	yes,	they	were	rife	with
deadly	secrets.	Plans	of	slavery	and	oppression,	of	tyranny,	not	just	over	Black
Coral,	but	beyond,	out	to	the	nearby	cities	–	wherever	humans	could	be	found,
the	Tiste	Andii	cast	covetous	eyes.	And	now	he	had	proof.
Someone	was	after	him,	tracking	with	all	the	deliberate	malice	of	a	hunting
cat	–	he’d	yet	to	spy	that	murderer,	but	in	a	world	such	as	Night	that	was	not
surprising.	The	Tiste	Andii	were	skilled	in	their	realm	of	Darkness,	deadly	as
serpents.
He	needed	to	reach	the	barrow.	He	needed	to	get	to	Gradithan.	Once	there,
Harak	knew	he	would	be	safe.	They	had	to	be	warned,	and	new	plans	would
have	to	be	made.	Harak	knew	that	he	might	well	be	the	last	one	left	in	Black
Coral.
He	stayed	in	the	most	ruined	areas	of	the	city,	seeking	to	circle	round	or,
failing	that,	get	out	through	the	inland	gate	that	led	into	the	forested	hills	–
where	the	cursed	Bridgeburners	had	made	a	stand,	killing	thousands	with	foul
sorcery	and	Moranth	munitions	–	why,	the	entire	slope	was	still	nothing	more
than	shattered,	charred	trees,	fragments	of	mangled	armour,	the	occasional


leather	boot	and,	here	and	there	in	the	dead	soil,	jutting	bones.	Could	he	reach
that,	he	could	find	a	path	leading	into	Daylight	and	then,	finally,	he	would	be
safe.
This	latter	option	became	ever	more	inviting	–	he	was	not	too	far	from	the
gate,	and	these	infernal	shadows	and	the	endless	gloom	here	were	of	no	help	to
him	–	the	Tiste	Andii	could	see	in	this	darkness,	after	all,	whilst	he	stumbled
about	half	blind.
He	heard	a	rock	shift	in	the	rubble	behind	him,	not	thirty	paces	away.	Heart
pounding,	Harak	set	his	eyes	upon	the	gate.	Smashed	down	in	the	siege,	but	a
path	of	sorts	had	been	cleared	through	it,	leading	out	to	the	raised	road	that
encircled	the	inland	side	of	the	city.	Squinting,	he	could	make	out	no	figures
lingering	near	that	gate.
Twenty	paces	away	now.	He	picked	up	his	pace	and,	once	on	to	the	cleared
avenue,	sprinted	for	the	opening	in	the	wall.
Were	those	footfalls	behind	him?	He	dared	not	turn.
Run!	Damn	my	legs	–	run!
On	to	the	path,	threading	between	heaps	of	broken	masonry,	and	outside
the	city!
Onward,	up	the	slope	to	the	raised	road,	a	quick,	frantic	scamper	across	it,
and	down	into	the	tumbled	rocks	at	the	base	of	the	ruined	slope.	Battered	earth,
makeshift	grave-mounds,	tangled	roots	and	dead	branches.	Whimpering,	he
clambered	on,	torn	and	scratched,	coughing	in	the	dust	of	dead	pine	bark.
And	there,	near	the	summit,	was	that	sunlight?	Yes.	It	was	near	dawn,	after
all.	Sun	–	blessed	light!
A	quick	glance	back	revealed	nothing	–	he	couldn’t	make	out	what	might
be	whispering	through	the	wreckage	below.
He	was	going	to	make	it.
Harak	scrambled	the	last	few	strides,	plunged	into	cool	morning	air,	shafts
of	golden	rays	–	and	a	figure	rose	into	his	path.	A	tulwar	lashed	out.	Harak’s
face	bore	an	expression	of	astonishment,	frozen	there	as	his	head	rolled	from
his	shoulders,	bounced	and	pitched	back	down	the	slope,	where	it	lodged	near	a
heap	of	bleached,	fractured	bones.	The	body	sank	down	on	to	its	knees,	at	the
very	edge	of	the	old	trench	excavated	by	the	Bridgeburners,	and	there	it	stayed.
Seerdomin	wiped	clean	his	blade	and	sheathed	the	weapon.	Was	this	the	last
of	them?	He	believed	that	it	was.	The	city…cleansed.	Leaving	only	those	out	at
the	barrow.	Those	ones	would	persist	for	a	time,	in	ignorance	that	everything
in	Black	Coral	had	changed.
He	was	weary	–	the	hunt	had	taken	longer	than	he	had	expected.	Yes,	he
would	rest	now.	Seerdomin	looked	about,	studied	the	rumpled	trenchwork	the


sappers	had	managed	with	little	more	than	folding	shovels.	And	he	was
impressed.	A	different	kind	of	soldier,	these	Malazans.
But	even	this	the	forest	was	slowly	reclaiming.
He	sat	down	a	few	paces	from	the	kneeling	corpse	and	settled	his	head	into
his	gloved	hands.	He	could	smell	leather,	and	sweat,	and	old	blood.	The	smells
of	his	past,	and	now	they	had	returned.	In	his	mind	he	could	hear	echoes,	the
rustle	of	armour	and	scabbards	brushing	thighs.	Urdomen	marching	in	ranks,
the	visors	on	their	great	helms	dropped	down	to	hide	their	fevered	eyes.
Squares	of	Betaklites	forming	up	outside	the	city,	preparing	to	strike
northward.	Scalandi	skirmishers	and	Tenescowri	–	the	starving	multitudes,
desperate	as	bared	teeth.	He	recalled	their	mass,	shifting	in	vast	heaves,	ripples
and	rushes	on	the	plain,	the	way	each	wave	left	bodies	behind	–	the	weakest
ones,	the	dying	ones	–	and	how	eddies	would	form	round	them,	as	those
closest	swung	back	to	then	descend	on	their	hapless	comrades.
When	there	was	no	one	else,	the	army	ate	itself.	And	he	had	simply	looked
on,	expressionless,	wrapped	in	his	armour,	smelling	iron,	leather,	sweat	and
blood.
Soldiers	who	had	fought	in	a	just	war	–	a	war	they	could	see	as	just,
anyway	–	could	hold	on	to	a	sense	of	pride,	every	sacrifice	a	worthy	one.	And
so	fortified,	they	could	leave	it	behind,	finding	a	new	life,	a	different	life.	And
no	matter	how	grotesque	the	injustices	of	the	world	around	them,	the	world	of
the	present,	that	veteran	could	hold	on	to	the	sanctity	of	what	he	or	she	had
lived	through.
But	fighting	an	unjust	war…that	was	different.	If	one	had	any	conscience	at
all,	there	was	no	escaping	the	crimes	committed,	the	blood	on	the	hands,	the
sheer	insanity	of	that	time	–	when	honour	was	a	lie,	duty	a	weapon	that
silenced,	and	courage	itself	was	stained	and	foul.	Suddenly,	then,	there	was	no
defence	against	injustice,	no	sanctuary	to	be	found	in	memories	of	a	righteous
time.	And	so	anger	seethed	upward,	filling	every	crack,	building	into	rage.
There	was	no	way	to	give	it	a	voice,	no	means	of	releasing	it,	and	so	the
pressure	built.	When	it	finally	overwhelmed,	then	suicide	seemed	the	easiest
option,	the	only	true	escape.
Seerdomin	could	see	the	logic	of	that,	but	logic	was	not	enough.	Anyone
could	reason	themselves	into	a	corner,	and	so	justify	surrender.	It	was	even
easier	when	courage	itself	was	vulnerable	to	abuse	and	sordid	mockery.
Because,	after	all,	to	persist,	to	live	on,	demanded	courage,	and	that	was	only
possible	when	the	virtue	remained	worthy	of	respect.
Seerdomin	lifted	his	head	and	glared	over	at	the	decapitated	corpse.	‘Can
you	understand	any	of	that,	Harak?	Can	you	grasp,	now,	finally,	how	the	very


existence	of	people	like	you	gives	me	reason	to	stay	alive?	Because	you	give
my	rage	a	face,	and	my	sword,	well,	it’s	hungry	for	faces.’	It	was	either	that,	or
the	fury	within	him	would	devour	his	own	soul.	No,	better	to	keep	the	face	he
slashed	open	someone	else’s,	rather	than	his	own.	Keep	finding	them,	one	after
another.	Justice	was	so	weak.	The	corrupt	won,	the	pure	of	heart	failed	and	fell
to	the	wayside.	Graft	and	greed	crowed	triumphant	over	responsibility	and
compassion.	He	could	fight	that,	and	that	fight	need	not	even	be	in	his	own
name.	He	could	fight	for	Black	Coral,	for	the	Tiste	Andii,	for	humanity	itself.
Even	for	the	Redeemer	–	no,	that	cannot	be.	What	I	do	here	can	never	be
healed	–	there	can	be	no	redemption	for	me.	Ever.	You	must	see	that.	All	of	you
must	see	that.
He	realized	he	was	pleading	–	but	to	whom?	He	did	not	know.	We	were	put
in	an	impossible	situation,	and,	at	least	for	us,	the	tyrant	responsible	is	dead	–
has	been	punished.	It	could	have	been	worse	–	he	could	have	escaped
retribution,	escaped	justice.
There	was	trauma	in	war.	Some	people	survived	it;	others	were	for	ever
trapped	in	it.	For	many	of	those,	this	circumstance	was	not	a	failing	on	their
part.	Not	some	form	of	sickness,	or	insanity.	It	was,	in	truth,	the	consequence
of	a	profoundly	moral	person’s	inability	to	reconcile	the	conflicts	in	his	or	her
soul.	No	healer	could	heal	that,	because	there	was	nothing	to	heal.	No	elixir
swept	the	malady	away.	No	salve	erased	the	scars.	The	only	reconciliation
possible	was	to	make	those	responsible	accountable,	to	see	them	face	justice.
And	more	often	than	not,	history	showed	that	such	an	accounting	rarely	ever
took	place.	And	so	the	veteran’s	wounds	never	mend,	the	scars	never	fade,	the
rage	never	subsides.
So	Seerdomin	had	come	to	believe,	and	he	well	knew	that	what	he	was
doing	here,	with	weapon	in	hand,	solved	nothing	of	the	conflict	within	him.
For	he	was	as	flawed	as	anyone,	and	no	matter	how	incandescent	his	rage,	his
righteous	fury,	he	could	not	deliver	pure,	unsullied	justice	–	for	such	a	thing
was	collective,	integral	to	a	people’s	identity.	Such	a	thing	must	be	an	act	of
society,	of	civilization.	Not	Tiste	Andii	society	–	they	clearly	will	not	accept
that	burden,	will	not	accede	to	meting	out	justice	on	behalf	of	us	humans,	nor
should	they	be	expected	to.	And	so…here	I	am,	and	I	hear	the	Redeemer	weep.
One	cannot	murder	in	the	name	of	justice.
Irreconcilable.	What	he	had	been,	what	he	was	now.	The	things	he	did	then,
and	all	he	was	doing	here,	at	this	moment.
The	would-be	usurper	knelt	beside	him,	headless	in	sour	symbolism.	But	it
was	a	complicated,	messy	symbol.	And	he	could	find	for	himself	but	one	truth
in	all	of	this.


Heads	roll	downhill.
	
It	may	be	that	in	the	belief	of	the	possibility	of	redemption,	people	willingly	do
wrong.	Redemption	waits,	like	a	side	door,	there	in	whatever	court	of	judgement
we	eventually	find	ourselves.	Not	even	the	payment	of	a	fine	is	demanded,
simply	the	empty	negotiation	that	absolves	responsibility.	A	shaking	of	hands
and	off	one	goes,	through	that	side	door,	with	the	judge	benignly	watching	on.
Culpability	and	consequences	neatly	evaded.
Oh,	Salind	was	in	a	crisis	indeed.	Arguments	reduced	until	the	very	notion
of	redemption	was	open	to	challenge.	The	Redeemer	embraced,	taking	all
within	himself.	Unquestioning,	delivering	absolution	as	if	it	was	without	value,
worthless,	whilst	the	reward	to	those	embraced	was	a	gift	greater	than	a
tyrant’s	hoard.
Where	was	justice	in	all	of	this?	Where	was	the	punishment	for	crimes
committed,	retribution	for	wrongs	enacted?	There	is,	in	this,	no	moral
compass.	No	need	for	one,	for	every	path	leads	to	the	same	place,	where
blessing	is	passed	out,	no	questions	asked.
The	cult	of	the	Redeemer…it	is	an	abomination.
She	had	begun	to	understand	how	priesthoods	were	born,	the	necessity	of
sanctioned	forms,	rules	and	prohibitions,	the	moral	filter	defined	by	accepted
notions	of	justice.	And	yet,	she	could	also	see	how	profoundly	dangerous	such
an	institution	could	become,	as	arbiters	of	morality,	as	dispensers	of	that
justice.	Faces	like	hooded	vultures,	guarding	the	door	to	the	court,	choosing
who	gets	inside	and	who	doesn’t.	How	soon	before	the	first	bag	of	silver
changes	hands?	How	soon	before	the	first	reprehensible	criminal	buys	passage
into	the	arms	of	the	blind,	unquestioning	Redeemer?
She	could	fashion	such	a	church,	could	formalize	the	cult	into	a	religion,
and	she	could	impose	a	harsh,	unwavering	sense	of	justice.	But	what	of	the	next
generation	of	priests	and	priestesses?	And	the	one	after	that,	and	the	next	one?
How	long	before	the	hard	rules	make	that	church	a	self-righteous,	powermongering	tyranny?	How	long	before	corruption	arrives,	when	the	hidden
heart	of	the	religion	is	the	simple	fact	that	the	Redeemer	embraces	everyone
who	comes	before	him?	A	fact	virtually	guaranteed	to	breed	cynicism	in	the
priesthood,	and	from	such	cynicism	secular	acquisitiveness	would	be
inevitable.
This	loss	was	not	just	a	loss	of	faith	in	the	Redeemer.	It	was	a	loss	of	faith
in	religion	itself.
Her	prayers	touched	a	presence,	were	warmed	by	the	nearby	breath	of	an


immortal.	And	she	pleaded	with	that	force.	She	railed.	Made	demands.	Insisted
on	explanations,	answers.
And	he	took	all	her	anger	into	his	embrace,	as	he	did	everything	else.	And
that	was	wrong.
There	were	two	meanings	to	the	word	‘benighted’.	The	first	was
pejorative,	a	form	of	dour	ignorance.	The	second	was	an	honour	conferred	in
service	to	a	king	or	queen.	It	was	this	latter	meaning	that	had	been	applied	to
Seerdomin,	a	title	of	respect.
There	was	a	third	definition,	one	specific	to	Black	Coral	and	to	Seerdomin
himself.	He	dwelt	in	Night,	after	all,	where	Darkness	was	not	ignorance,	but
profound	wisdom,	ancient	knowledge,	symbolic	of	the	very	beginning	of
existence,	the	first	womb	from	which	all	else	was	born.	He	dwelt	in	Night,	then,
and	for	a	time	had	made	daily	pilgrimages	out	to	the	barrow	with	its	forbidden
riches,	a	one-man	procession	of	rebirth	that	Salind	only	now	comprehended.
Seerdomin	was,	in	truth,	the	least	ignorant	of	them	all.	Had	he	known
Itkovian	in	his	life?	She	thought	not.	Indeed,	it	would	have	been	impossible.
And	so	whatever	had	drawn	Seerdomin	to	the	cult	arrived	later,	after	Itkovian’s
death,	after	his	ascension.	Thus,	a	personal	crisis,	a	need	that	he	sought	to
appease	with	daily	prayers.
But…why	bother?	The	Redeemer	turned	no	one	away.	Blessing	and
forgiveness	was	a	certainty.	The	bargaining	was	a	sham.	Seerdomin	need	only
have	made	that	procession	once,	and	been	done	with	it.
Had	no	one	confronted	him,	he	would	still	be	making	his	daily	pilgrimage,
like	an	animal	pounding	its	head	against	the	bars	of	a	cage	–	and,	disregarded
to	one	side,	the	door	hanging	wide	open.
Was	that	significant?	Seerdomin	did	not	want	the	Redeemer ’s	embrace.	No,
the	redemption	he	sought	was	of	a	different	nature.
Need	drove	her	from	the	bed	in	the	temple,	out	into	Night.	She	felt	weak,
light-headed,	and	every	step	seemed	to	drain	appalling	amounts	of	energy	into
the	hard	cobbles	underfoot.	Wrapped	in	a	blanket,	unmindful	of	those	she
passed,	she	walked	through	the	city.
There	was	meaning	in	the	barrow	itself,	in	the	treasure	that	none	could
touch.	There	was	meaning	in	Seerdomin’s	refusal	of	the	easy	path.	In	his
prayers	that	asked	either	something	the	Redeemer	could	not	grant,	or	nothing
at	all.	There	was,	perhaps,	a	secret	in	the	Redeemer ’s	very	embrace,	something
hidden,	possibly	even	deceitful.	He	took	in	crimes	and	flaws	and	held	it	all	in
abeyance…until	when?	The	redeemed’s	death?	What	then?	Did	some	hidden
accounting	await	each	soul?
How	much	desperation	hid	within	each	and	every	prayer	uttered?	The	hope


for	blessing,	for	peace,	for	the	sense	that	something	greater	than	oneself	might
acknowledge	that	hapless	self,	and	might	indeed	alter	all	of	reality	to	suit	the
self’s	desires.	Were	prayers	nothing	more	than	attempted	bargains?	A	pathetic
assertion	of	some	kind	of	reciprocity?
Well,	she	would	not	bargain.	No,	she	had	questions,	and	she	wanted
answers.	She	demanded	answers.	If	the	faith	that	was	given	to	a	god	came	from
nothing	more	than	selfish	desires,	then	it	was	no	less	sordid	than	base	greed.	If
to	hand	over	one’s	soul	to	a	god	was	in	fact	a	surrendering	of	will,	then	that
soul	was	worthless,	a	willing	slave	for	whom	freedom	–	and	all	the
responsibility	that	entailed	–	was	anathema.
She	found	herself	reeling	through	the	gate,	on	to	the	road	that	Seerdomin
once	walked	day	after	day.	It	had	begun	raining,	the	drops	light,	cool	on	her
fevered	forehead,	sweet	as	tears	in	her	eyes.	Not	much	grew	to	either	side	of
the	road,	not	even	the	strange	Andiian	plants	that	could	be	found	in	the	walled
and	rooftop	gardens.	The	dying	moon	had	showered	this	place	in	salt	water,	a
downpour	the	remnants	of	which	remained	as	white	crust	like	a	cracked	skin
on	the	barren	earth.
She	could	smell	the	sea	rising	around	her	as	she	staggered	on.
And	then,	suddenly,	she	stumbled	into	daylight,	the	sun’s	shafts	slanting	in
from	the	east	whilst	a	single	grey	cloud	hung	directly	overhead,	the	rain	a
glittering	tracery	of	angled	streaks.
Bare	feet	slipping	on	the	road’s	cobbles,	Salind	continued	on.	She	could
see	the	barrow	ahead,	glistening	and	freshly	washed,	with	the	mud	thick	and
churned	up	round	its	base.	There	were	no	pilgrims	to	be	seen	–	perhaps	it	was
too	early.	Perhaps	they	have	all	left.	But	no,	she	could	see	smoke	rising	from
cookfires	in	the	encampment.	Have	they	lost	their	way,	then?	Is	that
surprising?	Have	I	not	suffered	my	own	crisis	of	faith?
She	drew	closer,	gaze	fixed	now	on	the	barrow.
Redeemer!	You	will	hear	me.	You	must	hear	me!
She	fell	on	to	her	knees	in	the	mud	and	its	chill	rippled	up	through	her.	The
rain	was	past	and	steam	now	rose	on	all	sides.	Water	ran	in	trickles	everywhere
on	the	barrow,	a	hundred	thousand	tears	threading	through	all	the	offerings.
Redeemer—
A	fist	closed	in	the	short	hair	at	the	back	of	her	neck.	She	was	savagely
pulled	upright,	head	yanked	round.	She	stared	up	into	Gradithan’s	grinning
face.
‘You	should	never	have	come	back,’	the	man	said.	His	breath	stank	of
kelyk,	and	she	saw	the	brown	stains	on	his	lips	and	mouth.	His	eyes	looked
strangely	slick,	like	stones	washed	by	waves.	‘I	am	tempted,	Priestess,	to	give


you	to	my	Urdomen	–	not	that	they’d	have	you.’
Urdomen.	He	was	an	Urdo,	a	commander	of	the	fanatic	élites.	Now	I	begin
to	underst—
‘But	Monkrat	might.’
She	frowned.	What	had	he	been	saying?	‘Leave	me,’	she	said,	and	was
shocked	at	how	thin	and	weak	her	voice	sounded.	‘I	want	to	pray.’
He	twisted	his	grip,	forcing	her	round	to	face	him,	close	enough	to	be
lovers.	‘Monkrat!’
Someone	came	up	beside	them.
‘Get	some	saemankelyk.	I’d	like	to	see	how	well	she	dances.’
She	could	feel	his	hard	knuckles	pressing	the	back	of	her	neck,	twisting
and	ripping	hair	from	its	roots,	pushing	into	the	bruises	he’d	already	made.
‘I	can	give	you	nothing,’	she	said.
‘Oh,	but	you	will,’	he	replied.	‘You’ll	give	us	a	path,’	and	he	turned	her
back	to	face	the	barrow,	‘straight	to	him.’
She	did	not	understand,	and	yet	fear	gripped	her,	and	as	she	heard	someone
hurrying	up,	bottle	swishing,	her	fear	burgeoned	into	terror.
Gradithan	tugged	her	head	further	back.	‘You	are	going	to	drink,	woman.
Waste	a	drop	and	you’ll	pay.’
Monkrat	came	close,	lifting	the	bottle	with	its	stained	mouth	to	her	lips.
She	sought	to	twist	her	face	away	but	the	Urdo’s	grip	denied	that.	He
reached	up	with	his	other	hand	and	closed	her	nostrils.
‘Drink,	and	then	you	can	breathe	again.’
Salind	drank.
	
Finding	her	gone	from	her	room,	Spinnock	Durav	stood	for	a	long	moment,
staring	down	at	the	rumpled	mattress	of	the	cot,	noting	the	missing	blanket,
seeing	that	she’d	left	most	of	her	clothes	behind,	including	her	moccasins.	He
told	himself	he	should	not	be	surprised.	She	had	not	much	welcomed	his
attentions.
Still,	he	felt	as	if	some	cold,	grinning	bastard	had	carved	a	gaping	hole	in
his	chest.	It	was	absurd,	that	he	should	have	been	careless	enough,	complacent
enough,	to	find	himself	this	vulnerable.	A	human	woman	of	so	few	years	–	he
was	worse	than	some	old	man	sitting	on	the	temple	steps	and	drooling	at	every
young	thing	sauntering	past.	Love	could	be	such	a	squalid	emotion:	burning
bright	in	the	midst	of	pathos,	the	subject	of	pity	and	contempt,	it	blazed	with
brilliant	stupidity	all	the	same.
Furious	with	himself,	he	wheeled	about	and	strode	from	the	room.


In	a	city	of	unending	Night,	no	bell	was	too	early	for	a	drink.	He	left	the
temple	and	the	keep,	made	his	way	down	ghostly	streets	to	the	Scour.
Inside,	Resto	was	behind	the	bar,	red-eyed	and	scratching	at	his	beard	and
saying	nothing	as	Spinnock	walked	to	the	table	at	the	back.	Tavern-keepers
knew	well	the	myriad	faces	of	misery,	and	unbidden	he	drew	a	tall	tankard	of
ale,	bringing	it	over	with	gaze	averted.
Glaring	at	the	other	tables	–	all	empty;	he	was	the	only	customer	–
Spinnock	collected	the	tankard	and	swallowed	down	half	its	foamy	contents.
Moments	after	Resto	delivered	the	third	such	tankard	the	door	opened	and
in	walked	Seerdomin.
Spinnock	felt	a	sudden	apprehension.	Even	from	there	the	man	smelled	of
blood,	and	his	face	was	a	ravaged	thing,	aged	and	pallid,	the	eyes	so	haunted
that	the	Tiste	Andii	had	to	look	away.
As	if	unaware	of	his	reaction,	Seerdomin	came	to	Spinnock’s	table	and	sat
down	opposite	him.	Resto	arrived	with	a	jug	and	a	second	tankard.
‘She	doesn’t	want	my	help,’	Spinnock	said.
Seerdomin	said	nothing	as	he	poured	ale	into	his	tankard,	setting	the	jug
back	down	with	a	thump.	‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
Spinnock	looked	away.	‘I	couldn’t	find	you.	I	searched	everywhere.’
‘That	desperate	for	a	game?’
A	game?	Oh.	Kef	Tanar.	‘You	are	looking	at	a	pathetic	old	man,	Seerdomin.
I	feel	I	must	sacrifice	the	last	of	my	dignity,	here	and	now,	and	tell	you
everything.’
‘I	don’t	know	if	I’m	ready	for	that,’	the	man	replied.	‘Your	dignity	is
important	to	me.’
Spinnock	flinched,	and	still	would	not	meet	Seerdomin’s	eyes.	‘I	have
surrendered	my	heart.’
‘Well.	You	can’t	marry	her,	though,	can	you?’
‘Who?’
‘The	High	Priestess	–	although	it’s	about	time	you	realized	that	she	loves
you	in	return,	probably	always	has.	You	damned	Andii	–	you	live	so	long	it’s
as	if	you’re	incapable	of	grasping	on	to	things	in	the	here	and	now.	If	I	had
your	endless	years…no,	scratch	out	the	eyes	of	that	thought.	I	don’t	want	them.
I’ve	lived	too	long	as	it	is.’
Spinnock’s	mind	was	spinning.	The	High	Priestess?	‘No,	she	doesn’t.	Love
me,	I	mean.	I	didn’t	mean	her,	anyway.’
‘Gods	below,	Spinnock	Durav,	you’re	a	damned	fool.’
‘I	know	that.	I’ve	as	much	as	confessed	it,	for	Hood’s	sake.’
‘So	you’re	not	interested	in	making	the	High	Priestess	happier	than	she’s


been	in	a	thousand	years.	Fine.	That’s	your	business.	Some	other	woman,	then.
Careful,	someone	might	up	and	murder	her.	Jealousy	is	deadly.’
This	was	too	off-hand	for	Seerdomin,	too	loose,	too	careless.	It	had	the
sound	of	a	man	who	had	surrendered	to	despair,	no	longer	caring	–	about
anything.	Loosing	every	arrow	in	his	quiver,	eager	to	see	it	suddenly,	fatally
empty.	This	Seerdomin	frightened	Spinnock.	‘What	have	you	been	up	to?’	he
asked.
‘I	have	been	murdering	people.’	He	poured	another	round,	then	settled
back	in	his	chair.	‘Eleven	so	far.	They	saw	themselves	as	liberators.	Scheming
the	downfall	of	their	Tiste	Andii	oppressors.	I	answered	their	prayers	and
liberated	every	one	of	them.	This	is	my	penance,	Spinnock	Durav.	My	singular
apology	for	the	madness	of	humanity.	Forgive	them,	please,	because	I	cannot.’
Spinnock	found	a	tightness	in	his	throat	that	started	tears	in	his	eyes.	He
could	not	so	much	as	look	at	this	man,	dared	not,	lest	he	see	all	that	should
never	be	revealed,	never	be	exposed.	Not	in	his	closest	friend.	Not	in	anyone.
‘That,’	he	said,	hating	his	own	words,	‘was	not	necessary.’
‘Strictly	speaking,	you	are	right,	friend.	They	would	have	failed	–	I	lack	no
faith	in	your	efficacy,	especially	that	of	your	Lord.	Understand,	I	did	this	out	of
a	desire	to	prove	that,	on	occasion,	we	are	capable	of	policing	our	own.
Checks	and	balances.	This	way	the	blood	stains	my	hands,	not	yours.	Giving	no
one	else	cause	for	hating	you.’
‘Those	who	hate	need	little	cause,	Seerdomin.’
The	man	nodded	–	Spinnock	caught	the	motion	peripherally.
There	was	a	silence.	The	tale	had	been	told,	Spinnock	recalled,	more	than
once.	How	the	Bridgeburner	named	Whiskeyjack	–	a	man	Anomander	Rake
called	friend	–	had	intervened	in	the	slaughter	of	the	Pannion	witches,	the	mad
mothers	of	Children	of	the	Dead	Seed.	Whiskeyjack,	a	human,	had	sought	to
grant	the	Son	of	Darkness	a	gift,	taking	away	the	burden	of	the	act.	A	gesture
that	had	shaken	his	Lord	to	the	core.	It	is	not	in	our	nature	to	permit	others	to
share	our	burden.
Yet	we	will,	unhesitatingly,	take	on	theirs.
‘I	wonder	if	we	blazed	his	trail.’
‘What?’
Spinnock	rubbed	at	his	face,	feeling	slightly	drunk.	‘Itkovian’s.’
‘Of	course	you	didn’t.	The	Grey	Swords—’
‘Possessed	a	Shield	Anvil,	yes,	but	they	were	not	unique	in	that.	It’s	an
ancient	title.	Are	we	the	dark	mirror	to	such	people?’	Then	he	shook	his	head.
‘Probably	not.	That	would	be	a	grand	conceit.’
‘I	agree,’	Seerdomin	said	in	a	slurred	growl.


‘I	love	her.’
‘So	you	claimed.	And	presumably	she	will	not	have	you.’
‘Very	true.’
‘So	here	you	sit,	getting	drunk.’
‘Yes.’
‘Once	I	myself	am	drunk	enough,	Spinnock	Durav,	I	will	do	what’s
needed.’
‘What’s	needed?’
‘Why,	I	will	go	and	tell	her	she’s	a	damned	fool.’
‘You’d	fail.’
‘I	would?’
Spinnock	nodded.	‘She’s	faced	you	down	before.	Unflinchingly.’
Another	stretch	of	silence.	That	stretched	on,	and	on.
He	was	drunk	enough	now	to	finally	shift	his	gaze,	to	fix	his	attention	on
Seerdomin’s	face.
It	was	a	death	mask,	white	as	dust.	‘Where	is	she?’	the	man	asked	in	a	raw,
strained	voice.
‘On	her	way	back	out	to	the	barrow,	I	should	think.	Seerdomin,	I	am	sorry.
I	did	not	lie	when	I	said	I	was	a	fool—’
‘You	were,’	and	he	rose,	weaving	slightly	before	steadying	himself	with
both	hands	on	the	back	of	his	chair.	‘But	not	in	the	way	you	think.’
‘She	didn’t	want	my	help,’	Spinnock	Durav	said.
‘And	I	would	not	give	her	mine.’
‘Your	choice—’
‘You	should	not	have	listened,	my	friend.	To	her.	You	should	not	have
listened	to	her!’
Spinnock	stood	as	Seerdomin	spun	round	and	marched	for	the	door.	He
was	suddenly	without	words,	numbed,	stunned	into	confusion.	What	have	I
done?
What	have	I	not	done?
But	his	friend	was	gone.
	
In	her	irritation,	Samar	Dev	discovered	traits	in	herself	that	did	not	please.
There	was	no	reason	to	resent	the	manner	in	which	her	two	companions	found
so	much	pleasure	in	each	other ’s	company.	The	way	they	spoke	freely,
unconstrained	by	decorum,	unaffected	even	by	the	fact	that	they	barely	knew
one	another,	and	the	way	the	subjects	flowed	in	any	and	every	direction,	flung
on	whims	of	mood,	swirling	round	heady	topics	like	eddies	round	jagged


rocks.	Most	infuriating	of	all,	they	struck	on	moments	of	laughter,	and	she	well
knew	–	damn	the	gods,	she	was	certain	–	that	neither	man	possessed	such	ease
of	humour,	that	they	were	so	far	removed	from	that	characterization	that	she
could	only	look	on	in	stunned	disbelief.
They	spoke	of	their	respective	tribes,	traded	tales	of	sexual	conquests.
They	spoke	of	weapons	and	neither	hesitated	in	handing	over	his	sword	for	the
other	to	examine	and,	indeed,	try	a	few	experimental	swings	and	passes	with.
Traveller	told	of	a	friend	of	old	named	Ereko,	a	Tartheno	of	such	pure,	ancient
blood	that	he	would	have	towered	over	Karsa	Orlong	had	the	two	been
standing	side	by	side.	And	in	that	story	Samar	Dev	sensed	deep	sorrow,	wounds
of	such	severity	that	it	was	soon	apparent	that	Traveller	himself	could	not
venture	too	close,	and	so	his	tale	of	Ereko	reached	no	conclusion.	And	Karsa
Orlong	did	not	press,	revealing	his	clear	understanding	that	a	soul	could	bleed
from	unseen	places	and	often	all	that	kept	a	mortal	going	depended	on
avoiding	such	places.
He	reciprocated	in	his	speaking	of	the	two	companions	who	had
accompanied	him	on	an	ill-fated	raid	into	the	settled	lands	of	humans,	Bairoth
Gild	and	Delum	Thord.	Whose	souls,	Karsa	blithely	explained,	now	dwelt
within	the	stone	of	his	sword.
Traveller	simply	grunted	at	that	detail,	and	then	said,	‘That	is	a	worthy
place.’
By	the	second	day	of	this,	Samar	Dev	was	ready	to	scream.	Tear	her	hair
from	her	head,	spit	blood	and	curses	and	teeth	and	maybe	her	entire	stomach
by	the	time	she	was	done.	And	so	she	held	her	silence,	and	held	on	to	her	fury,
like	a	rabid	beast	chained	to	the	ground.	It	was	absurd.	Pathetic	and	ridiculous,
this	crass	envy	she	was	feeling.	Besides,	had	she	not	learned	more	about	both
men	since	their	fateful	meeting	than	she	had	ever	known	before?	Like	a
tickbird	flitting	between	two	bull	bhederin,	her	attention	was	drawn	to	first	one,
then	the	other.	While	the	peace	lasted	it	would	do	to	say	nothing,	to	make	no
commotion	no	matter	how	infuriated	she	happened	to	be.
They	rode	on,	across	the	vast	plain,	along	a	worn	caravan	track	angling
into	the	Cinnamon	Wastes.	Those	few	merchant	trains	they	met	or	overtook
were	singularly	taciturn,	the	guards	edgy,	the	traders	unwelcoming.	Just	before
dusk	last	night,	four	horsemen	had	passed	close	by	their	camp,	and,	after	a
long	look,	had	ridden	on	without	a	word	ventured.
Karsa	had	sneered	and	said,	‘See	that,	Samar	Dev?	As	my	grandfather	used
to	say,	“The	wolf	does	not	smell	the	bear ’s	anus.”’
‘Your	grandfather,’	Traveller	had	replied,	‘was	an	observant	man.’
‘Mostly	he	was	a	fool,	but	even	fools	could	spout	tribal	wisdom.’	And	he


turned	to	Samar	Dev	again.	‘You	are	safe,	witch.’
‘From	other	people,	yes,’	she	had	growled	in	reply.
And	the	bastard	had	laughed.
The	Cinnamon	Wastes	were	well	named.	One	species	of	deep-rooted	grass
quickly	predominated,	rust-red	and	hip-high,	with	serrated	edges	and	thorny
seed-pods	on	thin	wavering	stalks.	Small	red-banded	lizards	swarmed	these
grasses,	tails	whipping	and	rustling	as	they	scattered	from	their	path.	The	land
levelled	until	not	a	single	rise	or	hill	was	in	sight.
Amidst	this	monotony,	Traveller	and	Karsa	Orlong	seemed	intent	on
wearing	out	their	vocal	cords.
‘Few	recall,’	Traveller	was	saying,	‘the	chaos	of	the	Malazan	Empire	in
those	early	days.	The	madness	only	began	with	Kellanved,	the	Emperor.	His
first	cadre	of	lieutenants	were	all	Napan,	each	one	secretly	sworn	to	a	young
woman	named	Surly,	who	was	heiress	to	the	crown	of	the	Nap	Isles	–	in	hiding
ever	since	the	Untan	conquest.’	He	paused.	‘Or	so	goes	the	tale.	Was	it	true?
Was	Surly	truly	the	last	of	the	Napan	royal	line?	Who	can	say,	but	it	came	in
handy	when	she	changed	her	name	to	Laseen	and	attained	the	throne	of	the
Empire.	In	any	case,	those	lieutenants	were	crocked,	every	one	of	them.	Urko,
Crust,	Nok,	all	of	them.	Quick	to	fanaticism,	willing	to	do	anything	and
everything	to	advance	the	Empire.’
‘The	Empire,	or	Surly?’	asked	Karsa	Orlong.	‘Does	it	not	seem	just	as
likely	that	they	were	simply	using	Kellanved?’
‘A	fair	suspicion,	except	that	only	Nok	remained	once	Laseen	became
Empress.	The	others	each…drowned.’
‘Drowned?’
‘Officially.	That	cause	of	death	quickly	became	euphemistic.	Put	it	this	way.
They	disappeared.’
‘There	was	someone	else,’	Samar	Dev	said.
‘Dancer—’
‘Not	him,	Traveller.	There	was	the	First	Sword.	There	was	Dassem	Ultor,
commander	of	all	the	Emperor ’s	armies.	He	was	not	Napan.	He	was	Dal
Honese.’
Traveller	glanced	across	at	her.	‘He	fell	in	Seven	Cities,	shortly	before
Laseen	took	power.’
‘Surly	had	him	assassinated,’	said	Samar	Dev.
Karsa	Orlong	grunted.	‘Eliminating	potential	rivals	–	she	needed	to	clear
the	path.	That,	witch,	is	neither	savage	nor	civilized.	You	will	see	such	things	in
dirt-nosed	tribes	and	in	empires	both.	This	truth	belongs	to	power.’
‘I	would	not	dispute	your	words,	Toblakai.	Do	you	want	to	know	what


happened	after	you	killed	Emperor	Rhulad?’
‘The	Tiste	Edur	quit	the	Empire.’
‘How	–	how	did	you	know	that?’
He	bared	his	teeth.	‘I	guessed,	witch.’
‘Just	like	that?’
‘Yes.	They	did	not	want	to	be	there.’
Traveller	said,	‘I	expect	the	Tiste	Edur	discovered	rather	quickly	the	curse
of	occupation.	It	acts	like	a	newly	opened	wound,	infecting	and	poisoning	both
the	oppressors	and	the	oppressed.	Both	cultures	become	malformed,	bitter	with
extremes.	Hatred,	fear,	greed,	betrayal,	paranoia,	and	appalling	indifference	to
suffering.’
‘Yet	the	Malazans	occupied	Seven	Cities—’
‘No,	Samar	Dev.	The	Malazans	conquered	Seven	Cities.	That	is	different.
Kellanved	understood	that	much.	If	one	must	grip	hard	in	enemy	territory,	then
that	grip	must	be	hidden	–	at	the	very	cusp	of	local	power.	And	so	no	more	than
a	handful	is	being	strictly	controlled	–	everyone	else,	merchants	and	herders
and	farmers	and	tradefolk	–	everyone	–	is	to	be	shown	better	circumstances,	as
quickly	as	possible.	“Conquer	as	a	rogue	wave,	rule	in	quiet	ripples.”	The
Emperor ’s	own	words.’
‘This	is	what	the	Claw	did,	isn’t	it?	Infiltrate	and	paralyse	the	rulers—’
‘The	less	blood	spilled,	the	better.’
Karsa	Orlong	barked	a	laugh.	‘That	depends,’	he	said.	‘There	are	other
kinds	of	conquest.’
‘Such	as?’
‘Traveller,	my	friend,	you	speak	of	conquest	as	a	means	of	increasing
one’s	power	–	the	more	subjects	and	the	more	cities	under	your	control	is	the
measure	of	that	power.	But	what	of	the	power	of	destruction?’
Samar	Dev	found	she	was	holding	her	breath,	and	she	watched	Traveller
considering	Karsa’s	words,	before	he	said,	‘There	is	nothing	then	to	be
gained.’
‘You	are	wrong,’	said	Karsa,	pausing	to	stretch	his	back.	Havok’s	head
tossed,	a	chopping	motion	like	an	axe	blade.	‘I	have	looked	upon	the	face	of
civilization,	and	I	am	not	impressed.’
‘There	is	no	flaw	in	being	critical.’
‘He’s	not	just	being	critical,’	said	Samar	Dev.	‘He	intends	to	destroy	it.
Civilization,	I	mean.	The	whole	thing,	from	sea	to	sea.	When	Karsa	Orlong	is
done,	not	a	single	city	in	the	world	will	remain	standing,	isn’t	that	right,
Toblakai?’
‘I	see	no	value	in	modest	ambitions,	witch.’


Traveller	was	quiet	then,	and	the	silence	was	like	an	expanding	void,	until
even	the	moan	of	the	incessant	wind	seemed	distant	and	hollow.
Gods,	how	often	have	I	wished	him	well?	Even	as	the	thought	horrifies	me	–
he	would	kill	millions.	He	would	crush	every	symbol	of	progress.	From	ploughs
back	to	sticks.	From	bricks	to	caves.	From	iron	to	stone.	Crush	us	all	back	into
the	ground,	the	mud	of	waterholes.	And	the	beasts	will	hunt	us,	and	those	of	us
who	remain,	why,	we	will	hunt	each	other.
Traveller	finally	spoke.	‘I	dislike	cities,’	he	said.
‘Barbarians	both,’	she	muttered	under	her	breath.
Neither	man	responded.	Perhaps	they	hadn’t	heard.	She	shot	each	of	them	a
quick	glance,	right	and	then	left,	and	saw	that	both	were	smiling.
Riding	onward,	the	day	rustling	in	waves	of	red	grass.
Until	Traveller	once	again	began	speaking.	‘The	first	law	of	the	multitude
is	conformity.	Civilization	is	the	mechanism	of	controlling	and	maintaining
that	multitude.	The	more	civilized	a	nation,	the	more	conformed	its	population,
until	that	civilization’s	last	age	arrives,	when	multiplicity	wages	war	with
conformity.	The	former	grows	ever	wilder,	ever	more	dysfunctional	in	its
extremities;	whilst	the	latter	seeks	to	increase	its	measure	of	control,	until	such
efforts	acquire	diabolical	tyranny.’
‘More	of	Kellanved?’	Samar	Dev	asked.
Traveller	snorted.	‘Hardly.	That	was	Duiker,	the	Imperial	Historian.’
	
Through	the	course	of	the	night	just	past,	Nimander	Golit	had	led	his	meagre
troupe	through	the	city	of	Bastion.	Children	of	Darkness,	with	Aranatha’s	quiet
power	embracing	them,	they	had	moved	in	silence,	undetected	as	far	as	they
could	tell,	for	no	alarms	were	raised.	The	city	was	a	thing	seemingly	dead,	like
a	closed	flower.
At	dusk,	shortly	before	they	set	out,	they	had	heard	clattering	commotion
out	on	the	main	avenue,	and	went	to	the	gates	to	watch	the	arrival	into	the	city
of	scores	of	enormous	wagons.	Burdened	with	trade	goods,	the	carters	slackfaced,	exhausted,	with	haunted	eyes	above	brown-stained	mouths.	Bales	of	raw
foodstuffs,	casks	of	figs	and	oils,	eels	packed	in	salt,	smoked	bhederin,	spiced
mutton,	and	countless	other	supplies	that	had	been	eagerly	pressed	upon	them
in	exchange	for	the	barrels	of	kelyk.
There	was	cruel	irony	to	be	found	in	the	sordid	disinterest	the	locals
displayed	before	such	essential	subsistence	–	most	were	past	the	desire	for
food.	Most	were	starving	in	an	ecstatic	welter	of	saemankelyk,	the	black	ink	of
a	god’s	pain.


The	Tiste	Andii	wore	their	armour.	They	wore	their	gear	for	fighting,	for
killing.	Nimander	did	not	need	a	glance	back	to	know	the	transformation	and
what	it	did	to	the	expressions	on	all	but	one	of	the	faces	of	those	trailing	behind
him.	Skintick,	whose	smile	had	vanished,	yet	his	eyes	glittered	bright,	as	if
fevered.	Kedeviss,	ever	rational,	now	wore	a	mask	of	madness,	beauty	twisted
into	something	terrible.	Nenanda,	for	all	his	postures	of	ferocity,	was	now
ashen,	colourless,	as	if	the	truth	of	desire	soured	him	with	poison.	Desra,
flushed	with	something	like	excitement.	Only	Aranatha	was	unchanged.	Placid,
glassy-eyed	with	concentration,	her	features	somehow	softer,	blurred.
Skintick	and	Kedeviss	carried	Clip	between	them.	Nenanda	held	over	one
shoulder	the	man’s	weapons,	his	bow	and	quiver,	his	sword	and	knife	belt	–	all
borne	on	a	single	leather	strap	that	could	be	loosed	in	a	moment	should	the
need	arise.
They	had	slipped	past	buildings	in	which	worshippers	danced,	starved
limbs	waving	about,	distended	bellies	swaying	–	doors	had	been	left	open,
shutters	swung	back	to	the	night.	Voices	moaned	in	disjointed	chorus.	Even
those	faces	that	by	chance	turned	towards	the	Tiste	Andii	as	they	moved	ghostly
past	did	not	awaken	with	recognition,	the	eyes	remaining	dull,	empty,	unseeing.
The	air	was	warm,	smelling	of	rancid	salt	from	the	dying	lake	mixed	with
the	heavier	stench	of	putrefying	corpses.
They	reached	the	edge	of	the	central	square,	looked	out	across	its	empty
expanse.	The	altar	itself	was	dark,	seemingly	lifeless.
Nimander	crouched	down,	uncertain.	There	must	be	watchers.	It	would	be
madness	to	think	otherwise.	Could	they	reach	the	altar	before	some	hidden
mob	rushed	forth	to	accost	them?	It	did	not	seem	likely.	They	had	not	seen
Kallor	since	his	march	to	the	altar	the	previous	day.	Nenanda	believed	the	old
man	was	dead.	He	believed	they	would	find	his	body,	cold	and	pale,	lying	on
the	tiled	floor	somewhere	within	the	building.	For	some	reason,	Nimander	did
not	think	that	likely.
Skintick	whispered	behind	him,	‘Well?	It’s	nearing	dawn,	Nimander.’
What	awaited	them?	There	was	only	one	way	to	find	out.	‘Let’s	go.’
All	at	once,	with	their	first	strides	out	into	the	concourse,	the	air	seemed	to
swirl,	thick	and	heavy.	Nimander	found	he	had	to	push	against	it,	a	tightness
forming	in	his	throat	and	then	his	chest.
‘They’re	burning	the	shit,’	Skintick	hissed.	‘Can	you	smell	it?	The	kelyk
—’
‘Quiet.’
Fifteen,	twenty	paces	now.	Silence	all	around.	Nimander	set	his	eyes	on	the
entrance	to	the	altar,	the	steps	glistening	with	dew	or	something	far	worse.	The


black	glyphs	seemed	to	throb	in	his	eyes,	as	if	the	entire	structure	was
breathing.	He	could	feel	something	dark	and	unpleasant	in	his	veins,	like
bubbles	in	his	blood,	or	seeds,	eager	to	burst	into	life.	He	felt	moments	from
losing	control.
Behind	him,	hard	gasping	breaths	–	they	were	all	feeling	this,	they	were	all
—
‘Behind	us,’	grunted	Nenanda.
And	to	the	sides,	crowds	closing	in	from	every	street	and	alley	mouth,
slowly,	dark	shapes	pushing	into	the	square.	They	look	like	the	scarecrows,	cut
loose	from	their	stakes	–	Mother’s	blessing—
Forty	strides,	reaching	the	centre	of	the	concourse.	Every	avenue	closed	to
them	now,	barring	that	to	the	building	itself.
‘We’re	being	herded,’	said	Kedeviss,	her	voice	tight.	‘They	want	us	inside.’
Nimander	glanced	back,	down	upon	the	limp	form	of	Clip,	the	man’s	head
hanging	and	hair	trailing	on	the	ground.	Clip’s	eyes	were	half	open.	‘Is	he	still
alive?’
‘Barely,’	said	Kedeviss.
Hundreds	of	figures	drew	yet	closer,	blackened	eyes	gleaming,	mouths
hanging	open.	Knives,	hatchets,	pitchforks	and	hammers	dangled	down	from
their	hands.	The	only	sound	that	came	from	them	was	the	shuffle	of	their	bare
feet.
Twenty	paces	now	from	the	steps.	To	the	right	and	left,	and	in	their	wake,
the	worshippers	in	the	front	lines	began	lifting	their	weapons,	then	those
behind	them	followed	suit.
‘Skintick,’	said	Nimander,	‘take	Clip	by	yourself.	Aranatha,	his	weapons.
Desra,	ward	your	sister.	Kedeviss,	Nenanda,	prepare	to	rearguard	–	once	we’re
inside,	hold	them	at	the	entrance.’
Two	against	a	thousand	or	more.	Fanatics,	fearless	and	senseless	–	gods,
we	are	unleashed.
He	heard	a	pair	of	swords	rasp	free	of	scabbards.	The	sound	sliced
through	the	air,	and	it	was	as	if	the	cold	iron	touched	his	brow,	startling	him
awake.
The	crowd	was	close	now,	a	bestial	growl	rising.
Nimander	reached	the	first	step.	‘Now!’
They	rushed	upward.	Skintick	was	immediately	behind	Nimander,	Clip	on
his	hunched	back	as	he	gripped	one	wrist	and	one	thigh.	Then	Aranatha,
flowing	up	the	steps	like	an	apparition,	Desra	in	her	wake.	Nenanda	and
Kedeviss,	facing	the	opposite	way	with	swords	held	ready,	backed	up	more
slowly.


The	front	ranks	of	worshippers	moaned	and	then	surged	forward.
Iron	rang,	clashed,	thudded	into	flesh	and	bone.	Nimander	plunged	through
the	entranceway.	There	was	no	light	–	every	torch	in	its	sconce	had	been
capped	–	yet	his	eyes	could	penetrate	the	gloom,	in	time	to	see	a	score	of
priests	rushing	for	him.
Shouting	a	warning,	Nimander	unsheathed	his	sword—
The	fools	were	human.	In	this	darkness	they	were	half	blind.	He	slashed
out,	saw	a	head	roll	off	shoulders,	the	body	crumpling.	A	back	swing
intercepted	an	arm	thrusting	a	dagger	at	his	chest.	The	sword’s	edge	sliced
through	wrist	bones	and	the	severed	hand,	still	gripping	the	weapon,	thumped
against	his	chest	before	falling	away.	Angling	the	sword	point	back	across	his
torso,	Nimander	stabbed	the	one-handed	priest	in	the	throat.
In	his	peripheral	vision	he	caught	Clip’s	form	rolling	on	to	the	floor	as
Skintick	freed	his	arms	to	defend	himself.
The	sickly	sound	of	edge	biting	meat	echoed	in	the	chamber,	followed	by
the	spatter	of	blood	across	tiles.
Nimander	stop-thrust	another	charging	priest,	the	point	pushing	hard
between	ribs	and	piercing	the	man’s	heart.	As	he	fell	he	sought	to	trap	the
sword	but	Nimander	twisted	round	and	with	a	savage	tug	tore	his	weapon	free.
A	knife	scraped	the	links	of	his	chain	hauberk	beneath	his	left	arm	and	he
pulled	away	and	down,	cross-stabbing	and	feeling	the	sword	punch	into	soft
flesh.	Stomach	acids	spurted	up	the	blade	and	stung	his	knuckles.	The	priest
folded	round	the	wound.	Nimander	kicked	hard	into	his	leg,	shin-high,
breaking	bones.	As	the	man	sagged	away,	he	pushed	forward	to	close	against
yet	another	one.
Sword	against	dagger	was	no	contest.	As	the	poor	creature	toppled,
sobbing	from	a	mortal	wound,	Nimander	whipped	his	sword	free	and	spun	to
meet	the	next	attacker.
There	were	none	left	standing.
Skintick	stood	nearby,	slamming	his	still	bloodied	sword	back	into	the
scabbard	at	his	belt,	then	crouching	to	retrieve	Clip.	Desra,	weapon	dripping,
hovered	close	to	Aranatha	who,	unscathed,	walked	past,	gaze	fixed	on	the	set	of
ornate	doors	marking	some	grand	inner	entranceway.	After	a	moment	Desra
followed.
From	the	outer	doors	the	frenzied	sounds	of	fighting	continued,	human
shrieks	echoing,	bouncing	in	crazed	cacophony.	Nimander	looked	back	to	see
that	Kedeviss	and	Nenanda	still	held	the	portal,	blood	and	bile	spreading
beneath	their	boots	to	trace	along	the	indents	and	impressions	of	the	tiles.
Nimander	stared	at	that	detail,	transfixed,	until	a	nudge	from	Skintick	shook


him	free.
‘Come	on,’	Nimander	said	in	a	rasp,	setting	out	into	Aranatha’s	wake.
	
Desra	felt	her	entire	body	surging	with	life.	Not	even	sex	could	match	this
feeling.	A	score	of	insane	priests	rushing	upon	them,	and	the	three	of	them
simply	cut	them	all	down.	With	barely	a	catch	of	breath	–	she	had	seen
Nimander	slaughter	the	last	few,	with	such	casual	grace	that	she	could	only
look	on	in	wonder.	Oh,	he	believed	himself	a	poor	swordsman,	and	perhaps
when	compared	to	Nenanda,	or	Kedeviss,	he	was	indeed	not	their	equal.	Even
so	–	Bastion,	your	children	should	never	have	challenged	us.	Should	never	have
pushed	us	to	this.
Now	see	what	you’ve	done.
She	hurried	after	her	brainless	sister.
	
Skintick	wanted	to	weep,	but	he	knew	enough	to	save	that	for	later,	for	that
final	stumble	through,	into	some	future	place	when	all	this	was	over	and	done
with,	when	they	could	each	return	to	a	normal	life,	an	almost	peaceful	life.
He	had	never	been	one	for	prayers,	especially	not	to	Mother	Dark,	whose
heart	was	cruel,	whose	denial	was	an	ever-bleeding	wound	in	the	Tiste	Andii.
Yet	he	prayed	none	the	less.	Not	to	a	god	or	goddess,	not	to	some	unknown
force	at	ease	with	the	gift	of	mercy.	No,	Skintick	prayed	for	peace.
A	world	of	calm.
He	did	not	know	if	such	a	world	existed,	anywhere.	He	did	not	know	if	one
such	as	he	deserved	that	world.	Paradise	belonged	to	the	innocent.
Which	was	why	it	was	and	would	ever	remain…empty.
And	that	is	what	makes	it	a	paradise.
	
At	the	outer	doors,	the	slaughter	continued.	Kedeviss	saw	Nenanda	smiling,
and	had	she	the	time,	she	would	have	slapped	him.	Hard.	Hard	enough	to	shake
the	glee	from	his	eyes.	There	was	nothing	glorious	in	this.	The	fools	came	on
and	on,	crushing	each	other	in	their	need,	and	she	and	Nenanda	killed	them	one
by	one	by	one.
Oh,	fighting	against	absurd	odds	was	something	they	were	used	to;
something	they	did	damnably	well.	That	was	no	source	of	pride.	Desperate
defence	demanded	expedience	and	little	else.	And	the	Tiste	Andii	were,	above


all	else,	an	expedient	people.
And	so	blood	spilled	down,	bodies	crumpled	at	their	feet,	only	to	be
dragged	clear	by	the	next	ones	to	die.
She	killed	her	twentieth	worshipper,	and	he	was	no	different	from	the
nineteenth,	no	different	from	the	very	first	one,	back	there	on	the	steps.
Blood	like	rain.	Blood	like	tears.	It	was	all	so	pointless.
Nenanda	began	laughing.
Moments	later,	the	worshippers	changed	their	tactics.	With	frenzied
screams	they	pushed	forward	en	masse,	and	those	Nenanda	and	Kedeviss
mortally	wounded	were	simply	heaved	ahead,	dying,	flailing	shields	of	flesh
and	bone.	As	the	mob	drove	onward,	the	two	Tiste	Andii	were	forced	from	the
threshold—
And	the	attackers	poured	in	with	triumphant	shrieks.
Nenanda	stopped	laughing.
	
Nimander	was	at	the	inner	doorway	when	he	heard	the	savage	cries	behind
him.	Spinning	round,	he	saw	Nenanda	and	Kedeviss	retreating	under	an
onslaught	of	maddened	figures.
‘Skintick!’
His	cousin	shifted	Clip’s	body	on	to	Nimander ’s	shoulders,	then	turned
and,	drawing	his	sword	once	more,	plunged	into	the	mêlée.
Nimander	staggered	into	the	passageway.
Why?	Why	are	we	doing	this?	We	deliver	Clip	to	the	Dying	God,	like	a
damned	sacrifice.	Ahead,	he	saw	Desra	and	Aranatha	approaching	the	far	end,
where	it	seemed	there	was	another	chamber.	The	altar	room	–	where	he	awaits
us—	‘Stop!’	he	shouted.
Only	Desra	glanced	back.
Aranatha	strode	within.
The	reek	of	burning	kelyk	assailed	Nimander	and	he	stumbled	as	he	moved
forward	beneath	the	slack,	dragging	weight	of	Clip’s	unconscious	form.	The
raw	glyphs	swarmed	on	the	walls	to	either	side.	Projecting	busts	of	some	past
deity	showed	battered	faces,	sections	crushed	and	others	sheared	off	by	recent
demolition.	Lone	eyes	leered	down.	Half-mouths	smiled	with	a	jester ’s	crook.
Passing	by	one	after	another.
Trembling,	Nimander	forced	himself	forward.	He	saw	Desra	stride	after
Aranatha.
The	glyphs	began	weeping,	and	all	at	once	he	felt	as	if	time	itself	was
dissolving.	Sudden	blindness,	the	terrible	sounds	of	fighting	behind	him


diminishing,	as	if	pulled	far	away,	until	only	the	rush	of	blood	remained,	a
storm	in	his	head.
Through	which,	faintly	and	then	rising,	came	a	child’s	voice.	Singing
softly.
	
Seerdomin	emerged	from	Night,	squinted	against	the	mid-morning	glare.
Silver	clouds	ahead,	heaped	above	the	barrow	like	the	sky’s	detritus.	Rain
slanted	down	on	the	mound.
Tulwar	in	his	hand,	he	hurried	on,	boots	slipping	in	the	salt-crusted	mud	of
the	track.
She	had	gone	out,	alone.
Spinnock	Durav	–	the	only	friend	he	had	left	–	had	professed	his	love	for
her.	But	he	had	not	understood	–	yes,	she	would	refuse	his	help.	But	such
refusal	must	be	denied.	He	should	have	comprehended	that.
Gods	below,	this	was	not	Seerdomin’s	fight.	She	was	not	his	fight.
Yet	he	found	himself	driven	on,	cold	with	fear,	feverish	with	dread,	and
everything	that	he	saw	around	him	seemed	to	scream	its	details,	as	if	even	the
mundane	truths	could	burn,	could	sting	like	acid	in	his	eyes.	Ruts	and	broken
spokes,	potsherds,	pools	of	opaque	water,	exposed	roots	like	the	hackles	of	the
earth	–	each	one	ferociously	demanding	his	attention.	We	are	as	it	is,	they
seemed	to	shout,	we	are	all	there	is!	We	are—
Not	his	fight,	but	Spinnock	had	not	understood.	He	was	Tiste	Andii.	He	was
a	creature	of	centuries	and	what	was	avoided	one	day	could	be	addressed	later
–	decades,	millennia,	ages	later.	In	their	eyes,	nothing	changed.	Nothing	could
change.	They	were	a	fallen	people.	The	dream	of	getting	back	up	had	faded	to
dust.
She	had	gone	out.	Alone.	Out	where	the	conspirators	strutted	in	the	light	of
day,	insanely	plotting	the	return	of	suffering.	Where	they	abused	the	sanctuary
of	an	indifferent	god.	Maybe	she	was	now	back	among	her	kind	–	if	that	was
true,	then	Spinnock	Durav	deserved	to	hear	the	truth	of	that.
A	rat	slithered	into	the	ditch	a	few	strides	ahead.	He	drew	closer	to	the	filth
of	the	encampment,	its	stench	so	foul	not	even	the	rain	could	wash	it	away.
Would	he	be	challenged?	He	hoped	so.	If	the	conspirators	hid	themselves,
he	might	have	trouble	rooting	them	out.	And	if	she	decided	to	hide,	well,	he
would	have	to	kick	through	every	decrepit	hut	and	shelter,	into	every	leaking
tent	and	rust-seized	wagon.
Birdsong	drifted	down	from	the	trees	of	the	slope	on	the	opposite	side	of
the	camp,	the	sound	startlingly	clear.	Tendrils	of	smoke	from	rain-dampened


hearths	undulated	upward,	each	one	solid	as	a	serpent	in	Seerdomin’s	eyes.	He
was,	he	realized,	walking	into	their	nest.
But	Spinnock,	you	need	not	do	this,	you	need	not	even	know	of	this.	This	is	a
human	affair,	and	if	she	is	willing	then	yes,	I	will	drag	her	free	of	it.	Back	to
you.	One	can	be	saved	and	that	should	be	enough.
He	wondered	if	the	Redeemer	ever	saw	things	that	way.	Taking	one	soul
into	his	embrace	with	a	thousand	yearning	others	looking	on	–	but	no,	he	did
not	choose,	did	not	select	one	over	another.	He	took	them	all.
Seerdomin	realized	he	did	not	care	either	way.	This	god	was	not	for	him.
Redemption	had	never	been	his	reason	for	kneeling	before	that	barrow.	I	was
lonely.	I	thought	he	might	be	the	same.	Damn	you,	High	Priestess,	why	didn’t
you	just	leave	me	alone?
Not	my	mess.
Spinnock,	you	owe	me,	and	you	will	never	know.	I	will	say	nothing	–	let	this
rain	wash	the	blood	from	my	hands—
He	had	begun	this	march	half	drunk,	but	nothing	of	that	remained.	Now,
everything	was	on	fire.
Reaching	the	slope	of	the	camp’s	main	avenue,	he	began	the	ascent.	The
rain	was	fine	as	mist,	yet	he	was	quickly	soaked	through,	steam	rising	from	his
forearms.	The	ground	gave	queasily	beneath	his	boots	with	every	step.	He
arrived	at	the	crest	leaning	far	forward,	scrabbling	in	his	haste.
Straightening,	something	flashed	into	his	vision.	He	heard	a	snap,	a	crunch
that	exploded	in	his	head,	and	then	nothing.
	
Gradithan	stood	over	the	sprawled	form	of	Seerdomin,	staring	down	at	the
smashed,	bloodied	face.	Monkrat	crept	closer	and	crouched	down	beside	the
body.
‘He	lives.	He	will	drown	in	his	blood	if	I	do	not	roll	him	over,	Urdo.	What
is	your	wish?’
‘Yes,	push	him	over	–	I	want	him	alive,	for	now	at	least.	Take	his	weapons,
bind	his	limbs,	then	drag	him	to	the	Sacred	Tent.’
Gradithan	licked	his	lips,	tasting	the	staleness	of	dried	kelyk.	He	wanted
more,	fresh,	bitter	and	sweet,	but	he	needed	his	mind.	Sharp,	awake,	aware	of
everything.
As	Monkrat	directed	two	of	his	Urdomen	to	attend	to	the	Seerdomin,
Gradithan	set	off	for	the	Sacred	Tent.	Sanctified	ground,	yes,	but	only
temporary.	Soon,	they	would	have	the	barrow	itself.	The	barrow,	and	the
ignorant	godling	within	it.


Along	the	track,	the	once-worshippers	of	the	Redeemer	knelt	as	he	passed.
Some	moaned	in	the	dregs	of	the	night’s	dance.	Others	stared	at	the	mud	in
front	of	their	knees,	heads	hanging,	brown	slime	drooling	down	from	their
gaping	mouths.	Oh,	this	might	seem	like	corruption,	but	Gradithan	wasn’t
interested	in	such	misconceptions.
The	Dying	God	was	more	important	than	Black	Coral	and	its	morose
overlords.	More	important	than	the	Redeemer	and	his	pathetic	cult.	The	Dying
God’s	song	was	a	song	of	pain,	and	was	not	pain	the	curse	of	mortality?
He	had	heard	of	another	cult,	a	foreign	one,	devoted	to	someone	called	the
Crippled	God.
Perhaps,	Monkrat	had	ventured	that	morning,	there	is	a	trend.
There	was	something	blasphemous	in	that	observation,	and	Gradithan
reminded	himself	that	he	would	have	to	have	the	mage	beaten	–	but	not	yet.
Gradithan	needed	Monkrat,	at	least	for	now.
He	entered	the	Sacred	Tent.
Yes,	she	was	still	dancing,	writhing	now	on	the	earthen	floor,	too	exhausted
perhaps	to	stand,	yet	the	sensual	motions	were	still	powerful	enough	to	take
away	Gradithan’s	breath.	It	did	not	matter	any	more	that	she	had	been	a	Child
of	the	Dead	Seed.	No	one	could	choose	their	parents,	after	all.	Besides,	she	had
been	adopted	now.	By	the	Dying	God,	by	the	blessed	pain	and	ecstasy	it
delivered.
Let	her	dance	on,	yes,	until	the	gate	was	forced	open.
Gradithan	lifted	his	head,	sniffed	the	air	–	oh,	the	blood	was	being	spilled,
the	sacrifice	fast	closing	on	the	threshold.	Close	now.
The	Dying	God	bled.	Mortal	followers	drank	that	blood.	Then	spilled	it
out,	transformed,	so	that	the	Dying	God	could	take	it	once	more	within
himself.	This	was	the	secret	truth	behind	all	blood	sacrifice.	The	god	gives	and
the	mortal	gives	back.	All	the	rest…nothing	more	than	ornate	dressing,
nothing	more	than	obfuscation.
Die,	my	distant	friends.	Die	in	your	multitudes.	We	are	almost	there.
	
‘You	are	dying.’
Seerdomin	opened	his	eyes.	An	unfamiliar	face	stared	down	at	him.
‘You	are	bleeding	into	your	brain,	Segda	Travos.	They	mean	to	abuse	you.
Torture	you	with	terrible	sights	–	the	Urdo	named	Gradithan	believes	you	a
traitor.	He	wants	you	to	suffer,	but	you	will	deny	him	that	pleasure,	for	you	are
dying.’
‘Who	–	what…’


‘I	am	Itkovian.	I	am	the	Redeemer.’
‘I	–	I	am	sorry.’
The	man	smiled	and	Seerdomin	could	see	how	that	smile	belonged	to	these
gentle	features,	the	kind	eyes.	Such	compassion	was…‘Wrong’.
‘Perhaps	it	seems	that	way,	but	you	are	strong	–	your	spirit	is	very	strong,
Segda	Travos.	You	believe	I	am	without	true	compassion.	You	believe	I
embrace	suffering	out	of	selfish	need,	to	feed	a	hunger,	an	addiction.’
Itkovian’s	soft	eyes	shifted	away.	‘Perhaps	you	are	right.’
Seerdomin	slowly	sat	up.	And	saw	a	domed	sky	that	glittered	as	if	with
millions	upon	millions	of	stars,	a	solid	cluster	vying	for	every	space,	so	that
every	splinter	and	whorl	of	darkness	seemed	shrunken,	in	retreat.	The	vision
made	his	head	spin	and	he	quickly	looked	down.	And	found	he	was	kneeling	on
a	ground	composed	entirely	of	coins.	Copper,	tin,	brass,	a	few	sprinkles	of
silver,	fewer	still	of	gold.	Gems	gleamed	here	and	there.	‘We	are,’	he	said	in	an
awed	whisper,	‘within	your	barrow.’
‘Yes?’	said	Itkovian.
Seerdomin	shot	the	god	a	quick	glance.	‘You	did	not	know…’
‘Is	knowing	necessary,	Segda	Travos?’
‘I	no	longer	use	that	name.	Segda	Travos	is	dead.	I	am	Seerdomin.’
‘Warrior	Priest	of	the	Pannion	Seer.	I	see	the	warrior	within	you,	but	not
the	priest.’
‘It	seems	I	am	not	much	of	a	warrior	any	more,’	Seerdomin	observed.	‘I
was	coming	to	save	her.’
‘And	now,	my	friend,	you	must	fight	her.’
‘What?’
Itkovian	pointed.
Seerdomin	twisted	round	where	he	knelt.	A	storm	was	building,	seeping	up
into	the	dome	of	offerings,	and	he	saw	how	the	blackness	engulfed	those
blazing	stars,	drowning	them	one	by	one.	Beneath	the	savage	churning	clouds
there	was	a	figure.	Dancing.	And	with	each	wild	swing	of	an	arm	more
midnight	power	spun	outward,	up	into	the	growing	stormcloud.	She	seemed	to
be	a	thousand	or	more	paces	away,	yet	grew	larger	by	the	moment.
He	could	see	her	mouth,	gaping	like	a	pit,	from	which	vile	liquid	gushed
out,	splashing	down,	spraying	as	she	twirled.
Salind.	Gods,	what	has	happened	to	you?
‘She	wants	me,’	Itkovian	said.	‘It	is	her	need,	you	see.’
‘Her	need?’
‘Yes.	For	answers.	What	more	can	a	god	fear,	but	a	mortal	demanding
answers?’


‘Send	her	away!’
‘I	cannot.	So,	warrior,	will	you	defend	me?’
‘I	cannot	fight	that!’
‘Then,	my	friend,	I	am	lost.’
Salind	came	closer,	and	as	she	did	so	she	seemed	to	lose	focus	in
Seerdomin’s	eyes,	her	limbs	smearing	the	air,	her	body	blurring	from	one
position	to	the	next.	Her	arms	seemed	to	multiply,	and	in	each	one,	he	now	saw,
she	held	a	weapon.	Brown-stained	iron,	knotted	wood	trailing	snags	of	hair,
daggers	of	obsidian,	scythes	of	crimson	bronze.
Above	her	stained,	weeping	mouth,	her	eyes	blazed	with	insane	fire.
‘Redeemer,’	whispered	Seerdomin.
‘Yes?’
‘Answer	me	one	question.	I	beg	you.’
‘Ask.’
And	he	faced	the	god.	‘Are	you	worth	it?’
‘Am	I	worth	the	sacrifice	you	must	make?	No,	I	do	not	think	so.’
‘You	will	not	beg	to	be	saved?’
Itkovian	smiled.	‘Will	you?’
No.	I	never	have.	He	rose	to	his	feet,	found	that	the	tulwar	remained	in	his
hand.	He	hefted	the	weapon	and	eyed	Salind.	Can	I	defy	her	need?	Can	I	truly
stand	against	that?	‘If	not	for	your	humility,	Redeemer,	I	would	walk	away.	If
not	for	your…uncertainty,	your	doubts,	your	humanity.’
And,	awaiting	no	reply	from	the	god,	he	set	out	into	her	path.
	
The	sudden	hush	within	the	Scour	Tavern	finally	penetrated	Spinnock	Durav’s
drunken	haze.	Blinking,	he	tilted	his	head,	and	found	himself	looking	up	at	his
Lord.
Who	said,	‘It	is	time,	my	friend.’
‘You	now	send	me	away?’	Spinnock	asked.
‘Yes.	I	now	send	you	away.’
Spinnock	Durav	reeled	upright.	His	face	was	numb.	The	world	seemed	a
sickly	place,	and	it	wanted	in.	He	drew	a	deep	breath.
‘My	request	pains	you	–	why?’
He	could	have	told	him	then.	He	could	have	spoken	of	this	extraordinary
blessing	of	love.	For	a	human	woman.	He	could	have	told	Anomander	Rake	of
his	failure,	and	in	so	doing	he	would	have	awakened	the	Son	of	Darkness	to	his
sordid	plight.
Had	he	done	all	of	this,	Anomander	Rake	would	have	reached	a	hand	to


rest	light	on	his	shoulder,	and	he	would	have	said,	Then	you	must	stay,	my
friend.	For	love,	you	must	stay	–	go	to	her,	now.	Now,	Spinnock	Durav.	It	is	the
last	gift	within	our	reach.	The	last	–	did	you	truly	believe	I	would	stand	in	the
way	of	that?	That	I	would	decide	that	my	need	was	greater?
Did	you	think	I	could	do	such	a	thing,	when	I	come	to	you	here	and	now
because	of	my	own	love?	For	you?	For	our	people?
Go	to	her,	Spinnock	Durav.	Go.
But	Spinnock	Durav	said	nothing.	Instead,	he	bowed	before	his	Lord.	‘I
shall	do	as	you	ask.’
And	Anomander	Rake	said,	‘It	is	all	right	to	fail,	friend.	I	do	not	demand
the	impossible	of	you.	Do	not	weep	at	that	moment.	For	me,	Spinnock	Durav,
find	a	smile	to	announce	the	end.	Fare	well.’

The	killing	seemed	without	end.	Skintick’s	sword	arm	ached,	the	muscles
lifeless	and	heavy,	and	still	they	kept	coming	on	–	faces	twisted	eager	and
desperate,	expressions	folding	round	mortal	wounds	as	if	sharp	iron	was	a
blessing	touch,	an	exquisite	gift.	He	stood	between	Kedeviss	and	Nenanda,	and
the	three	had	been	driven	back	to	the	second	set	of	doors.	Bodies	were	piled	in
heaps,	filling	every	space	of	the	chamber ’s	floor,	where	blood	and	fluids
formed	thick	pools.	The	walls	on	all	sides	were	splashed	high.
He	could	see	daylight	through	the	outer	doors	–	the	morning	was	dragging
on.	Yet	from	the	passage	at	their	backs	there	had	been…nothing.	Were	they	all
dead	in	there?	Bleeding	out	on	the	altar	stone?	Or	had	they	found	themselves
somehow	trapped,	or	lost	with	no	answers	–	was	Clip	now	dead,	or	had	he	been
delivered	into	the	Dying	God’s	hands?
The	attackers	were	running	out	of	space	–	too	many	corpses	–	and	most
now	crawled	or	even	slithered	into	weapon	range.
‘Something’s	wrong,’	gasped	Kedeviss.	‘Skintick	–	go	–	we	can	hold	them
off	now.	Go	–	find	out	if…’
If	we’re	wasting	our	time.	I	understand.	He	pulled	back,	one	shoulder
cracking	into	the	frame	of	the	entranceway.	Whirling,	he	set	off	along	the
corridor.	When	horror	stalked	the	world,	it	seemed	that	every	grisly	truth	was
laid	bare.	Life’s	struggle	ever	ended	in	failure.	No	victory	was	pure,	or	clean.
Triumph	was	a	comforting	lie	and	always	revealed	itself	to	be	ephemeral,
hollow	and	shortlived.	This	is	what	assailed	the	spirit	when	coming	face	to	face
with	horror.
And	so	few	understood	that.	So	few…


He	clawed	through	foul	smoke,	heard	his	own	heartbeat	slowing,	dragging
even	as	his	breaths	faded.	What	–	what	is	happening?	Blindness.	Silence,	an	end
to	all	motion.	Skintick	sought	to	push	forward,	only	to	find	that	desire	was
empty	when	without	will,	and	when	there	was	no	strength,	will	itself	was	a
conceit.	Glyphs	flowed	down	like	black	rain,	on	his	face,	his	neck	and	his
hands,	streaming	hot	as	blood.
Somehow,	he	fought	onward,	his	entire	body	dragging	behind	him	as	if
half	dead,	an	impediment,	a	thing	worth	forgetting.	He	wanted	to	pull	free	of	it,
even	as	he	understood	that	his	flesh	was	all	that	kept	him	alive	–	yet	he	yearned
for	dissolution,	and	that	yearning	was	growing	desperate.
Wait.	This	is	not	how	I	see	the	world.	This	is	not	the	game	I	choose	to	play	–
I	will	not	believe	in	this	abject…surrender.
It	is	what	kelyk	offers.	The	blood	of	the	Dying	God	delivers	escape	–	from
everything	that	matters.	The	invitation	is	so	alluring,	the	promise	so
entrancing.
Dance!	All	around	you	the	world	rots.	Dance!	Poison	into	your	mouths	and
poison	out	from	your	mouths.	Dance,	damn	you,	in	the	dust	of	your	dreams.	I
have	looked	into	your	eyes	and	I	have	seen	that	you	are	nothing.	Empty.
Gods,	such	seductive	invitation!
The	recognition	sobered	him,	abrupt	as	a	punch	in	the	face.	He	found
himself	lying	on	the	tiles	of	the	corridor,	the	inner	doors	almost	within	reach.
In	the	chamber	beyond	darkness	swirled	like	thick	smoke,	like	a	storm	trapped
beneath	the	domed	ceiling.	He	heard	singing,	soft,	the	voice	of	a	child.
He	could	not	see	Nimander,	or	Desra	or	Aranatha.	The	body	of	Clip	was
sprawled	not	five	paces	in,	face	upturned,	eyes	opened,	fixed	and	seemingly
sightless.
Trembling	with	weakness,	Skintick	pulled	himself	forward.
	
The	moment	he	had	bulled	his	way	into	the	altar	chamber,	Nimander	had	felt
something	tear,	as	if	he	had	plunged	through	gauze-thin	cloth.	From	the
seething	storm	he	had	plunged	into,	he	emerged	to	sudden	calm,	to	soft	light
and	gentle	currents	of	warm	air.	His	first	step	landed	on	something	lumpy	that
twisted	beneath	his	weight.	Looking	down,	he	saw	a	small	doll	of	woven
grasses	and	twigs.	And,	scattered	on	the	floor	all	round,	there	were	more	such
figures.	Some	of	strips	of	cloth,	others	of	twine,	polished	wood	and	fired	clay.
Most	were	broken	–	missing	limbs,	or	headless.	Others	hung	down	from	the
plain,	low	ceiling,	twisted	beneath	nooses	of	leather	string,	knotted	heads	tilted
over,	dark	liquid	dripping.


The	wordless	singing	was	louder	here,	seeming	to	emanate	from	all
directions.	Nimander	could	see	no	walls	–	just	floor	and	ceiling,	both
stretching	off	into	formless	white.
And	dolls,	thousands	of	dolls.	On	the	floor,	dangling	from	the	ceiling.
‘Show	yourself,’	said	Nimander.
The	singing	stopped.
‘Show	yourself	to	me.’
‘If	you	squeeze	them,’	said	the	voice	–	a	woman’s	or	a	young	boy’s	–	‘they
leak.	I	squeezed	them	all.	Until	they	broke.’	There	was	a	pause,	and	then	a	soft
sigh.	‘None	worked.’
Nimander	did	not	know	where	to	look	–	the	mangled	apparitions	hanging
before	him	filled	him	with	horror	now,	as	he	saw	their	similarity	to	the
scarecrows	of	the	fields	outside	Bastion.	They	are	the	same.	They	weren’t
planted	rows,	nothing	made	to	deliver	a	yield.	They	were…versions.
‘Yes.	Failing	one	by	one	–	it’s	not	fair.	How	did	he	do	it?’
‘What	are	you?’	Nimander	asked.
The	voice	grew	sly,	‘On	the	floor	of	the	Abyss	–	yes,	there	is	a	floor	–
there	are	the	fallen.	Gods	and	goddesses,	spirits	and	prophets,	disciples	and
seers,	heroes	and	queens	and	kings	–	junk	of	existence.	You	can	play	there.	I
did.	Do	you	want	to?	Do	you	want	to	play	there,	too?’
‘No.’
‘All	broken,	more	broken	than	me.’
‘They	call	you	the	Dying	God.’
‘All	gods	are	dying.’
‘But	you	are	no	god,	are	you?’
‘Down	on	the	floor,	you	never	go	hungry.	Am	I	a	god	now?	I	must	be.
Don’t	you	see?	I	ate	so	many	of	them.	So	many	parts,	pieces.	Oh,	their	power,	I
mean.	My	body	didn’t	need	food.	Doesn’t	need	it,	I	mean,	yes,	that	is	fair	to	say.
It	is	so	fair	to	say.	I	first	met	him	on	the	floor	–	he	was	exploring,	he	said,	and	I
had	travelled	so	far…so	far.’
‘Your	worshippers—’
‘Are	mostly	dead.	More	to	drink.	All	that	blood,	enough	to	make	a	river,
and	the	current	can	take	me	away	from	here,	can	bring	me	back.	All	the	way
back.	To	make	her	pay	for	what	she	did!’
Having	come	from	chaos,	it	was	no	surprise	that	the	god	was	insane.
‘Show	yourself.’
‘The	machine	was	broken,	but	I	didn’t	know	that.	I	rode	its	back,	up	and	up.
But	then	something	happened.	An	accident.	We	fell	a	long	way.	We	were
terribly	broken,	both	of	us.	When	they	dragged	me	out.	Now	I	need	to	make	a


new	version,	just	like	you	said.	And	you	have	brought	me	one.	It	will	do.	I	am
not	deaf	to	its	thoughts.	I	understand	its	chaos,	its	pains	and	betrayals.	I	even
understand	its	arrogance.	It	will	do,	it	will	do.’
‘You	cannot	have	him,’	said	Nimander.	‘Release	him.’
‘None	of	these	ones	worked.	All	the	power	just	leaks	out.	How	did	he	do
it?’
One	of	these	dolls.	He	is	one	of	these	dolls.	Hiding	in	the	multitude.
The	voice	began	singing	again.	Wordless,	formless.
He	drew	his	sword.
‘What	are	you	doing?’
The	iron	blade	slashed	outward,	chopping	through	the	nearest	figures.
Strings	cut,	limbs	sliced	away,	straw	and	grass	drifting	in	the	air.
A	cackle,	and	then:	‘You	want	to	find	me?	How	many	centuries	do	you	have
to	spare?’
‘As	many	as	I	need,’	Nimander	replied,	stepping	forward	and	swinging
again.	Splintering	wood,	shattering	clay.	Underfoot	he	ground	his	heel	into
another	figure.
‘I’ll	be	gone	long	before	then.	The	river	of	blood	you	provided	me	–	my
way	out.	Far	away	I	go!	You	can’t	see	it,	can	you?	The	gate	you’ve	opened
here.	You	can’t	even	see	it.’
Nimander	destroyed	another	half-dozen	dolls.
‘Never	find	me!	Never	find	me!’
	
A	savage	blur	of	weapons	as	Salind	charged	Seerdomin.	Each	blow	he	caught
with	his	tulwar,	and	each	blow	thundered	up	his	arm,	shot	agony	through	his
bones.	He	reeled	back	beneath	the	onslaught.	Three	steps,	five,	ten.	It	was	all	he
could	do	simply	to	defend	himself.	And	that,	he	knew,	could	not	last.
The	Redeemer	wanted	him	to	hold	against	this?
He	struggled	on,	desperate.
She	was	moaning,	a	soft,	yearning	sound.	A	sound	of	want.	Mace	heads
beat	against	his	weapon,	sword	blades,	the	shafts	of	spears,	flails,	daggers,
scythes	–	a	dozen	arms	swung	at	him.	Impacts	thundered	through	his	body.
He	could	not	hold.	He	could	not—
An	axe	edge	tore	into	his	left	shoulder,	angled	up	to	slam	into	the	side	of
his	face.	He	felt	his	cheekbone	and	eye	socket	collapse	inward.	Blinded,
Seerdomin	staggered,	attempting	a	desperate	counter-attack,	the	tulwar
slashing	out.	The	edge	bit	into	wood,	splintering	it.	Something	struck	him	high
on	his	chest,	snapping	a	clavicle.	As	his	weapon	arm	sagged,	suddenly	lifeless,


he	reached	across	and	took	the	sword	with	his	other	hand.	Blood	ran	down
from	his	shoulder	–	he	was	losing	all	strength.
Another	edge	chopped	into	him	and	he	tottered,	then	fell	on	to	his	back.
Salind	stepped	up	to	stand	directly	over	him.
He	stared	up	into	her	dark,	glittering	eyes.
	
After	a	moment	Nimander	lowered	his	sword.	The	Dying	God	was	right	–	this
was	pointless.	‘Show	yourself,	you	damned	coward!’
Aranatha	was	suddenly	at	his	side.	‘He	must	be	summoned,’	she	said.
‘You	expect	him	to	offer	us	his	name?’
The	Dying	God	spoke.	‘Who	is	here?	Who	is	here?’
‘I	am	the	one,’	answered	Aranatha,	‘who	will	summon	you.’
‘You	do	not	know	me.	You	cannot	know	me!’
‘I	know	your	path,’	she	replied.	‘I	know	you	spoke	with	the	one	named
Hairlock,	on	the	floor	of	the	Abyss.	And	you	imagined	you	could	do	the	same,
that	you	could	fashion	for	yourself	a	body.	Of	wood,	of	twine,	of	clay—’
‘You	don’t	know	me!’
‘She	discarded	you,’	said	Aranatha,	‘didn’t	she?	The	fragment	of	you	that
was	left	afterwards.	Tainted	childlike,	abandoned.’
‘You	cannot	know	this	–	you	were	not	there!’
Aranatha	frowned.	‘No,	I	was	not	there.	Yet…the	earth	trembled.	Children
woke.	There	was	great	need.	You	were	the	part	of	her…that	she	did	not	want.’
‘She	will	pay!	And	for	you	–	I	know	you	now	–	and	it	is	too	late!’
Aranatha	sighed.	‘Husband,	Blood	Sworn	to	Nightchill,’	she	intoned,	‘child
of	Thelomen	Tartheno	Toblakai,	Bellurdan	Skullcrusher,	I	summon	you.’	And
she	held	out	her	hand,	in	time	for	something	to	slap	hard	into	its	grip.	A
battered,	misshapen	puppet	dangled,	one	arm	snapped	off,	both	legs	broken
away	at	the	knees,	a	face	barely	discernible,	seemingly	scorched	by	fire.
Aranatha	faced	Nimander.	‘Here	is	your	Dying	God.’
Around	them	the	scene	began	dissolving,	crumbling	away.
‘He	does	not	speak,’	Nimander	said,	eyeing	the	mangled	puppet.
‘No,’	she	said.	‘Curious.’
‘Are	you	certain	you	have	him,	Aranatha?’
She	met	his	eyes,	and	then	shrugged.
‘What	did	he	mean,	that	he	knew	you?	And	how	–	how	did	you	know	his
name?’
She	blinked,	and	then	frowned	down	at	the	puppet	she	still	held	out	in	one
hand.	‘Nimander,’	she	whispered	in	a	small	voice,	‘so	much	blood…’


	
Reaching	out	to	Clip,	Skintick	dragged	the	man	close,	studied	the	face,	the
staring	eyes,	and	saw	something	flicker	to	life.	‘Clip?’
The	warrior	shifted	his	gaze,	struggling	to	focus,	and	then	he	scowled.	His
words	came	out	in	an	ugly	croak.	‘Fuck.	What	do	you	want?’
Sounds,	motion,	and	then	Nimander	was	there,	kneeling	on	the	other	side
of	Clip.	‘We	seem,’	he	said,	‘to	have	succeeded.’
‘How?’
‘I	don’t	know,	Skin.	Right	now,	I	don’t	know	anything.’
Skintick	saw	Aranatha	standing	just	near	a	massive	block	of	stone	–	the
altar.	She	was	holding	a	doll	or	puppet	of	some	sort.	‘Where’s	Desra?’	he
suddenly	asked,	looking	round.
‘Over	here.’
The	foul	smoke	was	clearing.	Skintick	lifted	himself	into	a	sitting	position
and	squinted	in	the	direction	of	the	voice.	In	the	wall	behind	the	altar	and	to	the
left,	almost	hidden	between	columns,	there	was	a	narrow	door,	through	which
Desra	now	emerged.	She	was	soaked	in	blood,	although	by	the	way	she	moved,
none	of	it	was	her	own.	‘Some	sort	of	High	Priest,	I	suppose,’	she	said.	‘Trying
to	protect	a	corpse,	or	what	I	think	is	a	corpse.’	She	paused,	and	then	spat	on	to
the	floor.	‘Strung	up	like	one	of	those	scarecrows,	but	the	body	parts…all
wrong,	all	sewn	together—’
‘The	Dying	God,’	said	Aranatha,	‘sent	visions	of	what	he	wanted.	Flawed.
But	what	leaked	out	tasted	sweet.’
From	the	corridor	Kedeviss	and	Nenanda	arrived.	They	both	looked
round,	their	faces	flat,	their	eyes	bludgeoned.
‘I	think	we	killed	them	all,’	said	Kedeviss.	‘Or	the	rest	fled.	This	wasn’t	a
fight	–	this	was	a	slaughter.	It	made	no	sense—’
‘Blood,’	said	Nimander,	studying	Clip	–	who	remained	lying	before	him	–
with	something	like	suspicion.	‘You	are	back	with	us?’
Clip	swung	his	scowl	on	to	Nimander.	‘Where	are	we?’
‘A	city	called	Bastion.’
A	strange	silence	followed,	but	it	was	one	that	Skintick	understood.	The
wake	of	our	horror.	It	settles,	thickens,	forms	a	hard	skin	–	something	lifeless,
smooth.	We’re	waiting	for	it	to	finish	all	of	that,	until	it	can	take	our	weight
once	more.
And	then	we	leave	here.
‘We	still	have	far	to	go,’	said	Nimander,	straightening.
In	Skintick’s	eyes,	his	kin	–	his	friend	–	looked	aged,	ravaged,	his	eyes


haunted	and	bleak.	The	others	were	no	better.	None	of	them	had	wanted	this.
And	what	they	had	done	here…it	had	all	been	for	Clip.
‘Blood,’	said	Clip,	echoing	Nimander,	and	he	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.
He	glared	at	the	others.	‘Look	at	you.	By	Mother	Dark,	I’d	swear	you’ve	been
rolling	in	the	waste	pits	of	some	abattoir.	Get	cleaned	up	or	you	won’t	have	my
company	for	much	longer.’	He	paused,	and	his	glare	hardened	into	something
crueller.	‘I	smell	murder.	Human	cults	are	pathetic	things.	From	now	on,	spare
me	your	lust	for	killing	innocents.	I’d	rather	not	be	reminded	of	whatever
crimes	you	committed	in	the	name	of	the	Son	of	Darkness.	Yes,’	he	added,
baring	his	teeth,	‘he	has	so	much	to	answer	for.’
	
Standing	over	him,	weapons	whirling,	spinning.	Seerdomin	watched	her	with
his	one	remaining	eye,	waiting	for	the	end	to	all	of	this,	an	end	he	only	faintly
regretted.	The	failure,	his	failure,	yes,	that	deserved	some	regret.	But	then,	had
he	truly	believed	he	could	stop	this	apparition?
He	said	I	was	dying.
I’m	dying	again.
All	at	once,	she	was	still.	Her	eyes	like	hooded	lanterns,	her	arms	settling
as	if	the	dance	had	danced	its	way	right	out	of	her	and	now	spun	somewhere
unseen.	She	stared	down	at	him	without	recognition,	and	then	she	turned	away.
He	heard	her	stumbling	back	the	way	she	had	come.
‘That	was	long	enough.’
Seerdomin	turned	his	head,	saw	the	Redeemer	standing	close.	Not	a	large
man.	Not	in	any	way	particularly	impressive.	Hard	enough,	to	be	sure,
revealing	his	profession	as	a	soldier,	but	otherwise	unremarkable.	‘What	made
you	what	you	are?’	he	asked	–	or	tried	to	–	his	mouth	filled	with	blood	that
frothed	and	spattered	with	every	word.
The	Redeemer	understood	him	none	the	less.	‘I	don’t	know.	We	may
possess	ambition,	and	with	it	a	self-image	both	grandiose	and	posturing,	but
they	are	empty	things	in	the	end.’	Then	he	smiled.	‘I	do	not	recall	being	such	a
man.’
‘Why	did	she	leave,	Redeemer?’
The	answer	was	long	in	coming.	‘You	had	help,	I	believe.	And	no,	I	do	not
know	what	will	come	of	that.	Can	you	wait?	I	may	need	you	again.’
Seerdomin	managed	a	laugh.	‘Like	this?’
‘I	cannot	heal	you.	But	I	do	not	think	you	will…cease.	Yours	is	a	strong
soul,	Seerdomin.	May	I	sit	down	beside	you?	It	has	been	a	long	time	since	I	last
had	someone	to	speak	to.’


Well,	here	I	bleed.	But	there	is	no	pain.	‘As	long	as	I	can,’	he	said,	‘you	will
have	someone	to	speak	to.’
The	Redeemer	looked	away	then,	so	that	Seerdomin	could	not	see	his
sudden	tears.
	
‘He	didn’t	make	it,’	Monkrat	said,	straightening.
Gradithan	glowered	down	at	Seerdomin’s	corpse.	‘We	were	so	close,	too.	I
don’t	understand	what’s	happened,	I	don’t	understand	at	all.’
He	turned	slightly	and	studied	the	High	Priestess	where	she	knelt	on	the
muddy	floor	of	the	tent.	Her	face	was	slack,	black	drool	hanging	from	her
mouth.	‘She	used	it	up.	Too	soon,	too	fast,	I	think.	All	that	wasted	blood…’
Monkrat	cleared	his	throat.	‘The	visions—’
‘Nothing	now,’	Gradithan	snapped.	‘Find	some	more	kelyk.’
At	that	Salind’s	head	lifted,	a	sudden	thirst	burning	in	her	eyes.	Seeing	this,
Gradithan	laughed.	‘Ah,	see	how	she	worships	now.	An	end	to	all	those	doubts.
One	day,	Monkrat,	everyone	will	be	like	her.	Saved.’
Monkrat	seemed	to	hesitate.
Gradithan	turned	back	and	spat	on	to	Seerdomin’s	motionless,	pallid
visage.	‘Even	you,	Monkrat,’	he	said.	‘Even	you.’
‘Would	you	have	me	surrender	my	talents	as	a	mage,	Urdo?’
‘Not	yet.	But	yes,	one	day,	you	will	do	that.	Without	regrets.’
Monkrat	set	off	to	find	another	cask	of	kelyk.
Gradithan	walked	over	to	Salind.	He	crouched	in	front	of	her,	leaned
forward	to	lick	the	drool	from	her	lips.	‘We’ll	dance	together,’	he	said.	‘Are
you	eager	for	that?’
He	saw	the	answer	in	her	eyes.
	
High	atop	the	tower,	in	the	moment	that	Silanah	stirred	–	cold	eyes	fixed	upon
the	pilgrim	encampment	beyond	the	veil	of	Night	–	Anomander	Rake	had
reached	out	to	still	her	with	the	lightest	of	touches.
‘Not	this	time,	my	love,’	he	said	in	a	murmur.	‘Soon.	You	will	know.’
Slowly,	the	enormous	dragon	settled	once	more,	eyes	closing	to	the
thinnest	of	slits.
The	Son	of	Darkness	let	his	hand	remain,	resting	there	on	her	cool,	scaled
neck.	‘Do	not	fear,’	he	said,	‘I	will	not	restrain	you	next	time.’
He	sensed	the	departure	of	Spinnock	Durav,	on	a	small	fast	cutter	into	the


Ortnal	beyond	Nightwater.	Perhaps	the	journey	would	serve	him	well,	a
distance	ever	stretching	between	the	warrior	and	what	haunted	him.
And	he	sensed,	too,	the	approach	of	Endest	Silann	down	along	the	banks	of
the	river,	his	oldest	friend,	who	had	one	more	task	ahead	of	him.	A	most
difficult	one.
But	these	were	difficult	times,	he	reflected.
Anomander	Rake	left	Silanah	then,	beneath	Darkness	that	never	broke.
	
North	and	west	of	Bastion,	Kallor	walked	an	empty	road.
He	had	found	nothing	worthwhile	in	Bastion.	The	pathetic	remnant	of	one
of	Nightchill’s	lovers,	a	reminder	of	curses	voiced	long	ago,	a	reminder	of
how	time	twisted	everything,	like	a	rope	binding	into	ever	tighter	knots	and
kinks.	Until	what	should	have	been	straight	was	now	a	tangled,	useless	mess.
Ahead	awaited	a	throne,	a	new	throne,	one	that	he	deserved.	He	believed	it
was	taking	shape,	becoming	something	truly	corporeal.	Raw	power,	brimming
with	unfulfilled	promise.
But	the	emergence	of	the	throne	was	not	the	only	thing	awaiting	him,	and
he	sensed	well	that	much	at	least.	A	convergence,	yes,	yet	another	of	those
confounded	cusps,	when	powers	drew	together,	when	unforeseen	paths
suddenly	intersected.	When	all	of	existence	could	change	in	a	single	moment,
in	the	solitary	cut	of	a	sword,	in	a	word	spoken	or	a	word	left	unspoken.
What	would	come?
He	needed	to	be	there.	In	its	midst.	Such	things	were	what	kept	him	going,
after	all.	Such	things	were	what	made	life	worth	living.
I	am	the	High	King	of	Failures,	am	I	not?	Who	else	deserves	the	Broken
Throne?	Who	else	personifies	the	misery	of	the	Crippled	God?	No,	it	will	be
mine,	and	as	for	all	the	rest,	well,	we’ll	see,	won’t	we?
He	walked	on,	alone	once	more.	Satisfying,	to	be	reminded	–	as	he	had
been	when	travelling	in	the	company	of	those	pathetic	Tiste	Andii	–	that	the
world	was	crowded	with	idiots.	Brainless,	stumbling,	clumsy	with	stupid
certainties	and	convictions.
Perhaps,	this	time,	he	would	dispense	with	empires.	This	time,	yes,	he
would	crush	everything,	until	every	wretched	mortal	scrabbled	in	the	dirt,
fighting	over	grubs	and	roots.	Was	that	not	the	perfect	realm	for	a	broken
throne?
Yes,	and	what	better	proof	of	my	right	to	claim	that	throne?	Kallor	alone
turns	his	back	on	civilization.	Look	on,	Fallen	One,	and	see	me	standing	before
you.	Me	and	none	other.


I	vow	to	take	it	all	down.	Every	brick.	And	the	world	can	look	on,	awed,	in
wonder.	The	gods	themselves	will	stare,	dumbfounded,	amazed,	bereft	and	lost.
Curse	me	to	fall	each	and	every	time,	will	you?	But	I	will	make	a	place	where
no	fall	is	possible.	I	will	defeat	that	curse,	finally	defeat	it.
Can	you	hear	me,	K’rul?
No	matter.	You	will	see	what	there	is	to	see,	soon	enough.
These	were,	he	decided,	glorious	times	indeed.


Book	Three

To	Die	in	the	Now


	

Push	it	on	to	the	next	moment
Don’t	think	now,	save	it
For	later	when	thinking	will	show
Its	useless	face
When	it’s	too	late	and	worry	is	wasted
In	the	rush	for	cover
Push	it	past	into	that	pocket
So	that	it	relents	its	gnawing	presence
And	nothing	is	worth	doing
In	pointless	grace
When	all	the	valid	suppositions
Smother	your	cries
Push	it	over	into	the	deep	hole
You	don’t	want	to	know
In	case	it	breaks	and	makes	you	feel
Cruel	reminders
When	all	you	could	have	done	is	now	past
No	don’t	bother
Push	it	well	into	the	corner
It’s	no	use,	so	spare	me	the	grief
You	didn’t	like	the	cost	so	bright,	so	high
The	bloodiest	cut
When	all	you	sought	was	sweet	pleasure
To	the	end	of	your	days
Push	it	on	until	it	pushes	back
Shout	your	shock,	shout	it
You	never	imagined	you	never	knew	what
Turning	away	would	do
Now	wail	out	your	dread	in	waves	of	disbelief


It’s	done	it’s	dead
Push	your	way	to	the	front
Clawing	the	eyes	of	screaming	kin
No	legacy	awaits	your	shining	children
It’s	killed,	killed
Gone	the	future	all	to	feed	some	holy	glory
The	world	is	over.	Over.
Siban’s	Dying	Confession
Siban	of	Aren
	


Chapter	Thirteen

We	watched	him	approach	from	a	league	away
Staggering	beneath	the	weight	of	all	he	held
In	his	arms
We	thought	he	wore	a	crown	but	when	he	came	near
The	circlet	was	revealed	as	the	skin	of	a	serpent
Biting	its	tail
We	laughed	and	shared	the	carafe	when	he	fell
Cheering	as	he	climbed	back	upright
In	pleasing	charm
We	slowed	into	silence	when	he	arrived
And	saw	for	ourselves	the	burden	he	carried
Kept	from	harm
We	held	stern	in	the	face	of	his	relieved	smile
And	he	said	this	fresh	young	world	he	had	found
Was	now	ours
We	looked	on	as	if	we	were	grand	gods
Contemplating	a	host	of	undeserved	gifts
Drawing	knives
Bold	with	pride	we	cut	free	bloodied	slices
Shared	out	this	bright	dripping	bounty
And	ate	our	fill
We	saw	him	weep	then	when	nothing	was	left
Backing	away	with	eyes	of	pain	and	dismay
Arms	falling
But	wolves	will	make	of	any	world	a	carcass
We	simply	replied	with	our	natures	revealed
In	all	innocence
We	proclaimed	with	zeal	our	humble	purity
Though	now	he	turned	away	and	did	not	hear
As	the	taste	soured


And	the	betrayal	of	poison	crept	into	our	limbs
We	watched	him	walk	away	now	a	league	maybe	more
His	lonely	march
His	mourning	departure	from	our	kindness
His	happy	annihilation	of	our	mindless	selves
Snake-bit	unto	death
The	Last	Days	of	Our	Inheritance
Fisher	kel	Tath

The	vast	springs	of	the	carriage	slammed	down	to	absorb	the	thundering
impact;	then,	as	the	enormous	conveyance	surged	back	up,	Gruntle	caught	a
momentary	glimpse	of	one	of	the	Bole	brothers,	his	grip	torn	loose,	wheeling
through	the	grainy	air.	Arms	scything,	legs	kicking,	face	wide	with	bemused
surprise.
His	tether	snapped	taut,	and	Gruntle	saw	that	the	idiot	had	tied	it	to	one	of
his	ankles.	The	man	plunged	down	and	out	of	sight.
The	horses	were	screaming,	manes	whipping	in	their	frantic	heaves
forward	across	stony,	broken	ground.	Shadowy	figures	voiced	muted	cries	as
the	beasts	trampled	them	under	hoof,	and	the	carriage	rocked	sickeningly	over
bodies.
Someone	was	shrieking	in	his	ear,	and	Gruntle	twisted	round	on	his	perch
on	the	carriage	roof,	to	see	the	other	Bole	brother	–	Jula	–	tugging	on	the
tether.	A	foot	appeared	–	moccasin	gone,	long	knobby	toes	splayed	wide	as	if
seeking	a	branch	–	and	then	the	shin	and	lumpy	knee.	A	moment	later	Amby
reached	up,	found	a	handhold,	and	pulled	himself	back	on	to	the	roof.	Wearing
the	strangest	grin	Gruntle	had	ever	seen.
In	the	half-light	the	Trygalle	carriage	raced	onward,	plunging	through
seething	masses	of	people.	Even	as	they	carved	through	like	a	ship	cutting
crazed	seas,	ragged,	rotting	arms	reached	up	to	the	sides.	Some	caught	hold
only	to	have	their	arms	torn	from	their	sockets.	Others	were	pulled	off	their
feet,	and	these	ones	started	climbing,	seeking	better	purchase.
Upon	which	the	primary	function	of	the	shareholders	was	made	apparent.
Sweetest	Sufferance,	the	short,	plump	woman	with	the	bright	smile,	was	now
snarling,	wailing	with	a	hatchet	into	an	outreaching	arm.	Bones	snapped	like
sticks	and	she	shouted	as	she	kicked	into	a	leering	desiccated	face,	hard	enough
to	punch	the	head	from	the	shoulders.


Damned	corpses	–	they	were	riding	through	a	sea	of	animated	corpses,	and
it	seemed	that	virtually	every	one	of	them	wanted	to	book	passage.
A	large	brutish	shape	reared	up	beside	Gruntle.	Barghast,	hairy	as	an	ape,
filed	blackened	teeth	revealed	in	a	delighted	grin.
Releasing	one	hand	from	the	brass	rung,	Gruntle	tugged	loose	one	of	his
cutlasses,	slashed	the	heavy	blade	into	the	corpse’s	face.	It	reeled	away,	the
bottom	half	of	the	grin	suddenly	gone.	Twisting	further	round,	Gruntle	kicked
the	Barghast	in	the	chest.	The	apparition	fell	back.	A	moment	later	someone
else	appeared,	narrow-shouldered,	the	top	of	its	head	an	elongated	pate	with	a
nest	of	mousy	hair	perched	on	the	crown,	a	wizened	face	beneath	it.
Gruntle	kicked	again.
The	carriage	pitched	wildly	as	the	huge	wheels	rolled	over	something	big.
Gruntle	felt	himself	swinging	out	over	the	roof	edge	and	he	shouted	in	pain	as
his	hand	was	wrenched	where	it	gripped	a	rung.	Clawed	fingers	scrabbled
against	his	thighs	and	he	kicked	in	growing	panic.	His	heel	struck	something
that	didn’t	yield	and	he	used	that	purchase	to	launch	himself	back	on	to	the
roof.
On	the	opposite	side,	three	dead	men	were	now	mauling	Sweetest
Sufferance,	each	one	seemingly	intent	on	some	kind	of	rape.	She	twisted	and
writhed	beneath	them,	chopping	with	her	hatchets,	biting	at	their	withered
hands	and	head-butting	the	ones	that	tried	for	a	kiss.	Reccanto	Ilk	then	joined
the	fray,	using	a	strange	saw-toothed	knife	as	he	attacked	various	joints	–
shoulders,	knees,	elbows	–	and	tossing	the	severed	limbs	over	the	side	as	he
went.
Gruntle	lifted	himself	on	to	his	knees	and	glared	out	across	the	landscape.
The	masses	of	dead,	he	realized,	were	all	moving	in	one	direction,	whilst	the
carriage	cut	obliquely	into	their	path	–	and	as	the	resistance	before	them	built,
figures	converging	like	blood	to	a	wound,	forward	momentum	began
inexorably	to	slow,	the	horses	stamping	high	as	they	clambered	over	ever
more	undead.
Someone	was	shouting	near	the	rear	of	the	carriage,	and	Gruntle	turned	to
see	the	woman	named	Faint	leaning	down	over	the	side,	yelling	through	the
shuttered	window.
Another	heavy	blow	buffeted	the	carriage,	and	something	demonic	roared.
Claws	tore	free	a	chunk	of	wood.
‘Get	us	out	of	here!’
Gruntle	could	not	agree	more,	as	the	demon	suddenly	loomed	into	view,
reptilian	arms	reaching	for	him.
Snarling,	he	leapt	to	his	feet,	both	weapons	now	in	hand.


An	elongated,	fanged	face	lunged	at	him,	hissing.
Gruntle	roared	back	–	a	deafening	sound	–	cutlasses	lashing	out.	Edges
slammed	into	thick	hide,	sliced	deep	into	lifeless	flesh,	down	to	the	bones	of
the	demon’s	long	neck.
He	saw	something	like	surprise	flicker	in	the	creature’s	pitted	eyes,	and
then	the	head	and	half	of	the	neck	fell	away.
Two	more	savage	chops	sent	its	forearms	spinning.
The	body	plunged	back,	and	even	as	it	did	so	smaller	corpses	were
scrambling	on	to	it,	as	if	climbing	a	ladder.
He	now	heard	a	strange	sound	ahead,	rhythmic,	like	the	clashing	of
weapons	against	shield	rims.	But	the	sound	was	too	loud	for	that,	too
overwhelming,	unless	–	Gruntle	straightened	and	faced	forward.
An	army	indeed.	Dead	soldiers,	moving	in	ranks,	in	squares	and	wedges,
marching	along	with	all	the	rest	–	and	in	numbers	unimaginable.	He	stared,
struggling	to	comprehend	the	vastness	of	the	force.	As	far	as	he	could	see
before	them…Gods	below,	all	of	the	dead,	on	the	march	–	but	where?	To	what
war?
The	scene	suddenly	blurred,	dispersed	in	fragments.	The	carriage	seemed
to	slump	under	him.	Darkness	swept	in,	a	smell	of	the	sea,	the	thrash	of	waves,
sand	sliding	beneath	the	wheels.	The	carriage	side	nearest	him	lurched	into	the
bole	of	a	palm	tree,	sending	down	a	rain	of	cusser-sized	nuts	that	pounded
along	the	roof	before	bounding	away.	The	horses	stumbled,	slowing	their	wild
plunge,	and	a	moment	later	everything	came	to	a	sinking	halt.
Looking	up	Gruntle	saw	stars	in	a	gentle	night	sky.
Beneath	him	the	carriage	door	creaked	open,	and	someone	clambered	out
to	vomit	on	to	the	sands,	coughing	and	spitting	and	cursing.
Master	Quell.
Gruntle	climbed	down,	using	the	spokes	of	the	nearest	wheel,	and,	his	legs
feeling	shaky	under	him,	made	his	way	to	the	sorceror.
The	man	was	still	on	his	hands	and	knees,	hacking	out	the	last	dregs	of
whatever	had	been	in	his	stomach.	‘Oh,’	he	gasped.	‘My	aching	head.’
Faint	came	up	alongside	Gruntle.	She’d	been	wearing	an	iron	skullcap	but
she’d	lost	it,	and	now	her	hair	hung	in	matted	strands,	framing	her	round	face.
‘I	thought	a	damned	tiger	had	landed	on	us,’	she	said,	‘but	it	was	you,	putting
the	terror	into	a	demon.	So	it’s	true,	those	tattoos	aren’t	tattoos	at	all.’
Glanno	Tarp	had	dropped	down,	dodging	to	avoid	the	snapping	teeth	of	the
nearest	horses.	‘Did	you	see	Amby	Bole	go	flying?	Gods,	that	was	stupacular!’
Gruntle	frowned.	‘Stu	–	what?’
‘Stupidly	spectacular,’	explained	Faint.	‘Or	spectacularly	stupid.	Are	you


Soletaken?’
He	glanced	at	her,	then	set	off	to	explore.
A	task	quickly	accomplished.	They	were	on	an	island.	A	very	small	island,
less	than	fifty	paces	across.	The	sand	was	crushed	coral,	gleaming	silver	in	the
starlight.	Two	palm	trees	rose	from	the	centre.	In	the	surrounding	shallows,	a
thousand	paces	out,	ribbons	of	reef	ran	entirely	round	the	atoll,	breaking	the
surface	like	the	spine	of	a	sea	serpent.	More	islands	were	visible,	few	bigger
than	the	one	they	were	on,	stretching	out	like	the	beads	of	a	broken	necklace,
the	nearest	one	perhaps	three	thousand	paces	distant.
As	he	returned	he	saw	a	corpse	plummeting	down	from	the	carriage	roof
to	thump	in	the	sand.	After	a	moment	it	sat	up.	‘Oh,’	it	said.
The	Trell	emerged	from	the	carriage,	followed	by	the	swamp	witch,
Precious	Thimble,	who	looked	ghostly	pale	as	she	stumbled	a	few	steps,	then
promptly	sat	down	on	the	sand.	Seeing	Gruntle,	Mappo	walked	over.
‘I	gather,’	he	said,	‘we	encountered	something	unexpected	in	Hood’s
realm.’
‘I	wouldn’t	know,’	Gruntle	replied.	‘It	was	my	first	visit.’
‘Unexpected?’	Faint	snorted.	‘That	was	insane	–	all	the	dead	in	existence,
on	the	march.’
‘Where	to?’	Gruntle	asked.
‘Maybe	not	to,	maybe	from.’
From?	In	retreat?	Now	that	was	an	alarming	notion.	If	the	dead	are	on	the
run…
‘Used	to	be,’	Faint	mused,	‘the	realm	of	the	dead	was	an	easy	ride.
Peaceful.	But	in	the	last	few	years…something’s	going	on.’	She	walked	over	to
Master	Quell.	‘So,	if	that’s	not	going	to	work,	Quell,	what	now?’
The	man,	still	on	his	hands	and	knees,	looked	up.	‘You	just	don’t	get	it,	do
you?’
‘What?’
‘We	didn’t	even	reach	the	damned	gate.’
‘But,	then,	what—’
‘There	wasn’t	any	gate!’	the	mage	shrieked.
A	long	silence	followed.
Nearby,	the	undead	man	was	collecting	seashells.
	
Jula	Bole’s	watery	eyes	fixed	on	Precious	Thimble,	dreamy	with	adoration.
Seeing	this,	Amby	did	the	same,	trying	to	make	his	expression	even	more
desirous,	so	that	when	she	finally	looked	over	she	would	see	that	he	was	the


right	one	for	her,	the	only	one	for	her.	As	the	moments	stretched,	the
competition	grew	fierce.
His	left	leg	still	ached,	from	the	hip	right	down	to	his	toes,	and	he	had	only
one	moccasin,	but	at	least	the	sand	was	warm	so	that	wasn’t	too	bad.
Precious	Thimble	was	in	a	meeting	with	Master	Quell	and	that	scary
barbed	man,	and	the	hairy	giant	ogre	named	Mappo.	These	were	the	important
people,	he	decided,	and	excepting	Precious	Thimble	he	wanted	nothing	to	do
with	them.	Standing	too	close	to	those	folk	was	never	healthy.	Heads	explode,
hearts	burst	–	he’d	seen	it	with	his	own	eyes,	back	when	he	was	a	runt	(but	not
nearly	as	much	of	a	runt	as	Jula)	and	the	family	had	decided	at	last	to	fight	the
Malazans	who	were	showing	up	in	their	swamp	like	poison	mushrooms.	Buna
Bole	had	been	running	things	back	then,	before	he	got	eaten	by	a	toad,	but	it
was	a	fact	that	Buna’s	next-to-closest	brothers	–	the	ones	who	wanted	to	get
closer	–	all	went	and	got	themselves	killed.	Exploding	heads.	Bursting	hearts.
Boiling	livers.	It	was	the	law	of	dodging,	of	course.	Marshals	and	their	submarshals	were	smart	and	smart	meant	fast,	so	when	the	arrows	and	quarrels
and	waves	of	magic	flew,	why,	they	dodged	out	of	the	way.	Anybody	round
them,	trying	to	be	as	smart	but	not	smart	at	all	and	so	just	that	much	slower,
well,	they	didn’t	dodge	quick	enough.
Jula	finally	sighed,	announcing	his	defeat,	and	looked	over	at	Amby.	‘I
can’t	believe	I	saved	you.’
‘I	can’t	neither.	I	wouldn’t	of.’
‘That’s	why	I	can’t	believe	that’s	what	I	did.	But	then	she’s	seen	how	brave	I
am,	how	generous	and	selfless.	She’s	seen	I’m	better	because	she	knows	you
wouldn’t	have	done	it.’
‘Maybe	I	would’ve,	and	maybe	she	knows	that,	Jula.	Besides,	one	of	them
sick	smelly	ones	was	trying	to	open	the	doors,	and	if	it	wasn’t	for	me	he’d	of
got	in	–	and	that’s	what	she	really	saw.’
‘You	didn’t	scrape	that	one	off	on	purpose.’
‘How	do	you	know?’
‘Because	you	butted	him	with	your	face,	Amby.’
Amby	tested	his	nose	again	and	winced,	and	then	he	sneered.	‘She	saw	what
she	saw,	and	what	she	saw	wasn’t	you.’
‘She	saw	my	hands,	reaching	down	to	drag	you	back	up.	She	saw	that.’
‘She	didn’t.	I	made	sure	by	covering	them	with,	er,	with	my	shirt.’
‘You	lie.’
‘You	lie.’
‘No,	you.’
‘You!’


‘You	can	say	what	you	like,	Amby,	whatever	you	like.	It	was	me	saving
you.’
‘Pulling	off	my	moccasin,	you	mean.’
‘That	was	an	accident.’
‘Yeah,	then	where	is	it?’
‘Fell	off	the	side.’
‘No	it	didn’t.	I	checked	your	bag,	Jula.	You	wasn’t	trying	to	save	me	at	all,
you	was	stealing	my	moccasin	because	it’s	your	favourite	moccasin.	I	want	it
back.’
‘It’s	against	the	law	to	look	in	someone	else’s	bag.’
‘Swamp	law.	Does	this	look	like	a	swamp?’
‘That	doesn’t	matter.	You	broke	the	law.	Anyway,	what	you	found	was	my
spare	moccasin.’
‘Your	one	spare	moccasin?’
‘That’s	right.’
‘Then	why	was	it	full	of	my	love	notes?’
‘What	love	notes?’
‘The	ones	me	and	her	been	writing	back	and	forth.	The	ones	I	hid	in	my
moccasin.	Those	ones,	Jula.’
‘What’s	obvious	now	is	just	how	many	times	you	been	breaking	the	law.
Because	you	been	hiding	your	love	notes	–	which	you	write	to	yourself	and
nobody	else	–	you	been	hiding	them	in	my	spare	moccasin!’
‘Not	that	you’d	ever	look.’
‘But	I	might,	if	I	knew	about	it.’
‘You	didn’t	though,	did	you?	Besides,	you	don’t	have	a	spare	moccasin,
because	I	stole	it.’
‘And	that’s	why	I	stole	it	back!’
‘You	can’t	steal	back	what	you	didn’t	know	was	stolen	in	the	first	place.
That’s	just	stealing.	And	stealing’s	against	the	law.’
‘Swamp	law.’
‘Your	bag	is	a	swamp.’
‘Hahahahaha—’
And	Amby	grinned	at	his	own	joke,	and	then	he	too	laughed.	‘Hahahahaha
—’
	
Faint	tugged	the	stopper	free	and	took	a	swig,	then	handed	the	skin	to	Sweetest
Sufferance.	‘Listen	to	those	idiots,’	she	said.
‘I	don’t	want	to,’	Sweetest	Sufferance	replied.	And	then	she	shivered.	‘That


was	the	first	time,	you	know,	them	trying	to	get	in	my	trousers	like	that.’
‘Cursed	with	rigor	mortis,	maybe.’
She	snorted.	‘You	kidding	me?	Whatever	they	had	down	there	wasn’t	even
real,	like	maybe	sticks	tied	on	or	something.’	She	drank	down	some	wine,	then
sighed	and	looked	round.	‘Pretty.’
‘Our	tiny	piece	of	paradise.’
‘We	can	watch	the	sun	come	up,	at	least.	That	will	be	nice.’	She	was	quiet
for	a	moment,	before	resuming,	‘When	Reccanto	showed	up,	I	thought	he	was
helping.	But	now	I	think	he	was	just	using	the	situation	to	get	a	few	handfuls	of
his	own.’
‘Are	you	surprised,	Sweetie?	He’s	a	man.’
‘With	bad	eyes.’
‘Bad	eyes	and	bad	hands.’
‘I	might	have	to	murder	him.’
‘Hold	on,’	said	Faint,	taking	the	skin	back.	‘He	did	save	you,	cutting	off
arms	and	hands—’
‘Eliminating	the	competition.’
‘Defending	your	honour,	Sweetie.’
‘If	you	say	so.’
Faint	replaced	the	stopper.	‘Gods	below,	Sweetie,	what	do	you	think	we	ran
into	back	there?’
Sweetest	Sufferance	pursed	her	plump	lips,	long-lashed	lids	settling	down
over	her	eyes.	‘Back	in	One	Eye	Cat,	when	I	was	a	child,	I	was	taken	to	a	Dawn
of	Flies	–	you	know,	those	ceremonies	from	the	Temple	of	Hood,	when	all	the
priests	paint	themselves	in	honey—’
‘In	some	places,’	cut	in	Faint,	‘they	use	blood.’
‘So	I’ve	heard.	In	One	Eye	Cat,	it	was	honey,	so	that	the	flies	stuck.	Flies
and	wasps,	actually.	Anyway,	I	was	with	my	grandfather,	who’d	been	a	soldier
in	the	Revenants—’
‘Gods,	it’s	been	a	long	time	since	I	last	heard	them	mentioned!’	Faint	stared
across	at	Sweetest	Sufferance.	‘Is	this	true?	Your	grandfather	was	with	the
Revenants?’
‘So	he	always	told	it.	When	I	was	very	young,	I	believed	every	word	he
said.	When	I	was	older,	I	didn’t	believe	any	of	it.	And	now	I’m	still	older,	I’ve
gone	back	to	believing	him.	Things	in	his	house,	the	carved	flagstones,	the
broken	masks	he	had	on	the	wall…yes,	Faint,	I	believe	he	was	at	that.’
‘Commanded	by	a	Seguleh—’
‘An	outlawed	Seguleh,	yes.	Anyway,	it	was	my	grandfather	who	took	me	to
watch	his	old	company’s	patron	temple	and	all	the	priests	and	priestesses	doing


their	flies	thing.’
‘Wait.	The	Revenants	were	supposed	to	have	all	disappeared	–	taken	by
Hood	himself,	to	serve	him	in	the	realm	of	the	dead.	So	what	was	your
grandfather	doing	living	in	One	Eye	Cat?’
‘He	lost	his	sword	arm	in	a	battle.	He’d	been	left	for	dead,	and	by	the	time
anyone	found	him	it	was	too	late	for	any	serious	healing.	So	they	seared	the
stump	and	retired	him	out.	Now,	you	going	to	let	me	tell	my	tale	or	not?’
‘Yes,	fine.	Sorry.’
‘He	said	the	priests	were	getting	it	all	wrong,	with	that	honey.	The	flies	and
wasps	weren’t	the	important	thing	in	the	ceremony.	It	was	the	blood	–	honey,
but	that	symbolized	blood.	The	Revenants	–	who	were	as	good	as	Hood’s	own
warrior-priests,	in	the	mortal	world	anyway	–	well,	they	were	flagellants.
Blood	on	the	skin,	life	bled	out	to	die	on	the	skin	–	that	was	the	important
detail.	It’s	why	Hood	cherishes	dead	soldiers	more	than	any	other	of	the
countless	dead	that	stumble	through	the	gate.	The	Merchants	of	Blood,	the
army	that	will	fight	on	the	hidden	plain	called	Defiance	Last.’	She	paused,	then
licked	her	lips.	‘That’s	what	the	Dawn	of	Flies	is	about.	A	final	battle,	the	dead
gathered,	on	a	hidden	plain	called	Defiance	Last.’
‘So,’	said	Faint,	feeling	chilled	by	Sweetest	Sufferance’s	story,	‘maybe
that’s	why	Hood	took	the	Revenants.	Because	that	battle	is	coming.’
‘Give	me	some	more	of	that,’	Sweetest	Sufferance	said,	reaching	for	the
wineskin.
	
Glanno	Tarp	nudged	Reccanto	Ilk.	‘See	’em?	They’re	talking	about	us.	Well,
me,	mostly.	It’s	gonna	happen,	Ilk,	sooner	or	later,	it’s	gonna	happen.’
Reccanto	Ilk	squinted	across	at	the	man.	‘What,	they	gonna	kill	you	in	your
sleep?’
‘Don’t	be	an	idiot.	One	a	them’s	gonna	ask	me	to	forever-marry	her.’
‘And	then	she’ll	kill	you	in	your	sleep.	And	then	we	can	all	slice	up	your
share.’
‘You	think	I	didn’t	see	how	you	gropered	Sweetie?’
‘How	could	you?	You	was	driving!’
‘There	ain’t	nothing	that	I	don’t	see,	Ilk.	That’s	what	makes	me	such	a
goodiferous	driver.’
‘She’s	got	the	nicest	handholds.’
‘Watch	what	you’re	doing	with	my	future	foreverwife.’
‘Could	be	Faint	you	end	up	with,	which	means	I	can	do	what	I	like	with
Sweetie.’


Glanno	Tarp	loosed	a	loud	belch.	‘We	should	make	up	something	to	eat.
Breakfast,	so	when	they’re	finished	jawbering	over	there	we	can	up	and	get	on
our	way.’
‘Wherever	that	is.’
‘Wherever	don’t	matter.	Never	has	and	never	will.’
Reccanto	Ilk	grinned.	‘Right.	It	ain’t	the	destination	that	counts…’
And	together	they	added,	‘It’s	the	journey!’
Faint	and	Sweetest	Sufferance	looked	over,	both	scowling.	‘Not	that	again!’
Faint	called.	‘Just	stop	it,	you	two!	Stop	it	or	we’ll	kill	you	in	your	sleep!’
Reccanto	Ilk	nudged	Glanno	Tarp.
	
Mappo	crouched,	rocking	on	the	balls	of	his	broad	feet,	waiting	for	Master
Quell	to	finish	his	muttered	incantation	against	pain.	He	sympathized,	since	it
was	clear	that	the	mage	was	suffering,	his	face	pale	and	drawn,	forehead	slick
with	sweat,	his	hands	trembling.
That	anyone	would	choose	such	a	profession,	given	the	terrible	cost,	was	a
difficult	notion	to	accept.	Was	coin	worth	this?	He	could	not	understand	that
sort	of	thinking.
What	held	real	value	in	this	world?	In	any	world?	Friendship,	the	gifts	of
love	and	compassion.	The	honour	one	accorded	the	life	of	another	person.
None	of	this	could	be	bought	with	wealth.	It	seemed	to	him	such	a	simple	truth.
Yet	he	knew	that	its	very	banality	was	fuel	for	sneering	cynicism	and	mockery.
Until	such	things	were	taken	away,	until	the	price	of	their	loss	came	to	be
personal,	in	some	terrible,	devastating	arrival	into	one’s	life.	Only	at	that
moment	of	profound	extremity	did	the	contempt	wash	down	from	that	truth,
revealing	it	bare,	undeniable.
All	the	truths	that	mattered	were	banal.
Yet	here	was	another	truth.	He	had	paid	for	this	journey.	His	coin	bought
this	man’s	pain.	The	exchange	was	imbalanced,	and	so	Mappo	grieved	for
Master	Quell,	and	would	not	shy	away	from	his	own	guilt.	Honour	meant,	after
all,	a	preparedness,	a	willingness	to	weigh	and	measure,	to	judge	rightful
balance	with	no	hand	tilting	the	scales.
And	so,	they	all	here	were	paying	to	serve	Mappo’s	need,	this	journey
through	warrens.	Another	burden	he	must	accept.	If	he	could.
The	formidable	warrior	sitting	beside	him	stirred	then	and	said,	‘I	think	I
see	now	why	the	Trygalle	loses	so	many	shareholders,	Master	Quell.	By	the
Abyss,	there	must	be	warrens	where	one	can	journey	through	in	peace?’
Master	Quell	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘Realms	resist,	Gruntle.	We	are	like	a


splash	of	water	in	hot	oil.	It’s	all	I	can	do	to	not…bounce	us	off.	Mages	can
push	themselves	into	their	chosen	warrens	–	it’s	not	easy,	it’s	a	game	of	subtle
persuasion	most	of	the	time.	Or	a	modest	assertion	of	will.	You	don’t	want	to
blast	a	hole	from	one	realm	to	the	next,	because	that’s	likely	to	go	out	of
control.	It	can	devour	a	mage	in	an	instant.’	He	looked	up	at	them	with
bloodshot	eyes.	‘We	can’t	do	it	that	way.’	He	waved	a	weak	hand	at	the	carriage
behind	him.	‘We	arrive	like	an	insult.	We	are	an	insult.	Like	a	white-hot	spear
point,	we	punch	through,	race	along	our	wild	path,	and	all	that	we	leave	in	our
wake	I	need	to	make	sure	is,	er,	cauterized.	Seared	shut.	Failing	that,	a	rush	of
power	explodes	behind	us,	and	that’s	a	wave	no	mortal	can	ride	for	long.’
Precious	Thimble	spoke	from	behind	Mappo.	‘You	must	be	High	Mages,
then,	one	and	all.’
To	her	observation,	Master	Quell	nodded.	‘I	admit,	it’s	starting	to	trouble
me,	this	way	of	travel.	I	think	we’re	scarring	the	whole	damned	universe.
We’re	making	existence…bleed.	Oh,	just	a	seep	here	and	there,	amidst
whatever	throbs	of	pain	reality	might	possess.	In	any	case,	that’s	why	there’s	no
peaceful	path,	Gruntle.	Denizens	in	every	realm	are	driven	to	annihilate	us.’
‘You	said	we	did	not	even	reach	Hood’s	Gate,’	the	barbed	man	said	after	a
moment.	‘And	yet…’
‘Aye.’	He	spat	on	to	the	sand.	‘The	dead	sleep	no	more.	What	a	damned
mess.’
‘Find	us	the	nearest	land	in	our	own	world,’	said	Mappo.	‘I	will	walk	from
there.	Make	my	own	way—’
‘We	stay	true	to	the	contract,	Trell.	We’ll	deliver	you	where	you	want	to	go
—’
‘Not	at	the	price	of	you	and	your	companions	possibly	dying	–	I	cannot
accept	that,	Master	Quell.’
‘We	don’t	do	refunds.’
‘I	do	not	ask	for	one.’
Master	Quell	rose	shakily.	‘We’ll	see	after	our	next	leg.	For	now,	it’s	time
for	breakfast.	There’s	nothing	worse	than	heaving	when	there’s	nothing	in	the
gut	to	heave.’
Gruntle	also	straightened.	‘You	have	decided	on	a	new	path?’
Quell	grimaced.	‘Look	around,	Gruntle.	It’s	been	decided	for	us.’
Mappo	rose	and	remained	at	Gruntle’s	side	as	Quell	staggered	to	his	crew,
who	were	gathered	round	a	brazier	they	had	dragged	out	from	the	belly	of	the
carriage.	The	Trell	squinted	at	the	modest	plot	of	land.	‘What	did	he	mean?’	he
asked.
Gruntle	shrugged.	When	he	smiled	at	Mappo	his	fangs	gleamed.	‘Since	I


have	to	guess,	Trell,	I’d	say	we’re	going	for	a	swim.’
And	Precious	Thimble	snorted.	‘Mael’s	realm.	And	you	two	thought	Hood
was	bad.’
	
When	she	was	four	years	old,	Precious	Thimble	was	given	a	breathing	tube
and	buried	in	peat,	where	she	remained	for	two	days	and	one	night.	She
probably	died.	Most	of	them	did,	but	the	soul	remained	in	the	dead	body,
trapped	by	the	peat	and	its	dark,	sorcerous	qualities.	This	was	how	the	old
witches	explained	things.	A	child	must	be	given	into	the	peat,	into	that	unholy
union	of	earth	and	water,	and	the	soul	must	be	broken	free	of	the	flesh	it	dwelt
within,	for	only	then	could	that	soul	travel,	only	then	could	that	soul	wander
free	in	the	realm	of	dreams.
She	had	few	memories	of	that	time	in	the	peat.	Perhaps	she	screamed,
sought	to	thrash	in	panic.	The	ropes	that	bound	her,	that	would	be	used	to	pull
her	free	at	dusk	of	the	second	day,	had	left	deep	burns	on	her	wrists	and	her
neck,	and	these	burns	had	not	come	from	the	gentle,	measured	pressure	when
the	witches	had	drawn	her	back	into	the	world.	It	was	also	whispered	that
sometimes	the	spirits	that	lurked	in	the	peat	sought	to	steal	the	child’s	body,	to
make	it	a	place	of	their	own.	And	the	witches	who	sat	guarding	the	temporary
grave	told	of	times	when	the	rope	–	its	ends	wrapped	about	their	wrists	–
suddenly	grew	taut,	and	a	battle	would	then	begin,	between	the	witches	of	the
surface	and	the	spirits	of	the	deep.	Sometimes,	it	was	admitted,	the	witches	lost,
the	ropes	were	gnawed	unto	breaking,	and	the	child	was	pulled	into	the	foul
deep,	emerging	only	once	every	year,	on	the	Night	of	the	Awakened.	Children
with	blue-brown	skin	and	hollowed-out	eye	sockets,	with	hair	the	colour	of
rust	or	blood,	with	long	polished	nails	–	walking	the	swamp	and	singing	songs
of	the	earth	that	could	drive	a	mortal	mad.
Had	spirits	come	for	her?	The	witches	would	not	say.	Were	the	burns	on
her	skin	the	result	of	panic,	or	something	else?	She	did	not	know.
Her	memories	of	that	time	were	few	and	visceral.	The	weight	on	her	chest.
The	seeping	cold.	The	taste	of	fetid	water	in	her	mouth,	the	stinging	in	her
squeezed-shut	eyes.	And	the	sounds	she	could	hear,	terrible	trickling	sounds,
like	the	rush	of	fluids	in	the	veins	of	the	earth.	The	thumps	and	crunches,	the
crackling	approach	of…things.
It	was	said	there	was	no	air	in	the	peat.	That	not	even	her	skin	could	breathe
–	and	such	breathing	was	necessary	to	all	life.	And	so	she	must	have	died	in
truth.
Since	then,	at	night	when	she	slept,	she	could	rise	from	her	flesh,	could


hover,	invisible,	above	her	motionless	body.	And	look	down	in	admiration.	She
was	beautiful	indeed,	as	if	something	of	the	child	she	had	been	never	aged,	was
immune	to	growing	old.	A	quality	that	made	men	desperate	to	claim	her,	not	as
an	equal,	alas,	but	as	a	possession.	And	the	older	the	man	the	greater	the	need.
When	she	had	made	this	discovery,	about	herself	and	about	the	men	who
most	desired	her,	she	was	disgusted.	Why	give	this	gorgeous	body	to	such
wrinkled,	pathetic	creatures?	She	would	not.	Ever.	Yet	she	found	it	difficult	to
defend	herself	against	such	needy	hunters	of	youth	–	oh,	she	could	curse	them
into	misery,	she	could	poison	them	and	see	them	die	in	great	pain,	but	such
things	only	led	her	to	pity,	the	soft	kind	not	the	nasty	kind,	which	made	being
cruel	just	that	much	harder.
She	had	found	her	solution	in	the	two	young	Bole	brothers.	Barely	out	of
their	teens,	neither	one	well	suited	to	staying	in	the	Mott	Irregulars,	for	certain
reasons	over	which	she	need	not	concern	herself.	And	both	of	them	gloriously
in	love	with	her.
It	did	not	matter	that	they	barely	had	a	single	brain	between	them.	They
were	Boles,	ferocious	against	mages	and	magic	of	any	kind,	and	born	with	the
salamander	god’s	gift	of	survival.	They	protected	her	in	all	the	battles	one
could	imagine,	from	out-and-out	fighting	to	the	devious	predations	of	old	men.
When	she	was	done	admiring	her	own	body,	she	would	float	over	to	where
they	slept	and	look	down	upon	their	slack	faces,	on	the	gaping	mouths	from
which	snores	groaned	out	in	wheezing	cadence,	the	threads	of	drool	and	the
twitching	eyelids.	Her	pups.	Her	guard	dogs.	Her	deadly	hounds.
Yet	now,	on	this	night	with	the	tropical	stars	peering	down,	Precious
Thimble	felt	a	growing	unease.	This	Trygalle	venture	she’d	decided	on	–	this
whim	–	was	proving	far	deadlier	than	she	had	expected.	In	fact,	she’d	almost
lost	one	of	them	in	Hood’s	realm.	And	losing	one	of	them	would	be…bad.	It
would	free	the	other	one	to	close	in	and	that	she	didn’t	want,	not	at	all.	And	one
guard	dog	wasn’t	nearly	as	effective	as	two.
Maybe,	just	maybe,	she’d	gone	too	far	this	time.
	
Gruntle	opened	his	eyes,	and	watched	as	the	faintly	glowing	emanation	floated
over	to	hover	above	the	sleeping	forms	of	the	Bole	brothers,	where	it	lingered
for	a	time	before	returning	to	sink	back	down	into	the	form	of	Precious
Thimble.
From	nearby	he	heard	the	Trell’s	soft	grunt,	and	then,	‘What	game	does
she	play	at,	I	wonder…’
Gruntle	thought	to	reply.	Instead,	sleep	took	him	suddenly,	pouncing,


tumbling	his	mind	away	and	down,	spitting	him	out	like	a	mangled	rat	into	a
damp	glade	of	high	grass.	The	sun	blazed	down	like	a	god’s	enraged	eye.
Feeling	battered,	misused,	he	rose	on	to	all	fours	–	a	position	that	did	not	feel
at	all	awkward,	or	strike	him	as	unusual.
Solid	jungle	surrounded	the	clearing,	from	which	came	the	sounds	of
countless	birds,	monkeys	and	insects	–	a	cacophony	so	loud	and	insistent	that	a
growl	of	irritation	rose	from	deep	in	his	throat.
All	at	once	the	nearest	sounds	ceased,	a	cocoon	of	silence	broken	only	by
the	hum	of	bees	and	a	pair	of	long-tailed	hummingbirds	dancing	in	front	of	an
orchid	–	sprites	that	then	raced	off	in	a	beating	whirr	of	wings.
Gruntle	felt	his	hackles	rise,	stiff	and	prickling	on	the	back	of	his	neck	–
too	fierce	for	a	human	–	and	looking	down	he	saw	the	sleek	banded	forelimbs
of	a	tiger	where	his	arms	and	hands	should	have	been.
Another	one	of	these	damned	dreams.	Listen,	Trake,	if	you	want	me	to	be
just	like	you,	stop	playing	these	scenes	for	me.	I’ll	be	a	tiger	if	that’s	what	you
want	–	just	don’t	confine	it	to	my	dreams.	I	wake	up	feeling	clumsy	and	slow
and	I	don’t	like	it.	I	wake	up	remembering	nothing	but	freedom.
Something	was	approaching.	Things…three,	no,	five.	Not	big,	not
dangerous.	He	slowly	swung	his	head	round,	narrowing	his	gaze.
The	creatures	that	came	to	the	edge	of	the	clearing	were	somewhere
between	apes	and	humans.	Small	as	adolescents,	lithe	and	sleek,	with	fine	fur
thickening	at	the	armpits	and	crotch.	The	two	males	carried	short	curved
batons	of	some	sort,	fire-hardened,	with	inset	fangs	from	some	large
carnivore.	The	females	wielded	spears,	one	of	them	holding	her	spear	in	one
hand	and	a	broad	flint	axe	head	in	the	other,	which	she	tossed	into	the	clearing.
The	object	landed	with	a	thump,	flattening	the	grasses,	halfway	between
Gruntle	and	the	band.
Gruntle	realized,	with	a	faint	shock,	that	he	knew	the	taste	of	these
creatures	–	their	hot	flesh,	their	blood,	the	saltiness	of	their	sweat.	In	this	form,
in	this	place	and	in	this	time,	he	had	hunted	them,	had	pulled	them	down,
hearing	their	piteous	cries	as	his	jaws	closed	fatally	round	their	necks.
This	time,	however,	he	was	not	hungry,	and	it	seemed	they	knew	it.
Awe	flickered	in	their	eyes,	their	mouths	twisting	into	strange	expressions,
and	all	at	once	one	of	the	women	was	speaking.	The	language	trilled,
punctuated	by	clicks	and	glottal	stops.
And	Gruntle	understood	her.
‘Beast	of	darkness	and	fire,	hunter	in	dark	and	light,	fur	of	night	and
motion	in	grasses,	god	who	takes,	see	this	our	gift	and	spare	us	for	we	are	weak
and	few	and	this	land	is	not	ours,	this	land	is	the	journey	for	we	dream	of	the


shore,	where	food	is	plenty	and	the	birds	cry	in	the	heat	of	the	sun.’
Gruntle	found	himself	sliding	forward,	silent	as	a	thought,	and	he	was	life
and	power	bound	in	a	single	breath.	Forward,	until	the	axe	blade	was	at	his
taloned	paws.	Head	lowering,	nostrils	flaring	as	he	inhaled	the	scent	of	stone
and	sweat,	the	edges	where	old	blood	remained,	where	grasses	had	polished
the	flint,	the	urine	that	had	been	splashed	upon	it.
These	creatures	wanted	to	claim	this	glade	for	their	own.
They	were	begging	permission,	and	maybe	something	more.	Something
like…protection.
‘The	leopard	tracks	us	and	challenges	you,’	the	woman	sang,	‘but	she	will
not	cross	your	path.	She	will	flee	your	scent	for	you	are	the	master	here,	the
god,	the	unchallenged	hunter	of	the	forest.	Last	night,	she	took	my	child	–	we
have	lost	all	our	children.	Perhaps	we	will	be	the	last.	Perhaps	we	will	never
find	the	shore	again.	But	if	our	flesh	must	feed	the	hungry,	then	let	it	be	you
who	grows	strong	with	our	blood.
‘Tonight,	if	you	come	to	take	one	of	us,	take	me.	I	am	the	eldest.	I	bear	no
more	children.	I	am	useless.’	She	hunched	down	then,	discarding	her	spear,	and
sank	into	the	grasses,	where	she	rolled	on	to	her	back,	exposing	her	throat.
They	were	mad,	Gruntle	decided.	Driven	insane	by	the	terrors	of	the
jungle,	where	they	were	strangers,	lost,	seeking	some	distant	coastline.	And	as
they	journeyed,	every	night	delivered	horror.
But	this	was	a	dream.	From	some	ancient	time.	And	even	if	he	sought	to
guide	them	to	the	shore,	he	would	awaken	long	before	that	journey	was
completed.	Awaken,	and	so	abandon	them	to	their	fates.	And	what	if	he	grew
hungry	in	this	next	moment?	What	if	his	instinct	exploded	within	him,
launching	him	at	this	hapless	female,	closing	his	jaws	on	her	throat?
Was	this	where	the	notion	of	human	sacrifice	came	from?	When	nature
eyed	them	avid	with	hunger?	When	they	had	naught	but	sharpened	sticks	and	a
smouldering	fire	to	protect	them?
He	would	not	kill	them	this	night.
He	would	find	something	else	to	kill.	Gruntle	set	off,	into	the	jungle.	A
thousand	scents	filled	him,	a	thousand	muted	noises	whispered	in	the	deep
shadows.	He	carried	his	massive	weight	effortlessly,	silent	as	he	padded
forward.	Beneath	the	canopy	the	world	was	dusk	and	so	it	would	ever	remain,
yet	he	saw	everything,	the	flit	of	a	green-winged	mantis,	the	scuttle	of	woodlice
in	the	humus,	the	gliding	escape	of	a	millipede.	He	slipped	across	the	path	of
deer,	saw	where	they	had	fed	on	dark-leaved	shoots.	He	passed	a	rotted	log	that
had	been	torn	apart	and	pushed	aside,	the	ground	beneath	ravaged	by	the
questing	snouts	of	boar.


Some	time	later,	with	night	descending,	he	found	the	spoor	he	had	been
seeking.	Acrid,	pungent,	both	familiar	and	strange.	It	was	sporadic,	proof	that
the	creature	that	left	it	was	cautious,	taking	to	the	trees	in	its	moments	of	rest.
A	female.
He	slowed	his	pace	as	he	tracked	the	beast.	All	light	was	gone	now,	every
colour	shifted	into	hues	of	grey.	If	she	discovered	him	she	would	flee.	But	then,
the	only	beast	that	wouldn’t	was	the	elephant,	and	he	had	no	interest	in	hunting
that	wise	leviathan	with	its	foul	sense	of	humour.
Edging	forward,	one	soft	step	at	a	time,	he	came	upon	the	place	where	she
had	made	a	kill.	A	wapiti,	its	panic	a	bitter	breath	in	the	air.	The	humus	scuffed
by	its	tiny	hoofs,	a	smear	of	blood	on	curled	black	leaves.	Halting,	settling
down,	Gruntle	lifted	his	gaze.
And	found	her.	She	had	drawn	her	prey	up	on	to	a	thick	branch	from	which
lianas	depended	in	a	cascade	of	night	blossoms.	The	wapiti	–	or	what	remained
of	it	–	was	draped	across	the	bole,	and	she	was	lying	along	the	branch’s	length,
lambent	eyes	fixed	upon	Gruntle.
This	leopard	was	well	suited	to	hunting	at	night	–	her	coat	was	black	on
black,	the	spots	barely	discernible.
She	regarded	him	without	fear,	and	this	gave	Gruntle	pause.
A	voice	then	murmured	in	his	skull,	sweet	and	dark.	‘Go	on	your	way,	Lord.
There	is	not	enough	to	share…even	if	I	so	desired,	which	of	course	I	do	not.’
‘I	have	come	for	you,’	Gruntle	replied.
Her	eyes	widened	and	he	saw	muscles	coiling	along	her	shoulders.	‘Do	all
beasts	know	riders,	then?’
For	a	moment	Gruntle	did	not	comprehend	her	question,	and	then
understanding	arrived	with	sudden	heat,	sudden	interest.	‘Has	your	soul
travelled	far,	my	lady?’
‘Through	time.	Through	unknown	distances.	This	is	where	my	dreams	take
me	every	night.	Ever	hunting,	ever	tasting	blood,	ever	shying	from	the	path	of
the	likes	of	you,	Lord.’
‘I	am	summoned	by	prayer,’	Gruntle	said,	knowing	even	as	he	said	it	that	it
was	the	truth,	that	the	half-human	creatures	he	had	left	behind	did	indeed	call
upon	him,	as	if	to	invite	the	killer	answered	some	innate	refusal	of	random
chance.	He	was	summoned	to	kill,	he	realized,	to	give	proof	to	the	notion	of
fate.
‘Curious	idea,	Lord.’
‘Spare	them,	Lady.’
‘Who?’
‘You	know	of	whom	I	speak.	In	this	time,	there	is	but	one	creature	that	can


voice	prayers.’
He	sensed	wry	amusement.	‘You	are	wrong	in	that.	Although	the	others
have	no	interest	in	imagining	beasts	as	gods	and	goddesses.’
‘Others?’
‘Many	nights	away	from	this	place,	there	are	mountains,	and	in	them	can	be
found	fastnesses	where	dwell	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	There	is	a	vast	river	that
runs	to	a	warm	ocean,	and	on	its	banks	can	be	found	the	pit-cities	of	the
Forkrul	Assail.	There	are	solitary	towers	where	lone	Jaghut	live,	waiting	to	die.
There	are	the	villages	of	the	Tartheno	Toblakai	and	their	tundra-dwelling
cousins,	the	Neph	Trell.’
‘You	know	this	world	far	better	than	I	do,	Lady.’
‘Do	you	still	intend	to	kill	me?’
‘Will	you	cease	hunting	the	half-humans?’
‘As	you	like,	but	you	must	know,	there	are	times	when	this	beast	has	no
rider.	There	are	times	too,	I	suspect,	when	the	beast	you	now	ride	also	hunts
alone.’
‘I	understand.’
She	rose	from	her	languid	perch,	and	made	her	way	down	the	trunk	of	the
tree	head	first,	landing	lightly	on	the	soft	forest	floor.	‘Why	are	they	so
important	to	you?’
‘I	do	not	know.	Perhaps	I	pity	them.’
‘For	our	kind,	Lord,	there	is	no	room	for	pity.’
‘I	disagree.	It	is	what	we	can	give	when	we	ride	the	souls	of	these	beasts.
Hood	knows,	it’s	all	we	can	give.’
‘Hood?’
‘The	God	of	Death.’
‘You	come	from	a	strange	world,	I	think.’
Now	this	was	startling.	Gruntle	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	and	then	he
asked,	‘Where	are	you	from,	Lady?’
‘A	city	called	New	Morn.’
‘I	know	of	a	ruin	named	Morn.’
‘My	city	is	no	ruin.’
‘Perhaps	you	exist	in	a	time	before	the	coming	of	Hood.’
‘Perhaps.’	She	stretched,	the	glow	of	her	eyes	thinning	to	slits.	‘I	am
leaving	soon,	Lord.	If	you	are	here	when	I	do,	the	beast	that	remains	will	not
take	kindly	to	your	presence.’
‘Oh?	And	would	she	be	so	foolish	as	to	attack	me?’
‘And	die?	No.	But	I	would	not	curse	her	with	terror.’
‘Ah,	is	that	pity,	then?’


‘No,	it	is	love.’
Yes,	he	could	see	how	one	could	come	to	love	such	magnificent	animals,
and	find	the	riding	of	their	souls	a	most	precious	gift.	‘I	will	go	now,	Lady.	Do
you	think	we	will	meet	again?’
‘It	does	seem	we	share	the	night,	Lord.’
She	slipped	away,	and	even	Gruntle’s	extraordinary	vision	failed	him	from
tracking	her	beyond	a	few	strides.	He	swung	about	and	padded	off	in	the
opposite	direction.	Yes,	he	could	feel	his	own	grip	here	weakening,	and	soon
he	would	return	to	his	own	world.	That	pallid,	stale	existence,	where	he	lived
as	if	half	blind,	half	deaf,	deadened	and	clumsy.
He	allowed	himself	a	deep	cough	of	anger,	silencing	the	unseen	denizens
on	all	sides.
Until	some	brave	monkey,	high	overhead,	flung	a	stick	at	him.	The	thump
as	it	struck	the	ground	near	his	left	hind	leg	made	him	start	and	shy	away.
From	the	darkness	overhead	he	heard	chittering	laughter.
	
The	storm	of	chaos	cavorted	into	his	vision,	consuming	half	the	sky	with	a
swirling	madness	of	lead,	grainy	black	and	blazing	tendrils	of	argent.	He	could
see	the	gust	front	tearing	the	ground	up	in	a	frenzied	wall	of	dust,	rocks	and
dirt,	growing	ever	closer.
Imminent	oblivion	did	not	seem	so	bad,	as	far	as	Ditch	was	concerned.	He
was	being	dragged	by	the	chain	shackled	to	his	right	ankle.	Most	of	his	skin
had	been	scraped	away	–	the	white	bone	and	cartilage	of	his	remaining	elbow,
studded	with	grit,	was	visible	within	haloes	of	red.	His	knees	were	larger
versions,	and	the	shackle	was	slowly	carving	through	his	ankle	and	foot	bones.
He	wondered	what	would	happen	when	that	foot	was	finally	torn	off	–	how	it
would	feel.	He’d	lie	there,	motionless	at	last,	perhaps	watching	that	shackle
tumble	and	twist	and	stutter	away.	He’d	be…free.
The	torment	of	this	existence	should	not	include	pain.	That	was	unfair.	Of
course,	most	of	that	pain	was	fading	now	–	he	was	too	far	gone	to	curl	and
flinch,	to	gasp	and	sob	–	but	the	memories	remained,	like	fire	in	his	skull.
Pulled	onward	over	loose	stones,	their	sharp	edges	rolling	up	his	back,
gouging	new	furrows	through	the	pulped	meat,	knuckling	against	the	base	of
his	skull	to	tear	away	the	last	few	snarls	of	hair	and	scalp.	And	as	the	chain
snagged,	only	to	give	and	twist	him	round,	he	stared	again	and	again	upon	that
storm	in	their	wake.
Songs	of	suffering	from	the	groaning	wagon	somewhere	ahead,	an
unending	chorus	of	misery	ever	drifting	back.


Too	bad,	he	reflected,	that	the	huge	demon	had	not	found	him	in	the
moments	following	his	collapse,	had	not	lifted	him	to	its	shoulder	–	not	that	it
could	carry	any	more	than	it	already	had	been	carrying.	But	even	if	it	had	done
little	more	than	drag	him	to	one	side,	then	the	edge	of	the	wagon’s	massive
wheel	would	not	have	crushed	his	right	arm	and	shoulder,	grinding	both	into
pulp	until	threads	of	gristle	were	all	that	held	it	to	his	body.	After	that,	all	hopes
–	faint	as	they	had	been	–	of	rising	again	to	add	his	strength	to	the	procession
had	vanished.	He	had	become	yet	one	more	dead	weight,	dragged	in	the	wake,
adding	to	the	suffering	of	those	who	trudged	on.
Nearby,	almost	parallel	to	him,	a	huge	chain	sheathed	in	moss	ended	in	the
remnants	of	a	dragon.	Wings	like	tattered	sails,	spars	snapped	and	dangling,
the	mostly	skinless	head	dragged	behind	a	shredded	neck.	When	he	had	first
seen	it	he	had	been	shocked,	horrified.	Now,	each	time	it	came	into	view,	he	felt
a	wave	of	dread.	That	such	a	creature	should	have	failed	was	proof	of	the
desperate	extremity	now	plaguing	them.
Anomander	Rake	had	stopped	killing.	The	legion	was	failing.	Annihilation
edged	ever	closer.
Life	fears	chaos.	It	was	ever	thus.	We	fear	it	more	than	anything	else,
because	it	is	anathema.	Order	battles	against	dissolution.	Order	negotiates
cooperation	as	a	mechanism	of	survival,	on	every	scale,	from	a	patch	of	skin	to
an	entire	menagerie	of	interdependent	creatures.	That	cooperation,	of	course,
may	not	of	essence	be	necessarily	peaceful	–	a	minute	exchange	of	failures	to
ensure	greater	successes.
Yes,	as	I	am	dragged	along	here,	at	the	very	end	of	my	existence,	I	begin	to
understand…
See	me,	see	this	gift	of	contemplation.
Rake,	what	have	you	done?
A	calloused	hand	closed	about	his	remaining	arm,	lifted	him	clear	of	the
ground,	and	he	was	being	carried	forward,	closer	to	that	crawling	wagon.
‘There	is	no	point.’
‘That,’	replied	a	deep,	measured	voice,	‘is	without	relevance.’
‘I	am	not	worth—’
‘Probably	not,	but	I	intend	to	find	you	room	on	that	wagon.’
Ditch	hacked	a	ragged	laugh.	‘Just	tear	my	foot	off,	good	sir,	and	leave
me.’
‘No.	There	may	be	need	for	you,	mage.’
Need?	Now	that	was	an	absurd	thing	to	say.	‘Who	are	you?’
‘Draconus.’
Ditch	laughed	a	second	time.	‘I	looked	for	you…seems	centuries	ago,


now.’
‘Now	you	have	found	me.’
‘I	thought	you	might	know	a	way	of	escaping.	Now,	isn’t	that	funny?	After
all,	if	you	had,	you	would	not	still	be	here,	would	you?’
‘That	seems	logical.’
An	odd	reply.	‘Draconus.’
‘What?’
‘Are	you	a	logical	man?’
‘Not	in	the	least.	Now,	here	we	are.’
The	sight	that	greeted	Ditch	as	he	was	heaved	round	to	face	forward	was,	if
anything,	even	more	terrifying	than	anything	else	he	had	witnessed	since
arriving	in	the	accursed	realm	of	Dragnipur.	A	wall	of	bodies,	projecting	feet
jammed	amongst	staring	faces,	the	occasional	arm	hanging	out,	twitching,
dripping	sweat.	Here	a	knee,	there	a	shoulder.	Tangles	of	sodden	hair,	fingers
with	dagger-long	nails.	Human,	demon,	Forkrul	Assail,	K’Chain	Che’Malle,
others	of	natures	Ditch	could	not	even	identify.	He	saw	one	hand	and	forearm
that	appeared	to	be	made	entirely	of	metal,	sockets	and	hinges	and	rods	and	a
carapace	of	iron	skin	visible	in	mottled,	pitted	patches.	Worst	of	all	were	the
staring	eyes,	peering	from	faces	that	seemed	to	have	surrendered	every
possible	expression,	leaving	behind	something	slack	and	dull.
‘Make	space	up	top!’	bellowed	Draconus.
Cries	of	‘No	room!’	and	‘Nowhere	left!’	greeted	him.
Ignoring	such	protests,	Draconus	began	climbing	the	wall	of	flesh.	Faces
twisted	in	rage	and	pain,	eyes	widened	in	affronted	disbelief,	hands	clawed	at
him	or	beat	him	with	fists,	but	the	huge	warrior	was	indifferent	to	all	of	it.
Ditch	could	feel	the	man’s	enormous	strength,	an	implacable	certainty	to	every
movement	that	bespoke	something	unconquerable.	He	was	awed	into	silence.
Higher	they	climbed,	and	shadows	raced	in	crazed	patterns	now	in	the
churning	glare	of	the	storm,	as	if	the	natural	gloom	of	the	world	clung	close	to
its	surface,	and	here,	high	above	it,	the	air	was	clearer,	sharper.
The	rocking	crawl	of	the	wagon	below	was	felt	now	in	the	swaying	of	the
wall	near	the	top,	a	motion	groaned	out	in	the	slick	shifting	of	flesh	and	in	a
wavering	song	of	dull,	rhythmic	moans	and	grunts.	The	wall	finally	sloped
inward,	and	Ditch	was	tugged	over	hummocks	of	skin,	the	bodies	so	tightpacked	that	the	surface	beneath	him	seemed	solid,	an	undulating	landscape,
sheathed	in	sweat	and	flecks	of	ash	and	grime.	Most	of	those	lying	here	had
settled	on	their	stomachs,	as	if	to	stare	at	the	sky	–	that	would	vanish	for	ever	as
soon	as	the	next	body	arrived	–	was	too	much	to	bear.
Draconus	rolled	him	into	a	depression	between	two	backs,	one	facing	one


way,	the	other	in	the	opposite	direction.	A	man,	a	woman	–	the	sudden	contact
with	the	woman’s	soft	flesh	as	he	was	wedged	against	her	startled	an
awakening	in	Ditch	and	he	cursed.
‘Take	what	you	can,	mage,’	said	Draconus.
Ditch	heard	him	leaving.
He	could	make	out	distinct	voices	now,	odd	nearby	sounds.	Someone	was
scrabbling	closer	and	Ditch	felt	a	faint	tug	on	his	chain.
‘Almost	off,	then.	Almost	off.’
Ditch	twisted	round	to	see	who	had	spoken.
A	Tiste	Andii.	He	was	clearly	blind,	and	both	sockets	bore	the	terrible
scarring	of	burns	–	only	deliberate	torture	could	be	that	precise.	His	legs	were
gone,	stumps	visible	just	below	his	hips.	He	was	dragging	himself	up
alongside	Ditch,	and	the	mage	saw	that	the	creature	held	in	one	hand	a	long
sharpened	bone	with	a	blackened	point.
‘Plan	on	killing	me?’	Ditch	asked.
The	Tiste	Andii	paused,	lifted	his	head.	Straggly	black	hair	framed	a
narrow,	hollowed-out	face.	‘What	sort	of	eyes	do	you	have,	friend?’
‘Working	ones.’
A	momentary	smile,	and	then	he	squirmed	closer.
Ditch	managed	to	shift	round	so	that	his	ruined	shoulder	and	arm	were
beneath	him,	freeing	his	undamaged	arm.	‘It’s	crazy,	but	I	still	intend	to	defend
myself.	Though	death	–	if	it	even	exists	here	–	would	be	a	mercy.’
‘It	doesn’t,’	replied	the	Tiste	Andii.	‘I	could	stab	you	for	the	next	thousand
years	and	do	nothing	more	than	leave	you	full	of	holes.	Full	of	holes.’	He
paused	and	the	smile	flickered	once	more.	‘Yet	I	must	stab	you	anyway,	since
you’ve	made	a	mess	of	things.	A	mess,	a	mess,	a	mess.’
‘I	have?	Explain.’
‘There’s	no	point,	unless	you	have	eyes.’
‘I	have	them,	you	damned	fool!’
‘But	can	they	see?’
He	caught	the	emphasis	on	the	last	word.	Could	he	awaken	magic	here?
Could	he	scrape	something	from	his	warren	–	enough	to	attenuate	his	vision?
There	was	nothing	to	do	but	try.	‘Wait	a	moment,’	he	said.	Oh,	the	warren	was
there,	yes,	as	impervious	as	a	wall	–	yet	he	sensed	something	he	had	not
expected.	Cracks,	fissures,	things	bleeding	in,	bleeding	out.
The	effects	of	chaos,	he	realized.	Gods,	it’s	all	breaking	down!	Would	there
be	a	time,	he	wondered	–	an	instant,	in	the	very	moment	that	the	storm	finally
struck	them	–	when	he	would	find	his	warren	within	reach?	Could	he	escape
before	he	was	obliterated	along	with	everyone	and	everything	else?


‘How	long,	how	long,	how	long?’	asked	the	Tiste	Andii.
Ditch	found	he	could	indeed	scrape	a	residue	of	power.	A	few	words
muttered	under	his	breath,	and	all	at	once	he	saw	what	had	been	hidden	before
–	he	saw,	yes,	the	flesh	he	was	lying	on.
A	mass	of	tattoos	blanketed	every	exposed	patch	of	skin,	lines	and	images
crossing	from	one	body	to	the	next,	yet	nowhere	could	he	see	solid	areas	–	all
was	made	up	of	intricate,	delicate	traceries,	patterns	within	patterns.	He	saw
borders	that	dipped	and	twisted.	He	saw	elongated	figures	with	stretched	faces
and	misshapen	torsos.	Not	a	single	body	atop	this	massive	wagon	had	been
exempted	–	barring	Ditch’s	own.
The	Tiste	Andii	must	have	heard	his	gasp,	for	he	laughed.	‘Imagine
yourself	hovering…oh,	say	fifteen	man-heights	overhead.	Fifteen	man-heights.
Overhead,	overhead.	Hovering	in	the	air,	just	beneath	the	ceiling	of
nothingness,	the	ceiling	of	nothingness.	Looking	down	upon	all	this,	all	this,
all	this.	Aye,	it	looks	awry	to	you	from	where	you	crouch,	but	from	up	there,
from	up	there,	from	up	there	–	you	will	see	no	mounds	of	flesh,	no	knobs	of
skin-stretched	bones	–	you’ll	see	no	shadows	at	all	–	only	the	scene.	The	scene,
yes,	laid	flat	you’d	swear.	You’d	swear	it	to	every	god	and	goddess	you	can
think	of.	Flat!	Laid	flat,	laid	flat!’
Ditch	struggled	to	comprehend	what	he	was	seeing	–	he	did	not	dare
attempt	what	the	Tiste	Andii	had	suggested,	fearing	the	effort	would	drive	him
mad;	no,	he	would	not	try	to	imagine	himself	plucked	free	of	his	flesh,	his	soul
floating	somewhere	overhead.	It	was	difficult	enough	to	comprehend	the
obsession	of	this	creation	–	a	creation	by	a	blind	man.	‘You’ve	been	up	here
for	a	long	time,’	Ditch	finally	said.	‘Avoiding	getting	buried.’
‘Yes	and	yes.	I	was	among	the	first	on	the	wagon.	Among	the	first.
Murdered	by	Draconus,	because	I	sought	to	wrest	Dragnipur	from	him	–	oh,
Anomandaris	Purake	was	not	the	first	to	try.	I	was.	I	was.	I	was.	And	if	I	had
won	the	sword,	why,	my	first	victim	would	have	been	Anomandaris	himself.	Is
that	not	a	bitter	joke,	friend?	It	is,	it	is.’
‘But	this’	–	Ditch	gestured	with	his	one	hand	–	‘it	has	to	be	a	recent	effort
—’
‘No,	only	the	last	layer,	the	last	layer,	the	last	layer.’
‘What	–	what	do	you	use	for	ink?’
‘Clever	question!	From	the	wagon	bloodwood,	blackwood,	the	pitch	and
the	pitch	ever	leaking	out,	ever	sweating	from	the	grain.’
‘Could	I	hover	high	up,	as	you	say,’	asked	Ditch,	‘what	scene	would	I	see?’
‘Wanderings,	Holds,	Houses,	every	god,	every	goddess,	every	spirit	worth
mentioning.	Demon	kings	and	demon	queens.	Dragons	and	Elders	–	oh,	all


there,	all	there.	All	there.	Is	this	where	you	mean	to	stay,	friend?	Is	this	where
you	mean	to	stay?’
Ditch	thought	of	this	creature	hunkered	up	against	him,	that	bone	needle
pricking	his	skin.	‘No.	I	plan	on	crawling	round,	as	much	as	I	can,	never
stopping.	Leave	me	out	of	your	scene.’
‘You	cannot	do	that!	You	will	ruin	everything!’
‘Imagine	me	invisible,	then.	Imagine	I	don’t	even	exist	–	I	will	stay	out	of
your	way.’
The	sightless	eyes	were	glistening	and	the	Tiste	Andii	was	shaking	his	head
again	and	again.
‘You	will	not	have	me,’	Ditch	said.	‘Besides,	it	will	all	be	ending	soon.’
‘Soon?	How	soon?	How	soon?	How	soon?	How	soon?’
‘The	storm	looks	to	be	no	more	than	a	league	behind	us.’
‘If	you	will	not	join	the	scene,’	the	Tiste	Andii	said,	‘I	will	push	you	off.’
‘Draconus	might	not	like	that.’
‘He	will	understand.	He	understands	more	than	you,	more	than	you,	more
and	more	and	more	than	you!’
‘Just	let	me	rest,’	said	Ditch,	‘for	a	while.	I	will	then	climb	back	down.	I
don’t	want	to	be	up	here	when	the	end	comes.	I	want	to	be	standing.	Facing	the
storm.’
‘Do	you	really	imagine	the	ritual	will	awaken	all	at	once?	Do	you	do	you
do	you?	The	flower	opens	soon,	but	the	night	is	long,	and	it	will	take	that	long,
that	long.	For	the	flower	to	open.	Open	in	the	moment	before	dawn.	Open	in
the	moment.	Draconus	chose	you	–	a	mage	–	for	the	nexus.	I	need	the	nexus.
You	are	the	nexus.	Lie	there,	be	quiet,	don’t	move.’
‘No.’
‘I	cannot	wait	long,	friend.	Crawl	about	now	if	you	like,	but	I	cannot	wait
too	long.	A	league	away!’
‘What	is	your	name?’	Ditch	asked.
‘What	matter	any	of	that?’
‘For	when	I	next	speak	to	Draconus.’
‘He	knows	me.’
‘I	don’t.’
‘I	am	Kadaspala,	brother	to	Enesdia	who	was	wife	to	Andarist.’
Andarist.	That’s	one	name	I	recognize.	‘You	wanted	to	murder	the	brother
of	your	sister ’s	husband?’
‘I	did.	For	what	he	did	to	them,	what	he	did	to	them.	For	what	he	did	to
them!’
Ditch	stared	at	the	anguish	in	the	man’s	ravaged	face.	‘Who	blinded	you,


Kadaspala?’
‘It	was	a	gift.	A	mercy.	I	did	not	comprehend	the	truth	of	that,	not	the	real
truth	of	it,	the	real	truth.	No.	Besides,	I	thought	my	inner	sight	would	be	enough
–	to	challenge	Draconus.	To	steal	Dragnipur.	I	was	wrong,	wrong.	I	was
wrong.	The	truth	is	a	gift,	a	mercy.’
‘Who	blinded	you?’
The	Tiste	Andii	flinched,	then	seemed	to	curl	into	himself.	Tears	glistened
in	the	pits	of	his	sockets.	‘I	blinded	myself,’	Kadaspala	whispered.	‘When	I	saw
what	he’d	done.	What	he’d	done.	To	his	brother.	To	my	sister.	To	my	sister.’
Suddenly,	Ditch	did	not	want	to	ask	any	more	questions	of	this	man.	He
pushed	himself	from	between	the	two	bodies.	‘I	am	going	to…explore.’
‘Come	back,	mage.	Nexus.	Come	back.	Come	back.’
We’ll	see.

With	all	this	time	to	reflect	on	things,	Apsal’ara	concluded	that	her	biggest
mistake	was	not	in	finding	her	way	into	Moon’s	Spawn.	Nor	in	discovering	the
vaults	and	the	heaps	of	magicked	stones,	ensorcelled	weapons,	armour,	the
blood-dipped	idols	and	reliquaries	from	ten	thousand	extinct	cults.	No,	her
greatest	error	in	judgement	had	been	in	trying	to	stab	Anomander	Rake	in	the
back.
He’d	been	amused	at	finding	her.	He’d	not	spoken	of	executing	her,	or
even	chaining	her	in	some	deep	crypt	for	all	eternity.	He’d	simply	asked	her
how	she	had	managed	to	break	in.	Curiosity,	more	than	a	little	wonder,	perhaps
even	some	admiration.	And	then	she	went	and	tried	to	kill	him.
The	damned	sword	had	been	out	of	its	scabbard	faster	than	an	eye-blink,
the	deadly	edge	slicing	across	her	belly	even	as	she	lunged	with	her	obsidian
dagger.
Such	stupidity.	But	lessons	only	became	lessons	when	one	has	reached	the
state	of	humility	required	to	heed	them.	When	one	is	past	all	the	egotistical
excuses	and	explanations	flung	up	to	fend	off	honest	culpability.	It	was	nature
to	attack	first,	abjuring	all	notions	of	guilt	and	shame.	Lash	out,	white	with
rage,	then	strut	away	convinced	of	one’s	own	righteousness.
She	had	long	since	left	such	imbecilic	posturing	behind.	A	journey	of
enlightenment,	and	it	had	begun	with	her	last	mortal	breath,	as	she	found
herself	lying	on	the	hard	stone	floor,	looking	up	into	the	eyes	of	Anomander
Rake,	and	seeing	his	dismay,	his	regret,	his	sorrow.
She	could	feel	the	growing	heat	of	the	storm,	could	feel	its	eternal	hunger.


Not	long	now,	and	then	all	her	efforts	would	be	for	naught.	The	kinks	of	the
chain	finally	showed	some	wear,	but	not	enough,	not	nearly	enough.	She	would
be	destroyed	along	with	everyone	else.	She	was	not	unique.	She	was,	in	fact,	no
different	from	every	other	idiot	who’d	tried	to	kill	Rake,	or	Draconus.
The	rain	trickling	down	from	the	wagon	bed	was	warmer	than	usual,	foul
with	sweat,	blood	and	worse.	It	streamed	over	her	body.	Her	skin	had	been	wet
for	so	long	it	was	coming	away	in	ragged	pieces,	white	with	death,	revealing
raw	red	meat	underneath.	She	was	rotting.
The	time	was	coming	when	she	would	have	to	drop	down	once	more,
emerge	from	under	the	wagon,	and	see	for	herself	the	arrival	of	oblivion.
There	would	be	no	pity	in	its	eyes	–	not	that	it	had	any	–	just	the	indifference
that	was	the	other	face	of	the	universe,	the	one	all	would	have	for	ever	turned
away.	The	regard	of	chaos	was	the	true	source	of	terror	–	all	the	rest	were	but
flavours,	variations.
I	was	a	child	once.	I	am	certain	of	it.	A	child.	I	have	a	memory,	one	memory
of	that	time.	On	a	barren	bank	of	a	broad	river.	The	sky	was	blue	perfection.
The	caribou	were	crossing	the	river,	in	their	tens	and	tens	of	thousands.
I	remember	their	up-thrust	heads.	I	remember	seeing	the	weaker	ones
crowded	in,	pushed	down	to	vanish	in	the	murky	water.	These	carcasses	would
wash	up	down	current,	where	the	short-nosed	bears	and	the	wolves	and	eagles
and	ravens	waited	for	them.	But	I	stood	with	others.	Father,	mother,	perhaps
sisters	and	brothers	–	just	others	–	my	eyes	on	the	vast	herd.
Their	seasonal	migration,	and	this	was	but	one	of	many	places	of	crossing.
The	caribou	often	chose	different	paths.	Still,	the	river	had	to	be	crossed,	and
the	beasts	would	mill	for	half	a	morning	on	the	bank,	until	they	plunged	into	the
current,	until	all	at	once	they	were	flooding	the	river,	a	surging	tide	of	hide	and
flesh,	of	breaths	drawn	in	and	gusted	out.
Not	even	the	beasts	display	eagerness	when	accosting	the	inevitable,	when
it	seems	numbers	alone	can	possibly	confuse	fate,	and	so	each	life	strives,
strikes	out	into	the	icy	flow.	‘Save	me.’	That	is	what	is	written	in	their	eyes.
‘Save	me	above	all	the	others.	Save	me,	so	that	I	may	live.	Give	me	this	moment,
this	day,	this	season.	I	will	follow	the	laws	of	my	kind…’
She	remembered	that	one	moment	when	she	was	a	child,	and	she
remembered	her	sense	of	awe	in	witnessing	the	crossing,	in	that	force	of
nature,	that	imposition	of	will,	its	profound	implacability.	She	remembered,
too,	the	terror	she	had	felt.
Caribou	are	not	just	caribou.	The	crossing	is	not	just	this	crossing.	The
caribou	are	all	life.	The	river	is	the	passing	world.	Life	swims	through,	riding
the	current,	swims,	drowns,	triumphs.	Life	can	ask	questions.	Life	–	some	of	it	–


can	even	ask:	how	is	it	that	I	can	ask	anything	at	all?	And:	how	is	it	that	I
believe	that	answers	answer	anything	worthwhile?	What	value	this	exchange,
this	precious	dialogue,	when	the	truth	is	unchanged,	when	some	live	for	a	time
while	others	drown,	when	in	the	next	season	there	are	new	caribou	while	others
are	for	ever	gone?
The	truth	is	unchanged.
Each	spring,	in	the	time	of	crossing,	the	river	is	in	flood.	Chaos	swirls
beneath	the	surface.	It	is	the	worst	time.
Watch	us.
The	child	had	not	wanted	to	see.	The	child	had	wailed	and	fled	inland.
Brothers	and	sisters	pursued,	laughing	maybe,	not	understanding	her	fear,	her
despair.	Someone	pursued,	anyway.	Laughing,	unless	it	was	the	river	that
laughed,	and	it	was	the	herd	of	caribou	that	surged	up	from	the	bank	and
lunged	forward,	driving	the	watchers	to	scatter,	shouting	their	surprise.
Perhaps	that	was	what	had	made	her	run.	She	wasn’t	sure.
The	memory	ended	with	her	panic,	her	cries,	her	confusion.
Lying	on	the	cross-beam,	the	wood	sweating	beneath	her,	Apsal’ara	felt
like	that	child	once	again.	The	season	was	coming.	The	river	awaited	her,	in
fullest	flood,	and	she	was	but	one	among	many,	praying	for	fate’s	confusion.
	
A	hundred	stones	flung	into	a	pond	will	shatter	the	smooth	surface,	will	launch
a	clash	of	ripples	and	waves	until	the	eye	loses	all	sense	of	order	in	what	it
sees.	And	this	discordant	moment	perturbs	the	self,	awakens	unease	in	the	spirit
and	leaves	one	restive.	So	it	was	that	morning	in	Darujhistan.	Surfaces	had
been	shattered.	People	moved	and	every	move	betrayed	agitation.	People	spoke
and	they	were	abrupt	in	their	speech	and	they	were	short	with	others,	strangers
and	dear	ones	alike.
A	squall	of	rumours	rode	the	turgid	currents,	and	some	held	more	truth
than	others,	but	all	of	them	hinted	of	something	unpleasant,	something
unwelcome	and	disorderly.	Such	sensibilities	can	grip	a	city	and	hold	tight	for
days,	sometimes	weeks,	sometimes	for	ever.	Such	sensibilities	could	spread
like	a	plague	to	infect	an	entire	nation,	an	entire	people,	leaving	them
habituated	in	their	anger,	perpetually	belligerent,	inclined	to	cruelty	and
miserly	with	their	compassion.
Blood	had	been	spilled	in	the	night.	More	corpses	than	usual	had	been
found	in	the	morning,	a	score	or	more	of	them	in	the	Estates	District,
delivering	a	thunderous	shock	to	the	coddled	highborn	citizens	in	their	walled
homes.	Spurred	by	frantic	demands	for	investigation,	the	City	Guard	brought


in	court	mages	to	conduct	magical	examinations.	Before	long	a	new	detail	was
whispered	that	widened	eyes,	that	made	citizens	gasp.	Assassins!	One	and	all	–
the	Guild	has	been	devastated!	And,	following	this,	on	a	few	faces,	a	sly	smile
of	pleasure	–	quickly	hidden	or	saved	for	private	moments,	since	one	could
never	be	too	careful.	Still,	the	evil	killers	had	clearly	taken	on	someone	nastier
than	them,	and	had	paid	for	it	with	dozens	of	lives.
Some	then	grew	somewhat	more	thoughtful	–	oh,	they	were	rare	enough	to
make	one,	well,	depressed.	None	the	less,	for	these	there	followed	a	rather
ominous	question:	precisely	who	is	in	this	city	who	can	with	impunity	cut	down
a	score	of	deadly	assassins?
As	chaotic	as	that	morning	was,	what	with	official	carriages	and	corpsewagons	rattling	this	way	and	that;	with	squads	of	guards	and	crowds	of
gawping	onlookers	and	the	hawkers	who	descended	among	them	with
sweetened	drinks	and	sticky	candies	and	whatnot;	with	all	this,	none	made	note
of	the	closed,	boarded-up	K’rul’s	Bar	with	its	freshly	washed	walls	and	flushed
gutters.
It	was	just	as	well.

Krute	of	Talient	stepped	into	his	squalid	room	and	saw	Rallick	Nom	slouched
in	a	chair.	Grunting,	Krute	walked	over	to	the	niche	that	passed	for	a	kitchen
and	set	down	the	burlap	sack	with	its	load	of	vegetables,	fruit	and	wrapped	fish.
‘Not	seen	you	much	of	late,’	he	said.
‘It’s	a	foolish	war,’	Rallick	Nom	said	without	looking	up.
‘I’m	sure	Seba	Krafar	agrees	with	you	this	morning.	They	struck,	in	what
they	must	have	imagined	was	overwhelming	force,	only	to	get	mauled.	If	this
keeps	up	Seba	will	be	Master	in	a	Guild	of	one.’
‘You	sound	foul	of	mood,	Krute.	Why	does	it	matter	to	you	that	Seba	is
making	mistakes?’
‘Because	I	gave	my	life	to	the	Guild,	Rallick.’	Krute	stood	with	a	turnip	in
one	hand.	After	a	moment	he	flung	it	into	the	basket	beside	the	cask	of	fresh
water.	‘He’s	single-handedly	destroying	it.	True,	he’ll	be	gone	soon	enough,
but	what	will	be	left	by	then?’
Rallick	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘Everyone’s	mood	is	sour	these	days,	it	seems.’
‘What	are	we	waiting	for?’
Krute	could	not	long	hold	Rallick’s	gaze	when	the	assassin	finally	looked
at	him.	There	was	something	so…remorseless	in	those	cold	eyes,	in	that	hard
face	that	seemed	carved	to	refute	for	ever	the	notion	of	a	smile.	A	face	that


could	not	soften,	could	not	relax	into	anything	human.	No	wonder	he’d	been
Vorcan’s	favourite.
Krute	fidgeted	with	the	food	he’d	purchased.	‘You	hungry?’	he	asked.
‘What	did	you	have	in	mind?’
‘Fish	stew.’
‘In	a	few	bells	it’ll	be	hot	enough	outside	to	melt	lead.’
‘That’s	what	I’m	cooking,	Rallick.’
Sighing,	the	assassin	rose	and	stretched.	‘Think	I’ll	take	a	walk	instead.’
‘As	you	like.’
At	the	door	Rallick	paused	and	glanced	over,	his	expression	suddenly	wry.
‘It	wears	off,	doesn’t	it?’
Krute	frowned.	‘What	does?’
Rallick	did	not	reply,	and	moments	later	he	was	gone,	the	door	closing
behind	him.
‘What	does?’	Did	I	have	any	reason	there	to	be	so	obtuse?	Must	have,
though	I	can’t	think	of	one	right	now.	Maybe	just…instinctive.	Yes,	Rallick	Nom,
it	wears	off.	Fast.
Things	were	easier	before	–	should	have	recognized	that	back	then.	Should
have	liked	things	just	fine.	Should	have	stopped	gnawing.
	
On	her	hands	and	knees,	Thordy	rubbed	the	ashes	into	the	spaces	between	the
set	stones,	into	every	crack	and	fissure,	every	groove	scoring	the	vaguely	flat
surfaces.	Tiny	bits	of	bone	rolled	under	her	fingertips.	No	ash	was	perfect
unless	it	came	from	nothing	but	wood,	and	this	ash	was	made	of	more	things
than	just	wood.	The	dry	season	had,	she	hoped,	finally	arrived.	Otherwise	she
might	have	to	do	this	all	over	again,	to	keep	the	glyphs	hidden,	the	pleasant,
beautiful	glyphs	with	all	the	promises	they	whispered	to	her.
She	heard	the	back	door	swing	open	on	its	leather	hinges	and	knew	Gaz
was	standing	on	the	threshold,	eyes	hooded,	watching	her.	His	fingerless	hands
twitching	at	the	ends	of	his	arms,	the	ridge	of	knuckles	marred	and	bright	red,
teeth-cut	and	bone-gouged.
He	killed	people	every	night,	she	knew,	to	keep	from	killing	her.	She	was,
she	knew,	the	cause	of	their	deaths.	Every	one	of	them	a	substitute	for	what	Gaz
really	wanted	to	do.
She	heard	him	step	outside.
Straightening,	wiping	the	ash	from	her	hands	on	her	apron,	she	turned.
‘Breakfast	leavings,’	he	muttered.
‘What?’


‘The	house	is	full	of	flies,’	he	said,	standing	there	as	if	struck	rooted	by	the
sunlight.	Red-shot	eyes	wandered	about	the	yard	as	if	wanting	to	crawl	out
from	his	head	and	find	shelter.	Beneath	that	rock,	or	the	bleached	plank	of	grey
wood,	or	under	the	pile	of	kitchen	scraps.
‘You	need	a	shave,’	she	said.	‘Want	me	to	heat	the	water?’
The	haunted	eyes	flicked	towards	her	–	but	there	was	nowhere	to	hide	in
that	direction,	so	he	looked	away	once	more.	‘No,	don’t	touch	me.’
She	thought	of	holding	the	razor	in	her	hand,	settling	its	edge	against	his
throat.	Seeing	the	runnels	winding	down	through	the	lathered	soap,	the	throb	of
his	pulse.	‘Well,’	she	said,	‘the	beard	hides	how	thin	you’ve	become.	In	the
face,	anyway.’
His	smile	was	a	threat.	‘And	you	prefer	that,	wife?’
‘It’s	just	different,	Gaz.’
‘You	can’t	prefer	anything	when	you	don’t	care,	right?’
‘I	didn’t	say	that.’
‘You	didn’t	have	to.	Why’d	you	make	that	stone	thing	–	right	there	on	the
best	dirt?’
‘I	just	felt	like	it,’	she	replied.	‘A	place	to	sit	and	rest.	Where	I	can	keep	an
eye	on	all	the	vegetables.’
‘In	case	they	run	away?’
‘No.	I	just	like	looking	at	them,	that’s	all.’	They	don’t	ask	questions.	They
don’t	ask	for	much	of	anything	at	all.	A	few	dribbles	of	water,	maybe.	A	clear
path	to	the	sun,	free	of	any	weeds.
They	don’t	get	suspicious.	They	don’t	think	about	murdering	me.
‘Have	supper	ready	for	dusk,’	Gaz	said,	lurching	into	motion.
She	watched	him	leave.	Gritty	ash	made	black	crescents	of	her	fingernails,
as	if	she	had	been	rooting	through	the	remnants	of	a	pyre.	Which	was
appropriate,	because	she	had,	but	Gaz	didn’t	need	to	know	things	like	that.	He
didn’t	need	to	know	anything	at	all.
Be	a	plant,	Gaz.	Worry	about	nothing.	Until	the	harvest.

The	ox	was	too	stupid	to	worry.	If	not	for	a	lifetime	of	back-breaking	labour
and	casual	abuse,	the	beast	would	be	content,	existence	a	smooth	cycle	to	match
the	ease	of	day	into	night	and	night	into	day	and	on	and	on	for	ever.	Feed	and
cud	aplenty,	water	to	drink	and	salt	to	lick,	a	plague	to	eradicate	the	world’s
biting	flies	and	ticks	and	fleas.	If	the	ox	could	dream	of	paradise,	it	would	be	a
simple	dream	and	a	simple	paradise.	To	live	simply	was	to	evade	the	worries


that	came	with	complexity.	This	end	was	achieved	at	the	expense,	alas,	of
intelligence.
The	drunks	that	staggered	out	of	the	taverns	as	the	sun	rose	were	in	search
of	paradise	and	they	had	the	sodden,	besotted	brains	to	prove	it.	Lying
senseless	in	the	durhang	and	d’bayang	dens	could	be	found	others	oozing
down	a	similar	path.	The	simplicity	they	would	find	was	of	course	death,	the
threshold	crossed	almost	without	effort.
Unmindful	(naturally)	of	any	irony,	the	ox	pulled	a	cart	into	an	alley
behind	the	dens	where	three	emaciated	servants	brought	out	this	night’s	crop	of
wasted	corpses.	The	carter,	standing	with	a	switch	to	one	side,	spat	out	a
mouthful	of	rustleaf	juice	and	silently	gestured	to	another	body	lying	in	the
gutter	behind	a	back	door.	In	for	a	sliver,	in	for	a	council.	Grumbling,	the	three
servants	went	over	to	this	corpse	and	reached	for	limbs	to	lift	it	from	the
cobblestones.	One	then	gasped	and	recoiled,	and	a	moment	later	so	too	did	the
others.
The	ox	was	not	flicked	into	motion	for	some	time	thereafter,	as	humans
rushed	about,	as	more	arrived.	It	could	smell	the	death,	but	it	was	used	to	that.
There	was	much	confusion,	yet	the	yoked	beast	remained	an	island	of	calm,
enjoying	the	shade	of	the	alley.
The	city	guardsman	with	the	morning	ache	in	his	chest	brushed	a	hand
along	the	ox’s	broad	flank	as	he	edged	past.	He	crouched	down	to	inspect	the
corpse.
Another	one,	this	man	beaten	so	badly	he	was	barely	recognizable	as
human.	Not	a	single	bone	in	his	face	was	left	unbroken.	The	eyes	were	pulped.
Few	teeth	remained.	The	blows	had	continued,	down	to	his	crushed	throat	–
which	was	the	likely	cause	of	death	–	and	then	his	chest.	Whatever	weapon	had
been	used	left	short,	elongated	patterns	of	mottled	bruising.	Just	like	all	the
others.
The	guardsman	rose	and	faced	the	three	servants	from	the	dens.	‘Was	he	a
customer?’
Three	blank	faces	regarded	him,	then	one	spoke,	‘How	in	Hood’s	name
can	we	tell?	His	damned	face	is	gone!’
‘Clothing?	Weight,	height,	hair	colour	–	anyone	in	there	last—’
‘Sir,’	cut	in	the	man,	‘if	he	was	a	customer	he	was	a	new	one	–	he’s	got
meat	on	his	bones,	see?	And	his	clothes	was	clean.	Well,	before	he	spilled
hisself.’
The	guardsman	had	made	the	same	observations.	‘Might	he	have	been,
then?	A	new	customer?’
‘Ain’t	been	none	in	the	last	day	or	so.	Some	casuals,	you	know,	the	kind


who	can	take	it	or	leave	it,	but	no,	we	don’t	think	we	seen	this	one,	by	his
clothes	and	hair	and	such.’
‘So	what	was	he	doing	in	this	alley?’
No	one	had	an	answer.
Did	the	guardsman	have	enough	to	requisition	a	necromancer?	Only	if	this
man	was	well	born.	But	the	clothes	aren’t	that	high-priced.	More	like	merchant
class,	or	some	mid-level	official.	If	so,	then	what	was	he	doing	here	in	the	dregs
of	Gadrobi	District?	‘He’s	Daru,’	he	mused.
‘We	get	’em,’	said	the	loquacious	servant,	with	a	faint	sneer.	‘We	get	Rhivi,
we	get	Callowan,	we	get	Barghast	even.’
Yes,	misery	is	egalitarian.	‘Into	the	cart,	then,	with	the	others.’
The	servants	set	to	work.
The	guardsman	watched.	After	a	moment	his	gaze	drifted	to	the	carter.	He
studied	the	wizened	face	with	its	streaks	of	rustleaf	juice	running	down	the
stubbled	chin.	‘Got	a	loving	woman	back	home?’
‘Eh?’
‘I	imagine	that	ox	is	happy	enough.’
‘Oh,	aye,	that	it	is,	sir.	All	the	flies,	see,	they	prefer	the	big	sacks.’
‘The	what?’
The	carter	squinted	at	him,	then	stepped	closer.	‘The	bodies,	sir.	Big	sacks,
I	call	’em.	I	done	studies	and	lots	of	thinking,	on	important	things.	On	life	and
stuff.	What	makes	it	work,	what	happens	when	it	stops	and	all.’
‘Indeed.	Well—’
‘Every	body	in	existence,	sir,	is	made	up	of	the	same	stuff.	So	small	you
can’t	see	except	with	a	special	lens	but	I	made	me	one	a	those.	Tiny,	that	stuff.	I
call	’em	bags.	And	inside	each	bag	there’s	a	wallet,	floating	in	the	middle	like.
And	I	figure	that	in	that	wallet	there’s	notes.’
‘I’m	sorry,	did	you	say	notes?’
A	quick	nod,	a	pause	to	send	out	a	stream	of	brown	juice.	‘With	all	the
details	of	that	body	written	on	’em.	Whether	it’s	a	dog	or	a	cat	or	a	greenbanded	nose-worm.	Or	a	person.	And	things	like	hair	colour	and	eye	colour
and	other	stuff	–	all	written	on	those	notes	in	that	wallet	in	that	bag.	They’re
instructions,	you	see,	telling	the	bag	what	kind	of	bag	it’s	supposed	to	be.	Some
bags	are	liver	bags,	some	are	skin,	some	are	brain,	some	are	lungs.	And	it’s	the
mother	and	the	father	that	sew	up	them	bags,	when	they	make	themselves	a
baby.	They	sew	’em	up,	you	see,	with	half	and	half,	an’	that’s	why	brats	share
looks	from	both	ma	and	da.	Now	this	’ere	ox,	it’s	got	bags	too	that	look	pretty
much	the	same,	so’s	I	been	thinking	of	sewing	its	half	with	a	human	half	–
wouldn’t	that	be	something?’


‘Something,	good	sir,	likely	to	get	you	run	out	of	the	city	–	if	you	weren’t
stoned	to	death	first.’
The	carter	scowled.	‘That’s	the	probbem	wi’	the	world	then,	ain’t	it?	No
sense	of	adventure!’
	
‘I	have	a	very	important	meeting.’
Iskaral	Pust,	still	wearing	his	most	ingratiating	smile,	simply	nodded.
Sordiko	Qualm	sighed.	‘It	is	official	Temple	business.’
He	nodded	again.
‘I	do	not	desire	an	escort.’
‘You	don’t	need	one,	High	Priestess,’	said	Iskaral	Pust.	‘You	shall	have
me!’	And	then	he	tilted	his	head	and	licked	his	lips.	‘Won’t	she	just!	Hee	hee!
And	she’ll	see	that	with	me	she’ll	have	more	than	she	ever	believed	possible!
Why,	I	shall	be	a	giant	walking	penis!’
‘You	already	are,’	said	Sordiko	Qualm.
‘Are?	Are	what,	dearest?	We	should	get	going,	lest	we	be	late!’
‘Iskaral	Pust,	I	don’t	want	you	with	me.’
‘You’re	just	saying	that,	but	your	eyes	tell	me	different.’
‘What’s	in	my	eyes,’	she	replied,	‘could	see	me	dangling	on	High	Gallows.
Assuming,	of	course,	the	entire	city	does	not	launch	into	a	spontaneous
celebration	upon	hearing	of	your	painful	death,	and	set	me	upon	a	throne	of
solid	gold	in	acclamation.’
‘What	is	she	going	on	about?	No	one	knows	I’m	even	here!	And	why
would	I	want	a	gold	throne?	Why	would	she,	when	she	can	have	me?’	He	licked
his	lips	again,	and	then	revised	his	smile.	‘Lead	on,	my	love.	I	promise	to	be
most	officious	in	this	official	meeting.	After	all,	I	am	the	Magus	of	the	House
of	Shadow.	Not	a	mere	High	Priest,	but	a	Towering	Priest!	A	Looming	Priest!	I
shall	venture	no	opinions	of	whatever,	unless	invited	to,	of	course.	No,	I	shall
be	stern	and	wise	and	leave	all	the	jabbering	to	my	sweet	underling.’	He	ducked
and	added,	‘With	whom	I	shall	be	underlinging	very	shortly!’
Her	hands	twitched	oddly,	most	fetchingly,	in	fact,	and	then	surrender
cascaded	in	her	lovely	eyes,	thus	providing	Iskaral	Pust	with	the	perfect	image
to	resurrect	late	at	night	under	his	blankets	with	Mogora	snoring	through	all
the	spider	balls	filled	with	eggs	lodged	up	her	nose.
‘You	will	indeed	be	silent,	Iskaral	Pust.	The	one	with	whom	I	must	speak
does	not	tolerate	fools,	and	I	will	make	no	effort	to	intercede	should	you	prove
fatally	obnoxious.’	She	paused	and	shook	her	head.	‘Then	again,	I	cannot
imagine	you	being	anything	but	obnoxious.	Perhaps	I	should	retract	my


warning,	in	the	hope	that	you	will	give	such	offence	as	to	see	you	instantly
obliterated.	Whereupon	I	can	then	evict	those	foul	bhokarala	and	your	equally
foul	wife.’	Sudden	surprise.	‘Listen	to	me!	Those	thoughts	were	meant	to	be
private!	Yours	is	a	most	execrable	influence,	Iskaral	Pust.’
‘Soon	we	shall	be	as	peas	in	a	pod!	Those	spiny,	sharp	pods	that	stick	to
everything,	especially	crotch	hair	if	one	is	forced	to	wee	in	the	bushes.’	He
reached	out	for	her.	‘Hand	in	hand	gliding	down	the	streets!’
She	seemed	to	recoil,	but	of	course	that	was	only	his	delicate	and	fragile
self-esteem	and	its	niggling	worries,	quickly	buried	beneath	the	plastering	of
yet	another	ingratiating	smile	on	his	face.
They	escaped	the	temple	through	a	little	used	side	postern	gate,	slamming
it	shut	just	in	time	to	avoid	the	squall	of	bhokarala	excitedly	pursuing	them
down	the	corridor.
Wretched	sunshine	in	the	streets,	Sordiko	Qualm	seemingly	indifferent	to
such	atmospheric	disregard	–	why,	not	a	single	cloud	in	sight!	Worse	than
Seven	Cities,	with	not	a	crevasse	to	be	found	anywhere.
Miserable	crowds	to	thread	through,	a	sea	of	ill-tempered	faces	snapping
round	at	the	gentle	prod	of	his	elbows	and	shoulders	as	he	hurried	to	keep	pace
with	the	long-legged	High	Priestess.	‘Long	legs,	yes!	Ooh.	Ooh	ooh	ooh.	Look
at	them	scythe,	see	the	waggle	of	those	delicious—’
‘Quiet!’	she	hissed	over	a	shapely	shoulder.
‘Shadowthrone	understood.	Yes	he	did.	He	saw	the	necessity	of	our
meeting,	her	and	me.	The	consummation	of	Shadow’s	two	most	perfect
mortals.	The	fated	storybook	love	–	the	lovely	innocent	woman	–	but	not	too
innocent,	one	hopes	–	and	the	stalwart	man	with	his	brave	smile	and	warm
thews.	Er,	brave	thews	and	warm	smile.	Is	“thews”	even	the	right	word?
Muscled	arms	and	such,	anyway.	Why,	I	am	a	mass	of	muscles,	am	I	not?	I	can
even	make	my	ears	flex,	when	the	need	presents	itself	–	no	point	in	showing
off.	She	despises	the	strutting	type,	being	delicate	and	all.	And	soon—’
‘Watch	that	damned	elbow,	runt!’
‘And	soon	the	glory	will	be	delivered	unto	us—’
‘—a	damned	apology!’
‘What?’
A	hulking	oaf	of	a	man	was	forcing	himself	into	Iskaral	Pust’s	path,	his	big
flat	face	looking	like	something	one	found	at	the	bottom	of	a	nightsoil	bucket.
‘I	said	I	expect	a	damned	apology,	y’damned	toad-faced	ferret!’
Iskaral	Pust	snorted.	‘Oh,	look,	a	hulking	oaf	of	a	man	with	a	big	flat	face
looking	like	something	one	finds	at	the	bottom	of	a	nightsoil	bucket	wants	me
to	apologize!	And	I	will,	good	sir,	as	soon	as	you	apologize	for	your


oafishness	and	your	bucket-face	–	in	fact,	apologize	for	existing!’
The	enormous	apish	hand	that	reached	for	his	throat	was	so	apish	that	it
barely	possessed	a	thumb,	or	so	Iskaral	Pust	would	later	report	to	his	wideeyed	murmuring	audience	of	bhokarala.
Naturally,	he	ignored	that	hand	and	did	some	reaching	out	of	his	own,
straight	into	the	oaf’s	crotch,	where	he	squeezed	and	yanked	back	and	forth	and
tugged	and	twisted,	even	as	the	brute	folded	up	with	a	whimper	and	collapsed
like	a	sack	of	melons	on	to	the	filthy	cobbles,	where	he	squirmed	most
pitifully.
Iskaral	Pust	stepped	over	him	and	hurried	to	catch	up	to	Sordiko	Qualm,
who	seemed	to	have	increased	her	pace,	her	robes	veritably	flying	out	behind
her.
‘The	rudeness	of	some	people!’	Iskaral	Pust	gasped.
They	arrived	at	the	gates	of	a	modest	estate	close	to	Hinter ’s	Tower.	The
gates	were	locked	and	Sordiko	Qualm	tugged	on	a	braided	rope,	triggering
chiming	from	somewhere	within.
They	waited.
Chains	rattled	on	the	other	side	of	the	gates,	and	a	moment	later	the	solid
doors	creaked	open,	streams	of	rust	drifting	down	from	the	hinges.
‘Not	many	visitors,	I	take	it?’
‘From	this	moment	on,’	said	Sordiko	Qualm,	‘you	will	be	silent,	Iskaral
Pust.’
‘I	will?’
‘You	will.’
Whoever	had	opened	the	gates	seemed	to	be	hiding	behind	one	of	them,
and	the	High	Priestess	strode	in	without	any	further	ceremony.	Iskaral	Pust
rushed	in	behind	her	to	avoid	being	locked	out,	as	both	gates	immediately
began	closing.	As	soon	as	he	was	clear	he	turned	to	upbraid	the	rude	servant.
And	saw,	working	a	lever	to	one	side,	a	Seguleh.
‘Thank	you,	Thurule,’	said	Sordiko.	‘Is	the	Lady	in	the	garden?’
There	was	no	reply.
The	High	Priestess	nodded	and	walked	on,	along	a	winding	path	through
an	overgrown,	weedy	courtyard,	its	walls	covered	in	wisteria	in	full	bloom.
Sordiko	paused	upon	seeing	a	large	snake	coiled	in	the	sun	on	the	path,	then
edged	carefully	round	it.
Iskaral	crept	after	her,	eyes	on	the	nasty	creature	as	it	lifted	its	wedgeshaped	head,	tongue	flicking	out	in	curiosity	or	maybe	hunger.	He	hissed	at	it
as	he	passed	and	was	pleased	at	its	flinch.
The	estate’s	main	house	was	small,	elegant	in	a	vaguely	feminine	way.


Arched	pathways	went	round	it	on	both	sides,	vine-webbed	tunnels	blissfully
draped	in	shadows.	The	High	Priestess	chose	one	and	continued	on	towards	the
back.
As	they	drew	closer	they	heard	the	murmur	of	voices.
The	centre	of	the	back	garden	was	marked	by	a	flagstone	clearing	in	which
stood	a	dozen	full-sized	bronze	statues	in	a	circle	facing	inward.	Each	statue
wept	water	from	its	oddly	shielded	face	down	into	the	ringed	trough	it	stood	in,
where	water	flowed	ankle	deep.	The	statues,	Iskaral	Pust	saw	with	faint	alarm
as	they	drew	closer,	were	of	Seguleh,	and	the	water	that	fell	down	did	so	from
beneath	masks	sheathed	in	moss	and	verdigris.	In	the	middle	of	the	circle	was	a
thin-legged,	quaint	table	of	copper	and	two	chairs.	In	the	chair	facing	them	sat
a	man	with	long	grey	hair.	There	was	blood-spatter	on	his	plain	shirt.	A	woman
was	seated	with	her	back	to	them.	Long,	lustrous	black	hair	shimmered,
contrasting	perfectly	with	the	white	linen	of	her	blouse.
Upon	seeing	Sordiko	Qualm	and	Iskaral	Pust	the	man	rose	and	bowed	to
his	host.	‘Milady,	until	next	time.’
A	second,	sketchier	bow	to	the	High	Priestess	and	Iskaral,	and	then	he	was
walking	past.
Sordiko	Qualm	entered	the	circle	and	positioned	herself	to	the	right	of	the
now	vacated	chair.	To	Iskaral	Pust’s	astonishment	(and,	a	moment	later,
delight)	she	curtsied	before	her	host.	‘Lady	Envy.’
‘Do	sit,	my	love,’	Lady	Envy	replied.	Then,	as	Iskaral	Pust	hovered	into
view,	seeing	at	last	her	exquisite	face,	so	perfect	a	match	to	that	lovely	hair,	and
the	poise	of	her,	er,	pose,	there	in	that	spindly	chair	with	her	legs	crossed
revealing	the	underside	of	one	shapely	thigh	just	begging	for	a	caress,	she
scowled	and	said,	‘Perhaps	I	should	get	a	sandbox	installed	for	your	foundling,
High	Priestess?	Somewhere	to	play	and	soak	up	his	drool.’
‘We	would,	alas,	have	to	bury	him	in	it.’
‘Interesting	suggestion.’
Thurule	then	arrived	with	another	chair.	The	similarity	between	him	and
the	statues	was	somewhat	disquieting,	and	Iskaral	Pust	shivered	as	he	quickly
bowed	to	Lady	Envy	then	perched	himself	on	the	chair.
‘Her	beauty	challenges	even	that	of	the	High	Priestess!	Why,	imagine	the
two	of	them—’
‘Iskaral	Pust!’	snapped	Sordiko	Qualm.	‘I	did	instruct	you	to	be	quiet,	did	I
not?’
‘But	I	said	nothing,	my	love!	Nothing	at	all!’
‘I	am	not	your	love,	nor	will	I	ever	be.’
He	smiled,	and	then	said,	‘I	will	play	these	two	beauties	off	one	another,


driving	both	to	spasms	of	jealousy	with	my	charm,	as	it	slides	so	easily	from
one	to	the	other.	Pluck	here,	brush	there!	Oh,	this	will	be	such	a	delight!’
‘I	am	of	a	mind	to	kill	him,’	said	Lady	Envy	to	Sordiko	Qualm.
‘Alas,	he	is	the	Magus	of	Shadow.’
‘You	cannot	be	serious!’
‘Oh	yes!’	cried	Iskaral	Pust.	‘She	is!	Furthermore,	it	is	most	propitious	that
I	am	here,	for	I	know	something	you	do	not!’
‘Oh,	goodness,’	sighed	Lady	Envy.	‘A	beautiful	morning	thus	shattered
into	ruin.’
‘Who	was	he?’	Iskaral	demanded.	‘That	man	who	was	here?	Who	was	he?’
‘Why	should	I	tell	you	that?’
‘In	exchange	–	you	satisfy	my	curiosity	and	I	yours	–	and	so	we	shall
satisfy	each	other	and	how	do	you	like	that,	Sordiko	Qualm?	Hah!’
Lady	Envy	rubbed	at	her	temples	for	a	moment,	as	if	overwhelmed,	and
then	said,	‘That	was	the	bard,	Fisher	kel	Tath.	A	most	unusual	man.	He…invites
confession.	There	have	been	dire	events	in	the	city—’
‘None	so	dire	as	what	I	would	tell	you!’	said	Iskaral	Pust.
And	now	Sordiko	was	rubbing	at	her	own	brow.
‘It’s	working!’
Lady	Envy	eyed	him.	‘If	I	grant	you	this	exchange,	Magus,	will	you	then
restrain	yourself,	thus	permitting	the	High	Priestess	and	me	to	conduct	our
conversation?’
‘My	restraint	is	guaranteed,	Lady	Envy.	Of	course,	I	make	this	promise
only	if	you	do	the	same.’
‘Whatever	do	you	mean?’
‘Lady	Envy,	I	arrived	on	a	ship.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘A	ship	owned	by	a	most	delicious	woman—’
‘Oh,	not	another	one!’	moaned	Sordiko	Qualm.
‘The	poor	thing,’	said	Lady	Envy.
‘Hardly.’	Iskaral	Pust	leaned	back	in	his	chair,	tilting	it	up	on	its	legs	so	that
his	view	could	encompass	both	women.	‘How	I	dream	of	such	moments	as	this!
See	how	they	hang	on	my	every	word!	I	have	them,	I	have	them!’
‘What	is	wrong	with	this	man,	High	Priestess?’
‘I	could	not	begin	to	tell	you.’
Iskaral	Pust	examined	his	hands,	his	fingernails	–	but	that	made	him
slightly	nauseous,	since	the	bhokarala	were	in	the	habit	of	sucking	on	his
fingertips	when	he	slept	at	night,	leaving	them	permanently	wrinkled,	mangled
and	decidedly	unpleasant,	so	he	looked	away,	casually,	and	found	himself


staring	at	Thurule,	which	wasn’t	a	good	idea	either,	so,	over	there,	at	that
flower	–	safe	enough,	he	supposed	–	until	it	was	time	at	last	to	meet	Lady
Envy’s	extraordinary	eyes.	‘Yes,’	he	drawled,	‘I	see	the	similarity	at	last,
although	you	were	the	victor	in	the	war	of	perfection.	Not	by	much,	but
triumphant	none	the	less	and	for	that	I	can	only	applaud	and	admire	and	all	that.
In	any	case,	resident	even	at	this	very	moment,	on	the	ship,	in	the	harbour,	is
none	other	than	your	beloved	sister,	Spite!’
‘I	thought	so!’	Lady	Envy	was	suddenly	on	her	feet,	trembling	in	her…
excitement?
Iskaral	Pust	sniggered.	‘Yes,	I	play	at	this	until	they	play	no	more,	and	all
truths	are	revealed,	as	sensibilities	are	rocked	back	and	forth,	as	shock
thunders	through	the	cosmos,	as	the	shadows	themselves	explode	into	all
existence!	For	am	I	not	the	Magus	of	Shadow?	Oh,	but	I	am,	I	am!’	He	then
leaned	forward	with	an	expression	of	gravid	dismay.	‘Are	you	not	delighted,
Lady	Envy?	Shall	I	hasten	to	her	to	forward	your	invitation	to	visit	this
wondrous	garden?	Instruct	me	as	your	servant,	please!	Whatever	you	wish,	I
will	do!	Of	course	I	won’t!	I’ll	do	whatever	I	want	to.	Let	her	think	otherwise	–
maybe	it’ll	bring	some	colour	back	to	her	face,	maybe	it’ll	calm	the	storm	in
her	eyes,	maybe	it’ll	stop	the	water	in	this	trough	from	boiling	–	impressive
detail,	by	the	way,	now,	what	should	I	say	next?’
Sordiko	Qualm	and	Lady	Envy	never	did	get	to	their	conversation	that	day.
	
Grainy-eyed	and	exhausted,	Cutter	went	in	search	of	somewhere	to	eat
breakfast.	Once	his	belly	was	full,	he’d	head	back	to	the	Phoenix	Inn	and
collapse	on	his	bed	upstairs.	This	was	the	extent	of	his	tactical	prowess	and
even	achieving	that	had	been	a	struggle.	He	would	be	the	last	man	to	downplay
the	extraordinary	variety	of	paths	a	life	could	take,	and	there	were	few
blessings	he	could	derive	from	having	come	full	circle	–	from	his	journey	and
the	changes	wrought	in	himself	between	the	Darujhistan	of	old	and	this	new
place	–	and	yet	the	contrast	with	the	fate	that	had	taken	Challice	Vidikas	had	left
him	numbed,	disorientated	and	feeling	lost.
He	found	an	empty	table	in	the	half-courtyard	restaurant	facing	Borthen
Park,	an	expensive	establishment	that	reminded	him	he	was	fast	running	out	of
coin,	and	sat	waiting	for	one	of	the	servers	to	take	note	of	him.	The	staff	were
Rhivi	one	and	all,	three	young	women	dressed	in	some	new	obscure	fashion
characterized	by	long	swishing	skirts	of	linen	streaked	in	indigo	dye,	and	tight
black	leather	vests	with	nothing	underneath.	Their	hair	was	bound	up	in	knotted
braids,	revealing	bisected	clam-shells	stitched	over	their	ears.	While	this	latter


affectation	was	quaint	the	most	obvious	undesirable	effect	was	that	twice	one	of
the	servers	sauntered	past	him	and	did	not	hear	his	attempts	to	accost	her.	He
resolved	to	stick	out	a	leg	the	next	time,	then	was	shocked	at	such	an
ungracious	impulse.
At	last	he	caught	the	attention	of	one	of	them	and	she	approached.	‘A	pot	of
tea,	please,	and	whatever	you’re	serving	for	breakfast.’
Seeing	his	modest	attire,	she	glanced	away	as	she	asked,	in	a	bored	tone,
‘Fruit	breakfast	or	meat	breakfast?	Eggs?	Bread?	Honey?	What	kind	of	tea	–
we	have	twenty-three	varieties.’
He	frowned	up	at	her.	‘Er,	you	decide.’
‘Excuse	me?’
‘What	did	you	have	this	morning?’
‘Flatcakes,	of	course.	What	I	always	have.’
‘Do	you	serve	those	here?’
‘Of	course	not.’
‘What	kind	of	tea	did	you	drink?’
‘I	didn’t.	I	drank	beer.’
‘Rhivi	custom?’
‘No,’	she	replied,	still	looking	away,	‘it’s	my	way	of	dealing	with	the
excitement	of	my	day.’
‘Gods	below,	just	bring	me	something.	Meat,	bread,	honey.	No	fancy
rubbish	with	the	tea,	either.’
‘Fine,’	she	snapped,	flouncing	off	in	a	billow	of	skirts.
Cutter	squeezed	the	bridge	of	his	nose	in	an	effort	to	fend	off	a	burgeoning
headache.	He	didn’t	want	to	think	about	the	night	just	past,	the	bell	after	bell
spent	in	that	graveyard,	sitting	on	that	stone	bench	with	Challice	all	too	close
by	his	side.	Seeing,	as	the	dawn’s	light	grew,	what	the	handful	of	years	had
done	to	her,	the	lines	of	weariness	about	her	eyes,	the	lines	bracketing	her
mouth,	the	maturity	revealed	in	a	growing	heaviness,	her	curves	more
pronounced	than	they	had	once	been.	The	child	he	had	known	was	still	there,	he
told	himself,	beneath	all	of	that.	In	the	occasional	gesture,	in	the	hint	of	a	soft
laugh	at	one	point.	No	doubt	she	saw	the	same	in	him	–	the	layers	of	hardness,
the	vestiges	of	loss	and	pain,	the	residues	of	living.
He	was	not	the	same	man.	She	was	not	the	same	woman.	Yet	they	had	sat	as
if	they	had	once	known	each	other.	As	if	they	were	old	friends.	Whatever
childish	hopes	and	vain	ambitions	had	sparked	the	space	between	them	years
ago,	they	were	deftly	avoided,	even	as	their	currents	coalesced	into	something
romantic,	something	oddly	nostalgic.
It	had	been	the	lively	light	ever	growing	in	her	eyes	that	most	disturbed


Cutter,	especially	since	he	had	felt	his	own	answering	pleasure	–	in	the	hazy
reminiscences	they	had	played	with,	in	the	glow	lifting	between	them	on	that
bench	that	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	rising	sun.
There	was	nothing	right	about	any	of	this.	She	was	married,	after	all.	She
was	nobility	–	but	no,	that	detail	was	without	relevance,	for	what	she	had
proposed	had	nothing	to	do	with	matters	of	propriety,	was	in	no	way	intended
to	invite	public	scrutiny.
She	is	bored.	She	wants	a	lover.	She	wants	what	she	could	have	had	but
didn’t	take.	A	second	chance,	that’s	what	she	wants.
Do	second	chances	even	exist?
This	would	be…sordid.	Despicable.	How	could	he	even	contemplate	such	a
thing?
Maybe	Apsalar	saw	all	too	well.	Saw	right	into	me,	to	the	soul	that	was	less
than	it	should	have	been,	to	the	will	that	was	weak.	I	do	not	stand	before	a
woman,	do	I?	No,	I	fall	into	her	arms.	I	change	shape	to	fit	each	one,	to	make
things	snug,	as	if	matching	their	dreams	is	the	only	path	I	know	into	their
hearts.
Maybe	she	was	right	to	walk	away.
Was	this	all	that	Challice	wanted?	An	amusing	diversion	to	alleviate	the
drudgery	of	her	comfortable	life?	He	admitted	to	some	suspicion	that	things
were	not	that	simple.	There	had	been	a	darker	current,	as	if	to	take	him	meant
something	more	to	Challice.	Proof	of	her	own	descent,	perhaps.	Her	own	fall.
Or	something	else,	something	even	more	pernicious.
The	Rhivi	server	had	brought	him	a	pot	of	tea,	a	plate	of	fresh	bread,	a
dipping	jar	of	honey,	and	a	bowl	of	diced	fruit.	He	now	stared	at	the	array	on
the	table	in	front	of	him,	trying	without	success	to	recall	the	moment	it	had	all
arrived.
‘I	need	you,’	she	had	said,	the	words	cutting	through	his	exhaustion	as	the
sky	began	to	show	its	colour.	‘Crokus.	Cutter.	Whatever	name	you	want.	I	knew
it	the	moment	I	saw	you.	I	had	been	walking,	most	of	the	night,	just	walking.	I
didn’t	know	it,	but	I	was	looking	for	someone.	My	life’s	become	a	question	that
I	thought	no	one	could	answer.	Not	my	husband,	not	anyone.	And	then,	there
you	were,	standing	in	this	cemetery,	like	a	ghost.’
Oh,	he	knew	about	ghosts,	the	way	they	could	haunt	one	day	and	night.	The
way	they	found	places	to	hide	in	one’s	own	soul.	Yes,	he	knew	about	ghosts.
‘Challice—’
‘You	loved	me	once.	But	I	was	young.	A	fool.	Now,	I	am	neither	young	nor
a	fool.	This	time,	I	won’t	turn	away.’
‘Your	husband—’


‘Doesn’t	care	what	I	do,	or	with	whom	I	do	it.’
‘Why	did	you	marry	him	then?’
She	had	looked	away,	and	it	was	some	time	before	she	replied.	‘When	he
saved	my	life,	that	night	in	the	garden	of	Simtal’s	estate,	it	was	as	if	he	then
owned	it.	My	life.	He	owned	it	because	he	saved	it.	He	wasn’t	alone	in	believing
that,	either.	So	did	I.	All	at	once,	it	was	as	if	I	no	longer	had	any	choice.	He
possessed	my	future,	to	do	with	as	he	pleased.’
‘Your	father—’
‘Should	have	counselled	me?’	She	laughed,	but	it	was	a	bitter	laugh.	‘You
didn’t	see	it,	but	I	was	spoiled.	I	was	obnoxious,	Crokus.	Maybe	he	tried,	I	don’t
really	recall.	But	I	think	he	was	happy	to	see	me	go.’
No,	this	was	not	the	Challice	he	had	known.
‘House	Vidikas	owns	an	annexe,	a	small	building	down	by	the	docks.	It’s
almost	never	used.	There	are	two	levels.	On	the	main	floor	it’s	just	storage,
filled	with	the	shipwright’s	leavings	after	the	trader	boat	was	finished.	On	the
upper	level	is	where	the	man	lived	while	under	contract.	I’ve…seen	it,	and	I
have	a	key.’
Seen	it?	He	wondered	at	her	hesitation	in	that	admission.	But	not	for	long.
She’s	used	it	before.	She’s	using	it	still.	For	trysts	just	like	the	one	she’s	talking
about	right	now.	Challice,	why	are	you	bothering	with	me?
At	his	hesitation	she	leaned	closer,	one	hand	on	his	arm.	‘We	can	just	meet
there,	Crokus.	To	talk.	A	place	where	we	can	talk	about	anything,	where	there’s
no	chance	of	being	seen.	We	can	just	talk.’
He	knew,	of	course,	that	such	a	place	was	not	for	talking.
And,	this	evening,	he	would	meet	her	there.
What	was	he—‘Ow!’
The	server	had	just	cuffed	him	in	the	side	of	the	head.	Astonished,	he	stared
up	at	her.
‘If	I	go	to	all	that	work	to	make	you	a	damned	breakfast,	you’d	better	eat
it!’
‘Sorry!	I	was	just	thinking—’
‘It’s	easier	when	you’re	chewing.	Now,	don’t	make	me	have	to	come	back
here.’
He	glared	at	her	as	she	walked	away.	If	I	was	nobleborn	she’d	never	have
done	that.	He	caught	the	eye	of	a	man	sitting	at	a	nearby	table.
‘You	have	a	way	with	women,	I	see.’
‘Hah	hah.’
	


Events	and	moments	can	deliver	unexpected	mercy,	and	though	she	did	not
know	it,	such	mercy	was	granted	to	Scillara	at	that	instant,	for	she	was	not
thinking	of	Cutter.	Instead,	she	was	sitting	beside	the	Malazan	historian,	Duiker,
fighting	an	instinct	to	close	her	arms	round	him	and	so	in	some	small	measure
ease	his	silent	grief.	All	that	held	her	back,	she	knew,	was	the	fear	that	he	would
not	welcome	her	sympathy.	That,	and	the	distinct	possibility	that	she	was
misreading	him.
To	live	a	hard	life	was	to	make	solid	and	impregnable	every	way	in,	until
no	openings	remained	and	the	soul	hid	in	darkness,	and	no	one	else	could	hear
its	screams,	its	railing	at	injustice,	its	long,	agonizing	stretches	of	sadness.
Hardness	without	created	hardness	within.
Sadness	was,	she	well	knew,	not	something	that	could	be	cured.	It	was	not,
in	fact,	a	failing,	not	a	flaw,	not	an	illness	of	spirit.	Sadness	was	never	without
reason,	and	to	assert	that	it	marked	some	kind	of	dysfunction	did	little	more
than	prove	ignorance	or,	worse,	cowardly	evasiveness	in	the	one	making	the
assertion.	As	if	happiness	was	the	only	legitimate	way	of	being.	As	if	those
failing	at	it	needed	to	be	locked	away,	made	soporific	with	medications;	as	if
the	causes	of	sadness	were	merely	traps	and	pitfalls	in	the	proper	climb	to
blissful	contentment,	things	to	be	edged	round	or	bridged,	or	leapt	across	on
wings	of	false	elation.
Scillara	knew	better.	She	had	faced	her	own	sadness	often	enough.	Even
when	she	discovered	her	first	means	of	escaping	it,	in	durhang,	she’d	known
that	such	an	escape	was	simply	a	flight	from	feelings	that	existed	legitimately.
She’d	just	been	unable	to	permit	herself	any	sympathy	for	such	feelings,
because	to	do	so	was	to	surrender	to	their	truth.
Sadness	belonged.	As	rightful	as	joy,	love,	grief	and	fear.	All	conditions	of
being.
Too	often	people	mistook	the	sadness	in	others	for	self-pity,	and	in	so
doing	revealed	their	own	hardness	of	spirit,	and	more	than	a	little	malice.
The	taproom	stank	of	blood,	shit,	piss	and	vomit.	Blend	was	recovering	in
her	bedroom	upstairs,	as	close	to	death	as	she’d	ever	been,	but	the	worst	was
past,	now.	Barathol	and	Chaur	had	gone	down	to	the	cellars	below	to	help
Picker	and	Antsy	bury	the	bodies	of	their	comrades.	The	blacksmith’s	grief	at
the	death	of	his	new	friend,	Mallet,	was	too	raw	for	Scillara	to	face	–	he	was	in
no	way	a	hard	man	and	this	jarred	her	frail	assembly	of	beliefs,	for	he	should
have	been.	Yet	had	she	not	seen	the	same	breathless	vulnerability	when	he’d
struggled	to	bring	Chaur	back	to	life	after	the	huge	simpleton	had	drowned?
‘He	is…’	Duiker	began,	and	then	frowned,	‘a	remarkable	man,	I	think.’
Scillara	blinked.	‘Who?’


The	historian	shook	his	head,	unwilling	to	meet	her	eyes.	‘I	should	be
getting	drunk.’
‘Never	works,’	she	said.
‘I	know.’
They	were	silent	again,	moments	stretching	on.
We	just	stumbled	into	these	people.	A	crazy	contest	at	a	restaurant.	We	were
just	getting	to	know	them,	to	treasure	each	and	every	one	of	them.
Mallet	was	a	healer.	A	Bridgeburner.	In	his	eyes	there	had	burned	some
kind	of	self-recrimination,	a	welter	of	guilt.	A	healer	tortured	by	something	he
could	not	heal.	A	list	of	failures	transformed	into	failings.	Yet	he	had	been	a
gentle	man.	That	soft,	oddly	high	voice	–	which	they	would	never	hear	again.
For	him,	Barathol	had	wept.
Bluepearl	was	a	mage.	Amusingly	awkward,	kind	of	wide-eyed,	which
hardly	fit	all	that	he’d	been	through,	because	he	too	had	been	a	Bridgeburner.
Antsy	had	railed	over	the	man’s	corpse,	a	sergeant	dressing	down	a	soldier	so
incompetent	as	to	be	dead.	Antsy	had	been	offended,	indignant,	even	as	anguish
glittered	in	his	bright	blue	eyes.	‘You	damned	fool!’	he’d	snarled.	‘You	Hooddamned	useless	idiotic	fool!’	When	he’d	made	to	kick	the	body	Picker	had
roughly	pulled	him	back,	almost	off	his	feet,	and	Antsy	had	lurched	off	to	slam
the	toe	of	one	boot	into	the	planks	of	the	counter.
They	looked	older	now.	Picker,	Antsy.	Wan	and	red-eyed,	shoulders
slumped,	not	bothering	to	rinse	the	dried	blood	from	their	faces,	hands	and
forearms.
Duiker	alone	seemed	unchanged,	as	if	these	last	deaths	had	been	little	more
than	someone	pissing	into	a	wide,	deep	river.	His	sadness	was	an	absolute
thing,	and	he	never	came	up	for	air.	She	wanted	to	take	him	in	her	arms	and
shake	the	life	back	into	him.	Yet	she	would	not	do	that,	for	she	knew	such	a
gesture	would	be	a	selfish	one,	serving	only	her	own	needs.	As	much,	perhaps,
as	her	initial	impulse	to	embrace	him	in	sympathy.
Because	she	too	felt	like	weeping.	For	having	dragged	the	historian	out
into	the	city	–	away	from	what	had	happened	here	the	past	night.	For	having
saved	his	life.
When	they’d	first	arrived	back;	when	they’d	seen	the	bodies	on	the	street;
when	they’d	stepped	inside	to	look	upon	the	carnage,	Duiker	had	shot	her	a
single	glance,	and	in	that	she	had	read	clearly	the	thought	behind	it.	See	what
you	took	me	away	from?	A	thought	so	far	away	from	the	sentiment	of	gratitude
that	it	might	as	well	be	in	another	realm.
The	truth	was	obvious.	He	would	rather	have	been	here.	He	would	rather
have	died	last	night.	Instead,	interfering	bitch	that	she	was,	Scillara	had	refused


him	that	release.	Had	instead	left	him	in	this	sad	life	that	would	not	end.	That
glance	had	been	harder,	more	stinging,	than	a	savage	slap	in	the	face.
She	should	have	gone	below.	Should	be	standing	there	in	that	narrow,
cramped	cellar,	holding	Chaur ’s	hand,	listening	to	them	all	grieve,	each	in
their	own	way.	Antsy’s	curses.	Picker	at	his	side,	so	close	as	to	be	leaning	on
him,	but	otherwise	expressionless	beyond	the	bleakness	of	her	glazed	stare.
Barathol	and	his	glistening	beard,	his	puffy	eyes,	the	knotted	muscles	ravaging
his	brow.
The	door	opened	suddenly,	sending	a	shaft	of	daylight	through	suspended
dust,	and	in	stepped	the	grey-haired	bard.
She	and	Duiker	watched	as	the	man	shut	the	door	behind	him	and	replaced
the	solid	iron	bar	in	its	slots	–	how	he	had	ended	up	with	that	bar	in	his	hands
was	a	mystery,	yet	neither	Scillara	nor	the	historian	commented.
The	man	approached,	and	she	saw	that	he	too	had	not	bothered	to	change
his	clothes,	wearing	the	old	blood	with	the	same	indifference	she	had	seen	in
the	others.
There’d	been	a	half-dozen	bodies,	maybe	more,	at	the	stage.	A	passing
observation	from	Blend	implicated	the	bard	in	that	slaughter,	but	Scillara	had
trouble	believing	that.	This	man	was	gaunt,	old.	Yet	her	eyes	narrowed	on	the
blood	spatter	on	his	shirt.
He	sat	down	opposite	them,	met	Duiker ’s	eyes,	and	said,	‘Whatever	they
have	decided	to	do,	Historian,	they	can	count	me	in.’
‘So	they	did	try	for	you,	too,’	said	Scillara.
He	met	her	gaze.	‘Scillara,	they	attacked	everyone	in	the	room.	They	killed
innocents.’
‘I	don’t	think	they’ll	do	anything,’	said	Duiker,	‘except	sell	up	and	leave.’
‘Ah,’	the	bard	said,	then	sighed.	‘No	matter.	I	will	not	be	entirely	on	my
own	in	any	case.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	called	in	an	old	favour,	Historian.	Normally,	I	am	not	one	to	get
involved	in…things.’
‘But	you’re	angry,’	Scillara	observed,	recognizing	at	last	the	odd	flatness
in	the	old	man’s	eyes,	the	flatness	that	came	before	–	before	cold	killing.	This
poet	has	claws	indeed.	And	now	I	look	at	him,	he’s	not	as	old	as	I	thought	he
was.
‘I	am,	yes.’
From	below	there	came	a	splintering	crack	followed	by	shouts	of	surprise.
All	three	at	the	table	swiftly	rose.	Duiker	leading	the	way,	they	ran	to	the
kitchen,	then	down	the	narrow	stairs	to	the	cellar.	Torchlight	wavered	at	the	far


end	of	the	elongated	storage	room,	casting	wild	shadows	on	a	bizarre	scene.
Pungent	fluid	sloshed	on	the	earthen	floor,	seeming	reluctant	to	drain,	and	in	a
half-circle	stood	the	two	Malazans,	Barathol	and	Chaur,	all	facing	one	side
wall	where	a	large	cask	had	shattered.
Antsy,	Scillara	surmised,	had	just	kicked	it.
Splitting	it	open,	in	a	cascade	of	pickling	juice,	revealing	to	them	all	the
object	that	that	liquid	had	so	perfectly	preserved.
Folded	up	with	knees	beneath	chin,	arms	wrapped	round	the	shins.
Still	wearing	a	mask	on	which	four	linear,	vertical	barbs	marked	a	row
across	the	forehead.
The	bard	grunted.	‘I’d	often	wondered,’	he	said	under	his	breath,	‘where
the	old	ones	ended	up.’
The	fluids	were	now	seeping	into	the	floor,	along	the	edges	of	the	freshly
dug	mounds.

A	hundred	stones,	a	cavort	of	ripples,	the	city	in	its	life	which	is	one	life	which
is	countless	lives.	To	ignore	is	to	deny	brotherhood,	sisterhood,	the
commonality	that,	could	it	be	freed,	would	make	the	world	a	place	less	cruel,
less	vicious.	But	who	has	time	for	that?	Rush	this	way,	plunge	that	way,	evade
every	set	of	eyes,	permit	no	recognition	in	any	of	the	faces	flashing	past.	The
dance	of	trepidation	is	so	very	tiresome.
Hold	this	gaze,	if	you	dare,	in	the	tracking	of	these	tremulous	ripples,	the
lives,	the	lives!	See	Stonny	Menackis,	wrought	with	recrimination,	savaged	by
guilt.	She	sleeps	badly	or	not	at	all	(who	would	risk	peering	into	her	dark
bedroom	at	night,	for	fear	of	seeing	the	gleam	of	staring	eyes?).	She	trembles,
her	nerves	like	strings	of	fire,	whilst	poor	Murillio	stands	apart,	desperate	to
comfort	her,	to	force	open	all	that	had	now	closed	between	them.
And	in	the	courtyard	a	mob	of	unattended	young	savages	wail	about	with
wooden	swords	and	it’s	a	miracle	no	one’s	yet	lost	an	eye	or	dropped	to	the
pavestones	with	a	crushed	trachea.
While,	in	a	workroom	not	too	far	away,	Tiserra	sits	at	the	potter ’s	wheel
and	stares	into	space	as	the	lump	of	clay	spins	round	and	round	to	the	rhythm
of	her	pumping	foot	–	struck	frozen,	shocked	by	the	stunning	realization	of	the
sheer	depth	of	her	love	for	her	husband.	A	love	so	fierce	that	she	is	terrified,
comprehending	at	last	the	extent	of	her	vulnerability.
The	sense	is	a	wonder.	It	is	delicious	and	terrifying.	It	is	ecstatic.
Smile	with	her.	Oh,	do	smile	with	her!


Whilst	at	this	very	moment,	the	object	of	Tiserra’s	devotion	strides	into	the
courtyard	of	the	Varada	estate,	his	new	place	of	employment.	His	mind,	which
had	been	calm	in	the	course	of	his	walk	from	home,	now	stirs	with	faint
unease.	He	had	sent	Scorch	and	Leff	home,	and	he	had	stood	at	the	gate
watching	them	stumble	off	like	undead,	and	this	had	made	him	think	of
moments	of	greatest	danger	–	just	before	dawn	was	the	moment	to	strike,	if
one	intended	such	violence	–	but	who	would	bother?	What	was	this	mysterious
Lady	Varada	up	to	anyway?
A	seat	on	the	Council,	true,	but	was	that	sufficient	cause	for	assassination?
And	why	was	he	thinking	of	such	things	at	all?	There’d	been	rumours	–	picked
up	at	the	drunk	baker ’s	stall	–	that	the	night	just	past	should	have	belonged	to
the	Assassins’	Guild	but	had	turned	sour	for	the	hired	killers	and	oh,	wasn’t
that	regrettable?	A	moment	of	silence	then	pass	the	dumplings,	if	you	please.
Now	he	paused	in	the	courtyard,	seeing	the	latest	employees,	his	peculiar
charges,	with	their	dubious	pasts	and	potentially	alarming	motivations.
Reunited,	yes,	with	the	castellan,	with	the	infamous	Studious	Lock.	Madrun	and
Lazan	Door	were	tossing	knuckles	against	the	compound	wall	to	his	right.
Technically,	their	shift	was	over,	although	Torvald	Nom	suspected	that	this
game	of	theirs	had	been	going	on	for	some	time.	Another	word	of	warning	to
them?	No,	his	spirits	were	already	plunging,	as	they	were	wont	to	do	when	he
awakened	to	a	sense	that	something	was	being	pulled	over	him,	that	he	was
being	connived	around	–	as	his	mother	used	to	say	when	with	one	foot	she
pinned	young	Torvald	to	the	floor	and	stared	down	at	him	as	he	squirmed	and
thrashed	(mostly	an	act,	of	course;	she	weighed	about	as	much	as	a	guard	dog,
without	the	bite).	Connived	around,	dear	boy,	and	when	I	get	to	the	bottom	of
things	and	all	the	trouble’s	on	the	table,	why,	who	will	I	find	hiding	in	the
closet?
His	sweet	mother	never	quite	mastered	the	extended	metaphor,	bless	her.
Suddenly	too	despondent	to	so	much	as	announce	his	arrival,	Torvald	Nom
headed	for	his	office,	eager	to	climb	over	the	desk	and	plant	himself	in	the
chair,	where	he	could	doze	until	the	sounding	of	the	lunch	chime.	At	least	the
cooks	she’d	employed	knew	their	business.
Leave	him	there,	now,	and	ride	one	last	ripple,	out	beyond	the	city,	west
along	the	lakeshore,	out	to	a	dusty,	smoky	pit	where	the	less	privileged
laboured	through	their	shortened	lives	to	keep	such	creatures	as	Gorlas
Vidikas	and	Humble	Measure	at	the	level	of	comfort	and	entitlement	they	held
to	be	righteous.	And,	to	be	fair,	they	laboured	as	well	to	contribute	to	the
general	feeling	of	civilization,	which	is	normally	measured	by	technical
wherewithal,	a	sense	of	progression	and	the	notion	of	structural	stability,	little


of	which	said	labourers	could	themselves	experience,	save	vicariously.
The	child	Harllo	has	been	lashed	ten	times	for	being	places	he	wasn’t
supposed	to	be,	and	this	punishment	was	fierce	enough	to	leave	him	prostrate,
lying	on	his	stomach	on	his	cot	with	thick	unguents	slowly	melting	into	the
wounds	on	his	back.
Bainisk	had	received	a	whip	to	his	left	shoulder	which	would	result	in	the
third	such	scar	for	dereliction	of	his	responsibilities	as	overseer	in	Chuffs,	and
he	now	came	to	sit	beside	Harllo,	studying	his	young	charge	in	a	silence	that
stretched.
Until	at	last	Harllo	said,	‘I’m	sorry,	Bainisk—’
‘Never	mind	that.	I	just	want	to	know	what	you	were	up	to.	I	didn’t	think
you’d	keep	secrets	from	me,	I	really	didn’t.	Venaz	is	saying	“I	told	you	so”.
He’s	saying	you’re	no	good,	Mole,	and	that	I	should	just	push	you	on	to	the
dredge	crews.’
The	young	ones	did	not	live	long	in	the	dredge	crews.	‘Venaz	wants	to	be
your	best	mole	again.’
‘I	know	that,	only	he’s	grown	too	big.’
‘People	like	him	never	like	people	like	me,’	Harllo	said.	This	was	not	a
whine,	just	an	observation.
‘Because	you’re	smarter	than	he	is	and	his	being	older	means	nothing,
means	it’s	worse	even,	because	in	your	head	you’re	already	past	him,	past	us
all,	maybe.	Listen,	Harllo,	I	seen	ones	like	you	before,	coming	in,	going
through.	They	get	beaten	down,	beaten	stupid.	Or	they	end	up	getting	killed.
Maybe	they	try	to	run,	maybe	they	stand	up	to	the	pit	bosses	over	something.
Your	smartness	is	what’s	going	to	ruin	you,	you	understand?’
‘Yes,	Bainisk.	I’m	sorry.’
‘Why’d	you	sneak	back	into	the	tunnels?’
He	could	tell	him	everything.	At	this	moment,	it	seemed	like	the	right	thing
to	do.	But	Harllo	no	longer	trusted	himself	with	such	feelings.	Explaining	was
dangerous.	It	could	get	them	all	into	even	more	trouble.
‘You	was	carrying	bones,’	said	Bainisk.	‘Those	bones,	they’re	cursed.’
‘Why?’
‘They	just	are.’
‘But	why,	Bainisk?’
‘Because	they	were	found	where	no	bones	belong,	that’s	why.	So	far	down
it’s	impossible	that	anybody	buried	them	–	and	besides,	who’d	bury	dead
animals?	No,	those	bones,	they’re	from	demons	that	live	in	the	rock	and	in	the
dark.	Right	down	with	the	roots	of	the	earth.	You	don’t	touch	them,	Harllo,	and
you	never	ever	try	putting	them	back.’


So	this	was	what	Bainisk	suspected	him	of	doing,	then?	‘I	was…I	was
scared,’	Harllo	said.	‘It	was	as	if	we	were	disturbing	graves	or	something.	And
that’s	why	there’ve	been	so	many	accidents	lately—’
‘Them	accidents	are	because	the	new	boss	is	pushing	us	too	hard,	into	the
tunnels	with	the	cracked	ceilings	and	the	bad	air	–	the	kind	of	air	that	makes
you	see	things	that	ain’t	real.’
‘I	think	maybe	that’s	what	happened	to	me.’
‘Maybe,	but,’	and	he	rose,	‘I	don’t	think	so.’
He	walked	away	then.	Tomorrow,	Harllo	was	expected	to	return	to	work.
He	was	frightened	of	that,	since	his	back	hurt	so,	but	he	would	do	it,	because	it
would	make	things	easier	for	Bainisk	who’d	been	punished	when	he	shouldn’t
have	been.	Harllo	would	work	extra	hard,	no	matter	the	pain	and	all;	he	would
work	extra	hard	so	Bainisk	would	like	him	again.
Because,	in	this	place,	with	no	one	liking	you,	there	didn’t	seem	much
point	in	going	on.
Lying	on	his	stomach,	fresh	into	another	year	of	life,	Harllo	felt	no	ripples
reach	him	from	the	outside	world.	Instead,	he	felt	alone.	Maybe	he’d	lost	a
friend	for	ever	and	that	felt	bad,	too.	Maybe	his	only	friend	was	a	giant
skeleton	in	the	depths	of	the	mines	–	who	with	new	legs	might	have	walked
away,	disappeared	into	the	dark,	and	all	Harllo	had	to	remember	him	by	was	a
handful	of	tools	hidden	beneath	his	cot.
For	a	child,	thinking	of	the	future	was	a	difficult	thing,	since	most	thoughts
of	the	future	built	on	memories	of	the	past,	whether	in	continuation	or	serving
as	contrast,	and	a	child	held	few	memories	of	his	or	her	past.	The	world	was
truncated	forward	and	back.	Measure	it	from	his	toes	to	the	top	of	his	head,
tousle	the	mop	of	hair	in	passing,	and	when	nothing	else	is	possible,	hope	for
the	best.
	
In	the	faint	phosphor	glow	streaking	the	rock,	a	T’lan	Imass	climbed	to	his	feet
and	stood	like	someone	who	had	forgotten	how	to	walk.	The	thick,	curved
femurs	of	the	emlava	forced	him	into	a	half-lean,	as	if	he	was	about	to	launch
himself	forward,	and	the	ridged	ball	of	the	long	bones,	where	it	rested	in	the
socket	of	each	hip,	made	grinding	sounds	as	he	fought	for	balance.
Unfamiliar	sorcery,	this.	He	had	observed	how	connecting	tissue	had	reknitted,	poorly	at	first,	to	these	alien	bones,	and	he	had	come	to	understand	that
such	details	were	a	kind	of	conceit.	The	Ritual	forced	animation	with	scant
subtlety,	and	whatever	physical	adjustments	occurred	proceeded	at	a	snail’s
pace,	although	their	present	incompleteness	seemed	to	have	no	effect	on	his


ability	to	settle	his	weight	on	these	new	legs,	even	to	move	them	into	his	first
lurching	step,	then	his	second.
The	grinding	sounds	would	fade	in	time,	he	thought,	as	ball	and	socket
were	worn	into	a	match,	although	he	suspected	he	would	never	stand	as	erect	as
he	once	had.
No	matter.	Dev’ad	Anan	Tol	was	mobile	once	more.	And	as	he	stood,	a
flood	of	memories	rose	within	him	in	a	dark	tide.
Leading	to	that	last	moment,	with	the	Jaghut	Tyrant,	Raest,	standing	before
him,	blood-smeared	mace	in	one	hand,	as	Dev’ad	writhed	on	the	stone	floor,
legs	for	ever	shattered.
No,	he	had	not	been	flung	from	a	ledge.	Sometimes,	it	was	necessary	to	lie.
He	wondered	if	the	weapons	he	had	forged,	so	long	ago	now,	still
remained	hidden	in	their	secret	place.	Not	far.	After	a	moment,	the	T’lan	Imass
set	out.	Feet	scraping,	his	entire	body	pitching	from	side	to	side.
Raest’s	unhuman	face	twisted	indignant.	Outraged.	Slaves	were	ever	slaves.
None	could	rise	to	challenge	the	master.	None	could	dare	plot	the	master ’s
downfall,	none	could	get	as	close	as	Dev’ad	had	done.	Yes,	an	outrage,	a	crime
against	the	laws	of	nature	itself.
‘I	break	you,	T’lan.	I	leave	you	here,	in	this	pit	of	eternal	darkness.	To	die.
To	rot.	None	shall	know	a	word	of	your	mad	ambition.	All	knowledge	of	you
shall	fade,	shall	vanish.	Nothing	of	you	shall	remain.	Know	this,	could	I	keep
you	alive	down	here	for	ever,	I	would	–	and	even	that	torture	would	not	suffice.
In	my	enforced	indifference,	T’lan,	lies	mercy.’
See	me	now.	I	have	outlived	you,	Raest.	And	there,	old	friend,	lies	my
mercy.
He	came	to	the	secret	place,	a	deep	crack	in	the	wall,	into	which	he	reached.
His	hand	closed	about	a	heavy,	rippled	blade,	and	Dev’ad	dragged	the	weapon
out.
The	T’lan	knew	stone,	stone	that	was	water	and	water	that	was	stone.	Iron
belonged	to	the	Jaghut.
He	held	up	the	sword	he	had	made	countless	thousands	of	years	ago.	Yes,	it
had	the	form	of	flint,	the	ridges	encircling	every	flake	struck	from	the	edge,
the	undulating	modulations	of	parallel	flaking	and	the	twin	flutes	running	the
length	to	either	side	of	a	wavy	dorsal	spine.	The	antler	base	that	formed	the
grip	was	now	mineralized,	a	most	comforting	and	pleasing	weight.
The	form	of	flint	indeed.	And	yet	this	sword	was	made	of	iron,	tempered	in
the	holy	fires	of	Tellann.	Impervious	to	rust,	to	decay,	the	huge	weapon	was	the
hue	of	first	night,	the	deep	blue	sky	once	the	final	light	of	the	drowned	sun	had
faded.	In	the	moment	of	the	stars’	birth,	yes,	that	was	the	colour	of	this	blade.


He	leaned	it	point	down	against	the	wall	and	reached	into	the	crack	again,
drawing	out	a	matching	knife	–	hefty	as	a	shortsword.	The	hide	sheaths	had
long	since	rotted	to	dust,	but	he	would	make	new	ones	soon.
The	Tyrant	of	old	was	gone.	Somewhere	close,	then,	waited	an	empty
throne.
Waiting	for	Dev’ad	Anan	Tol.	Who	had	once	been	crippled	but	was
crippled	no	longer.
He	raised	both	weapons	high,	the	dagger	in	his	right	hand,	the	sword	in	his
left.	Slashes	of	first	night,	in	the	moment	of	the	stars’	birth.	Iron	in	the	guise	of
stone,	iron	in	the	guise	of	stone	that	is	water	and	water	that	is	stone	and	stone
that	is	iron.	Jaghut	tyranny	in	the	hands	of	a	T’lan	Imass.
The	gods	are	fools,	alas,	in	believing	every	piece	in	the	game	is	known.
That	the	rules	are	fixed	and	accepted	by	all;	that	every	wager	is	counted	and
marked,	exposed	and	glittering	on	the	table.	The	gods	lay	out	their	perfect
paths	to	the	perfect	thrones,	each	one	representing	perfect	power.
The	gods	are	fools	because	it	never	occurs	to	them	that	not	everyone	uses
paths.


Chapter	Fourteen

Beneath	the	battered	shield	of	the	sky
The	man	sits	in	a	black	saddle	atop	a	black	horse
His	hair	long	and	grey	drifting	out	round	his	iron	helm
Knowing	nothing	of	how	he	came	to	be	here
Only	that	where	he	has	come	to	be	is	nowhere
And	where	he	must	go	is	perhaps	near
His	beard	is	the	hue	of	dirty	snow
His	eyes	are	eyes	that	will	never	thaw
Beneath	him	the	horse	does	not	breathe
Nor	does	the	man	and	the	wind	moans	hollow
Along	the	dents	of	his	rusty	scaled	hauberk
And	it	is	too	much	to	shift	about	to	the	approach
Of	riders	one	from	his	right	the	other	from	his	left
On	dead	horses	with	empty	eyes	they	rein	in
Settle	silent	with	strange	familiarity
Flanking	easy	his	natural	command
Beneath	these	three	the	ground	is	lifeless
And	within	each	ashes	are	stirred	in	the	dirge
Of	grim	recollections	that	slide	seeping	into	regret
But	all	is	past	and	the	horses	do	not	move
And	so	he	glances	rightward	with	jaw	clenching
Upon	the	one-eyed	regard	he	once	knew	though	not	well
Answering	the	wry	smile	with	sudden	need
So	he	asks,	‘Are	they	waiting,	Corporal?’
‘Bequeathed	and	loose	on	the	dead	plain,	Sergeant,
And	was	this	not	what	you	wanted?’
To	that	he	can	but	shrug	and	set	gaze	upon	the	other
‘I	see	your	garb	and	know	you,	sir,	yet	do	not.’


Black	beard	and	visage	dark,	a	brow	like	cracked	basalt
A	man	heavy	in	armour	few	could	stand	in
And	he	meets	the	observance	with	a	grimace
‘Then	know,	if	you	will,	Brukhalian	of	the	Grey	Swords.’
Beneath	these	three	thunder	rides	the	unproven	earth
Nothing	sudden	but	growing	like	an	awakening	heart
And	the	echoes	roll	down	from	the	shield	overhead
As	iron	reverberates	the	charge	of	what	must	be
‘So	once	more,	the	Bridgeburners	march	to	war.’
To	which	Brukhalian	adds,	‘Too	the	Grey	Swords	who	fell
And	this	you	call	Corporal	was	reborn	only	to	die,
A	new	bridge	forged	between	you	and	me,	good	sir.’
They	turn	then	on	their	unbreathing	mounts
To	review	the	ranks	arrayed	in	grainy	mass	on	the	plain
Onward	to	war	from	where	and	what	they	had	once	been
When	all	that	was	known	is	all	that	one	knows	again
And	in	this	place	the	heather	never	blooms
The	blood	to	be	spilled	never	spills	and	never	flows
Iskar	Jarak,	Bird	That	Steals,	sits	astride	a	black	horse
And	looks	to	command	once	more
Sword	and	Shield
Fisher	kel	Tath

Bliss	on	a	sun-warmed	sandy	beach,	on	a	remote	island,	proves	tedious	to
souls	habituated	to	stimulation	and	excitement.	The	smaller	the	island,	the
faster	the	scene	palls.	So	Gruntle	concluded	after	completing	his	thirtieth	circle
round	the	white	rim	of	the	shore,	finding	himself	fascinated	by	his	own
footprints,	especially	when	a	new	set	arrived	to	track	his	path.	Dulled	and
insensate	as	he	had	become,	it	was	a	moment	before	it	occurred	to	him	to	halt
and	turn	round,	to	see	the	one	who	now	followed.
Master	Quell	was	sweating,	gasping,	fighting	through	the	soft	sand	as	he
probably	fought	through	all	of	life,	one	wheezing	step	at	a	time.	He	was
sunburned	on	one	side	of	his	body,	face	and	neck,	bared	forearm,	ankle	and
foot,	the	result	of	falling	asleep	in	an	unwise	position.	That	he	had	been
pursuing	Gruntle	for	some	time	was	clear	in	that	his	footprints	completed	an


entire	circumambulation,	leaving	Gruntle	to	wonder	why	the	man	had	not
simply	called	out	to	capture	his	attention.	Indeed,	if	Gruntle	had	not	noticed	the
new	trail	upon	his	own,	they	might	well	have	gone	round	all	day,	one	pursuing,
the	other	simply	walking	at	a	pace	the	pursuer	could	not	achieve.
‘A	simple	shout,’	he	said	as	the	man	drew	closer.
‘I	did	not,	uh,	want,	uh,	to	call	undue	attention,	uh,	upon	us.’
‘You	do	not	sound	well.’
‘I	need	to	pee.’
‘Then—’
‘I	can’t.	Well,	I	can,	but	intermittently.	Generally	when	I’m	not,	er,	thinking
about	it.’
‘Ah.	A	healer	could—’
‘Yes,	yes,	I	know.	Never	mind	that.	Listen—’
‘Master	Quell,’	said	Gruntle,	‘this	was	not	the	way	to	avoid	undue	attention
–	everyone	else	is	sitting	right	there	in	the	shade	of	the	carriage,	and	they	have
been	watching	us	for	some	time.	Me,	at	least.	Why,	the	Bole	brothers	wave	to
me	with	every	pass	I	make.’
They	both	glanced	over	and,	sure	enough,	Jula	and	Amby	waved.
Master	Quell	rubbed	at	his	bicolour	red	and	pasty	face.	‘I	need	an	escort.’
‘For	what?	To	where?’
‘Back	to	the	realm	of	the	dead.	No,	not	in	the	carriage.	Just	you	and	me,
Gruntle.	I	need	to	get	a	sense	of	what’s	going	on.	We	need	to	just,	er,	slip	in.	A
quick	look	round,	then	back	out.’
‘And	then?’
Quell’s	brows	lifted.	‘Then?	Well,	we	resume	our	journey,	of	course.’
‘You	want	me	to	escort	you	into	Hood’s	realm,	as	what,	your	bodyguard?’
The	man	bristled	slightly.	‘The	shareholder	agreement	you	have	made	with
the	Guild	includes	discretionary	tasks	as	assigned	by	the	Pilot.’
Gruntle	shrugged.	‘I	was	but	wondering,	Master	Quell,	what	possible	use	I
could	be,	given	that	the	realm	is	awash	with	rabid	masses	of	miserable
corpses.’
‘I	said	we’d	go	in	quiet!’
‘We	could	ask	the	passenger	we	picked	up	back	there.’
‘What?	Oh,	is	he	still	here?’
‘Under	the	palm	trees.’
‘Under	them?	Only	a	dead	man	could	be	so	stupid.	Fine,	let’s	see	what	we
can	find	out	–	but	I	still	need	to	see	some	things	for	myself.’
The	rest	of	the	crew,	along	with	Mappo,	watched	them	walk	over	to	the
twin	palm	trees,	edging	into	their	shade	to	stand	–	nervously	–	before	the


gaunt,	withered	undead	who	was	piling	up	coconuts	into	pyramids	like	catapult
ammunition.	Even	as	he	worked,	unmindful	of	his	new	guests,	another	nut
thumped	heavily	on	the	sand	nearby,	making	both	Gruntle	and	Quell	flinch.
‘You,’	said	Quell.
The	ghastly	face	peered	up	with	shrunken	eyes.	‘Do	you	like	these?
Patterns.	I	like	patterns.’
‘Happy	for	you,’	Quell	muttered.	‘How	long	have	you	been	dead?’
‘How	long	is	a	taproot?’
‘What?	Well,	show	it	to	me	and	I’ll	guess.’
‘It’s	three	times	the	length	of	the	above	ground	stalk.	In	the	baraka	shrub,
anyway.	Does	the	ratio	hold	for	other	plants?	Should	we	find	out?’
‘No.	Later,	I	mean.	Look,	you	were	marching	with	all	the	rest	in	Hood’s
realm.	Why?	Where	were	you	all	going?	Or	coming	from?	Was	it	Hood
himself	who	summoned	you?	Does	he	command	all	the	dead	now?’
‘Hood	never	commands.’
‘That’s	what	I	thought,	but—’
‘Yet	now	he	has.’
Quell’s	eyes	widened.	‘He	has?’
‘How	wide	is	the	sky?	How	deep	is	the	ocean?	I	think	about	these	things,	all
the	time.’
Gruntle	noted	the	Master	gaping,	like	a	beached	fish,	and	so	he	asked,
‘What	was	your	name	when	you	were	alive,	sir?’
‘My	name?	I	don’t	recall.	Being	alive,	I	mean.	But	I	must	have	been,	once.
My	name	is	Cartographer.’
‘That	sounds	more	like	a	profession.’
The	corpse	scratched	his	forehead,	flakes	of	skin	fluttering	down.	‘It	does.
An	extraordinary	coincidence.	What	were	my	parents	thinking?’
‘Perhaps	you	are	but	confused.	Perhaps	you	were	a	cartographer,	trained	in
the	making	of	maps	and	such.’
‘Then	it	was	wise	that	they	named	me	so,	wasn’t	it?	Clever	parents.’
‘What	did	Hood	command	of	you,	Cartographer?’
‘Well,	he	said	“Come”	and	nothing	more.	It	wasn’t	a	command	to	create
confusion,	or	arguments	regarding	interpretation.	A	simple	command.	Even
dogs	understand	it,	I	believe.	Dogs	and	sharks.	I	have	found	seventeen	species
of	shellfish	on	this	beach.	Proof	that	the	world	is	round.’
Another	nut	thudded	in	the	sand.
‘We	are	perturbing	this	island	with	our	presence,’	said	the	cartographer.
‘The	trees	are	so	angry	they’re	trying	to	kill	us.	Of	course,	I	am	already	dead.’
He	climbed	to	his	feet,	bits	falling	away	here	and	there,	and	brushed	sand	and


skin	from	his	hands.	‘Can	we	go	now?’
‘Yes,’	said	Master	Quell,	though	his	eyes	were	still	a	little	wild.	‘We’re
going	back	to	Hood’s	realm	and	we’re	happy	to	take	you	with	us.’
‘Oh,	no,	I’m	not	going	back	there.	It’s	not	time.’
‘Yes	it	is	and	yes	you	are,’	said	Master	Quell.
‘No	it	isn’t	and	no	I’m	not.	Hood	issued	a	second	command,	one	just	to	me.
He	said	“Go”	and	so	I	did.	It’s	not	time.	Until	it	is,	I’m	staying	with	you.’
‘Everyone	who	rides	the	carriage,’	Quell	said	in	a	growl,	‘has	to	work	for
the	privilege.’
‘Yes,	and	I	have	begun.’	And	he	gestured	down	at	the	coconut	pyramids.
‘You	have	netting	bundled	to	the	sides	of	the	carriage,	presumably	to	hold
people	on	board.	If	we	are	to	cross	water,	then	we	should	place	these	nuts
within	said	netting.	As	flotation	devices,	in	case	someone	is	washed
overboard.’	He	made	a	heaving	motion	with	his	emaciated	arms.	‘With	a	line
attached	for	retrieval.’
‘That	might	work,’	said	Gruntle.
‘Gods	below,’	Master	Quell	muttered.	‘Fine,	I’m	not	arguing	with	a	dead
man.	Gruntle,	draw	your	weapons.	We’re	going	now.’
‘My	weapons?’
‘Just	in	case.	And	now,	no	more	damned	talking	back!’
Quell	fashioned	a	portal	into	Hood’s	warren	that	was	but	a	thin,	elongated
slice,	like	a	parting	of	curtains,	from	which	cool	lifeless	breath	gusted	out,
sweeping	the	sand	into	the	air.	Eyes	stinging,	Gruntle	glanced	back	just	before
following	the	mage	into	the	rent.	And	saw	Amby	and	Jula	wave.
They	emerged	on	the	summit	of	a	hill,	one	of	a	long	spine	of	hills,	each
one	so	similar	to	the	next	that	they	might	be	enormous	barrows	–	although	why
there	would	be	barrows	in	the	realm	of	death	Gruntle	could	not	imagine.
In	the	valley	before	them	the	broad	basin	was	a	solid	river	of	grey	figures,
tens	of	thousands	on	the	march.	Ragged	pennons	hung	from	standards	as	if
impervious	to	the	moaning	wind.	Weapons	glinted	in	muted	flashes.
‘Gods	below,’	muttered	Quell.	‘He’s	assembling	the	entire	host.’
‘Looks	that	way,’	agreed	Gruntle,	feeling	like	an	idiot	with	his	cutlasses	in
his	hands.	He	slid	them	back	into	the	under-slung	scabbards.	‘Do	we	make	our
way	down?’
‘I’d	rather	not.’
‘Good.	Seen	enough?	Can	we	go	now,	Master	Quell?’
‘Look,	a	rider	approaches.’
The	horse	was	clearly	as	dead	as	the	man	who	rode	it,	gaunt	and	withered,
mottled	where	hair	had	worn	off.	Both	wore	armour,	boiled	leather	tarnished


and	cracked,	flapping	on	frayed	leather	thongs	as	they	climbed	the	slope.	A
ragged	cape	lifted	like	a	tattered	wing	behind	the	warrior.	As	they	drew	closer,
Gruntle	swore	under	his	breath.	‘He’s	wearing	a	mask	–	he’s	a	damned
Seguleh!’	And	he	reached	for	his	weapons—
‘Gods’	breath,	Gruntle,	don’t	do	that!’
It	was	a	struggle	to	lower	his	arms.	Gruntle’s	blood	felt	hot	as	fire	in	his
veins	–	the	beast	within	him	wanted	to	awaken,	to	show	hackles	lifted	and	fangs
bared.	The	beast	wanted	to	challenge	this…thing.	Trembling,	he	made	no	move
as	the	rider	drove	his	horse	over	the	crest	a	dozen	paces	to	their	right,	sawing
the	reins	and	wheeling	the	beast	round	to	face	them.
‘Now	this	is	living!’	the	Seguleh	roared,	tilting	his	head	back	to	loose	a
manic	laugh.	Then	he	leaned	forward	on	the	saddle	and	cocked	his	head,	long
filthy	hair	swinging	like	ropes.	‘Well,’	he	amended	in	an	amused	rumble,	‘not
quite.	But	close	enough.	Close	enough.	Tell	me,	mortals,	do	you	like	my	army?
I	do.	Did	you	know	the	one	thing	a	commander	must	battle	against	–	more	than
any	enemy	across	the	plain,	more	than	any	personal	crisis	of	will	or
confidence,	more	than	unkind	weather,	broken	supply	chains,	plague	and	all	the
rest?	Do	you	know	what	a	commander	wages	eternal	war	with,	my	friends?	I
will	tell	you.	The	true	enemy	is	fear.	The	fear	that	haunts	every	soldier,	that
haunts	even	the	beasts	they	ride.’	He	lifted	a	gauntleted	hand	and	waved	to	the
valley	below.	‘But	not	with	this	army!	Oh,	no.	Fear	belongs	to	the	living,	after
all.’
‘As	with	the	T’lan	Imass,’	said	Gruntle.
The	darkness	within	the	mask’s	elongated	eye-holes	seemed	to	glitter	as
the	Seguleh	fixed	his	attention	on	Gruntle.	‘Trake’s	cub.	Now,	wouldn’t	you
like	to	cross	blades	with	me?’	A	low	laugh.	‘Yes,	as	with	the	T’lan	Imass.	Is	it
any	wonder	the	Jaghut	recoiled?’
Master	Quell	cleared	his	throat.	‘Sir,’	he	said,	‘what	need	has	Hood	for	an
army?	Will	he	now	wage	war	against	the	living?’
‘If	only,’	the	Seguleh	replied	in	a	grunt.	‘You	don’t	belong	here	–	and	if
you	drag	that	infernal	carriage	of	yours	back	here	any	time	soon,	I	will	seek
you	out	myself.	And	then	Trake’s	spitting	kitten	here	can	fulfil	his	desperate
desire,	hah!’	He	twisted	in	his	saddle.	Other	riders	were	approaching.	‘Look	at
them.	My	watchdogs.	“Be	reasonable”,	indeed.	Have	I	chopped	these	two
interlopers	to	pieces?	I	have	not.	Restraint	has	been	shown.’	He	faced	Gruntle
and	Quell	once	more.	‘You	will	confirm	this,	yes?’
‘Beyond	you	goading	Gruntle	here,’	Quell	said,	‘yes,	I	suppose	we	can.’
‘It	was	a	jest!’	the	Seguleh	shouted.
‘It	was	a	threat,’	Quell	corrected,	and	Gruntle	was	impressed	by	the	man’s


sudden	courage.
The	Seguleh	tilted	his	head,	as	if	he	too	was	casting	new	measure	upon	the
mage.	‘Oh,	trundle	your	wagon	wherever	you	like,	then,	see	if	I	care.’
Three	riders	mounted	the	summit	and,	slowing	their	horses	to	a	walk,	drew
up	to	where	waited	the	Seguleh,	who	now	sat	slumped	like	a	browbeaten	bully.
Gruntle	started,	took	an	involuntary	step	forward.	‘Toc	Anaster?’
The	one-eyed	soldier ’s	smile	was	strained.	‘Hello,	old	friend.	I	am	sorry.
There	may	come	a	time	for	this,	but	it	is	not	now.’
Gruntle	edged	back,	blunted	by	Toc	Anaster ’s	cold	–	even	harsh	–	tone.	‘I	–
I	did	not	know.’
‘It	was	a	messy	death.	My	memories	remain	all	too	sharp.	Gruntle,	deliver
this	message	to	your	god:	not	long	now.’
Gruntle	scowled.	‘Too	cryptic.	If	you	want	me	to	pass	on	your	words,	you
will	have	to	do	better	than	that.’
Toc	Anaster ’s	single	eye	–	terrifying	in	its	lifelessness	–	shifted	away.
‘He	cannot,’	said	the	middle	horseman,	and	there	was	something	familiar
about	the	face	behind	the	helm’s	cheekguards.	‘I	remember	you	from	Capustan.
Gruntle,	chosen	servant	of	Treach.	Your	god	is	confused,	but	it	must	choose,
and	soon.’
Gruntle	shrugged.	‘There	is	no	point	in	bringing	all	this	to	me.	Trake	and
me,	we’re	not	really	on	speaking	terms.	I	didn’t	ask	for	any	of	this.	I	don’t	even
want	it—’
‘Hah!’	barked	the	Seguleh,	twisting	round	to	face	the	middle	rider.	‘Hear
that,	Iskar	Jarak?	Let	me	kill	him!’
Iskar	Jarak?	I	seem	to	recall	he	had	a	different	name.	One	of	those	odd
ones,	common	to	the	Malazan	soldiery	–	what	was	it	now?
‘Save	your	wrath	for	Skinner,’	Iskar	Jarak	calmly	replied.
‘Skinner!’	roared	the	Seguleh,	savagely	wheeling	his	horse	round.	‘Where
is	he,	then?	I’d	forgotten!	Hood,	you	bastard	–	you	made	me	forget!	Where	is
he?’	He	faced	the	three	riders.	‘Does	Toc	know?	Brukhalian,	you?	Someone
tell	me	where	he’s	hiding!’
‘Who	knows?’	said	Iskar	Jarak.	‘But	there	is	one	thing	for	certain.’
‘What?’	demanded	the	Seguleh.
‘Skinner	is	not	here	on	this	hill.’
‘Bah!’	The	Seguleh	drove	spurs	into	his	horse’s	senseless	flanks.	The
animal	surged	forward	anyway,	plunging	off	the	hilltop	and	raging	downslope
like	an	avalanche.
Soft	laughter	from	Brukhalian,	and	Gruntle	saw	that	even	Toc	was
grinning	–	though	he	still	would	not	meet	his	eyes.	That	death	must	have	been


terrible	indeed,	as	if	the	world	had	but	one	answer,	one	way	of	ending	things,
and	whatever	lessons	could	be	gleaned	from	that	did	not	ease	the	spirit.	The
notion	left	him	feeling	morose.
It	was	a	common	curse	to	feel	unclean,	but	that	curse	would	be	unbearable
if	no	cleansing	awaited	one,	if	not	at	the	moment	of	dying,	then	afterwards.
Looking	upon	these	animated	corpses,	Gruntle	saw	nothing	of	redemption,
nothing	purged	–	guilt,	shame,	regrets	and	grief,	they	all	swirled	about	these
figures	like	a	noxious	cloud.
‘If	getting	killed	lands	me	with	you	lot,’	he	said,	‘I’d	rather	do	without.’
The	one	named	Iskar	Jarak	leaned	wearily	over	the	large	Seven	Cities
saddle	horn.	‘I	sympathize,	truly.	Tell	me,	do	you	think	we’ve	all	earned	our
rest?’
‘Don’t	you?’
‘You	have	lost	all	your	followers.’
‘I	have.’	Gruntle	saw	that	Toc	Anaster	was	now	watching	him,	fixed,	sharp
as	a	dagger	point.
‘They	are	not	here.’
He	frowned	at	Iskar	Jarak.	‘And	they	should	be,	I	suppose?’
Brukhalian	finally	spoke,	‘It	is	just	that.	We	are	no	longer	so	sure.’
‘Stay	out	of	Hood’s	realm,’	said	Toc	Anaster.	‘The	gate	is…closed.’
Master	Quell	started.	‘Closed?	But	that’s	ridiculous!	Does	Hood	now	turn
the	dead	away?’
Toc’s	single	eye	held	on	Gruntle.	‘The	borders	are	sealed	to	the	living.
There	will	be	sentinels.	Patrols.	Intrusions	will	not	be	tolerated.	Where	we
march	you	can’t	go.	Not	now,	perhaps	never.	Stay	away,	until	the	choice	is
taken	from	you.	Stay	away.’
And	Gruntle	saw	then,	finally,	the	anguish	that	gripped	Toc	Anaster,	the
bone-deep	fear	and	dread.	He	saw	how	the	man’s	warning	was	in	truth	a	cry	to
a	friend,	from	one	already	lost,	already	doomed.	Save	yourself.	Just	do	that,
and	it	will	all	be	worth	it	–	all	we	must	do,	the	war	we	must	seek.	Damn	you,
Gruntle,	give	all	this	meaning.
Quell	must	have	sensed	something	of	these	fierce	undercurrents,	for	he
then	bowed	to	the	three	riders.	‘I	shall	deliver	your	message.	To	all	the	pilots
of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild.’
The	ground	seemed	to	shift	uneasily	beneath	Gruntle’s	boots.
‘And	now	you	had	better	leave,’	said	Brukhalian.
The	hill	groaned	–	and	what	Gruntle	had	imagined	as	some	internal
vertigo	was	now	revealed	as	a	real	quaking	of	the	earth.
Master	Quell’s	eyes	were	wide	and	he	held	his	hands	out	to	the	sides	to	stay


balanced.
At	the	far	end	of	the	range	of	hills,	a	massive	eruption	thundered,	lifting
earth	and	stones	skyward.	From	the	ruptured	mound	something	rose,	clawing
free,	sinuous	neck	and	gaping,	snapping	jaws,	wings	spreading	wide—
The	hill	shivered	beneath	them.
The	three	riders	had	wheeled	their	horses	and	were	now	barrelling	down
the	slope.
‘Quell!’
‘A	moment,	damn	you!’
Another	hill	exploded.
Damned	barrows	all	right!	Holding	dead	dragons!	‘Hurry—’
‘Be	quiet!’
The	portal	that	split	open	was	ragged,	edges	rippling	as	if	caught	in	a
storm.
The	hill	to	their	right	burst	its	flanks.	A	massive	wedge-shaped	head
scythed	in	their	direction,	gleaming	bone	and	shreds	of	desiccated	skin—
‘Quell!’
‘Go!	I	need	to—’
The	dragon	heaved	up	from	cascading	earth,	forelimbs	tearing	into	the
ground.	The	leviathan	was	coming	for	them.
No	–	it’s	coming	for	the	portal	–	Gruntle	grasped	Master	Quell	and	dragged
him	towards	the	rent.	The	mage	struggled,	shrieking	–	but	whatever	he	sought
to	say	was	lost	in	the	deafening	hiss	from	the	dragon	as	it	lurched	forward.	The
head	snapped	closer,	jaws	wide	–	and	Gruntle,	with	Quell	in	his	arms,	threw
himself	back,	plunging	into	the	portal—
They	emerged	at	twice	the	height	of	a	man	above	the	sandy	beach,
plummeting	downward	to	thump	heavily	in	a	tangle	of	limbs.
Shouts	from	the	others—
As	the	undead	dragon	tore	through	the	rent	with	a	piercing	cry	of	triumph,
head,	neck,	forelimbs	and	shoulders,	then	one	wing	cracked	out,	spreading
wide	in	an	enormous	torn	sail	shedding	dirt.	The	second	wing	whipped	into
view—
Master	Quell	was	screaming,	weaving	frantic	words	of	power,	panic
driving	his	voice	ever	higher.
The	monstrosity	shivered	out	like	an	unholy	birth,	lunged	skyward	above
the	island.	Stones	rained	down	in	clouds.	As	the	tattered	tip	of	its	long	tail
slithered	free,	the	rent	snapped	shut.
Lying	half	in	the	water,	half	on	hard-packed	sand,	Gruntle	stared	up	as	the
creature	winged	away,	still	shedding	dust.


Shareholder	Faint	arrived,	falling	to	her	knees	beside	them.	She	was
glaring	at	Master	Quell	who	was	slowly	sitting	up,	a	stunned	look	on	his	face.
‘You	damned	fool,’	she	snarled,	‘why	didn’t	you	throw	a	damned	harness
on	that	thing?	We	just	lost	our	way	off	this	damned	island!’
Gruntle	stared	at	her.	Insane.	They	are	all	insane.
	
There	was	a	tension	in	his	stance	that	she	had	not	seen	before.	He	faced	east,
across	the	vast	sweeping	landscape	of	the	Dwelling	Plain.	Samar	Dev	gave	the
tea	another	stir	then	hooked	the	pot	off	the	coals	and	set	it	to	one	side.	She	shot
Karsa	Orlong	a	look,	but	the	Toblakai	was	busy	retying	the	leather	strings	of
one	of	his	moccasins,	aided	in	some	mysterious	way	by	his	tongue	which	had
curled	into	view	from	the	corner	of	his	mouth	–	the	gesture	was	so	childlike
she	wondered	if	he	wasn’t	mocking	her,	aware	as	always	that	she	was	studying
him.
Havok	cantered	into	view	from	a	nearby	basin,	his	dawn	hunt	at	an	end.
The	other	horses	shifted	nervously	as	the	huge	beast	drew	closer	with	head
held	high	as	if	to	show	off	the	blood	glistening	on	his	muzzle.
‘We	need	to	find	water	today,’	Samar	Dev	said,	pouring	out	the	tea.
‘So	we	will,’	Karsa	replied,	standing	now	to	test	the	tightness	of	the
moccasin.	Then	he	reached	beneath	his	trousers	to	make	some	adjustments.
‘Reminding	yourself	it’s	there?’	she	asked.	‘Here’s	your	tea.	Don’t	gulp.’
He	took	the	cup	from	her.	‘I	know	it’s	there,’	he	said.	‘I	was	just	reminding
you.’
‘Hood’s	breath,’	she	said,	and	then	stopped	as	Traveller	seemed	to	flinch.
He	turned	to	face	them,	his	eyes	clouded,	far	away.	‘Yes,’	he	said.	‘Spitting
something	out.’
Samar	Dev	frowned.	‘Yes	what?’
His	gaze	cleared,	flitted	briefly	to	her	and	then	away	again.	‘Something	is
happening,’	he	said,	walking	over	to	pick	up	the	tin	cup.	He	looked	down	into
the	brew	for	a	moment,	then	sipped.
‘Something	is	always	happening,’	Karsa	said	easily.	‘It’s	why	misery	gets
no	rest.	The	witch	says	we	need	water	–	we	can	follow	yon	valley,	at	least	for	a
time,	since	it	wends	northerly.’
‘The	river	that	made	it	has	been	dead	ten	thousand	years,	Toblakai.	But	yes,
the	direction	suits	us	well	enough.’
‘The	valley	remembers.’
Samar	Dev	scowled	at	Karsa.	The	warrior	was	getting	more	cryptic	by	the
day,	as	if	he	was	being	overtaken	by	something	of	this	land’s	ambivalence.	For


the	Dwelling	Plain	was	ill	named.	Vast	stretches	of…nothing.	Animal	tracks	but
no	animals.	The	only	birds	in	the	sky	were	those	vultures	that	daily	tracked
them,	wheeling	specks	of	patience.	Yet	Havok	had	found	prey.
The	Dwelling	Plain	was	a	living	secret,	its	language	obscure	and	wont	to
drift	like	waves	of	heat.	Even	Traveller	seemed	uneasy	with	this	place.
She	drained	the	last	of	her	tea	and	rose.	‘I	believe	this	land	was	cursed
once,	long	ago.’
‘Curses	are	immortal,’	said	Karsa	in	a	dismissive	grunt.
‘Will	you	stop	that?’
‘What?	I	am	telling	you	what	I	sense.	The	curse	does	not	die.	It	persists.’
Traveller	said,	‘I	do	not	think	it	was	a	curse.	What	we	are	feeling	is	the
land’s	memory.’
‘A	grim	memory,	then.’
‘Yes,	Samar	Dev,’	agreed	Traveller.	‘Here,	life	comes	to	fail.	Beasts	too
few	to	breed.	Outcasts	from	villages	and	cities.	Even	the	caravan	tracks	seem	to
wander	half	lost	–	none	are	used	with	any	consistency,	because	the	sources	of
water	are	infrequent,	elusive.’
‘Or	they	want	to	keep	bandits	guessing.’
‘I	have	seen	no	old	camps,’	Traveller	pointed	out.	‘There	are	no	bandits
here,	I	think.’
‘We	need	to	find	water,’	Samar	said	again.
‘So	you	said,’	Karsa	said,	with	an	infuriating	grin.
‘Why	not	clean	up	the	breakfast	leavings,	Toblakai.	Astonish	me	by	being
useful.’	She	walked	over	to	her	horse,	collecting	the	saddle	on	the	way.	She
could	draw	a	dagger,	she	could	let	slip	some	of	her	lifeblood,	could	reach
down	into	this	dry	earth	and	see	what	was	there	to	be	seen.	Or	she	could	keep
her	back	turned,	her	self	closed	in.	The	two	notions	warred	with	each	other.
Curiosity	and	trepidation.
She	swung	the	saddle	on	to	the	horse’s	broad	back,	adjusted	the	girth	straps
and	then	waited	for	the	animal	to	release	its	held	breath.	Nothing	likes	to	be
bound.	Not	the	living,	perhaps	not	the	dead.	Once,	she	might	have	asked	Karsa
about	that,	if	only	to	confirm	what	she	already	knew	–	but	he	had	divested
himself	of	that	mass	of	souls	trailing	in	his	wake.	Somehow,	the	day	he	killed
the	Emperor.	Oh,	two	remained,	there	in	that	horrid	sword	of	his.
And	perhaps	that	was	what	was	different	about	him,	she	realized.
Liberation.	But	then,	has	he	not	already	begun	collecting	more?	She	cinched	the
strap	then	half	turned	to	regard	the	giant	warrior,	who	was	using	sand	to	scrub
the	blackened	pan	on	which	she’d	cooked	knee-root,	challenging	the
pernicious	crust	with	a	belligerent	scowl.	No,	she	could	sense	nothing	–	not	as


drawn	in	as	she’d	made	herself.	Thus,	sensing	nothing	didn’t	mean	anything,
did	it?	Perhaps	he	had	grown	at	ease	with	those	victims	dragged	behind	him
everywhere	he	went.
A	man	like	that	should	not	smile.	Should	never	smile,	or	laugh.	He	should
be	haunted.
But	he	was	too	damned	arrogant	to	suffer	haunting,	a	detail	that	invariably
irritated	her,	even	as	she	was	drawn	to	it	(and	was	that	not	irritating	in	itself?).
‘You	chew	on	him,’	said	Traveller,	who	had	come	unseen	to	her	side	and
now	spoke	quietly,	‘as	a	jackal	does	an	antler.	Not	out	of	hunger	so	much	as
habit.	He	is	not	as	complicated	as	you	think,	Samar	Dev.’
‘Oh	yes	he	is.	More	so,	in	fact.’
The	man	grimaced	as	he	set	about	saddling	his	own	horse.	‘A	child
dragged	into	the	adult	world,	but	no	strength	was	lost.	No	weakening	of
purpose.	He	remains	young	enough,’	Traveller	said,	‘to	still	be	certain.	Of	his
vision,	of	his	beliefs,	of	the	way	he	thinks	the	world	works.’
‘Oh,	so	precisely	when	will	the	world	get	round	to	kicking	him	good	and
hard	between	the	legs?’
‘For	some,	it	never	does.’
She	eyed	him.	‘You	are	saying	it	does	no	good	to	rail	against	injustice.’
‘I	am	saying	do	not	expect	justice,	Samar	Dev.	Not	in	this	world.	And	not	in
the	one	to	come.’
‘Then	what	drives	you	so,	Traveller?	What	forces	your	every	step,	ever
closer	to	whatever	destiny	waits	for	you?’
He	was	some	time	in	answering,	although	she	did	not	deceive	herself	into
thinking	that	her	words	had	struck	something	vulnerable.	These	men	here	with
her,	they	were	armoured	in	every	way.	He	cinched	the	girth	straps	and	dropped
the	stirrups.	‘We	have	an	escort,	Samar	Dev.’
‘We	do?	The	vultures?’
‘Well,	yes,	there	are	those,	too.	Great	Ravens.’
At	that	she	squinted	skyward.	‘Are	you	sure?’
‘Yes,	but	I	was	speaking	of	another	escort.’
‘Oh,	then	who?	And	why	doesn’t	it	show	itself?’
Traveller	swung	himself	astride	his	horse	and	gathered	the	reins.	Karsa
had	completed	packing	the	camp	gear	and	was	now	bridling	Havok.	‘I	have	no
answers	to	those	questions,	Samar	Dev.	I	do	not	presume	to	know	the	minds	of
Hounds	of	Shadow.’
She	saw	Karsa	Orlong	glance	over	at	that,	but	there	was	nothing	revealed
in	his	expression	beyond	simple	curiosity.
Gods,	he	drives	me	mad!


‘Do	they	hunt	us?’	Karsa	asked.
‘No,’	Traveller	replied.	‘At	least,	not	me,	nor,	I	imagine,	our	witch	here.’
Karsa	mounted	his	Jhag	horse.	‘Today,’	he	announced,	‘I	shall	not	ride
with	you.	Instead,	I	shall	find	these	Hounds	of	Shadow,	for	I	wish	to	see	them
for	myself.	And	if	they	in	turn	see	me	alone,	then	they	may	choose	to	make
plain	their	desires.’
‘Now	what	is	the	point	of	that?’	demanded	Samar	Dev.
‘I	have	faced	Hounds	before,’	he	said.	‘I	am	happy	to	invite	them	close,	so
they	can	smell	the	truth	of	that.’
‘There	is	no	need,’	said	Traveller.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	the	Hounds	began	as	my
escort	–	one	in	truth	–	granted	me	by	Shadowthrone.	They	are	not	interested	in
you,	I	am	sure	of	it.’
Samar	Dev	rounded	on	him.	‘Then	why	did	you	suggest	otherwise?’
He	met	her	eyes	and	she	saw	him	gritting	his	teeth,	the	muscles	of	his	jaws
binding.	‘You	were	right,	witch,’	he	said,	‘you	know	this	warrior	better	than	I.’
Karsa	snorted	a	laugh.	‘I	will	see	you	later.’
They	watched	him	ride	off.
Samar	Dev	wanted	to	spit	–	the	tea	had	left	her	mouth	dry,	bitter.	‘He
probably	will	at	that,’	she	muttered,	‘whether	the	Hounds	like	it	or	not.’
Traveller	simply	nodded.
	
Skintick	knew	precisely	the	day	he	died.	The	final	terrible	battle	waged	on	Drift
Avalii,	with	four	of	his	closest	companions	falling,	each	just	beyond	his	reach,
beyond	his	own	life	which	he	would	have	sacrificed	to	take	their	place.	And
into	the	midst	of	the	crumbling	defence,	Andarist	had	stepped	forward,	making
of	himself	a	lodestone	to	the	attacking	Tiste	Edur.
The	death	of	the	man	whom	Skintick	thought	of	as	his	father	remained	in
his	mind,	like	a	scene	painted	by	some	chronicler	of	abject,	pathetic	moments.
And	in	that	sad,	regretful	face,	he	had	seen	all	the	kin	who	had	fallen	before,
killed	for	no	cause	worth	thinking	about	–	or	so	it	seemed	at	the	time.	The
grey-skinned	barbarians	desired	the	throne	–	perhaps	they	were	collecting	such
things,	as	if	possession	conferred	a	right,	but	what	did	it	matter?	These	games
were	stupidity,	every	trophy	an	absurd	icon	symbolizing	precisely	nothing
beyond	the	raging	ego	of	the	players.
Honourable	souls	had	died	for	this,	and,	once	the	grief	washed	away,	what
was	left	but	this	building	contempt	for	all	of	it?	Defending	this,	fighting	for
that,	winning	in	one	moment	only	to	lose	in	the	next.	Raw	magic	blistering
flesh,	javelins	winging	to	thud	into	bodies,	everything	of	value	spilling	out	on


to	dusty	cobbles	and	the	ribbons	of	grass	growing	exuberant	between	them.
The	things	that	died	in	him	on	that	day	would	be	deemed	virtues	by	most.
Duty	had	revealed	its	lie,	shattering	the	sanctity	of	loyalty	and	honour.	They’d
fought	for	nothing.	They	could	have	retreated,	holed	up	at	the	decrepit	temple
entrance,	and	simply	waited	for	the	arrival	of	the	humans,	first	the	assassins
and	then	the	one	named	Traveller	and	his	followers.	Traveller,	who	murdered
everyone	foolish	enough	to	step	into	his	path.	Whose	arrival	made	Andarist’s
death	–	and	the	deaths	of	his	friends	–	meaningless.
How	Skintick	hated	that	man.	Competence	was	no	gift	when	it	arrived	too
late.
He	no	longer	believed	in	honesty	either.	To	be	told	the	truth	was	to	feel	the
shackles	snap	shut	on	one’s	ankle.	Truth	was	delivered	with	the	expectation	that
it	would	force	a	single	course	of	action	–	after	all,	how	could	one	honourably
turn	away?	Truth	was	used	as	a	weapon,	and	all	one	could	do	in	defence	against
such	an	assault	was	to	throw	up	a	wall	of	lies.	Lies	of	acceptance,	capitulation.
Lies	to	oneself,	too.	That	things	mattered.	That	ideas	had	currency	and	symbols
deserved	the	servitude	of	courageous	fools.	And	that	it	all	had	meaning.
Nor	was	he	a	believer	in	courage.	People	relied	on	the	bravery	of	others	to
reap	whatever	profits	they	imagined	they	had	earned	or	deserved,	but	the	blood
spilled	was	never	theirs,	was	it?	No,	it	was	clear	now	to	Skintick.	Virtues	were
lauded	to	ensure	compliance,	to	wrap	round	raw,	reprehensible	servitude.	To
proclaim	the	sacrifice	of	others	–	each	of	whom	stood	in	place	of	those
reaping	the	rewards	and	so	were	paid	in	suffering	and	pain.
So	much	for	the	majesty	of	patriotism.
He	was	having	none	of	it,	not	any	more,	never	again.	And	this	was	what
made	him	dead	now.	And	as	with	anyone	for	whom	nothing	matters,	he	now
found	much	of	what	he	saw	around	him	profoundly	amusing.	Snide
commentary,	derisive	regard	and	an	eye	for	the	horror	of	true	irony,	these
were	the	things	he	would	now	pursue.
Did	Anomander	Rake	grieve	for	his	dead	brother?	For	Andarist,	who	had
stood	in	his	place?	Did	he	spare	a	thought	for	his	wretched	spawn,	so	many	of
whom	were	now	dead?	Or	was	he	now	lolling	fat	and	dissolute	on	whatever
mockery	he	called	his	throne,	reaping	all	the	rewards	of	his	brother ’s	final
sacrifice?	And	that	of	my	cousins?	My	closest	friends,	who	each	died	to	defend
a	possession	so	valuable	to	you	that	it	rots	in	an	empty	temple?	Remind	me	to
ask	you	that	question	when	we	finally	meet.
Though	he	loved	Nimander	–	indeed,	loved	them	all	in	this	pathetic	band
(save	Clip,	of	course)	–	Skintick	could	not	help	but	observe	with	silent	hilarity
the	desperate	expectations	of	this	journey’s	fated	end.	They	all	sought	safety


and,	no	doubt,	a	pat	on	the	head	for	services	rendered.	They	all	wanted	to	be
told	that	their	sacrifices	had	meaning,	value,	were	worthy	of	pride.	And
Skintick	knew	that	he	alone	would	be	able	to	see	the	disdain	veiled	in	the	eyes
of	the	Son	of	Darkness,	even	as	he	spouted	all	the	necessary	platitudes,	before
sending	them	off	to	their	small	rooms	in	some	forgotten	wing	of	whatever
palace	Rake	now	occupied.
And	then	what,	my	dearest	kin?	Shunted	out	on	to	the	streets	to	wander	in
the	dusk,	as	the	presence	of	others	slowly	prises	our	band	apart,	until	all	we
once	were	becomes	memories	thick	with	dust,	barely	worthy	of	the	occasional
reminiscence,	some	annual	gathering	in	some	tavern	with	a	leaking	roof,	where
we	will	see	how	we	each	have	sagged	with	the	years,	and	we’ll	get	drunk
swapping	tales	we	all	know	by	heart,	even	as	the	edges	grow	blunt	and	all	the
colours	bleed	out.
Desra	lying	on	her	back,	her	legs	spread	wide,	but	the	numbness	inside
can’t	be	pierced	that	way	and	she	probably	knows	but	habits	never	die,	they	just
wear	disguises.	Nenanda	will	polish	his	weapons	and	armour	every	morning	–
we’ll	see	him	clanking	round	guarding	everything	and	nothing,	his	eyes	mottled
with	verdigris	and	rust.	Aranatha	sits	in	an	overgrown	garden,	mesmerized	for
ten	years	and	counting	by	a	lone	blossom	beneath	a	tree;	do	we	not	envy	the
bliss	in	her	empty	eyes?	Kedeviss?	Well,	she	will	chronicle	our	despair,	our
sordid	demise.	Rounding	us	up	for	the	night	in	the	tavern	will	be	her	one	task
with	any	meaning	–	at	least	to	her	–	and	she	will	silently	rail	at	our	turgid,
insipid	uninterest.
Nimander,	ah,	Nimander,	what	waits	for	you?	One	night,	your	vision	will
clear.	One	deadly,	devastating	night.	You	will	see	the	blood	on	your	hands,	dear
vicious	Phaed’s	blood.	And	that	of	so	many	others,	since	you	were	the	one	we
victimized	by	proclaiming	you	as	our	leader.	And	on	that	night,	my	friend,	you
will	see	that	it	was	all	for	naught,	and	you	will	take	your	own	life.	A	tower,	a
window	ledge	and	a	plummet	down	through	the	dark	to	achieve	the	incumbent
poetic	futility.
Skintick	could	not	find	himself	in	that	future.	He	did	not	expect	to	complete
this	journey.	He	was	not	sure	he	even	wanted	to.	The	same	chronicler	who
painted	past	scenes	would	paint	the	future	ones,	too.	The	same	damned	theme,
reworked	with	all	the	obsessiveness	of	a	visionary	throttling	the	blind.
One	thing	was	certain.	He	would	permit	no	one	ever	again	to	abuse	his
virtues	–	even	those	few	that	remained,	in	their	dishevelled	state.	They	were	not
currency,	not	things	to	be	measured,	weighed	against	gold,	gems,	property	or
power.	If	the	bastards	wanted	all	that,	they	could	sweat	their	own	sweat	and
bleed	their	own	blood	to	get	it.


Take	me	as	a	knife	and	I	will	turn	in	your	hand.	I	swear	it.
‘You	are	smiling,’	Nimander	observed.	‘It	pleases	me	to	see	that	alive	and
well.’
Skintick	glanced	at	him.	The	legacy	of	Bastion	remained	in	the	stains	of
old	blood	beneath	the	salt	that	now	caked	moccasins	and	leggings.	No	one	had
bothered	cleaning	their	gear,	so	desperate	was	the	need	to	leave	that	city.
Something	had	changed	in	Nimander,	however,	beyond	the	horrors	of
saemankelyk	and	the	Dying	God’s	altar.	As	if	his	sense	of	purpose	had	taken	a
fresh	beating,	like	a	new	seedling	trampled	underfoot.	How	many	times,
Skintick	wondered,	could	Nimander	suffer	that,	before	some	fundamental
poison	altered	his	very	nature?	The	vision	he	had	of	Nimander ’s	final	demise
was	dependent	upon	a	certain	sanctity	of	spirit	remaining,	something	precious
and	rare	that	would	drive	him	to	that	last	act	of	despair.	If	it	was	already	dead,
or	twisted	malign,	then	Nimander ’s	fate	would	become	truly	unknown.
Has	he	found	ambition?	Is	the	poison	of	cynicism	awakening	in	his
beleaguered	soul?	This	could	change	things,	Skintick	realized.	He	might
become	someone	I	could	choose	to	follow	–	yes,	down	that	nasty	path	and	why
not?	Let	someone	else	suffer	for	our	gains,	for	a	change.	Topple	them	into	the
dirt	and	see	how	they	like	the	sweet	reversal.
Is	he	hard	enough	to	play	that	game?
Am	I	hard	enough	to	make	use	of	him?
They	had	found	a	horse	for	Clip,	but	retained	the	wagon,	at	least	for	this
journey	northward	along	the	edge	of	the	dying	salt	lake.	Nenanda	was	seated
once	more	on	the	raised	bench,	reins	in	one	hand,	switch	in	the	other.	Aranatha
sat	with	her	legs	dangling	off	the	end	of	the	wagon,	eyes	on	the	row	of	broken
teeth	that	was	Bastion’s	dwindling	skyline,	hazy	and	shimmering	above	the	heat
waves.	Desra	lounged	in	the	wagon’s	bed,	dozing	among	the	casks	of	water
and	bundles	of	dried	goods.	Kedeviss	rode	flank	off	to	the	right,	almost	thirty
paces	away	now,	her	horse	picking	its	way	along	the	old	beach	with	its
withered	driftwood.
Clip	rode	far	ahead,	emphasizing	his	impatience.	He’d	not	been	much
interested	in	hearing	the	tale	of	their	doings	since	his	collapse	at	the	village	–	a
failing	on	his	part	(as	he	evidently	saw	the	suggestion)	that	he	refused	to
entertain,	although	this	clearly	left	a	mysterious	and	no	doubt	troubling	gap	in
his	memory.	He	was,	if	anything,	even	more	evasive	than	he	had	been	before,
and	more	than	once	Skintick	had	caught	suspicion	in	the	warrior ’s	eyes	when
observing	the	rest	of	them.	As	if	they	had	conspired	to	steal	something	from
him,	and	had	succeeded.
Skintick’s	distrust	of	the	bastard	was	growing.	It	wasn’t	hard	to	hate	Clip	–


absurdly	easy,	in	fact	–	and	such	sentiments	could	well	cloud	his	sense	of	the
warrior	with	his	endlessly	spinning	rings.	Clip	was,	he	now	believed,	one	of
those	eager	to	abuse	the	virtues	of	others	to	achieve	whatever	private	and
entirely	personal	victory	he	sought.	And	if	the	effort	left	a	half-dozen
contemptible	youths	dead	in	his	wake,	what	of	it?
He	could	not	but	see	the	bloodstains	they	now	wore;	could	not	but	have
noticed	the	notched	and	nicked	weapons	they	took	files	to	during	rest	stops.
Their	damaged	armour.	And	dazed	and	groggy	as	he	had	been	upon	awakening
in	the	altar	chamber,	he	could	not	have	been	blind	to	the	scores	of	dead	–	the
veritable	slaughterhouse	they	had	left	behind.	And	yet	still	Clip	saw	them	as
barely	worth	his	regard,	beyond	that	malicious	suspicion	as	it	slowly	flowered
into	paranoia,	and	what	might	that	lead	him	to	do?
To	us?
Yes,	one	more	fear	to	stalk	me	now,	though	I	am	dead.
‘We	will	need	to	find	a	way	through	those	mountains,’	Nimander	said,
squinting	ahead.
‘God’s	Walk,	Clip	called	them.	An	astounding	fount	of	unexpected
knowledge,	our	grateful	friend.’
‘Grateful?	Ah,	I	see.	Well,	he	wasn’t	there	in	spirit,	was	he?’
‘No,	too	busy	dancing	from	the	spider ’s	bite.’
‘It	does	little	good	to	try	describing	what	happened,’	Nimander	said.	‘To
one	who	remains	closed,	words	are	thinner	than	webs,	easily	swept	aside.’
‘We	should	have	lied.’
Nimander	looked	over,	brows	lifting.
Skintick	grinned.	‘Some	wild	tale	of	godly	possession	and	insane	fanatics
eager	to	splash	the	world	with	their	own	blood.	Us	stumbling	on	to	a	path	to
paradise	only	to	find	we’re	not	welcome.	Double-crossing	a	simpleton	god
who	misunderstood	the	notion	of	puppets	–	that	they	be	made	of	followers,	not
himself.	A	tale	of	poisoned	wine	that	was	blood	that	was	wine	that	was	blood.
Oh,	and	let’s	not	forget	our	glorious	slaughter,	that	improbable	collection	of
lucky	swings	and	pokes	and	the	infernal	bad	luck	of	our	attackers.	And	then—’
‘Enough,	Skin,	please.’
‘Why	did	we	bother,	Nimander?	Bother	saving	him?’
Nimander ’s	eyes	remained	on	the	distant	mountains.	‘Aranatha	says	he	is
needed.	Necessary.’
‘For	what?	And	what	would	she	know	about	it	anyway?’
‘I	wish	I	could	answer	those	questions,	Skin.’
‘I	feel	as	if	I	am	drowning	in	blood.’
Nimander	nodded.	‘Yes.	I	feel	the	same.	I	think	we	all	do.’


‘I	don’t	think	Anomander	Rake	has	it	in	him	to	throw	us	a	rope.’
‘Probably	not.’
This	admission,	so	wise,	shook	Skintick.	His	fear	was	accurate	–	their
leader	had	changed.	Does	he	even	now	see	clearly?	Yet,	if	that	is	so,	where	is
his	despair?	I	do	not	understand—
‘It	feels	like,’	Nimander	said,	‘dying	inside.	That’s	what	it	feels	like.’
‘Don’t	say	that,	brother.	Don’t.’
‘Why	not?’
Only	one	of	us	can	feel	that	way.	Only	one.	I	got	there	first,	damn	you!	It’s
mine!	Abruptly,	he	barked	a	laugh.	‘No	reason,	in	truth.	No	reason	at	all.’
‘You	are	acting	strangely,	Skin,	did	you	know	that?’
He	shrugged.	‘We	need	to	wash	this	blood	off,	Nimander.’
They	rode	on	across	the	bleached	salt	flat.	The	day	grew	hotter.
	
Directly	beneath	the	floor	of	the	terondai,	where	blazed	the	black	sun,	a	vast
chamber	had	been	carved	out	of	the	bedrock.	When	Anomander	Rake,	Lord	of
Black	Coral	and	Son	of	Darkness,	wearied	of	the	view	from	the	keep’s	tower
and	other	high	vantage	points,	he	descended	into	this	womb	in	the	rock,	where
darkness	remained	absolute.
Such	moments	were	rare,	and	even	rarer	that	the	Lord	should	summon
Endest	Silann	to	meet	him	in	the	subterranean	cavern.	His	legs	still	stiff	from
the	long	trek	back	to	the	city,	the	castellan	made	his	way	down	the	steep,
winding	stairs,	until	at	last	he	reached	the	base.	Enormous	doors	sealed	the
cave,	scaled	in	beaten	silver	in	patterns	suggesting	the	skin	of	dragons.
Tarnished	black,	barring	the	gleam	of	the	scales’	edges,	the	barrier	was	barely
visible	to	Endest	Silann’s	failing	eyes,	and	when	he	reached	for	the	heavy	latch
he	was	forced	to	grope	for	a	moment	before	his	hand	settled	on	the	silver	bar.
Cold	air	gusted	around	him	as	he	pulled	one	of	the	doors	open.	A	smell	of
raw	stone,	acrid	and	damp,	the	sound	of	trickling	water.	He	saw	his	Lord
standing	near	the	centre,	where	an	obelisk	rose	like	a	stalagmite	from	the	floor.
This	basalt	edifice	was	carved	square	at	the	base,	tapering	to	an	apex	at	twice
the	height	of	a	Tiste	Andii.	On	the	side	facing	Rake	there	was	an	indent,
moulded	to	match	the	sword	he	carried	on	his	back.
‘It	is	not	often,’	said	Anomander	as	Endest	approached,	‘that	I	feel	the	need
to	ease	the	burden	of	Dragnipur.’
‘Sire.’
He	watched	as	Anomander	unsheathed	the	dread	sword	and	set	it	into	the
indentation.	At	once	the	obelisk	began	sweating,	thick,	glistening	beads


studding	the	smoothed	surface,	then	racing	down	the	sides.	Something	like
thunder	groaned	through	the	stone	underfoot.
Endest	Silann	sighed,	leaned	on	his	walking	stick.	‘The	stone,	Lord,	cannot
long	withstand	that	burden.’	Yet	you	can,	and	this	so	few	understand,	so	few
comprehend	at	all.
‘A	few	moments	more,’	Anomander	Rake	murmured.
‘Sire,	that	was	not	a	chastisement.’
A	brief	smile.	‘But	it	was,	old	friend,	and	a	wise	one.	Stone	knows	its	own
weight,	and	the	limits	of	what	it	can	sustain.	Be	assured,	I	will	not	long	abuse
its	generosity.’
Endest	Silann	looked	round,	drawing	in	the	sweet	darkness,	so	pure,	so
perfect.	It	is	almost	as	we	once	knew.	Kharkanas,	before	she	embraced	Light,
before	the	ones	born	of	ashes	lifted	themselves	up	and	took	swords	in	hand.
Scabandari.	Ilgast	Rend,	Halyd	Bahann.	Esthala	who	dreamed	of	peace.
Kagamandra	Tulas	Shorn,	who	did	not.
‘I	have	sent	Spinnock	Durav	away.’
‘Yes,	I	heard.	Sire,	I	cannot—’
‘I	am	afraid	you	have	no	choice,	Endest.’
‘The	High	Priestess—’
‘Understands,	and	she	will	do	all	she	can.’
So	long	ago	now.	Lord,	your	patience	beggars	that	of	gods.
‘There	was	no	purpose	worthy	enough	to	breathe	life	into	our	people,	was
there?	It	is	not	history	that	so	assailed	us,	although	many	see	it	that	way.	The
lessons	of	futility	can	be	gathered	by	anyone	with	a	mind	so	inclined.	Every
triumph	hollow,	every	glory	revealed	at	last	to	be	ephemeral.	But	none	of	that
gives	cause	to	wither	the	spirit.	Damage	it,	perhaps,	yes,	but	the	road	we	have
walked	down	stands	high	above	such	things.	Do	you	understand	that,	Endest?’
‘I	think	I	do,	sire.’
‘We	were	murdered	by	compromises.	No,	not	those	that	followed	the
arrival	of	Light.	Not	those	born	of	Shadow.	These	things	were	inevitable.	They
were,	by	their	very	nature,	necessary.’
‘Yes.’
‘The	day	we	accepted	her	turning	away,	Endest,	was	the	day	we	ran	the
knives	across	our	own	throats.’	Anomander	Rake	paused,	and	then	said,	‘We
are	an	ancient,	stubborn	people.’	He	faced	Endest	Silann.	‘See	how	long	it	has
taken	to	bleed	out?’
And	then,	to	complete	the	unruly	triumvirate,	there	was	the	brood	of	Osserc.
Menandore,	and	that	mess	of	mixed	bloods	to	follow:	Sheltatha	Lore,	Sukul
Ankhadu,	Brevith	Dreda.	The	others,	the	ones	outside	all	of	that,	how	they


watched	on,	bemused,	brows	darkening	with	anger.	Draconus,	you	thought	you
could	give	answer	to	all	of	us.	You	were	wrong.
Were	you	wrong?	He	found	himself	staring	at	Dragnipur,	catching	the
faintest	echo	of	rumbling	wheels,	the	muted	cries	of	the	suffering,	and	there,
yes,	that	seething	storm	of	chaos	drawing	ever	closer.
‘Without	the	blood	of	dragons,’	Anomander	Rake	went	on,	‘we	would	all
be	dust,	scattered	on	the	winds,	drifting	between	the	stars	themselves.	Yes,
others	might	see	it	differently,	but	that	cold	fever,	so	sudden	in	our	veins,	so
fierce	in	our	minds	–	the	chaos,	Endest	–	gave	us	the	strength	to	persist,	to
cease	fearing	change,	to	accept	all	that	was	unknown	and	unknowable.	And	this
is	why	you	chose	to	follow	us,	each	in	our	time,	our	place.’
The	chaos	in	you,	yes,	a	fire	on	the	promontory,	a	beacon	piercing	the
profound	entropy	we	saw	all	around	us.	And	yet,	so	few	of	you	proved	worthy	of
our	allegiance.	So	few,	Lord,	and	fewer	with	each	generation,	until	now	here
you	stand,	virtually	alone.
Tears	were	streaming	from	his	eyes	now,	weeping	as	did	the	obelisk,	as
did	the	stone	on	all	sides.	The	one	who	was	worth	it.	The	only	one.
‘You	will	find	the	strength	within	you,	Endest	Silann.	Of	that	I	have	no
doubt.’
‘Yes,	sire.’
‘As	shall	I.’	And	with	that	the	Son	of	Darkness	reached	out,	reclaimed	the
sword	Dragnipur.	With	familiar	ease	he	slid	the	weapon	into	the	scabbard	on
his	back.	He	faced	Endest	and	smiled	as	if	the	burden	he	had	just	accepted	yet
again	could	not	drive	others	to	their	knees	–	gods,	ascendants,	the	proud	and
the	arrogant,	all	to	their	knees.	Rake’s	legs	did	not	buckle,	did	not	even	so
much	as	tremble.	He	stood	tall,	unbowed,	and	in	the	smile	he	offered	Endest
Silann	there	was	a	certainty	of	purpose,	so	silent,	so	indomitable,	so	utterly
appalling	that	Endest	felt	his	heart	clench,	as	if	moments	from	rupturing.
And	his	Lord	stepped	close	then,	and	with	one	hand	brushed	the	wetness
from	one	cheek.
	
He	could	see	her	dancing	out	there,	amidst	dust	devils	and	shards	of	frostskinned	rock,	through	shafts	of	blistering	sunlight	and	hazy	swirls	of	spinning
snow.	Blood	still	streamed	from	his	wounds	and	it	seemed	that	would	never
cease	–	that	this	crimson	flow	debouched	from	some	eternal	river,	and	the
blood	was	no	longer	his	own,	but	that	of	the	god	standing	beside	him.	It	was	an
odd	notion,	yet	it	felt	truthful	even	though	he	dared	not	ask	the	Redeemer,
dared	not	hear	the	confirmation	from	the	god’s	mouth.


The	crazed	weather	whirled	on	out	on	that	plain,	and	she	moved	through	it
effortlessly,	round	and	round,	this	way	and	that,	but	not	yet	drawing	closer,	not
yet	coming	for	him	once	more.
‘Why	does	she	wait?’	he	asked.	‘She	must	see	that	I	cannot	withstand
another	assault,	that	I	will	surely	fall.’
‘She	would	if	she	could,’	the	Redeemer	replied.
‘What	holds	her	back?’
‘Wounds	must	heal,	memories	of	pain	fade.’
Seerdomin	rubbed	at	the	grit	on	his	face.	There	had	been	dirty	rain,	gusting
up	to	where	they	stood,	but	it	had	since	wandered	back	down	into	the	basin,	a
rotted	brown	curtain	dragged	aimlessly	away.
‘Sometimes,’	said	the	Redeemer,	‘things	leak	through.’
Seerdomin	grunted,	then	asked,	‘From	where?’
‘Lives	of	the	T’lan.	So	much	was	unleashed,	so	much	forgotten	only	to	be
lived	once	again.	There	was	anguish.	There	was…glory.’
He	had	not	been	there	to	witness	that	moment.	The	kneeling	of	the	T’lan
Imass.	Such	a	thing	was	hard	to	imagine,	yet	it	sent	shivers	through	him	none
the	less.	A	moment	to	shake	every	belief,	when	the	world	drew	breath
and…held	it.
‘Did	you	know	what	to	expect?’
‘They	humbled	me,’	said	the	Redeemer.
I	suspect	it	was	you	who	humbled	them,	Itkovian	–	yes,	a	mortal	back	then,
just	a	mortal.	No,	they	were	the	ones	struck	mute,	filled	with	awe	and	wonder.	I
do	not	know	how	I	know	that,	but	I	do.
…things	leak	through.
‘The	madness	of	the	weather	comes	from	the	memories	of	the	T’lan
Imass?	Can	you	not	summon	them?	Draw	them	up	in	ranks	before	you?	Do
you	not	think	they	would	proudly	accept	such	a	thing?	A	way	to	pay	you	back
for	what	you	did?	Redeemer,	summon	the	spirits	of	the	T’lan	Imass	–	and	that
woman	below	will	never	reach	you.’
‘I	cannot.	I	will	not.	Yes,	they	would	accept	that	notion.	Reciprocity.	But	I
will	not.	What	I	gave	I	gave	freely,	a	gift,	not	an	exchange.	Oh,	they	forced	one
upon	me,	at	the	end,	but	it	was	modest	enough	–	or	I	was	weak	enough	then	not
to	resist	it.’
‘If	you	will	not	accept	service,’	Seerdomin	then	said,	‘why	do	you	seek	it
from	me?’
‘You	are	free	to	choose,’	the	Redeemer	replied.	‘Defend	me,	or	step	aside
and	see	me	fall.’
‘That’s	hardly	a	choice!’


‘True.	Such	things	rarely	are.	I	would	send	you	back,	but	your	body	no
longer	functions.	It	lies	on	a	heap	of	rubbish	behind	the	pilgrim	camp.
Scavengers	have	fed,	for	your	flesh	is	not	poisoned	as	is	that	of	the	others	thus
disposed.’
Seerdomin	grimaced,	fixing	eyes	once	more	upon	the	High	Priestess
dancing	on	the	plain.	‘Thank	you	for	the	grisly	details.	If	I	stand	aside	–	if	I
watch	you	die	–	then	what	will	happen	to	me?	To	my	spirit?’
‘I	do	not	know.	If	I	am	able,	I	will	grieve	for	you	then,	as	much	as	I	do	for
the	souls	of	all	those	I	now	hold	within	me.’
Seerdomin	slowly	turned	and	studied	the	god.	‘If	she	takes	you	–	all	those
T’lan	Imass—’
‘Will	be	helpless.	They	will	succumb.	All	who	are	within	me	will
succumb.’
‘So	much	for	standing	aside.’
‘Seerdomin.	Segda	Travos,	you	are	not	responsible	for	their	fate.	I	am.
This	error	is	mine.	I	will	not	judge	you	harshly	should	you	choose	to	yield.’
‘Error.	What	error?’
‘I	am…defenceless.	You	sensed	that	from	the	very	beginning	–	when	you
came	to	the	barrow	and	there	knelt,	honouring	me	with	your	companionship.	I
possess	no	provision	for	judgement.	My	embrace	is	refused	no	one.’
‘Then	change	that,	damn	you!’
‘I	am	trying.’
Seerdomin	glared	at	the	god,	who	now	offered	a	faint	smile.	After	a
moment,	Seerdomin	hissed	and	stepped	back.	‘You	ask	this	of	me?	Are	you
mad?	I	am	not	one	of	your	pilgrims!	Not	one	of	your	mob	of	would-be	priests
and	priestesses!	I	do	not	worship	you!’
‘Precisely,	Segda	Travos.	It	is	the	curse	of	believers	that	they	seek	to
second-guess	the	one	they	claim	to	worship.’
‘In	your	silence	what	choice	do	they	have?’
The	Redeemer ’s	smile	broadened.	‘Every	choice	in	the	world,	my	friend.’
	
Countless	paths,	a	single	place	sought	by	all.	If	she	could	be	bothered,	she
could	think	on	the	innumerable	generations	–	all	that	rose	to	stand	with
thoughts	reaching	into	the	night	sky,	or	plunging	into	the	mesmerizing	flames
of	the	campfire	–	the	hunger	did	not	change.	The	soul	lunged,	the	soul	crawled,
the	soul	scraped	and	dragged	and	pitched	headlong,	and	in	the	place	it	desired
–	needed	–	there	was	this:	the	bliss	of	certainty.
Conviction	like	armour,	eyes	shining	like	swords;	oh,	the	bright	glory	that


was	the	end	to	every	question,	every	doubt.	Shadows	vanished,	the	world	raged
sudden	white	and	black.	Evil	dripped	with	slime	and	the	virtuous	stood	tall	as
giants.	Compassion	could	be	partitioned,	meted	out	only	to	the	truly	deserving
–	the	innocent	and	the	blessed.	As	for	all	the	rest,	they	could	burn,	for	they
deserved	no	less.
She	danced	like	truth	unleashed.	The	beauty	of	simplicity	flowed	pure	and
sweet	through	her	limbs,	rode	the	ebb	and	sweep	of	her	sighing	breath.	All
those	agonizing	uncertainties	were	gone,	every	doubt	obliterated	by	the	gift	of
saemankelyk.
She	had	found	the	shape	of	the	world,	every	edge	clear	and	sharp	and
undeniable.	Her	thoughts	could	dance	through	it	almost	effortlessly,	evading
snags	and	tears,	not	once	touching	raw	surfaces	that	might	scrape,	that	might
make	her	flinch.
The	bliss	of	certainty	delivered	another	gift.	She	saw	before	her	a	universe
transformed,	one	where	contradictions	could	be	rightfully	ignored,	where
hypocrisy	did	not	exist,	where	to	serve	the	truth	in	oneself	permitted	easy
denial	of	anything	that	did	not	fit.
The	minuscule	mote	of	awareness	that	hid	within	her,	like	a	snail	flinching
into	its	shell,	was	able	to	give	shape	to	this	transformation,	well	recognizing	it
as	genuine	revelation,	the	thing	she	had	been	seeking	all	along	–	yet	in	the
wrong	place.
Salind	understood	now	that	the	Redeemer	was	a	child	god,	innocent,	yes,
but	not	in	a	good	way.	The	Redeemer	possessed	no	certainty	in	himself.	He	was
not	all-seeing,	but	blind.	From	a	distance	the	two	might	appear	identical,	there
in	that	wide	embrace,	the	waiting	arms,	the	undefended	openness.	He	forgave
all	because	he	could	not	see	difference,	could	not	even	sense	who	was
deserving	and	who	was	not.
Saemankelyk	brought	an	end	to	ambiguity.	It	divided	the	world	cleanly,
absolutely.
She	must	give	that	to	him.	It	would	be	her	gift	–	the	greatest	gift	imaginable
–	to	her	beloved	god.	An	end	to	his	ambivalence,	his	ignorance,	his
helplessness.
Soon,	the	time	would	come	when	she	would	once	again	seek	him.	The
pathetic	mortal	soul	standing	in	her	way	would	not	frustrate	her	the	next	time
she	found	her	weapons	–	no,	her	righteous	blades	would	cut	and	slash	him	to
pieces.
The	thought	made	her	fling	her	arms	into	the	air	as	she	whirled.	Such	joy!
She	had	a	gift.	It	was	her	duty	to	deliver	it.
Whether	you	like	it	or	not.


No,	he	could	not	refuse.	If	he	did,	why,	she	would	have	to	kill	him.

Bone	white,	the	enormous	beasts	stood	on	the	ridge,	side	on,	their	heads	turned
to	watch	Karsa	Orlong	as	he	cantered	Havok	ever	closer.	He	sensed	his	horse
tensing	beneath	him,	saw	the	ears	flick	a	moment	before	he	became	aware	that
he	was	being	flanked	by	more	Hounds	–	these	ones	darker,	heavier,	shorthaired	excepting	one	that	reminded	him	of	the	wolves	of	his	homeland,	that
tracked	him	with	amber	eyes.
‘So,’	Karsa	murmured,	‘these	are	the	Hounds	of	Shadow.	You	would	play
games	with	me,	then?	Try	for	me,	and	when	we’re	done	few	of	you	will	leave
this	place,	and	none	will	be	free	of	wounds,	this	I	promise	you.	Havok,	see	the
black	one	in	the	high	grasses?	Thinks	to	hide	from	us.’	He	grunted	a	laugh.
‘The	others	will	feint,	but	that	black	one	will	lead	the	true	charge.	My	sword
shall	tap	her	nose	first.’
The	two	white	beasts	parted,	one	trotting	a	dozen	or	so	paces	along	the
ridge,	the	other	turning	round	and	doing	the	same	in	the	opposite	direction.	In
the	gap	now	between	them,	shadows	swirled	like	a	dust-devil.
Karsa	could	feel	a	surge	of	battle	lust	within	him,	his	skin	prickling
beneath	the	fixed	attention	of	seven	savage	beasts,	yet	he	held	his	gaze	on	that
smudge	of	gloom,	where	two	figures	were	now	visible.	Men,	one	bare-headed
and	the	other	hooded	and	leaning	crooked	over	a	knobby	cane.
The	Hounds	to	either	side	maintained	their	distance,	close	enough	for	a
swift	charge	but	not	so	close	as	to	drive	Havok	into	a	rage.	Karsa	reined	in	six
paces	from	the	strangers	and	eyed	them	speculatively.
The	bare-headed	one	was	plainly	featured,	pale	as	if	unfamiliar	with
sunlight,	his	dark	hair	straight	and	loose,	almost	ragged.	His	eyes	shifted
colour	in	the	sunlight,	blue	to	grey,	to	green	and	perhaps	even	brown,	a
cascade	of	indecision	that	matched	his	expression	as	he	in	turn	studied	the
Toblakai.
The	first	gesture	came	from	the	hooded	one	with	the	hidden	face,	a	lifting
of	the	cane	in	a	half-hearted	waver.	‘Nice	horse,’	he	said.
‘Easier	to	ride	than	a	dog,’	Karsa	replied.
A	snort	from	the	dark-haired	man.
‘This	one,’	said	the	hooded	man,	‘resists	sorcery,	Cotillion.	Though	his
blood	is	old,	I	wonder,	will	all	mortals	one	day	be	like	him?	An	end	to
miracles.	Nothing	but	dull,	banal	existence,	nothing	but	mundane	absence	of
wonder.’	The	cane	jabbed.	‘A	world	of	bureaucrats.	Mealy-minded,	sour-faced


and	miserable	as	a	reunion	of	clerks.	In	such	a	world,	Cotillion,	not	even	the
gods	will	visit.	Except	in	pilgrimage	to	depression.’
‘Quaintly	philosophical	of	you,	Shadowthrone,’	replied	the	one	named
Cotillion.	‘But	is	this	one	really	the	right	audience?	I	can	almost	smell	the	bear
grease	from	here.’
‘That’s	Lock,’	said	Shadowthrone.	‘He	was	rolling	in	something	a	while
ago.’
Karsa	leaned	forward	on	the	strange	saddle	that	Samar	Dev	had	had	fitted
for	Havok	back	in	Letheras.	‘If	I	am	a	clerk,	then	one	prophecy	will	prove
true.’
‘Oh,	and	which	one	would	that	be?’	Cotillion	asked,	seemingly	amused	that
Karsa	was	capable	of	speech.
‘The	tyranny	of	the	number	counters	will	be	a	bloody	one.’
Shadowthrone	wheezed	laughter,	then	coughed	into	the	silence	of	the
others	and	said,	‘Hmmm.’
Cotillion’s	eyes	had	narrowed.	‘In	Darujhistan,	a	temple	awaits	you,
Toblakai.	A	crown	and	a	throne	for	the	taking.’
Karsa	scowled.	‘Not	more	of	that	shit.	I	told	the	Crippled	God	I	wasn’t
interested.	I’m	still	not.	My	destiny	belongs	to	me	and	none	other.’
‘Oh,’	said	Shadowthrone,	cane	wavering	about	once	again,	like	a	headless
snake,	‘we’re	not	encouraging	you	to	take	it.	Far	from	it.	You	on	that	throne
would	be…distressing.	But	he	will	drive	you,	Toblakai,	the	way	hunters	drive	a
man-eating	lion.	Straight	into	the	spike-filled	pit.’
‘A	smart	lion	knows	when	to	turn,’	Karsa	said.	‘Watch	as	the	hunters
scatter.’
‘It	is	because	we	understand	you,	Toblakai,	that	we	do	not	set	the	Hounds
upon	you.	You	bear	your	destiny	like	a	standard,	a	grisly	one,	true,	but	then,	its
only	distinction	is	in	being	obvious.	Did	you	know	that	we	too	left	civilization
behind?	The	scribblers	were	closing	in	on	all	sides,	you	see.	The	clerks	with
their	purple	tongues	and	darting	eyes,	their	shuffling	feet	and	sloped	shoulders,
their	bloodless	lists.	Oh,	measure	it	all	out!	Acceptable	levels	of	misery	and
suffering!’	The	cane	swung	down,	thumped	hard	on	the	ground.	‘Acceptable?
Who	the	fuck	says	any	level	is	acceptable?	What	sort	of	mind	thinks	that?’
Karsa	grinned.	‘Why,	a	civilized	one.’
‘Indeed!’	Shadowthrone	turned	to	Cotillion.	‘And	you	doubted	this	one!’
Cotillion	grimaced.	‘I	stand	corrected,	Shadowthrone.	If	the	Crippled	God
has	not	yet	learned	his	lesson	with	this	warrior,	more	lessons	are	bound	to
follow.	We	can	leave	him	to	them.	And	leave	this	Toblakai,	too.’
‘Barring	one	detail,’	Shadowthrone	said	in	a	rasp.	‘Toblakai,	heed	this


warning,	if	you	value	that	destiny	you	would	seek	for	yourself.	Do	not	stand	in
Traveller ’s	path.	Ever.’
Karsa’s	grin	broadened.	‘We	are	agreed,	he	and	I.’
‘You	are?’
‘I	will	not	stand	in	his	path,	and	he	will	not	stand	in	mine.’
Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion	were	silent	then,	considering.
Leaning	back,	Karsa	collected	the	lone	rein.	Havok	lifted	his	head,	nostrils
flaring.	‘I	killed	two	Deragoth,’	Karsa	said.
‘We	know,’	said	Cotillion.
‘Their	arrogance	was	their	soft	underbelly.	Easy	to	reach.	Easy	to	plunge
in	my	hands.	I	killed	them	because	they	thought	me	weak.’
Cotillion’s	expression	grew	mocking.	‘Speaking	of	arrogance…’
‘I	was	speaking,’	said	Karsa	as	he	swung	Havok	round,	‘of	lessons.’	Then
he	twisted	in	the	saddle.	‘You	laugh	at	those	coming	to	the	Crippled	God.
Perhaps	one	day	I	will	laugh	at	those	coming	to	you.’
	
Cotillion	and	Shadowthrone,	with	the	Hounds	gathering	close,	watched	the
Toblakai	ride	away	on	his	Jhag	horse.
A	thump	of	the	cane.	‘Did	you	sense	the	ones	in	his	sword?’
Cotillion	nodded.
‘They	were…’	Shadowthrone	seemed	to	struggle	with	the	next	word,
‘…proud.’
And	again,	Cotillion	could	do	little	more	than	nod.
Abruptly,	Shadowthrone	giggled,	the	sound	making	the	two	new	Hounds
flinch	–	a	detail	he	seemed	not	to	notice.	‘Oh,’	he	crooned,	‘all	those	poor
clerks!’
	
‘Is	that	a	cloud	on	the	horizon?’
At	Reccanto	Ilk’s	query,	Mappo	glanced	up	and	followed	the	man’s
squinting	gaze.	He	rose	suddenly.	‘That’s	more	than	a	cloud,’	he	said.
Sweetest	Sufferance,	sitting	nearby,	grunted	and	wheezed	herself	upright,
brushing	sand	from	her	ample	behind.	‘Master	Qu	–	ellll!’	she	sang.
Mappo	watched	as	the	crew	started	scrabbling,	checking	the	leather	straps
and	fastening	rings	and	clasps	dangling	from	the	carriage.	The	horses	shifted
about,	suddenly	restless,	eyes	rolling	and	ears	flattening.	Gruntle	came	up	to
stand	beside	the	Trell.	‘That’s	one	ugly	storm,’	he	said,	‘and	it	looks	to	be


bearing	down	right	on	us.’
‘These	people	baffle	me,’	Mappo	admitted.	‘We	are	about	to	get
obliterated,	and	they	look…excited.’
‘They	are	mad,	Mappo.’	He	eyed	the	Trell	for	a	long	moment,	then	said,
‘You	must	be	desperate	to	have	hired	this	mob.’
‘Why	is	it,’	Mappo	asked,	‘that	Master	Quell	seemed	indifferent	to
unleashing	an	undead	dragon	into	this	world?’
‘Well,	hardly	indifferent.	He	said	oops!	At	least,	I	think	that’s	what	I	heard,
but	perhaps	that	was	but	my	imagination.	This	Trygalle	Guild…these
carriages,	they	must	be	dragging	things	across	realms	all	the	time.	Look	at	yon
walking	corpse.’
They	did	so,	observing	in	silence	as	the	desiccated	figure,	holding	a
collection	of	cast-off	straps	and	rope,	stood	speculatively	eyeing	one	of	the
carriage’s	spoked	wheels.
The	wind	freshened	suddenly,	cooler,	strangely	charged.
One	of	the	horses	shrilled	and	began	stamping	the	sand.	After	a	moment
the	others	caught	the	same	feverish	anxiety.	The	carriage	rocked,	edged
forward.	Master	Quell	was	helping	Precious	Thimble	through	the	door,
hastening	things	at	the	end	with	a	hard	shove	to	her	backside.	He	then	looked
round,	eyes	slightly	wild,	until	he	spied	Mappo.
‘Inside	you	go,	good	sir!	We’re	about	to	leave!’
‘Not	a	moment	too	soon,’	Gruntle	said.
Mappo	set	out	for	the	carriage,	then	paused	and	turned	to	Gruntle.	‘Please,
be	careful.’
‘I	will,	as	soon	as	I	figure	out	what’s	about	to	happen.	Quell!	What	warren
are	we	using	now?	And	hadn’t	you	better	get	the	way	through	opened?’
Quell	stared	at	him.	‘Get	on	the	damned	carriage!’
‘Fine,	but	tell	me—’
‘You	idiot!’	shouted	Faint	from	where	she	sat	on	the	roof.	‘Don’t	you	get
it?’	And	she	jabbed	a	finger	at	the	churning	black	cloud	now	almost	towering
over	them.	‘That’s	our	ride!’
‘But	–	wait	–	how—’
‘Climb	aboard,	you	oaf,	or	drown!’
‘Climb	aboard,’	shrieked	Sweetest	Sufferance,	‘and	maybe	drown
anyway!’
Gruntle	saw	that	the	corpse	had	tied	itself	to	the	wheel.
Gods	below,	what	am	I	doing	here?
A	roar	exploded	on	the	reef	and	Gruntle	whirled	round	to	see	the	gust
front’s	devastating	arrival,	a	wall	of	thrashing,	spume-crested	water,	rising,


charging,	lifting	high	to	devour	the	entire	island.
He	lunged	for	the	carriage.	As	he	scrambled	up	the	side	and	fumbled	for
the	lashing,	Reccanto	Ilk,	squinting,	asked,	‘Is	it	here	yet?’
The	horses	began	screaming	in	earnest.
And	all	at	once,	the	short-sighted	idiot	had	his	answer.


Chapter	Fifteen

You	would	call	us	weak?
Fear	talks	out	of	the	side	of	the	mouth
Each	item	in	your	list	is	an	attack
That	turns	its	stab	upon	yourself
Displaying	the	bright	terrors
That	flaw	the	potential	for	wonder
You	drone	out	your	argument
As	if	stating	naught	but	what	is	obvious
And	so	it	is	but	not	in	the	way	you	think
The	pathos	revealed	is	your	paucity
Of	wisdom	disguised	as	plain	speak
From	your	tower	of	reason
As	if	muscle	alone	bespoke	strength
As	if	height	measures	the	girth	of	will
As	if	the	begotten	snips	thorns	from	the	rose
As	if	the	hearthfire	cannot	devour	a	forest
As	if	courage	flows	out	lost	monthly
In	wasted	streams	of	dead	blood
Who	is	this	to	utter	such	doubt?
Priest	of	a	cult	false	in	its	division
I	was	there	on	the	day	the	mob	awoke
Storming	the	temple	of	quailing	half-men
You	stood	gape-jawed	behind	them
As	your	teachings	were	proved	wrong
Shrink	back	from	true	anger
Flee	if	you	can	this	burgeoning	strength
The	shape	of	the	rage	against	your	postulated
Justifications	is	my	soldier ’s	discipline


Sure	in	execution	and	singular	in	purpose
Setting	your	head	atop	the	spike
Last	Day	of	the	Man	Sect
Sevelenatha	of	Genabaris
		(cited	in	‘Treatise	on	Untenable
Philosophies	among	Cults’
Genorthu	Stulk)

Many	children,	early	on,	acquire	a	love	of	places	they	have	never	been.	Often,
such	wonder	is	summarily	crushed	on	the	crawl	through	the	sludge	of	murky,
confused	adolescence	on	to	the	flat,	cracked	pan	of	adulthood	with	its	airless
vistas	ever	lurking	beyond	the	horizon.	Oh,	well,	sometimes	such	gifts	of
curiosity,	delight	and	adventure	do	indeed	survive	the	stationary	trek,	said
victims	ending	up	as	artists,	scholars,	inventors	and	other	criminals	bent	on
confounding	the	commonplace	and	the	platitudes	of	peaceful	living.	But	never
mind	them	for	now,	since,	for	all	their	flailing	subversions,	nothing	really	ever
changes	unless	in	service	to	convenience.
Bainisk	was	still,	in	the	sheltered	core	of	his	being,	a	child.	Ungainly	with
growth,	yes,	awkward	in	a	body	with	which	he	had	not	yet	caught	up,	but	he	had
yet	to	surrender	his	love	of	the	unknown.	And	so	it	should	be	wholly
understandable	that	he	and	young	Harllo	should	have	shared	a	spark	of	delight
and	wonder,	the	kind	that	wove	tight	between	them	so	that	not	even	the
occasional	snarl	could	truly	sever	the	binding.
In	the	week	following	that	fateful	tear	in	the	trust	between	them,	Harllo	had
come	to	believe	that	he	was	once	more	truly	alone	in	the	world.	Wounds
scabbed	over	and	scabs	fell	away	to	reveal	faint	scars	that	soon	faded	almost
out	of	existence,	and	the	boy	worked	on,	crawling	into	fissures,	scratching	his
way	along	fetid,	gritty	cracks	in	the	deep	rock.	Choking	at	times	on	bad	air,
stung	by	blind	centipedes	and	nipped	by	translucent	spiders.	Bruised	by	shifting
stones,	his	eyes	wide	in	the	darkness	as	he	searched	out	the	glitter	of	ore	on
canted,	close	walls.
At	week’s	end,	however,	Bainisk	was	with	him	once	more,	passing	him	a
jug	of	silty	lakewater	as	he	backed	out	of	a	fissure	and	sat	down	on	the	warm,
dry	stone	of	the	tunnel	floor,	and	in	this	brief	shared	moment	the	tear	slowly
began	to	heal,	re-knitted	in	the	evasiveness	of	their	eyes	that	would	not	yet	lock
on	to	the	reality	of	their	sitting	side	by	side	–	far	beneath	the	world’s	surface,


two	beating	hearts	that	echoed	naught	but	each	other	–	and	this	was	how	young
boys	made	amends.	Without	words,	with	spare	gestures	that,	in	their	rarity,
acquired	all	the	necessary	significance.	When	Harllo	was	done	drinking	he
passed	back	the	jug.
‘Venaz	is	on	me	all	the	time	now,’	Bainisk	said.	‘I	tried	it,	with	him	again,	I
mean.	But	it’s	not	the	same.	We’re	both	too	old	for	what	we	had,	once.	All	he
ever	talks	about	is	stuff	that	bores	me.’
‘He	just	likes	hurting	people.’
Bainisk	nodded.	‘I	think	he	wants	to	take	over	my	job.	He	argued	over
every	order	I	gave	him.’
‘People	like	him	always	want	to	take	over,’	Harllo	said.	‘And	most	times
when	other	people	see	it	they	back	off	and	let	them.	That’s	what	I	don’t	get,
Bainisk.	It’s	the	scariest	thing	of	all.’
That	last	admission	was	uncommon	between	boys.	The	notion	of	being
frightened.	But	theirs	was	not	a	normal	world,	and	to	pretend	that	there	was
nothing	to	fear	was	not	among	the	few	privileges	they	entertained.	Out	here,
people	didn’t	need	reasons	to	hurt	someone.	They	didn’t	need	reasons	for
doing	anything.
‘Tell	me	about	the	city	again,	Mole.’
‘There’s	a	haunted	tower.	My	uncle	took	me	to	see	it	once.	He	has	big
hands,	so	big	that	when	he	holds	yours	it’s	like	your	hand	disappears	and
there’s	nothing	in	the	world	could	pull	you	apart.	Anyway,	there’s	a	ghost	in
that	tower.	Named	Hinter.’
Bainisk	set	on	him	wide	eyes.	‘Did	you	see	it?	Did	you	see	that	ghost?’
‘No,	it	was	daytime.	They’re	hard	to	see	in	daytime.’
‘It’s	dark	enough	down	here,’	Bainisk	said,	looking	round.	‘But	I	ain’t
never	seen	a	ghost.’
Harllo	thought	to	tell	him,	then.	It	had	been	his	reason	for	bringing	up	the
story	in	the	first	place,	but	he	found	himself	holding	back	yet	again.	He	wasn’t
sure	why.	Maybe	it	was	because	the	skeleton	wasn’t	a	true	ghost.	‘Sometimes,’
he	said,	‘the	dead	don’t	go	away.	I	mean,	sometimes,	they	die	but	the	soul
doesn’t,	er,	leave	the	body.	It	stays	where	it	is,	where	it	always	was.’
‘Was	this	Hinter	like	that?’
‘No,	he	was	a	real	ghost.	A	spirit	with	no	body.’
‘So	what	makes	ghosts	of	some	people	but	not	others?’
Harllo	shrugged.	‘Don’t	know,	Bainisk.	Maybe	spirits	with	a	reason	to	stay
are	the	ones	that	become	ghosts.	Maybe	the	Lord	of	Death	doesn’t	want	them,
or	lets	them	be	so	they	can	maybe	finish	doing	what	they	need	to	do.	Maybe
they	don’t	realize	they’re	dead.’	He	shrugged	again.	‘That’s	what	my	uncle


said.	He	didn’t	know	either,	and	not	knowing	made	him	mad	–	I	could	tell	by
the	way	he	held	my	hand	tighter.’
‘He	got	mad	at	a	ghost?’
‘Could	be.	That’s	what	I	figure,	anyway.	I	didn’t	say	nothing	to	make	him
mad,	so	it	must	have	been	the	ghost.	His	not	knowing	what	it	wanted	or
something.’
Harllo	could	well	recall	that	moment.	Like	Bainisk,	he’d	asked	lots	of
questions,	amazed	that	such	a	thing	as	a	ghost	could	exist,	could	be	hiding,
watching	them,	thinking	all	its	ghost	thoughts.	And	Gruntle	had	tried	to	answer
him,	though	it	was	obviously	a	struggle.	And	when	Harllo	asked	him	if	maybe
his	father	–	who	was	dead	–	might	be	a	ghost	out	there	somewhere	far	away,
his	uncle	had	said	nothing.	And	when	he	asked	if	maybe	his	ghost	father	was
still	around	because	he	was	looking	for	his	son,	then	Gruntle’s	big	hand
squeezed	tight	and	then	tighter	for	a	breath	or	two,	not	enough	to	actually	hurt
Harllo,	but	close.	And	then	the	grip	softened	once	more,	and	Gruntle	took	him
off	to	buy	sweets.
He’d	probably	seen	Hinter,	looking	out	through	one	of	the	gloomy
windows	of	the	tower.	He’d	probably	wanted	to	tell	Hinter	to	go	away	and
never	come	back.	Like	bad	fathers	did.	Because	maybe	Harllo’s	father	wasn’t
dead	at	all,	since	one	time	his	real	mother	had	said	something	about	‘putting
the	bastard	away’,	and	though	Harllo	didn’t	know	the	precise	meaning	of
‘bastard’	he’d	heard	it	often	enough	to	guess	it	was	a	word	used	for	people	no
one	liked	having	around.
But	thinking	about	Gruntle	made	him	sad,	so	instead	he	reached	for	the	jug
of	water	again	and	drank	deep.
Bainisk	watched	him,	and	then	rose.	‘There’s	a	new	chute	that’s	been
cleared.	I	was	thinking	maybe	you	could	climb	it,	if	you	was	rested	up	enough.’
‘Sure,	Bainisk.	I’m	ready.’
They	set	out	in	silence.	But	this	time	the	silence	wasn’t	uncomfortable,	and
Harllo	felt	such	a	wave	of	relief	when	he	realized	this	that	his	eyes	welled	up
for	a	moment.	Silly,	really,	and	dangerous	besides.	When	he	had	a	moment
when	Bainisk	wasn’t	looking,	he	quickly	wiped	his	grimy	cheeks	and	then
dried	the	backs	of	his	hands	on	his	tunic.
Even	had	he	been	turned	towards	Harllo,	Bainisk	probably	would	not	have
noticed.	His	mind	was	stepping	stealthily	on	to	the	worn	stones	of	the	path
leading	to	Hinter ’s	Tower,	so	that	he	could	see	the	ghost	for	himself.	What	a
thing	that	would	be!	To	see	with	his	own	eyes	something	that	he	had	never	seen
before!
There	in	that	amazing	city	so	far	away.	Where	all	manner	of	wonders


jostled	with	the	crowds	on	all	the	bright	streets.	Where	ghosts	argued	with
landlords	over	rent.	Where	people	had	so	much	food	they	got	fat	and	had	to	be
carried	around.	And	people	didn’t	hurt	other	people	for	no	good	reason,	and
people	like	Venaz	got	exactly	what	they	deserved.
Oh	yes,	he	did	love	that	city,	that	place	where	he	had	never	been.
	
Don’t	be	absurd.	The	modestly	pudgy	man	in	the	red	waistcoat	is	not	so	crass
as	to	fish	for	weeping	multitudes	in	the	rendition	of	this	moment,	nor	so
awkward	with	purple	intent.	Give	Kruppe	some	credit,	you	who	are	so	quick	to
cast	aspersions	like	hooks	into	a	crowded	pool	(caught	something,	did	you?
No,	dear	friend,	do	not	crow	your	prowess,	’twas	only	this	carp	desperate	to
get	out).
The	water ’s	reflection	is	not	so	smooth;	oh,	no,	not	so	smooth.
Is	Bainisk’s	city	quaint,	possibly	even	cute	and	heart-warming,	in	a	softly
tragic	way?	Not	the	point!
Some	of	us,	you	see	(or	don’t),	still	dream	of	that	city.	Where	none	of	us
has	ever	been.
That,	dear	ones,	is	the	point.
	
Second	guessing	is	murder.	Or,	depending	on	one’s	point	of	view,	suicide.
Blend	had	found	plenty	of	opportunity	to	consider	such	matters	while	lying
bleeding	on	the	floor	of	K’rul’s	Bar.	It	had	been	close,	and	without	Mallet
around	the	prospects	of	a	thorough	healing	of	her	wounds	was	something	she
would	just	have	to	live	without.	The	Councilman,	Coll,	had	sent	over	a	local
cutter	with	passing	skills	in	common	Denul,	and	he	had	managed	to	half	knit
the	ruptured	flesh	and	stem	the	flow	of	blood,	and	then	had	taken	needle	and
gut	to	suture	the	wounds.	All	of	which	left	Blend	propped	up	on	her	bed,	barely
able	to	move.
K’rul’s	Bar	remained	closed.	What	had	once	been	a	temple	was	now	a
crypt.	From	what	Picker	had	told	her,	there	wasn’t	a	patch	of	raw	earth	in	the
cellars	below	that	wasn’t	soft	and	queasy	underfoot.	The	Elder	God	never	had
it	so	good.
Bluepearl	and	Mallet,	both	dead.	The	very	idea	of	that	left	gaping	holes	that
opened	out	beneath	every	thought,	every	feeling	that	leaked	through	her	grim
control.	The	bastards	had	survived	decades	of	war,	battle	after	battle,	only	to
get	cut	down	in	their	retirement	by	a	mob	of	assassins.


The	shock	lingered,	there	in	the	echoes	of	empty	rooms,	the	silences	from
all	the	wrong	places,	the	bitter	arguments	that	erupted	between	Antsy	and
Picker	in	the	office	or	in	the	corridors.	If	Duiker	remained	resident	–	if	he
hadn’t	fled	–	he	was	silent,	witnessing,	as	any	historian	would,	every	opinion
strapped	down	into	immobility.	And,	it	seemed,	thoroughly	uninterested	in
whether	she	–	or	any	of	them	–	lived	or	died.
The	sunlight	creeping	through	the	shutters	told	her	it	was	day,	possibly	late
afternoon,	and	she	was	hungry	and	maybe,	just	maybe,	they’d	all	forgotten	her.
She’d	heard	the	occasional	thump	from	the	main	floor	below,	a	few	murmured
conversations,	and	was	contemplating	finding	something	to	pound	on	the	floor
when	she	heard	steps	approaching	along	the	corridor.	A	moment	later	her	door
opened	and	in	strode	Scillara,	bearing	a	tray.
Something	sweet	and	avid	curled	up	deep	in	Blend’s	gut,	then	squirmed	at	a
succession	of	delicious	thoughts.	‘Gods,	you’re	a	sight.	I	was	moments	from
slipping	away,	straight	into	Hood’s	hoary	arms,	but	now,	all	at	once—’
‘You	have	reason	to	live,	yes,	all	that.	It’s	tapu	–	I	hope	you	don’t	mind,	but
the	only	cuisine	I	know	at	all	is	Seven	Cities,	and	little	enough	of	that.’
‘They’ve	got	you	cooking	now?’
‘Pays	my	room	and	board.	At	least,’	she	added	as	she	set	the	tray	down	on
Blend’s	lap,	‘no	one’s	demanded	I	clear	my	tab.’
Blend	looked	down	at	the	skewers	of	meat	and	vegetables	and	fruit.	The
pungent	aroma	of	greenspice	made	her	eyes	water.	‘Money	can	go	piss	itself,’
she	said.
Scillara’s	eyes	widened.
Blend	shrugged,	reaching	for	the	first	skewer.	‘We	were	never	in	this	to	get
rich,	love.	It	was	just…something	to	do,	a	place	to	be.	Besides,	we’re	not	going
to	hold	our	hands	out	when	it	comes	to	you	and	Barathol,	and	Chaur.	Gods
below,	you	dragging	Duiker	off	on	a	date	kept	the	old	fool	alive.	And	Barathol
and	Chaur	arrived	like	a	mailed	fist	–	from	what	I	hear,	just	in	time,	too.	We
may	be	idiots,	Scillara,	but	we’re	loyal	idiots.’
‘I	imagine,’	Scillara	said,	pulling	a	chair	close,	‘the	Assassins’	Guild	is	not
thinking	of	you	as	idiots	at	the	moment.	More	like	a	hornet’s	nest	they	regret
kicking.	Regret?’	She	snorted.	‘That’s	too	mild	a	word.	If	you	think	you’re
reeling,	consider	the	Guild	Master	right	now.’
‘He’ll	recover,’	Blend	said.	‘Us?	I’m	not	so	sure.	Not	this	time.’
Scillara’s	heavy-lidded	eyes	settled	on	Blend	for	a	long	moment,	and	then
she	said,	‘Picker	was	badly	shaken.	Still	is,	in	fact.	Time	and	again	I	see	the
colour	drain	from	her	face,	I	see	her	knees	go	weak,	and	she	reaches	out	to
grab	hold	of	something.	Middle	of	the	night,	she’s	up	and	pacing	the	hallways


–	she	acts	like	Hood’s	at	her	shoulder	these	days—’
‘That’s	just	it,	though,	isn’t	it?	A	few	years	ago	and	she’d	be	strapping	on
the	armour	and	counting	quarrels	–	we’d	have	to	chain	her	down	to	keep	her
from	charging	off—’
‘You	don’t	get	it,	do	you,	Blend?’
‘What?’
‘Years	ago,	as	you	say,	she	was	a	soldier	–	so	were	you.	A	soldier	lives
with	certain	possibilities.	Needs	to	keep	in	mind	what	might	happen	at	any	time.
But	you’re	all	retired	now.	Time	to	put	all	that	away.	Time	to	finally	relax.’
‘Fine.	It	takes	a	while	to	get	it	all	back—’
‘Blend,	Picker ’s	the	way	she	is	right	now	because	she	almost	lost	you.’
In	the	silence	that	followed	that	statement,	Blend’s	mind	was	awhirl.
‘Then…’
‘She	can’t	bear	to	come	in	here	and	see	you	the	way	you	are.	So	pale.	So
weak.’
‘And	that’s	what’s	keeping	her	from	hunting	the	killers	down?	That’s
ridiculous.	Tell	her,	from	me,	Scillara,	that	all	this	going	soft	shit	is,	um,
unattractive.	Tell	her,	if	she’s	not	ready	to	start	talking	vengeance,	then	she	can
forget	about	me.	We’ve	never	run	from	anything	in	our	lives,	and	as	soon	as
I’m	back	on	my	feet,	I	plan	on	a	rat	hunt	the	likes	of	which	the	Guild	has	never
seen.’
‘All	right.’
‘Is	this	what	all	the	arguing’s	about?	Her	and	Antsy?’
A	nod.
‘Find	me	a	High	Denul	healer,	will	you?	I’ll	pay	whatever	it	takes.’
‘Fine.	Now	eat.’
	
The	corpse	still	smelled	of	fermented	peaches.	Laid	out	on	a	long	table	in	one
of	the	back	rooms,	the	Seguleh	might	have	been	sleeping	one	off,	and	Picker
expected	the	ghastly	warrior ’s	serenely	closed	eyes	to	flicker	open	at	any
moment.	The	thought	sent	shivers	through	her	and	she	glanced	over	once	more
at	Duiker.
‘So,	Historian,	you’ve	done	some	thinking	on	this,	some	jawing	with	that
bard	and	that	alchemist	friend	of	yours.	Tell	us,	what	in	Hood’s	name	are	all
these	pickled	Seguleh	doing	in	the	cellar?’
Duiker	frowned,	rubbed	at	the	back	of	his	neck,	and	would	not	meet
Picker ’s	hard	stare.	‘Baruk	didn’t	take	the	news	well.	He	seemed…upset.	How
many	casks	have	you	examined?’


‘There’s	twelve	of	the	bastards,	including	this	one.	Three	are	women.’
Duiker	nodded.	‘They	can	choose.	Warriors	or	not.	If	not,	they	cannot	be
challenged.	Seems	to	relate	to	infant	mortality.’
Picker	frowned.	‘What	does?’
‘Denul	and	midwifery.	If	most	children	generally	survive,	then	mothers
don’t	need	to	birth	eight	or	ten	of	them	in	the	hopes	that	one	or	two	make	it—’
‘Well,	that’s	the	way	it	is	everywhere.’
‘Of	course,’	Duiker	continued	as	if	he	had	not	heard	her	statement,	‘some
cultures	have	an	overriding	need	to	increase	their	population	base.	And	this	can
impose	strictures	on	women.	There’s	a	high	attrition	rate	among	the	Seguleh.	A
duelling	society	by	its	very	nature	cuts	down	the	survival	rate	once	adulthood
is	reached.	Young	warriors	in	their	prime	–	probably	as	deadly	as	a	war,	only
this	is	a	war	that	never	ends.	Still,	there	must	be	periods	–	cycles,	perhaps	–
when	young	women	are	freed	up	to	choose	their	own	path.’
Picker ’s	eyes	settled	on	the	corpse	on	the	table	while	Duiker	spoke.	She
tried	to	imagine	such	a	society,	wherein	like	bhederin	cows	all	the	women
stood	moaning	as	their	tails	were	pushed	to	one	side	almost	as	soon	as	the
latest	calf	had	dropped	out	bleating	on	to	the	ground.	It	was	madness.	It	was
unfair.	‘Good	thing	even	Seguleh	women	wear	masks,’	she	muttered.
‘Sorry,	what?’
She	scowled	across	at	the	historian.	‘Hides	all	the	rage.’
‘Oh,	well,	I	don’t	know	that	the	non-warrior	women	do	–	it	never	occurred
to	me	to	ask.	But	I	see	your	point.’
‘But	is	that	enough?’	she	asked.	‘Do	so	many	warriors	kill	each	other	that
it’s	necessary	to	demand	that	of	the	women?’
Duiker	glanced	at	her,	then	away	again.
The	bastard’s	hiding	some	suspicions.
‘I	don’t	know,	Picker.	Could	be.	Their	savagery	is	infamous.’
‘How	long	do	you	think	these	ones	have	been	down	there?	In	the	cellar,	I
mean,	in	those	casks?’
‘The	seals	are	templar.	Baruk	suggests	that	the	cult	persisted,	in	some
residual	form,	long	after	its	presumed	extinction.’
‘Decades?	Centuries?’
He	shrugged.
‘But	what	are	they	doing	here	in	Darujhistan	anyway?	Those	islands	are
right	off	the	south	end	of	the	damned	continent.	Nearly	a	thousand	leagues
between	them	and	this	city.’
‘I	don’t	know.’
Yeah,	right.	Sighing,	she	turned	away.	‘Seen	Antsy?’


‘At	the	bar.’
‘Typical.	Depleting	our	stock.’
‘Your	indecision	has	left	him	despondent.’
‘Stuff	that,	Duiker,’	she	snapped,	walking	from	the	room,	leaving	him
there	with	that	damned	corpse.	It	was	a	contest	which	of	them	was	the	least
forthcoming,	in	any	case,	and	she	was	tired	of	the	duck	and	dodge.	Yet,
something	in	all	of	that	had	lodged	in	her	the	suspicion	that	the	Guild	contract
out	on	them	was	connected,	somehow,	with	this	old	temple	and	all	its	grisly
secrets.	Find	the	connection,	and	maybe	find	the	piece	of	shit	who	put	the	chop
on	us.	Find	him,	or	her,	so	I	can	shove	a	cusser	up	inside	nice	and	deep.
Antsy	was	leaning	on	the	bar,	glowering	at	nothing	in	particular,	at	least
until	he	found	a	perfect	victim	in	Picker	as	she	walked	up.	‘Careful,	woman,’
he	growled,	‘I	ain’t	in	the	mood.’
‘Ain’t	in	the	mood	for	what?’
‘For	anything.’
‘Except	one	thing.’
‘Anything	you	might	try	on	me,	is	what	I	meant.	As	for	the	other	thing,
well,	I’ve	already	decided	to	go	it	alone	if	I	have	to.’
‘So,’	she	leaned	on	the	bar	beside	him,	‘what	are	you	waiting	for,	then?’
‘Blend.	Once	she’s	back	on	her	feet,	Pick,	she’ll	be	hungry	enough	to	take
the	fight	to	’em.’	He	tugged	on	his	moustache,	then	scowled	at	her.	‘It’s	you	I
can’t	figure.’
‘Antsy,’	Picker	said,	sighing,	‘much	as	I’d	love	to	murder	every	damned
assassin	in	this	city,	and	the	Guild	Master,	too,	they’re	not	the	source	of	the
problem.	Someone	hired	them,	only	we	don’t	know	who,	and	we	don’t	know
why.	We’ve	been	through	this	before.	We’re	back	right	where	we	started,	in
fact,	only	this	time	we’re	down	two.’	She	found	she	was	trembling,	and	was
unable	to	meet	Antsy’s	stare.	‘You	know,	I	find	myself	wishing	Ganoes	Paran
was	here	–	if	anybody	could	work	out	what’s	going	on,	it’s	the	Captain.’
Antsy	grunted.	‘Master	of	the	Deck,	aye.’	He	drank	down	the	last	of	his
drink	and	straightened.	‘Fine,	let’s	go	to	the	Finnest	House,	then	–	maybe	he’s
in	there,	maybe	he’s	not.	Either	way,	it’s	doing	something.’
‘And	leave	Blend	here	on	her	own?’
‘She’s	not	alone.	There’s	Duiker	and	Scillara.	Not	to	mention	that	bard.
There	ain’t	nobody	coming	back	to	finish	us,	not	in	the	daytime	at	least.	We	can
be	back	before	dusk,	Pick.’
Still	she	hesitated.
Antsy	stepped	close.	‘Listen,	I	ain’t	so	stupid,	I	know	what’s	goin’	on	in
your	head.	But	us	just	sitting	here	is	us	waiting	for	their	next	move.	You	know


the	marine	doctrine,	Corporal.	It	ain’t	our	job	to	react	–	it’s	our	job	to	hit	first
and	make	them	do	the	reacting.	Twice	now	they	hit	us	–	they	do	it	again	and
we’re	finished.’
Despite	the	alcoholic	fumes	drifting	off	the	man,	his	blue	eyes	were	hard
and	clear,	and	Picker	knew	he	was	right,	and	yet…she	was	afraid.	And	she
knew	he	could	see	it,	was	struggling	with	it	–	badly	–	since	fear	was	not
something	he’d	expect	from	her.	Not	ever.	Gods,	you’ve	become	an	old	woman,
Pick.	Frail	and	cowering.
They’ve	killed	your	damned	friends.	They	damn	near	killed	your	dearest
love.
‘I	doubt	he’s	there,’	she	said.	‘Else	he’d	have	been	by.	He’s	gone
somewhere,	Antsy.	Might	never	be	back	and	why	would	he?	Wherever	Paran’s
gone,	he’s	probably	busy	–	he’s	the	type.	Always	in	the	middle	of	some	damned
thing.’
‘All	right,’	Antsy	allowed.	‘Still,	maybe	there’s	some	way	we	can,	um,	send
him	a	message.’
Her	brows	rose.	‘Now	that’s	an	idea,	Antsy.	Glad	one	of	us	is	thinking.’
‘Aye.	Can	we	go	now,	then?’
	
They	set	out,	making	use	of	a	side	postern	gate.	Both	wore	cloaks,	hiding
armour	and	their	swords,	the	weapons	loose	in	their	scabbards.	Antsy	also
carried	two	sharpers,	each	in	its	own	cloth	sack,	one	knotted	to	his	weapon
harness	and	the	other	down	at	his	belt.	He	could	tug	a	grenado	loose	and	fling
it	in	its	sack	as	one	might	throw	a	slingstone.	It	was	his	own	invention,	and	he’d
practised	with	a	stone	inside	the	sack,	acquiring	passable	skill.	Hood	knew	he
was	no	sapper,	but	he	was	learning.
Nothing	infuriated	him	more	than	losing	a	fight.	True,	they’d	come	out	the
other	side,	while	pretty	much	all	of	the	assassins	had	died,	so	it	wasn’t	really	a
defeat,	but	it	felt	like	one.	Since	retiring,	his	handful	of	Malazan	companions
had	come	to	feel	like	family.	Not	in	the	way	a	squad	did,	since	squads	existed	to
fight,	to	kill,	to	wage	war,	and	this	made	the	tightness	between	the	soldiers	a
strange	one.	Stained	with	brutality,	with	the	extremes	of	behaviour	that	made
every	moment	of	life	feel	like	a	damned	miracle.	No,	this	family	wasn’t	like
that.	They’d	all	calmed	down	some.	Loosened	up,	left	the	nasty	shit	far	behind.
Or	so	they’d	thought.
As	he	and	Picker	set	out	for	Coll’s	estate	and	the	wretched	house	behind	its
grounds,	he	tried	to	think	back	to	when	he’d	had	nothing	to	do	with	this	kind	of
life,	back	to	when	he’d	been	a	scrawny	bow-legged	runt	in	Falar.	Bizarrely,	his


own	mental	image	of	his	ten-year-old	face	retained	the	damned	moustache	and
he	was	pretty	sure	he’d	yet	to	grow	one,	but	memories	were	messy	things.
Unreliable,	maybe	mostly	lies,	in	fact.	A	scatter	of	images	stitched	together	by
invented	shit,	so	that	what	had	been	in	truth	a	time	as	chaotic	as	the	present
suddenly	seemed	like	a	narration,	a	story.
The	mind	in	the	present	was	ever	eager	to	narrate	its	own	past,	each	one	its
own	historian,	and	since	when	were	historians	reliable	on	anything?	Aye,	look
at	Duiker.	He	spun	a	fine	tale,	that	one	about	Coltaine	and	the	Chain	of	Dogs.
Heartbreaking,	but	then	those	were	always	the	best	kind,	since	they	made	a
person	feel	–	when	so	much	of	living	was	avoiding	feeling	anything.	But	was
any	of	it	real?	Aye,	Coltaine	got	killed	for	real.	The	army	got	shattered	just	like
he	said.	But	any	of	the	rest?	All	those	details?
No	way	of	ever	knowing.	And	it	don’t	really	matter	in	the	end,	does	it?
Just	like	our	own	tales.	Who	we	were,	what	we	did.	The	narration	going	on,
until	it	stops.	Sudden,	like	a	caught	breath	that	never	again	lets	out.
End	of	story.
The	child	with	the	moustache	was	looking	at	him,	there	in	his	head.
Scowling,	suspicious,	maybe	disbelieving.	‘You	think	you	know	me,	old	man?
Not	a	chance.	You	don’t	know	a	thing	and	what	you	think	you	remember	ain’t
got	nothing	to	do	with	me.	With	how	I’m	thinking.	With	what	I’m	feeling.	You’re
farther	away	than	my	own	da,	that	miserable,	bitter	tyrant	neither	of	us	could
ever	figure	out,	not	you,	not	me,	not	even	him.	Maybe	he’s	not	us,	but	then	he’s
not	him,	either.
‘Old	man,	you’re	as	lost	as	I	am	and	don’t	pretend	no	different.	Lost	in
life…till	death	finds	you.’
Well,	this	was	why	he	usually	avoided	thinking	about	his	own	past.	Better
left	untouched,	hidden	away,	locked	up	in	a	trunk	and	dropped	over	the	side	to
sink	down	into	the	depths.	Problem	was,	he	was	needing	to	dredge	up	some
things	all	over	again.	Thinking	like	a	soldier,	for	one.	Finding	that	nasty	edge
again,	the	hard	way	of	looking	at	things.	The	absence	of	hesitation.
Gallons	of	ale	wasn’t	helping.	Just	fed	his	despondency,	his	sense	of
feeling	too	old,	too	old	for	all	of	it,	now.
‘Gods	below,	Antsy,	I	can	hear	you	grinding	your	teeth	from	over	here.
Whatever	it	is,	looks	like	it’s	tasting	awful.’
He	squinted	across	at	her.	‘Expect	me	to	be	skippin’	a	dance	down	this
damned	street?	We’re	in	more	trouble	than	we’ve	ever	been,	Pick.’
‘We’ve	faced	worse—’
‘No.	Because	when	we	faced	worse	we	was	ready	for	it.	We	was	trained	to
deal	with	it.	Grab	it	by	the	throat,	choke	the	life	from	it.’	He	paused,	and	then


spat	on	to	the	cobbles	before	adding,	‘I’m	starting	to	realize	what	“retirement”
really	means.	Everything	we	let	go	of,	we’re	now	scrabbling	to	get	back,	only
it’s	outa	reach.	It’s	fuckin’	out	of	reach.’
She	said	nothing,	and	that	told	Antsy	she	knew	he	was	right;	that	she	felt	the
same.
Scant	comfort,	this	company.
They	reached	Coll’s	estate,	went	round	towards	the	back	wall.	The	journey
from	K’rul’s	Bar	to	here	was	already	a	blur	in	Antsy’s	mind,	so	unimportant	as
to	be	instantly	worthless.	He’d	not	registered	a	single	figure	amidst	the	crowds
on	the	streets.	Had	they	been	tracked?	Followed?	Probably.	‘Hood’s	breath,
Pick,	I	wasn’t	checkin’	if	we	picked	up	a	sniffin’	dog.	See	what	I	mean?’
‘We	did,’	she	replied.	‘Two	of	’em.	Lowlifes,	not	actual	assassins,	just	their
dogs,	like	you	say.	They’re	keeping	their	distance	–	probably	warned	right	off
us.	I	doubt	they’ll	follow	us	into	the	wood.’
‘No,’	Antsy	agreed.	‘They’d	smell	ambush.’
‘Right,	so	never	mind	them.’
She	led	the	way	into	the	overgrown	thicket	behind	the	estate.	The	uneven
forest	floor	was	littered	at	the	edges	with	rubbish,	but	this	quickly	dwindled	as
they	pushed	deeper	into	the	shadowy,	overgrown	copse.	Few	people,	it	was
obvious,	wanted	to	set	eyes	on	the	Finnest	House,	to	feel	the	chill	of	it	looking
right	back	at	them.	Attention	from	something	as	ghastly	as	that	dark	edifice	was
unwanted	attention.
Thirty	uneven	strides	in,	they	caught	sight	of	the	black	half-stone	halfwood	walls,	the	wrinkled,	scarred	face	of	the	house,	shutters	matted	like	rotted
wicker,	no	light	leaking	through	from	anywhere.	Vines	snaked	up	the	sides,
sprawled	out	over	the	humped	ground	in	the	low-walled	yard.	The	few	trees	in
that	yard	were	twisted	and	leafless,	roots	bared	like	bones.
‘More	lumps	than	last	time	I	was	here,’	Picker	observed	as	they	made	their
way	towards	the	gate.
Antsy	grunted.	‘No	shortage	of	idiots	tryin’	t’get	inside.	Thinkin’	they’ll
find	treasure…’
‘Secret	short	cuts	to	power,’	she	added.	‘Magical	items	and	crap.’
‘An’	all	they	got	was	an	early	grave.’	He	hesitated	at	the	gate	and	glanced	at
Picker.	‘Could	be	we	end	up	the	same	way.’
‘Stay	on	the	path,	that’s	the	trick.	Follow	me.’
He	fell	into	step	close	behind	her	as	she	set	out	along	the	narrow,	winding
track	of	tilted	pavestones.	Too	close,	as	he	trod	on	her	heel	and	almost	made
her	stumble.	She	shot	him	a	vicious	look	over	one	shoulder	before	continuing
on.


The	sheer	lack	of	anything	untoward	had	Antsy’s	nerves	overwrought	by
the	time	they	reached	the	door.	He	watched	as	Picker	lifted	a	gloved	hand,
made	a	fist,	hesitated,	then	thumped	it	hard	against	the	black	wood.	The	boom
reverberated	as	if	an	abyss	waited	on	the	other	side.
They	waited.	From	here,	all	sounds	of	the	city	beyond	this	wood	had
vanished,	as	if	the	normal	world	had	ceased	to	exist,	or,	perhaps,	the	endless
rush	of	life	out	there	held	no	relevance	to	what	loomed	before	them	now,	this
grotesque	intrusion	from	another	realm.
A	dozen	heartbeats.	Picker	made	to	pound	once	more	on	the	door.
The	clunk	of	a	latch	sounded	dully	through	the	thick	wood,	and	a	moment
later	the	door	creaked	back.
Paran	had	spoken	of	the	lich	resident	in	the	Finnest	House,	the	blasted
creature	that	had	once	been	a	Jaghut,	but	this	was	Antsy’s	first	sight	of	it.	Tall
(gods	how	he	hated	tall	things),	gaunt	yet	large-boned,	adorned	in	a	long
ragged	coat	of	black	chain.	Bared	head	with	long	colourless	hair	hanging
down	from	patches	–	where	the	scalp	was	visible	there	was	twisted	scarring,
and	in	one	place	something	had	punctured	through	the	skull,	and	within	the
uneven	hole	left	behind	there	was	only	darkness,	as	if	the	apparition’s	brain
had	simply	withered	away.	Tusks	in	a	shattered	face,	the	eyes	shrunken	back
into	shadows.	All	in	all,	Antsy	was	not	inspired	with	confidence	that	this	fell
meeting	would	proceed	in	anything	like	a	reasonable	fashion.
‘Lord	Raest,’	Picker	said,	bowing.	‘I	am	a	friend	of	Ganoes	Paran.	If	you
recall,	we	met—’
‘I	know	who	you	are,	Corporal	Picker,’	the	lich	replied	in	a	deep,	resonant
voice.
‘This	is	Sergeant	Antsy—’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘We	need	to	find	Ganoes	Paran—’
‘He	is	not	here.’
‘We	need	to	get	a	message	to	him.’
‘Why?’
Picker	glanced	at	Antsy,	then	back	up	at	Raest.	‘Well,	it’s	a	complicated	tale
–	can	we	come	inside?’
Raest’s	dead	eyes	held	steady	on	her	for	a	long	moment,	and	then	he	asked,
‘Do	you	expect	me	to	serve	refreshments	as	well?’
‘Er,	no,	that	won’t	be	necessary,	Raest.’
The	Jaghut	stepped	back.
Picker	edged	round	him	and	halted	a	few	steps	in.	Antsy	pushed	in	behind
her.	They	stood	in	a	vaulted	entryway,	raw	black	stone	underfoot.	Opposite	the


front	door	there	were	twin	doors	and	a	narrow	corridor	off	to	the	right	and
left.	The	air	was	dry	and	warm,	smelling	of	freshly	turned	earth	–	reminding
Antsy	of	the	cellar	beneath	K’rul’s	Bar.
‘Been	digging	graves?’	he	asked,	and	then	cursed	himself,	trying	to	ignore
Picker ’s	wild	stare.
Raest	shut	the	door	and	faced	them.	‘What	manner	of	refreshments	were
you	expecting,	Sergeant	Antsy?	I	am	afraid	I	have	nothing	buried	within	the
house.	If	you	like,	however—’
‘No	that’s	fine,’	Picker	said	hastily.
Antsy	could	only	nod	agreement.	His	mouth	had	dried	up,	tongue	like	a
piece	of	leather	gummed	against	the	palate.	And	he	needed	to	empty	his
bladder,	but	the	thought	of	asking	directions	to	the	water	closet	was	suddenly
akin	to	demanding	that	the	Jaghut	hand	over	all	his	money	or	else.
Raest	studied	them	in	silence	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	said,	‘Follow
me,	if	you	must.’
The	lich’s	moccasin-wrapped	feet	made	rasping	sounds.	Cloth	rustled,	the
mail	of	the	coat	crackling,	as	Raest	walked	to	the	double	doors	and	pushed
them	open.
Within	was	a	main	room	bearing	a	stone	fireplace	directly	opposite,
wherein	flames	flickered	cosily,	and	two	deep,	high-backed	chairs	to	either
side,	sitting	on	a	thick	woven	rug	bearing	arcane,	geometric	patterns	barely
visible	in	the	general	gloom.	Large	tapestries	covered	the	walls	to	either	side,
one	clearly	Malazan	in	origin	–	probably	Untan	given	the	subject	matter	(some
antiquated	court	event,	significance	long	lost	but	no	doubt	relevant	to	House
Paran);	the	other	was	local	and	depicted	a	scene	from	the	Night	of	the	Moon,
when	Moon’s	Spawn	had	descended	to	brush	the	highest	buildings	in	the	city;
when	dragons	warred	in	the	night	sky,	and	Raest	himself	had	attempted	his
assault	upon	Darujhistan.	The	image	focused	on	the	dragons,	one	black	and
silver-maned,	the	other	muted	bronze	or	brown.	Jaws	and	talons	were	locked
upon	one	another	as	they	fought	in	midair,	with	the	backdrop	the	base	of
Moon’s	Spawn	and	the	silhouettes	of	rooftops	and	spires,	all	bordered	in	an
intricate	pattern	of	Great	Ravens	in	flight.
‘That’s	not	bad,’	Picker	muttered,	eyeing	the	work.
Antsy	grunted,	not	one	to	ponder	too	much	on	artwork	beyond	identifying
whatever	scene	it	happened	to	be	recording.	Personally,	he	could	not	imagine	a
more	useless	talent,	and	thanked	the	gods	he’d	never	been	cursed	with	such
creative	misery.	Most	of	his	own	memories	of	great	events	he	had	witnessed
employed	stick	figures,	and	that	was	good	enough	for	him.	It	did	not	occur	to
him	that	this	was	at	all	unusual.


Raest	gestured	to	the	two	chairs.	‘Sit	down,’	he	said,	the	tone	only	vaguely
related	to	an	invitation.	When	they	had	done	so,	both	angling	their	chairs	to
face	the	Jaghut,	he	said,	‘Explain	to	me,	if	you	will,	how	precisely	you	intend
to	send	Ganoes	Paran	a	message.’
‘We	have	no	idea,’	Picker	said,	with	a	queasy	smile.	‘We	were	hoping	you
might	have	some	suggestions.’
‘I	have	many	suggestions,’	Raest	replied,	‘none	of	which	are	relevant	to
your	request.’
Antsy	slowly	narrowed	his	eyes,	but	said	nothing.
Picker	opened	her	mouth	a	few	times,	breaking	off	a	succession	of
possible	responses,	the	repeated	gaping	reminding	Antsy	of	netted	fish	on	the
deck	of	his	da’s	fisher	boat.	Unless	I	just	made	that	up.	All	a	lie,	maybe.	Maybe
I	seen	a	fish	on	some	other	deck.	How	can	I	be	sure?	How	can—
‘One	possibility	occurs	to	me,’	Raest	said.	‘It	would,	I	suspect,	require	that
one	of	you	be	an	adept	with	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Or	possessing	the	potential
thereof.’
‘I	see,’	said	Picker.	‘Well,	I’ve	had	a	few	brushes	with	the	Deck.’
‘You	are	an	illustrator	of	Decks?’
‘What?	Oh,	not	that	kind	of	brush.	I	mean,	I’ve	had	my	hands	on	’em	a	few
times.’
‘Did	such	contact	leave	you	damaged,	Corporal	Picker?’
‘Damaged	how?’
‘Are	you,	perhaps,	now	insane?’
She	sat	upright.	‘Hang	on,	how	in	Hood’s	name	would	I	even	know	if	I	was
insane	or	not?’
‘Precisely,’	said	Raest,	and	waited.
Antsy’s	gaze	fixed	once	more	on	the	Jaghut.	‘Pick,’	he	finally	growled.
She	twisted	to	face	him	in	exasperation.	‘What	is	it	now,	Antsy?’
‘This	bastard’s	having	us	on.’
Her	eyes	bulged	momentarily,	and	then	she	looked	once	more	at	the
Jaghut.
Who	shrugged.	‘One	needs	to	amuse	oneself	on	occasion.	Company	is	so
very	rare	these	days.’
‘So	when	it	arrives,’	Antsy	snapped,	‘you	treat	it	like	dirt?	Do	you	think
maybe	there’s	a	connection	atwixt	the	two,	you	hoary	lich?’
‘Like	dirt?	I	think	not.	More	like…with	amiable	contempt.’
‘You	got	a	few	things	to	learn	about	people,	Jaghut.’
‘Undoubtedly,	Sergeant	Antsy.	Alas,	I	find	myself	disinclined	to	make	any
effort	in	that	direction.’


‘Oh?	And	what	direction	do	you	make	your	efforts	in?’
‘When	I	discover	one	I	will	let	you	know,	if	it	proves	of	any	interest	–	to
either	me	or,	of	course,	you.	In	the	meantime,	I	have	no	idea	if	communication
is	possible	with	Ganoes	Paran.	Perhaps	if	you	informed	me	of	your	present
crisis,	I	might	be	able	to	assist	you	in	some	way	that	does	not	involve
precipitous,	desperate	acts	that	might	ultimately	inconvenience	me.’
‘Hood	forbid	we	do	that,’	snarled	Antsy.
‘Hood	is	not	one	to	forbid	much	of	anything,’	Raest	observed.
‘Can’t	think	he	much	likes	these	Azath	Houses,’	Picker	said,	having
recovered	from	her	shock	and	irritation	and,	perhaps,	indignation.	‘All	this
trapping	of	souls	and	things	like	you,	Raest.’
‘I	doubt	I	rate	highly	on	Hood’s	wish	list,’	the	undead	Jaghut	replied.
Antsy	grunted	a	laugh.	‘All	right,	I’m	finally	working	out	your	sense	of
humour.	And	I	thought	Malazan	marines	were	dry,	Abyss	below!	Fine,	Raest,
let’s	play	this	game	for	real.	If	you	can	help	us	with	our	problem,	we’ll	do
something	for	you	in	return.	If	it’s	within	our	abilities,	that	is,	so	nothing	like
“get	me	outa	here”	or	anything	like	that.	But,	you	know,	other	stuff.’
‘I	do	have	a	modest	request.	Very	well,	I	accept	the	reciprocal
engagement.’
Antsy	grinned	across	at	Picker,	and	then	said	to	Raest,	‘It’s	this.	Someone’s
taken	out	a	contract	on	us.	We	don’t	know	why.	We’re	thinking	maybe	Paran
can	work	out	who	and	what’s	got	’em	so	aggravated.’
The	Jaghut	stared.
Picker	cleared	her	throat.	‘Possible	causes.	One,	we’re	Malazans.	Veterans.
We’ve	made	more	than	a	few	enemies	on	this	continent.	Two,	we	own	K’rul’s
Bar,	which	used	to	be	K’rul’s	Belfry,	which	used	to	be	K’rul’s	Temple.	In	the
cellar	we	just	found	twelve	pickled	Seguleh,	maybe	centuries	old,	but	looking
fresh.	Since	they’re,	er,	pickled.’	She	paused,	drew	a	breath,	and	then	continued,
‘Three,	well,	I	ain’t	got	to	three	yet.	The	way	I	figure	it,	it’s	all	got	to	do	with
K’rul	–	maybe	some	cultists	want	the	temple	back.	Maybe	someone	put	in	an
order	for	pickled	Seguleh	and	wants	’em	delivered.’
Antsy	stared	at	her.	‘Someone	did	what?	Pick,	that’s	the	stupidest	idea	I’ve
ever	heard.’
‘I	wouldn’t	argue	with	that,’	she	said,	‘only	I’m	desperate,	and	besides,	I
got	a	hunch	those	Seguleh	are	part	of	the	problem.’
Antsy	looked	to	Raest.	‘So	there	it	is.	Got	any	suggestions	or	are	you	just
going	to	stand	there	for	ever?’
‘Yes	I	am,’	Raest	replied,	‘but	that	detail	is	not	relevant.	As	for	suggestions,
I	suggest	you	kill	every	assassin	in	the	city.’


‘Then	whoever	wants	us	dead	just	starts	hiring	thugs,’	Picker	said.
‘Kill	all	thugs.’
Antsy	tugged	at	his	moustache.	‘Ain’t	practical.	There’s	only	three	of	us
left	–	it’d	take	years.’
‘Kidnap	the	Guild	Master	and	torture	him	or	her	to	reveal	the	client.	Then
kill	the	client.’
‘Killing	the	client	makes	sense	to	us,’	Picker	said,	nodding.	‘The
kidnapping	thing	doesn’t	sound	very	feasible	–	we’d	have	to	carve	through	a
few	hundred	assassins	to	do	it.	Besides,	we	don’t	know	where	the	Guild
Master ’s	hideout	is.	We	could	capture	and	torture	an	assassin	to	find	that	out,
but	they	probably	operate	in	cells	which	means	whoever	we	get	might	not
know	a	thing.	The	point	is,	we	don’t	know	who	the	client	is.	We	need	to	find
out.’
Raest	said,	‘Your	suspicion	that	the	K’rul	Temple	is	central	to	this	matter	is
probably	accurate.	Determining	the	specifics,	however,	would	best	be	served
by	enlisting	the	assistance	of	the	Master	of	the	Deck.’
‘That’s	what	we	wanted	in	the	first	place!’	Antsy	shouted.
‘Extraordinary,	isn’t	it?’
Antsy	glared	up	at	the	infuriating	lich,	bit	down	a	few	retorts	that	might
prove	unwise.	He	drew	a	deep	breath	to	calm	himself,	and	then	said	in	a	nice,
quiet	tone,	‘So	let’s	see	if	we	can	send	him	a	message,	shall	we?’
‘Follow	me,’	Raest	said.
	
Back	into	the	corridor,	turning	right,	five	strides	to	a	narrow	door	on	the	left
that	led	into	the	squat	round	tower,	up	the	spiral	staircase,	arriving	into	the
upper	level	–	a	circular	room	with	the	walls	bearing	oversized	painted
renditions	of	the	cards	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	Something	twisted	the	eye	in
this	chamber	and	Picker	almost	staggered.
‘Gods	below,’	muttered	Antsy.	‘This	place	is	magicked	–	makes	me	sick	to
the	stomach.’
The	images	swirled,	blurred,	shifted	in	rippling	waves	that	crossed	from
every	conceivable	direction,	a	clash	of	convergences	inviting	vertigo	no
matter	where	the	eye	turned.	Picker	found	herself	gasping.	She	squeezed	shut
her	eyes,	heard	Antsy	cursing	as	he	backed	out	of	the	room.
Raest’s	dry	voice	drifted	faintly	into	her	head.	‘The	flux	has	increased.
There	appears	to	be	some	manner	of…deterioration.	Even	so,	Corporal	Picker,
if	you	focus	your	mind	and	concentrate	on	Ganoes	Paran,	the	efficacy	of	your
will	may	prove	sufficient	to	anchor	in	place	the	Master ’s	own	card,	which


perhaps	will	awaken	his	attention.	Unless	of	course	he	is	otherwise	engaged.
Should	your	willpower	prove	unequal	to	the	task,	I	am	afraid	that	what	remains
of	your	sanity	will	be	torn	away.	Your	mind	itself	will	be	shredded	by	the
maelstrom,	leaving	you	a	drooling	wreck.’	After	a	moment,	he	added,	‘Such	a
state	of	being	may	not	be	desirable.	Of	course,	should	you	achieve	it,	you	will
not	care	one	way	or	the	other,	which	you	may	consider	a	blessing.’
‘Well,’	she	replied,	‘that’s	just	great.	Give	me	a	moment,	will	you?’
She	tugged	from	her	memory	the	captain’s	not	unpleasant	face,	sought	to
fix	it	before	her	mind’s	eye.	Ganoes	Paran,	pay	attention.	Captain,	wherever
you	are.	This	is	Corporal	Picker,	in	Darujhistan.	Ganoes,	I	need	to	talk	to	you.
She	saw	him	now,	framed	as	would	a	card	be	framed	in	the	Deck	of
Dragons.	She	saw	that	he	was	wearing	a	uniform,	that	of	the	Malazan	soldier
he	had	once	been	–	was	that	her	memory,	conjuring	up	her	last	sight	of	him?
But	no,	he	looked	older.	He	looked	beaten	down,	smeared	in	dust.	Spatters	of
dried	blood	on	his	scarred	leather	jerkin.	The	scene	behind	him	was	one	of
smoke	and	ruination,	the	blasted	remnants	of	rolling	farmland,	tracts	defined
by	low	stone	walls,	but	nothing	green	in	sight.	She	thought	she	could	see
bodies	on	that	dead	earth.
Paran’s	gaze	seemed	to	sharpen	on	her.	She	saw	his	mouth	move	but	no
sound	reached	her.
Ganoes!	Captain	–	listen,	just	concentrate	back	on	me.
‘—not	the	time,	Corporal.	We’ve	landed	in	a	mess.	But	listen,	if	you	can	get
word	to	them,	try.	Warn	them,	Picker.	Warn	them	off.’
Captain	–	someone’s	after	the	temple	–	K’rul’s	Temple.	Someone’s	trying	to
kill	us—
‘—jhistan	can	take	care	of	itself,	Pick.	Baruk	knows	what	to	do	–	trust	him.
You	need	to	find	out	who	wants	it.	Talk	to	Kruppe.	Talk	to	the	Eel.	But	listen	–
pass	on	my	warning,	please.’
Pass	it	on	to	who?	Who	are	you	talking	about,	Captain?	And	what	was	that
about	Kruppe?
The	image	shredded	before	her	eyes,	and	she	felt	something	like	claws	tear
into	her	mind.	Screaming,	she	sought	to	reel	back,	pull	away.	The	claws	sank
deeper,	and	all	at	once	Picker	realized	that	there	was	intent,	there	was	malice.
Something	had	arrived,	and	it	wanted	her.
Shrieking,	she	felt	herself	being	dragged	forward,	into	a	swirling
madness,	into	the	maw	of	something	vast	and	hungry,	something	that	wanted	to
feed	on	her.	For	a	long,	long	time,	until	her	soul	was	gone,	devoured,	until
nothing	of	her	was	left.
Pressure	and	darkness	on	all	sides,	ripping	into	her.	She	could	not	move.


In	the	midst	of	the	savage	chaos,	she	felt	and	heard	the	arrival	of	a	third
presence,	a	force	flowing	like	a	beast	to	draw	up	near	her	–	she	sensed	sudden
attention,	a	cold-eyed	regard,	and	a	voice	murmured	close,	‘Not	here.	Not	now.
There	were	torcs	once,	that	you	carried.	There	was	a	debt,	still	unpaid.	Not	now.
Not	here.’
The	beast	pounced.
Whatever	had	grasped	hold	of	Picker,	whatever	was	now	feeding	on	her,
suddenly	roared	in	pain,	in	fury,	and	the	claws	tore	free,	slashed	against	its	new
attacker.
Snarls,	the	air	trembling	to	thunder	as	two	leviathans	clashed.
Dwarfed,	forgotten,	small	as	an	ant,	Picker	crawled	away,	leaking	out	her
life	in	a	crimson	trail.	She	was	weeping,	shivering	in	the	aftermath	of	the
thing’s	feeding.	It	had	been	so…intractable,	so	horribly…indifferent.	To	who
she	was,	to	her	right	to	her	own	life.	My	soul…my	soul	was…food.	That’s	all.
Abyss	below—
She	needed	to	find	a	way	out.	All	round	her	chaos	swarmed	and	shivered	as
the	great	forces	battled	on,	there	in	her	wake.	She	needed	to	tell	Antsy	things,
important	things.	Kruppe.	Baruk.	And	perhaps	the	most	important	detail	of	all.
When	they’d	walked	into	the	House,	she	had	seen	that	the	two	bodies	that	had
been	lying	on	the	floor	on	her	last	visit	were	gone.	Gone.	Two	assassins,	said
Paran.
And	one	of	them	was	Vorcan.
She’s	in	the	city.	She’s	out	there,	Antsy—
Concentrate!	The	room.	In	the	tower	–	find	the	room—
Crawling,	weeping.
Lost.
	
Antsy	loosed	a	dozen	curses	when	Raest	dragged	Picker ’s	unconscious	body
on	to	the	landing.	‘What	did	you	do?’
‘Alas,’	the	Jaghut	said,	stepping	back	as	Antsy	fell	to	his	knees	beside	the
woman,	‘my	warnings	of	the	risk	were	insufficient.’
As	Antsy	set	his	hand	upon	Picker ’s	brow	he	hissed	and	snatched	it	back.
‘She’s	ice	cold!’
‘Yet	her	heart	struggles	on,’	Raest	said.
‘Will	she	come	back?	Raest,	you	damned	lich!	Will	she	come	back?’
‘I	don’t	know.	She	spoke,	for	a	time,	before	the	situation…changed.
Presumably,	she	was	speaking	to	Ganoes	Paran.’
‘What	did	she	say?’


‘Questions,	for	the	most	part.	I	was	able,	however,	to	glean	a	single	name.
Kruppe.’
Antsy	bared	his	teeth.	He	set	his	hand	again	upon	her	forehead.	Slightly
warmer?	Possibly,	or	this	time	he’d	been	expecting	it,	making	it	less	of	a
shock.	Hard	to	tell	which.	‘Help	me	get	her	back	downstairs,’	he	said.
‘Of	course.	And	now,	in	return	for	my	assistance,	I	will	tell	you	what	I	seek
from	you.’
He	glared	up	at	the	Jaghut.	‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
‘This	time,	I	am,	Sergeant	Antsy.	I	wish	to	have	a	cat.’
A	cat.	‘To	eat?’
‘No,	as	a	pet.	It	will	have	to	be	a	dead	cat,	of	course.	Now,	permit	me	to
take	her	legs,	whilst	you	take	her	arms.	Perhaps	some	time	before	the	hearth
will	revive	her.’
‘Do	you	think	so?’
‘No.’
This	had	all	been	his	idea,	and	now	look	at	what	had	happened.	‘Picker,’	he
whispered,	‘I’m	sorry.	I’m	so	sorry.’
‘A	white	one,’	said	Raest.
‘What?’
‘A	white	cat.	A	dead	white	cat,	Sergeant.’
Oh,	aye,	Raest.	One	stuffed	lumpy	with	cussers.	Here,	catch,	you	damned
bastard.
Shit,	we’re	down	to	two	now.	Down	to	two…
	
‘Never	bargain	with	the	dead.	They	want	what	you	have	and	will	give	you	what
they	have	to	get	it.	Your	life	for	their	death.	Being	dead,	of	course,	whatever
life	they	grab	hold	of	just	ends	up	slipping	through	their	bony	fingers.	So	you
both	lose.’
‘That	is	rather	generous	of	you,	Hinter,’	said	Baruk.	‘In	fact,	I	do	not	recall
you	being	so	loquacious	the	last	time	we	spoke.’
The	apparition	stood	within	the	door	frame	of	the	tower.	‘The	struggle	I
face	is	between	my	desire	to	close	my	ghostly	fingers	about	your	throat,	High
Alchemist,	and	providing	whatever	service	I	can	to	this	fair	city.	It	must	also	be
noted,	the	return	of	the	Tyrant	would	also	mark	the	end	of	what	limited
freedom	I	possess,	for	I	would	be	quickly	enslaved.	And	so,	self-interest	and
altruism	prove	unlikely	allies,	yet	sufficient	to	overwhelm	my	natural
murderous	urges.’
‘The	debate	is	moot,’	Baruk	replied,	interlacing	his	fingers	and	resting	his


hands	on	his	stomach,	‘since	I	have	no	intention	of	coming	within	reach	of
your	deadly	grasp.	No,	I	will	remain	here,	in	the	yard.’
‘Just	as	well,’	Hinter	replied.	‘I	haven’t	dusted	in	centuries.’
‘There	are	forces	in	the	city,’	Baruk	said	after	a	moment,	‘formidable,
unpredictable	forces.	The	threat—’
‘Enough	of	that,’	Hinter	cut	in.	‘You	know	very	well	why	most	of	those
entities	are	in	the	city,	since	you	invited	them,	High	Alchemist.	And	as	for	the
others	on	the	way,	well,	few	of	those	will	surprise	you	much.	They
are…necessary.	So,	an	end	to	your	dissembling.’
‘Not	all	of	what	approaches	is	my	doing,’	Baruk	countered.	‘Were	you
aware	that	both	Lady	Envy	and	Sister	Spite	are	here	right	now?	The	daughters
of	Draconus	were	not	invited,	not	by	me	at	any	rate.	One	is	bad	enough,	but
both…’	he	shook	his	head.	‘I	fear	they	will	leave	the	entire	city	a	smouldering
heap	of	ashes,	given	the	chance.’
‘So	do	something	to	ensure	that	does	not	happen,’	Hinter	said	airily.
‘Any	suggestions	on	that	count?’
‘None	whatsoever.’
‘Has	either	one	paid	you	a	visit?’
‘You	strain	my	altruism,	High	Alchemist.	Very	well,	of	course	Lady	Envy
has	visited,	and	more	than	once.’
‘Does	she	know	her	sister	is	here?’
‘Probably.’
‘What	does	Envy	want,	Hinter?’
‘What	she	has	always	wanted,	High	Alchemist.’
Baruk	hissed	under	his	breath	and	glanced	away.	‘She	can’t	have	it.’
‘Then	I	suggest	you	pay	her	sister	a	visit.	She	resides	aboard—’
‘I	know	where	she	is,	thank	you.	Now,	have	you	heard	of	that	selfproclaimed	High	Priest	of	the	Crippled	God	who’s	now	squatting	in	an
abandoned	Temple	of	Fener?	And	leads	a	congregation	growing	by	the	day?’
‘No,	I	have	not.	But	are	you	surprised?’
‘The	Fallen	God	is	a	most	unwelcome	complication.’
‘The	legacy	of	messing	with	things	not	yet	fully	understood	–	of	course,
those	precipitous	sorcerors	all	paid	with	their	lives,	which	prevented	everyone
else	from	delivering	the	kind	of	punishment	they	truly	deserved.	Such	things
are	most	frustrating,	don’t	you	think?’
Baruk’s	gaze	narrowed	on	the	ghost	in	the	doorway.
After	a	moment	Hinter	waved	an	ethereal	hand.	‘So	many…legacies.’
‘Point	taken,	Necromancer.	As	you	can	see,	however,	I	am	not	one	to	evade
responsibility.’


‘True,	else	you	would	have	come	within	my	reach	long	ago.	Or,	indeed,
chosen	a	more	subtle	escape,	as	did	your	fellow…mages	in	the	Cabal,	the	night
Vorcan	walked	the	shadows…’
Baruk	stared,	and	then	sighed.	‘I	have	always	wondered	at	the	sudden
incompetence	displayed	by	my	comrades	that	night.	Granted,	Vorcan’s	skills
were	–	are	–	impressive.’	And	then	he	fell	silent	for	a	moment.	And	thought
about	certain	matters.	‘Hinter,	has	Vorcan	visited	you?’
‘No.	Why	would	she?’
Baruk	was	suddenly	chilled.	‘She	made	no	effort	at…discussing	anything
with	me	that	night.’
‘Perhaps	she	knew	how	you	would	respond.’
‘As	she	would	have	for	Derudan	as	well.’
‘No	doubt.’
‘But	the	others…’
Hinter	said	nothing.
Baruk	felt	sick	inside.	Matters	had	grown	far	too	complicated	in	this	city.
Oh,	he	had	known	that	they	were	walking	a	most	narrow	bridge,	with	the
yawning	abyss	below	whispering	soft	invitations	of	surrender.	But	it	seemed
the	far	end	was	ever	dwindling,	stretching	away,	almost	lost	in	the	mists.	And
every	step	he	took	seemed	more	tenuous	than	the	last,	as	if	at	any	moment	the
span	beneath	him	might	simply	crumble	into	dust.
He	could	understand	those	others	in	the	Cabal	and	the	sudden,	perfect
escape	that	Vorcan	represented.	And	he	recalled	that	flat	promise	in	her	eyes	on
that	night	long	ago	now	–	it	still	haunted	him,	the	ease	of	her	betrayal,	as	if	the
contract	offered	by	the	Malazan	Empire	had	simply	provided	her	with	an
excuse	for	doing	something	she	had	always	wanted	to	do:	murder	every	other
mage	in	the	Cabal.
He	might	ask	her	why,	but	Vorcan	was	a	woman	who	kept	her	own	counsel.
She	owed	him	nothing	and	that	had	not	changed.
‘You	had	better	go	now,’	Hinter	said,	cutting	into	his	thoughts.
He	blinked.	‘Why?’
‘Because	your	silence	is	boring	me,	High	Alchemist.’
‘My	apologies,	Hinter,’	Baruk	replied.	‘One	last	thing,	and	then	I	will
indeed	leave.	The	risk	of	your	enslavement	is	very	real,	and	is	not	dependent
on	the	actual	return	of	the	Tyrant	–	after	all,	there	are	agents	in	the	city	even
now	working	towards	that	fell	resurrection.	They	might	well	decide—’
‘And	you	imagine	they	might	succeed,	High	Alchemist?’
‘It	is	a	possibility,	Hinter.’
The	ghost	was	silent	for	a	time,	and	then	said,	‘Your	solution?’


‘I	would	set	one	of	my	watchers	on	your	tower,	Hinter.	To	voice	the	alarm
should	an	attempt	be	made	on	you.’
‘You	offer	to	intercede	on	my	behalf,	High	Alchemist?’
‘I	do.’
‘I	accept,	on	condition	that	this	does	not	indebt	me	to	you.’
‘Of	course.’
‘You	would	rather	I	remain…neutral,	and	this	I	understand.	Better	this	than
me	as	an	enemy.’
‘You	were	once	a	most	formidable	sorceror—’
‘Rubbish.	I	was	passable,	and	fatally	careless.	Still,	neither	of	us	would
have	me	serving	a	most	miserable	cause.	Send	your	watcher,	then,	but	give	me
its	name,	lest	I	invite	in	the	wrong	servant.’
‘Chillbais.’
‘Oh,’	said	Hinter,	‘him.’
	
As	he	made	his	way	back	to	his	estate,	Baruk	recalled	his	lone	meeting	with
Vorcan,	only	a	few	nights	after	her	awakening.	She	had	entered	the	chamber
with	her	usual	feline	grace.	The	wounds	she	had	borne	were	long	healed	and
she	had	found	a	new	set	of	clothes,	loose	and	elegant,	that	seemed	at	complete
odds	with	her	chosen	profession.
He	had	stood	before	the	fireplace,	and	offered	her	a	slight	bow	to	hide	a
sudden	tremble	along	his	nerves.	‘Vorcan.’
‘I	will	not	apologize,’	she	said.
‘I	did	not	ask	you	to.’
‘We	have	a	problem,	Baruk,’	she	said,	walking	over	to	pour	herself	some
wine,	then	facing	him	once	more.	‘It	is	not	a	question	of	seeking	prevention	–
we	cannot	stop	what	is	coming.	The	issue	is	how	we	will	position	ourselves	for
that	time.’
‘You	mean,	to	ensure	our	continued	survival.’
A	faint	smile	as	she	regarded	him.	‘Survival	is	not	in	question.	We	three
left	in	the	Cabal	will	be	needed.	As	we	were	once,	as	we	will	be	again.	I	am
speaking	more	of	our,	shall	we	say,	level	of	comfort.’
Anger	flared	within	Baruk	then.	‘Comfort?	What	value	that	when	we	have
ceased	to	be	free?’
She	snorted.	‘Freedom	is	ever	the	loudest	postulation	among	the	indolent.
And	let’s	face	it,	Baruk,	we	are	indolent.	And	now,	suddenly,	we	face	the	end	to
that.	Tragedy!’	Her	gaze	hardened.	‘I	mean	to	remain	in	my	privileged	state—’
‘As	Mistress	of	the	Assassins’	Guild?	Vorcan,	there	will	be	no	need	for


such	a	Guild,	no	room	for	it.’
‘Never	mind	the	Guild.	I	am	not	interested	in	the	Guild.	It	served	a	function
of	the	city,	a	bureaucratic	mechanism.	Its	days	are	fast	dwindling	in	number.’
‘Is	that	why	you	sent	your	daughter	away?’
A	flicker	of	true	annoyance	in	her	eyes,	and	she	looked	away.	‘My	reasons
are	not	of	your	concern	in	that	matter,	High	Alchemist.’	Her	tone	added,	And
it’s	none	of	your	business,	old	man.
‘What	role,	then,’	Baruk	asked,	‘do	you	envision	for	yourself	in	this	new
Darujhistan?’
‘A	quiet	one,’	she	replied.
Yes,	quiet	as	a	viper	in	the	grass.	‘Until	such	time,	I	imagine,	as	you	see	an
opportunity.’
She	drained	her	wine	and	set	down	the	goblet.	‘We	are	understood,	then.’
‘Yes,’	he	said,	‘I	suppose	we	are.’
‘Do	inform	Derudan.’
‘I	shall.’
And	she	left.
The	recollection	left	a	sour	taste	in	Baruk’s	mouth.	Was	she	aware	of	the
other	convergences	fast	closing	on	Darujhistan?	Did	she	even	care?	Well,	she
wasn’t	the	only	one	who	could	be	coy.	One	thing	he	had	gleaned	from	that
night	of	murder	years	ago:	Vorcan	had,	somehow,	guessed	what	was	on	its
way.	Even	back	then,	she	had	begun	her	preparations…all	to	ensure	her	level	of
comfort.	Sending	her	daughter	away,	extricating	herself	from	the	Guild.	And
visiting	her	version	of	mercy	upon	the	others	in	the	Cabal.	And	if	she’d	got	her
way,	she	would	now	be	the	only	one	left	alive.
Think	hard	on	that,	Baruk,	in	the	light	of	her	professed	intentions.	Her
desire	to	position	herself.
Might	she	try	again?
He	realized	he	was	no	longer	sure	she	wouldn’t.
	
This	is	the	moment	for	mirrors,	and	surely	that	must	be	understood	by	now.
Polished,	with	the	barest	of	ripples	to	twist	the	reflection,	to	make	what	one
faces	both	familiar	and	subtly	altered.	Eyes	locked,	recognition	unfolding,
quiet	horrors	flowering.	What	looks	upon	you	here,	now,	does	not	mock,
denies	the	cogent	wink,	and	would	lead	you	by	a	dry	and	cool	hand	across	the
cold	clay	floor	of	the	soul.
People	will	grieve.	For	the	dead,	for	the	living.	For	the	loss	of	innocence
and	for	the	surrender	of	innocence,	which	are	two	entirely	different	things.	We


will	grieve,	for	choices	made	and	not	made,	for	the	mistakes	of	the	heart	which
can	never	be	undone,	for	the	severed	nerve-endings	of	old	scars	and	those	to
come.
A	grey-haired	man	walks	through	the	Estate	District.	No	more	detailed
description	is	necessary.	The	blood	on	his	hands	is	only	a	memory,	but	some
memories	leave	stains	difficult	to	wash	away.	By	nature,	he	observes.	The
world,	its	multitude	of	faces,	its	tide-tugged	swirling	sea	of	emotions.	He	is	a
caster	of	nets,	a	trailer	of	hooks.	He	speaks	in	the	rhythm	of	poetry,	in	the	lilt
of	song.	He	understands	that	there	are	wounds	in	the	soul	that	must	not	be
touched;	but	there	are	others	that	warm	to	the	caress.	He	understands,	in	other
words,	the	necessity	of	the	tragic	theme.	The	soul,	he	knows,	will,	on	occasion,
offer	no	resistance	to	the	tale	that	draws	blood.
Prise	loose	those	old	scars.	They	remind	one	what	it	is	to	grieve.	They
remind	one	what	it	is	to	live.
A	moment	for	mirrors,	a	moment	for	masks.	The	two	ever	conspire	to
play	out	the	tale.	Again	and	again,	my	friends.
Here,	take	my	hand.
He	walks	to	an	estate.	The	afternoon	has	waned,	dusk	creeps	closer	through
the	day’s	settling	dust.	Each	day,	there	is	a	moment	when	the	world	has	just
passed	by,	leaving	a	sultry	wake	that	hovers,	suspended,	not	yet	stirred	by	the
awakening	of	night.	The	Tiste	Edur	worship	this	instant.	The	Tiste	Andii	are
still,	motionless	as	they	wait	for	darkness.	The	Tiste	Liosan	have	bowed	their
heads	and	turned	away	to	grieve	the	sun’s	passing.	In	the	homes	of	humans,
hearthfires	are	stirred	awake.	People	draw	into	their	places	of	shelter	and	think
of	the	night	to	come.
Before	one’s	eyes,	solidity	seems	poised,	moments	from	crumbling	into
dissolution.	Uncertainty	becomes	a	law,	rising	supreme	above	all	others.	For	a
bard,	this	time	is	a	minor	key,	a	stretch	of	frailty,	a	pensive	interlude.	Sadness
drifts	in	the	air,	and	his	thoughts	are	filled	with	endings.
Arriving	at	the	estate,	he	is	quickly	and	without	comment	escorted	into	the
main	house,	down	its	central	corridor	and	out	into	a	high-walled	garden	where
night	flowers	stream	down	the	walls,	drenched	blossoms	opening	to	drink	in
the	gathering	dusk.	The	masked	bodyguard	then	leaves	him,	for	the	moment
alone	in	the	garden,	and	the	bard	stands	motionless	for	a	time,	the	air	sweet	and
pungent,	the	sound	of	trickling	water	filling	the	enclosed	space.
He	recalls	the	soft	songs	he	has	sung	here,	unaccompanied	by	any
instrument.	Songs	drawn	from	a	hundred	cultures,	a	dozen	worlds.	His	voice
weaving	together	the	fragments	of	Shadow’s	arrival,	drawing	together	the	day
just	past	and	the	night	eager	to	arrive.


There	were	secrets	in	music	and	poetry.	Secrets	few	knew	and	even	fewer
understood.	Their	power	often	stole	into	a	listener	subtle	as	the	memory	of
scent	on	a	drawn	breath,	less	than	a	whisper,	yet	capable	of	transforming	the
one	so	gifted,	an	instinctual	ecstasy	that	made	troubles	vanish,	that	made	all
manner	of	grandeur	possible	–	indeed,	within	reach.
A	skilled	bard,	a	wise	bard,	knew	that	at	certain	moments	in	the	course	of	a
cycle	of	day	and	night,	the	path	into	the	soul	of	a	listener	was	smooth,
unobstructed,	a	succession	of	massive	gates	that	swung	open	to	a	feather ’s
touch.	This	was	the	most	precious	secret	of	all.	Dusk,	midnight,	and	that
strange	period	of	sudden	wakefulness	known	as	the	watch	–	yes,	the	night	and
its	stealthy	approach	belonged	to	the	heart.
Hearing	a	footfall	behind	him,	he	turns.
She	stands,	her	long	black	hair	shimmering,	her	face	untouched	by	sun	or
wind,	her	eyes	a	perfect	reflection	of	the	violet	blossoms	adorning	the	walls.
He	can	see	through	the	white	linen	of	her	dress,	to	the	outlines	of	her	body,
roundness	and	curves	and	sweeps	of	aesthetic	perfection	–	those	forms	and
lines	that	murmured	their	own	secret	language	to	awaken	desires	in	a	man’s
soul.
Every	sense,	he	knows,	is	a	path	into	the	heart.
Lady	Envy	watches	him,	and	he	is	content	to	let	her	do	so,	as	he	in	turn
regards	her.
They	could	discuss	the	Seguleh	–	the	dead	ones	in	the	casks,	the	living	ones
serving	in	this	estate.	They	could	ponder	all	that	they	sensed	fast	approaching.
He	could	speak	of	his	anger,	its	quiet,	deadly	iron	that	was	so	cold	it	could
burn	at	the	touch	–	and	she	would	see	the	truth	of	his	words	in	his	eyes.	She
might	drift	this	way	and	that	in	this	modest	garden,	brushing	fingertips	along
trembling	petals,	and	speak	of	desires	so	long	held	that	she	was	almost
insensate	to	the	myriad	roots	and	tendrils	they	had	wrought	through	her	body
and	soul,	and	he	would	perhaps	warn	her	of	the	dangers	they	presented,	the	risk
of	failure	that	must	be	faced	and,	indeed,	accepted	–	and	she	would	sigh	and
nod	and	know	well	he	spoke	with	wisdom.
Mocking	flirtation,	the	jaw-dropping	self-obsession,	all	the	ways	in	which
she	amused	herself	when	engaging	with	the	mortals	of	this	world,	did	not
accompany	Lady	Envy	to	this	garden.	Not	with	this	man	awaiting	her.	Fisher
kel	Tath	was	not	a	young	man	–	and	there	were	times	when	she	wondered	if	he
was	mortal	at	all,	although	she	would	never	pry	in	search	of	truth	–	and	he	was
not	at	all	godlike	with	physical	perfection.	His	gifts,	if	she	could	so	crassly	list
them,	would	include	his	voice,	his	genius	with	the	lyre	and	a	dozen	other
obscure	instruments,	and	the	mind	behind	the	eyes	that	saw	all,	that	understood


far	too	much	of	what	he	did	see,	that	understood	too	the	significance	of	all	that
remained	and	would	ever	remain	hidden	–	yes,	the	mind	behind	the	eyes	and
every	faint	hint	he	offered	up	to	reveal	something	of	that	mind,	its	manner	of
observance,	its	stunning	capacity	for	compassion	that	only	blistering	fools
would	call	weakness.
No,	this	was	one	man	whom	she	would	not	mock	–	could	not,	in	fact.
They	could	have	discussed	many	things.	Instead,	they	stood,	eyes	meeting
and	held,	and	the	dusk	closed	in	with	all	its	scents	and	secrets.
	
Storm	the	abyss	and	throw	down	a	multitude	of	astounded	gods!	The	sky
cracks	open	from	day	into	night,	and	then	cracks	yet	again,	revealing	the	flesh
of	space	and	the	blood	of	time	–	see	it	rent	and	see	it	spray	in	glistening	red
droplets	of	dying	stars!	The	seas	boil	and	the	earth	steams	and	melts!
Lady	Envy	has	found	a	lover.
Poetry	and	desire,	fulminations	one	and	the	same	and	oh	this	is	a	secret	to
make	thugs	and	brainless	oafs	howl	at	the	night.
Has	found	a	lover.
A	lover.
	
‘I	dreamt	I	was	pregnant.’
Torvald	paused	inside	the	door	and	hesitated	just	a	little	too	long	before
saying,	‘Why,	that’s	great!’
Tiserra	shot	him	a	quizzical	look	from	where	she	stood	at	the	table	bearing
her	latest	throw	of	pottery.	‘It	is?’
‘Absolutely,	darling.	You	can	go	through	all	the	misery	of	that	without	its
being	real.	I	can	imagine	your	sigh	of	relief	when	you	awoke	and	realized	it
was	nothing	but	a	dream.’
‘Well,	I	certainly	imagined	yours,	my	love.’
He	walked	in	and	slumped	down	into	a	chair,	stretching	out	his	legs.
‘Something	strange	is	going	on,’	he	said.
‘It	was	just	a	passing	madness,’	she	said.	‘No	need	for	you	to	fret,	Tor.’
‘I	mean	at	the	estate.’	He	rubbed	at	his	face.	‘The	castellan	spends	all	his
time	mixing	up	concoctions	for	diseases	nobody	has,	and	even	if	they	did,	his
cures	are	liable	to	kill	them	first.	The	two	compound	guards	do	nothing	but
toss	bones	and	that’s	hardly	something	you’d	think	renegade	Seguleh	would
do,	is	it?	And	if	that’s	not	weird	enough,	Scorch	and	Leff	are	actually	taking


their	responsibilities	seriously.’
At	that	she	snorted.
‘No,	really,’	Torvald	insisted.	‘And	I	think	I	know	why.	They	can	smell	it,
Tis.	The	strangeness.	The	Mistress	went	to	the	Council	and	claimed	her	place
and	there	wasn’t	a	whisper	of	complaint	–	or	so	I	heard	from	Coll	–	and	you’d
think	there’d	be	visitors	now	from	various	power	blocs	in	the	Council,
everyone	trying	to	buy	her	alliance.	But…nothing.	No	one.	Does	that	make
sense?’
Tiserra	was	studying	her	husband.	‘Ignore	it,	Tor.	All	of	it.	Your	task	is
simple	–	keep	it	that	way.’
He	glanced	up	at	her.	‘I	would,	believe	me.	Except	that	all	my	instincts	are
on	fire	–	as	if	some	damned	white-hot	dagger	is	hovering	at	my	back.	And	not
just	me,	but	Scorch	and	Leff,	too.’	He	rose,	began	pacing.
‘I	haven’t	begun	supper	yet,’	Tiserra	said.	‘It’ll	be	a	while	–	why	don’t	you
go	to	the	Phoenix	Inn	for	a	tankard	or	two?	Say	hello	to	Kruppe	if	you	see
him.’
‘What?	Oh.	Good	idea.’
She	watched	him	leave,	waited	for	a	few	dozen	heartbeats	to	ensure	that
he’d	found	no	reason	to	change	his	mind,	and	then	went	to	one	of	the	small
trapdoors	hidden	in	the	floor,	sprang	the	release	and	reached	in	to	draw	out	her
Deck	of	Dragons.	She	sat	at	the	table	and	carefully	removed	the	deerskin	cover.
This	was	something	she	did	rarely	these	days.	She	was	sensitive	enough	to
know	that	powerful	forces	were	gathering	in	Darujhistan,	making	any	field	she
attempted	fraught	with	risk.	Yet	Tiserra,	for	all	her	advice	to	Torvald	to	simply
ignore	matters,	well	knew	that	her	husband’s	instincts	were	too	sharp	to	be
summarily	dismissed.
‘Renegade	Seguleh,’	she	muttered,	then	shook	her	head	and	collected	up
the	Deck.	Her	version	was	Barukan,	with	a	few	cards	of	her	own	added,
including	one	for	The	City	–	in	this	case,	Darujhistan	–	and	another	–	but	no,
she	would	not	think	of	that	one.	Not	unless	she	had	to.
A	tremor	of	fear	rushed	through	her.	The	wooden	cards	felt	cold	in	her
hands.	She	decided	on	a	spiral	field	and	was	not	at	all	surprised	when	she	set
the	centre	card	down	and	saw	that	it	was	The	City,	a	silhouetted,	familiar
skyline	at	dusk,	with	the	glow	of	blue	fires	rising	up	from	below,	each	one	like
a	submerged	star.	She	studied	it	for	a	time,	until	those	fires	seemed	to	swim
before	her	eyes,	until	the	dusk	the	card	portrayed	began	to	flow	into	the	world
around	her,	one	bleeding	into	the	other,	back	and	forth	until	the	moment	was
fixed,	time	pinned	down	as	if	by	a	knife	stabbed	into	the	table.	She	was	not
seeking	the	future	–	prophecy	was	far	too	dangerous	with	all	the	converging


powers	–	but	the	present.	This	very	instant,	each	strand’s	point	of	attachment	in
the	vast	web	that	now	spanned	Darujhistan.
She	set	down	the	next	card.	High	House	Shadow,	The	Rope,	Patron	of
Assassins.	Well,	that	was	not	too	surprising,	given	the	latest	rumours.	Yet	she
sensed	the	relationship	was	more	complicated	than	it	at	first	appeared	–	yes,	the
Guild	was	active,	was	snarled	in	something	far	bloodier	than	it	had	anticipated.
Too	bad	for	the	Guild.	Still,	The	Rope	never	played	one	game.	There	were
others,	beneath	the	surface.	The	obvious	was	nothing	more	than	a	veil.
The	third	card	clattered	on	to	the	tabletop,	and	she	found	her	hand	would
not	rest,	flinging	out	the	next	card	and	yet	another.	Three	tightly	bound,	then.
Three	cards,	forming	their	own	woven	nest.	Obelisk,	Soldier	of	Death,	and
Crown.	These	needed	a	frame.	She	set	down	the	sixth	card	and	grunted.	Knight
of	Darkness	–	a	faint	rumble	of	wooden	wheels,	a	chorus	of	moans	drifting
like	smoke	from	the	sword	in	the	Knight’s	hands.
Thus,	The	Rope	on	one	side,	the	Knight	on	the	other.	She	saw	that	her
hands	were	trembling.	Three	more	cards	quickly	followed	–	another	nest.	King
of	High	House	Death,	King	in	Chains,	and	Dessembrae,	Lord	of	Tragedy.
Knight	of	Darkness	as	the	inside	frame.	She	set	down	the	other	end	and	gasped.
The	card	she	wished	she	had	never	made.	The	Tyrant.
Closing	the	field.	The	spiral	was	done.	City	and	Tyrant	at	beginning	and
end.
Tiserra	had	not	expected	anything	like	this.	She	was	not	seeking	prophecy
–	her	thoughts	had	been	centred	on	her	husband	and	whatever	web	he	had
found	himself	trapped	in	–	no,	not	prophecy,	nothing	on	such	a	grand	scale	as
this…
I	see	the	end	of	Darujhistan.	Spirits	save	us,	I	see	my	city’s	end.	This,
Torvald,	is	your	nest.
‘Oh,	husband,’	she	murmured,	‘you	are	in	trouble	indeed…’
Her	eyes	strayed	once	more	to	The	Rope.	Is	that	you,	Cotillion?	Or	has
Vorcan	returned?	It’s	not	just	the	Guild	–	the	Guild	means	nothing	here.	No,
there	are	faces	behind	that	veil.	There	are	terrible	deaths	coming.	Terrible
deaths.	Abruptly,	she	swept	up	the	cards,	as	if	by	that	gesture	alone	she	could
defy	what	was	coming,	could	fling	apart	the	strands	and	so	free	the	world	to
find	a	new	future.	As	if	things	could	be	so	easy.	As	if	choices	were	indeed	free.
Outside,	a	cart	clunked	past,	its	battered	wheels	crackling	and	stepping	on
the	uneven	cobbles.	The	hoofs	of	the	ox	pulling	it	beat	slow	as	a	dirge,	and
there	came	to	her	the	rattle	of	a	heavy	chain,	slapping	leather	and	wood.
She	wrapped	the	deck	once	more	and	returned	it	to	its	hiding	place.	And
then	went	to	another,	this	one	made	by	her	husband	–	perhaps	indeed	he’d


thought	to	keep	it	a	secret	from	her,	but	such	things	were	impossible.	She	knew
the	creak	of	every	floorboard,	after	all,	and	had	found	his	private	pit	only	days
after	he’d	dug	it.
Within,	items	folded	in	blue	silk	–	the	silk	of	the	Blue	Moranth.	Tor ’s	loot
–	she	wondered	again	how	he’d	come	by	it.	Even	now,	as	she	knelt	above	the
cache,	she	could	feel	the	sorcery	roiling	up	thick	as	a	stench,	reeking	of	watery
decay	–	the	Warren	of	Ruse,	no	less,	but	then,	perhaps	not.	This,	I	think,	is
Elder.	This	magic,	it	comes	from	Mael.
But	then,	what	connection	would	the	Blue	Moranth	have	with	the	Elder
God?
She	reached	down	and	edged	back	the	silk.	A	pair	of	sealskin	gloves,
glistening	as	if	they	had	just	come	up	from	the	depths	of	some	ice-laden	sea.
Beneath	them,	a	water-etched	throwing	axe,	in	a	style	she	had	never	seen
before	–	not	Moranth,	for	certain.	A	sea-raider ’s	weapon,	the	inset	patterns	on
the	blue	iron	swirling	like	a	host	of	whirlpools.	The	handle	was	an	ivory	tusk
of	some	sort,	appallingly	oversized	for	any	beast	she	could	imagine.	Carefully
tucked	in	to	either	side	of	the	weapon	were	cloth-wrapped	grenados,	thirteen	in
all,	one	of	which	was	–	she	had	discovered	–	empty	of	whatever	chemical
incendiary	was	trapped	inside	the	others.	An	odd	habit	of	the	Moranth,	but	it
had	allowed	her	a	chance	to	examine	more	closely	the	extraordinary	skill
involved	in	manufacturing	such	perfect	porcelain	globes,	without	risk	of
blowing	herself	and	her	entire	home	to	pieces.	True,	she	had	heard	that	most
Moranth	munitions	were	made	of	clay,	but	not	these	ones,	for	some	reason.
Lacquered	with	a	thick,	mostly	transparent	gloss	that	was	nevertheless	faintly
cerulean,	these	grenados	were	–	to	her	eye	–	works	of	art,	which	made	the
destruction	implicit	in	their	proper	use	strike	her	as	almost	criminal.
Now,	dear	husband,	why	do	you	have	these?	Were	they	given	to	you,	or	did
you	–	as	is	more	likely	–	steal	them?
If	she	confronted	him,	she	knew,	he	would	tell	her	the	truth.	But	that	was
not	something	she	would	do.	Successful	marriages	took	as	sacrosanct	the
possession	of	secrets.	When	so	much	was	shared,	certain	other	things	must
ever	be	held	back.	Small	secrets,	to	be	sure,	but	precious	ones	none	the	less.
Tiserra	wondered	if	her	husband	foresaw	a	future	need	for	such	items.	Or
was	this	just	another	instance	of	his	natural	inclination	to	hoard,	a	quirk	both
charming	and	infuriating,	sweet	and	potentially	deadly	(as	all	the	best	ones
were).
Magic	flowed	in	endless	half-visible	patterns	about	the	porcelain	globes	–
another	detail	she	suspected	was	unusual.
Ensorcelled	munitions	–	what	were	the	Blue	Moranth	thinking?


Indeed,	whatever	were	they	thinking?
	
Two	empty	chairs	faced	Kruppe,	a	situation	most	peculiar	and	not	at	all
pleasing.	A	short	time	earlier	they	had	been	occupied.	Scorch	and	Leff,
downing	a	fast	tankard	each	before	setting	out	to	their	place	of	employment,
their	nightly	vigil	at	the	gates	of	the	mysterious	estate	and	its	mysterious	lady.
Oh,	a	troubled	pair	indeed,	their	fierce	frowns	denoting	an	uncharacteristic
extreme	of	concentration.	They’d	swallowed	down	the	bitter	ale	like	water,	the
usual	exchange	of	pleasant	idiocies	sadly	muted.	Watching	them	hurry	out,
Kruppe	was	reminded	of	two	condemned	men	on	the	way	to	the	gallows	(or	a
wedding),	proof	of	the	profound	unfairness	of	the	world.
But	fairness,	while	a	comforting	conceit,	was	an	elusive	notion,	in	the	habit
of	swirling	loose	and	wild	about	the	vortex	of	the	self,	and	should	the	currents
of	one	collide	with	those	of	another,	why,	fairness	ever	revealed	itself	as	a	onesided	coin.	In	this	fell	clash	could	be	found	all	manner	of	conflict,	from	vast
continent-spanning	wars	to	neighbours	feuding	over	a	crooked	fence	line.
But	what	significance	these	philosophical	meanderings?	Nary	effect	upon
the	trudging	ways	of	life,	to	be	sure.	Skip	and	dance	on	to	this	next	scene	of
portentous	gravity,	and	here	arriving	hooded	as	a	vulture	through	the	narrow
portal	of	the	Phoenix	Inn,	none	other	than	Torvald	Nom.	Pausing	just	within
the	threshold,	answering	Sulty’s	passing	greeting	with	a	distracted	smile,	and
then	to	the	bar,	where	Meese	has	already	poured	him	a	tankard.	And	in
reaching	over	to	collect	it,	Torvald’s	wrist	is	grasped,	Meese	pulling	him	close
for	a	few	murmured	words	of	possible	import,	to	which	Torvald	grimaces	and
then	reluctantly	nods	–	his	response	sufficient	for	Meese	to	release	him.
Thus	sprung,	Torvald	Nom	strode	over	to	smiling	Kruppe’s	table	and
slumped	down	into	one	of	the	chairs.	‘It’s	all	bad,’	he	said.
‘Kruppe	is	stunned,	dear	cousin	of	Rallick,	at	such	miserable	misery,	such
pessimistic	pessimism.	Why,	scowling	Torvald	has	so	stained	his	world	that
even	his	underlings	have	been	infected.	Look,	even	here	thy	dark	cloud	crawls
darkly	Kruppe’s	way.	Gestures	are	necessary	to	ward	off	sour	infusion!’	And
he	waved	his	hand,	crimson	handkerchief	fluttering	like	a	tiny	flag.	‘Ah,	that	is
much	better.	Be	assured,	Torvald,	Kruppe’s	friend,	that	“bad”	is	never	as	bad	as
bad	might	be,	even	when	it’s	very	bad	indeed.’
‘Rallick	left	a	message	for	me.	He	wants	to	see	me.’
Kruppe	waggled	his	brows	and	made	an	effort	at	leaning	forward,	but	his
belly	got	in	the	way	so	he	settled	back	again,	momentarily	perturbed	at	what
might	be	an	expanding	girth	–	but	then,	it	was	in	truth	a	question	of	angles,	and


thus	a	modest	shift	in	perspective	eased	his	repose	once	more,	thank	the	gods	–
‘Unquestionably	Rallick	seeks	no	more	than	a	cheery	greeting	for	his	long	lost
cousin.	There	is,	Kruppe	proclaims,	no	need	for	worry.’
‘Shows	what	little	you	know,’	Torvald	replied.	‘I	did	something	terrible
once.	Horrible,	disgusting	and	evil.	I	scarred	him	for	life.	In	fact,	if	he	does
track	me	down,	I	expect	he’ll	kill	me.	Why	d’you	think	I	ran	away	in	the	first
place?’
‘A	span	of	many	years,’	said	Kruppe,	‘weakens	every	bridge,	until	they
crumble	at	a	touch,	or	if	not	a	touch,	then	a	frenzied	sledgehammer.’
‘Will	you	speak	to	him	for	me,	Kruppe?’
‘Of	course,	yet,	alas,	Rallick	has	done	something	terrible	and	horrible	and
disgusting	and	evil	to	poor	Kruppe,	for	which	forgiveness	is	not	possible.’
‘What?	What	did	he	do?’
‘Kruppe	will	think	of	something.	Sufficient	to	wedge	firmly	the	crowbar	of
persuasion,	until	he	cannot	but	tilt	helpless	and	desperate	for	succour	in	your
direction.	You	need	only	open	wide	your	arms,	dear	friend,	when	said	moment
arrives.’
‘Thanks,	Kruppe,	you’re	a	true	friend.’	And	Torvald	drank	deep.
‘No	truer,	no	lie,	’tis	true.	Kruppe	blesses	you,	alas,	with	none	of	the
formal	panoply	accorded	you	by	the	Blue	Moranth	–	oh,	had	Kruppe	been
there	to	witness	such	extraordinary,	indeed	singular,	honorificals!	Sulty,	sweet
lass,	is	it	not	time	for	supper?	Kruppe	withers	with	need!	Oh,	and	perhaps
another	carafe	of	vintage—’
‘Hold	it,’	Torvald	Nom	cut	in,	his	eyes	sharpening.	‘What	in	Hood’s	name
do	you	know	about	that,	Kruppe?	And	how?	Who	told	you	–	no	one	could’ve
told	you,	because	it	was	secret	in	the	first	place!’
‘Calmly,	please,	calmly,	Kruppe’s	dearest	friend.’	Another	wave	of	the
handkerchief,	concluded	by	a	swift	mop	as	sweat	had	inexplicably	sprung	to
brow.	‘Why,	rumours—’
‘Not	a	chance.’
‘Then,	er,	a	dying	confession—’
‘We’re	about	to	hear	one	of	those,	yes.’
Kruppe	hastily	mopped	some	more.	‘Source	escapes	me	at	the	moment,
Kruppe	swears!	Why,	are	not	the	Moranth	in	a	flux—’
‘They’re	always	in	a	damned	flux,	Kruppe!’
‘Indeed.	Then,	yes,	perturbations	among	the	Black,	upon	gleaning	hints	of
said	catechism,	or	was	it	investiture?	Something	religious,	in	any	case—’
‘It	was	a	blessing,	Kruppe.’
‘Precisely,	and	who	among	all	humans	more	deserved	such	a	thing	from


the	Moranth?	Why,	none,	of	course,	which	is	what	made	it	singular	in	the	first
place,	thus	arching	the	exoskeletal	eyebrows	of	the	Black,	and	no	doubt	the	Red
and	Gold	and	Silver	and	Green	and	Pink	–	are	there	Pink	Moranth?	Kruppe	is
unsure.	So	many	colours,	so	few	empty	slots	in	Kruppe’s	brain!	Oh,	spin	the
wheel	and	let’s	see	explosive	mauve	flash	into	brilliant	expostulation	and	why
not?	Yes,	’twas	the	Mauve	Moranth	so	verbose	and	carelessly	so,	although	not
so	carelessly	as	to	reveal	anything	to	anyone	but	Kruppe	and	Kruppe	alone,
Kruppe	assures	you.	In	fact,	so	precise	their	purple	penchant	for	verbosity	that
even	Kruppe’s	recollection	of	the	specific	moment	is	lost	–	to	them	and	to
Kruppe	himself.	Violate	a	Violet	if	you	dare,	but	they’re	not	telling.	Nor	is
Kruppe!’	And	he	squeezed	out	a	stream	of	sweat	from	his	handkerchief,	off	to
one	side,	of	course,	which	unfortunately	coincided	with	Sulty’s	arrival	with	a
plate	of	supper.
Thus	did	Kruppe	discover	the	virtue	of	perspiratory	reintegration,
although	his	subsequent	observation	that	the	supper	was	a	tad	salty	was	not	well
received,	not	well	received	at	all.
Astoundingly,	Torvald	quickly	lost	all	appetite	for	his	ale,	deciding	to
leave	(rudely	so)	in	the	midst	of	Kruppe’s	meal.
Proof	that	manners	were	not	as	they	once	were.	But	then,	they	never	were,
were	they?
	
Hasty	departure	to	echo	Torvald	Nom’s	flight	back	into	the	arms	of	his	wife,
out	into	the	dusk	when	all	paths	are	unobstructed,	when	nothing	of	reality
intrudes	with	insurmountable	obstacles	and	possibly	deadly	repercussions.	In	a
merchant	house	annexe	down	at	the	docks,	in	the	second	floor	loft	above	a
dusty	storeroom	with	sawdust	on	the	floor,	a	wellborn	young	woman	straddles
a	once-thief	on	the	lone	narrow	cot	with	its	thin,	straggly	mattress,	and	in	her
eyes	darkness	unfolds,	is	revealed	to	the	man	savage	and	naked	–	raw	enough
to	startle	in	him	a	moment	of	fear.
Indeed.	Fear.	At	the	moment,	Cutter	could	not	reach	past	that	ephemeral
chill,	could	not	find	anything	specific	–	what	Challice’s	eyes	revealed	was	allconsuming,	frighteningly	desperate,	perhaps	depthless	and	insatiable	in	its
need.
She	was	unmindful	of	him	–	he	could	see	that.	In	this	instant	he	had	become
a	weapon	on	which	she	impaled	herself,	ecstatic	with	the	forbidden,	alive	with
betrayal.	She	stabbed	herself	again	and	again,	transformed	into	something
private,	for	ever	beyond	his	reach,	and,	yes,	without	doubt	these	were	selfinflicted	wounds,	hinting	of	an	inwardly	directed	contempt,	perhaps	even


disgust.
He	did	not	know	what	to	think,	but	there	was	something	alluring	in	being
faceless,	in	being	that	weapon	–	and	this	truth	shivered	through	him	as	dark	as
all	that	he	saw	in	her	eyes.
Apsalar,	is	this	what	you	feared?	If	it	is,	then	I	understand.	I	understand
why	you	fled.	You	did	it	for	both	of	us.
With	this	thought	he	arched,	groaning,	and	spilled	into	Challice	Vidikas.
She	gasped,	lowered	herself	on	to	him.	Sweat	on	sweat,	waves	of	heat
embracing	them.
Neither	spoke.
From	outside,	gulls	cried	to	the	dying	sun.	Shouts	and	laughter	muted	by
walls,	the	faint	slap	of	waves	on	the	broken	crockery-cluttered	shore,	the	creak
of	pulleys	as	ships	were	loaded	and	off-loaded.	From	outside,	the	world	as	it
always	was.
Cutter	was	now	thinking	of	Scillara,	of	how	this	was	a	kind	of	betrayal	–
no	different	from	Challice’s	own.	True,	Scillara	had	said	often	enough	that
theirs	was	a	love	of	convenience,	unbound	by	expectations.	She’d	insisted	on
that	distance,	and	if	there	had	been	moments	of	uncontrolled	passion	in	their
lovemaking,	it	was	the	selfish	kind,	quickly	plucked	apart	once	they	were	both
spent.	He	also	suspected	that	he	had	hurt	her	–	with	their	landing	in	his	city,
some	part	of	him	had	sought	to	sever	what	they	had	had	aboard	the	ship,	as	if
by	closing	one	chapter	every	thread	was	cut	and	the	tale	began	anew.
But	that	wasn’t	possible.	All	breaks	in	the	narrative	of	living	had	more	to
do	with	the	limits	of	what	could	be	sustained	at	any	one	time,	the	reach	of
temporary	exhaustion.	Memory	did	not	let	go;	it	remained	the	net	dragged	in
one’s	wake,	with	all	sorts	of	strange	things	snarled	in	the	knotted	strands.
He	had	behaved	unfairly,	and	that	had	hurt	her	and,	indeed,	hurt	their
friendship.	And	now	it	seemed	he	had	gone	too	far,	too	far	to	ever	get	back
what	he	now	realized	was	precious,	was	truer	than	everything	he	was	feeling
now,	here	beneath	this	woman.
It’s	said	joy’s	quick	crash	was	weighted	in	truth.	All	at	once	Challice,
sprawled	prone	atop	him,	felt	heavier.
	
In	her	own	silence,	Challice	of	House	Vidikas	was	thinking	back	to	that
morning,	to	one	of	those	rare	breakfasts	in	the	company	of	her	husband.	There
had	been	sly	amusement	in	his	expression,	or	at	least	the	tease	of	that	emotion,
making	his	every	considerate	gesture	slightly	mocking,	as	if	in	sitting	facing
one	another	at	the	table	they	were	but	acting	out	clichéd	roles	of	propriety.	And


finding,	it	seemed,	a	kind	of	comfort	in	the	ease	of	their	mutual	falsehoods.
She	suspected	that	some	of	Gorlas’s	satisfaction	involved	a	bleed-over	into
her	private	activities,	as	if	it	pleased	him	to	take	some	credit	for	her	fastreceding	descent	into	depravity;	that	his	unperturbed	comfort	was	in	fact
supportive,	something	to	be	relied	upon,	a	solid	island	she	could	flail	back	to
when	the	storm	grew	too	wild,	when	her	swimming	in	the	depths	took	on	the
characteristics	of	drowning.
Making	her	so-called	private	activities	little	more	than	extensions	of	his
possession.	In	owning	her	he	was	free	to	see	her	used	and	used	up	elsewhere.	In
fact,	she	had	sensed	a	sexual	tension	between	them	that	had	not	been	there
since…that	had	never	been	there	before.	She	was,	she	realized,	making	herself
more	desirable	to	him.
It	seemed	a	very	narrow	bridge	that	he	chose	to	walk.	Some	part	of	her,
after	all,	was	her	own	–	belonging	to	no	one	else	no	matter	what	they	might
believe	–	and	so	she	would,	ultimately,	be	guided	by	her	own	decisions,	the
choices	she	made	that	would	serve	her	and	none	other.	Yes,	her	husband	played
a	most	dangerous	game	here,	as	he	might	well	discover.
He	had	spoken,	in	casual	passing,	of	the	falling	out	between	Shardan	Lim
and	Hanut	Orr,	something	trivial	and	soon	to	mend,	of	course.	But	moments
were	strained	of	late,	and	neither	ally	seemed	eager	to	speak	to	Gorlas	about
any	of	it.	Hanut	Orr	had,	however,	said	some	strange	things,	offhand,	to	Gorlas
in	the	few	private	conversations	they’d	had	–	curious,	suggestive	things,	but	no
matter.	It	was	clear	that	something	had	wounded	Hanut	Orr ’s	vaunted	ego,	and
that	was	ever	the	danger	with	possessing	such	an	ego	–	its	constant	need	to	be
fed,	lest	it	deflate	to	the	prods	of	sharp	reality.
Sharden	Lim’s	mood,	too,	had	taken	a	sudden	downward	turn.	One	day
veritably	exalted,	the	next	dour	and	short-tempered.
Worse	than	adolescents,	those	two.	You’d	think	there	was	a	woman
involved…
Challice	had	affected	little	interest,	finding,	to	her	own	surprise,	that	she
was	rather	good	at	dissembling,	at	maintaining	the	necessary	pretensions.	The
Mistress	of	the	House,	the	pearlescent	prize	of	the	Master,	ever	smooth	to	the
touch,	as	delicate	as	a	porcelain	statue.	Indifferent	to	the	outside	world	and	all
its	decrepit,	smudged	details.	This	was	the	privilege	of	relative	wealth,	after	all,
encouraging	the	natural	inclination	to	manufacture	a	comforting	cocoon.
Keeping	out	the	common	indelicacies,	the	mundane	miseries,	all	those	raw
necessities,	needs,	wants,	all	those	crude	stresses	that	so	strained	the	lives	of
normal	folk.
Only	to	discover,	in	gradual	increments	of	growing	horror,	that	the	world


within	was	little	different;	that	all	those	grotesque	foibles	of	humanity	could
not	be	evaded	–	they	just	reared	up	shinier	to	the	eye,	like	polished	baubles,	but
no	less	cheap,	no	less	sordid.
In	her	silence,	Challice	thought	of	the	gifts	of	privilege,	and	oh	wasn’t	she
privileged	indeed?	A	rich	husband	getting	richer,	one	lover	among	his	closest
allies	(and	that	was	a	snare	she	might	use	again,	if	the	need	arose),	and	now
another	–	one	Gorlas	knew	virtually	nothing	about.	At	least,	she	didn’t	think	he
did.
Sudden	rapid	flutter	of	her	heart.	What	if	he	has	someone	following	me?
The	possibility	was	very	real,	but	what	could	she	do	about	it?	And	what	might
her	husband	do	when	he	discovered	that	her	most	recent	lover	was	not	a	player
in	his	game?	That	he	was,	in	fact,	a	stranger,	someone	clearly	beyond	his
reach,	his	sense	of	control.	Would	he	then	realize	that	she	too	was	now	beyond
his	control?
Gorlas	might	panic.	He	might,	in	truth,	become	murderous.
‘Be	careful	now,	Cro—Cutter.	What	we	have	begun	is	very	dangerous.’
He	said	nothing	in	reply,	and	after	a	moment	she	pushed	herself	off	him,
and	rose	to	stand	beside	the	narrow	bed.	‘He	would	kill	you,’	she	continued,
looking	down	on	him,	seeing	once	again	how	the	years	had	hardened	his	body,
sculpted	muscles	bearing	the	scars	of	past	battles.	His	eyes,	fixed	on	her	own,
regarded	her	with	thoughts	and	feelings	veiled,	unknowable.
‘He’s	a	duellist,	isn’t	he?’
She	nodded.	‘One	of	the	best	in	the	city.’
‘Duels,’	he	said,	‘don’t	frighten	me.’
‘That	would	be	a	mistake,	Cutter.	In	any	case,	given	your…station,	it’s
doubtful	he’d	bother	with	anything	so	formal.	More	like	a	half-dozen	thugs
hired	to	get	rid	of	you.	Or	even	an	assassin.’
‘So,’	he	asked,	‘what	should	I	do	about	it?’
She	hesitated,	and	then	turned	away	to	find	her	clothes.	‘I	don’t	know.	I	was
but	warning	you,	my	love.’
‘I	would	imagine	you’d	be	even	more	at	risk.’
She	shrugged.	‘I	don’t	think	so.	Although,’	she	added,	‘a	jealous	man	is	an
unpredictable	man.’	Turning,	she	studied	him	once	more.	‘Are	you	jealous,
Cutter?’
‘Of	Gorlas	Vidikas?’	The	question	seemed	to	surprise	him	and	she	could
see	him	thinking	about	it.	‘Title	and	wealth,	yes,	that	would	be	nice.	Being	born
into	something	doesn’t	mean	it’s	deserved,	of	course,	so	maybe	he	hasn’t
earned	all	his	privileges,	but	then,	maybe	he	has	–	you’d	know	more	of	that
than	I	would.’


‘That’s	not	what	I	meant.	When	he	takes	me,	when	he	makes	love	to	me.’
‘Oh.	Does	he?’
‘Occasionally.’
‘Make	love?	Or	just	make	use	of	you?’
‘That	is	a	rather	rude	question.’
Years	ago,	he	would	have	leapt	to	his	feet,	apologies	tumbling	from	him	in
a	rush.	Now,	he	remained	on	the	bed,	observing	her	with	those	calm	eyes.
Challice	felt	a	shiver	of	something	in	her,	and	thought	it	might	be	fear.	She	had
assumed	a	certain…control.	Over	all	of	this.	Over	him.	And	now	she
wondered.	‘What,’	he	now	asked,	‘do	you	want	from	me,	Challice?	Years	and
years	of	this?	Meeting	in	dusty,	abandoned	bedrooms.	Something	you	can	own
that	Gorlas	does	not?	It’s	not	as	if	you’ll	ever	leave	him,	is	it?’
‘You	once	invited	me	to	run	away	with	you.’
‘If	I	did,’	he	said,	‘you	clearly	said	no.	What	has	changed?’
‘I	have.’
His	gaze	sharpened	on	her.	‘So	now…you	would?	Leave	it	all	behind?	The
estate,	the	wealth?’	He	waved	languidly	at	the	room	around	them.	‘For	a	life	of
this?	Challice,	understand:	the	world	of	most	people	is	a	small	world.	It	has
more	limitations	than	you	might	think—’
‘And	you	think	it’s	that	different	among	the	nobleborn?’
He	laughed.
Fury	hissed	through	her,	and	to	keep	from	lashing	out	she	quickly	began
dressing.	‘It’s	typical,’	she	said,	pleased	at	her	calm	tone.	‘I	shouldn’t	have	been
surprised.	The	lowborn	always	think	we	have	it	so	easy,	that	we	can	do
anything,	go	anywhere.	That	our	every	whim	is	answered.	They	don’t	think—’
she	spun	to	face	him,	and	watched	his	eyes	widen	as	he	comprehended	her
anger,	‘—you	don’t	think	that	people	like	me	can	suffer.’
‘I	never	said	that—’
‘You	laughed.’
‘Where	are	you	going	now,	Challice?	You’re	going	back	to	your	home.
Your	estate,	where	your	handmaids	will	rush	to	attend	to	you.	Where	another
change	of	clothes	and	jewellery	awaits.	After	a	languid	bath,	of	course.’	He	sat
up,	abruptly.	‘The	ship’s	carpenter	who	stayed	in	this	room	here,	well,	he	did
so	because	he	had	nowhere	else	to	go.	This	was	his	estate.	Temporary,
dependent	on	the	whim	of	House	Vidikas,	and	when	his	reason	for	being	here
was	done	out	he	went,	to	find	somewhere	else	to	live	–	if	he	was	lucky.’	He
reached	for	his	shirt.	‘And	where	will	I	go	now?	Oh,	out	on	to	the	streets.
Wearing	the	same	clothes	I	arrived	in,	and	that	won’t	change	any	time	soon.
And	tonight?	Maybe	I	can	wheedle	another	night	in	a	room	at	the	Phoenix	Inn.


And	if	I	help	in	the	kitchen	I’ll	earn	a	meal	and	if	Meese	is	in	a	good	mood	then
maybe	even	a	bath.	Tomorrow,	the	same	challenges	of	living,	the	same
questions	of	“what	next?”’	He	faced	her	and	she	saw	amused	irony	in	his
expression,	which	slowly	faded.	‘Challice,	I’m	not	saying	you’re	somehow
immune	to	suffering.	If	you	were,	you	wouldn’t	be	here,	would	you?	I	spoke	of
limited	worlds.	They	exist	everywhere,	but	that	doesn’t	mean	they’re	all
identical.	Some	are	a	damned	sight	more	limited	than	others.’
‘You	had	choices,	Cutter,’	she	said.	‘More	choices	than	I	ever	had.’
‘You	could	have	told	Gorlas	no	when	he	sought	your	hand	in	marriage.’
‘Really?	Now	that	reveals	one	thing	in	you	that’s	not	changed	–	your
naïveté.’
He	shrugged.	‘If	you	say	so.	What	next,	Challice?’
His	sudden,	seemingly	effortless	dismissal	of	the	argument	took	her	breath
away.	It	doesn’t	matter	to	him.	None	of	it.	Not	how	I	feel,	not	how	I	see	him.	‘I
need	to	think,’	she	said,	inwardly	flailing.
He	nodded	as	if	unsurprised.
‘Tomorrow	evening,’	she	said,	‘we	should	meet	again.’
A	half-grin	as	he	asked,	‘To	talk?’
‘Among	other	things.’
‘All	right,	Challice.’
	
Some	thoughts,	possessing	a	frightening	kind	of	self-awareness,	knew	to	hide
deep	beneath	others,	riding	unseen	the	same	currents,	where	they	could	grow
unchallenged,	unexposed	by	any	horrified	recognition.	One	could	always	sense
them,	of	course,	but	that	was	not	the	same	as	slashing	through	all	the
obfuscation,	revealing	them	bared	to	the	harsh	light	and	so	seeing	them	wither
into	dust.	The	mind	ran	its	own	shell-game,	ever	amused	at	its	own	sleight	of
hand	misdirection	–	in	truth,	this	was	how	one	tended	to	live,	from	moment	to
moment,	with	the	endless	exchange	of	denials	and	deference	and	quick	winks
in	the	mirror,	even	as	inner	proclamations	and	avowals	thundered	with	false
willpower	and	posturing	conviction.
Does	this	lead	one	into	unease?
Challice	Vidikas	hurried	home,	nevertheless	taking	a	circuitous	route	as
now	and	then	whispers	of	paranoia	rose	in	faint	swells	to	the	surface	of	her
thoughts.
She	was	thinking	of	Cutter,	this	man	who	had	once	been	Crokus.	She	was
thinking	of	the	significance	in	the	new	name,	the	new	man	she	had	found.	She
was	thinking,	also	(there,	beneath	the	surface),	of	what	to	do	with	him.


Gorlas	would	find	out,	sooner	or	later.	He	might	confront	her,	he	might
not.	She	might	discover	that	he	knew	only	by	arriving	one	afternoon	at	the	loft
in	the	annexe,	and	finding	Cutter ’s	hacked,	lifeless	corpse	awaiting	her	on	the
bed.
She	knew	she	was	trapped	–	in	ways	a	free	man	like	Cutter	could	never
comprehend.	She	knew,	as	well,	that	the	ways	out	were	limited,	each	one
chained	to	sacrifices,	losses,	abandonments,	and	some…despicable.	Yes,	that
was	the	only	word	for	them.
Despicable.	She	tasted	the	word	anew,	there	in	her	mind.	Contemplated
whether	she	was	in	fact	capable	of	living	with	such	a	penance.	But	why	would	I?
What	would	I	need	to	see	done,	to	make	me	see	myself	in	that	way?
How	many	lives	am	I	willing	to	destroy,	in	order	to	be	free?
The	question	itself	was	despicable,	the	stem	to	freedom’s	blessed	flower	–
to	grasp	hold	was	to	feel	the	stab	of	countless	thorns.
Yet	she	held	tight	now,	riding	the	pain,	feeling	the	slick	blood	welling	up,
running	down.	She	held	tight,	to	feel,	to	taste,	to	know	what	was	coming…
if…if	I	decide	to	accept	this.
She	could	wait	for	Gorlas	to	act.	Or	she	could	strike	first.
A	corpse	lying	on	the	bed.	A	mangled	rose	lying	on	the	floor.
Cutter	was	not	Crokus	–	she	could	see	that,	yes,	very	clearly.	Cutter
was…dangerous.	She	recalled	the	scars,	the	old	knife	wounds,	sword	wounds
even,	perhaps.	Others	that	might	have	been	left	by	the	punch	of	arrows	or
crossbolts.	He	had	fought,	he	had	taken	lives	–	she	was	certain	of	it.
Not	the	boy	he’d	once	been.	But	this	man	he	now	is…can	he	be	used?
Would	he	even	blink	if	I	so	asked?
Should	I	ask?	Soon?	Tomorrow?
Thus	exposed,	one	must	recoil	indeed,	but	these	were	deep-run	thoughts,
nowhere	near	the	surface.	They	were	free	to	flow,	free	to	swirl	round	unseen,
as	if	detached	from	all	reality.	But	they	weren’t,	were	they?	Detached	from	all
reality.
Oh,	no,	they	were	not.
Does	this	lead	one	into	unease?

On	a	surge	of	immense	satisfaction,	Barathol	Mekhar ’s	rather	large	fist
smashed	into	the	man’s	face,	sending	him	flying	back	through	the	doorway	of
the	smithy.	He	stepped	out	after	him,	shaking	the	stinging	pain	from	his	hand.	‘I
will	be	pleased	to	pay	the	Guild’s	annual	fees,	sir,’	he	said,	‘when	the	Guild


decides	to	accept	my	membership.	As	for	demanding	coin	while	denying	my
right	to	run	my	business,	well,	you	have	just	had	my	first	instalment.’
A	smashed	nose,	blood	pouring	forth,	eyes	staring	up	from	a	puffiness
burgeoning	to	swallow	up	his	features,	the	Guild	agent	managed	a	feeble	nod.
‘You	are	welcome,’	Barathol	continued,	‘to	come	back	next	week	for	the
next	one,	and	by	all	means	bring	a	few	dozen	of	your	associates	–	I	expect	I’ll
be	in	an	even	more	generous	mood	by	then.’
A	crowd	had	gathered	to	watch,	but	the	blacksmith	was	disinclined	to	pay
them	any	attention.	He	rather	wanted	word	to	get	out,	in	fact,	although	from
what	he’d	gathered	his	particular	feud	was	already	a	sizzling	topic	of
conversation,	and	no	doubt	his	words	just	spoken	would	be	quoted	and
misquoted	swift	as	a	plague	on	the	hot	winds.
Turning	about,	he	walked	back	into	his	shop.
Chaur	stood	near	the	back	door,	wearing	his	heavy	apron	with	its	spatter	of
burn	holes	revealing	the	thick	weave	of	aesgir	grass	insulation	beneath	the
leather	–	the	only	plant	known	that	did	not	burn,	even	when	flung	into	a	raging
fire.	Oversized	gloves	of	the	same	manufacture	covered	his	hands	and
forearms,	and	he	was	holding	tongs	that	gripped	a	fast-cooling	curl	of	bronze.
Chaur ’s	eyes	were	bright	and	he	was	smiling.
‘Best	get	that	back	into	the	forge,’	Barathol	said.
As	expected,	business	was	slow.	A	campaign	had	begun,	fomented	by	the
Guild,	that	clearly	involved	the	threat	of	a	blacklist	that	could	–	and	would	–
spread	to	other	guilds	in	the	city.	Barathol’s	customers	could	find	themselves
unable	to	purchase	things	they	needed	from	a	host	of	other	professions,	and
that	of	course	would	prove	devastating.	And	as	for	Barathol’s	own	material
requirements,	most	doors	had	already	begun	closing	in	his	face.	He	was	forced
to	seek	out	alternatives	in	the	black	market,	never	a	secure	option.
As	his	friend	Mallet	had	predicted,	Malazans	resident	in	the	city	had	been
indifferent	to	all	such	extortions	and	warnings	against	taking	Barathol’s
custom.	There	was,	evidently,	something	in	their	nature	that	resisted	the	notion
of	threats,	and	in	fact	being	told	they	could	not	do	something	simply	raised
their	hackles	and	set	alight	a	stubborn	fire	in	their	eyes.	That	such	a	response
could	prove	a	curse	had	been	driven	home	with	the	slaughter	at	K’rul’s	–	and
the	grief	that	followed	remained	deeply	embedded	in	Barathol,	producing
within	him	a	dark,	cold	rage.	Unfortunately	for	the	latest	agent	from	the	Guild
of	Blacksmiths,	something	of	that	fury	had	transferred	itself	into	Barathol’s
instinctive	reaction	to	the	man’s	demand	for	coin.
Even	so,	he	had	not	come	to	Darujhistan	to	make	enemies.	Yet	now	he
found	himself	in	a	war.	Perhaps	more	than	one	at	that.	No	wonder,	then,	his


foul	mood.
He	made	his	way	into	the	work	yard,	where	the	heat	from	the	two	stoked
forges	rolled	over	him	in	a	savage	wave.	His	battle	axe	needed	a	new	edge,	and
it	might	do	to	fashion	a	new	sword	–	something	he	could	actually	wear	in
public.
Barathol’s	new	life	in	Darujhistan	was	proving	anything	but	peaceful.
	
Bellam	Nom	was,	in	Murillio’s	estimation,	the	only	student	of	the	duelling
school	worthy	of	the	role.	Fifteen	years	of	age,	still	struggling	with	the
awkwardness	of	his	most	recent	growth	spurt,	he	approached	his	studies	with
surprising	determination.	Even	more	astonishing,	the	lad	actually	wanted	to	be
here.
In	the	prolonged	absence	of	Stonny	Menackis’s	attention,	it	had	fallen	to
Murillio	to	assume	most	of	the	school’s	responsibilities,	and	he	was	finding
this	very	distant	relation	of	Rallick	(and	Torvald)	in	every	respect	a	Nom,
which	alone	encouraged	a	level	of	instruction	far	beyond	what	he	gave	the
others.	The	young	man	stood	before	him	sheathed	in	sweat,	as	the	last	of	the
class	hurried	out	through	the	compound	gate,	the	echoes	of	their	voices
quickly	fading,	and	Murillio	sensed	that	Bellam	was	far	from	satisfied	with	the
torturously	slow	pace	of	the	day’s	session.
‘Master,’	he	now	said,	‘I	have	heard	of	an	exercise	involving	suspended
rings.	To	achieve	the	perfect	lunge,	piercing	the	hole	and	making	no	contact
with	the	ring	itself—’
Murillio	snorted.	‘Yes.	Useful	if	you	happen	to	be	in	a	travelling	fair	or	a
circus.	Oh,	for	certain,	Bellam,	point	control	is	essential	in	fencing	with	the
rapier	–	I	wouldn’t	suggest	otherwise.	But	as	an	exercise,	I	am	afraid	its	value
is	limited.’
‘Why?’
Murillio	eyed	the	young	man	for	a	moment,	and	then	sighed.	‘Very	well.
The	exercise	requires	too	many	constraints,	few	of	which	ever	occur	in	the
course	of	a	real	fight.	You	achieve	point	control	–	useful	point	control,	I	mean
–	when	it’s	made	integral	to	other	exercises.	When	it’s	combined	with
footwork,	distance,	timing	and	the	full	range	of	defence	and	offence	demanded
when	facing	a	real,	living	opponent.	Spearing	rings	is	all	very	impressive,	but
the	form	of	concentration	it	demands	is	fundamentally	different	from	the
concentration	necessary	in	a	duel.	In	any	case,	you	can	spend	the	next	two
months	mastering	the	art	of	spearing	a	ring,	or	two	months	mastering	the	art
of	staying	alive	against	a	skilled	enemy,	and	not	just	staying	alive,	but


presenting	a	true	threat	to	that	enemy,	in	turn.’	He	shrugged.	‘Your	choice,	of
course.’
Bellam	Nom	grinned	suddenly	and	Murillio	saw	at	once	how	much	he
looked	like	his	oh-so-distant	cousin.	‘I	still	might	try	it	–	in	my	own	time,	of
course.’
‘Tell	you	what,’	Murillio	said.	‘Master	spearing	a	suspended	ring	at	the
close	of	a	mistimed	lunge,	an	off-balance	recovery	to	your	unarmed	side,	two
desperate	parries,	a	toe-stab	to	your	opponent’s	lead	foot	to	keep	him	or	her
from	closing,	and	a	frantic	stop-thrust	in	the	midst	of	a	back-pedalling	retreat.
Do	that,	and	I	will	give	you	my	second	best	rapier.’
‘How	long	do	I	have?’
‘As	long	as	you	like,	Bellam.’
‘Extra	time	with	an	instructor,’	said	a	voice	from	the	shaded	colonnade	to
one	side,	‘is	not	free.’
Murillio	turned	and	bowed	to	Stonny	Menackis.	‘Mistress,	we	were	but
conversing—’
‘You	were	giving	advice,’	she	cut	in,	‘and	presenting	this	student	with	a
challenge.	The	first	point	qualifies	as	instruction.	The	second	is	an	implicit
agreement	to	extracurricular	efforts	on	your	part	at	some	time	in	the	future.’
Bellam’s	grin	had	broadened.	‘My	father,	Mistress,	will	not	hesitate	to	meet
any	extra	expense,	I	assure	you.’
She	snorted,	stepping	out	from	the	gloom.	‘Any?’
‘Within	reason,	yes.’
She	looked	terrible.	Worn,	old,	her	clothes	dishevelled.	If	Murillio	had	not
known	better,	he	would	judge	her	as	being	hungover,	a	condition	of	temporary,
infrequent	sobriety	to	mark	an	alcoholic	slide	into	fatal	oblivion.	Yet	he	knew
she	was	afflicted	with	something	far	more	tragic.	Guilt	and	shame,	self-hatred
and	grief.	The	son	she	didn’t	want	had	been	taken	from	her	–	to	imagine	that
such	a	thing	could	leave	her	indifferent	was	not	to	understand	anything	at	all.
Murillio	said	to	Bellam,	‘You’d	best	go	now.’
They	watched	him	walk	away.
‘Look	at	him,’	Stonny	muttered	as	he	reached	the	gate,	‘all	elbows	and
knees.’
‘That’ll	pass,’	he	said.
‘A	stage,	is	it?’
‘Yes.’	And	of	course	he	knew	this	particular	game,	the	way	she	spoke	of
Harllo	by	not	speaking	of	him,	of	the	life	that	might	await	him,	or	the	future
taken	away	from	him,	stolen	by	her	cruel	denial.	She	would	inflict	this	on
herself	again	and	again,	at	every	opportunity.	Seemingly	innocent


observations,	each	one	a	masochistic	flagellation.	For	this	to	work,	she
required	someone	like	Murillio,	who	would	stand	and	listen	and	speak	and
pretend	that	all	this	was	normal	–	the	back	and	forth	and	give	and	take,	the
blood	pooling	round	her	boots.	She	had	trapped	him	in	this	role	–	using	the
fact	of	his	adoration,	his	love	for	her	–	and	he	was	no	longer	certain	that	his
love	could	survive	such	abuse.
The	world	is	small.	And	getting	smaller.
He	had	walked	the	pauper	pits	south	of	the	city,	just	outside	the	wall
between	the	two	main	trader	gates.	He	had	looked	upon	scores	of	recent
unclaimed	dead.	It	was,	in	fact,	becoming	something	of	a	ritual	for	him,	and
though	he	had	only	second-hand	descriptions	of	Harllo,	he	did	his	best,	since
no	one	who	knew	the	boy	would	accompany	him.	Not	Stonny,	not	Myrla	nor
Bedek.	On	occasion,	Murillio	had	been	forced	to	descend	into	one	of	the	pits	to
make	closer	examination	of	some	small	body,	a	soft,	lime-dusted	face,	eyes
lidded	shut	as	if	in	sleep	or,	on	occasion,	scrunched	in	some	last	moment	of
pain,	and	these	mute,	motionless	faces	now	paraded	in	his	dreams	at	night,	a
procession	of	such	sorrow	that	he	awoke	with	tears	streaming	from	his	eyes.
He	told	Stonny	none	of	this.	He’d	said	nothing	of	how	his	and	Kruppe’s
enquiries	among	the	sailors	and	fisherfolk	had	failed	to	find	any	evidence	of
someone	press-ganging	a	five-year-old	boy.	And	that	every	other	possible	trail
thus	far	had	turned	up	nothing,	not	even	a	hint	or	remote	possibility,	leaving	at
last	the	grim	likelihood	of	some	fell	mishap,	unreported,	uninvestigated	–	just
another	dead	child	abandoned	long	before	death’s	arrival,	known	only	in	the
records	of	found	corpses	as	the	‘twice-dead’.
‘I	am	thinking	of	signing	over	my	stakes	in	this	school,’	Stonny	now	said.
‘To	you.’
Startled,	he	turned	to	stare	at	her.	‘I	won’t	accept.’
‘Then	you’d	be	a	fool	–	as	if	I	didn’t	already	know	that.	You’re	better
suited.	You’re	a	better	teacher.	I	barely	managed	any	interest	in	this	from	the
very	start	–	it	was	always	the	coin	–	and	now	I	find	I	could	not	care	less.	About
the	school,	the	students	–	even	promising	ones	like	Nom	there.	I	don’t	care
about	anything,	in	fact.’
Including	you,	Murillio.	Yes,	he	heard	that	unspoken	addition	without	the
need	for	her	to	actually	say	it	aloud.	Well,	she	would	of	course	want	to	push
him	away.	Much	as	she	needed	him	to	play	those	self-wounding	games	with
her,	she	needed	even	more	the	solitude	necessary	for	complete	self-destruction.
Isolation	was	more	than	a	simple	defence	mechanism;	it	also	served	to	prepare
one	for	more	severe	punishments,	possibly	culminating	in	suicide.	On	another
level,	she	would	view	her	desire	to	drive	him	off	as	an	act	of	mercy	on	her


part.	But	that	was	a	most	irritating	form	of	self-pity.
He	had	given	his	heart	to	the	wrong	woman.	Timing,	Bellam	Nom,	is
everything.	With	sword	in	hand.
With	love	in	hand.
Oh,	well.	I’d	figured	it	out	with	a	rapier,	at	least.
‘Don’t	make	that	decision	just	yet,’	he	said.	‘I	have	one	more	thing	I	can
try.’	It	won’t	be	pleasant,	but	you	don’t	need	to	know	that.
Stonny	simply	turned	away.	‘I’ll	see	you	tomorrow,	then.’
	
Many	adults,	in	the	indurated	immobility	of	years,	acquire	a	fear	of	places	they
have	never	been,	even	as	they	long	for	something	different	in	their	lives,
something	new.	But	this	new	thing	is	a	world	of	the	fantastical,	formless	in
answer	to	vague	longings,	and	is	as	much	defined	by	absence	as	presence.	It	is
a	conjuration	of	emotions	and	wishful	imaginings,	which	may	or	may	not
possess	a	specific	geography.	Achieving	such	a	place	demands	a	succession	of
breaks	with	one’s	present	situation,	always	a	traumatic	endeavour,	and	upon
completion,	why,	sudden	comes	the	fear.
Some	do	not	choose	the	changes	in	their	lives.	Some	changes	no	one	in
their	right	mind	would	ever	choose.	In	K’rul’s	Bar,	a	once-soldier	of	the
Malazan	Empire	stands	tottering	over	the	unconscious	form	of	her	lover,
whilst	behind	her	paces	Antsy,	muttering	self-recriminations	under	his	breath,
interrupted	every	now	and	then	with	a	stream	of	curses	in	a	half-dozen
languages.
Blend	understood	all	that	had	motivated	Picker	to	attempt	what	she	had
done.	This	did	little	to	assuage	her	fury.	The	very	same	High	Denul	healer	who
had	just	attended	to	her	had	set	to	a	thorough	examination	of	Picker	as	soon	as
Antsy	had	returned	with	his	charge	lying	in	the	bed	of	a	hired	oxcart,	only	to
pronounce	that	there	was	nothing	to	be	done.	Either	Picker	would	awaken	or
she	wouldn’t.	Her	spirit	had	been	torn	loose	and	now	wandered	lost.
The	healer	had	left.	In	the	main	room	below,	Duiker	and	Scillara	sat	in	the
company	of	ghosts	and	not	much	else.
Although	still	weak,	Blend	set	out	to	collect	her	weapons	and	armour.
Antsy	followed	her	into	the	corridor.
‘What’re	you	planning?’	he	demanded,	almost	on	her	heels	as	she	went
into	her	own	room.
‘I’m	not	sure,’	she	replied,	laying	out	her	chain	hauberk	on	the	bed,	then
pulling	off	her	shirt	to	find	the	padded	undergarment.
Antsy’s	eyes	bugged	slightly	as	he	stared	at	her	breasts,	the	faint	bulge	of


her	belly,	the	sweet—
Blend	tugged	on	the	quilted	shirt	and	then	returned	to	the	hauberk.	‘You’ll
need	to	wrap	me,’	she	said.
‘Huh?	Oh,	aye.	Right.	But	what	about	me?’
She	regarded	him	for	a	moment.	‘You	want	to	help?’
He	half	snarled	in	reply.
‘All	right,’	she	said.	‘Go	find	a	couple	of	crossbows	and	plenty	of	quarrels.
You’re	going	to	cover	me,	for	as	long	as	that’s	possible.	We	don’t	walk
together.’
‘Aye,	Blend.’
She	worked	the	hauberk	over	her	head	and	pushed	her	arms	through	the
heavy	sleeves.
Antsy	went	to	the	equipment	trunk	at	the	foot	of	the	bed	and	began
rummaging	through	its	contents,	looking	for	the	swaths	of	black	cloth	to	bind
the	armour	close	and	noiseless	about	Blend’s	body.	‘Gods	below,	woman,	what
do	you	need	all	these	clothes	for?’
‘Banquets	and	soirées,	of	course.’
‘You	ain’t	never	been	to	one	in	your	life,	woman.’
‘The	possibility	always	exists,	Antsy.	Yes,	those	ones,	but	make	sure	the
drawstrings	are	still	in	them.’
‘How	do	you	expect	to	find	the	nest?’
‘Simple,’	she	said.	‘Don’t	know	why	we	didn’t	think	of	it	before.	The	name
Picker	said,	the	one	that	Jaghut	heard.’	She	selected	a	matched	pair	of	Wickan
longknives	from	her	store	of	weapons	and	strapped	the	belt	on,	low	on	her
hips,	offered	Antsy	a	hard	grin.	‘I’m	going	to	ask	the	Eel.’


Chapter	Sixteen

And	these	things	were	never	so	precious
Listen	to	the	bird	in	its	cage	as	it	speaks
In	a	dying	man’s	voice;	when	he	is	gone
The	voice	lives	to	greet	and	give	empty
Assurances	with	random	poignancy
I	do	not	know	if	I	could	live	with	that
If	I	could	armour	myself	as	the	inhuman	beak
Opens	to	a	dead	man’s	reminder,	head	cocked
As	if	channelling	the	ghost	of	the	one
Who	imagines	an	absence	of	sense,	a	vacuum	awaiting
The	cage	is	barred	and	nightly	falls	the	shroud
To	silence	the	commentary	of	impossible	apostles
Spirit	godlings	and	spanning	abyss,	impenetrable	cloud
Between	the	living	and	the	dead,	the	here	and	the	gone
Where	no	bridge	can	smooth	the	passage	of	pain
And	these	things	were	never	so	precious
Listening	to	the	bird	as	it	speaks	and	it	speaks
And	it	speaks,	the	one	who	has	faded	away
The	father	departed	knowing	the	unknown
And	it	speaks	and	it	speaks	and	it	speaks
In	my	father ’s	voice
Caged	Bird
Fisher	kel	Tath

There	was	no	breath	to	speak	of.	Rather,	what	awoke	him	was	the	smell	of
death,	dry,	an	echo	of	pungent	decay	that	might	belong	to	the	carcass	of	a	beast


left	in	the	high	grasses,	desiccated	yet	holding	its	reek	about	itself,	close	and
suffocating	as	a	cloak.	Opening	his	eyes,	Kallor	found	himself	staring	up	at	the
enormous,	rotted	head	of	a	dragon,	its	massive	fangs	and	shredded	gums
almost	within	reach.
The	morning	light	was	blotted	out	and	it	seemed	the	shade	cast	by	the
dragon	roiled	with	all	its	centuries	of	forgotten	breath.
As	the	savage	thunder	of	Kallor ’s	heartbeat	eased,	he	slowly	edged	to	one
side	–	the	dragon’s	viper	head	tilting	to	track	his	movement	–	and	carefully
stood,	keeping	his	hands	well	away	from	the	scabbarded	sword	lying	on	the
ground	beside	his	bedroll.	‘I	did	not,’	he	said,	scowling,	‘ask	for	company.’
The	dragon	withdrew	its	head	in	a	crackling	of	dried	scales	along	the
length	of	its	serpent	neck;	settled	back	between	the	twin	cowls	of	its	folded
wings.
He	could	see	runnels	of	dirt	trickling	down	from	creases	and	joins	on	the
creature’s	body.	One	gaunt	forelimb	bore	the	tracery	of	fine	roots	in	a
colourless	mockery	of	blood	vessels.	From	the	shadowed	pits	beneath	the
gnarled	brow	ridges	there	was	the	hint	of	withered	eyes,	a	mottling	of	grey	and
black	that	could	hold	no	display	of	desire	or	intent;	and	yet	Kallor	felt	that
regard	raw	as	sharkskin	against	his	own	eyes	as	he	stared	up	at	the	undead
dragon.
‘You	have	come,’	he	said,	‘a	long	way,	I	suspect.	But	I	am	not	for	you.	I	can
give	you	nothing,	assuming	I	wanted	to,	which	I	do	not.	And	do	not	imagine,’
he	added,	‘that	I	will	bargain	with	you,	whatever	hungers	you	may	still
possess.’
He	looked	about	his	makeshift	camp,	saw	that	the	modest	hearth	with	its
fistful	of	coals	still	smouldered	from	the	previous	night’s	fire.	‘I	am	hungry,
and	thirsty,’	he	said.	‘You	can	leave	whenever	it	pleases	you.’
The	dragon’s	sibilant	voice	spoke	in	Kallor ’s	skull.	‘You	cannot	know	my
pain.’
He	grunted.	‘You	cannot	feel	pain.	You’re	dead,	and	you	have	the	look	of
having	been	buried.	For	a	long	time.’
‘The	soul	writhes.	There	is	anguish.	I	am	broken.’
He	fed	a	few	clumps	of	dried	bhederin	dung	on	to	the	coals,	and	then
glanced	over.	‘I	can	do	nothing	about	that.’
‘I	have	dreamt	of	a	throne.’
Kallor ’s	attention	sharpened	with	speculation.	‘You	would	choose	a
master?	That	is	unlike	your	kind.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘I	scarcely	believe	it.’
‘Because	you	do	not	understand.	None	of	you	understand.	So	much	is
beyond	you.	You	think	to	make	yourself	the	King	in	Chains.	Do	not	mock	my


seeking	a	master,	High	King	Kallor.’
‘The	Crippled	God’s	days	are	numbered,	Eleint,’	said	Kallor.	‘Yet	the
throne	shall	remain,	long	after	the	chains	have	rusted	to	dust.’
There	was	silence	between	them	then,	for	a	time.	The	morning	sky	was
clear,	tinted	faintly	red	with	the	pollen	and	dust	that	seemed	to	seethe	up	from
this	land.	Kallor	watched	the	hearth	finally	lick	into	flames,	and	he	reached	for
the	small,	battered,	blackened	pot.	Poured	the	last	of	his	water	into	it	and	set	the
pot	on	the	tripod	perched	above	the	fire.	Swarms	of	suicidal	insects	darted	into
the	flames,	igniting	in	sparks,	and	Kallor	wondered	at	this	penchant	for
seeking	death,	as	if	the	lure	for	an	end	was	irresistible.	Not	a	trait	he	shared,
however.
‘I	remember	my	death,’	the	dragon	said.
‘And	that’s	worth	remembering?’
‘The	Jaghut	were	a	stubborn	people.	So	many	saw	naught	but	the	coldness
in	their	hearts—’
‘Misunderstood,	were	they?’
‘They	mocked	your	empire,	High	King.	They	answered	you	with	scorn.	It
seems	the	wounds	have	not	healed.’
‘A	recent	reminder,	that’s	all,’	Kallor	replied,	watching	the	water	slowly
awaken.	He	tossed	in	a	handful	of	herbs.	‘Very	well,	tell	me	your	tale.	I
welcome	the	amusement.’
The	dragon	lifted	its	head	and	seemed	to	study	the	eastern	horizon.
‘Never	wise	to	stare	into	the	sun,’	Kallor	observed.	‘You	might	burn	your
eyes.’
‘It	was	brighter	then	–	do	you	recall?’
‘Perturbations	of	orbit,	or	so	believed	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.’
‘So	too	the	Jaghut,	who	were	most	diligent	in	their	observations	of	the
world.	Tell	me,	High	King,	did	you	know	they	broke	peace	only	once?	In	all
their	existence	–	no,	not	the	T’lan	Imass	–	that	war	belonged	to	those	savages
and	the	Jaghut	were	a	most	reluctant	foe.’
‘They	should	have	turned	on	the	Imass,’	Kallor	said.	‘They	should	have
annihilated	the	vermin.’
‘Perhaps,	but	I	was	speaking	of	an	earlier	war	–	the	war	that	destroyed	the
Jaghut	long	before	the	coming	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	The	war	that	shattered	their
unity,	that	made	of	their	lives	a	moribund	flight	from	an	implacable	enemy	–
yes,	long	before	and	long	after	the	T’lan	Imass.’
Kallor	considered	that	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	grunted	and	said,	‘I	am
not	well	versed	in	Jaghut	history.	What	war	was	this?	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle?
The	Forkrul	Assail?’	He	squinted	at	the	dragon.	‘Or,	perhaps,	you	Eleint?’


There	was	sorrow	in	its	tone	as	the	dragon	replied,	‘No.	There	were	some
among	us	who	chose	to	join	in	this	war,	to	fight	alongside	the	Jaghut	armies—’
‘Armies?	Jaghut	armies?’
‘Yes,	an	entire	people	gathered,	a	host	of	singular	will.	Legions
uncountable.	Their	standard	was	rage,	their	clarion	call	injustice.	When	they
marched,	swords	beating	on	shields,	time	itself	found	measure,	a	hundred
million	hearts	of	edged	iron.	Not	even	you,	High	King,	could	imagine	such	a
sight	–	your	empire	was	less	than	a	squall	to	that	terrible	storm.’
For	once,	Kallor	had	nothing	to	say.	No	snide	comment	to	voice,	no
scoffing	refutation.	In	his	mind	he	saw	the	scene	the	dragon	had	described,	and
was	struck	mute.	To	have	witnessed	such	a	thing!
The	dragon	seemed	to	comprehend	his	awe.	‘Yes	again,	High	King.	When
you	forged	your	empire,	it	was	on	the	dust	of	that	time,	that	grand	contest,	that
most	bold	assault.	We	fought.	We	refused	to	retreat.	We	failed.	We	fell.	So	many
of	us	fell	–	should	we	have	believed	otherwise?	Should	we	have	held	to	our	faith
in	the	righteousness	of	our	cause,	even	as	we	came	to	believe	that	we	were
doomed?’
Kallor	stared	across	at	the	dragon,	the	tea	in	the	pot	steaming	away.	He
could	almost	hear	the	echoes	of	tens	of	millions,	hundreds	of	millions,	dying
on	a	plain	so	vast	even	the	horizons	could	not	close	it	in.	He	saw	flames,	rivers
of	blood,	a	sky	solid	with	ash.	In	creating	this	image,	he	had	only	to	draw	upon
his	own	fury	of	destruction,	then	multiply	it	a	thousandfold.	The	notion	took
his	breath,	snatched	it	from	his	lungs,	and	his	chest	filled	with	pain.	‘What,’	he
managed,	‘who?	What	enemy	could	vanquish	such	a	force?’
‘Grieve	for	the	Jaghut,	High	King,	when	at	last	you	sit	on	that	throne.
Grieve	for	the	chains	that	bind	all	life,	that	you	can	never	break.	Weep,	for	me
and	my	fallen	kin	–	who	did	not	hesitate	to	join	a	war	that	could	not	be	won.
Know,	for	ever	in	your	soul,	Kallor	Eidorann,	that	the	Jaghut	fought	the	war	no
other	has	dared	to	fight.’
‘Eleint…’
‘Think	of	these	people.	Think	of	them,	High	King.	The	sacrifice	they	made
for	us	all.	Think	of	the	Jaghut,	and	an	impossible	victory	won	in	the	heart	of
defeat.	Think,	and	then	you	will	come	to	understand	all	that	is	to	come.
Perhaps,	then,	you	alone	will	know	enough	to	honour	their	memory,	the
sacrifice	they	made	for	us	all.
‘High	King,	the	Jaghut’s	only	war,	their	greatest	war,	was	against	Death
itself.’
The	dragon	turned	away	then,	spreading	its	tattered	wings.	Sorcery
blossomed	round	the	huge	creature,	and	it	lifted	into	the	air.


Kallor	stood,	watching	the	Eleint	rise	into	the	cinnamon	sky.	A	nameless
dead	dragon,	that	had	fallen	in	the	realm	of	Death,	that	had	fallen	and	in	dying
had	simply…switched	sides.	No,	there	could	be	no	winning	such	a	war.	‘You
damned	fool,’	he	whispered	at	the	fast	receding	Eleint.	‘All	of	you,	damned
fools.’	Bless	you,	bless	you	all.
Gothos,	when	next	we	meet,	this	High	King	owes	you	an	apology.
On	withered	cheeks	that	seemed	cursed	to	eternal	dryness,	tears	now
trickled	down.	He	would	think	long	and	think	hard,	now,	and	he	would	come	to
feelings	that	he’d	not	felt	in	a	long	time,	so	long	that	they	seemed	foreign,
dangerous	to	harbour	in	his	soul.
And	he	would	wonder,	with	growing	unease,	at	the	dead	Eleint	who,	upon
escaping	the	realm	of	Death,	would	now	choose	the	Crippled	God	as	its	new
master.
A	throne,	Emperor	Kellanved	once	said,	is	made	of	many	parts.	And	then
he	had	added,	any	one	of	which	can	break,	to	the	king’s	eternal	discomfort.	No,
it	did	no	good	to	simply	sit	on	a	throne,	deluding	oneself	of	its	eternal	solidity.
He	had	known	that	long	before	Kellanved	ever	cast	an	acquisitive	eye	on
empire.	But	he	was	not	one	for	resonant	quotations.
Well,	everyone	has	a	few	flaws.
	
In	a	dark	pool	a	score	of	boulders	rise	clear	of	the	lightless,	seemingly	lifeless
surface.	They	appear	as	islands,	no	two	connected	in	any	obvious	way,	no
chain	of	uplifted	progression	to	hint	at	some	mostly	submerged	range	of
mountains,	no	half-curl	to	mark	a	flooded	caldera.	Each	stands	alone,	a	bold
proclamation.
Is	this	how	it	was	at	the	very	beginning?	Countless	scholars	struggled	to
make	sense	of	it,	the	distinct	existences,	the	imposition	of	order	in	myriad
comprehensions.	Lines	were	drawn,	flags	splashed	with	colours,	faces	blended
into	singular	philosophies	and	attitudes	and	aspects.	Here	there	is	Darkness,
and	here	there	is	Life.	Light,	Earth,	Fire,	Shadow,	Air,	Water.	And	Death.	As	if
such	aspects	began	as	pure	entities,	unstained	by	contact	with	any	of	the	others.
And	as	if	time	was	the	enemy,	forcing	the	inevitable	infections	from	one	to
another.
Whenever	Endest	Silann	thought	about	these	things,	he	found	himself
trapped	in	a	prickly,	uneasy	suspicion.	In	his	experience,	purity	was	an
unpleasant	concept,	and	to	imagine	worlds	defined	by	purity	filled	him	with
fear.	An	existence	held	to	be	pure	was	but	the	physical	corollary	of	a	point	of
view	bound	in	certainty.	Cruelty	could	thrive	unfettered	by	compassion.	The


pure	could	see	no	value	among	the	impure,	after	all.	Justifying	annihilation
wasn’t	even	necessary,	since	the	inferiority	was	ever	self-evident.
Howsoever	all	creation	had	begun,	he	now	believed,	those	pure	forms
existed	as	nothing	more	than	the	raw	materials	for	more	worthy	elaborations.
As	any	alchemist	knew,	transformation	was	only	possible	as	a	result	of
admixture.	For	creation	to	thrive,	there	must	be	an	endless	succession	of
catalysts.
His	Lord	had	understood	that.	Indeed,	he	had	been	driven	to	do	all	that	he
had	done	by	that	very	comprehension.	And	change	was,	for	so	many,
terrifying.	For	so	much	of	existence,	Anomander	Rake	had	fought	virtually
alone.	Even	his	brothers	had	but	fallen,	bound	by	the	ties	of	blood,	into	the
chaos	that	followed.
Was	Kharkanas	truly	the	first	city?	The	first,	proudest	salutation	to	order	in
the	cosmos?	Was	it	in	fact	even	true	that	Darkness	preceded	all	else?	What	of
the	other	worlds,	the	rival	realms?	And,	if	one	thought	carefully	about	that
nascent	age	of	creation,	had	not	the	admixture	already	begun?	Was	there	not
Death	in	the	realms	of	Darkness,	Light,	Fire	and	all	the	rest?	Indeed,	how	could
Life	and	Death	exist	in	any	form	of	distinction	without	the	other?
No,	he	now	believed	that	the	Age	of	Purity	was	but	a	mythical	invention,	a
convenient	separation	of	all	the	forces	necessary	for	all	existence.	Yet	was	he
not	witness	to	the	Coming	of	Light?	To	Mother	Dark’s	wilful	rejection	of
eternal	stasis?	Did	he	not	with	his	own	eyes	see	the	birth	of	a	sun	over	his
blessed,	precious	city?	How	could	he	not	have	understood,	at	that	moment,	how
all	else	would	follow,	inevitably,	inexorably?	That	fire	would	awaken,	that
raging	winds	would	howl,	that	waters	would	rise	and	the	earth	crack	open?
That	death	would	flood	into	their	world	in	a	brutal	torrent	of	violence?	That
Shadow	would	slide	between	things,	whispering	sly	subversions	of	all	those
pristine	absolutes?
He	sat	alone	in	his	room,	in	the	manner	of	all	old	men	when	the	last
witness	has	wandered	off,	when	nothing	but	stone	walls	and	insensate	furniture
gathered	close	to	mock	his	last	few	aspirations,	his	last	dwindling	reasons	for
living.	In	his	mind	he	witnessed	yet	again,	in	a	vision	still	sharp,	still
devastating,	Andarist	staggering	into	view.	Blood	on	his	hands.	Blood	painted
in	the	image	of	a	shattered	tree	upon	his	grief-wracked	face	–	oh,	the	horror	in
his	eyes	could	still	make	Endest	Silann	reel	back,	wanting	none	of	this,	this
curse	of	witnessing—
No,	better	stone	walls	and	insensate	furniture.	All	the	errors	in	Andarist’s
life,	now	crowding	with	jabbering	madness	in	those	wide,	staring	eyes.
Yes,	he	had	reeled	back	once	that	stare	fixed	his	own.	Some	things	should


never	be	communicated,	should	never	be	cast	across	to	slash	through	the	heavy
curtains	one	raised	to	keep	whatever	was	without	from	all	that	was	within,
slashing	through	and	lodging	deep	in	the	soul	of	a	defenceless	witness.	Keep
your	pain	to	yourself,	Andarist!	He	left	you	to	this	–	he	left	you	thinking	you
wiser	than	you	were.	Do	not	look	so	betrayed,	damn	you!	He	is	not	to	blame!
I	am	not	to	blame.
To	break	Shadow	is	to	release	it	into	every	other	world.	Even	in	its	birth,	it
had	been	necessarily	ephemeral,	an	illusion,	a	spiral	of	endless,	self-referential
tautologies.	Shadow	was	an	argument	and	the	argument	alone	was	sufficient	to
assert	its	existence.	To	stand	within	was	a	solipsist’s	dream,	seeing	all	else	as
ghostly,	fanciful	delusion,	at	best	the	raw	matter	to	give	Shadow	shape,	at	worst
nothing	more	than	Shadow’s	implicit	need	to	define	itself	–	Gods,	what	is	the
point	of	trying	to	make	sense	of	such	a	thing?	Shadow	is,	and	Shadow	is	not,
and	to	dwell	within	it	is	to	be	neither	of	one	thing	nor	of	any	other.
And	your	children,	dear	Shadow,	took	upon	themselves	the	strength	of
Andiian	courage	and	Liosan	piety,	and	made	of	that	blend	something	savage,
brutal	beyond	belief.	So	much	for	promises	of	glory.
He	found	he	was	sitting	with	his	head	in	his	hands.	History	charged,
assailing	his	weary	defences.	From	the	image	of	Andarist	he	next	saw	the
knowing	half-smile	of	Silchas	Ruin,	on	the	dawn	when	he	walked	to	stand
beside	Scabandari,	as	if	he	knew	what	was	to	come,	as	if	he	was	content	with
accepting	all	that	followed,	and	doing	so	to	spare	his	followers	from	a	more
immediate	death	–	as	Liosan	legions	ringed	the	horizon,	soldiers	singing	that
horrifying,	haunting	song,	creating	a	music	of	heartbreaking	beauty	to
announce	their	march	to	slaughter	–	sparing	his	people	a	more	immediate
death,	granting	them	a	few	more	days,	perhaps	weeks,	of	existence,	before	the
Edur	turned	on	their	wounded	allies	on	some	other	world.
Shadow	torn,	rent	into	pieces,	drifting	in	a	thousand	directions.	Like
blowing	upon	a	flower’s	seed-head,	off	they	wing	into	the	air!
Andarist,	broken.	Silchas	Ruin,	gone.
Anomander	Rake,	standing	alone.
This	long.	This	long…
The	alchemist	knows:	the	wrong	catalyst,	the	wrong	admixture,	illconceived	proportions,	and	all	pretence	of	control	vanishes	–	the
transformation	runs	away,	unchained,	burgeons	to	cataclysm.	Confusion	and
fear,	suspicion	and	then	war,	and	war	shall	breed	chaos.	And	so	it	shall	and	so
it	does	and	so	it	ever	will.
See	us	flee,	dreaming	of	lost	peace,	the	age	of	purity	and	stasis,	when	we
embraced	decay	like	a	lover	and	our	love	kept	us	blind	and	we	were	content.	So


long	as	we	stayed	entertained,	we	were	content.
Look	at	me.
This	is	what	it	is	to	be	content.
Endest	Silann	drew	a	deep	breath,	lifted	his	head	and	blinked	to	clear	his
eyes.	His	master	believed	he	could	do	this,	and	so	he	would	believe	his	master.
There,	as	simple	as	that.
Somewhere	in	the	keep,	priestesses	were	singing.
	
A	hand	reached	up	and	grasped	hard.	A	sudden,	powerful	pull	tore	loose
Apsal’ara’s	grip	and,	snarling	curses,	she	tumbled	from	the	axle	frame	and
thumped	heavy	on	the	sodden	ground.
The	face	staring	down	at	her	was	one	she	knew,	and	would	rather	she	did
not.	‘Are	you	mad,	Draconus?’
His	only	response	was	to	grasp	her	chain	and	begin	dragging	her	out	from
under	the	wagon.
Furious,	indignant,	she	writhed	across	the	mud,	seeking	purchase	–
anything	to	permit	her	to	right	herself,	to	even,	possibly,	resist.	Stones	rolled
beneath	the	bite	of	her	fingernails,	mud	grated	and	smeared	like	grease	beneath
her	elbows,	her	knees,	her	feet.	And	still	he	pulled,	treating	her	with	scant,
bitter	ceremony,	as	if	she	was	nothing	more	than	a	squalling	cut-purse	–	the
outrage!
Out	from	the	wagon’s	blessed	gloom,	tumbling	across	rock-studded	dirt	–
chains	whipping	on	all	sides,	lifting	clear	and	then	falling	back	to	track
twisting	furrows,	lifting	again	as	whoever	or	whatever	was	at	the	other	end
heaved	forward	another	single,	desperate	step.	The	sound	was	maddening,
pointless,	infuriating.
Apsal’ara	rolled	upright,	gathering	a	length	of	chain	and	glaring	across	at
Draconus.	‘Come	closer,’	she	hissed,	‘so	I	can	smash	your	pretty	face.’
His	smile	was	humourless.	‘Why	would	I	do	that,	Thief?’
‘To	please	me,	of	course,	and	I	at	least	deserve	that	much	from	you	–	for
dragging	me	out	here.’
‘Oh,’	he	said,	‘I	deserve	many	things,	Apsal’ara.	But	for	the	moment,	I	will
be	content	with	your	attention.’
‘What	do	you	want?	We	can	do	nothing	to	stop	this.	If	I	choose	to	greet	my
end	lounging	on	the	axle,	why	not?’
They	were	forced	to	begin	walking,	another	step	every	few	moments	–
much	slower	now,	so	slow	the	pathos	stung	through	to	her	heart.
‘You	have	given	up	on	your	chain?’	Draconus	asked,	as	if	the	manner	in


which	he	had	brought	her	out	here	was	of	no	import,	easily	dismissed	now.
She	decided,	after	a	moment,	that	he	was	right.	At	the	very	least,	there’d
been	some…drama.	‘Another	few	centuries,’	she	said,	shrugging,	‘which	I	do
not	have.	Damn	you,	Draconus,	there	is	nothing	to	see	out	here	–	let	me	go
back—’
‘I	need	to	know,’	he	cut	in,	‘when	the	time	comes	to	fight,	Apsal’ara	–	will
you	come	to	my	side?’
She	studied	him.	A	well-featured	man,	beneath	that	thick,	black	beard.	Eyes
that	had	known	malice	long	since	stretched	to	snapping,	leaving	behind	a
strange	bemusement,	something	almost	regretful,	almost…wise.	Oh,	this
sword’s	realm	delivered	humility	indeed.	‘Why?’	she	demanded.
His	heavy	brows	lifted,	as	if	the	question	surprised	him.	‘I	have	seen
many,’	he	said,	haltingly,	‘in	my	time.	So	many,	appearing	suddenly,	screaming
in	horror,	in	anguish	and	despair.	Others…already	numbed,	hopeless.	Madness
arrives	to	so	many,	Apsal’ara…’
She	bared	her	teeth.	Yes,	she	had	heard	them.	Above	the	places	where	she
hid.	Out	to	the	sides,	beyond	the	incessant	rains,	where	the	chains	rolled	and
roped,	fell	slack	then	lifted	once	more,	where	they	crossed	over,	one	wending
ever	farther	to	one	side,	cutting	across	chain	after	chain	–	as	the	creature	at	the
end	staggered	blind,	unknowing,	and	before	too	long	would	fall	and	not	rise
again.	The	rest	would	simply	step	over	that	motionless	chain,	until	it	stretched
into	the	wagon’s	wake	and	began	dragging	its	charge.
‘Apsal’ara,	you	arrived	spitting	like	a	cat.	But	it	wasn’t	long	before	you	set
out	to	find	a	means	of	escape.	And	you	would	not	rest.’	He	paused,	and	wiped	a
hand	across	his	face.	‘There	are	so	few	here	I	have	come	to…admire.’	The
smile	Draconus	then	offered	her	was	defenceless,	shocking.	‘If	we	must	fall,
then	I	would	choose	the	ones	at	my	side	–	yes,	I	am	selfish	to	the	last.	And	I	am
sorry	for	dragging	you	out	here	so	unceremoniously.’
She	walked	alongside	him,	saying	nothing.	Thinking.	At	last,	she	sighed.	‘It
is	said	that	only	one’s	will	can	fight	against	chaos,	that	no	other	weapons	are
possible.’
‘So	it	is	said.’
She	shot	him	a	look.	‘You	know	me,	Draconus.	You	know…I	have	strength.
Of	will.’
‘You	will	fight	long,’	he	agreed,	nodding.	‘So	very	long.’
‘The	chaos	will	want	my	soul.	Will	seek	to	tear	it	apart,	strip	away	my
awareness.	It	will	rage	all	around	me.’
‘Yes,’	he	said.
‘Some	of	us	are	stronger	than	others.’


‘Yes,	Apsal’ara.	Some	of	us	are	stronger	than	others.’
‘And	these	you	would	gather	close	about	you,	that	we	might	form	a	core.
Of	resistance,	of	stubborn	will.’
‘So	I	have	thought.’
‘To	win	through	to	the	other	side?	Is	there	an	other	side,	Draconus?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘You	don’t	know,’	she	repeated,	making	the	words	a	snarl.	‘All	my	life,’
she	said,	‘I	have	chosen	to	be	alone.	In	my	struggles,	in	my	victories	and	my
failings.	Draconus,	I	will	face	oblivion	in	the	same	way.	I	must	–	we	all	must.	It
does	nothing	to	stand	together,	for	we	each	fall	alone.’
‘I	understand.	I	am	sorry,	then,	Apsal’ara,	for	all	this.’
‘There	is	no	other	side,	Draconus.’
‘No,	probably	not.’
She	drew	up	more	of	her	chain,	settled	its	crushing	weight	on	to	her
shoulders,	and	then	pulled	away	from	the	man,	back	towards	the	wagon.	No,
she	could	not	give	him	anything,	not	when	hope	itself	was	impossible.	He	was
wrong	to	admire	her.	To	struggle	was	her	own	madness,	resisting	something
that	could	not	be	resisted,	fighting	what	could	not	be	defeated.
This	foe	would	take	her	mind,	her	self,	tearing	it	away	piece	by	piece	–	and
she	might	sense	something	of	those	losses,	at	least	to	begin	with,	like	vast
blanks	in	her	memory,	perhaps,	or	an	array	of	simple	questions	she	could	no
longer	answer.	But	before	long,	such	knowledge	would	itself	vanish,	and	each
floating	fragment	would	swirl	about,	untethered,	alone,	unaware	that	it	had
once	been	part	of	something	greater,	something	whole.	Her	life,	all	her
awareness,	scattered	into	frightened	orphans,	whimpering	at	every	strange
sound,	every	unseen	tug	from	the	surrounding	darkness.	From	woman	to	child,
to	helpless	babe.
She	knew	what	was	coming.	She	knew,	too,	that	in	the	end	there	was	a	kind
of	mercy	to	that	blind	ignorance,	to	the	innocence	of	pieces.	Unknowing,	the
orphans	would	dissolve	away,	leaving	nothing.
What	mind	could	not	fear	such	a	fate?
‘Draconus,’	she	whispered,	although	she	was	far	from	his	side	now,
closing	in	on	the	wagon	once	more,	‘there	is	no	other	side	of	chaos.	Look	at
us.	Each	chained.	Together,	and	yet	alone.	See	us	pass	the	time	as	we	will,	until
the	end.	You	made	this	sword,	but	the	sword	is	only	a	shape	given	to	something
far	beyond	you,	far	beyond	any	single	creature,	any	single	mind.	You	just	made
it	momentarily	manageable.’
She	slipped	into	the	gloom	behind	the	lead	wheel.	Into	the	thick,	slimy	rain.
‘Anomander	Rake	understands,’	she	hissed.	‘He	understands,	Draconus.


More	than	you	ever	did.	Than	you	ever	will.	The	world	within	Dragnipur	must
die.	That	is	the	greatest	act	of	mercy	imaginable.	The	greatest	sacrifice.	Tell
me,	Draconus,	would	you	relinquish	your	power?	Would	you	crush	down	your
selfishness,	to	choose	this…this	emasculation?	This	sword,	your	cold,	iron
grin	of	vengeance	–	would	you	see	it	become	lifeless	in	your	hands?	As	dead
as	any	other	hammered	bar	of	iron?’
She	ducked	beneath	the	lead	axle	and	heaved	the	chain	on	her	shoulders	up
and	on	to	the	wooden	beam.	Then	climbed	up	after	it.	‘No,	Draconus,	you
could	not	do	that,	could	you?’
There	had	been	pity	in	Rake’s	eyes	when	he	killed	her.	There	had	been
sorrow.	But	she	had	seen,	even	then,	in	that	last	moment	of	locked	gazes,	how
such	sentiments	were	tempered.
By	a	future	fast	closing	in.	Only	now,	here,	did	she	comprehend	that.
You	give	us	chaos.	You	give	us	an	end	to	this.
And	she	knew,	were	she	in	Anomander	Rake’s	place,	were	she	the	one
possessing	Dragnipur,	she	would	fail	in	this	sacrifice.	The	power	of	the
weapon	would	seduce	her	utterly,	irrevocably.
None	other.	None	other	but	you,	Anomander	Rake.
Thank	the	gods.
	
He	awoke	to	the	sting	of	a	needle	at	the	corner	of	one	eye.	Flinching	back,
gasping,	scrabbling	away	over	the	warm	bodies.	In	his	wake,	that	blind	artist,
the	mad	Tiste	Andii,	Kadaspala,	face	twisted	in	dismay,	the	bone	stylus	drawing
back.
‘Wait!	Come	back!	Wait	and	wait,	stay	and	stay,	I	am	almost	done!	I	am
almost	done	and	I	must	be	done	before	it’s	too	late,	before	it’s	too	late!’
Ditch	saw	that	half	his	mangled	body	now	bore	tattoos,	all	down	one	side	–
wherever	skin	had	been	exposed	whilst	he	was	lying	unconscious	atop	the	heap
of	the	fallen.	How	long	had	he	been	lying	there,	insensate,	whilst	the	insane
creature	stitched	him	full	of	holes?	‘I	told	you,’	he	said,	‘not	me.	Not	me!’
‘Necessary.	The	apex	and	the	crux	and	the	fulcrum	and	the	heart.	He	chose
you.	I	chose	you.	Necessary!	Else	we	are	all	lost,	we	are	all	lost,	we	are	all	lost.
Come	back.	Where	you	were	and	where	you	were,	lying	just	so,	your	arm
over,	the	wrist	–	the	very	twitch	of	your	eye—’
‘I	said	no!	Come	at	me	again,	Kadaspala,	and	I	will	choke	the	life	from
you.	I	swear	it.	I	will	crush	your	neck	to	pulp.	Or	snap	your	fingers,	every
damned	one	of	them!’
Lying	on	his	stomach,	gaping	sockets	seeming	to	glare,	Kadaspala


snatched	his	hands	back,	hiding	them	beneath	his	chest.	‘You	must	not	do	that
and	you	must	not	do	that.	I	was	almost	finished	with	you.	I	saw	your	mind	went
away,	leaving	me	your	flesh	–	to	do	what	was	needed	and	what	was	needed	is
still	needed,	can’t	you	understand	that?’
Ditch	crawled	further	away,	well	beyond	the	Tiste	Andii’s	reach,	rolling
and	then	sinking	down	between	two	demonic	forms,	both	of	which	shifted
sickeningly	beneath	his	weight.	‘Don’t	come	any	closer,’	he	hissed.
‘I	must	convince	you.	I	have	summoned	Draconus.	He	is	summoned.	There
will	be	threats,	they	come	with	Draconus,	they	always	come	with	Draconus.	I
have	summoned	him.’
Ditch	slowly	lowered	himself	down	on	to	his	back.	There	would	be	no	end
to	this,	he	knew.	Each	time	his	mind	fell	away,	fled	to	whatever	oblivion	it
found,	this	mad	artist	would	crawl	to	his	side,	and,	blind	or	not,	he	would
resume	his	work.	What	of	it?	Why	should	I	really	care?	This	body	is	mostly
destroyed	now,	anyway.	If	Kadaspala	wants	it	–	no,	damn	him,	it	is	all	I	have
left.
‘So	many	are	pleased,’	the	Tiste	Andii	murmured,	‘to	think	that	they	have
become	something	greater	than	they	once	were.	It	is	a	question	of	sacrifices,	of
which	I	know	all	there	is	to	know,	yes,	I	know	all	there	is	to	know.	And,’	he
added,	somewhat	breathlessly,	‘there	is	of	course	more	to	it,	more	to	it.
Salvation—’
‘You	cannot	be	serious.’
‘It	is	not	quite	a	lie,	not	quite	a	lie,	my	friend.	Not	quite	a	lie.	And	truth,
well,	truth	is	never	as	true	as	you	think	it	is,	or	if	it	is,	then	not	for	long	not	for
long	not	for	long.’
Ditch	stared	up	at	the	sickly	sky	overhead,	the	flashes	of	reflected	argent
spilling	through	what	seemed	to	be	roiling	clouds	of	grey	dust.	Everything	felt
imminent,	something	hovering	at	the	edge	of	his	vision.	There	was	a
strangeness	in	his	mind,	as	if	he	was	but	moments	from	hearing	some
devastating	news,	a	fatal	illness	no	healer	could	solve;	he	knew	it	was	coming,
knew	it	to	be	inevitable,	but	the	details	were	unknown	and	all	he	could	do	was
wait.	Live	on	in	endless	anticipation	of	that	cruel,	senseless	pronouncement.
If	there	were	so	many	sides	to	existing,	why	did	grief	and	pain	overwhelm
all	else?	Why	were	such	grim	forces	so	much	more	powerful	than	joy,	or	love,
or	even	compassion?	And,	in	the	face	of	that,	did	dignity	really	provide	a
worthy	response?	It	was	but	a	lifted	shield,	a	display	to	others,	whilst	the	soul
cowered	behind	it,	in	no	way	ready	to	stand	unmoved	by	catastrophe,
especially	the	personal	kind.
He	felt	a	sudden	hatred	for	the	futility	of	things.


Kadaspala	was	crawling	closer,	his	slithering	stalking	betrayed	in	minute
gasps	of	effort,	the	attempts	at	stealth	pathetic,	almost	comical.
Blood	and	ink,	ink	and	blood,	right,	Kadaspala?	The	physical	and	the
spiritual,	each	painting	the	truth	of	the	other.
I	will	wring	your	neck,	I	swear	it.
He	felt	motion,	heard	soft	groans,	and	all	at	once	a	figure	was	crouching
down	beside	him.	Ditch	opened	his	eyes.	‘Yes,’	he	said,	sneering,	‘you	were
summoned.’
‘Just	how	many	battles,	wizard,	are	you	prepared	to	lose?’
The	question	irritated	him,	but	then	it	was	meant	to.	‘Either	way,	I	have	few
left,	don’t	I?’
Draconus	reached	down	and	dragged	Ditch	from	between	the	two	demons,
roughly	throwing	him	on	to	his	stomach	–	no	easy	thing,	since	Ditch	was	not	a
small	man,	yet	the	muscles	behind	that	effort	made	the	wizard	feel	like	a	child.
‘What	are	you	doing?’	Ditch	demanded,	as	Draconus	placed	his	hands	to
either	side	of	the	wizard’s	head,	fingers	lacing	below	his	jaw.
Ditch	sought	to	pull	his	head	back,	away	from	that	tightening	grip,	but	the
effort	failed.
A	sudden	wrench	to	one	side.	Something	in	his	neck	broke	clean,	a	crunch
and	snap	that	reverberated	up	into	his	skull,	a	brief	flare	of	what	might	have
been	pain,	then…nothing.
‘What	have	you	done?’
‘Not	the	solution	I	would	have	preferred,’	Draconus	said	from	above	him,
‘but	it	was	obvious	that	argument	alone	would	not	convince	you	to	cooperate.’
Ditch	could	not	feel	his	body.	Nothing,	nothing	at	all	beneath	his	neck.	He
broke	it	–	my	neck,	severed	the	spinal	cord.	He	–	gods!	Gods!	‘Torment	take
you,	Elder	God.	Torment	take	your	soul.	An	eternity	of	agony.	Death	of	all
your	dreams,	sorrow	unending	among	your	kin	–	may	they	too	know	misery,
despair	–	all	your—’
‘Oh,	be	quiet,	Ditch.	I	haven’t	the	time	for	this.’
The	scene	before	Ditch’s	eyes	rocked	then,	swung	wild	and	spun,	as
Draconus	dragged	him	back	to	where	he	had	been	lying	before,	to	where
Kadaspala	needed	him	to	be.	The	apex,	the	crux,	the	heart,	the	whatever.	You
have	me	now,	Tiste	Andii.
And	yes,	I	did	not	heed	your	threat,	and	look	at	me	now.	True	and	true,	you
might	say,	Ditch	never	learns.	Not	about	threats.	Not	about	risks.	And	no,
nothing	–	nothing	–	about	creatures	such	as	Draconus.	Or	Anomander	Rake.	Or
any	of	them,	who	do	what	they	have	to	do,	when	it	needs	doing.
‘Hold	your	face	still,’	Kadaspala	whispered	close	to	one	ear.	‘I	do	not	want


to	blind	you,	I	do	not	want	to	blind	you.	You	do	not	want	to	be	blind,	trust	me,
you	do	not	want	to	be	blind.	No	twitching,	this	is	too	important,	too	too	too
important	and	important,	too.’
The	stab	of	the	stylus,	a	faint	sting,	and	now,	as	it	was	the	only	sensation	he
had	left,	the	pain	shivered	like	a	blessing,	a	god’s	merciful	touch	to	remind
him	of	his	flesh	–	that	it	still	existed,	that	blood	still	flowed	beneath	the	skin.
The	healer,	Ditch,	has	devastating	news.
But	you	still	have	your	dignity.	You	still	have	that.
Oh	yes,	he	still	has	his	dignity.	See	the	calm	resignation	in	these	steady
eyes,	the	steeled	expression,	the	courage	of	no	choice.
Be	impressed,	won’t	you?
	
The	south-facing	slopes	of	God’s	Walk	Mountains	were	crowded	with	ruins.
Shattered	domes,	most	of	them	elliptical	in	shape,	lined	the	stepped	tiers	like
broken	teeth.	Low	walls	linked	them,	although	these	too	had	collapsed	in
places,	where	run-off	from	the	snow-clad	peaks	had	cut	trenches	and	gullies
like	gouges	down	the	faces,	as	if	the	mountains	themselves	were	eager	to	wash
away	the	last	remnants	of	the	long	dead	civilization.
Water	and	earth	will	heal	what	needs	healing.	Water	and	earth,	sun	and
wind,	these	will	take	away	every	sign	of	wilful	assertion,	of	cogent	imposition.
Brick	crumbles	to	rubble,	mortar	drifts	away	as	grit	on	the	breeze.	These
mountains,	Kedeviss	knew,	will	wash	it	all	away.
The	notion	pleased	her,	and	in	these	sentiments	she	was	little	different	from
most	Tiste	Andii	–	at	least	those	she	knew	and	had	known.	There	was	a	secret
delight	in	impermanence,	in	seeing	arrogance	taken	down,	whether	in	a	single
person	or	in	a	bold,	proud	civilization.	Darkness	was	ever	the	last	thing	to
remain,	in	the	final	closing	of	eyelids,	in	the	unlit	depths	of	empty	buildings,
godless	temples.	When	a	people	vanished,	their	every	home,	from	the
dishevelled	hovel	of	the	destitute	to	the	palaces	of	kings	and	queens,	became
nothing	but	a	sepulchre,	a	tomb	host	to	nothing	but	memories,	and	even	these
quickly	faded.
She	suspected	that	the	dwellers	of	the	village,	there	at	the	foot	of	the
nearest	mountain,	on	the	edge	of	a	lake	in	headlong	retreat,	knew	nothing
about	the	sprawling	city	whose	ruins	loomed	above	them.	A	convenient	source
of	cut	stone	and	oddly	glazed	bricks	and	nothing	more.	And	of	course,
whatever	little	knowledge	they	had	possessed,	they	had	surrendered	it	all	to
saemankelyk,	for	it	was	clear	as	the	troupe	drew	closer	that	the	village	was
lifeless,	abandoned.


Against	the	backdrop	of	the	mountains,	the	figure	of	Clip	–	striding	well
ahead	of	the	rest	of	them	–	looked	appropriately	diminished,	like	an	ant	about
to	tackle	a	hillside.	Despite	this,	Kedeviss	found	her	gaze	drawn	to	him	again
and	again.	I’m	not	sure.	Not	sure	about	him.	Distrust	came	easy,	and	even	had
Clip	been	all	smiles	and	eager	generosity,	still	she	would	have	her	suspicions.
They’d	not	done	well	with	strangers,	after	all.
‘I	have	never,’	said	Nimander	as	he	walked	at	her	side,	‘seen	a	city	like
that.’
‘They	certainly	had	a	thing	about	domes,’	observed	Skintick	behind	them.
‘But	let’s	hope	that	some	of	those	channels	still	run	with	fresh	water.	I	feel
salted	as	a	lump	of	bacon.’
Crossing	the	dead	lake	had	been	an	education	in	human	failure.	Long	lost
nets	tangled	on	deadheads,	harpoons,	anchors,	gaffs	and	more	shipwrecks	than
seemed	reasonable.	The	lake’s	death	had	revealed	its	treachery	in	spiny	ridges
and	shoals,	in	scores	of	mineralized	tree	trunks,	still	standing	from	the	day
some	dam	high	in	the	mountains	broke	to	send	a	deluge	sweeping	down	into	a
forested	valley.	Fisher	boats	and	merchant	scows,	towed	barges	and	a	few	sleek
galleys	attesting	to	past	military	disputes,	the	rusted	hulks	of	armour	and	other
things	less	identifiable	–	the	lake	bed	seemed	a	kind	of	concentrated	lesson	on
bodies	of	water	and	the	fools	who	dared	to	navigate	them.	Kedeviss	imagined
that,	should	a	sea	or	an	ocean	suddenly	drain	away	to	nothing,	she	would	see
the	same	writ	large,	a	clutter	of	loss	so	vast	as	to	take	one’s	breath	away.	What
meaning	could	one	pluck	free	from	broken	ambition?	Avoid	the	sea.	Avoid
risks.	Take	no	chances.	Dream	of	nothing,	want	less.	An	Andiian	response,
assuredly.	Humans,	no	doubt,	would	draw	down	into	thoughtful	silence,
thinking	of	ways	to	improve	the	odds,	of	turning	the	battle	and	so	winning	the
war.	For	them,	after	all,	failure	was	temporary,	as	befitted	a	shortlived	species
that	didn’t	know	any	better.
‘I	guess	we	won’t	be	camping	in	the	village,’	Skintick	said,	and	they	could
see	that	Clip	had	simply	marched	through	the	scatter	of	squatting	huts,	and	was
now	attacking	the	slope.
‘He	can	walk	all	night	if	he	likes,’	Nimander	said.	‘We’re	stopping.	We
need	the	rest.	Water,	a	damned	bath.	We	need	to	redistribute	our	supplies,	since
there’s	no	way	we	can	take	the	cart	up	and	over	the	mountains.	Let’s	hope	the
locals	just	dropped	everything	like	all	the	others	did.’
A	bath.	Yes.	But	it	won’t	help.	We	cannot	clean	our	hands,	not	this	time.
They	passed	between	sagging	jetties,	on	to	the	old	shore	by	way	of	a	boatlaunch	ramp	of	reused	quarry	stones,	many	of	which	had	been	carved	with
strange	symbols.	The	huts	rested	on	solid,	oversized	foundations,	the	contrast


between	ancient	skill	and	modern	squalor	so	pathetic	it	verged	on	the	comical,
and	Kedeviss	heard	Skintick’s	amused	snort	as	they	wended	their	way	between
the	first	structures.
A	rectangular	well	dominated	the	central	round,	with	more	perfectly	cut
stone	set	incompetently	in	the	earth	to	form	a	rough	plaza	of	sorts.	Discarded
clothing	and	bedding	was	scattered	about,	bleached	by	salt	and	sun,	like	the
shrunken	remnants	of	people.
‘I	seem	to	recall,’	Skintick	said,	‘a	child’s	story	about	flesh-stealers.
Whenever	you	find	clothes	lying	on	the	roadside	and	in	glades,	it’s	because	the
stealers	came	and	took	the	person	wearing	them.	I	never	trusted	that	story,
though,	since	who	would	be	walking	round	wearing	only	a	shirt?	Or	one	shoe?
No,	my	alternative	theory	is	far	more	likely.’
Nimander,	ever	generous	of	heart,	bit	on	the	hook.	‘Which	is?’
‘Why,	the	evil	wind,	of	course,	ever	desperate	to	get	dressed	in	something
warm,	but	nothing	ever	fits	so	the	wind	throws	the	garments	away	in	a	fit	of
fury.’
‘You	were	a	child,’	Kedeviss	said,	‘determined	to	explain	everything,
weren’t	you?	I	don’t	really	recall,	since	I	stopped	listening	to	you	long	ago.’
‘She	stabs	deep,	Nimander,	this	woman.’
Nenanda	had	drawn	up	the	cart	and	now	climbed	down,	stretching	out	the
kinks	in	his	back.	‘I’m	glad	I’m	done	with	that,’	he	said.
Moments	later	Aranatha	and	Desra	joined	them.
Yes,	here	we	are	again.	With	luck,	Clip	will	fall	into	a	crevasse	and	never
return.
Nimander	looked	older,	like	a	man	whose	youth	has	been	beaten	out	of
him.	‘Well,’	he	said	with	a	sigh,	‘we	should	search	these	huts	and	find	whatever
there	is	to	find.’
At	his	command	the	others	set	out	to	explore.	Kedeviss	remained	behind,
her	eyes	still	on	Nimander,	until	he	turned	about	and	regarded	her	quizzically.
‘He’s	hiding	something,’	she	said.
He	did	not	ask	whom	she	meant,	but	simply	nodded.
‘I’m	not	sure	why	he	feels	the	need	for	us,	’Mander.	Did	he	want
worshippers?	Servants?	Are	we	to	be	his	cadre	in	some	political	struggle	to
come?’
A	faint	smile	from	Nimander.	‘You	don’t	think,	then,	he	collected	us	out	of
fellowship,	a	sense	of	responsibility	–	to	take	us	back…to	our	“Black-Winged
Lord”?’
‘Do	you	know,’	she	said,	‘he	alone	among	us	has	never	met	Anomander
Rake.	In	a	sense,	he’s	not	taking	us	to	Anomander	Rake.	We’re	taking	him.’


‘Careful,	Kedeviss.	If	he	hears	you	you	will	have	offended	his	selfimportance.’
‘I	may	end	up	offending	more	than	that,’	she	said.
Nimander ’s	gaze	sharpened	on	her.
‘I	mean	to	confront	him,’	she	said.	‘I	mean	to	demand	some	answers.’
‘Perhaps	we	should	all—’
‘No.	Not	unless	I	fail.’	She	hoped	he	wouldn’t	ask	for	her	reasons	on	this,
and	suspected,	as	she	saw	his	smile	turn	wry,	that	he	understood.	A	challenge
by	all	of	them,	with	Nimander	at	the	forefront,	could	force	into	the	open	the
power	struggle	that	had	been	brewing	between	Clip	and	Nimander,	one	that	was
now	played	out	in	gestures	of	indifference	and	even	contempt	–	on	Clip’s	part,
at	any	rate,	since	Nimander	more	or	less	maintained	his	pleasant,	if	slightly
morbid,	passivity,	fending	off	Clip’s	none	too	subtle	attacks	as	would	a	man
used	to	being	under	siege.	Salvos	could	come	from	any	direction,	after	all.	So
carry	a	big	shield,	and	keep	smiling.
She	wondered	if	Nimander	even	knew	the	strength	within	him.	He	could
have	become	a	man	such	as	Andarist	had	been	–	after	all,	Andarist	had	been
more	of	a	father	to	him	than	Anomander	Rake	had	ever	been	–	and	yet
Nimander	had	grown	into	a	true	heir	to	Rake,	his	only	failing	being	that	he
didn’t	know	it.	And	perhaps	that	was	for	the	best,	at	least	for	the	time	being.
‘When?’	he	asked	now.
She	shrugged.	‘Soon,	I	think.’
	
A	thousand	paces	above	the	village,	Clip	settled	on	one	of	the	low	bridging
walls	and	looked	down	at	the	quaintly	sordid	village	below.	He	could	see	his
miserable	little	army	wandering	about	at	the	edges	of	the	round,	into	and	out	of
huts.
They	were,	he	decided,	next	to	useless.	If	not	for	concern	over	them,	he
would	never	have	challenged	the	Dying	God.	Naturally,	they	were	too	ignorant
to	comprehend	that	detail.	They’d	even	got	it	into	their	heads	that	they’d	saved
his	life.	Well,	such	delusions	had	their	uses,	although	the	endless	glances	his
way	–	so	rank	with	hopeful	expectation	–	were	starting	to	grate.
He	spun	the	rings.	Clack-clack…clack-clack…
Oh,	I	sense	your	power,	O	Black-Winged	Lord.	Holding	me	at	bay.	Tell	me,
what	do	you	fear?	Why	force	me	into	this	interminable	walk?
The	Liosan	of	old	had	it	right.	Justice	was	unequivocal.	Explanations
revealed	the	cowardice	at	the	core	of	every	criminal,	the	whining
expostulations,	the	series	of	masks	each	one	tried	on	and	discarded	in


desperate	succession.	The	not-my-fault	mask.	The	it-was-a-mistake	mask.	Youdon’t-understand	and	see-me-so-helpless	and	have-pity-I’m-weak	–	he	could
see	each	expression,	perfectly	arranged	round	eyes	equally	perfect	in	their
depthless	pit	of	self-pity	(come	in	there’s	room	for	everyone).	Mercy	was	a	flaw,
a	sudden	moment	of	doubt	to	undermine	the	vast,	implacable	structure	that	was
true	justice.	The	masks	were	meant	to	stir	awake	that	doubt,	the	last	chance	of
the	guilty	to	squirm	free	of	proper	retribution.
Clip	had	no	interest	in	pity.	Acknowledged	no	flaws	within	his	own	sense
of	justice.	The	criminal	depends	upon	the	compassion	of	the	righteous	and
would	use	that	compassion	to	evade	precisely	everything	that	that	criminal
deserved.	Why	would	any	sane,	righteous	person	fall	into	such	a	trap?	It
permitted	criminals	to	thrive	(since	they	played	by	different	rules	and	would
hold	no	pity	or	compassion	for	those	who	might	wrong	them).	No,	justice	must
be	pure.	Punishment	left	sacrosanct,	immune	to	compromise.
He	would	make	it	so.	For	his	modest	army,	for	the	much	larger	army	to
come.	His	people.	The	Tiste	Andii	of	Black	Coral.	We	shall	rot	no	longer.	No
more	dwindling	fires,	drifting	ashes,	lives	wasted	century	on	century	–	do	you
hear	me,	O	Lord?	I	will	take	your	people,	and	I	will	deliver	justice.
Upon	this	world.
Upon	every	god	and	ascendant	who	ever	wronged	us,	betrayed	us,	scorned
us.
Watch	them	reel,	faces	bloodied,	masks	awry,	the	self-pity	in	their	eyes
dissolving	–	and	in	its	place	the	horror	of	recognition.	That	there	is	no	escape
this	time.	That	the	end	has	arrived,	for	every	damned	one	of	them.
Yes,	Clip	had	read	his	histories.	He	knew	the	Liosan,	the	Edur,	he	knew	all
the	mistakes	that	had	been	made,	the	errors	in	judgement,	the	flaws	of
compassion.	He	knew,	too,	the	true	extent	of	the	Black-Winged	Lord’s	betrayal.
Of	Mother	Dark,	of	all	the	Tiste	Andii.	Of	those	you	left	in	the	Andara.	Of
Nimander	and	his	kin.
Your	betrayal,	Anomander	Rake,	of	me.
The	sun	was	going	down.	The	rings	clacked	and	clacked,	and	clacked.
Below,	the	salt	pan	was	cast	in	golden	light,	the	hovels	crouched	on	the	near
shoreline	blessed	picturesque	by	distance	and	lack	of	detail.	Smoke	from	a
cookfire	now	rose	from	their	midst.	Signs	of	life.	Flames	to	beat	back	the
coming	darkness.	But	it	would	not	last.	It	never	lasted.
	
The	High	Priestess	pushed	the	plate	away.	‘That’s	it,’	she	said.	‘Any	more	and	I
will	burst.’	A	first	level	acolyte	ducked	in	to	take	the	plate,	scurrying	off	with


such	haste	that	she	almost	spilled	the	towering	heap	of	cracked	crayfish	shells.
Leaning	back,	the	High	Priestess	wiped	the	melted	butter	from	her	fingers.
‘It’s	typical,’	she	said	to	the	half-dozen	sisters	seated	at	the	table,	‘the	nets	drag
up	a	sudden,	unexpected	bounty,	and	what	do	we	do?	Devour	it	entire.’
‘Kurald	Galain	continues	to	yield	surprises,’	said	the	Third	Sister,	‘why	not
expect	more	to	come?’
‘Because,	dearest,	nothing	lasts	for	ever.	Surrounding	Kharkanas,	there
once	stood	forests.	Until	we	chopped	them	down.’
‘We	were	young—’
‘And	that	would	be	a	worthy	defence,’	the	High	Priestess	cut	in,	‘if	we	have
not,	here	in	our	old	age,	just	repeated	the	stupidity.	Look	at	us.	Come	the
morrow	all	our	clothes	will	cease	to	fit.	We	will	discover,	to	our	horror,
bulges	where	none	existed	before.	We	see	pleasure	as	an	excuse	for	all	manner
of	excess,	but	it	is	a	most	undisciplined	trait.	Now,	sermon	ended.	Someone
pour	the	tea.’
More	first	level	acolytes	slithered	in.
A	rustling	of	small	bells	at	the	corridor	door	preceded	the	arrival	of	a
temple	guardian.	The	woman,	clad	in	scale	armour	and	ringed	leather,
marched	up	to	halt	beside	the	High	Priestess.	She	lowered	the	grille	face-piece
on	her	helm	and	leaned	close	to	whisper	–	lips	unseen	and	so	unreadable	by
any	–	a	brief	message.
The	High	Priestess	nodded,	and	then	gestured	the	guardian	away.	‘Second
and	Third	Sister,	remain	in	your	seats.	You	others,	take	your	tea	to	the	Unlit
Garden.	Sixth	Sister,	once	there	you	can	stop	hiding	that	flask	and	top	up
everyone	else,	yes?’
Moments	later,	only	three	women	remained	in	the	chamber,	as	even	the
acolytes	had	been	sent	away.
The	door	opened	again	and	the	guardian	reappeared,	this	time	escorting	an
old	woman,	human,	who	tottered	on	two	canes	to	support	her	massive	weight.
Sweat	darkened	the	cloth	of	her	loose	clothing	round	her	armpits	and	beneath
her	cleavage	and	on	the	bulging	islands	of	her	hips.	Her	expression	was	one	of
anxiety	and	discomfort.
Unbidden,	Third	Sister	rose	and	pulled	a	bench	away	from	one	wall,
positioning	it	in	the	woman’s	path.
‘Please	do	sit,’	said	the	High	Priestess,	thinking,	alas,	of	the	two	dozen
blind	crayfish	she’d	just	eaten,	each	almost	half	the	size	of	a	lobster,	served	up
drenched	in	melted	butter.	Pleasure	until	pain,	and	we	then	rail	at	our
misfortune.
With	muttered	thanks,	the	woman	lowered	herself	on	to	the	bench.	‘Please


to	introduce	myself,’	she	said	in	a	wheeze.	‘I	am	the	Witch—’
‘I	know,’	the	High	Priestess	interrupted,	‘and	that	title	will	suffice	here,	as
must	my	own.	Yours	has	been	a	trying	journey,	and	so	I	can	only	assume	you
come	with	word	of	a	crisis.’
A	quick	nod.	‘The	cult	of	the	Redeemer,	High	Priestess,	has	become…
corrupted.’
‘And	what	is	the	agency	of	that	corruption?’
‘Well,	but	that	is	complicated,	you	see.	There	was	a	High	Priestess	–	oh,
she	was	a	reluctant	owner	of	that	title,	and	all	the	duties	that	came	with	it.	Yet
none	could	deny	her	natural	authority—’
‘“Natural	authority”,’	said	the	High	Priestess.	‘I	like	that	phrase.	Sorry,	do
go	on.’
‘Outlaws	have	usurped	the	pilgrim	camp.	There	is	some	concentrated	form
of	the	drink	called	kelyk	–	I	do	not	know	if	you	are	familiar	with	it?’
‘We	are,	yes.’
Another	quick	nod.	‘Saemankelyk.	The	word	comes	from	a	dialect
common	south	of	God’s	Walk	Mountains.	“Saeman”	means	“Dying	God”	and
“kelyk”	means—’
‘Blood.’
A	sigh.	‘Yes.’
Second	Sister	cleared	her	throat,	and	then	said,	‘Surely	you	do	not	mean	to
suggest	that	the	meaning	is	literal?’
The	witch	licked	her	lips	–	an	instinctive	gesture	rather	than	anything
ironic	–	and	said,	‘I	have	applied	some…arts,	er,	to	examining	this
saemankelyk.	There	are	unnatural	properties,	that	much	is	certain.	In	any	case,
the	outlaws	have	made	addicts	of	the	pilgrims.	Including	Salind,	the
Redeemer ’s	High	Priestess.’
Third	Sister	spoke.	‘If	this	foul	drink	is	in	any	way	blessed,	then	one	might
well	see	its	poisonous	influence	as	a	corruption	of	the	Redeemer ’s
worshippers.	If	one	kneels	before	saemankelyk…well,	one	cannot	kneel	before
two	masters,	can	one?’
Not	without	physically	splitting	in	half,	no.	‘Witch,	what	is	it	you	wish	of
us?’
‘This	corruption,	High	Priestess.	It	could…spread.’
Silence	round	the	table.
It	was	clear	now	to	the	High	Priestess	that	the	witch	had	given	this	meeting
considerable	thought,	until	arriving	at	the	one	suggestion	she	considered	most
likely	to	trigger	alarm.	As	if	we	Tiste	Andii	are	but	taller,	black-skinned
versions	of	humans.	As	if	we	could	so	easily	be…stolen	away.


Emboldened,	the	witch	resumed.	‘High	Priestess,	Salind	–	she	needs	help.
We	need	help.	There	was	a	warrior,	one	among	you,	but	he	has	disappeared.
Now	that	Seerdomin	is	dead,	I	sought	to	find	him.	Spinnock	Durav.’
The	High	Priestess	rose.	‘Come	with	me,	Witch,’	she	said.	‘Just	you	and
me.	Come,	it’s	not	far.’
The	old	woman	levered	herself	upright,	confusion	in	her	small	eyes.
To	a	side	passage,	a	narrow	corridor	of	twenty	paces,	and	then	down	a
short	flight	of	stairs,	the	air	still	smelling	of	fresh-chiselled	basalt,	into	a	large
but	low-vaulted	octagonal	chamber	devoid	of	any	furniture,	the	floor	of	which
was	inlaid	with	onyx	tesserae,	irregular	in	shape	and	size.	A	journey	of	but	a
few	moments	for	most	people;	yet	for	the	witch	it	was	an	ordeal,	striking	the
High	Priestess	with	the	poignancy	of	the	old	woman’s	desperation	–	that	she
should	so	subject	herself	to	such	a	struggle.	The	trek	from	her	home	through
the	city	to	the	keep	must	have	been	an	epic	undertaking.
These	thoughts	battered	at	the	High	Priestess’s	impatience,	and	so	she
weathered	the	delay	saying	nothing	and	without	expression	on	her	smooth,
round	face.
As	soon	as	the	witch	tottered	into	the	chamber,	she	gasped.
‘Yes,	you	are	clearly	an	adept,’	observed	the	High	Priestess.	‘There	are
nodes	of	power	in	this	temple.	Kurald	Galain,	the	cleansing	darkness.’	She
could	see	that	the	witch	was	breathing	hard	and	fast,	and	there	was	a	look	of
wonder	on	that	sweat-sheathed	face.	‘Do	not	be	alarmed	at	what	you	feel
inside,’	she	said.	‘By	entering	here,	you	have	drawn	Kurald	Galain	into	your
body,	in	your	breaths,	through	the	very	pores	of	your	skin.	The	sorcery	is	now
within	you.’
‘B-but…why?	Why	have	you	done	this	to	me?’
‘I	could	sense	the	labouring	of	your	heart,	Witch.	Your	trek	to	my	temple
would	have	been	your	last—’
‘Oh,	I	knew	that!’	snapped	the	witch.
The	sudden	irritation	shocked	the	High	Priestess	for	a	moment.	She
reassessed	this	woman	tottering	before	her.	‘I	see.	Then…’
‘Then	yes,	I	prayed	my	sacrifice	would	be	worth	it.	Salind	is	so	precious	–
what	has	been	done	to	her	is	despicable.	Is…evil.’
‘Then	you	have	not	come	in	the	name	of	the	Redeemer,	have	you?’
‘No.	I	came	for	a	friend.’
A	friend.	‘Witch,	Spinnock	Durav	is	no	longer	in	Black	Coral.	It	grieves
me	to	hear	of	Seerdomin’s	death.	And	it	grieves	me	more	to	learn	of	Salind’s
fate.	Tell	me,	what	else	are	you	feeling?’
The	witch	was	hunched	over,	as	if	in	visceral	pain.	‘Fine,’	she	hissed


reluctantly.	‘I	can	see	that	there	is	no	risk	of	the	poison	spreading.	I	never
thought	there	was.’
‘I	know	that,’	said	the	High	Priestess,	her	voice	soft.
‘But	I	needed	to	bargain	for	your	help.’
‘That	is	ever	the	assumption	among	you	humans.	Do	you	know,	when	the
delegates	from	the	Free	Cities	came	to	treat	with	us,	when	the	Rhivi	and	the
man	who	pretended	to	be	Prince	K’azz	D’Avore	of	the	Crimson	Guard	came	to
us	–	they	all	thought	to	bargain.	To	buy	our	swords,	our	power.	To	purchase
our	alliance.	Lord	Anomander	Rake	but	lifted	one	hand	–	before	any	of	them
could	even	so	much	as	say	one	beseeching	word.	And	he	said	this:	“We	are	the
Tiste	Andii.	Do	not	seek	to	bargain	with	us.	If	you	wish	our	help,	you	will	ask
for	it.	We	will	say	yes	or	we	will	say	no.	There	will	be	no	negotiations.”’
The	witch	was	staring	across	at	her.
The	High	Priestess	sighed.	‘It	is	not	an	easy	thing	for	a	proud	man	or
woman,	to	simply	ask.’
‘No,’	whispered	the	witch.	‘It’s	not.’
Neither	spoke	then	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	and	then	the	witch	slowly
straightened.	‘What	have	you	done	to	me?’
‘I	expect	Kurald	Galain	has	done	its	assessment.	Your	aches	are	gone,	yes?
Your	breathing	has	eased.	Various	ailments	will	disappear	in	the	next	few	days.
You	may	find	your	appetite…diminished.	Kurald	Galain	prefers	forces	in
balance.’
The	witch’s	eyes	were	wide.
The	High	Priestess	waited.
‘I	did	not	ask	for	such	things.’
‘No.	But	it	did	not	please	me	to	realize	that	your	journey	to	my	temple
would	prove	fatal.’
‘Oh.	Then,	thank	you.’
The	High	Priestess	frowned.	‘Am	I	not	yet	understood?’
‘You	are,’	replied	the	witch,	with	another	flash	of	irritation,	‘but	I	have	my
own	rules,	and	I	will	voice	my	gratitude,	whether	it	pleases	you	or	not.’
That	statement	earned	a	faint	smile	and	the	High	Priestess	dipped	her	head
in	acknowledgement.
‘Now,	then,’	said	the	witch	after	yet	another	brief	stretch	of	silence,	‘I	ask
that	you	help	Salind.’
‘No.’
The	witch’s	face	darkened.
‘You	have	come	here,’	said	the	High	Priestess,	‘because	of	a	loss	of	your
own	faith.	Yes,	you	would	have	the	Temple	act	on	behalf	of	Salind.	It	is	our


assessment	that	Salind	does	not	yet	need	our	help.	Nor,	indeed,	does	the
Redeemer.’
‘Your…assessment?’
‘We	are,’	said	the	High	Priestess,	‘rather	more	aware	of	the	situation	than
you	might	have	believed.	If	we	must	act,	then	we	will,	if	only	to	preempt
Silanah	–	although,	I	admit,	it	is	no	easy	thing	attempting	to	measure	out	the
increments	of	an	Eleint’s	forbearance.	She	could	stir	at	any	time,	at	which	point
it	will	be	too	late.’
‘Too	late?’
‘Yes,	for	Salind,	for	the	usurpers,	for	the	pilgrim	camp	and	all	its
inhabitants.’
‘High	Priestess,	who	is	Silanah?	And	what	is	an	Eleint?’
‘Oh,	I	am	sorry.	That	was	careless	of	me.	Silanah	commands	the	spire	of
this	keep	–	she	is	rather	difficult	to	miss,	even	in	the	eternal	gloom.	On	your
return	to	your	home,	you	need	but	turn	and	glance	back,	and	up,	of	course,	and
you	will	see	her.’	She	paused,	and	then	added,	‘Eleint	means	dragon.’
‘Oh.’
‘Come,	let	us	return	to	the	others.	I	am	sure	more	tea	has	been	brewed,	and
we	can	take	some	rest	there.’
The	witch	seemed	to	have	run	out	of	commentary,	and	now	followed
meekly	as	the	High	Priestess	strode	from	the	chamber.
The	return	journey	did	not	take	nearly	as	long.
	
It	should	have	come	as	no	surprise	to	Samar	Dev	when	Karsa	Orlong	rode
back	into	the	camp	at	dusk	at	the	end	of	the	third	day	since	leaving	them.	Riding
in,	saying	nothing,	looking	oddly	thoughtful.
Unscathed.	As	if	challenging	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	was	no	greater	risk
than,	say,	herding	sheep,	or	staring	down	a	goat	(which,	of	course,	couldn’t	be
done	–	but	such	a	detail	would	hardly	stop	the	Toblakai,	would	it?	And	he’d
win	the	wager,	too).	No,	it	was	clear	that	the	encounter	had	been	a	peaceful	one
–	perhaps	predicated	on	the	Hounds’	fleeing	at	high	speed,	tails	between	their
legs.
Slipping	down	from	Havok’s	back,	Karsa	walked	over	to	where	sat	Samar
Dev	beside	the	dung	fire.	Traveller	had	moved	off	thirty	or	so	paces,	as	it	was
his	habit	to	attend	to	the	arrival	of	dusk	in	relative	solitude.
The	Toblakai	crouched	down.	‘Where	is	the	tea?’	he	asked.
‘There	isn’t	any,’	she	said.	‘We’ve	run	out.’
Karsa	nodded	towards	Traveller.	‘This	city	he	seeks.	How	far	away?’


Samar	Dev	shrugged.	‘Maybe	a	week,	since	we’re	going	rather	slowly.’
‘Yes.	I	was	forced	to	backtrack	to	find	you.’	He	was	silent	for	a	moment,
looking	into	the	flames,	and	then	he	said,	‘He	does	not	seem	the	reluctant	type.’
‘No,	you’re	right.	He	doesn’t.’
‘I’m	hungry.’
‘Cook	something.’
‘I	will.’
She	rubbed	at	her	face,	feeling	the	scrape	of	calluses	from	her	hands,	and
then	tugged	at	the	knots	in	her	hair.	‘Since	meeting	you,’	she	said,	‘I	have
almost	forgotten	what	it	is	to	be	clean	–	oh,	Letheras	was	all	right,	but	we	were
pretty	much	in	a	prison,	so	it	doesn’t	really	count.	No,	with	you	it’s	just	empty
wastelands,	blood-soaked	sands,	the	occasional	scene	of	slaughter.’
‘You	sought	me	out,	witch,’	he	reminded	her.
‘I	delivered	your	horse.’	She	snorted.	‘Since	you	two	are	so	clearly	perfect
for	each	other,	it	was	a	matter	of	righting	the	cosmic	balance.	I	had	no	choice.’
‘You	just	want	me,’	he	said,	‘yet	whenever	we	are	together,	you	do	nothing
but	second-guess	everything.	Surrender,	woman,	and	you	can	stop	arguing
with	yourself.	It	has	been	a	long	time	since	I	spilled	my	seed	into	a	woman,
almost	as	long	as	since	you	last	felt	the	heat	of	a	man.’
She	could	have	shot	back,	unleashed	a	flurry	of	verbal	quarrels	that	would,
inevitably,	all	bounce	off	his	impervious	barbarity.	‘You’d	be	gentle	as	a	desert
bear,	of	course.	I’d	probably	never	recover.’
‘There	are	sides	of	me,	witch,	that	you	have	not	seen,	yet.’
She	grunted.
‘You	are	ever	suspicious	of	being	surprised,	aren’t	you?’
A	curious	question.	In	fact,	a	damned	tangle	of	a	question.	She	didn’t	like	it.
She	didn’t	want	to	go	near	it.	‘I	was	civilized,	once.	Content	in	a	proper	city,	a
city	with	an	underground	sewer	system,	with	Malazan	aqueducts	and	hot	water
from	pipes.	Hallways	between	enclosed	gardens	and	the	front	windows	to
channel	cool	air	through	the	house.	Proper	soap	to	keep	clothes	clean.
Songbirds	in	cages.	Chilled	wine	and	candied	pastries.’
‘The	birds	sing	of	imprisonment,	Samar	Dev.	The	soap	is	churned	by
indentured	workers	with	bleached,	blistered	hands	and	hacking	coughs.	Outside
your	cool	house	with	its	pretty	garden	there	are	children	left	to	wander	in	the
streets.	Lepers	are	dragged	to	the	edge	of	the	city	and	every	step	is	cheered	on
by	a	hail	of	stones.	People	steal	to	eat	and	when	they	are	caught	their	hands	are
cut	off.	Your	city	takes	water	from	farms	and	plants	wither	and	animals	die.’
She	glared	across	at	him.	‘Nice	way	to	turn	the	mood,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘There	was	a	mood?’


‘Too	subtle,	was	it?’
He	waved	a	dismissive	hand.	‘Speak	your	desires	plain.’
‘I	was	doing	just	that,	you	brainless	bhederin.	Just	a	little…comfort.	That’s
all.	Even	the	illusion	would	have	served.’
Traveller	returned	to	the	fire.	‘We	are	about	to	have	a	guest,’	he	said.
Samar	Dev	rose	and	searched	round,	but	darkness	was	fast	swallowing	the
plain.	She	turned	with	a	query	on	her	lips,	and	saw	that	Karsa	had	straightened
and	was	looking	skyward,	to	the	northeast.	And	there,	in	the	deepening	blue,	a
dragon	was	gliding	towards	them.
‘Worse	than	moths,’	Traveller	muttered.
‘Are	we	about	to	be	attacked?’
He	glanced	at	her,	and	shrugged.
‘Shouldn’t	we	at	least	scatter	or	something?’
Neither	warrior	replied	to	that,	and	after	a	moment	Samar	Dev	threw	up
her	hands	and	sat	down	once	more	beside	the	fire.	No,	she	would	not	panic.	Not
for	these	two	abominations	in	her	company,	and	not	for	a	damned	dragon,
either.	Fine,	let	it	be	a	single	pass	rather	than	three	–	what	was	she,	an	ant?	She
picked	up	another	piece	of	dung	and	tossed	it	into	the	fire.	Moths?	Ah,	I	see.	We
are	a	beacon,	are	we,	a	wilful	abrogation	of	this	wild,	empty	land.	Whatever.
Flap	flap	on	over,	beastie,	just	don’t	expect	scintillating	discourse.
The	enormous	creature’s	wings	thundered	as	the	dragon	checked	its	speed
a	hundred	paces	away,	and	then	it	settled	almost	noiselessly	on	to	the	ground.
Watching	it,	Samar	Dev’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘That	thing’s	not	even	alive.’
‘No,’	Karsa	and	Traveller	said	in	unison.
‘Meaning,’	she	continued,	‘it	shouldn’t	be	here.’
‘That	is	true,’	Traveller	said.
In	the	gloom	the	dragon	seemed	to	regard	them	for	a	moment,	and	then,	in
a	blurring	dissolution,	the	creature	sembled,	until	they	saw	a	tall,	gaunt	figure
of	indeterminate	gender.	Grey	as	cobwebs	and	dust,	pallid	hair	long	and	ropy
with	filth,	wearing	the	remnants	of	a	long	chain	hauberk,	unbelted.	An	empty,
splintered	scabbard	hung	from	a	baldric	beneath	the	right	arm.	Leggings	of
some	kind	of	thick	hide,	scaled	and	the	hue	of	forest	loam,	reached	down	to
grey	leather	boots	that	rose	to	just	below	the	knees.
No	light	was	reflected	from	the	pits	of	its	eyes.	It	approached	with	peculiar
caution,	like	a	wild	animal,	and	halted	at	the	very	edge	of	the	firelight.
Whereupon	it	lifted	both	hands,	brought	them	together	into	a	peak	before	its
face,	and	bowed.
In	the	native	tongue	of	Ugari,	it	said,	‘Witch,	I	greet	you.’
Samar	Dev	rose,	shocked,	baffled.	Was	it	some	strange	kind	of	courtesy,	to


address	her	first?	Was	this	thing	in	the	habit	of	ignoring	ascendants	as	if	they
were	nothing	more	than	bodyguards?	And	from	her	two	formidable
companions,	not	a	sound.
‘And	I	greet	you	in	return,’	she	managed	after	a	moment.
‘I	am	Tulas	Shorn,’	it	said.	‘I	scarce	recall	when	I	last	walked	this	realm,	if
I	ever	have.	The	very	nature	of	my	demise	is	lost	to	me,	which,	as	you	might
imagine,	is	proving	disconcerting.’
‘So	it	would,	Tulas	Shorn.	I	am	Samar	Dev—’
‘Yes,	the	one	who	negotiates	with	spirits,	with	the	sleeping	selves	of	stream
and	rock,	crossroads	and	sacred	paths.	Priestess	of	Burn—’
‘That	title	is	in	error,	Tulas	Shorn—’
‘Is	it?	You	are	a	witch,	are	you	not?’
‘Yes,	but—’
‘You	do	not	reach	into	warrens,	and	so	force	alien	power	into	this	world.
Your	congress	is	with	the	earth,	the	sky,	water	and	stone.	You	are	a	priestess	of
Burn,	chosen	among	those	of	whom	she	dreams,	as	are	others,	but	you,	Samar
Dev,	she	dreams	of	often.’
‘How	would	you	know	that?’
Tulas	Shorn	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘There	is	death	in	dreaming.’
‘You	are	Tiste	Edur,’	said	Karsa	Orlong,	and,	baring	his	teeth,	he	reached
for	his	sword.
‘More	than	that,’	said	Traveller,	‘one	of	Hood’s	own.’
Samar	Dev	spun	to	her	two	companions.	‘Oh,	really!	Look	at	you	two!	Not
killed	anything	in	weeks	–	how	can	you	bear	it?	Planning	on	chopping	it	into
tiny	pieces,	are	you?	Well,	why	not	fight	for	the	privilege	first?’
Traveller ’s	eyes	widened	slightly	at	her	outburst.
Karsa’s	humourless	smile	broadened.	‘Ask	it	what	it	wants,	then,	witch.’
‘The	day	I	start	taking	orders	from	you,	Karsa	Orlong,	I	will	do	just	that.’
Tulas	Shorn	had	taken	a	step	back.	‘It	seems	I	am	not	welcome	here,	and	so
I	shall	leave.’
But	Samar	Dev’s	back	was	up,	and	she	said,	‘I	welcome	you,	Tulas	Shorn,
even	if	these	ones	do	not.	If	they	decide	to	attack	you,	I	will	stand	in	their	way.	I
offer	you	all	the	rights	of	a	guest	–	it’s	my	damned	fire,	after	all,	and	if	these
two	idiots	don’t	like	it	they	can	make	their	own,	preferably	a	league	or	two
away.’
‘You	are	right,’	Traveller	said.	‘I	apologize.	Be	welcome,	then,	Tulas
Shorn.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘I	suppose,’	he	said,	‘I’ve	killed	enough	Edur.	Besides,
this	one’s	already	dead.	I	still	want	to	know	what	it	wants.’


Tulas	Shorn	edged	in	warily	–	a	caution	that	seemed	peculiarly	out	of	place
in	a	corpse,	especially	one	that	could	veer	into	a	dragon	at	any	moment.	‘I	have
no	urgent	motivations,	Tartheno	Toblakai.	I	have	known	solitude	for	too	long
and	would	ease	the	burden	of	being	my	only	company.’
‘Then	join	us,’	Karsa	said,	returning	to	crouch	at	the	fire.	‘After	all,’	he
added,	‘perhaps	one	day	I	too	will	tire	of	my	own	company.’
‘Not	any	time	soon,	I	would	wager,’	said	the	Tiste	Edur.
Traveller	snorted	a	laugh,	and	then	looked	shocked	at	himself.
Samar	Dev	settled	down	once	more,	thinking	of	Shorn’s	words.	‘There	is
death	in	dreaming.’	Well,	she	supposed,	there	would	be	at	that.	Then	why	did
she	feel	so…rattled?	What	were	you	telling	me,	Tulas	Shorn?
‘Hood	has	released	you?’	Traveller	asked.	‘Or	was	he	careless?’
‘Careless?’	The	Tiste	Edur	seemed	to	consider	the	word.	‘No,	I	do	not
think	that.	Rather,	an	opportunity	presented	itself	to	me.	I	chose	not	to	waste	it.’
‘So	now,’	said	Traveller,	eyes	fixed	on	the	withered	face	enlivened	only	by
reflected	firelight,	‘you	wing	here	and	there,	seeking	what?’
‘Instinct	can	set	one	on	a	path,’	Tulas	Shorn	said,	‘with	no	destination	in
mind.’	It	raised	both	hands	and	seemed	to	study	them.	‘I	have	thought	to	see	life
once	more,	awakened	within	me.	I	do	not	know	if	such	a	thing	is	even	possible.
Samar	Dev,	is	such	a	thing	possible?	Can	she	dream	me	alive	once	more?’
‘Can	she	–	what?	I	don’t	know.	Call	me	a	priestess	if	you	like,	but	I	don’t
worship	Burn,	which	doesn’t	make	me	a	very	good	priestess,	does	it?	But	if
she	dreams	death,	then	she	dreams	life,	too.’
‘From	one	to	the	other	is	generally	in	one	direction	only,’	Traveller
observed.	‘Hood	will	come	for	you,	Tulas	Shorn;	sooner	or	later,	he	will	come
to	reclaim	you.’
For	the	first	time,	she	sensed	evasiveness	in	the	Tiste	Edur	as	it	said,	‘I
have	time	yet,	I	believe.	Samar	Dev,	there	is	sickness	in	the	Sleeping	Goddess.’
She	flinched.	‘I	know.’
‘It	must	be	expunged,	lest	she	die.’
‘I	imagine	so.’
‘Will	you	fight	for	her?’
‘I’m	not	a	damned	priestess!’	She	saw	the	surprise	on	the	faces	of	Karsa
and	Traveller,	forced	herself	back	from	the	ragged	edge	of	anger.	‘I	wouldn’t
know	where	to	start,	Tulas	Shorn.’
‘I	believe	the	poison	comes	from	a	stranger ’s	pain.’
‘The	Crippled	God.’
‘Yes,	Samar	Dev.’
‘Do	you	actually	think	it	can	be	healed?’


‘I	do	not	know.	There	is	physical	damage	and	then	there	is	spiritual
damage.	The	former	is	more	easily	mended	than	the	latter.	He	is	sustained	by
rage,	I	suspect.	His	last	source	of	power,	perhaps	his	only	source	of	power
whilst	chained	in	this	realm.’
‘I	doubt	he’s	in	the	negotiating	mood,’	Samar	Dev	said.	‘And	even	if	he
was,	he’s	anathema	to	the	likes	of	me.’
‘It	is	an	extraordinary	act	of	courage,’	said	Tulas	Shorn,	‘to	come	to	know
a	stranger ’s	pain.	To	even	consider	such	a	thing	demands	a	profound
dispensation,	a	willingness	to	wear	someone	else’s	chains,	to	taste	their
suffering,	to	see	with	one’s	own	eyes	the	hue	cast	on	all	things	–	the	terrible
stain	that	is	despair.’	The	Tiste	Edur	slowly	shook	its	head.	‘I	have	no	such
courage.	It	is,	without	doubt,	the	rarest	of	abilities.’
None	spoke	then	for	a	time.	The	fire	ate	itself,	indifferent	to	witnesses,	and
in	its	hunger	devoured	all	that	was	offered	it,	again	and	again,	until	night	and
the	disinterest	of	its	guests	left	it	to	starve,	until	the	wind	stirred	naught	but
ashes.
If	Tulas	Shorn	sought	amiable	company,	it	should	have	talked	about	the
weather.
In	the	morning,	the	undead	Soletaken	was	gone.	And	so	too	were
Traveller ’s	and	Samar	Dev’s	horses.
‘That	was	careless	of	us,’	Traveller	said.
‘He	was	a	guest,’	Samar	Dev	said,	baffled	and	more	than	a	little	hurt	by	the
betrayal.	They	could	see	Havok,	standing	nervously	some	distance	off,	as	if
reluctant	to	return	from	his	nightlong	hunting,	as	if	he	had	been	witness	to
something	unpleasant.
There	was,	however,	no	sign	of	violence.	The	picket	stakes	remained
where	they	had	been	pounded	into	the	hard	ground.
‘It	wanted	to	slow	us	down,’	Traveller	said.	‘One	of	Hood’s	own,	after	all.’
‘All	right,’	Samar	Dev	glared	across	at	a	silent	Karsa	Orlong,	‘the	fault
was	all	mine.	I	should	have	left	you	two	to	chop	the	thing	to	bits.	I’m	sorry.’
But	Karsa	shook	his	head.	‘Witch,	goodwill	is	not	something	that	needs	an
apology.	You	were	betrayed.	Your	trust	was	abused.	If	there	are	strangers	who
thrive	on	such	things,	they	will	ever	remain	strangers	–	because	they	have	no
other	choice.	Pity	Tulas	Shorn	and	those	like	it.	Even	death	taught	it	nothing.’
Traveller	was	regarding	the	Toblakai	with	interest,	although	he	ventured
no	comment.
Havok	was	trotting	towards	them.	Karsa	said,	‘I	will	ride	out,	seeking	new
mounts	–	or	perhaps	the	Edur	simply	drove	your	beasts	off.’
‘I	doubt	that,’	Traveller	said.


And	Karsa	nodded,	leaving	Samar	Dev	to	realize	that	he	had	offered	the
possibility	for	her	sake,	as	if	in	some	clumsy	manner	seeking	to	ease	her	selfrecrimination.	Moments	later,	she	understood	that	it	had	been	anything	but
clumsy.	It	was	not	her	inward	chastisement	that	he	spoke	to;	rather,	for	her,	he
was	giving	Tulas	Shorn	the	benefit	of	the	doubt,	although	Karsa	possessed	no
doubt	at	all	–	nor,	it	was	clear,	did	Traveller.
Well	then,	I	am	ever	the	fool	here.	So	be	it.	‘We’d	best	get	walking,	then.’
In	setting	out,	they	left	behind	a	cold	hearth	ringed	in	stones,	and	two
saddles.

Almost	two	leagues	away,	high	in	the	bright	blue	sky,	Tulas	Shorn	rode	the
freshening	breeze,	the	tatters	of	his	wings	rapping	in	the	rush	of	air.
As	he	had	suspected,	the	trio	had	made	no	effort	to	hunt	down	the	lost
horses.	Assuming,	as	they	would,	that	the	dragon	had	simply	obliterated	the
animals.
Tulas	Shorn	had	known	far	too	much	death,	however,	to	so	casually	kill
innocent	creatures.	No,	instead,	the	dragon	had	taken	them,	one	in	each	massive
clawed	foot,	ten	leagues	to	the	south,	almost	within	sight	of	a	small,	wild	herd
of	the	same	species	–	one	of	the	last	such	wild	herds	on	the	plain.
Too	many	animals	were	made	to	bow	in	servitude	to	a	succession	of
smarter,	crueller	masters	(and	yes,	those	two	traits	went	together).	Poets	ever
wailed	upon	witnessing	fields	of	slaughter,	armies	of	soldiers	and	warriors
frozen	in	death,	but	Tulas	Shorn	–	who	had	walked	through	countless	such
scenes	–	reserved	his	sorrow,	his	sense	of	tragedy,	for	the	thousands	of	dead
and	dying	horses,	war	dogs,	the	oxen	trapped	in	yokes	of	siege	wagons	mired
in	mud	or	shattered,	the	beasts	that	bled	and	suffered	through	no	choice	of	their
own,	that	died	in	a	fog	of	ignorance,	all	trust	in	their	masters	destroyed.
The	horse	knows	faith	in	the	continuation	of	care	from	its	master;	that	food
and	water	will	be	provided,	that	injuries	will	be	mended,	that	the	stiff	brush	will
stroke	its	hide	at	day’s	end.	And	in	return	it	serves	as	best	it	can,	or	at	least	as
best	it	chooses.	The	dog	understands	that	the	two-legged	members	of	its	pack
cannot	be	challenged,	and	believes	that	every	hunt	will	end	in	success.	These
were	truths.
A	master	of	beasts	must	be	as	a	parent	to	a	host	of	unruly	but	trusting
children.	Stolid,	consistent,	never	wanton	in	cruelty,	never	unmindful	of	the
faith	in	which	he	or	she	is	held.	Oh,	Tulas	Shorn	was	not	unaware	of	the
peculiarity	of	such	convictions,	and	had	been	the	subject	of	mockery	even


among	fellow	Tiste	Edur.
Although	such	mockery	had	invariably	faded	when	they	had	seen	what	had
been	achieved	by	this	strange,	quiet	warrior	with	the	Eleint-tainted	eyes.
Gliding	high	above	the	Lamatath	Plain,	now	scores	of	leagues	south	of	the
witch	and	her	companions,	Tulas	Shorn	could	taste	something	in	the	air,	so
ancient,	so	familiar,	that	if	the	dragon	had	still	possessed	functioning	hearts,
why,	they	would	have	thundered.	Pleasure,	perhaps	even	anticipation.
How	long	had	it	been?
Long.
What	paths	did	they	now	wander	down?
Alien	ones,	to	be	sure.
Would	they	remember	Tulas	Shorn?	The	first	master,	the	one	who	had
taken	them	raw	and	half-wild	and	taught	them	the	vast	power	of	a	faith	that
would	never	know	betrayal?
They	are	close,	yes.
My	Hounds	of	Shadow.
	
If	he’d	had	a	single	moment,	a	lone	instant	of	unharried	terror,	Gruntle	might
have	conjured	in	his	mind	a	scene	such	as	might	be	witnessed	from	someone	in
a	passing	ship	–	some	craft	beyond	the	raging	storm,	at	the	very	edge	of	this
absurd	insanity.	Hands	gripping	the	ratlines,	deck	pitching	wild	in	the	midst	of
a	dishevelled	sea,	and	there,	yes…something	impossible.
An	enormous	carriage	thrashing	through	a	heaving	road	of	foam,	frenzied
horses	ploughing	through	swollen,	whipped	waves.	And	figures,	clinging	here
and	there	like	half-drowned	ticks,	and	another,	perched	high	on	the	driver ’s
bench	behind	the	maddened	animals,	from	whom	endless	screams	pealed	forth,
piercing	the	gale	and	thunder	and	surge.	Whilst	on	all	sides	the	storm	raged	on,
as	if	in	indignant	fury;	the	winds	howled,	rain	slashing	the	air	beneath	bulging,
bruised	clouds;	and	the	sea	rose	up	in	a	tumult,	spray	erupting	in	tattered	sheets.
Yes,	the	witness	might	well	stare,	agape.	Aghast.
But	Gruntle	had	no	opportunity	for	such	musing,	no	sweet	luxury	of	time
to	disconnect	his	mind’s	eye	from	this	drenched,	exhausted	and	battered	body
strapped	tight	to	the	roof	of	the	carriage,	this	careering	six-wheeled	island	that
seemed	ever	tottering	on	the	edge	of	obliteration.	To	draw	one	more	breath
was	the	only	goal,	the	singular	purpose	of	existence.	Nothing	else	was
remotely	relevant.
He	did	not	know	if	he	was	the	last	one	left	–	he	had	not	opened	his	eyes	in
an	eternity	–	and	even	if	he	was,	why,	he	knew	he	would	not	hold	out	much


longer.	He	convulsed	yet	again,	but	there	was	nothing	left	in	his	stomach	–
gods,	he	had	never	felt	so	sick	in	all	his	life.
The	wind	tore	at	his	hair	–	he’d	long	since	lost	his	helm	–	savage	as	clawed
fingers,	and	he	ducked	lower.	Those	unseen	fingers	then	grabbed	a	handful	and
pulled	his	head	up.
Gruntle	opened	his	eyes	and	found	himself	staring	into	a	crazed	face,	the
features	so	twisted	that	he	could	not	for	a	moment	recognize	who	was
accosting	him	–	some	lost	sailor	from	a	drowned	ship?	Flung	aboard	the
carriage	as	gods	rolled	in	helpless	laughter?	–	but	no,	it	was	Faint,	and	that
expression	was	not	abject	terror.	It	was	wild,	gut-wrenching	hilarity.
She	tugged	on	the	rings	attached	to	the	iron	rails	and	managed	to	pull
herself	yet	closer,	enough	to	dip	her	head	down	beside	his,	and	in	the	halfsheltered	cave	their	arms	created	her	voice	seemed	to	come	from	his	own
skull.	‘I	thought	you	were	dead!	So	pale,	like	a	damned	cadaver!’
And	this	left	her	convulsed	with	laughter?	‘I	damn	well	wish	I	was!’	he
shouted	back.
‘We’ve	known	worse!’
Now,	he’d	heard	that	a	dozen	times	since	this	venture	began,	and	he	had
begun	to	suspect	it	was	one	of	those	perfect	lies	that	people	voiced	to	stay	sane
no	matter	what	madness	they	found	themselves	in.	‘Has	Quell	ever	done
anything	like	this	before?’
‘Like	what?	This	is	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild,	shareholder!	This	is	what	we
do,	man!’
And	when	she	began	laughing	again,	he	planted	a	hand	on	her	head	and
pushed	her	away.	Faint	retreated,	back	along	the	rail,	and	Gruntle	was	alone
once	more.
How	long	had	it	been?	Days.	Weeks.	Decades.	He	desperately	needed	fresh
water	–	whatever	rain	reached	his	face	was	as	salty	as	the	sea.	He	could	feel
himself	weakening	–	even	could	he	find	something	to	eat,	he	would	never	hold
it	down.	Outrageous,	to	think	that	he	could	die	here,	body	flopping	about	on	its
straps,	slowly	torn	apart	by	the	storm.	Not	with	a	weapon	in	hand,	not	with	a
defiant	bellow	tearing	loose	from	his	throat.	Not	drenched	in	hot	blood,	not
staring	his	killer	in	the	eye.
This	was	worse	than	any	demise	he	might	imagine.	As	bad	as	some	unseen
disease	–	the	sheer	helplessness	of	discovering	that	one’s	own	body	could	fail
all	on	its	own.	He	could	not	even	roar	to	the	heavens	with	his	last	breath	–	the
gesture	would	flood	his	mouth,	leave	him	choking,	defiance	flung	straight
back	at	him,	right	back	down	his	own	throat.
More	screaming	–	laughter?	No,	this	was	screaming.


What	now?
Gruntle	snatched	a	breath	and	then	looked	up.
Walls	of	water	on	all	sides	–	he	flinched	–	and	then	a	swell	heaved	them
skyward,	the	carriage	twisting,	pitching.	Rings	squealed	as	he	was	tossed	up,
until	sharp,	savage	tugs	from	the	straps	snatched	him	back	down.
But	he	had	seen	–	yes	–	all	his	companions	–	their	wide	eyes,	their	gaping
mouths	–	and	he	had	seen,	too,	the	object	of	their	terror.
They	were	racing,	faster	than	any	wave,	straight	for	a	towering	cliff-face.
‘Land	ho!’	shrieked	Glanno	Tarp	from	his	perch.
Explosions	of	foam	at	the	cliff’s	base	appeared	with	every	lift	of	the	waves.
Jagged	spires	of	black	rock,	reefs,	shoals	and	all	those	other	names	for	killers
of	people	and	ships.	And	carriages.	All	looming	directly	ahead,	a	third	of	a
league	away	and	closing	fast.
Can	those	horses	climb	straight	up	a	cliff-face?	Sounds	ridiculous	–	but	I
won’t	put	it	past	them.	Not	any	more.
Even	so,	why	is	everyone	screaming?
A	moment	later	Gruntle	had	his	answer.	Another	upward	pitch,	and	this
time	he	twisted	round	and	glanced	back,	into	their	wake	–	no	reason,	at	least,	he
didn’t	think	there	was,	but	the	view,	surely,	could	not	be	as	horrifying	as	what
lay	ahead.
And	he	saw	another	wall	of	water,	this	one	high	as	a	damned	mountain.
Its	sickly	green	flank	picked	up	the	carriage	and	then	the	horses,	and	began
carrying	them	into	the	sky.	So	fast	that	the	water	streamed	from	the	roof,	from
every	flattened	shareholder,	and	even	the	rain	vanished	as	higher	they	went,
into	the	gut	of	the	clouds.
He	thought,	if	he	dared	open	his	eyes,	he	would	see	stars,	the	ferment
above,	to	the	sides,	and	indeed	below	–	but	Gruntle’s	nerve	had	failed	him.	He
clung,	eyes	squeezed	shut,	flesh	dry	and	shivering	in	the	bitter	cold	of	the	wind.
More	sound	than	a	mortal	brain	could	comprehend	–	thunder	from
beneath,	animal	squeals	and	human	shrieks,	the	swollen	thrash	of	blood	in
every	vein,	every	artery,	the	hollow	howl	of	wind	in	his	gaping	mouth.
Higher,	and	higher	still—
And	wasn’t	there	a	cliff	dead	ahead?
He	could	not	look.
	
Everyone	thought	that	Reccanto	Ilk	was	the	one	with	the	bad	eyes,	and	that	was
a	most	pleasing	misindirection	as	far	as	Glanno	Tarp	was	concerned.	Besides,
he	was	fine	enough	with	things	within,	oh,	thirty	or	so	paces.	Beyond	that,


objects	acquired	a	soft-edged	dissolidity,	became	blocks	of	vague	shape,	and
the	challenge	was	in	gauging	the	speed	at	which	they	approached,	and,	from
this,	their	distance	and	relative	size.	The	carriage	driver	had	taken	this	to	a	fine
art	indeed,	with	no	one	the	wiser.
Which,	in	this	instance	at	least,	was	of	no	help	at	all.
He	could	hear	everyone	screaming	behind	him,	and	he	was	adding	plenty
all	on	his	own,	even	as	the	thought	flashed	in	his	mind	that	Reccanto	Ilk	was
probably	shrieking	in	ignorance	–	simply	because	everyone	else	was	–	but	the
looming	mass	of	the	rotted	cliff-face	was	a	most	undenimissable	presence,	and
my	how	big	it	was	getting!
The	horses	could	do	naught	but	run,	what	must	have	seemed	downhill	for
the	hapless	beasts,	even	as	the	wave’s	surge	reared	ever	higher	–	all	sorts	of
massomentum	going	on	here,	Glanno	knew,	and	no	quibblering	about	it,	either.
What	with	pitch	and	angle	and	cant	and	all	that,	Glanno	could	now	see	the
top	of	the	cliff,	a	guano-streaked	lip	all	wavy	and	grimacing.	Odd	vertical
streaks	depended	down	from	the	edge	–	what	were	those?	Could	it	be?
Ladders?	How	strange.
Higher	still,	view	expandering,	the	sweep	of	the	summit,	flat	land,	and
globs	of	glimmering	light	like	melted	dollops	of	murky	wax.	Something
towering,	a	spire,	a	tower	–	yes,	a	towering	tower,	with	jagged-teeth	windows
high	up,	blinking	in	and	out	–	all	directly	opposite	now,	almost	level—
Something	pounded	the	air,	pounded	right	into	his	bones,	rattling	the	roots
of	his	insipid	or	was	it	inspired	grin	–	something	that	tore	the	wave	apart,	an
upward	charging	of	spume,	a	world	splashed	white,	engulfing	the	horses,	the
carriage,	and	Glanno	himself.
His	mouth	was	suddenly	full	of	seawater.	His	eyes	stared	through	stinging
salt.	His	ears	popped	like	berries	between	finger	and	thumb,	ploop	ploop.	And
oh,	that	hurt!
The	water	rushed	past,	wiping	clean	the	world	–	and	there,	before	him	–
were	those	buildings?
Horses	were	clever.	Horses	weren’t	half	blind.	They	could	find	something,
a	street,	a	way	through,	and	why	not?	Clever	horses.
‘Yeaagh!’	Glanno	thrashed	the	reins.
Equine	shrills.
The	wheels	slammed	down	on	to	something	hard	for	the	first	time	in	four
days.
And,	with	every	last	remnant	of	axle	grease	scrubbed	away,	why,	those
wheels	locked	up,	a	moment	of	binding,	and	then	the	carriage	leapt	back	into
the	air,	and	Glanno’s	head	snapped	right	and	left	at	the	flanking	blur	of	wheels


spinning	past	at	high	speed.
Oh.
When	the	carriage	came	back	down	again,	the	landing	was	far	from
smooth.
Things	exploded.	Glanno	and	the	bench	he	was	strapped	to	followed	the
horses	down	a	broad	cobbled	street.	Although	he	was	unaware	of	it	at	the	time,
the	carriage	behind	them	elected	to	take	a	sharp	left	turn	on	to	a	side	street,	just
behind	the	formidable	tower,	and,	skidding	on	its	belly,	barrelled	another	sixty
paces	down	the	avenue	before	coming	to	a	rocking	rest	opposite	a	squat	gabled
building	with	a	wooden	sign	swinging	wildly	just	above	the	front	door.
Glanno	rode	the	bench	this	way	and	that,	the	reins	sawing	at	his	fingers	and
wrists,	as	the	horses	reached	the	end	of	the	rather	short	high	street,	and	boldly
leapt,	in	smooth	succession,	a	low	stone	wall	that,	alas,	Glanno	could	not	quite
manage	to	clear	on	his	skidding	bench.	The	impact	shattered	all	manner	of
things,	and	the	driver	found	himself	flying	through	the	air,	pulled	back	down
as	the	horses,	hoofs	hammering	soft	ground,	drew	taut	the	leather	harness,	and
then	whipped	him	round	as	they	swung	left	rather	than	leaping	the	next	low
stone	wall	–	and	why	would	they?	They	had	found	themselves	in	a	corral.
Glanno	landed	in	deep	mud	consisting	mostly	of	horse	shit	and	piss,	which
was	probably	what	saved	his	two	legs,	already	broken,	from	being	torn	right
off.	The	horses	came	to	a	halt	beneath	thrashing	rain,	in	early	evening	gloom,
easing	by	a	fraction	the	agony	of	his	two	dislocated	shoulders,	and	he	was	able
to	roll	mostly	on	to	his	back,	to	lie	unmoving,	the	rain	streaming	down	his
face,	his	eyes	closed,	with	only	a	little	blood	dripping	from	his	ears.
Outside	the	tavern,	frightened	patrons	who	had	rushed	out	at	the	cacophony
in	the	street	now	stood	getting	wet	beneath	the	eaves,	staring	in	silence	at	the
wheelless	carriage,	from	the	roof	of	which	people	on	all	sides	seemed	to	be
falling,	whereupon	they	dragged	themselves	upright,	bleary	eyes	fixing	on	the
tavern	door,	and	staggered	whenceforth	inside.	Only	a	few	moments
afterwards,	the	nearest	carriage	door	opened	with	a	squeal,	to	unleash	a	gush
of	foamy	seawater,	and	then	out	stumbled	the	occupants,	beginning	with	a
gigantic	tattooed	ogre.
The	tavern’s	patrons,	one	and	all,	really	had	nothing	to	say.
	
Standing	in	the	highest	room	of	the	tower,	an	exceedingly	tall,	bluish-skinned
man	with	massive,	protruding	tusks,	curved	like	the	horns	of	a	ram	to	frame
his	bony	face,	slowly	turned	away	from	the	window,	and,	taking	no	notice	of
the	dozen	servants	staring	fixedly	at	him	–	not	one	of	whom	was	remotely


human	–	he	sighed	and	said,	‘Not	again.’
The	servants,	reptilian	eyes	widening	with	comprehension,	then	began	a
wailing	chorus,	and	this	quavering	dirge	reached	down	through	the	tower,	past
chamber	after	chamber,	spiralling	down	the	spiral	staircase	and	into	the	crypt
that	was	the	tower ’s	hollowed-out	root.	Wherein	three	women,	lying
motionless	on	stone	slabs,	each	opened	their	eyes.	And	as	they	did	so,	a	crypt
that	had	been	in	darkness	was	dark	no	longer.
From	the	women’s	broad,	painted	mouths	there	came	a	chittering	sound,	as
of	chelae	clashing	behind	the	full	lips.	A	conversation,	perhaps,	about	hunger.
And	need.	And	dreadful	impatience.
Then	the	women	began	shrieking.
High	above,	in	the	topmost	chamber	of	the	tower,	the	man	winced	upon
hearing	those	shrieks,	which	grew	ever	louder,	until	even	the	fading	fury	of	the
storm	was	pushed	down,	down	under	the	sea’s	waves,	there	to	drown	in	shame.
	
In	the	tavern	in	the	town	on	the	coast	called	the	Reach	of	Woe,	Gruntle	sat	with
the	others,	silent	at	their	table,	as	miserable	as	death	yet	consumed	with	shaky
relief.	Solid	ground	beneath	them,	dry	roof	overhead.	A	pitcher	of	mulled	wine
midway	between.
At	the	table	beside	them,	Jula	and	Amby	Bole	sat	with	Precious	Thimble	–
although	she	was	there	in	flesh	only,	since	everything	else	had	been	battered
senseless	–	and	the	two	Bole	brothers	were	talking.
‘The	storm’s	got	a	new	voice.	You	hear	that,	Jula?’
‘I	hear	that	and	I	hear	you,	Amby.	I	hear	that	in	this	ear	and	I	hear	you	in
that	ear,	and	they	come	together	in	the	middle	and	make	my	head	ache,	so	if
you	shut	up	then	one	ear ’s	open	so	the	sound	from	the	other	can	go	right
through	and	sink	into	that	wall	over	there	and	that	wall	can	have	it,	’cause	I
don’t.’
‘You	don’t	–	hey,	where’d	everyone	go?’
‘Down	into	that	cellar	–	you	ever	see	such	a	solid	cellar	door,	Amby?	Why,
it’s	as	thick	as	the	ones	we	use	on	the	pits	we	put	wizards	in,	you	know,	the	ones
nobody	can	open.’
‘It	was	you	that	scared	’em,	Jula,	but	look,	now	we	can	drink	even	more
and	pay	nothing.’
‘Until	they	all	come	back	out.	And	then	you’ll	be	looking	at	paying	a	whole
lot.’
‘I’m	not	paying.	This	is	a	business	expense.’
‘Is	it?’


‘I	bet.	We	have	to	ask	Master	Quell	when	he	wakes	up.’
‘He’s	awake,	I	think.’
‘He	don’t	look	awake.’
‘Nobody	does,	exceptin’	us.’
‘Wonder	what	everyone’s	doing	in	the	cellar.	Maybe	there’s	a	party	or
something.’
‘That	storm	sounds	like	angry	women.’
‘Like	Mother,	only	more	than	one.’
‘That	would	be	bad.’
‘Ten	times	bad.	You	break	something?’
‘Never	did.	You	did.’
‘Someone	broke	something,	and	those	mothers	are	on	the	way.	Sounds
like.’
‘Sounds	like,	yes.’
‘Coming	fast.’
‘Whatever	you	broke,	you	better	fix	it.’
‘No	way.	I’ll	just	say	you	did	it.’
‘I’ll	say	I	did	it	first	–	no,	you	did	it.	I’ll	say	you	did	it	first.’
‘I	didn’t	do—’
But	now	the	shrieking	storm	was	too	loud	for	any	further	conversation,
and	to	Gruntle’s	half-deadened	ears	it	did	indeed	sound	like	voices.	Terrible,
inhuman	voices,	filled	with	rage	and	hunger.	He’d	thought	the	storm	was
waning;	in	fact,	he’d	been	certain	of	it.	But	then	everyone	had	fled	into	the
cellar—
Gruntle	lifted	his	head.
At	precisely	the	same	time	that	Mappo	did.
Their	eyes	met.	And	yes,	both	understood.	That’s	not	a	storm.


Chapter	Seventeen

My	finest	student?	A	young	man,	physically	perfect.	To	look	upon
him	was	to	see	a	duellist	by	any	known	measure.	His	discipline	was
a	source	of	awe;	his	form	was	elegance	personified.	He	could	snuff
a	dozen	candles	in	successive	lunges,	each	lunge	identical	to	the
one	preceding	it.	He	could	spear	a	buzzing	fly.	Within	two	years	I
could	do	nothing	more	for	him	for	he	had	passed	my	own	skill.
I	was,	alas,	not	there	to	witness	his	first	duel,	but	it	was	described	to
me	in	detail.	For	all	his	talent,	his	perfection	of	form,	for	all	his
precision,	his	muscle	memory,	he	revealed	one	and	only	one	flaw.
He	was	incapable	of	fighting	a	real	person.	A	foe	of	middling	skill
can	be	profoundly	dangerous,	in	that	clumsiness	can	surprise,	illpreparation	can	confound	brilliant	skills	of	defence.	The	very
unpredictability	of	a	real	opponent	in	a	life	and	death	struggle	served
my	finest	student	with	a	final	lesson.
It	is	said	the	duel	lasted	a	dozen	heartbeats.	From	that	day	forward,
my	philosophy	of	instruction	changed.	Form	is	all	very	well,	repetition
ever	essential,	but	actual	blood-touch	practice	must	begin	within	the
first	week	of	instruction.	To	be	a	duellist,	one	must	duel.	The	hardest
thing	to	teach	is	how	to	survive.
Trevan	Ault
2nd	century,	Darujhistan

Gather	close,	and	let	us	speak	of	nasty	little	shits.	Oh,	come	now,	we	are	no
strangers	to	the	vicious	demons	in	placid	disguises,	innocent	eyes	so	wide,
hidden	minds	so	dark.	Does	evil	exist?	Is	it	a	force,	some	deadly	possession
that	slips	into	the	unwary?	Is	it	a	thing	separate	and	thus	subject	to	accusation
and	blame,	distinct	from	the	one	it	has	used?	Does	it	flit	from	soul	to	soul,
weaving	its	diabolical	scheme	in	all	the	unseen	places,	snarling	into	knots
tremulous	fears	and	appalling	opportunity,	stark	terrors	and	brutal	self-


interest?
Or	is	the	dread	word	nothing	more	than	a	quaint	and	oh	so	convenient
encapsulation	of	all	those	traits	distinctly	lacking	moral	context,	a	sweeping
generalization	embracing	all	things	depraved	and	breathtakingly	cruel,	a	word
to	define	that	peculiar	glint	in	the	eye	–	the	voyeur	to	one’s	own	delivery	of
horror,	of	pain	and	anguish	and	impossible	grief?
Give	the	demon	crimson	scales,	slashing	talons.	Tentacles	and	dripping
poison.	Three	eyes	and	six	slithering	tongues.	As	it	crouches	there	in	the	soul,
its	latest	abode	in	an	eternal	succession	of	abodes,	may	every	god	kneel	in
prayer.
But	really.	Evil	is	nothing	but	a	word,	an	objectification	where	no
objectification	is	necessary.	Cast	aside	this	notion	of	some	external	agency	as
the	source	of	inconceivable	inhumanity	–	the	sad	truth	is	our	possession	of	an
innate	proclivity	towards	indifference,	towards	deliberate	denial	of	mercy,
towards	disengaging	all	that	is	moral	within	us.
But	if	that	is	too	dire,	let’s	call	it	evil.	And	paint	it	with	fire	and	venom.
There	are	extremities	of	behaviour	that	seem,	at	the	time,	perfectly	natural,
indeed	reasonable.	They	are	arrived	at	suddenly,	or	so	it	might	seem,	but	if	one
looks	the	progression	reveals	itself,	step	by	step,	and	that	is	a	most	sad	truth.
Murillio	walked	from	the	duelling	school,	rapier	at	his	hip,	gloves	tucked
into	his	belt.	Had	he	passed	anyone	who	knew	him	they	might	be	forgiven	for
not	at	first	recognizing	him,	given	his	expression.	The	lines	of	his	face	were
drawn	deep,	his	frown	a	clench,	as	if	the	mind	behind	it	was	in	torment,	sick	of
itself.	He	looked	older,	harder.	He	looked	to	be	a	man	in	dread	of	his	own
thoughts,	a	man	haunted	by	an	unexpected	reflection	in	a	lead	window,	a
silvered	mirror,	flinching	back	from	his	own	face,	the	eyes	that	met	themselves
with	defiance.
Only	a	fool	would	have	stepped	directly	into	this	man’s	path.
In	his	wake,	a	young	student	hesitated.	He	had	been	about	to	call	out	a
greeting	to	his	instructor;	but	he	had	seen	Murillio’s	expression,	and,	though
young,	the	student	was	no	fool.	Instead,	he	set	out	after	the	man.
Bellam	Nom	would	not	sit	in	any	god’s	lap.	Mark	him,	mark	him	well.
	
There	had	been	fervent,	breathless	discussion.	Crippled	Da	was	like	a	man
reborn,	finding	unexpected	reserves	of	strength	to	lift	himself	into	the	rickety
cart,	with	Myrla,	her	eyes	bright,	fussing	over	him	until	even	he	slapped	her
hands	away.
Mew	and	Hinty	stared	wide-eyed,	brainless	as	toddlers	were,	faces	like


sponges	sucking	in	everything	and	understanding	none	of	it.	As	for	Snell,	oh,	it
was	ridiculous,	all	this	excitement.	His	ma	and	da	were,	he	well	knew,	complete
idiots.	Too	stupid	to	succeed	in	life,	too	thick	to	realize	it.
They	had	tortured	themselves	and	each	other	over	the	loss	of	Harllo,	their
mutual	failure,	their	hand-in-hand	incompetence	that	made	them	hated	even	as
they	wallowed	in	endless	self-pity.	Ridiculous.	Pathetic.	The	sooner	Snell	was
rid	of	them	the	better,	and	at	that	thought	he	eyed	his	siblings	once	again.	If	Ma
and	Da	just	vanished,	why,	he	could	sell	them	both	and	make	good	coin.	They
weren’t	fit	for	much	else.	Let	someone	else	wipe	their	stinking	backsides	and
shove	food	into	their	mouths	–	damned	things	choked	half	the	time	and	spat	it
out	the	other	half,	and	burst	into	tears	at	the	lightest	poke.
But	his	disgust	was	proving	a	thin	crust,	cracking	as	terror	seethed	beneath,
the	terror	born	of	remote	possibilities.	Da	and	Ma	were	going	to	a	temple,	a
new	temple,	one	devoted	to	a	god	as	broken	and	useless	as	Bedek	himself.	The
High	Priest,	who	called	himself	a	prophet,	was	even	more	crippled.	Nothing
worked	below	his	arms,	and	half	his	face	sagged	and	the	eye	on	that	side	had
just	dried	up	since	the	lids	couldn’t	close	and	now	it	looked	like	a	rotten	crab
apple	–	Snell	had	seen	it	for	himself,	when	he’d	stood	at	the	side	of	the	street
watching	as	the	Prophet	was	being	carried	by	his	diseased	followers	to	the	next
square,	where	he’d	croak	out	yet	another	sermon	predicting	the	end	of	the
world	and	how	only	the	sick	and	the	stupid	would	survive.
No	wonder	Da	was	so	eager.	He’d	found	his	god	at	last,	one	in	his	own
image,	and	that	was	usually	the	way,	wasn’t	it?	People	don’t	change	to	suit	their
god;	they	change	their	god	to	suit	them.
Da	and	Ma	were	on	their	way	to	the	Temple	of	the	Crippled	God,	where
they	hoped	to	speak	to	the	Prophet	himself.	Where	they	hoped	to	ask	the	god’s
blessing.	Where	they	hoped	to	discover	what	had	happened	to	Harllo.
Snell	didn’t	believe	anything	would	come	of	that.	But	then,	he	couldn’t	be
sure,	could	he?	And	that	was	what	was	scaring	him.	What	if	the	Crippled	God
knew	about	what	Snell	had	done?	What	if	the	Prophet	prayed	to	it	and	was	told
the	truth,	and	then	told	Da	and	Ma?
Snell	might	have	to	run	away.	But	he’d	take	Hinty	and	Mew	with	him,
selling	them	off	to	get	some	coin,	which	he’d	need	and	need	bad.	Let	someone
else	wipe	their	stinking…
Yes,	Ma,	I’ll	take	care	of	them.	You	two	go,	see	what	you	can	find	out.
Just	look	at	them,	so	filled	with	hope,	so	stupid	with	the	idea	that	something
else	will	solve	all	their	problems,	swipe	away	their	miseries.	The	Crippled
God:	how	good	can	a	god	be	if	it’s	crippled?	If	it	can’t	even	heal	itself?	That
Prophet	was	getting	big	crowds.	Plenty	of	useless	people	in	the	world,	so	that


was	no	surprise.	And	they	all	wanted	sympathy.	Well,	Snell’s	family	deserved
sympathy,	and	maybe	some	coin,	too.	And	a	new	house,	all	the	food	they	could
eat	and	all	the	beer	they	could	drink.	In	fact,	they	deserved	maids	and	servants,
and	people	who	would	think	for	them,	and	do	everything	that	needed	doing.
Snell	stepped	outside	to	watch	Ma	wheeling	Da	off	down	the	alley,
clickety-click.
Behind	him	Hinty	was	snuffling,	probably	getting	ready	to	start	bawling
since	Ma	was	out	of	sight	and	that	didn’t	happen	often.	Well,	he’d	just	have	to
shut	the	brat	up.	A	good	squeeze	to	the	chest	and	she’d	just	pass	out	and	things
would	get	quiet	again.	Maybe	do	that	to	both	of	them.	Make	it	easier	wrapping
them	up	in	some	kind	of	sling,	easier	to	carry	in	case	he	decided	to	run.
Hinty	started	crying.
Snell	spun	round	and	the	runt	looked	at	him	and	her	crying	turned	into
shrieks.
‘Yes,	Hinty,’	Snell	said,	grinning,	‘I’m	coming	for	ya.	I’m	coming	for	ya.’
And	so	he	did.
	
Bellam	Nom	had	known	that	something	was	wrong,	terribly	so.	The
atmosphere	in	the	school	was	sour,	almost	toxic.	Hardly	conducive	to	learning
about	duelling,	about	everything	one	needed	to	know	about	staying	alive	in	a
contest	of	blades.
On	a	personal,	purely	selfish	level,	all	this	was	frustrating,	but	one	would
have	to	be	an	insensitive	bastard	to	get	caught	up	in	that	kind	of	thinking.	The
problem	was,	something	had	broken	Stonny	Menackis.	Broken	her	utterly.	And
that	in	turn	had	left	Murillio	shattered,	because	he	loved	her	–	no	doubt	about
that,	since	he	wouldn’t	have	hung	around	if	he	didn’t,	not	with	the	way	she	was
treating	him	and	everyone	else,	but	especially	him.
It	hadn’t	been	easy	working	out	what	was	wrong,	since	nobody	was	talking
much,	but	he’d	made	a	point	of	lingering,	standing	in	shadows	as	if	doing	little
more	than	cooling	himself	off	after	a	bell’s	worth	of	footwork	in	the	sunlight.
And	Bellam	Nom	had	sharp	ears.	He	also	had	a	natural	talent,	one	it	seemed	he
had	always	possessed:	he	could	read	lips.	This	had	proved	useful,	of	course.
People	had	a	hard	time	keeping	secrets	from	Bellam.
Master	Murillio	had	reached	some	sort	of	decision,	and	walked	as	one
driven	now,	and	Bellam	quickly	realized	that	he	did	not	need	to	employ	any
stealth	while	trailing	him	–	an	entire	legion	of	Crimson	Guard	could	be
marching	on	the	man’s	heels	and	he	wouldn’t	know	it.
Bellam	was	not	certain	what	role	he	might	be	able	to	play	in	whatever	was


coming.	The	only	thing	that	mattered	to	him	was	that	he	be	there	when	the	time
came.
Mark	him	well.	These	are	the	thoughts	of	courage,	unquestioning	and
uncompromising,	and	this	is	how	heroes	come	to	be.	Small	ones.	Big	ones.	All
kinds.	When	drama	arrives,	they	are	there.	Look	about.	See	for	yourself.
	
He	seemed	such	an	innocuous	man,	so	aptly	named,	and	there	was	nothing	in
this	modest	office	that	might	betray	Humble	Measure’s	ambitions,	nor	his
bloodthirsty	eagerness	in	making	use	of	Seba	Krafar	and	his	Guild	of
Assassins.
Harmless,	then,	and	yet	Seba	found	himself	sweating	beneath	his
nondescript	clothes.	True,	he	disliked	appearing	in	public,	particularly	in	the
light	of	day,	but	that	unease	barely	registered	when	in	the	presence	of	the
Master	Ironmonger.
It’s	simple.	I	don’t	like	the	man.	And	is	that	surprising?	Despite	the	fact	that
he’s	provided	the	biggest	contract	I’ve	seen,	at	least	as	head	of	the	Guild.
Probably	the	Malazan	offer	Vorcan	took	on	was	bigger,	but	only	because
achieving	it	was	impossible,	even	for	that	uncanny	bitch.
Seba’s	dislike	was	perhaps	suspect,	even	to	his	own	mind,	since	it	was
caught	up	in	the	grisly	disaster	of	Humble	Measure’s	contract.	Hard	to	separate
this	man	from	the	scores	of	assassins	butchered	in	the	effort	(still
unsuccessful)	to	kill	those	damned	Malazans.	And	this	particular	subject	was
one	that	would	not	quite	depart,	despite	Humble	Measure’s	casual,	dismissive
wave	of	one	soft	hand.
‘The	failing	is	of	course	temporary,’	Seba	Krafar	said.	‘Hadn’t	we	best
complete	it,	to	our	mutual	satisfaction,	before	taking	on	this	new	contract	of
yours?’
‘I	have	reconsidered	the	K’rul	Temple	issue,	at	least	for	the	moment,’	said
Humble	Measure.	‘Do	not	fear,	I	am	happy	to	add	to	the	original	deposit
commensurate	with	the	removal	of	two	of	the	subjects,	and	should	the	others
each	fall	in	turn,	you	will	of	course	be	immediately	rewarded.	As	the	central
focus,	however,	I	would	be	pleased	if	you	concentrated	on	the	new	one.’
Seba	Krafar	was	never	able	to	meet	anyone’s	gaze	for	very	long.	He	knew
that	most	would	see	that	as	a	weakness,	or	as	proof	that	Seba	could	not	be
trusted,	but	he	always	made	a	point	of	ensuring	that	what	he	had	to	say	was
never	evasive.	This	blunt	honesty,	combined	with	the	shying	eyes,	clearly
unbalanced	people,	and	that	was	fine	with	Seba.	Now,	if	only	it	worked	on	this
man.	‘This	new	one,’	he	ventured,	‘is	political.’


‘Your	specialty,	I	gather,’	said	Humble	Measure.
‘Yes,	but	one	that	grows	increasingly	problematic.	The	noble	class	has
learned	to	protect	itself.	Assassinations	are	not	as	easy	as	they	once	were.’
The	Ironmonger ’s	brows	lifted.	‘Are	you	asking	for	more	money?’
‘Actually,	no.	It’s	this:	the	Guild	is	wounded.	I’ve	had	to	promote	a	dozen
snipes	months	ahead	of	their	time.	They’re	not	ready	–	oh,	they	can	kill	as
efficiently	as	anyone,	but	most	of	them	are	little	more	than	ambitious	thugs.
Normally,	I	would	cull	them,	ruthlessly,	but	at	the	moment	I	can’t	afford	to.’
‘This	will	require,	I	assume,	certain	modifications	to	your	normal	tactics.’
‘It	already	has.	Fifteen	of	my	dead	from	K’rul’s	Bar	were	my	latest
promotions.	That’s	left	the	rest	of	them	rattled.	An	assassin	without	confidence
is	next	to	useless.’
Humble	Measure	nodded.	‘Plan	well	and	execute	with	precision,	Master
Krafar,	and	that	confidence	will	return.’
‘Even	that	won’t	be	enough,	unless	we	succeed.’
‘Agreed.’
Seba	was	silent	for	a	moment,	still	sweating,	still	uneasy.	‘Before	I	accept
this	latest	contract,’	he	said,	‘I	should	offer	you	a	way	out.	There	are	other,	less
bloody	ways	of	getting	elected	to	the	Council.	It	seems	money	is	not	a
problem,	and	given	that—’	He	stopped	when	the	man	lifted	a	hand.
Suddenly,	there	was	something	new	in	Humble	Measure’s	eyes,	something
Seba	had	not	seen	before,	and	it	left	him	chilled.	‘If	it	was	my	desire	to	buy	my
way	on	to	the	Council,	Master	Krafar,	I	would	not	have	summoned	you	here.
That	should	be	obvious.’
‘Yes,	I	suppose—’
‘But	I	have	summoned	you,	yes?	Therefore,	it	is	reasonable	to	assume	my
desires	are	rather	more	complicated	than	simply	gaining	a	seat	on	the
Council.’
‘You	want	this	particular	councillor	dead.’
Humble	Measure	acknowledged	this	with	a	brief	closing	of	his	eyes	that
somehow	conveyed	a	nod	without	his	having	to	move	his	head.	‘We	are	not
negotiating	my	reasons,	since	they	are	none	of	your	business	and	have	no
relevance	to	the	task	itself.	Now,	you	will	assault	this	particular	estate,	and	you
will	kill	the	councillor	and	everyone	else,	down	to	the	scullery	maid	and	the
terrier	employed	to	kill	rats.’
Seba	Krafar	looked	away	(but	then,	he’d	been	doing	that	on	and	off	ever
since	he’d	sat	down).	‘As	you	say.	Should	be	simple,	but	then,	these	things
never	are.’
‘Are	you	saying	that	you	are	not	up	to	this?’


‘No,	I’m	saying	that	I	have	learned	to	accept	that	nothing	is	simple,	and	the
simpler	it	looks	the	more	complicated	it	probably	is.	Therefore,	this	will	need
careful	planning.	I	trust	you	are	not	under	any	pressure	to	get	on	to	the	Council
in	a	hurry?	There’re	all	kinds	of	steps	needed	in	any	case,	sponsorships	or
bloodline	claims,	assessment	of	finances	and	so	on…’	He	fell	silent	after,	in	a
brief	glance,	he	noted	the	man’s	level	look.	Seba	cleared	his	throat,	and	then
said,	‘Ten	days	at	the	minimum.	Acceptable?’
‘Acceptable.’
‘Then	we’re	done	here.’
‘We	are.’
	
‘The	deposition	provided	us	by	the	Malazan	embassy	is	unacceptable.’
Councillor	Coll	fixed	a	steady	regard	on	Hanut	Orr ’s	smooth-shaven	face,
and	saw	nothing	in	it	but	what	he	had	always	seen.	Fear,	contempt,	misdirection
and	outright	deceit,	the	gathered	forces	of	hatred	and	spite.	‘So	you	stated,’	he
replied.	‘But	as	you	can	see,	the	meeting	has	finished.	I	do	my	best	to	leave
matters	of	the	Council	in	the	chamber.	Politicking	is	a	habit	that	can	fast	run
away	with	you,	Councillor.’
‘I	do	not	recall	seeking	your	advice.’
‘No,	just	my	allegiance.	Of	the	two,	you	elected	the	wrong	one,
Councillor.’
‘I	think	not,	since	it	is	the	only	relevant	one.’
‘Yes,’	Coll	smiled,	‘I	understood	you	well	enough.	Now,	if	you	will	excuse
me—’
‘Their	explanation	for	why	they	needed	to	expand	the	embassy	is	flimsy	–
are	you	so	easily	duped,	Councillor	Coll?	Or	is	it	just	a	matter	of	filling	your
purse	to	buy	your	vote?’
‘Either	you	are	offering	to	bribe	me,	Councillor	Orr,	or	you	are
suggesting	that	I	have	been	bribed.	The	former	seems	most	unlikely.	Thus,	it
must	be	the	latter,	and	since	we	happen	to	be	standing	in	the	corridor,	with
others	nearby	–	close	enough	to	hear	you	–	you	leave	me	no	choice	but	to	seek
censure.’
Hanut	Orr	sneered.	‘Censure?	Is	that	the	coward’s	way	of	avoiding	an
actual	duel?’
‘I	accept	that	it	is	such	a	rare	occurrence	that	you	probably	know	little
about	it.	Very	well,	for	the	benefit	of	your	defence,	allow	me	to	explain.’
A	dozen	or	more	councillors	had	now	gathered	and	were	listening,
expressions	appropriately	grave.


Coll	continued,	‘I	hereby	accept	your	accusation	as	a	formal	charge.	The
procedure	now	is	the	engagement	of	an	independent	committee	that	will	begin
investigating.	Of	course,	said	investigation	is	most	thorough,	and	will	involve
the	detailed	auditing	of	both	of	our	financial	affairs	–	yes,	accuser	and	accused.
Such	examination	inevitably…propagates,	so	that	all	manner	of	personal
information	comes	to	light.	Once	all	pertinent	information	is	assembled,	my
own	advocates	will	review	your	file,	to	determine	whether	a	countercharge	is
appropriate.	At	this	point,	the	Council	Judiciary	takes	over	proceedings.’
Hanut	Orr	had	gone	somewhat	pale.
Coll	observed	him	with	raised	brows.	‘Shall	I	now	seek	censure,
Councillor?’
‘I	was	not	suggesting	you	were	taking	bribes,	Councillor	Coll.	And	I
apologize	if	my	carelessness	led	to	such	an	interpretation.’
‘I	see.	Were	you	then	offering	me	one?’
‘Of	course	not.’
‘Then,	is	our	politicking	done	here?’
Hanut	Orr	managed	a	stiff	bow,	and	then	whirled	off,	trailed	after	a
moment	by	Shardan	Lim	and	then,	with	studied	casualness,	young	Gorlas
Vidikas.
Coll	watched	them	depart.
Estraysian	D’Arle	moved	to	his	side	and,	taking	him	by	the	arm,	led	him
towards	a	private	alcove	–	the	ones	designed	precisely	for	extra-chamber
politicking.	Two	servants	delivered	chilled	white	wine	and	then	quickly
departed.
‘That	was	close,’	Estraysian	murmured.
‘He’s	young.	And	stupid.	A	family	trait?	Possibly.’
‘There	was	no	bribe,	was	there?’
Coll	frowned.	‘Not	as	such.	The	official	reasons	given	are	just	as	Orr
claimed.	Flimsy.’
‘Yes.	And	he	was	not	privy	to	the	unofficial	ones.’
‘No.	Wrong	committee.’
‘Hardly	an	accident.	That	ambitious	trio’s	been	given	places	on	every
meaningless	committee	we	can	think	of	–	but	that’s	not	keeping	them	busy
enough,	it	seems.	They	still	find	time	to	get	in	our	way.’
‘One	day,’	said	Coll,	‘they	will	indeed	be	as	dangerous	as	they	think	they
are.’
	
Outside	the	building,	standing	in	the	bright	sun,	the	three	ambitious	young


councillors	formed	a	sort	of	island	in	a	sea	of	milling	pigeons.	None	took	note
of	the	cooing	on	all	sides.
‘I’ll	have	that	bastard’s	head	one	day,’	said	Hanut	Orr.	‘On	a	spike	outside
my	gate.’
‘You	were	careless,’	said	Shardan	Lim,	doing	little	to	disguise	his
contempt.
Stung,	Orr ’s	gloved	hand	crept	to	the	grip	of	his	rapier.	‘I’ve	had	about
enough	of	you,	old	friend.	It’s	clear	you	inherited	every	mewling	weakness	of
your	predecessor.	I	admit	I’d	hoped	for	something	better.’
‘Listen	to	you	two,’	said	Gorlas	Vidikas.	‘Bitten	by	a	big	dog	so	here	you
are	snapping	at	each	other,	and	why?	Because	the	big	dog’s	too	big.	If	he	could
see	you	now.’
Hanut	Orr	snorted.	‘So	speaks	the	man	who	can’t	keep	his	wife	on	a	tight
enough	leash.’
Was	the	perfect	extension	of	the	metaphor	deliberate?	Who	can	say?	In	any
case,	to	the	astonishment	of	both	Orr	and	Lim,	Gorlas	Vidikas	simply	smiled,
as	if	appreciative	of	the	riposte.	He	made	a	show	of	brushing	dust	from	his
cuffs.	‘Well	then,	I	will	leave	you	to…whatever,	as	I	have	business	that	will	take
me	out	of	the	city	for	the	rest	of	the	day.’
‘That	Ironmonger	will	never	get	on	the	Council,	Vidikas,’	Shardan	Lim
said.	‘There’s	no	available	seat	and	that	situation’s	not	likely	to	change	any
time	soon.	This	partnership	of	yours	will	take	you	nowhere	and	earn	you
nothing.’
‘On	the	contrary,	Shardan.	I	am	getting	wealthy.	Do	you	have	any	idea	how
essential	iron	is	to	this	city?	Ah,	I	see	that	such	matters	are	beneath	you	both.
So	be	it.	As	a	bonus,	I	am	about	to	acquire	a	new	property	in	the	city	as	well.	It
has	been	and	will	continue	to	be	a	most	rewarding	partnership.	Good	day	to
you,	sirs.’
	
There	was	no	denying	Seba	Krafar ’s	natural	air	of	brutality.	He	was	a	large,
bearish	man,	and	though	virtually	none	of	the	people	he	pushed	past	while
crossing	the	market’s	round	knew	him	for	the	Master	of	the	Assassins’	Guild,
they	none	the	less	quickly	retreated	from	any	confrontation;	and	if	any	might,
in	their	own	natural	belligerence,	consider	a	bold	challenge	to	this	rude	oaf,
why,	a	second,	more	searching	glance	disavowed	them	of	any	such	notions.
He	passed	through	the	press	like	a	heated	knife	through	pig	fat,	a	simile
most	suited	to	his	opinion	of	humanity	and	his	place	within	it.	One	of	the
consequences	of	this	attitude,	however,	was	that	his	derisive	regard	led	to	a


kind	of	arrogant	carelessness.	He	took	no	notice	whatsoever	of	the	nondescript
figure	who	fell	into	his	wake.
The	nearest	cellar	leading	down	into	the	tunnels	was	at	the	end	of	a	narrow,
straight	alley	that	led	to	a	dead	end.	The	steps	to	the	cellar	ran	along	the	back	of
the	last	building	on	the	left.	The	cellar	had	once	served	as	a	storage	repository
for	coal,	in	the	days	before	the	harnessing	of	gas	–	back	when	the	notion	of
poisoning	one’s	own	air	in	the	name	of	brainless	convenience	seemed
reasonable	(at	least	to	people	displaying	their	lazy	stupidity	with	smug	pride).
Now,	the	low-ceilinged	chamber	squatted	empty	and	sagging	beneath	three
levels	of	half-rotted	tenement	rooms	in	symbolic	celebration	of	modernity.
From	the	shutterless	windows	babies	cried	to	the	accompaniment	of
clanking	cookware	and	slurred	arguments,	sounds	as	familiar	to	Seba	Krafar
as	the	rank	air	of	the	alley	itself.	His	thoughts	were	busy	enough	to	justify	his
abstracted	state.	Fear	warred	with	greed	in	a	mutual,	ongoing	exchange	of
masks	which	were	in	fact	virtually	identical,	but	never	mind	that;	the	game	was
ubiquitous	enough,	after	all.	Before	too	long,	in	any	case,	the	two	combatants
would	end	up	supine	with	exhaustion.	Greed	usually	won,	but	carried	fear	on
its	back.
So	much	for	Seba	Krafar ’s	preoccupations.	Even	without	them,	it	was
unlikely	he	would	have	heard	the	one	on	his	trail,	since	that	one	possessed
unusual	talents,	of	such	measure	that	he	was	able	to	move	up	directly	behind
the	Master	Assassin,	and	reach	out	with	ill	intent.
A	hand	closed	on	Seba’s	neck,	fingers	like	contracting	claws	of	iron
pressing	nerves	that	obliterated	all	motor	control,	yet	before	the	assassin	could
collapse	(as	his	body	wanted	to	do)	he	was	flung	halfway	round	and	thrown	up
against	a	grimy	stone	wall.	And	held	there,	moccasined	feet	dangling.
He	felt	a	breath	along	one	cheek,	and	then	heard	whispered	words.
‘Pull	your	watchers	off	K’rul’s	Bar.	When	I	leave	here,	you	will	find	a
small	sack	at	your	feet.	Five	councils.	The	contract	is	now	concluded	–	I	am
buying	it	out.’	The	tip	of	a	knife	settled	beneath	Seba’s	right	eye.	‘I	trust	five
councils	is	sufficient.	Unless	you	object.’
‘No,	not	at	all,’	gasped	Seba.	‘The	Malazans	are	safe	–	at	least	from	the
Guild.	Of	course,	that	just	means	the	client	will	seek,	er,	other	means.’
‘Yes,	about	your	client.’
‘I	cannot—’
‘No	need	to,	Seba	Krafar.	I	am	well	aware	of	the	Master	Ironmonger ’s
particular	obsession.’
‘Lucky	you,’	Seba	said	in	a	growl	–	gods,	whoever	this	was	still	held	him
off	the	ground,	and	that	grip	did	not	waver.	‘Because,’	he	added	–	for	he	was


still	a	brave	man	–	‘I’m	not.’
‘If	you	were,’	said	the	man,	‘you	would	not	be	so	eager	to	take	his	coin,	no
matter	how	much	he	offered.’
‘Since	you	put	it	that	way,	perhaps	those	five	councils	down	there	could
buy	him	an	accident.’
‘Generous	offer,	but	suicidal	on	your	part.	No,	I	do	not	hire	people	to	do
my	dirty	work.’
Through	gritted	teeth	–	feeling	was	returning	to	his	limbs,	like	sizzling
fire	–	Seba	said,	‘So	I’ve	gathered.’
‘We’re	done	here,’	the	man	said.
‘Unless	you’ve	other	pressing	business,’	Seba	managed,	and	felt	a
slackening	of	that	grip,	and,	vague	beneath	his	feet,	the	greasy	cobblestones.
‘Very	well,’	said	the	voice,	‘you’ve	actually	managed	to	impress	me,	Seba
Krafar.	Reach	up	to	that	old	lantern	hook,	there	on	your	left	–	you	can	hold
yourself	up	until	the	strength	returns	to	your	legs.	It	wouldn’t	do	anything	for
your	already	damaged	dignity	to	have	you	fall	now.	Stay	facing	the	wall	for	ten
steady	breaths,	eyes	closed.	I	don’t	want	to	have	to	change	my	mind	about	you.’
‘First	impressions	are	never	easy	to	live	up	to,’	said	Seba,	‘but	I’ll	do	my
best.’
The	hand	pulled	away,	then	returned	to	give	his	shoulder	a	gentle	pat.
He	stood,	forehead	pressed	against	the	wall,	eyes	closed,	and	counted	ten
slow	breaths.	Somewhere	round	the	third	one,	he	caught	the	stench	–	oh,	more
than	just	muscles	let	loose	below	his	neck,	and	now	he	understood	the	man’s
comments	on	dignity.	Yes,	plopping	down	on	my	arse	would’ve	been	most
unpleasant.
Sweat	ran	down	both	sides	of	his	face.	Glancing	straight	down,	he	saw	the
small	bag	with	its	measly	five	coins.	‘Shit,’	he	muttered,	‘I	forgot	to	write	him
a	receipt.’

Fisher	waited	at	the	mouth	of	the	alley,	until	he	saw	the	Master	Assassin
delicately	bend	down	to	retrieve	the	bag.
Agreement	consummated.
The	Master	Assassin,	he	was	certain,	would	bother	them	no	more.	As	for
Humble	Measure,	well,	that	man’s	downfall	would	require	something
considerably	more	complicated.	But	there	was	time.
And	this	is	the	lesson	here,	dear	friends.	Even	a	man	such	as	Fisher	kel
Tath,	for	all	his	formidable,	mysterious	qualities,	was	quite	capable	of


grievous	errors	in	judgement.
Time	then	to	return	to	K’rul’s	Bar.	Perhaps	Picker	had	found	her	way	back,
into	that	cool	flesh	that	scarcely	drew	breath.	If	not,	why,	Fisher	might	have	to
do	something	about	that.	Lost	souls	had	a	way	of	getting	into	trouble.
Was	this	sufficient	cause	for	his	own	carelessness?	Perhaps.	Leaving	the
round	and	its	crowds,	he	walked	into	the	narrow,	shady	Avenue	of	the
Bullocks,	threading	between	the	few	hurrying	passers-by	–	at	night,	this	street
was	notorious	for	muggings,	and	indeed,	was	it	not	but	two	days	ago	that	the
City	Guard	had	found	yet	another	battered	corpse?	There,	before	those	very
steps	leading	to	a	shop	selling	square	nails,	rivets	and	wooden	frames	on
which	to	hang	skinned	things	and	other	works	worthy	of	display.	Even	during
the	day	this	track	was	risky.	It	was	the	shadows,	you	see—
And	out	from	one	stepped	a	small,	toad-visaged	apparition	wearing	a
broad	grin	that	split	the	very	dark,	somewhat	pocked	face,	reminding	one	of	a
boldly	slashed	overripe	melon.	Seemingly	balanced	on	this	creature’s	head	was
a	bundle	of	bow-gut	–	no,	it	was	hair	–	in	which	at	least	three	spiders	nested.
‘You,’	hissed	the	man,	his	eyes	bright	and	then	shifty,	and	then	bright	once
more.
‘None	other,’	said	Fisher,	with	the	faintest	of	sighs.
‘Of	course	not.’	The	head	tilted	but	the	hair	did	not	slide	off.	‘Another	idiot
–	this	city’s	full	of	them!	“None	other.”	What	kind	of	thing	to	say	is	that?	If
some	other,	why,	I’d	not	have	leapt	into	his	path,	would	I?	Best	keep	this
simple.’	The	head	righted	itself,	spiders	adjusting	their	perches	to	match.	‘I
bring	word	from	my	brilliant	not-all-there	master.’	A	sudden	whisper:
‘Brilliant,	yes,	a	word	used	most	advisedly;	still,	use	it	once	and	we’re	done
with	it	for	ever.’	He	then	raised	his	voice	once	more.	‘When	all	this	is	done—’
‘Excuse	me,’	cut	in	Fisher.	‘When	all	what	is	done?’
‘This,	of	course!	Foolish	Iskaral	–	keep	it	simple!	Simpler,	even!	Listen,
dear	middling	bard,	when	all	this	is	done,	eke	out	the	eel	–	no,	wait	–	er,	seek
out	the	eel.	Seal?	Damn,	I	had	the	message	memorized	and	everything!	Peek	at
–	eat	an	eel	–	seek	and	peek	the	bleak	earl	–	perk	the	veal,	deal	the	prick	–	oh,
Hood’s	breath!	What	was	it	again?	And	I	had	the	gall	to	call	him	brilliant!	He
should’ve	sent	Sordiko	Qualm,	yes,	so	I	could’ve	followed	the	glorious
rocking	ship	of	her	sweet	hips—’	and	he	wagged	his	head	side	to	side,	side	to
side,	eyes	glazing,	‘slib-slab,	slib-slab,	oh!’
‘Thank	you,’	Fisher	said	as	the	man	began	muttering	under	his	breath	and
pausing	every	now	and	then	to	lick	his	lips,	‘for,	er,	the	message.	I	assure	you,	I
understand.’
‘Of	course	you	do	–	you’re	a	man,	aren’t	you?	Gods,	that	a	simple	casual


stride	could	so	reduce	one	to	gibbering	worship	–	why,	who	needs	gods	and
goddesses	when	we	have	arses	like	that?’
‘Indeed,	who?	Now,	since	you	have	successfully	delivered	your	message
from	your	master,	may	I	proceed	on	my	way?’
‘What?	Naturally.	Go	away.	You’re	a	damned	distraction,	is	what	you	are.’
A	tilt	of	the	head,	and	the	bard	was	indeed	on	his	way	once	more.
	
The	mob	outside	the	newly	consecrated	Temple	of	the	Fallen	One,	or	the
Crippled	God,	or	indeed	the	name	by	which	most	knew	it	–	the	Temple	of
Chains	–	was	thick	and	strangely	rank.	More	than	natural	sweat	as	might	be
squeezed	out	by	the	midmorning	sun,	this	was	the	human	rendering	of
desperation,	made	even	sicklier	with	obsequious	anticipation.
Yet	the	door	to	the	narrow-fronted	temple	remained	shut,	evidently	barred
from	within.	Offerings	were	heaped	up	against	it	–	copper	and	tin	coins	as	well
as	links	of	chain	and	the	odd	clasp	and	cheap	jewellery.
Bedek	on	his	cart	and	Myrla	standing	before	him,	gripping	the	handles,
found	themselves	in	the	midst	of	trembling	alcoholics,	the	pock-scarred,	the
lame	and	the	deformed.	Milky	eyes	stared,	as	if	cataracts	were	punishment	for
having	seen	too	much	–	all	other	eyes	were	filled	with	beseeching	need,	the
hunger	for	blessing,	for	even	the	passing	brush	of	a	twisted	hand	if	it	belonged
to	the	Prophet.	Misshapen	faces	lifted	up,	held	fixedly	upon	that	door.	Within
the	press	the	stink	became	unbearable.	The	breath	of	rotting	teeth	and
consumptive	dissolution.	From	his	low	perch,	Bedek	could	see	nothing	but
shoulders	and	the	backs	of	heads.	Whimpering,	he	plucked	at	his	wife’s	tunic.
‘Myrla.	Myrla!’
The	look	she	turned	on	him	was	both	savage	and…small,	and	with	a	shock
Bedek	suddenly	saw	her	–	and	himself	–	as	meaningless,	insignificant,
worthless.	They	were,	he	realized,	no	better	than	anyone	else	here.	Each	of
them,	seeking	to	be	singled	out,	to	be	guided	out,	to	be	raised	up	from	all	the
others.	Each	dreaming	of	coming	into	glorious	focus	in	the	eyes	of	a	god	–
eyes	brimming	with	pity	and	knowledge,	eyes	that	understood	injustice	and	the
unfairness	of	existence.	A	god,	yes,	to	make	them	right.	To	make	us	all	–	each
and	every	one	of	us	–	right.	Whole.
But	Bedek	had	held	no	such	notions.	They	were	not	why	he	was	here.	He
and	Myrla	were	different.	From	all	of	these	people.	They,	you	see,	had	lost	a
child.
The	door	would	remain	locked,	they	learned,	until	at	least	midday.
Sometimes	even	later.	And	even	then,	the	Prophet	might	not	emerge.	If	he	was


communing	with	his	own	pain,	they	were	told,	he	might	not	be	seen	for	days.
Yes,	but	did	he	bless	people?	Did	he	help	people?
Oh,	yes.	Why,	I	saw	a	man	in	terrible	pain,	and	the	Prophet	took	it	all	away.
He	healed	the	man?
No,	he	smothered	him.	Delivered	his	spirit	–	now	at	peace	–	into	the	hands
of	the	Fallen	One.	If	you	are	in	pain,	this	is	where	you	can	end	your	life	–	only
here,	do	you	understand,	can	you	be	sure	your	soul	will	find	a	home.	There,	in
the	loving	heart	of	the	Fallen	One.	Don’t	you	want	to	find	your	legs	again?
Other	side	of	life,	that’s	where	you’ll	find	them.
And	so	Bedek	came	to	understand	that,	perhaps,	this	Crippled	God	could
not	help	them.	Not	with	finding	Harllo.	And	all	at	once	he	wanted	to	go	home.
But	Myrla	would	have	none	of	that.	The	yearning	was	unabated	in	her	eyes,
but	it	had	been	transformed,	and	what	she	sought	now	had	nothing	to	do	with
Harllo.	Bedek	did	not	know	what	that	new	thing	might	be,	but	he	was	frightened
down	to	the	core	of	his	soul.
	
Snell	struggled	to	form	a	sling	to	take	the	runts,	both	of	whom	were	lying
senseless	on	the	floor.	He	had	checked	to	see	they	were	both	breathing,	since
he’d	heard	that	making	them	black	out	could	sometimes	kill	them	–	if	he’d	held
them	tight	for	too	long	–	though	he’d	been	careful.	He	was	always	careful
when	doing	that,	though	if	one	of	them	did	die,	why,	he	would	say	it	went	to
sleep	and	just	never	woke	up	and	that	happened,	didn’t	it,	with	the	little	ones?
And	then	he’d	cry	because	that	was	expected.
Poor	thing,	but	it’d	always	been	weak,	hadn’t	it?	So	many	children	were
weak.	Only	the	strong	ones,	the	smart	ones,	survived.	It’s	what	the	world	was
like,	after	all,	and	the	world	can’t	be	changed,	not	one	bit.
There	was	a	man	in	the	Daru	High	Market	who	always	dressed	well	and
had	plenty	of	coin,	and	it	was	well	known	he’d	take	little	ones.	Ten,	twenty
silver	councils,	boy	or	girl,	it	didn’t	matter	which.	He	knew	people,	rich	people
–	he	was	just	the	middleman,	but	you	dealt	with	him	if	you	didn’t	want	no	one
to	find	out	anything,	and	if	there	were	any	small	bodies	left	over,	well,	they
never	ever	showed	up	to	start	people	asking	questions.
It	would	be	a	bit	of	a	walk,	especially	with	both	Mew	and	Hinty,	and	that’s
why	he	needed	to	work	out	a	sling	of	some	sort,	like	the	ones	the	Rhivi
mothers	used.	Only,	how	did	they	do	that?
The	door	opened	behind	him	and	Snell	whirled	in	sudden	terror.
The	man	standing	on	the	threshold	was	familiar	–	he’d	been	with	Stonny
Menackis	the	last	time	she’d	visited	–	and	Snell	could	see	at	once	that	dear


Snell	was	in	trouble.	Ice	cold	fear,	a	mouth	impossibly	dry,	a	pounding	heart.
‘They’re	just	sleeping!’
The	man	stared.	‘What	have	you	done	to	them,	Snell?’
‘Nothing!	Go	away.	Da	and	Ma	aren’t	here.	They	went	to	the	Chains
Temple.	Come	back	later.’
Instead,	the	man	stepped	inside.	One	gloved	hand	casually	flung	Snell	back,
away	from	the	motionless	girls	on	the	floor.	The	blow	rocked	Snell,	and	as	if	a
stopper	had	been	jarred	loose	fear	poured	through	him.	As	the	man	knelt	and
drew	off	a	glove	to	set	a	palm	against	Mew’s	forehead,	Snell	scrabbled	to	the
back	wall.
‘I’m	gonna	call	the	guards	–	I’m	gonna	scream—’
‘Shut	your	damned	face	or	I’ll	do	it	for	you.’	A	quick,	heavy	look.	‘I’ve	not
yet	started	with	you,	Snell.	Everything	comes	back	to	you.	On	the	day	Harllo
went	missing,	on	that	day,	Snell…’	He	lifted	his	hand	and	straightened.	‘Are
they	drugged?	Tell	me	how	you	did	this.’
He	meant	to	keep	lying,	but	all	at	once	he	thought	that	maybe	if	he	told	the
truth	about	this,	the	man	might	believe	the	lies	he	used	afterwards,	on	the	other
stuff.	‘I	just	squeeze	’em,	when	they	cry	too	much,	that’s	all.	It	don’t	hurt	them
none,	honest.’
The	man	had	glanced	at	the	stretch	of	burlap	lying	beside	Mew.	Maybe	he
was	putting	things	together,	but	nothing	could	be	proved,	could	it?	It	would	be
all	right.	It	would	be—
Two	quick	strides	and	those	hands	–	one	gloved	and	the	other	bare	and
scarred	–	snagged	the	front	of	Snell’s	tunic.	He	was	lifted	into	the	air	until	his
eyes	were	level	with	the	man’s.	And	Snell	saw	in	those	deadly	eyes	something
dark,	a	lifeless	whisper	that	could	flatten	out	at	any	moment,	and	all	thoughts	of
lying	whimpered	away.
‘On	that	day,’	the	man	said,	‘you	came	back	with	a	load	of	sun-dried	dung.
Something	you’d	never	done	before,	and	have	never	done	since.	No,	your
mother	said	it	was	Harllo	who	did	such	things.	Harllo,	who	at	five	fucking
years	old	did	more	to	help	this	family	than	you	ever	have.	Who	collected	that
dung,	Snell?’
Snell	had	widened	his	eyes	as	wide	as	they	could	go.	He	made	his	chin
tremble.	‘Harllo,’	he	whispered,	‘but	I	never	hurt	him	–	I	swear	it!’
Oh,	he	hadn’t	wanted	to	lie.	It	just	came	out.
‘Past	Worrytown	or	Two-Ox	Gate?’
‘The	gate.	Two-Ox.’
‘Did	you	go	with	him	or	did	you	follow	him?	What	happened	out	there,
Snell?’


And	Snell’s	eyes	betrayed	him	then,	a	flicker	too	instinctive	to	stop	in	time
–	down	to	where	Mew	and	Hinty	were	lying.
The	man’s	eyes	flattened	just	as	Snell	had	feared	they	might.
‘I	never	killed	him!	He	was	breathing	when	I	left	him!	If	you	kill	me	they’ll
find	out	–	they’ll	arrest	you	–	you’ll	go	to	the	gallows	–	you	can’t	kill	me	–
don’t!’
‘You	knocked	him	out	and	left	him	there,	after	stealing	the	dung	he’d
collected.	The	hills	beyond	Two-Ox	Gate.’
‘And	I	went	back,	a	couple	of	days	–	the	day	after	–	and	he	was	gone!	He’s
just	run	off,	that’s	all—’
‘A	five-year-old	boy	doing	everything	he	could	to	help	his	family	just	ran
off,	did	he?	Or	did	you	drive	him	off,	Snell?’
‘I	never	did	–	he	was	just	gone	–	and	that’s	not	my	fault,	is	it?	Someone
maybe	found	him,	maybe	even	adopted	him.’
‘You	are	going	to	tell	your	parents	everything,	Snell,’	the	man	said.	‘I	will
be	back	tonight,	probably	late,	but	I	will	be	back.	Don’t	even	think	of	running
—’
‘He	won’t,’	said	a	voice	from	the	door.
The	man	turned.	‘Bellam	–	what—’
‘Master	Murillio,	I’ll	stay	here	and	keep	an	eye	on	the	fucker.	And	when	his
parents	show	up,	well,	he’ll	spill	it	all	out.	Go	on,	Master,	you	don’t	need	to
worry	about	anything	happening	back	here.’
The	man	–	Murillio	–	was	silent	for	a	time,	seeming	to	study	the	rangy	boy
who	stood,	arms	folded,	leaning	against	the	doorway’s	frame.
And	then	he	set	Snell	down	and	stepped	back.	‘I	won’t	forget	this,	Bellam.’
‘It’ll	be	fine,	Master.	I	won’t	beat	the	bones	out	of	him,	much	as	I’d	like	to,
and	much	as	he	obviously	deserves	it.	No,	he’s	going	to	sit	and	play	with	his
little	sisters	–	soon	as	they	come	round—’
‘A	splash	of	water	should	do	it.’
‘After	a	splash,	then.	And	not	only	is	Snell	going	to	play	with	them,	but
he’s	going	to	make	a	point	of	losing	every	game,	every	argument.	If	they	want
him	to	stand	on	his	head	while	picking	his	arsehole,	why,	that’s	what	Snell	will
do.	Right,	Snell?’
Snell	had	met	older	boys	just	like	this	one.	They	had	calm	eyes	but	that	was
just	to	fix	you	good	when	you	weren’t	expecting	nothing.	He	was	more
frightened	of	this	Bellam	than	he’d	been	of	Murillio.	‘You	hurt	me	and	I’ll	get
my	friends	after	you,’	he	hissed.	‘My	street	friends—’
‘And	when	they	hear	the	name	Bellam	Nom	they’ll	cut	you	loose	faster
than	you	can	blink.’


Murillio	had	found	a	clay	bowl	into	which	he	now	poured	some	water.
‘Master,’	said	Bellam,	‘I	can	do	that.	You	got	what	you	needed	from	him	–
at	least	a	trail,	a	place	to	start.’
‘Very	well.	Until	tonight	then,	Bellam,	and	thank	you.’
	
After	he’d	left,	Bellam	shut	the	door	and	advanced	on	Snell,	who	once	more
cringed	against	the	back	wall.
‘You	said—’
‘We	do	that,	don’t	we,	when	it	comes	to	grown-ups.’
‘Don’t	touch	me!’
‘No	grown-ups	anywhere	close,	Snell	–	what	do	you	like	to	do	when
they’re	not	around?	Oh,	yes,	that’s	right.	You	like	to	torment	everyone	smaller
than	you.	That	sounds	a	fun	game.	I	think	I’ll	play,	and	look,	you’re	smaller
than	me.	Now,	what	torment	shall	we	do	first?’
In	leaving	them	for	the	time	being,	all	grim	concern	regarding	anything
unduly	cruel	can	be	thankfully	dispensed	with.	Bellam	Nom,	being	cleverer
than	most,	knew	that	true	terror	belonged	not	to	what	did	occur,	but	to	what
might	occur.	He	was	content	to	encourage	Snell’s	own	imagination	into	the
myriad	possibilities,	which	was	a	delicate	and	precise	form	of	torture.
Especially	useful	in	that	it	left	no	bruises.
Bullies	learn	nothing	when	bullied	in	turn;	there	are	no	lessons,	no	aboutface	in	their	squalid	natures.	The	principle	of	righteous	justice	is	a	peculiar
domain	where	propriety	and	vengeance	become	confused,	almost
indistinguishable.	The	bullied	bully	is	shown	but	the	other	side	of	the	same	fear
he	or	she	has	lived	with	all	his	or	her	life.	The	about-face	happens	there,	on	the
outside,	not	the	inside.	Inside,	the	bully	and	everything	that	haunts	the	bully’s
soul	remains	unchanged.
It	is	an	abject	truth,	but	conscience	cannot	be	shoved	down	the	throat.
If	only	it	could.

Moths	were	flattened	against	the	walls	of	the	narrow	passageway,	waiting	for
something,	probably	night.	As	it	was	a	little	used	route	to	and	from	the	Vidikas
estate,	frequented	twice	a	day	at	specific	times	by	deliveries	to	the	kitchen,
Challice	had	taken	to	using	it	with	all	the	furtive	grace	of	the	insouciant
adulteress	that	she	had	become.	The	last	thing	she	expected	was	to	almost	run
into	her	husband	there	in	the	shadows	midway	through.


Even	more	disconcerting,	it	was	clear	that	he	had	been	awaiting	her.	One
hand	holding	his	duelling	gloves	as	if	about	to	slap	them	across	her	cheek,	yet
there	was	an	odd	smile	on	his	face.	‘Darling,’	he	said.
She	halted	before	him,	momentarily	struck	dumb.	It	was	one	thing	to	play
out	the	game	at	breakfast,	a	table	between	them	cluttered	with	all	the	false	icons
of	a	perfect	and	perfectly	normal	marriage.	Their	language	then	was	such	a
smooth	navigation	round	all	those	deadly	shoals	that	it	seemed	the	present	was
but	a	template	of	the	future,	of	years	and	years	of	this;	not	a	single	wound	stung
to	life,	no	tragic	floundering	on	the	jagged	shallows,	sailors	drowning	in	the
foam.
He	stood	before	her	now,	tall	with	a	thousand	sharp	edges,	entirely
blocking	her	path,	his	eyes	glittering	like	wrecker	fires	on	a	promontory.	‘So
pleased	I	found	you,’	he	said.	‘I	must	head	out	to	the	mining	camp	–	no	doubt
you	can	hear	the	carriage	being	readied	behind	you.’
Casual	words,	yet	she	was	startled,	like	a	bird;	flash	of	fluttering,	panicked
wings	in	the	gloom	as	she	half	turned	to	register	the	snort	of	horses	and	the
rustle	of	traces	from	the	forecourt	behind	her.	‘Oh,’	she	managed,	then	faced
him	once	more.	Her	heart’s	rapid	beat	began	slowing	down.
‘Even	here,’	Gorlas	said,	‘there	is	a	sweet	flush	to	your	cheeks,	dear.	Most
becoming.’
She	could	almost	feel	the	brush	of	fingertips	to	grant	benediction	to	the
compliment.	A	moth,	startled	awake	by	the	clash	of	currents	in	the	dusty	air,
wings	dry	as	talc	as	it	fluttered	against	her	face.	She	flinched	back.	‘Thank
you,’	she	said.
This	was	just	another	game,	of	course.	She	realized	that	now.	He	did	not
want	things	to	get	messy,	not	here,	not	any	time	soon.	She	told	herself	this	with
certainty,	and	hoped	it	was	true.	But	then,	why	not	an	explosive	shattering?
Freeing	him,	freeing	her	–	wouldn’t	that	be	healthier	in	the	end?	Unless	his
idea	of	freeing	himself	is	to	kill	me.	Such	things	happen,	don’t	they?
‘I	do	not	expect	to	be	back	for	at	least	three	days.	Two	nights.’
‘I	see.	Be	well	on	your	journey,	Gorlas.’
‘Thank	you,	darling.’	And	then,	without	warning,	he	stepped	close,	his	free
hand	grasping	her	right	breast.	‘I	don’t	like	the	thought	of	strangers	doing
this,’	he	said,	his	voice	low,	that	odd	smile	still	there.	‘I	need	to	picture	the	face,
one	I	know	well.	I	need	a	sense	of	the	bastard	behind	it.’
She	stared	into	his	eyes	and	saw	only	a	stranger,	calculating,	as	clinical	and
cold	as	a	dresser	of	the	dead	–	like	the	one	who’d	come	to	do	what	was	needed
with	the	corpse	of	her	mother,	once	the	thin	veil	of	sympathy	was	tossed	aside
like	a	soiled	cloth	and	the	man	set	to	work.


‘When	I	get	back,’	he	continued,	‘we’ll	have	a	talk.	One	with	details.	I	want
to	know	all	about	him,	Challice.’
She	knew	that	what	she	said	at	this	precise	moment	would	echo	in	her
husband’s	mind	for	virtually	every	spare	moment	in	the	course	of	the	next
three	days	and	two	nights,	and	by	the	time	he	returned	her	words	would	have
done	their	work	in	transforming	him	–	into	a	broken	thing,	or	into	a	monster.
She	could	say	All	right,	as	if	she	was	being	forced,	cornered,	and	whatever
immediate	satisfaction	he	felt	would	soon	twist	into	something	dark,
unpleasant,	and	she	would	find	herself	across	from	a	vengeful	creature	in	three
days’	time.	She	might	say	If	you	like,	and	he	would	hear	that	as	defiance	and
cruel	indifference	–	as	if	for	her	his	needs	were	irrelevant,	as	if	she	would
oblige	out	of	pity	and	not	much	else.	No,	in	truth	she	had	few	choices	in	what
she	might	utter	at	this	moment.	In	an	instant,	as	he	awaited	her	response,	she
decided	on	what	she	would	say	and	when	it	came	out	it	was	calm	and	assured
(but	not	too	much	so).	‘Until	then,	husband.’
He	nodded,	and	she	saw	the	pupils	of	his	eyes	dilate.	She	caught	his
quickened	breathing,	and	knew	her	choice	had	been	the	right	one.	Now,	the	next
three	days	and	two	nights,	Gorlas	would	be	as	one	on	fire.	With	anticipation,
with	his	imagination	unleashed	and	playing	out	scenarios,	each	one	a	variation
on	a	single	theme.
Yes,	Gorlas,	we	are	not	done	with	each	other	yet,	after	all.
His	hand	withdrew	from	her	breast	and,	with	a	courtly	bow,	he	stepped	to
one	side	to	permit	her	to	pass.
She	did	so.
	
Murillio	hired	a	horse	for	the	day;	with	tack	included,	the	rental	amounted	to
three	silver	councils	along	with	a	twenty-council	deposit.	Of	that,	the	animal
was	worth	perhaps	five,	certainly	not	much	more.	Slope-backed,	at	least	ten
years	old,	worn	out,	beaten	down,	the	misery	in	the	beast’s	eyes	stung	Murillio
to	sympathy	and	he	was	of	half	a	mind	to	forgo	the	deposit	and	leave	the
animal	in	the	hands	of	a	kindly	farmer	with	plenty	of	spare	pasture.
He	rode	at	a	slow,	plodding	walk	through	the	crowded	streets,	until	he
reached	Two-Ox	Gate.	Passing	through	the	archway’s	shadow,	he	collected	the
horse	into	a	steady	trot	on	the	cobbled	road,	passing	laden	wagons	and	carts
and	the	occasional	Gadrobi	peasant	struggling	beneath	baskets	filled	with
salted	fish,	flasks	of	oil,	candles	and	whatever	else	they	needed	to	make
bearable	living	in	a	squalid	hut	along	the	roadside.
Once	beyond	the	leper	colony,	he	began	scanning	the	lands	to	either	side,


seeking	the	nearest	active	pasture.	A	short	distance	on	he	spied	sheep	and	goats
wandering	the	slope	of	a	hillside	to	his	right.	A	lone	shepherd	hobbled	along
the	ridge,	waving	a	switch	to	keep	the	flies	off.	Murillio	pulled	his	mount	off
the	road	and	rode	towards	him.
The	old	man	noticed	his	approach	and	halted.
He	was	dressed	in	rags,	but	the	crook	he	carried	looked	new,	freshly	oiled
and	polished.	His	eyes	were	smeared	with	cataracts	from	too	many	years	in	the
bright	sunlight,	and	he	squinted,	wary	and	nervous,	as	Murillio	drew	up	and
settled	back	in	the	saddle.
‘Hello,	good	shepherd.’
A	terse	nod	answered	him.
‘I	am	looking	for	someone—’
‘Nobody	but	me	here,’	the	old	man	replied,	flicking	the	switch	before	his
face.
‘This	was	a	few	weeks	back.	A	young	boy,	up	here	collecting	dung,
perhaps.’
‘We	get	’em,	out	from	the	city.’
The	furtiveness	was	ill-disguised.	The	old	man	licked	his	lips,	switched	at
flies	that	weren’t	there.	There	were	secrets	here,	Murillio	realized.	He
dismounted.	‘You	know	of	this	one,’	he	said.	‘Five	years	old.	He	was	hurt,
possibly	unconscious.’
The	shepherd	stepped	back	as	he	approached,	half	raised	the	crook.	‘What
was	I	supposed	to	do?’	he	demanded.	‘The	ones	that	come	out	here,	they	got
nothing.	They	live	in	the	streets.	They	sell	the	dung	for	a	few	coppers.	I	got	no
help	here,	we	just	working	for	somebody	else.	We	go	hungry	every	winter	–
what	was	I	supposed	to	do?’
‘Just	tell	me	what	happened,’	said	Murillio.	‘You	do	that	and	maybe	I’ll	just
walk	away,	leave	you	be.	But	you’re	a	bad	liar,	old	man,	and	if	you	try	again	I
might	get	angry.’
‘We	wasn’t	sure	he	was	gonna	live	–	he	was	beat	up	near	dead,	sir.	Woulda
died	if	we	hadn’t	found	him,	took	care	of	him.’
‘And	then?’
‘Sold	him	off.	It’s	hard	enough,	feedin’	ourselves—’
‘To	who?	Where	is	he?’
‘Iron	mines.	The	Eldra	Holdings,	west	of	here.’
Murillio	felt	a	chill	grip	his	heart.	‘A	five-year-old	boy—’
‘Moles,	they	call	’em.	Or	–	so	I	heard.’
He	returned	to	the	horse.	Lifted	himself	into	the	saddle	and	roughly	pulled
the	beast	round.	Rode	hard	back	to	the	road.


A	thousand	paces	along,	the	horse	threw	a	shoe.
	
The	ox	lumbered	along	at	the	pace	of	a	beast	for	which	time	was	meaningless,
and	perhaps	in	this	it	was	wise	indeed.	Walking	beside	it,	the	man	with	the	crop
twitched	its	flank	every	now	and	then,	but	this	was	habit,	not	urgency.	The	load
of	braided	leather	was	not	a	particularly	onerous	burden,	and	if	the	carter
timed	things	right,	why,	he	might	wangle	himself	a	meal	at	the	camp	before	the
long	return	journey	back	to	the	city.	At	least	by	then	the	day	would	be	mostly
done	and	the	air	would’ve	cooled.	In	this	heat,	neither	man	nor	beast	was	in	any
hurry.
Hardly	surprising,	then,	that	the	lone	traveller	on	foot	caught	up	with	them
before	too	long,	and	after	a	brief	conversation	–	a	few	words	to	either	side	of
the	jangle	of	coins	–	the	load	on	the	cart	grew	heavier,	yet	still	not	enough	to
force	a	groan	from	the	ox.	This	was,	after	all,	the	task	of	its	life,	the	very
definition	of	its	existence.	In	truth,	it	had	little	memory	of	ever	being	free,	of
ever	trundling	along	without	something	to	drag	behind	it,	or	the	endless
reverberation	in	its	bones	as	wheels	clunked	across	cobbles,	slipping	into	and
out	of	worn	ruts	in	the	stone.
Languid	blinks,	the	storm	of	flies	that	danced	in	the	heat,	twitching	tail	and
spots	of	blood	on	the	fetlocks,	and	pulling	something	from	one	place	to
another.	And	at	its	side,	squinting	red-shot	eyes,	a	storm	of	flies	dancing,	spots
of	blood	here	and	there	from	midges	and	whatnot,	and	taking	something	from
one	place	to	another.	Ox	and	driver,	parallel	lives	through	meaningless	years.
A	singular	variation,	now,	the	man	sitting	with	legs	dangling	off	the	cart,	his
boots	worn	and	blisters	oozing,	and	the	dark	maelstrom	in	his	eyes	that	was	for
neither	of	them,	and	no	business	of	theirs	besides.
The	ornate,	lacquered,	leaf-sprung	carriage	that	rumbled	past	them	a
league	from	the	camp	had	its	windows	shuttered	against	the	heat	and	dust.
The	man	in	the	back	had	watched	its	approach.	The	carter	watched	it	pass.
The	ox	saw	it	moving	away	in	front	of	it	at	a	steady	pace	that	it	could	never
match,	even	had	it	wanted	to,	which	it	didn’t.
	
Snell	was	nobody’s	fool,	and	when	the	ball	of	bound	multicoloured	twine
rolled	close	to	the	door	and	Hinty	stared	at	it,	expecting	its	miraculous	return
to	her	pudgy,	grimy	hands,	why,	Snell	obliged	–	and	as	soon	as	he	was	at	the
door,	he	darted	outside	and	was	gone.


He	heard	Bellam’s	shout,	but	Snell	had	a	good	head	start	and	besides,	the
stupid	idiot	wouldn’t	just	leave	the	runts	behind,	would	he?	No,	Snell	had	made
good	his	escape,	easy	as	that,	because	he	was	clever	and	jerks	could	threaten
him	all	the	time	but	he	won	in	the	end,	he	always	won	–	proof	of	his	cleverness.
Up	the	street,	into	an	alley,	under	the	broken	fence,	across	the	narrow	yard
–	chickens	scattering	from	his	path	–	and	on	to	the	stacked	rabbit	pens,	over	the
next	fence,	into	Twisty	Alley,	twenty	strides	up	and	then	left,	into	the	muddy
track	where	a	sewage	pipe	leaked.	Nobody’d	go	down	this	pinched
passageway,	what	with	the	stench	and	all,	but	he	did,	piss	soaking	through	his
worn	moccasins,	and	then	he	was	out	on	to	Purse	Street,	and	freedom.
Better	if	he’d	stolen	the	runts	to	sell.	Better	still	if	he’d	still	had	his	stash	of
coins.	Now,	he	had	nothing.	But	nobody	would	catch	him	now.	There	were
some	older	boys	with	connections	to	the	gang	that	worked	Worrytown,	lifting
what	they	could	from	the	trader	wagons	that	crowded	through.	If	Snell	could
get	out	there,	he’d	be	outside	the	city,	wouldn’t	he?	They	could	hunt	for	ever
and	not	find	him.
And	he	could	make	himself	rich.	He	could	rise	in	the	ranks	and	become	a
pack	leader.	People	would	be	scared	of	him,	terrified	even.	Merchants	would
pay	him	just	not	to	rob	them.	And	he’d	buy	an	estate,	and	hire	assassins	to	kill
Bellam	Nom	and	Stonny	Menackis	and	Murillio.	He’d	buy	up	his	parents’	debts
and	make	them	pay	him	every	month	–	wouldn’t	that	be	something?	It’d	be
perfect.	And	his	sisters	he	could	pimp	out	and	eventually	he’d	have	enough
money	to	buy	a	title	of	some	sort,	get	on	the	Council,	and	proclaim	himself
King	of	Darujhistan,	and	he’d	order	new	gallows	built	and	execute	everyone
who’d	done	him	wrong.
He	rushed	through	the	crowds,	his	thoughts	a	world	away,	a	future	far	off
but	almost	in	reach.
His	feet	were	clipped	out	from	under	him	and	he	fell	hard:	numbing	shock
from	one	shoulder	and	his	hip.	Bellam	Nom	stood	over	him,	breathing	hard
but	grinning.	‘Nice	try,’	he	said.
‘Mew	and	Hinty!	You	left	them—’
‘Locked	up,	yes.	That’s	what	slowed	me	down.’	And	he	reached	down,
grasped	Snell’s	arm	and	yanked	him	to	his	feet,	twisting	hard	enough	to	make
him	yelp	in	pain.
Bellam	dragged	Snell	back	the	way	he’d	come.
‘I’m	going	to	kill	you	one	day,’	Snell	said,	then	winced	as	Bellam’s	grip
tightened	on	his	arm.
‘It’s	what	people	like	you	rely	on,	isn’t	it?’
‘What?’


‘That	none	of	us	are	as	nasty	as	you.	That	we’ll	have	qualms	about,	say,
skinning	you	alive.	Or	shattering	your	kneecaps.	Gouging	out	your	eyes.	You
want	to	kill	me?	Fine,	just	don’t	be	surprised	if	I	get	to	you	first,	Snell.’
‘You	can’t	murder—’
‘Can’t	I?	Why	not?	You	seem	to	think	you	can,	whenever	you	like,
whenever	the	chance	arises.	Well,	I’m	not	Stonny	Menackis.	I’m	not	Murillio,
either.	They’re…civilized	folk.	No,	Snell,	I’m	more	like	you,	only	I’m	older
and	better	at	it.’
‘If	you	did	anything	to	me,	Murillio	would	have	to	go	after	you.	Like	you
say,	he’s	not	like	us.	Or	Stonny.	She’d	cut	you	to	pieces.	Yes,	it’d	be	Stonny,
once	Da	asked	her	to,	and	he	would.’
‘You’re	making	a	big	assumption,	Snell.’
‘What?’
‘That	they’d	ever	figure	out	it	was	me.’
‘I’ll	warn	them	–	as	soon	as	they	come	back	–	I’ll	warn	them	about	you—’
‘Before	or	after	you	make	your	confession?	About	what	you	did	to	poor
Harllo?’
‘That	was	different!	I	didn’t	do	nothing	on	purpose—’
‘You	hurt	him,	probably	killed	him,	and	left	his	body	for	the	birds.	You
kept	it	all	a	secret,	Snell.	Hood	knows,	if	I	asked	nicely	enough,	your	da	might
just	hand	you	over	to	me	and	good	riddance	to	you.’
Snell	said	nothing.	There	was	true	terror	inside	him	now.	So	much	terror	it
filled	him	up,	spilled	out	through	his	pores,	and	out	from	between	his	legs.
This	Bellam	was	a	monster.	He	didn’t	feel	anything	for	nobody.	He	just	wanted
to	hurt	Snell.	A	monster.	A	vicious	demon,	yes,	a	demon.	Bellam	was
everything	that	was	wrong	with…with…everything.
‘I’ll	be	good,’	Snell	whimpered.	‘You’ll	see.	I’ll	make	it	right,	all	of	it.’
But	these	were	lies,	and	both	of	them	knew	it.	Snell	was	what	he	was,	and
no	amount	of	cuddling	and	coddling	would	change	that.	He	stood,	there	in	the
mind,	as	if	to	say:	we	are	in	your	world.	More	of	us	than	you	imagine.	If	you
knew	how	many	of	us	there	are,	you’d	be	very,	very	frightened.	We	are	here.
Now,	what	are	you	going	to	do	with	us?	Snell	was	what	he	was,	yes,	and	so,	too,
was	Bellam	Nom.
When	he	was	dragged	in	through	the	narrow	door	of	a	nondescript	shop	at
the	near	end	of	Twisty	Alley,	Snell	suddenly	recoiled	–	he	knew	this	place.	He
knew—
‘What	you	got	yourself	there,	Bellam?’
‘A	fresh	one,	Goruss,	and	I’ll	let	him	go	cheap.’
‘Wait!’	Snell	shrieked,	and	then	a	heavy	hand	clamped	over	his	mouth	and


he	was	pulled	into	the	gloom,	smelling	rank	sweat,	feeling	a	breath	on	his
cheek	as	the	ogre	named	Goruss	leaned	in	close.
‘A	screamer,	iz	he?’
‘A	nasty	little	shit,	in	fact.’
‘We’ll	work	that	outer	’im.’
‘Not	this	one.	He’d	stab	his	mother	just	to	watch	the	blood	flow.	’Sprobably
left	a	trail	of	tortured	small	animals	ten	leagues	long,	buried	in	little	holes	in
every	back	yard	of	the	neighbourhood.	This	is	one	of	those,	Goruss.’
‘Eighteen	silver?’
‘Slivers?’
‘Yah.’
‘All	right.’
Snell	thrashed	about	as	he	was	carried	off	into	a	back	room,	then	down
steps	and	into	an	unlit	cellar	that	smelled	of	piss-soaked	mud.	He	was	gagged
and	bound	and	thrown	into	a	low	iron	cage.	Goruss	then	went	back	up	the
stairs,	leaving	Snell	alone.
In	the	front	room,	Goruss	sat	down	across	from	Bellam.	‘Ale,	nephew?’
‘Too	early	for	me,	Uncle.’
‘How	long	you	want	me	to	hold	him?’
‘Long	enough	to	shit	everything	out	of	him.	I	want	him	so	scared	he	breaks
inside.’
‘Give	him	a	night,	then.	Enough	to	run	through	all	his	terrors,	but	not	so
much	he	gets	numb.	Shit,	nephew,	I	don’t	deal	in	anybody	under,	oh,	fifteen
years	old,	and	we	do	careful	interviewing	and	observing,	and	only	the
completely	hopeless	ones	get	shipped	to	the	rowing	benches.	And	even	then,
they	get	paid	and	fed	and	signed	out	after	five	years	–	and	most	of	them	do
good	after	that.’
‘I	doubt	Snell	knows	any	of	that,	Uncle.	Just	that	children	are	dragged	into
this	shop	and	they	don’t	come	back	out.’
‘Must	look	that	way.’
Bellam	smiled.	‘Oh,	it	does,	Uncle,	it	does.’
	
‘Not	seen	him	in	days.’
Barathol	just	nodded,	then	walked	over	to	the	cask	of	water	to	wash	the
grime	off	his	forearms	and	hands.	Chaur	sat	on	a	crate	nearby,	eating	some
local	fruit	with	a	yellow	skin	and	pink,	fleshy	insides.	Juice	dribbled	down	his
stubbled	chin.
Scillara	gave	him	a	bright	smile	as	she	wandered	into	the	front	room.	The


air	smelled	brittle	and	acrid,	the	way	it	does	in	smithies,	and	she	thought	now
that,	from	this	moment	on,	the	scent	would	accompany	her	every	recollection
of	Barathol,	this	large	man	with	the	gentle	eyes.	‘Had	any	more	trouble	with
the	Guilds?’	she	asked.
He	dried	himself	off	and	flung	the	cloth	to	one	side.	‘They’re	making	it
hard,	but	I	expected	that.	We’re	surviving.’
‘So	I	see.’	She	kicked	at	a	heap	of	iron	rods.	‘New	order?’
‘Swords.	The	arrival	of	the	Malazan	embassy’s	garrison	has	triggered	a
new	fad	among	the	nobles.	Imperial	longswords.	Gave	trouble	to	most	of	the
local	swordsmiths.’	He	shrugged.	‘Not	me,	of	course.’
Scillara	settled	down	in	the	lone	chair	and	began	scraping	out	her	pipe.
‘What’s	so	special	about	Malazan	longswords?’
‘The	very	opposite,	actually.	The	local	makers	haven’t	quite	worked	out
that	they	have	to	reverse	engineer	to	get	them	right.’
‘Reverse	engineer?’
‘The	Malazan	longsword’s	basic	design	and	manufacture	is	originally
Untan,	from	the	imperial	mainland.	Three	centuries	old,	at	least,	maybe	older.
The	empire	still	uses	the	Untan	foundries	and	they’re	a	conservative	bunch.’
‘Well,	if	the	damned	things	do	what	they’re	supposed	to	do,	why	make
changes?’
‘That	seems	to	be	the	thinking,	yes.	The	locals	have	gone	mad	folding	and
refolding,	trying	to	capture	that	rough	solidity,	but	the	Untan	smiths	are	in	the
habit	of	working	iron	not	hot	enough.	It’s	also	red	iron	that	they’re	using	–	the
Untan	Hills	are	rotten	with	it	even	though	it’s	rare	everywhere	else.’	He	paused,
watching	as	she	lit	her	pipe.	‘This	can’t	be	of	any	real	interest	to	you,	Scillara.’
‘Not	really,	but	I	do	like	the	sound	of	your	voice.’	And	she	looked	up	at
him	through	the	smoke,	her	eyes	half	veiled.
‘Anyway,	I	can	make	decent	copies	and	the	word’s	gone	out.	Eventually,
some	swordsmith	will	work	things	out,	but	by	then	I’ll	have	plenty	of	satisfied
customers	and	even	undercutting	me	won’t	be	too	damaging.’
‘Good,’	she	said.
He	studied	her	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	‘So,	Cutter ’s	gone	missing,
has	he?’
‘I	don’t	know	about	that.	Only	that	I’ve	not	seen	him	in	a	few	days.’
‘Are	you	worried?’
She	thought	about	it,	and	then	thought	some	more.	‘Barathol,	that	wasn’t
my	reason	for	visiting	you.	I	wasn’t	looking	for	someone	to	charge	in	as	if
Cutter ’s	been	kidnapped	or	something.	I’m	here	because	I	wanted	to	see	you.
I’m	lonely	–	oh,	I	don’t	mean	anybody’ll	do,	either,	when	I	say	that.	I	just


wanted	to	see	you,	that’s	all.’
After	a	moment,	he	shrugged	and	held	out	his	hands.	‘Here	I	am.’
‘You	won’t	make	it	easy,	will	you?’
‘Scillara,	look	at	me.	Please,	look.	Carefully.	You’re	too	fast	for	me.
Cutter,	that	historian,	even	that	Bridgeburner,	you	leave	them	all	spinning	in
your	wake.	Given	my	choice,	I’d	rather	go	through	the	rest	of	my	life	beneath
the	notice	of	everyone.	I’m	not	interested	in	drama,	or	even	excitement.’
She	stretched	out	her	legs.	‘And	you	think	I	am?’
‘It’s	life	that	you’re	full	of.’	Barathol	frowned	and	then	shook	his	head.
‘I’m	not	very	good	at	saying	what	I	mean,	am	I?’
‘Keep	trying.’
‘You	can	be…overwhelming.’
‘Typical,	put	on	a	little	fat	and	suddenly	I’m	too	much	for	him.’
‘You’re	not	fat	and	you	know	it.	You	have,’	he	hesitated,	‘shape.’
She	thought	to	laugh,	decided	that	it	might	come	out	too	obviously	hurt,
which	would	make	him	feel	even	worse.	Besides,	her	comment	had	been	little
more	than	desperate	misdirection	–	she’d	lost	most	of	the	weight	she’d	put	on
during	her	pregnancy.	‘Barathol,	has	it	not	occurred	to	you	that	maybe	I	am	as
I	am	because	behind	it	all	there’s	not	much	else?’
His	frown	deepened.
Chaur	dropped	down	from	the	crate	and	came	over.	He	patted	her	on	the
head	with	a	sticky	hand	and	then	hurried	off	into	the	yard.
‘But	you’ve	lived	through	so	much.’
‘And	you	haven’t?	Gods	below,	you	were	an	officer	in	the	Red	Blades.
What	you	did	in	Aren—’
‘Was	just	me	avoiding	a	mess,	Scillara.	As	usual.’
‘What	are	we	talking	about	here?’
His	eyes	shied	away.	‘I’m	not	sure.	I	suppose,	now	that	Cutter ’s	left	you…’
‘And	Duiker ’s	too	old	and	Picker ’s	a	woman	and	that’s	fun	but	not	serious
–	for	me,	at	least	–	I’ve	found	myself	in	need	of	another	man.	Chaur ’s	a	child,
in	his	head,	that	is.	Leaving…you.’
The	harsh	sarcasm	of	her	voice	stung	him	and	he	almost	stepped	back.
‘From	where	I’m	standing,’	he	said.
‘Well,’	she	said,	sighing,	‘it’s	probably	what	I	deserve,	actually.	I	have	been
a	bit…loose.	Wayward.	Looking,	trying,	not	finding,	trying	again.	And	again.
From	where	you’re	standing,	yes,	I	can	see	that.’
‘None	of	that	would	matter	to	me,’	Barathol	then	said.	‘Except,	well,	I	don’t
want	to	be	just	another	man	left	in	your	wake.’
‘No	wonder	you’ve	devoted	your	life	to	making	weapons	and	armour.


Problem	is,	you’re	doing	that	for	everyone	else.’
He	said	nothing.	He	simply	watched	her,	as,	she	realized,	he	had	been
doing	for	some	time	now.	All	at	once,	Scillara	felt	uncomfortable.	She	drew
hard	on	her	pipe.	‘Barathol,	you	need	some	armour	of	your	own.’
And	he	nodded.	‘I	see.’
‘I’m	not	going	to	make	promises	I	can’t	keep.	Still,	it	may	be	that	my
waywardness	is	coming	to	an	end.	People	like	us,	who	spend	all	our	time
looking,	well,	even	when	we	find	it	we	usually	don’t	realize	–	until	it’s	too
late.’
‘Cutter.’
She	squinted	up	at	him.	‘He	had	no	room	left	in	his	heart,	Barathol.	Not	for
me,	not	for	anyone.’
‘So	he’s	just	hiding	right	now?’
‘In	more	ways	than	one,	I	suspect.’
‘But	he’s	broken	your	heart,	Scillara.’
‘Has	he?’	She	considered.	‘Maybe	he	has.	Maybe	I’m	the	one	needing
armour.’	She	snorted.	‘Puts	me	in	my	place,	doesn’t	it.’	And	she	rose.
Barathol	started.	‘Where	are	you	going?’
‘What?	I	don’t	know.	Somewhere.	Nowhere.	Does	it	matter?’
‘Wait.’	He	stepped	closer.	‘Listen	to	me,	Scillara.’	And	then	he	was	silent,
on	his	face	a	war	of	feelings	trying	to	find	words.	After	a	moment,	his	scowl
deepened.	‘Yesterday,	if	Cutter	had	just	walked	in	here	to	say	hello,	I’d	have
taken	him	by	the	throat.	Hood,	I’d	have	probably	beaten	him	unconscious	and
tied	him	up	in	that	chair.	Where	he’d	stay	–	until	you	dropped	by.’
‘Yesterday.’
‘When	I	thought	I	had	no	chance.’
She	was	having	her	own	trouble	finding	words.	‘And	now?’
‘I	think…I’ve	just	thrown	on	some	armour.’
‘The	soldier…unretires.’
‘Well,	I’m	a	man,	and	a	man	never	learns.’
She	grinned.	‘That’s	true	enough.’
And	then	she	leaned	close,	and	as	he	slowly	raised	his	arms	to	take	her	into
an	embrace	she	almost	shut	her	eyes	–	all	that	relief,	all	that	anticipation	of
pleasure,	even	joy	–	and	the	hands	instead	grasped	her	upper	arms	and	she	was
pushed	suddenly	to	one	side.	Startled,	she	turned	to	see	a	squad	of	City	Guard
crowding	the	doorway.
The	officer	in	the	lead	had	the	decency	to	look	embarrassed.
‘Barathol	Mekhar?	By	city	order,	this	smithy	is	now	under	temporary
closure,	and	I	am	afraid	I	have	to	take	you	into	custody.’


‘The	charge?’
‘Brought	forward	by	the	Guild	of	Smiths.	Contravention	of	proper	waste
disposal.	It	is	a	serious	charge,	I’m	afraid.	You	could	lose	your	business.’
‘I	don’t	understand,’	Barathol	said.	‘I	am	making	use	of	the	sewage	drains
–	I	spill	nothing—’
‘The	common	drain,	yes,	but	you	should	be	using	the	industrial	drain,
which	runs	alongside	the	common	drain.’
‘This	is	the	first	I	have	heard	of	such	a	thing.’
‘Well,’	said	a	voice	behind	the	guards,	‘if	you	were	a	member	of	the	Guild,
you’d	know	all	about	it,	wouldn’t	you?’
It	was	a	woman	who	spoke,	but	Scillara	could	not	see	past	the	men	in	the
doorway.
Barathol	threw	up	his	hands.	‘Very	well,	I	am	happy	to	comply.	I	will	install
the	proper	pipes—’
‘You	may	do	so,’	said	the	officer,	‘once	the	charges	are	properly
adjudicated,	fines	paid,	and	so	forth.	In	the	meantime,	this	establishment	must
be	shut	down.	The	gas	valves	must	be	sealed.	Materials	and	tools	impounded.’
‘I	see.	Then	let	me	make	some	arrangement	for	my	helper	–	somewhere	to
stay	and—’
‘I	am	sorry,’	cut	in	the	officer,	‘but	the	charge	is	against	both	you	and	your
apprentice.’
‘Not	precisely,’	said	the	unseen	woman.	‘The	blacksmith	cannot	have	an
apprentice	unless	he	is	a	member	of	the	Guild.	The	two	are	colluding	to
undermine	the	Guild.’
The	officer ’s	expression	tightened.	‘As	she	said,	yes.	I’m	not	here	to	prattle
on	in	the	language	of	an	advocate.	I	do	the	arrest	and	leave	one	of	my	guards	to
oversee	the	decommissioning	of	the	establishment	by	a	qualified	crew.’
‘A	moment,’	said	Barathol.	‘You	are	arresting	Chaur?’
‘Is	that	your	apprentice’s	name?’
‘He’s	not	my	apprentice.	He’s	a	simpleton—’
‘Little	more	than	a	slave,	then,’	snapped	the	unseen	official	of	the	Guild.
‘That	would	be	breaking	a	much	more	serious	law,	I	should	think.’
Scillara	watched	as	two	men	went	to	the	yard	and	returned	with	a	wideeyed,	whimpering	Chaur.	Barathol	attempted	to	console	him,	but	guards
stepped	in	between	them	and	the	officer	warned	that,	while	he	didn’t	want	to
make	use	of	shackles,	he	would	if	necessary.	So,	if	everyone	could	stay	calm
and	collected,	they	could	march	out	of	here	like	civilized	folk.	Barathol
enquired	as	to	his	right	to	hire	an	advocate	and	the	officer	replied	that,	while	it
wasn’t	a	right	as	such,	it	was	indeed	a	privilege	Barathol	could	exercise,


assuming	he	could	afford	one.
At	that	point	Scillara	spoke	up	and	said,	‘I’ll	find	one	for	you,	Barathol.’
A	flicker	of	relief	and	gratitude	in	his	eyes,	replaced	almost	immediately
by	his	distress	over	the	fate	of	Chaur,	who	was	now	bawling	and	tugging	his
arms	free	every	time	a	guard	sought	to	take	hold	of	him.
‘Let	him	alone,’	said	Barathol.	‘He’ll	follow	peacefully	enough	–	just	don’t
grab	him.’
And	then	the	squad,	save	one,	all	marched	out	with	their	prisoners.	Scillara
fell	in	behind	them,	and	finally	saw	the	Guild	official,	a	rather	imposing
woman	whose	dignity	was	marred	by	the	self-satisfied	smirk	on	her	face.
As	Scillara	passed	behind	the	woman,	she	took	hold	of	her	braid	and	gave
it	a	sharp	downward	tug.
‘Ow!’	The	woman	whirled,	her	expression	savage.
‘Sorry,’	Scillara	said.	‘Must	have	caught	on	my	bracelet.’
And	as	Scillara	continued	on	down	the	street,	she	heard,	from	the	squad
officer:	‘She’s	not	wearing	any	bracelet.’
The	Guild	woman	hissed	and	said,	‘I	want	her—’
And	then	Scillara	turned	the	corner.	She	did	not	expect	the	officer	to	send
anyone	in	pursuit.	The	man	was	doing	his	job	and	had	no	interest	in
complicating	things.
‘And	there	I	was,’	she	muttered	under	her	breath,	‘about	to	trap	a	very	fine
man	in	my	messed-up	web.	Hoping	–	praying	–	that	he’d	be	the	one	to	untangle
my	life.’	She	snorted.	‘Just	my	luck.’
	
From	rank	superstitions	to	scholarly	treatises,	countless	generations	had
sought	understanding	of	those	among	them	whose	minds	stayed	undeveloped,
childlike	or,	indeed,	seemingly	trapped	in	some	other	world.	God	and	demon
possession,	stolen	souls,	countless	chemical	imbalances	and	unpleasant
humours,	injuries	sustained	at	birth	or	even	before;	blows	to	the	head	as	a
child;	fevers	and	so	on.	What	could	never	be	achieved,	of	course	(barring
elaborate,	dangerous	rituals	of	spirit-walking),	was	to	venture	into	the	mind	of
one	thus	afflicted.
It	would	be	easy	to	assume	an	inner	world	of	simple	feelings,	frightening
unknowns	and	the	endless	miasma	of	confusion.	Or	some	incorporeal	demon
crouched	down	on	every	thought,	crushing	the	life	from	it,	choking	off	every
possible	passage	to	awareness.	Such	assumptions,	naturally,	are	but
suppositions,	founded	only	on	external	observation:	the	careful	regard	of
seemingly	blank	eyes	and	stupid	smiles,	repetitive	behaviour	and	unfounded


fears.
Hold	tight,	then,	this	hand,	on	this	momentary	journey	into	Chaur ’s	mind.
The	world	he	was	witness	to	was	a	place	of	objects,	some	moving,	some
never	moving,	and	some	that	were	still	but	could	be	moved	if	one	so	willed	it.
These	three	types	were	not	necessarily	fixed,	and	he	well	knew	that	things	that
seemed	destined	to	immobility	could	suddenly	come	awake,	alive,	in	explosive
motion.	Within	himself,	Chaur	possessed	apprehensions	of	all	three,	in	ever
shifting	forms.	There	was	love,	a	deeply	rooted	object,	from	which	came
warmth,	and	joy,	and	a	sense	of	perfect	well-being.	It	could,	on	occasion,	reach
out	to	take	in	another	–	someone	or	something	on	the	outside	–	but,	ultimately,
that	was	not	necessary.	The	love	was	within	him,	its	very	own	world,	and	he
could	go	there	any	time	he	liked.	This	was	expressed	in	a	rather	dreamy	smile,
an	expression	disengaged	with	everything	on	the	outside.
Powerful	as	it	was,	love	was	vulnerable.	It	could	be	wounded,	jabbed	into
recoiling	pain.	When	this	happened,	another	object	was	stirred	awake.	It	could
be	called	hate,	but	its	surface	was	mottled	with	fear	and	anger.	This	object	was
fixed	as	deeply	in	his	soul	as	was	love,	and	the	two	needed	each	other	even	if
their	relationship	was	strained,	fraught.	Prodded	into	life	by	love’s	pain,	hate
opened	eyes	that	could	only	look	outward	–	never	to	oneself,	never	even	to	the
identity	known	as	Chaur.	Hate	blazed	in	one	direction	and	one	only	–	to	the
outer	world	with	its	objects,	some	moving,	some	not,	some	that	might	do
either,	shifting	from	one	to	the	next	and	back	again.
Hate	could,	if	it	must,	make	use	of	Chaur ’s	body.	In	lashing	out,	in	a
frenzied	reordering	of	the	world.	To	bring	it	back	into	the	right	shape,	to	force
an	end	to	whatever	caused	love	its	pain.
All	of	this	depended	upon	observation,	but	such	observation	did	not	rely
overmuch	on	what	he	saw,	or	heard,	smelled,	touched	or	tasted.	Hate’s	secret
vision	was	much	sharper	–	it	saw	colours	that	did	not	exist	for	others,	and
those	colours	were,	on	an	instinctive	level,	encyclopedic.	Seeing	them,	hate
knew	everything.	Knew,	indeed,	far	beyond	what	a	normal	mind	might	achieve.
Was	this	little	more	than	a	peculiar	sensitivity	to	nonverbal
communication?	Don’t	ask	Chaur.	He	is,	after	all,	in	his	own	world.
His	object	called	hate	had	a	thing	about	blood.	Its	hue,	the	way	it	flowed,
the	way	it	smelled	and	tasted,	and	this	was	a	bizarre	truth:	his	hate	loved	blood.
To	see	it,	to	immerse	oneself	in	it,	was	to	feel	joy	and	warmth	and	contentment.
The	guards	flanking	Chaur,	walking	at	ease	and	with	modest	thoughts	of
their	own,	had	no	inkling	of	all	that	swirled	in	the	seemingly	simple	mind	of
their	prisoner.	Who	walked,	limbs	loose	and	swinging	now	that	the	natural
tension	that	had	bound	up	the	huge	man’s	neck	and	shoulders	had	eased	away	–


clearly,	the	oaf	had	forgotten	all	the	trouble	he	was	in,	had	forgotten	that	they
were	all	walking	to	a	gaol,	that	soon	Chaur	would	find	himself	inside	a	cage	of
stolid	black	iron	bars.	All	those	thick	walls	enclosing	the	simpleton’s	brain
were	clearly	back	in	place.
Not	worth	a	second	glance.
And	so	there	were	none	to	see	the	hate-filled	eyes	peering	out	through
every	crack,	every	murder	hole,	every	arrow	slit	–	a	thousand,	ten	thousand
glittering	eyes,	seeing	everything,	the	frenzied	flicking	as	immobile	objects
were	observed,	gauged	and	then	discarded;	as	others	were	adjudged	potentially
useful	as	things	that,	while	unmoving,	could	be	made	to	move.	Seeing	all,	yes,
absorbing	and	processing	at	speeds	that	would	stun	one	of	normal	intelligence
–	because	this	was	something	different,	something	alien,	something	almost
perfect	in	its	own	way,	by	its	own	rules,	by	all	the	forces	it	could	assemble,
harbour,	and	then,	when	the	time	was	appropriate,	unleash	upon	a	most
unsuspecting	world.
The	simple	ones	aren’t	simple.	The	broken	ones	aren’t	broken.	They	are
rearranged.	For	better,	for	worse?	Such	judgements	are	without	relevance.
After	all,	imagine	a	world	where	virtually	every	mind	is	simpler	than	it
imagines	itself	to	be,	or	is	so	utterly	broken	that	it	is	itself	unaware	of	its	own
massive,	stunning	dysfunction.	In	such	a	world,	life	goes	on,	and	madness
thrives.	Stupidity	repeats.	Behaviours	destroy	and	destroy	again,	and	again,	yet
remain	impervious	to	enlightenment.	Crimes	against	humanity	abound,	and	not
one	victimizer	can	even	comprehend	one	day	becoming	victim;	not	a	single
cruel	soul	understands	that	cruelty	delivered	yields	cruelty	repaid	tenfold.	It	is
enough	to	eat	today	and	let	tomorrow’s	children	starve.	Wealth	ever	promises
protection	against	the	strictures	of	an	unkind,	avaricious	world,	and	yet	fails	to
deliver	on	that	promise	every	single	time,	be	the	slayer	disease,	betrayal	or	the
ravaging	mobs	of	revolution.	Wealth	cannot	comprehend	that	the	very	avarice
it	fears	is	its	own	creation,	the	toxic	waste	product	of	its	own	glorious
exaltation.	Imagine	such	a	world,	then	–	oh,	don’t	bother.	Better	to	pity	poor,
dumb	Chaur.
Who,	without	warning,	exploded	into	motion.	Placid	thoughts	in	guardian
skulls	shattered	into	oblivion	as	fists	smashed,	sending	each	man	flying	out	to
the	side.	As	dulled	senses	of	something	awry	shot	the	first	spurt	of	chemical
alarm	through	the	nearest	of	the	remaining	guards,	Chaur	reached	him,	picked
him	up	by	belt	and	neck,	and	threw	him	against	a	happily	immobile	stone	wall
on	the	right.	The	officer	and	the	last	guard	both	began	their	whirl	to	confront
the	still	mostly	unknown	threat,	and	Chaur,	smiling,	was	there	to	meet	them.	He
had	in	his	left	hand	–	gripped	by	one	ear	–	a	heavy	amphora,	which	he	had


collected	from	a	stall	to	his	left,	and	he	brought	this	object	round	to	crash	into
the	officer.	Clay	shards,	a	shower	of	pellet	grain,	and	in	their	midst	a
crumpling	body.	The	last	guard,	one	hand	tugging	at	his	sword,	mouth	open	to
begin	a	shout	of	alarm,	saw	in	his	last	conscious	moment	Chaur	and	his	broad
smile,	as	the	simpleton,	with	a	roundhouse	swing,	drove	his	fist	into	the	side	of
the	man’s	head,	collapsing	the	helm	on	that	side	and	sending	the	headpiece
flying.	In	a	welter	of	blood	from	ear	and	temple,	the	guard	fell	to	the	ground,
alive	but	temporarily	unwilling	to	acknowledge	the	fact.
And	Chaur	stood	now	facing	Barathol,	with	such	pleased,	excited	eyes	that
the	blacksmith	could	only	stare	back,	speechless,	aghast.
	
Gorlas	Vidikas	stepped	out	from	the	carriage	and	paused	to	adjust	his
leggings,	noting	with	faint	displeasure	the	discordant	creases	sitting	in	that
sweaty	carriage	had	left	him	with,	and	then	glanced	up	as	the	sickly	foreman
wheezed	his	way	over.
‘Noble	sir,’	he	gasped,	‘about	the	interest	payments	–	I’ve	been	ill,	as	you
know—’
‘You’re	dying,	you	fool,’	Gorlas	snapped.	‘I	am	not	here	to	discuss	your
problems.	We	both	know	what	will	happen	should	you	default	on	the	loan,	and
we	both	know	–	I	should	trust	–	that	you	are	not	long	for	this	world,	which
makes	the	whole	issue	irrelevant.	The	only	question	is	whether	you	will	die	in
your	bed	or	end	up	getting	tossed	out	on	your	backside.’	After	a	moment,	he
stepped	closer	and	slapped	the	man	on	his	back,	triggering	a	cloud	of	dust.
‘You’ve	always	got	your	shack	here	at	camp,	yes?	Come	now,	it’s	time	to
discuss	other	matters.’
The	foreman	blinked	up	at	him,	with	all	that	pathetic	piteousness	perfected
by	every	loser	the	world	over.	Better,	of	course,	than	the	dark	gleam	of	malice
–	the	stupid	ones	were	quick	to	hate,	once	they’d	got	a	sense	of	how	they’d
been	duped	–	no,	best	keep	this	one	making	all	those	mewling	help-me	faces.
Gorlas	smiled.	‘You	can	stay	in	your	lovely	new	home,	friend.	I	will	forgo
the	interest	payments	so	you	can	leave	this	world	in	peace	and	comfort.’	And
oh,	wasn’t	this	such	extraordinary	favour?	This	concession,	this	grave
sacrifice,	why,	it	would	not	be	remiss	if	this	idiot	fell	to	his	knees	in	abject
gratitude,	but	never	mind	that.	A	second	thump	on	the	back,	this	one	triggering
a	coughing	fit	from	the	old	man.
Gorlas	walked	to	the	edge	of	the	vast	pit	and	surveyed	the	bustling	hive	of
activity	below.	‘All	is	well?’
The	foreman,	after	hacking	out	a	palmful	of	yellow	phlegm,	hobbled	up	to


stand	hunched	beside	him,	wiping	a	hand	on	a	caked	trouser	leg.	‘Well	enough,
sir,	yes,	well	enough	indeed.’
See	how	his	mood	has	improved?	No	doubt	eaten	up	with	worry	all
morning,	the	poor	useless	bastard.	Well,	the	world	needed	such	creatures,
didn’t	it?	To	do	all	the	dirty,	hard	work,	and	then	thank	people	like	Gorlas	for
the	privilege.	You’re	so	very	welcome,	you	stupid	fool,	and	see	this?	It’s	my
smile	of	indulgence.	Bask	and	bask	well	–	it’s	the	only	thing	I	give	away	that’s
truly	free.
‘How	many	losses	this	week?’
‘Three.	Average,	sir,	that’s	average	as	can	be.	One	mole	in	a	cave-in,	the
others	died	of	the	greyface	sickness.	We	got	the	new	vein	producing	now.
Would	you	believe,	it’s	red	iron!’
Gorlas’s	brows	lifted,	‘Red	iron?’
A	quick,	eager	nod.	‘Twice	the	price	at	half-weight,	that	stuff.	Seems
there’s	growing	demand—’
‘Yes,	the	Malazan	longswords	everyone’s	lusting	after.	Well,	this	will	make
it	easier	to	order	one,	since	up	to	now	only	one	smith	had	the	skill	to	make	the
damned	weapons.’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Ugly	things,	if	you	ask	me.	Curious
thing	is,	we	don’t	get	red	iron	round	here	–	not	till	now,	that	is	–	so	how	was
the	fool	making	such	perfect	copies?’
‘Well,	noble	sir,	there’s	an	old	legend	’bout	how	one	can	actually	turn
regular	iron	into	the	red	stuff,	and	do	it	cheap	besides.	Maybe	it	ain’t	just	a
legend.’
Gorlas	grunted.	Interesting.	Imagine	finding	out	that	secret,	being	able	to
take	regular	iron,	toss	in	something	virtually	worthless,	and	out	comes	red
iron,	worth	four	times	the	price.	‘You’ve	just	given	me	an	idea,’	he	murmured.
‘Though	I	doubt	the	smith	would	give	up	the	secret	–	no,	I’d	have	to	pay.	A	lot.’
‘Maybe	a	partnership,’	the	foreman	ventured.
Gorlas	scowled.	He	wasn’t	asking	for	advice.	Still,	yes,	a	partnership	might
work.	Something	he’d	heard	about	that	smith…some	Guild	trouble.	Well,	could
be	Gorlas	could	smooth	all	that	over,	for	a	consideration.	‘Never	mind,’	he
said,	a	tad	overloud,	‘it	was	just	a	notion	–	I’ve	already	discarded	it	as	too
complicated,	too	messy.	Let’s	forget	we	ever	discussed	it.’
‘Yes,	sir.’
But	was	the	foreman	looking	oddly	thoughtful?	Might	be	necessary,
Gorlas	reflected,	to	hasten	this	fool’s	demise.
From	up	the	road	behind	them,	a	trader ’s	cart	was	approaching.
	


Stupid,	really.	He’d	elected	to	wear	his	riding	boots,	but	the	things	were
ancient,	worn,	and	it	seemed	his	feet	had	flattened	out	some	since	he’d	last	used
them,	and	now	he	had	enormous	blisters,	damned	painful	ones.	And	so,	for	all
his	plans	of	a	stentorian,	impressive	arrival	at	the	camp,	full	of	dour	intent	and
an	edge	of	bluster,	to	then	be	ameliorated	by	a	handful	of	silver	councils,	a
relieved	foreman	sending	a	runner	off	to	retrieve	the	wayward	child,	Murillio
found	himself	on	the	back	of	a	rickety	cart,	covered	in	dust	and	sweating	in	the
midst	of	a	cloud	of	flies.
Well,	he	would	just	have	to	make	the	best	of	it,	wouldn’t	he?	As	the	ox
halted	at	the	top	of	the	ridgeline,	the	old	man	walking	slow	as	a	snail	over	to
where	stood	the	eponymous	foreman	beside	some	fancy	noble	–	now	both
looking	their	way	–	Murillio	eased	himself	down,	wincing	at	the	lancing	pain
shooting	up	his	legs,	thinking	with	dread	of	the	long	walk	back	to	the	city,	his
hand	holding	Harllo’s	tiny	one,	with	darkness	crawling	up	from	the	ditches	to
either	side	–	a	long,	long	walk	indeed,	and	how	he’d	manage	it	was,	truth	be
told,	beyond	him.
Soldiers	knew	about	blisters,	didn’t	they?	And	men	and	women	who
worked	hard	for	a	living.	To	others,	the	affliction	seemed	trivial,	a	minor
irritation	–	and	when	there	were	years	between	this	time	and	the	last	time	one
had	suffered	from	them,	it	was	easy	to	forget,	to	casually	dismiss	just	how
debilitating	they	truly	were.
Raw	leather	rubbed	at	each	one	like	ground	glass	as	he	settled	his	weight
back	down.	Still,	it	would	not	do	to	hobble	over,	and	so,	mustering	all	his	will,
Murillio	walked,	one	careful	step	at	a	time,	to	where	the	foreman	and	the
nobleman	stood	discussing	things	with	the	carter.	As	he	drew	closer,	his	gaze
narrowed	on	the	highborn	one,	a	hint	of	recognition…but	where?	When?
The	carter	had	been	told	by	the	foreman	where	to	take	the	supplies,	and	off
he	went,	with	a	passing	nod	at	Murillio.
The	foreman	was	squinting	curiously,	and	as	Murillio	drew	up	before	them
he	spat	to	one	side	and	said,	‘You	look	lost,	sir.	If	you’ve	the	coin	you	can	buy
a	place	at	the	workers’	table	–	it’s	plain	fare	but	fillin’	enough,	though	we	don’t
serve	nothing	but	weak	ale.’	He	barked	a	laugh.	‘We	ain’t	no	roadside	inn,	are
we?’
Murillio	had	thought	long	on	how	he	would	approach	this.	But	he	had	not
expected	a	damned	nobleman	in	this	particular	scene,	and	something	whispered
to	him	that	what	should	have	been	a	simple	negotiation,	concluded	by	paying
twice	the	going	rate	for	a	five-year-old	boy,	might	now	turn	perilously
complicated.	‘Are	you	the	foreman	of	the	camp,	sir?’	he	asked,	after	a
deferential	half-bow	to	the	nobleman.	At	the	answering	nod,	Murillio


continued,	‘Very	good.	I	am	here	in	search	of	a	young	boy,	name	of	Harllo,
who	was	sold	to	your	camp	a	few	weeks	back.’	He	quickly	raised	a	gloved
hand.	‘No,	I	have	no	desire	to	challenge	the	propriety	of	that	arrangement.
Rather,	I	wish	to	purchase	the	boy’s	freedom,	and	so	deliver	him	back	to	his,
er,	terribly	distressed	parents.’
‘Do	ye	now?’	The	foreman	looked	over	at	the	nobleman.
Yes,	Murillio	thought	he	might	know	this	young	man.
‘You	are	the	one	named	Murillio,’	the	nobleman	said,	with	an	odd	glitter	in
his	gaze.
‘You	have	the	better	of	me—’
‘That	goes	without	saying.	I	am	the	principal	investor	of	this	operation.	I
am	also	a	councillor.	Gorlas	Vidikas	of	House	Vidikas.’
Murillio	bowed	a	second	time,	as	much	to	hide	his	dismay	as	in	proper
deference.	‘Councillor	Vidikas,	it	is	a	pleasure	meeting	you.’
‘Is	it?	I	very	much	doubt	that.	It	took	me	a	few	moments	to	place	you.	You
were	pointed	out,	you	see,	a	couple	of	years	back,	at	some	estate	fête.’
‘Oh?	Well,	there	was	a	time	when	I	was—’
‘You	were	on	a	list,’	Gorlas	cut	in.
‘A	what?’
‘A	hobby	of	a	friend	of	mine,	although	I	doubt	he	would	have	seen	it	as	a
hobby.	In	fact,	if	I	was	so	careless	as	to	use	that	word,	when	it	came	to	his	list,
he’d	probably	call	me	out.’
‘I	am	sorry,’	Murillio	said,	‘but	I’m	afraid	I	do	not	know	what	you	are
talking	about.	Some	sort	of	list,	you	said?’
‘Likely	conspirators,’	Gorlas	said	with	a	faint	smile,	‘in	the	murder	of
Turban	Orr,	not	to	mention	Ravyd	Lim	–	or	was	it	some	other	Lim?	I	don’t
recall	now,	but	then,	that	hardly	matters.	No,	Turban	Orr,	and	of	course	the
suspicious	suicide	of	Lady	Simtal	–	all	on	the	same	night,	in	her	estate.	I	was
there,	did	you	know	that?	I	saw	Turban	Orr	assassinated	with	my	own	eyes.’
And	he	was	in	truth	smiling	now,	as	if	recalling	something	yielding	waves	of
nostalgia.	But	his	eyes	were	hard,	fixed	like	sword	points.	‘My	friend,	of
course,	is	Hanut	Orr,	and	the	list	is	his.’
‘I	do	recall	attending	the	Simtal	fête,’	Murillio	said,	and	in	his	mind	he	was
reliving	those	moments	after	leaving	the	Lady’s	bedchamber	–	leaving	her	with
the	means	by	which	she	could	take	her	own	life	–	and	his	thoughts,	then,	of
everything	he	had	surrendered,	and	what	it	might	mean	for	his	future.
Appropriate,	then,	that	it	should	now	return	to	crouch	at	his	feet,	like	a	rabid
dog	with	fangs	bared.	‘Alas,	I	missed	the	duel—’
‘It	was	no	duel,	Murillio.	Turban	Orr	was	provoked.	He	was	set	up.	He	was


assassinated,	in	plain	view.	Murder,	not	a	duel	–	do	you	even	comprehend	the
difference?’
The	foreman	was	staring	back	and	forth	between	them	with	all	the	dumb
bewilderment	of	an	ox.
‘I	do,	sir,	but	as	I	said,	I	was	not	there	to	witness	the	event—’
‘You	call	me	a	liar,	then?’
‘Excuse	me?’	Gods	below,	ten	years	past	and	he	would	have	handled	this
with	perfect	grace	and	mocking	equanimity,	and	all	that	was	ruffled	would	be
smoothed	over,	certain	debts	accepted,	promises	of	honouring	those	debts	not
even	needing	explicit	enunciation.	Ten	years	past	and—
‘You	are	calling	me	a	liar.’
‘No,	I	do	not	recall	doing	so,	Councillor.	If	you	say	Turban	Orr	was
assassinated,	then	so	be	it.	As	for	my	somehow	conspiring	to	bring	it	about,
well,	that	is	itself	a	very	dangerous	accusation.’	Oh,	he	knew	where	this	was
leading.	He	had	known	for	some	time,	in	fact.	It	was	all	there	in	Gorlas
Vidikas’s	eyes	–	and	Murillio	now	recalled	where	he	had	last	seen	this	man,
and	heard	of	him.	Gorlas	enjoyed	duelling.	He	enjoyed	killing	his	opponents.
Yes,	he	had	attended	one	of	this	bastard’s	duels,	and	he	had	seen—
‘It	seems,’	said	Gorlas,	‘we	have	ourselves	a	challenge	to	honour	here.’	He
gave	a	short	laugh.	‘When	you	retracted	your	accusation,	well,	I	admit	I
thought	you	were	about	to	tuck	your	tail	between	your	legs	and	scuttle	off
down	the	road.	And	perhaps	I	would’ve	let	you	go	at	that	–	it’s	Hanut’s
obsession,	after	all.	Not	mine.’
Murillio	said	nothing,	understanding	how	he	had	trapped	himself,	with	the
foreman	to	witness	the	fact	that	the	demand	for	a	duel	had	come	from	him,	not
Gorlas	Vidikas.	He	also	understood	that	there	had	been	no	chance,	none	at	all,
that	Gorlas	would	have	let	him	go.
‘Naturally,’	continued	the	councillor,	‘I	have	no	intention	of	withdrawing
my	accusation	–	so	either	accept	it	or	call	me	out,	Murillio.	I	have	vague
recollections	that	you	were	once	judged	a	decent	duellist.’	He	scanned	the	track
to	either	side.	‘This	place	seems	well	suited.	Now,	a	miserable	enough
audience,	granted,	but—’
‘Excuse	me,’	cut	in	the	foreman,	‘but	the	day’s	shift	bell	is	about	to	sound.
The	crews	can	get	a	perfect	view,	what	with	you	two	on	the	ridgeline	–	if	you’d
like.’
Gorlas	winked	over	at	Murillio	as	he	said,	‘By	all	means	we	shall	wait,
then.’
The	foreman	trundled	down	the	path	into	the	pit,	to	ensure	that	the	crew
captains	were	told	what	was	going	on.	They’d	enjoy	the	treat	after	a	long	day’s


work	in	the	tunnels.
As	soon	as	the	foreman	was	out	of	earshot,	Gorlas	grinned	at	Murillio.
‘Now,	anything	more	we	should	talk	about,	now	that	we’ve	got	no	witness?’
‘Thank	you	for	the	invitation,’	Murillio	said,	tightening	the	straps	of	his
glove.	‘Turban	Orr	didn’t	deserve	an	honourable	death.	Hanut	is	your	friend?
Tell	me,	do	you	enjoy	sleeping	with	vipers,	or	are	you	just	stupid?’
‘If	that	was	an	attempt	to	bring	me	to	a	boil,	it	was	pathetic.	You	truly	think
I	don’t	know	all	the	tricks	leading	up	to	a	duel?	Gods	below,	old	man.	Still,	I
am	pleased	by	your	admission	–	Hanut	will	be	delighted	to	hear	that	his
suspicions	were	accurate.	More	important,	he	will	find	himself	in	my	debt.’
And	then	he	cocked	his	head.	‘Of	course,	the	debt	will	be	all	the	greater	if	I	let
you	live.	A	duel	unto	wounding	–	leaving	your	fate	in	Hanut’s	hands.	Yes,	that
would	be	perfect.	Well,	Murillio,	shall	it	be	wounding?’
‘If	you	like,’	Murillio	said.
‘Are	your	boots	pinching?’
‘No.’
‘You	seem	in	discomfort,	Murillio,	or	is	that	just	nerves?’
Bells	clanged	in	the	pit	below.	Distant	shouts,	and	out	from	the	tunnel
mouths	spewed	filthy	figures	looking	barely	human	at	this	distance.	Runners
raced	down	the	lines.	Word	was	getting	out.
‘What’s	this	Harllo	boy	to	you,	anyway?’
Murillio	glanced	back	to	Gorlas.	‘You	married	Estraysian	D’Arle’s
daughter,	didn’t	you?	She’s	made	herself	very…popular,	of	late,	hasn’t	she?
Alas,	I	am	starting	to	understand	why	–	you’re	not	much	of	a	man,	are	you,
Gorlas?’
For	all	the	councillor ’s	previous	bravado,	he	paled	in	the	late	afternoon
light.
‘It’s	terrible,	isn’t	it,’	Murillio	went	on,	‘how	every	sordid	detail,	no	matter
how	private	and	personal,	so	easily	leaves	the	barricaded	world	of	the
wellborn	and	races	like	wind-blown	seeds	among	all	us	common	folk,	us
lowborn.	Why,	whatever	happened	to	decency?’
The	rapier	rasped	its	way	out	of	the	sheath	and	the	point	lifted	towards
Murillio.	‘Draw	your	weapon,	old	man.’
	
Krute	of	Talient	stepped	inside.	He	saw	Rallick	Nom	standing	by	the	window,
but	it	was	shuttered	closed.	The	man	might	as	well	be	standing	facing	a	wall.
Oh,	he	was	a	strange	one	indeed,	stranger	now	than	he’d	ever	been	before.	All
that	silence,	all	that	sense	of	something	being	very	much…wrong.	In	his	head?


Maybe.	And	that	was	a	worrying	thought	–	that	Rallick	Nom	might	not	be	right
any	more.
‘It’s	confirmed,’	said	Krute,	setting	down	the	burlap	sack	filled	with	the
makings	for	supper.	‘One	contract	dissolved,	a	new	one	accepted.	Stinks	of
desperation,	doesn’t	it?	Gods,	Seba’s	even	called	me	back	and	that’s	an
invitation	no	sane	man	would	refuse.’	He	paused,	eyeing	his	friend,	and	then
said,	‘So	you	may	not	be	seeing	much	of	me	from	now	on.	From	what	I’ve
gathered,	this	new	one’s	pretty	straightforward,	but	it’s	the	kind	that’ll	shake	up
the	precious	bloods.’
‘Is	it	now?’	Rallick	asked,	expressionless.
‘Listen,’	said	Krute,	knowing	he	was	betraying	his	nerves,	‘I	couldn’t	say
no,	could	I?	It’s	fine	enough	living	off	your	coin,	but	that’s	hard	on	a	man’s
pride.	I’ve	got	a	chance	to	get	back	into	the	middle	of	things	again.	I’ve	got	a
chance	to	walk	with	the	Guild	again.	Rallick,	I	got	to	take	it,	you	understand?’
‘Is	it	that	important	to	you,	Krute?’
Krute	nodded.
‘Then,’	said	Rallick,	‘I	had	best	leave	your	company.’
‘I’m	sorry	about	that	–	it’s	my	being…what’s	that	word	again?’
‘Compromised.’
‘Exactly.	Now,	if	you’d	made	your	move	on	Seba,	well,	we	wouldn’t	be	in
this	situation,	would	we?	It’s	the	waiting	that’s	been	so	hard.’
‘There	are	no	plans	to	replace	Seba	Krafar,’	said	Rallick.	‘I	am	sorry	if	I
have	unintentionally	misled	you	on	that	count.	This	is	not	to	say	we’re
uninterested	in	the	Guild.’	He	hesitated.	‘Krute,	listen	carefully.	I	can	leave	you
some	coin	–	enough	for	a	while,	a	half-year ’s	worth,	in	fact.	Just	decline
Seba’s	invitation	–	you	don’t	know	what	you’re	getting	into—’
‘And	you	do?	No,	Rallick,	the	point	is,	if	I	don’t	know	it’s	because	I’ve
been	pushed	out	of	things.’
‘You	should	be	thankful	for	that.’
‘I	don’t	need	any	patronizing	shit	from	you,	Rallick	Nom.	You’re	all
secrets	now,	nothing	but	secrets.	But	you’ll	live	here,	with	me,	and	eat	what	I
cook,	and	what	about	me?	Oh,	right,	on	the	outside	again,	this	time	with	you.
Well,	I	can’t	live	like	that,	so	you’d	better	go.	Don’t	think	ill	of	me	–	I	won’t
tell	Seba	about	you.’
‘Can	I	not	buy	your	retirement,	Krute?’
‘No.’
Rallick	nodded	and	then	walked	to	the	door.	‘Guard	yourself	well,	Krute.’
‘You	too,	Rallick.’


Emerging	from	the	tenement	building’s	narrow	back	door,	Rallick	Nom
stepped	out	into	the	rank,	rubbish-filled	alley.	His	last	venture	into	the	world
had	seen	him	very	nearly	killed	by	Crokus	Younghand,	and	of	his	time	spent
recovering	at	the	Phoenix	Inn,	it	was	clear	that	no	one	who’d	known	of	his
presence	had	said	a	thing	–	not	Kruppe,	nor	Coll,	nor	Murillio,	nor	Meese,	or
Irilta;	the	Guild	had	not	sniffed	out	his	ignominious	return.	Even	that	wayward
cousin	of	his,	Torvald,	had	said	nothing	–	although	why	that	man	had	so
vigorously	avoided	him	was	both	baffling	and	somewhat	hurtful.
Anyway,	in	a	sense,	Rallick	remained	invisible.
He	paused	in	the	alley.	Still	light,	a	ribbon	of	brightness	directly	above.	It
felt	odd,	to	be	outside	in	the	day,	and	he	knew	it	would	not	be	long	before
someone	caught	sight	of	him,	recognizing	his	face	–	eyes	widening	with
astonishment	–	and	word	would	race	back	to	Seba	Krafar.	And	then?
Well,	the	Master	would	probably	send	one	of	his	lieutenants	to	sound
Rallick	out	–	what	did	he	want?	What	did	he	expect	from	the	Guild?	There
might	be	an	invitation	as	well,	the	kind	that	was	deadly	either	way.	Accept	it	and
walk	into	an	ambush.	Reject	it	and	the	hunt	would	begin.	There	were	few	who
could	take	down	Rallick	one	on	one,	but	that	wouldn’t	be	the	preferred	tactic	in
any	case.	No,	it	would	be	a	quarrel	to	the	back.
There	were	other	places	he	could	hide	–	he	could	probably	walk	right	back
into	the	Finnest	House.	But	then,	Krute	was	not	the	only	one	getting	impatient.
Besides,	Rallick	had	never	much	liked	subterfuge.	He’d	not	used	it	when	he’d
been	active	in	the	Guild,	after	all	–	except	when	he	was	working,	of	course.
No,	the	time	had	come	to	stir	things	awake.	And	if	Seba	Krafar ’s
confidence	had	been	rattled	by	a	handful	of	rancorous	Malazans,	well,	he	was
about	to	be	sent	reeling.
The	notion	brought	a	faint	smile	to	Rallick’s	lips.	Yes,	I	am	back.
He	set	out	for	the	Phoenix	Inn.
I	am	back,	so	let’s	get	this	started,	shall	we?
	
Echoing	alarms	at	the	blurred	border	between	the	Daru	and	Lakefront	districts,
a	half-dozen	streets	behind	them	now	as	Barathol	–	holding	Chaur ’s	hand	as	he
would	a	child’s	–	dragged	the	giant	man	through	the	late	afternoon	crowds.
They	had	passed	a	few	patrols,	but	word	had	yet	to	outdistance	the	two
fugitives,	although	it	was	likely	that	this	flight	would,	ultimately,	prove
anything	but	surreptitious	–	guards	and	bystanders	both	could	not	help	but


recall	the	two	huge	foreigners,	one	onyx-skinned,	the	other	the	hue	of	stained
rawhide,	rushing	past.
Barathol	had	no	choice	but	to	dispense	with	efforts	at	stealth	and
subterfuge.	Chaur	was	bawling	with	all	the	indignant	outrage	of	a	toddler
unjustly	punished,	astonished	to	discover	that	not	all	things	were	cute	and	to	be
indulged	by	adoring	caregivers	–	that,	say,	shoving	a	sibling	off	a	cliff	was	not
quite	acceptable	behaviour.
He	had	tried	calming	Chaur	down,	but	simple	as	Chaur	was,	he	was	quick
to	sense	disapproval,	and	Barathol	had	been	unthinking	and	careless	in
expressing	that	disapproval	–	well,	rather,	he	had	been	shocked	into
carelessness	–	and	now	the	huge	child	would	wail	unto	eventual	exhaustion,
and	that	exhaustion	was	still	a	long	way	off.
Two	streets	away	from	the	harbour,	three	guards	thirty	paces	behind	them
suddenly	raised	shouts,	and	now	the	chase	was	on	for	real.
To	Barathol’s	surprise,	Chaur	fell	silent,	and	the	smith	pulled	him	up
alongside	him	as	they	hurried	along.	‘Chaur,	listen	to	me.	Get	back	to	the	ship
–	do	you	understand?	Back	to	the	ship,	to	the	lady,	yes?	Back	to	Spite	–	she’ll
hide	you.	To	the	ship,	Chaur,	understand?’
A	tear-streaked	face,	cheeks	blotchy,	eyes	red,	Chaur	nodded.
Barathol	pushed	him	ahead.	‘Go.	On	your	own	–	I’ll	catch	up	with	you.
Go!’
And	Chaur	went,	lumbering,	knocking	people	off	their	feet	until	a	path
miraculously	opened	before	him.
Barathol	turned	about	to	give	the	three	guards	some	trouble.	Enough	to
purchase	Chaur	the	time	he	needed,	at	least.
He	managed	that	well	enough,	with	fists	and	feet,	with	knees	and	elbows,
and	if	not	for	the	arrival	of	reinforcements,	he	might	even	have	won	clear.	Six
more	guards,	however,	proved	about	five	too	many,	and	he	was	wrestled	to	the
ground	and	beaten	half	senseless.
The	occasional	thought	filtered	weakly	through	the	miasma	of	pain	and
confusion	as	he	was	roughly	carried	to	the	nearest	gaol.	He’d	known	a	cell
before.	It	wasn’t	so	bad,	so	long	as	the	gaolers	weren’t	into	torture.	Yes,	he
could	make	a	tour	of	gaol	cells,	country	to	country,	continent	to	continent.	All
he	needed	to	do	was	start	up	a	smithy	without	the	local	Guild’s	approval.
Simple	enough.
Then	these	fragmented	notions	went	away,	and	the	bliss	of
unconsciousness	was	unbroken,	for	a	time.
	


‘’Tis	the	grand	stupidity	of	our	kind,	dear	Cutter,	to	see	all	the	errors	of	our
ways,	yet	find	in	ourselves	the	inability	to	do	anything	about	them.	We	sit,
dumbfounded	by	despair,	and	for	all	our	ingenuity,	our	perceptivity,	for	all	our
extraordinary	capacity	to	see	the	truth	of	things,	we	hunker	down	like	snails	in
a	flood,	sucked	tight	to	our	precious	pebble,	fearing	the	moment	it	is	dislodged
beneath	us.	Until	that	terrible	calamity,	we	do	nothing	but	cling.
‘Can	you	even	imagine	a	world	where	all	crimes	are	punished,	where
justice	is	truly	blind	and	holds	out	no	hands	happy	to	yield	to	the	weight	of
coin	and	influence?	Where	one	takes	responsibility	for	his	or	her	mistakes,
acts	of	negligence,	the	deadly	consequences	of	indifference	or	laziness?	Nay,
instead	we	slip	and	duck,	dance	and	dodge,	dance	the	dodge	slip	duck	dance,
feet	ablur!	Our	selves	transformed	into	shadows	that	flit	in	chaotic	discord.	We
are	indeed	masters	of	evasion	–	no	doubt	originally	a	survival	trait,	at	least	in
the	physical	sense,	but	to	have	such	instincts	applied	to	the	soul	is	perhaps	our
most	egregious	crime	against	morality.	What	we	will	do	so	that	we	may
continue	living	with	ourselves.	In	this	we	might	assert	that	a	survival	trait	can
ultimately	prove	its	own	antithesis,	and	in	the	cancelling	out	thereof,	why,	we
are	left	with	the	blank,	dull,	vacuous	expression	that	Kruppe	now	sees	before
him.’
‘Sorry,	what?’
‘Dear	Cutter,	this	is	a	grave	day,	I	am	saying.	A	day	of	the	misguided	and
the	misapprehended,	a	day	of	mischance	and	misery.	A	day	in	which	to	grieve
the	unanticipated,	this	yawning	stretch	of	too-late	that	follows	fell	decisions,
and	the	stars	will	plummet	and	if	we	truly	possessed	courage	we	would	ease
ourselves	with	great	temerity	into	that	high,	tottering	footwear	of	the	gods,	and
in	seeing	what	they	see,	in	knowing	what	they	have	come	to	know,	we	would	at
last	comprehend	the	madness	of	struggle,	the	absurdity	of	hope,	and	off	we
would	stumble,	wailing	our	way	into	the	dark	future.	We	would	weep,	my
friend,	we	would	weep.’
‘Maybe	I	have	learned	all	about	killing,’	Cutter	said	in	a	mumble,	his	glazy
eyes	seemingly	fixed	on	the	tankard	in	his	hand.	‘And	maybe	assassins	don’t
spare	a	thought	as	to	who	deserves	what,	or	even	motivations.	Coin	in	hand,	or
love	in	the	heart	–	reward	has	so	many…flavours.	But	is	this	what	she	really
wants?	Or	was	that	some	kind	of	careless…burst,	like	a	flask	never	meant	to	be
opened	–	shatters,	everything	pours	out	–	staining	your	hands,	staining…
everything.’
‘Cutter,’	said	Kruppe	in	a	low,	soft	but	determined	tone.	‘Cutter.	You	must
listen	to	Kruppe,	now.	You	must	listen	–	he	is	done	with	rambling,	with	his	own
bout	of	terrible,	grievous	helplessness.	Listen!	Cutter,	there	are	paths	that	must


not	be	walked.	Paths	where	going	back	is	impossible	–	no	matter	how	deeply
you	would	wish	it,	no	matter	how	loud	the	cry	in	your	soul.	Dearest	friend,	you
must—’
Shaking	himself,	Cutter	rose	suddenly.	‘I	need	a	walk,’	he	said.	‘She
couldn’t	have	meant	it.	That	future	she	paints…it’s	a	fairy	tale.	Of	course	it	is.
Has	to	be.	No,	and	no,	and	no.	But…’
Kruppe	watched	as	the	young	man	walked	away,	watched	as	Cutter	slipped
through	the	doorway	of	the	Phoenix	Inn,	and	was	gone	from	sight.
‘Sad	truth,’	Kruppe	said	–	his	audience	of	none	sighing	in	agreement	–
‘that	a	tendency	towards	verbal	excess	can	so	defeat	the	precision	of	meaning.
That	intent	can	be	so	well	disguised	in	majestic	plethora	of	nuance,	of	rhythm
both	serious	and	mocking,	of	this	penchant	for	self-referential	slyness,	that	the
unwitting	simply	skip	on	past	–	imagining	their	time	to	be	so	precious,
imagining	themselves	above	all	manner	of	conviction,	save	that	of	their	own
witty	perfection.	Sigh	and	sigh	again.
‘See	Kruppe	totter	in	these	high	shoes	–	nay,	even	his	balance	is	not	always
precise,	no	matter	how	condign	he	may	be	in	so	many	things.	Totter,	I	say,	as
down	fall	the	stars	and	off	wail	the	gods	and	helplessness	is	an	ocean	in	flood,
ever	rising	–	but	we	shall	not	drown	alone,	shall	we?	No,	we	shall	have	plenty
of	company	in	this	chill	comfort.	The	guilty	and	the	innocent,	the	quick	and	the
thick,	the	wise	and	the	dumb,	the	righteous	and	the	wicked	–	the	flood	levels
all,	faces	down	in	the	swells,	oh	my.
‘Oh	my…’
	
A	miracle,	better	than	merely	recounted	second	or	third	hand	–	witnessed.
Witnessed:	the	four	bearers	would	have	carried	their	charge	directly	past,	but
then	–	see	–	a	gnarled,	feeble	hand	reached	out,	damp	fingertips	pressing
against	Myrla’s	forehead.
And	the	bearers	–	who	were	experienced	in	such	random	gestures	of
deliverance	–	halted.
She	stared	up	into	the	Prophet’s	eyes	and	saw	terrible	pain,	a	misery	so
profound	it	purified,	and	knowledge	beyond	anything	her	useless,	dross-filled
mind	could	comprehend.	‘My	son,’	she	gasped.	‘My	son…my	self	–	oh	my
heart—’
‘Self,	yes,’	he	said,	fingers	pressing	against	her	forehead	like	four	iron
nails,	pinning	her	guilt	and	shame,	her	weakness,	her	useless	stupidity.	‘I	can
bless	that.	So	I	shall.	Do	you	feel	my	touch,	dear	woman?’
And	Myrla	could	not	but	nod,	for	she	did	feel	it,	oh,	yes,	she	felt	it.


From	behind	her	Bedek’s	quavering	voice	drifted	past.	‘Glorious	One	–
our	son	has	been	taken.	Kidnapped.	We	know	not	where,	and	we	thought,	we
thought…’
‘Your	son	is	beyond	salvation,’	said	the	Prophet.	‘He	has	the	vileness	of
knowledge	within	his	soul.	I	can	sense	how	you	two	merged	in	his	creation	–
yes,	your	blood	was	his	poison	of	birth.	He	understands	compassion,	but	he
chooses	it	not.	He	understands	love,	but	uses	it	as	a	weapon.	He	understands	the
future,	and	knows	it	does	not	wait	for	anyone,	not	even	him.	He	is	a	living
maw,	your	son,	a	living	maw,	which	all	of	the	world	must	feed.’
The	hand	withdrew,	leaving	four	precise	spots	of	ice	on	Myrla’s	forehead
–	every	nerve	dead	there,	for	ever	more.	‘Even	the	Crippled	God	must	reject
such	a	creature.	But	you,	Myrla,	and	you,	Bedek,	I	bless.	I	bless	you	both	in
your	lifelong	blindness,	your	insensitive	touch,	the	fugue	of	your
malnourished	minds.	I	bless	you	in	the	crumpling	of	the	two	delicate	flowers	in
your	hands	–	your	two	girls	–	for	you	have	made	of	them	versions	no	different
from	you,	no	better,	perhaps	much	worse.	Myrla.	Bedek.	I	bless	you	in	the
name	of	empty	pity.	Now	go.’
And	she	staggered	back,	stumbled	into	the	cart,	knocking	it	and	Bedek
over.	He	cried	out,	falling	hard	on	to	the	cobbles,	and	a	moment	later	she
landed	on	top	of	him.	The	snap	of	his	left	arm	was	loud	in	the	wake	of	the	nowresumed	procession	of	bearers	and	Prophet,	the	swirling	press	of	begging
worshippers	sweeping	in,	stepping	without	care,	without	regard.	A	heavy	boot
stamped	down	on	Myrla’s	hip	and	she	shrieked	as	something	broke,	lancing
agony	into	her	right	leg.	Another	foot	collided	with	her	face,	toenails	slashing
one	cheek.	Heels	on	hands,	fingers,	ankles.
Bedek	caught	a	momentary	glimpse	upward,	to	see	the	face	of	a	man
desperate	to	climb	over	them,	for	they	were	in	his	way	and	he	wanted	to	reach
the	Prophet,	and	the	man	looked	down,	his	pleading	expression	transforming
into	one	of	black	hate.	And	he	drove	the	point	of	his	boot	into	Bedek’s	throat,
crushing	the	trachea.
Unable	to	breathe	past	the	devastation	that	had	once	been	his	throat,	Bedek
stared	up	with	bulging	eyes.	His	face	deepened	to	a	shade	of	blue-grey,	and
then	purple.	The	awareness	in	the	eyes	flattened	out,	went	away,	and	away.
Still	screaming,	Myrla	dragged	herself	over	her	husband	–	noting	his
stillness	but	otherwise	uncomprehending	–	and	pulled	herself	through	a	forest
of	hard,	shifting	legs	–	shins	and	knees,	jabbing	feet,	out	into	a	space,	suddenly
open,	clear,	the	cobbles	slick	beneath	her.
Although	she	was	not	yet	aware	of	them,	four	spots	of	gangrene	were
spreading	across	her	forehead	–	she	could	smell	something	foul,	horribly	foul,


as	though	someone	had	dropped	something	in	passing,	somewhere	close;	she
just	couldn’t	see	it	yet.	The	pain	of	her	broken	hip	was	now	a	throbbing	thing,	a
deadweight	she	dragged	behind	her,	growing	ever	more	distant	in	her	mind.
We	run	from	our	place	of	wounding.	No	different	from	any	other	beast,	we
run	from	our	place	of	wounding.	Run,	or	crawl,	crawl	or	drag,	drag	or	reach.
She	realized	that	even	such	efforts	had	failed	her.	She	was	broken	everywhere.
She	was	dying.
See	me?	I	have	been	blessed.	He	has	blessed	me.
Bless	you	all.
	
He	could	barely	stand,	and	now	he	must	duel.	Murillio	untied	his	coin	pouch
and	tossed	it	towards	the	foreman	who	had	just	returned,	gasping	and	redfaced.	The	bag	landed	in	a	cloud	of	dust,	a	heavy	thud.	‘I	came	for	the	boy,’
Murillio	said.	‘That’s	more	than	he’s	worth	–	do	you	accept	the	payment,
foreman?’
‘He	does	not,’	said	Gorlas.	‘No,	I	have	something	special	in	mind	for	little
Harllo.’
‘He’s	not	part	of	any	of	this—’
‘You	just	made	him	so,	Murillio.	One	of	your	clan,	maybe	even	a	whelp	of
one	of	your	useless	friends	in	the	Phoenix	Inn	–	your	favoured	hangout,	yes?
Hanut	knows	everything	there	is	to	know	about	you.	No,	the	boy’s	in	this,	and
that’s	why	you	won’t	have	him.	I	will,	to	do	with	as	I	please.’
Murillio	drew	his	rapier.	‘What	makes	people	like	you,	Gorlas?’
‘I	could	well	ask	the	same	of	you.’
Well,	a	lifetime	of	mistakes.	And	so	we	are	perhaps	more	alike	than	either	of
us	would	care	to	admit.	He	saw	the	foreman	bend	down	to	collect	the	purse.
The	odious	man	hefted	it	and	grinned.	‘About	those	interest	payments,
Councillor…’
Gorlas	smiled.	‘Why,	it	seems	you	can	clear	your	debt	after	all.’
Murillio	assumed	his	stance,	point	extended,	sword	arm	bent	slightly	at	the
elbow,	left	shoulder	thrown	back	to	reduce	the	plane	of	his	exposed	torso.	He
settled	his	weight,	gingerly,	down	through	the	centre	of	his	hips.
Smiling	still,	Gorlas	Vidikas	moved	into	a	matching	pose,	although	he	was
leaning	slightly	forward.	Not	a	duellist	ready	to	retreat,	then.	Murillio	recalled
that	from	the	fight	he’d	seen	the	very	end	of,	the	way	Gorlas	would	not	step
back,	unwilling	to	yield	ground,	unwilling	to	accept	that	sometimes	pulling
away	earned	advantages.	No,	he	would	push,	and	push,	surrendering	nothing.
He	rapped	Murillio’s	blade	with	his	own,	a	contemptuous	batting	aside	to


gauge	response.
There	was	none.	Murillio	simply	resumed	his	line.
Gorlas	probed	with	the	rapier ’s	point,	jabbing	here	and	there	round	the
bell	hilt,	teasing	and	gambling	with	the	quillons	that	could	trap	his	blade,	but
for	Murillio	to	do	so	he	would	have	to	twist	and	fold	his	wrist	–	not	much,	but
enough	for	Gorlas	to	make	a	darting	thrust	into	the	opened	guard,	and	so
Murillio	let	the	man	play	with	that.	He	was	in	no	hurry;	footsore	and	weary	as
he	was,	he	suspected	he	would	have	but	one	solid	chance,	sooner	or	later,	to
end	this.	Point	to	lead	kneecap,	or	down	to	lead	boot,	or	a	flicking	slash	into
wrist	tendons,	crippling	the	sword	arm	–	possibly	for	ever.	Or	higher,	into	the
shoulder,	stop-hitting	a	lunge.
Gorlas	pressed,	closing	the	distance,	and	Murillio	stepped	back.
And	that	hurt.
He	could	feel	wetness	in	his	boots,	that	wretched	clear	liquid	oozing	out
from	the	broken	blisters.
‘I	think,’	ventured	Gorlas,	‘there’s	something	wrong	with	your	feet,
Murillio.	You	move	like	a	man	standing	on	nails.’
Murillio	shrugged.	He	was	past	conversation;	it	was	hard	enough
concentrating	through	the	stabs	of	pain.
‘Such	an	old-style	stance	you	have,	old	man.	So…upright.’	Gorlas	resumed
the	flitting,	wavering	motions	of	his	rapier,	minute	threats	here	and	there.	He
had	begun	a	rhythmic	rocking	back	and	forth	on	the	balls	of	his	feet,
attempting	to	lull	Murillio	into	that	motion.
When	he	finally	launched	into	his	attack,	the	move	was	explosive,	lightning
fast.
Murillio	tracked	the	feints,	caught	and	parried	the	lunge,	and	snapped	out	a
riposte	–	but	he	was	stepping	back	as	he	did	so,	and	his	point	snipped	the	cloth
of	Gorlas’s	sleeve.	Before	he	could	ready	himself,	the	younger	duellist
extended	his	attack	with	a	hard	parrying	beat	and	then	a	second	lunge,	throwing
his	upper	body	far	forward	–	closing	enough	to	make	Murillio’s	retreat
insufficient,	as	was	his	parry.
Sizzling	fire	in	his	left	shoulder.	Staggering	back,	the	motion	tugging	the
point	free	of	his	flesh,	Murillio	righted	himself	and	then	straightened.	‘Blood
drawn,’	he	said,	voice	tightened	by	pain.
‘Oh,	that,’	said	Gorlas,	resuming	his	rocking	motion	once	more,	‘I’ve
changed	my	mind.’
One	insult	too	many.	I	never	learn.
Murillio	felt	his	heart	pounding.	The	scar	of	his	last,	near	fatal	wounding
seemed	to	be	throbbing	as	if	eager	to	reopen.	He	could	feel	blood	pulsing


down	from	his	pierced	shoulder	muscle,	could	feel	warm	trickles	running
down	the	length	of	his	upper	arm	to	soak	the	cloth	at	his	elbow.
‘Blood	drawn,’	he	repeated.	‘As	you	guessed,	I	am	in	no	shape	to	duel
beyond	that,	Gorlas.	We	were	agreed,	before	a	witness.’
Gorlas	glanced	over	at	his	foreman.	‘Do	you	recall,	precisely,	what	you
heard?’
The	old	man	shrugged.	‘Thought	there	was	something	about	wounding…’
Gorlas	frowned.
The	foreman	cleared	his	throat.	‘…but	that’s	all.	A	discussion,	I	think.	I
heard	nothing,	er,	firmed	up	between	you.’
Gorlas	nodded.	‘Our	witness	speaks.’
A	few	hundred	onlookers	in	the	pit	below	were	making	restless	sounds.
Murillio	wondered	if	Harllo	was	among	them.
‘Ready	yourself,’	Gorlas	said.
So,	it	was	to	be	this	way.	A	decade	past	Murillio	would	have	been	standing
over	this	man’s	corpse,	regretful,	of	course,	wishing	it	all	could	have	been
handled	peacefully.	And	that	was	the	luxury	of	days	gone	past,	that	cleaner
world,	while	everything	here,	now,	ever	proved	so…messy.
I	didn’t	come	here	to	die	this	day.	I’d	better	do	something	about	that.	I	need
to	survive	this.	For	Harllo.	He	resumed	his	stance.	Well,	he	was	debilitated,
enough	to	pretty	much	ensure	that	he	would	fight	defensively,	seeking	only
ripostes	and	perhaps	a	counterattack	–	taking	a	wound	to	deliver	a	death.	All	of
that	would	be	in	Gorlas’s	mind,	would	shape	his	tactics.	Time,	then,	to	surprise
the	bastard.
His	step	and	lunge	was	elegant,	a	fluid	forward	motion	rather	quick	for	a
man	his	age.	Gorlas,	caught	on	the	forward	tilt	of	his	rocking,	was	forced	to
jump	a	half-step	back,	parrying	hard	and	without	precision.	His	riposte	was
wild	and	inaccurate,	and	Murillio	caught	it	with	a	high	parry	of	his	own,
following	through	with	a	second	attack	–	the	one	he	had	wanted	to	count	from
the	very	first	–	a	fully	extended	lunge	straight	for	his	opponent’s	chest	–	heart
or	lungs,	it	didn’t	matter	which—
But	somehow,	impossibly,	Gorlas	had	stepped	close,	inside	and	to	one	side
of	that	lunge	–	his	half-step	back	had	not	been	accompanied	by	any	shift	in
weight,	simply	a	repositioning	of	his	upper	body,	and	this	time	his	thrust	was
not	at	all	wild.
Murillio	caught	a	flash	along	the	length	of	Daru	steel,	and	then	he	could
not	breathe.	Something	was	pouring	down	the	front	of	his	chest,	and	spurting
up	into	his	mouth.
He	felt	part	of	his	throat	tearing	from	the	inside	out	as	Gorlas	slashed	his


blade	free	and	stepped	to	the	right.
Murillio	twisted	round	to	track	him,	but	the	motion	lost	all	control,	and	he
continued	on,	legs	collapsing	under	him,	and	now	he	was	lying	on	the	stony
ground.
The	world	darkened.
He	heard	Gorlas	say	something,	possibly	regretful,	but	probably	not.
Oh,	Harllo,	I	am	so	sorry.	So	sorry—
And	the	darkness	closed	in.
He	was	rocked	momentarily	awake	by	a	kick	to	his	face,	but	that	pain
quickly	flushed	away,	along	with	everything	else.
	
Gorlas	Vidikas	stood	over	Murillio’s	corpse.	‘Get	that	carter	to	take	the	body
back,’	he	said	to	the	foreman,	bending	down	to	clean	his	blade	on	the
threadbare	silk	sleeve	of	his	victim’s	weapon	arm.	‘Have	him	deliver	it	to	the
Phoenix	Inn,	rapier	and	all.’
From	the	pit	below,	people	were	cheering	and	clanging	their	tools	like
some	ragtag	mob	of	barbarians.	Gorlas	faced	them	and	raised	his	weapon	in
salute.	The	cheering	redoubled.	He	turned	back	to	the	foreman.	‘An	extra
tankard	of	ale	for	the	crews	tonight.’
‘They	will	toast	your	name,	Councillor!’
‘Oh,	and	have	someone	collect	the	boy	for	me.’
‘It’s	his	shift	in	the	tunnels,	I	think,	but	I	can	send	someone	to	get	him.’
‘Good,	and	they	don’t	have	to	be	gentle	about	it,	either.	But	make	sure	–
nothing	so	bad	he	won’t	recover.	If	they	kill	him,	I	will	personally	disembowel
every	one	of	them	–	make	sure	they	understand.’
‘I	will,	Councillor.’	The	foreman	hesitated.	‘I	never	seen	such	skill,	I	never
seen	such	skill	–	I	thought	he	had	you—’
‘I’m	sure	he	thought	so,	too.	Go	find	that	carter,	now.’
‘On	my	way,	Councillor.’
‘Oh,	and	I’ll	take	that	purse,	so	we’re	clear.’
The	foreman	rushed	over	to	deliver	it.	Feeling	the	bag’s	weight	for	the
first	time,	Gorlas	raised	his	brows	–	a	damned	year ’s	wages	for	this	foreman,
right	here	–	probably	all	Murillio	had,	cleaned	right	out.	Three	times	as	much
as	the	interest	this	fool	owed	him.	Then	again,	if	the	foreman	had	stopped	to
count	out	the	right	amount,	intending	to	keep	the	rest,	well,	Gorlas	would	have
had	two	bodies	to	dispose	of	rather	than	just	one,	so	maybe	the	old	man	wasn’t
so	stupid	after	all.
It	had,	Gorlas	decided,	been	a	good	day.


	
And	so	the	ox	began	its	long	journey	back	into	the	city,	clumping	along	the
cobbled	road,	and	in	the	cart’s	bed	lay	the	body	of	a	man	who	might	have	been
precipitous,	who	might	indeed	have	been	too	old	for	such	deadly	ventures,	but
no	one	could	say	that	his	heart	had	not	been	in	the	right	place.	Nor	could
anyone	speak	of	a	lack	of	courage.
Raising	a	most	grave	question	–	if	courage	and	heart	are	not	enough,	what
is?
The	ox	could	smell	blood,	and	liked	it	not	one	bit.	It	was	a	smell	that	came
with	predators,	with	hunters,	notions	stirring	the	deepest	parts	of	the	beast’s
brain.	It	could	smell	death	as	well,	there	in	its	wake,	and	no	matter	how	many
clumping	steps	it	took,	that	smell	did	not	diminish,	and	this	it	could	not
understand,	but	was	resigned	to	none	the	less.
There	was	no	room	in	the	beast	for	grieving.	The	only	sorrow	it	knew	was
for	itself.	So	unlike	its	two-legged	masters.
Flies	swarmed,	ever	unquestioning,	and	the	day’s	light	fell	away.


Chapter	Eighteen

He	is	unseen,	one	in	a	crowd	whom	none	call
Do	not	slip	past	that	forgettable	face
Crawl	not	inside	to	find	the	unbidden	rill
As	it	flows	in	dark	horror	from	place	to	place
He	is	a	common	thing,	in	no	way	singular
Who	lets	no	one	inside	the	uneven	steps
Down	those	eyes	that	drown	the	solitary	star
We	boldly	share	in	these	human	depths
Not	your	brother,	not	anyone’s	saviour
He	will	loom	only	closer	to	search	your	clothes
Push	aside	the	feeble	hand	that	seeks	to	stir
Compassion’s	glow	(the	damp,	dying	rose)
He	has	plucked	his	garden	down	to	bone
And	picked	every	last	bit	of	warm	flesh
With	fear	like	claws	and	nervous	teeth	when	alone
He	wanders	this	wasteland	of	cinder	and	ash
I	watch	in	terror	as	he	ascends	our	blessed	throne
To	lay	down	his	cloak	of	shame	like	a	shroud
And	beckons	us	the	illusion	of	a	warm	home
A	sanctuary	beneath	his	notice,	one	in	a	crowd
He	finds	his	power	in	our	indifference
Shredding	the	common	to	dispense	with	congress
No	conjoined	will	to	set	against	him	in	defiance
And	one	by	one	by	one,	he	kills	us
A	King	Takes	the	Throne
		(carved	on	the	Poet’s	Wall,


Royal	Dungeons,	Unta)

With	a	twist	and	a	snarl,	Shan	turned	on	Lock.	The	huge	white-coated	beast	did
not	flinch	or	scurry,	but	simply	loped	away,	tongue	lolling	as	if	in	laughter.	A
short	distance	off,	Pallid	watched.	Fangs	still	bared,	Shan	slipped	off	into	the
high	grasses	once	more.
Baran,	Blind,	Rood	and	Gear	had	not	slowed	during	this	exchange	–	it	had
happened	many	times	before,	after	all	–	and	they	continued	on,	in	a	vaguely
crescent	formation,	Rood	and	Gear	on	the	flanks.	Antelope	observed	them
from	a	rise	off	to	the	southwest	–	the	barest	tilt	of	a	head	from	any	of	the
Hounds	and	they	would	be	off,	fast	as	their	bounding	legs	could	take	them,
their	hearts	a	frenzied	drum-roll	of	bleak	terror.
But	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	were	not	hunting	this	day.	Not	antelope,	not
bhederin,	nor	mule	deer	nor	ground	sloth.	A	host	of	animals	that	lived	either	in
states	of	blessed	anonymity	or	states	of	fear	had	no	need	to	lurch	from	the
former	into	the	latter	–	at	least	not	because	of	the	monstrous	Hounds.	As	for
the	wolves	of	the	plains,	the	lumbering	snub-nosed	bears	and	the	tawny	cats	of
the	high	grasses,	there	were	none	within	ten	leagues	–	the	faintest	wisp	of	scent
had	sent	them	fleeing	one	and	all.
Great	Ravens	sailed	high	above	the	Hounds,	minute	specks	in	the	vaulted
blue.
Shan	was	displeased	with	the	two	new	companions,	these	blots	of	dirty
white	with	the	lifeless	eyes.	Lock	in	particular	irritated	her,	as	it	seemed	this
one	wanted	to	travel	as	she	did,	close	by	her	side,	sliding	unseen,	ghostly	and
silent.	Most	annoying	of	all,	Lock	was	Shan’s	able	match	in	such	skill.
But	she	had	no	interest	in	surrendering	her	solitude.	Ambush	and	murder
were	best	served	alone,	as	far	as	she	was	concerned.	Lock	complicated	things,
and	Shan	despised	complications.
Somewhere,	far	behind	them,	creatures	pursued.	In	the	profoundly	long
history	of	the	Hounds	of	Shadow,	they	had	been	hunted	many	times.	More	often
than	not,	the	hunters	came	to	regret	the	decision,	whether	a	momentary	impulse
or	an	instinctive	need;	whether	at	the	behest	of	some	master	or	by	the	hatred	in
their	souls,	their	desire	usually	proved	fatal.
Occasionally,	however,	being	hunted	was	such	exquisite	pleasure	that	the
Hounds	never	turned	the	game.	Let	the	chase	go	on,	and	on.	Dance	from	the
path	of	that	rage,	all	that	blind	need.
All	things	will	cast	a	shadow.	If	light	blazes	infernal,	a	shadow	can	grow


solid,	outlines	sharp,	motion	rippling	within.	Shape	is	a	reflection,	but	not	all
reflections	are	true.	Some	shadows	lie.	Deception	born	of	imagination	and
imagination	born	of	fear,	or	perhaps	it	is	the	other	way	round	and	fear	ignites
imagination	–	regardless,	shadows	will	thrive.
In	the	dark	conjurings	of	a	sentient	mind,	all	that	is	imagined	can	be	made
real.	The	beast,	and	the	shadow	it	casts.	The	beast’s	shadow,	and	the	light	from
which	it	is	born.	Each	torn	away,	made	distinct,	made	into	things	of	nightmare.
Philosophers	and	fools	might	claim	that	light	is	without	shape,	that	it	finds
its	existence	in	painting	the	shape	of	other	things,	as	wayward	as	the	opening	of
an	eye.	That,	in	the	absence	of	such	things,	it	slants	unseen,	indeed,	invisible.
Without	other	things	to	strike	upon,	it	does	not	cavort,	does	not	bounce,	does
not	paint	and	reflect.	Rather,	it	flows	eternal.	If	this	is	so,	then	light	is	unique	in
the	universe.
But	the	universe	holds	to	one	law	above	all	others:	nothing	is	unique.
Fools	and	philosophers	have	not,	alas,	seen	the	light.
Conjure	the	shapes	of	beasts,	of	Hounds	and	monsters,	fiends	and
nightmares.	Of	light,	of	dark,	and	of	shadow.	A	handful	of	clay,	a	gifted	breath
of	life,	and	forces	will	seethe	in	the	conflicts	inscribed	upon	their	souls.
The	Deragoth	are	the	dark,	and	in	their	savage	solidity	would	claim
ownership	of	the	shadows	they	cast.	Lock	and	Pallid,	however,	are	the	light	that
gave	the	Deragoth	shape,	without	whom	neither	the	Deragoth	nor	the	Hounds
of	Shadow	would	exist.	If	the	hunters	and	the	hunted	so	will,	one	day	the	beasts
shall	come	together,	baleful	in	mutual	regard,	perhaps	even	eager	to	annihilate
one	another,	and	then,	in	a	single	instant	of	dumbfounded	astonishment,	vanish
one	and	all.	Ha	hah.
Not	all	instincts	guide	one	to	behaviours	of	survival.	Life	is	mired	in
stupidity,	after	all,	and	the	smarter	the	life,	the	stupider	it	can	be.	The	Hounds
of	Shadow	were	neither	brilliant	nor	brainless.	They	were,	in	fact,	rather
clever.
Salutations	to	this	tripartite	universe,	so	mutually	insistent.	And	why	not?	It
doesn’t	even	exist,	except	in	the	caged	mind	that	so	needs	simplification.
A	mind,	mused	Cotillion,	like	mine.
He	glanced	across	at	his	companion.	But	not	his.	When	you	stand	at	the
centre	of	the	game,	no	questions	arise.	How	can	that	be?	What	is	it	like,	to	be
the	storm’s	eye?	What	happens,	dear	Shadowthrone,	when	you	blink?
‘This,’	muttered	Shadowthrone,	‘was	unexpected.’
‘A	damned	complication,’	Cotillion	agreed.	‘We	need	the	Hounds	there,
just	to	ensure	nothing	goes	awry.’
Shadowthrone	snorted.	‘It	always	goes	awry.	Gods	below,	I’ve	had	to	use


that	mad	High	Priest	again.’
‘Iskaral	Pust.’	After	a	moment,	Cotillion	realized	he	was	smiling.	He
quickly	cast	away	that	expression,	since	if	Shadowthrone	saw	it	he	might	well
go	apoplectic.	‘Lovely	as	she	is,	Sordiko	Qualm	is	not	insurance	enough,	not
for	this,	anyway.’
‘Nor	is	Pust!’	snapped	Shadowthrone.
They	watched	the	Hounds	drawing	closer,	sensed	the	beasts’	collective
curiosity	at	this	unplanned	intercession.	Their	task	now,	after	all,	was	simple.
Straightforward,	even.
Cotillion	glanced	back	over	his	shoulder,	eyes	narrowing	on	the	gaunt
figure	walking	towards	them.	Well,	not	precisely	–	the	stranger	was	on	his	way
to	a	damned	reunion,	and	what	would	come	of	that?
‘Too	many	histories,	too	many	half-truths	and	outright	lies.’	Shadowthrone
snarled	every	word	of	that	statement.	‘Pups	of	the	Tiste	Edur	–	any	one	will	do,
it	seems,	if	they	know	the	old	commands.	But	now…’
‘According	to	my,	er,	research,	its	name	is	Tulas	Shorn,	and	no,	I	do	not
know	the	gender	and	what	seems	to	be	left	of	it	doesn’t	look	as	if	it	will
provide	enough	detail	to	decide	either	way.’
Shadowthrone	grunted,	and	then	said,	‘At	least	it’s	sembled	–	oh,	how	I
hate	dragons!	If	vermin	had	a	throne,	they’d	be	on	it.’
‘Everywhere	there’s	a	mess,	they’re	in	the	middle	of	it,	all	right.	Eleint,
Soletaken	–	hardly	a	difference,	when	it	comes	to	trouble.’
‘The	chaos	of	their	blood,	Cotillion.	Imagine	how	dull	it	would	be	without
them…and	I	so	cherish	dullness.’
If	you	say	so.
‘So,’	Shadowthrone	resumed,	‘how	does	all	this	fit	with	your	ridiculously
convoluted	theories?’
‘They’re	only	convoluted	because	they	are	without	substance	–	if	you’ll
kindly	excuse	that	inadvertent	pun.	Light,	Dark,	Shadow.	Hounds	of	this	and
that	and	that.	These	beasts	may	exist	only	because	of	semantics.’
Shadowthrone	snorted.	‘You	don’t	have	to	clean	up	after	them	–	the	only
possible	excuse	for	such	an	idiotic	suggestion.	They	smell,	they	slaver	and
slobber,	they	scratch	and	they	lick,	Cotillion.	Oh,	and	they	tear	things	to	pieces.
When	it	suits	them.’
‘Because	we	expect	them	to.’
‘Really	now.’
‘Listen	–	what	was	the	mess	behind	the	origin	of	the	Deragoth?	Wild	beasts
from	the	dusty	aeons	of	past	ages,	seven	left	in	all	the	world,	and	the	First
Emperor	–	who	was	anything	but	–	chooses	them	as	the	repositories	of	his


divided	soul.	All	very	well,	but	then	we	have	the	Hounds	of	Shadow,	and,
presumably,	the	Hounds	of	Light—’
‘They’re	just	damned	albinos,	Cotillion,	a	detail	probably	irrelevant,	and
besides,	there’re	only	two	of	them—’
‘That	we	know	of,	and	we	know	of	them	only	because	they	wandered	into
our	realm	–	why?	What	or	who	summoned	them?’
‘I	did,	of	course.’
‘How?’
Shadowthrone	shrugged.	‘I	mused	out	loud	on	the	need	for…
replacements.’
‘And	that	constitutes	summoning?	I	believe	I	have	also	heard	you	musing
on	the	“need”	for	a	breathlessly	beautiful	Queen	of	Shadow,	a	slave	to	your
every	desire—’
‘You	were	hiding	behind	the	curtain!	I	knew	it!’
‘The	point	is,	where	is	she?’
The	question	was	left	unanswered,	as	Tulas	Shorn	had	arrived,	halting	ten
paces	before	them.	‘It	seems,’	the	undead	Tiste	Edur	said,	‘my	Hounds	have
found	new…pets.’
‘Saw	his	head	off,	Cotillion,’	Shadowthrone	said.	‘I	hate	him	already.’
Shan	slid	up	beside	Cotillion,	eyes	fixed	on	Tulas	Shorn.	A	moment	later
Baran,	Rood,	Blind	and	Gear	arrived,	padding	round	the	rulers	of	the	Realm	of
Shadow,	and	onward	to	encircle	the	Tiste	Edur.
Who	held	out	his	hands,	as	if	inviting	the	beasts	to	draw	close.
None	did.
‘They	preferred	you	living,	I	think,’	Cotillion	observed.	‘The	dead
surrender	so	much.’
‘If	only	my	sentiments	were	dead,’	Tulas	Shorn	said,	then	sighed	as	it
lowered	its	hands	to	its	sides	once	more.	‘Still,	it	pleases	me	to	see	them.	But
two	are	missing.’
At	that	Cotillion	glanced	round.	‘Well,	you’re	right.’
‘Killed?’
‘Killed,’	confirmed	Shadowthrone.
‘Who?’
‘Anomander	Rake.’
At	the	name	Tulas	Shorn	started.
‘Still	around,’	said	Shadowthrone,	‘yes.	Hee	hee.	Hound-slayer.’
‘And	neither	of	you	strong	enough	to	avenge	the	slayings,	it	seems.	I	am
astonished	that	my	Hounds	have	accepted	such	feeble	masters.’
‘I	thought	it	was	pets.	No	matter.	Ganrod	and	Doan	died	because	they	were


precipitate.	Blame	poor	training.	I	do.’
‘I	am	of	a	mind	to	test	you,’	said	Tulas	Shorn	after	a	moment.
‘You	want	the	Throne	of	Shadow,	do	you?’
‘My	first	rule	was	cut	short.	I	have	learned	since—’
‘Hardly.	You	died.’	Shadowthrone	waved	one	ephemeral	hand.	‘Whatever
you	learned,	you	did	not	learn	well	enough.	Obviously.’
‘You	seem	certain	of	that.’
‘He	is,’	said	Cotillion.
‘Is	it	simply	megalomania,	then,	that	so	afflicts	him?’
‘Well,	yes,	but	that’s	beside	the	point.’
‘And	what	is	the	point?’
‘That	you	clearly	have	not	learned	anything	worthwhile.’
‘And	why	do	you	say	that?’
‘Because	you’ve	just	said	that	you	were	of	a	mind	to	test	us.’
Tulas	Shorn	cocked	its	head.	‘Do	you	imagine	the	Hounds	will	defend
you?’
‘These	ones?	Probably	not.’
‘Then—’	But	the	rest	of	his	statement	was	left	unfinished,	as	Lock	and
Pallid	arrived,	heads	low,	hackles	upright	like	spines,	to	flank	Shadowthrone
and	Cotillion.	Upon	seeing	them,	Tulas	Shorn	stepped	back.	‘By	the	Abyss,’	it
whispered,	‘have	you	two	lost	your	minds?	They	cannot	be	here	–	they	must
not	be	among	you—’
‘Why?’	Cotillion	demanded,	leaning	forward	in	sudden	interest.
But	the	Tiste	Edur	simply	shook	its	head.
The	two	bone-white	Hounds	looked	barely	restrained,	moments	from
exploding	into	a	deadly	charge.	The	hate	was	avid	in	their	eyes.
‘Why?’	Cotillion	asked	again.
‘The…implacability	of	forces	–	we	think	to	tame,	but	the	wildness	remains.
Control	is	a	delusion	in	the	mind	of	self-proclaimed	masters.’	And	that	last
word	dripped	with	contempt.	‘The	leash,	you	fools,	is	frayed	–	don’t	you
understand	anything	at	all?’
‘Perhaps—’
Tulas	Shorn	lifted	both	hands	again,	but	this	time	in	a	warding	gesture.	‘We
thought	the	same,	once.	We’d	deceived	ourselves	into	thinking	we	were	the
masters,	that	every	force	bowed	to	our	command.	And	what	happened?	They
destroyed	everything!’
‘I	don’t—’
‘Understand?	I	see	that!	They	are	conjurations	–	manifestations	–	they
exist	to	warn	you.	They	are	the	proof	that	all	that	you	think	to	enslave	will	turn


on	you.’	And	it	backed	away.	‘The	end	begins	again,	it	begins	again.’
Cotillion	stepped	forward.	‘Light,	Dark	and	Shadow	–	these	three	–	are	you
saying—’
‘Three?’	Tulas	Shorn	laughed	with	savage	bitterness.	‘What	then	of	Life?
Fire	and	Stone	and	Wind?	What,	you	fools,	of	the	Hounds	of	Death?
Manifestations,	I	said.	They	will	turn	–	they	are	telling	you	that!	That	is	why
they	exist!	The	fangs,	the	fury	–	all	that	is	implacable	in	nature–	each	aspect
but	a	variation,	a	hue	in	the	maelstrom	of	destruction!’
Tulas	Shorn	was	far	enough	away	now,	and	the	Tiste	Edur	began	veering
into	a	dragon.
As	one,	all	seven	Hounds	surged	forward	–	but	they	were	too	late,	as	the
enormous	winged	creature	launched	skyward,	rising	on	a	wave	of	appalling
power	that	sent	Cotillion	staggering	back;	that	blew	through	Shadowthrone
until	he	seemed	half	shredded.
The	Soletaken	dragon	rose	higher,	as	if	riding	on	a	column	of	pure	panic,
or	horror.	Or	dismay.	A	pillar	reaching	for	the	heavens.	Far	above,	the	Great
Ravens	scattered.
Recovering,	Cotillion	turned	on	Shadowthrone.	‘Are	we	in	trouble?’
The	ruler	of	High	House	Shadow	slowly	collected	himself	back	into	a
vaguely	human	shape.	‘I	can’t	be	sure,’	he	said.
‘Why	not?’
‘Why,	because	I	blinked.’
Up	ahead,	the	Hounds	had	resumed	their	journey.	Lock	loped	a	tad	too
close	alongside	Shan	and	she	snarled	the	beast	off.
Tongue	lolled,	jaw	hanging	in	silent	laughter.
So	much	for	lessons	in	hubris.
	
There	were	times,	Kallor	reflected,	when	he	despised	his	own	company.	The
day	gloried	in	its	indifference,	the	sun	a	blinding	blaze	tracking	the	turgid
crawl	of	the	landscape.	The	grasses	clung	to	the	hard	earth	the	way	they	always
did,	seeds	drifting	on	the	wind	as	if	on	sighs	of	hope.	Tawny	rodents	stood
sentinel	above	warren	holes	and	barked	warnings	as	he	marched	past.	The
shadows	of	circling	hawks	rippled	across	his	path	every	now	and	then.
Despising	himself	was,	oddly	enough,	a	comforting	sensation,	for	he	knew
he	was	not	alone	in	his	hate.	He	could	recall	times,	sitting	on	a	throne	as	if	he
and	it	had	merged	into	one,	as	immovable	and	inviolate	as	one	of	the	matching
statues	outside	the	palace	(any	one	of	his	innumerable	palaces),	when	he	would
feel	the	oceanic	surge	of	hate’s	tide.	His	subjects,	tens,	hundreds	of	thousands,


each	and	every	one	wishing	him	dead,	cast	down,	torn	to	pieces.	Yet	what	had
he	been	but	the	perfect,	singular	representative	of	all	that	they	despised	within
themselves?	Who	among	them	would	not	eagerly	take	his	place?	Casting	down
foul	judgements	upon	all	whose	very	existence	offended?
He	had	been,	after	all,	the	very	paragon	of	acquisitiveness.	Managing	to
grasp	what	others	could	only	reach	for,	to	gather	into	his	power	a	world’s
arsenal	of	weapons,	and	reshape	that	world	in	hard	cuts,	to	make	of	it	what	he
willed	–	not	one	would	refuse	to	take	his	place.	Yes,	they	could	hate	him;
indeed,	they	must	hate	him,	for	he	embodied	the	perfection	of	success,	and	his
very	existence	mocked	their	own	failures.	And	the	violence	he	delivered?	Well,
watch	how	it	played	out	in	smaller	scenes	everywhere	–	the	husband	who
cannot	satisfy	his	wife,	so	he	beats	her	down	with	his	fists.	The	streetwise
adolescent	bully,	pinning	his	victim	to	the	cobbles	and	twisting	the	hapless
creature’s	arm.	The	noble	walking	past	the	starving	beggar.	The	thief	with	the
avaricious	eye	–	no,	none	of	these	is	any	different,	not	in	their	fundamental
essence.
So,	hate	Kallor	even	as	he	hates	himself.	Even	in	that,	he	will	do	it	better.
Innate	superiority	expressed	in	all	manner	of	ways.	See	the	world	gnash	its
teeth	–	he	answers	with	a	most	knowing	smile.
He	walked,	the	place	where	he	had	begun	far,	far	behind	him	now,	and	the
place	to	where	he	was	going	drawing	ever	closer,	step	by	step,	as	inexorable	as
this	crawling	landscape.	Let	the	sentinels	bark,	let	the	hawks	muse	with	wary
eye.	Seeds	ride	his	legs,	seeking	out	new	worlds.	He	walked,	and	in	his	mind
memories	unfolded	like	worn	packets	of	parchment,	seamed	and	creased;
scurried	up	from	the	bottom	of	some	burlap	sack	routed	as	rats,	crackling	as
they	opened	up	in	a	rain	of	flattened	moths	and	insect	carcasses.
Striding	white-faced	and	blood-streaked	down	a	jewel-studded	hallway,
dragging	by	an	ankle	the	corpse	of	his	wife	–	just	one	in	a	countless	succession
–	her	arms	trailing	behind	her	limp	as	dead	snakes,	their	throats	slashed	open.
There	had	been	no	warning,	no	patina	of	dust	covering	her	eyes	when	she	fixed
him	with	their	regard	that	morning,	as	he	sat	ordering	the	Century	Candles	in	a
row	on	the	table	between	them.	As	he	invited	her	into	a	life	stretched	out,	the
promise	of	devouring	for	ever	–	no	end	to	the	feast	awaiting	them,	no	need
ever	to	exercise	anything	like	restraint.	They	would	speak	and	live	the
language	of	excess.	They	would	mark	out	the	maps	of	interminable	expansion,
etching	the	ambitions	they	could	now	entertain.	Nothing	could	stop	them,	not
even	death	itself.
Some	madness	had	afflicted	her,	like	the	spurt	and	gush	of	a	nicked	artery
–	there	could	be	no	other	cause.	Madness	it	had	been.	Insanity,	to	have	flung


away	so	much.	Of	what	he	offered	her.	So	much,	yes,	of	him.	Or	so	he	had	told
himself	at	the	time,	and	for	decades	thereafter.	It	had	been	easier	that	way.
He	knew	now	why	she	had	taken	her	own	life.	To	be	offered	everything
was	to	be	shown	what	she	herself	was	capable	of	–	the	depthless	reach	of	her
potential	depravity,	the	horrors	she	would	entertain,	the	plucking	away	of
every	last	filament	of	sensitivity,	leaving	her	conscience	smooth,	cool	to	the
touch,	a	thing	maybe	alive,	maybe	not,	a	thing	nothing	could	prod	awake.	She
had	seen,	yes,	just	how	far	she	might	take	herself…and	had	then	said	no.
Another	sweet	packet,	unfolding	with	the	scent	of	flowers.	He	knelt	beside
Vaderon,	his	war	horse,	as	the	animal	bled	out	red	foam,	its	one	visible	eye
fixed	on	him,	as	if	wanting	to	know:	was	it	all	worth	this?	What	has	my	life
purchased	you,	my	blood,	the	end	of	my	days?
A	battlefield	spread	out	on	all	sides.	Heaps	of	the	dead	and	the	dying,
human	and	beast,	Jheck	and	Tartheno	Toblakai,	a	scattering	of	Forkrul	Assail
each	one	surrounded	by	hundreds	of	the	fallen,	the	ones	protecting	their
warleaders,	the	ones	who	failed	in	taking	the	demons	down.	And	there	was	no
dry	ground,	the	blood	was	a	shallow	sea	thickening	in	the	heat,	and	more	eyes
looked	upon	nothing	than	scanned	the	nightmare	seeking	friends	and	kin.
Voices	cried,	but	they	seemed	distant	–	leagues	away	from	Kallor	where	he
knelt	beside	Vaderon,	unable	to	pull	his	gaze	from	that	one	fixating	eye.
Promises	of	brotherhood,	flung	into	the	crimson	mud.	Silent	vows	of	honour,
courage,	service	and	reward,	all	streaming	down	the	broken	spear	shaft	jutting
from	the	animal’s	massive,	broad	chest.	And	yes,	Vaderon	had	reared	to	take
that	thrust,	a	thrust	aimed	at	Kallor	himself,	because	this	horse	was	too	stupid
to	understand	anything.
That	Kallor	had	begun	this	war,	had	welcomed	the	slaughter,	the	mayhem.
That	Kallor,	this	master	now	kneeling	at	its	side,	was	in	truth	a	brutal,
despicable	man,	a	bag	of	skin	filled	with	venom	and	spite,	with	envy	and	a
child’s	selfish	snarl	that	in	losing	took	the	same	from	everyone	else.
Vaderon,	dying.	Kallor,	dry-eyed	and	damning	himself	for	his	inability	to
weep.	To	feel	regret,	to	sow	self-recrimination,	to	make	promises	to	do	better
the	next	time	round.
I	am	as	humankind,	he	often	told	himself.	Impervious	to	lessons.	Pitiful	in
loss	and	defeat,	vengeful	in	victory.	With	every	possible	virtue	vulnerable	to
exploitation	and	abuse	by	others,	could	they	claim	dominion,	until	such	virtues
became	hollow	things,	sweating	beads	of	poison.	I	hold	forth	goodness	and	see
it	made	vile,	and	do	nothing,	voice	no	complaint,	utter	no	disavowal.	The
world	I	make	I	have	made	for	one	single	purpose	–	to	chew	me	up,	me	and
everyone	else.	Do	not	believe	this	bewildered	expression.	I	am	bemused	only


through	stupidity,	but	the	clever	among	me	know	better,	oh,	yes	they	do,	even
as	they	lie	through	my	teeth,	to	you	and	to	themselves.
Kallor	walked,	over	one	shoulder	a	burlap	sack	ten	thousand	leagues	long
and	bulging	with	folded	packets.	So	different	from	everyone	else.	Ghost	horses
run	at	his	side.	Wrist-slashed	women	show	bloodless	smiles,	dancing	round	the
rim	of	deadened	lips.	And	where	dying	men	cry,	see	his	shadow	slide	past.
	
‘I	want	things	plain,’	said	Nenanda.	‘I	don’t	want	to	have	to	work.’	And	then	he
looked	up,	belligerent,	quick	to	take	affront.
Skintick	was	bending	twigs	to	make	a	stick	figure.	‘But	things	aren’t	plain,
Nenanda.	They	never	are.’
‘I	know	that,	just	say	it	straight,	that’s	all.’
‘You	don’t	want	your	confusion	all	stirred	up,	you	mean.’
Nimander	roused	himself.	‘Skin—’
But	Nenanda	had	taken	the	bait	–	and	it	was	indeed	bait,	since	for	all	that
Skintick	had	seemed	intent	on	his	twigs,	he	had	slyly	noted	Nenanda’s
diffidence.	‘Liars	like	confusion.	Liars	and	thieves,	because	they	can	slip	in	and
slip	out,	when	there’s	confusion.	They	want	your	uncertainty,	but	there’s
nothing	uncertain	in	what	they	want,	is	there?	That’s	how	they	use	you	–	you’re
like	that	yourself	sometimes,	Skintick,	with	your	clever	words.’
‘Wait,	how	can	they	use	me	if	I	am	them?’
Desra	snorted.
Nenanda’s	expression	filled	with	fury	and	he	would	have	risen,	if	not	for
Aranatha’s	gentle	hand	settling	on	his	arm,	magically	dispelling	his	rage.
Skintick	twisted	the	arms	of	the	tiny	figure	until	they	were	above	the
knotted	head	with	its	lone	green	leaf,	and	held	it	up	over	the	fire	so	that	it	faced
Nenanda.	‘Look,’	he	said,	‘he	surrenders.’
‘Do	not	mock	me,	Skintick.’
‘On	the	contrary,	I	applaud	your	desire	to	have	things	simple.	After	all,
either	you	can	cut	it	with	your	sword	or	you	can’t.’
‘There	you	go	again.’
The	bickering	would	go	on	half	the	night,	Nimander	knew.	And	as	it	went
on	it	would	unravel,	and	Skintick	would	increasingly	make	Nenanda	into	a
thick-witted	fool,	when	he	was	not	anything	of	the	sort.	But	words	were	indeed
ephemeral,	able	to	sleet	past	all	manner	of	defences,	quick	to	cut,	eager	to	draw
blood.	They	were	the	perfect	weapons	of	deceit,	but	they	could	also	be,	he	well
knew,	the	solid	pavestones	of	a	path	leading	to	comprehension	–	or	what
passed	for	comprehension	in	this	murky,	impossible	world.


There	were	so	many	ways	to	live,	one	for	every	single	sentient	being	–	and
perhaps	for	the	non-sentient	ones	too	–	that	it	was	a	true	miracle	whenever	two
could	meet	in	mutual	understanding,	or	even	passive	acceptance.	Proof,
Skintick	had	once	said,	of	life’s	extraordinary	flexibility.	But	then,	he	had
added,	it	is	our	curse	to	be	social	creatures,	so	we’ve	little	choice	but	to	try	to
get	along.
They	were	camped	on	a	broad	terrace	above	the	last	of	the	strange	ruins	–
the	day’s	climb	had	been	long,	dusty	and	exhausting.	Virtually	every	stone	in
the	rough	gravel	filling	the	old	drainage	channels	proved	to	be	some	sort	of
fossil	–	pieces	of	what	had	once	been	bone,	wood,	tooth	or	tusk	–	all	in
fragments.	The	entire	mountainside	seemed	to	be	some	sort	of	midden,
countless	centuries	old,	and	to	imagine	the	lives	needed	to	create	so	vast	a
mound	was	to	feel	bewildered,	weakened	with	awe.	Were	the	mountains	behind
this	one	the	same?	Was	such	a	thing	even	possible?
Can’t	you	see,	Nenanda,	how	nothing	is	simple?	Not	even	the	ground	we
walk	upon.	How	is	this	created?	Is	what	we	come	from	and	where	we	end	up	any
different?	No,	that	was	badly	put.	Make	it	simpler.	What	is	this	existence?
As	Nenanda	might	answer,	it	does	a	warrior	no	good	to	ask	such	questions.
Leave	us	this	headlong	plunge,	leave	to	the	moment	to	come	that	next	step,
even	if	it’s	over	an	abyss.	There’s	no	point	in	all	these	questions.
And	how	might	Skintick	respond	to	that?	Show	a	bhederin	fear	and	watch	it
run	off	a	cliff.	What	killed	it?	The	jagged	rocks	below,	or	the	terror	that	made	it
both	blind	and	stupid?	And	Nenanda	would	shrug.	Who	cares?	Let’s	just	eat	the
damned	thing.
This	was	not	the	grand	conflict	of	sensibilities	one	might	think	it	was.	Just
two	heads	on	the	same	coin,	one	facing	right	on	this	side,	the	other	facing	left
on	the	other	side.	Both	winking.
And	Desra	would	snort	and	say,	Keep	your	stupid	words,	I’ll	take	the	cock
in	my	hand	over	words	any	time.
Holding	on	for	dear	life,	Skintick	would	mutter	under	his	breath,	and
Desra’s	answering	smile	fooled	no	one.	Nimander	well	remembered	every
conversation	among	his	followers,	his	siblings,	his	family,	and	remembered
too	how	they	could	repeat	themselves,	with	scant	variation,	if	all	the	cues	were
triggered	in	the	right	sequence.
He	wondered	where	Clip	had	gone	to	–	somewhere	out	beyond	this	pool	of
firelight,	perhaps	listening,	perhaps	not.	Would	he	hear	anything	he’d	not	heard
before?	Would	anything	said	this	night	alter	his	opinion	of	them?	It	did	not
seem	likely.	They	bickered,	they	rapped	against	personalities	and	spun	off
either	laughing	or	infuriated.	Prodding,	skipping	away,	ever	seeking	where	the


skin	was	thinnest	above	all	the	old	bruises.	All	just	fighting	without	swords,
and	no	one	ever	died,	did	they?
Nimander	watched	Kedeviss	–	who	had	been	unusually	quiet	thus	far	–	rise
and	draw	her	cloak	tighter	about	her	shoulders.	After	a	moment,	she	set	off
into	the	dark.
Somewhere	in	the	crags	far	away,	wolves	began	howling.
	
Something	huge	loomed	just	outside	the	flickering	orange	light,	and	Samar
Dev	saw	both	Karsa	and	Traveller	twist	round	to	face	it,	and	then	they	rose,
reaching	for	their	weapons.	The	shape	shifted,	seemed	to	wag	from	side	to
side,	and	then	–	at	the	witch’s	eye	level	had	she	been	standing	–	a	glittering,
twisting	snout,	a	broad	flattened	halo	of	fur,	the	smear	of	fire	in	two	small
eyes.
Samar	Dev	struggled	to	breathe.	She	had	never	before	seen	such	an
enormous	bear.	If	it	reared,	it	would	tower	over	even	Karsa	Orlong.	She
watched	that	uplifted	head,	the	flattened	nose	testing	the	air.	The	creature,	she
realized,	clearly	relied	more	on	smell	than	on	sight.	I	thought	fire	frightened
such	beasts	–	not	summoned	them.
If	it	attacked,	things	would	happen…fast.	Two	swords	flashing	into	its
lunge,	a	deafening	bellow,	talons	scything	to	sweep	away	the	two	puny
attackers	–	and	then	it	would	come	straight	for	her.	She	could	see	that,	was
certain	of	it.	The	bear	had	come	for	her.
De	nek	okral.	The	words	seemed	to	foam	up	to	the	surface	of	her	thoughts,
like	things	belched	from	the	murky	depths	of	instinct.	‘De	nek	okral,’	she
whispered.
The	nostrils	flared,	dripping.
And	then,	with	a	snuffling	snort,	the	beast	drew	back,	out	of	the	firelight.	A
crunch	of	stones,	and	the	ground	trembled	as	the	animal	lumbered	away.
Karsa	and	Traveller	moved	their	hands	away	from	their	weapons,	and	then
both	eased	back	down,	resuming	their	positions	facing	the	fire.
The	Toblakai	warrior	found	a	stick	and	dropped	it	into	the	flames.	Sparks
whirled	skyward,	bright	with	liberation,	only	to	wink	out.	His	expression
looked	thoughtful.
Samar	Dev	glanced	down	at	her	trembling	hands,	and	then	slipped	them
beneath	the	woollen	blanket	she	had	wrapped	about	herself.
‘Strictly	speaking,’	said	Traveller,	‘not	an	okral.	De	nek…’	He	raised	his
brows.	‘“Short	nose”?’
‘How	should	I	know?’	Samar	Dev	snapped.


His	brows	lifted	higher.
‘I	don’t	know	where	those	words	came	from.	They	just…arrived.’
‘They	were	Imass,	Samar	Dev.’
‘Oh?’
‘Okral	is	the	word	for	a	plains	bear,	but	that	was	no	plains	bear	–	too	big,
legs	too	long—’
‘I	would	not,’	said	Karsa,	‘wish	to	be	chased	by	that	beast,	even	on
horseback.	That	animal	was	built	for	running	its	prey	down.’
‘But	it	was	not	hunting,’	said	Traveller.
‘I	don’t	know	what	it	was	doing,’	Karsa	conceded	with	a	loose	shrug.	‘But	I
am	glad	it	changed	its	mind.’
‘From	you	two,’	Samar	said,	‘it	would	have	sensed	no	fear.	That	alone
would	have	made	it	hesitate.’	Her	voice	was	harsh,	almost	flinging	the	words
out.	She	was	not	sure	why	she	was	so	angry.	Perhaps	naught	but	the	aftermath
of	terror	–	a	terror	that	neither	companion	had	the	decency	to	have	shared	with
her.	They	made	her	feel…diminished.
Traveller	was	still	studying	her,	and	she	wanted	to	snarl	at	him.	When	he
spoke,	his	tone	was	calm.	‘The	old	gods	of	war	are	returning.’
‘War?	The	god	of	war?	That	was	Fener,	wasn’t	it?	The	Boar.’
‘Fener,	Togg,	Fanderay,	Treach,	and,’	he	shrugged,	‘De	nek	Okral	–	who
can	say	how	many	once	existed.	They	arose,	I	would	imagine,	dependent	on	the
environment	of	the	worshippers	–	whatever	beast	was	supreme	predator,	was
the	most	savage—’
‘But	none	were,’	cut	in	Karsa	Orlong.	‘Supreme.	That	title	belonged	to	us
two-legged	hunters,	us	bright-eyed	killers.’
Traveller	continued	to	stare	at	Samar	Dev.	‘The	savagery	of	the	beasts
reflected	the	savagery	in	the	souls	of	the	worshippers.	In	war,	this	is	what	was
shared.	Boar,	tigers,	wolves,	the	great	bears	that	knew	no	fear.’
‘Is	this	what	Fener ’s	fall	has	done,	then?’	Samar	Dev	asked.	‘All	the	hoary,
forgotten	ones	clambering	back	to	fight	over	the	spoils?	And	what	has	that	to
do	with	that	bear,	anyway?’
‘That	bear,’	said	Traveller,	‘was	a	god.’
Karsa	spat	into	the	fire.	‘No	wonder	I	have	never	before	seen	such	a	beast.’
‘They	once	existed,’	said	Traveller.	‘They	once	ruled	these	plains,	until	all
that	they	hunted	was	taken	from	them,	and	so	they	vanished,	as	have	so	many
other	proud	creatures.’
‘The	god	should	have	followed	them,’	said	Karsa.	‘There	are	too	many
faces	of	war	as	it	is.’
Samar	Dev	grunted.	‘That’s	rich	coming	from	you.’


Karsa	eyed	her	over	the	flames,	and	then	grinned,	the	crazed	tattoos
seeming	to	split	wide	open	on	his	face.	‘There	need	be	only	one.’
Yours.	Yes,	Toblakai,	I	understand	you	well	enough.	‘I	have	one	true	fear,’
she	said.	‘And	that	is,	when	you	are	done	with	civilization,	it	will	turn	out	that
you	as	master	of	everything	will	prove	no	better	than	the	ones	you	pulled
down.	That	you	will	find	the	last	surviving	throne	and	plop	yourself	down	on
it,	and	find	it	all	too	much	to	your	liking.’
‘That	is	an	empty	fear,	witch,’	said	Karsa	Orlong.	‘I	will	leave	not	one
throne	to	sit	on	–	I	will	shatter	them	all.	And	if,	when	I	am	done,	I	am	the	last
left	standing	–	in	all	the	world	–	then	I	will	be	satisfied.’
‘What	of	your	people?’
‘I	have	listened	too	long	to	the	whispers	of	Bairoth	Gild	and	Delum	Thord.
Our	ways	are	but	clumsier	versions	of	all	the	other	ways	in	which	people	live	–
their	love	of	waste,	their	eagerness	to	reap	every	living	thing	as	if	it	belonged
to	them,	as	if	in	order	to	prove	ownership	they	must	destroy	it.’	He	bared	his
teeth.	‘We	think	no	differently,	just	slower.	Less…efficiently.	You	will	prattle
on	about	progress,	Samar	Dev,	but	progress	is	not	what	you	think	it	is.	It	is	not
a	tool	guided	by	our	hands	–	not	yours,	not	mine,	not	Traveller ’s.	It	is	not
something	we	can	rightly	claim	as	our	destiny.	Why?	Because	in	truth	we	have
no	control	over	it.	Not	your	machines,	witch,	not	a	hundred	thousand	slaves
shackled	to	it	–	even	as	we	stand	with	whips	in	hand.’
Now	Traveller	had	turned	slightly	and	was	studying	the	Toblakai	with	that
same	curious	wonder	that	she	had	seen	before.	‘What	then,’	he	asked,	‘is
progress,	Karsa	Orlong?’
The	Toblakai	gestured	into	the	night	sky.	‘The	crawl	of	the	stars,	the
plunge	and	rise	of	the	moon.	Day,	night,	birth,	death	–	progress	is	the	passage
of	reality.	We	sit	astride	this	horse,	but	it	is	a	beast	we	can	never	tame,	and	it
will	run	for	ever	–	we	will	age	and	wither	and	fall	off,	and	it	cares	not.	Some
other	will	leap	aboard	and	it	cares	not.	It	may	run	alone,	and	it	cares	not.	It
outran	the	great	bears.	The	wolves	and	their	worshippers.	It	outran	the	Jaghut,
and	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle.	And	still	it	runs	on,	and	to	it	we	are	nothing.’
‘Then	why	not	let	us	ride	it	for	a	time?’	Samar	Dev	demanded.	‘Why	not
leave	us	that	damned	illusion?’
‘Because,	woman,	we	ride	it	to	hunt,	to	kill,	to	destroy.	We	ride	it	as	if	it	is
our	right	and	our	excuse	both.’
‘And	yet,’	said	Traveller,	‘is	that	not	precisely	what	you	intend,	Karsa
Orlong?’
‘I	shall	destroy	what	I	can,	but	never	shall	I	claim	to	own	what	I	destroy.	I
will	be	the	embodiment	of	progress,	but	emptied	of	greed.	I	shall	be	like


nature’s	fist:	blind.	And	I	shall	prove	that	ownership	is	a	lie.	The	land,	the	seas,
the	life	to	be	found	there.	The	mountains,	the	plains,	the	cities,	the	farms.	Water,
air.	We	own	none	of	it.	This	is	what	I	will	prove,	and	by	proving	it	will	make	it
so.’
He	leaned	forward	then	and	gathered	up	in	his	hands	a	heap	of	dusty	earth.
The	Toblakai	rose	to	his	feet,	and	dropped	the	soil	on	to	the	fire,	snuffing	out
the	flames.	Darkness	took	them	all,	as	if	but	awaiting	this	moment.	Or,	she
thought	with	a	chill,	as	if	it	has	always	been	there.	The	light	blinded	me,	else	I
would	have	seen	it.
As	I	do	now.
God	of	war,	what	did	you	want	with	me?
	
With	an	ear-piercing	scream	the	enkaral	crashed	down	on	to	Pearl,	talons
slashing	through	flesh,	dagger	fangs	closing	on	the	back	of	the	demon’s	neck.
Grunting,	he	reached	up	and	closed	one	hand	about	the	winged	beast’s	throat,
the	other	forcing	its	way	beneath	the	enkaral’s	upper	jaw	–	fingers	sliced	into
shreds	as	he	reached	ever	farther	and	then	began	prising	the	mouth	back	open.
The	fangs	of	the	lower	jaw	sank	deeper	into	the	muscles	of	Pearl’s	neck,	and
still	he	pushed.	As	this	was	going	on,	the	talons	never	ceased	their	frantic
rending	along	the	demon’s	lower	back,	seeking	to	hook	round	his	spine,
seeking	to	tear	loose	that	column	–	but	the	chains	and	shackles	snarled	its
efforts,	as	did	Pearl’s	twisting	to	evade	each	stabbing	search	through	his
muscles.
Finally,	as	his	grip	on	the	beast’s	throat	tightened,	he	could	hear	the
desperate	squeal	of	its	breath,	and	the	jaws	weakened.	Something	crunched	and
all	at	once	Pearl	was	able	to	rip	the	jaws	free	of	his	neck.	He	staggered
forward,	dragging	the	huge	beast	round,	both	hands	closing	on	its	scaled	throat
–	and	more	things	collapsed	inside	that	crushing	grip.
The	enkaral	flailed	about,	legs	kicking	wildly	now,	talons	scoring	furrows
on	Pearl’s	thighs.	He	forced	the	beast	down	on	to	the	ground.	The	thrashing
slowed,	and	then,	with	a	spasm,	the	creature	went	limp.
Pearl	slowly	rose,	flinging	the	carcass	to	one	side;	a	thud,	the	slap	and
rustle	of	chains.	The	demon	then	glanced	over	to	the	figure	walking	alongside
it.	‘Did	I	anger	it	somehow,	Draconus?’
The	man	squinted,	shifting	the	weight	of	his	chains	over	his	other	shoulder
before	replying,	‘No,	Pearl.	Madness	took	it,	that’s	all.	You	just	happened	to	be
near.’
‘Oh,’	said	Pearl.	And	then	the	demon	sighed.	‘Then	it	is	good	it	was	me	and


not	something…smaller.’
‘Can	you	continue,	Pearl?’
‘I	can,	yes.	Thank	you	for	asking.’
‘Not	much	longer,	I	should	think.’
‘No,	not	much	longer,’	agreed	Pearl.	‘And	then?’
‘We	will	see,	won’t	we?’
‘Yes,	that	is	true.	Draconus?’
‘Pearl?’
‘I	think	I	will	welcome	an	end	–	is	that	a	terrible	thing	for	me	to	say?’
The	man	shook	his	head,	his	expression	hinting	that	he	might	be	in	pain.
‘No,	my	friend,	it	is	not.’
Fully	one	half	of	the	sky	was	now	a	seething	argent	storm.	Thunder	rolled
from	the	horizon	behind	them,	as	the	very	ground	was	ripped	up,	annihilated	–
their	world	had	acquired	an	edge,	raw	as	a	cliff,	and	that	cliff	was	drawing
closer	as	vast	sections	sheared	away,	as	the	raging	abyss	swallowed	the
toppling	stone	columns	one	by	one.
And	it	occurred	to	Draconus,	then,	that	each	of	them	here,	seemingly
alone,	each	with	his	or	her	own	shackle,	his	or	her	own	chain,	had	finally,	at
long	last,	come	together.
We	are	an	army.	But	an	army	in	retreat.	See	the	detritus	we	leave	in	our
wake,	the	abandoned	comrades.	See	the	glaze	of	our	eyes,	this	veil	of	numbed
exhaustion	–	when	at	last	we	tear	it	aside,	we	will	find	the	despair	we	have
harboured	for	so	long,	like	a	black	poisoned	fruit	under	a	leaf	–	all	revealed	as
we	look	into	each	other’s	eyes.
Was	the	comfort	found	in	mutual	recognition	of	any	true	worth?	Here,	at
the	last?	When	the	common	ground	is	failure?	Like	a	field	of	corpses	after	a
battle.	Like	a	sea	of	skulls	rolling	in	the	tide.	Is	not	the	brotherhood	too	bitter
to	bear?
And	now,	he	wanted	to…to	what?	Yes,	to	rage,	but	first,	let	me	close	my
eyes.	Just	for	a	moment.	Let	me	find,	again,	my	will—
‘Draconus?’
‘Yes,	Pearl?’
‘Do	you	hear	drums?	I	hear	drums.’
‘The	thunder—’	and	then	he	stopped,	and	turned	round,	to	look	back	at	that
fulminating,	crazed	horizon.	‘Gods	below.’
Chaos	had	found	a	new	way	to	mock	them.	With	legions	in	ranks,	weapons
and	armour	blazing,	with	standards	spitting	lightning	into	the	sky.	Emerging	in
an	endless	row,	an	army	of	something	vaguely	human,	shaped	solely	by	intent,
in	numbers	unimaginable	–	they	did	not	march	so	much	as	flow,	like	a	frothing


surge	devouring	the	ground	–	and	no	more	than	a	league	away.	Lances	and
pike	heads	flashing,	round	shields	spinning	like	vortices.	Drums	like	rattling
bones,	rushing	to	swarm	like	maddened	wasps.
So	close…has	the	hunger	caught	fresh	our	scent	–	does	the	hunger	now
rush	to	us,	faster	than	ever	before?
Is	there	something	in	that	storm…that	knows	what	it	wants?
‘I	do	not	understand,’	said	Pearl.	‘How	can	chaos	take	shapes?’
‘Perhaps,	friend,	what	we	are	seeing	is	the	manifestation	of	what	exists	in
all	of	us.	Our	secret	love	of	destruction,	the	pleasure	of	annihilation,	our
darkest	glee.	Perhaps	when	at	last	they	reach	us,	we	shall	realize	that	they	are	us
and	we	are	them.’	That	Dragnipur	has	but	cut	us	in	two,	and	all	chaos	seeks	is
to	draw	us	whole	once	more.
Oh,	really	now,	Draconus,	have	you	lost	your	mind?
‘If	they	are	the	evil	in	our	souls,	Pearl,	then	there	can	be	no	doubt	as	to
their	desire.’
‘Perhaps	not	just	our	souls,’	mused	Pearl,	wiping	blood	from	his	eyes.
‘Perhaps	every	soul,	since	the	beginning	of	creation.	Perhaps,	Draconus,	when
each	of	us	dies,	the	evil	within	us	is	torn	free	and	rushes	into	the	realm	of
Chaos.	Or	the	evil	is	that	which	survives	the	longest…’
Draconus	said	nothing.	The	demon’s	suggestions	horrified	him,	and	he
thought	–	oh,	he	was	thinking,	yes	–	that	Pearl	had	found	a	terrible	truth.
Somewhere	among	those	possibilities.
Somewhere	among	them…I	think…there	is	a	secret.	An	important	secret.
Somewhere…
‘I	do	not	want	to	meet	my	evil	self,’	said	Pearl.
Draconus	glanced	across	at	him.	‘Who	does?’
	
Ditch	was	dreaming,	for	dreaming	was	his	last	road	to	freedom.	He	could
stride,	reaching	out	to	the	sides,	reshaping	everything.	He	could	make	the
world	as	he	wanted	it,	as	it	should	be,	a	place	of	justice,	a	place	where	he	could
be	a	god	and	look	upon	humanity	as	it	truly	was:	a	mob	of	unruly,	faintly
ridiculous	children.	Watch	them	grasp	things	when	they	think	no	one’s	looking.
Watch	them	break	things,	hurt	things,	steal.	Listen	to	their	expostulations	of
innocence,	their	breathless	list	of	excuses,	listen	to	how	they	repent	and	repent
and	repent	and	then	go	and	do	the	same	damned	things	all	over	again.	Children.
With	all	his	godly	powers,	he	would	teach	them	about	consequences,	that
most	terrible	of	lessons,	the	one	resisted	the	longest.	He	would	teach	them
because	he	had	learned	in	the	only	way	possible	–	with	scars	and	broken	bones,


with	sickness	in	the	soul	tasting	of	fear,	with	all	the	irreparable	damage
resulting	from	all	his	own	thoughtless	decisions.
There	could	be	wonder	and	joy	among	children,	too.	Too	easy	to	see
naught	but	gloom,	wasn’t	it?	Wonder	and	joy.	Naïve	creations	of	beauty.	He
was	not	blind	to	such	things,	and,	like	any	god,	he	understood	that	such	gifts
were	pleas	for	mercy.	An	invitation	to	indulge	that	reprehensible	host	of	flaws.
Art	and	genius,	compassion	and	passion,	they	were	as	islands	assailed	on	all
sides.	But	no	island	lived	for	ever.	The	black,	writhing,	worm-filled	seas	ever
rose	higher.	And	sooner	or	later,	the	hungry	storms	ate	their	fill.
Nature	might	well	struggle	for	balance.	And	perhaps	the	egregious
imbalance	Ditch	thought	he	perceived	in	his	kind	was	but	an	illusion,	and
redress	waited,	stretched	out	to	match	the	extremity.	A	fall	as	sudden	and
ferocious	as	the	rise.
In	his	state	of	dreaming,	it	did	not	occur	to	him	that	his	dreams	were	not
his	own,	that	this	harsh	cant	of	judgement	belonged	to	a	tyrant	or	even	a	god,
or	to	one	such	as	himself	if	madness	had	taken	hold.	But	he	was	not	mad,	and
nor	was	he	a	tyrant,	and	for	all	his	natural	inclination	(natural	to	almost
everyone)	to	wish	for	true	justice	he	was,	after	all,	wise	enough	to	know	the
vulnerability	of	moral	notions,	the	ease	with	which	they	were	corrupted.	Was
he	dreaming,	then,	the	dreams	of	a	god?
	
Blind	as	Kadaspala	was,	he	could	sense	far	too	much	of	Ditch’s	visions	–	he
could	feel	the	incandescent	rage	in	the	flicker	of	the	man’s	eyelids,	the	heat	of
his	breath,	the	ripples	of	tautness	washing	over	his	face.	Oh,	this	unconscious
wizard	stalked	an	unseen	world,	filled	with	outrage	and	fury,	with	the	hunger
for	retribution.
There	were	so	many	paths	to	godhood.	Kadaspala	was	certain	of	that.	So
many	paths,	so	many	paths.	Refuse	to	die,	refuse	to	surrender,	refuse	to	die	and
refuse	to	surrender	and	that	was	one	path,	stumbled	on	to	without	true	intent,
without	even	wanting	it,	and	these	gods	were	the	bemused	ones,	the	reluctant
ones.	They	were	best	left	alone,	for	to	prod	them	awake	was	to	risk	apocalypse.
Reluctant	power	was	the	deadliest	power	of	them	all,	for	the	anger	behind	it
was	long	stoked.	Long	stoked	and	stoked	long	and	long,	so	best	leave	them
leave	them	leave	them	alone.
Other	gods	were	called	into	being	and	the	nature	of	that	call	took	countless
forms.	A	convulsion	of	natural	forces,	until	the	very	sludge	awakens.
Wherever	discordant	elements	clashed,	the	possibility	was	born.	Life.	Intent.
Desire	and	need.	But	these	too	were	accidental	things,	in	as	much	as	anything


could	be	accidental	when	all	the	particles	necessary	for	creation	abounded,	as
they	surely	did.	There	were	other	ways	of	calling	a	god	into	being.
Gather	a	host	of	words,	a	host	of	words.	Gather	a	host	of	words.	Make
them,	make	them,	make	them	what?	Physical,	yes,	make	them	physical,	from
the	empty	ether	to	the	incision	in	clay,	the	stain	on	stone,	the	ink	on	skin.
Physical,	because	the	physical	created	–	by	its	very	nature	before	the	eye	(or
the	inner	eye)	–	created	and	created	patterns.	And	they	could	be	played	with
played	with	played	with.	In	numbers	and	sigils,	in	astral	proportions.	They
could	be	coded	inside	codes	inside	codes	until	something	is	rendered,
something	both	beautiful	and	absolute.	Beautiful	in	its	absoluteness.	In	its
absolution,	in	its	absolved	essence,	a	thing	of	beauty.
Understand,	won’t	you,	the	truth	of	patterns,	how	pattern	finds	truth	in	the
tension	of	juxtaposition,	in	the	game	of	meaning	meaning	the	game	which	is
the	perfect	pattern	of	language	in	the	guise	of	imperfection	–	but	what	value
any	of	this	any	of	this	any	of	this?
The	value	is	the	body	of	text	(hah,	the	body	–	the	bodies)	that	in	its
absoluteness	becomes	sacred,	and	in	sacredness	becomes	all	that	it	portrays	in
its	convivial	ordering	of	the	essentially	meaningless.	Patterns	where	none
existed	before.	Creation	from	nothing.	Awakening	from	absence	of	self.	And
what	is	the	word	the	beautiful	word	the	precious	word	and	the	perfect	word	that
starts	the	game	starts	everything	everything	everything?
Why,	the	word	is	birth.
Bodies	of	text,	all	these	bodies,	all	this	flesh	and	the	ink	and	the	words	and
the	words	oh	the	words.	Bodies	and	bodies,	patterns	inside	patterns,	lives	and
lives	and	lives	all	dreaming…all	dreaming	one	dream.
One	dream.	One	dream	one	dream	one	one	one	dream.	One.
A	dream	of	justice.
‘Let	the	cosmos	quake,’	Kadaspala	whispered	as	he	etched	sigil	inside	sigil
inside	sigil,	as	he	wove	language	and	meaning,	as	the	ink	rode	the	piercing	and
flowed	beneath	skin	pocket	by	pocket.	‘Quake	and	quiver,	whimper	and	quaver.
A	god	oh	a	god	yes	a	god	now	a	god	soon	a	god	a	god	awakens.	Lives	and
lives	cut	down	one	and	all,	cut	down,	yes,	by	judgement’s	sharp	edge	–	did	we
deserve	it?	Did	we	earn	the	punishment?	Are	any	of	us	innocent,	any	of	us	at
all?	Not	likely	not	likely	not	likely.	So,	lives	and	lives	and	none	none	none	of
us	did	not	receive	precisely	what	we	deserved.
‘Do	you	understand?	Godling,	to	you	I	speak.	Listen	listen	listen	well.	We
are	what	you	come	from.	The	punished,	the	punished,	the	victims	of	justice,	the
victims	of	our	own	stupidity,	yes,	and	who	could	say	that	none	of	us	has
learned	our	lesson?	Who	can	say	that?	Look	oh	look	oh	look	where	we	are!


Godling,	here	is	your	soul,	writ	in	flesh,	in	flesh,	writ	here	by	Kadaspala,	who
was	once	blind	though	he	could	see	and	now	can	see	though	he	is	blind.	And
am	I	not	the	very	definition	of	sentience?	Blind	in	life,	I	can	see	in	death	–	the
definition	of	mortality,	my	darling	child,	heed	it	and	heed	it	come	the	moment
you	must	act	and	decide	and	stand	and	sit	in	judgement.	Heed	and	heed,
godling,	this	eternal	flaw.
‘And	what,	you	will	wonder,	is	written	upon	your	soul?	What	is	written
here?	Here	upon	the	flesh	of	your	soul?	Ah,	but	that	is	the	journey	of	your	life,
godling,	to	learn	the	language	of	your	soul,	to	learn	it	to	learn	it	even	as	you
live	it.
‘Soon,	birth	arrives.	Soon,	life	awakens.
‘Soon,	I	make	a	god.’
And	even	now,	the	god	dreams	of	justice.	For,	unlike	Ditch,	Kadaspala	is
indeed	mad.	His	code	struck	to	flesh	is	a	code	of	laws.	The	laws	from	which
the	god	shall	be	born.	Consider	that,	consider	that	well.
In	the	context	of,	say,	mercy…
	
She	was	out	there,	down	in	the	basin,	on	her	knees,	head	hanging,	her	torso
weaving	back	and	forth	to	some	inner	rhythm.	After	studying	her	yet	again,
Seerdomin,	with	a	faint	gasp,	tore	his	gaze	away	–	something	it	was	getting
ever	harder	to	manage,	for	she	was	mesmerizing,	this	child-woman,	this	fount
of	corruption,	and	the	notion	that	a	woman’s	fall	could	be	so	alluring,	so
perfectly	sexual,	left	him	horrified.	By	this	language	of	invitation.	By	his	own
darkness.
Behind	him,	the	Redeemer	murmured,	‘Her	power	grows.	Her	power	over
you,	Segda	Travos.’
‘I	do	not	want	to	be	where	she	is.’
‘Don’t	you?’
Seerdomin	turned	and	eyed	the	god.	‘Self-awareness	can	be	a	curse.’
‘A	necessary	one.’
‘I	suppose	so,’	he	conceded.
‘Will	you	still	fight	her,	Segda	Travos?’
‘I	think	so,	yes.’
‘Why?’
Seerdomin	bared	his	teeth.	‘Don’t	you	start	with	me,	Redeemer.	The	enemy
never	questions	motivations	–	the	enemy	doesn’t	chew	the	ground	out	beneath
its	own	feet.’	He	jabbed	a	finger	back	at	the	woman	kneeling	in	the	basin.	‘She
has	no	questions.	No	doubts.	What	she	has	instead	is	strength.	Power.’


‘That	is	true,’	said	the	Redeemer.	‘All	of	it.	It	is	why	those	haunted	by
uncertainty	must	ever	retreat.	They	cannot	stand	before	the	self-righteous.
Instead,	they	must	slink	away,	they	must	hide,	they	must	slip	behind	the	enemy’s
lines—’
‘Where	every	damned	one	of	them	is	hunted	down	and	silenced	–	no,
Redeemer,	you	forget,	I	lived	in	a	tyranny.	I	kicked	in	doors.	I	dragged	people
away.	Do	you	truly	believe	unbelievers	will	be	tolerated?	Scepticism	is	a
criminal	act.	Wave	the	standard	or	someone	else	will,	and	they’ll	be	coming
for	you.	Redeemer,	I	have	looked	in	the	eyes	of	my	enemy,	and	they	are	hard,
cold,	emptied	of	everything	but	hate.	I	have,	yes,	seen	my	own	reflection	–	it
haunts	me	still.’
No	further	words	were	exchanged	then.	Seerdomin	looked	back	down	to
that	woman,	the	High	Priestess	who	had	once	been	Salind.	She	was	naught	but	a
tool,	now,	a	weapon	of	some	greater	force’s	will,	its	hunger.	The	same	force,
he	now	suspected,	that	drove	nations	to	war,	that	drove	husbands	to	kill	wives
and	wives	to	kill	husbands.	That	could	take	even	the	soul	of	a	god	and	crush	it
into	subservience.
When	will	you	rise,	Salind?	When	will	you	come	for	me?
This	was	not	the	afterlife	he	had	imagined.	My	fighting	should	be	over.	My
every	need	made	meaningless,	the	pain	of	thoughts	for	ever	silenced.
Is	not	death’s	gift	indifference?	Blissful,	perfect	indifference?
She	swayed	back	and	forth,	gathering	strength	as	only	the	surrendered
could	do.
	
Monkrat	walked	through	the	pilgrim	camp.	Dishevelled	as	it	had	once	been,
now	it	looked	as	if	a	tornado	had	ripped	through	it.	Tents	had	sagged;	shacks
leaned	perilously	close	to	collapse.	There	was	rubbish	everywhere.	The	few
children	still	alive	after	being	so	long	abandoned	watched	him	walk	past	with
haunted	eyes	peering	out	from	filth-streaked	faces.	Sores	ate	into	their	drawn
lips.	Their	bellies	were	swollen	under	the	rags.	There	was	nothing	to	be	done
for	them,	and	even	if	there	was,	Monkrat	was	not	the	man	to	do	it.	In	his	mind
he	had	left	humanity	behind	long	ago.	There	was	no	kinship	to	nip	at	his	heart.
Every	fool	the	world	over	was	on	his	or	her	own,	or	they	were	slaves.	These
were	the	only	two	states	of	being	–	every	other	one	was	a	lie.	And	Monkrat	had
no	desire	to	become	a	slave,	as	much	as	Gradithan	or	saemankelyk	might	want
that.
No,	he	would	remain	his	own	world.	It	was	easier	that	way.	Ease	was
important.	Ease	was	all	that	mattered.


Soon,	he	knew,	he	would	have	to	escape	this	madness.	Gradithan’s
ambitions	had	lost	all	perspective	–	the	curse	of	kelyk.	He	talked	now
incessantly	of	the	coming	of	the	Dying	God,	the	imminent	end	of	all	things	and
the	glorious	rebirth	to	follow.	People	talking	like	that	disgusted	Monkrat.	They
repeated	themselves	so	often	it	soon	became	grossly	obvious	that	their	words
were	wishes	and	the	wish	was	that	their	words	might	prove	true.	Round	and
round,	all	that	wasted	breath.	The	mind	so	liked	to	go	round	and	round,	so
liked	that	familiar	track,	the	familiarity	of	it.	Round	and	round,	and	each	time
round	the	mind	was	just	that	much	stupider.	Increment	by	increment,	the	range
of	thoughts	narrower,	the	path	underfoot	more	deeply	trenched	–	he	had	even
noted	how	the	vocabulary	diminished,	as	uneasy	notions	were	cast	away	and	all
the	words	associated	with	them,	too.	The	circular	track	became	a	mantra,	the
mantra	a	proclamation	of	stupid	wishes	that	things	could	be	as	they	wanted
them,	that	in	fact	they	were	as	they	wanted	them.
Fanaticism	was	so	popular.	There	had	to	be	a	reason	for	that,	didn’t	there?
Some	vast	reward	to	the	end	of	thinking,	some	great	bliss	to	the	blessing	of
idiocy.	Well,	Monkrat	trusted	none	of	that.	He	knew	how	to	think	for	himself
and	that	was	all	he	knew	so	why	give	it	up?	He’d	yet	to	hear	an	argument	that
could	convince	him	–	but	of	course,	fanatics	didn’t	use	arguments,	did	they?
No,	just	that	fixed	gaze,	the	threat,	the	reason	to	fear.
Aye,	he’d	had	enough.	Gods	below,	he	was	actually	longing	for	the	city
where	he	had	been	born.	There	in	the	shadow	of	Mock’s	Hold,	and	that
blackwater	bay	of	the	harbour	where	slept	a	demon,	half	buried	in	mud	and
tumbled	ballast	stones.	And	who	knew,	maybe	there	was	no	one	left	there	to
recognize	him	–	and	why	would	they	in	any	case?	His	old	name	was	on	the	toll
of	the	fallen,	after	all,	and	beside	it	was	Blackdog	Wood,	1159	Burn’s	Sleep.	The
Bridgeburners	were	gone,	dead,	destroyed	in	Pale	with	the	remnants	mopped
up	here	at	Black	Coral.	But	he’d	been	a	casualty	long	before	then,	and	the	years
since	then	had	been	damned	hard	–	no,	it	wasn’t	likely	that	he’d	be	recognized.
Yes,	Malaz	City	sounded	sweet	now,	as	he	walked	this	wretched	camp’s
main	street,	the	squalling	of	gulls	loud	in	his	ears.
Gradithan,	you’ve	lost	it.
There	won’t	be	any	vengeance	on	the	Tiste	Andii.	Not	for	me,	not	for	you.	It
was	a	stupid	idea	and	now	it’s	gone	too	far.
History	wasn’t	worth	reliving.	He	understood	that	now.	But	people	never
learned	that	–	they	never	fucking	learned	that,	did	they?	Round	and	round.
A	fallen	pilgrim	stumbled	out	from	between	two	hovels,	brown-smeared
chin	and	murky	eyes	swimming	in	some	dubious	rapture	painting	its	lie	behind
them.	He	wanted	to	kick	the	brainless	idiot	between	the	legs.	He	wanted	to


stomp	on	the	fool’s	skull	and	see	the	shit-coloured	sludge	spill	out.	He	wanted
every	child	to	watch	him	do	it,	too,	so	they’d	realize,	so	they’d	run	for	their
lives.
Not	that	he	cared.
	
‘High	Priestess.’
She	looked	up,	then	rose	from	behind	her	desk,	came	round	with	a
gathering	of	her	robes,	and	then	bowed.	‘Son	of	Darkness,	welcome.	Did	we
have	anything	arranged?’
His	smile	was	wry.	‘Do	we	ever?’
‘Please,’	she	said,	‘do	come	in.	I	will	send	for	wine	and—’
‘No	need	on	my	account,	High	Priestess.’	Anomander	Rake	walked	into	the
small	office,	eyed	the	two	chairs	and	then	selected	the	least	ornate	one	to	sit
down	in.	He	stretched	out	his	legs,	fingers	lacing	together	on	his	lap,	and	eyed
her	speculatively.
She	raised	her	arms,	‘Shall	I	dance?’
‘Shall	I	sing?’
‘Abyss	take	me,	no.	Please.’
‘Do	sit	down,’	said	Rake,	indicating	the	other	chair.
She	did	so,	keeping	her	back	straight,	a	silent	question	lifting	her
eyebrows.
He	continued	watching	her.
She	let	out	a	breath	and	slumped	back.	‘All	right,	then.	I’m	relaxing.	See?’
‘You	have	ever	been	my	favourite,’	he	said,	looking	away.
‘Your	favourite	what?’
‘High	Priestess,	of	course.	What	else	might	I	be	thinking?’
‘Well,	that	is	the	eternal	question,	isn’t	it?’
‘One	too	many	people	spend	too	much	time	worrying	about.’
‘You	cannot	be	serious,	Anomander.’
He	seemed	to	be	studying	her	desk	–	not	the	things	scattered	on	its	surface,
but	the	desk	itself.	‘That’s	too	small	for	you,’	he	pronounced.
She	glanced	at	it.	‘You	are	deceived,	alas.	It’s	my	disorganization	that’s	too
big.	Give	me	a	desk	the	size	of	a	concourse	and	I’ll	still	fill	it	up	with	junk.’
‘Then	it	must	be	your	mind	that	is	too	big,	High	Priestess.’
‘Well,’	she	said,	‘there	is	so	little	to	think	about	and	so	much	time.’	She
fluttered	a	hand.	‘If	my	thoughts	have	become	oversized	it’s	only	out	of
indolence.’	Her	gaze	sharpened.	‘And	we	have	become	so	indolent,	haven’t
we?’


‘She	has	been	turned	away	for	a	long	time,’	Anomander	Rake	said.	‘That	I
allowed	all	of	you	to	turn	instead	to	me	was	ever	a	dubious	enterprise.’
‘You	made	no	effort	to	muster	worship,	Son	of	Darkness,	and	that	is	what
made	it	dubious.’
One	brow	lifted.	‘Not	my	obvious	flaws?’
‘And	Mother	Dark	is	without	flaws?	No,	the	Tiste	Andii	were	never	foolish
enough	to	force	upon	our	icons	the	impossibility	of	perfection.’
‘“Icons”,’	said	Anomander	Rake,	frowning	as	he	continued	studying	the
desk.
‘Is	that	the	wrong	word?	I	think	not.’
‘And	that	is	why	I	rejected	the	notion	of	worship.’
‘Why?’
‘Because,	sooner	or	later,	the	believers	shatter	their	icons.’
She	grunted,	and	thought	about	that	for	a	time,	before	sighing	and	nodding.
‘A	hundred	fallen,	forgotten	civilizations,	yes.	And	in	the	ruins	all	those
statues…with	their	faces	chopped	off.	The	loss	of	faith	is	ever	violent,	it
seems.’
‘Ours	was.’
The	statement	stung	her.	‘Ah,	we	are	not	so	different	then,	after	all.	What	a
depressing	realization.’
‘Endest	Silann,’	he	said.
‘Your	stare	is	making	the	legs	of	my	desk	tremble,	Lord	Rake	–	am	I	so
unpleasant	that	you	dare	not	rest	eyes	upon	me?’
He	slowly	turned	his	head	and	settled	his	gaze	upon	her.
And	seeing	all	that	was	in	his	eyes	almost	made	her	flinch,	and	she
understood,	all	at	once,	the	mercy	he	had	been	giving	her	–	with	his	face	turned
away,	with	his	eyes	veiled	by	distraction.	But	then	she	had	asked	for	his	regard,
as	much	out	of	vanity	as	the	secret	pleasure	of	her	attraction	to	him	–	she	could
not	now	break	this	connection.	Marshalling	her	resolve,	she	said,	‘Endest
Silann,	yes.	The	reason	for	this	visit.	I	understand.’
‘He	is	convinced	he	was	broken	long	ago,	High	Priestess.	We	both	know	it
is	not	true.’
She	nodded.	‘He	proved	that	when	he	sustained	Moon’s	Spawn	beneath	the
sea	–	proved	it	to	everyone	but	himself.’
‘I	reveal	to	him	my	confidence,’	said	Rake,	‘and	each	time	he…contracts.	I
cannot	reach	through,	it	seems,	to	bolster	what	I	know	is	within	him.’
‘Then	it	is	his	faith	that	is	broken.’
He	grimaced,	made	no	reply.
‘When	the	time	comes,’	she	said,	‘I	will	be	there.	To	do	what	I	can.


Although,’	she	added,	‘that	may	not	be	much.’
‘You	need	not	elaborate	on	the	efficacy	of	your	presence,	High	Priestess.
We	are	speaking,	as	you	said,	of	faith.’
‘And	there	need	be	no	substance	to	it.	Thank	you.’
He	glanced	away	once	more,	and	this	time	the	wry	smile	she	had	seen
before	played	again	across	his	features.	‘You	were	always	my	favourite,’	he
said.
‘Me,	or	the	desk	you	so	seem	to	love?’
He	rose	and	she	did	the	same.	‘High	Priestess,’	he	said.
‘Son	of	Darkness,’	she	returned,	with	another	bow.
And	out	he	went,	leaving	in	his	wake	a	sudden	absence,	an	almost	audible
clap	of	displacement	–	but	no,	that	was	in	her	mind,	a	hint	of	something
hovering	there	behind	her	memory	of	his	face,	his	eyes	and	all	that	she	had
seen	there.
Mother	Dark,	hear	me.	Heed	me.	You	did	not	understand	your	son	then.	You
do	not	understand	him	now.
Don’t	you	see?	This	was	all	Draconus’s	doing.
	
‘This	ain’t	right,’	gasped	Reccanto	Ilk,	each	word	spraying	blood.	‘When	it
comes	to	screaming	women,	they	should	be	leaving	the	bar,	not	trying	to	get
in!’
The	ragged	hole	the	shrieking,	snarling,	jaw-snapping	women	had	torn
through	the	tavern’s	door	was	jammed	with	arms	stretching,	fingers	clutching,
all	reaching	inward	in	a	desperate	attempt	to	tear	through	the	barrier.	Claws
stabbed	into	the	Trell’s	tattooed	shoulders	and	he	ducked	his	head	lower,
grunting	as	the	demons	battered	at	the	door,	planks	splintering	–	but	that	Trell
was	one	strong	bastard,	and	he	was	holding	’em	back,	as	he	had	been	doing
since	that	first	rush	that	nearly	saw	Reccanto’s	precious	head	get	torn	off.
Thank	whatever	gods	squatted	in	the	muck	of	this	damned	village	that	these
demons	were	so	stupid.	Not	one	had	tried	either	of	the	shuttered	windows
flanking	the	entrance,	although	with	that	barbed	hulk,	Gruntle,	waiting	at	one
of	’em	with	his	cutlasses	at	the	ready,	and	Faint	and	the	Bole	brothers	at	the
other,	at	least	if	them	demons	went	and	tried	one	of	’em	they’d	be	cut	to	pieces
in	no	time.	Or	so	Reccanto	hoped,	since	he	was	hiding	under	a	table	and	a	table
wasn’t	much	cover,	or	wouldn’t	be	if	them	demons	was	nasty	enough	to	tear
apart	Gruntle	and	Faint	and	the	Boles	and	the	Trell,	and	Sweetest	Sufferance,
too,	for	that	matter.
Master	Quell	and	that	swampy	witch,	Precious	Thimble,	were	huddled


together	at	the	back,	at	the	barred	cellar	door,	doing	Hood	knew	what.	Glanno
Tarp	was	missing	–	he’d	gone	with	the	horses	when	they	went	straight	and	the
carriage	went	left,	and	Reccanto	was	pretty	sure	that	the	idiot	had	gone	and
killed	himself	bad.	Or	worse.
As	for	that	corpse,	Cartographer,	why,	the	last	Ilk	had	seen	of	it	it	was	still
lashed	to	a	wheel,	spinning	in	a	blur	as	the	damned	thing	spun	off	its	axle	and
bounded	off	into	the	rainy	night.	Why	couldn’t	the	demons	go	after	it?	A
damned	easier	fight—
Repeated	blows	were	turning	the	door	into	a	shattered	wreck,	and	one	of
the	arms	angled	down	to	slash	deep	gouges	across	Mappo’s	back,	making	the
Trell	groan	and	groaning	wasn’t	good,	since	it	meant	Mappo	might	just	give
up	trying	to	hold	’em	back	and	in	they’d	come,	straight	for	the	man	hiding
under	the	table.	It	wasn’t	fair.	Nothing	was	fair	and	what	was	fair	about	that,
dammit?
He	drew	out	his	rapier	and	clutched	the	grip	in	one	shaky	hand.	A	lunge
from	the	knees	–	was	such	a	thing	possible?	He	was	about	to	find	out.	Oh,	yes,
he’d	skewer	one	for	its	troubles,	just	watch.	And	if	the	other	two	(he	was	pretty
sure	there	were	three	of	’em)	ripped	him	up	then	fine,	just	fine.	A	man	could
only	do	so	much.
Gruntle	was	shouting	something	at	Mappo,	and	the	Trell	bellowed	a	reply,
drawing	his	legs	up	under	himself	as	if	about	to	dive	to	one	side	–	thanks	a
whole	lot,	you	ogre!	–	and	then	all	at	once	Mappo	did	just	that,	off	to	the	right,
slamming	into	the	legs	of	the	Boles	and	Faint	and	taking	all	three	down	with
him.
An	explosion	of	wood	splinters	and	thrashing	arms,	clacking	fangs,
unclean	hair	and	terribly	unreasonable	expressions,	and	the	three	screeching
women	plunged	in.
Two	were	brought	up	short	pretty	fast,	as	their	heads	leapt	up	in	gouts	of
greenish	uck	and	their	bodies	sprawled	in	a	thrashing	mess.
Even	as	this	was	happening,	the	third	woman	charged	straight	for
Reccanto.	He	shrieked	and	executed	his	lunge	from	the	knees,	which	naturally
wasn’t	a	lunge	at	all.	More	like	a	flèche,	a	forward	flinging	of	his	upper	body,
arm	and	point	extended,	and	as	he	overbalanced	and	landed	with	a	bonecreaking	thump	on	the	floorboards	the	rapier ’s	point	snagged	on	something
and	the	blade	bowed	alarmingly	and	so	he	let	go,	so	that	it	sprang	up,	then	back
down,	the	pommel	crunching	the	top	of	Reccanto’s	head,	not	once,	but	twice,
each	time	driving	his	face	into	the	floor,	nose	crackling	in	a	swirl	of	stinging
tears	and	bursting	into	his	brain	the	horrid	stench	of	mouse	droppings	and
greasy	dirt	–	immediately	replaced	by	a	whole	lot	of	flowing	blood.


It	was	strangely	quiet,	and,	moaning,	Reccanto	rolled	on	to	his	side	and
lifted	himself	up	on	one	elbow.
And	found	himself	staring	into	the	blank,	horrible	eyes	of	the	woman
who’d	charged	him.	The	rapier	point	had	driven	in	between	her	eyes,	straight
in,	so	far	that	he	should	be	able	to	see	it	coming	back	out	from	somewhere
beneath	the	back	of	her	skull	–	but	it	wasn’t	there.	Meaning—
‘She	broke	it!’	he	raged,	clambering	on	to	his	feet.	‘She	broke	my	damned
rapier!’
The	demonic	woman	was	on	her	knees,	head	thrust	forward,	mouth	still
stretched	open,	the	weight	of	her	upper	body	resting	on	the	knocked-over	chair
that	had	served	as	pathetic	barricade.	The	other	two,	headless,	still	thrashed	on
the	floor	as	green	goo	flowed.	Gruntle	was	studying	that	ichor	where	it
slathered	the	broad	blades	of	his	cutlasses.
Mappo,	the	Boles	and	Faint	were	slowly	regaining	their	feet.
Sweetest	Sufferance,	clutching	a	clay	bottle,	staggered	up	to	lean	against
Reccanto.	‘Too	bad	about	your	rapier,’	she	said,	‘but	damn	me,	Ilk,	that	was	the
neatest	flèche	I	ever	did	see.’
Reccanto	squinted,	wiped	blood	from	his	streaming	nose	and	lacerated
lips,	and	then	grinned.	‘It	was,	wasn’t	it.	The	timing	of	a	master—’
‘I	mean,	how	could	you	have	guessed	she’d	trip	on	one	of	them	rolling
heads	and	go	down	on	her	knees	skidding	like	that,	straight	into	your	thrust?’
Tripped?	Skidded?	‘Yes,	well,	like	I	said,	I’m	a	master	duellist.’
‘I	could	kiss	you,’	she	continued,	her	breath	rank	with	sour	wine,	‘except
you	went	and	pissed	yourself	and	there’s	limits	t’decency,	if	you	know	what	I
mean.’
‘That	ain’t	piss	–	we’re	all	still	sopping	wet!’
‘But	we	don’t	quite	smell	the	way	you	do,	Ilk.’
Snarling,	he	lurched	away.	Damned	overly	sensitive	woman!	‘My	rapier,’
he	moaned.
‘Shattered	inside	her	skull,	I’d	wager,’	said	Gruntle,	‘which	couldn’t	have
done	her	brain	any	good.	Nicely	done,	Reccanto.’
Ilk	decided	it	was	time	to	strut	a	little.
	
Whilst	Reccanto	Ilk	walked	round	like	a	rooster,	Precious	Thimble	glanced
over	worriedly	at	the	Boles,	and	was	relieved	to	see	them	both	apparently
unharmed.	They	hadn’t	been	paying	her	enough	attention	lately	and	they
weren’t	paying	her	any	now	either.	She	felt	a	tremor	of	unease.
Master	Quell	was	thumping	on	the	cellar	door.	‘I	know	you	can	hear	me,’


he	called.	‘You,	hiding	in	there.	We	got	three	of	’em	–	is	there	more?	Three	of
’em	killed.	Is	there	more?’
Faint	was	checking	her	weapons.	‘We	got	to	go	and	find	Glanno,’	she	said.
‘Any	volunteers?’
Gruntle	walked	over,	pausing	to	peer	out	of	the	doorway.	‘The	rain’s
letting	off	–	looks	as	if	the	storm’s	spent.	I’ll	go	with	you,	Faint.’
‘I	was	asking	for	volunteers	–	I	wasn’t	volunteering	myself.’
‘I’ll	go!’	said	Amby.
‘I’ll	go!’	said	Jula.
And	then	they	glared	at	each	other,	and	then	grinned	as	if	at	some	private
joke,	and	a	moment	later	both	burst	out	laughing.
‘What’s	so	funny?’	Precious	Thimble	demanded,	truly	bewildered	this
time.	Have	they	lost	their	minds?	Assuming	they	have	minds,	I	mean.
Her	harsh	query	sobered	them	and	both	ducked,	avoiding	her	stare.
The	cellar	door	creaked	open,	drawing	everyone’s	attention,	and	a
bewhiskered	face	poked	out,	eyes	wide	and	rolling.	‘Three,	ya	said?	Ya	said
three?’
The	dialect	was	Genabackan,	the	accent	south	islander.
‘Ya	got	ah	three?	Deed?’
Quell	nodded.	‘Any	more	lurking	about,	host?’
A	quick	shake	of	the	head,	and	the	tavern	keep	edged	out,	flinching	when
he	saw	the	slaughtered	bodies.	‘Oh,	darlings,’	he	whispered,	‘ahm	so	soory.	So
soory!’
‘You	know	them?’	Quell	asked.	‘You	know	what	they	were?’
More	figures	crowded	behind	the	keep,	pale	faces,	frightened	eyes.	To
Quell’s	questions	the	whiskered	man	flinched.	‘Coarsed,’	he	said	in	a	rasp.
‘Our	daughters…coarsed.’
‘Cursed?	When	they	come	of	age,	right?’
A	jerky	nod,	and	then	the	man’s	eyes	widened	on	the	wizard.	‘You	know	it?
You	know	the	coarse?’
‘How	long	have	you	had	it,	host?	Here,	in	this	village	–	how	long	have	you
had	the	curse?’
‘Foor	yars	now.	Foor	yars.’	And	the	man	edged	out.	‘Aai,	their	heeds!	Ya
cart	erf	their	heeds!’	Behind	him	the	others	set	up	a	wailing.
Precious	Thimble	met	Quell’s	eyes	and	they	exchanged	a	nod.	‘Still	about,
I’d	say,’	Precious	said	under	her	breath.
‘Agreed.	Should	we	go	hunting?’
She	looked	round	once	more.	Mappo	was	dragging	the	first	naked,
headless	corpse	out	through	the	doorway.	The	green	blood	had	blackened	on


the	floor	and	left	tarry	streaks	trailing	the	body.	‘Let’s	take	that	Trell	with	us,	I
think.’
‘Good	idea.’	Quell	walked	up	to	the	tavern	keep.	‘Is	there	a	constable	in
this	village?	Who	rules	the	land	–	where	in	Hood’s	name	are	we	anyway?’
Owlish	blinks	of	the	eyes.	‘Reach	of	Woe	is	war	ye	are.	Seen	the	toower?
It’s	war	the	Provost	leeves.	Yull	wan	the	Provost,	ah	expeect.’
Quell	turned	away,	rubbed	at	his	eyes,	then	edged	close	to	Precious
Thimble.	‘We’re	agreed,	then,	it’s	witchery,	this	curse.’
‘Witch	or	warlock,’	she	said,	nodding.
‘We’re	on	the	Reach	of	Woe,	a	wrecker	coast.	I’d	wager	it’s	the	arrival	of
strangers	that	wakes	up	the	daughters	–	they	won’t	eat	their	kin,	will	they?’
‘When	the	frenzy’s	on	them,’	said	Precious	Thimble,	‘they’ll	eat	anything
that	moves.’
‘That’s	why	the	locals	bolted,	then,	right.	Fine,	Witch,	go	collect	Mappo	–
and	this	time,	tell	him	he	needs	to	arm	himself.	This	could	get	messy.’
Precious	Thimble	looked	over	at	the	last	body	the	Trell	was	now	dragging
outside.	‘Right,’	she	said.
	
Flanked	by	the	Boles,	Jula	on	his	right,	Amby	on	his	left,	Gruntle	walked	back
down	to	the	main	street,	boots	squelching	in	the	mud.	The	last	spits	of	rain
cooled	his	brow.	Oh,	he’d	wanted	a	nastier	fight.	The	problem	with	mindless
attackers	was	their	mindlessness,	which	made	them	pathetically	predictable.
And	only	three	of	the	damned	things—
‘I	was	going	first,’	said	Amby.
‘No,	I	was,’	said	Jula.
Gruntle	scowled.	‘Going	where?	What	are	you	two	talking	about?’
‘That	window	back	there,’	said	Jula,	‘at	the	tavern.	If’n	the	girlies	got	in
through	the	door,	I	was	goin’	out	through	the	window	–	only	we	couldn’t	get
the	shutters	pulled	back—’
‘That	was	your	fault,’	said	Amby.	‘I	kept	lifting	the	latch	and	you	kept
pushing	it	back	down.’
‘The	latch	goes	down	to	let	go,	Amby,	you	idiot.’
‘No	it	goes	up	–	it	went	up,	I	saw	it—’
‘And	then	back	down—’
‘Up.’
‘Then	down.’
Gruntle’s	sudden	growl	silenced	them	both.	They	were	now	following	the
hoof	prints	and	various	furrows	of	things	being	dragged	in	the	wake	of	the


animals.	In	the	squat	houses	to	either	side,	muted	lights	flickered	through	thickglassed	windows.	The	sound	of	draining	water	surrounded	them,	along	with
the	occasional	distant	rumble	of	thunder.	The	air	mocked	with	the	freshness
that	came	after	a	storm.
‘There	they	are,’	said	Amby,	pointing.	‘Just	past	that	low	wall.	You	see
them,	Gruntle?	You	see	them?’
A	corral.	The	wreckage	of	the	carriage	high	bench	was	scattered	along	the
base	of	the	stone	wall.
Reaching	it,	they	paused,	squinted	at	the	field	of	churned-up	mud,	the
horses	huddled	at	the	far	end	–	eyeing	them	suspiciously	–	and	there,
something	sprawled	near	the	middle.	A	body.	Far	off	to	the	left	was	one	of	the
carriage	wheels.
Gruntle	leading	the	way,	they	climbed	the	wall	and	set	out	for	Glanno	Tarp.
As	they	drew	closer,	they	could	hear	him	talking.
‘…and	so	she	wasn’t	so	bad,	compared	to	Nivvy,	but	it	was	years	before	I
surrealized	not	all	women	talked	that	way,	and	if	I’d	a	known,	well,	I	probably
would	never	have	agreed	to	it.	I	mean,	I	have	some	decency	in	me,	I’m	sure	of
it.	It	was	the	way	she	carried	on	pretending	she	was	nine	years	old,	eyes	so
wide,	all	those	cute	things	she	did	which,	when	you	think	about	it,	was	maybe
cute	some	time,	long	ago,	but	now	–	I	mean,	her	hair	was	going	grey,	for
Hood’s	sake	–	oh,	you	found	me.	Good.	No,	don’t	move	me	just	yet,	my	legs	is
broke	and	maybe	a	shoulder	too,	and	an	arm,	wrist,	oh,	and	this	finger	here,
it’s	sprained.	Get	Quell	–	don’t	go	moving	me	without	Quell,	all	right?	Thanks.
Now,	where	was	I?	Nivvy?	No,	that	stall	keeper,	Luft,	now	she	didn’t	last,	for
the	reasons	I	experplained	before.	It	was	months	before	I	found	me	a	new
woman	–	well,	before	Coutre	found	me,	would	be	more	reaccurate.	She’d	just
lost	all	her	hair…’
The	carriage	wheel	had	moved	slightly.	Gruntle	had	caught	the	motion	out
of	the	corner	of	his	eye	and,	leaving	Glanno	babbling	on	to	the	Boles,	who
stood	looking	down	with	mouths	hanging	open,	he	set	out	for	it.
He	sheathed	his	cutlasses	and	heaved	at	the	wheel.	It	resisted	until,	with	a
thick	slurping	sound,	it	lifted	clear	of	the	mud	and	Gruntle	pushed	it	entirely
upright.
Cartographer	was	a	figure	seemingly	composed	entirely	of	clay,	still
bound	by	the	wrists	and	ankle	to	the	spokes.	The	face	worked	for	a	time,
pushing	out	lumps	of	mud	from	its	mouth,	and	then	the	corpse	said,	‘It’s	the
jam-smeared	bread	thing,	isn’t	it?’
	


‘Look	at	that,’	Quell	said.
Precious	Thimble	made	a	warding	gesture	and	then	spat	thrice,	up,	down,
straight	ahead.	‘Blackdog	Swamp,’	she	said.	‘Mott	Wood.	This	was	why	I	left,
dammit!	That’s	the	problem	with	Jaghut,	they	show	up	everywhere.’
Behind	them,	Mappo	grunted	but	otherwise	offered	no	comment.
The	tower	was	something	between	square	and	round,	the	corners	either
weathered	down	by	centuries	and	centuries	of	wind	or	deliberately	softened	to
ease	that	same	buffeting,	howling	wind.	The	entranceway	was	a	narrow
gloomy	recess	beneath	a	mossy	lintel	stone,	the	moss	hanging	in	beards	that
dripped	in	a	curtain	of	rainwater,	each	drop	popping	into	eroded	hollows	on
the	slab	of	the	landing.
‘So,’	said	Quell	with	brittle	confidence,	‘the	village	Provost	went	and
moved	into	a	Jaghut	tower.	That	was	brave—’
‘Stupid.’
‘Stupidly	brave,	yes.’
‘Unless,’	she	said,	sniffing	the	air.	‘That’s	the	other	problem	with	Jaghut.
When	they	build	towers,	they	live	in	them.	For	ever.’
Quell	groaned.	‘I	was	pretending	not	to	think	that,	Witch.’
‘As	if	that	would	help.’
‘It	helped	me!’
‘There’s	two	things	we	can	do,’	Precious	Thimble	announced.	‘We	can	turn
right	round	and	ignore	the	curse	and	all	that	and	get	out	of	this	town	as	fast	as
possible.’
‘Or?’
‘We	can	go	up	to	that	door	and	knock.’
Quell	rubbed	at	his	chin,	glanced	back	at	a	silent	Mappo,	and	then	once
more	eyed	the	tower.	‘This	witchery	–	this	curse	here,	Precious,	that	strikes
when	a	woman	comes	of	age.’
‘What	about	it?	It’s	a	damned	old	one,	a	nasty	one.’
‘Can	you	break	it?’
‘Not	likely.	All	we	can	hope	to	do	is	make	the	witch	or	warlock	change	her
or	his	mind	about	it.	The	caster	can	surrender	it	a	whole	lot	more	easily	than
someone	else	can	break	it.’
‘And	if	we	kill	the	caster?’
She	shrugged.	‘Could	go	either	way,	Wizard.	Poof!	Gone.	Or…not.
Anyway,	you’re	stepping	sideways,	Quell.	We	were	talking	about	this…this
Provost.’
‘Not	sideways,	Witch.	I	was	thinking,	well,	about	you	and	Sweetest
Sufferance	and	Faint,	that’s	all.’


All	at	once	she	felt	as	if	she’d	just	swallowed	a	fistful	of	icy	knuckles.	Her
throat	ached,	her	stomach	curdled.	‘Oh,	shit.’
‘And	since,’	Quell	went	on	remorselessly,	‘it’s	going	to	be	a	day	or	two
before	we	can	effect	repairs	–	at	best	–	well…’
‘I	think	we’d	better	knock,’	she	said.
‘All	right.	Just	let	me,	er,	empty	my	bladder	first.’
He	walked	off	to	the	stone-lined	gutter	to	his	left.	Mappo	went	off	a	few
paces	in	the	other	direction,	to	rummage	in	his	sack.
Precious	Thimble	squinted	up	at	the	tower.	‘Well,’	she	whispered,	‘if
you’re	a	Jaghut	–	and	I	think	you	are	–	you	know	we’re	standing	right	here.
And	you	can	smell	the	magic	on	our	breaths.	Now,	we’re	not	looking	for
trouble,	but	there’s	no	chance	you	don’t	know	nothing	about	that	curse	–	we
need	to	find	that	witch	or	warlock,	you	see,	that	nasty	villager	who	made	up
this	nasty	curse,	because	we’re	stuck	here	for	a	few	days.	Understand?	There’s
three	women	stuck	here.	And	I’m	one	of	them.’
‘You	say	something?’	Quell	asked,	returning.
‘Let’s	go,’	she	said	as	Mappo	arrived,	holding	an	enormous	mace.
They	walked	to	the	door.
Halfway	there,	it	swung	open.
	
‘My	mate,’	said	the	Provost,	‘is	buried	in	the	yard	below.’	He	was	standing	at
the	window,	looking	out	over	the	tumultuous	seas	warring	with	the	shoals.
Quell	grunted.	‘What	yard?’	He	leaned	forward	and	peered	down.	‘What
yard?’
The	Provost	sighed.	‘It	was	there	two	days	ago.’	He	turned	from	the
window	and	eyed	the	wizard.
Who	did	his	best	not	to	quail.
Bedusk	Pall	Kovuss	Agape,	who	called	himself	a	Jaghut	Anap,	was	simply
gigantic,	possibly	weighing	more	than	Mappo	and	at	least	a	head	and	a	half
taller	than	the	Trell.	His	skin	was	blue,	a	deeper	hue	than	any	Malazan	Napan
Quell	could	recall	seeing.	The	blue	even	seemed	to	stain	the	silver-tipped	tusks
jutting	from	his	lower	jaw.
Quell	cleared	his	throat.	He	needed	to	pee	again,	but	that	would	have	to
wait.	‘You	lost	her	long	ago?’
‘Who?’
‘Er,	your	mate?’
Bedusk	Agape	selected	one	of	the	three	crystal	decanters	on	the	marble
table,	sniffed	at	its	contents,	and	then	refilled	their	goblets.	‘Have	you	ever	had


a	wife,	Wizard?’
‘No,	not	that	I’m	aware	of.’
‘Yes,	it	can	be	like	that	at	times.’
‘It	can?’
The	Jaghut	gestured	towards	the	window.	‘One	moment	there,	the	next…
gone.’
‘Oh,	the	cliff.’
‘No,	no.	I	was	speaking	of	my	wife.’
Quell	shot	Precious	Thimble	a	helpless	look.	Off	near	the	spiral	staircase,
Mappo	stood	examining	an	elaborate	eyepiece	of	some	kind,	mounted	on	a
spike	with	a	peculiar	ball-hinge	that	permitted	the	long	black	metal	instrument
to	be	swivelled	about,	side	to	side	and	up	and	down.	The	damned	Trell	was
paying	attention	to	all	the	wrong	things.
Precious	Thimble	looked	back	at	Quell	with	wide	eyes.
‘Loss,’	stammered	the	wizard,	‘is	a	grievous	thing.’
‘Well	of	course	it	is,’	said	Bedusk	Agape,	frowning.
‘Um,	not	always.	If,	for	example,	one	loses	one’s,	er,	virginity,	or	a
favourite	shiny	stone,	say…’
The	red-rimmed	eyes	stayed	steady,	unblinking.
Quell	wanted	to	squeeze	his	legs	together	–	no,	better,	fold	one	over	the
other	–	lest	his	snake	start	drooling	or,	worse,	spitting.
Precious	Thimble	spoke	in	a	strangely	squeaky	voice,	‘Jaghut	Anap,	the
curse	afflicting	this	village’s	daughters—’
‘There	have	been	twelve	in	all,’	said	Bedusk	Agape.	‘Thus	far.’
‘Oh.	What	happened	to	the	other	nine?’
The	Jaghut	flicked	his	gaze	over	to	her.	‘You	are	not	the	first	trouble	to
arrive	in	the	past	few	years.	Of	course,’	he	added,	after	sipping	his	wine,	‘all
the	young	girls	are	now	sent	to	the	next	village	along	this	coast	–	permanently,
alas,	which	does	not	bode	well	for	the	future	of	this	town.’
‘I	thought	I	saw	women	down	in	the	tavern	cellar,’	said	Precious	Thimble.
‘Bearing	a	child	prevents	the	settling	of	the	curse.	Mothers	are	immune.
Therefore,	if	you	or	your	fellow	female	companions	have	at	any	time
produced	a	child,	you	need	not	worry.’
‘Um,’	said	Precious	Thimble,	‘I	don’t	think	any	of	us	qualify.’
‘How	unfortunate,’	said	Bedusk.
‘So	how	is	it	you	got	elected	Provost?’	Quell	asked.	‘Just	curious,	you	see
–	I’m	the	nosy	type,	that’s	all.	I	didn’t	mean	anything—’
‘I	believe	it	was	a	collective	attempt	to	ameliorate	my	grief,	my	solitude.
None	would	deny,	I	now	expect,	that	such	an	invitation	was	ill-conceived.’


‘Oh?	Why?’
‘Well,	had	I	remained	in	my	isolation,	this	terrible	curse	would	not	exist,	I
am	afraid.’
‘It’s	your	curse,	then?’
‘Yes.’
A	long	moment	of	silence.	From	near	the	staircase,	Mappo	slowly	turned
to	face	them.
‘Then	you	can	end	it,’	said	Quell.
‘I	could,	yes,	but	I	shall	not.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	you	are	not	that	important.’
Quell	crossed	his	legs.	‘May	I	ask,	what	happened	to	your	mate?’
‘We	argued.	I	lost.	I	buried	her.’
There	seemed	to	be,	at	least	to	the	wizard’s	thinking,	something	missing	in
that	answer.	But	he	was	getting	distracted	by	his	bladder.	He	couldn’t	think
straight.
‘So,’	said	Precious	Thimble	in	a	thin	voice,	‘if	you	lose	an	argument	to
someone,	you	then	kill	them?’
‘Oh,	I	didn’t	say	she	was	dead.’
Mappo	spoke	from	where	he	still	stood,	‘She	is	now,	Jaghut.’
Bedusk	Agape	sighed.	‘That	does	seem	likely,	doesn’t	it?’
‘How	long,’	the	Trell	asked,	‘was	she	pinned	down?	Your	mate?’
‘Nine	years	or	so.’
‘And	the	argument?’
‘I	sense	a	certain	belligerence	in	you,	Trell.’
‘Belligerence,	Jaghut?’	Mappo	bared	his	fangs	in	a	cold	grin.	‘Your	senses
have	dulled	with	disuse,	I	think.’
‘I	see.	And	you	imagine	you	can	best	me?’
‘I	was	asking	you	about	the	argument.’
‘Something	trivial.	I	have	forgotten	the	details.’
‘But	you	found	yourself	alone,	at	least	until	the	villagers	took	pity	on	you
and	elected	you	their	Provost.	And	then…you	fell	in	love?’
Bedusk	Agape	winced.
Precious	Thimble	gasped.	‘Oh!	I	see	now.	Oh,	it’s	like	that.	She	spurned
you.	You	got	mad,	again,	only	this	time	you	couldn’t	very	well	bury	the	whole
village—’
‘Actually,	I	considered	it.’
‘Um,	well,	you	decided	not	to,	then.	So,	instead,	you	worked	up	a	curse,	on
her	and	all	her	young	pretty	friends,	since	they	laughed	at	you	or	whatever.


You	turned	them	all	into	Tralka	Vonan.	Blood	Feeders.’
‘You	cannot	hope	to	break	my	curse,	Witch,’	said	Bedusk.	‘Even	with	the
wizard’s	help,	you	will	fail.’	The	Jaghut	then	faced	Mappo.	‘And	you,	Trell,
even	if	you	manage	to	kill	me,	the	curse	will	not	die.’	He	refilled	his	goblet	for
the	third	time.	‘Your	women	will	have	a	day	or	so	before	the	curse	takes	effect.
In	that	time,	I	suppose,	they	could	all	endeavour	to	become	pregnant.’
All	at	once	Quell	sat	straighter.
But	when	he	saw	Precious	Thimble’s	expression,	his	delighted	smile
turned	somewhat	sheepish.
	
Down	on	the	narrow	strand	of	what	had	once	been	beach,	at	the	foot	of	the	raw
cliff,	waves	skirled	foam-thick	tendrils	through	the	chunks	of	clay	and	rock
and	black	hairy	roots,	gnawing	deep	channels	and	sucking	back	into	the	sea
milky,	silt-laden	water.	The	entire	heap	was	in	motion,	settling,	dissolving,
sections	collapsing	under	the	assault	of	the	waves.
Farther	down	the	beach	the	strand	reemerged,	the	white	sand	seemingly
studded	with	knuckles	of	rust,	to	mark	the	thousands	of	ship	nails	and	rivets
that	had	been	scattered	in	profusion	along	the	shoreline.	Fragments	of	wood
formed	a	snagged	barrier	higher	up,	and	beyond	that,	cut	into	the	cliff-face,
weathered	steps	led	up	to	a	hacked-out	cave	mouth.
This	cave	was	in	fact	a	tunnel,	rising	at	a	steep	angle	up	through	the	bowels
of	the	promontory,	to	open	out	in	the	floor	of	the	village’s	largest	structure,	a
stone	and	timbered	warehouse	where	the	wreckers	off-loaded	their	loot	after
the	long	haul	of	the	carts	from	the	cliff	base.	A	tidy	enterprise,	all	things
considered,	one	that	gave	employment	to	all	the	folk	of	the	village	–	from
tending	the	false	fires	to	rowing	the	deep-hulled	boats	out	to	the	reef,	where	the
stripping	down	of	the	wrecks	took	place,	along	with	clubbing	survivors	and
making	sure	they	drowned.	The	local	legend,	concocted	to	provide	meagre
justification	for	such	cruel	endeavours,	revolved	around	some	long-ago	pirate
raids	on	the	village,	and	how	someone	(possibly	the	Provost,	who	had	always
lived	here,	or	the	locally	famous	Gacharge	Hadlorn	Who	Waits	–	but	he	had
left	so	there	was	no	way	to	ask	him)	had	suggested	that,	since	the	sea	was	so
eager	to	deliver	murderers	to	this	shore,	why	could	it	not	also	deliver	death	to
the	would-be	murderers?	And	so,	once	the	notion	was	planted,	the	earth	was
tilled,	with	mallet	and	pick	and	flint	and	fire,	and	the	days	of	fishing	for	a
living	off	the	treacherous	shoals	soon	gave	way	to	a	far	more	lucrative
venture.
Oh,	the	nets	were	cast	out	every	now	and	then,	especially	in	the	calm


season	when	the	pickings	got	slim,	and	who	could	deny	the	blessing	of	so
many	fish	these	days,	and	fat,	big	ones	at	that?	Why,	it	wasn’t	so	long	ago	that
they’d	damned	near	fished	out	the	area.
The	beach	was	comfortable	with	half-eaten	corpses	rolling	up	on	to	the
sands,	where	crabs	and	gulls	swarmed.	The	beach	helped	pick	the	bones	clean
and	then	left	them	to	the	waves	to	bury	or	sweep	away.	On	this	fast-closing
night,	however,	something	unusual	clawed	its	way	to	the	shore.	Unusual	in	that
it	still	lived.	Crabs	scuttled	from	its	path	as	fast	as	their	tiny	legs	could	manage.
Water	sluiced	from	the	figure	as	it	heaved	itself	upright.	Red-rimmed	eyes
scanned	the	scene,	fixing	at	last	on	the	steps	and	the	gaping	mouth	of	the	cave.
After	a	moment,	it	set	out	in	that	direction,	leaving	deep	footprints	that	the
beach	hastened	to	smooth	away.
	
‘Do	you	really	think	I	can’t	see	what’s	going	on	in	your	skull,	Quell?	You’re
right	there,	first	in	line,	with	the	three	of	us	lying	in	a	row,	legs	spread	wide.
And	in	you	dive,	worse	than	a	damned	dog	on	a	tilted	fence	post.	Reccanto
waiting	for	his	turn,	and	Glanno,	and	Jula	and	Amby	and	Mappo	here	and
Gruntle	and	probably	that	damned	undead—’
‘Hold	on	a	moment,’	growled	the	Trell.
‘Don’t	even	try,’	Precious	Thimble	snapped.
They	were	marching	back	to	the	tavern,	Precious	Thimble	in	the	lead,	the
other	two	hastening	to	keep	up.	That	she	was	tiny	and	needed	two	steps	for
every	one	of	theirs	seemed	irrelevant.
‘Then	again,’	she	went	on,	‘maybe	that	Jaghut	will	go	and	jump	the	queue,
and	by	the	dawn	we’ll	all	be	planted	with	some	ghastly	monster,	half	Trell,	half
Jaghut,	half	pissy	wizard,	half—’
‘Twins?’	asked	Quell.
She	swung	a	vicious	glare	back	at	him.	‘Oh,	funny.’
‘Anyway,’	added	Quell,	‘I’m	pretty	sure	that’s	not	how	things	like	that
work—’
‘How	would	you	know?	No,	me	and	Sweetest	and	Faint,	we’re	out	of	here
as	soon	as	we	can	get	our	gear	together	–	you	can	collect	us	somewhere	down
the	road.	This	damned	village	can	go	to	Hood,	with	Bedusk	Pall	Kovuss	Agape
in	the	lead.	They’re	damned	wreckers	anyway,	and	if	anybody	deserves	cursing
to	damnation,	it’s	them.’
‘I	wouldn’t	disagree	there,’	said	Mappo.
‘Stop	trying	to	get	under	my	skirt,	Trell.’
‘What?	I	wasn’t—’


Quell	cut	in	with	a	snort.	‘You	don’t	wear	skirts,	Witch.	Though	if	you	did,
it’d	be	so	much	easier—’
Now	she	spun	round.	‘What	would	be,	Quell?’
He’d	halted	and	now	backed	up.	‘Sorry,	did	I	think	that	out	loud?’
‘You	think	the	curse	on	this	village	is	bad,	you	just	wait	and	see	what	I	can
come	up	with!’
‘All	right,	we	take	your	point,	Precious.	Relax.	You	three	just	go,	right?
We’ll	get	the	carriage	fixed	up	and	find	you,	just	like	you	said.’
She	whirled	about	once	more	and	resumed	her	march.
	
Gruntle	saw	the	three	in	the	street,	closing	fast	on	the	entrance	to	the	tavern.	He
shouted	to	catch	their	attention	and	hurried	over.
‘Master	Quell,	your	driver	is	a	heap	of	broken	bones	back	there,	but	he’s
still	breathing.’
‘Well,	he	should	have	let	go	of	the	damned	reins,’	Quell	said	in	a	growl.
‘And	now	I	got	to	do	healing	and	that	takes	time.	That’s	just	great	–	how	am	I
supposed	to	fix	the	carriage?	Why	can’t	anybody	else	do	anything	useful	round
here?	You,	Witch	–	go	and	heal	Glanno—’
‘I	can’t	do	that!	Oh,	I	can	set	splints	and	spit	on	wounds	to	chase	infection
away,	but	it’s	sounding	as	if	he	needs	a	whole	lot	more	than	that.	Right,
Gruntle?’
The	tattooed	warrior	shrugged.	‘Probably.’
‘Don’t	even	try,’	she	snarled	at	him,	and	then	stalked	into	the	tavern.
Gruntle	stared	after	her.	‘What	did	she	mean?	Try	what?’
‘Getting	under	her	skirt,’	said	Quell.
‘But	she	doesn’t	wear—’
‘That’s	not	the	point,’	the	wizard	cut	in.	‘You’re	thinking	like	a	man.	That’s
your	mistake.	It’s	all	our	mistakes,	in	fact.	It’s	why	we’re	standing	out	here,
three	men,	no	women.	If	we’d	gone	and	said,	why,	Precious,	we	wouldn’t	even
think	of	it,	you	know	what	she’d	say	then?	“What’s	wrong	with	me?	Am	I	too
ugly	or	something?”	and	we’d	be	in	trouble	all	over	again!’
Gruntle	glanced	bemusedly	at	Mappo,	who,	rather	cryptically,	simply
nodded.
Quell	straightened	his	still-wet	clothes.	‘Lead	me	to	him,	then,	Gruntle.’
	
At	one	end	of	the	corral	there	was	a	stable	and	next	to	it,	a	loading	platform


built	of	weathered	planks	that	marked	one	end	of	a	huge,	solidly	built
warehouse.	Jula	and	Amby	had	helped	Glanno	sit	up,	and	Cartographer,	cut
loose	from	the	wheel,	was	staggering	in	circles	as	he	plucked	and	scraped
manure	off	his	face,	neck,	and	rotted	clothes.
Glanno	had	reached	the	eleventh	love	of	his	life,	some	woman	named
Herboo	Nast,	‘…who	wore	a	fox	round	her	neck	–	not	just	its	fur,	you
understand,	the	actual	animal,	paws	trussed	up	in	berbraided	silk,	gamuzzled	in
leather,	but	it	was	the	beast’s	eyes	I	remember	most	–	that	look.	Panic,	like	it’d
just	realized	it	was	trapped	in	its	worst	nightly-mare.	Not	that	she	wasn’t	goodlooking,	in	that	goat-like	way	of	hers	–	you	know,	those	long	curly	hairs	that
show	up	under	their	chin	after	a	certain	age	–	did	I	mention	how	I	liked	my
women	experientialled?	I	do.	I	most	certainly	do.	I	wanna	see	decades	and
decades	of	miserable	livin’	in	their	eyes,	so	that	when	I	arrive,	why,	it’s	like	a
fresh	spring	rain	on	a	withered	daisy.	Which	one	was	I	talking	about?	Fox,
goat,	panic,	trussed	up,	right,	Herboo	Nast—’
He	stopped	then,	so	abruptly	that	neither	Jula	nor	Amby	noticed	the	sudden,
ominous	silence,	and	just	kept	on	with	the	smiles	and	nods	with	which	they	had
accompanied	Glanno’s	monologue,	and	they	were	still	smiling	and	nodding
when	the	figure	that	had	appeared	on	the	warehouse	loading	platform	–	the	one
whose	arrival	had	so	thoroughly	stunned	Glanno	Tarp’s	flapping	tongue	–
walked	up	to	halt	directly	in	front	of	all	three,	as	the	horses	bolted	for	the	most
distant	corner	of	the	corral	in	a	drum-roll	of	hoofs.

‘No	losses	so	far	and	that’s	good,’	said	Quell	as	he	and	Gruntle	walked
towards	the	corral.
‘I	didn’t	know	you	were	a	practitioner	of	Denul,’	Gruntle	said.
‘I’m	not,	not	really,	I	mean.	I	have	elixirs,	unguents,	salves,	and	some	of
those	are	High	Denul,	for	emergencies.’
‘Like	now.’
‘Maybe.	We’ll	see.’
‘Broken	legs—’
‘Doesn’t	need	legs	to	drive	the	carriage,	does	he?	Besides,	he	might
decline	my	services.’
‘Why	would	he	do	that?’
‘Healing	expenses	cut	into	his	share.	He	could	come	out	of	this	owing	the
Guild	rather	than	the	other	way	round.’	He	shrugged.	‘Some	people	refuse.’
‘Well,’	said	Gruntle,	‘he	said	to	get	you,	so	I	don’t	think	he’s	going	to


refuse,	Master	Quell.’
They	reached	the	low	stone	wall	and	then	halted.
‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	is	that?’	Gruntle	asked,	squinting	at	the	tall	ragged
figure	standing	with	the	Bole	brothers.
Quell	grunted,	and	then	said,	‘Well,	and	it’s	just	a	guess,	mind	you,	but	I’d
say	that	that’s	the	Provost’s	wife.’
‘He’s	married	to	a	Jaghut?’
‘Was,	until	he	buried	her,	but	then	the	yard	collapsed	into	the	sea,	taking
her	with	it.	And	now	she’s	back	and	I’d	wager	a	trip’s	profit	she’s	not	in	the
best	of	moods.’	And	then	he	smiled	up	at	Gruntle.	‘We	can	work	all	this	out.
Oh,	yes,	we	can	work	all	this	out,	now.’
This	confidence	was	shattered	when	Jula	and	Amby	Bole	suddenly	took	it
upon	themselves	to	attack	the	Jaghut.	Bellowing,	they	flung	themselves	at	her,
and	all	three	figures	lurched	about	as	they	struggled,	clawed,	scratched	and	bit,
until	finally	they	lost	their	footing	and	toppled	in	a	multi-limbed	mass	that
slopped	heavily	in	the	muck.
Quell	and	Gruntle	scrambled	over	the	wall	and	raced	for	them.
Glanno	Tarp	was	shrieking	something,	his	words	unintelligible	as	he
sought	to	crawl	away	from	the	scrap.
From	the	Jaghut	woman	sorcery	erupted,	a	thundering,	deafening
detonation	that	lit	up	the	entire	corral	and	all	the	buildings	nearby.	Blinking
against	the	sudden	blindness,	Gruntle	staggered	in	the	mud.	He	heard	Quell	fall
beside	him.	The	coruscating,	actinic	light	continued	to	bristle,	throwing
everything	into	harsh	shadows.
Glanno	Tarp	resumed	his	shrieks.
As	vision	returned,	Gruntle	saw,	to	his	astonishment,	that	both	Boles	still
lived.	In	fact,	they	had	each	pinned	down	an	arm	and	were	holding	tight	as	the
Jaghut	woman	thrashed	and	snarled.
Drawing	his	cutlasses,	Gruntle	made	his	way	over.	‘Jula!	Amby!	What	are
you	doing?’
Two	mud-smeared	faces	looked	up,	and	their	expressions	were	dark,
twisted	with	anger.
‘A	swamp	witch!’	Jula	said.	‘She’s	one	of	them	swamp	witches!’
‘We	don’t	like	swamp	witches!’	added	Amby.	‘We	kill	swamp	witches!’
‘Master	Quell	said	this	one	can	help	us,’	said	Gruntle.	‘Or	she	would	have,
if	not	for	you	two	jumping	her	like	that!’
‘Cut	her	head	off!’	said	Jula.	‘That	usually	works!’
‘I’m	not	cutting	her	head	off.	Let	her	go,	you	two—’
‘She’ll	attack	us!’


Gruntle	crouched	down.	‘Jaghut	–	stop	snarling	–	listen	to	me!	If	they	let
you	go,	will	you	stop	fighting?’
Eyes	burned	as	if	aflame.	She	struggled	some	more,	and	then	ceased	all
motion.	The	blazing	glare	dimmed,	and	after	a	few	deep,	rattling	breaths,	she
nodded.	‘Very	well.	Now	get	these	two	fools	off	me!’
‘Jula,	Amby	–	let	go	of	her—’
‘We	will,	once	you	cut	her	head	off!’
‘Do	it	now,	Boles,	or	I	will	cut	your	heads	off.’
‘Do	Amby	first!’
‘No,	Jula	first!’
‘I’ve	got	two	cutlasses	here,	boys,	so	I’ll	do	it	at	the	same	time.	How	does
that	suit	you?’
The	Boles	half	lifted	themselves	up	and	glared	across	at	each	other.
‘We	don’t	like	it,’	said	Amby.
‘So	leave	off	her,	then.’
They	rolled	to	the	sides,	away	from	the	Jaghut	woman,	and	she	pulled	her
arms	loose	and	clambered	to	her	feet.	The	penumbra	of	sorcery	dimmed,
winked	out.	Breathing	hard,	she	spun	to	face	the	Bole	brothers,	who’d	rolled	in
converging	arcs	until	they	collided	and	were	now	crouched	side	by	side	in	the
mud,	eyeing	her	like	a	pair	of	wolves.
Clutching	his	head,	Master	Quell	stumbled	up	to	them.	‘You	idiots,’	he
gasped.	‘Jaghut,	your	husband’s	cursed	this	village.	Tralka	Vonan.	Can	you	do
anything	about	that?’
She	was	trying	to	wipe	the	mud	from	her	rotted	clothes.	‘You’re	not	from
around	here,’	she	said.	‘Who	are	you	people?’
‘Just	passing	through,’	Quell	said.	‘But	our	carriage	needs	repairs	–	and
we	got	wounded—’
‘I	am	about	to	destroy	this	village	and	everyone	in	it	–	does	that	bother
you?’
Quell	licked	his	muddy	lips,	made	a	face,	and	then	said,	‘That	depends	if
you’re	including	us	in	your	plans	of	slaughter.’
‘Are	you	pirates?’
‘No.’
‘Wreckers?’
‘No.’
‘Necromancers?’
‘No.’
‘Then,’	she	said,	with	another	glare	at	the	Boles,	‘I	suppose	you	can	live.’
‘Your	husband	says	even	if	he	dies,	the	curse	will	persist.’


She	bared	stained	tusks.	‘He’s	lying.’
Quell	glanced	at	Gruntle,	who	shrugged	in	return	and	said,	‘I’m	not	happy
with	the	idea	of	pointless	slaughter,	but	then,	wreckers	are	the	scum	of
humanity.’
The	Jaghut	woman	walked	towards	the	stone	wall.	They	watched	her.
‘Master	Quell,’	said	Glanno	Tarp,	‘got	any	splints?’
Quell	shot	Gruntle	another	look.	‘Told	you,	the	cheap	bastard.’
At	last	the	sun	rose,	lifting	a	rim	of	fire	above	the	horizon	on	this	the	last
day	of	the	wrecker	village	on	the	Reach	of	Woe.
From	a	window	of	the	tower,	Bedusk	Pall	Kovuss	Agape	stood	watching
his	wife	approaching	up	the	street.	‘Oh,’	he	murmured,	‘I’m	in	trouble	now.’
	
In	the	moments	before	dawn,	Kedeviss	rose	from	her	blankets	and	walked	out
into	the	darkness.	She	could	make	out	the	shape	of	him,	sitting	on	a	large
boulder	and	staring	northward.	Rings	spun	on	chains,	glittering	like	snared
stars.
Her	moccasins	on	the	gravel	scree	gave	her	away	and	she	saw	him	twist
round	to	watch	her	approach.
‘You	no	longer	sleep,’	she	said.
To	this	observation,	Clip	said	nothing.
‘Something	has	happened	to	you,’	she	continued.	‘When	you	awoke	in
Bastion,	you	were…changed.	I	thought	it	was	some	sort	of	residue	from	the
possession.	Now,	I	am	not	so	sure.’
He	put	away	the	chain	and	rings	and	then	slid	down	from	the	boulder,
landing	lightly	and	taking	a	moment	to	straighten	his	cloak.	‘Of	them	all,’	he
said	in	a	low	voice,	‘you,	Kedeviss,	are	the	sharpest.	You	see	what	the	others	do
not.’
‘I	make	a	point	of	paying	attention.	You’ve	hidden	yourself	well,	Clip	–	or
whoever	you	now	are.’
‘Not	well	enough,	it	seems.’
‘What	do	you	plan	to	do?’	she	asked	him.	‘Anomander	Rake	will	see
clearly,	the	moment	he	sets	his	eyes	upon	you.	And	no	doubt	there	will	be
others.’
‘I	was	Herald	of	Dark,’	he	said.
‘I	doubt	it,’	she	said.
‘I	was	Mortal	Sword	to	the	Black-Winged	Lord,	to	Rake	himself.’
‘He	didn’t	choose	you,	though,	did	he?	You	worshipped	a	god	who	never
answered,	not	a	single	prayer.	A	god	who,	in	all	likelihood,	never	even	knew


you	existed.’
‘And	for	that,’	whispered	Clip,	‘he	will	answer.’
Her	brows	rose.	‘Is	this	a	quest	for	vengeance?	If	we	had	known—’
‘What	you	knew	or	didn’t	know	is	irrelevant.’
‘A	Mortal	Sword	serves.’
‘I	said,	Kedeviss,	I	was	a	Mortal	Sword.’
‘No	longer,	then.	Very	well,	Clip,	what	are	you	now?’
In	the	grainy	half-light	she	saw	him	smile,	and	something	dark	veiled	his
eyes.	‘One	day,	in	the	sky	over	Bastion,	a	warren	opened.	A	machine	tumbled
out,	and	down—’
She	nodded.	‘Yes,	we	saw	that	machine.’
‘The	one	within	brought	with	him	a	child	god	–	oh,	not	deliberately.	No,
the	mechanism	of	his	sky	carriage,	in	creating	gates,	in	travelling	from	realm
to	realm,	by	its	very	nature	cast	a	net,	a	net	that	captured	this	child	god.	And
dragged	it	here.’
‘And	this	traveller	–	what	happened	to	him?’
Clip	shrugged.
She	studied	him,	head	cocked	to	one	side.	‘We	failed,	didn’t	we?’
He	eyed	her,	as	if	faintly	amused.
‘We	thought	we’d	driven	the	Dying	God	from	you	–	instead,	we	drove	him
deeper.	By	destroying	the	cavern	realm	where	he	dwelt.’
‘You	ended	his	pain,	Kedeviss,’	said	Clip.	‘Leaving	only	his…hunger.’
‘Rake	will	destroy	you.	Nor,’	she	added,	‘will	we	accompany	you	to	Black
Coral.	Go	your	own	way,	godling.	We	shall	find	our	own	way	there—’
He	was	smiling.	‘Before	me?	Shall	we	race,	Kedeviss	–	me	with	my	hunger
and	you	with	your	warning?	Rake	does	not	frighten	me	–	the	Tiste	Andii	do	not
frighten	me.	When	they	see	me,	they	will	see	naught	but	kin	–	until	it	is	too
late.’
‘Godling,	if	in	poring	through	Clip’s	mind	you	now	feel	you	understand
the	Tiste	Andii,	I	must	tell	you,	you	are	wrong.	Clip	was	a	barbarian.	Ignorant.
A	fool.	He	knew	nothing.’
‘I	am	not	interested	in	the	Tiste	Andii	–	oh,	I	will	kill	Rake,	because	that	is
what	he	deserves.	I	will	feed	upon	him	and	take	his	power	into	me.	No,	the	one
I	seek	is	not	in	Black	Coral,	but	within	a	barrow	outside	the	city.	Another
young	god	–	so	young,	so	helpless,	so	naïve.’	His	smile	returned.	‘And	he
knows	I	am	coming	for	him.’
‘Must	we	then	stop	you	ourselves?’
‘You?	Nimander,	Nenanda,	all	you	pups?	Now	really,	Kedeviss.’
‘If	you—’


His	attack	was	a	blur	–	one	hand	closing	about	her	throat,	the	other
covering	her	mouth.	She	felt	her	throat	being	crushed	and	scrabbled	for	the
knife	at	her	belt.
He	spun	her	round	and	flung	her	down	to	the	ground,	so	hard	that	the	back
of	her	head	crunched	on	the	rocks.	Dazed,	her	struggles	weakened,	flailed,	fell
away.
Something	was	pouring	out	from	his	hand	where	it	covered	her	mouth,
something	that	numbed	her	lips,	her	jaws,	then	forced	its	way	into	her	mouth
and	down	her	throat.	Thick	as	tree	sap.	She	stared	up	at	him,	saw	the	muddy
gleam	of	the	Dying	God’s	eyes	–	dying	no	longer,	now	freed	–	and	thought:
what	have	we	done?
He	was	whispering.	‘I	could	stop	now,	and	you’d	be	mine.	It’s	tempting.’
Instead,	whatever	oozed	from	his	hand	seemed	to	burgeon,	sliding	like	a
fat,	sleek	serpent	down	her	throat,	coiling	in	her	gut.
‘But	you	might	break	loose	–	just	a	moment’s	worth,	but	enough	to	warn
the	others,	and	I	can’t	have	that.’
Where	the	poison	touched,	there	was	a	moment	of	ecstatic	need,	sweeping
through	her,	but	that	was	followed	almost	instantly	by	numbness,	and	then
something…darker.	She	could	smell	her	own	rot,	pooling	like	vapours	in	her
brain.
He	is	killing	me.	Even	that	knowledge	could	not	awaken	any	strength	within
her.
‘I	need	the	rest	of	them,	you	see,’	he	was	saying.	‘So	we	can	walk	in,	right
in,	without	anyone	suspecting	anything.	I	need	my	way	in,	that’s	all.	Look	at
Nimander.’	He	snorted.	‘There	is	no	guile	in	him,	none	at	all.	He	will	be	my
shield.	My	shield.’
He	was	no	longer	gripping	her	neck.	It	was	no	longer	necessary.
Kedeviss	stared	up	at	him	as	she	died,	and	her	final,	fading	thought	was:
Nimander…guileless?	Oh,	but	you	don’t…	And	then	there	was	nothing.
The	nothing	that	no	priest	dared	speak	of,	that	no	holy	scripture	described,
that	no	seer	or	prophet	set	forth	in	ringing	proclamation.	The	nothing,	this
nothing,	it	is	the	soul	in	waiting.
Comes	death,	and	now	the	soul	waits.
	
Aranatha	opened	her	eyes,	sat	up,	then	reached	out	to	touch	Nimander ’s
shoulder.	He	awoke,	looked	at	her	with	a	question	in	his	eyes.
‘He	has	killed	Kedeviss,’	she	said,	the	words	soft	as	a	breath.
Nimander	paled.


‘She	was	right,’	Aranatha	went	on,	‘and	now	we	must	be	careful.	Say
nothing	to	anyone	else,	not	yet,	or	you	will	see	us	all	die.’
‘Kedeviss.’
‘He	has	carried	her	body	to	a	crevasse,	and	thrown	her	into	it,	and	now	he
makes	signs	on	the	ground	to	show	her	careless	steps,	the	way	the	edge	gave
way.	He	will	come	to	us	in	shock	and	grief.	Nimander,	you	must	display	no
suspicion,	do	you	understand?’
And	she	saw	that	his	own	grief	would	sweep	all	else	aside	–	at	least	for
now	–	which	was	good.	Necessary.	And	that	the	anger	within	him,	the	rage
destined	to	come,	would	be	slow	to	build,	and	as	it	did	she	would	speak	to	him
again,	and	give	him	the	strength	he	would	need.
Kedeviss	had	been	the	first	to	see	the	truth	–	or	so	it	might	have	seemed.
But	Aranatha	knew	that	Nimander ’s	innocence	was	not	some	innate	flaw,	not
some	fatal	weakness.	No,	his	innocence	was	a	choice	he	had	made.	The	very
path	of	his	life.	And	he	had	his	reasons	for	that.
Easy	to	see	such	a	thing	and	misunderstand	it.	Easy	to	see	it	as	a	failing,
and	then	to	believe	him	irresolute.
Clip	had	made	this	error	from	the	very	beginning.	And	so	too	this	Dying
God,	who	knew	only	what	Clip	believed,	and	thought	it	truth.
She	looked	down	and	saw	tears	held	back,	waiting	for	Clip’s	sudden
arrival	with	his	tragic	news,	and	Aranatha	nodded	and	turned	away,	to	feign
sleep.
Somewhere	beyond	the	camp	waited	a	soul,	motionless	as	a	startled	hare.
This	was	sad.	Aranatha	had	loved	Kedeviss	dearly,	had	admired	her	cleverness,
her	percipience.	Had	cherished	her	loyalty	to	Nimander	–	even	though
Kedeviss	had	perhaps	suspected	the	strange	circumstances	surrounding	Phaed’s
death,	and	had	seen	how	Phaed	and	her	secrets	haunted	Nimander	still.
When	one	can	possess	loyalty	even	in	the	straits	of	full,	brutal
understanding,	then	that	one	understands	all	there	is	to	understand	about
compassion.
Kedeviss,	you	were	a	gift.	And	now	your	soul	waits,	as	it	must.	For	this	is
the	fate	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	Our	fate.	We	will	wait.
Until	the	wait	is	over.

Endest	Silann	stood	with	his	back	to	the	rising	sun.	And	to	the	city	of	Black
Coral.	The	air	was	chill,	damp	with	night’s	breath,	and	the	road	wending	out
from	the	gates	that	followed	the	coastline	of	the	Cut	was	a	bleak,	colourless


ribbon	that	snaked	into	stands	of	dark	conifers	half	a	league	to	the	west.	Empty
of	traffic.
The	cloak	of	eternal	darkness	shrouding	the	city	blocked	the	sun’s
stretching	rays,	although	the	western	flanks	of	the	jumbled	slope	to	their	right
was	showing	gilt	edges;	and	far	off	to	the	left,	the	gloom	of	the	Cut	steamed
white	from	the	smooth,	black	surface.
‘There	will	be,’	said	Anomander	Rake,	‘unpleasantness.’
‘I	know,	Lord.’
‘It	was	an	unanticipated	complication.’
‘Yes,	it	is.’
‘I	will	walk,’	said	Rake,	‘until	I	reach	the	tree	line.	Out	of	sight,	at	least
until	then.’
‘Have	you	waited	too	long,	Lord?’
‘No.’
‘That	is	well,	then.’
Anomander	Rake	rested	a	hand	on	Endest’s	shoulder.	‘You	have	ever	been,
my	friend,	more	than	I	deserve.’
Endest	Silann	could	only	shake	his	head,	refuting	that.
‘If	we	are	to	live,’	Rake	went	on,	‘we	must	take	risks.	Else	our	lives
become	deaths	in	all	but	name.	There	is	no	struggle	too	vast,	no	odds	too
overwhelming,	for	even	should	we	fail	–	should	we	fall	–	we	will	know	that	we
have	lived.’
Endest	nodded,	unable	to	speak.	There	should	be	tears	streaming	down	his
face,	but	he	was	dry	inside	–	his	skull,	behind	his	eyes,	all…dry.	Despair	was	a
furnace	where	everything	had	burned	up,	where	everything	was	ashes,	but	the
heat	remained,	scalding,	brittle	and	fractious.
‘The	day	has	begun.’	Rake	withdrew	his	hand	and	pulled	on	his	gauntlets.
‘This	walk,	along	this	path…I	will	take	pleasure	in	it,	my	friend.	Knowing	that
you	stand	here	to	see	me	off.’
And	the	Son	of	Darkness	set	out.
Endest	Silann	watched.	The	warrior	with	his	long	silver	hair	flowing,	his
leather	cloak	flaring	out.	Dragnipur	a	scabbarded	slash.
Blue	seeped	into	the	sky,	shadows	in	retreat	along	the	slope.	Gold	painted
the	tops	of	the	tree	line	where	the	road	slipped	in.	At	the	very	edge,	Anomander
Rake	paused,	turned	about	and	raised	one	hand	high.
Endest	Silann	did	the	same,	but	the	gesture	was	so	weak	it	made	him	gasp,
and	his	arm	faltered.
And	then	the	distant	figure	swung	round.
And	vanished	beneath	the	trees.


Book	Four

Toll	the	Hounds


	

Like	broken	slate
We	take	our	hatred
And	pile	it	high
Rolling	with	the	hills
A	ragged	line	to	map
Our	rise	and	fall
And	I	saw	suffused
With	the	dawn
Crows	aligned	in	rows
Along	the	crooked	wall
Come	to	feed
Bones	lie	scattered
At	the	stone’s	foot
The	heaped	ruin
Of	past	assaults
The	crows	face	each	way
To	eye	the	pickings
On	both	sides
For	all	its	weakness
The	world	cannot	break
What	we	make
Of	our	hatred
I	watched	the	workers
Carry	each	grey	rock
They	laboured
Blind	and	stepped
Unerringly	modest	paths
Piece	by	sheared	piece
They	built	a	slaughter
Of	innocent	others
While	muttering	as	they	might


Of	waves	of	weather
And	goodly	deeds
We	the	Builders
Hanasp	Tular
	


Chapter	Nineteen

Pray	you	never	hear	an	imprecise	breath
Caught	in	its	rough	web
Every	god	turns	away	at	the	end
And	not	a	whisper	sounds
Do	not	waste	a	lifetime	awaiting	death
Caught	in	its	rough	web
It	hovers	in	the	next	moment	you	must	attend
As	your	last	whisper	sounds
Pray	you	never	hear	an	imprecise	breath
Rough	Web
Fisher

The	soul	knows	no	greater	anguish	than	to	take	a	breath	that	begins	in	love	and
ends	with	grief.
Time	unravels	now.	Event	clashes	upon	event.	So	much	to	recount,	pray
this	sad-eyed	round	man	does	not	falter,	does	not	grow	too	breathless.	History
has	its	moments.	To	dwell	within	one	is	to	understand	nothing.	We	are	rocked
in	the	tumult,	and	the	awareness	of	one’s	own	ignorance	is	a	smothering	cloak
that	proves	poor	armour.	You	will	flinch	with	the	wounds.	We	shall	all	flinch.
As	might	a	crow	or	an	owl,	or	indeed	a	winged	eel,	hover	now	a	moment
above	this	fair	city,	its	smoke	haze,	the	scurrying	figures	in	the	streets	and
lanes,	the	impenetrable	dark	cracks	of	narrow	alleyways.	Thieves’	Road
spreads	a	tangled	web	between	buildings.	Animals	bawl	and	wives	berate
husbands	and	husbands	bellow	back,	night	buckets	gush	from	windows	down
into	the	guttered	alleys	and	–	in	some	poorer	areas	of	the	Gadrobi	District	–
into	streets	where	pedestrians	duck	and	dodge	in	the	morning	ritual	of	their
treacherous	journeys	to	work,	or	home.	Clouds	of	flies	are	stirred	awake	with
the	dawn’s	light.	Pigeons	revive	their	hopeless	struggle	to	walk	straight	lines.
Rats	creep	back	into	their	closed-in	refuges	after	yet	another	night	of	seeing


far	too	much.	The	night’s	damp	smells	are	burned	off	and	new	stinks	arise	in
pungent	vapours.
And	on	the	road,	where	it	passes	through	the	leper	colony	west	of	the	city,
a	weary	ox	and	a	tired	old	man	escort	a	burdened	cart	on	which	lies	a	canvaswrapped	figure,	worn	riding	boots	visible.
Ahead	awaits	Two-Ox	Gate.
Hover	no	longer.	Plummet	both	wings	and	spirit	down	to	the	buzzing	flies,
the	animal	heat	sweet	and	acrid,	the	musty	closeness	of	the	stained	burlap.	The
old	man	pausing	to	wipe	sweat	from	his	lined	brow	with	its	array	of	warts	and
moles,	and	his	knees	ache	and	there	is	dull	pain	in	his	chest.
Of	late,	he	has	been	carting	corpses	round	day	and	night,	or	so	it	seems.
Each	one	made	him	feel	older,	and	the	glances	he	has	been	casting	at	the	ox	are
tainted	with	an	irrational	dislike,	wavering	in	its	intensity,	as	if	the	beast	was	to
blame	for…for	something,	though	he	knows	not	what.
	
The	two	guards	at	the	gate	were	leaning	against	a	wall,	staying	cool	in	the
shade	that	would	dwindle	as	the	day	rolled	on	overhead.	Upon	seeing	the
jutting	boots	one	of	the	men	stepped	forward.	‘Hold,	there.	You’ll	find	plenty
of	cemeteries	and	pits	outside	the	walls	–	we	don’t	need	more—’
‘A	citizen	of	the	city,’	said	the	old	man.	‘Killt	in	a	duel.	By	Councillor
Vidikas,	who	said	to	send	him	back	to	his	friends	–	the	dead	man’s	friends,	I
mean.’
‘Oh,	right.	On	your	way,	then.’
Crowded	as	a	city	can	be,	an	ox	drawing	a	corpse-laden	cart	will	find	its
path	clear,	for	reasons	involving	a	host	of	instinctive	aversions,	few	of	which
made	much	sense.	To	see	a	dead	body	was	to	recoil,	mind	spinning	a	dust-devil
of	thoughts	–	that	is	not	me	–	see	the	difference	between	us?	That	is	not	me,
that	is	not	me.	No	one	I	know,	no	one	I	have	ever	known.	That	is	not	me…but…it
could	be.
So	easily,	it	could	be.
Remonstrance	of	mortality	is	a	slap	in	the	face,	a	stinging	shock.	It	is	a
struggle	for	one	to	overcome	this	moment,	to	tighten	the	armour	about	one’s
soul,	to	see	bodies	as	nothing	but	objects,	unpleasant,	to	be	disposed	of	quickly.
Soldiers	and	undertakers	fashion	macabre	humour	to	deflect	the	simple,	raw
horror	of	what	they	must	see,	of	that	to	which	they	are	witness.	It	rarely	works.
Instead,	the	soul	crawls	away,	scabbed,	wounded,	at	peace	with	nothing.
A	soldier	goes	to	war.	A	soldier	carries	it	back	home.	Could	leaders	truly
comprehend	the	damage	they	do	to	their	citizens,	they	would	never	send	them


to	war.	And	if,	in	knowing,	they	did	so	anyway	–	to	appease	their	hunger	for
power	–	then	may	they	choke	on	the	spoils	for	ever	more.
Ah,	but	the	round	man	digresses.	Forgive	this	raw	spasm	of	rage.	A	friend
lies	wrapped	in	canvas	on	the	bed	of	a	cart.	Death	is	on	its	way	home.	Forgive.
Wending	through	Gadrobi	District,	life	parted	its	stream,	voices	dimmed,
and	it	was	some	time	after	the	passing	through	of	death	that	those	voices	arose
once	more	in	its	wake.	Curtains	of	flies	repeatedly	billowed	open	and	closed
again,	until	it	seemed	the	ox	pulled	a	stage	of	a	thousand	acts,	each	one	the
same,	and	the	chorus	was	a	bow	wave	of	silence.
Journey	on,	comes	the	prayer	of	all,	journey	on.

At	last,	the	old	man	finds	his	destination	and	draws	the	ox	up	opposite	the
doors,	halting	the	beast	with	a	tug	on	its	yoke.	He	spends	a	moment	brushing
dust	from	his	clothes,	and	then	heads	inside	the	Phoenix	Inn.
It	has	been	a	long	night.	He	hobbles	to	a	table	and	catches	the	eye	of	one	of
the	servers.	He	orders	a	tankard	of	strong	ale	and	a	breakfast.	Stomach	before
business.	The	body’s	not	going	anywhere,	is	it?
	
He	did	not	know	if	it	was	love;	he	suspected	he	did	not	understand	that	word.
But	there	was	something	inside	Cutter	that	felt…sated.	Was	it	just	physical,
these	tangled	pitches	and	rolls	and	the	oil	of	sweat,	breaths	hot	in	his	face	with
the	scent	of	wine	and	rustleaf?	Was	it	just	the	taste	of	the	forbidden,	upon	which
he	fed	as	might	a	bat	on	nectar?	If	so,	then	he	should	have	felt	the	same	when
with	Scillara,	perhaps	even	more	so,	since	without	question	Scillara’s	skills	in
that	area	far	eclipsed	those	of	Challice,	whose	hunger	whispered	of	insatiable
needs,	transforming	her	lovemaking	into	a	frantic	search	that	found	no
appeasement,	no	matter	how	many	times	she	convulsed	in	orgasm.
No,	something	was	indeed	different.	Still,	he	was	troubled,	wondering	if
this	strange	flavour	came	from	the	betrayal	they	committed	time	and	again.	A
married	woman,	the	sordid	man’s	conquest.	Had	he	become	such	a	man?	Well,
he	supposed	that	he	had,	but	not	in	the	manner	of	those	men	who	made	a	career
of	seducing	and	stealing	the	wives	of	other	men.	And	yet,	there	was	a	sense,	an
extraordinary	sense,	he	admitted,	of	dark	pleasure,	savage	delight,	and	he
could	see	just	how	addictive	such	living	could	become.
Even	so,	he	was	not	about	to	pursue	the	headlong	pitch	of	promiscuity.
There	remained	a	part	of	him	that	thirsted	for	an	end	–	or,	rather,	a


continuation:	love	and	life	made	stable,	forces	of	reassurance	and	comfort.	He
was	not	about	to	toss	Challice	aside	and	seek	out	a	new	lover.	He	was,	he	told
himself,	not	Murillio,	who	could	travel	with	practised	ease	from	bedroom	to
bedroom	–	and	see	where	it	had	got	him,	damn	near	murdered	by	some
drunken	suitor.
Oh,	there	was	a	lesson	there,	yes.	At	least	it	seemed	that	Murillio	had
heeded	it,	if	the	rumours	of	his	‘retirement’	were	accurate.	And	what	about	me?
Have	I	taken	note?	It	seems	not.	I	still	go	to	her,	I	still	plunge	into	this	betrayal.
I	go	to	her,	so	hungry,	so	desperate,	it	is	as	if	we	have	remade	ourselves	into
perfect	reflections.	Me	and	Challice.	Hand	in	hand	in	our	descent.
Because	it	makes	the	fall	easier,	doesn’t	it?
There	was	nothing	to	stop	Gorlas	Vidikas	from	exacting	vengeance.	He
would	be	entirely	within	his	rights	to	hunt	them	both	down	and	murder	them,
and	a	part	of	Cutter	would	not	blame	him	if	he	did	just	that.
He	was	thinking	such	thoughts	as	he	walked	to	the	annexe	warehouse,	but
they	did	little	to	assail	his	anticipation.	Into	each	other ’s	arms	again,	desire	hot
as	a	fever	in	their	mouths,	their	hands,	their	groins.	Proof,	to	Cutter ’s	mind,	of
the	claims	of	some	scholars	that	humans	were	but	animals	–	clever	ones,	but
animals	none	the	less.	There	was	no	room	for	thinking,	no	space	for
rationality.	Consequences	thinned	to	ethereal	ghosts,	snatched	in	with	the	first
gasp	and	flung	away	in	the	next.	Only	the	moment	mattered.
He	made	no	effort	to	disguise	himself,	no	effort	to	mask	the	destination	of
his	journey,	and	he	well	knew	how	the	locals	around	the	warehouse	watched
him,	with	that	glittering	regard	that	was	envy	and	disgust	and	amusement	in
equal	parts;	much	as	they	had	watched	Challice	perhaps	only	moments	earlier,
although	in	her	case	lust	probably	warred	with	all	the	other	emotions.	No,	this
affair	was	a	brazen	thing,	and	that	in	itself	somehow	made	it	all	the	more
erotic.
There	was	heat	in	his	mind	as	he	used	his	key	to	open	the	office	door,	and
when	he	stepped	within	he	could	smell	her	perfume	in	the	dusty	air.	Through
the	office	and	into	the	cavernous	warehouse	interior,	and	then	to	the	wooden
steps	leading	to	the	loft.
She	must	have	heard	his	ascent,	for	she	was	standing	facing	the	door	when
he	arrived.
Something	in	her	eyes	stopped	him.
‘You	have	to	save	me,’	she	said.
‘What	has	happened?’
‘Promise	you’ll	save	me,	my	love.	Promise!’
He	managed	a	step	forward.	‘Of	course.	What’s—’


‘He	knows.’
The	heat	of	desire	evaporated.	He	was	suddenly	cold	inside.
Challice	drew	closer	and	in	her	face	he	saw	an	expression	he	struggled	to
identify,	and	when	he	did	the	cold	turned	into	ice.	She	is…excited.
‘He	will	kill	you.	And	me.	He’ll	kill	us	both,	Crokus!’
‘As	is	his	right—’
In	her	eyes	a	sudden	fear,	and	she	fixed	him	with	it	for	a	long	moment
before	turning	round.	‘Maybe	you	have	no	problem	with	dying,’	she	hissed	as
she	walked	to	the	bed,	where	she	faced	him	again.	‘But	I	have!’
‘What	do	you	want	me	to	do?’
‘You	know	what	to	do.’
‘What	we	should	do,’	he	said,	‘is	run.	Take	what	you	can	and	let’s	just	run.
Find	some	other	city—’
‘No!	I	don’t	want	to	leave	here!	I	like	it	here!	I	like	the	way	I	live,	Crokus!’
‘It	was	just	a	day	or	two	ago,	Challice,	that	you	were	lying	in	my	arms	and
talking	about	escaping—’
‘Just	dreams	–	that	wasn’t	real.	I	mean,	the	dream	wasn’t	real.	Wasn’t
realistic	–	just	a	stupid	dream.	You	can’t	take	any	notice	of	what	I	say	after
we’ve…been	together.	I	just	come	out	with	any	old	thing.	Crokus,	we’re	in
trouble.	We	have	to	do	something	–	we	have	to	do	it	now.’
You	just	come	out	with	any	old	thing,	do	you,	Challice?	But	it’s	only	after
we’ve	been	together	that	you	say	you	love	me.
‘He’ll	kill	me,’	she	whispered.
‘That	doesn’t	sound	like	the	Gorlas	you’ve	been	describing.’
She	sat	down	on	the	bed.	‘He	confronted	me.	Yesterday.’
‘You	didn’t	mention—’
She	shook	her	head.	‘It	seemed,	well,	it	seemed	it	was	just	the	usual	game.
He	said	he	wanted	to	know	about	you,	and	I	said	I’d	tell	him	when	he	got	back	–
he’s	at	the	mines	right	now.	And	then,	and	then,	walking	here	just	now	–	O
gods!	I	suddenly	understood!	Don’t	you	see?	He	was	asking	about	the	man	he
planned	to	kill!’
‘So	he	plans	to	kill	me.	What	of	it,	Challice?’
She	bared	her	teeth,	and	it	was	an	expression	so	brutal,	so	ugly,	that	Cutter
was	shocked.	‘I	said	I	understood.	First	you.	Then	he’ll	come	back	to	me,	so	he
can	tell	me	what	he	did	to	you.	In	every	detail.	He	will	use	every	word	like	a
knife	–	until	he	pulls	out	the	real	one.	And	then	he’ll	cut	my	throat.’	She	looked
up	at	him.	‘Is	that	what	you	want?	Does	his	killing	me	matter	to	you,	Crokus?’
‘He	won’t	kill	you—’
‘You	don’t	know	him!’


‘It	sounds	as	if	you	don’t,	either.’	At	her	glare,	he	added,	‘Look,	assume
he’ll	take	pleasure	in	killing	me,	and	he	will.	And	then,	even	more	pleasure	in
telling	you	all	about	it	–	yes?	We’re	agreed	on	that?’
She	nodded,	a	single	motion,	tight.
‘But	if	he	then	kills	you,	what	has	he	got?	Nothing.	No,	he’ll	want	you	to
do	it	again,	with	someone	else.	Over	and	over	again,	and	each	time	it’ll	turn
out	the	same	–	he	kills	your	lover,	he	tells	you	about	it.	He	doesn’t	want	all	that
to	end.	The	man’s	a	duellist,	right,	one	who	likes	killing	his	opponents.	This
way,	he	can	lawfully	do	it	to	as	many	men	as	you	care	to	collect,	Challice.	He
wins,	you	win—’
‘How	can	you	say	I	win!’
‘—because,’	he	finished,	‘neither	of	you	gets	bored.’
She	stared	at	him	as	if	he	had	just	kicked	in	some	invisible	door	hidden
inside	her.	And	then	recovered.	‘I	don’t	want	you	to	die,	Crokus.	Cutter	–	I	keep
forgetting.	It’s	Cutter	now.	A	dangerous	name.	An	assassin’s	name.	Careful,	or
someone	might	think	there’s	something	real	behind	it.’
‘Which	is	it,	Challice?	You	don’t	want	me	to	die.	Or	am	I	the	man	I	pretend
to	be?	What	is	it,	exactly,	you’re	trying	to	appeal	to?’
‘But	I	love	you!’
And	there	was	that	word	again.	And	whatever	it	meant	to	her	probably	was
not	what	it	meant	to	him	–	not	that	he	knew	what	it	meant	to	him,	of	course.	He
moved	to	one	side,	as	if	intent	on	circling	the	bed	even	if	it	took	him	through
the	outer	wall,	then	halted	and	ran	his	hands	through	his	hair.	‘Have	you	been
leading	me	to	this	moment	all	along?’
‘What?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Just	wondering	out	loud.	It’s	not	important.’
‘I	want	my	life	as	it	is,	Cutter,	only	without	him.	I	want	you	instead	of	him.
That’s	how	I	want	it.’
What	would	Murillio	say	in	this	situation?	But	no,	I’m	not	Murillio.
Still…
He’d	be	out	through	this	window	in	a	heartbeat.	Duels	with	wronged
husbands?	Hood’s	breath!	He	faced	her.	‘Is	that	what	you	want?’
‘I	just	told	you	it	was!’
‘No,	that’s	not	what	I	meant.	I	meant…oh,	never	mind.’
‘You	have	to	do	it.	For	me.	For	us.’
‘He’s	at	the	mines	west	of	the	city?	For	how	much	longer?’
‘Two	days	at	least.	You	can	go	out	there.’
And	suddenly	she	was	standing	in	front	of	him,	hands	on	the	sides	of	his
face,	her	body	pressing	hard,	and	he	stared	down	into	her	dilated	eyes.


Excitement.
I	used	to	think…that	look	–	this	look…I	used	to	think…
‘My	love,’	she	whispered.	‘It	has	to	be	done.	You	see	that,	don’t	you?’
But	it	was	always	this,	just	this.	Leading	up	to	this	moment.	Where	she	was
taking	me	–	or	have	I	got	it	all	wrong?
‘Challice—’
But	her	mouth	was	on	his	now,	and	she	swallowed	down	all	his	words,
until	none	were	left.
	
Spin	round	and	rush	back.	Murillio	still	lies	in	the	dust,	a	crowd	mechanically
cheering	in	the	pit	below.	The	day	draws	to	a	close,	and	a	youth	named	Venaz
gathers	his	gang	of	followers	and	sets	out	for	the	tunnel	called	Steep.
Not	much	need	be	said	about	Venaz.	But	let	us	give	him	this.	Sold	to	the
mine	by	his	stepfather	–	dear	Ma	too	drunk	to	even	lift	her	head	when	the
collectors	showed	up	and	if	she	heard	the	clinking	of	coins,	well,	her	thoughts
would	have	crawled	the	short	distance	to	the	moment	when	she	could	buy
another	bottle,	and	no	further.	That	had	been	four	years	ago.
The	lesson	that	a	child	is	not	loved,	not	even	by	the	one	who	bore	it,
delivers	a	most	cruel	wound.	One	that	never	heals,	but	instead	stretches	scar
tissue	over	the	mind’s	eye,	so	that	for	that	orphan’s	entire	life	the	world	beyond
is	tainted,	and	it	sees	what	others	do	not,	and	is	blinded	by	perpetual	mistrust	to
all	that	the	heart	feels.	Such	was	Venaz,	but	to	know	is	not	to	excuse,	and	we
shall	leave	it	there.
	
Venaz’s	pack	consisted	of	boys	a	year	or	so	younger	than	him.	They	vied	with
each	other	for	position	in	the	pecking	order	and	were	as	vicious	individually
as	they	were	in	a	group.	They	were	just	versions	of	him,	variations	only	on	the
surface.	They	followed	and	would	do	anything	he	told	them	to,	at	least	until	he
stumbled,	made	a	mistake.	And	then	they	would	close	in	like	half-starved
wolves.
Venaz	walked	emboldened,	excited,	delighted	at	this	amazing	turn	of
events.	The	Big	Man	wanted	Harllo	and	not	to	pat	him	on	the	head	either.	No,
there	would	be	even	more	blood	spilled	on	this	day,	and	if	Venaz	could	work	it
right,	why,	he	might	be	the	one	to	spill	it	–	at	the	Big	Man’s	nod,	that’s	all	it
would	take,	and	maybe	the	Big	Man	would	see	how	good	Venaz	could	be.
Good	enough,	maybe,	to	recruit	him	into	his	own	household.	Every	noble


needed	people	like	Venaz,	to	do	the	ugly	stuff,	the	bad	stuff.
They	reached	the	slope	leading	to	the	mouth	of	the	tunnel.	Three	grownups	were	trying	to	fix	the	axle	of	a	cart	and	they	looked	up	when	Venaz	arrived.
‘Where’s	Bainisk?’	Venaz	asked.
‘New	vein,’	one	of	them	replied.	‘He	in	trouble	again?’
‘He	got	his	moles	with	him?’	It	felt	good	being	so	important	he	didn’t	have
to	answer	the	man’s	question.
Shrugs	all	round.
Venaz	scowled.	‘Has	he	got	his	moles	with	him?’
The	one	who’d	spoken	slowly	straightened.	His	backhanded	slap	caught
Venaz	by	surprise,	and	was	hard	enough	to	knock	the	boy	back.	He	was	then
grabbed	and	thrown	on	to	the	stony	ground.	The	man	stood	over	him.	‘Watch
your	mouth.’
Venaz	sat	up,	glaring.	‘You	ain’t	seen	what	just	happened?	Up	on	the
ridge?’
Another	grunted.	‘We	heard	’bout	something.’
‘A	duel	–	the	Big	Man	killed	someone!’
‘So	what?’
‘And	then	he	called	for	Harllo!	He	wants	Harllo!	And	I	come	to	get	him
and	you’re	stopping	me	and	when	he	hears—’
He	got	no	further	as	the	man	who	had	struck	him	now	grasped	him	by	the
throat	and	dragged	him	to	his	feet.	‘He	won’t	hear	nothing,	Venaz.	You	think
we	give	a	fuck	about	Vidikas	having	a	fuckin’	duel?	Killin’	some	poor	bastard
for	what?	Our	entertainment?’
‘He’s	turnin’	blue,	Haid.	Better	loosen	yer	grip	some.’
Venaz	gasped	an	agonizing	lungful	of	air.
‘Get	it	right,	lad,’	Haid	went	on,	‘Vidikas	owns	us.	We’re	pieces	of	meat	to
him,	right?	So	he	puts	out	a	call	for	one	of	us	and	for	what?	Why,	to	chew	it
up,	that	poor	piece	of	meat.	And	what,	you	think	that’s	a	fuckin’	good	idea?	Get
outa	my	sight,	Venaz,	but	you	can	count	on	me	rememberin’	this.’
The	pack	was	huddled	together	now,	white-faced,	but	among	some	of	them
there	was	something	rather	more	calculating.	Was	this	the	moment	to	usurp
Venaz?
The	three	men	went	back	to	working	on	the	axle.	Venaz,	his	colour
returning	to	normal,	dusted	himself	off	and	then	set	out	in	a	stiff-legged	march
towards	the	tunnel	mouth.	His	pack	fell	in	behind	him.
As	they	plunged	into	the	cool	gloom	Venaz	wheeled.	‘That	was	Haid	and
Favo	and	Dule,	right?	Remember	them	names.	They’re	on	my	list	now,	all
three	of	them.	They’re	on	my	list.’


Faces	nodded.
And	those	who	had	been	weighing	their	chances	each	realized	that	the
moment	had	passed.	They’d	been	too	slow.	Venaz	had	a	way	of	recovering,	and
fast,	scary	fast.	He	was,	they	reminded	themselves	yet	again,	going	places,
without	a	doubt.
	
Harllo	slid	along	the	vein,	feeling	with	his	bare	stomach	the	purity	of	the	black
silver	and,	yes,	it	was	silver	and	where	had	it	come	from	when	all	they’d	been
working	for	so	long	was	copper	up	on	the	skins	and	iron	down	deep?	But	it	felt
so	beautiful,	this	silver.	Better	than	gold,	better	than	anything.
Wait	till	he	told	Bainisk	and	Bainisk	told	the	foreman!	They’d	be	heroes.
They	might	even	get	extra	portions	at	supper,	or	a	cup	of	watered	wine!
The	chute	was	narrow,	so	small	they’d	need	moles	for	weeks	before	it	got
worked	out	big	enough	to	take	the	pickers,	so	there	was	a	good	chance	that
Harllo	would	be	seeing	–	and	feeling	–	a	lot	more	of	this	silver,	every	day,
maybe.
And	all	that	trouble	from	before	would	go	away,	just	like	that	–	he	knew	it
would—
‘Harllo!’
The	voice	whispered	up	from	somewhere	behind	his	feet,	reminding	him
that	he	was	still	head	down	and	that	could	be	dangerous.	He	might	pass	out	and
not	even	know	it.	‘I’m	all	right,	Bainisk!	I	found—’
‘Harllo!	Get	back	here	right	now!’
A	shiver	ran	through	Harllo.	Bainisk’s	voice	didn’t	sound	right.	It
sounded…scared.
But	that	wouldn’t	last,	would	it?	Not	with	the	silver—
‘Hurry!’
Moving	backwards	was	never	easy.	He	pushed	with	his	hands,	squirmed
and	pressed	his	toes	against	the	hard	stone	and	then	extended	his	heels.	There
were	leather	pads	tied	to	his	feet	for	this	purpose,	but	it	still	hurt.	Like	a
caterpillar,	gathering	up	and	then	pushing,	bit	by	bit,	working	his	way	back	up
the	chute.
All	at	once	hands	grasped	his	ankles	and	he	was	being	roughly	dragged.
Harllo	cried	out	as	his	chin	struck	an	obstruction	and	when	he	lifted	his
head	up	the	top	crunched	on	rock,	scraping	away	skin	and	hair.	‘Bainisk!	What
—’
He	fell	free	of	the	chute,	thumping	down.	The	hands	released	his	ankles
and	now	grasped	his	upper	arms,	lifting	him	to	his	feet.


‘Bainisk—’
‘Shhh!	Word’s	come	down	–	someone	came	to	find	you	–	from	the	city.’
‘What?’
‘Vidikas	killed	him	–	in	a	duel	–	and	now	he’s	called	for	you	to	be	brought
to	him.	It’s	bad,	Harllo.	I	think	he’s	going	to	kill	you!’
But	this	was	too	much	to	hear,	too	much	all	at	once	–	someone	had	come	–
who?	Gruntle!	And	Vidikas	had…had	killed	him.	No.	He	couldn’t	have	–	he
didn’t—	‘Who	was	he?’	he	asked.
‘I	don’t	know.	Listen,	we’re	going	to	escape,	you	and	me,	Harllo	–	do	you
understand?’
‘But	how	can	we—’
‘We’re	going	deeper	in,	to	the	Settle—’
‘But	that’s	not	safe—’
‘There	are	huge	cracks	on	that	side	–	some	of	them,	they	got	to	go	right	up
and	out,	lakeside.	We	get	there,	and	then	along	the	shoreline,	all	the	way	back
to	the	city!’
They	had	been	hissing	back	and	forth,	and	now	they	heard	shouts	echoing
down	from	the	main	passage.
‘Venaz	–	that	figures,	doesn’t	it?	Come	on,	Harllo,	we	got	to	go	now!’
They	set	out,	each	with	a	lantern,	Bainisk	taking	a	coil	of	rope	as	well,
down	through	the	fresh	workings	–	there	was	no	one	there	yet,	as	first	the	air
had	been	bad	and	then	there’d	been	flooding	and	only	the	shift	before	the	last
of	the	hoses	was	snaked	out	to	see	how	much	more	water	was	seeping	back	in.
After	fifty	or	so	paces	they	were	ankle-deep	in	icy	water	and	flows	slicked	the
side	walls	and	drops	rained	down	from	the	ceiling.	The	farther	in	they	went,
the	more	cracks	they	saw	–	everywhere,	all	sides,	above	and	below	–	proof	that
they	were	reaching	the	Settle,	where	half	a	cliff	was	sinking	towards	the	lake.
The	rumours	were	that	it	was	only	days	from	collapse.
The	tunnel	descended	in	irregular	shelves,	and	now	the	water	was	at
Harllo’s	thighs,	numbingly	cold.	Both	were	gasping.
‘Bainisk	–	will	this	go	back	up?’
‘It	will,	if	the	water ’s	not	too	deep,	it	will,	I	promise.’
‘Why	–	why	are	you	doing	this?	You	should’ve	just	handed	me	over.’
Bainisk	was	some	time	before	answering.	‘I	want	to	see	it,	Harllo.’
‘You	want	to	see	what?’
‘The	city.	I	–	I	just	want	to	see	it,	that’s	all.	When	I	heard,	well,	it	was	as	if
everything	fell	into	place.	This	was	the	time	–	our	best	chance	–	this	close	to
the	Settle.’
‘You’d	been	thinking	about	this.’


‘Yes.	Harllo,	I	never	stop	thinking	about	this.’
‘The	city.’
‘The	city.’
Something	clanged	somewhere	behind	them	–	still	distant,	but	closer	than
expected.
‘Venaz!	They’re	after	us	–	shit	–	come	on,	Harllo,	we	got	to	hurry.’
The	water	reached	Harllo’s	hips.	He	was	having	trouble	working	his	legs.
He	kept	stumbling.	Twice	he	almost	let	his	lantern	sink	down	too	far.	Their
desperate	gasping	echoed	on	all	sides,	along	with	sloshing	water.
‘Bainisk,	I	can’t—’
‘Drop	your	light	–	just	take	hold	of	my	shirt	–	I’ll	pull	you.	Don’t	let	go.’
Groaning,	Harllo	let	the	lantern	sink	into	the	water.	A	sudden	hiss,
something	cracking.	When	he	released	the	handle	the	lantern	vanished	into	the
blackness.	He	took	hold	of	Bainisk’s	ragged	shirt.
They	continued	on,	Harllo	feeling	his	legs	trailing	behind	him	but	only
from	the	hips	–	below	that	there	was	nothing.	A	strange	lassitude	flowed	into
him,	taking	away	the	icy	cold.	Bainisk	was	chest-deep	now,	whimpering	as	he
sought	to	keep	the	lantern	held	high.
They	stopped.
‘The	tunnel	goes	under,’	said	Bainisk.
‘Issallright,	Bainisk.	We	gan	stop	now.’
‘No,	hold	on	to	this	ledge.	I’m	going	under.	I	won’t	be	long.	I	promise.’
He	set	the	lantern	on	a	narrow	ledge.	And	then	he	sank	down	and	was	gone.
Harllo	was	alone.	It	would	be	much	easier	to	let	go,	to	relax	his	aching
hands.	Venaz	was	coming,	he’d	be	here	soon.	And	then	it	would	be	over.	The
water	was	warm	now	–	that	might	be	one	way	to	escape	them.	Do	what	Bainisk
had	just	done.	Just	sink	away,	vanish.
He	wasn’t	wanted,	he	knew.	Not	by	his	mother,	not	by	anyone.	And	the	one
who’d	come	to	find	him,	well,	that	man	had	died	for	that.	And	that	wasn’t	right.
Nobody	should	go	and	die	for	Harllo.	Not	Gruntle,	not	Bainisk,	not	anybody.
So,	no	more	of	any	of	that	–	he	could	let	go—
Foaming	water,	thrashing,	gasps	and	coughs.	An	icy	hand	clutched	at
Harllo.
‘We	can	get	through!	Harllo	–	the	tunnel	on	the	other	side	–	it	slopes
upward!’
‘I	can’t—’
‘You	have	to!	The	city,	Harllo,	you	have	to	show	it	to	me	–	I’d	be	lost.	I
need	you,	Harllo.	I	need	you.’
‘All	right,	but…’	He	was	about	to	tell	Bainisk	the	truth.	About	the	city.	That


it	wasn’t	the	paradise	he’d	made	it	out	to	be.	That	people	starved	there.	That
people	did	bad	things	to	each	other.	But	no,	that	could	wait.	It’d	be	bad	to	talk
about	those	things	right	now.	‘All	right,	Bainisk.’
They	left	the	lantern.	Bainisk	uncoiled	some	of	the	rope	and	tied	the	end
about	Harllo’s	waist,	fumbling	with	numbed	hands	on	the	knot.	‘Take	a	few
deep	breaths	first,’	he	said.	‘And	then	one	more,	deep	as	you	can.’
The	plunge	into	the	dark	left	Harllo	instantly	disoriented.	The	rope	round
his	waist	pulled	him	down	and	then	into	the	face	of	the	current.	He	opened	his
eyes	and	felt	the	thrill	of	shock	from	the	icy	flow.	Strange	glowing	streaks
flashed	past,	possibly	from	the	rock	itself,	or	perhaps	they	were	but	ghosts
lurking	behind	his	eyes.	At	first	he	sought	to	help	Bainisk,	flailing	with	his
arms	and	trying	to	kick,	but	after	a	moment	he	simply	went	limp.
Either	Bainisk	would	pull	them	both	through,	or	he	wouldn’t.	Either	way
was	fine.
His	mind	began	to	drift,	and	he	so	wanted	to	take	a	breath	–	he	couldn’t
hold	back	much	longer.	His	lungs	were	burning.	The	water	would	be	cool,
cool	enough	to	quench	that	fire	for	ever	more.	Yes,	he	could	do	that.
Cold	bit	into	his	right	hand	–	what?	And	then	his	head	was	lifted	above	the
surface.	And	he	was	sucking	in	icy	lungfuls	of	air.
Darkness,	the	rush	and	gurgle	of	water	flowing	past,	seeking	to	pull	him
back,	back	and	down.	But	Bainisk	was	tugging	him	along,	and	it	was	getting
shallower	as	the	tunnel	widened.	The	black,	dripping	ceiling	seemed	to	be
sagging,	forming	a	crooked	spine	overhead.	Harllo	stared	up	at	it,	wondering
how	he	could	see	at	all.
And	then	he	was	being	dragged	across	broken	stone.
They	halted,	lying	side	by	side.
Before	too	long,	the	shivering	began.	Racing	into	Harllo	like	demonic
possession,	a	spirit	that	shook	through	him	with	rabid	glee.	His	teeth	chattered
uncontrollably.
Bainisk	was	plucking	at	him.	Through	clacking	teeth	he	said,	‘Venaz	won’t
stop.	He’ll	see	the	lantern	–	he’ll	know.	We	got	to	keep	going,	Harllo.	It’s	the
only	way	to	get	warm	again,	the	only	way	to	get	away.’
But	it	was	so	hard	to	climb	to	his	feet.	His	legs	still	didn’t	work	properly.
Bainisk	had	to	help	him	and	he	leaned	heavily	on	the	bigger	boy	as	they
staggered	skidding	upslope	along	the	scree-scattered	path.
It	seemed	to	Harllo	that	they	walked	for	ever,	into	and	out	of	faint	light.
Sometimes	the	slope	pitched	downward,	only	to	slowly	climb	yet	again.	Pain
throbbed	in	Harllo’s	legs	now,	but	it	was	welcome	–	life	was	returning,	filled
with	its	stubborn	fire,	and	now	he	wanted	to	live,	now	it	mattered	more	than


anything	else.
‘Look!’	Bainisk	gasped.	‘At	what	we’re	walking	on	–	Harllo,	look!’
Phosphorescent	mould	limned	the	walls,	and	in	the	faint	glow	Harllo	could
make	out	the	vague	shapes	of	the	rubble	underfoot.	Broken	pottery.	Small
fragments	of	burned	bone.
‘It’s	got	to	lead	up,’	Bainisk	said.	‘To	some	cave.	The	Gadrobi	used	them
to	bury	their	ancestors.	A	cave	overlooking	the	lake.	We’re	almost	there.’
Instead,	they	reached	a	cliff	ledge.
And	stood,	silent.
A	vertical	section	of	rock	had	simply	plummeted	away,	leaving	a	broad
gap.	The	bottom	of	the	fissure	was	swallowed	in	black,	from	which	warm	air
rose	in	dry	gusts.	Opposite	them,	ten	or	more	paces	across,	a	slash	of	diffuse
light	revealed	the	continuation	of	the	tunnel	they	had	been	climbing.
‘We’ll	climb	down,’	said	Bainisk,	uncoiling	the	rope	and	starting	to	tie	a
knot	at	one	end.	‘And	then	back	up.	We	can	do	this,	you’ll	see.’
‘What	if	the	rope’s	not	long	enough?	I	can’t	see	the	bottom,	Bainisk.’
‘We’ll	just	find	more	handholds.’	Now	he	was	tying	a	loop	at	the	other	end
which	he	then	set	round	a	knob-like	projection.	‘I’ll	throw	a	snake	back	up	to
dislodge	this,	so	we	can	take	the	rope	with	us	for	the	climb	up	the	other	side.
Now,	you	go	first.’	He	tossed	the	rest	of	the	rope	over	the	edge.	They	heard	it
snap	out	to	its	full	length.	Bainisk	grunted.	‘Like	I	said,	we	can	find	handholds.’
Harllo	worked	his	way	over	the	side,	gripping	hard	the	wet	rope	–	it
wanted	to	slide	through,	but	if	that	happened	he	knew	he	was	dead,	so	he	held
tight.	His	feet	scrambled,	found	shallow	ledges	running	at	an	angle	across	the
cliff-face.	Not	much,	but	they	eased	the	strain.	He	began	working	his	way
down.
He	was	perhaps	three	body-lengths	down	when	Bainisk	began	following.
The	rope	began	swaying	unpredictably,	and	Harllo	found	his	feet	slipping
from	their	scant	purchases	again	and	again,	each	time	resulting	in	a	savage	tug
on	his	arms.
‘Bainisk!’	he	hissed.	‘Wait!	Let	me	go	a	little	farther	down	first	–	you’re
throwing	me	about.’
‘Okay.	Go	on.’
Harllo	found	purchase	again	and	resumed	the	descent.
If	Bainisk	started	up	again	he	no	longer	felt	the	sways	and	tugs.	The	rope
was	getting	wetter,	which	meant	that	he	was	reaching	its	end	–	the	water	was
soaking	its	way	down.	And	then	he	reached	the	sodden	knot.	Sudden	panic	as	he
sought	to	find	projections	in	the	wall	for	his	feet.	There	were	very	few	–	the
stone	was	almost	sheer.


‘Bainisk!	I’m	at	the	knot!’	He	craned	his	neck	to	look	down.	Blackness,
unrelieved,	depthless.	‘Bainisk!	Where	are	you?’
	
Since	Harllo’s	first	call,	Bainisk	had	not	moved.	The	last	thing	he	wanted	to	do
was	accidentally	dislodge	the	boy,	not	after	they’d	made	it	this	far.	And,	truth
be	told,	he	was	experiencing	a	growing	fear.	This	wall	was	too	even	–	no
cracks,	the	strata	he	could	feel	little	more	than	ripples	at	a	steeply	canted	angle.
They	would	never	be	able	to	hold	on	once	past	the	rope	–	and	there	was
nothing	he	could	use	to	slip	the	loop	round.
They	were,	he	realized,	in	trouble.
Upon	hearing	Harllo’s	last	call	–	the	boy	reaching	the	knot	–	he	readied
himself	to	resume	his	descent.
And	there	was	a	sharp	upward	tug	on	the	rope.
He	looked	up.	Vague	faces	peering	over,	hands	and	more	hands	reaching	to
close	on	the	rope.	Venaz	–	yes,	there	he	was,	grinning.
‘Got	you,’	he	murmured,	low	and	savage.	‘Got	you	both,	Bainisk.’
Another	tug	upward.
Bainisk	drew	his	knife	one-handed.	He	reached	down	to	cut	the	rope
beneath	him,	and	then	hesitated,	looking	up	once	more	at	Venaz’s	face.
Maybe	that	had	been	his	own,	only	a	few	years	ago.	That	face,	so	eager	to
take	over,	to	rule	the	moles.	Well,	Venaz	could	have	them.	He	could	have	it	all.
Bainisk	reached	up	with	the	knife,	just	above	his	fist	where	it	held	tight.
And	he	sliced	through.

Dig	heels	in,	it	will	not	help.	We	must	wing	back	to	the	present.	For	everything
to	be	understood,	every	facet	must	flash	alight	at	least	once.	Earlier,	the	round
man	begged	forgiveness.	Now,	he	pleads	for	trust.	His	is	a	sure	hand,	even	if	it
trembles.	Trust.
A	bard	sits	opposite	an	historian.	At	a	nearby	table	in	K’rul’s	Bar,	Blend
watches	Scillara	unfolding	coils	of	smoke	from	her	mouth.	There	is	something
avid	in	that	gaze,	but	every	now	and	then	a	war	erupts	in	her	eyes,	when	she
thinks	of	the	woman	lying	in	a	coma	upstairs.	When	she	thinks	of	her,	yes.
Blend	has	taken	to	sleeping	in	the	bed	with	Picker,	has	taken	to	trying	all	she
could	think	of	to	awaken	sensation	once	more	in	her	lover.	But	nothing	has
worked.	Picker ’s	soul	is	lost,	wandering	far	from	the	cool,	flaccid	flesh.
Blend	hates	herself	now,	as	she	senses	her	soul	ready	to	move	on,	to	seek


the	blessing	of	a	new	life,	a	new	body	to	explore	and	caress,	new	lips	to	press
upon	her	own.
But	this	is	silly.	Scillara’s	amiability	was	ever	casual.	She	was	a	woman
who	preferred	a	man’s	charms,	such	as	they	were.	And	truth	be	told,	Blend	had
played	in	that	crib	more	than	once	herself.	So	why	now	has	this	lust	awakened?
What	made	it	so	wild,	so	needy?
Loss,	my	dear.	Loss	is	like	a	goad,	a	stinging	shove	that	sets	one	lunging
forward	seeking	handholds,	seeking	ecstasy,	delicious	surrender,	even	the	lure
of	self-destruction.	The	bud	cut	at	the	stem	throws	its	last	energy	into	one	final
flowering,	one	glorious	exclamation.	The	flower	defies,	to	quote	in	entirety	an
ancient	Tiste	Andii	poem.	Life	runs	from	death.	It	must,	it	cannot	help	it.	Life
runs,	to	quote	a	round	man’s	epitome	of	poetic	brevity.
Slip	into	Blend’s	mind,	ease	in	behind	her	eyes,	and	watch	as	she	watches,
feel	as	she	feels,	if	you	dare.
Or	try	Antsy,	there	at	the	counter	on	which	are	arrayed	seven	crossbows,
twelve	flatpacks	of	quarrels	amounting	to	one	hundred	and	twenty	darts,	six
shortswords,	three	throwing	axes	of	Falari	design,	a	Genabarii	broadsword
and	buckler,	two	local	rapiers	with	fancy	quillons	–	so	fancy	the	weapons	were
snagged	together	and	Antsy	had	spent	an	entire	morning	trying	to	separate
them,	with	no	luck	–	and	a	small	sack	containing	three	sharpers.	He	is	trying	to
decide	what	to	wear.
But	the	mission	they	were	about	to	set	out	on	was	meant	to	be	peaceful,	so
he	should	just	wear	his	shortsword	as	usual,	peace-strapped	as	usual,
everything	as	usual,	in	fact.	But	then	there	were	assassins	out	there	who	wanted
Antsy’s	head	on	a	dagger	point,	so	maybe	keeping	things	usual	was	in	fact
suicidal.	So	he	should	strap	on	at	least	two	shortswords,	throw	a	couple	of
crossbows	over	his	shoulders	and	hold	the	broadsword	in	his	right	hand	and
the	twin	rapiers	in	his	left,	with	a	flatpack	tied	to	each	hip,	the	sharper	sack	at
his	belt,	and	a	throwing	axe	between	his	teeth	–	no,	that’s	ridiculous,	he’d	break
his	jaw	trying	that.	Maybe	an	extra	shortsword,	but	then	he	might	cut	his	own
tongue	out	the	first	time	he	tried	saying	anything	and	he	was	sure	to	try	saying
something	eventually,	wasn’t	he?
But	he	could	run	the	scabbards	for	all	six	shortswords	through	his	belt,	and
end	up	wearing	a	skirt	of	shortswords,	but	that’d	be	all	right,	wouldn’t	it?	But
then,	where	would	he	carry	the	sharpers?	One	knock	against	a	pommel	or	hilt
and	he’d	be	an	expanding	cloud	of	whiskers	and	weapon	bits.	And	what	about
the	crossbows?	He’d	need	to	load	them	all	up	but	keep	everything	away	from
the	releases,	unless	he	wanted	to	end	up	skewering	all	his	friends	with	the	first
stumble.


What	if—
What’s	that?	Back	to	Blend,	please?	Flesh	against	flesh,	the	weight	of	full
breasts	in	hands,	one	knee	pushing	up	between	parted	thighs,	sweat	a	blending
of	sweet	oils,	soft	lips	trying	to	merge,	tongues	dancing	eager	and	slick	as—
‘I	can’t	wear	alla	this!’
Scillara	glanced	over.	‘Really,	Antsy?	Didn’t	Blend	say	that	about	a	bell
ago?’
‘What?	Who?	Her?	What	does	she	know?’
To	that	entirely	unselfconscious	display	of	irony,	Blend	could	only	raise
her	brows	when	she	caught	Scillara’s	eye.
Scillara	smiled	in	response,	then	drew	again	on	her	pipe.
Blend	glanced	over	at	the	bard,	and	then	said	to	Antsy,	‘We’re	safe	out
there	now,	anyway.’
Eyes	bulging,	Antsy	stared	at	her	in	disbelief.	‘You’d	take	the	word	of
some	damned	minstrel?	What	does	he	know?’
‘You	keep	asking	what	does	anyone	know,	when	it’s	obvious	that	whatever
they	know	you’re	not	listening	to	anyway.’
‘What?’
‘Sorry,	that	so	confused	me	I	doubt	I	could	repeat	it.	The	contract’s
cancelled	–	Fisher	said	so.’
Antsy	wagged	his	head	from	side	to	side.	‘Fisher	said	so!’	He	jabbed	a
finger	at	the	bard.	‘He’s	not	Fisher	–	not	the	famous	one,	anyway.	He’s	just
stolen	the	name!	If	he	was	famous	he	wouldn’t	be	just	sittin’	there,	would	he?
Famous	people	don’t	do	that.’
‘Really?’	the	bard	who	called	himself	Fisher	asked.	‘What	are	we	supposed
to	do,	Antsy?’
‘Famous	people	do	famous	things,	alla	time.	Everybody	knows	that!’
‘The	contract	has	been	bought	out,’	the	bard	said.	‘But	if	you	want	to	dress
as	if	preparing	for	a	single-handed	assault	on	Moon’s	Spawn,	you	go	right
ahead.’
‘Rope!	Do	I	need	rope?	Let	me	think!’	And	to	aid	in	this	process	Antsy
began	pacing,	moustache	twitching.
Blend	wanted	to	pull	a	boot	off	and	push	her	foot	between	Scillara’s	thighs.
No,	she	wanted	to	crawl	right	in	there.	Staking	a	claim.	With	a	hiss	of
frustration	she	stood,	hesitated,	and	then	went	to	sit	down	at	the	bard’s	table.
She	fixed	him	with	an	intense	stare,	to	which	he	responded	with	a	raised	brow.
‘There’re	more	songs	supposedly	composed	by	Fisher	than	anyone	else
I’ve	ever	heard	of.’
The	man	shrugged.


‘Some	of	them	are	a	hundred	years	old.’
‘I	was	a	prodigy.’
‘Were	you	now?’
Duiker	spoke.	‘The	poet	is	immortal.’
She	turned	to	face	him.	‘Is	that	some	kind	of	general,	ideological
statement,	Historian?	Or	are	you	talking	about	the	man	sharing	this	table	with
you?’
Antsy	cursed	suddenly	and	then	said,	‘I	don’t	need	any	rope!	Who	put	that
into	my	head?	Let’s	get	going	–	I’m	taking	this	shortsword	and	a	sharper	and
anybody	gets	too	close	to	me	or	looks	suspicious	they	can	eat	the	sharper	for
breakfast!’
‘We’ll	stay	here,’	Duiker	said	when	Blend	hesitated.	‘The	bard	and	me.	I’ll
look	in	on	Picker.’
‘All	right.	Thanks.’
Antsy,	Blend	and	Scillara	set	out.
The	journey	took	them	from	the	Estates	District	and	into	Daru	District,
along	the	Second	Tier	Wall.	The	city	had	fully	awakened	now,	and	in	places	the
crowds	were	thick	with	the	endless	machinery	of	living.	Voices	and	smells	and
needs	and	wants,	hungers	and	thirsts,	laughter	and	irritation,	misery	and	joy,
and	the	sunlight	fell	on	everything	it	could	reach	and	shadows	retreated
wherever	they	could.
Temporary	barriers	blocked	the	three	foreigners	here	and	there	–	a	cart
jammed	sideways	in	a	narrow	street,	a	carthorse	dropped	dead	with	its	legs
sticking	up,	half	a	family	pinned	under	the	upended	cart.	A	swarm	of	people
round	a	small	collapsed	building,	stealing	every	dislodged	brick	and	shard	of
lumber,	and	if	anyone	had	been	trapped	in	it,	alas,	no	one	was	looking	for
them.
Scillara	walked	like	a	woman	bred	to	be	admired.	And	oh,	yes,	people
noticed.	In	other	circumstances,	Blend	–	being	another	woman	–	might	have
resented	that,	but	then	she’d	made	a	career	out	of	not	being	noticed;	and
besides,	she	counted	herself	among	the	admirers.
‘Friendly	people,	these	Darujhistanii,’	said	Scillara	as	they	finally	swung
south	from	the	wall,	heading	for	the	southwest	corner	of	the	district.
‘They’re	smiling,’	said	Blend,	‘because	they	want	a	roll	with	you.	And
clearly	you	haven’t	noticed	the	wives	and	such,	all	looking	as	if	they
swallowed	something	sour.’
‘Maybe	they	did.’
‘Oh	they	did,	all	right.	The	truth	that	men	are	men,	that’s	what	they’ve
swallowed.’


Antsy	snorted.	‘What	else	would	men	be	but	men?	Your	problem,	Blend,	is
you	see	too	much,	even	when	it’s	not	there.’
‘Oh,	and	what	have	you	been	noticing,	Antsy?’
‘Suspicious	people,	that’s	what.’
‘What	suspicious	people?’
‘The	ones	who	keep	staring	at	us,	of	course.’
‘That’s	because	of	Scillara	–	what	do	you	think	we’ve	just	been	talking
about?’
‘Maybe	they	are,	maybe	they	ain’t.	Maybe	they’re	assassins,	lookin’	to
jump	us.’
‘That	old	man	back	there	who	got	his	ear	boxed	by	his	wife	was	an
assassin?	What	kind	of	Guild	are	they	running	here?’
‘You	don’t	know	she	was	his	wife,’	Antsy	retorted.	‘And	you	don’t	know
but	that	was	a	signal	to	somebody	on	a	roof.	We	could	be	walking	right	into	an
ambush!’
‘Of	course,’	agreed	Blend,	‘that	woman	was	his	mother,	because	Guild
rules	state	that	Ma’s	got	to	come	along	to	make	sure	he’s	got	the	hand	signals
down,	and	that	he	eats	all	his	lunch	and	his	knives	are	sharp	and	he’s	tied	up	his
moccasins	right	so	he	doesn’t	trip	in	the	middle	of	his	murderous	lunge	at
Sergeant	Antsy.’
‘I	ain’t	so	lucky	he	trips,’	Antsy	said	in	a	growl.	‘In	case	you	ain’t	noticed,
Blend,	it’s	been	a	run	of	the	Lord’s	push	for	us.	Oponn’s	got	it	in	for	me,
especially.’
‘Why?’	Scillara	asked.
‘Because	I	don’t	believe	in	the	Twins,	that’s	why.	Luck	–	it’s	all	bad.	Oponn
only	pulls	now	to	push	later.	If	you’ve	been	pulled,	it	don’t	end	there.	Never
does.	No,	you	can	expect	the	push	to	come	any	time	and	all	you	know	for	sure
is	it’s	gonna	come,	that	push.	Every	time.	In	fact,	we’re	all	as	good	as	dead.’
‘Well,’	said	Scillara,	‘I	can’t	argue	with	that.	Sooner	or	later,	Hood	takes	us
all,	and	that’s	the	only	certainty	there	is.’
‘Aren’t	you	two	cheerful	this	morning,’	Blend	observed.	‘Look,	here	we
are.’
They	had	arrived	at	the	Warden	Barracks,	suitably	sombre	and	foreboding.
Blend	saw	an	annexe	fronting	the	blockish	building	with	barred	windows
and	set	out	towards	it,	the	other	two	following.
A	guard	lounging	outside	the	door	watched	them	approach,	and	then	said,
‘Check	your	weapons	at	the	front	desk.	You	here	to	visit	someone?’
‘No,’	snorted	Antsy,	‘we’ve	come	to	break	’im	out!’	And	then	he	laughed.
‘Haha.’


No	one	found	the	joke	at	all	amusing,	especially	after	the	sharper	was
found	and	correctly	identified.	Antsy	then	made	the	mistake	of	getting
belligerent,	in	the	midst	of	five	or	six	stern-visaged	constabulary,	which	led	to
a	scuffle	and	then	an	arrest.
When	all	was	said	and	done,	Antsy	found	himself	in	a	lock-up	with	three
drunks,	only	one	of	whom	was	conscious	–	singing	some	old	Fisher	classic	in
a	broken-hearted	voice	–	and	a	fourth	man	who	seemed	to	be	entirely	mad,
convinced	as	he	was	that	everyone	he	saw	was	wearing	a	mask,	which	was
hiding	something	demonic,	horrible,	bloodthirsty.	He’d	been	arrested	for
trying	to	tear	off	a	merchant’s	face	and	he	eyed	Antsy	speculatively	before
evidently	deciding	that	the	red-whiskered	foreigner	looked	too	tough	to	take
on,	at	least	while	he	was	still	awake.
The	sentence	was	three	days	long,	provided	Antsy	proved	a	model
prisoner.	Any	trouble	and	it	could	stretch	out	some	more.
As	a	result	of	all	this,	it	was	some	time	before	Scillara	and	Blend	managed
to	gain	permission	to	see	Barathol	Mekhar.	They	met	him	in	a	holding	cell
while	two	guards	stood	flanking	the	single	door,	shortswords	drawn.
Noting	this,	Scillara	said,	‘Making	friends	in	here,	are	you?’
The	blacksmith	looked	somewhat	shamefaced	as	he	shrugged.	‘I	had	no
intention	of	resisting	the	arrest,	Scillara.	My	apprentice,	alas,	decided
otherwise.’	Anxiety	tightened	his	features	as	he	asked,	‘Any	news	of	him?	Has
he	been	captured?	Is	he	hurt?’
Scillara	shrugged.	‘We’ve	not	seen	or	heard	anything	like	that,	Barathol.’
‘I	keep	telling	them	here,	he’s	only	a	child	in	his	head.	It	was	my
responsibility,	all	of	it.	But	he	went	and	broke	some	bones	and	noses,	and
they’re	pretty	annoyed	about	that.’
Blend	cleared	her	throat.	Something	was	going	back	and	forth	between
Barathol	and	Scillara	and	it	made	her	uneasy.	‘Barathol,	we	can	pay	the	fine	to
the	Guild,	but	that	scrap	you	had,	that	one’s	more	serious.’
He	nodded	morosely.	‘Hard	labour,	yes.	Six	months	or	so.’	There	was	the
twitch	of	a	grin.	‘And	guess	who	I	will	be	working	for?’
‘Who?’
‘Eldra	Foundry.	And	in	six	months	I’ll	earn	my	ticket	as	a	smith,	since
that’s	allowed.	Some	kind	of	rehabilitation	programme.’
Scillara’s	throaty	laugh	straightened	up	both	guards.	‘Well,	that’s	one	way
to	get	there,	I	suppose.’
He	nodded.	‘I	went	about	it	all	wrong,	it	seems.’
‘I’m	not	sure,’	said	Scillara.	‘Is	the	Guild	happy	with	that?	I	mean,	it’s	sort
of	a	way	round	them,	isn’t	it?’


‘They’ve	no	choice.	Every	Guild	in	the	city	has	to	comply,	barring,	I
suppose,	the	Assassins’	Guild.	Obviously,	for	most	prisoners	six	months
working	in	a	trade	might	earn	them	an	apprentice	grade	of	some	sort	–	but
there’s	no	limit	to	how	fast	you	can	advance.	Just	pass	the	exams	and	that’s
that.’
Scillara	looked	ready	to	burst	out	laughing.	Even	Barathol	was	struggling.
Blend	sighed	and	then	said,	‘I’ll	go	settle	the	fine.	Consider	it	a	loan.’
‘Much	appreciated,	Blend,	and	thank	you.’
‘Remembering	Kalam,’	she	replied,	heading	out.	Neither	guard	paid	her
any	attention.	But	she	was	used	to	that.
	
A	bhokaral	answered	the	door.	High	Alchemist	Baruk	stared	down	at	it	for	a
long	moment	before	concluding	that	this	was	nothing	more	than	a	bhokaral.
Not	a	demon,	not	Soletaken.	Just	a	bhokaral,	its	little	wizened	face	scrunched
up	in	belligerent	regard,	spiky	ears	twitching.	When	it	made	to	close	the
postern	door	again	Baruk	stepped	forward	and	held	it	open.
Sudden	outrage	and	indignation.	Hissing,	spitting,	making	faces,	the
bhokaral	shook	a	fist	at	Baruk	and	then	fled	down	the	corridor.
The	High	Alchemist	closed	the	door	behind	him	and	made	his	way	along
the	corridor.	He	could	now	hear	other	bhokarala,	a	cacophony	of	bestial	voices
joining	in	with	the	first	one,	raising	an	alarm	that	echoed	through	the	temple.
At	a	branching	of	the	passageway	he	came	upon	an	old	Dal	Honese	woman
tearing	apart	a	straw	broom.	She	glared	up	at	Baruk	and	snapped	something	in
some	tribal	tongue,	then	made	squiggly	gestures	with	the	fingers	of	her	left
hand.
The	High	Alchemist	scowled.	‘Retract	that	curse,	witch.	Now.’
‘You’ll	not	be	so	bold	when	the	spiders	come	for	you.’
‘Now,’	he	repeated,	‘before	I	lose	my	temper.’
‘Bah!	You’re	not	worth	the	effort	anyway!’	And	all	at	once	she	collapsed
into	a	heap	of	spiders	that	scurried	in	all	directions.
Baruk	blinked,	and	then	quickly	stepped	back.	But	none	of	the	creatures
skittered	his	way.	Moments	later	they	had	inexplicably	vanished,	although	not	a
single	crack	or	seam	was	visible.
‘High	Alchemist.’
He	looked	up.	‘Ah,	High	Priestess.	I	did	knock—’
‘And	a	bhokaral	let	you	in,	yes.	They’re	in	the	habit	of	doing	that,	having
chased	away	most	of	my	acolytes.’
‘I	wasn’t	aware	bhokarala	were	in	the	habit	of	infestation.’


‘Yes,	well.	Have	you	come	to	speak	to	me	or	the	chosen…mouthpiece	of
Shadowthrone?’
‘I	do	not	believe	you	have	been	entirely	usurped,	High	Priestess.’
‘Your	generosity	is	noted.’
‘Why	is	there	a	witch	of	Ardatha	in	your	temple?’
‘Yes,	why?	Come	with	me.’
	
The	Magus	of	Shadow	–	gods	below	–	was	sitting	on	the	floor	in	the	altar
chamber,	sharpening	knives.	A	dozen	such	weapons	were	scattered	round	him,
each	one	of	a	different	design.	‘…tonight,’	he	was	muttering,	‘they	all	die!	Cut
throats,	cleaved	hearts,	pierced	eyeballs,	pared-back	fingernails.	Mayhem	and
slaughter.	Clippings—’	and	then	he	glanced	up,	started	guiltily,	licked	his	lips
once	and	suddenly	smiled.	‘Welcome,	High	Barukness.	Isn’t	it	a	lovely	day?’
‘High	Alchemist	Baruk,	Magus.	And	no,	it	is	not	a	lovely	day.	What	are
you	doing?’
His	eyes	darted.	‘Doing?	Nothing,	can’t	you	see	that?’	He	paused.	‘Can’t	he
smell	them?	Close,	oh	so	close!	It’s	going	to	be	a	mess	and	whose	fault	will
that	be?	A	real	mess	–	nothing	to	do	with	Iskaral	Pust,	though!	I	am	perfect.’	He
attempted	an	expression	of	innocence.	‘I	am	perfect…ly	–	perfectly	–	fine.’
Baruk	could	not	help	himself,	turning	to	Sordiko	Qualm.	‘What	was
Shadowthrone	thinking?’
The	question	clearly	depressed	her.	‘I	admit	to	a	crisis	of	faith,	High
Alchemist.’
Iskaral	Pust	leapt	to	his	feet.	‘Then	you	must	pray,	my	love.	To	me,	since
Shadowthrone	sees	through	my	eyes,	hears	through	my	ears,	smells	through
my	nose.’	He	crossed	his	eyes	and	added	in	a	different	tone,	‘Farts	through	my
bung-hole,	too,	but	that	would	be	too	offensive	to	mention.’	He	struggled	to
correct	his	gaze	and	smiled	again.	‘Sordiko,	my	sweetness,	there	are	very
special,	very	secret	prayers.	And,	er,	rituals.	See	me	after	this	man	has	left,
there’s	no	time	to	waste!’
Bhokarala	were	creeping	into	the	chamber.	A	score	of	them,	moving	with
pointless	stealth,	all	converging	on	Iskaral	Pust	–	who	seemed	entirely	unaware
of	them	as	he	winked	at	Sordiko	Qualm.
‘High	Priestess,’	said	Baruk,	‘you	have	my	sympathy.’
‘I	have	news	from	Shadowthrone,’	Iskaral	Pust	said.	‘This	is	why	I	have
summoned	you,	Baruchemist.’
‘You	did	not	summon	me.’
‘I	didn’t?	But	I	must	have.	At	least,	I	was	supposed	to.’	He	tilted	his	head.


‘He’s	another	idiot,	nothing	but	idiots	on	all	sides.	There’s	just	me	and	Sordiko
darling,	against	the	world.	Well,	we	shall	triumph!’
‘Shadowthrone?’	Baruk	prompted.
‘What?	Who?	Oh,	him.’
‘Through	your	mouth.’
‘Brilliance	shall	pass,	yes	yes.	Let	me	think,	let	me	think.	What	was	that
message	again?	I	forget.	Wait!	Wait,	hold	on.	It	was…what	was	it?	Set	a	watch
on	the	Urs	Gate.	That’s	it,	yes.	Urs	Gate.	Or	was	it	Foss	Gate?	Raven	Gate?
Worry	Gate?	Cutter	Gate?	Two-Ox?’
‘Yes,’	said	Baruk,	‘that’s	all	of	them.’
‘Urs,	yes,	it	must	have	been.	Urs.’
Sordiko	Qualm	looked	ready	to	weep.
Baruk	rubbed	at	his	eyes,	and	then	nodded.	‘Very	well.	I	shall	take	my	leave
then.’	He	bowed	to	the	High	Priestess.
The	bhokarala	rushed	in.	Each	stole	a	knife	and	then,	with	shrieks,	they
raced	away	clutching	their	prizes.
Iskaral	Pust	stared	agape,	and	then	pulled	at	the	two	snarls	of	hair	above	his
ears.	‘Evil!’	he	screamed.	‘They	knew!	They	knew	all	my	plans!	How?	How?’
	
‘Now,	what	shall	I	do	with	you?’
Chaur	watched	her	with	doleful	eyes.	He	had	been	crying	again,	his	eyes
puffy,	two	runnels	of	snot	streaking	down	to	his	reddened,	chapped	lips.
‘We	must	assume,’	Spite	continued,	‘that	Barathol	is	unavoidably
indisposed	–	of	course,	at	the	moment	all	we	can	do	is	assume,	since	in	truth
we	have	no	idea	what’s	happened	to	him.	One	thing	is	obvious,	and	that	is	that
he	cannot	come	here.	If	he	could	he	would	have,	right?	Come	to	collect	you,
Chaur.’
He	was	moments	from	bawling	again.	The	simple	mention	of	Barathol
threatened	to	set	him	off.
Spite	tapped	her	full	lips	with	one	long,	perfectly	manicured	finger.
‘Unfortunately,	I	will	need	to	leave	here	soon.	Can	I	trust	you	to	stay	here,
Chaur?	Can	I?’
He	nodded.
‘Are	you	sure?’
He	nodded	again,	and	then	wiped	his	nose,	rather	messily.
She	frowned.	‘Dear	me,	you’re	a	sight.	Do	you	realize	it	is	nothing	more
than	certain	pathways	in	your	brain	that	are	in	disarray?	A	practitioner	of	High
Denul	could	work	wonders	for	you,	Chaur.	It’s	a	thought,	isn’t	it?	Oh,	I	know,


you	don’t	have	“thoughts”	as	such.	You	have…impulses,	and	confusion,	and
these	two	make	up	the	man	known	as	Chaur.	And,	barring	times	such	as	this
one,	you	are	mostly	happy,	and	perhaps	that	is	not	something	to	be	fiddled
with.	The	gods	know,	happiness	is	a	precious	and	rare	commodity,	and	indeed
it	seems	that	the	more	intelligent	and	perceptive	the	individual,	the	less	happy
they	generally	are.	The	cost	of	seeing	things	as	they	are,	I	expect.
‘Then,	of	course,	there	is	my	sister.	My	smiling	murderess	sibling.	My
vicious,	ice-cold,	treacherous	kin.	She	happens	to	be	almost	as	intelligent	as
me,	and	yet	she	is	immune	to	unhappiness.	A	quality,	I	suspect,	of	her	particular
insanity.
‘Anyway,	Chaur,	you	will	need	to	remain	here,	staying	out	of	sight.	For	I
must	pay	my	sister	a	visit.	For	a	word	or	two.	Soon,	yes?’
He	nodded.
‘Now,	let’s	get	you	cleaned	up.	I	wouldn’t	want	to	upset	Barathol	and
neither	would	you,	I’m	sure.’
Now,	Chaur	was	good	at	understanding	people	most	of	the	time.	He	was
good	at	nodding,	too.	But	on	occasion	understanding	and	nodding	did	not	quite
match.	This	was	such	a	time.
But	more	of	that	later.
	
The	carter	failed	to	complete	his	breakfast,	as	it	did	not	take	long	for	someone
to	take	note	of	the	wrapped	corpse,	and	then	to	bring	word	in	to	Meese	that
some	fool	had	left	a	body	in	the	bed	of	the	cart	outside	the	inn	–	hardly	the	kind
of	positive	advertisement	any	inn	might	welcome,	even	the	Phoenix.	Swearing,
Meese	went	out	to	see	for	herself,	and	something	about	those	boots	looked
familiar.	With	a	suddenly	cold	heart,	she	pulled	the	canvas	back	from
Murillio’s	face.
Things	happened	quickly	then:	wretched	comprehension,	word’s	swift
rush,	and	finally,	the	dusty,	lifeless	place	in	the	soul	that	was	grief.	Abject	sense
of	uselessness,	the	pummelling	assault	that	is	shock.	The	carter	was	cornered
by	Irilta	and,	seeing	the	strait	he’d	found	himself	in,	the	old	man	was	quick	to
tell	everyone	all	he	knew.
The	short,	round	man	at	the	back	of	the	room	rose	then	with	a	sober
expression	and	quietly	took	charge.	He	told	Irilta	and	Meese	to	carry	the	body
to	a	spare	room	upstairs,	which	they	did	with	heartrending	tenderness.	Word
was	sent	out	to	Coll.	As	for	the	others,	well,	everyone	returned	to	the	Phoenix
Inn	eventually,	and	so	the	ordeal	of	relaying	the	bad	news	would	not	end	soon,
and	each	time	the	emotions	would	well	up	once	more.	The	living	felt	this	new


burden	and	they	could	see	that	the	next	few	days	would	be	without	pleasure,
without	ease,	and	already	everyone	felt	exhausted,	and	not	even	Kruppe	was
immune.
A	dear	friend	is	dead,	and	there	is	nothing	just	in	death.	When	the	moment
arrives,	it	is	always	too	soon.	The	curse	of	incompletion,	the	loss	that	can
never	be	filled.	Before	too	long,	rising	like	jagged	rocks	from	the	flood,	there
was	anger.
The	carter	was	made	to	explain	again	about	the	visit	to	a	mining	camp,	the
duel	over	some	boy,	and	the	victor ’s	instructions	that	the	body	be	returned	to
the	Phoenix	Inn.	That	was	all	he	knew,	he	swore	it,	and	for	the	moment	none
but	Kruppe	–	wise	Kruppe,	clever	Kruppe	–	comprehended	who	that	boy	must
have	been.
Must	he	now	visit	a	certain	duelling	school?	Possibly.
The	ordeal	of	the	burden,	the	dread	weight	of	terrible	news	–	the
witnessing	of	another	crushed	spirit,	oh,	this	was	a	fell	day	indeed.	A	most	sad,
fell	day.
And	on	this	night,	widows	will	weep,	and	so	shall	we.
	
Two	men	are	converging	on	the	Phoenix	Inn.	Which	one	arrives	first	changes
everything.	If	the	redressing	of	balance	truly	existed	beyond	nature	–	in	the
realm	of	humanity,	that	is	–	then	Rallick	Nom	would	have	been	the	first	to	hear
of	his	friend’s	death;	and	he	would	have	set	out,	hard-eyed,	to	take	upon
himself	a	new	burden,	for	although	vengeance	salved	certain	spiritual	needs,
cold	murder	delivered	terrible	damage	to	the	soul.	Of	course,	he	had	done	this
once	before,	in	the	name	of	another	friend,	and	so	in	his	mind	he	felt	he	could
be	no	more	lost	than	he	already	was.
Alas,	that	particular	flavour	of	redress	was	not	to	be.
	
Troubled	by	a	host	of	thoughts,	Cutter	approached	the	entrance	to	the	Phoenix
Inn.	He	noted	an	old	carter	leading	an	ox	away,	but	had	no	reason	to	give	it	any
further	consideration.	As	soon	as	he	walked	inside,	he	sensed	that	something
was	wrong.	Irilta	was	behind	the	bar	with	a	bottle	in	her	hand	–	not,	he	saw,	to
pour	drinks	for	customers,	but	to	lift	it	to	her	mouth,	tilt	it	back	and	take
punishing	mouthfuls.	Her	eyes	were	red,	startling	in	a	pallid	face.
Few	people	were	speaking,	and	those	who	were	did	so	in	muted	tones.
Meese	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	but	Cutter	noticed	Kruppe,	sitting	at	his


table	with	his	back	to	the	room	–	something	he	had	never	before	seen	him	do.
A	dusty	bottle	of	expensive	wine	was	before	him,	four	goblets	set	out.	Kruppe
was	slowly	filling	the	one	opposite	the	chair	on	his	right.
His	unease	deepening,	Cutter	walked	over.	He	pulled	out	that	chair	and	sat
down.
There	was	no	sign	of	Kruppe’s	usual	affability	in	his	visage.	Grave,
colourless,	bleak.	In	his	eyes,	raw	anguish.	‘Drink,	my	young	friend,’	he	said.
Cutter	saw	that	the	remaining	two	goblets	were	empty.	He	reached	out.
‘This	is	the	expensive	stuff,	isn’t	it?	What’s	happened,	Kruppe?’
‘Honourable	Murillio	is	dead.’
The	statement	felt	like	a	body	blow,	punching	the	breath	from	Cutter ’s
chest.	He	could	not	move.	Pain	surged	up	through	the	numbness,	sank	down
again	only	to	return	once	more.	Over	and	over	again.
‘A	duel,’	said	Kruppe.	‘He	went	to	retrieve	a	lost	child.	The	Eldra	Mines
west	of	the	city.’
Something	jerked	inside	Cutter,	but	he	could	make	no	sense	of	it.	A
recognition?	Of	what?	‘I	thought	–	I	thought	he’d	given	all	that	up.’
‘Given	what	up,	my	friend?	The	desire	to	do	right?’
Cutter	shook	his	head.	‘Duelling.	I	meant…duelling.’
‘To	effect	the	release	of	young	Harllo.	The	mine’s	owner	was	there,	or	one
of	them	at	least.	History	comes	round,	as	it	is	known	to	do.’	Kruppe	sighed.	‘He
was	too	old	for	such	things.’
And	now	came	the	question,	and	it	was	asked	in	a	dull	tone,	a	voice
emptied	of	everything.	‘Who	killed	him,	Kruppe?’
And	the	round	man	flinched,	and	hesitated.
‘Kruppe.’
‘This	will	not	do—’
‘Kruppe!’
‘Ah,	can	such	forces	be	resisted?	Gorlas	Vidikas.’
And	that	was	that.	He’d	known,	yes,	Cutter	had	known.	The	mine…Eldra…
the	history.	He	knows	about	me.	He	wanted	to	punish	me.	He	killed	Murillio	to
hurt	me.	He	killed	a	fine…a	fine	and	noble	man.	This	–	this	must	stop.
‘Sit	down,	Cutter.’
I	mean	to	stop	this.	Now.	It’s	what	she	wants,	anyway.
‘Coll	is	coming,’	Kruppe	said.	‘And	Rallick	Nom	–	Crokus,	leave	this	to
Rallick—’
But	he	was	already	moving,	eyes	on	the	door.	Irilta	stood	watching	and
something	in	her	face	caught	his	attention.	There	was	dark	hunger	in	her	eyes	–
as	if	she	knew	where	he	was	going,	as	if	she	knew	–	‘Cutter,’	she	said	in	a	rasp,


‘get	the	bastard.	Get	him.’
And	then	he	was	outside.	The	day’s	brilliance	was	like	a	slap,	rocking	his
head.	He	gasped,	but	breathing	still	wasn’t	easy.	Pressures	assailed	him,	and
rage	rose	in	his	mind,	a	nightmare	leviathan	with	gaping	mouth,	and	its	howl
filled	his	skull.
Deafening	Cutter	to	the	world.
	
The	day	is	stripped	down,	time	itself	torn	away,	the	present	expanding,
swallowing	everything	in	sight.	It	is	an	instant	and	that	instant	feels	eternal.
Recall	this	day’s	beginning.	A	single	breath,	drawn	in	with	love—
	
Bellam	Nom	took	a	length	of	braided	hide,	made	loops	at	both	ends.	He
crouched	down	in	front	of	Mew.	‘See	this	loop,	Mew?	Take	it	in	your	hands	–
I’m	going	to	hold	on	to	the	other	end,	all	right?	We’re	going	out.	You	just	keep
hold	of	the	rope,	all	right?’
Round-eyed	Mew	nodded.
‘Don’t	worry,’	said	Bellam,	‘I’ll	walk	slowly.’	He	then	went	to	Hinty	and
picked	the	girl	up,	taking	her	weight	in	the	crook	of	his	left	arm.	Her	thin	arms
wrapped	about	his	neck	and	her	wet	nose	brushed	his	cheek.	Bellam	smiled
down	at	Mew.	‘Ready?’
Another	nod.
They	set	out.
Snell	was	still	with	the	old	bodymonger,	and	Bellam	had	no	interest	in
retrieving	him	just	yet.	He	had	no	idea	what	had	happened	to	Myrla	and	Bedek,
but	he	left	a	message	scrawled	out	with	charcoal	on	the	surface	of	the	lone
table,	telling	them	where	he’d	taken	Mew	and	Hinty.
Murillio	should	have	been	back	by	now.	Bellam	was	getting	worried.	He
couldn’t	wait	around	any	longer.
They	walked	slowly	through	the	crowds.	Twice	Mew	was	inadvertently
tugged	loose	from	the	rope,	but	both	times	Bellam	was	able	to	retrieve	her.
They	left	the	unofficial	neighbourhood	slum	known	as	the	Trench	and	after
some	time	they	arrived	at	the	duelling	school.
Bellam	set	Hinty	down	in	the	warm-up	area,	instructed	Mew	to	remain	with
her	little	sister,	then	set	out	to	find	Stonny	Menackis.
She	was	sitting	on	a	stone	bench	in	the	shade-swallowed	colonnade
running	along	the	back	end	of	the	practice	yard,	her	long	legs	stretched	out,


her	eyes	on	nothing.	When	she	heard	him	approach	she	glanced	up.	‘Classes
cancelled.	Go	away.’
‘I’m	not	here	for	any	lessons,’	Bellam	said,	surprised	at	the	harsh
judgement	in	his	own	voice.
‘Get	out,’	she	said,	‘before	I	beat	you	senseless.’
‘Too	many	people,	Stonny,	are	stepping	in	for	you,	doing	what	you’re
supposed	to	be	doing.	It’s	not	fair.’
She	scowled.	‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘Murillio	hasn’t	come	back?’
‘Everybody	leaves.’
‘He	found	Harllo.’
‘What?’
He	saw	interest	flaring	to	life	in	her	dark	eyes.	‘He	found	him,	Stonny.
Working	in	a	mining	camp.	He	went	to	get	him	back.	But	he	hasn’t	returned.
Something’s	happened,	something	bad	–	I	can	feel	it.’
She	stood.	‘Where	is	this	camp?	How	did	he	end	up	there?’
‘Snell.’
She	stared.	‘I’m	going	to	kill	that	little	bastard.’
‘No,	you’re	not.	He’s	taken	care	of.	We’ve	got	a	new	problem.’
At	that	moment	a	small	figure	stepped	into	the	corridor,	stared	at	them.
Stonny	frowned.	‘Mew?	Where’s	your	ma	and	da?	Where’s	Hinty?’
Mew	started	crying,	and	then	rushed	towards	Stonny	who	had	no	choice	but
to	take	the	child	into	her	arms.
‘They’ve	gone	missing,’	said	Bellam.	‘I	was	taking	care	of	them,	waiting,
but	they	never	showed	up.	Stonny,	I	don’t	know	what	to	do	with	them.	I	need	to
get	home	–	my	own	parents	must	be	going	crazy	with	worry.’
She	spun	round,	still	holding	Mew,	and	her	face	was	savage.	‘I	need	to	get
Harllo!	Take	them	to	your	home!’
‘No.	Enough	of	this.	Take	responsibility	for	them,	Stonny.	Once	I	let	my
parents	know	I’m	all	right,	I’ll	go	and	find	Murillio.	Take	responsibility.	You
owe	it	to	Myrla	and	Bedek	–	they	did	it	for	you.	For	years.’
He	thought	she	would	strike	him,	saw	the	fury	warring	in	her	eyes.	He
stepped	back.	‘Hinty’s	in	the	warm-up,	probably	sleeping	–	she	does	that	a	lot.
Oh,	and	they’re	hungry.’
He	left	them	then.
It	took	the	words	of	a	young	man	–	no,	a	boy	–	to	do	what	Gruntle	could
not	do.	It	took	a	barrage	of	blunt,	honest	words,	smashing	through,	against
which	she	had	no	real	defence.
She	stood,	Mew	in	her	arms,	feeling	as	if	her	soul	had	been	blasted	open,


and	all	that	was	left	was	a	hollow	shell,	slowly	refilling.	Refilling	with…
something.	‘Oh,’	she	whispered,	‘Harllo.’
	
Shardan	Lim	was	waiting	for	Challice	when	she	returned	home.	He	rose	from
the	ornate	bench	but	did	not	approach,	instead	standing,	watching	her	with	an
odd	expression.
‘This,’	she	said,	‘is	unexpected.’
‘No	doubt.	Forgive	me	for	intruding	on	your…busy	schedule.’
There	was	no	genuine	remorse	to	back	his	apology,	however,	and	she	felt	a
trembling	of	her	nerves.	‘What	do	you	want,	Councillor?’
‘Are	we	not	past	titles,	Challice?’
‘That	depends.’
‘Perhaps	you’re	right.	Even	so,	after	we’re	done	here	there’ll	be	no	need
for	formalities	between	us.’
Should	she	call	for	the	guard?	What	would	he	do?	Why,	he’d	laugh.
Shardan	Lim	walked	closer.	‘Pour	yourself	some	wine.	Pour	yourself	a	lot
of	wine,	if	you	like.	I	must	tell	you,	I	am	not	at	all	pleased	at	having	been	so
unceremoniously	discarded.	It	seems	you	find	adultery	to	your	taste,	and	your
appetite	has	grown.	Out	of	control?	I	think,	yes,	out	of	control.’
‘You	forced	open	the	door,’	she	said,	‘and	now	complain	that	I’ve	left	the
room?’
His	thin	colourless	lips	curved	in	a	smile.	‘Something	like	that.	I’m	not
ready	for	you	to	leave	just	yet.’
‘And	I	am	to	have	no	say	in	the	matter?’
His	brows	lifted.	‘Dear	Challice.	You	surrendered	such	privileges	long
ago.	You	let	your	husband	use	you	–	not	in	any	normal	way,	but	still,	you	let
him	use	you.	You	let	me	do	the	same,	and	now	some	lowborn	thief,	and	who
knows	how	many	others.	Make	no	protest	now	–	it	will	sound	hollow	even	to
you,	I’m	sure.’
‘It’s	still	my	life.’	But	the	words	sounded	thin,	too	brittle	to	stretch	very	far
over	the	misshapen,	ugly	truth.
He	did	not	bother	with	a	response,	but	looked	across	to	a	divan.
‘You’ll	have	to	drag	me,’	she	said,	‘so	the	reality	will	be	plain,	so	plain
you	won’t	be	able	to	pretend	this	is	anything	but	the	rape	it	is.’
He	looked	disappointed.	‘Wrong	again,	Challice.	You	are	going	to	walk
over	there	and	undress.	You	are	going	to	lie	back	and	spread	your	legs.	It
should	be	easy	now;	you’ve	done	it	often	enough.	Your	lowborn	lover	is	going
to	have	to	share	you,	I’m	afraid.	Before	long,	I	expect	you’ll	not	even	be	able


to	tell	the	difference.’
How	could	he	force	her	to	do	such	things?	She	did	not	understand,
although	–	without	doubt	–	he	did.	Yes,	Shardan	Lim	understood	things	far	too
well.
She	walked	to	the	divan.
She	was	still	sore,	achy,	from	the	morning’s	lovemaking.	Before	long,	that
ache	would	be	deeper,	more	raw	than	it	was	now.	Pain	and	pleasure,	yes,
entwined	like	lovers.	She	could	feed	them	both	again	and	again,	for	ever	and
again.
And	so	she	would.	Until	the	time	came	when	she…awakened.
Crokus,	never	mind	my	husband.	There	is	no	point.	I	will	tell	you	that	the
next	time.	I	promise.
I	promise.
Shardan	Lim	used	her	then,	but	in	the	end	it	was	he	who	did	not	understand.
And	when	she	thanked	him	afterwards,	he	seemed	taken	aback.	As	he	hurried	to
dress	and	depart,	she	remained	lying	on	the	divan,	amused	at	his	confusion,	at
peace	with	the	way	of	things	now.
And	she	thought	of	her	glass	globe	with	its	trapped	moon,	that	gift	of	a
youth	long	lost,	and	she	smiled.

In	a	near	tropical	city,	the	dead	are	quickly	dressed.	A	distraught	Coll,	half-mad
with	grief,	arrived	in	a	carriage.	Meese	came	down	from	the	room	where	she
had	sat	with	the	body,	and	Coll	sent	one	of	his	aides	to	crack	open	the	family
crypt.	There	would	be	no	delays	permitted.	Grief	was	transformed	into	fury
when	Coll	discovered	who	had	been	responsible	for	Murillio’s	death.
‘First	blood	drawn’s	never	enough	for	Vidikas.	He	likes	killing	–	under
any	other	circumstances	he’d	be	on	his	way	to	the	High	Gallows.	Damn	these
antiquated	duelling	laws.	The	time’s	come	to	outlaw	duels	–	I	will	address	the
Council—’
‘Such	a	thing	will	not	pass,’	Kruppe	said,	shaking	his	head.	‘Coll	knows
this	as	well	as	does	Kruppe.’
Coll	stood	like	a	man	trapped,	cornered.	‘Where’s	Rallick?’	he	asked	in	a
growl.
Sighing,	Kruppe	poured	the	second	to	last	goblet	full	and	handed	it	to	Coll.
‘He	will	be	here	soon,	Kruppe	believes.	Such	is	this	day,	in	no	hurry	to	end,
and	will	any	of	us	sleep	this	night?	Kruppe	already	dreads	the	impending
solitude.	Ah,	here	is	Rallick.’


They	watched	as	Irilta	stumbled	to	the	assassin,	very	nearly	collapsing	into
Rallick’s	arms.	His	expression	of	shock	quickly	darkened	as	she	spoke,	her
voice	muffled	since	her	face	was	pressed	against	his	shoulder	–	but	not	so
muffled	that	he	did	not	comprehend.
His	gaze	lifted,	met	Kruppe’s,	and	then	Coll’s.
There	was	no	one	else	left	in	the	bar	–	the	poisoned	atmosphere	had	driven
away	even	the	most	insensate	drinkers.	Sulty	and	Chud	the	new	cook	stood	in
the	doorway	leading	to	the	kitchen,	Sulty	quietly	weeping.
Kruppe	poured	the	last	goblet	and	then	sat	down,	his	back	to	the	scene.	Coll
slumped	down	beside	Kruppe,	draining	down	the	wine	with	the	practised	ease
of	an	alcoholic	reacquainting	himself	with	his	deadly	passion,	but	Kruppe	had
chosen	this	wine	with	such	risks	in	mind	–	its	headiness	was	an	illusion,	the
taste	of	alcohol	a	clever	combination	of	spices	and	nothing	more.	This	was,
Kruppe	understood,	but	a	temporary	solution.	He	knew	Coll	well,	understood
the	self-serving	cycle	of	self-pity	that	now	loomed	before	the	man,	sauntering
in	wearing	that	familiar	smirk,	like	an	old,	deadly	lover.	She	would	open	wide
her	arms,	now,	to	fold	Coll	in	once	more	–	the	days	and	nights	ahead	would	be
difficult	indeed.
After	a	long	moment	Rallick	joined	them,	and	although	he	remained
standing	he	reached	down	for	the	goblet.	‘Crokus	should	be	here,’	he	said.
‘He	was,	but	he	has	left.’
Coll	started.	‘Left?	Did	Murillio	mean	so	little	to	him	that	he’d	just	walk
away?’
‘He	left,’	said	Kruppe,	‘to	find	Gorlas	Vidikas.’
Coll	swore	and	rose.	‘The	fool	–	Vidikas	will	slice	him	to	pieces!	Rallick
—’
And	the	assassin	was	already	setting	the	goblet	back	down	and	turning
away.
‘Wait!’	snapped	Kruppe	in	a	tone	that	neither	man	had	ever	heard	before	–
not	from	Kruppe,	at	least.	‘Both	of	you!	Take	up	that	wine	again,	Rallick.’	And
now	he	too	rose.	‘There	is	the	memory	of	a	friend	and	we	will	drink	to	it.
Here,	now.	Rallick,	you	will	not	catch	Crokus,	you	will	not	make	it	in	time.
Listen	well	to	Kruppe,	both	of	you.	Vengeance	need	not	be	rushed—’
‘So	Rallick	should	just	let	Vidikas	kill	yet	another	friend	of	ours?’
Kruppe	faced	the	assassin.	‘Do	you	lack	faith	as	well,	Rallick	Nom?’
‘That	is	not	the	point,’	the	man	replied.
‘You	cannot	halt	what	has	already	happened.	He	has	already	walked	this
path.	You	discovered	that,	did	you	not?	Outside	this	very	inn.’
Coll	rubbed	at	his	face,	as	if	waiting	to	find	the	numbness	a	bellyful	of


wine	should	have	given	him.	‘Is	Crokus	truly—’
‘He	has	a	new	name,’	Rallick	interrupted,	finally	nodding.	‘One	he	has
clearly	earned	the	hard	way.’
‘Cutter,	yes,’	said	Kruppe.
Coll	looked	back	and	forth	between	the	two	of	them,	and	then	thumped
back	down	into	his	chair.	All	at	once	he	looked	a	century	old,	shoulders
folding	in	as	he	reached	for	the	bottle	and	refilled	his	goblet.	‘There	will	be
repercussions.	Vidikas	is…not	alone.	Hanut	Orr,	Shardan	Lim.	Whatever
happens	is	going	to	ripple	outward	–	gods	below,	this	could	get	messy.’
Rallick	grunted.	‘Hanut	Orr	and	Shardan	Lim.	I	can	get	in	their	way	when
the	time	comes.’
Coll’s	eyes	flashed.	‘You’ve	got	Cutter ’s	back.	Good.	We	can	take	care	of
this	–	you	can,	I	mean.	I’m	useless	–	I	always	was.’	He	sank	back,	the	chair
creaking,	and	looked	away.	‘What’s	with	this	wine?	It’s	doing	nothing.’
‘Murillio,’	said	Kruppe,	‘would	not	be	pleased	at	you	standing	drunk	when
his	body	is	carried	into	the	crypt.	Honour	him,	Coll,	now	and	from	now	on.’
‘Fuck	off,’	he	replied.
The	back	of	Rallick	Nom’s	gloved	hand	snapped	hard	against	Coll’s	face,
rocking	him	back.	He	surged	upright,	outraged,	reaching	for	the	ornate	knife
at	his	belt.	The	two	men	stood	glaring	at	each	other.
‘Stop	this!’
A	bottle	smashed	against	the	floor,	the	contents	spraying	the	feet	of	Coll
and	Rallick,	and	both	turned	as	Meese	snarled,	‘There	you	go,	Coll,	lap	it	up
and	choke	to	death!	In	the	meantime,	how	’bout	the	rest	of	us	pay	our	respects
and	walk	him	to	the	crypt	–	the	undertaker ’s	cart’s	arrived.	It’s	time	–	not	for
any	of	you,	but	for	him.	For	Murillio.	You	chew	up	this	day	and	it’ll	haunt	you
for	ever.	And	Hood’s	breath,	so	will	I.’
Coll	ducked	his	head	and	spat	blood,	and	then	said,	‘Let’s	get	this	done,
then.	For	Murillio.’
Rallick	nodded.
Behind	the	bar,	Irilta	was	suddenly	sick.	The	sounds	of	her	gagging	and
coughing	silenced	everyone	else.
Coll	looked	shamefaced.
Kruppe	rested	a	hand	on	the	man’s	shoulder.	And	all	at	once	the	councillor
was	weeping,	so	broken	that	to	bear	witness	was	to	break	deep	within	oneself.
Rallick	turned	away	then,	both	hands	lifting	to	his	face.
Survivors	do	not	mourn	together.	They	each	mourn	alone,	even	when	in
the	same	place.	Grief	is	the	most	solitary	of	all	feelings.	Grief	isolates,	and
every	ritual,	every	gesture,	every	embrace,	is	a	hopeless	effort	to	break


through	that	isolation.
None	of	it	works.	The	forms	crumble	and	dissolve.
To	face	death	is	to	stand	alone.
	
How	far	can	a	lost	soul	travel?	Picker	believed	she	had	begun	in	some	distant
frozen	world,	struggling	thigh-deep	through	drifts	of	snow,	a	bitter	wind
howling	round	her.	Again	and	again	she	fell,	crusted	ice	scraping	her	flesh	raw
–	for	she	was	naked,	her	fingers	blackening	from	the	tips	as	they	froze	into
solid,	dead	things.	Her	toes	and	then	her	feet	did	the	same,	the	skin	splitting,	the
ankles	swelling.
Two	wolves	were	on	her	trail.	She	did	not	know	how	she	knew	this,	but	she
did.	Two	wolves.	God	and	Goddess	of	War,	the	Wolves	of	Winter.	They	scented
her	as	they	would	a	rival	–	but	she	was	no	ascendant,	and	certainly	no	goddess.
She	had	worn	torcs	once,	sworn	to	Treach,	and	this	now	marked	her.
War	could	not	exist	without	rivals,	without	enemies,	and	this	was	as	true	in
the	immortal	realm	as	it	was	in	the	mortal	one.	The	pantheon	ever	reflects	the
nature	of	its	countless	aspects.	The	facets	deliver	unerring	truths.	In	winter,	war
was	the	lifeless	chill	of	dead	flesh.	In	summer,	war	rotted	in	fetid,	flyblown
clouds.	In	autumn,	the	battlefield	was	strewn	with	the	dead.	In	spring,	war	arose
anew	in	the	same	fields,	the	seeds	well	nurtured	in	rich	soil.
She	fought	through	a	dark	forest	of	black	spruce	and	firs.	Her	fingers
dropped	off	one	by	one.	She	stumbled	on	stumps.	The	winter	assailed	her,	the
winter	was	her	enemy,	and	the	wolves	drew	ever	closer.
Through	a	mountain	pass,	then;	brief	flashes	of	awareness	and	each	time
they	arrived,	lifting	her	out	of	oblivion,	she	found	the	landscape	transformed.
Heaped	boulders,	eskers,	ragged	peaks	towering	overhead.	A	tortured,	twisted
trail,	suddenly	pitching	sharply	downward,	stunted	pines	and	oaks	to	either
side.	Bestial	howls	voicing	their	rage	high	above,	far	behind	her	now.
A	valley	below,	verdant	and	rank,	a	jungle	nestled	impossibly	close	to	the
high	ranges	and	the	whipping	snow-sprayed	winds	–	or	perhaps	she	had
traversed	continents.	Her	hands	were	whole,	her	bare	feet	sinking	into	warm,
wet	loam.	Insects	spun	and	whirred	about	her.
From	the	thicket	came	an	animal	cough,	a	cat’s	heavy	growl.
And	another	hunter	had	found	her.
She	hurried	on,	as	if	some	other	place	awaited	her,	a	sanctuary,	a	cave	that
she	could	enter,	to	emerge	upon	some	other	side,	reborn.	And	now	she	saw,
rising	haphazardly	from	the	moss	and	humus	and	mounds	of	rotted	trunks,
swords,	blades	encrusted,	cross-hilts	bedecked	in	moss,	pommels	green	with


verdigris.	Swords	of	all	styles,	all	so	corroded	and	rusted	that	they	would	be
useless	as	weapons.
She	heard	the	cat’s	cough	again,	closer	this	time.
Panic	flitted	through	her.
She	found	a	clearing	of	high	swaying	grasses,	a	sea	of	emerald	green	that
she	plunged	into,	pushing	her	way	across.
Something	thrashed	into	her	wake,	a	swift,	deadly	rush.
She	screamed,	fell	to	the	ground.
Snapping,	barking	voices	surrounded	her,	answered	by	a	snarl	from
somewhere	close	behind	her.	Picker	rolled	on	to	her	back.	Humanlike	figures
crowded	her,	baring	their	teeth	and	making	stabbing	gestures	with	firehardened	spears	towards	a	leopard	crouched	down	not	three	paces	from	where
she	was	lying.	The	beast’s	ears	were	flattened	back,	its	eyes	blazing.	Then,	in	a
flash,	it	was	gone.
Picker	pushed	herself	to	her	feet,	and	found	that	she	towered	over	these
people,	and	yet	they	were	one	and	all	adults	–	even	through	the	fine	pelt	of	hair
covering	them	she	could	see	that.	Five	females,	four	males,	and	the	females
were	the	more	robust	among	them,	with	wide	hips	and	deep	ribcages.
Luminous	brown	eyes	fixed	upon	her	with	something	like	worship,	and
then	the	spears	were	brought	round	and	she	was	being	prodded	along,	on	to	a
trail	cutting	across	the	path	she	had	been	taking.	So	much	for	worship.	Those
spears	threatened,	and	she	saw	something	black	smeared	on	the	points.	I’m	a
prisoner.	Terrific.
They	hurried	down	the	trail,	a	trail	never	meant	for	one	as	tall	as	Picker,
and	she	found	branches	scraping	across	her	face	again	and	again.	Before	long
they	reached	another	clearing,	this	one	at	the	foot	of	a	cliff.	A	wide,	low	rock
shelf	projected	over	a	sloping	cave-mouth	from	which	drifted	woodsmoke.
Two	ancients	were	squatting	at	the	entrance,	both	women,	with	a	gaggle	of
children	staring	out	behind	them.
There	was	none	of	the	expected	squealing	excitement	from	the	children	–
indeed,	no	sounds	were	uttered	at	all,	and	Picker	felt	a	sudden	suspicion:	these
creatures	were	not	the	masters	of	their	domain.	No,	they	behaved	as	would
prey.	She	saw	stones	to	either	side	of	the	cave,	heaped	up	to	be	used	to	make	a
barricade	come	the	dusk.
Her	captors	drove	her	into	the	cave.	She	was	forced	to	bend	over	to	keep
from	scraping	her	head	on	the	pitched,	blackened	ceiling.	The	children	fled	to
either	side.	Beyond	the	flickering	light	from	the	lone	hearth	the	cave	continued
on	into	darkness.	Coughing	in	the	smoke,	she	stumbled	forward,	round	the
fire,	and	into	the	depths.	The	shafts	of	the	spears	urged	her	on.	The	floor	of


packed	earth	beneath	her	feet	was	free	of	rubble,	but	the	slope	was	getting	ever
steeper	and	she	felt	herself	sliding,	losing	purchase.
Suddenly	the	shafts	pressed	hard	against	her	and	shoved.
Shouting	in	alarm,	Picker	pitched	forward,	slid	on	the	damp	floor	as	if	it
was	layered	in	grease.	She	fought	to	grasp	hold	of	something,	but	nothing
touched	her	flailing	hands	–	and	then	the	floor	vanished	beneath	her,	and	she
was	falling.
	
Harllo’s	sudden	unexpected	plummet	ended	quickly	amidst	sharp-edged
boulders.	Gashes	ripped	across	his	back,	one	thigh	and	the	ankle	of	the	same
leg.	The	impact	left	him	stunned.	He	vaguely	heard	something	strike	the	rocks
nearby,	a	terrible	snapping,	crunching	sound.
Eventually,	he	stirred.	The	pain	from	the	wounds	was	fierce,	and	he	could
feel	blood	trickling	down,	but	it	seemed	he’d	broken	no	bones.	He	crawled
slowly	to	where	he’d	heard	Bainisk	land,	and	heard	ragged	breathing.
When	his	probing	hands	touched	warm	flesh,	he	found	it	wet,	broken.	And
at	the	brush	of	his	fingertips	it	flinched	away.
‘Bainisk!’
A	low	groan,	and	then	a	gasp.
‘Bainisk,	it’s	me.	We	made	it	down	–	we	got	away.’
‘Harllo?’	The	voice	was	awful	in	its	weakness,	its	pain.	‘Tell	me…’
He	pulled	himself	up	alongside	Bainisk,	his	eyes	making	out	a	rough
shape.	He	found	Bainisk’s	face,	tilted	towards	him,	and	Harllo	drew	himself	on
to	his	knees	and	eased	up	his	friend’s	head	–	feeling	strange	shards	moving
under	his	hands,	beneath	Bainisk’s	blood-matted	hair	–	and	then,	as	gently	as	he
could	manage,	he	settled	the	head	on	to	his	lap.
‘Bainisk.’
The	face	was	crushed	along	one	side.	It	was	a	miracle	that	he	could	speak
at	all.	‘I	dreamed,’	he	whispered.	‘I	dreamed	of	the	city.	Floating	on	the	lake…
going	wherever	the	waves	go.	Tell	me,	Harllo,	tell	me	about	the	city.’
‘You’ll	see	it	soon	enough—’
‘Tell	me.’
Harllo	stroked	his	friend’s	brow.	‘In	the	city…Bainisk,	oh,	in	the	city,
there’s	shops	and	everybody	has	all	the	money	they	need	and	you	can	buy
whatever	you	want.	There’s	gold	and	silver,	beautiful	silver,	and	the	people	are
happy	to	give	it	away	to	anyone	they	like.	No	one	ever	argues	about	anything	–
why	should	they?	There’s	no	hunger,	no	hurts,	no	hurts	of	any	kind,	Bainisk.	In
the	city	every	child	has	a	mother	and	a	father…and	the	mother	loves	her	son


for	ever	and	ever	and	the	father	doesn’t	rape	her.	And	you	can	just	pick	them
for	yourself.	A	beautiful	mother,	a	strong,	handsome	father	–	they’d	be	so
happy	to	take	care	of	you	–	you’ll	see,	you’ll	see.
‘They’d	see	how	good	you	are.	They’d	see	right	through	to	your	heart,	and
see	it	pure	and	golden,	because	all	you	ever	wanted	to	do	was	to	help	out,
because	you	were	a	burden	to	them	and	you	didn’t	want	that,	and	maybe	if	you
helped	enough	they’d	love	you,	and	want	you	to	be	with	them,	to	live	with
them.	And	when	it	didn’t	work,	well,	it	just	means	you	have	to	work	harder.	Do
more,	do	everything.
‘Oh,	Bainisk,	the	city…there	are	mothers…’
He	stopped	then,	for	Bainisk	had	stopped	breathing.	He	was	perfectly	still,
his	whole	broken-up	body	folded	over	the	sharp	rocks,	his	head	so	heavy	in
Harllo’s	lap.
Leave	them	there,	now.
	
The	city,	ah,	the	city.	As	dusk	closes	in,	the	blue	fires	awaken.	Figures	stand	in
a	cemetery	surrounded	by	squat	Daru	crypts,	and	they	are	silent	as	they	watch
the	workers	sealing	the	door	once	more.	Starlings	flit	overhead.
Down	at	the	harbour	a	woman	steps	lithely	on	to	the	dock	and	breathes
deep	the	squalid	air,	and	then	sets	out	to	find	her	sister.
Scorch	and	Leff	stand	nervously	at	the	gate	of	an	estate.	They’re	not
talking	much	these	nights.	Within	the	compound,	Torvald	Nom	paces.	He	is	not
sure	if	he	should	go	home.	The	night	has	begun	strange,	heavy,	and	his	nerves
are	a	mess.	Madrun	and	Lazan	Door	are	throwing	knuckles	against	a	wall,
while	Studious	Lock	stands	on	a	balcony,	watching.
Challice	Vidikas	sits	in	her	bedroom,	holding	a	glass	globe	and	staring	at
the	trapped	moon	within	its	crystal	clear	sphere.
In	a	room	above	a	bar	Blend	sits	beside	the	motionless	form	of	her	lover,
and	weeps.
Below,	Duiker	slowly	looks	up	as	Fisher,	cradling	a	lute,	begins	a	song.
In	the	Phoenix	Inn,	an	old,	worn-out	woman,	head	pounding,	shambles	to
her	small	cubicle	and	sinks	down	on	to	the	bed.	There	were	loves	in	the	world
that	never	found	voice.	There	were	secrets	never	unveiled,	and	what	would
have	been	the	point	of	that?	She	was	no	languid	beauty.	She	was	no	genius	wit.
Courage	failed	her	again	and	again,	but	not	this	time,	as	she	drew	sharp	blades
lengthways	up	her	wrists,	at	precise	angles,	and	watched	as	life	flowed	away.	In
Irilta’s	mind,	this	last	gesture	was	but	a	formality.
Passing	through	Two-Ox	Gate,	Bellam	Nom	sets	out	on	the	road.	From	a


hovel	among	the	lepers	he	hears	someone	softly	sobbing.	The	wind	has	died,
the	smell	of	rotting	flesh	hangs	thick	and	motionless.	He	hurries	on,	as	the
young	are	wont	to	do.
Much	farther	down	the	road,	Cutter	rides	on	a	horse	stolen	from	Coll’s
stable.	His	chest	is	filled	with	ashes,	his	heart	a	cold	stone	buried	deep.
He	drew	a	breath,	sometime	earlier	that	day,	filled	with	love.
And	then	released	it,	black	with	grief.
Both	seem	to	be	gone	now,	vanished	within	him,	perhaps	never	to	return.
And	yet,	hovering	there	before	his	mind’s	eye,	he	sees	a	woman.
Ghostly,	wrapped	in	black,	dark	eyes	fixed	upon	his	own.
Not	this	path,	my	love.
He	shakes	his	head	at	her	words.	Shakes	his	head.
Not	my	path,	my	love.
But	he	rides	on.
I	will	give	you	my	breath,	my	love.	To	hold.
Hold	it	for	me,	as	I	hold	yours.	Turn	back.
Cutter	shakes	his	head	again.	‘You	left	me.’
No,	I	gave	you	a	choice,	and	the	choice	remains.	My	love,	I	gave	you	a
place	to	come	to,	when	you	are	ready.	Find	me.	Come	find	me.
‘This	first.’
Take	my	breath.	But	not	this	one,	not	this	one.
‘Too	late,	Apsalar.	It	was	always	too	late.’
	
The	soul	knows	no	greater	anguish	than	to	take	a	breath	that	begins	with	love
and	ends	with	grief.	But	there	are	other	anguishes,	many	others.	They	unfold	as
they	will,	and	to	dwell	within	them	is	to	understand	nothing.
Except,	perhaps,	this.	In	love,	grief	is	a	promise.	As	sure	as	Hood’s	nod.
There	will	be	many	gardens,	but	this	last	one	to	visit	is	so	very	still.	Not	meant
for	lovers.	Not	meant	for	dreamers.	Meant	only	for	a	single	figure,	there	in	the
dark,	standing	alone.
Taking	a	single	breath.


Chapter	Twenty

In	hollow	grove	and	steeple	chamber
The	vine	retreats	and	moss	rolls	inside
The	void	from	whence	it	came
In	shallow	grave	and	cloven	crypt
The	bones	shiver	and	shades	flee
Into	the	spaces	between	breaths
In	tilted	tower	and	webslung	doorway
Echoes	still	and	whispers	will	die
Men	in	masks	rap	knuckles	’gainst	walls
In	dark	cabinets	and	beneath	bed	slats
Puppets	clack	limbs	and	painted	eyes	widen
To	the	song	pouring	down	from	hills
And	the	soul	starts	in	its	cavern	drum
Battered	and	blunted	to	infernal	fright
This	is	the	music	of	the	beast
The	clamour	of	the	world	at	bay
Begun	its	mad	savage	charge
The	hunt	commences	my	friends
The	Hounds	are	among	us.
Prelude
Toll	the	Hounds
Fisher

Faces	of	stone,	and	not	one	would	turn	Nimander ’s	way.	His	grief	was	too	cold
for	them,	too	strange.	He	had	not	shown	enough	shock,	horror,	dismay.	He	had
taken	the	news	of	her	death	as	would	a	commander	hearing	of	the	loss	of	a
soldier,	and	only	Aranatha	–	in	the	single,	brief	moment	when	she
acknowledged	anyone	or	anything	–	had	but	nodded	in	his	direction,	as	if	in
grim	approval.


Skintick’s	features	were	tight	with	betrayal,	once	the	stunned	disbelief	wore
off,	and	the	closeness	he	had	always	felt	with	Nimander	now	seemed	to	have
suddenly	widened	into	a	chasm	no	bridge	could	span.	Nenanda	had	gone	so	far
as	to	half	draw	his	sword,	yet	was	torn	as	to	who	most	deserved	his	blade’s
bite:	Clip	or	Nimander.	Clip	for	his	shrug,	after	showing	them	the	crumbled
edge	of	the	cliff	where	she	must	have	lost	her	footing.	Or	Nimander,	who
stood	dry-eyed	and	said	nothing.	Desra,	calculating,	selfish	Desra,	was	the	first
to	weep.
Skintick	expressed	the	desire	to	climb	down	into	the	crevasse,	but	this	was
a	sentimental	gesture	he	had	drawn	from	his	time	among	humans	–	the	need	to
observe	the	dead,	perhaps	even	to	bury	Kedeviss’s	body	beneath	boulders	–	and
his	suggestion	was	met	with	silence.	The	Tiste	Andii	held	no	regard	for
corpses.	There	would	be	no	return	to	Mother	Dark,	after	all.	The	soul	was
flung	away,	to	wander	for	ever	lost.
They	set	out	shortly	thereafter,	Clip	in	the	lead,	continuing	on	through	the
rough	pass.	Clouds	swept	down	the	flanks	of	the	peaks,	as	if	the	mountains
were	shedding	their	mantles	of	white,	and	before	long	the	air	grew	cold	and
damp,	thin	in	their	lungs,	and	all	at	once	the	clouds	swallowed	the	world.
Stumbling	on	the	slick,	icy	stone,	Nimander	trudged	on	in	Clip’s	wake	–
although	the	warrior	was	no	longer	even	visible,	there	was	only	one	possible
path.	He	could	feel	judgement	hardening	upon	his	back,	an	ever	thickening
succession	of	layers,	from	Desra,	from	Nenanda,	and	most	painfully	from
Skintick,	and	it	seemed	the	burdens	would	never	relent.	He	longed	for	Aranatha
to	speak	up,	to	whisper	the	truth	to	them	all,	but	she	was	silent	as	a	ghost.
They	were	now	all	in	grave	danger.	They	needed	to	be	warned,	but
Nimander	could	guess	the	consequences	of	such	a	revelation.	Blood	would
spill,	and	he	could	not	be	certain	that	it	would	be	Clip’s.	Not	now,	not	when
Clip	could	unleash	the	wrath	of	a	god	–	or	whatever	it	was	that	possessed	the
warrior.
Kedeviss	had	brought	to	him	her	suspicions	down	in	the	village	beside	the
lakebed,	giving	firm	shape	to	what	he	had	already	begun	to	believe.	Clip	had
awakened	but	at	a	distance,	as	if	behind	a	veil.	Oh,	he	had	always	shown	his
contempt	for	Nimander	and	the	others,	but	this	was	different.	Something
fundamental	had	changed.	The	new	contempt	now	hinted	of	hunger,	avarice,	as
if	Clip	saw	them	as	nothing	more	than	raw	meat,	awaiting	the	flames	of	his
need.
Yet	Nimander	understood	that	Clip	would	only	turn	upon	them	if	cornered,
if	confronted.	As	Kedeviss	had	done	–	even	when	Nimander	had	warned	her
against	such	a	scene.	No,	Clip	still	needed	them.	His	way	in.	As	for	what	would


happen	then,	not	even	the	gods	knew.	Lord	Anomander	Rake	did	not	suffer
upstarts.	He	was	never	slowed	by	indecisiveness,	and	in	delivering	mercy	even
the	cruellest	miser	could	not	match	his	constraint.	And	as	for	Clip’s	claim	to	be
some	sort	of	emissary	from	Mother	Dark,	well,	that	had	become	almost
irrelevant,	unless	the	god	within	the	warrior	was	seeking	to	usurp	Mother	Dark
herself.
This	notion	disturbed	Nimander.	The	goddess	was,	after	all,	turned	away.
Her	leaving	had	left	a	void.	Could	something	as	alien	as	the	Dying	God	assume
the	Unseen	Crown?	Who	would	even	kneel	before	such	an	entity?
It	was	hard	to	imagine	Anomander	Rake	doing	so,	or	any	of	the	other	Tiste
Andii	that	Nimander	and	his	kin	had	known.	Obedience	had	never	been	deemed
a	pure	virtue	among	the	Tiste	Andii.	To	follow	must	be	an	act	born	of
deliberation,	of	clear-eyed,	cogent	recognition	that	the	one	to	be	followed	has
earned	the	privilege.	So	often,	after	all,	formal	structures	of	hierarchy	stood	in
place	of	such	personal	traits	and	judgements.	A	title	or	rank	did	not
automatically	confer	upon	the	one	wearing	it	any	true	virtue,	or	even
worthiness	to	the	claim.
Nimander	had	seen	for	himself	the	flaws	inherent	in	that	hierarchy.	Among
the	Malazans,	the	renegade	army	known	as	the	Bonehunters,	there	had	been
officers	Nimander	would	not	follow	under	any	circumstances.	Men	and	women
of	incompetence	–	oh,	he’d	seen	how	such	fools	were	usually	weeded	out,
through	the	informal	justice	system	practised	by	the	common	soldier,	a
process	often	punctuated	by	a	knife	in	the	back,	which	struck	Nimander	as	a
most	dangerous	habit.	But	these	were	human	ways,	not	those	of	the	Tiste	Andii.
If	Clip	and	the	Dying	God	that	possessed	him	truly	believed	they	could
usurp	Mother	Dark,	and	indeed	her	chosen	son,	Anomander	Rake,	as	ruler	of
the	Tiste	Andii,	then	that	conceit	was	doomed.	And	yet,	he	could	not	but	recall
the	poisonous	lure	of	saemankelyk.	There	could	be	other	paths	to	willing
obedience.
And	that	is	why	I	can	say	nothing.	Why	Aranatha	is	right.	We	must	lull	Clip
into	disregarding	us,	so	that	he	continues	believing	we	are	fools.	Because	there
is	the	chance,	when	the	moment	arrives,	that	I	alone	will	be	standing	close
enough.	To	strike.	To	catch	him	–	them	–	unawares.
It	may	be	that	Anomander	Rake	and	the	others	in	Black	Coral	will	have
nothing	to	fear	from	Clip,	from	the	Dying	God.	It	may	be	that	they	will	swat
them	down	with	ease.
But	we	cannot	be	sure	of	that.
In	truth,	I	am	afraid…
‘I	can	see	water.’


Startled,	Nimander	glanced	back	at	Skintick,	but	his	cousin	would	not	meet
his	eyes.
‘Where	the	valley	dips	down,	eastward	–	I	think	that	is	the	Cut	that	Clip
described.	And	along	the	north	shore	of	it,	we	will	find	Black	Coral.’
Clip	had	halted	on	an	outcropping	and	was	staring	down	into	the	misty
valley.	They	had	left	most	of	the	cloud	in	their	wake,	descending	beneath	its
ceiling.	Most	of	the	range	was	now	on	their	left,	westward,	the	nearest	cliffface	grey	and	black	and	broken	only	by	a	dozen	or	so	mountain	sheep	wending
their	way	along	a	seam.
Skintick	called	out	to	the	warrior,	‘That	looks	to	be	a	long	swim	across,
Clip.’
The	man	turned,	rings	spinning	on	their	chain.	‘We	will	find	a	way,’	he
said.	‘Now,	we	should	continue	on,	before	it	gets	too	dark.’
‘What	is	your	hurry?’	Skintick	asked.	‘The	entire	trail	down	is	bound	to	be
treacherous,	especially	in	this	half-light.	What	would	be	the	point	in	taking	a
tumble	and…’	Skintick	went	no	further.
And	breaking	a	neck.
In	the	uncomfortable	silence	that	followed,	only	the	clack	of	the	rings
carried	on,	like	a	man	chewing	stones.
After	a	moment,	Clip	stepped	back	from	the	ledge	and	set	out	down	the
path	once	more.
Nimander	made	to	follow	but	Skintick	grasped	his	arm,	forcing	him
round.
‘Enough,’	Skintick	growled,	and	Nenanda	moved	up	beside	him,	Desra
joining	them.	‘We	want	to	know	what’s	going	on,	Nimander.’
Nenanda	spoke.	‘She	didn’t	just	fall	–	do	you	think	we’re	fools,
Nimander?’
‘Not	fools,’	he	replied,	and	then	hesitated,	‘but	you	must	play	at	being
fools…for	a	little	longer.’
‘He	killed	her,	didn’t	he?’
At	Skintick’s	question	Nimander	forced	himself	to	lock	gazes	with	his
cousin,	but	he	said	nothing.
Nenanda	gave	a	sudden	hiss	and	whirled	to	glare	at	Aranatha,	who	stood
nearby.	‘You	must	have	sensed	something!’
Her	brows	arched.	‘Why	do	you	say	that?’
He	seemed	moments	from	closing	on	her	with	a	hand	upraised,	but	she	too
did	not	flinch,	and	after	a	moment	a	look	of	sheer	helplessness	crumpled
Nenanda’s	face	and	he	turned	from	them	all.
‘He’s	not	what	he	was,’	said	Desra.	‘I’ve	felt	it	–	he’s…uninterested.’


Of	course	she	was	speaking	of	Clip.	Indeed	they	were	not	fools,	none	of
them.	Still	Nimander	said	nothing.	Still	he	waited.
Skintick	could	no	longer	hold	Nimander ’s	gaze.	He	glanced	briefly	at
Desra	and	then	stepped	back.	‘Fools,	you	said.	We	must	play	at	being	fools.’
Nenanda	faced	them	once	more.	‘What	does	he	want	with	us?	What	did	he
ever	want?	Dragging	us	along	as	if	we	were	but	his	pets.’	His	eyes	fixed	on
Desra.	‘Flinging	you	on	your	back	every	now	and	then	to	keep	the	boredom
away	–	and	now	you’re	saying	what?	Only	that	he’s	become	bored	by	the
distraction.	Well.’
She	gave	no	sign	that	his	words	wounded	her.	‘Ever	since	he	awakened,’
she	said.	‘I	don’t	think	boredom	is	a	problem	for	him,	not	any	more.	And	that
doesn’t	make	sense.’
‘Because,’	added	Skintick,	‘he’s	still	contemptuous	of	us.	Yes,	I	see	your
point,	Desra.’
‘Then	what	does	he	want	with	us?’	Nenanda	demanded	again.	‘Why	does	he
still	need	us	at	all?’
‘Maybe	he	doesn’t,’	said	Skintick.
Silence.
Nimander	finally	spoke.	‘She	made	a	mistake.’
‘Confronted	him.’
‘Yes.’	He	stepped	away	from	Skintick,	setting	his	gaze	upon	the	descent
awaiting	them.	‘My	authority	holds	no	weight,’	he	said.	‘I	told	her	to	stay	away
–	to	leave	it	alone.’
‘Leave	it	to	Anomander	Rake,	you	mean.’
He	faced	Skintick	again.	‘No.	That	is	too	much	of	an	unknown.	We	–	we
don’t	know	the	situation	in	Black	Coral.	If	they’re…vulnerable.	We	don’t	know
anything	of	that.	It’d	be	dangerous	to	assume	someone	else	can	fix	all	this.’
They	were	all	watching	him	now.
‘Nothing	has	changed,’	he	said.	‘If	he	gets	even	so	much	as	a	hint	–	it	must
be	us	to	act	first.	We	choose	the	ground,	the	right	moment.	Nothing	has
changed	–	do	you	all	understand	me?’
Nods.	And	odd,	disquieting	expressions	on	every	face	but	Aranatha’s	–	he
could	not	read	them.	‘Am	I	not	clear	enough?’
Skintick	blinked,	as	if	surprised.	‘You	are	perfectly	clear,	Nimander.	We
should	get	moving,	don’t	you	think?’
What	–	what	has	just	happened	here?	But	he	had	no	answers.	Uneasy,	he
moved	out	on	to	the	trail.
The	rest	fell	in	behind	him.


	
Nenanda	drew	Skintick	back,	slowing	their	progress,	and	hissed,	‘How,	Skin?
How	did	he	do	that?	We	were	there,	about	to	–	I	don’t	know	–	and	then,	all	of	a
sudden,	he	just,	he	just—’
‘Took	us	into	his	hands	once	more,	yes.’
‘How?’
Skintick	simply	shook	his	head.	He	did	not	think	he	could	find	the	right
words	–	not	for	Nenanda,	not	for	the	others.	He	leads.	In	the	ways	of	leading,
the	ways	the	rest	of	us	do	not	–	and	can	never	–	understand.
I	looked	into	his	eyes,	and	I	saw	such	resolve	that	I	could	not	speak.
Absence	of	doubt?	No,	nothing	so	egotistic	as	that.	Nimander	has	plenty	of
doubts,	so	many	that	he’s	lost	his	fear	of	them.	He	accepts	them	as	easily	as
anything	else.	Is	that	the	secret?	Is	that	the	very	definition	of	greatness?
He	leads.	We	follow	–	he	took	us	into	his	hands,	again,	and	each	one	of	us
stood,	silent,	finding	in	ourselves	what	he	had	just	given	us	–	that	resolve,	the
will	to	go	on	–	and	it	left	us	humbled.
Oh,	do	I	make	too	much	of	this?	Are	we	all	no	more	than	children,	and	these
the	silly,	meaningless	games	of	children?
‘He	killed	Kedeviss,’	muttered	Nenanda.
‘Yes.’
‘And	Nimander	will	give	answer	to	that.’
Yes.
	
Monkrat	squatted	in	the	mud	and	watched	the	line	of	new	pilgrims	edge	closer
to	the	camp.	Most	of	their	attention,	at	least	to	begin	with,	had	been	on	the
barrow	itself	–	on	that	emperor ’s	ransom	of	wasted	wealth	–	but	now,	as	they
approached	the	decrepit	ruin,	he	could	see	how	they	hesitated,	as	something	of
the	wrongness	whispered	through.	Most	were	rain-soaked,	senses	dulled	by
long,	miserable	journeys.	It	would	take	a	lot	to	stir	their	unease.
He	watched	the	sharpening	of	their	attention,	as	details	resolved	from	the
gloom,	the	mists	and	the	woodsmoke.	The	corpse	of	the	child	in	the	ditch,	the
rotting	swaths	of	clothes,	the	broken	cradle	with	four	crows	crowding	the	rail,
looming	over	the	motionless,	swaddled	bundle.	The	weeds	now	growing	up	on
the	path	leading	to	and	from	the	barrow.	Things	were	not	as	they	should	be.
Some	might	beat	a	quick	retreat.	Those	with	a	healthy	fear	of	corruption.
But	so	many	pilgrims	came	with	the	desperate	hunger	that	was	spiritual	need	–
it	was	what	made	them	pilgrims	in	the	first	place.	They	were	lost	and	they


wanted	to	be	found.	How	many	would	resist	that	first	cup	of	kelyk,	the	drink
that	welcomed,	the	nectar	that	stole…everything?
Perhaps	more	than	among	those	who	had	come	before	–	as	they	saw	the
growing	signs	of	degradation,	of	abandonment	of	all	those	qualities	of
humanity	the	Redeemer	himself	honoured.	Monkrat	watched	them	hesitate,
even	as	the	least	broken	of	the	kelykan	shuffled	into	their	midst,	each	offering
up	a	jug	of	the	foul	poison.
‘The	Redeemer	has	drunk	deep!’	they	murmured	again	and	again.
Well,	not	yet.	But	that	time	was	coming,	of	that	Monkrat	had	little	doubt.	At
which	point…he	shifted	about	slightly	and	lifted	his	gaze	to	the	tall,	narrow
tower	rising	into	the	dark	mists	above	the	city.	No,	he	couldn’t	make	her	out
from	here,	not	with	this	sullen	weather	sinking	down,	but	he	could	feel	her
eyes	–	eternally	open.	Oh,	he	knew	that	damned	dragon	of	old,	could	well
recall	his	terror	as	the	creature	sailed	above	the	treetops	in	Blackdog	and	Mott
Wood,	the	devastation	of	her	attacks.	If	the	Redeemer	fell,	she	would	assail	the
camp,	the	barrow,	everything	and	everyone.	There	would	be	fire,	a	fire	that
needed	no	fuel,	yet	devoured	all.
And	then	Anomander	Rake	himself	would	arrive,	striding	through	the
wreckage	with	black	sword	in	his	hands,	to	take	the	life	of	a	god	–	whatever
life	happened	to	be	left.
Shivering	in	the	damp,	he	rose,	pulling	his	tattered	raincape	about	him.
Gradithan	was	probably	looking	for	him,	wanting	to	know	what	Monkrat’s
countless	sets	of	eyes	in	the	city	might	have	seen	–	not	that	there	was	much	to
report.	The	Tiste	Andii	weren’t	up	to	much,	but	then	they	never	were,	until	such
time	as	necessity	stirred	them	awake.	Besides,	he’d	woken	up	with	a	headache,
a	dull	throb	just	behind	the	eyes	–	it	was	the	weather,	pressure	building	in	his
sinuses.	And	even	the	rats	in	the	camp	were	proving	elusive,	strangely	nervous,
skittish	when	he	sought	to	snare	them	to	his	will.
He	wasn’t	interested	in	seeing	Gradithan.	The	man	had	moved	from
opportunist	to	fanatic	alarmingly	fast,	and	while	Monkrat	had	no	problem
understanding	the	former,	he	was	baffled	by	the	latter.	And	frightened.
The	best	way	to	avoid	Gradithan	was	to	wander	down	into	Black	Coral.
The	blessing	of	darkness	was	far	too	bitter	for	the	worshippers	of
saemankelyk.
He	worked	his	way	into	the	ankle-deep	river	of	mud	that	was	the	trail
leading	into	Night.
From	somewhere	nearby	a	cat	suddenly	yowled	and	Monkrat	started	as	he
sensed	a	wave	of	panic	sweep	through	every	rat	within	hearing.	Shaking
himself,	he	continued	on.


A	moment	later	he	realized	someone	was	walking	behind	him	–	a	pilgrim,
perhaps,	smart	enough	to	elect	to	avoid	the	camp,	someone	now	looking	for	an
inn,	all	thoughts	of	salvation	riding	the	tide	out	in	waves	of	revulsion.
‘No	believer	should	arrive	willing.’	So	said	that	High	Priestess,	Salind,
before	Gradithan	destroyed	her.	Monkrat	recalled	being	confused	by	that
statement	back	then.	Now,	he	wasn’t.	Now,	he	understood	precisely	what	she’d
meant.	Worship	born	of	need	could	not	but	be	suspect,	fashioned	from	selfserving	motives	as	it	was.	‘Someone	wanting	their	bowl	filled	will	take
whatever	is	poured	into	it.’	No,	revelation	could	not	be	sought,	not	through
willing	deprivation	or	meditation.	It	needed	to	arrive	unexpected,	even
undesired.	‘Do	not	trust	an	easy	believer.’	Aye,	she’d	been	a	strange	High
Priestess,	all	right.
He	remembered	one	night,	when—
A	knife	edge	pressed	cold	against	his	throat.
‘Not	a	move,’	hissed	a	voice	behind	him,	and	it	was	a	moment	before
Monkrat	realized	that	the	words	had	been	spoken	in	Malazan.
‘Figured	I	wouldn’t	recognize	you,	soldier?’
Cold	sweat	cut	through	the	steamy	heat	beneath	his	woollen	clothes.	His
breath	came	in	gasps.	‘Hood’s	breath,	if	you’re	gonna	kill	me	just	get	it	done
with!’
‘I’m	sore	tempted,	I	am.’
‘Fine,	do	it	then	–	I’ve	got	a	curse	ready	for	you—’
The	Malazan	snorted,	and	dogs	started	barking.	‘That’d	be	a	real	mistake.’
Monkrat’s	headache	had	redoubled.	He	felt	something	trickling	down	from
his	nostrils.	The	air	was	rank	with	a	stench	he	struggled	to	identify.	Bestial,	like
an	animal’s	soaked	pelt.	‘Gods	below,’	he	groaned.	‘Spindle.’
‘Aye,	my	fame	precedes	me.	Sorry	I	can’t	recall	your	name,	or	your	squad,
even.	But	you	were	a	Bridgeburner	–	that	much	I	do	remember.	Vanished	up
north,	listed	as	dead	–	but	no,	you	deserted,	ran	out	on	your	squadmates.’
‘What	squadmates?	They	were	all	killed.	My	friends,	all	killed.	I’d	had
enough,	Spindle.	We	were	getting	chewed	to	pieces	in	that	swamp.	Aye,	I
walked.	Would	it	have	been	better	if	I’d	stayed,	only	to	die	here	in	Black
Coral?’
‘Not	everyone	died	here,	soldier—’
‘That’s	not	what	I	heard.	The	Bridgeburners	are	done,	finished.’
After	a	moment	the	knife	fell	away.
Monkrat	spun	round,	stared	at	the	short,	bald	man,	wearing	that	infamous
hairshirt	–	and	Hood’s	breath,	it	stank.	‘Which	has	me	wondering	–	what	are
you	doing	here?	Alive?	Out	of	uniform?’


‘Dujek	looked	at	us	–	a	handful	left	–	and	just	went	and	added	our	names	to
the	list.	He	sent	us	on	our	way.’
‘And	you—’
‘I	decided	on	the	pilgrimage.	The	Redeemer	–	I	saw	Itkovian	myself,	you
see.	And	I	saw	Capustan.	I	was	here	when	the	barrow	went	up	–	there’s	a
sharper	of	mine	in	that	heap,	in	fact.’
‘A	sharper?’
Spindle	scowled.	‘You	had	to	have	been	there,	soldier.’
‘Monkrat.	That’s	my	name	now.’
‘Wipe	the	blood	from	your	nose,	Monkrat.’
‘Listen,	Spindle	–	hear	me	well	–	you	want	nothing	to	do	with	the
Redeemer.	Not	now.	You	didn’t	kill	me,	so	I	give	you	that	–	my	warning.	Run,
run	fast.	As	far	away	from	here	as	you	can.’	He	paused.	‘Where’d	you	come
from	anyway?’
‘Darujhistan.	It’s	where	we	settled.	Me	and	Antsy,	Bluepearl,	Picker,	Blend,
Captain	Paran.	Oh,	and	Duiker.’
‘Duiker?’
‘The	Imperial	Historian—’
‘I	know	who	he	is	–	was	–	whatever.	It’s	just,	that	don’t	fit,	him	being	there,
I	mean.’
‘Aye,	he	didn’t	fit	well	at	all.	He	was	on	the	Chain	of	Dogs.’
Monkrat	made	a	gesture.	Fener ’s	blessing.
Spindle’s	eyes	widened.	He	sheathed	his	knife.	‘I’ve	worked	up	a	thirst,
Monkrat.’
‘Not	for	kelyk,	I	hope.’
‘That	shit	they	tried	to	force	on	me	back	there?	Smelled	like	puke.	No,	I
want	beer.	Ale.	Wine.’
‘We	can	find	that	in	Black	Coral.’
‘And	you	can	tell	me	what’s	happened	–	to	the	Redeemer.’
Monkrat	rubbed	at	the	bristle	on	his	chin,	and	then	nodded.	‘Aye,	I	will.’	He
paused.	‘Hey,	you	remember	the	red	dragon?	From	Blackdog?’
‘Aye.’
‘She’s	here	–	and	when	it	gets	bad	enough	with	the	Redeemer,	well,	she’ll
spread	her	wings.’
‘No	wonder	I	got	so	edgy	when	I	arrived.	Where’s	she	hiding,	then?’
Monkrat	grimaced.	‘In	plain	sight.	Come	on,	see	for	yourself.’
The	two	ex-soldiers	set	out	for	Black	Coral.
The	clouds	closed	in,	thick	as	curtains	of	sodden	sand.	In	the	camp,	new
dancers	spun	and	whirled	through	the	detritus,	while	a	handful	of	terrified


pilgrims	fled	back	up	the	trail.
Rain	arrived	in	a	torrent,	the	water	rushing	down	the	flanks	of	the	barrow,
making	it	glisten	and	gleam	until	it	seemed	it	was	in	motion.	Shivering,
moments	from	splitting	wide	open.	From	the	clouds,	thunder	rattled	like	ironshod	spears,	a	strange,	startling	sound	that	drew	denizens	of	Black	Coral	out
into	the	streets,	to	stare	upward	in	wonder.
	
The	water	in	the	black	bowls	surrounding	the	High	Priestess	trembled	in
answer	to	that	reverberation.	She	frowned	as	a	wave	of	trepidation	rolled
through	her.	The	time	was	coming,	she	realized.	She	was	not	ready,	but	then,
for	some	things,	one	could	never	be	ready.	The	mind	worked	possibilities,
countless	variations,	in	a	procession	that	did	nothing	but	measure	the	time
wasted	in	waiting.	And	leave	one	exhausted,	even	less	prepared	than	would
have	been	the	case	if,	for	example,	she	had	spent	that	period	in	an	orgy	of
hedonistic	abandon.
Well,	too	late	for	regrets	–	she	shook	her	head.	Oh,	it’s	never	too	late	for
regrets.	That’s	what	regrets	are	all	about,	you	silly	woman.	She	rose	from	the
cushion	and	spent	a	moment	shaking	out	the	creases	in	her	robe.	Should	she
track	down	Endest	Silann?
Another	heavy	clatter	of	thunder.
Of	course	he	felt	it,	too,	that	old	priest,	the	deathly	charge	growing	ever
tauter	–	he	didn’t	need	her	to	remind	him,	rushing	in	all	hysterical	foam	to
gush	round	the	poor	man’s	ankles.	The	absurd	image	made	her	smile,	but	it
was	a	wry	smile,	almost	bitter.	She	had	worked	hard	at	affecting	the	cool
repose	so	essential	to	the	role	of	High	Priestess,	a	repose	easily	mistaken	for
wisdom.	But	how	could	a	woman	in	her	position	truly	possess	wisdom,	when
the	very	goddess	she	served	had	rejected	her	and	all	that	she	stood	for?	Not
wisdom,	but	futility.	Persistent,	stubborn	futility.	If	anything,	what	she
represented	was	a	failure	of	the	intellect,	and	an	even	graver	one	of	the	spirit.
Her	worship	was	founded	on	denial,	and	in	the	absence	of	a	true	relationship
with	her	goddess,	she	–	like	all	those	who	had	come	before	her	–	was	free	to
invent	every	detail	of	that	mock	relationship.
The	lie	of	wisdom	is	best	hidden	in	monologue.	Dialogue	exposes	it.	Most
people	purporting	to	wisdom	dare	not	engage	in	dialogue,	lest	they	reveal	the
paucity	of	their	assumptions	and	the	frailty	of	their	convictions.	Better	to	say
nothing,	to	nod	and	look	thoughtful.
Was	that	notion	worth	a	treatise?	Yet	another	self-indulgent	meander	for
the	hall	of	scrolls?	How	many	thoughts	could	one	explore?	Discuss,	weigh,


cast	and	count?	All	indulgences.	The	woman	looking	for	the	next	meal	for	her
child	has	no	time	for	such	things.	The	warrior	shoulder	to	shoulder	in	a	line
facing	an	enemy	can	only	curse	the	so-called	wisdom	that	led	him	to	that	place.
The	flurry	of	kings	and	their	avaricious	terrors.	The	brutal	solidity	of	slights
and	insults,	grievances	and	disputes.	Does	it	come	down	to	who	will	eat	and
who	will	not?	Or	does	it	come	down	to	who	will	control	the	option?	The	king’s
privilege	in	deciding	who	eats	and	who	starves,	privilege	that	is	the	taste	of
power,	its	very	essence,	in	fact?
Are	gods	and	goddesses	any	different?
To	that	question,	she	knew	Anomander	Rake	would	but	smile.	He	would
speak	of	Mother	Dark	and	the	necessity	of	every	decision	she	made	–	even
down	to	the	last	one	of	turning	away	from	her	children.	And	he	would	not	even
blink	when	stating	that	his	betrayal	had	forced	upon	her	that	final	necessity.
She	would	walk	away	then,	troubled,	until	some	stretch	of	time	later,	when,
in	the	solitude	of	her	thoughts,	she	would	realize	that,	in	describing	the
necessities	binding	Mother	Dark,	he	was	also	describing	his	very	own
necessities	–	all	that	had	bound	him	to	his	own	choices.
His	betrayal	of	Mother	Dark,	she	would	comprehend	–	with	deathly	chill	–
had	been	necessary.
In	Rake’s	mind,	at	any	rate.	And	everything	had	simply	followed	on	from
there,	inevitably,	inexorably.
She	could	hear	the	rain	lashing	down	on	the	temple’s	domed	roof,	harsh	as
arrows	on	upraised	shields.	The	sky	was	locked	in	convulsions,	a	convergence
of	inimical	elements.	A	narrow	door	to	her	left	opened	and	one	of	her
priestesses	hurried	in,	then	abruptly	halted	to	bow.	‘High	Priestess.’
‘Such	haste,’	she	murmured	in	reply,	‘so	unusual	for	the	temple	historian.’
The	woman	glanced	up,	and	her	eyes	were	impressively	steady.	‘A
question,	if	I	may.’
‘Of	course.’
‘High	Priestess,	are	we	now	at	war?’
‘My	sweetness	–	old	friend	–	you	have	no	idea.’
The	eyes	widened	slightly,	and	then	she	bowed	a	second	time.	‘Will	you
summon	Feral,	High	Priestess?’
‘That	dour	creature?	No,	let	the	assassin	stay	in	her	tower.	Leave	her	to
lurk	or	whatever	it	is	she	does	to	occupy	her	time.’
‘Spinnock	Durav—’
‘Is	not	here,	I	know	that.	I	know	that.’	The	High	Priestess	hesitated,	and	then
said,	‘We	are	now	at	war,	as	you	have	surmised.	On	countless	fronts,	only	one
of	which	–	the	one	here	–	concerns	us,	at	least	for	the	moment.	I	do	not	think


weapons	need	be	drawn,	however.’
‘High	Priestess,	shall	we	prevail?’
‘How	should	I	know?’	Those	words	snapped	out,	to	her	instant	regret	as
she	saw	her	old	friend’s	gaze	harden.	‘The	risk,’	she	said,	in	a	quieter	tone,	‘is
the	gravest	we	have	faced	since…well,	since	Kharkanas.’
That	shocked	the	temple	historian	–	when	nothing	else	had,	thus	far.	But
she	recovered	and,	drawing	a	deep	breath,	said,	‘Then	I	must	invoke	my	role,
High	Priestess.	Tell	me	what	must	be	told.	All	of	it.’
‘For	posterity?’
‘Is	that	not	my	responsibility?’
‘And	if	there	will	be	no	posterity?	None	to	consider	it,	naught	but	ashes	in
the	present	and	oblivion	in	place	of	a	future?	Will	you	sit	scribbling	until	your
last	moment	of	existence?’
She	was	truly	shaken	now.	‘What	else	would	you	have	me	do?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Go	find	a	man.	Make	fearful	love.’
‘I	must	know	what	has	befallen	us.	I	must	know	why	our	Lord	sent	away
our	greatest	warrior,	and	then	himself	left	us.’
‘Countless	fronts,	this	war.	As	I	have	said.	I	can	tell	you	intent	–	as	I
understand	it,	and	let	me	be	plain,	I	may	well	not	understand	it	at	all	–	but	not
result,	for	each	outcome	is	unknown.	And	each	must	succeed.’
‘No	room	for	failure?’
‘None.’
‘And	if	one	should	fail?’
‘Then	all	shall	fail.’
‘And	if	that	happens…ashes,	oblivion	–	that	will	be	our	fate.’
The	High	Priestess	turned	away.	‘Not	just	ours,	alas.’
Behind	her,	the	historian	gasped.
On	all	sides,	water	trembled	in	bowls,	and	the	time	for	the	luxurious
consideration	of	possibilities	was	fast	fading.	Probably	just	as	well.
	
‘Tell	me	of	redemption.’
‘There	is	little	that	I	can	say,	Segda	Travos.’
Seerdomin	snorted.	‘The	god	known	as	the	Redeemer	can	say	nothing	of
redemption.’	He	gestured	to	that	distant	quiescent	figure	kneeling	in	the	basin.
‘She	gathers	power	–	I	can	smell	it.	Like	the	rot	of	ten	thousand	souls.	What
manner	of	god	does	she	now	serve?	Is	this	the	Fallen	One?	The	Crippled
God?’
‘No,	although	certain	themes	are	intertwined.	For	followers	of	the


Crippled	God,	the	flaw	is	the	virtue.	Salvation	arrives	with	death,	and	it	is
purchased	through	mortal	suffering.	There	is	no	perfection	of	the	spirit	to
strive	towards,	no	true	blessing	to	be	gained	as	a	reward	for	faith.’
‘And	this	one?’
‘As	murky	as	the	kelyk	itself.	The	blessing	is	surrender,	the	casting	away
of	all	thought.	The	self	vanishes	within	the	dance.	The	dream	is	shared	by	all
who	partake	of	pain’s	nectar,	but	it	is	a	dream	of	oblivion.	In	a	sense,	the	faith
is	antilife.	Not	in	the	manner	of	death,	however.	If	one	views	life	as	a	struggle
doomed	to	fail,	then	it	is	the	failing	that	becomes	the	essence	of	worship.	He	is
the	Dying	God,	after	all.’
‘They	celebrate	the	act	of	dying?’
‘In	a	manner,	yes,	assuming	you	can	call	it	celebration.	More	like
enslavement.	Worship	as	self-destruction,	perhaps,	in	which	all	choice	is	lost.’
‘And	how	can	such	a	thing	salve	the	mortal	soul,	Redeemer?’
‘That	I	cannot	answer.	But	it	may	be	that	we	shall	soon	find	out.’
‘You	do	not	believe	I	can	protect	you	–	at	least	in	that	we’re	in	agreement.
So,	when	I	fall	–	when	I	fail	–	the	Dying	God	shall	embrace	me	as	it	will	you.’
He	shook	his	head.	‘I	am	not	unduly	worried	about	me.	I	fear	more	the	notion
of	what	eternal	dying	can	do	to	redemption	–	that	seems	a	most	unholy	union.’
The	Redeemer	simply	nodded	and	it	occurred	to	Seerdomin	that	the	god
had	probably	been	thinking	of	little	else.	A	future	that	seemed	sealed	into	fate,
an	end	to	what	was,	and	nothing	glorious	in	what	would	follow.
He	rubbed	at	his	face,	vaguely	dismayed	at	the	weariness	he	felt.	Here,
disconnected	from	his	body,	from	any	real	flesh	and	bone,	it	was	his	spirit	that
was	exhausted,	battered	down.	And	yet…and	yet,	I	will	stand.	And	do	all	I	can.
To	defend	a	god	I	have	chosen	not	to	worship,	against	a	woman	who	dreamt
once	of	his	embrace,	and	dreams	of	the	same	now	–	with	far	deadlier	intent.	He
squinted	down	at	her,	a	form	almost	shapeless	in	the	gathering	gloom	beneath
gravid,	leaden	clouds.
After	a	moment	raindrops	splashed	against	his	helm,	stained	his	forearms
and	his	hands.	He	lifted	one	hand,	and	saw	that	the	rain	was	black,	thick,
wending	like	slime.
The	sky	was	raining	kelyk.
She	raised	her	head,	and	the	distance	between	them	seemed	to	vanish.	Her
eyes	shone	with	fire,	a	slow,	terrible	pulse.
Gods	below…
	
Like	the	worn	ridge	of	a	toothless	jaw,	the	Gadrobi	Hills	rose	into	view,


spanning	the	north	horizon.	Kallor	halted	to	study	them.	An	end	to	this	damned
plain,	to	this	pointless	sweep	of	grasses.	And	there,	to	the	northwest,	where	the
hills	sank	back	down,	there	was	a	city.
He	could	not	yet	see	it.	Soon.
The	temple	would	be	nondescript,	the	throne	within	it	a	paltry	thing,	poorly
made,	an	icon	of	insipid	flaws.	A	broken	fool	once	named	Munug	would
writhe	before	it,	in	obeisance,	the	High	Priest	of	Pathos,	the	Prophet	of	Failure
–	enough	thematic	unity,	in	fact,	to	give	any	king	pause.	Kallor	allowed	himself
a	faint	smirk.	Yes,	he	was	worthy	of	such	worship,	and	if	in	the	end	he	wrested
it	body	and	soul	from	the	Crippled	God,	so	be	it.
The	temple	his	domain,	the	score	of	bent	and	maimed	priests	and
priestesses	his	court,	the	milling	mob	outside,	sharing	nothing	but	chronic	ill
luck,	his	subjects.	This,	he	decided,	had	the	makings	of	an	immortal	empire.
Patience	–	it	would	not	do,	he	realized,	to	seek	to	steal	the	Fallen	One’s
worshippers.	There	was	no	real	need.	The	gods	were	already	assembling	to
crush	the	Crippled	fool	once	and	for	all.	Kallor	did	not	think	they	would	fail
this	time.	Though	no	doubt	the	Fallen	One	had	a	few	more	tricks	up	his	rotted
sleeve,	not	least	the	inherent	power	of	the	cult	itself,	feeding	as	it	did	on	misery
and	suffering	–	two	conditions	of	humanity	that	would	persist	for	as	long	as
humans	existed.
Kallor	grunted.	‘Ah,	fuck	patience.	The	High	King	will	take	this	throne.
Then	we	can	begin	the…negotiations.’
He	was	no	diplomat	and	had	no	interest	in	acquiring	a	diplomat’s	skills,
not	even	when	facing	a	god.	There	would	be	conditions,	some	of	them
unpalatable,	enough	to	make	the	hoary	bastard	choke	on	his	smoke.	Well,	too
bad.
One	more	throne.	The	last	he’d	ever	need.
He	resumed	walking.	Boots	worn	through.	Dust	wind-driven	into	every
crease	of	his	face,	the	pores	of	his	nose	and	brow,	his	eyes	thinned	to	slits.	The
world	clawed	at	him,	but	he	pushed	through.	Always	did.	Always	would.
One	more	throne.	Darujhistan.
	
Long	ago,	in	some	long	lost	epoch,	people	had	gathered	on	this	blasted	ridge
overlooking	the	flattened	valley	floor,	and	had	raised	the	enormous	standing
stones	that	now	leaned	in	an	uneven	line	spanning	a	thousand	paces	or	more.	A
few	had	toppled	here	and	there,	but	among	the	others	Samar	Dev	sensed	a
belligerent	vitality.	As	if	the	stones	were	determined	to	stand	sentinel	for	ever,
even	as	the	bones	of	those	who’d	raised	them	now	speckled	the	dust	that


periodically	scoured	their	faces.
She	paused	to	wipe	sweat	from	her	forehead,	watching	as	Traveller
reached	the	crest,	and	then	moved	off	into	the	shade	of	the	nearest	stone,	a
massive	phallic	menhir	looming	tall,	where	he	leaned	against	it	with	crossed
arms.	To	await	her,	of	course	–	she	was	clearly	slowing	them	down,	and	this
detail	irritated	her.	What	she	lacked,	she	understood,	was	manic	obsession,
while	her	companions	were	driven	and	this	lent	them	the	vigour	common	to
madmen.	Which,	she	had	long	since	decided,	was	precisely	what	they	were.
She	missed	her	horse,	the	one	creature	on	this	journey	that	she	had	come	to
feel	an	affinity	with.	An	average	beast,	a	simple	beast,	normal,	mortal,	sweetly
dull-eyed	and	pleased	by	gestures	of	care	and	affection.
Resuming	her	climb,	she	struggled	against	the	crumbled	slope,	forcing	her
legs	between	the	sage	brushes	–	too	weary	to	worry	about	slumbering	snakes
and	scorpions,	or	hairy	spiders	among	the	gnarled,	twisted	branches.
The	thump	of	Havok’s	hoofs	drummed	through	the	ground,	halting
directly	above	her	at	the	top	of	the	slope.	Scowling,	she	looked	up.
Karsa’s	regard	was	as	unreadable	as	ever,	the	shattered	tattoo	like	a	web
stretching	to	the	thrust	of	the	face	behind	it.	He	leaned	forward	on	his	mount’s
neck	and	said,	‘Do	we	not	feed	you	enough?’
‘Hood	take	you.’
‘Why	will	you	not	accept	sharing	Havok’s	back,	witch?’
Since	he	showed	no	inclination	to	move,	she	was	forced	to	work	to	one
side	as	she	reached	the	crest,	using	the	sage	branches	to	pull	herself	on	to	the
summit.	Where	she	paused,	breathing	hard,	and	then	she	held	up	her	hands	to
her	face,	drawing	in	the	sweet	scent	of	the	sage.	After	a	moment	she	glanced	up
at	the	Toblakai.	A	number	of	responses	occurred	to	her,	in	a	succession	of
escalating	viciousness.	Instead	of	voicing	any	of	them,	she	sighed	and	turned
away,	finding	her	own	standing	stone	to	lean	against	–	noting,	with	little
interest,	that	Traveller	had	lowered	his	head	and	seemed	to	be	muttering	quietly
to	himself.
This	close	to	the	grey	schist,	she	saw	that	patterns	had	been	carved	into	its
surface,	wending	round	milky	nodules	of	quartz.	With	every	dawn,	she
realized,	this	side	of	the	stone	would	seem	to	writhe	as	the	sun	climbed	higher,
the	nodes	glistening.	And	the	purpose	of	all	that	effort?	Not	even	the	gods
knew,	she	suspected.
History,	she	realized,	was	mostly	lost.	No	matter	how	diligent	the
recorders,	the	witnesses,	the	researchers,	most	of	the	past	simply	no	longer
existed.	Would	never	be	known.	The	notion	seemed	to	empty	her	out
somewhere	deep	inside,	as	if	the	very	knowledge	of	loss	somehow	released	a


torrent	of	extinction	within	her	own	memories	–	moments	swirling	away,
never	to	be	retrieved.	She	set	a	finger	in	one	groove	etched	into	the	stone,
followed	its	serpentine	track	downward	as	far	as	she	could	reach,	then	back	up
again.	The	first	to	do	so	in	how	long?
Repeat	the	old	pattern	–	ignorance	matters	not	–	just	repeat	it,	and	so	prove
continuity.
Which	in	turn	proves	what?
That	in	living,	one	recounts	the	lives	of	all	those	long	gone,	long	dead,	even
forgotten.	Recounts	all	the	demands	of	necessity	–	to	eat,	sleep,	make	love,
sicken,	fade	into	death	–	and	the	urges	of	blessed	wonder	–	a	finger	tracking	the
serpent’s	path,	a	breath	against	stone.	Weight	and	presence	and	the	lure	of
meaning	and	pattern.
By	this	we	prove	the	existence	of	the	ancestors.	That	they	once	were,	and
that	one	day	we	will	be	the	same.	I,	Samar	Dev,	once	was.	And	am	no	more.
Be	patient,	stone,	another	fingertip	will	come,	to	follow	the	track.	We	mark
you	and	you	mark	us.	Stone	and	flesh,	stone	and	flesh…
	
Karsa	slid	down	from	Havok,	paused	to	stretch	out	his	back.	He	had	been
thinking	much	of	late,	mostly	about	his	people,	the	proud,	naïve	Teblor.	The
ever-tightening	siege	that	was	the	rest	of	the	world,	a	place	of	cynicism,	a	place
where	virtually	every	shadow	was	painted	in	cruelty,	in	countless	variations	on
the	same	colourless	hue.	Did	he	truly	want	to	lead	his	people	into	such	a
world?	Even	to	deliver	a	most	poetic	summation	to	all	these	affairs	of
civilization?
He	had	seen,	after	all,	the	poison	of	such	immersion,	when	observing	the
Tiste	Edur	in	the	city	of	Letheras.	Conquerors	wandering	bewildered,	lost,
made	useless	by	success.	An	emperor	who	could	not	rule	even	himself.	And	the
Crippled	God	had	wanted	Karsa	to	take	up	that	sword.	With	such	a	weapon	in
his	hands,	he	would	lead	his	warriors	down	from	the	mountains,	to	bring	to	an
end	all	things.	To	become	the	living	embodiment	of	the	suffering	the	Fallen
One	so	cherished.
He	had	not	even	been	tempted.	Again	and	again,	in	their	disjointed
concourse,	the	Crippled	God	had	revealed	his	lack	of	understanding	when	it
came	to	Karsa	Orlong.	He	made	his	every	gift	to	Karsa	an	invitation	to	be
broken	in	some	fashion.	But	I	cannot	be	broken.	The	truth,	so	simple,	so	direct,
seemed	to	be	an	invisible	force	as	far	as	the	Crippled	God	was	concerned,	and
each	time	he	collided	with	it	he	was	surprised,	dumbfounded.	Each	time,	he	was
sent	reeling.


Of	course,	Karsa	understood	all	about	being	stubborn.	He	also	knew	how
such	a	trait	could	be	fashioned	into	worthy	armour,	while	at	other	times	it	did
little	more	than	reveal	a	consummate	stupidity.	Now,	he	wanted	to	reshape	the
world,	and	he	knew	it	would	resist	him,	yet	he	would	hold	to	his	desire.	Samar
Dev	would	call	that	‘stubborn’,	and	in	saying	that	she	would	mean	‘stupid’.
Like	the	Crippled	God,	the	witch	did	not	truly	understand	Karsa.
On	the	other	hand,	he	understood	her	very	well.	‘You	will	not	ride	with
me,’	he	said	now	as	she	rested	against	one	of	the	stones,	‘because	you	see	it	as
a	kind	of	surrender.	If	you	must	rush	down	this	torrent,	you	will	decide	your
own	pace,	as	best	you	can.’
‘Is	that	how	it	is?’	she	asked.
‘Isn’t	it?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	she	replied.	‘I	don’t	know	anything.	I	had	some	long
forgotten	god	of	war	track	me	down.	Why?	What	meaning	was	I	supposed	to
take	from	that?’
‘You	are	a	witch.	You	awaken	spirits.	They	scent	you	as	easily	as	you	do
them.’
‘What	of	it?’
‘Why?’
‘Why	what?’	she	demanded.
‘Why,	Samar	Dev,	did	you	choose	to	become	a	witch?’
‘That’s	–	oh,	what	difference	does	that	make?’
He	waited.
‘I	was…curious.	Besides,	once	you	see	that	the	world	is	filled	with	forces	–
most	of	which	few	people	ever	see,	or	even	think	about	–	then	how	can	you	not
want	to	explore?	Tracing	all	the	patterns,	discovering	the	webs	of	existence	–
it’s	no	different	from	building	a	mechanism,	the	pleasure	in	working	things
out.’
He	grunted.	‘So	you	were	curious.	Tell	me,	when	you	speak	with	spirits,
when	you	summon	them	and	they	come	to	you	without	coercion	–	why	do	you
think	they	do	that?	Because,	like	you,	they	are	curious.’
She	crossed	her	arms.	‘You’re	saying	I’m	trying	to	find	significance	in
something	that	was	actually	pretty	much	meaningless.	The	bear	sniffed	me	out
and	came	for	a	closer	look.’
He	shrugged.	‘These	things	happen.’
‘I’m	not	convinced.’
‘Yes,’	he	smiled,	‘you	are	truly	of	this	world,	Samar	Dev.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
He	turned	back	to	Havok	and	stroked	the	beast’s	dusty	neck.	‘The	Tiste


Edur	failed.	They	were	not	thorough	enough.	They	left	the	cynicism	in	place,
and	thought	that	through	the	strength	of	their	own	honour,	they	could	defeat	it.
But	the	cynicism	made	their	honour	a	hollow	thing.’	He	glanced	back	at	her.
‘What	was	once	a	strength	became	an	affectation.’
She	shook	her	head,	as	if	baffled.
Traveller	moved	to	join	them,	and	there	was	something	haggard	in	his
face.	Seeing	this	odd,	inexplicable	transformation,	Karsa	narrowed	his	gaze	on
the	man	for	a	moment.	Then	he	casually	looked	away.
‘Perhaps	the	bear	came	to	warn	you,’	he	said	to	Samar	Dev.
‘About	what?’
‘What	else?	War.’
‘What	war?’
The	shout	made	Havok	shift	under	his	hand,	and	he	reached	up	to	grasp	the
beast’s	wiry	mane.	Calming	the	horse,	he	then	vaulted	on	to	its	back.	‘Why,	the
one	to	come,	I	would	think.’
She	glared	across	at	Traveller,	and	seemed	to	note	for	the	first	time	the
change	that	had	come	over	him.
Karsa	watched	her	take	a	step	closer	to	Traveller.	‘What	is	it?	What	has
happened?	What	war	is	he	talking	about?’
‘We	should	get	moving,’	he	said,	and	then	he	set	out.
She	might	weep.	She	might	scream.	But	she	did	neither,	and	Karsa	nodded
to	himself	and	then	reached	down	one	arm.	‘This	torrent,’	he	muttered,
‘belongs	to	him,	not	us.	Ride	it	with	me,	witch	–	you	surrender	nothing	of
value.’
‘I	don’t?’
‘No.’
She	hesitated,	and	then	stepped	up	and	grasped	hold	of	his	arm.
When	she	was	settled	in	behind	him,	Karsa	tilted	to	one	side	and	twisted
round	slightly	to	grin	at	her.	‘Don’t	lie.	It	feels	better	already,	does	it	not?’
‘Karsa	–	what	has	happened	to	Traveller?’
He	collected	the	lone	rein	and	faced	forward	once	more.	‘Shadows,’	he
said,	‘are	cruel.’
	
Ditch	forced	open	what	he	thought	of	as	an	eye.	His	eye.	Draconus	stood	above
the	blind	Tiste	Andii,	Kadaspala,	reaching	down	and	dragging	the	squealing
creature	up	with	both	hands	round	the	man’s	scrawny	neck.
‘You	damned	fool!	It	won’t	work	that	way,	don’t	you	see	that?’
Kadaspala	could	only	choke	in	reply.


Draconus	glowered	for	a	moment	longer,	and	then	flung	the	man	back
down	on	to	the	heap	of	bodies.
Ditch	managed	a	croaking	laugh.
Turning	to	skewer	Ditch	with	his	glare,	Draconus	said,	‘He	sought	to
fashion	a	damned	god	here!’
‘And	it	shall	speak,’	Ditch	said,	‘in	my	voice.’
‘No,	it	shall	not.	Do	not	fall	into	this	trap,	Wizard.	Nothing	must	be
fashioned	of	this	place—’
‘What	difference?	We	all	are	about	to	die.	Let	the	god	open	its	eyes.	Blink
once	or	twice,	and	then	give	voice…’	he	laughed	again,	‘the	first	cry	also	the
last.	Birth	and	death	with	nothing	in	between.	Is	there	anything	more	tragic,
Draconus?	Anything	at	all?’
‘Dragnipur,’	said	Draconus,	‘is	nobody’s	womb.	Kadaspala,	this	was	to	be	a
cage.	To	keep	Darkness	in	and	Chaos	out.	One	last,	desperate	barrier	–	the	only
gift	we	could	offer.	A	gate	that	is	denied	its	wandering	must	find	a	home,	a
refuge	–	a	fortress,	even	one	fashioned	from	flesh	and	bone.	The	pattern,
Kadaspala,	was	meant	to	defy	Chaos	–	two	antithetical	forces,	as	we	discussed
—’
‘That	will	fail!’	The	blind	Tiste	Andii	was	twisting	about	at	Draconus’s
feet,	like	an	impaled	worm.	‘Fail,	Draconus	–	we	were	fools,	idiots.	We	were
mad	to	think	mad	to	think	mad	to	think	–	give	me	this	child,	this	wondrous
creation	–	give	me—’
‘Kadaspala!	The	pattern	–	nothing	more!	Just	the	pattern,	damn	you!’
‘Fails.	Shatters.	Shatters	and	fails	shattering	into	failure.	Failure	failure
failure.	We	die	and	we	die	and	we	die	and	we	die!’
Ditch	could	hear	the	army	marching	in	pursuit,	steps	like	broken	thunder,
spears	and	standards	clattering	like	a	continent	of	reeds,	the	wind	whistling
through	them.	War	chants	erupting	from	countless	mouths,	no	two	the	same,
creating	instead	a	war	of	discordance,	a	clamour	of	ferocious	madness.	The
sound	was	more	horrible	than	anything	he	had	ever	heard	before	–	no	mortal
army	could	start	such	terror	in	a	soul	as	this	one	did.	And	above	it	all,	the	sky
raged,	actinic	and	argent,	seething,	wrought	through	with	blinding	flashes
from	some	descending	devastation,	ever	closer	descending	–	and	when	at	last	it
struck,	the	army	will	charge.	Will	sweep	over	us.
Ditch	looked	about	with	his	one	eye	–	only	to	realize	that	it	was	still	shut,
gummed	solid,	that	maybe	he	had	no	eye	left	at	all,	and	that	what	he	was	seeing
through	was	the	pattern	etched	in	black	ink	on	his	eyelid.	The	god’s	eye?	The
pattern’s	eye?	How	is	it	I	can	see	at	all?
Draconus	stood	facing	their	wake,	the	convulsing	figure	at	his	feet


forgotten	for	the	moment.
Such	studied	belligerence,	such	a	heroic	pose,	the	kind	that	should	be
sculpted	in	immortal	bronze.	Heroism	that	needed	the	green	stains	of	verdigris,
the	proof	of	centuries	passed	since	last	such	noble	forces	existed	in	the	world	–
any	world,	whatever	world;	no	matter,	details	unimportant.	The	statue
proclaims	the	great	age	now	lost,	the	virtues	left	behind.
Civilizations	made	sure	their	heroes	were	dead	before	they	honoured	them.
Virtue	belonged	to	the	dead,	not	the	living.	Everyone	knew	this.	Lived	with	this,
this	permanent	fall	from	grace	that	was	the	present	age.	The	legacy
squandered,	because	this	was	what	people	did	with	things	they	themselves	have
not	earned.
He	studied	Draconus,	and	the	man	seemed	to	darken,	blur,	become
strangely	indistinct.	Ditch	gasped,	and	in	the	next	instant	Draconus	was	once
more	as	he	had	always	been.
So	little	of	his	mind	was	left,	so	little	of	what	could	be	called	his	self,	and
these	moments	of	clarity	were	fast	diminishing.	Was	there	irony	to	be	found,
should	the	chaos	reach	him	only	to	find	him	already	gone?
Draconus	was	suddenly	crouched	down	beside	him.	‘Ditch,	listen	to	me.
He’s	made	you	the	nexus	–	you	were	meant	to	be	the	god’s	eyes	–	no,	its	brain
–	your	pattern,	the	one	upon	your	skin…’
Ditch	grunted,	amused.	‘Each	soul	begins	with	a	single	word.	He’s	written
that	word	–	on	me.	Identity	is	only	a	pattern.	The	beginning	form.	The	world	–
life	and	experience	–	is	Kadaspala,	etching	and	etching	the	fine	details.	By
life’s	end,	who	can	even	make	out	that	first	word?’
‘It	is	within	you,’	said	Draconus,	‘to	break	that	pattern,	Ditch.	Hold	on	to	a
part	of	yourself,	hold	tight	to	it	–	you	may	need	it—’
‘No,	you	may	need	it,	Draconus.’
‘There	can	be	no	child-god.	Not	fashioned	of	this	nightmare	–	can’t	you
understand	that?	It	would	be	a	horrid,	terrible	thing.	Kadaspala	is	mad—’
‘Yes,’	agreed	Ditch,	‘most	unfortunate.	Mad.	Not	a	good	beginning,	no.’
‘Hold	on,	Ditch.’
‘It’s	just	a	word.’
Draconus	stared	down	into	that	painted	eye.	Then	he	rose,	gathering	up	his
chains,	and	moved	out	of	Ditch’s	limited	range	of	vision.
Kadaspala	crawled	close.	‘He	only	wants	to	escape	escape	escape.	But	you
but	you	but	you	are	the	knot	the	knot.	Snapping	tight!	No	one	gets	away.	No	one
gets	away.	No	one	gets	away.	Hold	still	hold	still	and	hold	still	until	he	awakens
and	he	will	awaken	and	so	he	will.	Awaken.	My	child.	The	word,	you	see,	the
word	is	the	word	is	the	word.	The	word	is	kill.’


Ditch	smiled.	Yes,	he’d	known	that.	He	had.
‘Wait,	sweet	knot,	and	wait	wait	wait.	Everything	will	make	sense.
Everything.	Promise	promise	I	promise	and	I	do	promise	–	for	I	have	seen	into
the	future.	I	know	what’s	coming.	I	know	all	the	plans.	Her	brother	died	and	he
should	not	have	had	to	do	that,	no.	No,	he	shouldn’t	have	had	to	do	that.	I	do
this	for	her	for	her	for	her.	Only	for	her.
‘Knot,	I	do	this	for	her.’
Kill,	thought	Ditch,	nodding,	kill,	yes,	I	understand.	I	do.	Kill,	for	her.	Kill.
And	he	found	that	the	word	itself,	yes,	the	word	itself,	knew	how	to	smile.
Even	as	the	ashes	rained	down.
	
Beneath	a	sprawl	of	stars,	Precious	Thimble	stood	by	the	side	of	the	track,
watching	the	carriage	approach.	The	repairs	looked	makeshift	even	in	the
gloom	and	the	entire	contraption	rocked	and	wobbled.	She	saw	Glanno	Tarp
perched	on	the	high	bench,	his	splinted	legs	splayed	wide,	and	the	horses
tossed	their	heads,	ears	flattened	and	eyes	rolling.
Figures	walked	to	either	side.	Mappo	and	Gruntle	on	the	left,	Reccanto	Ilk,
the	Boles	and	that	wretched	Cartographer	on	the	right.	Master	Quell,
presumably,	was	inside.
Beside	Precious,	Faint	muttered	something	under	her	breath	and	then
climbed	to	her	feet.	‘Wake	up,	Sweetest,	they’re	finally	here.’
From	the	town	known	as	Reach	of	Woe,	half	a	league	distant,	not	a	single
glimmer	of	light	showed.
Precious	approached	Gruntle.	‘What	happened	back	there?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘You	truly	do	not	want	to	know,	Witch.’
‘Why	do	Jaghut	bother	getting	married	at	all?’	Reccanto	asked,	his	face
pale	as	the	moon.	‘Gods	below,	like	Glanno	might	say,	that	was	the	most
pettytracted	nefoaminous	argument	I	ever	seen!	’Twas	still	in	full	swing	when
we	blaggered	it	outa	there.’
‘Blaggered?’	said	Faint.	‘The	carriage	can	barely	crawl,	Ilk.’
‘Ain’t	nothing	so	tensifying	as	running	for	your	life	at	a	snail’s	pace,	let
me	tell	you,	but	if	it	wasn’t	for	Master ’s	protecterives	we’d	be	nothing	but
flops	of	hairy	skin	and	chunks	of	meat	like	everyone	else	back	there.’
Precious	Thimble	shivered	and	made	a	warding	gesture.
Master	Quell	emerged	from	the	carriage	after	forcing	open	an	ill-hung
door.	He	was	sheathed	in	sweat.	‘What	a	damned	world	this	is,’	he	said
raggedly.
‘I	thought	we	were	on	an	island,’	Jula	said,	frowning.


‘We	heading	back	to	sea?’	Precious	asked	Quell.
‘Not	a	chance	–	the	carriage	wouldn’t	hold.	We	need	to	find	a	more	civil
place	to	hole	up.’
She	watched	him	walk	off	the	track	to	find	a	private	place	where	he	could
groan	and	sigh	as	he	emptied	his	bladder,	or	at	least	tried	to	–	he	never
wandered	far	enough.	‘You	need	a	practitioner	of	High	Denul,’	she	called	after
him.
‘As	you	say,	Witch,	as	you	say…’
Cartographer	had	found	a	stick	from	somewhere	and	was	scraping	out
patterns	on	the	dirt	of	the	road	a	dozen	paces	ahead.	Precious	Thimble	squinted
at	him.	‘What’s	that	thing	doing?’
No	one	seemed	to	have	an	answer.
After	a	long	pause,	Sweetest	Sufferance	spoke.	‘Either	of	you	other	girls
feeling	a	tad	bloodthirsty?’
Well,	that	woke	everyone	else	up	fast	enough,	Precious	Thimble	observed
a	short	while	later,	still	struggling	with	her	own	panic.	That	damned	lardball
was	still	half	convulsed	in	laughter,	and	Precious	was	of	a	mind	to	stick	a	knife
in	one	of	those	teary	eyes,	and	she	doubted	anyone	would	try	to	stop	her.
Master	Quell	reappeared.	‘What’s	so	funny,	Sweetest?	Oh,	never	mind.’	He
surveyed	everyone	else	with	a	pinched,	uncomfortable	expression,	like	a	man
who’d	sat	on	a	cork.	‘The	night	stinks	–	anybody	else	noticed	that?	I	was
thinking	of	Rashan,	but	now	I’m	not	so	sure.’
‘You	need	only	take	me	as	far	as	a	port,’	said	Mappo.	‘I	can	find	my	own
way	from	there.’
Quell	squinted	at	him.	‘We’ll	deliver	you	as	agreed,	Trell—’
‘The	risks—’
‘Are	why	we	charge	as	much	as	we	do.	Now,	no	more	about	that,	and	don’t
even	think	of	just	cancelling	the	contract	–	we’d	take	that	as	a	grievous	insult,	a
slur	on	our	good	name.	We’ll	get	you	there,	Trell,	even	if	it’s	on	one	wheel
behind	a	three-legged	horse.’
Cartographer	tottered	back	to	them.	‘If	it	pleases,’	he	said,	attempting	a
smile	that	Precious	decided	was	too	ghoulish	to	describe	without	descending
into	insanity,	‘I	have	outlined	a	solution.’
‘Sorry	I	missed	it,’	said	Quell.
‘He	meant	that	literally,’	said	Precious,	pointing	up	the	road.
Quell	in	the	lead,	they	walked	up	to	observe	the	faint	scouring	on	the	pale
dust	of	the	track.
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	is	that?’
‘A	map,	of	course.’


‘What	kind	of	map?’
‘Our	journey	to	come.’
Reccanto	Ilk	squatted	to	study	the	effort,	and	then	shook	his	head.	‘I	can’t
even	make	out	the	island	we’re	on.	This	is	a	stupid	map,	Cartogopher.’	He
straightened	and	nodded	to	the	others.	‘That’s	what	you	get	tryin’	to	work	with
a	dead	man.	I	swear,	common	sense	is	the	first	to	go	when	you	turn	into	the
walking	dead	–	why	is	that?’
The	Bole	brothers	looked	thoughtful,	as	if	working	on	possible	answers.
Then,	noticing	each	other ’s	frown,	both	broke	into	smiles.	Amby	snorted	then
had	to	wipe	goo	from	his	upper	lip	with	the	back	of	one	hand.
‘I	must	be	mad,’	Precious	whispered.
Quell	asked,	‘This	is	some	kind	of	gate	you’ve	drawn	here,
Cartographer?’
‘Absent	of	investiture,	but	yes.	I	have	no	power	to	give	it.	But	then,	you	do.’
‘Maybe,’	Quell	mused,	‘but	I	don’t	recognize	anything	you’ve	drawn,	and
that	makes	me	nervous.’
Cartographer	walked	along	one	side	and	pointed	a	withered	finger	down	at
the	far	end	of	the	map.	‘Do	you	see	this	straight,	wide	groove?	All	the	rest
funnels	into	this	path,	the	path	we	need	to	take.	The	best	maps	show	you	the
right	direction.	The	best	maps	are	the	ones	that	lead	you	to	a	specific
destination.’
Reccanto	Ilk	scratched	at	his	head,	looking	bewildered.	‘But	that’s	what
maps	are	for	–	what’s	he	glommering	on	about?’
‘Not	all	maps,’	corrected	Cartographer,	with	a	shake	of	his	head	–	and
nothing,	Precious	concluded,	could	ever	be	as	solemn	as	a	dead	man’s	shake	of
the	head.	‘Objective	rendition	is	but	one	form	in	the	art	of	cartography,	and	not
even	the	most	useful	one.’
‘If	you	say	so,’	said	Master	Quell.	‘I’m	still	uneasy.’
‘You	have	few	other	options,	Wizard.	The	carriage	is	damaged.	The
marital	argument	is	even	now	extending	beyond	the	town’s	limits	and	will	soon
engulf	this	entire	island	in	a	conflagration	of	disputing	versions	of	who-saidwhat.’
‘He’s	smarter	than	he	was	before,’	observed	Faint.
‘That’s	true,’	said	Reccanto.
‘I	gather	more	of	myself,	yes,’	said	Cartographer,	giving	them	all	another
ghastly	smile.
Flinches	all	round.
‘How	come,’	asked	Quell,	‘you	never	showed	this	talent	before?’
The	corpse	straightened.	‘I	have	displayed	numerous	talents	on	this


journey,	each	one	appropriate	to	the	situation	at	the	time.	Have	you	forgotten
the	coconuts?’
Faint	rolled	her	eyes	and	said,	‘How	could	we	forget	the	coconuts?’
‘Besides,’	resumed	Cartographer,	‘as	an	uninvited	guest,	I	feel	a	pressing
need	to	contribute	to	the	enterprise.’	One	ragged	hand	gestured	at	the	scribbles
on	the	track.	‘Invest	power	into	this,	Master	Quell,	and	we	can	be	on	our	way.’
‘To	somewhere	we	can	stop	for	a	time?’
Cartographer	shrugged.	‘I	am	not	able	to	predict	the	situations	awaiting	us,
only	that	in	general	they	are	not	particularly	threatening.’
Quell	looked	as	if	he	needed	to	piss	again.	Instead,	he	turned	back	to	the
carriage.	‘Everyone	on	board.	Precious,	you’re	with	me	as	usual.	Same	for
you,	Mappo.’	He	paused.	‘The	rest	of	you,	get	ready.’
‘For	what?’	Gruntle	asked.
‘For	anything,	of	course.’
Reccanto,	still	strutting	after	his	extraordinary	on-the-knees	skewering
lunge,	slapped	one	hand	on	the	huge	warrior ’s	back.	‘Don’t	fret,	friend,	you’ll
get	used	to	all	this	eventually.	Unless,’	he	added,	‘it	kills	you	first.’
Cartographer	held	up	some	ropes.	‘Who	will	kindly	tie	me	to	a	wheel?’
	
Night	sweeps	across	the	Dwelling	Plain.	Along	the	vast	vault	of	the	sky	the
stars	are	faint,	smudged,	as	if	reluctant	to	sharpen	to	knife	points	amidst	the
strangely	heavy	darkness.	The	coyotes	mute	their	cries	for	this	night.	Wolves
flee	half	blind	in	formless	terror,	and	some	will	run	until	their	hearts	burst.
South	of	the	western	tail	of	the	Gadrobi	Hills,	a	lone	chain-clad	figure
pauses	in	his	journey,	seeing	at	last	the	faint	bluish	glow	that	is	the	ever-beating
heart	of	the	great,	legendary	city.
Darujhistan.
Three	leagues	west	of	him,	three	more	strangers	gaze	upon	that	selfsame
glow,	and	in	the	eyes	of	one	of	them	–	unseen	by	the	others	–	there	is	such
dread,	such	anguish,	as	would	crush	the	soul	of	a	lesser	man.	His	gauntleted
hand	steals	again	and	again	to	the	leather-wrapped	grip	of	his	sword.
He	tells	himself	that	vengeance	answered	is	peace	won,	but	even	he	does
not	quite	believe	that.	Beyond	the	city	awaiting	him,	the	future	is	a	vast	absence,
a	void	he	now	believes	he	will	never	see,	much	less	stride	into.
Yet,	for	all	the	tumultuous,	seething	forces	of	will	within	these	arrayed
strangers,	none	among	them	is	the	cause	of	the	night’s	thick,	palpable	silence.
Less	than	a	league	north	of	the	three	strangers,	seven	Hounds	are	arrayed
along	a	ridge,	baleful	eyes	fixed	upon	the	glow	of	the	city.


The	beasts	possess	the	capacity	to	detect	a	rabbit’s	rapid	heartbeat	half	a
league	away,	so	they	hear	well	the	tolling	of	the	twelfth	bell,	announcing	the
arrival	of	midnight	in	the	city	of	Darujhistan.
And	as	one,	the	seven	Hounds	lift	their	massive	heads,	and	give	voice	to	a
howl.
	
The	stars	are	struck	into	blazing	sparks	overhead.	The	High	King	halts	in	midstride,	and	the	ancient,	stubborn	blood	in	his	veins	and	arteries	suddenly	floods
cold	as	ice.	For	the	first	time	in	this	journey,	Kallor	knows	a	moment	of	fear.
	
Havok’s	long	head	snaps	up	and	the	beast	skitters	to	one	side.	Astride	the
animal,	Samar	Dev	makes	a	desperate	grab	for	Karsa,	lest	she	be	thrown	to	the
ground,	and	she	can	feel	the	sudden	tautness	of	every	muscle	in	the	huge
warrior.
Ahead	of	them,	Traveller	pauses,	his	shoulders	hunching	as	if	those	all	too
close	howls	even	now	lash	at	his	back.	Then	he	shakes	himself,	and	marches
on.
	
Atop	a	cornice	of	a	gate	facing	the	south	plain,	a	squat	toad-like	demon	lifts	its
head,	pointed	ears	suddenly	alert.
Then,	as	the	howls	slowly	fade,	the	demon	settles	once	more.
Although	now,	at	last,	it	can	feel,	rising	up	from	the	very	earth,	rising	up	to
shiver	along	its	bones,	the	rumble	of	heavy	paws	on	distant	ground.
Drawing	closer,	ever	closer.
In	the	city	behind	Chillbais,	the	twelfth	bell	clangs	its	sonorous	note.
Another	season’s	grand	fête	is	almost	gone.	One	more	day	in	the	name	of
Gedderone.	One	more	night	to	close	the	riot	of	senseless	celebration.
Dance,	and	dance	on.
Because,	as	everyone	knows,	all	that	you	see	about	you	will	last,	well…for
ever!


Chapter	Twenty-One

My	friend,	this	is	not	the	place
The	cut	flowers	lie	scattered	on	the	path
And	the	light	of	the	moon	glistens
In	what	the	stems	bleed
In	the	day	just	for	ever	lost
I	watched	a	black	wasp	darting	into	the	face
Of	a	web,	and	the	spider	she	dropped
Only	to	be	caught	in	mid-air
Footfalls	leave	no	trace
In	the	wake	of	a	hungry	creature’s	wrath
You	can	only	lie	in	hope,	dreaming
She	lightly	touched	ground
And	danced	away	like	a	breath
Hiding	beneath	leaves	nodding	in	place
While	the	hunter	circles	and	listens
But	pray	nothing	is	found
My	friend,	this	is	not	your	face
So	pale	and	still	never	again	to	laugh
When	the	moon’s	light	fell	and	then	stopped
Cold	as	silver	in	the	glade
Look	back	on	the	day,	it’s	for	ever	lost
Stare	into	the	night,	where	things	confound
The	web	stretches	empty,	wind	keening
In	threads	of	absent	songs
(Song	of)	Old	Friend
Fisher


Voluminous	in	wonder,	but,	be	assured,	terse	in	grief.	Consider	the	woodsman
standing	facing	the	forest,	axe	in	hand.	In	a	moment	he	will	stride	forward.
Consider	now	the	first	line	of	trees,	rooted,	helpless	against	what	comes.
The	seep	of	trickling	water	round	roots	does	not	quicken.	The	sweet
warmth	of	sunlight	on	leaves	does	not	blaze	into	urgent	flame.	The	world	and
its	pace	cannot	change.	What	is	to	be	done?	Why,	there	is	nothing	to	be	done.
The	woodsman	swings	his	axe	with	blinding	speed	and	splendid	indifference,
and	he	hears	not	the	chorus	of	cries.
Is	this	fancy	worthless?	For	some,	perhaps	many,	it	must	be.	But	know	this,
empathy	is	no	game.
Twist	back	time.	Dusk	still	gathers,	but	it	is	early	yet	and	so	it	is	a	weak
gathering.	A	lone	rider	draws	up	on	a	ridge	overlooking	a	mining	camp.	Up
here	the	sun’s	light	remains.	Dust	streams	gold	and	nothing	wants	to	settle.	In
the	shadowy	pit	below	figures	seethe	back	and	forth.
He	is	finally	seen.	An	old	man	works	his	way	up	the	path.	A	runner	hurries
to	the	main	building	squatting	atop	a	levelled	heap	of	tailings.
It	begins.
	
‘Another	guest?	Come	for	the	boy?	What’s	so	damned	special	about	that	boy?’
But	Gorlas	Vidikas	wasn’t	much	interested	in	any	answers	to	those	questions,
especially	since	this	runner	was	in	no	position	to	explain	much	of	anything,
having	been	sent	direct	from	the	foreman.	He	rose	and	pulled	on	his	cloak,
then	collected	up	his	fine	deerskin	gloves,	and	set	out.	Would	he	have	the
pleasure	of	killing	yet	another	fool?	He	dearly	hoped	so.
Was	it	that	pompous	old	bastard,	Coll?	That	would	be	ideal,	and	who	could
say,	maybe	the	ghost	of	Lady	Simtal	would	stir	awake	at	the	man’s	last	gasp,	to
howl	her	delight	at	this	most	perfect	vengeance,	this	long-awaited	conclusion
to	the	vile	treachery	of	her	last	fête.	Of	course,	that	was	mostly	Hanut	Orr ’s
business,	and	maybe	Shardan	Lim’s	as	well,	but	Gorlas	welcomed	the	sudden
unexpected	currency	he	would	reap	in	reward	for	killing	at	least	two	of	the	old
conspirators.
Coll’s	death	would	also	leave	open	a	seat	on	the	Council.	Gorlas	smiled	at
the	thought	as	he	climbed	the	slatted	wooden	steps	up	towards	the	ridge	where
it	wound	behind	and	above	the	main	building.	Humble	Measure	would	offer	up
his	own	reward	for	such	a	thing,	no	doubt	one	that	would	make	the	gratitude	of
Hanut	and	Shardan	seem	like	a	pauper ’s	grudging	gift.	He	had	a	sudden,	odd
image	then	of	a	half-dozen	such	paupers	–	beggars	and	worse	–	gathered	in
some	abandoned	building,	squatting	on	damp	earth	as	they	passed	round	a


pathetic	slab	of	grainy	bread	and	a	mouldy	lump	of	cheese.	And,	as	he	looked
on	like	some	unseen	ghost,	he	had	the	sense	that	the	circle	was	somehow…
incomplete.
Someone	is	missing.	Who’s	missing?
He	shook	himself	then,	dispelling	the	scene,	and	found	that	he	had	halted
just	below	the	landing,	one	hand	on	the	rail	at	his	side.	At	that	last	moment,	as
the	image	burst	apart,	he	thought	he	had	caught	a	glimpse	of	something	–	a
corpse	twisting	beneath	a	thick	branch,	the	face	swinging	round	to	meet	his
own	–	then	gone.
Gorlas	found	his	mouth	unaccountably	dry.	Had	some	god	or	spirit	sent
him	a	vision?	Well,	if	something	or	someone	had,	it	was	a	poor	one,	for	he
could	make	no	sense	of	it,	none	at	all.
He	tugged	on	his	gloves	and	resumed	the	climb,	emerging	out	into	the
blessed	sunlight	where	everything	was	painted	gold.	Yes,	the	wealth	of	the
world	was	within	reach.	He’d	never	understood	poor	people,	their	stupidity,
their	lack	of	ambition,	their	laziness.	So	much	within	reach	–	couldn’t	they	see
that?	And	then	how	dare	they	bitch	and	complain	and	cast	him	dark	looks,	when
he	went	and	took	all	that	he	could?	Let	them	fall	to	the	wayside,	let	them	tumble
underfoot.	He	was	going	where	he	wanted	to	be	and	if	that	meant	pushing	them
out	of	the	way,	or	crushing	them	down,	so	be	it.
Why,	he	could	have	been	born	in	the	damned	gutter,	and	he’d	still	be	where
he	was	today.	It	was	his	nature	to	succeed,	to	win.	The	fools	could	keep	their
resentment	and	envy.	Hard	work,	discipline,	and	the	courage	to	grasp
opportunity	when	it	presented	itself	–	these	were	all	the	things	most	people
lacked.	What	they	didn’t	lack,	not	in	the	least,	was	the	boundless	energy	to
complain.	Bitterness	was	a	waste	of	energy,	and,	like	acid,	it	ate	the	vessel	that
held	it.
As	he	came	round	the	curve	of	the	ridge	he	saw	at	once	that	the	man
awaiting	him	was	not	Coll.	Nor,	Gorlas	realized,	was	he	a	stranger.	Gods
below,	can	this	be?	Oponn,	is	it	you	so	blessing	me	now?	Pull	me	forward,	Lady.
Shove	him	closer,	Lord.
The	young	man	(well,	they	were	of	the	same	age,	but	not	in	Gorlas’s	eyes)
saw	him	approach	and	slowly	dismounted,	stepping	round	the	horse	and
positioning	himself	in	the	centre	of	the	path	facing	Gorlas.
‘She	was	not	foolish	enough	to	send	you	here,	was	she?’
‘You	know	me,	then.’
Gorlas	smiled.	‘I	watched	you	once,	only	a	few	days	back,	from	across	a
street.	You	looked	guilty,	did	you	know	that?	You	looked	like	a	coward	–	what
is	your	name?	I	want	to	know	your	name,	so	I	can	be	precise	when	I	tell	her


what	I’ve	done	to	you…and	your	corpse.’
The	man	stood	unmoving,	arms	at	his	sides.	‘I	am	not	here	for	Challice,’
he	said.
‘If	you	want	to	think	it	was	all	your	idea,	fine.	But	I	should	tell	you,	I	know
her	well	–	far	better	than	you.	She’s	been	working	on	you,	filling	your	head	–
she’s	pretty	much	led	you	here	by	the	hand,	even	if	you’re	too	thick	to	realize
it.	Of	course,	she	probably	didn’t	want	anyone	too	smart,	since	a	clever	man
would	have	seen	through	her	deadly	scheming.	A	clever	man	would	have
walked	away.	Or	run.’
The	man	tilted	his	head	slightly.	‘What	is	the	value	of	all	this,	Gorlas
Vidikas?’
Gorlas	sighed,	glanced	back	at	the	foreman,	who	stood	watching	and
listening	–	yes,	something	would	have	to	be	done	about	that	–	and	then	faced
the	man	once	more.	‘Since	you’re	too	much	the	coward	to	actually	tell	me	your
name,	I	will	just	have	to	slice	off	your	face,	to	take	back	to	her	as	proof.	Look
at	you,	you’re	not	even	wearing	a	sword.	Foreman!	Do	we	still	have	Murillio’s
rapier?	I	forget,	did	that	go	back	with	him?’
‘Not	sure,	sir	–	want	me	to	go	and	look?’
‘Well,	find	the	waif	a	sword.	Anything	will	do	–	it’s	not	as	if	he	knows	how
to	use	it	in	any	case.	And	hurry,	before	we	lose	the	light	and	the	mob	down
there	gets	bored	waiting.’	He	smiled	at	the	man.	‘They’ve	got	bloodthirsty	of
late	–	my	fault,	that—’
‘Yes,	about	Murillio…’
‘Ah,	is	that	why	you’ve	come?	The	duel	was	fairly	fought.	He	simply	could
not	match	my	skill.’
‘Where	is	the	boy?’
‘So	he’s	the	reason	you’re	here?	This	is	getting	difficult	to	believe.	The
child’s	not	some	orphaned	prince	or	something,	is	he?	Rather,	was	he?’
‘Was?’
‘Yes.	He’s	dead,	I’m	afraid.’
‘I	see.’
‘So,	still	interested?’	Gorlas	asked.	‘Of	course,	that’s	not	really	relevant
any	more,	because	I	want	you	to	stay.	I	suppose	you	can	try	to	run,	but	I	assure
you,	you’ll	be	cut	down	before	you	get	astride	that	fine	horse	–	a	horse	I	will
welcome	in	my	stables.	Tell	me,	are	you	a	better	duellist	than	Murillio	was?
You’ll	have	to	be.	Much	better.’
The	foreman	had	gone	halfway	down	the	trail	before	yelling	instructions,
and	now	a	youth	was	scurrying	up	cradling	a	sword	–	not	Murillio’s,	but
something	found	in	one	of	the	workings	from	the	look	of	it.	Thin,	tapered	to	a


point	that	was	slightly	bent.	Iron,	at	least,	but	the	patina	was	a	thick	crust	over
the	blade’s	spine,	and	both	edges	were	severely	notched.	The	handle,	Gorlas
saw	as	the	foreman	–	breath	wheezing	–	delivered	it,	wasn’t	even	wrapped.
‘Sorry	about	the	lack	of	grip,’	Gorlas	said.	‘But	really,	you	should	have
come	prepared.’
‘How	did	it	feel,’	the	man	asked,	‘killing	an	old	man?’
‘The	duel	was	fair—’
‘Agreed	to	the	death?	I	doubt	that,	Vidikas.’
‘I	dislike	the	lack	of	respect	in	using	my	last	name	like	that	–	especially
when	you	won’t	even	tell	me	your	name.’
‘Well,	your	wife	calls	you	Useless,	so	if	you’d	prefer	that…’
Gorlas	flung	the	weapon	at	the	man’s	feet,	where	it	skidded	in	a	puff	of
golden	dust.	‘On	guard,’	he	ordered	in	a	rasp.	‘To	the	death.’
The	man	made	no	move	to	pick	up	the	weapon.	He	stood	as	he	had	before,
head	tipped	a	fraction	to	one	side.
‘You	are	a	coward	in	truth,’	Gorlas	said,	drawing	his	rapier.	‘Cowards	do
not	deserve	to	be	treated	with	honour,	so	let	us	dispense	with	convention—’
‘I	was	waiting	for	you	to	say	that.’
	
The	foreman,	standing	off	to	one	side,	still	struggling	with	the	ache	in	his	chest
from	a	labouring	heart,	was	in	the	process	of	licking	his	gritty	lips.	Before	he
had	finished	that	instinctive	flicker,	the	scene	before	him	irrevocably	changed.
And	Gorlas	Vidikas	was	falling	forward,	landing	hard.	His	rapier	rolled
from	his	hand	to	catch	up	in	the	grass	lining	the	track.	Dust	puffed	up,	then
slowly	settled.
The	stranger	–	had	he	even	moved?	the	foreman	was	unsure	–	now	turned
to	him	and	said,	‘You	heard	him	dispense	with	the	rules	of	the	duel,	correct?’
The	foreman	nodded.
‘And,	think	back	now,	good	sir,	did	you	even	once	hear	me	voice	a	formal
challenge?’
‘Well,	I	was	part	of	the	way	down	the	trail	for	a	moment—’
‘But	not	beyond	range	of	hearing,	I’m	sure.’
‘Ah,	no,	unless	you	did	whisper	something—’
‘Think	back.	Gorlas	was	babbling	on	and	on	–	could	I	have	said	anything
even	if	I’d	wanted	to?’
‘True	enough,	thinking	on	it.’
‘Then	are	we	satisfied	here?’
‘Ain’t	for	me	to	say	that	either	way,’	the	foreman	replied.	‘It’s	the	man	this


one	was	working	for.’
‘Who,	being	absent,	will	have	to	rely	solely	upon	your	report.’
‘Er,	I	suppose	so.’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Do	as	you	see	fit,	then.’	He	glanced	down	into	the	pit.
‘You	get	the	feeling	they’re	about	to	start	cheering,’	he	said.
‘They	ain’t	decided.’
‘No?’
‘They	ain’t	decided	if	whoever	replaces	Vidikas	is	gonna	be	any	better,	you
see?’
‘Because,	in	their	experience,	they’re	all	the	same.’
The	foreman	nodded.	‘Didn’t	think	you	was	nobleborn.’
‘No,	I’m	not.’
‘No,	you’re	pretty	much	like	them	below.	Like	me,	even.’
‘I	suppose	so.’	The	man	walked	to	the	body	of	Gorlas	Vidikas,	bent	down
to	roll	it	on	to	its	back,	and	the	foreman	saw	the	two	knife	handles,	blades
buried	to	the	hilts,	jutting	from	Gorlas’s	chest.
He	decided	to	lick	his	lips	again,	and	somehow	the	dust	suddenly	tasted
sweeter.	‘Know	anything	’bout	property	law,	by	any	chance?’
‘Sorry,	what?’
‘Like,	if	I	was	paying	on	a	loan	to	this	man—’
‘No,	no	idea.	Though	I	imagine	if	you	just	sit	tight,	maybe	wait	to	see	if
anybody	ever	shows	up	to	collect,	well,	that	would	hardly	be	considered
illegal.	Would	it	now?’
‘No,	seems	proper	enough	to	me,’	the	foreman	agreed.
The	man	worked	the	knives	back	out,	wiped	the	blood	off	on	the	stained,
rumpled	cloak.	‘Did	he	tell	true	about	Harllo?’
‘What?	Oh.	He	did.	The	lad	tried	to	escape,	and	was	killed.’
The	man	sighed,	and	then	straightened.	‘Ah,	shit,	Murillio,’	he	muttered.
‘I’m	sorry.’
‘Wait	–	this	Harllo	–	was	he	that	important?	I	mean—’	and	the	foreman
gestured,	to	encompass	not	only	the	corpse	lying	on	the	road,	but	the	one	that
had	been	there	the	day	before	as	well,	‘all	this	killing.	Who	was	Harllo?’
The	man	walked	to	his	horse	and	swung	himself	into	the	saddle.	He
collected	the	reins.	‘I’m	not	sure,’	he	said	after	a	moment’s	consideration.	‘The
way	it	started,	well,	it	seemed…’	he	hesitated,	and	then	said,	‘he	was	a	boy
nobody	loved.’
Bitter	and	scarred	as	he	was,	even	the	foreman	winced	at	that.	‘Most	of	’em
are,	as	end	up	here.	Most	of	’em	are.’
The	man	studied	him	from	the	saddle.


The	foreman	wondered	–	he	didn’t	see	much	in	the	way	of	triumph	or
satisfaction	in	that	face	looking	down	at	him.	He	wasn’t	sure	what	he	was
seeing,	in	fact.	Whatever	it	was,	it	didn’t	fit.
The	stranger	drew	the	horse	round	and	set	off	up	the	road.	Heading	back	to
the	city.
The	foreman	coughed	up	a	throatful	of	rank	phlegm,	then	stepped	forward
and	spat	down,	quite	precisely,	on	to	the	upturned	face	of	Gorlas	Vidikas.	Then
he	turned	round.	‘I	want	three	guards	and	the	fastest	horses	we	got!’
He	watched	the	runner	scramble.
From	the	pit	below	rose	the	occasional	snatch	of	harsh	laughter.	The
foreman	understood	that	well	enough,	and	so	he	nodded.	‘Damn	and	below,	I’ll
give	’em	all	an	extra	flagon	of	ale	anyway.’
	
Cutter	rode	for	a	time	as	dusk	surrendered	to	darkness.	The	horse	was	the	first
to	sense	a	loss	of	will,	as	the	rider	on	its	back	ceased	all	efforts	at	guiding	its
pace.	The	beast	dropped	from	a	canter	to	a	trot,	then	a	walk,	and	then	it	came	to
rest	and	stood	at	the	edge	of	the	road,	head	lowering	to	snag	a	tuft	of	grass.
Cutter	stared	down	at	his	hands,	watched	as	the	reins	slithered	free.	And
then	he	began	to	weep.	For	Murillio,	for	a	boy	he	had	never	met.	But	most	of
all,	he	wept	for	himself.
Come	to	me,	my	love.	Come	to	me	now.
A	short	time	later,	three	messengers	thundered	past	–	paying	him	no	heed
at	all.	The	drum	of	horse	hoofs	was	slow	to	fade,	and	the	clouds	of	dust	left	in
their	wake	hung	suspended,	lit	only	by	starlight.
	
Venaz	the	hero,	Venaz	who	followed	orders,	and	if	those	meant	something
vicious,	even	murderous,	then	that	was	how	it	would	be.	No	questions,	no
qualms.	He	had	returned	up	top	in	grim	triumph.	Another	escape	thwarted,	the
message	sweetly	delivered.	Even	so,	he	liked	being	thorough.	In	fact,	he’d
wanted	to	make	sure.
And	so,	in	keeping	with	his	new	privileges	as	head	of	the	moles,	when	he
collected	a	knotted	climbing	rope	and	set	off	back	into	the	tunnels,	he	was	not
accosted.	He	could	do	as	he	liked	now,	couldn’t	he?	And	when	he	returned,
carrying	whatever	proof	he	could	find	of	the	deaths	of	Bainisk	and	Harllo,	then
Gorlas	Vidikas	would	see	just	how	valuable	he	was,	and	Venaz	would	find	a
new	life	for	himself.


Good	work	led	to	good	rewards.	A	simple	enough	truth.
Whatever	flood	had	filled	part	of	the	passage	deep	in	the	Settle	had	mostly
drained	away,	easing	his	trek	to	the	crevasse.	When	he	reached	it	he	crouched
at	the	edge,	listening	carefully	–	to	make	certain	that	no	one	was	still	alive,
maybe	scuffling	about	in	the	pitch	blackness	down	below.	Satisfied,	he	worked
Bainisk’s	rope	off	the	knob	of	stone	and	replaced	it	with	his	own,	then	sent	the
rest	of	the	coil	tumbling	over	the	edge.
Venaz	set	his	lantern	to	its	lowest	setting	and	tied	half	a	body-length	of
twine	to	the	handle,	and	the	other	end	to	one	ankle.	He	let	the	lantern	down,	and
then	followed	with	his	legs.	He	brought	both	feet	together,	the	rope	in	between,
and	edged	further	over	until	they	rested	on	a	knot.	Now,	so	long	as	the	twine
didn’t	get	fouled	with	the	rope,	he’d	be	fine.
Moving	with	great	caution,	he	began	his	descent.
Broken,	bleeding	bodies	somewhere	below,	killed	by	rocks	–	not	by	Venaz,
since	he’d	not	even	cut	the	rope.	Bainisk	had	done	that,	the	fool.	Still,	Venaz
could	take	the	credit	–	nothing	wrong	with	that.
Even	with	the	knots,	the	slow	going	was	making	his	arms	and	shoulders
ache.	He	didn’t	really	have	to	do	this.	But	maybe	it	would	be	the	one	deed	that
made	all	the	difference	in	the	eyes	of	Gorlas	Vidikas.	Nobles	looked	for
certain	things,	mysterious	things.	They	were	born	with	skills	and	talents.	He
needed	to	show	the	man	as	much	as	he	could	of	his	own	talents	and	all	that.
The	lantern	clunked	below	him	and	he	looked	down	to	see	the	faint	blush
of	dull	light	playing	across	dry,	jagged	stones.	A	few	moments	later	he	was
standing,	somewhat	uneasily	as	the	rocks	shifted	about	beneath	him.	He	untied
the	lantern	and	put	away	the	twine,	and	then	twisted	the	wick	up	a	couple	of
notches.	The	circle	of	light	widened.
He	saw	Bainisk’s	feet,	the	worn	soles	of	the	moccasins,	the	black-spattered
shins,	both	of	which	were	snapped	and	showing	the	split	ends	of	bones.	But
there	was	no	flowing	blood.	Bainisk	was	dead	as	dead	come.
He	worked	his	way	closer	and	stared	down	at	the	smashed	face,	slightly
startled	by	the	way	it	seemed	fixed	in	a	smile.
Venaz	crouched.	He	would	collect	Bainisk’s	belt-pouch,	where	he	kept	all
his	valuables	–	the	small	ivory-handled	knife	that	Venaz	so	coveted;	the	halfdozen	coppers	earned	as	rewards	for	special	tasks;	the	one	silver	coin	that
Bainisk	had	cherished	the	most,	as	it	showed	on	one	face	a	city	skyline	beneath
a	rainbow	or	some	sort	of	huge	moon	filling	the	sky	–	a	coin,	someone	had
said,	from	Darujhistan,	but	long	ago,	in	the	time	of	the	Tyrants.	Treasures	now
belonging	to	Venaz.
But	he	could	not	find	the	pouch.	He	rolled	the	body	over,	scanned	the


blood-smeared	rocks	beneath	and	to	all	sides.	No	pouch.	Not	even	fragments
of	string.
He	must	have	given	it	to	Harllo.	Or	maybe	he’d	lost	it	somewhere	back	up
the	passage	–	if	Venaz	didn’t	find	it	down	here	he	could	make	a	careful	search
on	his	way	back	up	top.
Now,	time	to	find	the	other	boy,	the	one	he’d	hated	almost	from	the	first.
Always	acted	like	he	was	smarter	than	everyone	else.	It	was	that	look	in	his
eyes,	as	if	he	knew	he	was	better,	so	much	better	it	was	easy	to	be	nice	to	all	the
stupider	people.	Easy	to	smile	and	say	nice	things.	Easy	to	be	helpful	and
generous.
Venaz	wandered	out	from	Bainisk’s	body.	Something	was	missing	–	and
not	just	Harllo’s	body.	And	then,	after	a	moment,	he	realized	what	it	was.	The
rest	of	the	damned	rope,	which	should	have	fallen	close	to	the	cliff	base,	close
to	Bainisk.	The	damned	rope	was	gone	–	and	so	was	Harllo.
He	worked	his	way	along	the	crevasse	and	after	twenty	or	so	steps	he
reached	the	edge	of	the	floor,	which	he	discovered	wasn’t	a	floor	at	all,	but	a
plug,	a	bridge	of	fallen	rock.	The	crevasse	dropped	away	an	unknown	depth,
and	the	air	rising	from	below	was	hot	and	dry.	Frightened	by	the	realization
that	he	was	standing	on	something	that	could	collapse	and	fall	away	at	any
moment,	Venaz	hurried	back	in	the	other	direction.
Harllo	was	probably	badly	hurt.	He	must	have	been.	Unless…maybe	he	had
been	already	down,	standing,	holding	the	damned	rope,	just	waiting	for
Bainisk	to	join	him.	Venaz	found	his	mouth	suddenly	dry.	He’d	been	careless.
That	wouldn’t	go	down	well,	would	it?	This	could	only	work	out	right	if	he
tracked	the	runt	down	and	finished	him	off.	The	thought	sent	a	cold	tremor
through	him	–	he’d	never	actually	killed	somebody	before.	Could	he	even	do
it?	He’d	have	to,	to	make	everything	right.
The	plug	sloped	slightly	upward	on	the	other	side	of	Bainisk’s	body,	and
each	chunk	of	stone	was	bigger,	the	spaces	between	them	whistling	with	winds
from	below.	Terrifying	grating	sounds	accompanied	his	every	tender	step.
Fifteen	paces	on,	another	sudden	drop-off.	Baffled,	Venaz	worked	his	way
along	the	edge.	He	reached	the	facing	wall	–	the	other	side	of	the	crevasse	–
and	held	high	the	lantern.	In	the	light	he	saw	an	angular	fissure,	two	shelves	of
bedrock	where	one	side	had	shifted	faster	and	farther	than	the	other	–	he	could
even	see	where	the	broken	seams	continued	between	the	shelves.	The	drop	had
been	about	a	body’s	height,	and	the	fissure	–	barely	a	forearm	wide	–	angled
sharply	into	a	kind	of	chute.
Bainisk	would	never	have	squeezed	into	that	crack.	But	Harllo	could,	and
did	–	it	was	the	only	way	off	the	plug.


Venaz	retied	the	lantern,	and	then	forced	himself	into	the	fissure.	A	tight	fit.
He	could	only	draw	half-breaths	before	the	cage	of	his	ribs	met	solid,
unyielding	stone.	Whimpering,	he	pushed	himself	deeper,	but	not	so	deep	as	to
get	stuck	–	no,	to	climb	he’d	need	at	least	one	arm	free.	By	crabbing	one	leg
sideways	and	squirming	with	his	torso,	he	moved	himself	into	a	position
whereby	he	could	hitch	himself	up	in	increments.	The	dry,	baked	feel	of	the
stone	began	as	a	salvation.	Had	it	been	wet	he	would	simply	have	slid	back
down	again	and	again.	Before	he’d	managed	two	man-heights,	however,	he
was	slick	with	sweat,	and	finding	streaks	of	the	same	above	him,	attesting	to
Harllo’s	own	struggles.	And	he	found	that	the	only	way	he	could	hold	himself
in	place	between	forward	hitches	was	to	take	the	deepest	breath	he	could
manage,	turning	his	own	chest	into	a	wedge,	a	plug.	The	rough,	worn	fabric	of
his	tunic	was	rubbing	his	skin	raw.
How	much	time	passed?	How	long	this	near	vertical	passage?	Venaz	lost
all	sense	of	such	details.	He	was	in	darkness,	a	world	of	stone	walls,	dry	gusts
of	air	along	one	flank,	a	right	arm	that	screamed	with	fatigue.	He	bled.	He
oozed	sweat.	He	was	a	mass	of	scrapes	and	gouges.	But	then	the	fissure
widened	in	step	fractures,	each	one	providing	a	blessed	ledge	on	which	to
finally	rest	his	quivering	muscles.	Widening,	becoming	a	manageable	chute.
He	was	able	to	draw	in	deep	breaths,	and	the	creaking	ache	of	his	ribs	slowly
faded.	He	continued	on,	and	before	long	he	reached	a	new	stress	fracture,	this
one	cutting	straight	into	the	bedrock,	perpendicular	to	the	chute.
Venaz	hesitated,	and	then	worked	his	way	into	it,	to	see	how	far	it	went	–
and	almost	instantly	he	smelled	humus,	faint	and	stale,	and	a	little	farther	in	he
arrived	at	an	almost	horizontal	dip	where	forest	detritus	had	settled.	Behind	that
heady	smell	there	was	something	else	–	acrid,	fresh.	He	brightened	the	lantern
and	held	it	out	before	him.	A	steep	slope	of	scree	rose	along	the	passage,	and
even	as	he	scanned	it	there	was	the	clatter	of	stones	bouncing	down	to	patter
amidst	the	dried	leaves	and	dead	moss.
He	hurried	to	the	base	of	the	slide	and	peered	upward.
And	saw	Harllo	–	no	more	than	twenty	man-heights	above	him,	flattened
on	the	scree,	pulling	himself	upward	with	feeble	motions.
Yes,	he	had	smelled	the	boy.
Venaz	smiled,	and	then	quickly	shuttered	the	lantern.	If	Harllo	found	out	he
was	being	chased	still,	he	might	try	to	kick	loose	a	deadly	slide	of	the	rubble	–
of	course,	if	he	did	that	it’d	take	him	down	with	it.	Harllo	wasn’t	stupid.	Any
wrong	move	on	this	slide	and	they’d	both	die.	The	real	risk	was	when	he
reached	the	very	top,	pulling	clear.	Then	there	could	be	real	trouble	for	Venaz.
And	smell	that	downward	draught	–	that	was	fresh,	clean	air.	Smelling	of


reeds	and	mud.	The	lake	shore.
Venaz	thought	about	things,	and	thought	some	more.	And	then	settled	on	a
plan.	A	desperate,	risky	one.	But	really,	he	had	no	choice.	No	matter	what,
Harllo	would	hear	him	on	this	climb.	Fine,	then,	let	him.
He	laughed,	a	low,	throaty	laugh	that	he	knew	would	travel	up	the	stones
like	a	hundred	serpents,	coiling	with	icy	poison	round	Harllo’s	heart.	Laughed,
and	then	crooned,	‘Harrrllo!	Found	youuu!’
And	he	heard	an	answering	cry.	A	squeal	like	a	crippled	puppy	underfoot,	a
whimper	of	bleak	terror.	And	all	of	this	was	good.
Panic	was	what	he	wanted.	Not	the	kind	that	would	make	the	boy	scrabble
wildly	–	since	that	might	just	send	him	all	the	way	back	down	–	but	the	kind	that
would,	once	he	gained	the	top,	send	him	flying	out	into	the	night,	to	run	and
run	and	run.
Venaz	abandoned	the	lantern	and	began	climbing.
The	chase	was	torturous.	Like	two	worms	they	snaked	up	the	dusty	slabs	of
shale.	Desperate	flight	and	pursuit	were	both	trapped	in	the	stuttering	beating	of
hearts,	the	quaking	gasps	of	needful	lungs.	All	trapped	inside,	for	their	limbs
could	move	but	slowly,	locked	in	an	agonizing	tentativeness.	Minute	slides
froze	them	both,	queasy	shifts	made	them	spread	arms	and	legs	wide,	breaths
held,	eyes	squeezed	shut.
Venaz	would	have	to	kill	him.	For	all	of	this,	Harllo	would	die.	There	was
no	other	choice	now,	and	Venaz	found	it	suddenly	easy	to	think	about	choking
the	life	from	the	boy.	His	hands	round	Harllo’s	chicken	neck,	the	face	above
them	turning	blue,	then	grey.	Jutting	tongue,	bulging	eyes	–	yes,	that	wouldn’t
be	hard	at	all.
Sudden	scrambling	above,	a	skitter	of	stones,	and	then	Venaz	realized	he
was	alone	on	the	slide.	Harllo	had	reached	the	surface,	and	thank	the	gods,	he
was	running.
Your	one	mistake,	Harllo,	and	now	I’ll	have	you.	Your	throat	in	my	hands.
I	have	you.
	
The	soft	whisper	of	arrivals	once	more	awakens,	even	as	figures	depart.	From
places	of	hiding,	from	refuges,	from	squalid	nests.	Into	the	streams	of
darkness,	shadowy	shapes	slide	unseen.
	
Thordy	watched	as	the	killer	who	was	her	husband	set	out	from	the	cage	of	lies


they	called,	with	quaint	irony,	their	home.	As	his	chopping	footfalls	faded,	she
walked	out	to	her	garden,	to	stand	at	the	edge	of	the	pavestone	circle.	She
looked	skyward,	but	there	was	no	moon	as	yet,	no	bright	smudge	to	bleach	the
blue	glow	of	the	city’s	gaslight.
A	voice	murmured	in	her	head,	a	heavy,	weighted	voice.	And	what	it	told
her	made	her	heart	slow	its	wild	hammering,	brought	peace	to	her	thoughts.
Even	as	it	spoke,	in	measured	tones,	of	a	terrible	legacy	of	death.
She	drew	the	one	decent	kitchen	knife	they	possessed,	and	held	the	cold	flat
of	the	blade	against	one	wrist.	In	this	odd,	ominous	stance,	she	waited.
In	the	city,	at	that	moment,	Gaz	walked	an	alley.	Wanting	to	find	someone.
Anyone.	To	kill,	to	beat	into	a	ruin,	smashing	bones,	bursting	eyes,	tearing
slack	lips	across	the	sharp	stumps	of	broken	teeth.	Anticipation	was	such	a
delicious	game,	wasn’t	it?
	
In	another	home,	this	one	part	residence,	part	studio,	Tiserra	dried	her	freshly
washed	hands.	Every	sense	within	her	felt	suddenly	raw,	as	if	scraped	with
crushed	glass.	She	hesitated,	listening,	hearing	naught	but	her	own	breathing,
this	frail	bellows	of	life	that	now	seemed	so	frighteningly	vulnerable.
Something	had	begun.	She	was,	she	realized,	terrified.
Tiserra	hurried	to	a	certain	place	in	the	house.	Began	a	frantic	search.
Found	the	hidden	cache	where	her	husband	had	stored	his	precious	gifts	from
the	Blue	Moranth.
Empty.
Yes,	she	told	herself,	her	husband	was	no	fool.	He	was	a	survivor	–	it	was
his	greatest	talent.	Hard	won	at	that	–	nowhere	near	that	treacherous	arena
where	Oponn	played	push	and	pull.	He’d	taken	what	he	needed.	He’d	done	what
he	could.
She	stood,	feeling	helpless.	This	particular	feeling	was	not	pleasant,	not
pleasant	at	all.	It	promised	that	the	night	ahead	would	stretch	out	into	eternity.
	
Blend	descended	to	the	main	floor,	where	she	paused.	The	bard	sat	on	the	edge
of	the	stage,	tuning	his	lyre.	Duiker	sat	at	his	usual	table,	frowning	at	a	tankard
of	ale	that	his	hands	were	wrapped	round	as	if	he	was	throttling	some	hard,
unyielding	fate.
Antsy	–	Antsy	was	in	gaol.	Scillara	had	wandered	out	a	few	bells	earlier
and	had	not	returned.	Barathol	was	spending	his	last	night	in	his	own	cell	–


he’d	be	on	a	wagon	headed	out	to	some	ironworks	come	the	dawn.
Picker	was	lying	on	a	cot	upstairs,	eyes	closed,	breaths	shallow	and	weak.
She	was,	in	truth,	gone.	Probably	never	to	return.
Blend	drew	on	her	cloak.	Neither	man	paid	her	any	attention.
She	left	the	bar.
	
Ever	since	the	pretty	scary	woman	had	left	earlier	–	how	long,	days,	weeks,
years,	Chaur	had	no	idea	–	he	had	sat	alone,	clutching	the	sweating	lance	a	dead
man	wearing	a	mask	had	once	given	C’ur,	and	rocking	back	and	forth.	Then,
all	at	once,	he	wanted	to	leave.	Why?	Because	the	gulls	outside	never	stopped
talking,	and	the	boat	squeaked	like	a	rat	in	a	fist,	and	all	the	slapping	water
made	him	need	to	pee.
Besides,	he	had	to	find	Baral.	The	one	face	that	was	always	kind,	making	it
easy	to	remember.	The	face	that	belonged	to	Da	and	Ma	both,	just	one	face,	to
make	it	easier	to	remember.	Without	Baral,	the	world	turned	cold.	And	mean,
and	nothing	felt	solid,	and	trying	to	stay	together	when	everything	else	wasn’t
was	so	hard.
So	he	dropped	the	lance,	rose	and	set	out.
To	find	Baral.	And	yes,	he	knew	where	to	find	him.	How	he	knew	no	one
could	say.	How	he	thought,	no	one	could	imagine.	How	deep	and	vast	his	love,
no	one	could	conceive.
	
Spite	stood	across	the	street	from	the	infernal	estate	that	was	the	temporary
residence	of	her	infernal	sister,	and	contemplated	her	next	move,	each
consideration	accompanied	by	a	pensive	tap	of	one	finger	against	her	full,
sweetly	painted	lips.
All	at	once	that	tapping	finger	froze	in	mid-tap,	and	she	slowly	cocked	her
head.	‘Oh,’	she	murmured.	And	again,	‘Oh.’
The	wind	howled	in	the	distance.
But,	of	course,	there	was	no	wind,	was	there?
‘Oh.’
And	how	would	this	change	things?
	
A	guard,	ignoring	once	more	the	dull	ache	in	his	chest	and	the	occasional	stab
of	pain	shooting	down	his	left	arm,	walked	out	from	the	guard	annexe	to	begin


his	rounds,	making	his	way	to	the	Lakefront	District	and	the	wall	that	divided	it
from	the	Daru	District	–	the	nightly	murders	had	begun	clustering	to	either
side	of	that	wall.	Maybe	this	time	he’d	be	lucky	and	see	something	–	someone	–
and	everything	would	fall	into	place.	Maybe.
He	had	put	in	a	requisition	for	a	mage,	a	necromancer,	in	fact,	but	alas	the
wheels	of	bureaucracy	ground	reluctantly	in	such	matters.	It	would	probably
take	the	slaying	of	someone	important	before	things	could	lurch	into	motion.
He	really	couldn’t	wait	for	that.	Finding	this	killer	had	become	a	personal
crusade.
The	night	was	strangely	quiet,	given	that	it	marked	the	culmination	of	the
Gedderone	Fête.	Most	people	were	still	in	the	taverns	and	bars,	he	told	himself,
even	as	he	fought	off	a	preternatural	unease,	and	even	as	he	noted	the	taut
expressions	of	those	people	he	passed,	and	the	way	they	seemed	to	scurry	by.
Where	was	the	revelry?	The	delirious	dancing?	Early	yet,	he	told	himself.	But
those	two	words	and	everything	behind	them	felt	oddly	flat.
He	could	hear	a	distant	storm	on	the	plains	south	of	the	city.	Steady
thunder,	an	echoing	wind,	and	he	told	himself	he	was	feeling	that	storm’s
approach.	Nothing	more,	just	the	usual	fizz	in	the	air	that	preceded	such	events.
He	hurried	on,	grimacing	at	the	ache	in	his	chest,	still	feeling	the	parting
kiss	of	his	wife	on	his	lips,	the	careless	hugs	of	his	children	round	his	waist.
He	was	a	man	who	would	never	ask	for	sympathy.	He	was	a	man	who
sought	only	to	do	what	was	right.	Such	people	appear	in	the	world,	every
world,	now	and	then,	like	a	single	refrain	of	some	blessed	song,	a	fragment
caught	on	the	spur	of	an	otherwise	raging	cacophony.
Imagine	a	world	without	such	souls.
Yes,	it	should	have	been	harder	to	do.
	
After	a	rather	extended	time	of	muted	regard	fixed	dully	upon	a	sealed	crypt,
four	mourners	began	their	return	journey	to	the	Phoenix	Inn,	where	Meese
would	make	a	grim	discovery	–	although	one	that,	in	retrospect,	did	not	in	fact
shock	her	as	much	as	it	might	have.
Before	they	had	gone	five	hundred	paces,	however,	Rallick	Nom	drew	to	a
sudden	halt.	‘I	must	leave	you	now,’	he	said	to	the	others.
‘Kruppe	understands.’
And	the	assassin	narrowed	his	gaze	upon	the	short,	solemn-faced	man.
‘Where,’	Rallick	asked,	‘will	this	go,	Kruppe?’
‘The	future,	my	friend,	is	ever	turned	away,	even	when	it	faces	us.’
To	this	bizarre,	unlikely	truism,	Coll	grunted,	‘Gods	below,	Kruppe—’


But	Rallick	had	already	completed	his	own	turning	away	and	was	walking
towards	the	mouth	of	an	alley.
‘I	got	a	sick	feeling	inside,’	Meese	said.
Coll	grunted	a	second	time	and	then	said,	‘Let’s	go.	I	need	to	find	me
another	bottle	–	this	time	with	something	in	it	that	actually	does	something.’
Kruppe	offered	him	a	beatific	smile.	Disingenuous?	Really	now.
	
Seba	Krafar,	Master	of	the	Assassins’	Guild,	surveyed	his	small	army	of
murderers.	Thirty-one	in	all.	Granted,	absurd	overkill,	but	even	so	he	found
himself	not	quite	as	comfortable	–	or	as	confident	–	as	such	numbers	should
have	made	him.	‘This	is	ridiculous,’	he	muttered	under	his	breath.	And	then	he
gestured.
The	mob	shifted	into	three	distinct	groups,	and	then	each	hurried	off	in	a
different	direction,	to	close	on	the	target	at	the	appointed	time.
Come	the	morning,	there’d	be	a	newly	vacated	seat	on	the	Council.	Blooddrenched,	true,	but	it	would	hardly	be	the	first	time	for	that,	would	it?
	
Shardan	Lim	saw	before	him	a	perfect	future.	He	would,	if	all	went	well,
finally	step	out	from	Hanut	Orr ’s	shadow.	And	into	his	own	shadow	he’d	drag
Gorlas	Vidikas.	They	would	be	sharing	a	woman,	after	all,	and	there	would	be
no	measured	balance	in	that	situation,	since	Gorlas	was	next	to	useless	when	it
came	to	satisfying	Challice.	So	Gorlas	would	find	that	his	wife’s	happiness	was
dependent	not	upon	him,	but	upon	the	other	man	sharing	her	pleasure	–
Shardan	Lim	–	and	when	the	first	child	arrived,	would	there	be	any	doubt	as	to
its	progeny?	An	heir	of	provable	bloodline,	the	perfect	usurpation	of	House
Vidikas.
He	had	set	out	alone	this	night,	making	his	casual	way	to	the	Vidikas	estate,
and	he	now	stood	opposite	the	front	gate,	studying	the	modest	but	wellconstructed	building.	There	were	hints	of	Gadrobi	in	the	style,	he	saw.	The
square	corner	tower	that	was	actually	higher	than	it	looked,	its	rooms
abandoned	to	dust	and	spiders	–	virtually	identical	edifices	could	still	be	found
here	and	there	in	the	Gadrobi	District,	and	in	the	hills	to	the	east	of	the	city.
Vines	covered	three	of	the	four	walls,	reaching	up	from	the	garden.	If	the
tower	had	been	a	tree	it	would	be	dead,	centuries	dead.	Hollowed	out	by	rot,	the
first	hard	wind	would	have	sent	it	thrashing	down.	This	deliberate	rejection
was	no	accident.	Gadrobi	blood	among	the	nobles	was	an	embarrassment.	It


had	always	been	that	way	and	it	always	would	be.
When	Shardan	owned	this	estate,	he	would	see	it	torn	down.	His	blood	was
pure	Daru.	Same	as	Challice’s	own.
He	heard	horses	approach	at	a	dangerously	fast	canter,	up	from	the	lower
city,	and	a	few	moments	later	three	riders	appeared,	sharply	reining	in	before
the	estate’s	gate.
Frowning,	Shardan	Lim	stepped	out	and	quickly	approached.
Private	guards	of	some	sort,	looking	momentarily	confused	as	they
dismounted.	Their	horses	were	lathered,	heads	dipping	as	they	snorted	out
phlegm.
‘You	three,’	Shardan	called	out,	and	they	turned.	‘I	am	Councillor	Shardan
Lim,	and	I	am	about	to	visit	the	Vidikas	estate.	If	you	carry	a	message	for	Lady
Challice,	do	permit	me	to	deliver	it.’	As	he	drew	closer,	he	offered	the	three
men	a	comradely	smile.	‘She	is	a	delicate	woman	–	having	three	sweaty	men
descend	on	her	wouldn’t	do.	I’m	sure	you	understand—’
‘Forgive	me,	Councillor,’	one	of	the	men	said,	‘but	the	news	we	deliver	is
bad.’
‘Oh?	Come	now,	no	more	hesitation.’
‘Gorlas	Vidikas	is	dead,	sir.	He	was	killed	in	a	duel	earlier	today.	We	were
instructed	to	ride	to	his	widow	first,	and	hence	on	to	Eldra	Iron	Mongery.	It
means	we	got	to	go	right	back	the	way	we	come,	but	the	foreman	insisted.	As	a
courtesy.	As	the	proper	thing	to	do.’
Shardan	Lim	simply	stared	at	the	man,	his	thoughts	racing.
‘Weren’t	no	duel,’	growled	one	of	the	other	men.
‘What’s	that?’	Shardan	demanded.	‘You	there,	step	out.	What	did	you	just
say?’
The	man	was	suddenly	frightened,	but	he	moved	into	the	councillor ’s	line
of	sight,	managed	a	quick	bow	and	then	said,	‘He	was	assassinated,	sir.	The
foreman	kept	saying	it	was	all	legitimate,	but	we	saw	it,	sir,	with	our	own	eyes.
Two	knives—’
‘Two	knives?	Two	knives?	Are	you	certain?’
‘Because	of	the	other	duel,	you	see,	sir.	It	was	revenge.	It	was	murder.
Councillor	Vidikas	killed	another	man,	then	this	other	one	shows	up.	Then	out
flash	those	knives	–	so	fast	you	couldn’t	even	see	’em,	and	Councillor	Vidikas
topples	over,	stone	dead,	sir.	Stone	dead.’
‘This	is	all	sounding	familiar,’	Shardan	Lim	said.	‘Listen	to	me,	you	three.
One	of	you,	ride	to	the	Orr	estate	and	inform	Councillor	Hanut	Orr.	The	other
two,	go	on	to	Eldra,	as	you	will.	I	will	inform	Lady	Challice.	Then,	the	three	of
you,	find	a	decent	inn	for	the	night	and	tell	the	proprietor	to	treat	you	well,	and


to	bill	House	Lim.	Go	on,	now.’
There	was	some	discussion	as	to	who	would	go	where,	and	which	inn
they’d	rendezvous	at	when	the	tasks	were	done,	and	then	the	three	men	rode
off.
Thunder	to	the	south,	getting	closer.	He	could	hear	the	wind	but	it	was	yet
to	arrive.	Shardan	Lim	walked	up	to	the	gate,	pulled	on	the	braided	chime	in	its
elongated	niche.	While	he	waited	for	the	doorman	to	arrive,	he	thought	about
how	he	would	deliver	this	grim	news.	He	would	need	a	grave	countenance,
something	more	fitting	than	the	dark	grin	he	was	even	now	fighting.
She	was	a	widow	now.	Vulnerable.	There	was	no	heir.	Cousins	and	halfrelations	might	well	creep	out	of	the	woodwork,	mediocre	but	grasping	with
sudden	ambition.	Proclaiming	ascendancy	in	the	Vidikas	bloodline	and	so
asserting	their	newly	conceived	rights	to	claim	stewardship	over	the	entire
House.	Without	strong	allies	at	her	side,	she’d	be	out	before	the	week	was
done.
Once	Hanut	Orr	heard	the	report,	and	gleaned	whatever	he	could	from	the
particular	details,	his	mind	would	fill	with	the	desire	for	vengeance	–	and	more
than	a	little	fear	along	with	it,	Shardan	was	sure.	And	he	would	not	even	think
of	Challice,	not	at	first,	and	the	opportunities	now	present.	The	next	day	or	two
would	be	crucial,	and	Shardan	would	have	to	move	sure	and	fast	to	position
himself	at	her	side	and	leave	no	room	for	Hanut	Orr	once	the	man’s	own
ambitions	awakened.
An	eye-slot	scraped	to	one	side,	then	closed	again	with	a	snap.	The	gate
opened.	‘House	Vidikas	welcomes	Councillor	Lim,’	said	the	doorman	from	his
low	bow,	as	if	addressing	Shardan’s	boots.	‘The	Lady	is	being	informed	of
your	arrival.	If	you	will	kindly	follow	me.’
And	in	they	went.
	
She	hesitated,	facing	the	wardrobe,	studying	the	array	of	possible	shifts	to
draw	on	over	her	mostly	naked	body.	Most	were	intended	to	cover	other
clothes,	as	befitted	a	modest	noblewoman	engaged	in	entertaining	guests,	but
the	truth	was,	she	couldn’t	be	bothered.	She	had	been	about	to	go	to	sleep,	or	at
least	what	passed	for	sleep	of	late,	lying	flat	and	motionless	on	her	bed.
Alone	whether	her	husband	was	there	or	not.	Staring	upward	in	the	grainy
darkness.	Where	the	only	things	that	could	stir	her	upright	included	another
goblet	of	wine,	one	more	pipe	bowl	or	a	ghostly	walk	in	the	silent	garden.
Those	walks	always	seemed	to	involve	searching	for	something,	an
unknown	thing,	in	fact,	and	she	would	follow	through	on	the	desire	even	as	she


knew	that	what	she	sought	no	garden	could	hold.	Whatever	it	was	did	not
belong	to	the	night,	nor	could	it	be	found	in	the	spinning	whirls	of	smoke,	or
the	bite	of	strong	drink	on	her	numbed	tongue.
She	selected	a	flowing,	diaphanous	gown,	lavender	and	wispy	as	wreaths
of	incense	smoke,	pulling	it	about	her	bare	shoulder.	A	broad	swath	of	the
same	material	served	to	gather	it	tight	about	her	lower	torso,	beneath	her
breasts,	firm	against	her	stomach	and	hips.	The	thin	single	layer	covering	her
breasts	hid	nothing.
Shardan	Lim	was	showing	his	impatience.	His	crassness.	He	was	even	now
in	the	sitting	room,	sweaty,	his	eyes	dilated	with	pathetic	needs.	He	was	nothing
like	what	he	pretended	to	be,	once	the	façade	of	sophisticated	lechery	was
plucked	aside.	The	charm,	the	sly	winks,	the	suave	lie.
This	entire	damned	world,	she	knew,	consisted	of	nothing	but	thin	veneers.
The	illusion	of	beauty	survived	not	even	a	cursory	second	look.	Cheap	and
squalid,	this	was	the	truth	of	things.	He	could	paint	it	up	all	he	liked,	the	stains
on	the	sheets	remained.
Barefooted,	she	set	out	to	meet	him.	Imagining	the	whispers	of	the	staff,	the
maids	and	servants,	the	guards	–	never	within	range	of	her	hearing,	of	course.
That	would	not	do.	Propriety	must	be	maintained	at	all	costs.	They’d	wait	for
her	to	pass,	until	she	was	out	of	sight.	It	was	their	right,	after	all,	their	reward
for	a	lifetime	of	servitude,	for	all	that	bowing	and	scraping,	for	all	the	gestures
meant	to	convince	her	and	people	like	her	that	she	was	in	fact	superior	to	them.
The	noble	bloods,	the	rich	merchants,	the	famous	families	and	all	the	rest.
When	the	truth	was,	luck	and	mischance	were	the	only	players	in	the	game
of	success.	Privilege	of	birth,	a	sudden	harmony	of	forces,	a	sudden
inexplicable	balance	later	seen	as	a	run	of	good	fortune.	Oh,	they	might	strut
about	–	we	all	might	–	and	proclaim	that	talent,	skill	and	cunning	were	the	real
players.	But	Challice	held	the	belief	that	even	the	poor,	the	destitute,	the	plaguescarred	and	the	beleaguered	might	possess	talents	and	cunning,	only	to	find
their	runs	of	fortune	nonexistent,	proper	rewards	for	ever	beyond	reach.
Servants	bowed,	and	that	they	needed	to	do	so	was	proof	of	just	how	flimsy
the	delusion	of	superiority	was.
She	opened	the	door	and	walked	with	dignity	into	the	sitting	room.
‘Councillor	Lim,	have	you	been	left	here	alone?	No	one	to	provide	you	with
refreshments?	This	is	unacceptable—’
‘I	sent	her	away,’	he	cut	in,	and	she	saw	that	his	expression	was	strange,
conflicted	by	something	but	in	a	most	peculiar	way.
‘You	have	not	even	poured	yourself	some	wine.	Allow	me—’
‘No,	thank	you,	Lady	Challice.	Although,	perhaps,	I	should	pour	you	one.


Yes.’
And	he	went	over	to	select	a	decanter	and	then	a	goblet.	She	watched	the
amber	wine	slosh	into	the	crystal,	and	then	flow	over	before	he	righted	the
decanter.	He	stared	down	at	the	goblet	for	a	moment,	and	then	faced	her.	‘Lady
Challice,	I	have	terrible	news.’
Then	why	do	you	struggle	so	not	to	smile?	‘Ah.	Speak	on,	then,	Councillor.’
He	stepped	forward.	‘Challice—’
All	at	once,	she	sensed	that	something	was	deeply	awry.	He	was	too	excited
with	his	news.	He	was	hungry	to	see	its	effect	on	her.	He	had	no	interest	in
using	her	body	this	night.	And	here	she	had	arrived	dressed	like	a	fancy	whore.
‘Forgive	me,’	she	said,	stepping	back	and	attempting	to	draw	the	shift	more
modestly	about	her.
He	barely	registered	the	gesture.	‘Challice.	Gorlas	has	been	murdered.
Your	husband	is	dead.’
‘Murdered?	But	he’s	still	out	at	the	mining	camp.	He’s—’	and	then	she
stopped,	stunned	at	how	disbelief	could	so	swiftly	become	certainty.
‘Assassinated,	out	at	the	camp,’	Shardan	Lim	said.	‘Was	it	a	contract?	I
can’t	imagine	who	would…’	And	then	he	too	fell	silent,	and	the	regard	he	fixed
upon	her	now	was	suddenly	sharp,	piercing.
She	could	not	face	the	question	he	looked	ready	to	ask,	and	so	she	went	to
collect	the	goblet,	unmindful	of	the	wine	spilling	over	her	hand,	and	drank
deep.
He	had	moved	to	one	side	and	still	he	said	nothing	as	he	watched	her.
Challice	felt	light-headed,	unbalanced.	She	was	having	trouble	thinking.
Feelings	and	convictions,	which	arrived	first?	Truths	and	dreads	–	she	was
finding	it	hard	to	breathe.
‘Challice,’	Shardan	Lim	whispered,	suddenly	standing	close.	‘There	were
other	ways.	You	could	have	come	to	me.	If	this	comes	out,	you	will	hang	–	do
you	understand	me?	It	will	take	your	father	down	–	the	entire	House	D’Arle.
The	whole	Council	will	be	rocked	to	its	very	foundations.	Hood’s	breath,
Challice	–	if	anyone	discovers	the	truth—’
She	turned	to	him	and	her	voice	was	flat	as	she	said,	‘What	truth?	What	are
you	talking	about,	Councillor?	My	husband	has	been	murdered.	I	expect	you
and	the	Council	to	conduct	an	investigation.	The	assassin	must	be	found	and
punished.	Thank	you	for	taking	upon	yourself	the	difficult	task	of	informing
me.	Now,	please,	leave	me,	sir.’
He	was	studying	her	as	if	he	had	never	truly	seen	her	before,	and	then	he
stepped	away	and	shook	his	head.	‘I’d	no	idea,	Challice.	That	you	were	this…’
‘That	I	was	what,	Councillor?’


‘It	may	be…ah,	that	is,	you	are	within	your	rights	to	claim	the	seat	on	the
Council.	Or	arrange	that	someone	of	your	own	choosing—’
‘Councillor	Lim,	such	matters	must	wait.	You	are	being	insensitive.	Please,
will	you	now	leave?’
‘Of	course,	Lady	Challice.’
When	he	was	gone,	she	stood	unmoving,	the	goblet	still	in	one	hand,	the
spilled	wine	sticky	under	her	fingers.
A	formal	investigation.	And	yes,	it	would	be	thorough.	Staff	would	be
questioned.	Improprieties	revealed.	Shardan	Lim	himself…yes,	it	would	be
occurring	to	him	about	now,	as	he	walked	the	street,	and	he	might	well	change
his	destination	–	no	longer	back	to	his	house,	but	to	the	Orr	estate.	To	arrange,
with	growing	desperation,	the	covering	of	his	own	tracks.
But	none	of	this	affected	her.	Shardan	Lim’s	fate	was	meaningless.
She	had	succeeded.	She	had	achieved	precisely	what	she	wanted,	the	very
thing	she	had	begged	him	to	do.	For	her.	For	them.	But	no,	for	her.
He	had	killed	her	husband.	Because	she	had	asked	him	to.	And	it	was	now
almost	certain	that	he	would	hang	for	it.	Shardan	would	talk,	pointing	the
finger	so	that	all	eyes	shifted	away	from	him,	and	his	accusation	would	be	all
fire,	blazing	with	deadly	details.	And	as	for	her,	why,	she’d	be	painted	as	a
foolish	young	woman.	Playing	with	lowborn	but	astoundingly	ignorant	of	just
how	vicious	such	creatures	could	be,	when	something	or	someone	stood	in
their	way.	When	obsessive	love	was	involved,	especially.	Oh,	she’d	been
playing,	but	that	nasty	young	lowborn	thug	had	seen	it	differently.	And	now	she
would	have	to	live	with	the	fact	that	her	idle	game	had	led	to	her	husband’s
murder.	Poor	child.
Her	father	would	arrive,	because	he	was	the	sort	of	father	to	do	just	that.
He	would	raise	impenetrable	walls	around	her,	and	personally	defend	every
portico,	every	bastion.	Aim	the	knife	of	innuendo	towards	her	and	he	would
step	into	its	path.	He	would	retaliate,	ferociously,	and	the	sly	sceptics	would
quickly	learn	to	keep	their	mouths	shut,	if	they	valued	their	heads.
She	would	be	the	eye	of	the	storm,	and	feel	not	even	a	single	drop	of	rain,
nor	sigh	of	wind.
Challice	set	the	goblet	down.	She	walked	out	into	the	corridor	and
proceeded	without	haste	back	to	her	bedroom,	where	she	collected	the	glass
globe	with	its	imprisoned	moon.	And	then	left	once	more,	this	time	to	the
square	tower,	with	its	rooms	crowded	with	antique	Gadrobi	furniture	slowly
rotting	to	dust,	with	its	musty	draughts	sliding	up	and	down	the	stairs.
I	have	killed	him.	I	have	killed	him.
I	have	killed	him.


	
Hanut	Orr	adjusted	his	sword-belt	and	checked	his	rapier	yet	again.	He	had
come	close	to	beating	the	hapless	mine	guard	to	glean	every	last	detail	of	the
events	surrounding	the	assassination	of	Gorlas	Vidikas,	and	he	now	believed
he	had	a	fair	idea	of	the	grisly	story	behind	it.	The	echoes	tasted	sour,	personal.
Once	he	learned	where	the	first	man’s	body	had	been	delivered,	he	knew	where
this	night	would	take	him.
He	assembled	his	four	most	capable	guards	and	they	set	out	into	the	city.
Two	knives	to	the	chest.	Yes,	the	past	never	quite	went	away,	did	it?	Well,
finally,	he	would	be	able	to	deliver	his	long-delayed	vengeance.	And	when	he
was	done	there,	he	would	find	the	one	man	who	was	at	the	centre	of	all	of	this.
Councillor	Coll	would	not	see	the	dawn.
He	dispatched	two	of	his	men	to	Coll’s	estate.	Watch.	Any	strangers	show
up,	they	don’t	reach	the	damned	gate.	We	are	at	war	tonight.	Be	ready	to	kill,
am	I	understood?
Of	course	he	was.	These	hard	men	were	no	fools.
He	knew	that	damned	mob	in	the	Phoenix	Inn.	He	knew	every	one	of	Coll’s
decrepit,	lowborn	friends,	and	he	intended	to	kill	them	all.
Down	from	the	Estates	District	and	into	the	Daru	District.	Not	far.
Two	streets	from	the	Phoenix	Inn	he	halted	his	two	remaining	men.	‘You’ll
watch	the	front	entrance,	Havet.	Kust,	I	want	you	to	walk	in	and	make	a	show	–
it	won’t	have	to	be	much,	they’ll	smell	you	out	fast	enough.	I	have	the	alley,	for
when	somebody	bolts.	Both	of	you,	keep	an	eye	out	for	a	short,	fat	man	in	a
red	waistcoat.	If	you	get	a	chance,	Havet,	cut	him	down	–	that	shouldn’t	be	hard.
There’re	two	tough-looking	women	who	run	the	place	–	they’re	fair	targets	as
well	if	they	head	outside.	I’m	not	sure	who	else	will	be	in	that	foul	nest	–	we’ll
find	out	soon	enough.	Now,	go.’
They	went	one	way.	He	went	another.
	
Torvald	Nom	grunted	and	gasped	as	he	pulled	himself	on	to	the	estate	roof.
Sitting	at	his	desk	had	been	driving	him	mad.	He	needed	to	be	out,	roving
round,	keeping	an	eye	on	everything.	On	everything.	This	was	a	terrible	night
and	nothing	had	happened	yet.	He	missed	his	wife.	He	wished	he	was	back
home,	and	with	the	coming	storm	he’d	be	drenched	by	the	time	he	stumbled
into	that	blessed,	warm	abode.	Assuming	he	ever	made	it.
He	worked	his	way	along	the	edge	so	that	he	could	see	down	into	the
forecourt.	And	there	they	were,	Madrun	and	Lazan	Door,	throwing	knuckles


against	the	wall	to	the	left	of	the	main	gate.	He	heard	the	door	of	the	house
open	directly	beneath	him	and	saw	the	carpet	of	light	unfold	on	the	steps	and
pavestones,	and	the	silhouette	of	the	man	standing	in	the	doorway	was	instantly
recognizable.	Studlock,	Studious	Lock.	Not	moving	at	all,	just	watching,	but
watching	what?
Knuckles	pattered,	bounced	on	stone,	then	settled,	and	the	two	compound
guards	hunched	down	over	them	to	study	the	cast.
That’s	what	he’s	watching.	He’s	watching	the	throws.
And	Torvald	Nom	saw	both	men	slowly	straighten,	and	turn	as	one	to	face
the	man	standing	in	the	doorway.
Who	must	have	stepped	back	inside,	softly	closing	the	door.
Oh,	shit.
There	was	a	scuffle	somewhere	behind	him	and	Torvald	Nom	spun	round.
It	was	too	damned	dark	–	where	was	the	moon?	Hiding	somewhere	behind	the
storm	clouds,	of	course,	and	he	glanced	up.	And	saw	a	sweep	of	bright	stars.
What	clouds?	There	aren’t	any	clouds.	And	if	that’s	thunder,	then	where’s	the
lightning?	And	if	that’s	the	howl	of	wind,	why	is	everything	perfectly	still?	He
wasn’t	sure	now	if	he’d	actually	heard	anything	–	nothing	was	visible	on	the
roof,	and	there	were	no	real	places	to	hide	either.	He	was	alone	up	here.
Like	a	lightning	rod.
He	tried	a	few	deep	breaths	to	slow	the	frantic	beat	of	his	heart.	At	least
he’d	prepared	himself.	All	his	instincts	strumming	like	taut	wires,	he’d	done	all
he	could.
And	it’s	not	enough.	Gods	below,	it’s	not	enough!
	
Scorch	looked	startled,	but	then	he	always	looked	startled.
‘Relax,’	hissed	Leff,	‘you’re	driving	me	to	distraction.’
‘Hey,	you	hear	something?’
‘No.’
‘Exactly.’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?	We	ain’t	hearing	nothing.	Good.	That
means	there’s	nothing	to	hear.’
‘They	stopped.’
‘Who	stopped?’
‘Them,	the	ones	on	the	other	side	of	the	gate,	right?	They	stopped.’
‘Well,	thank	Hood,’	said	Leff.	‘Those	knuckles	was	driving	me	crazy.
Every	damned	night,	on	and	on	and	on.	Click	clack	click	clack,	gods	below.	I
never	knew	Seguleh	were	such	gamblers	–	it’s	a	sickness,	you	know,	an


addiction.	No	wonder	they	lost	their	masks	–	probably	in	a	bet.	Picture	it.	“Ug,
got	nuffin	but	this	mask,	and	m’luck’s	boot	to	change,	’sgot	to,	right?	So,	I’m
in	–	look,	’sa	good	mask!	Ug”.’
‘That	would’ve	been	a	mistake,’	Scorch	said,	nodding.	‘If	you	don’t	want
nobody	to	know	you’re	bluffing,	what	better	way	than	to	wear	a	mask?	So,	they
lost	’em	and	it’s	been	downhill	ever	since.	Yeah,	that	makes	sense,	but	it’s	got
me	thinking,	Leff.’
‘’Bout	what?’
‘Well,	the	Seguleh.	Hey,	maybe	they’re	all	bluffing!’
Leff	nodded	back.	This	was	better.	Distract	the	fidgety	idiot.	All	right,
maybe	things	didn’t	feel	quite	right.	Maybe	there	was	a	stink	in	the	air	that	had
nothing	to	do	with	smell,	and	maybe	he	had	sweat	trickling	down	under	his
armour,	and	he	was	keeping	his	hand	close	to	the	sword	at	his	belt	and	eyeing
the	crossbow	leaning	against	the	gate.	Was	it	cocked?	It	was	cocked.
Click	clack	click	clack.	Come	on,	boys,	start	’em	up	again,	before	you	start
making	me	nervous.
	
Cutter	halted	the	horse	and	sat,	leaning	forward	on	the	saddle,	studying	the	ship
moored	alongside	the	dock.	No	lights	showed.	Had	Spite	gone	to	bed	this
early?	That	seemed	unlikely.	He	hesitated.	He	wasn’t	even	sure	why	he	had
come	here.	Did	he	think	he’d	find	Scillara?
That	was	possible,	but	if	so	it	was	a	grotesque	desire,	revealing	an	ugly
side	to	his	nature	that	he	did	not	want	to	examine	for	very	long,	if	at	all.	He	had
pretty	much	abandoned	her.	She	was	a	stranger	to	Darujhistan	–	he	should	have
done	better.	He	should	have	been	a	friend.
How	many	more	lives	could	he	ruin?	If	justice	existed,	it	was	indeed
appropriate	that	he	ruin	himself	as	well.	The	sooner	the	better,	in	fact.	Grief
and	self-pity	seemed	but	faint	variations	on	the	same	heady	brew	that	was	selfindulgence	–	did	he	really	want	to	drown	Scillara	in	his	pathetic	tears?
No,	Spite	would	be	better	–	he’d	get	three	words	out	and	she’d	start
slapping	him	senseless.	Get	over	it,	Cutter.	People	die.	It	wasn’t	fair,	so	you	put
it	right.	And	now	you	feel	like	Hood’s	tongue	after	a	night	of	slaughter.	Live
with	it.	So	wipe	your	nose	and	get	out	there.	Do	something,	be	someone	and	stay
with	it.
Yes,	that	was	what	he	needed	right	now.	A	cold,	cogent	regard,	a	wise
absence	of	patience.	In	fact,	she	wouldn’t	even	have	to	say	anything.	Just	seeing
her	would	do.
He	swung	down	from	the	saddle	and	tied	the	reins	to	a	bollard,	then


crossed	the	gangplank	to	the	deck.	Various	harbour	notices	had	been	tacked	to
the	mainmast.	Moorage	fees	and	threats	of	imminent	impoundment.	Cutter
managed	a	smile,	imagining	a	scene	of	confrontation	in	the	near	future.
Delightful	to	witness,	if	somewhat	alarming,	provided	he	stayed	uninvolved.
He	made	his	way	below.	‘Spite?	You	here?’
No	response.	Spirits	plunging	once	more,	he	tried	the	door	to	the	main
cabin,	and	found	it	unlocked.	Now,	that	was	strange.	Drawing	a	knife,	he	edged
inside,	and	waited	for	his	eyes	to	adjust	to	the	gloom.	Nothing	seemed
untoward,	no	signs	of	disarray	–	so	there	had	been	no	roving	thief,	which	was
a	relief.	As	he	stepped	towards	the	lantern	hanging	from	a	hook,	his	foot	struck
something	that	skidded	a	fraction.
Cutter	looked	down.
His	lance	–	the	one	that	dead	Seguleh	horseman	had	given	him,	in	that
plague-stricken	fort	in	Seven	Cities.	He	recalled	seeing	it	later,	strapped	to	the
back	of	a	floating	pack	amidst	wreckage	in	the	waves.	He	recalled	Spite’s
casual	retrieval.	He	had	since	stashed	the	weapon	beneath	his	bunk.	So,	what
was	it	doing	here?
And	then	he	noted	the	beads	of	what	looked	like	sweat	glistening	on	the
iron	blade.
Cutter	reached	down.
The	copper	sheathing	of	the	shaft	was	warm,	almost	hot.	Picking	the	lance
up,	he	realized,	with	a	start,	that	the	weapon	was	trembling.	‘Beru	fend,’	he
whispered,	‘what	is	going	on	here?’
Moments	later	he	was	back	on	the	deck,	staring	over	at	his	horse	as	the
beast	tugged	at	the	reins,	hoofs	stamping	the	thick	tarred	boards	of	the	dock.	Its
ears	were	flat,	and	it	looked	moments	from	tearing	the	bollard	free	–	although
of	course	that	was	impossible.	Cutter	looked	down	to	find	he	was	still	carrying
the	lance.	He	wondered	at	that,	but	not	for	long,	as	he	heard	a	sudden,
deafening	chorus	of	howls	roll	through	the	city.	All	along	the	shoreline,
nesting	birds	exploded	upward	in	shrieking	panic,	winging	into	the	night.
Cutter	stood	frozen	in	place.	The	Hounds.
They’re	here.
	
Grisp	Falaunt	had	once	been	a	man	of	vast	ambitions.	Lord	of	the	single
greatest	landholding	anywhere	on	the	continent,	a	patriarch	of	orchards,
pastures,	groves	and	fields	of	corn	stretching	to	the	very	horizon.	Why,	the
Dwelling	Plain	was	unclaimed,	was	it	not?	And	so	he	could	claim	it,
unopposed,	unobstructed	by	prohibitions.


Forty-one	years	later	he	woke	one	morning	stunned	by	a	revelation.	The
Dwelling	Plain	was	unclaimed	because	it	was…useless.	Lifeless.	Pointless.	He
had	spent	most	of	his	life	trying	to	conquer	something	that	was	not	only
unconquerable,	but	capable	of	using	its	very	indifference	to	annihilate	every
challenger.
He’d	lost	his	first	wife.	His	children	had	listened	to	his	promises	of
glorious	inheritance	and	then	had	simply	wandered	off,	each	one	terminally
unimpressed.	He’d	lost	his	second	wife.	He’d	lost	three	partners	and	seven
investors.	He’d	lost	his	capital,	his	collateral	and	the	shirt	on	his	back	–	this	last
indignity	courtesy	of	a	crow	that	had	been	hanging	round	the	clothes	line	in	a
most	suspicious	manner.
There	comes	a	time	when	a	man	must	truncate	his	ambitions,	cut	them	right
down,	not	to	what	was	possible,	but	to	what	was	manageable.	And,	as	one	grew
older	and	more	worn	down,	manageable	became	a	notion	blurring	with
minimal,	as	in	how	could	a	man	exist	with	the	minimum	of	effort?	How	little
was	good	enough?
He	now	lived	in	a	shack	on	the	very	edge	of	the	Dwelling	Plain,	offering	a
suitable	view	to	the	south	wastes	where	all	his	dreams	spun	in	lazy	dust-devils
through	hill	and	dale	and	whatnot.	And,	in	the	company	of	a	two-legged	dog	so
useless	he	needed	to	hand-feed	it	the	rats	it	was	supposed	to	kill	and	eat,	he
tended	three	rows	of	root	crops,	each	row	barely	twenty	paces	in	length.	One
row	suffered	a	blight	of	purple	fungus;	another	was	infested	with	grub-worm;
and	the	one	between	those	two	had	a	bit	of	both.
On	this	gruesome	night	with	its	incessant	thunder	and	invisible	lightning
and	ghost	wind,	Grisp	Falaunt	sat	rocking	on	his	creaking	chair	on	his	back
porch,	a	jug	of	cactus	spit	in	his	lap,	a	wad	of	rustleaf	bulging	one	cheek	and	a
wad	of	durhang	the	other.	He	had	his	free	hand	under	his	tunic,	as	would	any
man	keeping	his	own	company	with	only	a	two-legged	dog	looking	on	–	but
the	mutt	wasn’t	paying	him	any	attention	anyway,	which,	all	things	considered,
was	a	rare	relief	these	nights	when	the	beast	mostly	just	stared	at	him	with
oddly	hungry	eyes.	No,	old	Scamper	had	his	eyes	on	something	to	the	south,
out	there	in	the	dark	plain.
Grisp	hitched	the	jug	up	on	the	back	of	a	forearm	and	tilted	in	a	mouthful
of	the	thick,	pungent	liquor.	Old	Gadrobi	women	in	the	hills	still	chewed	the
spiny	blades	after	hardening	the	insides	of	their	mouths	by	eating	fire,	and	spat
out	the	pulp	in	bowls	of	water	sweetened	with	virgins’	piss.	The	mixture	was
then	fermented	in	sacks	of	sewn-up	sheep	intestines	buried	under	dung	heaps.
And	there,	in	the	subtle	cascade	of	flavours	that,	if	he	squeezed	shut	his
watering	eyes,	he	could	actually	taste,	one	could	find	the	bouquets	marking


every	damned	stage	in	the	brewing	process.	Leading	to	an	explosive,	highly
volatile	cough	followed	by	desperate	gasping,	and	then—
But	Scamper	there	had	sharpened	up,	as	much	as	a	two-legged	dog	could,
anyway.	Ears	perking,	seeming	to	dilate	–	but	no,	that	was	the	spit	talking	–	and
nape	hairs	snapping	upright	in	fierce	bristle,	and	there	was	his	ratty,	knobby
tail,	desperately	snaking	down	and	under	the	uneven	haunches	–	and	gods
below,	Scamper	was	whimpering	and	crawling,	piddling	as	he	went,	straight
for	under	the	porch	–	look	at	the	damned	thing	go!	With	only	two	legs,	too!
Must	be	some	storm	out	there—
And,	looking	up,	Grisp	saw	strange	baleful	fires	floating	closer.	In	sets	of
two,	lifting,	weaving,	lowering,	then	back	up	again.	How	many	sets?	He
couldn’t	count.	He	could	have,	once,	long	ago,	right	up	to	twenty,	but	the	bad
thing	about	cactus	spit	was	all	the	parts	of	the	brain	it	stamped	dead	underfoot.
Seemed	that	counting	and	figuring	was	among	them.
Fireballs!	Racing	straight	for	him!
Grisp	screamed.	Or,	rather,	tried	to.	Instead,	two	wads	were	sucked	in	quick
succession	to	the	back	of	his	throat,	and	all	at	once	he	couldn’t	breathe,	and
could	only	stare	as	a	horde	of	giant	dogs	attacked	in	a	thundering	charge,
straight	across	his	three	weepy	rows,	leaving	a	churned,	uprooted,	trampled
mess.	Two	of	the	beasts	made	for	him,	jaws	opening.	Grisp	had	rocked	on	to
the	two	back	legs	of	the	chair	with	that	sudden,	shortlived	gasp,	and	now	all	at
once	he	lost	his	balance,	pitching	directly	backward,	legs	in	the	air,	even	as	two
sets	of	enormous	jaws	snapped	shut	in	the	place	where	his	head	had	been	a
heartbeat	earlier.
His	shack	erupted	behind	him,	grey	shards	of	wood	and	dented
kitchenware	exploding	in	all	directions.
The	thumping	impact	when	he	hit	the	porch	sent	both	wads	out	from	his
mouth	on	a	column	of	expelled	air	from	his	stunned	lungs.	The	weight	of	the
jug,	two	fingers	still	hooked	through	the	lone	ear,	pulled	him	sideways	and	out
of	the	toppled	chair	on	to	his	stomach,	and	he	lifted	his	head	and	saw	that	his
shack	was	simply	gone,	and	there	were	the	beasts,	fast	dwindling	as	they
charged	towards	the	city.
Groaning,	he	lowered	his	head,	settling	his	forehead	on	to	the	slatted
boards,	and	could	see	through	the	crack	to	the	crawlspace	below,	only	to	find
Scamper ’s	two	beady	eyes	staring	back	up	at	him	in	malevolent	accusation.
‘Fair	’nough,’	he	whispered.	‘Time’s	come,	Scamper	old	boy,	for	us	to
pack	up	’n’	leave.	New	pastures,	hey?	A	world	before	us,	just	waitin’	wi’	open
arms,	just—’
The	nearest	gate	of	the	city	exploded	then,	the	shock	wave	rolling	back	to


flatten	Grisp	once	more	on	the	floorboards.	He	heard	the	porch	groan	and	sag
and	had	one	generous	thought	for	poor	Scamper	–	who	was	scrambling	as	fast
as	two	legs	could	take	him	–	before	the	porch	collapsed	under	him.
	
Like	a	dozen	bronze	bells,	hammered	so	hard	they	tore	loose	from	their
frames	and,	in	falling,	dragged	the	bell	towers	down	around	them,	the	power
of	the	seven	Hounds	obliterated	the	gate,	the	flanking	unfinished	fortifications,
the	guard	house,	the	ring-road	stable,	and	two	nearby	buildings.	Crashing
blocks	of	stone,	wooden	beams,	bricks	and	tiles,	crushed	furniture	and	fittings,
more	than	a	few	pulped	bodies	in	the	mix.	Clouds	of	dust,	spurts	of	hissing
flame	from	ruptured	gas	pipes,	the	ominous	subterranean	roar	of	deadlier
eruptions—
Such	a	sound!	Such	portentous	announcement!	The	Hounds	have	arrived,
dear	friends.	Come,	yes,	come	to	deliver	mayhem,	to	reap	a	most	senseless
toll.	Violence	can	arrive	blind,	without	purpose,	like	the	fist	of	nature.	Cruel	in
disregard,	brutal	in	its	random	catastrophe.	Like	a	flash	flood,	like	a	tornado,	a
giant	dust-devil,	an	earthquake	–	so	blind,	so	senseless,	so	without	intent!
These	Hounds…they	were	nothing	like	that.
	
Moments	before	this	eruption,	Spite,	still	facing	the	estate	of	her	venal	bitch	of
a	sister,	reached	a	decision.	And	so	she	raised	her	perfectly	manicured	hands,
up	before	her	face,	and	closed	them	into	fists.	Then	watched	as	a	deeper	blot	of
darkness	formed	over	the	estate,	swelling	ever	larger	until	blood-red	cracks
appeared	in	the	vast	shapeless	manifestation.
In	her	mind,	she	was	recalling	a	scene	from	millennia	past,	a	blasted
landscape	of	enormous	craters	–	the	fall	of	the	Crippled	God,	obliterating	what
had	been	a	thriving	civilization,	leaving	nothing	but	ashes	and	those	craters	in
which	magma	roiled,	spitting	noxious	gases	that	swirled	high	into	the	air.
The	ancient	scene	was	so	vivid	in	her	mind	that	she	could	scoop	out	one	of
those	craters,	half	a	mountain’s	weight	of	magma,	slap	it	into	something	like	a
giant	ball,	and	then	position	it	over	the	sleepy	estate	wherein	lounged	her
sleepy,	unsuspecting	sister.	And,	now	that	it	was	ready,	she	could	just…let	go.
The	mass	descended	in	a	blur.	The	estate	vanished	–	as	did	those	nearest	to
it	–	and	as	a	wave	of	scalding	heat	swept	over	Spite,	followed	by	a	wall	of	lava
thrashing	across	the	street	and	straight	for	her,	she	realized,	with	a	faint	squeal,
that	she	too	was	standing	far	too	close.


Ancient	sorceries	were	messy,	difficult	to	judge,	harder	yet	to	control.
She’d	let	her	eponymous	tendencies	affect	her	judgement.	Again.
Undignified	flight	was	the	only	option	for	survival,	and	as	she	raced	up	the
alley	she	saw,	standing	thirty	paces	ahead,	at	the	passageway’s	mouth,	a	figure.
	
Lady	Envy	had	watched	the	conjuration	at	first	with	curiosity,	then	admiration,
and	then	awe,	and	finally	in	raging	jealousy.	That	spitting	cow	always	did
things	better!	Even	so,	as	she	watched	her	twin	sister	bleating	and	scrambling
mere	steps	ahead	of	the	gushing	lava	flow,	she	allowed	herself	a	most	pitiless
smile.
Then	released	a	seething	wave	of	magic	straight	into	her	sister ’s	slightly
prettier	face.
Spite	never	thought	ahead.	A	perennial	problem,	a	permanent	flaw	–	that
she	hadn’t	killed	herself	long	ago	was	due	only	to	Envy’s	explicit	but	casualseeming	indifference.	But	now,	if	the	cow	really	wanted	to	take	her	on,	at	last,
to	bring	an	end	to	all	this,	well,	that	was	just	dandy.
	
As	her	sister ’s	nasty	magic	engulfed	her,	Spite	did	the	only	thing	she	could	do
under	the	circumstances.	She	let	loose	everything	she	had	in	a	counterattack.
Power	roared	out	from	her,	clashed	and	then	warred	with	Envy’s	own.
They	stood,	not	twenty	paces	apart,	and	the	space	between	them	raged	like
the	heart	of	a	volcano.	Cobbles	blistered	bright	red	and	melted	away.	Stone	and
brick	walls	rippled	and	sagged.	Faint	voices	shrieked.	Slate	tiles	pitched	down
into	the	maelstrom	as	roofs	tilted	hard	over	on	both	sides.
Needless	to	say,	neither	woman	heard	a	distant	gate	disintegrate,	nor	saw
the	fireball	that	followed,	billowing	high	into	the	night.	They	did	not	even	feel
the	thunderous	reverberations	rippling	out	beneath	the	streets,	the	ones	that
came	from	the	concussions	of	subterranean	gas	chambers	igniting	one	after
another.
No,	Spite	and	Envy	had	other	things	on	their	minds.
	
There	could	be	no	disguising	a	sudden	rush	to	the	estate	gate	by	a	dozen	blackclad	assassins.	As	five	figures	appeared	from	an	alley	mouth	directly	opposite
Scorch	and	Leff,	three	others,	perched	on	the	rooftop	of	the	civic	building	to
the	right	of	the	alley,	sent	quarrels	hissing	towards	the	two	lone	guards.	The


remaining	four,	two	to	a	side,	sprinted	in	from	the	flanks.
The	facing	attack	had	made	itself	known	a	moment	too	soon,	and	both
Scorch	and	Leff	had	begun	moving	by	the	time	the	quarrels	arrived.	This	lack
of	coordination	could	be	viewed	as	inevitable	given	the	scant	training	these
assassins	possessed,	since	this	group	was,	in	fact,	little	more	than	a	diversion,
and	thus	comprised	the	least	capable	individuals	among	the	attackers.
One	quarrel	glanced	off	Leff’s	helm.	Another	was	deflected	by	Scorch’s
chain	hauberk,	although	the	blow,	impacting	his	left	shoulder	blade,	sent	him
stumbling.
The	third	quarrel	exploded	in	stone.	The	sky	to	the	west	lit	up	momentarily,
and	the	cobbles	shook	as	Leff	reached	his	crossbow,	managed	a	skidding	turn
and	loosed	the	quarrel	into	the	crowd	of	killers	fast	closing.
A	bellow	of	pain	and	one	figure	tumbled,	weapons	skittering.
Scorch	scrabbled	for	his	own	crossbow,	but	it	looked	to	Leff	as	if	he
would	not	ready	it	in	time,	and	so	with	a	shout	he	drew	his	shortsword	and
leapt	into	the	path	of	the	attackers.
Scorch	surprised	him,	as	a	quarrel	sped	past	to	thud	deep	into	a	man’s
chest,	punching	him	back	and	fouling	up	the	assassin	behind	him.	Leff	shifted
direction	and	went	in	on	that	side,	slashing	with	his	sword	at	the	tangled	figure
–	a	thick,	heavyset	woman	–	and	feeling	the	edge	bite	flesh	and	then	bone.
Shapes	darted	in	on	his	left	–	but	all	at	once	Scorch	was	there.
Things	got	a	bit	hot	then.
	
Torvald	Nom	was	looking	for	a	way	down	when	the	tiles	beneath	his	boots
trembled	to	the	sounds	of	running	feet.	He	spun	round	to	find	four	figures
charging	towards	him.	Clearly,	they	had	not	been	expecting	to	find	anyone	up
here,	since	none	carried	crossbows.	In	the	moment	before	they	reached	him,	he
saw	in	their	hands	knives,	knotted	clubs	and	braided	saps.
The	nearest	one	wobbled	suddenly	–	a	bolt	was	buried	deep	in	his	right
temple	–	and	then	fell	in	a	sprawl.
Torvald	threw	himself	to	one	side	and	rolled	–	straight	over	the	roof	edge.
Not	quite	what	he	had	planned,	and	he	desperately	twisted	as	he	fell,	knowing
that	it	wouldn’t	help	in	the	least.
He	had	tucked	into	his	belt	two	Blue	Moranth	sharpers.
Torvald	could	only	close	his	eyes	as	he	pounded	hard	on	to	the	pavestones.
The	impact	threw	him	back	upward	on	a	rising	wave	of	stunning	pain,	but	the
motion	seemed	strangely	slow,	and	he	opened	his	eyes	–	amazed	that	he	still
lived	–	only	to	find	that	the	world	had	turned	into	swirling	green	and	blue


clouds,	thick,	wet.
No,	not	clouds.	He	was	inside	a	bulging,	sloshing	sphere	of	water.	Hanging
suspended	now,	as	it	rolled,	taking	him	with	it,	out	into	the	courtyard.
Looking	up	at	the	rooftop	as	the	misshapen	globe	tumbled	him	over	and
over,	he	saw	an	assassin	pitch	over	the	edge	in	a	black	spray	of	blood	–	and
then	he	was	looking	at	Madrun	and	Lazan	Door,	wielding	two	curved	swords
each,	cutting	through	a	mob	that	even	now	scattered	in	panic.
At	that	moment	sorcery	lit	up	the	courtyard,	rolling	in	a	spitting,	raging
wave	that	swept	up	the	main	building’s	front	steps	and	collided	with	the	door,
shattering	it	and	the	lintel	above.	Clouds	of	dust	tumbled	out,	and	three	vague
shapes	rushed	in,	disappearing	inside	the	house.	A	fourth	one	skidded	to	a	halt
at	the	base	of	the	cracked	steps,	spun	round	and	raised	gloved	hands.	More
magic,	shrieking	as	it	darted	straight	for	the	two	unmasked	Seguleh	and	those
few	assassins	still	standing.	The	impact	sent	bodies	flying.
Torvald	Nom,	witnessing	all	this	through	murky	water	and	discovering	a
sudden	need	to	breathe,	lost	sight	of	everything	as	the	globe	heaved	over	one
last	time,	even	as	he	heard	water	draining,	splashing	down	out	to	the	sides,	and
watched	the	blurred	pavestones	beneath	him	draw	closer.
All	at	once	he	found	himself	lying	on	the	courtyard,	drenched,	gasping	for
air.	He	rolled	over	on	to	his	back,	saw	a	spark-lit,	fiery	black	cloud	tumble
through	the	sky	directly	overhead	–	and	that	was	curious,	wasn’t	it?
Detonations	from	within	the	estate.	A	sudden	scream,	cut	bloodily	short.	He
looked	over	to	where	Lazan	Door	and	Madrun	had	been.	Bodies	crowded	up
against	the	inside	wall,	like	a	handful	of	black	knuckles,	and	their	bouncing,
skidding	journey	was	at	an	end,	every	knuckle	settled	and	motionless.
Someone	was	approaching.	Slow,	steady	steps,	coming	to	a	rest	beside
him.
Blinking,	Torvald	Nom	looked	up.	‘Cousin!	Listen!	I’m	sorry,	all	right?	I
never	meant	it,	honest!’
‘What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	going	on	about,	Tor?’	Rallick	Nom	was
wiping	blood	from	his	tjaluk	knives.	‘I’d	swear	you	were	scared	of	me	or
something.’
‘I	didn’t	mean	to	steal	her,	Rallick.	That’s	no	lie!’
‘Tiserra?’
Torvald	stared	up	at	his	cousin,	wide-eyed,	his	heart	bounding	like	an
antelope	with	a	hundred	starving	wolves	on	its	stumpy	tail.
Rallick	made	a	face.	‘Tor,	you	idiot.	We	were	what,	seven	years	old?	Sure,
I	thought	she	was	cute,	but	gods	below,	man,	any	boy	and	girl	who	start
holding	hands	at	seven	and	are	still	madly	in	love	with	each	other	twenty-five


years	later	–	that’s	not	something	to	mess	with—’
‘But	I	saw	the	way	you	looked	at	us,	year	after	year	–	I	couldn’t	stand	it,	I
couldn’t	sleep,	I	knew	you’d	come	for	me	sooner	or	later,	I	knew…’
Rallick	frowned	down	at	him.	‘Torvald,	what	you	saw	in	my	face	was	envy.
Yes,	such	a	thing	can	get	ugly,	but	not	with	me.	I	watched	in	wonder,	in
admiration.	Dammit,	I	loved	you	both.	Still	do.’	He	sheathed	his	weapons	and
reached	down	with	a	red-stained	hand.	‘Good	to	see	you,	cousin.	Finally.’
Torvald	took	that	hand,	and	suddenly	–	years	of	guilt	and	fear	shedding
away	–	the	whole	world	was	all	right.	He	was	pulled	effortlessly	to	his	feet.
‘Hang	on,’	he	said,	‘what	are	you	doing	here?’
‘Helping	out,	of	course.’
‘Taking	care	of	me—’
‘Ah,	that	was	incidental,	in	truth.	I	saw	you	on	the	rooftop	earlier.	There’d
be	a	few	trying	that	way.	Anyway,	you	did	a	nice	job	of	catching	their
attention.’
‘That	quarrel	through	that	one’s	head	was	from	you?’
‘At	that	range,	I	never	miss.’
They	turned	then	as	Studious	Lock,	limping,	emerged	from	the	wreckage
of	the	main	entrance.	And	behind	him	strode	the	Lady	of	the	house.	She	was
wearing	leather	gloves	that	ran	up	to	the	elbow	on	which	dagger-sheaths	had
been	riveted.	Her	usual	voluminous	silks	and	linens	had	been	replaced	by	tightfitting	fighting	clothes.	Torvald	squinted	thoughtfully.
Studious	Lock	was	making	his	way	towards	the	heap	of	bodies.
Lady	Varada	saw	Rallick	and	Torvald	and	approached.
Rallick	bowed.	‘Did	the	mage	give	you	any	trouble,	Mistress?’
‘No.	Is	the	rooftop	clear?’
‘Of	course.’
‘And	Seba?’
‘Probably	scampering	for	his	warren	as	fast	as	his	legs	can	take	him.’
Rallick	paused.	‘Mistress,	you	could	walk	back	in—’
‘And	who	is	left	in	my	Guild,	Rallick?	Of	any	worth,	I	mean.’
‘Krute,	perhaps.	Myself.	Even	Seba	would	manage,	so	long	as	he	was
responsible	for	a	single	cell	and	nothing	more.’
Torvald	was	no	fool,	and	as	he	followed	this	conversation,	certain	things
fell	into	place.	‘Lady	Varada,’	he	said.	‘Er,	Mistress	Vorcan,	I	mean.	You	knew
this	was	coming,	didn’t	you?	And	you	probably	hired	me,	and	Scorch	and	Leff,
because	you	believed	we	were	useless,	and,	er,	expendable.	You	wanted	them	to
get	through	–	you	wanted	them	all	in	here,	so	you	could	wipe	them	out	once
and	for	all.’


She	regarded	him	for	a	moment,	one	eyebrow	lifting,	and	then	turned	away
and	headed	back	to	her	house.
Torvald	made	to	pursue	her	but	Rallick	reached	out	a	hand	and	held	him
back.	‘Cousin,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘she	was	Mistress	of	the	Assassins’
Guild.	Do	you	think	she’s	anything	like	us?	Do	you	really	think	she	gives	a
damn	if	we	live	or	die?’
Torvald	glanced	over	at	Rallick.	‘Now	who’s	the	fool,	cousin?	No,	you’re
right,	about	me	and	Scorch	and	Leff	–	and	those	fallen	Seguleh	over	there	–
she	doesn’t	care.	But	you,	Rallick,	that’s	different.	Are	you	blind?	Soon	as	she
stepped	out,	her	eyes	went	to	you,	and	all	the	stiffness	relaxed,	and	she	came
over	to	make	sure	you	weren’t	wounded.’
‘You	can’t	be	serious.’
‘And	you	can’t	be	so	stupid,	can	you?’
At	that	moment	the	main	gates	crashed	open	and	two	bloody	figures
staggered	in.
‘We	was	attacked!’	Scorch	shouted	in	outrage.
‘We	killed	’em	all,’	Leff	added,	looking	round	wildly,	‘but	there	could	be
more!’
Torvald	noted	his	cousin’s	expression	and	softly	laughed,	drawing
Rallick’s	attention	once	more.	‘I	got	some	wine	in	my	office,’	Torvald	said.
‘We	can	sit	and	relax	and	I	can	tell	you	some	things	about	Scorch	and	Leff—’
‘This	is	not	the	night	for	that,	Tor	–	are	you	deaf?’
Torvald	scowled,	then	thumped	at	the	side	of	his	head.	Both	sides.	‘Sorry,
got	water	in	my	ears.	Even	you	here,	you	sound	to	me	like	you’re	under	a
bucket.’
The	thumping	worked,	at	least	for	one	ear,	and	he	could	hear	now	what
everyone	else	was	listening	to.
Screams,	all	through	the	city.	Buildings	crashing	down.	Echoing	howls.
Recalling	the	fireball	he’d	seen,	he	looked	skyward.	No	stars	in	sight	–	the	sky
was	filled	with	smoke,	huge	bulges	underlit	by	wildfires	in	the	city.	‘Gods
below!’
	
Harllo	ran	down	the	road.	His	knees	were	cut	and	deeply	scored	by	his	climb
up	the	slope	of	scree,	and	blood	ran	down	his	shins.	Stitches	bit	into	his	sides
and	every	muscle	was	on	fire.	And	Venaz	was	so	close	behind	him	that	he
could	hear	his	harsh	gasps	–	but	Venaz	was	older,	his	legs	were	longer,	and	it
would	be	soon	now,	no	matter	how	tired	he	sounded.
To	have	come	so	far,	and	everything	was	about	to	end…but	Harllo	would


not	weep.	Would	not	plead	or	beg	for	his	life.	Venaz	was	going	to	beat	him	to
death.	It	was	as	simple	as	that.	There	was	no	Bainisk	to	stand	in	the	way,	there
were	no	rules	of	the	camp.	Harllo	was	not	a	mole	any	more;	he	was	of	no	use
to	anyone.
People	like	him,	big	and	small,	died	all	the	time.	Killed	by	being	ignored,
killed	because	nobody	cared	what	happened	to	them.	He’d	walked	the	streets	of
Darujhistan	often	enough	to	see	for	himself,	to	see	that	the	only	thing	between
those	huddled	shapes	and	himself	was	a	family	that	didn’t	even	want	him,	no
matter	how	hard	he	worked.	They	were	Snell’s	parents,	and	Snell	was	what
they’d	made	between	them,	and	nothing	in	the	world	could	cut	through	those
tethers.
That	was	why	they	let	Snell	play	with	Harllo,	and	if	he	played	using	fists
and	feet	and	something	went	bad,	well,	that	stuff	happened	all	the	time,	didn’t
it?	That’s	why	they	never	came	to	get	him.	And	the	one	man	who	did,	Gruntle,
who	always	looked	down	at	him	with	sad	eyes,	he	was	dead	now,	too,	and	it
was	this	fact	that	eased	Harllo’s	mind.	He	was	happy	to	go	where	Gruntle	had
gone.	He	would	take	hold	of	that	giant	scarred	hand	and	know	that,	finally,	he
was	safe.
‘I	got	you!	I	got	you!’
A	hand	snagged	at	the	back	of	his	shirt,	missed.
Harllo	threw	himself	forward	–	maybe	one	last	spurt	–	away,	fast	as	he
could—
The	hand	caught	a	handful	of	tunic,	and	Harllo	stumbled,	and	then	a	thin
sweaty	arm	wrapped	tight	round	his	neck,	lifting	him	from	his	feet.
The	forearm	pressed	against	his	throat.	He	could	not	breathe.	And	all	at
once	Harllo	did	not	want	to	die.
He	flailed,	but	Venaz	was	too	big,	too	strong.
Harllo	was	forced	down	to	the	stony	surface	of	the	road,	then	pushed	over
on	his	back	as	Venaz	straddled	him	and	closed	both	hands	round	his	neck.
The	face	glaring	down	at	him	was	flushed	with	triumph.	Sweat	ran	muddy
streaks	down	it;	something	had	cut	one	cheek	and	white	threads	of	cave-worms
clustered	round	the	wound	–	they’d	lay	eggs	and	that	cut	would	become	a	huge
welt,	until	it	burst	and	the	grubs	crawled	out,	and	the	scar	left	behind	would
never	go	away	and	Venaz	would	be	ugly	for	the	rest	of	his	life.
‘Got	you	got	you	got	you,’	Venaz	whispered,	his	eyes	bright.	‘And	now
you	die.	Now	you	die.	Got	you	and	now	you	die.’
Those	hands	squeezed	with	savage	strength.
He	fought,	he	scratched,	he	kicked,	but	it	was	hopeless.	He	felt	his	face
swell,	grow	hot.	The	darkness	flushed	red.


Something	cracked	hard	and	Venaz	was	reeling	back,	his	grip	torn	loose.
Hands	closed	on	Harllo’s	upper	arms	and	dragged	him	a	short	distance	away.
Gasping,	he	stared	up	at	a	strange	face	–	another	boy	–	who	now	stepped	past
him,	advancing	on	Venaz.
Who	had	scrambled	upright,	nose	streaming	blood.	‘Who	the	shit	are—’
The	stranger	flung	himself	at	Venaz,	and	both	went	down.
Coughing,	tears	streaming,	Harllo	forced	himself	on	to	his	hands	and
knees.	The	two	boys	were	about	the	same	size,	and	they	were	of	that	age	when	a
real	fight	had	a	deadly	edge.	They	fought	as	would	rabid	dogs.	Clawing	into
faces,	seeking	eye	sockets,	or	inside	the	mouth	to	tear	aside	one	entire	cheek.
They	bit,	gouged,	used	their	elbows	and	knees	as	they	rolled	about	on	the
roadside.
Something	snapped,	like	a	green	sapling,	and	someone	howled	in	terrible
pain.
Harllo	climbed	to	his	feet,	and	he	found	he	was	holding	a	large	round
stone	in	his	hands.
Venaz	had	broken	the	stranger ’s	left	arm,	and	he	was	now	working	himself
on	top,	fists	raining	down	into	the	other	boy’s	face	–	who	did	what	he	could	to
protect	it	with	his	one	working	arm,	but	half	of	those	fists	got	through,
smashing	into	the	face	beneath.
Harllo	stepped	up	behind	Venaz,	who	was	straddling	the	stranger.	He
looked	down,	seeing	him	as	the	stranger	must	have	done	when	Harllo	was	the
one	lying	on	the	ground,	being	murdered.	He	raised	the	rock,	and	then	drove	it
down	on	to	the	top	of	Venaz’s	skull.
The	impact	made	him	lose	his	grip	on	the	stone	and	he	saw	it	roll	off	to
one	side,	leaving	a	shallow	dent	in	Venaz’s	head.
Venaz	seemed	to	be	in	the	midst	of	a	coughing	fit,	a	barely	human
stuttering	sound	bursting	from	his	throat.	He	pushed	himself	off	the	other	boy
and	rose	wobbling	to	his	feet.	When	he	turned	to	stare	at	Harllo,	he	was
smiling,	the	teeth	bright	shards	between	gushing	streams	of	blood	from	his
nose.	His	eyes	had	filled	and	were	now	opaque.	He	lost	his	balance	and	reeled
to	one	side,	only	to	lose	his	footing	on	the	edge	of	the	road	and	plunge	into	the
grassy	ditch.
Harllo	went	to	stare	down	at	him.	Venaz	was	still	smiling,	lying	on	his
back,	his	cut	and	bruised	hands	making	strange	circular	motions.	He	had	soiled
himself	and	the	stench	made	Harllo	step	back,	away,	to	walk	over	and	kneel
down	beside	the	other	boy.
Who	was	sitting	up,	cradling	his	broken	arm,	hair	hanging	over	his	face.
‘Hello,’	said	Harllo,	‘who	are	you?’


	
Hanut	Orr	stood	in	the	shadows	behind	the	Phoenix	Inn,	waiting	for	the	first	of
the	cowardly	bastards	to	come	rushing	out	from	the	kitchen	door.	His	man
must	be	inside	by	now,	stirring	things	up.	Not	long,	then.
He	ducked	at	the	sound	of	ferocious	howls	echoing	through	the	city,	and
then	a	thundering	concussion	somewhere	to	the	south	–	but	close	–	and	he
stepped	out	to	the	centre	of	the	alley.	Some	shambling	figure	walking	past	had
to	shift	quickly	to	one	side	to	avoid	colliding	with	him.
‘Watch	it,’	Hanut	snapped,	and	then	he	looked	up	into	the	slash	of	night
visible	between	the	buildings,	as	it	suddenly	lit	red	and	orange.
It	was	pretty	much	the	last	thing	he	ever	saw.
	
As	soon	as	he	was	past	the	fool,	Gaz	whirled	round,	his	right	fingerless	hand
lashing	out	to	crack	with	a	crunch	against	the	base	of	his	victim’s	neck.	Bone
against	bone,	and	it	was	not	knuckles	that	broke	–	they	were	by	now	too
scarred,	too	calcined,	for	that.	No,	what	snapped	was	Hanut	Orr ’s	neck.
Gaz	was	swinging	with	his	other	hand	even	as	the	body	crumpled,	his	left
pounding	into	the	man’s	forehead,	flinging	the	head	back	like	a	bulbous	seed
pod	on	a	broken	stalk.	Slap	went	the	body,	head	bouncing	once	and	then	lolling
way	too	far	to	one	side.
He	stared	down,	and	then	moaned.	This	was	no	drunk	who’d	been	leaning
against	a	wall	behind	the	inn.	He	should	have	noted	the	man’s	tone	when	he’d
warned	him	off.
This	was	a	highborn.
Gaz	found	he	was	breathing	fast.	A	rapid	pounding	in	his	chest,	a	sudden
heat	flooding	through	him.	His	knuckles	throbbed.
‘Thordy,’	he	whispered,	‘I’m	in	deep	trouble.	Thordyyyy…’
He	looked	up	and	down	the	alley,	saw	no	one,	and	then	set	off,	stiff-legged,
leaning	far	forward,	his	fingerless	hands	drawn	up	under	his	chin.	He	was
going	home.	Yes,	he	had	to	get	home,	and	be	there	all	night,	yes,	he’d	been
there	all	night—
In	trouble	in	trouble	I’m	in	trouble	now.	Mages	and	necromancers,	guards
everywhere	–	listen	to	the	alarms	–	they’ve	found	him	already!	Oh	oh	oh
trouble,	Thordy,	so	much	trouble…
	
Councillor	Coll	had	pushed	him	back	on	to	the	bar,	then	down	on	to	its	battered


surface.	The	severe	arch	forced	by	the	position	had	Hanut	Orr ’s	thug	groaning
in	pain.
‘Is	he	waiting,	then?’	Coll	asked,	leaning	close.	‘Your	shitface	boss	–	is	he
waiting	outside?’
The	man	understood	loyalty,	and	he	understood	the	demands	of	raw
survival,	and	of	course	there	was	no	contest	between	the	two.	He	managed	a
nod	and	gasped,	‘Alley.	He’s	in	the	alley.	There’s	another	man,	other	side	of	the
street	out	front.’
‘And	who	are	you	all	looking	for?’
‘Any	–	uh	–	any	one	of	you.	No,	wait.	The	assassin,	the	one	with	the	two
knives	–	the	one	who	just	killed	Gorlas	Vidikas.’
The	man	saw	Coll’s	broad,	oddly	puffy	face	twist	into	a	frown,	and	the
heavy	weight	pressing	down	on	his	chest	–	keeping	him	pinned	on	the
countertop	–	eased	back.
‘Meese,	this	one	moves,	kill	him.’
The	woman	with	the	absurd	two-handed	mace	stepped	up,	eyes	flat	and
lifeless	as	they	fixed	on	the	thug.	‘Give	me	a	reason,’	she	said.
The	thug	simply	shook	his	head	and	stayed	right	where	he	was,	leaning
now	against	the	rail.
He	watched	as	Coll	shambled	over	to	where	stood	the	short,	round	man	in
the	red	waistcoat.	They	spoke	for	a	time,	in	tones	so	low	the	man	had	no
chance	of	overhearing	their	conversation.	And	then	Coll	went	behind	the	bar
and	emerged	a	moment	later	with	an	antique	broadsword	that	looked	like	a
perfect	fit	in	those	huge	hands.	Trailed	by	the	fat	man,	he	marched	out	into	the
kitchen,	presumably	for	the	back	door.
Well,	Hanut	Orr	was	an	arrogant	tyrant.	So	he	got	what	he	wanted	and	a
whole	lot	more.	Things	like	that	happen.
The	man	suddenly	recalled	that	he’d	spilled	nothing	about	the	two	men
waiting	outside	Coll’s	estate.	Well,	this	could	work	out	just	fine,	so	long	as	he
managed	to	get	out	of	this	damned	inn	before	Coll	got	ambushed	at	his	gate.
Damned	noisy	in	the	city	tonight	–	ah,	yes,	the	last	night	of	the	Gedderone
Fête.	Of	course	it	was	noisy,	and	dammit,	he	wanted	to	be	out	there	himself,
partying,	dancing,	squeezing	soft	flesh,	maybe	picking	a	fight	or	two	–	but
ones	he	could	win,	of	course.	Nothing	like	this	crap—
All	at	once	Coll	and	the	fat	man	were	back,	both	looking	confused.
‘Sulty	dear,’	sang	out	the	fat	man,	and	one	of	the	serving	wenches	looked
over	–	they	all	had	themselves	a	quiet,	nervous	audience	among	the	half-dozen
others	in	the	tavern,	and	so	numerous	sets	of	eyes	watched	as	she	headed	over.
She	was	just	rounding	the	nearest	table	when	the	fat	man	said,	‘It	would	appear


that	Hanut	Orr	has	met	an	untimely	end	–	before	we	even	arrived,	alas	for
Coll’s	sake.	Best	summon	a	guard—’
She	made	a	face.	‘What?	Out	there?	In	the	damned	streets?	Sounds	like	ten
thousand	wolves	have	been	let	loose	out	there,	Kruppe!’
‘Sweet	Sulty,	Kruppe	assures	you	no	harm	will	come	to	you!	Kruppe
assures,	yes,	and	will	warmly	comfort	too	upon	your	triumphant	return!’
‘Oh	now	that’s	incentive,’	and	she	turned	round	and	headed	for	the	front
door.	And	the	man	was	close	enough	to	hear	her	add	under	her	breath,
‘Incentive	to	throw	myself	into	the	jaws	of	the	first	wolf	I	see…’
But	out	she	went.
	
The	guard	with	the	loving	family	and	the	aching	chest	was	at	the	intersection
just	on	this	side	of	the	wall	one	street	away	from	the	Phoenix	Inn	–	and
hurrying	with	genuine	alarm	towards	the	sounds	of	destruction	to	the	south
(the	other	raging	fire	in	the	Estate	District	was	not	his	jurisdiction)	–	when	he
heard	someone	shouting	at	him	and	so	turned,	lifting	high	his	lantern.
A	young	woman	was	waving	frantically.
He	hesitated,	and	then	flinched	at	a	howl	so	loud	and	so	close	he	expected
to	see	a	demon	standing	at	his	shoulder.	He	jogged	towards	the	woman.
‘For	Hood’s	sake!’	he	shouted.	‘Get	yourself	inside!’
He	saw	her	spin	round	and	scamper	for	the	entrance	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.	As
he	drew	closer	a	flash	of	motion	from	a	facing	alley	mouth	almost	drew	him
round,	but	when	he	shot	the	bull’s	eye	in	that	direction,	he	saw	no	one.	He
hurried	on,	breathing	hard	as	he	climbed	the	steps	and	went	inside.
A	short	time	and	a	tumble	of	words	later,	he	followed	Councillor	Coll	and
Kruppe	into	the	alley,	where	they	gathered	round	the	corpse	of	yet	another
councillor.	Hanut	Orr,	apparently.
Wincing	at	the	tightness	that	was	closing	like	a	vice	round	his	ribcage,	the
guard	slowly	squatted	to	examine	the	wounds.	Only	two	blows	–	which	didn’t
sound	like	his	man	–	but	then,	the	look	of	those	wounds…‘I	think	he’s	killed
another	one,’	he	muttered.	‘Not	long	ago	either.’	He	looked	up.	‘And	you	two
saw	nothing?’
Coll	shook	his	head.
Kruppe	–	a	man	the	guard	had	always	regarded	askance,	with	considerable
suspicion,	in	fact	–	hesitated.
‘What?	Speak,	you	damned	thief.’
‘Thief?	Aaii,	such	an	insult!	Kruppe	was	but	observing	with	most	sharp	eye
the	nature	of	said	wounds	upon	forehead	and	back	of	neck.’


‘That’s	how	I	know	it’s	the	same	man	as	has	been	killing	dozens	over	the
last	few	months.	Some	kind	of	foreign	weapon—’
‘Foreign?	Not	at	all,	Kruppe	suggests.	Not	at	all.’
‘Really?	Do	go	on.’
‘Kruppe	suggests,	most	vigilant	and	honourable	guard,	that	’twas	hands
alone	did	this	damage.	Knuckles	and	no	more,	no	less.’
‘No,	that’s	wrong.	I’ve	seen	the	marks	a	fist	makes—’
‘But	Kruppe	did	not	say	“fist”.	Kruppe	was	being	more	precise.	Knuckles,
yes?	As	in	knuckles	unencumbered	by	fingers…’
The	guard	frowned,	and	then	looked	once	more	at	that	bizarre	elongated
dent	in	Hanut	Orr ’s	forehead.	He	suddenly	straightened.	‘Knuckles…but	no
fingers.	But…I	know	that	man!’
‘Indeed?’	Kruppe	beamed.	‘Best	make	haste	then,	friend,	and	beware	on
this	night	of	all	nights,	do	beware.’
‘What?	Beware	what	–	what	are	you	talking	about?’
‘Why,	the	Toll,	friend.	Beware	the	Toll.	Now	go	quickly	–	we	shall	take
this	poor	body	inside,	until	the	morning	when	proper	arrangements	are,	er,
arranged.	Such	a	multitude	of	sorrows	this	night!	Go,	friend,	hunt	down	your
nemesis!	This	is	the	very	night	for	such	a	thing!’
Everything	was	pulsing	in	front	of	the	guard’s	eyes,	and	the	pain	had
surged	from	his	chest	into	his	skull.	He	was	finding	it	hard	to	so	much	as	think.
But…yes,	he	knew	that	man.	Gods,	what	was	his	name?
It	would	come	to	him,	but	for	now	he	hurried	down	the	alley,	and	out	into
yet	another	bizarrely	empty	street.	The	name	would	come	to	him,	but	he	knew
where	the	bastard	lived,	he	knew	that	much	and	wasn’t	that	enough	for	now?	It
was.
Throbbing,	pounding	pulses	rocked	the	brain	in	his	skull.	Flashes	of
orange	light,	flushes	of	dry	heat	against	his	face	–	gods,	he	wasn’t	feeling
right,	not	right	at	all.	There	was	an	old	cutter	down	the	street	from	where	he
lived	–	after	tonight,	he	should	pay	her	a	visit.	Lances	of	agony	along	his
limbs,	but	he	wasn’t	going	to	stop,	not	even	for	a	rest.
He	had	the	killer.	Finally.	Nothing	was	going	to	get	in	his	way.
And	so	onward	he	stumbled,	lantern	swinging	wildly.
	
Gaz	marched	up	to	the	door,	pushed	it	open	and	halted,	looking	round.	The
stupid	woman	hadn’t	even	lit	the	hearth	–	where	the	fuck	was	she?	He	made	his
way	across	the	single	room,	three	strides	in	all,	to	the	back	door,	which	he
kicked	open.


Sure	enough,	there	she	was,	standing	with	her	back	to	him,	right	there	in
front	of	that	circle	of	flat	stones	she’d	spent	days	and	nights	arranging	and
rearranging.	As	if	she’d	lost	her	mind,	and	the	look	in	her	eyes	of	late	–	well,
they	were	in	so	much	trouble	now.
‘Thordy!’
She	didn’t	even	turn	round,	simply	said,	‘Come	over	here,	husband.’
‘Thordy,	there’s	trouble.	I	messed	up.	We	messed	up	–	we	got	to	think	–	we
got	to	get	out	of	here,	out	of	the	city	–	we	got	to	run—’
‘We’re	not	running,’	she	said.
He	came	up	beside	her.	‘Listen,	you	stupid	woman—’
She	casually	raised	an	arm	and	slid	something	cold	and	biting	across	his
throat.	Gaz	stared,	reached	up	his	battered,	maimed	hands,	and	felt	hot	blood
streaming	down	from	his	neck.	‘Thordy?’	The	word	bubbled	as	it	came	out.
Gaz	fell	to	his	knees,	and	she	stepped	up	behind	him	and	with	a	gentle	push
sent	him	sprawling	face	down	on	to	the	circle	of	flat	stones.
‘You	were	a	good	soldier,’	she	said.	‘Collecting	up	so	many	lives.’
He	was	getting	cold,	icy	cold.	He	tried	to	work	his	way	back	up,	but	there
was	no	strength	left	in	him,	none	at	all.
‘And	me,’	she	went	on,	‘I’ve	been	good	too.	The	dreams	–	he	made	it	all	so
simple,	so	obvious.	I’ve	been	a	good	mason,	husband,	getting	it	all	ready…for
you.	For	him.’
The	ice	filling	Gaz	seemed	to	suddenly	reach	in,	as	deep	inside	him	as	it
was	possible	to	go,	and	he	felt	something	–	something	that	was	his,	and	his
alone,	something	that	called	itself	me	–	convulse	and	then	shriek	in	terror	and
anguish	as	the	cold	devoured	it,	ate	into	it,	and	piece	after	piece	of	his	life
simply	vanished,	piece	after	piece	after—
	
Thordy	dropped	the	knife	and	stepped	back	as	Hood,	the	Lord	of	Death,	High
King	of	the	House	of	the	Slain,	Embracer	of	the	Fallen,	began	to	physically
manifest	on	the	stone	dais	before	her.	Tall,	swathed	in	rotting	robes	of	muted
green,	brown,	and	black.	The	face	was	hidden	but	the	eyes	were	dull	slits
faintly	lit	in	the	midst	of	blackness,	as	was	the	smeared	gleam	of	yellow	tusks.
Hood	now	stood	on	the	blood-splashed	stones,	in	a	decrepit	garden	in	the
district	of	Gadrobi,	in	the	city	of	Darujhistan.	Not	a	ghostly	projection,	not
hidden	behind	veils	of	shielding	powers,	not	even	a	spiritual	visitation.
No,	this	was	Hood,	the	god.
Here,	now.
And	in	the	city	on	all	sides,	the	howling	of	the	Hounds	rose	in	an	ear-


shattering,	soul-flailing	crescendo.
The	Lord	of	Death	had	arrived,	to	walk	the	streets	in	the	City	of	Blue	Fire.
	
The	guard	came	on	to	the	decrepit	street	facing	the	ramshackle	house	that	was
home	to	the	serial	murderer,	but	he	could	barely	make	it	out	through	the
pulsing	waves	of	darkness	that	seemed	to	be	closing	in	on	all	sides,	faster	and
faster,	as	if	he	was	witness	to	a	savage,	nightmarish	compression	of	time,	day
hurtling	into	night	into	day	and	on	and	on.	As	if	he	was	somehow	rushing	into
his	own	old	age,	right	up	to	his	final	mortal	moment.	A	roaring	sound	filled
his	head,	excruciating	pain	radiating	out	from	his	chest,	burning	with	fire	in
his	arms,	the	side	of	his	neck.	His	jaws	were	clenched	so	tight	he	was	crushing
his	own	teeth,	and	every	breath	was	agony.
He	made	it	halfway	to	the	front	door	before	falling	to	his	knees,	doubling
up	and	sinking	down	on	to	his	side,	the	lantern	clunking	as	it	struck	the
cobbles.	And	suddenly	he	had	room	for	a	thousand	thoughts,	all	the	time	he
could	have	wanted,	now	that	he’d	taken	his	last	breath.	So	many	things	became
clear,	simple,	acquiring	a	purity	that	lifted	him	clear	of	his	body—
And	he	saw,	as	he	hovered	above	his	corpse,	that	a	figure	had	emerged
from	the	killer ’s	house.	His	altered	vision	revealed	every	detail	of	that	ancient,
unhuman	visage	within	the	hood,	the	deep-etched	lines,	the	ravaged	map	of
countless	centuries.	Tusks	rising	from	the	lower	jaw,	chipped	and	worn,	the
tips	ragged	and	splintered.	And	the	eyes	–	so	cold,	so…haunted	–	all	at	once	the
guard	knew	this	apparition.
Hood.	The	Lord	of	Death	had	come	for	him.
He	watched	as	the	god	lifted	his	gaze,	fixing	him	with	those	terrible	eyes.
And	a	voice	spoke	in	his	head,	a	heavy	voice,	like	the	grinding	of	massive
stones,	the	sinking	of	mountains.	‘I	have	thought	nothing	of	justice.	For	so
long	now.	It	is	all	one	to	me.	Grief	is	tasteless,	sorrow	an	empty	sigh.	Live	an
eternity	in	dust	and	ashes	and	then	speak	to	me	of	justice.’
To	this	the	guard	had	nothing	to	say.	He	had	been	arguing	with	death	night
after	night.	He	had	been	fighting	all	the	way	from	the	Phoenix	Inn.	Every
damned	step.	He	was	past	that	now.
‘So,’	continued	Hood,	‘here	I	stand.	And	the	air	surrounding	me,	the	air
rushing	into	my	lungs,	it	lives.	I	cannot	prevent	what	comes	with	my	every	step
here	in	the	mortal	world.	I	cannot	be	other	than	what	I	am.’
The	guard	was	confused.	Was	the	Lord	of	Death	apologizing?
‘But	this	once,	I	shall	have	my	way.	I	shall	have	my	way.’	And	he	stepped
forward,	raising	one	withered	hand	–	a	hand,	the	guard	saw,	missing	two


fingers.	‘Your	soul	shines.	It	is	bright.	Blinding.	So	much	honour,	so	much
love.	Compassion.	In	the	cavern	of	loss	you	leave	behind,	your	children	will	be
less	than	all	they	could	have	been.	They	will	curl	round	scars	and	the	wounds
will	never	quite	heal,	and	they	will	learn	to	gnaw	those	scars,	to	lick,	to	drink
deep.	This	will	not	do.’
The	guard	convulsed,	spinning	down	back	into	the	corpse	on	the	cobbles.
He	felt	his	heart	lurch,	and	then	pound	with	sudden	ease,	sudden,	stunning
vigour.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	the	air	wondrous,	cool,	sweeping	away	the	last
vestige	of	pain	–	sweeping	everything	away.
All	that	he	had	come	to,	in	those	last	moments	–	that	scintillating	clarity	of
vision,	the	breathtaking	understanding	of	everything	–	now	sank	beneath	a
familiar	cloud,	settling	grey	and	thick,	where	every	shape	was	but	hinted	at,
where	he	was	lost.	As	lost	as	he	had	been,	as	lost	as	any	and	every	mortal	soul,
no	matter	how	blustery	its	claims	to	certainty,	to	faith.	And	yet…and	yet	it	was
a	warm	cloud,	shot	through	with	precious	things:	his	love	for	his	wife,	his
children;	his	wonder	at	their	lives,	the	changes	that	came	to	them	day	by	day.
He	found	he	was	weeping,	even	as	he	climbed	to	his	feet.	He	turned	to	look
at	the	Lord	of	Death,	in	truth	not	expecting	to	see	the	apparition	which	must
surely	come	only	to	the	dead	and	dying,	and	then	cried	out	in	shock.
Hood	looked	solid,	appallingly	real,	walking	down	the	street,	eastward,
and	it	was	as	if	the	webs	binding	them	then	stretched,	the	fabric	snapping,
wisping	off	into	the	night,	and	with	each	stride	that	took	the	god	farther	away
the	guard	felt	his	life	returning,	an	awareness	of	breathtaking	solidity	–	in	this
precise	moment,	and	in	every	one	that	would	follow.
He	turned	away	–	and	even	that	was	easy	–	and	settled	his	gaze	upon	the
door,	which	hung	open,	and	all	that	waited	within	was	dark	and	rotted	through
with	horror	and	madness.
The	guard	did	not	hesitate.
With	this	modest	and	humble	man,	with	this	courageous,	honourable	man,
Hood	saw	true.	And,	for	just	this	once,	the	Lord	of	Death	had	permitted	himself
to	care.
Mark	this,	a	most	significant	moment,	a	most	poignant	gesture.
	
Thordy	heard	boots	on	the	warped	floorboards	of	the	back	porch	and	she
turned	to	see	a	city	guardsman	emerge	from	her	house,	out	through	the	back
door,	holding	a	lantern	in	one	hand.
‘He	is	dead,’	she	said.	‘The	one	you	have	come	here	for.	Gaz,	my	husband.’
She	pointed	with	a	blood-slick	knife.	‘Here.’


The	guard	walked	closer,	sliding	back	one	of	the	shutters	on	the	lantern
and	directing	the	shaft	of	light	until	it	found	and	held	on	the	motionless	body
lying	on	the	stones.
‘He	confessed,’	she	said.	‘So	I	killed	him,	with	my	own	hand.	I	killed	this…
monster.’
The	guardsman	crouched	down	to	study	the	corpse.	He	reached	out	and
gently	slipped	one	finger	under	the	cuff	of	one	of	Gaz’s	sleeves,	and	raised	up
the	battered,	fingerless	hand.	He	sighed	then,	and	slowly	nodded.
As	he	lowered	the	arm	again	and	began	straightening,	Thordy	said,	‘I
understand	there	is	a	reward.’
He	looked	across	at	her.
She	wasn’t	sure	what	she	saw	in	his	expression.	He	might	be	horrified,	or
amused,	or	cynically	drained	of	anything	like	surprise.	But	it	didn’t	matter
much.	She	just	wanted	the	money.	She	needed	the	money.
Becoming,	for	a	time,	the	mason	of	the	Lord	of	the	Slain	entailed	a
fearsome	responsibility.	But	she	hadn’t	seen	a	single	bent	copper	for	her
troubles.
The	guardsman	nodded.	‘There	is.’
She	held	up	the	kitchen	knife.
He	might	have	flinched	a	bit,	maybe,	but	what	mattered	now	would	be
Thordy	seeing	him	nod	a	second	time.
And	after	a	moment,	he	did	just	that.
	
A	god	walked	the	streets	of	Darujhistan.	In	itself,	never	a	good	thing.	Only
fools	would	happily,	eagerly	invite	such	a	visitation,	and	such	enthusiasm
usually	proved	shortlived.	That	this	particular	god	was	the	harvester	of	souls
meant	that,	well,	not	only	was	his	manifestation	unwelcome,	but	his	gift
amounted	to	unmitigated	slaughter,	rippling	out	to	overwhelm	thousands	of
inhabitants	in	tenement	blocks,	in	the	clustered	hovels	of	the	Gadrobi	District,
in	the	Lakefront	District	–	but	no,	such	things	cannot	be	glanced	over	with	a
mere	shudder.
Plunge	then,	courage	collected,	into	this	welter	of	lives.	Open	the	mind	to
consider,	cold	or	hot,	all	manner	of	judgement.	Propriety	is	dispensed	with,
decency	cast	aside.	This	is	the	eye	that	does	not	blink,	but	is	such	steely	regard
an	invitation	to	cruel	indifference?	To	a	hardened,	compassionless	aspect?	Or
will	a	sliver	of	honest	empathy	work	its	way	beneath	the	armour	of
desensitized	excess?
When	all	is	done,	dare	to	weigh	thine	own	harvest	of	feelings	and	consider


this	one	challenge:	if	all	was	met	with	but	a	callous	shrug,	then,	this	round	man
invites,	shift	round	such	cruel,	cold	regard,	and	cast	one	last	judgement.	Upon
thyself.
But	for	now…witness.
	
Skilles	Naver	was	about	to	murder	his	family.	He	had	been	walking	home	from
Gajjet’s	Bar,	belly	filled	with	ale,	only	to	have	a	dog	the	size	of	a	horse	step	out
in	front	of	him.	A	blood-splashed	muzzle,	eyes	burning	with	bestial	fire,	the
huge	flattened	head	swinging	round	in	his	direction.
He	had	frozen	in	place.	He	had	pissed	himself,	and	then	shat	himself.
A	moment	later	a	high	wooden	fence	surrounding	a	vacant	lot	further	up	the
street	–	where	a	whole	family	had	died	of	some	nasty	fever	a	month	earlier	–
suddenly	collapsed	and	a	second	enormous	dog	appeared,	this	one	bone	white.
Its	arrival	snatched	the	attention	of	the	first	beast,	and	in	a	surge	of
muscles	the	creature	lunged	straight	for	it.
They	collided	like	two	runaway,	laden	wagons,	the	impact	a	concussion	that
staggered	Skilles.	Whimpering,	he	turned	and	ran.
And	ran.
And	now	he	was	home,	stinking	like	a	slop	pail,	and	his	wife	was	but	half
packed	–	caught	in	the	midst	of	a	treacherous	flight,	stealing	the	boys,	too.	His
boys.	His	little	workers,	who	did	everything	Skilles	told	them	to	(and	Beru	fend
if	they	didn’t	or	even	talked	back,	the	little	shits)	and	the	thought	of	a	life
without	them	–	without	his	perfect,	private,	very	own	slaves	–	lit	Skilles	into	a
white	rage.
His	wife	saw	what	was	coming.	She	pushed	the	boys	into	the	corridor	and
then	turned	to	give	up	her	own	life.	Besk	the	neighbour	the	door	next	over	was
collecting	the	boys	for	some	kind	of	escape	to	who	knew	where.	Well,	Skilles
would	just	have	to	hunt	him	down,	wouldn’t	he?	It	wasn’t	as	if	puny	rat-faced
Surna	was	going	to	hold	him	back	for	long,	was	it?
Just	grab	her,	twist	that	scrawny	neck	and	toss	the	waste	of	space	to	one
side—
He	didn’t	even	see	the	knife,	and	all	he	felt	of	the	murderous	stab	was	a
prick	under	his	chin,	as	the	thin	blade	shot	up	through	his	mouth,	deflected
inward	by	his	upper	palate,	and	sank	three	fingers	deep	straight	into	the	base	of
his	brain.
Surna	and	her	boys	didn’t	have	to	run	after	all.
	


Kanz	was	nine	years	old	and	he	loved	teasing	his	sister	who	had	a	real	temper,
as	Ma	always	said	as	she	picked	up	pieces	of	broken	crockery	and	bits	of	hated
vegetables	scattered	all	over	the	floor,	and	the	best	thing	was	prodding	his
sister	in	the	ribs	when	she	wasn’t	looking,	and	she’d	spin	round,	eyes	flashing
with	fury	and	hate	–	and	off	he’d	run,	with	her	right	on	his	heels,	out	into	the
corridor,	pell-mell	straight	to	the	stairs	and	then	down	and	round	and	down	fast
as	he	could	go	with	her	screeching	behind	him.
Down	and	round	and	down	and—
—and	he	was	flying	through	the	air.	He’d	tripped,	missed	his	grip	on	the
rail,	and	the	ground	floor	far	below	rushed	up	to	meet	him.
‘You	two	will	be	the	death	of	each	other!’	Ma	always	said.	Zasperating!	She
said	that	too—
He	struck	the	floor.	Game	over.
Sister’s	quick	temper	went	away	and	never	returned	after	that	night.	And
Ma	never	again	voiced	the	word	‘zasperating’.	Of	course	it	did	not	occur	to	her
that	its	sudden	vanishing	from	her	mind	was	because	her	little	boy	had	taken	it
with	him,	the	last	word	he’d	thought.	He’d	taken	it,	as	would	a	toddler	a	doll,	or
a	blanket.	For	comfort	in	his	dark	new	world.
	
Benuck	Fill	sat	watching	his	mother	wasting	away.	Some	kind	of	cancer	was
eating	her	up	inside.	She’d	stopped	talking,	stopped	wanting	anything;	she	was
like	a	sack	of	sticks	when	he	picked	her	up	to	carry	her	to	the	washtub	to	wipe
down	all	the	runny	stuff	she	leaked	out	these	days,	these	nights.	Her	smile,
which	had	told	him	so	much	of	her	love	for	him,	and	her	shame	at	what	she	had
become	–	that	horrible	loss	of	dignity	–	had	changed	now	into	something	else:
an	open	mouth,	lips	withered	and	folded	in,	each	breath	a	wheezing	gasp.	If	that
was	a	smile	then	she	was	smiling	at	death	itself	and	that	was	hard	for	him	to
bear.	Seeing	that.	Understanding	it,	what	it	meant.
Not	long	now.	And	Benuck	didn’t	know	what	he	would	do.	She	had	given	him
life.	She	had	fed	him,	held	him,	kept	him	warm.	She	had	given	him	words	to	live
by,	rules	to	help	him	shape	his	life,	his	self.	She	wasn’t	clever,	very,	or	even
wise.	She	was	just	an	average	person,	who	worked	hard	so	that	they	could	live,
and	worked	even	harder	when	Da	went	to	fight	in	Pale	where	he	probably	died
though	they	never	found	out	either	way.	He	just	never	came	back.
Benuck	sat	wringing	his	hands,	listening	to	her	breathing,	wishing	he	could
help	her,	fill	her	with	his	own	breath,	fill	her	right	up	so	she	could	rest,	so	she’d
have	a	single,	final	moment	when	she	didn’t	suffer,	one	last	moment	of	painless
life,	and	then	she	could	let	go…


But	here,	unseen	by	any,	was	the	real	truth.	His	mother	had	died	eight	days
ago.	He	sat	facing	an	empty	chair,	and	whatever	had	broken	in	his	mind	had
trapped	him	now	in	those	last	days	and	nights.	Watching,	washing,	dressing.
Things	to	do	for	her,	moments	of	desperate	care	and	love,	and	then	back	to	the
watching	and	there	was	no	light	left	in	her	eyes	and	she	made	no	sign	she	heard
a	thing	he	said,	all	his	words	of	love,	his	words	of	thanks.
Trapped.	Lost.	Not	eating,	not	doing	anything	at	all.
Hood’s	hand	brushed	his	brow	then	and	he	slumped	forward	in	his	chair,
and	the	soul	of	his	mother,	that	had	been	hovering	in	anguish	in	this	dreadful
room	all	this	time,	now	slipped	forward	for	an	eternal	embrace.
Sometimes,	the	notion	of	true	salvation	can	start	the	eyes.
	
Avab	Tenitt	fantasized	about	having	children	with	him	in	his	bed.	Hadn’t
happened	yet,	but	soon	he	would	make	it	all	real.	In	the	meantime	he	liked	tying
a	rope	round	his	neck,	a	damned	noose,	in	fact,	while	he	masturbated	under	the
blankets	while	his	unsuspecting	wife	scrubbed	dishes	in	the	kitchen.
Tonight,	the	knot	snagged	and	wouldn’t	loosen.	In	fact,	it	just	got	tighter
and	tighter	the	more	he	struggled	with	it,	and	so	as	he	spilled	out,	so	did	his
life.
When	his	wife	came	into	the	room,	exhausted,	her	hands	red	and	cracked	by
domestic	travails,	and	on	her	tongue	yet	another	lashing	pending	for	her
wastrel	husband,	she	stopped	and	stared.	At	the	noose.	The	bloated,	blue	and
grey	face	above	it,	barely	recognizable,	and	it	was	as	if	a	thousand	bars	of	lead
had	been	lifted	from	her	shoulders.
Let	the	dogs	howl	outside	all	night.	Let	the	fires	rage.	She	was	free	and	her
life	ahead	was	all	her	own	and	nobody	else’s.	For	ever	and	ever	again.
A	week	later	a	neighbour	would	see	her	pass	on	the	street	and	would	say	to
friends	that	evening	how	Nissala	had	suddenly	become	beautiful,	stunning,	in
fact,	filled	with	vitality,	looking	years	and	years	younger.	Like	a	dead	flower
suddenly	reborn,	a	blossom	fierce	under	the	brilliant	warm	sunlight.
And	then	the	two	gossipy	old	women	would	fall	silent,	both	thinking	the
same	dark	thoughts,	the	delicious	what-if	and	maybe-she	notions	that	made	life
so	much	fun,	and	gave	them	plenty	to	talk	about,	besides.
In	the	meantime,	scores	of	children	would	stay	innocent	for	a	little	longer
than	they	would	have	otherwise	done.
	


Widow	Lebbil	was	a	reasonable	woman	most	of	the	time.	But	on	occasion	this
gentle	calm	twisted	into	something	malign,	something	so	bound	up	in	rage	that
it	overwhelmed	its	cause.	The	same	thing	triggered	her	incandescent	fury,	the
same	thing	every	time.
Fat	Saborgan	lived	above	her,	and	around	this	time	every	night	–	when
decent	people	should	be	sleeping	though	truth	be	told	who	could	do	that	on	this
insane	night	when	the	mad	revelry	in	the	streets	sounded	out	of	control	–	he’d
start	running	about	up	there,	back	and	forth,	round	and	round,	this	way	and
that.
Who	could	sleep	below	that	thunder?
And	so	she	worked	her	way	out	of	bed,	groaning	at	her	aching	hips,	took
one	of	her	canes	and,	standing	on	a	rickety	chair,	pounded	against	the	ceiling.
Her	voice	was	too	thin,	too	frail	–	he’d	never	hear	if	she	yelled	up	at	him.	Only
the	cane	would	do.	And	she	knew	he	heard	her,	she	knew	he	did,	but	did	it	make
any	difference?
No!	Never!
She	couldn’t	go	on	with	this.	She	couldn’t!
Thump	thump	scrape	thump	scrape	thump	thump	–	and	so	she	pounded	and
pounded	and	pounded,	her	arms	on	fire,	her	shoulders	cramping.	Pounded	and
pounded.
Saborgan	should	indeed	have	heard	the	widow’s	protest,	but,	alas,	he	was
lost	in	his	own	world,	and	he	danced	with	the	White-Haired	Empress,	who’d
come	from	some	other	world,	surely,	to	his	very	room	and	the	music	filled	his
head	and	was	so	sweet,	so	magical,	and	her	hands	were	soft	as	doves	held	as
gently	as	he	could	manage	in	his	own	blunted,	clumsy	fingers.	And	soft	and	frail
as	her	hands	were,	the	Empress	led,	tugging	him	back	and	forth	so	that	he	never
quite	regained	his	balance.
The	White-Haired	Empress	was	very	real.	She	was	in	fact	a	minor	demon,
conjured	and	chained	into	servitude	in	this	ancient	tenement	on	the	very	edge	of
the	Gadrobi	District.	Her	task,	from	the	very	first,	had	been	singular,	a	geas	set
upon	her	by	the	somewhat	neurotic	witch	dead	now	these	three	centuries.
The	White-Haired	Empress	was	bound	to	the	task	of	killing	cockroaches,	in
this	one	room.	The	manner	in	which	she	did	so	had,	over	decades	and	decades,
suffered	a	weakening	of	strictures,	leaving	the	now	entirely	loony	demon	the
freedom	to	improvise.
This	mortal	had	huge	feet,	his	most	attractive	feature,	and	when	they
danced	he	closed	his	eyes	and	silently	wept,	and	she	could	guide	those	feet	on
to	every	damned	cockroach	skittering	across	the	filthy	floor.	Step	crunch	step
crunch	–	there!	A	big	one	–	get	it!	Crunch	and	smear,	crunch	and	smear!


In	this	lone	room,	barring	the	insects	who	lived	in	terror,	there	was	pure,
unmitigated	joy,	delicious	satisfaction,	and	the	sweetest	love.
It	all	collapsed	at	around	the	same	time	as	the	floor.	Rotted	crossbeams,
boards	and	thick	plaster	descended	on	to	Widow	Lebbil	and	it	was	as	much	the
shock	as	the	weight	of	the	wreckage	that	killed	her	instantly.
Poor	Saborgan,	losing	his	grip	on	the	wailing	Empress,	suffered	the
stunning	implosion	of	a	cane	driven	up	his	anus	–	oh,	even	to	recount	is	to
wince!	–	which	proved	a	most	fatal	intrusion	indeed.	As	for	the	Empress	herself,
well,	after	a	moment	of	horrific	terror	her	geas	shattered,	releasing	her	at	last
to	return	to	her	home,	the	realm	of	the	Cockroach	Kings	(oh,	very	well,	the
round	man	just	made	up	that	last	bit.	Forgive?).	Who	knows	where	she	went?
The	only	thing	for	certain	is	that	she	danced	every	step	of	the	way.
	
The	vague	boom	of	a	collapsing	floor	in	a	squalid	tenement	building	somewhere
overhead	went	unnoticed	by	Seba	Krafar,	Master	of	the	Assassins’	Guild,	as	he
staggered	down	the	subterranean	corridor,	seeking	the	refuge	of	his	nest.
Would	the	disasters	never	end?	It	had	all	started	with	that	damned	Rallick
Nom	cult,	and	then,	almost	before	the	dust	settled	on	that,	their	first	big
contract	ran	up	against	the	most	belligerent,	vicious	collection	of	innkeepers
imaginable.	And	the	one	that	followed?
He	suspected	he	was	the	only	survivor.	He’d	left	his	cross-bowmen	to	cover
his	retreat	and	not	one	of	them	had	caught	up	with	him;	and	now,	with	gas
storage	caverns	igniting	one	after	another,	well,	he	found	himself	in	an
abandoned	warren	of	tunnels,	rushing	through	raining	dust,	coughing,	eyes
stinging.
All	ruined.	Wrecked.	He’d	annihilated	the	entire	damned	Guild.
He	would	have	to	start	over.
All	at	once,	the	notion	excited	him.	Yes,	he	could	shape	it	himself	–	nothing
to	inherit.	A	new	structure.	A	new	philosophy,	even.
Such…possibilities.
He	staggered	into	his	office,	right	up	to	the	desk,	which	he	leaned	on	with
both	hands	on	its	pitted	surface.	And	then	frowned	at	the	scattering	of	scrolls,
and	saw	documents	strewn	everywhere	on	the	floor	–	what	in	Hood’s	name?
‘Master	Krafar,	is	it?’
The	voice	spun	him	round.
A	woman	stood	with	her	back	resting	against	the	wall	beside	the	doorway.	A
cocked	crossbow	was	propped	beside	her	left	boot,	quarrel	head	resting	on	the
packed	earthen	floor.	Her	arms	were	crossed.


Seba	Krafar	scowled.	‘Who	in	Hound’s	name	are	you?’
‘You	don’t	know	me?	Careless.	My	name	is	Blend.	I’m	one	of	the	owners	of
K’rul’s.’
‘That	contract’s	cancelled	–	we’re	done	with	you.	No	more—’
‘I	don’t	care.	It’s	simple	–	I	want	the	name.	The	one	who	brought	you	the
contract.	Now,	you	can	give	it	to	me	without	any	fuss,	and	I	will	walk	out	of
here	and	that’s	the	last	you’ll	see	of	me,	and	all	your	worries	will	be	at	an	end.
The	Guild	removed	from	the	equation.	Consider	it	a	gift,	but	now	it’s	time	for
you	to	earn	it.’
He	studied	her,	gauging	his	chances.	She	didn’t	look	like	much.	There	was
no	way	she’d	reach	that	crossbow	in	time	–	two	quick	strides	and	he’d	be	right
in	her	face.	With	two	knives	in	her	gut.	And	then	he’d	send	a	note	to	Humble
Measure	and	claim	one	more	down	–	leaving	what,	two	or	three	left?	He’d	get
paid	well	for	that,	and	Hood	knew	he	needed	the	coin	if	he	was	going	to	start
over.
And	so	he	attacked.
He	wasn’t	sure	what	happened	next.	He	had	his	knives	out,	she	was	right
there	in	front	of	him,	and	then	her	elbow	smashed	into	his	face,	shattering	his
nose	and	blinding	him	with	pain.	And	somehow	both	thrusts	he	sent	her	way,
one	seeking	the	soft	spot	just	beneath	her	sternum,	the	other	striking	lower
down,	failed.	One	blocked,	the	other	missing	entirely,	dagger	point	driving	into
the	wall	she’d	been	leaning	against.
The	blow	to	his	face	turned	his	knees	to	water,	but	only	for	the	briefest	of
moments,	for	Seba	Krafar	was	a	bull	of	a	man,	a	brawler.	Damage	was
something	to	shake	off	and	then	just	get	on	with	it,	and	so,	shoulder	hunching,
he	attempted	a	slanting	slash,	trying	to	gut	the	bitch	right	then	and	there.
Something	hard	hammered	his	wrist,	sending	the	dagger	flying,	and	bones
cracked	in	his	arm.	As	he	stumbled	back,	tugging	the	other	knife	from	the	wall,
he	attempted	a	frantic	thrust	to	keep	her	off	him.	She	caught	his	good	wrist	and
her	thumb	was	like	an	iron	nail,	impaling	the	base	of	his	palm.	The	knife
dropped	from	senseless	fingers.	She	then	took	that	arm	and	twisted	it	hard
round,	pushing	his	shoulder	down	and	so	forcing	his	head	to	follow.
Where	it	met	a	rising	knee.
An	already	broken	nose	struck	again,	struck	even	harder,	in	fact,	is	not
something	that	can	be	shaken	off.	Stunned,	not	a	sliver	of	will	left	in	his	brain,
he	landed	on	his	back.	Some	instinct	made	him	roll,	up	against	the	legs	of	his
desk,	and	he	heaved	himself	upright	once	more.
The	quarrel	took	him	low	on	the	right	side,	just	above	his	hip,	glancing	off
the	innominate	bone	and	slicing	messily	through	his	liver.


Seba	Krafar	sagged	back	down,	into	a	slump	with	his	back	against	the	desk.
With	streaming	eyes	he	looked	across	at	the	woman.
Malazan,	right.	She’d	been	a	soldier	once.	No,	she’d	been	a	Bridgeburner.
He	used	to	roll	his	eyes	at	that.	A	Bridgeburner?	So	what?	Just	some	puffed	up
ooh-ah	crap.	Seba	was	an	assassin.	Blood	kin	to	Talo	Krafar	and	now	there	was
a	monster	of	a	man—
Who’d	been	taken	down	by	a	quarrel.	Killed	like	a	boar	in	a	thicket.
She	walked	over	to	stand	before	him.	‘That	was	silly,	Seba.	And	now	here
you	are,	face	broken	and	skewered.	That’s	your	liver	bleeding	out	there,	I	think.
Frankly,	I’m	amazed	you’re	not	already	dead,	but	lucky	for	you	that	you	aren’t.’
She	crouched	and	held	up	a	small	vial.	‘If	I	pour	this	into	that	wound	–	once	I
pluck	out	the	bolt,	that	is,	and	assuming	you	survive	that	–	well,	there’s	a	good
chance	you’ll	live.	So,	should	I	do	that,	Seba?	Should	I	save	your	sorry	arse?’
He	stared	at	her.	Gods,	he	hurt	everywhere.
‘The	name,’	she	said.	‘Give	me	the	name	and	you’ve	got	a	chance	to	survive
this.	But	best	hurry	up	with	your	decision.	You’re	running	out	of	time.’
Was	Hood	hovering?	In	that	buried	place	so	far	beneath	the	streets?	Well,
of	course	he	was.
Seba	gave	her	the	name.	He	even	warned	her	off	–	don’t	mess	with	that	one,
he’s	a	damned	viper.	There’s	something	there,	in	his	eyes,	I	swear—
Blend	was	true	to	her	word.
So	Hood	went	away.
	
The	cascade	of	sudden	deaths,	inexplicable	and	outrageous	accidents,
miserable	ends	and	terrible	murders	filled	every	abode,	every	corner	and
every	hovel	in	a	spreading	tide,	a	most	fatal	flood	creeping	out	through	the
hapless	city	on	all	sides.	No	age	was	spared,	no	weight	of	injustice	tipped	these
scales.	Death	took	them	all:	well	born	and	destitute,	the	ill	and	the	healthy,
criminal	and	victim,	the	unloved	and	the	cherished.
So	many	last	breaths:	coughed	out,	sighed,	whimpered,	bellowed	in
defiance,	in	disbelief,	in	numbed	wonder.	And	if	such	breaths	could	coalesce,
could	form	a	thick,	dry,	pungent	fugue	of	dismay,	in	the	city	on	this	night	not	a
single	globe	of	blue	fire	could	be	seen.
There	were	survivors.	Many,	many	survivors	–	indeed,	more	survived	than
died	–	but	alas,	it	was	a	close	run	thing,	this	measure,	this	fell	harvest.
The	god	walked	eastward,	out	from	Gadrobi	District	and	into	Lakefront,
and,	from	there,	up	into	the	Estates.
This	night	was	not	done.	My,	not	done	at	all.


	
Unseen	in	the	pitch	black	of	this	moonless,	smoke-wreathed	night,	a	massive
shape	sailed	low	over	the	Gadrobi	Hills,	westward	and	out	on	to	the	trader ’s
road.	As	it	drew	closer	to	the	murky	lights	of	Worrytown,	the	silent	flier
slowly	dropped	lower	until	its	clawed	talons	almost	brushed	the	gravel	of	the
road.
Above	it,	smaller	shapes	beat	heavy	wings	here	and	there,	wheeling	round,
plummeting	and	then	thudding	themselves	back	up	again.	These	too	uttered	no
calls	in	the	darkness.
To	one	side	of	the	track,	crouched	in	high	grasses,	a	coyote	that	had	been
about	to	cross	the	track	suddenly	froze.
Heady	spices	roiled	over	the	animal	in	a	warm,	sultry	gust,	and	where	a
moment	earlier	there	had	been	black,	shapeless	clouds	sliding	through	the	air,
now	there	was	a	figure	–	a	man-thing,	the	kind	the	coyote	warred	with	in	its
skull,	fear	and	curiosity,	opportunity	and	deadly	betrayal	–	walking	on	the
road.
But	this	man-thing,	it	was…different.
As	it	came	opposite	the	coyote,	its	head	turned	and	regarded	the	beast.
The	coyote	trotted	out.	Every	muscle,	every	instinct,	cried	out	for	a
submissive	surrender,	and	yet	as	if	from	some	vast	power	outside	itself,	the
coyote	held	its	head	high,	ears	sharp	forward	as	it	drew	up	alongside	the
figure.
Who	reached	down	to	brush	gloved	fingers	back	along	the	dome	of	its
head.
And	off	the	beast	bounded,	running	as	fast	as	its	legs	could	carry	it,	out
into	the	night,	the	vast	plain	to	the	south.
Freed,	blessed,	beneficiary	of	such	anguished	love	that	it	would	live	the
rest	of	its	years	in	a	grassy	sea	of	joy	and	delight.
Transformed.	No	special	reason,	no	grim	purpose.	No,	this	was	a
whimsical	touch,	a	mutual	celebration	of	life.	Understand	it	or	stumble
through.	The	coyote’s	role	is	done,	and	off	it	pelts,	heart	bright	as	a	blazing
star.
Gifts	to	start	the	eyes.
	
Anomander	Rake,	Son	of	Darkness,	walked	between	the	shanties	of
Worrytown.	The	gate	was	ahead,	but	no	guards	were	visible.	The	huge	doors


were	barred.
From	beyond,	from	the	city	itself,	fires	roared	here	and	there,	thrusting
bulging	cloaks	of	spark-lit	smoke	up	into	the	black	night.
Five	paces	from	the	gates	now,	and	something	snapped	and	fell	away.	The
doors	swung	open.	And,	unaccosted,	unnoticed,	Anomander	Rake	walked	into
Darujhistan.
Howls	rose	like	madness	unleashed.
The	Son	of	Darkness	reached	up	and	unsheathed	Dragnipur.
Steam	curled	from	the	black	blade,	twisting	into	ephemeral	chains	that
stretched	out	as	he	walked	up	the	wide,	empty	street.	Stretched	out	to	drag
behind	him,	and	from	each	length	others	emerged	and	from	these	still	more,	a
forest’s	worth	of	iron	roots,	snaking	out,	whispering	over	the	cobbles.
He	had	never	invited	such	a	manifestation	before.	Reining	in	that	bleed	of
power	had	been	an	act	of	mercy,	to	all	those	who	might	witness	it,	who	might
comprehend	its	significance.
But	on	this	night,	Anomander	Rake	had	other	things	on	his	mind.
Chains	of	smoke,	chains	and	chains	and	chains,	so	many	writhing	in	his
wake	that	they	filled	the	breadth	of	the	street,	that	they	snaked	over	and	under
and	spilled	out	into	side	streets,	alleys,	beneath	estate	gates,	beneath	doors	and
through	windows.	They	climbed	walls.
Wooden	barriers	disintegrated	–	doors	and	sills	and	gates	and	window
frames.	Stones	cracked,	bricks	spat	mortar.	Walls	bowed.	Buildings	groaned.
He	walked	on	as	those	chains	grew	taut.
No	need	yet	to	lean	forward	with	each	step.	No	need	yet	to	reveal	a	single
detail	to	betray	the	strength	and	the	will	demanded	of	him.
He	walked	on.
	
Throughout	the	besieged	city,	mages,	witches,	wizards	and	sorcerors	clutched
the	sides	of	their	heads,	eyes	squeezing	shut	as	unbearable	pressure	closed	in.
Many	fell	to	their	knees.	Others	staggered.	Still	others	curled	up	into	tight
foetal	balls	on	the	floor,	as	the	world	groaned.
Raging	fires	flinched,	collapsed	into	themselves,	died	in	silent	gasps.
The	howl	of	the	Hounds	thinned	as	if	forced	through	tight	valves.
	
In	a	slag-crusted	pit	twin	sisters	paused	as	one	in	their	efforts	to	scratch	each
other ’s	eyes	out.	In	the	midst	of	voluminous	clouds	of	noxious	vapours,	knee


deep	in	magma	that	swirled	like	a	lake	of	molten	sewage,	the	sisters	halted,	and
slowly	lifted	their	heads.
As	if	scenting	the	air.
Dragnipur.
Dragnipur.
	
Down	from	the	Estates,	into	that	projecting	wedge	that	was	Daru,	and	hence
through	another	gate	and	on	to	the	main	avenue	in	Lakefront,	proceeding
parallel	to	the	shoreline.	As	soon	as	he	reached	the	straight,	level	stretch	of	that
avenue,	the	Son	of	Darkness	paused.
	
Four	streets	distant	on	that	same	broad	track,	Hood,	Lord	of	Death,	fixed	his
gaze	on	the	silver-haired	figure	which	seemed	to	have	hesitated,	but	only	for	a
moment,	before	resuming	its	approach.
Hood	felt	his	own	unease,	yet	onward	he	strode.
The	power	of	that	sword	was	breathtaking,	even	for	a	god.	Breathtaking.
Terrifying.
They	drew	closer,	in	measured	steps,	and	closer	still.
The	Hounds	had	fallen	silent.	In	the	wake	of	crushed	fires,	smoke	billowed
low,	barely	lit	by	fitful	blue	gaslight.	Piercing	in	and	out	of	the	black	clouds,
Great	Ravens	circled,	advanced,	and	retreated;	and	moments	before	the	two
figures	reached	each	other,	the	huge	birds	began	landing	on	roof	edges	facing
down	into	the	street,	in	rows	and	clusters,	scores	and	then	hundreds.
They	were	here.
To	witness.
To	know.	To	believe.
And,	perchance,	to	feed.
	
Only	three	strides	between	them	now.	Hood	slowed	his	steps.	‘Son	of
Darkness,’	he	said,	‘I	have	reconsidered—’
And	the	sword	lashed	out,	a	clean	arc	that	took	the	Lord	of	Death	in	the
neck,	slicing	clean	through.
As	Hood’s	head	pitched	round	inside	its	severed	cloth	sack,	the	body
beneath	it	staggered	back,	dislodging	what	it	had	lost.
A	heavy,	solid	crunch	as	the	god’s	head	struck	the	cobbles,	rolling	on	to


one	cheek,	the	eyes	staring	and	lifeless.
Black	blood	welled	up	from	the	stump	of	neck.	One	more	step	back,	before
the	legs	buckled	and	the	Lord	of	Death	fell	to	his	knees	and	then	sat	back.
Opposite	the	dead	god,	Anomander	Rake,	face	stretching	in	agony,	fought
to	remain	standing.
Whatever	weight	descended	upon	him	at	this	moment	was	invisible	to	the
mortal	eye,	unseen	even	by	the	thousand	Great	Ravens	perched	and	leaning	far
forward	on	all	sides,	but	its	horrendous	toll	was	undeniable.
The	Son	of	Darkness,	Dragnipur	in	one	hand,	bowed	and	bent	like	an	old
man.	The	sword’s	point	grated	and	then	caught	in	the	join	between	four
cobbles.	And	Anomander	Rake	began	to	lean	on	it,	every	muscle	straining	as
his	legs	slowly	gave	way	–	no,	he	could	not	stand	beneath	this	weight.
And	so	he	sank	down,	the	sword	before	him,	both	hands	on	the	cross-hilt’s
wings,	head	bowed	against	Dragnipur,	and	these	details	alone	were	all	that
distinguished	him	from	the	god	opposite.
They	sat,	on	knees	and	haunches,	as	if	mirrored	images.	One	leaning	on	a
sword,	forehead	pressed	to	the	gleaming,	smoke-wreathed	blade.	The	other
decapitated,	hands	resting	palm	up	on	the	thighs.
One	was	dead.
The	other,	at	this	moment,	profoundly…vulnerable.
Things	noticed.
Things	were	coming,	and	coming	fast.
	
And	this	night,	why,	it	is	but	half	done.


Chapter	Twenty-Two

He	slid	down	the	last	of	the	trail	and	he	asked	of	me,
‘Do	you	see	what	you	expected?’
And	this	was	a	question	breaking	loose,	rolling	free.
Out	from	under	stones	and	scattered
Into	thoughts	of	what	the	cruel	fates	would	now	decree.
He	settled	back	in	the	dust	and	made	his	face	into	pain,
‘Did	you	see	only	what	you	believed?’
And	I	looked	down	to	where	blood	had	left	its	stain
The	charge	of	what’s	given,	what’s	received
Announcing	the	closing	dirge	on	this	long	campaign.
‘No,’	I	said,	‘you	are	not	what	I	expected	to	see.’
Young	as	hope	and	true	as	love	was	my	enemy,
‘The	shields	were	burnished	bright	as	a	sun-splashed	sea,
And	drowning	courage	hath	brought	me	to	this	calamity.
Expectation	has	so	proved	the	death	of	me.’
He	spoke	to	say,	‘You	cannot	war	against	the	man	you	were,
And	I	cannot	slay	the	man	I	shall	one	day	become,
Our	enemy	is	expectation	flung	backward	and	fore,
The	memories	you	choose	and	the	tracks	I	would	run.
Slayer	of	dreams,	sower	of	regrets,	all	that	we	are.’
Soldier	at	the	End	of	his	Days
		(fragment)
Des’Ban	of	Nemil

They	did	not	stop	for	the	night.	With	the	city’s	fitful	glow	to	the	north,
throbbing	crimson,	Traveller	marched	as	would	a	man	possessed.	At	times,	as


she	and	Karsa	rode	on	ahead	to	the	next	rise	to	fix	their	gazes	upon	that	distant
conflagration,	Samar	Dev	feared	that	he	might,	upon	reaching	them,	simply
lash	out	with	his	sword.	Cut	them	both	down.	So	that	he	could	take	Havok	for
himself,	and	ride	hard	for	Darujhistan.
Something	terrible	was	happening	in	that	city.	Her	nerves	were	on	fire.	Her
skull	seemed	to	creak	with	some	kind	of	pervasive	pressure,	building	with	each
onward	step.	She	felt	febrile,	sick	to	her	stomach,	her	mouth	dry	as	dust,	and
she	held	on	to	Karsa	Orlong’s	muscled	girth	as	if	he	was	a	mast	on	a	stormwracked	ship.	He	had	said	nothing	for	some	time	now,	and	she	did	not	have	the
courage	to	break	that	grim	silence.
Less	than	a	league	away,	the	city	flashed	and	rumbled.
When	Traveller	reached	them,	however,	it	was	as	if	they	did	not	exist.	He
was	muttering	under	his	breath.	Vague	arguments,	hissed	denials,	breathless
lists	of	bizarre,	disconnected	phrases,	each	one	worked	out	as	if	it	was	a
justification	for	something	he	had	done,	or	something	he	was	about	to	do.	At
times	those	painful	phrases	sounded	like	justifications	for	both.	Future	blended
with	the	past,	a	swirling	vortex	with	a	tortured	soul	at	its	very	heart.	She	could
not	bear	to	listen.
Obsession	was	a	madness,	a	fever.	When	it	clawed	its	way	to	the	surface,	it
was	terrible	to	behold.	It	was	impossible	not	to	see	the	damage	it	did,	the
narrowness	of	the	treacherous	path	one	was	forced	to	walk,	as	if	between	walls
of	thorns,	jutting	knife	blades.	One	misstep	and	blood	was	drawn,	and	before
long	the	poor	creature	was	a	mass	of	wounds,	streaked	and	dripping,	blind	to
everything	but	what	waited	somewhere	ahead.
And	what	if	he	found	what	he	sought?	What	if	he	won	through	in	his	final
battle	–	whatever	that	might	be?	What	then	for	Traveller?
It	will	kill	him.
His	reason	for	living…gone.
Gods	below,	I	will	not	bear	witness	to	such	a	scene.	I	dare	not.
For	I	have	my	own	obsessions…
Traveller	marched	on	in	dark	argument.	She	and	Karsa	rode	Havok,	but
even	this	frightening	beast	was	starting,	shying	as	if	something	was	bodily
pushing	against	it.	Head	tossed,	hoofs	stamped	the	packed	ground.
Finally,	after	the	horse	almost	reared,	Karsa	uttered	a	low	snarl	and	reined
in.	‘Down,	witch,’	he	said	–	as	Traveller	once	more	stalked	past	–	‘we	will	walk
from	here.’
‘But	Havok—’
‘Can	fend	for	himself.	When	I	need	him,	we	shall	find	each	other	once
more.’


They	dismounted.	Samar	stretched	her	back.	‘I’m	exhausted.	My	head	feels
like	a	wet	pot	in	a	kiln	–	about	to	explode.	Karsa—’
‘Stay	here	if	you	will,’	he	said,	eyes	on	Traveller ’s	back.	‘I	will	go	on.’
‘Why?	Wherever	he’s	going,	it’s	his	battle,	not	yours.	You	cannot	help	him.
You	must	not	help	him,	Karsa	–	you	see	that,	don’t	you?’
He	grimaced.	‘I	can	guard	his	back—’
‘Why?	We	have	journeyed	together	out	of	convenience.	And	that’s	done,
now.	Can’t	you	feel	it?	It’s	done.	Take	one	wrong	step	–	cross	his	path	–	and	he
will	drag	out	that	sword.’	She	brought	her	hands	up	and	pressed	hard	against
her	eyelids.	Flashes	of	fire	ignited	her	inner	world.	No	different	from	what	she
was	seeing	in	the	city	before	them.	She	dropped	her	hands	and	blinked	blearily
at	the	Toblakai.	‘Karsa,	in	the	name	of	mercy,	let’s	turn	away.	Leave	him	to…
whatever ’s	in	Darujhistan.’
‘Witch,	we	have	been	following	a	trail.’
‘Sorry,	what?’
‘A	trail.’	He	glanced	down	at	her.	‘The	Hounds.’
She	looked	again	at	the	city,	even	as	a	fireball	ripped	upward	and	moments
later	thunder	rolled	through	the	ground	at	their	feet.	The	Hounds.	They’re
tearing	that	city	apart.	‘We	can’t	go	there!	We	can’t	walk	into	that!’
In	answer	Karsa	bared	his	teeth.	‘I	do	not	trust	those	beasts	–	are	they	there
to	protect	Traveller?	Or	hunt	him	down	in	some	deadly	game	in	the	streets?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘I’ll	not	clip	his	heels,	witch.	We’ll	keep	a	respectable
distance,	but	I	will	guard	his	back.’
She	wanted	to	scream.	You	stupid,	stubborn,	obstinate,	thick-skulled
bastard!	‘So	who	guards	our	backs?’
Sudden	blackness	welled	up	inside	her	mind	and	she	must	have	reeled,	for
a	moment	later	Karsa	was	holding	her	up,	genuine	concern	in	his	face.	‘What
ails	you,	Samar?’
‘You	idiot,	can’t	you	feel	it?’
‘No,’	he	replied.
She	thought	he	lied	then,	but	had	no	energy	to	challenge	him.	That
blackness	had	seemed	vast,	depthless,	a	maw	eager	to	devour	her,	swallow	her
down.	And,	most	horrifying	of	all,	something	about	it	was	seductive.	Slick	with
sweat,	her	legs	shaky	beneath	her,	she	held	on	to	Karsa’s	arm.
‘Stay	here,’	he	said	quietly.
‘No,	it	makes	no	difference.’
He	straightened	suddenly,	and	she	saw	that	he	was	facing	the	way	they	had
come.	‘What	–	what	is	it?’
‘That	damned	bear	–	it’s	back.’


She	twisted	round.	Yes,	there,	perhaps	a	hundred	paces	away,	a	huge	dark
shape.	Coming	no	closer.
‘What’s	it	want	with	me?’	she	asked	in	a	whisper.
‘If	you	stay,	you	may	find	out,	witch.’
‘No,	I	said.	We’ll	follow	Traveller.	It’s	decided.’
Karsa	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	then	he	grunted.	‘I	am	thinking…’
‘What?’
‘You	wanted	to	know,	earlier,	who	would	be	guarding	our	backs.’
She	frowned,	and	then	loosed	a	small	gasp	and	squinted	once	more	at	that
monstrous	beast.	It	was	just…hovering,	huge	head	slowly	wagging	from	side
to	side,	pausing	occasionally	to	lift	its	snout	in	their	direction.	‘I	wouldn’t	trust
that,	Karsa,	I	wouldn’t	trust	that	at	all.’
He	shrugged.
But	still	she	resisted,	glaring	now	into	the	vault	of	night	overhead.
‘Where’s	the	damned	moon,	Karsa?	Where	in	the	Abyss	is	the	damned	moon?’
	
Kallor	was	certain	now.	Forces	had	converged	in	Darujhistan.	Clashing	with
deadly	consequence,	and	blood	had	been	spilled.
He	lived	for	such	things.	Sudden	opportunities,	unexpected	powers
stumbling,	falling	within	reach.	Anticipation	awakened	within	him.
Life	thrust	forth	choices,	and	the	measure	of	a	man	or	woman’s	worth
could	be	found	in	whether	they	possessed	the	courage,	the	brazen	decisiveness,
to	grasp	hold	and	not	let	go.	Kallor	never	failed	such	moments.	Let	the	curse
flail	him,	strike	him	down;	let	defeat	batter	him	again	and	again.	He	would	just
get	back	up,	shake	the	dust	off,	and	begin	once	more.
He	knew	the	world	was	damned.	He	knew	that	the	curse	haunting	him	was
no	different	from	history’s	own	progression,	the	endless	succession	of
failures,	the	puerile	triumphs	that	had	a	way	of	falling	over	as	soon	as	one
stopped	looking.	Or	caring.	He	knew	that	life	itself	corrected	gross	imbalances
by	simply	folding	everything	over	and	starting	anew.
Too	often	scholars	and	historians	saw	the	principle	of	convergence	with
narrow,	truncated	focus.	In	terms	of	ascendants	and	gods	and	great	powers.	But
Kallor	understood	that	the	events	they	described	and	pored	over	after	the	fact
were	but	concentrated	expressions	of	something	far	vaster.	Entire	ages
converged,	in	chaos	and	tumult,	in	the	anarchy	of	Nature	itself.	And	more	often
than	not,	very	few	comprehended	the	disaster	erupting	all	around	them.	No,
they	simply	went	on	day	after	day	with	their	pathetic	tasks,	eyes	to	the	ground,
pretending	that	everything	was	just	fine.


Nature	wasn’t	interested	in	clutching	their	collars	and	giving	them	a
rattling	shake,	forcing	their	eyes	open.	No,	Nature	just	wiped	them	off	the
board.
And,	truth	be	told,	that	was	pretty	much	what	they	deserved.	Not	a	stitch
more.	There	were	those,	of	course,	who	would	view	such	an	attitude	aghast,
and	then	accuse	Kallor	of	being	a	monster,	devoid	of	compassion,	a	vision
stained	indelibly	dark	and	all	that	rubbish.	But	they	would	be	wrong.
Compassion	is	not	a	replacement	for	stupidity.	Tearful	concern	cannot	stand	in
the	stead	of	cold	recognition.	Sympathy	does	not	cancel	out	the	hard	facts	of
brutal,	unwavering	observation.	It	was	too	easy,	too	cheap,	to	fret	and	wring
one’s	hands,	moaning	with	heartfelt	empathy	–	it	was	damned	self-indulgent,	in
fact,	providing	the	perfect	excuse	for	doing	precisely	nothing	while	assuming
a	pious	pose.
Enough	of	that.
Kallor	had	no	time	for	such	games.	A	nose	in	the	air	just	made	it	easier	to
cut	the	throat	beneath	it.	And	when	it	came	to	that	choice,	why,	he	never
hesitated.	As	sure	as	any	force	of	Nature,	was	Kallor.
He	walked,	shins	tearing	and	uprooting	tangled	grasses.	Above	him,	a
strange,	moonless	night	with	the	western	horizon	–	where	the	sun	had	gone
down	long	ago	–	convulsing	with	carmine	flashes.
Reaching	a	raised	road	of	packed	gravel,	he	set	out,	hastening	his	pace
towards	the	waiting	city.	The	track	dipped	and	then	began	a	long,	stretched-out
climb.	Upon	reaching	the	summit,	he	paused.
A	hundred	paces	ahead	someone	had	set	four	torches	on	high	poles	where
four	paths	met,	creating	a	square	with	the	flaring	firelight	centred	on	the
crossroads.	There	were	no	buildings	in	sight,	nothing	to	give	reason	for	such	a
construction.	Frowning,	he	resumed	walking.
As	he	drew	closer,	he	saw	someone	sitting	on	a	marker	stone,	just	beneath
one	of	the	torches.	Hooded,	motionless,	forearms	resting	on	thighs,	gauntleted
hands	draped	down	over	the	knees.
Kallor	felt	a	moment	of	unease.	He	scraped	through	gravel	with	one	boot
and	saw	the	hood	slowly	lift,	the	figure	straightening	and	then	rising	to	its	feet.
Shit.
The	stranger	reached	up	and	tugged	back	the	hood,	then	walked	to	position
himself	in	the	centre	of	the	crossroads.
In	the	wake	of	recognition,	dismay	flooded	through	Kallor.	‘No,	Spinnock
Durav,	not	this.’
The	Tiste	Andii	unsheathed	his	sword.	‘High	King,	I	cannot	let	you	pass.’
‘Let	him	fight	his	own	battles!’


‘This	need	not	be	a	battle,’	Spinnock	replied.	‘I	am	camped	just	off	this
road.	We	can	go	there	now,	sit	at	a	fire	and	drink	mulled	wine.	And,	come	the
morning,	you	can	turn	round,	go	back	the	other	way.	Darujhistan,	High	King,
is	not	for	you.’
‘You	damned	fool.	You	know	you	cannot	best	me.’	He	glared	at	the
warrior,	struggling.	A	part	of	him	wanted	to…gods…	a	part	of	him	wanted	to
weep.	‘How	many	of	his	loyal,	brave	followers	will	he	see	die?	And	for	what?
Listen	to	me,	Spinnock.	I	have	no	real	enmity	against	you.	Nor	Rake.’	He
waved	one	chain-clad	hand	in	the	air	behind	him.	‘Not	even	those	who	pursue
me.	Heed	me,	please.	I	have	always	respected	you,	Spinnock	–	by	the	Abyss,	I
railed	at	how	Rake	used	you—’
‘You	do	not	understand,’	the	Tiste	Andii	said.	‘You	never	did,	Kallor.’
‘You’re	wrong.	I	have	nothing	against	any	of	you!’
‘Korlat—’
‘Did	you	think	it	was	my	intention	to	murder	Whiskeyjack?	Do	you	think	I
just	cut	down	honourable	men	and	loyal	soldiers	out	of	spite?	You	weren’t
even	there!	It	was	Silverfox	who	needed	to	die,	and	that	is	a	failure	we	shall	all
one	day	come	to	rue.	Mark	my	words.	Ah,	gods,	Spinnock.	They	got	in	my	way,
damn	you!	Just	as	you’re	doing	now!’
Spinnock	sighed.	‘It	seems	there	will	be	no	mulled	wine	this	night.’
‘Don’t.’
‘I	am	here,	High	King,	to	stand	in	your	way.’
‘You	will	die.	I	cannot	stay	my	hand	–	everything	will	be	beyond	control	by
then.	Spinnock	Durav,	please!	This	does	not	need	to	happen.’
The	Tiste	Andii’s	faint	smile	nearly	broke	Kallor ’s	heart.	No,	he
understands.	All	too	well.	This	will	be	his	last	battle,	in	Rake’s	name,	in
anyone’s	name.
Kallor	drew	out	his	sword.	‘Does	it	occur,	to	any	of	you,	what	these	things
do	to	me?	No,	of	course	not.	The	High	King	is	cursed	to	fail,	but	never	to	fall.
The	High	King	is	but…what?	Oh,	the	physical	manifestation	of	ambition.
Walking	proof	of	its	inevitable	price.	Fine.’	He	readied	his	two-handed	weapon.
‘Fuck	you,	too.’
With	a	roar	that	ripped	like	fire	from	his	throat,	Kallor	charged	forward,
and	swung	his	sword.
Iron	rang	on	iron.
Four	torches	lit	the	crossroads.	Four	torches	painted	two	warriors	locked
in	battle.	Would	these	be	the	only	witnesses?	Blind	and	miserably	indifferent
with	their	gift	of	light?
For	now,	the	answer	must	be	yes.


	
The	black	water	looked	cold.	Depthless,	the	blood	of	darkness.	It	breathed
power	in	chill	mists	that	clambered	ashore	to	swallow	jagged,	broken	rocks,
fallen	trees.	Night	itself	seemed	to	be	raining	down	into	this	sea.
Glittering	rings	spun	and	clicked,	and	Clip	slowly	turned	to	face	Nimander
and	the	others.	‘I	can	use	this,’	he	said.	‘The	power	rising	from	this	water,	it	is
filled	with	currents	of	pure	Kurald	Galain.	I	can	use	this.’
‘A	Gate?’
‘Well,	at	least	one	of	you	is	thinking.	A	Gate,	yes,	Nimander.	A	Gate.	To
take	us	to	Black	Coral.’
‘How	close?’	Skintick	asked.
Clip	shrugged.	‘Close	enough.	We	will	see.	At	the	very	least,	within	sight
of	the	city	walls.’
‘So	get	on	with	it,’	said	Nenanda,	his	words	very	nearly	a	snarl.
Smiling,	Clip	faced	the	Cut	once	more.	‘Do	not	speak,	any	of	you.	I	must
work	hard	at	this.’
Nimander	rubbed	at	his	face.	He	felt	numb,	haunted	by	exhaustion.	He
moved	off	to	sit	on	a	boulder.	Just	up	from	the	steep	shoreline,	thick	moss
blunted	everything,	the	stumps	of	rotted	trees,	the	upended	roots,	the	tumbled
black	stones.	The	night	air	clung	to	him,	cold	and	damp,	reaching	in	to	his
bones,	closing	tight	about	his	heart.	He	listened	to	the	soft	lap	of	the	water,	the
suck	and	gurgle	among	the	rocks.	The	smell	was	rich	with	decay,	the	mists
sweet	with	brine.
He	could	feel	the	cold	of	the	boulder	seeping	through,	and	his	hands	ached.
Clip	spun	his	chain,	whirled	the	two	rings,	one	gold,	one	silver,	and	round
and	round	they	went.	Apart	from	that	he	stood	motionless,	his	back	to	them	all.
Skintick	settled	down	beside	Nimander.	Their	eyes	met	and	Skintick
shrugged	a	silent	question,	to	which	Nimander	replied	with	a	faint	shake	of	his
head.
He’d	thought	he’d	have	a	few	more	days.	To	decide	things.	The	when.	The
how.	The	options	if	they	should	fail.	Tactics.	Fall-back	plans.	So	much	to	think
about,	but	he	could	speak	to	no	one,	could	not	even	hint	of	what	he	thought
must	be	done.	Clip	had	stayed	too	close	to	them	on	this	descent,	as	if
suspicious,	as	if	deliberately	forcing	Nimander	to	say	nothing.
There	was	so	much	he	needed	to	tell	them,	and	so	much	that	he	needed	to
hear.	Discussions,	arguments,	the	weighing	of	risks	and	contingencies	and
coordination.	All	the	things	demanded	of	one	who	would	lead;	but	his	inability
to	give	voice	to	his	intentions,	to	deliver	orders	at	the	end	of	a	long	debate,	had


made	him	next	to	useless.
By	his	presence	alone,	Clip	had	stopped	Nimander	in	his	tracks.
In	this	game	of	move	and	countermove,	Clip	had	outwitted	him,	and	that
galled.	The	moment	the	charade	was	shattered,	there	would	be	chaos,	and	in
that	scene	Clip	held	the	advantage.	He	had	only	himself	to	worry	about,	after
all.
No,	Nimander	had	no	choice	but	to	act	alone,	to	trust	in	the	others	to
follow.
He	knew	they	were	watching	him,	his	every	move,	studying	his	face	for
any	telltale	expression,	for	every	silent	message,	and	this	meant	he	had	to	hold
himself	in	check.	He	had	to	guard	himself	against	revealing	anything,	lest	one
of	them	misunderstand	and	so	make	a	fatal	mistake,	and	all	of	this	was	wearing
him	down.
Something	lifted	noisily	from	the	black	water.	A	span	of	darkness,	vertical,
its	upper	edges	dripping,	fast	dissolving.
‘Follow	me,’	Clip	gasped.	‘Quickly!’
Nimander	rose	and	tugged	Skintick	back	–	‘Everyone,	stay	behind	me’	–
and,	seeing	Clip	lunge	forward	and	vanish	within	the	Gate,	he	hurried	forward.
But	Nenanda	reached	the	portal	before	him,	rushing	in	even	as	he	drew	his
sword.
Cursing	under	his	breath,	Nimander	darted	after	him.
The	Gate	was	collapsing.	Someone	shrieked	in	his	wake.
Nimander	staggered	on	slippery,	uneven	bedrock,	half	blinded	by	streaks
of	luminescence	that	scattered	like	cut	webs.	He	heard	a	gasping	sound,	almost
at	his	feet,	and	a	moment	later	stumbled	against	something	that	groaned.
Nimander	reached	down,	felt	a	body	lying	prone.	Felt	something	hot	and
welling	under	one	palm	–	the	slit	of	a	wound,	the	leaking	of	blood.	‘Nenanda?’
Another	gasp,	and	then,	‘I’m	sorry,	Nimander	–	I	saw	–	I	saw	him	reaching
for	his	dagger,	even	as	he	stepped	through	–	I	saw	–	he	knew,	he	knew	you
were	following,	you	see	–	he—’
From	somewhere	ahead	there	came	a	hollow	laugh.	‘Do	you	imagine	me
an	idiot,	Nimander?	Too	bad	it	wasn’t	you.	It	should	have	been	you.	But	then,
this	way	it’s	just	one	more	death	for	you	to	carry	along.’
Nimander	stared	but	could	see	nothing.	‘You	still	need	us!’
‘Maybe,	but	it’s	too	risky	to	have	you	so	close.	When	I	see	a	viper,	I	don’t
invite	it	into	my	belt-pouch.	So,	wander	lost	in	here…for	ever,	Nimander.	It
won’t	feel	very	different	from	your	life	before	this,	I	expect.’
‘The	god	within	you,’	Nimander	said,	‘is	a	fool.	My	Lord	will	cut	it	down
and	you	with	it,	Clip.	You	don’t	know	him.	You	don’t	know	a	damned	thing!’


Another	laugh,	this	one	much	farther	away.
Nimander	wiped	the	tears	from	his	cheeks	with	his	free	forearm.	Beneath
his	palm,	the	pulse	of	blood	from	the	wound	had	slowed.
Too	many	failures.	Too	many	defeats.
A	soul	carries	a	vessel	of	courage.	It	cannot	be	refilled.	Every	thing	that
takes	from	it	leaves	less	behind.
What	do	I	have	left?
Whatever	it	was,	the	time	had	come	to	drink	deep,	to	use	it	all.	One	last
time.	Nimander	straightened.
‘Desra?	Skintick?	Anyone?’
His	words	drew	echoes,	and	they	were	the	only	replies	he	received.
Nimander	drew	his	sword,	and	then	set	out.	In	the	direction	of	that	mocking
laughter.
Ribbons	of	light	swam	in	the	air	on	all	sides.
He	encountered	no	walls,	felt	no	wayward	currents	of	air.	The	folded
bedrock	beneath	his	feet	undulated	randomly,	angling	neither	upward	nor
downward	for	long,	uneven	enough	to	make	him	stumble	every	now	and	then,
and	once	to	land	on	his	knees	with	a	painful,	stinging	jolt.
Lost.	Not	a	single	sound	to	betray	where	Clip	might	be	now.
Yes,	this	was	a	clever	end	for	Nimander,	one	that	must	have	given	Clip
moments	of	delicious	anticipation.	Lost	in	darkness.	Lost	to	his	kin.	To	his
Lord,	and	to	a	future	that	now	would	never	arrive.	So	perfect,	so	precise,	this
punishment—
‘Enough	of	that,	you	pathetic	creature.’
Phaed.
‘They’re	here,	you	fool.	As	lost	as	you.’
What?	Who?	Leave	me	be.	I	told	you,	I’m	sorry.	For	what	happened	to	you,
for	what	I	tried	to	do.	I’m	sorry—
‘Too	late	for	that.	Besides,	you	don’t	understand.	I	lived	in	fear.	I	lived	in
perpetual	terror.	Of	everything.	Of	all	of	you.	That	I’d	be	found	out.	Can	you
imagine,	Nimander,	what	that	was	like?	To	live	was	torture,	to	dread	an	end
even	worse.	Oh,	I	knew	it	was	coming.	It	had	to.	People	like	me	win	for	only	so
long,	before	someone	notices	–	and	then	his	face	fills	with	disgust,	and	he
crushes	me	underfoot.
‘Or	throws	me	out	of	a	window.’
Please,	no	more—
‘They’re	here.	Desra,	Skintick.	Sweet	Aranatha.	Find	them.’
How?
‘I	can’t	do	this	for	you.	Shouts	will	go	unheard.	There	are	layers	to	this


place.	Layers	and	layers	and	layers.	You	could	have	walked	right	through	one
of	them	and	known	nothing.	Nimander	Golit,	the	blood	of	our	Lord	is	within
you.	The	blood	of	Eleint,	too	–	is	that	the	secret?	Is	that	the	one	weapon	Clip
did	not	know	you	possess?	How	could	he	know?	How	could	anyone?	We	have
suppressed	it	within	ourselves	for	so	long	now—’
Because	Andarist	told	us	to!
‘Because	Andarist	told	us	to.	Because	he	was	bitter.	And	hurting.	He
thought	he	could	take	his	brother’s	children	and	make	them	his	own,	more	his
own	than	Rake’s.’
Nenanda—
‘Had	the	thinnest	blood	of	all.	We	knew	that.	You	knew	it,	too.	It	made	him
too	predictable.	It’s	probably	killed	him.	Brother,	father,	son	–	these	layers	are
so	precious,	aren’t	they?	Look	on	them	again,	my	lover,	my	killer,	but	this	time…
with	a	dragon’s	eyes.’
But,	Phaed,	I	don’t	know	how!	How	do	I	do	that?
She	had	no	answer.	No,	it	would	never	be	that	simple,	would	it?	Phaed	was
not	an	easy	memory,	not	a	gentle	ghost.	Nor	his	wise	conscience.	She	was	none
of	that.
Just	one	more	kin	whose	blood	stained	Nimander ’s	hands.
He	had	stopped	walking.	He	stood	now,	surrounded	by	oblivion.
‘My	hands,’	he	whispered.	And	then	slowly	lifted	them.	‘Stained,’	he	said.
‘Yes,	stained.’
The	blood	of	kin.	The	blood	of	Tiste	Andii.	The	blood	of	dragons.
That	shines	like	beacons.	That	call,	summon,	can	cast	outward	until—
A	woman’s	hand	reached	out	as	if	from	nowhere,	closing	round	one	of	his
own	in	a	cold	grip.
And	all	at	once	she	was	before	him,	her	eyes	like	twin	veils,	parting	to
reveal	a	depthless,	breathtaking	love.
He	gasped,	vertiginous,	and	almost	reeled.	‘Aranatha.’
She	said,	‘There	is	little	time,	brother.	We	must	hurry.’
Still	holding	his	hand,	she	set	off,	pulling	him	along	as	she	might	a	child.
But	Nimander	was	of	no	mind	to	complain.
He	had	looked	into	her	eyes.	He	had	seen	it.	That	love.	He	had	seen	it.
And	more,	he	had	understood.
	
The	Dying	God,	he	was	coming.	Pure	as	music,	bright	as	truth,	solid	as
certainty.	A	fist	of	power,	driving	onward,	smashing	everything	in	its	path,
until	that	fist	uncurled	and	the	hand	opened,	to	close	round	the	soul	of	the


Redeemer.	A	weaker	god,	a	god	lost	in	its	own	confusion.
Salind	would	be	that	fist,	she	would	be	that	hand.	Delivering	a	gift,	from
which	a	true	and	perfect	faith	would	emerge.	This	is	the	blood	of	redemption.
You	will	understand,	Redeemer.	Drink	deep	the	blood	of	redemption,	and	dance.
The	song	is	glory,	and	glory	is	a	world	we	need	never	leave.	And	so,	my
beloved	Itkovian,	dance	with	me.	Here,	see	me	reaching	for	you—
	
Supine	on	the	muddy	floor	of	Gradithan’s	hut,	Salind	leaked	thick	black	mucus
from	her	mouth	and	nose,	from	the	tear	ducts	of	her	eyes.	Her	fingernails	were
black,	and	more	inky	fluid	oozed	out	of	them.	She	was	naked,	and	as	he	knelt
beside	her	Gradithan	had	paused,	breathing	hard,	his	eyes	fixed	on	the	black
milk	trickling	down	from	the	woman’s	nipples.
Standing	wrapped	in	his	raincape	close	to	the	doorway,	Monkrat	looked	on
with	flat	eyes,	his	face	devoid	of	expression.	He	could	see	how	Gradithan
struggled	against	the	sudden	thirst,	the	desire	that	was	half	childlike	and	half
sexual,	as	he	stared	down	at	those	leaking	breasts.	The	bastard	had	already
raped	her,	in	some	twisted	consummation,	a	sacrifice	of	her	virginity,	so	the
only	thing	that	must	have	been	holding	the	man	back	was	some	kind	of
overriding	imperative.	Monkrat	was	not	happy	thinking	about	that.
Gradithan	lifted	Salind’s	head	with	one	hand	and	tugged	open	her	mouth
with	the	other.	He	reached	for	the	jug	of	saemankelyk.	‘Time,’	he	muttered,
‘and	time,	time,	time,	the	time.	Is	now.’	He	tipped	the	jug	and	the	black	juice
poured	into	Salind’s	gaping,	stained	mouth.
She	swallowed,	and	swallowed,	and	it	seemed	she	would	never	stop,	that
her	body	was	depthless,	a	vessel	with	no	bottom.	She	drank	down	her	need,	and
that	need	could	never	find	satiation.
Monkrat	grunted.	He’d	known	plenty	of	people	like	that.	It	was	a	secret
poorly	kept	once	you	knew	what	to	look	for,	there	in	their	eyes.	Hope	and
expectation	and	hunger	and	the	hint	of	spiteful	rage	should	a	single	demand	be
denied.	They	had	a	way	of	appearing,	and	then	never	leaving.	Yes,	he’d	known
people	like	that.
And,	well,	here	was	their	god,	shining	from	Salind’s	eyes.	Everyone
needed	a	god.	Slapped	together	and	shaped	with	frantic	hands,	a	thing	of	clay
and	sticks.	Built	up	of	wants	and	all	those	unanswerable	questions	that	plagued
the	mortal	soul.	Neuroses	carved	in	stone.	Malign	obsessions	given	a	hard,
judgemental	face	–	he	had	seen	them,	all	the	variations,	in	city	after	city,	on	the
long	campaigns	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	They	lined	the	friezes	in	temples;	they
leered	down	from	balustrades.	Ten	thousand	gods,	one	for	every	damned


mood,	it	seemed.	A	pantheon	of	exaggerated	flaws.
Salind	was	convulsing	now,	the	black	poison	gushing	from	her	mouth,
thick	as	honey	down	her	chin,	and	hanging	in	drop-heavy	threads	like	some
ghastly	beard.
When	she	smiled,	Monkrat	flinched.
The	convulsions	found	a	rhythm,	and	Gradithan	was	pushed	away	as	she
undulated	upright,	a	serpent	rising,	a	thing	of	sweet	venom.
Monkrat	edged	back,	and	before	Gradithan	could	turn	to	him	the	exBridgeburner	slipped	outside.	Rain	slanted	down	into	his	face.	He	paused,
ankle-deep	in	streaming	mud,	and	drew	up	his	hood.	That	water	had	felt	clean.
If	only	it	could	wash	all	of	this	away.	Oh,	not	the	camp	–	it	was	already	doing
that	–	but	everything	else.	Choices	made,	bad	decisions	stumbled	into,	years	of
useless	living.	Would	he	ever	do	anything	right?	His	list	of	errors	had	grown
so	long	he	felt	trapped	by	some	internal	pell-mell	momentum.	Dozens	more
awaited	him—
A	bedraggled	shape	emerged	from	the	rain.	Grizzled	face,	a	sopping
hairshirt.	Like	some	damned	haunt	from	his	past,	a	ghoul	grinning	with	dread
reminders	of	everything	he	had	thrown	away.
Spindle	stepped	up	to	Monkrat.	‘It’s	time.’
‘For	what?	Aye,	we	got	drunk,	we	laughed	and	cried	and	all	that	shit.	And
maybe	I	told	you	too	much,	but	not	enough,	I’m	now	thinking,	if	you	believe
you	can	do	a	damned	thing	about	all	this.	It’s	a	god	we’re	talking	about	here,
Spin.	A	god.’
‘Never	mind	that.	I	been	walking	through	this	shit-hole.	Monkrat,	there’s
children	here.	Just…abandoned.’
‘Not	for	long.	They’re	going	to	be	taken.	Used	to	feed	the	Dying	God.’
‘Not	if	we	take	’em	first.’
‘Take	them?	Where?’
Spindle	bared	his	teeth,	and	only	now	did	Monkrat	comprehend	the	barely
restrained	fury	in	the	man	facing	him.	‘Where?	How	about	away?	Does	that
sound	too	complicated	for	you?	Maybe	those	hills	west	of	here,	in	the	woods.
You	said	it	was	all	coming	down.	If	we	leave	’em	they’ll	all	die,	and	I	won’t
have	it.’
Monkrat	scratched	at	his	beard.	‘Now	ain’t	that	admirable	of	you,	but—’
The	hard	angled	point	of	a	shortsword	pressed	the	soft	flesh	below
Monkrat’s	chin.	He	scowled.	The	bastard	was	fast,	all	right,	and	old	Monkrat
was	losing	his	edge.
‘Now,’	hissed	Spindle,	‘you	either	follow	Gredithick	around—’
‘Gradithan.’


‘Whatever.	You	either	follow	him	like	a	pup,	or	you	start	helping	me	round
up	the	runts	still	alive.’
‘You’re	giving	me	a	choice?’
‘Kind	of.	If	you	say	you	want	to	be	a	pup,	then	I’ll	saw	off	your	head,	as
clumsily	as	I	can.’
Monkrat	hesitated.
Spindle’s	eyes	widened.	‘You’re	in	a	bad	way,	soldier—’
‘I	ain’t	a	soldier	no	more.’
‘Maybe	that’s	your	problem.	You’ve	forgotten	things.	Important	things.’
‘Such	as?’
Spindle	grimaced,	as	if	searching	for	the	right	words,	and	Monkrat	saw	in
his	mind	a	quick	image	of	a	three-legged	dog	chasing	rabbits	in	a	field.	‘Fine,’
Spindle	finally	said	in	a	grating	tone.	‘It	had	to	have	happened	to	you	at	least
once.	You	and	your	squad,	you	come	into	some	rotten	foul	village	or	hamlet.
You	come	to	buy	food	or	maybe	get	your	tack	fixed,	clothes	mended,	whatever.
But	you	ain’t	there	to	kill	nobody.	And	so	you	get	into	a	few	conversations.	In
the	tavern.	The	smithy.	With	the	whores.	And	they	start	talking.	About
injustices.	Bastard	landholders,	local	bullies,	shit-grinning	small-time	tyrants.
The	usual	crap.	The	corruption	and	all	that.	You	know	what	I’m	talking	about,
Monkrat?’
‘Sure.’
‘So	what	did	you	do?’
‘We	hunted	the	scum	down	and	flayed	their	arses.	Sometimes	we	even
strung	’em	up.’
Spindle	nodded.	‘You	did	justice,	is	what	you	did.	It’s	what	a	soldier	can	do,
when	there’s	nobody	else.	We	got	swords,	we	got	armour,	we	got	all	we	need
to	terrorize	anybody	we	damned	well	please.	But	Dassem	taught	us	–	he	taught
every	soldier	in	the	Malazan	armies	back	then.	Sure,	we	had	swords,	but	who
we	used	’em	on	was	up	to	us.’	The	point	of	the	shortsword	fell	away.	‘We	was
soldiers,	Monkrat.	We	had	the	chance	–	the	privilege	–	of	doing	the	right
thing.’
‘I	deserted—’
‘And	I	was	forced	into	retirement.	Neither	one	changes	what	we	were.’
‘That’s	where	you’re	wrong.’
‘Then	listen	to	this.’	The	shortsword	pressed	against	his	throat	again.	‘I	can
still	deliver	justice,	and	if	need	be	I’ll	do	it	right	now	and	right	here.	By	cutting
a	coward’s	head	off.’
‘Don’t	talk	to	me	about	cowardice!’	Monkrat	snapped.	‘Soldiers	don’t	talk
that	ever!	You	just	broke	the	first	rule!’


‘Someone	turns	his	back	on	being	a	soldier	–	on	what	it	means	in	the	soul
–	that’s	cowardice.	You	don’t	like	the	word,	don’t	live	it.’
Monkrat	stared	into	the	man’s	eyes,	and	hated	what	he	saw	there.	He
sagged.	‘Best	get	on	with	it	then,	Spin.	I	got	nothing	left.	I’m	used	up.	What	do
you	do	when	the	soldier	inside	you	dies	before	you	do?	Tell	me.’
‘You	go	through	the	motions,	Monkrat.	You	just	follow	me.	Do	as	I	do.	We
start	there	and	worry	about	the	rest	later.’
Monkrat	realized	that	Spindle	was	still	waiting.	‘Do	what’s	right,’	Dassem
told	us.	Gods,	even	after	all	this	time	he	still	remembered	the	First	Sword’s
words.	‘That’s	a	higher	law	than	the	command	of	any	officer.	Higher	even	than
the	Emperor’s	own	words.	You	are	in	a	damned	uniform	but	that’s	not	a	licence
to	deliver	terror	to	everyone	–	just	the	enemy	soldier	you	happen	to	be	facing.
Do	what	is	right,	for	that	armour	you	wear	doesn’t	just	protect	your	flesh	and
bone.	It	defends	honour.	It	defends	integrity.	It	defends	justice.	Soldiers,	heed
me	well.	That	armour	defends	humanity.	And	when	I	look	upon	my	soldiers,
when	I	see	these	uniforms,	I	see	compassion	and	truth.	The	moment	those
virtues	fail,	then	the	gods	help	you,	for	no	armour	is	strong	enough	to	save
you.’
‘All	right,	Spin.	I’ll	follow	you.’
A	sharp	nod.	‘Dassem,	he’d	be	proud.	And	not	surprised,	no,	not	surprised
at	all.’
‘We	have	to	watch	out	for	Gradithan	–	he	wants	those	virgins.	He	wants
their	blood,	for	when	the	Dying	God	arrives.’
‘Yeah?	Well,	Gredishit	can	chew	on	Hood’s	arsehole.	He	ain’t	getting	’em.’
‘A	moment	ago	I	was	thinking,	Spin…’
‘Thinking	what?’
‘That	you	was	a	three-legged	dog.	But	I	was	wrong.	You’re	a	damned
Hound	of	Shadow	is	what	you	are.	Come	on.	I	know	where	they	all	huddle	to
stay	outa	the	rain.’
	
Seerdomin	adjusted	the	grip	on	his	sword	and	then	glanced	back	at	the
Redeemer.	The	god’s	position	was	unchanged.	Kneeling,	half	bent	over,	face
hidden	behind	his	hands.	A	position	of	abject	submission.	Defeat	and	despair.
Hardly	an	inspiring	standard	to	stand	in	front	of,	hardly	a	thing	to	fight	for,
and	Seerdomin	could	feel	the	will	draining	from	him	as	he	faced	once	more
the	woman	dancing	in	the	basin.
Convulsing	clouds	overhead,	an	endless	rain	of	kelyk	that	turned
everything	black.	The	drops	stung	and	then	numbed	his	eyes.	He	had	ceased	to


flinch	from	the	crack	of	lightning,	the	stuttering	crash	of	thunder.
He	had	fought	for	something	unworthy	once,	and	had	vowed	never	again.
Yet	here	he	was,	standing	between	a	god	of	unimaginable	power	and	a	god	not
worth	believing	in.	One	wanted	to	feed	and	the	other	looked	ready	to	be
devoured	–	why	should	he	get	in	the	way	of	the	two?
A	wretched	gasp	from	the	Redeemer	snapped	him	round.	The	rain	painted
Itkovian	black,	ran	like	dung-stained	water	down	the	face	he	had	lifted
skyward.	‘Dying,’	he	murmured,	so	faint	that	Seerdomin	had	to	step	closer	to
catch	the	word.	‘But	no	end	is	desired.	Dying,	for	all	eternity.	Who	seeks	this
fate?	For	himself?	Who	yearns	for	such	a	thing?	Can	I…can	I	help	him?’
Seerdomin	staggered	back,	as	if	struck	by	a	blow	to	his	chest.	That	–	Beru
fend	–	that	is	not	a	proper	question!	Not	against	this…this	thing.	Look	to
yourself,	Redeemer!	You	cannot	heal	what	does	not	want	healing!	You	cannot
mend	what	delights	in	being	broken!	‘You	cannot,’	he	growled.	‘You	cannot
help	it,	Redeemer.	You	can	only	fall	to	it.	Fall,	vanish,	be	swallowed	up.’
‘He	wants	me.	She	wants	me.	She	gave	him	this	want,	do	you	see?	Now
they	share.’
Seerdomin	turned	to	gaze	upon	the	High	Priestess.	She	was	growing	more
arms,	each	bearing	a	weapon,	each	weapon	whirling	and	spinning	in	a	clashing
web	of	edged	iron.	Kelyk	sprayed	from	the	blades,	a	whirling	cloud	of
droplets.	Her	dance	was	carrying	her	closer.
The	attack	was	beginning.
‘Who,’	Seerdomin	whispered,	‘will	share	this	with	me?’
‘Find	her,’	said	the	Redeemer.	‘She	remains,	deep	inside.	Drowning,	but
alive.	Find	her.’
‘Salind?	She	is	nothing	to	me!’
‘She	is	the	fire	in	Spinnock	Durav’s	heart.	She	is	his	life.	Fight	not	for	me.
Fight	not	for	yourself.	Fight,	Seerdomin,	for	your	friend.’
A	sob	was	wrenched	from	the	warrior.	His	soul	found	a	voice,	and	that
voice	wailed	its	anguish.	Gasping,	he	lifted	his	sword	and	set	his	eyes	upon	the
woman	cavorting	in	her	dance	of	carnage.	Can	I	do	this?	Spinnock	Durav,	you
fool,	how	could	you	have	fallen	so?
Can	I	find	her?
I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	think	so.
But	his	friend	had	found	love.	Absurd,	ridiculous	love.	His	friend,
wherever	he	was,	deserved	a	chance.	For	the	only	gift	that	meant	a	damned
thing.	The	only	one.
Blinking	black	tears	from	his	eyes,	Seerdomin	went	down	to	meet	her.
Her	howl	of	delight	was	a	thing	of	horror.


	
A	soldier	could	discover,	in	one	horrendous,	crushing	moment,	that	everything
that	lay	at	the	heart	of	duty	was	a	lie,	a	rotted,	fetid	mass,	feeding	like	a	cancer
on	all	that	the	soldier	was;	and	that	every	virtue	was	rooted	in	someone	else’s
poison.
Look	to	the	poor	fool	at	your	side.	Know	well	there’s	another	poor	fool	at
your	back.	This	is	how	far	the	world	shrinks	down,	when	everything	else	melts
in	front	of	your	eyes	–	too	compromised	to	sustain	clear	vision,	the	brutal,
uncluttered	recognition	of	the	lie.
Torn	loose	from	the	Malazan	Empire,	from	Onearm’s	Host,	the
bedraggled	clutch	of	survivors	that	was	all	that	remained	of	the	Bridgeburners
had	dragged	their	sorry	backsides	to	Darujhistan.	They	found	for	themselves	a
cave	where	they	could	hide,	surrounded	by	a	handful	of	familiar	faces,	to
remind	them	of	what	had	pushed	them	each	step	of	the	way,	from	the	past	to	the
present.	And	hoping	it	would	be	enough	to	take	them	into	the	future,	one
hesitant,	wayward	step	at	a	time.
Slash	knives	into	the	midst	of	that	meagre,	vulnerable	clutch,	and	it	just
falls	apart.
Mallet.	Bluepearl.
Like	blindfolded	goats	dragged	up	to	the	altar	stone.
Not	that	goats	needed	blindfolds.	It’s	just	no	fun	looking	into	a	dying
animal’s	eyes.
Picker	fell	through	darkness.	Maybe	she	was	flesh	and	bone.	Maybe	she
was	nothing	but	a	soul,	torn	loose	and	now	plummeting	with	naught	but	the
weight	of	its	own	regrets.	But	her	arms	scythed	through	bitter	cold	air,	her	legs
kicked	out	to	find	purchase	where	none	existed.	And	each	breath	was	getting
harder	to	snatch	from	that	rushing	blast.
In	the	dream-world	every	law	could	be	twisted	round,	bent,	folded.	And	so,
as	she	sensed	the	unseen	ground	fast	approaching,	she	spun	herself	upright	and
slowed,	sudden	and	yet	smooth,	and	moments	later	she	landed	lightly	on
uneven	bedrock.	Snail	shells	crunched	underfoot;	she	heard	the	faint	snap	of
small	rodent	bones.
Blinking,	gasping	one	breath	after	another	deep	into	her	lungs,	she	simply
stood	for	a	time,	knees	slightly	flexed,	hands	out	to	her	sides.
She	could	smell	an	animal	stench,	thick,	as	if	she	found	herself	in	a	den	in
some	hillside.
The	darkness	slowly	faded.	She	saw	rock	walls	on	which	scenes	had	been
pecked,	others	painted	in	earthy	hues.	She	saw	the	half-shells	of	gourds


crowding	the	rough	floor	on	both	sides	–	she	had	landed	upon	a	sort	of	path,
reaching	ahead	and	behind,	perhaps	three	paces	wide.	Before	her,	six	or	seven
paces	away,	it	ended	in	a	stone	wall.	Behind	her,	the	trail	blended	into	darkness.
She	looked	once	more	at	the	objects	cluttering	the	flanks.	In	each	gourd	there
was	thick,	dark	liquid.	She	knew	instinctively	that	it	was	blood.
The	image	etched	into	the	wall	in	front,	where	the	path	ended,	now	snared
her	attention,	and	slowly	its	details	began	to	resolve.	A	carriage	or	wagon,	a
swarm	of	vague	shapes	all	reaching	up	for	it	on	both	sides,	with	others	hinted
at	in	its	wake.	A	scene	of	frenzy	and	panic,	the	figure	sitting	on	the	bench
holding	reins	that	seemed	to	whip	about	–	but	no,	her	mind	was	playing	tricks
in	this	faint	light,	and	that	sound,	as	of	wheels	slamming	and	rocking	and
spinning	over	broken	ground,	was	only	her	lunging	heart,	the	rush	of	blood	in
her	ears.
But	Picker	stared,	transfixed.
A	soldier	with	nothing	left	to	believe	in	is	a	terrible	thing	to	behold.	When
the	blood	on	the	hands	is	unjust	blood,	the	soul	withers.
Death	becomes	a	lover,	and	that	love	leads	to	but	one	place.	Every	time,	but
one	place.
Friends	and	family	watch	on,	helpless.	And	in	this	tragic	scene,	the	liars,
the	cynical	bearers	of	poison,	they	are	nowhere	to	be	found.
	
Endest	Silann	had	once	been	a	priest,	a	believer	in	forces	beyond	the	mortal
realm;	a	believer	in	the	benign	regard	of	ancestors,	spirits,	each	one	a	moral
lodestone	that	cut	through	the	dissembling,	the	evasions	of	responsibility,	the
denials	of	culpability	–	a	man	of	faith,	yes,	in	the	traditional	sense	of	the	word.
But	these	things	no	longer	found	harbour	in	his	soul.	Ancestors	dissolved	into
the	ground,	leaving	nothing	but	crumbling	flecks	of	bone	in	dark	earth.	Spirits
offered	no	gifts	and	those	still	clinging	to	life	were	bitter	and	savage,	too	often
betrayed,	too	often	spat	upon,	to	hold	any	love	for	anyone.
He	now	believed	that	mortals	were	cursed.	Some	innate	proclivity	led	them
again	and	again	on	the	same	path.	Mortals	betrayed	every	gift	granted	them.
They	betrayed	the	giver.	They	betrayed	their	own	promises.	Their	gods,	their
ancestors,	their	children	–	everywhere,	betrayal.
The	great	forests	of	Kharkanas	had	been	cut	down;	the	squalid	dying
islands	of	growth	left	behind	had	each	one	fallen	to	fire	or	blight.	The	rich
soils	washed	down	into	the	rivers.	The	flesh	of	the	land	was	stripped	back	to
reveal	bedrock	bones.	And	hunger	stalked	the	children.	Mothers	wailed,	fathers
tried	on	hardened	masks	of	resolve,	but	before	any	of	this	both	had	looked	out


upon	the	ravaged	world	with	affronted	disbelief	–	someone’s	to	blame,
someone	always	is,	but	by	the	Abyss,	do	not	look	at	me!
But	there	was	nowhere	else	to	look.	Mother	Dark	had	turned	away.	She	had
left	them	to	fates	of	their	own	devising,	and	in	so	doing,	she	had	taken	away
their	privilege	of	blaming	someone	else.	Such	was	a	godless	world.
One	might	think,	then,	that	a	people	would	rise	to	fullest	height,	stand
proud,	and	accept	the	notion	of	potential	culpability	for	each	decision	made	or
not	made.	Yes,	that	would	be	nice.	That	would	be	something	to	behold,	to	feed
riotous	optimism.	But	such	a	moment,	such	stature,	never	came.	Enlightened
ages	belonged	to	the	past	or	waited	for	the	future.	Such	ages	acquired	the	gloss
of	iconic	myth,	reduced	to	abstractions.	The	present	world	was	real,	filled	with
the	grit	of	reality	and	compromise.	People	did	not	stand	tall.	They	ducked.
There	was	no	one	about	with	whom	Endest	Silann	could	discuss	all	this.	No
one	who	might	–	just	might	–	understand	the	significance	of	what	he	was
thinking.
Rush	headlong.	Things	are	happening.	Standing	stones	topple	one	against
another	and	on	and	on.	Tidal	surges	lift	ever	higher.	Smoke	and	screams	and
violence	and	suffering.	Victims	piled	in	heaps	like	the	plunder	of	cannibals.
This	is	the	meat	of	glee,	the	present	made	breathless,	impatience	burning	like
acid.	Who	has	time	to	comprehend?
Endest	Silann	stood	atop	the	lesser	tower	of	the	keep.	He	held	out	one	hand,
knuckles	to	the	earth,	as	black	rain	pooled	in	the	cup	of	his	palm.
Was	the	truth	as	miserable	as	it	seemed?
Did	it	all	demand	that	one	figure,	one	solitary	figure,	rise	to	stand	tall?	To
face	that	litany	of	destruction,	the	brutality	of	history,	the	lie	of	progress,	the
desecration	of	a	home	once	sacred,	precious	beyond	imagining?	One	figure?
Alone?
Is	his	own	burden	not	enough?	Why	must	he	carry	ours?	Why	have	we	done
this	to	him?	Why,	because	it’s	easier	that	way,	and	we	so	cherish	the	easy	paths,
do	we	not?	The	least	of	effort	defines	our	virtues.	Trouble	us	not,	for	we	dislike
being	troubled.
The	children	are	hungry.	The	forests	are	dead,	the	rivers	poisoned.
Calamity	descends	again	and	again.	Diseases	flower	like	mushrooms	on
corpses.	And	soon	we	will	war	over	what’s	left.	As	we	did	in	Kharkanas.
He	will	take	this	burden,	but	what	does	that	mean?	That	we	are	freed	to	stay
unchanging?	Freed	to	continue	doing	nothing?
The	black	water	overflowed	the	cup,	spilled	down	to	become	rain	once
more.
Even	the	High	Priestess	did	not	understand.	Not	all	of	it,	no.	She	saw	this	as


a	single,	desperate	gambit,	a	cast	of	the	knuckles	on	which	rode	everything.	But
if	it	failed,	well,	there’d	be	another	game.	New	players,	the	same	old	tired
rules.	The	wealth	wagered	never	lost	its	value,	did	it?	The	heap	of	golden	coins
will	not	crumble.	It	will	only	grow	bigger	yet.
Then,	if	the	players	come	and	go,	while	the	rules	never	change,	does	not
that	heap	in	fact	command	the	game?	Would	you	bow	to	this	god	of	gold?	This
insensate	illusion	of	value?
Bow,	then.	Press	forehead	to	the	hard	floor.	But	when	it	all	goes	wrong,
show	me	no	affronted	disbelief.
Yes,	Anomander	Rake	would	take	that	burden,	and	carry	it	into	a	new
world.	But	he	would	offer	no	absolution.	He	would	deliver	but	one	gift	–	an
undeserved	one	–	and	that	was	time.
The	most	precious	privilege	of	all.	And	what,	pray	tell,	shall	we	do	with	it?
Off	to	his	left,	surmounting	a	much	higher	tower,	a	dragon	fixed	slitted
eyes	upon	a	decrepit	camp	beyond	the	veil	of	Night.	No	rain	could	blind	it,	no
excuse	could	brave	its	unwavering	regard.	Silanah	watched.	And	waited.
But	the	waiting	was	almost	over.
Rush	then,	to	this	feast.	Rush,	ye	hungry	ones,	to	the	meat	of	glee.
	
The	wall	had	never	been	much	to	begin	with.	Dismantled	in	places,	unfinished
in	others.	It	would	never	have	withstood	a	siege	for	any	length	of	time.	Despite
its	execrable	condition,	the	breach	made	by	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	was
obvious.	An	entire	gate	was	gone,	filled	with	the	flame-licked	wreckage	of	the
blockhouses	and	a	dozen	nearby	structures.	Figures	now	clambered	in	its
midst,	hunting	survivors,	fighting	the	flames.
Beyond	it,	vast	sections	of	the	city	–	where	heaving	clouds	of	smoke	lifted
skyward,	lit	bright	by	raging	gas-fires	–	suddenly	ebbed,	as	if	Darujhistan’s
very	breath	had	been	snatched	away.	Samar	Dev	staggered,	fell	to	her	knees.
The	pressure	closing	about	her	head	felt	moments	from	crushing	the	plates	of
her	skull.	She	cried	out	even	as	Karsa	crouched	down	beside	her.
Ahead,	Traveller	had	swung	away	from	the	destroyed	gate,	seeking	instead
another	portal	to	the	east,	through	which	terrified	refugees	now	spilled	out	into
the	ramshackle	neighbourhood	of	shanties,	where	new	fires	had	erupted	from
knocked-down	shacks	and	in	the	wake	of	fleeing	squatters.	How	Traveller
intended	to	push	his	way	through	that	mob—
‘Witch,	you	must	concentrate.’
‘What?’
‘In	your	mind,	raise	a	wall.	On	all	sides.	Make	it	strong,	give	it	the	power


to	withstand	the	one	who	has	arrived.’
She	pulled	away	from	his	hand.	‘Who?	Who	has	arrived?	By	the	spirits,	I
can’t	stand—’
He	slapped	her,	hard	enough	to	knock	her	down.	Stunned,	she	stared	up	at
him.
‘Samar	Dev,	I	do	not	know	who,	or	what	–	it	is	not	the	Hounds.	Not	even
Shadowthrone.	Someone	is	there,	and	that	someone	blazes.	I	–	I	cannot	imagine
such	a	being—’
‘A	god.’
He	shrugged.	‘Build	your	walls.’
The	pressure	had	eased	and	she	wondered	at	that,	and	then	realized	that
Karsa	had	moved	round,	placing	himself	between	her	and	the	city.	She	saw
sweat	running	down	the	Toblakai’s	face,	streaming	like	rain.	She	saw	the
tightness	in	his	eyes.	‘Karsa—’
‘If	we	are	to	follow,	you	and	me	both,	then	you	must	do	this.	Build	walls,
witch,	and	hurry.’
His	gaze	lifted	to	something	behind	her	and	all	at	once	she	felt	a	breath	of
power	at	her	back,	gusting	against	her,	sinking	past	clothes,	past	skin,	through
flesh	and	then	deep	into	her	bones.	She	gasped.
The	pressure	was	pushed	back,	left	to	rage	against	immense	barriers	now
shielding	her	mind.
She	climbed	to	her	feet.
Side	by	side,	they	set	out	after	Traveller.
He	was	cutting	across	a	ragged	strip	of	fallow	field,	dust	rising	with	each
stride,	making	for	the	gate	at	a	sharp	angle.
The	surging	mob	of	people	blocking	the	portal	seemed	to	melt	back,	and
she	wondered	what	those	refugees	had	seen	in	Traveller ’s	face	as	he	marched
straight	for	them.	Whatever	it	had	been,	clearly	it	was	not	something	to	be
challenged.
A	strange,	diffuse	light	now	painted	the	city,	the	uneven	wall,	the	domes,
minarets	and	spires	visible	behind	it.	From	a	thousand	throats	erupted	a
moaning	wail.	Of	shock,	of	dread.	She	saw	faces	lift,	one	by	one.	She	saw	eyes
widen.
Grunting,	Karsa	glanced	back,	and	then	halted.	‘Gods	below!’
She	spun.	The	giant	bear	loomed	twenty	or	so	paces	back,	its	outline
limned	by	a	silver	light	–	and	that	light—
The	moon	had	finally	clambered	free	of	the	horizon	–	but	it	was…Queen
of	Dreams—
‘Shattered,’	Karsa	said.	‘The	moon	has	shattered.	Faces	in	the	Rock,	what


has	happened?’
What	rose	now	into	the	sky	was	a	mass	of	fragments,	torn	apart	amidst	a
cloud	of	thin	rings	of	dust.	It	had	expanded	in	its	eruption	and	was	now	twice
its	normal	size.	Huge	chunks	were	visibly	spiralling	away	from	the	centre.	The
light	it	cast	was	sickly	yet	astonishingly	bright.
The	monstrous	bear	had	half	turned	and	was	lifting	its	snout	towards	that
devastated	world,	as	if	it	was	capable	of	smelling	death	across	the	span	of
countless	leagues.
Karsa	tugged	at	Samar	Dev.	‘He’s	in	the	city,	witch.	We	cannot	lose	him.’
She	permitted	him	to	drag	her	along,	her	hand	enveloped	by	his.
	
Perched	in	a	niche	close	to	the	gate,	Chillbais	tracked	the	one	known	as
Traveller.	The	demon	was	shaking	uncontrollably.	The	bellowing	of	Hounds,
the	detonations	of	entire	buildings,	the	arrival	of	the	Son	of	Darkness	and	the
slaying	of	a	god	–	oh,	any	of	these	could	have	been	sufficient	cause	for	such
quivering	terror.	Even	that	ruined	moon	thrusting	skyward	to	the	south.	Alas,
however,	it	was	none	of	these	that	had	elicited	the	winged	toad’s	present	state	of
abject	extremity.
No,	the	source	was	threading	through	the	crowd	at	the	gate,	now	passing
beneath	the	arch.	The	one	named	Traveller.	Oh,	he	held	in	so	much	of	himself,
a	will	of	such	breathtaking	intensity	that	Chillbais	imagined	it	could,	if	the	man
so	desired,	reach	into	the	heavens,	close	about	all	those	spinning	pieces	in	the
sky,	and	remake	the	entire	moon.
But	this	was	not	a	healing	power.	This	was	not	a	benign	will.
The	Hounds	howled	anew,	announcing	all	that	they	had	sensed,	all	that	they
even	now	reeled	away	from.	Goaded,	they	lashed	out	in	all	directions,	killing
with	mindless	frenzy.	And	once	more	madness	was	unleashed	upon	the	hapless
people	of	Darujhistan.
Oh,	the	master	would	be	furious	at	this	loss	of	control.	Most	furious.
Chillbais	opened	his	mouth	and	managed	an	impossibly	broad	grin.	A
smile	to	the	crazed	night	sky.	The	demon	worked	its	way	out	of	the	niche	and
flapped	its	wings	a	few	times	to	work	out	the	folds.	Then	it	sprang	into	the	air.
Plunging	into	the	milling	crowd	was	not	part	of	the	plan,	and	the	panic	that
ensued	seemed	out	of	all	proportion	to	this	modest	demon’s	unexpected
arrival.	After	some	hectic	moments,	Chillbais	succeeded	in	flapping	upward
once	more,	bruised	and	scraped,	scratched	and	scuffed,	winging	his	way	to	the
estate	of	his	master.
Eager	to	deliver	a	message.


He	is	here!	He	is	here!	Dassem	Ultor	is	here!
Can	I	leave	now?
	
Both	Karsa	and	Samar	Dev	had	witnessed	the	demon’s	plight,	but	neither	made
comment,	even	as	it	winged	back	up	to	vanish	over	the	wall.	They	were
rushing,	Karsa	Orlong	imposing	enough	to	clear	a	path,	straight	for	the	gate.
A	short	time	later	they	stumbled	through,	out	on	to	a	broad	avenue	into
which	citizens	streamed	from	every	conceivable	direction.
They	saw	Traveller	sixty	or	so	paces	ahead,	reaching	an	intersection	oddly
empty	of	refugees.	Those	figures	nearest	it	were	running	in	blind	panic.
Traveller	had	halted.	A	solitary	figure,	bathed	in	the	light	of	the	shattered
moon.
A	Hound	trotted	into	view	on	the	warrior ’s	left.	A	mangled,	headless	torso
hung	in	its	jaws,	still	draining	thick	blood.	Its	lambent	eyes	were	on	Traveller,
who	had	not	moved,	although	it	was	clear	that	he	was	tracking	the	beast	with
his	gaze.
Karsa	unsheathed	his	sword	and	quickened	his	pace.	Samar	Dev,	her	heart
pounding,	hurried	after	him.
She	saw	the	Toblakai	slow	suddenly,	and	then	stop,	still	thirty	paces	from
the	intersection,	and	a	moment	later	she	saw	why.
Cotillion	was	walking	up	to	Traveller.	Another	Hound	–	the	black	one	–
had	appeared	to	guard	the	god’s	other	flank.
Behind	them	a	distant	building	suddenly	crashed	down,	and	in	the	heart	of
that	thunder	there	was	the	sound	of	two	beasts	locked	in	mortal	combat,	neither
yielding.	Frail	screams	echoed	in	fragile	counterpoint.
Traveller	waited.	Cotillion	came	to	stand	directly	in	front	of	him,	and
began	to	speak.
Samar	Dev	wanted	to	rush	forward,	at	least	to	a	spot	from	where	she	could
overhear	the	god,	catch	whatever	response	Traveller	delivered.	But	Karsa’s
hand	held	her	back,	and	he	shook	his	head,	saying	in	a	murmur,	‘This	is	not	for
us,	witch.’
Traveller	seemed	to	be	refusing	something,	stepping	back,	looking	away.
Cotillion	pressed	on.
‘He	does	not	want	it,’	Karsa	said.	‘Whatever	he	asks,	Traveller	does	not
want	it.’
Yes,	she	could	see	that.	‘Please,	I	need	to—’
‘No.’
‘Karsa—’


‘What	drives	you	is	want,	not	need.’
‘Fine,	then!	I’m	a	nosy	bitch	–	just	leave	me	to	it—’
‘No.	This	is	between	them,	and	so	it	must	remain.	Samar	Dev,	answer	me
this.	If	you	could	hear	what	they	say,	if	you	comprehended	all	that	it	might
mean,	would	you	be	able	to	stay	silent?’
She	bristled,	and	then	hissed	in	frustration.	‘I’m	not	very	good	at	doing
that,	am	I?	All	right,	Karsa	–	but	what	if	I	did	say	something?	What	harm	would
that	do?’
‘Leave	him,’	said	Karsa.	‘Leave	him	free	to	choose	for	himself.’
Whatever	Cotillion	was	saying	seemed	to	strike	like	physical	blows,	which
Traveller	absorbed	one	after	another,	still	looking	away	–	still	clearly	unable
to	meet	the	god’s	eyes.
The	Hound	with	the	chewed-up	torso	was	now	eating	it	with	all	the
mindless	intensity	common	to	carnivores	filling	their	stomachs.	The	other
beast	had	half	turned	away	and	seemed	to	be	listening	to	that	distant	fight.
Cotillion	was	unrelenting.
For	the	god,	for	Traveller,	and	for	Samar	Dev	and	Karsa	Orlong,	the
world	beyond	this	scene	had	virtually	vanished.	A	moment	was	taking
portentous	shape,	hewn	one	piece	at	a	time,	like	finding	a	face	in	the	heart	of	a
block	of	stone.	A	moment	that	spun	on	some	kind	of	decision,	one	that
Traveller	must	make,	here,	now,	for	it	was	obvious	that	Cotillion	had	placed
himself	in	the	warrior ’s	path,	and	would	not	step	to	one	side.
‘Karsa	–	if	this	goes	wrong—’
‘I	have	his	back,’	said	the	Toblakai	in	a	growl.
‘But	what	if—’
An	inhuman	cry	from	Traveller	cut	through	her	words,	cut	through	every
thought,	slashing	like	a	knife.	Such	a	forlorn,	desperate	sound	–	it	did	not
belong	to	him,	could	not,	but	he	had	thrust	out	one	arm,	as	if	to	shove	Cotillion
aside.
They	stood	too	far	apart	for	that.	Yet	Cotillion,	now	silent,	simply	stepped
away	from	Traveller ’s	path.
And	the	warrior	walked	past,	but	now	it	was	as	if	each	boot	needed	to	be
dragged	forward,	as	if	Traveller	now	struggled	against	some	terrible,	invisible
tide.	That	ferocious	obsession	seemed	to	have	come	untethered	–	he	walked	as
would	a	man	lost.
Cotillion	watched	him	go,	and	she	saw	him	lift	a	forearm	to	his	eyes,	as	if
he	did	not	want	the	memory	of	this,	as	if	he	could	wipe	it	away	with	a	single,
private	gesture.
Although	she	did	not	understand,	sorrow	flooded	through	Samar	Dev.


Sorrow	for	whom?	She	had	no	answer	that	made	sense.	She	wanted	to	weep.
For	Traveller.	For	Cotillion.	For	Karsa.	For	this	damned	city	and	this	damned
night.
The	Hounds	had	trotted	off.
She	blinked.	Cotillion	too	had	disappeared.
Karsa	shook	himself,	and	then	led	her	onward	once	more.
The	pressure	was	building,	leaning	in	on	her	defences.	She	sensed	cracks,
the	sifting	of	dust.	And	as	they	stumbled	along	in	Traveller ’s	wake,	Samar	Dev
realized	that	the	warrior	was	marching	straight	for	the	nexus	of	that	power.
The	taste	of	fear	was	bitter	on	her	tongue.
No,	Traveller,	no.	Change	your	mind.	Change	it,	please.
But	he	would	not	do	that,	would	he?	Would	not.	Could	not.	The	fate	of	the
fated,	oh,	that	sounds	clumsy,	and	yet…what	else	can	it	be	called?	This	force	of
inevitability,	both	willed	and	unwilling,	both	unnecessary	and	inexorable.	The
fate	of	the	fated.
Walking,	through	a	city	trapped	in	a	nightmare,	beneath	the	ghoulish	light
of	a	moon	in	its	death-throes.	Traveller	might	as	well	be	dragging	chains,	and
at	the	ends	of	those	chains,	none	other	than	Karsa	Orlong	and	Samar	Dev.	And
Traveller	might	as	well	be	wearing	his	own	collar	of	iron,	something	invisible
but	undeniable	heaving	him	forward.
She	had	never	felt	so	helpless.
	
In	the	eternity	leading	up	to	the	moment	of	the	Lord	of	Death’s	arrival,	the
world	of	Dragnipur	had	begun	a	slow,	deadly	and	seemingly	unstoppable
convulsion.	Everywhere,	the	looming	promise	of	annihilation.	Everywhere,	a
chorus	of	desperate	cries,	bellowing	rage	and	hopeless	defiance.	The	raw
nature	of	each	chained	thing	was	awakened,	and	each	gave	that	nature	voice,
and	each	voice	held	the	flavour	of	sharp	truth.	Dragons	shrilled,	demons
roared,	fools	shrieked	in	hysteria.	Bold	heroes	and	murderous	thugs	snatched
deep	breaths	that	made	ribs	creak,	and	then	loosed	battle	cries.
Argent	fires	were	tumbling	down	from	the	sky,	tearing	down	through
clouds	of	ash.	An	army	of	unimaginable	size,	from	which	no	quarter	was
possible,	had	begun	a	lumbering	charge,	and	weapons	clashed	the	rims	of
shields	and	this	white,	rolling	wave	of	destruction	seemed	to	surge	higher	as	if
seeking	to	merge	with	the	storm	clouds.
Feeble,	eroded	shapes	dragged	along	at	the	ends	of	chains	now	flopped
blunted	limbs	as	if	to	fend	off	the	fast	closing	oblivion.	Eyes	rolled	in	battered
skulls,	remnants	of	life	and	of	knowledge	flickering	one	last	time.


No,	nothing	wanted	to	die.	When	death	is	oblivion,	life	will	spit	in	its	face.
If	it	can.
The	sentient	and	the	mindless	were	now,	finally,	all	of	one	mind.
Shake	awake	all	reason.	These	gathered	instincts	are	not	the	end	but	the
means.	Rattle	the	chains	if	you	must,	but	know	that	that	which	binds	does	not
break,	and	the	path	is	never	as	wayward	as	one	might	believe.
	
Ditch	stared	with	one	eye	into	the	descending	heavens,	and	knew	terror,	but	that
terror	was	not	his.	The	god	that	saw	with	the	same	eye	filled	Ditch’s	skull	with
its	shrieks.	Born	to	die!	I	am	born	to	die!	I	am	born	to	die!	Not	fair	not	fair	not
fair!	And	Ditch	just	rattled	a	laugh	–	or	at	least	imagined	that	he	did	so	–	and
replied,	We’re	all	born	to	die,	you	idiot.	Let	the	span	last	a	single	heartbeat,	let
it	last	a	thousand	years.	Stretch	the	heartbeat	out,	crush	down	the	centuries,	it’s
no	different.	They	feel	the	same,	when	the	end	arrives.
Gods,	they	feel	the	same!
No,	he	was	not	much	impressed	by	this	godling	cowering	in	his	soul.
Kadaspala	was	mad,	mad	to	think	such	a	creation	could	achieve	anything.	Etch
deep	into	its	heart	this	ferocious	hunger	to	kill,	and	then	reveal	the	horror	of	its
helplessness	–	oh,	was	that	not	cruel	beyond	all	reason?	Was	that	not	its	own
invitation	into	insanity?
Kadaspala,	you	have	but	made	versions	of	yourself.	You	couldn’t	help	it	–
yes,	I	see	that.
But,	damn	you,	my	flesh	belonged	to	me.	Not	you.
Damn	you—
But	curses	meant	nothing	now.	Every	fate	was	now	converging.	Hah	hah,
take	that,	you	pious	posers,	and	you	arrogant	shits,	and	all	you	whining	victims
–	see	what	comes!	It’s	all	the	same,	this	end,	all	the	same!
And	here	he	was,	trapped	in	the	greater	scheme.	His	skin	a	piece	of	a
tapestry.	And	its	grand	scene?	A	pattern	he	could	never	read.
	
The	demon	Pearl	stood	wearing	bodies	from	which	a	forest	of	iron	roots
swept	down	in	loops	and	coils.	It	could	carry	no	more,	and	so	it	stood,	softly
weeping,	its	legs	like	two	failing	trunks	that	shook	and	trembled.	It	had	long
since	weighed	the	value	of	hatred.	For	the	High	Mage	Tayschrenn,	who	first
summoned	it	and	bound	it	to	his	will.	For	Ben	Adaephon	Delat,	who	unleashed
it	against	the	Son	of	Darkness;	and	for	Anomander	Rake	himself,	whose	sword


bit	deep.	But	the	value	was	an	illusion.	Hate	was	a	lie	that	in	feeding	fills	the
hater	with	the	bliss	of	satiation,	even	as	his	spirit	starves.	No,	Pearl	did	not	hate.
Life	was	a	negotiation	between	the	expected	and	the	unexpected.	One	made	do.
Draconus	staggered	up.	‘Pearl,	my	friend,	I	have	come	to	say	goodbye.
And	to	tell	you	I	am	sorry.’
‘What	saddens	you?’	the	demon	asked.
‘I	am	sorry,	Pearl,	for	all	of	this.	For	Dragnipur.	For	the	horror	forged	by
my	own	hands.	It	was	fitting,	was	it	not,	that	the	weapon	claimed	its	maker?	I
think,	yes,	it	was.	It	was.’	He	paused,	and	then	brought	both	hands	up	to	his	face.
For	a	moment	it	seemed	he	would	begin	clawing	his	beard	from	the	skin
beneath	it.	Instead,	the	shackled	hands	fell	away,	down,	dragged	by	the	weight
of	the	chains.
‘I	too	am	sorry,’	said	Pearl.	‘To	see	the	end	of	this.’
‘What?’
‘So	many	enemies,	all	here	and	not	one	by	choice.	Enemies,	and	yet
working	together	for	so	long.	It	was	a	wondrous	thing,	was	it	not,	Draconus?
When	necessity	forced	each	hand	to	clasp,	to	work	as	one.	A	wondrous	thing.’
The	warrior	stared	at	the	demon.	He	seemed	unable	to	speak.
	
Apsal’ara	worked	her	way	along	the	top	of	the	beam.	It	was	hard	to	hold	on,
the	wagon	pitching	and	rocking	so	with	one	last,	useless	surge	forward,	and
the	beam	itself	thick	with	the	slime	of	sweat,	blood	and	runny	mucus.	But
something	was	happening	at	the	portal,	that	black,	icy	stain	beneath	the	very
centre	of	the	wagon.
A	strange	stream	was	flowing	into	the	Gate,	an	intricate	pattern	ebbing
down	through	the	fetid	air	from	the	underside	of	the	wagon’s	bed.	Each	tendril
was	inky	black,	the	space	around	it	ignited	by	a	sickly	glow	that	pulsed	slower
than	any	mortal	heart.
Was	it	Kadaspala’s	pathetic	god?	Seeking	to	use	the	tattooist’s	insane
masterpiece	as	if	it	was	a	latticework,	a	mass	of	rungs,	down	which	it	could
clamber	and	so	plunge	through	the	Gate?	Seeking	to	escape?
If	so,	then	she	intended	to	make	use	of	it	first.
Let	the	cold	burn	her	flesh.	Let	pieces	of	her	simply	fall	away.	It	was	a
better	end	than	some	snarling	manifestation	of	chaos	ripping	out	her	throat.
She	struggled	ever	closer,	her	breath	sleeting	out	in	crackling	plumes	that
sank	down	in	sparkling	ice	crystals.	It	reminded	her	of	her	youth,	the	nights	out
on	the	tundra,	when	the	first	snows	came,	when	clouds	shivered	and	shed	their
diamond	skins	and	the	world	grew	so	still,	so	breathless	and	perfect,	that	she


felt	that	time	itself	was	but	moments	from	freezing	solid	–	to	hold	her	for	ever
in	that	place,	hold	her	youth,	hold	tight	her	dreams	and	ambitions,	her
memories	of	the	faces	she	loved	–	her	mother,	her	father,	her	kin,	her	lovers.
No	one	would	grow	old,	no	one	would	die	and	fall	away	from	the	path,	and	the
path	itself,	why,	it	would	never	end.
Leave	me	in	mid-step.	My	foot	never	to	settle,	never	to	edge	me	forward
that	much	closer	to	the	end	of	things.	Yes,	leave	me	here.	At	the	very	heart	of
possibilities,	not	one	of	which	will	crash	down.	No	failures	to	come,	no	losses,
no	regrets	to	kiss	upon	the	lips	–	I	will	not	feel	the	cold.
I	will	not	feel	the	cold—
She	cried	out	in	the	frigid,	deathly	air.	Such	pain	–	how	could	she	ever	get
close	enough?
Apsal’ara	drew	herself	up,	knees	beneath	her.	And	eyed	that	pattern,	just
there,	a	body’s	length	away	and	still	streaming	down.	If	she	launched	herself
from	this	place,	simply	threw	herself	forward,	would	that	flowing	net	catch
her?
Would	it	simply	shatter?	Or	flow	aside,	opening	up	to	permit	the
downward	plunge	of	a	body	frozen	solid,	lifeless,	eyes	open	but	seeing
nothing?
She	had	a	sudden	thought,	shivering	up	through	her	doubts,	her	fears.	And,
with	aching	limbs,	she	began	dragging	up	the	length	of	her	chains,	piling	the
links	on	the	beam	in	front	of	her.
Was	the	Gate’s	cold	of	such	power	that	it	could	snap	these	links?	If	she
heaved	the	heap	into	that	Gate,	as	much	as	she	could,	would	the	chains	break?
And	then?
She	snarled.	Yes,	and	then	what?	Run	like	a	hare,	leave	the	wagon	far
behind,	flee	the	legions	of	chaos?
And	when	the	Gate	itself	is	destroyed,	where	will	I	run	then?	Will	this	world
even	exist?
She	realized	then	that	such	questions	did	not	matter.	To	be	free,	even	if
only	for	a	moment,	would	be	enough.
Apsal’ara,	the	Mistress	of	Thieves.	How	good	was	she?	Why,	she	slipped
the	chains	of	Dragnipur!
She	continued	piling	up	links	of	the	chains,	her	breaths	coming	in
agonized,	lung-numbing	gasps.
	
Draconus	stumbled	away	from	Pearl’s	side.	He	could	not	bear	the	emotions	the
demon	stirred	to	life	within	him.	He	could	not	understand	such	a	power	to


forgive,	never	mind	the	sheer	madness	of	finding	something	worthwhile	in	this
cursed	realm.	And	to	see	Pearl	standing	there,	almost	crushed	beneath	the
twitching,	dripping	bodies	of	fallen	comrades,	no,	that	too	was	too	much.
Kadaspala	had	failed.	The	pattern	was	flawed;	it	had	no	power	to	resist
what	was	about	to	assail	them.	It	had	been	a	desperate	gambit,	the	only	kind
Draconus	had	left,	and	he	could	not	even	rail	at	the	blind,	legless	Tiste	Andii.
None	of	us	were	up	to	this.
The	moment	Rake	ceased	killing	things,	we	were	doomed.
And	yet,	he	found	he	had	no	rage	left	in	him	when	he	thought	of
Anomander	Rake.	In	fact,	he	had	begun	to	understand,	even	sympathize	with
that	exhausted	desire	to	end	things.	To	end	everything.	The	delusion	was
calling	it	a	game	in	the	first	place.	That	very	founding	principle	had	assured
ultimate	failure.	Bored	gods	and	children	with	appalling	power,	these	were	the
worst	sorts	of	arbiters	in	this	scheme	of	existence.	They	fought	change	even	as
they	forced	it	upon	others;	they	sought	to	hold	all	they	claimed	even	as	they
struggled	to	steal	all	they	could	from	rivals.	They	proclaimed	love	only	to	kill
it	in	betrayal	and	spite.
Yes,	Draconus	understood	Rake.	Any	game	that	played	with	grief	was	a
foul	thing,	an	abomination.	Destroy	it.	Bring	it	all	down,	Rake.	Rake,	my	heir,
my	son	in	spirit,	my	unknown	and	unknowable	inheritor.	Do	as	you	must.
I	stand	aside.
Oh,	bold	words.
When	the	truth	is,	I	have	no	choice.
The	force	that	suddenly	descended	upon	the	realm	of	Dragnipur	was	of
such	magnitude	that,	for	an	instant,	Draconus	believed	the	chaos	had	finally
reached	them,	and	he	was	driven	to	his	knees,	stunned,	half	blinded.	The
immense	pressure	bore	down,	excruciating,	and	Draconus	ducked	his	head,
covered	it	with	his	arms,	and	felt	his	spine	bowing	beneath	a	crushing
presence.
If	there	was	sound,	he	heard	nothing.	If	there	was	light,	he	saw	only
darkness.	If	there	was	air,	he	could	not	draw	it	into	his	lungs.	He	felt	his	bones
groaning—
The	torture	eased	with	the	settling	of	a	skeletal,	long-fingered	hand	on	his
right	shoulder.
Sounds	rose	once	more,	strangely	muted.	A	renewed	storm	of	wailing
terror	and	dismay.	In	front	of	Draconus	the	world	found	its	familiar	details,
although	they	seemed	ghostly,	ephemeral.	He	was	able,	at	last,	to	breathe	deep
–	and	he	tasted	death.
Someone	spoke	above	him.	‘He	is	indeed	a	man	of	his	word.’


And	Draconus	twisted	round,	lifted	his	gaze	–	the	hand	on	his	shoulder
rasping	away	with	a	rustle	of	links	–	and	stared	up	at	the	one	who	had	spoken.
At	Hood,	the	Lord	and	High	King	of	the	Dead.
‘No!’	Draconus	bellowed,	rising	only	to	stagger	back,	almost	tripping	on
his	chains.	‘No!	What	has	he	done?	By	the	Abyss,	what	has	Rake	done?’
Hood	half	raised	his	arms	and	seemed	to	be	staring	down	at	the	manacles
enclosing	his	gaunt	wrists.
Disbelief	collapsed	into	shock,	and	then	raw	horror.	This	made	no	sense.
Draconus	did	not	understand.	He	could	not	–	gods	–	he	could	not	believe—
He	spun	round,	then,	and	stared	at	the	legions	of	chaos	–	oh,	they	had	been
pushed	back,	a	league	or	more,	by	the	arrival	of	this	singular	creature,	by	the
power	of	Hood.	The	actinic	storm	clouds	had	tumbled	in	retreat,	building	anew
and	seeming	to	thrash	in	frustration	–	yes,	an	interlude	had	been	purchased.	But
–	‘Wasted.	All	wasted!	Why?	This	has	achieved	nothing!	Hood	–	you	were
betrayed.	Can	you	not	see	that?	No—’	Draconus	clutched	at	his	head.	‘Rake,	oh
Rake,	what	did	you	want	of	this?	How	could	you	think	it	would	achieve
anything?’
‘I	have	missed	you,	Draconus,’	Hood	said.
And	he	twisted	round	once	more,	glaring	at	the	god.	Jaghut.	Yes,	the	mad,
unknowable	Jaghut.	‘You	damned	fool!	You	asked	for	this,	didn’t	you?	Have
you	lost	your	mind?’
‘A	bargain,	old	friend,’	Hood	replied,	still	studying	the	chains	on	his
wrists.	‘A…gamble.’
‘What	will	happen?	When	chaos	claims	you?	When	chaos	devours	the
realm	of	death	itself?	You	have	betrayed	the	gods,	all	of	them.	You	have
betrayed	all	life.	When	you	fall—’
‘Draconus,’	Hood	cut	in	with	a	sigh,	reaching	up	now	to	pull	back	the
hood,	revealing	that	withered	Jaghut	face,	the	clawed	lines	of	eternal	sorrow.
‘Draconus,	my	friend,’	he	said	softly,	‘surely	you	do	not	think	I	have	come
here	alone?’
He	stared	at	the	god,	for	a	moment	uncomprehending.	And	then	–	he
caught	a	distant	roar	of	sound,	edging	in	from	three	of	the	four	horizons,	and
those	indistinct	skylines	were	now…seething.
As	the	armies	of	the	dead	marched	at	the	behest	of	their	Lord.
From	one	side,	a	score	of	riders	was	fast	approaching.
‘Hood,’	Draconus	said,	numbed,	baffled,	‘they	are	unchained.’
‘So	they	are.’
‘This	is	not	their	fight.’
‘Perhaps.	That	is,	as	yet,	undecided.’


Draconus	shook	his	head.	‘They	cannot	be	here.	They	cannot	fight	the
enemy	–	those	dead,	Hood,	all	they	have	left	is	their	identities,	each	soul,
barely	holding	on.	You	cannot	do	this	to	them!	You	cannot	ask	this	of	them!’
The	god	was	now	eyeing	the	wagon.	‘All	I	shall	ask,’	he	said,	‘of	the	fallen,
Draconus,	is	that	they	choose.	Of	their	own	will.	After	this,	I	shall	ask	nothing
of	them.	Ever	again.’
‘So	who	will	claim	the	dead?’
‘Let	the	gods	see	to	their	own.’
The	coldness	of	that	response	staggered	Draconus.	‘And	what	of	those	who
worship	no	gods?’
‘Yes,	what	of	them?’
‘What’s	that	supposed	to	mean?’
‘After	this,’	Hood	said,	still	studying	the	wagon,	‘the	dead	will	not	be	my
concern.	Ever	again.’
The	approaching	riders	rode	rotted,	skeletal	mounts.	Ragged	capes	flailed
out	behind	the	warriors.	From	the	advancing	armies,	countless	standards
wavered	and	pitched	about	amidst	up-thrust	spearheads.	The	numbers	were
indeed	unimaginable.	Broken	fragments	of	war	songs	arrived	like	tatters	of
wind.	The	realm	groaned	–	Draconus	could	not	comprehend	the	weight	that
must	now	be	crushing	down	the	weapon’s	wielder.	Could	Draconus	have
withstood	it?	He	did	not	know.	But	then,	perhaps	even	at	this	moment
Anomander	Rake	himself	was	dying,	bones	snapping,	blood	spurting…
But	there	was	more.	Here,	before	his	eyes.
All	the	creatures	chained	to	the	wagon	had	ceased	pulling	the	enormous
edifice	–	for	the	first	time	in	millennia,	the	wagon	had	stopped	rolling.	And
those	creatures	stood	or	knelt,	staring	outward,	silent,	perhaps	disbelieving,	as
legions	of	the	dead	closed	in.	A	flood,	an	ocean	of	iron	and	bone—
The	riders	arrived.	Strangers	all	to	Draconus.	Six	trotted	their	withered
mounts	closer.	One	of	them	was	masked,	and	he	had	seen	those	masks	before	–
a	host	slain	in	succession	by	Anomander	Rake.	Seguleh.	The	marks	upon	this
one	told	Draconus	that	he	was	looking	upon	the	Second.	Had	he	challenged	the
First?	Or	had	someone	challenged	him?
The	Second	was	the	first	to	speak.	‘This	is	the	sorry	shit-hole	you	want	us
to	fight	for,	Hood?	Flinging	ourselves	into	the	maw	of	chaos.’	The	masked
face	seemed	to	scan	the	huddled,	bedraggled	creatures	in	their	chains.	‘What
are	these,	that	we	must	now	die	again	for?	That	we	must	cease	for?	Miserable
wretches,	one	and	all!	Useless	fools,	bah!	Hood,	you	ask	too	much.’
The	Lord	of	Death	did	not	even	face	the	Seguleh	as	he	replied,	‘Do	you
now	change	your	mind,	Knight?’


‘No,’	he	said.	‘I	was	just	complaining.’	He	drew	out	a	pair	of	notched,	ruststained	swords.	‘You	know	me	better	than	that.	Still,	oh,	how	I	wanted	Skinner.
To	lose	him	this	way	–	by	the	Tyrant,	it	galls.’
‘That	is	why,’	said	Hood,	‘you	will	not	lead	the	Dead	into	this	war.’
‘What?	I	am	the	Knight	of	Death!	The	damned	bony	fist	himself!	I	demand
—’
‘Oh,	do	be	quiet,	Second,’	sighed	the	Lord	of	Death.	‘Other	tasks	await	you
–	and	you	will	not	rue	them,	I	am	sure.	Iskar	Jarak,	will	you	command	in	the
Knight’s	stead?	At	the	head	of	the	spear,	driving	into	the	very	heart	of	the
enemy?’
The	one	so	addressed	had	the	look	of	a	veteran	among	veterans.	Greybearded,	scarred,	wearing	threadbare,	faded	colours	over	his	plain	chain
hauberk.	Grey	and	magenta,	bordered	in	black.	At	Hood’s	request	he	faced	the
Jaghut.	‘We	will	harden	the	point,’	he	said.	‘With	Malazans.	At	the	very	tip,	my
Bridgeburners.	Dujek	on	my	left	flank,	Bult	on	the	right	with	the	Seventh	and
his	Wickans.’	He	then	twisted	in	the	saddle	to	regard	another	soldier.
‘Brukhalian	and	his	Grey	Swords	to	the	right	of	Bult.’
Brukhalian	nodded.	‘I	find	honour	in	that,	Iskar	Jarak.’
‘Skamar	Ara,	your	Jacuruku	legions	to	the	left	of	Dujek.	Hood,	listen	well.
Beyond	the	spear,	so	many	of	the	rest	are	so	much	dross.	Their	will	is
weakened	by	countless	millennia	–	they	will	march	into	the	face	of	the	enemy,
but	they	will	not	last.’
‘Yes,’	said	Hood.
‘Just	so	you	know,’	said	Iskar	Jarak.	‘Just	so	you	know.’
‘Return	now	to	your	forces,’	Hood	commanded.	‘Iskar	Jarak,	send	to	me
the	one-eyed	outrider.	And	Bult,	find	my	Soldier,	the	one	once	named	Baudin.
There	are	things	still	to	do.’
Draconus	watched	as	the	commanders	rode	off,	with	only	the	Seguleh
remaining,	swords	sheathed	once	more.	‘Hood,’	he	said,	‘what	is	happening
here?	You	will	ask	the	dead	to	fight	for	us?	They	will	fail.	They	will	earn
oblivion	and	naught	else.	They	cannot	succeed,	Hood.	The	chaos	pursuing
Dragnipur	will	not	be	denied	–	do	you	understand	what	I’m	telling	you?’
The	Knight	snorted.	‘It	is	you	who	does	not	understand,	Elder.	Long	before
he	was	Lord	of	the	Fallen,	he	was	Jaghut.	Lords	of	the	Last	Stands,	hah!
Sentinels	of	the	Sundered	Keeps.	Devourers	of	the	Forlorn	Hope.	You,	Elder,
who	stood	time	and	again	against	the	Tiste	Andii,	the	Tiste	Edur	–	you,	who
walked	the	ashes	of	Kharkanas	itself	–	understand	me.	The	dour	Tiste	Andii
and	the	suicidal	Edur,	they	are	as	nothing	to	the	miserable	madness	of	the
Jaghut!’


During	this	tirade,	Hood	continued	to	stare	at	the	wagon,	at	its	towering,
tottering	heap	of	bodies.	And	then	the	Lord	of	the	Dead	spoke.	‘I	often
wondered	what	it	looked	like,	this	Hold	creaking	on	its	wooden	wheels…a
pathetic	thing,	really.	Crude,	clumsy.’	He	faced	Draconus,	rotted	skin	curling
back	from	the	tusks.	‘Now,	turn	it	around.’


Chapter	Twenty-Three

Ask	what	the	dead	face
Snatching	the	curtain	aside
These	stony	tracks	into	blind	worlds
Where	to	grope	is	to	recall
All	the	precious	jewels	of	life
Ask	what	the	dead	see
In	that	last	backward	glance
These	fetish	strings	knots	left	untied
Where	every	sinew	strains
To	reach	and	touch	once	more
Ask	what	the	dead	know
When	knowing	means	nothing
Arms	full	and	heaped	with	baubles
As	if	to	build	a	home	anew
In	places	we’ve	never	been
Ask	but	the	dead	do	not	answer
Behind	the	veil	of	salty	rain
Skirl	now	amid	the	rotted	leavings
When	the	worms	fall	away
To	that	wealth	of	silence
The	Lost	Treasures	of	Indaros
Fisher	kel	Tath

Eyes	rolling	white,	the	ox	ran	for	its	life.	Cart	skidding	and	bouncing,	tilting
on	one	wild	wheel	as	the	moaning	beast	hurtled	round	a	corner	and	raced	down
a	cobbled	street.


Even	the	gods	could	not	reach	through	that	thick-boned	pate	of	skull,	down
into	the	tender	knot	of	terror	in	its	murky	brain.	Once	prodded	awake,
incessant	need	blurred	the	world	beyond,	reducing	all	to	a	narrow	tunnel	with
salvation	at	the	far,	far	end.	Why,	who	could	comprehend	such	extremity?	Not
mortal	kin,	much	less	a	god	with	its	eternally	bemused	brow	–	to	regard	such
fitful	interludes,	blank-eyed	and	mind	rushing	past	like	a	flash	flood,	what
would	be	the	value	of	that,	after	all?
The	beast	is	what	it	is.	Four-legged,	two-legged.	Panic	will	use	as	many
limbs	as	are	available	to	it,	and	a	few	more	besides.	Panic	will	ride	a	wheeled
cart,	and	thunder	on	dung-smeared	hoofs.	Panic	will	scrabble	up	the	very	walls
as	one	horrendous	Hound	after	another	slinks	past.
The	night	air	stinks	and	that	stink	fills	the	nostrils	with	all	the	frenzied
flags	of	a	ship	floundering	on	shoals.	Smoke	and	blood,	bile	and	piss.	But,
mostly,	blood.
And	then	there	were	the	screams.	Ringing	out	everywhere,	so	many	of
them	cutting	off	in	mid-shriek,	or,	even	more	chilling,	in	strangled	gurgle.
Mothers	never	before	heard	such	a	multitude	of	beseeching	calls!	And	who
could	say	if	the	ox	was	not	bellowing	for	its	own,	for	that	sweet	teat,	the
massive	hulk	looming	overhead,	with	all	its	sure	scents	and	briny	warmth?
Alas,	the	beast’s	mam	was	long	since	sent	off	to	pull	the	great	cart	beyond	the
veil,	and	even	could	she	come	lumbering	back	at	the	desperate	call	of	her	get,
what	might	she	achieve	in	the	face	of	a	Hound?
No,	solitary	flight	this	must	remain.	For	each	and	all.	Ox,	horse,	dog,	cat,
mouse	and	rat,	lizard	and	gnat.	And	people	of	all	sorts.	Old	men	with	limps,
old	men	who	never	limped	in	their	lives	but	did	so	now.	Women	of	all	ages,
sizes	and	dispositions,	who	would	have	limped	could	it	have	earned	the
necessary	sympathy.	Yet	when	even	the	rooftops	hold	no	succour,	why	bother
riding	this	bouncing	cart	of	headlong	panic?	Best	to	simply	flop	down	in	abject
surrender,	with	but	a	few	tugs	to	rearrange	the	lie	of	one’s	dress	or	whatnot.
Let	the	men	soil	themselves	in	their	terror	–	they	never	washed	enough	as	it
was.
Nobles	fled	ignobly,	the	fallen	fairly	flew	as	if	on	winged	feet,	thieves
blustered	and	bullies	whined	and	wheedled,	guards	in	their	blind	fear	observed
nothing	and	soldiers	fled	every	clash	of	iron,	tooth	and	claw.	Fools	with
nothing	stood	their	ground.	Gamblers	danced	and	whores	bluffed	–	and	inside
a	Temple	of	Shadow	deliciously	feminine	acolytes	squealed	and	darted	from
the	path	of	a	screaming	Magus	atop	his	charging	mule,	straight	through	the
grand	altar	room,	censers	flying	with	tails	of	uncoiling	serpentine	smoke	and
heads	with	glowing	coal	eyes	in	myriad	profusion.	In	the	mule’s	careering


wake,	winged	bhokarala	shrieked	and	flitted	about	flinging	gobs	of	snot	and
segmented	cones	of	hairy	dung	at	every	fleeing	female,	while	spiders	swarmed
up	from	the	old	long-forgotten	blood	drain	at	the	base	of	the	altar	stone,	a
veritable	carpet	of	seething	jerky	stick-legs,	glistening	abdomens,	patterned
thoraxes	and	beady	Dal	Honese	eyes	by	the	thousands,	nay	tens	of	thousands!
And	was	it	any	wonder	the	Magus	and	the	mule	pelted	right	across	the
chamber,	the	doors	at	the	far	end	exploding	open	as	if	of	their	own	accord?
Even	as	the	High	Priestess	–	stumbling	out	from	behind	a	curtain	like	a
woman	tossed	from	the	throes	of	manic	lovemaking,	with	stubble-rubbed	chin
and	puffy	lips	high	and	low	and	breasts	all	awry	and	great	molten	swells	of
pale	flesh	swaying	to	and	fro	–	plunging,	yes,	into	the	midst	of	that	crawling
black	carpet	of	spite	and	venom,	and	so	no	wonder	she	began	a	dance	riotous
in	its	frenzy	but	let’s	face	it,	even	Mogora	was	too	shocked,	too	disbelieving,
to	sink	a	forest	of	fangs	into	such	sweet	meat	–	and	the	bhokarala	swooped
down	to	scoop	up	handfuls	of	yummy	spiders	and	crunch	crunch	into	their
maws	and	if	spiders	could	scream,	why,	they	did	so	then,	even	as	they	foamed
in	swirling	retreat	back	down	the	drain.
Mule	and	Magus	drum-rolled	down	the	colonnade	and	out	through	another
shattered	set	of	doors,	out	into	the	moody	alleyway	with	its	huddled	mass	of
hiding	refugees,	who	now	scattered	at	the	arrival	of	this	dread	apparition,	and
the	squall	of	bhokarala	swirling	out	behind	it.
Now,	wing	swift	as	a	burning	moth	across	the	city,	back	to	the	ox	as	it
lumbered	along	in	heart-pounding,	chest-heaving	exhaustion	–	pursued	by	an
angry	cart	and	who	knew	what	else	–	and	found	itself	fast	approaching	the
collapsed	ruin	of	an	enormous	building	of	some	sort…
	
Serendipity	serves	as	the	quaintest	description	of	the	fickle	mayhem	delivered
by	the	Hounds	of	Shadow.	Shortly	following	the	breach	of	the	gate,	Baran
pelted	westward	in	pursuit	of	Pallid,	as	that	bone-white	beast	broke	from	the
pack	with	untoward	designs	in	another	part	of	the	stricken	city.
Pallid	was	unaware	that	it	was	being	hunted	as	it	discovered	a	dozen	city
guards	rushing	down	the	centre	of	the	street,	heading	for	the	destroyed	gate.
The	monstrous	beast	lunged	into	their	midst,	lashing	out	with	slavering	jaws.
Armour	collapsed,	limbs	were	torn	away,	weapons	spun	through	the	air.
Screams	erupted	in	a	welter	of	slaughter.
Even	as	Pallid	crushed	in	its	jaws	the	head	of	the	last	guard,	Baran	arrived
in	an	avalanche.	The	impact	boomed	like	thunder	as	Pallid	was	struck	in	the
side,	the	caged	bell	of	its	chest	reverberating	as	both	beasts	skidded	and	then


struck	the	wall	of	a	large	building.
The	solid,	fortified	entranceway	was	punched	inward.	Stone	shards	tore
through	the	three	people	unlucky	enough	to	be	stationed	in	the	front	room.	The
huge	blocks	framing	the	doors	tumbled	down,	bouncing	like	knuckle	bones,
crushing	one	of	the	wounded	men	before	he	could	even	scream.	The	remaining
two,	lacerated	and	spilling	blood,	were	pushed	back	by	the	broad	front	desk,
and	pinned	against	the	far	wall.	Both	died	within	moments,	bones	and	organs
macerated.
Rolling,	snapping	and	growling,	the	two	Hounds	shattered	that	desk,	and
the	grillework	attached	to	it	sailed	upward	to	crack	on	the	ceiling,	which	had
already	begun	sagging	as	its	supports	and	braces	gave	way.	With	terrible
groans,	the	entire	front	of	the	structure	dragged	itself	down,	and	now	screams
rose	through	the	dust,	muted	and	pitiful.
Another	wall	collapsed	under	the	impact	of	the	beasts,	and	beyond	it	was	a
corridor	and	bars	lining	cells,	and	two	more	guards	who	sought	to	flee	down
the	aisle’s	length	–	but	this	entire	room	was	coming	down,	the	iron	bars
snapping	out	from	their	frames,	locks	shattering.	Prisoners	vanished	beneath
splintered	wooden	beams,	plaster	and	bricks.
Rearing	back	on	to	its	hind	legs,	knocked	over	by	another	charge	from
Baran,	Pallid	smashed	into	one	cell.	The	prisoner	within	it	pitched	down	and
rolled	up	against	one	side	as	the	Hounds,	locked	once	more,	knocked	down	the
back	wall	and,	kicking	and	snarling,	rolled	into	the	space	beyond	–	an	alleyway
already	half	filled	with	falling	masonry	as	the	entire	gaol	broke	apart.
The	lone	prisoner	scrambled	back	to	his	feet	and	rushed	into	the	Hounds’
wake—
But	not	in	time,	as	the	floor	above	dropped	down	to	fill	the	cell.
In	the	alley	Pallid	had	managed	to	close	its	jaws	about	Baran’s	shoulder,
and	with	a	savage	surge	sent	the	beast	wheeling	through	the	air	to	crunch	into
what	remained	of	the	wall	on	that	side	–	and	this	too	folded	inward	beneath	the
impact	of	Baran’s	thrashing	weight.
From	the	wreckage	of	the	first	cell,	a	section	of	plaster	and	mortared	brick
lifted	up,	and	as	it	tumbled	back	the	prisoner	–	covered	in	dust,	bruised	and
bleeding	–	began	to	climb	free.
Pallid,	hearing	these	sounds	–	the	gasps	and	coughs,	the	scrambling	–
wheeled	round,	eyes	blazing.
And	Barathol	paused,	legs	still	pinned,	and	stared	into	those	infernal	orbs,
and	knew	that	they	were	the	last	things	he	would	ever	see.
Pallid	gathered	its	legs	for	its	charge.	Its	smeared,	torn	lips	stretched	back
to	reveal	its	massive	fangs,	and	then	it	sprang	forward—


Even	as	a	figure	hurtled	bodily	into	its	side,	striking	it	low,	beneath	its
right	shoulder,	hard	enough	to	twist	the	animal	round	as	it	flew	in	mid-air.
Barathol	flung	himself	back	and	as	much	to	one	side	as	he	could	manage,
as	the	Hound’s	crimson-splashed	head	pounded	side-on	into	the	rubble,	its
flailing	body	following.
Picking	himself	up	from	the	ground,	Chaur	looked	over	at	Barathol,	and
then	showed	him	a	bright	red	smile,	even	as	he	dragged	free	the	huge	war-axe
he	had	collected	from	the	smithy	–	Barathol’s	very	own	weapon.	As	Pallid
clambered	back	upright,	Chaur	threw	the	axe	in	Barathol’s	direction,	and	then
picked	up	a	chunk	of	stone.
Barathol	shrieked,	desperate	to	tear	himself	free,	as	the	white	Hound,
snarling,	spun	to	face	Chaur	with	fury	incandescent	in	its	eyes.
From	the	rubble	farther	down	the	alley,	Baran	was	working	free,	but	it
would	not	arrive	in	time.	Not	for	Chaur.
Kicking,	heedless	of	tearing	flesh,	Barathol	fought	on.
Chaur	threw	his	stone	the	instant	the	white	Hound	charged.
It	struck	the	beast’s	snout	dead-on.
A	yelp	of	agony,	and	then	the	beast’s	momentum	slammed	it	into	Chaur,
sent	him	flying	across	the	alley	to	crunch	sickeningly	against	the	opposite	wall.
When	he	fell	to	the	grimy	cobbles,	he	did	not	move.
Barathol	dragged	his	legs	loose,	leaving	trails	of	blood	and	pieces	of	meat.
He	rolled,	grasping	hold	of	the	axe	handle,	and	then	heaved	himself	to	his	feet.
Pallid’s	huge	head	turned.
Baran	broke	clear	into	the	alley.
The	white	Hound	looked	over,	and,	with	another	snarl,	the	beast	pivoted
round	and	fled.
A	moment	later	Baran	flashed	past.
Barathol	sagged	back	on	wobbly	legs.	Drawing	in	one	cold	breath	after
another,	he	turned	his	gaze	once	more	upon	the	motionless	body	opposite.
With	a	sob,	he	dragged	himself	to	his	feet	and	stumbled	over.
	
In	the	strange,	mysterious	places	within	the	brain,	places	that	knew	of
themselves	as	Chaur,	a	black	flood	was	seeping	in,	and	one	by	one	those	places
began	to	drown.	Fitful	sparks	ebbed,	and	once	gone	did	not	light	again.	His
state	of	unconsciousness	slipped	into	something	deeper,	a	kind	of	protective
oblivion	that	mercifully	hid	from	Chaur	the	fact	that	he	was	dying.
His	expression	was	serene,	save	for	the	slow	sag	along	one	side	of	his
face,	and	when	Barathol	rolled	back	his	eyelids,	the	pupil	of	one	eye	was	vastly


dilated.
Weeping,	the	blacksmith	pulled	Chaur ’s	head	and	upper	body	on	to	his
thighs.	The	rest	of	the	world,	the	explosions,	the	screams,	the	thunder	of	battle,
all	fell	away,	and	it	was	some	time	before	Barathol	realized	that	someone	was
clambering	out	of	the	rubble	that	was	the	gaol.	A	staccato	cascade	of	curses	in
Falari,	Malazan,	Dobri	and	Daru.	Blinking,	the	blacksmith	lifted	his	gaze.
‘Antsy	–	here,	please,	I	need	your	help!	Please.	He’s	hurt.’
The	ex-Bridgeburner	was	covered	in	dust	but	otherwise	unscathed.	‘I	lost
my	damned	sword.	I	lost	my	damned	crossbow.	I	lost	my	damned	sharpers.	I
lost	my—’
‘Antsy!	Hood’s	breath,	please	help	me	–	we	need	to	find	a	healer.	High
Denul	–	there	must	be	one	in	the	city.	There	must	be!’
‘Well,	there’s	Mallet,	but	he’s	–	shit,	he’s	dead.	I	forgot.	Can’t	believe	I
forgot.’	Antsy	crouched	down	and	studied	Chaur	for	a	moment,	and	then	he
shook	his	head.	‘He’s	done	for,	Barathol.	Cracked	skull,	bleeding	into	his	brain
–	you	can	always	tell,	when	one	side	of	the	face	goes—’
‘I	know	all	that,	damn	you.	We	need	a	healer!	Think,	Antsy	–	there	must	be
someone.’
‘Maybe,	but	not	close	–	we	got	to	cross	half	the	city,	Barathol,	and	with
them	Hounds—’
‘Never	mind	the	Hounds.’	The	blacksmith	gathered	Chaur	up	into	his	arms
and	straightened.
Antsy	stared.	‘You	can’t	carry	him—’
‘Then	help	me!’
‘I’m	trying!	Let	me	think.’
At	that	moment	they	both	heard	the	clumping	of	hoofs,	the	clack	of
wooden	wheels	on	cobbles.	And	they	turned	to	the	alley	mouth.
	
Behold,	the	ox.	Too	weary	to	run.	Even	the	cart	in	its	wake	clumped	in
exhaustion.	Stolid	legs	trembled.	Mucus	slathered	down	in	a	gleaming	sheet
that	dragged	dusty	tendrils	between	the	beast’s	front	hoofs.	The	painful	clarity
of	panic	was	fading,	dulling	its	eyes	once	more,	and	when	the	two	man-things
arrived	and	set	down	a	third	body	on	the	bed	of	the	cart,	why,	this	was	old
business	as	far	as	the	ox	was	concerned.	At	last,	the	world	had	recovered	its
sanity.	There	were	tasks	to	be	done,	journeys	to	complete.	Salvation	sweeter
than	mam’s	milk.
Tired	but	content,	the	beast	fell	in	step	beside	the	man-things.


	
The	two	cousins	stood	on	the	rooftop,	looking	out	over	the	city.
Conflagrations	lit	the	night	sky.	A	section	of	the	Gadrobi	District	was	aflame,
with	geysers	of	burning	gas	spouting	high	into	the	air.	A	short	time	earlier	a
strange	atmospheric	pressure	had	descended,	driving	down	the	fires	–	nothing
was	actually	spreading,	as	far	as	could	be	determined,	and	the	detonations	had
grown	more	infrequent.	Even	so,	there	was	no	one	fighting	the	flames,	which
was,	all	things	considered,	hardly	surprising.
In	the	courtyard	below,	Studious	Lock	was	fussing	about	over	the	fallen
compound	guards,	both	of	whom	had	been	dragged	out	on	to	pallets.
Miraculously,	both	still	lived,	although,	having	survived	the	assassins,	there
remained	the	grave	chance	that	they	would	not	survive	Studlock’s
ministrations.	Scorch	and	Leff	had	set	themselves	the	task	of	patrolling	outside
the	estate,	street	by	alley	by	street	by	alley,	round	and	round,	crossbows	at	the
ready	and	in	states	of	high	excitement.
‘These	Hounds,’	said	Rallick,	‘are	most	unwelcome.’
‘It	seems	walls	don’t	stop	them	either.	Any	idea	why	they’re	here?’
When	Rallick	did	not	reply,	Torvald	glanced	over	and	saw	that	his	cousin
was	staring	up	at	the	shattered	moon.
Torvald	did	not	follow	his	gaze.	That	mess	unnerved	him.	Would	those
spinning	chunks	now	begin	raining	down?	Rallick	had	noted	earlier	that	most
of	the	fragments	seemed	to	be	heading	the	other	way,	growing	ever	smaller.
There	was	another	moon	that	arced	a	slower	path	that	seemed	to	suggest	it	was
farther	away,	and	while	it	appeared	tiny	its	size	was	in	fact	unknown.	For	all
anyone	knew,	it	might	be	another	world	as	big	as	this	one,	and	maybe	now	it
was	doomed	to	a	rain	of	death.	Anyway,	Torvald	didn’t	much	like	thinking
about	it.
‘Rallick—’
‘Never	mind,	Tor.	I	want	you	to	stay	here,	within	the	walls.	I	doubt	there
will	be	any	trouble	–	the	Mistress	has	reawakened	her	wards.’
‘Tiserra—’
‘Is	a	clever	woman,	and	a	witch	besides.	She’ll	be	fine,	and	mostly	will	be
worrying	about	you.	Stay	here,	cousin,	until	the	dawn.’
‘What	about	you?’
Rallick	turned	about	then,	and	a	moment	later	Torvald	sensed	that	someone
else	had	joined	them,	and	he	too	swung	round.
Vorcan	stood,	wrapped	in	a	thick	grey	cloak.	‘The	High	Alchemist,’	she
said	to	Rallick,	‘suggested	we	be	close	by…in	case	we	are	needed.	The	time,	I


believe,	has	come.’
Rallick	nodded.	‘Rooftops	and	wires,	Mistress?’
She	smiled.	‘You	make	me	nostalgic.	Please,	take	the	lead.’
And	yes,	Torvald	comprehended	all	the	subtle	layers	beneath	those	gentle
words,	and	he	was	pleased.	Leave	it	to	my	cousin	to	find	for	himself	the	most
dangerous	woman	alive.	Well,	then	again,	maybe	I	found	myself	the	second
most,	especially	if	I	forget	to	buy	bread	on	my	way	home.
	
Edging	round	the	corner	of	the	wall,	an	alley	behind	them,	a	street	before
them,	Scorch	and	Leff	paused.	No	point	in	being	careless	now,	even	though
there’d	be	no	attack	from	any	assassins	any	time	soon,	unless	of	course	they
did	breed	fast	as	botflies,	and	Scorch	wasn’t	sure	if	Leff	had	been	joking	with
that,	not	sure	at	all.
The	street	was	empty.	No	refugees,	no	guards,	no	murderous	killers	all
bundled	in	black.
Most	important	of	all:	no	Hounds.
‘Damn,’	hissed	Leff,	‘where	are	them	beasts?	What,	you	smell	badder	and
worster	than	anyone	else,	Scorch?	Is	that	the	problem	here?	Shit,	I	want	me	a
necklace	of	fangs.	And	maybe	a	paw	to	hang	at	my	belt.’
‘A	paw?	More	like	a	giant	club	making	you	walk	tilted	over.	Now,	that’d	be
funny	to	see,	all	right.	Worth	getting	a	knock	or	two	taking	one	of	’em	down,
just	to	see	that.	A	Hound’s	paw,	hah	hah.’
‘You	said	you	wanted	a	skull!’
‘Wasn’t	planning	to	wear	it,	though.	To	make	me	a	boat,	just	flip	it	upside
down,	right?	I	could	paddle	round	the	lake.’
‘Skulls	don’t	float.	Well,	maybe	yours	would,	being	cork.’
They	set	out	on	to	the	street.
‘I’d	call	it	Seahound,	what	do	you	think?’
‘More	like	Sinkhound.’
‘You	don’t	know	anything	you	think	you	know,	Leff.	That’s	your	problem.
Always	has	been,	always	will	be.’
‘Wish	there’d	been	twenty	more	of	them	assassins.’
‘There	were,	just	not	attacking	us.	We	was	the	diversion,	that’s	what	Tor
said.’
‘We	diverted	’em,	all	right.’
At	that	moment	a	Hound	of	Shadow	slunk	into	view,	not	twenty	paces	away.
Its	sides	were	heaving,	strips	of	flesh	hanging	down	trailing	threads	of	blood.
Its	mouth	was	crusted	with	red	foam.	It	swung	its	head	and	eyed	them.


In	unison,	Scorch	and	Leff	lifted	their	crossbows	into	vertical	positions,
and	spat	on	the	barbed	heads.	Then	they	slowly	settled	the	weapons	back	down,
trained	on	the	Hound.
Nostrils	flaring,	the	beast	flinched	back.	A	moment	later	and	it	was	gone.
‘Shit!’
‘I	knew	you	smelled	bad,	damn	you!	We	almost	had	it!’
‘Wasn’t	me!’
‘It’s	no	fun	wandering	around	with	you,	Scorch,	no	fun	at	all.	Every	chance
we	get,	you	go	and	mess	it	all	up.’
‘Not	on	purpose.	I	like	doing	fun	stuff	as	much	as	you	do,	I	swear	it!’
‘Next	time,’	muttered	Leff.	‘We	shoot	first	and	argue	later.’
‘Good	idea.	Next	time.	We’ll	do	it	right	the	next	time.’
	
Beneath	a	moon	that	haunted	him	with	terrifying	memories,	Cutter	rode	Coll’s
horse	at	a	slow	trot	down	the	centre	of	the	street.	In	one	hand	he	gripped	the
lance,	but	it	felt	awkward,	too	heavy.	Not	a	weapon	he’d	ever	used,	and	yet
something	made	him	reluctant	to	abandon	it.
He	could	hear	the	Hounds	of	Shadow,	unleashed	like	demons	in	his	poor
city,	and	this	too	stirred	images	from	the	past,	but	these	were	bittersweet.	For
she	was	in	them,	a	presence	dark,	impossibly	soft.	He	saw	once	more	every
one	of	her	smiles,	rare	as	they	had	been,	and	they	stung	like	drops	of	acid	on
his	soul.
He	had	been	so	lost,	from	the	very	morning	he	awoke	in	the	monastery	to
find	her	gone.	Oh,	he’d	delivered	his	brave	face,	standing	there	beside	a	god
and	unwilling	to	see	the	sympathy	in	Cotillion’s	dark	eyes.	He	had	told	himself
that	it	was	an	act	of	courage	to	let	her	go,	to	give	her	the	final	decision.
Courage	and	sacrifice.
He	no	longer	believed	that.	There	was	no	sacrifice	made	in	being
abandoned.	There	was	no	courage	in	doing	nothing.	Regardless	of	actual	age,
he	had	been	so	much	younger	than	her.	Young	in	that	careless,	senseless	way.
When	thinking	felt	hard,	unpleasant,	until	one	learned	to	simply	shy	away	from
the	effort,	even	as	blind	emotions	raged,	one	conviction	after	another	raised
high	on	the	shining	shield	of	truth.	Or	what	passed	for	truth;	and	he	knew	now
that	whatever	it	had	been,	truth	it	was	not.	Blustery,	belligerent	stands,	all	those
pious	poses	–	they	seemed	so	childish	now,	so	pathetic.	I	could	have	embraced
the	purest	truth.	Still,	nobody	would	listen.	The	older	you	get,	the	thicker	your
walls.	No	wonder	the	young	have	grown	so	cynical.	No	wonder	at	all.
Oh,	she	stood	there	still,	a	dark	figure	in	his	memories,	the	flash	of	eyes,


the	beginnings	of	a	smile	even	as	she	turned	away.	And	he	could	forget
nothing.
	
At	this	moment,	Challice,	having	ascended	to	the	top	of	the	estate	tower	–	that
ghoulish	Gadrobi	embarrassment	–	now	stepped	out	on	to	the	roof,
momentarily	buffeted	by	a	gust	of	smoke.	She	held	in	her	hands	the	glass	globe
in	which	shone	the	prisoner	moon,	and	she	paused,	lifting	her	gaze,	and	stared
in	wonder	at	the	destruction	now	filling	a	third	of	the	sky.

But	she	had	left	him	with	bad	habits.	Terrible	ones,	and	they	had	proceeded	to
shape	his	entire	life.	Cutter	remembered	the	expression	on	Rallick’s	face	–	the
shock	and	the	dismay	–	as	he	looked	down	at	the	knife	buried	in	his	shoulder.
The	recognition	–	yes,	Cutter	was	Apsalar ’s	creation,	through	and	through.
Yes,	another	man	had	been	lost.
It	seemed	wryly	fitting	that	the	moon	was	breaking	into	pieces	in	the	night
sky,	but	to	find	amusement	in	such	a	poignant	symbol	was	proving	a	struggle.
He	did	not	possess	Rallick’s	hardness,	the	layers	of	scar	tissue	worn	like
armour.	And,	for	all	that	she	had	given	him,	Cutter	was	not	her	perfect
reflection.	He	could	not	silence	the	anguish	he	felt	inside,	the	legacy	of
delivering	murder,	making	the	notion	of	justice	as	unpalatable	as	a	prisoner ’s
gruel.	And	these	were	things	she	did	not	feel.
He	rode	on.
The	Hounds	knew	him,	he	was	sure	of	that,	and	if	that	meant	anything	on
this	night,	then	he	had	no	reason	to	fear	them.
The	occasional	refugee	darted	across	his	path.	Like	ousted	rats,	the
desperate	hunt	for	cover	filled	their	minds,	and	the	faces	flashing	past	seemed
empty	of	anything	human.	Survival	was	a	fever,	and	it	left	eyes	blank	as	those
of	a	beached	fish.	Witnessing	this,	Cutter	felt	his	heart	breaking.
This	is	my	city.	Darujhistan.	Of	the	Blue	Fires.	It	does	not	deserve	this.
No,	he	did	not	fear	the	Hounds	of	Shadow.	But	he	now	despised	them.	The
devastation	they	were	delivering	was	senseless,	a	pointless	unleashing	of
destruction.	He	did	not	think	Cotillion	had	anything	at	all	to	do	with	that.	This
stank	of	Shadowthrone,	the	fickleness,	the	cruel	indifference.	He	had	freed	his
beasts	to	play.	In	blood	and	snapped	bones.	In	flames	and	collapsed	tenements.
All	this	fear,	all	this	misery.	For	nothing.
Awkward	or	not,	the	lance	felt	reassuring	in	his	hand.	Now,	if	only


Shadowthrone	would	show	himself,	why,	he’d	find	a	place	to	plant	the	damned
thing.
	
There,	within	its	tiny,	perfect	world,	the	moon	shone	pure,	unsullied.	There	had
been	a	time,	she	realized,	when	she	too	had	been	like	that.	Free	of	stains,	not	yet
bowed	to	sordid	compromise,	feeling	no	need	to	shed	this	tattered	skin,	these
glazed	eyes.
Women	and	men	were	no	different	in	the	important	things.	They	arrived
with	talents,	with	predispositions,	with	faces	and	bodies	either	attractive	to
others	or	not.	And	they	all	made	do,	in	all	the	flavours	of	living,	with	whatever
they	possessed.	And	there	were	choices,	for	each	and	every	one	of	them.	For
some,	a	few	of	those	choices	were	easier	than	others,	when	the	lure	of	being
desirable	was	not	a	conceit,	when	it	reached	out	an	inviting	hand	and	all	at	once
it	seemed	to	offer	the	simplest	path.	So	little	effort	was	involved,	merely	a
smile	and	thighs	that	did	not	resist	parting.
But	there	was	no	going	back.	These	stains	didn’t	wash	off.	The	moon
shone	pure	and	beautiful,	but	it	remained	for	ever	trapped.
She	stared	up	into	the	sky,	watched	how	fragments	spun	out	from	a	fastdarkening	core.	The	momentum	seemed	to	have	slowed,	and	indeed,	she
thought	she	could	see	pieces	falling	back,	inward,	whilst	dust	flattened	out,	as	if
transformed	into	a	spear	that	pierced	all	that	was	left	of	the	moon.
The	dust	dreams	of	the	world	it	had	once	been.
But	the	dust,	alas,	does	not	command	the	wind.
	
Cutter	knew	now	that	he	had	–	since	her	–	taken	into	his	arms	two	women	as	if
they	were	capable	of	punishing	him,	each	in	turn.	Only	one	had	succeeded,	and
he	rode	towards	her	now,	to	stand	before	her	and	tell	her	that	he	had	murdered
her	husband.	Not	because	she	had	asked	him	to,	because,	in	truth,	she	did	not
have	that	sort	of	hold	over	him,	and	never	would.	No,	Gorlas	Vidikas	was	dead
for	other	reasons,	the	specifics	of	which	were	not	relevant.
She	was	free,	he	would	say.	To	do	as	she	pleased.	But	whatever	that	would
be,	he	would	tell	her,	her	future	would	not	–	could	never	–	include	him.
‘See,	there	he	is,	at	her	side.	What	gall!	Kills	her	husband	and	now	she
hangs	on	his	arm.	Oh,	made	for	each	other,	those	two.	And	may	Hood	find	them
the	deepest	pit,	and	soon.’
He	could	face	that	down,	if	need	be.	But	he	would	not	subject	her	to	such	a


fate.	Not	even	for	love	could	he	do	that.
He	had	returned	to	his	city,	only	to	lose	it	for	ever.
This	journey	to	Challice	would	be	his	last.	By	dawn	he	would	be	gone.
Darujhistan	would	not	miss	him.
	
She	looked	down	once	more	at	the	imprisoned	moon	cupped	in	her	hands.	And
here,	she	realized,	was	her	childhood	in	all	its	innocence.	Frozen,	timeless,	and
for	ever	beyond	her	reach.	She	need	only	let	her	gaze	sink	in,	to	find	all	that
she	had	once	been.	Cursed	with	beauty,	blessed	with	health	and	vigour,	the
glow	of	promise—
Dust	of	dreams,	will	you	now	command	the	wind?
Dust	of	dreams,	is	it	not	time	to	set	you	free?
It	was	easy,	then,	to	climb	up	on	to	the	low	wall,	to	stare	down	at	the	garden
flagstones	far	below.	Easy,	yes,	to	set	it	all	free.
	
Together,	they	plummeted	through	the	smoky	air,	and	when	they	struck,	the
globe	shattered,	the	tiny	moon	flung	loose	to	sparkle	briefly	in	the	air.	Before
twinkling	out.
Dreams	will	not	linger,	but	their	dust	rides	the	winds	for	ever.
	
Kruppe	is	no	stranger	to	sorrow.	The	round	man	need	only	look	at	his	own
waistline	to	grasp	the	tragedies	of	past	excesses,	and	understand	that	all	the
things	that	come	to	pass	will	indeed	come	to	pass.	Heart	so	heavy	he	must	load
it	into	a	wheelbarrow	(or	nearly	so),	and	with	not	a	single	sly	wink	to	offer,	he
leaves	the	grim	confines	of	the	Phoenix	Inn	and	commences	the	torrid	trek	to
the	stables,	where	he	attends	to	his	sweet-natured	mule,	deftly	avoiding	its
snapping	bites	and	lashing	kicks.
The	moon’s	face	has	broken	apart	into	a	thousand	glittering	eyes.	Nothing
can	hide	and	all	is	seen.	All	can	see	that	there	is	nothing	left	to	hide.	Dread
clash	is	imminent.
The	vast	pressure	snuffs	blazing	fires	as	would	a	thumb	and	finger	a
candle	wick,	snuff!	Here	and	there	and	elsewhere,	too.	But	this	blessing	is
borne	with	harsh,	cruel	burden.	A	god	has	died,	a	pact	been	sealed,	and	in	a
street	where	onlookers	now	gather	at	the	very	edges,	a	most	honourable	man
sits	hunched	over	his	knees,	head	bowed	low.	The	wind	takes	ethereal	chains


emerging	from	the	sword	in	his	hands,	and	tugs	them,	tears	at	them,	shreds
them	into	ghostly	nothings	that	drift	up	only	to	vanish	in	the	smoke
enwreathing	the	city.
Will	he	rise	again?
Can	he	answer	this	final	challenge?
What	sort	of	man	is	this?	This	white-maned	Tiste	Andii	whose	hands
remain	stained	with	a	brother ’s	blood,	a	people’s	vast	loss?
Ah,	but	look	closely.	The	core	burns	still,	hot	and	pure,	and	it	gathers	unto
itself,	bound	by	indomitable	will.	He	will	take	the	wounds	of	the	heart,	for
Anomander	Rake	is	the	sort	of	man	who	sees	no	other	choice,	who	accepts	no
other	choice.
Still.	For	now,	grant	him	a	few	more	moments	of	peace.
The	round	man	rides	out	into	Darujhistan.
There	are	temptations,	and	to	some	they	can	prove,	ah,	overwhelming.	If
need	be,	the	round	man	can	prove	a	most	blunt	barrier.
Just	ask	the	man	with	the	hammer.
	
As	a	warrior	walked	alone	–	in	his	wake	a	Toblakai	and	a	witch,	on	the	flanks
three,	now	four	Hounds	of	Shadow	–	an	ox	and	cart	drew	to	a	halt	outside	an
estate.	The	two	men	leading	it	separated,	one	heading	to	the	back	of	the	cart	to
set	a	trembling	hand	upon	a	chest	–	terrified	that	he	might	find	it	still,	silent	–
and	a	moment	later	a	faint	sob	broke	free,	but	it	was	one	of	relief.	The	other
man	hurried	up	to	the	postern	gate	and	tugged	on	a	braided	cord.
He	ducked	upon	hearing	the	heavy	flap	of	feathered	wings	overhead,	and
glared	upward,	but	saw	nothing	but	a	thick,	impenetrable	layer	of	smoke.	He
twitched	as	he	waited,	muttering	under	his	breath.
The	door	creaked	open.
‘Master	Baruk!	I	am	glad	it’s	you	and	not	one	of	your	damned	servants	–
getting	past	them	is	impossible.	Listen,	we	have	a	hurt	man	–	bad	hurt	–	who
needs	healing.	We’ll	pay—’
‘Sergeant—’
‘Just	Antsy	these	days,	sir.’
‘Antsy,	I	am	so	sorry,	but	I	must	refuse	you—’
At	that,	Barathol	came	round	the	cart	and	marched	up,	his	hands	curling
into	fists	for	a	moment,	before	loosening	as	he	reached	towards	the	huge	axe
slung	across	his	back.	But	these	gestures	were	instinctive	–	he	was	not	even
aware	of	them,	and	when	he	spoke	it	was	in	a	tone	of	despairing	fury.	‘His
skull	is	fractured!	He’ll	die	without	healing	–	and	I	will	not	accept	that!’


Baruk	held	up	both	hands.	‘I	was	about	to	leave	–	I	cannot	delay	any	longer.
Certain	matters	demand	my	immediate	attention—’
‘He	needs—’
‘I	am	sorry,	Barathol.’
And	the	alchemist	was	backing	through	the	gate	once	more.	The	panel
clicked	shut.
Antsy	snatched	and	tugged	at	his	moustache	in	agitation,	and	then	reached
out	to	restrain	Barathol,	who	seemed	about	to	kick	down	that	door.	‘Hold	on,
hold	on	–	I	got	another	idea.	It’s	desperate,	but	I	can’t	think	of	anything	else.
Come	on,	it’s	not	far.’
Barathol	was	too	distraught	to	say	anything	–	he	would	grasp	any	hope,	no
matter	how	forlorn.	Face	ashen,	he	went	back	to	the	ox,	and	when	Antsy	set	out,
he	and	the	ox	and	the	cart	bearing	the	body	of	Chaur	followed.
	
In	the	stricken	man’s	mind,	few	sparks	remained.	The	black	tide	was	very
nearly	done.	Those	flickers	that	knew	themselves	as	Chaur	had	each	lost	touch
with	the	others,	and	so	wandered	lost.	But	then,	some	of	them	had	known	only
solitary	existences	throughout	their	lives	–	crucial	sparks	indeed	–	for	ever
blind	to	pathways	that	might	have	awakened	countless	possibilities.
Until	one,	drifting	untethered,	so	strangely	freed,	now	edged	forward
along	a	darkened	path	it	had	never	before	explored,	and	the	track	it	burned
remained	vibrant	in	its	wake.	And	then,	in	a	sudden	flaring,	that	spark	found
another	of	its	kind.
Something	stirred	then,	there	in	the	midst	of	an	inner	world	fast	dying.
Awareness.
Recognition.
A	tumbling	complexity	of	thoughts,	connections,	relationships,	meanings.
Flashing,	stunned	with	its	own	existence,	even	as	the	blackness	closed	in	on
all	sides.
	
Cutting	down	an	alley	away	from	Baruk’s	estate,	Antsy,	ten	paces	in	the	lead,
stumbled	suddenly	on	something.	Swearing,	he	glanced	back	at	the	small	object
lying	on	the	cobbles,	and	then	bent	down	to	collect	it,	stuffing	the	limp	thing
into	his	cloak.
He	swore	again,	something	about	a	stink,	but	what’s	a	dead	nose	gonna
know	or	care?	And	then	he	resumed	walking.


They	arrived	at	an	estate	that	Barathol	recognized.	Coll’s.	And	Antsy
returned	to	help	lead	the	suddenly	uneasy	ox	down	the	side	track,	to	that
primordial	thicket	behind	the	garden	wall.	Beneath	the	branches	the	gloom	was
thick	with	flying	moths,	their	wings	a	chorus	of	dry	whispering.	Fog	crawled
between	the	boles	of	twisted	trees.	The	air	was	rich	with	a	steamy,	earthy	smell.
Tears	ran	down	Barathol’s	cheeks,	soaked	his	beard.	‘I	told	him	to	stay	on
the	ship,’	he	said	in	a	tight,	distraught	voice.	‘He	usually	listens	to	me.	He’s	not
one	to	disobey,	not	Chaur.	Was	it	Spite?	Did	she	force	him	out?’
‘What	was	he	doing	at	the	gaol?’	Antsy	asked,	just	to	keep	his	friend
talking	for	reasons	even	he	could	not	explain.	‘How	did	he	even	find	it,	unless
someone	led	him	there?	It’s	all	a	damned	mystery.’
‘He	saved	my	life,’	said	Barathol.	‘He	was	coming	to	break	me	out	–	he
had	my	axe.	Chaur,	you	fool,	why	didn’t	you	just	leave	it	all	alone?’
‘He	couldn’t	do	that,’	said	Antsy.
‘I	know.’
They	arrived	at	the	edge	of	the	clearing,	halting	just	beyond	a	low,	uneven
stone	wall	almost	buried	beneath	vines.	The	gateway	was	an	arch	of	rough
stone	veined	with	black	roots.	The	house	beyond	showed	a	blackened	face.
‘Let’s	do	this,	then,’	said	Antsy	in	a	growl,	coming	round	to	the	back	of	the
cart.	‘Before	the	ox	bolts—’
‘What	are	we	doing?’
‘We’re	carrying	him	up	the	path.	Listen,	Barathol,	we	got	to	stay	on	that
path,	you	understand?	Not	one	step	off	it,	not	one.	Understand?’
‘No—’
‘This	is	the	Finnest	House,	Barathol.	It’s	an	Azath.’
The	ex-sergeant	seemed	to	be	standing	within	a	cloud	of	rotting	meat.
Moths	swarmed	in	a	frenzy.
Confused,	frightened,	Barathol	helped	Antsy	lift	Chaur ’s	body	from	the
cart	bed,	and	with	the	Falari	in	the	lead	and	walking	backwards	–	one	tender
step	at	a	time	–	they	made	their	way	up	the	flagstone	path.
‘You	know,’	Antsy	said	between	gasps	–	for	Chaur	was	a	big	man,	and,
limp	as	he	was,	it	was	no	easy	thing	carrying	him	–	‘I	was	thinking.	If	the
damned	moon	can	just	break	apart	like	that,	who’s	to	say	that	can’t	happen	to
our	own	world?	We	could	just	be—’
‘Be	quiet,’	snapped	Barathol.	‘I	don’t	give	a	shit	about	the	moon	–	it’s	been
trying	to	kill	me	for	some	time.	Careful,	you’re	almost	there.’
‘Right,	set	him	down	then,	easy,	on	the	stones…aye,	that’ll	do.’
Antsy	stepped	up	to	the	door,	reached	for	the	knife	at	his	belt	and	then
swore.	‘I	lost	my	knife,	too.	I	can’t	believe	this!’	He	made	a	fist	and	pounded


against	the	wood.
The	sound	that	made	was	reminiscent	of	punching	a	wall	of	meat.	No
reverberation,	no	echoes.
‘Ow,	that	hurt.’
They	waited.
Sighing,	Antsy	prepared	to	knock	a	second	time,	but	then	something
clunked	on	the	other	side	of	the	barrier,	and	a	moment	later	the	door	swung
back	with	a	loud	squeal.
The	tall,	undead	monstrosity	filled	the	doorway.	Empty,	shadow-drowned
eye	sockets	regarded	them	–	or	not;	it	was	impossible	to	tell.
Antsy	shifted	from	one	foot	to	the	other.	‘You	busy,	Raest?	We	need	to
make	use	of	the	hallway	floor	behind	you—’
‘Oh	yes,	I	am	very	busy.’
The	Falari	blinked.	‘Really?’
‘Dust	breeds.	Cobwebs	thicken.	Candle	wax	stains	precious	surfaces.	What
do	you	want?’
Antsy	glanced	back	at	Barathol.	‘Oh,	a	corpse	with	a	sense	of	humour,	what
do	you	know?	And	surprise,	it’s	so	droll.’	He	faced	the	Jaghut	again	and
smiled.	‘In	case	you	ain’t	noticed,	the	whole	city	has	gone	insane	–	that’s	why	I
figured	you	might	be	suffering	some—’
‘I	am	sorry,’	cut	in	Raest,	‘is	something	happening?’
Antsy’s	eyes	bulged	slightly.	‘The	Hounds	of	Shadow	are	loose!’
Raest	leaned	forward	as	if	to	scan	the	vicinity,	and	then	settled	back	once
more.	‘Not	in	my	yard.’
Antsy	clawed	through	his	hair.	‘Trust	me,	then,	it’s	a	bad	night	–	now,	if
you’d	just	step	back—’
‘Although,	come	to	think	of	it,	I	did	have	a	visitor	earlier	this	evening.’
‘What?	Oh,	well,	I’m	happy	for	you,	but—’
Raest	lifted	one	desiccated	hand	and	pointed.
Antsy	and	Barathol	turned.	And	there,	in	the	yard,	there	was	a	fresh	mound
of	raw	earth,	steaming.	Vines	were	visibly	snaking	over	it.	‘Gods	below,’	the
Falari	whispered,	making	a	warding	gesture	with	one	hand.
‘A	T’lan	Imass	with	odd	legs,’	said	Raest.	‘It	seemed	to	harbour	some
dislike	towards	me.’	The	Jaghut	paused.	‘I	can’t	imagine	why.’
Antsy	grunted.	‘It	should’ve	stayed	on	the	path.’
‘What	do	T’lan	Imass	know	of	footpaths?’	Raest	asked.	‘In	any	case,	it’s
still	too	angry	for	a	conversation.’	Another	pause.	‘But	there’s	time.	Soldier,
you	have	been	remiss.	I	am	therefore	disinclined	to	yield	the	floor,	as	it	were.’
‘Like	Hood	I	have!’	And	Antsy	reached	beneath	his	tunic	and	tugged	out	a


bedraggled,	half-rotted	shape.	‘I	found	you	your	damned	white	cat!’
‘Oh,	so	you	have.	How	sweet.	In	that	case,’	Raest	edged	back,	‘do	come	in.’
Barathol	hesitated.	‘What	will	this	achieve,	Antsy?’
‘He	won’t	die,’	the	ex-sergeant	replied.	‘It’s	like	time	doesn’t	exist	in	there.
Trust	me.	We	can	find	us	a	proper	healer	tomorrow,	or	a	month	from	now	–	it
don’t	matter.	S’long	as	he’s	breathing	when	we	carry	him	across	the	threshold.
So,	come	on,	help	me.’	He	then	realized	he	was	still	clutching	the	dead	cat,	and
so	he	went	up	to	the	Jaghut	and	thrust	the	ghastly	thing	into	most	welcoming
arms.
‘I	shall	call	it	Tufty,’	said	Raest.
	
The	black	tide	ceased	its	seemingly	inexorable	crawl.	A	slow,	shallow	breath
held	half	drawn.	A	struggling	heart	hovered	in	mid-beat.	And	yet	that	spark	of
awareness,	suddenly	emboldened,	set	out	on	a	journey	of	exploration	and
discovery.	So	many	long-dark	pathways…
	
Dragnipur	has	drunk	deep,	so	deep.
Dragnipur,	sword	of	the	father	and	slayer	of	the	same.	Sword	of	Chains,
Gate	of	Darkness,	wheeled	burden	of	life	and	life	ever	flees	dissolution	and	so
it	must!	Weapon	of	edges,	caring	naught	who	wields	it.	Cut	indifferent,	cut
blind,	cut	when	to	do	so	is	its	very	purpose,	its	perfect	function.
Dragnipur.
Dread	sisterly	feuds	dwindled	in	significance	–	something	was	proffered,
something	was	almost	within	reach.	Matters	of	final	possession	could	be
worked	out	later,	at	leisure	in	some	wrought-iron,	oversized	bath-tub	filled	to
the	brim	with	hot	blood.
Temporary	pact.	Expedience	personified,	Spite	quelled,	Envy	in	abeyance.
In	their	wake	a	crater	slowly	sagged,	edges	toppling	inward,	heat	fast
dissipating.	The	melted	faces	of	buildings	turned	glassy	in	rainbow	hues.	For
now	the	brilliance	of	these	colours	was	but	hinted	at	in	this	moon-glow.	But
that	reflected	light	had	begun	a	thousand	new	games,	hinting	at	something	far
deadlier.	Still	to	come,	still	to	come.
Everywhere	in	the	city,	fires	ebbed.
The	pressure	of	Dragnipur	Unsheathed	starves	the	flames	of	destruction.
Darkness	is	anathema	to	such	forces,	after	all.
Yes,	salvation	found,	in	a	weapon	let	loose.


The	sisters	were	mad,	but	not	so	mad	as	to	fail	to	grasp	the	pleasing	irony
of	such	things.
Quell	the	violence.
Invite	murder.
He	was	in	no	condition	to	resist	them	–	not	both	of	them	–	extraordinary
that	such	an	alliance	had	not	occurred	long	before	this	night.	But	sibling
wounds	are	the	festering	kind,	and	natures	at	war	are	normally	blind	to	every
pacifying	gesture.	What	was	needed	was	the	proper	incentive.
Alas,	it	did	not	occur	to	either	twin	that	their	father	understood	all	too	well
the	potential	danger	of	his	daughters	forged	together	in	alliance.	And	in
shaping	them	–	as	carefully,	as	perfectly	as	he	shaped	Dragnipur	itself	–	he	had
done	what	he	could	to	mitigate	the	risk.
And	so,	as	they	walked	side	by	side	up	the	street,	in	Spite’s	mind	she	had
already	begun	scheming	her	fateful	stab	into	her	sister ’s	back.	While	Envy
amused	herself	with	virtually	identical	thoughts,	roles	reversed,	naturally.
First	things	first,	however.
They	would	kill	Anomander	Rake.
For	Dragnipur	has	drunk	deep,	so	very	deep…
	
‘Karsa,	please.’
Ashes	drifted	in	the	air,	amidst	foul	smoke.	Distant	screams	announced
tragic	scenes.	The	last	night	of	the	Gedderone	Fête	was	sinking	into	misery	and
suffering.
‘There	is	nothing	to	be	done,	Samar	Dev.	But	we	will	do	this	–	we	will
witness.	We	will	withstand	the	cost	of	that,	if	we	can.’
She	had	not	expected	such	uncertainty	in	the	Toblakai.	Always	a	stranger	to
humility,	or	so	he	seemed	to	her.	He	had	not	even	drawn	his	flint	sword.
They	were	twenty-five	paces	behind	Traveller.	They	could	see	an	angled
gate	arching	over	the	broad	street	as	it	sloped	upward,	a	hundred	paces	ahead.
But	the	warrior	they	tracked	had	slowed	his	steps.	There	was	something	–
someone	–	in	the	centre	of	the	street	in	front	of	Traveller.	And	silent	crowds	on
both	sides	–	crowds	that	flinched	back	as	the	Hounds	lumbered	into	view;
flinched,	but	did	not	flee.
Something	held	them	in	place,	something	stronger	than	fear.
Samar	Dev	sensed	the	pressure	sliding	past,	like	a	wind	sweeping	round
her,	drawing	inward	once	more	–	straight	into	that	huddled	figure,	who	now,	at
last,	stirred.
Traveller	stood,	six	or	so	paces	away	from	the	stranger,	and	watched	in


silence	as	the	man	slowly	straightened.
Tiste	Andii.
Silver-haired.	In	his	hands,	a	sword	trailing	ghostly	chains…oh…spirits
below,	oh,	no—
Traveller	spoke.	‘He	said	you	would	stand	in	my	way.’	That	voice	carried,
strong	as	waves	surging	against	a	dark	shore.
Samar	Dev’s	heart	stuttered.
When	Anomander	Rake	replied,	his	words	were	cold,	solid	and
unyielding,	‘What	else	did	he	tell	you?’
Traveller	shook	his	head.	‘Where	is	he?’	he	demanded.	‘I	can	feel	–	he’s
close.	Where	is	he?’
Not	Cotillion.	A	different	‘he’	this	time.	The	one	Traveller	seeks.	The	one	he
has	ever	sought.
‘Yes,’	said	Rake.	‘Close.’
Thick,	flapping	sounds,	drifting	in	from	the	smoky	night	sky.	She	looked
up	in	alarm	and	saw	Great	Ravens.	Landing	upon	roof	ledges.	Scores,
hundreds,	silent	but	for	the	beat	of	air	beneath	crooked	wings.	Gathering,
gathering,	along	the	arched	gate	and	the	sections	of	wall	to	either	side.	Landing
everywhere,	so	long	as	it’s	a	place	from	which	they	can	see.
‘Then	stand	aside,’	commanded	Traveller.
‘I	cannot.’
‘Dammit,	Rake,	you	are	not	my	enemy.’
The	Son	of	Darkness	tilted	his	head,	as	if	receiving	a	compliment,	an
unexpected	gift.
‘Rake.	You	have	never	been	my	enemy.	You	know	that.	Even	when	the
Empire…’
‘I	know,	Dassem.	I	know.’
‘He	said	this	would	happen.’	There	was	dismay	in	that	statement,	and
resignation.
Rake	made	no	reply.
‘He	said,’	continued	Dassem,	‘that	you	would	not	yield.’
‘No,	I	will	not	yield.’
‘Please	help	me,	Rake,	help	me	to	understand…why?’
‘I	am	not	here	to	help	you,	Dassem	Ultor.’	And	Samar	Dev	heard	genuine
regret	in	that	admission.	The	Son	of	Darkness	closed	both	hands	about	the	long
grip	of	Dragnipur	and,	angling	the	pommel	upward	and	to	his	right,	slowly
widened	his	stance.	‘If	you	so	want	Hood,’	he	said,	‘come	and	get	him.’
Dassem	Ultor	–	the	First	Sword	of	the	Malazan	Empire	–	who	was
supposed	to	be	dead.	As	if	Hood	would	even	want	this	one	–	Dassem	Ultor,	the


one	they	had	known	as	Traveller,	unsheathed	his	sword,	the	water-etched	blade
flashing	as	if	lapped	by	molten	silver.	Samar	Dev’s	sense	of	a	rising	wave	now
burgeoned	in	her	mind.	Two	forces.	Sea	and	stone,	sea	and	stone.
Among	the	onlookers	to	either	side,	a	deep,	soft	chant	had	begun.
Samar	Dev	stared	at	those	arrayed	faces,	the	shining	eyes,	the	mouths
moving	in	unison.	Gods	below,	the	cult	of	Dessembrae.	These	are	cultists	–	and
they	stand	facing	their	god.
And	that	chant,	yes,	it	was	a	murmuring,	it	was	the	cadence	of	deep	water
rising.	Cold	and	hungry.
Samar	Dev	saw	Anomander	Rake’s	gaze	settle	briefly	on	Dassem’s	sword,
and	it	seemed	a	sad	smile	showed	itself,	in	the	instant	before	Dassem	attacked.
To	all	who	witnessed	–	the	cultists,	Samar	Dev,	Karsa	Orlong,	even	unto
the	five	Hounds	of	Shadow	and	the	Great	Ravens	hunched	on	every	ledge	–	that
first	clash	of	weapons	was	too	fast	to	register.	Sparks	slanted,	the	night	air	rang
with	savage	parries,	counterblows,	the	biting	crunch	of	edges	against	crosshilts.	Even	their	bodies	were	but	a	blur.
And	then	both	warriors	staggered	back,	opening	up	the	distance	between
them	once	more.
‘Faces	in	the	Rock,’	hissed	Karsa	Orlong.
‘Karsa—’
‘No.	Only	a	fool	would	step	between	these	two.’
And	the	Toblakai	sounded…shaken.
Dassem	launched	himself	forward	again.	There	were	no	war	cries,	no
bellowed	curses,	not	even	the	grunts	bursting	free	as	ferocious	swings
hammered	forged	iron.	But	the	swords	had	begun	singing,	a	dreadful,
mournful	pair	of	voices	rising	in	eerie	syncopation.	Thrusts,	slashes,	lowedged	ripostes,	the	whistle	of	a	blade	cutting	through	air	where	a	head	had	been
an	instant	earlier,	bodies	writhing	to	evade	counterstrokes,	and	sparks	rained,
poured,	from	the	two	combatants,	bounced	like	shattered	stars	across	the
cobbles.
They	did	not	break	apart	this	time.	The	frenzied	flurry	did	not	abate,	but
went	on,	impossibly	on.	Two	forces,	neither	yielding,	neither	prepared	to	draw
a	single	step	back.
And	yet,	for	all	the	blinding	speed,	the	glowing	shower	spraying	out	like
the	blood	of	iron,	Samar	Dev	saw	the	death	blow.	She	saw	it	clear.	She	saw	its
undeniable	truth	–	and	somehow,	somehow,	it	was	all	wrong.
Rake	wide-legged,	angling	the	pommel	high	before	his	face	with
Dragnipur ’s	point	downward	–	as	if	to	echo	his	opening	stance	–	and	higher
still,	and	Dassem,	his	free	hand	joining	the	other	upon	his	sword’s	grip,


throwing	his	entire	weight	into	a	crossways	slash	–	the	warrior	bodily	lifting
as	if	about	to	take	to	the	air	and	close	upon	Rake	with	an	embrace.	And	his
swing	met	the	edge	of	Dragnipur	at	a	full	right	angle	–	a	single	moment
shaping	a	perfect	cruciform	fashioned	by	the	two	weapons’	colliding,	and	then
the	power	of	Dassem’s	blow	slammed	Dragnipur	back—
Driving	its	inside	edge	into	Anomander	Rake’s	forehead,	and	then	down
through	his	face.
His	gauntleted	hands	sprang	away	from	the	handle,	yet	Dragnipur
remained	jammed,	seeming	to	erupt	from	his	head,	as	he	toppled	backward,
blood	streaming	down	to	flare	from	the	tip	as	the	Son	of	Darkness	crashed
down	on	his	back.
Even	this	impact	did	not	dislodge	Dragnipur.	The	sword	shivered,	and	now
there	was	but	one	song,	querulous	and	fading	in	the	sudden	stillness.
Blood	boiled,	turned	black.	The	body	lying	on	the	cobbles	did	not	move.
Anomander	Rake	was	dead.
Dassem	Ultor	slowly	lowered	his	weapon,	his	chest	heaving.
And	then	he	cried	out,	in	a	voice	so	filled	with	anguish	that	it	seemed	to
tear	a	jagged	hole	in	the	night	air.	This	unhuman	scream	was	joined	by	a
chorus	of	shrieks	as	the	Great	Ravens	exploded	into	flight,	lifting	like	a
massive	feathered	veil	that	whirled	above	the	street,	and	then	began	a	spinning
descent.	Cultists	flinched	away	and	crouched	against	building	walls,	their
wordless	chant	drowned	beneath	the	caterwauling	cacophony	of	this	black,
glistening	shroud	that	swept	down	like	a	curtain.
Dassem	staggered	back,	and	then	pitched	drunkenly	to	one	side,	his	sword
dragging	in	his	wake,	point	skirling	a	snake	track	across	the	cobbles.	He	was
brought	up	short	by	a	pitted	wall,	and	he	sagged	against	it,	burying	his	face	in
the	shelter	of	a	crooked	arm	that	seemed	to	be	all	that	held	him	upright.
Broken.	Broken.	They	are	broken.
Oh,	gods	forgive	them,	they	are	broken.
Karsa	Orlong	shocked	her	then,	as	he	twisted	to	one	side	and	pointedly	spat
on	to	the	street.	‘Cheated,’	he	said.	‘Cheated!’
She	stared	at	him,	aghast.	She	did	not	know	what	he	meant	–	but	no,	she	did.
Yes,	she	did.	‘Karsa,	what	just	happened?’	Wrong.	It	was	wrong.	‘I	saw	–	I	saw
—’
‘You	saw	true,’	he	said,	baring	his	teeth,	his	gaze	fixed	upon	that	fallen
body.	‘As	did	Traveller,	and	see	what	it	has	done	to	him.’
The	area	surrounding	the	corpse	of	Anomander	Rake	churned	with	Great
Ravens	–	although	not	one	drew	close	enough	to	touch	the	cooling	flesh	–	and
now	the	five	Hounds	of	Shadow,	not	one	spared	of	wounds,	closed	in	to	push


the	birds	aside,	as	if	to	form	a	protective	circle	around	Anomander	Rake.
No,	not	him.	The	sword…
Unease	stirred	awake	in	Samar	Dev.	‘This	is	not	over.’
	
A	beast	can	sense	weakness.	A	beast	knows	the	moment	of	vulnerability,	and
opportunity.	A	beast	knows	when	to	strike.
The	moon	died	and,	in	dying,	began	its	torturous	rebirth.	The	cosmos	is
indifferent	to	the	petty	squabbles	of	what	crawls,	what	whimpers,	what	bleeds
and	what	breathes.	It	has	flung	out	its	fates	on	the	strands	of	immutable	laws,
and	in	the	skirling	unravelling	of	millions	of	years,	tens	of	millions,	each	fate
will	out.	In	its	time,	it	will	out.
Something	massive	had	arrived	from	the	depths	of	the	blackness	beyond
and	struck	the	moon	a	short	time	back.	An	initial	eruption	from	the	impact	had
briefly	showered	the	moon’s	companion	world	with	fragments,	but	it	was	the
shock	wave	that	delivered	the	stricken	moon’s	death	knell,	and	this	took	time.
Deep	in	the	core,	vast	tides	of	energy	opened	immense	fissures.	Concussive
forces	shattered	the	crust.	Energy	was	absorbed	until	nothing	more	could	be
borne.	The	moon	blew	apart.
Leave	it	to	the	flit	of	eager	minds	to	find	prophetic	significance.	The
cosmos	does	not	care.	The	fates	will	not	crack	a	smile.
From	a	thousand	sources,	now,	reflected	sunlight	danced	wild	upon	the
blue,	green	and	ochre	world	far	below.	Shadows	were	devoured,	darkness
flushed	away.	Night	itself	broke	into	fragments.
In	the	city	of	Darujhistan,	light	was	everywhere,	like	a	god’s	fingers.
Brushing,	prodding,	poking,	driving	down	into	alleys	that	had	never	seen	the
sun.	And	each	assault	shattered	darkness	and	shadow	both.	Each	invasion
ignited,	in	a	proclamation	of	power.
Dearest	serendipity,	yet	not	an	opportunity	to	be	ignored,	no.	Not	on	this
night.	Not	in	the	city	of	Darujhistan.
Pallid	and	Lock,	their	bone-white	hides	sprayed	in	crimson,	their	skin
hanging	in	strips	in	places,	with	horrid	puncture	wounds	red-rimmed	black
holes	in	their	necks	and	elsewhere,	padded	side	by	side	down	the	main	avenue
running	parallel	to	the	lake	shore.	Hurting,	but	undaunted.
Light	bloomed,	ran	like	water	across	their	path.
Light	tilted	shafts	down	between	buildings,	and	some	of	these	flashed,	and
from	those	flashes	more	Hounds	emerged.
Behold,	the	Hounds	of	Light	have	arrived.


	
What,	the	world	shifts	unexpectedly?	Without	hint,	without	inkling?	How
terrible,	how	unexpected!	How	perfectly…natural.	Rules	abound,	laws	carved
into	stones,	but	they	are	naught	but	delusions.	Witness	the	ones	who	do	not
care.	See	the	mocking	awareness	in	their	fiery	eyes.	Rail	at	the	unknown,	even
as	jaws	open	wide	for	the	warbling	throat.
But	give	the	round	man	no	grief.	He	spreads	wide	pudgy	hands.	He	shrugs.
He	saves	his	sly	smile	for…why,	for	thee!
	
Venasara	and	Cast	were	the	first	to	join	Pallid	and	Lock.	Cast	was	almost	twice
the	weight	of	Lock,	while	Venasara	still	bore	the	signs	of	the	ordeals	of	raising
a	squabble	of	young.	Ultama	soon	arrived,	long-limbed,	sleek,	broad	head	held
low	at	the	end	of	a	sinewy	neck.	Ultama’s	oversized	upper	canines	jutted	down.
The	exposed	portions	of	the	fangs,	dagger-length,	gleamed	white.
At	an	intersection	ahead	waited	Jalan,	Grasp	and	Hanas,	the	youngest	three
of	the	pack,	hackles	high	and	eyes	flashing	with	vicious	excitement.
Gait	and	then	Ghennan	were	the	last	to	arrive,	the	lord	and	the	lady	of	the
pack,	more	silver	than	white,	with	scarred	muzzles	misshapen	by	centuries	of
dread	battle.	These	two	wore	thick	collars	of	black	leather	scattered	with	pearls
and	opals	–	although	far	fewer	than	had	once	adorned	these	proud	bands.
Ten	in	number.	Each	one	a	match	for	any	Hound	of	Shadow.
Of	whom	there	were,	ah,	but	five.
No	one	stepped	into	the	path	of	these	beasts.	They	were	coming	to	claim	a
prize	for	their	master.
Dragnipur.	A	sword	of	perfect	justice.
Such	perfect	justice.
	
High	in	the	sky	above	the	city,	tilting,	sliding	and	dipping	to	avoid	each	shaft	of
infernal	light,	an	undead	dragon	tracked	the	Hounds	of	Light.
Tulas	Shorn	was	not	pleased,	even	as	something	flowed	sweet	as	a	stream
through	its	mind.	A	kind	of	blessing,	alighting	with	faint,	lilting	notes	of
wonder.
Tulas	Shorn	had	never	known	that	Hood,	Lord	of	the	Slain,	could	prove
so…generous.
Or	perhaps	it	was	nothing	more	than	a	Jaghut’s	talent	for	anticipating	the
worst.


As	an	Elder	might	observe,	there	is	nothing	worse	than	a	suspicious
dragon.
	
Do	not	grieve.	Hold	close	such	propensities	for	a	while	longer.	The	time	will
come.
Some	gifts	are	evil.	Others	are	not,	but	what	they	are	remains	to	be
discovered.
Rest	easy	for	the	next	few	moments,	for	there	is	more	to	tell.
	
Iskaral	Pust	rode	like	a	madman.	Unfortunately,	the	mule	beneath	him	had
decided	that	a	plodding	walk	would	suffice,	making	the	two	of	them	a	most
incongruous	pair.	The	High	Priest	flung	himself	back	and	forth,	pitched	from
side	to	side.	His	feet	kicked	high,	toes	skyward,	then	lashed	back	down.	Heels
pounded	insensate	flanks	in	a	thumping	drum-roll	entirely	devoid	of	rhythm.
Reins	flailed	about	but	the	mule	had	chewed	through	the	bit	and	so	the	reins
were	attached	to	nothing	but	two	mangled	stumps	that	seemed	determined	to
batter	Pust	senseless.
He	tossed	about	as	if	riding	a	goaded	bull.	Spraying	sweat,	lips	pulled	back
in	a	savage	grimace,	the	whites	visible	round	his	bugged-out	eyes.
The	mule,	why,	the	mule	walked.	Clump	clump	(pause)	clump	(pause)
clump	clump.	And	so	on.
Swirling	just	above	Iskaral	Pust’s	head,	and	acrobatically	avoiding	the	bitends,	flapped	the	squall	of	bhokarala.	Like	oversized	gnats,	and	how	that
mule’s	tail	whipped	back	and	forth!	She	sought	to	swat	them	away,	but	in	the
spirit	of	gnat-hood	the	bhokarala	did	not	relent,	so	eager	were	they	to	claim	the
very	next	plop	of	dung	wending	its	way	out	beneath	that	tail.	Over	which	they’d
fight	tooth,	talon	and	claw.
Swarming	in	mule	and	rider ’s	wake	was	a	river	of	spiders,	flowing
glittering	black	over	the	cobbles.
At	one	point	three	white	Hounds	tramped	across	the	street	not	twenty	paces
distant.	A	trio	of	immensely	ugly	heads	swung	to	regard	mule	and	rider.	And	to
show	that	it	meant	business,	the	mule	propped	up	its	ears.	Clump	clump	(pause)
clump	clump	clump.
The	Hounds	moved	on.
It	does	no	good	to	molest	a	mule.
Alas,	as	Iskaral	Pust	and	his	placid	mount	were	moments	from


discovering,	there	were	indeed	forces	in	the	world	that	could	confound	both.
	
And	here	then,	at	last,	arrives	the	shining,	blazing,	astonishing	nexus,	the
penultimate	pinnacle	of	this	profound	night,	as	bold	Kruppe	nudges	his
ferocious	war-mule	into	the	path	of	one	Iskaral	Pust,	mule,	and	sundry	spiders
and	bhokarala.
Mule	sees	mule.	Both	halt	with	a	bare	fifteen	paces	between	them,	ears	at
bristling	attention.
Rider	sees	rider.	Magus	grows	dangerously	still,	eyes	hooded.	Kruppe
waves	one	plump	hand	in	greeting.
Bhokarala	launch	a	mid-air	conference	that	results	in	one	beast	landing
awkwardly	on	the	cobbles	to	the	left	of	the	High	Priest,	whilst	the	others	find
window	sills,	projections,	and	the	heads	of	handsome	gargoyles	on	which	to
perch,	chests	heaving	and	tongues	lolling.
The	spiders	run	away.
Thus,	the	tableau	is	set.
	
‘Out	of	my	way!’	screeched	Iskaral	Pust.	‘Who	is	this	fool	and	how	dare	he
fool	with	me?	I’ll	gnash	him!	I’ll	crush	him	down.	I’ll	feint	right	and	dodge	left
and	we’ll	be	by	in	a	flash!	Look	at	that	pathetic	mule	–	he’ll	never	catch	us!	I
got	a	sword	to	claim.	Mine,	yes,	mine!	And	then	won’t	Shadowthrone	grovel
and	simper!	Iskaral	Pust,	High	Priest	of	Dragnipur!	Most	feared	swordsman	in
ten	thousand	worlds!	And	if	you	think	you’ve	seen	justice	at	its	most	fickle,
you	just	wait!’	He	then	leaned	forward	and	smiled.	‘Kind	sir,	could	you	kindly
move	yourself	and	yon	beast	to	one	side?	I	must	keep	an	appointment,	you
understand.	Hastily,	in	fact.’	Then	he	hissed,	‘Go	climb	up	your	own	arse,	you
red-vested	ball	of	lard	that	someone	rolled	across	a	forest	floor!	Go!	Scat!’
‘Most	confounding	indeed,’	Kruppe	replied	with	his	most	beatific	smile.	‘It
seems	we	are	in	discord,	in	that	you	seek	to	proceed	in	a	direction	that	will
inevitably	collide	with	none	other	than	Kruppe,	the	Eel	of	Darujhistan.	Poor
priest,	it	is	late.	Does	your	god	know	where	you	are?’
‘Eel?	Kruppe?	Collide?	Fat	and	an	idiot	besides,	what	a	dastardly
combination,	and	on	this	of	all	nights!	Listen,	take	another	street.	If	I	run	into
this	Crappy	Eel	I’ll	be	sure	to	let	him	know	you’re	looking	for	him.	It’s	the
least	I	can	do.’
‘Hardly,	but	no	matter.	I	am	Kruppe	the	Crappy	Eel,	alas.’


‘So	fine,	we’ve	run	into	each	other.	Glad	that’s	over	with.	Now	let	me
pass!’
‘Kruppe	regrets	that	any	and	every	path	you	may	seek	shall	be	impeded	by
none	other	than	Kruppe	himself.	Unless,	of	course,	you	conclude	that	what	you
seek	is	not	worth	the	effort,	nor	the	grief	certain	to	follow,	and	so	wisely
return	to	thy	shadowy	temple.’
‘You	don’t	know	what	I	want	so	it’s	none	of	your	damned	business	what	I
want!’
‘Misapprehensions	abound,	but	wait,	does	this	slavering	fool	even
understand?’
‘What?	I	wasn’t	supposed	to	hear	that?	But	I	did!	I	did,	you	fat	idiot!’
‘He	only	thought	he	heard.	Kind	priest,	Kruppe	assures	you,	you	did	not
hear	but	mishear.	Kind	priest?	Why,	Kruppe	is	too	generous,	too	forgiving	by
far,	and	hear	hear!	Or	is	it	here	here?	No	matter,	it’s	not	as	if	this	grinning	toad
will	understand.	Why,	his	mule’s	got	a	sharper	look	in	its	eye	than	he	has.	Now,
kindly	priest,	it’s	late	and	you	should	be	in	bed,	yes?	Abjectly	alone,	no	doubt.
Hmm?’
Iskaral	Pust	stared.	He	gaped.	His	eyes	darted,	alighting	on	the	bhokaral
squatting	on	the	cobbles	beside	him	as	it	made	staring,	gaping,	darting
expressions.	‘My	worshippers!	Of	course!	You!	Yes,	you!	Gather	your	kin	and
attack	the	fat	fool!	Attack!	Your	god	commands	you!	Attack!’
‘Mlawhlaoblossblayowblagmilebbingoblaiblblafblablallblayarblablabnablahblallblah!’
‘What?’
‘Bla?’
‘Bla?’
‘Yarb?’
‘Bah!	You’re	stupid	and	useless	and	ugly!’
‘Blabluablablablahllalalabala,	too!’
Iskaral	Pust	scowled	at	it.
The	bhokaral	scowled	back.
‘Rat	poison!’	Pust	hissed.	And	then	smiled.
The	bhokaral	offered	him	a	dung	sausage.	And	then	smiled.

Oh,	so	much	for	reasoned	negotiation.
Iskaral	Pust’s	warbling	battle	cry	was	somewhat	strangled	as	he	leaned
forward,	perched	high	in	the	stirrups,	hands	reaching	like	a	raptor ’s	talons,	and


the	mule	reluctantly	stumped	forward.
Kruppe	watched	this	agonizingly	slow	charge.	He	sighed.	‘Really	now.	It
comes	to	this?	So	be	it.’	And	he	kicked	his	war-mule	into	motion.
The	beasts	closed,	step	by	step.	By	step.
Iskaral	Pust	clawed	the	air,	weaving	and	pitching,	head	bobbing.	Overhead,
the	bhokarala	screamed	and	flew	in	frenzied	circles.	The	High	Priest’s	mule
flicked	its	tail.
Kruppe’s	war-mule	edged	to	the	right.	Pust’s	beast	angled	to	its	right.	Their
heads	came	alongside,	and	then	their	shoulders.	Whereupon	they	halted.
Snarling	and	spitting,	Iskaral	Pust	launched	himself	at	Kruppe,	who
grunted	a	surprised	oof!	Fists	flew,	thumbs	jabbed,	jaws	snapped	–	the	High
Priest’s	crazed	attack	–	and	the	Eel	threw	up	his	forearms	to	fend	it	off,	only	to
inadvertently	punch	Pust	in	the	nose	with	one	pudgy	hand.	Head	rocked	back,	a
stunned	gasp.	Attack	renewed.
They	grappled.	They	toppled,	thumping	on	to	the	cobbles	in	a	flurry	of
limbs.
The	bhokarala	joined	in,	diving	from	above	with	screeches	and	snarls,
swarming	the	two	combatants	before	beginning	to	fight	with	each	other.	Fists
flying,	thumbs	jabbing,	jaws	snapping.	Spiders	swept	in	from	all	sides,	tiny
fangs	nipping	everything	in	sight.
The	entire	mass	writhed	and	seethed.
The	two	mules	walked	a	short	distance	away,	then	turned	in	unison	to	watch
the	proceedings.
Best	leave	this	egregious	scene	for	now.
Honest.
	
When	the	two	women	appeared	some	distance	down	a	side	avenue,	dressed	in
diaphanous	robes,	and	approached	side	by	side	with	elegant	grace	–	like	nobleborn	sisters	out	for	a	late	night	stroll	–	the	Great	Ravens	scattered,	shrieking,
and	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	drew	up,	hackles	rising	and	lips	stretching	back	to
reveal	glistening	fangs.
Even	at	this	distance,	Samar	Dev	could	feel	the	power	emanating	from
them.	She	stepped	back,	her	chest	tightening.	‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	they?’
When	Karsa	did	not	reply	she	glanced	over	to	see	that	he	was	watching	a
lone	horseman	coming	up	from	the	lakefront.	This	rider	held	a	lance	and	the
moment	her	eyes	alit	upon	that	weapon	she	drew	a	sharp,	ragged	breath.	Gods,
now	what?
The	horse’s	hoofs	echoed	like	a	cracked	temple	bell.


Ignoring	the	rider,	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	set	out	in	the	direction	of	the	two
women.	The	five	enormous	beasts	moved	warily,	heads	held	low.
	
At	this	moment,	High	Alchemist	Baruk	stood	beside	his	carriage	in	the	estate
compound.	It	might	have	seemed	to	the	servants	and	guards	watching	that	he
was	studying	the	crazed	night	sky,	but	none	of	these	worthies	was	positioned	to
see	anything	of	his	face.
The	man	was	weeping.
He	did	not	see	the	shattered	moon.	Nor	the	wreaths	of	low	smoke	drifting
past.	In	truth,	he	saw	nothing	that	anyone	else	could	possibly	see,	for	his	vision
was	turned	inward,	upon	memories	of	friendship,	upon	burdens	since	accepted,
and,	through	it	all,	there	was	a	rising	flood	of	something	–	he	could	not	be
certain,	but	he	believed	it	was	humility.
In	the	course	of	a	life,	sacrifices	are	made,	dire	legacies	accepted.	Burdens
are	borne	upon	a	humble	back,	or	they	ride	the	shoulders	of	bitter	martyrs.
These	are	the	choices	available	to	the	spirit.	There	was	no	doubt,	none	at	all,	as
to	which	one	had	been	chosen	by	the	Son	of	Darkness.
A	great	man	was	dead.	So	much	cruelly	taken	away	on	this	sour	night.
And	he	had	lost	a	friend.
It	availed	him	nothing	that	he	understood,	that	he	accepted	that	so	many
other	choices	were	made,	and	that	he	had	his	own	role	still	to	play	out	in	this
tragic	end.
No,	he	simply	felt	broken	inside.
Everything	seemed	thin,	fragile.	All	that	he	felt	in	his	heart,	all	that	he	saw
with	his	eyes.	So	very	fragile.
Yes,	the	moon	died,	but	a	rebirth	was	coming.
Could	he	hold	to	that?
He	would	try.
For	now,	however,	all	he	could	manage	were	these	tears.
Baruk	turned	to	his	carriage,	stepped	inside.	The	door	was	shut	behind	him
as	he	settled	on	the	cushioned	bench.	He	looked	across	to	his	guest,	but	could
say	nothing.	Not	to	this	one,	who	had	lost	so	much	more	than	he	had.	So	much
more.
The	gates	were	opened	and	the	carriage	set	out,	its	corner	lanterns
swinging.
	


Cutter	dismounted,	leaving	the	horse	to	wander	where	it	would.	He	walked
forward,	indifferent	to	the	presence	of	the	Hounds	–	they	seemed	intent	on
something	else	in	any	case	–	and	indifferent	as	well	to	the	Great	Ravens	as	they
drove	onlookers	away	with	beaks	eager	to	stab	and	slash.	His	eyes	were	on	the
body	lying	on	the	cobbles.
He	walked	past	a	woman	who	stood	beside	a	towering	warrior	who	was
drawing	loose	a	two-handed	flint	sword	as	he	stared	at	something	in	the
direction	from	whence	Cutter	had	just	come.
None	of	these	details	could	drag	Cutter ’s	attention	from	the	body,	and	that
gleaming	black	sword	so	brutally	driven	into	the	head	and	face.	He	walked
until	he	stood	over	it.
The	woman	moved	up	beside	him.	‘That	weapon	in	your	hands	–	it’s	not
—’
‘We	are	in	trouble,’	Cutter	said.
‘What?’
He	could	not	believe	what	he	was	seeing.	Could	not	accept	that	the	Lord	of
Moon’s	Spawn	was	lying	here,	one	eye	closed,	the	other	open	and	staring
sightlessly.	Killed	by	his	own	sword.	Killed…taken.	By	Dragnipur.	‘How	did
this	happen?	Who	could	have…’
‘Dassem	Ultor.’
He	finally	looked	at	her.	She	was	Seven	Cities,	that	much	he	could	see	at
once.	Older	than	Cutter	by	a	decade,	maybe	more.	‘The	name’s	familiar,	but…’
He	shrugged.
She	pointed	to	one	side	and	Cutter	turned.
A	man	was	crouched,	slumped	against	a	wall,	a	sword	propped	up	beside
him.	He	had	buried	his	face	in	his	arms.	Cutter ’s	eyes	went	back	to	that	sword.
I’ve	seen	that	thing	before…but	where?	When?
‘He	was	known	to	us,’	said	the	woman,	‘as	Traveller.’
Memories	rushed	through	Cutter,	leaving	in	their	wake	something	cold,
lifeless.	‘It’s	not	the	same,’	he	whispered.	‘Vengeance.	Or	grief.	Your	choice.’
He	drew	an	uneven	breath.	‘That	sword	–	it	was	forged	by	Anomander	Rake.	It
was	his	weapon.	Before	Dragnipur.	He	left	it	with	his	brother,	Andarist.	And
then	I…I…Beru	fend…’
The	giant	warrior	now	twisted	round.	‘If	you	would	protect	that	body,’	he
said	in	a	growl,	‘then	ready	that	spear.’
The	two	women	had	halted	a	street	away,	their	path	blocked	by	a	half-circle
of	Hounds,	with	less	than	twenty	paces	separating	the	parties.
Seeing	those	women,	Cutter	frowned.	‘Spite,’	he	muttered.	‘Did	you	guess?
Or	was	it	just	some	damned	itch?’


‘Samar	Dev,’	snapped	the	giant.	‘Witch!	Get	Traveller	on	his	feet!	I	will
need	him!’
‘Damn	you!’	screamed	the	woman	beside	Cutter.	‘What	is	it?’
But	there	was	no	need	for	an	answer.	For	she	saw	now,	as	did	Cutter.
More	Hounds,	these	ones	pale	as	ghosts,	a	pack	twice	the	number	of	the
Hounds	of	Shadow.	Loping	up	the	street	from	Lakefront,	moments	from	a
charge.
‘It’s	the	sword,’	said	the	woman	named	Samar	Dev.	‘They’ve	come	for	the
sword.’
Cutter	felt	his	limbs	turn	to	ice,	even	as	the	lance	in	his	hands	flared	with
heat.
‘Give	me	room,’	said	the	giant,	lumbering	forward	into	a	clear	space.
Against	ten	Hounds?	Are	you	mad?
Cutter	moved	out	to	the	left	of	the	warrior.	The	witch	rushed	over	to
Traveller.
The	lance	trembled.	It	was	getting	too	hot	to	hold,	but	what	else	did	he
have?	Some	damned	daggers	–	against	these	things?	Gods,	what	am	I	even
doing	here?
But	he	would	stand.	He	would	die	here,	beside	a	giant	–	who	was	just	as
doomed.	And	for	what?	There	is	nothing…there	is	nothing	in	my	life.	To	explain
any	of	this.	He	glared	at	the	white	Hounds.	It’s	just	a	sword.	What	will	you	even
do	with	it?	Chew	the	handle?	Piss	on	the	blade?	He	looked	across	at	the	huge
warrior	beside	him.	‘What’s	your	name	at	least?’
The	giant	glanced	at	him.	‘Yes,’	he	said	with	a	sharp	nod.	‘I	am	Karsa
Orlong	of	the	Teblor.	Toblakai.	And	you?’
‘Crokus.	Crokus	Younghand.’	He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘I	was	once	a	thief.’
‘Be	one	again,’	said	Karsa,	teeth	bared,	‘and	steal	me	a	Hound’s	life	this
night.’
Shit.	‘I’ll	try.’
‘That	will	do,’	the	Toblakai	replied.
Thirty	paces	away	now.	And	the	white	Hounds	fanned	out,	filled	the	street
in	a	wall	of	bleached	hide,	rippling	muscle	and	rows	of	fangs.
A	gust	of	charnel	wind	swept	round	Cutter;	something	clattered,	rang	sharp
on	cobbles,	and	then	a	hand	swept	down—
The	Hounds	of	Light	charged.
As,	on	the	side	street	to	the	left,	the	daughters	of	Draconus	unleashed	their
warrens	in	a	howling	rush	of	destruction	that	engulfed	the	five	beasts	before
them.


Scything	blade	of	notched	iron,	driving	Spinnock	Durav	back.	Blood	sprayed
with	each	blow,	links	of	ringed	armour	pattered	on	the	ground.	So	many	tiny
broken	chains,	there	was	a	trail	of	them,	marking	each	step	of	the	warrior ’s
rocking,	reeling	retreat.	When	his	own	sword	caught	Kallor ’s	frenzied	blows,
the	reverberation	ripped	up	Spinnock’s	arm,	seeming	to	mash	his	muscles	into
lifeless	pulp.
His	blood	was	draining	away	from	countless	wounds.	His	helm	had	been
battered	off,	that	single	blow	leaving	behind	a	fractured	cheekbone	and	a	deaf
ear.
Still	he	fought	on;	still	he	held	Kallor	before	him.
Kallor.
There	was	no	one	behind	the	High	King’s	eyes.	The	berserk	rage	had
devoured	the	ancient	warrior.	He	seemed	tireless,	an	automaton.	Spinnock
Durav	could	find	no	opening,	no	chance	to	counterattack.	It	was	all	he	could	do
simply	to	evade	each	death	blow,	to	minimize	the	impacts	of	that	jagged	edge,
to	turn	the	remaining	fragments	of	his	hauberk	into	the	blade’s	inexorable	path.
Spreading	bruises,	cracked	bones,	gaping	gouges	from	which	blood
welled,	soaking	his	wool	gambon,	he	staggered	under	the	unceasing	assault.
It	could	not	last.
It	had	already	lasted	beyond	all	reason.
Spinnock	blocked	yet	another	slash,	but	this	time	the	sound	his	sword	made
was	strangely	dull,	and	the	grip	suddenly	felt	loose,	the	handle	shorn	from	the
tine	–	the	pommel	was	gone.	With	a	sobbing	gasp,	he	ducked	beneath	a
whistling	blade	and	then	pitched	back—
But	Kallor	pressed	forward,	giving	him	no	distance,	and	that	two-handed
sword	lashed	out	yet	again.
Spinnock’s	parry	jolted	his	arm	and	his	weapon	seemed	to	blow	apart	in
his	hand,	tined	blade	spinning	into	the	air,	the	fragments	of	the	grip	a	handful
of	shards	falling	from	his	numbed	fingers.
The	back-slash	caught	him	across	his	chest.
He	was	thrown	from	his	feet,	landing	hard	on	the	slope	of	the	ditch,	where
he	sagged	back,	blood	streaming	down	his	front,	and	closed	his	eyes.
Kallor ’s	rasping	breaths	drew	closer.
Sweat	dripped	on	to	Spinnock’s	face,	but	still	he	did	not	open	his	eyes.	He
had	felt	it.	A	distant	death.	Yes,	he	had	felt	it,	as	he	feared	he	might.	So	feared
that	he	might.	And,	of	all	the	deeds	he	had	managed	here	at	these	crossroads,
all	that	he	had	done	up	until	this	moment,	not	one	could	match	the	cost	of	the


smile	that	now	emerged	on	split,	bleeding	lips.
And	this	alone	stayed	Kallor ’s	sword	from	its	closing	thrust.	Stayed	it…for
a	time.
‘What,’	Kallor	asked	softly,	‘was	the	point,	Spinnock	Durav?’
But	the	fallen	warrior	did	not	answer.
‘You	could	never	win.	You	could	never	do	anything	but	die	here.	Tell	me,
damn	you,	what	was	the	fucking	point?’
The	question	was	a	sob,	the	anguish	so	raw	that	Spinnock	was	startled	into
opening	his	eyes,	into	looking	up	at	Kallor.
Behind	the	silhouette	with	its	halo	of	tangled,	sweat-matted	hair,	the
heaving	shoulders,	he	saw	Great	Ravens,	a	score	or	more,	flying	up	from	the
south.
Closer	and	closer.
With	an	effort,	Spinnock	focused	on	Kallor	once	more.	‘You	don’t
understand,’	he	said.	‘Not	yet,	Kallor,	but	you	will.	Someday,	you	will.’
‘He	does	not	deserve	you!’
Spinnock	frowned,	blinked	to	clear	his	eyes.	‘Oh,	Kallor…’
The	High	King’s	face	was	ravaged	with	grief,	and	all	that	raged	in	the
ancient	man’s	eyes	–	well,	none	of	it	belonged.	Not	to	the	legend	that	was
Kallor.	Not	to	the	nightmares	roiling	round	and	round	his	very	name.	Not	to
the	lifeless	sea	of	ashes	in	his	wake.	No,	what	Spinnock	saw	in	Kallor ’s	eyes
were	things	that,	he	suspected,	no	one	would	ever	see	again.
It	was,	of	sorts,	a	gift.
‘Kallor,’	he	said,	‘listen	to	me.	Take	this	as	you	will,	or	not	at	all.	I	–	I	am
sorry.	That	you	are	driven	to	this.	And…and	may	you	one	day	show	your	true
self.	May	you,	one	day,	be	redeemed	in	the	eyes	of	the	world.’
Kallor	cried	out,	as	if	struck,	and	he	staggered	back.	He	recovered	with
bared	teeth.	‘My	true	self?	Oh,	you	damned	fool!	You	see	only	what	you	want
to	see!	In	this	last	moment	of	your	pathetic,	useless	life!	May	your	soul	rage
for	eternity	in	the	heart	of	a	star,	Tiste	Andii!	May	you	yearn	for	what	you	can
never	have!	For	all	infernal	eternity!’
Spinnock	had	flinched	back	at	the	tirade.	‘Do	you	now	curse	me,	High
King?’	he	asked	in	a	whisper.
Kallor ’s	face	looked	ready	to	shatter.	He	dragged	a	forearm	across	his
eyes.	‘No,’	he	said.	‘Of	course	not.	I	will	kill	you	clean.	For	what	you	have
shown	me	this	night	–	I	have	never	before	faced	such	a	defence.’	And	then	he
paused,	edging	forward	again,	his	eyes	burning	in	their	pits.	‘You	had	chances,
Spinnock	Durav.	To	strike	back.	You	could	have	wounded	me	–	yes,	you	could
have…’


‘I	was	not	here	to	do	that,	Kallor.’
The	High	King	stared,	and	a	glint	of	comprehension	lit	in	his	face.	‘No,’	he
said.	‘You	only	needed	to	delay	me.’
Spinnock	closed	his	eyes	once	more	and	settled	his	head	back.	‘For	a	time.
You	may	never	accept	this,	but	it	was	for	your	own	good.	It’s	a	mess	over
there.	In	that	city.	My	Lord	wanted	you	kept	away.’
Kallor	snarled.	‘How	generous	in	his	mercy	is	your	Lord.’
‘Yes,’	sighed	Spinnock,	‘he	was	ever	that.’
Silence,	then.
Not	a	sound.	A	dozen	laboured	heartbeats.	Another	dozen.	Finally,	some
odd	unease	forced	Spinnock	to	open	his	eyes	yet	again,	to	look	upon	Kallor.
Who	stood,	head	bowed.
‘Yes,’	said	Spinnock,	in	true	sorrow,	‘he	is	gone.’
Kallor	did	not	lift	his	gaze.	He	did	not	move	at	all.
‘And	so,’	continued	Spinnock,	‘I	have	stood	here.	In	his	stead.	One	last
time.’	He	paused.	‘And	yes,	it	makes	my	death	seem…easier—’
‘Oh	shut	up,	will	you?	I	am	thinking.’
‘About	what?’
Kallor	met	his	eyes	and	bared	his	teeth.	‘That	bastard.	The	bold,	brazen
bastard!’
Spinnock	studied	the	High	King,	and	then	he	grunted.	‘Well,	that’s	it,	then.’
‘I	don’t	ever	want	to	see	you	again,	Spinnock	Durav.	You	are	bleeding	out.
I	will	leave	you	to	that.	I	hear	it’s	quieter,	easier	–	but	then,	what	do	I	know?’
The	Tiste	Andii	watched	him	set	off	then,	up	the	road,	to	that	fair	city	that
even	now	bled	with	its	own	terrible	wounds.
Too	late	to	do	anything,	even	if	he’d	wanted	to.	But,	Spinnock	Durav	now
suspected,	Kallor	might	well	have	done	nothing.	He	might	have	stood	aside.
‘High	King,’	he	whispered,	‘all	you	ever	wanted	was	a	throne.	But	trust	me,
you	don’t	want	Rake’s.	No,	proud	warrior,	that	one	you	would	not	want.	I	think,
maybe,	you	just	realized	that.’
Of	course,	when	it	came	to	Kallor,	there	was	no	way	to	know.
The	Great	Ravens	were	descending	now,	thumping	heavily	on	to	the	bloodsplashed,	muddy	surface	of	the	road.
And	Spinnock	Durav	looked	skyward	then,	as	the	dark	forms	of	two
dragons	sailed	past,	barely	a	stone’s	throw	above	the	ground.
Racing	for	Kallor.
He	saw	one	of	the	dragons	suddenly	turn	its	head,	eyes	flashing	back	in	his
direction,	and	the	creature	pitched	to	one	side,	coming	round.
A	moment	later	the	other	dragon	reached	Kallor,	catching	him	entirely


unawares,	talons	lashing	down	to	grasp	the	High	King	and	lift	him	into	the	air.
Wings	thundering,	the	dragon	carried	its	charge	yet	higher.	Faint	screams	of
fury	sounded	from	the	man	writhing	in	that	grasp.
Dragon	and	High	King	dipped	behind	a	hill	to	the	north.
One	of	the	Great	Ravens	drew	up	almost	at	Spinnock’s	feet.
‘Crone!’	Spinnock	coughed	and	spat	blood.	‘I’d	have	thought…
Darujhistan…’
‘Darujhistan,	yes.	I’d	have	liked	to.	To	honour,	to	witness.	To	remember,
and	to	weep.	But	our	Lord…well,	he	had	thoughts	of	you.’	The	head	tilted.
‘When	we	saw	you,	lying	there,	Kallor	looming	as	he	so	likes	to	do,	ah,	we
thought	we	were	too	late	–	we	thought	we	had	failed	our	Lord	–	and	you.	We
thought	–	oh,	never	mind.’
The	Great	Raven	was	panting.
Spinnock	knew	that	this	was	not	exhaustion	he	was	seeing	in	the	ancient
bird.	You	can	shed	no	tears,	yet	tears	take	you	none	the	less.	The	extremity,	the
terrible	distress.
The	dragon	that	had	returned	now	landed	on	the	grasses	to	the	south	of	the
track.	Sembling,	walking	towards	Spinnock	and	Crone	and	the	haggle	of
Crone’s	kin.
Korlat.
Spinnock	would	have	smiled	up	at	her,	but	he	had	lost	the	strength	for	such
things,	and	so	he	could	only	watch	as	she	came	up	to	him,	using	one	boot	to
shunt	a	squawking	Crone	to	one	side.	She	knelt	and	reached	out	a	hand	to	brush
Spinnock’s	spattered	cheek.	Her	eyes	were	bleak.	‘Brother…’
Crone	croaked,	‘Just	heal	him	and	be	done	with	it	–	before	he	gasps	out	his
last	breath	in	front	of	us!’
She	drew	out	a	quaint	flask.	‘Endest	Silann	mixed	this	one.	It	should
suffice.’	She	tugged	loose	the	stopper	and	gently	set	the	small	bottle’s	mouth
between	Spinnock’s	lips,	and	then	tilted	it	to	drain	the	contents,	and	he	felt	that
potent	liquid	slide	down	his	throat.	Sudden	warmth	flowed	through	him.
‘Sufficient,	anyway,	to	carry	you	home.’	And	she	smiled.
‘My	last	fight	in	his	name,’	said	Spinnock	Durav.	‘I	did	as	he	asked,	did	I
not?’
Her	expression	tightened,	revealed	something	wan	and	ravaged.	‘You	have
much	to	tell	us,	brother.	So	much	that	needs…explaining.’
Spinnock	glanced	at	Crone.
The	Great	Raven	ducked	and	hopped	a	few	steps	away.	‘We	like	our
secrets,’	she	cackled,	‘when	it’s	all	we	have!’
Korlat	brushed	his	cheek	again.	‘How	long?’	she	asked.	‘How	long	did	you


hold	him	back?’
‘Why,’	he	replied,	‘I	lit	the	torches…dusk	was	just	past…’
Her	eyes	slowly	widened.	And	she	glanced	to	the	east,	where	the	sky	had
begun,	at	last,	to	lighten.
‘Oh,	Spinnock…’
	
A	short	time	later,	when	she	went	to	find	his	sword	where	it	was	lying	in	the
grasses,	Spinnock	Durav	said,	‘No,	Korlat.	Leave	it.’
She	looked	at	him	in	surprise.
But	he	was	not	of	a	mind	to	explain.
	
Above	the	Gadrobi	Hills,	Kallor	finally	managed	to	drag	free	his	sword,	even
as	the	dragon’s	massive	head	swung	down,	jaws	wide.	His	thrust	sank	deep	into
the	soft	throat,	just	above	the	jutting	avian	collar	bones.	A	shrill,	spattering
gasp	erupted	from	the	Soletaken,	and	all	at	once	they	were	plunging	earthward.
The	impact	was	thunder	and	snapping	bones.	The	High	King	was	flung
away,	tumbling	and	skidding	along	dew-soaked	grass.	He	gained	his	feet	and
spun	to	face	the	dragon.
It	had	sembled.	Orfantal,	on	his	face	an	expression	of	bemused	surprise,
was	struggling	to	stand.	One	arm	was	broken.	Blood	gushed	down	from	his
neck.	He	seemed	to	have	forgotten	Kallor,	as	he	turned	in	the	direction	of	the
road,	and	slowly	walked	away.
Kallor	watched.
Orfantal	managed	a	dozen	steps	before	he	fell	to	the	ground.
It	seemed	this	was	a	night	for	killing	Tiste	Andii.
His	shoulders	were	on	fire	from	the	dragon’s	puncture	wounds,	which
might	well	have	proved	fatal	to	most	others,	but	Kallor	was	not	like	most
others.	Indeed,	the	High	King	was	unique.
In	his	ferocity.	In	his	stubborn	will	to	live.
In	the	dry	furnace	heat	of	the	hatred	that	ever	swirled	round	him.
He	set	out	once	more	for	the	city.
As	dawn	finally	parted	the	night.
Kallor.


Chapter	Twenty-Four

‘There	is	no	struggle	too	vast,	no	odds	too	overwhelming,	for
even	should	we	fail	–	should	we	fall	–	we	will	know	that	we
have	lived.’
Anomander	Rake
Son	of	Darkness

The	continent-sized	fragments	of	the	shattered	moon	sent	reflected	sunlight
down	upon	the	world.	The	fabric	of	Night,	closed	so	tight	about	the	city	of
Black	Coral,	began	at	last	to	fray.	The	web	that	was	this	knotted	manifestation
of	Kurald	Galain	withered	under	the	assault.	Shafts	broke	through	and
moonlight	painted	buildings,	domes,	towers,	walls	and	the	long-dead	gardens
they	contained.	Silvery	glow	seeped	into	the	dark	waters	of	the	bay,	sending
creatures	plunging	to	the	inky	blackness	of	the	depths.
New	world,	young	world.	So	unexpected,	so	premature,	this	rain	of	death.
Endest	Silann	could	feel	every	breach	as	he	knelt	on	the	cold	mosaic	floor
of	the	temple’s	Grand	Vestry.	He	had	once	held	the	waters	back	from	Moon’s
Spawn.	He	had	once,	long,	long	ago,	guided	his	Lord	to	the	fateful,	final
encounter	with	Mother	Dark	herself.	He	had	clasped	the	hand	of	a	dying	High
Priestess,	sharing	with	her	the	bleak	knowledge	that	nothing	awaited	her,
nothing	at	all.	He	had	stood,	gods,	so	long	ago	now,	staring	down	at	his	bloodcovered	hands,	above	the	body	of	a	sweet,	gentle	woman,	Andarist’s	wife.
While	through	the	high	window,	the	flames	of	dying	Kharkanas	flickered
crimson	and	gold.
The	Saelen	Gara	of	the	lost	Kharkanan	forestlands	had	believed	that	the
moon	was	Father	Light’s	sweet	seduction,	innocent	maiden	gift	to	Mother
Dark.	To	remind	her	of	his	love,	there	in	the	sky	of	night.	But	then,	they	had
also	believed	the	moon	was	but	the	backside	of	Father	Light’s	baleful	eye,	and
could	one	rise	up	and	wing	the	vast	distance	to	that	moon,	they	would	discover
that	it	was	but	a	lens,	and	to	look	through	was	to	see	other	worlds	for	whom	the


moon	was	not	the	moon	at	all,	but	the	sun.	The	Saelen	Gara	talespinner	would
grin	then,	and	make	odd	motions	with	his	hands.	‘Perspective,’	he’d	say.	‘You
see?	The	world	changes	according	to	where	you	stand.	So	choose,	my
children,	choose	and	choose	again,	where	you	will	make	your	stand…’
Where	you	will	make	your	stand.	The	world	changes.
The	world	changes.
Yes,	he	had	held	back	the	sea.	He	had	made	Moon’s	Spawn	into	a	single
held	breath	that	had	lasted	months.
But	now,	ah,	now,	his	Lord	had	asked	him	to	hold	back	Light	itself.
To	save	not	a	fortress,	but	a	city.	Not	a	single	breath	to	hold,	but	the	breath
of	Kurald	Galain,	an	Elder	Warren.
But	he	was	old,	and	he	did	not	know…he	did	not	know…
	
Standing	twenty	paces	away,	in	a	niche	of	the	wall,	the	High	Priestess	watched.
Seeing	him	struggle,	seeing	him	call	upon	whatever	reserves	he	had	left.
Seeing	him	slowly,	inexorably,	fail.
And	she	could	do	nothing.
Light	besieged	Dark	in	the	sky	overhead.	A	god	in	love	with	dying
besieged	a	child	of	redemption,	and	would	use	that	child’s	innocence	to	usurp
this	weakened	island	of	Kurald	Galain	–	to	claim	for	itself	the	very	Throne	of
Darkness.
For	she	has	turned	away.
Against	all	this,	a	lone,	ancient,	broken	warlock.
It	was	not	fair.
Time	was	the	enemy.	But	then,	she	told	herself	with	wry	bitterness,	time
was	always	the	enemy.
Endest	Silann	could	not	drive	back	every	breach.	She	had	begun	to	feel	the
damage	being	wrought	upon	Night,	upon	the	Tiste	Andii	in	this	city.	It	arrived
like	a	sickness,	a	failing	of	internal	balances.	She	was	weakening.
We	are	all	weakening.
An	old,	broken	man.	He	was	not	enough,	and	they	had	all	known	–
everyone	except	the	one	who	mattered	the	most.	Lord	Rake,	your	faith	blinded
you.	See	him,	kneeling	there	–	there,	my	Lord,	is	your	fatal	error	in	judgement.
And	without	him	–	without	the	power	here	and	now	to	keep	everything	away
–	without	that,	your	grand	design	will	collapse	into	ruin.
Taking	us	with	it.
By	the	Abyss,	taking	us	all.
It	seemed	so	obvious	now.	To	stand	in	Rake’s	presence	was	to	feel	a	vast,


unassailable	confidence.	That	he	could	gauge	all	things	with	such	precision	as
to	leave	one	in	awe,	in	disbelief	and	in	wonder.
The	plans	of	the	Son	of	Darkness	never	went	awry.	Hold	to	faith	in	him,
and	all	shall	settle	into	place.
But	how	many	plans	worked	out	precisely	because	of	our	faith	in	him?	How
many	times	did	we	–	did	people	like	Endest	Silann	and	Spinnock	Durav	–	do
things	beyond	their	capability,	simply	to	ensure	that	Rake’s	vision	would	prove
true?	And	how	many	times	can	he	ask	that	of	them,	of	us?
Anomander	Rake	wasn’t	here.
No,	he	was	gone.
For	ever	gone.
Where	then	was	that	solid	core	of	confidence,	which	they	might	now	grasp
tight?	In	desperation,	in	pathetic	need?
You	should	never	have	left	this	to	us.	To	him.
The	sickness	in	her	soul	was	spreading.	And	when	she	succumbed,	the	last
bulwark	protecting	every	Tiste	Andii	in	Black	Coral	would	give	way.
And	they	would	all	die.	For	they	were	the	flesh	of	Kurald	Galain.
Our	enemies	feed	on	flesh.
Lord	Anomander	Rake,	you	have	abandoned	us.
She	stood	in	the	niche	as	if	it	was	a	sarcophagus.	Fevered,	watching	Endest
Silann	slowly	crumple	there	in	the	centre	of	that	proud,	diffident	mosaic
spanning	the	floor.
You	failed	us.
And	now	we	fail	you.
	
With	a	gasp	of	agony,	Apsal’ara	lunged	backward	along	the	beam.	The	skin	of
her	hands	and	forearms	had	blackened.	She	kicked	in	desperate	need,	pushing
herself	still	farther	from	that	swirling	vortex	of	darkness.	Sliding	on	her	back,
over	the	grease	of	sweat,	bile	and	blood.	Steam	rose	from	her	arms.	Her
fingers	were	twisted	like	roots—
The	pain	was	so	vast	it	was	almost	exquisite.	She	writhed,	twisted	in	its
grip,	and	then	pitched	down	from	the	beam.	Chains	rapped	against	the	sodden
wood.	Her	weight	pulled	them	down	in	a	rattle	and	she	heard	something	break.
Thumping	on	to	ash-smeared	clay.
Staring	as	she	held	up	her	hands.	Seeing	frost-rimed	shackles,	and,	beneath
them,	broken	links.
	


She	had	felt	the	wagon	rocking	its	way	back	round.	Horror	and	disbelief	had
filled	her	soul,	and	the	need	to	do	something	had	overwhelmed	her,	trampling
all	caution,	trampling	sanity	itself.
And	now,	lying	on	the	cold,	gritty	mud,	she	thought	to	laugh.
Free.
Free	with	nowhere	to	run.	With	possibly	dead	hands	–	and	what	good	was	a
thief	with	dead,	rotting	hands?
She	struggled	to	uncurl	her	fingers.	Watched	the	knuckles	crack	open	like
charred	meat.	Red	fissures	gaped.	And,	as	she	stared,	she	saw	the	first	droplets
of	blood	welling	from	them.	Was	that	a	good	sign?
‘Fire	is	life,’	she	intoned.	‘Stone	is	flesh.	Water	is	breath.	Fire	is	life.	Stone
is	water	is	flesh	is	breath	is	life.	Pluck	a	flower	from	a	field	and	it	will	not
thrive.	Take	and	beauty	dies,	and	that	which	one	possesses	becomes	worthless.	I
am	a	thief.	I	take	but	do	not	keep.	All	I	gain	I	cast	away.	I	take	your	wealth	only
because	you	value	it.
‘I	am	Apsal’ara,	Mistress	of	Thieves.	Only	you	need	fear	me,	you	who	lust
to	own.’
She	watched	her	fingers	slowly	straighten,	watched	flakes	of	skin	lift	and
then	fall	away.
She	would	survive	this.	Her	hands	had	touched	Darkness,	and	lived	still.
As	if	it	mattered.
Even	here,	beneath	the	wagon,	the	dread	sounds	of	war	surrounded	her.
Chaos	closed	in	on	all	sides.	Souls	died	in	numbers	beyond	counting,	and	their
cries	revealed	a	loss	so	far	past	comprehension	that	she	refused	to	contemplate
it.	The	death	of	honourable	souls.	The	immense	sacrifice	wasted.	No,	none	of
this	bore	thinking	about.
Apsal’ara	rolled	on	to	her	side,	and	then	on	to	her	knees	and	elbows.
She	began	crawling.
And	then	gasped	anew,	as	a	familiar	voice	filled	her	head.
‘Mistress	of	Thieves.	Take	the	eye.	The	eye	of	the	god.	Apsal’ara,	steal	the
eye…’
Trembling	–	wondering	–	how?	How	could	he	reach	so	into	her	mind?	He
could	do	so	only	if…only	if—
Apsal’ara	gasped	a	third	time.
And	so…once	in	pain,	once	in	wonder,	and	once	in…in	hope.
She	resumed	crawling.
Pluck	your	flower.	I	am	coming	for	you.
Oh	yes,	I	am	coming	for	you.


	
With	each	soul	consumed,	the	power	of	chaos	grew.	Hunger	surged	with
renewed	strength,	and	the	beleaguered	defenders	fell	back	another	step.
But	they	were	running	out	of	steps.
The	indomitable	legions	surrounded	the	now	stationary	wagon	and	its
dwindling	ring	of	souls.	The	countless	dead	who	had	answered	Hood’s	final
summons	were	melting	away,	most	of	them	too	ancient	to	call	upon	memories
of	strength,	to	even	remember	that	will	alone	held	power.	In	standing	against
the	enemy,	they	had	done	little	more	than	marginally	slow	the	advance	of
chaos,	as	all	that	remained	of	them	was	ripped	apart,	devoured.
Some,	however,	were	made	of	sterner	things.	The	Grey	Swords,	delivered
unto	Hood	by	the	loss	of	Fener,	fought	with	grim	ferocity.	Commanding	them,
Brukhalian	was	like	a	deep-rooted	standing	stone,	as	if	capable	of	willing
himself	immovable,	unconquerable.	He	had,	after	all,	done	this	before.	The
company	fought	and	held	for	a	time	–	an	impressive	length	of	time	–	but	now
their	flanks	were	under	assault,	and	there	was	nothing	to	do	but	retreat	yet
closer	to	the	enormous	wagon	with	its	heap	of	bodies.
A	score	of	Seguleh,	all	that	remained	of	the	Second’s	forces,	formed	one
impossibly	thin	link	with	the	Grey	Swords.	Each	one	had	fallen	to	Anomander
Rake,	and	this	knowledge	alone	was	sufficient,	for	it	burned	like	acid,	it	stung
like	shame.	They	wore	their	masks,	and	as	they	fought,	the	painted	slashes,	the
sigils	of	rank,	began	to	fade,	worn	away	by	the	fires	of	chaos,	until	upon	each
warrior	the	mask	gleamed	pure.	As	if	here,	within	the	world	of	this	sword,
some	power	could	yield	to	greater	truths.	Here,	Dragnipur	seemed	to	say,	you
are	all	equal.
The	Grey	Swords’	other	flank	closed	up	with	another	knot	of	soldiers	–	the
Bridgeburners,	into	which	remnants	of	other	Malazan	forces	were	falling,
drawing	upon	the	élite	company’s	ascendant	power,	and	upon	the	commander
now	known	as	Iskar	Jarak.
The	Bridgeburners	were	arrayed	in	a	half-circle	that	slowly	contracted
under	the	brunt	of	the	assault.	Grey	Swords	on	one	flank,	and	the	last	of	the
Chained	on	the	other,	where	a	huge	demon	formed	the	point	of	a	defiant	wedge
that	refused	to	buckle.	Tears	streamed	down	the	demon’s	face,	for	even	as	it
fought,	it	grieved	for	those	lost.	And	such	grief	filled	Pearl’s	heart	unto
bursting.	Pearl	did	not	fight	for	itself,	nor	for	the	wagon,	nor	even	the	Gate	of
Darkness,	the	Wandering	Hold.	The	demon	fought	for	its	comrades,	as	would	a
soldier	pushed	beyond	breaking,	pushed	until	there	was	nowhere	else	to	go.
In	the	ash-swarmed	sky	above,	chained	dragons,	Loqui	Wyval	and


Enkarala	tore	swaths	through	the	tumbling,	descending	storm	clouds.
Lightning	lashed	out	to	enwreath	them,	slowly	tearing	them	to	pieces.	Still	they
fought	on.	The	Enkarala	would	not	relent	for	they	were	mindless	in	their	rage.
The	Loqui	Wyval	found	strength	in	hearts	greater	than	their	modest
proportions	–	no,	they	were	not	dragons;	they	were	lesser	kin	–	but	they	knew
the	power	of	mockery,	of	disdain.	For	the	Enkarala,	chaos	itself	was	a
contemptible	thing.	The	dragons,	many	of	whom	had	been	chained	since	the
time	of	Draconus,	were	indifferent	to	the	Gate,	to	all	the	other	squalid	victims
of	this	dread	sword.	They	did	not	fight	on	behalf	of	any	noble	cause.	No,	each
one	fought	alone,	for	itself,	and	they	knew	that	survival	had	nothing	to	do	with
nobility.	No	alliance	was	weighed,	no	thought	of	fighting	in	concert	brushed
the	incandescent	minds	of	these	creatures.	Nothing	in	their	nature	was	designed
to	accommodate	aught	but	singular	battle.	A	strength	and	a	curse,	but	in	these
fiery,	deadly	clouds,	that	strength	was	failing,	and	the	very	nature	of	the
dragons	was	now	destroying	them.
The	battle	raged.	Annihilation	was	a	deafening	scream	that	drove	all	else
from	the	minds	of	the	defenders.	They	made	their	will	into	weapons,	and	with
these	weapons	they	slashed	through	the	misshapen,	argent	foe,	only	to	find	yet
more	rising	before	them,	howling,	laughing,	swords	thundering	on	shields.
	
Toc	had	no	idea	where	this	damned	horse	had	come	from,	but	clearly	some
breathtaking	will	fired	its	soul.	In	its	life	it	had	not	been	bred	for	war,	and	yet	it
fought	like	a	beast	twice	its	weight.	Kicking,	stamping,	jaws	snapping.	A
Wickan	breed	–	he	was	fairly	certain	of	that	–	a	creature	of	appalling
endurance,	it	carried	him	into	the	fray	again	and	again,	and	he	had	begun	to
suspect	that	he	would	fail	before	the	horse	did.
Humbling	–	no,	infuriating.
He	struggled	to	control	it	as	he	sought	to	lunge	once	more	into	that	wall	of
chaotic	rage.	Getting	to	be	a	miserable	habit,	all	this	dying	and	dying	again.	Of
course,	this	would	be	the	final	time,	and	a	better	man	than	he	would	find	some
consolation	in	that.	A	better	man,	aye.
Instead,	he	railed.	He	spat	into	the	eye	of	injustice,	and	he	fought	on,	even
as	his	one	eyeless	socket	itched	damnably,	until	it	seemed	to	be	sizzling	as	if
eating	its	way	into	his	brain.
He	lost	his	grip	on	the	reins,	and	almost	pitched	from	the	saddle	as	the
horse	galloped	away	from	the	front	line	of	the	Bridgeburners.	He	loosed	a
stream	of	curses	–	he	wanted	to	die	at	their	sides,	he	needed	to	–	no,	he	was	not
one	of	them,	he	could	not	match	their	power,	their	ascendant	ferocity	–	he	had


seen	Trotts	there,	and	Detoran.	And	so	many	others,	and	there	was	Iskar	Jarak
himself,	although	why	Whiskeyjack	had	come	to	prefer	some	Seven	Cities
name	–	in	place	of	his	real	one	–	made	no	sense	to	Toc.	Not	that	he	was	of	any
stature	to	actually	ask	the	man	–	gods,	even	had	he	been,	he	couldn’t	have	got
close,	so	tightly	were	the	Bridgeburners	arrayed	around	the	soldier.
And	now	the	stupid	horse	was	taking	him	farther	and	farther	away.
He	saw,	ahead,	the	Lord	of	Death.	Standing	motionless,	as	if	contemplating
guests	at	a	damned	picnic.	The	horse	carried	Toc	straight	for	the	hoary	bastard,
who	slowly	turned	at	the	very	last	moment,	as	the	horse	skidded	to	a	halt	in	a
spray	of	ashes	and	mud.
Hood	glanced	down	at	the	spatter	on	its	frayed	robes.
‘Don’t	look	at	me!’	Toc	snarled	as	he	collected	up	the	reins	once	more.	‘I
was	trying	to	get	the	beast	going	the	other	way!’
‘You	are	my	Herald,	Toc	the	Younger,	and	I	have	need	of	you.’
‘To	do	what,	announce	your	impending	nuptials?	Where	is	the	skeletal	hag,
anyway?’
‘You	have	a	message	to	deliver—’
‘Deliver	where?	How?	In	case	you	haven’t	noticed,	we’re	in	a	little	trouble
here,	Hood.	Gods,	my	eye	–	agh,	I	mean,	the	missing	one	–	it’s	driving	me
mad!’
‘Yes,	your	missing	eye.	About	that—’
At	that	instant,	Toc’s	horse	reared	in	sudden	terror,	as	a	churning	cloud
lunged	down	like	an	enormous	fist,	engulfing	a	dying	dragon	directly
overhead.
Swearing,	his	voice	rising	in	fear,	Toc	fought	to	regain	control	of	the	beast
as	cloud	and	dragon	tumbled	to	one	side	–	the	dragon	pulled	down	to	the
thrashing	legions,	which	closed	in	and	swarmed	it.	In	moments	the	dragon	was
gone.
The	horse	skittered	and	then	settled—
Only	to	bolt	once	more,	as	in	a	burst	of	cold,	bitter	air,	something	else
arrived.
	
What	good	could	ever	come	of	acceding	to	the	suggestions	of	a	corpse?	This
was	the	sort	of	question	Glanno	Tarp	was	good	at	asking,	only	he’d	forgotten
this	time	and	it	was	funny	how	blind	gibbering	terror	could	do	that.	Warrens
and	warrens	and	portals	and	Gates	and	places	nobody	in	their	right	minds
might	want	to	visit	no	matter	how	special	the	scenery	–	and	no,	dammit,	he
didn’t	know	where	they’d	just	ended	up,	but	he	could	tell	–	oh	yes,	he	could	tell


all	right	–	that	it	wasn’t	a	nice	place.
Horses	shrilling	(but	then,	they	always	did	that	when	arriving),	carriage
slapping	down	on	to	gritty	mud	in	a	chorus	of	outraged	creaks,	splinters	and
calamcophony,	slewing	this	way	and	that	–	and	the	sky	was	coming	down	in
giant	balls	of	mercury	and	there	were	dragons	up	there	and	wyval	and	Hood
knew	what	else—
Chains	sawing	back	and	forth,	to	the	sides	and	straight	up,	all	emerging
from	the	ghastliest	wagon	Glanno	had	ever	seen	–	loaded	with	more	bodies
than	seemed	reasonable,	much	less	possible.
So	of	course	he	froze	up	all	the	brakes	–	what	else	was	he	supposed	to	do?
And	then	bodies	were	flying	past.	Sweetest	Sufferance,	curled	up	into	a	soft
flouncy	bouncy	ball	that	landed	bouncily	and	rolled	and	rolled.	That	snarling
hulk	Gruntle,	twisting	in	the	air	so	that	he	could	land	on	all	fours	–	meow	–	and
Faint,	far	less	elegant	for	all	her	bountiferous	beauty,	going	splat	on	her	face
all	spread-eagled,	silly	girl.	Amby	and	Jula	flew	past	embraced	like	lovers,	at
least	until	the	ground	showed	up	and	got	between	them.	Reccanto	Ilk	fetched	up
beside	Glanno,	cracking	the	backrest	of	the	bench.
‘You	idiot!	We	ain’t	tied	ourselves!	It	was	just	dark	and	dark	and	nothing
else	and	now	you	just	go	and	drop	us	into—’
‘Wasn’t	me,	you	clumsy	pig!’
This	argument	didn’t	survive	the	fullest	comprehension	of	their
surroundings.
Reccanto	Ilk	slowly	sat	up.	‘Holy	shit.’
Glanno	leapt	to	his	feet.	‘Cartographer!’	But	he’d	forgotten	about	his
splints.	Yelping,	he	tottered,	and	then	pitched	forward	on	to	the	backs	of	the
first	two	horses.	They	deftly	stepped	to	either	side	so	that	he	could	fall	a	little
more	before	getting	tangled	in	all	the	crap	down	there,	whereupon	the	horses
eagerly	moved	back	in	an	effort	to	crush	him	into	the	kind	of	pulp	that	could
never	again	whip	the	reins.
Reccanto	scrabbled	to	drag	him	back	on	to	the	bench.	The	splint	bindings
helped,	although	Glanno	did	plenty	of	shrieking	in	pain	–	at	least	he	wasn’t
being	crushed.	Moments	later	he	fetched	up	again	on	the	splintered	bench.
A	wretched	dead-looking	Jaghut	was	walking	up	to	Cartographer,	who,
lashed	to	a	wheel,	had	come	to	rest	with	his	head	down,	eyeing	the	Jaghut’s
muddy	boots.	‘I	had	begun	to	wonder,’	the	Jaghut	said,	‘if	you	had	become
lost.’
Pushing	Reccanto	aside,	Glanno	worked	his	way	round	to	witness	this
fateful	meeting	–	oh	yes,	that	had	to	be	Hood	himself.	Why,	a	damned	family
reunionebration!


Cartographer ’s	upside-down	smile	seemed	to	send	a	nearby	rider ’s	horse
into	yet	another	panic,	and	the	soldier	swore	impressively	as	he	fought	to	quell
the	beast.	‘My	Lord,’	Cartographer	was	saying,	‘we	both	know,	surely,	that
what	goes	around	comes	around.’	And	then	he	struggled	feebly	at	his	bindings.
‘And	around,’	he	added	despondently.
Gruntle,	who	had	staggered	up	to	join	them,	now	growled	deep	in	his	chest
and	then	went	to	the	carriage	door,	thumping	it	with	a	fist.	‘Master	Quell!’
Hood	turned	to	the	warrior.	‘That	will	not	be	necessary,	Treach-spawn.	My
sole	requirement	was	that	you	arrive	here.	Now,	you	need	only	leave	once
more.	Cartographer	will	guide	you.’
Sweetest	Sufferance	was	dragging	a	dazed	Faint	back	up	on	to	the	carriage,
displaying	surprising	strength,	although	the	effort	made	her	eyes	bulge
alarmingly.	Glanno	nudged	Reccanto	and	nodded	towards	Sweetest.	‘That	face
remind	you	of	anything?’
Reccanto	squinted,	and	then	sniggered.
‘You’re	both	dead,’	she	hissed.
Amby	and	Jula	bobbed	into	view	to	either	side	of	her,	grinning	through
smears	of	mud.

Inside	the	carriage,	Mappo	started	to	open	the	door	but	Quell	snapped	out	a
shaky	hand	to	stay	him.	‘Gods,	don’t	do	that!’
Precious	Thimble	had	curled	up	on	the	floor	at	their	feet,	rocking	and
moaning.
‘What	awaits	us	outside?’	the	Trell	asked.
Quell	shook	his	head.	He	was	bone	white,	face	glistening	with	sweat.	‘I
should’ve	guessed.	The	way	that	map	on	the	road	narrowed	at	the	far	end.	Oh,
we’ve	been	used!	Duped!	Gods,	I	think	I’m	going	to	be	sick—’
	
‘Damned	Trygalle,’	muttered	Toc.	More	confused	than	he	had	ever	been	by	this
sudden,	inexplicable	arrival.	How	did	they	manage	to	arrive	here?	And	then	he
saw	Gruntle.	‘Gods	below,	it’s	you!’
Someone	was	being	loudly	sick	inside	the	carriage.
Gruntle	stared	up	at	Toc,	and	then	frowned.
Ah,	I	guess	I	don’t	look	like	Anaster	any	more.	‘We	shared—’
‘Herald,’	said	Hood.	‘It	is	time.’
Toc	scowled,	and	then	scratched	at	his	eye	socket.	‘What?	You’re	sending


me	with	them?’
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking.’
‘Then	I’m	to	rejoin	the	living?’
‘Alas,	no,	Toc	the	Younger.	You	are	dead	and	dead	you	will	remain.	But
this	shall	mark	your	final	task	as	my	Herald.	Another	god	claims	you.’
Toc	prepared	to	dismount	but	the	Lord	of	Death	lifted	a	hand.	‘Ride	in	the
carriage’s	wake,	close	in	its	wake.	For	a	time.	Now,	Herald,	listen	well	to	my
last	message.	The	blood	is	needed.	The	blood	is	needed…’
	
Gruntle	had	stopped	listening.	Even	the	vague	disquiet	he’d	felt	when	that	oneeyed	rider	had	accosted	him	was	fast	vanishing	beneath	a	flood	of	battle	lust.
He	stared	out	at	the	enemy,	watched	the	defenders	wither	away.
A	war	that	could	not	be	won	by	such	sorry	souls	–	a	war	that	begged	for	a
champion,	one	who	would	stand	until	the	very	end.
Another	growl	rumbled	from	him,	and	he	stepped	away	from	the	carriage,
reaching	for	his	cutlasses.
‘Whoa	there,	y’damned	manx!’
The	bark	startled	him	and	he	glared	up	at	Glanno	Tarp,	who	smiled	a	hard
smile.	‘Shareholders	can’t	just	walk	away	–	we’d	have	to	plug	ya	fulla	arrows.
Get	back	aboard,	stripy,	we’re	leaving	all	over	again!’
	
There	could	be	but	one	outcome,	and	Draconus	had	known	that	all	along.	He
had	sensed	nothing	of	the	Trygalle’s	arrival,	nor	even	its	departure,	with	Toc
riding	in	its	wake.	Whatever	occurred	behind	him	could	not	reach	through	to
awaken	his	senses.
One	outcome.
After	all,	Dragnipur	had	never	offered	salvation.	Iron	forged	to	bind,	a
hundred	thousand	chains	hammered	into	the	blade,	layers	upon	layers
entwined,	folded,	wrapped	like	rope.	Draconus,	surrounded	in	the	molten	fires
of	Burn’s	heart,	drawing	forth	chains	of	every	metal	that	existed,	drawing	them
out	link	by	glowing	link.	Twisted	ropes	of	metal	on	the	anvil,	and	down	came
the	hammer.	The	one	hammer,	the	only	tool	that	could	forge	such	a	weapon	–
and	he	remembered	its	vast	weight,	the	scalding	grip	that	lacerated	his	alien
hand.
Even	in	her	dreaming,	Burn	had	been	most	displeased.
Chains	upon	chains.	Chains	to	bind.	Bind	Darkness	itself,	transforming	the


ancient	forest	through	which	it	had	wandered,	twisting	that	blackwood	into	a
wagon,	into	huge,	tottering	wheels,	into	a	bed	that	formed	a	horizontal	door	–
like	the	entrance	to	a	barrow	–	above	the	portal.	Blackwood,	to	hold	and
contain	the	soul	of	Kurald	Galain.
He	remembered.	Sparks	in	countless	hues	skipping	away	like	shattered
rainbows.	The	deafening	ringing	of	the	hammer	and	the	way	the	anvil	trembled
to	every	blow.	The	waves	of	heat	flashing	against	his	face.	The	bitter	taste	of
raw	ore,	the	stench	of	sulphur.	Chains!	Chains	and	chains,	pounded	down	into
glowing	impressions	upon	the	blade,	quenched	and	honed	and	into	Burn’s	white
heart	and	then	–	it	begins	again.	And	again.
Chains!	Chains	to	bind!
Bind	the	Fallen!
And	now,	unbelievably,	impossibly,	Draconus	had	felt	that	first	splintering.
Chains	had	broken.
So	it	ends.	I	did	not	think,	I	did	not	imagine—
He	had	witnessed	his	Bound	companions	falling	away,	failing.	He	had	seen
the	chaos	descend	upon	each	one,	eating	through	flesh	with	actinic	zeal,	until
shackles	fell	to	the	ground	–	until	the	iron	bands	held	nothing.	Nothing	left.
I	never	meant	–	I	never	wanted	such	an	end	–	to	any	of	you,	of	us.
No,	I	was	far	too	cruel	to	ever	imagine	an	end.	An	escape.
Yet	now,	witness	these	thoughts	of	mine.	Now,	I	would	see	you	all	live	on,
yes,	in	these	chains,	but	not	out	of	cruelty.	Ah,	no,	not	that.	Abyss	take	me,	I
would	see	you	live	out	of	mercy.
Perhaps	he	wept	now.	Or	these	scalding	tears	announced	the	crushing	end
of	hysterical	laughter.	No	matter.	They	were	all	being	eaten	alive.	We	are	all
being	eaten	alive.
And	Dragnipur	had	begun	to	come	apart.
When	the	chaos	disintegrated	the	wagon,	destroyed	the	door,	and	took	hold
of	the	Gate,	the	sword	would	shatter	and	chaos	would	be	freed	of	this	oh-soclever	trap,	and	Draconus’s	brilliant	lure	–	his	eternal	snare	eternally	leading
chaos	on	and	away	from	everything	else	–	would	have	failed.	He	could	not
contemplate	what	would	happen	then,	to	the	countless	succession	of	realms	and
worlds,	and	of	course	he	would	not	be	there	to	witness	the	aftermath	in	any
case.	But	he	knew	that,	in	his	last	thoughts,	he	would	feel	nothing	but
unbearable	guilt.
So,	chaos,	at	least	unto	one	victim,	what	you	deliver	is	indeed	mercy.
He	had	begun	walking	forward,	to	join	the	other	Bound,	to	stand,	perhaps,
at	Pearl’s	side,	until	the	end	came.
The	echo	of	that	snapping	chain	haunted	him.	Someone’s	broken	loose.


How?	Even	the	Hounds	of	Shadow	could	only	slip	free	by	plunging	into
Kurald	Galain’s	black	heart.	Their	chains	did	not	break.	Dragnipur ’s	essential
integrity	had	not	been	damaged.
But	now…someone’s	broken	loose.
How?
Chains	and	chains	and	chains	to	bind—
A	bony	hand	closed	on	his	shoulder	and	dragged	him	back.
Snarling,	Draconus	half	turned.	‘Let	go,	damn	you!	I	will	stand	with	them,
Hood	–	I	must,	can’t	you	see	that?’
The	Lord	of	Death’s	hand	tightened,	the	nails	biting,	and	Hood	slowly
pulled	him	closer.	‘The	fray,’	the	god	said	in	a	rasp,	‘is	not	for	you.’
‘You	are	not	my	master—’
‘Stand	with	me,	Draconus.	It’s	not	yet	time.’
‘For	what?’	He	struggled	to	tear	free,	but	a	Jaghut’s	strength	could	be
immense,	and	barring	the	bloody	removal	of	his	entire	shoulder,	Draconus
could	do	nothing.	He	and	the	Lord	of	Death	stood	alone,	not	twenty	paces	from
the	motionless	wagon.
‘Consider	this,’	said	Hood,	‘a	request	for	forgiveness.’
Draconus	stared.	‘What?	Who	asks	my	forgiveness?’
	
Hood,	Lord	of	the	Dead,	should	have	been	the	last	to	fall	to	Dragnipur.
Whatever	the	Son	of	Darkness	intended,	its	final	play	was	found	in	the	slaying
of	this	ancient	god.	Such	was	the	conviction	of	Draconus.	A	mad,	pointless
gamble,	the	empty	purchase	of	time	already	consumed,	the	wasting	of
countless	souls,	an	entire	realm	of	the	dead.
As	it	turned	out,	Draconus	was	wrong.
There	was	one	more.	One	more.
Arriving	with	the	power	of	a	mountain	torn	apart	in	a	long,	deafening,
crushing	detonation.	Argent	clouds	were	shredded,	whipped	away	in	dark
winds.	The	legions	pressing	on	all	sides	recoiled,	and	the	thousand	closing
paces	so	viciously	won	were	lost	in	an	instant.	Dragons	screamed.	Voices
erupted	as	if	dragged	out	from	throats	–	the	pressure,	the	pain,	the	stunning
power—
Chaos	flinched,	and	then,	slowly,	began	to	gather	itself	once	more.
No	single	force	could	defeat	this	enemy.	Destruction	was	its	own	law,	and
even	as	it	devoured	itself	it	would	devour	everything	else.	Chaos,	riding	the
road	of	Darkness,	ever	to	arrive	unseen,	from	sources	unexpected,	from	places
where	one	never	thought	to	look,	much	less	guard	against.


The	sword	and	all	within	it	was	dying,	now,	at	last;	dying.
Hood’s	hand	had	left	his	shoulder,	and	Draconus	sagged	down	on	to	his
knees.
One	more.
And,	yes,	he	knew	who	was	now	among	them.
Should	he	laugh?	Should	he	seek	him	out,	mock	him?	Should	he	close
hands	about	his	throat	so	that	they	could	lock	one	to	the	other	until	the	descent
of	oblivion?
No,	he	would	do	none	of	this.
Who	asks	for	my	forgiveness?
Had	he	the	strength,	he	would	have	cried	out.
Anomander	Rake,	you	need	not	ask.	That	begging,	alas,	must	come	from	me.
This	was	Mother	Dark	I	snared	here.	Your	mother—
And	so,	what	will	you	now	do?
A	heartbeat	later,	a	faint	gasp	escaped	Draconus,	and	he	lifted	his	head,
opened	his	eyes	once	more.	‘Rake?’	he	whispered.
Draconus	slowly	rose.	And	turned.	To	face	the	wagon.
To	witness.
	
The	Second	watched	yet	another	Seguleh	fall.	He	then	dragged	his	horse
round,	to	glare	with	dead	eyes	at	a	tall,	ornate	carriage,	as	its	train	of
screaming	horses	lunged	forward.	Figures	pitched	to	one	side,	holding	on	for
dear	life	as	a	fissure	tore	open	–	into	which	those	horses	vanished.
Hood’s	Herald	–	that	one-eyed	soldier	–	drove	heels	to	his	tattered	mount,
following.
And	the	Lord	of	Death’s	voice	drifted	through	the	Second.	‘It	seems	you
are	needed	after	all,	as	you	suspected.	Now	go	–	and	know	this,	old	friend,	you
have	served	me	well.
‘I	am	the	god	of	death	no	longer.
‘When	you	have	done	this	last	thing,	your	service	is	at	an	end.	And	then,
well,	Skinner	awaits…’
The	Second	tilted	back	his	masked,	helmed	head	and	howled	in	glee.
Sheathing	his	swords,	he	rode	hard	after	the	carriage.
He	saw	the	Herald	vanish.
And	the	fissure	began	to	close.
The	Second	drove	his	long-dead	Jaghut	stallion	into	that	dying	portal—
And	left	the	realm	of	Dragnipur.	The	other	Seguleh	were	doomed	anyway,
and	though	in	this	last	battle	they	had	each	redeemed	something	of	their	shame


in	dying	to	a	foreigner,	that	was	no	reason	to	fall	at	their	sides.
The	Second	did	not	stay	long	in	the	wake	of	the	others	as	they	thundered
through	unknown	warrens,	no,	not	long	at	all.	For	he	had	been	summoned.
Summoned,	yes,	by	a	weapon	in	need—
Riding	a	seething	storm	of	fiery	winds,	plunging	through,	his	horse’s
sheaves	of	armour	clattering,	its	hoofs	ringing	sharp	on	cobbles,	the	Second
saw	what	he	sought,	and	he	swept	his	hand	down—
	
‘I’ll	take	that,’	laughed	a	hollow,	metallic	voice.	And	the	lance	was	torn	from
Cutter ’s	hand.	In	an	array	of	flapping	tatters	of	hide,	frayed	straps	and	mangled
buckles,	the	undead	Seguleh	who	had,	long	ago,	once	given	him	the	weapon,
now	readied	the	lance,	even	as	the	masked	warrior	charged	straight	towards	the
white	Hounds.
‘Skinner!’	he	roared.	‘I’m	coming	for	you!	But	first,	these	guys…’
	
Karsa	Orlong	sidestepped	at	the	sudden	arrival	of	some	armoured	warrior
riding	a	monstrous,	dead	horse.	Seeing	the	newcomer	ride	to	meet	the	Hounds,
he	snarled	and	set	off	after	him.
The	lance	angled	down	on	the	left	side	and	so	the	Toblakai	went	to	the
rider ’s	right,	eyes	fixing	on	a	Hound	that	clearly	intended	an	attack	on	the
horseman’s	unprotected	side.
Two	beasts	and	two	warriors	all	met	at	once.
The	rider ’s	lance	drove	into	a	Hound’s	throat	just	beneath	the	jaw,	surging
upward	through	the	base	of	the	skull,	severing	the	spinal	cord	on	its	way	to
obliterate	the	back	of	the	animal’s	brain.	The	serrated	lance	head	erupted	from
the	skull	in	an	explosion	of	grey	pulp,	blood	and	bone	shards.
Karsa	swung	down,	two-handed,	as	the	other	Hound	arrived	alongside	the
rider	and	reared	to	close	jaws	on	the	stranger ’s	right	thigh.	Flint	blade	sliced
down	through	the	spine,	chopping	halfway	through	a	neck	thick	as	a	horse’s,
before	jamming	–	the	Hound’s	forward	momentum,	now	pitching	downward,
dragged	the	weapon	and	Karsa	with	it	as	the	animal	slammed	the	cobbles.
At	that	instant	the	rider ’s	Jaghut	horse	collided	chest	to	chest	with	a	third
hound.	Bones	shattered.	The	impact	sent	the	rider	over	his	horse’s	head,
dragging	his	lance	free	as	he	went.	He	struck	and	rolled	off	the	back	of	the
Hound	–	which	seemed	stunned,	as	the	undead	horse	stumbled	back.
Pulled	down	on	to	his	knees,	Karsa	ducked	the	snapping	attack	of	another


Hound	–	and	then	the	beast	was	past,	as	were	all	the	others.	The	Toblakai	rose,
took	two	quick	strides	and	thrust	his	sword	into	the	chest	of	the	dazed	third
Hound.	Howling	in	pain,	it	staggered	away	from	Karsa’s	blade,	blood
fountaining	out	in	the	path	of	the	withdrawing	sword.	The	stranger	had
recovered	and	he	now	sank	the	lance	into	the	gut	of	the	writhing	animal,	the
lance	head	tearing	messily	through	soft	tissue,	fluids	spilling	down.
Something	flashed	in	the	eye-holes	of	the	twin-scarred	mask.	‘Well	done,
Toblakai!	Now	let’s	chase	down	the	others!’
The	two	warriors	swung	round.
	
Cutter	stared	as	seven	Hounds	swept	round	Karsa	and	the	Seguleh.	Now	he
didn’t	even	hold	a	lance	–	dammit	–	and	he	unsheathed	a	pair	of	knives	as	one
of	the	beasts	made	straight	for	him.
A	hand	grasped	the	back	of	his	shirt	and	yanked	him	back.	Yelling	in
alarm,	Cutter	stumbled	into	someone’s	short,	brawny	arms.	He	caught	a
momentary	glimpse	of	a	weathered	face,	eyes	bulging,	red	moustache
twitching	beneath	a	bulbous	nose—
Do	I	know	this	man?
And	the	one	who	had	thrown	him	clear	now	lumbered	forward,	lifting	an
enormous	two-handed	axe.	Barathol—
‘Wrong	place	for	us!’	growled	the	man	holding	Cutter,	and	they	began
backing	up.
	
Barathol	recognized	this	beast	–	the	one	Chaur	had	tangled	with,	the	one	that
had	broken	his	friend’s	skull.	He	almost	sang	his	joy	as	he	launched	himself
into	its	path,	axe	sweeping	in	a	savage	diagonal	arc,	low	to	high,	as	the	Hound
arrived,	snarling,	monstrous—
The	axe	edge	bit	deep	into	the	beast’s	lower	jaw	–	another	single	instant’s
delay	and	he	would	have	caught	its	neck.	As	it	was,	the	blow	hammered	the
Hound’s	head	to	one	side.
The	beast’s	chest	struck	Barathol.
As	if	he’d	been	standing	in	the	path	of	a	bronze-sheathed	battering	ram,	he
was	flung	back,	cartwheeling	through	the	air,	and	was	unconscious	before	he
landed,	fifteen	paces	behind	the	body	of	Anomander	Rake.
The	Hound	had	skidded,	stumbled,	wagging	its	head	–	its	right	mandible
was	broken,	a	row	of	jagged	molars	jutting	out	almost	horizontal,	blood


splashing	down.
For	this	battle,	the	beast	was	finished.
	
In	the	moment	that	Karsa	and	the	stranger	whirled	round,	a	shadow	swept	over
them,	and	both	flinched	down	in	the	midst	of	a	sudden	wind,	reeking	of	rot,
gusting	past—
Tips	of	its	wings	clattering	along	the	facings	of	buildings	to	either	side,	a
dragon	sailed	above	the	street,	talons	striking	like	vipers.	Each	one	closing
round	a	Hound	in	a	crushing,	puncturing	embrace,	lifting	the	screaming
animals	into	the	air.	The	dragon’s	head	snapped	down,	jaws	engulfing	another
—
And	then	the	dragon	thundered	its	wings	and	lifted	skyward	once	more,
carrying	away	three	Hounds.
The	creature’s	attack	had	lasted	but	a	handful	of	heartbeats,	in	the	moment
that	Cutter	was	dragged	back	into	Antsy’s	arms	–	the	Falari	half	carrying	him
in	his	charge	towards	the	door	of	the	shopfront	to	the	right	–	and	Barathol,	his
gaze	fixed	solely	upon	the	hated	Hound	attacking	him,	swung	his	axe.
These	three	did	not	even	see	the	dragon.
	
Samar	Dev	stared	wide-eyed	at	the	dragon	as	it	heaved	back	into	the	sky	with
its	three	howling,	snarling	victims.
She	was	crouched	over	the	motionless	form	of	Traveller,	Dassem	Ultor,
wielder	of	Vengeance,	slayer	of	the	Son	of	Darkness,	who	now	lifted	a	sorrowwracked	visage,	bleak,	broken	–	and	then	reached	out	and	grasped	her,	tugged
her	close.
‘Not	my	choice!	Do	not	blame	me,	woman!	Do	you	hear?	Do	not!’
Then	his	eyes	widened	and	he	dragged	her	down	on	to	the	cobbles,
covered	her	with	his	own	body.
As	two	behemoths	collided	not	three	paces	distant.
A	white	Hound.
And	a	bear,	a	god,	a	beast	forgotten	in	the	passing	of	the	world.
It	had	arrived	a	moment	after	the	Hound,	and	its	massive	forearms
wrapped	round	in	a	crushing	embrace,	lifting	the	Hound	into	the	air	–	and	clear
of	Samar	Dev	and	Dassem	–	before	both	creatures	slammed	into	and	through
the	building’s	front	wall.
Rubble	crashed	down,	tumbling	chunks	of	masonry	striking	Dassem’s


broad	back	as	he	pulled	himself	and	Samar	away	from	the	collapsing	façade.
Somewhere	within	that	building,	bear	and	Hound	fought	in	a	frenzy.
	
Leaving,	now,	two	Hounds	of	Light,	unopposed,	and	they	reached	the	corpse	of
Anomander	Rake.	Jaws	closed	about	a	thigh	and	his	body	was	dragged	upward.
The	second	beast	circled,	as	if	contemplating	its	own	bite	–	but	the	sword	still
lodged	in	the	Tiste	Andii’s	skull	was	pitching	about	as	the	first	animal	sought
to	carry	away	its	prize,	and	wise	caution	kept	it	back.
The	Seguleh	threw	his	lance	from	fifteen	paces	away.	The	weapon	sank
into	the	side	of	the	circling	Hound,	knocking	it	down	–	to	be	up	again	in	an
instant,	snarling	and	snapping	at	the	jutting	shaft.
Karsa,	whose	longer	strides	had	sent	him	ahead	of	the	Second,	voiced	a
Teblor	battle	cry	–	an	ancient	one,	heard	only	when	the	elders	spun	their	tales
of	ancient	heroes	–	and	the	Hound	gripping	Rake’s	corpse	flinched	at	the
sound.
Releasing	its	hold	on	that	torn,	gashed	leg,	it	lunged	towards	the	attacking
Toblakai.
Two	javelins	struck	the	animal	from	its	left.	Neither	lodged,	but	it	was
enough	to	sting	its	attention,	and	the	Hound’s	head	pitched	round	to	confront
the	new	attackers.
Two	young	Teblor	women	stood	on	the	other	side	of	the	avenue,	each
calmly	readying	another	javelin	in	her	atlatl.	Between	them	stood	a	large,
mangy	dog,	tensed,	fangs	bared,	its	growl	so	low	it	might	as	well	have	been
coming	up	from	the	earth	below.
The	Hound	hesitated.
Karsa	charged	towards	it,	blade	whistling	through	the	air—
The	beast	broke	and	ran	–	and	the	Toblakai’s	sword	sliced	off	its	stubby
tail	and	nothing	else.
The	Hound	howled.
Shifting	round,	Karsa	advanced	on	the	other	animal	–	it	had	dragged	the
lance	loose	and	now	it	too	was	fleeing,	leaving	a	trail	of	blood.
The	Seguleh	reclaimed	his	gore-smeared	weapon.
Karsa	hesitated,	and	then	he	moved	to	stand	over	the	body	of	Anomander
Rake.	‘They	are	beaten,’	he	said.
The	masked	face	swung	round.	Dead	eyes	in	rimmed	slits	regarded	him.	‘It
has	been	a	long	time	since	I	last	heard	that	war	cry,	Toblakai.	Pray,’	the	warrior
added,	‘I	never	hear	it	again!’
Karsa’s	attention,	however,	was	drawn	to	the	Teblor	women,	and	the	dog


that	now	advanced,	its	own	stubbed	tail	wagging.
Staring	at	the	animal,	watching	its	limping	approach,	Karsa	Orlong
struggled	against	a	sob.	He	had	sent	this	dog	home.	Half	dead,	fevered	and
weak	from	blood	loss,	it	had	set	out	–	so	long	ago	now,	so	long	ago.	He
looked	up	at	the	Teblor	girls,	neither	of	whom	spoke.	It	was	difficult	to	see
through	the	tears	–	did	he	know	these	two?	No,	they	looked	too	young.
They	looked…
	
Down	the	side	street,	the	five	Hounds	of	Shadow	had	been	driven	back,	unable
to	hold	their	ground	against	the	combined	sorceries	of	Spite	and	Envy.	The
magic	slashed	their	hides.	Blood	sprayed	from	their	snouts.	And	on	all	sides,
forces	sought	to	crush	them	down,	destroy	them	utterly.
Writhing,	battered,	they	fell	back,	step	by	step.
And	the	Daughters	of	Draconus	drew	ever	closer	to	their	prize.
Their	father ’s	sword.
A	birthright	long	denied	them.	Of	course,	both	Envy	and	Spite	understood
the	value	of	patience.	Patience,	yes,	in	the	fruition	of	their	desires,	their	needs.
The	Hounds	could	not	match	them,	not	in	power,	nor	in	savage	will.
The	long	wait	was	almost	over.
	
The	sisters	barely	registered	the	quiet	arrival	of	a	carriage	well	behind	the
Hounds.	Alas,	the	same	could	not	be	said	for	the	one	who	stepped	out	from	it
and	swung	strangely	bestial	eyes	towards	them.
That	steady,	deadly	regard	reached	through	indeed.
They	halted	their	advance.	Sorceries	died	away.	The	Hounds,	shedding
blood	that	steamed	in	the	dawn’s	light,	limped	back	in	the	direction	of	the
fallen	wielder	of	Dragnipur.
Envy	and	Spite	hesitated.	Desires	were	stuffed	screaming	back	into	their
tiny	lockboxes.	Plans	hastily,	bitterly	readjusted.	Patience…ah,	patience,	yes,
awakened	once	more.
Oh	well,	maybe	next	time.
	
The	vicious	battle	within	the	shell	of	the	mostly	demolished	building	had
ended.	Heart	fluttering	with	fear,	Samar	Dev	cautiously	approached.	She
worked	her	way	over	the	rubble	and	splintered	crossbeams,	edged	past	an


inner	wall	that	had	remained	mostly	intact,	and	looked	then	upon	the	two
motionless	leviathans.
A	faint	cry	rose	from	her.	Awkwardly,	she	made	her	way	closer,	and	a
moment	later	found	herself	half	sitting,	half	slumped	against	a	fragmented	slab
of	plastered	wall,	staring	down	at	the	dying	bear ’s	torn	and	shredded	head.
The	Hound	was	gasping	as	well,	its	back	end	buried	beneath	the	giant	bear,
red	foam	bubbling	from	its	nostrils,	each	breath	shallower	and	wetter	than	the
one	before,	until	finally,	with	a	single,	barely	audible	sigh,	it	died.
Samar	Dev’s	attention	returned	to	the	god	that	had	so	haunted	her,	ever
looming,	ever	testing	the	air…seeking…what?	‘What?’	she	asked	it	now	in	a
hoarse	whisper.	‘What	did	you	want?’
The	beast’s	one	remaining	eye	seemed	to	shift	slightly	inside	its	ring	of
red.	In	it,	she	saw	only	pain.	And	loss.
The	witch	drew	out	her	knife.	Was	this	the	thing	to	do?	Should	she	not
simply	let	it	go?	Let	it	leave	this	unjust,	heartless	existence?	The	last	of	its	kind.
Forgotten	by	all…
Well,	I	will	not	forget	you,	my	friend.
She	reached	down	with	the	knife,	and	slipped	the	blade	into	the	pool	of
blood	beneath	the	bear ’s	head.	And	she	whispered	words	of	binding,	repeating
them	over	and	over	again,	until	at	last	the	light	of	life	departed	the	god’s	eye.
	
Clutching	two	Hounds	with	a	third	one	writhing	in	his	mouth,	Tulas	Shorn
could	do	little	more	than	shake	the	beasts	half	senseless	as	the	dragon	climbed
ever	higher	above	the	mountains	north	of	Lake	Azure.	Of	course,	he	could	do
one	more	thing.	He	could	drop	them	from	a	great	height.
Which	he	did.	With	immense	satisfaction.
	
‘Wait!	Wait!	Stop	it!	Stop!’
Iskaral	Pust	climbed	free	of	the	ruckus	–	the	mound	of	thrashing,	snarling,
spitting	and	grunting	bhokarala,	the	mass	of	tangled,	torn	hair	and	filthy	robes
and	prickly	toes	that	was	his	wife,	and	he	glared	round.
‘You	idiots!	He	isn’t	even	here	any	more!	Gah,	it’s	too	late!	Gah!	That
odious,	slimy,	putrid	lump	of	red-vested	dung!	No,	get	that	away	from	me,
ape.’	He	leapt	to	his	feet.	His	mule	stood	alone.	‘What	good	are	you?’	he
accused	the	beast,	raising	a	fist.
Mogora	climbed	upright,	adjusting	her	clothes.	She	then	stuck	out	her


tongue,	which	seemed	to	be	made	entirely	of	spiders.
Seeing	this,	Iskaral	Pust	gagged.	‘Gods!	No	wonder	you	can	do	what	you
do!’
She	cackled.	‘And	oh	how	you	beg	for	more!’
‘Aagh!	If	I’d	known,	I’d	have	begged	for	something	else!’
‘Oh,	what	would	you	have	begged	for,	sweetie?’
‘A	knife,	so	I	could	cut	my	own	throat.	Look	at	me.	I’m	covered	in	bites!’
‘They	got	sharp	teeth,	all	right,	them	bhokarala—’
‘Not	them,	month-old	cream	puff.	These	are	spider	bites!’
‘You	deserve	even	worse!	Did	you	drug	her	senseless?	There’s	no	other
way	she’d	agree	to—’
‘Power!	I	have	power!	It’s	irresistible,	everybody	knows	that!	A	man	can
look	like	a	slug!	His	hair	can	stick	out	like	a	bhederin’s	tongue!	He	can	be
knee-high	and	perfectly	proportioned	–	he	can	stink,	he	can	eat	his	own
earwax,	none	of	it	matters!	If	he	has	power!’
‘Well,	that’s	what’s	wrong	with	the	world,	then.	It’s	why	ugly	people	don’t
just	die	out.’	And	then	she	smiled.	‘It’s	why	you	and	me,	we’re	made	for	each
other!	Let’s	have	babies,	hundreds	of	babies!’
Iskaral	Pust	ran	to	his	mule,	scrabbled	aboard,	and	fled	for	his	life.
The	mule	walked,	seemingly	unmindful	of	the	rider	thrashing	and	kicking
about	on	its	back,	and	at	a	leisurely	saunter,	Mogora	kept	pace.
The	bhokarala,	which	had	been	cooing	and	grooming	in	a	reconciliatory
love	fest,	now	flapped	up	into	the	air,	circling	over	their	god’s	head	like	gnats
round	the	sweetest	heap	of	dung	ever	beheld.
	
Approaching	thunder	startled	Picker	from	her	reverie	within	the	strange	cave,
and	she	stared	upon	the	carved	rock	wall,	eyes	widening	to	see	the	image	of	the
carriage	blurring	as	if	in	motion.
If	the	monstrosity	was	indeed	pounding	straight	for	her,	moments	from
exploding	into	the	cavern,	then	she	would	be	trampled,	for	there	was	nowhere
to	go	in	the	hope	of	evading	those	rearing	horses	and	the	pitching	carriage
behind	them.
An	absurd	way	for	her	soul	to	die—
The	apparition	arrived	in	a	storm	of	infernal	wind,	yet	it	emerged	from	the
wall	ghostly,	almost	transparent,	and	she	felt	the	beasts	and	the	conveyance	tear
through	her	–	a	momentary	glimpse	of	a	manic	driver,	eyes	wide	and	staring,
both	legs	jutting	out	straight	and	splayed	and	apparently	splinted.	And	still
others,	on	the	carriage	roof	and	tossing	about	on	the	ends	of	straps	from	the


sides,	expressions	stunned	and	jolted.	All	of	this,	sweeping	through	her,	and
past—
And	a	rider	lunged	into	view	directly	before	her,	sawing	the	reins	–	and
this	man	and	his	mount	were	real,	solid.	Sparks	spat	out	from	skidding	hoofs,
the	horse’s	eyeless	head	lifting.	Picker	staggered	back	in	alarm.
Damned	corpses!	She	stared	up	at	the	rider,	and	then	swore.	‘I	know	you!’
The	one-eyed	man,	enwreathed	in	the	stench	of	death,	settled	his	horse	and
looked	down	upon	her.	And	then	he	said,	‘I	am	Hood’s	Herald	now,	Corporal
Picker.’
‘Oh.	Is	that	a	promotion?’
‘No,	a	damned	sentence,	and	you’re	not	the	only	one	I	need	to	visit,	so
enough	of	the	sardonic	shit	and	listen	to	me—’
She	bridled.	‘Why?	What	am	I	doing	here?	What’s	Hood	want	with	me	that
he	ain’t	already	got?	Hey,	take	a	message	back	to	him!	I	want	to—’
‘I	cannot,	Picker.	Hood	is	dead.’
‘He’s	what?’
‘The	Lord	of	Death	no	longer	exists.	Gone.	For	ever	more.	Listen,	I	ride	to
the	gods	of	war.	Do	you	understand,	torc-bearer?	I	ride	to	all	the	gods	of	war.’
Torc-bearer?	She	sagged.	‘Ah,	shit.’
Toc	the	Younger	spoke	then,	and	told	her	all	she	needed	to	know.
When	he	was	done,	she	stared,	the	blood	drained	from	her	face,	and
watched	as	he	gathered	the	reins	once	more	and	prepared	to	leave.
‘Wait!’	she	demanded.	‘I	need	to	get	out	of	here!	How	do	I	do	that,	Toc?’
The	dead	eye	fixed	upon	her	one	last	time.	He	pointed	at	the	gourds	resting
on	the	stone	floor	to	either	side	of	Picker.	‘Drink.	Live	up	to	your	name.	Pick
one,	Picker.’
‘Are	you	mad?	You	just	told	me	where	that	blood’s	come	from!’
‘Drink,	and	remember	all	that	I	have	told	you.’
And	then	he	was	gone.
Remember,	yes,	she	would	do	that.	‘Find	the	Toblakai.	Find	the	killer	and
remind	him…remind	him,	do	you	understand	me?	Then,	torc-bearer,	lead	him	to
war.
‘Lead	him	to	war…’
There	had	been	more,	much	more.	None	of	it	anything	she	could	hope	to
forget.	‘All	I	wanted	to	do	was	retire.’
Cursing	under	her	breath,	she	walked	over	to	the	nearest	gourd,	crouched
down	before	it.	Drink.	It’s	blood,	dammit!
Drink.


	
To	stand	in	the	heart	of	Dragnipur,	to	stand	above	the	very	Gate	of	Darkness,
this	was,	for	Anomander	Rake,	a	most	final	act.	Perhaps	it	was	desperation.	Or
a	sacrifice	beyond	all	mortal	measure.
A	weapon	named	Vengeance,	or	a	weapon	named	Grief	–	either	way,	where
he	had	been	delivered	by	that	sword	was	a	world	of	his	own	making.	And	all
the	choices	that	might	have	been	were	as	dust	on	the	bleak	trail	of	his	life.
He	was	the	Son	of	Darkness.	His	people	were	lost.	There	was,	for	him,
room	to	grieve,	here	at	the	end	of	things,	and	he	could	finally	turn	away,	as	his
mother	had	done	so	long	ago.	Turn	away	from	his	children.	As	every	father
must	one	day	do,	in	that	final	moment	that	was	death.	The	notion	of
forgiveness	did	not	even	occur	to	him,	as	he	stood	on	the	mound	of	moaning,
tattooed	bodies.
He	was,	after	all,	not	the	begging	sort.
The	one	exception	was	Draconus.	Ah,	but	those	circumstances	were
unique,	the	crime	so	faceted,	so	intricately	complicated,	that	it	did	no	good	to
seek	to	prise	loose	any	single	detail.	In	any	case,	the	forgiveness	he	asked	for
did	not	demand	an	answer.	All	that	mattered	was	that	Draconus	be	given	those
words.	He	could	do	with	them	as	he	pleased.
Anomander	Rake	stood,	eyes	fixed	heavenward,	facing	that	seething
conflagration,	the	descending	annihilation,	and	he	did	not	blink,	did	not	flinch.
For	he	felt	its	answer	deep	within	him,	in	the	blood	of	Tiam,	the	blood	of
chaos.
He	would	stand,	then,	for	all	those	he	had	chained	here.	He	would	stand	for
all	the	others	as	well.	And	for	these	poor,	broken	souls	underfoot.	He	would
stand,	and	face	that	ferocious	chaos.
Until	the	very	last	moment.	The	very	last	moment.
Like	a	mass	of	serpents,	the	tattoos	swarmed	beneath	him.
	
Kadaspala	had	waited	for	so	long.	For	this	one	chance.	Vengeance	against	the
slayer	of	a	beloved	sister,	the	betrayer	of	Andarist,	noble	Andarist,	husband
and	brother.	Oh,	he	had	come	to	suspect	what	Anomander	Rake	intended.
Sufficient	reparation?	All	but	one	Tiste	Andii	would	answer	‘yes’	to	that
question.	All	but	one.
Not	Kadaspala!	No,	not	me!	Not	me	not	me!	Not	me	not	me	not	me!
I	will	make	you	fail.	In	this,	your	last	gesture,	your	pathetic	attempt	at
reconciliation	–	I	will	make	you	fail!


See	this	god	I	made?	See	it?	See	it	see	it!
No,	you	did	not	expect	that	expect	that	expect	that,	did	you	now?	Did	you
now?
Nor	the	knife	in	its	hand.	Nor	the	knife	in	its	hand!
Teeth	bared,	blind	Kadaspala	twisted	on	to	his	back,	the	better	to	see	the
Son	of	Darkness,	yes,	the	better	to	see	him.	Eyes	were	not	necessary	and	eyes
were	not	necessary.	To	see	the	bastard.
Standing	so	tall,	so	fierce,	almost	within	reach.
Atop	the	mountain	of	bodies,	the	moaning	bridge	of	flesh	and	bone,	the
sordid	barrier	at	Dark’s	door,	this	living	ward	–	so	stupid	so	stupid!	Standing
there,	eyes	lifting	up,	soul	facing	down	and	down	and	downward	–	will	she
sense	him?	Will	she	turn?	Will	she	see?	Will	she	understand?
No	to	all	of	these	things.	For	Kadaspala	has	made	a	god	a	god	a	god	he	has
made	a	god	and	the	knife	the	knife	the	knife—
Anomander	Rake	stands,	and	the	map	awakens,	its	power	and	his	power,
awakening.
Wandering	Hold,	wander	no	longer.	Fleeing	Gate,	flee	no	more.	This	is
what	he	will	do.	This	is	the	sacrifice	he	will	make,	oh	so	worthy	so	noble	so
noble	yes	and	clever	and	so	very	clever	and	who	else	but	Anomander	Rake	so
noble	and	so	clever?
All	to	fail!
Child	god!	It’s	time!	Feel	the	knife	in	your	hand	–	feel	it!	Now	lift	it	high	–
the	fool	sees	nothing,	suspects	nothing,	knows	nothing	of	how	I	feel,	how	I	do
not	forget	will	never	forget	will	never	forget	and	no,	I	will	never	forget!
Reach	high.
Stab!
Stab!
Stab!
	
Storm	of	light,	a	scattered	moon,	a	rising	sun	behind	bruised	clouds	from
which	brown,	foul	rain	poured	down,	Black	Coral	was	a	city	under	siege,	and
the	Tiste	Andii	within	it	could	now	at	last	feel	the	death	of	their	Lord,	and	with
him	the	death	of	their	world.
Was	it	fair,	to	settle	the	burden	of	long-dead	hope	upon	one	person,	to	ask
of	that	person	so	much?	Was	it	not,	in	fact,	cowardice?	He	had	been	their
strength.	He	had	been	their	courage.	And	he	had	paid	the	Hound’s	Toll	for	them
all,	centuries	upon	centuries,	and	not	once	had	he	turned	away.
As	if	to	stand	in	his	mother ’s	stead.	As	if	to	do	what	she	would	not.


Our	Lord	is	dead.	He	has	left	us.
A	people	grieved.
The	rain	descended.	Kelyk	ran	in	bitter	streams	on	the	streets,	down
building	walls.	Filled	the	gutters	in	mad	rush.	Droplets	struck	and	sizzled	black
upon	the	hide	of	Silanah.	This	was	the	rain	of	usurpation,	and	against	it	they
felt	helpless.
Drink	deep,	Black	Coral.
And	dance,	yes,	dance	until	you	die.
	
Monkrat	struggled	his	way	up	the	muddy,	root-tangled	slope	with	the	last	two
children	in	his	arms.	He	glanced	up	to	see	Spindle	crouched	at	the	crest,
smeared	in	clay,	looking	like	a	damned	gargoyle.	But	there	was	no	glee	in	the
staring	eyes,	only	exhaustion	and	dread.
The	unnatural	rain	had	reached	out	to	this	broken,	half-shattered	forest.
The	old	trenches	and	berms	were	black	with	slime,	the	wreckage	of	retaining
walls	reminding	him	of	rotting	bones	and	teeth,	as	if	the	hillside’s	flesh	had
been	torn	away	to	reveal	a	giant,	ravaged	face,	which	now	grinned	vacuously
at	the	grey	and	brown	sky.
The	two	ex-Bridgeburners	had	managed	to	find	an	even	twenty	children,
four	of	them	so	close	to	death	they’d	weighed	virtually	nothing,	hanging	limp
in	their	arms.	The	two	men	had	worked	through	the	entire	night	ferrying	them
up	to	the	entrenchments,	down	into	the	tunnels	where	they	could	be	out	of	the
worst	of	the	rain.	They	had	scrounged	blankets,	some	food,	clean	water	in	clay
jugs.
As	Monkrat	drew	closer	Spindle	reached	down	to	help	him	scrabble	over
the	edge.	The	scrawny	girls	dangled	like	straw	dolls,	heads	lolling,	as	Monkrat
passed	each	one	up	to	Spindle,	who	stumbled	away	with	them,	sloshing	through
the	muddy	rivulet	of	the	trench.
Monkrat	sagged,	stared	down	at	the	ground	to	keep	the	rain	from	his	eyes
and	mouth	as	he	drew	in	deep	breaths.
A	lifetime	of	soldiering,	aye,	the	kind	that	made	miserable	slogs	like	this
one	old	news,	as	familiar	as	a	pair	of	leaking	leather	boots.	So	what	made	this
one	feel	so	different?
He	could	hear	someone	crying	in	the	tunnel,	and	then	Spindle’s	voice,
soothing,	reassuring.
And	gods,	how	Monkrat	wanted	to	weep.
Different,	aye,	so	very	different.
‘Soldiers,’	he	muttered,	‘come	in	all	sorts.’


He’d	been	one	kind	for	a	long	time,	and	had	grown	so	sick	of	it	he’d	just
walked	away.	And	now	Spindle	showed	up,	to	take	him	and	drag	him	inside	out
and	make	him	into	a	different	kind	of	soldier.	And	this	one,	why,	it	felt	right.	It
felt	proper.	He’d	no	idea…
He	looked	over	as	Spindle	stumbled	into	view.	‘Let’s	leave	it	at	this,	Spin,’
he	begged.	‘Please.’
‘I	want	to	stick	a	knife	in	Gradithan’s	face,’	Spindle	growled.	‘I	want	to	cut
out	his	black	tongue.	I	want	to	drag	the	bastard	up	here	so	every	one	of	them
tykes	can	see	what	I	do	to	him—’
‘You	do	that	and	I’ll	kill	you	myself,’	Monkrat	vowed,	baring	his	teeth.
‘They	seen	too	much	as	it	is,	Spin.’
‘They	get	to	see	vengeance—’
‘It	won’t	feel	like	vengeance	to	them,’	Monkrat	said,	‘it’ll	just	be	more	of
the	same	fucking	horror,	the	same	cruel	madness.	You	want	vengeance,	do	it	in
private,	Spindle.	Do	it	down	there.	But	don’t	expect	my	help	–	I	won’t	have
none	of	it.’
Spindle	stared	at	him.	‘That’s	a	different	row	of	knots	you’re	showing	me
here,	Monkrat.	Last	night,	you	was	talking	it	up	’bout	how	we’d	run	him	down
and	do	him	good—’
‘I	changed	my	mind,	Spin.	These	poor	runts	did	that.’	He	hesitated.	‘You
did	that,	making	me	do	what	we	just	done.’	He	then	laughed	harshly.	‘Fancy
this,	I’m	feeling…redeemed.	Now	ain’t	that	ironic,	Spin.’
Spindle	slowly	settled	back	against	the	trench	wall,	and	then	sank	down
until	he	was	sitting	in	the	mud.	‘Shit.	How	about	that.	And	I	walked	all	this	way,
looking	for	just	what	you	done	and	found	here.	I	was	needing	something,	I
thought	they	was	answers…but	I	didn’t	even	know	the	right	questions.’	He
grimaced	and	spat.	‘I	still	don’t.’
Monkrat	shrugged.	‘Me	neither.’
‘But	you	been	redeemed.’	And	that	statement	was	almost	bitter-sounding.
Monkrat	struggled	with	his	thoughts.	‘When	that	hits	you	–	me,	when	it	hit
me,	well,	what	it’s	feeling	like	right	now,	Spin,	it’s	like	redemption	finds	a	new
meaning.	It’s	when	you	don’t	need	answers	no	more,	because	you	know	that
anybody	promising	answers	is	fulla	crap.	Priest,	priestess,	god,	goddess.	Fulla
crap,	you	understanding	me?’
‘That	don’t	sound	right,’	Spindle	objected.	‘To	be	redeemed,	someone’s
got	to	do	the	redeeming.’
‘But	maybe	it	don’t	have	to	be	someone	else.	Maybe	it’s	just	doing
something,	being	something,	someone,	and	feeling	that	change	inside	–	it’s	like
you	went	and	redeemed	yourself.	And	nobody	else’s	opinion	matters.	And	you


know	that	you	still	got	all	them	questions,	right	ones,	wrong	ones,	and	maybe
you’ll	be	able	to	find	an	answer	or	two,	maybe	not.	But	it	don’t	matter.	The
only	thing	that	matters	is	you	now	know	ain’t	nobody	else	has	got	a	damned
thing	to	do	with	it,	with	any	of	it.	That’s	the	redemption	I’m	talking	about	here.’
Spindle	leaned	his	head	back	and	closed	his	eyes.	‘Lucky	you,	Monkrat.
No,	I	mean	that.	I	do.’
‘You	idiot.	I	was	rotting	here,	seeing	everything	and	doing	nothing.	If	I
now	ended	up	someplace	else,	it’s	all	because	of	you.	Shit,	you	just	done	what	a
real	priest	should	do	–	no	fucking	advice,	no	bullshit	wisdom,	no	sympathy,
none	of	that	crap.	Just	a	damned	kick	in	the	balls	and	get	on	with	doing	what
you	know	is	right.	Anyway,	I	won’t	forget	what	you	done,	Spin.	I	won’t	ever
forget.’
Spindle	opened	his	eyes,	and	Monkrat	saw	an	odd	frown	on	the	man’s	face
as	he	stared	skyward.
And	then	he	too	looked	up.
	
A	lone	figure	walked	towards	the	Temple	of	Darkness,	moccasins	whispering
on	the	slick	cobbles.	One	hand	was	held	up,	from	which	thin	delicate	chains
whirled	round	and	round,	the	rings	at	their	ends	flashing.	Thick	rain	droplets
burst	apart	in	that	spinning	arc,	spraying	against	the	face	and	the	half-smile
curving	the	lips.
Someone	within	that	building	was	resisting.	Was	it	Rake	himself?	Clip
dearly	hoped	so,	and	if	it	was	true,	then	the	so-called	Son	of	Darkness	was
weak,	pathetic,	and	but	moments	from	annihilation.	Clip	might	have	harboured
demands	and	accusations	once,	all	lined	up	and	arrayed	like	arrows	for	the
plucking.	Bowstring	thrumming,	barbed	truths	winging	unerringly	through	the
air	to	strike	home	again	and	again.	Yes,	he	had	imagined	such	a	scene.	Had
longed	for	it.
What	value	hard	judgement	when	there	was	no	one	to	hurt	with	it?	Where
was	satisfaction?	Pleasure	in	seeing	the	wounds?	No,	hard	judgement	was	like
rage.	It	thrived	on	victims.	And	the	delicious	flush	of	superiority	in	the
delivery.
Perhaps	the	Dying	God	would	reward	him,	for	he	so	wanted	victims.	He
had,	after	all,	so	much	rage	to	give	them.	Listen	to	me,	Lord	Rake.	They
slaughtered	everyone	in	the	Andara.	Everyone!	And	where	were	you,	when	your
worshippers	were	dying?	Where	were	you?	They	called	upon	you.	They	begged
you.
Yes,	Clip	would	break	him.	He	owed	his	people	that	much.


He	studied	the	temple	as	he	approached,	and	he	could	sense	familiarity	in
its	lines,	echoes	of	the	Andara,	and	Bluerose.	But	this	building	seemed	rawer,
cruder,	as	if	the	stone	inadvertently	mimicked	rough-hewn	wood.	Memories
honoured?	Or	elegance	forgotten?	No	matter.
An	instant’s	thought	shattered	the	temple	doors,	and	he	felt	the	one	within
recoil	in	pain.
He	ascended	the	steps,	walked	through	the	smoke	and	dust.
Rings	spinning,	kelyk	streaming.
The	domed	roof	was	latticed	with	cracks,	and	the	rain	poured	down	in
thick,	black	threads.	He	saw	a	woman	standing	at	the	back,	her	face	a	mask	of
horror.	And	he	saw	an	old	man	down	on	his	knees	in	the	centre	of	the	mosaic
floor,	his	head	bowed.
Clip	halted,	frowned.	This	was	his	opponent?	This	useless,	broken,	feeble
thing?
Where	was	Anomander	Rake?
He…he	is	not	here.	He	is	not	even	here!	I	am	his	Mortal	Sword!	And	he	is
not	even	here!
He	screamed	in	fury.	And	power	lashed	out,	rushing	in	a	wall	that	tore
tesserae	from	the	broad	floor	as	it	ripped	its	way	out	from	him,	that	shattered
the	pillars	ringing	the	chamber	so	that	they	toppled	back	like	felled	trees.	That
engulfed	the	puny	old	man—
	
Endest	Silann	groaned	under	the	assault.	Like	talons,	the	Dying	God’s	power
sank	deep	into	him,	shredding	his	insides.	This	was	too	vast	to	resist.	He
yielded	ground,	pace	hastening,	moments	from	a	rout,	a	terrified,	fatal	flight—
But	there	was	nowhere	to	go.	If	he	fell	now,	every	Tiste	Andii	in	Black
Coral	would	be	lost.	Saemankelyk	would	claim	them	all,	and	the	city	itself
would	succumb	to	that	dread	stain.	Kurald	Galain	would	be	corrupted,	made	to
feed	an	alien	god’s	mad	hunger	for	power.
And	so,	amidst	a	broken	chorus	of	snapping	bones	and	splitting	flesh,
Endest	Silann	held	on.
Desperate,	searching	for	a	source	of	strength	–	anything,	anyone	–	but
Anomander	Rake	was	gone.	He	had	raged	with	power	like	a	pillar	of	fire.	He
had	been	indomitable,	and	in	reaching	out	a	hand	to	settle	firm	on	a	shoulder,
he	could	make	his	confidence	a	gift.	He	could	make	the	ones	who	loved	him	do
the	impossible.
But	now,	he	was	gone.
And	Endest	Silann	was	alone.


He	felt	his	soul	withering,	dying	under	this	blistering	assault.
And,	from	some	vast	depth,	the	old	man	recalled…a	river.
Defiant	of	all	light,	deep,	so	deep	where	ran	the	currents	–	currents	that	no
force	could	contain.	He	could	slip	into	those	sure	streams,	yes,	if	he	but
reached	down…
But	the	pain,	it	was	so	fierce.	It	demanded	all	of	him.	He	could	not	claw
free	of	it,	even	as	it	devoured	him.
The	river	–	if	he	could	but	reach	it	–
	
The	god	possessing	Clip	laughed.	Everything	was	within	his	grasp.	He	could
feel	his	cherished	High	Priestess,	so	lovingly	usurped	from	the	Redeemer ’s
clutches,	so	thoroughly	seduced	into	the	mindless	dance	of	oblivion,	the
worship	of	wasted	lives	–	she	was	defeating	the	Redeemer ’s	lone	guardian	–	he
was	falling	back	step	by	step,	a	mass	of	wounds,	a	dozen	of	them	clearly	fatal,
and	though	somehow	he	still	stood,	still	fought,	he	could	not	last	much	longer.
The	god	wanted	the	Redeemer.	A	more	worthy	vessel	than	the	one	named
Clip,	which	was	so	venal	in	its	thoughts,	so	miserable	in	its	hurts.	No	better
than	a	child	burned	by	neglect,	and	now	all	it	dreamed	of	was	lashing	out.
It	believed	it	had	come	to	confront	its	father,	but	there	was	no	father	here.
There	never	had	been.	It	had	believed	it	was	chosen	to	deliver	justice,	but	the
one	named	Clip	–	who	had	never	seen	justice	–	did	not	understand	its	true
meaning,	which	ever	belonged	solely	and	exclusively	within	the	cage	of	one’s
own	soul.
No,	the	god’s	need	for	Clip	was	coming	to	an	end.	This	vessel	would	be
given	over	to	saemankelyk,	no	different	from	all	the	others.	To	dance,	to	lie
above	the	High	Priestess	and	gush	black	semen	into	her	womb	–	a	deed	without
pleasure,	for	all	pleasure	was	consumed	by	the	Dying	God’s	own	blood,	by	the
sweet	kelyk.	And	she	would	swell	with	the	immortal	gifts	a	thousand	times,	ten
thousand	times.
The	sweetest	poison,	after	all,	is	the	one	eagerly	shared.
The	god	advanced	on	the	kneeling	old	man.	Time	to	kill	the	fool.
	
Aranatha’s	hand	was	cool	and	dry	in	Nimander ’s	grasp	as	she	led	him	through
an	unknown	realm	that	left	him	blind,	stumbling,	like	a	dog	beaten	senseless,
the	leash	of	that	hand	tugging	him	on	and	on.
‘Please,’	he	whispered,	‘where	are	we	going?’


‘To	battle,’	she	replied,	and	her	voice	was	almost	unrecognizable.
Nimander	felt	a	tremor	of	fear.	Was	this	even	Aranatha?	Perhaps	some
demon	had	taken	her	place	–	yet	the	hand,	yes,	he	knew	it.	Unchanged,	so
familiar	in	its	ethereal	touch.	Like	a	glove	with	nothing	in	it	–	but	no,	he	could
feel	it,	firm,	solid.	Her	hand,	like	everything	else	about	her,	was	a	mystery	he
had	come	to	love.
The	kiss	she	had	given	him	–	what	seemed	an	eternity	ago	–	he	could	feel	it
still,	as	if	he	had	tasted	something	alien,	something	so	far	beyond	him	that	he
had	no	hope	of	ever	understanding,	of	ever	recognizing	what	it	might	be.	A
kiss,	sweet	as	a	blessing	–	but	had	it	been	Aranatha	who	had	blessed	him?
‘Aranatha—’
‘We	are	almost	there	–	oh,	will	you	defend	me,	Nimander?	I	can	but	reach
through,	not	far,	with	little	strength.	It	is	all	I	have	ever	been	able	to	do.	But
now…she	insists.	She	commands.’
‘Who?’	he	asked,	suddenly	chilled,	suddenly	shivering.	‘Who	commands
you?’
‘Why,	Aranatha.’
But	then	–	‘Who	–	who	are	you?’
‘Will	you	defend	me,	Nimander?	I	do	not	deserve	it.	My	errors	are	legion.
My	hurt	I	have	made	into	your	curse,	a	curse	upon	every	one	of	you.	But	we
are	past	apologies.	We	stand	in	the	dust	of	what’s	done.’
‘Please—’
‘I	do	not	think	enough	of	me	can	reach	through	–	not	against	him.	I	am
sorry.	If	you	do	not	stand	in	his	way,	I	will	fall.	I	will	fail.	I	feel	in	your	blood	a
whisper	of…someone.	Someone	dear	to	me.	Someone	who	might	have
withstood	him.
‘But	he	does	not	await	us.	He	is	not	there	to	defend	me.	What	has
happened?	Nimander,	I	have	only	you.’
The	small	hand,	that	had	felt	dry	and	cool	and	so	oddly	reassuring	in	its
remoteness,	now	felt	suddenly	frail,	like	thin	porcelain.
She	does	not	guide	me.
She	holds	on.
He	sought	comprehension	from	all	that	she	had	said.	The	blood	of	someone
dear.	She	cannot	reach	through,	not	enough	to	make	her	powerful	enough
against	Clip,	against	the	Dying	God.	She	–	she	is	not	Aranatha.
‘Nimander,	I	have	only	you.’
‘We	stand	in	the	dust	of	what’s	done.’
‘Nimander,	we	have	arrived.’


	
Tears	streamed	down	Seerdomin’s	ravaged	face.	Overwhelmed	by	the
helplessness,	by	the	futility	of	his	efforts	against	such	an	enemy,	he	rocked	to
every	blow,	staggered	in	retreat,	and	if	he	was	laughing	–	and	gods,	he	was	–
there	was	no	humour	in	that	terrible	sound.
He	hadn’t	had	much	pride	to	begin	with	–	or	so	he	had	made	his	pose,	there
before	the	Redeemer,	one	of	such	humility	–	but	no	soldier	with	any	spine	left
did	not	hold	to	a	secret	conviction	of	prowess.	And	although	he	had	not	lied
when	he’d	told	himself	he	was	fighting	for	a	god	he	did	not	believe	in,	well,	a
part	of	him	was	unassailed	by	that	particular	detail.	As	if	it’d	make	no
difference.	And	in	that	was	revealed	the	secret	pride	he	had	harboured.
He	would	surprise	her.	He	would	astonish	her	by	resisting	far	beyond	what
she	could	have	anticipated.	He	would	fight	the	bitch	to	a	standstill.
How	grim,	how	noble,	how	poetic.	Yes,	they	would	sing	of	the	battle,	all
those	shining	faces	in	some	future	temple	of	white,	virgin	stone,	all	those
shining	eyes	so	pleased	to	share	heroic	Seerdomin’s	triumphant	glory.
He	could	not	help	but	laugh.
She	was	shattering	him	piece	by	pathetic	piece.	It	was	a	wonder	any	part	of
his	soul	was	left	that	could	still	recognize	itself.
See	me,	Spinnock	Durav,	old	friend.	Noble	friend.	And	let	us	share	this
laugh.
At	my	stupid	posing.
I	am	mocked,	friend,	by	my	own	pride.	Yes,	do	laugh,	as	you	so	wanted	to	do
each	and	every	time	you	defeated	me	on	our	tiny	field	of	battle,	there	on	the
stained	table	in	that	damp,	miserable	tavern.
You	did	not	imagine	how	I	struggled	to	hold	on	to	that	pride,	defeat	after
defeat,	crushing	loss	after	crushing	loss.
So	now,	let	us	cast	aside	our	bland	masks.	Laugh,	Spinnock	Durav,	as	you
watch	me	lose	yet	again.
He	had	not	even	slowed	her	down.	Blades	smashed	into	him	from	all	sides,
three,	four	at	a	time.	His	broken	body	did	not	even	know	where	to	fall	–	her
attacks	were	all	that	kept	him	standing.
He’d	lost	his	sword.
He	might	even	have	lost	the	arm	and	hand	that	had	been	wielding	it.	There
was	no	telling.	He	had	no	sense	beyond	this	knot	of	mocking	knowledge.	This
lone	inner	eye	unblinkingly	fixed	on	its	pathetic	self.
And	now,	at	last,	she	must	have	flung	away	all	her	weapons,	for	her	hands
closed	round	his	throat.


He	forced	his	eyes	open,	stared	into	her	laughing	face—
Oh.
I	understand	now.	It	was	you	laughing.
You,	not	me.	You	I	was	hearing.	Yes,	I	understand	now—
That	meant	that	he,	why,	he’d	been	weeping.	So	much	for	mockery.	The
truth	was,	there	was	nothing	left	in	him	but	self-pity.	Spinnock	Durav,	look
away	now.	Please,	look	away.
Her	hands	tightening	round	his	throat,	she	lifted	him	from	the	ground,	held
him	high.	So	she	could	watch	his	face	as	she	choked	the	last	life	from	him.
Watch,	and	laugh	in	his	face	of	tears.
	
The	High	Priestess	stood	with	hands	to	her	mouth,	too	frightened	to	move,
watching	the	Dying	God	destroy	Endest	Silann.	He	should	have	crumbled	by
now,	he	should	have	melted	beneath	that	onslaught.	And	indeed	it	had	begun.
Yet,	somehow,	unbelievably,	he	still	held	on.
Making	of	himself	a	final,	frail	barrier	between	the	Tiste	Andii	and	this
horrendous,	insane	god.	She	cowered	in	its	shadow.	It	had	been	hubris,	mad
hubris,	to	have	believed	they	could	withstand	this	abomination.	Without
Anomander	Rake,	without	even	Spinnock	Durav.	And	now	she	sensed	every
one	of	her	kin	being	driven	down,	unable	to	lift	a	hand	in	self-defence,	lying
with	throats	exposed,	as	the	poison	rain	flooded	the	streets,	bubbled	in	beneath
doors,	through	windows,	eating	the	tiles	of	roofs	as	if	it	was	acid,	to	stream
down	beams	and	paint	brown	every	wall.	Her	kin	had	begun	to	feel	the	thirst,
had	begun	to	desire	that	deadly	first	sip	–	as	she	had.
And	Endest	Silann	held	the	enemy	back.
Another	moment.
And	then	yet	another—
	
In	the	realm	of	Dragnipur,	every	force	had	ceased	fighting.	Every	force,	every
face	–	Draconus,	Hood,	Iskar	Jarak,	the	Chained,	the	burning	eyes	of	the
soldiers	of	chaos	–	all	turned	to	stare	at	the	sky	above	the	wagon.
And	at	the	lone	figure	standing	tall	on	the	mound	of	bodies.
Where	something	extraordinary	had	begun.
The	tattooed	pattern	had	lifted	free	of	the	tumbled,	wrinkled	canvas	of
skins	–	as	if	the	layer	that	had	existed	for	all	to	see	was	now	revealed	as	but	one
side,	one	facet,	one	single	dimension,	of	a	far	greater	manifestation.	Which


now	rose,	unfolding,	intricate	as	a	perfect	cage,	a	web	of	gossamer,	glistening
like	wet	strokes	of	ink	suspended	in	the	air	around	Anomander	Rake.
He	slowly	raised	his	arms.
	
Lying	almost	at	Rake’s	feet,	Kadaspala	twisted	in	a	frenzy	of	joy.	Revenge	and
revenge	and	yes,	revenge.
Stab!	Dear	child!	Now	stab,	yes	and	stab	and	stab—
	
Ditch,	all	that	remained	of	him,	stared	with	one	eye.	He	saw	an	elongated,
tattoo-swarmed	arm	lifting	clear,	saw	the	knife	in	its	hand,	hovering	like	a
rearing	serpent	behind	Rake’s	back.	And	none	of	this	surprised	him.
The	child-god’s	one	purpose.	The	child-god’s	reason	to	exist.
And	he	was	its	eye.	There	to	look	upon	its	soul	inward	and	outward.	To
feel	its	heart,	and	that	heart	overflowed	with	life,	with	exultation.	To	be	born
and	to	live	was	such	a	gift!	To	see	the	sole	purpose,	to	hold	and	drive	the	knife
deep—
And	then?
And	then…it	all	ends.
Everything	here.	All	of	them.	These	bodies	so	warm	against	me.	All,
betrayed	by	the	one	their	very	lives	have	fed.	Precious	memories,	host	of	purest
regrets	–	but	what,	above	all	else,	must	always	be	chained	to	each	and	every
soul?	Why,	regrets,	of	course.	For	ever	chained	to	one’s	own	history,	one’s	own
life	story,	for	ever	dragging	that	creaking,	tottering	burden…
To	win	free	of	those	chains	of	regret	is	to	shake	free	of	humanity	itself.	And
so	become	a	monster.
Sweet	child	god,	will	you	regret	this?
‘No.’
Why	not?
‘There…there	will	be	no	time.’
Yes,	no	time.	For	anyone.	Anything.	This	is	your	moment	of	life	–	your	birth,
your	deed,	your	death.	By	this	you	must	measure	yourself,	in	this	handful	of
breaths.
Your	maker	wants	you	to	kill.
You	are	born	now.	Your	deed	awaits.	Your	death	hovers	just	beyond	it.	Child
god,	what	will	you	do?
And	he	felt	the	god	hesitate.	He	felt	it	awaken	to	its	own	self,	and	to	the


freedom	that	such	awakening	offered.	Yes,	its	maker	had	sought	to	shape	it.
Sire	to	child,	an	unbroken	stream	of	hate	and	vengeance.	To	give	its	own
imminent	death	all	the	meaning	it	demanded.
Fail	in	this,	and	that	death	will	have	no	meaning	at	all.
‘Yes.	But,	if	I	die	without	achieving	what	I	am	made	to	do—’
The	god	could	sense	the	power	that	had	lifted	clear	now	rushing	down
from	this	extraordinary	Tiste	Andii	with	the	silver	hair,	rushing	down	along
the	traceries	of	the	countless	bodies	–	travelling	the	strands	of	the	vast	web.
Down,	and	down,	into	that	Gate.
What	was	he	doing?
And	Ditch	smiled	as	he	answered.	Friend,	know	this	for	certain.	Whatever
Anomander	Rake	now	attempts	to	do,	he	does	not	do	it	for	himself.
And	that	statement	stunned	this	child	god.
Not	for	himself?	Was	such	a	thing	possible?	Did	one	not	ever	choose,	first
and	foremost,	for	oneself?
For	most,	yes,	that	is	true.	And	when	these	ones	pass,	they	are	quickly
forgotten.	Their	every	achievement	grows	tarnished.	The	recognition	comes
swift,	that	they	were	not	greater	than	anyone	else.	Not	smarter,	not	braver.
Their	motives,	ah,	such	sordid	things	after	all.	For	most,	I	said,	but	not	this	one.
Not	Anomander	Rake.
‘I	see.	Then,	my	mortal	friend,	I…I	shall	do	no	less.’
And	so,	that	long	arm	writhed	round,	twisting,	and	the	knife	stabbed	down,
down	into	Kadaspala’s	chest.
The	blind	Tiste	Andii	shrieked,	and	his	blood	poured	over	the	packed
bodies.
Slain	by	his	own	child.	And	the	web	drank	deep	its	maker ’s	blood.
Someone	crawled	alongside	Ditch.	He	struggled	to	focus	with	his	one
dying	and	dying	eye.	A	broad	face,	the	skin	flaking	off	in	patches,	long	thick
hair	of	black	slashed	through	with	red.	She	held	a	flint	knife	in	one	hand.
‘Take	it,’	he	whispered.	‘Take	it	quick—’
And	so	she	did.
Agonizing	pain,	fire	stabbing	deep	into	his	skull,	and	then…everything
began	to	fade.
And	the	child	god,	having	killed,	now	dies.
Only	one	man	wept	for	it,	red	tears	streaming	down.	Only	one	man	even
knew	what	it	had	done.
Was	it	enough?
	


Apsal’ara	saw	Anomander	Rake	pause,	and	then	look	down.	He	smiled.	‘Go,
with	my	blessing.’
‘Where?’
‘You	will	know	soon	enough.’
She	looked	deep	into	his	shining	eyes,	even	as	they	darkened,	and
darkened,	and	darkened	yet	more.	Until	she	realized	what	she	was	seeing,	and	a
breath	cold	as	ice	rushed	over	her.	She	cried	out,	recalling	where	she	had	felt
that	cold	before—
And	Apsal’ara,	Mistress	of	Thieves,	tossed	him	the	bloody	eye	of	the	god.
He	caught	it	one-handed.
‘A	keepsake,’	she	whispered,	and	then	rolled	clear.
For	this	wagon	was	no	place	to	be.	Not	with	what	was	about	to	happen.
	
The	pattern	sank	down,	through	the	heaped	forms,	even	as	the	Gate	of
Darkness	rose	up	to	meet	it.
Wander	no	longer.
Anomander	Rake,	still	standing,	head	tilted	back,	arms	raised,	began	to
dissolve,	shred	away,	as	the	Gate	took	hold	of	him,	as	it	fed	upon	him,	upon	the
Son	of	Darkness.	Upon	what	he	desired,	what	he	willed	to	be.
Witnessing	this,	Draconus	sank	down	to	his	knees.
He	finally	understood	what	was	happening.	He	finally	understood	what
Anomander	Rake	had	planned,	all	along	–	this,	this	wondrous	thing.
Staring	upward,	he	whispered,	‘You	ask	my	forgiveness?	When	you
unravel	what	I	have	done,	what	I	did	so	long	ago?	When	you	heal	what	I
wounded,	when	you	mend	what	I	broke?’	He	raised	his	voice	to	a	shout.	‘Rake!
There	is	no	forgiveness	you	must	seek	–	not	from	me,	gods	below,	not	from
any	of	us!’
But	there	was	no	way	to	know	if	he	had	been	heard.	The	man	that	had	been
Anomander	Rake	was	scattered	into	the	realm	of	Kurald	Galain,	on	to	its	own
long-sealed	path	that	might	–	just	might	–	lead	to	the	very	feet	of	Mother	Dark.
Who	had	turned	away.
‘Mother	Dark,’	Draconus	whispered.	‘I	believe	you	must	face	him	now.
You	must	turn	to	your	children.	I	believe	your	son	insists.	He	demands	it.	Open
your	eyes,	Mother	Dark.	See	what	he	has	done!	For	you,	for	the	Tiste	Andii	–
but	not	for	himself.	See!	See	and	know	what	he	has	done!’
Darkness	awakened,	the	pattern	grasping	hold	of	the	Gate	itself,	and
sinking,	sinking	down,	passing	beyond	Dragnipur,	leaving	for	ever	the	dread
sword—


	
In	the	Temple	of	Shadow,	in	the	city	of	Black	Coral	that	drowned	in	poison
rain,	Clip	and	the	god	within	him	stood	above	the	huddled	form	of	Endest
Silann.
This	game	was	over.	All	pleasure	in	the	victory	had	palled	in	the	absurd,
stubborn	resistance	of	the	old	man.
The	rings	spun,	round	and	round	from	one	hand,	as	he	drew	a	dagger	with
the	other.	Simple,	messy,	yes,	but	succinct,	final.
And	then	he	saw	the	floor	suddenly	awaken	with	black,	seething	strands,
forming	a	pattern,	and	icy	cold	breath	rose	in	a	long	sigh.	The	sheets	of
spilling	rain	froze	the	instant	each	droplet	reached	the	cold	air,	falling	to
shatter	on	the	heaved	cobbles	and	broken	tesserae.	And	that	cold	lifted	yet
higher.
The	Dying	God	frowned.
The	pattern	was	spreading	to	cover	the	entire	floor	of	the	altar	chamber,
swarming	outward.	It	looked	strangely	misshapen,	as	if	the	design	possessed
more	dimensions	than	were	visible.
The	entire	temple	trembled.
	
Crouched	on	a	berm	at	the	crest	of	a	forested	slope,	Spindle	and	Monkrat
stared	up	at	the	sky	directly	above	Black	Coral.	As	a	strange	maze-like	pattern
appeared	in	the	air,	burgeoning	out	to	the	sides	even	as	it	began	sinking	down
on	to	the	city.
They	saw	the	moment	when	a	tendril	of	that	pattern	touched	the	sleeping
dragon	perched	on	its	spire,	and	they	saw	it	spread	its	wings	out	in	massive
unfolding	crimson	fans,	saw	its	head	lifting	on	its	long	neck,	jaws	opening.
And	Silanah	roared.
A	sound	that	deafened.	A	cry	of	grief,	of	rage,	of	unleashed	intent.
It	launched	itself	into	that	falling	pattern,	that	falling	sky,	and	sailed	out
over	the	city.
Spindle	laughed	a	vicious	laugh.	‘Run,	Gradithan.	Run	all	you	like!	That
fiery	bitch	is	hunting	you!’
	
Aranatha	stepped	through,	Nimander	following.	Gasping,	he	tore	his	hand	free
–	for	her	grip	had	become	a	thing	of	unbearable	cold,	burning,	too	deadly	to


touch.
He	stumbled	to	one	side.
She	had	halted	at	the	very	edge	of	an	enormous	altar	chamber.	Where	a
bizarre,	ethereal	pattern	was	raining	down	from	the	domed	ceiling,	countless
linked	filaments	of	black	threads,	slowly	descending,	even	as	other	tendrils
rose	from	the	floor	itself.
And	Nimander	heard	her	whisper,	‘The	Gate.	How…oh,	my	dearest	son…
oh,	Anomander…’
	
Clip	stood	in	the	centre	of	the	chamber,	and	he	turned	round	upon	the	arrival	of
Aranatha	and	Nimander.
The	rings	spun	out	on	their	lengths	of	chain	–	and	then	stopped,	caught	in
the	pattern,	the	chains	shivering	taut.
Sudden	agony	lit	Clip’s	face.
There	was	a	snap	as	the	looped	chain	bit	through	his	index	finger	–	and	the
rings	spun	and	whirled	up	and	away,	speared	in	the	pattern.	Racing	along	every
thread,	ever	faster,	until	they	were	nothing	but	blurs,	and	then	even	that
vanished.
Nimander	stepped	past	Aranatha	and	leapt	forward,	straight	for	Clip.
Who	had	staggered	to	one	side,	looking	down	–	as	if	seeking	his	severed
finger	somewhere	at	his	feet.	On	his	face,	shock	and	pain,	bewilderment—
He	had	ever	underestimated	Nimander.	An	easy	mistake.	Mistakes	often
were.
So	like	his	sire,	so	slow	to	anger,	but	when	that	anger	arrived…Nimander
grasped	Clip	by	the	front	of	his	jerkin,	swung	him	off	his	feet	and	in	a	single,
ferocious	surge	sent	him	sprawling,	tumbling	across	the	floor.
Awakening	the	Dying	God.	Blazing	with	rage,	it	regained	its	feet	and
whirled	to	face	Nimander.
Who	did	not	even	flinch	as	he	prepared	to	advance	to	meet	it,	unsheathing
his	sword.
A	fluttering	touch	on	his	shoulder	stayed	him.
Aranatha	–	who	was	no	longer	Aranatha	–	stepped	past	him.
But	no,	her	feet	were	not	even	touching	the	floor.	She	rose	yet	higher,
amidst	streams	of	darkness	that	flowed	down	like	silk,	and	she	stared	down
upon	the	Dying	God.
Who,	finding	himself	face	to	face	with	Mother	Dark	–	with	the	Elder
Goddess	in	the	flesh	–	quailed.	Shrinking	back,	diminished.
She	does	not	reach	through	–	not	any	more.	She	is	here.	Mother	Dark	is


here.
And	Nimander	heard	her	say,	‘Ah,	my	son…I	accept.’
	
The	Gate	of	Darkness	wandered	no	more.	Was	pursued	no	longer.	The	Gate	of
Darkness	had	found	a	new	home,	in	the	heart	of	Black	Coral.
Lying	in	a	heap	of	mangled	flesh	and	bone,	dying,	Endest	Silann	rose	from
the	river	–	thing	of	memory	and	of	truth,	that	had	kept	him	alive	for	so	long	–
and	opened	his	eyes.	The	High	Priestess	knelt	at	his	side,	one	hand	brushing	his
cheek.	‘How,’	she	whispered,	‘how	could	he	ask	this	of	you?	How	could	he
know—’
Through	his	tears,	he	smiled.	‘All	that	he	has	ever	asked	of	us,	of	me,	and
Spinnock	Durav,	and	so	many	others,	he	has	given	us	in	return.	Each	and	every
time.	This…this	is	his	secret.	Don’t	you	understand,	High	Priestess?	We	served
the	one	who	served	us.’
He	closed	his	eyes	then,	as	he	felt	another	presence	–	one	he	had	never
imagined	he	would	ever	feel	again.	And	in	his	mind,	he	spoke,	‘For	you,
Mother,	he	did	this.	For	us,	he	did	this.	He	has	brought	us	all	home.	He	has
brought	us	all	home.’
And	she	replied	in	his	mind	then,	her	voice	rising	from	the	depths	below,
from	the	river	where	he	had	found	his	strength.	His	strength	to	hold,	one	last
time.	As	his	Lord	had	asked	him	to.	As	his	Lord	had	known	he	would	do.	She
said,	I	understand.	Come	to	me,	then.
The	water	between	us,	Endest	Silann,	is	clear.
The	water	is	clear.

As	the	ruined,	lifeless	remnant	that	had	once	been	Seerdomin	was	flung	to	one
side,	Salind	prepared	to	resume	her	attack,	at	last	upon	the	Redeemer	himself—
The	god	who	had	once	been	Itkovian	–	silent,	wondering	witness	to	a
defence	of	unimaginable	courage	–	now	lifted	his	head.	He	could	feel	a
presence.	More	than	one.	A	mother.	A	son.	Apart	for	so	long,	and	now	they
were	entwined	in	ways	too	mysterious,	too	ineffable,	to	grasp.	And	then,	in	a
flood,	he	was	made	to	comprehend	the	truth	of	gifts,	the	truth	of	redemption.
He	gasped.
‘I	am…shown.	I	am	shown…’
And	down	he	marched	to	meet	her.
‘Thank	you,	Anomander	Rake,	for	this	unexpected	gift.	My	hidden	friend.


And…fare	you	well.’
The	Redeemer,	on	his	barrow	of	worthless	wealth,	need	not	stand	outside,
need	not	face	Darkness.	No,	he	could	walk	forward	now,	into	that	realm.
Down	through	the	thinning,	watery	rain	to	where	she	stood,	uncertain,
trembling,	on	the	very	edge	of	abandonment.
He	took	Salind	into	his	embrace.
And,	holding	her	close,	he	spoke	these	words:	‘Bless	you,	that	you	not	be
taken.	Bless	you,	that	you	begin	in	your	time	and	that	you	end	in	its	fullness.
Bless	you,	in	the	name	of	the	Redeemer,	in	my	name,	against	the	cruel
harvesters	of	the	soul,	the	takers	of	life.	Bless	you,	that	your	life	and	each	life
shall	be	as	it	is	written,	for	peace	is	born	of	completion.’
Against	this,	the	Dying	God	had	no	defence.	In	this	embrace,	the	Dying
God	came	to	believe	that	he	had	not	marched	to	the	Redeemer,	but	that	the
Redeemer	had	summoned	him.	An	invitation	he	could	not	have	seen,	nor
recognized.	To	heal	what	none	other	could	heal.
Here	in	this	pure	Darkness.	At	the	very	Gate	of	Mother	Dark,	there	was,	in
fact,	no	other	possible	place	for	rebirth.
The	Dying	God	simply…slipped	away.
And	Salind,	why,	she	felt	soft	in	his	arms.
The	Redeemer	leaves	judgement	to	others.	This	frees	him,	you	see,	to
cleanse	all.
And	the	water	is	clear	between	them.
	
The	ashes	drifted	down	upon	a	still,	silent	scene.	The	legions	of	chaos	were
gone	from	Dragnipur,	their	quarry	vanished.	The	wagon	stood	motionless,
riven	with	fissures.	Draconus	looked	round	and	he	could	see	how	few	of	the
Chained	were	left.	So	many	obliterated,	devoured.	His	gaze	settled	for	a
moment	upon	the	patch	of	ground	where	the	demon	Pearl	had	made	its	stand,
where	it	had	fallen,	defiant	to	the	very	end.
He	saw	the	soldier	named	Iskar	Jarak,	sitting	astride	his	horse	and	staring
up	at	the	place	where	Anomander	Rake	had	been,	there	on	top	of	the	now
motionless,	silent	bodies	–	not	one	of	whom	bore	any	remnant	of	the	vast
tattoo.
Draconus	walked	up	to	stand	beside	him.	‘You	knew	him,	didn’t	you?’
Iskar	Jarak	nodded.	‘He	called	me	a	friend.’
Draconus	sighed.	‘I	wish	I	could	say	the	same.	I	wish…I	wish	I	could	have
known	him	better	than	I	did.’	He	heard	someone	approaching	and	turned	to	see
Hood.	‘Lord	of	Death,	now	what?	We	remain	chained;	we	cannot	leave	as	did


the	Bridgeburners	and	the	Grey	Swords.	There	are	too	few	of	us	to	pull	the
wagon,	even	had	we	anywhere	to	go.	I	see,	I	understand	what	Rake	has	done,
and	I	do	not	hold	him	any	ill	will.	But	now,	I	find	myself	wishing	I	had	joined
the	others.	To	find	an	end	to	this—’
Iskar	Jarak	grunted	and	then	said,	‘You	spoke	true,	Draconus,	when	you
said	you	did	not	know	him	well.’
Draconus	scowled.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘He	means,’	said	Hood,	‘we	now	come	to	the	final	act	in	this	bargain.	He
has	been	true	to	his	word,	but	now	what	comes	is	out	of	his	hands.	He	wrought
a	promise,	yes,	but	will	that	suffice?’
‘Shame	on	you,	Hood,’	said	Iskar	Jarak,	gathering	up	the	reins.	‘There	is
not	a	fool	out	there	who	would	betray	the	Son	of	Darkness,	not	in	this,	not	even
now	–	though	he	has	left	us,	though	he	has	returned	to	his	Mother ’s	realm.’
‘You	chastise	me,	Iskar	Jarak?’
‘I	do.’
The	Jaghut	snorted.	‘Accepted,’	he	said.
	
Barathol	sat	on	the	cobbles,	feeling	as	if	every	bone	in	his	body	was	fractured,
as	if	every	muscle	was	bruised.	He	wanted	to	throw	up,	but	struggled	against
the	impulse,	lest	the	convulsions	kill	him.	He	glanced	yet	again	at	that	sprawled
corpse	with	the	sword	embedded	in	its	face	and	skull.	He	could	see	the	broad,
deep	puncture	wounds	on	one	thigh,	where	the	Hound	had	picked	it	up.	No
blood	leaked	from	them.
Antsy	came	over	and	crouched	down.	‘Look	at	what	we	run	into	here.
There’s	beast	blood	everywhere,	and	you,	y’damned	idiot,	you	stood	down	one
of	them	monsters	–	with	a	damned	axe!’
‘Help	me	up,	will	you?’
Antsy	stared,	then	sighed.	‘We’d	need	the	ox	for	that	–	you’re	big	as	a
bhederin.	Fine,	I’ll	squat	here	and	you	try	using	me	like	I	was	a	ladder,	but
don’t	blame	me	if	my	knees	buckle.’
Another	carriage	had	drawn	up	a	short	time	earlier,	and	before	it	stood	the
High	Alchemist	Baruk	–	the	one	who’d	turned	them	away	–	and	beside	him	a
warrior	with	Barghast	blood,	an	enormous	hammer	strapped	to	his	back.	This
one	walked	up	to	stare	down	at	the	dead	Tiste	Andii.
Barathol	pulled	himself	upright,	Antsy	grunting	under	his	weight,	and	then
straightened	with	a	soft	word	of	thanks.	He	glanced	over	to	study	the	others
still	remaining.	The	Toblakai	warrior	and	the	woman	who	seemed	to	be	his
companion.	The	two	other	Toblakai,	young	women	–	possibly	even	children	–


who	might	have	been	sisters,	and	a	large	dog	bearing	more	scars	than	seemed
possible.	Great	Ravens	still	lined	the	roof	edges,	or	huddled	like	black,
demonic	gnomes	on	the	street	itself,	silent	as	wraiths.
The	dawn’s	golden	sunlight	streamed	through	the	smoke	hanging	over	the
city,	and	he	could	hear	nothing	of	the	normal	wakening	bustle	that	should	have
already	begun	filling	Darujhistan’s	streets.
Beyond	this	immediate	gathering,	others	were	appearing.	Citizens,	guards,
blank-faced	and	empty	of	words,	numb	as	refugees,	none	drawing	too	close
but	seemingly	unwilling	to	leave.
The	High	Alchemist	was	standing	a	respectful	distance	away	from	the
Barghast	and	the	dead	Tiste	Andii,	watching	with	sorrow-filled	eyes.	He	then
spoke,	‘Caladan	Brood,	what	he	sought	must—’
‘Wait,’	rumbled	the	Barghast.	‘It	must	wait.’	He	bent	down	then,	reached	out
and	grasped	hold	of	the	black-bladed	sword.	And,	with	little	ceremony,	he
worked	the	weapon	loose,	and	then	straightened	once	more.
It	seemed	everyone	present	held	their	breath.
Caladan	Brood	stared	down	at	the	weapon	in	his	hands.	Then,	Barathol
saw,	the	warrior ’s	mouth	twisted	into	a	faint	snarl,	filed	teeth	gleaming.	And	he
turned	round	and	walked	to	the	carriage,	where	he	opened	the	side	door	and
tossed	the	sword	inside.	It	clanged,	thumped.	The	door	clicked	shut.
The	Barghast	glared	about,	and	then	pointed.	‘That	ox	and	cart.’
‘Caladan—’
‘I	will	have	my	way	here,	Baruk.’	His	bestial	eyes	found	Barathol.	‘You,
help	me	with	him.’
Barathol	bit	back	every	groan	as	he	took	hold	of	the	Tiste	Andii’s	feet,
watching	as	Brood	forced	his	hands	beneath	the	corpse’s	shoulders,	down
under	the	arms.	Together,	they	lifted	the	body.
Antsy	had	brought	the	cart	close	and	he	now	stood	beside	the	ox,	his
expression	miserable.
They	laid	the	body	of	Anomander	Rake	on	the	slatted	bed	with	its	old
blood	stains.	Brood	leaned	over	it	for	a	long	moment.	And	then	he	drew
himself	upright	once	more	and	faced	the	High	Alchemist.	‘I	shall	build	him	a
barrow.	West	of	the	city.’
‘Caladan,	please,	that	can	wait.	We	have	to—’
‘No.’	He	moved	to	where	Antsy	stood	and	with	one	hand	pushed	the	Falari
away	from	the	ox,	grasping	hold	of	the	yoke.	‘I	will	do	this.	None	other	need
be	burdened	with	this	journey.	It	shall	be	Caladan	Brood	and	Anomander	Rake,
together	one	last	time.’
And	so	the	ox	began	its	fateful	walk.	A	warrior	at	its	side,	the	corpse	of


another	in	the	cart.
The	procession	was	forced	to	halt	but	once,	not	ten	paces	from	where	it
started,	as	a	short,	round	man	in	a	red	waistcoat	had	positioned	himself	directly
in	its	path.	Caladan	Brood	looked	up,	frowned.
The	short,	round	man	then,	with	surprising	grace,	bowed,	before	backing
to	one	side.
Brood	said	nothing,	simply	tugging	the	ox	into	motion	once	again.
	
It	was	said	that	he	had	saved	Darujhistan.	Once,	years	ago,	and	now	again.	The
Lord	of	Moon’s	Spawn,	who	on	this	night	brought	darkness	down,	darkness
and	cold,	down	upon	the	raging	fires.	Who	somehow	crushed	the	life	from	a
growing	conflagration	of	destruction.	Saving	the	lives	of	everyone.	It	was	said
he	single-handedly	banished	the	demon	Hounds.	It	was	said,	upon	the	instant	of
his	death,	the	heart	of	the	moon	broke.	And	proof	of	that	still	lingered	in	the
sky.
Who	killed	him?	No	one	was	sure.	Rumours	of	Vorcan’s	return	fuelled
speculation	of	some	vicious	betrayal.	A	Malazan	contract.	A	god’s	blind	rage.
But	clearly	it	was	fated,	that	death,	for	did	not	the	worshippers	of	Dessembrae
emerge	from	their	temple	last	night?	Was	that	not	a	time	for	the	Lord	of
Tragedy?	Oh,	but	it	was,	yes,	it	surely	was.
And	so,	unbidden,	people	came	out	on	to	the	streets.	They	lined	the	route
taken	by	Caladan	Brood	to	await	his	passing,	the	warrior,	the	ox,	the	cart.	And
when	he	did,	he	was	watched	in	silence;	and	when	the	procession	had	passed,
the	people	fell	into	his	wake,	becoming	a	river	of	humanity.
On	this	morning,	Darujhistan	was	like	no	other	city.	No	hawkers	called	out
their	wares.	Market	stalls	remained	shut.	No	fisher	boats	slipped	their
moorings	and	set	out	on	the	mirror	waters	of	the	lake.	Looms	stayed
motionless,	spindles	unspun.	And,	from	every	temple,	bells	began	their	toll.
Discordant,	sonorous,	building	like	a	broken	echo,	as	if	the	city	itself	had
found	a	voice,	and	that	voice,	so	filled	with	the	chaos	of	grief,	would	now
speak	for	every	citizen,	for	the	priests	and	priestesses,	for	the	very	gods	in
their	temples.
Amidst	the	clanging	bells,	Great	Ravens	rose	into	the	smoky	sky,	wheeling
above	rooftops,	forming	a	caterwauling,	grisly	escort.	At	first	there	were	but
hundreds,	and	then	there	were	thousands.	Swirling	in	a	mass,	as	if	drawn	to
deliver	darkness	to	Darujhistan,	as	if	to	shroud	the	body	below.
And,	just	beyond	Worrytown,	ascending	the	first	of	the	Gadrobi	Hills,	a
lone	swordsman	paused	and	half	turned	a	ravaged	face	to	the	fretful	music	of


those	bells,	those	birds,	and	whatever	might	have	been	there,	in	his	eyes,	well,
there	was	no	one	to	witness	it.
And	so	he	set	his	back	to	Darujhistan	and	resumed	his	journey.	That	he	had
nowhere	to	go,	at	least	for	the	moment,	was	without	relevance.	Solitude	finds
its	own	path,	for	the	one	who	will	not	share	burdens.	And	loneliness	is	no	fit
companion	for	the	eternally	lost,	but	it	is	the	only	one	they	know.
At	this	moment,	another	lone	figure,	clad	in	chain,	sat	in	a	tavern	in
Worrytown.	The	notion	of	witnessing	the	procession	in	the	city	was	proving
too…unpalatable.	Kallor	despised	funerals.	Celebrations	of	failure.	Wallowing
in	pathos.	Every	living	soul	standing	there	forced	to	stare	into	mortality’s
grinning	face	–	no,	that	was	not	for	Kallor.
He	preferred	kicking	that	piss-grinning,	shit-reeking	bastard	face,	right
between	the	fucking	eyes.
The	tavern	was	empty,	since	it	seemed	no	one	else	shared	his	sentiments,
and	that	was	fine	with	him.	It	had	always	been	fine	with	him.
Or	so	he	told	himself,	as	he	stared	down	into	his	stolen	tankard	of	bad	ale,
and	listened	to	those	infernal	bells	and	those	oversized	vultures.	And	that
chorus	was	hauntingly	familiar.	Death,	ruin,	grief.	‘Hear	that?’	he	said	to	his
tankard,	‘they’re	playing	our	song.’
	
Blend	walked	into	K’rul’s	Bar	and	found	it	empty,	save	for	the	hunched	figure
of	the	historian,	who	sat	at	his	chosen	table,	staring	at	the	stained,	pitted	wood.
She	walked	over	and	looked	down	at	him.	‘Who	died?’
Duiker	did	not	look	up.	‘Not	who,	Blend.	More	like	what.	What	died?
More,	I	think,	than	we’ll	ever	know.’
She	hesitated.	‘Have	you	checked	on	Picker?’
‘She	walked	out	of	here	a	quarter-bell	ago.’
‘What?’
‘Said	she’d	be	back.’
‘That’s	it?	That’s	all	she	said?’
‘Something	else.	Something	about	“them	damned	torcs”.’	He	finally
glanced	up,	his	eyes	bleak	as	ever.	‘Sit	down,	Blend.	Please.	I	don’t	like	being
alone,	not	right	now.	She’ll	be	back.’
At	that	moment	a	bell	began	ringing	overhead	and	both	Malazans	ducked	at
the	deafening	clangour.
‘Gods	below!’	swore	Blend.	‘Who’s	up	in	the	belfry?’
Duiker	was	frowning.	‘The	only	other	person	here	is	Scillara.	I	suppose…’
and	then	he	fell	silent,	and	the	wasted	misery	in	his	eyes	deepened.


Blend	sat	down.	‘She’d	better	get	tired	soon,	or	I’ll	have	to	go	up	there.’
They	sat,	weathering	the	clanging.	Blend	studied	Duiker,	wondering	at	his
ever-deepening	despondency.	And	then	a	realization	struck	her.	‘I	thought	we
unshipped	that	bell.’
‘We	did,	Blend.	It’s	in	the	cellar.’
‘Oh.’
No	wonder	he	looked	so	wretched.
	
‘Plan	on	cutting	off	its	head?’	Samar	Dev	asked.
Karsa	Orlong	was	standing	over	the	Hound	he	had	killed.	At	her	question
he	grunted.	‘I	could	use	a	kitchen	knife	to	finish	the	job.	See	how	my	blade	cut
through	that	spine?	Like	chopping	down	a	tree.’
She	found	she	was	trembling,	decided	it	was	exhaustion.	‘They’re	your
daughters,	aren’t	they?’
Karsa	glanced	over	at	the	two	Toblakai	girls,	who	stood	watching,	silent,
expectant.	‘I	raped	a	mother	and	a	daughter.’
‘Ah,	well,	isn’t	that	nice.’
‘It	was	my	right.’
‘Funny,	that.’
‘What?’
‘That	idea	of	“rights”.	The	way	that	claiming	a	right	so	often	results	in
someone	else	losing	theirs.	At	which	point	it	all	comes	down	to	who’s	holding
the	biggest	sword.’
‘I	won	that	right	when	I	killed	their	men.	This	was	tribal	war,	witch.’	He
paused.	‘And	I	was	young.’
‘Gods	below,	you’re	actually	telling	me	you	have	regrets?’
The	Toblakai	turned	away	from	the	dead	Hound	and	faced	his	daughters.	‘I
have	many,’	he	answered.	‘But,	not	these	two.’
‘And	if	they	feel	differently	about	it,	Karsa?’
‘Why	should	they?	I	gave	them	life.’
‘I	think,’	Samar	Dev	said,	‘that	I	shall	never	understand	you.’	She	eyed	the
girls.	‘Do	they	know	what	we’re	saying?	Of	course	not,	they	couldn’t	have
learned	any	Seven	Cities	language.	I’ve	not	seen	you	speak	to	them,	Karsa.
What	are	you	waiting	for?’
‘I	am	waiting,’	he	replied,	‘for	when	I	can	think	of	something	to	say.’
At	that	moment	another	woman	emerged	from	an	alley	mouth	and,	gaze
fixed	on	Karsa	Orlong,	walked	over.	‘Toblakai,’	she	said,	‘I	have	a	message	to
deliver	to	you.’	She	was	speaking	Malazan.


‘I	don’t	know	you,’	Karsa	said	to	her	in	the	same	language.
‘The	feeling’s	mutual,’	she	snapped,	‘but	let’s	not	let	that	get	in	the	way.’
She	hesitated.	‘Do	you	want	this	message	private,	or	maybe	I	should	just	shout
it	so	everybody	can	hear.’
Karsa	shot	Samar	Dev	an	amused	look.	‘Did	I	ever	tell	you,	witch,	that	I
liked	Malazans?’
‘Yes,’	she	replied,	sighing.
‘You	need	not	shout,	Malazan.	Nor	will	we	hide	in	some	corner.	So,	tell	me
this	mysterious	message,	but	first,	tell	me	who	it	is	from.’
‘All	right.	It’s	from	Hood,	I	think.’
Samar	Dev	snorted.	‘Let	me	guess.	“Keep	up	the	good	work,	yours	truly”.’
The	Malazan	woman	regarded	her.	‘Well	now,	after	all	this	is	done,	permit
me	to	buy	you	a	drink.’
Samar	Dev’s	brows	rose.
‘The	message,’	Karsa	growled.
‘Right.	It’s	this.	You	must	not	leave	Darujhistan.’
‘And	if	I	do?’
‘Then	you	will	have	lost	your	one	opportunity	to	fulfil	a	vow	you	once
made.’
‘I	have	made	many	vows.’
‘I’m	shocked	to	hear	that.’
Karsa	was	smiling,	but	something	deadly	had	awakened	in	it.	‘Will	you	tell
me	more?’
The	woman	hesitated	again.	‘I’m	reconsidering.	This	really	needs	to	be
private	–	no	offence,	Witch	–	he	called	you	that,	yes?	It’s	just	that—’
‘Tell	me,’	Karsa	demanded.
Samar	Dev	was	impressed	to	see	that	the	Malazan	woman	did	not	flinch
from	Karsa’s	dangerous	smile.	‘Toblakai,	you	will	be	needed.’
‘To	do	what?’
‘Why,	to	kill	a	god.’
‘Which	god?’
The	Malazan	woman	stared,	discomfited	for	the	first	time	since	arriving.
‘You	were	supposed	to	run	away	when	I	told	you	that.	Any	sane	person	would.’
‘Then	you	found	the	wrong	warrior,’	said	Samar	Dev,	her	mouth	dry.	‘And
you	were	right,	I	wish	I	hadn’t	heard	that.	I’m	going	to	walk	away	now,	so	you
can	finish	delivering	your	message.’
‘Go	to	K’rul’s	Bar,’	said	the	Malazan.	‘Tell	them	Picker	sent	you.
Breakfast,	decent	wine,	and	if	Blend	offers	to	prepare	you	a	bath	and	maybe
soap	you	down	some,	be	nice	to	her.’


‘Generous	of	you,	I	think.’
‘That’s	me,’	Picker	said.
Samar	Dev	set	out	in	search	of	K’rul’s	Bar.	A	breakfast	sounded	very	fine
indeed,	as	did	the	notion	of	decent	wine.	As	for	the	bath,	well,	if	it	was	indeed
offered,	why,	she	suspected	she’d	be	too	weary	to	resist.
	
Tens	of	thousands	now	followed	the	ox	cart	and	its	burden	as	it	made	its	way
down	from	Lakefront	and	into	the	Gadrobi	District.	Bells	rang;	the	Great
Ravens	wheeled,	adding	their	wretched	cries.	And	already,	from	the	hills
beyond	Two-Ox	Gate,	clouds	of	dust	rose	into	the	morning	sky.
Caladan	Brood	did	not	need	to	hew	each	stone,	or	drive	spade	into	stony
soil.	The	warren	of	Tennes	had	been	awakened,	and	the	flesh	of	Burn	was
given	new	shape	and	new	purpose.	In	this	chosen	place,	a	hill	was	being
transformed.	And	by	the	time	Brood	led	the	ox	up	to	the	barrow’s	passage
entrance,	and	took	the	body	of	Anomander	Rake	into	his	arms,	the	chamber
within	was	ready.	And	when	he	then	emerged,	pausing	as	if	startled	upon
seeing	the	tens	of	thousands	of	silent	mourners	forming	a	ring	round	the	hill’s
base,	an	enormous	capstone	had	risen	into	view,	splitting	the	grassy	ground.
And	when	with	one	hand	Caladan	Brood	had	guided	it	into	place,	he	drew
his	hammer.	To	seal	the	barrow	for	ever.
Anomander	Rake	was	interred	in	darkness.	Weaponless,	accompanied	by
no	gifts,	no	wealth,	no	treasured	possessions.	His	flesh	was	not	treated	against
the	ravages	of	decay.	The	blood	and	gore	covering	his	face	was	not	even
washed	away.	None	of	these	gestures	belonged	to	the	Tiste	Andii,	for	whom	the
soul’s	departure	leaves	the	flesh	blind,	insensate	and	indifferent.
Dying	delivers	one	into	the	river	of	darkness,	that	passes	into	and	out	of
the	ruined	city	of	Kharkanas,	the	womb	long	dead,	long	abandoned.	Into	the
river,	and	the	river	must	travel	on,	ever	on.
Caladan	Brood	sealed	the	barrow,	and	upon	the	capstone	of	bleached
dolomite	he	set	a	symbol,	carved	deep	into	the	stone’s	face.	An	ancient
Barghast	glyph,	its	meaning	precise	and	yet	a	thing	of	countless	layers	–
although	this	is	known	only	to	those	who	in	life	come	to	face	it	directly.
A	single	Barghast	glyph.
Which	said	Grief.
	
When	Baruk	had	vanished	inside	his	carriage	and	the	conveyance	had	rumbled


off	on	its	way	to	the	High	Alchemist’s	venerable	estate;	when	the	huge
Toblakai	warrior	and	Picker	had	concluded	their	conversation,	and	each	had
gone	their	own	way,	the	former	trailed	by	his	daughters	and	the	limping	dog;
when	the	place	where	two	warriors	had	met	in	mortal	combat	bore	nothing	but
a	scattering	of	masonry,	sun-darkened	swaths	of	spilled	blood	and	the
motionless	forms	of	dead	Hounds	of	Light	–	when	all	this	had	come	to	pass,
two	figures	emerged	from	the	shadows.
One	was	barely	visible	despite	the	harsh	sunlight:	ghostly,	leaning	on	a
cane.	And	after	a	time	of	silence,	this	one	spoke	in	a	rasping	voice.	To	begin
with,	a	single	word:	‘Well?’
And	his	companion	replied	in	kind.	‘Well.’
The	cane	tapped	a	few	times	on	the	cobbles.
The	companion	then	said,	‘It’s	out	of	our	hands	now,	until	the	end.’
‘Until	the	end,’	agreed	Shadowthrone.	‘You	know,	Cotillion,	I	never	much
liked	Caladan	Brood.’
‘Really?	I	never	knew.’
‘Do	you	think…’
‘I	think,’	said	Cotillion,	‘that	we	need	not	worry	on	that	count.’
Shadowthrone	sighed.	‘Are	we	pleased?	It	was…delicate…the	timing.	Are
we	pleased?	We	should	be.’
‘The	damned	Hounds	of	Light,’	said	Cotillion,	‘that	was	unexpected.	Two,
yes.	But	ten?	Gods	below.’
‘Hmph!	I	was	more	worried	by	my	Magus’s	temporary	sanity.’
‘Is	that	what	you	call	it?’
‘He	had	a	chance	–	a	slim	one,	but	he	had	a	chance.	Imagine	that	one
wielding	Dragnipur.’
Cotillion	regarded	his	companion.	‘Are	you	suggesting	he	would	not	have
relinquished	it?	Ammanas,	really.	That	was	all	your	play.	I’m	not	fooled	by	his
seemingly	going	rogue	on	you.	You	vowed	you’d	not	try	to	steal	the	sword.
But	of	course	you	never	mentioned	anything	about	one	of	your	High	Priests
doing	it	for	you.’
‘And	it	would	have	been	mine!’	Shadowthrone	hissed	in	sudden	rage.	‘If
not	for	that	confounded	fat	man	with	the	greasy	lips!	Mine!’
‘Iskaral	Pust’s,	you	mean.’
Shadowthrone	settled	down	once	more,	tapped	his	cane.	‘We’d	have	seen
eye	to	eye,	eventually.’
‘I	doubt	it.’
‘Well,	who	cares	what	you	think,	anyway?’
‘So	where	is	he	now?’


‘Pust?	Back	in	the	temple,	poring	through	the	archives	of	the	Book	of
Shadows.’
‘Looking	for	what?’
‘Some	provision,	any	provision,	for	a	High	Priest	of	Shadow	having	two
wives.’
‘Is	there	one?’
‘How	should	I	know?’
‘Well,’	Cotillion	said,	‘didn’t	you	write	it?’
Shadowthrone	shifted	about.	‘I	was	busy.’
‘So	who	did?’
Shadowthrone	would	not	answer.
Cotillion’s	brows	rose.	‘Not	Pust!	The	Book	of	Shadows,	where	he’s
proclaimed	the	Magus	of	the	High	House	Shadow?’
‘It’s	called	delegation,’	Shadowthrone	snapped.
‘It’s	called	idiocy.’
‘Well,	hee	hee.	I	dare	say	he’ll	find	what	he’s	looking	for,	won’t	he?’
‘Aye,	with	the	ink	still	wet.’
They	said	nothing	then	for	a	time,	until	Cotillion	drew	in	a	deep	breath	and
let	it	out	in	a	long	sigh,	and	then	said,	‘We	should	give	him	a	few	days,	I	think.’
And	this	time,	he	was	not	speaking	of	Iskaral	Pust.
‘Unless	you	want	to	get	cut	to	pieces,	yes,	a	few	days.’
‘I	wasn’t	sure	he’d,	well,	accept.	Right	up	until	the	moment	he…’	Cotillion
winced	and	looked	up	the	street,	as	if	straining	to	see	some	lone,	wandering,
lost	figure	dragging	a	sword	in	one	hand.	But	no,	he	wouldn’t	be	coming	back.
‘You	know,	I	did	offer	to	explain.	It	might	have	eased	his	conscience.	But	he
wasn’t	interested.’
‘Listen	to	these	damned	bells,’	said	Shadowthrone.	‘My	head’s	hurting
enough	as	it	is.	Let’s	go,	we’re	done	here.’
And	so	they	were,	and	so	they	did.
	
Two	streets	from	his	home,	Bellam	Nom	was	grasped	from	behind	and	then
pushed	up	against	a	wall.	The	motion	ripped	pain	through	his	broken	arm.
Gasping,	close	to	blacking	out,	he	stared	into	the	face	of	the	man	accosting
him,	and	then	slumped.	‘Uncle.’	And	he	saw,	behind	Rallick,	another	vaguely
familiar	face.	‘And…Uncle.’
Frowning,	Rallick	eased	back.	‘You	look	a	mess,	Bellam.’
And	Torvald	said,	‘The	whole	damned	Nom	clan	is	out	hunting	for	you.’
‘Oh.’


‘It	won’t	do	having	the	heir	to	the	House	going	missing	for	days,’	Torvald
said.	‘You’ve	got	responsibilities,	Bellam.	Look	at	us,	even	we	weren’t	so
wayward	in	our	young	days,	and	we’re	heirs	to	nothing.	So	now	we’ve	got	to
escort	you	home.	See	how	you’ve	burdened	us?’
And	they	set	out.
‘I	trust,’	Rallick	said,	‘that	whoever	you	tangled	with	fared	worse,	Bellam.’
‘Ah,	I	suppose	he	did.’
‘Well,	that’s	something	at	least.’
After	they	had	ushered	the	young	man	through	the	gate,	peering	after	him
to	make	sure	he	actually	went	inside,	Rallick	and	Torvald	set	off.
‘That	was	a	good	one,’	Rallick	said,	‘all	that	rubbish	about	us	in	our
youth.’
‘The	challenge	was	in	keeping	a	straight	face.’
‘Well	now,	we	weren’t	so	bad	back	then.	At	least	until	you	stole	my
girlfriend.’
‘I	knew	you	hadn’t	forgotten!’
‘I	suggest	we	go	now	to	sweet	Tiserra,	where	I	intend	to	do	my	best	to	steal
her	back.’
‘You’re	not	actually	expecting	she’ll	make	us	breakfast,	are	you?’
‘Why	not?’
‘Tiserra	is	nobody’s	servant,	cousin.’
‘Oh,	well.	You	can	keep	her,	then.’
Torvald	smiled	to	himself.	It	was	so	easy	working	Rallick.	It	had	always
been	so	easy,	getting	him	to	end	up	thinking	precisely	what	Torvald	wanted
him	to	think.
Rallick	walked	beside	him,	also	pleased	as	from	the	corner	of	his	eye	he
noted	Torvald’s	badly	concealed,	faintly	smug	smile.	Putting	his	cousin	at	ease
had	never	taxed	Rallick.
It	was	a	comfort,	at	times,	how	some	things	never	changed.
	
When	Sister	Spite	stepped	on	to	the	deck,	she	saw	Cutter	near	the	stern,	leaning
on	the	rail	and	staring	out	over	the	placid	lake.	She	hid	her	surprise	and	went	to
join	him.
‘I	am	returning	to	Seven	Cities,’	she	said.
He	nodded.	‘That’s	close	enough.’
‘Ah,	well,	I	am	pleased	to	have	your	company,	Cutter.’
He	glanced	over	at	her.	‘Get	what	you	wanted?’
‘Of	course	not,	and…mostly.’


‘So,	you’re	not	upset?’
‘Only	in	so	far	as	I	failed	in	sinking	my	teeth	into	my	sister ’s	soft	throat.
But	that	can	wait.’
If	he	was	startled	by	her	words,	he	did	not	show	it.	‘I	would	have	thought
you’d	want	to	finish	it,	since	you	came	all	this	way.’
‘Oh,	there	are	purposes	and	there	are	purposes	to	all	that	we	do,	my	young
friend.	In	any	case,	it	is	best	that	I	leave	immediately,	for	reasons	I	care	not	to
explain.	Have	you	said	your	goodbyes?’
He	shrugged.	‘I	think	I	did	that	years	ago,	Spite.’
‘Very	well,	shall	we	cast	off?’
	
A	short	time	later,	the	ship	slipping	easily	just	out	from	the	shoreline,	on	a
westward	heading,	they	both	stood	at	the	port	rail	and	observed	the	funeral
procession’s	end,	there	at	a	new	long	barrow	rising	modestly	above	the
surrounding	hills.	Crowds	upon	crowds	of	citizens	ringed	the	mound.	The
silence	of	the	scene,	with	the	bells	faint	and	distant,	made	it	seem	ethereal,	like
a	painted	image,	solemn	through	the	smoke	haze.	They	could	see	the	cart,	the
ox.
Spite	sighed.	‘My	sister	once	loved	him,	you	know.’
‘Anomander	Rake?	No,	I	didn’t	know	that.’
‘His	death	marks	the	beginning.’
‘Of	what?’
‘The	end,	Cutter.’
He	had	no	response	to	that.	A	few	moments	drifted	past.	‘You	said	she
loved	him	once.	What	happened?’
‘He	acquired	Dragnipur.	At	least,	I	imagine	that	was	the	cause.	She	is	well
named,	is	my	sister.’
Envy.
Cutter	shot	her	a	glance,	thinking	of	her	own	name,	this	beautiful	woman	at
his	side,	and	wisely	he	said	nothing,	nothing	at	all.
	
The	bell	that	wasn’t	there	had	finally	stopped	its	manic	ringing,	and	Scillara
was	able	to	climb	back	on	to	the	temple	roof,	so	that	she	could	gaze	out	over
the	city.	She	could	see	the	lake,	where	one	lone	ship	had	unfurled	sails	to	ride
the	morning	breeze.	She	knew	those	sails	and	she	tracked	them	for	a	time.
Who	was	on	board?	Well,	Spite	for	certain.	And,	if	he’d	any	sense,


Barathol.	With	smiling	Chaur	at	his	side,	the	giant	child	with	his	childish	love
that	would	never	know	betrayal,	at	least	until	the	day,	hopefully	decades	hence,
when	the	blacksmith	bowed	to	old	age	and	took	to	bed	for	the	last	time.	She
could	almost	see	him,	his	face,	the	deep	wrinkles,	the	dimming	of	his	dark
eyes,	and	all	the	losses	of	his	life	falling	away,	veil	by	veil,	until	he	ceased
looking	outward	entirely.
Chaur	would	not	understand.	What	he	would	feel	would	crash	blind	as	a
boar	in	a	thicket,	crash	right	through	him.	It	would	be	a	dreadful	thing	to
witness,	to	see	the	poor	child	tangled	in	the	clutches	of	pain	he	could	not
understand,	and	loss	he	could	not	fathom.
Who	would	care	for	him	then?
And	what	of	dear	Scillara?	Why	was	she	not	with	them?	She	wished	she
had	an	answer	to	that.	But	she	had	come	to	certain	truths	about	herself.
Destined,	she	now	believed,	to	provide	gentle	comfort	to	souls	in	passing.	A
comforting	bridge,	yes,	to	ease	the	loneliness	of	their	journey.
She	seemed	doomed	ever	to	open	her	arms	to	the	wrong	lover,	to	love
fully	yet	never	be	so	loved	in	return.	It	made	her	pathetic	stock	in	this	retinue
of	squandered	opportunities	that	scrawled	out	the	history	of	a	clumsy	life.
Could	she	live	with	that?	Without	plunging	into	self-pity?	Time	would	tell,
she	supposed.
Scillara	packed	her	pipe,	struck	sparks	and	drew	deep.
A	sound	behind	her	made	her	turn—
As	Barathol	stepped	close,	one	hand	sliding	up	behind	her	head,	leaned
forward	and	kissed	her.	A	long,	deep,	determined	kiss.	When	he	finally	pulled
away,	she	gasped.	Eyes	wide,	staring	up	into	his	own.
He	said,	‘I	am	a	blacksmith.	If	I	need	to	forge	chains	to	keep	you,	I	will.’
She	blinked,	and	then	gave	him	a	throaty	laugh.	‘Careful,	Barathol.	Chains
bind	both	ways.’
His	expression	was	grave.	‘Can	you	live	with	that?’
‘Give	me	no	choice.’
	
Ride,	my	friends,	the	winds	of	love!	There	beside	a	belfry	where	a	man	and	a
woman	find	each	other,	and	out	in	the	taut	billows	of	sails	where	another	man
stares	westward	and	dreams	of	sweet	moonlight,	a	garden,	a	woman	who	is	the
other	half	of	his	soul.
Gentle	gust	through	a	door,	sweet	sigh,	as	a	guard	comes	home	and	is
engulfed	by	his	wife,	who	had	suffered	an	eternal	night	of	fears,	but	she	holds
him	now	and	all	is	well,	all	is	right,	and	children	yell	in	excitement	and	dance


in	the	kitchen.
The	river	of	grief	has	swept	through	Darujhistan,	and	morning	waxes	in	its
wake.	There	are	lives	to	rebuild,	so	many	wounds	to	mend.
A	bag	of	coins	thumps	on	to	the	tabletop	before	a	woman	new	to	her
blessed	widowhood,	and	she	feels	as	if	she	has	awakened	from	a	nightmare	of
decades,	and	this	is,	for	her,	a	private	kind	of	love,	a	moment	for	herself	and
no	one	else.
Picker	strides	into	the	bar	and	there	waits	Blend,	tears	in	her	eyes,	and
Samar	Dev	watches	from	a	table	and	she	smiles	but	that	smile	is	wistful	and	she
wonders	what	doors	wait	for	her,	and	which	ones	will	prove	unlocked,	and
what	might	lie	beyond.
And	in	a	temple,	Iskaral	Pust	blots	dry	the	ink	and	crows	over	his	literary
genius.	Mogora	looks	on	with	jaded	eyes,	but	is	already	dreaming	of	alliances
with	Sordiko	Qualm.
The	bhokarala	sit	in	a	clump,	exchanging	wedding	gifts.
Two	estate	guards,	after	a	busy	night,	burst	into	a	brothel,	only	to	find
nobody	there.	Love	will	have	to	wait,	and	is	anyone	really	surprised	at	their	ill
luck?
At	the	threshold	of	a	modest	home	and	workshop,	Tiserra	stands	facing	the
two	loves	of	her	life.	And,	for	the	briefest	of	moments,	her	imagination	runs
wild.	She	then	recovers	herself	and,	in	a	light	tone,	asks,	‘Breakfast?’
Torvald	is	momentarily	startled.
Rallick	just	smiles.
	
There	is	a	round	man,	circumference	unending,	stepping	ever	so	daintily
through	rubble	on	his	way	back	to	the	Phoenix	Inn.	It	will	not	do	to	be	a
stranger	to	sorrow,	if	only	to	cast	sharp	the	bright	wonder	of	sweeter	things.
And	so,	even	as	he	mourns	in	his	own	fashion	(with	cupcakes),	so	too	he	sighs
wistfully.	Love	is	a	city,	yes	indeed,	a	precious	city,	where	a	thousand	thousand
paths	wend	through	shadow	and	light,	through	air	stale	and	air	redolent	with
blossoms,	nose-wrinkling	perfume	and	nose-wrinkling	dung,	and	there	is	gold
dust	in	the	sewage	and	rebirth	in	the	shedding	of	tears.
And	at	last,	we	come	to	a	small	child,	walking	into	a	duelling	school,
passing	through	gilded	streams	of	sunlight,	and	he	halts	ten	paces	from	a
woman	sitting	on	a	bench,	and	he	says	something	then,	something	without
sound.
A	moment	later	two	imps	trundle	into	view	and	stop	in	their	tracks,	staring
at	Harllo,	and	then	they	squeal	and	rush	towards	him.


The	woman	looks	up.
She	is	silent	for	a	long	time,	watching	Mew	and	Hinty	clutching	the	boy.
And	then	a	sob	escapes	her	and	she	makes	as	if	to	turn	away—
But	Harllo	will	have	none	of	that.	‘No!	I’ve	come	home.	That’s	what	this	is,
it’s	me	coming	home!’
She	cannot	meet	his	eyes,	but	she	is	weeping	none	the	less.	She	waves	a
hand.	‘You	don’t	understand,	Harllo.	That	time,	that	time	–	I	have	no	good
memories	of	that	time.	Nothing	good	came	of	it,	nothing.’
‘That’s	not	true!’	he	shouts,	close	to	tears.	‘That’s	not	true.	There	was	me.’
As	Scillara	now	knew,	some	doors	you	cannot	hold	back.	Bold	as	truth,
some	doors	get	kicked	in.
Stonny	did	not	know	how	she	would	manage	this.	But	she	would.	She
would.	And	so	she	met	her	son’s	eyes,	in	a	way	that	she	had	never	before
permitted	herself	to	do.	And	that	pretty	much	did	it.
And	what	was	said	by	Harllo,	in	silence,	as	he	stood	there,	in	the	moments
before	he	was	discovered?	Why,	it	was	this:	See,	Bainisk,	this	is	my	mother.


Epilogue

Rage	and	tell	me	then
Not	every	tale	is	a	gift
When	anguish	gives	the	knife
One	more	twist
And	blood	is	thinned	by	tears
Cry	out	the	injustice
Not	every	tale	is	a	gift
In	a	world	harsh	with	strife
Leaving	us	bereft
Deeds	paling	through	the	years
And	I	will	meet	your	eye
Neither	flinching	nor	shy
As	I	fold	death	inside	life
And	face	you	down
With	a	host	of	mortal	fears
And	I	will	say	then
Every	tale	is	a	gift
And	the	scars	borne	by	us	both
Are	easily	missed
In	the	distance	between	us
Bard’s	Curse
Fisher	kel	Tath

Nimander	stood	on	the	roof	of	the	keep,	leaning	with	his	arms	on	the
battlement’s	cold	stone,	and	watched	the	distant	figure	of	Spinnock	Durav	as	he
crossed	the	old	killing	ground.	A	fateful,	fretful	meeting	awaited	that	warrior,


and	Nimander	was	worried,	for	it	was	by	Nimander ’s	own	command	that
Spinnock	now	went	to	find	the	woman	he	loved.
Skintick	arrived	to	stand	at	his	side.
‘It’s	madness,’	said	Nimander.	‘It	should	be	Durav	on	the	throne.	Or
Korlat.’
‘It’s	your	lack	of	confidence	we	find	so	charming,’	Skintick	replied.
‘Is	that	supposed	to	be	amusing?’
‘Well,	it	amuses	me,	Nimander.	I	settle	for	that,	most	times.	Listen,	it’s
simple	and	it’s	complicated.	His	blood	courses	strong	within	you,	stronger
than	you	realize.	And	like	it	or	not,	people	will	follow	you.	Listen	to	you.
Spinnock	Durav	was	a	good	example,	I’d	venture.	He	took	your	command	like
a	body	blow,	and	then	he	set	out	to	follow	it.	Not	a	word	of	complaint	–	your
irritated	impatience	stung	him.’
‘Precisely	my	point.	It	was	none	of	my	business	in	the	first	place.	I	had	no
right	to	be	irritated	or	impatient.’
‘You	were	both	because	you	cared,	and	you	barely	know	the	man.	You	may
not	know	it,	but	you	made	friends	in	that	throne	room,	right	then	and	right
there.	Korlat’s	eyes	shone.	And	the	High	Priestess	actually	smiled.	Like	a
mother,	both	proud	and	indulgent.	They	are	yours,	Nimander.’	He	hesitated,
and	then	added,	‘We	all	are.’
Nimander	wasn’t	ready	to	contemplate	such	notions.	‘How	fares	Nenanda?’
‘Recovering,	as	thin-skinned	as	ever.’
‘And	Clip?’
Skintick	shrugged.	‘I	wish	I	could	say	humbled.’
‘I	wish	you	could	as	well.’
‘He’s	furious.	Feels	cheated,	personally	slighted.	He’ll	be	trouble,	I	fear,	an
eternal	thorn	in	your	side.’
Nimander	sighed.	‘They	probably	felt	the	same	at	the	Andara,	which	was
why	they	sent	him	to	find	us.’
‘On	a	wave	of	cheering	fanfare,	no	doubt.’
Nimander	turned.	‘Skin,	I	truly	do	not	know	if	I	can	do	this.’
‘Unlike	Anomander	Rake,	you	are	not	alone,	Nimander.	The	burden	no
longer	rests	upon	one	person.	She	is	with	us	now.’
‘She	could	have	left	us	Aranatha.’
‘Aranatha	was	not	Aranatha	for	some	time	–	perhaps	you	don’t	remember
when	she	was	younger.	Nimander,	our	sister	was	a	simpleton.	Barely	a	child	in
her	mind,	no	matter	that	she	grew	into	a	woman.’
‘I	always	saw	it	as…innocence.’
‘There	again,	your	generosity	of	spirit.’


‘My	inability	to	discriminate,	you	mean.’
They	were	silent	for	a	time.	Nimander	glanced	up	at	the	spire.	‘There	was	a
dragon	up	there.’
‘Silanah.	Er,	very	close	to	Anomander	Rake,	I’m	told.’
‘I	wonder	where	she	went?’
‘You	could	always	awaken	Tiam’s	blood	within	you,	and	find	out,
Nimander.’
‘Ah,	no	thank	you.’
Spinnock	Durav	had	moved	out	past	Night	and	had	reached	the	razed
stretch	that	had	been	a	squalid	encampment,	where	a	monastery	was	now	under
construction,	although	for	the	moment	a	military	tent	was	the	temple	wherein
dwelt	Salind,	the	High	Priestess	of	the	Redeemer.
Would	she	accept	him?
Mother	Dark,	hear	me	please.	For	Spinnock	Durav,	who	stood	in	your	son’s
place,	again	and	again.	Give	him	peace.	Give	him	happiness.
At	the	Great	Barrow	there	were	other	workers,	pilgrims	for	the	most	part,
raising	a	lesser	burial	mound,	to	hold	the	bones	of	someone	named
Seerdomin,	who	had	been	chosen	to	stand	eternal	vigilance	at	the	foot	of	the
Redeemer.	It	was	odd	and	mysterious,	how	such	notions	came	to	pass.
Nimander	reminded	himself	that	he	would	have	to	send	a	crew	out	there,	to	see
if	they	needed	any	help.
‘What	are	you	thinking,	Lord	Nimander?’
Nimander	winced	at	the	title.	‘I	was	thinking,’	he	said,	‘about	prayers.	How
they	feel…cleaner	when	one	says	them	not	for	oneself,	but	on	behalf	of
someone	else.’	He	shrugged,	suddenly	uncomfortable.	‘I	was	praying	for
Spinnock.	Anyway,	that’s	what	I	was	thinking.	Well,	the	High	Priestess	says
there	are	things	we	need	to	talk	about.	I’d	best	be	off.’
As	he	turned,	Skintick	said,	‘It’s	said	that	Anomander	Rake	would	stand
facing	the	sea.’
‘Oh,	and?’
‘Nothing.	It’s	just	that	I’ve	noticed	that	you’ve	taken	to	staring	out	over
land,	out	to	that	Great	Barrow.	Is	there	something	about	the	Redeemer	that
interests	you?’
And	Nimander	just	smiled,	and	then	he	went	inside,	leaving	Skintick
staring	after	him.
	
In	a	chamber	devoted	to	the	most	arcane	rituals,	forty-seven	steps	beneath	the
ground	floor	of	the	High	Alchemist’s	estate,	two	iron	anvils	had	been	placed


within	an	inscribed	circle.	The	torches	lining	the	walls	struggled	to	lift	flames
above	their	blackened	mouths.
Sitting	at	a	table	off	to	one	side	was	the	witch,	Derudan,	a	hookah	at	her
side,	smoke	rising	from	her	as	if	she	steamed	in	the	chilly	air.	At	the	edge	of
the	circle	stood	Vorcan,	who	now	called	herself	Lady	Varada,	wrapped	tight
inside	a	dark	grey	woollen	cloak.	The	Great	Raven,	Crone,	walked	as	if	pacing
out	the	chamber ’s	dimensions,	her	head	crooking	again	and	again	to	regard	the
anvils.
Baruk	was	by	the	door,	eyeing	Vorcan	and	Derudan.	The	last	of	the
T’orrud	Cabal.	The	taste	in	his	mouth	was	of	ashes.
There	were	servants	hidden	in	the	city,	and	they	were	even	now	at	work.	To
bring	about	a	fell	return,	to	awaken	one	of	the	Tyrants	of	old.	Neither	woman
in	this	room	was	unaware	of	this,	and	the	fear	was	palpable	in	its	persistent
distraction.
The	fate	of	Darujhistan	–	and	of	the	T’orrud	Cabal	–	was	not	their	reason
for	being	here,	however.
The	door	swung	open	with	a	creak	and	in	strode	Caladan	Brood,	carrying
in	one	hand	the	sword	Dragnipur.	He	paused	just	inside	and	glowered	across	at
Vorcan,	and	then	Derudan.	‘This	has	nothing	to	do	with	you,’	he	told	them.
Vorcan	bowed.	‘Forgive	us,	Warlord,	but	we	will	stay.’
Clearing	his	throat,	Baruk	said,	‘My	fault,	Warlord.	It	seems	they	do	not
trust	me	–	not	in	such	close	proximity	to	that	weapon.’
Brood	bared	his	teeth.	‘Am	I	not	guardian	enough?’
Seeing	Vorcan’s	faint	smile,	Baruk	said,	‘The	lack	of	trust	is	mutual,	I	am
afraid.	I	am	more	at	ease	with	these	two	here	in	front	of	us,	rather	than,	um,	my
starting	at	every	shadow.’
The	warlord	continued	staring	at	Vorcan.	‘You’d	try	for	me,	Assassin?’
Crone	cackled	at	the	suggestion.
‘I	assume,’	Vorcan	said,	‘there	will	be	no	need.’
Brood	glanced	at	Baruk.	‘What	a	miserable	nest	you	live	in,	High
Alchemist.	Never	mind,	it’s	time.’
They	watched	him	walk	into	the	circle.	They	watched	him	set	Dragnipur
down,	bridging	the	two	anvils.	He	took	a	single	step	back,	then,	and	grew	still
as	he	stared	down	at	the	sword.
‘It	is	beautiful,’	he	said.	‘Fine	craftsmanship.’
‘May	you	one	day	be	able	to	compliment	its	maker	in	person,’	Vorcan	said.
‘Just	don’t	expect	me	to	make	the	introduction.	I	don’t	know	where	they	will	all
spill	out,	so	long	as	it	isn’t	in	my	city.’
Brood	shrugged.	‘I	am	the	wrong	one	from	whom	to	seek	reassurance,


Assassin.’	He	drew	the	huge	hammer	from	his	back	and	readied	the	weapon.
‘I’m	just	here	to	break	the	damned	thing.’
No	one	spoke	then,	and	not	one	of	the	watchers	moved	a	muscle	as	the
warlord	took	a	second	step	back	and	raised	the	hammer	over	his	head.	He	held
it	poised	for	a	moment.	‘I’d	swear,’	he	said	in	a	low	rumble,	‘that	Burn’s
smiling	in	her	sleep	right	now.’
And	down	came	the	hammer.
	
Fisher	was	waiting	in	the	garden,	strangely	fresh,	renewed,	when	Lady	Envy
returned	home.	She	had	walked	in	the	midst	of	thousands,	out	to	a	barrow.	She
had	watched,	as	had	all	the	others,	as	if	a	stranger	to	the	one	fallen.	But	she	was
not	that.
She	found	a	delicate	decanter	of	the	thinnest	Nathii	greenglass,	filled	with
amber	wine,	and	collected	two	goblets,	and	walked	out	to	join	the	bard.	He	rose
from	the	bench	he	had	been	sitting	on	and	would	have	taken	a	step	closer	to
her,	but	then	he	saw	her	expression.
The	bard	was	wise	enough	to	hide	his	sigh	of	relief.	He	watched	her	fill
both	goblets	to	the	brim.	‘What	happened?’	he	asked.
She	would	not	speak	of	her	time	at	the	barrow.	She	would,	in	fact,	never
speak	of	it.	Not	to	this	man,	not	to	anyone.	‘Caladan	Brood,’	she	replied,	‘that’s
what	happened.	And	there’s	more.’
‘What?’
She	faced	him,	and	then	drained	her	goblet.	‘My	father.	He’s	back.’
	
Oh	frail	city…
An	empty	plain	it	was,	beneath	an	empty	sky.	Weak,	flickering	fire	nested
deep	in	its	ring	of	charred	stones,	now	little	more	than	ebbing	coals.	A	night,	a
hearth,	and	a	tale	now	spun,	spun	out.
‘Has	thou	ever	seen	Kruppe	dance?’
‘No.	I	think	not.	Not	by	limb,	not	by	word.’
‘Then,	my	friends,	settle	yourselves	for	this	night.	And	witness…’
And	so	they	did.	Bard	and	Elder	God,	and	oh	how	Kruppe	danced.	Blind	to
the	threat	of	frowns,	blind	to	dismay,	rolling	eyes,	blind	even	to	contempt	–
although	none	of	these	things	came	from	these	two	witnesses.	But	beyond	this
frail	ring	of	warm	light,	out	in	that	vast	world	so	discordant,	so	filled	with
tumult,	judgement	harsh	and	gleeful	in	cruelty,	there	can	be	no	knowing	the


cast	of	arrayed	faces.
No	matter.
One	must	dance,	and	dance	did	Kruppe,	oh,	yes,	he	did	dance.
The	night	draws	to	an	end,	the	dream	dims	in	the	pale	silver	of	awakening.
Kruppe	ceases,	weary	beyond	reason.	Sweat	drips	down	the	length	of	his	ratty
beard,	his	latest	affectation.
A	bard	sits,	head	bowed,	and	in	a	short	time	he	will	say	thank	you.	But	for
now	he	must	remain	silent,	and	as	for	the	other	things	he	would	say,	they	are
between	him	and	Kruppe	and	none	other.	Fisher	sits,	head	bowed.	While	an
Elder	God	weeps.
The	tale	is	spun.	Spun	out.
Dance	by	limb,	dance	by	word.	Witness!
	
This	ends	the	Eighth	Tale	of	the
Malazan	Book	of	the	Fallen

