DEADHOUSE
GATES
BOOK	TWO	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	the	characters	and	events	portrayed	in	this	novel
are	either	fictitious	or	are	used	fictitiously.
DEADHOUSE	GATES:	BOOK	TWO	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE
FALLEN
Copyright	©	2000	by	Steven	Erikson
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers
All	rights	reserved,	including	the	right	to	reproduce	this	book,	or	portions
thereof,	in	any	form.
Maps	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor-forge.com
Tor ® 	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Erikson,	Steven.
Deadhouse	gates	:	Steven	Erikson.—1st	ed.
p.	cm.
“A	Tom	Doherty	Associates	book.”
ISBN:	978-0-7653-1002-6
I.	Title.
PS3605.R55D43	2004
813′.54—dc22
2004058083
eISBN	9781429926492


This	novel	is	dedicated	to	two	gentlemen:
DAVID	T HOMAS,	JR.,
who	welcomed	me	to	England
with	an	introduction	to	a	certain	agent,	and
P AT RICK	WALSH,
the	agent	he	introduced	me	to.
There	has	been	a	lot	of	faith	shown	over	the	years,
and	I	thank	you	both.


Acknowledgments

With	deepest	gratitude	I	acknowledge	the	following	for	their	support:	the	staff
at	Café	Rouge,	Dorking	(keep	the	coffees	coming….);	the	folks	at	Psion,
whose	extraordinary	5	Series	was	home	to	this	novel’s	first	draft;	Daryl	and
crew	at	Café	Hosete;	and,	of	course,	Simon	Taylor	and	the	rest	at	Transworld.
For	my	family	and	friends,	thank	you	for	your	faith	and	encouragement,
without	which	all	that	I	achieve	means	little.	Thanks	also	to	Stephen	and	Ross
Donaldson	for	their	kind	words,	James	Barclay,	Sean	Russell,	and	Ariel.
Finally,	a	big	thank-you	to	those	readers	who	took	time	to	write	their
comments	on	various	Web	sites—writing	is	a	solitary,	isolating	activity,	but
you	have	made	it	less	so.





Dramatis	Personae

On	the	Path	of	the	Hand
Icarium,	a	mixed-blood	Jaghut	wanderer
Mappo,	his	Trell	companion
Iskaral	Pust,	a	High	Priest	of	Shadow
Ryllandaras,	the	White	Jackal,	a	D’ivers
Messremb,	a	Soletaken
Gryllen,	a	D’ivers
Mogora,	a	D’ivers
The	Malazans
Felisin,	youngest	daughter	of	House	Paran
Heboric	Light	Touch,	exiled	historian	and	ex-priest	of	Fener
Baudin,	companion	to	Felisin	and	Heboric
Fiddler,	9th	Squad,	Bridgeburners
Crokus,	a	visitor	from	Darujhistan
Apsalar,	9th	Squad,	Bridgeburners
Kalam,	a	corporal	in	the	9th	Squad,	Bridgeburners
Duiker,	Imperial	Historian
Kulp,	cadre	mage,	7th	Army
Mallick	Rel,	chief	adviser	to	the	High	Fist	of	the	Seven	Cities
Sawark,	commander	of	the	guard	in	the	Otataral	mining	camp,	Skullcup
Pella,	a	soldier	stationed	at	Skullcup
Pormqual,	High	Fist	of	the	Seven	Cities,	in	Aren
Blistig,	Commander	of	Aren	Guard
Topper,	Commander	of	the	Claw
Lull,	a	captain	in	the	Sialk	Marines
Chenned,	a	captain	in	the	7th	Army
Sulmar,	a	captain	in	the	7th	Army
List,	a	corporal	in	the	7th	Army
Mincer,	a	sapper


Cuttle,	a	sapper
Gesler,	a	corporal	in	the	Coastal	Guard
Stormy,	a	soldier	in	the	Coastal	Guard
Truth,	a	recruit	in	the	Coastal	Guard
Squint,	a	bowman
Pearl,	a	Claw
Captain	Keneb,	a	refugee
Selv,	Keneb’s	wife
Minala,	Selv’s	sister
Kesen,	Keneb	and	Selv’s	first-born	son
Vaneb,	Keneb	and	Selv’s	second-born	son
Captain,	owner	and	commander	of	the	trader	craft	Ragstopper
Bent,	a	Wickan	cattle-dog
Roach,	a	Hengese	lapdog
Wickans
Coltaine,	Fist,	7th	Army
Temul,	a	young	lancer
Sormo	E’nath,	a	warlock
Nil,	a	warlock
Nether,	a	warlock
Bult,	a	veteran	commander	and	Coltaine’s	uncle
The	Red	Blades
Baria	Setral	(Dosin	Pali)
Mesker	Setral,	his	brother	(Dosin	Pali)
Tene	Baralta	(Ehrlitan)
Aralt	Arpat	(Ehrlitan)
Lostara	Yil	(Ehrlitan)
Nobles	on	the	Chain	of	Dogs	(Malazan)
Nethpara
Lenestro
Pullyk	Alar
Tumlit


Followers	of	the	Apocalypse
Sha’ik,	leader	of	the	rebellion
Leoman,	captain	in	the	Raraku	Apocalypse
Toblakai,	a	bodyguard	and	warrior	in	the	Raraku	Apocalypse
Febryl,	a	mage	and	elder	adviser	to	Sha’ik
Korbolo	Dom,	renegade	Fist	leading	the	Odhan	army
Kamist	Reloe,	High	Mage	with	the	Odhan	army
L’oric,	a	mage	with	the	Raraku	Apocalypse
Bidithal,	a	mage	with	the	Raraku	Apocalypse
Mebra,	a	spy	in	Ehrlitan
Others
Salk	Elan,	a	traveler	on	the	seas
Shan,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Gear,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Blind,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Baran,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Rood,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Moby,	a	familiar
Hentos	Ilm,	a	T’lan	Imass	Bonecaster
Legana	Breed,	a	T’lan	Imass
Olar	Ethil,	a	T’lan	Imass	Bonecaster
Kimloc,	a	Tanno	Spiritwalker
Beneth,	a	crime	lord
Irp,	a	small	servant
Rudd,	an	equally	small	servant
Apt,	an	aptorian	demon
Panek,	a	child
Karpolan	Demesand,	a	merchant
Bula,	an	innkeeper
Cotillion,	patron	god	of	assassins
Shadowthrone,	Ruler	of	High	House	Shadow
Rellock,	a	servant


Prologue

What	see	you	in	the	horizon’s	bruised	smear
That	cannot	be	blotted	out
By	your	raised	hand?
THE	BRIDGEBURNERS
T OC	THE	YOUNGER
1163rd	Year	of	Burn’s	Sleep
Ninth	Year	of	the	Rule	of	Empress	Laseen
Year	of	the	Cull
He	came	shambling	into	Judgment’s	Round	from	the	Avenue	of	Souls,	a
misshapen	mass	of	flies.	Seething	lumps	crawled	on	his	body	in	mindless
migration,	black	and	glittering	and	occasionally	falling	away	in	frenzied
clumps	that	exploded	into	fragmented	flight	as	they	struck	the	cobbles.
The	Thirsting	Hour	was	coming	to	a	close	and	the	priest	staggered	in	its
wake,	blind,	deaf	and	silent.	Honoring	his	god	on	this	day,	the	servant	of	Hood,
Lord	of	Death,	had	joined	his	companions	in	stripping	naked	and	smearing
himself	in	the	blood	of	executed	murderers,	blood	that	was	stored	in	giant
amphorae	lining	the	walls	of	the	temple’s	nave.	The	brothers	had	then	moved
in	procession	out	onto	the	streets	of	Unta	to	greet	the	god’s	sprites,	enjoining
the	mortal	dance	that	marked	the	Season	of	Rot’s	last	day.
The	guards	lining	the	Round	parted	to	let	the	priest	pass,	then	parted
further	for	the	spinning,	buzzing	cloud	that	trailed	him.	The	sky	over	Unta	was
still	more	gray	than	blue,	as	the	flies	that	had	swept	at	dawn	into	the	capital	of
the	Malazan	Empire	now	rose,	slowly	winging	out	over	the	bay	toward	the	salt
marshes	and	sunken	islands	beyond	the	reef.	Pestilence	came	with	the	Season
of	Rot,	and	the	Season	had	come	an	unprecedented	three	times	in	the	past	ten
years.
The	air	of	the	Round	still	buzzed,	was	still	speckled	as	if	filled	with	flying
grit.	Somewhere	in	the	streets	beyond	a	dog	yelped	like	a	thing	near	death	but


not	near	enough,	and	close	to	the	Round’s	central	fountain	the	abandoned	mule
that	had	collapsed	earlier	still	kicked	feebly	in	the	air.	Flies	had	crawled	into
the	beast	through	every	orifice	and	it	was	now	bloated	with	gases.	The	animal,
stubborn	by	its	breed,	was	now	over	an	hour	in	dying.	As	the	priest	staggered
sightlessly	past,	flies	rose	from	the	mule	in	a	swift	curtain	to	join	those	already
enshrouding	him.
It	was	clear	to	Felisin	from	where	she	and	the	others	waited	that	the	priest
of	Hood	was	striding	directly	toward	her.	His	eyes	were	ten	thousand	eyes,	but
she	was	certain	they	were	all	fixed	on	her.	Yet	even	this	growing	horror	did
little	to	stir	the	numbness	that	lay	like	a	smothering	blanket	over	her	mind;	she
was	aware	of	it	rising	inside	but	the	awareness	seemed	more	a	memory	of	fear
than	fear	now	alive	within	her.
She	barely	recalled	the	first	Season	of	Rot	she’d	lived	through,	but	had
clear	memories	of	the	second	one.	Just	under	three	years	ago,	she	had
witnessed	this	day	secure	in	the	family	estate,	in	a	solid	house	with	its	windows
shuttered	and	cloth-sealed,	with	the	braziers	set	outside	the	doors	and	on	the
courtyard’s	high,	broken-glass-rimmed	walls	billowing	the	acrid	smoke	of
istaarl	leaves.	The	last	day	of	the	Season	and	its	Thirsting	Hour	had	been	a	time
of	remote	revulsion	for	her,	irritating	and	inconvenient	but	nothing	more.
Then	she’d	given	little	thought	to	the	city’s	countless	beggars	and	the	stray
animals	bereft	of	shelter,	or	even	to	the	poorer	residents	who	were
subsequently	press-ganged	into	clean-up	crews	for	days	afterward.
The	same	city,	but	a	different	world.
Felisin	wondered	if	the	guards	would	make	any	move	toward	the	priest	as
he	came	closer	to	the	Cull’s	victims.	She	and	the	others	in	the	line	were	the
charges	of	the	Empress	now—Laseen’s	responsibility—and	the	priest’s	path
could	be	seen	as	blind	and	random,	the	imminent	collision	one	of	chance
rather	than	design,	although	in	her	bones	Felisin	knew	differently.	Would	the
helmed	guards	step	forward,	seek	to	guide	the	priest	to	one	side,	lead	him
safely	through	the	Round?
“I	think	not,”	said	the	man	squatting	on	her	right.	His	half-closed	eyes,
buried	deep	in	their	sockets,	flashed	with	something	that	might	have	been
amusement.	“Seen	you	flicking	your	gaze,	guards	to	priest,	priest	to	guards.”
The	big,	silent	man	on	her	left	slowly	rose	to	his	feet,	pulling	the	chain
with	him.	Felisin	winced	as	the	shackle	yanked	at	her	when	the	man	folded	his
arms	across	his	bare,	scarred	chest.	He	glared	at	the	approaching	priest	but
said	nothing.
“What	does	he	want	with	me?”	Felisin	asked	in	a	whisper.	“What	have	I
done	to	earn	a	priest	of	Hood’s	attention?”


The	squatting	man	rocked	back	on	his	heels,	tilting	his	face	into	the	late
afternoon	sun.	“Queen	of	Dreams,	is	this	self-centered	youth	I	hear	from	those
full,	sweet	lips?	Or	just	the	usual	stance	of	noble	blood	around	which	the
universe	revolves?	Answer	me,	I	pray,	fickle	Queen!”
Felisin	scowled.	“I	felt	better	when	I	thought	you	asleep—or	dead.”
“Dead	men	do	not	squat,	lass,	they	sprawl.	Hood’s	priest	comes	not	for	you
but	for	me.”
She	faced	him	then,	the	chain	rattling	between	them.	He	looked	more	of	a
sunken-eyed	toad	than	a	man.	He	was	bald,	his	face	webbed	in	tattooing,
minute,	black,	square-etched	symbols	hidden	within	an	overall	pattern
covering	skin	like	a	wrinkled	scroll.	He	was	naked	but	for	a	ragged	loincloth,
its	dye	a	faded	red.	Flies	crawled	all	over	him;	reluctant	to	leave,	they	danced
on—but	not,	Felisin	realized,	to	Hood’s	bleak	orchestration.	The	tattooed
pattern	covered	the	man—the	boar ’s	face	overlying	his	own,	the	intricate	maze
of	script-threaded,	curled	fur	winding	down	his	arms,	covering	his	exposed
thighs	and	shins,	and	the	detailed	hooves	etched	into	the	skin	of	his	feet.	Felisin
had	until	now	been	too	self-absorbed,	too	numb	with	shock	to	pay	any	attention
to	her	companions	in	the	chain	line:	this	man	was	a	priest	of	Fener,	the	Boar	of
Summer,	and	the	flies	seemed	to	know	it,	understand	it	enough	to	alter	their
frenzied	motion.	She	watched	with	morbid	fascination	as	they	gathered	at	the
stumps	at	the	ends	of	the	man’s	wrists,	the	old	scar	tissue	the	only	place	on	him
unclaimed	by	Fener,	but	the	paths	the	sprites	took	to	those	stumps	touched	not	a
single	tattooed	line.	The	flies	danced	a	dance	of	avoidance—but	for	all	that,
they	were	eager	to	dance.
The	priest	of	Fener	had	been	ankle-shackled	last	in	the	line.	Everyone	else
had	the	narrow	iron	bands	fastened	around	their	wrists.	His	feet	were	wet	with
blood	and	the	flies	hovered	there	but	did	not	land.	She	saw	his	eyes	flick	open
as	the	sun’s	light	was	suddenly	blocked.
Hood’s	priest	had	arrived.	Chain	stirred	as	the	man	on	Felisin’s	left	drew
back	as	far	as	the	links	allowed.	The	wall	at	her	back	felt	hot,	the	tiles—painted
with	scenes	of	imperial	pageantry—now	slick	through	the	thin	weave	of	her
slave	tunic.	Felisin	stared	at	the	fly-shrouded	creature	standing	wordless	before
the	squatting	priest	of	Fener.	She	could	see	no	exposed	flesh,	nothing	of	the
man	himself—the	flies	had	claimed	all	of	him	and	beneath	them	he	lived	in
darkness	where	even	the	sun’s	heat	could	not	touch	him.	The	cloud	around	him
spread	out	now	and	Felisin	shrank	back	as	countless	cold	insect	legs	touched
her	legs,	crawling	swiftly	up	her	thighs—she	pulled	her	tunic’s	hem	close
around	her,	clamping	her	legs	tight.
The	priest	of	Fener	spoke,	his	wide	face	split	into	a	humorless	grin.	“The


Thirsting	Hour ’s	well	past,	Acolyte.	Go	back	to	your	temple.”
Hood’s	servant	made	no	reply	but	it	seemed	the	buzzing	changed	pitch,
until	the	music	of	the	wings	vibrated	in	Felisin’s	bones.
The	priest’s	deep	eyes	narrowed	and	his	tone	shifted.	“Ah,	well	now.	Indeed
I	was	once	a	servant	of	Fener	but	no	longer,	not	for	years—Fener ’s	touch
cannot	be	scrubbed	from	my	skin.	Yet	it	seems	that	while	the	Boar	of	Summer
has	no	love	for	me,	he	has	even	less	for	you.”
Felisin	felt	something	shiver	in	her	soul	as	the	buzzing	rapidly	shifted,
forming	words	that	she	could	understand.	“Secret…to	show…now…”
“Go	on	then,”	the	one-time	servant	of	Fener	growled,	“show	me.”
Perhaps	Fener	acted	then,	the	swatting	hand	of	a	furious	god—Felisin
would	remember	the	moment	and	think	on	it	often—or	the	secret	was	the
mocking	of	immortals,	a	joke	far	beyond	her	understanding,	but	at	that
moment	the	rising	tide	of	horror	within	her	broke	free,	the	numbness	of	her
soul	seared	away	as	the	flies	exploded	outward,	dispersing	in	all	directions	to
reveal…no	one.
The	former	priest	of	Fener	flinched	as	if	struck,	his	eyes	wide.	From
across	the	Round	half	a	dozen	guards	cried	out,	wordless	sounds	punched
from	their	throats.	Chains	snapped	as	others	in	the	line	jolted	as	if	to	flee.	The
iron	loops	set	in	the	wall	snatched	taut,	but	the	loops	held,	as	did	the	chains.
The	guards	rushed	forward	and	the	line	shrank	back	into	submission.
“Now	that,”	the	tattooed	man	shakily	muttered,	“was	uncalled	for.”
	
An	hour	passed,	an	hour	in	which	the	mystery,	shock	and	horror	of	Hood’s
priest	sank	down	within	Felisin	to	become	but	one	more	layer,	the	latest	but	not
the	last	in	what	had	become	an	unending	nightmare.	An	acolyte	of	Hood…who
was	not	there.	The	buzzing	of	wings	that	formed	words.	Was	that	Hood
himself?	Had	the	Lord	of	Death	come	to	walk	among	mortals?	And	why	stand
before	a	once-priest	of	Fener—what	was	the	message	behind	the	revelation?
But	slowly	the	questions	faded	in	her	mind,	the	numbness	seeping	back,	the
return	of	cold	despair.	The	Empress	had	culled	the	nobility,	stripped	the
Houses	and	families	of	their	wealth,	followed	by	a	summary	accusation	and
conviction	of	treason	that	had	ended	in	chains.	As	for	the	ex-priest	on	her	right
and	the	huge,	bestial	man	with	all	the	makings	of	a	common	criminal	on	her
left,	clearly	neither	one	could	claim	noble	blood.
She	laughed	softly,	startling	both	men.
“Has	Hood’s	secret	revealed	itself	to	you,	then,	lass?”	the	ex-priest	asked.
“No.”


“What	do	you	find	so	amusing?”
She	shook	her	head.	I	had	expected	to	find	myself	in	good	company,	how’s
that	for	an	upturned	thought?	There	you	have	it,	the	very	attitude	the	peasants
hungered	to	tear	down,	the	very	same	fuel	the	Empress	has	touched	to	flame—
“Child!”
The	voice	was	that	of	an	aged	woman,	still	haughty	but	with	an	air	of
desperate	yearning.	Felisin	closed	her	eyes	briefly,	then	straightened	and
looked	along	the	line	to	the	gaunt	old	woman	beyond	the	thug.	The	woman	was
wearing	her	nightclothes,	torn	and	smeared.	With	noble	blood,	no	less.	“Lady
Gaesen.”
The	old	woman	reached	out	a	shaking	hand.	“Yes!	Wife	to	Lord	Hilrac!	I
am	Lady	Gaesen…”	The	words	came	as	if	she’d	forgotten	who	she	was,	and
now	she	frowned	through	the	cracked	makeup	covering	her	wrinkles	and	her
red-shot	eyes	fixed	on	Felisin.	“I	know	you,”	she	hissed.	“House	of	Paran.
Youngest	daughter.	Felisin!”
Felisin	went	cold.	She	turned	away	and	stared	straight	ahead,	out	into	the
compound	where	the	guards	stood	leaning	on	pikes	passing	flasks	of	ale
between	them	and	waving	away	the	last	of	the	flies.	A	cart	had	arrived	for	the
mule,	four	ash-smeared	men	clambering	down	from	its	bed	with	ropes	and
gaffs.	Beyond	the	walls	encircling	the	Round	rose	Unta’s	painted	spires	and
domes.	She	longed	for	the	shadowed	streets	between	them,	longed	for	the
pampered	life	of	a	week	ago,	Sebry	barking	harsh	commands	at	her	as	she	led
her	favorite	mare	through	her	paces.	And	she	would	look	up	as	she	guided	the
mare	in	a	delicate,	precise	turn,	to	see	the	row	of	green-leafed	leadwoods
separating	the	riding	ground	from	the	family	vineyards.
Beside	her	the	thug	grunted.	“Hood’s	feet,	the	bitch	has	some	sense	of
humor.”
Which	bitch?	Felisin	wondered,	but	she	managed	to	hold	her	expression
even	as	she	lost	the	comfort	of	her	memories.
The	ex-priest	stirred.	“Sisterly	spat,	is	it?”	He	paused,	then	dryly	added,
“Seems	a	bit	extreme.”
The	thug	grunted	again	and	leaned	forward,	his	shadow	draping	Felisin.
“Defrocked	priest,	are	you?	Not	like	the	Empress	to	do	any	temples	a	favor.”
“She	didn’t.	My	loss	of	piety	was	long	ago.	I’m	sure	the	Empress	would
rather	I’d	stayed	in	the	cloister.”
“As	if	she’d	care,”	the	thug	said	derisively	as	he	settled	back	into	his	pose.
Lady	Gaesen	rattled,	“You	must	speak	with	her,	Felisin!	An	appeal!	I	have
rich	friends—”
The	thug’s	grunt	turned	into	a	bark.	“Farther	up	the	line,	hag,	that’s	where


you’ll	find	your	rich	friends!”
Felisin	just	shook	her	head.	Speak	with	her,	it’s	been	months.	Not	even	when
Father	died.
A	silence	followed,	dragging	on,	approaching	the	silence	that	had	existed
before	this	spate	of	babble,	but	then	the	ex-priest	cleared	his	throat,	spat	and
muttered,	“Not	worth	looking	for	salvation	in	a	woman	who’s	just	following
orders,	Lady,	never	mind	that	one	being	this	girl’s	sister—”
Felisin	winced,	then	glared	at	the	ex-priest.	“You	presume—”
“He	ain’t	presuming	nothing,”	growled	the	thug.	“Forget	what’s	in	the
blood,	what’s	supposed	to	be	in	it	by	your	slant	on	things.	This	is	the	work	of
the	Empress.	Maybe	you	think	it’s	personal,	maybe	you	have	to	think	that,
being	what	you	are…”
“What	I	am?”	Felisin	laughed	harshly.	“What	House	claims	you	as	kin?”
The	thug	grinned.	“The	House	of	Shame.	What	of	it?	Yours	ain’t	looking
any	less	shabby.”
“As	I	thought,”	Felisin	said,	ignoring	the	truth	of	his	last	observation	with
difficulty.	She	glowered	at	the	guards.	“What’s	happening?	Why	are	we	just
sitting	here?”
The	ex-priest	spat	again.	“The	Thirsting	Hour ’s	past.	The	mob	outside
needs	organizing.”	He	glanced	up	at	her	from	under	the	shelf	of	his	brows.
“The	peasants	need	to	be	roused.	We’re	the	first,	girl,	and	the	example’s	got	to
be	established.	What	happens	here	in	Unta	is	going	to	rattle	every	nobleborn	in
the	Empire.”
“Nonsense!”	Lady	Gaesen	snapped.	“We	shall	be	well	treated.	The	Empress
shall	have	to	treat	us	well—”
The	thug	grunted	a	third	time—what	passed	for	laughter,	Felisin	realized—
and	said,	“If	stupidity	was	a	crime,	lady,	you	would’ve	been	arrested	years	ago.
The	ogre’s	right.	Not	many	of	us	are	going	to	make	it	to	the	slave	ships.	This
parade	down	Colonnade	Avenue	is	going	to	be	one	long	bloodbath.	Mind	you,”
he	added,	eyes	narrowing	on	the	guards,	“old	Baudin	ain’t	going	to	be	torn
apart	by	any	mob	of	peasants…”
Felisin	felt	real	fear	stirring	in	her	stomach.	She	fought	off	a	shiver.	“Mind
if	I	stay	in	your	shadow,	Baudin?”
The	man	looked	down	at	her.	“You’re	a	bit	plump	for	my	tastes.”	He	turned
away,	then	added,	“But	you	do	what	you	like.”
The	ex-priest	leaned	close.	“Thinking	on	it,	girl,	this	rivalry	of	yours	ain’t
in	the	league	of	tattle-tales	and	scratch-fights.	Likely	your	sister	wants	to	be
sure	you—”
“She’s	Adjunct	Tavore,”	Felisin	cut	in.	“She’s	not	my	sister	anymore.	She


renounced	our	House	at	the	call	of	the	Empress.”
“Even	so,	I’ve	an	inkling	it’s	still	personal.”
Felisin	scowled.	“How	would	you	know	anything	about	it?”
The	man	made	a	slight,	ironic	bow.	“Thief	once,	then	priest,	now	historian.
I	well	know	the	tense	position	the	nobility	finds	itself	in.”
Felisin’s	eyes	slowly	widened	and	she	cursed	herself	for	her	stupidity.
Even	Baudin—who	could	not	have	helped	overhearing—leaned	forward	for	a
searching	stare.	“Heboric,”	he	said.	“Heboric	Light	Touch.”
Heboric	raised	his	arms.	“As	light	as	ever.”
“You	wrote	that	revised	history,”	Felisin	said.	“Committed	treason—”
Heboric’s	wiry	brows	rose	in	mock	alarm.	“Gods	forbid!	A	philosophic
divergence	of	opinions,	nothing	more!	Duiker ’s	own	words	at	the	trial—in	my
defense,	Fener	bless	him.”
“But	the	Empress	wasn’t	listening,”	Baudin	said,	grinning.	“After	all,	you
called	her	a	murderer,	and	then	had	the	gall	to	say	she	bungled	the	job!”
“Found	an	illicit	copy,	did	you?”
Baudin	blinked.
“In	any	case,”	Heboric	continued	to	Felisin,	“it’s	my	guess	your	sister	the
Adjunct	plans	on	your	getting	to	the	slave	ships	in	one	piece.	Your	brother
disappearing	on	Genabackis	took	the	life	out	of	your	father…so	I’ve	heard,”
he	added,	grinning.	“But	it	was	the	rumors	of	treason	that	put	spurs	to	your
sister,	wasn’t	it?	Clearing	the	family	name	and	all	that—”
“You	make	it	sound	reasonable,	Heboric,”	Felisin	said,	hearing	the
bitterness	in	her	voice	but	not	caring	any	more.	“We	differed	in	our	opinions,
Tavore	and	I,	and	now	you	see	the	result.”
“Your	opinions	of	what,	precisely?”
She	did	not	reply.
There	was	a	sudden	stirring	in	the	line.	The	guards	straightened	and	swung
to	face	the	Round’s	West	Gate.	Felisin	paled	as	she	saw	her	sister—Adjunct
Tavore	now,	heir	to	Lorn,	who’d	died	in	Darujhistan—ride	up	on	her	stallion,
a	beast	bred	out	of	Paran	stables,	no	less.	Beside	her	was	the	ever-present
T’amber,	a	beautiful	young	woman	whose	long,	tawny	mane	gave	substance	to
her	name.	Where	she’d	come	from	was	anyone’s	guess,	but	she	was	now
Tavore’s	personal	aide.	Behind	these	two	rode	a	score	of	officers	and	a
company	of	heavy	cavalry,	the	soldiers	looking	exotic,	foreign.
“Touch	of	irony,”	Heboric	muttered,	eyeing	the	horsesoldiers.
Baudin	jutted	his	head	forward	and	spat.	“Red	Swords,	the	bloodless
bastards.”
The	historian	threw	the	man	an	amused	glance.	“Traveled	well	in	your


profession,	Baudin?	Seen	the	sea	walls	of	Aren,	have	you?”
The	man	shifted	uneasily,	then	shrugged.	“Stood	a	deck	or	two	in	my	time,
ogre.	Besides,”	he	added,	“the	rumor	of	them’s	been	in	the	city	a	week	or
more.”
There	was	a	stirring	from	the	Red	Sword	troop,	and	Felisin	saw	mailed
hands	close	on	weapon	grips,	peaked	helms	turning	as	one	toward	the	Adjunct.
Sister	Tavore,	did	our	brother’s	disappearance	cut	you	so	deep?	How	great	his
failing	you	must	imagine,	to	seek	this	recompense…and	then,	to	make	your
loyalty	absolute,	you	chose	between	me	and	Mother	for	the	symbolic	sacrifice.
Didn’t	you	realize	that	Hood	stood	on	the	side	of	both	choices?	At	least	Mother
is	with	her	beloved	husband	now…She	watched	as	Tavore	scanned	her	guard
briefly,	then	said	something	to	T’amber,	who	edged	her	own	mount	toward	the
East	Gate.
Baudin	grunted	one	more	time.	“Look	lively.	The	endless	hour ’s	about	to
begin.”
	
It	was	one	thing	to	accuse	the	Empress	of	murder,	it	was	quite	another	to
predict	her	next	move.	If	only	they’d	heeded	my	warning.	Heboric	winced	as
they	shuffled	forward,	the	shackles	cutting	hard	against	his	ankles.
People	of	civilized	countenance	made	much	of	exposing	the	soft
underbellies	of	their	psyche—effete	and	sensitive	were	the	brands	of	finer
breeding.	It	was	easy	for	them,	safe,	and	that	was	the	whole	point,	after	all:	a
statement	of	coddled	opulence	that	burned	the	throats	of	the	poor	more	than
any	ostentatious	show	of	wealth.
Heboric	had	said	as	much	in	his	treatise,	and	could	now	admit	a	bitter
admiration	for	the	Empress	and	for	Adjunct	Tavore,	Laseen’s	instrument	in
this.	The	excessive	brutality	of	the	midnight	arrests—doors	battered	down,
families	dragged	from	their	beds	amidst	wailing	servants—provided	the	first
layer	of	shock.	Dazed	by	sleep	deprivation,	the	nobles	were	trussed	up	and
shackled,	forced	to	stand	before	a	drunken	magistrate	and	a	jury	of	beggars
dragged	in	from	the	streets.	It	was	a	sour	and	obvious	mockery	of	justice	that
stripped	away	the	few	remaining	expectations	of	civil	behavior—stripped	away
civilization	itself,	leaving	nothing	but	the	chaos	of	savagery.
Shock	layered	on	shock,	a	rending	of	those	fine	underbellies.	Tavore	knew
her	own	kind,	knew	their	weaknesses	and	was	ruthless	in	exploiting	them.	What
could	drive	a	person	to	such	viciousness?
The	poor	folk	mobbed	the	streets	when	they	heard	the	details,	screaming
adoration	for	their	Empress.	Carefully	triggered	riots,	looting	and	slaughter


followed,	raging	through	the	Noble	District,	hunting	down	those	few	selected
highborns	who	hadn’t	been	arrested—enough	of	them	to	whet	the	mob’s
bloodlust,	give	them	faces	to	focus	on	with	rage	and	hate.	Then	followed	the
reimposition	of	order,	lest	the	city	take	flame.
The	Empress	made	few	mistakes.	She’d	used	the	opportunity	to	round	up
malcontents	and	unaligned	academics,	to	close	the	fist	of	military	presence	on
the	capital,	drumming	the	need	for	more	troops,	more	recruits,	more
protection	against	the	treasonous	scheming	of	the	noble	class.	The	seized
assets	paid	for	this	martial	expansion.	An	exquisite	move	even	if	forewarned,
rippling	out	with	the	force	of	Imperial	Decree	through	the	Empire,	the	cruel
rage	now	sweeping	through	each	city.
Bitter	admiration.	Heboric	kept	finding	the	need	to	spit,	something	he
hadn’t	done	since	his	cut-purse	days	in	the	Mouse	Quarter	of	Malaz	City.	He
could	see	the	shock	written	on	most	of	the	faces	in	the	chain	line.	Faces	above
nightclothes	mostly,	grimy	and	filthy	from	the	pits,	leaving	their	wearers
bereft	of	even	the	social	armor	of	regular	clothing.	Disheveled	hair,	stunned
expressions,	broken	poses—everything	the	mob	beyond	the	Round	lusted	to
see,	hungered	to	flail—
Welcome	to	the	streets,	Heboric	thought	to	himself	as	the	guards	prodded
the	line	into	motion,	the	Adjunct	looking	on,	straight	in	her	high	saddle,	her
thin	face	drawn	in	until	nothing	but	lines	remained—the	slit	of	her	eyes,	the
brackets	around	her	uncurved,	almost	lipless	mouth—damn,	but	she	wasn’t
born	with	much,	was	she?	The	looks	went	to	her	young	sister,	to	the	lass
stumbling	a	step	ahead	of	him.
Heboric’s	eyes	fixed	on	Adjunct	Tavore,	curious,	seeking	something—a
flicker	of	malicious	pleasure,	maybe—as	her	icy	gaze	swept	the	line	and
lingered	for	the	briefest	of	moments	on	her	sister.	But	the	pause	was	all	she
revealed,	a	recognition	acknowledged,	nothing	more.	The	gaze	swept	on.
The	guards	opened	the	East	Gate	two	hundred	paces	ahead,	near	the	front
of	the	chained	line.	A	roar	poured	through	that	ancient	arched	passageway,	a
wave	of	sound	that	buffeted	soldier	and	prisoner	alike,	bouncing	off	the	high
walls	and	rising	up	amidst	an	explosion	of	terrified	pigeons	from	the	upper
eaves.	The	sound	of	flapping	wings	drifted	down	like	polite	applause,	although
to	Heboric	it	seemed	that	he	alone	appreciated	that	ironic	touch	of	the	gods.
Not	to	be	denied	a	gesture,	he	managed	a	slight	bow.
Hood	keep	his	damned	secrets.	Here,	Fener	you	old	sow,	it’s	that	itch	I
could	never	scratch.	Look	on,	now,	closely,	see	what	becomes	of	your	wayward
son.


	
Some	part	of	Felisin’s	mind	held	on	to	sanity,	held	with	a	brutal	grip	in	the	face
of	a	maelstrom.	Soldiers	lined	Colonnade	Avenue	in	ranks	three	deep,	but
again	and	again	the	mob	seemed	to	find	weak	spots	in	that	bristling	line.	She
found	herself	observing,	clinically,	even	as	hands	tore	at	her,	fists	pummeled
her,	blurred	faces	lunged	at	her	with	gobs	of	spit.	And	even	as	sanity	held
within	her,	so	too	a	pair	of	steady	arms	encircled	her—arms	without	hands,	the
ends	scarred	and	suppurating,	arms	that	pushed	her	forward,	ever	forward.	No
one	touched	the	priest.	No	one	dared.	While	ahead	was	Baudin—more
horrifying	than	the	mob	itself.
He	killed	effortlessly.	He	tossed	bodies	aside	with	contempt,	roaring,
gesturing,	beckoning.	Even	the	soldiers	stared	beneath	their	ridged	helmets,
heads	turning	at	his	taunts,	hands	tightening	on	pike	or	sword	hilt.
Baudin,	laughing	Baudin,	his	nose	smashed	by	a	well-flung	brick,	stones
bouncing	from	him,	his	slave	tunic	in	rags	and	soaked	with	blood	and	spit.
Every	body	that	darted	within	his	reach	he	grasped,	twisted,	bent	and	broke.
The	only	pause	in	his	stride	came	when	something	happened	ahead,	some
breach	in	the	soldiery—or	when	Lady	Gaesen	faltered.	He’d	grasp	her	arms
under	the	shoulders,	none	too	gently,	then	propel	her	forward,	swearing	all	the
while.
A	wave	of	fear	swept	ahead	of	him,	a	touch	of	the	terror	inflicted	turning
back	on	the	mob.	The	number	of	attackers	diminished,	although	the	bricks	flew
in	a	constant	barrage,	some	hitting,	most	missing.
The	march	through	the	city	continued.	Felisin’s	ears	rang	painfully.	She
heard	everything	through	a	daze	of	sound,	but	her	eyes	saw	clearly,	seeking
and	finding—all	too	often—images	she	would	never	forget.
The	gates	were	in	sight	when	the	most	savage	breach	occurred.	The
soldiers	seemed	to	melt	away,	and	the	tide	of	fierce	hunger	swept	into	the
street,	engulfing	the	prisoners.
Felisin	caught	Heboric’s	grunting	words	close	behind	her	as	he	shoved
hard:	“This	is	the	one,	then.”
Baudin	roared.	Bodies	crowded	in,	hands	tearing,	nails	clawing.	Felisin’s
last	shreds	of	clothing	were	torn	away.	A	hand	closed	on	a	fistful	of	her	hair,
yanked	savagely,	twisting	her	head	around,	seeking	the	crack	of	vertebrae.	She
heard	screaming	and	realized	it	came	from	her	own	throat.	A	bestial	snarl
sounded	behind	her	and	she	felt	the	hand	clench	spasmodically,	then	it	was
gone.	More	screaming	filled	her	ears.
A	strong	momentum	caught	them,	pulling	or	pushing—she	couldn’t	tell—


and	Heboric’s	face	came	into	view,	spitting	bloody	skin	from	his	mouth.	All	at
once	a	space	cleared	around	Baudin.	He	crouched,	a	torrent	of	dock	curses
bellowing	from	his	mashed	lips.	His	right	ear	had	been	torn	off,	taking	with	it
hair,	skin	and	flesh.	The	bone	of	his	temple	glistened	wetly.	Broken	bodies	lay
around	him,	few	moving.	At	his	feet	was	Lady	Gaesen.	Baudin	held	her	by	the
hair,	pulling	her	face	into	view.	The	moment	seemed	to	freeze,	the	world
closing	in	to	this	single	place.
Baudin	bared	his	teeth	and	laughed.	“I’m	no	whimpering	noble,”	he
growled,	facing	the	crowd.	“What	do	want?	You	want	the	blood	of	a
noblewoman?”
The	mob	screamed,	reaching	out	eager	hands.	Baudin	laughed	again.	“We
pass	through,	you	hear	me?”	He	straightened,	dragging	Lady	Gaesen’s	head
upward.
Felisin	couldn’t	tell	if	the	old	woman	was	conscious.	Her	eyes	were	closed,
the	expression	peaceful—almost	youthful—beneath	the	smeared	dirt	and
bruises.	Perhaps	she	was	dead.	Felisin	prayed	that	it	was	so.	Something	was
about	to	happen,	something	to	condense	this	nightmare	into	a	single	image.
Tension	held	the	air.
“She’s	yours!”	Baudin	screamed.	With	his	other	hand	grasping	the	Lady’s
chin,	he	twisted	her	head	around.	The	neck	snapped	and	the	body	sagged,
twitching.	Baudin	wrapped	a	length	of	chain	around	her	neck.	He	pulled	it	taut,
then	began	sawing.	Blood	showed,	making	the	chain	look	like	a	mangled	scarf.
Felisin	stared	in	horror.
“Fener	have	mercy,”	Heboric	breathed.
The	crowd	was	stunned	silent,	withdrawing	even	in	their	bloodlust,
shrinking	back.	A	soldier	appeared,	helmetless,	his	young	face	white,	his	eyes
fixed	on	Baudin,	his	steps	ceasing.	Beyond	him	the	glistening	peaked	helms
and	broad	blades	of	the	Red	Swords	flashed	above	the	crowd	as	the	horsemen
slowly	pushed	their	way	toward	the	scene.
No	movement	save	the	sawing	chain.	No	breath	save	Baudin’s	grunting
snorts.	Whatever	riot	continued	to	rage	beyond	this	place,	it	seemed	a	thousand
leagues	away.
Felisin	watched	the	woman’s	head	jerk	back	and	forth,	a	mockery	of	life’s
animation.	She	remembered	Lady	Gaesen,	haughty,	imperious,	beyond	her
years	of	beauty	and	seeking	stature	in	its	stead.	What	other	choice?	Many,	but	it
didn’t	matter	now.	Had	she	been	a	gentle,	kindly	grandmother,	it	would	not
have	mattered,	would	not	have	changed	the	mind-numbing	horror	of	this
moment.
The	head	came	away	with	a	sobbing	sound.	Baudin’s	teeth	glimmered	as	he


stared	at	the	crowd.	“We	had	a	deal,”	he	grated.	“Here’s	what	you	want,
something	to	remember	this	day	by.”	He	flung	Lady	Gaesen’s	head	into	the
mob,	a	whirl	of	hair	and	threads	of	blood.	Screams	answered	its	unseen
landing.
More	soldiers	appeared—backed	by	the	Red	Swords—moving	slowly,
pushing	at	the	still-silent	onlookers.	Peace	was	being	restored,	all	along	the
line—in	all	places	but	this	one	violently,	without	quarter.	As	people	began	to
die	under	sword	strokes,	the	rest	fled.
The	prisoners	who	had	filed	out	of	the	arena	had	numbered	around	three
hundred.	Felisin,	looking	up	the	line,	had	her	first	sight	of	what	remained.
Some	shackles	held	only	forearms,	others	were	completely	empty.	Under	a
hundred	prisoners	remained	on	their	feet.	Many	on	the	paving	stones	writhed,
screaming	in	pain,	the	rest	did	not	move	at	all.
Baudin	glared	at	the	nearest	knot	of	soldiers.	“Likely	timing,	tin-heads.”
Heboric	spat	heavily,	his	face	twisting	as	he	glared	at	the	thug.	“Imagined
you’d	buy	your	way	out,	did	you,	Baudin?	Give	them	what	they	want.	But	it	was
wasted,	wasn’t	it?	The	soldiers	were	coming.	She	could	have	lived—”
Baudin	slowly	turned,	his	face	a	sheet	of	blood.	“To	what	end,	priest?”
“Was	that	your	line	of	reasoning?	She	would’ve	died	in	the	hold	anyway?”
Baudin	showed	his	teeth	and	said	slowly,	“I	just	hate	making	deals	with
bastards.”
Felisin	stared	at	the	three-foot	length	of	chain	between	herself	and	Baudin.
A	thousand	thoughts	could	have	followed,	link	by	link—what	she	had	been,
what	she	was	now;	the	prison	she’d	discovered,	inside	and	out,	merged	as	vivid
memory—but	all	she	thought,	all	she	said,	was	this:	“Don’t	make	any	more
deals,	Baudin.”
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her,	her	words	and	tone	reaching	him,	somehow,
some	way.
Heboric	straightened,	a	hard	look	in	his	eyes	as	he	studied	her.	Felisin
turned	away,	half	in	defiance,	half	in	shame.
A	moment	later	the	soldiers—having	cleared	the	line	of	the	dead—pushed
them	along,	out	through	the	gate,	onto	the	East	Road	toward	the	pier	town
called	Luckless.	Where	Adjunct	Tavore	and	her	retinue	waited,	as	did	the	slave
ships	of	Aren.
Farmers	and	peasants	lined	the	road,	displaying	nothing	of	the	frenzy	that
had	gripped	their	cousins	in	the	city.	Felisin	saw	in	their	faces	a	dull	sorrow,	a
passion	born	of	different	scars.	She	could	not	understand	where	it	came	from,
and	she	knew	that	her	ignorance	was	the	difference	between	her	and	them.	She
also	knew,	in	her	bruises,	scratches	and	helpless	nakedness,	that	her	lessons


had	begun.


Book	One
Raraku


	

He	swam	at	my	feet,
Powerful	arms	in	broad	strokes
Sweeping	the	sand.
So	I	asked	this	man,
What	seas	do	you	swim?
And	to	this	he	answered,
“I	have	seen	shells	and	the	like
On	this	desert	floor,
So	I	swim	this	land’s	memory
Thus	honoring	its	past.”
Is	the	journey	far,	queried	I.
“I	cannot	say,”	he	replied,
“For	I	shall	drown	long	before
I	am	done.”
SAYINGS	OF	THE	FOOL
T HENYS	BULE
	


Chapter	One

And	all	came	to	imprint
Their	passage
On	the	path,
To	scent	the	dry	winds
Their	cloying	claim
To	ascendancy
THE	PATH	OF	HANDS
MESSREMB
1164th	Year	of	Burn’s	Sleep
Tenth	Year	of	the	Rule	of	Empress	Laseen
The	Sixth	in	the	Seven	Years	of	Dryjhna,	the	Apocalyptic
A	corkscrew	plume	of	dust	raced	across	the	basin,	heading	deeper	into	the
trackless	desert	of	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan.	Though	less	than	two	thousand	paces
away,	it	seemed	a	plume	born	of	nothing.
From	his	perch	on	the	mesa’s	wind-scarred	edge,	Mappo	Runt	followed	it
with	relentless	eyes	the	color	of	sand,	eyes	set	deep	in	a	robustly	boned,	pallid
face.	He	held	a	wedge	of	emrag	cactus	in	his	bristle-backed	hand,	unmindful	of
the	envenomed	spikes	as	he	bit	into	it.	Juices	dribbled	down	his	chin,	staining	it
blue.	He	chewed	slowly,	thoughtfully.
Beside	him	Icarium	flicked	a	pebble	over	the	cliff	edge.	It	clicked	and
clattered	on	its	way	down	to	the	boulder-strewn	base.	Under	the	ragged
Spiritwalker	robe—its	orange	faded	to	dusty	rust	beneath	the	endless	sun—his
gray	skin	had	darkened	into	olive	green,	as	if	his	father ’s	blood	had	answered
this	wasteland’s	ancient	call.	His	long,	braided	black	hair	dripped	black	sweat
onto	the	bleached	rock.
Mappo	pulled	a	mangled	thorn	from	between	his	front	teeth.	“Your	dye’s
running,”	he	observed,	eyeing	the	cactus	blade	a	moment	before	taking	another
bite.


Icarium	shrugged.	“Doesn’t	matter	any	more.	Not	out	here.”
“My	blind	grandmother	wouldn’t	have	swallowed	your	disguise.	There
were	narrow	eyes	on	us	in	Ehrlitan.	I	felt	them	crawling	on	my	back	day	and
night.	Tannos	are	mostly	short	and	bow-legged,	after	all.”	Mappo	pulled	his
gaze	away	from	the	dust	cloud	and	studied	his	friend.	“Next	time,”	he	grunted,
“try	belonging	to	a	tribe	where	everyone’s	seven	foot	tall.”
Icarium’s	lined,	weather-worn	face	twitched	into	something	like	a	smile,
just	a	hint,	before	resuming	its	placid	expression.	“Those	who	would	know	of
us	in	Seven	Cities,	surely	know	of	us	now.	Those	who	would	not	might	wonder
at	us,	but	that	is	all	they	will	do.”	Squinting	against	the	glare,	he	nodded	at	the
plume.	“What	do	you	see,	Mappo?”
“Flat	head,	long	neck,	black	and	hairy	all	over.	If	just	that,	I	might	be
describing	one	of	my	uncles.”
“But	there’s	more.”
“One	leg	up	front	and	two	in	back.”
Icarium	tapped	the	bridge	of	his	nose,	thinking.	“So,	not	one	of	your
uncles.	An	aptorian?”
Mappo	slowly	nodded.	“The	convergence	is	months	away.	I’d	guess
Shadowthrone	caught	a	whiff	of	what’s	coming,	sent	out	a	few	scouts…”
“And	this	one?”
Mappo	grinned,	exposing	massive	canines.	“A	tad	too	far	afield.	Sha’ik’s
pet	now.”	He	finished	off	the	cactus,	wiped	his	spatulate	hands,	then	rose	from
his	crouch.	Arching	his	back,	he	winced.	There	had	been,	unaccountably,	a
mass	of	roots	beneath	the	sand	under	his	bedroll	the	night	just	past,	and	now
the	muscles	to	either	side	of	his	spine	matched	every	knot	and	twist	of	those
treeless	bones.	He	rubbed	at	his	eyes.	A	quick	scan	down	the	length	of	his	body
displayed	for	him	the	tattered,	dirt-crusted	state	of	his	clothes.	He	sighed.	“It’s
said	there’s	a	waterhole	out	there,	somewhere—”
“With	Sha’ik’s	army	camped	around	it.”
Mappo	grunted.
Icarium	also	straightened,	noting	once	again	the	sheer	mass	of	his
companion—big	even	for	a	Trell—the	shoulders	broad	and	maned	in	black
hair,	the	sinewy	muscles	of	his	long	arms,	and	the	thousand	years	that	capered
like	a	gleeful	goat	behind	Mappo’s	eyes.	“Can	you	track	it?”
“If	you	like.”
Icarium	grimaced.	“How	long	have	we	known	each	other,	friend?”
Mappo’s	glance	was	sharp,	then	he	shrugged.	“Long.	Why	do	you	ask?”
“I	know	reluctance	when	I	hear	it.	The	prospect	disturbs	you?”
“Any	potential	brush	with	demons	disturbs	me,	Icarium.	Shy	as	a	hare	is


Mappo	Trell.”
“I	am	driven	by	curiosity.”
“I	know.”
The	unlikely	pair	turned	back	to	their	small	campsite,	tucked	between	two
towering	spires	of	wind-sculpted	rock.	There	was	no	hurry.	Icarium	sat	down
on	a	flat	rock	and	proceeded	to	oil	his	longbow,	striving	to	keep	the	hornwood
from	drying	out.	Once	satisfied	with	the	weapon’s	condition,	he	turned	to	his
single-edged	long	sword,	sliding	the	ancient	weapon	from	its	bronze-banded
boiledleather	scabbard,	then	setting	an	oiled	whetstone	to	its	notched	edge.
Mappo	struck	the	hide	tent,	folding	it	haphazardly	before	stuffing	it	into	his
large	leather	bag.	Cooking	utensils	followed,	as	did	the	bedding.	He	tied	the
drawstrings	and	hefted	the	bag	over	one	shoulder,	then	glanced	to	where
Icarium	waited—bow	rewrapped	and	slung	across	his	back.
Icarium	nodded,	and	the	two	of	them,	half-blood	Jaghut	and	full-blood
Trell,	began	on	the	path	leading	down	into	the	basin.
	
Overhead	the	stars	hung	radiant,	casting	enough	light	down	onto	the	basin	to
tinge	its	cracked	pan	silver.	The	bloodflies	had	passed	with	the	vanishing	of	the
day’s	heat,	leaving	the	night	to	the	occasional	swarm	of	capemoths	and	the
batlike	rhizan	lizards	that	fed	on	them.
Mappo	and	Icarium	paused	for	a	rest	in	the	courtyard	of	some	ruins.	The
mudbrick	walls	had	all	but	eroded	away,	leaving	nothing	but	shin-high	ridges
laid	out	in	a	geometric	pattern	around	an	old,	dried-up	well.	The	sand	covering
the	courtyard’s	tiles	was	fine	and	windblown	and	seemed	to	glow	faintly	to
Mappo’s	eyes.	Twisted	brush	clung	with	fisted	roots	along	its	edges.
The	Pan’potsun	Odhan	and	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku	that	flanked	it	to	the
west	were	both	home	to	countless	such	remnants	from	long-dead	civilizations.
In	their	travels	Mappo	and	Icarium	had	found	high	tels—flat-topped	hills	built
up	of	layer	upon	layer	of	city—situated	in	a	rough	procession	over	a	distance
of	fifty	leagues	between	the	hills	and	the	desert,	clear	evidence	that	a	rich	and
thriving	people	had	once	lived	in	what	was	now	dry,	wind-blasted	wasteland.
From	the	Holy	Desert	had	emerged	the	legend	of	Dryjhna	the	Apocalyptic.
Mappo	wondered	if	the	calamity	that	had	befallen	the	city-dwellers	in	this
region	had	in	some	way	contributed	to	the	myth	of	a	time	of	devastation	and
death.	Apart	from	the	occasional	abandoned	estate	such	as	the	one	they	now
rested	in,	many	ruins	showed	signs	of	a	violent	end.
His	thoughts	finding	familiar	ruts,	Mappo	grimaced.	Not	all	pasts	can	be
laid	at	our	feet,	and	we	are	no	closer	here	and	now	than	we’ve	ever	been.	Nor


have	I	any	reason	to	disbelieve	my	own	words.	He	turned	away	from	those
thoughts	as	well.
Near	the	courtyard’s	center	stood	a	single	column	of	pink	marble,	pitted
and	grooved	on	one	side	where	the	winds	born	out	in	Raraku	blew	unceasingly
toward	the	Pan’potsun	Hills.	The	pillar ’s	opposite	side	still	retained	the	spiral
patterning	carved	there	by	long-dead	artisans.
Upon	entering	the	courtyard	Icarium	had	walked	directly	to	the	six-foothigh	column,	examining	its	sides.	His	grunt	told	Mappo	he’d	found	what	he
had	been	looking	for.
“And	this	one?”	the	Trell	asked,	setting	his	leather	sack	down.
Icarium	came	over,	wiping	dust	from	his	hands.	“Down	near	the	base,	a
scattering	of	tiny	clawed	hands—the	seekers	are	on	the	Trail.”
“Rats?	More	than	one	set?”
“D’ivers,”	Icarium	agreed,	nodding.
“Now	who	might	that	be,	I	wonder?”
“Probably	Gryllen.”
“Mhm,	unpleasant.”
Icarium	studied	the	flat	plain	stretching	into	the	west.	“There	will	be	others.
Soletaken	and	D’ivers	both.	Those	who	feel	near	to	Ascendancy,	and	those	who
are	not,	yet	seek	the	Path	nonetheless.”
Mappo	sighed,	studying	his	old	friend.	Faint	dread	stirred	within	him.
D’ivers	and	Soletaken,	the	twin	curses	of	shapeshifting,	the	fever	for	which
there	is	no	cure.	Gathering…here,	in	this	place.	“Is	this	wise,	Icarium?”	he
asked	softly.	“In	seeking	your	eternal	goal,	we	find	ourselves	walking	into	a
most	disagreeable	convergence.	Should	the	gates	open,	we	shall	find	our
passage	contested	by	a	host	of	blood-thirsty	individuals	all	eager	in	their	belief
that	the	gates	offer	Ascendancy.”
“If	such	a	pathway	exists,”	Icarium	said,	his	eyes	still	on	the	horizon,	“then
perhaps	I	shall	find	my	answers	there	as	well.”
Answers	are	no	benediction,	friend.	Trust	me	in	this.	Please.	“You	have	still
not	explained	to	me	what	you	will	do	once	you	have	found	them.”
Icarium	turned	to	him	with	a	faint	smile.	“I	am	my	own	curse,	Mappo.	I
have	lived	centuries,	yet	what	do	I	know	of	my	own	past?	Where	are	my
memories?	How	can	I	judge	my	own	life	without	such	knowledge?”
“Some	would	consider	your	curse	a	gift,”	Mappo	said,	a	flicker	of	sadness
passing	across	his	features.
“I	do	not.	I	view	this	convergence	as	an	opportunity.	It	might	well	provide
me	with	answers.	To	achieve	them,	I	hope	to	avoid	drawing	my	weapons,	but	I
shall	if	I	must.”


The	Trell	sighed	a	second	time	and	rose	from	his	crouch.	“You	may	be
tested	in	that	resolve	soon,	friend.”	He	faced	southwest.	“There	are	six	desert
wolves	on	our	trail.”
Icarium	unwrapped	his	antlered	bow	and	strung	it	in	a	swift,	fluid	motion.
“Desert	wolves	never	hunt	people.”
“No,”	Mappo	agreed.	It	was	another	hour	before	the	moon	would	rise.	He
watched	Icarium	lay	out	six	long,	stone-tipped	arrows,	then	squinted	out	into
the	darkness.	Cold	fear	crept	along	the	nape	of	his	neck.	The	wolves	were	not
yet	visible,	but	he	felt	them	all	the	same.	“They	are	six,	but	they	are	one.
D’ivers.”	Better	it	would	have	been	a	Soletaken.	Veering	into	a	single	beast	is
unpleasant	enough,	but	into	many…
Icarium	frowned.	“One	of	power,	then,	to	achieve	the	shape	of	six	wolves.
Do	you	know	who	it	might	be?”
“I	have	a	suspicion,”	Mappo	said	quietly.
They	fell	silent,	waiting.
Half	a	dozen	tawny	shapes	appeared	out	of	a	gloom	that	seemed	of	its	own
making,	less	than	thirty	strides	away.	At	twenty	paces	the	wolves	spread	out
into	an	open	half-circle	facing	Mappo	and	Icarium.	The	spicy	scent	of	D’ivers
filled	the	still	night	air.	One	of	the	lithe	beasts	edged	forward,	then	stopped	as
Icarium	raised	his	bow.
“Not	six,”	Icarium	muttered,	“but	one.”
“I	know	him,”	Mappo	said.	“A	shame	he	can’t	say	the	same	of	us.	He	is
uncertain,	but	he’s	taken	a	blood-spilling	form.	Tonight,	Ryllandaras	hunts	in
the	desert.	Does	he	hunt	us	or	something	else,	I	wonder?”
Icarium	shrugged.	“Who	shall	speak	first,	Mappo?”
“Me,”	the	Trell	replied,	taking	a	step	forward.	This	would	require	guile
and	cunning.	A	mistake	would	prove	deadly.	He	pitched	his	voice	low	and	wry.
“Long	way	from	home,	aren’t	we.	Your	brother	Treach	had	it	in	mind	that	he
killed	you.	Where	was	that	chasm?	Dal	Hon?	Or	was	it	Li	Heng?	You	were
D’ivers	jackals	then,	I	seem	to	recall.”
Ryllandaras	spoke	inside	their	minds,	a	voice	cracking	and	halting	with
disuse.	I	am	tempted	to	match	wits	with	you,	N’Trell,	before	killing	you.
“Might	not	be	worth	it,”	Mappo	replied	easily.	“With	the	company	I’ve
been	keeping,	I’m	as	out	of	practice	as	you,	Ryllandaras.”
The	lead	wolf’s	bright	blue	eyes	flicked	to	Icarium.
“I	have	little	wits	to	match,”	the	Jaghut	half-blood	said	softly,	his	voice
barely	carrying.	“And	I	am	losing	patience.”
Foolish.	Charm	is	all	that	can	save	you.	Tell	me,	bowman,	do	you	surrender
your	life	to	your	companion’s	wiles?


Icarium	shook	his	head.	“Of	course	not.	I	share	his	opinion	of	himself.”
Ryllandaras	seemed	confused.	A	matter	of	expedience	then,	the	two	of	you
traveling	together.	Companions	without	trust,	without	confidence	in	each	other.
The	stakes	must	be	high.
“I	am	getting	bored,	Mappo,”	Icarium	said.
The	six	wolves	stiffened	as	one,	half	flinching.	Mappo	Runt	and	Icarium.
Ah,	we	see.	Know	that	we’ve	no	quarrel	with	you.
“Wits	matched,”	Mappo	said,	his	grin	broadening	a	moment	before
disappearing	entirely.	“Hunt	elsewhere,	Ryllandaras,	before	Icarium	does
Treach	a	favor.”	Before	you	unleash	all	that	I	am	sworn	to	prevent.	“Am	I
understood?”
Our	trail…converges,	the	D’ivers	said,	upon	the	spoor	of	a	demon	of
Shadow.
“Not	Shadow	any	longer,”	Mappo	replied.	“Sha’ik’s.	The	Holy	Desert	no
longer	sleeps.”
So	it	seems.	Do	you	forbid	us	our	hunt?
Mappo	glanced	at	Icarium,	who	lowered	his	bow	and	shrugged.	“If	you
wish	to	lock	jaws	with	an	aptorian,	that	is	your	choice.	Our	interest	was	only
passing.”
Then	indeed	shall	our	jaws	close	upon	the	throat	of	the	demon.
“You	would	make	Sha’ik	your	enemy?”	Mappo	asked.
The	lead	wolf	cocked	its	head.	The	name	means	nothing	to	me.
The	two	travelers	watched	as	the	wolves	padded	off,	vanishing	once	again
into	a	gloom	of	sorcery.	Mappo	showed	his	teeth,	then	sighed,	and	Icarium
nodded,	giving	voice	to	their	shared	thought.	“It	will,	soon.”
	
The	Wickan	horsesoldiers	loosed	fierce	cries	of	exultation	as	they	led	their
broad-backed	horses	down	the	transport’s	gang-planks.	The	scene	at	the
quayside	of	Hissar ’s	Imperial	Harbor	was	chaotic,	a	mass	of	unruly	tribesmen
and	women,	the	flash	of	iron-headed	lances	rippling	over	black	braided	hair
and	spiked	skullcaps.	From	his	position	on	the	harbor-entrance	tower	parapet,
Duiker	looked	down	on	the	wild	outland	company	with	more	than	a	little
skepticism,	and	with	growing	trepidation.
Beside	the	Imperial	Historian	stood	the	High	Fist’s	representative,	Mallick
Rel,	his	fat,	soft	hands	folded	together	and	resting	on	his	paunch,	his	skin	the
color	of	oiled	leather	and	smelling	of	Aren	perfumes.	Mallick	Rel	looked
nothing	like	the	chief	adviser	to	the	Seven	Cities’	commander	of	the	Malazan
armies.	A	Jhistal	priest	of	the	Elder	god	of	the	seas,	Mael,	his	presence	here	to


officially	convey	the	High	Fist’s	welcome	to	the	new	Fist	of	the	7th	Army	was
precisely	what	it	appeared	to	be:	a	calculated	insult.	Although,	Duiker	amended
silently,	the	man	at	his	side	had,	in	a	very	short	time,	risen	to	a	position	of
power	among	the	Imperial	players	on	this	continent.	A	thousand	rumors	rode
the	tongues	of	the	soldiers	about	the	smooth,	soft-spoken	priest	and	whatever
weapon	he	held	over	High	Fist	Pormqual—each	and	every	rumor	no	louder
than	a	whisper,	for	Mallick	Rel’s	path	to	Pormqual’s	side	was	a	tale	of
mysterious	misfortune	befalling	everyone	who	stood	in	his	way,	and	fatal
misfortune	at	that.
The	political	mire	among	the	Malazan	occupiers	in	Seven	Cities	was	as
obscure	as	it	was	potentially	deadly.	Duiker	suspected	that	the	new	Fist	would
understand	little	of	veiled	gestures	of	contempt,	lacking	as	he	did	the	more
civilized	nuances	of	the	Empire’s	tamed	citizens.	The	question	that	remained
for	the	historian,	then,	was	how	long	Coltaine	of	the	Crow	Clan	would	survive
his	new	appointment.
Mallick	Rel	pursed	his	full	lips	and	slowly	exhaled.	“Historian,”	he	said
softly,	his	Gedorian	Falari	accent	faint	in	its	sibilant	roll.	“Pleased	by	your
presence.	Curious	as	well.	Long	from	Aren	court,	now…”	He	smiled,	not
showing	his	green-dyed	teeth.	“Caution	bred	of	distant	culling?”
Words	like	the	lap	of	waves,	the	god	Mael’s	formless	affectation	and
insidious	patience.	This,	my	fourth	conversation	with	Rel.	Oh,	how	I	dislike	this
creature!	Duiker	cleared	his	throat.	“The	Empress	takes	little	heed	of	me,
Jhistal…”
Mallick	Rel’s	soft	laugh	was	like	the	rattle	of	a	snake’s	tail.	“Unheeded
historian	or	unheeding	of	history?	Hint	of	bitterness	at	advice	rejected	or
worse,	ignored.	Be	calmed,	no	crimes	winging	back	from	Unta’s	towers.”
“Pleased	to	hear	it,”	Duiker	muttered,	wondering	at	the	priest’s	source.	“I
remain	in	Hissar	as	a	matter	of	research,”	he	explained	after	a	moment.	“The
precedent	of	shipping	prisoners	to	the	Otataral	mines	on	the	island	reaches
back	to	the	Emperor ’s	time,	although	he	generally	reserved	that	fate	for
mages.”
“Mages?	Ah,	ah.”
Duiker	nodded.	“Effective,	yes,	although	unpredictable.	The	specific
properties	of	Otataral	as	a	magic-deadening	ore	remain	largely	mysterious.
Even	so,	madness	claimed	most	of	those	sorcerers,	although	it	is	not	known	if
that	was	the	result	of	exposure	to	the	ore	dust,	or	the	deprivation	from	their
Warrens.”
“Some	mages	among	the	next	slave	shipment?”
“Some.”


“Question	soon	answered,	then.”
“Soon,”	Duiker	agreed.
The	T-shaped	quay	was	now	a	maelstrom	of	belligerent	Wickans,
frightened	dock	porters	and	short-tempered	warhorses.	A	cordon	of	Hissar
Guard	provided	the	stopper	to	the	bottleneck	at	the	dock’s	end	where	it	opened
out	onto	the	cobbled	half-round.	Of	Seven	Cities	blood,	the	Guards	had	hitched
their	round	shields	and	unsheathed	their	tulwars,	waving	the	broad,	curving
blades	threateningly	at	the	Wickans,	who	answered	with	barking	challenges.
Two	men	arrived	on	the	parapet.	Duiker	nodded	greetings.	Mallick	Rel	did
not	deign	to	acknowledge	either	of	them—a	rough	captain	and	the	7th’s	lone
surviving	cadre	mage,	both	men	clearly	ranked	too	low	for	any	worthwhile
cultivation	by	the	priest.
“Well,	Kulp,”	Duiker	said	to	the	squat,	white-haired	wizard,	“your	arrival
may	prove	timely.”
Kulp’s	narrow,	sunburned	face	twisted	into	a	sour	scowl.	“Came	up	here	to
keep	my	bones	and	flesh	intact,	Duiker.	I’m	not	interested	in	becoming
Coltaine’s	lumpy	carpet	in	his	step	up	to	the	post.	They’re	his	people,	after	all.
That	he	hasn’t	done	a	damned	thing	to	quell	this	brewing	riot	doesn’t	bode
well,	I’d	say.”
The	captain	at	his	side	grunted	agreement.	“Sticks	in	the	throat,”	he
growled.	“Half	the	officers	here	saw	their	first	blood	facing	that	bastard
Coltaine,	and	now	here	he	is,	about	to	take	command.	Hood’s	knuckles,”	he
spat,	“won’t	be	any	tears	spilled	if	the	Hissar	Guard	cuts	down	Coltaine	and
every	one	of	his	Wickan	savages	right	here	at	the	Quay.	The	Seventh	don’t
need	them.”
“Truth,”	Mallick	Rel	said	to	Duiker	with	veiled	eyes,	“behind	the	threat	of
uprisings.	Continent	here	a	viper	nest.	Coltaine	an	odd	choice—”
“Not	so	odd,”	Duiker	said,	shrugging.	He	returned	his	attention	to	the
scene	below.	The	Wickans	closest	to	the	Hissar	Guard	had	begun	strutting	back
and	forth	in	front	of	the	armored	line.	The	situation	was	but	moments	away
from	a	full-scale	battle—the	bottleneck	was	about	to	become	a	killing	ground.
The	historian	felt	something	cold	clutch	his	stomach	at	seeing	horn	bows	now
strung	among	the	Wickan	soldiers.	Another	company	of	guards	appeared	from
the	avenue	to	the	right	of	the	main	colonnade,	bristling	with	pikes.
“Can	you	explain	that?”	Kulp	asked.
Duiker	turned	and	was	surprised	to	see	all	three	men	staring	at	him.	He
thought	back	to	his	last	comment,	then	shrugged	again.	“Coltaine	united	the
Wickan	clans	in	an	uprising	against	the	Empire.	The	Emperor	had	a	hard	time
bringing	him	to	heel—as	some	of	you	know	first-hand.	True	to	the	Emperor ’s


style,	he	acquired	Coltaine’s	loyalty—”
“How?”	Kulp	barked.
“No	one	knows.”	Duiker	smiled.	“The	Emperor	rarely	explained	his
successes.	In	any	case,	since	Empress	Laseen	held	no	affection	for	her
predecessor ’s	chosen	commanders,	Coltaine	was	left	to	rot	in	some	backwater
on	Quon	Tali.	Then	the	situation	changed.	Adjunct	Lorn	is	killed	in
Darujhistan,	High	Fist	Dujek	and	his	army	turn	renegade,	effectively
surrendering	the	entire	Genabackan	Campaign,	and	the	Year	of	Dryjhna
approaches	here	in	Seven	Cities,	prophesied	as	the	year	of	rebellion.	Laseen
needs	able	commanders	before	it	all	slips	from	her	grasp.	The	new	Adjunct
Tavore	is	untested.	So…”
“Coltaine,”	the	captain	nodded,	his	scowl	deepening.	“Sent	here	to	take
command	of	the	Seventh	and	put	down	the	rebellion—”
“After	all,”	Duiker	said	dryly,	“who	better	to	deal	with	insurrection	than	a
warrior	who	led	one	himself?”
“If	mutiny	occurs,	scant	his	chances,”	Mallick	Rel	said,	his	eyes	on	the
scene	below.
Duiker	saw	half	a	dozen	tulwars	flash,	watched	the	Wickans	recoil	and	then
unsheathe	their	own	long-knives.	They	seemed	to	have	found	a	leader,	a	tall,
fierce-looking	warrior	with	fetishes	in	his	long	braids,	who	now	bellowed
encouragement,	waving	his	own	weapon	over	his	head.	“Hood!”	the	historian
swore.	“Where	on	earth	is	Coltaine?”
The	captain	laughed.	“The	tall	one	with	the	lone	long-knife.”
Duiker ’s	eyes	widened.	That	madman	is	Coltaine?	The	Seventh’s	new	Fist?
“Ain’t	changed	at	all,	I	see,”	the	captain	continued.	“If	you’re	going	to	keep
your	head	as	leader	of	all	the	clans,	you’d	better	be	nastier	than	all	the	rest	put
together.	Why’d	you	think	the	old	Emperor	liked	him	so	much?”
“Beru	fend,”	Duiker	whispered,	appalled.
In	the	next	breath	an	ululating	scream	from	Coltaine	brought	sudden
silence	from	the	Wickan	company.	Weapons	slid	back	into	their	sheaths,	bows
were	lowered,	arrows	returned	to	their	quivers.	Even	the	bucking,	snapping
horses	fell	still,	heads	raised	and	ears	pricked.	A	space	cleared	around
Coltaine,	who	had	turned	his	back	on	the	guards.	The	tall	warrior	gestured	and
the	four	men	on	the	parapet	watched	in	silence	as	with	absolute	precision	every
horse	was	saddled.	Less	than	a	minute	later	the	horsesoldiers	were	mounted,
guiding	their	horses	into	a	close	parade	formation	that	would	rival	the
Imperial	elites.
“That,”	Duiker	said,	“was	superbly	done.”
A	soft	sigh	escaped	Mallick	Rel.	“Savage	timing,	a	beast’s	sense	of


challenge,	then	contempt.	Statement	for	the	guards.	For	us	as	well?”
“Coltaine’s	a	snake,”	the	captain	said,	“if	that’s	what	you’re	asking.	If	the
High	Command	at	Aren	thinks	they	can	dance	around	him,	they’re	in	for	a
nasty	surprise.”
“Generous	advice,”	Rel	acknowledged.
The	captain	looked	as	if	he’d	just	swallowed	something	sharp,	and	Duiker
realized	that	the	man	had	spoken	without	thought	as	to	the	priest’s	place	in	the
High	Command.
Kulp	cleared	his	throat.	“He’s	got	them	in	troop	formation—guess	the	ride
to	the	barracks	will	be	peaceful	after	all.”
“I	admit,”	Duiker	said	wryly,	“that	I	look	forward	to	meeting	the	Seventh’s
new	Fist.”
His	heavy-lidded	eyes	on	the	scene	below,	Rel	nodded.	“Agreed.”
	
Leaving	behind	the	Skara	Isles	on	a	heading	due	south,	the	fisherboat	set	out
into	the	Kansu	Sea,	its	triangular	sail	creaking	and	straining.	If	the	gale	held,
they	would	reach	the	Ehrlitan	coast	in	four	hours.	Fiddler ’s	scowl	deepened.
The	Ehrlitan	coast,	Seven	Cities.	I	hate	this	damned	continent.	Hated	it	the	first
time,	hate	it	even	more	now.	He	leaned	over	the	gunnel	and	spat	acrid	bile	into
the	warm,	green	waves.
“Feeling	any	better?”	Crokus	asked	from	the	prow,	his	tanned	young	face
creased	with	genuine	concern.
The	old	saboteur	wanted	to	punch	that	face;	instead	he	just	growled	and
hunched	down	deeper	against	the	barque’s	hull.
Kalam’s	laugh	rumbled	from	where	he	sat	at	the	tiller.	“Fiddler	and	water
don’t	mix,	lad.	Look	at	him,	he’s	greener	than	that	damned	winged	monkey	of
yours.”
A	sympathetic	snuffling	sound	breathed	against	Fiddler ’s	cheek.	He	pried
open	one	bloodshot	eye	to	find	a	tiny,	wizened	face	staring	at	him.	“Go	away,
Moby,”	Fiddler	croaked.	The	familiar,	once	servant	to	Crokus’s	uncle
Mammot,	seemed	to	have	adopted	the	sapper,	the	way	stray	dogs	and	cats	often
did.	Kalam	would	say	it	was	the	other	way	around,	of	course.	“A	lie,”	Fiddler
whispered.	“Kalam’s	good	at	those—”	like	lounging	around	in	Rutu	Jelba	for	a
whole	damn	week	on	the	off-chance	that	a	Skrae	trader	would	come	in.	“Book
passage	in	comfort,	eh,	Fid?”	Not	like	the	damned	ocean	crossing,	oh	no—and
that	one	was	supposed	to	have	been	in	comfort,	too.	A	whole	week	in	Rutu
Jelba,	a	lizard-infested,	orange-bricked	cesspool	of	a	city,	then	what?	Eight
jakatas	for	this	rag-stoppered	sawed-in-half	ale	casket.


The	steady	rise	and	fall	lulled	Fiddler	as	the	hours	passed.	His	mind	drifted
back	to	the	appallingly	long	journey	that	had	brought	them	thus	far,	then	to	the
appallingly	long	journey	that	lay	ahead.	We	never	do	things	the	easy	way,	do
we?
He	would	rather	that	every	sea	dried	up.	Men	got	feet,	not	flippers.	Even	so,
we’re	about	to	cross	overland—over	a	fly-infested,	waterless	waste,	where
people	smile	only	to	announce	they’re	about	to	kill	you.
The	day	dragged	on,	green-tinged	and	shaky.
He	thought	back	to	the	companions	he’d	left	behind	on	Genabackis,
wishing	he	could	be	marching	alongside	them.	Into	a	religious	war.	Don’t
forget	that,	Fid.	Religious	wars	are	no	fun.	The	faculty	of	reasoning	that
permitted	surrender	did	not	apply	in	such	instances.	Still,	the	squad	was	all	he’d
known	for	years.	He	felt	bereft	out	of	its	shadows.	Just	Kalam	for	old	company,
and	he	calls	that	land	ahead	home.	And	he	smiles	before	he	kills.	And	what’s	he
and	Quick	Ben	got	planned	they	ain’t	told	me	about	yet?
“There’s	more	of	those	flying	fish,”	Apsalar	said,	her	voice	identifying	the
soft	hand	that	had	found	its	way	to	his	shoulder.	“Hundreds	of	them!”
“Something	big	from	the	deep	is	chasing	them,”	Kalam	said.
Groaning,	Fiddler	pushed	himself	upright.	Moby	took	the	opportunity	to
reveal	its	motivation	behind	the	day’s	cooing	and	crawled	into	the	sapper ’s	lap,
curling	up	and	closing	its	yellow	eyes.	Fiddler	gripped	the	gunnel	and	joined
his	three	companions	in	studying	the	school	of	flying	fish	a	hundred	yards	off
the	starboard	side.	The	length	of	a	man’s	arm,	the	milky	white	fish	were
clearing	the	waves,	sailing	thirty	feet	or	so,	then	slipping	back	under	the
surface.	In	the	Kansu	Sea	flying	fish	hunted	like	sharks,	the	schools	capable	of
shredding	a	bull	whale	down	to	bones	in	minutes.	They	used	their	ability	to	fly
to	launch	themselves	onto	the	back	of	a	whale	when	it	broke	for	air.	“What	in
Mael’s	name	is	hunting	them?”
Kalam	was	frowning.	“Shouldn’t	be	anything	here	in	the	Kansu.	Out	in
Seeker ’s	Deep	there’s	dhenrabi,	of	course.”
“Dhenrabi!	Oh,	that	comforts	me,	Kalam.	Oh	yes	indeed!”
“Some	kind	of	sea	serpent?”	Crokus	asked.
“Think	of	a	centipede	eighty	paces	long,”	Fiddler	answered.	“Wraps	up
whales	and	ships	alike,	blows	out	all	the	air	under	its	armored	skin	and	sinks
like	a	stone,	taking	its	prey	with	it.”
“They’re	rare,”	Kalam	said,	“and	never	seen	in	shallow	water.”
“Until	now,”	Crokus	said,	his	voice	rising	in	alarm.
The	dhenrabi	broke	the	surface	in	the	midst	of	the	flying	fish,	thrashing	its
head	side	to	side,	a	wide	razorlike	mouth	flensing	prey	by	the	score.	The	width


of	the	creature’s	head	was	immense,	as	many	as	ten	arm-spans.	Its	segmented
armor	was	deep	green	under	the	encrusted	barnacles,	each	segment	revealing
long	chitinous	limbs.
“Eighty	paces	long?”	Fiddler	hissed.	“Not	unless	it’s	been	cut	in	half!”
Kalam	rose	at	the	tiller.	“Ready	with	the	sail,	Crokus.	We’re	going	to	run.
Westerly.”
Fiddler	pushed	a	squawking	Moby	from	his	lap	and	opened	his	backpack,
fumbling	to	unwrap	his	crossbow.	“If	it	decides	we	look	tasty,	Kalam…”
“I	know,”	the	assassin	rumbled.
Quickly	assembling	the	huge	iron	weapon,	Fiddler	glanced	up	and	met
Apsalar ’s	wide	eyes.	Her	face	was	white.	The	sapper	winked.	“Got	a	surprise	if
it	comes	for	us,	girl.”
She	nodded.	“I	remember…”
The	dhenrabi	had	seen	them.	Veering	from	the	school	of	flying	fish,	it	was
now	cutting	sinuously	through	the	waves	toward	them.
“That’s	no	ordinary	beast,”	Kalam	muttered.	“You	smelling	what	I’m
smelling,	Fiddler?”
Spicy,	bitter.	“Hood’s	breath,	that’s	a	Soletaken!”
“A	what?”	Crokus	asked.
“Shapeshifter,”	Kalam	said.
A	rasping	voice	filled	Fiddler ’s	mind—and	the	expressions	on	his
companions’	faces	told	him	they	heard	as	well—Mortals,	unfortunate	for	you
to	witness	my	passage.
The	sapper	grunted.	The	creature	did	not	sound	at	all	regretful.
It	continued,	For	this	you	must	all	die,	though	I	shall	not	dishonor	your
flesh	by	eating	you.
“Kind	of	you,”	Fiddler	muttered,	setting	a	solid	quarrel	in	the	crossbow’s
slot.	The	iron	head	had	been	replaced	with	a	grapefruit-sized	clay	ball.
Another	fisherboat	mysteriously	lost,	the	Soletaken	mused	ironically.	Alas.
Fiddler	scrambled	to	the	stern,	crouching	down	beside	Kalam.	The	assassin
straightened	to	face	the	dhenrabi,	one	hand	on	the	tiller.	“Soletaken!	Be	on	your
way—we	care	nothing	for	your	passage!”
I	shall	be	merciful	when	killing	you.	The	creature	rushed	the	barque	from
directly	astern,	cutting	through	the	water	like	a	sharp-hulled	ship.	Its	jaws
opened	wide.
“You	were	warned,”	Fiddler	said	as	he	raised	the	crossbow,	aimed	and
fired.	The	quarrel	sped	for	the	beast’s	open	mouth.	Lightning	fast,	the	dhenrabi
snapped	at	the	shaft,	its	thin,	saw-edged	teeth	slicing	through	the	quarrel	and
shattering	the	clay	ball,	releasing	to	the	air	the	powdery	mixture	within	the	ball.


The	contact	resulted	in	an	instantaneous	explosion	that	blew	the	Soletaken’s
head	apart.
Fragments	of	skull	and	gray	flesh	raked	the	water	on	all	sides.	The
incendiary	powder	continued	to	burn	fiercely	all	it	clung	to,	sending	up	hissing
steam.	Momentum	carried	the	headless	body	to	within	four	spans	of	the
barque’s	stern	before	it	dipped	down	and	slid	smoothly	out	of	sight	even	as	the
last	echoes	of	the	detonation	faded.	Smoke	drifted	sideways	over	the	waves.
“You	picked	the	wrong	fishermen,”	Fiddler	said,	lowering	his	weapon.
Kalam	settled	back	at	the	tiller,	returning	the	craft	to	a	southerly	course.	A
strange	stillness	hung	in	the	air.	Fiddler	disassembled	his	crossbow	and
repacked	it	in	oilcloth.	As	he	resumed	his	seat	amidships,	Moby	crawled	back
into	his	lap.	Sighing,	he	scratched	it	behind	an	ear.	“Well,	Kalam?”
“I’m	not	sure,”	the	assassin	admitted.	“What	brought	a	Soletaken	into	the
Kansu	Sea?	Why	did	it	want	its	passage	secret?”
“If	Quick	Ben	was	here…”
“But	he	isn’t,	Fid.	It’s	a	mystery	we’ll	have	to	live	with,	and	hopefully	we
won’t	run	into	any	more.”
“Do	you	think	it’s	related	to…?”
Kalam	scowled.	“No.”
“Related	to	what?”	Crokus	demanded.	“What	are	you	two	going	on	about?”
“Just	musing,”	Fiddler	said.	“The	Soletaken	was	heading	south.	Like	us.”
“So?”
Fiddler	shrugged.	“So…nothing.	Just	that.”	He	spat	again	over	the	side	and
slumped	down.	“The	excitement	made	me	forget	my	seasickness.	Now	the
excitement’s	faded,	dammit.”
Everyone	fell	silent,	though	the	frown	on	the	face	of	Crokus	told	the
sapper	that	the	boy	wasn’t	about	to	let	the	issue	rest	for	long.
The	gale	remained	steady,	pushing	them	hard	southward.	Less	than	three
hours	after	that	Apsalar	announced	that	she	could	see	land	ahead,	and	forty
minutes	later	Kalam	directed	the	craft	parallel	to	the	Ehrlitan	coastline	half	a
league	offshore.	They	tacked	west,	following	the	cedar-lined	ridge	as	the	day
slowly	died.
“I	think	I	see	horsemen,”	Apsalar	said.
Fiddler	raised	his	head,	joining	the	others	in	studying	the	line	of	riders
following	a	coastal	track	along	the	ridge.
“I	make	them	six	in	all,”	Kalam	said.	“Second	rider ’s—”
“Got	an	Imperial	pennon,”	Fiddler	finished,	his	face	twisting	at	the	taste	in
his	mouth.	“Messenger	and	Lancer	guard—”
“Heading	for	Ehrlitan,”	Kalam	added.


Fiddler	turned	in	his	seat	and	met	his	corporal’s	dark	eyes.	Trouble?
Maybe.
The	exchange	was	silent,	a	product	of	years	fighting	side	by	side.
Crokus	asked,	“Something	wrong?	Kalam?	Fiddler?”
The	boy’s	sharp.	“Hard	to	say,”	Fiddler	muttered.	“They’ve	seen	us	but	what
have	they	seen?	Four	fisherfolk	in	a	barque,	some	Skrae	family	headed	into	the
port	for	a	taste	of	civilization.”
“There’s	a	village	just	south	of	the	tree-line,”	Kalam	said.	“Keep	an	eye	out
for	a	creek	mouth,	Crokus,	and	a	beach	with	no	driftwood—the	houses	will	be
tucked	leeward	of	the	ridge,	meaning	inland.	How’s	my	memory,	Fid?”
“Good	enough	for	a	native,	which	is	what	you	are.	How	long	out	of	the
city?”
“Ten	hours	on	foot.”
“That	close?”
“That	close.”
Fiddler	fell	silent.	The	Imperial	messenger	and	his	horse	guard	had	moved
out	of	sight,	leaving	the	ridge	as	they	swung	south	toward	Ehrlitan.	The	plan
had	been	to	sail	right	into	the	Holy	City’s	ancient,	crowded	harbor,	arriving
anonymously.	It	was	likely	that	the	messenger	was	delivering	information	that
had	nothing	to	do	with	them—they’d	given	nothing	away	since	reaching	the
Imperial	port	of	Karakarang	from	Genabackis,	arriving	on	a	Moranth	Blue
trader	having	paid	passage	as	crew.	The	overland	journey	from	Karakarang
across	the	Talgai	Mountains	and	down	to	Rutu	Jelba	had	been	on	the	Tano
pilgrim	route—a	common	enough	journey.	And	the	week	in	Rutu	Jelba	had
been	spent	inconspicuously	lying	low,	with	only	Kalam	making	nightly
excursions	to	the	wharf	district,	seeking	passage	across	the	Otataral	Sea	to	the
mainland.
At	worst,	a	report	might	have	reached	someone	official,	somewhere,	that
two	possible	deserters,	accompanied	by	a	Genabackan	and	a	woman,	had
arrived	on	Malazan	territory—hardly	news	to	shake	the	Imperial	wasp	nest	all
the	way	to	Ehrlitan.	So,	likely	Kalam	was	being	his	usual	paranoid	self.
“I	see	the	stream	mouth,”	Crokus	said,	pointing	to	a	place	on	the	shore.
Fiddler	glanced	back	at	Kalam.	Hostile	land,	how	low	do	we	crawl?
Looking	up	at	grasshoppers,	Fid.
Hood’s	breath.	He	looked	back	to	the	shore.	“I	hate	Seven	Cities,”	he
whispered.	In	his	lap,	Moby	yawned,	revealing	a	mouth	bristling	with
needlelike	fangs.	Fiddler	blanched.	“Cuddle	up	whenever	you	want,	pup,”	he
said,	shivering.
Kalam	angled	the	tiller.	Crokus	worked	the	sail,	deft	enough	after	a	two-


month	voyage	across	Seeker ’s	Deep	to	let	the	barque	slip	easily	into	the	wind,
the	tattered	sail	barely	raising	a	luff.	Apsalar	shifted	on	the	seat,	stretched	her
arms	and	flashed	Fiddler	a	smile.	The	sapper	scowled	and	looked	away.	Burn
shake	me,	I’ve	got	to	keep	my	jaw	from	dropping	every	time	she	does	that.	She
was	another	woman,	once.	A	killer,	the	knife	of	a	god.	She	did	things…Besides,
she’s	with	Crokus,	ain’t	she.	The	boy’s	got	all	the	luck	and	the	whores	in
Karakarang	looked	like	poxed	sisters	from	some	gigantic	poxed	family	and	all
those	poxed	babies	on	their	hips…He	shook	himself.	Oh,	Fiddler,	too	long	at
sea,	way	too	long!
“I	don’t	see	any	boats,”	Crokus	said.
“Up	the	creek,”	Fiddler	mumbled,	dragging	a	nail	through	his	beard	in
pursuit	of	a	nit.	After	a	moment	he	plucked	it	out	and	flicked	it	over	the	side.
Ten	hours	on	foot,	then	Ehrlitan,	and	a	bath	and	a	shave	and	a	Kansuan	girl
with	a	saw-comb	and	the	whole	night	free	afterward.
Crokus	nudged	him.	“Getting	excited,	Fiddler?”
“You	don’t	know	the	half	of	it.”
“You	were	here	during	the	conquest,	weren’t	you?	Back	when	Kalam	was
fighting	for	the	other	side—for	the	Seven	Holy	Falah’dan—and	the	T’lan
Imass	marched	for	the	Emperor	and—”
“Enough,”	Fiddler	waved	a	hand.	“I	don’t	need	reminding,	and	neither	does
Kalam.	All	wars	are	ugly,	but	that	one	was	uglier	than	most.”
“Is	it	true	that	you	were	in	the	company	that	chased	Quick	Ben	across	the
Holy	Desert	Raraku,	and	that	Kalam	was	your	guide,	only	he	and	Quick	were
planning	on	betraying	you	all,	but	Whiskeyjack	had	already	worked	that	out—”
Fiddler	turned	a	glare	on	Kalam.	“One	night	in	Rutu	Jelba	with	a	jug	of
Falari	rum,	and	this	boy	knows	more	than	any	Imperial	historian	still
breathing.”	He	swung	back	to	Crokus.	“Listen,	son,	best	you	forget	everything
that	drunken	lout	told	you	that	night.	The	past	is	already	hunting	our	tails—no
point	in	making	it	any	easier.”
Crokus	ran	a	hand	through	his	long	black	hair.	“Well,”	he	said	softly,	“if
Seven	Cities	is	so	dangerous,	why	didn’t	we	just	head	straight	down	to	Quon
Tali,	to	where	Apsalar	lived,	so	we	can	find	her	father?	Why	all	this	sneaking
around—and	on	the	wrong	continent	at	that?”
“It’s	not	that	simple,”	Kalam	growled.
“Why?	I	thought	that	was	the	reason	for	this	whole	journey.”	Crokus
reached	for	Apsalar ’s	hand	and	clasped	it	in	both	of	his,	but	saved	his	hard
expression	for	Kalam	and	Fiddler.	“You	both	said	you	owed	it	to	her.	It	wasn’t
right	and	you	wanted	to	put	it	right.	But	now	I’m	thinking	it’s	only	part	of	the
reason,	I’m	thinking	that	you	two	have	something	else	planned—that	taking


Apsalar	back	home	was	just	an	excuse	to	come	back	to	your	Empire,	even
though	you’re	officially	outlawed.	And	whatever	it	is	you’re	planning,	it’s
meant	coming	here,	to	Seven	Cities,	and	it’s	also	meant	we	have	to	sneak
around,	terrified	of	everything,	jumping	at	shadows,	as	if	the	whole	Malazan
army	was	after	us.”	He	paused,	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	continued.	“We	have	a
right	to	know	the	truth,	because	you’re	putting	us	in	danger	and	we	don’t	even
know	what	kind,	or	why,	or	anything.	So	out	with	it.	Now.”
Fiddler	leaned	back	on	the	gunnel.	He	looked	over	at	Kalam	and	raised	an
eyebrow.	“Well,	Corporal?	It’s	your	call.”
“Give	me	a	list,	Fiddler,”	Kalam	said.
“The	Empress	wants	Darujhistan,”	The	sapper	met	Crokus’s	steady	gaze.
“Agreed?”
The	boy	hesitated,	then	nodded.
Fiddler	continued.	“What	she	wants	she	usually	gets	sooner	or	later.	Call	it
precedent.	Now,	she’s	tried	to	take	your	city	once,	right,	Crokus?	And	it	cost
her	Adjunct	Lorn,	two	Imperial	demons,	and	High	Fist	Dujek’s	loyalty,	not	to
mention	the	loss	of	the	Bridgeburners.	Enough	to	make	anyone	sting.”
“Fine.	But	what’s	that	got	to	do—”
“Don’t	interrupt.	Corporal	said	make	a	list.	I’m	making	it.	You’ve	followed
me	so	far?	Good.	Darujhistan	eluded	her	once—but	she’ll	make	certain	next
time.	Assuming	there	is	a	next	time.”
“Well,”	Crokus	was	scowling,	“why	wouldn’t	there	be?	You	said	she	gets
what	she	wants.”
“And	you’re	loyal	to	your	city,	Crokus?”
“Of	course—”
“So	you’d	do	anything	you	could	to	prevent	the	Empress	from	conquering
it?”
“Well,	yes	but—”
“Sir?”	Fiddler	turned	back	to	Kalam.
The	burly	black-skinned	man	looked	out	over	the	waves,	sighed,	then
nodded	to	himself.	He	faced	Crokus.	“It’s	this,	lad.	Time’s	come.	I’m	going
after	her.”
The	Daru	boy’s	expression	was	blank,	but	Fiddler	saw	Apsalar ’s	eyes
widen,	her	face	losing	its	color.	She	sat	back	suddenly,	then	half-smiled—and
Fiddler	went	cold	upon	seeing	it.
“I	don’t	know	what	you	mean,”	Crokus	said.	“After	who?	The	Empress?
How?”
“He	means,”	Apsalar	said,	still	smiling	a	smile	that	had	belonged	to	her
once,	long	ago,	when	she’d	been…someone	else,	“that	he’s	going	to	try	and	kill


her.”
“What?”	Crokus	stood,	almost	pitching	himself	over	the	side.	“You?	You
and	a	seasick	sapper	with	a	broken	fiddle	strapped	to	his	back?	Do	you	think
we’re	going	to	help	you	in	this	insane,	suicidal—”
“I	remember,”	Apsalar	said	suddenly,	her	eyes	narrowing	on	Kalam.
Crokus	turned	to	her.	“Remember	what?”
“Kalam.	He	was	a	Falah’dan’s	Dagger,	and	the	Claw	gave	him	command	of
a	Hand.	Kalam’s	a	master	assassin,	Crokus.	And	Quick	Ben—”
“Is	three	thousand	leagues	away!”	Crokus	shouted.	“He’s	a	squad	mage,	for
Hood’s	sake!	That’s	it,	a	squalid	little	squad	mage!”
“Not	quite,”	Fiddler	said.	“And	being	so	far	away	doesn’t	mean	a	thing,
son.	Quick	Ben’s	our	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole.”
“Your	what	in	the	where?”
“Shaved	knuckle,	as	in	the	game	of	knuckles—a	good	gambler ’s	usually
using	a	shaved	knuckle,	as	in	cheating	in	the	casts,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.	As
for	‘hole,’	that’d	be	Quick	Ben’s	Warren—the	one	that	can	put	him	at	Kalam’s
side	in	the	space	of	a	heartbeat,	no	matter	how	far	away	he	happens	to	be.	So,
Crokus,	there	you	have	it:	Kalam’s	going	to	give	it	a	try,	but	it’s	going	to	take
some	planning,	preparation.	And	that	starts	here,	in	Seven	Cities.	You	want
Darujhistan	free	forever	more?	The	Empress	Laseen	must	die.”
Crokus	slowly	sat	back	down.	“But	why	Seven	Cities?	Isn’t	the	Empress	in
Quon	Tali?”
“Because,”	Kalam	said	as	he	angled	the	fisherboat	into	the	creek	mouth	and
the	oppressive	heat	of	the	land	rose	around	them,	“because,	lad,	Seven	Cities	is
about	to	rise.”
“What	do	you	mean?”
The	assassin	bared	his	teeth.	“Rebellion.”
Fiddler	swung	around	and	scanned	the	fetid	undergrowth	lining	the	banks.
And	that,	he	said	to	himself	with	a	chill	clutching	his	stomach,	is	the	part	of
this	plan	that	I	hate	the	most.	Chasing	one	of	Quick	Ben’s	wild	ideas	with	the
whole	countryside	going	up	in	flames.
A	minute	later	they	rounded	a	bend	and	the	village	appeared,	a	scattering	of
wattle-and-daub	huts	in	a	broken	half-circle	facing	a	line	of	skiffs	pulled	onto	a
sandy	beach.	Kalam	nudged	the	tiller	and	the	fisherboat	drifted	toward	the
strand.	As	the	keel	scraped	bottom,	Fiddler	clambered	over	the	gunnel	and
stepped	onto	dry	land,	Moby	now	awake	and	clinging	with	all	fours	to	the	front
of	his	tunic.	Ignoring	the	squawking	creature,	Fiddler	slowly	straightened.
“Well,”	he	sighed	as	the	first	of	the	village’s	mongrel	dogs	announced	their
arrival,	“it’s	begun.”


Chapter	Two

To	this	day	it	remains	easy	to	ignore	the	fact	that	the	Aren	High
Command	was	rife	with	treachery,	dissension,	rivalry	and
malice…The	assertion	that	[the	Aren	High	Command]	was
ignorant	of	the	undercurrents	in	the	countryside	is,	at	best	naive,
at	worst	cynical	in	the	extreme…
THE	SHA’IK	REBELLION
CULLARAN
The	red	ochre	handprint	on	the	wall	was	dissolving	in	the	rain,	trickling	roots
down	along	the	mortar	between	the	fired	mudbricks.	Hunched	against	the
unseasonal	downpour,	Duiker	watched	as	the	print	slowly	disappeared,	wishing
that	the	day	had	broken	dry,	that	he	could	have	come	upon	the	sign	before	the
rain	obscured	it,	that	he	could	then	have	gained	a	sense	of	the	hand	that	had
made	its	mark	here,	on	the	outer	wall	of	the	old	Falah’d	Palace	in	the	heart	of
Hissar.
The	many	cultures	of	Seven	Cities	seethed	with	symbols,	a	secret
pictographic	language	of	oblique	references	that	carried	portentous	weight
among	the	natives.	Such	symbols	formed	a	complex	dialogue	that	no	Malazan
could	understand.	Slowly,	during	his	many	months	resident	here,	Duiker	had
come	to	realize	the	danger	behind	their	ignorance.	As	the	Year	of	Dryjhna
approached,	such	symbols	blossomed	in	chaotic	profusion,	every	wall	in	every
city	a	scroll	of	secret	code.	Wind,	sun	and	rain	assured	impermanence,	wiping
clean	the	slate	in	readiness	for	the	next	exchange.
And	it	seems	they	have	a	lot	to	say	these	days.
	
Duiker	shook	himself,	trying	to	loosen	the	tension	in	his	neck	and	shoulders.
His	warnings	to	the	High	Command	seemed	to	be	falling	on	deaf	ears.	There
were	patterns	in	these	symbols,	and	it	seemed	that	he	alone	among	all	the
Malazans	had	any	interest	in	breaking	the	code,	or	even	in	recognizing	the


risks	of	maintaining	an	outsider ’s	indifference.
He	pulled	his	cowl	further	over	his	head	in	an	effort	to	keep	his	face	dry,
feeling	water	trickle	on	his	forearms	as	the	wide	cuffs	of	his	telaba	cloak
briefly	opened	to	the	rain.	The	last	of	the	print	had	washed	away.	Duiker
pushed	himself	into	motion,	resuming	his	journey.
Water	ran	in	ankle-deep	torrents	down	the	cobbled	slopes	beneath	the
palace	walls,	gushing	down	into	the	gutters	bisecting	each	alley	and	causeway
in	the	city.	Opposite	the	immense	palace	wall,	awnings	sagged	precariously
above	closet-sized	shops.	In	the	chill	shadows	of	the	holes	that	passed	for
store-fronts,	dour-faced	merchants	watched	Duiker	as	he	passed	by.
Apart	from	miserable	donkeys	and	the	occasional	sway-backed	horse,	the
streets	were	mostly	empty	of	pedestrian	traffic.	Even	with	the	rare	wayward
current	from	the	Sahul	Sea,	Hissar	was	a	city	born	of	inland	drylands	and
deserts.	Though	a	port	and	now	a	central	landing	for	the	Empire,	the	city	and
its	people	lived	with	a	spiritual	back	to	the	sea.
Duiker	left	behind	the	close	ring	of	ancient	buildings	and	narrow	alleys
surrounding	the	palace	wall,	coming	to	the	Dryjhna	Colonnade	that	ran	straight
as	a	spear	through	Hissar ’s	heart.	The	guldindha	trees	lining	the	colonnade’s
carriage	track	swam	with	blurred	motion	as	the	rain	pelted	down	on	their
ochre	leaves.	Estate	gardens,	most	of	them	unwalled	and	open	to	public
admiration,	stretched	green	on	either	side.	The	downpour	had	stripped	flowers
from	their	shrubs	and	dwarf	trees,	turning	the	cobbled	walkways	white,	red	and
pink.
The	historian	ducked	as	a	gusting	wind	pressed	his	cloak	tight	against	his
right	side.	The	water	on	his	lips	tasted	of	salt,	the	only	indication	of	the	angry
sea	a	thousand	paces	to	his	right.	Where	the	street	named	after	the	Storm	of	the
Apocalypse	narrowed	suddenly,	the	carriage	path	became	a	muddy	track	of
broken	cobbles	and	shattered	pottery,	the	tall,	once	royal	nut	trees	giving	way
to	desert	scrub.	The	change	was	so	abrupt	that	Duiker	found	himself	up	to	his
shins	in	dung-stained	water	before	he	realized	he’d	come	to	the	city’s	edge.
Squinting	against	the	rain,	he	looked	up.
Off	to	his	left,	hazy	behind	the	sheets	of	water,	ran	the	stone	wall	of	the
Imperial	Compound.	Smoke	struggled	upward	from	beyond	the	wall’s	fortified
height.	On	his	right	and	much	closer	was	a	chaotic	knot	of	hide	tents,	horses
and	camels	and	carts—a	trader	camp,	newly	arrived	from	the	Sialk	Odhan.
Drawing	his	cloak	tighter	against	the	wind,	Duiker	swung	to	the	right	and
made	for	the	encampment.	The	rain	was	heavy	enough	to	mask	the	sound	of	his
approach	from	the	tribe’s	dogs	as	he	entered	the	narrow,	mud-choked	pathway
between	the	sprawling	tents.	Duiker	paused	at	an	intersection.	Opposite	was	a


large	copper-stained	tent,	its	walls	profusely	cluttered	with	painted	symbols.
Smoke	drifted	from	the	entrance	flap.	He	crossed	the	intersection,	hesitating
only	a	moment	before	drawing	the	flap	to	one	side	and	entering.
A	roar	of	sound,	carried	on	waves	of	hot,	steam-laden	air	buffeted	the
historian	as	he	paused	to	shake	the	water	from	his	cloak.	Voices	shouting,
cursing,	laughing	on	all	sides,	the	air	filled	with	durhang	smoke	and	incense,
roasting	meats,	sour	wine	and	sweet	ale,	closed	in	around	Duiker	as	he	took	in
the	scene.	Coins	rattled	and	spun	in	pots	where	a	score	of	gamblers	had
gathered	off	to	his	left;	in	front	of	him	a	tapu	weaved	swiftly	through	the
crowd,	a	four-foot-long	iron	skewer	of	roasted	meats	and	fruit	in	each	hand.
Duiker	shouted	the	tapu	over,	raising	a	hand	to	catch	the	man’s	eye.	The
hawker	quickly	approached.
“Goat,	I	swear!”	the	tapu	exclaimed	in	the	coastal	Debrahl	language.	“Goat,
not	dog,	Dosii!	Smell	for	yourself,	and	only	a	clipping	to	pay	for	such
delicious	fare!	Would	you	pay	so	little	in	Dosin	Pali?”
Born	on	the	plains	of	Dal	Hon,	Duiker ’s	dark	skin	matched	that	of	the	local
Debrahl;	he	was	wearing	the	telaba	sea	cloak	of	a	merchant	trader	from	the
island	city	of	Dosin	Pali,	and	spoke	the	language	without	hint	of	an	accent.	To
the	tapu’s	claim	Duiker	grinned.	“For	dog	I	would,	Tapuharal.”	He	fished	out
two	local	crescents—the	equivalent	of	a	base	“clipping”	of	the	Imperial	silver
jakata.	“And	if	you	imagine	the	Mezla	are	freer	with	their	silver	on	the	island,
you	are	a	fool	and	worse!”
Looking	nervous,	the	tapu	slid	a	chunk	of	dripping	meat	and	two	soft
amber	globes	of	fruit	from	one	of	the	skewers,	wrapping	them	in	leaves.
“Beware	Mezla	spies,	Dosii,”	he	muttered.	“Words	can	be	twisted.”
“Words	are	their	only	language,”	Duiker	replied	with	contempt	as	he
accepted	the	food.	“Is	it	true	then	that	a	scarred	barbarian	now	commands	the
Mezla	army?”
“A	man	with	a	demon’s	face,	Dosii.”	The	tapu	wagged	his	head.	“Even	the
Mezla	fear	him.”	Pocketing	the	crescents	he	moved	off,	raising	the	skewers
once	more	over	his	head.	“Goat,	not	dog!”
Duiker	found	a	tent	wall	to	put	his	back	against	and	watched	the	crowd	as
he	ate	his	meal	in	local	fashion,	swiftly,	messily.	Every	meal	is	your	last
encompassed	an	entire	Seven	Cities	philosophy.	Grease	smeared	on	his	face
and	dripping	from	his	fingers,	the	historian	dropped	the	leaves	to	the	muddy
floor	at	his	feet,	then	ritually	touched	his	forehead	in	a	now	outlawed	gesture
of	gratitude	to	a	Falah’d	whose	bones	were	rotting	in	the	silty	mud	of	Hissar
Bay.	The	historian’s	eyes	focused	on	a	ring	of	old	men	beyond	the	gamblers
and	he	walked	over	to	it,	wiping	his	hands	on	his	thighs.


The	gathering	marked	a	Circle	of	Seasons,	wherein	two	seers	faced	one
another	and	spoke	a	symbolic	language	of	divination	in	a	complicated	dance	of
gestures.	As	he	pushed	into	a	place	among	the	ring	of	onlookers,	Duiker	saw
the	seers	within	the	circle,	an	ancient	shaman	whose	silver-barbed,	skinthreaded	face	marked	him	as	from	the	Semk	tribe,	far	inland,	and	opposite	him
a	boy	of	about	fifteen.	Where	the	boy’s	eyes	should	have	been	were	two
gouged	pits	of	badly	healed	scar	tissue.	His	thin	limbs	and	bloated	belly
revealed	an	advanced	stage	of	malnutrition.	Duiker	realized	instinctively	that
the	boy	had	lost	his	family	during	the	Malazan	conquest	and	now	lived	in	the
alleys	and	streets	of	Hissar.	He	had	been	found	by	the	Circle’s	organizers,	for
it	was	well	known	that	the	gods	spoke	through	such	suffering	souls.
The	tense	silence	among	the	onlookers	told	the	historian	that	there	was
power	in	this	divination.	Though	blind,	the	boy	moved	to	keep	himself	face	to
face	with	the	Semk	seer,	who	himself	slowly	danced	across	a	floor	of	white
sand	in	absolute	silence.	They	held	out	their	hands	toward	each	other,
inscribing	patterns	in	the	air	between	them.
Duiker	nudged	the	man	beside	him.	“What	has	been	foreseen?”	he
whispered.
The	man,	a	squat	local	with	the	scars	of	an	old	Hissar	regiment	poorly
obscured	by	mutilating	burns	on	his	cheeks,	hissed	warningly	through	his
stained	teeth.	“Nothing	less	than	the	spirit	of	Dryjhna,	whose	outline	was
mapped	by	their	hands—a	spirit	seen	by	all	here,	a	ghostly	promise	of	fire.”
Duiker	sighed.	“Would	that	I	had	witnessed	that…”
“You	shall—see?	It	comes	again!”
The	historian	watched	as	the	weaving	hands	seemed	to	contact	an	invisible
figure,	leaving	a	smear	of	reddish	light	that	flickered	in	their	wake.	The	glow
suggested	a	human	shape,	and	that	shape	slowly	grew	more	defined.	A	woman
whose	flesh	was	fire.	She	raised	her	arms	and	something	like	iron	flashed	at
her	wrists	and	the	dancers	became	three	as	she	spun	and	writhed	between	the
seers.
The	boy	suddenly	threw	back	his	head,	words	coming	from	his	throat	like
the	grinding	of	stones.	“Two	fountains	of	raging	blood!	Face	to	face.	The
blood	is	the	same,	the	two	are	the	same	and	salty	waves	shall	wash	the	shores
of	Raraku.	The	Holy	Desert	remembers	its	past!”
The	female	apparition	vanished.	The	boy	toppled	forward,	thumping	stiff
as	a	board	onto	the	sand.	The	Semk	seer	crouched	down,	resting	a	hand	on	the
boy’s	head.	“He	is	returned	to	his	family,”	the	old	shaman	said	in	the	silence	of
the	circle.	“The	mercy	of	Dryjhna,	the	rarest	of	gifts,	granted	to	this	child.”
Hardened	tribesmen	began	weeping,	others	falling	to	their	knees.	Shaken,


Duiker	pulled	back	as	the	ring	slowly	contracted.	He	blinked	sweat	from	his
eyes,	sensing	that	someone	was	watching	him.	He	looked	around.	Across	from
him	stood	a	figure	shrouded	in	black	hides,	a	goat’s-head	hood	pulled	up,
leaving	the	face	in	shadow.	A	moment	later	the	figure	looked	away.	Duiker
quickly	moved	from	the	stranger ’s	line	of	sight.
He	made	for	the	tent	flap.
Seven	Cities	was	an	ancient	civilization,	steeped	in	the	power	of	antiquity,
where	Ascendants	once	walked	on	every	trader	track,	every	footpath,	every
lost	road	between	forgotten	places.	It	was	said	the	sands	hoarded	power	within
their	susurrating	currents,	that	every	stone	had	soaked	up	sorcery	like	blood,
and	that	beneath	every	city	lay	the	ruins	of	countless	other	cities,	older	cities,
cities	that	went	back	to	the	First	Empire	itself.	It	was	said	each	city	rose	on	the
backs	of	ghosts,	the	substance	of	spirits	thick	like	layers	of	crushed	bone;	that
each	city	forever	wept	beneath	the	streets,	forever	laughed,	shouted,	hawked
wares	and	bartered	and	prayed	and	drew	first	breaths	that	brought	life	and	the
last	breaths	that	announced	death.	Beneath	the	streets	there	were	dreams,
wisdom,	foolishness,	fears,	rage,	grief,	lust	and	love	and	bitter	hatred.
The	historian	stepped	outside	into	the	rain,	drawing	in	lungfuls	of	clean,
cool	air	as	he	once	more	wrapped	cloak	about	him.
Conquerors	could	overrun	a	city’s	walls,	could	kill	every	living	soul
within	it,	fill	every	estate	and	every	house	and	every	store	with	its	own	people,
yet	rule	nothing	but	the	city’s	thin	surface,	the	skin	of	the	present,	and	would
one	day	be	brought	down	by	the	spirits	below,	until	they	themselves	were	but
one	momentary	layer	among	many.	This	is	an	enemy	we	can	never	defeat,
Duiker	believed.	Yet	history	tells	the	stories	of	those	who	would	challenge	that
enemy,	again	and	again.	Perhaps	victory	is	not	achieved	by	overcoming	that
enemy,	but	by	joining	it,	becoming	one	with	it.
The	Empress	has	sent	a	new	Fist	to	batter	down	the	restless	centuries	of
this	land.	Had	she	abandoned	Coltaine	as	I’d	suggested	to	Mallick	Rel?	Or	had
she	just	held	him	back	in	readiness,	like	a	weapon	forged	and	honed	for	one
specific	task?
Duiker	left	the	encampment,	once	more	hunched	beneath	the	driving	rain.
Ahead	loomed	the	gates	of	the	Imperial	Compound.	He	might	well	find	some
answers	to	his	questions	within	the	next	hour,	as	he	came	face	to	face	with
Coltaine	of	the	Crow	Clan.
He	crossed	the	rutted	track,	sloshing	through	the	murky	puddles	filling	the
horse	and	wagon	ruts,	then	ascended	the	muddy	slope	toward	the	gatehouse.
Two	cowled	guards	stepped	into	view	as	he	reached	the	gate’s	narrow	side
passage.


“No	petitions	today,	Dosii,”	one	of	the	Malazan	soldiers	said.	“Try
tomorrow.”
Duiker	unclasped	the	cloak,	opened	it	to	reveal	the	Imperial	diadem	pinned
to	his	tunic.	“The	Fist	has	called	a	council,	has	he	not?”
Both	soldiers	saluted	and	stepped	back.	The	one	who’d	spoken	earlier
smiled	apologetically.	“Didn’t	know	you	were	with	the	other	one,”	he	said.
“What	other	one?”
“He	came	in	just	a	few	minutes	ago,	historian.”
“Yes,	of	course.”	Duiker	nodded	to	the	two	men,	then	passed	within.	The
stone	floor	of	the	passage	bore	the	muddy	tracks	of	a	pair	of	moccasins.
Frowning,	he	continued	on,	coming	to	the	inside	compound.	A	roofed
causeway	followed	the	wall	to	his	left,	leading	eventually	to	the	side	postern	of
the	squat,	unimaginative	headquarters	building.	Already	wet,	Duiker	ignored	it,
electing	to	cross	the	compound	directly	toward	the	building’s	main	entrance.	In
passing	he	noticed	that	the	man	who	had	preceded	him	had	done	the	same.	The
pooled	prints	of	his	steps	betrayed	a	bowlegged	gait.	The	historian’s	frown
deepened.
He	came	to	the	entrance,	where	another	guard	appeared,	who	directed
Duiker	to	the	council	room.	As	he	approached	the	room’s	double	doors,	he
checked	for	his	predecessor ’s	footprints,	but	there	were	none.	Evidently	he’d
gone	to	some	other	chamber	within	the	building.	Shrugging,	Duiker	opened
the	doors.
The	council	room	was	low-ceilinged,	its	stone	walls	unplastered	but
washed	in	white	paint.	A	long	marble	table	dominated,	looking	strangely
incomplete	in	the	absence	of	chairs.	Already	present	were	Mallick	Rel,	Kulp,
Coltaine	and	another	Wickan	officer.	They	all	turned	at	the	historian’s
entrance,	Rel’s	brows	lifting	in	mild	surprise.	Clearly,	he’d	been	unaware	that
Coltaine	had	extended	to	Duiker	an	invitation.	Had	it	been	the	new	Fist’s
intention	to	unbalance	the	priest,	a	deliberate	exclusion?	After	a	moment	the
historian	dismissed	the	thought.	More	likely	the	result	of	a	disorganized	new
command.
The	chairs	had	been	specifically	removed	for	this	council,	as	was	evident
in	the	tracks	their	legs	had	left	through	the	white	dust	on	the	floor.	The
discomfort	of	not	knowing	where	to	stand	or	how	to	position	oneself	was
evident	in	both	Mallick	Rel	and	Kulp.	The	Jhistal	priest	of	Mael	was	shifting
weight	from	one	foot	to	the	other,	sweat	on	his	brow	reflecting	the	harsh	glare
of	the	lanterns	set	on	the	tabletop,	his	hands	folded	into	his	sleeves.	Kulp
looked	in	need	of	a	wall	to	lean	against,	but	was	clearly	uncertain	how	the
Wickans	would	view	such	a	casual	posture.


Inwardly	smiling,	Duiker	removed	his	dripping	cloak,	hanging	it	from	an
old	torch	bracket	beside	the	doors.	He	then	turned	about	and	presented	himself
before	the	new	Fist,	who	stood	at	the	nearest	end	of	the	table,	his	officer	on	his
left—a	scowling	veteran	whose	wide,	flat	face	seemed	to	fold	in	on	itself
diagonally	in	a	scar	from	right	jawline	to	left	brow.
“I	am	Duiker,”	the	historian	said.	“Imperial	Historian	of	the	Empire.”	He
half	bowed.	“Welcome	to	Hissar,	Fist.”	Up	close,	he	could	see	that	the
warleader	of	the	Crow	Clan	showed	the	weathering	of	forty	years	on	the	north
Wickan	Plains	of	Quon	Tali.	His	lean,	expressionless	face	was	lined,	deep
brackets	around	the	thin,	wide	mouth,	and	squint	tracks	at	the	corners	of	his
dark,	deep-set	eyes.	Oiled	braids	hung	down	past	his	shoulders,	knotted	with
crow-feather	fetishes.	He	was	tall,	wearing	a	battered	vest	of	chain	over	a	hide
shirt,	a	crowfeather	cloak	hanging	from	his	broad	shoulders	down	to	the	backs
of	his	knees.	He	wore	a	rider ’s	leggings,	laced	with	gut	up	the	outer	sides	to
his	hips.	A	single	horn-handled	long-knife	jutted	out	from	under	his	left	arm.
In	answer	to	Duiker ’s	words	he	cocked	his	head.	“When	I	last	saw	you,”	he
said	in	his	harsh	Wickan	accent,	“you	lay	in	fever	on	the	Emperor ’s	own	cot,
about	to	rise	and	walk	through	the	Hooded	One’s	Gates.”	He	paused.	“Bult	was
the	young	warrior	whose	lance	ripped	you	open	and	for	his	effort	a	soldier
named	Dujek	kissed	Bult’s	face	with	his	sword.”	Coltaine	slowly	turned	to
smile	at	the	scarred	Wickan	at	his	side.
The	grizzled	horseman’s	scowl	remained	unchanged	as	he	glared	at
Duiker.	After	a	moment	he	shook	his	head	and	swelled	his	chest.	“I	remember
an	unarmed	man.	The	lack	of	weapons	in	his	hands	turned	my	lance	at	the	last
moment.	I	remember	Dujek’s	sword	that	stole	my	beauty	even	as	my	horse	bit
his	arm	crushing	bone.	I	remember	that	Dujek	lost	that	arm	to	the	surgeons,
fouled	as	it	was	with	my	horse’s	breath.	Between	us,	I	lost	the	exchange,	for	the
loss	of	an	arm	did	nothing	to	damage	Dujek’s	glorious	career,	while	the	loss
of	my	beauty	left	me	with	but	the	one	wife	that	I	already	had.”
“And	was	she	not	your	sister,	Bult?”
“She	was,	Coltaine.	And	blind.”
Both	Wickans	fell	silent,	the	one	frowning	and	the	other	scowling.
Off	to	one	side	Kulp	voiced	something	like	a	strangled	grunt.	Duiker
slowly	raised	an	eyebrow.	“I	am	sorry,	Bult,”	he	said.	“Although	I	was	at	the
battle,	I	never	saw	Coltaine,	nor	you.	In	any	case,	I	had	not	noticed	any
particular	loss	of	your	beauty.”
The	veteran	nodded.	“One	must	look	carefully,	it’s	true.”
“Perhaps,”	Mallick	Rel	said,	“time	to	dispense	with	the	pleasantries,
entertaining	as	they	are,	and	begin	this	council.”


“When	I’m	ready,”	Coltaine	said	casually,	still	studying	Duiker.
Bult	grunted.	“Tell	me,	Historian,	what	inspired	you	to	enter	battle	without
weapons?”
“Perhaps	I	lost	them	in	the	melee.”
“But	you	did	not.	You	wore	no	belt,	no	scabbard,	you	carried	no	shield.”
Duiker	shrugged.	“If	I	am	to	record	the	events	of	this	Empire,	I	must	be	in
their	midst,	sir.”
“Shall	you	display	such	reckless	zeal	in	recording	the	events	of	Coltaine’s
command?”
“Zeal?	Oh	yes,	sir.	As	for	reckless,”	he	sighed,	“alas,	my	courage	is	not	as
it	once	was.	These	days	I	wear	armor	when	attending	battle,	and	a	short	sword
and	shield.	And	helm.	Surrounded	by	bodyguards,	and	at	least	a	league	away
from	the	heart	of	the	fighting.”
“The	years	have	brought	you	wisdom,”	Bult	said.
“In	some	things,	I	am	afraid,”	Duiker	said	slowly,	“not	enough.”	He	faced
Coltaine.	“I	would	be	bold	enough	to	advise	you,	Fist,	at	this	council.”
Coltaine’s	gaze	slid	to	Mallick	Rel	as	he	spoke,	“And	you	fear	the
presumption,	for	you	will	say	things	I	will	not	appreciate.	Perhaps,	in	hearing
such	things,	I	shall	command	Bult	to	complete	the	task	of	killing	you.	This	tells
me	much,”	he	continued,	“of	the	situation	at	Aren.”
“I	know	little	of	that,”	Duiker	said,	feeling	sweat	trickle	beneath	his	tunic.
“But	even	less	of	you,	Fist.”
Coltaine’s	expression	did	not	change.	Duiker	was	reminded	of	a	cobra
slowly	rising	before	him,	unblinking,	cold.
“Question,”	Mallick	Rel	said.	“Has	the	council	begun?”
“Not	yet,”	Coltaine	said	slowly.	“We	await	my	warlock.”
The	priest	of	Mael	drew	a	sharp	breath	at	that.	Off	to	one	side,	Kulp	took	a
step	forward.
Duiker	found	his	throat	suddenly	dry.	Clearing	it,	he	said,	“Was	it	not	at	the
command	of	the	Empress—in	her	first	year	on	the	throne—that	all	Wickan
warlocks	be,	uh,	rooted	out?	Was	there	not	a	subsequent	mass	execution?	I	have
a	memory	of	seeing	Unta’s	outer	walls…”
“They	took	many	days	to	die,”	Bult	said.	“Hung	from	spikes	of	iron	until
the	crows	came	to	collect	their	souls.	We	brought	our	children	to	the	city	walls,
to	look	upon	the	tribal	elders	whose	lives	were	taken	from	us	by	the	shorthaired	woman’s	command.	We	gave	them	memory	scars,	to	keep	the	truth
alive.”
“An	Empress,”	Duiker	said,	watching	Coltaine’s	face,	“whom	you	now
serve.”


“The	short-haired	woman	knows	nothing	of	Wickan	ways,”	Bult	said.	“The
crows	that	carried	within	them	the	greatest	of	the	warlock	souls	returned	to	our
people	to	await	each	new	birth,	and	so	the	power	of	our	elders	returned	to	us.”
A	side	entrance	Duiker	had	not	noticed	before	slid	open.	A	tall,	bow-legged
figure	stepped	into	the	room,	face	hidden	in	the	shadow	of	a	goat’s-head	cowl,
which	he	now	pulled	back,	revealing	the	smooth	visage	of	a	boy	no	more	than
ten	years	old.	The	youth’s	dark	eyes	met	the	historian’s.
“This	is	Sormo	E’nath,”	Coltaine	said.
“Sormo	E’nath—an	old	man—was	executed	at	Unta,”	Kulp	snapped.	“He
was	the	most	powerful	of	the	warlocks—the	Empress	made	sure	of	him.	It’s
said	he	took	eleven	days	on	the	wall	to	die.	This	one	is	not	Sormo	E’nath.	This
is	a	boy.”
“Eleven	days,”	Bult	grunted.	“No	single	crow	could	hold	all	of	his	soul.
Each	day	there	came	another,	until	he	was	all	gone.	Eleven	days,	eleven	crows.
Such	was	Sormo’s	power,	his	life	will,	and	such	was	the	honor	accorded	him
by	the	black-winged	spirits.	Eleven	came	to	him.	Eleven.”
“Elder	sorcery,”	Mallick	Rel	whispered.	“Most	ancient	scrolls	hint	at	such
things.	This	boy	is	named	Sormo	E’nath.	Truly	the	warlock	reborn?”
“The	Rhivi	of	Genabackis	have	similar	beliefs,”	Duiker	said.	“A	newborn
child	can	become	the	vessel	of	a	soul	that	has	not	passed	through	Hood’s
Gates.”
The	boy	spoke,	his	voice	reedy	but	breaking,	on	the	edge	of	manhood.	“I
am	Sormo	E’nath,	who	carries	in	his	breastbone	the	memory	of	an	iron	spike.
Eleven	crows	attended	my	birth.”	He	hitched	his	cloak	behind	his	shoulders.
“This	day	I	came	upon	a	ritual	of	divination	and	saw	there	among	the	crowd
the	historian	Duiker.	Together	we	witnessed	a	vision	sent	by	a	spirit	of	great
power,	a	spirit	whose	face	is	one	among	many.	This	spirit	promised
armageddon.”
“I	saw	as	he	did,”	Duiker	said.	“A	trader	caravan	has	camped	outside	the
city.”
“You	were	not	discovered	as	a	Malazan?”	Mallick	asked.
“He	speaks	the	tribal	language	well,”	Sormo	said.	“And	makes	gestures
announcing	his	hatred	of	the	Empire.	Well	enough	of	countenance	and	in
action	to	deceive	the	natives.	Tell	me,	Historian,	have	you	seen	such
divinations	before?”
“None	so…obvious,”	Duiker	admitted.	“But	I	have	seen	enough	signs	to
sense	the	growing	momentum.	The	new	year	will	bring	rebellion.”
“Bold	assertion,”	Mallick	Rel	said.	He	sighed,	clearly	uncomfortable	with
standing.	“The	new	Fist	would	do	well	to	regard	with	caution	such	claims.


Many	are	the	prophecies	of	this	land,	as	many	as	there	are	people,	it	seems.
Such	multitudes	diminish	the	veracity	of	each.	Rebellion	has	been	promised	in
Seven	Cities	each	year	since	the	Malazan	conquest.	What	has	come	of	them?
Naught.”
“The	priest	has	hidden	motives,”	Sormo	said.
Duiker	found	himself	holding	his	breath.
Mallick	Rel’s	round,	sweat-sheened	face	went	white.
“All	men	have	hidden	motives,”	Coltaine	said,	as	if	dismissing	his
warlock’s	claim.	“I	hear	counsel	of	warning	and	counsel	of	caution.	A	good
balance.	These	are	my	words.	The	mage	who	yearns	to	lean	against	walls	of
stone	views	me	as	an	adder	in	his	bedroll.	His	fear	of	me	speaks	for	every
soldier	in	the	Seventh	Army.”	The	Fist	spat	on	the	floor,	his	face	twisting.	“I
care	nothing	for	their	sentiments.	If	they	obey	my	commands	I	in	turn	will
serve	them.	If	they	do	not,	I	will	tear	their	hearts	from	their	chests.	Do	you	hear
my	words,	Cadre	Mage?”
Kulp	was	scowling.	“I	hear	them.”
“I	am	here,”	Rel’s	voice	was	almost	shrill,	“to	convey	the	commands	of
High	Fist	Pormqual—”
“Before	or	after	the	High	Fist’s	official	welcome?”	Even	as	he	spoke
Duiker	regretted	his	words,	despite	Bult’s	bark	of	laughter.
In	response,	Mallick	Rel	straightened.	“High	Fist	Pormqual	welcomes	Fist
Coltaine	to	Seven	Cities,	and	wishes	him	well	in	his	new	command.	The
Seventh	Army	remains	as	one	of	the	three	original	armies	of	the	Malazan
Empire,	and	the	High	Fist	is	confident	that	Fist	Coltaine	will	honor	their
commendable	history.”
“I	care	nothing	for	reputations,”	Coltaine	said.	“They	shall	be	judged	by
their	actions.	Go	on.”
Trembling,	Rel	continued,	“The	High	Fist	Pormqual	has	asked	me	to
convey	his	orders	to	High	Fist	Coltaine.	Admiral	Nok	is	to	leave	Hissar
Harbor	and	proceed	to	Aren	as	soon	as	his	ships	are	resupplied.	High	Fist
Coltaine	is	to	begin	preparations	for	marching	the	Seventh	overland…to	Aren.
It	is	the	High	Fist’s	desire	to	review	the	Seventh	prior	to	its	final	stationing.”
The	priest	produced	a	sealed	scroll	from	his	robes	and	set	it	on	the	tabletop.
“Such	are	the	High	Fist’s	commands.”
A	look	of	disgust	darkened	Coltaine’s	features.	He	crossed	his	arms	and
deliberately	turned	his	back	on	Mallick	Rel.
Bult	laughed	without	humor.	“The	High	Fist	wishes	to	review	the	army.
Presumably	the	High	Fist	has	an	attendant	High	Mage,	perhaps	a	Hand	of	the
Claw	as	well?	If	he	wishes	to	review	Coltaine’s	troops	he	can	come	here	by


Warren.	The	Fist	has	no	intention	of	outfitting	this	army	to	march	four	hundred
leagues	so	that	Pormqual	can	frown	at	the	dust	on	their	boots.	Such	a	move	will
leave	the	eastern	provinces	of	Seven	Cities	without	an	occupying	army.	At	this
time	of	unrest	it	would	be	viewed	as	a	retreat,	especially	when	accompanied	by
the	withdrawal	of	the	Sahul	Fleet.	This	land	cannot	be	governed	from	behind
the	walls	of	Aren.”
“Defying	the	High	Fist’s	command?”	Rel	asked	in	a	whisper,	eyes
glittering	like	blooded	diamonds	on	Coltaine’s	broad	back.
The	Fist	whirled.	“I	am	counseling	a	change	of	those	commands,”	he	said,
“and	now	await	a	reply.”
“Reply	I	shall	give	you,”	the	priest	rasped.
Coltaine	sneered.
Bult	said,	“You?	You	are	a	priest,	not	a	soldier,	not	a	governor.	You	are	not
even	recognized	as	a	member	of	the	High	Command.”
Rel’s	glare	flicked	from	Fist	to	veteran.	“I	am	not?	Indeed—”
“Not	by	Empress	Laseen,”	Bult	cut	in.	“She	knows	nothing	of	you,	priest,
apart	from	the	High	Fist’s	reports.	Understand	that	the	Empress	does	not
convey	power	upon	people	whom	she	does	not	know.	High	Fist	Pormqual
employed	you	as	his	messenger	boy	and	that	is	how	the	Fist	shall	treat	you.
You	command	nothing.	Not	Coltaine,	not	me,	not	even	a	lowly	mess	cook	of
the	Seventh.”
“I	shall	convey	these	words	and	sentiments	to	the	High	Fist.”
“No	doubt.	You	may	go	now.”
Rel’s	jaw	dropped.	“Go?”
“We	are	done	with	you.	Leave.”
In	silence	they	watched	the	priest	depart.	As	soon	as	the	doors	closed
Duiker	turned	to	Coltaine.	“That	may	not	have	been	wise,	Fist.”
Coltaine’s	eyes	looked	sleepy.	“Bult	spoke,	not	I.”
Duiker	glanced	at	the	veteran.	The	scarred	Wickan	was	grinning.
“Tell	me	of	Pormqual,”	Coltaine	said.	“You	have	met	him?”
The	historian	swung	back	to	the	Fist.	“I	have.”
“Does	he	govern	well?”
“As	far	as	I	have	been	able	to	determine,”	Duiker	said,	“he	does	not	govern
at	all.	Most	edicts	are	issued	by	the	man	you—Bult—just	expelled	from	this
council.	There	are	a	host	of	others	behind	the	curtain,	mostly	nobleborn
wealthy	merchants.	They	are	the	ones	primarily	responsible	for	the	cuts	in	duty
taxation	on	imported	goods,	and	the	corresponding	increases	in	local	taxes	on
production	and	exports—with	exemptions,	of	course,	in	whatever	export	they
themselves	are	engaged	in.	The	Imperial	occupation	is	managed	by	Malazan


merchants,	a	situation	unchanged	since	Pormqual	assumed	the	title	of	High	Fist
four	years	ago.”
Bult	asked,	“Who	was	High	Fist	before	him?”
“Cartheron	Crust,	who	drowned	one	night	in	Aren	Harbor.”
Kulp	snorted.	“Crust	could	swim	drunk	through	a	hurricane,	but	then	he
went	and	drowned	just	like	his	brother	Urko.	Neither	body	was	ever	found,	of
course.”
“Meaning?”
Kulp	grinned	at	Bult,	but	said	nothing.
“Both	Crust	and	Urko	were	the	Emperor ’s	men,”	Duiker	explained.	“It
seems	they	shared	the	same	fate	as	most	of	Kellanved’s	companions,	including
Toc	the	Elder	and	Ameron.	None	of	their	bodies	were	ever	found,	either.”	The
historian	shrugged.	“Old	history	now.	Forbidden	history,	in	fact.”
“You	assume	they	were	murdered	at	Laseen’s	command,”	Bult	said,	baring
his	jagged	teeth.	“But	imagine	a	circumstance	where	the	Empress’s	most	able
commanders	simply…disappeared.	Leaving	her	isolated,	desperate	for	able
people.	You	forget,	Historian,	that	before	Laseen	became	Empress,	she	was
close	companions	with	Crust,	Urko,	Ameron,	Dassem	and	the	others.	Imagine
her	now	alone,	still	feeling	the	wounds	of	abandonment.”
“And	her	murder	of	the	other	close	companions—Kellanved	and	Dancer—
was	not	something	she	imagined	would	affect	her	friendship	with	those
commanders?”	Duiker	shook	his	head,	aware	of	the	bitterness	in	his	voice.
They	were	my	companions,	too.
“Some	errors	in	judgment	can	never	be	undone,”	Bult	said.	“The	Emperor
and	Dancer	were	able	conquerors,	but	were	they	able	rulers?”
“We’ll	never	know,”	Duiker	snapped.
The	Wickan’s	sigh	was	almost	a	snort.	“No,	but	if	there	was	one	person
close	to	the	throne	capable	of	seeing	what	was	to	come,	it	was	Laseen.”
Coltaine	spat	on	the	floor	once	again.	“That	is	all	to	say	on	the	matter,
Historian.	Record	the	words	that	have	been	uttered	here,	if	you	do	not	find
them	too	sour	a	taste.”	He	glanced	over	at	a	silent	Sormo	E’nath,	frowning	as
he	studied	his	warlock.
“Even	if	I	choked	on	them,”	Duiker	replied,	“I	would	recount	them
nonetheless.	I	could	not	call	myself	a	historian	if	it	were	otherwise.”
“Very	well,	then.”	The	Fist’s	gaze	remained	on	Sormo	E’nath.	“Tell	me,
Historian,	what	hold	does	Mallick	Rel	have	over	Pormqual?”
“I	wish	I	knew,	Fist.”
“Find	out.”
“You	are	asking	me	to	become	a	spy.”


Coltaine	turned	to	him	with	a	faint	smile.	“And	what	were	you	in	the
trader ’s	tent,	Duiker?”
Duiker	grimaced.	“I	would	have	to	go	to	Aren.	I	do	not	think	Mallick	Rel
would	welcome	me	to	inner	councils	any	more.	Not	after	witnessing	his
humiliation	here.	In	fact,	I	warrant	he	has	marked	me	as	an	enemy	now,	and	his
enemies	have	a	habit	of	disappearing.”
“I	shall	not	disappear,”	Coltaine	said.	He	stepped	closer,	reached	out	and
gripped	the	historian’s	shoulder.	“We	shall	disregard	Mallick	Rel,	then.	You
will	be	attached	to	my	staff.”
“As	you	command,	Fist,”	Duiker	said.
“This	council	is	ended.”	Coltaine	spun	to	his	warlock.	“Sormo,	you	shall
recount	for	me	this	morning’s	adventure…later.”
The	warlock	bowed.
Duiker	retrieved	his	cloak	and,	followed	by	Kulp,	left	the	chamber.	As	the
doors	closed	behind	them,	the	historian	plucked	at	the	cadre	mage’s	sleeve.	“A
word	with	you.	In	private.”
“My	thoughts	exactly,”	Kulp	replied.
They	found	a	room	further	down	the	hallway,	cluttered	with	broken
furniture	but	otherwise	unoccupied.	Kulp	shut	and	locked	the	door,	then	faced
Duiker,	his	eyes	savage.	“He’s	not	a	man	at	all—he’s	an	animal	and	he	sees
things	like	an	animal.	And	Bult—Bult	reads	his	master ’s	snarling	and	raised
hackles	and	puts	it	all	into	words—I’ve	never	heard	such	a	talkative	Wickan	as
that	mangled	old	man.”
“Evidently,”	Duiker	said	dryly,	“Coltaine	had	a	lot	to	say.”
“I	suspect	even	now	the	priest	of	Mael	is	planning	his	revenge.”
“Aye.	But	it	was	Bult’s	defense	of	the	Empress	that	shook	me.”
“Do	you	countenance	his	argument?”
Duiker	sighed.	“That	she	regrets	her	actions	and	now	feels,	in	full,	the
solitude	of	power?	Possibly.	Interesting,	but	its	relevance	is	long	past.”
“Has	Laseen	confided	in	these	Wickan	savages,	do	you	think?”
“Coltaine	was	summoned	to	an	audience	with	the	Empress,	and	I’d	guess
that	Bult	is	as	much	as	sewn	to	his	master ’s	side—but	what	occurred	between
them	in	Laseen’s	private	chambers	remains	unknown.”	The	historian	shrugged.
“They	were	prepared	for	Mallick	Rel,	that	much	seems	clear.	And	you,	Kulp,
what	of	this	young	warlock?”
“Young?”	The	cadre	mage	scowled.	“That	boy	has	the	aura	of	an	ancient
man.	I	could	smell	on	him	the	ritual	drinking	of	mare’s	blood,	and	that	ritual
marks	a	warlock’s	Time	of	Iron—his	last	few	years	of	life,	the	greatest
flowering	of	his	power.	Did	you	see	him?	He	fired	a	dart	at	the	priest,	then


stood	silent,	watching	its	effect.”
“Yet	you	claimed	it	was	all	a	lie.”
“No	need	to	let	Sormo	know	how	sensitive	my	nose	is,	and	I’ll	continue
treating	him	as	if	he	was	a	boy,	an	impostor.	If	I’m	lucky	he’ll	ignore	me.”
Duiker	hesitated.	The	air	in	the	room	was	stale,	tasting	of	dust	when	he
drew	breath.	“Kulp,”	he	finally	said.
“Aye,	Historian,	what	do	you	ask	of	me?”
“It	has	nothing	to	do	with	Coltaine,	or	Mallick	Rel	or	Sormo	E’nath.	I
require	your	assistance.”
“In	what?”
“I	wish	to	free	a	prisoner.”
The	cadre	mage’s	brows	rose.	“In	Hissar ’s	jail?	Historian,	I	have	no	clout
with	the	Hissar	Guard—”
“No,	not	in	the	city	jail.	This	is	a	prisoner	of	the	Empire.”
“Where	is	this	prisoner	kept?”
“He	was	sold	into	slavery,	Kulp.	He’s	in	the	Otataral	mines.”
The	cadre	mage	stared.	“Hood’s	breath,	Duiker,	you’re	asking	the	help	of	a
mage?	You	imagine	I	would	willingly	go	anywhere	near	those	mines?	Otataral
destroys	sorcery,	drives	mages	insane—”
“No	closer	than	a	dory	off	the	island’s	coast,”	Duiker	cut	in.	“I	promise
that,	Kulp.”
“To	collect	the	prisoner,	and	then	what,	rowing	like	a	fiend	with	a	Dosii
war	galley	in	hot	pursuit?”
Duiker	grinned.	“Something	like	that.”
Kulp	glanced	at	the	closed	door,	then	studied	the	wreckage	in	the	room	as
if	he	had	not	noticed	it	before.	“What	chamber	was	this?”
“Fist	Torlom’s	office,”	Duiker	answered.	“Where	the	Dryjhnii	assassin
found	her	that	night.”
Kulp	slowly	nodded.	“And	was	our	choosing	it	an	accident?”
“I	certainly	hope	so.”
“So	do	I,	Historian.”
“Will	you	help	me?”
“This	prisoner…who?”
“Heboric	Light	Touch.”
Kulp	slowly	nodded	a	second	time.	“Let	me	think	on	it,	Duiker.”
“May	I	ask	what	gives	you	pause?”
Kulp	scowled.	“The	thought	of	another	traitorous	historian	loose	in	the
world,	what	else?”


	
The	Holy	City	of	Ehrlitan	was	a	city	of	white	stone,	rising	from	the	harbor	to
surround	and	engulf	a	vast,	flat-topped	hill	known	as	Jen’rahb.	It	was	believed
that	one	of	the	world’s	first	cities	was	buried	within	Jen’rahb,	and	that	in	the
compacted	rubble	waited	the	Throne	of	the	Seven	Protectors	which	legend	held
was	not	a	throne	at	all,	but	a	chamber	housing	a	ring	of	seven	raised	daises,
each	sanctified	by	one	of	the	Ascendants	who	set	out	to	found	Seven	Cities.
Ehrlitan	was	a	thousand	years	old,	but	Jen’rahb	the	ancient	city,	now	a	hill	of
crushed	stone,	was	believed	to	be	nine	times	that.
An	early	Falah’d	of	Ehrlitan	had	begun	extensive	and	ambitious	building
on	the	flat	top	of	Jen’rahb,	to	honor	the	city	buried	beneath	the	streets.	The
quarries	along	the	north	coast	were	gutted,	whole	hillsides	carved	out,	the	tenton	white	blocks	of	marble	dressed	and	transported	by	ship	to	Ehrlitan’s
harbor,	then	pulled	through	the	lower	districts	to	the	ramps	leading	to	the	hill’s
summit.	Temples,	estates,	gardens,	domes,	towers	and	the	Falah’d	palace	rose
like	the	gems	of	a	virgin	crown	on	Jen’rahb.
Three	years	after	the	last	block	had	been	nudged	into	place,	the	ancient
buried	city…shrugged.	Subterranean	archways	collapsed	beneath	the	immense
strains	of	the	Falah’d	Crown,	walls	folded,	foundation	stones	slid	sideways
into	streets	packed	solid	with	dust.	Beneath	the	surface	the	dust	behaved	like
water,	racing	down	streets	and	alleys,	into	gaping	doorways,	beneath	floors—
all	unseen	in	the	unrelieved	darkness	of	Jen’rahb.	On	the	surface,	on	a	bright
dawn	marking	an	anniversary	of	the	Falah’d	rule,	the	Crown	sagged,	towers
toppled,	domes	split	in	clouds	of	white	marble	dust,	and	the	palace	dropped
unevenly,	in	some	places	no	more	than	a	few	feet,	in	others	over	twenty	armspans	down	into	flowing	rivers	of	dust.
Observers	in	the	Lower	City	described	the	event.	It	was	as	if	a	giant
invisible	hand	had	reached	down	to	the	Crown,	closing	to	gather	in	every
building,	crushing	them	all	while	pushing	down	into	the	hill.	The	cloud	of	dust
that	rose	turned	the	sun	into	a	copper	disc	for	days	afterward.
Over	thirty	thousand	people	died	that	day,	including	the	Falah’d	himself,
and	of	the	three	thousand	who	dwelt	and	worked	within	the	Palace,	but	one
survived:	a	young	cook’s	helper	who	was	convinced	that	the	beaker	he	had
dropped	on	the	floor	a	moment	before	the	earthquake	was	to	blame	for	the
entire	catastrophe.	Driven	mad	with	guilt,	he	stabbed	himself	in	the	heart	while
standing	in	the	Lower	City’s	Merykra	Round,	his	blood	flowing	down	to
drench	the	paving	stones	where	Fiddler	now	stood.
His	blue	eyes	narrowed,	the	sapper	watched	a	troop	of	Red	Swords	ride


hard	through	a	scattering	crowd	on	the	other	side	of	the	Round.
Swathed	in	thin	bleached	linen	robes,	the	hood	pulled	up	and	over	his	head
in	the	manner	of	a	Gral	tribesman,	he	stood	motionless	on	the	sacred	paving
stone	with	its	faded	commemorative	script,	wondering	if	the	rapid	thumping	of
his	heart	was	loud	enough	to	be	heard	by	the	crowds	moving	nervously	around
him.	He	cursed	himself	for	risking	a	wander	through	the	ancient	city,	then	he
cursed	Kalam	for	delaying	their	departure	until	he’d	managed	to	make	contact
with	one	of	his	old	agents	in	the	city.
“Mezla’ebdin!”	a	voice	near	him	hissed.
Malazan	lapdogs	was	an	accurate	enough	translation.	The	Red	Swords
were	born	of	Seven	Cities,	yet	avowed	absolute	loyalty	to	the	Empress.	Rare—
if	at	the	moment	unwelcome—pragmatists	in	a	land	of	fanatical	dreamers,	the
Red	Swords	had	just	begun	an	independent	crackdown	on	the	followers	of
Dryjhna	in	their	typical	fashion:	with	sword	edge	and	lance.
Half	a	dozen	victims	lay	unmoving	on	the	bleached	stones	of	the	Round,
amidst	scattered	baskets,	bundles	of	cloth,	and	food.	Two	small	girls	crouched
beside	a	woman’s	body	near	the	dried-up	fountain.	Sprays	of	blood	decorated
nearby	walls.	From	a	few	streets	away	the	alarms	of	the	Ehrlitan	Guard	were
ringing,	the	city’s	Fist	having	just	been	informed	that	the	Red	Swords	were
once	again	defying	his	inept	rule.
The	savage	riders	continued	their	impromptu,	indiscriminate	slaughter	up
a	main	avenue	leading	off	from	the	Round,	and	were	soon	out	of	sight.
Beggars	and	thieves	swooped	in	on	the	felled	bodies,	even	as	the	air	filled	with
wailing	voices.	A	hunchbacked	pimp	gathered	up	the	two	girls	and	hobbled	out
of	sight	up	an	alleyway.
A	few	minutes	earlier	Fiddler	had	come	near	to	having	his	skull	split	wide
open	upon	entering	the	Round	and	finding	himself	in	the	path	of	a	charging
Red	Sword.	His	soldier ’s	experience	launched	him	across	the	horse’s	path,
forcing	the	warrior	to	swing	his	blade	to	his	shield	side,	and	a	final	duck
beneath	the	swishing	sword	took	the	sapper	past	and	out	of	reach.	The	Red
Sword	had	not	bothered	pursuing	him,	turning	instead	to	behead	the	next
hapless	citizen,	a	woman	desperately	dragging	two	children	from	the	horse’s
path.
Fiddler	shook	himself,	breathing	a	silent	curse.	Pushing	through	the
jostling	crowd,	he	made	for	the	alley	the	pimp	had	used.	The	tall,	leaning
buildings	to	either	side	shrouded	the	narrow	passage	in	shadow.	Rotting	food
and	something	dead	filled	the	air	with	a	thick	stench.	There	was	no	one	in	sight
as	Fiddler	cautiously	padded	along.	He	came	to	a	side	track	between	two	high
walls,	barely	wide	enough	for	a	mule	and	shin-deep	in	dry	palm	leaves.	Behind


each	high	wall	was	a	garden,	the	tall	palm	trees	entwining	their	fronds	like	a
roof	twenty	feet	overhead.	Thirty	paces	on	the	passage	came	to	a	dead	end,	and
there	crouched	the	pimp,	one	knee	holding	down	the	youngest	girl	while	he
pressed	the	other	girl	against	the	wall,	fumbling	at	her	leggings.
The	pimp’s	head	turned	at	the	sound	of	Fiddler	striding	through	the	dried
leaves.	He	had	the	white	skin	of	a	Skrae	and	showed	blackened	teeth	in	a
knowing	grin.	“Gral,	she’s	yours	for	a	half	jakata,	once	I’ve	broken	her	skin.
The	other	will	cost	you	more,	being	younger.”
Fiddler	stepped	up	to	the	man.	“I	buy,”	he	said.	“Make	wives.	Two	jakatas.”
The	pimp	snorted.	“I’ll	make	twice	that	in	a	week.	Sixteen	jakatas.”
Fiddler	drew	the	Gral	long-knife	he’d	purchased	an	hour	earlier	and
pressed	the	edge	against	the	pimp’s	throat.	“Two	jakatas	and	my	mercy,
simharal.”
“Done,	Gral,”	the	pimp	grated,	eyes	wide.	“Done,	by	the	Hooded	One!”
Fiddler	drew	two	coins	from	his	belt	and	tossed	them	into	the	leaves.	Then
he	stepped	back.	“I	take	them	now.”
The	simharal	fell	to	his	knees,	scrabbling	through	the	dried	fronds.	“Take
them,	Gral,	take	them.”
Fiddler	grunted,	sheathing	the	knife	and	gathering	one	girl	under	each	arm.
Turning	his	back	on	the	pimp,	he	walked	out	of	the	alley.	The	likelihood	that
the	man	would	attempt	any	treachery	was	virtually	nonexistent.	Gral	tribesmen
often	begged	for	insults	to	give	cause	for	their	favorite	activity:	pursuing
vendettas.	And	it	was	reputedly	impossible	to	sneak	up	on	one	from	behind,	so
none	dared	try.	For	all	that,	Fiddler	was	thankful	for	the	thick	carpet	of	leaves
between	him	and	the	pimp.
He	exited	the	alleyway.	The	girls	hung	like	oversized	dolls	in	his	arms,
still	numbed	with	shock.	He	glanced	down	at	the	face	of	the	older	one.	Nine,
maybe	ten	years	of	age,	she	stared	up	at	him	with	wide,	dark	eyes.	“Safe	now,”
he	said.	“If	I	set	you	down,	can	you	walk?	Can	you	show	me	where	you	live?”
After	a	long	moment,	she	nodded.
They	had	reached	one	of	the	tortuous	tracks	that	passed	for	a	street	in	the
Lower	City.	Fiddler	set	the	girl	down,	cradling	the	other	in	the	crook	of	his
arm—she	seemed	to	have	fallen	asleep.	The	older	child	immediately	grasped
his	robes	to	keep	from	being	pushed	away	by	the	jostling	crowd,	then	began
tugging	him	along.
“Home?”	Fiddler	asked.
“Home,”	she	replied.
Ten	minutes	later	they	passed	beyond	the	market	district	and	entered	a
quieter	residential	area,	the	dwellings	modest	but	clean.	The	girl	guided


Fiddler	toward	a	side	street.	As	soon	as	they	reached	it,	children	appeared,
shouting	and	rushing	to	gather	around	them.	A	moment	later	three	armed	men
burst	from	a	garden	gate.	They	confronted	Fiddler	with	tulwars	raised	as	the
crowd	of	children	dispersed	on	all	sides,	suddenly	silent	and	watchful.
“Nahal	Gral,”	Fiddler	growled.	“The	woman	fell	to	a	Red	Sword.	A
simharal	took	these	two.	I	bought	them.	Unbroken.	Three	jakatas.”
“Two,”	corrected	one	of	the	men,	spitting	on	the	cobbles	at	Fiddler ’s	feet.
“We	found	the	simharal.”
“Two	to	buy.	One	more	to	deliver.	Unbroken.	Three.”	Fiddler	gave	them	a
hard	grin.	“Fair	price,	cheap	for	Gral	honor.	Cheap	for	Gral	protection.”
A	fourth	man	spoke	from	behind	Fiddler.	“Pay	the	Gral,	you	fools.	A
hundred	gold	jakatas	would	not	be	too	much.	The	nurse	and	the	children	were
under	your	protection,	yet	you	fled	when	the	Red	Swords	came.	If	this	Gral	had
not	come	upon	the	children	and	purchased	them,	they	would	now	be	broken.
Pay	the	coin,	and	bless	this	Gral	with	the	Queen	of	Dreams’	favor,	bless	him
and	his	family	for	all	time.”	The	man	slowly	stepped	around.	He	wore	the
armor	of	a	private	guard,	with	a	captain’s	insignia.	His	lean	face	was	scarred
with	the	hatched	symbol	of	a	veteran	of	Y’ghatan	and	on	the	backs	of	his	hands
were	the	pitted	tracks	of	incendiary	scars.	His	hard	eyes	held	Fiddler ’s.	“I	ask
for	your	trader	name,	Gral,	so	that	we	may	honor	you	in	our	prayers.”
Fiddler	hesitated,	then	gave	the	captain	his	true	name,	the	name	he	had	been
born	with,	long	ago.
The	man	frowned	upon	hearing	it,	but	made	no	comment.
One	of	the	guards	approached	with	coins	in	hand.	Fiddler	offered	the
sleeping	child	to	the	captain.	“It	is	wrong	that	she	sleeps,”	he	said.
The	grizzled	veteran	received	the	child	with	gentle	care.	“We	shall	have	the
House	Healer	attend	to	her.”
Fiddler	glanced	around.	Clearly	the	children	belonged	to	a	rich,	powerful
family,	yet	the	abodes	within	sight	were	all	relatively	small,	the	homes	of
minor	merchants	and	craftworkers.
“Will	you	share	a	meal	with	us,	Gral?”	the	captain	asked.	“The	children’s
grandfather	will	wish	to	see	you.”
Curious,	Fiddler	nodded.	The	captain	led	him	to	a	low	postern	gate	in	a
garden	wall.	The	three	guardsmen	moved	ahead	to	open	it.	The	young	girl	was
the	first	through.
The	gate	opened	into	a	surprisingly	spacious	garden,	the	air	cool	and
damp	with	the	breath	of	an	unseen	stream	trickling	through	the	lush
undergrowth.	Old	fruit	and	nut	trees	canopied	the	stone-lined	path.	On	the	other
side	rose	a	high	wall	constructed	entirely	of	murky	glass.	Rainbow	patterns


glistened	on	the	panes,	beaded	with	moisture	and	mottled	with	mineral	stains.
Fiddler	had	never	before	seen	so	much	glass	in	one	place.	A	lone	door	was	set
in	the	wall,	made	of	bleached	linen	stretched	over	a	thin	iron	frame.	Before	it
stood	an	old	man	dressed	in	a	wrinkled	orange	robe.	The	deep,	rich	ochre	of
his	skin	was	set	off	by	a	shock	of	white	hair.	The	girl	ran	up	to	embrace	the
man.	His	amber	eyes	held	steadily	on	Fiddler.
The	sapper	dropped	to	one	knee.	“I	beg	your	blessing,	Spiritwalker,”	he
said	in	his	harshest	Gral	accent.
The	Tano	priest’s	laughter	was	like	blowing	sand.	“I	cannot	bless	what	you
are	not,	sir,”	he	said	quietly.	“But	please,	join	me	and	Captain	Turqa	in	a
private	repast.	I	trust	these	guardians	will	prove	eager	to	regain	their	courage
in	taking	care	of	the	children,	here	within	the	garden’s	confines.”	He	laid	a
weathered	hand	on	the	sleeping	child’s	forehead.	“Selal	protects	herself	in	her
own	way.	Captain,	tell	the	Healer	she	must	be	drawn	back	to	this	world,	gently.”
The	captain	handed	the	child	over	to	one	of	the	guards.	“You	heard	the
Master.	Quickly	now.”
Both	children	were	taken	through	the	linen	door.	Gesturing,	the	Tano
Spiritwalker	led	Fiddler	and	Turqa	to	the	same	door	at	a	more	sedate	pace.
Inside	the	glass-walled	room	squatted	a	low	iron	table	with	shin-high	hidebound	chairs	around	it.	On	the	table	were	bowls	holding	fruit	and	chilled	meats
stained	red	with	spices.	A	crystal	carafe	of	pale	yellow	wine	had	been
unstoppered	and	left	to	air.	At	the	carafe’s	base	the	wine’s	sediment	was	two
fingers	thick:	desert	flower	buds	and	the	carcasses	of	white	honey	bees.	The
wine’s	cool	sweet	scent	permeated	the	chamber.
The	inner	door	was	solid	wood,	set	in	a	marble	wall.	Small	alcoves	set
within	that	wall	held	lit	candles	displaying	flames	of	assorted	colors.	Their
flickering	reflections	danced	hypnotically	on	the	facing	glass.
The	priest	sat	down	and	indicated	the	other	chairs.	“Please	be	seated.	I	am
surprised	that	a	Malazan	spy	would	so	jeopardize	his	disguise	by	saving	the
lives	of	two	Ehrlii	children.	Do	you	now	seek	to	glean	valuable	information
from	a	family	overwhelmed	by	gratitude?”
Fiddler	drew	his	hood	back,	sighing.	“I	am	Malazan,”	he	acknowledged.
“But	not	a	spy.	I	am	disguised	to	avoid	discovery…by	Malazans.”
The	old	priest	poured	the	wine	and	handed	the	sapper	a	goblet.	“You	are	a
soldier.”
“I	am.”
“A	deserter?”
Fiddler	winced.	“Not	by	choice.	The	Empress	saw	fit	to	outlaw	my
regiment.”	He	sipped	the	flowery	sweet	wine.


Captain	Turqa	hissed.	“A	Bridgeburner.	A	soldier	of	Onearm’s	Host.”
“You	are	well	informed,	sir.”
The	Tano	Spiritwalker	gestured	toward	the	bowls.	“Please.	If,	after	so
many	years	of	war,	you	are	seeking	a	place	of	peace,	you	have	made	a	grave
error	in	coming	to	Seven	Cities.”
“So	I	gathered,”	Fiddler	said,	helping	himself	to	some	fruit.	“Which	is	why
I	am	hoping	to	book	passage	to	Quon	Tali	as	soon	as	possible.”
“The	Kansu	Fleet	has	left	Ehrlitan,”	the	captain	said.	“Few	are	the	trader
ships	setting	forth	on	oceanic	voyages	these	days.	High	taxes—”
“And	the	prospect	of	riches	that	will	come	with	a	civil	war,”	Fiddler	said,
nodding.	“Thus,	it	must	be	overland,	at	least	down	to	Aren.”
“Unwise,”	the	old	priest	said.
“I	know.”
But	the	Tano	Spiritwalker	was	shaking	his	head.	“Not	simply	the	coming
war.	To	travel	to	Aren,	you	must	cross	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan,	skirting	the	Holy
Desert	Raraku.	From	Raraku	the	whirlwind	of	the	Apocalypse	will	come	forth.
And	more,	there	will	be	a	convergence.”
Fiddler ’s	eyes	narrowed.	The	Soletaken	dhenrabi.	“As	in	a	drawingtogether	of	Ascendant	powers?”
“Just	so.”
“What	will	draw	them?”
“A	gate.	The	Prophecy	of	the	Path	of	Hands.	Soletaken	and	D’ivers.	A	gate
promising…something.	They	are	drawn	as	moths	to	a	flame.”
“Why	would	shapeshifters	have	any	interest	in	a	warren’s	gate?	They	are
hardly	a	brotherhood,	nor	are	they	users	of	sorcery,	at	least	not	in	any
sophisticated	sense.”
“Surprising	depth	of	knowledge	for	a	soldier.”
Fiddler	scowled.	“Soldiers	are	always	underestimated,”	he	said.	“I’ve	not
spent	fifteen	years	fighting	Imperial	wars	with	my	eyes	closed.	The	Emperor
clashed	with	both	Treach	and	Ryllandaras	outside	Li	Heng.	I	was	there.”
The	Tano	Spiritwalker	bowed	his	head	in	apology.	“I	have	no	answers	to
your	questions,”	he	said	quietly.	“Indeed,	I	do	not	think	even	the	Soletaken	and
D’ivers	are	fully	aware	of	what	they	seek.	Like	salmon	returning	to	the	waters
where	they	were	born,	they	act	on	instinct,	a	visceral	yearning	and	a	promise
only	sensed.”	He	folded	his	hands	together.	“There	is	no	unification	among
shapeshifters.	Each	stands	alone.	This	Path	of	Hands—”	he	hesitated,	then
continued—“is	perhaps	a	means	to	Ascendancy—for	the	victor.”
Fiddler	drew	a	slow,	unsteady	breath.	“Ascendancy	means	power.	Power
means	control.”	He	met	the	Spiritwalker ’s	tawny	eyes.	“Should	one


shapeshifter	attain	Ascendancy—”
“Domination	of	its	own	kind,	yes.	Such	an	event	would	have…
repercussions.	In	any	case,	friend,	the	wastelands	could	never	be	called	safe,
but	the	months	to	come	shall	turn	the	Odhan	into	a	place	of	savage	horror,	this
much	I	know	with	certainty.”
“Thank	you	for	the	warning.”
“Yet	it	shall	not	deter	you.”
“I	am	afraid	not.”
“Then	it	befalls	me	to	offer	you	some	protection	for	your	journey.
Captain,	if	you	would	be	so	kind?”
The	veteran	rose	and	departed.
“An	outlawed	soldier,”	the	old	priest	said	after	a	moment,	“who	will	risk
his	life	to	return	to	the	heart	of	the	Empire	that	has	sentenced	him	to	death.	The
need	must	be	great.”
Fiddler	shrugged.
“The	Bridgeburners	are	remembered	here	in	Seven	Cities.	A	name	that	is
cursed,	yet	admired	all	the	same.	You	were	honorable	soldiers	fighting	in	a
dishonorable	war.	It	is	said	the	regiment	was	honed	in	the	heat	and	scorched
rock	of	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku,	in	pursuit	of	a	Falah’d	company	of	wizards.
That	is	a	story	I	would	like	to	hear	some	time,	so	that	it	may	be	shaped	into
song.”
Fiddler ’s	eyes	widened.	A	Spiritwalker ’s	sorcery	was	sung,	no	other	rituals
were	required.	Although	devoted	to	peace,	the	power	in	a	Tano	song	was	said
to	be	immense.	The	sapper	wondered	what	such	a	creation	would	do	to	the
Bridgeburners.
The	Tano	Spiritwalker	seemed	to	understand	the	question,	for	he	smiled.
“Such	a	song	has	never	before	been	attempted.	There	is	in	a	Tano	song	the
potential	for	Ascendancy,	but	can	an	entire	regiment	ascend?	Truly	a	question
deserving	an	answer.”
Fiddler	sighed.	“Had	I	the	time,	I	would	give	you	that	story.”
“It	would	take	but	a	moment.”
“What	do	you	mean?”
The	old	priest	raised	a	long-fingered,	wrinkled	hand.	“If	you	were	to	let
me	touch	you,	I	would	know	your	history.”
The	sapper	recoiled.
“Ah,”	the	Tano	Spiritwalker	sighed,	“you	fear	I	would	be	careless	with
your	secrets.”
“I	fear	that	your	possessing	them	would	endanger	your	life.	Nor	are	all	of
my	memories	honorable.”


The	old	man	tilted	his	head	back	and	laughed.	“If	they	were	all	honorable,
friend,	you	would	be	more	deserving	of	this	robe	than	I.	Forgive	me	my	bold
request,	then.”
Captain	Turqa	returned,	carrying	a	small	chest	of	weathered	wood	the
color	of	sand.	He	set	it	down	on	the	table	before	his	master,	who	raised	the	lid
and	reached	inside.	“Raraku	was	once	a	sea,”	the	Tano	said.	He	withdrew	a
bleached	white	conch	shell.	“Such	remnants	can	be	found	in	the	Holy	Desert,
provided	you	know	the	location	of	the	ancient	shores.	In	addition	to	the
memory	song	contained	within	it,	of	that	inland	sea,	other	songs	have	been
invested.”	He	glanced	up,	meeting	Fiddler ’s	eyes.	“My	own	songs	of	power.
Please	accept	this	gift,	in	gratitude	for	saving	the	lives	and	honor	of	my
granddaughters.”
Fiddler	bowed	as	the	old	priest	set	the	conch	shell	into	his	hands.	“Thank
you,	Tano	Spiritwalker.	Your	gift	offers	protection,	then?”
“Of	a	sort,”	the	priest	said,	smiling.	After	a	moment	he	rose	from	his	seat.
“We	shall	not	keep	you	any	longer,	Bridgeburner.”
Fiddler	quickly	stood.
“Captain	Turqa	will	see	you	out.”	He	stepped	close	and	laid	a	hand	on
Fiddler ’s	shoulder.	“Kimloc	Spiritwalker	thanks	you.”
The	conch	shell	in	his	hands,	the	sapper	was	ushered	from	the	priest’s
presence.	Outside	in	the	garden	the	water-cooled	air	plucked	at	the	sweat	on
Fiddler ’s	brow.	“Kimloc,”	he	muttered	under	his	breath.
Turqa	grunted	beside	him	as	they	walked	the	path	to	the	back	gate.	“His
first	guest	in	eleven	years.	Do	you	comprehend	the	honor	bestowed	upon	you,
Bridgeburner?”
“Clearly,”	Fiddler	said	dryly,	“he	values	his	granddaughters.	Eleven	years,
you	say?	Then	his	last	guest	would	have	been…”
“High	Fist	Dujek	Onearm,	of	the	Malazan	Empire.”
“Negotiating	the	peaceful	surrender	of	Karakarang,	the	Holy	City	of	the
Tano	cult.	Kimloc	claimed	he	could	destroy	the	Malazan	armies.	Utterly.	Yet	he
capitulated	and	his	name	is	now	legendary	for	empty	threats.”
Turqa	snorted.	“He	opened	the	gates	of	his	city	because	he	values	life
above	all	things.	He	took	the	measure	of	your	Empire	and	realized	that	the
death	of	thousands	meant	nothing	to	it.	Malaz	would	have	what	it	desired,	and
what	it	desired	was	Karakarang.”
Fiddler	grimaced.	With	heavy	sarcasm	he	said,	“And	if	that	meant	bringing
the	T’lan	Imass	to	the	Holy	City—to	do	to	it	what	they	did	to	Aren—then	we
would	have	done	just	that.	I	doubt	even	Kimloc’s	sorcery	could	hold	back	the
T’lan	Imass.”


They	stood	at	the	gate.	Turqa	swung	it	open,	old	pain	in	his	dark	eyes.	“As
did	Kimloc,”	he	said.	“The	slaughter	at	Aren	revealed	the	Empire’s	madness
—”
“What	happened	during	the	Aren	Rebellion	was	a	mistake,”	Fiddler
snapped.	“No	command	was	ever	given	to	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass.”
Turqa’s	only	reply	was	a	sour,	bitter	grin	as	he	gestured	to	the	street
beyond.	“Go	in	peace,	Bridgeburner.”
Irritated,	Fiddler	left.
	
Moby	squealed	in	delight,	launching	itself	across	the	narrow	room	to	collide
with	Fiddler ’s	chest	in	a	frenzied	flap	of	wings	and	clutching	limbs.	Swearing
and	pushing	the	familiar	away	as	it	attempted	a	throat-crushing	embrace,	the
sapper	crossed	the	threshold,	closing	the	door	behind	him.
“I	was	starting	to	get	worried,”	Kalam	rumbled	from	the	shadows	filling
the	room’s	far	end.
“Got	distracted,”	Fiddler	said.
“Trouble?”
He	shrugged,	stripping	off	his	outer	cloak	to	reveal	the	leather-bound
chain	surcoat	beneath.	“Where	are	the	others?”
“In	the	garden,”	Kalam	replied	wryly.
On	his	way	over	Fiddler	stopped	by	his	backpack.	He	crouched	and	set	the
Tano	shell	inside,	pushing	it	into	the	bundle	of	a	spare	shirt.
Kalam	poured	him	a	jug	of	watered	wine	as	the	sapper	joined	him	at	the
small	table,	then	refilled	his	own.	“Well?”
“A	cusser	in	an	eggshell,”	Fiddler	said,	drinking	deep	before	continuing.
“The	walls	are	crowded	with	symbols.	I’d	guess	no	more	than	a	week,	then	the
streets	run	red.”
“We’ve	horses,	mules	and	supplies.	We	should	be	nearing	the	Odhan	by
then.	Safer	out	there.”
Fiddler	eyed	his	companion.	Kalam’s	dark,	bearish	face	glistened	in	the
faint	daylight	from	the	cloth-covered	window.	A	brace	of	knives	rested	on	the
pitted	tabletop	in	front	of	the	assassin,	a	whetstone	beside	them.	“Maybe.	Maybe
not.”
“The	hands	on	the	walls?”
Fiddler	grunted.	“You	noticed	them.”
“Symbols	of	insurrection	aplenty,	meeting	places	announced,	rituals	to
Dryjhna	advertised—I	can	read	all	of	that	as	well	as	any	other	native.	But	those
unhuman	hand-prints	are	something	else	entirely.”	Kalam	leaned	forward,


picking	up	a	knife	in	each	hand.	He	idly	crossed	the	blued	blades.	“They	seem
to	indicate	a	direction.	South.”
“Pan’potsun	Odhan,”	Fiddler	said.	“It’s	a	convergence.”
The	assassin	went	still,	his	dark	eyes	on	the	blades	crossed	before	him.
“That’s	not	a	rumor	I’ve	heard	yet.”
“It’s	Kimloc’s	belief.”
“Kimloc!”	Kalam	cursed.	“He’s	in	the	city?”
“So	it’s	said.”	Fiddler	took	another	mouthful	of	wine.	Telling	the	assassin
of	his	adventures—and	his	meeting	with	the	Spiritwalker—would	send	Kalam
out	through	the	door.	And	Kimloc	to	Hood’s	Gates.	Kimloc,	his	family,	his
guards.	Everyone.	The	man	sitting	across	from	him	would	take	no	chances.
Another	gift	to	you,	Kimloc…my	silence.
Footsteps	sounded	in	the	back	hallway	and	a	moment	later	Crokus
appeared.	“It’s	as	dark	as	a	cave	in	here,”	he	complained.
“Where’s	Apsalar?”	Fiddler	demanded.
“In	the	garden—where	else?”	the	Daru	thief	snapped	back.
The	sapper	subsided.	Remnants	of	his	old	unease	still	clung	to	him.	When
she	was	out	of	sight,	trouble	would	come	from	it.	When	she	was	out	of	sight	you
watched	your	back.	It	was	still	hard	to	accept	that	the	girl	was	no	longer	what
she’d	been.	Besides,	if	the	Patron	of	Assassins	chose	once	more	to	possess	her,
the	first	warning	we’d	get	would	be	a	knife	blade	across	the	throat.	He	kneaded
the	taut	muscles	of	his	neck,	sighing.
Crokus	dragged	a	chair	to	the	table,	dropped	into	it	and	reached	for	the
wine.	“We’re	tired	of	waiting,”	he	pronounced.	“If	we	have	to	cross	this
damned	land,	then	let’s	do	it.	There’s	a	steaming	pile	of	rubbish	behind	the
garden	wall,	clogging	up	the	sewage	gutter.	Crawling	with	rats.	The	air ’s	hot
and	so	thick	with	flies	you	can	barely	breathe.	We’ll	catch	a	plague	if	we	stay
here	much	longer.”
“Let’s	hope	it’s	the	bluetongue,	then,”	Kalam	said.
“What’s	that?”
“Your	tongue	swells	up	and	turns	blue,”	Fiddler	explained.
“What’s	so	good	about	that?”
“You	can’t	talk.”
	
The	stars	bristled	overhead,	the	moon	yet	to	rise	as	Kalam	made	his	way
toward	Jen’rahb.	The	old	ramps	climbed	to	the	hill’s	summit	like	a	giant’s
stairs,	gap-toothed	where	the	chiseled	blocks	of	stone	had	been	removed	for
use	in	other	parts	of	Ehrlitan.	Tangled	scrub	filled	the	gaps,	long,	wiry	roots


anchored	deep	in	the	slope’s	fill.
The	assassin	scrambled	lithely	over	the	rubble,	staying	low	so	that	he
would	make	little	outline	against	the	sky,	should	anyone	glance	up	from	the
streets	below.	The	city	was	quiet,	its	silence	unnatural.	The	few	patrols	of
Malazan	soldiery	found	themselves	virtually	alone,	as	if	assigned	to	guard	a
necropolis,	the	haunt	of	ghosts	and	scant	else.	Their	unease	had	made	them
loud	as	they	walked	the	alleys	and	Kalam	had	been	able	to	avoid	them	with
little	effort.
He	reached	the	crest,	slipping	in	between	two	large	limestone	blocks	that
had	once	formed	part	of	the	summit’s	outer	wall.	He	paused,	breathing	deep	the
dusty	night	air,	and	looked	down	on	the	streets	of	Ehrlitan.	The	Fist’s	Keep,
once	the	home	of	the	city’s	Holy	Falah’d,	rose	dark	and	misshapen	above	a
well-lit	compound,	like	a	clenched	hand	rising	from	a	bed	of	coals.	Yet	within
that	stone	edifice	the	military	governor	of	the	Malazan	Empire	cowered,
shutting	his	ears	to	the	heated	warnings	of	the	Red	Blades	and	whatever
Malazan	spies	and	sympathizers	had	not	yet	been	driven	out	or	murdered.	The
entire	occupying	regiment	was	holed	up	in	the	Keep’s	own	barracks,	having
been	called	in	from	the	outlying	garrison	forts	strategically	placed	around
Ehrlitan’s	circumference.	The	Keep	could	not	accommodate	such	numbers—
the	well	was	already	foul,	and	soldiers	slept	on	the	bailey’s	flagstones	under
the	stars.	In	the	harbor	two	ancient	Falari	triremes	were	moored	off	the
Malazan	mole	and	a	lone	undermanned	company	of	marines	held	the	Imperial
Docks.	The	Malazans	were	under	siege	with	not	a	hand	yet	raised	against	them.
Kalam	found	within	himself	conflicting	loyalties.	By	birth	he	was	among
the	occupied,	but	he	had	by	choice	fought	under	the	standards	of	the	Empire.
He’d	fought	for	Emperor	Kellanved.	And	Dassem	Ultor,	and	Whiskeyjack,	and
Dujek	Onearm.	But	not	Laseen.	Betrayal	cut	those	bonds	long	ago.	The
Emperor	would	have	cut	the	heart	out	of	this	rebellion	with	its	first	beat.	A
short	but	unremitting	bloodbath,	followed	by	a	long	peace.	But	Laseen	had	left
the	old	wounds	to	fester,	and	what	was	coming	would	silence	Hood	himself.
Kalam	swung	back	from	the	hill’s	crest.	The	landscape	before	him	was	a
tumbled	maze	of	shattered	limestone	and	bricks,	sinkholes	and	knotted	shrubs.
Clouds	of	insects	hovered	over	black	pools.	Bats	and	rhizan	darted	among
them.
Near	the	center	rose	the	first	three	levels	of	a	tower,	tilted	with	roots
snaking	down	from	a	drought-twisted	tree	on	its	top.	The	maw	of	a	doorway
was	visible	at	its	base.
Kalam	studied	it	for	a	time,	then	finally	approached.	He	was	ten	paces	from
the	opening	when	he	saw	a	flicker	of	light	within.	The	assassin	withdrew	a


knife,	tapped	the	pommel	twice	against	a	block,	then	crossed	to	the	doorway.	A
voice	from	its	darkness	stopped	him.
“No	closer,	Kalam	Mekhar.”
Kalam	spat	loudly.	“Mebra,	you	think	I	don’t	recognize	your	voice?	Vile
rhizan	like	you	never	wander	far	from	their	nest,	which	is	what	made	you	so
easy	to	find,	and	following	you	here	was	even	easier.”
“I	have	important	business	to	attend	to,”	Mebra	growled.	“Why	have	you
returned?	What	do	you	want	of	me?	My	debt	was	with	the	Bridgeburners,	but
they	are	no	more.”
“Your	debt	was	with	me,”	Kalam	said.
“And	when	the	next	Malazan	dog	with	the	sigil	of	a	burning	bridge	finds
me,	he	can	claim	the	debt	as	well?	And	the	next,	and	the	next	after	that?	Oh	no,
Kal—”
The	assassin	was	at	the	doorway	before	Mebra	realized	it,	lunging	into	the
darkness,	a	hand	flashing	out	unerringly	to	grip	the	spy	by	the	throat.	The	man
squawked,	dragged	from	his	feet	as	Kalam	lifted	him	and	threw	him	against	a
wall.	The	assassin	held	him	there,	a	knife	point	pricking	the	hollow	above	his
breastbone.	Something	the	spy	had	been	clutching	to	his	chest	fell,	slipping
between	them	to	thud	heavily	at	their	feet.	Kalam	did	not	spare	it	a	glance;	his
eyes	fixed	on	Mebra’s	own.
“The	debt,”	he	said.
“Mebra	is	an	honorable	man,”	the	spy	gasped.	“Pays	every	debt!	Pays
yours!”
Kalam	grinned.	“The	hand	you’ve	just	closed	on	that	dagger	at	your	belt
had	best	remain	where	it	is,	Mebra.	I	see	all	that	you	plan.	There	in	your	eyes.
Now	look	into	mine.	What	do	you	see?”
Mebra’s	breath	quickened.	Sweat	trickled	down	his	brow.	“Mercy,”	he	said.
Kalam’s	brows	rose.	“A	fatal	misreading—”
“No,	no!	I	ask	for	mercy,	Kalam!	In	your	eyes	I	see	only	death!	Mebra’s
death!	I	shall	repay	the	debt,	my	old	friend.	I	know	much,	all	that	the	Fist	needs
to	know!	I	can	deliver	Ehrlitan	into	his	hands—”
“No	doubt,”	Kalam	said,	releasing	his	grip	on	the	man’s	throat	and
stepping	back.	Mebra	slid	down	the	wall	into	a	feeble	crouch.	“But	leave	the
Fist	to	his	fate.”
The	spy	looked	up,	in	his	eyes	a	sudden	cunning.	“You	are	outlawed.	With
no	wish	to	return	to	the	Malazan	fold.	You	are	Seven	Cities	once	again!	Kalam,
may	the	Seven	bless	you!”
“I	need	the	signs,	Mebra.	Safe	passage	through	the	Odhan.”
“You	know	them—”


“The	symbols	have	bred.	I	know	the	old	ones,	and	those	will	get	me	killed
by	the	first	tribe	that	finds	me.”
“Passage	is	yours	with	but	one	symbol,	Kalam.	Across	the	breadth	of
Seven	Cities,	I	swear	it.”
The	assassin	stepped	back.	“What	is	it?”
“You	are	Dryjhna’s	child,	a	soldier	of	the	Apocalypse.	Make	the	whirlwind
gesture—do	you	recall	it?”
Suspicious,	Kalam	slowly	nodded.	“Yet	I	have	seen	so	many	more,	so
many	new	symbols.	What	of	them?”
“Amidst	the	cloud	of	locusts	there	is	but	one,”	Mebra	said.	“How	best	to
keep	the	Red	Blades	blind?	Please,	Kalam,	you	must	go.	I	have	repaid	the
debt…”
“If	you	have	betrayed	me,	Adaephon	Ben	Delat	shall	know	of	it.	Tell	me,
could	you	escape	Quick	Ben	with	his	warrens	unveiled?”
Mute,	his	face	pale	as	the	moonlight,	Mebra	shook	his	head.
“The	whirlwind.”
“Yes,	I	swear	by	the	Seven.”
“Do	not	move,”	Kalam	commanded.	One	hand	on	the	long-knife	at	his	belt,
the	assassin	stepped	forward,	crouched	and	collected	the	object	that	Mebra	had
dropped	earlier.	He	heard	the	spy’s	breath	catch	and	smiled.	“Perhaps	I	will
take	this	with	me,	as	guarantee.”
“Please,	Kalam—”
“Silence.”	The	assassin	found	himself	holding	a	muslin-wrapped	book.	He
pulled	the	dirt-stained	cloth	away.	“Hood’s	breath!”	he	whispered.	“From	the
High	Fist’s	vaults	at	Aren…into	the	hands	of	an	Ehrlii	spy.”	He	looked	up	and
met	Mebra’s	eyes.	“Does	Pormqual	know	of	the	theft	of	that	which	is	to	unleash
the	Apocalypse?”
The	little	man	grinned,	displaying	a	row	of	sharp	silver-capped	teeth.	“The
fool	could	have	his	silk	pillow	stolen	from	under	him	and	would	not	know	it.
You	see,	Kalam,	if	you	take	this	as	guarantee,	every	warrior	of	the	Apocalypse
will	be	hunting	you.	The	Holy	Book	of	Dryjhna	has	been	freed	and	must	return
to	Raraku,	where	the	Seeress—”
“Will	raise	the	Whirlwind,”	Kalam	finished.	The	ancient	tome	felt	heavy	as
a	slab	of	granite	in	his	hands.	Its	bhederinhide	binding	was	stained	and	scarred,
the	lambskin	pages	within	smelling	of	lanolin	and	bloodberry	ink.	And	on
those	pages…words	of	madness,	and	in	the	Holy	Desert	waits	Sha’ik,	the
Seeress,	the	rebellion’s	promised	leader…	“You	shall	tell	me	the	final	secret,
Mebra,	the	one	the	carrier	of	this	Book	must	know.”
The	spy’s	eyes	widened	with	alarm.	“This	cannot	be	your	hostage,	Kalam!


Take	me	in	its	stead,	I	beg	you!”
“I	shall	deliver	it	into	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku,”	Kalam	said.	“Into	Sha’ik’s
own	hands,	and	this	shall	purchase	my	passage,	Mebra.	And	should	I	detect	any
treachery,	should	I	see	any	single	soldier	of	the	Apocalypse	on	my	trail,	the
Book	is	destroyed.	Do	you	understand	me?”
Mebra	blinked	sweat	from	his	eyes,	then	jerked	a	nod.	“You	must	ride	a
stallion	the	color	of	sand,	your	blood	blended.	You	must	wear	a	telaba	of	red.
Each	night	you	must	face	your	trail,	on	your	knees,	and	unwrap	the	Book	and
call	upon	Dryjhna—that,	and	no	more,	not	another	word,	for	the	Whirlwind
goddess	shall	hear	and	obey—and	all	signs	of	your	trail	shall	be	obliterated.
You	must	wait	an	hour	in	silence,	then	wrap	the	Book	once	again.	It	must	never
be	exposed	to	sunlight,	for	the	time	of	the	Book’s	awakening	belongs	to
Sha’ik.	I	shall	now	repeat	those	instructions—”
“No	need,”	Kalam	growled.
“Are	you	truly	an	outlaw?”
“Is	this	not	proof	enough?”
“Deliver	into	Sha’ik’s	hands	the	Book	of	Dryjhna,	and	your	name	shall	be
sung	to	the	heavens	for	all	time,	Kalam.	Betray	the	cause,	and	your	name	shall
ride	spit	into	the	dust.”
The	assassin	shrouded	the	Book	once	more	in	its	muslin	wrap,	then	tucked
it	into	the	folds	of	his	tunic.	“Our	words	are	done.”
“Blessings	of	the	Seven,	Kalam	Mekhar.”
With	a	grunt	his	only	reply,	Kalam	moved	to	the	doorway,	pausing	to	scan
outside.	Seeing	no	one	under	the	moonlight,	he	slipped	through	the	opening.
Still	crouched	against	the	wall,	Mebra	watched	the	assassin	leave.	He
strained	to	hear	telltale	sounds	of	Kalam	crossing	the	rocks,	bricks	and	rubble,
but	heard	nothing.	The	spy	wiped	sweat	from	his	brow,	tilted	his	head	back
against	the	cool	stone	and	closed	his	eyes.
A	few	minutes	later	he	heard	the	rustle	of	armor	at	the	tower ’s	entrance.
“You	saw	him?”	Mebra	asked,	eyes	still	shut.
A	low	voice	rumbled	in	reply.	“Lostara	follows	him.	He	has	the	Book?”
Mebra’s	thin	mouth	widened	in	a	smile.	“Not	the	visitor	I	anticipated.	Oh
no,	I	could	never	have	imagined	such	a	fortuitous	guest.	That	was	Kalam
Mekhar.”
“The	Bridgeburner?	Kiss	of	Hood,	Mebra,	had	I	known,	we	would	have	cut
him	down	before	he’d	taken	a	step	from	this	tower.”
“Had	you	tried,”	Mebra	said,	“you	and	Aralt	and	Lostara	would	now	be
feeding	your	blood	to	Jen’rahb’s	thirsty	roots.”
The	large	warrior	barked	a	laugh,	stepping	inside.	Behind	him,	as	the	spy


had	guessed,	loomed	Aralt	Arpat,	guarding	the	entrance,	tall	and	wide	enough
to	block	most	of	the	moonlight.
Tene	Baralta	rested	his	gauntleted	hands	on	the	sword	pommels	on	either
side	of	his	hips.	“What	of	the	man	you	first	approached?”
Mebra	sighed.	“As	I	told	you,	we	would	likely	have	needed	a	dozen	nights
such	as	this	one.	The	man	took	fright	and	is	probably	halfway	to	G’danisban	by
now.	He…reconsidered,	as	any	reasonable	man	would.”	The	spy	rose	to	his
feet,	brushing	the	dust	from	his	telaba.	“I	cannot	believe	our	luck,	Baralta—”
Tene	Baralta’s	mailed	hands	was	a	blur	as	it	flashed	out	and	struck	Mebra,
the	spurred	links	raking	deep	gashes	across	the	man’s	face.	Blood	spattered	the
wall.	The	spy	reeled	back,	hands	to	his	torn	face.
“You	are	too	familiar,”	Baralta	said	calmly.	“You	have	prepared	Kalam,	I
take	it?	The	proper…instructions?”
Mebra	spat	blood,	then	nodded.	“You	shall	be	able	to	trail	him	unerringly,
Commander.”
“All	the	way	to	Sha’ik’s	camp?”
“Yes.	But	I	beg	you,	be	careful,	sir.	If	Kalam	senses	you,	he	will	destroy	the
Book.	Stay	a	day	behind	him,	even	more.”
Tene	Baralta	removed	a	fragment	of	bhederin	hide	from	a	pouch	at	his
belt.	“The	calf	yearns	for	its	mother,”	he	said.
“And	seeks	her	without	fail,”	Mebra	finished.	“To	kill	Sha’ik,	you	shall
need	an	army,	Commander.”
The	Red	Blade	smiled.	“That	is	our	concern,	Mebra.”
Mebra	drew	a	deep	breath,	hesitating,	then	said,	“I	ask	only	one	thing,	sir.”
“You	ask?”
“I	beg,	Commander.”
“What	is	it?”
“Kalam	lives.”
“Your	wounds	are	uneven,	Mebra.	Allow	me	to	caress	the	other	side	of
your	face.”
“Hear	me	out,	Commander!	The	Bridgeburner	has	returned	to	Seven
Cities.	He	claims	himself	a	soldier	of	the	Apocalypse.	Yet	is	Kalam	one	to	join
Sha’ik’s	camp?	Can	a	man	born	to	lead	content	himself	to	follow?”
“What	is	your	point.”
“Kalam	is	here	for	another	reason,	Commander.	He	sought	only	safe
passage	across	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan.	He	takes	the	Book	because	to	do	so	will
ensure	that	passage.	The	assassin	is	heading	south.	Why?	I	think	that	is
something	the	Red	Blades—and	the	Empire—would	know.	And	such
knowledge	can	only	be	gained	while	he	yet	breathes.”


“You	have	suspicions.”
“Aren.”
Tene	Baralta	snorted.	“To	slip	a	blade	between	Pormqual’s	ribs?	We	would
all	bless	that,	Mebra.”
“Kalam	cares	nothing	for	the	High	Fist.”
“Then	what	does	he	seek	at	Aren?”
“I	can	think	of	only	one	thing,	Commander.	A	ship	bound	for	Malaz.”
Hunched,	his	face	pulsing	with	pain,	Mebra	watched	with	hooded	eyes	as	his
words	sank	roots	into	the	Red	Blade	commander ’s	mind.
After	a	long	moment,	Tene	Baralta	asked	in	a	low	voice,	“What	do	you
plan?”
Although	it	cost	him,	Mebra	smiled.
	
Like	massive	limestone	slabs	each	resting	against	the	other,	the	cliffs	rose
from	the	desert	floor	the	height	of	four	hundred	arm-spans.	Gouged	across	the
weathered	face	were	deep	fissures,	and	tucked	inside	the	largest	of	these,	a
hundred	and	fifty	arm-spans	above	the	sands,	was	a	tower.	A	single	arched
window	showed	black	against	the	bricks.
Mappo	sighed	shakily.	“I	see	no	obvious	approach,	but	there	must	be	one.”
He	shot	a	glance	back	at	his	companion.	“You	believe	it	is	occupied.”
Icarium	rubbed	the	crusted	blood	from	his	brow,	then	nodded.	He	half	slid
the	sword	from	its	sheath,	frowning	at	the	fragments	of	flesh	still	snagged	on
the	notched	edge.
The	D’ivers	had	caught	them	unawares,	a	dozen	leopards	the	color	of	sand,
streaming	from	a	gully	bed	less	than	ten	paces	to	their	right	as	the	two
travelers	prepared	to	make	camp.	One	of	the	beasts	had	leaped	onto	Mappo’s
back,	jaws	closing	on	the	nape	of	his	neck,	the	fangs	punching	through	the
Trell’s	tough	hide.	It	had	attacked	him	as	if	he	was	an	antelope,	seeking	to	bite
down	on	his	windpipe	as	it	dragged	him	down,	but	Mappo	was	no	antelope.
Though	the	canines	sank	deep,	they	found	only	muscle.	Enraged,	the	Trell	had
reached	over	his	head	and	torn	the	animal	from	his	shoulders.	Gripping	the
snarling	leopard	by	its	skin	at	neck	and	hips,	he	had	slammed	it	hard	against	a
boulder,	shattering	its	skull.
The	other	eleven	had	closed	in	on	Icarium.	Even	as	Mappo	flung	his
attacker ’s	body	aside	and	whirled,	he	saw	four	of	the	beasts	lying	motionless
around	the	half-blood	Jaghut.	Fear	gripped	the	Trell	suddenly	as	his	gaze	fell
on	Icarium.	How	far?	How	far	has	the	Jhag	gone?	Beru	bless	us,	please.
One	of	the	other	beasts	had	wrapped	its	jaws	around	Icarium’s	left	thigh


and	Mappo	watched	the	warrior ’s	ancient	sword	chop	downward,	decapitating
the	leopard.	In	a	macabre	detail,	the	head	held	on	briefly,	a	blood-gushing
lump	protruding	from	the	warrior ’s	leg.
The	surviving	cats	circled.
Mappo	lunged	forward,	hands	closing	on	a	lashing	tail.	He	bellowed	as	he
swung	the	squalling	creature	through	the	air.	Writhing,	the	leopard	sailed	seven
or	eight	paces	until	it	struck	a	rock	wall,	snapping	its	spine.
It	was	already	too	late	for	the	D’ivers.	Realizing	its	error,	it	tried	to	pull
away,	but	Icarium	was	unrelenting.	Giving	voice	to	a	keening	hum,	the	Jhag
plunged	among	the	five	remaining	leopards.	They	scattered	but	not	quickly
enough.	Blood	fountained,	sheared	flesh	thudded	into	the	sand.	Within
moments	five	more	bodies	lay	still	on	the	ground.
Icarium	whirled,	seeking	more	victims,	and	the	Trell	took	half	a	step
forward.	After	a	moment	Icarium’s	high-pitched	keening	fell	away	and	he
slowly	straightened	from	his	crouch.	His	stony	gaze	found	the	Trell,	and	he
frowned.
Mappo	saw	the	beads	of	blood	on	Icarium’s	brow.	The	eerie	sound	was
gone.	Not	too	far.	Safe.	Gods	below,	this	path…I	am	a	fool	to	follow.	Close,	all
too	close.
The	scent	of	D’ivers	blood	so	copiously	spilled	would	draw	others.	The
two	had	quickly	repacked	their	camp	gear	and	set	off	at	a	swift	pace.	Before
leaving,	Icarium	withdrew	a	single	arrow	from	his	quiver,	which	he	stabbed
into	the	sand	in	full	view.
They	traveled	at	a	dogtrot	through	the	night.	Neither	was	driven	by	fear	of
dying;	for	both	of	them,	it	was	killing	that	brought	a	greater	dread.	Mappo
prayed	that	Icarium’s	arrow	would	prove	sufficient	warning.
Dawn	brought	them	to	the	eastern	escarpment.	Beyond	the	cliffs	rose	the
range	of	weathered	mountains	that	divided	Raraku	from	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan.
Something	had	ignored	the	arrow	and	was	trailing	them,	perhaps	a	league
behind.	The	Trell	had	sensed	it	an	hour	earlier,	a	Soletaken,	and	the	form	it	had
taken	was	huge.
“Find	us	the	ascent,”	Icarium	said,	stringing	his	bow.	He	set	out	his
remaining	arrows,	squinting	back	along	their	trail.	After	a	hundred	paces	the
shimmering	heat	that	rose	like	a	curtain	obscured	everything	beyond.	If	the
Soletaken	came	into	view	and	charged,	the	Jhag	had	time	to	loose	half	a	dozen
arrows.	The	warrens	carved	into	their	shafts	could	bring	down	a	dragon,	but
Icarium’s	expression	made	it	clear	he	was	sickened	by	the	thought.
Mappo	probed	at	the	puncture	wounds	on	the	back	of	his	neck.	The	torn
flesh	was	hot,	septic	and	crawling	with	flies.	The	muscles	ached	with	a	deep


throb.	He	pulled	a	blade	of	jegura	cactus	from	his	pack	and	squeezed	its	juices
onto	the	wounds.	Numbness	spread,	allowing	him	to	move	his	arms	without	the
stabbing	agony	that	had	had	him	bathed	in	sweat	over	the	last	few	hours.	The
Trell	shivered	with	sudden	chill.	The	cactus	juice	was	so	powerful	it	could	be
used	only	once	a	day,	lest	the	numbing	effect	spread	to	the	heart	and	lungs.	And
if	anything,	it	would	make	the	flies	thirstier.
He	approached	the	cleft	in	the	rockface.	Trell	were	plains	dwellers.	Mappo
had	no	special	skill	in	climbing,	and	he	was	not	looking	forward	to	the	task
ahead.	The	fissure	was	deep	enough	to	swallow	the	sun’s	morning	light,	and
narrow	at	the	base,	barely	the	width	of	his	shoulders.	Ducking,	he	slipped
inside,	the	cool,	musty	air	triggering	another	wave	of	shivering.	His	eyes
quickly	adjusting,	he	made	out	the	fissure’s	back	wall	six	paces	away.	There
were	no	stairs,	no	handholds.	Tilting	his	head,	he	looked	up.	The	cleft	widened
higher	up	but	was	unrelieved	until	it	reached	what	he	took	to	be	the	base	of	the
tower.	Nothing	so	simple	as	a	dangling	knotted	rope.	Growling	in	frustration,
Mappo	stepped	back	into	the	sunlight.
Icarium	stood	facing	their	trail	with	arrow	nocked	and	bow	raised.	Thirty
paces	from	him	was	a	massive	brown	bear,	down	on	all	fours,	swaying,	nose
lifted	and	testing	the	wind.	The	Soletaken	had	arrived.
Mappo	joined	his	companion.	“This	one	is	known	to	me,”	he	said	quietly.
The	Jhag	lowered	his	weapon,	releasing	the	bowstring’s	tension.	“He	is
sembling,”	he	said.
The	bear	lurched	forward.
Mappo	blinked	against	the	sudden	blurring	of	his	vision.	He	tasted	grit,
nostrils	twitching	at	the	strong	spicy	smell	that	came	with	the	change.	He	felt	an
instinctive	wave	of	fear,	a	dusty	dryness	making	swallowing	difficult.	A
moment	later	the	sembling	was	complete,	and	a	man	now	strode	toward	them,
naked	and	pale	under	the	harsh	sunlight.
Mappo	slowly	shook	his	head.	When	masked,	the	Soletaken	was	huge,
powerful,	a	mass	of	muscle—yet	now,	in	his	human	form,	Messremb	stood	no
more	than	five	feet	in	height,	was	almost	hairless	and	thin	to	the	point	of
emaciation,	narrow-faced	and	shovel-toothed.	His	small	eyes,	the	color	of
garnet,	shone	within	wrinkled	nests	of	humor	that	drew	his	mouth	into	a	grin.
“Mappo	Trell,	my	nose	told	me	it	was	you!”
“It’s	been	a	long	time,	Messremb.”
The	Soletaken	was	eyeing	the	Jhag.	“Aye,	north	of	Nemil	it	was.”
“Those	unbroken	pine	forests	better	suited	you,	I	think,”	Mappo	said,	his
memories	drawn	back	to	that	time	for	a	moment,	those	freer	days	of	massive
Trellish	caravans	and	the	great	journeys	undertaken.


The	man’s	grin	fell	away.	“That	it	did.	And	you,	sir,	must	be	Icarium,
maker	of	mechanisms	and	now	the	bane	of	D’ivers	and	Soletaken.	Know	that	I
am	greatly	relieved	you	have	lowered	your	bow—there	was	racing	thunder	in
my	chest	when	I	watched	you	take	aim.”
Icarium	was	frowning.	“I	would	be	bane	to	no	one,	were	the	choice	mine,”
he	said.	“We	were	attacked	without	warning,”	he	added,	the	words	sounding
strangely	uncertain.
“Meaning	you	had	no	chance	to	warn	the	hapless	creature.	Pity	the	pieces
of	his	soul.	I,	however,	am	anything	but	precipitous.	Cursed	only	with	a	curious
nose.	What	scent	is	joined	with	the	Trell’s,	I	wondered,	so	close	to	Jaghut
blood,	yet	different?	Now	that	my	eyes	have	given	me	answer	I	can	resume	the
Path.”
“Do	you	know	where	it	takes	you?”	Mappo	asked.
Messremb	stiffened.	“You	have	seen	the	gates?”
“No.	What	do	you	expect	to	find	there?”
“Answers,	old	friend.	Now	I	shall	spare	you	the	taste	of	my	veering	by
putting	some	distance	between	us.	Do	you	wish	me	well,	Mappo?”
“I	do,	Messremb.	And	add	a	warning:	we	crossed	paths	with	Ryllandaras
four	nights	ago.	Be	careful.”
Something	of	the	savage	bear	glittered	in	the	Soletaken’s	eyes.	“I	shall
look	out	for	him.”
Mappo	and	Icarium	watched	the	man	walk	away,	disappearing	behind	an
outcrop	of	rock.	“Madness	lurked	within	him,”	Icarium	said.
The	Trell	flinched	at	those	words.	“Within	them	all,”	he	sighed.	“I’ve	yet	to
find	an	ascent,	by	the	way.	The	cave	reveals	nothing.”
The	sound	of	shod	hooves	reached	them,	slow	and	plodding.	From	a	trail
paralleling	the	cliff	face,	a	man	on	a	black	mule	appeared.	He	sat	cross-legged
on	a	high	wood	saddle,	shrouded	in	a	ragged,	dirt-stained	telaba.	His	hands,
which	rested	on	the	ornate	saddlehorn,	were	the	color	of	rust.	A	hood	hid	his
features.	The	mule	was	a	strange-looking	beast,	its	muzzle	black,	the	skin	of	its
ears	black,	as	were	its	eyes.	No	lightening	of	its	ebon	hue	was	anywhere	visible
with	the	exception	of	dust	and	spatters	of	what	might	have	been	dried	blood.
The	man	swayed	on	the	saddle	as	they	approached.	“No	way	in,”	he	hissed,
“but	the	way	out.	It’s	not	yet	the	hour.	A	life	given	for	a	life	taken,	remember
those	words,	remember	them.	You	are	wounded.	You	are	bright	with	infection.
My	servant	will	tend	to	you.	A	caring	man	with	salty	hands,	one	wrinkled,	one
pink—do	you	grasp	the	significance	of	that?	Not	yet.	Not	yet.	So	few…guests.
But	I	have	been	expecting	you.”
The	mule	stopped	opposite	the	cleft,	swinging	a	mournful	gaze	on	the	two


travelers	as	its	rider	struggled	to	pull	his	legs	from	their	crossed	position.
Whimpers	of	pain	accompanied	the	effort,	until	his	frantic	attempts
overwhelmed	his	balance	and,	with	a	squeal	of	dismay,	the	man	toppled,
thumping	into	the	dust.
Seeing	crimson	red	bloom	through	the	telaba’s	weave,	Mappo	stepped
forward.	“You	bear	your	own	wounds,	sir!”
The	man	writhed	on	the	ground	like	an	upended	tortoise,	his	legs	still
trapped	in	their	crossed	position.	His	hood	fell	back,	revealing	a	large	hawk
nose,	tufts	of	wiry	gray	beard,	a	tattooed	bald	pate	and	skin	like	dark	honey.	A
row	of	perfect	white	teeth	showed	in	his	grimace.
Mappo	knelt	beside	him,	squinting	to	see	signs	of	the	wound	that	had
spilled	so	much	blood.	A	smell	of	iron	was	pungent	in	the	Trell’s	nose.	After	a
moment	he	reached	under	the	man’s	cloak	and	withdrew	an	unstoppered
bladder.	Grunting,	he	glanced	over	at	Icarium.	“Not	blood.	Paint.	Red	ochre
paint.”
“Help	me,	you	oaf!”	the	man	snapped.	“My	legs!”
Bemused,	Mappo	helped	the	man	unlock	his	legs,	every	move	eliciting
moans.	As	soon	as	they	were	free	the	man	sat	up	and	started	beating	his	own
thighs.	“Servant!	Wine!	Wine,	damn	your	wood-rotted	brain!”
“I	am	not	your	servant,”	Mappo	said	coolly,	stepping	back.	“Nor	do	I	carry
wine	when	crossing	a	desert.”
“Not	you,	barbarian!”	The	man	glared	about.	“Where	is	he?”
“Who?”
“Servant,	of	course.	He	thinks	carrying	me	about	is	his	only	task—ah,
there!”
Following	the	man’s	gaze,	the	Trell	frowned.	“That	is	a	mule,	sir.	I	doubt
he	could	manage	a	wineskin	well	enough	to	fill	a	cup.”	Mappo	grinned	at
Icarium,	but	the	Jhag	was	paying	no	attention	to	the	proceedings:	he	had
unstrung	his	bow	and	now	sat	on	a	boulder,	cleaning	his	sword.
Still	sitting	on	the	ground,	the	man	collected	a	handful	of	sand	and	flung	it
at	the	mule.	Startled,	the	beast	brayed	and	bolted	toward	the	cleft,	disappearing
into	the	cave.	With	a	grunt	the	man	clambered	to	his	feet	and	stood	wobbling,
hands	held	before	him	plucking	at	each	other	in	some	kind	of	nervous	tic.
“Mostly	rude	greeting	of	guests,”	he	said,	attempting	a	smile.	“Most.	Most	rude
greeting,	was	meant.	Meaningless	apologies	and	kindly	gestures	very
important.	I	am	so	sorry	for	temporary	collapse	of	hospitality.	Oh	yes,	I	am.	I
would	have	more	practice	if	I	wasn’t	the	master	of	this	temple.	An	acolyte	is
obliged	to	fawn	and	scrape.	Later	to	mutter	and	gripe	with	his	comrades	in
misery.	Ah,	here	comes	Servant.”


A	wide-shouldered,	bow-legged	man	in	black	robes	had	emerged	from	the
cave,	carrying	a	tray	bearing	a	jug	and	clay	cups.	He	wore	a	servant’s	veil	over
his	features,	with	only	a	thin	slit	for	his	eyes,	which	were	deep	brown.
“Lazy	fool!	Did	you	see	any	cobwebs?”
Servant’s	accent	caught	Mappo	by	surprise.	It	was	Malazan.	“None,
Iskaral.”
“Call	me	by	my	title!”
“High	Priest—”
“Wrong!”
“High	Priest	Iskaral	Pust	of	the	Tesem	Temple	of	Shadow—”
“Idiot!	You	are	Servant!	Which	makes	me…”
“Master.”
“Indeed.”	Iskaral	turned	to	Mappo.	“We	rarely	talk,”	he	explained.
Icarium	joined	them.	“This	is	Tesem,	then.	I	was	led	to	believe	it	was	a
monastery,	sanctified	to	the	Queen	of	Dreams—”
“They	left,”	Iskaral	snapped.	“Took	their	lanterns	with	them,	leaving
only…”
“Shadows.”
“Clever	Jhag,	but	I	was	warned	of	that,	oh	yes.	You	two	are	sick	as
undercooked	pigs.	Servant	has	prepared	your	chambers.	And	broths	of	healing
herbs,	roots,	potions	and	elixirs.	White	Paralt,	emulor,	tralb—”
“Those	are	poisons,”	Mappo	pointed	out.
“Are	they?	No	wonder	the	pig	died.	It’s	almost	time,	shall	we	prepare	to
ascend?”
“Lead	the	way,”	Icarium	invited.
“A	life	given	for	a	life	taken.	Follow	me.	None	can	outwit	Iskaral	Pust.”
The	High	Priest	faced	the	cleft	with	a	fierce	squint.
They	waited,	for	what	Mappo	had	no	idea.	After	a	few	minutes	the	Trell
cleared	his	throat.	“Will	your	acolytes	send	down	a	ladder?”
“Acolytes?	I	have	no	acolytes.	No	opportunity	for	tyranny.	Very	sad,	no
muttering	and	grumbling	behind	my	back,	few	satisfying	rewards	for	this	High
Priest.	If	not	for	my	god’s	whispering,	I	wouldn’t	bother,	be	assured	of	that,
and	I	trust	you	will	take	that	into	account	with	all	I	have	done	and	am	about	to
do.”
“I	see	movement	in	the	fissure,”	Icarium	said.
Iskaral	grunted.	“Bhok’arala,	they	nest	on	this	cliffside.	Foul	mewling
beasts,	always	interfering,	sniffing	at	this	and	that,	pissing	on	the	altar,
defecating	on	my	pillow.	They	are	my	plague,	they	have	singled	me	out,	and
why?	I’ve	not	skinned	a	single	one,	nor	cooked	their	brains	to	scoop	out	of


their	skulls	in	civilized	repast.	No	snares,	no	traps,	no	poison,	yet	still	they
pursue	me.	There	is	no	answer	to	this.	I	despair.”
As	the	sun	sank	further	the	bhok’arala	grew	bolder,	flapping	from	perch	to
perch	high	on	the	cliff	wall,	scampering	with	their	hands	and	feet	along	cracks
in	the	stone,	seeking	the	rhizan	as	the	small	flying	lizards	emerged	for	their
night-feeding.	Small	and	simian,	the	bhok’arala	were	winged	like	bats,	tailless
with	hides	mottled	tan	and	brown.	Apart	from	long	canines,	their	faces	were
remarkably	human.
From	the	tower ’s	lone	window	a	knotted	rope	tumbled	down.	A	tiny	round
head	poked	out	to	peer	down	at	them.
“Of	course,”	Iskaral	added,	“a	few	of	them	have	proved	useful.”
Mappo	sighed.	He’d	been	hoping	for	some	sorcerous	means	of	ascent	to
appear,	something	worthy	of	a	High	Priest	of	Shadow.	“So	now	we	climb.”
“Most	certainly	not,”	Iskaral	replied	with	indignation.	“Servant	climbs,
then	pulls	us	up.”
“He	would	be	a	man	of	formidable	strength	to	manage	me,”	the	Trell	said.
“And	Icarium,	too.”
Servant	set	down	the	tray	he	had	been	holding,	spat	on	his	hands	and
walked	over	to	the	rope.	He	launched	himself	upward	with	surprising	agility.
Iskaral	crouched	by	the	tray	and	poured	wine	into	the	three	cups.
“Servant’s	half	bhokar ’al.	Long	arms.	Muscles	like	iron.	Makes	friends
with	them,	probable	source	of	all	my	ills.”	Iskaral	collected	a	cup	for	himself
and	gestured	down	at	the	tray	as	he	straightened.	“Fortunate	for	Servant	I	am
such	a	gentle	and	patient	master.”	He	swung	to	check	on	the	man’s	climb.
“Hurry,	you	snub-tailed	dog!”
Servant	had	already	reached	the	window	and	was	now	clambering	through
it	and	out	of	sight.
“Ammanas’s	gift,	is	Servant.	A	life	given	for	a	life	taken.	One	hand	old,
one	hand	new.	This	is	true	remorse.	You’ll	see.”
The	rope	twitched.	The	High	Priest	quaffed	down	the	last	of	his	wine,	flung
the	cup	away	and	scrambled	toward	the	rope.	“Too	long	exposed!	Vulnerable.
Quickly	now!”	He	wrapped	his	hands	around	a	knot,	set	his	feet	atop	another.
“Pull!	Are	you	deaf?	Pull!”
Iskaral	shot	upward.
“Pulleys,”	Icarium	said.	“Too	fast	to	be	otherwise.”
The	pain	returning	to	his	shoulders,	Mappo	winced,	then	said,	“Not	what
you	were	expecting,	I	take	it.”
“Tesem,”	Icarium	said,	watching	the	priest	vanish	through	the	window.	“A
place	of	healing.	Solitary	reflection,	repository	of	scrolls	and	tomes,	and


insatiable	nuns…”
“Insatiable?”
The	Jhag	glanced	at	his	friend,	an	eyebrow	rising.	“Indeed.”
“Oh,	sad	demise.”
“Very.”
“In	this	instance,”	Mappo	said	as	the	rope	tumbled	back	down,	“I	think
solitary	reflection	has	addled	a	brain.	Battling	wits	with	bhok’arala	and	the
whisperings	of	a	god	most	hold	as	himself	insane…”
“Yet	there	is	power	here,	Mappo,”	Icarium	said	in	a	low	voice.
“Aye,”	the	Trell	agreed	as	he	approached	the	rope.	“A	warren	opened	in	the
cave	when	the	mule	entered.”
“Then	why	does	the	High	Priest	not	use	it?”
“I	doubt	we’ll	find	easy	answers	to	Iskaral	Pust,	friend.”
“Best	hold	tight,	Mappo.”
“Aye.”
Icarium	reached	out	suddenly,	rested	a	hand	on	Mappo’s	shoulder.
“Friend.”
“Aye?”
The	Jhag	was	frowning.	“I	am	missing	an	arrow,	Mappo.	More,	there	is
blood	on	my	sword,	and	I	see	upon	you	dreadful	wounds.	Tell	me,	did	we
fight?	I	recall…nothing.”
The	Trell	was	silent	a	long	moment,	then	he	said,	“I	was	beset	by	a	leopard
while	you	slept,	Icarium.	Made	some	use	of	your	weapons.	I	did	not	think	it
worthy	of	mention.”
Icarium’s	frown	deepened.	“Once	again,”	he	slowly	whispered,	“I	have	lost
time.”
“Nothing	of	worth,	friend.”
“You	would	tell	me	otherwise?”	There	was	a	look	of	desperate	pleading	in
the	Jhag’s	gray	eyes.
“Why	would	I	not,	Icarium?”


Chapter	Three

The	Red	Blades	were,	at	this	time,	pre-eminent	among	those	proMalazan	organizations	that	arose	in	occupied	territories.
Viewing	themselves	as	progressive	in	their	embrace	of	the
values	of	imperial	unification,	this	quasi-military	cult	became
infamous	with	their	brutal	pragmatism	when	dealing	with
dissenting	kin…
LIVES	OF	THE	CONQUERED
ILEM	T RAUTH
Felisin	lay	unmoving	beneath	Beneth	until,	with	a	final	shudder,	he	was	done.
He	pushed	himself	off	and	grabbed	a	handful	of	her	hair.	His	face	was	flushed
under	the	grime	and	his	eyes	gleamed	in	the	lamp	glow.	“You’ll	learn	to	like	it,
girl,”	he	said.
The	edge	of	something	savage	always	rose	closer	to	the	surface
immediately	after	he’d	lain	with	her.	She	knew	it	would	pass.	“I	will,”	she	said.
“Does	he	get	a	day	of	rest?”
Beneth’s	grip	tightened	momentarily,	then	relaxed.	“Aye,	he	does.”	He
moved	away,	began	tying	up	his	breeches.	“Though	I	don’t	much	see	the	point.
The	old	man	won’t	last	another	month.”	He	paused,	his	breath	harsh	as	he
studied	her.	“Hood’s	breath,	girl,	but	you’re	beautiful.	Show	me	some	life	next
time.	I’ll	treat	you	right.	Get	you	soap,	a	new	comb,	lousebane.	You’ll	work
here	in	Twistings,	that’s	a	promise.	Show	pleasure,	girl,	that’s	all	I	ask.”
“Soon,”	she	said.	“Once	it	stops	hurting.”
The	day’s	eleventh	bell	had	sounded.	They	were	in	the	third	reach	off
Twistings	Far	shaft.	The	reach	had	been	gouged	out	by	the	Rotlegs	and	was
barely	high	enough	to	crawl	for	most	of	its	quarter-mile	length.	The	air	was
close	and	stank	of	Otataral	dust	and	sweating	rock.
Virtually	everyone	else	would	have	reached	Nearlight	by	now,	but	Beneth
moved	in	Captain	Sawark’s	shadow	and	could	do	as	he	pleased.	He	had	claimed
the	abandoned	reach	as	his	own.	It	was	Felisin’s	third	visit.	The	first	time	had


been	the	hardest.	Beneth	had	picked	her	within	hours	of	her	arrival	at	Skullcup,
the	mining	camp	in	the	Dosin	Pit.	He	was	a	big	man,	bigger	than	Baudin	and
though	a	slave	himself	he	was	master	of	every	other	slave,	the	guards’	inside
man,	cruel	and	dangerous.	He	was	also	astonishingly	handsome.
Felisin	had	learned	fast	on	the	slave	ship.	She	had	nothing	but	her	body	to
sell,	but	it	had	proved	a	valuable	currency.	Giving	herself	to	the	ship	guards
had	been	repaid	with	more	food	for	herself,	Heboric	and	Baudin.	By	opening
her	legs	to	the	right	men	she	had	managed	to	get	herself	and	her	two
companions	chained	on	the	keel	ramp	rather	than	in	the	sewage-filled	water
that	sloshed	shin-deep	beneath	the	hold’s	walkway.	Others	had	rotted	in	that
water.	Some	had	drowned	when	starvation	and	sickness	so	weakened	them	that
they	could	not	stay	above	it.
Heboric’s	grief	and	anger	at	the	price	she	paid	had	at	first	been	difficult	to
ignore,	filling	her	with	shame.	But	it	had	paid	for	their	lives,	and	that	was	a
truth	that	could	not	be	questioned.	Baudin’s	only	reaction	had	been—and
continued	to	be—a	regard	without	expression.	He	watched	her	as	would	a
stranger	unable	to	decide	who	or	what	she	was.	Yet	he	had	held	to	her	side,	and
now	stood	close	to	Beneth	as	well.	Some	kind	of	arrangement	had	been	made
between	them.	When	Beneth	was	not	there	to	protect	her,	Baudin	was.
On	the	ship	she	had	learned	well	the	tastes	of	men,	as	well	as	those	of	the
few	women	guards	who’d	taken	her	to	their	bunks.	She’d	thought	she’d	be
prepared	for	Beneth,	and	in	most	ways	she	was.	Everything	but	his	size.
Wincing,	Felisin	pulled	on	her	slave	tunic.
Beneth	watched	her,	his	high	cheekbones	harsh	ridges	beneath	his	eyes,	his
long,	curly	black	hair	glistening	with	whale	oil.	“I’ll	give	the	old	man	Deepsoil
if	you	like,”	he	said.
“You’d	do	that?”
He	nodded.	“For	you	I’ll	change	things.	I	won’t	take	any	other	woman.	I’m
king	of	Skullcup,	you’ll	be	my	queen.	Baudin	will	be	your	personal	guard—I
trust	him.”
“And	Heboric?”
Beneth	shrugged.	“Him	I	don’t	trust.	And	he’s	not	much	use.	Pulling	the
carts	is	about	all	he	can	do.	The	carts,	or	a	plow	at	Deepsoil.”	His	gaze
flickered	at	her.	“But	he’s	your	friend,	so	I’ll	find	something	for	him.”
Felisin	dragged	her	fingers	through	her	hair.	“It’s	the	carts	that	are	killing
him.	If	you’ve	sent	him	to	Deepsoil	just	to	pull	a	plow,	it’s	not	much	of	a	favor
—”
Beneth’s	scowl	made	her	wonder	if	she’d	pushed	too	far.	“You’ve	never
pulled	a	cart	full	of	stone,	girl.	Pulled	one	of	those	up	through	half	a	league	of


tunnels,	then	going	back	down	and	pulling	another	one,	three,	four	times	a	day.
Compare	that	to	dragging	a	plow	through	soft,	broken	soil?	Dammit,	girl,	if
I’m	to	move	the	man	off	the	carts,	I’ve	got	to	justify	it.	Everyone	works	in
Skullcup.”
“That’s	not	the	whole	story,	is	it?”
He	turned	his	back	on	her	in	answer,	and	began	crawling	up	the	reach.
“I’ve	Kanese	wine	awaiting	us,	and	fresh	bread	and	cheese.	Bula’s	made	a	stew
for	the	guards	and	we’ve	got	a	bowl	each.”
Felisin	followed.	The	thought	of	food	made	her	mouth	water.	If	there	was
enough	cheese	and	bread	she	could	save	some	for	Heboric,	though	he	insisted
that	it	was	fruit	and	meat	that	was	needed.	But	both	were	worth	their	weight	in
gold,	and	just	as	rare	in	Skullcup.	He’d	be	grateful	enough	for	what	she
brought	him,	she	knew.
It	was	clear	that	Sawark	had	received	orders	to	see	the	historian	dead.
Nothing	so	overt	as	murder—the	political	risks	were	too	great	for	that—
rather,	the	slow,	wasting	death	of	poor	diet	and	overwork.	That	he	had	no
hands	gave	the	Pit	Captain	sufficient	reason	to	assign	Heboric	to	the	carts.
Daily	he	struggled	at	his	harness,	hauling	hundreds	of	pounds	of	broken	rock
up	the	Deep	Mine	to	the	shaft’s	Nearlight.	In	ever	other	harness	was	an	ox.	The
beasts	each	hauled	three	carts,	while	Heboric	pulled	but	one:	the	only
acknowledgment	the	guards	made	to	his	humanity.
Beneth	was	aware	of	Sawark’s	instructions,	Felisin	was	certain	of	that.	The
“king”	of	Skullcup	had	limits	to	his	power,	for	all	his	claims	otherwise.
Once	they	reached	the	main	shaft,	it	was	four	hundred	paces	to	Twistings’
Nearlight.	Unlike	Deep	Mine,	with	its	thick,	rich	and	straight	vein	of	Otataral
running	far	under	the	hills,	Twistings	followed	a	folded	vein,	rising	and
diving,	buckling	and	turning	through	the	limestone.
Unlike	the	iron	mines	on	the	mainland,	Otataral	never	ran	down	into	true
bedrock.	Found	only	in	limestone,	the	veins	ran	shallow	and	long,	like	rivers
of	rust	between	compacted	beds	filled	with	fossil	plants	and	shellfish.
Limestone	is	just	the	bones	of	things	once	living,	Heboric	had	said	their
second	night	in	the	hovel	they’d	claimed	off	Spit	Row—before	Beneth	had
moved	them	to	the	more	privileged	neighborhood	behind	Bula’s	Inn.	I’d	read
that	theory	before	and	am	now	myself	convinced.	So	now	I’m	led	to	believe	that
Otataral	is	not	a	natural	ore.
That’s	important?	Baudin	had	asked.
If	not	natural,	then	what?	Heboric	grinned.	Otataral,	the	bane	of	magic,
was	born	of	magic.	If	I	was	less	scrupulous	a	scholar,	I’d	write	a	treatise	on
that.


What	do	you	mean?	Felisin	asked.
He	means,	Baudin	said,	he’d	be	inviting	alchemists	and	mages	to
experiment	in	making	their	own	Otataral.
Is	that	a	problem?
Those	veins	we	dig,	Heboric	explained,	they’re	like	a	layer	of	once	melted
fat,	a	deep	river	of	it	sandwiched	between	layers	of	limestone.	This	whole
island	had	to	melt	to	make	those	veins.	Whatever	sorcery	created	Otataral
proved	beyond	controlling.	I	would	not	want	to	be	responsible	for	unleashing
such	an	event	all	over	again.
A	single	Malazan	guard	waited	at	Nearlight’s	gate.	Beyond	him	stretched
the	raised	road	that	led	into	the	pit	town.	At	the	far	end,	the	sun	was	just	setting
beyond	the	pit’s	ridge	line,	leaving	Skullcup	in	its	early	shadow,	a	pocket	of
gloom	that	brought	blessed	relief	from	the	day’s	heat.
The	guard	was	young,	resting	his	vambraced	forearms	on	the	cross	blades
of	his	pike.
Beneth	grunted.	“Where’s	your	mate,	Pella?”
“The	Dosii	pig	wandered	off,	Beneth.	Maybe	you	can	tune	Sawark’s	ear—
Hood	knows	he’s	not	hearing	us.	The	Dosii	regulars	have	lost	all	discipline.
They	ignore	the	duty	rosters,	spend	all	their	time	tossing	coins	at	Bula’s.
There’s	seventy-five	of	us	and	over	two	hundred	of	them,	Beneth,	and	all	this
talk	of	rebellion…explain	it	to	Sawark—”
“You	don’t	know	your	history,”	Beneth	said.	“The	Dosii	have	been	on	their
knees	for	three	hundred	years.	They	don’t	know	any	other	way	to	live.	First	it
was	mainlanders,	then	Falari	colonists,	now	you	Malazans.	Calm	yourself,	boy,
before	you	lose	face.”
“	‘History	comforts	the	dull-witted,’	”	the	young	Malazan	said.
Beneth	barked	a	laugh	as	he	reached	the	gate.	“And	whose	words	are	those,
Pella?	Not	yours.”
The	guard’s	brows	rose,	then	he	shrugged.	“I	forget	you’re	Korelri
sometimes,	Beneth.	Those	words?	Emperor	Kellanved.”	Pella’s	gaze	slid	to
Felisin	with	a	hint	of	sharpness.	“Duiker ’s	Imperial	Campaigns,	Volume	One.
You’re	Malazan,	Felisin,	do	you	recall	what	comes	next?”
She	shook	her	head,	bemused	by	the	young	man’s	veiled	intensity.	I’ve
learned	to	read	faces—Beneth	senses	nothing.	“I’m	not	that	familiar	with
Duiker ’s	works,	Pella.”
“Worth	learning,”	the	guard	said	with	a	smile.
Sensing	Beneth’s	growing	impatience	at	the	gate,	Felisin	stepped	past	Pella.
“I	doubt	there’s	a	single	scroll	in	Skullcup,”	she	said.
“Maybe	you’ll	find	someone’s	memory	worth	dragging	a	net	through,


eh?”
Felisin	glanced	back	with	a	frown.
“The	boy	flirting	with	you?”	Beneth	asked	from	the	ramp.	“Be	gentle,
girl.”
“I’ll	think	on	that,”	Felisin	told	Pella	in	a	low	voice	before	resuming	her
walk	through	the	Twistings	Gate.	Joining	Beneth	on	the	raised	road,	she	smiled
up	at	him.	“I	don’t	like	nervous	types.”
He	laughed.	“That	puts	me	at	ease.”
Blessed	Queen	of	Dreams,	make	that	true.
Rubble-filled	pits	lined	the	raised	road	until	it	joined	the	other	two	roads	at
the	Three	Fates	crossing,	a	broad	fork	that	was	flanked	by	two	squat	Dosii
guardhouses.	North	of	Twistings	Road,	and	on	their	right	as	they	approached
the	forks,	was	Deep	Mine	Road;	to	the	south	and	on	their	left	ran	Shaft	Road,
leading	to	a	worked-out	mine	where	the	dead	were	disposed	of	each	dusk.
The	body	wagon	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	meaning	it	had	been	held	up	on
its	route	through	the	pit	town,	with	more	than	the	usual	number	of	bodies	being
brought	out	and	tossed	onto	its	bed.
They	crossed	the	fork	and	continued	on	to	Work	Road.	Past	the	north	Dosii
guardhouse	was	Sinker	Lake,	a	deep	pool	of	turquoise-colored	water
stretching	all	the	way	to	the	north	pit	wall.	It	was	said	the	water	was	cursed	and
to	dive	into	it	was	to	disappear.	Some	believed	a	demon	lived	in	its	depths.
Heboric	asserted	that	the	lack	of	buoyancy	was	a	quality	of	the	lime-saturated
water	itself.	In	any	case,	few	slaves	were	foolish	enough	to	try	an	escape	in	that
direction,	for	the	pit	wall	was	as	sheer	on	the	north	side	as	it	was	on	the	others,
forever	weeping	water	over	a	skin	of	deposits	that	glimmered	like	wet,
polished	bone.
Heboric	had	asked	Felisin	to	keep	an	eye	on	Sinker	Lake’s	water	level	in
any	case,	now	that	the	dry	season	had	come,	and	as	they	walked	Work	Road,
she	studied	the	far	side	as	best	she	could	in	the	dim	light.	A	line	of	crust	was
visible	a	hand’s	span	above	the	surface.	The	news	would	please	him,	though
she	had	no	idea	why.	The	notion	of	escape	was	absurd.	Beyond	the	pit	was
lifeless	desert	and	withered	rock,	with	no	drinkable	water	in	any	direction	for
days.	Those	slaves	who	somehow	made	it	up	to	the	pit	edge,	and	then	eluded
the	patrols	on	Beetle	Road,	the	track	that	surrounded	the	pit,	had	left	their
bones	in	the	desert’s	red	sands.	Few	got	that	far,	and	the	spikes	named	Salvation
Row	on	the	sheer	wall	of	the	Tower	at	Rust	Ramp	displayed	their	failure	for	all
to	see.	Not	a	week	went	past	without	a	new	victim	appearing	on	the	Tower	wall.
Most	died	before	the	first	day	was	through,	but	some	lingered	longer.
Work	Road	ran	its	worn	cobbles	past	Bula’s	Inn	on	the	right	and	the	row	of


brothels	on	the	left	before	opening	out	into	Rathole	Round.	In	the	round’s
center	rose	Sawark’s	Keep,	a	hexagonal	tower	of	cut	limestone	three	stories
high.	Only	Beneth	among	all	the	slaves	had	ever	been	inside.
Twelve	thousand	slaves	lived	in	Skullcup,	the	vast	mining	pit	thirty	leagues
north	of	the	island’s	lone	city	on	the	south	coast,	Dosin	Pali.	In	addition	to	them
and	the	three	hundred	guards	there	were	locals:	prostitutes	for	the	brothels,
serving	staff	for	Bula’s	Inn	and	the	gambling	halls,	a	caste	of	servants	who	had
bound	their	lives	and	the	lives	of	their	families	to	the	Malazan	soldiery,
hawkers	for	the	struggling	market	that	filled	Rathole	Round	on	Rest	Day,	and	a
scattering	of	the	banished,	the	destitute	and	the	lost	who’d	chosen	a	pit	town
over	the	rotting	alleyways	of	Dosin	Pali.
“The	stew	will	be	cold,”	Beneth	muttered	as	they	approached	Bula’s	Inn.
Felisin	wiped	sweat	from	her	brow.	“That	will	be	a	relief.”
“You’re	not	yet	used	to	the	heat.	In	a	month	or	two	you’ll	feel	the	chill	of
night	just	like	everyone	else.”
“These	early	hours	still	hold	the	day’s	memory.	I	feel	the	cold	of	midnight
and	the	hours	beyond,	Beneth.”
“Move	in	with	me,	girl.	I’ll	keep	you	warm	enough.”
He	was	already	on	the	edge	of	one	of	his	sudden	dark	moods.	She	said
nothing,	hoping	he	would	let	it	go	for	the	moment.
“Be	careful	of	what	you	refuse,”	Beneth	rumbled.
“Bula	would	take	me	to	her	bed,”	she	said.	“You	could	watch,	perhaps	join
in.	She’d	be	sure	to	warm	the	bowls	for	us.	Even	second	helpings.”
“She’s	old	enough	to	be	your	mother,”	Beneth	growled.
And	you	my	father.	But	she	heard	his	breathing	change.	“She’s	round	and
soft	and	warm,	Beneth.	Think	on	that.”
She	knew	he	would,	and	the	subject	of	moving	in	with	him	would	drift
away.	For	this	night,	at	least.	Heboric’s	wrong.	There’s	no	point	in	thinking
about	tomorrow.	Just	the	next	hour,	each	hour.	Stay	alive,	Felisin,	and	live	well
if	you	can.	One	day	you’ll	find	yourself	face	to	face	with	your	sister,	and	an
ocean	of	blood	pouring	from	Tavore’s	veins	won’t	be	enough,	though	all	they
hold	will	suffice.	Stay	alive,	girl,	that’s	all	you	must	do.	Survive	each	hour,	the
next	hour…
She	slipped	her	hand	into	Beneth’s	as	they	reached	the	inn’s	door,	and	felt
in	it	the	sweat	born	of	the	visions	she	had	given	him.
One	day,	face	to	face,	sister.


Heboric	was	still	awake,	bundled	in	blankets	and	crouched	beside	the
hearthfire.	He	glanced	up	as	Felisin	climbed	into	the	room	and	locked	the	floor
hatch.	She	collected	a	sheepskin	wrap	from	a	chest	and	pulled	it	around	her
shoulders.
“Would	you	have	me	believe	you’ve	come	to	enjoy	the	life	you’ve	chosen,
girl?	Nights	like	these	and	I	wonder.”
“I	thought	you’d	be	tired	of	judgments	by	now,	Heboric,”	Felisin	said	as
she	collected	a	wineskin	from	a	peg	and	picked	through	a	pile	of	gourd	shells
seeking	a	clean	one.	“I	take	it	Baudin’s	not	back	yet.	Seems	even	the	minor
chore	of	cleaning	our	cups	is	beyond	him.”	She	found	one	that	would	pass
without	too	close	an	inspection	and	squeezed	wine	into	it.
“That	will	dry	you	out,”	Heboric	observed.	“Not	your	first	of	the	night
either,	I’d	wager.”
“Don’t	father	me,	old	man.”
The	tattooed	man	sighed.	“Hood	take	your	sister	anyway,”	he	muttered.
“She	wasn’t	satisfied	with	seeing	you	dead.	She’d	rather	turn	her	fourteenyear-old	sister	into	a	whore.	If	Fener	has	heard	my	prayers,	Tavore’s	fate	will
exceed	her	crimes.”
Felisin	drained	half	the	cup,	her	eyes	veiled	as	she	studied	Heboric.	“I
entered	my	sixteenth	year	last	month,”	she	said.
His	eyes	looked	suddenly	very	old	as	he	met	her	gaze	for	a	moment	before
returning	his	attention	to	the	hearth.
Felisin	refilled	the	cup,	then	joined	Heboric	at	the	square,	raised	fireplace.
The	burning	dung	in	the	groundstone	basin	was	almost	smokeless.	The
pedestal	the	basin	sat	on	was	glazed	and	filled	with	water.	Kept	hot	by	the	fire,
the	water	was	used	for	washing	and	bathing,	while	the	pedestal	radiated	enough
heat	to	keep	the	night’s	chill	from	the	single	room.	Fragments	of	Dosii	spun
rug	and	reed	mats	cushioned	the	floorboards.	The	entire	dwelling	was	raised
on	stilts	five	feet	above	the	sands.
Sitting	down	on	a	low	wooden	stool,	Felisin	pushed	her	chilled	feet	close
to	the	pedestal.	“I	saw	you	at	the	carts	today,”	she	said,	her	words	slightly
slurred.	“Gunnip	walked	beside	you	with	a	switch.”
Heboric	grunted.	“That	amused	them	all	day,	Gunnip	telling	his	guards	he
was	swatting	flies.”
“Did	he	break	skin?”
“Aye,	but	Fener ’s	tracks	heal	me	well,	you	know	that.”
“The	wounds,	yes,	but	not	the	pain—I	can	see,	Heboric.”
His	glance	was	wry.	“Surprised	you	can	see	anything,	lass.	Is	that	durhang	I
smell,	too?	Careful	with	that,	the	smoke	will	pull	you	into	a	deeper	and	darker


shaft	than	Deep	Mine	could	ever	reach.”
Felisin	held	out	a	pebble-sized	black	button.	“I	deal	with	my	pain,	you	deal
with	yours.”
He	shook	his	head.	“I	appreciate	the	offer,	but	not	this	time.	You	hold	there
in	your	hand	a	month’s	pay	for	a	Dosii	guard.	I’d	advise	you	to	use	it	in	trade.”
She	shrugged,	returning	the	durhang	to	the	pouch	at	her	belt.	“I’ve	nothing
I	need	that	Beneth	won’t	give	me	already.	All	I	need	do	is	ask.”
“And	you	imagine	he	gives	it	to	you	freely.”
She	drank.	“As	good	as.	You’re	being	moved,	Heboric.	To	Deepsoil.
Starting	tomorrow.	No	more	Gunnip	and	his	switch.”
He	closed	his	eyes.	“Why	does	thanking	you	leave	such	a	bitter	taste	in	my
mouth?”
“My	wine-soaked	brain	whispers	hypocrisy.”
She	watched	the	color	leave	his	face.	Oh,	Felisin,	too	much	durhang,	too
much	wine!	Do	I	only	do	good	for	Heboric	to	give	me	salt	for	his	wounds?	I’ve
no	wish	to	be	so	cruel.	She	withdrew	from	beneath	her	tunic	the	food	she	had
saved	for	him,	leaned	forward	and	placed	the	small	wrapped	bundle	in	his	lap.
“Sinker	Lake	has	dropped	another	hand’s	width.”
He	said	nothing,	eyes	on	the	stumps	at	the	ends	of	his	wrists.
Felisin	frowned.	There	was	something	else	she	wanted	to	tell	him,	but	her
memory	failed	her.	She	finished	the	wine	and	straightened,	running	both	hands
back	through	her	hair.	Her	scalp	felt	numb.	She	paused,	seeing	Heboric
surreptitiously	glance	at	her	breasts,	round	and	full	under	the	stretched	tunic.
She	held	the	pose	a	moment	longer	than	was	necessary,	then	slowly	lowered
her	arms.	“Bula	has	fantasies	of	you,”	she	said	slowly.	“It’s	the…possibilities…
that	intrigue	her.	It	would	do	you	some	good,	Heboric.”
He	spun	away	off	the	stool,	the	untouched	food	bundle	falling	to	the	floor.
“Hood’s	breath,	girl!”
She	laughed,	watching	him	sweep	aside	the	hanging	that	separated	his	cot
from	the	rest	of	the	room,	then	clumsily	yank	it	back	behind	him.	After	a
moment	her	laughter	fell	away,	and	she	listened	to	the	old	man	climb	onto	his
cot.	I’d	hoped	to	make	you	smile,	Heboric,	she	wanted	to	explain.	And	I	didn’t
want	my	laughter	to	sound	so…hard.	I’m	not	what	you	think	I	am.
Am	I?
She	retrieved	the	wrapped	food	and	placed	it	on	the	shelf	above	the	basin.
An	hour	later,	with	Felisin	lying	awake	on	her	cot	and	Heboric	on	his,
Baudin	returned.	He	stoked	up	the	hearth,	moving	about	quietly.	Not	drunk.	She
wondered	where	he’d	been.	She	wondered	where	he	went	every	night.	It	would
not	be	worth	asking	him.	Baudin	had	few	words	for	anyone,	and	even	fewer


for	her.
After	a	moment	she	was	forced	to	reconsider,	as	she	heard	the	man	flick	a
finger	against	Heboric’s	divider.	He	responded	promptly	with	low	words	she
could	not	make	out,	and	Baudin	whispered	something	back.	The	conversation
continued	a	minute	longer,	then	Baudin	softly	grunted	his	laugh-grunt	and
moved	off	to	his	own	bed.
The	two	were	planning	something,	but	it	was	not	this	that	shook	her.	It	was
that	she	was	being	excluded.	A	flash	of	anger	followed	this	realization.	I’ve
kept	them	alive!	I’ve	made	their	lives	easier—since	the	transport	ship!	Bula’s
right,	every	man’s	a	bastard,	good	enough	only	to	be	used.	Very	well,	see	for
yourselves	what	Skullcup	is	for	everyone	else,	I’m	done	with	favors.	I’ll	see	you
back	on	the	carts,	old	man,	I	swear	it.	She	found	herself	fighting	tears,	and
knew	she	would	do	nothing	of	the	sort.	She	needed	Beneth,	that	was	true
enough,	and	she’d	pay	to	keep	him.	But	she	needed	Heboric	and	Baudin	as
well,	and	a	part	of	her	clung	to	them	as	a	child	to	parents,	denying	the	hardness
that	everywhere	else	filled	her	world.	To	lose	that—to	lose	them—would	be	to
lose…everything.
Clearly,	they	thought	that	she’d	sell	their	trust	as	readily	as	she	did	her	own
body,	but	it	wasn’t	true.	I	swear	it’s	not	true.
Felisin	stared	up	into	the	darkness,	tears	streaming	from	her	eyes.	I’m
alone.	There’s	just	Beneth	now.	Beneth	and	his	wine	and	his	durhang	and	his
body.	She	still	ached	between	her	legs	from	when	Beneth	had	finally	joined	her
and	Bula	on	the	innkeeper ’s	huge	bed.
It	was,	she	told	herself,	simply	a	matter	of	will	to	turn	pain	into	pleasure.
Survive	each	hour.
	
The	quayside	market	had	begun	drawing	the	morning	crowds,	reinforcing	the
illusion	that	this	day	was	no	different	from	any	other.	Chilled	with	a	fear	that
even	the	rising	sun	could	not	master,	Duiker	sat	cross-legged	on	the	sea	wall,
his	gaze	traveling	out	over	the	bay	into	Sahul	Sea,	willing	the	return	of
Admiral	Nok	and	the	fleet.
But	those	were	orders	even	Coltaine	could	not	countermand.	The	Wickan
had	no	authority	over	the	Malazan	warships,	and	Pormqual’s	recall	had	seen
the	Sahul	Fleet	depart	Hissar ’s	harbor	this	very	morning	for	the	month-long
journey	to	Aren.
For	all	the	pretense	of	normality,	the	departure	had	not	gone	unnoticed	by
Hissar ’s	citizens,	and	the	morning	market	was	increasingly	shrill	with	laughter
and	excited	voices.	The	oppressed	had	won	their	first	victory,	and	all	that


would	distinguish	it	from	those	to	follow	was	its	bloodlessness.	Or	so	ran	the
sentiment.
The	only	consolation	Duiker	could	consider	was	that	the	Jhistal	High
Priest	Mallick	Rel	had	departed	with	the	fleet.	It	was	not	a	difficult	thing,
however,	to	imagine	the	report	the	man	would	prepare	for	Pormqual.
A	Malazan	sail	in	the	strait	caught	his	eye,	a	small	transport	coming	in
from	the	northeast.	Dosin	Pali	on	the	island,	perhaps,	or	from	farther	up	the
coast.	It	would	be	an	unscheduled	arrival,	making	Duiker	curious.
He	felt	a	presence	at	his	side	and	glanced	over	to	see	Kulp	clambering	up
onto	the	wide,	low	wall,	dangling	his	legs	down	to	the	cloudy	water	ten	paces
below.	“It’s	done,”	he	said,	as	if	the	admission	amounted	to	a	confession	of
foul	murder.	“Word	has	been	sent	in.	Assuming	your	friend	is	still	alive,	he’ll
receive	his	instructions.”
“Thank	you,	Kulp.”
The	mage	shifted	uneasily.	He	rubbed	at	his	face,	squinting	at	the	transport
ship	as	it	entered	the	harbor.	A	patrol	dory	approached	the	craft	as	the	crew
struck	the	lone	sail.	Two	men	in	glinting	armor	stood	on	deck,	watching	as	the
dory	came	alongside.
One	of	the	armored	men	leaned	over	the	gunwale	and	addressed	the	harbor
official.	A	moment	later	the	dory’s	oarsmen	were	swinging	the	craft	around
with	obvious	haste.
Duiker	grunted.	“Did	you	see	that?”
“Aye,”	Kulp	growled.
The	transport	glided	toward	the	Imperial	Pier,	pushed	along	by	a	low	bank
of	oars	that	had	appeared	close	to	the	hull’s	waterline.	A	moment	later	the	pierside	oars	withdrew	back	into	the	ship.	Dockmen	scrambled	to	receive	the	cast
lines.	A	broad	gangplank	was	being	readied	and	horses	were	now	visible	on
the	deck.
“Red	Blades,”	Duiker	said	as	more	armored	men	appeared	on	the
transport,	standing	alongside	their	mounts.
“From	Dosin	Pali,”	Kulp	said.	“I	recognize	the	first	two:	Baria	Setral	and
his	brother	Mesker.	They	have	another	brother,	Orto.	He	commands	the	Aren
Company.”
“The	Red	Blades,”	the	historian	mused.	“They’ve	no	illusions	about	the
state	of	affairs.	Word’s	come	they	are	attempting	to	assert	control	in	other
cities,	and	here	we	are	to	witness	a	doubling	of	their	presence	in	Hissar.”
“I	wonder	if	Coltaine	knows.”
A	new	tension	filled	the	market;	heads	had	turned	and	eyes	now	observed
as	Baria	and	Mesker	led	their	troops	onto	the	pier.	The	Red	Blades	were


equipped	and	presented	for	war.	They	bristled	with	weapons,	with	full	chain
leggings	and	the	slitted	visors	on	their	helms	lowered.	Bows	were	strung,
arrows	loosened	in	their	quivers.	The	horse-blades	were	unsheathed	and	jutting
from	their	mounts’	forelegs.
Kulp	spat	nervously.	“Don’t	like	the	look	of	this,”	he	muttered.
“It	looks	as	if—”
“They	intend	to	attack	the	market,”	Kulp	said.	“This	isn’t	just	for	show,
Duiker.	Fener ’s	hoof!”
The	historian	glanced	at	Kulp,	his	mouth	dry.	“You’ve	opened	your
warren.”
Not	replying,	the	mage	slid	off	the	sea	wall,	eyes	on	the	Red	Blades	who
were	now	mounted	and	lining	up	at	pier ’s	end,	facing	five	hundred	citizens
who	had	fallen	silent	and	were	now	backing	away,	filling	the	aisles	between	the
carts	and	awnings.	The	contraction	of	the	crowd	would	trigger	panic,	which
was	precisely	what	the	Red	Blades	intended.
Lances	dangling	from	loops	of	rawhide	around	their	wrists,	the	Red
Blades	nocked	arrows,	the	horses	quivering	under	them	but	otherwise
motionless.
The	crowd	seemed	to	shiver	in	places,	as	if	the	ground	was	shifting
beneath	it.	Duiker	saw	figures	moving,	not	away,	but	toward	the	facing	line.
Kulp	took	half	a	dozen	steps	toward	the	Red	Blades.
The	figures	pushed	through	the	last	of	the	crowd,	pulling	away	their	telaba
cloaks	and	hoods,	revealing	leather	armor	with	stitched	black	iron	scales.
Longknives	flashed	in	gloved	hands.	Dark	eyes	in	tanned,	tattooed	Wickan
faces	held	cold	and	firm	on	Baria	and	Mesker	Setral	and	their	warriors.
Ten	Wickans	now	faced	the	forty-odd	Red	Blades,	the	crowd	behind	them
as	silent	and	as	motionless	as	statues.
“Stand	aside!”	Baria	bellowed,	his	face	dark	with	fury.	“Or	die!”
The	Wickans	laughed	with	fearless	derision.
Pushing	himself	forward,	Duiker	followed	Kulp	as	the	mage	strode
hurriedly	toward	the	Red	Blades.
Mesker	snapped	out	a	curse	upon	seeing	Kulp	approach.	His	brother
glanced	over,	scowling.
“Don’t	be	a	fool,	Baria!”	the	mage	hissed.
The	commander ’s	eyes	narrowed.	“Fling	magic	at	me	and	I’ll	cut	you
down,”	he	said.
Now	at	closer	range,	Duiker	saw	the	Otataral	links	interwoven	in	Baria’s
chain	armor.
“We	shall	cut	this	handful	of	barbarians	down,”	Mesker	growled,	“then


properly	announce	our	arrival	in	Hissar…with	the	blood	of	traitors.”
“And	five	thousand	Wickans	will	avenge	the	deaths	of	their	kin,”	Kulp	said.
“And	not	with	quick	sword	strokes.	No,	you’ll	be	hung	still	alive	from	the
seawall	spikes.	For	the	seagulls	to	play	with.	Coltaine’s	not	yet	your	enemy,
Baria.	Sheathe	your	weapons	and	report	to	the	new	Fist,	Commander.	To	do
otherwise	will	be	to	sacrifice	your	life	and	the	lives	of	your	soldiers.”
“You	ignore	me,”	Mesker	said.	“Baria	is	not	my	keeper,	Mage.”
Kulp	sneered.	“Be	silent,	pup.	Where	Baria	leads,	Mesker	follows,	or	will
you	now	cross	blades	with	your	brother?”
“Enough,	Mesker,”	Baria	rumbled.
His	brother ’s	tulwar	rasped	from	its	scabbard.	“You	dare	command	me!”
The	Wickans	shouted	encouragement.	A	few	brave	souls	in	the	crowd
behind	them	laughed.
Mesker ’s	face	was	sickly	with	rage.
Baria	sighed.	“Brother,	this	is	not	the	time.”
A	mounted	troop	of	Hissar	Guard	appeared	above	the	heads	of	the	crowd,
pushing	along	the	aisles	between	the	market	stalls.	A	chorus	of	hoots	sounded
to	their	left	and	Duiker	and	the	others	turned	to	see	three	score	Wickan
bowmen	with	arrows	nocked	and	bows	drawn	on	the	Red	Blades.
Baria	slowly	raised	his	left	hand,	making	a	twisting	gesture.	His	warriors
lowered	their	own	weapons.
Snarling	with	disgust,	Mesker	slammed	his	tulwar	back	into	its	wooden
scabbard.
“Your	escort	has	arrived,”	Kulp	said	dryly.	“It	seems	the	Fist	has	been
expecting	you.”
Duiker	stood	at	the	mage’s	side	and	watched	as	Baria	led	the	Red	Blades
forward	to	meet	the	Hissari	troop.	The	historian	shook	himself.	“Hood’s
breath,	Kulp,	that	was	a	chancy	cast	of	the	knuckles!”
The	man	grunted.	“You	can	always	count	on	Mesker	Setral,”	he	said.	“As
brainless	as	a	cat	and	just	as	easy	to	distract.	For	a	moment	there	I	was	hoping
Baria	would	accept	the	challenge—whatever	the	outcome,	there’d	be	one	less
Setral,	and	that’s	an	opportunity	missed.”
“Those	disguised	Wickans,”	Duiker	said,	“were	not	part	of	any	official
welcome.	Coltaine	had	infiltrated	the	market.”
“A	cunning	dog,	is	Coltaine.”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“They’ve	shown	themselves	now.”
“Aye,	and	showed	as	well	they	were	ready	to	lay	down	their	lives	to	protect
the	citizens	of	Hissar.”
“Had	Coltaine	been	here,	I	doubt	he	would	have	ordered	those	warriors


forward,	Kulp.	Those	Wickans	were	eager	for	a	fight.	Defending	the	market
mob	had	nothing	to	do	with	it.”
The	mage	rubbed	his	face.	“Best	hope	the	Hissari	believe	otherwise.”
“Come,”	Duiker	said,	“let	us	take	wine—I	know	a	place	in	Imperial	Square,
and	on	the	way	you	can	tell	me	how	the	Seventh	has	warmed	to	their	new	Fist.”
Kulp	barked	a	laugh	as	they	began	walking.	“Respect	maybe,	but	no
warmth.	He’s	completely	changed	the	drills.	We’ve	done	one	battlefield
formation	since	he	arrived,	and	that	was	the	day	he	took	command.”
Duiker	frowned.	“I’d	heard	that	he	was	working	the	soldiers	to	exhaustion,
that	he	didn’t	even	need	to	enforce	the	curfew	since	everyone	was	so	eager	for
sleep	and	the	barracks	were	silent	as	tombs	by	the	eighth	bell.	If	not	practicing
wheels	and	turtles	and	shield-walls,	then	what?”
“The	ruined	monastery	on	the	hill	south	of	the	city—you	know	the	one?
Just	foundations	left	except	for	the	central	temple,	but	the	chest-high	walls
cover	the	entire	hilltop	like	a	small	city.	The	sappers	have	built	them	up,	roofed
some	of	them	over.	It	was	a	maze	of	alleys	and	cul-de-sacs	to	begin	with,	but
Coltaine	had	the	sappers	turn	it	into	a	nightmare.	I’d	wager	there’s	soldiers	still
wandering	around	lost	in	there.	The	Wickan	has	us	there	every	afternoon,
mock	battles,	street	control,	assaulting	buildings,	break-out	tactics,	retrieving
wounded.	Coltaine’s	warriors	act	the	part	of	rioting	mobs	and	looters,	and	I	tell
you,	historian,	they	were	born	to	it.”	He	paused	for	breath.	“Every	day…we
bake	under	the	sun	on	that	bone-bleached	hill,	broken	down	to	squad	level,
each	squad	assigned	impossible	objectives.”	He	grimaced.	“Under	this	new
Fist,	each	soldier	of	the	Seventh	has	died	a	dozen	times	or	more	in	mock	battle.
Corporal	List	has	been	killed	in	every	exercise	so	far,	the	poor	boy’s	Hoodaddled,	and	through	it	all	those	Wickan	savages	hoot	and	howl.”
Duiker	said	nothing	as	they	continued	on	their	way	to	Imperial	Square.
When	they	entered	the	Malazan	Quarter,	the	historian	finally	spoke.
“Something	of	a	rivalry,	then,	between	the	Seventh	and	the	Wickan	Regiment.”
“Oh,	aye,	that	tactic’s	obvious	enough,	but	it’s	going	too	far,	I	think.	We’ll
see	in	a	few	days’	time,	when	we	start	getting	Wickan	Lancer	support.	There’ll
be	double-crossing,	mark	my	words.”
They	strode	into	the	square.	“And	you?”	Duiker	asked.	“What	task	has
Coltaine	given	the	Seventh’s	last	cadre	mage?”
“Folly.	I	conjure	illusions	all	day	until	my	skull’s	ready	to	burst.”
“Illusions?	In	the	mock	battles?”
“Aye,	and	it’s	what	makes	the	objectives	so	impossible.	Believe	me,	there’s
been	more	than	one	curse	thrown	my	way,	Duiker.	More	than	one.”
“What	do	you	conjure,	dragons?”


“I	wish.	I	create	Malazan	refugees,	historian.	By	the	hundred.	A	thousand
weighted	scarecrows	for	the	soldiers	to	drag	around	aren’t	sufficient	for
Coltaine,	the	ones	he	has	me	create	flee	the	wrong	way,	or	refuse	to	leave	their
homes,	or	drag	furniture	and	other	possessions.	Coltaine’s	orders—my
refugees	create	chaos,	and	so	far	cost	more	lives	than	any	other	element	in	the
exercises.	I’m	not	a	popular	man,	Duiker.”
“What	of	Sormo	E’nath?”	the	historian	asked,	his	mouth	suddenly	dry.
“The	warlock?	Nowhere	to	be	seen.”
Duiker	nodded	to	himself.	He’d	already	guessed	Kulp’s	answer	to	that
question.	You’re	busy	reading	the	stones	in	the	sand,	Sormo.	Aren’t	you?	While
Coltaine	hammers	the	Seventh	into	shape	as	guardians	to	Malazan	refugees.
“Mage,”	he	said.
“Aye?”
“Dying	a	dozen	times	in	mock	battle	is	nothing.	When	it’s	for	real	you	die
but	once.	Push	the	Seventh,	Kulp.	Any	way	you	can.	Show	Coltaine	what	the
Seventh’s	capable	of—talk	it	over	with	the	squad	leaders.	Tonight.	Come
tomorrow,	win	your	objectives,	and	I’ll	talk	to	Coltaine	about	a	day	of	rest.
Show	him,	and	he’ll	give	it.”
“What	makes	you	so	certain?”
Because	time’s	running	out	and	he	needs	you.	He	needs	you	sharp.	“Win
your	objectives.	Leave	the	Fist	to	me.”
“Very	well,	I’ll	see	what	I	can	do.”
	
Corporal	List	died	within	the	first	few	minutes	of	the	mock	engagement.	Bult,
commanding	a	howling	mob	of	Wickans	rampaging	down	the	ruin’s	main
avenue,	had	personally	clouted	the	hapless	Malazan	on	the	side	of	his	head,
hard	enough	to	leave	the	boy	sprawled	unconscious	in	the	dust.	The	veteran
warrior	had	then	thrown	List	over	one	shoulder	and	carried	him	from	the
battle.
Grinning,	Bult	jogged	up	the	dusty	track	to	the	rise	from	which	the	new
Fist	and	a	few	of	his	officers	observed	the	engagement,	and	dropped	the
corporal	into	the	dust	at	Coltaine’s	feet.	Duiker	sighed.
Coltaine	glanced	around.	“Healer!	Attend	the	boy!”
One	of	the	Seventh’s	cutters	appeared,	crouching	at	the	corporal’s	side.
Coltaine’s	slitted	eyes	found	Duiker.	“I	see	no	change	in	this	day’s
proceedings,	Historian.”
“It	is	early	yet,	Fist.”
The	Wickan	grunted,	returning	his	attention	to	the	dust-filled	ruins.


Soldiers	were	emerging	from	the	chaos,	fighters	from	the	Seventh	and
Wickans,	staggering	with	minor	wounds	and	broken	limbs.
Readying	his	cudgel,	Bult	scowled.	“You	spoke	too	soon,	Coltaine,”	he
said.	“This	one’s	different.”
There	were,	Duiker	saw,	more	Wickans	among	the	victims	than	soldiers	of
the	Seventh,	and	the	ratio	was	widening	with	every	passing	moment.
Somewhere	in	the	chaotic	clouds	of	dust,	the	tide	had	turned.
Coltaine	called	for	his	horse.	He	swung	himself	into	the	saddle	and	shot
Bult	a	glare.	“Stay	here,	Uncle.	Where	are	my	Lancers?”	He	waited	impatiently
as	forty	horsemen	rode	onto	the	rise.	Their	lances	were	blunted	with	bundled
strips	of	leather.	For	all	that,	Duiker	knew,	anything	more	than	a	glancing	blow
from	them	was	likely	to	break	bones.
Coltaine	led	them	at	a	canter	toward	the	ruins.
Bult	spat	dust.	“It’s	about	time,”	he	said.
“What	is?”	Duiker	asked.
“The	Seventh’s	finally	earned	Lancer	support.	It’s	been	a	week	overdue,
Historian.	Coltaine	had	expected	a	toughening,	but	all	we	got	was	a	wilting.
Who’s	given	them	new	spines,	then?	You?	Careful	or	Coltaine’ll	make	you	a
captain.”
“As	much	as	I’d	like	to	take	credit,”	Duiker	said,	“this	is	the	work	of	Kulp
and	the	squad	sergeants.”
“Kulp’s	making	things	easier,	then?	No	wonder	they’ve	turned	the	battle.”
The	historian	shook	his	head.	“Kulp	follows	Coltaine’s	orders,	Bult.	If
you’re	looking	for	a	reason	to	explain	your	Wickans’	defeat,	you’ll	have	to
look	elsewhere.	You	might	start	with	the	Seventh	showing	their	true	mettle.”
“Perhaps	I	shall,”	the	veteran	mused,	a	glint	in	his	small	dark	eyes.
“The	Fist	called	you	Uncle.”
“Aye.”
“Well?	Are	you?”
“Am	I	what?”
Duiker	gave	up.	He	was	coming	to	understand	the	Wickan	sense	of	humor.
No	doubt	there	would	be	another	half	a	dozen	or	so	brisk	exchanges	before
Bult	finally	relented	with	an	answer.	I	could	play	it	through.	Or	I	could	let	the
bastard	wait…wait	forever,	in	fact.
From	the	dust	clouds	a	score	of	refugees	appeared,	wavering	strangely	as
they	walked,	each	of	them	burdened	with	impossible	possessions—massive
dressers,	chests,	larder-packed	cupboards,	candlesticks	and	antique	armor.
Flanking	the	move	in	a	protective	cordon	were	soldiers	of	the	Seventh,
laughing	and	shouting	and	beating	swords	on	shields	as	they	made	good	their


withdrawal.
Bult	barked	a	laugh.	“My	compliments	to	Kulp	when	you	see	him,
Historian.”
“The	Seventh’s	earned	a	day	of	rest,”	Duiker	said.
The	Wickan	raised	his	hairless	brows.	“For	one	victory?”
“They	need	to	savor	it,	Commander.	Besides,	the	healers	will	be	busy
enough	mending	bones—you	don’t	want	them	with	exhausted	warrens	at	the
wrong	time.”
“And	the	wrong	time	is	soon,	is	it?”
“I	am	sure,”	Duiker	said	slowly,	“Sormo	E’nath	would	agreed	with	me.”
Bult	spat	again.	“My	nephew	approaches.”
Coltaine	and	his	Lancers	had	appeared,	providing	cover	for	the	soldiers,
many	of	whom	dragged	or	carried	the	scarecrow	refugees.	The	sheer	numbers
made	it	clear	that	victory	for	the	Seventh	had	been	absolute.
“Is	that	a	smile	on	Coltaine’s	face?”	Duiker	asked.	“Just	for	a	moment,	I
thought	I	saw…”
“Mistaken,	no	doubt,”	Bult	growled,	but	Duiker	was	coming	to	know	these
Wickans,	and	he	detected	a	hint	of	humor	in	the	veteran’s	voice.	After	a
moment	Bult	continued,	“Take	word	to	the	Seventh,	Historian.	They’ve	earned
their	day.”

Fiddler	sat	in	darkness.	The	overgrown	garden	had	closed	in	around	the	well
and	its	crescent-shaped	stone	bench.	Above	the	sapper	only	a	small	patch	of
starlit	sky	was	visible.	There	was	no	moon.	After	a	moment	he	cocked	his	head.
“You	move	quietly,	lad,	I’ll	give	you	that.”
Crokus	hesitated	behind	Fiddler,	then	joined	him	on	the	bench.	“Guess	you
never	expected	him	to	pull	rank	on	you	like	that,”	the	young	man	said.
“Is	that	what	it	was?”
“That’s	what	it	seemed	like.”
Fiddler	made	no	reply.	The	occasional	rhizan	flitted	through	the	clearing
in	pursuit	of	the	capemoths	hovering	above	the	well-mouth.	The	cool	night	air
was	rank	with	rotting	refuse	from	beyond	the	back	wall.
“She’s	upset,”	Crokus	said.
The	sapper	shook	his	head.	Upset.	“It	was	an	argument,	we	weren’t
torturing	prisoners.”
“Apsalar	doesn’t	remember	any	of	that.”
“I	do,	lad,	and	those	are	hard	memories	to	shake.”


“She’s	just	a	fishergirl.”
“Most	of	the	time,”	Fiddler	said.	“But	sometimes…”	He	shook	his	head.
Crokus	sighed,	then	changed	the	subject.	“So	it	wasn’t	part	of	the	plan,
then,	Kalam	going	off	on	his	own?”
“Old	blood	calls,	lad.	Kalam’s	Seven	Cities	born	and	raised.	Besides,	he
wants	to	meet	this	Sha’ik,	this	desert	witch,	the	Hand	of	Dryjhna.”
“Now	you’re	taking	his	side,”	Crokus	said	in	quiet	exasperation.	“A	tenth
of	a	bell	ago	you	nearly	accused	him	of	being	a	traitor…”
Fiddler	grimaced.	“Confusing	times	for	us	all.	We’ve	been	outlawed	by
Laseen,	but	does	that	make	us	any	less	soldiers	of	the	Empire?	Malaz	isn’t	the
Empress	and	the	Empress	isn’t	Malaz—”
“A	moot	distinction,	I’d	say.”
The	sapper	glanced	over.	“Would	you	now?	Ask	the	girl,	maybe	she’ll
explain	it.”
“But	you’re	expecting	the	rebellion.	In	fact,	you’re	counting	on	it—”
“Don’t	mean	we	have	to	be	the	ones	who	trigger	the	Whirlwind,	though,
does	it?	Kalam	wants	to	be	at	the	heart	of	things.	It’s	always	been	his	way.	This
time,	the	chance	literally	fell	into	his	lap.	The	Book	of	Dryjhna	holds	the	heart
of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess—to	begin	the	Apocalypse	it	needs	to	be	opened,	by
the	Seeress	and	no	one	else.	Kalam	knows	it	might	well	be	suicidal,	but	he’ll
deliver	that	Hood-cursed	book	into	Sha’ik’s	hands,	and	so	add	another	crack	in
Laseen’s	crumbling	control.	Give	him	credit	for	insisting	on	keeping	the	rest
of	us	out	of	it.”
“There	you	go	again,	defending	him.	The	plan	was	to	assassinate	Laseen,
not	get	caught	up	in	this	uprising.	It	still	doesn’t	make	any	sense	coming	to	this
continent—”
Fiddler	straightened,	eyes	on	the	stars	glittering	overhead.	Desert	stars,
sharp	diamonds	that	ever	seemed	eager	to	draw	blood.	“There’s	more	than	one
road	to	Unta,	lad.	We’re	here	to	find	one	that’s	probably	never	been	used
before	and	may	not	even	work,	but	we’ll	look	for	it	anyway,	with	Kalam	or
without	him.	Hood	knows,	it	might	be	Kalam’s	taking	the	wiser	path,	overland,
down	to	Aren,	by	mundane	ship	back	to	Quon	Tali.	Maybe	dividing	our	paths
will	prove	the	wisest	decision	of	all,	increasing	our	chances	that	one	of	us	at
least	will	make	it	through.”
“Right,”	Crokus	snapped,	“and	if	Kalam	doesn’t	make	it?	You’ll	go	after
Laseen	yourself?	A	glorified	ditch-digger,	and	long	in	the	tooth	at	that.	You
hardly	inspire	confidence,	Fiddler.	We’re	still	supposed	to	be	taking	Apsalar
home.”
Fiddler ’s	voice	was	cold.	“Don’t	push	me,	lad.	A	few	years	pilfering	purses


on	Darujhistan’s	streets	don’t	qualify	you	to	cast	judgment	on	me.”
Branches	thrashed	in	the	tree	opposite	the	two	men,	and	Moby	appeared,
hanging	one-armed,	a	rhizan	struggling	its	jaws.	The	familiar ’s	eyes	glittered
as	bones	crunched.	Fiddler	grunted.	“Back	in	Quon	Tali,”	he	said	slowly,
“we’ll	find	more	supporters	than	you	might	imagine.	No	one’s	indispensable,
nor	should	anyone	be	dismissed	as	useless.	Like	it	or	not,	lad,	you’ve	some
growing	up	to	do.”
“You	think	me	stupid	but	you’re	wrong.	You	think	I’m	blind	to	the	fact	that
you’re	thinking	you’ve	got	another	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole	and	I	don’t
mean	Quick	Ben.	Kalam’s	an	assassin	who	just	might	be	good	enough	to	get	to
Laseen.	But	if	he	doesn’t,	there’s	another	one	who	just	might	still	have	in	her
the	skills	of	a	god—but	not	any	old	god,	no,	the	Patron	of	Assassins,	the	one
you	call	the	Rope.	So	you	keep	prodding	her—you’re	taking	her	home	because
she	isn’t	what	she	once	was,	but	the	truth	is,	you	want	the	old	one	back.”
Fiddler	was	silent	for	a	long	time,	watching	Moby	eating	the	rhizan.	When
it	finally	swallowed	down	the	last	of	the	winged	lizard,	the	sapper	cleared	his
throat.	“I	don’t	think	that	deep,”	he	said.	“I	run	on	instinct.”
“Are	you	telling	me	that	using	Apsalar	didn’t	occur	to	you?”
“Not	to	me,	no…”
“But	Kalam…”
Fiddler	resisted,	then	shrugged.	“If	he	didn’t	think	of	it,	Quick	Ben	would
have.”
Crokus’s	hiss	was	triumphant.	“I	knew	it.	I’m	no	fool—”
“Oh,	Hood’s	breath,	lad,	that	you’re	not.”
“I	won’t	let	it	happen,	Fiddler.”
“This	bhok’aral	of	your	uncle’s,”	the	sapper	said,	nodding	at	Moby,	“it’s
truly	a	familiar,	a	servant	to	a	sorcerer?	But	if	Mammot	is	dead,	why	is	it	still
here?	I’m	no	mage,	but	I	thought	such	familiars	were	magically…fused	to	their
masters.”
“I	don’t	know,”	Crokus	admitted,	his	tone	retaining	an	edge	that	told
Fiddler	the	lad	was	entirely	aware	of	the	sapper ’s	line	of	thinking.	“Maybe	he’s
just	a	pet.	You’d	better	pray	it’s	so.	I	said	I	wouldn’t	let	you	use	Apsalar.	If
Moby’s	a	true	familiar,	it	won’t	just	be	me	you’ll	have	to	get	past.”
“I	won’t	be	trying	anything,	Crokus,”	Fiddler	said.	“But	I	still	say	you’ve
some	growing	up	to	do.	Sooner	or	later	it	will	occur	to	you	that	you	can’t
speak	for	Apsalar.	She’ll	do	what	she	decides,	like	it	or	not.	The	possession
may	be	over,	but	the	god’s	skills	remain	in	her	bones.”	He	slowly	turned	and
faced	the	boy.	“What	if	she	decides	to	put	those	skills	to	use?”
“She	won’t,”	Crokus	said,	but	the	assurance	was	gone	from	his	voice.	He


gestured	and	Moby	flapped	sloppily	into	his	arms.	“What	did	you	call	him—a
bhoka…?”
“Bhok’aral.	They’re	native	to	this	land.”
“Oh.”
“Get	some	sleep,	lad,	we’re	leaving	tomorrow.”
“So	is	Kalam.”
“Aye,	but	we	won’t	be	in	each	other ’s	company.	Parallel	paths	southward,
at	least	to	start	with.”
He	watched	Crokus	head	back	inside,	Moby	clinging	to	the	lad	like	a	child.
Hood’s	breath,	I’m	not	looking	forward	to	this	journey.
	
A	hundred	paces	inside	the	Caravan	Gate	was	a	square	in	which	the	land	traders
assembled	before	leaving	Ehrlitan.	Most	would	strike	south	along	the	raised
coastal	road,	following	the	line	of	the	bay.	Villages	and	outposts	were
numerous	on	this	route,	and	the	Malazan-built	cobble	road	itself	was	well
patrolled,	or,	rather,	would	have	been	had	not	the	city’s	Fist	recalled	the
garrisons.
As	far	as	Fiddler	could	learn	in	speaking	with	various	merchants	and
caravan	guards,	few	bandits	had	yet	to	take	advantage	of	the	troop	withdrawal,
but	from	the	swollen	ranks	among	the	mercenary	guards	accompanying	each
caravan,	it	was	clear	to	the	sapper	that	the	merchants	were	taking	no	chances.
It	would	have	been	fruitless	for	the	three	Malazans	to	disguise	themselves
as	merchants	on	their	journey	south;	they	had	neither	the	coin	nor	the
equipment	to	carry	out	such	a	masquerade.	With	travel	between	cities	as	risky
as	it	now	was,	they	had	chosen	to	travel	in	the	guise	of	pilgrims.	To	the	most
devout,	the	Path	of	the	Seven—pilgrimage	to	each	of	the	seven	Holy	Cities—
was	a	respected	display	of	faith.	Pilgrimage	was	at	the	heart	of	this	land’s
tradition,	impervious	to	the	threat	of	bandits,	or	war.
Fiddler	retained	his	Gral	disguise,	playing	the	role	of	guardian	and	guide
to	Crokus	and	Apsalar—two	young,	newly	married	believers	embarking	on	a
journey	that	would	bless	their	union	under	the	Seven	Heavens.	Each	would	be
mounted,	Fiddler	on	a	Gral-bred	horse	disdainful	of	the	sapper ’s	imposture
and	viciously	tempered,	Crokus	and	Apsalar	on	well-bred	mounts	purchased
from	one	of	the	better	stables	outside	Ehrlitan.	Three	spare	horses	and	four
mules	completed	the	train.
Kalam	had	left	with	the	dawn,	offering	Fiddler	and	the	others	only	a	terse
farewell.	The	words	that	had	been	exchanged	the	night	before	sullied	the
moment	of	departure.	The	sapper	understood	Kalam’s	hunger	to	wound	Laseen


through	the	blood	spilled	by	rebellion,	but	the	potential	damage	to	the	Empire
—and	to	whoever	assumed	the	throne	following	Laseen’s	fall—was,	to
Fiddler ’s	mind,	too	great	a	risk.	They’d	clashed	hard,	then,	and	Fiddler	was	left
feeling	nicked	and	blunted	by	the	exchange.
There	was	pathos	in	that	parting,	Fiddler	belatedly	realized,	for	it	seemed
that	the	duty	that	once	bound	him	and	Kalam	together,	to	a	single	cause	which
was	as	much	friendship	as	anything	else,	had	been	sundered.	And	for	the
moment,	at	least,	there	was	nothing	to	take	its	place	within	Fiddler.	He	was	left
feeling	lost,	more	alone	than	he	had	been	in	years.
They	would	be	among	the	last	of	the	trains	to	leave	through	Caravan	Gate.
As	Fiddler	checked	the	girth	straps	on	the	mules	one	final	time,	the	sound	of
galloping	horses	drew	his	attention.
A	troop	of	six	Red	Blades	had	arrived,	slowing	their	mounts	as	they
entered	the	square.	Fiddler	glanced	over	to	where	Crokus	and	Apsalar	stood
beside	their	horses.	Catching	the	lad’s	eye,	he	shook	his	head,	resumed
adjusting	the	mule’s	girth	strap.
The	soldiers	were	looking	for	someone.	The	troop	split,	a	rider	each
heading	for	one	of	the	remaining	trains.	Fiddler	heard	hoofs	clumping	on
cobbles	behind	him,	forced	himself	to	remain	calm.
“Gral!”
Pausing	to	spit	as	a	tribesman	would	at	the	accosting	of	a	Malazan	lapdog,
he	slowly	turned.
Beneath	the	helm’s	rim,	the	Red	Blade’s	dark	face	had	tightened	in
response	to	the	gesture.	“One	day	the	Red	Blades	will	cleanse	the	hills	of
Gral,”	he	promised,	his	smile	revealing	dull	gray	teeth.
Fiddler ’s	only	reply	was	a	snort.	“If	you	have	something	worthy	of	being
said,	Red	Blade,	speak.	Our	shadows	are	already	too	short	for	the	leagues	we
travel	this	day.”
“A	measure	of	your	incompetence,	Gral.	I	have	but	one	question	to	ask.
Answer	truthfully,	for	I	shall	know	if	you	lie.	We	would	know	if	a	man	on	a
roan	stallion	rode	out	alone	this	morning,	through	Caravan	Gate.”
“I	saw	no	such	man,”	Fiddler	replied,	“but	I	now	wish	him	well.	May	the
Seven	Spirits	guard	him	for	all	his	days.”
The	Red	Blade	snarled.	“I	warn	you,	your	blood	is	no	armor	against	me,
Gral.	You	were	here	with	the	dawn?”
Fiddler	returned	to	the	mules.	“One	question,”	he	grated.	“You	pay	for
more	with	coin,	Red	Blade.”
The	soldier	spat	at	Fiddler ’s	feet,	jerked	his	mount’s	head	around	and	rode
to	rejoin	the	troop.


Beneath	his	desert	veil,	Fiddler	allowed	himself	a	thin	smile.	Crokus
appeared	beside	him.
“What	was	that	about?”	he	demanded	in	a	hiss.
The	sapper	shrugged.	“The	Red	Blades	are	hunting	someone.	Not	anything
to	do	with	us.	Get	back	to	your	horse,	lad.	We’re	leaving.”
“Kalam?”
His	forearms	resting	on	the	mule’s	back,	Fiddler	hesitated,	squinting
against	the	glare	bouncing	from	the	bleached	cobbles.	“It	may	have	reached
them	that	the	holy	tome’s	no	longer	in	Aren.	And	someone’s	delivering	it	to
Sha’ik.	No	one	knows	Kalam	is	here.”
Crokus	looked	unconvinced.	“He	met	someone	last	night,	Fiddler.”
“An	old	contact	who	owes	him.”
“Giving	him	reason	to	betray	Kalam.	No	one	likes	being	reminded	of
debts.”
Fiddler	said	nothing.	After	a	moment	he	patted	the	mule’s	back,	raising	a
faint	puff	of	dust,	then	went	to	his	horse.	The	Gral	gelding	showed	its	teeth	as
he	reached	for	the	reins.	He	gripped	the	bridle	under	the	animal’s	chin.	It	tried
tossing	its	head	but	he	held	firm,	leaned	close.	“Show	some	manners,	you	ugly
bastard,	or	you’ll	live	to	regret	it.”	Gathering	the	reins,	he	pulled	himself	up
into	the	high-backed	saddle.
Beyond	Caravan	Gate	the	coastal	road	stretched	southward,	level	despite
the	gentle	rise	and	fall	of	the	sandstone	cliffs	that	overlooked	the	bay	on	the
west	side.	On	their	left	and	a	league	inland	ran	the	Arifal	Hills.	The	jagged
serrations	of	Arifal	would	follow	them	all	the	way	to	the	Eb	River,	thirty-six
leagues	to	the	south.	Barely	tamed	tribes	dwelt	in	those	hills,	pre-eminent
among	them	the	Gral.	Fiddler ’s	greatest	worry	was	running	into	a	real	Gral
tribesman.	The	chance	of	that	was	diminished	somewhat	given	the	season,	for
the	Gral	would	be	driving	their	goats	deep	into	the	range,	where	both	shade
and	water	could	be	found.
They	nudged	their	mounts	into	a	canter	and	rode	past	a	merchant’s	train	to
avoid	the	trailing	dust	clouds,	then	Fiddler	settled	them	back	into	a	slow	trot.
The	day’s	heat	was	already	building.	Their	destination	was	a	small	village
called	Salik,	a	little	over	eight	leagues	distant,	where	they	would	stop	to	eat	the
midday	meal	and	wait	out	the	hottest	hours	before	continuing	on	to	the	Trob
River.
If	all	went	well,	they	would	reach	G’danisban	in	a	week’s	time.	Fiddler
expected	Kalam	to	be	two,	maybe	even	three	days	ahead	of	them	by	then.
Beyond	G’danisban	was	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan,	a	sparsely	populated	wasteland
of	desiccated	hills,	the	skeletal	ruins	of	long-dead	cities,	poisonous	snakes,


biting	flies	and—he	recalled	the	Spiritwalker	Kimloc’s	words—the	potential	of
something	far	deadlier.	A	convergence.	Togg’s	feet,	I	don’t	like	that	thought	at
all.	He	thought	about	the	conch	shell	in	his	leather	pack.	Carrying	an	item	of
power	was	never	a	wise	thing.	Probably	more	trouble	than	it’s	worth.	What	if
some	Soletaken	sniffs	it	out,	decides	it	wants	it	for	its	collection?	He	scowled.	A
collection	easily	built	on	with	one	conch	shell	and	three	shiny	skulls.
The	more	he	thought	on	it,	the	more	uneasy	he	became.	Better	to	sell	it	to
some	merchant	in	G’danisban.	The	extra	coin	could	prove	useful.	The	thought
settled	him.	He	would	sell	the	conch,	be	rid	of	it.	While	no	one	would	deny	a
Spiritwalker ’s	power,	it	was	likely	dangerous	to	lean	too	heavily	on	it.	The
Tano	priests	gave	up	their	lives	in	the	name	of	peace.	Or	worse.	Kimloc
surrendered	his	honor.	Better	to	rely	on	the	Moranth	incendiaries	in	my	pack
than	on	any	mysterious	shell.	A	Flamer	will	burn	a	Soletaken	as	easily	as
anyone	else.
Crokus	rode	up	alongside	the	sapper.	“What	are	you	thinking,	Fiddler?”
“Nothing.	Where’s	that	bhok’aral	of	yours?”
The	young	man	frowned.	“I	don’t	know.	I	guess	he	was	just	a	pet	after	all.
Went	off	last	night	and	never	came	back.”	He	wiped	the	back	of	his	hand	across
his	face	and	Fiddler	saw	smeared	tears	on	his	cheeks.	“I	sort	of	felt	Mammot
was	with	me,	with	Moby.”
“Was	your	uncle	a	good	man,	before	the	Jaghut	Tyrant	took	him?”
Crokus	nodded.
Fiddler	grunted.	“Then	he’s	with	you	still.	Moby	probably	sniffed	kin	in	the
air.	More	than	a	few	highborn	keep	bhok’arala	as	pets	in	the	city.	Just	a	pet
after	all.”
“I	suppose	you’re	right.	For	most	of	my	life	I	thought	of	Mammot	as	just	a
scholar,	an	old	man	always	scribbling	on	scrolls.	My	uncle.	But	then	I	found
out	he	was	a	High	Priest.	Important,	with	powerful	friends	like	Baruk.	But
before	I	could	even	come	to	terms	with	that,	he	was	dead.	Destroyed	by	your
squad—”
“Hold	on	there,	lad!	What	we	killed	wasn’t	your	uncle.	Not	any	more.”
“I	know.	In	killing	him	you	saved	Darujhistan.	I	know,	Fiddler…”
“It’s	done,	Crokus.	And	you	should	realize,	an	uncle	who	took	care	of	you
and	loved	you	is	more	important	than	his	being	a	High	Priest.	And	he	would
have	told	you	the	same,	I	imagine,	if	he’d	had	the	chance.”
“But	don’t	you	see?	He	had	power,	Fiddler,	but	he	didn’t	do	a	damn	thing
with	it!	Just	hid	in	his	tiny	room	in	a	crumbling	tenement!	He	could	have
owned	an	estate,	sat	on	the	Council,	made	a	difference…”
Fiddler	wasn’t	ready	to	take	on	that	argument.	He’d	never	had	any	skill


with	counsel.	Got	no	advice	worth	giving	anyway.	“Did	she	kick	you	up	here
for	being	so	moody,	lad?”
Crokus’s	face	darkened,	then	he	spurred	forward,	taking	point	position.
Sighing,	Fiddler	twisted	in	the	saddle	and	eyed	Apsalar,	riding	a	few	paces
behind.	“Lovers’	spat,	is	it?”
She	blinked	owlishly.
Fiddler	swung	back,	settling	in	the	saddle.	“Hood’s	balls,”	he	muttered
under	his	breath.
	
Iskaral	Pust	poked	the	broom	farther	up	the	chimney	and	frantically	scrubbed.
Black	clouds	descended	onto	the	hearthstone	and	settled	on	the	High	Priest’s
gray	robes.
“You	have	wood?”	Mappo	asked	from	the	raised	stone	platform	he	had
been	using	as	a	bed	and	was	now	sitting	on.
Iskaral	paused.	“Wood?	Wood’s	better	than	a	broom?”
“For	a	fire,”	the	Trell	said.	“To	take	out	the	chill	of	this	chamber.”
“Wood!	No,	of	course	not.	But	dung,	oh	yes,	plenty	of	dung.	A	fire!
Excellent.	Burn	them	into	a	crisp!	Are	Trell	known	for	cunning?	No
recollection	of	that,	none	among	the	rare	mention	of	Trell	this,	Trell	that.
Finding	writings	on	an	illiterate	people	very	difficult.	Hmm.”
“Trell	are	quite	literate,”	Mappo	said.	“Have	been	for	some	time.	Seven,
eight	centuries,	in	fact.”
“Must	update	my	library,	an	expensive	proposition.	Raising	shadows	to
pillage	great	libraries	of	the	world.”	He	squatted	down	at	the	fireplace,
frowning	through	the	soot	covering	his	face.
Mappo	cleared	his	throat.	“Burn	what	into	a	crisp,	High	Priest?”
“Spiders,	of	course.	This	temple	is	rotten	with	spiders.	Kill	them	on	sight,
Trell.	Use	those	thick-soled	feet,	those	leathery	hands.	Kill	them	all,	do	you
understand?”
Nodding,	Mappo	pulled	the	fur	blanket	closer	around	him,	wincing	only
slightly	as	the	hide	brushed	the	puckered	wounds	on	the	back	of	his	neck.	The
fever	had	broken,	as	much	due	to	his	own	reserves	as,	he	suspected,	the
dubious	medicines	applied	by	Iskaral’s	silent	servant.	The	fangs	and	claws	of
D’ivers	and	Soletaken	bred	a	singularly	virulent	sickness,	often	culminating	in
hallucinations,	bestial	madness,	then	death.	For	many	who	survived,	the
madness	remained,	reappearing	on	a	regular	basis	for	one	or	two	nights	nine
or	ten	times	each	year.	It	was	a	madness	often	characterized	by	murder.
Iskaral	Pust	believed	Mappo	had	escaped	that	fate,	but	the	Trell	would	not


himself	be	confident	of	that	until	at	least	two	cycles	of	the	moon	had	passed
without	sign	of	any	symptoms.	He	did	not	like	to	think	what	he	would	be
capable	of	when	gripped	in	a	murderous	rage.	Many	years	ago	among	the
warband	ravaging	the	Jhag	Odhan,	Mappo	had	willed	himself	into	such	a	state,
as	warriors	often	did,	and	his	memories	of	the	deaths	he	delivered	remained
with	him	and	always	would.
If	the	Soletaken’s	poison	was	alive	within	him,	Mappo	would	take	his	own
life	rather	than	unleash	its	will.
Iskaral	Pust	stabbed	the	broom	into	each	corner	of	the	small	mendicant’s
chamber	that	was	the	Trell’s	quarters,	then	reached	up	to	the	ceiling	corners	to
do	the	same.	“Kill	what	bites,	kill	what	stings,	this	sacred	precinct	of	Shadow
must	be	pristine!	Kill	all	that	slithers,	all	that	scuttles.	You	were	examined	for
vermin,	the	both	of	you,	oh	yes.	No	unwelcome	visitors	permitted.	Lye	baths
were	prepared,	but	nothing	on	either	of	you.	I	remain	suspicious,	of	course.”
“Have	you	resided	here	long,	High	Priest?”
“No	idea.	Irrelevant.	Importance	lies	solely	in	the	deeds	done,	the	goals
achieved.	Time	is	preparation,	nothing	more.	One	prepares	for	as	long	as	is
required.	To	do	this	is	to	accept	that	planning	begins	at	birth.	You	are	born	and
before	all	else	you	are	plunged	into	shadow,	wrapped	inside	the	holy
ambivalence,	there	to	suckle	sweet	sustenance.	I	live	to	prepare,	Trell,	and	the
preparations	are	nearly	complete.”
“Where	is	Icarium?”
“A	life	given	for	a	life	taken,	tell	him	that.	In	the	library.	The	nuns	left	but	a
handful	of	books.	Tomes	devoted	to	pleasuring	themselves.	Best	read	in	bed,	I
find.	The	rest	of	the	material	is	mine,	a	scant	collection,	dreadful	paucity,	I	am
embarrassed.	Hungry?”
Mappo	shook	himself.	The	High	Priest’s	rambles	had	a	hypnotic	quality.
Each	question	the	Trell	voiced	was	answered	with	a	bizarre	rambling
monologue	that	seemed	to	drain	him	of	will	beyond	the	utterance	of	yet
another	question.	True	to	his	assertions,	Iskaral	Pust	could	make	the	passing	of
time	meaningless.	“Hungry?	Aye.”
“Servant	prepares	food.”
“Can	he	bring	it	to	the	library?”
The	High	Priest	scowled.	“Collapse	of	etiquette.	But	if	you	insist.”
The	Trell	pushed	himself	upright.	“Where	is	the	library?”
“Turn	right,	proceed	thirty-four	paces,	turn	right	again,	twelve	paces,	then
through	door	on	the	right,	thirty-five	paces,	through	archway	on	right	another
eleven	paces,	turn	right	one	last	time,	fifteen	paces,	enter	the	door	on	the
right.”


Mappo	stared	at	Iskaral	Pust.
The	High	Priest	shifted	nervously.
“Or,”	the	Trell	said,	eyes	narrowed,	“turn	left,	nineteen	paces.”
“Aye,”	Iskaral	muttered.
Mappo	strode	to	the	door.	“I	shall	take	the	short	route,	then.”
“If	you	must,”	the	High	Priest	growled	as	he	bent	to	close	examination	of
the	broom’s	ragged	end.
	
The	breach	of	etiquette	was	explained	when,	upon	entering	the	library,	Mappo
saw	that	the	squat	chamber	also	served	as	kitchen.	Icarium	sat	at	a	robust	blackstained	table	a	few	paces	to	the	Trell’s	right,	while	Servant	hunched	over	a
cauldron	suspended	by	chain	over	a	hearth	a	pace	to	Mappo’s	left.	Servant’s
head	was	almost	invisible	inside	a	cloud	of	steam,	drenched	in	condensation
and	dripping	into	the	cauldron	as	he	worked	a	wooden	ladle	in	slow,	turgid
circles.
“I	shall	pass	on	the	soup,	I	think,”	Mappo	said	to	the	man.
“These	books	are	rotting,”	Icarium	said,	leaning	back	and	eyeing	Mappo.
“You	are	recovered?”
“So	it	seems.”
Still	studying	the	Trell,	Icarium	frowned.	“Soup?	Ah,”	his	expression
cleared,	“not	soup.	Laundry.	You’ll	find	more	palatable	fare	on	the	carving
table.”	He	gestured	to	the	wall	behind	Servant,	then	returned	to	the	mouldering
pages	of	an	ancient	book	opened	before	him.	“This	is	astonishing,	Mappo…”
“Given	how	isolated	those	nuns	were,”	Mappo	said	as	he	approached	the
carving	table,	“I’m	surprised	you’re	astonished.”
“Not	those	books,	friend.	Iskaral’s	own.	There	are	works	here	whose
existence	was	but	the	faintest	rumor.	And	some—like	this	one—that	I	have
never	heard	of	before.	A	Treatise	on	Irrigation	Planning	in	the	Fifth	Millenium
of	Ararkal,	by	no	fewer	than	four	authors.”
Returning	to	the	library	table	with	a	pewter	plate	piled	high	with	bread	and
cheese,	Mappo	leaned	over	his	friend’s	shoulder	to	examine	the	detailed
drawings	on	the	book’s	vellum	pages,	then	the	strange,	braided	script.	The
Trell	grunted.	Mouth	suddenly	dry,	he	managed	to	mutter,	“What	is	so
astonishing	about	that?”
Icarium	leaned	back.	“The	sheer…frivolity,	Mappo.	The	materials	alone
for	this	tome	are	a	craftsman’s	annual	wage.	No	scholar	in	their	right	mind
would	waste	such	resources—never	mind	their	time—on	such	a	pointless,	trite
subject.	And	this	is	not	the	only	example.	Look,	Seed	Dispersal	Patterns	of	the


Purille	Flower	on	the	Skar	Archipelago,	and	here,	Diseases	of	White-Rimmed
Clams	of	Lekoor	Bay.	And	I	am	convinced	that	these	works	are	thousands	of
years	old.	Thousands.”
And	in	a	language	I	never	knew	you	would	recognize,	much	less	understand.
He	recalled	when	he’d	last	seen	such	a	script,	beneath	a	hide	canopy	on	a	hill
that	marked	his	tribe’s	northernmost	border.	He’d	been	among	a	handful	of
guards	escorting	the	tribe’s	elders	to	what	would	prove	a	fateful	summons.
Autumn	rains	drumming	overhead,	they	had	squatted	in	a	half-circle,
facing	north,	and	watched	as	seven	robed	and	hooded	figures	approached.	Each
held	a	staff,	and	as	they	strode	beneath	the	canopy	and	stood	in	silence	before
the	elders,	Mappo	saw,	with	a	shiver,	how	those	staves	seemed	to	writhe	before
his	eyes,	the	wood	like	serpentine	roots,	or	perhaps	those	parasitic	trees	that
entwined	the	boles	of	others,	choking	the	life	from	them.	Then	he	realized	that
the	twisted	madness	of	the	shafts	was	in	fact	runic	etching,	ever	changing,	as	if
unseen	hands	continually	carved	words	anew	with	every	breath’s	span.
Then	one	among	them	withdrew	its	hood,	and	so	began	the	moment	that
would	change	Mappo’s	future	path.	His	thoughts	jerked	away	from	the
memory.
Trembling,	the	Trell	sat	down,	clearing	a	space	for	his	plate.	“Is	all	this
important,	Icarium?”
“Significant,	Mappo.	The	civilization	that	brought	forth	these	works	must
have	been	appallingly	rich.	The	language	is	clearly	related	to	modern	Seven
Cities	dialects,	although	in	some	ways	more	sophisticated.	And	see	this
symbol,	here	in	the	spine	of	each	such	tome?	A	twisted	staff.	I	have	seen	that
symbol	before,	friend.	I	am	certain	of	it.”
“Rich,	you	said?”	The	Trell	struggled	to	drag	the	conversation	away	from
what	he	knew	to	be	a	looming	precipice.	“More	like	mired	in	minutiae.
Probably	explains	why	it’s	dust	and	ashes.	Arguing	over	seeds	in	the	wind
while	barbarians	batter	down	the	gates.	Indolence	takes	many	forms,	but	it
comes	to	every	civilization	that	has	outlived	its	will.	You	know	that	as	well	as	I.
In	this	case	it	was	an	indolence	characterized	by	a	pursuit	of	knowledge,	a
frenzied	search	for	answers	to	everything,	no	matter	the	value	of	such	answers.
A	civilization	can	as	easily	drown	in	what	it	knows	as	in	what	it	doesn’t	know.
Consider,”	he	continued,	“Gothos’s	Folly.	Gothos’s	curse	was	in	being	too
aware—of	everything.	Every	permutation,	every	potential.	Enough	to	poison
every	scan	he	cast	on	the	world.	It	availed	him	naught,	and	worse,	he	was	aware
of	even	that.”
“You	must	be	feeling	better,”	Icarium	said	wryly.	“Your	pessimism	has
revived.	In	any	case,	these	works	support	my	belief	that	the	many	ruins	in


Raraku	and	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan	are	evidence	that	a	thriving	civilization	once
existed	here.	Indeed,	perhaps	the	first	true	human	civilization,	from	which	all
others	were	born.”
Leave	this	path	of	thought,	Icarium.	Leave	it	now.	“And	how	does	this
knowledge	avail	us	in	our	present	situation?”
Icarium’s	expression	soured	slightly.	“My	obsession	with	time,	of	course.
Writing	replaces	memory,	you	see,	and	the	language	itself	changes	because	of
it.	Think	of	my	mechanisms,	in	which	I	seek	to	measure	the	passage	of	hours,
days,	years.	Such	measurings	are	by	nature	cyclic,	repetitive.	Words	and
sentences	once	possessed	the	same	rhythms,	and	could	thus	be	locked	into
one’s	mind	and	later	recalled	with	absolute	precision.	Perhaps,”	he	mused	after
a	moment,	“if	I	was	illiterate	I	would	not	be	so	forgetful.”	He	sighed,	forced	a
smile.	“Besides,	I	was	but	passing	time,	Mappo.”
The	Trell	tapped	one	blunt,	wrinkled	finger	on	the	open	book.	“I	imagine
the	authors	of	this	would	have	defended	their	efforts	with	the	same	words,
friend.	I	have	a	more	pressing	concern.”
The	Jhag’s	expression	was	cool,	not	completely	masking	amusement.	“And
that	is?”
Mappo	gestured.	“This	place.	Shadow	does	not	list	among	my	favorite
cults.	Nest	of	assassins	and	worse.	Illusion	and	deceit	and	betrayal.	Iskaral	Pust
affects	a	harmless	façade,	but	I	am	not	fooled.	He	was	clearly	expecting	us,	and
anticipates	our	involvement	in	whatever	schemes	he	plans.	We	risk	much	in
lingering	here.”
“But	Mappo,”	Icarium	said	slowly,	“it	is	precisely	here,	in	this	place,	that
my	goal	shall	be	achieved.”
The	Trell	winced.	“I	feared	you	would	say	that.	Now	you	shall	have	to
explain	it	to	me.”
“I	cannot,	friend.	Not	yet.	What	I	hold	are	suspicions,	nothing	more.	When
I	am	certain,	I	shall	feel	confident	enough	to	explain.	Can	you	be	patient	with
me?”
In	his	mind’s	eye	he	saw	another	face,	this	one	human,	thin	and	pale,
raindrops	tracking	runnels	down	the	withered	cheeks.	Flat,	gray	eyes	reaching
up,	finding	Mappo’s	own	beyond	the	rim	of	elders.	“Do	you	know	us?”	The
voice	was	a	rasp	of	rough	leather.
An	elder	had	nodded.	“We	know	you	as	the	Nameless	Ones.”
“It	is	well,”	the	man	replied,	eyes	still	fixed	on	Mappo’s	own.	“The
Nameless	Ones,	who	think	not	in	years,	but	in	centuries.	Chosen	warrior,”	he
continued,	addressing	Mappo,	“what	can	you	learn	of	patience?”
Like	rooks	bursting	from	a	copse,	the	memories	fled.	Staring	at	Icarium,


Mappo	managed	a	smile,	revealing	his	gleaming	canines.	“Patient?	I	can	be
nothing	else	with	you.	Nonetheless,	I	do	not	trust	Iskaral	Pust.”
Servant	began	removing	sopping	clothes	and	bedding	from	the	cauldron,
using	his	bare	hands	as	he	squeezed	steaming	water	from	the	bundles.
Watching	him,	the	Trell	frowned.	One	of	Servant’s	arms	was	strangely	pink,
unweathered,	almost	youthful.	The	other	more	befitted	the	man’s	evident	age,
thickly	muscled,	hairy	and	tanned.
“Servant?”
The	man	did	not	look	up.
“Can	you	speak?”	Mappo	continued.
“It	seems,”	Icarium	said	when	Servant	made	no	response,	“that	he’s	turned
a	deaf	ear	to	us,	by	his	Master ’s	command,	I’d	warrant.	Shall	we	explore	this
temple,	Mappo?	Bearing	in	mind	that	every	shadow	is	likely	to	echo	our	words
as	a	whisper	in	the	High	Priest’s	ears.”
“Well,”	the	Trell	growled	as	he	rose,	“it	is	of	little	concern	to	me	that
Iskaral	knows	of	my	distrust.”
“He	surely	knows	more	of	us	than	we	do	of	him,”	Icarium	said,	also	rising.
As	they	left,	Servant	was	still	twisting	water	from	the	cloth	with	something
like	savage	joy,	the	veins	thick	on	his	massive	forearms.


Chapter	Four

In	a	land	where
Seven	cities	rose	in	gold,
Even	the	dust	has	eyes
DEBRAHL	SAYING
A	crowd	of	dusty,	sweat-smeared	men	gathered	around	as	the	last	of	the	bodies
were	removed.	The	dust	cloud	hung	unmoving	over	the	mine	entrance	as	it	had
for	most	of	the	morning,	since	the	collapse	of	the	reach	at	the	far	end	of	Deep
Mine.	Under	Beneth’s	command	the	slaves	had	worked	frantically	to	retrieve
the	thirty-odd	companions	buried	in	the	fall.
None	had	survived.	Expressionless,	Felisin	watched	with	a	dozen	other
slaves	from	the	rest	ramp	at	Twistings	Mouth	while	they	awaited	the	arrival	of
refilled	water	casks.	The	heat	had	turned	even	the	deepest	reaches	of	the	mines
into	sweltering,	dripping	ovens.	Slaves	were	collapsing	by	the	score	every
hour	below	ground.
On	the	other	side	of	the	pit,	Heboric	tilled	the	parched	earth	of	Deepsoil.	It
was	his	second	week	there	and	the	cleaner	air	and	the	relief	from	pulling	stone
carts	had	improved	his	health.	A	shipment	of	limes	delivered	at	Beneth’s
command	had	helped	as	well.
Had	she	not	seen	to	his	transfer,	Heboric	would	now	be	dead,	his	body
crushed	under	tons	of	rock.	He	owed	her	his	life.
The	realization	brought	Felisin	little	satisfaction.	They	rarely	spoke	to
each	other	any	more.	Head	clouded	with	durhang	smoke,	it	was	all	Felisin
could	do	to	drag	herself	home	from	Bula’s	each	night.	She	slept	long	hours	but
gained	no	rest.	The	days	working	in	Twistings	passed	in	a	long,	numb	haze.
Even	Beneth	had	complained	that	her	lovemaking	had	become…torpid.
The	thuds	and	grunts	of	the	water	carts	on	the	pitted	work	road	grew
louder,	but	Felisin	could	not	pull	her	gaze	from	the	rescuers	as	they	laid	out	the
mangled	corpses	to	await	the	body	wagon.	A	faint	residue	of	pity	clung	to	what
she	could	see	of	the	scene,	but	even	that	seemed	too	much	of	an	effort,	never


mind	pulling	away	her	eyes.
For	all	her	dulled	responses,	she	went	to	Beneth,	wanting	to	be	used,	more
and	more	often.	She	sought	him	out	when	he	was	drunk,	weaving	and
generous,	when	he	offered	her	to	his	friends,	to	Bula	and	to	other	women.
You’re	numb,	girl,	Heboric	had	said	one	of	the	few	times	he’d	addressed
her.	Yet	your	thirst	for	feeling	grows,	until	even	pain	will	do.	But	you’re	looking
in	the	wrong	places.
Wrong	places.	What	did	he	know	of	wrong	places?	The	far	reach	of	Deep
Mine	was	a	wrong	place.	The	Shaft,	where	the	bodies	would	be	dumped,	that
was	a	wrong	place.	Everywhere	else	is	just	a	shade	of	good	enough.
She	was	ready	to	move	in	with	Beneth,	punctuating	the	choices	she’d	made.
In	a	few	days,	perhaps.	Next	week.	Soon.	She’d	made	such	an	issue	of	her	own
independence,	but	it	was	proving	not	so	great	a	task	to	surrender	it	after	all.
“Lass.”
Blinking,	Felisin	looked	up.	It	was	the	young	Malazan	guard,	the	one
who’d	warned	Beneth	once…long	ago.
The	soldier	grinned.	“Find	the	quote	yet?”
“What?”
“From	Kellanved’s	writings,	girl.”	The	boy	was	frowning	now.	“I
suggested	you	find	someone	who	knew	the	rest	of	the	passage	I	quoted.”
“I	don’t	know	what	you’re	talking	about.”
He	reached	down,	the	calluses	ridging	the	index	finger	and	thumb	of	his
sword	hand	scraping	her	chin	and	jawline	as	he	raised	her	face.	She	winced	in
the	bright	light	when	he	pushed	her	hair	back.	“Durhang,”	he	whispered.
“Queen’s	heart,	girl,	you	look	ten	years	older	than	the	last	time	I	saw	you,	and
when	was	that?	Two	weeks	back.”
“Ask	Beneth,”	she	mumbled,	pulling	her	head	away	from	his	touch.
“Ask	him	what?”
“For	me.	In	your	bed.	He’ll	say	yes,	but	only	if	he’s	drunk.	He’ll	be	drunk
tonight.	He	grieves	for	the	dead	with	a	jug.	Or	two.	Touch	me	then.”
He	straightened.	“Where’s	Heboric?”
“Heboric?	Deepsoil.”	She	thought	to	ask	why	he	wanted	him	instead	of	her,
but	the	question	drifted	away.	He	could	touch	her	tonight.	She’d	grown	to	like
calluses.
	
Beneth	was	paying	Captain	Sawark	a	visit	and	he’d	decided	to	take	her	with
him.	He	was	looking	to	make	a	deal,	Felisin	belatedly	realized,	and	he’d	offer
her	to	the	captain	as	an	incentive.


They	approached	Rathole	Round	from	Work	Road,	passing	Bula’s	Inn
where	half	a	dozen	off-duty	Dosii	guards	lounged	around	the	front	door,	their
bored	gazes	tracking	them.
“Walk	a	straight	line,	lass,”	Beneth	grumbled,	taking	her	arm.	“And	stop
dragging	your	feet.	It’s	what	you	like,	isn’t	it?	Always	wanting	more.”
An	undercurrent	of	disgust	had	come	to	his	tone	when	he	spoke	to	her.
He’d	stopped	making	promises.	I’ll	make	you	my	own,	girl.	Move	in	with	me.
We	won’t	need	anyone	else.	Those	gruff,	whispered	assurances	had	vanished.
The	realization	did	not	bother	Felisin.	She’d	never	really	believed	Beneth
anyway.
Directly	ahead,	Sawark’s	Keep	rose	squat	from	the	center	of	Rathole
Round,	its	huge,	rough-cut	blocks	of	stone	stained	from	the	greasy	smoke	that
never	really	left	Skullcup.	A	lone	guard	stood	outside	the	entrance,	a	pike	held
loosely	in	one	hand.	“Hard	luck,”	he	said	once	they	were	near.
“What	is?”	Beneth	demanded.
The	soldier	shrugged.	“This	morning’s	cave-in,	what	else?”
“We	might’ve	saved	some,”	Beneth	said,	“if	Sawark	had	sent	us	some
help.”
“Saved	some?	What’s	the	point?	Sawark’s	not	in	the	mood	if	you’ve	come
here	to	complain.”	The	man’s	flat	eyes	flicked	to	Felisin.	“If	you’re	here	with	a
gift,	that	would	be	another	matter.”	The	guard	opened	the	heavy	door.	“He’s	in
the	office.”
Beneth	grunted.	Tugging	at	Felisin’s	arm,	he	dragged	her	through	the
portal.	The	ground	floor	was	an	armory,	weapons	lining	the	walls	in	locked
racks.	A	table	and	three	chairs	were	off	to	one	side,	the	leavings	of	the	guards’
breakfast	crowding	the	small	tabletop.	Up	from	the	room’s	center	rose	an	iron
staircase.
They	ascended	a	single	flight	to	Sawark’s	office.	The	captain	sat	behind	a
desk	that	seemed	cobbled	together	from	driftwood.	His	chair	was	plushly
padded	with	a	high	back.	A	large,	leather-bound	tally	book	was	opened	before
him.	Sawark	set	down	his	quill	and	leaned	back.
Felisin	could	not	recall	ever	having	seen	the	captain	before.	He	made	a
point	of	remaining	aloof,	isolated	here	within	his	tower.	The	man	was	thin,
devoid	of	fat,	the	muscles	on	his	bared	forearms	like	twisted	cables	under	pale
skin.	Against	the	present	fashion,	he	was	bearded,	the	wiry	black	ringlets	oiled
and	scented.	The	hair	on	his	head	was	cut	short.	Watery	green	eyes	glittered
from	a	permanent	squint	above	high	cheekbones.	His	wide	mouth	was
bracketed	in	deep	downturned	lines.	He	stared	steadily	at	Beneth,	ignoring
Felisin	as	if	she	was	not	there.


Beneth	pushed	her	down	in	a	chair	close	to	one	wall,	on	Sawark’s	left,	then
sat	himself	down	in	the	lone	chair	directly	facing	the	captain.	“Ugly	rumors,
Sawark.	Want	to	hear	them?”
The	captain’s	voice	was	soft.	“What	will	that	cost	me?”
“Nothing.	These	are	free.”
“Go	on,	then.”
“The	Dosii	are	talking	loud	at	Bula’s.	Promising	the	Whirlwind.”
Sawark	scowled.	“More	of	that	nonsense.	No	wonder	you	give	me	this
news	free,	Beneth,	it’s	worthless.”
“So	I	too	thought	at	the	beginning,	but—”
“What	else	have	you	to	tell	me?”
Beneth’s	eyes	dropped	to	the	ledger	on	the	desk.	“You’ve	tallied	this
morning’s	dead?	Did	you	find	the	name	you	sought?”
“I	sought	no	particular	name,	Beneth.	You	think	you’ve	guessed	something,
but	there’s	nothing	there.	I’m	losing	patience.”
“There	were	four	mages	among	the	victims—”
“Enough!	Why	are	you	here?”
Beneth	shrugged,	as	if	tossing	away	whatever	suspicions	he	held.	“A	gift,”
he	said,	gesturing	to	Felisin.	“Very	young.	Docile,	but	ever	eager.	No	spirit	to
resist—do	whatever	you	want,	Sawark.”
The	captain’s	scowl	darkened.
“In	exchange,”	Beneth	continued,	“I	wish	the	answer	to	a	single	question.
The	slave	Baudin	was	arrested	this	morning—why?”
Felisin	blinked.	Baudin?	She	shook	her	head,	trying	to	clear	it	of	the	fog
that	marked	her	waking	hours.	Was	this	important?
“Arrested	in	Whipcord	Lane	after	curfew.	He	got	away	but	one	of	my	men
recognized	him	and	so	the	arrest	was	effected	this	morning.”	Sawark’s	watery
gaze	finally	swung	to	Felisin.	“Very	young,	you	said?	Eighteen,	nineteen?
You’re	getting	old,	Beneth,	if	you	call	that	very	young.”
She	felt	his	eyes	exploring	her	like	ghost	hands.	This	time,	the	sensation
was	anything	but	pleasing.	She	fought	back	a	shiver.
“She’s	fifteen,	Sawark.	But	experienced.	Arrived	but	two	transports	ago.”
The	captain’s	eyes	sharpened	on	her,	and	she	watched,	wondering,	as	all
the	blood	drained	from	his	face.
Beneth	surged	to	his	feet.	“I’ll	send	another.	Two	young	girls	from	the	last
shipment.”	He	stepped	close	to	Felisin	and	pulled	her	upright.	“I	guarantee
your	satisfaction,	Captain.	They’ll	be	here	within	the	hour—”
“Beneth.”	Sawark’s	voice	was	soft.	“Baudin	works	for	you,	does	he	not?”
“An	acquaintance,	Sawark.	Not	one	of	my	trusted	ones.	I	asked	because


he’s	on	my	reach	crew.	One	less	strong	man	will	slow	us	if	you’re	still	holding
him	tomorrow.”
“Live	with	it,	Beneth.”
Neither	one	believes	the	other.	The	thought	was	like	a	glimmer	of	longlost	awareness	in	Felisin.	She	drew	a	deep	breath.	Something’s	happening.	I
need	to	think	about	it.	I	need	to	be	listening.	Listening,	right	now.
In	answer	to	Sawark’s	suggestion,	Beneth	sighed	heavily.	“I	shall	have	to
do	just	that,	then.	Until	later,	Captain.”
Felisin	did	not	resist	as	Beneth	propelled	her	toward	the	stairs.	Once
outside	he	pulled	her	across	the	Round,	not	answering	the	Keep	guard	as	the
man	said	something	in	a	sneering	tone.	Breathing	hard,	Beneth	dragged	her
into	the	shadows	of	an	alley,	then	swung	her	around.
His	voice	was	a	harsh	rasp.	“Who	are	you,	girl,	his	long-lost	daughter?
Hood’s	breath!	Clear	your	wits!	Tell	me	what	happened	just	now	in	that	office!
Baudin?	What’s	Baudin	to	you?	Answer	me!”
“He’s—he’s	nothing—”
The	back	of	his	hand	when	it	struck	her	face	was	like	a	sack	of	rocks.	Light
exploded	behind	Felisin’s	eyes	as	she	sprawled	sideways.	Blood	streamed	from
her	nose	as	she	lay	unmoving	in	the	alley’s	rotting	refuse.	Staring	dumbly	at
the	ground	six	inches	away,	she	watched	the	red	pool	spread	in	the	dust.
Beneth	dragged	her	upright	and	threw	her	up	against	a	wood-slatted	wall.
“Your	full	name,	lass.	Tell	me!”
“Felisin,”	she	mumbled.	“Just	that—”
Snarling,	he	raised	his	hand	again.
She	stared	at	the	marks	her	teeth	had	left	just	above	the	knuckles.	“No!	I
swear	it!	I	was	a	foundling—”
Disbelief	crazed	his	eyes.	“A	what?”
“Found	outside	the	Fener	Monastery	on	Malaz	Island—the	Empress	made
accusations—followers	of	Fener.	Heboric—”
“Your	ship	came	from	Unta,	lass.	What	do	you	take	me	for?	You’re
nobleborn—”
“No!	Only	well	cared	for.	Please,	Beneth,	I’m	not	lying.	I	don’t	understand
Sawark.	Maybe	Baudin	spun	a	tale,	a	lie	to	save	his	own	skin—”
“Your	ship	sailed	from	Unta.	You’ve	never	even	been	to	Malaz	Island.	This
monastery,	near	which	city?”
“Jakata.	There’s	only	two	cities	on	the	island.	The	other ’s	Malaz	City,	I	was
sent	there	for	a	summer.	Schooling.	I	was	in	training	to	be	a	priestess.	Ask
Heboric,	Beneth.	Please.”
“Name	me	the	poorest	quarter	of	Malaz	City.”


“Poorest?”
“Name	it!”
“I	don’t	know!	The	Fener	Temple	is	in	Dockfront!	Is	it	the	poorest?	There
were	slums	outside	the	city,	lining	the	Jakata	Road.	I	was	there	for	but	a	season,
Beneth!	And	I	hardly	saw	Jakata—we	weren’t	allowed!	Please,	Beneth,	I	don’t
understand	any	of	this!	Why	are	you	hurting	me?	I’ve	done	everything	you
wanted	me	to	do—I	slept	with	your	friends,	I	let	you	trade	me,	I	made	myself
valuable—”
He	struck	her	again,	no	longer	seeking	answers	or	a	way	through	her
frantic	lies—a	new	reason	had	appeared	in	his	eyes,	birthing	a	bright	rage.	He
beat	her	systematically,	in	silent,	cold	fury.	After	the	first	few	blows,	Felisin
curled	herself	tight	around	the	pain,	the	shadow-cooled	alley	dust	feeling	like	a
balm	where	her	flesh	lay	upon	it.	She	struggled	to	concentrate	on	her
breathing,	closing	in	on	that	one	task,	drawing	the	air	in,	fighting	the	waves	of
agony	that	came	with	the	effort,	then	releasing	it	slowly,	a	steady	stream	that
carried	the	pain	away.
Eventually	she	realized	that	Beneth	had	stopped,	that	perhaps	he’d	only
struck	her	a	few	times,	and	that	he	had	left.	She	was	alone	in	the	alley,	the	thin
strip	of	sky	overhead	darkening	with	dusk.	She	heard	occasional	voices	in	the
street	beyond	but	no	one	approached	the	narrow	aisle	she	huddled	in.
She	woke	again	later.	Apparently	she	had	passed	out	while	crawling	toward
the	alley	mouth.	The	torchlit	Work	Road	was	a	dozen	paces	away.	Figures	ran
through	her	line	of	sight.	Through	the	constant	ringing	in	her	ears,	she	heard
shouts	and	screams.	The	air	stank	of	smoke.	She	thought	to	resume	crawling,
then	consciousness	slipped	away	again.
Cool	cloth	brushed	her	brow.	Felisin	opened	her	eyes.
Heboric	was	bending	over	her	and	seemed	to	be	studying	her	pupils,	each
in	turn.	“You	with	us,	lass?”
Her	jaw	ached,	her	lips	were	crusted	together	with	scabs.	She	nodded,	only
now	realizing	that	she	was	lying	in	her	own	bed.
“I’m	going	to	rub	some	oil	on	your	lips,	see	if	we	can	prise	them	open
without	it	hurting	too	much.	You	need	water.”
She	nodded	again,	and	steeled	herself	against	the	pain	of	his	ministrations
as	he	dabbed	at	her	mouth	with	the	oil-soaked	cloth	strapped	onto	the	stub	of
his	left	arm.	He	spoke	as	he	worked.	“Eventful	night	for	us	all.	Baudin	escaped
the	jail,	lighting	a	few	buildings	to	flame	for	diversion.	He’s	hiding
somewhere	here	in	Skullcup.	No	one	tried	the	cliff	walls	or	Sinker	Lake—the
cordon	of	guards	lining	Beetle	Road	up	top	reported	no	attempts	to	breach,	in
any	case.	Sawark’s	posted	a	reward—wants	the	bastard	alive,	not	least	because


Baudin	went	and	killed	three	of	his	men.	I	suspect	there’s	more	to	the	tale,	what
do	you	think?	Then	Beneth	reports	you	missing	from	the	Twistings	work	line
this	morning,	starts	me	wondering.	So	I	go	to	talk	to	him	at	the	midday	break
—says	he	last	saw	you	at	Bula’s	last	night,	says	he’s	cut	you	loose	because
you’re	all	used	up,	sucking	more	smoke	into	your	lungs	than	air,	as	if	he	ain’t
to	blame	for	that.	But	all	the	while	he’s	talking,	I’m	studying	those	cut	marks
on	his	knuckles.	Beneth	was	in	a	fight	last	night,	I	see,	and	the	only	damage
he’s	sporting	is	what	was	done	by	somebody’s	teeth.	Well,	the	weeding’s	done
and	nobody’s	keeping	an	eye	an	old	Heboric,	so	I	spend	the	afternoon	looking,
checking	alleys,	expecting	the	worst	I	admit—”
Felisin	pushed	his	arm	away.	Slowly	she	opened	her	mouth,	wincing	at	the
pain	and	feeling	the	cool	prick	of	reopened	gashes.	“Beneth,”	she	managed.
Her	chest	hurt	with	every	breath.
Heboric’s	eyes	were	hard.	“What	of	him?”
“Tell	him…from	me…tell	him	I’m…sorry.”
The	old	man	slowly	leaned	back.
“I	want	him…to	take	me	back.	Tell	him.	Please.”
Heboric	rose.	“Get	some	rest,”	he	said	in	a	strangely	flat	voice	as	he
moved	out	of	her	line	of	sight.
“Water.”
“Coming	up,	then	you	sleep.”
“Can’t,”	she	said.
“Why	not?”
“Can’t	sleep…without	a	pipe.	Can’t.”
She	sensed	him	staring	at	her.	“Your	lungs	are	bruised.	You’ve	some
cracked	ribs.	Will	tea	do?	Durhang	tea.”
“Make	it	strong.”
Hearing	him	fill	a	cup	of	water	from	the	cask,	she	closed	her	eyes.
“Clever	story,	lass,”	Heboric	said.	“A	foundling.	Lucky	for	you	I’m	quick.
I’d	say	there’s	a	good	chance	Beneth	believes	you	now.”
“Why?	Why	do	you	tell	me	this?”
“To	put	you	at	ease.	I	guess	what	I	mean	is—”	he	approached	with	the	cup
of	water	between	his	forearms	“—he	just	might	take	you	back,	lass.”
“Oh.	I…I	don’t	understand	you,	Heboric.”
He	watched	her	raise	the	clay	cup	to	her	lips.	“No,”	he	said,	“you	do	not.”
	
Like	an	enormous	wall,	the	sandstorm	descended	down	the	west	slope	of	the
Estara	Hills	and	approached	the	coastal	road	with	a	deathly	moan.	While	such


inland	storms	were	rare	on	the	peninsula,	Kalam	had	faced	their	wrath	before.
His	first	task	was	to	leave	the	road.	It	ran	too	close	to	the	sea	cliff	in	places,	and
such	cliffs	were	known	to	collapse.
The	stallion	complained	as	he	angled	him	down	the	road’s	scree	bank.	For
a	thick-muscled,	vicious	beast,	the	horse	was	overfond	of	comforts.	The	sands
were	hot,	the	footing	treacherous	with	hidden	sinkholes.	Ignoring	the	stallion’s
neck	tugs	and	head-tossing,	he	drove	him	down	and	onto	the	basin,	then	kicked
the	animal	into	a	canter.
A	league	and	a	half	ahead	was	Ladro	Landing,	and	beyond	that,	on	the
banks	of	a	seasonal	river,	Ladro	Keep.	Kalam	did	not	plan	on	staying	there	if
he	could	help	it.	The	Keep’s	commander	was	Malazan,	and	so	too	were	his
guards.	If	he	could,	the	assassin	would	outrun	the	worst	of	the	storm,	hoping	to
regain	the	coastal	road	beyond	the	Keep,	then	continue	on	south	to	the	village
of	Intesarm.
Keening,	the	ochre	wall	drew	the	horizon	on	Kalam’s	left	ever	closer.	The
hills	had	vanished.	A	turgid	gloom	curtained	the	sky.	The	flap	and	skitter	of
fleeing	rhizan	surrounded	him.	Hissing	a	curse,	the	assassin	spurred	the
stallion	into	a	gallop.
As	much	as	he	detested	horses	in	principle,	the	animal	was	magnificent
when	in	full	stride,	seeming	to	flow	effortlessly	over	the	ground	with	a	rhythm
forgiving	of	Kalam’s	modest	skills.	He	would	come	no	closer	to	admitting	a
growing	affection	toward	the	stallion.
As	he	rode,	he	glanced	to	see	the	edge	of	the	storm	less	than	a	hundred
paces	away.	There	would	be	no	outrunning	it.	A	swirling	breaker	of	whipped
sand	marked	where	the	wind	met	the	ground.	Kalam	saw	fist-sized	rocks	in	that
rolling	surf.	The	wall	would	crash	over	them	within	minutes.	Its	roar	filled	the
air.
Slightly	ahead	and	on	a	course	that	would	intercept	them,	Kalam	saw
within	the	ochre	cloud	a	gray	stain.	He	threw	himself	back	in	the	saddle,
sawing	the	reins.	The	stallion	shrilled,	broken	out	of	his	rhythm,	slewing	with
his	hooves	as	he	stumbled	to	a	stop.
“You’d	thank	me	if	you	had	half	a	brain,”	Kalam	snarled.	The	gray	stain
was	a	swarm	of	chigger	fleas.	The	voracious	insects	waited	for	storms	like	this
one,	then	rode	the	winds	in	search	of	prey.	The	worst	of	it	was,	one	could	not
see	them	straight	on;	only	from	the	side	were	they	visible.
As	the	swarm	swept	past	ahead	of	them,	the	storm	struck.
The	stallion	staggered	when	the	wall	rolled	over	them.	The	world	vanished
inside	a	shrieking,	whirling	ochre	haze:	Stones	and	gravel	pelted	them,
drawing	flinches	from	the	stallion	and	grunts	of	pain	from	Kalam.	The


assassin	ducked	his	hooded	head	and	leaned	into	the	wind.	Through	the	slit	in
his	telaba	scarf,	he	squinted	ahead,	nudging	his	mount	forward	at	a	walk.	He
leaned	down	over	the	animal’s	neck,	reached	out	one	gloved	hand	and	cupped
it	over	the	stallion’s	left	eye	to	shield	it	from	flying	stones	and	grit.	For	being
out	here,	the	assassin	owed	him	that	much.
They	continued	on	for	another	ten	minutes,	seeing	nothing	through	the
cloak	of	flying	sand.	Then	the	stallion	snorted,	rearing.	Snapping	and
crunching	sounds	rose	from	beneath	them.	Kalam	squinted	down.	Bones,	on	all
sides.	The	storm	had	blown	out	a	graveyard—a	common	enough	occurrence.
The	assassin	regained	control	of	his	mount,	then	tried	to	pierce	the	ochre
gloom.	Ladro	Landing	was	nearby,	but	he	could	see	nothing.	He	nudged	the
stallion	forward,	the	animal	stepping	daintly	around	the	skeletal	clumps.
The	coastal	road	appeared	ahead,	along	with	guardhouses	flanking	what
had	to	be	the	bridge.	The	village	must	be	on	his	right—if	the	damned	thing
hasn’t	blown	away.	Beyond	the	bridge,	then,	he	would	find	Ladro	Keep.
The	single-person	guardhouses	both	gaped	empty,	like	sockets	in	a
massive	geometric	skull.
	
His	horse	stabled,	Kalam	crossed	the	compound,	leaning	against	the	wind	and
wincing	at	the	ache	in	his	legs	as	he	approached	the	keep’s	gatehouse	entrance.
Ducking	within	the	alcove,	he	found	himself	beyond	the	storm’s	howl	for	the
first	time	in	hours.	Drifts	of	fine	sand	filled	the	gatehouse’s	corners,	but	the
dusty	air	was	calm.	No	guardsman	held	the	post:	the	lone	stone	bench	was
vacant.
Kalam	raised	the	heavy	iron	ring	on	the	wood	door,	slamming	it	down
hard.	He	waited.	Eventually	he	heard	the	bars	being	drawn	on	the	other	side.
The	door	swung	back	with	a	grating	sound.	An	old	kitchen	servant	regarded
him	with	his	one	good	eye.
“Inside,	then,”	he	grumbled.	“Join	the	others.”
Kalam	edged	past	the	old	man	and	found	himself	in	a	large	common	room.
Faces	had	turned	with	his	entrance.	At	the	far	end	of	the	main	table,	which	ran
the	length	of	the	rectangular	chamber,	sat	four	of	the	keep’s	guardsmen,
Malazans,	looking	foul-tempered.	Three	jugs	squatted	in	puddles	of	wine	on
the	tabletop.	To	one	side,	next	along	the	table,	was	a	wiry,	sunken-eyed	woman,
her	face	painted	in	a	style	best	left	to	young	maidens.	At	her	side	was	an	Ehrlii
merchant,	probably	the	woman’s	husband.
Kalam	bowed	to	the	group,	then	approached	the	table.	Another	servant,	this
one	younger	than	the	doorman	by	only	a	few	years,	appeared	with	a	fresh	jug


and	a	goblet,	hesitating	until	the	assassin	settled	on	where	he	would	sit—
opposite	the	merchant	couple.	He	set	the	goblet	down	and	poured	Kalam	a	halfmeasure,	then	backed	away.
The	merchant	showed	durhang-stained	teeth	in	a	welcoming	smile.	“Down
from	the	north,	then?”
The	wine	was	some	kind	of	herbal	concoction,	too	sweet	and	cloying	for
the	climate.	Kalam	set	the	goblet	down,	scowling.	“No	beer	in	this	hold?”
The	merchant’s	head	bobbed.	“Aye,	and	chilled	at	that.	Alas,	only	the	wine
is	free,	courtesy	of	our	host.”
“Not	surprised	it’s	free,”	the	assassin	muttered.	He	gestured	to	the	servant.
“A	tankard	of	beer,	if	you	please.”
“Costs	a	sliver,”	the	servant	said.
“Highway	robbery,	but	my	thirst	is	master.”	He	found	a	clipped	Jakata	and
set	it	on	the	table.
“Has	the	village	fallen	into	the	sea,	then?”	the	merchant	asked.	“On	your
way	down	from	Ehrlitan,	how	stands	the	bridge?”
Kalam	saw	a	small	velvet	bag	on	the	tabletop	in	front	of	the	merchant’s
wife.	Glancing	up,	he	met	her	pitted	eyes.	She	gave	him	a	ghastly	wink.
“He’ll	not	add	to	your	gossip,	Berkru	darling.	A	stranger	come	in	from	the
storm,	is	all	you’ll	learn	from	this	one.”
One	of	the	guardsmen	raised	his	head.	“Got	something	to	hide,	have	ya?
Not	guarding	a	caravan,	just	riding	alone?	Deserting	the	Ehrlitan	Guard,	or
maybe	spreading	the	word	of	Dryjhna,	or	both.	Now	here	ya	come,	expecting
the	hospitality	of	the	Master—Malazan	born	and	bred.”
Kalam	eyed	the	men.	Four	belligerent	faces.	Any	denial	of	the	sergeant’s
accusations	would	not	be	believed.	The	guards	had	decided	he	belonged	in	the
dungeon	for	the	night	at	least,	something	to	break	the	boredom.	Yet	the
assassin	was	not	interested	in	shedding	blood.	He	laid	his	hands	flat	on	the
table,	slowly	rose.	“A	word	with	you,	Sergeant,”	he	said.	“In	private.”
The	man’s	dark	face	turned	ugly.	“So	you	can	slit	my	throat?”
“You	believe	me	capable	of	that?”	Kalam	asked	in	surprise.	“You	wear
chain,	you’ve	a	sword	at	your	belt.	You’ve	three	companions	who	no	doubt
will	stay	close—if	only	to	eavesdrop	on	the	words	we	exchange	between	us.”
The	sergeant	rose.	“I	can	handle	you	well	enough	on	my	own,”	he
growled.	He	strode	to	the	back	wall.
Kalam	followed.	He	withdrew	a	small	pendant	from	under	his	telaba	and
held	it	up.	“Do	you	recognize	this,	Sergeant?”	he	asked	softly.
Cautiously,	the	man	leaned	forward	to	study	the	symbol	etched	on	the
pendant’s	flat	surface.	Recognition	paled	his	features	as	he	involuntarily


mouthed,	“Clawmaster.”
“An	end	to	your	questions	and	accusations,	Sergeant.	Do	not	reveal	what
you	know	to	your	men—at	least	until	after	I	am	gone.	Understood?”
The	sergeant	nodded.	“Pardon,	sir,”	he	whispered.
Kalam	hooked	a	half-smile.	“Your	unease	is	earned.	Hood’s	about	to	stride
this	land,	and	you	and	I	both	know	it.	You	erred	today,	but	do	not	relax	your
mistrust.	Does	the	Keep	Commander	understand	the	situation	beyond	these
walls?”
“Aye,	he	does.”
The	assassin	sighed.	“Makes	you	and	your	squad	among	the	lucky	ones,
Sergeant.”
“Aye.”
“Shall	we	return	to	the	table	now?”
The	sergeant	simply	shook	his	head	in	answer	to	his	squad’s	querying
expressions.
As	Kalam	returned	to	his	beer,	the	merchant’s	wife	reached	for	the	velvet
bag.	“The	soldiers	have	each	requested	a	reading	of	their	futures,”	she	said,
revealing	a	Deck	of	Dragons.	She	held	the	deck	in	both	hands,	her	unblinking
eyes	on	the	assassin.	“And	you?	Would	you	know	of	your	future,	stranger?
Which	gods	smile	upon	you,	which	gods	frown—”
“The	gods	have	little	time	or	inclination	to	spare	us	any	note,”	Kalam	said
with	contempt.	“Leave	me	out	of	your	games,	woman.”
“So	you	cow	the	sergeant,”	she	said,	smiling,	“and	now	seek	to	cow	me.
See	the	fear	your	words	have	wrought	in	me?	I	shake	with	terror.”
With	a	disgusted	snort,	Kalam	slid	his	gaze	away.
The	common	room	boomed	as	the	front	door	was	assailed.
“More	mysterious	travelers!”	the	woman	cackled.
Everyone	watched	as	the	doorman	reappeared	from	a	side	chamber	and
shuffled	toward	the	door.	Whoever	waited	outside	was	impatient—thunder
rang	imperiously	through	the	room	even	as	the	old	man	reached	for	the	bar.
As	soon	as	the	bar	cleared	the	latch,	the	door	was	pushed	hard.	The
doorman	stumbled	back.	Two	armored	figures	appeared,	the	first	one	a
woman.	Metal	rustled	and	boots	thumped	as	she	strode	into	the	center	of	the
chamber.	Flat	eyes	surveyed	the	guards	and	the	other	guests,	held	briefly	on
each	of	them	before	continuing	on.	Kalam	saw	no	special	attention	accorded
him.
The	woman	had	once	held	rank—perhaps	she	still	did,	although	her
accoutrements	and	colors	announced	no	present	status;	nor	was	the	man	behind
her	wearing	anything	like	a	uniform.


Kalam	saw	weals	on	both	their	faces	and	smiled	to	himself.	They’d	run
into	chigger	fleas,	and	neither	looked	too	pleased	about	it.	The	man	jerked
suddenly	as	one	bit	him	somewhere	beneath	his	hauberk,	cursing,	he	began
loosening	the	armor ’s	straps.
“No,”	the	woman	snapped.
The	man	stopped.
She	was	Pardu,	a	southern	plains	tribe;	her	companion	had	the	look	of	a
northerner—possibly	Ehrlii.	His	dusky	skin	was	a	shade	paler	than	the
woman’s	and	bare	of	any	tribal	tattooing.
“Hood’s	breath!”	the	sergeant	snarled	at	the	woman.	“Not	another	step
closer!	You’re	both	crawling	with	chiggers.	Take	the	far	end	of	the	table.	One
of	the	servants	will	prepare	a	cedar-chip	bath—though	that	will	cost	you.”
For	a	moment	the	woman	seemed	ready	to	resist,	but	then	she	gestured	to
the	unoccupied	end	of	the	table	with	one	gloved	hand	and	her	companion
responded	by	pulling	two	chairs	back	before	seating	himself	stiffly	in	one	of
them.	The	Pardu	took	the	other.	“A	flagon	of	beer,”	she	said.
“The	Master	charges	for	that,”	Kalam	said,	giving	her	a	wry	smile.
“The	Seven’s	fate!	The	cheap	bastard—you,	servant!	Bring	me	a	tankard
and	I’ll	judge	if	it’s	worth	any	coin.	Quickly	now!”
“The	woman	thinks	this	a	tavern,”	one	of	the	guards	said.
The	sergeant	spoke.	“You’re	here	by	the	grace	of	this	Keep’s	commander.
You’ll	pay	for	the	beer,	you’ll	pay	for	the	bath,	and	you’ll	pay	for	sleeping	on
this	floor.”
“And	this	is	grace?”
The	sergeant’s	expression	darkened—he	was	Malazan,	and	he	shared	the
room	with	a	Clawmaster.	“The	four	walls,	the	ceiling,	the	hearth	and	the	use	of
the	stables	are	free,	woman.	Yet	you	complain	like	a	virgin	princess—accept
the	hospitality	or	be	gone.”
The	woman’s	eyes	narrowed,	then	she	removed	a	handful	of	jakatas	from	a
belt	pouch	and	slammed	them	on	the	tabletop.	“I	gather,”	she	said	smoothly,
“that	your	gracious	master	charges	even	you	for	beer,	Sergeant.	So	be	it,	I’ve
no	choice	but	to	buy	everyone	here	a	tankard.”
“Generous,”	the	sergeant	said	with	a	stiff	nod.
“The	future	shall	now	be	prised	loose,”	the	merchant’s	wife	said,	trimming
the	Deck.
Kalam	saw	the	Pardu	flinch	upon	seeing	the	cards.
“Spare	us,”	the	assassin	said.	“There’s	nothing	to	be	gained	from	seeing
what’s	to	come,	assuming	you’ve	any	talent	at	all,	which	I	doubt.	Save	us	all
from	the	embarrassment	of	your	performance.”


Ignoring	him,	the	old	woman	angled	herself	to	face	the	guardsmen.	“All
your	fates	rest	upon…this!”	She	laid	out	the	first	card.
Kalam	barked	a	laugh.
“Which	one	is	that?”	one	of	the	guards	demanded.
“Obelisk,”	Kalam	said.	“The	woman’s	a	fake.	As	any	seer	of	talent	would
know,	that	card’s	inactive	in	Seven	Cities.”
“An	expert	in	divination,	are	you?”	the	old	woman	snapped.
“I	visit	a	worthy	seer	before	any	overland	journey,”	Kalam	replied.	“It
would	be	foolish	to	do	otherwise.	I	know	the	Deck,	and	I’ve	seen	when	the
reading	was	true,	when	power	showed	the	hand.	No	doubt	you	intended	to
charge	these	guardsmen	once	the	reading	was	done,	once	you’d	told	them	how
rich	they	were	going	to	become,	how	they’d	live	to	ripe	old	ages,	fathering
heroes	by	the	score—”
Her	expression	unveiling	the	charade’s	end,	the	old	woman	screamed	with
rage	and	flung	the	Deck	at	Kalam.	It	struck	him	on	the	chest,	cards	clattering	on
the	tabletop	in	a	wild	scatter—which	settled	into	a	pattern.
The	breath	hissed	from	the	Pardu	woman,	the	only	sound	to	be	heard
within	the	common	room.
Suddenly	sweating,	Kalam	looked	down	at	the	cards.	Six	surrounded	a
single,	and	that	single	card—he	knew	with	certainty—was	his.	The	Rope,
Assassin	of	Shadow.	The	six	cards	encircling	it	were	all	of	one	House.	King,
Herald,	Mason,	Spinner,	Knight,	Queen…High	House	Death,	Hood’s	House	all
arrayed…around	the	one	who	carries	the	Holy	Book	of	Dryjhna.	“Ah,	well,”
Kalam	sighed,	glancing	up	at	the	Pardu	woman,	“I	guess	I	sleep	alone	tonight.”
	
The	Red	Blade	Captain	Lostara	Yil	and	her	companion	soldier	were	the	last	to
leave	Ladro	Keep,	over	an	hour	after	their	target	had	departed	on	his	stallion,
riding	south	through	the	dusty	wake	of	the	sandstorm.
The	forced	proximity	with	Kalam	had	been	unavoidable,	but	just	as	he	was
skilled	at	deception,	so	too	was	Lostara.	Bluster	could	be	its	own	disguise,
arrogance	a	mask	hiding	an	altogether	deadlier	assurance.
The	Deck	of	Dragons’	unexpected	fielding	had	revealed	much	to	Lostara,
not	only	about	Kalam	and	his	mission.	The	Keep’s	sergeant	had	shown	himself
by	his	expression	to	have	been	a	co-conspirator—yet	another	Malazan	soldier
prepared	to	betray	his	Empress.	Evidently,	Kalam’s	stop	at	the	Keep	had	not
been	as	accidental	as	it	appeared.
Checking	their	horses,	Lostara	turned	as	her	companion	emerged	from	the
Keep.	The	Red	Blade	grinned	up	at	her.	“You	were	thorough,	as	always,”	he


said.	“The	commander	led	me	a	merry	chase,	however.	I	found	him	in	the
crypt,	struggling	to	climb	into	a	fifty-year-old	suit	of	armor.	He	was	much
thinner	in	his	youth,	it	seems.”
Lostara	swung	herself	into	the	saddle.	“None	still	breathing?	You’re
certain	you	checked	them	all?	What	of	the	servants	in	the	back	hallway—I	went
through	them	perhaps	too	quickly.”
“You	left	not	a	single	heart	still	beating,	Captain.”
“Very	good.	Mount	up.	That	horse	of	the	assassin’s	is	killing	these	ones—
we	shall	acquire	fresh	horses	in	Intesarm.”
“Assuming	Baralta	got	around	to	arranging	them.”
Lostara	eyed	her	companion.	“Trust	Baralta,”	she	said	coolly.	“And	be	glad
that—this	time—I	shall	not	report	your	skepticism.”
Tight-lipped,	the	man	nodded.	“Thank	you,	Captain.”
The	two	rode	down	the	keep	road,	turning	south	on	the	coastal	road.
	
The	entire	main	floor	of	the	monastery	radiated	in	a	circular	pattern	around	a
single	room	that	was	occupied	by	a	circular	staircase	of	stone	leading	down
into	darkness.	Mappo	crouched	beside	it.
“This	would,	I	imagine,	lead	down	to	the	crypt.”
“If	I	recall	correctly,”	Icarium	said	from	where	he	stood	near	the	room’s
entrance,	“when	nuns	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams	die	the	bodies	are	simply
wrapped	in	linen	and	placed	on	recessed	ledges	in	the	crypt	walls.	Have	you	an
interest	in	perusing	corpses?”
“Not	generally,	no,”	the	Trell	said,	straightening	with	a	soft	grunt.	“It’s	just
that	the	stone	changes	as	soon	the	stairs	descend	below	floor	level.”
Icarium	raised	a	brow.	“It	does?”
“The	level	we’re	on	is	carved	from	living	rock—the	cliff’s	limestone.	It’s
rather	soft.	But	beneath	it	there	are	cut	granite	blocks.	I	believe	the	crypt
beneath	us	is	an	older	construct.	Either	that	or	the	nuns	and	their	cult	hold	that	a
crypt’s	walls	and	approach	must	be	dressed,	whereas	living	chambers	need	not
be.”
The	Jhag	shook	his	head,	approaching.	“I	would	be	surprised.	The	Queen
of	Dreams	is	Life-aspected.	Very	well,	shall	we	explore?”
Mappo	descended	first.	Neither	had	much	need	for	artificial	light,	the
darkness	below	offering	no	obstacle.	The	spiral	steps	showed	the	vestiges	of
marble	tiling,	but	the	passage	of	many	feet	long	ago	had	worn	most	of	them
away.	Beneath,	the	hard	granite	defied	all	evidence	of	erosion.
The	stairs	continued	down,	and	down.	At	the	seventieth	step	they	ended	in


the	center	of	an	octagonally	walled	chamber.	Friezes	decorated	each	wall,	the
colors	hinted	at	in	the	many	shades	of	gray.	Beyond	the	staircase’s	landing,	the
floor	was	honeycombed	with	rectangular	pits,	cut	down	through	the	tiles	and
the	granite	blocks	beneath	removed.	These	blocks	were	now	stacked	over	what
was	obviously	a	portalway.	Within	each	pit	was	a	shrouded	corpse.
The	air	was	dry,	scentless.
“These	paintings	do	not	belong	to	the	cult	of	the	Queen,”	Mappo	said,
stating	the	obvious,	for	the	scenes	on	the	walls	revealed	a	dark	mythos.	Thick
fir	trees	reared	black,	moss-stained	boles	on	all	sides.	The	effect	created	was
of	standing	in	a	glade	deep	in	an	ancient	forest.	Between	the	trunks	here	and
there	was	the	hint	of	hulking,	four-legged	beasts,	their	eyes	glowing	as	if	in
reflected	moonlight.
Icarium	crouched	down,	running	a	hand	over	the	remaining	tiles.	“This
floor	held	a	pattern,”	he	said,	“before	the	nuns’	workers	cut	graves	in	it.	Pity.”
Mappo	glanced	at	the	blocked	doorway.	“If	answers	to	the	mysteries	here
exist,	they	lie	beyond	that	barricade.”
“Recovered	your	strength,	friend?”
“Well	enough.”	The	Trell	went	to	the	barrier,	pulled	down	the	highest
block.	As	he	tipped	it	down	into	his	arms,	he	staggered,	voicing	a	savage	grunt.
Icarium	rushed	to	help	him	lower	the	granite	block	to	the	floor.	“Hood’s
breath!	Heavier	than	I’d	expected.”
“I’d	gathered	that.	Shall	we	work	together,	then?”
Twenty	minutes	later	they	had	cleared	sufficient	blocks	to	permit	their
passage	into	the	hallway	beyond.	The	final	five	minutes	they	had	an	audience,
as	a	squall	of	bhok’aral	appeared	on	the	staircase,	silently	watching	their
efforts	from	where	they	clung	from	the	railings.	When	first	Mappo	and	then
Icarium	clambered	through	the	opening,	however,	the	bhok’arala	did	not
follow.
The	hallway	stretched	away	before	them,	a	wide	colonnade	lined	by	twin
columns	that	were	nothing	less	than	the	trunks	of	cedars.	Each	bole	was	at	least
an	arm-span	in	diameter.	The	shaggy,	gouged	bark	remained,	although	most	of
it	had	fallen	away	and	now	lay	scattered	over	the	floor.
Mappo	laid	a	hand	on	one	wooden	pillar.	“Imagine	the	effort	of	bringing
these	down	here.”
“Warren,”	Icarium	said,	sniffing.	“The	residue	remains,	even	after	all	these
centuries.”
“After	centuries?	Can	you	sense	which	warren,	Icarium?”
“Kurald	Galain.	Elder,	the	Warren	of	Darkness.”
“Tiste	Andii?	In	all	the	histories	of	Seven	Cities	that	I	am	aware	of,	I’ve


never	heard	mention	of	Tiste	Andii	present	on	this	continent.	Nor	in	my
homeland,	on	the	other	side	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.	Are	you	certain?	This	does	not
make	sense.”
“I	am	not	certain,	Mappo.	It	has	the	feel	of	Kurald	Galain,	that	is	all.	The
feel	of	Dark.	It	is	not	Omtose	Phellack	nor	Tellann.	Not	Starvald	Demelain.	I
know	of	no	other	Elder	Warrens.”
“Nor	I.”
Without	another	word	the	three	began	walking.
By	Mappo’s	count,	the	hallway	ended	three	hundred	and	thirty	paces	later,
opening	out	into	another	octagonal	chamber,	this	one	with	its	floor	raised	a
hand’s	width	higher	than	that	of	the	hallway.	Each	flagstone	was	also
octagonal,	and	on	each	of	them	images	had	been	intricately	carved,	then
defaced	with	gouges	and	scoring	in	what	seemed	entirely	random,	frenzied
destruction.
The	Trell	felt	his	hackles	stiffening	into	a	ridge	on	his	neck	as	he	stood	at
the	room’s	threshold.	Icarium	was	beside	him.
“I	do	not,”	the	Jhag	said,	“suggest	we	enter	this	chamber.”
Mappo	grunted	agreement.	The	air	stank	of	sorcery,	old,	stale	and	clammy
and	dense	with	power.	Like	waves	of	heat,	magic	bled	from	the	flagstones,
from	the	images	carved	upon	them	and	the	wounds	many	of	those	images	now
bore.
Icarium	was	shaking	his	head.	“If	this	is	Kurald	Galain,	its	flavor	is
unknown	to	me.	It	is…corrupted.”
“By	the	defilement?”
“Possibly.	Yet	the	stench	from	those	claw	marks	differs	from	what	rises
from	the	flagstones	themselves.	Is	it	familiar	to	you?	By	Dessembrae’s	mortal
tears	it	should	be,	Mappo.”
The	Trell	squinted	down	at	the	nearest	flagstone	bearing	scars.	His	nostrils
flared.	“Soletaken.	D’ivers.	The	spice	of	shapeshifters.	Of	course.”	He	barked
out	a	savage	laugh	that	echoed	in	the	chamber.	“The	Path	of	Hands,	Icarium.
The	gate—it’s	here.”
“More	than	a	gate,	I	think,”	Icarium	said.	“Look	upon	the	undamaged
carvings—what	do	they	remind	you	of?”
Mappo	had	an	answer	to	that.	He	scanned	the	array	with	growing	certainty,
but	the	realization	it	offered	held	no	answers,	only	more	questions.	“I	see	the
likeness,	yet	there	is	an…unlikeness,	as	well.	Even	more	irritating,	I	can	think
of	no	possible	linkage…”
“No	such	answers	here,”	Icarium	said.	“We	must	go	to	the	place	we	first
intended	to	find,	Mappo.	We	approach	comprehension—I	am	certain	of	that.”


“Icarium,	do	you	think	Iskaral	Pust	is	preparing	for	more	visitors?
Soletaken	and	D’ivers,	the	imminent	opening	of	the	gate.	Is	he—and	by
extension	Shadow	Realm—the	very	heart	of	this	convergence?”
“I	do	not	know.	Let’s	ask	him.”
They	stepped	back	from	the	threshold.
	
“We	approach	comprehension.”	Three	words	evoking	terror	within	Mappo.	He
felt	like	a	hare	in	a	master	archer ’s	sights,	each	direction	of	flight	so	hopeless
as	to	leave	him	frozen	in	place.	He	stood	at	the	side	of	powers	that	staggered
his	mind,	power	past	and	powers	present.	The	Nameless	Ones,	with	their
charges	and	hints	and	visions,	their	cowled	purposes	and	shrouded	desires.
Creatures	of	fraught	antiquity,	if	the	Trellish	legends	held	any	glimmer	of	truth.
And	Icarium,	oh,	dear	friend,	I	can	tell	you	nothing.	My	curse	is	silence	to	your
every	question,	and	the	hand	I	offer	as	a	brother	will	lead	you	only	into	deceit.
In	love’s	name,	I	do	this,	at	my	own	cost…and	such	a	cost.

The	bhok’arala	awaited	them	at	the	stairs	and	followed	the	two	men	at	a
discreet	distance	up	to	the	main	level.
They	found	the	High	Priest	in	the	vestibule	he	had	converted	into	his
sleeping	chamber.	Muttering	to	himself,	Iskaral	Pust	was	filling	a	wicker
rubbish	container	with	rotted	fruit,	dead	bats	and	mangled	rhizan.	He	threw
Mappo	and	Icarium	a	scowl	over	one	shoulder	as	they	stood	at	the	room’s
entrance.
“If	those	squalid	apes	are	following	you,	let	them	’ware	my	wrath,”	Iskaral
hissed.	“No	matter	which	chamber	I	choose,	they	insist	on	using	it	as
repository	for	their	foul	leavings.	I	have	lost	patience!	They	mock	a	High
Priest	of	Shadow	at	their	peril!”
“We	have	found	the	gate,”	Mappo	said.
Iskaral	did	not	pause	in	his	cleaning.	“Oh,	you	have,	have	you?	Fools!
Nothing	is	as	it	seems.	A	life	given	for	a	life	taken.	You	have	explored	every
corner,	every	cranny,	have	you?	Idiots!	Such	over-confident	bluster	is	the
banner	of	ignorance.	Wave	it	about	and	expect	me	to	cower?	Hah.	I	have	my
secrets,	my	plans,	my	schemes.	Iskaral	Pust’s	maze	of	genius	cannot	be
plumbed	by	the	likes	of	you.	Look	at	you	two.	Both	ancient	wanderers	of	this
mortal	earth.	Why	have	you	not	ascended	like	the	rest	of	them?	I’ll	tell	you.
Longevity	does	not	automatically	bestow	wisdom.	Oh	no,	not	at	all.	I	trust	you


are	killing	every	spider	you	spy.	You	had	better	be,	for	it	is	the	path	to	wisdom.
Oh	yes	indeed,	the	path!
“Bhok’arala	have	small	brains.	Tiny	brains	inside	their	tiny	round	skulls.
Cunning	as	rats,	with	eyes	like	glittering	black	stones.	Four	hours,	once,	I
stared	into	one’s	eyes,	he	into	mine.	Never	once	pulling	gaze	away,	oh	no,	this
was	a	contest	and	one	I	would	not	lose.	Four	hours,	face	to	face,	so	close	I
could	smell	his	foul	breath	and	he	mine.	Who	would	win?	It	was	in	the	lap	of
the	gods.”
Mappo	glanced	at	Icarium,	then	cleared	his	throat.	“And	who,	Iskaral	Pust,
won	this…this	battle	of	wits?”
Iskaral	Pust	fixed	a	pointed	stare	on	Mappo.	“Look	upon	him	who	does	not
waver	from	his	cause,	no	matter	how	insipid	and	ultimately	irrelevant,	and	you
shall	find	in	him	the	meaning	of	dull-witted.	The	bhok’aral	could	have	stared
into	my	eyes	forever,	for	there	was	no	intelligence	behind	them.	Behind	his
eyes,	I	mean.	It	was	proof	of	my	superiority	that	I	found	distraction	elsewhere.”
“Do	you	intend	to	lead	the	D’ivers	and	Soletaken	to	the	gate	below,	Iskaral
Pust?”
“Blunt	are	the	Trell,	determined	in	headlong	stumbling	and	headlong	in
stumbling	determination.	As	I	said.	You	know	nothing	of	the	mysteries
involved,	the	plans	of	Shadowthrone,	the	many	secrets	of	the	Gray	Keep,	the
Shrouded	House	where	stands	the	Throne	of	Shadow.	Yet	I	do.	I,	alone	among
all	mortals,	have	been	shown	the	truth	arrayed	before	me.	My	god	is	generous,
my	god	is	wise,	as	cunning	as	a	rat.	Spiders	must	die.	The	bhok’arala	have
stolen	my	broom	and	this	quest	I	set	before	you	two	guests.	Icarium	and	Mappo
Trell,	famed	wanderers	of	the	world,	I	charge	you	with	this	perilous	task—find
me	my	broom.”

Out	in	the	hallway,	Mappo	sighed.	“Well,	that	was	fruitless.	What	shall	we	do
now,	friend?”
Icarium	looked	surprised.	“It	should	be	obvious,	Mappo.	We	must	take	on
this	perilous	quest.	We	must	find	Iskaral	Pust’s	broom.”
“We	have	explored	this	monastery,	Icarium,”	the	Trell	said	wearily.	“I
noticed	no	broom.”
The	Jhag’s	mouth	quirked	slightly.	“Explored?	Every	corner,	every
cranny?	I	think	not.	Our	first	task,	however,	is	to	the	kitchen.	We	must	outfit
ourselves	for	our	impending	explorations.”
“You	are	serious.”


“I	am.”
	
The	flies	were	biting	in	the	heat,	as	foul-tempered	as	everything	else	beneath
the	blistering	sun.	People	filled	Hissar ’s	fountains	until	midday,	crowded
shoulder	to	shoulder	in	the	tepid,	murky	waters,	before	retiring	to	the	cooler
shade	of	their	homes.	It	was	not	a	day	for	going	outside,	and	Duiker	found
himself	scowling	as	he	drew	on	a	loose,	thinly	woven	telaba	while	Bult	waited
by	the	door.
“Why	not	under	the	moon,”	the	historian	muttered.	“Cool	night	air,	stars
high	overhead	with	every	spirit	looking	down.	Now	that	would	ensure
success!”
Bult’s	sardonic	grin	did	not	help	matters.	Strapping	on	his	rope	belt,
Duiker	turned	to	the	grizzled	commander.	“Very	well,	lead	on,	Uncle.”
The	Wickan’s	grin	widened,	deepening	the	scar	until	it	seemed	he	had	two
smiles	instead	of	one.
Outside,	Kulp	waited	with	the	mounts,	astride	his	own	small,	sturdylooking	horse.	Duiker	found	the	cadre	mage’s	glum	expression	perversely
pleasing.
They	rode	through	almost	empty	streets.	It	was	marrok:	early	afternoon,
when	sane	people	retired	indoors	to	wait	out	the	worst	of	the	summer	heat.	The
historian	had	grown	accustomed	to	napping	during	marrok;	he	was	feeling
grumpy,	all	too	out	of	sorts	to	attend	Sormo’s	ritual.	Warlocks	were	notorious
for	their	impropriety,	their	deliberate	discombobulating	of	common	sense.	For
the	defense	of	decency	alone,	the	Empress	might	be	excused	the	executions.	He
grimaced—clearly	not	an	opinion	to	be	safely	voiced	within	hearing	range	of
any	Wickans.
They	reached	the	city’s	northern	end	and	rode	out	on	a	coastal	track	for
half	a	league	before	swinging	inland,	into	the	wastes	of	the	Odhan.	The	oasis
they	approached	an	hour	later	was	dead,	the	spring	long	since	dried	up.	All	that
remained	of	what	had	once	been	a	lush,	natural	garden	amidst	the	sands	was	a
stand	of	withered,	gnarled	cedars	rising	from	a	carpet	of	tumbled	palms.
Many	of	the	trees	bore	strange	projections	that	drew	Duiker ’s	curiosity	as
they	led	their	horses	closer.
“Are	those	horns	in	the	trees?”	Kulp	asked.
“Bhederin,	I	think,”	the	historian	replied.	“Jammed	into	a	fork,	then	grown
past,	leaving	them	embedded	deep	in	the	wood.	These	trees	were	likely	a
thousand	years	old	before	the	water	vanished.”
The	mage	grunted.	“You’d	think	they’d	be	cut	down	by	now,	this	close	to


Hissar.”
“The	horns	are	warnings,”	Bult	said.	“Holy	ground.	Once,	long	ago.
Memories	remain.”
“As	well	they	should,”	Duiker	muttered.	“Sormo	should	be	avoiding
hallowed	sand,	not	seeking	it	out.	If	this	place	is	aspected,	it’s	likely	an	inimical
one	to	a	Wickan	warlock.”
“I’ve	long	since	learned	to	trust	Sormo	E’nath’s	judgment,	Historian.
You’d	do	well	to	learn	the	like.”
“It’s	a	poor	scholar	who	trusts	anyone’s	judgment,”	Duiker	said.	“Even	and
perhaps	especially	his	own.”
“	‘You	walk	shifting	sands,’”	Bult	sighed,	then	gave	him	another	grin,	“as
the	locals	would	say.”
“What	would	you	Wickans	say?”	Kulp	asked.
Bult’s	eyes	glittered	with	mischief.	“Nothing.	Wise	words	are	like	arrows
flung	at	your	forehead.	What	do	you	do?	Why,	you	duck,	of	course.	This	truth
a	Wickan	knows	from	the	time	he	first	learns	to	ride—long	before	he	learns	to
walk.”
They	found	the	warlock	in	a	clearing.	The	drifts	of	sand	had	been	swept
aside,	revealing	a	heaved	and	twisted	brick	floor—all	that	remained	of	a
structure	of	some	sort.	Chips	of	obsidian	glittered	in	the	joins.
Kulp	dismounted,	eyeing	Sormo	who	stood	in	the	center,	hands	hidden
within	heavy	sleeves.	He	swatted	at	a	fly.	“What’s	this,	then,	some	lost,
forgotten	temple?”
The	young	Wickan	slowly	blinked.	“My	assistants	concluded	it	had	been	a
stable.	They	then	left	without	elaborating.”
Kulp	scowled	at	Duiker.	“I	despise	Wickan	humor,”	he	whispered.
Sormo	gestured	them	closer.	“It	is	my	intention	to	open	myself	to	the
sacred	aspect	of	this	kheror,	which	is	the	name	Wickans	give	to	holy	places
open	to	the	skies—”
“Are	you	mad?”	Kulp’s	face	had	gone	white.	“Those	spirits	will	rip	your
throat	out,	child.	They	are	of	the	Seven—”
“They	are	not,”	the	warlock	retorted.	“The	spirits	in	this	kheror	were
raised	in	the	time	before	the	Seven.	They	are	the	land’s	own	and	if	you	must
liken	them	to	a	known	aspect,	then	it	must	be	Tellann.”
“Hood’s	mercy,”	Duiker	groaned.	“If	it	is	indeed	Tellann,	then	you	will	be
dealing	with	T’lan	Imass,	Sormo.	The	undead	warriors	have	turned	their	backs
on	the	Empress	and	all	that	is	the	Empire,	ever	since	the	Emperor ’s
assassination.”
The	warlock’s	eyes	were	bright.	“And	have	you	not	wondered	why?”


The	historian’s	mouth	snapped	shut.	He	had	theories	in	that	regard,	but	to
voice	them—to	anyone—would	be	treason.
Kulp’s	dry	question	to	Sormo	broke	through	Duiker ’s	thoughts.	“And	has
Empress	Laseen	tasked	you	with	this?	Are	you	here	to	seek	a	sense	of	future
events	or	is	that	just	a	feint?”
Bult	had	stood	a	few	paces	from	them	saying	nothing,	but	now	he	spat.	“We
need	no	seer	to	guess	that,	Mage.”
The	warlock	raised	his	arms	out	to	his	sides.	“Stay	close,”	he	said	to	Kulp,
then	his	eyes	slid	to	the	historian.	“And	you,	see	and	remember	all	you	will
witness	here.”
“I	am	already	doing	so,	Warlock.”
Sormo	nodded,	closed	his	eyes.
His	power	spread	like	a	faint,	subtle	ripple,	sweeping	over	Duiker	and	the
others	to	encompass	the	entire	clearing.	Daylight	faded	abruptly,	replaced	by	a
soft	dusk,	the	dry	air	suddenly	damp	and	smelling	of	marshlands.
Ringing	the	glade	like	sentinels	were	cypresses.	Mosses	hung	from
branches	in	curtains,	hiding	what	lay	beyond	in	impenetrable	shadow.
Duiker	could	feel	Sormo	E’nath’s	sorcery	like	a	warm	cloak;	he	had	never
before	felt	a	power	such	as	this	one.	Calm	and	protective,	strong	yet	yielding.
He	wondered	at	the	Empire’s	loss	in	exterminating	these	warlocks.	An	error
she’s	clearly	corrected,	though	it	might	well	be	too	late.	How	many	warlocks
were	lost	in	truth?
Sormo	loosed	an	ululating	cry	that	echoed	as	if	they	stood	within	a	vast
cavern.
The	next	moment	the	air	was	alive	with	icy	winds,	arriving	in	warring
gusts.	Sormo	staggered,	his	eyes	now	open	and	widening	with	alarm.	He	drew
a	breath,	then	visibly	recoiled	at	the	taste	and	Duiker	could	not	blame	him.
Bestial	stench	rode	the	winds,	growing	fouler	by	the	moment.
Taut	violence	filled	the	glade,	a	sure	promise	announced	in	the	sudden
thrashing	of	the	moss-laden	branches.	The	historian	saw	a	swarming	cloud
approach	Bult	from	behind	and	shouted	a	warning.	The	Wickan	whirled,	longknives	in	his	hands.	He	screamed	as	the	first	of	the	wasps	stung.
“D’ivers!”	Kulp	bellowed,	one	hand	grasping	Duiker ’s	telaba	and	pulling
the	historian	back	to	where	Sormo	stood	as	if	dazed.
Rats	scampered	over	the	soft	ground,	shrilly	screaming	as	they	attacked	a
writhing	bundle	of	snakes.
The	historian	felt	heat	on	his	legs,	looked	down.	Fire	ants	swarmed	him	up
to	his	thighs.	The	heat	rose	to	agony.	He	screamed.
Swearing,	Kulp	unleashed	his	warren	in	a	pulse	of	power.	Shriveled	ants


fell	from	the	historian’s	legs	like	dust.	The	attacking	swarm	flinched	back,	the
D’ivers	retreating.
The	rats	had	overrun	the	snakes	and	now	closed	in	on	Sormo.	The	Wickan
frowned	at	them.
Off	where	Bult	crouched	slapping	futilely	at	the	stinging	wasps,	liquid	fire
erupted	in	a	swath,	the	flames	tumbling	over	the	veteran.
Tracking	back	to	the	fire’s	source,	Duiker	saw	that	an	enormous	demon
had	entered	the	clearing.	Midnight-skinned	and	twice	the	height	of	a	man,	the
creature	voiced	a	roar	of	fury	and	launched	a	savage	attack	on	a	white-furred
bear—the	glade	was	alive	with	D’ivers	and	Soletaken,	the	air	filled	with
shrieks	and	snarls.	The	demon	landed	on	the	bear,	driving	it	to	the	ground	with
a	snap	and	crunch	of	bones.	Leaving	the	animal	twitching,	the	black	demon
leaped	to	one	side	and	roared	a	second	time,	and	this	time	Duiker	heard
meaning	within	it.
“It’s	warning	us!”	he	shouted	at	Kulp.
Like	a	lodestone	the	demon’s	arrival	drew	the	D’ivers	and	Soletaken.	They
fought	each	other	in	a	frenzied	rush	to	attack	the	creature.
“We	have	to	get	out	of	here!”	Duiker	said.	“Pull	us	out,	Kulp—now!”
The	mage	hissed	in	rage.	“How?	This	is	Sormo’s	ritual,	you	damned	bookgrub!”
The	demon	vanished	beneath	a	mob	of	creatures,	yet	clearly	remained
upright,	as	the	D’ivers	and	Soletaken	clambered	up	what	seemed	a	solid	pillar
of	stone.	Black-skinned	arms	appeared,	flinging	away	dead	and	dying
creatures.	But	it	could	not	last.
“Hood	take	you,	Kulp!	Think	of	something!”
The	mage’s	face	tightened.	“Drag	Bult	to	Sormo.	Quickly!	Leave	the
warlock	to	me.”	With	that,	Kulp	bolted	to	Sormo,	shouting	in	an	effort	to	wake
the	youth	from	whatever	spell	held	him.	Duiker	spun	to	where	Bult	lay	huddled
five	paces	away.	His	legs	felt	impossibly	heavy	beneath	the	prickling	pain	of
the	ant	bites	as	he	staggered	to	the	Wickan.
The	veteran	had	been	stung	scores	of	times,	his	flesh	was	misshapen	with
fiery	swelling.	He	was	unconscious,	possibly	dead.	Duiker	gripped	the	man’s
harness	and	dragged	him	to	where	Kulp	continued	accosting	Sormo	E’nath.
As	the	historian	arrived,	the	demon	gave	one	last	shriek,	then	disappeared
beneath	the	mound	of	attackers.	The	D’ivers	and	Soletaken	then	surged	toward
the	four	men.
Sormo	E’nath	was	oblivious,	his	eyes	glazed,	unheeding	of	the	mage’s
efforts	to	shout	him	into	awareness.
“Wake	him	or	we’re	dead,”	Duiker	gasped,	stepping	over	Bult	to	face	the


charging	beasts	with	naught	but	a	small	knife.
The	weapon	would	little	avail	him	as	a	seething	cloud	of	hornets	swiftly
closed	the	distance.
The	scene	was	jolted,	and	Duiker	saw	they	were	back	in	the	dead	oasis.	The
D’ivers	and	Soletaken	were	gone.	The	historian	turned	to	Kulp.	“You	did	it!
How?”
The	mage	glanced	down	at	a	sprawled,	moaning	Sormo	E’nath.	“I’ll	pay
for	it,”	he	muttered,	then	met	Duiker ’s	eyes.	“I	punched	the	lad.	Damn	near
broke	my	hand	doing	it,	too.	It	was	his	nightmare,	wasn’t	it?”
The	historian	blinked,	then	shook	himself	and	crouched	down	beside	Bult.
“This	poison	will	kill	him	long	before	we	can	get	help—”
Kulp	squatted,	ran	his	good	hand	over	the	veteran’s	swollen	face.	“Not
poison.	More	like	an	infecting	warren.	I	can	deal	with	this,	Duiker.	As	with
your	legs.”	He	closed	his	eyes	in	concentration.
Sormo	E’nath	slowly	pushed	himself	into	sitting	position.	He	looked
around,	then	tenderly	touched	his	jaw,	where	the	ridged	imprint	of	Kulp’s
knuckles	stood	like	puckered	islands	in	a	spreading	flush	of	red.
“He	had	no	choice,”	Duiker	told	him.
The	warlock	nodded.
“Can	you	talk?	Any	loose	teeth?”
“Somewhere,”	he	said	clearly,	“a	crow	flaps	broken-winged	on	the	ground.
There	are	but	ten	left.”
“What	happened	there,	Warlock?”
Sormo’s	eyes	flicked	nervously.	“Something	unexpected,	Historian.	A
convergence	is	underway.	The	Path	of	Hands.	The	gate	of	the	Soletaken	and	the
D’ivers.	An	unhappy	coincidence.”
Duiker	scowled.	“You	said	Tellann—”
“And	so	it	was,”	the	warlock	cut	in.	“Is	there	a	blending	between
shapeshifting	and	Elder	Tellann?	Unknown.	Perhaps	the	D’ivers	and	Soletaken
are	simply	passing	through	the	warren—imagining	it	unoccupied	by	T’lan
Imass	and	therefore	safer.	Indeed,	no	T’lan	Imass	to	take	umbrage	with	the
trespass,	leaving	them	with	only	each	other	to	battle.”
“They’re	welcome	to	annihilate	each	other,	then,”	the	historian	grumbled,
his	legs	slowly	giving	way	beneath	him	until	like	Sormo	he	sat	on	the	ground.
“I	shall	help	you	in	a	moment,”	Kulp	called	over.
Nodding,	Duiker	found	himself	watching	a	dung	beetle	struggle	heroically
to	push	aside	a	fragment	of	palm	bark.	He	sensed	something	profound	in	what
he	watched,	but	was	too	weary	to	pursue	it.


Chapter	Five

Bhok’arala	seem	to	have	originated	in	the	wastes	of	Raraku.
Before	long,	these	social	creatures	spread	outward	and	were
soon	seen	throughout	Seven	Cities.	As	efficacious	rat	control	in
settlements,	the	bhok’arala	were	not	only	tolerated,	but	often
encouraged.	It	was	not	long	before	a	lively	trade	in	domesticated
breeds	became	a	major	export…
The	usage	and	demonic	investment	of	this	species	among
mages	and	alchemists	is	a	matter	for	discussion	within	treatises
more	specific	than	this	one.	Baruk’s	Three	Hundred	and	Twentyfirst	Treatise	offers	a	succinct	analysis	for	interested	scholars…
DENIZENS	OF	RARAKU
IMRYGYN	T ALLOBANT
With	the	exception	of	the	sandstorm—which	they	had	waited	out	in	Trob—and
the	unsettling	news	of	a	massacre	at	Ladro	Keep,	told	to	them	by	an	outrider
from	a	well-guarded	caravan	bound	for	Ehrlitan,	the	journey	to	within	sight	of
G’danisban	had	proved	uneventful	for	Fiddler,	Crokus	and	Apsalar.
Although	Fiddler	knew	that	the	risks	that	lay	ahead,	south	of	the	small	city
out	in	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan,	were	severe	enough	to	eat	holes	in	his	stomach,
he	had	anticipated	a	lull	in	the	final	approach	to	G’danisban.	What	he	had	not
expected	to	find	was	a	ragtag	renegade	army	encamped	outside	the	city	walls.
The	army’s	main	force	straddled	the	road	but	was	shielded	by	a	thin	line	of
hills	on	the	north	side.	The	canal	road	led	the	three	unsuspecting	travelers	into
the	camp’s	perimeter	lines.	There	had	been	no	warning.
A	company	of	footmen	commanded	the	road	from	flanking	hills	and
oversaw	diligent	questioning	of	all	who	sought	entry	to	the	city.	The	company
was	supported	by	a	score	of	Arak	tribal	horsewarriors	who	were	evidently
entrusted	with	riding	down	any	traveler	inclined	to	flee	the	approach	to	the
makeshift	barricade.
Fiddler	and	his	charges	would	have	to	ride	on	through	and	trust	to	their


disguises.	The	sapper	was	anything	but	confident,	although	this	lent	a	typically
Gral	scowl	to	his	narrow	features	which	elicited	a	wholly	proper	wariness	in
two	of	the	three	guards	who	stepped	forward	to	intercept	them	at	the	barricade.
“The	city	is	closed,”	the	unimpressed	guard	nearest	them	said,	punctuating
his	words	by	spitting	between	the	hooves	of	Fiddler ’s	mount.
It	would	later	be	said	that	even	a	Gral’s	horse	knew	an	insult	when	it	saw
one.	Before	Fiddler	could	react,	his	mount’s	head	snapped	forward,	stripping
the	reins	from	the	sapper ’s	hands,	and	bit	the	guardsman	in	the	face.	The	horse
had	twisted	its	head	so	that	the	jaws	closed	round	the	man’s	cheeks	and	tore
into	cheeks,	upper	lip	and	nose.	Blood	gushed.	The	guardsman	dropped	like	a
sack	of	stones,	a	piercing,	keening	sound	rising	from	him.
For	lack	of	anything	else	to	grip,	Fiddler	snagged	the	gelding’s	ears	and
pulled	hard,	backing	the	beast	away	even	as	it	prepared	to	stomp	on	the	guard’s
huddled	form.	Hiding	his	shock	behind	an	even	fiercer	frown,	the	sapper
unleashed	a	stream	of	Gral	curses	at	the	two	remaining	men,	who	had	both
backed	frantically	clear	before	lowering	their	pikes.	“Foul	snot	of	rabid	dogs!
Anal	crust	of	dysenteried	goats!	Such	a	sight	for	two	young	newlyweds	to
witness!	Will	you	curse	their	marriage	but	two	weeks	since	the	blessed	day?
Shall	I	loose	the	fleas	on	my	head	to	rend	your	worthless	flesh	from	your
jellied	bones?”
As	Fiddler	roared	every	Gral	utterance	of	disgust	he	could	recall	in	an
effort	to	keep	the	guards	unbalanced,	a	troop	of	the	Arak	horsewarriors	rode
up	with	savage	haste.
“Gral!	Ten	jakatas	for	your	horse!”
“Twelve,	Gral!	To	me!”
“Fifteen	and	my	youngest	daughter!”
“Five	jakatas	for	three	tail	hairs!”
Fiddler	turned	his	fiercest	frown	on	the	riders.	“Not	one	of	you	is	fit	to
smell	my	horse’s	farts!”	But	he	grinned,	unstrapping	a	beer-filled	bladder	and
tossing	it	one-handed	to	the	nearest	Arak.	“But	let	us	camp	with	your	troop	this
night	and	for	a	sliver	you	may	feel	its	heat	with	your	palms—once	only!	For
more	you	must	pay!”
With	wild	grins,	the	Araks	passed	the	skin	between	them,	each	taking	deep
swigs	to	finalize	the	ritual	exchange.	By	sharing	beer,	Fiddler	had	granted	them
status	as	equals,	the	gesture	stripping	the	cutting	barb	from	the	insult	he	had
thrown	their	way.
Fiddler	glanced	back	at	Crokus	and	Apsalar.	They	looked	properly	shaken.
Biting	back	his	own	nausea,	the	sapper	winked.
The	guards	had	recovered	but	before	they	could	close	in,	the	tribesmen


drove	their	mounts	to	block	them.
“Ride	with	us!”	one	of	the	Araks	shouted	to	Fiddler.	As	one,	the	troop
wheeled	about.	Regaining	the	reins,	Fiddler	spurred	the	gelding	after	them,
sighing	when	he	heard	behind	him	the	newlyweds	following	suit.
It	was	to	be	a	race	to	the	Arak	camp,	and,	true	to	its	sudden	legendary
status,	the	Gral	horse	was	determined	to	burst	every	muscle	in	its	body	to	win.
Fiddler	had	never	before	ridden	such	a	game	beast,	and	he	found	himself
grinning	in	spite	of	himself,	even	as	the	image	of	the	guardsman’s	ravaged
face	remained	like	a	chill	knot	in	the	pit	of	his	stomach.
The	Arak	tipis	lined	the	edges	of	a	nearby	hill’s	windswept	summit,	each
set	wide	apart	so	that	no	shade	from	a	neighbor ’s	could	cast	insult.	Women	and
children	came	to	the	crest	to	watch	the	race,	screaming	as	Fiddler ’s	mount
burst	through	the	leading	line,	swerving	to	throw	a	shoulder	into	the	fastest
competitor.	That	horse	stumbled,	almost	pitching	its	rider	from	his	wood	and
felt	saddle,	then	righted	itself	with	a	furious	scream	at	being	driven	from	the
race.
Unimpeded,	Fiddler	leaned	forward	as	his	horse	reached	the	slope	and
surged	up	its	grassy	side.	The	line	of	watchers	parted	as	he	reached	the	crest
and	reined	in	amidst	the	tipis.
As	any	plains	tribe	would,	the	Arak	chose	hilltops	rather	than	valley	floors
for	their	camps.	The	winds	kept	the	insects	to	a	minimum—boulders	held	down
the	tipi	edges	to	prevent	the	hide	tents	from	blowing	away—and	the	rising	and
setting	of	the	sun	could	be	witnessed	to	mark	ritual	thanksgiving.
The	camp’s	layout	was	a	familiar	one	to	Fiddler,	who	had	ridden	with
Wickan	scouts	over	these	lands	during	the	Emperor ’s	campaigns.	Marking	the
center	of	the	ring	of	tipis	was	a	stone-lined	hearth.	Four	wooden	posts	off	to
one	side,	between	two	tipis,	and	joined	together	with	a	single	hemp	rope,
provided	the	corral	for	the	horses.	Bundles	of	rolled	felt	lay	drying	nearby,
along	with	tripods	bearing	stretched	hides	and	strips	of	meat.
The	dozen	or	so	camp	dogs	surrounded	the	snapping	gelding	as	Fiddler
paused	in	the	saddle	to	take	his	bearings.	The	scrawny,	yipping	mongrels	might
prove	a	problem,	he	realized,	but	he	hoped	that	their	suspicions	would	apply	to
all	strangers,	Gral	included.	If	not,	then	his	disguise	was	over.
The	troop	arrived	moments	later,	the	horsewarriors	shouting	and	laughing
as	they	reined	in	and	threw	themselves	from	their	saddles.	Appearing	last	on
the	summit’s	crest	were	Crokus	and	Apsalar,	neither	of	whom	seemed	ready	to
share	in	the	good	humor.
Seeing	their	faces	reminded	Fiddler	of	the	mangled	guardsman	on	the	road
below.	He	regained	his	scowl	and	slipped	from	the	saddle.	“The	city	is


closed?”	he	shouted.	“Another	Mezla	folly!”
The	Arak	rider	who’d	spoken	before	strode	up,	a	fierce	grin	on	his	lean
face.	“Not	Mezla!	G’danisban	has	been	liberated!	The	southern	hares	have	fled
the	Whirlwind’s	promise.”
“Then	why	was	the	city	closed	to	us?	Are	we	Mezla?”
“A	cleansing,	Gral!	Mezla	merchants	and	nobles	infest	G’danisban.	They
were	arrested	yesterday	and	this	day	they	are	being	executed.	Tomorrow
morning	you	shall	lead	your	blessed	couple	into	a	free	city.	Come,	this	night
we	celebrate!”
Fiddler	squatted	in	Gral	fashion.	“Has	Sha’ik	raised	the	Whirlwind,	then?”
He	glanced	back	at	Crokus	and	Apsalar,	as	if	suddenly	regretting	having	taken
on	the	responsibility.	“Has	the	war	begun,	Arak?”
“Soon,”	he	said.	“We	were	cursed	with	impatience,”	he	added	with	a	smirk.
Crokus	and	Apsalar	approached.	The	Arak	went	off	to	assist	in	the
preparations	for	the	night’s	festivities.	Coins	were	flung	at	the	gelding’s
hooves	and	hands	cautiously	reached	out	to	rest	lightly	on	the	animal’s	neck
and	flanks.	For	the	moment	the	three	travelers	were	alone.
“That	was	a	sight	I	will	never	forget,”	Crokus	said,	“though	I	wish	to	Hood
I	could.	Will	the	poor	man	live?”
Fiddler	shrugged.	“If	he	chooses	to.”
“We’re	camping	here	tonight?”	Apsalar	asked,	looking	around.
“Either	that	or	insult	these	Arak	and	risk	disembowelling.”
“We	will	not	fool	them	for	much	longer,”	Apsalar	said.	“Crokus	doesn’t
speak	a	word	of	this	land’s	tongue,	and	mine	is	a	Malazan’s	accent.”
“That	soldier	was	my	age,”	the	Daru	thief	muttered.
Frowning,	the	sapper	said,	“Our	only	other	choice	is	to	ride	into
G’danisban,	so	that	we	may	witness	the	Whirlwind’s	vengeance.”
“Another	celebration	of	what’s	to	come?”	Crokus	demanded.	“This
damned	Apocalypse	you’re	always	talking	about?	I	get	the	feeling	that	this
land’s	people	do	nothing	but	talk.”
Fiddler	cleared	his	throat.	“Tonight’s	celebration	in	G’danisban,”	he	said
slowly,	“will	be	the	flaying	alive	of	a	few	hundred	Malazans,	Crokus.	If	we
show	eagerness	to	witness	such	an	event,	these	Arak	may	not	be	offended	by
our	leaving	early.”
Apsalar	turned	to	watch	half	a	dozen	tribesmen	approach.	“Try	it,	Fiddler,”
she	said.
The	sapper	came	close	to	saluting.	He	hissed	a	curse.	“You	giving	me
orders,	Recruit?”
She	blinked.	“I	think	I	was	giving	orders…when	you	were	still	clutching


the	hem	of	your	mother ’s	dress,	Fiddler.	I	know—the	one	who	possessed	me.
It’s	his	instincts	that	are	ringing	like	steel	on	stone	right	now.	Do	as	I	say.”
The	chance	for	a	retort	vanished	as	the	Arak	arrived.	“You	are	blessed,
Gral!”	one	of	them	said.	“A	Gral	clan	is	on	its	way	to	join	the	Apocalypse!	Let
us	hope	that	like	you	they	bring	their	own	beer!”
Fiddler	made	a	kin	gesture,	then	soberly	shook	his	head.	“It	cannot	be,”	he
said,	mentally	holding	his	breath.	“I	am	outcast.	More,	these	newlyweds	insist
we	enter	the	city…to	witness	the	executions	in	further	blessing	of	their	binding.
I	am	their	escort,	and	so	must	obey	their	commands.”
Apsalar	stepped	forward	and	bowed.	“We	wish	no	offense,”	she	said.
It	wasn’t	going	well.	The	Arak	faces	arrayed	before	them	had	darkened.
“Outcast?	No	kin	to	honor	your	trail,	Gral?	Perhaps	we	shall	hold	you	for
your	brothers’	vengeance,	and	in	exchange	they	leave	us	your	horse.”
With	exquisite	perfection,	Apsalar	stamped	one	foot	to	announce	the	rage
of	a	pampered	daughter	and	new	wife.	“I	am	with	child!	Defy	me	and	be
cursed!	We	go	to	the	city!	Now!”
“Hire	one	of	us	for	the	rest	of	your	journey,	blessed	lady!	But	leave	the
riven	Gral!	He	is	not	fit	to	serve	you!”
Trembling,	Apsalar	prepared	to	lift	her	veil,	announcing	the	intention	to
voice	her	curse.
The	Araks	flinched	back.
“You	covet	the	gelding!	This	is	nothing	more	than	greed!	I	shall	now	curse
you	all—”
“Forgive!”	“We	bow	down,	blessed	lady!”	“Touch	not	your	veil!”	“Ride
on,	then!	To	the	city	below!	Ride	on!”
Apsalar	hesitated.	For	a	moment	Fiddler	thought	she	would	curse	them
anyway.	Instead	she	spun	about.	“Escort	us	once	more,	Gral,”	she	said.
Surrounded	by	worried,	frightened	faces,	the	three	mounted	up.
An	Arak	who	had	spoken	earlier	now	stepped	close	to	the	sapper.	“Stay
only	the	night,	then	ride	on	hard,	Gral.	Your	kin	will	pursue	you.”
“Tell	them,”	Fiddler	said,	“I	won	the	horse	in	a	fair	fight.	Tell	them	that.”
The	Arak	frowned.	“Will	they	know	the	story?”
“Which	clan?”
“Sebark.”
The	sapper	shook	his	head.
“Then	they	shall	ride	you	down	for	the	pleasure	of	it.	But	I	shall	tell	them
your	words,	anyway.	Indeed,	your	horse	was	worth	killing	for.”
Fiddler	thought	back	to	the	drunken	Gral	he’d	bought	the	gelding	from	in
Ehrlitan.	Three	jakata.	The	tribesmen	who	moved	into	the	cities	lost	much.


“Drink	my	beer	this	night,	Arak?”
“We	shall.	Before	the	Gral	arrive.	Ride	on.”
	
As	they	rode	onto	the	road	and	approached	G’danisban’s	north	gate,	Apsalar
said	to	him,	“We	are	in	trouble	now,	aren’t	we?”
“Is	that	what	your	instincts	tell	you,	lass?”
She	grimaced.
“Aye,”	Fiddler	sighed.	“That	we	are.	I	made	a	mistake	with	that	outcast
story.	I	think	now,	given	your	performance	back	there,	that	the	threat	of	your
curse	would	have	sufficed.”
“Probably.”
Crokus	cleared	his	throat.	“Are	we	going	to	actually	watch	these
executions,	Fid?”
The	sapper	shook	his	head.	“Not	a	chance.	We’re	riding	straight	through,	if
we	can.”	He	glanced	at	Apsalar.	“Let	your	courage	falter,	lass.	Another	temper
tantrum	and	the	citizens	will	rush	you	out	the	south	gate	on	a	bed	of	gold.”
She	acknowledged	him	with	a	wry	smile.
Don’t	fall	in	love	with	this	woman,	Fid,	old	friend,	else	you	loosen	your
guard	of	the	lad’s	life,	and	call	it	an	accident	of	fate…
	
Spilled	blood	stained	the	worn	cobbles	under	the	arched	north	gate	and	a
scatter	of	wooden	toys	lay	broken	and	crushed	to	either	side	of	the	causeway.
From	somewhere	close	came	the	screams	of	children	dying.
“We	can’t	do	this,”	Crokus	said,	all	the	color	gone	from	his	face.	He	rode
at	Fiddler ’s	side,	Apsalar	holding	her	mount	close	behind	them.	Looters	and
armed	men	appeared	now	and	then	farther	down	the	street,	but	the	way	into	the
city	seemed	strangely	open.	A	haze	of	smoke	hung	over	everything,	and	the
burnedout	shells	of	merchant	stores	and	residences	gaped	desolation	on	all
sides.
They	rode	amidst	scorched	furniture,	shattered	pottery	and	ceramics,	and
bodies	twisted	in	postures	of	violent	death.	The	children’s	dying	screams,	off
to	their	right,	had	mercifully	stopped,	but	other,	more	distant	screams	rose
eerily	from	G’danisban’s	heart.
They	were	startled	by	a	figure	darting	across	their	paths,	a	young	girl,
naked	and	bruised.	She	ran	as	if	oblivious	to	them,	and	clambered	under	a
brokenwheeled	cart	not	fifteen	paces	from	Fiddler	and	his	party.	They	watched


her	scramble	under	cover.
Six	armed	men	approached	from	a	side	street.	Their	weapons	were
haphazard,	and	none	wore	armor.	Blackened	blood	stained	their	ragged
telaban.	One	spoke.	“Gral!	You	see	a	girl?	We’re	not	done	with	her.”
Even	as	he	asked	his	question,	another	of	them	grinned	and	gestured	to	the
cart.	The	girl’s	knees	and	feet	were	clearly	visible.
“A	Mezla?”	Fiddler	asked.
The	group’s	leader	shrugged.	“Well	enough.	Fear	not,	Gral,	we’ll	share.”
The	sapper	heard	Apsalar	draw	a	long,	slow	breath.	He	eased	back	in	his
saddle.
The	group	split	in	passing	around	Fiddler,	Crokus	and	Apsalar.	The	sapper
casually	leaned	after	the	nearest	man	and	thrust	the	point	of	his	long-knife	into
the	base	of	his	skull.	The	Gral	gelding	pivoted	beneath	Fiddler	and	kicked	out
with	both	rear	hooves,	shattering	another	man’s	chest	and	propelling	him
backward,	sprawling	on	the	cobbles.
Regaining	control	of	the	gelding,	Fiddler	drove	his	heels	into	its	flanks.
They	bolted	forward,	savagely	riding	down	the	group’s	generous	leader.	From
under	the	horse’s	stamping	hooves	came	the	sound	of	snapping	bones	and	the
sickening	crushing	of	his	skull.	Fiddler	twisted	in	the	saddle	to	find	the
remaining	three	men.
Two	of	them	writhed	in	keening	pain	near	Apsalar,	who	sat	calm	in	the
saddle,	a	thick-bladed	kethra	knife	in	each	gloved	hand.
Crokus	had	dismounted	and	was	now	crouching	over	the	last	body,
removing	a	throwing	knife	from	a	blood-drenched	throat.
They	all	turned	at	a	grinding	of	potsherds	to	see	the	girl	claw	her	way
clear	of	the	cart,	scramble	to	her	feet,	then	race	into	the	shadows	of	an	alley,
disappearing	from	view.
The	sound	of	horsemen	coming	from	the	north	gate	reached	them.
“Ride	on!”	Fiddler	snapped.
Crokus	leaped	onto	his	mount’s	back.	Apsalar	sheathed	her	blades	and
gave	the	sapper	a	nod	as	she	gathered	up	the	reins.
“Ride	through—to	the	south	gate!”
Fiddler	watched	the	two	of	them	gallop	on,	then	he	slipped	from	the
gelding’s	back	and	approached	the	two	men	Apsalar	had	wounded.	“Ah,”	he
breathed	when	he	came	close	and	saw	their	slashed-open	crotches,	“that’s	the
lass	I	know.”
The	troop	of	horsemen	arrived.	They	all	wore	ochre	sashes	diagonally
across	their	chain-covered	chests.	Their	commander	opened	his	mouth	to
speak	but	Fiddler	was	first.


“Is	no	man’s	daughter	safe	in	this	seven-cursed	city?	She	was	no	Mezla,	by
my	ancestors!	Is	this	your	Apocalypse?	Then	I	pray	the	pit	of	snakes	awaits	you
in	the	Seven	Hells!”
The	commander	was	frowning.	“Gral,	you	say	these	men	were	rapists?”
“A	Mezla	slut	gets	what	she	deserves,	but	the	girl	was	no	Mezla.”
“So	you	killed	these	men.	All	six	of	them.”
“Aye.”
“Who	were	the	other	two	riders	with	you?”
“The	pilgrims	I	am	sworn	to	protect.”
“And	yet	they	ride	into	the	city’s	heart…without	you	at	their	side.”
Fiddler	scowled.
The	commander	scanned	the	victims.	“Two	yet	live.”
“May	they	be	cursed	with	a	hundred	thousand	more	breaths	before	Hood
takes	them.”
The	commander	leaned	on	his	saddlehorn	and	was	silent	a	moment.
“Rejoin	your	pilgrims,	Gral.	They	have	need	of	your	services.”
Growling,	Fiddler	remounted.	“Who	rules	G’danisban	now?”
“None.	The	army	of	the	Apocalypse	holds	but	two	districts.	We	shall	have
the	others	by	the	morrow.”
Fiddler	pulled	the	horse	around	and	kicked	it	into	a	canter.	The	troop	did
not	follow.	The	sapper	swore	under	his	breath—the	commander	was	right,	he
should	not	have	sent	Crokus	and	Apsalar	on.	He	knew	himself	lucky	in	that	his
remaining	with	the	rapists	could	so	easily	be	construed	as	typically	Gral—the
opportunity	to	brag	to	the	red-swathed	riders,	the	chance	to	voice	curses	and
display	a	tribesman’s	unassailable	arrogance—but	it	risked	offering	up	to
contempt	his	vow	to	protect	his	charges.	He’d	seen	the	mild	disgust	in	the
commander ’s	eyes.	In	all,	he’d	been	too	much	of	a	Gral	horsewarrior.	If	not
for	Apsalar ’s	frightening	talents,	those	two	would	now	be	in	serious	trouble.
He	rode	hard	in	pursuit,	noting	belatedly	that	the	gelding	was	responding
to	his	every	touch.	The	horse	knew	he	was	no	Gral,	but	it’d	evidently	decided
he	was	behaving	in	an	approved	manner,	well	enough	to	accord	him	some
respect.	It	was,	he	reflected,	this	day’s	lone	victory.
	
G’danisban’s	central	square	was	the	site	of	past	slaughter.	Fiddler	caught	up
with	his	companions	when	they	had	just	begun	walking	their	horses	through
the	horrific	scene.	They	both	turned	upon	hearing	his	approach,	and	Fiddler
could	only	nod	at	the	relief	in	their	faces	when	they	recognized	him.
Even	the	Gral	gelding	hesitated	at	the	square’s	edge.	The	bodies	covering


the	cobbles	numbered	several	hundred.	Old	men	and	old	women,	and	children,
for	the	most	part.	They	had	all	been	savagely	cut	to	pieces	or,	in	some	cases,
burned	alive.	The	stench	of	sun-warmed	blood,	bile	and	seared	flesh	hung	thick
in	the	square.
Fiddler	swallowed	back	his	revulsion,	cleared	his	throat.	“Beyond	this
square,”	he	said,	“all	pretenses	of	control	cease.”
Crokus	gestured	shakily.	“These	are	Malazan?”
“Aye,	lad.”
“During	the	conquest,	did	the	Malazan	armies	do	the	same	to	the	locals
here?”
“You	mean,	is	this	just	reprisal?”
Apsalar	spoke	with	an	almost	personal	vehemence.	“The	Emperor	warred
against	armies,	not	civilians—”
“Except	at	Aren,”	Fiddler	sardonically	interjected,	recalling	his	words	with
the	Tano	Spiritwalker.	“When	the	T’lan	Imass	rose	in	the	city—”
“Not	by	Kellanved’s	command!”	she	retorted.	“Who	ordered	the	T’lan
Imass	into	Aren?	I	shall	tell	you.	Surly,	the	commander	of	the	Claw,	the	woman
who	took	upon	herself	a	new	name—”
“Laseen.”	Fiddler	eyed	the	young	woman	quizzically.	“I	have	never	before
heard	that	assertion,	Apsalar.	There	were	no	written	orders—none	found,	in
any	case—”
“I	should	have	killed	her	there	and	then,”	Apsalar	muttered.
Astonished,	Fiddler	glanced	at	Crokus.	The	Daru	shook	his	head.
“Apsalar,”	the	sapper	said	slowly,	“you	were	but	a	child	when	Aren
rebelled	then	fell	to	the	T’lan	Imass.”
“I	know	that,”	she	replied.	“Yet	these	memories…they	are	so	clear.	I	was…
sent	to	Aren…to	see	the	slaughter.	To	find	out	what	happened.	I…I	argued	with
Surly.	No	one	else	was	in	the	room.	Just	Surly	and…and	me.”
They	reached	the	other	end	of	the	square.	Fiddler	reined	in	and	regarded
Apsalar	for	a	long	moment.
Crokus	said,	“It	was	the	Rope,	the	patron	god	of	assassins,	who	possessed
you.	Yet	your	memories	are—”
“Dancer ’s.”	As	soon	as	he	said	it,	Fiddler	knew	it	was	true.	“The	Rope	has
another	name.	Cotillion.	Hood’s	breath,	so	obvious!	No	one	doubted	that	the
assassinations	occurred.	Both	Dancer	and	the	Emperor…murdered	by	Laseen
and	her	chosen	Clawmasters.	What	did	Laseen	do	with	the	bodies?	No	one
knows.”
“So	Dancer	lived,”	Crokus	said	with	a	frown.	“And	ascended.	Became	a
patron	god	in	the	Warren	of	Shadow.”


Apsalar	said	nothing,	watching	and	listening	with	a	carefully	controlled
absence	of	expression	on	her	face.
Fiddler	was	cursing	himself	for	a	blind	idiot.	“What	House	appeared	in	the
Deck	of	Dragons	shortly	afterward?	Shadow.	Two	new	Ascendants.	Cotillion…
and	Shadowthrone…”
Crokus’s	eyes	widened.	“Shadowthrone	is	Kellanved,”	he	said.	“They
weren’t	assassinated—either	of	them.	They	escaped	by	ascending.”
“Into	the	Shadow	Realm.”	Fiddler	smiled	wryly.	“To	nurse	their	thoughts
of	vengeance,	leading	eventually	to	Cotillion	possessing	a	young	fishergirl	in
Itko	Kan,	to	begin	what	would	be	a	long,	devious	path	to	Laseen.	Which	failed.
Apsalar?”
“Your	words	are	true,”	she	said	without	inflection.
“Then	why,”	the	sapper	demanded,	“didn’t	Cotillion	reveal	himself	to	us?
To	Whiskeyjack,	to	Kalam?	To	Dujek?	Dammit,	Dancer	knew	us	all—and	if
that	bastard	understood	the	notion	of	friendship	at	all,	then	those	I’ve	just
mentioned	were	his	friends—”
Apsalar ’s	sudden	laugh	rattled	both	men.	“I	could	lie	and	say	he	sought	to
protect	you	all.	Do	you	really	wish	the	truth,	Bridgeburner?”
Fiddler	felt	himself	flushing.	“I	do,”	he	growled.
“Dancer	trusted	but	two	men.	One	was	Kellanved.	The	other	was	Dassem
Ultor,	the	First	Sword.	Dassem	is	dead.	I	am	sorry	if	this	offends	you,	Fiddler.
Thinking	on	it,	I	would	suggest	that	Cotillion	trusts	no	one.	Not	even
Shadowthrone.	Emperor	Kellanved…well	enough.	Ascendant	Kellanved—
Shadowthrone—ah,	that	is	something	wholly	different.”
“He	was	a	fool,”	Fiddler	pronounced,	gathering	up	his	reins.
Apsalar ’s	smile	was	strangely	wistful.
“Enough	words,”	Crokus	said.	“Let’s	get	out	of	this	damned	city.”
“Aye.”
	
The	short	journey	from	the	square	to	the	south	gate	was	surprisingly
uneventful,	for	all	the	commander ’s	warnings.	Dusk	shrouded	the	streets	and
smoke	from	a	burning	tenement	block	spread	an	acrid	haze	that	made
breathing	tortured.	They	rode	through	the	silent	aftermath	of	slaughter,	when
the	rage	has	passed	and	awareness	returns	with	shock	and	shame.
The	moment	was	a	single	indrawn	breath	in	what	Fiddler	knew	would	be
an	ever-burgeoning	wildfire.	If	the	Malazan	legions	had	not	been	withdrawn
from	nearby	Pan’potsun,	there	would	have	been	the	chance	of	crushing	the	life
from	this	first	spark,	with	a	brutality	to	match	the	renegades’.	When	slaughter


is	flung	back	on	the	perpetrators,	the	thirst	for	blood	is	quickly	quenched.
The	Emperor	would	have	acted	swiftly,	decisively.	Hood’s	breath,	he	would
never	have	let	it	slide	this	far.
Less	than	a	tenth	of	a	bell	after	leaving	the	square	they	passed	beneath	the
smoke-blackened	arch	of	an	unguarded	south	gate.	Beyond	stretched	the
Pan’potsun	Odhan,	flanked	to	the	west	by	the	ridge	that	divided	the	Odhan	from
the	Holy	Desert	Raraku.	The	night’s	first	stars	flickered	alight	overhead.
Fiddler	broke	the	long	silence.	“There	is	a	village	a	little	over	two	leagues
to	the	south.	With	luck	it	won’t	be	a	carrion	feast.	Not	yet,	anyway.”
Crokus	cleared	his	throat.	“Fiddler,	if	Kalam	had	known…about	Dancer,	I
mean,	Cotillion…”
The	sapper	grimaced,	glanced	at	Apsalar.	“She’d	be	with	him	right	now.”
Whatever	response	Crokus	intended	was	interrupted	by	a	squealing,
flapping	shape	that	dropped	down	out	of	the	darkness	to	collide	with	the	lad’s
back.	Crokus	let	out	a	shout	of	alarm	as	the	creature	gripped	his	hair	and
clambered	onto	his	head.
“It’s	just	Moby,”	Fiddler	said,	trying	to	shake	off	the	jitters	the	familiar ’s
arrival	had	elicited.	He	squinted.	“Looks	like	he’s	been	in	a	scrap,”	he
observed.
Crokus	pulled	Moby	down	into	his	arms.	“He’s	bleeding	everywhere!”
“Nothing	serious,	I’d	guess,”	Fiddler	said.
“What	makes	you	so	sure?”
The	sapper	grinned.	“Ever	seen	bhok’arala	mate?”
“Fiddler,”	Apsalar ’s	tone	was	tight.	“We	are	pursued.”
Reining	in,	Fiddler	rose	in	the	stirrups	and	twisted	around.	In	the	distant
gloom	was	a	cloud	of	dust.	He	hissed	a	curse.	“The	Gral	clan.”
“We	ride	weary	mounts,”	Apsalar	said.
“Aye.	Queen	grant	us	there’s	fresh	horses	to	be	had	in	New	Velar.”
	
At	the	base	of	three	converging	gorges,	Kalam	left	the	false	path	and	carefully
guided	his	horse	through	a	narrow	drainage	channel.	The	old	memories	of	the
ways	into	Raraku	felt	heavy	in	his	bones.	Everything’s	changed,	yet	nothing	has
changed.
Of	the	countless	trails	that	passed	through	the	hills,	all	but	a	few	led	only	to
death.	The	false	routes	were	cleverly	directed	away	from	the	few	waterholes
and	springs.	Without	water,	Raraku’s	sun	was	a	fatal	companion.	Kalam	knew
the	Holy	Desert,	the	map	within	his	head—decades	old—was	seared	anew	with
every	landmark	he	recognized.	Pinnacles,	tilted	rocks,	the	wend	of	a	flood


channel—he	felt	as	if	he	had	never	left,	for	all	his	new	loyalties,	his	conflicting
allegiances.	Once	more,	a	child	of	this	desert.	Once	more,	servant	to	its	sacred
need.
As	the	wind	and	sun	did	to	the	sand	and	stone,	Raraku	shaped	all	who	had
known	it.	Crossing	it	had	etched	the	souls	of	the	three	companies	that	would
come	to	be	called	the	Bridgeburners.	We	could	imagine	no	other	name.	Raraku
burned	our	pasts	away,	making	all	that	came	before	a	trail	of	ashes.
He	swung	the	stallion	onto	a	scree,	rocks	and	sand	skittering	and	tumbling
as	the	beast	scrambled	up	the	slope,	regaining	the	true	path	along	the	ridge	line
that	would	run	in	a	slow	descent	westward	to	Raraku’s	floor.
Stars	glittered	like	knife-points	overhead.	The	bleached	limestone	crags
shone	silver	in	the	faint	moonlight,	as	if	reflecting	back	memories	of	the	day
just	past.
The	assassin	led	his	horse	between	the	crumbled	foundations	of	two
watchtowers.	Potsherds	and	fractured	brick	crunched	under	the	stallion’s
hooves.	Rhizan	darted	from	his	path	with	a	soft	flit	of	wings.	Kalam	felt	he	had
returned	home.
“No	farther,”	a	rasping	voice	warned.
Smiling,	Kalam	reined	in.
“A	bold	announcement,”	the	voice	continued.	“A	stallion	the	color	of	sand,
red	telaba…”
“I	announce	what	I	am,”	Kalam	replied	casually.	He	had	pin-pointed	the
source	of	the	voice,	in	the	deep	shadows	of	a	sinkhole	just	beyond	the	left-hand
watchtower.	There	was	a	crossbow	trained	on	the	assassin,	but	Kalam	knew	he
could	dodge	the	quarrel,	rolling	from	the	saddle	with	the	stallion	between	him
and	the	stranger.	Two	well-thrown	knives	into	the	darker	shape	amidst	the
shadows	would	punctuate	the	exchange.	He	felt	at	ease.
“Disarm	him,”	the	voice	drawled.
Two	massive	hands	closed	on	his	wrists	from	behind	and	savagely	pulled
both	his	arms	back,	until	he	was	dragged,	cursing	with	rage,	over	the	stallion’s
rump.	As	soon	as	he	cleared	the	beast,	the	hands	twisted	his	body	around	and
drove	him	hard,	face	first,	into	the	stony	ground.	The	air	knocked	from	his
lungs,	Kalam	was	helpless.
He	heard	the	one	who’d	spoken	rise	up	from	the	sinkhole	and	approach.
The	stallion	snapped	his	teeth	but	was	swiftly	calmed	at	a	soft	word	from	the
stranger.	The	assassin	listened	as	the	saddlebags	were	lifted	away	and	set	on	the
ground.	Flaps	opened.	“Ah,	he’s	the	one,	then.”
The	hands	released	Kalam.	Groaning,	the	assassin	managed	to	roll	over.	A
giant	of	a	man	stood	over	him,	his	face	tattooed	like	shattered	glass.	A	long


single	braid	hung	down	the	left	side	of	his	chest.	The	man	wore	a	cloak	of
bhederin	hide	over	a	vest	of	armor	that	seemed	made	of	clam	shells.	The
wooden	handle	and	stone	pommel	of	a	bladed	weapon	of	some	kind	jutted
from	just	under	his	left	arm.	The	broad	belt	over	the	man’s	loincloth	was	oddly
decorated	with	what	looked	to	Kalam	like	dried	mushroom	caps	of	various
sizes.	He	was	over	seven	foot	tall,	yet	muscled	enough	to	seem	wide,	and	his
flat,	broad	face	gazed	down	without	expression.
Regaining	his	breath,	the	assassin	sat	up.	“A	sorcerous	silence,”	he
muttered,	mostly	to	himself.
The	man	who	now	held	the	Book	of	the	Apocalypse	heard	the	gruff
whisper	and	snorted.	“You	fancy	no	mortal	could	get	that	close	to	you	without
your	hearing	him.	You	tell	yourself	it	must	have	involved	magic.	You	are
wrong.	My	companion	is	Toblakai,	an	escaped	slave	from	the	Laederon
Plateau	of	Genabackis.	He’s	seen	seventeen	summers	and	has	personally	killed
forty-one	enemies.	Those	are	their	ears	on	his	belt.”	The	man	rose,	offering
Kalam	his	hand.	“You	are	most	welcome	to	Raraku,	Deliverer.	Our	long	vigil
is	ended.”
Grimacing,	Kalam	accepted	the	man’s	hand	and	felt	himself	pulled
effortlessly	to	his	feet.	The	assassin	brushed	the	dust	from	his	clothes.	“You	are
not	bandits,	then.”
The	stranger	barked	a	laugh.	“No,	we	are	not.	I	am	Leoman,	Captain	of
Sha’ik’s	Bodyguard.	My	companion	refuses	his	name	to	strangers,	and	we
shall	leave	it	at	that.	We	are	the	two	she	chose.”
“I	must	deliver	the	Book	into	Sha’ik’s	hands,”	Kalam	said.	“Not	yours,
Leoman.”
The	squat	warrior—by	his	color	and	clothing	a	child	of	this	desert—held
out	the	Book.	“By	all	means.”
Cautiously,	the	assassin	retrieved	the	heavy,	battered	tome.
A	woman	spoke	behind	him.	“You	may	now	give	it	to	me,	Deliverer.”
Kalam	slowly	closed	his	eyes,	struggling	to	gather	the	frayed	ends	of	his
nerves.	He	turned.
There	could	be	no	doubting.	The	small,	honey-skinned	woman	standing
before	him	radiated	power	in	waves,	the	smell	of	dust	and	sand	whipped	by
winds,	the	taste	of	salt	and	blood.	Her	rather	plain	face	was	deeply	lined,	giving
her	an	appearance	of	being	around	forty	years	old,	though	Kalam	suspected
she	was	younger—Raraku	was	a	harsh	home.
Involuntarily,	Kalam	dropped	to	one	knee.	He	held	out	the	Book.	“I	deliver
unto	you,	Sha’ik,	the	Apocalypse.”	And	with	it,	a	sea	of	blood—how	many
innocent	lives	shattered,	to	bring	Laseen	down?	Hood	take	me,	what	have	I


done?
The	Book’s	weight	left	his	hands	as	she	accepted	it.	“It	is	damaged.”
The	assassin	looked	up,	slowly	rose.
Sha’ik	was	frowning,	one	finger	tracing	a	torn	corner	of	the	leather	cover.
“Well,	one	should	not	be	surprised,	given	that	it	is	a	thousand	years	old.	I	thank
you,	Deliverer.	Will	you	now	join	my	band	of	soldiers?	I	sense	great	talents	in
you.”
Kalam	bowed.	“I	cannot.	My	destiny	lies	elsewhere.”	Flee,	Kalam,	before
you	test	the	skills	of	these	bodyguards.	Flee,	before	uncertainty	kills	you.
Her	dark	eyes	narrowed	on	his	searchingly,	then	widened.	“I	sense
something	of	your	desire,	though	you	shield	it	well.	Ride	on,	then,	the	way
south	is	open	to	you.	More,	you	shall	have	an	escort—”
“I	need	no	escort,	Seer—”
“But	you	shall	have	one	in	any	case.”	She	gestured	and	a	bulky,	ungainly
shape	appeared	from	the	gloom.
“Holy	One,”	Leoman	hissed	warningly.
“You	question	me?”	Sha’ik	snapped.
“The	Toblakai	is	as	an	army,	nor	are	my	skills	lacking,	Holy	One,	yet—”
“Since	I	was	a	child,”	Sha’ik	cut	in,	her	voice	brittle,	“one	vision	has
possessed	me	above	all	others.	I	have	seen	this	moment,	Leoman,	a	thousand
times.	At	dawn	I	shall	open	the	Book,	and	the	Whirlwind	shall	rise,	and	I	shall
emerge	from	it…renewed.	‘Blades	in	hands	and	unhanded	in	wisdom,’	such	are
the	wind’s	words.	Young,	yet	old.	One	life	whole,	another	incomplete.	I	have
seen,	Leoman!”	She	paused,	drew	a	breath.	“I	see	no	other	future	but	this	one.
We	are	safe.”	Sha’ik	faced	Kalam	again.	“I	acquired	a…a	pet	recently,	which	I
now	send	with	you,	for	I	sense…possibilities	in	you,	Deliverer.”	She	gestured
again.
The	huge,	ungainly	shape	moved	closer	and	Kalam	took	an	involuntary
step	backward.	His	stallion	voiced	a	soft	squeal	and	stood	trembling.
Leoman	spoke.	“An	aptorian,	Deliverer,	from	the	realm	of	Shadow.	Sent
into	Raraku	by	Shadowthrone…to	spy.	It	belongs	to	Sha’ik	now.”
The	beast	was	a	nightmare,	close	to	nine	feet	tall,	crouching	on	two	thin
hind	limbs.	A	lone	foreleg,	long	and	multijointed,	jutted	down	from	its
strangely	bifurcated	chest.	From	a	hunched,	angular	shoulder	blade,	the
demon’s	sinuous	neck	rose	to	a	flat,	elongated	head.	Needle	fangs	ridged	its
jawline,	which	was	swept	back	and	naturally	grinning	like	a	dolphin’s.	Head,
neck	and	limbs	were	black,	while	its	torso	was	a	dun	gray.	A	single,	flat	black
eye	regarded	Kalam	with	appalling	awareness.
The	assassin	saw	barely	healed	scarring	on	the	demon.	“It’s	been	in	a


fight?”
Sha’ik	scowled.	“A	D’ivers.	Desert	wolves.	She	drove	them	off—”
“More	like	a	tactical	withdrawal,”	Leoman	added	dryly.	“The	beast	does
not	eat	or	drink,	so	far	as	we’ve	seen.	And	though	the	Holy	One	believes
otherwise,	it	appears	to	be	entirely	brainless—that	look	in	its	eye	is	likely	a
mask	hiding	very	little.”
“Leoman	plagues	me	with	doubts,”	Sha’ik	said.	“It	is	his	chosen	task	and	I
grow	increasingly	weary	of	it.”
“Doubts	are	healthy,”	Kalam	said,	then	snapped	his	mouth	shut.
The	Holy	One	only	smiled.	“I	sensed	you	two	were	alike.	Leave	us,	then.
The	Seven	Holies	know,	one	Leoman	is	enough.”
With	a	final	glance	at	the	young	Toblakai,	the	assassin	vaulted	back	into	the
saddle,	swung	the	stallion	to	the	south	trail	and	nudged	him	into	a	trot.
The	aptorian	evidently	preferred	some	distance	between	them;	it	moved
parallel	to	Kalam	at	over	twenty	paces	away,	a	darker	stain	in	the	night,
striding	awkwardly	yet	silently	on	its	three	bony	legs.
After	ten	minutes	of	riding	at	a	fast	trot,	the	assassin	slowed	the	stallion	to
a	walk.	He	had	delivered	the	Book,	personally	seen	to	the	rise	of	the
Whirlwind.	Answered	his	blood’s	call,	no	matter	how	stained	the	motivation.
The	demands	of	his	other	life	lay	ahead.	He	would	kill	the	Empress,	to	save
the	Empire.	If	he	succeeded,	Sha’ik’s	rebellion	was	doomed.	Control	would	be
restored.	And	if	I	fail,	they	will	bleed	each	other	to	exhaustion,	Sha’ik	and
Laseen,	two	women	of	the	same	cloth—Hood,	they	even	looked	alike.	It	was	not
a	far	reach,	then,	for	Kalam	to	see	in	his	shadow	a	hundred	thousand	deaths.
And	he	wondered	if,	throughout	Seven	Cities,	readers	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons
now	held	a	newly	awakened	Herald	of	Death	in	their	trembling	hands.
Queen’s	blessing,	it’s	done.
	
Minutes	before	dawn,	Sha’ik	sat	down	cross-legged	before	the	Book	of	the
Apocalypse.	Her	two	guards	flanked	her,	each	in	the	ruins	of	a	watchtower.	The
Toblakai	youth	leaned	on	his	two-handed	ironwood	sword.	A	battered	bronze
helmet	missing	a	cheek-guard	was	on	his	head,	his	eyes	hidden	in	the	shadow
of	a	slitted	half-visor.	His	companion’s	arms	were	crossed.	A	crossbow	leaned
against	one	hide-wrapped	leg.	Two	one-handed	morning	stars	were	thrust
through	his	broad	leather	belt.	He	wore	a	colorless	telaba	scarf	over	a	peaked
iron	helm.	Below	it,	his	smooth-shaven	face	showed,	latticed	by	thirty	years	of
sun	and	wind.	His	light-blue	eyes	were	ever	restless.
The	dawn’s	rays	swept	over	Sha’ik.	The	Holy	One	reached	down	and


opened	the	Book.
The	quarrel	struck	her	forehead	an	inch	above	her	left	eye.	The	iron	head
shattered	the	bone,	plunging	inward	a	moment	before	the	spring-driven	barbs
opened	like	a	deadly	flower	inside	her	brain.	The	quarrel’s	head	then	struck	the
inside	of	the	back	of	her	skull,	exiting	explosively.
Sha’ik	toppled.
Tene	Baralta	bellowed	and	watched	with	satisfaction	as	Aralt	Arpat	and
Lostara	Yil	led	the	twelve	Red	Blades	in	a	charge	toward	the	two	hapless
bodyguards.
The	desert	warrior	had	dropped	and	rolled	a	moment	after	Sha’ik’s	death.
The	crossbow	now	in	his	hands	bucked.	Aralt	Arpat’s	chest	visibly	caved
inward	as	the	quarrel	drove	through	his	breastbone.	The	tall	sergeant	was
knocked	backward,	sprawling	in	the	dust.
The	commander	bellowed	in	fury,	drew	his	tulwars	and	joined	the	attack.
Lostara’s	squad	threw	lances	in	staggered	succession	when	but	fifteen
paces	from	the	Toblakai.
Tene	Baralta’s	eyes	widened	in	astonishment	as	not	one	of	the	six	lances
struck	home.	Impossibly	lithe	for	one	of	such	bulk,	the	Toblakai	seemed	to
simply	step	through	them,	shifting	weight	and	dipping	a	shoulder	before
springing	to	close,	his	archaic	wooden	sword	sweeping	across	in	a	backswing
that	connected	with	the	leading	Red	Blade’s	knees.	The	man	went	down	in	a
cloud	of	dust,	both	legs	shattered.
Then	the	Toblakai	was	in	the	squad’s	midst.	As	Tene	Baralta	sprinted	to
reach	them,	he	saw	Lostara	Yil	reel	back,	blood	spraying	from	her	head,	her
helmet	spinning	away	to	bounce	across	the	potsherd	gravel.	A	second	soldier
fell,	his	throat	crushed	by	a	thrust	from	the	wooden	sword.
Arpat’s	squad	attacked	the	desert	warrior.	Chains	snapped	as	the	morning
stars	lashed	out	and	struck	with	deadly	accuracy.	There	was	no	more	difficult	a
weapon	to	parry	than	a	morning	star—the	chain	wrapped	over	any	block,
sending	the	iron	ball	unimpeded	to	its	target.	The	weapon’s	greatest	drawback
was	that	it	was	slow	to	recover,	but	in	the	instant	that	Tene	Baralta	glanced	over
to	gauge	the	battle,	he	saw	that	the	desert	warrior	fought	equally	well	with
either	hand,	and	was	staggering	his	attacks,	resulting	in	a	perpetual	sequence	of
blows	that	none	of	the	soldiers	facing	him	could	penetrate.	A	helmed	head
crumpled	under	the	impact	in	the	momentary	span	of	the	commander ’s	glance.
In	an	instant	Tene	Baralta’s	tactics	shifted.	Sha’ik	was	dead.	The	mission
was	a	success—there	would	be	no	Whirlwind.	It	was	pointless	throwing	lives
away	against	these	two	appalling	executioners—who	had,	after	all,	failed	in
guarding	Sha’ik’s	life	and	now	sought	naught	but	vengeance.	He	barked	out	the


recall,	and	watched	as	his	soldiers	battled	to	extricate	themselves	from	the	two
men.	The	effort	proved	costly,	as	three	more	fell	before	the	remaining	fighters
cleared	a	space	in	which	to	turn	and	run.
Two	of	Lostara	Yil’s	soldiers	were	loyal	enough	to	drag	the	dazed	captain
with	them	in	their	retreat.
Bristling	at	the	sight	of	the	routed	Red	Blades,	Tene	Baralta	swallowed
down	a	stream	of	bitter	curses.	Tulwars	held	out,	he	shielded	the	soldiers’
withdrawal,	his	nerves	on	fire	at	the	thought	of	either	bodyguard	accepting	the
challenge.
But	the	two	men	did	not	pursue,	resuming	their	positions	at	the
watchtowers.	The	desert	warrior	crouched	to	reload	his	crossbow.
The	sight	of	the	weapon	readied	was	the	last	Tene	Baralta	had	of	the	two
killers,	as	the	commander	then	ducked	out	of	sight	and	jogged	with	his	soldiers
back	to	the	small	canyon	where	the	horses	were	tethered.
In	the	high-walled	arroyo,	the	Red	Blades	stationed	their	lone	surviving
crossbowman	on	the	south-facing	crest,	then	paused	to	staunch	wounds	and
regain	their	breaths.	Behind	them,	their	horses	nickered	at	the	smell	of	blood.
A	soldier	splashed	water	on	Lostara’s	red-smeared	face.	She	blinked,
awareness	slowly	returning	to	her	eyes.
Tene	Baralta	scowled	down	at	her.	“Recover	yourself,	Captain,”	he
growled.	“You	are	to	regain	Kalam’s	trail—at	a	safe	distance.”
She	nodded,	reaching	up	to	probe	the	gash	on	her	forehead.	“That	sword
was	wood.”
“Yet	as	hard	as	steel,	aye.	Hood	take	the	Toblakai—and	the	other	one	at
that.	We’ll	leave	them	be.”
A	slightly	wry	expression	coming	to	her	face,	Lostara	Yil	simply	nodded
again.
Tene	reached	down	a	gauntleted	hand	and	pulled	the	sergeant	to	her	feet.
“A	fine	shot,	Lostara	Yil.	You	killed	the	god-cursed	witch	and	all	that	went	with
her.	The	Empress	shall	be	pleased.	More	than	pleased.”
Weaving	slightly,	Lostara	went	to	her	horse,	pulled	herself	into	the	saddle.
“We	ride	to	Pan’potsun,”	Tene	Baralta	told	her.	“To	spread	the	word,”	he
added	with	a	dark	grin.	“Do	not	lose	Kalam,	Captain.”
“I’ve	yet	to	fail	in	that,”	she	said.
You	know	I’ll	count	these	losses	as	yours,	don’t	you?	Too	clever,	lass.
He	watched	her	ride	away,	then	swung	his	glare	on	his	remaining	soldiers.
“Cowards!	Lucky	for	you	that	I	guarded	your	retreat.	Mount	up.”
	


Leoman	laid	out	the	blanket	on	the	flat	ground	between	the	two	watchtower
foundations,	and	rolled	Sha’ik’s	linen-wrapped	body	onto	it.	He	knelt	beside	it
a	moment,	motionless,	then	wiped	grimy	sweat	from	his	brow.
The	Toblakai	stood	nearby.	“She	is	dead.”
“I	see	that,”	Leoman	said	dryly,	reaching	to	collect	the	blood-spattered
Book,	which	he	slowly	rewrapped	in	cloth.
“What	do	we	do	now?”
“She	opened	the	Book.	It	was	dawn.”
“Nothing	happened,	except	a	quarrel	going	through	her	head.”
“Damn	you,	I	know!”
The	Toblakai	crossed	his	massive	arms,	fell	silent.
“The	prophecy	was	certain,”	Leoman	said	after	a	few	minutes.	He	rose,
wincing	at	his	battle-stiffened	muscles.
“What	do	we	do	now?”	the	young	giant	asked	again.
“She	said	she	would	be…renewed…”	He	sighed,	the	Book	heavy	in	his
hands.	“We	wait.”
The	Toblakai	raised	his	head,	sniffed.	“There’s	a	storm	coming.”


Book	Two
Whirlwind


	

I	have	walked	old	roads
This	day
That	became	ghosts	with
Coming	night
And	were	gone	to	my	eyes
With	dawn.
Such	was	my	journey
Leagues	across	centuries
In	one	blink	of	the	sun
PARDU	EPITAPH
	


Chapter	Six

Early	in	Kellanved’s	reign,	cults	proliferated	among	the
Imperial	armies,	particularly	among	the	Marines.	It	should	be
remembered	that	this	was	also	the	time	of	Dassem	Ultor,	First
Sword	and	Supreme	Commander	of	the	Malazan	forces…a	man
sworn	to	Hood…
MALAZAN	CAMPAIGNS,	VOL.	II
DUIKER
Beneth	sat	at	his	table	in	Bula’s,	cleaning	his	nails	with	a	dagger.	They	were
immaculate,	making	the	habit	an	affectation.	Felisin	had	grown	familiar	with
his	poses	and	what	they	betrayed	of	his	moods.	The	man	was	in	a	rage,	shot
through	with	fear.	Uncertainties	now	plagued	his	life;	like	bloodfly	larvae	they
crawled	beneath	his	skin,	growing	as	they	gnawed	on	his	flesh.
His	face,	his	forehead	and	his	thick,	scarred	wrists	all	glistened	with	sweat.
The	pewter	mug	of	chilled	Saltoan	wine	sat	untouched	on	the	battered	tabletop,
a	row	of	flies	marching	round	and	round	the	mug’s	rim.
Felisin	stared	at	the	tiny	black	insects,	memories	of	horror	returning	to
her.	Hood’s	acolyte,	who	was	not	there.	A	man-shaped	swarm	of	Death’s
sprites,	the	buzz	of	wings	shaping	words…
“There’s	light	in	your	eyes	again,	lass,”	Beneth	said.	“Tells	me	you’re
realizing	what	you’ve	become.	An	ugly	light.”	He	pushed	a	small	leather	pouch
across	the	table	until	it	sat	directly	before	her.	“Kill	it.”
Her	hand	trembled	as	she	reached	for	the	bag,	loosened	the	ties	and
removed	a	button	of	durhang.
He	watched	her	crumbling	the	moist	pollen	into	her	pipe	bowl.
Six	days,	and	Baudin	was	still	missing.	Captain	Sawark	had	called	in
Beneth	more	than	once.	Skullcup	was	very	nearly	dismantled	during	the	search,
patrols	on	Beetle	Road	up	on	the	rim	were	doubled—round	and	round—and
Sinker	Lake	was	dredged.	It	was	as	if	the	man	had	simply	vanished.
Beneth	took	it	personally.	His	control	of	Skullcup	was	compromised.	He’d


called	her	back	to	his	side,	not	out	of	compassion,	but	because	he	no	longer
trusted	her.	She	knew	something—something	about	Baudin—and	worse,	he
knew	she	was	more	than	she	pretended	to	be.
Beneth	and	Sawark	have	spoken,	Heboric	said	the	day	she’d	left—when	his
ministrations	had	done	enough	to	allow	her	to	fake	a	well-being	sufficient	to
justify	her	leaving.	Be	careful,	lass.	Beneth	is	taking	you	back,	but	only	to
personally	oversee	your	destruction.	What	was	haphazard	before	is	now
precise,	deliberate.	He’s	been	given	guidelines.
How	do	you	know	any	of	this?
True,	I’m	just	guessing.	But	Baudin’s	escape	has	given	Beneth	leverage
over	Sawark,	and	he’s	likely	to	have	used	it	to	get	the	inside	story	on	you.
Sawark’s	granted	him	more	control—there	won’t	be	another	Baudin—neither
man	can	afford	it.	Sawark	has	no	choice	but	to	give	Beneth	more	control…more
knowledge…
The	durhang	tea	had	given	her	relief	from	the	pain	of	her	fractured	ribs
and	her	swollen	jaw,	but	it	had	not	been	potent	enough	to	dull	her	thoughts.
Minute	by	minute,	she’d	felt	her	mind	drag	her	ever	closer	to	desperation.
Leaving	Heboric	had	been	a	flight,	her	journey	back	to	Beneth	a	panicked
necessity.
He	smiled	as	she	set	flame	to	the	durhang.
“Baudin	wasn’t	just	a	dockside	thug,	was	he?”
She	frowned	at	him	through	a	haze	of	smoke.
Beneth	set	the	dagger	down	and	gave	it	a	spin.	They	both	watched	the
blade’s	flashing	turns.	When	it	ceased,	the	point	faced	Beneth.	He	scowled,
spun	it	a	second	time.	As	the	point	slowed	to	face	him	again	he	picked	up	the
dagger	and	slid	it	back	into	the	sheath	at	his	belt,	then	reached	for	the	pewter
mug.
The	flies	scattered	as	he	raised	the	mug	to	his	lips.
“I	don’t	know	anything	about	Baudin,”	Felisin	said.
His	deep-set	eyes	studied	her	for	a	long	moment.	“You	haven’t	figured
anything	out	about	anything,	have	you?	Which	makes	you	either	thick…or
willfully	ignorant.”
She	said	nothing.	A	numbness	was	spreading	through	her.
“Was	it	me,	lass?	Was	it	so	much	of	a	surrender	becoming	mine?	I	wanted
you,	Felisin.	You	were	beautiful.	Sharp—I	could	see	that	in	your	eyes.	Am	I	to
blame	for	you,	now?”
He	saw	her	glance	down	at	the	pouch	on	the	table	and	offered	up	a	wry
smile.	“Orders	are	orders.	Besides,	you	could	have	said	no.”
“At	any	time,”	she	said,	looking	away.


“Ah,	not	my	fault,	then.”
“No,”	she	replied,	“the	faults	are	all	mine,	Beneth.”
Abruptly	he	rose.	“There’s	nothing	pleasant	in	the	air	tonight.	The
She’gai’s	begun—the	hot	wind—all	your	suffering	until	now	has	just	been	a
prelude,	lass.	Summer	begins	with	the	She’gai.	But	tonight…”	He	stared	down
at	her	but	did	not	finish	the	sentence,	simply	taking	her	by	the	arm	and	pulling
her	upright.	“Walk	with	me.”
Beneth	had	been	granted	the	right	to	form	a	militia,	consisting	of	his
chosen	slaves,	each	now	armed	with	a	clout.	Throughout	the	night	they
patrolled	the	makeshift	streets	of	Skullcup.	The	curfew’s	restriction	would	now
be	punctuated	with	beating	followed	by	execution	for	anyone	caught	out	in	the
open	after	nightfall.	The	guards	would	handle	the	execution—Beneth’s	militia
took	their	pleasure	in	the	beating.
Beneth	and	Felisin	joined	the	patrol	squad,	half	a	dozen	men	she	knew
well,	as	Beneth	had	bought	their	loyalty	with	her	body.	“If	it’s	a	quiet	night,”	he
promised	them,	“we’ll	take	time	for	some	relaxation	come	the	dawn.”	The	men
grinned	at	that.
They	walked	the	littered	aisles	of	sand,	watchful	but	seeing	no	one	else.
Coming	opposite	a	gambling	establishment	called	Suruk’s,	they	saw	a	crowd
of	Dosii	guardsmen.	The	Dosii	captain,	Gunnip,	was	with	them.	Their	nighthooded	gazes	followed	the	patrol	as	it	continued	on.
Beneth	hesitated,	as	if	of	a	mind	to	speak	with	Gunnip,	then,	with	a	loud
sigh	through	his	nostrils,	resumed	walking.	One	hand	reached	up	to	rest	on	the
pommel	of	his	knife.
Felisin	became	dully	aware	of	something,	as	if	the	hot	wind	breathed	a	new
menace	into	the	night	air.	The	chatter	of	the	militiamen,	she	noted,	had	fallen
away,	and	signs	of	nervousness	were	evident.	She	extracted	another	button	of
durhang	and	popped	it	into	her	mouth,	where	it	rested	cool	and	sweet	between
cheek	and	gum.
“Watching	you	do	that,”	Beneth	muttered,	“reminds	me	of	Sawark.”
She	blinked.	“Sawark?”
“Aye.	The	worse	things	get,	the	more	he	shuts	his	eyes.”
Her	words	came	out	slurred.	“And	what	things	are	getting	worse?”
As	if	in	answer,	a	shout	followed	by	harsh	laughter	sounded	behind	them,
coming	from	the	front	of	Suruk’s.	Beneth	halted	his	men	with	a	gesture,	then
walked	back	to	the	crossroads	they	had	just	passed.	From	there	he	could	see
Suruk’s—and	Gunnip’s	soldiers.
Like	a	wraith	rising	up	and	stealing	through	Beneth,	tension	slowly	filled
the	man’s	posture.	As	she	watched,	vague	alarms	rang	in	Felisin’s	skull.	She


hesitated,	then	turned	to	the	militiamen.	“Something’s	happened.	Go	to	him.”
They	were	watching	as	well.	One	of	them	scowled,	one	hand	sliding
skittish	along	his	belt	to	the	clout.	“He	ain’t	gived	us	no	orders,”	he	growled.
The	others	nodded,	fidgeting	as	they	waited	in	the	shadows.
“He’s	standing	alone,”	she	said.	“Out	in	the	open.	I	think	there’s	arrows
trained	on	him—”
“Shut	your	face,	girl,”	the	militiaman	snapped.	“We	ain’t	going	out	there.”
Beneth	almost	backed	up	a	step,	then	visibly	steeled	himself.
“They’re	coming	for	him,”	Felisin	hissed.
Gunnip	and	his	Dosii	soldiers	wandered	into	view,	closing	a	half-circle
around	Beneth.	Cocked	crossbows	resting	on	forearms	pointed	toward	him.
Felisin	spun	to	the	militiamen.	“Back	him	up,	damn	you!”
“Hood	take	you!”	one	of	the	men	spat	back.	The	patrol	was	scattering,
slipping	back	into	the	shadows	and	then	into	the	dark	alleyways	beyond.
“You	all	alone	back	there,	lass?”	Captain	Gunnip	called	out.	His	soldiers
laughed.	“Come	join	Beneth	here.	We’re	just	telling	him	some	things,	that’s	all.
No	worry,	lass.”
Beneth	turned	to	speak	to	her.	A	Dosii	guardsman	stepped	up	and	struck
him	across	the	face	with	a	gauntleted	hand.	Beneth	staggered,	swearing	as	he
brought	his	hands	up	to	his	shattered	nose.
Felisin	stumbled	backward,	then	twisted	and	ran,	even	as	crossbows
thudded.	Quarrels	whipped	past	her	on	either	side	as	she	plunged	into	an	alley
mouth.	Laughter	echoed	behind	her.
She	ran	on,	the	alley	paralleling	Rust	Ramp.	A	hundred	paces	ahead	waited
Darkhall	and	the	barracks.	She	was	out	of	breath	when	she	stumbled	into	the
open	area	surrounding	the	two	Malazan	buildings,	her	heart	hammering	in	her
chest	as	if	she	was	fifty	years	old,	not	fifteen.	Slowly,	the	shock	of	seeing
Beneth	struck	down	spread	through	her.
Voices	shouted	from	behind	the	barracks.	Horse	hooves	pounded.	A	score
of	slaves	appeared,	running	toward	where	Felisin	stood	with	a	half-hundred
mounted	Dosii	soldiers	behind	them.	Lances	took	some	men	in	the	back,
driving	them	down	into	the	dust.	Unarmed,	the	slaves	tried	to	flee,	but	the	Dosii
had	now	completed	the	encirclement.	Belatedly,	Felisin	realized	that	escape	had
been	denied	her	as	well.
I	saw	Beneth	bleed.	From	that	thought	followed	another.	Now	we	die.
The	Dosii	horses	trampled	men	and	women.	Tulwars	swung	down.	In
hopeless	silence,	the	slaves	were	dying.	Two	riders	closed	in	on	Felisin.	She
watched,	wondering	which	of	them	would	reach	her	first.	One	gripped	a	lance,
angled	down	to	take	her	in	the	chest.	The	other	held	his	wide-bladed	sword


high,	readied	for	a	downward	chop.	In	their	faces	she	saw	flushed	joy	and	was
surprised	at	the	inhumanity	of	the	expression.
When	they	were	both	but	moments	away,	quarrels	thudded	into	their	chests.
Reeling,	both	men	toppled	from	the	saddles.	Felisin	turned	to	see	a	troop	of
Malazan	crossbowmen	advancing	in	formation,	the	front	line	kneeling	to
reload	while	the	second	line	slipped	a	few	paces	ahead,	took	aim,	then	as	one
loosed	quarrels	into	the	milling	Dosii	horsemen.	Animals	and	men	screamed
in	pain.
A	third	volley	broke	the	Dosii,	scattering	them	back	into	the	darkness
beyond	the	barracks.
A	handful	of	slaves	still	lived.	A	sergeant	barked	an	order	and	a	dozen
soldiers	moved	forward,	checking	the	bodies	littering	the	area,	then	pushing
the	survivors	back	toward	the	troop’s	position.
“Come	with	me,”	a	voice	hissed	beside	Felisin.
She	blinked,	slow	to	recognize	Pella’s	face.	“What?”
“We’re	quartering	the	slaves	at	the	stables—but	not	you.”	He	gently	took
her	arm.	“We’re	badly	outnumbered.	Defending	slaves	isn’t	a	high	priority,	I’m
afraid.	Sawark	wants	this	mutiny	crushed.	Tonight.”
She	studied	his	face.	“What	are	you	saying?”
The	sergeant	had	pulled	his	troop	into	a	more	defensible	position	at	an
alley	mouth.	The	twelve	detached	soldiers	were	pushing	the	slaves	down	the
side	street	that	led	to	the	stables.	Pella	guided	Felisin	in	the	same	direction.
Once	out	of	sight	of	the	sergeant,	he	addressed	the	other	soldiers.	“Three	of
you,	with	me.”
One	replied,	“Has	Oponn	stirred	your	brains,	Pella?	I	don’t	feel	safe	as	it
is,	and	you	want	to	split	the	squad?”
Another	growled,	“Let’s	just	get	rid	of	these	damned	slaves	and	get	back,
afore	the	sergeant	marches	to	rejoin	the	captain.”
“This	is	Beneth’s	woman,”	Pella	said.
“I	don’t	think	Beneth	is	still	alive,”	Felisin	said	dully.
“He	was	not	five	minutes	ago,	lass,”	Pella	said,	frowning.	“Bloodied	a	bit,
nothing	more.	He’s	rallying	his	militia	right	now.”	He	swung	to	the	others.
“We’ll	need	Beneth,	Reborid,	never	mind	Sawark’s	bluster.	Now,	three	of	you
—we’re	not	going	far.”
With	a	scowl,	the	one	named	Reborid	gestured	to	two	others.
	
A	fire	had	been	started	in	Skullcup’s	western	arm—somewhere	on	Spit	Row.
Unchecked,	it	was	spreading	fast,	throwing	a	lurid	orange	glow	up	against	the


underbellies	of	billowing	smoke.
As	Pella	dragged	Felisin	along,	Reborid	talked	unceasingly.	“Where	in
Hood’s	name	is	the	Be’thra	Garrison?	You	think	they	can’t	see	the	flames?
There	were	Malazan	squads	up	patrolling	Beetle	Road—a	rider	would	have
been	sent—the	troop	should	be	here	by	now,	dammit.”
There	were	bodies	in	the	streets,	huddled,	motionless	shapes.	The	small
party	went	around	them	without	pause.
“Hood	knows	what	Gunnip’s	thinking,”	the	soldier	went	on.	“Sawark	will
see	every	damn	Dosii	within	fifty	leagues	of	here	gutted	and	left	out	under	the
sun.”
“This	is	the	place,”	Pella	said,	tugging	Felisin	to	a	halt.	“Defensive
position,”	he	ordered	the	others.	“I’ll	be	but	a	moment.”
They	were	at	Heboric’s	house.	No	light	leaked	from	the	shutters.	The	door
was	locked.	Snorting	with	disgust,	Pella	kicked	the	flimsy	barrier	aside.	His
hand	against	her	back,	he	pushed	her	into	the	darkness	within,	then	followed.
“There’s	no	one	here,”	Felisin	said.
Pella	did	not	reply,	still	pushing	her	along,	until	they	reached	the	cloth
divider	behind	which	was	the	ex-priest’s	bedroom.	“Pull	it	aside,	Felisin.”
She	did,	stepping	into	the	small	room.	Pella	followed.
Heboric	sat	on	his	cot,	staring	up	at	them	in	silence.
“I	wasn’t	sure,”	Pella	said	in	a	low	voice,	“if	you	still	wanted	her	along.”
The	ex-priest	grunted.	“What	of	you,	Pella?	We	might	manage—”
“No.	Take	her	instead.	I’ve	got	to	rejoin	the	captain—we’ll	crush	this
mutiny—but	the	timing’s	perfect	for	you…”
Heboric	sighed.	“Aye,	that	it	is.	Fener ’s	grunt,	Baudin,	step	out	of	them
shadows.	This	lad’s	no	risk	to	us.”
Pella	started	as	a	massive	shape	separated	itself	from	behind	the	hanging.
Baudin’s	narrow-set	eyes	glittered	in	the	dimness.	He	said	nothing.
Shaking	himself,	Pella	stepped	back	to	the	entrance,	gripping	the	grimy
cloth	with	one	hand.	“Fener	guard	you,	Heboric.”
“Thank	you,	lad.	For	everything.”
Pella	gave	a	curt	nod,	then	was	gone.
Felisin	frowned	at	Baudin.	“You’re	wet.”
Heboric	rose.	“Is	all	ready?”	he	asked	Baudin.
The	big	man	nodded.
“Are	we	escaping?”	Felisin	asked.
“Aye.”
“How?”
Heboric	scowled.	“You’ll	see	soon	enough.”


Baudin	picked	up	two	large	leather	packs	from	behind	him,	and	tossed	one
effortlessly	to	Heboric,	who	trapped	it	deftly	between	his	arms.	The	sound	the
pack	made	when	the	ex-priest	caught	it	made	it	obvious	to	Felisin	that	it	was	in
fact	a	sealed	bladder,	filled	with	air.	“We’re	going	to	swim	Sinker	Lake,”	she
said.	“Why?	There’s	nothing	but	a	sheer	cliff	on	the	other	side.”
“There’s	caves,”	Heboric	said.	“You	can	reach	them	when	the	water	level’s
low…ask	Baudin,	since	he’s	been	hiding	in	one	for	a	week.”
“We	have	to	take	Beneth,”	Felisin	pronounced.
“Now,	lass—”
“No!	You	owe	me—both	of	you!	You	wouldn’t	be	alive	to	even	do	this,
Heboric,	if	it	wasn’t	for	me.	And	for	Beneth.	I’ll	find	him,	meet	you	at	the
lakeshore—”
“No,	you	won’t,”	Baudin	said.	“I’ll	get	him.”	He	handed	Felisin	the	bladder.
She	watched	him	slip	out	through	a	back	door	she	hadn’t	known	was	there,
then	slowly	turned	to	regard	Heboric.	He	was	crouched	down,	examining	the
loose	netting	wrapped	around	the	packs.	“I	wasn’t	part	of	your	escape	plan,	was
I,	Heboric?”
He	glanced	up,	raised	his	brows.	“Until	tonight,	it	seemed	you’d	made
Skullcup	your	paradise.	I	didn’t	think	you’d	be	interested	in	leaving.”
“Paradise?”	For	some	reason	the	word	shook	her.	She	sat	down	on	the	cot.
Eyeing	her,	he	shrugged.	“Beneth	provided.”
She	held	his	gaze	until,	after	a	long	moment,	he	finally	pulled	away,
hefting	the	pack	as	he	rose	with	a	grunt.	“We	should	get	going,”	he	said
gruffly.
“I’m	not	much	in	your	eyes	any	more,	am	I,	Heboric?	Was	I	ever?”	Felisin,
House	of	Paran,	whose	sister	was	Adjunct	Tavore,	whose	brother	rode	with
Adjunct	Lorn.	Nobleborn,	a	spoiled	little	girl.	A	whore.
He	did	not	reply,	making	his	way	to	the	gap	in	the	back	wall.
	
The	western	half	of	Skullcup	was	in	flames,	lighting	the	entire	bowl	a	grainy,
wavering	red.	Heboric	and	Felisin	saw	evidence	of	clashes	as	they	hurried
down	Work	Road	toward	the	lake—downed	horses,	dead	Malazan	and	Dosii
guards.	Bula’s	Inn	had	been	barricaded,	then	the	barriers	breached.	From	the
darkness	of	the	doorway,	as	they	passed,	came	a	faint	moaning.
Felisin	hesitated,	but	Heboric	hooked	her	arm.	“You	don’t	want	to	go	in
there,	lass,”	he	said.	“Gunnip’s	men	hit	that	place	early	on,	and	hard.”
Beyond	the	town’s	edge,	Work	Road	stretched	empty	and	dark	all	the	way
to	the	Three	Fates	fork.	Through	the	rushes	on	their	left	was	the	glimmer	of


Sinker	Lake’s	placid	surface.
The	ex-priest	led	her	down	into	the	grasses,	bade	her	crouch	down,	then
did	the	same.	“We’ll	wait	here,”	he	said,	wiping	sweat	from	his	wide,	tattooed
forehead.
The	mud	under	her	knees	was	clammy,	pleasantly	cool.	“So	we	swim	to	the
cave…then	what?”
“It’s	an	old	mineshaft,	leading	up	beyond	the	rim,	well	past	Beetle	Road.
There	will	be	supplies	left	for	us	at	the	other	end.	From	there,	it’s	out	across
the	desert.”
“Dosin	Pali?”
He	shook	his	head.	“Straight	west,	to	the	inside	coast.	Nine,	ten	days.
There’s	hidden	springs—Baudin	has	memorized	their	locations.	We’ll	get
picked	up	by	a	boat	and	taken	across	to	the	mainland.”
“How?	Who?”
The	ex-priest	grimaced.	“An	old	friend	with	more	loyalty	than	is	probably
good	for	him.	Hood	knows,	I’m	not	complaining.”
“And	Pella	was	the	contact?”
“Aye,	some	obscure	connection	to	do	with	friends	of	fathers	and	uncles
and	friends	of	friends	or	something	like	that.	He	first	approached	you,	you
know,	but	you	didn’t	catch	on.	So	he	found	me	himself.”
“I	don’t	remember	anything	like	that.”
“A	quote,	attributed	to	Kellanved	and	recorded	by	the	man	arranging	our
escape—Duiker.”
“A	familiar	name…”
“The	Imperial	Historian.	He	spoke	on	my	behalf	at	the	trial.	Then,
afterward,	arranged	to	be	sent	to	Hissar	by	warren.”	He	fell	silent,	slowly
shook	his	head.	“To	save	a	bitter	old	man	who	more	than	once	denounced	his
written	histories	as	deliberate	lies.	If	I	live	to	stand	face	to	face	with	Duiker,	I
think	I	owe	the	man	an	apology.”
A	buzzing,	frenzied	sound	reached	them,	coming	from	the	smoky	air
above	the	town.	The	sound	grew	louder.	Sinker	Lake’s	smooth	surface
vanished	beneath	what	seemed	a	spray	of	hailstones.
Felisin	crouched	lower	in	fear.	“What	is	it?	What’s	happening?”
Heboric	was	silent	a	moment,	then	he	hissed,	“Bloodflies!	Drawn,	then
driven,	by	the	fires.	Quickly,	lass,	scoop	up	mud—cover	yourself!	And	then
me.	Hurry!”
Glittering	clouds	of	the	insects	swept	into	view,	racing	like	gusts	of	fog.
Frantic,	Felisin	dug	her	fingers	into	the	cool	mud	between	the	red	stems,
slapping	handfuls	against	her	neck,	arms,	face.	As	she	worked	she	crawled


forward	on	her	knees	until	she	sat	in	the	lake	water,	then	she	turned	to	Heboric.
“Come	closer!”
He	scrambled	to	her	side.	“They’ll	dive	through	the	water,	girl—you	need
to	get	out	of	there—cover	your	legs	in	mud!”
“Once	I’m	done	with	you,”	she	said.
But	it	was	too	late.	All	at	once	the	air	was	almost	unbreathable	as	a	cloud
engulfed	them.	Bloodflies	shot	down	into	the	water	like	darts.	Pain	lanced
through	her	thighs.
Heboric	pushed	her	hands	away,	then	ducked	down.	“Mind	yourself,	lass!”
The	command	was	unnecessary,	as	all	thoughts	of	helping	Heboric	had
vanished	with	the	first	savage	bite.	Felisin	leaped	from	the	water,	clawed
gouges	of	mud	free	and	slapped	them	down	on	her	blood-smeared	thighs.	She
quickly	added	more	down	to	her	calves,	her	ankles	and	feet.	Insects	crawled
through	her	hair.	Whimpering,	she	clawed	them	away,	then	covered	her	head
with	mud.	Bloodflies	rode	her	drawn	gasps	into	her	mouth,	biting	as	she
gagged	and	spat.	She	found	herself	biting	down,	crunching	them,	and	their
bitter	juices	burned	like	acid.	They	were	everywhere,	blinding	her	as	they
gathered	in	frenzied	clumps	around	her	eyes.	Screaming,	she	scraped	them
away,	then	reached	down	and	found	more	mud.	Soothing	darkness,	yet	her
screaming	did	not	stop,	would	not	stop.	The	insects	were	at	her	ears.	She	filled
them	with	mud.	Silence.
Handless	arms	wrapped	tight	around	her,	Heboric’s	voice	reaching	her	as
if	from	a	great	distance	away.	“It’s	all	right,	lass—it’s	all	right.	You	can	stop
screaming,	Felisin.	You	can	stop.”
She	had	curled	into	a	ball	amidst	the	reeds.	The	pain	of	the	bites	was
passing	to	numbness—on	her	legs,	around	her	eyes	and	ears,	and	in	her	mouth.
Cool,	soft	numbness.	She	heard	herself	fall	silent.
“The	swarm’s	passing,”	Heboric	said.	“Fener ’s	blessing	too	fierce	a	touch
for	them.	We’re	all	right,	lass.	Wipe	clear	your	eyes—see	for	yourself.”
She	made	no	move.	It	was	too	easy	to	lie	still,	the	numbness	spreading
through	her.
“Wake	up!”	Heboric	snapped.	“There’s	an	egg	in	every	bite,	each	secreting
a	poison	that	deadens,	turns	your	flesh	into	something	soft.	And	dead.	Food	for
the	larvae	inside	those	eggs.	You	understanding	me,	lass?	We	need	to	kill	those
eggs—I’ve	a	tincture,	in	the	pouch	at	my	belt—but	you’ll	need	to	apply	it
yourself,	right?	An	old	man	without	hands	can’t	do	it	for	you—”
She	moaned.
“Wake	up,	damn	you!”
He	struck	her,	pushed,	then	kicked.	Cursing,	Felisin	sat	up.	“Stop	it,	I’m


awake!”	Her	words	slurred	passing	through	her	numbed	mouth.	“Where	is	that
pouch?”
“Here.	Open	your	eyes!”
She	could	barely	see	through	the	puffed	swelling,	but	a	strange	blue
penumbra	rising	from	Heboric’s	tattoos	illuminated	the	scene.	He	was	unbitten.
Fener’s	blessing	too	fierce	a	touch.
He	gestured	at	the	pouch	at	his	belt.	“Quickly,	those	eggs	are	about	to
hatch,	then	the	larvae	will	start	eating	you—from	the	inside	out.	Open	the
pouch…there,	the	black	bottle,	the	small	one.	Open	it!”
She	removed	the	stopper.	A	bitter	smell	made	her	recoil.
“One	drop,	on	your	fingertip,	then	push	that	drop	right	into	the	wound,
push	it	hard.	Then	the	next	one	and	the	next—”
“I—I	can’t	feel	the	ones	around	my	eyes—”
“I’ll	guide	you,	lass.	Hurry.”
The	horror	did	not	end.	The	tincture,	a	foul,	dark-brown	juice	that	stained
her	skin	yellow,	did	not	kill	the	emerging	larvae,	but	drove	them	out.	Heboric
directed	her	hands	to	the	ones	around	her	eyes	and	ears	as	each	sluggishly
wriggled	free,	and	she	plucked	them	from	the	holes	made	by	the	bites,	each
larva	as	long	as	a	nail	clipping,	limp	with	the	soporific	effect	of	the	tincture.
The	bites	she	could	see	illustrated	what	was	happening	around	her	eyes	and
ears.	In	her	mouth,	the	tincture’s	bitterness	overrode	the	bloodfly	larvae’s
poison,	making	her	head	spin	and	her	heartbeat	alarmingly	fast.	The	larvae	fell
like	grains	of	rice	onto	her	tongue.	She	spat	them	out.
“I’m	sorry,	Felisin,”	Heboric	said	after	she	had	done.	He	was	examining
the	bites	around	her	eyes,	his	expression	filled	with	compassion.
A	chill	ran	through	her.	“What’s	wrong?	Will	I	go	blind?	Deaf?	What	is	it,
Heboric!”
He	shook	his	head,	slowly	sat	back.	“Bloodfly	bites…the	deadening	poison
kills	the	flesh.	You’ll	heal,	but	there	will	be	pockmarks.	I’m	so	sorry,	lass.	It’s
bad	around	your	eyes.	It’s	bad…”
She	almost	laughed,	her	head	reeling.	Another	shiver	rippled	through	her
and	she	hugged	herself.	“I’ve	seen	those.	Locals.	Slaves.	Here	and	there—”
“Aye.	Normally,	bloodflies	don’t	swarm.	It	must	have	been	the	flames.	Now
listen,	a	good	enough	healer—someone	with	High	Denul—can	remove	the
scarring.	We’ll	find	ourselves	such	a	healer,	Felisin.	I	swear	it,	by	Fener ’s
tusks,	I	swear	it.”
“I	feel	sick.”
“That’s	the	tincture.	Rapid	heart,	chills,	nausea.	It’s	the	juice	of	a	plant
native	to	Seven	Cities.	If	you	drank	down	what’s	left	in	that	tiny	bottle	you’d	be


dead	in	minutes.”
This	time	she	did	laugh,	the	sound	shaky	and	brittle.	“I	might	welcome
Hood’s	Gates;	Heboric.”	She	squinted	at	him.	The	blue	glow	was	fading.
“Fener	must	be	very	forgiving.”
He	frowned	at	that.	“I	can	make	no	sense	of	it,	to	be	honest.	I	can	think	of
more	than	one	High	Priest	to	Fener	who’d	choke	at	the	suggestion	that	the	boar
god	was…forgiving.”	He	sighed.	“But	it	seems	you’re	right.”
“You	might	want	to	offer	thanks.	A	sacrifice.”
“I	might,”	he	growled,	looking	away.
“It	must	have	been	a	great	offense	that	drove	you	from	your	god,
Heboric.”
He	did	not	reply.	After	a	moment	he	rose,	eyes	on	the	flame-wracked	town.
“Riders	coming.”
She	sat	up	straighter,	still	too	dizzy	to	stand.	“Beneth?”
He	shook	his	head.
Moments	later	a	troop	of	Malazans	rode	up,	halting	directly	opposite
Heboric	and	Felisin.	At	the	head	was	Captain	Sawark.	A	Dosii	blade	had	laid
open	one	cheek.	His	uniform	was	wet	and	dark	with	blood.	Felisin
involuntarily	shrank	back	from	his	cold	lizard	eyes	as	they	fixed	on	her.
He	finally	spoke,	“When	you’re	up	on	the	rim…look	south.”
Heboric	cursed	softly	in	surprise.	“You’re	letting	us	go?	Thank	you,
Captain.”
His	face	darkened.	“Not	for	you,	old	man.	It’s	seditious	bastards	like	you
that	are	the	cause	of	all	this.	I’d	rather	spit	you	on	a	spear	right	now.”	He	made
as	if	to	say	something	more,	his	eyes	finding	Felisin	once	again,	but	instead	he
simply	reined	his	mount	around.
The	two	fugitives	watched	the	troop	ride	back	into	Skullcup.	They	were
heading	for	a	battle.	Felisin	knew	this	instinctively.	Another	sourceless
certainty	told	her,	in	a	whisper,	that	they	would	all	die.	Captain	Sawark.	Pella.
Every	Malazan.	She	glanced	over	at	Heboric.	The	man	looked	thoughtful	as	he
watched	the	troop	reach	the	edge	of	town,	then	vanish	into	the	smoke.
A	moment	later	Baudin	rose	from	a	bed	of	reeds	nearby.
Felisin	clambered	to	her	feet	and	stepped	toward	him.	“Where’s	Beneth?”
“Dead,	lass.”
“You—you…”	Her	words	were	drowned	out	in	a	flood	of	pain	rising	up
within	her,	an	anguish	more	thorough	in	shattering	her	than	anything	she’d	yet
suffered.	She	staggered	back	a	step.
Baudin’s	small,	flat	eyes	held	steady	on	her.
Heboric	cleared	his	throat.	“We’d	best	hurry.	Dawn’s	not	far	off,	and	while


I	doubt	our	crossing	the	lake	is	likely	to	be	noticed,	there’s	no	point	in	making
our	intentions	obvious.	After	all,	we’re	Malazan.”	He	strode	down	to	the
waiting	bladders.	“The	plan	is	to	wait	out	the	coming	day	at	the	other	end	of	the
reach,	then	set	out	after	sunset.	Less	likely	that	any	roving	bands	of	Dosii	will
see	us.”
Dully,	Felisin	followed	the	two	men	to	the	lake’s	edge.	Baudin	strapped	one
of	the	packs	against	Heboric’s	chest.	Felisin	realized	she	would	have	to	share
the	other	bladder	with	Baudin.	She	studied	the	big	man	as	he	checked	the
netting	one	last	time.
Beneth’s	dead.	So	he	says.	He	probably	didn’t	even	look	for	him.	Beneth’s
alive.	He	must	be.	Nothing	more	than	a	bloodied	face.	Baudin’s	lying.
Sinker	Lake’s	water	washed	the	last	of	the	mud	and	tincture	from	Felisin’s
skin.	It	was	not	nearly	enough.
	
The	cliff	face	bounced	back	the	echoes	of	their	harsh	breaths.	Chilled	and
feeling	the	water	striving	to	pull	her	down,	Felisin	tightened	her	grip	on	the
netting.	“I	see	no	cave,”	she	gasped.
Baudin	grunted.	“Surprised	you	can	see	anything	at	all,”	he	said.
She	made	no	reply.	The	flesh	around	her	eyes	had	swollen	until	only	slits
remained.	Her	ears	felt	like	slabs	of	meat,	heavy	and	huge,	and	the	flesh	inside
her	mouth	had	closed	around	her	teeth.	She	was	having	difficulty	breathing,
constantly	clearing	her	throat	without	effect.	The	discomforts	left	her	feeling
dislocated,	as	if	she	had	no	vanity	left	to	sting,	bringing	an	almost	amused
relief.
Surviving	this	is	all	that	counts.	Let	Tavore	see	all	the	scars	she’s	given	me,
the	day	we	come	face	to	face.	I	need	say	nothing,	then,	to	justify	my	revenge.
“The	opening	is	under	the	surface,”	Heboric	said.	“We	need	to	puncture
these	bladders	and	swim	down.	Baudin	will	go	first,	with	a	rope	tied	to	his
waist.	Hold	on	to	that	rope,	lass,	else	you’ll	be	pulled	to	the	bottom.”
Baudin	handed	her	a	dagger,	then	laid	the	rope	over	the	bobbing	pack.	A
moment	later	he	pushed	himself	toward	the	cliff	wall	and	vanished	beneath	the
lake’s	surface.
Felisin	snatched	at	the	rope,	gripping	it	hard	as	she	watched	the	coils	play
out.	“How	far	down?”
“Seven,	eight	feet,”	Heboric	said.	“Then	about	fifteen	feet	through	the	cave
until	you’ll	find	your	next	breath.	Can	you	manage	it,	lass?”
I	will	have	to.
Faint	screams	drifted	across	the	lake.	The	burning	town’s	last,	pitiful	cries.


It	had	happened	so	swiftly,	almost	quietly—a	single	night	to	bring	Skullcup	to
a	bloody	end.	It	didn’t	seem	real.
She	felt	a	tug	on	the	rope.
“Your	turn,”	Heboric	said.	“Puncture	the	bladder,	let	it	sink	away	from	you,
then	follow	the	rope.”
She	reversed	her	grip	on	the	dagger	and	stabbed	down.	A	gust	of	air
whistled,	the	pack	sagging.	Like	hands,	the	water	pulled	her	down.	She	snatched
a	frantic	breath	before	slipping	under.	In	a	moment	the	rope	no	longer	led
down,	but	up.	She	came	up	against	the	slick	face	of	the	cliff.	The	dagger	fell
away	as	she	clutched	the	rope	with	both	hands	and	pulled	herself	along.
The	cave	mouth	was	a	deeper	blackness,	the	water	bitter	cold.	Already	her
lungs	screamed	for	air.	She	felt	herself	blacking	out,	but	savagely	pushed	the
feeling	away.	A	glimmer	of	reflected	light	showed	ahead.	Kicking	out	as	her
mouth	filled	with	water,	she	clawed	her	way	toward	it.
Hands	reached	down	to	grip	her	tunic’s	hemmed	collar	and	pulled	her
effortlessly	up	into	air,	into	light.	She	lay	on	hard,	cold	stone,	racked	with
coughs.	An	oil-wick	lantern	glowed	beside	her	head.	Beyond	it,	leaning	against
the	wall,	were	two	wood-framed	travel	packs	and	bladders	swollen	with	water.
“You	lost	my	damned	knife,	didn’t	you?”
“Hood	take	you,	Baudin.”
He	grunted	his	laugh,	then	focused	his	attention	on	reeling	in	the	rope.
Heboric’s	head	broke	the	black	surface	moments	later.	Baudin	pulled	the	expriest	onto	the	rock	shelf.
“Must	be	trouble	up	top,”	the	big	man	said.	“Our	supplies	were	brought
down	here.”
“So	I	see.”	Heboric	sat	up,	gasping	as	he	recovered	his	breath.
“Best	you	two	stay	here	while	I	scout,”	Baudin	said.
“Aye.	Off	with	you,	then.”
As	Baudin	disappeared	up	the	reach.	Felisin	sat	up.	“What	kind	of	trouble?”
Heboric	shrugged.
“No,”	she	said.	“You’ve	suspicions.”
He	grimaced.	“Sawark	said,	‘Look	south.’”
“So?”
“So	just	that,	lass.	Let’s	wait	for	Baudin,	shall	we?”
“I’m	cold.”
“We	spared	no	room	for	extra	clothing.	Food	and	water,	a	few	weapons,	a
fire	kit.	There’s	blankets	but	best	keep	them	dry.”
“They’ll	dry	out	soon	enough,”	she	snapped,	crawling	over	to	one	of	the
packs.


Baudin	returned	a	few	minutes	later	and	crouched	down	beside	Heboric.
Shivering	under	a	blanket,	Felisin	watched	the	two	men.	“No,	Baudin,”	she	said
as	he	prepared	to	whisper	something	to	the	ex-priest,	“loud	enough	for	all	of
us.”
The	big	man	glanced	at	Heboric,	who	shrugged.
“Dosin	Pali	is	thirty	leagues	away,”	Baudin	said.	“Yet	you	can	see	its
glow.”
Heboric	frowned.	“Even	a	firestorm	wouldn’t	be	visible	at	such	a	distance,
Baudin.”
“True	enough,	and	it’s	no	firestorm.	It’s	sorcery,	old	man.	A	mage	battle.”
“Hood’s	breath,”	Heboric	muttered.	“Some	battle!”
“It’s	come,”	Baudin	growled.
“What	has?”	Felisin	asked.
“Seven	Cities	has	risen,	lass.	Dryjhna.	The	Whirlwind’s	come.”
	
The	hogg	boat	was	all	of	thirteen	feet	in	length.	Duiker	paused	a	long	moment
before	clambering	down	into	it.	Six	inches	of	water	sloshed	beneath	the	two
flat	boards	that	formed	the	craft’s	deck.	Rags	stoppered	a	score	of	minor	leaks
in	the	hull,	with	various	degrees	of	efficacy.	The	smell	of	rotting	fish	was
almost	overwhelming.
Wrapped	in	his	army-issue	raincape,	Kulp	had	not	moved	from	where	he
stood	on	the	dock.	“And	what,”	he	asked	tonelessly,	“did	you	pay	for	this…
boat?”
The	historian	sighed,	glancing	up	at	the	mage.	“Can	you	not	repair	it?
What	was	your	warren	again,	Kulp?”
“Boat	repair,”	the	man	answered.
“Very	well,”	Duiker	said,	climbing	back	onto	the	dock.	“I	take	your	point.
To	cross	the	Strait	you	will	need	something	more	seaworthy	than	this.	The	man
who	sold	me	this	craft	seems	to	have	exaggerated	its	qualities.”
“A	haral’s	prerogative.	Better	had	you	hired	a	craft.”
Duiker	grunted.	“Who	could	I	trust?”
“Now	what?”
The	historian	shrugged.	“Back	to	the	inn.	This	requires	a	new	plan.”
They	made	their	way	up	the	rickety	dock	and	entered	the	dirt	track	that
passed	for	the	village’s	main	thoroughfare.	The	fisher	shacks	on	either	side
displayed	a	paucity	of	pride	common	to	small	communities	in	the	shadow	of	a
large	city.	Dusk	had	fallen,	and	apart	from	a	pack	of	three	scrawny	dogs	taking
turns	rolling	on	the	carcass	of	a	fish,	there	was	no	one	about.	Heavy	curtains


blotted	out	most	of	the	light	coming	from	the	shacks.	The	air	was	hot,	an
inland	wind	holding	at	bay	the	sea	breeze.
The	village	inn	stood	on	stilts,	a	sprawling,	single-story	structure	of
bleached	wood	frame,	burlap	walls	and	thatched	roof.	Crabs	scuttled	in	the
sand	beneath	it.	Opposite	the	inn	was	the	stone	blockhouse	of	a	Malazan
Coastal	Guard	detachment—four	sailors	from	Cawn	and	two	marines	whose
appearance	betrayed	nothing	of	their	origins.	For	them,	the	old	national
allegiances	no	longer	held	any	relevance.	The	new	Imperial	breed,	Duiker
mused	as	he	and	Kulp	entered	the	inn	and	returned	to	the	table	they’d	occupied
earlier.	The	Malazan	Guards	were	crowded	around	another,	close	to	the	back
wall	where	the	burlap	had	been	pulled	aside,	revealing	the	tranquil	scene	of
withered	grasses,	white	sand	and	glittering	sea.	Duiker	envied	the	soldiers	the
fresh	air	that	no	doubt	drifted	in	to	where	they	sat.
They’d	yet	to	approach,	but	the	historian	knew	it	was	only	a	matter	of	time.
In	this	village	travelers	would	be	rare,	and	one	wearing	the	field	cape	of	a
soldier	even	rarer.	Thus	far,	however,	translating	curiosity	into	action	had
proved	too	great	an	effort.
Kulp	gestured	to	the	barman	for	a	jug	of	ale,	then	leaned	close	to	Duiker.
“There’s	going	to	be	questions.	Soon.	That’s	one	problem.	We	don’t	have	a
boat.	That’s	another.	I’m	a	poor	excuse	for	a	sailor,	that’s	a	third—”
“All	right,	all	right,”	the	historian	hissed.	“Hood’s	breath,	let	me	think	in
peace!”
His	expression	sour,	Kulp	leaned	back.
Moths	danced	clumsily	between	the	sputtering	lanterns	in	the	room.	There
were	no	villagers	present,	and	the	lone	barman’s	attention	seemed	close	to
obsessive	on	the	Malazan	soldiers,	holding	his	thin,	dark	eyes	on	them	even	as
he	set	down	the	ale	jug	in	front	of	Kulp.
Watching	the	barman	leave,	the	mage	grunted.	“This	night’s	passing
strange,	Duiker.”
“Aye.”	Where	is	everyone?
The	scrape	of	a	chair	drew	their	attention	to	the	ranking	Malazan,	a
corporal	by	the	sigil	on	his	surcoat,	who’d	risen	and	now	approached.	Beneath
the	dull	tin	sigil	was	a	larger	stain,	where	the	surcoat’s	dye	was	unweathered—
the	man	had	once	been	a	sergeant.
To	match	his	frame,	the	corporal’s	face	was	flat	and	wide,	evincing	north
Kanese	blood	somewhere	in	his	ancestry.	His	head	was	shaved,	showing	razor
scars,	some	still	blotted	with	dried	blood.	His	gaze	was	fixed	on	Kulp.
The	mage	spoke	first.	“Watch	your	tongue,	lest	you	keep	walking
backward.”


The	soldier	blinked.	“Backward?”
“Sergeant,	then	corporal—you	bucking	for	private	now?	You’ve	been
warned.”
The	man	seemed	unaffected.	“I	see	no	rank	showing,”	he	growled.
“Only	because	you	don’t	know	what	to	look	for.	Go	back	to	your	table,
Corporal,	and	leave	our	business	to	us.”
“You’re	Seventh	Army.”	He	clearly	had	no	intention	of	returning	to	his
table.	“A	deserter.”
Kulp’s	wiry	brows	rose.	“Corporal,	you’ve	just	come	face	to	face	with	the
Seventh’s	entire	Mage	Cadre.	Now	back	out	of	my	face	before	I	put	gills	and
scales	on	yours.”
The	corporal’s	eyes	flicked	to	Duiker,	then	back	to	Kulp.
“Wrong,”	the	mage	sighed.	“I’m	the	entire	cadre.	This	man’s	my	guest.”
“Gills	and	scales,	huh?”	The	corporal	set	his	wide	hands	down	on	the
tabletop	and	leaned	close	to	Kulp.	“I	get	even	a	sniff	of	you	opening	a	warren,
you’ll	find	a	knife	in	your	throat.	This	is	my	guardpost,	magicker,	and	any
business	you	got	here	is	my	business.	Now,	start	explaining	yourselves,	before
I	cut	those	big	ears	off	your	head	and	add	’em	to	my	belt.	Sir.”
Duiker	cleared	his	throat.	“Before	this	goes	any	further—”
“Shut	your	mouth!”	the	corporal	snapped,	still	glaring	at	Kulp.
Distant	shouting	interrupted	them.	“Truth!”	the	corporal	bellowed.	“Go	see
what’s	happening	outside.”
A	young	Cawn	sailor	leaped	to	his	feet,	checking	a	newly	issued	short
sword	scabbarded	at	his	hip	as	he	crossed	to	the	door.
“We	are	here,”	Duiker	told	the	corporal,	“to	purchase	a	boat—”
A	startled	curse	came	from	just	outside,	followed	by	a	frantic	scrabbling	of
boots	on	the	rickety	inn	steps.	The	recruit	named	Truth	tumbled	back	inside,	his
face	white.	An	impressive	stream	of	Cawn	dockside	curses	issued	from	the
youth’s	mouth,	finishing	with:	“—got	an	armed	mob	outside,	Corporal,	and
they	ain’t	interested	in	talking.	Saw	them	split,	about	ten	heading	to	the	Ripath.”
The	other	sailors	were	on	their	feet.	One	addressed	the	corporal.	“They’ll
torch	her,	Gesler,	then	we’ll	be	stuck	on	this	stinking	strip	of	beach—”
“Arms	out	and	form	up,”	Gesler	growled.	He	rose,	turning	to	the	other
marine.	“Front	door,	Stormy.	Find	out	who’s	leading	that	group	out	there	and
stick	a	quarrel	between	his	eyes.”
“We	have	to	save	the	boat!”	the	sailors’	spokesman	said.
Gesler	nodded.	“That	we	will,	Vered.”
The	marine	named	Stormy	took	position	at	the	door,	his	cocked	assault
crossbow	appearing	as	if	from	nowhere.	Outside,	the	shouting	had	grown


louder,	closer.	The	mob	was	working	itself	into	the	courage	it	needed	to	rush
the	inn.	The	boy	Truth	stood	in	the	center	of	the	room,	the	short	sword
twitching	in	his	hand,	his	face	red	with	rage.
“Calm	yourself,	lad,”	Gesler	said.	His	eyes	fell	to	Kulp.	“I’m	less	likely	to
cut	off	your	ears	if	you	open	a	warren	now,	Mage.”
Duiker	asked,	“You’ve	made	enemies	in	this	village,	Corporal?”
The	man	smiled.	“This	has	been	coming	for	some	time.	Ripath	is	fully
provisioned.	We	can	get	you	to	Hissar…maybe…we	got	to	get	out	of	this	first.
Can	you	use	a	crossbow?”
The	historian	sighed,	then	nodded.
“Expect	some	arrows	through	the	walls,”	Stormy	said	from	the	doorway.
“Found	their	leader	yet?”
“Aye,	and	he’s	keeping	his	distance.”
“We	can’t	wait—to	the	back	door,	everyone!”
The	barman,	who’d	been	crouching	behind	the	small	counter	on	one	side
of	the	room,	now	stepped	forward,	hunched	crablike	in	expectation	of	the	first
flight	of	arrows	through	the	burlap	wall.	“The	tab,	Mezla—many	weeks	now.
Seventy-two	jakatas—”
“What’s	your	life	worth?”	Gesler	asked,	gesturing	for	Truth	to	join	the
sailors	as	they	slipped	through	the	break	in	the	rear	wall.
The	barman’s	eyes	went	wide,	then	he	ducked	his	head.	“Seventy-two
jakatas,	Mezla?”
“About	right,”	the	corporal	nodded.
Cool,	damp	air,	smelling	of	moss	and	wet	stone,	filled	the	room.	Duiker
looked	at	Kulp,	who	mutely	shook	his	head.	The	historian	rose.	“They’ve	got	a
mage,	Corporal—”
A	roar	rushed	from	the	street	outside	and	struck	the	front	of	the	inn	like	a
wave.	The	wooden	frame	bowed,	the	burlap	walls	bellying.	Kulp	loosed	a
warning	shout,	pitching	from	his	chair	and	rolling	across	the	floor.	Wood
split,	cloth	tore.
Stormy	lunged	away	from	the	front,	and	all	at	once	everyone	left	in	the
room	was	bolting	for	the	rear	exit.	The	floor	lifted	under	them	as	the	front
stilts	lost	their	footing,	pitching	everyone	toward	the	back	wall.	Tables	and
chairs	toppled,	joining	the	headlong	rush.	Screaming,	the	barman	vanished
under	a	rack	of	wine	jugs.
Tumbling	through	the	rent,	Duiker	fell	through	the	darkness	to	land	on	a
heap	of	dried	seaweed.	Kulp	landed	on	him,	all	knees	and	elbows,	driving	the
breath	from	the	historian’s	lungs.
The	inn	was	still	rising	from	the	front	as	the	sorcerous	wave	took	hold	of


all	it	touched,	and	pushed.
“Do	something,	Kulp!”	Duiker	gasped.
In	answer	the	mage	pulled	the	historian	upright,	spun	him	around,	then
gave	him	a	hard	shove.	“Run!	That’s	what	we’re	going	to	do!”
The	sorcery	ravaging	the	inn	abruptly	ceased.	Still	balanced	on	its	rear
stilts,	the	building	pitched	back	down.	Cross-beams	snapped.	The	inn	seemed	to
explode,	the	wood	frame	shattering.	The	ceiling	collapsed	straight	down,
hitting	the	floor	in	a	cloud	of	sand	and	dust.
Stumbling	beside	Duiker	as	they	hurried	down	to	the	beach,	Stormy
grunted,	“Hood’s	just	paid	the	barman’s	tab,	eh?”	The	marine	gestured	with	the
crossbow	he	carried.	“I’m	here	to	take	care	of	you.	Corporal’s	gone	ahead—
we’re	looking	at	a	scrap	getting	to	Ripath’s	dock.”
“Where’s	Kulp?”	Duiker	demanded.	It	had	all	happened	so	fast,	he	was
feeling	overwhelmed	with	confusion.	“He	was	here	beside	me—”
“Gone	sniffing	after	that	spell-caster	is	my	guess.	Who	can	figure	mages,
eh?	Unless’n	he’s	run	away.	Hood	knows	he	ain’t	showed	much	so	far,	eh?”
They	reached	the	strand.	Thirty	paces	to	their	left	Gesler	and	the	sailors
were	closing	in	on	a	dozen	locals	who’d	taken	up	positions	in	front	of	a
narrow	dock.	A	low,	sleek	patrol	craft	with	a	single	mast	was	moored	there.	To
the	right	the	beach	stretched	in	a	gentle	curve	southward,	to	distant	Hissar…a
city	in	flames.	Duiker	staggered	to	a	halt,	staring	at	the	ruddy	sky	above	Hissar.
“Togg’s	teats!”	Stormy	hissed,	following	the	historian’s	gaze.	“Dryjhna’s
come.	Guess	we	won’t	be	taking	you	to	the	city	after	all,	eh?”
“Wrong,”	Duiker	said.	“I	need	to	rejoin	Coltaine.	My	horse	is	in	the	stables
—never	mind	the	damn	boat.”
“They’re	pinching	her	flanks	right	now,	I	bet.	Around	here,	people	ride
camels,	eat	horses.	Forget	it.”	He	reached	out	but	the	historian	pulled	away	and
began	running	up	the	strand,	away	from	Ripath	and	the	scrap	that	had	now
started	there.
Stormy	hesitated,	then,	growling	a	curse,	set	off	after	Duiker.
A	flash	of	sorcery	ignited	the	air	above	the	front	street,	followed	by	an
agonized	shriek.
Kulp,	Duiker	thought.	Delivering	or	dying.	He	stayed	on	the	beach,	running
parallel	to	the	village,	until	he	judged	he	was	opposite	the	stables,	then	he
turned	inward,	scrabbling	through	the	weeds	of	the	tide	line.	Stormy	moved	up
beside	the	historian.
“I’ll	just	see	you	safe	on	your	way,	eh?”
“My	thanks,”	Duiker	whispered.
“Who	are	you	anyway?”


“Imperial	Historian.	And	who	are	you,	Stormy?”
The	man	grunted.	“Nobody.	Nobody	at	all.”
They	slowed	as	they	slipped	between	the	first	row	of	huts,	keeping	to	the
shadows.	A	few	paces	from	the	street	the	air	blurred	in	front	of	them	and	Kulp
appeared.	His	cape	was	scorched,	his	face	red	from	a	fireflash.
“Why	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	two	here?”	he	demanded	in	a	hiss.	“There’s
a	High	Mage	out	prowling	around—Hood	knows	why	he’s	here.	Problem	is,
he	knows	I’m	here,	which	makes	me	bad	company	to	be	around—I	barely
squeezed	the	last	one—”
“That	scream	we	heard	was	yours?”	Duiker	asked.
“Ever	had	a	spell	roll	onto	you?	My	bones	have	been	rattled	damn	near	out
of	their	sockets.	I	shat	my	pants,	too.	But	I’m	alive.”
“So	far,”	Stormy	said,	grinning.
“Thanks	for	the	blessing,”	Kulp	muttered.
Duiker	said,	“We	need	to—”
The	night	blossomed	around	them,	a	coruscating,	flame-lit	explosion	that
flung	all	three	men	to	the	ground.	The	historian’s	shriek	of	pain	joined	two
others	as	the	sorcery	seemed	to	claw	into	his	flesh,	clutch	icy	cold	around	his
bones,	sending	jolts	of	agony	up	his	limbs.	His	scream	rose	higher	as	the
relentless	pain	reached	his	brain,	blotting	out	the	world	in	a	blood-misted	haze
that	seemed	to	sizzle	behind	his	eyes.	Duiker	thrashed	about	and	rolled	across
the	ground,	but	there	was	no	escape.	This	sorcery	was	killing	him,	a
horrifyingly	personal	assault,	invading	every	corner	of	his	being.
Then	it	was	gone.	He	lay	unmoving,	one	cheek	pressed	against	the	cool,
dusty	ground,	his	body	twitching	in	the	aftermath.	He’d	soiled	himself.	He’d
pissed	himself.	His	sweat	was	a	bitter	stink.
A	hand	clutched	the	collar	of	his	telaba.	Kulp’s	breath	gusted	hot	at	his	ear
as	the	mage	whispered,	“I	slapped	back.	Enough	to	sting.	We	need	to	get	to	the
boat—Gesler ’s—”
“Go	with	Stormy,”	Duiker	gasped.	“I’m	taking	the	horses—”
“Are	you	mad?”
Biting	back	a	scream,	the	historian	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.	He	staggered
as	memories	of	pain	rippled	through	his	limbs.	“Go	with	Stormy,	damn	you—
go!”
Kulp	stared	at	the	man,	then	his	eyes	narrowed.	“Aye,	ride	as	a	Dosii.	Might
work…”
Stormy,	his	face	white	as	death,	plucked	the	mage’s	sleeve.	“Gesler	won’t
wait	forever.”
“Aye.”	With	a	final	nod	at	Duiker,	the	mage	joined	the	marine.	They	ran


hard	back	down	to	the	beach.
Gesler	and	the	sailors	were	in	trouble.	Bodies	lay	sprawled	in	the	churnedup	sand	around	the	dock—the	first	dozen	locals	and	two	of	the	Cawn	sailors.
Gesler,	flanked	by	Truth	and	another	sailor,	were	struggling	to	hold	at	bay	a
newly	arrived	score	of	villagers—men	and	women—who	flung	themselves
forward	in	a	spitting	frenzy,	using	harpoons,	mallets,	cleavers,	some	with	only
their	bare	hands.	The	remaining	two	sailors—both	wounded—were	on	Ripath,
feebly	attempting	to	cast	off	the	lines.
Stormy	led	Kulp	to	within	a	dozen	paces	of	the	mob,	then	the	marine
crouched,	took	aim	and	fired	a	quarrel	into	the	press.	Someone	shrieked.
Stormy	slung	the	crossbow	over	a	shoulder	and	drew	a	short	sword	and
gutting	dagger.	“Got	anything	for	this,	Mage?”	he	demanded,	then,	without
waiting	for	a	reply,	he	plunged	forward,	striking	the	mob	on	its	flank.
Villagers	reeled;	none	was	killed,	but	many	were	horribly	maimed	as	the
marine	waded	into	the	press—the	dead	posed	no	burden;	the	wounded	did.
Gesler	now	held	the	dock	alone,	as	Truth	was	pulling	a	downed	comrade
back	toward	the	boat.	One	of	the	wounded	sailors	on	Ripath’s	deck	had	stopped
moving.
Kulp	hesitated,	knowing	that	whatever	sorcery	he	unleashed	would	draw
down	on	them	the	High	Mage.	The	cadre	mage	did	not	think	it	likely	that	he
could	withstand	another	attack.	All	his	joints	were	bleeding	inside,	swelling	the
flesh	with	blood.	By	the	morning	he	would	not	be	able	to	move.	If	I	survive	this
night.	Even	so,	more	subtle	ploys	remained.
Kulp	raised	his	arms,	voicing	a	keening	shriek.	A	wall	of	fire	erupted	in
front	of	him,	then	rolled,	tumbling	and	growing,	rushing	toward	the	villagers.
Who	broke,	then	ran.	Kulp	sent	the	flame	up	the	beach	in	pursuit.	When	it
reached	the	banked	sward,	it	vanished.
Stormy	whirled.	“If	you	could	do	that—”
“It	was	nothing,”	Kulp	said,	joining	the	men.
“A	wall	of—”
“I	meant	nothing!	A	Hood-blinked	illusion,	you	fool!	Now,	let’s	get	out	of
here!”
They	lost	Vered	twenty	spans	from	the	shore,	a	harpoon-head	buried	deep
in	his	chest	finally	gushing	the	last	of	his	blood	onto	the	slick	deck.	Gesler
unceremoniously	rolled	the	man	over	the	side.	Remaining	upright	in	addition
to	the	corporal	were	the	youth	Truth,	Stormy	and	Kulp.	Another	sailor	was
slowly	losing	a	battle	with	a	slashed	artery	in	his	left	thigh	and	was	but	minutes
from	Hood’s	Gate.
“Everyone	stay	quiet,”	Kulp	whispered.	“Show	no	lights—the	High	Mage


is	on	the	beach.”
Breaths	were	held,	including	a	pitiless	hand	clamped	down	over	the	dying
sailor ’s	mouth	until	the	man’s	moaning	ceased.
With	barely	a	storm-sail	rigged,	Ripath	slipped	slowly	from	the	shallow
bay,	her	keel	parting	water	with	a	soft	susurration.
Loud	enough,	Kulp	knew.	He	opened	his	warren,	threw	sounds	in	random
directions,	a	muted	voice	here,	a	creak	of	wood	there.	He	cast	a	shroud	of
gloom	over	the	area,	holding	the	power	of	his	warren	back,	letting	it	trickle
forth	to	deceive,	not	challenge.
Sorcery	flashed	sixty	spans	to	their	left,	fooled	by	a	thrown	sound.	The
gloom	swallowed	the	magic’s	light.
The	night	fell	silent	once	again.	Gesler	and	others	seemed	to	grasp	what
Kulp	was	doing.	Their	eyes	held	on	him,	hopeful,	with	barely	checked	fear.
Truth	held	the	tiller,	motionless,	not	daring	to	do	anything	but	keep	the	sail
ahead	of	the	soft	breeze.
It	seemed	they	merely	crawled	on	the	water.	Sweat	dripped	from	Kulp—he
was	soaked	through	with	the	effort	of	evading	the	High	Mage’s	questing
senses.	He	could	feel	those	deadly	probes,	only	now	realizing	that	his	opponent
was	a	woman,	not	a	man.
Far	to	the	south,	Hissar ’s	harbor	was	a	glowing	wall	of	black-smeared
flames.	No	effort	was	made	to	angle	toward	it,	and	Kulp	understood	as	well	as
the	others	that	there	would	be	no	succor	found	there.	Seven	Cities	had	risen	in
mutiny.
And	we’re	at	sea.	Is	there	a	safe	harbor	left	to	us?	Gesler	said	this	boat	was
provisioned—far	enough	to	take	us	to	Aren?	Through	hostile	waters	at	that…	A
better	option	would	be	Falar,	but	that	was	over	six	hundred	leagues	south	of
Dosin	Pali.
Then	another	thought	struck	him,	even	as	the	questing	of	the	High	Mage
faded,	then	finally	vanished.	Heboric	Light	Touch—the	poor	bastard’s	heading
for	the	rendezvous	if	all’s	gone	as	planned.	Crossing	a	desert	to	a	lifeless	coast.
“Breathe	easy	now,”	the	mage	said.	“She’s	abandoned	the	hunt.”
“Out	of	range?”	Truth	asked.
“No,	just	lost	interest.	I’d	guess	she	has	more	important	matters	to	attend
to,	lad.	Corporal	Gesler.”
“Aye?”
“We	need	to	cross	the	strait.	To	the	Otataral	Coast.”
“What	in	Hood’s	name	for,	Mage?”
“Sorry,	this	time	I’m	pulling	rank.	Do	as	I	command.”
“And	what	if	we	just	push	you	over	the	side?”	Gesler	inquired	calmly.


“There’s	dhenrabi	out	here,	feeding	along	the	edge	of	Sahul	Shelf.	You’d	be	a
tasty	morsel…”
Kulp	sighed.	“We	go	to	pick	up	a	High	Priest	of	Fener,	Corporal.	Feed	me
to	a	dhenrabi	and	no	one	mourns	the	loss.	Anger	a	High	Priest	and	his	foultempered	god	might	well	cock	one	red	eye	in	your	direction.	Are	you	prepared
for	that	risk?”
The	corporal	leaned	back	and	barked	a	laugh.	Stormy	and	Truth	were
grinning	as	well.
Kulp	scowled.	“You	find	this	amusing?”
Stormy	leaned	over	the	gunnel	and	spat	into	the	sea.	He	wiped	his	mouth
with	the	back	of	his	hand,	then	said,	“It	seems	Fener ’s	already	cocked	an	eye	in
our	direction,	Mage.	We’re	Boar	Company,	of	the	disbanded	First	Army.
Before	Laseen	crushed	the	cult,	that	is.	Now	we’re	just	marines	attached	to	a
miserable	Coastal	Guard.”
“Ain’t	stopped	us	from	following	Fener,	Mage,”	Gesler	said.	“Or	even
recruiting	new	followers	to	the	warrior	cult,”	he	added,	nodding	toward	Truth.
“So	just	point	the	way—Otataral	Coast,	you	said.	Angle	her	due	east,	lad,	and
let’s	get	this	sail	up	and	ready	the	spinnaker	for	the	morning	winds.”
Slowly,	Kulp	sat	back.	“Anyone	else	need	to	wash	out	their	leggings?”	he
asked.
	
Wrapped	in	his	telaba,	Duiker	rode	from	the	village.	There	were	figures	to
either	side	of	the	coastal	road,	featureless	in	the	faint	moon’s	light.	The	cool
desert	air	seemed	to	carry	in	it	the	residue	of	a	sandstorm,	a	desiccating	haze
that	parched	the	throat.	Reaching	the	crossroads,	the	historian	reined	in.
Southward	the	coastal	road	continued	on,	down	to	Hissar.	A	trader	track	led
west,	inland.	A	quarter-mile	down	this	track	was	encamped	an	army.
There	was	no	order	evident.	Thousands	of	tents	were	haphazardly	pitched
around	a	huge	central	corral	shrouded	in	fire-lit	clouds	of	dust.	Tribal	chants
drifted	across	the	sands.	Along	the	track,	no	more	than	fifty	long	paces	from
Duiker ’s	position,	a	hapless	squad	of	Malazan	soldiers	writhed	on	what	were
locally	called	Sliding	Beds—four	tall	spears	each	set	upright,	the	victim	set
atop	the	jagged	points,	at	the	shoulders	and	upper	thighs.	Depending	on	their
weight	and	their	strength	of	will	in	staying	motionless,	the	impaling	and	the
slow	slide	down	to	the	ground	could	take	hours.	With	Hood’s	blessing,	the
morrow’s	sun	would	hasten	the	tortured	death.	The	historian	felt	his	heart	grow
cold	with	rage.
He	could	not	help	them,	Duiker	knew.	It	was	challenge	enough	to	simply


stay	alive	in	a	countryside	aflame	with	murderous	lust.	But	there	would	come	a
time	for	retribution.	If	the	gods	will	it.
Mage	fires	blossomed	vast	and—at	this	distance—silent	over	Hissar.	Was
Coltaine	still	alive?	Bult?	The	Seventh?	Had	Sormo	divined	what	was	coming
in	time?
He	tapped	his	heels	against	his	mount’s	flanks,	continued	down	the	coastal
road.	The	renegade	army’s	appearance	was	a	shock.	It	had	emerged	as	if	from
nowhere,	and	for	all	the	chaos	of	the	encampment	there	were	commanders
there,	filled	with	bloodthirsty	intent	and	capable	of	achieving	what	they
planned.	This	was	no	haphazard	revolt.	Kulp	said	a	High	Mage.	Who	else	is	out
there?	Sha’ik	has	had	years	in	which	to	build	her	army	of	the	Apocalypse,
despatch	her	agents,	plan	this	night—and	all	that	will	follow.	We	knew	it	was
happening.	Laseen	should	have	stuck	Pormqual’s	head	on	a	spike	long	ago.	A
capable	High	Fist	could	have	crushed	this.
“Dosii	kim’aral!”
Three	cloaked	shapes	rose	from	the	flood	track	on	the	inland	side	of	the
road.	“A	night	of	glory!”	Duiker	responded,	not	slowing	as	he	rode	past.
“Wait,	Dosii!	The	Apocalypse	waits	to	embrace	you!”	The	figure	gestured
toward	the	encampment.
“I	have	kin	in	Hissari	Harbor,”	the	historian	replied.	“I	go	to	share	in	the
riches	of	liberation!”	Duiker	reined	in	suddenly	and	pulled	his	horse	around.
“Unless	the	Seventh	has	won	back	the	city—is	this	the	news	you	have	for	me?”
The	spokesman	laughed.	“They	are	crushed.	Destroyed	in	their	beds,
Dosii!	Hissar	has	been	freed	of	the	Mezla	curse!”
“Then	I	ride!”	Duiker	kicked	the	horse	forward	again.	He	held	his	breath	as
he	continued	on,	but	the	tribesmen	did	not	call	after	him.	The	Seventh	gone?
Does	Coltaine	ride	a	sliding	bed	right	now?	It	was	hard	to	believe,	yet	it	might
well	be	true.	Clearly	the	attack	had	been	sudden,	backed	by	high	sorcery—with
me	dragging	Kulp	away,	on	this	night	of	all	nights,	Hood	curse	my	bones.	For
all	the	lives	within	him,	Sormo	E’nath	was	still	a	boy,	his	flesh	hardly	steeled
to	such	a	challenge.	He	might	well	have	bloodied	a	few	noses	among	the
enemy’s	mages.	To	expect	or	hope	for	more	than	that	was	being	unfair.	They
would	have	fought	hard,	every	one	of	them.	Hissar ’s	price	would	have	been
high.
Nonetheless,	Duiker	would	have	to	see	for	himself.	The	Imperial	Historian
could	do	no	less.	More,	he	could	ride	among	the	enemy	and	that	was	an
extraordinary	opportunity.	Never	mind	the	risks.	He	would	gather	all	the
information	he	could,	anticipating	an	eventual	return	to	the	ranks	of	a	Malazan
punitive	force,	where	his	knowledge	could	be	put	to	lethal	use.	In	other	words,


a	spy.	So	much	for	objectivity,	Duiker.	The	image	of	the	Malazan	soldiers
lining	the	trader	track,	dying	slowly	on	the	sliding	beds,	was	enough	to	sear
away	his	detachment.
Magic	flared	in	the	fishing	village	half	a	mile	behind	him.	Duiker
hesitated,	then	rode	on.	Kulp	was	a	survivor,	and	by	the	look	of	that	Coastal
Guard,	he	had	veterans	at	his	side.	The	mage	had	faced	powerful	sorcery
before—what	he	could	not	defeat,	he	could	escape.	Duiker ’s	soldiering	days
were	long	past,	his	presence	more	of	an	impediment	than	an	asset—they	were
better	off	without	him.
But	what	would	Kulp	do	now?	If	there	were	any	survivors	among	the
Seventh,	then	the	cadre	mage’s	place	was	with	them.	What,	then,	of	Heboric’s
fate?	Well,	I’ve	done	what	I	could	for	the	old	handless	bastard.	Fener	guard
you,	old	man.
There	were	no	refugees	on	the	road.	It	seemed	the	fanatic	call	to	arms	was
complete—all	had	proclaimed	themselves	soldiers	of	Dryjhna.	Old	women,
fisherwives,	children	and	pious	grandfathers.	Nonetheless,	Duiker	had	been
expecting	to	find	Malazans,	or	at	the	very	least	signs	of	their	passage,	scenes
where	their	efforts	to	escape	came	to	a	grisly	end.	Instead,	the	raised	military
road	stretched	bare,	ghostly	in	the	moon’s	silver	light.
Against	the	glare	of	distant	Hissar	appeared	desert	capemoths,	wheeling
and	fluttering	like	flakes	of	ash	as	broad	across	as	a	splayed	hand	as	they
crossed	back	and	forth	in	front	of	the	historian.	They	were	carrion-eaters,	and
they	were	heading	in	the	same	direction	as	Duiker,	in	growing	numbers.
Within	minutes	the	night	was	alive	with	the	silent,	spectral	insects,	whirling
past	the	historian	on	all	sides.	Duiker	struggled	against	the	chill	dread	rising
within	him.	“The	world’s	harbingers	of	death	are	many	and	varied.”	He
frowned,	trying	to	recall	where	he’d	heard	those	words.	Probably	from	one	of
the	countless	dirges	to	Hood,	sung	by	the	priests	during	the	Season	of	Rot	in
Unta.
The	first	of	the	city’s	outlying	slums	appeared	in	the	fading	gloom	ahead,	a
narrow	cluster	of	shacks	and	huts	clinging	to	the	shelf	above	the	beach.	Smoke
now	rode	the	air,	smelling	of	burning	painted	wood	and	scorched	cloth.	The
smell	of	a	city	destroyed,	the	smell	of	anger	and	blind	hatred.	It	was	all	too
familiar	to	Duiker,	and	it	made	him	feel	old.
Two	children	raced	across	the	road,	ducking	between	shacks.	One	voiced	a
laugh	that	pealed	with	madness,	too	knowing	by	far	to	come	from	one	so
young.	The	historian	rode	past	the	spot,	his	skin	crawling.	He	was	astonished	to
feel	the	fear	within	him—afraid	of	children?	Old	man,	you	don’t	belong	here.
The	sky	was	lightening	over	the	strait	on	his	left.	The	capemoths	were


plunging	into	the	city	ahead,	vanishing	inside	the	roiling	clouds	of	smoke.
Duiker	reined	in.	The	coastal	road	split	here,	the	main	track	leading	straight	to
become	a	main	thoroughfare	of	the	city.	A	second	road,	on	the	right,	skirted
the	city	and	led	to	the	Malazan	barracks	compound.	The	historian	gazed	down
that	road,	squinting.	Black	columns	of	smoke	rose	half	a	mile	away	above	the
barracks,	the	columns	bending	high	up	where	a	desert	wind	caught	hold	and
pushed	them	seaward.
Butchered	in	their	beds?	The	possibility	suddenly	seemed	all	too	real.	He
rode	toward	the	barracks.	On	his	right,	as	shadows	appeared	with	the	rising
sun,	the	city	of	Hissar	burned.	Support	beams	were	giving	way,	mudbrick	walls
tumbling,	cut	stone	shattering	explosively	in	the	blistering	heat.	Smoke
covered	the	scene	with	its	deathly,	bitter	shawl.	Every	now	and	then	a	distant
scream	sounded	from	the	city’s	heart.	It	was	clear	that	the	mutiny’s	destructive
ferocity	had	turned	on	itself.	Freedom	had	been	won,	at	the	cost	of	everything.
He	reached	the	trampled	earth	where	the	trader	encampment	had	once	been
—where	he	and	the	warlock	Sormo	had	witnessed	the	divination.	The	camp	had
been	hastily	abandoned,	possibly	only	hours	earlier.	A	pack	of	dogs	from	the
city	now	rooted	through	the	rubbish	left	behind.
Opposite	the	grounds,	and	on	the	other	side	of	the	Faladhan	road,	rose	the
fortified	wall	of	the	Malazan	compound.	Duiker	slowed	his	mount	to	a	walk,
then	a	halt.	Streaks	of	black	scarred	the	few	sections	of	bleached	stone
remaining	upright.	The	sorcery	that	had	assailed	the	wall	had	breached	it	in
four	places	that	he	could	see,	each	one	a	sundering	of	stone	wide	enough	to
rush	a	phalanx	through.	Bodies	crowded	the	breaches,	sprawled	amidst	the
tumbled	blocks.	None	wore	much	in	the	way	of	armor,	and	the	weapons	Duiker
saw	scattered	about	ranged	from	antique	pikes	to	butcher ’s	cleavers.
The	Seventh	had	fought	hard,	meeting	their	attackers	at	every	breach;	in	the
face	of	savage	sorcery,	they	had	cut	down	their	attackers	by	the	score.	No	one
had	been	caught	asleep	in	his	bed.	The	historian	felt	a	trickle	of	hope	seep	into
his	thoughts.
He	glanced	down	the	road,	down	to	where	the	nut	trees	lined	the	cobbled
street.	There	had	been	a	cavalry	sortie	of	some	kind,	close	to	the	compound’s
inner	city	gate.	Two	horses	lay	among	dozens	of	Hissari	bodies,	but	no	lancers
that	he	could	see.	Either	they’d	been	lucky	enough	to	lose	no	one	in	the	attack,
or	they’d	had	the	time	to	retrieve	their	slain	and	wounded	comrades.	There	was
a	hand	of	organization	here,	a	strong	one.	Coltaine?	Bult?
He	saw	no	one	living	down	the	length	of	the	street.	If	battle	continued,	it
had	moved	on.	Duiker	dismounted	and	approached	one	of	the	breaches	in	the
compound	wall.	He	clambered	over	the	rubble,	avoiding	the	stones	slick	with


blood.	Most	of	the	attackers,	he	saw,	had	been	killed	by	quarrels.	Many	bodies
were	virtually	pincushioned	with	the	stubby	arrows.	The	range	had	been
devastatingly	short,	the	effect	lethal.	A	frenzied,	disorganized	rush	by	a	mob	of
ill-equipped	Hissari	stood	no	chance	against	such	concentrated	fire.	Duiker
saw	no	bodies	beyond	the	ridge	of	tumbled	stone.
The	compound’s	training	field	was	empty.	Bulwarks	had	been	raised	here
and	there	to	establish	murderous	crossfire	should	the	defense	at	the	breaches
fail—but	there	was	no	sign	that	that	had	occurred.
He	stepped	down	from	the	ridge	of	shattered	stone.	The	Malazan
headquarters	and	the	barracks	had	been	torched.	Duiker	now	wondered	if	the
Seventh	had	not	done	it	themselves.	Announcing	to	all	that	Coltaine	had	no
intention	of	hiding	behind	walls,	the	Seventh	and	the	Wickans	marched	out,	in
formation.	How	did	they	fare?
He	returned	to	his	waiting	horse.	Back	in	the	saddle	he	could	see	more
smoke,	billowing	heavily	from	the	Malazan	Estates	district.	Dawn	had	brought
a	strange	calm	to	the	air.	To	see	the	city	so	empty	of	life	made	it	all	seem
unreal,	as	if	the	bodies	sprawled	in	the	streets	were	but	scarecrows	left	over
from	a	harvest	festival.	The	capemoths	had	found	them,	however,	covering	the
forms	completely,	their	large	wings	slowly	fanning	as	they	fed.
As	he	rode	toward	the	Malazan	Estates,	he	could	hear	the	occasional	shout
and	faint	scream	in	the	distance,	barking	dogs	and	braying	mules.	The	roar	of
fires	rose	and	fell	like	waves	clawing	a	cliff	face,	carrying	gusts	of	heat	down
the	side	streets	hissing	and	rustling	through	the	litter.
Fifty	paces	from	the	Estates	Duiker	found	the	first	scene	of	true	slaughter.
The	Hissari	mutineers	had	struck	the	Malazan	quarter	with	sudden	ferocity,
probably	at	the	same	time	as	the	other	force	had	hemmed	in	the	Seventh	at	the
compound.	The	merchant	and	noble	houses	had	thrown	their	own	private
guards	forward	in	frantic	defense,	but	they	were	too	few	and,	lacking	cohesion,
had	been	quickly	and	savagely	cut	down.	The	mob	had	poured	into	the	district,
battering	down	estate	posterns,	dragging	out	into	the	wide	street	Malazan
families.
It	was	then,	Duiker	saw	as	his	mount	picked	a	careful	path	through	the
bodies,	that	madness	had	truly	arrived.	Men	had	been	gutted,	their	entrails
pulled	out,	wrapped	around	women—wives	and	mothers	and	aunts	and	sisters
—who	had	been	raped	before	being	strangled	with	the	intestinal	ropes.	The
historian	saw	children	with	their	skulls	crushed,	babies	spitted	on	tapu	skewers.
However,	many	young	daughters	had	been	taken	by	the	attackers	as	they
plunged	deeper	into	the	district.	If	anything,	their	fates	would	be	more	horrific
than	those	visited	on	their	kin.


Duiker	viewed	all	he	saw	with	a	growing	numbness.	The	terrible	agony
that	had	been	unleashed	here	seemed	to	remain	coiled	in	the	air,	poised,	ready
to	snatch	at	his	sanity.	In	self-defense,	his	soul	withdrew,	deeper,	ever	deeper.
His	power	to	observe	remained,	however,	detached	completely	from	his
feelings—the	release	would	come	later,	the	historian	well	knew:	the	shaking
limbs,	the	nightmares,	the	slow	scarification	of	his	faith.
Expecting	to	see	more	of	the	same,	Duiker	rode	toward	the	first	square	in
the	district.	What	he	saw	instead	jarred	him.	The	Hissari	mutineers	had	been
ambushed	in	the	square	and	slaughtered	by	the	score.	Arrows	had	been	used
and	then	retrieved,	but	some	shattered	shafts	remained.	The	historian
dismounted	to	pick	one	up.	Wickan.	He	believed	he	could	now	piece	together
what	had	occurred.
The	barracks	compound	had	been	besieged.	Whoever	commanded	the
Hissari	had	intended	to	prevent	Coltaine	and	his	forces	from	striking	out	into
the	city,	and,	if	the	sorcery’s	level	was	any	indication,	had	sought	the	complete
annihilation	of	the	Malazan	army.	In	this	the	commander	had	clearly	failed.
The	Wickans	had	sortied,	broken	through	the	encirclement,	and	had	ridden
directly	to	the	Estates—where	they	well	knew	the	planned	slaughter	would	have
already	begun.	Too	late	to	prevent	the	first	attack	at	the	District	Gates,	they	had
altered	their	route,	riding	around	the	mob,	and	set	up	an	ambush	in	the	square.
The	Hissari,	in	their	thirst	for	more	blood,	had	plunged	forward,	crossing	the
expanse	without	the	foresight	of	scouts.
The	Wickans	had	then	killed	them	all.	There	was	no	risk	of	reprisal	to
prevent	them	later	retrieving	their	arrow	shafts.	The	killing	must	have	been
absolute,	every	escape	closed	off,	then	the	precise,	calculated	murder	of	every
Hissari	in	the	square.
Duiker	swung	about	at	the	sound	of	approaching	footsteps.	A	band	of
mutineers	approached	from	the	gates	behind	him.	They	were	well	armed,	with
pikes	in	their	hands	and	tulwars	at	their	hips.	Chain	vests	glinted	from	beneath
the	red	telaban	they	wore.	On	their	heads	were	the	peaked	bronze	helmets	of
the	City	Guard.
“Terrible	slaughter!”	Duiker	wailed,	drawing	out	the	Dosii	accent.	“It	must
be	avenged!”
The	sergeant	leading	the	squad	eyed	the	historian	warily.	“You	have	the
dust	of	the	desert	upon	you,”	he	said.
“Aye,	I	have	ridden	down	from	the	High	Mage’s	forces	to	the	north.	A
nephew,	who	dwelt	in	the	harbor	district.	I	seek	to	join	him—”
“If	he	yet	lives,	old	man,	you	shall	find	him	marching	with	Reloe.”
“We	have	driven	the	Mezla	from	the	city,”	another	soldier	said.


“Outnumbered,	already	sorely	wounded	and	burdened	with	ten	thousand
refugees—”
“Silence,	Geburah!”	the	sergeant	snapped.	He	narrowed	his	gaze	on
Duiker.	“We	go	to	Reloe	now.	Come	with	us.	All	of	Hissari	shall	be	blessed	in
joining	in	the	final	slaughter	of	the	Mezla.”
Conscription.	No	wonder	there’s	no	one	about.	They’re	in	the	holy	army
whether	they	like	it	or	not.	The	historian	nodded.	“I	shall.	I	have	vowed	to
protect	the	life	of	my	nephew,	you	see…”
“The	vow	to	scourge	Seven	Cities	of	the	Mezla	is	greater,”	the	sergeant
growled.	“Dryjhna	demands	your	soul,	Dosii.	The	Apocalypse	has	come—
armies	gather	all	across	the	land	and	all	must	harken	to	the	call.”
“Last	night	I	joined	in	spilling	the	blood	of	a	Mezla	Coastal	Guard—my
soul	was	given	to	her	keeping	then,	Hissari.”	Duiker ’s	tone	held	a	warning	to
the	young	sergeant.	Respect	your	elders,	child.
The	man	answered	the	historian	with	an	acknowledging	nod.
Leading	his	horse	by	the	reins,	Duiker	accompanied	the	squad	as	they
made	their	way	through	the	Estates.	Kamist	Reloe’s	army,	the	sergeant
explained,	was	marshalling	on	the	plain	to	the	southwest	of	the	city.	Three
Odhan	tribes	were	maintaining	contact	with	the	hated	Mezla,	harrying	the	train
of	refugees	and	the	too	few	soldiers	trying	to	protect	them.	The	Mezla	were
seeking	to	reach	Sialk,	another	coastal	city	twenty	leagues	south	of	Hissar.
What	the	fools	did	not	know,	the	man	added	with	a	dark	grin,	was	that	Sialk	had
fallen	as	well,	and	even	now	thousands	of	Mezla	nobles	and	their	families	were
being	driven	up	the	north	road.	The	Mezla	commander	was	about	to	see	a
doubling	of	citizens	he	was	sworn	to	defend.
Kamist	Reloe	would	then	encircle	the	enemy,	his	forces	outnumbering
them	seven	to	one,	and	complete	the	slaughter.	The	battle	was	expected	to	take
place	in	three	days’	time.
Duiker	made	agreeable	noises	through	all	this,	but	his	mind	was	racing.
Kamist	Reloe	was	a	High	Mage,	one	believed	to	have	been	killed	in	Raraku
over	ten	years	ago,	in	a	clash	with	Sha’ik	over	who	was	destined	to	lead	the
Apocalypse.	Instead	of	killing	her	rival,	it	was	now	apparent	that	Sha’ik	had
won	his	loyalty.	The	hint	of	murderous	rivalry,	feuds	and	personality	clashes
had	served	Sha’ik	well	in	conveying	to	the	Malazans	an	impression	of	internal
weaknesses	plaguing	her	cause.	All	a	lie.	We	were	deceived,	and	now	we	are
suffering	the	cost.
“The	Mezla	army	is	as	a	great	beast,”	the	sergeant	said	as	they	neared	the
city’s	edge,	“wounded	by	countless	strikes,	flanks	streaming	with	blood.	The
beast	staggers	onward,	blind	with	pain.	In	three	days,	Dosii,	the	beast	shall


fall.”
The	historian	nodded	thoughtfully,	recalling	the	seasonal	boar	hunts	in	the
forests	of	northern	Quon	Tali.	A	tracker	had	told	him	that	among	the	hunters
who	were	killed	in	such	hunts,	most	met	their	fate	after	the	boar	had	taken	a
fatal	wound.	An	unexpected,	final	lashing	out,	a	murderous	lunge	that	seemed
to	defy	Hood’s	grip	on	the	beast.	Seeing	victory	only	moments	away	stripped
caution	from	the	hunters.	Duiker	heard	something	of	that	overconfidence	in	the
mutineer ’s	words.	The	beast	streamed	with	blood,	but	it	was	not	yet	dead.
The	sun	climbed	the	sky	as	they	traveled	south.
	
The	chamber ’s	floor	sagged	like	a	bowl,	carpeted	in	thick,	felt-like	drifts	of
dust.	Almost	a	third	of	a	league	into	the	hill’s	stone	heart,	the	rough-cut	walls
had	cracked	like	glass,	fissures	reaching	down	from	the	vaulted	roof.	In	the
center	of	the	room	lay	a	fishing	boat	resting	on	one	flank,	its	lone	mast’s
unreached	sail	hanging	like	rotted	webbing.	The	dry,	hot	air	had	driven	the
dowels	from	the	joins	and	the	planks	had	contracted,	splaying	beneath	the
boat’s	own	weight.
“This	is	no	surprise,”	Mappo	said	from	the	portalway.
Icarium’s	lips	quirked	slightly,	then	he	stepped	past	the	Trell	and
approached	the	craft.	“Five	years?	Not	longer—I	can	still	smell	the	brine.	Do
you	recognize	the	design?”
“I	curse	myself	for	having	taken	no	interest	in	such	things,”	Mappo	sighed.
“Truly	I	should	have	anticipated	moments	like	these—what	was	I	thinking?”
“I	believe,”	Icarium	said	slowly,	resting	a	hand	on	the	boat’s	prow,	“this	is
what	Iskaral	Pust	wished	us	to	find.”
“I	thought	the	quest	was	for	a	broom,”	the	Trell	muttered.
“No	doubt	his	broom	will	turn	up	of	its	own	accord.	It	was	not	the	goal	of
the	search	we	were	to	value,	but	the	journey.”
Mappo’s	eyes	narrowed	suspiciously	on	his	friend,	then	his	canines
showed	in	an	appreciative	grin.	“That	is	always	the	way,	isn’t	it?”	He	followed
the	Jhag	into	the	chamber.	His	nostrils	flared.	“I	smell	no	brine.”
“Perhaps	I	exaggerated.”
“I’ll	grant	you	it	does	not	look	like	it’s	been	here	for	centuries.	What	are
we	to	make	of	this,	Icarium?	A	fishing	boat,	found	in	a	room	deep	within	a
cliff	in	a	desert	thirty	leagues	from	anything	bigger	than	a	spring.	The	High
Priest	sets	before	us	a	mystery.”
“Indeed.”
“Do	you	recognize	the	style?”


“Alas,	I	am	as	ignorant	of	water	craft	and	other	things	of	the	sea	as	you,
Mappo.	I	fear	we	have	already	failed	in	Iskaral	Pust’s	expectations.”
The	Trell	grunted,	watching	Icarium	begin	examining	the	boat.
“There	are	nets	in	here,	deftly	made.	A	few	withered	things	that	might	have
been	fish	once…ah!”	The	Jhag	reached	down.	Wood	clattered.	He	straightened,
faced	Mappo,	in	his	hands	the	High	Priest’s	broom.
“Do	we	now	sweep	the	chamber?”
“I	think	our	task	is	to	return	this	to	its	rightful	owner.”
“The	boat	or	the	broom?”
Icarium’s	brows	rose.	“Now	that	is	an	interesting	question,	friend.”
Mappo	frowned,	then	shrugged.	If	there	had	been	anything	clever	in	his
query,	it	was	there	purely	by	chance.	He	was	frustrated.	Too	long	underground,
too	long	inactive	and	at	the	whim	of	a	madman’s	schemes.	It	was	an	effort	to
bend	his	mind	to	this	mystery,	and	indeed	he	resented	the	assumption	that	it	was
worth	doing	at	all.	After	a	long	moment,	he	sighed.	“Shadow	swept	down	on
this	craft	and	its	occupant,	plucked	them	both	away	and	delivered	them	here.
Was	this	Pust’s	own	boat?	He	hardly	strikes	me	as	from	fisher	bloodlines.	I’ve
not	heard	a	single	dockside	curse	pass	his	lips,	no	salty	metaphors,	no	barbed
catechisms.”
“So,	not	Iskaral	Pust’s	craft.”
“No.	Leaving…”
“Well,	either	the	mule	or	Servant.”
Mappo	nodded.	He	rubbed	his	bristled	jaw.	“I’ll	grant	you	a	mule	in	a	boat
dragging	nets	through	shoals	might	be	interesting	enough	to	garner	a	god’s
curiosity,	sufficient	to	collect	the	two	for	posterity.”
“Ah,	but	what	would	be	the	value	without	a	lake	or	pond	to	complete	the
picture?	No,	I	think	we	must	eliminate	the	mule.	This	craft	belongs	to	Servant.
Recall	his	adept	climbing	skills—”
“Recall	the	horrid	soup—”
“That	was	laundry,	Mappo.”
“Precisely	my	point,	Icarium.	You	are	correct.	Servant	once	plied	waters	in
this	boat.”
“Then	we	are	agreed.”
“Aye.	Hardly	a	move	up	in	the	world	for	the	poor	man.”
Icarium	shook	himself.	He	raised	the	broom	like	a	standard.	“More
questions	for	Iskaral	Pust.	Shall	we	begin	the	return	journey,	Mappo?”
	
Three	hours	later	the	two	weary	men	found	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	seated	at


the	table	in	the	library.	Iskaral	Pust	was	hunched	over	a	Deck	of	Dragons.
“You’re	late,”	he	snapped,	not	looking	up.	“The	Deck	keens	with	fierce	energy.
The	world	outside	is	in	flux—your	love	of	ignorance	is	not	worthy	of	these
precipitous	times.	Attend	this	field,	travelers,	or	remain	lost	at	your	peril.”
Snorting	his	disgust,	Mappo	strode	to	where	the	jugs	of	wine	waited	on	a
shelf.	It	seemed	even	Icarium	had	been	brought	short	by	the	High	Priest’s
words,	as	he	dropped	the	broom	clattering	on	the	floor	and	pulled	back	a	chair
opposite	Iskaral	Pust.	The	frustrated	air	about	the	Jhag	did	not	make	likely	an
afternoon	of	calm	conversation.	Mappo	poured	two	cups	of	wine,	then	returned
to	the	table.
The	High	Priest	raised	the	Deck	in	both	hands,	closed	his	eyes	and	breathed
a	silent	prayer	to	Shadowthrone.	He	began	a	spiral	field,	laying	the	center	card
first.
“Obelisk!”	Iskaral	squealed,	shifting	nervously	on	his	chair.	“I	knew	it!
Past	present	future,	the	here,	the	now,	the	then,	the	when—”
“Hood’s	breath!”	Mappo	breathed.
The	second	card	landed,	its	upper	left	corner	overlapping	Obelisk’s	lower
right.	“The	Rope—Shadow	Patron	of	Assassins,	hah!”	Subsequent	cards
followed	in	swift	succession,	Iskaral	Pust	announcing	their	identities	as	if	his
audience	were	ignorant	or	blind.	“Oponn,	the	male	Twin	upright,	the	luck	that
pushes,	ill	luck,	terrible	misfortune,	miscalculation,	poor	circumstance…
Scepter…Throne…Queen	of	High	House	Life…Spinner	of	High	House
Death…Soldier	of	High	House	Light…Knight	of	Life,	Mason	of	Dark…”	A
dozen	more	cards	followed,	then	the	High	Priest	sat	back,	his	eyes	thinned	to
slits,	his	mouth	hanging	open.	“Renewal,	a	resurrection	without	the	passage
through	Hood’s	Gates.	Renewal…”	He	looked	up,	met	Icarium’s	eyes.	“You
must	begin	a	journey.	Soon.”
“Another	quest?”	the	Jhag	asked	so	quietly	that	Mappo’s	hackles	rose	in
alarm.
“Aye!	Can	you	not	see,	fool?”
“See	what?”	Icarium	whispered.
Clearly	ignorant	that	his	life	hung	by	a	thread,	Iskaral	Pust	rose,	wildly
gesturing	at	the	field	of	cards.	“It’s	right	here	in	front	of	you,	idiot!	As	clear	as
my	Lord	of	Shadow	could	make	it!	How	have	you	survived	this	long?”	In	his
frenzy,	the	High	Priest	snatched	at	the	wispy	patches	of	hair	that	remained	on
his	head,	yanking	the	tufts	this	way	and	that.	He	was	fairly	hopping	in	place.
“Obelisk!	Can’t	you	see?	Mason,	Spinner,	Scepter,	Queens	and	Knights,	Kings
and	fools!”
Icarium	moved	lightning	fast,	across	the	table,	both	hands	closing	around


the	High	Priest’s	neck,	snatching	him	into	the	air	and	dragging	him	across	the
tabletop.	Iskaral	Pust	gurgled,	his	eyes	bulging	as	he	kicked	feebly.
“My	friend,”	Mappo	warned,	fearing	he	would	have	to	step	in	and	pry
Icarium’s	hands	from	his	victim’s	neck	before	lasting	damage	was	done.
The	Jhag	threw	the	man	back	down,	shaken	by	his	own	anger.	He	drew	a
deep	breath.	“Speak	plainly,	priest,”	he	said	calmly.
Iskaral	Pust	writhed	for	a	moment	longer	on	the	tabletop,	scattering	the
wooden	cards	to	the	floor,	then	he	stilled.	He	looked	up	at	Icarium	with	wide,
tear-filled	eyes.	“You	must	venture	forth,”	he	said	in	a	ravaged	voice.	“Into	the
Holy	Desert.”
“Why?”
“Why?	Why?	Sha’ik	is	dead.”
	
“We	have	to	assume,”	Mappo	said	slowly,	“that	the	characteristic	of	never
answering	directly	is	bred	into	the	man.	As	natural	as	breathing.”
They	sat	in	the	vestibule	the	Trell	had	been	given	as	his	quarters.	Iskaral
Pust	had	vanished	only	a	few	minutes	after	voicing	his	pronouncement,	and	of
Servant	there	had	been	no	sign	since	their	return	from	the	cavern	housing	the
fishing	boat.
Icarium	was	nodding.	“He	spoke	of	a	resurrection.	It	must	be	considered,
for	this	sudden	death	of	Sha’ik	seems	to	defy	every	prophecy,	unless	indeed	the
‘renewal’	marks	a	return	from	Hood’s	Gates.”
“And	Iskaral	Pust	expects	us	to	attend	this	rebirth?	How	effortlessly	has	he
ensnared	us	in	his	mad	web.	For	myself,	I	am	glad	the	witch	is	dead,	and	I	hope
she	remains	that	way.	Rebellion	is	ever	bloody.	If	her	death	plucks	this	land
back	from	the	brink	of	mutiny,	then	to	interfere	would	put	us	in	great	peril.”
“You	fear	the	wrath	of	the	gods?”
“I	fear	being	unwittingly	used	by	them,	or	their	servants,	Icarium.	Blood
and	chaos	is	the	wine	and	meat	of	the	gods—most	of	them,	anyway.	Especially
the	ones	most	eager	to	meddle	in	mortal	affairs.	I	will	do	nothing	to	achieve
their	desires.”
“Nor	I,	friend,”	the	Jhag	said,	rising	from	his	chair	with	a	sigh.
“Nonetheless,	I	would	witness	such	a	resurrection.	What	deceit	has	the	power
to	wrest	a	soul	from	Hood’s	clasp?	Every	ritual	of	resurrection	I	have	ever
heard	attempted	inevitably	resulted	in	a	price	beyond	reckoning.	Even	as	he
relinquishes	a	soul,	Hood	ensures	he	wins	in	the	exchange.”
Mappo	closed	his	eyes,	kneaded	his	broad,	scarred	brow.	My	friend,	what
are	we	doing	here?	I	see	your	desperation,	seeking	every	path	in	the	hopes	of


revelation.	Could	I	speak	openly	to	you,	I	would	warn	you	from	the	truth.	“This
is	an	ancient	land,”	he	said	softly.	“We	cannot	guess	what	powers	have	been
invested	in	the	stone,	sand	and	earth.	Generation	upon	generation.”	He	glanced
up,	suddenly	weary.	“When	we	wandered	the	edge	of	Raraku,	Icarium,	I	always
felt	as	if	I	was	walking	the	narrowest	strand,	in	a	web	stretching	to	every
horizon.	The	ancient	world	but	sleeps,	and	I	feel	its	restless	shifting—more
now	than	ever	before.”	Do	not	awaken	this	place,	friend,	lest	it	awaken	you.
“Well,”	Icarium	said	after	a	long,	thoughtful	moment,	“I	shall	venture	out
in	any	case.	Will	you	accompany	me,	Mappo	Trell?”
His	eyes	on	the	heaved	pavestones	of	the	floor,	Mappo	slowly	nodded.
	
The	wall	of	sand	rose	seamlessly	into	the	sky’s	ochre	dome.	Somewhere	in	that
fierce,	swirling	frenzy	was	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku.	Fiddler,	Crokus	and
Apsalar	sat	on	their	lathered	mounts	at	the	top	of	a	trail	that	led	down	the	slope
of	the	hills,	out	onto	the	desert	wastes.	A	thousand	paces	into	Raraku	and	the
world	simply	disappeared.
A	faint,	sibilant	roar	reached	them.
“Not,”	Crokus	said	quietly,	“your	average	storm,	I	assume.”
His	spirits	had	been	low	since	awakening	in	the	morning	to	find	that	Moby
had	once	again	disappeared.	The	creature	was	discovering	its	wild	instincts,
and	Fiddler	suspected	they	wouldn’t	see	it	again.
“When	I	heard	mention	of	the	Whirlwind,”	the	Daru	thief	continued	after	a
moment,	“I	assumed	it	was…well…figurative.	A	state	of	being,	I	suppose.	So
tell	me,	do	we	now	look	upon	the	true	Whirlwind?	The	wrath	of	a	goddess?”
“How	can	a	rebellion	be	born	in	the	heart	of	that?”	Apsalar	wondered.	“It
would	be	a	challenge	to	even	open	one’s	eyes	in	that	storm,	much	less
orchestrate	a	continent-wide	uprising.	Unless,	of	course,	it’s	a	barrier,	and
beyond	there	is	calm.”
“Seems	likely,”	Crokus	agreed.
Fiddler	grunted.	“Then	we’ve	no	choice.	We	ride	through.”
Their	Gral	hunters	were	less	than	ten	minutes	behind	them,	driving	equally
exhausted	horses.	They	numbered	at	least	a	score,	and	even	considering
Apsalar ’s	god-given	skills,	and	the	assortment	of	Moranth	munitions	in
Fiddler ’s	pack,	the	option	of	making	a	stand	against	the	warriors	was	not	a
promising	prospect.
The	sapper	glanced	at	his	companions.	Sun	and	wind	had	burned	their
faces,	leaving	white	creases	at	the	corners	of	the	eyes.	Chapped,	peeling	and
split	lips	showed	as	straight	lines,	bracketed	by	deeper	lines.	Hungry,	thirsty,


weaving	in	their	saddles	with	exhaustion—he	was	in	as	bad	a	shape,	he	well
knew.	Worse,	given	he	had	not	the	reserves	of	youth	to	draw	upon.	Mind	you,
Raraku	marked	me	once	before.	Long	ago.	I	know	what’s	out	there.
The	other	two	seemed	instinctively	to	understand	Fiddler ’s	hesitation,
waiting	with	something	like	respect,	even	as	the	sound	of	thundering	horse
hooves	rolled	up	the	trail	at	their	backs.
Apsalar	finally	spoke.	“I	wish	to	know	more…of	this	desert.	Its	power…”
“You	shall,”	Fiddler	growled.	“Wrap	up	your	faces.	We	go	to	greet	the
Whirlwind.”
	
Like	a	wing	sweeping	them	into	its	embrace,	the	storm	closed	around	them.	A
savage	awareness	seemed	to	ride	the	spinning	sand,	reaching	relentlessly	past
the	folds	of	their	telaban,	a	thousand	abrasive	fingers	clawing	paths	across
their	skin.	Loose	cloth	and	rope	ends	spiked	upward,	whipping	with	urgent
rhythm.	The	roar	filled	the	air,	filled	their	skulls.
Raraku	had	awakened.	All	that	Fiddler	had	sensed	the	last	time	he	rode
these	wastes,	sensed	as	an	underlying	restlessness,	the	spectral	promise	of
nightmares	beneath	the	surface,	was	now	unleashed,	exultant	with	freedom.
Heads	ducked,	the	horses	plodded	onward,	buffeted	by	wayward	gusts	of
sand-filled	air.	The	ground	underneath	was	hard-packed	clay	and	rubble—the
once	deep	cloak	of	fine	white	sand	had	been	lifted	from	the	surface,	now	sang
in	the	air,	and	with	it	were	stripped	away	the	patient,	all-covering	centuries.
The	group	dismounted,	hooded	their	mounts’	heads,	then	led	them	on.
Bones	appeared	underfoot.	Rusting	lumps	of	armor,	chariot	wheels,
remnants	of	horse	and	camel	tack,	pieces	of	leather,	the	humped	foundation
stones	of	wall—what	had	been	a	featureless	desert	now	showed	its	bones,	and
they	crowded	the	floor	in	such	profusion	as	to	leave	Fiddler	in	awe.	He	could
not	take	a	step	without	something	crunching	underfoot.
A	high	stone-lined	bank	suddenly	blocked	their	way.	It	was	sloped,	rising
to	well	above	their	heads.	Fiddler	paused	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	gathered
his	mount’s	reins	and	led	the	climb.	Scrambling,	stumbling	against	the	steep
bank,	they	eventually	reached	the	top	and	found	themselves	on	a	road.
The	paving	stones	were	exquisitely	cut,	evenly	set,	with	the	thinnest	of
cracks	visible	between	them.	Bemused,	Fiddler	crouched	down,	trying	to	hold
his	focus	as	he	studied	the	road’s	surface—a	task	made	more	difficult	by	the
streams	of	airborne	sand	racing	over	the	stones.	There	was	no	telling	its	age.
While	he	imagined	that,	even	buried	beneath	the	sands,	there	would	be	signs	of
wear,	he	could	detect	none.	Moreover,	the	engineering	showed	skill	beyond


any	masonry	he’d	yet	seen	in	Seven	Cities.
To	his	right	and	left	the	road	ran	spearshaft-straight	as	far	as	his	squinting
eyes	could	see.	It	stood	like	a	vast	breakwater	that	even	this	sorcerous	storm
could	not	breach.
Crokus	leaned	close.	“I	thought	there	were	no	roads	in	Raraku!”	he	shouted
over	the	storm’s	keening	wail.
The	sapper	shook	his	head,	at	a	loss	to	explain.
“Do	we	follow	it?”	Crokus	asked.	“The	wind’s	not	as	bad	up	here—”
As	far	as	Fiddler	could	judge,	the	road	angled	southwestward,	deep	into	the
heart	of	Raraku.	To	the	northeast	it	would	reach	the	Pan’potsun	Hills	within	ten
leagues—in	that	direction	they	would	come	to	the	hills	perhaps	five	leagues
south	of	where	they	had	left	them.	There	seemed	little	value	in	that.	He	stared
again	down	the	road	to	his	right.	The	heart	of	Raraku.	It	is	said	an	oasis	lies
there.	Where	Sha’ik	and	her	renegades	are	encamped.	How	far	to	that	oasis?
Can	water	be	found	anywhere	in	between	here	and	there?	Surely	a	road
crossing	a	desert	would	be	constructed	to	intersect	sources	of	water.	It	was
madness	to	think	otherwise,	and	clearly	the	builders	of	this	road	were	too
skilled	to	be	fools.	Tremorlor…If	the	gods	will	it,	this	track	will	lead	us	to	that
legendary	gate.	Raraku	has	a	heart,	Quick	Ben	said.	Tremorlor,	a	House	of	the
Azath.
Fiddler	mounted	the	Gral	gelding.	“We	follow	the	road,”	he	yelled	to	his
companions,	gesturing	southwestward.
They	voiced	no	complaints,	turning	to	their	mounts.	They	had	bowed	to	his
command,	Fiddler	realized,	because	both	were	lost	in	this	land.	They	relied	on
him	completely.	Hood’s	breath,	they	think	I	know	what	I’m	doing.	Should	I	now
tell	them	that	the	plan	to	find	Tremorlor	rests	entirely	on	the	faith	that	the
fabled	place	actually	exists?	And	that	Quick	Ben’s	suppositions	are	accurate,
despite	his	unwillingness	to	explain	the	source	of	his	certainty?	Do	I	tell	them
we’re	more	likely	to	die	out	here	than	anything	else—if	not	from	wasting	thirst,
then	at	the	hands	of	Sha’ik’s	fanatical	followers?
“Fid!”	Crokus	cried,	pointing	up	the	road.	He	spun	around	to	see	a	handful
of	Gral	warriors	ascending	the	bank,	less	than	fifty	paces	away.	Their	hunters
had	split	up	into	smaller	parties,	as	dismissive	of	the	sorcerous	storm	as
Fiddler ’s	group	had	been.	A	moment	later	they	saw	their	quarry	and	voiced
faint	war	cries	as	they	pulled	their	horses	onto	the	flat	top.
“Do	we	run?”	Apsalar	asked.
The	Gral	had	remounted	and	were	now	unslinging	their	lances.
“Looks	like	they’re	not	interested	in	conversation,”	the	sapper	muttered.	In
a	louder	voice	he	said,	“Leave	them	to	me!	You	two	ride	on!”


“What,	again?”	Crokus	slid	back	down	from	his	horse.	“What	would	be	the
point?”
Apsalar	followed	suit.	She	stepped	close	to	Fiddler,	her	eyes	meeting	his.
“With	you	dead,	what	are	our	chances	of	surviving	this	desert?”
About	as	bad	as	with	me	leading	you.	He	fought	the	temptation	to	give
voice	to	his	thought,	simply	shrugging	in	reply	as	he	unlimbered	his	crossbow.
“I	mean	to	make	this	a	short	engagement,”	he	said,	loading	a	cusser	quarrel
into	the	weapon’s	slot.
The	Gral	had	pulled	their	mounts	into	position	on	the	road.	Lances
lowered,	they	kicked	the	horses	into	motion.
Despite	himself,	Fiddler ’s	heart	broke	for	those	Gral	horses,	even	as	he
aimed	and	fired.	The	quarrel	struck	the	road	three	paces	in	front	of	the
charging	tribesmen.	The	detonation	was	deafening,	the	blast	a	bruised	gout	of
flame	that	drove	back	the	airborne	sand	and	the	wind	carrying	it,	and	flung	the
attackers	and	their	mounts	like	a	god’s	hand,	backward	onto	the	road	and	off
the	sides.	Blood	shot	upward	to	pull	sand	down	like	hail.	In	a	moment	the	wind
swept	the	flames	and	smoke	away,	leaving	nothing	but	twitching	bodies.
A	pointless	pursuit,	and	now	pointless	deaths.	I	am	not	Gral.	Would	the
crime	of	impersonation	trigger	such	a	relentless	hunt?	I	wish	I	could	have
asked	you,	warriors.
“For	all	that	they	have	twice	saved	us,”	Crokus	said,	“those	Moranth
munitions	are	horrible,	Fiddler.”
Silent,	the	sapper	loaded	another	quarrel,	slipped	a	leather	thong	over	the
bone	trigger	to	lock	it,	then	slung	the	heavy	weapon	over	a	shoulder.	Climbing
back	into	the	saddle,	he	gathered	the	reins	in	one	hand	and	regarded	his
comrades.	“Stay	sharp,”	he	said.	“We	may	ride	into	another	party	without
warning.	If	we	do,	try	to	break	through	them.”
He	lightly	kicked	the	mare	forward.
The	wind	came	as	laughter	to	his	ears,	the	sound	seemingly	stained	with
pleasure	at	witnessing	senseless	violence.	It	was	eager	for	more.	The
Whirlwind	awakened—this	goddess	is	mad,	riven	with	insanity—who	is	there
that	can	stop	her?	Fiddler ’s	slitted	eyes	stared	down	the	road,	the	featureless
march	of	stones	leading,	ever	leading,	into	an	ochre,	swirling	maw.	Into
nothingness.
Fiddler	growled	an	oath,	pushing	away	the	futility	clawing	at	his	thoughts.
They	would	have	to	find	Tremorlor,	before	the	Whirlwind	swallowed	them
whole.
	


The	aptorian	was	a	darker	shade	thirty	paces	on	Kalam’s	left,	striding	with
relentless	ease	through	the	sand-filled	wind.	The	assassin	found	himself
thankful	for	the	storm—his	every	clear	sighting	of	his	unwanted	companion
scraped	his	nerves	raw.	He’d	encountered	demons	before,	on	battlefields	and	in
war-ravaged	streets.	Often	they	had	been	thrown	into	the	fray	by	Malazan
mages,	and	so	were	allies	of	a	sort,	even	as	they	went	about	exacting	the	wills
of	their	masters	with	apparent	indifference	to	all	else.	On	thankfully	rarer
occasions,	he’d	come	face	to	face	with	a	demon	unleashed	by	an	enemy.	At
such	times	survival	was	his	only	concern,	and	survival	meant	flight.	Demons
were	flesh	and	blood,	to	be	sure—he’d	seen	enough	of	one’s	insides	once,
after	it	had	been	blown	apart	by	one	of	Hedge’s	cusser	quarrels,	to	retain	the
unwelcome	intimacy	of	the	memory—but	only	fools	would	try	to	face	down	a
demon’s	cold	rage	and	singularity	of	purpose.
Only	two	kinds	of	people	die	in	battle,	Fiddler	had	once	said,	fools	and	the
unlucky.	Trading	blows	with	a	demon	was	both	unlucky	and	foolish.
For	all	that,	the	aptorian	grated	strangely	on	Kalam’s	eyes,	like	an	iron
blade	trying	to	cut	granite.	Even	to	focus	too	long	on	the	beast	was	to	invite	a
wave	of	nausea.
There	was	nothing	welcome	in	Sha’ik’s	gift.	Gift…or	spy.	She’s	unleashed
the	Whirlwind	and	now	the	goddess	rides	her,	as	certain	as	possession.	That’s
likely	to	trim	short	the	wick	of	gratitude.	Besides,	even	Dryjhna	would	not	so
readily	waste	an	aptorian	demon	on	something	so	mundane	as	escort.	So,	friend
Apt,	I	cannot	trust	you.
Over	the	past	few	days	he’d	tried	losing	the	beast,	departing	camp	silently
an	hour	before	dawn,	plunging	into	the	thickest	twists	of	spinning	wind.
Outracing	the	creature	was	a	hopeless	task—it	could	outpace	any	earthly
animal	in	both	speed	and	endurance,	and	for	all	his	efforts	Apt	held	on	to	him
like	a	well-heeled	hound—although	mercifully	at	a	distance.
The	wind	scoured	the	rock-scabbed	hills	with	a	voracious	fury,	carving
into	cracks	and	fissures	as	if	hungering	to	spring	loose	every	last	speck	of
sand.	The	smooth,	humped	domes	of	bleached	limestone	lining	the	ridges	on
either	side	of	the	shallow	valley	he	rode	along	seemed	to	age	before	his	eyes,
revealing	countless	wrinkles	and	scars.
He’d	left	the	Pan’potsun	Hills	behind	six	days	earlier,	crossing	the
seamless	border	into	another	sawbacked	ridge	of	hills	called	the	Anibaj.	The
territory	this	far	south	of	Raraku	was	less	familiar	to	him.	He’d	come	close	on
occasion,	following	the	well-traveled	trader	tracks	skirting	the	eastern	edge	of
the	range.	The	Anibaj	were	home	to	no	tribes,	although	hidden	monasteries
were	rumored	to	exist.


The	Whirlwind	had	rolled	out	of	Raraku	the	night	before,	a	star-blotting
tidal	wave	of	sorcery	that	left	Kalam	shaken	despite	his	anticipating	its
imminent	arrival.	Dryjhna	had	awakened	with	a	hunger	fierce	enough	to	render
the	assassin	appalled.	He	feared	he	would	come	to	regret	his	role,	and	every
sighting	of	Apt	only	deepened	that	fear.
The	Anibaj	were	lifeless	to	Kalam’s	eyes.	He’d	seen	no	sign	of	habitation,
disguised	or	otherwise.	The	occasional	stronghold	ruin	hinted	at	a	more
crowded	past,	but	that	was	all.	If	ascetic	monks	and	nuns	hid	in	these
wastelands,	the	blessing	of	their	deities	kept	them	from	mortal	eyes.
And	yet,	as	he	rode	hunched	on	his	saddle,	the	wind	pummeling	his	back,
Kalam	could	not	shake	the	sense	that	something	was	trailing	him.	The
awareness	had	risen	within	him	over	the	past	six	hours.	A	presence	was	out
there—human	or	beast—beyond	the	range	of	his	sight,	following,	somehow
clinging	to	his	trail.	He	knew	his	and	his	horse’s	scent	only	preceded	them,
driven	south	on	the	wind,	and	no	doubt	swiftly	tattered	apart	before	it	had	gone
ten	paces.	Nor	did	any	tracks	his	horse	left	last	much	beyond	a	few	seconds.
Unless	the	hunter ’s	vision	was	superior	to	the	assassin’s—which	he	did	not
think	likely—so	that	he	was	able	to	stay	just	beyond	Kalam’s	own	range,	the
only	explanation	he	was	left	with	was…Hood-spawned	sorcery.	The	last	thing	I
need.
He	glared	to	the	left	again	and	could	make	out	Apt’s	vast	shape,	its
strangely	mechanical	flow	as	it	kept	pace	with	him.	The	demon	showed	no
alarm—mind	you,	how	could	one	tell?—but	rather	than	drawing	comfort	from
it	he	felt	instead	a	growing	unease,	a	suspicion	that	the	demon’s	role	no	longer
included	protecting	him.
Abruptly	the	wind	fell,	the	roar	shifting	to	the	hiss	of	settling	sand.
Grunting	in	surprise,	Kalam	reined	in	and	looked	back	over	his	shoulder.	The
storm’s	edge	was	a	tumbling,	stationary	wall	five	paces	behind	him.	Sand
rained	from	it	forming	scalloped	dunes	along	a	slightly	curving	edge	that	ran
to	the	horizon’s	edge	both	east	and	west.	Overhead	the	sky	had	lightened	to	a
faintly	burnished	copper.	The	sun,	hanging	an	hour	above	the	western	horizon,
was	the	color	of	beaten	gold.
The	assassin	walked	his	horse	on	another	dozen	paces,	then	halted	a	second
time.	Apt	had	not	emerged	from	the	storm.	A	shiver	of	alarm	took	hold	and	he
reached	for	the	crossbow	hanging	from	its	strap	on	the	saddlehorn.
A	jolt	of	sudden	panic	took	his	horse	and	the	beast	shied	sideways,	head
lifted	and	ears	flattened.	A	strong,	spicy	smell	filled	the	air.	Kalam	rolled	from
the	saddle	even	as	something	passed	swiftly	through	the	air	over	him.
Relinquishing	his	grip	on	the	unloaded	crossbow,	the	assassin	unsheathed	both


longknives	even	as	his	right	shoulder	struck	the	soft	sand,	his	momentum
taking	him	over	and	onto	his	feet	in	a	low	crouch.	His	attacker—a	desert	wolf
of	startling	mass—had	failed	in	clearing	the	sidestepping	horse	and	was	now
scrambling	for	purchase	athwart	the	saddle,	its	amber	eyes	fixed	on	Kalam.
The	assassin	lunged	forward,	thrusting	with	the	narrow	blade	in	his	right
hand.	Another	wolf	struck	him	from	the	left,	a	writhing	weight	of	thick	muscle
and	snapping	jaws,	taking	him	to	the	ground.	His	left	arm	was	pinned	by	the
beast’s	weight.	Long	canines	gouged	into	the	mail	links	covering	his	shoulder.
Rings	popped	and	snapped,	the	teeth	breaking	through	and	pushing	hard
against	his	flesh.
Kalam	reached	around	and	drove	the	point	of	his	right	longknife	high	into
the	animal’s	flank,	the	blade	slipping	under	the	spine	just	fore	of	the	wolf’s	hip.
The	tightening	jaws	released	his	shoulder;	jerking	back,	the	animal	kicked	to
pull	away	from	him.	As	the	assassin	struggled	to	pull	the	blade	free,	he	felt	the
edge	bite	bone.	The	Aren	steel	bent,	then	snapped.
Howling	in	pain,	the	wolf	leaped	away,	back	hunched,	spinning	as	if
chasing	its	tail	in	an	effort	to	close	its	jaws	on	the	jutting	fragment	of	blade.
Spitting	sand,	Kalam	rolled	to	his	feet.	The	first	wolf	had	been	thrown
from	its	purchase	across	the	saddle	by	the	horse’s	frenzied	bucking.	It	had	then
taken	a	solid	kick	to	the	side	of	the	head.	The	beast	stood	dazed	half	a	dozen
paces	away,	blood	running	from	its	nose.
There	were	others,	somewhere	behind	the	storm	wall,	their	growls,	yips
and	snarls	muted	by	the	wind.	They	battled	something,	it	was	obvious.	Kalam
recalled	Sha’ik’s	mention	of	a	D’ivers	that	had	attacked	the	aptorian—
inconclusively—some	weeks	earlier.	It	seemed	the	shapeshifter	was	trying
again.
The	assassin	saw	his	horse	bolt	away	down	the	trail,	southward,	bucking	as
it	went.	He	spun	back	to	the	two	wolves,	only	to	find	them	gone,	twin	spattered
paths	of	blood	leading	back	to	the	storm.	From	within	the	Whirlwind	all
sounds	of	battle	had	ceased.
A	moment	later,	Apt	lumbered	into	view.	Dark	blood	streamed	from	its
flanks	and	dripped	from	its	needle	fangs,	making	the	grin	of	its	jawline	all	the
more	ghastly.	It	swung	its	elongated	head	and	regarded	Kalam	with	its	black,
knowing	eye.
Kalam	scowled.	“I	risk	enough	without	this	damned	feud	of	yours,	Apt.”
The	demon	clacked	its	jaws,	a	snakelike	tongue	darting	out	to	lick	the
blood	from	its	teeth.	He	saw	it	was	trembling—some	of	the	puncture	wounds
near	its	neck	looked	deep.
Sighing,	the	assassin	said,	“Treating	you	will	have	to	await	finding	my


horse.”	He	reached	for	the	small	canteen	at	his	belt.	“But	at	the	very	least	I	can
clean	your	wounds.”	He	stepped	forward.
The	demon	flinched	back,	head	ducking	menacingly.
Kalam	stopped.	“Perhaps	not,	then.”	He	frowned.	There	was	something	odd
about	the	demon,	standing	on	a	low	hump	of	bleached	bedrock,	its	head	turned
as	its	slitted	nostrils	flared	to	test	the	air.	The	assassin’s	frown	deepened.
Something…After	a	long	moment,	he	sighed,	glancing	down	at	the	grip	of	the
broken	long-knife	in	his	right	hand.	He’d	carried	the	matched	pair	for	most	of
his	adult	life,	like	a	mirror	to	the	twin	loyalties	within	him.	Which	of	the	two
have	I	now	lost?
He	brushed	dust	from	his	telaba,	collected	his	crossbow,	slinging	it	over	a
shoulder,	then	began	the	walk	southward,	down	the	trail	toward	the	distant
basin.	Alongside	him,	and	closer	now,	Apt	followed,	head	sunk	low,	its	single
forelimb	kicking	up	puffs	of	dust	that	glowed	pink	in	the	sun’s	failing	light.


Chapter	Seven

Death	shall	be	my	bridge.
T OBLAKAI	SAYING
Burning	wagons,	the	bodies	of	horses,	oxen,	mules,	men,	women	and	children,
pieces	of	furniture,	clothing	and	other	household	items	lay	scattered	on	the
plain	south	of	Hissar,	for	as	far	as	Duiker	could	see.	Here	and	there	mounds	of
bodies	rose	like	earthless	barrows,	where	warriors	had	made	a	last,	desperate
stand.	There’d	been	no	mercy	to	the	killing,	no	prisoners	taken.
The	sergeant	stood	a	few	paces	in	front	of	the	historian,	as	silent	as	his
men	as	he	took	in	the	scene	that	was	the	Vin’til	Basin	and	the	battle	that	would
become	known	for	the	village	less	than	a	league	distant,	Bat’rol.
Duiker	leaned	in	his	saddle	and	spat.	“The	wounded	beast	had	fangs,”	he
said	sourly.	Oh,	well	done,	Coltaine!	They’ll	hesitate	long	before	closing	with
you	again.	The	bodies	were	Hissari—even	children	had	been	flung	into	the
fighting.	Black,	scorched	scars	crossed	the	battlefield	as	if	a	god’s	claws	had
swept	down	to	join	the	slaughter.	Pieces	of	burned	meat	clogged	the	scars—
human	or	beast,	there	was	no	means	of	telling.	Capemoths	fluttered	like	silent
madness	over	the	scene.	The	air	stank	of	sorcery,	the	clash	of	warrens	had
spread	greasy	ash	over	everything.	The	historian	felt	beyond	horror,	his	heart
hardened	enough	to	feel	only	relief.
Somewhere	to	the	southwest	was	the	Seventh,	remnants	of	loyal	Hissari
auxiliaries,	and	the	Wickans.	And	tens	of	thousands	of	Malazan	refugees,	bereft
of	their	belongings…but	alive.	The	peril	remained.	Already,	the	army	of	the
Apocalypse	had	begun	regrouping—shattered	survivors	contracting	singly	and
in	small	groups	toward	the	Meila	Oasis	where	awaited	the	Sialk
reinforcements	and	latecoming	desert	tribes.	When	they	renewed	the	pursuit,
they	would	still	vastly	outnumber	Coltaine’s	battered	army.
One	of	the	sergeant’s	men	returned	from	his	scouting	to	the	west.	“Kamist
Reloe	lives,”	he	announced.	“Another	High	Mage	brings	a	new	army	from	the
north.	There	will	be	no	mistakes	next	time.”


The	words	were	less	reassuring	to	the	others	than	they	would	have	been	a
day	ago.	The	sergeant’s	mouth	was	a	thin	slash	as	he	nodded.	“We	join	the
others	at	Meila,	then.”
“Not	I,”	Duiker	growled.
Eyes	narrowed	on	him.
“Not	yet,”	the	historian	added,	scanning	the	battlefield.	“My	heart	tells	me	I
shall	find	the	body	of	my	nephew…out	there.”
“Seek	first	among	the	survivors,”	one	soldier	said.
“No.	My	heart	does	not	feel	fear,	only	certainty.	Go	on.	I	shall	join	you
before	dusk.”	He	swung	a	hard,	challenging	gaze	to	the	sergeant.	“Go.”
The	man	gestured	mutely.
Duiker	watched	them	stride	westward,	knowing	that	should	he	see	them
again,	it	would	be	from	the	ranks	of	the	Malazan	army.	And	somehow	they
would	be	less	than	human	then.	The	game	the	mind	must	play	to	unleash
destruction.	He’d	stood	amidst	the	ranks	more	than	once,	sensing	the	soldiers
alongside	him	seeking	and	finding	that	place	in	the	mind,	cold	and	silent,	the
place	where	husbands,	fathers,	wives	and	mothers	became	killers.	And	practice
made	it	easier,	each	time.	Until	it	becomes	a	place	you	never	leave.
The	historian	rode	out	into	the	battlefield,	almost	desperate	to	rejoin	the
army.	It	was	not	a	time	to	be	alone,	in	the	heart	of	slaughter,	where	every	piece
of	wreckage	or	burned	and	torn	flesh	seemed	to	cry	out	silent	outrage.	Sites	of
battle	held	on	to	a	madness,	as	if	the	blood	that	had	soaked	into	the	soil
remembered	pain	and	terror	and	held	locked	within	it	the	echoes	of	screams
and	death	cries.
There	were	no	looters,	naught	but	flies,	capemoths,	rhizan	and	wasps—
Hood’s	myriad	sprites,	wings	fanning	and	buzzing	in	the	air	around	him	as	he
rode	onward.	Half	a	mile	ahead	a	pair	of	riders	galloped	across	the	south
ridge,	heading	west,	their	telaban	whipping	twisted	and	wild	behind	them.
They	had	passed	out	of	his	sight	by	the	time	Duiker	reached	the	low	ridge.
Before	him	the	dusty	ground	was	rutted	and	churned.	The	column	that	had
departed	the	battlesite	had	done	so	in	an	orderly	fashion,	though	its	width
suggested	that	the	train	was	huge.	Nine,	ten	wagons	abreast.	Cattle.	Spare
mounts…Queen	of	Dreams!	How	can	Coltaine	hope	to	defend	all	this?	Two
score	thousand	refugees,	perhaps	more,	all	demanding	a	wall	of	soldiers
protecting	their	precious	selves—even	Dassem	Ultor	would	have	balked	at	this.
Far	to	the	east	the	sky	was	smeared	ruddy	brown.	Like	Hissar,	Sialk	was
aflame.	But	there	had	only	been	a	small	Marine	garrison	in	that	city,	a
stronghouse	and	compound	down	at	the	harbor,	with	its	own	jetty	and	three
patrol	craft.	With	Oponn’s	luck	they’d	made	good	their	withdrawal,	though	in


truth	Duiker	held	little	hope	in	that.	More	likely	they	would	have	sought	to
protect	the	Malazan	citizens—adding	their	bodies	to	the	slaughter.
It	was	simple	enough	to	follow	the	trail	Coltaine’s	army	and	the	refugees
had	made,	southwestward,	inland,	into	the	Sialk	Odhan.	The	nearest	city	in
which	they	might	find	succor,	Caron	Tepasi,	was	sixty	leagues	distant,	with	the
hostile	clans	of	the	Tithan	occupying	the	steppes	in	between.	And	Kamist
Reloe’s	Apocalypse	in	pursuit.	Duiker	knew	he	might	rejoin	the	army	only	to
die	with	them.
Nevertheless,	the	rebellion	might	well	have	been	crushed	elsewhere.	There
was	a	Fist	in	Caron	Tepasi,	another	in	Guran.	If	either	or	both	had	succeeded	in
extinguishing	the	uprising	in	their	cities,	then	a	feasible	destination	was
available	to	Coltaine.	Such	a	journey	across	the	Odhan,	however,	would	take
months.	While	there	was	plenty	of	grazing	land	for	the	livestock,	there	were
few	sources	of	water,	and	the	dry	season	had	just	begun.	No,	even	to
contemplate	such	a	journey	is	beyond	desperation.	It	is	madness.
That	left…counterattack.	A	swift,	deadly	thrust,	retaking	Hissar.	Or	Sialk.	A
destroyed	city	offered	more	opportunity	for	defense	than	did	steppe	land.
Moreover,	the	Malazan	fleet	could	then	relieve	them—Pormqual	might	be	a
fool,	but	Admiral	Nok	is	anything	but.	The	7th	Army	could	not	be	simply
abandoned,	for	without	it	any	hope	of	quickly	ending	the	rebellion	was	lost.
For	the	moment,	however,	it	was	clear	that	Coltaine	was	leading	his
column	to	Dryj	Spring,	and	despite	the	headstart,	Duiker	expected	to	rejoin
him	well	before	then.	The	foremost	need	for	the	Malazans	now	was	water.
Kamist	Reloe	would	know	this	as	well.	He	had	Coltaine	trapped	into
predictability,	a	position	no	commander	desired.	The	fewer	choices	the	Fist
possessed,	the	more	dire	was	the	situation.
He	rode	on.	The	sun	slowly	angled	westward	as	he	continued	following	the
detritus-strewn	trail,	its	mindless	regard	making	Duiker	feel	insignificant,	his
hopes	and	fears	meaningless.	The	occasional	body	of	a	refugee	or	soldier	who
had	died	of	wounds	lay	on	the	trackside,	dumped	without	ceremony.	The	sun
had	swelled	their	corpses,	turning	the	skin	deep	red	and	mottled	black.	Leaving
such	unburied	bodies	in	their	wake	would	have	been	a	difficult	thing	to	do.
Duiker	sensed	something	of	the	desperation	in	that	beleaguered	force.
An	hour	before	dusk	a	dust	cloud	appeared	a	half-league	inland.	Tithan
horsewarriors,	the	historian	guessed,	riding	hard	toward	Dryj	Spring.	There
would	be	no	peace	for	Coltaine	and	his	people.	Lightning	raids	on	horseback
would	harry	the	encampment’s	pickets;	sudden	drives	to	peel	away	livestock,
flaming	arrows	sent	into	the	refugee	wagons…a	night	of	unceasing	terror.
He	watched	the	Tithansi	slowly	pull	ahead,	and	contemplated	forcing	his


weary	mount	into	a	canter.	The	tribal	riders	no	doubt	led	spare	mounts,
however,	and	the	historian	would	have	to	kill	his	horse	in	the	effort	to	reach
Coltaine	before	them.	And	then	he	could	do	naught	but	warn	of	the	inevitable.
Besides,	Coltaine	must	know	what’s	coming.	He	knows,	because	he	once	rode	as
a	renegade	chieftain,	once	harried	a	retreating	Imperial	army	across	the
Wickan	plains.
He	continued	on	at	a	steady	trot,	thinking	about	the	challenge	of	the	night
ahead:	the	ride	through	enemy	lines,	the	unheralded	approach	to	the	Seventh’s
nerve-frayed	pickets.	The	more	he	thought	on	it,	the	less	likely	seemed	his
chances	of	surviving	to	see	the	dawn.
The	red	sky	darkened	with	that	desert	suddenness,	suffusing	the	air	with	the
color	of	drying	blood.	Moments	before	he	lost	the	last	of	the	light,	Duiker
chanced	to	glance	behind	him.	He	saw	a	grainy	cloud,	visibly	expanding	as	it
swept	southward.	It	seemed	to	glitter	with	a	hundred	thousand	pale	reflections,
as	if	a	wind	was	flipping	the	underside	of	birch	leaves	at	the	edge	of	a	vast
forest.	Capemoths,	surely	in	their	millions,	leaving	Hissar	behind,	flying	to	the
scent	of	blood.
He	told	himself	that	it	was	a	mindless	hunger	that	drove	them.	He	told
himself	that	the	blots,	stains	and	smudges	in	that	billowing,	sky-filling	cloud
were	only	by	chance	finding	the	shape	of	a	face.	Hood,	after	all,	had	no	need	to
manifest	his	presence.	Nor	was	he	known	as	a	melodramatic	god—the	Lord	of
Death	was	reputed	to	be,	if	anything,	ironically	modest.	Duiker ’s	imaginings
were	the	product	of	fear,	the	all	too	human	need	to	conjure	symbolic	meaning
from	meaningless	events.	Nothing	more.
Duiker	kicked	his	horse	into	a	canter,	eyes	fixed	once	more	on	the
growing	darkness	ahead.
	
From	the	crest	of	the	low	rise,	Felisin	watched	the	seething	floor	of	the	basin.	It
was	as	if	insanity’s	grip	had	swept	out,	from	the	cities,	from	the	minds	of	men
and	women,	to	stain	the	natural	world.	With	the	approach	of	dusk,	as	she	and
her	two	companions	prepared	to	break	camp	for	the	night’s	walk,	the	basin’s
sand	had	begun	to	shiver	like	the	patter	of	rain	on	a	lake.	Beetles	began
emerging,	each	black	and	as	large	as	Baudin’s	thumb,	crawling	in	a	glittering
tide	that	soon	filled	the	entire	sweep	of	desert	before	them.	In	their	thousands,
then	hundreds	of	thousands,	yet	moving	as	one,	with	a	singular	purpose.
Heboric,	ever	the	scholar,	had	gone	off	to	determine	their	destination.	She	had
watched	him	skirt	the	far	edge	of	the	insect	army,	then	vanish	beyond	the	next
ridge.


Twenty	minutes	had	passed	since	then.
Crouching	beside	her	was	Baudin,	his	forearms	resting	on	the	large
backpack,	squinting	to	pierce	the	deepening	gloom.	She	sensed	his	growing
unease	but	had	decided	that	she	would	not	be	the	one	to	give	voice	to	their
shared	concern.	There	were	times	when	she	wondered	at	Heboric’s	grasp	of
what	mattered	over	what	didn’t.	She	wondered	if	the	old	man	was,	in	fact,	a
liability.
The	swelling	had	ebbed,	enough	so	that	she	could	see	and	hear,	but	a
deeper	pain	remained,	as	if	the	bloodfly	larvae	had	left	something	behind
under	her	flesh,	a	rot	that	did	more	than	disfigure	her	appearance,	but	laid	a
stain	on	her	soul	as	well.	There	was	a	poison	lodged	within	her.	Her	sleep	was
filled	with	visions	of	blood,	unceasing,	a	crimson	river	that	carried	her	like
flotsam	from	sunrise	to	sunset.	Six	days	since	their	escape	from	Skullcup,	and
a	part	of	her	looked	forward	to	the	next	sleep.
Baudin	grunted.
Heboric	reappeared,	jogging	steadily	along	the	basin’s	edge	toward	their
position.	Squat,	hunched,	he	was	like	an	ogre	shambling	out	from	a	child’s
bedtime	story.	Blunt	knobs	where	his	hands	should	be,	about	to	be	raised	to
reveal	fangstudded	mouths.	Tales	to	frighten	children.	I	could	write	those.	I
need	no	imagination,	only	what	I	see	all	around	me.	Heboric,	my	boar-tattooed
ogre.	Baudin,	red-scarred	where	one	ear	used	to	be,	the	hair	growing	tangled
and	bestial	from	the	puckered	skin.	A	pair	to	strike	terror,	these	two.
The	old	man	reached	them,	kneeling	to	sling	his	arms	through	his
backpack.	“Extraordinary,”	he	mumbled.
Baudin	grunted	again.	“But	can	we	get	around	them?	I	ain’t	wading
through,	Heboric.”
“Oh,	aye,	easily	enough.	They’re	just	migrating	to	the	next	basin.”
Felisin	snorted.	“And	you	find	that	extraordinary?”
“I	do,”	he	said,	waiting	as	Baudin	tightened	the	pack’s	straps.	“Tomorrow
night	they’ll	march	to	the	next	patch	of	deep	sand.	Understand?	Like	us	they’re
heading	west,	and	like	us	they’ll	reach	the	sea.”
“And	then?”	Baudin	asked.	“Swim?”
“I	have	no	idea.	More	likely	they’ll	turn	around	and	march	east,	to	the
other	coast.”
Baudin	strapped	on	his	own	pack	and	stood.	“Like	a	bug	crawling	the	rim
of	a	goblet,”	he	said.
Felisin	gave	him	a	quick	glance,	remembering	her	last	evening	with
Beneth.	The	man	had	been	sitting	at	his	table	in	Bula’s,	watching	flies	circle	the
rim	of	his	mug.	It	was	one	of	the	few	memories	that	she	could	conjure	up.


Beneth,	my	lover,	the	Fly	King	circling	Skullcup.	Baudin	left	him	to	rot,	that’s
why	he	won’t	meet	my	eye.	Thugs	never	lie	well.	He’ll	pay	for	that,	one	day.
“Follow	me,”	Heboric	said,	setting	off,	his	feet	sinking	into	the	sand	so	that
it	seemed	he	walked	on	stumps	to	match	those	at	the	end	of	his	arms.	He	always
started	out	fresh,	displaying	an	energy	that	struck	Felisin	as	deliberate,	as	if	he
sought	to	refute	that	he	was	old,	that	he	was	the	weakest	among	them.	The	last
third	of	the	night	he	would	be	seven	or	eight	hundred	paces	behind	them,	head
ducked,	legs	dragging,	weaving	with	the	weight	of	the	pack	that	nearly	dwarfed
him.
Baudin	seemed	to	have	a	map	in	his	head.	Their	source	of	information	had
been	precise	and	accurate.	Even	though	the	desert	seemed	lifeless,	a	barrier	of
wasting	deadliness,	water	could	be	found.	Spring-fed	pools	in	rock
outcroppings,	sinks	of	mud	surrounded	by	the	tracks	of	animals	they	never
saw,	where	one	could	dig	down	an	arm-span,	sometimes	less,	and	find	the	lifegiving	water.
They	had	carried	enough	food	for	twelve	days,	two	more	than	was
necessary	for	the	journey	to	the	coast.	It	was	not	a	large	margin	but	it	would
have	to	suffice.	For	all	that,	however,	they	were	weakening.	Each	night,	they
managed	less	distance	in	the	hours	between	the	sun’s	setting	and	its	rise.
Months	at	Skullcup,	working	the	airless	reaches,	had	diminished	some
essential	reserve	within	them.
That	knowledge	was	plain,	though	unspoken.	Time	now	stalked	them,
Hood’s	most	patient	servant,	and	with	each	night	they	fell	back	farther,	closer
to	that	place	where	the	will	to	live	surrendered	to	a	profound	peace.	There’s	a
sweet	promise	to	giving	up,	but	realizing	that	demands	a	journey.	One	of	spirit.
You	can’t	walk	to	Hood’s	Gate,	you	find	it	before	you	when	the	fog	clears.
“Your	thoughts,	lass?”	Heboric	asked.	They	had	crossed	two	ridge	lines,
arriving	on	a	withered	pan.	The	stars	were	spikes	of	iron	overhead,	the	moon
yet	to	rise.
“We	live	in	a	cloud,”	she	replied.	“All	our	lives.”
Baudin	grunted.	“That’s	durhang	talking.”
“Never	knew	you	were	so	droll,”	Heboric	said	to	the	man.
Baudin	fell	silent.	Felisin	grinned	to	herself.	The	thug	would	say	little	for
the	rest	of	the	night.	He	did	not	take	well	being	mocked.	I	must	remember	that,
for	when	he	next	needs	cutting	down.
“My	apologies,	Baudin,”	Heboric	said	after	a	moment.	“I	was	irritated	by
what	Felisin	said	and	took	it	out	on	you.	More,	I	appreciated	the	joke,	no	matter
that	it	was	unintended.”
“Give	it	up,”	Felisin	sighed.	“A	mule	comes	out	of	a	sulk	eventually,	but


it’s	nothing	you	can	force.”
“So,”	Heboric	said,	“while	the	swelling’s	left	your	tongue,	its	poison
remains.”
She	flinched.	If	you	only	knew	the	full	truth	of	that.
Rhizan	flitted	over	the	cracked	surface	of	the	pan,	their	only	company	now
that	they’d	left	the	mindless	beetles	behind.	They	had	seen	no	one	since
crossing	Sinker	Lake	the	night	of	the	Dosii	mutiny.	Rather	than	loud	alarms
and	frenetic	pursuit,	their	escape	had	effected	nothing.	For	Felisin,	it	made	the
drama	of	that	night	now	seem	somehow	pathetic.	For	all	their	self-importance,
they	were	but	grains	of	sand	in	a	storm	vaster	than	anything	they	could
comprehend.	The	thought	pleased	her.
Nevertheless,	there	was	cause	for	worry.	If	the	uprising	had	spread	to	the
mainland,	they	might	arrive	at	the	coast	only	to	die	waiting	for	a	boat	that
would	never	come.
They	reached	a	low	serrated	ridge	of	rock	outcroppings,	silver	in	the
starlight	and	looking	like	the	vertebrae	of	an	immense	serpent.	Beyond	it
stretched	a	wavelike	expanse	of	sand.	Something	rose	from	the	dunes	fifty	or
so	paces	ahead,	angled	like	a	toppled	tree	or	marble	column,	though,	as	they
came	nearer,	they	could	see	that	it	was	blunted,	crooked.
A	vague	wind	rustled	on	the	sands,	twisting	as	if	in	the	wake	of	a	spiderbitten	dancer.	Gusts	of	sand	caressed	their	shins	as	they	strode	on.	The	bent
pillar,	or	whatever	it	was,	was	proving	farther	away	than	Felisin	had	first
thought.	As	a	new	sense	of	scale	formed	in	her	mind,	her	breath	hissed	between
her	teeth.
“Aye,”	Heboric	whispered	in	reply.
Not	fifty	paces	away.	More	like	five	hundred.	The	wind-blurred	surface
had	deceived	them.	The	basin	was	not	a	flat	sweep	of	land,	but	a	vast,	gradual
descent,	rising	again	around	the	object—a	wave	of	dizziness	followed	the
realization.
The	scythe	of	the	moon	had	risen	above	the	southern	horizon	by	the	time
they	reached	the	monolith.	By	unspoken	agreement,	Baudin	and	Heboric
dropped	their	packs,	the	thug	sitting	down	and	leaning	against	his,	already
dismissive	of	the	silent	edifice	towering	over	them.
Heboric	removed	the	lantern	and	the	firebox	from	his	pack.	He	blew	on	the
hoarded	coals,	then	set	alight	a	taper,	which	he	used	to	light	the	lantern’s	thick
wick.	Felisin	made	no	effort	to	help,	watching	with	fascination	as	he	managed
the	task	with	a	deftness	belying	the	apparent	awkwardness	of	the	scarred
stumps	of	his	wrists.
Slinging	one	forearm	under	the	lantern’s	handle,	he	rose	and	approached


the	dark	monolith.
Fifty	men,	hands	linked,	could	not	encircle	the	base.	The	bend	occurred
seven	or	eight	man-lengths	up,	at	about	three-fifths	of	the	total	length.	The
stone	looked	both	creased	and	polished,	dark	gray	under	the	colorless	light	of
the	moon.
The	glow	of	the	lantern	revealed	the	stone	to	be	green,	as	Heboric	arrived
to	stand	before	it.	She	watched	his	head	tilt	back	as	he	scanned	upward.	Then	he
stepped	forward	and	pressed	a	stump	against	the	surface.	A	moment	later	he
stepped	back.
Water	sloshed	beside	her	as	Baudin	drank	from	a	waterskin.	She	reached
out	and,	after	a	moment,	he	passed	it	to	her.	Sand	whispered	as	Heboric
returned.	The	ex-priest	squatted.
Felisin	offered	him	the	bladder.	He	shook	his	head,	his	toadlike	face
twisted	into	a	troubled	frown.
“Is	this	the	biggest	pillar	you’ve	seen,	Heboric?”	Felisin	asked.	“There’s	a
column	in	Aren…or	so	I’ve	heard…that’s	as	high	as	twenty	men,	and	carved	in
a	spiral	from	top	to	bottom.	Beneth	described	it	to	me	once.”
“Seen	it,”	Baudin	grumbled.	“Not	as	wide,	but	maybe	higher.	What’s	this
one	made	of,	Priest?”
“Jade.”
Baudin	grunted	phlegmatically,	but	Felisin	saw	his	eyes	widen	slightly.
“Well,	I’ve	seen	taller.	I’ve	seen	wider—”
“Shut	up,	Baudin,”	Heboric	snapped,	wrapping	his	arms	around	himself.
He	glared	up	at	the	man	from	under	the	ridge	of	his	brows.	“That’s	not	a
column	over	there,”	he	rasped.	“It’s	a	finger.”
	
Dawn	stole	into	the	sky,	spreading	shadows	on	the	landscape.	The	details	of
that	carved	jade	finger	were	slowly	prised	from	the	gloom.	Swells	and	folds	of
skin,	the	whorls	of	the	pad,	all	became	visible.	So	too	did	a	ridge	in	the	sand
directly	beneath	it—another	finger.
Fingers,	to	hand.	Hand	to	arm,	arm	to	body…For	all	the	logic	of	that
progression,	it	was	impossible,	Felisin	thought.	No	such	thing	could	be
fashioned,	no	such	thing	could	stand	or	stay	in	one	piece.	A	hand,	but	no	arm,
no	body.
Heboric	said	nothing,	wrapped	around	himself,	motionless	as	the	night’s
darkness	faded.	He	held	the	wrist	that	had	touched	the	edifice	tucked	under	him,
as	if	the	memory	of	that	contact	brought	pain.	Staring	at	him	in	the	growing
light,	Felisin	was	struck	anew	by	his	tattoos.	They	seemed	to	have	deepened


somehow,	become	sharper.
Baudin	finally	rose	and	began	pitching	the	two	small	tents,	close	to	the
base	of	the	finger,	where	the	shadows	would	hold	longest.	He	ignored	the
towering	monolith	as	if	it	was	nothing	more	than	the	bole	of	a	tree,	and	set
about	driving	deep	into	the	sand	the	long,	thin	spikes	through	the	first	tent’s
brass-hooped	corners.
An	orange	tint	suffused	the	air	as	the	sun	climbed	higher.	Although	Felisin
had	seen	that	color	of	sky	before	on	the	island,	it	had	never	before	been	so
saturated.	She	could	almost	taste	it,	bitter	as	iron.
As	Baudin	began	on	the	second	tent,	Heboric	finally	roused	himself,	his
head	lifting	as	he	sniffed	the	air,	then	squinted	upward.	“Hood’s	breath!”	he
growled.	“Hasn’t	there	been	enough?”
“What	is	it?”	Felisin	demanded.	“What’s	wrong?”
“There’s	been	a	storm,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“That’s	Otataral	dust.”
At	the	tents,	Baudin	paused.	He	ran	a	hand	across	one	shoulder,	then
frowned	at	his	palm.	“It’s	settling,”	he	said.
“We’d	best	get	under	cover—”
Felisin	snorted.	“As	if	that	will	do	any	good!	We’ve	mined	the	stuff,	in	case
you’ve	forgotten.	Whatever	effect	it’s	had	on	us,	it’s	happened	long	ago.”
“Back	at	Skullcup	we	could	wash	ourselves	at	day’s	end,”	Heboric	said,
slinging	an	arm	through	the	food	pack’s	strap	and	dragging	it	toward	the	tents.
She	saw	that	he	still	held	his	other	stump—the	one	that	had	touched	the
edifice—tight	against	his	midriff.
“And	you	think	that	made	a	difference?”	she	asked.	“If	that’s	true,	why	did
every	mage	who	worked	there	die	or	go	mad?	You’re	not	thinking	clearly,
Heboric—”
“Sit	there,	then,”	the	old	man	snapped,	ducking	under	the	first	tent’s	flap
and	pulling	the	pack	in	after	him.
Felisin	glanced	at	Baudin.	The	thug	shrugged,	resumed	readying	the
second	tent,	without	evident	haste.
She	sighed.	She	was	exhausted,	yet	not	sleepy.	If	she	took	to	the	tent,	she
would	in	all	likelihood	simply	lie	there,	eyes	open	and	studying	the	weave	of
the	canvas	above	her	face.
“Best	get	inside,”	Baudin	said.
“I’m	not	sleepy.”
He	stepped	close,	the	motion	fluid	like	a	cat’s.	“I	don’t	give	a	damn	if
you’re	sleepy	or	not.	Sitting	out	under	the	sun	will	dry	you	out,	meaning	you’ll
drink	more	water,	meaning	less	for	us,	meaning	get	in	this	damned	tent,	lass,
before	I	lay	a	hand	to	your	backside.”


“If	Beneth	was	here	you	wouldn’t—”
“The	bastard’s	dead!”	he	snarled.	“And	Hood	take	his	rotten	soul	to	the
deepest	pit!”
She	sneered.	“Brave	now—you	wouldn’t	have	dared	stand	up	against	him.”
He	studied	her	as	he	would	a	bloodfly	caught	in	a	web.	“Maybe	I	did,”	he
said,	a	sly	grin	showing	a	moment	before	he	turned	away.
Suddenly	cold,	Felisin	watched	the	thug	stride	over	to	the	other	tent,	crouch
down	and	crawl	inside.	I’m	not	fooled,	Baudin.	You	were	a	mongrel	skulking	in
alleys,	and	all	that’s	changed	is	that	you’ve	left	the	alleys	behind.	You’d	squirm
in	the	sand	at	Beneth’s	feet,	if	he	were	here.	She	waited	another	minute	in
defiance	before	entering	her	own	tent.
Unfurling	her	bedroll,	she	lay	down.	Her	eagerness	to	sleep	was
preventing	her	from	doing	so.	She	stared	up	at	the	dark	imperfections	in	the
canvas	weave,	wishing	she	had	some	durhang	or	a	jug	of	wine.	The	crimson
river	of	her	dreams	had	become	an	embrace,	protective	and	welcoming.	She
conjured	from	memory	an	echo	of	the	image,	and	all	the	feelings	that	went
with	it.	The	river	flowed	with	purpose,	ordered	and	inexorable;	when	in	its
warm	currents,	she	felt	close	to	understanding	that	purpose.	She	knew	she
would	discover	it	soon,	and	with	that	knowledge	her	world	would	change,
become	so	much	more	than	it	was	now.	Not	just	a	girl,	plump	and	out	of	shape
and	used	up,	the	vision	of	her	future	reduced	to	days	when	it	should	be
measured	in	decades—a	girl	who	could	call	herself	young	only	with	sneering
irony.
For	all	that	the	dream	promised	her,	there	was	a	value	in	self-contempt,	a
counterpoint	between	her	waking	and	sleeping	hours,	what	was	and	what	could
be.	A	tension	between	what	was	real	and	what	was	imagined,	or	so	Heboric
would	put	it	from	his	acid-pocked	critical	eye.	The	scholar	of	human	nature
held	it	in	low	opinion.	He	would	deride	her	notions	of	destiny,	and	her	belief
that	the	dream	offered	something	palpable	would	give	him	cause	to	voice	his
contempt.	Not	that	he’s	needed	cause.	I	hate	myself,	but	he	hates	everyone	else.
Which	of	us	has	lost	the	most?
	
She	awoke	groggy,	her	mouth	parched	and	tasting	of	rust.	The	air	was	grainy,
a	dim	gray	light	seeping	through	the	canvas.	She	heard	sounds	of	packing
outside,	a	short	murmur	from	Heboric,	Baudin’s	answering	grunt.	Felisin
closed	her	eyes,	trying	to	recapture	the	steady,	flowing	river	that	had	carried
her	through	her	sleep,	but	it	was	gone.
She	sat	up,	wincing	as	every	joint	protested.	The	others	experienced	the


same,	she	knew.	A	nutritional	deficiency,	Heboric	guessed,	though	he	did	not
know	what	it	might	be.	They	had	dried	fruit,	strips	of	smoked	mule	and	some
kind	of	Dosii	bread,	brick-hard	and	dark.
Muscles	aching,	she	crawled	from	the	tent	into	the	chill	morning	air.	The
two	men	sat	eating,	the	packets	of	rations	laid	out	before	them.	There	was	little
left,	with	the	exception	of	the	bread,	which	was	salty	and	tended	to	make	them
desperately	thirsty.	Heboric	had	tried	to	insist	that	they	eat	the	bread	first—over
the	first	few	days—while	they	were	still	strong,	not	yet	dehydrated,	but	neither
she	nor	Baudin	had	listened,	and	for	some	reason	he	abandoned	the	idea	with
the	next	meal.	Felisin	had	mocked	him	for	that,	she	recalled.	Unwilling	to
follow	your	own	advice,	eh,	old	man?	Yet	the	advice	had	been	good.	They
would	reach	the	salt-laden,	deathly	coast	with	naught	but	even	saltier	bread	to
eat,	and	little	water	to	assuage	their	thirst.
Maybe	we	didn’t	listen	because	none	of	us	believed	we	would	ever	reach	the
coast.	Maybe	Heboric	decided	the	same	after	that	first	meal.	Only	I	wasn’t
thinking	that	far	ahead,	was	I?	No	wise	acceptance	of	the	futility	of	all	this.	I
mocked	and	ignored	the	advice	out	of	spite,	nothing	more.	As	for	Baudin,	well,
rare	was	the	criminal	with	brains,	and	he	wasn’t	at	all	rare.
She	joined	the	breakfast,	ignoring	their	looks	as	she	took	an	extra
mouthful	of	lukewarm	water	from	the	bladder	when	washing	down	the	smoked
meat.
When	she	was	done,	Baudin	repacked	the	food.
Heboric	sighed.	“What	a	threesome	we	are!”	he	said.
“You	mean	our	dislike	of	each	other?”	Felisin	asked,	raising	a	brow.	“You
shouldn’t	be	surprised,	old	man,”	she	continued.	“In	case	you	haven’t	noticed,
we’re	all	broken	in	some	way.	Aren’t	we?	The	gods	know	you’ve	pointed	out
my	fall	from	grace	often	enough.	And	Baudin’s	nothing	more	than	a	murderer
—he’s	dispensed	with	all	notions	of	brotherhood,	and	is	a	bully	besides,
meaning	he’s	a	coward	at	heart…”	She	glanced	over	to	see	him	crouched	at	the
packs,	flatly	eyeing	her.	Felisin	gave	him	a	sweet	smile.	“Right,	Baudin?”
The	man	said	nothing,	the	hint	of	a	frown	in	his	expression	as	he	studied
her.
Felisin	returned	her	attention	to	Heboric.	“Your	flaws	are	obvious	enough
—hardly	worth	mentioning—”
“Save	your	breath,	lass,”	the	ex-priest	muttered.	“I	don’t	need	no	fifteenyear-old	girl	telling	me	my	failings.”
“Why	did	you	leave	the	priesthood,	Heboric?	Skimmed	the	coffers,	I
suppose.	So	they	cut	your	hands	off,	then	tossed	you	onto	the	rubbish	heap
behind	the	temple.	That’s	certainly	enough	to	make	anyone	take	up	writing


history	as	a	profession.”
“Time	to	go,”	Baudin	said.
“But	he	hasn’t	answered	my	question—”
“I’d	say	he	has,	girl.	Now	shut	up.	Today	you	carry	the	other	pack,	not	the
old	man.”
“A	reasonable	suggestion,	but	no	thanks.”
Face	darkening,	Baudin	rose.
“Leave	it	be,”	Heboric	said,	moving	to	sling	the	straps	through	his	arms.	In
the	gloom	Felisin	saw	the	stump	that	had	touched	the	jade	finger	for	the	first
time.	It	was	swollen	and	red,	the	puckered	skin	stretched.	Tattoos	crowded	the
end	of	the	wrist,	turning	it	nearly	solid	dark.	She	realized	then	that	the	etchings
had	deepened	everywhere	on	him,	grown	riotous	like	vines.
“What’s	happened	to	you?”
He	glanced	over.	“I	wish	I	knew.”
“You	burned	your	wrist	on	that	statue.”
“Not	burned,”	the	old	man	said.	“Hurts	like	Hood’s	own	kiss,	though.	Can
magic	thrive	buried	in	Otataral	sand?	Can	Otataral	give	birth	to	magic?	I’ve	no
answers,	lass,	for	any	of	this.”
“Well,”	she	muttered,	“it	was	a	stupid	thing	to	do—touching	the	damned
thing.	Serves	you	right.”
Baudin	started	off	without	comment.	Ignoring	Heboric,	Felisin	fell	in
behind	the	thug.	“Is	there	a	waterhole	ahead	this	night?”	she	asked.
The	big	man	grunted.	“Should’ve	asked	that	before	you	took	more	than
your	ration.”
“Well,	I	didn’t.	So,	is	there?”
“We	lost	half	a	night	yesterday.”
“Meaning?”
“Meaning	no	water	until	tomorrow	night.”	He	looked	back	at	her	as	he
walked.	“You’ll	wish	you’d	saved	that	mouthful.”
She	made	no	reply.	She	had	no	intention	of	being	honorable	when	the	time
came	for	her	next	drink.	Honor’s	for	fools.	Honor’s	a	fatal	flaw.	I’m	not	going
to	die	on	a	point	of	honor,	Baudin.	Heboric’s	probably	dying	anyway.	It’d	be
wasted	on	him.
The	ex-priest	trudged	in	her	wake,	the	sound	of	his	footfalls	dimming	as
he	fell	farther	back	as	the	hours	passed.	In	the	end,	she	concluded,	it	would	be
she	and	Baudin,	just	the	two	of	them,	standing	facing	the	sea	at	the	western
edge	of	this	Queen-forsaken	island.	The	weak	always	fall	to	the	wayside.	It	was
the	first	law	of	Skullcup;	indeed,	it	was	the	first	lesson	she’d	learned—in	the
streets	of	Unta	on	the	march	to	the	slaveships.


Back	then,	in	her	naivety,	she’d	looked	upon	Baudin’s	murder	of	Lady
Gaesen	as	an	act	of	reprehensible	horror.	If	he	were	to	do	the	same	today—
putting	Heboric	out	of	his	misery—she	would	not	even	blink.	A	long	journey,
this	one.	Where	will	it	end?	She	thought	of	the	river	of	blood,	and	the	thought
warmed	her.
	
True	to	Baudin’s	prediction,	there	was	no	waterhole	to	mark	the	end	of	the
night’s	journey.	The	man	selected	as	a	campsite	a	sandy	bed	surrounded	by
wind-sculpted	projections	of	limestone.	Bleached	human	bones	littered	the	bed,
but	Baudin	simply	tossed	them	aside	when	laying	out	the	tents.
Felisin	sat	down	with	her	back	to	rock	and	watched	for	Heboric’s	eventual
appearance	at	the	far	end	of	the	flat	plain	they	had	just	crossed.	He	had	never
lagged	behind	this	distance	before—the	plain	was	over	a	third	of	a	league
across—and	as	the	dawn’s	blush	lightened	the	skyline	before	her,	she	began	to
wonder	if	his	lifeless	body	wasn’t	lying	out	there	somewhere.
Baudin	crouched	beside	her.	“I	told	you	to	carry	the	food	pack,”	he	said,
squinting	eastward.
Not	out	of	sympathy	for	the	old	man,	then.	“You’ll	just	have	to	go	find	it,
won’t	you?”
Baudin	straightened.	Flies	buzzed	around	him	in	the	still-cool	air	as	he
stared	eastward	for	a	long	moment.
She	watched	him	set	off,	softly	gasping	as	he	loped	into	a	steady	jog	once
clear	of	the	rocks.	For	the	first	time	she	became	truly	frightened	of	Baudin.
He’s	been	hoarding	food—he	has	a	hidden	skin	of	water—there’s	no	other	way
he	could	still	have	such	reserves.	She	scrambled	to	her	feet	and	rushed	over	to
the	other	pack.
The	tents	had	been	raised,	the	bedrolls	set	out	within	them.	The	pack	sat	in
a	deflated	heap	close	by.	Left	in	it	was	a	wrapped	pouch	that	she	recognized	as
containing	their	first-aid	supplies,	a	battered	flint	and	tinder	box	that	she’d	not
seen	before—Baudin’s	own—and,	beneath	a	flap	sewn	along	one	edge	at	the
bottom	of	the	pack,	a	small,	flat	packet	of	deer	hide.
No	skin	of	water,	no	hidden	pockets	of	food.	Unaccountably,	her	fear	of
the	man	deepened.
Felisin	sat	down	in	the	soft	sand	beside	the	pack.	After	a	moment	she
reached	to	the	hide	packet,	loosened	its	drawstrings	and	unfolded	it	to	reveal	a
set	of	fine	thief’s	tools—an	assortment	of	picks,	minute	saws	and	files,	knobs
of	wax,	a	small	sack	of	finely	ground	flour,	and	two	dismantled	stilettos,	the
needlelike	blades	deeply	blued	and	exuding	a	bitter,	caustic	smell,	the	bone


hafts	polished	and	dark-stained,	the	small	hilts	in	pieces	that	hinged	together	to
form	an	X-shaped	guard,	and	holed	and	weighted	pommels	of	iron	wrapped
around	lead	cores.	Throwing	weapons.	An	assassin’s	weapons.	The	last	item	in
the	packet	was	tucked	into	a	leather	loop:	the	talon	of	some	large	cat,	ambercolored	and	smooth.	She	wondered	if	it	held	poison,	painted	invisibly	on	its
surface.	The	item	was	ominous	in	its	mystery.
Felisin	rewrapped	the	packet,	returning	it	and	everything	else	to	the	pack.
She	heard	heavy	footsteps	approach	from	the	east	and	straightened.
Baudin	appeared	from	between	the	limestone	projections,	the	pack	on	his
shoulders	and	Heboric	in	his	arms.
The	thug	was	not	even	out	of	breath.
“He	needs	water,”	Baudin	said	as	he	strode	into	the	camp	and	laid	the
unconscious	man	down	on	the	soft	sand.	“In	this	pack,	lass,	quickly—”
Felisin	did	not	move.	“Why?	We	need	it	more,	Baudin.”
The	man	paused	for	a	heartbeat,	then	slipped	his	arms	free	of	the	pack	and
dragged	it	around.	“Would	you	want	him	saying	the	same,	if	you	were	the	one
lying	here?	Soon	as	we	get	off	this	island,	we	can	go	our	separate	ways.	But
for	now,	we	need	each	other,	girl.”
“He’s	dying.	Admit	it.”
“We’re	all	dying.”	He	unstoppered	the	bladder	and	eased	it	between
Heboric’s	cracked	lips.	“Drink,	old	man.	Swallow	it	down.”
“Those	are	your	rations	you’re	giving	him,”	Felisin	said.	“Not	mine.”
“Well,”	he	said	with	a	cold	grin,	“no	one	would	think	you	anything	but
nobleborn.	Mind	you,	opening	your	legs	for	anyone	and	everyone	back	in
Skullcup	was	proof	enough,	I	suppose.”
“It	kept	us	all	alive,	you	bastard.”
“Kept	you	plump	and	lazy,	you	mean.	Most	of	what	me	and	Heboric	ate
came	from	the	favors	I	did	for	the	Dosii	guards.	Beneth	gave	us	dregs	to	keep
you	sweet.	He	knew	we	wouldn’t	tell	you	about	it.	He	used	to	laugh	at	your
noble	cause.”
“You’re	lying.”
“As	you	say,”	he	said,	still	grinning.
Heboric	coughed,	his	eyes	opening.	He	blinked	in	the	dawn’s	light.
“You	should	see	yourself,”	Baudin	said	to	him.	“From	five	feet	away
you’re	one	solid	tattoo—as	dark	as	a	Dal	Honese	warlock.	Up	this	close	and	I
can	see	every	line—every	hair	of	the	Boar ’s	fur.	It’s	covered	your	stump,	too,
not	the	one	that’s	swollen	but	the	other	one.	Here,	drink	some	more—”
“Bastard!”	Felisin	snapped.	She	watched	as	the	last	of	their	water	trickled
into	the	old	man’s	mouth.	He	left	Beneth	to	die.	Now	he’s	trying	to	poison	the


memory	of	him,	too.	It	won’t	work.	I	did	what	I	did	to	keep	them	both	alive,	and
they	hate	that	fact—both	of	them.	It	eats	them	inside,	the	guilt	for	the	price	I
paid.	And	that’s	what	Baudin’s	now	trying	to	deny.	He’s	cutting	his	conscience
loose,	so	when	he	slips	one	of	those	knives	into	me	he	won’t	feel	a	thing.	Just
another	dead	nobleborn.	Another	Lady	Gaesen.
She	spoke	loudly,	meeting	Heboric’s	eyes.	“I	dream	a	river	of	blood	every
night.	I	ride	it.	And	you’re	both	there,	at	first,	but	only	at	first,	because	you	both
drown	in	that	river.	Believe	anything	you	like.	I’m	the	one	who’s	going	to	live
through	this.	Me.	Just	me.”
She	left	the	two	men	to	stare	at	her	back	as	she	walked	to	her	tent.

The	next	night,	they	found	the	spring	an	hour	before	the	moon	rose.	It	revealed
itself	at	the	base	of	a	stone	depression,	fed	from	below	by	some	unseen	fissure.
The	surface	appeared	to	be	gray	mud.	Baudin	went	down	to	its	edge,	but	made
no	move	to	scoop	out	a	hole	and	drink	the	water	that	would	seep	into	it.	After	a
moment,	her	head	spinning	with	weakness,	Felisin	dropped	the	food	pack	from
her	shoulders	and	stumbled	down	to	kneel	beside	him.
The	gray	was	faintly	phosphorescent	and	consisted	of	drowned	capemoths,
their	wings	spread	out	and	overlapping	to	cover	the	entire	surface.	Felisin
reached	to	push	the	floating	carpet	aside	but	Baudin’s	hand	snapped	out,
closing	on	her	wrist.
“It’s	fouled,”	he	said.	“Full	of	capemoth	larvae,	feeding	off	the	bodies	of
their	parents.”
Hood’s	breath,	not	more	larvae.	“Strain	the	water	through	a	cloth,”	Felisin
said.
He	shook	his	head.	“The	larvae	piss	poison,	fill	the	water	with	it.
Eliminates	any	competition.	It’ll	be	a	month	before	the	water ’s	drinkable.”
“We	need	it,	Baudin.”
“It’ll	kill	you.”
She	stared	down	at	the	gray	sludge,	her	desire	desperate,	an	agonized	fire
in	her	throat,	in	her	mind.	This	can’t	be.	We’ll	die	without	this.
Baudin	turned	away.	Heboric	had	arrived,	weaving	as	he	staggered	down
the	bedrock	slope.	His	skin	was	black	as	the	night,	yet	shimmering	silver	as	the
etched	highlights	of	the	boar	hair	reflected	the	stars	overhead.	Whatever
infection	had	seized	the	stump	of	his	right	wrist	had	begun	to	fade,	leaving	a
suppurating,	crackled	network	of	split	skin.	It	exuded	a	strange	smell	of
powdered	stone.


He	was	an	apparition,	and	in	answer	to	his	nightmarish	appearance	Felisin
laughed,	on	the	edge	of	hysteria.	“Remember	the	Round,	Heboric?	In	Unta?
Hood’s	acolyte,	the	priest	covered	in	flies…who	was	naught	but	flies.	He	had	a
message	for	you.	And	now,	what	do	I	see?	Staggering	into	view,	a	man	aswarm
—not	in	flies	but	in	tattoos.	Different	gods,	but	the	same	message,	that’s	what	I
see.	Let	Fener	speak	through	those	peeling	lips,	old	man.	Will	your	god’s
words	echo	Hood’s?	Is	the	world	truly	a	collection	of	balances,	the	infinite
tottering	to	and	fro	of	fates	and	destinies?	Boar	of	Summer,	Tusked	Sower	of
War,	what	do	you	say?”
The	old	man	stared	at	her.	His	mouth	opened,	but	no	words	came	forth.
“What	was	that?”	Felisin	cupped	an	ear.	“The	buzzing	of	wings?	Surely
not!”
“Fool,”	Baudin	muttered.	“Let’s	find	a	place	to	camp.	Not	here.”
“Ill	omens,	murderer?	I	never	knew	they	meant	anything	to	you.”
“Save	your	breath,	girl,”	Baudin	said,	facing	the	stone	slope.
“Makes	no	difference,”	she	replied.	“Not	now.	We’re	still	dancing	in	the
corner	of	a	god’s	eye,	but	it’s	only	for	show.	We’re	dead,	for	all	our	twitching
about.	What’s	Hood’s	symbol	in	Seven	Cities?	They	call	him	the	Hooded	One
here,	don’t	they?	Out	with	it,	Baudin,	what’s	carved	on	the	Lord	of	Death’s
temple	in	Aren?”
“I’d	guess	you	already	know,”	Baudin	said.
“Capemoths,	the	harbingers,	the	eaters	of	rotting	flesh.	It’s	the	nectar	of
decay	for	them,	the	rose	bloating	under	the	sun.	Hood	delivered	us	a	promise
in	the	Round	at	Unta,	and	it’s	just	been	fulfilled.”
Baudin	climbed	to	the	rim	of	the	depression,	her	words	following	him	up.
Orange-tinged	by	the	rising	sun,	he	turned	and	looked	down	on	her.	“So	much
for	your	river	of	blood,”	he	said	in	a	low,	amused	voice.
Dizziness	washed	through	her.	Her	legs	buckled	and	she	abruptly	sat	down,
jarring	her	tailbone	on	the	hard	bedrock.	She	glanced	over	to	see	Heboric
lying	huddled	an	arm-span	away.	The	soles	of	his	moccasins	had	worn
through,	revealing	ravaged,	glistening	flesh.	Was	he	already	dead?	As	good	as.
“Do	something,	Baudin.”
He	said	nothing.
“How	far	to	the	coast?”	she	asked.
“Doubt	it	would	matter,”	he	replied	after	a	moment.	“The	boat	was	to	have
patrolled	for	three	or	so	nights,	no	longer.	We’re	at	least	four	days	from	the
coast	and	getting	weaker	by	the	hour.”
“And	the	next	water?”
“About	seven	hours’	walk.	More	like	fourteen,	the	shape	we’re	in.”


“You	seemed	spry	enough	last	night!”	she	snapped.	“Running	off	to	collect
Heboric.	You	don’t	seem	as	parched	as	us,	either—”
“I	drink	my	own	piss.”
“You	what?”
He	grunted.	“You	heard	me.”
“Not	a	good	enough	answer,”	she	decided	after	thinking	a	moment.	“And
don’t	tell	me	you’re	eating	your	own	shit,	too.	It	still	wouldn’t	explain	things.
Have	you	made	a	pact	with	some	god,	Baudin?”
“You	think	doing	something	like	that’s	a	simple	task?	Hey,	Queen	of
Dreams,	save	me	and	I’ll	serve	you.	Tell	me,	how	many	of	your	prayers	have
been	answered?	Besides,	I	ain’t	got	faith	in	anything	but	me.”
“So	you	haven’t	given	up	yet?”
She	thought	he	wouldn’t	answer,	but	after	a	long	minute	in	which	she’d
begun	to	sink	into	herself,	he	startled	her	awake	with	a	blunt	“No.”
He	removed	his	pack,	then	skidded	back	down	the	slope.	Something	in	the
able	economy	of	his	movements	filled	her	with	sudden	dread.	Calls	me	plump,
eyes	me	like	a	piece	of	flesh—not	to	use	like	Beneth	did,	but	more	as	if	he’s
eyeing	his	next	meal.	Heart	hammering,	she	watched	for	the	first	move,	a
hungry	flash	in	his	small,	bestial	eyes.
Instead	he	crouched	down	beside	Heboric,	pulling	the	unconscious	man
onto	his	back.	He	leaned	close	to	listen	for	breath,	then	sat	back,	sighing.
“He’s	dead?”	Felisin	asked.	“You	do	the	skinning—I	won’t	eat	tattooed	skin
no	matter	how	hungry	I	am.”
Baudin	glanced	at	her	momentarily,	but	said	nothing,	returning	to	his
examination	of	the	ex-priest.
“Tell	me	what	you’re	doing,”	she	finally	said.
“He	lives,	and	that	alone	may	save	us.”	He	paused.	“How	far	you	fall,	girl,
matters	nothing	to	me.	Just	keep	your	thoughts	to	yourself.”
She	watched	him	peel	Heboric’s	rotting	clothing	away,	revealing	the
astonishing	weave	of	tattooing	beneath.	Baudin	then	moved	to	keep	his	own
shadow	behind	him	before	bending	close	to	study	the	dark	patterning	on	the
ex-priest’s	chest.	He	was	looking	for	something.
“A	raised	nape,”	she	said	dully,	“the	ends	pulled	down	and	almost	touching,
almost	a	circle.	It	surrounds	a	pair	of	tusks.”
He	stared,	eyes	narrowing.
“Fener ’s	own	mark,	the	one	that’s	sacred,”	she	said.	“It’s	what	you’re
looking	for,	isn’t	it?	He’s	excommunicated,	yet	Fener	remains	within	him.	That
much	is	obvious	by	those	living	tattoos.”
“And	the	mark?”	he	asked	coolly.	“How	did	you	come	to	know	such


things?”
“A	lie	I	spun	for	Beneth,”	she	explained	as	the	man	resumed	his
examination	of	the	ex-priest’s	crowded	flesh.	“I	needed	Heboric	to	support	it.	I
needed	details	of	the	cult.	He	told	me.	You	mean	to	call	on	the	god.”
“Found	it,”	he	said.
“Now	what?	How	do	you	reach	another	man’s	god,	Baudin?	There’s	no
keyhole	in	that	mark,	no	sacred	lock	you	can	pick.”
He	jerked	at	that,	his	eyes	glittering	as	they	bore	into	her	own.
She	didn’t	blink,	revealed	nothing.
“How	do	you	think	he	lost	his	hands?”	Felisin	asked	innocently.
“He	was	a	thief,	once.”
“He	was.	But	it	was	the	excommunication	that	took	them.	There	was	a	key,
you	see.	The	High	Priest’s	warren	to	his	god.	Tattooed	on	the	palm	of	his	right
hand.	Held	to	the	sacred	mark—hand	to	chest,	basically—as	simple	as	a	salute.
I	spent	days	healing	from	Beneth’s	beating,	and	Heboric	talked.	Told	me	so
many	things—I	should	have	forgotten	all	of	it,	you	know.	Drinking	durhang
tea	by	the	gallon,	but	that	brew	just	dissolved	the	surface,	that	filter	that	says
what’s	important,	what	isn’t.	His	words	poured	in	unobstructed,	and	stayed.	You
can’t	do	it,	Baudin.”
He	raised	Heboric’s	right	forearm,	studied	the	glistening,	flushed	stump	in
the	growing	light.
“You	can	never	go	back,”	she	said.	“The	priesthood	made	sure	of	that.	He
isn’t	what	he	was,	and	that’s	that.”
With	a	silent	snarl	Baudin	pulled	the	forearm	around	to	push	the	stump
against	the	sacred	mark.
The	air	screamed.	The	sound	battered	them,	flung	them	both	down	to
scrabble,	claw,	mindlessly	dig	into	the	rock—away…away	from	the	pain.	Away!
There	was	such	agony	in	that	shriek,	it	descended	like	fire,	darkening	the	sky
overhead,	spreading	hairline	fissures	through	the	bedrock,	the	cracks
spreading	outward	from	under	Heboric’s	motionless	body.
Blood	streaming	from	her	ears,	Felisin	tried	to	crawl	away,	up	the
trembling	slope.	The	fissures—Heboric’s	tattoos	had	blossomed	out	from	his
body,	leaped	the	unfathomable	distance	from	skin	to	stone—swept	under	her,
turning	the	rock	into	something	slick	and	greasy	under	her	palms.
Everything	had	begun	to	shake.	Even	the	sky	seemed	to	twist,	yanked	down
into	itself	as	if	a	score	of	invisible	hands	had	reached	through	unseen	portals,
grasping	the	fabric	of	the	world	with	cold,	destructive	rage.
The	scream	was	unending.	Rage	and	unbearable	pain	meshed	together	like
twin	strands	in	an	ever-tightening	rope.	Closing	in	a	noose	around	her	neck,


the	sound	blocked	the	outside	world—its	air,	its	light.
Something	struck	the	ground,	the	bedrock	under	her	shuddering,	throwing
her	upward.	She	came	back	down	hard	on	one	elbow.	The	bones	of	her	arm
shivered	like	the	blade	of	a	sword.	The	glare	of	the	sun	dimmed	as	Felisin
fought	for	air.	Her	wide	eyes	caught	a	glimpse	of	something	beyond	the	basin,
lifting	ponderously	from	the	plain	in	a	heaving	cloud	of	dust.	Two-toed,	a	fursnarled	hoof,	too	large	for	her	to	fully	grasp,	rising	up,	pulled	skyward	into	a
midnight	gloom.
The	tattoo	had	leaped	from	stone	to	the	air	itself,	a	woad-stained	web
growing	in	crazed,	jerking	blots,	snapping	outward	in	all	directions.
She	could	not	breathe.	Her	lungs	burned.	She	was	dying,	sucked	airless
into	the	void	that	was	a	god’s	scream.
Sudden	silence,	out	beyond	the	ringing	echoes	in	her	skull.	Air	flooded
her,	cold	and	bitter,	yet	sweeter	than	anything	she	had	known.	Coughing,
spitting	bile,	Felisin	pushed	herself	onto	her	hands	and	knees,	shakily	raised
her	head.
The	hoof	was	gone.	The	tattoo	hung	like	an	after-image	across	the	entire
sky,	slowly	fading	as	she	watched.	Movement	pulled	her	gaze	down,	to	Baudin.
He’d	been	on	his	knees,	hands	cupping	the	sides	of	his	head.	He	now	slowly
straightened,	tears	of	blood	filling	the	lines	of	his	face.
The	ground	under	her	feeling	strangely	fluid,	Felisin	tottered	to	her	feet.
She	looked	down,	blinking	dumbly	at	the	mosaic	of	limestone.	The	swirling
furred	patterns	of	the	tattoo	still	trembled,	rippling	outward	from	her
moccasins	as	she	struggled	for	balance.	The	cracks,	the	tattoos…they	go	down,
and	down,	all	the	way	down.	As	if	I’m	standing	atop	a	bed	of	league-deep	nails,
each	nail	kept	upright	only	by	the	others	surrounding	it.	Have	you	come	from
the	Abyss,	Fener?	It’s	said	your	sacred	warren	borders	Chaos	itself.	Fener?	Are
you	among	us	now?	She	turned	to	meet	Baudin’s	eyes.	They	were	dull	with
shock,	though	she	could	detect	the	first	glimmers	of	fear	burning	through.
“We	wanted	the	god’s	attention,”	she	said.	“Not	the	god	himself.”	A
trembling	seized	her.	She	wrapped	her	arms	around	herself,	forcing	more
words	forth.	“And	he	didn’t	want	to	come!”
His	flinch	was	momentary,	then	he	rolled	his	shoulders	in	something	that
might	have	been	a	shrug.	“He’s	gone	now,	ain’t	he?”
“Are	you	sure	of	that?”
He	shook	off	the	need	to	answer,	looking	instead	at	Heboric.	After	a
moment’s	study,	he	said,	“He	breathes	steadier	now.	Nor	so	wrinkled	and
parched.	Something’s	happened	to	him.”
She	sneered.	“The	reward	for	missing	getting	stomped	on	by	a	hair ’s


breadth.”
Baudin	grunted,	his	attention	suddenly	elsewhere.
She	followed	his	gaze.	The	pool	of	water	was	gone,	drained	away	until
only	a	carpet	of	capemoth	corpses	remained.	Felisin	barked	a	laugh.	“Some
salvation	we’ve	had	here.”
Heboric	slowly	curled	himself	into	a	ball.	“He’s	here,”	he	whispered.
“We	know,”	Baudin	said.
“In	the	mortal	realm…”	the	ex-priest	continued	after	a	moment.
“Vulnerable.”
“You’re	looking	at	it	the	wrong	way,”	Felisin	said.	“The	god	you	no
longer	worship	took	your	hands.	So	now	you	pulled	him	down.	Don’t	mess
with	mortals.”
Either	her	cold	tone	or	brutal	words	in	some	way	steeled	through	Heboric.
He	uncurled,	raised	his	head,	then	sat	up.	His	gaze	found	Felisin.	“Out	of	the
mouth	of	babes,”	he	said	with	a	grin	that	knew	nothing	of	humor.
“So	he’s	here,”	Baudin	said,	looking	around.	“How	can	a	god	hide?”
Heboric	rose	to	his	feet.	“I’d	give	what’s	left	of	an	arm	to	study	a	field	of
the	Deck	right	now.	Imagine	the	maelstrom	among	the	Ascendants.	This	is	not
a	fly-specked	visitation,	not	a	pluck	and	strum	on	the	strands	of	power.”	He
lifted	his	arms,	frowning	down	at	the	stumps.	“It’s	been	years,	but	the	ghosts
are	back.”
Watching	Baudin’s	confusion	was	a	struggle	in	itself.	“Ghosts?”
“The	hands	that	aren’t	there,”	Heboric	explained.	“Echoes.	Enough	to	drive
a	man	mad.”	He	shook	himself,	squinted	sunward.	“I	feel	better.”
“You	look	it,”	Baudin	said.
The	heat	was	building.	In	an	hour	it	would	soar.
Felisin	scowled.	“Healed	by	the	god	he	rejected.	It	doesn’t	matter.	If	we	stay
in	our	tents	today	we’ll	be	too	weak	to	do	anything	come	dusk.	We	have	to
walk	now.	To	the	next	water-hole.	If	we	don’t	we’re	dead.”	But	I’ll	outlive	you,
Baudin.	Enough	to	drive	the	dagger	home.
Baudin	shouldered	his	pack.	Grinning,	Heboric	slung	his	arms	through	the
straps	of	the	pack	she’d	been	carrying.	He	rose	easily,	though	taking	a	step	to
catch	his	balance	once	he	straightened.
Baudin	led	the	way.	Felisin	fell	in	behind	him.	A	god	stalks	the	mortal
realm,	yet	is	afraid.	He	has	power	unimaginable,	yet	he	hides.	And	somehow
Heboric	had	found	the	strength	to	withstand	all	that	had	happened.	And	the	fact
that	he’s	responsible.	This	should	have	broken	him,	shattered	his	soul.	Instead,
he	bends.	Could	his	wall	of	cynicism	withstand	such	a	siege	for	long?	What	did
he	do	to	lose	his	hands?


She	had	her	own	inner	turmoil	to	manage.	Her	thoughts	plundered	every
chamber	in	her	mind.	She	still	envisaged	murder,	yet	felt	a	vaguely	mocking
wave	of	comradeship	for	her	two	companions.	She	wanted	to	run	from	them,
sensing	that	their	presence	was	a	vortex	tugging	her	into	madness	and	death,
yet	she	knew	that	she	was	also	dependent	on	them.
Heboric	spoke	behind	her.	“We’ll	make	it	to	the	coast.	I	smell	water.	Close.
To	the	coast,	and	when	we	get	there,	Felisin,	you	will	find	that	nothing	has
changed.	Nothing	at	all.	Do	you	grasp	my	meaning?”
She	sensed	a	thousand	meanings	to	his	words,	yet	understood	none
of	them.	Up	ahead,	Baudin	gave	a	shout	of	surprise.
Mappo	Trell’s	thoughts	traveled	westward	almost	eight	hundred	leagues,	to	a
dusk	not	unlike	this	one	but	two	centuries	past.	He	saw	himself	crossing	a	plain
of	chest-high	grass,	but	the	grass	had	been	plastered	down,	laden	with	what
looked	like	grease,	and	as	he	walked	the	very	earth	beneath	his	hide	boots
shifted	and	shied.	He’d	known	centuries	already,	wedded	to	war	in	what	had
become	an	ever-repeating	cycle	of	raids,	feuding	and	bloody	sacrifices	before
the	god	of	honor.	Youth’s	game,	and	he’d	long	grown	weary	of	it.	Yet	he’d
stayed,	nailed	to	a	single	tree	but	only	because	he’d	grown	used	to	the	scenery
around	it.	It	was	amazing	what	could	be	endured	when	in	the	grip	of	inertia.	He
had	reached	a	point	where	anything	strange,	unfamiliar,	was	cause	for	fear.	But
unlike	his	brothers	and	sisters,	Mappo	could	not	ride	that	fear	across	the	full
span	of	his	life.	For	all	that,	it	had	taken	the	horror	he	now	approached	to	prise
him	from	the	tree.
He	had	been	young	when	he	walked	out	of	the	trader	town	that	was	his
home.	He	was	caught—like	so	many	of	his	age	back	then—in	a	fevered
backlash,	rejecting	the	rotting	immobility	of	the	Trell	towns	and	the	elder
warriors	who’d	become	merchants	trading	in	bhederin,	goats	and	sheep,	and
now	relived	their	fighting	paths	in	the	countless	taverns	and	bars.	He	embraced
the	wandering	ways	of	old,	willingly	suffered	initiation	into	one	of	the	backland	clans	that	had	retained	the	traditional	lifestyle.
The	chains	of	his	convictions	held	for	hundreds	of	years,	snapped	at	last	in
a	way	he	could	never	have	foreseen.
His	memories	remained	sharp,	and	in	his	mind	he	once	again	strode	across
the	plain.	The	ruins	of	the	trader	town	where	he’d	been	born	were	now	visible.
A	month	had	passed	since	its	destruction.	The	bodies	of	the	fifteen	thousand
slain—those	that	had	not	burned	in	the	raging	fires—had	long	since	been


picked	clean	by	the	plain’s	scavengers.	He	was	returning	home	to	bleached
bone,	fragments	of	cloth	and	heat-shattered	brick.
The	ancient	shoulder-women	of	his	adopted	clan	had	divined	the	tale	from
the	flat	bones	they	burned,	as	the	Nameless	Ones	had	predicted	months	earlier.
While	the	Trell	of	the	towns	had	become	strangers	to	them	all,	they	were	kin.
The	task	that	remained	was	not,	however,	one	of	vengeance.	This
pronouncement	silenced	the	many	companions	who,	like	Mappo,	had	been
born	in	the	destroyed	town.	No,	all	notions	of	vengeance	must	be	purged	in	the
one	chosen	for	the	task	ahead.	Thus	were	the	words	of	the	Nameless	Ones,	who
foresaw	this	moment.
Mappo	still	did	not	understand	why	he	had	been	chosen.	He	was	no
different	from	his	fellow	warriors,	he	believed.	Vengeance	was	sustenance.
More	than	meat	and	water,	the	very	reason	to	eat	and	drink.	The	ritual	that
would	purge	him	would	destroy	all	that	he	was.	You	will	be	an	unpainted	hide,
Mappo.	The	future	will	offer	its	own	script,	writing	and	shaping	your	history
anew.	What	was	done	to	the	town	of	our	kin	must	never	happen	again.	You	will
ensure	that.	Do	you	understand?
Expressions	of	dreadful	necessity.	Yet,	without	the	horrific	destruction	of
the	town	of	his	birth	Mappo	would	have	defied	them	all.	He’d	walked	the
overgrown	main	street,	with	its	riotous	carpet	of	weeds	and	roots,	and	had	seen
the	glimmer	of	sun-bleached	bones	at	his	feet.
Near	the	market	round,	he	discovered	a	Nameless	One	awaiting	him,
standing	in	the	clearing’s	center,	gray-faded	robes	flickering	in	the	prairie
wind,	hood	drawn	back	to	reveal	a	stern	woman’s	visage.	Pale	eyes	met	his	as
he	approached.	The	staff	she	held	in	one	hand	seemed	to	writhe	in	her	grip.
“We	do	not	see	in	years,”	she	hissed.
“But	in	centuries,”	Mappo	replied.
“It	is	well.	Now,	warrior,	you	must	learn	to	do	the	same.	Your	elders	shall
decree	it	so.”
The	Trell	slowly	gazed	around,	squinting	at	the	ruins.	“It	has	more	the	feel
of	a	raider ’s	army—it’s	said	that	such	forces	exist	south	of	Nemil—”
Her	sneer	surprised	him	with	its	unveiled	contempt.	“One	day	he	shall
return	to	his	home,	as	you’ve	done	here	and	now.	Until	that	time,	you	must
attend—”
“Why	me,	damn	you!”
Her	answer	was	a	faint	shrug.
“And	if	I	defy	you?”
“Even	that,	warrior,	will	demand	patience.”	She	raised	the	staff	then,	the
gesture	drawing	his	eye.	The	twisting,	buckling	wood	seemed	to	reach


hungrily	for	the	Trell,	growing,	filling	his	world	until	he	was	lost	in	its
tortured	maze.
“Strange	how	a	land	untraveled	can	look	so	familiar.”
Mappo	blinked,	the	memories	scattered	by	the	sound	of	that	familiar	soft
voice.	He	glanced	up	at	Icarium.	“Stranger	still	how	the	mind’s	eye	can	travel
so	far	and	so	fast,	yet	return	in	an	instant.”
The	Jhag	smiled.	“With	that	eye	you	might	explore	the	entire	world.”
“With	that	eye	you	might	escape	it.”
Icarium’s	gaze	narrowed	as	he	scanned	the	rubble-strewn	sweep	of	desert
below.	They’d	climbed	a	tel	the	better	to	see	the	way	ahead.	“Your	memories
always	fascinate	me,	since	I	seem	to	have	so	few	of	my	own,	and	more	so	since
you	have	always	been	so	reluctant	to	share	them.”
“I	was	recalling	my	clan,”	Mappo	said,	shrugging.	“It	is	astonishing	the
trivial	things	one	comes	to	miss.	Birthing	season	for	the	herds,	the	way	we
winnowed	the	weak	in	unspoken	agreement	with	the	plains’	wolves.”	He
smiled.	“The	glory	I	earned	when	I’d	snuck	into	a	raiding	party’s	camp	and
broken	the	tips	of	every	warrior ’s	knife,	then	sneaked	back	out	with	no	one
awakening.”	He	sighed.	“I	carried	those	points	in	a	bag	for	years,	tied	to	my
war	belt.”
“What	happened	to	them?”
“Stolen	back	by	a	cleverer	raider.”	Mappo’s	smile	broadened.	“Imagine	her
glory!”
“Was	that	all	she	stole?”
“Ah,	leave	me	some	secrets,	friend.”	The	Trell	rose,	brushing	sand	and
dust	from	his	leather	leggings.	“If	anything,”	he	said	after	a	pause,	“that
sandstorm	has	grown	a	third	in	size	since	we	stopped.”
Hands	on	his	hips,	Icarium	studied	the	dark	wall	bisecting	the	plain.	“I
believe	it	has	marched	closer,	as	well,”	he	said.	“Born	of	sorcery,	perhaps	the
very	breath	of	a	goddess,	its	strength	still	grows.	I	can	feel	it	reaching	out	to
us.”
“Aye.”	Mappo	nodded,	repressing	a	shiver.	“Surprising,	assuming	that
Sha’ik	is	indeed	dead.”
“Her	death	may	have	been	necessary,”	Icarium	said.	“After	all,	can	mortal
flesh	command	this	power?	Can	a	living	being	stay	alive	being	the	gateway
between	Dryjhna	and	this	realm?”
“You’re	thinking	she’s	become	Ascendant?	And	in	doing	so	left	her	flesh
and	bones	behind?”
“It’s	possible.”
Mappo	fell	silent.	The	possibilities	multiplied	each	time	they	discussed


Sha’ik,	the	Whirlwind	and	the	prophecies.	Together,	he	and	Icarium	were
sowing	their	own	confusion.	And	whom	might	that	serve?	Iskaral	Pust’s
grinning	face	appeared	in	his	mind.	Breath	hissed	through	his	teeth.	“We’re
being	manipulated,”	he	growled.	“I	can	feel	it.	Smell	it.”
“I’ve	noted	your	raised	hackles,”	Icarium	said	with	a	grim	smile.	“For
myself,	I’ve	become	numb	to	such	notions—I	have	felt	manipulated	all	my
life.”
The	Trell	shook	himself	to	disguise	his	flinch.	“And,”	he	asked	softly,
“who	would	be	doing	that?”
The	Jhag	shrugged,	glanced	down	with	a	raised	eyebrow.	“I	stopped	asking
that	question	long	ago,	friend.	Shall	we	eat?	The	lesson	needed	here	is	that
mutton	stew	is	a	taste	superior	to	that	of	sweet	curiosity.”
Mappo	studied	Icarium’s	back	as	the	warrior	strode	down	into	camp.	But
what	of	sweet	vengeance,	friend?
	
They	rode	down	the	ancient	road,	harried	by	banshee	gusts	of	sand-filled	wind.
Even	the	Gral	gelding	was	stumbling	with	exhaustion,	but	Fiddler	had	run	out
of	options.	He	had	no	answer	to	what	was	happening.
Somewhere	in	the	impenetrable	sweeps	of	sand	to	their	right	a	running
battle	was	under	way.	It	was	close—it	sounded	close,	but	of	the	combatants	they
could	see	no	sign,	nor	was	Fiddler	of	a	mind	to	ride	to	investigate.	In	his	fear
and	exhaustion,	he’d	arrived	at	a	fevered,	panicky	conviction	that	staying	on
the	road	was	all	that	kept	them	alive.	If	they	left	it	they	would	be	torn	apart.
The	battle	sounds	were	not	clashing	steel,	nor	the	death	cries	of	men.	The
sounds	were	of	beasts—roars,	snaps,	snarls,	keening	songs	of	terror	and	pain
and	savage	fury.	Nothing	human.	There	might	have	been	wolves	in	the	unseen
struggle,	but	other,	wholly	different	throats	voiced	their	own	frantic
participation.	The	nasal	groans	of	bears,	the	hiss	of	large	cats,	and	other
sounds—reptilian,	avian,	simian.	And	demons.	Mustn’t	forget	those	demonic
barks—Hood’s	own	nightmares	couldn’t	be	worse.
He	rode	without	reins.	Both	hands	gripped	the	sand-pitted	stock	of	his
crossbow.	It	was	cocked,	a	flamer	quarrel	nocked	in	place,	and	had	been	since
the	scrap	began,	ten	hours	ago.	The	gut-wound	cord	was	weary	by	now,	he	well
knew.	The	wider	than	usual	spread	of	the	steel	ribs	told	him	as	much.	The
quarrel	would	not	fly	far,	and	its	flight	would	be	soft.	But	he	needed	neither
accuracy	nor	range	for	the	flamer	to	be	effective.	The	knowledge	that	to	drop
the	weapon	would	result	in	their	being	engulfed—he	and	his	horse	both—in
raging	fire,	kept	reminding	him	of	that	efficacy	each	time	his	aching,	sweat-


slick	hands	let	the	weapon	slip	slightly	in	his	grip.
He	could	not	go	on	much	longer.	A	single	glance	back	over	his	shoulder
showed	Apsalar	and	Crokus	still	with	him,	their	horses	past	the	point	of
recovery	and	now	running	until	life	fled	their	bodies.	Not	long	now.
The	Gral	gelding	screamed	and	slewed	sideways.	Fiddler	was	suddenly
awash	in	hot	liquid.	Blinking	and	cursing,	he	shook	the	fluid	from	his	eyes.
Blood.	A	Fener-born	Hood-damned	gushing	fountain	of	blood.	It	had	shot	out
from	the	impenetrable	airborne	sand.	Something	got	close.	Something	else
stopped	it	from	getting	any	closer.	Queen’s	blessing,	what	in	the	Abyss	is	going
on?
Crokus	shouted.	Fiddler	looked	back	in	time	to	see	him	leap	clear	of	his
collapsing	mount.	The	animal’s	front	legs	folded	under	it.	He	watched	the
horse’s	chin	strike	hard	on	the	cobbles,	leaving	a	smear	of	blood	and	froth.	It
jerked	its	head	clear	in	one	last	effort	to	recover,	then	rolled,	legs	kicking	in
the	air	a	moment	before	sagging	and	falling	still.
The	sapper	pried	a	hand	loose	from	the	crossbow,	gathered	the	reins	and
drew	his	gelding	to	a	halt.	He	swung	the	stumbling	beast	around.	“Dump	the
tents!”	he	shouted	to	Crokus,	who	had	regained	his	feet.	“That’s	the	freshest	of
the	spare	mounts.	Quickly,	damn	you!”
Slumped	in	her	saddle,	Apsalar	rode	close.	“It’s	no	use,”	she	said	through
cracked	lips.	“We	have	to	stop.”
Snarling,	Fiddler	glared	out	into	the	biting	sheets	of	sand.	The	battle	was
getting	closer.	Whatever	was	holding	them	back	was	giving	ground.	He	saw	a
massive	shape	loom	into	view,	then	vanish	again	as	quickly.	It	seemed	to	have
leopards	riding	its	shoulders.	Off	to	one	side	four	hulking	shapes	appeared,
low	to	the	ground	and	rolling	forward	black	and	silent.
Fiddler	swung	the	crossbow	around	and	fired.	The	bolt	struck	the	ground	a
half-dozen	paces	from	the	four	beasts.	Sheets	of	flame	washed	over	them.	The
creatures	shrieked.
He	spared	no	time	to	watch,	pulling	at	random	another	quarrel	from	the
hardened	case	strapped	to	the	saddle.	He’d	only	a	dozen	quarrel-mounted
Moranth	munitions	to	start	with.	He	was	now	down	to	nine,	and	of	those	only
one	more	cusser.	He	spared	a	glance	as	he	loaded	the	quarrel—another	flamer
—then	resumed	scanning	the	wall	of	heaving	sand,	leaving	his	hands	to	work
by	memory.
Shapes	were	showing,	flashing	like	grainy	ghosts.	A	dozen	dog-sized
winged	reptiles	shuddered	into	view	twenty	feet	up,	rising	on	a	column	of	air.
Esanthan’el—Hood’s	breath,	these	are	D’ivers	and	Soletaken!	A	huge	capeshape	swept	over	the	esanthan’el,	engulfing	them.


Crokus	was	frantically	rummaging	in	a	pack	for	the	short	sword	he’d
purchased	in	Ehrlitan.	Apsalar	crouched	beside	him,	daggers	glinting	in	her
hands	as	she	faced	down	the	road.
Fiddler	was	about	to	shout	that	the	enemy	was	to	her	left,	when	he	saw	what
she’d	seen.	Three	Gral	hunters	rode	shoulder	to	shoulder	in	full	charge,	less
than	a	dozen	horse-strides	from	their	position.	Their	lances	lowered.
The	range	was	too	close	for	a	safe	shot.	The	sapper	could	only	watch	as
the	warriors	closed	in.	Time	seemed	to	slow	down	as	Fiddler	stared,	helpless
to	intervene.	A	massive	bear	bolted	up	from	the	side	of	the	road,	colliding	with
the	Gral	rider	on	the	left.	The	Soletaken	was	as	big	as	the	horse	it	pulled	down.
Its	jaws	closed	sideways	around	the	warrior ’s	waist,	between	ribs	and	hips,	the
canines	sinking	in	almost	past	the	far	side.	The	jaws	squeezed	seemingly
without	effort.	Bile	and	blood	sprayed	from	the	warrior ’s	mouth.
Apsalar	sprang	at	the	other	two	men,	flashing	beneath	the	lanceheads,	both
knives	thrusting	up	and	out	as	she	slipped	between	the	horses.	Neither	Gral	had
time	to	parry.	As	if	in	mirror	reflection,	each	blade	vanished	up	and	under	the
ribcage,	the	one	on	the	left	finding	a	heart,	the	one	on	the	right	rupturing	a
lung.
Then	she	was	past,	leaving	both	weapons	behind.	A	dive	and	a	shoulder
roll	avoided	the	lance	of	a	fourth	rider	Fiddler	hadn’t	seen	earlier.	In	a	single,
fluid	motion,	Apsalar	regained	her	feet	and	sprang	in	an	astonishing	surge	of
strength,	and	was	suddenly	sitting	behind	the	Gral,	her	right	arm	closing
around	his	throat,	her	left	reaching	down	over	the	man’s	head,	two	fingers
sinking	deep	into	each	eye,	then	yanking	back	in	time	for	the	small	knife	that
suddenly	appeared	in	her	right	hand	to	slide	back	across	the	warrior ’s	exposed
throat.
Fiddler ’s	rapt	attention	was	violently	broken	by	something	large	and
scaled	whipping	across	his	face,	knocking	him	from	the	saddle,	sending	his
crossbow	flying	from	his	hands.	He	struck	the	road	surface	in	an	explosion	of
pain.	Ribs	snapped,	the	shattered	ends	grinding	and	tearing	as	he	rolled	onto
his	stomach.	Any	thoughts	of	trying	to	rise	were	quickly	killed	as	a	vicious
battle	burst	into	life	directly	above	him.	Hands	behind	his	head,	Fiddler	curled
himself	tight,	willed	himself	smaller.	Bony	hooves	battered	him,	clawed	feet
scored	his	chain	armor,	ravaged	his	thighs.	One	sudden	push	crushed	his	left
ankle,	then	pivoted	on	what	was	left	before	lifting	away.
He	heard	his	horse	screaming,	not	in	pain,	but	in	terror	and	rage.	The
sound	of	the	gelding’s	hooves	connecting	with	something	solid	was	a
momentary	flash	of	satisfaction	amidst	the	pain	flooding	Fiddler ’s	mind.
A	huge	body	thumped	to	the	ground	beside	the	sapper,	rolling	to	press	a


scaled	flank	against	him.	He	felt	the	muscles	twitching,	sending	sympathetic
shivers	through	his	own	pummeled	body.
The	sounds	of	battle	had	ceased.	Only	the	moaning	wind	and	hissing	sand
was	left.	He	tried	to	sit	up	but	found	he	could	barely	lift	his	head.	The	scene
was	one	of	carnage.	Immediately	in	front	of	him,	within	an	arm’s	reach,	stood
the	four	trembling	legs	of	his	gelding.	Off	to	one	side	lay	his	crossbow,	flamer
gone—the	weapon	must	have	discharged	when	it	struck	the	ground,	catapulting
the	deadly	quarrel	into	the	storm.	Just	ahead	the	lung-stabbed	Gral	lay
coughing	blood.	Standing	over	him	speculatively	was	Apsalar,	the	assassin’s
throat-slitter	held	loosely	in	one	hand.	A	dozen	paces	past	her,	the	hulking
brown	back	of	the	Soletaken	bear	was	visible,	rippling	as	it	tore	at	the	meat	of
the	horse	it	had	brought	down.	Crokus	stepped	into	view—he’d	found	his	short
sword	but	had	yet	to	unsheathe	it.	Fiddler	felt	a	wave	of	compassion	at	the
expression	on	the	lad’s	face.
The	sapper	reached	one	arm	behind	him,	groaning	with	the	effort.	His
hand	found	and	rested	against	scaled	hide.	The	twitches	had	ceased.
The	bear	roared	in	sudden	alarm.	Fiddler	twisted	around	in	time	to	see	the
beast	bolt	away.	Oh,	Hood,	if	he’s	fleeing…
The	trembling	of	the	mare’s	legs	increased,	making	them	almost	blurry	to
Fiddler ’s	eyes,	but	the	animal	did	not	run,	stepping	only	to	interpose	herself
between	the	sapper	and	whatever	was	coming.	The	gesture	rent	the	man’s	heart.
“Dammit,	beast,”	he	rasped.	“Get	out	of	here!”
Apsalar	was	backing	toward	him.	Crokus	stood	motionless,	the	sword
falling	unheeded	from	his	hands.
He	finally	saw	the	newcomer.	Newcomers.	Like	a	seething,	lumpy	black
carpet,	the	D’ivers	rolled	over	the	cobbles.	Rats,	hundreds.	Yet	one.	Hundreds?
Thousands.	Oh,	Hood,	I	know	of	this	one.	“Apsalar!”
She	glanced	at	him,	expressionless.
“In	my	saddlebag,”	the	sapper	said.	“A	cusser—”
“Not	enough,”	she	said	coolly.	“Too	late	anyway.”
“Not	them.	Us.”
Her	reaction	was	a	slow	blink,	then	she	stepped	up	to	the	gelding.
A	stranger ’s	voice	rose	above	the	wailing	wind.	“Gryllen!”
Yes,	that’s	the	D’ivers’s	name.	Gryllen,	otherwise	known	as	the	Tide	of
Madness.	Flushed	out	of	Y’ghatan	in	the	fire.	Oh,	it	comes	around,	don’t	it	just!
“Gryllen!”	the	voice	bellowed	again.	“Leave	here,	D’ivers!”
Hide-bound	legs	stepped	into	view.	Fiddler	looked	up,	saw	an
extraordinarily	tall	man,	lean,	wearing	a	faded	Tano	telaba.	His	skin	was
somewhere	between	gray	and	green,	and	he	held	in	his	long-fingered	hands	a


recurved	bow	and	a	runewrapped	arrow	nocked	and	ready.	His	long,	gray	hair
showed	remnants	of	black	dye,	making	his	mane	appear	spotted.	The	sapper
saw	the	ragged	tips	of	tusks	bulging	the	line	of	his	thin	lower	lip.	A	Jhag.
Didn’t	know	they	traveled	this	far	east.	Why	in	Hood’s	name	that	should	matter,
I	don’t	know.
The	Jhag	took	another	step	toward	the	heaving	mass	of	rats	that	now
covered	what	was	left	of	the	bear-killed	horse	and	rider,	and	laid	a	hand	on	the
shoulder	of	the	mare.	The	trembling	stilled.	Apsalar	stepped	back,	warily
studying	the	stranger.
Gryllen	was	hesitating—Fiddler	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	He	glanced
again	at	the	Jhag.	Another	figure	had	appeared	beside	the	tall	bowman.	Short
and	wide	as	a	siege	engine,	his	skin	a	deep,	warm	brown,	his	black	hair	braided
and	studded	with	fetishes.	If	anything,	his	canines	were	bigger	than	his
companion’s,	and	looking	much	sharper.	A	Trell.	A	Jhag	and	a	Trell.	That	rings
a	towerful	of	bells,	if	only	I	could	get	through	the	pain	to	spare	it	another
thought.
“Your	quarry	has	fled,”	the	Jhag	said	to	Gryllen.	“These	people	here	do
not	pursue	the	Trail	of	Hands.	Moreover,	I	now	protect	them.”
The	rats	hissed	and	twittered	in	a	deafening	roar,	and	surged	higher	on	the
road.	Dust-gray	eyes	glittered	in	a	seething	storm.
“Do	not,”	the	Jhag	said	slowly,	“try	my	patience.”
A	thousand	bodies	flinched.	The	tide	withdrew,	a	wave	of	greasy	fur.	A
moment	later	they	were	gone.
The	Trell	squatted	beside	Fiddler.	“You	will	live,	soldier?”
“Seems	I’ll	have	to,”	the	sapper	replied,	“if	only	to	make	some	sense	of
what	just	happened.	I	should	know	you	two,	shouldn’t	I?”
The	Trell	shrugged.	“Can	you	stand?”
“Let’s	see.”	He	pulled	an	arm	under	him,	pushed	himself	up	an	inch,	then
remembered	nothing	more.


Chapter	Eight

It	is	said	that	on	the	night	of	Kellanved	and	Dancer ’s	Return,
Malaz	City	was	a	maelstrom	of	sorcery	and	dire	visitations.	It	is
not	a	far	reach	to	find	one	sustained	in	the	belief	that	the
assassinations	were	a	messy,	confused	affair,	and	that	success
and	failure	are	judgments	dependent	on	one’s	perspective…
CONSPIRACIES	IN	THE	IMPERIUM
HEBORIC
Coltaine	had	surprised	them	all.	Leaving	the	footsoldiers	of	the	Seventh	to
guard	the	taking-on	of	water	at	Dryj	Spring,	he	had	led	his	Wickans	out	onto
the	Odhan.	Two	hours	after	sunset,	the	Tithansi	tribesmen,	resting	their	horses
by	walking	with	lead	reins	over	a	league	from	the	oasis,	suddenly	found
themselves	the	center	of	a	closing-horseshoe	charge.	Few	had	time	to	so	much
as	remount,	much	less	wheel	in	formation	to	meet	the	attack.	Though	they
outnumbered	the	Wickans	seven	to	one,	they	broke,	and	died	a	hundred	for
every	one	of	Coltaine’s	clan	warriors	who	fell.	Within	two	hours	the	slaughter
was	complete.
Riding	the	south	road	toward	the	oasis,	Duiker	had	seen	the	glow	from	the
Tithansi’s	burning	wagons	way	off	on	his	right.	It	was	a	long	moment	before
he	grasped	what	he	was	seeing.	There	was	no	question	of	riding	into	that
conflagration.	The	Wickans	rode	the	blood	of	butchery—they	would	not	pause
to	think	before	taking	him	down.	Instead	he	swung	his	mount	northwest	and
rode	at	a	canter	until	he	ran	into	the	first	of	the	fleeing	Tithansi,	from	whom	he
gleaned	the	story.
The	Wickans	were	demons.	They	breathed	fire.	Their	arrows	magically
multiplied	in	mid-air.	Their	horses	fought	with	uncanny	intelligence.	A	Mezla
Ascendant	had	been	conjured	and	sent	to	Seven	Cities,	and	now	faced	the
Whirlwind	goddess.	The	Wickans	could	not	be	killed.	There	would	never	come
another	dawn.
Duiker	left	the	man	to	whatever	fate	awaited	him	and	rode	back	to	the	road,


resuming	his	journey	to	the	oasis.	He	had	lost	two	hours,	but	had	gleaned
invaluable	information	amidst	the	Tithansi	deserter ’s	terror-spawned	ravings.
This,	the	historian	realized	as	he	rode	on,	was	more	than	the	simple
lashingout	of	a	wounded,	tormented	beast.	Coltaine	clearly	did	not	view	the
situation	in	that	way.	Perhaps	he	never	did.	The	Fist	was	conducting	a
campaign.	Engaged	in	a	war,	not	a	panicked	flight.	The	leaders	of	the
Apocalypse	had	better	reorder	their	thoughts,	if	they’re	to	hold	any	hope	of
wresting	the	fangs	from	this	serpent.	More,	they’d	better	kill	the	notion
evidently	already	rampant	that	the	Wickans	were	more	than	just	human,	and
that’s	easier	said	than	done.
Kamist	Reloe	still	retained	superior	numbers,	but	the	quality	of	the	troops
was	beginning	to	tell—Coltaine’s	Wickans	were	disciplined	in	their	mayhem,
and	the	Seventh	was	a	veteran	force	that	the	new	Fist	had	taken	pains	in
preparing	for	this	kind	of	war.	There	was	still	the	likelihood	that	the	Malazan
forces	would	be	destroyed	eventually—if	things	were	as	bad	elsewhere,	there’d
be	little	hope	for	the	stranded	army	and	the	thousands	of	refugees	that	clung	to
it.	All	these	minor	victories	cannot	win	the	war—Reloe’s	potential	recruits
number	in	the	hundreds	of	thousands—assuming	Sha’ik	recognizes	the	threat
Coltaine	poses	and	sends	them	in	pursuit	of	the	High	Fist.
When	he	came	within	sight	of	the	small	oasis	surrounding	Dryj	Spring,	he
was	shocked	to	see	that	almost	every	palm	tree	had	been	cut	down.	The	stands
were	gone,	leaving	only	stumps	and	low	plants.	Smoke	drifted	over	the	area,
ghostly	under	the	paling	sky.	Duiker	rose	in	his	stirrups,	scanning	for
campfires,	pickets,	the	tents	of	the	encampment.	Nothing…perhaps	on	the	other
side	of	the	spring…
The	smoke	thickened	as	he	rode	into	the	oasis,	his	mount	picking	its	way
around	the	hacked	stumps.	There	were	signs	everywhere—first	the	pits	dug
into	the	sand	by	the	outlying	picket	stations,	then	the	deep	ruts	where	wagons
had	been	positioned	in	a	defensive	line.	In	the	hearth-places	only	smoldering
ashes	remained.
Dumbfounded	and	suddenly	exhausted,	Duiker	let	his	horse	wander
through	the	abandoned	camp.	The	deep	sinkhole	beyond	was	the	spring—it	had
been	virtually	emptied	and	was	only	now	beginning	to	refill:	a	small	brownish
pool	surrounded	by	the	mud-coated	husks	of	palm	bark	and	rotting	fronds.
Even	the	fish	had	been	taken.
While	the	Wickan	horsewarriors	had	set	off	to	ambush	the	Tithansi,	the
Seventh	and	the	refugees	had	already	left	the	oasis.	The	historian	struggled	to
comprehend	that	fact.	He	envisioned	the	scene	of	departure,	the	stumbling,	redeyed	refugees,	children	piled	onto	wagons,	the	stricken	gazes	of	the	veteran


soldiers	guarding	the	exodus.	Coltaine	gave	them	no	rest,	no	pause	to
assimilate	the	shock,	to	come	to	terms	with	all	that	had	happened,	was
happening.	They’d	arrived,	stripped	the	oasis	of	water	and	everything	else	that
might	prove	useful,	then	they’d	left.
Where?
Duiker	nudged	his	mount	forward.	He	came	to	the	oasis’s	southwestern
edge,	his	eyes	tracking	the	wide	swath	left	behind	by	the	wagons,	cattle	and
horses.	Off	to	the	southeast	rose	the	weathered	range	of	the	Lador	Hills.
Westward	stretched	the	Tithansi	Steppes.	Nothing	in	that	direction	until	the
Sekala	River—too	far	for	Coltaine	to	contemplate.	If	northwest,	then	the	village
of	Manot,	and	beyond	that,	Caron	Tepasi,	on	the	coast	of	the	Karas	Sea.	Almost
as	far	as	Sekala	River.	The	trail	led	due	west,	into	the	steppes.	Hood’s	breath,
there’s	nothing	there!
There	seemed	little	point	in	trying	to	anticipate	the	Wickan	Fist.	The
historian	wheeled	back	to	the	spring	and	stiffly	dismounted,	wincing	at	the	ache
in	his	hips	and	thighs,	the	dull	throb	in	his	lower	back.	He	could	go	no	farther,
nor	could	his	horse.	They	needed	to	rest—and	they	needed	the	soupy	water	at
the	bottom	of	the	lakebed.
He	removed	his	bedroll	from	the	saddle,	tossing	it	onto	the	leaf-strewn
sand.	Unhitching	the	mare’s	girth	strap,	he	slid	the	ornate	saddle	from	its
sweatcovered	back.	Taking	the	reins,	he	led	the	animal	down	to	the	water.
The	spring	had	been	plugged	with	rocks,	which	explained	its	slowed
trickle.	Duiker	removed	his	scarf	and	strained	the	water	through	the	fabric	into
his	helmet.	He	let	the	horse	drink	first,	then	repeated	the	filtering	process
before	quenching	his	own	thirst	and	refilling	his	canteen.
He	fed	the	mare	from	the	bag	of	grain	strapped	to	the	saddle,	then	rubbed
the	beast	down	before	turning	his	attention	to	setting	up	his	own	makeshift
camp.	He	wondered	whether	he	would	ever	rejoin	Coltaine	and	the	army;
whether,	perhaps,	he	was	trapped	in	some	nightmarish	pursuit	of	ghosts.	Maybe
they	are	demons,	after	all.	His	weariness	was	getting	the	better	of	him.
Duiker	laid	out	the	bedroll,	then	rigged	over	it	a	sunshade	using	his	telaba.
Without	the	trees	the	sun	would	scorch	this	oasis—it	would	be	years	in
recovering,	if	it	ever	did.	Before	sleep	took	him,	he	thought	long	on	the	war	to
come.	Cities	meant	less	than	did	sources	of	water.	Armies	would	have	to
occupy	oases,	which	would	become	as	important	as	islands	in	a	vast	sea.
Coltaine	would	ever	be	at	a	disadvantage—his	every	destination	known,	his
every	approach	prepared	for…provided	Kamist	Reloe	can	get	to	them	first,	and
how	can	he	fail	in	that?	He	doesn’t	have	thousands	of	refugees	to	escort.	For	all
the	Fist’s	surprises,	Coltaine	was	tactically	constrained.


The	question	the	historian	asked	himself	before	falling	asleep	held	a	blunt
finality:	how	long	could	Coltaine	delay	the	inevitable?
He	awoke	at	dusk,	and	twenty	minutes	later	was	on	the	trail,	a	solitary	rider
beneath	a	vast	cloak	of	capemoths	so	thick	as	to	blot	out	the	stars.
	
Breakers	rolled	over	a	reef	a	quarter	of	a	mile	out,	a	phosphorescent	ribbon
beneath	a	cloud-filled	sky.	The	sun’s	rise	was	an	hour	away.	Felisin	stood	on	a
grassy	shelf	overlooking	a	vast	beach	of	white	sand,	light-headed	and	weaving
slightly	as	the	minutes	passed.
There	was	no	boat	in	sight,	no	sign	that	anyone	had	ever	set	foot	on	this
stretch	of	coast.	Driftwood	and	heaps	of	dead	seaweed	marked	the	tide	line.
Sand	crabs	crawled	everywhere	she	looked.
“Well,”	Heboric	said	beside	her,	“at	least	we	can	eat.	Assuming	those	are
edible,	that	is,	and	there’s	only	one	way	to	find	out.”
She	watched	as	he	removed	a	sackcloth	from	the	pack,	then	made	his	way
down	onto	the	sand.	“Watch	those	claws,”	she	said	to	him.	“Wouldn’t	want	to
lose	a	finger,	would	we?”
The	ex-priest	laughed,	continuing	on.	She	could	see	him	only	because	of
his	clothes.	His	skin	was	now	completely	black,	the	traceries	barely	detectable
even	up	close	and	in	daylight.	The	visible	changes	were	matched	by	other,
more	subtle	ones.
“You	can’t	hurt	him	any	more,”	Baudin	said	from	where	he	crouched	over
the	other	backpack.	“No	matter	what	you	say.”
“Then	I’ve	no	reason	to	stay	quiet,”	she	replied.
They	had	water	to	last	another	day,	maybe	two.	The	clouds	over	the	straits
promised	rain,	but	Felisin	knew	every	promise	was	a	lie—salvation	was	for
others.	She	looked	around	again.	This	is	where	our	bones	will	rest,	humps	and
ripples	in	the	sand.	Then,	one	day,	even	those	signs	will	be	gone.	We’ve	reached
the	shore,	where	Hood	awaits	and	no	one	else.	A	journey	of	the	spirit	as	much
as	of	the	flesh.	I	welcome	the	end	to	both.
Baudin	had	pitched	the	tents	and	was	now	collecting	wood	for	a	fire.
Heboric	returned	with	the	sackcloth	gripped	between	his	stumps.	The	tips	of
claws	showed	through	the	bag’s	loose	weave.	“These	will	either	kill	us	or
make	us	very	thirsty—I’m	not	sure	which	will	be	worse.”
The	last	fresh	water	was	eleven	hours	behind	them,	a	damp	patch	in	a
shallow	basin.	They’d	had	to	dig	down	an	arm-span	to	find	it,	and	it	had	proved
brackish,	tasting	of	iron	and	difficult	to	keep	down.	“Do	you	truly	believe
Duiker ’s	still	out	there,	sailing	back	and	forth	for—what,	five	days	now?”


Heboric	squatted,	setting	the	sack	down.	“He’s	not	published	anything	in
years—what	else	would	he	have	to	do	with	all	his	time?”
“Do	you	think	frivolity	is	the	proper	way	to	meet	Hood?”
“I	didn’t	know	there	was	a	proper	way,	lass.	Even	if	I	was	certain	death	was
coming—which	I’m	not,	at	least	in	the	immediate	future—well,	each	of	us	has
to	answer	it	in	our	own	way.	After	all,	even	the	priests	of	Hood	argue	over	the
preferred	manner	in	which	to	finally	face	their	god.”
“If	I’d	known	a	lecture	was	coming,	I’d	have	kept	my	mouth	shut.”
“Coming	to	terms	with	life	as	an	adolescent,	are	you?”
Her	scowl	made	him	laugh	in	delight.
Heboric’s	favorite	jokes	are	the	unintended	ones.	Mockery	is	just	hate’s
patina,	and	every	laugh	is	vicious.	She	didn’t	have	the	strength	to	continue
riposting.	The	last	laugh	won’t	be	yours,	Heboric.	You’ll	discover	that	soon
enough.	You	and	Baudin	both.
They	cooked	the	crabs	in	a	bed	of	coals,	needing	sticks	to	push	the
creatures	back	into	the	searing	heat	until	their	struggles	ceased.	The	white	flesh
was	delicious,	but	salty.	A	bounteous	feast	and	an	endless	supply	that	could
prove	fatal.
Baudin	then	collected	more	driftwood,	intending	to	build	a	beacon	fire	for
the	night	to	come.	In	the	meantime,	as	the	sun	broke	the	eastern	skyline,	he
piled	damp	seaweed	on	the	fire	and	studied	with	a	satisfied	expression	the
column	of	smoke	that	rose	into	the	air.
“You	planning	to	do	that	all	day?”	Felisin	asked.	What	about	sleep?	I	need
you	sleeping,	Baudin.
“Every	now	and	then,”	he	replied.
“Don’t	see	the	point	if	those	clouds	roll	in.”
“They	ain’t	rolled	in	yet,	have	they?	If	anything,	they’re	rolling	out—back
to	the	mainland.”
She	watched	him	working	the	fire.	He’d	lost	the	economy	of	his
movements,	she	realized;	there	was	now	a	sloppiness	there	that	betrayed	the
extremity	of	his	exhaustion,	a	weakness	that	probably	came	with	finally
reaching	the	coast.	They’d	lost	any	control	over	their	fates.	Baudin	believed	in
Baudin	and	no	one	else.	Now	just	like	us	he’s	depending	on	someone	else.	And
maybe	it	was	all	for	nothing.	Maybe	we	should’ve	taken	our	chances	going	to
Dosin	Pali.
The	crab	meat	began	taking	its	toll.	Waves	of	desperate	thirst	assailed
Felisin,	followed	by	sharp	cramps	as	her	stomach	rebelled	at	being	full.
Heboric	disappeared	inside	his	tent,	clearly	suffering	the	same	symptoms.
Felisin	did	little	over	the	next	twenty	minutes,	simply	clawing	through	the


pain	and	watching	Baudin,	willing	on	him	the	same	affliction.	If	he	was
similarly	assailed	he	showed	no	sign.	Her	fear	of	him	deepened.
The	cramps	faded,	although	the	thirst	remained.	The	clouds	over	the	straits
retreated,	the	sun’s	heat	rose.
Baudin	dumped	a	last	pile	of	seaweed	on	the	fire,	then	made	ready	to	retire
to	the	tent.
“Take	mine,”	Felisin	said.
His	head	jerked	around,	his	eyes	narrowing.
“I’ll	join	you	in	a	moment.”
He	still	stared.
“Why	not?”	she	snapped.	“What	other	escape	is	there?	Unless	you’ve	taken
vows—”
He	flinched	almost	imperceptibly.
Felisin	went	on,	“—sworn	to	some	sex-hating	Ascendant.	Who	would	that
be?	Hood?	Wouldn’t	that	be	a	surprise!	But	there’s	always	a	little	death	in
lovemaking—”
“That	what	you	call	it?”	Baudin	muttered.	“Lovemaking?”
She	shrugged.
“I’m	sworn	to	no	god.”
“So	you’ve	said	before.	Yet	you’ve	never	made	use	of	me,	Baudin.	Do	you
prefer	men?	Boys?	Throw	me	on	my	stomach	and	you	won’t	know	the
difference.”
He	straightened,	still	staring,	his	expression	unreadable.	Then	he	walked	to
the	tent.	Felisin’s	tent.
She	smiled	to	herself,	waited	a	hundred	heartbeats,	then	joined	him.
His	hands	moved	over	her	clumsily,	as	if	he	was	trying	to	be	gentle	but	did
not	know	how.	The	rags	of	their	clothing	had	taken	but	moments	to	remove.
Baudin	guided	her	down	until	she	lay	on	her	back,	looking	up	at	his	blunt,
bearded	face,	his	eyes	still	cold	and	unfathomable	as	his	large	hands	gathered
her	breasts	and	pushed	them	together.
As	soon	as	he	was	inside	her,	his	restraint	fell	away.	He	became	something
other	than	human,	reduced	to	an	animal.	He	was	rough,	but	not	as	rough	as
Beneth	had	been,	nor	a	good	number	of	Beneth’s	followers.
He	was	quickly	done,	settling	his	considerable	weight	on	her,	his	breath
harsh	and	heavy	in	her	ear.	She	did	not	move	him;	her	every	sense	was	attuned
to	his	breathing,	to	the	twitching	of	muscles	as	sleep	stole	up	on	him.	She	had
not	expected	him	to	surrender	so	easily,	she	had	not	anticipated	his
helplessness.
Felisin’s	hand	stole	into	the	sands	beside	the	pallet	and	probed	until	it


found	the	grip	of	the	dagger.	She	willed	calm	into	her	own	breathing,	though
she	could	do	nothing	to	slow	her	hammering	heart.	He	was	asleep.	He	did	not
stir.
She	slipped	the	blade	free,	shifting	her	grasp	to	angle	the	point	inward.	She
drew	a	deep	breath,	held	it.
His	hand	caught	her	wrist	the	instant	she	began	her	thrust.	He	rose	fluidly,
wrenching	her	arm	around	and	twisting	her	until	she	rolled	onto	her	stomach
beneath	him.	His	weight	pinned	her	down.
Baudin	squeezed	her	wrist	until	the	dagger	fell	free.	“You	think	I	don’t
check	my	gear,	lass?”	he	whispered.	“You	think	you’re	a	mystery	to	me?	Who
else	would	steal	one	of	my	throat-stickers?”
“You	left	Beneth	to	die.”	She	couldn’t	see	his	face,	and	was	almost	glad	for
that	when	he	replied.
“No,	lass.	I	killed	the	bastard	myself.	Snapped	his	neck	like	a	reed.	He
deserved	more	pain,	something	slower,	but	there	wasn’t	any	time	for	that.	He
didn’t	deserve	the	mercy,	but	he	got	it.”
“Who	are	you?”
“Never	done	a	man	or	a	boy.	But	I’ll	pretend.	I’m	good	at	pretending.”
“I’ll	scream—”
“Heboric’s	sleep	isn’t	the	kind	you	can	shake	him	out	of.	He	dreams.	He
thrashes	about.	I’ve	slapped	him	and	he	didn’t	stir.	So	scream	away.	What	are
screams	anyway?	Voicing	your	outrage—didn’t	think	you	were	capable	of
outrage	any	more,	Felisin.”
She	felt	the	hopelessness	flood	through	her	body.	It’s	just	more	of	the	same.
I	can	survive	it,	I	can	even	enjoy	it.	If	I	try.
Baudin	rose	from	her.	She	writhed	onto	her	back,	stared	at	him.	He’d
collected	the	dagger	and	had	backed	to	the	entrance.	He	smiled.	“Sorry	if	I
disappointed	you,	but	I	wasn’t	in	the	mood.”
“Then	why—”
“To	see	if	you’re	still	what	you	were.”	He	did	not	need	to	voice	his
conclusion.	“Get	some	sleep,	lass.”
Alone,	Felisin	curled	up	on	the	pallet,	numbness	filling	her.	To	see	if	you’re
still…yes,	you	still	are.	Baudin	knew	that	already.	He	just	wanted	to	show	you
to	yourself,	girl.	You	thought	you	were	using	him	but	he	was	using	you.	He	knew
what	you	planned.	Think	on	that.	Think	on	it	long	and	hard.
	
Hood	came	striding	out	of	the	waves,	the	reaper	of	carved-out	souls.	He’d
waited	long	enough,	his	amusement	at	their	suffering	losing	its	flavor.	Time


had	come	for	the	Gates.
Feeling	bleached	and	withered	as	the	dead	driftwood	around	her,	Felisin	sat
facing	the	straits.	Clouds	flickered	over	the	water,	lightning	danced	to	the
rumbling	beat	of	thunder.	Spume	rose	fierce	along	the	line	of	the	reef,
launching	blue-white	explosions	into	the	darkness.
An	hour	earlier	Heboric	and	Baudin	had	come	back	from	their	walk	up	the
beach,	dragging	between	them	the	prow	of	a	shattered	boat.	It	was	old,	but
they’d	talked	about	building	a	raft.	The	discussion	had	the	sound	of	pointless
musing—no	one	had	the	strength	for	such	a	task.	They	would	start	dying	by
dawn,	and	they	all	knew	it.
Felisin	realized	that	Baudin	would	be	the	last	to	die.	Unless	Heboric’s	god
returned	to	scoop	up	his	wayward	child.	Felisin	finally	began	to	believe	she
would	be	the	first.	No	vengeance	achieved.	Not	Baudin,	not	sister	Tavore,	not
the	entire	Hood-warped	Malazan	Empire.
A	strange	wave	of	lightning	leaped	up	beyond	the	breakers	hammering	the
reef.	It	played	out	tumbling	and	pitching	as	if	wrapped	around	an	invisible	log
leagues	long	and	thirty	paces	thick.	The	crackling	spears	struck	the	sheets	of
spume	with	a	searing	hiss.	Thunder	slapped	the	beach	hard	enough	to	shiver
the	sand.	The	lightning	rolled	on,	straight	toward	them.
Heboric	was	suddenly	at	her	side,	his	froglike	face	split	wide	in	a	grimace
of	fear.	“That’s	sorcery,	lass!	Run!”
Her	laugh	was	a	harsh	bark.	She	made	no	move.	“It’ll	be	quick,	old	man!”
Wind	howled.
Heboric	spun	to	face	the	approaching	wave.	He	snarled	a	curse	that	was
flung	away	by	the	growing	roar,	then	interposed	himself	between	Felisin	and
the	sorcery.	Baudin	crouched	down	beside	her,	his	face	lit	in	a	blue	glow	that
intensified	as	the	lightning	reached	the	shore,	then	rolled	up	to	them.
It	shattered	around	Heboric	as	if	he	was	a	spire	of	rock.	The	old	man
staggered,	his	tattoos	a	tracery	of	fire	that	flared	bright,	then	vanished.
The	sorcery	was	gone.	For	all	its	threat,	it	swiftly	died	up	and	down	the
beach.
Heboric	sagged,	settling	on	his	knees	in	the	sand.	“Not	me,”	he	said	in	the
sudden	silence.	“Otataral.	Of	course.	Nothing	to	fear.	Nothing	at	all.”
“There!”	Baudin	shouted.
A	boat	had	somehow	cleared	the	reef	and	now	raced	toward	them,	its	lone
sail	aflame.	Sorcery	stabbed	at	the	craft	from	all	sides	like	vipers,	then	fell
away	as	the	boat	neared	shore.	A	moment	later	it	scraped	bottom	and	slid	to	a
halt,	canting	to	one	side	as	it	settled.	Two	figures	were	at	the	ratlines	in	an
instant,	cutting	away	the	burning	sail.	The	cloth	swept	down	like	a	wing	of


flame,	instantly	doused	as	it	struck	the	water.	Two	other	men	leaped	down	and
waded	onto	shore.
“Which	one’s	Duiker?”	Felisin	asked.
Heboric	shook	his	head.	“Neither,	but	the	one	on	the	left	is	a	mage.”
“How	can	you	tell?”
He	made	no	reply.
The	two	men	swiftly	approached,	both	staggering	in	exhaustion.	The	mage,
a	small,	red-faced	man	wearing	a	singed	cape,	was	the	first	to	speak—in
Malazan.	“Thank	the	gods!	We	need	your	help.”

Somewhere	beyond	the	reef	waited	an	unknown	mage—a	man	unconnected	to
the	rebellion,	a	stranger	trapped	within	his	own	nightmare.	As	the	vortex	of	a
savage	storm,	he	had	risen	from	the	deep	on	the	second	day	out.	Kulp	had
never	before	felt	such	unrestrained	power.	Its	very	wildness	was	all	that	saved
them,	as	the	madness	that	gripped	the	sorcerer	tore	and	flayed	his	warren.
There	was	no	control,	the	warren’s	wounds	gushed,	the	winds	howled	with	the
mage’s	own	shrieks.
The	Ripath	was	flung	about	like	a	piece	of	bark	in	a	cascading	mountain
stream.	At	first	Kulp	countered	with	illusions—believing	he	and	his
companions	were	the	object	of	the	mage’s	wrath—but	it	quickly	became
apparent	that	the	insane	wielder	was	oblivious	to	them,	fighting	an	altogether
different	war.	Kulp	contracted	his	own	warren	into	a	protective	shell	around
Ripath,	then,	as	Gesler	and	his	crewmen	struggled	to	keep	the	craft	upright,	he
crouched	down	to	withstand	the	onslaught.
The	unleashed	sorcery	instinctively	hunted	them	and	no	illusion	could
deceive	something	so	thoroughly	mindless.	They	became	its	lodestone,	the
attacks	endless	and	wildly	fluctuating	in	strength,	battering	Kulp	relentlessly
for	two	days	and	nights.
They	were	driven	westward,	toward	the	Otataral	shores.	The	mage’s	power
assailed	that	coastline,	with	little	effect,	and	Kulp	finally	began	to	make	sense
of	it—the	mage’s	mind	must	have	been	destroyed	by	Otataral.	Likely	an
escaped	miner,	a	prisoner	of	war	who	had	scaled	the	walls	only	to	find	he	took
his	prison	with	him.	Losing	control	of	his	warren,	it	had	then	taken	control	of
him.	It	surged	with	power	far	beyond	anything	the	mage	himself	had	ever
wielded.
The	realization	left	Kulp	horrified.	The	storm	threatened	to	fling	them
onto	that	shore.	Was	the	same	fate	awaiting	him?


Gesler	and	his	crew’s	skill	was	all	that	kept	the	Ripath	from	striking	the
reef.	For	eleven	hours	they	managed	to	sail	parallel	to	the	razor-sharp	rocks
beneath	the	breakers.
On	the	third	night	Kulp	sensed	a	change.	The	coastline	on	their	right—
which	he	had	felt	as	an	impenetrable	wall	of	negation,	the	bloodless	presence
of	Otataral—suddenly…softened.	A	power	resided	there,	bruising	the	will	of
the	magic-deadening	ore,	pushing	it	back	on	all	sides.
There	was	a	cut	in	the	reef.	It	gave	them,	Kulp	decided,	their	only	chance.
Rising	from	where	he	crouched	amidships,	he	shouted	to	Gesler.	The	corporal
grasped	his	meaning	instantly,	with	desperate	relief.	They	had	been	losing	the
struggle	to	exhaustion,	to	the	overwhelming	stress	of	watching	sorcery	speed
toward	them,	only	to	wash	over	Kulp’s	protective	magic—a	protection	they
could	see	weakening	with	every	pass.
Another	attack	came,	even	as	they	swept	between	the	jagged	breakers,
sundering	Kulp’s	resistance.	Flame	lit	the	storm-jib,	the	lines,	the	sail.	Had	any
of	the	men	been	dry	they	would	have	become	beacons	of	fire.	As	it	was,	the
sorcery	swept	over	them	in	a	wave	of	hissing	steam,	then	was	gone,	striking
the	shore	and	rolling	up	the	beach	until	it	fizzled	out.
Kulp	had	half	expected	that	the	strangely	blunted	effect	on	this	part	of
shore	was	in	some	way	connected	to	the	man	he	was	sent	to	find,	and	so	was
not	surprised	to	see	three	figures	emerge	from	the	gloom	beyond	the	beach.
Weary	as	he	was,	something	about	the	way	the	three	stood	in	relation	to	each
other	jangled	alarms	in	his	head.	Circumstances	had	forced	them	together,	and
experience	cared	little	for	the	bonds	of	friendship.	Yet	it	was	more	than	that.
The	motionless	ground	beneath	his	feet	was	making	him	dizzy.	When
Kulp’s	weary	gaze	fell	on	the	handless	priest,	a	wave	of	relief	washed	through
him,	and	there	was	nothing	ironic	in	his	call	for	help.
The	ex-priest	answered	it	with	a	dried-out	laugh.
“Get	them	water,”	the	mage	said	to	Gesler.	The	corporal	pulled	his	eyes
from	Heboric	with	difficulty,	then	nodded	and	spun	about.	Truth	had	swung
down	to	inspect	Ripath’s	hull	for	damage,	while	Stormy	sat	perched	on	the
prow,	his	crossbow	cradled	in	his	arms.	The	corporal	shouted	for	one	of	the
water	casks.	Truth	clambered	back	into	the	boat	to	retrieve	it.
“Where’s	Duiker?”	Heboric	asked.
Kulp	frowned.	“Not	sure.	We	went	our	separate	ways	in	a	village	north	of
Hissar.	The	Apocalypse—”
“We	know.	Dosin	Pali	was	ablaze	the	night	we	escaped	the	pit.”
“Yeah,	well.”	Kulp	studied	the	other	two.	The	big	man	lacking	an	ear	met
his	eyes	coolly.	Despite	the	ravages	of	deprivation	evident	in	his	bearing,	there


was	a	measure	of	self-control	to	him	that	made	the	mage	uneasy.	He	was
clearly	more	than	the	scarred	dockyard	thug	he	first	took	him	for.
The	young	girl	was	no	less	disturbing,	though	in	a	way	Kulp	could	not
define.	He	sighed.	Worry	about	it	later.	Worry	about	everything	later.
Truth	arrived	with	the	water	cask,	Gesler	a	step	behind	him.
The	three	escapees	converged	on	the	young	marine	as	he	breached	the
cask,	then	held	the	tin	cup	that	was	tied	to	it	and	splashed	it	full	of	water.
“Go	slow	on	that,”	Kulp	said.	“Sips,	not	gulps.”
As	he	watched	them	drink,	the	mage	sought	out	his	warren.	It	felt	slippery,
elusive,	yet	he	was	able	to	take	hold,	stealing	power	to	bolster	his	senses.	When
he	looked	again	upon	Heboric	he	almost	shouted	in	surprise.	The	ex-priest’s
tattoos	swarmed	with	a	life	of	their	own:	flickering	waves	of	power	raced
across	his	body	and	spun	a	handlike	projection	beyond	the	stump	of	his	left
wrist.	That	ghost-hand	reached	into	a	warren,	was	clenched	as	if	gripping	a
tether.	A	wholly	different	power	pulsed	around	his	right	stump,	shot	through
with	veins	of	green	and	Otataral	red,	as	if	two	snakes	writhed	in	mortal
combat.	The	blunting	effect	arose	exclusively	from	the	green	bands,	radiating
outward	with	what	felt	like	conscious	will.	That	it	was	strong	enough	to	push
back	the	effects	of	the	Otataral	was	astonishing.
Denul	healers	often	described	diseases	as	waging	war,	with	the	flesh	as	the
battleground,	which	their	warren	gave	them	sight	to	see.	Kulp	wondered	if	he
wasn’t	seeing	something	similar.	But	not	a	disease.	A	battle	of	warrens—
Fener’s	own,	linked	by	one	ghostly	hand,	the	other	ensnared	by	Otataral,	yet
waxing	nonetheless—a	warren	I	can’t	recognize,	a	force	alien	to	every	sense	I
possess.	He	blinked.	Heboric	was	staring	at	him,	a	faint	smile	on	his	broad
mouth.
“What	in	Hood’s	name	has	happened	to	you?”	Kulp	demanded.
The	ex-priest	shrugged.	“I	wish	I	knew.”
The	three	marines	now	approached	Heboric.	“I’m	Gesler,”	the	corporal
said	in	gruff	deference.	“We’re	all	that’s	left	of	the	Boar	Cult.”
The	old	man’s	smile	faded.	“That	would	make	three	too	many.”	He	turned
away	and	strode	off	to	retrieve	a	pair	of	backpacks.
Gesler	stared	after	him,	expressionless.
That	man	recovers	damned	quick.	The	boy	Truth	had	gasped	at	the	harsh
words	of	a	man	he	took	to	be	his	god’s	priest.	Kulp	saw	something	crumbling
into	ruins	behind	the	lad’s	light-blue	eyes.	Stormy	revealed	the	dark	clouds	that
likely	gave	reason	to	his	name,	but	he	laid	a	hand	on	Truth’s	shoulder	a
moment	before	facing	the	one-eared	man.
“Your	hands	keep	hovering	over	those	hidden	blades	and	I’m	gonna	get


nervous,”	he	said	in	a	low	growl,	shifting	grip	on	his	crossbow.
“That’s	Baudin,”	the	young	woman	said.	“He	murders	people.	Old	women,
rivals.	You	name	them,	he’s	got	their	blood	on	his	hands.	Isn’t	that	right,
Baudin?”	Without	awaiting	a	reply	she	went	on,	“I’m	Felisin,	House	of	Paran.
Last	in	the	line.	But	don’t	let	any	of	that	fool	you.”
She	did	not	elaborate.
Heboric	returned	with	a	pack	slung	over	each	forearm.	He	set	them	down,
then	moved	close	to	Kulp.	“We’re	in	no	shape	to	help	you,	but	after	crossing
this	damned	desert	the	thought	of	death	by	drowning	is	oddly	appealing.”	He
stared	out	over	the	thrashing	waves.	“What’s	out	there?”
“Imagine	a	child	holding	a	leash	and	at	the	other	end	is	a	Hound	of
Shadow.	The	child’s	the	mage,	the	Hound’s	his	warren.	Too	long	in	the	mines
before	making	his	escape,	is	my	guess.	We	need	to	rest	before	trying	to	run	his
storm	again.”
“How	bad	are	things	on	the	mainland?”
Kulp	shrugged.	“I	don’t	know.	We	saw	Hissar	in	flames.	Duiker	went	to
rejoin	Coltaine	and	the	Seventh—that	old	man’s	got	a	streak	of	optimism	that’ll
get	him	stuck	on	a	sliding	bed.	I’d	say	the	Seventh’s	history,	and	so’s	Coltaine
and	his	Wickans.”
“Ah,	that	Coltaine.	When	I	was	chained	at	the	base	of	the	crevasse	behind
Laseen’s	Palace	I	half	expected	to	meet	the	man	as	a	neighbor.	Hood	knows
there	was	worthy	enough	company	down	there.”	After	a	moment	he	shook	his
head.	“Coltaine’s	alive,	Mage.	You	don’t	kill	men	like	that	easily.”
“If	that’s	true,	then	I’m	bound	to	rejoin	him.”
Heboric	nodded.
“He	was	excommunicated,”	Felisin	said	loudly.
Both	men	turned	to	see	Gesler	facing	the	girl.	She	continued,	“More	than
that,	he’s	the	bane	of	his	own	god.	Of	yours,	I	gather.	Beware	scorned	priests.
You’ll	have	to	lead	your	own	prayers	to	Fener,	lads,	and	I’d	advise	you	to	pray.
A	lot.”
The	ex-priest	swung	back	to	Kulp	with	a	sigh.	“You	opened	your	warren	to
look	upon	me.	What	did	you	see?”
Kulp	scowled.	“I	saw,”	he	said	after	a	moment,	“a	child	dragging	a	Hound
as	big	as	a	Hood-damned	mountain.	In	one	hand.”
Heboric’s	expression	tightened.	“And	in	the	other?”
“Sorry,”	Kulp	replied,	“no	easy	answer	there.”
“I’d	let	go…”
“If	you	could.”
Heboric	nodded.


Kulp	lowered	his	voice.	“If	Gesler	realized…”
“He’d	cut	me	loose.”
“Messily.”
“I	take	it	we’re	understood,”	Heboric	said	with	a	faint	smile.
“Not	really,	but	I’ll	let	it	lie	for	now.”
The	ex-priest	acknowledged	him	with	a	nod.
“Did	you	choose	your	company	here,	Heboric?”	Kulp	asked,	eyes	on
Baudin	and	Felisin.
“Aye,	I	did.	More	or	less.	Hard	to	believe,	isn’t	it?”
“Walk	up	the	beach	with	me,”	the	mage	said,	heading	off.	The	tattooed	man
followed.	“Tell	me	about	them,”	Kulp	said	after	they’d	gone	a	distance.
Heboric	shrugged.	“You	have	to	compromise	to	stay	alive	in	the	mines,”
he	said.	“And	that	which	one	person	thinks	of	value,	another	is	the	first	to	sell.
Cheap.	Well,	that’s	what	they	are	now.	What	they	were	before…”	He	shrugged
again.
“Do	you	trust	them?”
Heboric’s	wide	face	split	in	a	grin.	“Do	you	trust	me,	Kulp?	I	know,	it’s	too
soon	to	answer	that.	Yours	is	not	an	easy	question.	I	trust	Baudin	to	work	with
us	so	long	as	it’s	in	his	interest	to	do	so.”
“And	the	girl?”
The	old	man	was	a	long	time	in	answering.	“No.”
Not	what	I’d	expected.	This	should	have	been	the	easy	part.	“All	right,”	he
said.
“And	what	of	your	companions?	Those	foolish	men	and	their	foolish
cult?”
“Harsh	words	for	a	priest	of	Fener—”
“An	excommunicated	priest.	The	girl	spoke	the	truth.	My	soul	is	my	own,
not	Fener ’s.	I	took	it	back.”
“Didn’t	know	that	was	possible.”
“Maybe	it	isn’t.	Please,	I	can	walk	no	farther,	Mage.	Our	journey	has
been…difficult.”
You’re	not	the	only	one,	old	man.
They	shared	no	more	words	on	the	way	back	to	the	others.	For	all	the
chaos	of	the	crossing,	Kulp	had	expected	this	part	of	the	plan	to	be	relatively
straightforward.	They	would	come	to	the	coast.	They	would	find	Duiker ’s
friend	waiting…or	not.	He’d	fought	down	his	misgivings	when	the	historian
first	came	to	him,	asking	for	help.	Idiot.	Well,	he	would	take	them	off	this
damned	island,	deposit	them	on	the	mainland,	and	that	would	be	that.	It	was	all
he’d	been	asked	to	do.


The	sun	was	rising,	the	sorcerous	storm	over	the	sea	withdrawing	from
shore	to	boil	black	and	bruised	over	the	middle	of	the	straits.
Food	had	been	brought	from	Ripath.	Heboric	joined	his	two	companions
in	a	silent,	tense	meal.	Kulp	strode	to	where	Gesler	sat	watch	over	his	two
sleeping	soldiers,	the	three	of	them	beneath	a	square	of	sailcloth	rigged	on
four	poles.
The	corporal’s	scarred	face	twisted	into	an	ironic	grin.	“Fener ’s	joke,	this
one,”	he	said.
Kulp	squatted	down	beside	the	corporal.	“Glad	you’re	enjoying	it.”
“The	boar	god’s	humor	ain’t	the	laughing	kind,	Mage.	Strange,	though,	I
could’ve	sworn	the	Lord	of	Summer	was…here.	Like	a	crow	on	that	priest’s
shoulder.”
“You’ve	felt	Fener ’s	touch	before,	Gesler?”
The	man	shook	his	head.	“Gifts	don’t	come	my	way.	Never	did.	It	was	just
a	feeling,	that’s	all.”
“Still	have	it?”
“I	don’t	think	so.	Don’t	know.	Doesn’t	matter.”
“How’s	Truth?”
“Took	it	hard,	finding	a	priest	of	Fener	who	then	turns	around	and	denies
us	all.	He’ll	be	all	right—me	and	Stormy,	we	look	out	for	him.	Now	it’s	your
turn	to	answer	some	questions.	How’re	we	getting	back	to	the	mainland?	That
damned	wizard’s	still	out	there,	ain’t	he?”
“The	priest	will	see	us	through.”
“How’s	that?”
“That’d	be	a	long	explanation,	Corporal,	and	all	I	can	think	of	right	now	is
sleep.	I’ll	take	next	watch.”	He	rose	and	went	off	to	find	some	shade	of	his	own.
	
Wide	awake,	arms	wrapped	around	herself,	Felisin	watched	the	mage	rig	a
sunshade,	then	slip	beneath	it	to	sleep.	She	glanced	over	at	the	marines,	feeling
a	wave	of	gleeful	disdain.	Followers	of	Fener,	that’s	a	laugh.	The	boar	god	with
nothing	between	his	ears.	Hey,	you	fools,	Fener’s	here,	somewhere,	cowering	in
the	mortal	realm.	Ripe	for	any	hunter	with	a	sharp	spear.	We	saw	his	hoof.	You
can	thank	that	old	man	for	that.	Thank	him	any	way	you	care	to.
Baudin	had	gone	down	to	the	water	to	wash	himself.	He	now	returned,	his
beard	dripping.
“Scared	yet,	Baudin?”	Felisin	asked.	“Look	at	that	soldier	over	there,	the
one	that’s	awake.	Too	tough	for	you	by	far.	And	that	one	with	the	crossbow—
didn’t	take	him	long	to	figure	you	out,	did	it?	Hard	men—harder	than	you—”


Baudin	drawled,	“What,	you	bedded	them	already?”
“You	used	me—”
“What	of	it,	girl?	You’ve	made	being	used	a	way	of	life.”
“Hood	take	you,	bastard!”
Standing	over	her,	he	grunted	a	laugh.	“You	won’t	pull	me	down—we’re
getting	off	this	island.	We’ve	survived	it.	Nothing	you	can	say’s	going	to
change	my	mood,	girl.	Nothing.”
“What’s	the	talon	signify,	Baudin?”
His	face	became	an	expressionless	mask.
“You	know,	the	one	you’ve	got	hidden	away,	along	with	all	your	thieving
tools.”
The	man’s	flat	gaze	flicked	past	her.	She	turned	to	find	Heboric	standing	a
few	paces	away.	The	ex-priest’s	eyes	were	fixed	on	Baudin	as	he	said,	“Did	I
hear	that	right?”
The	one-eared	man	said	nothing.
She	watched	what	had	to	be	comprehension	sweep	across	Heboric’s	face,
watched	as	he	glanced	down	at	her,	then	back	to	Baudin.	After	a	moment,	he
smiled.	“Well	done,”	he	said.	“So	far.”
“You	really	think	so?”	Baudin	asked,	then	turned	away.
“What’s	going	on,	Heboric?”	Felisin	demanded.
“You	should	have	paid	better	attention	to	your	history	tutors,	lass.”
“Explain.”
“Like	Hood	I	will.”	He	shambled	off.
Felisin	wrapped	herself	tighter	in	her	own	arms,	pivoting	to	face	the	straits.
We’re	alive.	I	can	be	patient	again.	I	can	bide	my	time.	The	mainland	burned
with	rebellion	against	the	Malazan	Empire.	A	pleasing	thought.	Maybe	it	would
pull	it	all	down—the	Empire,	the	Empress…the	Adjunct.	And	without	the
Malazan	Empire,	peace	would	once	again	come.	An	end	to	repression,	an	end
to	the	threat	of	restraint	as	I	set	about	exacting	revenge.	The	day	you	lose	your
bodyguards,	sister	Tavore,	I	will	appear.	I	swear	it,	by	every	god	and	every
demon	lord	that	ever	existed.	In	the	meantime,	she	would	have	to	make	use	of
these	people	around	her,	she	would	have	to	get	them	on	her	side.	Not	Baudin	or
Heboric—it	was	too	late	for	them.	But	the	others.	The	mage,	the	soldiers…
Felisin	rose.
The	corporal	watched	her	approach	with	sleepy	eyes.
“When	did	you	last	lie	with	a	woman?”	Felisin	asked	him.
It	was	not	Gesler	who	answered,	however.	The	crossbowman’s—Stormy’s
—voice	drifted	out	from	the	shadow	beneath	the	sailcloth:	“That	would	be	a
year	and	a	day,	the	night	I	dressed	up	as	a	Kanese	harlot—had	Gesler	fooled


for	hours.	Mind	you,	he	was	pretty	drunk.	Mind	you,	so	was	I.”
The	corporal	grunted.	“That’s	a	soldier ’s	life	for	you.	Too	thick	to	know
the	difference…”
“Too	drunk	to	care,”	the	crossbowman	finished.
“You	got	it,	Stormy.”	Gesler ’s	heavy	eyes	slid	up	to	Felisin.	“Play	your
games	elsewhere,	lass.	No	offense,	but	we’ve	done	enough	rutting	to	know
when	an	offer ’s	got	hidden	chains.	You	can’t	buy	what	ain’t	for	sale,	anyhow.”
“I	told	you	about	Heboric,”	she	said.	“I	didn’t	have	to.”
“Hear	that,	Stormy?	The	girl	took	pity	on	us.”
“He’ll	betray	you.	He	despises	you	already.”
The	boy	named	Truth	sat	up	at	that.
“Go	away,”	Gesler	told	her.	“My	men	are	trying	to	get	some	sleep.”
Felisin	met	Truth’s	startling	blue	eyes,	saw	nothing	but	innocence	in	them.
She	threw	him	a	pouty	kiss,	smiled	as	color	flooded	his	face.	“Careful	or	those
ears	will	catch	fire,”	she	said.
“Hood’s	breath,”	Stormy	muttered.	“Go	on,	lad.	She	wants	it	that	bad.	Give
her	a	taste.”
“Not	a	chance,”	she	said,	turning	away.	“I	only	sleep	with	men.”
“Fools,	you	mean,”	Gesler	corrected,	an	edge	to	his	tone.
Felisin	strode	down	to	the	beach,	walked	out	until	the	waves	lapped	her
knees.	She	studied	the	Ripath.	Flashburns	painted	the	hull	black	in	thick,
random	streaks.	The	front	railing	of	the	forecastle	glittered	as	if	the	wood	had
been	studded	with	a	hail	of	quartz.	The	lines	were	frayed,	unravelled	where
knives	had	cut.
The	sun’s	reflection	off	the	water	was	blinding.	She	closed	her	eyes,	let	her
mind	fall	away	until	there	was	nothing	but	the	feel	of	the	warm	water	slipping
around	her	legs.	She	felt	an	exhaustion	that	was	beyond	physical.	She	could	not
stop	herself	lashing	out,	and	every	face	she	made	turn	her	way	became	a
mirror.	There	has	to	be	a	way	to	reflect	something	other	than	hate	and
contempt.
No,	not	a	way.
A	reason.
	
“My	hope	is	that	the	Otataral	entwined	in	you	is	enough	to	drive	away	that
insane	mage,”	Kulp	said.	“Otherwise,	we’re	in	for	a	rough	voyage.”	Truth	had
lit	a	lantern	and	now	crouched	in	the	triangular	forecastle,	waiting	for	them	to
set	out	for	the	reef.	The	yellow	light	caught	reflective	glimmers	in	Heboric’s
tattoos	as	he	grimaced	in	response	to	Kulp’s	words.


Gesler	sat	leaning	over	the	steering	oar.	Like	everyone	else,	he	was
waiting	for	the	ex-priest.	Waiting	for	a	small	measure	of	hope.
The	sorcerous	storm	raged	beyond	the	reef,	its	manic	flashes	lighting	up
the	night,	revealing	tumbling	black	clouds	over	a	frothing	sea.
“If	you	say	so,”	Heboric	eventually	said.
“Not	good	enough—”
“Best	I	can	do,”	the	old	man	snapped.	He	raised	one	stump,	jabbed	it	in
front	of	Kulp.	“You	see	what	I	can’t	even	feel,	Mage!”
The	mage	swung	to	Gesler.	“Well,	Corporal?”
The	soldier	shrugged.	“We	got	a	choice?”
“It’s	not	that	simple,”	Kulp	said,	fighting	to	stay	calm.	“With	Heboric
abroad	I	don’t	even	know	if	I	can	open	my	warren—he’s	got	taints	to	him	I
wouldn’t	want	spreading.	Without	my	warren	I	can’t	deflect	that	sorcery.
Meaning—”
“We	get	roasted	crisp,”	Gesler	said,	nodding.	“Look	alive	up	there,	Truth.
We’re	heading	out!”
“Yours	is	a	misplaced	faith,	Corporal,”	Heboric	said.
“Knew	you’d	say	that.	Now	everyone	stay	low—me	and	Stormy	and	the	lad
got	work	to	do.”
Although	he	sat	within	arm’s	reach	of	the	tattooed	old	man,	Kulp	could
sense	his	own	warren.	It	felt	ready—almost	eager—for	release.	The	mage	was
frightened.	Meanas	was	a	remote	warren,	and	every	fellow	practitioner	Kulp
had	met	characterized	it	the	same	way:	cool,	detached,	amused	intelligence.
The	game	of	illusions	was	played	with	light,	dark,	texture	and	shadows,
crowing	victory	when	it	succeeded	in	deceiving	an	eye,	but	even	that	triumph
felt	emotionless,	the	satisfaction	clinical.	Accessing	the	warren	always	had	the
feel	of	interrupting	a	power	busy	with	other	things.	As	if	shaping	a	small
fraction	of	that	power	was	a	distraction	barely	worth	acknowledging.
Kulp	did	not	trust	his	warren’s	uncharacteristic	attentiveness.	It	wanted	to
join	the	game.	He	knew	he	was	falling	into	the	trap	of	thinking	of	Meanas	as	an
entity,	a	faceless	god,	where	access	was	worship,	success	a	reward	of	faith.
Warrens	were	not	like	that.	A	mage	was	not	a	priest	and	magic	was	not	divine
intervention.	Sorcery	could	be	the	ladder	to	Ascendancy—a	means	to	an	end,
but	there	was	no	point	to	worshipping	the	means.
Stormy	had	rigged	a	small,	square	sail,	enough	to	give	control	but	not	so
large	that	it	would	risk	the	weakened	mast.	The	Ripath	slipped	forward	in	front
of	a	mild	shore	breeze.	Truth	lay	on	the	bowsprit,	scanning	the	breakers	ahead.
The	cut	they’d	come	in	through	was	proving	hard	to	find.	Gesler	barked	out
commands	and	swung	the	craft	to	run	parallel	to	the	reef.


Kulp	glanced	at	Heboric.	The	ex-priest	sat	with	his	left	shoulder	against	the
mast,	squinting	out	into	the	darkness.	The	mage	was	desperate	to	open	his
warren—to	look	upon	the	old	man’s	ghost-hands,	to	gauge	the	serpent	of
Otataral—but	he	held	back,	suspicious	of	his	own	curiosity.
“There!”	Truth	shouted,	pointing.
“I	see	it!”	Gesler	bellowed.	“Move	it,	Stormy!”
The	Ripath	swung	around,	bow	wheeling	to	face	the	breakers…and	a	gap
that	Kulp	could	barely	make	out.	The	wind	picked	up,	the	sail	stretching	taut.
Beyond	it,	the	billowing	clouds	twisted,	creating	an	inverted	funnel.
Lightning	leaped	up	from	the	waves	to	frame	it.	The	Ripath	slipped	through	the
reef	and	plunged	directly	into	the	spinning	vortex.
Kulp	did	not	even	have	time	to	scream.	His	warren	opened,	locking	in
instant	battle	with	a	power	demonic	in	its	fury.	Spears	of	water	slanted	down
from	overhead,	shredding	the	sail	in	moments.	The	struck	the	deck	like
quarrels,	punching	through	the	planks.	Kulp	saw	one	shaft	pierce	Stormy’s
thigh,	pinning	him	shrieking	to	the	deck.	Others	shattered	against	Heboric’s
hunched	back—he	had	thrown	himself	over	the	girl,	Felisin,	shielding	her	as
the	spears	rained	down.	His	tattoos	raged	with	fire	the	color	of	mud-smeared
gold.
Baudin	had	hurled	himself	onto	the	forecastle,	one	arm	reaching	down	and
out	of	sight.	Truth	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
The	spears	vanished.	Pitching	as	if	on	a	single	surging	wave,	the	Ripath
lurched	forward,	stern	lifting.	Overhead	the	sky	raged,	bruised	and	flushing
with	blooms	of	power.	Kulp’s	eyes	widened	as	he	stared	up—a	tiny	figure	rode
the	storm	above,	limbs	flailing,	the	fragments	of	a	cloak	whipping	about	like	a
tattered	wing.	Sorcery	flung	the	figure	around	as	if	it	was	no	more	than	a
straw-stuffed	doll.	Blood	exploded	outward	as	a	coruscating	wave	engulfed	the
hapless	creature.	When	the	wave	swept	past,	the	figure	rolled	and	tumbled	after
it,	webs	of	blood	spreading	out	like	a	fisherman’s	net	behind	it.
Then	it	was	falling.
Gesler	pushed	past	Kulp.	“Take	the	oar!”	he	yelled	above	the	roaring	wind.
The	mage	scrambled	aft.	Steer?	Steer	through	what?	He	was	certain	it	was
not	water	carrying	them.	They’d	plunged	into	a	madman’s	warren.	Closing	his
hands	around	the	oar ’s	handle,	he	felt	his	own	warren	flow	down	into	the	wood
and	take	hold.	The	pitching	steadied.	Kulp	grunted.	There	was	no	time	to
wonder—being	appalled	demanded	all	his	attention.
Gesler	clambered	forward,	grasping	Baudin’s	ankles	just	as	the	big	man
started	to	slip	over	the	bow.	Pulling	him	back	revealed	that	Baudin	held,	with
one	hand,	onto	Truth,	his	fingers	wrapped	in	the	lad’s	belt.	Blood	streamed


from	that	hand,	and	Baudin’s	face	was	white	with	pain.
The	unseen	wave	beneath	them	slumped.	The	Ripath	charged	forward	into
dead	calm.	Silence.
Heboric	scrambled	to	Stormy.	The	marine	lay	motionless	on	the	deck,
blood	gushing	in	horrifying	amounts	from	his	punctured	thigh.	The	flow	lost
its	fierceness	even	as	Kulp	watched.
Heboric	did	the	only	thing	he	could,	or	so	Kulp	would	remember	it	in
retrospect.	At	that	instant,	however,	the	mage	screamed	a	warning—but	too	late
—as	Heboric	plunged	a	ghostly,	loam-smeared	hand	directly	into	the	wound.
Stormy	spasmed,	giving	a	bark	of	pain.	The	tattoos	flowed	out	from
Heboric’s	wrist	to	spread	a	glowing	pattern	on	the	soldier ’s	thigh.
When	the	old	man	pulled	his	arm	away,	the	wound	closed,	the	tattoos
knitting	together	like	sutures.	Heboric	scrambled	back,	eyes	wide	with	shock.
A	hissing	sigh	escaped	Stormy’s	grimacing	lips.	Trembling	and	bone
white,	he	sat	up.	Kulp	blinked.	He’d	seen	something	more	than	just	healing	pass
from	Heboric’s	arm	into	Stormy.	Whatever	it	had	been,	it	was	virulent	and
tinged	with	madness.	Worry	about	it	later—the	man’s	alive,	isn’t	he?	The
mage’s	attention	swung	to	where	Gesler	and	Baudin	knelt	on	either	side	of	a
prone,	motionless	Truth.	The	corporal	had	turned	the	lad	onto	his	stomach	and
was	rhythmically	pushing	down	with	both	hands	to	expel	the	water	that	filled
Truth’s	lungs.	After	a	moment	the	boy	coughed.
The	Ripath	sat	heavily,	listing	to	one	side.	The	uniform	gray	sky	hung
close	and	faintly	luminous	over	them.	They	were	becalmed,	the	only	sound
coming	from	water	pouring	into	the	hold	somewhere	below.
Gesler	helped	Truth	sit	up.	Baudin,	still	on	his	knees,	clutched	his	right
hand	in	his	lap.	Kulp	saw	that	all	the	fingers	had	been	pulled	from	their	joints,
skin	split	and	streaming	blood.
“Heboric,”	the	mage	whispered.
The	old	man’s	head	jerked	around.	He	was	drawing	breath	in	rapid	gasps.
“Tend	to	Baudin	with	that	healing	touch,”	Kulp	said	quietly.	We	won’t	think
about	what	comes	with	it.	“If	you	can…”
“No,”	Baudin	growled,	studying	Heboric	intently.	“Don’t	want	your	god’s
touch	on	me,	old	man.”
“Those	joints	need	resetting,”	Kulp	said.
“Gesler	can	do	it.	The	hard	way.”
The	corporal	looked	up,	then	nodded	and	moved	over.
Felisin	spoke.	“Where	are	we?”
Kulp	shrugged.	“Not	sure.	But	we’re	sinking.”
“She’s	stove	through,”	Stormy	said.	“Four,	five	places.”	The	soldier	stared


down	at	the	tattoos	covering	his	thigh	and	frowned.
The	young	woman	struggled	to	her	feet,	one	hand	reaching	out	to	grip	the
charred	mast.	The	slant	of	the	deck	had	sharpened.
“She	might	capsize,”	Stormy	said,	still	studying	the	tattoos.	“Any	time
now.”
Kulp’s	warren	subsided.	He	slumped	in	sudden	exhaustion.	He	wouldn’t
last	long	in	the	water,	he	knew.
Baudin	grunted	as	Gesler	set	the	first	finger	of	his	right	hand.	The
corporal	spoke	as	he	moved	on	to	the	next	one.	“Rig	up	some	casks,	Stormy.	If
you	can	walk,	that	is.	Divide	up	the	fresh	water	among	them.	Felisin,	get	the
emergency	food	stores—that’s	the	chest	on	this	side	of	the	forecastle.	Take	the
whole	thing.”	Baudin	moaned	as	he	set	the	next	finger.	“Truth,	you	up	to
getting	some	bandages?”
His	dry	heaves	having	stopped	a	few	moments	earlier,	the	boy	slowly
pushed	himself	to	his	hands	and	knees	and	starting	crawling	aft.
Kulp	glanced	at	Felisin.	She	had	not	moved	in	response	to	Gesler ’s	orders
and	seemed	to	be	debating	a	few	choice	words.	“Come	on,	lass,”	Kulp	said,
rising,	“I’ll	give	you	a	hand.”
Stormy’s	fears	of	capsizing	were	not	realized:	as	the	Ripath	settled,	the
cant	slowly	diminished.	Water	had	filled	the	hold	and	now	lapped	the	hatch,
thick	as	soup	and	pale	blue	in	color.
“Hood’s	breath,”	Stormy	said,	“we’re	sinking	in	goat’s	milk.”
“With	a	seasoning	of	brine,”	Gesler	added.	He	finished	working	on
Baudin’s	hand.	Truth	joined	them	with	a	medic’s	kit.
“We	won’t	have	to	go	far,”	Felisin	said,	her	gaze	off	to	starboard.	Joining
her,	Kulp	saw	what	she	was	looking	at.	A	large	ship	sat	motionless	in	the	thick
water	less	then	fifty	arm-spans	away.	It	had	twin	banks	of	oars,	hanging	down
listlessly.	A	single	rudder	was	visible.	There	were	three	masts,	the	main	and
fore	both	rigged	with	tattered	square	sails,	the	mizzen	mast	with	the	shredded
remnants	of	a	lateen.	There	was	no	sign	of	life.
Baudin,	his	right	hand	now	a	blunt	bandaged	lump,	joined	them,	the
corporal	a	step	behind.	The	one-eared	man	grunted.	“That’s	a	Quon	dromon.
Pre-Imperial.”
“You	know	your	ships,”	Gesler	said,	giving	the	man	a	sharp	glance.
Baudin	shrugged.	“I	worked	in	a	prison	gang,	scuttling	the	republic’s	fleet
in	Quon	Harbor.	That	was	twenty	years	ago—Dassem	had	been	using	them	to
train	his	Marines—”
“I	know,”	Gesler	said,	his	tone	revealing	first-hand	knowledge.
“Young	to	be	in	a	prison	gang,”	Stormy	said	from	where	he	squatted


amidst	the	water	casks.	“You	were	what,	ten?	Fifteen?”
“Something	like	that,”	Baudin	said.	“And	what	got	me	there	ain’t	your
business,	soldier.”
There	was	a	long	silence,	then	Gesler	shook	himself.	“You	done,	Stormy?”
“Aye,	all	rigged	up.”
“All	right,	let’s	swim	over	before	our	lady	makes	her	rush	to	the	bottom.
No	gain	if	we	end	up	all	getting	pulled	down	in	her	wake.”
“I	ain’t	happy,”	Stormy	said	as	he	eyed	the	dromon.	“That’s	right	out	of	a
tavern	tale	told	at	midnight.	Could	be	Hood’s	Herald,	could	be	cursed,	plagueridden—”
“Could	be	the	only	dry	underfoot	we’ll	find,”	Gesler	said.	“As	for	the	rest,
think	of	the	tale	you’ll	spin	in	the	next	tavern,	Stormy.	You’ll	have	them	pissing
their	pants	and	rushing	off	to	the	nearest	temple	for	a	blessing.	You	could	set	it
up	to	take	a	cut	from	the	avatars.”
“Well,	maybe	you	ain’t	got	enough	brains	to	be	scared	of	anything…”
The	corporal	grinned.	“Let’s	get	wet,	everyone.	I	hear	noblewomen	pay	in
gold	for	a	bath	like	the	one	we’re	about	to	take.	That	right,	lass?”
Felisin	did	not	answer.
Kulp	shook	his	head.	“You’re	just	happy	to	be	alive,”	he	said	to	Gesler.
“Damn	right.”
The	water	was	cool,	strangely	slick	and	not	easy	to	swim	through.	The
Ripath	settled	behind	them,	its	decks	awash.	Then	the	mast	leaned	to	one	side,
pausing	a	moment	before	sweeping	down	to	the	water.	Within	seconds	it	had
slipped	beneath	the	surface.
Half	an	hour	later	they	reached	the	dromon,	gasping	with	exhaustion.	Truth
proved	the	only	one	capable	of	climbing	up	the	steering	oar.	He	clambered
over	the	high	sterncastle	railing.	A	few	moments	later	a	thick-twined	hemp
ladder	tumbled	down	to	the	others.
It	was	a	struggle,	but	eventually	everyone	was	aboard,	Gesler	and	Stormy
pulling	up	the	food	chest	and	water	casks	last.
From	the	sterncastle,	Kulp	looked	down	the	length	of	the	ship’s	deck.	The
abandonment	had	been	a	hasty	thing.	Coiled	ropes	and	bundles	of	supplies
wrapped	in	sealskin	lay	scattered	about,	along	with	discarded	body	armor,
swords	and	belts.	A	thick,	pale,	greasy	dust	clung	to	everything.
The	others	joined	him	in	silent	study.
“Anybody	see	a	name	on	the	hull?”	Gesler	asked	eventually.	“I	looked,
but…”
“Silanda,”	Baudin	said.
Stormy	growled,	“Togg’s	teats,	man,	there	wasn’t	no—”


“Don’t	need	one	to	know	this	ship,”	Baudin	said.	“That	cargo	lying	about
down	there,	that’s	from	Drift	Avalii.	Silanda	was	the	only	craft	sanctioned	to
trade	with	the	Tiste	Andii.	She	was	on	her	way	to	the	island	when	the
Emperor ’s	forces	overran	Quon.	She	never	returned.”
Silence	followed	his	words.
It	was	broken	by	a	soft	laugh	from	Felisin.	“Baudin	the	thug.	Did	your
prison	gangs	work	in	libraries	as	well?”
“Anybody	else	notice	the	waterline?”	Gesler	asked.	“This	ship	hasn’t
moved	in	years.”	He	shot	one	last,	piercing	glare	at	Baudin,	then	descended	to
the	main	deck.	“Might	as	well	be	a	pile	of	rock	knee-deep	in	guano,”	he	said,
stopping	at	one	of	the	sealskin	bundles.	He	crouched	down	to	unwrap	it.	A
moment	later	he	hissed	a	curse	and	lurched	back.	The	bundle’s	flaps	fell	away,
releasing	its	contents:	a	severed	head.	It	rolled	crazily	across	the	deck,
thumping	up	against	the	lip	of	the	hold’s	hatchway.
Kulp	pushed	past	a	motionless	Heboric,	scrambled	down	to	the	main	deck
and	approached	the	head.	He	raised	his	warren.	Stopped.
“What	do	you	see?”	the	ex-priest	asked.
“Nothing	I	like,”	the	mage	replied.	He	stepped	closer,	crouched.	“Tiste
Andii.”	He	glanced	over	at	Gesler.	“What	I’m	about	to	suggest	is	not	pleasant,
but…”
The	corporal,	his	face	white,	nodded.	“Stormy,”	he	said	as	he	turned	to	the
next	bundle.	“Give	me	a	hand.”
“Doing	what?”
“Counting	heads.”
“Fener	save	me!	Gesler—”
“You	gotta	be	cold	to	spin	a	tale	like	this	one.	Takes	practice.	Get	down
here	and	get	your	hands	dirty,	soldier.”
There	were	dozens	of	bundles.	Each	contained	a	head,	cleanly	severed.
Most	were	Tiste	Andii,	but	some	were	human.	Gesler	began	stacking	them	into
a	grisly	pyramid	around	the	main	mast.	The	corporal’s	recovery	from	his
initial	shock	had	been	swift—clearly,	the	man	had	seen	his	share	of	horrors	as
a	Marine	of	the	Empire.	Stormy	was	almost	as	quick	in	casting	aside	his
revulsion,	although	a	superstitious	terror	seemed	to	replace	it—he	worked
frantically	fast,	and	before	too	long	every	head	had	joined	the	ghastly	pyramid.
Kulp	turned	his	attention	to	the	hatch	leading	down	into	the	oar	pit.	A	faint
aura	of	sorcery	rose	from	it,	visible	to	his	warren-touched	senses	as	waves
rippling	the	still	air.	He	hesitated	long	before	approaching	it.
Apart	from	the	mage	and	Gesler	and	Stormy,	the	others	remained	in	the
sterncastle,	watching	the	proceedings	with	something	like	numb	shock.


The	corporal	joined	Kulp.	“Ready	to	check	below?”
“Absolutely	not.”
“Lead	on,	then,”	Gesler	said	with	a	tight	grin.	He	unsheathed	his	sword.
Kulp	glanced	down	at	it.
The	corporal	shrugged.	“Yeah,	I	know.”
Muttering	under	his	breath,	Kulp	headed	for	the	hatch.	The	lack	of	light
below	did	nothing	to	hide	what	he	saw.	Sorcery	lined	everything,	sickly	yellow
and	faintly	pulsing.	Both	hands	on	the	railing,	the	mage	descended	the
encrusted	steps,	Gesler	close	behind	him.
“Can	you	see	anything?”	the	corporal	asked.
“Oh	yes.”
“What’s	that	smell?”
“If	patience	has	a	smell,”	Kulp	said,	“you’re	smelling	it.”	He	cast	a	wave	of
light	down	the	length	of	the	center	walkway	between	the	bench	rows,	spun	it
sideways	and	left	it	there.
“Well,”	Gesler	said,	dry	and	rasping,	“there’s	a	certain	logic,	isn’t	there?”
The	oars	were	manned	by	headless	corpses,	three	to	a	bench.	Other
sealskin	bundles	crowded	every	available	space.	Another	headless	figure	sat
behind	a	skin	drum,	both	hands	gripping	strange,	gourdlike	batons.	The	figure
was	massively	muscled.	There	was	no	evidence	of	decay	on	any	of	the	bodies.
White	bone	and	red	flesh	glistened	at	the	necks.
Neither	man	spoke	for	a	long	time,	then	Gesler	cleared	his	throat,	to	little
effect	as	he	squeezed	out	gravel	words.	“Did	you	say	patience,	Kulp?”
“Aye.”
“I	ain’t	misheard,	then.”
Kulp	shook	his	head.	“Someone	took	the	ship,	beheaded	everyone
aboard…then	put	them	to	work.”
“In	that	order.”
“In	that	order.”
“How	long	ago?”
“Years.	Decades.	We’re	in	a	warren,	Corporal.	No	telling	how	time	works
here.”
Gesler	grunted.	“What	say	we	check	the	captain’s	cabin?	There	might	be	a
log.”
“And	a	‘take	to	the	oars’	whistle.”
“Yeah.	You	know,	if	we	hide	that	drum-beater,	I	could	send	Stormy	down
here	to	beat	the	time.”
“You’ve	a	wicked	sense	of	humor,	Gesler.”
“Aye.	Thing	is,	Stormy	tells	the	world’s	most	boring	sea	tales.	It’d	do	a


favor	to	anyone	he	meets	from	now	on	to	spice	things	up	a	little.”
“Don’t	tell	me	you’re	serious.”
The	corporal	sighed.	“No,”	he	said	after	a	moment.	“I	won’t	invite
madness	on	anyone,	Mage.”
They	returned	to	the	main	deck.	The	others	stared	at	them.	Gesler
shrugged.	“What	you’d	expect,”	he	said,	“if	you	was	completely	insane,	that
is.”
“Well,”	Felisin	replied,	“you’re	talking	to	the	right	crowd.”
Kulp	strode	toward	the	cabin	hatch.	The	corporal	sheathed	his	sword	and
then	followed.	The	hatch	descended	two	steps,	then	opened	out	into	a	galley.	A
large	wooden	table	commanded	the	center.	Opposite	them	was	a	second	hatch,
leading	to	a	narrow	walkway	with	berths	on	either	side.	At	the	far	end	was	the
door	to	the	captain’s	cabin.
No	one	occupied	the	berths,	but	there	was	gear	aplenty,	all	waiting	for
owners	who	no	longer	needed	it.
The	cabin	door	opened	with	a	loud	squeal.
Even	with	all	they	had	seen	thus	far,	the	interior	was	a	scene	of	horror.
Four	bodies	were	immediately	visible,	three	of	them	twisted	grotesquely	in
postures	of	sudden	death.	There	was	no	evidence	of	decay,	but	no	blood	was
visible.	Whatever	had	killed	them	had	crushed	them	thoroughly	without	once
breaking	skin.	The	exception	sat	in	the	captain’s	chair	at	the	end	of	a	map	table,
as	if	presiding	over	Hood’s	own	stage.	A	spear	jutted	from	his	chest,	and	had
been	pushed	through	to	the	chair,	then	beyond.	Blood	glistened	down	the	front
of	the	figure’s	body,	pooled	in	his	lap.	It	had	stopped	flowing,	yet	looked	still
wet.
“Tiste	Andii?”	Gesler	asked	in	a	whisper.
“They	have	that	look,”	Kulp	replied	softly,	“but	not	quite.”	He	stepped	into
the	cabin.	“Their	skins	are	gray,	not	black.	Nor	do	they	look	very…refined.”
“The	Tiste	Andii	of	Drift	Avalii	were	said	to	be	pretty	barbaric—not	that
anyone	living	has	visited	the	isle.”
“None	returned,	in	any	case,”	Kulp	conceded.	“But	these	are	wearing	skins
—barely	cured.	And	look	at	their	jewelry…”	The	four	bodies	were	adorned	in
bone	fetishes,	claws,	the	canines	of	beasts,	and	polished	seashells.	There	was
none	of	the	fine	Tiste	Andii	craftwork	that	Kulp	had	had	occasion	to	see	in	the
past.	Moreover,	all	four	were	brown-haired,	the	hair	hanging	loose	and
uncombed,	stringy	with	grease.	Tiste	Andii	hair	was	either	silver-white	or
midnight	black.
“What	in	Hood’s	name	are	we	seeing?”	Gesler	asked.
“The	killers	of	the	Quon	sailors	and	the	Tiste	Andii,	is	my	guess,”	Kulp


said.	“They	then	sailed	into	this	warren,	maybe	by	choice,	maybe	not.	And	ran
into	something	nastier	than	them.”
“You	think	the	rest	of	the	crew	escaped?”
Kulp	shrugged.	“If	you’ve	got	the	sorcery	to	command	headless	corpses,
who	needs	a	bigger	crew	than	the	one	we’re	looking	at	right	here?”
“They	still	look	like	Tiste	Andii,”	the	corporal	said,	peering	closely	at	the
man	in	the	chair.
“We	should	get	Heboric	in	here,”	Kulp	said.	“Maybe	he’s	read	something
somewhere	that’ll	bring	light	to	all	this.”
“Wait	here,”	Gesler	said.
The	ship	was	creaking	now	as	the	rest	of	the	group	began	moving	around
on	the	main	deck.	Kulp	listened	to	the	corporal’s	footsteps	recede	up	the
walkway.	The	mage	leaned	both	hands	on	the	table,	scanning	the	charts	splayed
out	on	its	surface.	There	was	a	map	there,	showing	a	land	he	could	not
recognize:	a	ragged	coastline	of	fjords	studded	with	cursory	sketches	of	pine
trees.	Inland	was	a	faint	whitewash,	as	of	ice	or	snow.	A	course	had	been
plotted,	striking	east	from	the	jagged	shoreline,	then	southward	across	a	vast
ocean.	The	Malazan	Empire	purported	to	have	world	maps,	but	they	showed
nothing	like	the	land	he	saw	here.	The	Empire’s	claim	to	dominance	suddenly
seemed	pathetic.
Heboric	stepped	into	the	cabin	behind	him.	Kulp	did	not	turn	from	his
study	of	the	chart.	“Give	them	a	close	look,”	the	mage	said.
The	old	man	moved	past	Kulp,	crouching	down	to	frown	at	the	captain’s
face.	The	high	cheekbones	and	angular	eye	sockets	looked	Tiste	Andii,	as	did
the	man’s	evident	height.	Heboric	reached	out	tentatively—
“Wait,”	Kulp	growled.	“Be	careful	what	you	touch.	And	which	arm	you
use.”
Heboric	hissed	in	exasperation	and	dropped	his	arm.	After	a	moment,	he
straightened.	“I	can	only	think	of	one	thing.	Tiste	Edur.”
“Who?”
“Gothos’s	Folly.	There’s	mention	of	three	Tiste	peoples	arriving	from
another	realm.	Of	course	the	only	one	that’s	known	to	us	is	the	Tiste	Andii,	and
Gothos	only	names	one	of	the	other	groups—Tiste	Edur.	Gray-skinned,	not
black.	Children	of	the	unwelcome	union	of	Mother	Dark	with	the	Light.”
“Unwelcome?”
Heboric	grimaced.	“The	Tiste	Andii	considered	it	a	degradation	of	pure
Dark,	and	the	source	of	all	their	subsequent	ills.	Anyway,	Gothos’s	Folly	is	the
only	tome	where	you’ll	find	mention	of	them.	It	also	happens	to	be	the	oldest.”
“Gothos	was	Jaghut,	correct?”


“Aye,	and	as	sour-tempered	a	writer	as	I’ve	ever	had	the	displeasure	of
reading.	Tell	me,	Kulp,	what	does	your	warren	reveal?”
“Nothing.”
Heboric	glanced	over	in	surprise.	“Nothing	at	all?”
“No.”
“But	they	look	to	be	in	stasis—this	blood’s	still	wet.”
“I	know.”
Heboric	gestured	at	something	around	the	captain’s	neck.	“There’s	your
whistle,	assuming	we’re	going	to	make	use	of	what’s	below	decks.”
“Either	that	or	we	sit	here	and	starve.”	Kulp	stepped	closer	to	the	captain’s
corpse.	A	long	bone	whistle	hung	from	a	leather	thong,	resting	alongside	the
spear ’s	shaft.	“I	sense	nothing	from	that	bone	tube	either.	It	may	not	even
work.”
Heboric	shrugged.	“I’m	going	back	up	for	what	passes	for	fresh	air.	That
spear ’s	Barghast,	by	the	way.”
“It’s	too	damned	big,”	Kulp	countered.
“I	know,	but	that’s	what	it	looks	like	to	me.”
“It’s	too	big.”
Heboric	made	no	reply,	disappearing	up	the	walkway.	Kulp	glared	at	the
spear.	It’s	too	big.	After	a	moment	he	reached	out	and	gingerly	removed	the
whistle	from	around	the	corpse’s	neck.
Emerging	onto	the	main	deck,	the	mage	glanced	again	at	the	whistle.	He
grunted.	It	was	alive	with	sorcery	now.	The	breath	of	Otataral’s	in	that	cabin.
No	wonder	their	sorcery	couldn’t	defend	them.	He	looked	around.	Stormy	had
positioned	himself	at	the	prow,	his	ever-present	crossbow	strapped	to	his	back.
Baudin	stood	near	him,	cradling	his	bandaged	hand.	Felisin	leaned	against	the
railing	near	the	main	mast,	arms	crossed,	appallingly	cool	with	a	pyramid	of
severed	heads	almost	at	her	feet.	Heboric	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
Gesler	approached.	“Truth	is	heading	up	to	the	crow’s	nest,”	he	said.	“You
got	the	whistle?”
Kulp	tossed	it	over.	“Chosen	a	course	yet?”
“Truth	will	see	what	he	sees,	then	we’ll	decide.”
The	mage	craned	his	head,	eyes	narrowing	on	the	lad	as	he	lithely
scrambled	up	the	rigging.	Five	breaths	later	Truth	clambered	into	the	crow’s
nest	and	vanished	from	sight.
“Fener ’s	hoof!”	The	curse	drifted	down,	snared	everyone’s	attention.
“Truth!”
“Three	pegs	to	port!	Storm	sails!”
Gesler	and	Kulp	rushed	to	the	starboard	railing.	A	smudge	marred	the


formless	horizon,	flickering	with	lightning.	Kulp	hissed.	“That	Hood-damned
wizard’s	followed	us!”
The	corporal	spun	around.	“Stormy!	Check	what’s	left	of	these	sails.”
Without	pause	he	put	the	whistle	to	his	lips	and	blew.	The	sound	was	a	chorus
of	voices,	keening	tonelessly.	It	chilled	the	air,	the	wail	of	souls	twisted	past
torture,	transforming	pain	into	sound,	fading	with	reluctance	as	Gesler	pulled
the	whistle	away.
Wood	thumped	on	either	side	as	oars	were	readied.	Heboric	stumbled	from
the	hold	hatch,	his	tattoos	glowing	like	phosphor,	his	eyes	wide	as	he	swung	to
Gesler.	“You’ve	got	your	crew,	Corporal.”
“Awake,”	Felisin	muttered,	stepping	away	from	the	main	mast.
Kulp	saw	what	she	had	seen.	The	severed	heads	had	opened	their	eyes,
swiveling	to	fix	on	Gesler	as	if	driven	by	a	single	ghastly	mechanism.
The	corporal	seemed	to	flinch,	then	he	shook	it	off.	“Could’ve	used	one	of
these	when	I	was	a	drill	sergeant,”	he	said	with	a	tight	grin.
“Your	drummer ’s	ready	down	below,”	Heboric	said	from	where	he	stood
peering	down	into	the	rowers’	pit.
“Forget	the	sails,”	Stormy	said.	“Rotted	through.”
“Man	the	steering	oar,”	Gesler	ordered	him.	“Three	pegs	to	port—we	can’t
do	nothing	but	run.”	He	raised	the	whistle	again	and	blew	a	rapid	sequence.	The
drum	started	booming	in	time.	The	oars	swung,	blades	flipping	from
horizontal	to	vertical,	then	dipped	down	into	the	sluggish	water	and	pulled.
The	ship	groaned,	crunching	through	the	meniscus	of	crust	that	had	clung
to	the	hull.	The	Silanda	lurched	into	motion	and	slowly	eased	round	until	the
rapidly	approaching	storm	cloud	was	directly	astern.	The	oars	pushed	slimy
water	with	relentless	precision.
Gesler	looped	the	whistle’s	thong	around	his	neck.	“Wouldn’t	the	old
Emperor	have	loved	this	old	lady,	Kulp,	eh?”
“Your	excitement’s	nauseating,	Corporal.”
The	man	barked	a	laugh.
The	twin	banks	of	oars	lifted	the	Silanda	into	a	ramming	pace	and	stayed
there.	The	cadence	of	the	drum	was	a	too	swift	heartbeat.	It	reverberated	in
Kulp’s	bones	with	a	resonance	that	etched	his	nerves	with	pain.	He	did	not	need
to	descend	into	the	pit	to	affirm	his	vision	of	that	thick-muscled,	headless
corpse	pounding	the	gourds	against	the	skin,	the	relentless	heave	and	pull	of
the	rowers,	the	searing	play	of	Hood-bound	sorcery	in	the	stifling	atmosphere.
His	eyes	went	in	search	of	Gesler,	and	found	him	standing	at	the	sterncastle
alongside	Stormy.	These	were	hard	men,	harder	than	he	could	fathom.	They’d
taken	the	grim	black	humor	of	the	soldier	further	than	he’d	thought	possible,


cold	as	the	sunless	core	of	a	glacier.	Bloody-minded	confidence…or	fatalism?
Never	knew	Fener’s	bristles	could	be	so	black.
The	mad	sorcerer ’s	storm	still	gained	on	them,	slower	than	before,	yet	an
undeniable	threat	nonetheless.	The	mage	strode	to	Heboric’s	side.
“Is	this	your	god’s	warren?”
The	old	man	scowled.	“Not	my	god.	Not	his	warren.	Hood	knows	where	in
the	Abyss	we	are,	and	it	seems	there’s	no	easy	wakening	from	this	nightmare.”
“You	drove	the	god-touched	hand	into	Stormy’s	wound.”
“Aye.	Nothing	but	chance.	Could	have	as	easily	been	the	other	one.”
“What	did	you	feel?”
Heboric	shrugged.	“Something	passing	through.	You’d	guessed	as	much,
didn’t	you?”
Kulp	nodded.
“Was	it	Fener	himself?”
“I	don’t	know.	I	don’t	think	so.	I’m	not	an	expert	in	matters	religious.
Doesn’t	seem	to	have	affected	Stormy…apart	from	the	healing.	I	didn’t	know
Fener	granted	such	boons.”
“He	doesn’t,”	the	ex-priest	muttered,	eyes	clouding	as	he	looked	back	at	the
two	marines.	“Not	without	a	price,	anyway.”
	
Felisin	sat	apart	from	the	others,	her	closest	company	the	pyramid	of	staring
heads.	They	didn’t	bother	her	much,	since	their	attention	remained	on	Gesler,
on	the	man	with	the	siren	whistle	of	bone	dangling	on	his	chest.	She	thought
back	to	the	round	in	Unta,	to	the	priest	of	flies.	That	had	been	the	first	time
sorcery	had	been	visited	upon	her.	For	all	the	stories	of	magic	and	wild
wizards,	of	sorcerous	conflagrations	engulfing	cities	in	wars	at	the	very	edges
of	the	Empire,	Felisin	had	never	before	witnessed	such	forces.	It	was	never	as
common	as	the	tales	purported	it	to	be.	And	the	witnessing	of	magic	left	scars,
a	feeling	of	overwhelming	vulnerability	in	the	face	of	something	beyond	one’s
control.	It	made	the	world	suddenly	fey,	deadly,	frightening	and	bleak.	That	day
in	Unta	had	shifted	her	place	in	the	world,	or	at	least	her	sense	of	it.	And	she’d
felt	off-balance	ever	since.
But	maybe	it	wasn’t	that.	Not	that	at	all.	Maybe	it	was	what	I	lived	through
on	the	march	to	the	galleys,	maybe	it	was	that	sea	of	faces,	the	storm	of	hate
and	mindless	fury,	of	the	freedom	and	hunger	to	deliver	pain	writ	so	plain	in	all
those	so	very	normal	faces.	Maybe	it	was	the	people	that	sent	me	reeling.
She	looked	over	at	the	severed	heads.	The	eyes	did	not	blink.	They	were
drying,	crackling	like	egg	white	splashed	on	hot	cobblestones.	Like	mine.	Too


much	has	been	seen.	Far	too	much.	If	demons	rose	out	of	the	waters	around
them	right	now	she	would	feel	no	shock,	only	a	wonder	that	they	had	taken	so
long	to	appear	and	could	you	be	swift	in	ending	it	all,	now?	Please.
Like	a	long-limbed	ape,	Truth	came	scrambling	down	from	the	rigging,
landing	lightly	on	the	deck	and	pausing	close	to	her	as	he	brushed	dusty	rope
fibers	from	his	clothes.	He	had	a	couple	of	years	on	her,	yet	looked	much
younger	to	her	eyes.	Unpocked,	smooth	skin.	The	wisps	of	beard,	all	too	clear
eyes.	No	gallons	of	wine,	no	clouds	of	durhang	smoke,	no	weighty	bodies	taking
turns	to	push	inside,	into	a	place	that	had	started	out	vulnerable	yet	was	soon
walled	off	from	anything	real,	anything	that	mattered.	I	only	gave	them	the
illusion	of	getting	inside	me,	a	dead-end	pocket.	Can	you	grasp	what	I’m
talking	about,	Truth?
He	noted	her	attention,	gave	her	a	shy	smile.	“He’s	in	the	clouds,”	he	said,
his	voice	hoarse	with	adolescence.
“Who	is?”
“The	sorcerer.	Like	an	untethered	kite,	this	way	and	that,	trailing	streamers
of	blood.”
“How	poetic,	Truth.	Go	back	to	being	a	marine.”
He	reddened,	turned	away.
Baudin	spoke	behind	her.	“The	lad’s	too	good	for	you	and	that’s	what
makes	you	mean.”
“What	would	you	know?”	she	sneered	without	turning.
“I	can’t	scry	you	much,	lass,”	he	admitted.	“But	I	can	scry	you	some.”
“So	you’d	like	to	believe.	Let	me	know	when	that	hand	starts	rotting—I
want	to	be	there	when	it’s	cut	off.”
The	oars	clacked	in	counterpoint	to	the	thundering	drum.	The	wind	arrived
like	a	gasping	exhalation,	and	the	sorcerer ’s	storm	was	upon	them.
	
Something	ragged	across	his	brow	awoke	Fiddler.	He	opened	his	eyes	to	a
mass	of	bristle	ends	that	suddenly	lifted	clear	to	reveal	a	wizened	black	face
peering	critically	down.	The	face	concluded	its	examination	with	an	expression
of	distaste.
“Spiders	in	your	beard…or	worse.	Can’t	see	them,	but	I	know	they’re
there.”
The	sapper	drew	a	deep	breath	and	winced	at	the	throbbing	protest	from
his	broken	ribs.	“Get	away	from	me!”	he	growled.	Stinging	pain	wrapped	his
thighs,	reminders	of	the	gouging	claws	that	had	raked	them.	His	left	ankle	was
heavily	bandaged—the	numbness	from	his	foot	was	worrying.


“Can’t,”	the	old	man	replied.	“No	escape	is	possible.	Bargains	were	sealed,
arrangements	made.	The	Deck	speaks	plain	in	this.	A	life	given	for	a	life	taken,
and	more	besides.”
“You’re	Dal	Honese,”	Fiddler	said.	“Where	am	I?”
The	face	split	into	a	wide	grin.	“In	Shadow.	Hee	hee.”
A	new	voice	spoke	from	behind	the	strange	old	man.	“He	wakens	and	you
torment	him,	High	Priest.	Move	aside,	the	soldier	needs	air,	not	airs.”
“It’s	a	matter	of	justice,”	the	High	Priest	retorted,	though	he	pulled	back.
“Your	tempered	companion	kneels	before	that	altar,	does	he	not?	These	details
are	vital	to	understanding.”	He	took	another	step	back	as	the	massive	form	of
the	other	speaker	moved	into	view.
“Ah,”	Fiddler	sighed.	“The	Trell.	Memory	returns.	And	your	companion…
the	Jhag?”
“He	entertains	your	companions,”	the	Trell	said.	“Feebly,	I	admit.	For	all
his	years,	Icarium	has	never	mastered	the	social	grace	necessary	to	put	others
at	ease.”
“Icarium,	the	Jhag	by	that	name.	The	maker	of	machines,	the	chaser	of	time
—”
The	Trell	showed	his	canines	in	a	wide,	wry	smile.	“Aye,	lord	of	the	sand
grains—though	that	poetic	allusion’s	lost	on	most	and	awkward	besides.”
“Mappo.”
“Aye	again.	And	your	friends	name	you	Fiddler,	relieving	you	of	the	guise
of	a	Gral	horsewarrior.”
“Hardly	matters	that	I	awoke	out	of	character,	then,”	Fiddler	said.
“There’s	no	punishment	awaiting	the	lapse,	soldier.	Thirsty?	Hungry?”
“Good,	yes	and	yes.	But	first,	where	are	we?”
“In	a	temple	carved	into	a	cliff.	Out	of	the	Whirlwind.	Guests	of	a	High
Priest	of	Shadow—whom	you’ve	met.	Iskaral	Pust.”
“Pust?”
“Even	so.”
The	Dal	Honese	High	Priest	pushed	into	view	again,	scowling.	“You	mock
my	name,	soldier?”
“Not	I,	High	Priest.”
The	old	man	grunted,	adjusted	his	grip	on	the	broom,	then	scampered
from	the	room.
Fiddler	sat	up	gingerly,	moving	like	an	ancient.	He	was	tempted	to	ask
Mappo	for	an	assessment	of	the	damage,	especially	his	ankle,	but	decided	to
hold	off	hearing	the	likely	bad	news	a	while	longer.	“What’s	that	man’s	story?”
“I	doubt	even	he	knows.”


“I	awoke	when	he	was	sweeping	my	head.”
“Not	surprising.”
There	was	an	ease	to	the	Trell’s	presence	that	relaxed	Fiddler.	Until	he
recalled	the	warrior ’s	name.	Mappo,	a	name	ever	chained	to	another’s.	And
enough	rumors	to	fill	a	tome.	If	any	were	true…“Icarium	scared	off	the
D’ivers.”
“His	reputation	carries	weight.”
“Is	it	earned,	Mappo?”	Even	as	he	asked,	Fiddler	knew	he	should	have
bitten	back	the	question.
The	Trell	winced,	withdrew	slightly.	“I	shall	get	you	food	and	drink,	then.”
Mappo	left	the	small	room,	moving	silently	despite	his	considerable	bulk,
the	combination	raising	an	echo	that	brought	Kalam	to	mind.	Did	you	outrun
the	storm,	old	friend?
Iskaral	Pust	eased	back	into	the	chamber.	“Why	are	you	here?”	he
whispered.	“Do	you	know	why?	You	don’t,	but	I’ll	tell	you.	You	and	no	one
else.”	He	leaned	close,	plucking	at	his	spiral	wisps	of	hair	with	both	hands.
“Tremorlor!”
Laughing	at	Fiddler ’s	expression,	he	spun	about	in	wild,	capering	steps
before	settling	once	more	in	front	of	the	sapper,	their	faces	inches	apart.	“The
rumor	of	a	path,	a	way	home.	A	small	wriggling	worm	of	a	rumor,	even	less,	a
grub,	smaller	than	a	nail	clipping,	the	compacted	and	knotted	mess	wrapped
around	something	that	might	be	a	truth.	Or	not.	Hee	hee!”
Fiddler	had	had	enough.	Grimacing	through	the	pain,	he	grabbed	the	man’s
collar	and	shook.	Spittle	struck	his	face,	the	High	Priest’s	eyes	rolled	about	like
marbles	in	a	cup.
“What,	again?”	Iskaral	Pust	managed	to	say.
Fiddler	pushed	him	away.
The	old	man	staggered,	righted	himself	and	made	a	show	of	reassembling
his	dignity.	“A	concurrence	of	reactions.	Too	long	out	of	social	engagements
and	the	like.	Must	examine	my	manners,	and	more,	my	personality.”	He	cocked
his	head.	“Honest.	Forthright.	Amusing.	Gentle	and	impressive	integrity.	Well!
Where’s	the	problem,	then?	Soldiers	are	crude.	Callow	and	thick.	Distempered.
Do	you	know	the	Chain	of	Dogs?”
Fiddler	started,	blinked	as	if	shaken	from	a	trance.	“What?”
“It’s	begun,	though	not	yet	known.	Anabar	Thy’lend.	Chain	of	Dogs	in	the
Malazan	tongue.	Soldiers	have	no	imaginations,	meaning	they’re	capable	of
vast	surprises.	There	are	some	things	even	the	Whirlwind	cannot	sweep	aside.”
Mappo	Trell	returned,	bearing	a	tray.	“Harassing	our	guest	again,	Iskaral
Pust?”


“Shadow-borne	prophecies,”	the	High	Priest	muttered,	eyeing	Fiddler	with
cool	appraisal.	“The	gutter	under	the	flood,	raising	ripples	on	the	plunging
surface.	A	river	of	blood,	the	flow	of	words	from	a	hidden	heart.	All	things
sundered.	Spiders	in	every	crook	and	corner.”	He	whirled	about,	stamped	out
of	the	room.
Mappo	stared	after	him.
“Pay	him	no	heed,	right?”
The	Trell	swung	around,	his	heavy	brows	lifting.	“Hood,	no,	pay	that	man
every	heed,	Fiddler.”
“I	was	afraid	you’d	say	that.	He	mentioned	Tremorlor.	He	knows.”
“He	knows	what	even	your	companions	don’t,”	Mappo	said,	carrying	the
tray	to	the	sapper.	“You	seek	the	fabled	Azath	House,	out	in	the	desert.
Somewhere.”
Aye,	and	the	gate	Quick	Ben	swears	it	holds…“And	you?”	Fiddler	asked.
“What	has	brought	you	to	Raraku?”
“I	follow	Icarium,”	the	Trell	replied.	“A	search	without	end.”
“And	you’ve	devoted	your	life	to	helping	him	in	his	search?”
“No,”	Mappo	sighed,	then	whispered	without	meeting	Fiddler ’s	gaze,	“I
seek	to	keep	it	endless.	Here,	break	your	fast.	You’ve	been	unconscious	for	two
days.	Your	friends	are	restless	with	questions,	eager	to	speak	with	you.”
“I	suppose	I’ve	no	choice—I’d	better	answer	those	questions.”
“Aye,	and	once	you’ve	mended	some,	we	can	begin	our	journey…”	He
smiled	cautiously.	“To	find	Tremorlor.”
Fiddler	frowned.	“Mended,	you	said.	My	ankle	was	crushed—I	can	barely
feel	a	thing	beyond	my	knee.	Seems	likely	you’ll	have	to	cut	that	foot	off.”
“I’ve	some	experience	in	healing,”	Mappo	said.	“This	temple	once
specialized	in	such	alchemies,	and	the	nuns	left	much	behind.	And,	oddly
enough,	Iskaral	Pust	seems	to	show	some	talent	as	well,	though	one	has	to	keep
an	eye	on	him.	His	wits	scatter	sometimes	and	he	confuses	elixirs	with
poisons.”
“He’s	an	avatar	of	Shadowthrone,”	the	sapper	said,	eyes	narrowing.	“Or
the	Rope,	Cotillion,	the	Patron	of	Assassins—there’s	little	difference	between
the	two.”
The	Trell	shrugged.	“The	art	of	assassination	requires	a	complementary
knowledge	of	healing.	Two	sides	to	the	same	alchemical	coin.	In	any	case,	he
actually	did	surgery	on	your	ankle—fear	not,	I	observed.	And,	I	admit,	learned
much.	Essentially,	the	High	Priest	rebuilt	your	ankle.	Using	an	unguent,	he
sealed	the	fragments—I’ve	never	before	seen	the	like.	Thus,	you	will	heal,	and
quickly.”


“A	pair	of	hands	devoted	to	Shadow	poked	around	under	my	skin?	Hood’s
breath!”
“It	was	that	or	lose	your	foot.	You	had	a	punctured	lung	as	well—beyond
my	skills,	that,	but	the	High	Priest	contrived	to	drain	your	lung	of	blood,	then
made	you	breathe	a	healing	vapor.	You	owe	Iskaral	Pust	your	life.”
“Precisely	my	point,”	Fiddler	muttered.
There	were	voices	outside,	then	Apsalar	appeared	in	the	doorway,	Crokus
behind	her.	The	two	days	out	of	the	desiccating	storm	had	done	much	to	revive
both	of	them.	They	entered,	Crokus	rushing	past	to	crouch	beside	Fiddler ’s
bed.
“We	have	to	get	out	of	here!”	he	hissed.
The	sapper	glanced	at	Mappo,	noted	his	wry	smile	as	he	slowly	backed
away.	“Calm	down,	lad.	What	is	the	problem?”
“The	High	Priest—he’s	of	the	Shadow	Cult,	Fiddler.	Don’t	you	see—
Apsalar…”
Something	cold	slithered	along	the	sapper ’s	bones.	“Oh,	damn,”	he
whispered.	“I	see	your	point.”	He	looked	up	as	the	young	woman	stepped	to	the
foot	of	the	bed,	and	spoke	in	a	low	tone.	“Your	mind	still	your	own,	lass?”
“The	little	man	treats	me	well,”	she	said,	shrugging.
“Well?”	Crokus	spluttered.	“Like	the	prodigal	returned,	you	mean!	What’s
to	stop	Cotillion	from	possessing	you	all	over	again?”
“You	need	only	ask	his	servant,”	a	new	voice	said	from	the	doorway.
Icarium	stood	leaning,	arms	crossed,	against	the	frame.	His	slitted	gray	eyes
were	fixed	on	the	room’s	far	corner.
From	the	gloom	of	the	shadows	there	a	figure	took	shape.	Iskaral	Pust,
seated	on	a	strangely	wrought	chair,	squirmed	and	flung	a	glare	at	the	Jhag.	“I
was	to	remain	unseen,	fool!	What	gift	shadows	when	you	so	clearly	divine
what	they	hide?	Pah!	I	am	undone!”
Icarium’s	thin	lips	quirked	slightly.	“Why	not	give	them	answer,	Iskaral
Pust?	Put	them	at	ease.”
“Put	them	at	ease?”	The	High	Priest	seemed	to	find	the	words	awkward.
“What	value	that?	I	must	think.	At	ease.	Relaxed.	Unmindful	of	restraint.
Careless.	Yes,	of	course!	Excellent	idea.”	He	paused,	swung	his	head	to	Fiddler.
The	sapper	watched	a	smile	slide	aboard	the	wizened	man’s	face,	oiled	and
smooth	and	pathetically	insincere.
“Everything’s	fine,	my	friends,”	he	purred.	“Be	calm.	Cotillion	is	done
with	possessing	the	lass.	The	bane	of	Anomander	Rake’s	threat	remains.	Who
wants	that	crude	conveyor	of	uncivilized	mayhem	crashing	through	the	temple
door?	Not	Shadowthrone.	Not	the	Patron	of	Assassins.	She	is	protected	still.


Besides	which,	Cotillion	finds	no	further	value	in	using	her,	and	indeed	the
residue	of	his	talents	still	within	her	gives	cause	for	secret	concern—”	His	face
twisted	on	itself.	“No,	better	keep	that	thought	unspoken!”	He	smiled	again.
“Cultured	conversation	has	been	rediscovered	and	used	with	guile	and	grace.
Look	upon	them,	Iskaral	Pust,	they	are	won	over	one	and	all.”
There	was	a	long	silence.
Mappo	cleared	his	throat.	“The	High	Priest	rarely	has	company,”	he	said.
Fiddler	sighed,	suddenly	exhausted.	He	leaned	back,	closed	his	eyes.	“My
horse?	Did	it	live?”
“Yes,”	Crokus	said.	“It’s	been	taken	care	of,	as	have	the	others—those	that
Mappo	had	time	to	tend	to,	that	is.	And	there’s	a	servant	here,	somewhere.	We
haven’t	seen	him,	but	he	does	good	work.”
Apsalar	spoke.	“Fiddler,	tell	us	about	Tremorlor.”
A	new	tension	filled	the	air.	The	sapper	sensed	it	even	as	sleep	pulled	at
him,	alluring	with	its	promise	of	temporary	escape.	After	a	moment	he	pushed
it	away	with	another	sigh	and	opened	his	eyes.	“Quick	Ben’s	knowledge	of	the
Holy	Desert	is,	uh,	vast.	When	we	last	rode	the	Holy	Desert—as	we	rode	out,	in
fact—he	spoke	of	the	Vanished	Roads.	Like	the	one	we	found,	an	ancient	road
that	sleeps	beneath	the	sands	and	appears	only	occasionally—if	the	winds	are
right,	that	is.	Well,	one	of	those	roads	leads	to	Tremorlor—”
Crokus	cut	in,	“Which	is?”
“A	House	of	the	Azath.”
“Like	the	one	that	arose	in	Darujhistan?”
“Aye.	Such	buildings	exist—or	are	rumored	to	exist—on	virtually	every
continent.	No	one	knows	their	purpose,	though	it	does	seem	that	they	are	a
lodestone	to	power.	There’s	the	old	story	that	the	Emperor	and	Dancer…”	Oh,
Hood,	Kellanved	and	Dancer,	Ammanas	and	Cotillion,	the	possible	linkage	with
Shadow…this	temple…Fiddler	shot	Iskaral	Pust	a	sharp	look.	The	High	Priest
sported	an	avid	grin,	his	eyes	glittering.	“Uh,	the	legend	goes	that	Kellanved
and	Dancer	once	occupied	one	such	House,	in	Malaz	City—”
“Deadhouse,”	Icarium	said	from	the	doorway.	“The	legend	is	true.”
“Aye,”	Fiddler	muttered,	then	shook	himself.	“Well	enough.	In	any	case,
it’s	Quick	Ben’s	belief	that	such	Houses	are	all	linked	to	one	another,	via	gates
of	some	sort.	And	that	travel	between	them	is	possible—virtually	instantaneous
travel—”
“Excuse	me,”	Icarium	said,	stepping	into	the	room	with	an	air	of	sudden
attentiveness.	“I	have	not	heard	the	name	Quick	Ben.	Who	is	this	man
purporting	to	possess	such	arcane	knowledge	of	the	Azath?”
The	sapper	fidgeted	under	the	Jhag’s	intent	gaze,	then	scowled	at	himself


and	straightened	slightly.	“A	squad	mage,”	he	answered,	making	it	clear	he	did
not	intend	to	elaborate.
Icarium’s	eyes	went	oddly	heavy.	“You	put	much	weight	on	a	squad	mage’s
opinions.”
“Aye,	I	do.”
Crokus	spoke.	“You	mean	to	find	Tremorlor	to	use	the	gate	to	take	us	to
Malaz	City.	To	this	Deadhouse.	Which	would	leave	us—”
“A	half-day’s	sail	from	the	Itko	Kanese	coast,”	Fiddler	said,	meeting
Apsalar ’s	eyes.	“And	home	to	your	father.”
“Father?”	Mappo	asked,	frowning.	“You	now	confuse	me.”
“We’re	delivering	Apsalar	back	home,”	Crokus	explained.	“To	her	family.
She	was	possessed	by	Cotillion,	stolen	away	from	her	father,	her	life—”
“Her	life	as	what?”	Mappo	asked.
“A	fishergirl.”
The	Trell	fell	silent,	but	Fiddler	thought	he	knew	Mappo’s	unspoken
thoughts.	After	what	she’s	been	through,	she’s	going	to	settle	for	a	life	dragging
nets?
Apsalar	herself	said	nothing.
“A	life	given	for	a	life	taken!”	Iskaral	Pust	shouted,	leaping	from	his	chair
and	spinning	in	place,	both	hands	clenched	in	his	tufts	of	hair.	“Such	patience	is
enough	to	drive	one	mad!	But	not	me!	Anchored	to	the	currents	of	weathered
stone,	the	trickling	away	of	sand	under	the	sun’s	glare!	Time	stretched,
stretching,	immortal	players	in	a	timeless	game.	There	is	poetry	in	the	pull	of
elements,	you	know.	The	Jhag	understands.	The	Jhag	seeks	the	secrets—he	is
stone	and	the	stone	forgets,	the	stone	is	ever	now,	and	in	this	lies	the	truth	of
the	Azath—but	wait!	I’ve	rambled	on	with	such	hidden	thoughts	and	heard
nothing	of	what	is	being	said!”	He	fell	abruptly	silent	and	subsided	back	into
the	chair.
Icarium’s	study	of	the	High	Priest	could	well	have	been	something	carved
from	charged	stone.	Fiddler ’s	attention	was	being	pulled	every	which	way.
Thoughts	of	sleep	had	long	since	vanished.	“I’m	not	certain	of	these	details,”
he	said	slowly,	drawing	everyone’s	attention,	“but	I	have	the	distinct	feeling	of
being	a	marionette	joining	a	vast	and	intricate	dance.	What’s	the	pattern?	Who
clutches	the	strings?”
All	eyes	swung	to	Iskaral	Pust.	The	High	Priest	retained	his	fixed
attentiveness	a	moment	longer,	then	blinked.	“A	question	asked	of	modest	me?
Excuses	and	apologies	admittedly	insincere.	Vast	and	intricate	mind	wanders
on	occasion.	Your	query?”	He	ducked	his	head,	smiled	into	the	shadows.	“Are
they	deceived?	Subtle	truths,	vague	hints,	a	chance	choice	of	words	in


unmindful	echo?	They	know	not.	Bask	in	their	awe	with	all	wide-eyed
innocence,	oh,	this	is	exquisite!”
“You’ve	answered	us	eloquently,”	Mappo	said	to	the	High	Priest.
“I	have?	This	is	unwell.	Rather,	how	kind	of	me.	You’re	welcome.	I	shall
command	Servant	to	ready	your	party,	then.	A	journey	to	fabled	Tremorlor,
where	all	truths	shall	converge	with	the	clarity	of	unsheathed	blades	and
unveiled	fangs,	where	Icarium	shall	find	his	lost	past,	the	once	possessed
fisher-girl	shall	find	what	she	does	not	yet	know	she	seeks,	where	the	lad	shall
find	the	price	of	becoming	a	man,	or	perhaps	not,	where	the	hapless	Trell	shall
do	whatever	he	must,	and	where	a	weary	sapper	shall	at	least	receive	his
Emperor ’s	blessing,	oh	yes.	Unless,	of	course,”	he	added,	one	finger	to	his
lips,	“Tremorlor	is	naught	but	a	myth	and	these	quests	nothing	but	hollow
artifice.”
The	High	Priest—finger	still	against	his	lips—settled	back	in	the	strange
chair.	Shadows	closed	around	him.	A	moment	later	he	and	the	chair	vanished.
Fiddler	found	himself	starting	out	of	a	vague,	floating	trance.	He	shook	his
head,	rubbed	his	face	and	glanced	at	the	others,	only	to	see	they	were	reacting
in	similar	ways—as	if	they	had	one	and	all	been	pulled	into	a	subtle,	seductive
sorcery.	Fiddler	released	a	shaky	breath.	“Can	there	be	magic	in	mere	words?”
he	asked	to	no	one	in	particular.
Icarium	answered.	“Magic	powerful	enough	to	drive	gods	to	their	knees,
soldier.”
“We	have	to	get	out	of	here,”	Crokus	muttered.
This	time	everyone	nodded	agreement.


Chapter	Nine

The	Malazan	engineers	are	a	unique	breed.	Cantankerous,	foulmouthed,	derisive	of	authority,	secretive	and	thick-headed.	They
are	the	heartstone	of	the	Malazan	Army…
THE	IMPERIAL	MILITARY
SENJALLE
As	he	descended	into	the	Orbala	Odhan,	Kalam	came	upon	the	first	signs	of	the
uprising.	A	train	of	Malazan	refugees	had	been	ambushed	while	traveling
along	a	dried	stream	bed.	The	attackers	had	come	from	the	high	grass	lining
both	banks,	first	with	arrow	fire,	then	a	rush	to	close	with	the	hapless	Malazans.
Three	wagons	had	been	set	aflame.	The	assassin	sat	motionless	on	his
horse,	studying	the	smoke-hazed	heaps	of	charred	wood,	ash	and	bone.	A	small
bundle	of	child’s	clothing	was	all	that	remained	of	the	victims’	possessions,	a
small	knot	of	color	ten	paces	from	the	smoldering	remains	of	wagons.
After	one	last	glance	around	in	search	of	Apt—the	demon	was	nowhere	to
be	seen,	though	he	knew	it	was	close—Kalam	dismounted.	Tracks	revealed	that
the	train’s	livestock	had	been	led	away	by	the	ambushers.	The	only	bodies	were
those	that	had	been	burned	in	the	wagons.	His	search	revealed	that	there	had
been	survivors,	a	small	group	abandoning	the	scene	and	fleeing	south,	out
across	the	Odhan.	It	did	not	appear	that	they	had	been	pursued,	but	Kalam	well
knew	that	there	was	little	chance	of	salvation	out	on	the	plain.	The	town	of
Orbal	was	five,	perhaps	six	days	away	on	foot,	and	it	was	likely	that	it	was	in
rebel	hands	in	any	case,	since	the	Malazan	detachment	there	had	always	been
undermanned.
He	wondered	where	the	refugees	had	come	from.	There	was	little	to	be
found	for	leagues	in	any	direction.
Making	a	sound	on	the	sand	like	the	beat	of	a	skin	drum,	Apt	ambled	into
view	from	downstream.	The	beast’s	wounds	had	healed,	more	or	less,	leaving
puckered	scars	on	its	black	hide.	Five	days	had	passed	since	the	D’ivers	attack.
There	had	been	no	sign	that	the	shapeshifter	still	pursued	them,	and	Kalam


hoped	that	it	had	taken	enough	damage	to	be	discouraged	from	persisting	in
the	hunt.
Nevertheless,	they	were	being	trailed	by…someone.	The	assassin	felt	it	in
his	bones.	He	was	tempted	to	lay	an	ambush	of	his	own,	but	he	was	one	man
alone	and	his	pursuers	might	be	many.	Moreover,	he	was	uncertain	whether
Apt	would	assist	his	efforts—he	suspected	not.	His	only	advantage	was	the
swiftness	of	his	travel.	He’d	found	his	horse	after	the	battle	without	much
trouble,	and	the	animal	seemed	impervious	to	the	rigors	of	the	journey.	He’d
begun	to	suspect	that	an	issue	of	pride	had	arisen	between	the	stallion	and	the
demon—his	mount’s	bolting	from	the	fight	must	have	stung,	and	it	was	as	if
the	horse	was	determined	to	recover	whatever	delusions	of	dominance	he
possessed.
Kalam	climbed	back	into	the	saddle.	Apt	had	found	the	trail	left	by	the
fleeing	survivors	and	was	sniffing	the	air,	swinging	its	long,	blunt	head	from
side	to	side.
“Not	our	problem,”	Kalam	told	it,	loosening	the	lone	surviving	long-knife
at	his	belt.	“We’ve	enough	troubles	of	our	own,	Apt.”	He	nudged	his	mount	and
set	off	in	a	direction	that	would	take	him	well	around	the	trail.
In	deepening	dusk	he	rode	across	the	plain.	Despite	its	size,	the	demon
seemed	to	vanish	within	the	gloom.	A	demon	born	in	the	Shadow	Realm,	I
shouldn’t	be	surprised.
The	grassland	dipped	ahead—another	ancient	river	track.	As	he
approached,	figures	rose	from	cover	along	the	nearest	bank.	Cursing	under	his
breath,	Kalam	slowed	his	mount,	raising	both	hands,	palms	forward.
“Mekral,	Obarii,”	Kalam	said.	“I	ride	the	Whirlwind!”
“Closer	then,”	a	voice	replied.
Hands	still	raised,	Kalam	guided	his	horse	forward	with	his	heels	and
knees.
“Mekral,”	the	same	voice	acknowledged.	A	man	stepped	clear	of	the	high
grasses,	a	tulwar	in	one	hand.	“Come	join	us	in	our	feast,	rider.	You	have	news
of	the	north?”
Relaxing,	Kalam	dismounted.	“Months	old,	Obarii.	I’ve	not	spoken	aloud
in	weeks—what	stories	can	you	tell	me?”
The	spokesman	was	simply	another	bandit	who	now	marauded	behind	the
rebellion’s	noble	mask.	He	showed	the	assassin	a	gap-toothed	smile.
“Vengeance	against	the	Mezla,	Mekral.	Sweet	as	spring	water,	such	vengeance.”
“The	Whirlwind	has	seen	no	defeat,	then?	Have	the	Mezla	armies	done
nothing?”
Leading	his	horse,	Kalam	strode	with	the	raiders	down	into	the


encampment.	It	had	been	carelessly	laid	out,	revealing	a	sloppy	mind	in
command.	A	large	pile	of	wood	was	about	to	be	set	alight,	promising	a
cooking	fire	that	would	be	visible	across	half	the	Odhan.	A	small	herd	of	oxen
had	been	paddocked	inside	a	makeshift	kraal	just	downwind	of	the	camp.
“The	Mezla	armies	have	done	nothing	but	die,”	the	leader	said,	grinning.
“We	have	heard	that	but	one	remains,	far	to	the	southeast.	Led	by	a	Wickan	with
a	heart	of	black,	bloodless	stone.”
Kalam	grunted.	A	man	passed	him	a	wineskin	and,	nodding	his	thanks,	he
drank	deep.	Saltoan,	booty	from	the	Mezla—probably	the	wagons	I	saw	earlier.
Same	for	the	oxen.	“Southeast?	One	of	the	coastal	cities?”
“Aye,	Hissar.	But	Hissar	is	now	in	Kamist	Reloe’s	hands.	As	are	all	the
cities	but	Aren,	and	Aren	has	the	Jhistal	within.	The	Wickan	flees	overland,
chained	with	refugees	by	the	thousand—they	beg	his	protection	even	as	they
lap	his	blood.”
“Not	black-hearted	enough,	then,”	Kalam	muttered.
“True.	He	should	leave	them	to	Reloe’s	armies,	but	he	fears	the	wrath	of
the	coddled	fools	commanding	in	Aren,	not	that	they’ll	breathe	much	longer.”
“What	is	this	Wickan’s	name?”
“Coltaine.	It’s	said	he	is	winged	like	a	crow,	and	finds	much	to	laugh	about
amidst	slaughter.	A	long,	slow	death	awaits	him,	this	much	Kamist	Reloe	has
promised.”
“May	the	Whirlwind	reap	every	reward	it’s	earned,”	the	assassin	said,
drinking	again.
“A	beautiful	horse	you	have,	Mekral.”
“And	loyal.	Beware	the	stranger	seeking	to	ride	him.”	Kalam	hoped	the
warning	was	not	too	subtle	for	the	man.
The	bandit	leader	shrugged.	“All	things	can	be	tamed.”
The	assassin	sighed,	set	down	the	wineskin.	“Are	you	betrayers	of	the
Whirlwind?”	he	asked.
All	motion	around	him	ceased.	Off	to	his	left	the	fire’s	bone-dry	wood
crackled	in	a	rising	flame.
The	leader	spread	his	hands,	an	offended	expression	on	his	face.	“A	simple
compliment,	Mekral!	How	have	we	earned	such	suspicion?	We	are	not	thieves
or	murderers,	friend.	We	are	believers!	Your	fine	horse	is	yours,	of	course,
though	I	have	gold—”
“Not	for	sale,	Obarii.”
“You	have	not	heard	my	offer!”
“All	Seven	Holy	Treasures	will	not	sway	me,”	Kalam	growled.
“Then	no	more	shall	be	said	of	such	matters.”	The	man	retrieved	the


wineskin	and	offered	it	to	Kalam.
He	accepted	but	did	no	more	than	wet	his	lips.
“These	are	sad	times,”	the	bandit	leader	continued,	“when	trust	is	a	rare
thing	among	fellow	soldiers.	We	all	ride	in	Sha’ik’s	name,	after	all.	We	share	a
single,	hated	enemy.	Nights	such	as	these,	granted	peace	under	the	stars	amidst
this	holy	war,	are	cause	for	celebration	and	brotherhood,	friend.”
“Your	words	have	captured	the	beauty	of	our	crusade,”	Kalam	said.	Words
can	so	easily	glide	over	mayhem	and	terror	and	horror,	it’s	a	wonder	trust	exists
at	all.
“You	will	now	give	me	your	horse	and	that	fine	weapon	at	your	belt.”
The	assassin’s	laugh	was	a	soft	rumble.	“I	count	seven	of	you,	four	before
me,	three	hovering	behind.”	He	paused,	smiling	as	he	met	the	bandit	leader ’s
fire-lit	eyes.	“It	will	be	a	close	thing,	but	I	will	be	certain	to	kill	you	first,
friend.”
The	man	hesitated,	then	answered	with	his	own	smile.	“You’ve	no	sense	of
humor.	Perhaps	it	is	due	to	traveling	so	long	without	company	that	you	have
forgotten	the	games	soldiers	play.	Have	you	eaten?	We	came	upon	a	party	of
Mezla	only	this	morning,	and	they	were	all	too	generous	with	their	food	and
possessions.	We	shall	visit	them	again,	at	dawn.	There	are	women	among
them.”
Kalam	scowled.	“And	this	is	your	war	against	the	Mezla?	You	are	armed,
you	are	mounted—why	have	you	not	joined	the	armies	of	the	Apocalypse?
Kamist	Reloe	needs	warriors	like	you.	I	ride	south	to	join	in	the	siege	of	Aren,
which	must	surely	come.”
“As	do	we—to	walk	through	Aren’s	yawning	gates!”	the	man	replied
fervently.	“And	more,	we	bring	livestock	with	us,	to	help	feed	our	brothers	in
the	army!	Do	you	suggest	we	ignore	the	rich	Mezla	we	come	upon?”
“The	Odhan	will	kill	them	without	our	help,”	the	assassin	said.	“You	have
their	oxen.”	Aren’s	yawning	gates…the	Jhistal	within.	What	does	that	mean?
Jhistal,	not	a	familiar	word,	not	Seven	Cities.	Falari?
The	man’s	expression	had	cooled	in	response	to	Kalam’s	words.	“We
attack	them	at	dawn.	Do	you	ride	with	us,	Mekral?”
“They	are	south	of	here?”
“They	are.	Less	than	an	hour ’s	ride.”
“Then	it	is	the	direction	I	am	already	traveling,	so	I	shall	join	you.”
“Excellent!”
“But	there	is	nothing	holy	in	rape,”	Kalam	growled.
“No,	not	holy.”	The	man	grinned.	“But	just.”


	
They	rode	in	the	night,	beneath	a	vast	scatter	of	stars.	One	of	the	bandits	had
stayed	behind	with	the	oxen	and	other	booty,	leaving	Kalam	riding	with	a	party
of	six.	All	carried	short	recurved	bows,	though	their	supply	of	arrows	was	low
—not	a	single	quiver	held	more	than	three,	and	all	with	ragged	fletching.	The
weapons	would	be	effective	at	close	range	only.
Bordu,	the	bandit	leader,	told	the	assassin	that	the	Malazan	refugees
consisted	of	one	man—a	Malazan	soldier—two	women	and	two	young	boys.
He	was	certain	that	the	soldier	had	been	wounded	in	the	first	ambush.	Bordu
did	not	expect	much	of	a	fight.	They	would	take	down	the	man	first.	“Then	we
can	play	with	the	women	and	boys—perhaps	you	will	change	your	mind,
Mekral.”
Kalam’s	only	response	was	a	grunt.	He	knew	men	such	as	these.	Their
courage	held	so	long	as	they	outnumbered	their	victims,	the	hollow	glory	they
thirsted	for	came	with	overpowering	and	terrorizing	the	helpless.	Such
creatures	were	common	in	the	world,	and	a	land	locked	in	war	left	them	to	run
free,	the	brutal	truths	behind	every	just	cause.	They	were	given	a	name	in	the
Ehrlii	tongue:	e’ptarh	le’gebran,	the	vultures	of	violence.
The	withered	skin	of	the	prairie	broke	up	ahead.	Hump-shouldered	knobs
of	granite	were	visible	above	the	grasses,	studding	the	slopes	of	a	series	of	low
hills.	Faint	firelight	blushed	the	air	behind	one	such	large	outcropping.	Kalam
shook	his	head.	Far	too	careless	in	a	hostile	land—the	soldier	with	them	should
have	known	better.
Bordu	raised	a	hand,	slowing	them	to	a	halt	about	fifty	paces	from	the
monolithic	outcrop.	“Keep	your	eyes	from	the	hearth,”	he	whispered	to	the
others.	“Let	those	fools	be	cursed	with	blindness,	not	us.	Now,	spread	out.	The
Mekral	and	I	will	ride	around	to	the	other	side.	Give	us	fifty	breaths,	then
attack.”
Kalam’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	bandit	leader.	Coming	at	the	camp	from	the
opposite	side,	he	would	run	an	obvious	risk	of	taking	an	arrow	or	three	from
these	attackers	in	the	melee.	More	soldier’s	humor,	I	take	it.	But	he	said	nothing,
pulling	away	when	Bordu	did	and	riding	side	by	side	on	a	route	that	would
circumvent	the	refugees’	camp.
“Your	men	are	skilled	with	their	bows?”	the	assassin	asked	a	few	minutes
later.
“Like	vipers,	Mekral.”
“With	about	the	same	range,”	Kalam	muttered.
“They’ll	not	miss.”


“No	doubt.”
“You	are	afraid,	Mekral?	You,	such	a	large,	dangerous-looking	man.	A
warrior,	without	doubt.	I	am	surprised.”
“I’ve	a	bigger	surprise,”	Kalam	said,	reaching	over	and	sliding	a	blade
across	Bordu’s	throat.
Blood	sprayed.	Gurgling,	the	bandit	leader	reeled	back	in	his	saddle,	his
head	flopping	horribly.
The	assassin	sheathed	his	knife.	He	rode	closer	in	time	to	prop	the	man
back	up	in	his	saddle	and	hold	him	balanced	there,	one	hand	to	Bordu’s	back.
“Ride	with	me	a	while	longer,”	Kalam	said,	“and	may	the	Seven	Holies	flay
your	treacherous	soul.”	As	they	will	mine,	when	the	time	comes.
The	glimmering	firelight	lay	ahead.	Distant	shouts	announced	the	bandits’
charge.	Horse	hooves	thumped	the	hard	ground.	Kalam	tapped	his	mount	into	a
canter.	Bordu’s	horse	matched	the	pace,	the	bandit	leader ’s	body	weaving,	his
head	now	lolling	almost	on	its	side,	ear	against	one	shoulder.
They	reached	the	hill’s	slope,	which	was	gentler	on	this	side	and	mostly
unobstructed.	The	attackers	were	visible	now,	riding	into	the	shell	of	firelight,
arrows	zinging	to	thud	into	the	blanket-wrapped	figures	around	the	hearth.
From	the	sound	those	arrows	made	Kalam	knew	instantly	that	there	were
no	bodies	beneath	those	blankets.	The	soldier	had	proved	his	worth,	had	laid	a
trap.	The	assassin	grinned.	He	pushed	Bordu	down	over	the	saddlehorn	and
gave	the	bandit	leader ’s	horse	a	slap	on	the	rump.	It	charged	into	the	light.
The	assassin	quickly	checked	his	own	mount’s	canter,	slipped	to	the
ground	still	in	the	darkness	beyond	the	firelight,	and	padded	forward
noiselessly.
The	crisp	snap	of	a	crossbow	sounded.	One	of	the	bandits	pitched	back	in
his	saddle	and	tumbled	to	the	ground.	The	four	others	had	pulled	up,	clearly
confused.	Something	like	a	small	bag	flew	into	the	hearth,	landing	with	a	spray
of	sparks.	A	moment	later	the	night	was	lit	up	in	a	cascading	flame,	and	the
four	bandits	were	clearly	outlined.	The	crossbow	loosed	again.	A	bandit
shrieked,	arching	to	reach	for	a	quarrel	embedded	in	his	back.	A	moment	later
he	groaned,	sagging	as	his	horse	stepped	in	a	confused	circle.
Kalam	had	escaped	exposure	in	the	burst	of	light,	but	his	night	vision	was
gone.	Swearing	under	his	breath,	he	edged	forward,	long-knife	in	his	right
hand,	double-edged	dagger	in	his	left.
He	heard	another	rider	coming	in	hard	from	one	side.	Both	bandits
wheeled	their	mounts	to	meet	the	charge.	The	horse	appeared,	slowing	from
what	had	been	a	bolt.	There	was	no	one	in	the	saddle.
The	flare-up	from	the	hearth	was	ebbing.


His	nerves	suddenly	tingling,	Kalam	stopped	and	crouched	down.	He
watched	as	the	riderless	horse	trotted	aimlessly	to	the	right	of	the	bandits,	the
animal	moving	closer	to	come	alongside	one	of	the	attackers.	In	a	fluid,
graceful	motion,	the	rider	swung	up	into	view—a	woman,	who	had	been
crouching	down	out	of	sight	over	one	stirrup—twisting	to	chop	down	at	the
nearest	bandit	with	a	butcher ’s	cleaver.	The	huge	blade	connected	with	the
man’s	neck	and	cut	through	to	lodge	in	his	vertebra.
Then	the	woman	had	both	feet	on	the	saddle.	Even	as	the	bandit	toppled	she
stepped	onto	his	horse,	taking	the	lance	from	the	saddle	holster	and	jabbing	it
like	a	spear	at	the	second	bandit.
Cursing,	the	man	reacted	with	a	warrior ’s	training.	Instead	of	leaning	back
in	what	would	have	been	a	hopeless	effort	to	avoid	the	lancehead	flashing	at	his
chest,	he	drove	both	heels	into	his	horse,	twisting	to	let	the	lance	slip	past.	His
mount	rammed	the	other	horse,	chest	to	flank.	With	a	startled	yelp	the	woman
lost	her	balance	and	fell	heavily	to	the	ground.
The	bandit	leaped	from	the	saddle,	unsheathing	his	tulwar.
Kalam’s	dagger	took	him	in	the	throat	three	paces	from	the	dazed	woman.
Spitting	in	fury,	hands	clutching	his	neck,	the	bandit	fell	to	his	knees.	Kalam
approached	to	deliver	a	killing	thrust.
“Stand	still,”	a	voice	snapped	behind	him.	“Got	a	quarrel	trained	on	you.
Drop	that	lizard-sticker.	Now!”
Shrugging,	the	assassin	let	the	weapon	fall	from	his	hand.	“I’m	Second
Army,”	he	said.	“Onearm’s	Host—”
“Is	fifteen	hundred	leagues	away.”
The	woman	had	regained	the	breath	that	had	been	driven	from	her	lungs.
She	rose	to	her	hands	and	knees,	long	black	hair	hanging	down	over	her	face.
The	last	bandit	finished	dying	with	a	faint,	wet	gurgle.
“You’re	Seven	Cities,”	the	voice	behind	Kalam	said.
“Aye,	yet	a	soldier	of	the	Empire.	Listen,	work	it	out.	I	rode	up	from	the
other	side,	with	the	bandits’	leader.	He	was	dead	before	his	horse	carried	him
into	your	camp.”
“So	why	does	a	soldier	wear	a	telaba	and	no	colors	and	ride	alone?
Desertion,	and	that’s	a	death	sentence.”
Kalam	hissed	in	exasperation.	“And	clearly	you	chose	to	protect	your
family	instead	of	whatever	company	you’re	attached	to.	By	Imperial	Military
Law	that	counts	as	desertion,	soldier.”	As	he	spoke	the	Malazan	stepped
around,	his	crossbow	still	trained	on	the	assassin.
Kalam	saw	a	man	half	dead	on	his	feet.	Short	and	wide,	he	wore	the	tattered
remnants	of	an	Outpost	detachment	uniform,	light-gray	leather	jerkin,	dark-


gray	surcoat.	His	face	was	covered	in	a	network	of	scratches,	as	were	his	hands
and	forearms.	A	deep	wound	marred	his	bristly	chin,	and	the	helm	shadowing
his	eyes	was	dented.	The	clasp	of	his	surcoat	ranked	him	a	captain.
The	assassin’s	eyes	widened	upon	seeing	that.	“Though	a	captain	deserting
is	a	rare	thing…”
“He	didn’t	desert,”	the	woman	said,	now	fully	recovered	and	sorting
through	the	weapons	of	the	dead	bandits.	She	found	a	lightweight	tulwar	and
tested	its	balance	with	a	few	swings.	In	the	firelight	Kalam	could	see	she	was
attractive,	medium-boned,	her	hair	streaked	with	iron.	Her	eyes	were	a	startling
light	gray.	She	collected	a	belted	sword-hoop	and	strapped	it	on.
“We	rode	out	of	Orbal,”	the	captain	said,	pain	evident	in	his	voice.	“A
whole	company	escorting	out	refugees—our	families.	Ran	smack	into	a	Hooddamned	army	on	the	march	south.”
“We’re	all	that’s	left,”	the	woman	said,	turning	to	gesture	into	the	darkness.
Another	woman—a	younger,	thinner	version	of	the	other	one—and	two
children	stepped	cautiously	into	the	light,	then	rushed	to	the	captain’s	side.
The	man	continued	to	aim	an	unsteady	crossbow	at	Kalam.	“Selv,	my
wife,”	he	said,	gesturing	to	the	woman	now	at	his	side.	“Our	children,	there.
And	Selv’s	sister	Minala.	That’s	us.	Now,	let’s	hear	your	story.”
“Corporal	Kalam,	Ninth	Squad…Bridgeburners.	Now	you	know	why	I’m
out	of	uniform,	sir.”
The	man	grinned.	“You’ve	been	outlawed.	So	why	aren’t	you	marching
with	Dujek?	Unless	you’ve	returned	to	your	homeland	to	join	the	Whirlwind.”
“Is	that	your	horse?”	Minala	asked.
The	assassin	turned	to	see	his	mount	step	casually	into	the	camp.	“Aye.”
“You	know	your	horses,”	she	said.
“It	cost	me	a	virgin’s	ransom.	I	figure	if	something’s	expensive	it’s
probably	good,	and	that’s	how	much	I	know	horses.”
“You	still	haven’t	explained	why	you’re	here,”	the	captain	muttered,	but
Kalam	could	see	he	was	relaxing	his	guard.
“Smelled	the	uprising	in	the	wind,”	the	assassin	said.	“The	Empire	brought
peace	to	Seven	Cities.	Sha’ik	wants	a	return	to	the	old	days—tyrants,	border
wars	and	slaughter.	I	ride	for	Aren.	That’s	where	the	punitive	force	will	land—
and	if	I’m	lucky	I	can	slip	myself	in,	maybe	as	a	guide.”
“You’ll	ride	with	us,	then,	Corporal,”	the	captain	said.	“If	you’re	truly	a
Bridgeburner	you’ll	know	how	to	soldier,	and	if	that’s	what	you	show	me	on
the	way	to	Aren,	I’ll	see	you	rejoin	the	Imperial	ranks	without	fuss.”
Kalam	nodded.	“Can	I	retrieve	my	weapons	now,	Captain?”
“Go	ahead.”


The	assassin	crouched	down,	reached	for	his	long-knife,	paused.	“Oh,	one
thing,	Captain…”
The	man	had	sagged	against	his	wife.	He	swung	bleary	eyes	on	Kalam.
“What?”
“Better	my	name	should	change…I	mean,	officially.	I	wouldn’t	welcome
the	gallows	if	I’m	marked	in	Aren.	Granted,	Kalam	is	common	enough,	but
there’s	always	the	chance	I’d	be	recognized—”
“You’re	that	Kalam?	You	said	the	Ninth,	didn’t	you?	Hood’s	breath!”	If	the
captain	had	planned	to	say	more	it	was	lost	as	the	man’s	knees	buckled.	With	a
soft	whimper	his	wife	eased	him	down	to	the	ground,	looked	up	at	her	sister
with	frightened	eyes,	then	over	at	Kalam.
“Relax,	lass,”	the	assassin	said,	straightening.	He	grinned.	“I’m	back	in	the
army	now.”
The	two	boys,	one	about	seven	and	the	other	four,	moved	with	exaggerated
caution	toward	the	unconscious	man	and	his	wife.	She	saw	them	and	opened
her	arms.	They	rushed	to	her	embrace.
“He	was	trampled,”	Minala	said.	“One	of	the	bandits	dragged	him	behind
his	horse.	Sixty	paces	before	he	cut	himself	free.”
Women	who	lived	with	garrisons	were	either	harlots	or	wives—there	was
little	doubt	which	one	Minala	had	been.	“Your	husband	was	in	the	company	as
well?”
“He	commanded	it,	but	he’s	dead.”
It	could	have	been	a	statement	about	the	weather	for	all	the	emotion
expressed,	and	Kalam	sensed	the	rigid	control	that	held	the	woman.	“And	the
captain’s	your	brother-in-law?”
“His	name	is	Keneb.	You’ve	met	my	sister	Selv.	The	older	boy	is	Kesen,
the	younger	Vaneb.”
“You’re	from	Quon?”
“Long	ago.”
Not	the	talkative	type.	The	assassin	glanced	over	at	Keneb.	“Will	he	live?”
“I	don’t	know.	He	has	dizzy	spells.	Blackouts.”
“Sagging	face,	slurred	words?”
“No.”
Kalam	went	to	his	horse	and	gathered	up	the	reins.
“Where	are	you	going?”	Minala	demanded.
“There’s	one	bandit	standing	guard	over	food,	water	and	horses.	We	need
all	three.”
“Then	we	all	go.”
Kalam	started	to	argue	but	Minala	raised	a	hand.	“Think,	Corporal.	We


have	the	bandits’	horses.	We	can	ride,	all	of	us.	The	boys	sat	in	saddles	before
they	could	walk.	And	who	guards	us	when	you’re	gone?	What	happens	if	you
get	wounded	fighting	that	last	bandit?”	She	spun	to	her	sister.	“We’ll	get	Keneb
over	a	saddle,	Selv.	Agreed?”
She	nodded.
The	assassin	sighed.	“But	leave	the	guard	to	me.”
“We	will.	It	seems	you’ve	a	reputation,	by	Keneb’s	reaction.”
“Fame,	or	notoriety?”
“I	expect	he’ll	say	more	when	he	comes	around.”
I	hope	not.	The	less	they	know	about	me	the	better.
	
The	sun	was	still	an	hour	from	rising	when	Kalam	raised	a	hand	to	bring	the
party	to	a	halt.	“That	old	river	bed,”	he	hissed,	gesturing	a	thousand	paces
ahead.	“All	of	you	wait	here.	I	won’t	be	long.”
Kalam	removed	the	best	of	the	bandits’	recurved	bows	from	its	saddle
sheath	and	selected	two	of	the	least	tattered	arrows.	“Load	that	crossbow,”	he
said	to	Minala.	“In	case	something	goes	wrong.”
“How	will	I	know?”
The	assassin	shrugged.	“In	your	gut.”	He	glanced	at	Keneb.	The	captain
was	laid	over	a	saddle,	still	unconscious.	That	wasn’t	good.	Head	injuries	were
always	unpredictable.
“He’s	still	breathing,”	Minala	said	quietly.
Kalam	grunted,	then	set	off	at	a	dogtrot	across	the	plain.
He	saw	the	glow	of	the	campfire	well	before	he	reached	the	high	grass
lining	the	bank.	Still	careless.	A	good	sign.	The	voices	he	could	hear	weren’t.
He	dropped	down	and	slid	forward	through	the	dew-wet	grass	on	his	stomach.
Another	party	of	raiders	had	arrived.	Bearing	gifts.	Kalam	saw	the
motionless,	sprawled	bodies	of	five	women	flung	down	around	the	camp.	All
had	been	raped,	then	murdered.	In	addition	to	Bordu’s	guard	there	were	seven
others,	all	sitting	around	the	fire.	All	well	armed	and	armored	in	boiled	leather.
Bordu’s	guard	was	speaking	a	dozen	words	for	every	breath.	“—won’t	tire
the	horses.	So	the	prisoners	will	walk.	Two	women.	Two	boys.	Like	I	said.
Bordu	plans	these	things.	And	a	horse	worthy	of	a	prince.	You’ll	see	soon
enough—”
“Bordu	will	gift	the	horse,”	one	of	the	newcomers	growled.	Not	a	question.
“Of	course	he	will.	And	a	boy	too.	Bordu	is	a	generous	commander,	sir.
Very	generous…”
Sir.	True	soldiers	of	the	Whirlwind,	then.


Kalam	edged	back,	then	hesitated.	A	moment	later,	his	eyes	coming	to	rest
again	on	the	murdered	women,	he	breathed	a	silent	curse.
A	soft	clack	sounded	almost	at	his	shoulder.	The	assassin	went	rigid,	then
slowly	turned	his	head.	Apt	crouched	beside	him,	head	ducked	low,	a	long
thread	of	drool	hanging	from	its	jaws.	It	blinked	knowingly.
“This	time,	then?”	Kalam	whispered.	“Or	come	to	watch?”
The	demon	gave	nothing	away.	Naturally.
The	assassin	nocked	the	better	of	the	two	arrows,	licked	his	fingers	and	ran
them	along	the	feather	guides.	There	was	little	gain	in	elaborate	planning.	He
had	eight	men	to	kill.
Still	concealed	by	the	high	grass,	he	rose	into	a	crouch,	drawing	the
bowstring	as	he	took	a	deep	breath.	He	held	both	for	a	long	moment.
It	was	the	shot	he	needed.	The	arrow	entered	the	troop	commander ’s	left
eye	and	went	straight	through	to	the	back	of	the	skull,	the	iron	point	making	a
solid	crunching	sound	as	it	drove	into	the	bone.	The	man’s	head	snapped	back,
skullcap	helmet	flying	from	his	head.
Kalam	was	drawing	for	his	second	shot	even	as	the	body	rocked,	falling
forward	from	the	waist.	He	chose	the	man	fastest	to	react,	a	big	warrior	with
his	back	to	the	assassin.
The	arrow	went	high—betrayed	by	a	warped	shaft.	Sinking	into	the
warrior ’s	right	shoulder,	it	was	deflected	off	the	blade	and	up	under	the	rim	of
the	helmet.	Kalam’s	luck	held	as	the	man	pitched	forward	onto	the	fire,
instantly	dead.	Sparks	rose	as	the	body	swallowed	up	the	flames.	Darkness
swept	down	like	a	cloak.
The	assassin	dropped	the	bow	and	closed	swiftly	on	the	shouting,
frightened	men.	A	brace	of	knives	in	his	right	hand,	Kalam	selected	his	targets.
His	left	hand	was	a	blur	as	he	threw	the	first	knife.	A	warrior	screamed.
Another	caught	sight	of	the	assassin.
Kalam	unsheathed	his	long-knife	and	close-work	dagger.	A	tulwar	flashed
at	his	head.	He	ducked,	stepped	close	and	stabbed	the	man	under	the	chin.	With
no	solid	bone	to	bite	down	on	the	dagger	blade,	he	was	instantly	able	to
withdraw	it,	in	time	to	parry	a	lance	thrust,	take	another	step	and	stab	the	longknife’s	point	into	a	man’s	throat.
A	tulwar	skidded	across	his	shoulders,	the	blow	too	wild	to	penetrate	the
chain	under	Kalam’s	telaba.	He	spun,	a	back-hand	slice	opening	the	attacker ’s
cheek	and	nose.	The	man	reeled.
The	assassin	kicked	him	away.	The	three	warriors	still	prepared	to	fight,
and	Bordu’s	guard,	all	backed	off	to	regroup.	Their	reaction	made	it	clear	that
they	imagined	that	a	whole	squad	had	attacked	them.	Kalam	took	advantage	of


their	frantic	searching	of	the	shadows	to	finish	off	the	man	whose	face	he’d
cut.
“Spread	out!”	one	of	the	warriors	hissed.	“Jelem,	Hanor,	get	the	crossbows
—”
Waiting	for	that	was	suicide.	Kalam	attacked,	rushing	the	man	who’d	taken
command.	He	backed	off	desperately,	the	tulwar	in	his	hand	twitching	in	every
direction	as	he	tried	to	follow	the	assassin’s	intricate	feints,	hoping	to	catch	the
one	feint	that	was	in	fact	the	genuine	attack.	Then	instinct	made	the	man
abandon	the	effort	and	lash	out	in	a	counterattack.
Which	the	assassin	had	been	waiting	for.	He	intercepted	the	downward
swing	at	the	man’s	wrist—with	the	point	of	his	dagger.	Spitting	his	arm	on	the
blade,	the	warrior	screamed	in	pain,	weapon	flying	from	a	spasming	hand.
Kalam	thrust	the	long-knife	into	the	man’s	chest,	ducked	and	spun	to	evade
a	rushing	attack	from	Bordu’s	guard.	The	move	was	a	surprise,	since	the
assassin	had	not	expected	to	find	much	courage	in	the	man.	He	came	very	close
to	dying	then.	Straightening	inside	the	guard’s	reach	was	all	that	saved	him.
Kalam	drove	his	dagger	low,	stabbing	just	under	the	man’s	belt	buckle.	Hot
fluid	gushed	over	the	assassin’s	forearm.	The	guard	shrieked,	doubling	over,
trapping	both	knife	and	the	hand	gripping	it.
The	assassin	surrendered	the	weapon	and	stepped	around	the	guard.
The	remaining	two	warriors	crouched	twenty	feet	away,	loading	their
crossbows.	The	weapons	were	Malazan,	assault-issue,	and	both	men	revealed	a
fatal	lack	of	familiarity	with	the	loading	mechanisms.	Kalam	himself	could
ready	such	a	crossbow	in	four	seconds.
He	did	not	grant	the	warriors	even	that,	closing	with	them	in	a	flash.	One
still	tried	to	lock	the	crank,	his	frantic	terror	undoing	his	efforts	as	the	quarrel
jumped	from	its	slot	and	fell	to	the	ground.	The	other	man	tossed	his	crossbow
down	with	a	snarl	and	retrieved	his	tulwar	in	time	to	meet	Kalam’s	charge.	He
had	advantage	in	both	the	reach	and	weight	of	his	weapon,	yet	neither	availed
him	when	a	sudden	loss	of	courage	froze	him	in	his	tracks.
“Please—”
The	word	rode	his	last	breath	as	Kalam	batted	the	tulwar	aside	and	crossswung	his	long-knife’s	razor-sharp	edge,	opening	the	warrior ’s	throat.	The
swing	continued,	spinning	to	transform	into	a	sideways	thrust	that	pierced	the
other	man’s	chest,	through	boiled	leather,	skin,	between	ribs	and	into	the	lung.
Choking,	the	warrior	crumpled.	The	assassin	finished	him	with	another	thrust.
Behind	the	moans	of	Bordu’s	guard	lay	silence.	From	a	copse	of	low	trees
thirty	paces	down	the	river	bed	came	the	first	peeps	of	birds	awakening	to
dawn.	Kalam	dropped	to	one	knee,	sucking	in	lungfuls	of	sweet,	cool	air.


He	heard	a	horse	descend	the	south	bank	and	turned	to	see	Minala.	The
crossbow	in	her	hands	pointed	from	one	corpse	to	the	next	as	she	checked	the
clearing,	then	she	visibly	relaxed,	fixing	Kalam	with	wide	eyes.	“I	count	eight.”
Still	struggling	for	breath,	the	assassin	nodded.	He	reached	out	and	cleaned
his	long-knife’s	blade	and	hilt	on	his	last	victim’s	telaba,	then	checked	the
weapon’s	edge	before	sheathing	it	at	his	side.
Bordu’s	guard	finally	fell	silent.
“Eight.”
“How’s	the	captain?”
“Awake.	Groggy,	maybe	fevered.”
“There’s	another	clearing	about	forty	paces	east	of	here,”	Kalam	said.	“I
suggest	we	camp	there	for	the	day.	I	need	some	sleep.”
“Yes.”
“We	need	to	strip	this	camp…the	bodies…”
“Leave	that	to	Selv	and	me.	We	don’t	shock	easily.	Any	more…”
With	a	grunt	the	assassin	straightened	and	went	to	retrieve	his	other
weapons.	Minala	watched	him.
“There	were	two	others,”	she	said.
Kalam	paused	over	a	body,	looked	up.	“What?”
“Guarding	the	horses.	They	look…”	She	hesitated,	then	continued	grimly,
“They	were	torn	to	pieces.	Big	chunks…missing.	Bite	marks.”
The	assassin	voiced	a	second	grunt,	rose	slowly.	“I	hadn’t	had	much	to	eat
lately,”	he	muttered.
“Maybe	a	plains	bear,	the	big	brown	kind.	Took	advantage	of	the	ruckus	to
ambush	the	two	guards.	Did	you	hear	the	horses	screaming?”
“Maybe.”	He	studied	her	face,	wondering	what	was	going	on	behind	those
almost	silver	eyes.
“I	didn’t	but	there	were	plenty	of	screams	and	sound	does	jump	around	in
river	beds	like	these.	Anyway,	it’ll	do	as	an	explanation,	don’t	you	think?”
“Just	might.”
“Good.	I’ll	ride	back	for	the	others	now.	I	won’t	be	long.”
She	swung	her	mount	around	without	using	the	reins,	since	she	still	held
the	crossbow	in	her	hands.	Kalam	wasn’t	sure	how	she	managed	it.	He	recalled
her	crouch	over	one	stirrup	hours	earlier,	her	dance	across	the	saddles.	This
woman	can	sit	a	horse.
As	she	rode	back	up	the	bank,	the	assassin	surveyed	the	grisly	camp.
“Hood,”	he	breathed,	“I	need	a	rest.”


“Kalam,	who	rode	with	Whiskeyjack	across	Raraku…”	Captain	Keneb	shook
his	head	and	poked	again	at	the	fire.
It	was	dusk.	The	assassin	had	just	awakened	from	a	long,	deep	sleep.	His
first	hour	was	never	a	pleasant	one.	Aching	joints,	old	wounds—his	years
always	caught	up	with	him	while	he	slept.	Selv	had	brewed	a	strong	tea.	She
poured	Kalam	a	cup.	He	stared	into	the	dying	flames.
Minala	said,	“I	would	never	have	believed	that	one	man	could	kill	eight,	all
within	minutes.”
“Kalam	was	recruited	into	the	Claw,”	Keneb	said.	“That’s	rare.	They
usually	take	children,	train	them—”
“Train?”	the	assassin	grunted.	“Indoctrination.”	He	looked	up	at	Minala.
“Attacking	a	group	of	warriors	isn’t	as	impossible	as	you	think.	For	the	lone
attacker,	there’s	no	one	else	to	make	the	first	move.	Eight—ten	men…well,
they	figure	they	should	just	all	close	in	and	hack	me	down.	Only,	who	goes
first?	They	all	pause,	they	all	look	for	an	opening.	It’s	my	job	to	keep	moving,
make	sure	every	opening	is	closed	before	they	can	react.	Mind	you,	a	good
veteran	squad	knows	how	to	work	together…”
“Then	you	were	lucky	they	didn’t.”
“I	was	lucky.”
The	older	boy,	Kesen,	spoke	up.	“Can	you	teach	me	how	to	fight	like	that,
sir?”
Kalam	grunted.	“I	expect	your	father	has	a	better	life	in	mind	for	you,	lad.
Fighting	is	for	people	who	fail	at	everything	else.”
“But	fighting	isn’t	the	same	as	soldiering,”	Keneb	said.
“That’s	a	fact,”	the	assassin	agreed,	sensing	that	he’d	somehow	stung	the
captain’s	pride.	“Soldiers	are	worth	respect,	and	it’s	true	that	sometimes
fighting’s	required.	Soldiering	means	standing	firm	when	that	time	comes.	So,
lad,	if	you	still	want	to	learn	how	to	fight,	learn	how	to	soldier	first.”
“In	other	words,	listen	to	your	father,”	Minala	said,	giving	Kalam	a	quick,
wry	smile.
Following	some	gesture	or	look	the	assassin	did	not	catch,	Selv	rose	and
led	the	boys	off	to	finish	breaking	camp.	As	soon	as	they	were	out	of	earshot
Keneb	said,	“Aren’s	what,	three	months	away?	Hood’s	breath,	there	has	to	be	a
Malazanheld	city	or	fortification	that’s	closer	than	that,	Corporal.”
“All	the	news	I’ve	heard	has	been	bad,”	Kalam	said.	“Everything	south	of
here	is	tribal	lands,	all	the	way	to	the	River	Vathar.	Ubaryd’s	close	to	the	river,
but	I’d	guess	it’s	been	taken	by	Sha’ik’s	Apocalypse—too	valuable	a	port	to
leave	unsecured.	Secondly,	I	would	think	most	of	the	tribes	between	here	and
Aren	have	set	off	to	join	Kamist	Reloe.”


Keneb	looked	startled.	“Reloe?”
Kalam	frowned.	“The	bandits	spoke	of	him	as	being	southeast	of	here…”
“More	east	than	south.	Reloe	is	chasing	Fist	Coltaine	and	the	Seventh
Army.	He’s	probably	wiped	them	out	by	now,	but	even	so	his	forces	are	east	of
the	Sekala	River	and	that’s	the	territory	he’s	been	charged	to	hold.”
“You	know	much	more	of	this	than	I,”	the	assassin	said.
“We	had	Tithansi	servants,”	Minala	explained.	“Loyal.”
“They	paid	for	that	with	their	lives,”	the	captain	added.
“Then	is	there	an	army	of	the	Apocalypse	south	of	here?”
Keneb	nodded.	“Aye,	preparing	to	march	on	Aren.”
The	assassin	frowned.	“Tell	me,	Captain…you	ever	heard	the	word
‘Jhistal?’	”
“No,	not	Seven	Cities.	Why?”
“The	bandits	spoke	of	‘a	jhistal	inside’	Aren.	As	if	it	was	a	shaved
knuckle.”	He	fell	silent	for	a	moment,	then	sighed.	“Who	commands	this
army?”
“That	bastard	Korbolo	Dom.”
Kalam’s	eyes	narrowed.	“But	he’s	a	Fist—”
“Was,	till	he	married	a	local	woman	who	just	happened	to	be	the	daughter
of	Halaf’s	last	Holy	Protector.	He’s	turned	renegade,	had	to	execute	half	his
own	legion	who	refused	to	step	across	with	him.	The	other	half	divested	the
Imperial	uniform,	proclaimed	themselves	a	mercenary	company,	and	took	on
Korbolo’s	contract.	It	was	that	company	that	hit	us	in	Orbal.	Call	themselves	the
Whirlwind	Legion	or	something	like	that.”	Keneb	rose	and	kicked	at	the	fire,
scattering	the	last	embers.	“They	rode	in	like	allies.	We	didn’t	suspect	a	thing.”
There	was	more	to	this	tale,	the	assassin	sensed.	“I	remember	Korbolo,”
Kalam	muttered.
“Thought	you	might.	He	was	Whiskeyjack’s	replacement,	wasn’t	he?”
“For	a	time.	After	Raraku.	A	superb	tactician,	but	a	little	too	bloodthirsty
for	my	tastes.	For	Laseen,	too,	which	was	why	she	holed	him	in	Halaf.”
“And	promoted	Dujek	instead.”	The	captain	laughed.	“Who’s	now	been
outlawed.”
“Now	there’s	an	injustice	I’ll	tell	you	about	some	day,”	Kalam	said,	rising.
“We	should	get	going.	Those	raiders	may	have	friends	nearby.”
He	felt	Minala’s	eyes	on	him	as	he	readied	his	horse	and	was	not	a	little
disturbed.	Husband	dead	only	twenty-four	hours	ago.	An	anchor	cut	away.
Kalam	was	a	stranger	who’d	as	much	as	taken	charge	despite	being	outranked
by	her	brother-in-law.	She	must	have	thought	for	the	first	time	in	a	long	time
that	they	stood	a	chance	of	surviving	with	him	along.	It	was	not	a	responsibility


he	welcomed.	Still,	I’ve	always	appreciated	capable	women.	Only	an	interest
this	soon	after	her	husband’s	death	is	like	a	flower	on	a	dead	stalk.	Attractive
but	not	for	long.	She	was	capable,	but	if	he	let	her,	her	own	needs	would	end	up
undermining	that	capability.	Not	good	for	her.	And	besides,	if	I	led	this	one	on,
she’d	stop	being	what	attracted	me	to	her	in	the	first	place.	Best	to	leave	well
alone.	Best	to	stay	remote.
“Corporal	Kalam,”	Minala	said	behind	him.
He	swung	about.	“What?”
“Those	women.	I	think	we	should	bury	them.”
The	assassin	hesitated,	then	resumed	checking	his	horse’s	girth	strap.	“No
time,”	he	grunted.	“Worry	about	the	living,	not	the	dead.”
Her	voice	hardened.	“I	am.	There	are	two	young	boys	who	need	to	be
reminded	about	respect.”
“Not	now.”	He	faced	her	again.	“Respect	won’t	help	them	if	they’re	dead,
or	worse.	See	that	everyone	else	is	ready	to	ride,	then	get	to	your	horse.”
“Captain	gives	the	orders,”	she	said,	paling.
“He’s	got	a	busted	head	and	keeps	thinking	this	is	a	picnic.	Watch	the	times
he	comes	round—his	eyes	fill	with	fear.	And	here	you	go	wanting	to	add	yet
another	burden	on	the	man.	Even	the	slightest	nudge	might	make	him	retreat
into	his	head	for	good,	and	then	what	use	is	he?	To	anyone?”
“Fine,”	she	snapped,	whirling	away.
He	watched	her	stalk	off.	Selv	and	Keneb	stood	by	their	horses,	too	far
away	to	have	heard	anything	but	close	enough	to	know	that	dark	waters	had
been	stirred	between	Minala	and	the	assassin.	A	moment	later	the	children	rode
into	view	on	a	single	horse,	the	seven-year-old	in	front	and	sitting	tall	with	his
younger	brother ’s	arms	wrapped	around	him.	Both	looked	older	than	their
years.
Respect	for	life.	Sure.	The	other	lesson	is	just	how	cheap	that	life	can
become.	Maybe	the	former	comes	from	the	latter,	in	which	case	they’re	well	on
their	way	as	it	is.
“Ready,”	Minala	said	in	a	cold	voice.
Kalam	swung	into	the	saddle.	He	scanned	the	growing	darkness.	Stay	close,
Apt.	Only	not	too	close.
They	rode	out	of	the	river	bed	and	onto	the	grassy	Odhan,	Kalam	in	the
lead.	Luckily,	the	demon	was	shy.
	
The	rogue	wave	took	them	from	the	port	side,	a	thick,	sludgy	wall	that	seemed
to	leap	over	the	railing,	crashing	down	on	the	deck	like	a	landslide	of	mud.


The	water	drained	from	the	silts	within	seconds,	leaving	Felisin	and	the	others
on	the	main	deck	knee-deep	in	the	foul-smelling	muck.	The	pyramid	of	heads
was	a	shapeless	mound.
Crawling,	Heboric	reached	her,	his	face	smeared	a	dull	ochre.	“This	silt!”
he	gasped,	pausing	to	spit	some	from	his	mouth.	“Look	at	what’s	in	it!”
Almost	too	miserable	to	respond,	she	nevertheless	reached	down	and
scooped	up	a	handful.	“It’s	full	of	seeds,”	she	said.	“And	rotting	plants—”
“Aye!	Grass	seeds	and	rotting	grasses—don’t	you	understand,	lass?	That’s
not	sea	bottom	down	there.	It’s	prairie.	Inundated.	This	warren’s	flooded.
Recently.”
She	grunted,	unwilling	to	share	in	his	excitement.	“That’s	a	surprise?	Can’t
sail	a	ship	on	prairie,	can	you?”
His	eyes	narrowed.	“You	got	something	there,	Felisin.”
The	silt	around	her	shins	felt	strange,	crawling,	restless.	Ignoring	the	expriest,	she	clambered	her	way	toward	the	stern-castle.	The	wave	had	not	gone
that	high.	Gesler	and	Stormy	were	both	at	the	steering	oar,	all	four	hands
needed	to	maintain	a	course.	Kulp	was	near	them,	waiting	to	relieve	the	first
man	whose	strength	gave	out.	And	he’d	been	waiting	long	enough	for	it	to	be
obvious	that	Gesler	and	Stormy	were	locked	in	a	battle	of	pride,	neither	one
wanting	to	surrender	before	the	other.	Their	bared	grins	confirmed	it	for
Felisin.	Idiots!	They’ll	both	collapse	at	once,	leaving	the	mage	to	handle	the
steering	oar	by	himself.
The	sky	continued	to	convulse	over	them,	lashing	lightning	in	all
directions.	The	surface	of	the	sea	resisted	the	shrieking	wind,	the	silt-heavy
water	lifting	in	turgid	swells	that	seemed	reluctant	to	go	anywhere.	The
headless	oarsmen	continued	their	ceaseless	rowing,	though	a	dozen	oars	had
snapped,	the	splintered	shafts	keeping	time	with	those	still	pushing	water.	The
drum	beat	on,	answering	the	thunder	overhead	with	its	measured,	impervious
patience.
She	reached	the	steps	and	climbed	clear	of	the	mud,	then	stopped	in
surprise.	The	silt	fled	her	skin	as	if	alive,	poured	down	from	her	legs	to	rejoin
the	quaking	pool	that	covered	the	main	deck.
Crouched	near	the	main	mast,	Heboric	yelled	in	sudden	alarm,	eyes	on	the
mud	surrounding	him	as	its	shivering	increased.	“There’s	something	in	it!”
“Come	this	way!”	Truth	shouted	from	the	forecastle	steps,	reaching	out
with	one	hand.	Baudin	anchored	him	with	a	single-handed	grip	on	the	lad’s
other	arm.	“Quick!	Something’s	coming	out!”
Felisin	climbed	another	step	higher.
The	mud	was	transmogrifying,	coalescing	into	the	shapes	of	figures.	Flint


blades	appeared,	some	gray,	some	the	deep	red	of	chalcedony.	Bedraggled	fur
slowly	sprouted,	riding	broad,	bony	shoulders.	Bone	helmets	gleamed
polished	gold	and	brown—the	skulls	of	beasts	that	Felisin	could	not	imagine
existing	anywhere.	Long	ropes	of	filthy	hair	were	now	visible,	mostly	black	or
brown.	The	mud	did	not	so	much	fall	away	as	change.	These	creatures	were
one	with	the	clay.
“T’lan	Imass!”	Kulp	shouted	from	where	he	stood	clinging	to	the	mizzen
mast.	Silanda	was	rocking	with	a	wild	energy.	“Logros	T’lan!”
They	numbered	six.	All	wore	furs	except	one,	who	was	smaller	than	the
others	and	last	to	appear.	It	was	bedecked	in	the	oily,	ragged	feathers	of
colorful	birds,	and	its	long	hair	was	iron	gray	streaked	with	red.	Shell,	antler
and	bone	jewelry	hung	from	its	rotting	hide	shin,	but	it	appeared	to	carry	no
weapons.
Their	faces	were	withered,	the	bones	underneath	close	to	the	surface	and
robust.	The	sockets	of	their	eyes	were	black	pits.	The	wiry	remnants	of	beards
remained,	except	on	the	silver-haired	one,	who	now	straightened	and	faced
Kulp.
“Stand	aside,	Servant	of	the	Chained	One,	we	have	come	for	our	kin,	and
for	the	Tiste	Edur.”	The	voice	was	a	woman’s,	the	language	Malazan.
Another	T’lan	Imass	turned	to	the	silver-haired	one.	It	was	by	far	the
biggest	of	the	group.	The	fur	humped	over	its	shoulders	came	from	some	kind
of	bear,	the	hairs	were	silver-tipped.	“Mortal	worshipers	are	a	bane
themselves,”	it	said	in	a	bored	tone.	“We	should	kill	them	as	well.”
“We	shall,”	the	other	one	said.	“But	our	quarry	comes	first.”
“There	are	no	kin	of	yours	here,”	Kulp	said	shakily.	“And	the	Tiste	Edur
are	dead.	Go	see	for	yourself.	In	the	captain’s	cabin.”
The	female	T’lan	Imass	cocked	her	head.	Two	of	her	companions	strode
toward	the	hatch.	She	then	swung	about	and	stared	at	Heboric,	who	stood	by	the
forecastle	railing.	“Call	down	the	mage	linked	to	you.	He	is	a	wound.	And	he
spreads.	This	must	be	stopped.	More,	I	tell	your	god	that	such	games	place	him
in	great	peril.	We	shall	not	brook	such	damage	to	the	warrens.”
Felisin	laughed,	the	sound	tinged	with	hysteria.
As	one,	the	T’lan	Imass	looked	at	her.
She	flinched	from	those	lifeless	gazes,	then	drew	a	breath	to	steady	herself.
“You	may	be	immortal	and	powerful	enough	to	threaten	the	boar	god,”	she
said,	“but	you	haven’t	got	one	thing	right	yet.”
“Explain,”	the	female	said.
“Ask	someone	who	cares,”	she	said,	meeting	that	depthless	gaze,	surprised
that	she	neither	flinched	nor	broke	away.


“I	am	no	longer	a	priest	of	Fener,”	Heboric	said,	raising	both	stumps.	“If
the	boar	god	is	here,	among	us,	then	I	am	not	aware	of	it,	nor	do	I	much	care.
The	sorcerer	riding	this	storm	pursues	us,	seeking	to	destroy	us.	I	know	not
why.”
“He	is	the	madness	of	Otataral,”	the	female	said.
The	two	Imass	sent	to	the	cabin	now	returned.	Though	no	words	were
spoken	aloud,	the	female	nodded.	“They	are	dead,	then.	And	our	kin	have
departed.	We	must	continue	the	hunt.”	She	swung	her	gaze	back	to	Heboric.	“I
would	lay	hands	upon	you.”
Felisin	barked	another	laugh.	“That’ll	make	him	complete.”
“Shut	up,	girl,”	Kulp	growled,	pushing	past	to	descend	to	the	main	deck.
“We’re	not	Servants	of	the	Chained	One,”	he	said.	“Hood’s	breath,	what	is	the
Chained	One?	Never	mind,	I	don’t	even	want	to	know.	We’re	on	this	ship	by
accident,	not	design—”
“We	did	not	anticipate	this	warren	would	be	flooded,”	the	female	said.
“It’s	said	you	can	cross	oceans,”	the	mage	muttered,	frowning.	Felisin
could	see	he	was	having	trouble	following	the	T’lan	Imass’s	statements.	So	was
she.
“We	can	cross	bodies	of	water,”	the	female	acknowledged.	“But	we	can
only	find	our	shapes	on	land.”
“So,	like	us,	you	came	to	this	ship	to	get	your	feet	dry—”
“And	complete	our	task.	We	pursue	renegade	kin.”
“If	they	were	here,	they’ve	since	left,”	Kulp	said.	“Before	we	arrived.	You
are	a	Bonecaster.”
The	female	inclined	her	head.	“Hentos	Ilm,	of	Logros	T’lann	Imass.”
“And	the	Logros	no	longer	serve	the	Malazan	Empire.	Glad	to	see	you’re
staying	busy.”
“Why?”
“Never	mind.”	Kulp	looked	skyward.	“He’s	eased	up	some.”
“He	senses	us,”	Hentos	Ilm	said.	She	faced	Heboric	again.	“Your	left	hand
is	in	balance,	it	is	true.	Otataral	and	a	power	unknown	to	me.	If	the	mage	in	the
storm	continues	to	grow	in	power,	the	Otataral	shall	prevail,	and	you	too	shall
know	its	madness.”
“I	want	it	gone	from	me,”	Heboric	growled.	“Please.”
Hentos	Ilm	shrugged,	and	approached	the	ex-priest.	“We	must	destroy	the
one	in	the	skies.	Then	we	must	seal	the	warren’s	wound.”
“In	other	words,”	Felisin	said,	“you’re	probably	not	worth	the	trouble,	old
man.”
“Bonecaster,”	Kulp	said.	“What	warren	is	this?”


Hentos	Ilm	paused,	attention	still	on	Heboric.	“Elder.	Kurald	Emurlahn.”
“I’ve	heard	of	Kurald	Galain—the	Tiste	Andii	warren.”
“This	is	Tiste	Edur.	You	surprise	me,	Mage.	You	are	Meanas	Rashan,	which
is	the	branch	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	accessible	to	mortal	humans.	The	warren
you	use	is	the	child	of	this	place.”
Kulp	was	scowling	at	the	Bonecaster ’s	back.	“This	makes	no	sense.	Meanas
Rashan	is	the	warren	of	Shadow.	Of	Ammanas	and	Cotillion,	and	the	Hounds.”
“Before	Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion,”	Hentos	Ilm	said,	“there	were	Tiste
Edur.”	The	Bonecaster	reached	toward	Heboric.	“I	would	touch	you.”
“Be	my	guest,”	he	said.
Felisin	watched	her	place	the	palm	of	one	withered	hand	against	the	old
man’s	chest.	After	a	moment	she	stepped	back	and	turned	away	as	if	dismissing
him.	She	addressed	the	bear-furred	T’lan	Imass	who’d	spoken	earlier.	“You	are
clanless,	Legana	Breed.”
“I	am	clanless,”	he	agreed.
She	pointed	at	Kulp.	“Mage.	Do	nothing.”
“Wait!”	Heboric	said.	“What	did	you	sense	in	me?”
“You	are	shorn	from	your	god,	though	he	continues	to	make	use	of	you.	I
see	no	other	purpose	in	your	existence.”
Felisin	bit	back	a	nasty	comment.	Not	this	one.	She	could	see	Heboric’s
shoulders	slowly	sag,	as	if	some	vital	essence	had	been	pulled,	pulped	and
dripping	blood,	from	his	chest.	He’d	clung	hard	to	something,	and	the
Bonecaster	had	just	pronounced	it	dead.	I’m	running	out	of	things	to	wound	in
him.	Maybe	that’ll	keep	me	from	trying.
Hentos	Ilm	tilted	her	head	back,	then	began	dissolving,	the	dust	of	her
being	spinning	in	place.	A	moment	later	it	spiraled	upward,	swiftly	vanishing
in	the	low	clouds	boiling	overhead.
Lightning	cracked,	a	rap	of	pain	in	Felisin’s	ears.	Crying	out,	she	fell	to
her	knees.	The	others	suffered	in	like	manner,	with	the	exception	of	the
remaining	T’lan	Imass,	who	stood	in	motionless	indifference.	The	Silanda
bucked.	The	mud-smeared	pyramid	of	severed	heads	around	the	main	mast
collapsed.	Heads	tumbled	and	bounced	heavily	on	the	deck.
The	T’lan	Imass	spun	at	that,	weapons	suddenly	out.
Thunder	bellowed	in	the	roiling	stormclouds.	The	air	shivered	again.
The	one	named	Legana	Breed	reached	down	and	lifted	one	head	by	its
long,	black	hair.	It	was	Tiste	Andii,	a	woman.	“She	still	lives,”	the	undead
warrior	said,	revealing	a	muted	hint	of	surprise.	“Kurald	Emurlahn,	the
sorcery	has	locked	their	souls	to	their	flesh.”
A	faint	shriek	bounced	down	through	the	clouds,	a	sound	filled	with


despair	and—jarringly—release.	The	clouds	spilled	out	in	every	direction,
tearing	into	thin	wisps.	A	pale	amber	sky	burned	through.	The	storm	was	gone,
and	so	too	was	the	mad	sorcerer.
Felisin	ducked	as	something	winged	past	her,	leaving	in	its	wake	a	musty,
dead	smell.	When	she	looked	up	Hentos	Ilm	stood	once	again	on	the	main
deck,	facing	Legana	Breed.	Neither	moved,	suggesting	a	silent	conversation
was	underway.
“Hood’s	breath,”	Kulp	breathed	beside	Felisin.	She	glanced	over.	He	was
staring	into	the	sky,	his	face	pale.	She	followed	his	gaze.
A	vast,	black	lesion,	rimmed	in	fiery	red	and	as	large	as	a	full	moon,
marred	the	amber	sky.	Whatever	leaked	from	it	seemed	to	steal	into	Felisin
through	her	eyes,	as	if	the	act	of	simply	seeing	it	was	capable	of	transmitting
an	infection,	a	disease	that	would	spread	through	her	flesh.	Like	the	poison	of	a
bloodfly.	A	small	whimper	escaped	her	throat,	then	she	desperately	pulled	her
eyes	away.
Kulp	still	stared,	his	face	getting	whiter,	his	mouth	hanging	listlessly.
Felisin	nudged	him.	“Kulp!”	He	did	not	respond.	She	struck	him.
Gesler	was	suddenly	beside	them,	wrapping	an	arm	around	Kulp’s	eyes.
“Dammit,	Mage,	snap	out	of	it!”
Kulp	struggled,	then	relaxed.	She	saw	him	nod.	“Let	him	go	now,”	she	said
to	the	corporal.
As	soon	as	Gesler	relinquished	his	hold,	the	mage	rounded	on	Hentos	Ilm.
His	voice	was	a	shaken	rasp.	“That’s	the	wound	you	mentioned,	isn’t	it?	It’s
spreading—I	can	feel	it,	like	a	cancer—”
“A	soul	must	bridge	it,”	the	Bonecaster	said.
Legana	Breed	was	on	the	move.	All	eyes	followed	him	as	he	strode	to	the
sterncastle	steps,	ascended	and	stood	before	Stormy.	The	scarred	veteran	did
not	recoil.
“Well,”	the	marine	muttered,	“this	is	as	close	as	I’ve	ever	been.”	His	grin
was	sickly.	“Once	is	enough.”
The	T’lan	Imass	raised	his	gray	flint	sword.
“Hold	it,”	Gesler	growled.	“If	you	need	a	soul	to	stopper	that	wound…use
mine.”
Legana	Breed’s	head	pivoted.
Gesler ’s	jaw	clenched.	He	nodded.
“Insufficient,”	Hentos	Ilm	pronounced.
Legana	Breed	faced	Stormy	again.	“I	am	the	last	of	my	clan,”	he	rumbled.
“L’echae	Shayn	shall	end.	This	weapon	is	our	memory.	Carry	it,	mortal.	Learn
its	weight.	Stone	ever	thirsts	for	blood.”	He	offered	the	marine	the	four-foot-


long	sword.
Face	blank,	Stormy	accepted	it.	Felisin	saw	the	muscles	of	his	forearms
stiffen	as	they	took	the	weight	and	held	it.
“Now,”	Hentos	Ilm	said.
Legana	Breed	stepped	back	and	collapsed	in	a	column	of	dust.	The	column
twisted,	spinning	in	on	itself.	The	air	on	all	sides	stirred,	then	swept	inward,
pulled	to	the	whirling	emanation.	A	moment	later	the	wind	fell	away	and
Legana	Breed	was	gone.	The	remaining	T’lan	Imass	turned	and	lifted	their
gazes	skyward.
Felisin	was	never	certain	whether	she	only	imagined	seeing	the	T’lan
Imass	reassume	his	form	upon	striking	the	heart	of	that	wound,	a	tiny,
seemingly	insignificant	splayed	figure	that	was	quickly	swallowed	in	the	inky
darkness.	A	moment	later	the	wound’s	edges	seemed	to	flinch,	faint	waves
rippling	outward.	Then	the	lesion	began	folding	in	on	itself.
Hentos	Ilm	continued	staring	upward.	Finally	she	nodded.	“Sufficient.	The
wound	is	bridged.”
Stormy	slowly	lowered	the	flint	sword’s	point	until	it	rested	on	the	deck.
A	beat-up	old	veteran,	knocked	down	cynical,	just	another	of	the	Empire’s
cast-offs.	He	was	clearly	overwhelmed.	Insufficient,	she	said.	Indeed.
“We	shall	go	now,”	Hentos	Ilm	said.
Stormy	shook	himself.	“Bonecaster!”
There	was	obvious	disdain	in	her	tone	as	she	said,	“Legana	Breed	claimed
his	right.”
The	marine	did	not	relent.	“This	‘bridging’…tell	me,	is	it	a	thing	of	pain?”
Hentos	Ilm’s	shrug	was	an	audible	grate	of	bones,	her	only	answer.
“Stormy—”	Gesler	warned,	but	his	companion	shook	his	head,	descended
to	the	main	deck.	As	he	approached	the	Bonecaster,	another	T’lan	Imass
stepped	forward	to	block	him.
“Soldier!”	Gesler	snapped.	“Stand	off!”
But	Stormy	only	moved	back	to	clear	space	as	he	raised	the	flint	sword.
The	T’lan	Imass	facing	him	closed	again,	the	motion	a	blur,	one	arm
shooting	out,	the	hand	closing	on	Stormy’s	neck.
Cursing,	Gesler	pushed	past	Felisin,	his	own	hand	finding	the	sword’s	grip
at	his	side.	The	corporal	slowed	when	it	became	obvious	that	the	T’lan	Imass
was	simply	holding	Stormy.	And	the	marine	himself	had	gone	perfectly	still.
Quiet	words	slipped	between	them.	Then	the	undead	warrior	released	his	grip
and	stepped	back.	Stormy’s	anger	had	vanished.	Something	in	the	set	of	his
shoulders	reminded	Felisin	of	Heboric.
All	five	T’lan	Imass	began	to	dissolve.


“Wait!”	the	mage	shouted,	rushing	forward.	“How	in	Hood’s	name	do	we
get	out	of	here?”
It	was	too	late.	The	creatures	were	gone.
Gesler	rounded	on	Stormy.	“What	did	that	bastard	tell	you?”	he	demanded.
The	soldier ’s	eyes	were	wet—shocking	Felisin—as	he	turned	to	his
corporal.
Gesler	whispered,	“Stormy…”
“He	said	there	was	great	pain,”	the	man	muttered.	“I	asked	How	long?	He
said	Forever.	The	wound	heals	around	him,	you	see.	She	couldn’t	command,
you	see.	Not	for	something	like	that	He	volunteered—”	The	man’s	throat
closed	up,	then.	He	spun	away,	bolted	through	the	gangway	and	out	of	sight.
“Clanless,”	Heboric	said	from	the	forecastle.	“As	good	as	useless.
Existence	without	meaning…”
Gesler	kicked	one	of	the	severed	heads	across	the	deck.	Its	uneven
thumping	was	loud	in	the	still	air.	“Who	still	wants	to	live	forever?”	he
growled,	then	spat.
Truth	spoke,	his	voice	quavering.	“Didn’t	anybody	else	see?”	he	asked.
“The	Bonecaster	didn’t—I’m	sure	of	it,	she	didn’t…”
“What’re	you	going	on	about,	lad?”	Gesler	demanded.
“That	T’lan	Imass.	He	tied	it	to	his	belt.	By	the	hair.	His	bear	cloak	hid	it.”
“What?”
“He	took	one	of	the	heads.	Didn’t	anybody	else	see?”
Heboric	was	the	first	to	react.	With	a	wild	grin	he	leaped	down	to	the	main
deck,	making	for	the	galley.	Even	as	he	plunged	through	the	doorway	Kulp	was
clambering	down	to	the	first	oar	deck.	He	disappeared	from	view.
Minutes	passed.
Gesler,	still	frowning,	went	to	join	Stormy	and	the	ex-priest.
Kulp	returned.	“One	of	them’s	dead	as	a	post,”	he	said.
Felisin	thought	to	ask	him	what	it	all	meant,	but	a	sudden	exhaustion	swept
the	impulse	away.	She	looked	around	until	she	saw	Baudin.	He	was	at	the	prow,
his	back	to	everything…to	everyone.	She	wondered	at	his	indifference.	Lack	of
imagination,	she	concluded	after	a	moment,	the	thought	bringing	a	sneer	to	her
lips.	She	made	her	way	to	him.
“All	too	much	for	you,	eh,	Baudin?”	she	asked,	leaning	beside	him	on	the
arching	rail.
“T’lan	Imass	were	never	nothing	but	trouble,”	he	said.	“Always	two	sides
to	whatever	they	did,	maybe	more	than	two.	Maybe	hundreds.”
“A	thug	with	opinions.”
“You	set	your	every	notion	in	stone,	lass.	No	wonder	people	always


surprise	you.”
“Surprise?	I’m	way	past	surprise,	thug.	We’re	in	something,	every	one	of
us.	There’s	more	to	come,	so	you	can	forget	about	thinking	of	a	way	out.
There	isn’t	one.”
He	grunted.	“Wise	words	for	a	change.”
“Don’t	soften	up	on	me,”	Felisin	said.	“I’m	just	too	tired	to	be	cruel.	Give
me	a	few	hours’	sleep	and	I’ll	be	back	to	my	old	self.”
“Planning	ways	to	murder	me,	you	mean.”
“Keeps	me	amused.”
He	was	silent	a	long	moment,	eyes	on	the	meaningless	horizon	ahead,	then
he	turned	to	her.	“You	ever	think	that	maybe	what	you	are	is	what’s	trapping
you	inside	whatever	it	is	you’re	trapped	inside?”
She	blinked.	There	was	a	glint	of	sardonic	judgment	in	his	small,	beastlike
eyes.	“I’m	not	following	you,	Baudin.”
He	smiled.	“Oh	yes,	you	are,	lass.”


Chapter	Ten

It	is	one	thing	to	lead	by	example	with	half	a	dozen	soldiers	at
your	back.	It	is	wholly	another	with	ten	thousand.
LIFE	OF	DASSEM	ULTOR
DUIKER
It	had	been	a	week	since	Duiker	came	upon	the	trail	left	by	the	refugees	from
Caron	Tepasi.	They	had	obviously	been	driven	south	to	place	further	strain	on
Coltaine’s	stumbling	city	in	motion,	the	historian	thought.	There	was	nothing
else	in	this	ceaseless	wasted	land.	The	dry	season	had	taken	hold,	the	sun	in	the
barren	sky	scorching	the	grasses	until	they	looked	and	felt	like	brittle	wire.
Day	after	day	had	rolled	by,	yet	Duiker	still	could	not	catch	up	with	the	Fist
and	his	train.	The	few	times	he	had	come	within	sight	of	the	massive	dust
cloud,	Reloe’s	Tithansi	outriders	had	prevented	the	historian	from	getting	any
closer.
Somehow,	Coltaine	kept	his	forces	moving,	endlessly	moving,	driving	for
the	Sekala	River.	And	from	there?	Does	he	make	a	stand,	his	back	to	the	ancient
ford?
So	Duiker	rode	in	the	train’s	wake.	The	detritus	from	the	refugees
diminished,	yet	grew	more	poignant.	Tiny	graves	humped	the	old
encampments;	the	short-bones	of	horses	and	cattle	lay	scattered	about;	an	oftrepaired	but	finally	abandoned	wagon	axle	marked	one	departure	point,	the
rest	of	the	wagon	dismantled	and	taken	for	spares.	The	latrine	trenches	reeked
beneath	clouds	of	flies.
Places	where	skirmishing	had	occurred	revealed	another	story.	Amidst	the
naked,	unrecovered	bodies	of	Tithansi	horsewarriors	were	shattered	Wickan
lances,	the	heads	removed.	Everything	that	could	be	reused	had	been	stripped
from	the	Tithansi	bodies:	leather	thongs	and	straps,	leggings	and	belts,
weapons,	even	braids	of	hair.	Dead	horses	were	dragged	away	entire,	leaving
swathes	of	blood-matted	grass	in	their	wake.
Duiker	was	well	past	astonishment	at	anything	he	saw.	Like	the	Tithansi


tribesmen	he’d	occasionally	exchanged	words	with,	he’d	begun	to	believe	that
Coltaine	was	something	other	than	human,	that	he	had	carved	his	soldiers	and
every	refugee	into	unyielding	avatars	of	the	impossible.	Yet	for	all	that,	there
was	no	hope	for	victory.	Kamist	Reloe’s	Apocalypse	consisted	of	the	armies	of
four	cities	and	a	dozen	towns,	countless	tribes	and	a	peasant	horde	as	vast	as	an
inland	sea.	And	it	was	closing	in,	content	for	the	moment	simply	to	escort
Coltaine	to	the	Sekala	River.	Every	current	was	drawing	to	that	place.	A	battle
was	taking	shape,	an	annihilation.
Duiker	rode	through	the	day,	parched,	hungry,	wind-burned,	his	clothes
reduced	to	rags.	A	straggler	from	the	peasant	army,	an	old	man	determined	to
join	the	last	struggle.	Tithansi	riders	knew	him	on	sight	and	paid	him	little	heed
apart	from	a	distant	wave.	Every	two	or	three	days	a	troop	would	join	him,
pass	him	bundles	of	food,	water	and	feed	for	the	horse.	In	some	ways,	he	had
become	their	icon,	his	journey	symbolic,	burdened	with	unasked-for
significance.	The	historian	felt	pangs	of	guilt	at	that,	yet	accepted	the	gifts	with
genuine	gratitude—they	kept	him	and	his	horse	alive.
Nonetheless,	his	faithful	mount	was	wearing	down.	More	and	more	each
day	Duiker	led	the	animal	by	the	reins.
Dusk	approached.	The	distant	dust	cloud	continued	to	march	on,	until	the
historian	was	certain	that	Coltaine’s	vanguard	had	reached	the	river.	The	Fist
would	insist	that	the	entire	train	drive	on	through	the	night	to	the	encampment
that	the	vanguard	was	even	now	preparing.	If	Duiker	was	to	have	any	chance	of
rejoining	them,	it	would	have	to	be	this	night.
He	knew	of	the	ford	only	from	maps,	and	his	recollection	was	frustratingly
vague.	The	Sekala	River	averaged	five	hundred	paces	in	width,	flowing	north
to	the	Karas	Sea.	A	small	village	squatted	in	the	crook	of	two	hills	a	few
hundred	paces	south	of	the	ford	itself.	He	seemed	to	remember	something
about	an	old	oxbow,	as	well.
The	dying	day	spread	shadows	across	the	land.	The	brightest	of	the	night’s
stars	glittered	in	the	sky’s	deepening	blue.	Wings	of	capemoths	rose	with	the
heat	that	fled	the	parched	ground,	like	black	flakes	of	ash.
Duiker	climbed	back	into	the	saddle.	A	small	band	of	Tithansi	outriders
rode	a	ridge	half	a	mile	to	the	north.	Duiker	judged	that	he	was	at	least	a	league
from	the	river.	The	patrols	of	horsewarriors	would	increase	the	closer	he
approached.	He	had	no	plan	for	dealing	with	them.
The	historian	had	walked	his	mount	for	most	of	the	day,	preparing	for	a
hard	ride	into	the	night.	He	would	need	all	that	the	beast	could	give	him,	and
was	afraid	that	it	would	not	be	enough.	He	nudged	the	mare	into	a	trot.
The	distant	Tithansi	paid	him	no	attention,	and	soon	rode	out	of	sight.


Heart	thumping,	Duiker	urged	his	horse	into	a	canter.
A	wind	brushed	his	face.	The	historian	hissed	a	blessing	to	whatever	god
was	responsible.	The	hanging	dust	cloud	ahead	began	to	edge	his	way.
The	sky	darkened.
A	voice	shouted	a	few	hundred	paces	to	his	left.	A	dozen	horsemen,	strips
of	fur	trailing	from	their	lances.	Tithansi.	Duiker	saluted	them	with	a	raised
fist.
“With	the	dawn,	old	man!”	one	of	them	bellowed.	“It	is	suicide	to	attack
now!”
“Ride	to	Reloe’s	camp!”	another	yelled.	“Northwest,	old	man—you	are
heading	for	the	enemy	lines!”
Duiker	waved	their	words	away,	gesturing	like	a	madman.	He	rose	slightly
in	the	saddle,	whispered	into	the	mare’s	ear,	squeezed	gently	with	his	knees.
The	animal’s	head	ducked	forward,	the	strides	lengthened.
Reaching	the	crest	of	a	low	hill,	the	historian	finally	saw	what	was	arrayed
before	him.	The	encampment	of	the	Tithansi	lancers	lay	ahead	and	to	his	right,
a	thousand	or	more	hide	tents,	the	gleam	of	cooking	fires.	Mounted	patrols
moved	in	a	restless	line	beyond	the	tents,	protecting	the	camp	from	the	enemy
forces	dug	in	at	the	ford.	To	the	left	of	the	Tithansi	camp	spread	a	score
thousand	makeshift	tents—the	peasant	army.	Smoke	hung	like	an	ash-stained
cloak	over	the	sprawling	tattered	shanty	town.	Meals	were	being	cooked.
Outlying	pickets	consisted	of	entrenchments,	again	facing	the	river.	Between
the	two	encampments	there	was	a	corridor,	no	more	than	two	wagons	wide,
running	down	the	sloping	floodplain	to	meet	Coltaine’s	earthen	defenses.
Duiker	angled	his	horse	down	the	corridor,	riding	at	full	gallop.	The
Tithansi	outriders	behind	him	had	not	pursued,	though	the	warriors	patrolling
the	encampment	now	watched	him,	converging	but	without	obvious	concern…
yet.
As	he	cleared	the	inside	edge	of	the	tribe’s	camp	on	his	right,	then	the
peasants’	sea	of	tents	on	his	left,	he	saw	raised	earthworks,	orderly	rows	of
tents,	solidly	manned	pickets—the	horde	had	additional	protection.	The
historian	saw	two	banners,	Sialk	and	Hissar—regular	infantry.	Helmed	heads
had	turned,	eyes	drawn	to	the	sound	of	his	horse’s	hooves	and	now	the	alarmed
shouts	of	the	Tithansi	riders.
The	mare	was	straining.	Coltaine’s	pickets	were	five	hundred	paces	ahead,
seeming	to	get	no	nearer.	He	heard	horses	in	pursuit,	gaining.	Figures
appeared	on	the	Malazan	bulwarks,	readying	bows.	The	historian	prayed	for
quick-witted	minds	among	the	soldiers	he	rode	toward.	He	cursed	as	he	saw	the
bows	raised,	then	drawn	back.


“Not	me,	you	bastards!”	he	bellowed	in	Malazan.
The	bows	loosed.	Arrows	sped	unseen	in	the	night.
Horses	screamed	behind	him.	His	pursuers	were	drawing	rein.	More
arrows	flew.	Duiker	risked	one	backward	glance	and	saw	the	Tithansi
scrambling	to	withdraw	out	of	arrow	range.	Thrashing	horses	and	bodies	lay
on	the	ground.
He	slowed	the	mare	to	a	canter,	then	a	trot	as	he	approached	the
earthworks.	She	was	lathered,	her	limbs	far	too	loose,	her	head	sagging.
Duiker	rode	into	the	midst	of	blue-skinned	Wickans—Weasel	Clan—who
stared	at	him	in	silence.	As	he	glanced	around,	the	historian	felt	himself	in
well-suited	company—the	plains	warriors	from	northeast	Quon	Tali	had	the
look	of	specters,	their	faces	drawn	with	an	exhaustion	to	match	his	own.
Beyond	the	Weasel	Clan’s	encampment	were	military-issue	tents	and	two
banners—the	Hissari	Guard	who	had	remained	loyal,	and	a	company	whose
standard	Duiker	did	not	recognize,	apart	from	a	central	stylized	crossbow
signifying	Malazan	Marines.
Hands	reached	up	to	help	him	from	the	saddle.	Wickan	youths	and	elders
gathered	around,	a	soothing	murmur	of	voices	rising.	Their	concern	was	for
the	mare.	An	old	man	gripped	the	historian’s	arm.	“We	will	tend	to	this	brave
horse,	stranger.”
“I	think	she’s	finished,”	Duiker	said,	a	wave	of	sorrow	flooding	him.	Gods,
I’m	tired.	The	setting	sun	broke	through	the	clouds	on	the	horizon,	bathing
everything	in	a	golden	glow.
The	old	man	shook	his	head.	“Our	horsewives	are	skilled	in	such	things.
She	shall	run	again.	Now,	an	officer	comes—go.”
A	captain	from	the	unknown	company	of	Marines	approached.	He	was
Falari,	his	beard	and	long,	wavy	hair	a	fiery	red.	“You	rode	in	your	saddle	like
a	Malazan,”	he	said,	“yet	dress	like	a	damned	Dosii.	Explain	yourself	and	be
quick	about	it.”
“Duiker,	Imperial	Historian.	I’ve	been	trying	to	rejoin	this	train	since	it	left
Hissar.”
The	captain’s	eyes	widened.	“A	hundred	and	sixty	leagues—you	expect	me
to	believe	that?	Coltaine	left	Hissar	almost	three	months	ago.”
“I	know.	Where’s	Bult?	Has	Kulp	rejoined	the	Seventh?	And	who	in	Hood’s
name	are	you?”
“Lull,	Captain	of	the	Sialk	Marines,	Cartheron	Wing,	Sahul	Fleet.
Coltaine’s	called	a	briefing—you’d	better	come	along,	Historian.”
They	began	making	their	way	through	the	encampment.	Duiker	was
appalled	at	what	he	saw.	Beyond	the	ragged	entrenchments	of	the	Marines	was


a	broad,	sloping	field,	a	single	roped	road	running	through	it.	On	the	right
were	wagons	in	their	hundreds,	their	beds	crowded	with	wounded.	The	wagon
wheels	were	sunk	deep	in	blood-soaked	mud.	Birds	filled	the	torchlit	air,
voicing	a	frenzied	chorus—it	seemed	they	had	acquired	a	taste	for	blood.	On
the	left	the	churned	field	was	a	solid	mass	of	cattle,	shoulder	to	shoulder,
shifting	in	a	seething	tide	beneath	a	hovering	haze	of	rhizan—the	winged
lizards	feasting	on	the	swarms	of	flies.
Ahead,	the	field	dropped	away	to	a	strip	of	marsh	bridged	by	wooden	slats.
The	swampy	pools	of	water	gleamed	red.	Beyond	it	was	a	broad	humped-back
oxbow	island	on	which,	in	crowded	mayhem,	were	encamped	the	refugees—in
their	tens	of	thousands.
“Hood’s	breath,”	the	historian	muttered,	“are	we	going	to	have	to	walk
through	that?”
The	captain	shook	his	head	and	gestured	toward	a	large	farmhouse	on	the
cattle	side	of	the	ford	road.	“There.	Coltaine’s	own	Crow	Clan	are	guarding	the
south	side,	along	the	hills,	making	sure	none	of	the	livestock	strays	or	gets
plucked	by	the	locals—there’s	a	village	over	on	the	other	side.”
“Did	you	say	Sahul	Fleet?	Why	aren’t	you	with	Admiral	Nok	in	Aren,
Captain?”
The	red-haired	soldier	grimaced.	“Wish	we	were.	We	left	the	fleet	and
pulled	up	in	Sialk	for	repairs—our	transport	was	seventy	years	old,	started
shipping	water	two	hours	out	from	Hissar.	The	mutiny	happened	the	same
night,	so	we	left	the	ship,	gathered	up	what	was	left	of	the	local	Marine
company,	then	escorted	the	exodus	out	of	Sialk.”
The	farmhouse	they	approached	was	a	sturdy,	imposing	structure,	its
inhabitants	having	just	fled	the	arrival	of	Coltaine’s	train.	Its	foundation	was	of
cut	stone,	and	the	walls	were	split	logs	chinked	with	sun-fired	clay.	A	soldier	of
the	Seventh	stood	guard	in	front	of	a	solid	oak	door.	He	nodded	to	Captain
Lull,	then	narrowed	his	eyes	on	Duiker.
“Ignore	the	tribal	garb,”	Lull	told	him,	“this	one’s	ours.	Who’s	here?”
“Everybody	but	the	Fist,	the	Warlocks	and	the	captain	of	the	sappers,	sir.”
“Forget	the	captain,”	Lull	said.	“He	ain’t	bothered	showing	for	one	of	these
yet.”
“Yes	sir.”	The	soldier	thumped	a	gauntleted	fist	on	the	door,	then	pushed	it
open.
Woodsmoke	drifted	out.	Duiker	and	the	captain	stepped	inside.	Bult	and
two	officers	of	the	Seventh	were	crouched	at	the	massive	stone	fireplace	at	the
room’s	far	end,	arguing	over	what	was	obviously	a	blocked	chimney.
Lull	unclipped	his	sword	belt	and	hung	the	weapon	on	a	hook	by	the	door.


“What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	building	a	fire	for?”	he	demanded.	“Ain’t	it	hot
and	stinking	enough	in	here?”	He	waved	at	the	smoke.
One	of	the	Seventh’s	officers	turned	and	Duiker	recognized	him	as	the
soldier	who’d	stood	at	his	side	when	Coltaine	and	his	Wickans	first	landed	in
Hissar.	Their	eyes	met.
“Togg’s	feet,	it’s	the	historian!”
Bult	straightened	and	swung	around.	Scar	and	mouth	both	shifted	into	twin
grins.	“Sormo	was	right—he’d	sniffed	you	on	our	trail	weeks	back.	Welcome,
Duiker!”
His	legs	threatening	to	give	way	under	him,	Duiker	sat	down	in	one	of	the
chairs	pushed	against	a	wall.	“Good	to	see	you,	Uncle,”	he	said,	leaning	back
and	wincing	at	his	aching	muscles.
“We	were	going	to	brew	some	herbal	tea,”	the	Wickan	said,	his	eyes	red
and	watering.	The	old	veteran	had	lost	weight,	his	pallor	gray	with	exhaustion.
“For	the	love	of	clear	lungs	give	it	up,”	Lull	said.	“What’s	keeping	the	Fist
anyway?	I	can’t	wait	to	hear	what	mad	scheme	he’s	concocted	to	get	us	out	of
this	one.”
“He’s	pulled	it	off	this	far,”	Duiker	said.
“Against	one	army,	sure,”	Lull	said,	“but	we’re	facing	two	now—”
The	historian	lifted	his	head.	“Two?”
“The	liberators	of	Guran,”	the	captain	known	to	Duiker	said.	“Can’t	recall
if	we	were	ever	introduced.	I’m	Chenned.	That’s	Captain	Sulmar.”
“You’re	it	for	the	Seventh’s	ranking	officers?”
Chenned	grinned.	“Afraid	so.”
Captain	Sulmar	grunted.	“Not	quite.	There’s	the	man	in	charge	of	the
Seventh’s	sappers.”
“The	one	who	never	shows	at	these	briefings.”
“Aye.”	Sulmar	looked	dour,	but	Duiker	already	suspected	that	the
expression	was	the	captain’s	favorite.	He	was	dark,	short,	appearing	to	have
Kanese	and	Dal	Honese	blood	in	his	ancestry.	His	shoulders	sloped	as	if
carrying	a	lifetime	of	burdens.	“Though	why	the	bastard	thinks	he’s	above	the
rest	of	us	I	don’t	know.	Damned	sappers’ve	been	doing	nothing	but	repairing
wagons	and	collecting	big	chunks	of	stone	and	getting	in	the	cutters’	way.”
“Bult	commands	us	in	the	field,”	Captain	Chenned	said.
“I	am	the	Fist’s	will,”	the	Wickan	veteran	rumbled.
There	was	the	sound	of	horses	pulling	up	outside,	the	jangle	of	tack	and
armor,	then	the	door	thumped	once	and	a	moment	later	swung	open.
Coltaine	looked	unchanged	to	Duiker ’s	eyes,	as	straight	as	a	spear,	his	lean
face	wind-burned	to	the	color	and	consistency	of	leather,	his	black	feather	cape


bellying	in	his	wake	as	he	strode	into	the	center	of	the	large	room.	Behind	him
came	Sormo	E’nath	and	half	a	dozen	Wickan	youths	who	spread	out	to	array
themselves	haphazardly	against	walls	and	pieces	of	furniture.	They	reminded
the	historian	of	a	pack	of	dock	rats	in	Malaz	City,	lords	over	the	small	patch
they	held.
Sormo	walked	up	to	Duiker	and	held	out	both	hands	to	grip	his	wrists.
Their	eyes	met.	“Our	patience	is	rewarded.	Well	done,	Duiker!”
The	boy	looked	infinitely	older,	lifetimes	closing	in	around	his	hooded
eyes.
“Rest	later,	Historian,”	Coltaine	said,	fixing	each	person	in	the	room	with	a
slow,	gauging	study.	“I	made	my	command	clear,”	he	said,	turning	at	last	to
Bult.	“Where	is	this	captain	of	the	Engineers?”
Bult	shrugged.	“Word	was	sent.	He’s	a	hard	man	to	find.”
Coltaine	scowled.	“Captain	Chenned,	your	report.”
“Third	and	Fifth	companies	are	across	the	ford,	digging	in.	The	crossing’s
about	four	hundred	and	twenty	paces,	not	counting	the	shallows	on	both	sides,
which	add	another	twenty	or	so.	Average	depth	is	one	and	a	half	arm-spans.
Width	is	between	four	and	five	most	of	the	way,	a	few	places	narrower,	a	few
wider.	The	bottom’s	about	two	fingers	of	muck	over	a	solid	spine	of	rocks.”
“The	Foolish	Dog	Clan	will	join	your	companies	on	the	other	side,”
Coltaine	said.	“If	the	Guran	forces	try	to	take	that	side	of	the	ford	during	the
crossing,	you	will	stop	them.”	The	Fist	wheeled	to	Captain	Lull.	“You	and	the
Weasel	Clan	shall	guard	this	side	while	the	wounded	and	the	refugees	cross.	I
will	maintain	position	to	the	south,	blocking	the	village	road,	until	the	way	is
clear.”
Captain	Sulmar	cleared	his	throat.	“About	the	order	of	crossing,	Fist.	The
Council	of	Nobles	will	scream—”
“I	care	not.	The	wagons	cross	first,	with	the	wounded.	Then	the	livestock,
then	the	refugees.”
“Perhaps	if	we	split	it	up	more,”	Sulmar	persisted,	sweat	glistening	on	his
flat	brow,	“a	hundred	cattle,	then	a	hundred	nobles—”
“Nobles?”	Bult	asked.	“You	meant	refugees,	surely.”
“Of	course—”
Captain	Lull	sneered	at	Sulmar.	“Trying	to	buy	favors	on	both	sides,	are
you?	And	here	I	thought	you	were	a	soldier	of	the	Seventh.”
Sulmar ’s	face	darkened.
“Splitting	the	crossing	would	be	suicide,”	Chenned	said.
“Aye,”	Bult	growled,	eyeing	Sulmar	as	if	he	was	a	piece	of	rancid	meat.
“We’ve	a	responsibility—”	the	captain	snapped	before	Coltaine	cut	him	off


with	a	snarled	curse.
It	was	enough.	There	was	silence	in	the	room.	From	outside	came	the	creak
of	wagon	wheels.
Bult	grunted.	“Mouthpiece	ain’t	enough.”
The	door	opened	a	moment	later	and	two	men	entered.	The	one	in	the	lead
wore	a	spotless	light-blue	brocaded	coat.	Whatever	muscle	he’d	carried	in
youth	had	given	way	to	fat,	and	that	fat	had	withered	with	three	months	of
desperate	flight.	With	a	face	like	a	wrinkled	leather	bag,	he	nonetheless
projected	a	coddled	air	that	was	now	tinged	with	indignant	hurt.	The	man	a	step
behind	him	also	wore	fine	clothes—although	reduced	by	dust	and	sweat	to	little
more	than	shapeless	sacks	hanging	from	his	lean	frame.	He	was	bald,	the	skin
of	his	scalp	patchy	with	old	sunburn.	He	squinted	at	the	others	with	watery	eyes,
blinking	rapidly.
The	first	nobleman	spoke.	“Word	of	this	gathering	reached	the	Council
belatedly—”
“Unofficially,	too,”	Bult	muttered	dryly.
The	nobleman	continued	with	the	barest	of	pauses.	“Events	such	as	these
are	admittedly	concerned	with	military	discussions	for	the	most	part,	and
Heavens	forbid	the	Council	involve	itself	with	such	matters.	However,	as
representatives	of	the	nearly	thirty	thousand	refugees	now	gathered	here,	we
have	assembled	a	list	of…issues…that	we	would	like	to	present	to	you.”
“You	represent	a	few	thousand	nobles,”	Captain	Lull	said,	“and	as	such
your	own	Hood-damned	interests	and	no	one	else’s,	Nethpara.	Save	the	piety
for	the	latrines.”
Nethpara	did	not	deign	to	acknowledge	the	captain’s	comments.	His	gaze
held	on	Coltaine,	awaiting	a	reply.
The	Fist	gave	no	sign	that	he	was	prepared	to	provide	one.	“Find	the
sappers,	Uncle,”	he	said	to	Bult.	“The	wagons	begin	crossing	in	an	hour.”
The	veteran	Wickan	slowly	nodded.
“We	were	expecting	a	night	of	rest,”	Sulmar	said,	frowning.	“Everyone’s
dead	on	their	feet—”
“An	hour,”	Coltaine	growled.	“The	wagons	with	the	wounded	first.	I	want
at	least	four	hundred	across	by	dawn.”
Nethpara	spoke,	“Please,	Fist,	reconsider	this	order	of	crossing.	While	my
heart	breaks	for	those	wounded	soldiers,	your	responsibility	is	to	protect	the
refugees.	More,	it	will	be	viewed	by	many	in	the	Council	as	a	grievous	insult
that	the	livestock	should	cross	before	unarmed	civilians	of	the	Empire.”
“And	if	we	lose	the	cattle?”	Lull	asked	the	nobleman.	“I	suppose	you	could
spit	the	orphaned	children	over	a	fire.”


Nethpara	smiled	resignedly.	“Ah,	yes,	the	matter	of	the	reduced	rations
numbers	in	our	list	of	concerns.	We	have	it	on	good	account	that	such
reductions	have	not	been	applied	to	the	soldiers	of	the	Seventh.	Perhaps	a	more
balanced	method	of	distribution	could	be	considered?	It	is	so	very	difficult	to
see	the	children	wither	away.”
“Less	meat	on	their	bones,	eh?”	Lull’s	face	was	flushed	with	barely
restrained	rage.	“Without	well-fed	soldiers	between	you	and	the	Tithansi,	your
stomachs	will	be	flopping	around	your	knees	in	no	time.”
“Get	them	out	of	here,”	Coltaine	said.
The	other	nobleman	cleared	his	throat.	“While	Nethpara	speaks	for	the
majority	of	the	Council,	his	views	are	not	unanimously	held.”	Ignoring	the
dark	glare	his	companion	threw	him,	the	old	man	continued.	“I	am	here	out	of
curiosity,	nothing	more.	For	example,	these	wagons	filled	with	wounded—it
seems	there	are	many	more	wounded	than	I	had	imagined:	the	wagons	are
veritably	crowded,	yet	there	are	close	to	three	hundred	and	fifty	of	them.	Two
days	ago	we	were	carrying	seven	hundred	soldiers,	using	perhaps	a	hundred
and	seventy-five	wagons.	Two	small	skirmishes	have	occurred	since	then,	yet
we	now	have	twice	as	many	wagons	being	used	to	transport	the	wounded.
More,	the	sappers	have	been	crawling	all	over	them,	keeping	everyone	away
even	to	the	point	of	discouraging	the	efforts	of	the	cutters.	What,	precisely,	is
being	planned	here?”
There	was	silence.	Duiker	saw	the	two	captains	of	the	Seventh	exchange
puzzled	looks.	Sulmar ’s	baffled	expression	was	almost	comical	as	his	mind
stumbled	back	over	the	details	presented	by	the	old	man.	Only	the	Wickans
seemed	unaffected.
“We	have	spread	the	wounded	out,”	Bult	said.	“Strengthened	the	side	walls
—”
“Ah,	yes,”	the	nobleman	said,	pausing	to	dab	his	watering	eyes	with	a	gray
handkerchief.	“So	I	first	concluded.	Yet	why	do	those	wagons	now	ride	so
heavy	in	the	mud?”
“Is	this	really	necessary,	Tumlit?”	Nethpara	asked	in	exasperation.
“Technical	nuances	may	be	your	fascination,	but	Hood	knows,	no	one	else’s.
We	were	discussing	the	Council’s	position	on	certain	vital	issues.	No
permission	shall	be	accorded	such	digressions—”
“Uncle,”	Coltaine	said.
Grinning,	Bult	grasped	both	noblemen	by	their	arms	and	guided	them
firmly	to	the	door.	“We’ve	a	crossing	to	plan,”	he	said.	“Digressions
unwelcome.”
“Yet	what	of	the	stonecutters	and	the	renderers—”	Tumlit	attempted.


“Out,	the	both	of	you!”	Bult	pushed	them	forward.	Nethpara	was	wise
enough	to	open	the	door	just	in	time	as	the	commander	gave	them	a	final
shove.	The	two	noblemen	stumbled	outside.
At	a	nod	from	Bult,	the	guard	reached	in	and	pulled	the	door	shut.
Lull	rolled	his	shoulders	beneath	the	weight	of	his	chain	shirt.	“Anything
we	should	know,	Fist?”
“I’m	concerned,”	said	Chenned	after	it	was	clear	that	Coltaine	would	not
respond	to	Lull’s	question,	“about	the	depth	of	this	ford.	The	crossing’s	likely
to	be	damned	slow—not	that	there’s	much	of	a	current,	but	with	the	mud
underfoot	and	four	and	a	half	feet	of	water	ain’t	nobody	going	to	cross	fast.
Even	on	a	horse.”	He	glanced	at	Lull.	“A	fighting	withdrawal	won’t	be	pretty.”
“You	all	know	your	positions	and	tasks,”	Coltaine	said.	He	swung	to
Sormo,	eyes	narrowing	as	he	studied	the	warlock,	then	the	children	arrayed
behind	him.	“You’ll	each	have	a	warlock,”	he	said	to	his	officers.	“All
communication	will	be	through	them.	Dismissed.”
Duiker	watched	the	officers	and	the	children	leave,	until	only	Bult,	Sormo
and	Coltaine	remained.
The	warlock	conjured	a	jug	seemingly	from	nowhere	and	passed	it	to	his
Fist.	Coltaine	drank	down	a	mouthful,	then	passed	it	to	Duiker.	The	Fist’s	eyes
glittered.	“Historian,	you’ve	a	story	to	tell	us.	You	were	with	the	Seventh’s
mage,	Kulp.	Rode	out	with	him	only	hours	before	the	uprising.	Sormo	cannot
find	the	man…anywhere.	Dead?”
“I	don’t	know,”	Duiker	said	truthfully.	“We	were	split	up.”	He	downed	a
mouthful	from	the	jug,	then	stared	at	it	in	surprise.	Chilled	ale,	where	did
Sormo	get	this	from?	He	glanced	at	the	warlock.	“You’ve	searched	for	Kulp
through	your	warren?”
The	young	man	crossed	his	arms.	“A	few	times,”	he	replied.	“Not	lately.
The	warrens	have	become…difficult.”
“Lucky	us,”	Bult	said.
“I	don’t	understand.”
Sormo	sighed.	“Recall	our	one	ritual,	Historian?	The	plague	of	D’ivers
and	Soletaken?	They	infest	every	warren	now—at	least	on	this	continent.	All
are	seeking	the	fabled	Path	of	Hands.	I	have	been	forced	to	turn	my	efforts	to
the	old	ways,	the	sorceries	of	the	land,	of	life	spirits	and	totem	beasts.	Our
enemy,	the	High	Mage	Kamist	Reloe,	does	not	possess	such	Elder	knowledge.
So	he	dares	not	unleash	his	magery	against	us.	Not	for	weeks	now.”
“Without	it,”	Coltaine	said,	“Reloe	is	but	a	competent	commander.	Not	a
genius.	His	tactics	are	simplistic.	He	looks	upon	his	massive	army	and	lets	his
confidence	undervalue	the	strength	and	will	of	his	opponents.”


“He	don’t	learn	from	his	defeats,	either,”	Bult	said.
Duiker	held	his	gaze	on	Coltaine.	“Where	do	you	lead	this	train,	Fist?”
“Ubaryd.”
The	historian	blinked.	Two	months	away,	at	least.	“We	still	hold	that	city,
then?”
Silence	stretched.
“You	don’t	know,”	Duiker	said.
“No,”	Bult	said,	retrieving	the	jug	from	the	historian’s	hand	and	taking	a
mouthful.
“Now,	Duiker,”	Coltaine	said,	“tell	us	of	your	journey.”
The	historian	had	no	intention	of	explaining	his	efforts	regarding	Heboric
Light	Touch.	He	sketched	a	tale	that	ran	close	enough	to	the	truth,	however,	to
sound	convincing.	He	and	Kulp	had	ridden	to	a	coastal	town	to	meet	some	old
friends	in	a	Marine	detachment.	Ill	luck	that	it	was	the	night	of	the	Mutiny.
Seeing	an	opportunity	to	pass	through	the	enemy	ranks	in	disguise,	gathering
information	as	he	went,	Duiker	elected	to	ride.	Kulp	had	joined	the	marines	in
an	effort	to	sail	south	to	Hissar ’s	harbor.	As	he	spoke,	the	muted	sounds	of
wagons	lurching	into	motion	on	the	oxbow	island	reached	the	men.
It	was	loud	enough	for	Kamist	Reloe’s	soldiers	to	hear,	and	rightly	guess
that	the	crossing	had	begun.	Duiker	wondered	how	the	Whirlwind	commander
would	respond.
As	the	historian	began	elaborating	on	what	he	had	observed	of	the	enemy,
Coltaine	cut	him	off	with	a	raised	hand.	“If	all	your	narratives	are	as	dull,	it’s	a
wonder	anyone	reads	them,”	he	muttered.
Smiling,	Duiker	leaned	back	and	closed	his	eyes.	“Ah,	Fist,	it’s	the	curse	of
history	that	those	who	should	read	them,	never	do.	Besides,	I	am	tired.”
“Uncle,	find	this	old	man	a	tent	and	a	bedroll,”	Coltaine	said.	“Give	him
two	hours.	I	want	him	up	to	witness	as	much	of	the	crossing	as	possible.	Let	the
events	of	the	next	day	be	written,	lest	history’s	lesson	be	lost	to	all	who
follow.”
“Two	hours?”	Duiker	mumbled.	“I	can’t	guarantee	I	won’t	have	a	blurry
recollection,	assuming	I	survive	to	record	the	tale.”
	
A	hand	shook	his	shoulder.	The	historian	opened	his	eyes.	He	had	fallen	asleep
in	the	chair.	A	blanket	had	been	thrown	across	him,	the	Wickan	wool	foulsmelling	and	dubiously	stained.	A	young	corporal	stood	over	him.
“Sir?	You	are	to	rise	now.”
Every	bone	ached.	Duiker	scowled.	“What’s	your	name,	Corporal?”


“List,	sir.	Fifth	Company,	sir.”
Oh.	Yes,	the	one	who	died	and	died	in	the	mock	engagements.
Only	now	did	the	composite	roar	from	outside	reach	the	historian’s	senses.
He	sat	up.	“Hood’s	breath!	Is	that	a	battle	out	there?”
Corporal	List	shrugged.	“Not	yet.	Just	the	drovers	and	the	livestock.
They’re	crossing.	There’s	been	some	clashes	on	the	other	side—the	Guran
army’s	arrived.	But	we’re	holding.”
Duiker	flung	the	blanket	aside	and	stood	up.	List	handed	him	a	battered	tin
cup.
“Careful,	sir,	it’s	hot.”
The	historian	stared	down	at	the	dark-brown	liquid.	“What	is	it?”
“Don’t	know,	sir.	Something	Wickan.”
He	took	a	sip,	wincing	at	the	scalding,	bitter	taste.	“Where	is	Coltaine?
Something	I	forgot	to	tell	him	last	night.”
“He	rides	with	his	Crow	Clan.”
“What	time	is	it?”
“Almost	dawn.”
Almost	dawn,	and	the	cattle	are	only	starting	to	cross?	He	felt	himself
becoming	alert,	glanced	down	again	at	the	drink	and	took	another	sip.	“This
one	of	Sormo’s	brews?	It’s	got	my	nerves	jumping.”
“Some	old	woman	handed	it	to	me,	sir.	Are	you	ready?”
“You’ve	been	assigned	to	me,	List?”
“Yes,	sir.”
“Your	first	task	then,	Corporal,	is	to	direct	me	to	the	latrine.”
They	stepped	outside	to	mayhem.	Cattle	covered	the	oxbow	island,	a	mass
of	humped	backs	slowly	edging	forward	to	the	shouts	of	drovers.	The	other
side	of	the	Sekala	was	obscured	in	clouds	of	dust	that	had	begun	drifting	over
the	river.
“This	way,	sir.”	List	gestured	toward	a	trench	behind	the	farmhouse.
“Dispense	with	the	‘sirs,’	”	Duiker	said	as	they	headed	toward	the	latrine.
“And	find	me	a	rider.	Those	soldiers	on	the	other	side	have	some	serious
trouble	heading	their	way.”
“Sir?”
Duiker	stood	at	the	edge	of	the	trench.	He	hitched	back	his	telaba,	then
paused.	“There’s	blood	in	this	trench.”
“Yes,	sir.	What	was	that	about	the	other	side	of	the	river,	sir?”
“Heard	from	some	Tithansi	outriders,”	the	historian	said	as	he	relieved	his
bladder.	“The	Semk	have	come	south.	They’ll	be	on	the	Guran	side,	I’d	guess.
That	tribe	has	sorcerers,	and	their	warriors	put	the	fear	in	the	Tithansi,	so	you


can	expect	they’re	a	nasty	bunch.	I’d	planned	on	mentioning	it	last	night	but
forgot.”
A	troop	of	horsewarriors	was	passing	in	front	of	the	house	at	that	moment.
Corporal	List	raced	back	to	intercept	them.
Duiker	finished	and	rejoined	his	aide.	He	slowed.	The	troop’s	standard	was
instantly	recognizable.	List	was	breathlessly	conveying	the	message	to	the
commander.	The	historian	shook	off	his	hesitation	and	approached.
“Baria	Setral.”
The	Red	Blade	commander ’s	eyes	flicked	to	Duiker,	went	cold.	Beside	him
his	brother	Mesker	growled	wordlessly.
“Seems	your	luck’s	held,”	the	historian	said.
“And	yours,”	Baria	rumbled.	“But	not	that	white-haired	mage.	Too	bad.	I
was	looking	forward	to	hanging	his	hide	from	our	banner.	This	word	of	the
Semk—from	you?”
“From	the	Tithansi.”
Mesker	barked	a	laugh	and	grinned.	“Shared	their	tents	on	the	way,	did
you?”	He	faced	his	brother.	“It’s	a	lie.”
Duiker	sighed.	“What	would	be	the	point	of	that?”
“We	ride	to	support	the	Seventh’s	advance	picket,”	Baria	said.	“We	shall
pass	on	your	warning.”
“It’s	a	trap—”
“Shut	up,	brother,”	Baria	said,	his	eyes	still	on	Duiker.	“A	warning	is	just
that.	Not	a	lie,	not	a	trap.	If	Semk	show,	we	will	be	ready.	If	not,	then	the	tale
was	false.	Nothing	surrendered.”
“Thank	you,	Commander,”	Duiker	said.	“We’re	on	the	same	side,	after	all.”
“Better	late	than	never,”	Baria	growled.	A	hint	of	a	smile	showed	in	his
oiled	beard.	“Historian.”	He	raised	a	gauntleted	fist,	opened	it.	At	the	gesture
the	troop	of	Red	Blades	resumed	their	canter	to	the	ford,	Mesker	alone
flinging	a	dark	glare	Duiker ’s	way	as	he	rode	past.
The	pale	light	of	dawn	edged	its	way	into	the	valley.	Above	the	Sekala	an
impenetrable	cloud	of	dust	eased	crossways	to	the	faint	breeze,	descending	on
the	ford	itself,	then	staying	there.	The	entire	crossing	was	obscured.	Duiker
grunted.	“Nice	touch,	that.”
“Sormo,”	Corporal	List	said.	“It’s	said	he’s	awakened	the	spirits	of	the	land
and	the	air.	From	a	sleep	of	centuries,	for	even	the	tribes	have	left	those	ways
behind.	Sometimes	you	can…smell	them.”
The	historian	glanced	at	the	young	man.	“Smell?”
“Like	when	you	flip	a	big	rock	over.	The	scent	that	comes	up.	Cool,
musty.”	He	shrugged.	“Like	that.”


An	image	of	List	as	a	boy—only	a	few	years	younger	than	he	was	now—
flashed	into	Duiker ’s	mind.	Flipping	rocks.	A	world	to	explore,	the	cocoon	of
peace.	He	smiled.	“I	know	that	smell,	List.	Tell	me,	these	spirits—how	strong
are	they?”
“Sormo	says	they’re	pleased.	Eager	to	play.”
“A	spirit’s	game	is	a	man’s	nightmare.	Well,	let’s	hope	they	take	their	play
seriously.”
The	mass	of	refugees—Duiker	saw	as	he	resumed	his	study	of	the	situation
—had	been	pushed	off	the	oxbow	island,	across	the	ford	road,	to	the	south
slope	and	swampy	bed	of	the	old	oxbow	channel.	There	were	too	many	for	the
space	provided,	and	he	saw	the	far	edge	of	the	crowd	creeping	onto	the	hills
beyond.	A	few	had	taken	to	the	river,	south	of	the	ford,	and	were	moving
slowly	out	into	the	current.
“Who	is	in	charge	of	the	refugees?”
“Elements	of	the	Crow	Clan.	Coltaine	has	his	Wickans	oversee	them—the
refugees	are	as	scared	of	them	as	they	are	of	the	Apocalypse.”
And	the	Wickans	won’t	be	bought,	either.
“There,	sir!”	List	pointed	to	the	east.
The	enemy	positions	that	Duiker	had	ridden	between	the	night	before	had
begun	moving.	The	Sialk	and	Hissari	infantry	were	on	the	right,	Hissari
lancers	on	the	left	and	Tithansi	horsewarriors	down	the	center.	The	two
mounted	forces	surged	forward	toward	the	Weasel	Clan’s	defenses.	Mounted
Wickan	bowmen	accompanied	by	lancers	rode	out	to	meet	them.	But	the	thrust
was	a	feint,	the	Hissari	and	Tithansi	wheeling	west	before	locking	antlers.
Their	commanders	had	called	it	too	fine,	however,	as	the	Wickan	bowmen	had
edged	into	range.	Arrows	flew.	Riders	and	horses	fell.
Then	it	was	the	turn	of	the	Wickan	lancers	to	bolt	forward	in	a	sudden
charge	and	their	enemy	quickly	withdrew	back	to	their	original	positions.
Duiker	watched	in	surprise	as	the	lancers	pulled	up,	a	number	of	them
dismounting	as	their	bowmen	kin	covered	them.	Wounded	enemy	were
summarily	despatched,	scalps	and	equipment	taken.	Ropes	appeared.	Minutes
later	the	Wickans	rode	back	to	their	defenses,	dragging	the	horse	carcasses
with	them,	along	with	a	handful	of	wounded	mounts	they	had	managed	to
round	up.
“The	Wickans	feed	themselves,”	List	said.	“They’ll	use	the	hides,	too.	And
the	bones,	and	the	tails	and	mane,	and	the	teeth,	and	the—”
“Got	it,”	Duiker	cut	in.
The	enemy	infantry	continued	their	slow	march.	The	Hissari	and	Tithansi
horsewarriors	had	recovered	and	now	made	a	slower,	more	cautious	approach.


“There’s	an	old	wall	on	the	island,”	List	said.	“We	could	climb	it	and	get	a
better	view	of	all	sides.	If	you	don’t	mind	walking	on	the	backs	of	cattle	to	get
there,	that	is.	It’s	not	as	hard	as	it	sounds—you	just	have	to	keep	moving.”
Duiker	raised	an	eyebrow.
“Honest,	sir.”
“All	right,	Corporal.	Lead	the	way.”
They	took	the	roped	road	westward	toward	the	ford.	The	old	channel	of	the
oxbow	was	bridged	by	wooden	slats,	bolstered	with	new	supports	placed	by	the
Seventh’s	sappers.	This	avenue	was	maintained	to	allow	for	the	movement	back
and	forth	of	mounted	messengers,	but,	as	everywhere	else,	chaos	reigned.
Duiker	held	close	in	List’s	wake	as	the	corporal	weaved	and	danced	his	way
down	to	the	bridge.	Beyond	it	rose	the	hump	of	the	island	and	thousands	of
cattle.
“Where	did	this	herd	come	from?”	the	historian	asked	as	they	reached	the
slatted	crossing.
“Purchased,	for	the	most	part,”	List	replied.	“Coltaine	and	his	clans	laid
claim	to	land	outside	Hissar,	then	started	buying	up	cattle,	horses,	oxen,	mules,
goats—just	about	anything	on	four	legs.”
“When	did	all	this	happen?”
“About	the	same	day	they	arrived,”	the	corporal	said.	“When	the	uprising
came,	most	of	the	Foolish	Dog	Clan	was	with	the	herds—the	Tithansi	tribes
thought	to	snatch	the	livestock	and	got	their	noses	bloodied	instead.”
As	they	neared	the	trailing	end	of	the	herd	the	noise	rose	to	a	roar	with
shouting	drovers,	the	bark	of	cattle-dogs—solidly	muscled,	half-wild	beasts
born	and	bred	on	the	Wickan	Plains—the	lowing	of	the	cattle	and	the	ceaseless
rumbling	thunder	of	their	hooves.	The	dust	cloud	engulfing	the	river	was
impenetrable.
Duiker ’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	seething	mass	ahead.	“Not	sure	about	your
idea,	Corporal—these	beasts	look	jumpy.	We’re	likely	to	get	crushed	in
seconds	flat.”
A	shout	from	behind	caught	their	attention.	A	young	Wickan	girl	was
riding	toward	them.
“Nether,”	List	said.
Something	in	his	tone	pulled	Duiker	around.	The	lad	was	pale	under	his
helmet.
The	girl,	no	more	than	nine	or	ten,	halted	her	horse	before	them.	She	was
dark,	her	eyes	like	black	liquid,	her	hair	cut	bristly	short.	The	historian
recalled	seeing	her	among	Sormo’s	charges	the	night	before.	“You	seek	the
wall	as	vantage,”	she	said.	“I	will	clear	you	a	path.”


List	nodded.
“There	is	aspected	magic	on	the	other	side,”	she	said,	eyes	on	Duiker.	“A
lone	god’s	warren,	no	D’ivers,	no	Soletaken.	A	tribe’s	god.”
“Semk,”	the	historian	said.	“The	Red	Blades	are	carrying	word.”	He	fell
silent	as	he	realized	the	import	of	her	words,	the	significance	of	her	presence
at	the	meeting	last	night.	One	of	the	warlocks	reborn.	Sormo	leads	a	clan	of
children	empowered	by	lifetimes.
“I	go	to	face	them.	The	spirit	of	the	land	is	older	than	any	god.”	She	guided
her	horse	around	the	two	men,	then	loosed	a	piercing	cry.	A	clear	avenue
began	to	take	shape,	animals	pushing	away	to	either	side	and	moaning	in	fear.
Nether	rode	down	that	aisle.	After	a	moment	List	and	Duiker	followed,
jogging	to	keep	up.	As	soon	as	they	trod	on	the	path	they	could	feel	the	earth
shivering	beneath	their	boots—not	the	deep	reverberations	of	countless
hooves,	but	something	more	intense,	muscular.	As	if	we	stride	the	spine	of	an
enormous	serpent…the	land	awakened,	the	land	eager	to	show	its	power.
Fifty	paces	ahead	the	ridge	of	a	weathered,	vine-cloaked	wall	appeared.
Squat	and	thick,	it	was	evidently	the	remnant	of	an	ancient	fortification,	rising
over	a	man’s	height	and	clear	of	the	cattle.	The	path	that	Nether	had	created
brushed	one	edge	of	it,	then	continued	on	down	to	the	river.
The	girl	rode	on	without	glancing	back.	Moments	later	List	and	Duiker
reached	the	stone	edifice	and	clambered	up	on	its	ragged	but	wide	top.
“Look	south,”	List	said,	pointing.
Dust	rose	in	a	gold	haze	from	the	line	of	hills	beyond	the	heaving	mass	of
refugees.
“Coltaine	and	his	Crows	are	in	a	fight,”	List	said.
Duiker	nodded.	“There’s	a	village	on	the	other	side	of	those	hills,	right?”
“Yes,	sir.	L’enbarl,	it’s	called.	The	scrap	looks	to	be	on	the	road	linking	it
to	the	ford.	We	haven’t	seen	the	Sialk	cavalry,	so	it’s	likely	Reloe	sent	them
around	to	try	and	take	our	flank.	Like	Coltaine	always	says,	the	man’s
predictable.”
Duiker	faced	north.	The	other	side	of	the	island	consisted	of	marsh	grasses
filling	the	old	oxbow	channel.	The	far	side	was	a	narrow	stand	of	dead
leadwood	trees,	then	a	broad	slope	leading	to	a	steep-sided	hill.	The	regularity
of	that	hill	suggested	that	it	was	a	tel.	Commanding	its	flat	plateau	was	an	army,
weapons	and	armor	glinting	in	the	morning	light.	Heavy	infantry.	Dark
banners	rose	amidst	large	tents	behind	two	front-line	legions	of	Tithansi
archers.	The	archers	had	begun	moving	down	the	slope.
“That’s	Kamist	Reloe	and	his	hand-picked	elites,”	List	said.	“He’s	yet	to	use
them.”


To	the	east	the	feints	and	probes	between	the	Weasel	Clan’s	horsewarriors
and	their	Tithansi	and	Hissari	counterparts	continued,	while	the	Sialk	and
Hissar	infantry	steadily	closed	the	distance	to	the	Wickan	defenses.	Behind
these	legions,	the	peasant	army	swirled	in	restless	motion.
“If	that	horde	decides	to	charge,”	Duiker	said,	“our	lines	won’t	hold.”
“They’ll	charge,”	List	affirmed	grimly.	“If	we’re	lucky,	they’ll	wait	too
long	and	give	us	room	to	fall	back.”
“That’s	the	kind	of	risk	Hood	loves,”	the	historian	muttered.
“The	ground	under	them	whispers	fear.	They	won’t	be	moving	for	a
while.”
“Do	I	see	control	on	all	sides,	or	the	illusion	of	control?”
List’s	face	twisted	slightly.	“Sometimes	the	two	are	one	and	the	same.	In
terms	of	their	effect,	I	mean.	The	only	difference—or	so	Coltaine	says—is	that
when	you	bloody	the	real	thing,	it	absorbs	the	damage,	while	the	other
shatters.”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“Who	would	have	imagined	a	Wickan	warleader	to
think	of	war	in	such…alchemical	terms?	And	you,	Corporal,	has	he	made	you
his	protégé?”
The	young	man	looked	dour.	“I	kept	dying	in	the	war	games.	Gave	me	lots
of	time	to	stand	around	and	eavesdrop.”
The	cattle	were	moving	more	quickly	now,	plunging	into	the	stationary
clouds	of	dust	masking	the	ford.	If	anything,	to	Duiker ’s	eyes	the	heaving	flow
was	too	quick.	“Four	and	a	half	feet	deep,	over	four	hundred	paces…those
animals	should	be	crossing	at	a	crawl.	More,	how	to	hold	the	herds	to	the
shallows?	Those	dogs	will	have	to	swim,	the	drovers	will	get	pushed	off	to	the
deeps,	and	with	all	that	dust,	who	can	see	a	damned	thing	down	there?”
List	said	nothing.
Thunder	sounded	on	the	other	side	of	the	ford,	followed	by	rapid
percussive	sounds.	Columns	of	smoke	pillared	upward	and	the	air	was
suddenly	febrile.	Sorcery.	The	Semk	wizard-priests.	A	lone	child	to	oppose	them.
“This	is	all	taking	too	long,”	Duiker	snapped.	“Why	in	Hood’s	name	did	it	take
all	night	just	to	get	the	wagons	across?	It	will	be	dark	before	the	refugees	even
move.”
“They’re	closing,”	List	said.	His	face	was	covered	in	dust-smeared	sweat.
To	the	east	the	Sialk	and	Hissar	infantry	had	made	contact	with	the	outer
defenses.	Arrows	swarmed	the	air.	Weasel	Clan	horsewarriors	battled	on	two
sides—against	Tithansi	lancers	at	the	front,	and	pike-wielding	infantry	on	their
right	flank.	They	were	struggling	to	withdraw.	Holding	the	earthen	defenses
were	Captain	Lull’s	marines,	Wickan	archers	and	a	scattering	of	auxiliary


units.	They	were	yielding	the	first	breastworks	to	the	hardened	infantry.	The
horde	had	begun	to	boil	on	the	slopes	beyond.
To	the	north	the	two	legions	of	Tithansi	archers	were	rushing	forward	for
the	cover	of	the	leadwoods.	From	there	they	would	start	killing	cattle.	There
was	no	one	to	challenge	them.
“And	so	it	shatters,”	Duiker	said.
“You’re	as	bad	as	Reloe.	Sir.”
“What	do	you	mean?”
“Too	quick	to	count	us	out.	This	isn’t	our	first	engagement.”
Faint	shrieks	drifted	across	from	the	leadwoods.	Duiker	squinted	through
the	dust.	The	Tithansi	archers	were	screaming,	thrashing	about,	vanishing	from
sight	in	the	high	marsh	grasses	beneath	the	skeletal	trees.	“What	in	Hood’s
name	is	happening	to	those	men?”
“An	old,	thirsty	spirit,	sir.	Sormo	promised	it	a	day	of	warm	blood.	One
last	day.	Before	it	dies	or	ceases	or	whatever	it	is	spirits	do	when	they	go.”
The	archers	had	routed,	their	panicked	flight	taking	them	back	to	the	slope
beneath	the	tel.
“There	go	the	last	of	them,”	List	said.
For	a	moment	Duiker	thought	the	corporal	referred	to	the	Tithansi	archers,
then	he	realized,	with	a	start,	that	the	cattle	were	gone.	He	wheeled	to	face	the
ford,	cursing	at	the	tumbling	clouds	of	dust.	“Too	fast,”	he	muttered.
The	refugees	had	begun	moving,	streamers	of	humanity	flowing	across	the
old	oxbow	channel	and	onto	the	island.	There	was	no	semblance	of	order,	no
way	to	control	almost	thirty	thousand	exhausted	and	terrified	people.	And	they
were	about	to	sweep	over	the	wall	where	Duiker	and	the	corporal	stood.
“We	should	move,”	List	said.
The	historian	nodded.	“Where?”
“Uh,	east?”
To	where	the	Weasel	Clan	now	covered	the	marines	and	other	footmen	as
they	relinquished	one	earthen	rampart	after	another,	the	soldiers	falling	back
so	quickly	that	they	would	be	at	the	slatted	bridge	in	minutes.	And	then?	Up
against	this	mob	of	shrieking	refugees.	Oh,	Hood!	What	now?
List	seemed	to	read	his	mind.	“They’ll	hold	at	the	bridge,”	he	asserted.
“They	have	to.	Come	on!”
Their	flight	took	them	across	the	front	of	the	leading	edge	of	the	refugees.
The	awakened	land	trembled	beneath	them,	steam	rising	with	a	reek	like	muddy
sweat.	Here	and	there	along	the	east	edge	of	the	island,	the	ground	bulged	and
split	open.	Duiker ’s	headlong	sprint	faltered.	Shapes	were	clambering	from	the
broken	earth,	skeletal	beneath	arcane,	pitted	and	encrusted	bronze	armor,


battered	helms	with	antlers	on	their	heads	and	long	red-stained	hair	hanging	in
matted	tufts	down	past	their	shoulders.	The	sound	that	came	from	them	chilled
Duiker ’s	soul.	Laughter.	Joyous	laughter.	Hood,	are	you	twisting	in	affronted
rage	right	now?
“Nil,”	List	gasped.	“Nether ’s	twin—that	boy	over	there.	Sormo	said	that
this	place	has	seen	battle	before—said	this	oxbow	island	wasn’t	natural…oh,
Queen	of	Dreams,	yet	another	Wickan	nightmare!”
The	ancient	warriors,	voicing	blood-curdling	glee,	were	now	breaking
free	of	the	earth	all	along	the	eastern	end	of	the	island.	On	Duiker ’s	right	and
behind	him,	refugees	screamed	with	terror,	their	headlong	flight	staggering	to
a	halt	as	the	horrific	creatures	rose	among	them.
The	Weasel	Clan	and	the	footmen	had	contracted	to	a	solid	line	this	side	of
the	bridge	and	channel.	That	line	twitched	and	shuffled	as	the	raised	warriors
pushed	through	their	ranks,	single-edged	swords	rising—the	weapons	almost
shapeless	beneath	mineral	accretions—as	they	marched	into	the	milling	mass
of	the	Hissar	and	Sialk	infantry.	The	laughter	had	become	singing,	a	guttural
battle	chant.
Duiker	and	List	found	themselves	in	a	cleared	area	pocked	with
smoldering,	broken	earth,	the	refugees	behind	them	withdrawing	as	they
pushed	toward	the	ford,	the	rearguard	before	them	finally	able	to	draw	breath
as	the	undead	warriors	waded	into	their	foe.
The	boy	Nil,	Nether ’s	twin,	rode	a	huge	roan	horse,	wheeling	back	and
forth	along	the	line,	in	one	hand	a	feather-bedecked,	knobbed	club	of	some
sort	which	he	waved	over	his	head.	The	undead	warriors	that	passed	near	him
bellowed	and	shook	their	weapons	in	salute—or	gratitude.	Like	them,	the	boy
was	laughing.
Reloe’s	veteran	infantry	broke	before	the	onslaught	and	fell	back	to	collide
with	the	horde	that	had	now	checked	its	own	advance.
“How	can	this	be?”	Duiker	asked.	“Hood’s	Warren—this	is	necromantic,
not—”
“Maybe	they’re	not	true	undead,”	List	suggested.	“Maybe	the	island’s	spirit
simply	uses	them—”
The	historian	shook	his	head.	“Not	entirely.	Hear	that	laughter—that	song
—do	you	hear	the	language?	These	warriors	have	had	their	souls	awakened.
Those	souls	must	have	remained,	held	by	the	spirit,	never	released	to	Hood.
We’ll	pay	for	this,	Corporal.	Every	one	of	us.”
Other	figures	were	emerging	from	the	ground	on	all	sides:	women,
children,	dogs.	Many	of	the	dogs	still	wore	leather	harnesses,	still	dragged	the
remnants	of	travois.	The	women	held	their	children	to	their	bosoms,	gripping


the	bone	hafts	of	wide-bladed	bronze	knives	they	then	plunged	into	those
children.	An	ancient,	final	tragedy	in	frozen	tableau,	as	a	whole	tribe	faced
slaughter	at	the	hands	of	some	unknown	foe—how	many	thousands	of	years
ago	did	this	happen,	how	long	have	these	trapped	souls	held	on	to	this
horrifying,	heart-rending	moment?	And	now?	Are	they	doomed	to	repeat	that
eternal	anguish?	“Hood	bless	these,”	Duiker	whispered,	“please.	Take	them.
Take	them	now.”
The	women	were	locked	into	that	fatal	pattern.	He	watched	them	thrusting
daggers	home,	watched	the	children	jerk	and	writhe,	listened	to	their	shortlived	wails.	He	watched	as	the	women	then	fell,	heads	crumpling	to	unseen
weapons—to	memories	only	they	could	see…and	feel.	The	remorseless
executions	went	on,	and	on.
Nil	had	ceased	his	frenzied	ride	and	now	guided	his	roan	at	a	walk	toward
the	ghastly	scene.	The	boy	was	sickly	pale	beneath	his	tanned	skin.	Something
whispered	in	Duiker ’s	mind	that	the	young	warlock	was	seeing	more	than
anyone	else—rather,	anyone	else	who	was	alive.	The	boy’s	head	moved,
tracking	ghost-killers.	He	flinched	at	every	death-dealing	blow.
The	historian,	his	legs	as	awkward	as	wooden	crutches	beneath	him,
stumbled	toward	the	boy.	He	reached	up	and	took	the	reins	from	the	warlock’s
motionless	hands.	“Nil,”	he	said	quietly.	“What	do	you	see?”
The	boy	blinked,	then	slowly	looked	down	to	meet	Duiker ’s	gaze.	“What?”
“You	can	see.	Who	kills	them?”
“Who?”	He	ran	a	trembling	hand	across	his	brow.	“Kin.	The	clan	split,	two
rivals	for	the	Antlered	Chair.	Kin,	Historian.	Cousins,	brothers,	uncles…”
Duiker	felt	something	breaking	inside	him	at	Nil’s	words.	Half-formed
expectations,	held	by	desperate	need,	had	insisted	that	the	killers	were…Jaghut,
Forkrul	Assail,	K’Chain	Che’Malle…someone…someone	other.	“No,”	he	said.
Nil’s	eyes,	young	yet	ancient,	held	his	as	the	warlock	nodded.	“Kin.	This
has	been	mirrored.	Among	the	Wick.	A	generation	ago.	Mirrored.”
“But	no	longer.”	Please.
“No	longer.”	Nil	managed	a	small	wry	smile.	“The	Emperor,	as	our
enemy,	united	us.	By	laughing	at	our	small	battles,	our	pointless	feuds.
Laughing	and	more:	sneering.	He	shamed	us	with	contempt,	Historian.	When
he	met	with	Coltaine,	our	alliance	was	already	breaking	apart.	Kellanved
mocked.	He	said	he	need	only	sit	back	and	watch	to	see	the	end	of	our
rebellion.	With	his	words	he	branded	our	souls.	With	his	words	and	his	offer
of	unity	he	bestowed	on	us	wisdom.	With	his	words	we	knelt	before	him	in	true
gratitude,	accepted	what	he	offered	us	and	gave	him	our	loyalty.	You	once
wondered	how	the	Emperor	won	our	hearts.	Now	you	know.”


The	enemy	resolve	stiffened	as	the	corroded	weapons	of	the	ancient
warriors	shattered	and	snapped	against	modern	iron.	Skeletal,	desiccated
bodies	proved	as	unequal	to	the	task.	Pieces	flew,	figures	stumbled,	then	fell,
too	broken	to	rise	again.
“Must	they	live	through	their	defeat	a	second	time?”	Duiker	asked.
Nil	shrugged.	“They	purchased	us	a	spell	to	breathe,	to	steady	ourselves.
Remember,	Historian,	had	these	warriors	won	the	first	time,	they	would	have
done	to	their	victims	what	was	done	to	their	own	families.”	The	child	warlock
slowly	shook	his	head.	“There	is	little	good	in	people.	Little	good.”
The	sentiment	jarred	coming	from	one	so	young.	Some	old	man’s	voice
comes	from	the	boy,	remember	that.	“Yet	it	can	be	found,”	Duiker	countered.
“All	the	more	precious	for	its	rarity.”
Nil	reclaimed	the	reins.	“You’ll	find	none	here,	Historian,”	he	said,	his
voice	as	hard	as	the	words.	“We	are	known	by	our	madness—this,	the	island’s
ancient	spirit	shows	us.	The	memories	that	survive	are	all	horror,	our	deeds	so
dark	as	to	sear	the	land	itself.	Keep	your	eyes	open,”	he	added,	spinning	his
mount	around	to	face	the	battle	that	had	resumed	at	the	slatted	bridge,	“we’re
not	finished	yet.”
Duiker	said	nothing,	watching	the	child	warlock	ride	toward	the	line.
Impossibly	to	the	historian’s	mind,	the	path	before	the	refugees	suddenly
cleared,	and	they	began	crossing.	He	looked	into	the	sky.	The	sun	edged	toward
noon.	Somehow,	it	had	felt	much	later.	He	glared	back	at	the	dust-shrouded
river—the	crossing	would	be	a	terrible	thing,	the	deep	water	perilous	on	both
sides,	the	screaming	of	children,	the	old	men	and	women,	too	weak	to	manage,
slipping	away	in	the	current,	vanishing	beneath	the	surface.	Dust	and	horror,
the	swirling	water	absorbing	every	echo.
Crow	Clan	horsewarriors	rode	around	the	edges	of	the	milling,	fearful
thousands,	as	if	tending	a	vast	herd	of	mindless	beasts.	With	long	blunted	poles,
they	kept	the	crowds	from	spreading	and	spilling	outward,	swinging	them
down	to	crack	shins	and	knees,	stabbing	at	faces.	The	refugees	flinched	back	en
masse	wherever	they	rode.
“Historian,”	List	said	at	his	side.	“We	should	find	horses.”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“Not	yet.	This	rearguard	defense	is	now	the	heart
of	the	battle—I’m	not	leaving.	I	have	to	witness	it—”
“Understood,	sir.	But	when	they	do	withdraw,	they’ll	be	collected	by	the
Wickans,	an	extra	soldier	for	each	rider.	Coltaine	and	the	rest	of	his	clan
should	be	joining	them	soon.	They’ll	hold	this	side	of	the	ford	to	allow	the
rearguard	to	cross.	If	we	don’t	want	our	heads	on	spears,	sir,	we’d	better	find
some	horses.”


After	a	moment	Duiker	nodded.	“Do	it,	then.”
“Yes,	sir.”	The	young	soldier	headed	off.
The	defensive	line	along	the	old	channel	writhed	like	a	serpent.	The
enemy’s	regular	infantry,	having	destroyed	the	last	of	the	skeletal	warriors,
now	pushed	hard.	Bolstered	by	the	steady	nerves	and	efficient	brutality	of	the
marines	among	them,	the	auxiliaries	continued	to	drive	the	regulars	back.	The
Weasel	Clan	horsewarriors	had	split	into	smaller	troops,	mixed	bowmen	and
lancers.	Wherever	the	line	seemed	about	to	buckle,	they	rode	to	support.
The	warlock	Nil	commanded	them,	his	shouted	orders	piercing	through
the	clash	and	roar	of	battle.	He	seemed	able	to	sense	weakening	elements
before	such	faltering	was	physically	reflected.	His	magically	enhanced	sense
of	timing	was	all	that	kept	the	line	from	collapsing.
To	the	north	Kamist	Reloe	had	finally	begun	moving	with	his	elite	force.
Archers	to	the	fore,	the	heavy	infantry	marched	in	ranks	behind	the	Tithansi
screen.	They	would	not	challenge	the	leadwoods	and	marsh,	however,	slowly
wheeling	eastward	to	skirt	its	deadly	edge.
The	peasant	army	now	pushed	behind	the	Sialk	and	Hissar	infantry,	the
weight	of	tens	of	thousands	building	to	an	unstoppable	tide.
Duiker	looked	anxiously	to	the	south.	Where	was	Coltaine?	Dust	and	now
smoke	rose	from	the	hills.	The	village	of	L’enbarl	was	burning,	and	the	battle
still	raged—if	Coltaine	and	the	bulk	of	his	Crow	Clan	could	not	disengage
soon,	they	would	be	trapped	on	this	side	of	the	river.	The	historian	noted	he
was	not	alone	in	his	trepid	attention.	Nil’s	head	jerked	in	that	direction	again
and	again.	Then	Duiker	finally	realized	that	the	young	warlock	was	in
communication	with	his	fellow	warlocks—the	ones	in	Coltaine’s	company.
Control…and	the	illusion	of	control.
List	rode	up,	leading	Duiker ’s	own	mare.	The	corporal	did	not	dismount	as
he	passed	the	reins	over.	The	historian	swung	himself	into	the	familiar	worn
saddle,	whispering	a	word	of	gratitude	to	the	Wickan	elders	who	had	so
lovingly	attended	to	his	horse.	The	animal	was	fit	and	full	of	life.	Now	if	they
could	manage	the	same	with	me.
The	rearguard	began	yielding	ground	once	again,	relinquishing	the	old
channel	as	the	enemy	pushed	relentlessly.	Kamist	Reloe’s	heavy	infantry	was
perhaps	five	minutes	from	striking	the	north	flank.
“This	isn’t	looking	good,”	Duiker	said.
Corporal	List	adjusted	his	helmet	strap	and	said	nothing,	but	the	historian
saw	the	tremble	in	the	lad’s	hands.
Weasel	Clan	riders	were	streaming	from	the	line	now,	burdened	with
wounded	soldiers.	They	rode	past	Duiker ’s	position,	blood-	and	dust-streaked


wraiths,	their	tattooed	faces	and	bodies	making	them	look	demonic.	The
historian’s	gaze	followed	them	as	they	headed	toward	the	seething	refugees.
The	mass	of	civilians	on	this	side	of	the	river	had	shrunk	considerably	since	he
last	looked.	Too	fast.	They	must	have	panicked	at	the	ford.	Thousands	drowning
in	the	deeps.	A	disaster.
“We	should	withdraw	now,	sir,”	List	said.
The	rearguard	was	crumbling,	the	stream	of	wounded	growing,	the	horses
thundering	past	were	each	carrying	two,	sometimes	three	fighters.	The	line
contracted,	the	flanking	edges	drawing	in	toward	the	center.	In	minutes	they
would	be	encircled.	Then	slaughtered.	He	saw	Captain	Lull	bellowing
commands	to	form	a	square.	Soldiers	still	on	their	feet	were	pitifully	few.
In	one	of	those	mysterious	vagaries	of	battle,	the	Sialk	and	Hissar	infantry
paused,	there	on	the	threshold	of	complete	victory.	Off	to	one	side	the	heavy
infantry	arrived,	two	rectangular	blocks	fifty	soldiers	across	and	twenty	deep,
bands	of	archers	now	in	between	those	blocks	and	to	either	side.	For	a	moment,
stillness	and	silence	rose	like	a	barrier	in	the	open	space	between	the	two
forces.
The	Weasel	Clan	continued	plucking	footmen.	Lull’s	square	was
disintegrating	from	this	side,	becoming	a	three-sided,	hollow	ring.
“The	last	of	the	refugees	are	in	the	water,”	Lull	said,	his	breath	coming
faster	than	before,	his	hands	twitching	as	they	gripped	the	reins.	“We	have	to
ride—”
“Where	in	Hood’s	name	is	Coltaine?”	Duiker	demanded.
From	a	dozen	paces	away	Nil	reined	in	amidst	a	rolling	cloud	of	dust.	“We
wait	no	longer!	Thus	the	Fist	commands!	Ride,	Historian!”
Horsemen	gathered	the	last	of	Lull’s	troops	even	as,	with	an	air-trembling
roar,	the	enemy	ranks	rushed	in.	Avenues	opened	between	the	infantry,
releasing	at	last	the	frenzied	rage	of	the	peasant	horde.
“Sir!”	List’s	cry	was	a	frantic	plea.
Cursing,	Duiker	wheeled	his	mount	and	drove	his	heels	into	the	mare’s
flanks.	They	bolted	after	the	Wickan	horsewarriors.
Now	unleashed,	the	horde	poured	in	pursuit,	eager	to	claim	this	side	of	the
ford.	The	Sialk	and	Hissar	infantry	and	Kamist’s	heavy	infantry	let	them	go
unescorted,	maintaining	their	discipline.
Wickan	riders	were	plunging	into	the	dust	clouds	ahead	at	full	gallop.	At
that	speed	they	would	clash	with	the	rear	elements	of	the	refugees	who	were
still	in	the	midst	of	crossing.	Then,	when	the	peasant	army	hit,	the	river	would
run	red.	Duiker	reined	in,	shouting	to	List.	The	corporal	glanced	back,	his
expression	one	of	shock.	He	sawed	the	reins,	his	horse	skidding	and	slipping


on	the	muddy	slope.
“Historian!”
“We	ride	south,	along	the	bank!”	Duiker	yelled.	“We	swim	the	horses—
ahead	lies	chaos	and	death!”
List	was	fiercely	shaking	his	head	in	denial.
Without	awaiting	a	reply,	the	historian	swung	his	mount	to	the	left.	If	they
rode	hard,	they	would	clear	the	island	before	the	horde	reached	the	ford’s
bank.	He	drove	his	heels	into	the	mare’s	flanks.	The	animal	lunged	forward.
“Historian!”
“Ride	or	die,	damn	you!”
A	hundred	paces	along	the	shore	was	the	sunken	mouth	of	the	old	oxbow,	a
thick,	verdant	swath	of	cattails	miraculously	untouched	by	the	day’s	events.
Beyond	it	rose	the	hills	shielding	L’enbarl.	If	Coltaine	extricates	himself,	he’ll
do	the	smart	thing—straight	into	the	river.	Even	if	the	current	carries	them
down	to	the	ford	itself,	they’ll	have	a	head	start.	A	few	hundred	drowned	is	a
damned	sight	better	than	three	thousand	slaughtered	trying	to	retake	this	side
of	the	ford.
As	if	to	defy	his	every	thought,	Wickan	horsewarriors	appeared,	sweeping
down	the	opposite	slope.	Coltaine	rode	at	the	head,	his	black	feather	cape	a
single	splayed	wing	behind	him.	Lances	were	lowered,	flanking	bowmen
nocking	arrows	on	the	fly.	The	charge	was	coming	directly	for	Duiker.
The	historian,	half	disbelieving,	dragged	the	mare	around	into	a
staggering	about-face.	“Oh	Hood,	might	as	well	join	this	doomed	charge!”	He
saw	List	doing	the	same,	the	lad’s	face	white	as	death	beneath	his	dusty	helm.
They	would	strike	the	peasant	army’s	flank	like	a	knife	blade	plunging	into
the	side	of	a	whale.	And	about	as	effective.	Suicide!	Even	if	we	make	the	ford,
we’ll	flounder.	Horses	will	fall,	men	will	drown,	and	the	peasants	will	descend
to	reap	slaughter.	Still	they	rode	on.	Moments	before	contact,	he	saw	Weasel
Clan	horsewarriors	reappear	from	the	dust	cloud.	Counterattack.	More
madness!
Crow	riders	swept	to	either	side	of	the	historian,	the	momentum	of	their
charge	at	its	peak.	Duiker	turned	his	head	at	Coltaine’s	fierce,	joyous	shout.
Arrows	whizzed	past.	The	flank	of	the	peasant	army	contracted,	flinched
back.	When	the	Wickans	struck,	it	was	into	a	solidly	packed	mass	of	humanity.
Yet,	at	the	last	moment,	the	Crow	Clan	riders	wheeled	toward	the	river	and
rode	alongside	the	flank.	Not	a	knife	plunge.	A	saber	slash.
Peasants	died.	Others	fell	in	their	frantic	retreat	and	were	trampled	by	the
frenzied	horses.	The	entire	flank	bloomed	red	as	the	savage	Wickan	blades
traveled	its	length.


The	peasants	holding	the	ford’s	landing	were	crumpling	beneath	the
Weasel	Clan’s	counterattack.	Then	the	lead	riders	of	the	Crow	Clan	struck	the
north	edge.
The	peasant	line	seemed	to	melt	away	before	Duiker ’s	eyes.	He	now	rode
with	the	Crow	Clan,	horse	shoulders	hammering	his	legs	to	either	side.	Blood
rained	from	raised	weapons,	spattering	his	face	and	hands.	Ahead,	the	Weasel
Clan’s	riders	parted,	covering	their	kin’s	wild	charge	straight	into	the	clouds
of	dust.
Now	the	mayhem	truly	begins.	For	all	the	glory	of	Coltaine’s	charge,	ahead
lay	the	river.	Wounded	soldiers,	refugees	and	Hood	knew	what	else.
The	historian	snatched	what	he	felt	would	be	his	last	breath	a	moment
before	plunging	into	the	sunlit	dust.
His	mare	splashed	water,	yet	barely	slowed.	The	way	before	him	stretched
clear,	a	swirling,	strangely	choppy	sweep	of	muddy	water.	Other	riders	were
barely	visible	farther	ahead,	their	horses	at	full	gallop.	Duiker	could	feel	the
unyielding,	solid	impact	his	mare’s	hooves	made	as	they	rode	on.	There	was
not	four	and	a	half	feet	of	river	beneath	them,	but	half	that.	And	the	hooves
struck	stone,	not	mud.	He	did	not	understand.
Corporal	List	appeared	alongside	the	historian,	as	well	as	a	straggling
squad	of	Crow	horsewarriors.	One	of	the	Wickans	grinned.	“Coltaine’s	road—
his	warriors	fly	like	ghosts	across	the	river!”
Various	comments	the	night	before	returned	to	Duiker.	Tumlit—that
nobleman’s	observations.	Reinforced	wagons	apparently	overloaded	with
wounded.	Stone	cutters	and	Engineers.	The	wagons	crossing	first	and	taking
most	of	the	night	to	do	so.	The	wounded	were	laid	atop	the	stone	blocks.	The
damned	Engineers	had	built	a	road!
It	still	seemed	impossible,	yet	the	evidence	was	there	beneath	him	as	he
rode.	Poles	had	been	raised	to	either	side,	strung	with	rope	made	from	Tithansi
hair	to	mark	the	edges.	A	little	over	ten	feet	wide—what	was	surrendered	in
width	was	made	up	for	with	the	relative	swiftness	of	crossing	the	more	than
four	hundred	paces	to	the	other	side.	The	ford’s	depth	was	no	more	than	two
and	a	third	feet	now,	and	had	clearly	proved	manageable	for	both	livestock	and
refugees.
The	dust	thinned	ahead	and	the	historian	realized	they	were	approaching
the	river ’s	west	side.	The	thunder	of	sorcery	reached	him.	This	battle’s	far	from
over.	We’ve	temporarily	outrun	one	army,	only	to	charge	headlong	into	another.
All	this,	just	to	get	crushed	between	two	rocks?
They	reached	the	shallows	and	a	moment	later	rode	upslope	twenty	strides,
emerging	from	the	last	drifting	shrouds	of	dust.


Duiker	shouted	in	alarm,	he	and	his	companions	frantically	sawing	their
reins.	Directly	in	front	of	them	was	a	squad	of	soldiers—Engineers—who	had
been	running	at	full	speed	toward	the	ford’s	landing.	The	sappers	now	scattered
with	foul	curses,	ducking	and	dodging	around	the	stumbling,	skidding	horses.
One,	a	solid,	mountainous	man	with	a	sun-burnished,	smooth-shaven,	flat	face,
flung	his	battered	helm	off,	revealing	a	bald	pate,	and	threw	the	iron	skullcap	at
the	nearest	Wickan	rider—missing	the	warrior ’s	head	by	scant	inches.	“Clear
out,	you	flyblown	piles	of	gizzards!	We	got	work	to	do!”
“Yeah!”	another	growled,	limping	in	circles	after	a	hoof	had	landed	full	on
a	foot.	“Go	fight	or	something!	We	got	a	plug	to	pull!”
Ignoring	their	demands,	Duiker	spun	the	mare	around	to	face	the	ford.
Whatever	sorcery	had	held	the	dust	over	the	water	was	now	gone.	The	clouds
had	already	drifted	fifty	paces	downstream.	And	Coltaine’s	Road	was	a	mass	of
armed,	screaming	peasants.
The	second	sapper	who’d	spoken	now	scrambled	to	a	shallow	pit
overlooking	the	muddy	landing.
“Hold	off	there,	Cuttle!”	the	big	man	commanded,	his	eyes	on	the	surging
thousands—the	lead	elements	now	in	the	middle	of	the	crossing.	The	man
anchored	his	huge	hands	on	his	hips,	glowering	and	seemingly	unaware	of	the
rapt	attention	his	squad	held	on	him,	as	well	as	that	from	Duiker,	List	and	the
half-dozen	Wickan	horsemen.	“Got	to	maximize,”	the	man	rumbled.	“Bastard
Wickans	ain’t	the	only	ones	who	know	about	timing.”
The	horde’s	vanguard,	glittering	with	weapons,	looking	like	the	ironfanged	maw	of	a	giant	snake,	was	three-quarters	across.	The	historian	could
make	out	individual	faces,	the	expressions	of	fear	and	murderous	intent	that
make	up	the	faces	of	battle.	A	glance	behind	him	showed	rising	columns	of
smoke	and	the	flash	of	sorcery,	concentrated	on	the	right	flank	of	the	Seventh’s
defensive	positions.	The	faint	screeching	Semk	war	cry	drifted	from	that	flank,
a	sound	like	claws	scraping	taut	skin.	A	fierce	melee	was	underway	at	the	first
earthworks.
“All	right,	Cuttle,”	the	big	man	drawled.	“Yank	the	hair.”
Duiker	swung	back	to	see	the	sapper	in	the	pit	raise	both	hands,	gripping	a
long,	black	cord	that	trailed	down	into	the	water.	Cuttle’s	dirt-smeared	face
twisted	into	a	fierce	grimace,	his	eyes	squeezing	shut.	Then	he	pulled.	The	cord
went	slack.
Nothing	happened.
The	historian	chanced	to	look	the	big	man’s	way.	He	had	a	finger	stuck	in
each	ear,	though	his	eyes	remained	open	and	fixed	on	the	river.	Realization
struck	Duiker	even	as	List	cried,	“Sir!”


The	ground	seemed	to	drop	an	inch	under	them.	The	water	on	the	ford	rose
up,	humped,	blurred,	the	hump	seeming	to	roll	with	lightning	swiftness	down
the	submerged	road’s	length.	The	peasants	on	the	river	simply	vanished.	Then
reappeared	a	heart-beat	later—even	as	the	concussion	struck	everyone	on
shore	with	a	wind	like	a	god’s	fist—in	blossoms	of	red	and	pink	and	yellow,
fragments	of	flesh	and	bone,	limbs,	hair,	tufts	of	cloth,	all	lifting	higher	and
higher	as	the	water	exploded	up	and	out	in	a	muddy,	ghastly	mist.
Duiker ’s	mare	backstepped,	head	tossing.	The	sound	had	been	deafening.
The	world	shivered	on	all	sides.	A	Wickan	rider	had	tumbled	from	his	saddle
and	now	writhed	on	the	ground,	hands	held	to	his	ears.
The	river	began	to	fall	back,	horridly	churned	with	bodies	and	pieces	of
bodies,	steam	twisting	away	on	sudden	gusts	of	wind.	The	giant	snake’s	head
was	gone.	Obliterated.	As	was	another	third	of	its	length—all	who	had	been	in
the	water	were	gone.
Though	he	now	stood	close	by,	the	big	man’s	words	sounded	faint	and
distant	to	Duiker ’s	ringing	ears	as	he	said,	“Fifty-five	cussers—what	the
Seventh’s	been	hoarding	for	years.	That	ford’s	now	a	trench.	Ha.”	Then	his
satisfied	expression	drained	away.	“Hood’s	toes,	we’re	back	to	digging	with
shovels.”
A	hand	plucked	the	historian’s	sleeve.	List	leaned	close	and	whispered,
“Where	to	now,	sir?”
The	historian	looked	downstream	at	the	twisting	eddies,	red-stained	and
full	of	human	flotsam.	For	a	moment	he	could	not	comprehend	the	corporal’s
question.	Where	to?	Nowhere	that’s	good,	no	place	where	giving	pause	to
slaughter	will	yield	something	other	than	despair.
“Sir?”
“To	the	melee,	Corporal.	We	see	this	through.”
The	swift	arrival	of	Coltaine	and	his	Crow	horsewarriors	to	strike	at	the
west	flank	of	the	Tithansi	lancers	on	this	side	of	the	river	had	turned	the	tide	of
battle.	As	they	rode	toward	the	engagement	at	the	earthworks,	Duiker	and	List
could	see	the	Tithansi	crumbling,	exposing	the	Semk	footmen	to	the	mounted
Wickan	bowmen.	Arrows	raked	through	the	wildhaired	Semk	fighters.
At	the	center	stood	the	bulk	of	the	Seventh’s	infantry,	holding	at	bay	the
frenzied	efforts	of	the	Semk,	while	a	hundred	paces	to	the	north,	the	Guran
heavy	infantry	still	waited	to	close	with	the	hated	Malazans.	Their	commander
was	evidently	having	second	thoughts.	Kamist	Reloe	and	his	army	were
trapped—for	this	battle	at	least—on	the	other	side	of	the	river.	Apart	from	the
battered	rearguard	marines	and	the	Weasel	Clan,	Coltaine’s	force	was
relatively	intact.


Five	hundred	paces	farther	west,	out	on	a	broad,	stony	plain,	the	Weasel
Clan	pursued	remnants	of	Guran	cavalry.
Duiker	saw	a	knot	of	color	amidst	the	Seventh,	gold	and	red—Baria	Setral
and	his	Red	Blades,	in	the	heart	of	the	fighting.	The	Semk	seemed	eager	to
close	on	the	Malzan	lapdogs,	and	were	paying	in	blood	for	their	desire.
Nonetheless,	Setral’s	troop	looked	at	no	more	than	half	strength—less	than
twenty	men.
“I	want	to	get	closer,”	Duiker	announced.
“Yes,	sir,”	List	said.	He	pointed.	“That	rise	there—it’ll	put	us	in	bow	range
though,	sir.”
“I’ll	take	that	risk.”
They	rode	toward	the	Seventh.	The	company	standard	stood	solitary	and
dust-streaked	on	a	low	hill	just	behind	the	line.	Three	gray-haired	veterans
guarded	it—Semk	bodies	strewn	on	the	slope	indicated	that	the	hill	had	been
hotly	contested	earlier	in	the	day.	The	veterans	had	been	in	the	fight,	and	all
bore	minor	wounds.
As	the	historian	and	the	corporal	rode	to	their	position,	Duiker	saw	that	the
three	men	crouched	around	a	fallen	comrade.	Tears	had	clawed	crooked	trails
down	their	dusty	cheeks.	Arriving,	the	historian	slowly	dismounted.
“You’ve	a	story	here,	soldiers,”	he	said,	pitching	his	voice	low	to	reach
through	the	clangor	and	shouts	of	the	struggle	thirty	paces	north	of	them.
One	of	the	veterans	glanced	up,	squinting.	“The	old	Emperor ’s	historian,
by	Hood’s	grin!	Saw	you	in	Falar,	or	maybe	the	Wickan	Plains—”
“Both.	The	standard	was	challenged,	I	see.	You	lost	a	friend	in	defending
it.”
The	man	blinked,	then	glanced	around	until	he	focused	on	the	Seventh’s
standard.	The	pikeshaft	leaned	to	one	side,	its	tattered	banner	bleached	into
ghost	colors	by	the	sun.	“Hood’s	breath,”	the	man	growled.	“Think	we’d	fight
to	save	a	piece	of	cloth	on	a	pole?”	He	gestured	at	the	body	his	friends	knelt
around.	“Nordo	took	two	arrows.	We	held	off	a	squad	of	Semk	so	he	could	die
in	his	own	time.	Those	bastard	tribesmen	snatch	wounded	enemies	and	keep
’em	alive	so’s	they	can	torture	’em.	Nordo	wasn’t	gettin’	none	of	that.”
Duiker	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	“Is	that	how	you	want	the	tale	told,
soldier?”
The	man	squinted	some	more,	then	he	nodded.	“Just	like	that,	Historian.	We
ain’t	just	a	Malazan	army	any	more.	We’re	Coltaine’s.”
“But	he’s	a	Fist.”
“He’s	a	cold-blooded	lizard.”	The	man	then	grinned.	“But	he’s	all	ours.”
Smiling,	Duiker	twisted	in	his	saddle	and	studied	the	battle	at	the	line.	Some


threshold	of	spirit	had	been	crossed.	The	Semk	were	broken.	Dying	by	the
score	with	three	legions	of	supposed	allies	sitting	motionless	on	the	slopes
behind	them,	they	had	carved	out	the	last	of	zeal	in	the	holy	cause—at	least	for
this	engagement.	There	would	be	curses	and	hot	accusations	in	the	enemy
camps	this	coming	night,	Duiker	knew.	Good,	let	them	crack	apart	of	their	own
accord.
Once	again,	it	was	not	to	be	the	Whirlwind’s	day.
	
Coltaine	did	not	let	his	victorious	army	rest	as	the	afternoon’s	light	sank	in	the
earth.	New	fortifications	were	raised,	others	reinforced.	Trenches	were	dug,
pickets	established.	The	refugees	were	led	out	onto	the	stony	plain	west	of	the
ford,	their	tents	arranged	in	blocks	with	wide	avenues	in	between.	Wagons
loaded	with	wounded	soldiers	were	moved	into	those	avenues,	and	the	cutters
and	healers	set	to	work.
The	livestock	were	driven	south,	to	the	grassy	slopes	of	the	Barl	Hills—a
weathered,	humped	range	of	bleached	rock	and	twisted	jackpine.	Drovers
supported	by	riders	of	the	Foolish	Dog	Clan	guarded	the	herds.
In	the	Fist’s	command	tent,	as	the	sun	dropped	beneath	the	horizon,
Coltaine	held	a	debriefing.
Duiker,	with	the	now	ever-present	Corporal	List	standing	at	his	shoulder,
sat	wearily	in	a	camp	chair,	listening	to	the	commanders	make	their	reports
with	a	dismay	that	slowly	numbed.	Lull	had	lost	fully	half	his	marines,	and	the
auxiliaries	that	had	supported	him	had	fared	even	worse.	The	Weasel	Clan	had
been	mauled	during	the	withdrawal—a	shortage	of	horses	was	now	their	main
concern.	From	the	Seventh,	captains	Chenned	and	Sulmar	recounted	a
seemingly	endless	litany	of	wounded	and	dead.	It	seemed	that	their	officers	and
squad	sergeants,	in	particular,	had	taken	heavy	losses.	The	pressure	against	the
defensive	line	had	been	enormous,	especially	early	in	the	day—before	support
had	arrived	in	the	form	of	the	Red	Blades	and	the	Foolish	Dog	Clan.	The	tale
of	Baria	Setral	and	his	company’s	fall	rode	many	a	breath.	They	had	fought
with	demonic	ferocity,	holding	the	front	ranks,	purchasing	with	their	lives	a
crucial	period	in	which	the	infantry	was	able	to	regroup.	The	Red	Blades	had
shown	valor,	enough	to	earn	comment	from	Coltaine	himself.
Sormo	had	lost	two	of	his	warlock	children	in	the	struggle	against	the
Semk	wizard-priests,	although	both	Nil	and	Nether	survived.	“We	were	lucky,”
he	said	after	reporting	the	deaths	in	a	cool,	dispassionate	tone.	“The	Semk	god
is	a	vicious	Ascendant.	It	uses	the	wizards	to	channel	its	rage,	without	regard
for	their	mortal	flesh.	Those	unable	to	withstand	their	god’s	power	simply


disintegrated.”
“That’ll	cut	their	numbers	down,”	Lull	said	with	a	grunt.
“The	god	simply	chooses	more,”	Sormo	said.	More	and	more	he	had
begun	to	look	like	an	old	man,	even	in	his	gestures.	Duiker	watched	the	youth
close	his	eyes	and	press	his	knuckles	against	them.	“More	extreme	measures
must	be	taken.”
The	others	were	silent,	until	Chenned	gave	voice	to	everyone’s	uncertainty.
“What	does	that	mean,	Warlock?”
Bult	said,	“Words	carried	on	breath	can	be	heard…by	a	vengeful,	paranoid
god.	If	no	alternative	exists,	Sormo,	then	proceed.”
The	warlock	slowly	nodded.
After	a	moment	Bult	sighed	loudly,	pausing	to	drink	from	a	bladder	before
speaking.	“Kamist	Reloe	is	heading	north.	He’ll	cross	at	the	river	mouth—
Sekala	town	has	a	stone	bridge.	But	to	do	so	means	he	loses	ten,	maybe	eleven
days.”
“The	Guran	infantry	will	stay	with	us,”	Sulmar	said.	“As	will	the	Semk.
They	need	not	stand	toe	to	toe	to	do	us	damage.	Exhaustion	will	claim	us
before	much	longer.”
Bult’s	wide	mouth	pressed	into	a	straight	line.	“Coltaine	had	proclaimed
tomorrow	a	day	of	rest.	Cattle	will	be	slaughtered,	the	enemy’s	dead	horses
butchered	and	cooked.	Weapons	and	armor	repaired.”
Duiker	lifted	his	head.	“Do	we	still	march	for	Ubaryd?”
No	one	answered.
The	historian	studied	the	commanders.	He	saw	nothing	hopeful	in	their
faces.	“The	city	has	fallen.”
“So	claimed	a	Tithansi	warleader,”	Lull	said.	“He	had	nothing	to	lose	in
telling	us	since	he	was	dying	anyway.	Nether	said	he	spoke	truth.	The	Malazan
fleet	has	fled	Ubaryd.	Even	now	tens	of	thousands	of	refugees	are	being	driven
northeast.”
“More	squalling	nobles	to	perch	on	Coltaine’s	lap,”	Chenned	said	with	a
sneer.
“This	is	impossible,”	Duiker	said.	“If	we	cannot	go	to	Ubaryd,	what	other
city	lies	open	to	us?”
“There	is	but	one,”	Bult	said.	“Aren.”
Duiker	sat	straight.	“Madness!	Two	hundred	leagues!”
“And	another	third,	to	be	precise,”	Lull	said,	baring	his	teeth.
“Is	Pormqual	counterattacking?	Is	he	marching	north	to	meet	us	halfway?
Is	he	even	aware	that	we	exist?”
Bult’s	gaze	held	steady	on	the	historian.	“Aware?	I	would	think	so,


Historian.	Will	he	march	out	from	Aren?	Counterattack?”	The	veteran
shrugged.
“I	saw	a	company	of	Engineers	on	my	way	here,”	Lull	said.	“They	were
weeping,	one	and	all.”
Chenned	asked,	“Why?	Is	their	invisible	commander	lying	on	the	bottom
of	the	Sekala	with	a	mouthful	of	mud?”
Lull	shook	his	head.	“They’re	out	of	cussers	now.	Just	a	crate	or	two	of
sharpers	and	burners.	You’d	think	every	one	of	their	mothers	had	just
croaked.”
Coltaine	finally	spoke.	“They	did	well.”
Bult	nodded.	“Aye.	Wish	I’d	been	there	to	see	the	road	go	up.”
“We	were,”	Duiker	said.	“Victory	tastes	sweetest	in	the	absence	of	haunting
memories,	Bult.	Savor	it.”
	
In	his	tent,	Duiker	awoke	to	a	soft,	small	hand	on	his	shoulder.	He	opened	his
eyes	to	darkness.
“Historian,”	a	voice	said.
“Nether?	What	hour	is	this?	How	long	have	I	slept?”
“Perhaps	two,”	she	answered.	“Coltaine	commands	you	to	come	with	me.
Now.”
Duiker	sat	up.	He’d	been	too	tired	to	do	more	than	simply	lay	his	bedroll
down	on	the	floor.	The	blankets	were	sodden	with	sweat	and	condensation.	He
shivered	with	chill.	“What	has	happened?”	he	asked.
“Nothing,	yet.	You	are	to	witness.	Quickly	now,	Historian.	We	have	little
time.”
He	stepped	outside	to	a	camp	quietly	moaning	in	the	deepest	hour	of
darkness	before	the	arrival	of	false	dawn.	Thousands	of	voices	made	the
dreadful,	gelid	sound.	Wounds	troubling	exhausted	sleep,	the	soft	cries	of
soldiers	beyond	the	arts	of	the	healers	and	cutters,	the	lowing	of	livestock,
shifting	hooves	underscoring	the	chorus	in	a	restless,	rumbling	beat.
Somewhere	out	on	the	plain	north	of	them	rose	faint	wailing,	wives	and
mothers	grieving	the	dead.
As	he	followed	Nether ’s	spry,	wool-cloaked	form	down	the	twisting	lanes
of	the	Wickan	encampment,	the	historian	was	drawn	into	sorrow-laden
thoughts.	The	dead	were	gone	through	Hood’s	Gate.	The	living	were	left	with
the	pain	of	their	passage.	Duiker	had	seen	many	peoples	as	Imperial	Historian,
yet	among	them	not	one	in	his	recollection	did	not	possess	a	ritual	of	grief.
For	all	our	personal	gods,	Hood	alone	embraces	us	all,	in	a	thousand	guises.


When	the	breath	from	his	gates	brushes	close,	we	ever	give	voice	to	drive	back
that	eternal	silence.	Tonight,	we	hear	the	Semk.	And	the	Tithansi.	Uncluttered
rituals.	Who	needs	temples	and	priests	to	chain	and	guide	the	expression	of	loss
and	dismay—when	all	is	sacred?
“Nether,	why	do	the	Wickans	not	grieve	this	night?”
She	half	turned	as	she	continued	walking.	“Coltaine	forbids	it.”
“Why?”
“For	that	answer	you	must	ask	him.	We	have	not	mourned	our	losses	since
this	journey	began.”
Duiker	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	said,	“And	how	do	you	and
the	others	in	the	three	clans	feel	about	that,	Nether?”
“Coltaine	commands.	We	obey.”
They	came	to	the	edge	of	the	Wickan	encampment.	Beyond	the	last	tent
stretched	a	flat	killing	strip,	perhaps	twenty	paces	wide,	then	the	freshly	raised
wicker	walls	of	the	pickets,	with	their	long	bamboo	spikes	thrust	through	them,
the	points	outward	and	at	the	height	of	a	horse’s	chest.	Mounted	warriors	of	the
Weasel	Clan	patrolled	along	them,	eyes	on	the	dark,	stone-studded	plain
beyond.
In	the	killing	strip	stood	two	figures,	one	tall,	the	other	short,	both	lean	as
specters.	Nether	led	Duiker	up	to	them.
Sormo.	Nil.	“Are	you,”	the	historian	asked	the	tall	warlock,	“all	that
remain?	You	told	Coltaine	you	lost	but	two	yesterday.”
Sormo	E’nath	nodded.	“The	others	rest	their	young	flesh.	A	dozen
horsewives	tend	to	the	mounts	and	a	handful	of	healers	tend	to	wounded
soldiers.	We	three	are	the	strongest,	thus	we	are	here.”	The	warlock	stepped
forward.	There	was	a	febrile	air	about	him,	and	in	his	voice	was	a	tone	that
asked	for	something	more	than	the	historian	could	give.	“Duiker,	whose	eyes
met	mine	across	the	Whirlwind	ghosts	in	the	trader	camp,	listen	to	my	words.
You	will	hear	the	fear—every	solemn	chime.	You	are	no	stranger	to	that	dark
chorus.	Know,	then,	that	this	night	I	had	doubts.”
“Warlock,”	Duiker	said	quietly,	as	Nether	stepped	forward	to	take	position
on	Sormo’s	right—turning	so	that	all	three	now	faced	the	historian—“what	is
happening	here?”
In	answer	Sormo	E’nath	raised	his	hands.
The	scene	shifted	around	them.	He	saw	moraines	and	scree	slopes	rising
behind	the	three	warlocks,	the	dark	sky	seeming	to	throb	its	blackness
overhead.	The	ground	was	wet	and	cold	beneath	Duiker ’s	moccasins.	He
looked	down	to	see	glittering	sheets	of	brittle	ice	covering	puddles	of	muddy
water.	The	crazed	patterns	in	the	ice	reflected	myriad	colors	from	a	sourceless


light.
A	breath	of	cold	wind	made	him	turn	around.	A	guttural	bark	of	surprise
was	loosed	from	his	throat.	The	historian	stepped	back,	his	being	filling	with
horror.	Rotten,	blood-smeared	ice	formed	a	shattered	cliff	before	him,	the
tumbled,	jagged	blocks	at	its	foot	less	than	ten	paces	away.	The	cliff	rose,
sloping	back	until	the	streaked	face	vanished	within	mists.
The	ice	was	full	of	bodies,	human-shaped	figures,	twisted	and	flesh-torn.
Organs	and	entrails	were	spilled	out	at	the	base	as	if	from	a	giant	abattoir.
Slowly	melting	chunks	of	blood-soaked	ice	created	a	lake	from	which	the	body
parts	jutted	or	rose	in	islands	humped	and	slick.
Exposed	flesh	had	begun	to	putrefy	into	misshapen	gelatinous	mounds,
through	which	bones	could	faintly	be	seen.
Sormo	spoke	behind	him.	“He	is	within	it,	but	close.”
“Who?”
“The	Semk	god.	An	Ascendant	from	long	ago.	Unable	to	challenge	the
sorcery,	he	was	devoured	with	the	others.	Yet	he	did	not	die.	Can	you	feel	his
anger,	Historian?”
“I	think	I’m	beyond	feeling.	What	sorcery	did	this?”
“Jaghut.	To	stem	the	tides	of	invading	humans,	they	raised	ice.	Sometimes
swiftly,	sometimes	slowly,	as	their	strategy	dictated.	In	places	it	swallowed
entire	continents,	obliterating	all	that	once	stood	upon	them.	Forkrul	Assail
civilizations,	the	vast	mechanisms	and	edifices	of	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle,	and
of	course	the	squalid	huts	of	those	who	would	one	day	inherit	the	world.	The
highest	of	Omtose	Phellack,	these	rituals	never	die,	Historian.	They	rise,
subside,	and	rise	yet	again.	Even	now,	one	is	born	anew	on	a	distant	land,	and
those	rivers	of	ice	fill	my	dreams,	for	they	are	destined	to	create	vast	upheaval,
and	death	in	numbers	unimaginable.”
Sormo’s	words	held	a	timbre	of	antiquity,	the	remorseless	cold	of	ages
folding	over	one	another,	again	and	again,	until	it	seemed	to	Duiker	that	every
rock,	every	cliff,	every	mountain	moved	in	eternal	motion,	like	mindless
leviathans.	Shivers	raced	the	blood	in	his	veins	until	he	trembled
uncontrollably.
“Think	of	all	such	ice	holds,”	Sormo	went	on.	“Looters	of	tombs	find
riches,	but	wise	hunters	of	power	seek…ice.”
Nether	spoke.	“They	have	begun	assembling.”
Duiker	finally	turned	away	from	the	ravaged,	flesh-marred	ice.	Shapeless
swirls	and	pulses	of	energy	now	surrounded	the	three	warlocks.	Some	waxed
bright	and	energetic,	while	others	blossomed	faintly	in	fitful	rhythm.
“The	spirits	of	the	land,”	Sormo	said.


Nil	fidgeted	in	his	robes,	as	if	barely	restraining	the	desire	to	dance.	A	dark
smile	showed	on	his	child-face.	“The	flesh	of	an	Ascendant	holds	much	power.
They	all	hunger	for	a	piece.	With	this	gift	we	bring	them,	further	service	is
bound.”
“Historian.”	Sormo	stepped	closer,	reaching	out	one	thin	hand	until	it
rested	on	Duiker ’s	shoulder.	“How	thin	is	this	slice	of	mercy?	All	that	anger…
brought	to	an	end.	Torn	apart,	each	fragment	consumed.	Not	death,	but	a	kind
of	dissipation—”
“And	what	of	the	Semk	wizard-priests?”
The	warlock	winced.	“Knowledge,	and	with	it	great	pain.	We	must	carve
the	heart	from	the	Semk.	Yet	that	heart	is	worse	than	stone.	How	it	uses	the
mortal	flesh…”	He	shook	his	head.	“Coltaine	commands.”
“You	obey.”
Sormo	nodded.
Duiker	said	nothing	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	he	sighed.	“I	have	heard
your	doubts,	Warlock.”
Sormo’s	expression	showed	an	almost	fierce	relief.	“Cover	your	eyes,
then,	Historian.	This	will	be…messy.”
Behind	Duiker,	the	ice	erupted	with	an	explosive	roar.	Cold	crimson	rain
struck	the	historian	in	a	rolling	wall,	staggering	him.
A	savage	shriek	sounded	behind	him.
The	spirits	of	the	land	bolted	forward,	spinning	and	tumbling	past	Duiker.
He	whirled	in	time	to	see	a	figure—flesh	rotted	black,	arms	long	as	an	ape’s—
clawing	its	way	out	of	the	dirty,	steaming	slush.
The	spirits	reached	it,	swarming	over	the	figure.	It	managed	a	single,
piercing	shriek	before	it	was	torn	to	pieces.
	
The	eastern	horizon	was	a	streak	of	red	when	they	returned	to	the	killing	strip.
The	camp	was	already	awakening,	the	demands	of	existence	pressing	once
more	upon	ragged,	weary	souls.	Wagon-mounted	forges	were	being	stoked,
fresh	hides	scraped,	leather	stretched	and	punched	or	boiled	in	huge	blackened
pots.	Despite	a	lifetime	spent	in	cities,	the	Malazan	refugees	were	learning	to
carry	their	city	with	them—or	at	least	those	meager	remnants	vital	to	survival.
Duiker	and	the	three	warlocks	were	sodden	with	old	blood	and	clinging
fragments	of	flesh.	Their	reappearance	on	the	plain	was	enough	to	announce
their	success	and	the	Wickans	raised	a	wail	that	ran	through	each	clan’s
encampment,	the	sound	as	much	sorrowful	as	triumphant,	a	fitting	dirge	to
announce	the	fall	of	a	god.


From	the	distant	Semk	camps	to	the	north,	the	rituals	of	mourning	had
fallen	off,	leaving	naught	but	ominous	silence.
Dew	steamed	from	the	earth,	and	the	historian	could	feel—as	he	crossed
the	killing	strip	back	toward	the	Wickan	encampment—a	darker	reverberation
to	the	power	of	the	spirits	of	the	land.	The	three	warlocks	parted	from	him	as
they	approached	the	camp’s	edge.
The	reverberating	power	found	a	voice	only	moments	later,	as	every	dog
in	the	vast	camp	began	howling.	The	cries	were	strangely	lifeless	and	cold	as
iron,	filling	the	air	like	a	promise.
Duiker	slowed	his	walk.	A	promise.	An	age	of	devouring	ice—
“Historian!”
He	looked	up	to	see	three	men	approach.	He	recognized	two	of	them,
Nethpara	and	Tumlit.	The	fellow	nobleman	accompanying	them	was	short	and
round,	burdened	beneath	a	gold-brocaded	cloak	that	would	have	looked
imposing	on	a	man	twice	his	height	and	half	his	girth.	As	it	was,	the	effect	held
more	pathos	than	anything	else.
Nethpara	was	breathless	as	he	hurried	up,	his	slack	folds	of	flesh	quivering
and	mud-spattered.	“Imperial	Historian	Duiker,	we	wish	to	speak	with	you.”
Lack	of	sleep—and	a	host	of	other	things—had	drawn	Duiker ’s	tolerance
short,	but	he	managed	to	keep	his	tone	calm.	“I	suggest	another	time—”
“Quite	impossible!”	snapped	the	third	nobleman.	“The	Council	is	not	to	be
brushed	off	yet	again.	Coltaine	holds	the	sword	and	so	may	keep	us	at	bay	with
his	barbaric	indifference,	but	we	will	have	our	petition	delivered	one	way	or
the	other!”
Duiker	blinked	at	the	man.
Tumlit	cleared	his	throat	apologetically	and	dabbed	his	watering	eyes.
“Historian,	permit	me	to	introduce	the	Highborn	Lenestro,	recent	resident	of
Sialk—”
“No	mere	resident!”	Lenestro	squealed.	“Sole	representative	of	the	Kanese
family	of	the	same	name,	in	all	Seven	Cities.	Factor	in	the	largest	trade
enterprise	exporting	the	finest	tanned	camel	hide.	I	am	chief	within	the	Guild,
granted	the	honor	of	First	Potency	in	Sialk.	More	than	one	Fist	has	bowed
before	me,	yet	here	I	stand,	reduced	to	demanding	audience	with	a	foulbespattered	scholar—”
“Lenestro,	please!”	Tumlit	said	in	exasperation.	“You	do	your	cause	little
good!”
“Slapped	across	the	face	by	a	lard-smeared	savage	the	Empress	should
have	had	spiked	on	a	wall	years	ago!	I	warrant	she	will	regret	her	mercy	when
news	of	this	horror	reaches	her!”


“Which	horror	would	that	be,	Lenestro?”	Duiker	quietly	asked.
The	question	made	Lenestro	gape	and	sputter,	his	face	reddening.
Nethpara	elected	to	answer.	“Historian,	Coltaine	conscripted	our	servants.
It	was	not	even	a	request.	His	Wickan	dogs	simply	collected	them—indeed,
when	one	of	our	honored	colleagues	protested,	he	was	struck	upon	his	person
and	knocked	to	the	ground.	Have	our	servants	been	returned?	They	have	not.
Are	they	even	alive?	What	horrible	suicide	stand	was	left	to	them?	We	have	no
answers,	Historian.”
“Your	concern	is	for	the	welfare	of	your	servants?”	Duiker	asked.
“Who	shall	prepare	our	meals?”	Lenestro	demanded.	“Mend	our	clothes
and	raise	our	tents	and	heat	the	water	for	our	baths?	This	is	an	outrage!”
“Their	welfare	is	uppermost	in	my	mind,”	Tumlit	said,	offering	a	sad
smile.
Duiker	believed	the	man.	“I	shall	inquire	on	your	behalf,	then.”
“Of	course	you	shall!”	Lenestro	snapped.	“Immediately.”
“When	you	can,”	Tumlit	said.
Duiker	nodded,	turned	away.
“We	are	not	yet	done	with	you!”	Lenestro	shouted.
“We	are,”	Duiker	heard	Tumlit	say.
“Someone	must	silence	these	dogs!	Their	howling	has	no	end!”
Better	howling	than	snapping	at	the	heel.	He	walked	on.	His	desire	to	wash
himself	was	becoming	desperate.	The	residue	of	blood	and	flesh	had	begun	to
dry	on	his	clothes	and	on	his	skin.	He	was	attracting	attention	as	he	shuffled
down	the	aisle	between	the	tents.	Warding	gestures	were	being	made	as	he
passed.	Duiker	feared	he	had	inadvertently	become	a	harbinger,	and	the	fate	he
promised	was	as	chilling	as	the	soulless	howls	of	the	camp	dogs.
Ahead,	the	morning’s	light	bled	across	the	sky.


Book	Three
Chain	of	Dogs


	

When	the	sands
Danced	blind,
She	emerged	from	the	face
Of	a	raging	goddess
SHA’IK
BIDITHAL
	


Chapter	Eleven

If	you	seek	the	crumbled	bones
of	the	T’lan	Imass,
gather	into	one	hand
the	sands	of	Raraku
THE	HOLY	DESERT
ANONYMOUS
Kulp	felt	like	a	rat	in	a	vast	chamber	crowded	with	ogres,	caged	in	by	shadows
and	but	moments	away	from	being	crushed	underfoot.	Never	before	when
entering	the	Meanas	Warren	had	it	felt	so…fraught.
There	were	strangers	here,	intruders,	forces	so	inimical	to	the	realm	that
the	very	atmosphere	bridled.	The	essence	of	himself	that	had	slipped	through
the	fabric	was	reduced	to	a	crouching,	cowering	creature.	And	yet,	all	he	could
feel	was	a	series	of	fell	passages,	the	spun	wakes	that	marked	the	paths	the
unwelcome	had	taken.	His	senses	shouted	at	him	that—for	the	moment	at	least
—he	was	alone,	the	dun	sprawled-out	landscape	devoid	of	all	life.
Still	he	trembled	with	terror.
Within	his	mind	he	reached	back	a	ghostly	hand,	finding	the	tactile
reassurance	of	the	place	where	his	body	existed,	the	heave	and	slush	of	blood
in	his	veins,	the	solid	weight	of	flesh	and	bone.	He	sat	cross-legged	in	the
captain’s	cabin	of	the	Silanda,	watched	over	by	a	wary,	restless	Heboric,	while
the	others	waited	on	the	deck,	ever	scanning	the	unbroken,	remorselessly	flat
horizon	on	all	sides.
They	needed	a	way	out.	The	entire	Elder	Warren	they’d	found	themselves
in	was	flooded,	a	soupy,	shallow	sea.	The	oarsmen	could	propel	Silanda
onward	for	a	thousand	years,	until	the	wood	rotted	in	their	dead	hands,	the
shafts	snapping,	until	the	ship	began	to	disintegrate	around	them,	still	the	drum
would	beat	and	the	backs	would	bend.	And	we’d	be	long	dead	by	then,	nothing
but	mouldering	dust.	To	escape,	they	must	find	a	means	of	shifting	warrens.
Kulp	cursed	his	own	limitations.	Had	he	been	a	practitioner	of	Serc,	or


Denul	or	D’riss	or	indeed	virtually	any	of	the	other	warrens	accessible	to
humans,	he	would	find	what	they	needed.	But	not	Meanas.	No	seas,	no	rivers,
not	even	a	Hood-damned	puddle.	From	within	his	warren,	Kulp	was	seeking	to
effect	a	passage	through	to	the	mortal	world…and	it	was	proving	problematic.
They	were	bound	by	peculiar	laws,	by	rules	of	nature	that	seemed	to	play
games	with	the	principles	of	cause	and	effect.	Had	they	been	riding	a	wagon,
the	passage	through	the	warrens	would	unerringly	have	taken	them	on	a	dry
path.	The	primordial	elements	asserted	an	intractable	consistency	across	all
warrens.	Land	to	land,	air	to	air,	water	to	water.
Kulp	had	heard	of	High	Mages	who—it	was	rumored—had	found	ways	to
cheat	those	illimitable	laws,	and	perhaps	the	gods	and	other	Ascendants
possessed	such	knowledge	as	well.	But	they	were	as	beyond	a	lowly	cadre
mage	as	the	tools	of	an	ogre’s	smithy	to	a	cowering	rat.
His	other	concern	was	the	vastness	of	the	task	itself.	Pulling	a	handful	of
companions	through	his	warren	was	difficult,	but	manageable.	But	an	entire
ship!	He’d	hoped	he	would	find	inspiration	once	within	the	Meanas	Warren,
some	thunderbolt	delivering	a	simple,	elegant	solution.	With	all	the	grace	of
poetry.	Was	it	not	Fisher	Kel’Tath	himself	who	once	said	poetry	and	sorcery
were	the	twin	edges	to	the	knife	in	every	man’s	heart?	Where	then	are	my	magic
cants?
Kulp	sourly	admitted	that	he	felt	as	stupid	within	Meanas	as	he	did	sitting	in
the	captain’s	cabin.	The	art	of	illusion	is	grace	itself.	There	must	be	a	way	to…
to	trick	our	way	through.	What’s	real	versus	what	isn’t	is	the	synergy	within	a
mortal’s	mind.	And	greater	forces?	Can	reality	itself	be	fooled	into	asserting	an
unreality?
His	shouting	senses	changed	pitch.	Kulp	was	no	longer	alone.	The	thick,
turgid	air	of	the	Meanas	Warren—where	shadows	were	textured	like	ground
glass	and	to	slip	through	them	was	to	feel	a	shivering	ecstasy—had	begun	to
bulge,	then	bow,	as	if	something	huge	approached,	pushing	the	air	before	it.
And	whatever	it	was,	it	was	coming	fast.
A	sudden	thought	flooded	the	mage’s	mind.	And	moreover,	it	possessed…
elegance.	Togg’s	toes,	can	I	do	this?	Building	pressure,	then	vacuous	wake,	a
certain	current,	a	certain	flow.	Hood,	it	ain’t	water,	but	close	enough.
I	hope.
He	saw	Heboric	jump	back	in	alarm,	striking	his	head	on	a	low	crossbeam
in	the	cabin.	Kulp	slipped	back	into	his	body	and	loosed	a	rasping	gasp.	“We’re
about	to	go,	Heboric.	Get	everyone	ready!”
The	old	man	was	rubbing	a	stump	against	the	back	of	his	head.	“Ready	for
what,	Mage?”


“Anything.”
Kulp	slid	back	out,	mentally	clambering	back	over	his	anchor	within
Meanas.
The	Unwelcome	was	coming,	a	force	of	such	power	as	to	make	the	febrile
atmosphere	shiver.	The	mage	saw	nearby	shadows	vibrate	into	dissolution.	He
felt	outrage	building	in	the	air,	in	the	loamy	earth	underfoot.	Whatever	was
passing	through	this	warren	had	drawn	the	attention	of…of	whatever—
Shadowthrone,	the	Hounds—or	perhaps	warrens	truly	are	alive.	In	any	case,	on
it	came,	in	arrogant	disregard.
Kulp	suddenly	thought	back	to	Sormo’s	ritual	that	had	drawn	them	into	the
T’lan	Imass	warren	outside	Hissar.	Oh,	Hood,	Soletaken	or	D’ivers…but	such
power!	Who	in	the	Abyss	has	such	power?	He	could	think	of	but	two:
Anomander	Rake,	the	Son	of	Darkness,	and	Osric.	Both	Soletaken,	both
supremely	arrogant.	If	there	were	others,	the	tales	of	their	activities	would	have
reached	him,	he	was	certain.	Warriors	talk	about	heroes.	Mages	talk	about
Ascendants.	He	would	have	heard.
Rake	was	on	Genabackis,	and	Osric	was	reputed	to	have	journeyed	to	a
continent	far	to	the	south	a	century	or	so	back.	Well,	maybe	the	cold-eyed
bastard’s	back.	Either	way,	he	was	about	to	find	out.
The	presence	arrived.	His	spiritual	belly	flat	on	the	soft	ground,	Kulp
craned	his	head	skyward.
The	dragon	came	low	to	the	earth.	It	defied	every	image	of	a	draconian
being	Kulp	had	ever	seen.	Not	Rake,	not	Osric.	Hugely	boned,	with	skin	like
dry	shark	hide,	its	wing-span	dwarfed	even	that	of	the	Son	of	Darkness—who
has	within	him	the	blood	of	the	draconian	goddess—and	the	wings	had	nothing
of	the	smooth,	curving	grace;	the	bones	were	multi-jointed	in	a	crazed	pattern,
like	that	of	a	crushed	bat	wing,	each	knobbed	joint	prominent	beneath	taut,
cracked	skin.	The	dragon’s	head	was	as	wide	as	it	was	long,	like	a	viper ’s,	the
eyes	high	on	its	skull.	There	was	no	ridged	forehead,	instead	the	skull	sloped
back	to	a	basal	serration	almost	buried	in	neck	and	jaw	muscles.
A	dragon	roughly	cast,	a	creature	exhaling	an	aura	of	primordial	antiquity.
And,	Kulp	realized	with	a	breathless	start	as	his	senses	devoured	all	that	the
creature	projected,	it	was	undead.
The	mage	felt	it	become	aware	of	him	as	it	sailed	in	a	whisper	twenty	armspans	overhead.	A	sudden	sharpening	of	intensity	that	quickly	passed	into
indifference.
As	the	dragon’s	wake	arrived	with	a	piercing	wind,	Kulp	rolled	onto	his
back	and	hissed	the	few	words	of	High	Meanas	he	possessed.	The	warren’s
fabric	parted,	a	tear	barely	large	enough	to	allow	the	passage	of	a	horse.	But	it


opened	onto	a	vacuum,	and	the	shrieking	wind	became	a	roar.
Still	hovering	between	realms,	Kulp	watched	in	awe	as	Silanda’s	mudcrusted,	battered	prow	filled	the	rent.	The	fabric	split	wider,	then	yet	wider.
Suddenly,	the	ship’s	beam	seemed	appallingly	broad.	The	mage’s	awe	turned	to
fear,	then	terror.	Oh	no,	I’ve	really	done	it	now.
Milky,	foaming	water	gushed	in	around	the	ship’s	hull.	The	portalway	was
tearing	wider	on	all	sides,	uncontrolled,	as	the	weight	of	a	sea	began	to	rush
through.
A	wall	of	water	descended	on	Kulp	and	a	moment	later	it	struck,	destroying
his	anchor,	his	spiritual	presence.	He	was	back	in	the	pitching,	groaning
captain’s	cabin.	Heboric	was	half	in	and	half	out	of	the	cabin	doorway,
scrambling	to	find	purchase	as	Silanda	rode	the	wave.
The	ex-priest	shot	Kulp	a	glare	when	he	saw	the	mage	clamber	upright.
“Tell	me	you	planned	this!	Tell	me	you’ve	got	it	all	under	control,	Mage!”
“Of	course,	you	idiot!	Can’t	you	tell?”	He	climbed	his	way	round	the
bolted-down	furniture	to	the	passage,	stepping	over	Heboric	as	he	went.	“Hold
the	fort,	old	man,	we’re	counting	on	you!”
Heboric	snarled	a	few	choice	words	after	him	as	Kulp	made	his	way	to	the
main	deck.
If	the	Unwelcome’s	passage	was	to	be	bitterly	tolerated	and	not	directly
opposed	by	the	powers	within	Meanas,	the	rending	of	the	warren	obliterated
the	option	of	restraint.	This	was	damage	on	a	cosmic	scale,	a	wounding	quite
possibly	beyond	repair.
I	may	just	have	destroyed	my	own	warren.	If	reality	can’t	be	fooled.	Of
course	it	can	be	fooled—I	do	it	all	the	time!
Kulp	scrambled	onto	the	main	deck	and	hurried	to	the	sterncastle.	Gesler
and	Stormy	were	at	the	steering	oar,	both	men	grinning	like	demented	fools	as
they	struggled	to	stay	the	course.	Gesler	pointed	forward	and	Kulp	turned	to
see	the	vague,	ghostlike	apparition	of	the	dragon,	its	narrow,	bony	tail	waving
in	side-to-side	rhythm	like	a	snake	crossing	sand.	As	he	watched,	the	creature’s
wedge-shaped	head	appeared	as	it	twisted	to	cast	its	dead,	black	eye	sockets	in
their	direction.
Gesler	waved.
Shaking	himself,	Kulp	forced	his	way	into	the	wind,	coming	to	the	stern
rail	which	he	gripped	with	both	hands.	The	rent	was	already	far	away—yet	still
visible,	meaning	it	must	be…oh,	Hood!	Water	gushed	in	a	tumbling	torrent
within	the	wake	left	by	the	Soletaken	dragon.	That	it	did	not	spread	out	to	all
sides	was	due	entirely	to	the	mass	of	shadows	Kulp	saw	assailing	its	edges—
and	being	destroyed	in	the	effort.	Yet	still	more	arrived.	The	task	of	healing	the


breach	was	so	overwhelming	as	to	deny	any	opportunity	of	approaching	the
rent,	of	sealing	the	wound	itself.
Shadowthrone!	And	every	other	hoary	Ascendant	bastard	within	hearing!
Maybe	I’ve	got	no	faith	in	any	of	you,	but	you’d	better	acquire	a	faith	in	me.
And	fast!	Illusion’s	my	gift,	here	and	now.	Believe!	Eyes	on	the	rent,	Kulp
braced	his	legs	wide,	then	released	the	stern	rail	and	raised	high	both	arms,
It	shall	close…it	shall	heal!	The	scene	before	him	wavered,	the	tear
sealing,	stitching	together	the	edges.	The	water	slowed.	He	pushed	harder,
willing	the	illusion	to	become	real.	His	limbs	shook.	Sweat	sprang	out	on	his
skin,	soaked	his	clothing.
Reality	pushed	back.	The	illusion	blurred.	Kulp’s	knees	buckled.	He
gripped	the	railing	to	keep	himself	upright.	He	was	failing.	No	strength	left.
Failing.	Dying…
The	force	that	struck	him	from	behind	was	like	a	physical	blow	to	the	back
of	his	head.	Stars	spasmed	across	his	vision.	An	alien	power	swept	through
him,	flinging	his	body	back	upright.	Spread-eagled,	he	felt	his	feet	leave	the
tilted	deck.	The	power	held	him,	hovering	in	place,	a	will	as	cold	as	ice
flooding	his	flesh.
The	power	was	undead.	The	will	that	gripped	him	was	a	dragon’s.	Tinged
with	irritation,	reluctant	to	act,	it	nevertheless	grasped	the	illogic	of	Kulp’s
sorcerous	effort…and	gave	it	all	the	force	it	needed.	Then	more.
He	screamed,	pain	lancing	through	him	with	glacial	fire.
Undead	cared	nothing	for	the	limits	of	mortal	flesh,	a	lesson	now	burning
in	his	bones.
The	distant	rent	closed.	All	at	once	other	powers	were	channeling	through
the	mage.	Ascendants,	grasping	Kulp’s	outrageous	intent,	swept	in	to	join	the
game	with	dark	glee.	Always	a	game.	Damn	you	bastards	one	and	all!	I	take
back	my	prayers!	Hear	me?	Hood	take	you	all!
He	realized	the	pain	was	gone,	the	Soletaken	dragon	withdrawing	its
attention	as	soon	as	other	forces	arrived	to	take	its	place.	He	remained
hovering	a	few	feet	above	the	deck,	however,	his	limbs	twitching	as	the	powers
using	him	playfully	plucked	at	his	mortality.	Not	the	indifference	of	an	undead,
but	malice.	Kulp	began	to	yearn	for	the	former.
He	fell	suddenly,	cracking	both	knees	on	the	dirt-smeared	deck.	Tool	done
with,	now	discarded…
Stormy	was	at	his	side,	waving	a	wineskin	before	the	mage’s	face.	Kulp
grasped	it	and	poured	until	his	mouth	was	full	of	the	tart	liquid.
“We	ride	the	dragon’s	wake,”	the	soldier	said.	“Though	not	on	water	any
more.	That	gush	has	closed	up	tight	as	a	sapper ’s	arse.	Whatever	you	did,


Mage,	it	worked.”
“Not	over	yet,”	Kulp	muttered,	trying	to	still	his	trembling	limbs.	He
swallowed	more	wine.
“Watch	yourself	with	that,	then,”	Stormy	said	with	a	grin.	“It	packs	a	punch,
right	to	the	back	of	the	head—”
“I	won’t	notice	the	difference—my	skull’s	already	full	of	pulp.”
“You	lit	up	with	blue	fire,	Mage.	Never	seen	anything	like	it.	Make	a
damned	good	tavern	tale.”
“Ah,	I’ve	achieved	immortality	at	last.	Take	that,	Hood!”
“Well	enough	to	stand?”
Kulp	was	not	too	proud	to	accept	the	soldier ’s	arm	as	he	tottered	to	his	feet.
“Give	me	a	few	moments,”	he	said,	“then	I’ll	try	to	slip	us	from	the	warren…
back	to	our	realm.”
“Will	the	ride	be	as	rough,	Mage?”
“I	hope	not.”
	
Felisin	stood	on	the	forecastle	deck,	watching	the	mage	and	Stormy	passing	the
wineskin	between	them.	She	had	felt	the	presence	of	the	Ascendants,	the	cold,
bloodless	attention	plucking	and	prodding	at	the	ship	and	all	who	were	upon	it.
The	dragon	was	the	worst	of	them	all,	gelid	and	remote.	Like	fleas	on	its	hide,
that’s	all	we	were	to	it.
She	swung	about.	Baudin	was	studying	the	massive	winged	apparition
cleaving	the	path	ahead,	his	bandaged	hand	resting	lightly	on	the	carved	rail.
Whatever	they	rode	rolled	beneath	them	in	a	whispering	surge.	The	oars	still
plied	with	remorseless	patience,	though	it	was	clear	that	Silanda	was	moving
more	swiftly	than	anything	muscle	and	bone	could	achieve—even	when	those
muscles	and	bones	were	undead.
Look	at	us.	A	handful	of	destinies.	We	command	nothing,	not	even	our	next
step	in	this	mad,	fraught	journey.	The	mage	has	his	sorcery,	the	old	soldier	his
stone	sword	and	the	other	two	their	faith	in	the	Tusked	God.	Heboric…Heboric
has	nothing.	And	as	for	me,	I	have	pocks	and	scars.	So	much	for	our
possessions.
“The	beast	prepares…”
She	glanced	over	at	Baudin.	Oh	yes,	I	forgot	the	thug.	He	has	his	secrets,
for	what	that’s	worth,	like	as	not	scant	little.	“Prepares	what?	Are	you	an	expert
in	dragons	as	well?”
“Something’s	opening	ahead—there’s	a	change	in	the	sky.	See	it?”
She	did.	The	unrelieved	gray	pall	had	acquired	a	stain	ahead,	a	smudge	of


brass	that	deepened,	grew	larger.	A	word	to	the	mage,	I	think—
But	even	as	she	turned,	the	stain	blossomed,	filling	half	the	sky.	From
somewhere	far	behind	them	came	a	howl	of	curdled	outrage.	Shadows	sped
across	their	path,	tumbled	to	the	sides	as	Silanda’s	prow	clove	through	them.
The	dragon	crooked	its	wings,	vanishing	into	a	blazing	inferno	of	bronze	fire.
Spinning,	Baudin	wrapped	Felisin	in	his	huge	arms	and	ducked	down
around	her	as	the	fire	swept	over	the	ship.	She	heard	his	hiss	as	the	flames
engulfed	them.
The	dragon’s	found	a	warren…to	sear	the	fleas	from	its	hide!
She	flinched	as	the	flames	licked	around	Baudin’s	protective	mass.	She
could	smell	him	burning—the	leather	shirt,	the	skin	of	his	back,	his	hair.	Her
gasps	drew	agony	into	her	lungs.
Then	Baudin	was	running,	carrying	her	effortlessly	in	his	arms,	leaping
down	the	companionway	to	the	main	deck.	Voices	were	shouting.	Felisin
caught	a	glimpse	of	Heboric—his	tattoos	wreathed	in	black	smoke—
staggering,	striking	the	port	rail,	then	plummeting	over	the	ship’s	side.
Silanda	burned.
Still	running,	Baudin	plunged	past	the	mainmast.	Kulp	lunged	into	view
and	grasped	the	thug’s	arms	as	he	tried	to	scream	something	the	roaring	fires
swept	away.	But	Baudin	had	become	a	thing	mindless	in	its	pain.	His	arm	flung
outward,	and	the	mage	was	hurled	back	through	the	flames.
Bellowing,	Baudin	lurched	on,	a	blind,	hopeless	flight	to	the	sterncastle.
The	marines	had	vanished—either	incinerated	or	dying	somewhere	below
decks.	Felisin	did	not	struggle.	Seeing	that	no	escape	was	possible,	she	almost
welcomed	the	bites	of	fire	that	now	came	with	increasing	frequency.
She	simply	watched	as	Baudin	carried	her	over	the	stern	rail.
They	fell.
The	breath	was	knocked	from	her	lungs	as	they	struck	hard-packed	sand.
Still	clutched	in	an	embrace,	they	rolled	down	a	steep	slope	and	came	to	rest
amidst	a	pile	of	water-smoothed	cobbles.	The	bronze	fire	was	gone.
Dust	settling	around	them,	Felisin	stared	up	at	bright	sunlight.	Somewhere
near	her	head	flies	buzzed,	the	sound	so	natural	that	she	trembled—as	if
desperately	held	defensive	walls	were	crumbling	within	her.	We’ve	returned.
Home.	She	knew	it	with	instinctive	certainty.
Baudin	groaned.	Slowly	he	pushed	himself	away,	the	cobbles	sliding	and
grating	beneath	him.
She	looked	at	him.	The	hair	was	gone	from	his	head,	leaving	a	flashburned	pate	the	color	of	mottled	bronze.	His	leather	shirt	was	nothing	but
stitched	strips	hanging	down	his	broad	back	like	fragments	of	charred


webbing,	If	anything,	the	skin	of	his	back	was	darker	and	more	mottled	than
that	of	his	head.	The	bandages	on	his	hand	were	gone	as	well,	revealing
swollen	fingers	and	bruised	joints.	Incredibly,	his	skin	was	not	cracked,	not
split	open;	instead,	he	had	the	appearance	of	having	been	gilded.	Tempered.
Baudin	rose,	slowly,	each	move	aching	with	precision.	She	saw	him	blink,
draw	a	deep	breath.	His	eyes	widened	as	he	looked	down	at	himself.
Not	what	you	were	expecting.	The	pain	fades—I	see	it	in	your	face—now
only	a	memory.	You’ve	survived,	but	somehow…it	all	feels	different.	It	feels.	You
feel.
Can	nothing	kill	you,	Baudin?
He	glanced	at	her,	then	frowned.
“We’re	alive,”	she	said.
She	followed	suit	when	he	clambered	upright.	They	stood	in	a	narrow
arroyo,	a	gorge	where	flash	floods	had	swept	through	with	such	force	as	to
pack	the	bends	of	the	channel	with	skullsized	rocks.	The	cut	was	less	than	five
paces	wide,	the	sides	twice	the	height	of	a	man	and	banded	in	variously	colored
layers	of	sand.
The	heat	was	fierce.	Sweat	ran	in	runnels	down	her	back.	“Can	you	see
anywhere	we	can	climb	out?”	she	asked.
“Can	you	smell	Otataral?”	Baudin	muttered.
A	chill	wrapped	her	bones.	We’re	back	on	the	island—“No.	Can	you?”
He	shook	his	head.	“Can’t	smell	a	damned	thing.	Just	a	thought.”
“Not	a	nice	one,”	she	snapped.	“Let’s	find	a	way	out.”	You	expect	me	to
thank	you	for	saving	my	life,	don’t	you?	You’re	waiting	for	even	a	single	word,
or	maybe	something	as	small	as	a	look,	a	meeting	of	the	eyes.	You	can	wait
forever,	thug.
They	worked	their	way	along	the	choked	channel,	surrounded	by	a
whining	cloud	of	flies	and	their	own	echoes.
“I’m…heavier,”	Baudin	said	after	a	few	minutes.
She	paused,	glanced	back	at	him.	“What?”
He	shrugged.	“Heavier.”	He	kneaded	his	own	arm	with	his	uninjured	hand.
“More	solid.	I	don’t	know.	Something’s	changed.”
Something’s	changed.	She	stared	him,	the	emotions	within	her	twisting
around	unvoiced	fears.
“I	could’ve	sworn	I	was	burning	away	to	bones,”	he	said,	his	frown
deepening.
“I	haven’t	changed,”	she	said,	turning	and	continuing	on.	She	heard	him
follow	a	moment	later.
They	found	a	side	channel,	a	cleft	where	torrents	of	water	had	rushed	down


to	join	the	main	channel’s	course,	cutting	through	the	layers	of	sandstone.	This
track	quickly	lost	its	depth,	opening	out	after	twenty	or	so	paces.	They	emerged
onto	the	edge	of	a	range	of	blunt	hills	overlooking	a	broad	valley	of	cracked
earth.	More	hills,	sharper	and	ragged,	rose	on	the	other	side,	blurry	behind
waves	of	heat.
Five	hundred	paces	out	on	the	pan	stood	a	figure.	At	its	feet	lay	a	humped
shape.
“Heboric,”	Baudin	said,	squinting.	“The	one	standing.”
And	the	other	one?	Dead	or	alive?	And	who?
They	walked	side	by	side	toward	the	ex-priest,	who	now	watched	them.	His
clothing	too	had	burned	away	to	little	more	than	charred	rags.	Yet	his	flesh,
beneath	that	skein	of	tattooing,	was	unmarred.
As	they	neared,	Heboric	gestured	toward	his	own	bald	pate.	“Suits	you,
Baudin,”	he	said	with	a	wry	grin.
“What?”	Felisin’s	tone	was	caustic.	“Are	you	two	a	brotherhood	now?”
The	figure	at	the	old	man’s	feet	was	the	mage,	Kulp.	Her	gaze	fell	to	him.
“Dead.”
“Not	quite,”	Heboric	said.	“He’ll	live,	but	he	hit	something	going	over	the
side.”
“Awaken	him,	then,”	Felisin	said.	“I	don’t	plan	on	waiting	in	this	heat	just
so	he	can	get	some	beauty	sleep.	We’re	in	a	desert	again,	old	man,	in	case	you
hadn’t	noticed.	And	desert	means	thirst,	not	to	mention	the	fact	that	we’re
without	food	or	anything	like	supplies.	And	finally,	we’ve	no	idea	where	we
are—”
“On	the	mainland,”	Heboric	said.	“Seven	Cities.”
“How	do	you	know	that?”
The	ex-priest	shrugged.	“I	know.”
Kulp	groaned,	then	sat	upright.	One	hand	gingerly	probing	a	lump	above
his	left	eye,	the	mage	looked	around.	His	expression	soured.
“The	Seventh	Army’s	camped	just	over	yonder,”	Felisin	said.
For	a	moment	he	looked	credulous,	then	he	gave	a	weary	smile.	“Funny,
lass.”	He	climbed	to	his	feet	and	scanned	the	horizon	on	all	sides	before	tilting
his	head	back	and	sniffing	the	air.	“Mainland,”	he	pronounced.
“Why	didn’t	all	that	white	hair	burn	off?”	Felisin	asked.	“You’re	not	even
singed.”
“That	dragon’s	warren,”	Heboric	said,	“what	was	it?”
“Damned	if	I	know,”	Kulp	admitted,	running	a	hand	through	the	white
shock	on	his	head	as	if	to	confirm	that	it	still	existed.	“Chaos,	maybe—a	storm
of	it	between	warrens—I	don’t	know.	Never	seen	anything	like	it	before,


though	that	don’t	mean	much—I’m	no	Ascendant,	after	all—”
“I’ll	say,”	Felisin	muttered.
The	mage	squinted	at	her.	“Those	pocks	on	your	face	are	fading.”
This	time	it	was	she	who	was	startled.
Baudin	grunted.
She	whirled	on	him.	“What’s	so	funny?”
“I	saw	that,	only	it	don’t	make	you	any	prettier.”
“Enough	of	this,”	Heboric	said.	“It’s	midday,	meaning	it’ll	get	hotter
before	it	gets	cooler.	We	need	somewhere	to	shelter.”
“Any	sign	of	the	marines?”	Kulp	asked.
“They’re	dead,”	Felisin	said.	“They	went	below	decks,	only	the	ship	was	on
fire.	Dead.	Fewer	mouths	to	feed.”
No	one	replied	to	that.
Kulp	took	the	lead,	evidently	choosing	as	their	destination	the	far	ridge	of
hills.	The	others	followed	without	comment.
Twenty	minutes	later	Kulp	paused.	“We’d	better	pick	up	our	pace.	I	smell	a
storm	coming.”
Felisin	snorted.	“All	I	smell	is	rank	sweat—you’re	standing	too	close,
Baudin,	go	away.”
“I’m	sure	he	would	if	he	could,”	Heboric	muttered,	not	unsympathetically.
A	moment	later	he	looked	up	in	surprise,	as	if	he	had	not	intended	to	voice
aloud	that	thought.	His	toadlike	face	twisted	in	dismay.
Felisin	waited	to	regain	control	of	her	breathing,	then	she	swung	to	face
the	thug.
Baudin’s	small	eyes	were	like	dull	coins,	revealing	nothing.
“Bodyguard,”	Kulp	said,	with	a	slow	nod.	His	voice	was	cold	as	he
addressed	Heboric.	“Out	with	it.	I	want	to	know	who	our	companion	is,	and
where	his	loyalties	lie.	I	let	it	slide	before,	because	Gesler	and	his	soldiers
were	on	hand.	But	not	now.	This	girl	has	a	bodyguard—why?	Right	now,	I
can’t	see	anyone	caring	a	whit	for	a	cruel-hearted	creature	like	this	one,
meaning	this	loyalty’s	been	bought.	Who	is	she,	Heboric?”
The	ex-priest	grimaced.	“Tavore’s	sister,	Mage.”
Kulp	blinked.	“Tavore?	The	Adjunct?	Then	what	in	Hood’s	name	was	she
doing	in	a	mining	pit?”
“She	sent	me	there,”	Felisin	said.	“You’re	right—no	loyalty	involved.	I	was
just	one	more	in	Unta’s	cull.”
Clearly	shaken,	the	mage	spun	to	Baudin.	“You’re	a	Claw,	aren’t	you?”	The
air	around	Kulp	seemed	to	glitter—Felisin	realized	he’d	opened	his	warren.
The	mage	bared	his	teeth.	“The	Adjunct’s	remorse,	in	the	flesh.”


“Not	a	Claw,”	Heboric	said.
“Then	what?”
“That’ll	take	a	history	lesson	to	explain—”
“Start	talking.”
“An	old	rivalry,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“Dancer	and	Surly.	Dancer	created	a
covert	arm	for	military	campaigns.	In	keeping	with	the	Imperial	symbol	of	the
demon	hand	gripping	a	sphere,	he	called	them	his	Talons.	Surly	used	that
model	in	creating	the	Claw.	The	Talons	were	external—outside	the	Empire—
but	the	Claw	were	internal,	a	secret	police,	a	network	of	spies	and	assassins.”
“But	the	Claw	are	used	in	covert	military	operations,”	Kulp	said.
“They	are	now.	When	Surly	became	Regent	in	the	absence	of	Kellanved
and	Dancer,	she	sent	her	Claws	after	the	Talons.	The	betrayal	started	subtly—a
string	of	disastrous	botched	missions—but	someone	got	careless	and	gave	the
game	away.	The	two	locked	daggers	and	fought	it	out	to	the	bitter	end.”
“And	the	Claw	won.”
Heboric	nodded.	“Surly	becomes	Laseen,	Laseen	becomes	Empress.	The
Claws	sit	atop	the	pile	of	skulls	like	well-fed	crows.	The	Talons	went	the	way
of	Dancer.	Dead	and	gone…or,	as	a	few	mused	now	and	then,	so	far
underground	as	to	seem	extinct.”	The	ex-priest	grinned.	“Like	Dancer	himself,
maybe.”
Felisin	studied	Baudin.	Talon.	What’s	my	sister	got	to	do	with	some	secret
sect	of	revivalists	still	clinging	to	the	memory	of	the	Emperor	and	Dancer?	Why
not	use	a	Claw?	Unless	she	needed	to	work	outside	anyone	else’s	knowledge.
“It	was	too	bitter	to	contemplate	from	the	very	start,”	Heboric	was	saying.
“Throwing	her	younger	sister	into	shackles	like	any	other	common	victim.	An
example	proclaiming	her	loyalty	to	the	Empress—”
“Not	just	hers,”	Felisin	said.	“House	Paran.	Our	brother ’s	a	renegade	with
Onearm	on	Genabackis.	It	made	us…vulnerable.”
“It	all	went	wrong,”	Heboric	said,	staring	at	Baudin.	“She	wasn’t	meant	to
stay	long	in	Skullcup,	was	she?”
Baudin	shook	his	head.	“Can’t	pull	out	a	person	who	don’t	want	to	go.”	He
shrugged,	as	if	those	words	were	enough	and	he	would	say	nothing	more	on
that	subject.
“So	the	Talons	remain,”	Heboric	said.	“Then	who	commands	you?”
“No	one,”	Baudin	answered.	“I	was	born	into	it.	There’s	a	handful	left,
kicking	around	here	and	there,	either	old	or	drooling	or	both.	A	few	first	sons
inherited…the	secret.	Dancer ’s	not	dead.	He	ascended,	alongside	Kellanved—
my	father	was	there	to	see	it,	in	Malaz	City,	the	night	of	the	Shadow	Moon.”
Kulp	snorted	but	Heboric	was	slowly	nodding.


“I	got	close	in	my	suppositions,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“Too	close	for	Laseen,
as	it	turned	out.	She	suspects	or	knows	outright,	doesn’t	she?”
Baudin	shrugged.	“I’ll	ask	next	time	we	chat.”
“My	need	for	a	bodyguard	is	ended,”	Felisin	said.	“Get	out	of	my	sight,
Baudin.	Take	my	sister’s	concern	through	Hood’s	gates.”
“Lass—”
“Shut	up,	Heboric.	I	will	try	to	kill	you,	Baudin.	Every	chance	I	get.	You’ll
have	to	kill	me	to	save	your	own	skin.	Go	away.	Now.”
The	big	man	surprised	her	again.	He	made	no	appeal	to	the	others,	but
simply	turned	away,	taking	a	route	at	right	angles	to	the	one	they	had	been
traveling.
That’s	it.	He’s	leaving.	Out	of	my	life,	without	a	single	word.	She	stared
after	him,	wondering	at	the	twisting	in	her	heart.
“Damn	you,	Felisin,”	the	ex-priest	snarled.	“We	need	him	more	than	he
needs	us.”
Kulp	spoke.	“I’ve	a	mind	to	join	him	and	drag	you	with	me,	Heboric.
Leave	this	foul	witch	to	herself	and	Hood	take	her	with	my	blessings.”
“Go	ahead,”	Felisin	challenged.
The	mage	ignored	her.	“I	took	on	the	responsibility	of	saving	your	skin,
Heboric,	and	I’ll	stick	to	it	because	Duiker	asked	me.	It’s	your	call,	now.”
The	old	man	hugged	himself.	“I	owe	her	my	life—”
“Thought	you’d	forgotten	that,”	Felisin	sneered.
He	shook	his	head.
Kulp	sighed.	“All	right.	I	suspect	Baudin	will	do	better	without	us,	in	any
case.	Let’s	get	going	before	I	melt,	and	maybe	you	can	explain	to	me	your
comment	about	Dancer	still	being	alive,	Heboric?	That’s	a	very	intriguing
idea…”
Felisin	shut	their	words	away	as	she	walked.	This	changes	nothing,	dear
sister.	Your	cherished	agent	murdered	my	lover,	the	only	person	in	Skullcup	who
gave	a	damn	about	me.	I	was	Baudin’s	assignment,	nothing	more,	and	worse,	he
was	incompetent,	a	bumbling,	thick-skulled	fool.	Carrying	around	his	father’s
secret	sigil—how	pathetic!	I	will	find	you,	Tavore.	There,	in	my	river	of	blood.
That	I	promise—
“—sorcery.”
The	word	jarred	her	into	awareness.	She	looked	over	at	Kulp.	The	mage
had	quickened	his	step,	his	face	pale.
“What	did	you	say?”	she	asked.
“I	said	that	storm	rolling	up	behind	us	isn’t	natural,	that’s	what	I	said.”
She	glanced	back.	A	bruised	wall	of	sand	cut	the	valley	down	its	length—


the	hills	she	and	Baudin	had	left	earlier	had	vanished.	The	wall	rolled	toward
them	like	a	leviathan.
“Time	to	run,	I	think,”	Heboric	gasped	at	her	side.	“If	we	can	reach	the	hills
—”
“I	know	where	we	are!”	Kulp	shouted.	“Raraku!	That’s	the	Whirlwind!”
Ahead,	two	hundred	or	more	paces	away,	rose	the	ragged,	rock-strewn
slopes	of	the	hills.	Deep	defiles	cut	between	each	hump,	like	the	imprint	of	vast
ribs.
The	three	of	them	ran,	knowing	that	they	would	not	make	it	in	time.	The
wind	that	struck	their	back	howled	like	a	thing	demented.	A	moment	later,	the
sand	engulfed	them.
	
“The	truth	of	it	was,	we	were	out	hunting	Sha’ik’s	corpse.”
Fiddler	frowned	at	the	Trell	sitting	opposite	him.	“Corpse?	She’s	dead?
How?	When?”	Was	this	your	doing,	Kalam?	I	can’t	believe	it—
“Iskaral	Pust	claims	she	was	murdered	by	a	troop	of	Red	Blades	from
Ehrlitan.	Or	so	the	Deck	whispered	to	him.”
“I	had	no	idea	the	Deck	of	Dragons	could	be	so	precise.”
“As	far	as	I	know,	it	cannot.”
They	were	sitting	on	stone	benches	within	a	burial	chamber	at	least	two
levels	below	the	Shadow	priest’s	favored	haunts.	The	benches	were	attached
alongside	a	rough-hewn	wall	that	had	once	held	painted	tiles,	and	the	indents	in
the	limestone	beneath	them	made	it	clear	that	the	benches	were	actually
pedestals,	meant	to	hold	the	dead.
Fiddler	flexed	his	leg,	reached	down	and	kneaded	his	knuckles	in	the	stillswollen	flesh	around	the	mended	bone.	Elixirs,	unguents…forced	healing	still
hurts.	His	emotions	were	dark—had	been	for	days	now	as	the	High	Priest	of
Shadow	found	one	excuse	after	another	for	delaying	their	departure,	the	latest
being	the	need	for	more	supplies.	In	a	strange	way	Iskaral	Pust	reminded	the
sapper	of	Quick	Ben,	the	squad’s	mage.	An	endless	succession	of	plans	within
plans.	He	imagined	peeling	through	them	one	by	one,	right	down	to	thumbprint
schemes	all	awhirl	in	devious	patterns.	It’s	quite	possible	that	his	very	existence
is	nothing	more	than	a	collection	of	if-this	and	then-that	suppositions.	Hood’s
Abyss,	maybe	that’s	all	we	all	are!
The	High	Priest	made	his	head	spin.	As	bad	as	Quick	Ben	and	this	Togg’s
thorn	called	Tremorlor.	An	Azath	House,	like	the	Deadhouse	in	Malaz	City.	But
what	are	they,	precisely?	Does	anyone	know?	Anyone	at	all?	There	were
nothing	but	rumors,	obscure	warnings,	and	few	of	those	at	that.	Most	people


did	their	best	to	ignore	such	Houses—the	denizens	of	Malaz	City	seemed	to
nurture	an	almost	deliberate	ignorance,	“Just	an	abandoned	house,”	they	say.
“Nothing	special,	except	maybe	a	few	spooks	in	the	yard.”	But	there’s	a	skittish
look	in	the	eyes	of	some	of	them.
Tremorlor,	a	House	of	the	Azath.	Sane	people	don’t	go	looking	for	places
like	that.
“Something	on	your	mind,	soldier?”	Mappo	Runt	quietly	asked.	“I’ve	been
watching	such	a	progression	of	expressions	on	your	face	as	to	fill	a	wall	in
Dessembrae’s	temple.”
Dessembrae.	The	Cult	of	Dassem.
“It	appears	I’ve	just	said	something	unwelcome	to	your	ears,”	Mappo
continued.
“Eventually	a	man	reaches	a	point	where	every	memory	is	unwelcome,”
Fiddler	said,	gritting	his	teeth.	“I	think	I’ve	reached	that	point,	Trell.	I’m
feeling	old,	used	up.	Pust	has	something	in	mind—we’re	part	of	some	colossal
scheme	that’ll	likely	see	us	dead	before	too	long.	Used	to	be	I’d	get	a	sniff	or
two	of	stuff	like	that.	Had	a	nose	for	trouble,	you	might	say.	But	I	can’t	work	it
out—not	this	time.	He’s	baffled	me,	plain	and	simple.”
“I	think	it’s	to	do	with	Apsalar,”	Mappo	said	after	a	time.
“Aye.	And	that	worries	me.	A	lot.	She	don’t	deserve	any	more	grief.”
“Icarium	pursues	the	question,”	the	Trell	said,	squinting	down	at	the
cracked,	worn	pavestones.	The	lantern’s	oil	was	getting	low,	deepening	the
chamber ’s	gloom.	“I	admit	I	have	been	wondering	if	the	High	Priest	is
intending	to	force	Apsalar	into	a	role	she	seems	made	for…”
“A	role?	Like	what?”
“Sha’ik’s	prophecy	speaks	of	a	rebirth…”
The	sapper	paled,	then	vehemently	shook	his	head.	“No.	She	wouldn’t	do	it.
This	land’s	not	hers,	the	goddess	of	the	Whirlwind	means	nothing	to	her.	Pust
can	try	and	force	it	all	he	wants,	the	lass	will	turn	her	back—mark	my	words.”
Suddenly	restless,	Fiddler	stood	up	and	began	pacing.	His	footfalls	whispered
with	faint	echoes	in	the	chamber.	“If	Sha’ik’s	dead,	she’s	dead.	Hood	take	any
obscure	prophecies!	The	Apocalypse	will	fizzle	out,	the	Whirlwind	sink	back
into	the	ground	to	sleep	another	thousand	years	or	however	long	it	is	until	the
next	Year	of	Dryjhna	comes	around…”
“Yet	Pust	seems	to	place	much	significance	on	this	uprising,”	Mappo	said.
“It’s	far	from	over—or	so	he	seems	to	believe.”
“How	many	gods	and	Ascendants	are	playing	in	this	game,	Trell?”	Fiddler
paused,	eyeing	the	ancient	warrior.	“Does	she	physically	resemble	Sha’ik?”
Mappo	shrugged	his	massive	shoulders.	“I	saw	the	Whirlwind	Seer	but


once,	and	that	at	a	distance.	Light-skinned	for	a	Seven	Cities	native.	Dark	eyes,
not	especially	tall	or	imposing.	It’s	said	the	power	is—was—within	her	eyes.
Dark	and	cruel.”	He	shrugged	a	second	time.	“Older	than	Apsalar.	Perhaps
twice	her	years.	Same	black	hair,	though.	Details	are	irrelevant	in	matters	of
faith	and	attendant	prophecies,	Fiddler.	Perhaps	only	the	role	need	be	reborn.”
“The	lass	ain’t	interested	in	vengeance	against	the	Malazan	Empire,”	the
sapper	growled,	resuming	his	pacing.
“And	what	of	the	shadowy	god	who	once	possessed	her?”
“Gone,”	he	snapped.	“Nothing	but	memories	and	blissfully	few	of	those.”
“Yet	daily	she	discovers	more.	True?”
Fiddler	said	nothing.	If	Crokus	had	been	present,	the	walls	would	have
been	resounding	with	his	anger—the	lad	had	a	fierce	temper	when	it	came	to
Apsalar.	Crokus	was	young,	not	by	nature	cruel,	but	the	sapper	felt	certain	that
the	lad	would	kill	Iskaral	Pust	without	hesitation	at	the	mere	possibility	of	the
High	Priest	seeking	to	use	Apsalar.	And	trying	to	kill	Pust	would	probably
prove	suicidal.	Bearding	a	priest	in	his	den	was	never	a	wise	move.
The	lass	was	finding	her	memories,	it	was	true.	And	they	weren’t	shocking
her	as	much	as	Fiddler	would	have	expected—or	hoped.	Another	disturbing
sign.	Although	he	told	Mappo	that	Apsalar	would	refuse	such	a	role,	the	sapper
had	to	admit—to	himself	at	least—that	he	couldn’t	be	so	certain.
With	memories	came	the	remembrance	of	power.	And	let’s	face	it,	there
are	few—in	this	world	or	any	other—who’d	turn	their	back	on	the	promise	of
power.	Iskaral	Pust	would	know	that,	and	that	knowledge	would	shape	any	offer
he	made.	Take	on	this	role,	lass,	and	you	can	topple	an	empire…
“Of	course,”	Mappo	said,	leaning	back	against	the	wall	and	sighing,	“we
may	be	on	entirely	the	wrong…”	He	slowly	sat	forward	again,	brows	knitting.
“…trail.”
Fiddler ’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	Trell.	“What	do	you	mean?”
“The	Path	of	Hands.	The	convergence	of	Soletaken	and	D’ivers—Pust	is
involved.”
“Explain.”
Mappo	pointed	a	blunt	finger	at	the	paving	stones	beneath	them.	“At	the
lowest	levels	of	this	temple	there	lies	a	chamber.	Its	floor—flagstones—
displays	a	series	of	carvings.	Inscribing	something	like	a	Deck	of	Dragons.
Neither	Icarium	nor	I	have	seen	anything	like	it	before.	If	it	is	indeed	a	Deck,
it’s	an	Elder	version.	Not	Houses,	but	Holds,	the	forces	more	elemental,	more
raw	and	primitive.”
“How	does	that	relate	to	shapeshifting?”
“You	can	view	the	past	as	something	like	a	mouldy	old	book.	The	closer


you	get	to	the	beginning,	the	more	fragmented	are	the	pages.	They	veritably
fall	apart	in	your	hands,	and	you’re	left	with	but	a	handful	of	words—most	of
them	in	a	language	you	can’t	even	understand.”	Mappo	closed	his	eyes	for	a
long	moment,	then	he	looked	up	and	said,	“Somewhere	among	those	scattered
words	is	recounted	the	creation	of	shapeshifters—the	forces	that	are	Soletaken
and	D’ivers	are	that	old,	Fiddler.	They	were	old	even	in	Elder	times.	No	one
species	can	claim	propriety,	and	that	includes	the	four	Founding	Races:	Jaghut,
Forkrul	Assail,	Imass	and	K’Chain	Che’Malle.
“No	shapeshifter	can	abide	another—under	normal	circumstances,	that	is.
There	are	exceptions	but	I	need	not	go	into	them	here.	Yet,	within	them	all,
there	is	a	hunger	as	deep	in	the	bone	as	the	bestial	fever	itself.	The	lure	to
dominance.	To	command	all	other	shapeshifters,	to	fashion	an	army	of	such
creatures—all	slaved	to	your	desire.	From	an	army,	an	Empire.	An	Empire	of
ferocity	unlike	anything	that	has	been	seen	before—”
Fiddler	grunted.	“Are	you	implying	that	an	Empire	born	of	Soletaken	and
D’ivers	would	be	inherently	worse—more	evil—than	any	other?	I’m
surprised,	Trell.	Nastiness	grows	like	a	cancer	in	any	and	every	organization—
human	or	otherwise,	as	you	well	know.	And	nastiness	gets	nastier.	Whatever
evil	you	let	ride	becomes	commonplace,	eventually.	Problem	is,	it’s	easier	to
get	used	to	it	than	carve	it	out.”
Mappo’s	answering	smile	was	broken-hearted.	“Well	said,	Fiddler.	When	I
said	ferocity	I	meant	a	miasma	of	chaos.	But	I	will	grant	you	that	terror	thrives
equally	well	in	order.”	He	rolled	his	shoulders	a	third	time,	sat	straighter	to
work	out	kinks	in	his	back.	“The	shapeshifters	are	gathering	to	the	promise	of
a	gate	through	which	they	can	attain	such	Ascendancy.	To	become	a	god	of	the
Soletaken	and	D’ivers—each	shapeshifter	seeks	nothing	less,	and	will	abide	no
obstacle.	Fiddler,	we	think	the	gate	lies	below,	and	we	think	that	Iskaral	Pust
will	do	all	he	can	to	prevent	the	shapeshifters	from	finding	it—even	to	painting
false	trails	in	the	desert,	to	mimic	the	trail	of	handprints	that	all	lead	to	the
place	of	the	gate.”
“And	Pust	has	a	role	in	mind	for	you	and	Icarium?”
“Likely,”	Mappo	conceded.	His	face	was	suddenly	ashen.	“I	believe	he
knows	about	us—about	Icarium,	that	is.	He	knows…”
Knows	what?	Fiddler	was	tempted	to	ask,	though	he	realized	that	the	Trell
would	not	willingly	explain.	The	name	Icarium	was	known—not	widely,	but
known	nonetheless.	A	Jaghut-blood	wanderer	around	whom	swirled,	like	the
blackest	wake,	rumors	of	devastation,	appalling	murders,	genocide.	The	sapper
mentally	shook	his	head.	The	Icarium	he	was	coming	to	know	made	those
rumors	seem	ludicrous.	The	Jhag	was	generous,	compassionate.	If	horrors	still


trailed	in	his	wake	they	must	be	ancient—youth	was	the	time	of	excess,	after
all.	This	Icarium	was	too	wise,	too	scarred,	to	tumble	into	power ’s	river	of
blood.	What	did	Pust	hope	would	be	unleashed	by	these	two?
“Perhaps,”	Fiddler	said,	“you	and	Icarium	are	Pust’s	last	line	of	defense.
Should	the	Path	converge	here.”	Aye,	preventing	the	shapeshifters	from
reaching	the	gate’s	a	good	thing,	but	the	effort	may	prove	fatal…or,	it	seems,
something	worse.
“Possibly,”	Mappo	admitted	glumly.
“Well,	you	could	leave.”
The	Trell	looked	up,	smiled	wryly.	“Icarium	has	his	own	quest,	I’m	afraid.
Thus,	we	shall	remain.”
Fiddler ’s	eyes	narrowed.	“You	two	would	seek	to	prevent	the	gate	from
being	used,	wouldn’t	you?	That’s	what	Iskaral	Pust	knows,	that’s	what	he	relies
upon,	isn’t	it?	He’s	used	your	sense	of	duty	and	honor	against	you.”
“A	powerful	ploy.	And	given	its	efficacy,	he	might	well	use	it	again—with
the	three	of	you.”
Fiddler	scowled.	“He’d	be	hard-pressed	to	find	me	that	loyal	about
anything.	While	being	a	soldier	relies	on	such	things	as	duty	and	honor,	it’s
also	something	that	beats	Hood	out	of	both	of	them.	As	for	Crokus,	his	loyalty
is	to	Apsalar.	And	as	for	her…”	He	fell	silent.
“Aye.”	Mappo	reached	out	and	settled	a	hand	on	the	sapper ’s	shoulder.
“And	so	I	can	see	the	cause	of	your	distress,	Fiddler.	And	empathize.”
“You	say	you’ll	escort	us	to	Tremorlor.”
“We	shall.	The	journey	will	be	fraught.	Icarium	has	decided	to	guide	you.”
“Then	it	truly	exists.”
“I	certainly	hope	so.”
“I	think	it’s	time	we	rejoined	the	others.”
“And	recount	for	them	our	thoughts?”
“Hood’s	breath,	no!”
The	Trell	nodded,	pushing	himself	to	his	feet.
Fiddler	hissed.
“What	is	it?”	Mappo	asked.
“The	lantern’s	out.	Has	been	for	some	time.	We’re	in	the	dark,	Trell.”
	
The	temple	was	oppressive	to	Fiddler ’s	mind.	The	squat,	cyclopean	walls
leaned	and	sagged	in	the	lower	levels,	as	if	buckling	under	the	weight	of	the
stone	overhead.	Dust	sifted	like	water	from	the	ceiling	joins	in	places,	leaving
pyramids	on	the	paving	stones.	He	limped	in	Mappo’s	wake	as	they	made	their


way	to	the	spiral	stairs	that	would	take	them	back	up	to	the	others.
Half	a	dozen	bhok’arala	shadowed	them	on	the	way,	each	gripping	leafy
branches	that	they	used	to	sweep	and	swat	the	stones	as	they	scampered	along.
The	sapper	would	have	been	more	amused	if	the	creatures	had	not	achieved
such	perfection	in	their	mimicry	of	Iskaral	Pust	and	his	obsession	with	spiders
—right	down	to	the	fierce	concentration	on	their	round,	wrinkled	black	faces.
Mappo	had	explained	that	the	creatures	worshipped	the	High	Priest.	Not
like	a	dog	its	master,	but	like	acolytes	their	god.	Offerings,	obscure	symbols
and	fitful	icons	crowded	their	awkward	rituals.	Many	of	those	rituals	seemed	to
involve	bodily	wastes.	When	you	can’t	produce	holy	books,	produce	what	you
can,	I	suppose.	The	creatures	drove	Iskaral	Pust	to	distraction.	He	cursed	them,
and	had	taken	to	carrying	rocks	in	a	sack.	He	flung	the	missiles	at	the
bhok’arala	at	every	opportunity.
The	winged	creatures	gathered	those	god-sent	objects	and	clearly	revered
them—the	High	Priest	had	found	the	sack	carefully	refilled	when	he	awoke	this
morning.	Pust	had	flown	into	a	spitting	rage	at	the	discovery.
Mappo	nearly	stumbled	over	a	cache	of	torches	on	the	way.	Darkness	was
anathema	to	shadows.	Pust	wanted	to	encourage	an	escort	of	his	god’s	minions.
They	lit	one	each,	sardonically	aware	of	their	ulterior	value.	While	Mappo
could	see	well	enough	without	their	aid,	Fiddler	had	been	left	groping,	one
hand	clutching	the	Trell’s	chest	harness.
They	reached	the	staircase	and	paused.	The	bhok’arala	held	back	a	dozen
paces	down	the	aisle,	twittering	among	themselves	in	some	obscure	but
vehement	argument.
“Icarium	has	passed	this	way	recently,”	Mappo	said.
“Does	sorcery	heighten	your	sensitivity?”	Fiddler	asked.
“Not	precisely.	More	like	centuries	of	companionship—”
“That	which	links	you	to	him,	you	mean.”
The	Trell	grunted.	“Not	one	chain	but	a	thousand,	soldier.”
“Is	your	friendship	such	a	burden,	then?”
“Some	burdens	are	willingly	embraced.”
Fiddler	was	silent	for	a	few	breaths.	“It’s	said	Icarium	is	obsessed	with
time,	true?”
“Aye.”
“He	builds	bizarre	constructs	to	measure	it,	places	those	constructs	in
locations	all	over	the	world.”
“His	temporal	maps,	yes.”
“He	feels	he	is	nearing	his	goal,	doesn’t	he?	He’s	about	to	find	his	answer
—the	one	you	would	do	anything	to	prevent.	Is	that	your	vow,	Mappo?	To	keep


the	Jhag	ignorant?”
“Ignorant	of	the	past,	yes.	His	past.”
“That	notion	frightens	me,	Mappo.	Without	history	there’s	no	growth—”
“Aye.”
The	sapper	fell	silent	again.	He’d	run	out	of	things	he	dared	to	say.	There’s
such	pain	in	this	giant	warrior.	Such	sadness.	Has	Icarium	never	wondered?
Never	questioned	this	centuries-long	partnership?	And	what	is	friendship	to	the
Jhag?	Without	memory	it’s	an	illusion,	an	agreement	taken	on	faith	and	faith
alone.	How	on	earth	is	Icarium’s	generosity	born	from	that?
They	resumed	their	journey,	climbing	the	saddle-backed	stone	steps.	After
a	short	pause,	punctuated	by	what	Fiddler	was	convinced	was	heated
whispering,	the	bhok’arala	fell	silent	and	slipped	into	their	wake	once	again.
Emerging	onto	the	main	level,	Mappo	and	Fiddler	were	accosted	with	the
harsh	echo	of	a	shouting	voice,	bouncing	down	the	hallway	from	the	altar
chamber.	The	sapper	grimaced.	“That	would	be	Crokus.”
“Not	in	prayer,	I	take	it.”
They	found	the	young	Daru	thief	at	the	extreme	edge	of	his	patience.	He
held	Iskaral	Pust	by	the	front	of	his	robe,	pushed	up	against	the	wall	behind	the
dusty	altarstone.	Pust’s	feet	dangled	ten	inches	above	the	flagstones,	kicking
feebly.	Off	to	one	side	stood	Apsalar,	arms	crossed,	watching	the	scene	without
expression.
Fiddler	stepped	forward	and	laid	a	hand	on	the	lad’s	shoulder.	“You’re
choking	the	life	out	of	him,	Crokus—”
“Precisely	what	he	deserves,	Fiddler!”
“I	won’t	argue	that,	but	in	case	you	haven’t	noticed,	there’s	shadows
gathering.”
“He’s	right,”	Apsalar	said.	“Like	I	said	before,	Crokus.	You’re	moments
from	Hood’s	Gates	yourself.”
The	Daru	hesitated;	then,	with	a	snarl,	he	flung	Pust	away.	The	High	Priest
skidded	along	the	wall,	gasping,	then	straightened	and	began	adjusting	his
robe.	He	spoke	in	a	rasp.	“Precipitous	youth!	I	am	reminded	of	my	own
melodramatic	gestures	when	I	but	toddled	about	in	Aunt	Tulla’s	yard.	Bullying
the	chickens	when	they	objected	to	the	straw	hats	I	had	spent	hours	weaving.
Incapable	of	appreciating	the	intricate	plaits	I	devised.	I	was	deeply	offended.”
He	cocked	his	head,	grinned	up	at	Crokus.	“She’ll	look	good	in	my	new	and
improved	straw	hat—”
Fiddler	intercepted	Crokus’s	lunge	and	grappled	with	the	lad.	With
Mappo’s	help	he	pulled	him	back	as	the	High	Priest	scampered	away,	giggling.
The	giggle	broke	into	a	fit	of	coughing	that	had	Pust	staggering	about	as	if


suddenly	blinded.	One	groping	hand	found	a	wall,	which	he	sagged	against	like
a	drunkard.	The	cough	ended	with	a	last	hack,	then	he	wiped	his	eyes	and
looked	up.
Crokus	growled,	“He	wants	Apsalar	to—”
“We	know,”	Fiddler	said.	“We	worked	that	much	out,	lad.	The	point	is,	it’s
up	to	her,	isn’t	it?”
Mappo	glanced	at	him	in	surprise.	The	sapper	shrugged.	Late	in	this
wisdom,	but	I	got	there	eventually.
“I	have	been	used	by	an	Ascendant	once,”	Apsalar	said.	“I’ll	not	willingly
be	used	again.”
“You	are	not	to	be	used,”	Iskaral	Pust	hissed,	beginning	a	strange	dance,
“you	lead!	You	command!	You	impose	your	will!	Dictate	terms!	Free	to
express	every	tantrum,	enforce	every	whim,	act	like	a	spoiled	child	and	be
worshipped	for	it!”	He	ducked	down	suddenly,	paused,	then	said	in	a	whisper,
“Such	lures	as	to	entice!	Self-examination	is	dispensed	with	at	the	beck	and	at
the	call	of	privileges	unfettered!	She	wavers,	she	leans—see	it	in	her	eyes!”
“I	do	not,”	Apsalar	said	coolly.
“She	does!	Such	percipience	in	the	lass	as	to	sense	my	every	thought—as	if
she	could	hear	them	aloud!	The	Rope’s	shadow	remains	within	her,	a	linkage
not	to	be	denied!	Gods,	I	am	brilliant!”
With	a	disgusted	snort	Apsalar	strode	from	the	chamber.
Iskaral	Pust	scurried	after	her.
Fiddler	held	back	the	Daru’s	attempt	to	pursue.	“She	can	handle	him,
Crokus,”	the	sapper	said.	“That	should	be	plain—even	to	you.”
“There	are	more	mysteries	here	than	you	imagine,”	Mappo	said,	frowning
after	the	High	Priest.
They	heard	voices	in	the	hall,	then	Icarium	appeared	at	the	entrance,
wearing	his	deer-hide	cloak	with	the	dust	of	the	desert	on	his	dusky	green	skin.
He	saw	the	question	in	Mappo’s	eyes	and	shrugged.	“He’s	left	the	temple—I
trailed	him	as	far	as	the	storm’s	edge.”
Fiddler	asked,	“Who	are	you	talking	about?”
“Servant,”	Mappo	answered,	his	frown	deepening.	He	glanced	at	Crokus.
“We	think	he’s	Apsalar ’s	father.”
The	lad’s	eyes	widened.	“Is	he	one-armed?”
“No,”	Icarium	replied.	“Iskaral	Pust’s	servant	is	a	fisherman,	however.
Indeed,	his	barque	can	be	found	in	a	lower	chamber	of	this	temple.	He	speaks
Malazan—”
“Her	father	lost	an	arm	at	the	siege	of	Li	Heng,”	Crokus	said,	shaking	his
head.	“He	was	among	the	rebels	who	held	the	walls,	and	had	his	arm	burned	off


when	the	Imperial	Army	retook	the	city.”
“When	a	god	intervenes…”	Mappo	said,	then	shrugged.	“One	of	his	arms
looks…young…younger	than	the	other,	Crokus.	Servant	was	sent	into	hiding
when	we	brought	you	back	here.	Pust	was	hiding	him	from	you.	Why?”
Icarium	spoke.	“Was	it	not	Shadowthrone	who	arranged	the	possession?
When	Cotillion	took	her,	Shadowthrone	may	well	have	taken	him.	There	is
little	point	in	trying	to	guess	at	motivations—the	Lord	of	the	Shadow	Realm	is
notoriously	obscure.	Nonetheless,	I	see	a	certain	logic	in	the	possibility.”
Crokus	had	gone	pale.	His	gaze	snapped	to	the	vacant	entranceway.
“Leverage,”	he	whispered.
Fiddler	instantly	grasped	the	Daru’s	meaning.	He	turned	to	Icarium.	“You
said	Servant’s	trail	led	into	the	Whirlwind	storm.	Is	there	a	particular	place
where	Sha’ik	is	expected	to	be	reborn?”
“The	High	Priest	says	her	body	has	not	been	moved	from	where	it	fell	at
the	hands	of	the	Red	Blades.”
“Within	the	storm?”
The	Jhag	nodded.
“He’s	telling	her	right	now,”	Crokus	growled,	his	hands	balling	into	fists,
the	knuckles	whitening.	“	‘Be	reborn,	and	you	shall	be	reunited	with	your
father.’	”
“	‘A	life	given	for	a	life	taken,’	”	Mappo	muttered.	The	Trell	eyed	the
sapper.	“Are	you	mended	well	enough	for	a	pursuit?”
Fiddler	nodded.	“I	can	ride,	walk…or	crawl	if	it	comes	to	that.”
“I	shall	prepare	for	our	departure,	then.”
	
In	the	small	storage	room	where	the	gear	and	travel	packs	had	been	assembled,
Mappo	crouched	down	over	his	own	sack.	He	rummaged	amidst	the	bedrolls
and	canvas	tent	until	his	hands	found	the	hard,	hide-wrapped	object	he	sought.
The	Trell	pulled	it	forth	and	slipped	the	waxed	elk	hide	away,	revealing	a	solid
long-bone	half	again	the	length	of	his	forearm.	The	shaft	was	golden	in	lustre,
polished	by	age.	Leather	cord	was	wrapped	around	the	grip,	enough	for	two
hands.	The	distal	end	was	ringed	in	similarly	polished	spike-shaped	teeth—
each	the	size	of	his	thumb—set	in	an	iron	collar.
A	hint	of	sage	reached	Mappo’s	nostrils.	The	sorcery	within	the	weapon
was	still	potent.	The	efforts	of	seven	Trell	witches	was	not	a	thing	to	fade	with
time.	The	long-bone	had	been	found	in	a	mountain	stream.	The	mineral-rich
water	had	made	it	hard	as	iron,	and	just	as	heavy.	Other	parts	of	the	strange,
unknown	beast’s	skeleton	had	been	recovered	as	well,	though	those	had


remained	with	the	Clan	as	revered	objects,	each	invested	with	power.
Only	once	had	Mappo	seen	all	the	fragments	laid	out	together,	hinting	at	a
beast	twice	the	mass	of	a	plains	bear,	the	upper	and	lower	jaws	both	sporting	a
row	of	fangs	that	roughly	interlocked.	The	thigh	bone—which	he	now	held	in
his	hands—had	the	shape	of	a	bird’s,	yet	impossibly	huge	and	twice	as	thick	as
the	hollow	shaft	it	surrounded.	Ridges	appeared	here	and	there	along	the	shaft,
where	what	must	have	been	massive	muscles	were	attached.
His	hands	trembled	beneath	the	burden	of	the	weapon.
Icarium	spoke	behind	him.	“I	do	not	recall	you	ever	using	that,	friend.”
Unwilling	as	yet	turn	to	to	the	Jhag,	Mappo	closed	his	eyes.	“No.”	You	do
not.
“I	am	continually	astonished,”	Icarium	went	on,	“at	just	how	much	you
manage	to	fit	into	that	tattered	sack.”
Another	trick	of	the	Clan	witches—this	small,	private	warren	beyond	the
drawstrings.	Should	never	have	lasted	this	long.	They	said	a	month,	maybe	two.
Not	centuries.	His	gaze	fell	again	to	the	weapon	in	his	hands.	There	was	power
in	these	bones	to	start	with—the	witches	simply	did	some	enhancements,	spells
of	binding	to	keep	the	parts	together	and	such.	Perhaps	the	bone	feeds	the
warren	in	the	sack	somehow…or	the	handful	of	irritating	people	I’ve	stuffed
inside	in	my	own	fits	of	ill	temper.	Wonder	where	they	all	went…	He	sighed	and
rewrapped	the	weapon,	returned	it	to	the	sack	and	cinched	tight	the	drawstrings.
Then	he	straightened,	turning	to	offer	Icarium	a	smile.
The	Jhag	had	collected	his	own	weapons.	“It	seems	our	journey	to	find
Tremorlor	shall	have	to	wait	a	while	longer,”	he	said,	shrugging.	“Apsalar	has
set	off	in	pursuit	of	her	father.”
“And	thus	will	be	led	to	the	place	where	Sha’ik’s	body	awaits.”
“We	are	to	go	after	her,”	Icarium	said.	“Perhaps	we	can	circumvent	Iskaral
Pust’s	intentions.”
“Not	just	Pust,	it	seems,	but	the	Whirlwind	goddess—who	may	well	have
shaped	this	from	the	very	start.”
The	Jhag	frowned.
Mappo	sighed	again.	“Think	on	it,	friend.	Sha’ik	was	anointed	as	the
Seeress	of	the	Apocalypse	almost	as	soon	as	she	was	born.	Forty	or	more
years	in	Raraku,	preparing	for	this	year…Raraku	is	not	a	kind	place,	and	four
decades	will	wear	down	even	a	chosen	one.	Perhaps	preparation	was	all	the
Seeress	was	meant	to	achieve—the	war	itself	requires	new	blood.”
“Yet	did	not	the	soldier	say	that	Cotillion’s	relinquishing	of	the	lass	was
forced	upon	him	by	the	threat	of	Anomander	Rake?	The	possession	was	meant
to	last	much	longer,	taking	the	lass	ever	closer	to	the	Empress	herself…”


“So	everyone	assumes,”	Mappo	said.	“Iskaral	Pust	is	a	High	Priest	of
Shadow.	I	think	it	best	to	assume	that	no	matter	how	devious	Pust	is,
Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion	are	more	devious.	By	far.	A	truly	possessed
Apsalar	would	never	get	close	to	Laseen—the	Claws	would	sniff	it	out,	not	to
mention	the	Adjunct	and	her	Otataral	sword.	But	an	Apsalar	no	longer
possessed…well…and	Cotillion’s	made	sure	she’s	not	just	a	simple	fishergirl
any	more,	hasn’t	he?”
“A	scheme	within	a	scheme.	Have	you	discussed	this	with	Fiddler?”
Mappo	shook	his	head.	“I	may	be	wrong.	It	may	be	that	the	Rulers	of
Shadow	simply	saw	an	opportunity	here,	a	means	to	take	advantage	of	the
convergence—the	dagger	is	honed,	then	slipped	in	amidst	the	tumult.	I	have
been	wondering	why	Apsalar ’s	memories	are	returning	so	swiftly…and	so
painlessly.”
“And	we	have	no	role	in	this?”
“That	I	do	not	know.”
“Apsalar	becomes	Sha’ik.	Sha’ik	defeats	the	Malazan	armies,	liberates	the
Seven	Cities.	Laseen,	forced	to	take	charge	herself,	arrives	with	an	army	to
reconquer	the	unruly	citizens	of	this	land.”
“Armed	with	Cotillion’s	skill	and	knowledge,	Sha’ik	kills	Laseen.	End	of
Empire—”
“End?”	Icarium’s	brows	rose.	“More	likely	a	new	Emperor	or	Empress
with	Shadow	the	patron	gods…”
Mappo	grunted.	“A	worrying	thought.”
“Why?”
The	Trell	scowled.	“I	had	a	sudden	vision	of	Emperor	Iskaral	Pust…”	He
shook	himself,	lifted	the	sack	and	swung	it	over	a	shoulder.	“For	the	moment,	I
think	it	best	we	keep	this	conversation	to	ourselves,	friend.”
Icarium	nodded.	He	hesitated,	then	said,	“I	have	one	question,	Mappo.”
“Aye?”
“I	feel	closer	to	discovering…who	I	am…than	ever	before.	Tremorlor	is
said	to	be	time-aspected—”
“Aye,	so	it’s	said,	though	what	that	means	is	anyone’s	guess.”
“Answers,	I	believe.	For	me.	For	my	life.”
“What	do	you	ask,	Icarium?”
“Should	I	discover	my	past,	Mappo,	how	will	that	change	me?”
“You	are	asking	me?	Why?”
Icarium’s	gaze	was	half-lidded	as	he	smiled	at	Mappo.	“Because,	friend,
within	you	reside	my	memories—none	of	which	you	are	prepared	to	reveal.”
And	so	we	come	to	this	point…again.	“Who	you	are,	Icarium,	is	not


dependent	on	me,	nor	on	my	memories.	What	value	would	it	be	to	seek	to
become	my	version	of	you?	I	accompany	you,	friend,	in	your	quest.	If	the	truth
—If	your	truth—is	to	be	found,	then	you	shall	find	it.”
Icarium	was	nodding,	past	echoes	of	this	conversation	returning	to	him—
but	little	else,	by	the	Ancients,	little	else,	please—“Yet	something	tells	me	that
you,	Mappo,	are	a	part	of	that	hidden	truth.”
Ice	filled	the	Trell’s	heart.	He’s	not	taken	it	that	far	before—is	Tremorlor’s
proximity	nudging	open	the	locked	gate?	“Then,	when	the	time	comes,	you
shall	face	a	decision.”
“I	think	I	shall.”
They	studied	each	other,	their	eyes	searching	the	altered	reflection	before
them,	one	set	plagued	with	innocent	questing,	the	other	disguising	devastating
knowledge.	And	between	us,	hanging	in	the	balance,	a	friendship	neither
understands.
Icarium	reached	out	and	clasped	Mappo’s	shoulder.	“We	should	join	the
others.”
	
Fiddler	sat	astride	the	Gral	gelding	as	they	waited	at	the	base	of	the	cliff.
Bhok’arala	scampered	along	the	temple	face,	squealing	and	barking	as	they
struggled	with	the	lowering	of	the	mule	packs	and	assorted	supplies.	One	had
got	its	tail	snagged	in	the	rope	and	screamed	pitifully	as	it	slowly	descended
with	the	gear.	Iskaral	Pust	hung	half	out	of	the	tower	window,	throwing	rocks
at	the	hapless	creature—none	of	which	came	close.
The	sapper	eyed	Mappo	and	Icarium,	sensing	a	new	tension	between	them,
though	they	continued	to	work	together	with	familiar	ease.	The	tension	was	in
the	words	unspoken	between	the	two,	Fiddler	suspected.	Changes	are	coming	to
us	all,	it	seems.	He	glanced	over	at	Crokus,	who	sat	rigid	with	barely	restrained
impatience	on	the	spare	mount	he	had	inherited.	He’d	caught	the	lad	running
through	a	gamut	of	close-in	knife-fighting	moves	a	short	while	earlier.	The
few	times	the	sapper	had	seen	him	use	the	knives	before	there’d	been	a	kind	of
desperation	marring	his	technique.	Crokus	had	some	skill	but	he	lacked
maturity—he	was	too	conscious	of	himself	behind	the	blades.	That	had
changed,	Fiddler	realized	as	he	watched	the	lad	go	through	his	routine.	Taking
cuts	was	essential	to	delivering	killing	thrusts.	Knife-fighting	was	a	messy
business.	Cold	determination	backed	Crokus	now—he	would	do	more	than	just
hold	his	own	from	now	on,	the	sapper	knew.	Nor	would	he	be	so	quick	to
throw	his	knives,	unless	he	had	plenty	of	spares	tucked	within	easy	reach	in	the
folds	of	his	telaba.	Now	more	likely,	I’d	hazard.


The	late-afternoon	sky	was	hazy	ochre,	filled	with	the	suspended	residue	of
the	Whirlwind,	which	still	raged	in	the	heart	of	Raraku	no	more	than	ten
leagues	distant.	The	heat	was	made	even	more	oppressive	by	that	suffocating
cloak.
Mappo	freed	the	snared	bhok’aral,	earning	a	nasty	bite	on	the	wrist	for	his
kindness.	The	creature	half	scampered,	half	flew	back	up	the	cliff	face,	voicing
an	abusive	torrent	as	it	went.
Fiddler	called	out	to	the	Trell.	“Set	us	a	pace,	then!”
Mappo	nodded	and	he	and	Icarium	set	off	down	the	trail.
The	sapper	was	glad	he	was	the	only	one	to	glance	back	to	see	a	score	of
bhok’arala	on	the	cliff	face	waving	farewell,	with	Iskaral	Pust	almost	falling
from	the	window	in	his	efforts	to	sweep	the	nearest	creatures	from	the	tower ’s
stone	wall	with	his	broom.
	
The	renegade	Korbolo	Dom’s	army	of	the	Apocalypse	was	spread	over	the
rumpled	carpet	of	grassy	hills	that	marked	the	south	edge	of	the	plain.	On	each
hilltop	stood	command	tents	and	the	raised	banners	of	various	tribes	and	selfproclaimed	battalions.	Between	small	towns	of	tents	and	wagons	roamed	vast
herds	of	cattle	and	horses.
The	encampment’s	pickets	were	marked	by	three	ragged	rows	of	crucified
prisoners.	Kites	and	rhizan	and	capemoths	swarmed	around	each	victim.
The	outermost	line	rose	above	the	earthworks	and	trench	less	than	fifty
paces	away	from	Kalam’s	position.	He	lay	flat	in	the	high	yellow	grasses,	the
heat	of	the	parched	ground	rising	up	around	him	with	a	smell	of	dust	and	sage.
Insects	crawled	over	him,	their	prickling	feet	tracking	aimless	paths	across	his
hands	and	forearms.	The	assassin	ignored	them,	his	eyes	on	the	nearest	of	the
crucified	victims.
A	young	Malazan	lad	of	no	more	than	twelve	or	thirteen.	Capemoths	rode
his	arms	from	shoulder	to	wrist,	making	them	look	like	wings.	Rhizan
gathered	in	writhing	clumps	at	his	hands	and	feet,	where	the	spikes	had	been
driven	through	bones	and	flesh.	The	boy	had	no	eyes,	no	nose—his	face	was	a
ravaged	wound—yet	he	still	lived.
The	image	was	etching	itself	into	Kalam’s	heart	like	acid	into	bronze.	His
limbs	felt	cold,	as	if	his	own	claim	to	life	was	withdrawing,	pooling	in	his	gut.
I	cannot	save	him.	I	cannot	even	kill	him	in	swift	mercy.	Not	this	lad,	not	a
single	one	of	these	hundreds	of	Malazans	surrounding	this	army.	I	can	do
nothing.	The	knowledge	was	a	whisper	of	madness.	The	assassin	feared	but	one
thing	that	left	him	skeined	with	terror:	helplessness.	But	not	the	helplessness	of


being	a	prisoner,	or	of	undergoing	torture—he’d	been	victim	to	both,	and	he
well	knew	that	torture	could	break	anyone—anyone	at	all.	But	this…Kalam
feared	insignificance,	he	feared	the	inability	to	produce	an	effect,	to	force	a
change	upon	the	world	beyond	his	flesh.
It	was	this	knowledge	that	the	scene	before	him	was	searing	into	his	soul.	I
can	do	nothing.	Nothing.	He	stared	across	the	intervening	fifty	paces	into	the
young	man’s	sightless	sockets,	the	distance	between	diminishing	with	every
breath,	until	he	felt	close	enough	to	brush	his	lips	against	the	boy’s	sun-cracked
forehead.	To	whisper	lies—your	death	won’t	be	forgotten,	the	truth	of	your
precious	life	which	you	still	refuse	to	surrender	because	it’s	all	you	have.	You
are	not	alone,	child—lies.	The	lad	was	alone.	Alone	with	his	withering,
collapsing	life.	And	when	the	body	became	a	corpse,	when	it	rotted	and	fell
away	to	join	all	those	others	ringing	a	place	that	had	once	held	an	army,	he
would	be	forgotten.	Another	faceless	victim.	One	in	a	number	that	beggared
comprehension.
The	Empire	would	exact	revenge—if	it	was	able—and	the	numbers	would
grow.	The	Imperial	threat	was	ever	thus:	The	destruction	you	wreak	upon	us
and	our	kind,	we	deliver	back	to	you	tenfold.	If	Kalam	succeeded	in	killing
Laseen,	then	perhaps	he	would	also	succeed	in	guiding	to	the	throne	someone
with	spine	enough	to	avoid	ruling	from	a	position	of	crisis.	The	assassin	and
Quick	Ben	had	someone	in	mind	for	that.	If	all	goes	as	planned.	But	for	these,
it	was	too	late.
He	let	out	a	slow	breath,	only	now	realizing	he	was	lying	on	an	ants’	nest
and	its	inhabitants	were	telling	him	to	leave	in	no	uncertain	terms.	I	lie	with	the
weight	of	a	god	on	their	world,	and	these	ants	don’t	like	it.	We’re	so	much	more
alike	than	most	would	think.
Kalam	edged	back	through	the	grasses.	Not	the	first	scene	of	horror	I’ve
witnessed,	after	all.	A	soldier	learns	to	wear	every	kind	of	armor,	and	so	long
as	he	stays	in	the	trade,	it	works	well	enough.	Gods,	I	don’t	think	my	sanity
would	survive	peace!
With	that	chilling	thought	seeping	like	weakness	into	his	limbs,	Kalam
reached	the	back	slope,	out	of	the	victims’	line	of	sight.	He	scanned	the	area,
seeking	sign	of	Apt’s	presence,	but	the	demon	seemed	to	have	vanished.	After	a
moment	he	rose	into	a	crouch	and	padded	back	to	the	aspen	grove	where	the
others	waited.
Minala	rose	from	cover	as	he	approached	the	low	brush	encircling	the
silver-leafed	trees,	crossbow	in	her	hands.
Kalam	shook	his	head.	In	silence	they	both	slipped	between	the	spindly
boles	and	rejoined	the	group.


Keneb	had	succumbed	to	yet	another	bout	of	fever.	His	wife,	Selv,	hovered
over	him	in	tight-lipped	fear	that	seemed	on	the	edge	of	panic,	holding	a	watersoaked	cloth	to	Keneb’s	forehead	and	murmuring	in	an	effort	to	still	his
thrashing	and	twitching.	The	children,	Vaneb	and	Kesen,	stood	nearby,
studiously	attending	to	their	horses.
“How	bad	is	it?”	Minala	asked,	carefully	uncocking	the	crossbow.
Kalam	was	preoccupied	with	plucking	and	brushing	ants	from	his	body	for
a	moment,	then	he	sighed.	“We’ll	not	get	around	them.	I	saw	standards	from	the
west	tribes—those	camps	are	still	growing,	meaning	the	Odhan	to	the	west
won’t	be	empty.	Eastward	we’d	run	into	villages	and	towns,	all	liberated	and
occupied	by	garrisons.	That	whole	horizon	is	nothing	but	smoke.”
“If	it	was	just	you	you’d	get	through,”	Minala	said,	reaching	up	to	brush
her	black	hair	from	her	face.	Her	light-gray	eyes	held	hard	on	him.	“Just
another	soldier	of	the	Apocalypse,	it	would	be	a	simple	task	to	take	picket	duty
on	the	south	edge,	then	slip	away	one	night.”
Kalam	grunted.	“Not	as	easy	as	you	think.	There’re	mages	in	that
encampment.”	And	I’ve	held	the	Book	in	my	hands—not	likely	I’d	stay
anonymous—
“What	difference	would	that	make?”	Minala	asked.	“Maybe	you’ve	got	a
reputation,	but	you’re	no	Ascendant.”
The	assassin	shrugged.	He	straightened,	retrieved	his	pack,	set	it	down	and
began	rummaging	through	its	contents.
“You	haven’t	answered	me,	Corporal,”	Minala	continued,	watching	him.
“Why	all	this	self-importance?	You’re	not	the	type	to	delude	yourself,	so	you
must	be	holding	something	back	from	us.	Some	other…significant	detail	about
yourself.”
“Sorcery,”	Kalam	muttered,	pulling	free	a	small	object	from	the	pack.	“Not
mine.	Quick	Ben’s.”	He	held	up	the	object	and	quirked	a	wry	grin.
“A	rock.”
“Aye.	Granted,	it’d	be	more	dramatic	if	it	was	a	faceted	gem	or	a	torc	of
gold.	But	there’s	not	a	mage	in	this	world	stupid	enough	to	invest	power	in	a
valuable	object.	After	all,	who’d	steal	a	rock?”
“I’ve	heard	legends	otherwise—”
“Oh,	you’ll	find	magic	embedded	in	jewels	and	such—sorcerers	make	up
dozens	of	them,	all	cursed	in	some	way	or	other.	Most	of	them	are	a	kind	of
magical	spying	device—the	sorcerer	can	track	them,	sometimes	even	see
through	them.	Claws	use	that	intelligence-gathering	method	all	the	time.”	He
tossed	the	rock	in	the	air,	caught	it,	then	suddenly	sobered.	“This	was	intended
to	be	used	as	a	last	resort…”	In	the	palace	at	Unta,	actually.


“What	does	it	do?”
The	assassin	grimaced.	I	haven’t	a	clue.	Quick	Ben’s	not	the	expansive	type,
the	bastard.	“It’s	your	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole,	Kalam.	With	this	you	can
stride	right	into	the	throne	room.	I	guarantee	it.”	He	glanced	around,	saw	a
low,	flat	rock	nearby.	“Get	everyone	ready	to	move.”
The	assassin	crouched	down	before	the	flat	rock,	set	the	stone	on	it,	then
found	a	fist-sized	cobble.	He	hefted	it	thoughtfully	before	bringing	it	crashing
down	on	the	stone.
He	was	shocked	as	it	splattered	like	wet	clay.
Darkness	swept	over	them.	Kalam	looked	up,	slowly	straightened.	Damn,	I
should’ve	guessed.
“Where	are	we?”	Selv	demanded	in	a	high,	taut	voice.
“Mother!”
The	assassin	turned	to	see	Kesen	and	Vaneb	stumbling	in	knee-deep	ash.
Ash	that	was	filled	with	charred	bones.	The	horses	were	shying,	tossing	their
heads	as	gray	dust	rose	like	smoke.
Hood’s	breath,	we’re	in	the	Imperial	Warren!	Kalam	found	himself
standing	on	a	broad,	raised	disc	of	gray	basalt.	Sky	merged	with	land	in	a
formless,	colorless	haze.	I	could	wring	your	neck,	Quick	Ben!	The	assassin	had
heard	rumors	that	such	a	warren	had	been	created	and	the	description	matched,
but	the	tales	he’d	picked	up	on	Genabackis	suggested	that	it	was	barely	nascent,
extending	no	more	than	a	few	hundred	leagues—if	leagues	mean	much	here—in
a	ring	around	Unta.	Instead,	it	reaches	all	the	way	into	Seven	Cities.	And
Genabackis?	Why	not?	Quick	Ben,	there	could	be	a	Claw	riding	your	shoulder
right	now…
The	children	had	settled	their	horses	and	were	now	in	the	saddles,	well
away	from	the	grisly	scorched	mound.	Kalam	glanced	over	to	see	Minala	and
Selv	tying	Keneb	onto	his	saddle.
The	assassin	approached	his	own	stallion.	The	beast	snorted	disdainfully	as
he	swung	himself	up	and	gathered	the	reins.
“We’re	in	a	warren,	aren’t	we?”	Minala	asked.	“I’d	always	believed	all
those	tales	of	other	realms	were	nothing	but	elaborate	inventions	wizards	and
priests	used	to	prop	up	all	the	fumbling	around	they	did.”
Kalam	grunted.	He’d	been	run	through	enough	warrens	and	plunged	into
enough	chaotic	maelstroms	of	sorcery	to	take	it	for	granted.	Minala	had	just
reminded	him	that	for	most	people	such	a	reality	was	remote,	viewed	with
skepticism	if	acknowledged	at	all.	Is	such	ignorance	a	comfort	or	a	source	of
blind	fear?
“I	take	it	we’re	safe	from	Korbolo	Dom	here?”


“I	certainly	hope	so,”	the	assassin	muttered.
“How	do	we	select	a	direction?	There’re	no	landmarks,	no	trail…”
“Quick	Ben	says	you	travel	with	an	intention	in	mind	and	the	warren	will
take	you	there.”
“And	the	destination	you	have	in	mind?”
Kalam	scowled,	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	Then	he	sighed.	“Aren.”
“How	safe	are	we?”
Safe?	We’ve	stepped	into	a	hornets’	nest.	“We’ll	see.”
“Oh,	that’s	a	comfort!”	Minala	snapped.
The	image	of	the	crucified	Malazan	boy	rose	once	again	in	the	assassin’s
thoughts.	He	glanced	over	at	Keneb’s	children.	“Better	this	risk	than	a…
different	certainty,”	he	muttered.
“Are	you	going	to	explain	that	comment?”
Kalam	shook	his	head.	“Enough	talk.	I’ve	a	city	to	visualize…”
	
Lostara	Yil	walked	her	mount	up	to	the	gaping	hole,	understanding	at	once	that,
although	she	had	never	seen	one	before,	this	was	a	portalway	into	another
warren.	Its	edges	had	begun	fading,	like	a	wound	closing.
She	hesitated.	The	assassin	had	chosen	a	shortcut,	a	means	of	slipping	past
the	traitor ’s	army	between	him	and	Aren.	The	Red	Blade	knew	she	had	no
choice	but	to	follow,	for	the	trail	would	prove	far	too	cold	should	she	manage
the	long	way	to	Aren.	Even	getting	through	Korbolo	Dom’s	forces	would
likely	prove	impossible—as	a	Red	Blade	she	was	bound	to	be	recognized,	even
wearing	unmarked	armor	as	she	did	now.
Still,	Lostara	Yil	hesitated.
Her	horse	reared	back	squealing	as	a	figure	staggered	from	the	portalway.
A	man,	gray-clothed,	gray-skinned—even	his	hair	was	gray—straightened
before	her,	glanced	around	with	strangely	luminous	eyes,	then	smiled.
“Not	a	hole	I	expected	to	fall	through,”	he	said	in	lilting	Malazan.	“My
apologies	if	I	startled	you.”	He	sketched	a	bow,	the	gesture	resulting	in	clouds
of	dust	cascading	from	him.	The	gray	was	ash,	Lostara	realized.	Dark	skin
revealed	itself	in	patches	on	the	man’s	lean	face.
He	eyed	her	knowingly.	“You	carry	an	aspected	sigil.	Hidden.”
“What?”	Her	hand	drifted	toward	her	sword	hilt.
The	man	caught	the	motion,	his	smile	broadening.	“You	are	a	Red	Blade,
an	officer	in	fact.	Which	makes	us	allies.”
Her	eyes	narrowed.	“Who	are	you?”
“Call	me	Pearl.	Now,	it	seems	you	were	about	to	enter	the	Imperial	Warren.


I	suggest	we	do	so	before	continuing	our	conversation—before	the	portalway
closes.”
“Can	you	not	keep	it	open,	Pearl?	After	all,	you	were	traveling	it…”
The	man’s	exaggerated	frown	was	mocking.	“Alas,	this	is	a	door	where	no
door	should	be	possible.	Granted,	north	of	here	even	the	Imperial	Warren	is
fraught	with…unwelcome	intruders…but	their	means	of	entry	is	far	more…
primitive,	shall	we	say…in	nature.	So,	since	this	portalway	is	clearly	not	of
your	making,	I	suggest	we	take	immediate	advantage	of	its	presence.”
“Not	until	I	know	who	you	are,	Pearl.	Rather,	what	you	are.”
“I	am	a	Claw,	of	course.	Who	else	is	granted	the	privilege	of	traveling	the
Imperial	Warren?”
She	nodded	at	the	portalway.	“Someone’s	just	granted	that	privilege	to
himself.”
Pearl’s	eyes	sparkled.	“And	this	is	what	you	shall	tell	me	about,	Red
Blade.”
She	sat	in	silence,	thinking,	then	nodded.	“Yes.	Ideal.	I	shall	accompany
you.”
Pearl	took	a	step	backward	and	beckoned	with	one	gloved	hand.
Lostara	Yil	tapped	heels	to	her	mount’s	flanks.

Quick	Ben’s	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole	was	slower	in	closing	than	anyone	had
anticipated.	Seven	hours	after	the	Red	Blade	and	the	Claw	had	vanished	within
the	Imperial	Warren,	stars	glittered	in	the	moonless	sky	overhead,	and	still	the
portalway	gaped,	its	red-lined	edges	fading	to	dull	magenta.
Sounds	drifted	into	the	glade,	echoes	of	panic	and	alarm	in	Korbolo
Dom’s	encampment.	Parties	of	riders	set	out	in	all	directions,	bearing	torches.
Mages	risked	their	warrens,	seeking	trails	through	the	now	perilous	pathways
of	sorcery.
Thirteen	hundred	Malazan	children	had	vanished,	the	liberation	unseen	by
the	pickets	or	the	mounted	patrols.	The	X-shaped	wooden	crosses	were	bare,
with	only	stains	of	blood,	urine	and	excrement	to	show	that	living	beings	had
once	hung	from	them	in	agony.
In	the	darkness	the	plain	was	strangely	alive	with	shadows,	flowing
sourcelessly	over	the	motionless	grasses.
Apt	strode	silently	into	the	glade,	her	daggerlike	fangs	gleaming	their
natural	grin.	Sweat	glistened	on	her	black	hide,	the	thick	spiny	bristles	of	her
hair	wet	with	dew.	She	stood	erect,	her	single	forelimb	clutching	the	limp	body


of	a	young	boy.	Blood	dripped	from	his	hands	and	feet,	and	his	face	had	been
horribly	chewed	and	pecked,	leaving	him	eyeless	and	with	a	gaping	red	hole
where	his	nose	had	been.	Faint	breaths	from	fevered,	shallow	lungs	showed	in
misty	plumes	that	drifted	forlornly	in	the	clearing.
The	demon	squatted	down	on	her	haunches	and	waited.
Shadows	gathered,	pouring	like	liquid	between	the	trees	to	hover	before
the	portalway.
Apt	cocked	her	head	and	spread	wide	her	mouth	in	something	like	a	canine
yawn.
A	vague	shape	took	form	within	the	shadows.	The	glowing	eyes	of
guardian	Hounds	appeared	to	flank	the	figure.
“I	thought	I	had	lost	you,”	Shadowthrone	whispered	to	the	demon.	“Snared
so	long	by	Sha’ik	and	her	doomed	goddess.	Yet	this	night	you	return,	not	alone
—oh	no,	not	alone,	aptorian.	You’ve	grown	ambitious	since	you	were	but	a
Demon	Lord’s	concubine.	Tell	me,	my	dear,	what	am	I	to	do	with	over	a
thousand	dying	mortals?”
The	Hounds	were	eyeing	Apt	as	if	the	demon	was	a	potential	meal.
“Am	I	a	cutter?	A	healer?”	Shadowthrone’s	voice	was	rising,	octave	by
octave.	“Is	Cotillion	a	kindly	uncle?	Are	my	Hounds	farmyard	skulkers	and
orphans’	puppies?”	The	shadow	that	was	the	god	flared	wildly.	“Have	you	gone
entirely	insane?”
Apt	spoke	in	a	rapid,	rasping	series	of	clicks	and	hisses.
“Of	course	Kalam	wanted	to	save	them!”	Shadowthrone	shrieked.	“But	he
knew	it	was	impossible!	Only	vengeance	was	possible!	But	now!	Now	I	must
exhaust	my	powers	healing	a	thousand	maimed	children!	And	for	what?”
Apt	spoke	again.
“Servants?	And	precisely	how	big	do	you	think	Shadow	Keep	is,	you	onearmed	imbecile!”
The	demon	said	nothing,	her	slate-gray	multifaceted	eye	glimmering	in	the
starlight.
Shadowthrone	hunched	suddenly,	his	gauzelike	cloak	wrapping	close	as	he
hugged	himself.	“An	army	of	servants,”	he	whispered.	“Servants.	Abandoned
by	the	Empire,	left	to	their	fates	at	the	hand	of	Sha’ik’s	bloodlusted	bandits.
There	will	be…ambivalence…in	their	scarred,	malleable	souls…”	The	god
glanced	up	at	the	demon.	“I	see	long-term	benefits	in	your	precipitous	act,
demon.	Lucky	for	you!”
Apt	hissed	and	clicked.
“You	wish	to	claim	for	your	own	the	one	in	your	clutches?	And—if	indeed
you	are	to	resume	your	guardianship	of	the	Bridgeburner	assassin—how


precisely	will	you	coordinate	such	conflicting	responsibilities?”
The	demon	replied.
Shadowthrone	spluttered.	“Such	nerve,	you	coddled	bitch!	No	wonder	you
fell	from	the	Aptorian	Lord’s	favor!”	He	fell	silent,	then,	after	a	moment,
flowed	forward.	“Forced	healing	demands	a	price,”	Shadowthrone	murmured.
“The	flesh	recovers	while	the	mind	writhes	with	the	memory	of	pain,	that
bludgeon	of	helplessness.”	He	raised	a	sleeve-shrouded	hand	to	the	boy’s
forehead.	“This	child	who	shall	ride	you	shall	be…unpredictable.”	He	hissed	a
laugh	as	the	wounds	began	closing,	as	new	flesh	formed	on	the	boy’s	ravaged
face.	“What	manner	of	eyes	do	you	wish	him	to	have,	my	dear?”
Apt	answered.
Shadowthrone	seemed	to	flinch,	then	he	laughed	again,	harsh	and	cold	this
time.	“	‘The	eyes	are	love’s	prism,’	are	they	now?	Will	you	go	hand	in	hand	to
the	fishmonger ’s	on	Market	Day,	my	dear?”
The	boy’s	head	jerked	back,	bones	altering	shape,	the	twin	gaping	orbits
merging	to	form	a	single	larger	one	above	a	nose	bridge	that	branched	to
either	side,	then	ran	up	the	outer	edge	of	the	socket	in	a	thin,	raised	ridge.	An
eye	to	match	the	demon’s	blurred	into	existence.
Shadowthrone	stepped	back	to	examine	his	handiwork.	“Aai,”	he
whispered.	“Who	then	is	it	who	now	looks	upon	me	through	such	a	prism?
Abyss	Below,	answer	not!”	The	god	spun	abruptly	to	stare	at	the	portalway.
“Cunning	Quick	Ben—I	know	his	handiwork.	He	could	have	gone	far	under
my	patronage…”
The	Malazan	boy	clambered	to	sit	behind	Apt’s	narrow,	jutting	shoulder
blade.	His	frail	body	shook	with	the	trauma	of	forced	healing,	and	an	eternity
nailed	to	a	cross,	but	his	ghastly	face	showed	a	slightly	ironic	smile	in	a	line
that	perfectly	matched	the	demon’s.
Apt	approached	the	portalway.
Shadowthrone	gestured.	“Go	on	then,	trail	the	ones	trailing	the
Bridgeburner.	Whiskeyjack’s	soldiers	were	ever	loyal,	I	seem	to	recall.	Kalam
does	not	intend	to	kiss	Laseen’s	cheeks	when	he	finds	her,	of	that	I’m	certain.”
Apt	hesitated,	then	spoke	one	last	time.
A	grimace	entered	the	god’s	tone	as	he	replied.	“That	High	Priest	of	mine
alarms	even	me.	If	he	cannot	deceive	the	hunters	on	the	Path	of	Hands,	my
precious	realm—which	has	seen	more	than	its	share	of	intruders	of	late—will
become	very	crowded	indeed…”	Shadowthrone	wagged	his	head.	“It	was	a
simple	task,	after	all.”	He	began	to	drift	away,	his	Hounds	following	suit.	“Can
anyone	find	reliable,	competent	help	these	days,	I	wonder…”
A	moment	later	Apt	was	alone,	the	shadows	slipping	away.


The	portalway	had	begun	to	weaken,	slowly	closing	the	wound	between	the
realms.	The	demon	rasped	words	of	comfort.	The	boy	nodded.
They	slid	into	the	Imperial	Warren.


Chapter	Twelve

Ages	unveiled	the	Holy	Desert.
Raraku	was	once	an	ochre	sea.
She	stood	in	the	wind
on	the	pride	of	a	spire
and	saw	ancient	fleets—
ships	of	bone,	sails	of	bleached
hair,	charging	the	crest
to	where	the	waters	slipped
beneath	the	sands
of	the	desert	to	come.
THE	HOLY	DESERT
ANONYMOUS
A	line	of	feral	white	goats	stood	on	the	crest	of	the	tel	known	as	Samon,
silhouetted	against	a	startlingly	blue	sky.	Like	bestial	gods	carved	from
marble,	they	watched	as	the	vast	train	wound	through	the	valley	swathed	in	a
massive	cloud	of	dust.	That	they	numbered	seven	was	an	omen	not	lost	on
Duiker	as	he	rode	with	the	south	flanking	patrol	of	Foolish	Dog	Wickans.
Nine	hundred	paces	behind	the	historian	marched	five	companies	of	the
Seventh,	slightly	under	a	thousand	soldiers,	while	the	same	distance	behind
them	rode	another	patrol	of	two	hundred	and	fifty	Wickans.	The	three	units
comprised	the	south-facing	guard	for	the	now	close	to	fifty	thousand	refugees,
as	well	as	livestock,	that	made	up	the	main	column,	and	were	mirrored	with
similar	forces	on	the	north	side.	An	inner	ring	of	loyal	Hissari	Infantry	and
Marines	were	spread	out	along	the	column’s	edges—walking	alongside	the
hapless	civilians.
A	rearguard	of	a	thousand	Wickans	from	each	of	the	clans	rode	in	the
train’s	dust	over	two-thirds	of	a	league	east	of	Duiker ’s	position.	Though	split
and	riding	in	troops	of	a	dozen	or	less,	their	task	was	impossible.	Tithansi
raiders	nipped	at	the	battered	tail	of	the	refugee	column,	snaring	the	Wickans


in	an	eternal	running	skirmish.	The	back	end	of	Coltaine’s	train	was	a	bleeding
wound	never	allowed	to	heal.
The	vanguard	to	the	refugees	consisted	of	the	surviving	elements	of	the
Seventh’s	attachment	of	medium-equipped	cavalry—slightly	more	than	two
hundred	riders	in	all.	Before	them	rode	the	Malazan	nobles	in	their	carriages
and	wagons,	flanked	on	either	side	by	ten	companies	of	the	7th	Infantry.	Close
to	a	thousand	additional	soldiers	of	the	Seventh—the	walking	wounded—
provided	the	nobles	with	their	own	vanguard,	while	ahead	of	them	rolled	the
wagons	bearing	the	cutters	and	their	more	seriously	injured	charges.	Coltaine
and	a	thousand	riders	of	his	Crow	Clan	spearheaded	the	entire	column.
But	there	were	too	many	refugees	and	too	few	able	combatants,	and	for	all
the	Malazan	efforts,	Kamist	Reloe’s	raiding	parties	struck	like	vipers	in
brilliantly	coordinated	mayhem.	A	new	commander	had	come	to	Reloe’s	army
of	the	Apocalypse,	a	nameless	Tithansi	warleader	charged	with	harrying	the
train	day	and	night	as	it	crawled	painfully	westward—a	bloodied	and	battered
serpent	that	refused	to	die—and	this	warrior	now	posed	the	most	serious	threat
to	Coltaine.
A	slow,	calculated	slaughter.	We’re	being	toyed	with.	The	endless	dust	had
scratched	the	historian’s	throat	raw,	making	every	swallow	agony.	They	were
running	perilously	low	on	water,	the	memories	of	Sekala	River	now	a	parched
yearning.	The	nightly	slaughter	of	cattle,	sheep,	pigs	and	goats	had	intensified,
as	animals	were	released	from	suffering,	then	butchered	to	flavor	the	vast
cauldrons	of	blood-stew,	marrow	and	oats	that	had	become	everyone’s	main
sustenance.	Each	night	the	encampment	became	an	abattoir	of	screaming
beasts,	the	air	alive	with	rhizan	and	capemoths	drawn	to	the	killing	stations.
The	cacophonous	uproar	and	chaos	each	dusk	had	scraped	Duiker ’s	nerves
raw—and	he	was	not	alone	in	that.	Madness	haunted	their	days,	stalking	them
as	relentlessly	as	Kamist	Reloe	and	his	vast	army.
Corporal	List	rode	alongside	the	historian	in	numbed	silence,	his	head
dropped	low	on	his	chest,	his	shoulders	slumped.	He	seemed	to	be	aging
before	Duiker ’s	eyes.
Their	world	had	dwindled.	We	totter	on	edges	seen	and	unseen.	We	are
reduced,	yet	defiant.	We’ve	lost	the	meaning	of	time.	Endless	motion	broken
only	by	its	dulled	absence—the	shock	of	rest,	of	those	horns	sounding	an	end	to
the	day’s	plodding.	For	that	moment,	as	the	dust	swirls	on,	no	one	moves.
Standing	in	disbelief	that	another	day	has	passed,	and	yet	still	we	live.
He’d	walked	the	refugee	camp	at	night,	wandering	between	the	ragged
rows	of	tents,	lean-tos	and	canopied	wagons,	his	eyes	taking	in	all	that	he	saw
with	perverse	detachment.	The	historian,	now	witness,	stumbling	in	the	illusion


that	he	will	survive.	Long	enough	to	set	the	details	down	on	parchment	in	the
frail	belief	that	truth	is	a	worthwhile	cause.	That	the	tale	will	become	a	lesson
heeded.	Frail	belief?	Outright	lie,	a	delusion	of	the	worst	sort.	The	lesson	of
history	is	that	no	one	learns.
Children	were	dying.	He’d	crouched,	one	hand	on	a	mother ’s	shoulder,	and
watched	with	her	as	life	ebbed	from	the	baby	in	her	arms.	Like	the	light	of	an
oil	lamp,	dimming,	dimming,	winking	out.	The	moment	when	the	struggle’s
already	lost,	surrendered,	and	the	tiny	heart	slows	in	its	own	realization,	then
stops	in	mute	wonder.	And	never	stirs	again.	It	was	then	that	pain	filled	the	vast
caverns	within	the	living,	destroying	all	it	touched	with	its	rage	at	inequity.
No	match	for	the	mother ’s	tears,	he’d	moved	on.	Wandering,	smeared	in
dirt,	sweat	and	blood,	he	was	becoming	a	spectral	presence,	a	self-proclaimed
pariah.	He’d	stopped	attending	Coltaine’s	nightly	sessions,	despite	direct
orders	to	the	contrary.	Accompanied	only	by	List,	he	rode	with	the	Wickans,	to
the	flanks	and	to	the	rear,	he	marched	with	the	Seventh,	with	the	Hissari	Loyals,
the	Marines,	the	sappers,	the	nobles	and	the	mud-bloods—as	the	lowborn
refugees	had	taken	to	calling	themselves.
Through	it	all	he	said	little,	his	presence	becoming	commonplace	enough
to	permit	a	relaxation	among	the	people	around	him.	No	matter	what	the
depredations,	there	always	seemed	energy	enough	to	expend	in	opinions.
Coltaine’s	a	demon	in	truth,	Laseen’s	dark	joke	on	us	all.	He’s	in	league
with	Kamist	Reloe	and	Sha’ik—this	uprising	is	naught	but	an	elaborate
charade	since	Hood’s	come	to	embrace	the	realm	of	humans.	We’ve	bowed	to
our	skull-faced	patron,	and	in	return	for	all	this	spilled	blood	Coltaine,	Sha’ik
and	Laseen	will	all	ascend	to	stand	alongside	the	Shrouded	One.
Hood	reveals	himself	in	the	flight	of	these	capemoths—he	shows	his	face
again	and	again,	greeting	each	dusk	with	a	hungry	grin	in	the	dimming	sky.
The	Wickans	have	made	a	pact	with	the	earth	spirits.	We’re	here	to	make
fertile	soil—
You’ve	taken	the	wrong	path	with	that,	friend.	We’re	sport	for	the
Whirlwind	goddess,	nothing	more.	We	are	a	lesson	drawn	long	in	the	telling.
The	Council	of	Nobles	are	eating	children.
Where	did	you	hear	that?
Someone	stumbled	onto	a	grisly	feast	last	night.	The	Council’s	petitioned
dark	Elder	gods	in	order	to	stay	fat—
To	what?
Fat,	I	said.	Truth.	And	now	bestial	spirits	wander	the	camp	at	night,
collecting	children	dead	or	near	enough	to	dead	to	make	no	difference,	except
those	ones	are	juicier.


You’ve	gone	mad—
He	may	have	something	there,	friend!	I	myself	saw	picked	and	gnawed
bones	this	morning,	all	in	a	heap—no	skulls	but	the	bones	looked	human
enough,	only	very	small.	Wouldn’t	you	do	for	a	roasted	baby	right	now,	eh?
Instead	of	the	half-cup	of	brown	sludge	we’re	getting	these	days?
I	heard	Aren’s	army	is	only	days	away,	led	by	Pormqual	himself.	He’s	got	a
legion	of	demons	with	him,	too—
Sha’ik’s	dead—you	heard	the	Semk	wailing	into	the	night,	didn’t	you?	And
now	they	wear	greased	ash	like	a	second	skin.	Someone	in	the	Seventh	told	me
he	came	face	to	face	with	one	at	last	night’s	ambush—the	scrap	at	the	dried-up
waterhole.	Said	the	Semk’s	eyes	were	black	pits,	dull	as	dusty	stones,	they	were.
Even	when	the	soldier	spitted	the	bastard	on	his	sword,	nothing	showed	in	those
eyes.	I	tell	you,	Sha’ik’s	dead.
Ubaryd’s	been	liberated.	We’re	going	to	swing	south	any	day	now—you’ll
see—it’s	the	only	thing	that	makes	sense.	There’s	nothing	west	of	here.	Nothing
at	all—
Nothing	at	all…
“Historian!”
That	harsh	Falari-accented	shout	came	from	the	dust-covered	rider	angling
his	mount	alongside	Duiker.	Captain	Lull,	Cartheron	Wing,	his	long,	red	hair
hanging	in	greasy	strands	from	under	his	helmet.	The	historian	blinked	at	him.
The	grizzled	soldier	grinned.	“Word	is,	you’ve	lost	your	way,	old	man.”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“I	follow	the	train,”	he	said	woodenly,	wiping	at	the
grit	that	stung	his	eyes.
“We’ve	got	a	Tithansi	warleader	out	there	needs	to	be	found,	hunted
down,”	Lull	said,	eyes	narrow	on	the	historian.	“Sormo	and	Bult	have
volunteered	some	names	for	the	task.”
“I	shall	dutifully	record	them	in	my	List	of	the	Fallen.”
The	breath	hissed	between	the	captain’s	teeth.	“Abyss	Below,	old	man,	they
ain’t	dead	yet—we	ain’t	dead	yet,	dammit!	Anyway,	I’m	here	to	inform	you	that
you’ve	volunteered.	We	head	out	tonight,	tenth	bell.	Gathering	at	Nil’s	hearth
by	the	ninth.”
“I	decline	the	offer,”	Duiker	said.
Lull’s	grin	returned.	“Request	denied,	and	I’m	to	stay	at	your	side	so	you
don’t	slip	away	as	you’re	wont	to	do.”
“Hood	take	you,	bastard!”
“Aye,	soon	enough.”
Nine	days	to	the	River	P’atha.	We	stretch	to	meet	each	minor	goal,	there’s	a
genius	in	this.	Coltaine	offers	the	marginally	possible	to	fool	us	into	achieving


the	impossible.	All	the	way	to	Aren.	But	for	all	his	ambition,	we	shall	fail.	Fail
in	the	flesh	and	the	bone.	“We	kill	the	warleader,	another	will	step	into	his
place,”	Duiker	said	after	a	time.
“Probably	not	as	talented	nor	as	brave	as	the	task	demands.	A	part	of	him
will	know:	if	his	efforts	are	mediocre,	we’re	likely	to	let	him	live.	If	he	shows
us	brilliance,	we’ll	kill	him.”
Ah,	that	rings	of	Coltaine.	His	well-aimed	arrows	of	fear	and	uncertainty.
He’s	yet	to	miss	the	mark.	So	long	as	he	does	not	fail,	he	cannot	fail.	The	day	he
slips	up,	shows	imperfection,	is	the	day	our	heads	will	roll.	Nine	days	to	fresh
water.	Kill	the	Tithansi	warleader	and	we’ll	get	there.	Make	them	reel	with
every	victory,	let	them	draw	breath	with	every	loss—Coltaine	trains	them	as	he
would	beasts,	and	they	don’t	even	realize	it.
Captain	Lull	leaned	over	the	saddlehorn.	“Corporal	List,	you	awake?”
The	young	man’s	head	swung	up	and	turned	from	side	to	side.
“Damn	you,	Historian,”	Lull	growled.	“The	lad’s	fevered	from	lack	of
water.”
Looking	at	the	corporal,	Duiker	saw	the	high	color	beneath	the	dust	streaks
on	List’s	drawn	cheeks,	his	all	too	bright	eyes.	“He	wasn’t	like	that	this
morning—”
“Eleven	hours	ago!”
Eleven?
The	captain	twisted	his	horse	away,	his	shouts	for	a	healer	breaking
through	the	incessant	rumble	of	hooves,	wagon	wheels	and	countless	footfalls
which	made	up	the	train’s	unceasing	roar.
Eleven?
Animals	shifted	position	in	the	clouds	of	dust.	Lull	returned,	alongside	him
Nether,	the	girl	looking	tiny	atop	the	huge,	muscular	roan	she	rode.	The
captain	collected	the	reins	of	List’s	horse	and	passed	them	over	to	Nether.
Duiker	watched	the	Wickan	child	lead	the	corporal	away.
“I’m	tempted	to	have	her	attend	to	you	afterward,”	Lull	said.	“Hood’s
breath,	man—when	did	you	last	take	a	sip	of	water?”
“What	water?”
“We’ve	casks	left	for	the	soldiers.	You	take	a	skin	every	morning,
Historian,	up	where	the	wagons	carrying	the	wounded	are	positioned.	Each
dusk	you	bring	the	skin	back.”
“There’s	water	in	the	stew,	isn’t	there?”
“Milk	and	blood.”
“If	there	are	casks	left	for	the	soldiers,	what	of	everyone	else?”
“Whatever	they	managed	to	carry	with	them	from	the	Sekala	River,”	Lull


said.	“We’ll	protect	them,	aye,	but	we’ll	not	mother	them.	Water ’s	become	the
currency,	I	hear,	and	the	trading’s	fierce.”
“Children	are	dying.”
Lull	nodded.	“That’s	a	succinct	summary	of	humankind,	I’d	say.	Who
needs	tomes	and	volumes	of	history?	Children	are	dying.	The	injustices	of	the
world	hide	in	those	three	words.	Quote	me,	Duiker,	and	your	work’s	done.”
The	bastard’s	right.	Economics,	ethics,	the	games	of	the	gods—all	within
that	single,	tragic	statement.	I’ll	quote	you,	soldier.	Be	assured	of	that.	An	old
sword,	pitted	and	blunt	and	nicked,	that	cuts	clean	to	the	heart.	“You	humble
me,	Captain.”
Lull	grunted,	passing	over	a	waterskin.	“A	couple	of	mouthfuls.	Don’t	push
it	or	you’ll	choke.”
Duiker ’s	smile	was	wry.
“I	trust,”	the	captain	continued,	“you’ve	kept	up	on	that	List	of	the	Fallen
you	mentioned.”
“No,	I’ve…stumbled	of	late,	I’m	afraid.”
Lull	jerked	a	tight	nod.
“How	do	we	fare,	Captain?”
“We’re	getting	mauled.	Badly.	Close	to	twenty	killed	a	day,	twice	that
wounded.	Vipers	in	the	dust—they	suddenly	appear,	arrows	fly,	a	soldier	dies.
We	send	out	a	troop	of	Wickans	in	pursuit,	they	ride	into	an	ambush.	We	send
out	another,	we	got	a	major	tangle	on	our	hands,	leaving	flanks	open	to	either
side.	Refugees	get	cut	down,	drovers	get	skewered	and	we	lose	a	few	more
animals—unless	those	Wickan	dogs	are	around,	that	is,	those	are	nasty	beasts.
Mind	you,	their	numbers	are	dropping	as	well.”
“In	other	words,	this	can’t	go	on	much	longer.”
Lull	bared	his	teeth,	a	white	gleam	amidst	his	gray-shot	red	beard.	“That’s
why	we’re	going	for	the	warleader ’s	head.	When	we	reach	the	River	P’atha,
there’ll	be	another	full-scale	battle.	He	ain’t	invited.”
“Another	disputed	crossing?”
“No,	the	river ’s	ankle-deep	and	getting	shallower	as	the	season	drags	on.
More	likely	on	the	other	side—the	trail	winds	through	some	rough	country—
we’ll	find	trouble	there.	In	any	case,	we	either	carve	ourselves	some	breathing
space	then,	or	we’re	purple	meat	under	the	sun	and	it	don’t	matter.”
The	Wickan	horns	sounded.
“Ah,”	Lull	said,	“we’re	done.	Get	some	rest,	old	man—we’ll	find	us	a	spot
in	the	Foolish	Dog	camp.	I’ll	wake	you	with	a	meal	in	a	few	hours.”
“Lead	on,	Captain.”


	
Scrapping	over	something	unrecognizable	in	the	tall	grasses,	the	pack	of
Wickan	cattle-dogs	paused	to	watch	Duiker	and	Lull	stride	past	at	a	distance	of
twenty	or	so	paces.	The	historian	frowned	at	the	wiry,	mottled	beasts.
“Best	not	look	them	in	the	eye,”	Lull	said.	“You	ain’t	Wickan	and	they
know	it.”
“I	was	just	wondering	what	they’re	eating.”
“Not	something	you	want	to	find	out.”
“There’s	been	a	rumor	about	dug-up	child	graves…”
“Like	I	said,	you	don’t	want	to	know,	Historian.”
“Well,	some	of	the	tougher	mud-bloods	have	been	hiring	themselves	out	to
stand	guard	over	those	graves—”
“If	they	ain’t	got	Wickan	blood	in	that	mud	they’ll	regret	it.”
The	dogs	resumed	their	snapping	and	bickering	once	the	two	men	had
moved	past.
Hearthfires	flickered	in	the	camp	ahead.	A	last	line	of	defenders	patrolled
the	perimeter	of	the	round	hide	tents,	old	folk	and	youths,	who	revealed	a
silent,	vaguely	ominous	watchfulness	that	matched	that	of	the	cattle-dogs	as	the
two	men	strode	into	the	Wickan	enclave.
“I	get	a	sense,”	Duiker	muttered,	“that	the	cause	of	protecting	the	refugees
is	cooling	among	these	people…”
The	captain	grimaced	but	said	nothing.
They	continued	on,	winding	between	the	tent	rows.	Smoke	hung	heavy	in
the	air,	as	did	the	smell	of	horse	urine	and	boiled	bones,	the	latter	acrid	yet
strangely	sweet.	Duiker	paused	as	they	passed	close	to	an	old	woman	tending
one	such	iron	pot	of	bones.	Whatever	boiled	in	the	pot	wasn’t	entirely	water.
The	woman	was	using	a	flat	blade	of	wood	to	collect	the	thick	bone	fat	and
marrow	that	congealed	on	the	surface,	scraping	it	into	an	intestine	to	be	later
twisted	and	tied	off	into	sausages.
The	old	woman	noticed	the	historian	and	held	up	the	wooden	blade—as	she
would	if	offering	it	to	a	toddler	to	lick	clean.	Flecks	of	sage	were	visible	in	the
fat—a	herb	Duiker	had	once	loved	but	had	come	to	despise,	since	it	was	one	of
the	few	native	to	the	Odhan.	He	smiled	and	shook	his	head.
As	he	caught	up	with	Lull,	the	captain	said,	“You’re	known,	old	man.	They
say	you	walk	in	the	spirit	world.	That	old	horsewife	wouldn’t	offer	food	to	just
anybody—not	me,	that’s	for	certain.”
The	spirit	world.	Yes,	I	walked	there.	Once.	Never	again.	“See	an	old	man	in
crusty	rags…”


“And	he’s	gods-touched,	aye.	Don’t	mock	out	loud—it	might	save	your
skin	one	day.”
Nil’s	hearth	was	unique	among	the	others	in	sight	in	that	it	held	no	cooking
pot,	nor	was	it	framed	in	drying	racks	bedecked	with	curing	strips	of	meat.	The
burning	dung	within	the	small	ring	of	stones	was	almost	smokeless,	revealing
a	naked,	blue-tinged	flame.	The	young	warlock	sat	to	one	side	of	the	hearth,	his
hands	deftly	pleating	strips	of	leather	into	something	like	a	whip.
Four	of	Lull’s	marines	squatted	nearby,	each	running	through	a	last	check
of	their	weapons	and	armor.	Their	assault	crossbows	had	been	freshly
blackened,	then	smeared	in	greasy	dust	to	remove	the	gleam.
One	glance	told	Duiker	that	these	were	hard	soldiers,	veterans,	their
movements	economical,	their	preparations	professional.	Neither	the	man	nor
the	three	women	were	under	thirty,	and	none	spoke	or	looked	up	as	their
captain	joined	them.
Nil	nodded	to	Duiker	as	the	historian	crouched	down	opposite	him.	“It
promises	to	be	a	cold	night,”	the	boy	said.
“Have	you	found	the	location	of	this	warleader?”
“Not	precisely.	A	general	area.	He	may	possess	some	minor	wards	against
detection—once	we	get	closer	they	will	not	avail	him.”
“How	do	you	hunt	down	someone	distinguished	only	by	his	or	her
competence,	Nil?”
The	young	warlock	shrugged.	“He’s	left…other	signs.	We	shall	find	him,
that	is	certain.	And	then	it	is	up	to	them—”	He	jerked	his	head	toward	the
marines.	“I	have	come	to	a	realization,	Historian,	over	these	past	months	on
this	plain.”
“And	that	is?”
“The	Malazan	professional	soldier	is	the	deadliest	weapon	I	know.	Had
Coltaine	three	armies	instead	of	only	three-fifths	of	one,	he	would	end	this
rebellion	before	year ’s	end.	And	with	such	finality	that	Seven	Cities	would
never	rise	again.	We	could	shatter	Kamist	Reloe	now—if	not	for	the	refugees
whom	we	are	sworn	to	protect.”
Duiker	nodded.	There	was	truth	enough	in	that.
The	sounds	of	the	camp	were	a	muffled	illusion	of	normality,	an	embrace
from	all	sides	that	the	historian	found	unsettling.	He	was	losing	the	ability	to
relax,	he	bleakly	realized.	He	picked	up	a	small	twig	and	tossed	it	toward	the
fire.
Nil’s	hand	snapped	it	out	of	the	air.	“Not	this	one,”	he	said.
Another	young	warlock	arrived,	his	thin,	bony	arms	ridged	in	hatchmarked	scars	from	wrist	to	shoulder.	He	squatted	down	beside	Nil	and	spat


once	into	the	fire.
There	was	no	answering	sizzle.
Nil	straightened,	tossing	aside	the	cord	of	leather,	and	glanced	over	at	Lull
and	his	soldiers.	They	stood	ready.
“Time?”	Duiker	asked.
“Yes.”
Nil	and	his	fellow	warlock	led	the	group	through	the	camp.	Few	of	their
clan	kin	looked	their	way,	and	it	was	a	few	minutes	before	Duiker	realized	that
their	seemingly	casual	indifference	was	deliberate,	possibly	some	kind	of
culturally	prescribed	display	of	respect.	Or	something	else	entirely.	To	look	is
to	ghost-touch,	after	all.
They	reached	the	encampment’s	north	edge.	Fog	wafted	on	the	plain
beyond	the	wicker	barriers.	Duiker	frowned.	“They’ll	know	it	isn’t	natural,”	he
muttered.
Lull	grunted.	“We’ve	a	diversion	planned,	of	course.	Three	squads	of
sappers	are	out	there	right	now	with	sacks	full	of	fun—”
He	was	interrupted	by	a	detonation	off	to	the	northeast,	followed	by	a
pause	in	which	faint	screams	wailed	in	the	shrouded	darkness.	Then	a	rapid
succession	of	explosions	shattered	the	night	air.
The	fog	swallowed	the	flashes,	but	Duiker	recognized	the	distinctive	crack
of	sharpers	and	thumping	whoosh	of	flamers.	More	screams,	then	the	swift
thudding	of	horse	hooves	converging	to	the	northeast.
“Now	we	let	things	settle,”	Lull	said.
Minutes	passed,	the	distant	screams	fading.	“Has	Bult	finally	managed	to
track	down	that	captain	of	the	sappers?”	the	historian	eventually	asked.
“Ain’t	seen	his	face	at	any	of	the	jaw	sessions,	if	that’s	what	you	mean.	But
he’s	around.	Somewhere.	Coltaine’s	finally	accepted	that	the	man’s	shy.”
“Shy?”
Lull	shrugged.	“A	joke,	Historian.	Remember	those?”
Nil	finally	turned	to	face	them.
“That’s	it,”	the	captain	said.	“No	more	talking.”
Half	a	dozen	Wickan	guards	pulled	up	the	spikes	anchoring	one	of	the
wicker	barriers,	then	quietly	lowered	it	flat.	A	thick	hide	was	unrolled	over	it	to
mask	the	inevitable	creaking	of	the	party’s	passage.
The	mist	beyond	was	dissipating	into	patches.	One	such	cloud	drifted	over,
then	settled	around	the	group,	keeping	pace	as	they	struck	out	onto	the	plain.
Duiker	wished	he’d	asked	more	questions	earlier.	How	far	to	the	enemy
camp’s	pickets?	What	was	the	plan	for	getting	through	them	undiscovered?
What	was	the	fallback	should	things	go	awry?	He	laid	a	hand	on	the	grip	of	the


short	sword	at	his	hip,	and	was	alarmed	at	how	strange	it	felt—it	had	been	a
long	time	since	he’d	last	used	a	weapon.	Being	pulled	from	the	front	lines	had
been	the	Emperor’s	reward	all	those	years	ago.	That	and	the	various	alchemies
that	keep	me	tottering	on	well	past	my	prime.	Gods,	even	the	scars	from	that
last	horror	have	faded	away!	“No	one	who’s	grown	up	amidst	scrolls	and	books
can	write	of	the	world,”	Kellanved	had	told	him	once,	“which	is	why	I’m
appointing	you	Imperial	Historian,	soldier.”
“Emperor,	I	cannot	read	or	write.”
“An	unsullied	mind.	Good.	Toc	the	Elder	will	be	teaching	you	over	the	next
six	months—he’s	another	soldier	with	a	brain.	Six	months,	mind.	No	more	than
that.”
“Emperor,	it	seems	to	me	that	he	would	be	better	suited	than	I—”
“I’ve	something	else	in	store	for	him.	Do	as	I	say	or	I’ll	have	you	spiked	on
the	city	wall.”
Kellanved’s	sense	of	humor	had	been	strange	even	at	the	best	of	times.
Duiker	recalled	those	learning	sessions:	he	a	soldier	of	thirty-odd	years	who’d
been	campaigning	for	over	half	that,	seated	alongside	Toc’s	own	son,	a	runt	of
a	boy	who	always	seemed	to	be	suffering	from	a	cold—the	sleeves	of	his	shirt
were	crusty	with	dried	snot.	It	had	taken	longer	than	six	months,	but	by	then	it
was	Toc	the	Younger	doing	the	teaching.
The	Emperor	loved	lessons	in	humility.	So	long	as	they	were	never	thrown
back	at	him.	What	happened	to	Toc	the	Elder,	I	wonder?	Vanishing	after	the
assassinations—I’d	always	imagined	it	as	Laseen’s	doing…and	Toc	the	Younger
—he’d	rejected	a	life	amidst	scrolls	and	books…now	lost	in	the	Genabackan
campaign—
A	gauntleted	hand	gripped	the	historian’s	shoulder	and	squeezed	hard.
Duiker	focused	on	Lull’s	battered	face,	nodded.	Sorry.	Mind	wandering	still,	it
seems.
They	had	stopped.	Ahead,	vague	through	the	mists,	rose	a	spike-bristling
ridge	of	packed	earth.	The	glow	of	fires	painted	the	fog	orange	beyond	the
earthwork	perimeter.
Now	what?
The	two	warlocks	knelt	in	the	grass	five	paces	in	front.	Both	had	gone
perfectly	still.
They	waited.	Duiker	heard	muffled	voices	from	the	other	side	of	the	ridge,
slowly	passing	from	left	to	right,	then	fading	as	the	Tithansi	patrol	continued
on.	Nil	twisted	around	and	gestured.
Crossbows	cocked,	the	marines	slipped	forward.	After	a	moment	the
historian	followed.


A	tunnel	mouth	had	opened	in	the	earth	before	the	two	warlocks.	The	soil
steamed,	the	rocks	and	gravel	popping	with	heat.	It	looked	to	have	been	clawed
open	by	huge	taloned	hands—from	below.
Duiker	scowled.	He	hated	tunnels.	No,	they	terrified	him.	There	was
nothing	rational	in	it—wrong	again.	Tunnels	collapse.	People	get	buried	alive.
All	perfectly	reasonable,	possible,	probable,	inevitable.
Nil	led	the	way,	slithering	down	and	out	of	sight.	The	other	warlock
quickly	followed.	Lull	turned	to	the	historian	and	gestured	him	forward.
Duiker	shook	his	head.
The	captain	pointed	at	him,	then	pointed	to	the	hole	and	mouthed	Now.
Hissing	a	curse,	the	historian	edged	forward.	As	soon	as	he	was	within
reach	Lull’s	hand	snapped	out,	gathering	a	handful	of	dusty	telaba,	and	dragged
Duiker	to	the	tunnel	mouth.
It	took	all	his	will	not	to	shriek	as	the	captain	unceremoniously	stuffed	him
down	into	the	tunnel.	He	scrambled,	clawed	wildly.	He	felt	his	kicking	heel
connect	with	something	in	the	air	behind	him.	Lull’s	jaw,	I	bet.	Serves	you	right,
bastard!	The	rush	of	satisfaction	helped.	He	scrabbled	past	the	old	flood	silts
and	found	himself	cocooned	in	warm	bedrock.	Collapse	was	unlikely,	he	told
himself,	the	thought	almost	a	gibber.	The	tunnel	continued	to	angle	downward,
the	warm	rock	turning	slippery,	then	wet.	Nightmare	visions	of	drowning
replaced	collapsing.
He	hesitated	until	a	sword	point	was	pressed	against	the	worn	sole	of	his
moccasin,	then	punched	through	to	jab	his	flesh.	Whimpering,	Duiker	pulled
himself	forward.
The	tunnel	levelled	out.	It	was	filling	with	water,	the	rock	bleeding	from
fissures	on	all	sides.	The	historian	sloshed	through	a	cool	stream	as	he
slithered	along.	He	paused,	took	a	tentative	sip,	tasted	iron	and	grit.	But
drinkable.
The	level	stretch	went	on	and	on.	The	stream	deepened	with	alarming
swiftness.	Soaked	and	increasingly	weighed	down	by	his	clothing,	Duiker
struggled	on,	exhausted,	his	muscles	failing	him.	The	sound	of	coughing	and
spitting	behind	him	was	all	that	kept	him	moving.	They’re	drowning	back	there,
and	I’m	next!
He	reached	the	upward	slope,	clawed	his	way	along	through	mud	and
sifting	earth.	A	rough	sphere	of	gray	fog	appeared	ahead—he’d	reached	the
mouth.
Hands	gripped	him	and	pulled	him	clear,	rolling	him	to	one	side	until	he
came	to	rest	in	a	bed	of	sharp-bladed	grasses.	He	lay	quietly	gasping,	staring
up	at	the	mist’s	low	ceiling	above	him.	He	was	vaguely	aware	of	the	marines


clambering	out	of	the	tunnel	and	forming	a	defensive	cordon,	breaths	hissing,
their	weapons	dripping	muddy	water.	Those	crossbow	cords	will	stretch,	unless
they’ve	been	soaked	in	oil	and	waxed.	Of	course	they	have—those	soldiers
aren’t	idiots.	Plan	for	any	eventuality,	even	swimming	beneath	a	dusty	plain.	I
once	saw	a	fellow	soldier	find	use	for	a	fishing	kit	in	a	desert.	What	makes	a
Malazan	soldier	so	dangerous?	They’re	allowed	to	think.
Duiker	sat	up.
Lull	was	communicating	with	his	marines	with	elaborate	hand	gestures.
They	responded	in	kind,	then	edged	out	into	the	mists.	Nil	and	the	other
warlock	began	snaking	forward	through	the	grass,	toward	the	glow	of	a
hearthfire	that	showed	dull	red	through	the	fog.
Voices	surrounded	them,	the	harsh	Tithan	tongue	spoken	in	low	murmurs
that	cavorted	alarmingly	until	Duiker	was	certain	a	squad	stood	but	a	pace
behind	him,	calmly	discussing	where	in	his	back	to	drive	their	spears.
Whatever	games	the	fog	played	with	sound,	the	historian	suspected	that	Nil	and
his	comrade	had	magically	amplified	the	effect	and	they	would	soon	be
gambling	their	lives	on	that	aural	confusion.
Lull	tapped	Duiker ’s	shoulder,	waved	him	forward	to	where	the	warlocks
had	vanished.	The	fog	pocket	was	impenetrable—he	could	see	no	farther	than
the	stretch	of	an	arm.	Scowling,	the	historian	dropped	to	his	belly,	sliding	his
sword	scabbard	around	to	the	back	of	his	hip	and	then	began	to	worm	his	way
forward	to	where	Nil	waited.
The	hearthfire	was	big,	the	flames	lurid	through	the	veil	of	mist.	Six
Tithansi	warriors	stood	or	sat	within	sight,	all	seemingly	bundled	in	furs.	Their
breaths	plumed.
Peering	at	the	scene	beside	Nil,	Duiker	could	now	see	a	thin	patina	of	frost
covering	the	ground.	Chill	air	wafted	over	them	with	a	wayward	turn	of	the
faint	night	wind.
The	historian	nudged	the	warlock,	nodded	at	the	frost	and	raised	his	brows
questioningly.
Nil’s	response	was	the	faintest	of	shrugs.
The	warriors	were	waiting,	red-painted	hands	stretched	out	toward	the
flames	in	an	effort	to	stay	warm.	The	scene	was	unchanged	for	another	twenty
breaths,	then	those	seated	or	squatting	all	rose	and	with	the	others	faced	in	one
direction—to	Duiker ’s	left.
Two	figures	emerged	into	the	firelight.	The	man	in	the	lead	was	built	like	a
bear,	the	comparison	strengthened	by	the	fur	of	that	animal	riding	his	broad
shoulders.	A	single-bladed	throwing	axe	jutted	from	each	hip.	His	leather	shirt
was	unlaced	from	the	breastbone	up,	revealing	solid	muscles	and	thick,	matted


hair.	The	crimson	slashes	of	paint	on	his	cheeks	announced	him	as	a	warleader,
each	slash	denoting	a	recent	victory.	The	multitude	of	freshly	painted	bands
made	plain	the	Malazans’	ill	fortune	at	his	hands.
Behind	this	formidable	creature	was	a	Semk.
That’s	one	assumption	obliterated.	Evidently	the	Semk	tribe’s	avowed
hatred	of	all	who	were	not	Semk	had	been	set	aside	in	obeisance	to	the
Whirlwind	goddess.	Or,	more	accurately,	to	the	destruction	of	Coltaine.
The	Semk	was	a	squatter,	more	pugnacious-looking	version	of	the	Tithan
warleader,	hairy	enough	to	dispense	with	the	need	for	a	bear	fur.	His	only
clothing	was	a	hide	loincloth	and	a	brace	of	belts	cinched	tight	over	his
stomach.	The	man	was	covered	in	greasy	ash,	his	shaggy	black	hair	hanging	in
thick	threads,	his	beard	knotted	with	finger-bone	fetishes.	The	contemptuous
sneer	twisting	his	face	had	a	permanence	about	it.
The	last	detail	that	revealed	itself	as	the	Semk	stepped	closer	to	the	fire	was
the	gut-stitching	closing	his	mouth.	Hood’s	breath,	the	Semk	take	their	vows	of
silence	seriously!
The	air	grew	icy.	Faint	alarm	whispered	at	the	back	of	Duiker ’s	mind	and
he	reached	out	to	nudge	Nil	yet	again.
Before	he	could	make	contact	with	the	warlock,	crossbows	snapped.	Two
quarrels	jutted	from	the	Tithan	warleader ’s	chest,	while	two	other	Tithan
warriors	grunted	before	pitching	to	the	ground.	A	fifth	quarrel	sank	deep	in	the
Semk’s	shoulder.
The	earth	beneath	the	hearth	erupted,	flinging	coals	and	burning	wood
skyward.	A	multilimbed,	tar-skinned	beast	clambered	free,	loosing	a	boneshivering	scream.	It	plunged	in	among	the	remaining	Tithansi,	claws	ripping
through	armor	and	flesh.
The	warleader	fell	to	his	knees,	staring	dumbly	down	at	the	leather-finned
quarrels	buried	in	his	chest.	Blood	sprayed	as	he	coughed,	convulsed,	then
toppled	face	down	on	the	dusty	ground.
A	mistake—the	wrong—
The	Semk	had	torn	the	quarrel	from	his	shoulder	as	if	it	was	a	carpenter ’s
nail.	The	air	around	him	swirled	white.	Dark	eyes	fixing	on	the	earth	spirit,	he
leaped	to	meet	it.
Nil	was	motionless	at	the	historian’s	side.	Duiker	twisted	to	shake	him,	and
found	the	young	warlock	unconscious.
The	other	Wickan	youth	was	on	his	feet,	reeling	back	under	an	invisible
sorcerous	onslaught.	Strips	of	flesh	and	blood	flew	from	the	warlock—in
moments	there	was	only	bone	and	cartilage	where	his	face	had	been.	The	sight
of	the	boy’s	eyes	bursting	had	Duiker	spinning	away.


Tithansi	were	converging	from	all	sides.	As	he	dragged	Nil	back,	the
historian	saw	Lull	and	one	of	his	marines	releasing	quarrels	at	almost	pointblank	range	into	the	Semk’s	back.	A	lance	flew	out	of	the	darkness	and	skidded
from	the	marine’s	chain-armored	back.	Both	soldiers	wheeled,	flinging	away
their	crossbows	and	unsheathing	long-knives	to	meet	the	first	warriors	to
arrive.
The	earth	spirit	was	shrieking	now,	three	of	its	limbs	torn	off	its	body	and
lying	twitching	on	the	ground.	The	Semk	was	silent	mayhem,	ignoring	the
quarrels	in	his	back,	closing	again	and	again	to	batter	the	earth	spirit.	Cold
poured	in	waves	from	the	Semk—a	cold	Duiker	recognized:	The	Semk	god—a
piece	of	him	survived,	a	piece	of	him	commands	one	of	his	chosen	warriors—
Detonations	erupted	to	the	south.	Sharpers.	Screams	filled	the	night.
Malazan	sappers	were	blasting	a	hole	through	the	Tithansi	lines.	And	here	I’d
concluded	this	was	a	suicide	mission.
Duiker	continued	dragging	Nil	southward,	toward	the	explosions,	praying
that	the	sappers	wouldn’t	mistake	him	for	an	enemy.
Horses	thundered	nearby.	Iron	rang.
One	of	the	marines	was	suddenly	at	his	side.	Blood	sheathed	one	side	of
her	face,	but	she	flung	away	her	sword	and	pulled	the	warlock	from	the
historian’s	hands,	hoisting	the	lad	effortlessly	over	one	shoulder.	“Pull	out	that
damned	sword	and	cover	me!”	she	snarled,	bolting	forward.
Without	a	shield?	Hood	take	us,	you	can’t	use	a	short	sword	without	a
shield!	But	the	weapon	was	in	his	hand	as	if	it	had	leaped	free	of	its	scabbard
and	into	his	palm	of	its	own	will.	The	tin-pitted	iron	blade	looked	pitifully
short	as	he	backed	away	in	the	marine’s	wake,	the	weapon	held	out	before	him.
His	heels	struck	something	soft	and	with	a	curse	he	stumbled	and	fell.
The	marine	glanced	back.	“On	your	feet,	dammit!	Someone’s	after	us!”
Duiker	had	tripped	over	a	body,	a	Tithansi	lancer	who’d	been	dragged	by
his	horse	before	the	mangled	mess	of	his	left	hand	finally	released	the	reins.	A
throwing	star	was	buried	deep	in	his	neck.	The	historian	blinked	at	that—a
Claw’s	weapon,	that	star—as	he	scrambled	to	his	feet.	More	unseen	back-up?
Sounds	of	battle	echoed	through	the	mists,	as	if	a	full-scale	engagement	was
underway.
Duiker	resumed	covering	the	marine	as	she	continued	on,	Nil’s	limp	body
hanging	like	a	sack	of	turnips	over	one	shoulder.
A	moment	later	three	Tithansi	warriors	plunged	out	of	the	fog,	tulwars
swinging.
Decades-old	training	saved	the	historian	from	their	initial	onslaught.	He
ducked	low	and	closed	with	the	warrior	on	his	right,	grunting	as	the	man’s


leather-wrapped	forearm	cracked	down	on	his	left	shoulder,	then	gasping	as
the	tulwar	it	held	whipped	down—the	Tithansi	bending	his	wrist—and	chopped
deep	into	Duiker ’s	left	buttock.	Even	as	the	pain	jolted	through	him,	he’d
driven	his	short	sword	up	and	under	the	warrior ’s	ribcage,	piercing	his	heart.
Tearing	the	blade	free,	the	historian	jumped	right.	There	was	a	falling
body	between	him	and	the	two	remaining	warriors,	both	of	whom	had	the
added	disadvantage	of	being	right-handed.	The	slashing	tulwars	missed	Duiker
by	an	arm’s	length.
The	nearest	weapon	had	been	swung	with	enough	force	to	drive	it	into	the
ground.	The	historian	stamped	a	boot	down	hard	on	the	flat	of	the	blade,
springing	the	tulwar	from	the	Tithan’s	hand.	Duiker	followed	up	with	a	savage
chop	between	the	man’s	shoulder	and	neck,	snapping	through	the	collarbone.
He	launched	himself	behind	the	reeling	warrior ’s	back	to	challenge	the
third	Tithan,	only	to	see	the	man	face	down	on	the	ground,	a	silver-pommelled
throwing	knife	jutting	from	between	his	shoulder	blades.	A	Claw’s	sticker—I’d
recognize	it	anywhere!
The	historian	paused,	glared	around,	but	could	see	no	one.	The	mists
swirled	thick,	smelling	of	ash.	A	hiss	from	the	marine	brought	him	around.	She
crouched	at	the	inside	edge	of	the	picket	trench,	gesturing	him	forward.
Suddenly	soaked	with	sweat	and	shivering,	Duiker	quickly	joined	her.
The	woman	grinned.	“That	was	damned	impressive	sword-play,	old	man,
though	I	couldn’t	make	out	how	you	done	the	last	one.”
“You	saw	no	one	else?”
“Huh?”
Struggling	to	draw	breath,	Duiker	only	shook	his	head.	He	glanced	down
to	where	Nil	lay	motionless	on	the	earthen	bank.	“What’s	wrong	with	him?”
The	marine	shrugged.	Her	pale-blue	eyes	were	still	appraising	the
historian.	“We	could	use	you	in	the	ranks,”	she	said.
“What	I’ve	lost	in	speed	I’ve	made	up	in	experience,	and	experience	tells
me	not	to	get	into	messes	like	this	one.	Not	an	old	man’s	game,	soldier.”
She	grimaced,	but	with	good	humor,	“Nor	an	old	woman’s.	Come	on,	the
scrap’s	swung	east—we	shouldn’t	have	any	trouble	crossing	the	trench.”	She
lifted	Nil	back	onto	her	shoulder	with	ease.
“You	nailed	the	wrong	man,	you	know…”
“Aye,	we’d	guessed	as	much.	That	Semk	was	possessed,	wasn’t	he?”
They	reached	the	slope	and	picked	their	way	carefully	through	the	spikes
studding	the	earth.	Tents	were	burning	in	the	Tithansi	camp,	adding	smoke	to
the	fog.	Screams	and	the	clash	of	weapons	still	echoed	in	the	distance.
Duiker	asked,	“Did	you	see	anyone	else	get	out?”


She	shook	her	head.
They	came	upon	a	score	of	bodies,	a	Tithansi	patrol	who’d	been	hit	with	a
sharper.	The	grenado’s	slivers	of	iron	had	ripped	through	them	with	horrific
efficiency.	Blood	trails	indicated	the	recent	departure	of	survivors.
The	fog	quickly	thinned	as	they	approached	the	Wickan	lines.	A	troop	of
Foolish	Dog	lancers	who	had	been	patrolling	the	wicker	barriers	spotted	them
and	rode	up.
Their	eyes	fixed	on	Nil.
The	marine	said,	“He	lives,	but	you’d	better	find	Sormo.”
Two	riders	peeled	off,	cantered	back	to	the	camp.
“Any	news	of	the	other	marines?”	Duiker	asked	the	nearest	horsewarrior.
The	Wickan	nodded.	“The	captain	and	one	other	made	it.”
A	squad	of	sappers	emerged	from	the	mists	in	a	desultory	dog-trot	that
slowed	to	a	walk	as	soon	as	they	saw	the	group.	“Two	sharpers,”	one	was
saying,	disbelief	souring	his	voice,	“and	the	bastard	just	got	back	up.”
Duiker	stepped	forward.	“Who,	soldier?”
“That	hairy	Semk—”
“Ain’t	hairy	no	more,”	another	sapper	threw	in.
“We	were	the	mop-up	mission,”	the	first	man	said,	showing	a	red-stained
grin.	“Coltaine’s	axe—you	were	the	edge,	we	were	the	wedge.	We	hammered
that	ogre	but	it	done	no	good—”
“Sarge	took	an	arrow,”	said	the	other	sapper.	“His	lung’s	bleeding—”
“Just	one	of	them	and	it’s	a	pinprick,”	the	sergeant	corrected,	pausing	to
spit.	“The	other	one’s	fine.”
“Can’t	breathe	blood,	Sarge—”
“I	shared	a	tent	with	you,	lad—I’ve	breathed	worse.”
The	squad	continued	on,	arguing	over	whether	or	not	the	sergeant	should
go	find	a	healer.	The	marine	stared	after	them,	shaking	her	head.	Then	she
turned	to	the	historian.	“I’ll	leave	you	to	talk	with	Sormo,	sir,	if	that’s	all
right.”
Duiker	nodded.	“Two	of	your	friends	didn’t	make	it	back—”
“But	one	did.	Next	time	for	sword	practice,	I’ll	come	looking	for	you,	sir.”
“My	joints	are	already	seizing,	soldier.	You’ll	have	to	prop	me	up.”
She	gently	lowered	Nil	to	the	grass,	then	moved	off.
Ten	years	younger,	I’d	have	the	nerve	to	ask	her…well,	never	mind.	Imagine
the	arguments	at	the	cooking	fire…
The	two	Wickan	riders	returned,	flanking	a	travois	harnessed	to	a	brutallooking	cattle-dog.	A	hoof	had	connected	with	its	head	some	time	in	its	past,
and	the	bones	had	healed	lopsided,	giving	the	animal	a	manic	half-snarl	that


seemed	well	suited	to	the	vicious	gleam	in	its	eyes.
The	riders	dismounted	and	carefully	laid	Nil	on	the	travois.	Disdaining	its
escort,	the	dog	moved	off,	back	toward	the	Wickan	encampment.
“That	was	one	ugly	beast,”	Captain	Lull	said	behind	the	historian.
Duiker	grunted.	“Proof	that	their	skulls	are	all	bone	and	no	brain.”
“Still	lost,	old	man?”
The	historian	scowled.	“Why	didn’t	you	tell	me	we	had	hidden	help,
Captain?	Who	were	they,	Pormqual’s?”
“What	in	Hood’s	name	are	you	talking	about?”
He	turned.	“The	Claw.	Someone	was	covering	our	retreat.	Using	stars	and
stickers	and	moving	unseen	like	a	Hood-damned	breath	on	my	back!”
Lull’s	eyes	widened.
“How	many	more	details	is	Coltaine	keeping	to	himself?”
“There’s	no	way	Coltaine	knows	anything	about	this,	Duiker,”	Lull	said,
shaking	his	head.	“If	you’re	certain	of	what	you	saw—and	I	believe	you—then
the	Fist	will	want	to	know.	Now.”

For	the	first	time	that	Duiker	could	recall,	Coltaine	looked	rattled.	He	stood
perfectly	still,	as	if	suddenly	unsure	that	no	one	hovered	behind	him,	invisible
blades	but	moments	from	their	killing	thrust.
Bult	growled	low	in	his	throat.	“The	heat’s	got	you	addled,	Historian.”
“I	know	what	I	saw,	Uncle.	More,	I	know	what	I	felt.”
There	was	a	long	silence,	the	air	in	the	tent	stifling	and	still.
Sormo	entered,	stopping	just	inside	the	entrance	as	Coltaine	pinned	him
with	a	glare.	The	warlock’s	shoulders	were	slumped,	as	if	no	longer	able	to
bear	the	weight	they	had	carried	all	these	months.	Shadows	pouched	his	eyes
with	fatigue.
“Coltaine	has	some	questions	for	you,”	Bult	said	to	him.	“Later.”
The	young	man	shrugged.	“Nil	has	awakened.	I	have	answers.”
“Different	questions,”	the	scarred	veteran	said	with	a	dark,	humorless	grin.
Coltaine	spoke.	“Explain	what	happened,	Warlock.”
“The	Semk	god	isn’t	dead,”	Duiker	said.
“I’d	second	that	opinion,”	Lull	muttered	from	where	he	sat	on	a	camp
saddlechair,	his	unbuckled	vambraces	in	his	lap,	his	legs	stretched	out.	He	met
the	historian’s	eyes	and	winked.
“Not	precisely,”	Sormo	corrected.	He	hesitated,	drew	a	deep	breath,	then
continued.	“The	Semk	god	was	indeed	destroyed.	Torn	to	pieces	and	devoured.


Sometimes,	a	piece	of	flesh	can	contain	such	malevolence	that	it	corrupts	the
devourer—”
Duiker	sat	forward,	wincing	at	the	pain	from	the	force-healed	wound	in	his
backside.	“An	earth	spirit—”
“A	spirit	of	the	land,	aye.	Hidden	ambition	and	sudden	power.	The	other
spirits…suspected	naught.”
Bult’s	face	twisted	in	disgust.	“We	lost	seventeen	soldiers	tonight	just	to
kill	a	handful	of	Tithan	warchiefs	and	unmask	a	rogue	spirit?”
The	historian	flinched.	It	was	the	first	time	he’d	heard	the	full	count	of
losses.	Coltaine’s	first	failure.	If	Oponn	smiles	on	us,	the	enemy	won’t	realize	it.
“With	such	knowledge,”	Sormo	explained	quietly,	“future	lives	will	be
saved.	The	spirits	are	greatly	distressed—they	were	perplexed	at	being	unable
to	detect	the	raids	and	ambushes,	and	now	they	know	why.	They	did	not	think	to
look	among	their	own	kin.	Now	they	will	deliver	their	own	justice,	in	their
own	time—”
“Meaning	the	raids	continue?”	The	veteran	looked	ready	to	spit.	“Will	your
spirit	allies	be	able	to	warn	us	now—as	they	once	did	so	effectively?”
“The	rogue’s	efforts	will	be	blunted.”
“Sormo,”	Duiker	said,	“why	was	the	Semk’s	mouth	sewn	shut?”
The	warlock	half	smiled.	“That	creature	is	sewn	shut	everywhere,
Historian.	Lest	that	which	was	devoured	escapes.”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“Strange	magic,	this.”
Sormo	nodded.	“Ancient,”	he	said.	“Sorcery	of	guts	and	bone.	We	struggle
with	knowledge	we	once	possessed	instinctively.”	He	sighed.	“From	a	time
before	warrens,	when	magic	was	found	within.”
A	year	ago	Duiker	would	have	been	galvanized	with	curiosity	and
excitement	at	such	comments,	and	would	have	relentlessly	interrogated	the
warlock	without	surcease.	Now,	Sormo’s	words	were	a	dull	echo	lost	in	the
vast	cavern	of	the	historian’s	exhaustion.	He	wanted	nothing	but	sleep,	and
knew	it	would	be	denied	him	for	another	twelve	hours—the	camp	outside	was
already	stirring,	even	though	another	hour	of	darkness	remained.
“If	that’s	the	case,”	Lull	drawled,	“why	didn’t	that	Semk	burst	apart	like	a
bloated	bladder	when	we	pricked	him?”
“What	was	devoured	hides	deep.	Tell	me,	was	this	possessed	Semk’s
stomach	shielded?”
Duiker	grunted.	“Belts,	thick	leather.”
“Just	so.”
“What	happened	to	Nil?”
“Caught	unawares,	he	made	use	of	that	very	knowledge	we	struggle	to


recall.	As	the	sorcerous	attack	came,	he	retreated	within	himself.	The	attack
pursued	but	he	remained	elusive,	until	the	malevolent	power	spent	itself.	We
learn.”
Into	Duiker ’s	mind	arose	the	image	of	the	other	warlock’s	horrific	death.
“At	a	cost.”
Sormo	said	nothing,	but	pain	revealed	itself	for	a	moment	in	his	eyes.
“We	increase	our	pace,”	Coltaine	announced.	“One	less	mouthful	of	water
for	each	soldier	each	day—”
Duiker	straightened.	“But	we	have	water.”
All	eyes	turned	to	him.	The	historian	smiled	wryly	at	Sormo.	“I	understand
Nil’s	report	was	rather…dry.	The	spirits	made	for	us	a	tunnel	through	the
bedrock.	As	the	Captain	can	confirm,	the	rock	weeps.”
Lull	grinned.	“Hood’s	breath,	the	old	man’s	right!”
Sormo	was	staring	at	the	historian	with	wide	eyes.	“For	lack	of	asking	the
right	questions,	we	have	suffered	long—and	needlessly.”
A	new	energy	infused	Coltaine,	culminating	in	a	taut	baring	of	his	teeth.
“You	have	one	hour,”	the	Fist	told	the	warlock,	“to	ease	a	hundred	thousand
throats.”
	
From	bedrock	that	split	the	prairie	soil	in	weathered	outcroppings,	sweet	tears
seeped	forth.	Vast	pits	had	been	excavated.	The	air	was	alive	with	joyous	songs
and	the	blessed	silence	of	beasts	no	longer	crying	their	distress.	And	beneath	it
all	was	a	warm,	startling	undercurrent.	For	once,	the	spirits	of	the	land	were
delivering	a	gift	untouched	by	death.	Their	pleasure	was	palpable	to	Duiker ’s
senses	as	he	stood	close	to	the	north	edge	of	the	encampment,	watching,
listening.
Corporal	List	was	at	his	side,	his	fever	abated.	“The	seepage	is	deliberately
slow	but	not	slow	enough—stomachs	will	rebel—the	reckless	ones	could	end
up	killing	themselves…”
“Aye.	A	few	might.”
Duiker	raised	his	head,	scanning	the	valley’s	north	ridge.	A	row	of	Tithansi
horsewarriors	lined	its	length,	watching	in	what	the	historian	imagined	was
fearful	wonder.	He	had	no	doubt	that	Kamist	Reloe’s	army	was	suffering,	even
though	they	had	the	advantage	of	seizing	and	holding	every	known	waterhole
on	the	Odhan.
As	he	studied	them,	his	eyes	caught	a	flash	of	white	that	flowed	down	the
valleyside,	then	vanished	beyond	Duiker ’s	line	of	sight.	He	grunted.
“Did	you	see	something,	sir?”


“Just	some	wild	goats,”	the	historian	said.	“Switching	sides…”
	
The	blowing	sand	had	bored	holes	into	the	mesa’s	sides,	an	onslaught	that
began	by	sculpting	hollows,	then	caves,	then	tunnels,	finally	passages	that
might	well	exit	out	of	the	other	side.	Like	voracious	worms	ravaging	old
wood,	the	wind	devoured	the	cliff	face,	hole	after	hole	appearing,	the	walls
between	them	thinning,	some	collapsing,	the	tunnels	widening.	The	mantle	of
the	plateau	remained,	however,	a	vast	cap	of	stone	perched	on	ever-dwindling
foundations.
Kulp	had	never	seen	anything	like	it.	As	if	the	Whirlwind’s	deliberately
attacked	it.	Why	lay	siege	to	a	rock?
The	tunnels	shrieked	with	the	wind,	each	one	with	its	own	febrile	pitch,
creating	a	fierce	chorus.	The	sand	was	fine	as	dust	where	it	spun	and	swirled
on	updrafts	at	the	base	of	the	cliff.	Kulp	glanced	back	to	where	Heboric	and
Felisin	waited—two	vague	shapes	huddled	against	the	ceaseless	fury	of	the
storm.
The	Whirlwind	had	denied	them	all	shelter	for	three	days	now,	ever	since	it
had	first	descended	upon	them.	The	wind	assailed	them	from	every	direction—
as	if	the	mad	goddess	has	singled	us	out.	The	possibility	was	not	as	unlikely	as
it	first	seemed.	The	malevolent	will	was	palpable.	We’re	intruders,	after	all.
The	Whirlwind’s	focus	of	hate	has	always	been	on	those	who	do	not	belong.
Poor	Malazan	Empire,	to	have	stepped	into	such	a	ready-made	mythos	of
rebellion…
The	mage	scrambled	back	to	the	others.	He	had	to	lean	close	to	be	heard
above	the	endless	roar.	“There’s	caves!	Only	the	wind’s	plunging	down	their
throats—I	suspect	it’s	cut	right	through	the	hill!”
Heboric	was	shivering,	beset	since	morning	by	a	fever	born	of	exhaustion.
He	was	weakening	fast.	We	all	are.	It	was	almost	dusk—the	unrelieved	ochre
dimming	over	their	heads—and	the	mage	estimated	they	had	traveled	little
more	than	a	league	in	the	past	twelve	hours.
They	had	no	water,	no	food.	Hood	stalked	their	heels.
Felisin	clutched	Kulp’s	tattered	cloak,	pulling	him	closer.	Her	lips	were
split,	sand	gumming	the	corners	of	her	mouth.	“We	try	anyway!”	she	said.
“I	don’t	know.	That	whole	hill	could	come	down—”
“The	caves!	We	go	into	the	caves!”
Die	out	here,	or	die	in	there.	At	least	the	caves	offer	us	a	tomb	for	our
corpses.	He	gave	a	sharp	nod.
They	half	dragged	Heboric	between	them.	The	cliff	offered	them	a	score


of	options	with	its	ragged,	honeycombed	visage.	They	made	no	effort	to	select
one,	simply	plunging	into	the	first	cave	mouth	they	came	to,	a	wide,	strangely
flattened	tunnel	that	seemed	to	run	level—at	least	for	the	first	few	paces.
The	wind	was	a	hand	at	their	backs,	dismissive	of	hesitation	in	its
unceasing	pressure.	Darkness	swept	around	them	as	they	staggered	on,	within	a
cauldron	of	screams.
The	floor	had	been	sculpted	into	ridges,	making	walking	difficult.	Fifteen
paces	on,	they	stumbled	into	an	outcropping	of	quartzite	or	some	other
crystalline	mineral	that	resisted	the	erosive	wind.	They	worked	their	way
around	it	and	found	in	its	lee	the	first	surcease	from	the	Whirlwind’s	battering
force	in	over	seventy	hours.
Heboric	sagged	in	their	arms.	They	set	him	down	in	the	ankle-deep	dust	at
the	base	of	the	outcropping.	“I’d	like	to	scout	ahead,”	Kulp	told	Felisin,	yelling
to	be	heard.
She	nodded,	lowering	herself	to	her	knees.
Another	thirty	paces	took	the	mage	to	a	larger	cavern.	More	quartzite	filled
the	space,	reflecting	a	faint	luminescence	from	what	appeared	to	be	a	ceiling	of
crushed	glass	fifteen	feet	above	him.	The	quartzite	rose	in	vertical	veins,	the
gleaming	pillars	creating	a	gallery	effect	of	startling	beauty,	despite	the	racing
wind’s	dust-filled	stream.	Kulp	strode	forward.	The	piercing	shriek	dimmed,
losing	itself	in	the	vastness	of	the	cavern.
Closer	to	the	center	of	the	cavern	rose	a	heap	of	tumbled	stones,	their
shapes	too	regular	to	be	natural.	The	glittering	substance	of	the	ceiling	covered
them	in	places—a	single	side	of	their	vaguely	rectangular	forms,	the	mage
realized	after	a	moment’s	examination.	Crouching,	he	ran	a	hand	along	one
such	side,	then	bent	still	lower.	Hood’s	breath,	it’s	glass	in	truth!	Multicolored,
crushed	and	compacted…
He	looked	up.	A	large	hole	gaped	in	the	ceiling,	its	edges	glowing	with	that
odd,	cool	light.	Kulp	hesitated,	then	opened	his	warren.	He	grunted.	Nothing.
Queen’s	blessing,	no	sorcery—it’s	mundane.
Hunching	low	against	the	wind,	the	mage	made	his	way	back	to	the	others.
He	found	them	both	asleep	or	unconscious.	Kulp	studied	them,	feeling	a	chill	at
the	composed	finality	he	saw	in	their	dehydrated	features.
Might	be	more	merciful	not	to	awaken	them.
As	if	sensing	his	presence,	Felisin	opened	her	eyes.	They	filled	with	instant
awareness.	“You’ll	never	have	it	that	easy,”	she	said.
“This	hill’s	a	buried	city,	and	we’re	under	what’s	buried.”
“So?”
“The	wind’s	got	into	one	chamber	at	least,	emptied	it	of	sand.”


“Our	tomb.”
“Maybe.”
“All	right,	let’s	go.”
“One	problem,”	Kulp	said,	not	moving.	“The	way	in	is	about	fifteen	feet
over	our	heads.	There’s	a	pillar	of	quartzite,	but	it	wouldn’t	be	an	easy	climb,
especially	not	in	our	condition.”
“Do	your	warren	trick.”
“What?”
“Open	a	gate.”
He	stared	at	her.	“It’s	not	that	simple.”
“Dying’s	simple.”
He	blinked.	“Let’s	get	the	old	man	on	his	feet,	then.”
Heboric’s	eyes	were	blistered	shut,	weeping	grit-filled	tears.	Slow	to
awaken,	he	clearly	had	no	idea	where	he	was.	His	wide	mouth	split	into	a
ghastly	smile.	“They	tried	it	here,	didn’t	they?”	he	asked,	tilting	his	head	as
they	helped	him	forward.	“Tried	it	and	paid	for	it,	oh,	the	memories	of	water,
all	those	wasted	lives…”
They	arrived	at	the	place	of	the	breached	ceiling.	Felisin	laid	a	hand	on	the
quartzite	column	nearest	the	hole.	“I’d	have	to	climb	this	like	a	Dosii	does	a
coconut	palm.”
“And	how’s	that	done?”	Kulp	asked.
“Reluctantly,”	Heboric	muttered,	cocking	his	head	as	if	hearing	voices.
Felisin	glanced	at	the	mage.	“I’ll	need	those	straps	from	your	belt.”
With	a	grunt,	Kulp	began	removing	the	leather	band	at	his	waist.	“Damned
strange	time	to	be	wanting	to	see	me	without	my	breeches,	lass.”
“We	can	all	do	with	the	laugh,”	she	replied.
He	handed	her	the	belt,	and	watched	as	she	affixed	the	binding	strips	at	each
end	to	her	ankles.	He	winced	at	how	savagely	she	tightened	the	knots.
“Now,	what’s	left	of	your	raincloak,	please.”
“What’s	wrong	with	your	tunic?”
“No	one	gets	to	ogle	my	breasts—not	for	free,	anyway.	Besides,	that
cloak’s	a	tougher	weave.”
“There	was	retribution,”	Heboric	said.	“A	methodical,	dispassionate
cleaningup	of	the	mess.”
As	he	pulled	off	his	sand-scoured	cloak,	Kulp	scowled	down	at	the	expriest.	“What	are	you	going	on	about,	Heboric?”
“First	Empire,	the	city	above.	They	came	and	put	things	aright.	Immortal
custodians.	Such	a	debacle!	Even	with	my	eyes	closed	I	can	see	my	hands—
they’re	groping	blind,	so	blind	now.	So	empty.”	He	sank	down,	suddenly


racked	with	shuddering	grief.
“Never	mind	him,”	Felisin	said,	stepping	up	as	if	to	embrace	the	jagged
pillar.	“The	old	toad’s	lost	his	god	and	it’s	broken	his	mind.”
Kulp	said	nothing.
Felisin	reached	around	the	column	and	linked	her	hands	on	the	other	side
by	gripping	two	ends	of	the	cloak	and	twisting	them	taut.	The	belt	between	her
feet	hugged	this	side	of	the	pillar.
“Ah,”	Kulp	said.	“I	see.	Clever	Dosii.”
She	hitched	the	cloak	as	high	as	she	could	on	the	opposite	side,	then	leaned
back	and,	in	a	jerking	motion,	jumped	a	short	distance	upward—knees	drawn
up,	the	belt	snapping	against	the	pillar.	He	saw	the	pain	rip	through	her	as	the
bindings	dug	into	her	ankles.
“I’m	surprised	the	Dosii	have	feet,”	Kulp	said.
Gasping,	she	said,	“Guess	I	got	some	minor	detail	wrong.”
In	all	truth,	the	mage	did	not	think	she	would	make	it.	Before	she	had	gone
two	arm-spans—a	full	body’s	length	from	the	ceiling—her	ankles	streamed
blood.	She	trembled	all	over,	using	unimagined	but	quickly	waning	reserves	of
energy.	Yet	she	did	not	stop.	This	is	a	hard,	hard	creature.	She	surpasses	us	all,
again	and	again.	The	thought	led	him	to	Baudin—banished,	likely	to	be
somewhere	out	there,	suffering	the	storm.	Another	hard	one,	stubborn	and
stolid.	How	fare	you,	Talon?
Felisin	finally	came	to	within	reach	of	the	hole’s	ragged	edge.	And	there
she	hesitated.
Aye,	now	what?
“Kulp!”	Her	voice	bounced	in	an	eerie	echo	that	was	quickly	swept	away
by	the	wind.
“Yes?”
“How	close	are	my	feet	to	you?”
“Maybe	three	arm-spans.	Why?”
“Prop	Heboric	beside	the	pillar.	Climb	onto	his	shoulders—”
“In	Hood’s	name	what	for?”
“You’ve	got	to	reach	my	ankles,	then	climb	over	me—I	can’t	let	go—
nothing	left!”
Gods,	I’m	not	as	hard	as	you,	lass.	“I	think—”
“Do	it!	We	have	no	choice,	damn	you!”
Hissing,	Kulp	swung	to	Heboric.	“Old	man,	can	you	understand	me?
Heboric!”
The	ex-priest	straightened,	grinned.	“Remember	the	hand	of	stone?	The
finger?	The	past	is	an	alien	world.	Powers	unimagined.	To	touch	is	to	recall


someone	else’s	memories,	someone	so	unlike	you	in	thought	and	senses	that
they	beckon	you	into	madness.”
Hand	of	stone?	The	bastard’s	raving.	“I	need	to	climb	onto	your	shoulders,
Heboric.	You	need	to	stand	firm—once	we	get	up	we’ll	rig	a	harness	to	pull
you	up,	OK?”
“On	my	shoulders.	A	mountain	of	stone,	each	one	carved	and	shaped	by	a
life	long	since	lost	to	Hood.	How	many	yearnings,	desires,	secrets?	Where
does	it	all	go?	The	unseen	energy	of	life’s	thoughts	is	food	for	the	gods,	did
you	know	that?	This	is	why	they	must—they	must—be	fickle!”
“Mage!”	Felisin	wailed.	“Now!”
Kulp	stepped	behind	the	ex-priest	and	set	his	hands	on	Heboric’s	shoulders.
“Stand	steady	now—”
Instead,	the	old	man	turned	to	face	him.	He	brought	both	wrists	together,
leaving	a	space	between	them	where	hands	should	be.	“Step.	I’ll	launch	you
straight	to	her.”
“Heboric—you’ve	no	hands	to	hold	my	foot—”
The	man’s	grin	broadened.	“Humor	me.”
Something	pushed	Kulp	beyond	wonder	as	his	moccasined	foot	settled	into
the	firm	stirrup	of	interlaced	fingers	he	could	not	see.	He	placed	his	hands	on
the	ex-priest’s	shoulders	once	again.
“Straight	up	you’ll	go,”	Heboric	said.	“I’m	blind.	Position	me,	Mage.”
“Back	a	step,	a	little	more,	There.”
“Ready?”
“Aye.”
But	he	wasn’t	prepared	for	the	immense	surge	of	strength	that	lifted	him,
flung	him	effortlessly	straight	up.	Kulp	made	an	instinctive	grab	for	Felisin,
missed—luckily,	as	he	was	then	past	her,	through	the	ceiling’s	hole.	He	almost
fell	straight	back	down.	A	panicked	twisting	of	his	upper	body,	however,
landed	him	painfully	on	an	edge.	It	groaned,	sagged.
His	fingers	clawing	unseen	flagstones,	the	mage	clambered	onto	the	floor.
Felisin’s	voice	keened	from	below.	“Mage!	Where	are	you?”
Feeling	a	slightly	hysterical	grin	frozen	on	his	face,	Kulp	said,	“Up	here.
I’ll	have	you	in	a	moment,	lass.”
	
Heboric	used	his	invisible	hands	to	swiftly	climb	the	makeshift	rope	of	leather
and	cloth	that	Kulp	sent	snaking	down	ten	minutes	later.	Seated	nearby	in	the
small,	gloomy	chamber,	Felisin	silently	watched	with	fear	racing	unchecked
within	her.


Her	body	tortured	her	with	pain,	the	feeling	returning	to	her	feet	with	silent
outrage.	Fine	white	dust	coated	the	blood	on	her	ankles	and	where	the	pillar ’s
crystalline	edges	had	scored	her	wrists.	She	shook	uncontrollably.	That	old
man	looked	dead	on	his	feet.	Dead.	He	was	burning	up,	yet	his	ravings	were	not
just	empty	words.	There	was	knowing	in	them,	impossible	knowing.	And	now	his
ghost-hands	have	become	real.
She	glanced	over	at	Kulp.	The	mage	was	frowning	at	the	torn	shambles	of
the	raincloak	in	his	hands.	Then	he	sighed	and	swung	his	gaze	to	a	silent	study
of	Heboric,	who	seemed	to	be	sinking	back	into	his	fevered	stupor.
Kulp	had	conjured	a	faint	glow	to	the	chamber,	revealing	bare	stone	walls.
Saddled	steps	rose	along	one	wall	to	a	solid-looking	door.	At	the	base	of	the
wall	opposite,	round	indentations	ran	in	a	row	on	the	floor,	each	of	a	size	to	fit
a	cask	or	key.	Rust-pitted	hooks	depended	on	chains	from	the	ceiling	at	the
room’s	far	end.	Everything	seemed	blunted	to	Felisin’s	eyes;	either	it	was
strangely	worn	down	or	the	effect	was	a	product	of	the	mage’s	sorcerous	light.
She	shook	her	head,	wrapping	her	arms	around	herself	to	fight	the
trembling.
“That	was	some	climb	you	managed,	lass,”	Kulp	said.
She	grunted.	“And	pointless,	as	it	turns	out.”	And	now	it’s	likely	to	kill	me.
There	was	more	to	making	that	climb	than	just	muscle	and	bone.	I	feel…
emptied,	with	nothing	left	in	me	to	rebuild.	She	laughed.
“What?”
“We’ve	found	a	cellar	for	a	tomb.”
“I	ain’t	ready	to	die	yet.”
“Lucky	you.”
She	watched	him	totter	to	his	feet.	He	looked	around.	“This	room	was
flooded	once.	With	water	that	flowed.”
“From	where	to	where?”
He	shrugged	and	approached	the	stairs	in	a	slow,	labored	shuffle.
He	looks	a	century	old.	As	old	as	I	feel.	Together,	we	can’t	make	up	even
one	Heboric.	I’m	learning	to	appreciate	irony,	at	least.
After	some	minutes	Kulp	finally	reached	the	door.	He	laid	a	hand	against	it.
“Bronze	sheeting—I	can	feel	the	hammer	strokes	that	flattened	it.”	He	rapped	a
knuckle	on	the	dark	metal.	The	sound	that	came	was	a	rustling,	sifting	whisper.
“Wood’s	rotted	behind	it.”
The	latch	broke	in	his	hand.	The	mage	muttered	a	curse,	then	set	his	weight
against	the	door	and	pushed.
The	bronze	cracked,	crumpled	inward.	A	moment	later	the	door	fell	back,
taking	Kulp	with	it	in	a	cloud	of	dust.


“Barriers	are	never	as	solid	as	one	thinks,”	Heboric	said	as	the	echoes	of
that	crash	faded.	He	stood	holding	his	stubbed	arms	out	before	him.	“I
understand	this	now.	To	a	blind	man	his	entire	body	is	a	ghost.	Felt	but	not
seen.	Thus,	I	raise	invisible	arms,	move	invisible	legs,	my	invisible	chest
rising	and	falling	to	unseen	air.	So	now	I	stretch	fingers,	then	make	fists.	I	am
everywhere	solid—and	always	have	been—if	not	for	the	deceit	perpetrated	by
my	own	eyes.”
Felisin	looked	away	from	the	ex-priest.	“Maybe	if	I	go	deaf	you’ll
disappear.”
Heboric	laughed.
At	the	landing,	Kulp	was	making	moaning	sounds,	his	breath	oddly	harsh
and	labored.	She	pushed	herself	upright,	stumbling	as	pain	closed	iron	bands
around	her	ankles.	Gritting	her	teeth,	she	hobbled	to	the	stairs.
The	eleven	steps	left	her	reeling	with	exhaustion.	She	fell	to	her	knees
beside	the	mage	and	waited	a	long	minute	before	her	breathing	steadied.	“You
all	right?”
Kulp	lifted	his	head.	“Broke	my	damned	nose,	I	think.”
“From	that	new	accent	I’d	say	you	were	right.	I	take	it	you’ll	live,	then.”
“Loudly.”	He	rose	to	his	hands	and	knees,	thick	blood	hanging	in	dusty
threads	from	his	face.	“See	what’s	ahead?	Ain’t	had	a	chance	to	look,	yet.”
“It’s	dark.	The	air	smells.”
“Like	what?”
She	shrugged.	“Not	sure.	Lime?	As	in	limestone,	that	is.”
“Not	bitter	fruit?	I’m	surprised.”
Shuffling	steps	on	the	stairs	indicated	Heboric’s	approach.
A	glow	rose	ahead,	raising	vague	highlights	that	slowly	etched	a	scene.
Felisin	stared.
“Your	breath’s	quickened,	lass,”	Kulp	said,	still	unwilling	or	unable	to	lift
his	head.	“Tell	me	what	you’re	seeing.”
Heboric’s	voice	echoed	from	halfway	up	the	stairs:	“Remnants	of	a	ritual
gone	awry	is	what	she’s	seeing.	Frozen	memories	of	ancient	pathos.”
“Sculptures,”	Felisin	said.	“Sprawled	all	over	the	floor—it’s	a	big	room.
Very	big—the	light	doesn’t	reach	the	far	end—”
“Wait,	you	said	sculptures?	What	kind?”
“People.	Carved	as	if	lying	around—at	first	I	thought	they	were	real—”
“And	why	don’t	you	think	that	any	more?”
“Well…”	Felisin	crawled	forward.	The	nearest	one	was	a	dozen	paces
away,	a	nude	woman	of	advanced	years,	lying	on	her	side	as	if	dead	or
sleeping.	The	stone	she	had	been	fashioned	from	was	dull	white,	limed	and


mottled	with	mold.	Every	wrinkle	of	her	withered	body	had	been	artfully
rendered,	no	detail	left	out.	She	looked	down	on	the	peaceful	aged	face.	Lady
Gaesen—this	woman	could	be	her	sister.	She	reached	out.
“Don’t	touch	anything,	mind,”	Kulp	said.	“I’m	still	seeing	stars,	but	I’ve
got	raised	hackles	that	says	there’s	sorcery	in	that	chamber.”
Felisin	withdrew	her	hand,	sat	back.	“They’re	just	statues—”
“On	pedestals?”
“Well,	no,	just	on	the	floor.”
The	light	suddenly	brightened,	filling	the	chamber.	Felisin	looked	back	to
see	Kulp	on	his	feet,	leaning	against	the	crumbled	door	frame.	The	mage	was
blinking	myopically	as	he	took	in	the	scene.	“Sculptures,	lass?”	he	growled.
“Not	a	chance.	A	warren’s	ripped	through	here.”
“Some	gates	should	never	be	opened,”	Heboric	said,	blithely	stepping	past
the	mage.	He	walked	unerringly	to	Felisin’s	side,	where	he	stopped,	cocking
his	head	and	smiling.	“Her	daughter	chose	the	Path	of	the	Soletaken,	a	fraught
journey,	that.	She	was	hardly	unique,	the	twisted	route	was	a	popular	alternative
to	Ascension.	More…earthly,	they	claimed.	And	older,	and	that	which	was	old
was	in	high	favor	in	the	last	days	of	the	First	Empire.”	The	ex-priest	paused,
sudden	sorrow	crumpling	his	features.	“It	was	understandable	that	Elders	of	the
day	sought	to	ease	their	children’s	chosen	path.	Sought	to	create	a	new	version
of	the	old,	risk-laden	one—for	that	had	crumbled;	weakened,	was	cancerous.
Too	many	of	the	Empire’s	young	were	being	lost—and	never	mind	the	wars	to
the	west—”
Kulp	had	laid	a	hand	on	Heboric’s	shoulder.	It	was	as	if	the	touch	closed	a
valve.	The	ex-priest	raised	a	ghost-hand	to	his	face,	then	sighed.	“Too	easy	to
become	lost…”
“We	need	water,”	the	mage	said.	“Does	her	memory	hold	such
knowledge?”
“This	was	a	city	of	springs,	fountains,	baths	and	canals.”
“Probably	filled	with	sand	one	and	all,”	Felisin	said.
“Maybe	not,”	Kulp	said,	glancing	around	with	bloodshot	eyes.	The	break
in	his	nose	was	a	bad	one,	the	swelling	cracking	the	too	dry	skin	on	either	side.
“This	one’s	been	emptied	out	recently—feel	how	the	air	still	stirs.”
Felisin	eyed	the	woman	at	her	feet.	“She	was	once	real,	then.	Flesh.”
“Aye,	they	all	were.”
“Alchemies	that	slowed	aging,”	Heboric	said.	“Six,	seven	centuries	for
each	citizen.	The	ritual	killed	them,	yet	the	alchemies	remained	potent—”
Then	water	deluged	the	city,”	Kulp	said.	“Mineral-rich.”
“Turning	not	just	bone	to	stone,	but	flesh	as	well.”	Heboric	shrugged.	“The


flood	was	born	of	distant	events—the	immortal	custodians	had	already	come
and	gone.”
“What	immortal	custodians,	old	man?”
“There	may	yet	be	a	spring,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“Not	far.”
“Lead	on,	blind	man,”	Felisin	said.
“I’ve	got	more	questions,”	Kulp	said.
Heboric	smiled.	“Later.	Our	immediate	journey	shall	explain	much.”
	
The	chamber ’s	mineralized	occupants	were	all	elderly,	and	numbered	in	the
hundreds.	Their	deaths	appeared	to	be,	one	and	all,	peaceful	ones,	which	had	a
vaguely	disquieting	effect	on	Felisin.	Not	all	ends	are	tortured.	Hood’s
indifferent	to	the	means.	So	the	priests	claim,	anyway.	Yet	his	greatest	harvests
come	from	war,	disease	and	famine.	Those	countless	ages	of	deliverance	must
surely	have	marked	the	High	King	of	Death.	Disorder	crowds	his	Gates	and
there’s	a	flavor	to	that.	Quiet	genocide	must	ring	very	different	bells.
She	felt	Hood	was	with	her	now,	in	these	hours	and	those	since	their	return
to	this	world.	She	found	herself	musing	on	him	as	if	he	was	her	lover,	driven
deep	inside	her	with	a	claim	that	felt	permanent	and	oddly	reassuring.
And	now,	I	fear	only	Heboric	and	Kulp.	It’s	said	gods	fear	mortals	more
than	they	do	each	other.	Is	that	the	source	of	my	terror?	Have	I	captured	an
echo	of	Hood	within	me?	The	god	of	death	must	surely	dream	rivers	of	blood.
Perhaps	I	have	been	his	all	this	time.
Thus	I	am	blessed.
Heboric	turned	suddenly,	seeming	to	regard	her	with	his	sunburned,
swollen-shut	eyes.
Can	you	now	read	my	mind,	old	man?
Heboric’s	broad	mouth	twisted	wryly.	After	a	moment	he	swung	back,
continued	on.
The	chamber	ended	in	a	portalway	that	funnelled	their	path	into	a	lowceilinged	tunnel.	Past	torrents	of	water	had	smoothed	and	polished	the	heavy
stones	on	every	side.	Kulp	maintained	the	diffuse,	sourceless	light	as	they
stumbled	onward.
We	shamble	like	animated	corpses,	cursed	in	a	journey	without	end.	Felisin
smiled.	Hood’s	own.
They	came	to	what	had	once	been	a	street,	narrow	and	crooked,	its	cobbles
heaved	and	buckled.	Low	residential	buildings	crowded	the	sides	beneath	a
roof	of	crusted,	compacted	glass.	Along	all	the	walls	in	sight	ran	narrow	bands
of	similar	substance,	as	if	marking	water	levels	or	layers	in	the	sand	that	had


once	filled	every	space.
In	the	street	lay	more	bodies,	but	there	was	no	peace	to	be	found	in	their
twisted,	malformed	shapes.	Heboric	paused	cocking	his	head.	“Ah,	now	we
come	upon	altogether	different	memories.”
Kulp	crouched	down	beside	a	figure.	“Soletaken,	caught	in	the	act	of
veering.	Into	something…reptilian.”
“Soletaken	and	D’ivers,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“The	ritual	unleashed	powers
that	ran	wild.	Like	a	plague,	shapeshifting	claimed	thousands,	unwelcomed,	no
initiation—many	went	mad.	Death	filled	the	city,	every	street,	every	house.
Families	were	torn	apart	by	their	own.”	He	shook	himself.	“All	within	but	a
handful	of	hours,”	he	whispered.
Kulp’s	eyes	fixed	on	another	figure,	almost	lost	in	the	midst	of	a	pile	of
mineralized	corpses.	“Not	just	Soletaken	and	D’ivers…”
Heboric	sighed.	“No.”
Felisin	approached	the	subject	of	the	mage’s	rapt	attention.	She	saw	thick,
nut-brown	limbs—an	arm	and	a	leg,	still	attached	to	an	otherwise	dismembered
torso.	Withered	skin	wrapped	the	thick	bones.	I’ve	seen	this	before.	On	the
Silanda.	T’lan	Imass.
“Your	immortal	custodians,”	Kulp	said.
“Aye.”
“They	took	losses	here.”
“Oh,	that	they	did,”	Heboric	said.	“Appalling	losses.	There	is	a	bond
between	the	T’lan	Imass	and	Soletaken	and	D’ivers,	a	mysterious	kinship	that
was	unsuspected	by	the	dwellers	of	this	city—though	they	claimed	for
themselves	the	proud	title	of	First	Empire.	That	would	have	irritated	the	T’lan
Imass—assuming	such	creatures	can	feel	irritation—to	have	so	boldly
assumed	a	title	that	rightly	belonged	to	them.	Yet	what	drew	them	here	was	the
ritual,	and	the	need	to	set	things	right.”
Kulp	was	frowning	behind	the	battered	mask	of	his	features.	“Our	brushes
with	Soletaken…and	the	Imass.	What’s	beginning	again,	Heboric?”
“I	don’t	know,	Mage.	A	return	to	that	ancient	gate?	Another	unleashing?”
“That	Soletaken	dragon	we	followed…it	was	undead.”
“It	was	T’lan	Imass,”	the	ex-priest	elaborated.	“A	Bonecaster.	Perhaps	it	is
the	old	gate’s	custodian,	drawn	once	again	in	answer	to	an	impending	calamity.
Shall	we	move	on?	I	can	smell	water—the	spring	we	seek	lives	yet.”
	
The	pool	lay	in	the	center	of	a	garden.	Pale	undergrowth	carpeted	the	cracked
flagstones	on	the	footpath,	white	and	pink	leaves	like	shreds	of	flesh,	colorless


globes	of	some	kind	of	fruit	depending	from	vines	wrapping	stone	columns
and	fossilized	tree	trunks.	A	garden	thriving	in	darkness.
Eyeless	white	fish	darted	in	the	pool,	seeking	shadows	as	the	sorcerous
light	pulsed	bright.
Felisin	fell	to	her	knees,	reached	trembling	hands	down,	slipped	them	into
the	cool	water.	The	sensation	rushed	through	her	with	ecstasy.
“Residue	of	alchemies,”	Heboric	said	behind	her.
She	glanced	back.	“What	do	you	mean?”
“There	will	be…benefits…in	drinking	this	nectar.”
“Is	this	fruit	edible?”	Kulp	asked,	hefting	one	of	the	pale	globes.
“It	was	when	it	was	bright	red,	nine	thousand	years	ago.”
	
The	thick	ash	hung	motionless	in	their	wake	for	as	far	as	Kalam	could	see,
though	distance	in	the	Imperial	Warren	was	not	a	thing	easily	gauged.	Their
trail	had	the	appearance	of	being	as	straight	as	a	spear	shaft.	His	frown
deepened.
“We	are	lost,”	Minala	said,	leaning	back	in	her	saddle.
“Better	than	dead,”	Keneb	muttered,	offering	the	assassin	at	least	that	much
sympathy.
Kalam	felt	Minala’s	hard	gray	eyes	on	him.	“Get	us	out	of	this	Hoodcursed	warren,	Corporal!	We’re	hungry,	we’re	thirsty,	we	don’t	know	where
we	are.	Get	us	out!”
I’ve	visualized	Aren,	I’ve	picked	the	place—an	unobtrusive	niche	at	the	end
of	the	final	twist	of	No	Help	Alley…in	the	heart	of	Dregs,	that	Malazan
expatriate	hovel	close	to	the	riverfront.	Right	down	to	the	cobbles	underfoot.	So
why	can’t	we	get	there?	What’s	blocking	us?	“Not	yet,”	Kalam	said.	“Even	by
warren,	Aren	is	a	long	journey.”	That	makes	sense,	doesn’t	it?	So	why	all	this
unease?
“Something’s	wrong,”	Minala	persisted.	“I	can	see	it	in	your	face.	We
should	have	arrived	by	now.”
The	taste	of	ash,	its	smell,	its	feel,	had	become	a	part	of	him,	and	he	knew
it	was	the	same	for	the	others.	The	lifeless	grit	seemed	to	stain	his	very
thoughts.	Kalam	had	suspicions	of	what	that	ash	had	once	been—the	heap	of
bones	they	had	stumbled	onto	when	arriving	had	not	proved	unique—yet	he
found	himself	instinctively	shying	from	acknowledging	those	suspicions.	The
possibility	was	too	ghastly,	too	overwhelming,	to	contemplate.
Keneb	grunted,	then	sighed.	“Well,	Corporal,	shall	we	continue	on?”
Kalam	glanced	at	the	captain.	The	fever	from	his	head	wound	was	gone,


though	a	barely	perceptible	slowness	to	his	movements	and	expressions
betrayed	a	healing	yet	incomplete.	The	assassin	knew	he	could	not	count	on	the
man	in	a	fight.	And	with	the	apparent	loss	of	Apt,	he	felt	his	back	exposed.
Minala’s	inability	to	trust	him	diminished	the	reliance	he	placed	in	her:	she
would	do	what	was	necessary	to	protect	her	sister	and	the	children—that	and
nothing	more.
Better	were	I	alone.	He	nudged	the	stallion	forward.	After	a	moment	the
others	followed.
The	Imperial	Warren	was	a	realm	with	neither	day	nor	night,	just	a
perpetual	dusk,	its	faint	light	sourceless—a	place	without	shadows.	They
measured	the	passage	of	time	by	the	cyclical	demands	imposed	by	their	bodies.
The	need	to	eat	and	drink,	the	need	to	sleep.	Yet,	when	gnawing	hunger	and
thirst	grew	constant	and	unappeased,	when	exhaustion	pulled	at	every	step,	the
notion	of	time	sank	into	meaninglessness;	indeed,	it	revealed	itself	as
something	born	of	faith,	not	fact.
“Time	makes	of	us	believers.	Timelessness	makes	of	us	unbelievers.”
Another	Saying	of	the	Fool,	another	sly	quote	voiced	by	the	sages	of	my
homeland.	Used	most	often	when	dismissing	precedent;	a	derisive	scoff	at	the
lessons	of	history.	The	central	assertion	of	sages	was	to	believe	nothing.	More,
that	assertion	was	a	central	tenet	of	those	who	would	become	assassins.
“Assassination	proves	the	lie	of	constancy.	Even	as	the	upraised	dagger	is
itself	a	constant,	your	freedom	to	choose	who,	to	choose	when,	is	the	constant’s
darker	lie.	An	assassin	is	chaos	unleashed,	students.	But	remember,	the
upraised	dagger	can	quench	firestorms	as	easily	as	light	them…”
And	there,	plainly	carved	in	his	thoughts	as	if	with	a	dagger-point,
stretched	the	thin,	straight	track	that	would	lead	him	to	Laseen.	Every
justification	he	needed	rode	unerring	within	that	fissure.	Yet,	while	the	track
cuts	through	Aren,	it	seems	all	unknowing	something’s	nudged	me	from	it,	left
me	wandering	this	plain	of	ash.
“I	see	clouds	ahead,”	Minala	said,	now	riding	beside	him.
Ridges	of	low-hanging	dust	crisscrossed	the	area	before	them.	Kalam’s
eyes	narrowed.	“As	good	as	footprints	in	mud,”	he	muttered.
“What?”
“Look	behind	us—we	leave	the	selfsame	trail.	We’ve	company	in	the
Imperial	Warren.”
“And	any	company’s	unwelcome,”	she	said.
“Aye.”
Arriving	at	the	first	of	the	ragged	ruts	only	deepened	Kalam’s	unease.
More	than	one.	Bestial.	No	servants	sworn	to	the	Empress	left	these…


“Look,”	Minala	said,	pointing.
Thirty	paces	ahead	was	what	appeared	to	be	a	sinkhole	or	dark	stain	on	the
ground.	Suspended	ash	rimmed	the	pit	in	a	motionless,	semi-translucent
curtain.
“Is	it	just	me,”	Keneb	growled	behind	them,	“or	is	there	a	new	smell	to	this
Hood-rotted	air?”
“Like	wood	spice,”	Minala	agreed.
Hackles	rising,	Kalam	freed	his	crossbow	from	its	binding	on	the	saddle,
cranked	the	claw	back	until	it	locked,	then	slid	a	quarrel	into	the	slot.	He	felt
Minala’s	eyes	on	him	throughout	and	was	not	surprised	when	she	spoke.
“That	particular	smell’s	one	you’re	familiar	with,	isn’t	it?	And	not	from
rifling	some	merchant’s	bolt-chest,	either.	What	should	we	be	on	the	lookout
for,	Corporal?”
“Anything,”	he	said,	kicking	his	horse	into	a	walk.
The	pit	was	at	least	a	hundred	paces	across,	the	edges	heaped	in	places	with
excavated	fill.	Burned	bone	jutted	from	those	mounds.
Kalam’s	stallion	stopped	a	few	yards	from	the	edge.	Still	gripping	the
crossbow,	the	assassin	lifted	one	leg	over	the	saddlehorn,	then	slipped	down,
landing	in	a	puff	of	gray	cloud.	“Best	stay	here,”	he	told	the	others.	“No	telling
how	firm	the	sides	are.”
“Then	why	approach	at	all?”	Minala	demanded.
Not	answering,	Kalam	edged	forward.	He	came	to	within	two	paces	of	the
rim,	close	enough	to	see	what	lay	at	the	bottom	of	the	pit,	although	at	first	it
was	the	far	side	that	held	his	attention.	Now	I	know	what	we’re	walking	on	and
refusing	to	think	on	it	didn’t	help	at	all.	Hood’s	breath!	The	ash	formed
compacted	layers,	revealing	past	variations	in	the	temperature	and	ferocity	of
the	fires	that	had	incinerated	this	land—and	everything	on	it.	The	layers	varied
in	thickness	as	well.	One	of	the	thickest	was	an	arm’s	length	in	depth	and
looked	solid	with	compacted,	shattered	bone.	Immediately	below	it	was	a
thinner,	reddish	layer	of	what	looked	like	brick	dust.	Other	layers	revealed
only	charred	bones,	mottled	with	black	patches	rimmed	in	white.	Those	few
that	he	could	identify	looked	human	in	size—perhaps	slightly	longer	of	limb.
The	banded	wall	opposite	him	was	at	least	six	arm-spans	deep.	We	stride
ancient	death,	the	remains	of…millions.
His	gaze	slowly	descended	to	the	pit’s	floor.	It	was	crowded	with	rusted,
corroded	mechanisms,	all	alike	though	strewn	about.	Each	was	the	size	of	a
trader ’s	wagon,	and	indeed	huge	spoked	iron	wheels	were	visible.
Kalam	studied	them	a	long	time,	then	he	swung	about	and	returned	to	the
others,	uncocking	the	crossbow	as	he	did	so.


“Well?”
The	assassin	shrugged,	pulling	himself	back	into	the	saddle.	“Old	ruins	at
the	bottom.	Odd	ones—the	only	time	I’ve	seen	anything	like	them	was	in
Darujhistan,	within	the	temple	that	housed	Icarium’s	Circle	of	Seasons,	which
was	said	to	measure	the	passage	of	time.”
Keneb	grunted.
Kalam	glanced	at	the	man.	“Something,	Captain?”
“A	rumor,	nothing	more.	Months	old.”
“What	rumor?”
“Oh,	that	Icarium	was	seen.”	The	man	suddenly	frowned.	“What	do	you
know	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons,	Corporal?”
“Enough	to	stay	away	from	it.”
Keneb	nodded.	“We	had	a	Seer	pass	through	around	that	time—some	of	my
squads	chipped	in	for	a	reading,	ended	up	getting	their	money	back	since	the
Seer	couldn’t	take	the	field	past	the	first	card—the	Seer	wasn’t	surprised,	I
recall.	Said	that’d	been	the	case	for	weeks,	and	not	just	for	him,	but	for	every
other	reader	as	well.”
Alas,	that	wasn’t	my	luck	the	last	time	I	saw	a	Deck.	“Which	card?”
“One	of	the	Unaligned	I	think	it	was.	Which	are	those?”
“Orb,	Throne,	Scepter,	Obelisk—”
“Obelisk!	That’s	the	one.	The	Seer	claimed	it	was	Icarium’s	doing,	that
he’d	been	seen	with	his	Trell	companion	in	Pan’potsun.”
“Does	any	of	this	matter?”	Minala	demanded.
Obelisk…past,	present,	future.	Time,	and	time	has	no	allies…“Probably
not,”	the	assassin	replied.
They	rode	on,	skirting	the	pit	at	a	safe	distance.	More	dust	trails	crossed
their	route,	with	only	a	few	suggesting	the	passage	of	a	human.	Although	it	was
hard	to	be	certain,	they	seemed	to	be	heading	in	the	opposite	direction	to	the
one	Kalam	had	chosen.	If	indeed	we’re	traveling	south,	then	the	Soletaken	and
Divers	are	all	traveling	north.	That	might	be	reassuring,	except	that	if	there’re
more	shapeshifters	on	the	way,	we’ll	run	right	into	them.
	
A	thousand	paces	later,	they	came	to	a	sunken	road.	Like	the	mechanisms	in	the
pit,	it	was	six	arm-spans	down.	While	dust	filled	the	air	above	the	cobbles,
making	them	blurry,	the	steeply	banked	sides	had	not	slumped.	Kalam
dismounted,	tied	a	long,	thin	rope	to	his	stallion’s	saddlehorn,	then,	gripping
the	rope’s	other	end,	began	making	his	way	down.	To	his	surprise	he	did	not
sink	into	the	bank.	His	boots	crunched.	The	slope	had	been	solidified	somehow.


Nor	was	it	too	steep	for	the	horses.
The	assassin	glanced	up	at	the	others.	“This	can	lead	us	in	the	direction
we’ve	been	traveling	along,	more	or	less.	I	suggest	we	take	it—we’ll	make
much	better	time.”
“Going	nowhere	faster,”	Minala	said.
Kalam	grinned.
When	everyone	had	led	their	mounts	down,	the	captain	spoke.	“Why	not
camp	here	for	a	while?	We’re	not	visible	and	the	air ’s	a	bit	cleaner.”
“And	cooler,”	Selv	added,	her	arms	around	her	all	too	quiet	children.
“All	right,”	the	assassin	agreed.
The	bladders	of	water	for	the	horses	were	getting	ominously	light—the
animals	could	last	a	few	days	on	feed	alone,	Kalam	knew,	though	they	would
suffer	terribly.	We’re	running	out	of	time.	As	he	unsaddled,	fed	and	watered	the
horses,	Minala	and	Keneb	laid	out	the	bedrolls,	then	assembled	the	meager
supplies	that	would	make	up	their	own	meal.	The	preparations	were	conducted
in	silence.
“Can’t	say	I’m	encouraged	by	this	place,”	Keneb	said	as	they	ate.
Kalam	grunted,	appreciating	the	gradual	emergence	of	the	captain’s	sense
of	humor.	“Could	do	with	a	good	sweeping,”	he	agreed.
“Aye.	Mind	you,	I’ve	seen	bonfires	get	out	of	control	before…”
Minala	took	a	last	sip	of	water,	set	the	bladder	down.	“I’m	done,”	she
announced,	rising.	“You	two	can	discuss	the	weather	in	peace.”
They	watched	her	stride	to	her	bedroll.	Selv	repacked	the	remaining	food,
then	led	her	children	away	as	well.
“It’s	my	watch,”	Kalam	reminded	the	captain.
“I’m	not	tired—”
The	assassin	barked	a	laugh.
“All	right,	I’m	tired.	We	all	are.	Thing	is,	this	dust	has	us	all	snoring	so
loud	we’d	drown	out	stags	in	heat.	I	end	up	just	lying	there,	staring	up	at	what
should	be	sky	but	looks	more	like	a	shroud.	Throat	on	fire,	lungs	aching	like
they	were	full	of	sludge,	eyes	drier	than	a	forgotten	luckstone.	We	won’t	get
any	decent	sleep	until	we’ve	cleared	this	place	out	of	our	bodies—”
“We	have	to	get	out	of	here	first.”
Keneb	nodded.	He	glance	over	to	where	the	snores	had	already	begun	and
lowered	his	voice.	“Any	predictions	on	when	that	will	be,	Corporal?”
“No.”
The	captain	was	silent	a	long	time,	then	he	sighed.	“You’ve	somehow
crossed	blades	with	Minala.	That’s	an	unwelcome	tension	to	our	little	family,
wouldn’t	you	say?”


Kalam	said	nothing.
After	a	moment,	Keneb	continued.	“Colonel	Tras	wanted	a	quiet,	obedient
wife,	a	wife	to	perch	on	his	arm	and	make	pretty	sounds—”
“Not	very	observant,	was	he?”
“More	like	stubborn.	Any	horse	can	be	broken,	was	his	philosophy.	And
that’s	what	he	set	about	doing.”
“Was	the	colonel	a	subtle	man?”
“Not	even	a	clever	one.”
“Yet	Minala	is	both—what	in	Hood’s	name	was	she	thinking?”
Keneb’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	assassin’s,	as	if	he’d	suddenly	grasped
something.	Then	he	shrugged.	“She	loves	her	sister.”
Kalam	looked	away	with	a	humorless	grin.	“Isn’t	the	officer	corps	a
wonderful	life.”
“Tras	wasn’t	long	for	that	backwater	garrison	post.	He	used	his
messengers	to	weave	a	broad	net.	He	was	maybe	a	week	away	from	catching	a
new	commission	right	at	the	heart	of	things.”
“Aren.”
“Aye.”
“You’d	get	the	garrison	command,	then.”
“And	ten	more	Imperials	a	month.	Enough	to	hire	good	tutors	for	Kesen
and	Vaneb,	instead	of	that	wine-addled	old	toad	with	the	fiddling	hands	attached
to	the	garrison	staff.”
“Minala	doesn’t	look	broken,”	Kalam	said.
“Oh,	she’s	broken	all	right.	Forced	healing	was	the	colonel’s	mainstay.	It’s
one	thing	to	beat	a	person	senseless,	then	have	to	wait	a	month	or	more	for	her
to	mend	before	you	can	do	it	again.	With	a	squad	healer	with	gambling	debts	at
your	side,	you	can	break	bones	before	breakfast	and	have	her	ready	for	more
come	the	next	sunrise.”
“With	you	smartly	saluting	through	it	all—”
Keneb	winced,	glanced	away.	“Can’t	object	to	what	you	don’t	know,
Corporal.	If	I’d	had	as	much	as	a	suspicion…”	He	shook	his	head.	“Closed
doors.	It	was	Selv	who	found	out,	through	a	launderer	we	shared	with	the
colonel’s	household.	Blood	on	the	sheets	and	all	that.	When	she	told	me	I	went
to	call	him	out	to	the	compound.”	He	grimaced.	“The	rebellion	interrupted	me
—I	walked	into	an	ambush	well	under	way,	and	then	my	only	concern	was	in
keeping	us	all	alive.”
“How	did	the	good	colonel	die?”
“You’ve	just	come	to	a	closed	door,	Corporal.”
Kalam	smiled.	“That’s	all	right.	Times	like	these	I	can	see	through	them


well	enough.”
“Then	I	needn’t	say	any	more.”
“Looking	at	Minala,	none	of	this	makes	sense,”	the	assassin	said.
“There’s	different	kinds	of	strength,	I	guess.	And	defenses.	She	used	to	be
close	with	Selv,	with	the	children.	Now	she	wraps	herself	around	them	like
armor,	just	as	cold	and	just	as	hard.	What	she’s	having	trouble	with	is	you,
Kalam.	You’ve	wrapped	yourself	in	the	same	way	but	around	her—and	the	rest
of	us.”
And	she’s	feeling	redundant?	Maybe	that’s	how	it	would	look	to	Keneb.
“Her	trouble	with	me	is	that	she	doesn’t	trust	me,	Captain.”
“Why	in	Hood’s	name	not?”
Because	I’m	holding	daggers	unseen.	And	she	knows	it.	Kalam	shrugged.
“From	what	you’ve	told	me,	I’d	expect	trust	to	be	something	she	wouldn’t
easily	grant	to	anyone,	Captain.”
Keneb	mused	on	this,	then	he	sighed	and	rose.	“Well,	enough	of	that.	I’ve	a
shroud	to	stare	up	at	and	snores	to	count.”
Kalam	watched	the	captain	move	away	and	settle	down	beside	Selv.	The
assassin	drew	a	deep,	slow	breath.	I	expect	your	death	was	a	quick	one,	Colonel
Tras.	Be	fickle,	dear	Hood,	and	spit	the	bastard	back	out.	I’ll	kill	him	again,
and	Queen	turn	away,	I’ll	not	be	quick.
	
On	his	belly,	Fiddler	wormed	his	way	down	the	rock-tumbled	slope,	heedlessly
scraping	his	knuckles	as	he	held	out	his	cocked	crossbow	before	him.	That
bastard	Servant’s	dissolving	in	a	dozen	stomachs	by	now.	Either	that	or	his
head’s	riding	a	pike	minus	the	ears	now	dangling	from	someone’s	hip.
All	of	Icarium’s	and	Mappo’s	skills	had	been	stretched	to	the	limit	with	the
simple	effort	of	keeping	everyone	alive.	The	Whirlwind,	for	all	its	violence,
was	no	longer	an	empty	storm	scouring	a	dead	land.	Servant’s	trail	had	led	the
group	into	a	more	focused	mayhem.
Another	lance	flew	out	from	the	swirling	ochre	curtain	to	his	left	and
landed	with	a	clatter	ten	paces	from	where	the	sapper	lay.	Your	goddess’s	wrath
leaves	you	as	blind	as	us,	fool!
They	were	in	hills	crawling	with	Sha’ik’s	desert	warriors.	There	was	both
coincidence	and	something	else	in	this	fell	convergence.	Convergence	indeed.
The	followers	seek	the	woman	they’re	sworn	to	follow.	Too	bad	that	the	other
path	happens	to	be	here	as	well.
Distant	screams	rose	above	the	wind’s	more	guttural	howl.	Lo,	the	hills	are
alive	with	beasts.	Foul-tempered	ones	at	that.	Three	times	in	the	past	hour


Icarium	had	led	them	around	a	Soletaken	or	a	D’ivers.	There	was	some	kind	of
mutually	agreed	avoidance	going	on—the	shapeshifters	wanted	nothing	to	do
with	the	Jhag.	But	Sha’ik’s	fanatics…ah,	now	they’re	fair	game.	Lucky	for	us.
Still,	the	likelihood	that	Servant	still	lived	seemed,	to	Fiddler ’s	mind,	very
small	indeed.	He	worried	for	Apsalar	as	well,	and	found	himself—ironically—
praying	that	a	god’s	skills	would	prove	equal	to	the	task.
Two	desert	warriors	wearing	leather	armor	appeared	ahead	and	below,
scampering	with	panicked	haste	down	toward	the	base	of	the	gorge.
Fiddler	hissed	a	curse.	He	was	the	group’s	flank	on	this	side—if	they	got
past	him…
The	sapper	raised	his	crossbow.
Black	cloaks	swept	over	the	two	figures.	They	shrieked.	The	cloaks
swarmed,	crawled.	Spiders,	big	enough	to	make	out	each	one	even	at	this
distance.	Fiddler ’s	skin	prickled.	You	should	have	brought	brooms,	friends.
He	pushed	himself	up	from	the	crevasse	he	had	wedged	himself	into,
angled	right	as	he	scrambled	along	the	slope.	And	if	I	don’t	get	back	into
Icarium’s	influence	soon,	I’ll	be	wishing	I	had	as	well.
The	screams	of	the	desert	warriors	ceased,	either	with	the	distance	the
sapper	put	between	him	and	them,	or	blissful	release—he	hoped	the	latter.
Directly	ahead	rose	the	side	of	the	ridge	that	had—thus	far—marked	Apsalar
and	her	father ’s	trail.
The	wind	tugged	at	him	as	he	clambered	his	way	to	the	top.	Almost
immediately	he	stumbled	onto	the	spine	and	caught	sight	of	the	others,	no	more
than	ten	paces	ahead.	The	three	were	crouched	over	a	motionless	figure.
Fiddler	went	cold.	Oh,	Hood,	make	it	a	stranger…
It	was.	A	young	man,	naked,	his	skin	too	pale	to	make	him	one	of	Sha’ik’s
desert	tribesmen.	His	throat	had	been	cut,	the	wound	gaping	down	to	the
vertebra’s	flattened	inner	side.	There	was	no	blood.
As	Fiddler	slowly	crouched	down,	Mappo	looked	over	at	the	sapper.	“A
Soletaken,	we	think,”	he	said.
“That’s	Apsalar ’s	work,”	Fiddler	said.	“See	how	the	head	was	pushed
forward	and	down,	chin	tucked	to	anchor	the	blade—I’ve	seen	it	before…”
“Then	she’s	alive,”	Crokus	said.
“As	I	said,”	Icarium	rumbled.	“As	is	her	father.”
So	far	so	good.	Fiddler	straightened.	“There’s	no	blood,”	he	said.	“Any
idea	how	long	ago	he	was	killed?”
“No	more	than	an	hour,”	Mappo	said.	“As	for	the	lack	of	blood…”	He
shrugged.	“The	Whirlwind	is	a	thirsty	goddess.”
The	sapper	nodded.	“I	think	I’ll	stick	closer	from	now	on,	if	you	don’t


mind—I	don’t	think	we’ll	have	any	more	trouble	from	Sha’ik’s	warriors—call
it	a	gut	feeling.”
Mappo	nodded.	“For	the	moment,	we	ourselves	walk	the	Path	of	Hands.”
And	why	is	that,	I	wonder?
They	resumed	their	journey.	Fiddler	mused	on	the	half-dozen	times	he’d
seen	desert	warriors	in	the	past	twelve	hours.	Desperate	men	and	women	in
truth.	Raraku	was	the	center	of	the	Apocalypse,	yet	the	rebellion	was	headless
and	had	been	for	some	time.	What	was	going	on	beyond	the	Holy	Desert’s	ring
of	crags?
Anarchy,	I’d	wager.	Slaughter	and	frenzy.	Hearts	of	ice	and	the	mercy	of
cold	steel.	Even	if	the	illusion	of	Sha’ik	is	being	maintained—her	ranking
followers	now	issuing	commands—she’s	not	led	her	army	out	to	make	it	the
rebellion’s	lodestone.	Doesn’t	sit	well	proclaiming	an	uprising,	then	not
showing	up	to	lead	it…
Apsalar	would	have	her	hands	full,	should	she	accept	the	role.	An
assassin’s	skills	might	keep	her	alive,	but	they	offered	nothing	of	the	intangible
magnetism	necessary	to	lead	armies.	Commanding	armies	was	easy	enough—
the	traditional	structures	ensured	that,	as	the	barely	competent	Fists	of	the
Malazan	Empire	clearly	showed—but	leading	was	another	thing	entirely.
Fiddler	could	think	of	only	a	handful	of	people	possessing	that	magnetic
quality.	Dassem	Ultor,	Prince	K’azz	D’Avore	of	the	Crimson	Guard,	Caladan
Brood	and	Dujek	Onearm.	Tattersail	if	she’d	had	the	ambition.	Likely	Sha’ik
herself.	And	Whiskeyjack.
As	alluring	as	Apsalar	was,	the	sapper	had	seen	nothing	of	such	force	of
personality.	Competence,	without	a	doubt.	Quiet	confidence	as	well.	But	she
clearly	preferred	observing	over	participating—at	least	until	the	time	came	to
draw	the	sticker.	Assassins	don’t	bother	honing	their	powers	to	persuade—why
bother?	She’ll	need	the	right	people	around	her…
Fiddler	scowled	to	himself.	He’d	already	taken	it	as	given	that	the	lass
would	assume	the	guise,	twined	to	the	central	thread	of	this	goddess-woven
tapestry.	And	here	we	are,	racing	through	the	Whirlwind…to	arrive	in	time	to
witness	the	prophetic	rebirth.
Eyes	narrowed	against	the	blowing	grit,	the	sapper	glanced	at	Crokus.	The
lad	strode	half	a	dozen	paces	ahead,	a	step	behind	Icarium.	Even	leaning	as	he
did	into	the	biting	wind,	he	betrayed	something	fraught	and	fragile	in	his
posture.	She’d	said	nothing	to	him	before	leaving—she’d	dismissed	him	and	his
concerns	as	easily	as	she	did	the	rest	of	us.	Pust	offered	her	father	to	seal	the
pact.	But	sent	him	out	here	first.	That	suggested	the	old	man	was	a	willing
player	in	the	scheme,	a	co-conspirator.	If	I	was	that	lass,	I’d	have	some	hard


questions	for	ol’	Dadda…
On	all	sides,	the	Whirlwind	seemed	to	howl	with	laughter.
	
The	bruise	was	vaguely	door-shaped	and	twice	a	man’s	height.	Pearl	paced
before	it,	muttering	to	himself,	while	Lostara	Yil	watched	in	weary	patience.
Finally	he	turned,	as	if	suddenly	recalling	her	presence.	“Complications,
my	dear.	I	am…torn.”
The	Red	Blade	eyed	the	portal.	“Has	the	assassin	left	the	warren,	then?	This
does	not	look	the	same	as	the	other	one…”
The	Claw	wiped	ash	from	his	brow,	leaving	a	dusky	streak.	“Ah,	no.	This
represents	a…a	detour.	I’m	the	last	surviving	operative,	after	all.	The	Empress
so	despises	idle	hands…”	He	gave	her	a	wry	smile,	then	shrugged.	“This	is	not
my	only	concern,	alas.	We	are	being	tracked.”
She	felt	a	chill	at	those	words.	“We	should	double	back,	then.	Prepare	an
ambush—”
Pearl	grinned,	waved	an	arm.	“Choose	us	a	likely	place,	then.	Please.”
She	glanced	around.	Flat	horizons	in	all	directions.	“What	of	those	raised
humps	we	passed	a	while	back?”
“Never	mind	those,”	the	Claw	said.	“Safe	distance	the	first	time	and	no
closer	now.”
“Then	that	pit…”
“Mechanisms	to	measure	futility.	I	think	not,	my	dear.	For	the	moment,	I
fear,	we	must	ignore	that	which	stalks	us—”
“What	if	it’s	Kalam?”
“It	isn’t.	Thanks	to	you,	we’re	keeping	our	eyes	on	him.	Our	assassin’s
mind	wanders,	and	so	therefore	does	his	path.	An	embarrassing	lack	of
discipline	for	one	so	weighty.	I	admit	I	am	disappointed	in	the	man.”	He	swung
to	face	the	portal.	“In	any	case,	we	have	digressed	a	rather	vast	distance	here.	A
small	measure	of	assistance	is	required—not	lengthy,	I	assure	you.	The
Empress	agrees	that	Kalam’s	journey	suggests…personal	risks	to	her	person,
and	so	must	take	ultimate	precedence.	Nonetheless…”
The	Claw	removed	his	half-cloak,	carefully	folding	it	before	setting	it
down.	Across	his	chest	was	a	belt	containing	throwing	stars.	A	brace	of	knives
jutted	pommel-forward	under	his	left	arm.	Pearl	went	through	a	ritual	of
checking	every	weapon.
“Do	I	wait	here?”
“As	you	like.	While	I	cannot	guarantee	your	safety	if	you	accompany	me,	I
am	for	a	skirmish.”


“The	enemy?”
“Followers	of	the	Whirlwind.”
Lostara	Yil	unsheathed	her	tulwar.
Pearl	grinned,	as	if	well	aware	of	the	effect	his	words	would	have.	“When
we	appear,	it	shall	be	night.	Thick	mists,	as	well.	Our	foes	are	Semk	and
Tithansi,	and	our	allies—”
“Allies?	This	is	a	skirmish	already	underway?”
“Oh,	indeed.	Wickans	and	marines	of	the	Seventh.”
Lostara	bared	her	teeth.	“Coltaine.”
His	grin	broadening,	Pearl	drew	on	a	pair	of	thin	leather	gloves.	“Ideally,”
he	continued,	“we	should	remain	unseen.”
“Why?”
“If	help	appears	once,	the	expectation	is	it	will	appear	again.	The	risk	is
dulling	Coltaine’s	edge,	and	by	the	Nameless	Ones,	the	Wickan	will	need	that
edge	in	the	weeks	to	come.”
“I	am	ready.”
“One	thing,”	the	Claw	drawled.	“There’s	a	Semk	demon.	Stay	away	from	it,
for	while	we	know	virtually	nothing	of	its	powers,	what	we	do	know	suggests
an	appalling…temper.”
“I	shall	be	right	behind	you,”	Lostara	said.
“Hmm,	in	that	case,	once	we’re	through,	pull	left.	I’ll	go	right.	Not	an
auspicious	entry	my	getting	trampled,	after	all.”
The	portal	flared.	In	a	blur	Pearl	slid	forward	and	vanished.	Lostara	jabbed
her	heels	into	her	mount’s	flanks.	The	horse	bolted	through	the	portal—
—her	hooves	thumping	hard	soil.	Fog	twisted	wildly	around	her,	through	a
darkness	that	was	alive	with	screams	and	detonations.	She’d	already	lost	Pearl,
but	that	concern	was	quickly	flung	aside	as	four	Tithansi	warriors	on	foot
stumbled	into	view.
A	sharper	had	chewed	them	up,	and	none	was	prepared	as	Lostara	charged
them,	her	tulwar	flashing.	They	scattered,	but	their	wounds	made	them	fatally
slow.	Two	fell	to	her	blade	with	the	first	pass.	She	spun	her	horse	to	ready	a
return	charge.
The	other	two	warriors	were	nowhere	to	be	seen,	the	mists	closing	in	like
slowly	tumbling	blankets.	A	flurry	of	sound	to	her	left	brought	her	wheeling
her	horse	around,	in	time	to	see	Pearl	sprint	into	view.	He	spun	in	midstride
and	sent	a	star	flashing	behind	him.
The	huge,	bestial	man	that	lumbered	into	sight	had	his	head	rocked	back	as
the	iron	star	embedded	itself	in	his	forehead.	It	barely	slowed	him.
Lostara	snarled,	quickly	dropping	the	tulwar	to	swing	wildly	from	the	loop


around	her	wrist	as	she	brought	her	crossbow	around.
Her	shot	went	low,	the	quarrel	sinking	in	just	below	the	Semk’s	sternum
and	above	the	odd	thick	leather	belts	protecting	his	midriff.	It	proved	far	more
efficacious	than	Pearl’s	star.	As	the	man	grunted	and	buckled,	she	saw	with
shock	that	his	mouth	and	nostrils	had	been	sewn	shut.	He	draws	no	breath!
Here’s	our	demon!
The	Semk	straightened,	flinging	his	arms	forward.	The	power	that	erupted
from	them	was	unseen,	but	both	Pearl	and	Lostara	were	thrown,	tumbling
through	the	air.	The	horse	screamed	in	mortal	agony	amidst	a	rapid	crunching
and	cracking	of	bones.
The	Red	Blade	landed	on	her	right	hip,	feeling	the	bone	resound	within	her
like	a	fractured	bell.	Then	waves	of	pain	closed	taloned	hands	around	her	leg.
Her	bladder	went,	flooding	her	underclothes	in	a	hot	bloom.
Moccasined	feet	landed	beside	her.	A	knife	grip	was	thrust	into	her	hand.
“Take	yourself	once	I’m	done!	Here	it	comes!”
Teeth	clenched,	Lostara	Yil	twisted	around.
The	Semk	demon	was	ten	paces	away,	huge	and	unstoppable.	Pearl
crouched	between	them,	holding	knives	that	dripped	red	fire.	Lostara	knew	he
considered	himself	already	dead.
The	thing	that	suddenly	closed	from	the	demon’s	left	was	a	nightmare.
Black,	three-limbed,	a	jutting	shoulder	blade	like	a	cowl	behind	a	long-necked
head,	a	grinning	jaw	crowded	with	fangs,	and	a	single,	flat	black	eye	that
glistened	wetly.
Even	more	terrifying	was	the	humanoid	figure	that	sat	behind	that	shoulder
blade,	its	face	a	mocking	mimicry	of	the	beast	it	rode,	the	lips	peeled	back	to
reveal	daggerlike	fangs	as	long	as	a	toddler ’s	fingers,	its	lone	eye	flashing.
The	apparition	struck	the	Semk	demon	like	a	runaway	armored	wagon.
The	single	forelimb	snapped	forward	to	plunge	deep	into	the	demon’s	belly,
then	pulled	back	in	an	explosion	of	spurting	fluids.	Clenched	in	that	forelimb’s
grip	was	something	that	radiated	fury	in	palpable	waves.	The	air	went	icy.
Pearl	backed	away	until	his	heels	struck	Lostara,	then	he	reached	down	one
hand,	eyes	still	on	the	scene,	and	gripped	her	weapon	harness.
The	Semk’s	body	seemed	to	fold	in	on	itself	as	it	staggered	back.	The
apparition	reared,	still	clutching	the	fleshy,	dripping	object.
Its	rider	made	a	grab	for	it,	but	the	creature	hissed,	twisting	to	keep	it	out
of	his	reach.	Instead	it	flung	the	object	away	into	the	mists.
The	Semk	stumbled	after	it.
The	apparition’s	long	head	swung	to	face	Lostara	and	Pearl	with	that
ghastly	grin.


“Thank	you,”	Pearl	whispered.
A	portal	blossomed	around	them.
Lostara	blinked	up	at	a	dull,	ash-laden	sky.	There	was	no	sound	but	their
breathing.	Safe.	A	moment	later	unconsciousness	slipped	over	her	like	a
shroud.


Chapter	Thirteen

An	exquisite	match	of	dog	to	master,	the	Wickan	cattle-dog	is	a
vicious,	unpredictable	breed,	compact	yet	powerful,	though	by
far	its	most	notable	characteristic	is	its	stubborn	will.
LIVES	OF	THE	CONQUERED
ILEM	T RAUTH
As	Duiker	strode	between	the	large,	spacious	tents,	a	chorus	of	shouts	erupted
ahead.	A	moment	later	one	of	the	Wickan	dogs	appeared,	head	low,	a	surging
rush	of	muscle,	heading	straight	for	the	historian.	Duiker	fumbled	for	his
sword,	already	knowing	it	was	far	too	late.	At	the	last	instant	the	huge	animal
dodged	lithely	around	him,	and	the	historian	saw	that	it	held	in	its	mouth	a
lapdog,	its	eyes	dark	pools	of	terror.
The	cattle-dog	ran	on,	slipping	between	two	tents	and	disappearing	from
sight.
Ahead	of	the	historian,	a	number	of	figures	appeared,	armed	with	large
rocks	and—bizarrely—Kanese	parasols.	One	and	all,	they	were	dressed	as	if
about	to	attend	a	royal	function,	although	in	their	expressions	Duiker	saw	raw
fury.
“You	there!”	one	yelled	imperiously.	“Old	man!	Did	you	see	a	mad	hound
just	now?”
“I	saw	a	running	cattle-dog,	aye,”	the	historian	quietly	replied.
“With	a	rare	Hengese	roach	dog	in	its	mouth?”
A	dog	that	eats	cockroaches?	“Rare?	I	assumed	it	was	raw.”
The	nobles	grew	quiet	as	gazes	focused	on	Duiker.
“A	foolish	time	for	humor,	old	man,”	the	spokesman	growled.	He	was
younger	than	the	others,	his	honey-colored	skin	and	large	eyes	denoting	his
Quon	Talian	lineage.	He	was	lean,	with	the	physical	assurance	of	a	duellist—
the	identification	confirmed	by	the	basket-hilted	rapier	at	his	belt.	Moreover,
there	was	something	in	the	man’s	eyes	that	suggested	to	Duiker	that	here	was
someone	who	enjoyed	killing.


The	man	approached,	his	walk	becoming	a	swagger.	“An	apology,	peasant
—though	I’ll	grant	it	won’t	save	you	from	a	beating,	at	least	you’ll	stay
breathing…”
A	horseman	approached	from	behind	at	a	canter.
Duiker	saw	the	duellist’s	eyes	dart	over	the	historian’s	shoulder.
Corporal	List	reined	in,	ignoring	the	nobleman.	“My	apologies,	sir,”	he
said.	“I	was	delayed	at	the	smithy.	Where	is	your	horse?”
“With	the	main	herd,”	Duiker	replied.	“A	day	off	for	the	poor	beast—long
overdue.”
For	a	young	man	of	low	rank,	List	managed	an	impressive	expression	of
cold	regard	as	he	finally	looked	down	at	the	nobleman.	“If	we	arrive	late,	sir,”
he	said	to	Duiker,	“Coltaine	will	demand	an	explanation.”
The	historian	addressed	the	nobleman.	“Are	we	done	here?”
The	man	gave	a	curt	nod.	“For	now,”	he	said.
Escorted	by	the	corporal,	Duiker	resumed	his	journey	through	the	nobles’
camp.	When	they	had	gone	a	dozen	paces,	List	leaned	over	his	saddle.	“Alar
looked	ready	to	call	you	out,	Historian.”
“He’s	known,	then?	Alar.”
“Pullyk	Alar—”
“How	unfortunate	for	him.”
List	grinned.
They	came	to	a	central	clearing	in	the	encampment	and	discovered	a
whipping	underway.	The	short,	wide	man	with	the	leather	cat-tail	in	one	heatbloated	hand	was	familiar.	The	victim	was	a	servant.	Three	other	servants
stood	off	to	one	side,	their	eyes	averted.	A	few	other	nobleborn	stood	nearby,
gathered	around	a	weeping	woman	and	voicing	murmurs	of	consolation.
Lenestro’s	gold-brocaded	cloak	had	lost	some	of	its	brilliant	sheen,	and	in
his	red-faced	frenzy	as	he	swung	the	cat-tail	he	looked	like	a	frothing	ape
performing	the	traditional	King’s	Mirror	farce	at	a	village	fair.
“I	see	the	nobles	are	pleased	by	the	return	of	their	servantfolk,”	List	said
dryly.
“I	suspect	this	has	more	to	do	with	a	snatched	lapdog,”	the	historian
muttered.	“In	any	case,	this	stops	now.”
The	corporal	glanced	over.	“He’ll	simply	resume	it	later,	sir.”
Duiker	said	nothing.
“Who	would	steal	a	lapdog?”	List	wondered,	staying	alongside	the
historian	as	he	approached	Lenestro.
“Who	wouldn’t?	We’ve	water	but	we’re	still	hungry.	In	any	case,	one	of	the
Wickan	cattle-dogs	thought	it	up	before	the	rest	of	us—to	our	collective


embarrassment.”
“I	blame	preoccupation,	sir.”
Lenestro	noted	their	approach	and	paused	his	whipping,	his	breath	loud	as
a	bellows.
Ignoring	the	nobleman,	Duiker	went	to	the	servant.	The	man	was	old,	down
on	his	elbows	and	knees,	hands	held	protectively	behind	his	head.	Red	welts
rode	his	knuckles,	his	neck	and	down	the	length	of	his	bony	back.	Beneath	the
ruin	were	the	tracks	of	older	scars.	A	jewel-studded	leash	with	a	broken	collar
lay	in	the	dust	beside	him.
“Not	your	business,	Historian,”	Lenestro	snapped.
“These	servants	stood	a	Tithansi	charge	at	Sekala,”	Duiker	said.	“That
defense	helped	to	keep	your	head	on	your	shoulders,	Lenestro.”
“Coltaine	stole	property!”	the	nobleman	squealed.	“The	Council	so	judged
him,	the	fine	has	been	issued!”
“Issued,”	List	said,	“and	duly	pissed	on.”
Lenestro	wheeled	on	the	corporal,	raised	his	whip.
“A	warning,”	Duiker	said,	straightening.	“Striking	a	soldier	of	the	Seventh
—or,	for	that	matter,	his	horse—will	see	you	hung.”
Lenestro	visibly	struggled	with	his	temper,	his	arm	still	raised,	the	whip
quivering.
Others	were	gathering,	their	sympathy	clearly	united	with	Lenestro.	Even
so,	the	historian	did	not	anticipate	violence.	The	nobles	might	well	possess
unrealistic	notions,	but	they	were	anything	but	suicidal.
Duiker	spoke,	“Corporal,	we’ll	take	this	man	to	the	Seventh’s	healers.”
“Yes,	sir,”	List	replied,	briskly	dismounting.
The	servant	had	passed	out.	Together	they	carried	him	to	the	horse	and	laid
him	belly-down	across	the	saddle.
“He	shall	be	returned	to	me	once	healed,”	Lenestro	said.
“So	you	can	do	it	all	over	again?	Wrong,	he’ll	not	be	returned	to	you.”	And
if	you	and	your	comrades	are	outraged,	wait	till	an	hour	from	now.
“All	such	acts	contrary	to	Malazan	law	are	being	noted,”	the	nobleman	said
shrilly.	“There	shall	be	recompense,	with	interest.”
Duiker	had	heard	enough.	He	suddenly	closed	the	distance	to	grasp
Lenestro’s	cloak	collar	with	both	hands,	and	gave	the	man	a	teeth-rattling
shake.	The	whip	fell	to	the	ground.	The	nobleman’s	eyes	were	wide	with	terror
—reminding	the	historian	of	the	lapdog’s	as	it	rode	the	hound’s	mouth.
“You	probably	think,”	Duiker	whispered,	“that	I’m	about	to	tell	you	about
the	situation	we’re	all	in.	But	it’s	already	quite	evident	that	there’d	be	little
point.	You	are	a	small-brained	thug,	Lenestro.	Push	me	again,	and	I’ll	have	you


eating	pigshit	and	liking	it.”	He	shook	the	pathetic	creature	again,	then	dropped
him.
Lenestro	collapsed.
Duiker	frowned	down	at	the	man.
“He’s	fainted,	sir,”	List	said.
“So	he	has.”	Old	man	scared	you,	did	he?
“Was	that	really	necessary?”	a	voice	asked	plaintively.	Nethpara	emerged
from	the	crowd.	“As	if	our	ongoing	petition	is	not	crowded	enough,	now	we
have	personal	bullying	to	add	to	our	grievances.	Shame	on	you,	Historian—”
“Excuse	me,	sir,”	List	said,	“but	you	might	wish	to	know—before	you
resume	berating	the	historian—that	scholarship	came	late	to	this	man.	You	will
find	his	name	among	the	Noted	on	the	First	Army’s	Column	at	Unta,	and	had
you	not	just	come	late	to	this	scene,	you	would	have	witnessed	an	old	soldier ’s
temper.	Indeed,	it	was	admirable	restraint	that	the	historian	elected	to	use	both
hands	to	grip	Lenestro’s	cloak,	lest	he	use	one	to	unsheathe	that	well-worn
sword	at	his	hip	and	drive	it	through	the	toad’s	heart.”
Nethpara	blinked	sweat	from	his	eyes.
Duiker	slowly	swung	to	face	List.
The	corporal	noted	the	dismay	in	the	historian’s	face	and	answered	it	with
a	wink.	“We’d	best	move	on,	sir,”	he	said.
They	left	behind	a	gathering	in	the	clearing	that	broke	its	silence	only	after
they’d	entered	the	opposite	aisle.
List	walked	alongside	the	historian,	leading	his	horse	by	the	reins.	“It	still
astonishes	me	that	they	persist	in	the	notion	that	we	will	survive	this	journey.”
Duiker	glanced	over	in	surprise.	“Are	you	lacking	such	faith,	then,
Corporal?”
“We’ll	never	reach	Aren,	Historian.	Yet	the	fools	compile	their	petitions,
their	grievances—against	the	very	people	keeping	them	alive.”
“There’s	great	need	to	maintain	the	illusion	of	order,	List.	In	us	all.”
The	young	man’s	expression	turned	wry.	“I	missed	your	moment	of
sympathy	back	there,	sir.”
“Obviously.”
They	left	the	nobles’	encampment	and	entered	the	mayhem	of	the	wagons
bearing	wounded.	Voices	moaned	a	constant	chorus	of	pain.	A	chill	crept	over
Duiker.	Even	wheeled	hospitals	carried	with	them	that	pervasive	atmosphere	of
fear,	the	sounds	of	defiance	and	the	silence	of	surrender.	Mortality’s	many
comforting	layers	had	been	stripped	away,	revealing	wracked	bones,	a	sudden
comprehension	of	death	that	throbbed	like	an	exposed	nerve.
Awareness	and	revelations	thickened	the	prairie	air	in	a	manner	priests


could	only	dream	of	for	their	temples.	To	fear	the	gods	is	to	fear	death.	In
places	where	men	and	women	are	dying,	the	gods	no	longer	stand	in	the	spaces
in	between.	The	soothing	intercession	is	gone.	They’ve	stepped	back,	back
through	the	gates,	and	watch	from	the	other	side.	Watch	and	wait.
“We	should’ve	gone	around,”	List	muttered.
“Even	without	that	man	in	need	on	your	horse,”	Duiker	said,	“I	would	have
insisted	we	pass	through	this	place,	Corporal.”
“I’ve	learned	this	lesson	already,”	List	replied,	a	tautness	in	his	tone.
“From	your	earlier	words,	I	would	suggest	that	the	lesson	you	have
learned	is	different	from	mine,	lad.”
“This	place	encourages	you,	Historian?”
“Strengthens,	Corporal,	though	in	a	cold	way,	I	admit.	Never	mind	the
games	of	Ascendants.	This	is	what	we	are.	The	endless	struggle	laid	bare.	Gone
is	the	idyllic,	the	deceit	of	self-import	as	well	as	the	false	humility	of
insignificance.	Even	as	we	battle	wholly	personal	battles,	we	are	unified.	This
is	the	place	of	level	earth,	Corporal.	That	is	its	lesson,	and	I	wonder	if	it	is	an
accident	that	that	deluded	mob	in	gold	threads	must	walk	in	the	wake	of	these
wagons.”
“Either	way,	few	revelations	have	bled	back	to	stain	noble	sentiments.”
“No?	I	smelled	desperation	back	there,	Corporal.”
List	spied	a	healer	and	they	delivered	the	servant	into	the	woman’s	bloodsmeared	hands.
The	sun	was	low	on	the	horizon	directly	ahead	by	the	time	they	reached	the
Seventh’s	main	camp.	The	faint	smoke	from	the	dung	fires	hung	like	gilded
gauze	over	the	ordered	rows	of	tents.	Off	to	one	side	two	squads	of	infantry
had	set	to	in	a	contest	of	belt-grip,	using	a	leather-strapped	skullcap	for	a	ball.
A	ring	of	cheering,	jeering	onlookers	had	gathered.	Laughter	rang	in	the	air.
Duiker	remembered	the	words	of	an	old	marine	from	his	soldiering	days.
Some	times	you	just	have	to	grin	and	spit	in	Hood’s	face.	The	contesting	squads
were	doing	just	that,	running	themselves	ragged	to	sneer	at	their	own
exhaustion	besides,	and	well	aware	that	Tithansi	eyes	watched	from	a	distance.
They	were	a	day	away	from	the	River	P’atha,	and	the	impending	battle	was
a	promise	that	thickened	the	dusk.
Two	of	the	Seventh’s	marines	flanked	Coltaine’s	command	tent,	and	the
historian	recognized	one	of	them.
She	nodded.	“Historian.”
There	was	a	look	in	her	pale	eyes	that	seemed	to	lay	an	invisible	hand
against	his	chest,	and	Duiker	was	stilled	to	silence,	though	he	managed	a	smile.
As	they	passed	between	the	drawn	flaps,	List	murmured,	“Well	now,


Historian.”
“Enough	of	that,	Corporal.”	But	he	did	not	glance	over	to	nail	the	young
man’s	grin,	as	he	was	tempted	to	do.	A	man	gets	to	an	age	where	he’s	wise	not
to	banter	on	desire	with	a	comrade	half	his	age.	Too	pathetic	by	far,	that
illusion	of	competition.	Besides,	that	look	of	hers	was	likely	more	pitying	than
anything	else,	no	matter	what	my	heart	whispered.	Put	an	end	to	your	foolish
thoughts,	old	man.
Coltaine	stood	near	the	center	pole,	his	expression	dark.	Duiker	and	List’s
arrival	had	interrupted	a	conversation.	Bult	and	Captain	Lull	sat	on	saddlechairs,	looking	glum.	Sormo	stood	wrapped	in	an	antelope	hide,	his	back	to	the
tent’s	far	wall,	his	eyes	hooded	in	shadow.	The	air	was	sweltering	and	tense.
Bult	cleared	his	throat.	“Sormo	was	explaining	about	the	Semk	godling,”
he	said.	“The	spirits	say	something	damaged	it.	Badly.	The	night	of	the	raid—a
demon	walked	the	land.	Lightly,	I	gather,	leaving	a	spoor	not	easily	sniffed	out.
In	any	case,	it	appeared,	mauled	the	Semk,	then	left.	It	seems,	Historian,	that	the
Claw	had	company.”
“An	Imperial	demon?”
Bult	shrugged	and	swung	his	flat	gaze	to	Sormo.
The	warlock,	looking	like	a	black	vulture	perched	on	a	fence	pole,	stirred
slightly.	“There	is	precedent,”	he	admitted.	“Yet	Nil	believes	otherwise.”
“Why?”	Duiker	asked.
There	was	a	long	pause	before	Sormo	answered.	“When	Nil	fled	into
himself	that	night…no,	that	is,	he	believed	that	it	was	his	own	mind	that
sheltered	him	from	the	Semk’s	sorcerous	attack…”	It	was	clear	that	the
warlock	was	in	difficulty	with	his	words.	“The	Tano	Spiritwalkers	of	this	land
are	said	to	be	able	to	quest	through	a	hidden	world—not	a	true	warren,	but	a
realm	where	souls	are	freed	of	flesh	and	bone.	It	seems	that	Nil	stumbled	into
such	a	place,	and	there	he	came	face	to	face	with…someone	else.	At	first	he
thought	it	but	an	aspect	of	himself,	a	monstrous	reflection—”
“Monstrous?”	Duiker	asked.
“A	boy	of	Nil’s	own	age,	yet	with	a	demonic	face.	Nil	believes	it	was
bonded	with	the	apparition	that	attacked	the	Semk.	Imperial	demons	rarely
possess	human	familiars.”
“Then	who	sent	it?”
“Perhaps	no	one.”
No	wonder	Coltaine’s	had	his	black	feathers	ruffled.
After	a	few	minutes	Bult	sighed	loudly,	stretching	out	his	gnarled,	bandy
legs.	“Kamist	Reloe	has	prepared	a	welcome	for	us	the	other	side	of	the	River
P’atha.	We	cannot	afford	to	go	around	him.	Therefore	we	shall	go	through


him.”
“You	ride	with	the	marines,”	Coltaine	told	Duiker.
The	historian	glanced	at	Captain	Lull.
The	red-bearded	man	grinned.	“Seems	you’ve	earned	a	place	with	the	best,
old	man.”
“Hood’s	breath!	I’ll	not	last	five	minutes	in	a	line	of	battle.	My	heart	nearly
gave	out	after	a	skirmish	lasting	all	of	three	breaths	the	other	night—”
“We	won’t	be	front	line,”	Lull	said.	“There	ain’t	enough	of	us	left	for	that.
If	all	goes	as	planned	we	won’t	even	get	our	swords	nicked.”
“Oh,	very	well.”	Duiker	turned	to	Coltaine.	“Returning	the	servants	to	the
nobles	was	a	mistake,”	he	said.	“It	seems	the	nobleborn	have	concluded	that
you’ll	not	take	them	away	again	if	they’re	not	fit	to	stand.”
Bult	said,	“They	showed	spine,	those	servants,	at	Sekala	Crossing.	Just
holding	shields,	mind,	but	hold	is	what	they	did.”
“Uncle,	do	you	still	have	that	scroll	demanding	compensation?”	Coltaine
asked.
“Aye.”
“And	that	compensation	was	calculated	based	on	the	worth	of	each	servant,
in	coin?”
Bult	nodded.
“Collect	the	servants	and	pay	for	them	in	full,	in	gold	jakatas.”
“Aye,	though	all	that	gold	will	burden	the	nobles	sorely.”
“Better	them	than	us.”
Lull	cleared	his	throat.	“That	coin’s	the	soldiers’	pay,	ain’t	it?”
“The	Empire	honors	its	debts,”	Coltaine	growled.
It	was	a	statement	that	promised	to	grow	in	resonance	in	the	time	to	come,
and	the	momentary	silence	in	the	tent	told	Duiker	that	he	was	not	alone	in	that
recognition.
	
Capemoths	swarmed	across	the	face	of	the	moon.	Duiker	sat	beside	the	flaked
embers	of	a	cooking	fire.	A	nervous	energy	had	driven	the	historian	from	his
bedroll.	On	all	sides	the	camp	slept,	a	city	exhausted.	Even	the	animals	had
fallen	silent.
Rhizan	swept	through	the	warm	air	above	the	hearth,	plucking	hovering
insects	on	the	wing.	The	soft	crunch	of	exoskeletons	was	a	constant	crackle.
A	dark	shape	appeared	at	Duiker ’s	side,	lowered	itself	into	a	squat,	held
silent.
After	a	while,	Duiker	said,	“A	Fist	needs	his	rest.”


Coltaine	grunted.	“And	a	historian?”
“Never	rests.”
“We	are	denied	in	our	needs,”	the	Wickan	said.
“It	was	ever	thus.”
“Historian,	you	joke	like	a	Wickan.”
“I’ve	made	a	study	of	Bult’s	lack	of	humor.”
“That	much	is	patently	clear.”
There	was	silence	between	them	for	a	time.	Duiker	could	make	no	claim	to
know	the	man	at	his	side.	If	the	Fist	was	plagued	by	doubts	he	did	not	show	it,
nor,	of	course,	would	he.	A	commander	could	not	reveal	his	flaws.	With
Coltaine,	however,	it	was	more	than	his	rank	dictating	his	recalcitrance.	Even
Bult	had	occasion	to	mutter	that	his	nephew	was	a	man	who	isolated	himself	to
levels	far	beyond	the	natural	Wickan	stoicism.
Coltaine	never	made	speeches	to	his	troops,	and	while	he	was	often	seen	by
his	soldiers,	he	did	not	make	a	point	of	it	as	many	commanders	did.	Yet	those
soldiers	belonged	to	him	now,	as	if	the	Fist	could	fill	every	silent	space	with	a
physical	assurance	as	solid	as	a	gripping	of	forearms.
What	happens	the	day	that	faith	is	shattered?	What	if	we	are	but	hours	from
that	day?
“The	enemy	hunts	our	scouts,”	Coltaine	said.	“We	cannot	see	what	has	been
prepared	for	us	in	the	valley	ahead.”
“Sormo’s	allies?”
“The	spirits	are	preoccupied.”
Ah,	the	Semk	godling.
“Can’eld,	Debrahl,	Tithan,	Semk,	Tepasi,	Halafan,	Ubari,	Hissari,	Sialk	and
Guran.”
Four	tribes	now.	Six	city	legions.	Am	I	hearing	doubt?
The	Fist	spat	into	the	embers.	“The	army	that	awaits	us	is	one	of	two
holding	the	south.”
How	in	Hood’s	name	does	he	know	this?	“Has	Sha’ik	marched	out	of
Raraku,	then?”
“She	has	not.	A	mistake.”
“What	holds	her	back?	Has	the	rebellion	been	crushed	in	the	north?”
“Crushed?	No,	it	commands	all.	As	for	Sha’ik…”	Coltaine	paused	to	adjust
his	crow-feather	cape.	“Perhaps	her	visions	have	taken	her	into	the	future.
Perhaps	she	knows	the	Whirlwind	shall	fail,	that	even	now	the	Adjunct	to	the
Empress	assembles	her	legions—Unta’s	harbor	is	solid	with	transports.	The
Whirlwind’s	successes	will	prove	but	momentary,	a	first	blood-rush	that
succeeded	only	because	of	Imperial	weakness.	Sha’ik	knows…the	dragon	has


been	stirred	awake,	and	moves	ponderously	still,	yet	when	the	full	fury	comes,
it	shall	scour	this	land	from	shore	to	shore.”
“This	other	army,	here	in	the	south…how	far	away?”
Coltaine	straightened.	“I	intend	to	arrive	at	Vathar	two	days	before	it.”
Word	must	have	reached	him	that	Ubaryd	has	fallen,	along	with	Devral	and
Asmar.	Vathar—the	third	and	last	river.	If	we	make	Vathar,	it’s	a	straight	run
south	to	Aren—through	the	most	forbidding	wasteland	on	this	Hood-cursed
continent.	“Fist,	the	River	Vathar	is	still	months	away.	What	of	tomorrow?”
Coltaine	pulled	his	gaze	from	the	embers	and	blinked	at	the	historian.
“Tomorrow	we	crush	Kamist	Reloe’s	army,	of	course.	One	must	think	far
ahead	to	succeed,	Historian.	You	should	understand	that.”
The	Fist	strolled	away.
Duiker	stared	at	the	dying	fire,	a	sour	taste	in	his	mouth.	That	taste	is	fear,
old	man.	You’ve	not	got	Coltaine’s	impenetrable	armor.	You	cannot	see	past	a
few	hours	from	now,	and	you	await	the	dawn	in	the	belief	that	it	shall	be	your
last,	and	therefore	you	must	witness	it.	Coltaine	expects	the	impossible,	he
expects	us	to	share	in	his	implacable	confidence.	To	share	in	his	madness.
A	rhizan	landed	on	his	boot,	delicate	wings	folding	as	it	settled.	A	young
capemoth	was	in	the	winged	lizard’s	mouth,	its	struggles	continuing	even	as
the	rhizan	methodically	devoured	it.
Duiker	waited	until	the	creature	had	finished	its	meal	before	a	twitch	of	his
foot	sent	it	winging	away.	The	historian	straightened.	The	sounds	of	activity
had	risen	in	the	Wickan	encampments.	He	made	his	way	toward	the	nearest	one.
The	horsewarriors	of	the	Foolish	Dog	Clan	had	gathered	to	ready	their
equipment	beneath	the	glare	of	torch	poles.	Duiker	strode	closer.	Ornate	boiled
leather	armor	had	appeared,	dyed	in	deep	and	muddy	shades	of	red	and	green.
The	thick,	padded	gear	was	in	a	style	the	historian	had	never	seen	before.
Wickan	runes	had	been	burned	into	it.	The	armor	looked	ancient,	yet	never
used.
Duiker	approached	the	nearest	warrior,	a	peach-faced	youth	busy	rubbing
grease	into	a	horse’s	brow-guard.	“Heavy	armor	for	a	Wickan,”	the	historian
said.	“And	for	a	Wickan	horse	as	well.”
The	young	man	nodded	soberly,	said	nothing.
“You’re	turning	yourselves	into	heavy	cavalry.”
The	lad	shrugged.
An	older	warrior	nearby	spoke	up.	“The	warleader	devised	these	during
the	rebellion…then	agreed	peace	with	the	Emperor	before	they	could	be	used.”
“And	you	have	been	carrying	them	around	with	you	all	this	time?”
“Aye.”


“Why	didn’t	you	use	this	armor	at	Sekala	Crossing?”
“Didn’t	need	to.”
“And	now?”
Grinning,	the	veteran	raised	an	iron	helm	with	new	bridge	and	cheekguards	attached.	“Reloe’s	horde	hasn’t	faced	heavy	cavalry	yet,	has	it?”
Thick	armor	doesn’t	make	heavy	cavalry.	Have	you	fools	ever	trained	for
this?	Can	you	gallop	in	an	even	line?	Can	you	wheel?	How	soon	before	your
horses	are	winded	beneath	all	that	extra	weight?	“You’ll	look	intimidating
enough,”	the	historian	said.
The	Wickan	caught	the	skepticism	and	his	grin	broadened.
The	youth	set	down	the	brow-guard	and	began	strapping	on	a	sword	belt.
He	slid	the	blade	from	the	scabbard,	revealing	four	feet	of	blackened	iron,	its
tip	rounded	and	blunt.	The	weapon	looked	heavy,	oversized	in	the	lad’s	hands.
Hood’s	breath,	one	swing’ll	yank	him	from	his	saddle.
The	veteran	grunted.	“Limber	up	there,	Temul,”	he	said	in	Malazan.
Temul	immediately	launched	into	a	complex	choreography,	the	blade
blurring	in	his	hand.
“Do	you	intend	to	dismount	once	you	reach	the	enemy?”
“Sleep	would	have	done	much	for	your	mind’s	cast,	old	man.”
Point	taken,	bastard.
Duiker	wandered	away.	He’d	always	hated	the	hours	before	a	battle.	None
of	the	rituals	of	preparation	had	ever	worked	for	him.	A	check	of	weapons	and
gear	rarely	took	an	experienced	soldier	more	than	twenty	heartbeats.	The
historian	had	never	been	able	to	repeat	that	check	mindlessly,	again	and	again,
as	did	so	many	soldiers.	Keeping	the	hands	busy	while	the	mind	slowly	slid
into	a	sharp-edged	world	of	saturated	colors,	painful	clarity	and	a	kind	of
lustful	hunger	that	seized	body	and	soul.
Some	warriors	ready	themselves	to	live,	some	ready	themselves	to	die,	and
in	these	hours	before	the	fate	unfolds,	it’s	damned	hard	to	tell	one	from	the
other.	The	lad	Temul’s	dance	a	moment	ago	might	be	his	last.	That	damned
sword	may	never	again	leap	from	its	sheath	and	sing	on	the	end	of	his	hand.
The	sky	was	lightening	in	the	east,	the	cool	wind	beginning	to	warm.	The
vast	dome	overhead	was	cloudless.	A	formation	of	birds	flew	high	to	the	north,
the	pattern	of	specks	almost	motionless.
The	Wickan	camp	behind	him,	Duiker	entered	the	regimental	rows	of	tents
that	marked	the	Seventh.	The	various	elements	maintained	their	cohesion	in	the
encampment’s	layout,	and	each	was	clearly	identifiable	to	the	historian.	The
medium	infantry,	who	formed	the	bulk	of	the	army,	were	arranged	by
company,	each	company	consisting	of	cohorts	that	were	in	turn	made	up	of


squads.	They	would	go	into	battle	with	full-body	shields	of	bronze,	pikes	and
short	swords.	They	wore	bronze	scale	hauberks,	greaves	and	gauntlets,	and
bronze	helmets	reinforced	with	iron	bars	wrapped	in	a	cage	around	the
skullcap.	Chain	camails	protected	their	necks	and	shoulders.	The	other	footmen
consisted	of	marines	and	sappers,	the	former	a	combination	of	heavy	infantry
and	shock	troops—the	old	Emperor ’s	invention	and	still	unique	to	the	Empire.
They	were	armed	with	crossbows	and	short	swords	as	well	as	long	swords.
They	wore	blackened	chain	beneath	gray	leathers.	Every	third	soldier	carried	a
large,	round	shield	of	thick,	soft	wood	that	would	be	soaked	for	an	hour	before
battle.	These	shields	were	used	to	catch	and	hold	enemy	weapons	ranging	from
swords	to	flails.	They	would	be	discarded	after	the	first	few	minutes	of	a	fight,
usually	studded	with	an	appalling	array	of	edged	and	spiked	iron.	This	peculiar
tactic	of	the	Seventh	had	proved	effective	against	the	Semk	and	their
undisciplined,	two-handed	fighting	methods.	The	marines	called	it	pulling
teeth.
The	sappers’	encampment	was	set	somewhat	apart	from	the	others—as	far
away	as	possible	when	they	carried	Moranth	munitions.	Though	he	looked,
Duiker	could	not	see	its	location,	but	he	knew	well	what	he’d	find.	Look	for	the
most	disordered	collection	of	tents	and	foul-smelling	vapors	aswarm	with
mosquitoes	and	gnats	and	you’ll	have	found	Malazan	Engineers.	And	in	that
quarter	you’ll	find	soldiers	shaking	like	leaves,	with	splash-burn	pockmarks,
singed	hair	and	a	dark,	manic	gleam	in	their	eyes.
Corporal	List	stood	with	Captain	Lull	at	one	end	of	the	Marine
encampment,	close	to	the	attachment	of	loyal	Hissari	Guards—whose	soldiers
were	readying	their	tulwars	and	round	shields	in	grim	silence.	Coltaine	held
them	in	absolute	trust,	and	the	Seven	Cities	natives	had	proved	themselves
again	and	again	with	fanatic	ferocity—as	if	they	had	assumed	a	burden	of
shame	and	guilt	and	could	only	relieve	it	by	slaughtering	every	one	of	their
traitorous	kin.
Captain	Lull	smiled	as	the	historian	joined	them.	“Got	a	cloth	for	your
face?	We’ll	be	eating	dust	today,	old	man,	in	plenty.”
“We	will	be	the	back	end	of	the	wedge,	sir,”	List	said,	looking	none	too
pleased.
“I’d	rather	swallow	dust	than	a	yard	of	cold	iron,”	Duiker	said.	“Do	we
know	what	we’re	facing	yet,	Lull?”
“That’s	‘Captain’	to	you.”
“As	soon	as	you	stop	calling	me	‘old	man,’	I’ll	start	calling	you	by	your
rank.”
“I	was	jesting,	Duiker,”	Lull	said.	“Call	me	what	you	like,	and	that	includes


pig-headed	bastard	if	it	pleases	you.”
“It	just	might.”
Lull’s	face	twisted	sourly.	“Didn’t	get	any	sleep,	did	you?”	He	swung	to
List.	“If	the	old	codger	starts	nodding	off,	you’ve	my	permission	to	give	him	a
clout	on	that	bashed-up	helmet	of	his,	Corporal.”
“If	I	can	stay	awake	myself,	sir.	This	good	cheer	is	wearing	me	out.”
Lull	grimaced	at	Duiker.	“The	lad’s	showing	spark	these	days.”
“Isn’t	he	just.”
The	sun	was	burning	clear	of	the	horizon.	Pale-winged	birds	flitted	over
the	humped	hills	to	the	north.	Duiker	glanced	down	at	his	boots.	The	morning
dew	had	seeped	through	the	worn	leather.	Strands	of	snagged	spiderwebs	made
a	stretched,	glittering	pattern	over	the	toes.	He	found	it	unaccountably	beautiful.
Gossamer	webs…intricate	traps.	Yet	it	was	my	thoughtless	passage	that	left	the
night’s	work	undone.	Will	the	spiders	go	hungry	this	day	because	of	it?
“Shouldn’t	dwell	on	what’s	to	come,”	Lull	said.
Duiker	smiled,	looked	up	at	the	sky.	“What’s	the	order?”
“The	Seventh’s	marines	are	the	spear ’s	point.	Crow	riders	to	either	side	are
the	flanking	barbs.	Foolish	Dog—now	a	Togg-thundering	heavy	cavalry—are
the	weight	behind	the	marines.	Then	come	the	wounded,	protected	on	all	sides
by	the	Seventh’s	infantry.	Taking	up	the	tail	are	the	Hissari	Loyals	and	the
Seventh’s	cavalry.”
Duiker	was	slow	to	react,	then	he	blinked	and	faced	the	captain.
Lull	nodded.	“The	refugees	and	herds	are	being	held	back,	this	side	of	the
valley	but	slightly	south,	on	a	low	shelf	of	land	the	maps	call	the	Shallows,
with	a	ridge	of	hills	south	of	that.	The	Weasel	Clan	guards	them.	It’s	the	safest
thing	to	do—that	clan’s	turned	dark	and	nasty	since	Sekala.	Their
horsewarriors	have	all	filed	their	teeth,	if	you	can	believe	that.”
“We	go	to	this	battle	unencumbered,”	the	historian	said.
“Excepting	the	wounded,	aye.”
Captains	Sulmar	and	Chenned	emerged	from	the	infantry	encampment.
Sulmar ’s	posture	and	expression	radiated	outrage,	Chenned’s	was	mocking	if
slightly	bemused.
“Blood	and	guts!”	Sulmar	hissed,	his	greased	mustache	bristling.	“Those
damned	sappers	and	their	Hood-spawned	captain	have	done	it	this	time!”
Chenned	met	Duiker ’s	gaze	and	shook	his	head.	“Coltaine	went	white	at	the
news.”
“What	news?”
“The	sappers	lit	out	last	night!”	Sulmar	snarled.	“Hood	rot	the	cowards	one
and	all!	Poliel	bless	them	with	pestilence,	pox	their	illegitimate	brood	with	her


pus-soaked	kiss!	Togg	trample	that	captain’s	ba—”
Chenned	was	laughing	in	disbelief.	“Captain	Sulmar!	What	would	your
friends	in	the	Council	say	to	such	foul-mouthed	cursing?”
“Burn	take	you,	too,	Chenned!	I’m	a	soldier	first,	damn	you.	A	trickle	to	a
flood,	that’s	what	we’re	facing—”
“There	won’t	be	any	desertions,”	Lull	said,	his	battered	fingers	slowly
raking	through	his	beard.	“The	sappers	ain’t	run	away.	They’re	up	to
something,	I’d	hazard.	It’s	not	easy	reining	in	that	unwashed,	motley	company
when	you	can’t	even	track	down	its	captain—but	I	don’t	imagine	Coltaine	will
make	the	same	mistake	again.”
“He’ll	not	have	the	chance,”	Sulmar	muttered.	“The	first	worms	will	crawl
into	our	ears	before	the	day’s	done.	It’s	the	oblivious	feast	for	us	all,	mark	my
words.”
Lull	raised	his	brows.	“If	that’s	as	encouraging	as	you	can	manage,
Sulmar,	I	pity	your	soldiers.”
“Pity’s	for	the	victors,	Lull.”
A	lone	horn	wailed	its	mournful	note.
“Waiting’s	over,”	Chenned	said	with	obvious	relief.	“Save	me	a	patch	of
grass	when	you	go	down,	gentlemen.”
Duiker	watched	the	two	Seventh	captains	depart.	He’d	not	heard	that
particular	send-off	in	a	long	time.
“Chenned’s	father	was	in	Dassem’s	First	Sword,”	Lull	said.	“Or	so	goes
the	rumor—even	when	names	are	swept	from	official	histories,	the	past	shows
its	face,	eh,	old	man?”
Duiker	was	in	no	mood	to	rise	to	either	jibe.	“Think	I’ll	check	my	gear,”
he	said,	turning	away.
	
It	was	noon	before	the	final	positioning	was	completed.	There	had	been	a	near
riot	when	the	refugees	finally	understood	that	the	main	army	was	to	make	the
crossing	without	them.	Coltaine’s	selection	of	the	Weasel	Clan	as	their	escort—
the	horsewarriors	presented	a	truly	terrifying	visage	with	their	threaded	skin,
black	tattooing	and	filed	teeth—proved	his	cunning	yet	again,	although	the
Weasel	riders	almost	took	it	too	far	with	their	bloodthirsty	taunts	flung	at	the
very	people	they	were	sworn	to	protect.	Desultory	calm	was	established,
despite	the	frenzied,	fear-stricken	efforts	of	the	nobleborn’s	Council	and	their
seemingly	inexhaustible	capacity	to	deliver	protests	and	writs.
With	the	main	force	finally	assembled,	Coltaine	issued	the	command	to
move	forward.


The	day	was	blisteringly	hot,	the	parched	ground	rising	in	clouds	of	dust
as	soon	as	the	brittle	grass	was	worn	away	by	hooves	and	tramping	boots.
Lull’s	prediction	of	eating	dust	proved	depressingly	accurate,	as	Duiker	once
more	raised	his	tin	belt-flask	to	his	lips,	letting	water	seep	into	his	mouth	and
down	the	dry	gully	of	his	throat.
Marching	on	his	left	was	Corporal	List,	his	face	caked	white,	helmet
sliding	down	over	his	sweat-sheened	forehead.	On	the	historian’s	right	strode
the	veteran	marine—he	did	not	know	her	name,	nor	would	he	ask.	Duiker ’s
fear	of	what	was	to	come	had	spread	through	him	like	an	infection.	His
thoughts	felt	fevered,	spinning	around	an	irrational	terror	of…of	knowledge.
Of	the	details	that	remind	one	of	humanity.	Names	to	faces	are	like	twinned
serpents	threatening	the	most	painful	bite	of	all.	I’ll	never	return	to	the	List	of
the	Fallen,	because	I	see	now	that	the	unnamed	soldier	is	a	gift.	The	named
soldier—dead,	melted	wax—demands	a	response	among	the	living…a	response
no	one	can	make.	Names	are	no	comfort,	they’re	a	call	to	answer	the
unanswerable.	Why	did	she	die,	not	him?	Why	do	the	survivors	remain
anonymous—as	if	cursed—while	the	dead	are	revered?	Why	do	we	cling	to	what
we	lose	while	we	ignore	what	we	still	hold?
Name	none	of	the	fallen,	for	they	stood	in	our	place,	and	stand	there	still	in
each	moment	of	our	lives.	Let	my	death	hold	no	glory,	and	let	me	die	forgotten
and	unknown.	Let	it	not	be	said	that	I	was	one	among	the	dead	to	accuse	the
living.
The	River	P’atha	bisected	a	dry	lake	bed	two	thousand	paces	east	to	west
and	over	four	thousand	north	to	south.	As	the	vanguard	reached	the	eastern
ridge	and	proceeded	down	into	the	basin,	Duiker	was	presented	with	a
panoramic	view	of	what	would	become	the	field	of	battle.
Kamist	Reloe	and	his	army	awaited	them,	the	glitter	of	iron	vast	and	bright
in	the	morning	glare,	city	standards	and	tribal	pennons	hanging	dull	and
listless	above	the	sea	of	peaked	helms.	The	arrayed	soldiers	rustled	and	rippled
as	if	tugged	by	unseen	currents.	Their	numbers	were	staggering.
The	river	was	a	thin,	narrow	strip	six	hundred	paces	ahead,	studded	with
boulders	and	lined	in	thorny	brush	on	both	sides.	A	trader	track	marked	the
traditional	place	of	crossing,	then	wound	westward	to	what	had	once	been	a
gentle	slope	to	the	opposite	ridge—but	Reloe’s	sappers	had	been	busy:	a	ramp
of	sandy	earth	had	been	constructed,	the	natural	slope	to	either	side	carved
away	to	create	a	steep,	high	cliff.	To	the	south	of	the	lake	bed	was	a	knotted
jumble	of	arroyos,	basoliths,	screes	and	jagged	outcroppings;	to	the	north	rose
a	serrated	ridge	of	hills	bone	white	under	the	sun.	Kamist	Reloe	had	made	sure
there	was	only	one	point	of	exit	westward,	and	at	the	summit	waited	his	elite


forces.
“Hood’s	breath!”	muttered	Corporal	List.	“The	bastard’s	rebuilt	Gelor
Ridge,	and	look	to	the	south,	sir,	that	column	of	smoke—that	was	the	garrison
at	Melm.”
Squinting	that	way,	Duiker	saw	another	feature	closer	at	hand.	Set	atop	a
pinnacle	looming	over	the	southeast	end	of	the	lake	bed	was	a	fortress.	“Who
did	that	belong	to?”	he	wondered	aloud.
“A	monastery,”	List	said.	“According	to	the	only	map	that	showed	it.”
“Which	Ascendant?”
List	shrugged.	“Probably	one	of	the	Seven	Holies.”
“If	there’s	anyone	still	in	there,	they’ll	get	quite	a	view	of	what’s	to	come.”
Kamist	Reloe	had	positioned	forces	down	and	to	either	side	of	his	elite
companies,	blocking	the	north	and	south	ends	of	the	basin.	Standards	of	the
Sialk,	Halafan,	Debrahl	and	Tithansi	contingents	rose	from	the	southern
element;	Ubari	the	northern.	Each	of	the	three	forces	outnumbered	Coltaine’s
by	a	large	margin.	A	roar	began	building	from	the	army	of	the	Apocalypse,
along	with	a	rhythmic	clash	of	weapons	on	shields.
The	marines	marched	toward	the	crossing	in	silence.	Voices	and	clangor
rolled	over	them	like	a	wave.	The	Seventh	did	not	falter.
Gods	below,	what	will	come	of	this?
The	River	P’atha	was	an	ankle-deep	trickle	of	warm	water,	less	than	a
dozen	paces	across.	Algae	covered	the	pebbles	and	stones	of	the	bottom.	The
larger	boulders	were	splashed	white	with	guano.	Insects	buzzed	and	danced	in
the	air.	The	river ’s	cool	breath	vanished	as	soon	as	Duiker	stepped	onto	the
opposite	bank,	the	basin’s	baked	heat	sweeping	over	him	like	a	cloak.
Sweat	soaked	the	quilted	undergarment	beneath	his	chain	hauberk;	it	ran
down	in	dirty	runnels	beneath	gauntlets	and	into	the	historian’s	palms.	He
tightened	his	grip	on	the	shield	strap,	his	other	hand	resting	on	the	pommel	of
his	short	sword.	His	mouth	was	suddenly	bone	dry,	though	he	resisted	the	urge
to	drink	from	his	flask.	The	air	stank	of	the	soldiers	he	followed,	a	miasma	of
sweat	and	fear.	There	was	a	sense	of	something	else,	as	well,	a	strange
melancholy	that	seemed	to	accompany	the	relentless	forward	motion	of	the
company.
Duiker	had	known	that	sense	before,	decades	ago.	It	was	not	defeat,	nor
desperation.	The	sadness	arose	from	whatever	lay	beyond	such	visceral
reactions,	and	it	felt	measured	and	all	too	aware.
We	go	to	partake	of	death.	And	it	is	in	these	moments,	before	the	blades	are
unsheathed,	before	blood	wets	the	ground	and	screams	fill	the	air,	that	the
futility	descends	upon	us	all.	Without	our	armor,	we	would	all	weep,	I	think.


How	else	to	answer	the	impending	promise	of	incalculable	loss?
“Our	swords	will	be	well	notched	this	day,”	List	said	beside	him,	his	voice
dry	and	breaking.	“In	your	experience,	sir,	what’s	worse—dust	or	mud?”
Duiker	grunted.	“Dust	chokes.	Dust	blinds.	But	mud	slips	the	world	from
under	your	feet.”	And	we’ll	have	mud	soon	enough,	when	enough	blood	and	bile
and	piss	have	soaked	the	ground.	An	equal	measure	of	both	curses,	lad.	“Your
first	battle,	then?”
List	grimaced.	“Attached	to	you,	sir,	I’ve	not	been	in	the	thick	of	things
yet.”
“You	sound	resentful.”
The	corporal	said	nothing,	but	Duiker	understood	well	enough.	The
soldier ’s	companions	had	all	gone	through	their	first	blooding,	and	that	was	a
threshold	both	feared	and	anticipated.	Imagination	whispered	untruths	that	only
experience	could	shatter.
Nevertheless,	the	historian	would	have	preferred	a	more	remote	vantage
point.	Marching	with	the	ranks,	he	could	see	nothing	beyond	the	press	of
humanity	around	him.	Why	did	Coltaine	put	me	here?	He’s	taken	from	me	my
eyes,	damn	him.
They	were	a	hundred	paces	from	the	ramp.	Horsewarriors	galloped	across
the	front	of	the	flanking	enemy	forces,	ensuring	that	all	held	position.	The
drumming	shields	and	screams	of	rage	promised	blood	and	would	not	be	held
in	check	for	much	longer.	Then	we	will	be	assailed	from	three	sides,	and	an
effort	will	be	made	to	cut	us	away	from	the	Seventh’s	infantry	while	they
struggle	to	defend	the	wounded.	They’ll	behead	the	serpent,	if	they	can.
The	Crow	horsewarriors	were	readying	bows	and	lances	to	either	side,
heads	turned	and	fixed	on	the	enemy	positions.	A	horn	announced	the
command	to	ready	shields,	the	front	line	locking	while	the	center	and	rear
lofted	theirs	overhead.	Archers	were	visible,	scrambling	into	position	at	the
top	of	the	ramp.
There	was	no	wind,	the	motionless	air	heavy.
It	may	have	been	disbelief	that	held	the	flanking	forces	back.	Coltaine	had
displayed	no	reaction	to	the	enemy’s	positions	and	strength;	indeed	the	Seventh
simply	marched	on	and,	reaching	the	ramp,	began	the	ascent	without	pause.
The	slope	was	soft,	boulders	and	sand,	deliberately	treacherous	underfoot.
Soldiers	stumbled.
Suddenly	arrows	filled	the	sky,	sweeping	down	like	rain.	Horrendous
clattering	racketed	over	Duiker ’s	head	as	shafts	snapped,	skidded	across	the
upraised	shields,	some	slipping	through	to	strike	armor	and	helms,	some
piercing	flesh.	Voices	grunted	beneath	the	turtle’s	back.	Cobbles	pitched


underfoot.	Yet	the	carapaced	wedge	climbed	on	without	pause.
The	historian’s	elbows	buckled	as	an	arrow	struck	his	shield	a	solid	blow.
Three	more	rapped	down	in	quick	succession,	all	glancing	impacts	that	then
skittered	away	across	other	shields.
The	air	beneath	the	shields	grew	sour	and	turgid—sweat,	urine	and	a
growing	anger.	An	attack	that	could	not	be	answered	was	a	soldier ’s	nightmare.
The	determination	to	reach	the	crest,	where	waited	howling	Semk	and	Guran
heavy	infantry,	burned	like	a	fever.	Duiker	knew	that	the	marines	were	being
driven	toward	a	threshold.	The	first	contact	would	be	explosive.
The	ramp	was	banked	on	either	side	closer	to	the	ridge,	steep	and	high,	its
top	flattened	and	broad	across.	Warriors	from	a	tribe	Duiker	could	not	identify
—Can’eld?—began	assembling	on	the	banks	and	readying	short	horn	bows.
They’ll	fire	down	on	us	from	both	sides	once	we	lock	with	the	Semk	and	Guran.
An	enfilade.
Bult	rode	with	the	flanking	Crow	horsewarriors,	and	the	historian	clearly
heard	the	veteran’s	bellowing	command.	In	a	flash	of	dust	and	iron,	riders
wheeled	and	swept	toward	the	banks.	Arrows	flew.	The	Can’eld—caught	by	the
swiftness	of	the	Wickan	response—scattered.	Bodies	fell,	tumbling	down	to	the
ramp.	The	Crow	warriors	rode	along	the	ditch,	raking	the	high	bank	with
murderous	missile	fire.	Within	moments	the	flat	top	was	clear	of	standing
tribesmen.
A	second	shout	reined	in	the	horsewarriors,	their	lead	riders	less	than	a
dozen	paces	from	the	bristling	line	of	Semk	and	Guran.	The	sudden	halt	drew
the	wild	Semk	forward.	Throwing	axes	flew	end	over	end	through	the
intervening	space.	Arrows	darted	in	return	fire.
The	forward	tip	of	the	wedge	surged	as	the	marines	saw	the	disorder	in	the
enemy	front	line.	Crow	riders	spun	their	horses,	rising	high	in	their	saddles	as
they	careered	to	avoid	being	pinned	between	the	closing	footsoldiers	and
inadvertently	breaking	up	the	marines’	momentum.	They	pulled	clear	with
moments	to	spare.
The	wedge	struck.
Through	the	shield	Duiker	felt	the	impact’s	thunder,	a	resounding	roll	that
jarred	his	bones.	He	could	see	little	from	his	position	apart	from	a	small	patch
of	blue	sky	directly	above	the	heads	of	the	soldiers,	and	into	that	air	spun	a
snapped	pike-shaft	and	a	helm	that	might	have	still	held	in	its	strap	a	bearded
jaw,	before	dust	rose	up	in	an	impenetrable	shroud.
“Sir!”	A	hand	tugged	at	his	shield	arm.	“You’re	to	turn	now!”
Turn?	Duiker	glared	at	List.
The	corporal	pulled	him	round.	“So	you	can	see,	sir—”


They	were	standing	in	the	next	to	last	line	of	the	wedge.	A	space	of	ten
paces	yawned	between	the	marines	and	the	mounted,	arcanely	armored	Foolish
Dog	horsewarriors,	who	stood	motionless,	heavy	swords	bared	and	resting
crossways	across	their	saddles.	Beyond	them,	the	basin	stretched—the
historian’s	position	high	on	the	earthen	ramp	afforded	him	a	view	of	the	rest	of
the	battle.
To	the	south	were	closed	ranks	of	Tithansi	archers	supported	by	Debrahl
cavalry.	Legions	of	Halafan	infantry	marched	east	of	them—to	their	right—
and	in	their	midst	a	company	of	Sialk	heavy	infantry.	Further	east	were	more
cavalry	and	archers.	One	jaw,	and	to	the	north,	the	other.	Now	inexorably
snapping	shut.
He	looked	to	the	north.	The	Ubari	legions—at	least	three—along	with
Sialk	and	Tepasi	cavalry,	were	less	than	fifty	paces	from	contacting	the
Seventh’s	infantry.	Among	the	standards	jutting	from	the	Ubari,	Duiker	saw	a
flash	of	gray	and	black	colors.	Marine-trained	locals,	now	there’s	irony	for
you.
East	of	the	river	a	huge	battle	was	underway,	if	the	vast	pall	of	drifting	dust
was	any	indication.	The	Weasel	Clan	had	found	their	fight	after	all.	The
historian	wondered	which	of	Kamist	Reloe’s	forces	had	managed	to	circle
round.	A	strike	for	the	herds,	and	the	gift	of	slaughter	among	the	refugees.	Hold
fast,	Weasels,	you’ll	get	no	relief	from	the	rest	of	us.
Jostling	from	the	soldiers	around	him	brought	Duiker ’s	attention	back	to
his	immediate	surroundings.	The	clash	of	weapons	and	screams	from	the	ridge
was	growing	as	the	wedge	slowly	flattened	out	against	an	anvil	of	stiff,
disciplined	resistance.	The	first	reeling	knock-back	rippled	through	the	press.
Togg’s	three	masks	of	war.	Before	the	day’s	done	we’ll	each	of	us	wear	them
all.	Terror,	rage	and	pain.	We	won’t	take	the	ridge—
A	deeper	roar	sounded	in	the	basin	behind	them.	The	historian	twisted
around.	The	jaws	had	closed.	The	Seventh’s	hollow	box	around	the	wagons	of
the	wounded	was	crumpling,	writhing,	like	a	worm	beset	by	ants.	Duiker
stared,	a	wave	of	dread	rising	within	him,	expecting	to	see	that	box
disintegrate,	torn	apart	by	the	ferocity	assailing	it.
The	Seventh	resisted,	impossible	though	it	seemed	to	the	historian’s	mind.
On	all	sides	the	enemy	reared	back	as	if	those	jaws	had	closed	on	poisonous
thorns	and	the	instinct	was	to	flinch	away.	There	was	a	pause,	a	visceral	chill
that	kept	the	two	sides	apart—the	space	between	them	carpeted	with	the	dead
and	dying—then	the	Seventh	did	the	unexpected.	In	a	silence	that	raised	the	hair
on	the	historian’s	nape,	they	rushed	forward,	the	box	bulging,	distorting	into
an	oval,	pikes	levelled.


Enemy	ranks	crumbled,	melted,	suddenly	broke.
Stop!	Too	far!	Too	thin!	Stop!
The	oval	stretched,	paused,	then	drew	back	with	a	measured	precision	that
was	almost	sinister—as	if	the	Seventh	had	become	some	kind	of	mechanism.
And	they’ll	do	it	again.	Little	surprise	the	next	time,	but	likely	just	as	deadly.
Like	a	lung	drawing	breath,	a	rhythm	of	calm	sleep,	again	and	again.
His	attention	was	snared	by	movement	among	the	Foolish	Dog.	Nil	and
Nether	had	emerged	from	the	front	line,	on	foot,	the	latter	leading	a	Wickan
mare.	The	animal’s	head	was	high,	ears	pricked	forward.	Sweat	glistened	on	its
ruddy	flanks.
The	two	warlocks	halted	to	either	side	of	the	mare,	Nether	leaving	the	reins
to	dangle,	and	laid	hands	on	the	beast.
A	moment	later	Duiker	was	stumbling,	as	the	rear	lines	of	the	wedge	were
pulled	forward,	up	the	ramp,	as	if	carried	on	an	indrawn	breath.
“Ready	close	weapons!”	a	sergeant	shouted	nearby.
Oh,	Hood’s	wet	dream—
“This	is	it,”	List	said	beside	him,	his	voice	as	taut	as	a	bowstring.
There	was	no	time	for	a	reply,	no	time	for	thought	itself,	for	suddenly	they
were	among	the	enemy.	Duiker	caught	a	flash	of	the	scene	before	him.	A
soldier	stumbling	and	cursing,	his	helm	slipped	down	over	his	eyes.	A	sword
flying	through	the	air.	A	shrieking	Semk	warrior	being	pulled	backward	by	his
braid,	his	scream	cut	to	a	wet	gurgle	as	the	point	of	a	short	sword	burst	from
under	his	chest	amidst	a	coiled	mass	of	intestines.	A	woman	marine	wheeling
from	an	attack,	her	own	urine	splattering	the	tops	of	her	boots.	And
everywhere…Togg’s	three	masks	and	a	cacophony	of	noise,	throats	making
sounds	they	were	never	meant	to	make,	blood	gushing,	people	dying—
everywhere,	people	dying.
“Ware	your	right!”
Duiker	recognized	the	voice—his	nameless	marine	companion—and
pivoted	in	time	to	parry	a	spear	blade,	his	short	sword	skittering	along	the	tinsheathed	shaft.	He	stepped	in	past	the	thrust	and	drove	his	sword	point	into	a
Semk	woman’s	face.	She	sank	down	in	red	ruin,	but	it	was	the	historian’s	cry	of
pain	that	ripped	the	air,	a	savage	piercing	of	his	soul.	He	stumbled	back	and
would	have	fallen	if	not	for	a	solid	shield	thudding	against	his	back.	The
unnamed	woman’s	voice	was	close	by	his	ear.	“Tonight	I’ll	ride	you	till	you
beg,	old	man!”
In	that	baffling	twist	that	was	the	human	mind,	Duiker	mentally	wrapped
himself	around	those	words,	not	in	lust,	but	as	a	drowning	man	clings	to	a
mooring	pole.	He	drew	a	sobbing	breath,	straightened	away	from	the	shield’s


support,	stepped	forward.
Ahead	battled	the	front	line	of	marines,	horribly	thinned,	yielding	step
after	step	as	the	Guran	heavy	infantry	pushed	down	the	slope.	The	wedge	was
about	to	shatter.
Semk	warriors	ranged	in	the	midst	of	the	marines	in	wild,	frenzied
mayhem,	and	it	was	these	ash-stained	warriors	that	the	rear	ranks	had	been
driven	forward	to	deal	with.
The	task	was	quickly	done,	brutal	discipline	more	than	a	match	for
individual	warriors	who	held	no	line,	offered	no	support	weapon-side,	and
heard	no	voice	except	their	own	manic	battle	cries.
For	all	that	sudden	deliverance,	the	marines	began	to	buckle.
Three	horns	sounded	in	quick,	braying	succession:	the	Imperial	call	to
split.	Duiker	gaped,	spun	round	to	look	for	List—but	the	corporal	was
nowhere	in	sight.	He	saw	his	marine	companion	and	staggered	over	to	her.
“Four ’s	the	withdraw,	were	there	four	blasts?	I	heard—”
She	bared	her	teeth.	“Three,	old	man.	Split!	Now!”
She	pulled	away.	Baffled,	Duiker	followed.	The	slope	was	treacherous,
blood-	and	bile-soaked	mud	over	shifting	cobbles.	They	stumbled	with	the
others	this	side	of	the	divide—the	south—toward	the	high	bank,	and	descended
into	the	narrow	ditch,	finding	themselves	ankle-deep	in	a	stream	of	blood.
The	Guran	heavy	infantry	had	paused,	sensing	a	trap—no	matter	how
improbable	events	had	made	that	possibility—as	they	shuffled	to	close	ranks
four	strides	down	from	the	crest.	A	ram’s	horn	bleated,	pulling	the	formation
back	to	the	summit	in	ragged	back-step.
Duiker	turned	in	time	to	see,	seventy	paces	farther	down	the	ramp,	the
Foolish	Dog	heavy	cavalry	edging	forward,	parting	around	Nil	and	Nether,
who	still	stood	on	either	side	of	the	stationary	mare,	their	hands	pressed
against	the	animal.
“Lord’s	push,”	cursed	the	woman	at	his	side.
They	mean	to	charge	up	this	ramp,	with	its	bodies	and	wreckage	and	mud
and	stones.	A	slope	steep	enough	to	force	the	riders	onto	their	mounts’	necks—
and	all	that	weight	onto	their	forelegs.	Coltaine	means	them	to	charge.	Into	the
face	of	heavy	infantry—“No!”	the	historian	whispered.
Rocks	and	sand	pattered	down	the	bank.	Around	Duiker	helmed	heads
turned	in	sudden	alarm—someone	was	on	the	bank’s	top.	More	dirt	slewed
down	on	them.
A	stream	of	Malazan	curses	sounded	from	above,	then	a	helmed	head
peered	over	the	edge.
“It’s	a	Hood-damned	sapper!”	one	of	the	marines	grunted.


The	dirt-smeared	face	above	them	grinned.	“Guess	what	turtles	do	in	the
winter?”	he	shouted	down,	then	pulled	back	and	out	of	sight.
Duiker	glanced	back	at	the	Foolish	Dog	horsewarriors.	Their	forward
motion	had	ceased,	as	if	suddenly	uncertain.	The	Wickans	had	their	heads
raised,	gazes	fixed	on	the	tops	of	the	banks	to	either	side.
The	Guran	heavy	infantry	and	surviving	Semk	stared	as	well.
Through	the	dust	rolling	down	the	ramp	from	the	crest,	Duiker	squinted
toward	the	north	bank.	Activity	swarmed	along	it—sappers,	wearing	shields	on
their	backs,	had	begun	moving	forward,	dropping	down	onto	the	ramp	in	the
body-piled	space	below	the	crest.
Another	horn	sounded,	and	the	Foolish	Dog	horsewarriors	rolled	forward
again,	pushing	their	mounts	into	a	trot,	then	a	clambering	canter.	But	now	a
company	of	sappers	blocked	their	path	to	the	ridge.
A	turtle	burrows	come	winter.	The	bastards	snuck	onto	the	banks	last	night
—under	the	very	noses	of	Reloe—and	buried	themselves.	What	in	Hood’s	name
for?
The	sappers,	still	wearing	their	shields	on	their	backs,	milled	about,
preparing	weapons	and	other	gear.	One	stepped	free	to	wave	the	Foolish	Dog
riders	forward.
The	ramp	trembled.
The	armor-clad	horses	surged	up	the	steep	slope	in	an	explosion	of
muscle,	swifter	than	the	historian	thought	possible.	Broadswords	lifted
skyward.	In	their	arcane,	bizarre	armor,	the	Wickans	sat	their	saddles	like
demonic	conjurations	above	equally	nightmarish	mounts.
The	sappers	rushed	the	Guran	line.	Grenados	flew,	followed	by	the	rap	of
explosions	and	dreadful	screams.
Every	munition	left	to	the	sappers	arced	a	path	into	the	press	of	heavy
infantry.	Sharpers,	burners,	flamers.	The	solid	line	of	Reloe’s	elite	soldiers
disintegrated.
The	Foolish	Dog’s	galloping	charge	reached	the	sappers,	who	went	down
beneath	the	hooves	in	resounding	clangs	that	beat	a	dreadful	rhythm	as	horse
after	horse	surged	over	them.
Into	the	gutted,	chaotic	maelstrom	that	had	moments	before	been	a	solid
line	of	heavy	infantry,	the	Wickan	horsewarriors	cleared	the	crest	and	plunged,
broadswords	swinging	down	in	fearful	slaughter.
Another	signal	wailed	above	the	din.
The	woman	at	Duiker ’s	side	rapped	a	gauntleted	hand	against	his	chest.
“Forward,	old	man!”
He	took	a	step,	then	hesitated.	Aye,	time	for	the	soldier	to	go	forward.	But


I’m	a	historian—I	have	to	see,	I	have	to	witness,	and	to	Hood	with	arrow-fire!
“Not	this	time,”	Duiker	said,	turning	to	scramble	his	way	up	the	embankment.
“See	you	tonight!”	she	shouted	after	him,	before	joining	the	rest	of	the
marines	as	they	marched	forward.
Duiker	pulled	himself	to	the	top,	gaining	a	mouthful	of	sandy	earth	in	the
bargain.	Coughing	and	gagging,	he	pushed	himself	to	his	feet,	then	looked
around.
The	bank’s	flat	surface	was	honeycombed	with	angled	shafts.	Cocoons	of
tent	cloth	lay	half	in,	half	out	of	some	of	the	man-sized	holes.	The	historian
stared	at	them	a	moment	longer	in	disbelief,	then	swung	his	attention	to	the
ramp.
The	marines’	forward	momentum	had	been	stalled	by	the	retrieval	of	the
trampled	sappers.	There	were	broken	bones	aplenty,	Duiker	could	see,	but	the
shields—now	battered	into	so	much	scrap—and	their	dented	helms	had	for	the
most	part	protected	the	crazed	soldiers.
Beyond	the	crest,	on	the	flatland	to	the	west,	the	Foolish	Dog
horsewarriors	pursued	the	routed	remnants	of	Kamist	Reloe’s	vaunted	elites.
The	commander ’s	own	tent,	situated	on	a	low	hill	a	hundred	paces	from	the
crest,	was	sinking	beneath	flames	and	smoke.	Duiker	suspected	that	the	rebel
High	Mage	had	set	that	fire	himself,	destroying	anything	of	potential	use	to
Coltaine	before	fleeing	through	whatever	paths	his	warren	offered	him.
Duiker	turned	to	survey	the	basin.
The	battle	down	there	still	raged.	The	Seventh’s	ring	of	defense	around	the
wagons	of	the	wounded	remained,	though	distorted	by	a	concerted,	relentless
push	from	the	Ubari	heavy	infantry	on	the	northern	side.	The	wagons
themselves	were	rolling	southward.	Tepasi	and	Sialk	cavalry	harried	the	rear
guard,	where	the	Hissari	Loyals	stood	fast…and	died	by	the	score.
We	could	lose	this	one	yet.
A	double	blast	of	horns	from	the	crest	commanded	the	Foolish	Dog’s
recall.	Duiker	could	see	Coltaine,	his	black	feather	cape	gray	with	dust,	sitting
astride	his	charger	on	the	crest.	The	historian	saw	him	gesture	to	his	staff	and
the	recall	horns	sounded	again,	in	quicker	succession.	We	need	you	now!
But	those	mounts	will	be	spent.	They	did	the	impossible.	They	charged
uphill,	with	a	speed	that	grew	and	grew,	with	a	speed	like	nothing	I	have	ever
seen	before.	The	historian	frowned,	then	spun	around.
Nil	and	Nether	still	stood	to	either	side	of	the	lone	mare.	A	light	wind	was
ruffling	the	beast’s	mane	and	tail,	but	it	did	not	otherwise	move.	A	ripple	of
unease	chilled	Duiker.	What	have	they	done?
Distant	howling	caught	the	historian’s	attention.	A	large	mounted	force	was


crossing	the	river,	their	standards	too	distant	to	discern	their	identity.	Then
Duiker	spied	small	tawny	shapes	streaming	out	ahead	of	the	riders.	Wickan
cattle-dogs.	That’s	the	Weasel	Clan.
The	horsewarriors	broke	into	a	canter	as	they	cleared	the	river	bed.
The	Tepasi	and	Sialk	cavalry	were	caught	completely	unawares,	first	by	a
wave	of	ill-tempered	dogs	that	ignored	horses	to	fling	themselves	at	riders,
sixty	snarling	pounds	of	teeth	and	muscle	dragging	soldiers	from	their
saddles,	then	by	the	Wickans	themselves,	who	announced	their	arrival	by
launching	severed	heads	through	the	air	before	them	and	raising	an	eerie,
blood-freezing	cry	a	moment	before	striking	the	cavalry’s	flank.
Within	a	score	of	heartbeats	the	Tepasi	and	Sialk	riders	were	gone—dead
or	dying	or	in	full	flight.	The	Weasel	horsewarriors	barely	paused	in	reforming	before	wheeling	at	a	canter	to	close	with	the	Ubari,	the	mottle-coated
cattle-dogs	loping	alongside	them.
The	enemy	broke	on	both	sides,	flinching	away	with	a	timing	that,
although	instinctive,	was	precise.
Foolish	Dog	riders	poured	back	down	the	ramp,	parting	around	the
warlocks	and	their	motionless	horse,	then	wheeling	to	the	south	in	pursuit	of
the	fleeing	Halafan	and	Sialk	infantry	and	the	Tithansi	archers.
Duiker	sank	to	his	knees,	suddenly	overwhelmed,	his	emotions	a	cauldron
of	grief,	anger	and	horror.	Speak	not	of	victory	this	day.	No,	do	not	speak	at	all
Somone	stumbled	onto	the	bank,	breath	ragged.	Footsteps	dragged	closer,
then	a	gauntleted	hand	fell	heavily	on	the	historian’s	shoulder.	A	voice	that
Duiker	struggled	to	identify	spoke.	“They	mock	our	nobleborn,	did	you	know
that,	old	man?	They’ve	a	name	for	us	in	Dhebral.	You	know	what	it	translates
into?	The	Chain	of	Dogs.	Coltaine’s	Chain	of	Dogs.	He	leads,	yet	is	led,	he
strains	forward,	yet	is	held	back,	he	bares	his	fangs,	yet	what	nips	at	his	heels	if
not	those	he	is	sworn	to	protect?	Ah,	there’s	profundity	in	such	names,	don’t
you	think?”
The	voice	was	Lull’s,	yet	altered.	Duiker	raised	his	head	and	stared	into	the
face	of	the	man	crouched	beside	him.	A	single	blue	eye	glittered	from	a
ravaged	mass	of	torn	flesh.	A	mace	had	caught	him	a	solid	blow,	driving	the
cheek	guard	into	his	face,	shattering	cheek,	bursting	one	eye	and	tearing	away
the	captain’s	nose.	The	horrifying	ruin	that	was	Lull’s	face	twisted	into
something	like	a	grin.	“I’m	a	lucky	man,	Historian.	Look,	not	a	single	tooth
knocked	out—not	even	a	wobble.”
	
The	count	of	losses	was	a	numbing	litany	to	war ’s	futility.	To	the	historian’s


mind,	only	Hood	himself	could	smile	in	triumph.
The	Weasel	Clan	had	awaited	the	Tithansi	lancers	and	the	godling
commander	who	led	them.	An	ambush	by	earth	spirits	had	taken	the	Semk
warleader	down,	tearing	his	flesh	to	pieces	in	their	hunger	to	rip	apart	and
devour	the	Semk	god’s	remnant.	Then	the	Weasel	Clan	had	sprung	their	own
trap,	and	it	had	held	its	own	horror,	for	the	refugees	had	been	the	bait,	and
hundreds	had	been	killed	or	wounded	in	the	trap’s	clinical,	cold-blooded
execution.
The	Weasel	Clan’s	warleaders	could	claim	that	they	had	been	outnumbered
four	to	one,	that	some	among	those	they	were	sworn	to	protect	had	been
sacrificed	to	save	the	rest.	All	true,	and	providing	a	defensible	justification	for
what	they	did.	Yet	the	warleaders	said	nothing,	and	though	that	silence	was	met
with	outrage	by	the	refugees	and	especially	by	the	Council	of	Nobles,	Duiker
saw	it	in	a	different	light.	The	Wickan	tribe	held	voiced	reasons	and	excuses	in
contempt—they	accepted	none	from	others	and	were	derisive	of	those	who
tried.	And	in	turn,	they	offered	none,	because,	Duiker	suspected,	they	held
those	who	were	sacrificed—and	their	kin—in	a	respect	that	could	not	survive
something	so	base	and	self-serving	as	its	utterance.
It	was	unfortunate	for	them	that	the	refugees	understood	none	of	this,	that
for	them	the	Wickans’	silence	was	in	itself	an	expression	of	contempt,	a	disdain
for	the	lives	lost.
The	Weasel	Clan	had,	however,	offered	yet	another	salute	to	those	refugees
who	had	died.	With	the	slaughter	of	the	Tithansi	archers	in	the	basin	added	to
the	Weasel	Clan’s	actions,	an	entire	plains	tribe	had	effectively	ceased	to	exist.
The	Wickans’	retribution	had	been	absolute.	Nor	had	they	stopped	there,	for
they	had	found	Kamist’s	army,	arriving	late	to	the	battle	from	the	east.	The
slaughter	exacted	there	was	a	graphic	revelation	of	the	fate	the	Tithansi	sought
to	inflict	on	the	Malazans.	This	lesson,	too,	was	lost	on	the	refugees.
For	all	that	scholars	tried,	Duiker	knew	there	was	no	explanation	possible
for	the	dark	currents	of	human	thought	that	roiled	in	the	wake	of	bloodshed.	He
need	only	look	upon	his	own	reaction,	when	stumbling	down	to	where	Nil	and
Nether	stood,	their	hands	gummed	with	congealing	sweat	and	blood	on	the
flanks	of	a	mare	standing	dead.	Life	forces	were	powerful,	almost	beyond
comprehension,	and	the	sacrifice	of	one	animal	to	gift	close	to	five	thousand
others	with	appalling	strength	and	force	of	will	was	on	the	face	of	it	worthy
and	noble.
If	not	for	a	dumb	beast’s	incomprehension	at	its	own	destruction	beneath
the	loving	hands	of	two	heartbroken	children.


	
The	Imperial	Warren’s	horizon	was	a	gray	shroud	on	all	sides.	Details	were
blurred	behind	the	gauze	of	the	still,	thick	air.	No	wind	stirred,	yet	echoes	of
death	and	destruction	remained,	suspended	as	if	trapped	outside	time	itself.
Kalam	settled	back	in	his	saddle,	eyes	on	the	scene	before	him.
Ashes	and	dust	shrouded	the	tiled	dome.	It	had	collapsed	in	one	place,
revealing	the	raw	edges	of	the	bronze	plates	that	covered	it.	A	gray	haze	lay
over	the	gaping	hole.	From	the	dome’s	curvature,	it	was	clear	that	less	than	a
third	of	it	was	above	the	surface.
The	assassin	dismounted.	He	paused	to	pluck	at	the	cloth	wrapped	over	his
nose	and	mouth	to	loosen	the	caked	grit,	glanced	back	at	the	others,	then
approached	the	structure.
Somewhere	beneath	their	feet	stood	a	palace	or	a	temple.	Reaching	the
dome,	the	assassin	leaned	forward	and	brushed	the	ash	from	one	of	the	bronze
tiles.	A	deeply	carved	symbol	revealed	itself.
A	breath	of	cold	recognition	swept	through	him.	He	had	last	seen	that
stylized	crown	on	another	continent,	in	an	unexpected	war	against	resistance
that	had	been	purchased	by	desperate	enemies.	Caladan	Brood	and	Anomander
Rake,	and	the	Rhivi	and	the	Crimson	Guard.	A	gathering	of	disparate	foes	to
challenge	the	Malazan	Empire’s	plans	for	conquest.	The	Free	Cities	of
Genabackis	were	a	squabbling,	back-stabbing	lot.	Gold-hungry	rulers	and
thieving	factors	squealed	loudest	at	the	threat	to	their	freedom…
His	mind	over	a	thousand	leagues	away,	Kalam	lightly	touched	the
engraved	sigil.	Blackdog…we	were	warring	against	mosquitoes	and	leeches,
poisonous	snakes	and	blood-sucking	lizards.	Supply	lines	cut,	the	Moranth
pulling	back	when	we	needed	them	the	most…and	this	sigil	I	remember,	there	on
a	ragged	standard,	rising	above	a	select	company	of	Brood’s	forces.
What	did	that	bastard	call	himself?	The	High	King?	Kallor…the	High	King
without	a	kingdom.	Thousands	of	years	old,	if	legends	speak	true,	perhaps	tens
of	thousands.	He	claimed	to	have	once	commanded	empires,	each	one	making
the	Malazan	Empire	no	larger	than	a	province.	He	then	claimed	to	have
destroyed	them	by	his	own	hand,	destroyed	them	utterly.	Kallor	boasted	he	had
made	worlds	lifeless…
And	this	man	now	stands	as	Caladan	Brood’s	second	in	command.	And	when
I	left,	Dujek,	the	Bridgeburners	and	the	reformed	Fifth	Army	were	about	to	seek
an	alliance	with	Brood.
Whiskeyjack…Quick	Ben…keep	your	heads	low,	friends.	There’s	a	madman
in	your	midst….


“If	you’re	done	daydreaming…”
“The	thing	I	hate	most	about	this	place,”	Kalam	said,	“is	how	the	ground
swallows	footfalls.”
Minala’s	startling	gray	eyes	were	narrow	above	the	scarf	covering	the
lower	half	of	her	face	as	she	studied	the	assassin.	“You	look	frightened.”
Kalam	scowled,	turning	back	to	the	others.	He	raised	his	voice.	“We’re
leaving	this	warren	now.”
“What?”	Minala	scoffed.	“I	see	no	gate!”
No,	but	it	feels	right.	We’ve	covered	enough	distance,	and	I’ve	suddenly
realized	that	the	power	of	deliberation	is	not	as	much	in	the	traveling	as	in	the
arriving.	He	closed	his	eyes,	shutting	Minala	and	everyone	else	out	as	he
forced	his	mind	into	stillness.	One	final	thought	escaped:	I	hope	I’m	right.
A	moment	later	a	portal	formed,	making	a	tearing	sound	as	it	spread	wider.
“You	thick-headed	bastard,”	Minala	snapped	with	sharp	comprehension.	“A
little	discussion	might	have	led	us	to	this	a	little	sooner—unless	you	were
deliberately	delaying	our	progress.	Hood	knows	what	you’re	about,	Corporal.”
Interesting	choice	of	words,	woman.	I	imagine	he	does.
Kalam	opened	his	eyes.	The	gate	was	an	impenetrable	black	stain	a	dozen
paces	away.	He	grimaced.	As	simple	as	that.	Kalam,	you	are	a	thick-headed
bastard.	Mind	you,	fear	can	focus	even	the	most	insipid	of	creatures.
“Follow	closely,”	the	assassin	said,	loosening	the	long-knife	in	its	sheath
before	striding	toward	the	portal	and	plunging	through.
His	moccasins	slid	on	sandy	cobbles.	It	was	night,	stars	bright	overhead
through	the	narrow	slit	between	two	high	brick	buildings.	The	alley	wound	on
ahead	in	a	tortuous	path	that	Kalam	knew	well.	There	was	no	one	in	sight.
The	assassin	moved	to	the	wall	on	his	left.	Minala	appeared,	leading	her
own	horse	and	Kalam’s.	She	blinked,	head	turning.	“Kalam?	Where—”
“Right	here,”	the	assassin	replied.
She	started,	then	hissed	in	frustration.	“Three	breaths	in	a	city	and	you’re
already	skulking.”
“Habit.”
“No	doubt.”	She	led	the	horses	farther	on.	A	moment	later	Keneb	and	Selv
appeared,	followed	by	the	two	children.
The	captain	glared	around	until	he	spotted	Kalam.	“Aren?”
“Aye.”
“Damned	quiet.”
“We’re	in	an	alley	that	winds	through	a	necropolis.”
“How	pleasant,”	Minala	remarked.	She	gestured	at	the	buildings	flanking
them.	“But	these	look	like	tenements.”


“They	are…for	the	dead.	The	poor	stay	poor	in	Aren.”
Keneb	asked,	“How	close	are	we	to	the	garrison?”
“Three	thousand	paces,”	Kalam	replied,	unwinding	the	scarf	from	his	face.
“We	need	to	wash,”	Minala	said.
“I’m	thirsty,”	Vaneb	said,	still	astride	his	horse.
“Hungry,”	added	Kesen.
Kalam	sighed,	then	nodded.
“I	hope,”	added	Minala,	“a	walk	through	dead	streets	isn’t	an	omen.”
“The	necropolis	is	ringed	by	mourners’	taverns,”	the	assassin	muttered.
“We	won’t	have	much	of	a	walk.”
	
Squall	Inn	claimed	to	have	seen	better	days,	but	Kalam	suspected	it	never	had.
The	floor	of	the	main	room	sagged	like	an	enormous	bowl,	tilting	every	wall
inward	until	angled	wooden	posts	were	needed	to	keep	them	upright.	Rotting
food	and	dead	rats	had	with	inert	patience	migrated	to	the	floor ’s	center,
creating	a	mouldering,	redolent	heap	like	an	offering	to	some	dissolute	god.
Chairs	and	tables	stood	on	creatively	sawed	legs	in	a	ring	around	the	pit,
only	one	still	occupied	by	a	denizen	not	yet	drunk	into	senselessness.	A	back
room	no	less	disreputable	provided	the	more	privileged	customers	with	some
privacy,	and	it	was	there	that	Kalam	had	deposited	his	group	to	eat	while	a
washtub	was	being	prepared	in	the	tangled	garden.	The	assassin	had	then	made
his	way	to	the	main	room	and	sat	himself	down	opposite	the	solitary	conscious
customer.
“It’s	the	food,	isn’t	it?”	the	grizzled	Napan	said	as	soon	as	the	assassin	took
his	seat.
“Best	in	the	city.”
“Or	so	voted	the	council	of	cockroaches.”
Kalam	watched	the	blue-skinned	man	raise	the	mug	to	his	lips,	watched	his
large	Adam’s	apple	bob.	“Looks	like	you’ll	have	another	one.”
“Easily.”
The	assassin	twisted	slightly	in	his	chair,	caught	the	drooped	gaze	of	the
old	woman	leaning	against	a	support	post	beside	the	ale	keg,	raised	two
fingers.	She	sighed,	pushed	herself	upright,	paused	to	adjust	the	rat-cleaver
tucked	through	her	apron	belt,	then	went	off	in	search	of	two	tankards.
“She’ll	break	your	arm	if	you	paw,”	the	stranger	said.
Kalam	leaned	back	and	regarded	the	man.	He	could	have	been	anywhere
between	thirty	and	sixty,	depending	on	his	life’s	toll.	Deeply	weathered	skin
was	visible	beneath	the	iron-streaked	snarl	of	beard.	The	dark	eyes	roved


restlessly	and	had	yet	to	fix	on	the	assassin.	The	man	was	dressed	in	baggy,
thread-bare	rags.	“You	force	the	question,”	the	assassin	said.	“Who	are	you	and
what’s	your	story?”
The	man	straightened	up.	“You	think	I	tell	that	to	just	anyone?”
Kalam	waited.
“Well,”	the	man	continued.	“Not	everyone.	Some	people	get	rude	and	stop
listening.”
An	unconscious	patron	at	a	nearby	table	toppled	from	his	chair,	his	head
crunching	as	it	struck	the	flagstones.	Kalam,	the	stranger	and	the	serving
woman—who	had	just	reappeared	with	two	tin	mugs—all	watched	as	the	drunk
slid	down	on	grease	and	vomit	to	join	the	central	heap.
It	turned	out	one	of	the	rats	had	been	just	playing	at	being	dead,	and	it
popped	free	and	clambered	onto	the	patron’s	body,	nose	twitching.
The	stranger	opposite	the	assassin	grunted.	“Everyone’s	a	philosopher.”
The	serving	woman	delivered	the	drinks,	her	peculiar	shuffle	to	their	table
displaying	long	familiarity	with	the	pitched	floor.	Eyeing	Kalam,	she	spoke	in
Dhebral.	“Your	friends	in	the	back	have	asked	for	soap.”
“Aye,	I	imagine	they	have.”
“We	got	no	soap.”
“I	have	just	realized	that.”
She	wandered	away.
“Newly	arrived,	I	take	it,”	the	stranger	said.	“North	gate?”
“Aye.”
“That’s	quite	a	climb,	with	horses	yet.”
“Meaning	the	north	gate’s	locked.”
“Sealed,	along	with	all	the	others.	Maybe	you	arrived	by	the	harborside.”
“Maybe.”
“Harbor ’s	closed.”
“How	do	you	close	Aren	Harbor?”
“All	right,	it’s	not	closed.”
Kalam	took	a	mouthful	of	ale,	swallowed	it	down	and	went	perfectly	still.
“Gets	even	worse	after	a	few,”	the	stranger	said.
The	assassin	set	the	tankard	back	down	on	the	table.	He	struggled	a
moment	to	find	his	voice.	“Tell	me	some	news.”
“Why	should	I?”
“I’ve	bought	you	a	drink.”
“And	I	should	be	grateful?	Hood’s	breath,	man,	you’ve	tasted	it!”
“I’m	not	usually	this	patient.”
“Oh,	very	well,	why	didn’t	you	say	so?”	He	finished	the	first	tankard,


picked	up	the	new	one.	“Some	ales	grow	on	you.	Some	grow	in	you.	To	your
health,	sir.”	He	quaffed	the	ale	down.
“I	have	slit	uglier	throats	than	yours,”	the	assassin	said.
The	man	paused,	his	eyes	flicking	for	the	briefest	of	moments	to	skitter
over	Kalam,	then	he	set	his	tankard	down.	“Kornobol’s	wives	locked	him	out
last	night—the	poor	bastard	was	left	wandering	the	streets	till	one	of	the	High
Fist’s	patrols	picked	him	up	for	breaking	curfew.	It’s	becoming	common
practice.	Wives	all	over	the	city	are	having	revelations.	What	else?	Can’t	get	a
decent	fillet	without	paying	an	arm	and	a	leg	for	it—there’s	more	maimed
beggars	than	ever	crowding	the	streets	where	the	markets	used	to	be.	Can’t	buy
a	reading	without	Hood’s	Herald	poking	up	on	the	field—tell	me,	do	you	think
it’s	even	possible	that	the	High	Fist	is	casting	someone	else’s	shadow	like	they
say?	Of	course,	who	can	cast	a	shadow	hiding	in	the	palace	wardrobe?	Fish
ain’t	the	only	slippery	things	in	this	city,	let	me	tell	you.	Why,	I’ve	been
arrested	four	times	in	the	last	two	days,	had	to	identify	myself	and	show	my
Imperial	charter,	if	you	can	believe	it.	Turned	out	lucky,	though,	since	I	found
my	crew	in	one	of	those	gaols.	With	Oponn’s	smile	I’ll	have	them	out	come
tomorrow—got	a	deck	to	scrub	and	believe	you	me,	those	drunken	louts	will
be	scrubbing	till	the	Abyss	swallows	the	world.	What’s	worse	is	the	way	some
people	step	right	around	that	charter,	make	demands	of	a	person	so	he’s	left
with	an	aching	head	delivering	messages	beneath	common	words,	as	if	life’s
not	complicated	enough—any	idea	how	a	hold	groans	when	it’s	full	of	gold?
And	now	you’re	going	to	say,	‘Well,	Captain,	it	just	so	happens	that	I’m
looking	to	buy	passage	back	to	Unta,’	and	I’ll	say,	‘The	gods	are	smiling	upon
you,	sir!	It	just	so	happens	that	I’m	sailing	in	two	days’	time,	with	twenty
marines,	the	High	Fist’s	treasurer	and	half	of	Aren’s	riches	on	board—but
we’ve	room,	sir,	oh,	yes	indeed.	Welcome	aboard!’	”
Kalam	was	silent	for	a	dozen	heartbeats,	then	he	said,	“The	gods	are
smiling	indeed.”
The	captain’s	head	bobbed.	“Smooth	and	beguiling,	them	smiles.”
“Who	do	I	thank	for	this	arrangement?”
“Says	he’s	a	friend	of	yours,	though	you’ve	never	met—though	you	will
aboard	my	ship,	Ragstopper,	in	two	days.”
“His	name?”
“Salk	Elan,	he	called	himself.	Says	he’s	been	waiting	for	you.”
“And	how	did	he	know	I	would	come	to	this	inn?	I	did	not	know	of	its
existence	an	hour	ago.”
“A	guess,	but	an	informed	one.	Something	about	this	being	the	first	one
you	come	to	down	from	the	gate	in	the	necropolis.	Too	bad	you	weren’t	here


last	night,	friend,	it	was	even	quieter,	at	least	until	the	wench	fished	a	drowned
rat	out	of	that	keg	over	yonder.	Too	bad	you	and	your	friends	missed	this
morning’s	breakfast.”
	
Kalam	slammed	the	rickety	door	behind	him,	pausing	to	regain	control.	Quick
Ben’s	arrangements?	Not	likely.	Impossible,	in	fact—
“What’s	wrong?”	Minala	was	sitting	at	the	table,	a	wedge	of	melon	in	one
hand.	Voices	from	the	garden	indicated	parents	bathing	reluctant	children.
The	assassin	closed	his	eyes	for	a	long	moment,	then	opened	them	with	a
sigh.	“You’ve	been	delivered	to	Aren—and	now	we	must	go	our	separate	ways.
Tell	Keneb	to	go	out	until	he	finds	a	patrol	or	one	finds	him,	and	then	make	his
report	to	the	City	Guard’s	commander—leaving	me	entirely	out	of	that	report
—”
“And	how	does	he	explain	us	getting	into	the	city?”
“A	fisherman	brought	you	in.	Keep	it	simple.”
“And	that’s	it?	You	won’t	even	say	goodbye	to	Keneb,	or	Selv,	or	the
children?	You	won’t	even	let	them	show	their	gratitude	for	saving	their	lives?”
“If	you	can,	Minala,	get	yourself	and	your	kin	out	of	Aren—go	back	to
Quon	Tali.”
“Don’t	do	it	like	this,	Kalam.”
“It’s	the	safest	way.”	The	assassin	hesitated,	then	said,	“I	wish	it	could	have
been…different.”
The	wedge	of	melon	caught	him	flush	on	one	cheek.	He	spent	a	moment
wiping	his	face,	then	picked	up	his	saddlebags	and	threw	them	over	one
shoulder.	“The	stallion’s	yours,	Minala.”
In	the	main	room,	Kalam	made	his	way	to	the	captain’s	table.	“All	right,
I’m	ready.”
Something	like	disappointment	flickered	in	the	man’s	eyes,	then	he	sighed
and	tottered	upright.	“So	you	say.	It’s	a	middling	long	walk	to	where
Ragstopper’s	moored—with	luck	I’ll	only	have	to	show	my	charter	a	dozen	or
so	times.	Hood	knows,	what	else	do	you	do	with	an	army	camped	in	a	city,	eh?”
“That	rag	of	a	shirt	you’re	wearing	won’t	help	matters,	Captain.	I	imagine
you’re	looking	forward	to	ditching	the	disguise.”
“What	disguise?	This	is	my	lucky	shirt.”
	
Lostara	Yil	leaned	back	against	the	wall	of	the	small	room,	her	arms	crossed


as	she	watched	Pearl	pacing	back	and	forth	near	the	window.
“Details,”	he	muttered,	“it’s	all	in	the	details.	Don’t	blink	or	you	might
miss	something.”
“I	must	report	to	the	Red	Blade	commander,”	Lostara	said.	“Then	I	shall
return	here.”
“Will	Orto	Setral	give	you	leave,	lass?”
“I	am	not	relinquishing	this	pursuit…unless	you	forbid	me.”
“Gods	forbid!	I	enjoy	your	company.”
“You	are	being	facetious.”
“Only	slightly.	Granted,	you’ve	displayed	little	ease	of	humor.	However,
we	have	shared	quite	an	adventure	thus	far,	have	we	not?	Why	end	it	now?”
Lostara	examined	her	uniform.	Its	weight	was	a	comfort—the	armor	she
had	worn	when	disguised	was	a	shattered	mess	and	she	had	happily	discarded	it
after	the	Claw’s	healing	of	her	wounds.
Pearl	had	offered	nothing	to	relieve	the	mystery	of	the	demon	that	had
appeared	during	the	night	engagement	out	on	the	plain,	but	it	was	clear	to	the
Red	Blade	that	the	incident	still	troubled	the	man.	As	it	does	me,	but	that	is	past
now.	We	have	made	it	to	Aren,	still	on	the	assassin’s	trail.	All	is	as	it	should	be.
“Will	you	wait	here	for	me?”	she	asked.
Pearl’s	smile	broadened.	“Until	the	end	of	time,	my	dear.”
“Dawn	will	suffice.”
He	bowed.	“I	shall	count	the	heartbeats	until	then.”
She	left	the	room,	shutting	the	door	behind	her.	The	inn’s	hallway	led	to	a
wooden	staircase	that	took	her	into	the	crowded	main	room.	The	curfew	made
for	a	captive	clientele,	although	the	mood	was	anything	but	festive.
Lostara	ducked	under	the	staircase	and	passed	through	the	kitchen.	The
eyes	of	the	cook	and	her	helpers	followed	her	as	she	walked	to	the	back	door,
which	had	been	left	ajar	to	provide	a	draft.	It	was	a	reaction	she	was	used	to.
The	Red	Blades	were	much	feared.
She	pushed	open	the	door	and	stepped	out	into	the	alley.	The	river ’s	breath,
mingled	with	the	salt	of	the	bay,	was	cool	against	her	face.	I	pray	I	never	travel
the	Imperial	Warren	again.
She	walked	to	the	main	street,	her	boots	loud	on	the	cobbles.
A	dozen	soldiers	of	the	High	Fist’s	army	accosted	her	as	she	reached	the
first	intersection	on	her	way	to	the	garrison	compound.	The	sergeant
commanding	them	stared	at	her	with	disbelief.
“Good	evening,	Red	Blade,”	he	said.
She	nodded.	“I	understand	that	the	High	Fist	has	imposed	a	curfew.	Tell	me,
do	the	Red	Blades	patrol	the	streets	as	well?”


“Not	at	all,”	the	sergeant	replied.
There	was	an	expectancy	among	the	soldiers	that	Lostara	found	vaguely
disturbing.
“They	are	tasked	with	other	responsibilities,	then?”
The	sergeant	slowly	nodded.	“I	imagine	they	are.	From	your	words	and
from…other	things,	I	gather	you	are	newly	arrived.”
She	nodded.
“How?”
“By	warren.	I	had	an…an	escort.”
“The	makings	of	an	interesting	story,	no	doubt,”	the	sergeant	said.	“I	will
have	your	weapons	now.”
“Excuse	me?”
“You	wish	to	join	your	fellow	Red	Blades,	yes?	Speak	with	Commander
Orto	Setral?”
“Yes.”
“By	the	High	Fist’s	order,	issued	four	days	ago,	the	Red	Blades	are	under
detention.”
“What?”
“And	await	trial	for	treason	against	the	Malazan	Empire.	Your	weapons,
please.”
Stunned,	Lostara	Yil	made	no	resistance	as	the	soldiers	disarmed	her.	She
stared	at	the	sergeant.	“Our	loyalty	has	been…challenged?”
There	was	no	malice	in	his	eyes	as	he	nodded.	“I	am	sure	your	commander
will	have	more	to	say	on	the	situation.”
	
“He’s	gone.”
Keneb’s	jaw	dropped.	“Oh,”	he	managed	after	a	moment.	Frowning,	he
watched	Minala	packing	her	gear.	“What	are	you	doing?”
She	whirled	on	him.	“Do	you	think	he	gets	away	leaving	it	like	that?”
“Minala—”
“Be	quiet,	Keneb!	You’ll	wake	the	children.”
“I	wasn’t	shouting.”
“Tell	your	commander	everything,	you	understand	me?	Everything—
except	about	Kalam.”
“I	am	not	stupid,	no	matter	what	you	may	think.”
Her	glare	softened.	“I	know.	Forgive	me.”
“You’d	better	ask	that	of	your	sister,	I	think.	And	Kesen	and	Vaneb.”
“I	will.”


“Tell	me,	how	will	you	pursue	a	man	who	does	not	want	to	be	pursued?”
A	hard	grin	flashed	on	her	dark	features.	“You	ask	that	of	a	woman?”
“Oh,	Minala…”
She	reached	up	to	brush	his	cheek	with	one	hand.	“No	need	for	tears,
Keneb.”
“I	blame	my	sentimental	streak,”	he	said	with	a	weary	smile.	“But	know
this,	I	shall	remain	hopeful.	Now,	go	and	say	good-bye	to	your	sister	and	the
children.”


Chapter	Fourteen

The	Goddess	drew	breath,
and	all	was	still…
THE	APOCALYPSE
HERULAHN
“We	can’t	stay	here.”
Felisin’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	mage.	“Why	not?	That	storm	outside	will
kill	us.	There’s	no	sheltering	from	it—except	here,	where	there’s	water…food
—”
“Because	we’re	being	hunted,”	Kulp	snapped,	wrapping	his	arms	around
himself.
From	where	he	sat	against	a	wall,	Heboric	laughed.	He	raised	his	invisible
hands.	“Show	me	a	mortal	who	is	not	pursued,	and	I’ll	show	you	a	corpse.
Every	hunter	is	hunted,	every	mind	that	knows	itself	has	stalkers.	We	drive	and
are	driven.	The	unknown	pursues	the	ignorant,	the	truth	assails	every	scholar
wise	enough	to	know	his	own	ignorance,	for	that	is	the	meaning	of
unknowable	truths.”
Kulp	looked	up	from	where	he	sat	on	the	low	wall	encircling	the	fountain,
the	lids	of	his	eyes	heavy	as	he	studied	the	ex-priest.	“I	was	speaking	literally,”
he	said.	“There	are	living	shapeshifters	in	this	city—their	scent	rides	every
wind	and	it’s	getting	stronger.”
“Why	don’t	we	just	give	up?”	Felisin	said.
The	mage	sneered.
“I	am	not	being	flippant.	We’re	in	Raraku,	the	home	of	the	Whirlwind.
There	won’t	be	a	friendly	face	within	a	hundred	leagues	of	here,	not	that
there’s	a	chance	of	making	it	that	far	in	any	case.”
“And	the	faces	closer	at	hand	aren’t	even	human,”	Heboric	added.	“Every
mask	unveiled,	and	you	know,	the	presence	of	D’ivers	and	Soletaken	is	most
likely	not	at	the	Whirlwind’s	beckoning.	All	a	tragic	coincidence,	this	Year	of
Dryjhna	and	the	unholy	convergence—”


“You’re	a	fool	if	you	think	that,”	Kulp	said.	“The	timing	is	anything	but
accidental.	I’ve	a	hunch	that	someone	started	those	shapeshifters	on	that
convergence,	and	that	someone	acted	precisely	because	of	the	uprising.	Or	it
went	the	other	way	around—the	Whirlwind	goddess	guided	the	prophecy	to
ensure	that	the	Year	of	Dryjhna	was	now,	when	the	convergence	was	under
way,	in	the	interest	of	creating	chaos	within	the	warrens.”
“Interesting	notions,	Mage,”	Heboric	said,	slowly	nodding.	“Natural,	of
course,	coming	from	a	practitioner	of	Meanas,	where	deceit	breeds	like
runaway	weeds	and	inevitability	defines	the	rules	of	the	game…but	only	when
useful.”
Felisin	stayed	silent,	watching	the	two	men.	One	conversation,	here	on	the
surface,	yet	another	beneath.	The	priest	and	the	mage	are	playing	games,	the
entwining	of	suspicion	with	knowledge.	Heboric	sees	a	pattern,	his	plundering
of	ghostly	lives	gave	him	what	he	needed,	and	I	think	he’s	telling	Kulp	that	the
mage	himself	is	closer	to	that	pattern	than	he	might	imagine.	“Here,	wielder	of
Meanas,	take	my	invisible	hand…”
Felisin	decided	she	had	had	enough.	“What	do	you	know,	Heboric?”
The	blind	man	shrugged.
“Why	does	it	matter	to	you,	lass?”	Kulp	growled.	“You’re	suggesting
surrender:	let	the	shapeshifters	take	us—we’re	dead	anyway.”
“I	asked,	why	do	we	struggle	on?	Why	leave	here?	We	haven’t	got	a	chance
out	in	the	desert.”
“Stay,	then!”	Kulp	snapped,	rising.	“Hood	knows	you’ve	nothing	useful	to
offer.”
“I’ve	heard	all	it	takes	is	a	bite.”
He	went	still	and	slowly	turned	to	her.	“You	heard	wrong.	It’s	common
enough	ignorance,	I	suppose.	A	bite	can	poison	you,	a	cyclical	fever	of
madness,	but	you	do	not	become	a	shapeshifter.”
“Really,	then	how	are	they	created?”
“They	aren’t.	They’re	born.”
Heboric	clambered	to	his	feet.	“If	we’re	to	walk	through	this	dead	city,	let
us	do	so	now.	The	voices	have	stilled,	and	I	am	clear	of	mind.”
“What	difference	does	that	make?”	Felisin	demanded.
“I	can	guide	us	on	the	swiftest	route,	lass.	Else	we	wander	lost	until	the
ones	who	hunt	us	finally	arrive.”
	
They	drank	one	last	time	from	the	pool,	then	gathered	as	many	of	the	pale
fruits	as	they	could	carry.	Felisin	had	to	admit	to	herself	that	she	felt	healthier


—more	mended—than	she	had	in	a	long	time,	as	if	memories	no	longer	bled
and	she	was	left	with	naught	but	scars.	Yet	the	cast	of	her	mind	remained
fraught.	She	had	run	out	of	hope.
Heboric	led	them	swiftly	down	tortuous	streets	and	alleys,	through	houses
and	buildings,	and	everywhere	they	went,	they	trod	over	and	around	bodies,
human,	shapeshifter	and	T’lan	Imass,	ancient	scenes	of	fierce	battle.	Heboric’s
plundered	knowledge	was	lodged	in	Felisin’s	mind,	a	trembling	of	ancient
horror	that	made	every	new	scene	of	death	they	stumbled	upon	resonate	within
her.	She	felt	she	was	close	to	grasping	a	profound	truth,	around	which	orbited
all	human	endeavor	since	the	very	beginning	of	existence.	We	do	naught	but
scratch	the	world,	frail	and	fraught.	Every	vast	drama	of	civilizations,	of
peoples	with	their	certainties	and	gestures,	means	nothing,	affects	nothing.	Life
crawls	on,	ever	on.	She	wondered	if	the	gift	of	revelation—of	discovering	the
meaning	underlying	humanity—offered	nothing	more	than	a	devastating	sense
of	futility.	It’s	the	ignorant	who	find	a	cause	and	cling	to	it,	for	within	that	is
the	illusion	of	significance.	Faith,	a	king,	queen	or	Emperor,	or	vengeance…all
the	bastion	of	fools.
The	wind	moaned	at	their	backs,	raising	small	gusts	of	dust	at	their	feet,
rasping	like	tongues	against	their	skin.	It	carried	in	it	a	faint	scent	of	spice.
Felisin	judged	an	hour	had	passed	before	Heboric	paused.	They	stood
before	the	grand	entrance	to	a	temple	of	some	kind,	where	the	columns,	squat
and	broad,	had	been	carved	into	a	semblance	of	tree	trunks.	A	frieze	ran
beneath	the	cracked,	sagging	plinth,	each	panel	a	framed	image	which	Kulp’s
warren-cast	light	eerily	lit	from	beneath.
The	mage	was	staring	up	at	the	images.	Hood’s	breath!	he	mouthed.
The	ex-priest	was	smiling.
“It’s	a	Deck,”	Kulp	said.
Yet	another	pathetic	assertion	of	order.
“The	Elder	Deck,	aye,”	Heboric	nodded.	“Not	Houses	but	Holds.	Realms.
Can	you	discern	Death	and	Life?	And	Dark	and	Light?	Do	you	see	the	Hold	of
the	Beast?	Who	sits	upon	that	antlered	throne,	Kulp?”
“It’s	empty,	assuming	I’m	looking	at	the	one	you	mean—the	frame
displays	various	creatures.	The	throne	is	flanked	by	T’lan	Imass.”
“Aye,	that	is	the	one.	No	one	on	the	throne,	you	say?	Curious.”
“Why?”
“Because	every	echo	of	memory	tells	me	there	used	to	be.”
Kulp	grunted.	“Well,	it’s	not	been	defaced—you	can	see	the	back	of	the
throne,	and	it	looks	as	weathered	as	everywhere	else.”
“There	should	be	the	Unaligned—can	you	detect	those?”


“No.	Perhaps	around	the	sides	and	back?”
“Possibly.	Among	them	you’ll	find	Shapeshifter.”
“All	very	fascinating,”	Felisin	drawled.	“I	take	it	we’re	to	enter	this	place—
since	that’s	where	the	wind	is	going.”
Heboric	smiled.	“Aye.	The	far	end	shall	provide	our	exit.”
The	interior	of	the	temple	was	nothing	more	than	a	tunnel,	its	walls,	floor
and	ceiling	hidden	behind	packed	layers	of	sand.	The	wind	raised	its	voice	the
farther	in	they	went.	Forty	paces	later	they	could	discern	pale	ochre	light	ahead.
The	tunnel	narrowed,	the	howling	wind	making	it	difficult	to	resist	being
pushed	forward	headlong,	and	they	were	forced	to	duck	into	a	shambling
crouch	near	the	exit	point.
Heboric	held	back	just	before	the	threshold	to	let	Kulp	pass,	then	Felisin.
The	mage	was	the	first	to	step	outside;	Felisin	followed.
They	stood	on	a	ledge,	the	mouth	of	a	cave	high	on	a	cliff	face.	The	wind
tore	at	them	as	if	seeking	to	cast	them	out,	flinging	them	into	the	air—and	a
fatal	drop	to	jagged	rocks	two	hundred	or	more	arm-spans	below.	Felisin
moved	to	grip	one	crumbling	edge	of	the	cave	mouth.	The	vista	had	taken	her
breath	away,	weakened	her	knees.
The	Whirlwind	raged,	not	before	them	but	beneath	them,	filling	the	vast
basin	that	was	the	Holy	Desert.	A	fine	haze	of	suspended	dust	drifted	above	a
floor	of	seething	yellow	and	orange	clouds.	The	sun	was	an	edgeless	ball	of
red	fire	to	the	west,	deepening	its	hue	as	they	watched.
After	a	long	moment	Felisin	barked	a	laugh.	“All	we	need	now	is	wings.”
“I	become	useful	once	again,”	Heboric	said,	grinning	as	he	stepped	out	to
stand	beside	her.
Kulp’s	head	whipped	around.	“What	do	you	mean?”
“Tie	yourselves	to	my	back—both	of	you.	This	man’s	got	a	pair	of	hands
and	he	can	use	them,	and	for	once	my	blindness	will	prove	a	salvation.”
Kulp	peered	down	the	cliff	face.	“Climb	down	this?	It’s	rotten	rock,	old
man—”
“Not	the	handholds	I’ll	find,	Mage.	Besides,	what	choice	do	you	have?”
“Oh,	I	simply	can’t	wait,”	Felisin	said.
“All	right,	but	I’ll	have	my	warren	open,”	Kulp	said.	“We’ll	fall	just	as	far,
but	the	landing	will	be	softer—not	that	it’ll	make	much	difference,	I	suppose,
but	at	least	it	gives	us	a	chance.”
“You	have	no	faith!”	Heboric	shouted,	his	face	twisting	as	he	fought	back
peals	of	laughter.
“Thanks	for	that,”	Felisin	said.	How	far	do	we	have	to	be	pushed?	We’re	not
slipping	into	madness,	we’re	being	nudged,	tugged	and	pulled	into	it.


A	hot,	solid	pressure	closed	on	her	shoulder.	She	turned.	Heboric	had	laid
an	invisible	hand	on	her—she	could	see	nothing,	yet	the	thin	weave	of	her
shirt’s	fabric	was	compressed,	slowly	darkening	with	sweat.	She	could	feel	its
weight.	He	leaned	close.	“Raraku	reshapes	all	who	come	to	it.	This	is	one	truth
you	can	cling	to.	What	you	were	falls	away,	what	you	become	is	something
different.”	His	smile	broadened	at	her	snort	of	disdain.	“Raraku’s	gifts	are
harsh,	it’s	true,”	he	said	in	a	tone	of	sympathy.
Kulp	was	readying	harnesses.	“These	straps	are	rotting,”	he	said.
Heboric	swung	to	him.	“Then	you	must	hold	tight.”
“This	is	madness.”
Those	were	my	words.
“Would	you	rather	await	the	D’ivers	and	Soletaken?”
The	mage	scowled.
	
Heboric’s	body	felt	like	gnarled	tree	roots.	Felisin	clung	with	trembling
muscles,	not	trusting	the	straining	leather	straps.	Her	gaze	remained	fixed	on
the	ex-priest’s	wrists—the	unseen	hands	themselves	were	plunged	into	the	rock
face—while	below	she	heard	his	feet	scrambling	for	purchase	again	and	again.
The	old	man	was	carrying	the	weight	of	the	three	of	them	with	his	hands	and
arms	alone.
The	battered	cliff	was	bathed	in	the	setting	sun’s	red	glare.	As	if	we’re
descending	into	a	cauldron	of	fire,	into	some	demonic	realm.	And	this	is	a
oneway	trip—Raraku	will	claim	us,	devour	us.	The	sands	will	bury	every	dream
of	vengeance,	every	desire,	every	hope.	We	will	all	of	us	drown,	here	in	this
desert.
Wind	slapped	them	against	the	cliff	face,	then	yanked	them	outward	in	a
biting	swirl	of	airborne	sand.	They	had	entered	the	Whirlwind	once	again.
Kulp	shouted	something	lost	in	the	battering	roar.	Felisin	felt	herself	being
pulled	away,	raised	up	horizontal	by	the	frantic,	hungry	wind.	She	hooked	one
arm	around	Heboric’s	right	shoulder.
Her	muscles	began	shuddering	with	the	strain,	her	joints	burning	like
fanned	coals.	She	felt	the	harness	straps	around	her	tightening	as	they	slowly,
inevitably,	assumed	the	strain.	Hopeless.	The	gods	mock	us	at	every	turn.
Heboric	continued	the	climb	downward,	into	the	heart	of	the	maelstrom.
From	inches	away,	Felisin	watched	as	the	blowing	sand	began	abrading	the
skin	stretched	over	her	elbow	joint.	The	sensation	was	nothing	more	than	that
of	a	cat’s	tongue,	yet	the	skin	was	peeling	back,	vanishing.
Her	legs	and	body	rode	the	wind,	and	from	everywhere	she	felt	that


dreadful	rasp	of	the	storm’s	tongue.	I	will	be	nothing	but	bones	and	sinew	when
we	reach	bottom,	tottering	fleshless	with	a	rictus	grin.	Felisin	unveiled	in	all
her	glory…
Heboric	stepped	away	from	the	cliff	face.	The	three	of	them	fell	in	a	heap
onto	a	ragged	floor	of	rocks.	Felisin	screamed	as	the	stones	and	sand	pressed
hard	against	the	ravaged	skin	of	her	back.	She	found	herself	staring	back	up	the
cliff,	revealed	in	patches	where	the	gusting	sand	momentarily	thinned.	She
thought	she	saw	a	figure,	fifty	arm-spans	above	them,	then	it	was	swallowed
once	more	by	the	storm.
Kulp	tugged	at	the	straps	with	frantic	haste.	Felisin	rolled	clear,	pushing
herself	onto	her	hands	and	knees.	There’s	something…even	I	can	feel	it—
“On	your	feet,	lass!”	the	mage	shouted.	“Quickly!”
Whimpering,	Felisin	struggled	upright.	The	wind	slapped	her	back	down
in	a	lash	of	pain.	Warm	hands	closed	on	her,	lifted	her	up	into	the	crook	of
rope-muscled	arms.
“Life’s	like	that,”	Heboric	said.	“Hold	tight.”
They	were	running,	leaning	into	the	raging	wind.	She	squeezed	shut	her
eyes,	the	agony	of	her	flayed	skin	flashing	like	lightning	behind	her	eyelids.
Hood	take	this!	All	of	it!
They	stumbled	into	sudden	calm.	Kulp	hissed	his	surprise.
Felisin	opened	her	eyes	on	a	motionless	mist	of	dust,	describing	a	sphere
in	the	midst	of	the	Whirlwind.	A	large,	vague	shape	was	tottering	toward	them
through	the	haze.	The	air	was	redolent	with	citrus	perfume.	She	struggled	until
Heboric	set	her	down.
Four	pale	men	in	rags	were	carrying	a	palanquin	on	which	sat,	beneath	an
umbrella,	a	vast,	corpulent	figure	wearing	voluminous	silks	in	a	splash	of
discordant	colors.	Slitted	eyes	peered	out	from	sweat-beaded	folds	of	flesh.
The	man	raised	one	bloated	hand	and	the	bearers	halted.
“Perilous!”	he	squealed.	“Join	me,	strangers,	and	take	leave	of	yon	dangers
—a	desert	filled	with	beasts	of	most	unpleasant	disposition.	I	offer	humble
sanctuary	through	artful	sorcery	invested	into	this	chair	at	great	personal
expense.	Do	you	hunger?	Do	you	thirst?	Ahh,	but	look	at	the	wounds	upon	the
frail	lass!	I	possess	healing	unguents,	I	would	see	such	a	delectable	morsel	with
skin	smoothed	once	again	into	youthful	perfection.	Tell	me,	is	she	perchance	a
slave?	Might	I	make	an	offer?”
“I	am	not	a	slave,”	Felisin	said.	And	I	am	no	longer	for	sale.
“The	reek	of	lemon	is	making	my	blind	eyes	water,”	Heboric	whispered.	“I
sense	greed	but	no	ill	will…”
“Nor	I,”	Kulp	said	beside	them.	“Only…his	porters	are	undead,	not	to


mention	strangely…chewed.”
“I	see	you	hesitate	and	I	applaud	caution	at	all	times.	Aye,	my	servants	have
seen	better	days,	but	they	are	harmless,	I	assure	you.”
“How	is	it,”	Kulp	called	out,	“you	oppose	the	Whirlwind?”
“Not	oppose,	sir!	I	am	a	true	believer	and	most	humble.	The	goddess
grants	me	ease	of	passage,	for	which	I	make	constant	propitiation!	I	am	naught
but	a	merchant,	my	trade	is	select	merchandise—of	the	magical	kind,	that	is.	I
am	making	my	return	journey	to	Pan’potsun,	you	see,	after	a	lucrative	venture
to	Sha’ik’s	rebel	camp.”	The	man	smiled.	“Aye,	I	know	you	as	Malazans	and	no
doubt	enemies	of	the	great	cause.	But	cruel	retribution	finds	no	root	in	my	soil,
I	assure	you.	And	truth	to	tell,	I	would	enjoy	your	company,	for	these	dread
servants	are	obsessed	with	their	own	deaths	and	there	is	no	end	to	their
complaints.”
At	a	gesture,	the	four	bearers	set	the	sedan	chair	down.	Two	of	them
immediately	began	removing	camp	gear	from	the	storage	rack	behind	the	seat,
their	movements	careless	and	loose,	while	the	other	pair	set	to	levering	their
master	onto	his	feet.
“There	is	a	most	potent	salve,”	the	man	wheezed.	“In	yon	wooden	chest—
there!	The	one	called	Nub	carries	it.	Nub!	Set	that	down,	you	gnawed	grub!
Nub	the	grub,	hee!	Leave	off	fumbling	with	the	catch—such	nimble	escapades
will	melt	your	rotting	brain.	Aai!	You’ve	no	hands!”	The	man’s	eyes	had	found
Heboric,	as	if	for	the	first	time.	“A	crime,	to	have	done	such	a	thing!	Alas,
none	of	my	healing	unguents	could	manage	such	complex	regeneration.”
“Please,”	Heboric	said,	“do	not	feel	distressed	at	what	I	lack,	or	even	at
what	you	lack.	I’ve	need	for	nothing,	although	this	shelter	from	the	wind	is
most	welcome.”
“Yours	is	assuredly	a	tragic	tale	of	abandonment,	once-priest	of	Fener,	and
I	shall	not	pry.	And	you—”	the	man	swung	to	Kulp—“forgive	me,	the	warren
of	Meanas,	perchance?”
“You	do	more	than	sell	sorcerous	trinkets,”	Kulp	growled,	his	face
darkening.
“Long	proximity,	kind	sir,”	the	man	said,	bowing	his	head.	“Nothing	more,
I	assure	you.	I	have	devoted	my	life	to	magery,	yet	I	do	not	practice	it.	The
years	have	granted	me	a	certain…sensitivity,	that	is	all.	My	apologies	if	I	gave
offense.”	He	reached	out	and	cuffed	one	of	his	servants.	“You,	what	name	did	I
give	you?”
Felisin	stared	in	fascination	as	the	corpse’s	gnawed	lips	peeled	back	in	a
twisted	grin.	“Clam,	though	I	once	knew	myself	as	Iryn	Thalar—”
“Oh,	shut	up	with	what	you	once	knew!	You	are	Clam	now.”


“I	had	a	horrid	death—”
“Shut	up!”	his	master	shrieked,	his	face	suddenly	darkening.
The	undead	servant	fell	silent.
“Now,”	the	man	gasped,	“find	us	that	Falari	wine—let	us	celebrate	with	the
Empire’s	most	civil	gifts.”
The	servant	stumbled	off.	Its	nearest	companion’s	head	swiveled	to	follow
with	desiccated	eyes.	“Yours	was	not	as	horrid	as	mine—”
“The	Seven	Holies	preserve	us!”	the	merchant	hissed.	“I	beg	of	you,	Mage,
a	spell	of	silence	about	these	ill-chosen	animations!	I	shall	pay	in	jakata
imperials,	and	pay	well!”
“Beyond	my	abilities,”	Kulp	muttered.
Felisin’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	cadre	mage.	That	has	to	be	a	lie.
“Ah,	well,”	the	man	sighed.	“Gods	below,	I	have	not	yet	introduced	myself!
I	am	Nawahl	Ebur,	humble	merchant	of	the	Holy	City	Pan’potsun.	And	what
names	do	you	three	wish	to	be	known	by?”
Oddly	put.
“I’m	Kulp.”
“Heboric.”
Felisin	said	nothing.
“While	the	lass	is	shy,”	Nawahl	said,	his	lips	curving	into	an	indulgent
smile	as	he	looked	upon	her.
Kulp	crouched	down	at	the	wooden	chest,	released	the	catch	and	lifted	the
lid.
“The	white	clay	bowl	with	the	wax	seal,”	the	merchant	said.
The	wind	was	a	distant	moan,	the	ochre	dust	of	the	calm	slowly	settling
around	them.	Heboric,	still	gifted	with	an	awareness	that	dispensed	with	the
need	for	sight,	sat	down	on	a	weathered	boulder.	A	faint	frown	wrinkled	his
broad	forehead,	and	his	tattoos	were	dull	beneath	a	veil	of	dust.
Kulp	strode	to	Felisin,	the	bowl	in	one	hand.	“It’s	a	healing	salve,”	he
affirmed.	“And	potent	indeed.”
“Why	didn’t	the	wind	tear	your	skin,	Mage?	You’ve	not	got	Heboric’s
protection—”
“I	don’t	know,	lass.	I	had	my	warren	open—perhaps	that	was	enough.”
“Why	didn’t	you	extend	its	influence	over	me?”
He	glanced	away.	“I	thought	I	had,”	he	muttered.
The	salve	was	cool	and	seemed	to	absorb	the	pain.	Beneath	its	colorless
patina,	she	saw	her	skin	grow	anew.	Kulp	applied	it	where	she	could	not	reach,
and	half	a	bowl	later,	the	last	flare	of	agony	was	healed.	Suddenly	exhausted,
Felisin	sat	down	on	the	sand.


A	broken-stemmed	glass	of	wine	appeared	before	her	face.	Nawahl	smiled
down	on	her.	“This	shall	restore	you,	gentle	lass.	A	pliant	current	will	take	the
mind	past	suffering,	into	life’s	most	peaceful	stream.	Here,	drink,	my	dear.	I
care	for	your	well-being	most	deeply.”
She	accepted	the	glass.	“Why?”	she	demanded.	“Why	do	you	care	most
deeply?”
“A	man	of	my	wealth	can	offer	you	much,	child.	All	that	you	grant	of	your
free	will	is	my	reward.	And	know,	I	am	most	gentle.”
She	downed	a	mouthful	of	the	tart,	cool	wine.	“Are	you	now?”
His	nod	was	solemn,	his	eyes	glittering	between	the	folds	of	dimpled	flesh.
“This	I	promise.”
Hood	knows	I	could	do	worse.	Riches	and	comfort,	ease	and	indulgences.
Durhang	and	wine.	Pillows	to	lie	on…
“I	sense	wisdom	in	you,	my	dear,”	Nawahl	said,	“so	I	shall	not	press.	Let
you,	rather,	yourself	ascend	to	the	proper	course.”
Bedrolls	had	been	laid	out.	One	of	the	undead	servants	had	fanned	to	life	a
camp	stove,	the	remnants	of	one	sleeve	catching	light	and	smoldering	in	the
process,	a	detail	none	commented	on.
Darkness	swiftly	closed	in	around	them.	Nawahl	commanded	the	lighting
of	lanterns	and	their	positioning	on	poles	situated	in	a	circle	around	the	camp.
One	of	the	corpses	stood	beside	Felisin	and	refilled	her	glass	after	every
mouthful.	The	creature’s	flesh	looked	gnawed.	Gaping	bloodless	wounds	lined
his	pallid	arms.	All	his	teeth	had	fallen	out.
Felisin	glanced	up	at	him,	willing	herself	against	recoiling.	“And	how	did
you	die?”	she	asked	sardonically.
“Terribly.”
“But	how?”
“I	am	forbidden	to	say	more.	I	died	terribly,	a	death	to	match	one	of
Hood’s	own	nightmares.	It	was	long,	yet	swift,	an	eternity	that	passed	in	an
instant.	I	was	surprised,	yet	knowing.	Small	pain,	yet	great	pain,	the	flood	of
darkness,	yet	blinding—”
“All	right.	I	see	your	master ’s	point.”
“So	you	shall.”
“Go	easy	on	that,	lass,”	Kulp	said	from	near	the	camp	stove.	“Best	have
your	wits	about	you.”
“Why?	It’s	not	availed	me	yet,	has	it?”	In	defiance,	she	drained	the	glass
and	held	it	up	to	be	refilled.	Her	head	was	swimming,	her	limbs	seeming	to
float.	The	servant	splashed	wine	over	her	hand.
Nawahl	had	returned	to	his	wide,	padded	chair,	watching	the	three	of	them


with	a	contented	smile	on	his	lips.	“Mortal	company,	such	a	difference!”	he
wheezed.	“I	am	so	much	delighted,	I	need	only	bask	in	the	mundane.	Tell	me,
where	do	you	seek	to	go?	Whatever	launched	you	on	such	a	perilous	journey?
The	rebellion?	Is	it	truly	as	bloody	as	I	have	heard	rumored?	Such	injustice	is
ever	repaid	in	full,	alas.	This	lesson	is	lost,	I	am	afraid.”
“We’re	going	nowhere,”	Felisin	said.
“Might	I	convince	you	to	revise	your	chosen	destination,	then?”
“And	you	offer	protection?”	she	asked.	“How	reliable?	What	happens	if	we
run	into	bandits,	or	worse?”
“No	harm	shall	come	to	you,	my	dear.	A	man	who	deals	in	sorcery	has
many	resorts	in	defense	of	selves.	Not	once	in	all	my	travels	have	I	been	beset
by	nefarious	fools.	Accosted	on	occasion,	yes,	but	all	have	turned	away	when	I
gifted	them	wisdom.	My	dear,	you	are	positively	breathtaking—your	smooth,
sun-honeyed	skin	is	a	balm	to	my	eyes.”
“What	would	your	wife	say?”	Felisin	murmured.
“Alas,	I	am	a	widower.	My	dearest	passed	through	the	Hooded	One’s	Gates
almost	a	year	ago	to	this	day.	Hers	was	a	full,	happy	life,	I	am	pleased	to	say—
and	that	gives	me	great	comfort.	Ah,	would	that	her	spirit	could	arise	and	set
you	at	ease	with	reassurances,	my	dear.”
Tapu	skewers	sizzled	on	the	camp	stove.
“Mage,”	Nawahl	said,	“you	have	opened	your	warren.	Tell	me,	what	do
you	see?	Have	I	given	you	cause	for	mistrust?”
“No,	merchant,”	Kulp	said.	“And	I	see	nothing	untoward—yet	the	spells
surrounding	us	are	High	castings…I	am	impressed.”
“Only	the	best	in	protection	of	oneself,	of	course.”
The	ground	trembled	suddenly	and	something	huge	pushed	a	brown-furred
shoulder	into	the	sphere	opposite	Felisin.	The	beast’s	shoulder	was	almost
three	arm-lengths	high.	After	a	moment	the	creature	growled	and	withdrew.
“Beasts!	They	plague	this	desert!	But	fear	not,	none	shall	defeat	my	wards.
I	urge	calm.”
Calm,	I	am	very	calm.	We’re	finally	safe.	Nothing	can	reach	us—
Finger-long	claws	tore	a	swath	down	the	sphere’s	blurry	wall,	a	bellow	of
rage	ripping	forth	to	shiver	the	air.
Nawahl	surged	upright	with	surprising	speed.	“Back,	damned	one!	Away!
One	thing	at	a	time!”
She	blinked.	One	thing	at	a	time?
The	sphere	glowed	as	the	jagged	tears	closed.	The	apparition	beyond
bellowed	again,	this	time	in	what	was	clearly	frustration.	Claws	scored	another
path,	which	healed	even	as	it	appeared.	A	body	thundered	against	the	barrier,


withdrew,	then	tried	again.
“We	are	safe!”	Nawahl	cried,	his	face	dark	with	fury.	“It	shall	not	succeed,
no	matter	how	stubborn!	But	still,	how	shall	we	sleep	in	such	racket!”
Kulp	strode	up	to	the	merchant,	who	unaccountably	backed	away	a	step.
The	mage	then	turned	to	face	the	determined	intruder.	“That’s	a	Soletaken,”	he
said.	“Very	strong—”
From	where	Felisin	sat,	all	that	followed	appeared	in	a	seamless	flow,	with
something	close	to	grace.	As	soon	as	Kulp	swung	his	back	to	the	merchant,
Nawahl	seemed	to	blur	beneath	his	silks,	his	skin	deepening	into	glistening
black	fur.	Sharp	spice	overpowered	the	citrus	perfume	in	a	hot	gust.	Rats
poured	forth,	a	growing	flood.
Heboric	screamed	a	warning,	but	it	was	already	too	late.	The	rats	flowed
over	Kulp	and	swallowed	him	entirely	in	a	seething	cloak,	not	by	the	score	but
in	the	hundreds.
The	mage’s	shriek	was	a	dull	muffle.	A	moment	later	the	mound	of
creatures	seemed	to	buckle,	their	weight	crushing	Kulp	down.
The	four	bearers	stood	off	to	one	side,	watching.
Heboric	plunged	into	the	mass	of	rats,	his	ghost-hands	now	glowing
gauntlets	of	fire,	one	jade	green,	the	other	rust-red.	Rats	flinched	away.	Each
one	he	grasped	burned	into	black,	mangled	flesh	and	bone.	Yet	the	swarm
spread	outward,	more	and	more	of	the	silent	creatures,	clambering	over	one
another,	heaving	in	waves	over	the	ground.
They	dissipated	from	the	place	where	Kulp	had	lain.	Felisin	saw	the	flash
of	wet	bones,	a	ragged	raincape.	She	could	not	comprehend	its	significance.
The	Soletaken	beyond	the	wards	was	attacking	the	barrier	in	a	frenzy.	The
torn	wounds	were	slower	in	closing.	A	bear ’s	paw	and	forearm,	as	wide
around	as	Felisin’s	waist,	plunged	through	a	rent.
The	rats	rose	in	a	writhing	crest	to	sweep	down	on	Heboric.	Still
screaming,	the	ex-priest	staggered	back.
A	hand	clutched	Felisin’s	collar	from	behind	and	yanked	her	upright.
“Grab	him	and	run,	lass.”
Head	spinning,	she	twisted	around,	to	find	herself	staring	up	into	Baudin’s
weathered	face.	He	held	in	his	other	hand	four	of	the	lanterns.	“Get	moving,
damn	you!”	He	pushed	her	hard	toward	the	ex-priest,	who	was	still	stumbling
back,	the	tide	seething	in	pursuit.	Behind	Heboric,	two	tons	of	bear	was
pushing	through	the	barrier.
Baudin	leaped	past	Heboric,	smashing	one	of	the	lanterns	against	the
ground.	Lamp	oil	sprayed	in	gushing	streaks	of	flame.
A	furious	scream	erupted	from	the	rats.


The	four	servants	broke	into	hacking	laughter.
The	crest	crashed	over	Baudin,	but	they	could	not	drag	him	down	as	they
had	Kulp.	He	swung	the	lanterns,	shattering	them.	Fire	leaped	around	him.	A
moment	later	he	and	hundreds	of	rats	were	engulfed	in	flames.
Felisin	reached	Heboric.	The	old	man	was	sheathed	in	blood	from
countless	small	wounds.	His	sightless	eyes	seemed	focused	on	an	inner	horror
that	matched	the	scene	before	them.	Grasping	an	arm,	she	pulled	him	to	one
side.
The	merchant’s	voice	filled	her	mind.	Do	not	fear	for	yourself,	my	dear.
Wealth	and	peace,	every	indulgence	to	sate	your	desires,	and	I	am	gentle—to
those	I	choose,	oh	so	gentle…
She	hesitated.
Leave	to	me	this	hard-skinned	stranger	and	the	old	man,	then	I	shall	deal
with	Messremb,	that	foul,	most	rude	Soletaken	who	so	dislikes	me…
Yet	she	heard	pain	in	his	words,	an	edge	of	desperation.	The	Soletaken	was
sundering	the	barrier,	its	hungry	roar	deafening	in	its	reverberations.
Baudin	would	not	fall.	He	killed	rat	after	rat,	all	within	a	shroud	of	flame,
yet	they	surged	over	him	in	ever-growing	numbers,	the	sheer	mass	of	bodies
smothering	the	burning	oil.
Felisin	glanced	at	the	Soletaken,	gauging	its	awesome	power,	its	fearless
rage.	She	shook	her	head.	“No.	You’re	in	trouble,	D’ivers.”	She	took	hold	of
Heboric	once	again	and	dragged	him	to	the	dying	barrier.
My	dear!	Wait!	Oh,	you	stubborn	mortal,	why	won’t	you	die!
Felisin	could	not	help	but	grin.	That	won’t	work—I	should	know.
The	Whirlwind	had	begun	its	own	assault	against	the	sphere.	Windwhipped	sand	rasped	against	her	face.
“Wait!”	Heboric	gasped.	“Kulp—”
Cold	gripped	Felisin.	He’s	dead,	oh,	gods,	he’s	dead!	Devoured.	And	I
watched,	drunk	and	uncaring,	noticing	nothing—“one	thing	at	a	time.”	Kulp’s
dead.	She	bit	back	a	sob,	pushed	the	ex-priest	into,	then	through,	the	barrier,
even	as	it	finally	collapsed.	The	Soletaken’s	roar	of	triumph	announced	its
surging	charge	into	the	midst	of	the	rats.	Felisin	did	not	turn	to	watch	the
attack,	did	not	turn	to	discover	Baudin’s	fate.	Dragging	Heboric,	she	ran	into
the	dusk-darkened	storm.
	
They	did	not	get	far.	The	sandstorm’s	fury	battered	them,	pushed	them,	finally
drove	them	into	the	frail	shelter	offered	by	an	overhanging	spur	of	rock.	They
collapsed	at	its	base,	huddling	together,	awaiting	death.


The	alcohol	in	Felisin	pulled	her	down	into	sleep.	She	thought	to	resist	it,
then	surrendered,	telling	herself	that	the	horror	would	soon	find	them,	and	to
witness	her	own	death	offered	no	comfort.	I	should	tell	Heboric	the	true	worth
of	knowledge	now.	Yet	he	will	learn	that	himself.	Not	long.	Not	long	at	all…
She	awoke	to	silence,	but	no,	not	silence.	Someone	nearby	was	weeping.
Felisin	opened	her	eyes.	The	Whirlwind’s	storm	had	ceased.	The	sky	overhead
was	a	golden	shroud	of	suspended	dust.	It	was	so	thick	on	all	sides	that	she
could	see	no	more	than	half	a	dozen	paces.	Yet	the	air	was	still.	Gods,	the
D’ivers	is	back—but	no,	the	calm	was	everywhere.
Head	aching	and	mouth	painfully	dry,	she	sat	up.
Heboric	knelt	a	few	paces	away,	vague	behind	a	refulgent	haze.	Invisible
hands	were	pressed	against	his	face,	pulling	the	skin	into	bizarre	folds,	as	if	he
was	wearing	a	grotesque	mask.	His	whole	body	heaved	with	grief	and	he
rocked	back	and	forth	with	dull,	senseless	repetition.
Memory	flooded	Felisin.	Kulp.	She	felt	her	own	face	twisting.	“He	should
have	sensed	something,”	she	croaked.
Heboric’s	head	shot	up,	his	sightless	eyes	red	and	hooded	as	they	fixed	on
her.	“What?”
“The	mage,”	she	snapped,	wrapping	herself	in	a	frail	hug.	“The	bastard
was	a	D’ivers.	He	should	have	known!”
“Gods,	girl,	would	that	I	had	your	armor!”
And	should	I	bleed	within	it,	you	see	nothing,	old	man.	No	one	shall	see.	No
one	shall	know.
“If	I	had,”	Heboric	continued	after	a	moment,	“I	would	be	able	to	stay	at
your	side,	to	offer	what	protection	I	could—though	wondering	why	I	bothered,
granted.	Yet	I	would.”
“What	are	you	babbling	about?”
“I	am	fevered.	The	D’ivers	has	poisoned	me,	lass.	And	it	wars	with	the
other	strangers	in	my	soul—I	do	not	know	if	I	shall	survive	this,	Felisin.”
She	barely	heard	him.	Her	attention	had	been	pulled	away	by	a	scuffing
sound.	Someone	was	approaching,	haltingly,	a	stagger	and	a	scrape	of	pebbles.
Felisin	pushed	herself	to	her	feet	to	face	the	sound.
Heboric	fell	silent,	his	head	cocked.
The	figure	that	emerged	from	the	ochre	mist	sank	talons	into	her	sanity.
She	heard	a	whimper	from	her	own	throat.
Baudin	was	burned,	gnawed,	parts	completely	eaten	away.	He	had	been
charred	down	to	the	bone	in	places,	and	the	heat	had	swelled	the	gases	in	his
belly,	bloating	him	until	he	looked	with	child,	the	skin	and	flesh	cracked	open.
There	was	nothing	left	of	his	features	except	ragged	holes	where	his	eyes,	nose


and	mouth	should	have	been.	Yet	Felisin	knew	it	was	him.
He	staggered	another	step	closer,	then	slowly	sank	down	to	the	ground.
“What	is	it?”	Heboric	demanded	in	a	hiss.	“This	time	I	am	truly	blind—
who	has	come?”
“No	one,”	Felisin	said	after	a	long	moment.	She	walked	slowly	to	the	thing
that	had	once	been	Baudin.	She	sank	down	into	the	warm	sand,	reached	out	and
lifted	his	head,	cradled	it	on	her	thighs.
He	was	aware	of	her,	reaching	up	an	encrusted,	fused	hand	to	hover	a
moment	near	her	elbow	before	falling	back.	He	spoke,	each	word	like	rope	on
rock.	“I	thought…the	fire…immune.”
“You	were	wrong,”	she	whispered,	an	image	of	armor	within	her	suddenly
cracking,	fissures	spreading.	And	beneath	it,	behind	it,	something	was	building.
“My	vow.”
“Your	vow.”
“Your	sister…”
“Tavore.”
“She—”
“Don’t.	No,	Baudin.	Say	nothing	of	her.”
He	drew	a	ragged	breath.	“You…”
Felisin	waited,	hoping	the	life	would	flee	this	husk,	flee	it	now,	before—
“You…were…not	what	I	expected…”
Armor	can	hide	anything	until	the	moment	it	falls	away.	Even	a	child.
Especially	a	child.
	
There	was	nothing	to	distinguish	sky	from	earth.	Gold	stillness	had	embraced
the	world.	Stones	pattered	down	the	trail	as	Fiddler	pulled	himself	onto	the
crest,	the	clatter	appallingly	loud	to	his	ears.	She’s	drawn	breath.	And	waits.
He	wiped	sweaty	dust	from	his	brow.	Hood’s	breath,	this	bodes	ill.
Mappo	emerged	from	the	haze	ahead.	The	huge	Trell’s	exhaustion	made
his	walk	more	of	a	shamble	than	usual.	His	eyes	were	red-rimmed,	the	lines
that	bracketed	his	prominent	canines	were	deeply	etched	into	his	weathered
skin.	“The	trail	winds	ever	onward,”	he	said,	crouching	beside	the	sapper.	“I
believe	she’s	with	her	father	now—they	walk	together.	Fiddler…”	He	hesitated.
“Aye.	The	Whirlwind	goddess…”
“There	is…expectancy…in	the	air.”
Fiddler	grunted	at	the	understatement.
“Well,”	Mappo	sighed	after	a	moment,	“let	us	join	the	others.”
Icarium	had	found	a	flat	stretch	of	rock	surrounded	by	large	boulders.


Crokus	sat	with	his	back	against	stone,	watching	the	Jhag	laying	out	foodstuffs
in	the	center.	The	expression	the	young	Daru	swung	to	the	sapper	when	he
arrived	belonged	to	a	much	older	man.	“She’s	not	turning	back,”	Crokus	said.
Fiddler	said	nothing,	unslinging	his	crossbow	and	setting	it	down.
Icarium	cleared	his	throat.	“Come	and	eat,	lad,”	he	said.	“The	realms	are
overlapping,	and	all	is	possible…including	the	unexpected.	Distress	over	what
has	not	yet	happened	avails	you	nothing.	In	the	meantime,	the	body	demands
sustenance,	and	it	will	do	none	of	us	good	if	you’ve	no	reserves	of	energy
when	comes	the	time	to	act.”
“It’s	already	too	late,”	Crokus	muttered,	but	he	clambered	to	his	feet
nonetheless.
“There	is	too	much	mystery	in	this	path	to	be	certain	of	anything,”	Icarium
replied.	“Twice	we	have	traveled	warrens—their	aspects	I	cannot	say.	They	felt
ancient	and	fragmented,	woven	into	the	very	rock	of	Raraku.	At	one	point	I
smelled	the	sea…”
“As	did	I,”	Mappo	said,	shrugging	his	broad	shoulders.
“More	and	more,”	Crokus	said,	“her	journey	takes	a	tack	where	such
things	as	rebirth	become	more	probable.	I	am	right	in	that,	aren’t	I?”
“Perhaps,”	Icarium	conceded.	“Yet,	this	pensive	air	hints	at	uncertainty	as
well,	Crokus.	Be	mindful	of	that.”
“Apsalar	is	not	seeking	to	flee	us,”	Mappo	said.	“She	is	leading	us.	What
significance	should	we	place	in	that?	With	her	godly	gifts	she	could	easily
mask	her	trail—that	shadow-wrought	residue	that,	to	Icarium	and	to	myself,	is
as	plain	and	undisguised	as	an	Imperial	road.”
“There	might	be	something	else	besides,”	Fiddler	muttered.	Faces	swung
his	way.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,	let	it	out	slowly.	“The	lass	knows	our	intent,
Crokus—what	Kalam	and	I	had	planned	and	what	is	still—as	far	as	I	know—
being	followed.	She	could	well	have	taken	the	notion	that	by	assuming	the
guise	of	Sha’ik,	she	can…indirectly…support	our	efforts.	In	a	manner	wholly
her	own	rather	than	that	of	the	god	who	once	possessed	her.”
Mappo	smiled	wryly.	“There	is	much	you’ve	held	from	myself	and
Icarium,	soldier.”
“An	Imperial	matter,”	the	sapper	said,	not	meeting	the	Trell’s	eyes.
“Yet	one	that	sees	advantage	in	this	land’s	rebellion.”
“Only	in	the	short	run,	Mappo.”
“In	becoming	Sha’ik	reborn,	Apsalar	will	not	simply	be	engaging	in	a
change	of	costume,	Fiddler.	The	cause	of	the	goddess	will	take	hold	of
Apsalar ’s	mind,	her	soul.	Such	visions	and	visitations	will	change	her.”
“She	may	not	realize	that	particular	possibility,	I’m	afraid.”


“She’s	not	a	fool,”	Crokus	snapped.
“I’m	not	saying	she	is,”	Fiddler	replied.	“Like	it	or	not,	Apsalar	possesses
something	of	a	god’s	arrogance—I	was	witness	to	the	full	force	of	that	back	on
Genabackis,	and	I	can	see	that	its	stain	still	resides	within	her.	Consider	her
present	decision	to	leave	Iskaral’s	temple,	alone,	in	pursuit	of	her	father.”
“In	other	words,”	Mappo	said,	“you	think	she	might	believe	she	can
withstand	the	influence	of	the	goddess,	even	as	she	assumes	the	role	of
prophetess	and	warleader.”
Crokus	scowled.	“My	mind’s	tumbling	from	one	thing	to	the	next.	What	if
the	patron	god	of	assassins	has	reclaimed	her?	What	will	it	mean	if	the
rebellion	is	suddenly	led	by	Cotillion—and,	by	extension,	Ammanas?	The	dead
Emperor	returns	to	wreak	vengeance.”
There	was	silence.	Fiddler	had	been	gnawing	on	that	possibility	like	an
obsessed	hound	since	it	had	occurred	to	him	days	earlier.	The	notion	of	a
murdered	Emperor	turned	Ascendant	suddenly	reaching	out	from	the	shadows
to	reclaim	the	Imperial	throne	was	anything	but	a	pleasant	prospect.	It	was	one
thing	seeking	to	assassinate	Laseen—that	was,	in	the	end,	a	mortal	affair.	Gods
ruling	a	mortal	Empire,	on	the	other	hand,	would	draw	other	Ascendants,	and
in	such	a	contest	entire	civilizations	would	be	destroyed.
They	finished	their	meal	without	another	word	spoken.
The	dust	filling	the	air	refused	to	settle;	it	simply	hung	motionless,	hot	and
lifeless.	Icarium	repacked	the	supplies.	Fiddler	strode	over	to	Crokus.
“No	value	in	fretting,	lad.	She’s	found	her	father,	after	all	these	years—
there’s	something	to	be	said	for	that,	don’t	you	think?”
The	Daru’s	smile	was	wry.	“Oh,	I’ve	thought	on	that,	Fid.	And	yes,	I	am
happy	for	her,	yet	mistrustful.	What	should	have	been	a	wondrous	reunion	has
been	compromised.	By	Iskaral	Pust.	By	Shadow’s	manipulation.	It’s	soured
everything—”
“However	you	may	have	envisioned	it,	Crokus,	it	belongs	to	Apsalar.”
The	lad	was	silent	for	a	long	minute,	then	he	nodded.
Fiddler	retrieved	his	crossbow	and	slung	it	over	one	shoulder.	“At	the	very
least,	we’ve	had	a	respite	from	Sha’ik’s	soldiers	and	the	D’ivers	and
Soletaken.”
“Where	is	she	leading	us,	Fid?”
The	sapper	shrugged.	“I	suspect	we’ll	find	that	out	soon	enough.”
	
The	weathered	man	stood	on	the	hump	of	rock,	facing	Raraku.	The	shroud	of
silence	was	absolute;	he	could	hear	his	own	heart,	a	steady,	mindless	rhythm	in


his	chest.	It	had	begun	to	haunt	him.
Rocks	skittered	at	his	back,	and	a	moment	later	the	Toblakai	appeared,
dropping	a	brace	of	arm-long	lizards	onto	the	bleached	bedrock.	“Everything’s
come	out	for	a	look	around,”	the	giant	youth	rumbled.	“For	once,	a	meal	worth
eating.”
The	Toblakai	was	gaunt.	His	rages	of	impatience	were	gone,	and	Leoman
was	thankful	for	that,	though	he	well	knew	that	a	withering	of	strength	was	the
cause.	We	wait	until	Hood	comes	to	take	us,	the	huge	barbarian	had	whispered	a
few	days	back,	when	the	Whirlwind	had	burgeoned	in	renewed	frenzy.
Leoman	had	had	no	answer	to	that.	His	faith	was	in	tatters.	Sha’ik’s
wrapped	corpse	still	lay	between	the	wind-sculpted	stone	gateposts.	It	had
shrunk.	The	tent-cloth	shroud	had	frayed	in	the	ceaseless,	clawing	wind.	The
dry	knobs	of	her	joints	protruded	through	the	worn	weave.	Her	hair,	which	had
continued	to	grow	for	weeks,	had	been	pulled	free	and	whipped	endlessly	in
the	storm.
Yet	now	a	change	had	come.	The	Whirlwind	held	its	immortal	breath.	The
desert,	which	had	been	lifted	entire	from	its	bones	of	rock,	filling	the	air,
refused	to	settle.
The	Toblakai	saw	this	as	the	Whirlwind’s	death.	Sha’ik’s	murder	had
triggered	a	prolonged	tantrum,	a	defeated	goddess	rampaging	in	frustration
and	fury.	Even	as	the	rebellion	spread	its	bloody	cloak	over	Seven	Cities,	its
heart	was	dead.	The	armies	of	the	Apocalypse	were	the	still-twitching	limbs	on
a	corpse.
Leoman,	plagued	with	hunger-born	visions	and	fevers,	had	begun	a	slow
stumbling	toward	the	same	belief.
Yet…
“This	meal,”	the	Toblakai	said,	“will	give	us	the	strength	needed,	Leoman.”
For	leaving.	And	where	do	we	go?	To	the	oasis	in	the	center	of	Raraku,
where	a	dead	woman’s	army	still	waits?	Are	we	the	chosen	deliverers	of	the
news	of	tragic	failure?	Or	do	we	abandon	them?	Set	off	for	Pan’potsun,	then	on
to	Ehrlitan,	a	flight	into	anonymity?
The	warrior	turned.	His	gaze	traveled	over	the	ground	and	came	to	rest	on
the	Book	of	Dryjhna	where	it	waited,	unmarred	by	the	Whirlwind,	immune
even	to	the	dust	that	found	its	way	into	everything.	The	power	abides.
Unquenched.	When	I	look	upon	that	tome,	I	know	I	cannot	let	go…
“Blades	in	hand	and	unhanded	in	wisdom.	Young,	yet	old,	one	life	whole,
another	incomplete—she	shall	emerge	renewed…”	Did	still-hidden	truths
remain	within	those	words?	Had	his	imagination—his	willful	yearning—
betrayed	him?


The	Toblakai	squatted	before	the	dead	lizards,	flipped	the	first	one	onto	its
back	and	set	a	knifeblade	to	its	belly.	“I	would	go	west,”	he	said.	“Into	the	Jhag
Odhan…”
Leoman	glanced	over.	The	Jhag	Odhan,	there	to	come	face	to	face	with
other	giants.	The	Jhag	themselves.	The	Trell.	More	savages.	The	lad	will	feel
right	at	home	in	that	wasteland.	“This	is	not	over,”	the	warrior	said.
The	Toblakai	bared	his	teeth,	a	hand	plunging	through	the	slit	in	the
lizard’s	belly	to	re-emerge	with	slick	entrails.	“This	one’s	female.	It’s	said	the
roe	is	good	for	fevers,	isn’t	it?”
“I	am	not	fevered.”
The	giant	said	nothing,	but	Leoman	saw	a	new	set	to	his	shoulders.	The
Toblakai	had	made	a	decision.
“Take	what’s	left	of	your	kill,”	the	warrior	said.	“You’ll	need	it	more	than
I.”
“You	jest,	Leoman.	You	do	not	see	yourself	as	I	see	you.	You	are	skin	on
bones.	You	have	devoured	your	own	muscles.	I	see	the	skull	behind	the	face
when	I	look	at	you.”
“I	am	clear	of	mind	nonetheless.”
The	Toblakai	grunted.	“A	hale	man	would	not	say	so	with	such	certainty.	Is
that	not	the	secret	revelation	of	Raraku?	‘Madness	is	simply	a	state	of	mind.’”
“The	Sayings	of	the	Fool	are	aptly	named,”	Leoman	muttered,	his	voice
falling	away.	A	charge	was	filling	the	hot,	motionless	air.	The	warrior	felt	his
heartbeat	faster,	harder.
The	Toblakai	straightened,	his	huge	hands	smeared	with	blood.
The	two	men	slowly	turned	to	face	the	ancient	gate.	The	black	hair
emerging	from	the	bundled	corpse	stirred,	the	strands	gently	lifting.	The
suspended	dust	had	begun	to	swirl	beyond	the	pillars.	Sparks	winked	in	its
midst,	like	jewels	set	in	an	ochre	cloak.
“What?”	the	Toblakai	asked.
Leoman	glanced	over	at	the	Holy	Book.	Its	hide	cover	glistened	as	if	with
sweat.	The	warrior	took	a	step	toward	the	gate.
Something	was	emerging	from	the	dust	cloud.	Two	figures,	side	by	side,
their	arms	locked	around	one	another,	staggering,	heading	straight	toward	the
pillars—and	the	corpse	lying	between	the	bleached	gateposts.
“Blades	in	hand	and	unhanded	in	wisdom…”
One	was	an	old	man,	the	other	a	young	woman.	Heart	hammering	in	his
chest,	Leoman	let	his	gaze	fix	on	her.	So	alike.	Dark	threat	pours	from	her.
Pain,	and	from	pain,	rage.
There	was	a	thump	and	a	grate	of	stones	beside	the	warrior.	He	turned	to


see	the	Toblakai	on	his	knees,	head	bowed	before	the	approaching	apparitions.
Raising	her	head,	the	woman	found	first	Sha’ik’s	wrapped	corpse,	then
lifted	her	eyes	higher	to	fix	on	Leoman	and	the	kneeling	giant.	She	halted,
almost	standing	over	the	body,	her	long	black	hair	rising	as	if	with	a	static
charge.
Younger.	Yet	the	fire	within…it’s	the	same.	Ah,	my	faith…
Leoman	lowered	himself	to	one	knee.	“You	are	reborn,”	he	said.
The	woman’s	low	laugh	was	triumphant.	“So	I	am,”	she	said.
She	shifted	her	grip	on	the	old	man,	whose	head	hung	down,	his	clothes
nothing	but	rags.	“Help	me	with	him,”	she	commanded.	“But	beware	his
hands…”


Book	Four
Deadhouse	Gates


	

Coltaine	rattles	slow
across	the	burning	land.
The	wind	howls	through	the	bones
of	his	hate-ridden	command.
Coltaine	leads	a	chain	of	dogs
ever	snapping	at	his	hand.
Coltaine’s	fist	bleeds	the	journey	home
along	rivers	of	red-soaked	sand.
His	train	howls	through	his	bones
in	spiteful	reprimand.
Coltaine	leads	a	chain	of	dogs
ever	snapping	at	his	hands.
COLTAINE
A	MARCHING	SONG	OF	THE	BONEHUNTERS
	


Chapter	Fifteen

A	god	walking	mortal	earth	trails	blood.
SAYINGS	OF	THE	FOOL
T HENYS	BULE
“The	chain	of	dogs,”	the	sailor	growled,	his	voice	as	dark	and	heavy	as	the	air
of	the	hold.	“Now	there’s	a	curse	no	man	would	wish	upon	his	worst	enemy.
What,	thirty	thousand	starving	refugees?	Forty?	Sweatjowled	nobleborn
among	’em,	too,	bleating	this	and	that.	Coltaine’s	hourglass	is	about	run	out,
I’d	wager.”
Kalam	shrugged	in	the	gloom,	his	hands	still	running	along	the	damp	hull.
Name	a	ship	Ragstopper	and	worry	starts	before	you	weigh	anchor.	“He’s
survived	this	long,”	he	muttered.
The	sailor	paused	in	his	stacking	of	bales.	“Look	at	this,	will	ya?	Threefifths’	stowage	gone	before	e’en	the	food	and	water	comes	’board.	Korbolo
Dom’s	collected	Reloe	and	his	army—added	up	with	his	own	and	making
what?	Fifty	thousand	swords	in	all?	Sixty?	The	traitor	will	catch	hold	o’	that
chain	at	Vathar.	Then	with	the	tribes	massing	to	the	south,	aye,	Beru	fend,	that
Wickan	mongrel’s	all	but	done	for.”	The	man	grunted	as	he	heaved	another
canvas-wrapped	bale.	“Heavy	as	gold…and	that	ain’t	no	empty	rumor,	I’d	say.
That	blob	of	whale	grease	calling	himself	High	Fist	has	his	nose	up	in	the	wind
—look	here,	his	seal’s	on	everything.	The	rotten	worm’s	turning	tail	with	his
loot.	Why	else	is	the	Imperial	Treasurer	comin	’board,	hey?	And	twenty
marines	besides…”
“You	may	have	a	point,”	the	assassin	said,	distracted.	He’d	yet	to	find	a	dry
plank.
“You	the	caulker ’s	man,	then,	eh?	Got	a	woman	here	in	Aren?	Bet	you	wish
you	was	comin’	wi’us,	hey?	Mind	you,	we’ll	be	cramped	enough	what	with	the
Treasurer	and	two	perfumed	elects.”
“Perfumed	elects?”
“Aye,	saw	one	of	’em	come	’board	not	ten	minutes	ago.	Smooth	as	rat-spit,


that	one,	all	airs	and	dainty	but	no	amount	of	flower	juice	could	hide	the	spunk,
if	you	know	what	I	mean.”
Kalam	grinned	in	the	darkness.	Not	precisely,	you	old	swab,	but	I	can	guess.
“What	of	the	other	one?”	he	asked.
“I’d	hazard	the	same,	only	I	ain’t	seen	him	yet.	Came	’board	with	the
captain,	I	heard.	Seven	Cities	blood,	if	you	can	believe	that.	That	was	before	the
captain	sprung	us	from	the	harbor	hole—not	that	we	deserved	to	be	arrested	in
the	first	place—Hood’s	breath,	when	a	squad	of	soldiers	comes	on	ya
demanding	this	and	that,	it’s	only	natural	to	put	a	fist	in	their	mawks,	hey?	We
wasn’t	ten	paces	from	the	gangplank—so	much	for	shore	leave!”
“Your	last	port	of	call?”
“Falar.	Big	red-haired	women	all	gruff	and	muscle	just	like	I	like	’em.	Ah,
that	was	a	time!”
“Your	haul?”
“Weapons,	in	advance	of	Tavore’s	fleet.	Rode	the	waves	like	a	sow,	let	me
tell	you—like	we’re	gonna	do	this	one,	too,	all	the	way	to	Unta.	Bulge	the	belly
like	that	and	your	master ’s	got	wet	hands	and	feet,	hey?	Good	coin,	though,	I
wager.”
Kalam	straightened.	“There	won’t	be	time	for	a	full	refit,”	he	said.
“Never	is,	but	Beru	bless	you—do	what	you	can.”
The	assassin	cleared	his	throat.	“Sorry	to	say,	you’ve	got	me	as	the	wrong
man.	I’m	not	one	of	the	caulker ’s	men.”
The	sailor	paused	over	a	bale.	“Hey?”
Kalam	dried	his	hands	on	his	cloak.	“I’m	the	other	perfumed	elect.”
There	was	silence	from	the	other	side	of	the	hold,	then	a	soft	muttering,
followed	by,	“Beg	your	pardon,	sir.”
“No	need	for	that,”	the	assassin	said.	“What’s	the	likelihood	of	finding	one
of	the	captain’s	guest	down	here	pressing	the	planks?	I’m	a	cautious	man	and,
alas,	my	nerves	haven’t	been	eased.”
“She	ships,	to	be	true,”	the	sailor	said,	“but	captain’s	got	three	dedicated
hands	on	the	pumps,	workin’	through	every	flip	o’	the	glass,	sir.	And	she’ll
ride	any	blow	and	that	she	has,	more	than	once.	Captain’s	got	a	lucky	shirt,
y’see.”
“I’ve	seen	it,”	Kalam	said,	stepping	over	a	row	of	chests	each	bearing	the
High	Fist’s	seal.	He	made	his	way	to	the	hatch,	laid	a	hand	on	the	ladder	rail,
then	paused.	“What’s	the	rebel	activity	out	in	the	Sahul?”
“Gettin’	hotter,	sir.	Bless	them	Marines,	’cause	we	won’t	be	outrunnin’	a
scow	on	this	run.”
“No	escort?”


“Pormqual’s	commanded	Nok’s	fleet	to	hold	this	harbor.	We’ll	have	cover
crossing	Aren	Bay	out	to	the	edge	of	Dojal	Hading	Sea,	at	least.”
Kalam	grimaced	at	that,	but	said	nothing.	He	climbed	the	ladder	to	the	main
deck.
Ragstopper	wallowed	heavily	at	the	Imperial	berth.	Stevedores	and
crewmen	were	busy	with	their	tasks,	making	it	difficult	for	the	assassin	to	find
a	place	out	of	anyone’s	path.	He	finally	found	a	spot	on	the	sterncastle	near	the
wheel,	from	which	he	could	observe.	A	huge	Malazan	transport,	high	in	the
water,	sat	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	broad	stone	dock.	The	horses	it	had
brought	from	Quon	had	been	unloaded	an	hour	earlier,	with	only	a	dozen
dockhands	left	behind	with	the	task	of	removing	the	butchered	remains	of	the
animals	that	had	not	survived	the	lengthy	journey.	It	was	common	practice	to
salt	the	meat	from	such	losses,	provided	the	ship’s	cutter	pronounced	it	edible.
The	hides	found	innumerable	uses	on	board.	The	dockhands	were	left	with
heads	and	bones	and	no	shortage	of	eager	buyers	crowding	the	harbor	front	on
the	other	side	of	the	Imperial	barrier.
Kalam	had	not	seen	the	captain	since	the	morning	they	had	boarded,	two
days	past.	The	assassin	had	been	shown	to	the	small	stateroom	Salk	Elan	had
purchased	for	Kalam’s	passage,	then	promptly	left	to	his	own	devices	while	the
captain	went	off	to	manage	the	release	of	his	jailed	crew.
Salk	Elan…I	weary	of	waiting	to	make	your	acquaintance…
Voices	barked	from	the	gangplank	and	Kalam	glanced	over	to	see	the
captain	arrive	on	deck.	Accompanying	him	was	a	tall,	stooped	man	of	middle
years,	his	hatchet	face	painfully	thin,	his	gaunt	cheeks	powdered	light	blue	in
some	recent	court	fashion,	and	wearing	oversized	Napan	sea	gear.	This	man
was	flanked	by	a	pair	of	bodyguards,	both	huge,	their	red	faces	buried	in	black,
snarled	beards	and	rudely	plaited	mustaches.	They	wore	pot	helms	with	bridgeguards,	full	shirts	of	mail,	and	broad-bladed	tulwars	at	their	hips.	Kalam	was
unable	to	guess	at	their	cultural	origins.	Neither	the	bodyguards	nor	their
master	stood	comfortably	on	the	mildly	rocking	deck.
“Ah,”	said	a	soft	voice	behind	the	assassin,	“that	would	be	Pormqual’s
treasurer.”
Startled,	Kalam	turned	to	find	the	speaker	leaning	against	the	stern	rail.	A
knife’s	thrust	away.
The	man	smiled.	“You	were	well	described	indeed.”
The	assassin	studied	the	stranger.	He	was	lean,	young,	dressed	in	a	loose,
sickly	green	silk	shirt.	His	face	was	handsome	enough,	though	a	touch	too
sharp-featured	to	be	called	friendly.	Rings	glittered	on	his	long	fingers.	“By
whom?”	Kalam	snapped,	disconcerted	by	the	man’s	sudden	appearance.


“Our	mutual	friend	in	Ehrlitan.	I	am	Salk	Elan.”
“I	have	no	friends	in	Ehrlitan.”
“Poor	choice	of	word,	then.	One	who	was	indebted	to	you,	and	to	whom	I
was	in	turn	indebted,	with	the	result	that	I	was	tasked	with	arranging	your
departure	from	Aren,	which	I	have	now	done,	thus	freeing	me	of	further
obligations—which	has	proved	timely,	I	might	add.”
Kalam	could	see	no	obvious	weapons	on	the	man,	which	told	him	plenty.
He	sneered.	“Games.”
Salk	Elan	sighed.	“Mebra,	who	entrusted	you	with	the	Book,	which	was
duly	delivered	to	Sha’ik.	You	were	bound	for	Aren,	or	so	Mebra	concluded.	He
further	suspected	that,	with	your,	uh,	talents,	you	were	determined	to	take	the
Holy	Cause	into	the	heart	of	the	Empire.	Or	rather,	through	one	heart	in
particular.	Among	other	preparations,	I	arranged	for	a	tripwire	of	sorts	to	be
set	at	the	Imperial	Warren’s	gate,	which	when	activated	would	immediately
trigger	various	prearranged	events.”	The	man	swung	his	head,	scanning	the
sprawling	rooftops	of	the	city.	His	smile	broadened.	“Now,	as	it	turned	out,	my
activities	in	Aren	have	been	curtailed	somewhat	of	late,	making	such
arrangements	difficult	to	maintain.	Even	more	disconcerting,	a	bounty	has
been	placed	on	my	head—all	a	dreadful	misunderstanding,	I	assure	you,	yet
I’ve	little	faith	in	Imperial	justice,	especially	when	the	High	Fist’s	own	Guard
are	involved.	Hence,	I	booked	not	one	berth	but	two—the	cabin	opposite	yours,
in	fact.”
“The	captain	does	not	strike	me	as	a	man	with	cheap	loyalties,”	Kalam
said,	struggling	to	conceal	his	alarm—If	Mebra	worked	out	I	was	planning	to
kill	the	Empress,	who	else	might	have?	And	this	Salk	Elan,	whoever	he	is,
clearly	doesn’t	know	when	to	shut	up…unless,	of	course,	he’s	fishing	for	a
reaction.	Besides,	there’s	a	classic	tactic	that	might	be	at	work	here.	No	time	to
test	veracity	when	you’re	reeling…
The	treasurer ’s	high-pitched	voice	wheeled	up	from	the	main	deck	behind
him,	in	varied	complaints	flung	at	the	captain—who	if	he	made	reply	did	so
under	his	breath.
“No,	not	cheap,”	Salk	Elan	agreed.	“Nonexistent	would	be	more	accurate.”
Kalam	grunted,	both	disappointed	at	the	failed	feint	and	pleased	that	he’d
heard	confirmation	of	his	assessment	of	the	captain’s	character.	Hood’s	breath,
Imperial	charters	aren’t	worth	the	oilskin	they’re	written	on	these	days…
“Yet	another	source	of	consternation,”	Elan	continued,	“the	man’s	far
above	average	in	wits,	and	seems	to	find	his	only	intellectual	stimulus	in
gestures	of	subterfuge	and	obfuscation.	No	doubt	he	went	overboard—as	it
were—in	his	mysterious	meeting	with	you	at	the	inn.”


Kalam	grinned	in	spite	of	himself.	“No	wonder	I	took	an	instant	liking	to
him.”
Elan’s	laugh	was	soft,	yet	appreciative.	“And	it	should	be	no	surprise	that	I
so	look	forward	to	our	meals	at	his	table	each	night	of	this	pending	voyage.”
Kalam	held	his	smile	as	he	said,	“I’ll	not	make	the	mistake	of	leaving	my
back	open	to	you	again,	Salk	Elan.”
“You	were	distracted,	of	course,”	the	man	said,	unperturbed.	“I	do	not
expect	such	a	potential	opportunity	to	recur.”
“I’m	glad	we’re	understood,	because	your	explanation	thus	far	has	more
leaks	than	this	ship.”
“Glad?	Such	understatement,	Kalam	Mekhar!	I	am	delighted	we’re	so
clearly	understood!”
Kalam	stepped	to	one	side	and	glanced	back	down	at	the	main	deck.	The
treasurer	was	continuing	his	tirade	against	the	captain.	The	crew	was
motionless,	all	eyes	on	the	scene.
Salk	Elan	tsked.	“An	appalling	breach	of	etiquette,	wouldn’t	you	say?”
“Ship’s	command	is	the	captain’s,”	the	assassin	said.	“If	he’d	the	mind	to,
he’d	have	put	a	halt	to	things	by	now.	Looks	to	me	like	the	captain’s	letting	this
squall	run	out.”
“Nonetheless,	I	suggest	you	and	I	join	the	proceedings.”
Kalam	shook	his	head.	“Not	our	business	and	there’s	no	value	in	making	it
so.	Mind	you,	don’t	let	my	opinion	stop	you.”
“Ah,	but	it	is	our	business,	Kalam.	Would	you	have	all	the	passengers
tarred	by	the	crew?	Unless	you	enjoy	the	cook’s	spit	in	your	gruel,	that	is.”
The	bastard	has	a	point.
He	watched	Salk	Elan	step	casually	down	to	the	main	deck,	and,	after	a
moment,	followed	suit.
“Noble	sir!”	Elan	called	out.
The	treasurer	and	his	two	bodyguards	all	turned.
“I	trust	you	are	fully	appreciative	of	the	captain’s	patience,”	Elan
continued,	still	approaching.	“On	most	ships	you	and	your	effete	servants
would	be	over	the	side	by	now,	and	at	least	two	of	you	would	have	sunk	like
ballast	stones—a	most	pleasing	image.”
One	of	the	bodyguards	growled	and	edged	forward,	a	large,	hairy	hand
closing	on	the	grip	of	his	tulwar.
The	treasurer	was	strangely	pale	beneath	the	sealskin	hood,	his	face
showing	not	a	drop	of	sweat	despite	the	heat	and	the	heavy	swaths	of	the	Napan
raincloak	covering	his	thin	frame.	“You	insolent	excuse	for	a	crab’s	anus!”	he
squealed.	“Roll	back	into	your	hole,	blood-smeared	turd,	before	I	call	on	the


harbor	magistrate	to	throw	you	in	chains!”	The	man	raised	one	pallid,	longfingered	hand.	“Megara,	beat	this	man	senseless!”
The	bodyguard	with	his	hand	on	his	weapon	stepped	forward.
“Belay	that!”	the	captain	bellowed.	Half	a	dozen	sailors	closed	in,	moving
between	the	mustached	bodyguard	and	Salk	Elan.	Pins	and	knives	waved	about
menacingly.	The	bodyguard	hesitated,	then	backed	away.
The	captain	smiled,	anchoring	his	hands	on	his	hips.	“Now,”	he	said	in	a
quiet,	reasonable	tone,	“me	and	the	coin-stacker	will	resume	our	discussion	in
my	cabin.	In	the	meantime,	my	crew	will	help	these	two	servants	out	of	their
Hood-damned	chain	and	stow	it	somewhere	safe.	Said	servants	will	then	bathe
and	ship’s	cutter	will	examine	them	for	vermin—which	I	don’t	tolerate	’board
Ragstopper—and	when	the	delousing’s	done	they	can	help	load	the	last	of	their
master ’s	provisions,	minus	the	leadwood	bench	which	we’ll	donate	to	the
customs	officer	to	ease	our	departure.	Finally,	any	further	cursing	on	this	ship
—no	matter	how	inventive—comes	from	me	and	no	one	else.	That,	gentlemen,
will	be	all.”
If	the	treasurer	intended	a	challenge,	it	was	pre-empted	by	his	sudden
collapse	onto	the	deck.	The	two	bodyguards	spun	about	at	the	loud	thump,	then
stood	stock	still,	staring	down	at	their	unconscious	master.
After	a	moment,	the	captain	said,	“Well,	not	all,	it	seems.	Get	the	coinstacker	below	and	get	him	out	of	those	sealskins.	Ship’s	cutter	has	more	work
to	do,	and	we	ain’t	even	cast	off	yet.”	He	swung	to	Salk	Elan	and	Kalam.	“Now,
you	two	gentlemen	can	join	me	in	my	cabin.”
	
The	room	was	not	much	larger	than	the	assassin’s	own,	and	almost	empty	of
possessions.	It	was	a	few	minutes	before	the	captain	managed	to	find	three
tankards	into	which	he	poured	local	sour	ale	from	a	clay	jug.	Without	offering
a	toast,	the	man	drained	half	his	tankard’s	contents,	then	wiped	his	mouth	with
the	back	of	one	hand.	His	eyes	roved	restlessly,	not	once	settling	on	the	two
men	before	him.	“The	rules,”	he	said,	grimacing.	“Simple.	Stay	out	of	the
treasurer ’s	way.	The	situation	is…confused.	With	the	Admiral	under	arrest—”
Kalam	choked	on	the	ale,	then	managed	to	rasp,	“What?	By	whose
command?”
The	captain	was	frowning	down	at	Elan’s	shoes.	“That	would	be	the	High
Fist’s,	of	course.	No	other	means,	you	see,	of	keeping	the	fleet	in	the	bay.”
“The	Empress—”
“Probably	doesn’t	know.	There’s	been	no	Claw	in	the	city	for	months—noone	knows	why.”


“And	their	absence,”	Elan	said,	“gives	implicit	authority	to	Pormqual’s
decisions,	I	take	it.”
“More	or	less,”	the	captain	conceded,	his	eyes	now	fixed	on	a	crossbeam.
He	finished	his	ale,	poured	more.	“In	any	case,	the	High	Fist’s	personal
treasurer	has	arrived	with	a	writ	granting	him	commander	status	for	this
voyage,	meaning	he	has	the	privilege	of	overriding	me	if	he	so	chooses.	Now,
while	I	hold	an	Imperial	charter,	neither	me	nor	my	ship	and	crew	are	actually
in	the	Imperial	Navy,	which	leaves	things,	like	I	said	earlier,	confused.”
Kalam	set	his	tankard	down	on	the	room’s	lone	table.	“Right	opposite	us	is
an	Imperial	transport	ship,	getting	ready	to	leave	as	much	as	we	are.	Why	in
Hood’s	name	hasn’t	Pormqual	sent	his	treasurer	and	his	loot	there?	It’s	bigger
and	better	defended,	after	all—”
“So	it	is.	And	it	has	indeed	been	commandeered	by	the	High	Fist,	and	will
depart	for	Unta	shortly	after	we	do,	loaded	with	Pormqual’s	household	and	his
precious	breeding	stallions,	meaning	it	will	be	very	crowded,	and	rank	to
boot.”	He	shrugged	as	if	his	shoulders	had	been	tugged	upward	by	invisible
hands.	He	glanced	nervously	toward	the	door	before	returning	his	somewhat
desperate	gaze	to	the	cross-beam	overhead.	“Ragstopper’s	fast	when	she	has	to
be.	Now,	that’s	all.	Drink	up.	The	marines	will	board	any	moment	now,	and	I
mean	for	us	to	cast	off	within	the	hour.”
	
In	the	companionway	outside	the	captain’s	cabin,	Salk	Elan	shook	his	head	and
muttered,	“He	couldn’t	have	been	serious.”
The	assassin	eyed	the	man.	“What	do	you	mean?”
“The	ale	was	atrocious.	‘Drink	up’	indeed.”
Kalam	scowled.	“No	Claw	in	the	city—now	why	would	that	be?”
The	man’s	shrug	was	loose.	“Aren’s	not	its	old	self,	alas.	Filled	with
monks	and	priests	and	soldiers,	the	jails	crowded	with	innocents	while	Sha’ik’s
fanatics—only	the	most	cunning	left	alive,	of	course—spread	murder	and
mayhem.	It’s	also	said	the	warrens	aren’t	what	they	used	to	be,	either,	though	I
gather	you	know	more	about	that	than	I.”	Elan	smiled.
“Was	that	an	answer	to	my	question?”
“And	am	I	an	expert	on	the	activities	of	the	Claw?	Not	only	have	I	never
run	into	one	of	those	horrid	throat-slitters,	I	make	it	policy	that	my	curiosity
about	them	is	thoroughly	curtailed.”	He	brightened	suddenly.	“Perhaps	the
treasurer	will	not	survive	his	heat	prostration!	Now	there’s	a	pleasing
thought!”
Kalam	swung	about	and	made	his	way	to	his	cabin.	He	heard	Salk	Elan


sigh,	then	head	in	the	opposite	direction,	ascending	the	companionway	ladder
to	the	main	deck.
The	assassin	closed	the	door	behind	him	and	leaned	against	it.	Better	to
walk	into	a	trap	that	you	can	see	than	one	you	can’t.	Yet	the	thought	gave	him
scant	comfort.	He	wasn’t	even	sure	if	there	was	a	trap.	Mebra’s	web	was	vast—
Kalam	had	always	known	that,	and	had	himself	plucked	those	strands	more
than	once.	Nor,	it	seemed,	had	the	Ehrlitan	spy	betrayed	him	when	it	came	to
delivering	the	Book	of	Dryjhna—Kalam	had	placed	it	into	Sha’ik’s	hands,	after
all.
Salk	Elan	was	likely	a	mage,	and	he	also	had	the	look	of	a	man	capable	of
handling	himself	in	a	fight.	He	had	not	so	much	as	flinched	when	the
treasurer ’s	bodyguard	had	closed	on	him.
None	of	which	puts	me	at	ease.
The	assassin	sighed.	And	the	man	knows	bad	ale	when	he	tastes	it…
	
When	the	High	Fist’s	breeding	stallions	were	led	through	the	gate	into	the
Imperial	yard,	chaos	ensued.	Stamping,	nervous	horses	jostled	with	stablers,
dockhands,	soldiers	and	various	officials.	The	Master	of	the	Horse	shrieked
and	ran	about	in	an	effort	to	impose	some	order,	fomenting	even	more
confusion	in	the	seething	press.
The	woman	holding	the	reins	of	one	magnificent	stallion	was	notable	only
for	her	watchful	calm,	and	when	the	Master	finally	managed	to	arrange	the
loading,	she	was	among	the	first	to	lead	her	charge	up	the	broad	gangplank
onto	the	Imperial	transport.	And	though	the	Master	knew	every	one	of	his
workers	and	every	one	of	the	breeders	in	his	care,	his	attention	was	so	tugged
and	strained	in	multiple	directions	that	he	did	not	register	that	both	woman	and
horse	were	unknown	to	him.
Minala	had	watched	Ragstopper	cast	off	two	hours	earlier,	following	the
boarding	of	two	squads	of	marines	and	their	gear.	The	trader	was	towed	clear
of	the	inside	harbor	before	being	allowed	to	stretch	sails,	flanked	by	Imperial
galleys	that	would	provide	escort	crossing	Aren	Bay.	Four	similar	warships
awaited	the	Imperial	transport	a	quarter-league	out.
The	complement	of	Marines	aboard	the	Imperial	transport	was	substantial,
at	least	seven	squads.	Clearly,	the	Dojal	Hading	Sea	was	not	secure.
Kalam’s	stallion	tossed	his	head	as	he	stepped	down	onto	the	main	deck.
The	massive	hatch	that	led	down	into	the	hold	was	in	fact	an	elevator,	raised
and	lowered	by	winches.	The	first	four	horses	had	been	led	onto	the	platform.
An	old,	grizzled	stabler	standing	near	Minala	eyed	her	and	the	stallion.


“The	latest	in	the	High	Fist’s	purchases?”	he	asked.
She	nodded.
“Magnificent	animal,”	the	man	said.	“He’s	a	good	eye,	has	the	High	Fist.”
And	not	much	else	worth	mentioning.	The	bastard’s	making	a	show	of	his
imminent	flight,	and	when	he	finally	leaves,	he’ll	have	an	entire	fleet	of
warships	for	escort,	no	doubt.	Ah,	Keneb,	is	this	what	we’ve	delivered	you	to?
Get	out	of	Aren,	Kalam	had	said.	She’d	urged	the	same	to	Selv	before
saying	goodbye,	but	Keneb	was	among	the	army’s	ranks	now.	Attached	to
Blistig’s	City	Garrison.	They	were	going	nowhere.
Minala	suspected	she	would	never	see	any	of	them	again.
All	to	chase	a	man	I	don’t	understand.	A	man	I’m	not	even	sure	I	like.	Oh,
woman,	you’re	old	enough	to	know	better…
	
The	southern	horizon	ran	in	a	thin,	gray-green	vein	that	wavered	in	the	streams
of	heat	rising	from	the	road.	The	land	that	stretched	before	it	was	barren,
studded	with	stones	except	along	the	path	of	the	potsherd-strewn	trader	track
that	branched	out	from	the	Imperial	Road.
The	vanguard	sat	their	horses	at	the	crossroads.	To	the	east	and	southeast
lay	the	coast,	with	its	clustering	of	villages	and	towns	and	the	Holy	City	of
Ubaryd.	The	skyline	in	that	direction	was	bruised	with	smoke.
Slumped	in	his	saddle,	Duiker	listened	with	the	others	as	Captain	Sulmar
spoke.
“—and	the	consensus	on	this	is	absolute,	Fist.	We’ve	no	choice	but	to	hear
Nethpara	and	Pullyk	out.	It	is,	after	all,	the	refugees	who	will	suffer	the	most.”
Captain	Lull	grunted	his	contempt.
Sulmar ’s	face	paled	beneath	the	dust,	but	he	went	on,	“Their	rations	are	at
starvation	level	as	it	is—oh,	there’ll	be	water	at	Vathar,	but	what	of	the
wasteland	beyond?”
Bult	raked	fingers	through	his	beard.	“Our	warlocks	say	they	sense
nothing,	but	we	are	still	distant—a	forest	and	a	wide	river	between	us	and	the
drylands.	It	may	be	that	the	spirits	of	the	land	down	there	are	simply	buried
deep—Sormo	has	said	as	much.”
Duiker	glanced	at	the	warlock,	who	offered	nothing	and	who	sat	wrapped
in	an	Elder ’s	cloak	atop	his	horse,	his	face	hidden	beneath	the	hood’s	shadow.
The	historian	could	see	the	now	constant	tremble	in	Sormo’s	long-fingered
hands	where	they	rested	on	the	saddlehorn.	Nil	and	Nether	were	still
recovering	from	their	ordeal	at	Gelor	Ridge,	not	once	emerging	from	the
covered	wagon	that	carried	them,	and	Duiker	had	begun	to	wonder	whether


they	still	lived	at	all.	Our	last	three	mages,	and	two	of	them	are	either	dead	or
too	weak	to	walk,	while	the	third	has	aged	ten	years	for	every	week	of	this
Hood-cursed	journey.
“The	tactical	advantages	must	be	clear	to	you,	Fist,”	Sulmar	said	after	a
moment.	“No	matter	how	sundered	Ubaryd’s	walls	may	be,	they’ll	provide	a
better	defense	than	a	land	devoid	even	of	hills—”
“Captain!”	Bult	barked.
Sulmar	subsided,	lips	pressing	into	a	thin,	bloodless	line.
Duiker	shivered	in	response	to	a	chill	that	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	dying
day’s	slow	cooling.	Such	a	vast	concession,	Sulmar,	according	to	a	Wickan	war
chief	the	rules	of	courtesy	expected	from	one	of	lower	rank.	What	skin	is	this
that’s	wearing	so	thin	on	you,	Captain?	No	doubt	quickly	cast	off	when	you	sup
wine	with	Nethpara	and	Pullyk	Alar…
Coltaine	did	not	take	Sulmar	to	task.	He	never	did.	He	met	every	jibe	and
dig	of	nobleborn	presumption	and	arrogance	in	the	same	manner	that	he	dealt
with	everything	else:	cold	indifference.	It	may	well	have	worked	for	the
Wickan,	but	Duiker	could	see	how	bold	it	was	making	Sulmar	and	others	like
him.
And	the	captain	was	not	finished.	“This	is	not	just	a	military	concern,	Fist.
The	civil	element	of	the	situation—”
“Promote	me,	Commander	Bult,”	Lull	said,	“so	that	I	may	whip	this	dog
until	his	hide’s	just	a	memory.”	He	bared	his	teeth	at	his	fellow	captain.
“Otherwise,	a	word	with	you	somewhere	private,	Sulmar…”
The	man	replied	with	a	silent	sneer.
Coltaine	spoke.	“There	is	no	civil	element.	Ubaryd	will	prove	a	fatal	trap
should	we	retake	it.	Assailed	from	the	land	and	the	sea,	we	would	never	hold.
Explain	that	to	Nethpara,	Captain,	as	your	last	task.”
“My	last	task,	sir?”
The	Fist	said	nothing.
“Last,”	Bult	rumbled.	“Means	just	that.	You’ve	been	stripped	of	rank,
drummed	out.”
“Begging	the	Fist’s	pardon,	but	you	cannot	do	that.”
Coltaine’s	head	turned	and	Duiker	wondered	if	the	captain	had	finally	got
to	the	Fist.
Sulmar	shrugged.	“My	Imperial	commission	was	granted	by	a	High	Fist,
sir.	Based	on	that,	it	is	within	my	right	to	ask	for	adjudication.	Fist	Coltaine,	it
has	always	been	the	strength	of	the	Malazan	Army	that	a	tenet	of	our	discipline
insists	that	we	speak	our	mind.	Regardless	of	your	commands—which	I	will
obey	fully—I	have	the	right	to	have	my	position	duly	recorded,	as	stated.	If	you


wish,	I	can	recite	the	relevant	Articles	to	remind	you	of	these	rights,	sir.”
There	was	silence,	then	Bult	swung	in	his	saddle	to	Duiker.	“Historian,	did
you	understand	any	of	that?”
“As	well	as	you,	Uncle.”
“Will	his	position	be	duly	recorded?”
“Aye.”
“And	presumably	adjudication	requires	the	presence	of	advocates,	not	to
mention	a	High	Fist.”
Duiker	nodded.
“Where	is	the	nearest	High	Fist?”
“Aren.”
Bult	nodded	thoughtfully.	“Then,	to	resolve	this	matter	of	the	captain’s
commission,	we	must	make	all	haste	to	Aren.”	He	faced	Sulmar.	“Unless,	of
course,	the	views	of	the	Council	of	Nobles	are	to	take	precedence	over	the
issue	of	the	fate	of	your	career,	Captain.”
“Retaking	Ubaryd	will	allow	relief	from	Admiral	Nok’s	fleet,”	Sulmar
said.	“Through	this	avenue,	a	swift	and	safe	journey	to	Aren	can	be	effected.”
“Admiral	Nok’s	fleet	is	in	Aren,”	Bult	pointed	out.
“Yes,	sir.	However,	once	news	reaches	them	that	we	are	in	Ubaryd,	the
obvious	course	will	be	clear.”
“You	mean	they	will	hasten	to	relieve	us?”	Bult’s	frown	was	exaggerated.
“Now	I	am	confused,	Captain.	The	High	Fist	holds	his	army	in	Aren.	More,	he
holds	the	entire	Seven	Cities	fleet	as	well.	Neither	has	moved	in	months.	He	has
had	countless	opportunities	to	despatch	either	force	to	our	aid.	Tell	me,
Captain,	in	your	family’s	hunting	estates,	have	you	ever	seen	a	deer	caught	in
lantern	light?	How	it	stands,	frozen,	unable	to	do	anything.	The	High	Fist
Pormqual	is	that	deer.	Coltaine	could	deliver	this	train	to	a	place	three	miles	up
the	coast	from	Aren	and	Pormqual	would	not	set	forth	to	deliver	us.	Do	you
truly	believe	that	an	even	greater	plight,	such	as	you	envisage	for	us	in	Ubaryd,
will	shame	the	High	Fist	into	action?”
“I	was	speaking	more	of	Admiral	Nok—”
“Who	is	dead,	sick	or	in	a	dungeon,	Captain.	Else	he	would	have	sailed
long	ere	now.	One	man	rules	Aren,	and	one	man	alone.	Will	you	place	your
life	in	his	hands,	Captain?”
Sulmar ’s	expression	had	soured.	“It	seems	I	have	in	either	case,
Commander.”	He	drew	on	his	riding	gloves.	“And	it	also	seems	that	I	am	no
longer	permitted	to	venture	my	views—”
“You	are,”	Coltaine	said.	“But	you	are	also	a	soldier	of	the	Seventh.”
The	captain’s	head	bobbed.	“I	apologize,	Fist,	for	my	presumption.	These


are	strained	times	indeed.”
“I	wasn’t	aware	of	that,”	Bult	said,	grinning.
Sulmar	swung	to	Duiker	suddenly.	“Historian,	what	are	your	views	on	all
this?”
As	an	objective	observer…“My	views	on	what,	Captain?”
The	man’s	mouth	twitched	into	a	smile.	“Ubaryd,	or	the	River	Vathar	and
the	forest	and	wastes	southward?	As	a	civilian	who	knows	well	the	plight	of	the
refugees,	do	you	truly	believe	they	will	survive	such	a	fraught	journey?”
The	historian	said	nothing	for	a	long	minute,	then	he	cleared	his	throat	and
shrugged.	“As	ever,	the	greater	of	the	threats	has	been	the	renegade	army.	The
victory	at	Gelor	Ridge	has	purchased	for	us	time	to	lick	our	wounds—”
“Hardly,”	Sulmar	interjected.	“If	anything,	we	have	been	pushed	even
harder	since	then.”
“Aye,	we	have,	and	for	good	reason.	It	is	Korbolo	Dom	who	now	pursues
us.	The	man	was	a	Fist	in	his	own	right,	and	is	a	very	able	commander	and
tactician.	Kamist	Reloe	is	a	mage,	not	a	leader	of	soldiers—he	wasted	his
army,	thinking	to	rely	upon	numbers	and	numbers	alone.	Korbolo	will	not	be
so	foolish.	If	our	enemy	arrives	at	the	River	Vathar	before	we	do,	we	are
finished—”
“Precisely	why	we	should	surprise	him	and	recapture	Ubaryd	instead!”
“A	short-lived	triumph,”	Duiker	replied.	“We’d	be	left	with	two	days	at	the
most	to	prepare	the	city’s	defenses	before	Korbolo’s	arrival.	As	you	said,	I	am
a	civilian,	not	a	tactician.	Yet	even	I	can	see	that	retaking	Ubaryd	would	prove
suicidal,	Captain.”
Bult	shifted	in	his	saddle,	making	a	show	of	looking	around.	“Let	us	find	a
cattle-dog,	so	that	we	may	have	yet	another	opinion.	Sormo,	where’s	that	ugly
beast	that’s	adopted	you?	The	one	the	marines	call	Bent?”
The	warlock’s	head	lifted	slightly.	“Do	you	really	wish	to	know?”	His
voice	was	a	rasp.
Bult	frowned.	“Aye,	why	not?”
“Hiding	in	the	grass	seven	paces	from	you,	Commander.”
It	was	inevitable	that	everyone	began	looking,	including	Coltaine.	Finally,
Lull	pointed	and,	after	peering	for	a	moment	longer,	Duiker	could	make	out	a
tawny	body	amidst	the	high	prairie	spikegrass.	Hood’s	breath!
“I	am	afraid,”	Sormo	said,	“that	he	will	offer	little	in	the	way	of	opinion,
Uncle.	Where	you	lead,	Bent	follows.”
“A	true	soldier,	then,”	Bult	said,	nodding.
Duiker	guided	his	horse	around	on	the	crossroads,	then	looked	back	over
the	vast	column	stretching	its	length	northward.	The	Imperial	Road	was


designed	for	the	swift	travel	of	armies.	It	was	wide	and	level,	the	cobbles
displaying	geometric	precision.	It	could	manage	a	troop	of	fifteen
horsewarriors	riding	abreast.	Coltaine’s	Chain	of	Dogs	was	over	an	Imperial
league	long,	even	with	the	three	Wickan	clans	riding	the	grasslands	to	either
side	of	the	road.
“Discussion	is	ended,”	Coltaine	announced.
Bult	said,	“Report	to	your	companies,	captains.”	It	was	not	necessary	to
add,	We	march	for	the	River	Vathar.	The	command	meeting	had	revealed
positions,	in	particular	Sulmar ’s	conflicting	loyalties,	and	beyond	the	mundane
discussion	of	troop	placement,	supply	issues	and	so	on,	nothing	else	was	open
to	debate.
Duiker	felt	a	wave	of	pity	for	Sulmar,	realizing	the	level	of	pressure	the
man	must	be	under	from	Nethpara	and	Pullyk	Alar.	The	captain	was	nobleborn,
after	all,	and	the	threat	of	displeasure	visited	upon	his	kin	made	Sulmar ’s
position	untenable.
“The	Malazan	Army	shall	know	but	one	set	of	rules,”	Emperor	Kellanved
had	proclaimed,	during	the	first	“cleansing”	and	“restructuring”	of	the	military
early	in	his	reign.	“One	set	of	rules,	and	one	ruler…”	His	and	Dassem	Ultor ’s
imposition	of	merit	as	the	sole	means	of	advancement	had	triggered	a	struggle
for	control	within	the	hierarchies	of	the	Army	and	Navy	commands.	Blood	was
spilled	on	the	palace	steps,	and	Laseen’s	Claw	was	the	instrument	of	that
surgery.	She	should	have	learned	from	that	episode.	We	had	our	second	cull,	but
it	came	far	too	late.
Captain	Lull	interrupted	Duiker ’s	thoughts.	“Ride	back	with	me,	old	man.
There’s	something	you	should	see.”
“Now	what?”
Lull’s	grin	was	ghastly	in	his	raw,	ravaged	face.	“Patience,	please.”
“Ah,	well,	I’ve	acquired	that	with	plenty	to	spare,	Captain.”	Waiting	to	die,
and	such	a	long	wait	it’s	been.
Lull	clearly	understood	Duiker ’s	comment.	He	squinted	his	lone	eye	out
across	the	plain,	northwest,	to	where	Korbolo	Dom’s	army	was,	less	than	three
days	away	and	closing	fast.	“It’s	an	official	request,	Historian.”
“Very	well.	Ride	on,	then.”
Coltaine,	Bult	and	Sormo	had	ridden	down	to	the	trader	track.	Voices
shouted	from	the	Seventh’s	advance	elements	as	preparations	began	to	leave
the	Imperial	Road.	Duiker	saw	the	cattle-dog	Bent	loping	ahead	of	the	three
Wickans.	And	so	we	follow.	We	are	indeed	well	named.
“How	fares	the	corporal?”	Lull	asked	as	they	rode	down	the	corridor
toward	Lull’s	company.


Duiker	frowned.	List	had	taken	a	vicious	wound	at	Gelor	Ridge.	“Mending.
We	face	difficulties	with	the	healers—they’re	wearing	down,	Captain.”
“Aye.”
“They’ve	drawn	so	much	on	their	warrens	that	it’s	begun	to	damage	their
own	bodies—I	saw	one	healer ’s	arm	snap	like	a	twig	when	he	lifted	a	pot	from
a	hearth.	That	frightened	me	more	than	anything	else	I’ve	yet	to	witness,
Captain.”
The	man	tugged	at	the	patch	covering	his	ruined	eye.	“You’re	not	alone	in
that,	old	man.”
Duiker	fell	silent.	Lull	had	nearly	succumbed	to	a	septic	infection.	He	had
become	gaunt	beneath	his	armor,	and	the	scars	on	his	face	had	set	his	features
into	a	tortured	expression	that	made	strangers	flinch.	Hood’s	breath,	not	just
strangers.	If	the	Chain	of	Dogs	has	a	face,	it	is	Lull’s.
They	rode	between	columns	of	soldiers,	smiled	at	the	shouts	and	grim	jests
thrown	their	way,	though	for	Duiker	the	smile	was	strained.	It	was	well	that
spirits	were	high,	the	strange	melancholy	that	came	with	victory	drifting	away,
but	the	specter	of	what	lay	ahead	nevertheless	loomed	with	monstrous	certainty.
The	historian	had	felt	his	own	spirits	deepening	to	sorrow,	for	he’d	long	since
lost	the	ability	to	will	himself	into	blind	faith.
The	captain	spoke	again.	“This	forest	beyond	the	river,	what	do	you	know
of	it?”
“Cedar,”	Duiker	replied.	“Source	of	Ubaryd’s	fame	in	ship-building.	It
once	covered	both	sides	of	the	River	Vathar,	but	now	only	the	south	side
remains,	and	even	that	has	dwindled	close	to	the	bay.”
“The	fools	never	bothered	replanting?”
“A	few	efforts,	when	the	threat	was	finally	recognized,	but	herders	had
already	claimed	the	land.	Goats,	Captain.	Goats	can	turn	a	paradise	into	a	desert
in	no	time	at	all.	They	eat	shoots,	they	strip	bark	entirely	around	the	boles	of
trees,	killing	them	as	surely	as	a	wildfire.	However,	there’s	plenty	of	forest	left
upriver—we’ll	be	a	week	or	more	traveling	through	it.”
“So	I’d	heard.	Well,	I’ll	welcome	the	shade…”
A	week	or	more,	indeed.	More	like	eternity—how	does	Coltaine	defend	his
vast	winding	train	amidst	a	forest,	where	ambushes	will	come	from	every
direction,	where	troops	cannot	wheel	and	respond	with	anything	like	swiftness
and	order?	Sulmar’s	concerns	about	the	dry	lands	beyond	the	forest	are	moot,
as	far	as	I’m	concerned.	And	I	wonder	if	I’m	alone	in	thinking	that?
They	rode	between	wagons	loaded	with	wounded	soldiers.	The	air	was
foul	here	with	flesh	rotting	where	forced	healing	had	failed	to	stem	the
advance	of	infection.	Soldiers	in	fever	raved	and	rambled,	delirium	prying


open	the	doors	of	their	minds	to	countless	other	realms—from	this	nightmare
world	into	countless	others.	Only	Hood’s	gift	offers	surcease…
Off	to	their	left	on	the	flat	grassland,	the	train’s	dwindling	herds	of	cattle
and	goats	moved	amidst	turgid	clouds	of	dust.	Wickan	cattle-dogs	patrolled	the
edges,	accompanied	by	Weasel	Clan	riders.	The	entire	herd	would	be
slaughtered	at	the	River	Vathar,	for	the	lands	beyond	the	forest	would	not
sustain	them.	For	there	are	no	spirits	of	the	land	there.
The	historian	found	himself	musing	as	he	eyed	the	herd.	The	animals	had
matched	them	step	for	step	on	this	soul-destroying	journey.	Month	after	month
of	suffering.	That	is	one	curse	we	all	share—the	will	to	live.	Their	fates	had
been	decided,	though	thankfully	they	knew	nothing	of	that.	Yet	even	that	will
change	in	the	last	moments.	The	dumbest	of	beasts	seems	capable	of	sensing	its
own	impending	death.	Hood	grants	every	living	thing	awareness	at	the	very
end.	What	mercy	is	that?
“The	horse’s	blood	had	burned	black	in	its	veins,”	Lull	said	suddenly.
Duiker	nodded,	not	needing	to	ask	which	horse	the	captain	meant.	She
carried	them	all,	such	a	raging	claim	on	her	life	force,	it	seared	her	from
within.	Such	thoughts	took	him	past	words,	into	a	place	of	raw	pain.
“It’s	said,”	Lull	went	on,	“that	their	hands	are	stained	black	now.	They	are
marked	forever	more.”
As	am	I.	He	thought	of	Nil	and	Nether,	two	children	curled	fetally	beneath
the	hood	of	the	wagon,	there	in	the	midst	of	their	silent	kin.	The	Wickans	know
that	the	gift	of	power	is	never	free.	They	know	enough	not	to	envy	the	chosen
among	them,	for	power	is	never	a	game,	nor	a	glittering	standards	raised	to
glory	and	wealth.	They	disguise	nothing	in	trappings,	and	so	we	all	see	what
we’d	rather	not,	that	power	is	cruel,	hard	as	iron	and	bone,	and	it	thrives	on
destruction.
“I	am	falling	into	your	silences,	old	man,”	Lull	said	softly.
Duiker	could	only	nod	again.
“I	find	myself	impatient	for	Korbolo	Dom.	For	an	end	to	this.	I	can	no
longer	see	what	Coltaine	sees,	Historian.”
“Can	you	not?”	Duiker	asked,	meeting	the	man’s	eye.	“Are	you	certain	that
what	he	sees	is	different	from	what	you	see,	Lull?”
Dismay	slowly	settled	on	his	twisted	features.
“I	fear,”	Duiker	continued,	“that	the	Fist’s	silences	no	longer	speak	of
victory.”
“A	match	to	your	own	growing	silence,	then.”
The	historian	shrugged.	An	entire	continent	pursues	us.	We	should	not	have
lived	this	long.	And	I	can	take	my	thoughts	no	further	than	that,	and	am


diminished	by	that	truth.	All	those	histories	I’ve	read…each	an	intellectual
obsession	with	war,	the	endless	redrawing	of	maps.	Heroic	charges	and
crushing	defeats.	We	are	all	naught	but	twists	of	suffering	in	a	river	of	pain.
Hood’s	breath,	old	man,	your	words	weary	even	yourself—why	inflict	them	on
others?
“We	need	to	stop	thinking,”	Lull	said.	“We’re	well	past	that	point.	Now	we
simply	exist.	Look	at	those	beasts	over	there.	We’re	the	same,	you	and	I,	the
same	as	them.	Struggling	beneath	the	sun,	pushed	and	ever	pushed	to	our	place
of	slaughter.”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“It	is	our	curse	that	we	cannot	know	the	bliss	of
being	mindless,	Captain.	You’ll	find	no	salvation	where	you’re	looking,	I’m
afraid.”
“Not	interested	in	salvation,”	Lull	growled.	“Just	a	way	to	keep	going.”
They	approached	the	captain’s	company.	In	the	midst	of	the	Seventh’s
infantry	stood	a	knot	of	haphazardly	armed	and	armored	men	and	women,
perhaps	fifty	in	all.	Faces	were	turned	expectantly	toward	Lull	and	Duiker.
“Time	to	be	a	captain,”	Lull	muttered	under	his	breath,	his	tone	so
dispirited	that	it	stung	the	historian’s	heart.
A	waiting	sergeant	barked	out	a	command	to	stand	at	attention	and	the
motley	gathering	made	a	ragged	but	determined	effort	to	comply.	Lull	eyed
them	for	a	moment	longer,	then	dismounted	and	approached.
“Six	months	ago	you	knelt	before	purebloods,”	the	captain	addressed	them.
“You	shied	away	your	eyes	and	had	the	taste	of	dusty	floors	on	your	tongues.
You	exposed	your	backs	to	the	whips	and	your	world	was	high	walls	and	foul
hovels	where	you	slept,	where	you	loved,	and	gave	birth	to	children	who
would	face	no	better	future.	Six	months	ago	I	wouldn’t	have	wasted	a	tin	jakata
on	the	lot	of	you.”	He	paused,	nodding	to	his	sergeant.
Soldiers	of	the	Seventh	came	forward,	each	carrying	folded	uniforms.
Those	uniforms	were	faded,	stained	and	restitched	where	weapons	had	pierced
the	cloth.	Resting	atop	each	pressed	bundle	was	an	iron	sigil.	Duiker	leaned
forward	on	his	saddle	to	examine	one	more	closely.	The	medallion	was
perhaps	four	inches	in	diameter,	a	circlet	of	chain	affixed	to	a	replica	Wickan
dog-collar,	and	in	the	center	was	a	cattle-dog’s	head—not	snarling,	simply
staring	outward	with	hooded	eyes.
Something	twisted	inside	the	historian	so	that	he	barely	managed	to	contain
it.
“Last	night,”	Captain	Lull	said,	“a	representative	of	the	Council	of	Nobles
came	to	Coltaine.	They	were	burdened	with	a	chest	of	gold	and	silver	jakatas.	It
seems	the	nobles	have	grown	weary	of	cooking	their	own	food,	mending	their


own	clothes…wiping	their	own	asses—”
At	another	time	such	a	comment	would	have	triggered	dark	looks	and	low
grumbling—just	one	more	spit	in	the	face	to	join	a	lifetime	of	others.	Instead,
the	former	servants	laughed.	The	antics	of	when	they	were	children.	Children
no	more.
Lull	waited	for	the	laughter	to	fall	away.	“The	Fist	said	nothing.	The	Fist
turned	his	back	on	them.	The	Fist	knows	how	to	gauge	value…”	The	captain
paused,	a	slow	frown	descending	on	his	scarred	features.	“There	comes	a	time
when	a	life	can’t	be	bought	by	coin,	and	once	that	line’s	crossed,	there’s	no
going	back.	You	are	soldiers	now.	Soldiers	of	the	Seventh.	Each	of	you	will
join	regular	squads	in	my	infantry,	to	stand	alongside	your	fellow	soldiers—
and	not	one	of	them	gives	a	damn	what	you	were	before.”	He	swung	to	the
sergeant.	“Assign	these	soldiers,	Sergeant.”
Duiker	watched	the	ritual	in	silence,	each	issuing	of	uniform	as	a	man	or
woman’s	name	was	called	out,	the	squads	coming	forward	to	collect	their	new
member.	Nothing	was	overplayed,	nothing	was	forced.	The	perfunctory
professionalism	of	the	act	carried	its	own	weight,	and	a	deep	silence	enveloped
the	scene.	The	historian	saw	inductees	in	their	forties,	but	none	was	unfit.
Decades	of	hard	labor	and	the	culling	of	two	battles	had	ensured	a	collection	of
stubborn	survivors.
They	will	stand,	and	stand	well.
The	captain	appeared	at	his	side.	“As	servants,”	Lull	softly	tumbled,	“they
might	have	survived,	been	sold	on	to	other	noble	families.	Now,	with	swords	in
their	hands,	they	will	die.	Can	you	hear	this	silence,	Duiker?	Do	you	know	what
it	signifies?	I	imagine	you	do,	all	too	well.”
With	all	that	we	do,	Hood	smiles.
“Write	of	this,	old	man.”
Duiker	glanced	at	the	captain	and	saw	a	broken	man.
	
At	Gelor	Ridge,	Corporal	List	had	leaped	down	into	the	ditch	beside	the
earthen	ramp	to	avoid	a	swarm	of	arrows.	His	right	foot	had	landed	on	a
javelin	head	thrust	up	through	the	dirt.	The	iron	point	had	driven	through	the
sole	of	his	boot,	then	the	flesh	between	his	big	toe	and	the	next	one	along.
A	small	wound,	naught	but	mischance,	yet	punctures	were	the	most	feared
of	all	battle	wounds.	They	carried	a	fever	that	seized	joints,	including	those	of
the	jaw,	that	could	make	the	mouth	impossible	to	open,	closing	the	throat	to	all
sustenance	and	bringing	agonizing	death.
The	Wickan	horsewives	had	experience	of	treating	such	injuries,	yet	their


supply	of	powers	and	herbs	had	long	since	dwindled,	leaving	them	with	but
one	treatment—burning	the	wound,	and	the	burning	had	to	be	thorough.	The
hours	after	the	battle	of	Gelor	Ridge,	the	air	was	foul	with	the	stench	of	burned
hair	and	the	macabre,	sweetly	enticing	smell	of	cooked	meat.
Duiker	found	List	hobbling	in	a	circle	with	a	determined	expression	on	his
thin,	sweat-beaded	face.	The	corporal	glanced	up	as	the	historian	approached.
“I	can	ride	as	well,	sir,	though	for	only	an	hour	at	a	time.	The	foot	goes	numb
and	it’s	then	that	infection	could	return—or	so	I’m	told.”
Four	days	ago	the	historian	had	walked	alongside	the	travois	that	carried
List,	looking	down	on	a	young	man	that	he	was	certain	was	dying.	A	harried
Wickan	horsewife	had	quickly	checked	on	the	corporal	during	the	march.
Duiker	had	seen	a	grim	expression	settle	into	her	lined	features	as	she	probed
with	her	fingers	the	swollen	glands	beneath	List’s	sparsely	bearded	chin.	Then
she	had	glanced	up	at	the	historian.
Duiker	recognized	her	then,	and	she	him.	The	woman	who	once	offered	me
food.
“It’s	not	good,”	he’d	said.
She	hesitated,	then	reached	under	the	folds	of	her	hide	cloak	to	withdraw	a
knuckle-sized,	misshapen	object	that	looked	to	Duiker	like	nothing	more	than	a
knob	of	mouldy	bread.	“A	jest	of	the	spirits,	no	doubt,”	she	said	in	Malazan.
Then	she	bent	down,	grasped	List’s	injured	foot—which	had	been	left
unbandaged	and	open	to	the	hot,	dry	air—and	pressed	the	knob	against	the
puncture	wound,	binding	it	in	place	with	a	strip	of	hide.
A	jest	to	make	Hood	frown.
“You	should	be	ready	to	rejoin	the	ranks	soon,	then,”	Duiker	now	said.
List	nodded,	approached.	“I	must	tell	you	something,	sir,”	he	said	quietly.
“My	fever	showed	me	visions	of	what’s	ahead—”
“That	happens	sometimes.”
“A	god’s	hand	reached	out	from	the	darkness,	grasped	my	soul	and
dragged	it	forward,	through	days,	weeks.	Historian—”List	paused	to	wipe	the
sweat	from	his	brow—“the	land	south	of	Vathar…we’re	going	to	a	place	of
old	truths.”
Duiker ’s	gaze	narrowed.	“Old	truths?	What	does	that	mean,	List?”
“Something	terrible	happened	there,	sir.	Long	ago.	The	earth—it’s	lifeless
—”
That	is	something	only	Sormo	and	the	High	Command	know.	“This	god’s
hand,	Corporal,	did	you	see	it?”
“No,	but	I	felt	it.	The	fingers	were	long,	too	long,	with	more	joints	than
there	should	be.	Sometimes	that	grip	comes	back,	like	a	ghost’s,	and	I	start


shivering	in	its	icy	clutch.”
“Do	you	recall	that	ancient	slaughter	at	Sekala	Crossing?	Did	your	visions
echo	those,	Corporal?”
List	frowned,	then	shook	his	head.	“No,	what	lies	ahead	of	us	now	is	much
older,	Historian.”
Shouts	arose	as	the	train	readied	to	lurch	into	motion	again,	down	off	the
Imperial	Road	and	onto	the	trader	track.
Duiker	looked	out	over	the	studded	plain	to	the	south.	“I	will	walk
alongside	your	travois,	Corporal,”	he	said,	“while	you	describe	for	me	in
detail	these	visions	of	yours.”
“They	might	be	naught	but	fevered	delusions,	Historian—”
“But	you	don’t	believe	so…and	neither	do	I.”	His	eyes	remained	on	the
plain.	A	many-jointed	hand.	Not	a	god’s	hand,	Corporal,	though	one	of	such
power	that	you	might	well	have	thought	so.	You’ve	been	chosen,	lad,	for
whatever	reason,	to	witness	an	Elder	vision.	Out	from	the	darkness	comes	the
cold	hand	of	a	Jaghut.
	
Felisin	sat	on	a	block	of	masonry	that	had	fallen	from	the	ancient	gate,	her
arms	wrapped	around	herself,	her	eyes	on	the	ground	before	her,	steadily
rocking	in	a	slow	cadence.	The	motion	brought	peace	to	her	mind,	as	if	she
was	nothing	more	than	a	vessel	filled	with	water.
Heboric	and	the	giant	warrior	were	arguing.	About	her,	about	prophecies
and	ill	chance,	about	the	desperation	of	fanatics.	Mutual	contempt	swirled	and
bubbled	between	the	two	men,	seemingly	born	in	the	instant	they	met,	and
growing	darker	with	every	moment	that	passed.
The	other	warrior,	Leoman,	crouched	nearby,	matching	her	silence.	He	had
before	him	the	Holy	Book	of	Dryjhna,	guarding	the	tome	in	her	stead,	awaiting
what	he	seemed	to	see	as	her	inevitable	acceptance	that	she	was	indeed	Sha’ik
reborn.
Reborn.	Renewed.	Heart	of	the	Apocalypse.	Delivered	by	the	unhanded	in
the	suspended	breath	of	the	goddess.	Who	waits	still.	Waits	as	Leoman	waits.
Felisin,	hinge	of	the	world.
A	smile	cracked	her	features.
She	rocked	to	distant	cries,	the	ancient	echoes	of	sudden,	soul-jarring
deaths—they	seemed	so	far	away	now.	Kulp,	devoured	beneath	a	seething
mound	of	rats.	Gnawed	bones	and	a	shock	of	white	hair	streaked	red.	Baudin,
burned	in	a	fire	of	his	own	making—oh,	the	irony	of	that,	he	lived	by	his	own
rule	and	died	with	that	same	godless	claim.	Even	as	he	gave	up	his	life	for


someone	else.	Still,	he’d	say	he	made	his	vow	freely.
These	are	the	things	that	bring	stillness.
Deaths	that	had	already	withdrawn,	far	down	the	endless,	dusty	track;	too
distant	to	make	their	demands	heard	or	felt.	Grief	rapes	the	mind,	and	I	know
all	about	rape.	It’s	a	question	of	acquiescence.	So	I	shall	feel	nothing.	No	rape,
no	grief.
Stones	grated	beside	her.	Heboric.	She	knew	the	feeling	of	his	presence	and
had	no	need	to	look	up.	The	one-time	priest	of	Fener	was	muttering	under	his
breath.	Then	he	fell	silent,	as	if	steeling	himself	to	reach	into	her	silence.	Rape.
A	moment	later	he	spoke,	“They	want	to	get	moving,	lass.	They’re	both	far
gone.	The	oasis—Sha’ik’s	encampment—is	a	long	walk.	There’s	water	to	be
found	on	the	way,	but	little	in	the	way	of	food.	The	Toblakai	will	hunt,	but
game’s	gone	very	scarce—the	Soletaken	and	D’ivers,	I	gather.	In	any	case,
whether	you	open	the	Book	or	not,	we	have	to	move.”
She	said	nothing,	continued	rocking.
Heboric	cleared	his	throat.	“For	all	I	rage	against	their	mad,	fevered
notions,	and	counsel	most	strongly	against	your	accepting	them…we	need
these	two,	and	the	oasis.	They	know	Raraku—better	than	anyone	else.	If	we’re
to	have	any	chance	of	surviving…”
Surviving.
“I’ll	grant	you,”	Heboric	went	on	after	a	moment,	“I’ve	acquired…
senses…that	make	my	blindness	less	of	a	liability.	And	these	hands	of	mine,
reborn…Nonetheless,	Felisin,	I’m	not	enough	to	guard	you.	And	besides,	there
is	no	guarantee	that	these	two	will	let	us	walk	away	from	them,	if	you
understand	my	meaning.”
Surviving.
“Wake	up,	lass!	You’ve	got	some	decisions	to	make.”
“Sha’ik	drew	her	blade	against	the	Empire,”	she	said,	eyes	still	on	the	dusty
ground.
“A	foolish	gesture—”
“Sha’ik	would	face	the	Empress,	would	send	the	Imperial	armies	into	a
blood-filled	Abyss.”
“History	recounts	similar	rebellions,	lass,	and	the	tale	is	an	endless	echo.
Glorious	ideals	lend	a	vigor	of	health	to	Hood’s	bleached	grin,	but	it’s	naught
but	a	glamor,	and	righteousness—”
“Who	cares	about	what’s	righteous,	old	man?	The	Empress	must	needs
answer	Sha’ik’s	challenge.”
“Aye.”
“And	shall	despatch	an	army	from	Quon	Tali.”


“Likely	already	on	the	way.”
“And,”	Felisin	continued,	feeling	a	cold	breath	touch	her	flesh,	“who
commands	this	army?”
She	heard	him	draw	a	sharp	breath	of	his	own	and	felt	him	flinch	back.
“Lass—”
She	snapped	out	a	hand	as	if	batting	away	a	wasp,	and	rose	to	her	feet.	She
turned	to	find	Leoman	staring	at	her,	his	sun-scoured	face	striking	her
suddenly	as	Raraku’s	own.	Harder	than	Beneth’s,	without	any	of	the
affectations.	Sharper	than	Baudin,	oh,	there’s	wit	there,	in	those	cold,	dark	eyes.
“To	Sha’ik’s	encampment,”	she	said.
He	glanced	down	at	the	Book,	then	back	to	her.
Felisin	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Would	you	rather	walk	through	a	storm?	Let
the	goddess	wait	a	little	longer	before	renewing	her	fury,	Leoman.”
She	saw	him	reappraise	her,	a	glimmer	of	uncertainty	newly	arriving	in	his
eyes,	and	was	pleased.	After	a	moment,	he	bowed	his	head.
“Felisin,”	Heboric	hissed,	“have	you	any	idea—”
“Better	than	you,	old	man.	Now	keep	quiet.”
“Perhaps	we	should	part	ways	now—”
She	swung	to	him.	“No.	I	think	I	shall	have	need	for	you,	Heboric.”
He	gave	her	a	bitter	smile.	“As	your	conscience,	lass?	I’m	a	poor	choice.”
Yes,	you	are,	and	all	the	better	for	that.
	
The	ancient	path	showed	signs	of	having	once	been	a	road,	running	the	length
of	a	ridge	that	twisted	like	a	crooked	spine	toward	a	distant	mesa.	Cobbles
showed	like	bone	where	the	wind	had	scoured	away	the	sandy	soil.	The	path
was	littered	with	red-glazed	potsherds	that	crunched	underfoot.
The	Toblakai	scouted	five	hundred	paces	ahead,	unseen	in	the	ochre	haze,
while	Leoman	led	Felisin	and	Heboric	at	a	measured	pace,	rarely	speaking.
The	man	was	frighteningly	gaunt	and	moved	so	silently	over	the	ground	that
Felisin	had	begun	to	imagine	him	no	more	than	a	specter.	Nor	did	Heboric
stumble	in	his	blindness	as	he	walked	behind	her.
Glancing	back,	she	saw	him	smiling.	“Something	amusing	you?”
“This	road	is	crowded,	lass.”
“The	same	ghosts	as	in	the	buried	city?”
He	shook	his	head.	“Not	as	old.	These	are	memories	of	an	age	that
followed	the	First	Empire.”
Leoman	stopped	and	turned	at	that.
Heboric’s	broad	mouth	extended	into	a	grin.	“Oh	aye,	Raraku	is	showing


me	her	secrets.”
“Why?”
The	ex-priest	shrugged.
Felisin	eyed	the	desert	warrior.	“Does	that	make	you	nervous,	Leoman?”
Because	it	should.
He	glanced	at	her,	his	eyes	dark	and	appraising.	“What	is	this	man	to	you?”
I	don’t	know.	“My	companion.	My	historian.	Of	great	value	since	I	am	to
make	Raraku	my	home.”
“The	Holy	Desert’s	secrets	are	not	his	to	possess.	He	plunders	them	as
would	any	foreign	raider.	If	you	desire	Raraku’s	truths,	look	within	yourself.”
She	almost	gave	a	laugh	at	that,	but	knew	its	bitterness	would	frighten	even
her.
They	continued	on,	the	morning’s	heat	rising,	the	sky	turning	into	gold
fire.	The	ridge	narrowed,	revealing	the	ancient	road’s	foundation	stones,	ten	or
more	feet	down	on	either	side,	the	slope	beyond	falling	away	a	further	fifty	or
sixty	feet.	The	Toblakai	awaited	them	at	a	place	where	the	road	bed	had
collapsed	to	create	large,	dark	holes	in	the	ground.	From	one	of	them	issued
the	soft	trickle	of	water.
“An	aqueduct	beneath	the	road,”	Heboric	said.	“It	used	to	flow	in	a	torrent.”
Felisin	saw	the	Toblakai	scowl.
Leoman	gathered	the	waterskins	and	proceeded	to	crawl	down	into	the
hole.
Heboric	sat	down	to	rest.	After	a	moment,	he	cocked	his	head.	“Sorry	you
had	to	wait	for	us,	Toblakai-with-the-secret-name,	though	I	imagine	you’d
have	trouble	getting	your	head	through	that	cave	mouth	in	any	case.”
The	giant	savage	sneered,	revealing	filed	teeth.	“I	collect	tokens	of	the
people	I	kill.	Tied	here	on	my	belt.	One	day	I	will	have	yours.”
“He	means	your	ears,	Heboric,”	Felisin	said.
“Oh,	I	know,	lass,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“Tortured	spirits	writhe	in	this
bastard’s	shadow—every	man,	woman	and	child	that	he’s	killed.	Tell	me,
Toblakai,	did	those	children	beg	to	live?	Did	they	weep,	cry	out	for	their
mothers?”
“No	more	than	grown	men	did,”	the	giant	said,	yet	Felisin	saw	that	he	had
paled,	through	she	sensed	that	it	was	not	his	killing	of	children	that	bothered
him.	No,	there	was	something	else	in	what	Heboric	had	said.
Tortured	spirits.	He’s	haunted	by	the	ghosts	of	those	he’s	slain.	Forgive	me,
Toblakai,	if	I	spare	you	no	pity.
“This	land	is	not	home	to	Toblakai,”	Heboric	said.	“Has	the	Rebellion’s
lure	of	slaughter	called	you	here?	From	where	did	you	crawl,	bastard?”


“I	have	said	to	you	all	that	I	shall	say.	When	I	speak	to	you	next	it	will	be
when	I	kill	you.”
Leoman	emerged	from	the	hole,	cobwebs	snagged	in	his	bound	hair,	the
waterskins	bulging	at	his	back.	“You	will	kill	no	one	until	I	say	so,”	he	growled
to	the	Toblakai,	then	swung	a	glare	on	Heboric.	“And	I’ve	not	yet	said	so.”
There	was	something	in	the	giant’s	expression	that	spoke	of	immense
patience	coupled	with	unwavering	certainty.	He	rose	to	his	full	height,	accepted
a	waterskin	from	Leoman,	then	set	off	down	the	trail.
Heboric	stared	sightlessly	after	him.	“The	wood	of	that	weapon	is	soaked
in	pain.	I	cannot	imagine	he	sleeps	well	at	night.”
“He	barely	sleeps	at	all,”	Leoman	muttered.	“You	shall	cease	baiting	him.”
The	ex-priest	grimaced.	“You’ve	not	seen	the	ghosts	of	children	tied	to	his
heels,	Leoman.	But	I	shall	make	the	effort	to	keep	my	mouth	shut.”
“His	tribe	made	few	distinctions,”	Leoman	said.	“There	was	kin,	and	those
who	were	not	kin	were	the	enemy.	Now,	enough	talk.”
A	hundred	paces	on,	the	road	suddenly	widened,	opening	out	onto	the	flat
of	the	mesa.	To	either	side	ran	row	upon	row	of	oblong	humps	of	fired,
reddish	clay,	each	hump	seven	feet	long	and	three	wide.	Despite	the
foreshortened	horizons	created	by	the	suspended	dust,	Felisin	could	see	that	the
rows,	scores	deep,	encircled	the	entire	plateau—entirely	surrounding	the
ruined	city	that	lay	before	them.
The	cobbles	were	fully	exposed	now,	revealing	a	broad	causeway	that	ran
in	a	straight	line	toward	what	had	once	been	a	grand	gate,	worn	down	by
centuries	of	wind	to	knee-high	stumps	of	bleached	stone—as	was	the	entire	city
beyond.
“A	slow	death,”	Heboric	whispered.
The	Toblakai	was	already	striding	through	the	distant	gates.
“We	must	cross	through	to	the	other	side,	down	to	the	harbor,”	Leoman
said.	“Where	we	shall	find	a	hidden	camp.	And	a	cache…unless	it	has	been
pillaged.”
The	city’s	main	street	was	a	dusty	mosaic	of	shattered	pottery:	red-glazed
body	sherds,	gray,	black	and	brown	rims.	“I	will	think	of	this,”	Felisin	said,
“when	I	next	carelessly	break	a	pot.”
Heboric	grunted.	“I	know	of	scholars	who	claim	they	can	map	entire
extinct	cultures	through	the	study	of	such	detritus.”
“Now	there’s	a	lifetime	of	excitement,”	Felisin	drawled.
“Would	that	I	could	trade	places	with	one	of	them!”
“You	are	not	serious,	Heboric.”
“I	am	not?	Fener ’s	tusk,	lass,	I	am	not	the	adventurous	type—”


“Perhaps	not	at	first,	but	then	you	were	broken.	Shattered.	Like	these	pots
here.”
“I	appreciate	the	observation,	Felisin.”
“You	cannot	be	remade	unless	you	are	first	broken.”
“You	have	become	very	philosophic	in	your	advanced	years,	I	see.”
More	than	you	realize.	“Tell	me	you’ve	learned	no	truths,	Heboric.”
He	snorted.	“Aye,	I’ve	learned	one.	There	are	no	truths.	You’ll	understand
that	yourself,	years	from	now,	when	Hood’s	shadow	stretches	your	way.”
“There	are	truths,”	Leoman	said	ahead	of	them,	not	turning	as	he
continued.	“Raraku.	Dryjhna.	The	Whirlwind	and	the	Apocalypse.	The	weapon
in	the	hand,	the	flow	of	blood.”
“You’ve	not	made	our	journey,	Leoman,”	Heboric	growled.
“Your	journey	was	rebirth—as	she	has	said—and	so	there	was	pain.	Only
fools	would	expect	otherwise.”
The	old	man	made	no	reply	to	that.
They	walked	on	in	the	city’s	sepulchral	silence.	The	foundation	stones	and
the	low	ridges	of	inner	walls	mapped	the	floor	plans	of	the	buildings	to	either
side.	A	precise	geometric	plan	was	evident	in	the	layout	of	streets	and	alleys,	a
half-circle	of	concentric	rings,	with	the	flat	side	the	harbor	itself.	The	remains
of	a	large,	palatial	structure	were	visible	ahead;	the	massive	stones	at	the	center
had	been	more	successful	in	withstanding	the	centuries	of	erosion.
Felisin	glanced	back	at	Heboric.	“Still	plagued	by	ghosts?”
“Not	plagued,	lass.	There	was	no	great	unleashing	of	brutality	here.	Only
sadness,	and	even	that	was	naught	but	a	subcurrent.	Cities	die.	Cities	mimic	the
cycle	of	every	living	thing:	birth,	vigorous	youth,	maturity,	old	age,	then
finally…dust	and	potsherds.	In	the	last	century	of	this	place,	the	sea	was	already
receding,	even	as	a	new	influence	arrived,	something	foreign.	There	was	a
brief	renaissance—we’ll	see	evidence	of	that	ahead,	at	the	harbor—but	it	was
short-lived.”	He	was	silent	for	a	dozen	or	so	paces.	“You	know,	Felisin,	I	begin
to	understand	something	of	the	lives	of	the	Ascendants.	To	live	for	hundreds,
then	thousands	of	years.	To	witness	this	flowering	in	all	its	futile	glory,	ah,	is	it
any	wonder	that	their	hearts	grow	hard	and	cold?”
“This	journey	has	brought	you	closer	to	your	god,	Heboric.”
The	comment	stung	him	to	silence.
She	saw	what	Heboric	had	hinted	at	when	they	reached	the	city’s	harbor.
What	had	once	been	the	bay	had	silted	in,	yet	four	cyclopean	channels	had	been
constructed,	reaching	out	to	vanish	in	the	haze.	Each	was	as	wide	as	three	city
streets	and	almost	as	deep.
“The	last	ships	sailed	out	from	these	canals,”	Heboric	said	at	her	side.	“The


heaviest	transports	scraped	bottom	at	the	far	mouths,	and	could	only	make	way
with	the	tide	at	peak.	A	few	thousand	denizens	remained,	until	the	aqueducts
dried	up.	This	is	one	story	of	Raraku,	but	alas,	not	the	only	one,	and	the	others
were	far	more	violent,	far	more	bloody.	Yet	I	wonder,	which	was	the	more
tragic?”
“You	waste	your	thoughts	on	the	past—”	Leoman	began,	but	was
interrupted	by	a	shout	from	the	Toblakai.	The	giant	had	appeared	near	one	of
the	canal	heads.	Falling	silent,	the	desert	warrior	set	off	toward	his	companion.
As	Felisin	moved	to	follow,	Heboric	grasped	her	arm,	the	unseen	hand	a
cool,	tingling	contact.	He	waited	until	Leoman	was	beyond	earshot,	then	said,
“I	have	fears,	lass—”
“I’m	not	surprised,”	she	cut	in.	“That	Toblakai	means	to	kill	you.”
“Not	that	fool.	I	mean	Leoman.”
“He	was	Sha’ik’s	bodyguard.	If	I	am	to	become	her	I’ll	not	need	to	mistrust
his	loyalty,	Heboric.	My	only	concern	is	that	he	and	the	Toblakai	did	such	a
poor	job	of	protecting	Sha’ik	the	first	time	around.”
“Leoman	is	no	fanatic,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“Oh,	he	might	well	make
appropriate	noises	to	lead	you	to	believe	otherwise,	but	there	is	an	ambivalence
in	him.	I	don’t	for	a	moment	believe	he	thinks	you	are	truly	Sha’ik	reborn.	The
simple	fact	is	the	rebellion	needs	a	figurehead—a	young,	strong	one,	not	the
worn-down	old	woman	that	the	original	Sha’ik	must	have	been.	Hood’s	breath,
she	was	a	force	in	this	desert	twenty-five	years	ago.	You	might	want	to
consider	the	possibility	that	these	two	bodyguards	didn’t	break	a	sweat	in	their
efforts	to	defend	her.”
She	looked	at	him.	The	tattoos	made	an	almost	solid	whirling	pattern	on
his	weathered,	toadlike	face.	His	eyes	were	red	and	rimmed	in	dried	mucus	and
a	thin,	gray	patina	dulled	his	pupils.	“Then	I	can	also	assume	they	will	have
greater	cause	this	time	around.”
“Provided	you	play	their	game.	Leoman’s	game,	to	be	more	precise.	He
will	be	the	one	to	speak	for	you	to	the	army	at	the	encampment—if	he	has
cause	he	will	hint	at	doubts,	and	they	will	tear	you	apart—”
“I	have	no	fear	of	Leoman,”	Felisin	said.	“I	understand	men	like	him,
Heboric.”
His	lips	closed	to	a	thin	line.
She	drew	her	arm	away	from	that	unnatural	grip	and	began	walking.
“Beneth	was	less	than	a	child	to	this	Leoman,”	the	ex-priest	hissed	behind
her.	“He	was	a	thug,	a	bully,	a	tyrant	to	a	handful	of	the	downtrodden.	Any	man
can	preen	with	great	ambitions,	no	matter	how	pathetic	his	station,	Felisin.	You
are	doing	worse	than	clinging	to	the	memory	of	Beneth—you	are	clinging	to


the	airs	he	projected,	and	they	were	naught	but	delusions—”
She	whirled.	“You	know	nothing!”	she	hissed,	trembling	with	fury.	“You
think	I	fear	what	a	man	can	do?	Any	man?	You	think	you	know	me?	That	you
can	know	my	thoughts,	know	what	I	feel?	You	presumptuous	bastard,	Heboric
—”
His	laughter	struck	her	like	a	blow,	shocking	her	into	silence.	“Dear	lass,”
he	said.	“You	would	keep	me	at	your	side.	As	what?	An	ornament?	A	macabre
curiosity?	Would	you	burn	out	my	tongue	to	balance	my	blindness?	I	am	here
to	keep	you	amused,	then,	even	as	you	accuse	me	of	presumption.	Oh,	that	is
sweet	indeed—”
“Stop	talking,	Heboric,”	Felisin	said	quietly,	suddenly	weary.	“If	one	day
we	do	come	to	understand	each	other,	it	will	be	without	words.	Who	needs
swords	when	we	have	our	tongues,	you	and	I?	Let	us	sheathe	them	and	have
done	with	it.”
He	cocked	his	head.	“One	last	question,	then.	Why	would	you	have	me	stay,
Felisin?”
She	hesitated	before	answering	him,	wondering	at	how	he	would	take	this
particular	truth.	Well,	that	is	something.	Not	long	ago	I	would	not	have	cared.
“Because	it	means	survival,	Heboric.	I	offer…for	Baudin.”
Head	still	cocked,	the	ex-priest	slowly	wiped	one	forearm	across	his	dusty
brow.	“Perhaps,”	he	said,	“we’ll	yet	come	to	understand	each	other.”
	
The	canal	mouth	was	marked	by	a	broad	series	of	stone	steps,	over	a	hundred
in	all.	At	the	base,	on	what	had	once	been	the	seabed,	a	more	recent	stone	wall
had	been	constructed,	providing	attachment	points	for	a	canvas	shelter.	A	ring
of	stones	surrounded	an	ash-stained	firepit	nearby,	and	the	old	cobbles	that	had
once	covered	the	cache	were	now	tumbled	about,	a	gutted	cairn.
The	subject	of	the	Toblakai’s	outcry	were	the	seven	half-eaten	corpses
scattered	about	the	camp,	each	a	mass	of	flies.	The	blood	in	the	fine,	white	sand
was	only	a	few	hours	old,	still	gummy	to	the	touch.	The	stench	of	loosened
bowels	soured	the	hazy	air.
Leoman	crouched	by	the	stairs,	studying	the	bestial	prints	that	marked	a
bloodstained	ascent	back	up	into	the	city.	After	a	long	moment,	he	glanced	over
at	the	Toblakai.	“If	you	want	this	one,	you’ll	go	on	your	own,”	he	said.
The	giant	bared	his	teeth.	“I	will	have	no	one	else	crowding	me,”	he
replied,	unslinging	his	waterskin	and	bedroll	and	letting	them	drop	to	the
ground.	He	unsheathed	his	wooden	sword,	holding	it	as	if	it	was	no	more	than
a	twig.


Heboric	snorted	from	where	he	leaned	against	the	stone	wall.	“You	plan	to
hunt	down	this	Soletaken?	I	take	it	that	in	your	tribe	you	are	nearing	the	end	of
the	average	expected	lifespan,	assuming	your	kin	are	as	stupid	as	you.	Well,	I
for	one	will	not	grieve	your	death.”
The	Toblakai	maintained	his	vow,	refusing	to	address	Heboric,	though	his
grin	broadened.	He	swung	to	Leoman.	“I	am	Raraku’s	vengeance	against	such
intruders.”
“If	you	are,	then	avenge	my	kin,”	the	desert	warrior	replied.
The	Toblakai	set	off,	taking	the	steps	three	at	a	time	and	not	slowing	until
he	reached	the	top,	where	he	paused	to	study	tracks.	A	moment	later	he	slipped
beyond	their	line	of	sight.
“The	Soletaken	will	kill	him,”	Heboric	said.
Leoman	shrugged.	“Perhaps.	Sha’ik	saw	far	into	his	future,	however…”
“And	what	did	she	see?”	Felisin	asked.
“She	would	not	say.	Yet	it…appalled	her.”
“The	Seer	of	the	Apocalypse	was	appalled?”	Felisin	looked	at	Heboric.
The	ex-priest’s	expression	was	drawn	taut,	as	if	he’d	just	heard	confirmation	of
some	glimmer	of	the	future	he	had	himself	sensed.	“Tell	me,	Leoman,”	she
said,	“of	her	other	visions.”
The	man	had	begun	dragging	the	bodies	of	his	kin	to	one	side.	He	paused
at	her	question,	glanced	over.	“When	you	open	the	Holy	Book,	they	shall	be
visited	upon	you.	This	is	Dryjhna’s	gift…among	others.”
“You	expect	me	to	go	through	with	this	ritual	before	we	reach	the
encampment.”
“You	must.	The	ritual	is	the	proof	that	you	are	truly	Sha’ik	reborn.”
Heboric	grunted.	“And	what	does	that	mean,	precisely?”
“If	she	is	false,	the	ritual	shall	destroy	her.”
	
The	ancient	island	rose	in	a	flat-topped	hump	above	the	cracked	clay	plain.
Gray,	weathered	stumps	marked	mooring	poles	and	more	substantial	piers	just
beyond	what	had	once	been	the	shoreline,	along	with	remnants	of	the	usual
garbage	that	had	once	been	dumped	over	the	sides	of	ships.	Sinkholes	in	what
had	been	the	bay’s	muddy	bottom	glittered	with	compacted	layers	of	glittering
fish-scale.
Crouching	beside	Fiddler,	Mappo	watched	as	Icarium	made	his	way	up	the
crumbled	remains	of	a	sea	wall.	Crokus	stood	just	behind	the	Trell,	near	the
hobbled	horses.	The	lad	had	fallen	strangely	silent	since	their	last	meal	stop,	a
certain	economy	coming	to	his	movements,	as	if	he	had	chained	himself	to	his


own	vow	of	patience.	And	seemingly	unconsciously,	the	Daru	had	begun	to
emulate	Icarium	in	his	speech	and	mannerisms.	Mappo	was	neither	amused	nor
displeased	when	he	noticed.	The	Jhag	had	always	been	an	overwhelming
presence,	all	the	more	so	because	he	made	no	affectation	or	pretense.
Still,	better	for	Crokus	had	he	looked	to	Fiddler.	This	soldier’s	a	wonder	in
his	own	right.
“Icarium	climbs	like	he	knows	where	he’s	going,”	the	sapper	observed.
Mappo	winced.	“I	had	come	to	the	same	observation,”	he	ruefully	admitted.
“Have	you	two	been	here	before?”
“I	have	not,	Fiddler.	But	Icarium…well,	he’s	wandered	this	land	before.”
“But	in	returning	to	a	place	he’d	been	to	before,	how	would	he	know?”
The	Trell	shook	his	head.	He	shouldn’t.	He	never	has	before.	Are	those
blessed	barriers	breaking	down?	Queen	of	Dreams,	return	Icarium	to	the	bliss
of	not	knowing.	I	beg	you…
“Let	us	join	him,”	Fiddler	said,	slowly	straightening.
“I’d	rather—”
“As	you	wish,”	the	soldier	replied,	setting	off	after	the	Jhag,	who	had
vanished	into	the	thorn-choked	city	ruins	beyond	the	sea	wall.	After	a	moment,
Crokus	strode	past	Mappo	as	well.
The	Trell	grimaced.	I	must	be	getting	old,	to	let	being	distraught	cow	me
so.	He	sighed,	rising	from	his	crouch	and	lumbering	after	the	others.
The	slope	of	detritus	at	the	base	of	the	sea	wall	was	a	treacherous	scree	of
splintered	wood,	slabs	of	plaster,	brick	and	potsherds.	Halfway	up,	Fiddler
grunted	and	paused,	reaching	down	to	pull	free	a	shaft	of	gray	wood.	“I’ve
some	rethinking	to	do,”	he	said,	glancing	back	down.	“All	this	wood’s	turned
to	stone.”
“Petrified,”	Crokus	said.	“My	uncle	described	the	process	to	me	once.	The
wood	soaks	up	minerals.	But	that’s	supposed	to	take	tens	of	thousands	of
years.”
“Well,	a	High	Mage	of	the	D’riss	Warren	could	manage	the	same	in	the
blink	of	an	eye,	lad.”
Mappo	pulled	free	a	fragment	of	pottery.	Not	much	thicker	than	an
eggshell,	the	shard	was	sky	blue	in	color	and	very	hard.	It	revealed	the	torso	of
a	figure	painted	on	the	surface,	black	with	a	green	outline.	The	image	was	stiff,
stylized,	but	without	doubt	human.	He	let	the	sherd	drop.
“This	city	was	dead	long	before	the	sea	dried	up,”	Fiddler	said,	resuming
his	climb.
Crokus	called	up	after	him,	“How	do	you	know?”
“Because	everything’s	water-worn,	lad.	Waves	crumbled	this	sea	wall.


Century	after	century	of	waves.	I	grew	up	in	a	port	city,	remember.	I’ve	seen
what	water	can	do.	The	Emperor	had	Malaz	Bay	dredged	before	the	Imperial
piers	were	built—revealed	old	sea	walls	and	the	like.”	Reaching	the	top,	he
paused	to	catch	his	breath.	“Showed	everyone	that	Malaz	City’s	older	than
anybody’d	realized.”
“And	that	the	sea	levels	have	risen	since,”	Mappo	observed.
“Aye.”
At	the	top	of	the	sea	wall	the	city	stretched	out	before	them.	While	the
remains	were	weathered,	it	was	clear	that	the	city	had	been	deliberately
destroyed.	Every	building	had	been	reduced	to	rubble,	revealing	a	cataclysmic
use	of	force	and	fury.	Scrub	brush	filled	every	open	space	that	remained	and
low,	gnarled	trees	clung	to	foundation	stones	and	surmounted	the	mounds	of
wreckage.
Statuary	had	been	a	primary	feature	of	the	architecture,	lining	the	broad
colonnades	and	set	in	niches	on	every	building	wall.	Marble	body	parts	lay
everywhere,	each	displaying	the	rigid	style	that	Mappo	had	seen	on	the
potsherd.	The	Trell	began	to	sense	a	familiarity	with	the	assortment	of	human
figures	portrayed.
A	legend,	told	on	the	Jhag	Odhan…a	tale	told	by	the	elders	in	my	tribe…
Icarium	was	nowhere	to	be	seen.
“Now	where?”	Fiddler	asked.
A	frail	keening	rising	in	his	head,	bringing	sweat	to	his	dark	skin,	Mappo
stepped	forward.
“Caught	a	scent	of	something,	have	you?”
He	barely	heard	the	sapper ’s	question.
The	city’s	pattern	was	hard	to	distinguish	from	what	remained,	yet	Mappo
followed	his	own	mental	map,	born	of	his	memory	of	the	legend,	its	cadence,
its	precise	metering	when	recounted	in	the	harsh,	clashing	dialect	of	archaic
Trell.	People	who	possessed	no	written	language	carried	the	use	of	speech	to
astonishing	extremes.	Words	were	numbers	were	codes	were	formulae.	Words
held	secret	maps,	the	measuring	of	paces,	the	patterns	of	mortal	minds,	of
histories,	of	cities,	of	continents	and	warrens.
The	tribe	Mappo	had	adopted	all	those	centuries	ago	had	chosen	to	return
to	the	old	ways,	rejecting	the	changes	that	were	afflicting	the	Trell.	The	elders
had	shown	Mappo	and	the	others	all	that	was	in	danger	of	being	lost,	the	power
that	resided	in	the	telling	of	tales,	the	ritual	unscrolling	of	memory.
Mappo	knew	where	Icarium	had	gone.	He	knew	what	the	Jhag	would	find.
His	heart	thundering	savagely	in	his	chest,	his	pace	increased	as	he	scrambled
over	the	rubble,	pushing	through	thickets	of	thorn	which	lacerated	even	his


tough	hide.
Seven	main	avenues	within	each	city	of	the	First	Empire.	The	Sky	Spirits
look	down	upon	the	holy	number,	seven	scorpion	tails,	seven	stings	facing	the
circle	of	sand.	To	all	who	would	make	offerings	to	the	Seven	Holies,	look	to	the
circle	of	sand.
Fiddler	called	out	somewhere	behind	him,	but	the	Trell	did	not	respond.
He’d	found	one	of	the	curving	avenues	and	was	making	for	the	center.
The	seven	scorpion-sting	thrones	had	once	towered	over	the	enclosure,
each	seventy-seven	arm-spans	high.	Each	had	been	shattered…by	sword	blows,
by	an	unbreakable	weapon	in	hands	powered	by	a	rage	almost	impossible	to
comprehend.
Little	remained	of	the	offerings	and	tributes	that	had	once	crowded	the
circle	of	sand,	with	one	exception,	before	which	Icarium	now	stood.	The	Jhag
was	motionless,	his	head	tilted	upward	to	take	in	the	immense	construction	that
rose	before	him.
Its	iron	gears	showed	no	rust,	no	corrosion,	and	would	still	be	moving	in	a
measure	that	could	not	be	seen	by	mortal	eyes.	The	enormous	disc	that
dominated	the	structure	stood	at	an	angle,	its	marble	face	smothered	with
etched	symbols.	It	faced	the	sun,	though	that	fiery	orb	was	barely	visible
through	the	sky’s	golden	haze.
Mappo	slowly	walked	toward	Icarium	and	stopped	two	paces	behind	him.
His	presence	was	sensed,	for	Icarium	spoke.	“How	can	this	be,	friend?”
It	was	the	voice	of	a	lost	child,	and	it	twisted	like	a	barbed	shaft	in	the
Trell’s	heart.
“This	is	mine,	you	see,”	the	Jhag	continued.	“My…gift.	Or	so	I	can	read,	in
this	ancient	Omtose	script.	More,	I	have	marked—with	knowing—its	season,
its	year	of	construction.	And	see	how	the	disc	has	turned,	so	that	I	may	see	the
Omtose	correspondence	for	this	year…allowing	me	to	calculate…”
His	voice	fell	away.
Mappo	hugged	himself,	unable	to	speak,	unable	even	to	think.	Anguish	and
fear	filled	him	until	he	too	felt	like	a	child,	come	face	to	face	with	a	nightmare.
“Tell	me,	Mappo,”	Icarium	continued	after	a	long	moment,	“why	did	the
destroyers	of	this	city	not	destroy	this	as	well?	True,	sorcery	invested	it,	made
it	immune	to	time’s	own	ravages…but	so	too	were	these	seven	thrones…so	too
were	many	other	gifts	in	this	circle.	All	things	made	can	be	broken,	after	all.
Why,	Mappo?”
The	Trell	prayed	his	friend	would	not	turn	around,	would	not	reveal	his
face,	his	eyes.	The	child’s	worst	fears,	the	nightmare’s	face—a	mother,	a	father,
all	love	stripped	away,	replaced	by	cold	intent,	or	blind	disregard,	the	simple


lack	of	caring…and	so	the	child	wakens	shrieking…
Do	not	turn,	Icarium,	I	cannot	bear	to	see	your	face.
“Perhaps	I	made	an	error,”	Icarium	said,	still	in	that	quiet,	innocent	tone.
Mappo	heard	Fiddler	and	Crokus	arrive	on	the	sand	behind	him.	Something	in
the	air	held	them	to	silence,	stalled	their	approach.	“A	mistake	in	the
measurement,	a	slip	of	the	script.	It’s	an	old	language,	Omtose,	faint	in	my
memory—perhaps	as	faint	back	then,	when	I	first	built	this.	The	knowledge	I
seem	to	retain	feels…precise,	yet	I	am	not	perfect,	am	I?	My	certainty	could	be
a	self-delusion.”
No,	Icarium,	you	are	not	perfect.
“I	calculate	that	ninety-four	thousand	years	have	passed	since	I	last	stood
here,	Mappo.	Ninety-four	thousand.	There	must	be	some	error	in	that.	No	city
ruin	could	survive	that	long,	could	it?”
Mappo	found	himself	shrugging.	How	could	we	know	one	way	or	the
other?
“The	investiture	of	sorcery,	perhaps…”
Perhaps.
“Who	destroyed	this	city,	I	wonder?”
You	did,	Icarium,	yet	even	in	your	rage	a	part	of	you	recognized	what	you
yourself	had	built,	and	left	it	intact.
“They	had	great	power,	whoever	they	were,”	the	Jhag	continued.	“T’lan
Imass	arrived	here,	sought	to	drive	the	enemy	back—an	old	alliance	between
the	denizens	of	this	city	and	the	Silent	Host.	Their	shattered	bones	lie	buried	in
the	sand	beneath	us.	In	their	thousands.	What	force	was	there	that	could	do	such
a	thing,	Mappo?	Not	Jaghut,	even	in	their	preeminence	a	thousand	millennia
past.	And	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	have	been	extinct	for	even	longer.	I	do	not
understand	this,	friend…”
A	callused	hand	fell	on	Mappo’s	shoulder,	offered	a	solid	grip	briefly,	then
withdrew	as	Fiddler	stepped	past	the	Trell.
“The	answer	seems	clear	enough	to	me,	Icarium,”	the	soldier	said,	halting
at	the	Jhag’s	side.	“An	Ascendant	power.	The	fury	of	a	god	or	goddess
unleashed	this	devastation.	How	many	tales	have	you	heard	of	ancient	empires
reaching	too	high	in	their	pride?	Who	were	the	Seven	Holies	to	begin	with?
Whoever	they	were,	they	were	honored	here,	in	this	city	and	no	doubt	its	sister
cities	throughout	Raraku.	Seven	thrones,	look	at	the	rage	that	assailed	each	of
them.	Looks…personal,	to	me.	A	god’s	or	a	goddess’s	hand	slapped	down
here,	Icarium—but	whoever	it	was	has	since	drifted	away	from	mortal	minds,
for	I,	at	least,	cannot	think	of	any	known	Ascendant	able	to	unleash	such	power
on	the	mortal	plain	as	we	see	here—”


“Oh,	they	could,”	Icarium	said,	a	hint	of	renewed	vigor	in	his	voice,	“but
they	have	since	learned	the	greater	value	of	subtlety	when	interfering	in	the
activities	of	mortals—the	old	way	was	too	dangerous	in	every	respect.	I
suspect	you	have	answered	my	question,	Fiddler…”
The	sapper	shrugged.
Mappo	found	his	heart	slowing.	Just	do	not	again	think	of	that	lone,
surviving	artifact,	Icarium.	Sweat	dripping	in	an	uneven	patter	on	the	sand,	he
shivered,	drew	a	deep	breath.	He	glanced	back	at	Crokus.	The	lad’s	attention
was	elsewhere	in	such	a	studied	pose	of	casual	indifference	that	the	Trell	was
left	wondering	at	his	state	of	mind.
“Ninety-four	thousand	years—that	must	be	an	error,”	Icarium	said.	He
turned	from	the	structure,	offering	the	Trell	a	weak	smile.
The	scene	blurred	in	Mappo’s	eyes.	He	nodded	and	looked	away	to	fight
back	a	renewed	surge	of	sorrow.
“Well,”	Fiddler	said,	“shall	we	resume	our	pursuit	of	Apsalar	and	her
father?”
Icarium	shook	himself,	then	murmured,	“Aye.	We	are	close…to	many
things,	it	seems.”
A	perilous	journey	indeed.
	
The	night	of	his	leavetaking	all	those	centuries	ago,	in	the	hours	when	the	last
of	his	old	loyalties	was	ritually	shriven	from	him,	Mappo	had	knelt	before	the
tribe’s	eldest	shoulder-woman	in	the	smoky	confines	of	her	yurt.	“I	must	know
more,”	he’d	whispered.	“More	of	these	Nameless	Ones,	who	would	so	demand
this	of	me.	Are	they	sworn	to	a	god?”
“Once,	but	no	more,”	the	old	woman	had	replied,	unable	or	unwilling	to
meet	his	eye.	“Cast	out,	cast	down.	In	the	time	of	the	First	Empire	which	was
not,	in	truth,	the	first—for	the	T’lan	Imass	claimed	that	title	long	before.	They
were	the	left	hand,	another	sect	the	right	hand—both	guiding,	meant	to	be
clasped.	Instead,	those	who	would	come	to	be	Unnamed,	in	their	journeys	into
mysteries—”	She	chopped	with	one	hand,	a	gesture	Mappo	had	not	seen	before
among	the	tribe’s	elders.	A	gesture,	he	realized	with	a	start,	of	a	Jhag.
“Mysteries	of	another	led	them	astray.	They	bowed	to	a	new	master.	That	is	all
there	is	to	say.”
“Who	was	this	new	master?”
The	woman	shook	her	head,	turned	away.
“Whose	power	resides	in	those	staves	they	carry?”
She	would	not	answer.


In	the	passage	of	time,	Mappo	believed	he	had	found	the	answer	to	that
question,	but	it	was	a	knowledge	devoid	of	comfort.
	
They	left	the	ancient	island	behind	and	struck	out	across	the	clay	plain	as	the
day’s	light	slowly	faded	from	the	sky.	The	horses	were	suffering,	needing
water	that	even	Icarium	and	Mappo’s	desert	craft	could	not	find.	The	Trell	had
no	idea	how	Apsalar	and	her	father	fared,	yet	they’d	managed	to	stay	ahead,
day	after	day.
This	trail	and	its	goal	has	naught	to	do	with	Sha’ik.	We	have	been	led	far
from	the	places	of	such	activity,	far	from	where	Sha’ik	was	killed,	far	from	the
oasis.	Fiddler	knows	our	destination.	He	has	divined	the	knowledge	from
whatever	secrets	he	holds	within	him.	Indeed,	we	all	suspect,	though	we	speak
nothing	of	it—perhaps	Crokus	alone	remains	ignorant,	but	I	may	well	be
underestimating	the	young	man.	He’s	grown	within	himself…Mappo	glanced
across	to	Fiddler.	We	go	to	the	place	you	sought	all	along,	soldier.
Dusk	closed	in	on	the	barren	landscape,	but	enough	light	remained	to
reveal	a	chilling	convergence	of	tracks.	Soletaken	and	D’ivers	by	the	score,	the
number	frightening	to	contemplate,	closing	to	join	the	twin	footsteps	of
Apsalar	and	her	father.
Crokus	fell	back	a	dozen	paces	as	they	walked	their	horses.	Mappo	took
little	note	of	the	detail	until,	a	short	while	later,	he	whirled	at	a	shout	from	the
Daru.	Crokus	was	on	the	ground,	grappling	with	a	man	in	the	dusty	gloom.
Shadows	flitted	across	the	cracked	clay.	The	lad	managed	to	pin	the	man	down,
gripping	his	wrists.
“I	knew	you	were	lurking	about,	you	weasel!”	Crokus	snarled.	“For	hours
and	hours,	since	before	the	island!	All	I	had	to	do	was	wait	and	now	I’ve	got
you!”
The	others	backtracked	to	where	Crokus	straddled	Iskaral	Pust.	The	High
Priest	had	ceased	his	writhing	efforts	to	escape.	“Another	thousand	paces!”	he
hissed.	“And	the	deceit	is	complete!	Have	you	seen	the	signs	of	my	glorious
success?	Any	of	you?	Are	you	all	dimwits?	Oh,	so	unkind	in	my	nefarious
thoughts!	But	see	me	respond	to	their	accusations	with	manly	silence,	hah!”
“You	might	let	him	up,”	Icarium	said	to	Crokus.	“He’ll	not	run	now.”
“Let	him	up?	How	about	stringing	him	up?”
“The	next	tree	we	come	to,	lad,”	Fiddler	said,	grinning,	“and	that’s	a
promise.”
The	Daru	released	the	High	Priest.	Iskaral	scrambled	to	his	feet,	crouching
like	a	rat	deciding	which	way	to	dart.	“Deadly	proliferation!	Do	I	dare


accompany	them?	Do	I	risk	the	glory	of	witnessing	with	my	own	eyes	the
fullest	yield	of	my	brilliant	efforts?	Well	disguised,	this	uncertainty,	they	know
nothing!”
“You’re	coming	with	us,”	Crokus	growled,	hands	on	the	two	daggers
jutting	from	his	belt.	“No	matter	what	happens.”
“Why,	of	course,	lad!”	Iskaral	spun	to	face	the	Daru,	his	head	bobbing.	“I
was	but	hastening	to	catch	up!”	He	ducked	his	head.	“He	believes	me,	I	can	see
it	in	his	face.	The	soft-brained	dolt!	Who	is	a	match	for	Iskaral	Pust?	No	one!	I
must	remain	quietly	triumphant,	so	very	quietly.	The	key	to	understanding	lies
in	the	unknown	nature	of	warrens.	Can	they	be	torn	into	fragments?	Oh	yes,	oh,
yes	indeed.	And	that	is	the	secret	of	Raraku!	They	wander	more	than	one
world,	all	unknowing…and	before	us,	ah,	the	slumbering	giant	that	is	the	heart!
The	true	heart,	not	Sha’ik’s	grubby	oasis,	oh,	such	fools	abound!”	He	paused,
looked	up	at	the	others.	“Why	do	you	stare	so?	We	should	be	walking.	A
thousand	paces,	no	more,	to	your	heart’s	desire,	hee	hee!”	He	broke	into	a
dance,	knees	jerking	high	as	he	jumped	in	place.
“Oh,	for	Hood’s	sake!”	Crokus	grasped	the	High	Priest’s	collar,	flung	him
stumbling	forward.	“Let’s	go.”
“The	cajoling	good-humored	jostling	of	youth,”	Iskaral	murmured.	“Such
warm	comradely	gestures,	oh,	I	am	softened,	am	I	not?”
Mappo	glanced	at	Icarium	and	found	the	Jhag	staring	at	him.	Their	gazes
locked.	A	fragmented	warren.	What	on	earth	has	happened	to	this	land?	The
question	was	shared	in	silence,	though	in	the	Trell’s	mind	a	further	thought
ensued.	The	legends	claim	that	Icarium	emerged	from	this	place,	strode	out	from
Raraku.	A	warren	torn	to	pieces—Raraku	changes	all	who	stride	its	broken	soil
—gods,	have	we	indeed	come	to	the	place	where	Icarium’s	living	nightmare	was
born?
They	continued	on.	Overhead,	the	sky’s	faded	bronze	deepened	to
impenetrable	black,	a	starless	void	that	seemed	to	be	slowly	sinking,	lowering
itself	around	them.	Iskaral	Pust’s	muttering	dwindled	as	if	swallowed	up	by	the
night.	Mappo	could	see	that	both	Fiddler	and	Crokus	were	having	difficulty,
though	both	continued	walking,	hands	held	out	like	blind	men.
A	dozen	strides	in	front	of	the	others,	Icarium	halted,	turned.
Mappo	tilted	his	head,	acknowledging	that	he	too	had	spied	the	two	figures
standing	fifty	paces	further	on.	Apsalar	and	Servant—the	only	name	by	which	I
know	that	old	man,	a	simple	but	ominous	title.
The	Jhag	strode	over	to	take	one	of	Crokus’s	outstretched	hands.	“We	have
found	them,”	he	said	in	a	low	tone	that	nevertheless	carried,	bringing	everyone
to	a	stop.	“They	await	us,	it	seems,”	Icarium	continued,	“before	a	threshold.”


“Threshold?”	Fiddler	snapped.	“Quick	Ben	never	mentioned	anything	like
that.	Threshold	to	what?”
“A	knotted,	torn	piece	of	warren!”	Iskaral	Pust	hissed.	“Oh,	see	how	the
Path	of	Hands	has	led	into	it—the	fools	followed,	one	and	all!	The	High	Priest
of	Shadow	was	tasked	to	set	a	false	trail,	and	look,	oh,	look	how	he	has	done
so!”
Crokus	turned	to	the	sound	of	Iskaral	Pust’s	voice.	“But	why	did	her	father
lead	us	here?	So	that	we	may	all	be	set	upon	and	slaughtered	by	a	horde	of
Soletaken	and	D’ivers?”
“Servant	journeys	home,	you	withered	mole	carcass!”	The	High	Priest
danced	in	place	again.	“If	the	convergence	does	not	kill	him	first,	of	course!
Hee	hee!	And	takes	her,	and	the	sapper,	too—and	you,	lad.	You!	Ask	the	Jhag
what	waits	within	the	warren!	Waits	like	a	clenched	hand	holding	down	this
fragment	of	realm!”
Apsalar	and	her	father	approached	side	by	side.
Mappo	had	wondered	at	this	reunion,	but	no	expectations	he’d	envisioned
would	match	the	reality.	Crokus	had	yet	to	notice	them,	and	was	instead
drawing	his	daggers	and	preparing	to	close	in	on	the	sound	of	the	High
Priest’s	voice.	Icarium	stood	behind	the	Daru,	a	moment	from	disarming	him.
The	scene	was	almost	comic,	for	Crokus	could	see	nothing,	and	Iskaral	Pust
began	throwing	his	voice	so	that	it	emerged	from	a	dozen	places	at	once,	while
he	continued	his	capering	dance.
Fiddler,	cursing	under	his	breath,	had	removed	a	battered	lantern	from	his
pack	and	was	now	hunting	for	a	flint.
“Do	you	dare	tread	the	path?”	Iskaral	Pust	sang	out.	“Do	you	dare?	Do	you
dare?”
Apsalar	halted	before	Mappo.	“I	knew	you	would	win	through,”	she	said.
She	swung	her	head.	“Crokus!	I	am	here—”
He	whirled,	sheathed	his	daggers	and	closed.
Sparks	flashed	and	bounced	from	where	Fiddler	crouched.
The	Trell	watched	as	the	Daru’s	reaching	arms	were	captured	by	Apsalar
and	guided	around	her	in	a	tight	embrace.	Oh,	lad,	you	do	not	know	how
poignant	your	blindness	is…
An	aura	that	was	an	echo	of	a	god	clung	to	her,	yet	it	had	become	wholly
her	own.	The	Trell’s	sense	of	it	did	not	leave	him	at	ease.
Icarium	came	close	to	Mappo.	“Tremorlor,”	he	said.
“Aye.”
“There	are	some	who	claim	the	Azath	are	in	truth	benign,	a	force	to	keep
power	in	check,	that	they	arise	where	and	when	there	is	need.	My	friend,	I	am


beginning	to	see	much	truth	in	those	claims.”
The	Trell	nodded.	This	torn	warren	possesses	such	pain.	If	it	could	wander,
drift,	it	would	deliver	horror	and	chaos.	Tremorlor	holds	it	here—Iskaral	Pust
speaks	the	truth—but	even	so,	how	Raraku	has	twisted	on	all	sides…
“I	sense	Soletaken	and	D’ivers	within,”	Icarium	said.	“Closing,	seeking	to
find	the	House—”
“Believing	it	to	be	a	gate.”
The	lantern	glowed	into	light,	a	lurid	yellow	that	reached	no	more	than	a
few	paces	in	any	direction.	Fiddler	rose	from	his	crouch,	eyes	on	Mappo.
“There	is	a	gate	there,	just	not	the	one	the	shapeshifters	seek.	Nor	will	they	get
to	it—the	grounds	of	the	Azath	will	take	them.”
“As	it	might	all	of	us,”	spoke	a	new	voice.
They	turned	to	see	Apsalar ’s	father	standing	nearby.	“Now,”	he	grated,	“I’d
be	obliged	if	you	could	bend	your	efforts	into	talkin’	my	daughter	out	of	going
any	farther—we	can’t	try	the	gate,	’cause	it’s	inside	the	House…”
“Yet	you	led	her	here,”	Fiddler	said.	“Granted,	we	were	looking	for
Tremorlor	in	any	case,	but	whatever	reasons	you	have	are	Iskaral	Pust’s,	aren’t
they?”
Mappo	spoke,	“Do	you	have	a	name,	Servant?”
The	old	man	grimaced.	“Rellock.”	Glancing	back	to	Fiddler,	he	shook	his
head.	“I	can’t	guess	the	High	Priest’s	motives.	I	only	did	what	I	was	told.	A	final
task	for	the	High	Priest,	one	to	clear	the	debt	and	I	always	clears	my	debt,	even
to	gods.”
“They	gave	you	back	the	arm	you’d	lost,”	the	sapper	said.
“And	spared	me	and	the	life	of	my	daughter,	the	day	the	Hounds	came.	No
one	else	survived,	you	know…”
Fiddler	grunted.	“It	was	their	Hounds,	Rellock.”
“Even	so,	even	so.	It’s	the	false	trail,	you	see,	the	one	that	leads	the
shapeshifters	astray,	leads	them—”
“Away	from	the	true	gate,”	Icarium	said,	nodding.	“The	one	beneath	Pust’s
temple.”
Rellock	nodded.	“We	had	to	finish	the	false	trail,	is	all,	me	and	my
daughter.	Plantin’	signs,	leaving	trails	and	the	like.	Now	that’s	done.	We	hid	in
shadow	while	the	shapeshifters	rushed	in.	If	I’m	fated	to	die	in	bed	in	my
village	in	Itko	Kan,	then	it	don’t	matter	how	long’s	the	walk.”
“Rellock	wants	to	go	back	to	fishing,	hee	hee!”	Iskaral	Pust	sang.	“But	the
place	you	left	is	not	what	you	return	to,	oh	no.	From	one	day	to	the	next,	never
mind	years.	Rellock’s	done	work	guided	by	the	hands	of	gods,	yet	he	dreams
of	dragging	nets,	with	the	sun	on	his	face	and	lines	between	his	toes!	He	is	the


heart	of	the	Empire—Laseen	should	take	note!	Take	note!”
Fiddler	returned	to	his	horse,	drew	out	the	crossbow	and	set	the	crank,	then
locked	it.	“The	rest	of	you	can	choose	as	you	like;	I’ve	got	to	go	in.”	He
paused,	glancing	back	at	the	horses.	“And	we	should	let	the	beasts	go.”	He
walked	over	to	his	mount	and	began	loosening	the	girth	straps.	He	sighed,
patting	the	Gral	gelding	on	the	neck.	“You’ve	done	me	proud,	but	you’ll	do
better	out	here—lead	the	others,	friend,	to	Sha’ik’s	camp…”
After	a	moment,	the	others	strode	to	their	own	mounts.
Icarium	turned	to	the	Trell.	“I	too	must	go.”
Mappo	closed	his	eyes,	willing	a	stillness	to	his	inner	turmoil.	Gods,	I	am	a
coward.	In	all	ways	imaginable,	a	coward.
“Friend?”
The	Trell	nodded.
“Oh,	you	will	all	go!”	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	crooned,	still	dancing.
“Seeking	answers	and	yet	more	answers!	But	in	my	silent	thoughts	I	snigger
and	warn	you	all	with	words	that	you	will	not	hear—beware	sleight	of	hand.
Compared	to	the	Azath,	my	immortal	lords	are	but	fumbling	children!”


Chapter	Sixteen

Tremorlor,	the	Throne	of	Sand
is	said	to	lie	within	Raraku.
A	House	of	the	Azath,	it
stands	alone	on	uprooted	soil
where	all	tracks	are	ghosts
and	every	ghost	leads	to
Tremorlor ’s	door.
PATTERNS	IN	THE	AZATH
T HE	NAMELESS	ONES
For	as	far	as	Duiker	could	see,	stretching	west	and	east,	the	cedar	forest	was
filled	with	butterflies.	The	dusty	green	of	the	trees	was	barely	visible	through	a
restless	canopy	of	pale	yellow.	Along	Vathar ’s	gutted	verge,	bracken	rose
amidst	skeletal	branches,	forming	a	solid	barrier	but	for	the	trader	track	that
carved	its	way	toward	the	river.
The	historian	had	ridden	out	from	the	column	and	halted	his	horse	on	a
low	hilltop	that	rose	from	the	studded	plain.	The	Chain	of	Dogs	was	stretched,
exhaustion	straining	its	links.	Dust	rode	the	air	above	it	like	a	ghostly	cape,
grasped	by	the	wind	and	pulled	northward.
Duiker	drew	his	eyes	from	the	distant	scenes	and	scanned	the	hilltop
beneath	him.	Large,	angular	boulders	had	been	placed	in	roughly	concentric
rings:	the	summit’s	crown.	He	had	seen	such	formations	before,	but	could	not
recall	where.	A	pervasive	unease	hung	in	the	air	over	the	hilltop.
A	rider	approached	at	a	trot	from	the	train,	showing	obvious	discomfort
with	each	rise	in	the	stirrups.	Duiker	scowled.	Corporal	List	was	anything	but
hale.	The	young	man	was	risking	a	permanent	limp	with	all	this	premature
activity,	but	there	was	no	swaying	him.
“Historian,”	List	said	as	he	reined	in.
“Corporal,	you’re	a	fool.”
“Yes,	sir.	Word’s	come	from	the	rearguard’s	western	flank.	Korbolo


Dom’s	lead	elements	have	been	sighted.”
“West?	He	plans	to	reach	the	river	before	us	then,	as	Coltaine	predicted.”
List	nodded,	wiping	sweat	from	his	brow.	“Aye.	Cavalry,	at	least	thirty
companies.”
“If	we	have	to	push	through	thirty	companies	of	soldiers	to	gain	the	ford,
we’ll	be	held	up—”
“And	Korbolo’s	main	force	will	close	jaws	on	our	tail,	aye.	That’s	why	the
Fist	is	sending	the	Foolish	Dog	ahead.	He	asks	that	you	join	them.	It’ll	be	a
hard	ride,	sir,	but	your	mare’s	fit—fitter	than	most,	anyway.”
Two	notches	up	on	her	girth	straps,	the	bones	of	her	shoulders	hard	against
my	knees,	yet	fitter	than	most.	“Six	leagues?”
“Closer	to	seven,	sir.”
An	easy	afternoon’s	ride,	under	normal	circumstances.	“We	might	well
arrive	only	to	wheel	mounts	and	meet	a	charge.”
“They’ll	be	as	weary	as	we	will,	sir.”
Not	by	half,	Corporal,	and	we	both	know	it.	Worse,	we’ll	be	outnumbered	by
more	than	three	to	one.	“Likely	to	be	a	memorable	ride,	then.”
List	nodded,	his	attention	drawn	to	the	forest.	“I’ve	never	seen	so	many
butterflies	in	one	place.”
“They	migrate,	like	birds.”
“It’s	said	the	river	is	very	low.”
“Good.”
“But	the	crossing’s	narrow	in	any	case.	Most	of	the	river	cuts	through	a
gorge.”
“Do	you	ride	in	the	same	fashion,	Corporal?	Tug	one	way,	tug	the	other.”
“Just	weighing	things	out,	sir.”
“What	do	your	visions	reveal	of	that	river?”
List’s	expression	tightened.	“It	is	a	border,	sir.	Beyond	it	lies	the	past.”
“And	the	rings	of	stones	here	on	this	hill?”
The	man	started,	looking	down.	“Hood’s	breath,”	he	muttered,	then	met	the
historian’s	eyes.
Duiker	crooked	a	grin,	gathered	up	his	reins.	“I	see	the	Foolish	Dog’s	on
its	way	forward.	It	wouldn’t	do	to	have	them	wait	for	us.”
	
A	loud	yapping	bit	the	air	at	the	vanguard,	and	as	the	historian	trotted	to	join
the	gathered	officers	he	was	startled	to	see,	among	the	cattle-dogs,	a	small,
longhaired	lapdog,	its	once	perfectly	groomed	coat	a	snarl	of	tangles	and
burrs.


“I’d	supposed	that	rat	had	long	since	gone	through	one	of	the	dogs,”
Duiker	said.
“I’m	already	wishing	it	had,”	List	said.	“That	bark	hurts	the	ears.	Look	at	it,
prancing	around	like	it	rules	the	pack.”
“Perhaps	it	does.	Attitude,	Corporal,	has	a	certain	efficacy	that	should
never	be	underestimated.”
Coltaine	swung	his	horse	around	at	their	approach.	“Historian.	I	have
called	yet	again	for	the	captain	of	the	company	of	Engineers.	I	begin	to	believe
the	man	does	not	exist—tell	me,	have	you	ever	seen	him?”
Duiker	shook	his	head.	“I	am	afraid	not,	although	I	have	been	assured	that
he	still	lives,	Fist.”
“By	whom?”
The	historian	frowned.	“I…I	can’t	actually	recall.”
“Precisely.	It	occurs	to	me	that	the	sappers	have	no	captain,	and	they’d
rather	not	acquire	one.”
“That	would	be	a	rather	complicated	deceit	to	carry	off,	Fist.”
“You	feel	they	are	incapable?”
“Oh	no,	sir,	not	at	all.”
Coltaine	waited,	but	the	historian	had	nothing	further	to	say	on	the	matter,
and	after	a	moment	the	Fist	sighed.	“You	would	ride	with	the	Foolish	Dog?”
“Yes,	Fist.	However,	I	ask	that	Corporal	List	remain	here,	with	the	main
column—”
“But	sir—”
“Not	another	word	from	you,	Corporal,”	Duiker	said.	“Fist,	he’s	anything
but	healed.”
Coltaine	nodded.
Bult’s	horse	surged	between	the	Fist	and	the	historian.	The	veteran’s	lance
darted	from	his	hand,	speeding	in	a	blur	into	the	high	grasses	lining	the	trail.
The	yapping	lapdog	shrieked	in	alarm	and	raced	off,	bounding	like	a	ragged
ball	of	mud	and	straw.	“Hood’s	curse!”	Bult	snarled.	“Again!”
“It’s	little	wonder	it	won’t	quieten,”	Coltaine	commented,	“with	you	trying
to	kill	it	daily.”
“You’ve	been	shouted	down	by	a	lapdog,	Uncle?”	Duiker	asked,	brows
rising.
“Careful,	old	man,”	the	scarred	Wickan	growled.
“Time	for	you	to	ride,”	Coltaine	told	Duiker,	his	eyes	lighting	on	a	new
arrival.	The	historian	turned	to	see	Nether.	She	was	pale,	looking	drawn	into
herself.	Raw	pain	still	showed	in	her	dark	eyes,	but	she	sat	straight	in	her
saddle.	Her	hands	were	black,	including	the	flesh	under	her	fingernails,	as	if


dipped	in	pitch.
Sorrow	flooded	the	historian	and	he	had	to	look	away.
	
The	butterflies	rose	from	the	track	in	a	swirling	cloud	as	they	reached	the
forest	edge.	Horses	reared,	a	few	stumbling	when	struck	from	behind	by	those
that	followed,	and	what	had	been	a	scene	of	unearthly	beauty	a	moment	before
now	threatened	chaos	and	injury.	Then,	with	the	mounts	skidding	and
staggering,	jostling,	heads	tossing,	a	score	of	cattle-dogs	bolted	forward,
taking	the	lead.	They	plunged	into	the	swarms	ahead,	the	insects	rising,	parting
over	the	road.
Duiker,	spitting	out	ragged	wings	that	tasted	of	chalk,	caught	a	momentary
glimpse	of	one	of	the	dogs	that	made	him	blink	and	shake	his	head	in	disbelief.
No,	I	didn’t	see	what	I	thought	I	saw.	Absurd.	The	animal	was	the	one	known	as
Bent	and	it	seemed	to	be	carrying	a	four-limbed	snag	of	fur	in	its	mouth.
Order	was	restored,	the	dogs	managing	to	clear	the	path,	and	the	canter
resumed.	Before	long,	Duiker	found	himself	settling	into	the	steady	cadence.
There	was	nothing	of	the	usual	shouting,	jests	or	Wickan	riding	songs	to
accompany	the	thunder	of	hooves	and	the	eerie	whisper	of	hundreds	of
thousands	of	butterfly	wings	caressing	the	air	above	them.
The	journey	assumed	a	surreal	quality,	sliding	into	a	rhythm	that	seemed
timeless,	as	if	beneath	and	above	the	noise	they	rode	a	river	of	silence.	To
either	side	the	bracken	and	dead	trees	gave	way	to	stands	of	young	cedars,	too
few	on	this	side	of	the	river	to	be	called	a	forest.	Of	mature	trees	only	stumps
remained.	The	stands	became	a	backdrop	against	which	pale	yellow	swirled	in
endless	motion,	the	fluttering	filling	Duiker ’s	peripheral	vision	until	his	head
ached.
They	rode	at	the	pace	of	the	cattle-dogs,	and	those	animals	proved	tireless,
far	fitter	than	the	horses	and	riders	that	followed	in	their	wake.	Each	hour	was
marked	by	a	rest	spell,	the	mounts	slowed	to	a	walk,	the	last	reserves	of	water
offered	in	wax-sealed	hide	bags.	The	dogs	waited	impatiently.
The	trader	track	provided	the	Clan’s	best	chance	of	reaching	the	crossing
first.	Korbolo	Dom’s	cavalry	would	be	riding	through	the	thinned	cedar	stands,
though	what	might	slow	them	more	than	anything	else	was	the	butterflies.
When	they	had	traveled	slightly	over	four	leagues,	a	new	sound	reached
them	from	the	west,	a	strange	susurration	that	Duiker	barely	registered	at	first,
until	its	unnatural	irregularity	brushed	him	aware.	He	nudged	his	mount
forward	to	gain	Nether ’s	side.
Her	glance	of	acknowledgment	was	furtive.	“A	mage	rides	with	them,


clearing	the	way.”
“Then	the	warrens	are	no	longer	contested.”
“Not	for	three	days	now,	Historian.”
“How	is	this	mage	destroying	the	butterflies?	Fire?	Wind?”
“No,	he	simply	opens	his	warren	and	they	vanish	within.	Note,	the	time	is
longer	between	each	effort—the	man	tires.”
“Well,	that’s	good.”
She	nodded.
“Will	we	reach	the	crossing	before	them?”
“I	believe	so.”
A	short	while	later	they	came	to	a	second	cleared	verge.	Beyond	it,	rock
pushed	up	from	the	earth	to	the	east	and	west,	creating	a	ragged	line	against	the
insect-filled	sky.	Directly	ahead,	the	track	began	a	downward	slope	along	the
path	of	a	pebble-filled	moraine,	and	at	its	base	was	a	broad	clearing,	beyond
which	was	revealed	a	flattened	yellow	carpet	of	butterflies	that	moved	in	a
mass	eastward.
The	River	Vathar.	The	funeral	procession	of	drowned	insects,	down	to	the
sea.
The	crossing	itself	was	marked	by	twin	lines	of	wooden	poles	spanning	the
river,	each	pole	bearing	tied	rags,	like	the	faded	standards	of	a	drowned	army.
On	the	eastern	downstream	side,	just	beyond	the	poles,	a	large	ship	rested	at
anchor,	bow	into	the	current.
The	breath	hissed	from	Nether	upon	seeing	it,	and	Duiker	felt	his	own
tremble	of	disquiet.
The	ship	had	been	burned,	scorched	in	fire	from	one	end	to	the	other,
making	it	entirely	black,	and	not	a	single	butterfly	had	alighted	on	it.	The
sweeps	of	oars—many	snapped—jutted	in	disarray	from	the	craft’s	flanks;
those	with	blades	were	dipped	into	the	current	and	dead	insects	adhered	to	them
in	lumps.
The	Clan	rode	down	toward	the	open	flat	that	marked	this	side	of	the
crossing.	A	sailcloth	awning	stood	on	poles	near	a	small	hearth	which
smoldered	with	foul	smoke.	Beneath	the	makeshift	tent	sat	three	men.
The	cattle-dogs	ringed	them	at	a	wary	distance.
Duiker	winced	at	a	sudden	yapping	bark.	Gods	below,	I	didn’t	imagine	it!
The	historian	and	Nether	rode	up	to	halt	near	the	restlessly	circling	dogs.
One	of	the	men	beneath	the	awning,	his	face	and	forearms	a	strangely
burnished	bronze	hue,	rose	from	the	coil	of	rope	he’d	been	sitting	on	and
stepped	out.
The	lapdog	rushed	him,	then	skidded	to	a	halt,	its	barks	ceasing.	A	ratty	tail


managed	a	fitful	wag.
The	man	crouched	down,	picked	up	the	dog	and	scratched	it	behind	its
mangy	ears.	He	eyed	the	Wickans.	“So	who	else	claims	to	be	in	charge	of	this
scary	herd?”	he	asked	in	Malazan.
“I	am,”	said	Nether.
The	man	scowled.	“It	figures,”	he	muttered.
Duiker	frowned.	There	was	something	very	familiar	about	these	men.
“What	does	that	mean?”
“Let’s	just	say	I’ve	had	my	fill	of	imperious	little	girls.	I’m	Corporal
Gesler	and	that’s	our	ship,	the	Silanda.”
“Few	would	choose	that	name	these	days,	Corporal,”	the	historian	said.
“We	ain’t	inviting	a	curse.	This	is	the	Silanda.	We	come	on	her…
somewhere	far	from	here.	So,	are	you	what’s	left	of	them	Wickans	as	landed	in
Hissar?”
Nether	spoke.	“How	did	you	come	to	be	awaiting	us,	Corporal?”
“We	didn’t,	lass.	We	was	just	outside	Ubaryd	Bay,	only	the	city	had	already
fallen	and	we	saw	more	than	one	unfriendly	sail	about,	so	we	holed	up	here,
planning	to	make	passage	tonight.	We	decided	to	make	for	Aren—”
“Hood’s	breath!”	Duiker	exclaimed.	“You’re	the	marines	from	the	village!
The	night	of	the	uprising…”
Gesler	scowled	at	the	historian.	“You	were	the	one	with	Kulp,	weren’t	you
—”
“Aye,	it’s	him,”	Stormy	said,	rising	from	his	stool	and	approaching.
“Fener ’s	hoof,	never	thought	to	see	you	again.”
“I	imagine,”	Duiker	managed,	“you’ve	a	tale	to	tell.”
The	veteran	grinned.	“You	got	that	right.”
Nether	spoke,	her	eyes	on	the	Silanda.	“Corporal	Gesler,	what’s	your
complement?”
“Three.”
“The	ship’s	crew?”
“Dead.”
Had	he	not	been	so	weary,	the	historian	would	have	noted	a	certain	dryness
to	that	reply.
	
The	eight	hundred	horsewarriors	of	the	Foolish	Dog	Clan	set	up	three	corrals
in	the	center	of	the	clearing,	then	began	establishing	perimeter	defenses.	Scouts
struck	out	through	the	stands	to	the	west,	returning	almost	immediately	with	the
news	that	Korbolo	Dom’s	advance	outriders	had	arrived.	Weapons	were


readied	among	an	outer	line	of	defenders,	while	the	rest	of	the	warriors
continued	the	entrenchments.
Duiker	dismounted	near	the	awning,	as	did	Nether.	As	Truth	joined	Stormy
and	Gesler	outside	the	awning,	Duiker	saw	that	they	all	shared	the	same	bronze
cast	to	their	skin.	All	three	were	beardless	and	their	pates	sported	the	short
stubble	of	recent	growth.
Despite	the	chorus	of	questions	crowding	his	thoughts,	the	historian’s	eyes
were	drawn	to	the	Silanda.	“You’ve	no	sails	left,	Corporal.	Are	you	suggesting
that	the	three	of	you	man	oars	and	rudder?”
Gesler	turned	to	Stormy.	“Ready	weapons—these	Wickans	are	already
worn	down	to	the	bone.	Truth,	to	the	dory—we	may	need	to	yank	our	arses	out
of	here	fast.”	He	swung	back	to	study	the	historian.	“Silanda	goes	on	her	own,
y’might	say—I	doubt	we	got	time	to	explain,	though.	This	ragtag	mess	of
Wickans	are	face	to	face	with	a	last	stand,	from	the	looks	of	it—we	might	be
able	to	take	a	hundred	or	so,	if	you	ain’t	fussy	about	the	company	you’d	be	in
—”
“Corporal,”	Duiker	snapped.	“This	‘ragtag	mess’	is	part	of	the	Seventh.
You	are	Marines—”
“Coastal.	Remember?	We	ain’t	officially	in	the	Seventh	and	I	don’t	care	if
you	was	Kulp’s	long-lost	brother,	if	you’re	of	a	mind	to	use	that	tone	on	me,
you’d	better	start	telling	me	about	the	tragic	loss	of	your	uniform	and	maybe
I’ll	buy	the	song	and	start	callin’	you	‘sir ’	or	maybe	I	won’t	and	you’ll	get
your	nose	busted	flat.”
Duiker	blinked—I	seem	to	recall	we’ve	gone	through	something	like	this
once	before—then	continued	slowly,	“You	are	Marines	and	Fist	Coltaine	might
well	be	interested	in	your	story,	and	as	Imperial	Historian	so	am	I.	The	Coastal
detachments	were	headquartered	in	Sialk,	meaning	Captain	Lull	is	your
commander.	No	doubt	he	too	will	want	to	hear	your	report.	Finally,	the	rest	of
the	Seventh	and	two	additional	Wickan	clans	are	on	their	way	here,	along	with
close	to	forty-five	thousand	refugees.	Gentlemen,	wherever	you	came	from	to
get	here,	here	you	are,	meaning	you	are	back	in	the	Imperial	Army.”
Stormy	stepped	forward	to	squint	at	Duiker.	“Kulp	had	a	lot	to	say	about
you,	Historian,	though	I	can’t	quite	recall	if	any	of	it	was	good.”	He	hesitated,
then	cradled	his	crossbow	in	one	arm	and	held	out	a	thick,	hairless	hand.	“Even
so,	I’ve	dreamed	of	meeting	the	bastard	to	blame	for	all	we’ve	been	through,
though	I	wish	we	still	had	a	certain	grumpy	old	man	with	us	so	I	could	wrap
him	in	ribbons	and	stuff	him	down	your	throat.”
“That	was	said	in	great	affection,”	Gesler	drawled.
Duiker	ignored	the	proffered	hand,	and	after	a	moment	the	soldier


withdrew	it	with	a	shrug.	“I	need	to	know,”	the	historian	said	in	a	low	voice,
“what	happened	to	Kulp.”
“We	wouldn’t	mind	knowing	that,	too,”	Stormy	said.
Two	of	the	Clan’s	warleaders	came	down	to	speak	with	Nether.	She
frowned	at	their	words.
Duiker	pulled	his	attention	away	from	the	marines.	“What	is	happening,
Nether?”
She	gestured	and	the	warleaders	withdrew.	“The	cavalry	are	establishing	a
camp	upriver,	less	than	three	hundred	paces	away.	They	are	making	no
preparations	to	attack.	They’ve	begun	felling	trees.”
“Trees?	Both	banks	are	high	cliffs	up	there.”
She	nodded.
Unless	they’re	simply	building	a	palisade,	not	a	floating	bridge,	which
would	be	pointless	in	any	case—they	can’t	hope	to	span	the	gorge,	can	they?
Gesler	spoke	behind	them.	“We	could	take	the	dory	upstream	for	a	closer
look.”
Nether	turned,	her	eyes	hard	as	they	fixed	on	the	corporal.	“What	is	wrong
with	your	ship?”	she	demanded	in	a	febrile	tone.
Gesler	shrugged.	“Got	a	little	singed,	but	she’s	still	seaworthy.”
She	said	nothing,	her	gaze	unwavering.
The	corporal	grimaced,	reached	under	his	burned	jerkin	and	withdrew	a
bone	whistle	that	hung	by	a	cord	around	his	neck.	“The	crew’s	dead	but	that
don’t	slow	’em	any.”
“Had	their	heads	chopped	off,	too,”	Stormy	said,	startling	the	historian
with	a	bright	grin.	“Just	can’t	hold	good	sailors	down,	I	always	say.”
“Mostly	Tiste	Andii,”	Gesler	added,	“only	a	handful	of	humans.	And	some
others,	in	the	cabin…Stormy,	what	did	Heboric	call	’em?”
“Tiste	Edur,	sir.”
Gesler	nodded,	his	attention	now	on	the	historian.	“Aye,	us	and	Kulp
plucked	Heboric	from	the	island,	just	like	you	wanted.	Him	and	two	others.	The
bad	news	is	we	lost	them	in	a	squall—”
“Overboard?”	Duiker	asked	in	a	croak,	his	thoughts	a	maelstrom.	“Dead?”
“Well,”	said	Stormy,	“we	can’t	be	sure	of	that.	Don’t	know	if	they	hit	water
when	they	jumped	over	the	side—we	was	on	fire,	you	see	and	it	might	have
been	wet	waves	we	was	riding,	then	again	it	might	not.”
A	part	of	the	historian	wanted	to	throttle	both	men,	cursing	the	soldiers’
glorious	and	excruciating	love	of	understatement.	The	other	part,	the	rocking
shock	of	what	he	was	hearing,	dropped	him	with	a	jarring	thud	to	the	muddy,
butterfly-carpeted	ground.


“Historian,	accompany	these	marines	in	the	dory,”	Nether	said,	“but	be
sure	to	keep	well	out	from	shore.	Their	mage	is	exhausted,	so	you	need	not
worry	about	him.	I	must	understand	what	is	happening.”
Oh,	we	are	agreed	in	that,	lass.
Gesler	reached	down	and	gently	lifted	Duiker	upright.	“Come	along	now,
sir,	and	Stormy	will	spin	the	tale	while	we’re	about	it.	It’s	not	that	we’re	coy,
you	see,	we’re	just	stupid.”
Stormy	grunted.	“Then	when	I’m	done,	you	could	tell	us	how	Coltaine	and
all	the	rest	managed	to	live	this	long.	Now	that’ll	surely	be	a	story	worth
hearing.”
	
“It’s	the	butterflies,	you	see,”	Stormy	grunted	as	he	pulled	on	the	oars.	“A	solid
foot	of	’em,	moving	slower	than	the	current	underneath.	Without	that,	we’d	be
making	no	gain	at	all.”
“We’ve	paddled	worse,”	Gesler	added.
“So	I	gather,”	Duiker	said.	They’d	been	sitting	in	the	small	rowboat	for
over	an	hour,	during	which	time	Stormy	and	Truth	had	managed	to	pull	them	a
little	over	a	hundred	and	fifty	paces	upriver	through	the	thick	sludge	of
drowned	butterflies.	The	north	bank	had	quickly	risen	to	a	steep	cliff,
festooned	with	creepers,	vines	covering	its	pitted	face.	They	were	approaching
a	sharp	bend	in	the	gorge	created	by	a	recent	collapse	on	that	side.
Stormy	had	spun	his	tale,	allowing	for	his	poor	narrative	skills,	and	it	was
his	painfully	obvious	lack	of	imagination	that	lent	it	the	greatest	credence.
Duiker	was	left	with	the	bleak	task	of	attempting	to	comprehend	the
significance	of	the	events	these	soldiers	had	witnessed.	That	the	warren	of	fire
they	had	survived	had	changed	the	three	men	was	obvious,	and	went	beyond	the
strange	hue	of	their	skin.	Stormy	and	Truth	were	tireless	at	the	oars,	and	pulled
with	a	strength	to	match	twice	their	number.	Duiker	both	longed	to	board	the
Silanda	and	dreaded	it.	Even	without	Nether ’s	mage-heightened	sensitivity,	the
aura	of	horror	emanating	from	that	craft	preyed	on	the	historian’s	senses.
“Will	you	look	at	that,	sir,”	Gesler	said.
They	had	edged	into	the	river ’s	awkward	crook.	The	collapsed	cliffside
had	narrowed	the	channel,	creating	a	churning,	white-frothed	torrent	through
the	gap.	A	dozen	taut	ropes	spanned	the	banks	at	a	height	of	over	ten	arm-spans.
A	dozen	Ubari	archers	in	harnesses	were	making	their	way	across	the	gulf.
“Easy	pickings,”	Gesler	said	from	the	tiller,	“and	Stormy’s	the	man	for	the
task.	Can	you	hold	us	in	place,	Truth?”
“I	can	try,”	the	young	man	said.


“Wait,”	Duiker	said.	“This	is	one	hornet’s	nest	we’re	better	off	not	stirring
up,	Corporal.	Our	advance	force	is	seriously	out-numbered.	Besides,	look	to
the	other	side—at	least	a	hundred	soldiers	have	already	gone	over.”	He	fell
silent,	thinking.
“If	they	was	chopping	down	trees,	it	wasn’t	to	build	a	bridge,”	the	corporal
muttered,	squinting	at	the	north	cliff	edge,	where	figures	appeared	every	now
and	then.	“Someone	in	charge’s	just	come	for	a	look	at	us,	sir.”
Duiker ’s	gaze	narrowed	on	the	figure.	“Likely	the	mage.	Well,	if	we	won’t
bite,	hopefully	neither	will	he.”
“Makes	a	nice	target,	though,”	Gesler	mused.
The	historian	shook	his	head.	“Let’s	head	back,	Corporal.”
“Aye,	sir.	Ease	up	there,	lads.”
	
The	mass	of	Korbolo	Dom’s	forces	had	arrived,	taking	position	to	either	side
of	the	ford.	The	sparse	forest	was	fast	disappearing	as	every	tree	in	sight	was
felled,	the	branches	stripped	and	the	trunks	carried	deeper	into	the
encampment.	A	no-man’s	zone	of	less	than	seventy	paces	separated	the	two
forces.	The	trader	track	had	been	left	open.
Duiker	found	Nether	seated	cross-legged	beneath	the	awning,	her	eyes
closed.	The	historian	waited,	suspecting	that	she	was	in	sorcerous
communication	with	Sormo.	After	a	few	minutes	she	sighed.	“What	news?”	she
asked,	eyes	still	shut.
“They’ve	strung	lines	across	the	gorge	and	are	sending	archers	to	the
other	side.	What	is	happening,	Nether?	Why	hasn’t	Korbolo	Dom	attacked?	He
could	crush	us	and	not	break	into	a	sweat.”
“Coltaine	is	less	than	two	hours	away.	It	seems	the	enemy	commander
would	wait.”
“He	should	have	heeded	the	lesson	of	Kamist	Reloe’s	arrogance.”
“A	new	Fist	and	a	renegade	Fist—does	it	surprise	you	that	Korbolo	Dom
would	choose	to	make	this	contest	personal?”
“No,	but	it	certainly	justifies	Empress	Laseen’s	dismissal	of	Dom.”
“Fist	Coltaine	was	chosen	over	him.	Indeed,	the	Empress	had	made	it	clear
that	Korbolo	would	never	advance	further	in	the	Imperial	Command.	The
renegade	feels	he	has	something	to	prove.	With	Kamist	Reloe,	we	faced	battles
of	brute	strength.	But	now,	we	shall	see	battles	of	wits.”
“If	Coltaine	comes	to	us,	he	will	be	stepping	into	the	jaws	of	a	dragon,	and
that’s	hardly	disguised.”
“He	comes.”


“Then	perhaps	arrogance	has	cursed	both	commands.”
Nether	opened	her	eyes.	“Where	is	the	corporal?”
Duiker	shrugged.	“Somewhere.	Not	far.”
“The	Silanda	shall	take	as	many	wounded	soldiers	as	it	can	carry—those
who	will	eventually	mend,	that	is.	To	Aren.	Coltaine	inquires	if	you	wish	to
accompany	them,	Historian.”
Not	arrogance	at	all,	then,	but	fatal	acceptance.	He	knew	he	should	have
hesitated,	given	the	suggestion	sober	thought,	but	heard	his	own	voice	reply,
“No.”
She	nodded.	“He	knew	you	would	answer	thus,	and	say	it	quickly	as	well.”
Frowning,	she	searched	Duiker ’s	face.	“How	does	Coltaine	know	such	things?”
Duiker	was	startled.	“You	are	asking	me?	Hood’s	breath,	lass,	the	man’s	a
Wickan!”
“And	no	less	a	cipher	to	us,	Historian.	The	clans	do	as	he	commands	and
say	nothing.	It	is	not	shared	certainty	or	mutual	understanding	that	breeds	our
silence.	It	is	awe.”
Duiker	could	say	nothing	to	that.	He	found	himself	turning	away,	eyes
caught	and	gathered	into	the	sky’s	sweeping	blurs	of	pale	yellow.	They	migrate.
Creatures	of	instinct.	A	mindless	plunge	into	fatal	currents.	A	beautiful,
horrifying	dance	to	Hood,	every	step	mapped	out.	Every	step…
	
The	Fist	arrived	in	darkness,	the	warriors	of	the	Crow	slipping	forward	to
establish	a	corridor	down	which	the	vanguard	rode,	followed	by	the	wagons
burdened	with	those	wounded	that	had	been	selected	for	the	Silanda.
Coltaine,	his	face	gaunt	and	lined	with	exhaustion,	strode	down	to	where
Duiker,	Nether	and	Gesler	waited	near	the	awning.	Behind	the	Fist	came	Bult,
captains	Lull	and	Sulmar,	Corporal	List	and	the	warlocks	Sormo	and	Nil.
Lull	strode	up	to	Gesler.
The	marine	corporal	scowled.	“You	ain’t	as	pretty	as	I	remembered,	sir.”
“I	know	you	by	reputation,	Gesler.	Once	a	captain,	then	a	sergeant,	now	a
corporal.	You’ve	got	your	boots	to	the	sky	on	the	ladder—”
“And	head	in	the	horseshit,	aye,	sir.”
“Two	left	in	your	squad?”
“Well,	one	officially,	sir.	The	lad’s	sort	of	a	recruit,	though	not	properly
inducted,	like.	So,	just	me	and	Stormy,	sir.”
“Stormy?	Not	Cartheron	Fist’s	Adjutant	Stormy—”
“Once	upon	a	time.”
“Hood’s	breath!”	Lull	swung	to	Coltaine.	“Fist,	we’ve	got	two	of	the


Emperor ’s	Old	Guard	here…as	Coastal	Marines.”
“It	was	a	quiet	posting,	sir,	until	the	uprising,	anyway.”
Lull	loosed	his	helm	strap,	pulled	the	helm	from	his	head	and	ran	a	hand
through	sparse,	sweat-plastered	hair.	He	faced	Gesler	again.	“Call	your	lad
forward,	Corporal.”
Gesler	beckoned	and	Truth	stepped	into	view.
Lull	scowled.	“You’re	now	officially	in	the	Marines,	lad.”
Truth	saluted,	thumb	pulled	in	and	pinning	the	little	finger.
Bult	snorted.	Captain	Lull’s	scowl	deepened.	“Where—oh,	don’t	bother.”
He	addressed	Gesler	again.	“As	for	you	and	Stormy—”
“If	you	promote	us,	sir,	I	will	punch	you	in	what’s	left	of	your	face.	And
Stormy	will	likely	kick	you	while	you’re	down.	Sir.”	Gesler	then	smiled.
Bult	pushed	past	Lull	and	stood	face	to	face	with	the	corporal,	their	noses
almost	touching.	“And,	Corporal,”	the	commander	hissed,	“would	you	punch
me	as	well?”
Gesler ’s	smile	did	not	waver.	“Yes,	sir.	And	Hood	take	me,	I’ll	give	the
Fist’s	crack-thong	a	yank	too,	if	you	ask	sweetly.”
There	was	a	moment	of	dead	silence.
Coltaine	burst	out	laughing.	The	shock	of	it	brought	Duiker	and	the	others
around	to	stare	at	the	Wickan.
Muttering	his	disbelief,	Bult	stepped	back	from	Gesler,	met	the	historian’s
eyes	and	simply	shook	his	head.
Coltaine’s	laughter	set	the	dogs	to	wild	howling,	the	animals	suddenly
close	and	swarming	about	like	pallid	ghosts.
Animated	for	the	first	time	and	still	laughing,	Coltaine	spun	to	the
corporal.	“And	what	would	Cartheron	Crust	have	said	to	that,	soldier?”
“He’d	have	punched	me	in	the—”
Gesler	got	no	further	as	Coltaine’s	fist	lashed	out	and	caught	the	corporal
flush	on	the	nose.	The	marine’s	head	snapped	back,	his	feet	leaving	the	ground.
He	fell	on	his	back	with	a	heavy	thud.	Coltaine	wheeled	around,	clutching	his
hand	as	if	he’d	just	connected	with	a	stone	wall.
Sormo	stepped	forward	and	grasped	the	Fist’s	wrist	to	examine	the	hand.
“Spirits	below,	it’s	shattered!”
All	eyes	swung	to	the	supine	corporal,	who	now	sat	up,	blood	gushing
from	his	nose.
Both	Nil	and	Nether	hissed,	lurching	back	from	the	man.	Duiker	grasped
Nether ’s	shoulder	and	pulled	her	around.	“What	is	it,	lass?	What’s	wrong—”
Nil	answered,	his	voice	a	whisper.	“That	blood—that	man	has	almost
ascended!”


Gesler	did	not	hear	the	comment.	His	gaze	was	on	Coltaine.	“I	guess	I’ll
take	that	promotion	now,	Fist,”	he	said	through	split	lips.
“—almost	ascended.	Yet	the	Fist…”	Both	warlocks	now	stared	at	Coltaine,
and	for	the	first	time	Duiker	could	clearly	see	the	awe	in	their	expressions.
Coltaine	cracked	open	Gesler’s	face.	Gesler,	a	man	on	the	edge	of
Ascendancy…and	into	what?	The	historian	thought	back	to	Stormy	and	Truth
manning	the	dory’s	sweeps…their	extraordinary	strength,	and	the	tale	of	the
burning	warren.	Abyss	below,	all	three	of	them…And…Coltaine?
There	was	such	confusion	among	the	group	that	none	heard	the	slow
approach	of	horses,	until	Corporal	List	grunted,	“Commander	Bult,	we	have
visitors.”
They	turned,	with	the	exception	of	Coltaine	and	Sormo,	to	see	half	a	dozen
Crow	horsewarriors	surrounding	an	Ubari	officer	wearing	silver	inlaid	scale
armor.	The	stranger ’s	dark	face	was	shrouded	in	beard	and	mustache,	the	curls
dyed	black.	He	was	unarmed,	and	now	held	out	both	hands	to	the	sides,	palms
forward.
“I	bring	greetings	from	Korbolo	Dom,	Humblest	Servant	of	Sha’ik,
Commander	of	the	South	Army	of	the	Apocalypse,	to	Fist	Coltaine	and	the
officers	of	the	Seventh	Army.”
Bult	stepped	forward,	but	it	was	Coltaine,	now	standing	straight,	his	broken
hand	behind	his	back,	who	spoke.	“Our	thanks	for	that.	What	does	he	want?”
A	new	handful	of	figures	rushed	into	the	gathering,	and	Duiker	scowled	as
he	recognized	Nethpara	and	Pullyk	Alar	at	their	head.
“Korbolo	Dom	wishes	only	peace,	Fist	Coltaine,	and	as	proof	of	his	honor
he	spared	your	Wickan	riders	who	came	here	to	this	crossing	earlier	today—
when	he	could	have	destroyed	them	utterly.	The	Malazan	Empire	has	been
driven	from	six	of	the	Seven	Holy	Cities.	All	lands	north	of	here	are	now	free.
We	would	see	an	end	to	the	slaughter,	Fist.	Aren’s	independence	can	be
negotiated,	to	the	gain	of	Empress	Laseen’s	treasury.”
Coltaine	said	nothing.
The	emissary	hesitated,	then	continued.	“As	yet	further	proof	of	our
peaceful	intentions,	the	crossing	of	the	refugees	to	the	south	bank	will	not	be
contested—after	all,	Korbolo	Dom	well	knows	that	it	is	those	elements	that
provide	the	greatest	difficulty	to	you	and	your	forces.	Your	soldiers	can	well
defend	themselves—this	we	all	have	seen,	to	your	glory.	Indeed,	our	own
warriors	sing	to	honor	your	prowess.	You	are	truly	an	Army	worthy	of
challenging	our	goddess.”	He	paused,	twisting	in	his	saddle	to	look	at	the
gathered	nobles.	“But	these	worthy	citizens,	ah,	this	war	is	not	theirs.”	He	faced
Coltaine	again.	“Your	journey	across	the	wastelands	beyond	the	forest	shall	be


difficult	enough—we	shall	not	pursue	to	add	to	your	tribulations,	Fist.	Go	in
peace.	Send	the	refugees	across	the	Vathar	tomorrow,	and	you	will	see	for
yourselves—and	without	risk	to	your	own	soldiers—Korbolo	Dom’s	mercy.”
Pullyk	Alar	stepped	forward.	“The	Council	trusts	in	Korbolo	Dom’s	word
on	this,”	he	announced.	“Give	us	leave	to	cross	tomorrow,	Fist.”
Duiker	frowned.	There	has	been	communication.
The	Fist	ignored	the	nobleman.	“Take	words	back	to	Korbolo	Dom,
Emissary.	The	offer	is	rejected.	I	am	done	speaking.”
“But	Fist—”
Coltaine	turned	his	back,	his	ragged	feather	cape	glistening	like	bronze
scales	in	the	firelight.
The	Crow	horsewarriors	closed	around	the	emissary	and	forced	the	man’s
mount	around.
Pullyk	Alar	and	Nethpara	rushed	toward	the	officers.	“He	must
reconsider!”
“Out	of	our	sight,”	Bult	growled,	“or	I	shall	have	your	hides	for	a	new	tent.
Out!”
The	pair	of	noblemen	retreated.
Bult	glared	about	until	he	found	Gesler.	“Ready	your	ship,	Captain.”
“Aye,	sir.”
Stormy	muttered	beside	the	historian,	“None	of	this	smells	right,	sir.”
Duiker	slowly	nodded.
	
Leoman	led	them	unerringly	across	the	clay	plain,	through	impenetrable
darkness,	to	another	cache	of	supplies,	this	one	stored	beneath	a	lone	slab	of
limestone.	As	he	unwrapped	the	hardbread,	dried	meat	and	fruits,	Felisin	sat
down	on	the	cool	ground	and	wrapped	her	arms	around	herself	in	an	effort	to
stop	shivering.
Heboric	sat	beside	her.	“Still	no	sign	of	the	Toblakai.	With	Oponn’s	luck
bits	of	him	are	souring	that	Soletaken’s	stomach.”
“He	fights	like	no	other,”	Leoman	said,	sharing	out	the	food.	“And	that	is
why	Sha’ik	chose	him—”
“An	obvious	miscalculation,”	the	ex-priest	said.	“The	woman’s	dead.”
“Her	third	guardian	would	have	prevented	that,	but	Sha’ik	relinquished	its
binding.	I	sought	to	change	her	mind,	but	failed.	All	foreseen,	each	of	us
trapped	within	our	roles.”
“Convenient,	that.	Tell	me,	is	the	prophecy	as	clear	on	the	rebellion’s	end?
Do	we	now	face	a	triumphant	age	of	Apocalypse	unending?	Granted,	there’s	an


inherent	contradiction,	but	never	mind	that.”
“Raraku	and	Dryjhna	are	one,”	Leoman	said.	“As	eternal	as	chaos	and
death.	Your	Malazan	Empire	is	but	a	brief	flare,	already	fading.	We	are	born
from	darkness	and	to	darkness	we	return.	These	are	the	truths	you	so	fear,	and
in	your	fear	discount.”
“I	am	no	one’s	marionette,”	Felisin	snapped.
Leoman’s	only	reply	to	that	was	a	soft	laugh.
“If	this	is	what	becoming	Sha’ik	demands,	then	you’d	better	go	back	to	that
withered	corpse	at	the	gate	and	wait	for	someone	else	to	show	up.”
“Becoming	Sha’ik	shall	not	shatter	your	delusions	of	independence,”
Leoman	said,	“unless,	of	course,	you	will	it.”
Listen	to	us.	Too	dark	to	see	a	thing.	We	are	naught	but	three	disembodied
voices	in	futile	counterpoint,	here	on	this	desert	stage.	Holy	Raraku	mocks	our
flesh,	makes	of	us	no	more	than	sounds	at	war	with	a	vast	silence.
Soft	footfalls	approached.
“Come	and	eat,”	Leoman	called	out.
Something	slapped	wetly	to	the	ground	close	to	Felisin.	The	stench	of	raw
meat	wafted	over	her.
“A	bear	with	white	fur,”	the	Toblakai	rumbled.	“For	a	moment,	I	dreamed	I
had	returned	to	my	home	in	Laederon.	Nethaur,	we	call	such	beasts.	But	we
fought	on	sand	and	rock,	not	snow	and	ice.	I	have	brought	its	skin	and	its	head
and	its	claws,	for	the	beast	was	twice	as	large	as	any	I’d	seen	before.”
“Oh,	I	just	can’t	wait	for	daylight,”	Heboric	said.
“The	next	dawn	is	the	last	before	the	oasis,”	the	giant	savage	said	to
Leoman.	“She	must	undertake	the	ritual.”
There	was	silence.
Heboric	cleared	his	throat.	“Felisin—”
“Four	voices,”	she	whispered.	“No	bone,	no	flesh,	just	these	feeble	noises
that	claim	their	selves.	Four	points	of	view.	The	Toblakai	is	pure	faith,	yet	he
shall	one	day	lose	it	all—”
“It	has	begun,”	Leoman	murmured.
“And	Heboric,	the	rendered	priest	without	faith,	who	shall	one	day
discover	it	anew.	Leoman,	the	master	deceiver,	who	sees	the	world	with	eyes
more	cynical	than	Heboric	in	his	fitting	blindness,	yet	is	ever	searching	the
darkness…for	hope.
“And	finally,	Felisin.	Ah,	now	who	is	this	woman	in	a	child’s	raiment?
Pleasures	of	the	flesh	devoid	of	pleasure.	Selves	surrendered	one	after	another.
Kindness	yearned	for	behind	every	cruel	word	she	utters.	She	believes	in
nothing.	A	crucible	fired	clean,	empty.	Heboric	possesses	hands	unseen	and


what	they	now	grasp	is	a	power	and	a	truth	that	he	cannot	yet	sense.	Felisin’s
hands…ah,	they	have	grasped	and	touched,	they	have	been	slick	and	they	have
been	soiled,	and	yet	have	held	nothing.	Life	slips	through	them	like	a	ghost.
“All	was	incomplete,	Leoman,	until	Heboric	and	I	came	to	you.	You	and
your	tragic	child	companion.	The	Book,	Leoman.”
She	heard	him	remove	the	clasps,	heard	the	tome	pulled	free	of	its	hide
wrapping.	“Open	it,”	she	told	him.
“You	must	open	it—nor	is	it	dawn!	The	ritual—”
“Open	it.”
“You—”
“Where	is	your	faith,	Leoman?	You	do	not	understand,	do	you?	The	test	is
not	mine	alone.	The	test	is	for	each	of	us.	Here.	Now.	Open	the	Book,
Leoman.”
She	heard	his	harsh	breathing,	heard	it	slow,	heard	it	gentled	by	a	fierce
will.	The	skin	cover	crackled	softly.
“What	do	you	see,	Leoman?”
He	grunted.	“Nothing,	of	course.	There	is	no	light	to	see	by.”
“Look	again.”
She	heard	him	and	the	others	gasp.	A	glow	the	color	of	spun	gold	had
begun	emanating	from	the	Book	of	Dryjhna.	On	all	sides	came	a	distant
whisper,	then	a	roar.	“The	Whirlwind	awakens—but	not	here,	not	in	the	heart
of	Raraku.	The	Book,	Leoman,	what	do	you	see?”
He	reached	down	to	touch	the	first	page,	peeled	it	back,	then	the	next,	then
the	one	after	that.	“But	this	is	not	possible—it	is	blank!	Every	page!”
“You	see	what	you	see,	Leoman.	Close	the	Book,	give	it	to	the	Toblakai,
now.”
The	giant	edged	forward	and	crouched	down,	his	massive,	bloodstained
hands	accepting	the	Book.	He	did	not	hesitate.
A	warm	light	bathed	his	face	as	he	stared	down	at	the	first	page.	She	saw
tears	fill	his	eyes	and	run	crooked	tracks	down	his	scarred	cheeks.
“Such	beauty,”	she	whispered	to	him.	“And	beauty	makes	you	weep.	Do
you	know	why	you	feel	such	sorrow?	No,	not	yet.	One	day…Close	the	Book,
Toblakai.
“Heboric—”
“No.”
Leoman	slid	a	dagger	free,	but	was	stilled	by	Felisin’s	hand.
“No,”	the	ex-priest	repeated.	“My	touch—”
“Aye,”	she	said.	“Your	touch.”
“No.”


“You	were	tested	before,	Heboric,	and	you	failed.	Oh,	how	you	failed.	You
fear	you	will	fail	again—”
“I	do	not,	Felisin,”	Heboric’s	tone	was	sharp,	certain.	“That	least	of	all.	I
shall	not	be	part	of	this	ritual,	nor	shall	I	risk	laying	hands	on	that	cursed
Book.”
“What	matter	if	he	opens	the	Book?”	the	Toblakai	growled.	“He’s	as	blind
as	an	enkar ’al.	Let	me	kill	him,	Sha’ik	Reborn.	Let	his	blood	seal	this	ritual.”
“Do	it.”
The	Toblakai	moved	in	a	blur,	the	wooden	sword	almost	unseen	as	it
slashed	for	Heboric’s	head.	Had	it	struck	it	would	have	shattered	the	old	man’s
skull,	spraying	bits	of	it	for	ten	paces	or	more.	Instead,	Heboric’s	hands	flared,
one	the	hue	of	dried	blood,	the	other	bestial	and	fur-backed.	They	shot	up	to
intercept	the	swing,	each	closing	on	one	of	the	giant’s	wrists—and	stopping	the
swing	dead.	The	wooden	sword	flew	out	of	the	Toblakai’s	hands,	vanishing
into	the	darkness	beyond	the	Book’s	pale	glow.
The	giant	grunted	in	pain.
Heboric	released	the	Toblakai’s	wrists,	grasped	the	giant	by	his	neck	and
belt,	then,	in	a	surge,	threw	him	out	into	the	darkness.	There	was	a	thud	as	he
struck	and	the	clay	trembled	beneath	their	feet.
Heboric	staggered	back,	his	face	twisted	in	shock,	and	the	blazing	rage	that
entwined	his	hands	winked	out.
“We	could	see,	then,”	Felisin	told	him.	“Your	hands.	You	were	never
forsaken,	Heboric,	no	matter	what	the	priests	may	have	believed	when	they	did
what	they	did.	You	were	simply	being	prepared.”
The	old	man	fell	to	his	knees.
“And	so	a	man’s	faith	is	born	anew.	Know	this:	Fener	would	never	risk
investing	you	and	you	alone,	Heboric	Light	Touch.	Think	on	that,	and	be	at
ease…”
Out	in	the	darkness,	the	Toblakai	groaned.
Felisin	rose	to	her	feet.	“I	shall	have	the	Book	now,	Leoman.	Come	the
dawn.”	Felisin,	surrendering	herself	yet	again.	Remade.	Reborn.	Is	this	the	last
time?	Oh	no,	it	most	certainly	is	not.
	
With	dawn	an	hour	away,	Icarium	led	the	others	to	the	edge	of	the	warren.
Hitching	the	stock	of	his	crossbow	on	one	hip,	Fiddler	handed	Crokus	the
lantern,	then	glanced	over	at	Mappo.
The	Trell	shrugged.	“The	barrier	is	opaque—nothing	of	what	lies	beyond
is	visible.”


“They	know	nothing	of	what	is	to	come,”	Iskaral	Pust	whispered.	“An
eternal	flare	of	pain,	but	shall	I	waste	words	in	an	effort	to	prepare	them?	No,
not	at	all,	never.	Words	are	too	precious	to	be	wasted,	hence	my	coy	silence
while	they	hesitate	in	a	fit	of	immobile	ignorance.”
Fiddler	gestured	with	the	crossbow.	“You	go	first,	Pust.”
The	High	Priest	gaped.	“Me?”	he	squealed.	“Are	you	mad?”	He	ducked	his
head.	“They	are	deceived	again,	even	that	gnarled	excuse	for	a	soldier—oh,
this	is	too	easy!”
Hissing,	Crokus	stepped	forward,	raising	the	lantern	high,	then	strode
through	the	barrier,	vanishing	from	the	others.	Icarium	immediately	followed.
With	a	growl,	Fiddler	gestured	Iskaral	Pust	forward.
As	the	two	disappeared,	Mappo	swung	to	Apsalar	and	her	father.	“You	two
have	been	through	once	before,”	he	said.	“The	warren’s	aura	clings	to	you
both.”
Rellock	nodded.	“The	false	trail.	We	had	to	make	sure	of	the	D’ivers	and
Soletaken.”
The	Trell	swung	his	gaze	to	Apsalar.	“What	warren	is	this?”
“I	don’t	know.	It	has	indeed	been	torn	apart.	There	is	little	hope	of
determining	its	nature	given	the	state	it’s	now	in.	And	my	memories	tell	me
nothing	of	such	a	warren	so	destroyed.”
Mappo	sighed,	rolling	his	shoulders	to	ease	the	tension	binding	his
muscles.	“Ah,	well,	why	assume	that	the	Elder	Warrens	we	know	of—Tellann,
Omtose	Phellack,	Kurald	Galain—are	the	only	ones	that	existed?”
The	barrier	was	marked	by	a	change	in	air	pressure.	Mappo	swallowed	and
felt	his	ears	pop.	He	blinked,	his	senses	struggling	to	manage	the	flood	that
rushed	upon	them.	The	Trell	stood	with	the	others	in	a	forest	of	towering	trees,
a	mix	of	spruce,	cedar	and	redwood	all	thickly	braided	in	moss.	Blue-tinged
sunlight	filtered	down.	The	air	smelled	of	decaying	vegetation	and	insects
buzzed.	The	scene’s	ethereal	beauty	descended	on	Mappo	like	a	cooling	balm.
“Don’t	know	what	I	was	expecting,”	Fiddler	muttered,	“but	it	wasn’t	this.”
A	large	dolomite	boulder,	taller	than	Icarium,	rose	from	the	mulch	directly
ahead.	Sunlight	bathed	it	in	pale	green,	lifting	into	view	the	shadows	of
grooves,	pits	and	other	shapes	carved	into	its	surface.
“The	sun	never	moves,”	Apsalar	said	beside	the	Trell.	“The	light	is	ever	at
that	angle,	the	only	angle	that	raises	those	carvings	to	our	eyes.”
The	base	and	sides	of	the	boulder	were	a	mass	of	hand	and	paw	prints,
every	one	the	color	of	blood.
The	Path	of	Hands.	Mappo	turned	to	Iskaral	Pust.	“More	of	your	deceit,
High	Priest?”


“A	lone	boulder	in	a	forest?	Free	of	lichen	and	moss,	bleached	by	another
world’s	harsh	sun?	The	Trell	is	dense	beyond	belief,	but	listen	to	this!”	He
offered	Mappo	a	wide	smile.	“Absolutely	not!	How	could	I	move	such	an
edifice?	And	look	at	those	ancient	carvings,	those	pits	and	whorls,	how	could
such	things	be	faked?”
Icarium	had	walked	up	to	stand	before	the	boulder.	He	followed	the
wending	track	of	one	of	the	grooves.	“No,	these	are	real	enough.	Yet	they	are
Tellann,	the	kind	you	would	find	at	a	site	sacred	to	the	T’lan	Imass—the
boulder	typically	surmounting	a	hilltop	on	a	tundra	or	plain.	I	would	not
expect,	of	course,	that	the	D’ivers	and	Soletaken	could	be	aware	of	such	an
incongruity—”
“Of	course	not!”	Iskaral	burst	out,	then	he	frowned	at	the	Jhag.	“Why	do
you	stop?”
“How	could	I	otherwise?	You	interrupted	me—”
“A	lie!	But	no,	I	must	stuff	my	outrage	into	a	bag,	a	bag	such	as	the	curious
sack	the	Trell	carries—such	a	curious	sack,	that!	Is	there	another	fragment
trapped	within	it?	The	possibility	is…possible.	A	likely	likelihood,	indeed,	a
certain	certainty!	I	need	but	turn	this	ingenuous	smile	on	the	Jhag	to	show	my
benign	patience	at	his	foul	insult,	for	I	am	a	bigger	man	than	he,	oh	yes.	All	his
airs,	his	posturing,	his	poorly	disguised	asides—hark!”	Iskaral	Pust	spun
around,	squinted	into	the	forest	beyond	the	boulder.
“Do	you	hear	something,	High	Priest?”	Icarium	asked	calmly.
“Hear,	here?”	Pust	scowled.	“Why	ask	me	that?”
Mappo	asked	Apsalar,	“How	far	into	this	wood	have	you	gone?”
She	shook	her	head.	Not	far.
“I’ll	take	point,”	Fiddler	said.	“Straight	ahead,	I	take	it,	past	this	rock?”
There	were	no	alternative	suggestions.
They	set	off,	Fiddler	ranging	ahead,	crossbow	readied	at	hip-level,	a
Moranth	quarrel	set	in	the	groove.	Icarium	followed,	his	bow	still	strapped	on
his	back,	sword	sheathed.	Pust,	Apsalar	and	her	father	were	next,	with	Crokus	a
few	paces	ahead	of	Mappo,	who	was	the	column’s	rearguard.
Mappo	could	not	be	sure	of	matching	the	Jhag’s	speed	in	responding	to	a
threat,	so	he	removed	the	bone	mace	from	his	sack.	Do	I	in	truth	carry	a
fragment	of	this	warren	within	this	tattered	ruck?	How	fare	my	hapless	victims,
then?	Perhaps	I	have	sent	them	to	paradise—a	thought	to	ease	my	conscience…
The	Trell	had	traveled	old	forests	before	and	this	one	was	little	different.
The	sounds	of	birds	were	few	and	far	between,	and	apart	from	insects	and	the
trees	and	plants	themselves,	there	was	no	other	indication	of	life.	It	would	be
easy	enough	to	lose	grip	on	imagination’s	reins	in	such	a	place,	if	one	were	so


inclined,	to	fashion	a	brooding	presence	from	the	primeval	atmosphere.	A
place	to	ravel	dark	legends,	to	make	us	no	more	than	children	shivering	to
fraught	tales…bah,	what	nonsense!	The	only	brooding	thing	here	is	me.
The	roots	were	thick	underfoot,	a	latticework	revealing	itself	here	and
there	through	the	humus,	spreading	out	to	bridge	the	gap	between	every	tree.
The	air	grew	cooler	as	they	journeyed	on,	abandoning	its	rich	smells,	and	it
eventually	became	apparent	that	the	trees	were	thinning	out,	the	spaces	between
them	stretching	from	a	few	paces	to	half	a	dozen,	then	a	dozen.	Yet	still	the
knotted	roots	remained	thickly	woven	on	the	ground—too	many	to	be
explained	by	the	forest	itself.	The	sight	of	them	triggered	hints	of	a	vaguely
disturbing	memory	in	Mappo,	yet	he	could	not	track	it	down.
They	could	now	see	five	hundred	paces	ahead,	a	vista	of	sentinel	boles	and
damp	air	tinted	blue	under	the	strange	sun’s	spectral	light.	Nothing	moved.	No
one	spoke,	and	the	only	sound	was	their	breathing,	the	rustle	of	clothing	and
armor,	and	the	tread	of	their	feet	on	the	endless	mat	of	entwined	tree	roots.
An	hour	later	they	reached	the	outer	edge	of	the	forest.	Beyond	it	lay	a
dark,	rolling	plain.
Fiddler	drew	the	company	to	a	halt.	“Any	thoughts	on	this?”	he	asked,
staring	out	over	the	bare,	undulating	landscape	that	lay	ahead.
The	ground	before	them	was	a	solid	weave,	a	riotous	twisting	of
serpentine	roots	that	stretched	off	into	the	distance.
Icarium	crouched	and	laid	a	hand	on	one	thick,	coiled	span	of	wood.	He
closed	his	eyes,	then	nodded.	The	Jhag	straightened.	“The	Azath,”	he	said.
“Tremorlor,”	Fiddler	muttered.
“I	have	never	seen	an	Azath	manifest	itself	in	this	way,”	Mappo	said.	No,
not	an	Azath,	but	I	have	seen	staves	of	wood…
“I	have,”	Crokus	said.	“In	Darujhistan.	The	Azath	House	there	grew	from
the	ground,	like	the	stump	of	a	tree.	I	saw	it	with	my	own	eyes.	It	rose	to
contain	a	Jaghut’s	Finnest.”
Mappo	studied	the	youth	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	turned	to	the	Jhag.
“What	else	did	you	sense,	Icarium?”
“Resistance.	Pain.	The	Azath	is	under	siege.	This	fragmented	warren	seeks
to	pull	free	of	the	House’s	grip.	And	now,	an	added	threat…”
“The	Soletaken	and	D’ivers.”
“Tremorlor	is…aware…of	those	who	seek	it.”
Iskaral	Pust	cackled,	then	ducked	at	a	glare	from	Crokus.
“Including	us,	I	take	it,”	Fiddler	said.
Icarium	nodded.	“Aye.”
“And	it	means	to	defend	itself,”	the	Trell	said.


“If	it	can.”
Mappo	scratched	his	jaw.	The	responses	of	a	living	entity.
“We	should	stop	here,”	Fiddler	said.	“Get	some	sleep—”
“Oh	no,	you	mustn’t!”	Iskaral	Pust	said.	“Urgency!”
“Whatever	lies	ahead,”	the	sapper	growled,	“can	wait.	If	we’re	not	rested
—”
“I	agree	with	Fiddler,”	Icarium	said.	“A	few	hours…”
	
The	camp	was	haphazard,	bedrolls	set	out	in	silence,	a	scant	meal	shared.
Mappo	watched	the	others	settling	down	until	only	he	and	Rellock	remained
awake.	The	Trell	joined	the	old	man	as	he	prepared	his	own	bedding.
Mappo	spoke	in	a	low	voice,	“Why	did	you	obey	Iskaral’s	commands,
Rellock?	To	draw	your	daughter	to	this	place…into	these	circumstances…”
The	fisherman	grimaced,	visibly	struggling	toward	a	reply.	“I	was	gifted,
sir,	with	this	here	arm.	Our	lives	were	spared—”
“As	you	said	before,	and	you	were	delivered	to	Iskaral.	To	a	fortress	in	a
desert.	Where	you	were	made	to	draw	your	only	child	into	danger…I	am	sorry
if	I	offend,	Rellock.	I	seek	only	to	understand.”
“She	ain’t	what	she	was.	Not	my	little	girl.	No.”	He	hesitated,	hands
twitching	where	they	rested	on	the	bedroll.	“No,”	he	repeated,	“what’s	done	is
done,	and	there’s	no	going	back.”	He	looked	up.	“Got	to	make	the	best	of	how
things	are.	My	girl	knows	things…”	He	glanced	away,	eyes	narrowing	as	he
stared	at	something	only	he	could	see.	“Terrible	things.	But,	well,	there’s	a
child	still	there—I	can	see	it.	All	that	she	knows…Well—”	he	fixed	Mappo	with
a	glare—“knowing	ain’t	enough.	It	ain’t	enough.”	He	scowled,	then	shook	his
head	and	looked	away.	“I	can’t	explain—”
“I	am	following	you	so	far.”
With	a	sigh,	Rellock	resumed,	“She	needs	reasons.	Reasons	for	everything.
It’s	my	feeling,	anyway.	I’m	her	father,	and	I	say	she’s	got	more	learning	to	do.
It’s	no	different	from	being	out	on	the	water—you	learn	no	place	safe.	Not	real
learning.	No	place	safe,	Trell.”	Shaking	himself,	he	rose.	“Now	you	gone	and
made	my	head	ache.”
“Forgive	me,”	Mappo	said.
“If	I’m	lucky,	she	might	do	that	for	me	one	day.”
The	Trell	watched	him	finish	laying	out	the	bedroll.	Mappo	rose	and
headed	to	where	he’d	left	his	sack.	“We	learn	no	place	safe.”	Whatever	sea	god
looks	down	on	you,	old	man,	must	surely	fix	an	eye	on	his	lost	child	now.


	
Muffled	in	his	bedrolls,	unable	to	sleep,	Mappo	heard	movement	behind	him,
then	Icarium’s	low	voice.
“Best	get	back	to	sleep,	lass.”
The	Trell	heard	wry	amusement	in	her	reply.	“We’re	much	alike,	you	and
I.”
“How	so?”	Icarium	asked.
She	sighed.	“We	each	have	our	protectors—neither	of	whom	is	capable	of
protecting	us.	Especially	not	from	ourselves.	So	they’re	dragged	along,
helpless,	ever	watchful,	but	so	very	helpless.”
Icarium’s	reply	was	measured	and	toneless.	“Mappo	is	a	companion	to	me,
a	friend.	Rellock	is	your	father.	I	understand	his	notion	of	protection—what
else	is	a	father	to	do?	But	it	is	a	different	thing,	Mappo	and	me.”
“Is	it	now?”
Mappo	held	his	breath,	ready	to	rise,	to	close	this	conversation	now—
Apsalar	continued	after	a	moment.	“Perhaps	you	are	right,	Icarium.	We	are
less	alike	than	it	first	seemed.	Tell	me,	what	will	you	do	with	your	memories
once	you	find	them?”
The	Trell’s	silent	relief	was	but	momentary.	Yet	now	he	did	not	struggle
with	an	urge	to	intervene;	rather,	he	held	himself	very	still,	waiting	to	hear	the
reply	to	a	question	he	had	never	dared	ask	Icarium.
“Your	question…startles	me,	Apsalar.	What	do	you	do	with	yours?”
“They	are	not	mine—most	of	them,	anyway.	I	have	a	handful	of	images
from	my	life	as	a	fishergirl.	Bargaining	in	a	market	for	twine.	Holding	my
father ’s	hand	over	a	cairn	where	cut	flowers	lay	scattered	on	the	weathered
stones,	a	feel	of	lichen	where	once	I	touched	skin.	Loss,	bewilderment—I	must
have	been	very	young.
“Other	memories	belong	to	a	wax	witch,	an	old	woman	who	sought	to
protect	me	during	Cotillion’s	possession.	She’d	lost	a	husband,	children,	all
sacrificed	to	Imperial	glory.	You’d	think,	wouldn’t	you,	that	bitterness	would
overwhelm	all	else	within	such	a	woman?	But	not	so.	Helpless	to	protect	her
loved	ones,	her	instincts—so	long	bottled	up—embraced	me	instead.	And	do
so	to	this	day,	Icarium…”
“An	extraordinary	gift,	lass…”
“Indeed.	Finally,	my	last	set	of	borrowed	memories—the	most	confusing
of	all.	An	assassin’s.	Once	mortal,	then	Ascendant.	Assassins	bow	to	the	altar	of
efficiency,	Icarium,	and	efficiency	is	brutal.	It	sacrifices	mortal	lives	without	a
second	thought,	all	for	whatever	is	perceived	as	the	greater	need.	At	least	it	was


so	in	the	case	of	Dancer,	who	did	not	kill	for	coin,	but	for	a	cause	that	was	less
self-aggrandizing	than	you	might	think.	In	his	mind,	he	was	a	man	who	fixed
things.	He	viewed	himself	as	honorable.	A	man	of	integrity,	was	Dancer.	But
efficiency	is	a	cold-blooded	master.	And	there’s	a	final	irony.	A	part	of	him,	in
defiance	of	his	need	to	seek	vengeance	upon	Laseen,	actually…sympathizes.
After	all,	she	bowed	to	what	she	perceived	as	a	greater	need—one	of	Empire—
and	chose	to	sacrifice	two	men	she	called	friends	to	answer	that	need.”
“Within	you,	then,	is	chaos.”
“Aye,	Icarium.	Such	are	memories	in	full	flood.	We	are	not	simple
creatures.	You	dream	that	with	memories	will	come	knowledge,	and	from
knowledge,	understanding.	But	for	every	answer	you	find,	a	thousand	new
questions	arise.	All	that	we	were	has	led	us	to	where	we	are,	but	tells	us	little	of
where	we’re	going.	Memories	are	a	weight	you	can	never	shrug	off.”
A	stubborn	tone	was	evident	as	Icarium	muttered,	“A	burden	I	would	accept
nonetheless.”
“Let	me	offer	some	advice.	Do	not	say	that	to	Mappo,	unless	you	wish	to
further	break	his	heart.”
The	Trell’s	blood	was	a	thunder	coursing	through	him,	his	chest	aching
with	a	breath	held	overlong.
“I	do	not	understand,”	Icarium	said	quietly	after	a	time,	“but	I	would	never
do	that,	lass.”
Mappo	let	the	air	loose,	slowly,	struggling	to	control	himself.	He	felt	tears
run	crooked	tracks	from	the	corners	of	his	eyes.
“I	do	not	understand.”	This	time,	the	words	were	a	whisper.
“Yet	you	wish	to.”
There	was	no	reply	to	that.	A	minute	passed,	then	there	came	to	Mappo
sounds	of	movement.	“Here,	Icarium,”	Apsalar	said,	“dry	those	eyes.	Jhag
never	weep.”
	
Sleep	eluded	Mappo	and,	he	suspected,	there	were	others	among	the	group	for
whom	rest	offered	no	surcease	from	tortured	thoughts.	Only	Iskaral	Pust
seemed	at	ease,	if	his	groaning	snores	were	any	indication.
Before	long,	Mappo	heard	the	sounds	of	movement	once	again,	and
Icarium	spoke	in	a	calm,	measured	voice.	“It	is	time.”
They	broke	camp	swiftly.	Mappo	was	still	drawing	the	ties	of	his	sack
when	Fiddler	set	out,	a	soldier	approaching	a	battlefield,	cautious	yet
determined.	The	High	Priest	of	Shadow	bounded	after	him.	As	Icarium
prepared	to	follow,	Mappo	reached	out	and	gripped	the	Jhag’s	arm.


“My	friend,	Azath	Houses	seek	to	imprison	all	who	posses	power—do	you
fathom	what	you	risk?”
Icarium	smiled.	“Not	just	me,	Mappo.	You	ever	underestimate	yourself,
what	you	have	become	after	all	these	centuries.	We	must	trust	in	the	Azath
understanding	that	we	mean	no	harm,	if	we	intend	to	continue	onward.”
The	others	had	all	set	out—Apsalar	sparing	one	searching	glance	their	way
—leaving	the	two	alone.
“How	can	we	trust	in	something	we	cannot	understand?”	the	Trell
demanded.	“You	said	‘aware.’	How?	Precisely	what	is	aware?”
“I	have	no	idea.	I	sense	a	presence,	that	is	all.	And	if	I	can	sense	it,	then	it	in
turn	can	sense	me.	Tremorlor	suffers,	Mappo.	It	fights	alone,	and	its	cause	is
just.	I	mean	to	help	the	Azath,	and	so	to	Tremorlor	lies	the	choice—to	accept
my	help	or	not.”
The	Trell	struggled	to	disguise	his	distress.	Oh,	my	friend,	you	offer	help
without	realizing	how	quickly	that	blade	can	turn.	In	your	ignorance	you	are	so
pure,	so	noble.	If	Tremorlor	knows	you	better	than	you	know	yourself,	will	it
dare	accept	your	offer?
“What	is	wrong,	friend?”
Bleak	suspicion	showed	in	the	Jhag’s	eyes,	and	Mappo	was	forced	to	look
away.	What	is	wrong?	I	would	speak	to	warn	you,	my	friend.	Should	Tremorlor
take	you,	the	world	is	freed	of	a	vast	threat,	but	I	lose	a	friend.	No,	I	betray	you
to	eternal	imprisonment.	The	Elders	and	the	Nameless	Ones	who	set	upon	me
this	task	would	command	me	with	certainty.	They	would	care	nothing	of	love.
Nor	would	the	young	Trell	warrior	who	so	freely	made	his	vow	hesitate—for	he
did	not	know	the	man	he	was	to	follow.	Nor	did	he	possess	doubts.	Not	then,	so
long	ago.	“I	beg	you,	Icarium,	let	us	turn	back	now.	The	risk	is	too	great,	my
friend.”	He	felt	his	eyes	water	as	he	stared	out	across	the	plain.	My	friend.	At
last,	dear	Elders,	I	am	revealed	to	you.	You	chose	wrongly.	I	am	a	coward.
“I	wish,”	Icarium	said	slowly,	haltingly,	“I	wish	I	could	understand.	The
war	I	see	within	you	breaks	my	heart,	Mappo.	You	must	realize	by	now…”
“Realize	what?”	the	Trell	croaked,	still	unable	to	meet	the	Jhag’s	eyes.
“That	I	would	give	my	life	for	you,	my	only	friend,	my	brother.”
Mappo	wrapped	his	arms	about	himself.	“No,”	he	whispered.	“Do	not	say
that.”
“Help	me	end	your	war.	Please.”
The	Trell	drew	a	deep,	ragged	breath.	“The	city	of	the	First	Empire,	the
one	upon	the	old	island…”
Icarium	waited.
“Destroyed…by	your	hand,	Icarium.	Yours	is	a	blind	rage…a	rage


unequaled.	It	burns	fierce,	so	fierce	all	your	memory	of	what	you	do	is
obliterated.	I	watch	you—I	have	watched	you	stirring	those	cold	ashes,	ever
seeking	to	discover	who	you	are,	yet	there	I	stand,	at	your	side,	bound	by	a
vow	to	prevent	you	ever	committing	such	an	act	again.	You	have	destroyed
cities,	entire	peoples.	Once	you	begin	killing,	you	cannot	stop,	until	all	before
you	is…lifeless.”
The	Jhag	said	nothing,	nor	could	Mappo	look	at	his	friend.	The	Trell’s
arms	ached	with	his	own	protective,	helpless	hug.	His	anguish	was	a	storm
within	him,	and	he	was	holding	it	back	with	all	his	strength.
“And	Tremorlor	knows,”	Icarium	said,	in	a	cold,	flat	voice.	“The	Azath
can	do	naught	but	take	me.”
If	it	is	able,	and	so	sorely	tested	before	the	effort’s	even	begun.	In	your
anger	you	may	destroy	it—spirits	below,	what	do	we	risk	here?
“I	believe	this	warren	has	shaped	you,	Icarium.	After	all	this	time,	you	have
finally	come	home.”
“Where	it	began,	it	shall	end.	I	go	to	Tremorlor.”
“Friend—”
“No.	I	cannot	walk	free	with	this	knowledge—you	must	see	that,	Mappo.	I
cannot—”
“If	Tremorlor	takes	you,	you	will	not	die,	Icarium.	Your	imprisonment	is
eternal,	yet	you	shall	be…aware.”
“Aye,	a	worthy	punishment	for	my	crimes.”
The	Trell	cried	out	at	that.
Icarium’s	hand	fell	on	his	shoulder.	“Walk	with	me	to	my	prison,	Mappo.
Do	what	you	must—what	you	clearly	have	done	before—to	prevent	my	rage.	I
must	not	be	allowed	to	resist.”
Please—
“Do	what	a	friend	would	do.	And	free	yourself,	if	I	am	to	be	so
presumptuous	as	to	offer	you	a	gift	in	return.	We	must	end	this.”
He	shook	his	head,	seeking	to	deny	everything.	Coward!	Strike	him	down
now!	Drag	him	away	from	here—far	away—he	will	return	to	consciousness
recalling	none	of	this.	I	can	lead	him	away,	in	some	other	direction,	and	we	can
be	as	we	were,	as	we	always	have	been—
“Rise,	please,	the	others	await	us.”
The	Trell	had	not	realized	he	was	on	the	ground,	curled	tight.	He	tasted
blood	in	his	mouth.
“Rise,	Mappo.	One	last	task.”
Firm,	strong	hands	helped	him	climb	to	his	feet.	He	tottered	as	if	drunk	or
fevered.


“Mappo,	I	cannot	call	you	friend	otherwise.”
“That,”	the	Trell	gasped,	“was	unfair—”
“Aye,	it	seems	I	must	make	you	what	I	seem	to	be.	Let	anger	be	the	iron	of
your	resolve.	Leave	no	room	for	doubt—you	were	ever	too	sentimental,
Trell.”
Even	your	attacks	with	words	are	kindly	said.	Ah,	gods,	how	can	I	do	this?
“The	others	are	deeply	shaken	by	what	they	have	seen—what	shall	we	tell
them?”
Mappo	shook	his	head.	Still	a	child	in	so	many	ways,	Icarium.	They	know.
“Come	along	now.	My	home	awaits	this	prodigal	return.”
	
“It	had	to	come,”	Fiddler	said	as	they	arrived.	Mappo	studied	each	of	them	in
turn	and	saw	the	knowledge	plainly	writ,	in	every	hue.	Iskaral	Pust’s	wizened
face	was	twisted	in	a	febrile	grin—fear,	anticipation	and	a	host	of	other
emotions	only	he	could	explain,	had	he	been	willing.	Apsalar	seemed	to	have
set	aside	whatever	sympathy	she	felt,	and	now	eyed	Icarium	as	if	gauging	a
potential	opponent;	her	uncertainty	at	her	own	ability	showed	for	the	first	time.
There	was	resignation	in	Rellock’s	eyes,	all	too	aware	of	the	threat	to	his
daughter.	Crokus	alone	seemed	immune	to	the	knowledge,	and	Mappo	once
again	wondered	at	the	certainty	the	young	man	seemed	to	have	discovered
within	himself.	As	if	the	lad	admires	Icarium—but	what	part	of	the	Jhag	does
he	admire?
They	stood	on	a	hill,	the	roots	chaotic	underfoot.	Some	ancient	creature
lies	imprisoned	beneath	us.	All	these	hills…Ahead,	the	landscape	changed,	the
roots	rising	in	narrow	ridges	to	create	thick	walls,	forming	corridors	in	a
sprawling,	wild	maze.	Some	of	the	roots	within	the	walls	seemed	to	be	moving.
Mappo’s	gaze	narrowed	as	he	studied	that	ceaseless	motion.
“Make	no	efforts	to	save	me,”	Icarium	announced,	“should	Tremorlor	seek
to	take	me.	Indeed,	assist	those	efforts	in	any	way	you	can—”
“Fool!”	Iskaral	Pust	crowed.	“The	Azath	needs	you	first!	Tremorlor	risks	a
cast	of	the	knuckles	that	even	Oponn	would	quail	at!	Desperation!	A	thousand
Soletaken	and	D’ivers	are	converging!	My	god	has	done	all	he	can,	as	have	I!
And	who	will	thank	us?	Who	will	acknowledge	our	sacrifice?	You	must	not
fail	us	now,	horrid	Jhag!”
Grimacing,	Icarium	turned	to	Mappo.	“I	shall	defend	the	Azath—tell	me,
can	I	fight	without…without	that	burning	rage?”
“You	possess	a	threshold,”	the	Trell	conceded.	But	oh	so	near.
“Hold	yourself	back,”	Fiddler	said,	checking	his	crossbow.	“Until	the	rest


of	us	have	done	all	we	can	do.”
“Iskaral	Pust,”	Crokus	snapped.	“That	includes	not	just	you,	but	your	god
—”
“Hah!	You	would	command	us?	We	have	brought	the	players	together—no
more	can	be	asked—”
The	Daru	closed	on	the	High	Priest,	a	knife-point	flashing	to	rest	lightly
against	Pust’s	neck.	“Not	good	enough,”	he	said.	“Call	your	god,	damn	you.
We	need	more	help!”
“The	risks—”
“Are	greater	if	you	just	stand	back,	dammit!	What	if	Icarium	kills	the
Azath?”
Mappo	held	his	breath,	astonished	at	how	deeply	Crokus	understood	the
situation.
There	was	silence.
Icarium	stepped	back,	shaken.
Oh	yes,	friend,	you	possess	such	power.
Iskaral	Pust	blinked,	gaped,	then	shut	his	mouth	with	a	snap.	“Unforeseen,”
he	finally	whimpered.	“All	that	would	be	freed…oh,	my!	Release	me	now.”
Crokus	stepped	back,	sheathing	his	knife.
“Shadowthrone…uh…my	worthy	Lord	of	Shadow…is	thinking.	Yes!
Thinking	furiously!	Such	is	the	vastness	of	his	genius	that	he	can	outwit	even
himself!”	The	High	Priest’s	eyes	widened	and	he	spun	to	face	the	forest	behind
them.
A	distant	howl	sounded	from	the	wood.
Iskaral	Pust	smiled.
“I’ll	be	damned,”	Apsalar	muttered.	“I	didn’t	think	he	had	it	in	him.”
	
Five	Hounds	of	Shadow	emerged	from	the	wood	like	a	loping	pack	of	wolves,
though	each	was	as	tall	as	a	pony.	To	mock	all	things	natural,	the	pale,	sightless
Hound	named	Blind	led	the	way.	Her	mate	Baran	ran	behind	and	to	her	right.
Gear	and	Shan	followed	in	rough	flanking	positions.	The	pack’s	leader,	Rood,
sauntered	in	their	wake.
Mappo	shivered.	“I	thought	there	were	seven.”
“Anomander	Rake	killed	two	on	the	Rhivi	Plain,”	Apsalar	said,	“when	he
demanded	Cotillion	cease	possession	of	my	body.”
Crokus	spun	in	surprise.	“Rake?	I	didn’t	know	that.”
Mappo	raised	an	eyebrow	at	the	Daru.	“You	know	Anomander	Rake,	Lord
of	Moon’s	Spawn?”


“We	met	but	once,”	Crokus	said.
“I	would	hear	that	tale	some	day.”
The	lad	nodded,	tight-lipped.
Mappo,	you	are	the	only	fool	here	who	believes	we	will	survive	this.	He
fixed	his	gaze	once	more	on	the	approaching	Hounds.	In	all	his	travels	with
Icarium,	they	had	never	before	crossed	paths	with	the	legendary	creatures	of
Shadow,	yet	the	Trell	well	knew	their	names	and	descriptions,	and	the	Hound
he	feared	most	was	Shan.	She	moved	like	fluid	darkness,	her	eyes	crimson
slits.	Where	the	others	showed,	in	the	scars	tracked	across	their	muscled	bulk,
the	savage	ferocity	of	brawlers,	Shan’s	sleek	approach	was	a	true	killer ’s,	an
assassin’s.	The	Trell	felt	the	hair	rise	on	the	back	of	his	neck	as	those	deadly
eyes	found	and	held	him	for	the	briefest	of	moments.
“They	are	not	displeased,”	Iskaral	Pust	crooned.
Mappo	pulled	his	eyes	away	from	the	beasts	and	saw	Fiddler	staring	at	him.
The	knowledge	that	passed	between	them	was	instant	and	certain.	The	sapper ’s
head	tilted	a	fraction.	The	Trell	sighed,	slowly	blinked,	then	turned	to	Icarium.
“My	friend—”
“I	welcome	them,”	the	Jhag	rumbled.	“We	shall	speak	no	more	of	it,
Mappo.”
In	silence	the	Hounds	arrived,	fanning	out	to	encircle	the	company.
“Into	the	maze	we	go,”	Iskaral	Pust	said,	then	cackled	as	a	distant,	uncanny
scream	reached	them.	The	Hounds	raised	their	heads	at	the	sound,	testing	the
motionless	air,	but	seemed	otherwise	unexcited.	There	was	around	each	beast
an	aura	of	dreadful	competence,	wrought	with	vast	antiquity	like	threads	of
iron.
The	High	Priest	of	Shadow	broke	into	another	dance,	brought	to	an	abrupt
halt	by	Baran’s	head	and	shoulder	as	the	animal,	with	blurring	speed,	batted
Iskaral	Pust	to	the	ground.
Fiddler	grunted	as	he	reached	down	to	help	the	priest	up.	“You’ve	managed
to	irritate	your	god,	Pust.”
“Nonsense,”	the	man	gasped.	“Affection.	The	puppy	was	so	pleased	to	see
me	it	became	overexcited.”
They	set	off	toward	the	maze,	beneath	a	sky	the	color	of	polished	iron.
	
Gesler	strode	to	where	Duiker,	Bult	and	Captain	Lull	sat	drinking	weak	herbal
tea.	The	corporal’s	face	was	red	and	swollen	around	the	fractured	nose,	his
voice	a	rough	whine.	“We	can’t	pack	no	more	aboard,	so	we’re	pulling	out	to
catch	the	last	of	the	tide.”


“How	quickly	can	those	undead	oarsmen	take	you	to	Aren?”	Lull	asked.
“Won’t	be	long.	Three	days	at	the	most.	Don’t	worry,	we	won’t	lose	any	of
the	wounded	on	the	way,	sir—”
“What	makes	you	so	certain	of	that,	Corporal?”
“Things	are	kind	of	timeless	on	the	Silanda,	sir.	All	those	heads	still	drip
blood,	only	they	ain’t	been	attached	to	their	bodies	for	months,	years,	maybe
even	decades.	Nothing	rots.	Fener ’s	tusk,	we	can’t	even	grow	beards	when
we’re	aboard,	sir.”
Lull	grunted.
It	was	an	hour	before	dawn.	The	sounds	of	frenzied	activity	rising	from
Korbolo	Dom’s	encampment	had	not	ceased.	Sorcerous	wards	prevented	the
Wickan	warlocks	from	discovering	the	nature	of	that	activity.	The	lack	of
knowing	had	stretched	everyone’s	nerves	taut.
“Fener	guard	you	all,”	Gesler	said.
Duiker	looked	up	to	meet	the	man’s	eyes.	“Deliver	our	wounded,
Corporal.”
“Aye,	Historian,	we’ll	do	just	that.	And	maybe	we	can	even	pry	Nok’s	fleet
out	of	the	harbor,	or	shame	Pormqual	into	marching.	The	captain	of	the	City
Garrison’s	a	good	man—Blistig—if	he	wasn’t	responsible	for	the	protection
of	Aren,	he’d	be	here	by	now.	Anyway,	maybe	the	two	of	us	can	put	some	iron
into	the	High	Fist’s	spine.”
“As	you	say,”	Lull	muttered.	“Get	on	with	you	now,	Corporal,	you’re
almost	as	ugly	as	me	and	it’s	turning	my	stomach.”
“Got	more	than	a	few	spare	Tiste	Andii	eyes	if	you’d	like	to	try	one	out	for
a	fitting,	sir.	Last	chance.”
“I’ll	pass,	Corporal,	but	thanks	for	the	offer.”
“Don’t	mention	it.	Fare	you	well,	Historian.	Sorry	we	couldn’t	have	done
better	with	Kulp	and	Heboric.”
“You	did	better	than	anyone	could	have	hoped	for,	Gesler.”
With	a	shrug,	the	man	turned	toward	the	waiting	dory.	Then	he	paused.
“Oh,	Commander	Bult.”
“Aye?”
“My	apologies	to	the	Fist	for	breaking	his	hand.”
“Sormo’s	managed	to	force-heal	that,	Corporal,	but	I’ll	pass	your	thoughts
on.”
“You	know,	Commander,”	Gesler	said	a	moment	before	stepping	into	the
boat,	“I	just	noticed—between	you	and	the	captain	you	got	three	eyes	and	three
ears	and	almost	a	whole	head	of	hair.”
Bult	swung	around	to	glare	at	the	corporal.	“Your	point?”


“Nothing.	Just	noticing,	sir.	See	you	all	in	Aren.”
Duiker	watched	the	man	row	his	way	across	the	yellow	sludge	of	the	river.
See	you	all	in	Aren.	That	was	feeble,	Corporal	Gesler,	but	well	enough	meant.
“For	the	rest	of	my	days,”	Lull	sighed,	“I’ll	know	Gesler	as	the	man	who
broke	his	nose	to	spite	his	face.”
Bult	grinned,	tossed	the	dregs	of	his	tea	onto	the	muddy	ground	and	rose
with	a	crackling	of	joints.	“Nephew	will	like	that	one,	Captain.”
“Was	it	just	a	matter	of	mistrust,	Uncle?”	Duiker	asked,	looking	up.
Bult	stared	down	for	a	moment,	then	shrugged.	“Coltaine	would	tell	you	it
was	so,	Historian.”
“But	what	do	you	think?”
“I’m	too	tired	to	think.	If	you	are	determined	to	know	the	Fist’s	thoughts	on
Korbolo	Dom’s	offer,	you	might	try	asking	him	yourself.”
They	watched	the	commander	walk	away.
Lull	grunted.	“Can’t	wait	to	read	your	account	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs,	old
man.	Too	bad	I	didn’t	see	you	send	a	trunk	full	of	scrolls	with	Gesler.”
Duiker	climbed	to	his	feet.	“It	seems	nobody	wants	to	hold	hands	this
night.”
“Might	have	better	luck	tomorrow	night.”
“Might.”
“Thought	you’d	found	a	woman.	A	marine—what	was	her	name?”
“I	don’t	know.	We	shared	one	night…”
“Ah,	sword	too	small	for	the	sheath,	eh?”
Duiker	smiled.	“We	decided	it	would	not	do	to	repeat	that	night.	We	each
have	enough	losses	to	deal	with…”
“You	are	both	fools,	then.”
“I	imagine	we	are.”
Duiker	set	off	through	the	restless,	sleepless	encampment.	He	heard	few
conversations,	yet	a	bleak	awareness	roared	around	him,	a	sound	only	his
bones	could	feel.
He	found	Coltaine	outside	his	command	tent,	conferring	with	Sormo,	Nil
and	Nether.	The	Fist’s	right	hand	was	still	swollen	and	mottled,	and	his	pale,
sweat-beaded	face	revealed	the	trauma	of	forced	healing.
Sormo	addressed	the	historian.	“Where	is	your	Corporal	List?”
Duiker	blinked.	“I	am	not	sure.	Why?”
“He	is	possessed	of	visions.”
“Aye,	he	is.”
The	warlock’s	gaunt	face	twisted	in	a	grimace.	“We	sense	nothing	of	what
lies	ahead.	A	land	so	emptied	is	unnatural,	Historian.	It	has	been	scoured,	its


soul	destroyed.	How?”
“List	says	there	was	a	war	once,	out	on	the	plain	beyond	the	forest.	So	long
ago	that	all	memory	of	it	has	vanished.	Yet	an	echo	remains,	sealed	in	the	very
bedrock.”
“Who	fought	this	war,	Historian?”
“Yet	to	be	revealed,	I’m	afraid.	A	ghost	guides	List	in	his	dreams,	but	it
will	be	no	certain	unveiling.”	Duiker	hesitated,	then	sighed.	“The	ghost	is
Jaghut.”
Coltaine	glanced	east,	seemed	to	study	the	paling	skyline.
“Fist,”	Duiker	said	after	a	moment,	“Korbolo	Dom—”
There	was	a	commotion	nearby.	They	turned	to	see	a	nobleman	rushing
toward	them.	The	historian	frowned,	then	recognition	came.	“Tumlit—”
The	old	man,	squinting	fiercely	as	he	scanned	each	face,	finally	came	to	a
halt	before	Coltaine.	“A	most	dreadful	occurrence,	Fist,”	he	gasped	in	his
tremulous	voice.
Duiker	only	now	heard	a	restlessness	rising	from	the	refugee	encampment
stretched	up	the	trader	track.	“Tumlit,	what	has	happened?”
“Another	emissary,	I’m	afraid.	Brought	through	in	secret.	Met	with	the
Council—I	sought	to	dissuade	them	but	failed,	alas.	Pullyk	and	Nethpara	have
swayed	the	others.	Fist,	the	refugees	shall	cross	the	river,	under	the	benign
protection	of	Korbolo	Dom—”
Coltaine	spun	to	his	warlocks.	“To	your	clans.	Send	Bult	and	the	captains	to
me.”
Shouts	now	sounded	from	the	Wickans	in	the	clearing	as	the	mass	of
refugees	surged	forward,	pushing	through,	down	to	the	ford.	The	Fist	found	a
nearby	soldier.	“Have	the	clan	war	chiefs	withdraw	their	warriors	from	their
path—we	cannot	contest	this.”
He’s	right—we	won’t	be	able	to	stop	the	fools.
Bult	and	the	captains	arrived	in	a	rush	and	Coltaine	snapped	out	his
commands.	Those	orders	made	it	clear	to	Duiker	that	the	Fist	was	preparing
for	the	worst.	As	the	officers	raced	off,	Coltaine	faced	the	historian.
“Go	to	the	sappers.	By	my	command	they	are	to	join	the	refugee	train,
insignia	and	uniforms	exchanged	for	mundane	garb—”
“That	won’t	be	necessary,	Fist—they	all	wear	assorted	rags	and	looted
gear	anyway.	But	I’ll	have	them	tie	their	helms	to	their	belts.”
“Go.”
Duiker	set	off.	The	sky	was	lightening,	and	with	that	burgeoning	glow	the
butterflies	stirred	on	all	sides,	a	silent	shimmering	that	sent	shivers	through	the
historian	for	no	obvious	reason.	He	worked	his	way	up	the	seething	train,


skirting	one	edge	and	pushing	through	the	ranks	of	infantry	who	were	standing
back	and	watching	the	refugees	without	expression.
He	spied	a	ragtag	knot	of	soldiers	seated	well	back	from	the	trail,	almost	at
the	edge	of	the	flanking	picket	line.	The	company	ignored	the	refugees	and
seemed	busy	with	the	task	of	coiling	ropes.	A	few	glanced	up	as	Duiker
arrived.
“Coltaine	commands	you	join	the	refugees,”	the	historian	said.	“No
arguments—take	off	your	helms,	now—”
“Who’s	arguing?”	one	squat,	wide	soldier	muttered.
“What	are	you	planning	with	the	ropes?”	Duiker	demanded.
The	sapper	looked	up,	his	eyes	narrow	slashes	in	his	wide,	battered	face.
“We	did	some	reconnoitring	of	our	own,	old	man.	Now	if	you’d	shut	up	we
can	get	ready,	right?”
Three	soldiers	appeared	from	the	forest	side,	approaching	at	a	jog.	One
carried	a	severed	head	by	its	braid,	trailing	threads	of	blood.	“This	one’s	done
his	last	nod	at	post,”	the	man	commented,	dropping	his	prize	to	thud	and	roll
on	the	ground.	No	one	else	took	notice,	nor	did	the	three	sappers	report	to
anyone.
The	entire	company	seemed	to	complete	their	preparations	all	at	once,
ropes	around	one	shoulder,	helms	strapped	to	belts,	crossbows	readied,	then
hidden	beneath	loose	raincapes	and	telaban.	In	silence	they	rose	and	began
making	their	way	toward	the	mass	of	refugees.
Duiker	hesitated.	He	turned	to	look	down	at	the	crossing.	The	head	of	the
refugee	column	had	pushed	out	into	the	ford,	which	was	proving	waist-deep,	at
least	forty	paces	wide,	its	bottom	thick,	cloying	mud.	Butterflies	swarmed
above	the	mass	of	humanity	in	sunlit	explosions	of	pallid	yellow.	A	dozen
Wickan	horsewarriors	had	been	sent	ahead	to	guide	the	column.	Behind	them
came	the	wagons	of	the	noble	blood—the	only	refugees	staying	dry	and	above
the	chaotic	tumult.	The	historian	glanced	over	at	the	surging	train	where	the
sappers	had	gone	but	they	were	nowhere	to	be	seen,	swallowed	up	in	the
crowds.	From	somewhere	farther	up	the	trader	track	came	the	terrible	lowing
of	cattle	being	slaughtered.
The	flanking	infantry	were	readying	weapons—Coltaine	was	clearly
anticipating	a	rearguard	defense	of	the	landing.
Still	the	historian	hesitated.	If	he	joined	the	refugees	and	the	worst	came	to
pass,	the	ensuing	panic	would	be	as	deadly	as	any	slaughter	visited	upon	them
by	Korbolo	Dom’s	forces.	Hood’s	breath!	We	are	now	truly	at	that	bastard’s
mercy.
A	hand	closed	on	his	arm	and	he	spun	around	to	see	his	nameless	marine	at


his	side.
“Come	on,”	she	said.	“Into	the	mob—we’re	to	support	the	sappers.”
“In	what?	Nothing	has	befallen	the	refugees	yet—and	they’re	near	to
halfway	across—”
“Aye,	and	look	at	the	heads	turning	to	look	downstream.	The	rebels	have
made	a	floating	bridge—no,	you	can’t	see	it	from	here,	but	it’s	there,	packed
with	pikemen—”
“Pikemen?	Doing	what?”
“Watching.	Waiting.	Come	on,	lover,	the	nightmare’s	about	to	begin.”
They	joined	the	mass	of	refugees,	entered	that	human	current	as	it	poured
down	toward	the	landing.	A	sudden	roar	and	muted	clash	of	weapons
announced	that	the	rearguard	had	been	struck.	The	tide’s	momentum	increased.
Packed	within	that	jostling	chaos,	Duiker	could	see	little	to	either	side	or
behind—but	the	slope	ahead	was	revealed,	as	was	the	River	Vathar	itself,	which
they	seemed	to	be	sweeping	toward	with	the	swiftness	of	an	avalanche.	The
entire	ford	was	packed	with	refugees.	Along	the	edges	people	were	being
pushed	into	deeper	water—Duiker	saw	bobbing	heads	and	arms	struggling	in
the	sludge,	the	current	dragging	them	ever	closer	to	the	pikemen	on	the	bridge.
A	great	cry	of	dismay	rose	from	those	on	the	river,	faces	now	turning
upstream	to	something	the	historian	could	not	yet	see.
The	dozen	horsewarriors	gained	the	clearing	on	the	opposite	bank.	He
watched	them	frantically	nocking	arrows	as	they	turned	toward	the	line	of	trees
farther	up	the	bank.	Then	the	Wickans	were	reeling,	toppling	from	their
mounts,	feathered	shafts	jutting	from	their	bodies.	Horses	screamed	and	went
down.
The	nobles’	wagons	clacked	and	clattered	ashore,	then	stopped	as	the	oxen
pulling	them	sank	down	beneath	a	swarm	of	arrows.
The	ford	was	blocked.
Panic	now	gripped	the	refugees,	descending	in	a	human	wave	down	to	the
landing.	Bellowing,	Duiker	was	helpless	as	he	was	carried	along	into	the
yellow-smeared	water.	He	caught	a	glimpse	of	what	approached	from	upstream
—another	floating	bridge,	packed	with	pikemen	and	archers.	Crews	on	both
banks	gripped	ropes,	guiding	the	bridge	as	the	current	drew	it	ever	closer	to
the	ford.
Arrows	ripped	through	the	clouds	of	whirling	butterflies,	descended	on	the
mass	of	refugees.	There	was	nowhere	to	hide,	nowhere	to	go.
The	historian	found	himself	within	a	nightmare.	All	around	him,
unarmored	civilians	died	in	that	ghastly	whisper	and	clatter.	The	mob	surged	in
every	direction	now,	caught	in	terrified,	helpless	eddies.	Children	vanished


underfoot,	trampled	down	into	the	turbid	water.
A	woman	fell	back	against	Duiker.	He	wrapped	his	arms	around	her	in	an
effort	to	keep	her	upright,	then	saw	the	arrow	that	had	driven	through	the	babe
in	her	arms,	then	into	her	chest.	He	cried	out	in	horror.
The	marine	appeared	at	his	side,	thrusting	a	reach	of	rope	into	his	hands.
“Grab	this!”	she	shouted.	“Hold	on	tight—we’re	through—don’t	let	go!”
He	twisted	the	rope	around	his	wrists.	Ahead	of	the	marine,	the	strand
stretched	on,	between	the	heaving	bodies	and	out	of	sight.	He	felt	it	tighten,	was
pulled	forward.
Arrows	rained	down	ceaselessly.	One	grazed	the	historian’s	cheek,	another
bounced	from	the	leather-sheathed	chain	protecting	his	shoulder.	He	wished	to
every	god	that	he	had	donned	his	helm	instead	of	tying	it	at	his	belt—from
which	it	had	long	since	been	torn	free	and	lost.
The	pressure	on	the	rope	was	steady,	relentless,	dragging	him	through	the
mob,	over	people	and	under	them.	More	than	once	he	was	pulled	down	under
the	water,	only	to	rise	again	half	a	dozen	paces	later,	choking	and	coughing.	At
one	point,	as	he	went	over	the	top	of	the	seething	press,	he	caught	the	flash	of
sorcery	from	somewhere	ahead,	a	thundering	wave,	then	he	was	yanked	back
down,	twisting	his	shoulder	to	slide	roughly	between	two	screaming	civilians.
The	journey	seemed	unending,	battering	him	with	surreal	glimpses	until	he
was	numb,	feeling	like	a	wraith	being	pulled	through	the	whole	of	human
history,	an	endless	procession	of	pain,	suffering	and	ignoble	death.	Fate’s	cast
of	chance	was	iron-barbed,	sky-sent,	or	the	oblivion	of	all	that	waited	below.
There	is	no	escape—another	lesson	of	history.	Mortality	is	a	visitor	never	gone
for	long—
Then	he	was	being	dragged	over	wet,	muddy	corpses	and	blood-slicked
clay.	The	arrows	no	longer	descended	from	the	sky	but	sped	low	over	the
ground,	striking	wood	and	flesh	on	all	sides.	Duiker	rolled	through	a	deep,
twisting	rut,	then	came	up	against	the	spoked	wheel	of	a	wagon.
“Let	go	the	rope!”	the	marine	commanded.	“We’re	here,	Duiker—”
Here.
He	wiped	the	mud	from	his	eyes,	staying	low	as	he	looked	around	for	the
first	time.	Wickan	horsewarriors,	sappers	and	marines	lay	amidst	dead	and
dying	mounts,	all	so	studded	with	arrows	that	the	entire	landing	looked	like	a
reed	bed.	The	nobles’	wagons	had	been	cleared	from	the	end	of	the	ford	and
arrayed	in	a	defensive	crescent,	although	the	fighting	had	pushed	beyond	them
into	the	forest	itself.
“Who?”	Duiker	gasped.
The	woman	lying	beside	him	grunted.	“Just	what’s	left	of	the	sappers,	the


marines…and	a	few	surviving	Wickans.”
“That’s	it?”
“Can’t	get	anyone	else	across—and	besides,	the	Seventh	and	at	least	two	of
the	clans	are	fighting	in	the	rearguard.	We’re	on	our	own,	Duiker,	and	if	we
can’t	clear	these	woods…”
We	will	be	annihilated.
She	reached	out	to	a	nearby	corpse,	dragging	it	closer	to	remove	the	dead
Wickan’s	helm.	“This	one	looks	more	your	size	than	mine,	old	man.	Here.”
“What	are	we	fighting	out	there?”
“At	least	three	companies.	Mostly	archers,	though—I	think	Korbolo	wasn’t
expecting	any	soldiers	at	the	front	of	the	column.	The	plan	was	to	use	the
refugees	to	block	our	deployment	and	stop	us	from	gaining	this	bank.”
“As	if	Korbolo	knew	Coltaine	would	reject	the	offer,	but	the	nobles
wouldn’t.”
“Aye.	The	arrow	fire’s	tailed	off—those	sappers	are	pushing	them	back—
gods,	they’re	mayhem!	Let’s	find	us	some	useful	weapons	and	go	join	the	fun.”
“Go	ahead,”	Duiker	said.	“But	here	I	stay—within	sight	of	the	river.	I	need
to	see…”
“You’ll	get	yourself	skewered,	old	man.”
“I’ll	risk	it.	Get	going!”
She	hesitated,	then	nodded	and	crawled	off	among	the	bodies.
The	historian	found	a	round	shield	and	clambered	up	on	the	nearest
wagon,	where	he	almost	stepped	on	a	cowering	figure.	He	stared	down	at	the
trembling	man.	“Nethpara.”
“Save	me,	please!”
Ignoring	the	nobleborn,	Duiker	turned	his	attention	back	to	the	river.
The	stream	of	refugees	who	reached	the	south	bank	could	not	go	forward;
they	began	spreading	out	along	the	shoreline.	Duiker	saw	a	mob	of	them
discover	the	rope	crew	for	the	upstream	bridge,	and	descend	on	them	with	a
ferocity	that	disregarded	their	lack	of	armor	and	weapons.	The	crew	were
literally	torn	apart.
The	slaughter	had	turned	the	river	downstream	into	a	pink	mass	of	stained
insects	and	bodies,	and	still	the	numbers	grew.	Another	flaw	in	Korbolo’s	plan
was	revealed	as	the	flights	of	arrows	from	the	upstream	bridge	dwindled—the
archers	had	already	spent	their	supply.	The	floating	platform	upstream	had
been	allowed	to	drift,	closing	the	gap	until	the	pikemen	finally	came	into
contact	with	the	unarmed	civilians	on	the	ford.	But	they	had	not	accounted	for
the	roaring	rage	that	met	them.	The	refugees	had	been	pushed	past	fear.	Hands
were	slashed	as	they	closed	on	the	pikeheads,	but	they	would	not	let	go.	Others


clambered	forward	in	a	rush	to	get	to	the	archers	behind	the	wavering	line	of
pikemen.	The	bridge	sagged	beneath	the	weight,	then	tilted.	A	moment	later	the
river	was	solid	with	flailing,	struggling	figures—refugees	and	Korbolo’s
companies	both—as	the	bridge	tipped	and	broke	apart.
And	over	it	all,	the	butterflies	swarmed,	like	a	million	yellow-petalled
flowers	dancing	on	swirling	winds.
Another	wave	of	sorcery	erupted,	and	Duiker ’s	head	turned	at	the	sound.
He	saw	Sormo,	out	in	the	center	of	the	mass,	astride	his	horse.	The	power	that
rolled	from	him	tumbled	toward	the	bridge	downstream,	striking	the	rebel
soldiers	with	sparks	that	scythed	like	barbed	wire.	Blood	sprayed	into	the	air,
and	above	the	bridge	the	butterflies	went	from	yellow	to	red	and	the	stained
clouds	fell	in	a	fluttering	blanket.
But	as	Duiker	watched,	four	arrows	struck	the	warlock,	one	driving
through	his	neck.	Sormo’s	horse	whipped	its	head	around,	screaming	at	the
half-dozen	arrows	embedded	in	it.	The	animal	staggered,	slewing	sideways	to
the	edge	of	the	shallows,	then	into	deep	water.	Sormo	reeled,	then	slowly	slid
from	the	saddle,	vanishing	beneath	the	sludge.	The	horse	collapsed	on	top	of
him.
Duiker	could	not	draw	breath.	Then	he	saw	a	thin,	lean	arm	thrust	skyward
a	dozen	yards	downstream.
Butterflies	mobbed	that	straining,	yearning	reach,	even	as	it	slowly	sank
back	down,	then	disappeared.	The	insects	were	converging,	thousands,	then
hundreds	of	thousands.	On	all	sides	it	seemed	that	the	battle,	the	slaughter,
paused	and	watched.
Hood’s	breath,	they’ve	come	for	him.	For	his	soul.	Not	crows,	not	as	it
should	be.	Gods	below!
A	quavering	voice	rose	from	beneath	the	historian.	“What	has	happened?
Have	we	won?”
The	breath	that	Duiker	pulled	into	his	lungs	was	ragged.	The	mass	of
butterflies	was	a	seething,	frenzied	mound	on	the	spot	where	Sormo	had
appeared,	a	mound	as	high	as	a	barrow	and	swelling	with	every	moment	that
passed,	with	every	staggering	beat	of	the	historian’s	heart.
“Have	we	won?	Can	you	see	Coltaine?	Call	him	here—I	would	speak	to
him—”
The	moment	when	all	stood	still	and	silent	was	broken	as	a	thick	flight	of
Wickan	arrows	struck	the	soldiers	on	the	downstream	bridge.	What	Sormo	had
begun,	his	clan	kin	completed:	the	last	of	the	archers	and	pikemen	went	down.
Duiker	saw	three	squares	of	infantry	dog-trot	down	the	north	slope,	pulled
from	the	rearguard	action	to	enforce	order	on	the	crossing.	Wickan


horsewarriors	of	the	Weasel	Clan	rode	out	from	the	flanking	woods,	voicing
their	ululating	victory	cries.
Duiker	swung	about.	He	saw	Malazan	soldiers	backing	away	from	cover	to
cover—a	handful	of	marines	and	less	than	thirty	sappers.	The	arrow	fire	was
intensifying,	getting	closer.	Gods,	they’ve	already	done	the	impossible—do	not
demand	more	of	them—
The	historian	drew	a	breath,	then	climbed	up	onto	the	wagon’s	high	bench.
“Everyone!”	he	shouted	to	the	milling	refugees	crowding	the	bank.	“Every	able
hand!	Find	a	weapon—to	the	forest,	else	the	slaughter	begins	again!	The
archers	are	retur—”
He	got	no	further,	as	the	air	shook	with	a	savage,	bestial	roar.	Duiker
stared	down,	watching	hundreds	of	civilians	rush	forward,	caring	nothing	for
weapons,	intent	only	on	closing	with	the	companies	of	archers,	on	answering
the	day’s	carnage	with	a	vengeance	no	less	terrible.
We	are	all	gripped	in	madness.	I	have	never	seen	the	like	nor	heard	of	such
a	thing—gods,	what	we	have	become…
The	waves	of	refugees	swept	over	the	Malazan	positions	and,	unwavering
before	frantic,	devastating	flights	of	arrows	from	the	treeline,	plunged	into	the
forest.	Shrieks	and	screams	echoed	eerily	in	the	air.
Nethpara	clambered	into	view.	“Where	is	Coltaine?	I	demand—”
Duiker	reached	down	one-handed	and	gripped	the	silk	scarf	wound	around
the	nobleman’s	neck.	He	dragged	Nethpara	closer.	The	man	squealed,
scratching	uselessly	at	the	historian’s	hand.
“Nethpara.	He	could	have	let	you	go.	Let	you	cross.	Alone.	Under	the
shelter	of	Korbolo	Dom’s	glorious	mercy.	How	many	have	died	this	day?	How
many	of	these	soldiers,	how	many	Wickans,	have	given	their	lives	to	protect
your	hide?”
“L-let	go	of	me,	you	foul	slave-spawn!”
A	red	mist	blossomed	before	Duiker ’s	eyes.	He	took	the	nobleman’s	flabby
neck	in	both	hands	and	began	squeezing.	He	watched	Nethpara’s	eyes	bulge.
Someone	battered	at	his	head.	Someone	yanked	at	his	wrists.	Someone
wrapped	a	forearm	around	his	own	neck	and	flexed	iron-hard	muscles	across
the	throat.	The	mist	dimmed,	as	if	night	was	falling.	The	historian	watched	as
hands	pried	his	own	from	Nethpara’s	neck,	watched	as	the	man	fell	away,
gasping.
Then	dark’s	descent	was	done.


Chapter	Seventeen

One	who	was	many
On	the	blood	trail
Came	hunting	his	own	voice
Savage	murder
Sprites	buzzing	in	the	sun
Came	hunting	his	own	voice
But	Hood’s	music	is	all
He	heard,	the	siren	song
Called	silence.
SEGLORA’S	ACCOUNT
SEGLORA
The	captain	had	begun	swaying,	though	not	in	time	with	the	heaving	ship.	He
poured	wine	all	over	the	table	as	well	as	into	the	four	goblets	arrayed	before
him.	“Ordering	thick-skulled	sailors	this	way	and	that	makes	for	a
considerable	thirst.	I	expect	the	food	will	be	along	shortly.”
Pormqual’s	treasurer,	who	did	not	consider	the	company	worthy	of
knowing	his	name,	raised	painted	eyebrows.	“But,	Captain,	we	have	already
eaten.”
“Have	we?	That	explains	the	mess,	then,	though	the	mess	still	has	some
explaining	to	do,	because	it	must	have	been	awful.	You	there,”	he	said	to
Kalam,	“you’re	as	solid	as	any	Fenn	bear,	was	that	palatable?	Never	mind,	what
would	you	know,	anyway?	I	hear	Seven	Cities	natives	grow	fruit	just	so	they
can	cat	the	larvae	in	them.	Gobble	the	worm	and	toss	the	apple,	hey?	If	you
want	to	know	how	you	folk	see	the	world,	it’s	all	there	in	that	one	custom.	Now
that	we’re	all	chums,	what	were	we	talking	about?”
Salk	Elan	reached	out	and	collected	his	goblet,	sniffing	cautiously	before
taking	a	swallow.	“The	dear	treasurer	was	surprising	us	with	a	complaint,
Captain.”
“Was	he	now?”	The	captain	leaned	over	the	small	table	to	stare	at	the


treasurer.	“A	complaint?	Aboard	my	ship?	You	bring	those	to	me,	sir.”
“I	just	have,”	the	man	replied,	sneering.
“And	deal	with	it	I	shall,	as	a	captain	must.”	He	leaned	back	with	an	air	of
satisfaction.	“Now,	what	else	should	we	talk	about?”
Salk	Elan	met	Kalam’s	eye,	winked.	“What	if	we	were	to	touch	on	the	small
matter	of	those	two	privateers	presently	pursuing	us?”
“They’re	not	pursuing,”	the	captain	said.	He	drained	his	goblet,	smacked
his	lips,	then	refilled	it	from	the	webbed	jug.	“They	are	keeping	pace,	sir,	and
that	is	entirely	different,	as	you	must	surely	grasp.”
“Well,	I	admit,	I	see	the	distinction	less	clearly	than	you	do,	Captain.”
“How	unfortunate.”
“You	might,”	the	treasurer	rasped,	“endeavor	to	enlighten	us.”
“What	did	you	say?	Lightendeavorus?	Extraordinary,	man!”	He	settled
back	in	his	seat,	a	contented	expression	on	his	face.
“They	want	a	stronger	wind,”	Kalam	ventured.
“Quickening,”	the	captain	said.	“They	want	to	dance	around	us,	aye,	the
alepissing	cowards.	Toe	to	toe,	that’s	how	I’d	like	it,	but	no,	they’d	rather	duck
and	dodge.”	He	swung	surprisingly	steady	eyes	on	Kalam.	“That’s	why	we’ll
take	them	unawares,	come	the	dawn.	Attack!	Hard	about!	Marines	prepare	to
board	enemy	vessel!	I	won’t	truck	complaints	aboard	Ragstopper.	Not	a	one,
dammit.	The	next	bleat	I	hear	and	the	bleater	loses	a	finger.	Bleats	again,	loses
another	one.	And	so	on.	Each	one	nailed	to	the	deck.	Tap	tap!”
Kalam	closed	his	eyes.	They	had	sailed	four	days	now	without	an	escort,
the	tradewinds	pushing	them	along	at	a	steady	six	knots.	The	sailors	had	run	up
every	sheet	of	canvas	they	possessed	and	the	ship	sang	a	chorus	of	ominous
creaks	and	groans,	but	the	two	pirate	galleys	could	still	sail	circles	around
Ragstopper.
And	the	madman	wants	to	attack.
“Did	you	say	attack?”	the	treasurer	whispered,	his	eyes	wide.	“I	forbid	it!”
The	captain	blinked	owlishly	at	the	man.	“Why,	sir,”	he	said	in	a	calm
voice,	“I	looked	into	my	tin	mirror,	did	I	not?	It’s	lost	its	polish,	on	my	word
so	it	has.	Between	yesterday	and	today.	I	plan	to	take	advantage	of	that.”
Since	the	voyage	began,	Kalam	had	managed	to	stay	in	his	cabin	for	the
most	part,	electing	to	emerge	on	deck	only	at	the	quietest	hour,	late	in	the	last
watch	before	dawn.	Eating	with	the	crew	in	the	galley	had	also	reduced	the
number	of	encounters	with	either	Salk	Elan	or	the	treasurer.	This	night,
however,	the	captain	had	insisted	on	his	joining	them	at	dinner.	The	appearance
of	the	pirates	at	midday	had	made	the	assassin	curious	about	how	the	captain
would	deal	with	the	threat,	so	he	had	agreed.


It	was	clear	that	Salk	Elan	and	the	treasurer	had	established	a	truce	of	sorts
as	things	never	went	beyond	the	occasional	sardonic	swipe.	The	exaggerated
airs	of	civil	discourse	made	their	efforts	at	self-control	obvious.
But	it	was	the	captain	who	was	the	true	mystery	aboard	the	Ragstopper.
Kalam	had	heard	enough	talk	in	the	galley	and	between	the	First	and	Second
Mates	to	gauge	that	the	man	was	viewed	with	both	respect	and	some	kind	of
twisted	affection.	In	the	manner	that	you’d	view	a	touchy	dog.	Pat	once	and	the
tail	wags,	pat	twice	and	lose	a	hand.	He	shifted	roles	with	random	alacrity,
dismissive	of	propriety.	He	revealed	a	sense	of	humor	that	yanked	taut
comprehension.	Too	long	in	his	company—especially	when	wine	was	the
drink	of	choice—and	the	assassin’s	head	ached	with	the	effort	of	following	the
captain’s	wending	ways.	What	was	worse,	Kalam	sensed	a	thread	of	cool
purpose	within	the	scattered	weave,	as	if	the	captain	spoke	two	languages	at
once,	one	robust	and	divergent,	the	other	silken	with	secrets.	I’d	swear	the
bastard’s	trying	to	tell	me	something.	Something	vital.	He’d	heard	of	a	certain
sorcery,	from	one	of	the	less	common	warrens,	that	could	lay	a	glamor	upon	a
person’s	mind,	a	kind	of	mental	block	that	the	victim—in	absolute,	tortured
awareness—could	circle	round	but	never	manage	to	penetrate.	Ah,	now	I’m
venturing	into	the	absurd.	Paranoia’s	the	assassin’s	bedmate,	and	no	rest	comes
in	that	clamoring	serpent’s	nest.	Would	that	I	could	speak	with	Quick	Ben	now
—
“—sleep	with	your	eyes	open,	man?”
Kalam	started,	frowned	at	the	captain.
“The	master	of	this	fine	sailing	ship	was	saying,”	Salk	Elan	purred,	“that
it’s	been	a	strange	passing	of	days	since	we	reached	open	water.	It	was	an
interrogative	seeking	your	opinion,	Kalam.”
“It’s	been	four	days	since	we	left	Aren	Bay,”	the	assassin	growled.
“Has	it	now?”	the	captain	asked.	“Are	you	certain?”
“What	do	you	mean?”
“Someone	keeps	knocking	over	the	hisser,	you	see.”
“The	what?”	Oh,	the	hissing	of	sand—I’d	swear	he’s	making	up	words	as	he
goes	along.	“Are	you	suggesting	you	have	but	one	hourglass	on	Ragstopper?”
“Official	time	is	so	kept	by	a	single	glass,”	Elan	said.
“While	none	of	the	others	on	board	agree,”	the	captain	added,	filling	his
goblet	yet	again.	“Four	days…or	fourteen?”
“Is	this	some	kind	of	philosophic	debate?”	the	treasurer	demanded
suspiciously.
“Hardly,”	the	captain	managed	to	say	during	a	belch.	“We	left	harbor	with
the	first	night	of	a	quarter	moon.”


Kalam	tried	to	think	back	to	the	previous	night.	He’d	stood	on	the
forecastle,	beneath	a	brilliantly	clear	sky.	Had	the	moon	already	set?	No,	it
rode	the	horizon,	directly	beneath	the	tip	of	the	constellation	known	as	the
Dagger.	End	of	a	three-quarter	moon.	But	that’s	impossible.
“Ten	weevils	a	handful,”	the	captain	went	on.	“As	good	as	a	hisser	in
gauging	passage.	You’d	have	ten	in	close	on	a	fort-night,	unless	the	flour	was
foul	from	the	start,	only	the	cook	swears	otherwise—”
“Just	as	he’d	swear	he’d	cooked	us	dinner	here	tonight,”	Salk	Elan	said
with	a	smile,	“though	our	bellies	groan	that	what	we’ve	just	eaten	was	anything
but	food.	In	any	case,	thank	you	for	dispelling	the	confusion.”
“Well,	sir,	you’ve	a	point	there,	sharp	enough	to	prick	skin,	though	mine’s
thicker	than	most	and	I	ain’t	anything	if	not	stubborn.”
“For	which	I	cannot	help	but	admire	you,	Captain.”
What	in	Hood’s	name	are	these	two	talking	about,	or,	rather,	not	talking
about?
“A	man	gets	so	he	can’t	even	trust	the	beat	of	his	own	heart—mind	you,	I
can’t	count	past	fourteen	in	any	case,	so’s	I	could	not	help	but	lose	track	and
tracking’s	what	we’re	talking	about	here	if	I’m	not	mistaken.”
“Captain,”	the	treasurer	said,	“you	cause	me	great	distress	with	your
words.”
Salk	Elan	commented,	“You’re	not	alone	in	that.”
“Do	I	offend	you,	sir?”	The	captain’s	face	had	reddened	as	he	glared	at	the
treasurer.
“Offend?	No.	Baffle.	I	dare	say	I	am	led	to	conclude	that	you	have	lost	the
grip	on	your	own	mind.	Thus,	to	ensure	the	safety	of	this	ship,	I	have	no	choice
—”
“No	choice?”	the	captain	erupted,	rising	from	his	seat.	“Words	and	grips
like	sand.	What	slips	through	your	fingers	can	knock	you	over!	I’ll	show	you
safety,	you	sweaty	stream	of	lard!”
Kalam	leaned	back	clear	of	the	table	as	the	captain	went	to	the	cabin	door
and	began	struggling	with	his	cloak.	Salk	Elan	had	not	moved	from	his	seat,
watching	with	a	tight	smile.
A	moment	later	the	captain	flung	open	the	cabin	door	and	barrelled	into	the
passageway,	bellowing	a	call	for	his	First	Mate.	His	boots	thumped	like	fists
hammering	a	wall	as	he	made	for	the	galley.
The	cabin’s	door	creaked	back	and	forth	on	its	hinges.
The	treasurer ’s	mouth	opened	and	closed,	then	opened	again.	“What
choice?”	he	whispered	to	no	one	in	particular.
“Not	yours	to	make,”	Elan	drawled.


The	noble	swung	to	him.	“Not	mine?	And	who	else,	if	not	the	man
entrusted	with	the	Aren	treasury—”
“Is	that	what	it’s	officially	called,	then?	How	about	Pormqual’s	ill-gotten
loot?	Those	seals	on	the	crates	below	have	the	High	Fist’s	sigil	on	them,	not
the	Imperial	scepter—”
And	so	you	have	been	in	the	hold,	Salk	Elan?	Interesting.
“To	lay	hands	upon	those	crates	is	punishable	by	death,”	the	treasurer
hissed.
Elan	sneered	his	disgust.	“You’re	doing	the	dirty	work	of	a	thief,	so	what
does	that	make	you?”
The	noble	went	white.	In	silence	he	rose	and,	using	his	hands	to	steady
himself	as	the	ship	pitched,	made	his	way	across	the	small	room,	then	out	into
the	passageway.
Salk	Elan	glanced	at	Kalam.	“So,	my	reluctant	friend,	what	do	you	make	of
this	captain	of	ours?”
“Nothing	I’d	share	with	you,”	Kalam	rumbled.
“Your	constant	efforts	to	avoid	me	have	been	childish.”
“Well,	it’s	either	that	or	I	kill	you	outright.”
“How	unpleasant	of	you,	Kalam,	after	all	the	efforts	I	have	made	on	your
behalf.”
The	assassin	rose.	“Rest	assured	I’ll	repay	the	debt,	Salk	Elan.”
“You	could	do	that	with	your	company	alone—intelligent	conversation
aboard	this	ship	is	proving	hard	to	come	by.”
“I’ll	spare	a	thought	in	sympathy,”	Kalam	said,	heading	to	the	cabin	door.
“You	wrong	me,	Kalam.	I	am	not	your	enemy.	Indeed,	we	two	are	much
alike.”
The	assassin	paused	in	the	portalway.	“If	you’re	seeking	friendship
between	us,	Salk	Elan,	you’ve	just	taken	a	long	step	back	with	that
observation.”	He	stepped	out	into	the	passage	and	made	his	way	forward.
He	emerged	onto	the	main	deck	and	found	himself	in	the	midst	of	furious
activity.	Gear	was	being	battened	down,	sailors	checking	the	rigging	and	others
taking	in	sail.	It	was	past	the	tenth	bell	and	the	night	sky	was	solid	clouds,	not	a
star	showing.
The	captain	reeled	down	to	Kalam’s	side.	“What	did	I	tell	you?	Lost	its
polish!”
A	squall	was	coming—the	assassin	could	feel	it	in	the	wind	that	now
swirled	as	if	the	air	had	nowhere	to	go.
“From	the	south,”	the	captain	laughed,	clapping	Kalam	on	the	shoulder.
“We’ll	turn	on	the	hunters,	aye,	won’t	we	just!	Storm-jibbed	and	marines


crowding	the	forecastle,	we’ll	ram	’em	down	their	throats!	Hood	take	these
smirking	stalkers—we’ll	see	how	long	their	grins	last	with	a	short	sword
jabbing	’em	in	the	face,	hey?”	He	leaned	close,	the	wine	sour	on	his	breath.
“Look	to	your	daggers,	man,	it’ll	be	a	night	for	close	work,	aye,	won’t	it	just.”
His	face	spasmed	suddenly	and	he	jerked	away,	began	screaming	at	his	crew.
The	assassin	stared	after	him.	Perhaps	I’m	not	being	paranoid,	after	all.
The	man’s	afflicted	with	something.
The	deck	heeled	as	they	came	hard	about.	The	storm’s	wind	arrived	at	the
same	time,	lifting	Ragstopper	to	run	before	it	on	stiff,	shortened	sails.	Lanterns
shuttered	and	the	crew	settling	into	their	tasks,	they	plunged	on,	northward.
A	sea	battle	in	a	raging	storm,	and	the	captain	expects	the	marines	to	board
the	enemy	craft,	to	stand	on	a	pitching,	wave-whipped	deck	and	take	the	fight	to
the	pirates.	This	is	beyond	audacious.
Two	large	figures	appeared	from	behind,	flanking	the	assassin.	Kalam
grimaced.	Both	of	the	treasurer ’s	bodyguards	had	been	incapacitated	by
seasickness	since	the	first	day,	and	neither	looked	in	any	condition	to	be	able	to
do	anything	except	puke	his	guts	out	on	the	assassin’s	boots,	yet	they	stood
their	ground,	hands	on	weapons.
“Master	wishes	to	speak	with	you,”	one	of	them	growled.
“Too	bad,”	Kalam	growled	back.
“Now.”
“Or	what,	you	kill	me	with	your	breath?	Master	can	speak	with	corpses,
can	he?”
“Master	commands—”
“If	he	wants	to	talk,	he	can	come	here.	Otherwise,	like	I	said,	too	bad.”
The	two	tribesmen	retreated.
Kalam	moved	forward,	past	the	main	mast,	to	where	the	two	squads	of
marines	crouched	low	before	the	forecastle.	The	assassin	had	weathered	more
than	his	share	of	squalls	while	serving	in	the	Imperial	campaigns,	in	galleys,
transports	and	triremes,	on	three	oceans	and	half	a	dozen	seas.	This	storm	was
—thus	far	at	least—comparatively	tame.	The	marines	were	grim-faced,	as
would	be	expected	before	an	engagement,	but	otherwise	laconic	as	they	readied
their	assault	crossbows	in	the	blunted	glow	of	a	shuttered	lantern.
Kalam’s	gaze	searched	among	them	until	he	found	the	lieutenant.	“A	word
with	you,	sir—”
“Not	now,”	she	snapped,	donning	her	helmet	and	locking	the	cheek-guards
in	place.	“Get	below.”
“He	means	to	ram—”
“I	know	what	he	means	to	do.	And	when	the	crunch	comes,	the	last	thing	we


need	is	some	Hood-damned	civilian	to	watch	out	for.”
“Do	you	take	the	captain’s	orders…or	the	treasurer ’s?”
She	looked	up	at	that,	eyes	narrowing.	The	other	marines	paused.	“Get
below,”	she	said.
Kalam	sighed.	“I’m	an	Imperial	veteran,	Lieutenant—”
“Which	army?”
He	hesitated,	then	said,	“Second.	Ninth	Squad,	Bridgeburners.”
As	one,	the	marines	sat	back.	All	eyes	were	on	him	now.
The	lieutenant	scowled.	“Now	how	likely	is	that?”
Another	marine,	a	grizzled	veteran,	barked	out,	“Your	sergeant?	Let’s	hear
some	names,	stranger.”
“Whiskeyjack.	Other	sergeants?	Not	many	left.	Antsy.	Tormin.”
“You’re	Corporal	Kalam,	ain’t	you?”
The	assassin	studied	the	man.	“Who	are	you?”
“Nobody,	sir,	and	been	that	way	a	long	time.”	He	turned	to	his	lieutenant
and	nodded.
“Can	we	count	on	you?”	she	asked	Kalam.
“Not	up	front,	but	I’ll	be	close	by.”
She	looked	around.	“The	treasurer ’s	got	an	Imperial	Writ—we’re	shackled
to	it,	Corporal.”
“I	don’t	think	the	treasurer	trusts	you,	should	it	come	down	to	making	a
choice	between	him	and	the	captain.”
She	made	a	face,	as	if	tasting	something	bad.	“This	attack’s	madness,	but
it’s	sharp	madness.”
Kalam	nodded,	waited.
“I	guess	the	treasurer ’s	got	reason.”
“If	it	comes	to	it,”	the	assassin	said,	“leave	the	bodyguards	to	me.”
“Both	of	them?”
“Aye.”
The	veteran	spoke	up.	“If	we	make	the	sharks	sick	in	the	gut	with	the
treasurer,	we’ll	hang	for	it.”
“Just	be	somewhere	else	when	it	happens—all	of	you.”
The	lieutenant	grinned.	“I	think	we	can	manage	that.”
“Now,”	Kalam	said,	loud	enough	to	be	heard	by	every	marine,	“I’m	just
another	one	of	those	grease-faced	civilians,	right?”
“We	never	figured	this	outlawing	stuff	was	for	real,”	a	voice	called	out.
“Not	Dujek	Onearm.	No	way.”
Hood,	for	all	I	know	you	may	be	right,	soldier.	But	he	hid	his	uncertainty
with	a	half-salute	before	making	his	way	back	down	the	length	of	the	deck.


Ragstopper	reminded	Kalam	of	a	bear	crashing	through	thickets	as	it
barrelled	along—lumbering,	broad	and	solid	in	the	spraying	high	seas—a
spring	bear,	an	hour	out	of	the	den,	eyes	red-rimmed	with	old	sleep,	miserable
and	gnawed	with	hunger	deep	in	its	belly.	Somewhere	ahead,	two	wolves
slinking	through	the	dark…they’re	in	for	a	surprise…
The	captain	was	on	the	sterncastle,	braced	against	the	hand	manning	the
tiller.	His	First	Mate	stood	near	him,	one	arm	looped	around	the	stern	mast.
Both	were	glaring	ahead	into	the	darkness,	awaiting	the	first	sighting	of	their
quarry.
Kalam	opened	his	mouth	to	speak,	but	a	shout	from	the	First	Mate	stopped
him.
“A	point	to	port,	Captain!	Beating	three-quarters!	Hood’s	breath,	we’re
right	on	top	of	her!”
The	pirate	vessel,	a	low,	single-masted	raider	barely	visible	in	the	gloom,
was	less	than	a	hundred	paces	away,	on	a	tack	that	would	cut	directly	in	front	of
Ragstopper.	The	positioning	was	breathtakingly	perfect.
“All	hands,”	the	captain	bellowed	through	the	howl	of	the	storm,	“prepare
to	ram!”
The	First	Mate	bolted	ahead,	shouting	orders	to	his	crew.	Kalam	saw	the
marines	crouch	low	to	the	deck,	readying	for	the	impact.	Faint	screams
reached	the	assassin	from	the	pirate	vessel.	The	taut	square	sail,	storm-jibbed,
billowed	suddenly,	the	ship’s	prow	pitching	away	as	the	pirate	crew	made	a
last,	doomed	effort	to	avoid	the	collision.
The	gods	were	grinning	down	on	the	scene,	but	it	was	the	rictus	of	a
death’s	head.	A	swell	lifted	Ragstopper	high	just	before	the	contact,	then
dropped	the	trader	down	onto	the	raider ’s	low	gunnels,	just	behind	the	peaked
prow.	Wood	exploded,	splintered	and	shuddered.	Kalam	was	thrown	forward,
losing	his	grip	on	the	starboard	stern	rail.	He	pitched	from	the	sterncastle,
struck	the	main	deck	with	a	tucked	shoulder,	rolling	as	the	momentum	carried
him	forward.
Masts	snapped	somewhere	above	him,	sails	whipping	like	ghost	wings	in
the	rain-tracked	air.
Ragstopper	settled,	grinding,	popping,	canting	heavily.	Sailors	were
screaming,	shrieking	on	all	sides,	but	Kalam	could	see	little	of	what	was
happening	from	where	he	lay.	Groaning,	he	worked	his	way	upright.
The	last	of	the	marines	were	plunging	over	the	forward	port	rail,	down
and	out	of	sight—presumably	onto	the	raider ’s	deck.	Or	what’s	left	of	it.	The
clash	of	weapons	rose	muted	beneath	the	wailing	wind.
The	assassin	turned,	but	the	captain	was	nowhere	in	sight.	Nor	was	there


anyone	at	the	tiller.	The	wreckage	of	a	snapped	spar	cluttered	the	sterncastle.
Kalam	made	his	way	aft.
The	locked	ships	had	no	steerage.	Waves	were	pummeling	Ragstopper’s
starboard	hull,	flinging	sheets	of	foaming	water	across	the	main	deck.	A	body
lay	in	that	wash,	face	down	and	leaking	blood	that	stretched	weblike	in	the
rolling	water.
Reaching	the	man,	Kalam	turned	him	over.	It	was	the	First	Mate,	his
forehead	sharply	caved	in.	The	blood	was	coming	from	nose	and	throat;	the
water	had	washed	clean	the	killing	blow,	and	the	assassin	stared	at	the	damage
for	half	a	dozen	heartbeats	before	rising	and	stepping	over	the	corpse.
Not	so	seasick	after	all.
He	climbed	to	the	sterncastle	and	began	searching	through	the	wreckage.
The	man	at	the	tiller	had	lost	most	of	his	head,	only	a	few	twisted	ropes	of
flesh	and	skin	holding	what	was	left	of	it	to	the	body.	He	examined	the	slash
across	the	neck.	Two-handed,	a	step	behind	and	to	the	left.	The	spar	crushed
what	was	already	dead.
He	found	the	captain	and	one	of	the	treasurer ’s	bodyguards	beneath	the
sail.	Splinters	of	wood	jutted	from	the	giant	tribesman’s	chest	and	throat.	He
still	gripped	his	two-handed	tulwar.	The	captain’s	hands	were	shredded	ribbons
closed	on	the	blade-end,	blood	pulsing	from	them	to	stain	the	swirling	wash	of
seawater.	A	massive	discoloring	reached	the	span	of	the	man’s	brow,	but	his
breathing	was	steady.
Kalam	pried	the	captain’s	fingers	from	the	tulwar	blade	and	dragged	him
free	of	the	wreckage.
Ragstopper	loosed	its	grip	on	the	raider	at	the	same	time,	dropping	down
into	a	trough,	then	pitching	wildly	as	waves	battered	its	hull.	Figures	appeared
on	the	sterncastle,	one	taking	the	tiller,	another	crouching	down	beside	the
assassin.
Glancing	up,	Kalam	found	himself	looking	into	Salk	Elan’s	dripping	face.
“He	lives?”
“Aye.”
“We’re	not	out	of	trouble	yet,”	Elan	said.
“To	Hood	with	that!	We’ve	got	to	get	this	man	below.”
“We’ve	sprung	leaks	up	front—most	of	the	marines	are	at	the	pumps.”
They	lifted	the	captain	between	them.	“And	the	raider?”
“The	one	we	hit?	In	pieces.”
“In	other	words,”	the	assassin	said	as	they	manhandled	the	captain	down	the
slippery	steps,	“not	what	the	treasurer	planned.”
Salk	Elan	stopped,	his	eyes	sharpening.	“Seems	we’ve	slunk	on	the	same


path,	you	and	I.”
“Where	is	the	bastard?”
“He’s	taken	command…for	now.	Seems	every	officer ’s	suffered	an
unlikely	accident—anyway,	we’ve	got	the	other	vessel	closing	on	us,	so,	like	I
said,	the	fun’s	anything	but	over.”
“One	thing	at	a	time,”	Kalam	grunted.
They	made	their	way	down	through	the	galley	and	into	the	passage.	Water
swirled	ankle-deep,	and	the	assassin	could	feel	just	how	sluggish	Ragstopper
had	become.
“You	pulled	rank	on	the	marines,	didn’t	you?”	Elan	asked	as	they	reached
the	captain’s	door.
“I	don’t	outrank	the	lieutenant.”
“Even	so.	Call	it	the	power	of	notoriety,	then—she’s	already	had	harsh
words	with	the	treasurer.”
“Why?”
“The	bastard	wants	us	to	surrender,	of	course.”
They	carried	the	captain	to	his	cot.	“A	transfer	of	cargo	in	this	blow?”
“No,	they’ll	wait	it	out.”
“Then	we	got	time	enough.	Here,	help	me	get	him	undressed.”
“His	hands	are	bad.”
“Aye,	we’ll	bandage	them	up	next.”
Salk	Elan	stared	down	at	the	captain	as	the	assassin	pulled	the	blanket	up
around	the	man.	“Think	he’ll	live?”
Kalam	said	nothing,	pulling	the	captain’s	hands	free	to	study	the
lacerations.	“He	stopped	a	blow	with	these.”
“Now	that’s	not	an	easy	thing	to	do.	Listen,	Kalam,	how	are	we	in	this?”
The	assassin	hesitated,	then	said,	“How	did	you	put	it?	‘Slunk	the	same
path?’	It	seems	neither	one	of	us	wants	to	end	up	in	a	shark’s	belly.”
“Meaning	we’d	better	work	together.”
“Aye,	for	now.	Just	don’t	expect	me	to	kiss	you	good	night,	Elan.”
“Not	even	once?”
“You’d	better	get	up	top,	find	out	what’s	going	on.	I	can	finish	here.”
“Don’t	tarry,	Kalam.	Blood	could	spill	fast.”
“Aye.”
Alone	with	the	captain,	the	assassin	found	a	sewing	kit	and	began	stitching
flesh.	He	finished	one	hand	and	had	started	on	the	other	when	the	captain
groaned.
“Hood’s	breath,”	Kalam	muttered.	“Just	another	ten	minutes,	that’s	all	I
needed.”


“Doublecross,”	the	captain	whispered,	his	eyes	squeezed	shut.
“We’d	guessed	as	much,”	the	assassin	said,	continuing	closing	wounds.
“Now	shut	up	and	let	me	work.”
“Poor	Pormqual’s	treasurer	is	crooked.”
“Like	attracts	like,	as	the	saying	goes.”
“You	and	that	poncy	skulker…two	of	a	kind.”
“Thanks.	So	I	keep	hearing.”
“Up	to	you	two,	now.”
“And	the	lieutenant.”
The	captain	managed	a	smile,	his	eyes	still	closed.	“Good.”
Kalam	sat	back,	reached	for	the	bandages.	“Almost	done.”
“Me	too.”
“That	bodyguard’s	dead,	you’ll	be	pleased	to	know.”
“Aye.	Killed	himself,	the	idiot.	I	ducked	the	first	swing.	The	blade	bit
through	the	wrong	ropes.	Feel	that,	Kalam?	We’re	rolling	even—someone	up
top	knows	what	we’re	doing,	thank	the	gods.	Still,	way	too	heavy…but	she’ll
hold	together.”
“Got	enough	rags	for	that,	then.”
“That	we	have.”
“All	right,	I’m	done,”	Kalam	said,	rising.	“Get	some	sleep,	Captain.	We
need	you	hale.	And	fast.”
“Not	likely.	That	other	bodyguard	will	finish	it	first	chance	he	gets.	The
treasurer	needs	me	out	of	the	way.”
“We’ll	take	care	of	it,	Captain.”
“Just	like	that?”
“Just	like	that?”
Closing	the	door	behind	him,	Kalam	paused,	loosened	the	long-knife	in	its
scabbard.	Just	like	that,	Captain.
	
The	squall	was	spent,	and	the	sky	to	the	east	was	brightening,	clean	and	gold.
Ragstopper	had	come	around	as	the	tradewind	returned.	The	mess	on	the
sterncastle	had	been	cleared	away	and	the	crew	looked	to	have	things	in	hand,
although	Kalam	could	see	their	tension.
The	treasurer	and	his	remaining	bodyguard	stood	near	the	mainmast,	the
former	staring	steadily	at	the	raider	keeping	pace	to	starboard,	close	enough	to
see	figures	on	its	deck,	watching	them	in	turn.	The	bodyguard’s	attention,
however,	was	on	Salk	Elan,	lounging	near	the	forecastle	steps.	None	of	the
crew	seemed	willing	to	cut	across	the	ten	paces	separating	the	two	men.


Kalam	made	his	way	to	the	treasurer ’s	side.	“You	have	taken	command,
then?”
The	man	nodded	sharply,	his	diffidence	obvious	as	he	avoided	the
assassin’s	eye.	“I	intend	to	buy	our	way	clear—”
“Take	your	cut,	you	mean.	And	how	much	would	that	be?	Eighty,	ninety
percent?	With	you	along	as	hostage,	of	course.”	He	watched	the	blood	leave	the
man’s	face.
“This	is	not	your	concern,”	the	treasurer	said.
“You’re	right.	But	killing	the	captain	and	his	officers	is,	because	it
jeopardizes	this	voyage.	If	the	crew	doesn’t	know	for	certain,	you	can	rest
assured	it	suspects.”
“We	have	the	marines	to	deal	with	that.	Back	away	and	you’ll	survive	intact.
Step	in	and	you’ll	be	cut	down.”
Kalam	studied	the	raider.	“And	what’s	their	percentage?	What’s	to	stop
them	from	slitting	your	throat	and	sailing	off	with	the	whole	share?”
The	treasurer	smiled.	“I	doubt	my	uncle	and	cousins	would	do	that.	Now,	I
suggest	you	go	below—back	to	your	cabin—and	stay	there.”
Ignoring	that	advice,	Kalam	went	off	to	find	the	marines.
The	engagement	with	the	pirates	had	been	fierce	and	short.	Not	only	was
the	ship	coming	apart	under	them,	but	there	was	little	fight	left	in	the	raider ’s
panicked	crew.
“More	like	a	slaughter,”	the	lieutenant	muttered	as	the	assassin	crouched
down	opposite	her.	The	two	squads	sat	in	the	forward	hold,	amidst	streams	of
water	running	down	the	planks,	busy	stuffing	rags	into	the	breaches	in	the	hull.
“We	didn’t	even	take	a	scratch.”
“What	have	you	worked	out	thus	far?”	Kalam	quietly	asked.
She	shrugged.	“As	much	as	we	need	to,	Corporal.	What	do	you	want	us	to
do?”
“The	treasurer	will	order	you	to	stand	down.	The	pirates	will	then	relieve
you	of	your	weapons—”
“At	which	point	they	slit	our	throats	and	toss	us	overside—Imperial	Writ
or	no,	the	man’s	committing	treason.”
“Well,	he’s	stealing	from	a	thief,	but	I	take	your	point.”	Kalam	rose.	“I’ll
talk	with	the	crew	and	get	back	to	you,	Lieutenant.”
“Why	don’t	we	take	down	the	treasurer	and	his	bodyguard	right	now,
Kalam?”
The	assassin’s	eyes	narrowed.	“Stick	to	the	rules,	Lieutenant.	Leave	murder
to	those	whose	souls	are	already	stained.”
She	bit	her	lip,	studied	him	for	a	long	time,	then	slowly	nodded.


	
Kalam	found	the	sailor	he’d	spoken	with	when	the	hold	was	being	loaded	at	the
Aren	pier.	The	man	was	coiling	ropes	on	the	sterncastle	with	the	air	of
someone	needing	to	keep	busy.
“Heard	you	saved	the	captain,”	the	sailor	said.
“He’s	alive,	but	in	bad	shape.”
“Aye.	Cook’s	standing	outside	his	cabin	door,	sir.	Wi’	a	cleaver	and—ask
any	hog—the	man	can	use	it.	Beru’s	blessing,	I	seen	the	man	shave	wi’	it	once,
as	clean	as	a	virgin’s	tit.”
“Who	is	standing	in	for	the	officers?”
“If	y’	mean	who’s	got	things	shipshape	and	all	the	hands	at	stations,	that’d
be	me,	sir,	only	our	new	commander	ain’t	much	interested	in	jawing	wi’	me.
His	swordsman’s	come	over	to	tell	me	t’	get	ready	to	heave	to,	once	the	seas
have	settled	some.”
“To	transfer	cargo.”
The	man	nodded.
“And	then?”
“Well	now,	if	the	commander ’s	true	to	his	word,	they’ll	let	us	go.”
Kalam	grunted.	“And	why	would	they	be	so	kind?”
“Aye,	I’ve	been	chewin’	that	one	myself.	We	got	sharp	enough	eyes—too
sharp	for	them	to	breathe	easy.	Besides,	there’s	what’s	been	done	to	Captain.
Got	us	a	little	peeved,	that	has.”
Boots	thumped	midships	and	the	two	men	turned	to	see	the	bodyguard	lead
the	marines	onto	the	main	deck.	The	lieutenant	was	looking	none	too	happy.
“It’s	the	gods’	puke	all	round	us	now,	sir,”	the	sailor	muttered.	“Raider ’s
closing.”
“So	we’ve	arrived,”	Kalam	said	under	his	breath.	He	looked	across	to	Salk
Elan	and	found	the	man’s	eyes	on	him.	The	assassin	gave	a	nod	and	Elan
casually	turned	away,	his	hands	hidden	beneath	his	cloak.
“That	raider ’s	got	a	shipload	of	swords,	sir.	I	make	fifty	or	more,	all
gettin’	ready.”
“Leave	them	to	the	marines.	Your	crew	stays	back—spread	the	word.”
The	sailor	moved	off.
Kalam	made	his	way	to	the	main	deck.	The	treasurer	was	facing	off	with
the	lieutenant.
“I	said	to	surrender	your	weapons,	Lieutenant!”	the	treasurer	snapped.
“No,	sir.	We	will	not.”
The	treasurer	was	trembling	with	rage.	He	gestured	to	his	bodyguard.


The	big	tribesman	did	not	get	very	far.	He	made	a	choking	sound,	hands
reaching	up	to	claw	at	the	knife	protruding	from	his	throat.	Then	he	fell	to	his
knees,	toppled.
Salk	Elan	stepped	forward.	“Change	of	plans,	my	dear	sir,”	he	said,
bending	to	retrieve	his	knife.
The	assassin	moved	behind	the	treasurer	and	pushed	the	point	of	his	longknife	against	the	man’s	lower	back.	“Not	a	word,”	he	growled,	“not	a	move.”
He	then	turned	to	the	marines.	“Lieutenant,	prepare	to	repel	boarders.”
“Aye,	sir.”
The	raider	was	coming	alongside,	the	pirates	jostling	as	they	prepared	to
leap	the	distance	between	the	ships.	The	difference	in	height	meant	that	they	had
a	climb	to	make—nor	could	those	on	deck	see	much	of	what	awaited	them	on
Ragstopper.	A	lone	crewman	on	the	raider	had	begun	a	lazy	climb	toward	the
lone	mast’s	tiny	crow’s	nest.
Too	late,	you	fools.
The	pirate	captain—the	treasurer ’s	uncle,	Kalam	assumed—shouted	a
greeting	across	the	distance.
“Say	hello,”	the	assassin	growled.	“Who	knows,	if	your	cousins	are	good
enough,	you	might	win	the	day	yet.”
The	treasurer	raised	a	hand,	called	out	his	answer.
There	was	less	than	ten	paces	between	the	two	ships	now.	Salk	Elan
approached	those	of	the	Ragstopper’s	crew	who	stood	near	the	marines.	“When
she’s	close	enough,	use	the	grappling	hooks.	Make	sure	we’re	snug,	lads,
because	if	she	gets	away,	she’ll	hound	us	from	here	to	Falar.”
The	pirate	climbing	the	mast	was	halfway	up,	already	swinging	around	to
see	if	he	could	get	a	better	look	at	the	scene	on	Ragstopper’s	main	deck.
The	raider ’s	crew	threw	lines	across.	The	ships	closed.
A	cry	of	warning	from	the	lookout	was	cut	short	by	a	crossbow	quarrel.
The	man	toppled,	landing	amidst	his	fellows	crowding	the	raider ’s	deck.
Angry	shouts	arose.
Kalam	gripped	the	treasurer	by	the	collar	and	dragged	him	back	as	the	first
of	the	pirates	leaped	the	distance	and	swarmed	up	Ragstopper’s	flank.
“You’ve	made	a	terrible	mistake,”	the	treasurer	hissed.
The	marines	answered	the	assault	with	a	murderous	flight	of	quarrels.	The
first	line	of	pirates	pitched	back.
Salk	Elan	shouted	a	warning	that	brought	Kalam	spinning	around.
Hovering	just	off	the	port	side,	directly	behind	the	grouped	marines,	an
apparition	took	form,	its	wings	ten	paces	across,	its	shimmering	scales	bright
yellow	and	blinding	in	the	new	day’s	light.	The	long	reptilian	head	was	a	mass


of	fangs.
An	enkar’al—this	far	from	Raraku—Hood’s	breath!
“I	warned	you!”	the	treasurer	laughed.
The	creature	was	a	blur	as	it	plunged	into	the	midst	of	the	marines,	talons
crunching	through	chain	and	helms.
Kalam	whirled	again,	drove	his	fist	into	the	grinning	treasurer ’s	face.	The
man	dropped	to	the	deck	unconscious,	blood	gushing	from	his	nose	and	eyes.
“Kalam!”	Salk	Elan	shouted.	“Leave	the	mage	to	me—help	the	marines!”
The	assassin	bolted	forward.	Enkar ’al	were	mortal	enough,	just
notoriously	hard	to	kill,	and	rare	even	in	their	desert	home	the	assassin	had
never	before	faced	one.
Seven	marines	were	down.	The	creature’s	wings	thundered	as	it	hung	over
the	rest,	its	two	taloned	limbs	darting	downward,	clashing	against	shields.
Pirates	were	streaming	onto	Ragstopper,	opposed	now	by	only	half	a
dozen	marines,	the	lieutenant	among	them.
Kalam	had	little	time	to	think	of	what	he	planned,	and	none	to	gauge	Salk
Elan’s	progress.	“Stiffen	shields!”	he	bellowed,	then	leaped	forward,
scrambling	onto	the	shields.	The	enkar ’al	twisted	around,	razor	claws	lashing
at	his	face.	He	ducked	and	drove	his	long-knife	up	between	the	creature’s	legs.
The	point	jammed	against	scale,	snapping	like	a	twig.
“Hood!”
Dropping	the	weapon,	Kalam	surged	upward,	clambering	over	the	gnarled,
scaly	hide.	Jaws	snapped	down	at	him	but	could	not	reach.	The	assassin	swung
around,	onto	the	beast’s	back.
Sorcerous	concussions	reached	his	ears	from	the	raider ’s	deck.
Thrusting	knife	in	one	hand,	his	other	arm	looped	around	the	enkar ’al’s
sinuous	neck,	Kalam	began	slashing	at	the	beating	wings.	The	blade	slipped
through	membrane,	opening	wide,	spreading	gaps.	The	enkar ’al	fell	to	the
deck,	into	the	midst	of	the	surviving	marines,	who	closed	in	around	it,
thrusting	with	their	short	swords.
The	heavier	weapons	succeeded	where	long-knife	failed,	driving	between
scales.	Blood	sprayed.	The	creature	screamed,	thrashing	about	in	its	death
throes.
There	was	fighting	on	all	sides	now,	as	pirates	converged	to	cut	down	the
last	of	the	marines.	Kalam	clambered	off	the	dying	enkar ’al,	shifted	the	knife
to	his	left	hand	and	found	a	short	sword	lying	beside	a	dead	marine,	barely	in
time	to	meet	the	charge	of	two	pirates,	their	heavy	scimitars	slashing	down	on
both	sides.
The	assassin	leaped	between	the	two	men,	inside	their	reach,	stabbed


swiftly	with	both	weapons,	then	pushed	past,	twisting	his	blades	as	he	dragged
them	free.
His	awareness	blurred	then,	as	Kalam	surged	through	a	crush	of	pirates,
cutting,	slashing	and	stabbing	on	all	sides.	He	lost	his	knife	as	it	jammed
between	ribs,	used	the	freed	hand	to	yank	a	helmet	away	from	a	collapsing
warrior	and	jam	it	onto	his	head—the	skullcap	was	too	small,	and	a	glancing
blow	from	a	wailing	scimitar	sent	it	flying	even	as	he	broke	through	the	press,
skidding	on	blood-slick	decking	as	he	spun	around.
Half	a	dozen	pirates	wheeled	to	attack	him.
Salk	Elan	struck	the	group	from	the	side,	a	long-knife	in	either	hand.	Three
pirates	went	down	in	the	first	attack.	Kalam	launched	himself	forward,	batting
aside	a	blade,	then	driving	stiff	fingers	into	its	wielder ’s	throat.
A	moment	later	the	clash	of	weapons	had	ceased.	Figures	were	sprawled	on
all	sides,	some	moaning,	some	shrieking	and	gibbering	in	pain,	but	most	still
and	silent.
Kalam	dropped	to	one	knee,	struggling	to	regain	his	breath.
“What	a	mess!”	Salk	Elan	muttered,	crouching	to	wipe	his	blades	clean.
The	assassin	lifted	his	head	and	stared	at	him.	Elan’s	fine	clothes	were
scorched	and	soaked	in	blood.	Half	his	face	was	bright	red,	flash-burned,	the
eyebrow	on	that	side	a	smear	of	ash.	He	was	breathing	heavily,	and	every
breath	caused	him	obvious	pain.
Kalam	looked	past	the	man.	Not	a	single	marine	was	standing.	A	handful	of
sailors	moved	among	the	bodies,	pulling	free	those	that	still	lived—they’d
found	but	two	thus	far,	neither	one	the	lieutenant.
The	acting	First	Mate	came	to	the	assassin’s	side.	“Cook	wants	to	know.”
“What?”
“Is	that	big	lizard	tasty?”
Salk	Elan’s	laugh	became	a	cough.
“A	delicacy,”	Kalam	muttered.	“A	hundred	jakatas	a	pound	in	Pan’potsun.”
“Permission	to	cross	over	to	the	raider,	sir,”	the	sailor	continued.	“We	can
resupply.”
The	assassin	nodded.
“I’ll	go	with	you,”	Salk	Elan	managed.
“Appreciate	that,	sir.”
“Hey,”	one	of	the	sailors	called,	“what	should	we	do	with	the	treasurer?
The	bastard’s	still	alive.”
“Leave	him	to	me,”	Kalam	said.
	


The	treasurer	was	conscious	as	they	loaded	him	down	with	sacks	of	coin,
making	noises	behind	his	gag,	his	eyes	wide.	Kalam	and	Salk	Elan	carried	the
man	between	them	to	the	side	and	pitched	him	over	without	ceremony.
Sharks	converged	on	the	splash	the	man	made,	but	the	effort	of	following
him	down	proved	too	great	for	the	already	sated	creatures.
The	stripped-down	raider	was	still	burning	beneath	a	column	of	smoke	as
it	vanished	beyond	the	horizon.
	
The	Whirlwind	lifted	itself	into	a	towering	wall,	higher	than	the	eye	could
fathom	and	over	a	mile	in	width,	around	the	Holy	Desert	Raraku.	Within	the
wasteland’s	heart,	all	remained	calm,	the	air	refulgent	with	golden	light.
Battered	ridges	of	bedrock	rose	above	the	sands	ahead,	like	blackened
bones.	Walking	half	a	dozen	paces	in	front,	Leoman	paused	and	turned.	“We
must	cross	a	place	of	spirits,”	he	said.
Felisin	nodded.	“Older	than	this	desert…they	have	risen	and	now	watch
us.”
“Do	they	mean	us	harm,	Sha’ik	Reborn?”	the	Toblakai	asked,	reaching	for
his	weapon.
“No.	They	may	be	curious,	but	they	are	beyond	caring.”	She	turned	to
Heboric.	The	ex-priest	was	still	huddled	within	himself,	hidden	beneath	his
tattoos.	“What	do	you	sense?”
He	flinched	away	from	her	voice,	as	if	every	word	sent	his	way	was	a
jagged	dart.	“One	needn’t	be	an	immortal	ghost	not	to	care,”	he	muttered.
She	studied	him.	“Fleeing	from	the	joy	of	being	reborn	cannot	last,
Heboric.	What	you	fear	is	becoming	human	once	again—”
His	laugh	was	bitter,	sardonic.
“You	do	not	expect	to	hear	such	thoughts	from	me,”	she	noted.	“For	all	that
you	disliked	what	I	was,	you	are	loath	to	relinquish	that	child.”
“You’re	still	in	that	rush	of	power,	Felisin,	and	it’s	deluded	you	into
thinking	it’s	delivered	wisdom	as	well.	There	are	gifts,	and	then	there	is	that
which	must	be	earned.”
“He	is	as	shackles	about	you,	Sha’ik	Reborn,”	the	Toblakai	growled.	“Kill
him.”
She	shook	her	head,	still	eyeing	Heboric.	“Since	wisdom	cannot	be	gifted
to	me,	I	would	be	gifted	a	wise	man.	His	company,	his	words.”
The	ex-priest	looked	up	at	that,	eyes	narrowing	beneath	the	heavy	shelf	of
his	brow.	“I	thought	you’d	left	me	no	choice,	Felisin.”
“Perhaps	it	only	seemed	that	way,	Heboric.”


She	watched	the	struggle	within	him,	the	struggle	that	had	always	been
there.	We	have	crossed	a	war-ravaged	land,	and	all	the	while	we	were	warring
with	ourselves.	Dryjhna	has	but	raised	a	mirror…	“I	have	learned	one	thing
from	you,	Heboric,”	she	said.
“And	that	is?”
“Patience.”	She	turned	about,	waved	Leoman	on.
They	approached	the	folded,	scarred	outcroppings.	There	was	little
evidence	that	this	place	had	once	known	sacred	rites.	The	basaltic	bedrock	was
impervious	to	the	usual	pitting	and	grooving	that	active	hands	often	worked
into	the	stone	of	holy	sites,	nor	was	there	any	pattern	in	the	few	boulders
scattered	about.
Yet	Felisin	could	sense	the	presence	of	spirits,	once	strong,	now	but
echoes,	and	their	faint	regard	followed	them	with	unseen	eyes.	Beyond	the	rise
the	desert	swept	out	and	down	into	an	immense	basin,	where	the	dwindling	sea
of	ancient	times	had	finally	died.	Suspended	dust	cloaked	the	vast	depression.
“The	oasis	lies	near	the	center,”	Leoman	said	at	her	side.
She	nodded.
“Less	than	seven	leagues	now.”
“Who	carries	Sha’ik’s	belongings?”	she	asked.
“I	do.”
“I	will	take	them.”
He	was	silent	as	he	set	down	his	pack,	untied	the	flap	and	began	removing
items.	Clothing,	a	scatter	of	a	poor	woman’s	rings,	bracelets	and	earrings,	a
thin-bladed	long-knife,	its	iron	stained	black	except	for	the	honed	edge.
“Her	sword	awaits	us	at	the	encampment,”	Leoman	said	when	he’d	done.
“She	wore	the	bracelets	on	her	left	wrist	only,	the	rings	on	her	left	hand.”	He
gestured	down	at	some	leather	straps.	“She	wound	these	around	her	right	wrist
and	forearm.”	He	paused,	looked	up	at	her	with	hard	eyes.	“It	were	best	you
matched	the	attire.	Precisely.”
She	smiled.	“To	aid	in	the	deceit,	Leoman?”
He	dropped	his	gaze.	“There	may	well	be	some…resistance.	The	High
Mages—”
“Would	bend	the	cause	to	their	wills,	create	factions	within	the	camp,	then
clash	in	a	struggle	to	decide	who	will	rule	all.	They	have	not	yet	done	so,	for
they	cannot	determine	if	Sha’ik	still	lives.	Yet	they	have	prepared	the	ground.”
“Seer—”
“Ah,	you	accept	that	much	at	least.”
He	bowed.	“None	could	deny	the	power	that	has	come	to	you,	yet…”
“Yet	I	did	not	myself	open	the	Holy	Book.”


He	met	her	eyes.	“You	did	not.”
Felisin	looked	up.	The	Toblakai	and	Heboric	stood	a	short	distance	away,
watching,	listening.	“What	I	shall	open	is	not	between	those	covers,	but	is
within	me.	Now	is	not	the	time.”	She	faced	Leoman	again.	“You	must	trust	in
me.”
The	skin	tightened	around	the	desert	warrior ’s	eyes.
“You	never	could	easily	yield	that,	could	you,	Leoman?”
“Who	speaks?”
“We	do.”
He	was	silent.
“Toblakai.”
“Yes,	Sha’ik	Reborn?”
“To	a	man	who	doubts	you,	you	would	use	what?”
“My	sword,”	he	replied.
Heboric	snorted.
Felisin	swung	to	him.	“And	you?	What	would	you	use?”
“Nothing.	I	would	be	as	I	am,	and	if	I	prove	worthy	of	trust,	that	man	will
come	to	it.”
“Unless…?”
He	scowled.	“Unless	that	man	cannot	trust	himself,	Felisin.”
She	turned	back	to	Leoman	and	waited.
Heboric	cleared	his	throat.	“You	cannot	command	someone	to	have	faith,
lass.	Obedience,	yes,	but	not	belief	itself.”
She	said	to	Leoman,	“You’ve	told	me	there	is	a	man	to	the	south.	A	man
leading	a	battered	remnant	of	an	army	and	refugees	numbering	tens	of
thousands.	They	do	as	he	bids,	their	trust	is	absolute—how	has	that	man
managed	that?”
Leoman	shook	his	head.
“Have	you	ever	followed	such	a	leader,	Leoman?”
“No.”
“So	you	truly	do	not	know.”
“I	do	not	know,	Seer.”
Dismissive	of	the	eyes	of	three	men,	Felisin	stripped	down	and	attired
herself	in	Sha’ik’s	clothing.	She	donned	the	stained	silver	jewelry	with	an	odd
sense	of	long	familiarity,	then	tossed	aside	the	rags	she	had	been	wearing
earlier.	She	studied	the	desert	basin	for	a	long	moment,	then	said,	“Come,	the
High	Mages	have	begun	to	lose	their	patience.”


“We’re	only	a	few	days	from	Falar,	according	to	the	First	Mate,”	Kalam	said.
“Everyone’s	talking	about	these	tradewinds.”
“I	bet	they	are,”	the	captain	growled,	looking	as	if	he’d	swallowed
something	sour.
The	assassin	refilled	their	tankards	and	leaned	back.	Whatever	still
afflicted	the	captain,	keeping	him	to	his	cot	for	days	now,	went	beyond	the
injuries	he’d	sustained	at	the	hands	of	the	bodyguard.	Mind	you,	head	wounds
can	get	complicated.	Even	so…The	captain	trembled	when	he	spoke,	though	his
speech	was	in	no	way	slurred	or	otherwise	impaired.	The	struggle	seemed	to
be	in	pushing	the	words	out,	in	linking	them	into	anything	resembling	a
sentence.	Yet	in	his	eyes	Kalam	saw	a	mind	no	less	sharp	than	it	had	been.
The	assassin	was	baffled,	yet	he	felt,	on	some	instinctive	level,	that	his
presence	gave	strength	to	the	captain’s	efforts.	“Lookout	sighted	a	ship	in	our
wake	just	before	sunset	yesterday—a	Malazan	fast	trader,	he	thinks.	If	it	was,	it
must	have	passed	us	without	lights	or	hail	in	the	night.	No	sign	of	it	this
morning.”
The	captain	grunted.	“Never	made	better	time.	Bet	their	eyes	are	wide,	too,
dropping	headless	cocks	over	the	starboard	side	and	into	Beru’s	smiling	maw
at	every	blessed	bell.”
Kalam	took	a	mouthful	of	watered	wine,	studying	the	captain	over	the
tankard’s	dented	rim.	“We	lost	the	last	two	marines	last	night.	Left	me
wondering	about	that	ship’s	healer	of	yours.”
“Been	having	a	run	of	the	Lord’s	push,	he	has.	Not	like	him.”
“Well,	he’s	passed	out	on	pirates’	ale	right	now.”
“Doesn’t	drink.”
“He	does	now.”
The	look	the	captain	gave	him	was	like	a	bright,	distant	flare,	a	beacon
warning	of	shoals	ahead.
“All’s	not	well,	I	take	it,”	the	assassin	quietly	rumbled.
“Captain’s	head’s	askew,	that’s	a	fact.	Tongue	full	of	thorns,	close	by	ears
like	acorns	under	the	mulch,	ready	to	hatch	unseen.	Hatch.”
“You’d	tell	me	if	you	could.”
“Tell	you	what?”	He	reached	a	shaking	hand	toward	the	tankard.	“Can’t
hold	what’s	not	there,	I	always	say.	Can’t	hold	in	a	blow,	neither,	lo,	the	acorn’s
rolled	away,	plumb	away.”
“Your	hands	look	well	enough	mended.”
“Aye,	well	enough.”	The	captain	looked	away,	as	if	the	effort	of
conversation	had	finally	become	too	much.
The	assassin	hesitated,	then	said,	“I’ve	heard	of	a	warren…”


“Rabbits,”	the	captain	muttered.	“Rats.”
“All	right,”	Kalam	sighed,	rising.	“We’ll	find	you	a	proper	healer,	a	Denul
healer,	when	we	get	to	Falar.”
“Getting	there	fast.”
“Aye,	we	are.”
“On	the	tradewinds.”
“Aye.”
“But	there	aren’t	any	tradewinds,	this	close	to	Falar.”
	
Kalam	emerged	onto	the	deck,	held	his	face	to	the	sky	for	a	moment,	then
made	his	way	to	the	forecastle.
“How	does	he	fare?”	Salk	Elan	asked.
“Poorly.”
“Head	injuries	are	like	that.	Get	knocked	wrong	and	you	end	up	muttering
marriage	vows	to	your	lapdog.”
“We’ll	see	in	Falar.”
“We’d	be	lucky	to	find	a	good	healer	in	Bantra.”
“Bantra?	Hood’s	breath,	why	Bantra	when	the	main	islands	are	but	a	few
leagues	farther	along?”
Elan	shrugged.	“Ragstopper’s	home	berth,	it	seems.	In	case	you	haven’t
noticed,	our	acting	First	Mate	lives	in	a	tangle	of	superstition.	He’s	a	legion	of
neurotic	sailors	all	rolled	up	in	one,	Kalam,	and	on	this	one	you	won’t	sway
him—Hood	knows	I’ve	tried.”
A	shout	from	the	lookout	interrupted	their	conversation.	“Sails!	Two	pegs
off	the	port	bow!	Six…seven…ten—Beru’s	blessing,	a	fleet!”
Kalam	and	Elan	stepped	over	to	the	forecastle’s	portside	rail.	As	yet,	they
could	see	nothing	but	waves.
The	First	Mate	called	up	from	the	main	deck.	“What’s	their	bearing,	Vole?”
“North,	sir!	And	westerly.	They’ll	cut	across	our	wake,	sir!”
“In	about	twelve	hours,”	Elan	muttered,	“hard-tacking	all	the	way.”
“A	fleet,”	Kalam	said.
“Imperial.	The	Adjunct	Tavore,	friend.”	The	man	turned	and	offered	the
assassin	a	tight	smile.	“If	you	thought	the	blood	had	run	thick	enough	over
your	homeland…well,	thank	the	gods	we’re	heading	the	other	way.”
They	could	see	the	first	of	the	sails	now.	Tavore’s	fleet.	Horse	and	troop
transports,	the	usual	league-long	wake	of	garbage,	sewage	and	corpses	human
and	animal,	the	sharks	and	dhenrabi	thrashing	the	waves.	Any	long	journey	by
sea	delivers	an	army	foul	of	temper	and	eager	to	get	to	business.	No	doubt


enough	tales	of	atrocities	have	reached	them	to	scorch	mercy	from	their	souls.
“The	serpent’s	head,”	Elan	said	quietly,	“on	that	long,	stretching	Imperial
neck.	Tell	me,	Kalam,	is	there	a	part	of	you—an	old	soldier ’s—longing	to	be
standing	on	a	deck	over	there,	noting	with	scant	interest	a	lone,	Falar-bound
trader	ship,	while	deep	within	you	builds	that	quiet,	deadly	determination?	On
your	way	to	deliver	Laseen’s	punishment,	what	she’s	always	delivered,	as	an
Empress	must;	a	vengeance	tenfold.	Are	you	tugged	between	two	tides	right
now,	Kalam?”
“My	thoughts	are	not	yours	to	pillage,	Elan,	no	matter	how	rampant	your
imagination.	You	do	not	know	me,	nor	shall	you	ever	know	me.”
The	man	sighed.	“We’ve	fought	side	by	side,	Kalam.	We	proved	ourselves
a	deadly	team.	Our	mutual	friend	in	Ehrlitan	had	suspicions	of	what	you	intend
—think	of	how	much	greater	your	chances	with	me	at	your	side…”
Kalam	slowly	turned	to	face	Elan.	“Chances	of	what?”	he	asked,	his	voice
barely	carrying.
Salk	Elan’s	shrug	was	easy,	careless.	“Whatever.	You’re	not	averse	to
partnerships,	are	you?	There	was	Quick	Ben	and,	before	that,	Porthal	K’nastra
—from	your	early	pre-Imperial	days	in	Karaschimesh.	Hood	knows,	anyone
looking	at	your	history,	Kalam,	might	well	assert	that	you	thrive	on
partnerships.	Well,	man,	what	do	you	say?”
The	assassin	responded	with	a	slow	blink	of	his	lids.	“And	what	makes	you
think	I	am	alone	right	now,	Salk	Elan?”
For	the	briefest	yet	most	satisfying	of	moments,	Kalam	saw	a	flicker	of
uncertainty	rattle	Elan’s	face,	before	a	smooth	smile	appeared.	“And	where
does	he	hide,	up	in	the	crow’s	nest	with	that	dubiously	named	lookout?”
Kalam	turned	away.	“Where	else?”
The	assassin	felt	Salk	Elan’s	eyes	on	his	back	as	he	strode	away.	You’ve	the
arrogance	common	to	every	mage,	friend.	You’ll	have	to	excuse	my	pleasure	in
spreading	cracks	through	it.


Chapter	Eighteen

I	stood	in	a	place
where	all	shadows	converged
the	end	of	the	Path	of	Hands
Soletaken	and	D’ivers
through	the	gates	of	truth
where	from	the	darkness
all	mysteries	emerged.
THE	PATH
T ROUT 	SEN’AL’BHOK’ARALA
They	came	upon	the	four	bodies	at	the	edge	of	an	upthrust	of	roots	that	seemed
to	mark	the	entrance	to	a	vast	maze.	The	figures	were	contorted,	limbs
shattered,	their	dark	robes	twisted	and	stiff	with	dried	blood.
Recognition	arrived	dull	and	heavy	in	Mappo’s	mind,	an	answering	of
suspicions	that	came	with	little	surprise.	Nameless	Ones…Priests	of	the	Azath,
if	such	entities	can	have	priests.	How	many	cold	hands	have	guided	us	here?
Myself…Icarium…these	two	twisted	roots…journeying	to	Tremorlor—
With	a	grunt,	Icarium	stepped	forward,	his	eyes	on	a	broken	staff	lying
beside	one	of	the	corpses.	“I	have	seen	those	before,”	he	said.
The	Trell	frowned	at	his	friend.	“How?	Where?”
“In	a	dream.”
“Dream?”
The	Jhag	gave	him	a	half-smile.	“Oh	yes,	Mappo,	I	have	dreams.”	He	faced
the	bodies	again.	“It	began	as	all	such	dreams	begin.	I	am	stumbling.	In	pain.
Yet	I	bear	no	wounds,	and	my	weapons	are	clean.	No,	the	pain	is	within	me,	as
of	a	knowledge	once	gained,	then	lost	yet	again.”
Mappo	stared	at	his	friend’s	back,	struggling	to	comprehend	his	words.
“I	arrive,”	the	Jhag	continued	in	dry	tones,	“at	the	outskirts	of	a	town.	A
Trellish	town	on	the	plain.	It	has	been	destroyed.	Scars	of	sorcery	stain	the
ground…the	air.	Bodies	rot	in	the	streets,	and	Great	Ravens	have	come	to	feed


—their	laughter	is	the	voice	of	the	stench.”
“Icarium—”
“And	then	a	woman	appears,	dressed	as	are	these	here	before	us.	A
priestess.	She	holds	a	staff,	from	which	fell	power	still	bleeds.
“	‘What	have	you	done?’	I	ask	her.
“	‘Only	what	is	necessary,’	is	her	soft	reply.	I	see	in	her	face	a	great	fear	as
she	looks	upon	me,	and	I	am	saddened	by	it.	‘Jhag,	you	must	not	wander
alone.’
“Her	words	seem	to	call	up	terrible	memories.	And	images,	faces—
companions,	countless	in	number.	As	if	I	have	rarely	been	alone.	Men	and
women	have	walked	at	my	side,	sometimes	singly,	sometimes	in	legion.	These
memories	fill	me	with	grief,	as	if	in	some	way	I	have	betrayed	every	one	of
those	companions.”	He	paused,	and	Mappo	saw	his	head	slowly	nod.	“Indeed,	I
understand	this	now.	They	were	all	guardians,	like	you,	Mappo.	And	they	all
failed.	Were,	perhaps,	killed	by	my	own	hand.”
He	shook	himself.	“The	priestess	sees	what	lies	writ	upon	my	face,	for	hers
becomes	its	mirror.	Then	she	nods.	Her	staff	blossoms	with	sorcery…and	I
wander	a	lifeless	plain,	alone.	The	pain	is	gone—where	it	had	lodged	within
me,	there	is	now	nothing.	And,	as	I	feel	my	memories	drift	apart…away…I
sense	I	have	but	dreamed.	And	so	awaken.”	He	turned	then,	offered	Mappo	a
dreadful	smile.
Impossible.	A	twisting	of	the	truth.	I	saw	the	slaughter	with	my	own	eyes.	I
spoke	with	the	priestess.	You	have	been	visited	in	your	dreams,	Icarium,	with
fickle	malice.
Fiddler	cleared	his	throat.	“Looks	like	they	were	guarding	this	entrance.
Whatever	found	them	proved	too	much.”
“They	are	known	on	the	Jhag	Odhan,”	Mappo	said,	“as	the	Nameless
Ones.”
Icarium’s	eyes	hardened	on	the	Trell.
“That	cult,”	Apsalar	muttered,	“is	supposed	to	be	extinct.”
The	others	looked	at	her.	She	shrugged.	“Dancer ’s	knowledge.”
Iskaral	sputtered.	“Hood	take	their	rotting	souls!	Presumptuous	bastards
one	and	all—how	dare	they	make	such	claims?”
“What	claims?”	Fiddler	growled.
The	High	Priest	hugged	himself.	“Nothing.	Speak	nothing	of	it,	yes.
Servants	of	the	Azath—pah!	Are	we	naught	but	pieces	on	a	gameboard?	My
master	scoured	them	from	the	Empire,	yes.	A	task	for	the	Talons,	as	Dancer
will	tell	you.	A	necessary	cleansing,	a	plucking	of	a	thorn	from	the	Emperor ’s
side.	Slaughter	and	desecration.	Merciless.	Too	many	vulnerable	secrets—


corridors	of	power—oh,	how	they	resented	my	master ’s	entry	into	Deadhouse
—”
“Iskaral!”	Apsalar	snapped.
The	priest	ducked	as	if	cuffed.
Icarium	faced	the	young	woman.	“Who	voiced	that	warning?	Through
your	mouth—who	spoke?”
She	fixed	cool	eyes	on	him.	“Possessing	these	memories	enforces	a
responsibility,	Icarium,	just	as	possessing	none	exculpates.”
The	Jhag	flinched.
Crokus	had	edged	forward.	“Apsalar?”
She	smiled.	“Or	Cotillion?	No,	it	is	just	me,	Crokus.	I	am	afraid	I	have
grown	weary	of	all	these	suspicions.	As	if	I	have	no	self	unstained	by	the	god
who	once	possessed	me.	I	was	but	a	girl	when	I	was	taken.	A	fisherman’s
daughter.	But	I	am	no	mere	girl	any	more.”
Her	father ’s	sigh	was	loud.	“Daughter,”	he	rumbled,	“we	ain’t	none	of	us
what	we	once	were,	and	there	ain’t	nothing	simple	in	what	we’ve	gone	through
to	get	here.”	He	scowled,	as	if	struggling	for	words.	“But	you	ordered	the	High
Priest	to	shut	up,	to	protect	secrets	that	Dancer—Cotillion—would	want	kept
that	way.	So	Icarium’s	suspicions	were	natural	enough.”
“Yes,”	she	countered,	“I	am	not	a	slave	to	what	I	was.	I	decide	what	to	do
with	the	knowledge	I	possess.	I	choose	my	own	causes,	Father.”
Icarium	spoke.	“I	stand	chastised,	Apsalar.”	He	faced	Mappo	again.	“What
more	do	you	know	of	these	Nameless	Ones,	friend?”
Mappo	hesitated,	then	said,	“Our	tribe	welcomed	them	as	guests,	but	their
visits	were	rare.	I	believe,	however,	that	indeed	they	view	themselves	as
servants	of	the	Azath.	If	Trell	legends	hold	any	truth,	then	the	cult	may	well
date	from	the	time	of	the	First	Empire—”
“They	have	been	eradicated!”	Iskaral	shrieked.
“Within	the	borders	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	perhaps,”	Mappo	conceded.
“My	friend,”	Icarium	said,	“you	are	withholding	truths.	I	would	hear
them.”
The	Trell	sighed.	“They	have	taken	it	upon	themselves	to	recruit	your
guardians,	Icarium,	and	have	done	so	since	the	beginning.”
“Why?”
“That	I	do	not	know.	Now	that	you	ask	it—”	He	frowned.	“An	interesting
question.	Dedication	to	noble	vows?	Protection	of	the	Azath?”	Mappo
shrugged.
“Hood’s	stubby	ankles!”	Rellock	growled.	“Might	be	guilt,	for	all	we
know.”


All	eyes	swung	to	him.
After	a	long,	silent	moment,	Fiddler	shook	himself.	“Come	on,	then.	Into
the	maze.”
	
Arms	and	limbs.	What	clawed	at	the	binding	roots,	what	stretched	and	twisted
in	a	hopeless	effort	to	pull	free,	what	reached	out	in	supplication,	in	silent
appeal	and	in	deadly	offer	from	all	sides,	was	an	array	of	imprisoned	life,	and
few	among	those	horridly	animate	projections	were	human	in	origin.
Fiddler ’s	imagination	failed	his	compulsive	desire	to	fashion	likely
bodies,	heads	and	faces	to	such	limbs,	even	as	he	knew	that	the	reality	of	what
lay	hidden	within	the	woven	walls	would	pale	his	worst	nightmares.
Tremorlor ’s	gnarled	jail	of	roots	held	demons,	ancient	Ascendants	and
such	a	host	of	alien	creatures	that	the	sapper	was	left	trembling	in	the
realization	of	his	insignificance	and	that	of	all	his	kind.	Humans	were	but	one
tiny,	frail	leaf	on	a	tree	too	massive	even	to	comprehend.	The	shock	of	that
unmanned	him,	mocking	his	audacity	with	an	endless	echo	of	ages	and	realms
trapped	within	this	mad,	riotous	prison.
They	could	hear	battles	raging	on	all	sides,	thus	far	mercifully	in	other
branches	of	the	tortured	maze.	The	Azath	was	being	assailed	from	all	fronts.
The	sound	of	snapping,	shattering	wood	cracked	through	the	air.	Bestial
screams	rent	the	iron-smeared	air	above	them,	voices	lost	from	the	throats	that
released	them,	voices	the	only	thing	that	could	escape	this	terrifying	war.
The	crossbow’s	stock	was	slick	with	sweat	in	Fiddler ’s	hands	as	he	edged
forward,	keeping	to	the	center	of	the	path,	beyond	the	reach	of	those	grasping,
unhuman	hands.	A	sharp	bend	lay	just	ahead.	The	sapper	crouched	down,	then
glanced	back	at	the	others.
Only	three	Hounds	remained.	Shan	and	Gear	had	set	off,	taking	divergent
paths.	Where	they	were	now	and	what	was	happening	to	them	Fiddler	had	no
idea,	but	Baran,	Blind	and	Rood	did	not	seem	perturbed	at	their	absence.	The
sightless	female	padded	at	Icarium’s	side	as	if	she	was	nothing	more	than	a
well-trained	companion	to	the	Jhag.	Baran	held	back	as	rear-guard,	while
Rood—pale,	mottled,	a	solid	mass	of	muscle—waited	not	five	paces	from
Fiddler ’s	position,	motionless.	Its	eyes,	a	dark	liquid	brown,	seemed	fixed	on
the	sapper.
He	shivered,	his	gaze	flicking	once	again	to	Blind.	At	Icarium’s	side…so
close…He	understood	that	proximity	all	too	clearly,	as	did	Mappo.	If	bargains
could	be	struck	with	a	House	of	the	Azath,	then	Shadowthrone	had	managed	it.
The	Hounds	would	not	be	taken—as	much	as	Tremorlor	would	have	yearned


for	such	prizes,	for	the	abrupt	and	absolute	removal	of	these	ancient	killers—
no,	the	deal	involved	a	much	greater	prize…
Mappo	stood	on	the	Jhag’s	other	side,	the	burnished	long-bone	club	raised
before	him.	A	surge	of	compassion	flooded	Fiddler.	The	Trell	was	being	torn
apart	from	within.	He	had	more	than	just	shapeshifters	to	guard	against—there
was,	after	all,	the	companion	he	loved	as	a	brother.
Crokus	and	Apsalar,	the	former	with	his	fighting	knives	out	and	held	in
admirably	relaxed	grips,	flanked	Servant.	Pust	slunk	along	a	step	behind	them.
And	this	is	what	we	are.	This,	and	no	more	than	this.
He	had	paused	before	the	bend	in	response	to	an	instinctive	hesitation	that
seemed	to	wrap	an	implacable	grip	around	his	spine.	Go	no	farther.	Wait.	The
sapper	sighed.	Wait	for	what?
His	eyes,	still	wandering	over	the	group	behind	him,	caught	on	something,
focused.
Rood’s	hackles	had	begun	a	slow	rise.
“Hood!”
Movement	exploded	all	around	him,	a	massive	shape	barrelling	into	view
directly	ahead	with	a	roar	that	turned	Fiddler ’s	marrow	into	spikes	of	ice.	And
above,	a	thudding	flapping	of	leathery	wings,	huge	talons	darting	down.
The	charging	Soletaken	was	a	brown	bear,	as	big	as	a	noble-born’s
carriage,	both	flanks	brushing	the	root	walls	of	the	maze,	where	arms	were
pulled,	stretched,	hands	closed	on	thick	fur.	The	sapper	saw	one	unhuman	limb
torn	from	the	trio	of	joints	that	formed	its	shoulder,	spurting	old,	black	blood.
Ignoring	these	desperate	efforts	as	if	they	were	no	more	than	burns	and	thorns,
the	bear	lunged	forward.
Fiddler	dropped	to	the	root-bound	floor—the	bark	hot	and	greasy	with
some	kind	of	sweat—sparing	no	breath	to	shout	even	a	warning.	Not	that	it	was
needed.
The	bear ’s	underside	swept	over	him	in	a	blur,	the	fur	pale	and	smeared	in
blood,	then	it	was	past,	even	as	the	sapper	rolled	to	follow	its	attack.
The	bear ’s	attention	was	fixed	exclusively	on	the	blood-red	enkar ’al
hovering	before	it—another	Soletaken,	shrieking	with	rage.	The	bear ’s	paws
lashed	out,	closing	on	empty	air	as	the	winged	reptile	darted	backward—and
into	the	reach	of	Mappo’s	club.
Fiddler	could	not	fathom	the	strength	behind	the	Trell’s	two-handed,	fullshouldered	swing.	The	weapon’s	tusked	head	struck	the	enkar ’al’s	ridged	chest
and	plunged	inward	with	a	snapping	of	bones.	The	enkar ’al,	itself	the	size	of	an
ox,	seemed	literally	to	crumple	and	fold	around	that	blow.	Wing	bones	broke,
neck	and	head	were	thrown	forward,	eyes	and	nostrils	spraying	blood.


The	reptilian	Soletaken	was	dead	before	it	struck	the	root	wall.	Talons	and
hands	received	and	held	it.
“No!”	Mappo	roared.
Fiddler ’s	gaze	darted	to	Icarium—but	the	Jhag	was	not	the	cause	of	the
Trell’s	cry,	for	the	Hound	Rood	had	attacked	the	massive	bear,	striking	it	from
the	side.
With	a	scream	the	Soletaken	lurched	sideways,	up	against	the	root	wall.
Few	were	the	reaching	limbs	that	could	hold	fast	such	a	beast,	yet	one	awaited
it,	one	wrapped	its	green-skinned	length	around	the	bear ’s	thick	neck,	and	that
one	possessed	a	strength	beyond	even	the	Soletaken’s.
Rood	clamped	a	flailing	paw	in	its	jaws,	crushing	bones,	then	tore	the
appendage	away	with	savage	shakes	of	its	head.
“Messremb!”	the	Trell	bellowed,	struggling	in	Icarium’s	restraining	grip.
“An	ally!”
“A	Soletaken!”	Iskaral	Pust	shrieked,	dancing	around.
Mappo	sagged	suddenly.	“A	friend,”	he	whispered.
And	Fiddler	understood.	The	first	friend	lost	this	day.	The	first…
Tremorlor	laid	claim	to	both	shapeshifters	as	roots	snaked	out,	wrapping
around	the	newcomers.	The	two	beasts	now	faced	each	other	on	their
respective	walls—their	eternal	resting	places.	The	Soletaken	bear,	blood
gushing	from	the	stump	at	the	end	of	one	limb,	struggled	on,	but	even	its
prodigious	strength	was	useless	against	the	otherworldly	might	of	the	Azath
and	the	arm	that	held	it,	now	tightening.	Messremb’s	constricted	throat
struggled	to	find	air.	The	red	rims	around	its	dark-brown	eyes	took	on	a	bluish
cast,	the	eyes	bulging	from	their	damp,	streaked	nests	of	fur.
Rood	had	pulled	away	and	was	placidly	devouring	the	severed	paw,	bones
and	flesh	and	fur.
“Mappo,”	Icarium	said,	“see	that	stranger ’s	arm	crushing	the	life	from	him
—do	you	understand?	Not	an	eternal	prison	for	Messremb.	Hood	will	take	him
—death	will	take	him,	as	it	did	the	enkar ’al…”
The	entwining	roots	from	the	opposing	walls	reached	out	to	each	other,
almost	touching.
“The	maze	finds	a	new	wall,”	Crokus	said.
“Quickly	then,”	Fiddler	snapped,	only	now	regaining	his	feet.	“Everyone
to	this	side.”

They	moved	on,	silent	once	again.	Fiddler	found	his	hands	trembling


incessantly	now	where	they	gripped	his	pitiful	weapon.	The	strengths	and
savagery	he	had	witnessed	minutes	earlier	clashed	with	such	alarm	that	it	left
his	mind	numb.
We	cannot	survive	this.	A	hundred	Hounds	of	Shadow	would	not	be	enough.
Such	shapeshifting	creatures	have	arrived	in	their	thousands,	all	here,	all	in
Tremorlor’s	grounds—how	many	will	reach	the	House?	Only	the	strongest.	The
strongest…And	what	is	it	we	dare?	To	step	within	the	House,	to	find	the	gate
that	will	take	us	to	Malaz	City,	to	the	Deadhouse	itself.	Gods,	we	are	but	minor
players…with	one	exception,	a	man	we	cannot	afford	to	unleash,	a	man	even	the
Azath	fears.
Sounds	of	fierce	battle	assailed	them	from	all	sides.	The	other	corridors	of
this	infernal	maze	played	host	to	a	mayhem	that	Fiddler	knew	they	themselves
would	soon	be	unable	to	avoid.	Indeed,	those	terrible	sounds	had	grown
louder,	closer.	We’re	getting	nearer	the	House.	We’re	all	converging…
He	stopped,	turning	toward	the	others.	He	left	his	warning	unspoken,	for
every	face,	every	set	of	eyes	that	met	his,	bespoke	the	same	knowledge.
Claws	clattered	ahead	and	the	sapper	whirled	to	see	Shan	arrive,	slowing
quickly	from	a	frantic	run.	Her	flanks	were	heaving,	tracked	in	countless
wounds.
Oh,	Hood…
Another	sound	reached	them,	approaching	from	up	the	trail,	from	where
the	Hound	had	just	come.
“He	was	warned!”	Icarium	cried.	“Gryllen!	You	were	warned!”
Mappo	had	wrapped	his	arms	around	the	Jhag.	Icarium’s	sudden	surge	of
anger	stilled	the	air	on	all	sides—as	if	an	entire	warren	had	drawn	breath.	The
Jhag	was	motionless	in	that	embrace,	yet	the	sapper	saw	the	Trell’s	arms	strain,
stretch	to	an	unseen	force.	The	sound	that	broke	from	Mappo	was	a	thing	of
such	pain,	such	distress	and	fear	that	Fiddler	sagged,	tears	starting	from	his
eyes.
The	Hound	Blind	stepped	away	from	Icarium’s	side,	and	the	shock	of
seeing	her	tail	dip	jolted	through	the	sapper.
Rood	and	Baran	joined	Shan,	forming	a	nervous	barrier—leaving	Fiddler
on	the	wrong	side.	He	scrambled	back,	his	limbs	moving	jerkily,	as	if
weakened	by	a	gallon	of	wine	in	his	veins.	His	gaze	held	on	Icarium,	as	the
edge	they	now	all	tottered	on	finally	revealed	itself,	promising	horror.
All	three	Hounds	flinched	and	jolted	back	a	step.	Fiddler	spun	about.	The
path	ahead	was	closed	into	a	new	wall,	a	seething,	swarming	wall.	Oh,	my,	we
meet	again.


	
The	girl	was	no	more	than	eleven	or	twelve,	wearing	a	leather	vest	on	which
was	stitched	overlapping	bronze	scales—flattened	coins,	in	fact—and	the	spear
she	held	in	her	hands	was	heavy	enough	to	waver	as	she	resolutely	maintained
her	guard	stance.
Felisin	glanced	down	at	the	basketful	of	braided	flowers	at	the	girl’s	bare,
dusty	feet.	“You’ve	some	skill	with	those,”	she	said.
The	young	sentry	glanced	again	at	Leoman,	then	the	Toblakai.
“You	may	lower	your	weapon,”	the	desert	warrior	said.
The	spear ’s	trembling	point	dropped	down	to	the	sand.
The	Toblakai’s	voice	was	hard,	“Kneel	before	Sha’ik	Reborn!”
She	was	prostrate	in	an	instant.
Felisin	reached	down	and	touched	the	girl’s	head.	“You	may	rise.	What	is
your	name?”
As	she	climbed	hesitantly	upright,	she	answered	with	a	shake	of	her	head.
“Likely	one	of	the	orphans,”	Leoman	said.	“None	to	speak	for	her	in	the
naming	rite.	Thus,	she	has	no	name,	yet	she	would	give	her	life	for	you,	Sha’ik
Reborn.”
“If	she	would	give	her	life	for	me,	then	she	has	earned	a	name.	So	with	the
other	orphans.”
“As	you	wish—who	then	will	speak	for	them?”
“I	shall,	Leoman.”
The	edge	of	the	oasis	was	marked	by	low,	crumbling	mudbrick	walls	and	a
thin	scatter	of	palms	under	which	sand	crabs	scuttled	through	dry	fronds.	A
dozen	white	goats	stood	in	nearby	shade,	light-gray	eyes	turned	toward	the
newcomers.
Felisin	reached	down	and	collected	one	of	the	bracelets	of	braided	flowers.
She	slipped	it	over	her	right	wrist.
They	continued	on	into	the	heart	of	the	oasis.	The	air	grew	cooler;	the
pools	of	shadow	they	passed	through	were	a	shock	after	so	long	under
unrelieved	sunlight.	The	endless	ruins	revealed	that	a	city	had	once	stood	here,
a	city	of	spacious	gardens	and	courtyards,	pools	and	fountains,	all	reduced	to
stumps	and	low	ridges.
Corrals	ringed	the	camp,	the	horses	within	them	looking	healthy	and	fit.
“How	large	is	this	oasis?”	Heboric	asked.
“Can	you	not	inquire	of	the	ghosts?”	Felisin	asked.
“I’d	rather	not.	This	city’s	destruction	was	anything	but	peaceful.	Ancient
invaders,	crushing	the	last	of	the	First	Empire’s	island	enclaves.	The	thin	sky-


blue	potsherds	under	our	feet	are	First	Empire,	the	thick	red	ones	are	from	the
conquerors.	From	something	delicate	to	something	brutal,	a	pattern	repeated
through	all	of	history.	These	truths	weary	me,	down	to	my	very	soul.”
“The	oasis	is	vast,”	Leoman	told	the	ex-priest.	“There	are	areas	that	hold
true	soil,	and	these	we	have	planted	with	forage	and	crops.	A	few	ancient	cedar
stands	remain,	amidst	stumps	that	have	turned	to	stone.	There	are	pools	and
lakes,	the	water	fresh	and	unending.	Should	we	choose,	we	need	never	leave
this	place.”
“How	many	people?”
“Eleven	tribes.	Forty	thousand	of	the	best-trained	cavalry	this	world	has
ever	seen.”
Heboric	grunted.	“And	what	can	cavalry	do	against	legions	of	infantry,
Leoman?”
The	desert	warrior	grinned.	“Only	change	the	face	of	war,	old	man.”
“It’s	been	tried	before,”	Heboric	said.	“What	has	made	the	Malazan
military	so	successful	is	its	ability	to	adapt,	to	alter	tactics—even	on	the	field
of	battle.	You	think	the	Empire	has	not	met	horse	cultures	before,	Leoman?
Met,	and	subdued.	A	fine	example	would	be	the	Wickans,	or	the	Seti.”
“And	how	did	the	Empire	succeed?”
“I	am	not	the	historian	for	such	details—they	never	interested	me.	Had	you
a	library	with	Imperial	texts—works	by	Duiker	and	Tallobant—you	could	read
for	yourself.	Assuming	you	can	read	Malazan,	that	is.”
“You	define	the	limits	of	their	region,	the	map	of	their	seasonal	rounds.
You	take	and	hold	water	sources,	building	forts	and	trading	posts—for	trade
weakens	your	enemy’s	isolation,	the	very	source	of	their	power.	And,
depending	on	how	patient	you	are,	you	either	fire	the	grasslands	and	slaughter
every	animal	on	four	legs,	or	you	wait,	and	to	every	band	of	youths	that	rides
into	your	settlements,	you	offer	the	glory	of	war	and	booty	in	foreign	lands,
with	the	promise	to	keep	the	group	intact	as	a	fighting	unit.	Such	a	lure	plucks
the	flower	from	those	tribes,	until	none	but	old	men	and	old	women	mutter
about	the	freedom	that	once	existed,”	Leoman	replied.
“Ah,	someone’s	done	their	reading,	then.”
“Aye,	we	possess	a	library,	Heboric.	A	vast	one,	at	Sha’ik	Elder ’s
insistence.	‘Know	your	enemy	better	than	they	know	themselves.’	So	said
Emperor	Kellanved.”
“No	doubt,	though	I	dare	say	he	wasn’t	the	first.”
The	mudbrick	residences	of	the	tribes	appeared	on	all	sides	as	the	group
emerged	from	an	avenue	between	horse	pens.	Children	ran	in	the	sandy	streets,
trader	carts	pulled	by	mules	and	oxen	were	slowly	winding	their	way	out	from


the	center,	the	market	done	for	the	day.	Packs	of	dogs	came	forward	to	assuage
their	curiosity,	then	fled	at	the	rank	challenge	of	the	stiff	roll	of	white	bear	fur
resting	across	the	Toblakai’s	broad	shoulders.
A	crowd	began	to	gather,	following	them	as	they	made	their	way	toward
the	settlement’s	heart.	Felisin	felt	a	thousand	eyes	on	her,	heard	the	uncertain
murmuring.	Sha’ik,	yet	not	Sha’ik.	Yet	Sha’ik,	for	look	at	her	two	favored
bodyguards,	the	Toblakai	and	Leoman	of	the	Wastes,	the	great	warriors	thinned
by	their	journey	into	the	desert.	The	prophecy	spoke	of	rebirth,	a	renewal.
Sha’ik	has	returned.	At	long	last,	and	she	is	reborn.	Sha’ik	Reborn—
“Sha’ik	Reborn!”	The	two	words	found	a	hissing	cadence,	a	rhythm	like
waves,	growing	louder.	The	crowds	burgeoned,	word	spreading	with	swift
breath.
“I	hope	there’s	a	clearing	or	amphitheater	at	the	center,”	Heboric	muttered.
He	gave	Felisin	an	ironic	grin.	“When	did	we	last	travel	a	crowded	street,
lass?”
“Better	from	shame	to	triumph	than	the	other	way	around,	Heboric.”
“Aye,	I’ll	not	argue	that.”
“There	is	a	parade	ground	before	the	palace	tent,”	Leoman	said.
“Palace	tent?	Ah,	a	message	of	impermanence,	a	symbol	saluting	tradition
—the	power	of	the	old	ways	of	life	and	all	that.”
Leoman	turned	to	Felisin.	“Your	companion’s	lack	of	respect	could	prove
problematic,	Sha’ik	Reborn.	When	we	meet	the	High	Mages—”
“He’ll	wisely	keep	his	mouth	shut.”
“He	had	better.”
“Cut	out	his	tongue,”	the	Toblakai	growled.	“Then	we	need	not	worry.”
“No?”	Heboric	laughed.	“You	underestimate	me	still,	oaf.	I	am	blind,	yet	I
see.	Cut	out	my	tongue	and	oh,	how	I	shall	speak!	Relax,	Felisin,	I’m	no	fool.”
“You	are	if	you	continue	using	her	old	name,”	Leoman	warned.
Felisin	left	them	to	bicker,	sensing	that,	at	last,	despite	the	sharp	edges	to
the	words	they	threw	at	one	another,	a	bond	was	developing	between	the	three
men.	Not	something	as	simple	as	friendship—the	Toblakai	and	Heboric	had
chains	of	hatred	linking	them,	after	all—but	one	of	experiences	shared.	My
rebirth	is	what	they	share,	even	as	they	stand	as	points	of	a	triangle,	with
Leoman	the	apex.	Leoman,	the	man	with	no	beliefs.	They	were	nearing	the
settlement’s	center.	She	saw	a	platform	to	one	side,	a	disc-shaped	dais
surrounding	a	fountain.	“There,	to	start.”
Leoman	turned	in	surprise.	“What?”
“I	would	speak	to	these	followers.”
“Now?	Before	we	meet	with	the	High	Mages?”


“Yes.”
“You	would	make	the	three	most	powerful	men	in	this	camp	wait?”
“Would	that	concern	Sha’ik,	Leoman?	Does	my	rebirth	require	their
blessing?	Unfortunately	they	weren’t	there,	were	they?”
“But—”
“Time	for	you	to	shut	your	mouth,	Leoman,”	Heboric	said,	not	unkindly.
“Clear	a	path	for	me,	Toblakai,”	Felisin	said.
The	giant	swung	abruptly,	cutting	directly	for	the	platform.	He	said
nothing,	for	nothing	was	needed.	His	presence	alone	split	the	mob,	peeled	it
back	on	both	sides	in	hushed	silence.
They	reached	the	dais.	“I	shall	need	your	lungs	to	start,	Toblakai.	Name	me
once	I’ve	ascended.”
“I	shall,	Chosen	One.”
Heboric	snorted	softly.	“Now	that’s	an	apt	title.”
A	cascade	of	thoughts	swept	through	Felisin	as	she	climbed	onto	the	stone
platform.	Sha’ik	Reborn,	that	dark	cloak	of	Dryjhna	descending.	Felisin,	nobleborn	brat	of	Unta,	whore	of	the	mining	pit.	Open	the	Holy	Book	and	thus
complete	the	rite.	That	young	woman	has	seen	the	face	of	the	Abyss—that
terrible	journey	behind	her—and	now	comes	the	demand	that	she	face	the	one
before	her.	The	young	woman	must	relinquish	her	life.	Opening	the	Holy	Book—
yet	who	would	have	thought	the	goddess	so	amenable	to	a	deal?	She	knows	my
heart,	and	that	grants	her	the	confidence,	it	seems,	of	deferring	her	claim	on	it.
The	deal	has	been	struck.	Power	granted—so	many	visions—yet	Felisin
remains,	her	rock-hard,	scarred	soul	floats	free	in	the	vast	Abyss.
And	Leoman	knows…
“Kneel	before	Sha’ik	Reborn!”	The	Toblakai’s	bellow	was	like	thunder	in
the	hot,	motionless	air.	As	one,	thousands	dropped	down,	heads	bowed.
Felisin	stepped	past	the	giant.	Dryjhna’s	power	trickled	into	her—ah,	dear
goddess,	precious	patroness,	do	you	now	hesitate	in	your	gifts?	Like	this	crowd,
like	Leoman,	do	you	await	the	proof	of	my	words?	My	intent?
Yet	the	power	was	sufficient	to	make	her	quiet	words	a	clear	whisper	in	the
ears	of	everyone	present—including	those	of	the	three	High	Mages	who	now
stood	beneath	the	parade-ground	archway—who	stood,	who	did	not	kneel.
“Rise,	my	faithful	ones.”
She	felt	the	three	distant	men	flinch	at	that,	as	they	were	meant	to.	Oh	yes,	I
know	where	you	stand,	you	three…“The	Holy	Desert	Raraku	lies	protected
within	the	Whirlwind	circle,	ensuring	the	sanctity	of	my	return.	While	beyond,
the	rebellion’s	claim	to	dominion—to	rightful	independence	from	the	Malazan
tyrants—continues	its	spreading	tide	of	blood.	My	servants	lead	vast	armies.


All	but	one	of	the	Seven	Holy	Cities	have	been	liberated.”	She	was	silent	a
moment,	feeling	the	power	building	within	her,	yet	when	she	spoke	again	it
was	in	a	low	whisper.	“Our	time	of	preparation	is	at	an	end.	The	time	has	come
to	march,	to	set	forth	from	this	oasis.	The	Empress,	upon	her	distant	throne,
would	punish	us.	A	fleet	approaches	Seven	Cities,	an	army	commanded	by	her
chosen	Adjunct,	a	commander	whose	mind	I	hold	as	a	map	within	my	own—
she	possesses	no	secrets	I	do	not	know…”
The	three	High	Mages	had	not	moved.	Felisin	was	gifted	with	knowing
them,	a	sudden	rush	of	knowledge	that	could	only	be	Sha’ik	Elder ’s.	She	could
see	their	faces	as	if	she	stood	but	a	pace	from	each	of	them,	and	she	knew	that
they	now	shared	that	sense	of	sudden,	precise	proximity—and	a	part	of	her
found	admiration	in	their	refusal	to	tremble.	The	eldest	of	the	three	was
ancient,	withered	Bidithal,	the	one	who	had	first	found	her,	no	more	than	a
child,	in	answer	to	his	own	visions.	His	filmy	eyes	were	fixed	on	her	own.
Bidithal,	remember	that	child?	The	one	you	used	so	brutally	that	first	and	only
night,	to	scourge	from	her	all	pleasures	of	the	flesh.	You	broke	her	within	her
own	body,	left	scars	that	felt	nothing,	that	were	senseless.	The	child	would	not
be	distracted,	no	children	of	her	own,	no	man	at	her	side	who	could	wrest
loyalty	away	from	the	goddess.	Bidithal,	I	have	reserved	a	place	for	you	in	the
fiery	Abyss,	as	you	well	know.	But	for	now,	you	serve	me.	Kneel.
She	saw	with	two	visions,	one	close,	the	other	from	the	distant	vantage
point	of	the	platform,	as	the	old	man	sank	down,	robes	folding	around	him.
She	turned	her	attention	to	the	next	man.	Febryl,	the	most	craven	and	conniving
of	my	High	Mages.	Thrice	you	sought	to	poison	me,	and	thrice	Dryjhna’s	power
burned	the	poison	from	my	veins—yet	not	once	did	I	condemn	you.	Did	you
believe	me	ignorant	of	your	efforts?	And	your	most	ancient	secret—your	flight
from	Dassem	Ultor	before	the	final	battle,	your	betrayal	of	the	cause—did	you
think	I	knew	nothing	of	this?	Nonetheless,	I	have	need	of	you,	for	you	are	the
lodestone	of	dissent,	of	those	who	would	betray	me.	On	your	knees,	bastard!
She	added	a	surge	of	power	to	the	command,	which	drove	the	man	down	to	the
ground	as	if	with	an	invisible	giant	hand.	He	squirmed	on	the	soft	sand,
whimpering.
Finally,	we	come	to	you,	L’oric,	my	only	true	mystery.	Your	sorcerous	arts
are	formidable,	particularly	in	weaving	an	impervious	barrier	about	you.	The
cast	of	your	mind	is	unknown	to	me,	even	the	breadth	and	depth	of	your	loyalty.
And	though	you	seem	faithless,	I	have	found	you	the	most	reliable.	For	you	are
a	pragmatist,	L’oric.	Like	Leoman.	Yet	I	am	ever	on	your	scales,	my	every
decision,	my	every	word.	So,	judge	me	now,	High	Mage,	and	decide.
He	dropped	to	one	knee,	bowed	his	head.


Felisin	smiled.	Half-measured.	Very	pragmatic,	L’oric.	I	have	missed	you.
She	saw	his	wry	answering	smile	there	in	the	shadows	cast	by	his	hood.
Finished	with	the	three	men,	Felisin’s	attention	returned	to	the	crowd
awaiting	her	next	pronouncement.	Silence	gripped	the	air.	What	is	left?	“We
must	march,	my	children.	Yet	that	alone	is	not	enough.	We	must	announce	what
we	are	about	to	do,	for	all	to	see.”
The	goddess	was	ready.
Felisin—Sha’ik	Reborn—raised	her	arms.
The	golden	dust	twisted	above	her,	corkscrewed	into	a	column.	It	grew.
The	spout	of	raging	wind	and	dust	burgeoned,	climbed	skyward,	drawing	in
the	desert’s	gilded	cloak,	the	breath	clearing	the	vast	dome	on	all	sides,
revealing	a	blue	expanse	that	had	not	been	seen	for	months.
And	still	the	column	grew,	surging	higher,	ever	higher.
The	Whirlwind	was	naught	but	preparation	for	this.	This,	the	raising	of
Dryjhna’s	standard,	the	spear	that	is	the	Apocalypse.	A	standard	to	tower	over
an	entire	continent,	seen	by	all.	Now,	at	last,	the	war	begins.	My	war.
Her	head	tilted	back,	she	let	her	sorcerous	vision	feast	on	what	was	rising
to	the	very	edge	of	heaven’s	canopy.	Dear	sister,	see	what	you’ve	made.
	
The	crossbow	jolted	in	Fiddler ’s	hands.	A	gout	of	fire	bloomed	in	the	heaving
mass	of	rats,	blackening	and	roasting	scores	of	the	creatures.
From	point,	the	sapper	had	become	rearguard,	as	the	group	retreated	from
Gryllen’s	nightmare	pursuit.	“The	D’ivers	has	stolen	powerful	lives,”	said
Apsalar,	and	Mappo,	struggling	to	pull	Icarium	back,	had	nodded.	“Gryllen	has
never	before	shown	such…capacity…”
Capacity.	Fiddler	grunted,	chewing	at	the	word.	The	last	time	he’d	seen	this
D’ivers,	the	rats	had	been	present	in	their	hundreds.	Now	they	were	in	their
thousands,	perhaps	tens	of	thousands—he	could	only	guess	at	their	numbers.
The	Hound	Gear	had	rejoined	them	and	now	led	their	retreat	down	side
tracks	and	narrow	tunnels.	They	were	seeking	to	circle	around	Gryllen—they
could	do	naught	else.
Until	Icarium	loses	control,	and	gods,	he’s	close.	Far	too	close.
The	sapper	reached	into	his	munitions,	his	fingers	touching	his	last	cusser,
then	brushing	past,	finding	instead	another	flamer.	No	time	to	affix	it	to	a
quarrel,	and	he	was	running	out	of	those	anyway.	The	swarm’s	lead	creatures,
scampering	toward	him,	were	no	more	than	half	a	dozen	paces	away.	Fiddler ’s
heart	stuttered	in	his	chest—Have	I	let	them	get	too	close	this	time?	Hood’s
breath!	He	flung	the	grenado.


Roast	rat.
Heaving	bodies	swallowed	the	liquid	fire,	rolled	and	tumbled	toward	him.
The	sapper	wheeled	and	ran.
He	nearly	plunged	into	Shan’s	blood-smeared	jaws.	Wailing,	Fiddler
dodged,	spun,	went	sprawling	among	boots	and	moccasins.	The	group	had
come	to	a	halt.	He	scrambled	upright.	“We	got	to	run!”
“Where?”	The	question	came	from	Crokus,	in	a	dry,	heavy	tone.
They	were	at	a	bend	in	the	path,	and	at	both	ends	swarmed	a	solid	wall	of
rats.
Four	Hounds	attacked	the	far	mob,	only	Shan	remaining	with	the	group—
taking	the	place	of	Blind,	perilously	close	to	Icarium.
With	a	shriek	of	rage	the	Jhag	threw	Mappo	from	his	shoulders	with	a
seemingly	effortless	shrug.	The	Trell	staggered,	lost	his	balance	and	struck	the
root	floor	with	a	rattling	thud.
“Everybody	down!”	Fiddler	screamed,	his	hand	blindly	reaching	into	the
munitions	bag,	closing	on	that	large,	smooth	object	within.
Keening,	Icarium	drew	his	sword.	Wood	snapped	and	recoiled	in	answer.
The	iron	sky	blushed	crimson,	began	twisting	into	a	vortex	directly	above
them.	Sap	sprayed	from	the	walls	like	sleet,	spattering	everyone.
Shan	attacked	Icarium	but	was	batted	aside,	sent	flying,	the	Jhag	barely
noticing.
Fiddler	stared	at	Icarium	a	moment	longer;	then,	pulling	his	cusser	free,
the	sapper	wheeled	around	and	threw	it	at	the	D’ivers.
But	it	was	not	a	cusser.
Eyes	wide,	Fiddler	stared	as	the	conch	shell	struck	the	root	floor	and
shattered	like	glass.
He	heard	a	savage	crack	behind	him,	but	had	no	time	to	give	it	thought,	and
all	further	sounds	vanished	as	a	whispering	voice	rose	from	the	ruined	shell—
a	Tano	Spiritwalker’s	gift—whispering	that	soon	filled	the	air,	a	song	of	bones,
finding	muscle	as	it	swept	outward.
The	heaving	mass	of	rats	on	both	sides	sought	to	retreat,	but	there	was
nowhere	to	flee—the	sound	enveloped	all.	The	creatures	began	crumpling,	the
flesh	withering,	leaving	only	fur	and	bones.	The	song	took	that	flesh,	and	so
grew.
Gryllen’s	thousand-voiced	scream	was	an	anguished	explosion	of	pain	and
terror.	And	it,	too,	was	swallowed,	devoured.
Fiddler	clapped	his	hands	to	his	ears	as	the	song	resonated	within,	insistent,
a	voice	anything	but	human,	anything	but	mortal.	He	twisted	away,	fell	to	his
knees.	His	wide	eyes	stared,	barely	registering	what	he	saw	before	him.


His	companions	were	down,	curling	around	themselves.	The	Hounds
cowered,	the	massive	beasts	trembling,	ears	flat.	Mappo	crouched	over	the
prone,	motionless	form	of	Icarium.	In	the	Trell’s	hands	was	his	bone	club,	the
flat	side	of	the	head	spattered	with	fresh	blood	and	snagged	strands	of	long
reddish	hair.	Mappo	finally	dropped	the	weapon	and	slapped	his	hands	over	his
ears.
Gods,	this	will	kill	us	all—stop!	Stop,	dammit!
He	realized	he	was	going	mad,	his	vision	betraying	him,	for	he	now	saw	a
wall,	a	wall	of	water,	sleet	gray	and	webbed	with	foam,	rushing	upon	them
down	the	path,	building	higher,	escaping	the	root-walls	and	tumbling	outward.
And	he	found	he	could	see	into	the	wall	now,	as	if	it	had	turned	to	liquid	glass.
Wreckage,	foundation	stones	softened	by	algae,	the	rotting	remains	of	sunken
ships,	encrusted,	shapeless	hunks	of	oxidized	metal,	bones,	skulls,	casks	and
bronze-bound	chests,	splintered	masts	and	fittings—the	submerged	memory	of
countless	civilizations,	an	avalanche	of	tragic	events,	dissolution	and	decay.
The	wave	buried	them,	drove	them	all	down	with	its	immense	weight,	its
relentless	force.
Then	was	gone,	leaving	them	dry	as	dust.
Silence	filled	the	air,	slowly	broken	by	harsh	gasps,	bestial	whimpers,	the
muted	rustling	of	clothing	and	weapons.
Fiddler	lifted	his	head,	pushing	himself	to	his	hands	and	knees.	Ghostly
remnants	of	that	flood	seemed	to	stain	him	through	and	through,	permeating
him	with	ineffable	sorrow.
Protective	sorcery?
The	Spiritwalker	had	smiled.	Of	a	sort.
And	I’d	planned	on	selling	the	damned	thing	in	G’danisban.	My	last	cusser
was	a	damned	conch	shell—I	never	checked,	not	once.	Hood’s	breath!
He	was	slow	to	sense	a	new	tension	rising	in	the	air.	The	sapper	looked	up.
Mappo	had	retrieved	his	club	and	now	stood	over	Icarium’s	unconscious	form.
Around	him	ranged	the	Hounds.	Raised	hackles	on	all	sides.
Fiddler	scrabbled	for	his	crossbow.	“Iskaral	Pust!	Call	off	those	Hounds,
damn	you!”
“The	bargain!	The	Azath	will	take	him!”	the	High	Priest	gasped,	still
staggering	about	in	the	stunned	aftermath	of	the	Tano’s	sorcery.	“Now’s	the
time!”
“No,”	growled	the	Trell.
Fiddler	hesitated.	The	deal,	Mappo.	Icarium	made	his	wishes	plain…	“Call
them	off,	Pust,”	he	said,	moving	toward	the	nervous	stand-off.	He	plunged	one
hand	into	his	munition	bag	and	swung	the	leather	sack	around	until	he	clutched


it	against	his	stomach.	“Got	one	last	cusser,	and	those	Hounds	could	be	made
of	solid	marble,	it	won’t	save	’em	when	I	fall	down	on	what	I’m	holding	here.”
“Damned	sappers!	Who	invented	them?	Madness!”
Fiddler	grinned.	“Who	invented	them?	Why,	Kellanved,	who	else—who
Ascended	to	become	your	god,	Pust.	I’d	have	thought	you’d	appreciate	the
irony,	High	Priest.”
“The	bargain—”
“Will	wait	a	while	longer.	Mappo,	how	hard	did	you	hit	him?	How	long
will	he	be	out?”
“As	long	as	I	wish,	friend.”
Friend,	and	in	that	word:	“thank	you.”
“All	right	then.	Call	the	mutts	off,	Pust.	Let’s	get	to	the	House.”
The	High	Priest	ceased	his	circling	stagger;	he	paused,	slowly	weaving
back	and	forth.	Glancing	over	at	Apsalar,	he	offered	her	a	wide	grin.
“As	the	soldier	says,”	she	said.
The	grin	vanished.	“The	youth	of	today	knows	no	loyalty.	A	shame,	not	at
all	how	things	used	to	be.	Wouldn’t	you	agree,	Servant?”
Apsalar ’s	father	grimaced.	“You	heard	her.”
“Far	too	permissive,	letting	her	get	her	way	so.	You’ve	spoiled	her,	man!
Betrayed	by	my	own	generation,	alas!	What	next?”
“What’s	next	is,	we	get	going,”	Fiddler	said.
“And	it	won’t	be	much	farther,”	Crokus	said.	He	pointed	down	the	path.
“There.	I	see	the	House.	I	see	Tremorlor.”
The	sapper	watched	Mappo	sling	his	weapon	over	a	shoulder,	then	gently
lift	Icarium.	The	Jhag	hung	limply	within	those	massive	arms.	The	scene	was
touched	with	such	gentle	caring	that	Fiddler	had	to	look	away.


Chapter	Nineteen

The	Day	of	Pure	Blood
was	a	gift	of	the	Seven
from	their	tombs	of	sand.
Fortune	was	a	river
the	glory	a	gift	of	the	Seven
that	flowed	yellow	and	crimson
across	the	day.
DOG	CHAIN
T HES’SORAN
In	the	local	Can’eld	dialect,	it	would	come	to	be	called	Mesh’arn	tho’ledann:
the	Day	of	Pure	Blood.	The	River	Vathar ’s	mouth	gushed	blood	and	corpses
into	Dojal	Hading	Sea	for	close	to	a	week	after	the	slaughter,	a	tide	that
deepened	from	red	to	black	amidst	pallid,	bloated	bodies.	To	the	fisherfolk
plying	those	waters,	that	time	was	called	the	Season	of	Sharks,	and	more	than
one	net	was	cut	away	before	a	ghastly	harvest	was	pulled	aboard.
Horror	knew	no	sides,	played	no	favorites.	It	spread	like	a	stain	outward,
from	tribe	to	tribe,	from	one	city	to	the	next.	And	from	that	revulsion	was	born
fear	among	the	natives	of	Seven	Cities.	A	Malazan	fleet	was	on	its	way,
commanded	by	a	woman	hard	as	iron.	What	happened	at	Vathar	Crossing	was	a
whetstone	to	hone	her	deadly	edge.
Yet,	Korbolo	Dom	was	anything	but	finished.
The	cedar	forest	south	of	the	river	rose	on	tiered	steps	of	limestone,	the
trader	track	crazed	with	switchbacks	and	steep,	difficult	slopes.	And	the	deeper
into	the	wood	the	depleted	train	went,	the	more	ancient,	the	more	uncanny	it
became.
Duiker	led	his	mare	by	the	reins,	stumbling	as	rocks	turned	underfoot.
Alongside	him	clattered	a	wagon,	sagging	with	wounded	soldiers.	Corporal
List	sat	on	the	buckboard,	his	switch	snapping	the	dusty,	sweat-runnelled	backs
of	the	pair	of	oxen	laboring	at	their	yokes.


The	losses	at	Vathar	Crossing	were	a	numb	litany	in	the	historian’s	mind.
Over	twenty	thousand	refugees,	a	disproportionate	number	of	children	among
them.	Less	than	five	hundred	able	fighters	remained	in	the	Foolish	Dog	Clan,
and	the	other	two	clans	were	almost	as	badly	mauled.	Seven	hundred	soldiers
of	the	Seventh	were	dead,	wounded	or	lost.	A	scant	dozen	engineers	remained
on	their	feet,	and	but	a	score	of	marines.	Three	noble	families	had	been	lost—
an	unacceptable	attrition,	this	latter	count,	as	far	as	the	Council	was	concerned.
And	Sormo	E’nath.	Within	the	one	man,	eight	elder	warlocks,	a	loss	of	not
just	power,	but	knowledge,	experience	and	wisdom.	A	blow	that	had	driven	the
Wickans	to	their	knees.
Earlier	that	day,	at	a	time	when	the	train	had	ground	to	a	temporary	halt,
Captain	Lull	had	joined	the	historian	to	share	some	rations.	Few	words	passed
between	them	to	start,	as	if	the	events	at	Vathar	Crossing	were	something	not	to
be	talked	about,	even	as	they	spread	like	a	plague	through	every	thought	and
echoed	ghostlike	behind	every	scene	around	them,	every	sound	that	rose	from
the	camp.
Lull	slowly	put	away	the	remnants	of	their	meal.	Then	he	paused,	and
Duiker	saw	the	man	studying	his	own	hands,	which	had	begun	trembling.	The
historian	looked	away,	surprised	at	the	sudden	shame	that	swept	through	him.
He	saw	List,	wrapped	in	sleep	on	the	buckboard,	trapped	within	his	prison	of
dreams.	I	could	in	mercy	awaken	the	lad,	yet	the	power	for	knowledge	has
mastered	me.	Cruelty	comes	easy	these	days.
The	captain	sighed	after	a	moment,	hastily	completing	the	task.	“Do	you
find	the	need	to	answer	all	this,	Historian?”	he	asked.	“All	those	tomes	you’ve
read,	those	other	thoughts	from	other	men,	other	women.	Other	times.	How
does	a	mortal	make	answer	to	what	his	or	her	kind	are	capable	of?	Does	each
of	us,	soldier	or	no,	reach	a	point	when	all	that	we’ve	seen,	survived,	changes
us	inside?	Irrevocably	changes	us.	What	do	we	become,	then?	Less	human,	or
more	human?	Human	enough,	or	too	human?”
Duiker	was	silent	for	a	long	minute,	his	eyes	on	the	rock-studded	dirt	that
surrounded	the	boulder	upon	which	he	sat.	Then	he	cleared	his	throat.	“Each	of
us	has	his	own	threshold,	friend.	Soldier	or	no,	we	can	only	take	so	much
before	we	cross	over…into	something	else.	As	if	the	world	has	shifted	around
us,	though	it’s	only	our	way	of	looking	at	it.	A	change	of	perspective,	but
there’s	no	intelligence	to	it—you	see	but	do	not	feel,	or	you	weep	yet	look
upon	your	own	anguish	as	if	from	somewhere	else,	somewhere	outside.	It’s	not
a	place	for	answers,	Lull,	for	every	question	has	burned	away.	More	human	or
less	human—that’s	for	you	to	decide.”
“Surely	it	has	been	written	of,	by	scholars,	priests…philosophers?”


Duiker	smiled	down	at	the	dirt.	“Efforts	have	been	made.	But	those	who
themselves	have	crossed	that	threshold…well,	they	have	few	words	to	describe
the	place	they’ve	found,	and	little	inclination	to	attempt	to	explain	it.	As	I	said,
it’s	a	place	without	intelligence,	a	place	where	thoughts	wander,	formless,
unlinked.	Lost.”
“Lost,”	the	captain	repeated.	“I	am	surely	that.”
“Yet	you	and	I,	Lull,	we	are	lost	late	in	our	lives.	Look	upon	the	children,
and	despair.”
“How	to	answer	this?	I	must	know,	Duiker,	else	I	go	mad.”
“Sleight	of	hand,”	the	historian	said.
“What?”
“Think	of	the	sorcery	we’ve	seen	in	our	lives,	the	vast,	unbridled,	deadly
power	we’ve	witnessed	unleashed.	Driven	to	awe	and	horror.	Then	think	of	a
trickster—those	you	saw	as	a	child—the	games	of	illusion	and	artifice	they
could	play	out	with	their	hands,	and	so	bring	wonder	to	your	eyes.”
The	captain	was	silent,	motionless.	Then	he	rose.	“And	there’s	my
answer?”
“It’s	the	only	one	I	can	think	of,	friend.	Sorry	if	it’s	not	enough.”
“No,	old	man,	it’s	enough.	It	has	to	be,	doesn’t	it?”
“Aye,	that	it	does.”
“Sleight	of	hand.”
The	historian	nodded.	“Ask	for	nothing	more,	for	the	world—this	world—
won’t	give	it.”
“But	where	will	we	find	such	a	thing?”
“Unexpected	places,”	Duiker	replied,	also	rising.	Somewhere	ahead,	shouts
rose	and	the	convoy	resumed	its	climb	once	more.	“If	you	fight	both	tears	and
a	smile,	you’ll	have	found	one.”
“Later,	Historian.”
“Aye.”
He	watched	the	captain	set	off	back	toward	his	company	of	soldiers,	and
wondered	if	all	he’d	said,	all	he’d	offered	to	the	man,	was	nothing	but	lies.
The	possibility	returned	to	him	now,	hours	later	as	he	trudged	along	on	the
trial.	One	of	those	random,	unattached	thoughts	that	were	coming	to
characterize	the	blasted	scape	of	his	mind.	Returned,	lingered	a	moment,	then
drifted	away	and	was	gone.
The	journey	continued,	beneath	clouds	of	dust	and	a	few	remaining
butterflies.
Korbolo	Dom	pursued,	sniping	at	the	train’s	mangled	tail,	content	to	await
better	ground	before	another	major	engagement.	Perhaps	even	he	quailed	at


what	Vathar	Forest	had	begun	to	reveal.
Among	the	tall	cedars	there	were	trees	of	some	other	species	that	had
turned	to	stone.	Gnarled	and	twisted,	the	petrified	wood	embraced	objects	that
were	themselves	fossilized—the	trees	held	offerings	and	had,	long	ago,	grown
around	them.	Duiker	well	recalled	the	last	time	he	had	seen	such	things,	in	what
had	been	a	holy	place	in	the	heart	of	an	oasis,	just	north	of	Hissar.	That	site	had
revealed	ram’s	horns	locked	in	the	wrapped	crooks	of	branches,	and	there
were	plenty	of	those	here	as	well,	although	they	were	the	least	disquieting	of
Vathar ’s	offerings.
T’lan	Imass.	No	room	for	doubt—their	undead	faces	stare	out	at	us,	from	all
sides,	skulls	and	withered	faces	peering	out	from	wreaths	of	crystallized	bark,
the	dark	pits	of	their	eyes	tracking	our	passage.	This	is	a	burial	ground,	not	of
the	flesh-and-blood	forebears	of	the	T’lan	Imass,	but	of	the	deathless	creatures
themselves.
List’s	visions	of	ancient	war—we	see	here	its	aftermath.	Crumpled
platforms	were	visible	as	well,	stone	latticework	perched	amidst	branches	that
had	once	grown	around	them,	closing	up	the	assembled	bones	like	the	fingers
of	stone	hands.
At	the	war’s	end,	the	survivors	came	here,	carrying	those	comrades	too
shattered	to	continue,	and	made	of	this	forest	their	eternal	home.	The	souls	of
the	T’lan	Imass	cannot	join	Hood,	cannot	even	flee	their	prisons	of	bone	and
withered	flesh.	One	does	not	bury	such	things—that	sentence	of	earthen
darkness	offers	no	peace.	Instead,	let	those	remnants	look	out	from	their
perches	upon	one	another,	upon	the	rare	mortal	passages	on	this	trail…
Corporal	List	saw	far	too	clearly,	his	visions	delivering	him	deep	into	a
history	better	left	lost.	Knowledge	had	beaten	him	down—as	it	does	us	all,
when	delivered	in	too	great	a	measure.	Yet	I	hunger	still.
Cairns	had	begun	appearing,	heaps	of	boulders	surmounted	with	totemic
skulls.	Not	barrows,	List	had	said.	Sites	of	engagement,	the	various	clans,
wherever	the	Jaghut	turned	from	flight	and	lashed	out.
The	day	was	drawing	to	a	close	when	they	reached	the	final	height,	a
broad,	jumbled	basolith	that	seemed	to	have	shed	its	limestone	coat,	the
exposed	bedrock	deeply	hued	the	color	of	wine.	Flat,	treeless	stretches	were
crowded	with	boulders	set	out	in	spirals,	ellipses	and	corridors.	Cedars	were
replaced	by	pines,	and	the	number	of	petrified	trees	diminished.
Duiker	and	List	had	been	traveling	in	the	last	third	of	the	column,	the
wounded	shielded	by	a	battered	rearguard	of	infantry.	Once	the	last	of	the
wagons	and	the	few	livestock	that	remained	cleared	the	slope	and	made	level
ground,	the	footmen	quickly	gained	the	ridge,	squads	scattering	to	various


vantage	points	and	potential	strongholds	commanding	the	approach.
List	halted	his	wagon	and	set	the	brake,	then	rose	from	the	buckboard,
stretched	and	looked	down	at	Duiker	with	haunted	eyes.
“Better	lines	of	sight	up	here,	anyway,”	the	historian	offered.
“Always	has	been,”	the	corporal	said.	“If	we	make	for	the	head	of	the
column,	we’ll	come	to	the	first	of	them.”
“The	first	of	what?”
The	blood	leaving	the	lad’s	face	bespoke	another	vision	flooding	his	mind,
a	world	and	a	time	seen	through	unhuman	eyes.	After	a	moment	he	shuddered,
wiping	sweat	from	his	face.	“I’ll	show	you.”
They	moved	through	the	quiet	press	in	silence.	The	efforts	at	making	camp
they	saw	on	all	sides	looked	wooden,	refugees	and	soldiers	alike	moving	as
automatons.	No	one	bothered	attempting	to	erect	tents;	they	simply	laid	out
their	bedrolls	on	the	flat	rock.	Children	sat	unmoving,	watching	with	the	eyes
of	old	men	and	women.
The	Wickan	camps	were	no	better.	There	was	no	escape	from	what	had
been,	from	the	images	and	remembered	scenes	that	rose	again	and	again,
remorselessly,	before	the	mind’s	eye.	Every	frail,	mundane	gesture	of	normal
life	had	shattered	beneath	the	weight	of	knowledge.
Yet	there	was	anger,	white	hot	and	buried	deep,	out	of	sight,	as	if	mantled
in	peat.	It	had	become	the	last	fuel	with	any	potency.	And	so	we	move	on,	day
after	day,	fighting	every	battle—those	inside	and	those	without—with	an
unyielding	ferocity	and	determination.	We	are	all	in	that	place	where	Lull	now
lives,	a	place	stripped	of	rational	thought,	trapped	in	a	world	without	cohesion.
Arriving	at	the	vanguard,	they	came	upon	a	scene.	Coltaine,	Bult	and
Captain	Lull	were	present,	and	facing	them	in	a	ragged	line	ten	paces	away
were	the	last	of	the	Engineers.
The	Fist	turned	as	Duiker	and	List	approached.	“Ah,	this	is	well.	I	would
have	you	witness	this,	Historian.”
“What	have	I	missed?”
Bult	grinned.	“Nothing;	we’ve	just	managed	the	prodigious	task	of
assembling	the	sappers—you’d	think	battles	with	Kamist	Reloe	were	tactical
nightmares.	Anyway,	here	they	are,	looking	like	they’re	waiting	to	be
ambushed,	or	worse.”
“And	are	they,	Uncle?”
The	commander ’s	grin	broadened.	“Maybe.”
Coltaine	now	stepped	toward	the	assembled	soldiers.	“Symbols	of	bravery
and	gestures	of	recognition	can	only	ring	hollow—this	I	know,	yet	what	else	is
left	to	me?	Three	clan	leaders	have	come	to	me,	each	begging	to	approach	you


men	and	women	with	an	offer	of	formal	adoption	to	their	clan.	Perhaps	you
are	unaware	of	what	such	unprecedented	requests	reveal…or	perhaps,	judging
by	your	expressions,	you	know.	I	felt	need	to	answer	on	your	behalf,	for	I
know	more	of	you	soldiers	than	do	most	Wickans,	including	those	clan
leaders,	and	they	have	each	humbly	withdrawn	their	requests.”
He	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.
“Nonetheless,”	Coltaine	finally	continued,	“I	would	have	you	know,	they
meant	to	honor	you.”
Ah,	Coltaine,	even	you	do	not	understand	these	soldiers	well	enough.	Those
scowls	you	see	arrayed	before	you	certainly	look	like	disapproval,	disgust	even,
but	then,	when	have	you	ever	seen	them	smile?
“So,	I	am	left	with	the	traditions	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	There	were
enough	witnesses	at	the	Crossing	to	weave	in	detail	the	tapestry	of	your	deeds,
and	among	all	of	you,	including	your	fallen	comrades,	the	natural	leadership
of	one	was	noted	again	and	again.	Without	it,	the	day	would	have	been	truly
lost.”
The	sappers	did	not	move,	their	scowls	if	anything	deeper,	more	fierce.
Coltaine	moved	to	stand	before	one	man.	Duiker	recalled	him	well—a
squat,	hairless,	immeasurably	ugly	sapper,	his	eyes	thin	slashes,	his	nose	a
flattened	spread	of	angles	and	crooks.	Audaciously,	he	wore	fragments	of
armor	that	Duiker	recognized	as	taken	from	a	commander	of	the	Apocalypse,
though	the	helm	tied	to	his	belt	was	something	that	could	have	adorned	an
antique	shop	in	Darujhistan.	Another	object	that	hung	from	his	belt	was
difficult	to	identify,	and	it	was	a	moment	before	the	historian	realized	he	was
looking	at	the	battered	remnant	of	a	shield:	two	reinforced	grips	behind	a
mangled	plate-sized	flap	of	bronze.	A	large,	blackened	crossbow	hung	from
one	shoulder,	so	covered	and	entwined	with	twigs,	branches	and	other
camouflage	as	to	make	it	seem	the	man	carried	a	bush.
“I	believe	the	time	has	come,”	Coltaine	said,	“for	a	promotion.	You	are
now	a	sergeant,	soldier.”
The	man	said	nothing,	his	eyes	narrowing	to	the	thinnest	of	slits.
“I	think	a	salute	would	be	appropriate,”	Bult	growled.
One	of	the	other	sappers	cleared	his	throat	and	nervously	yanked	at	his
mustache.
Captain	Lull	rounded	on	the	man.	“Got	something	to	say	about	this,
soldier?”
“Not	much,”	the	man	muttered.
“Out	with	it.”
The	soldier	shrugged.	“Well,	only…he	was	a	captain	not	two	minutes	ago,


sir.	The	Fist’s	just	demoted	him.	That’s	Captain	Mincer,	sir.	Commands	the
Engineers.	Or	did.”
Mincer	finally	spoke.	“And	since	I’m	now	a	sergeant,	I	suggest	the
captaincy	go	to	this	soldier.”	He	reached	out	and	grabbed	the	woman	beside
him	by	the	ear	to	drag	her	close.	“What	used	to	be	my	sergeant.	Name’s
Bungle.”
Coltaine	stared	a	moment	longer,	then	swung	around	and	met	Duiker ’s
eyes	with	such	comic	pleasure	that	the	historian’s	exhaustion	was	simply	swept
away,	flashburned	into	oblivion.	The	Fist	struggled	to	keep	a	straight	face,	and
Duiker	bit	his	lip	in	his	own	effort.	His	gaze	caught	on	Lull,	whose	face
showed	the	same	struggle,	even	as	the	captain	winked	and	mouthed	three	silent
words.
Sleight	of	hand.
The	question	remained	how	Coltaine	would	now	play	it.	Composing	his
face	into	stern	regard,	the	Fist	turned	about	again.	He	eyed	Mincer,	then	the
woman	named	Bungle.	“That	will	be	fine,	Sergeant,”	he	said.	“Captain	Bungle,
I	would	advise	you	to	listen	to	your	sergeant	in	all	matters.	Understood?”
The	woman	shook	her	head.
Mincer	grimaced	and	said,	“She’s	no	experience	with	that,	Fist.	I	never
asked	her	advice,	I’m	afraid.”
“From	what	I	have	gathered,	you	never	asked	anyone’s	advice	when	you
were	captain.”
“Aye,	that’s	a	fact.”
“Nor	did	you	attend	any	staff	briefings.”
“No,	sir.”
“And	why	was	that?”
Mincer	shrugged.
Captain	Bungle	spoke.	“Beauty	sleep,	sir.	That’s	what	he	always	said.”
“Hood	knows	the	man	needs	it,”	Bult	muttered.
Coltaine	raised	an	eyebrow.	“And	did	he	sleep,	Captain?	During	those
times?”
“Oh	yes,	sir.	He	sleeps	when	we	march,	too,	sir.	Sleeps	while	walking—
I’ve	never	seen	the	like.	Snoring	away,	sir,	one	foot	in	front	of	the	other,	a	bag
full	of	rocks	on	his	back—”
“Rocks?”
“For	when	he	breaks	his	sword,	sir.	He	throws	them,	and	there	ain’t	a
damned	thing	he	can’t	hit.”
“Wrong,”	Mincer	growled.	“That	lapdog…”
Bult	seemed	to	choke,	then	spat	in	sympathy.


Coltaine	had	drawn	his	hands	behind	him,	and	Duiker	saw	them	clench	in	a
white-knuckled	grip.	As	if	sensing	that	attention,	the	Fist	called	out	without
turning,	“Historian!”
“I	am	here,	Fist.”
“You	will	record	this?”
“Oh,	aye,	sir.	Every	blessed	word.”
“Excellent.	Engineers,	you	are	dismissed.”
The	group	wandered	off,	muttering.	One	man	clapped	Mincer	on	the
shoulder	and	received	a	blistering	glare	in	return.
Coltaine	watched	them	leave,	then	strode	to	Duiker,	Bult	and	Lull
following.
“Spirits	below!”	Bult	hissed.
Duiker	smiled.	“Your	soldiers,	Commander.”
“Aye,”	he	said,	suddenly	beaming	with	pride.	“Aye.”
“I	did	not	know	what	to	do,”	Coltaine	confessed.
Lull	grunted.	“You	played	it	perfectly,	Fist.	That	was	exquisite,	no	doubt
already	making	the	rounds	as	a	Hood-damned	full-blown	legend.	If	they	liked
you	before,	they	love	you	now,	sir.”
The	Wickan	remained	baffled.	“But	why?	I	just	demoted	a	man	for
unsurpassed	bravery!”
“Returned	him	to	the	ranks,	you	mean.	And	that	lifted	every	one	of	’em	up,
don’t	you	see	that?”
“But	Mincer—”
“Never	had	so	much	fun	in	his	life,	I’d	bet.	You	can	tell,	when	they	get	even
uglier.	Hood	knows,	I	can’t	explain	it—only	sappers	know	a	sapper ’s	way	of
thinking	and	behaving,	and	sometimes	not	even	them.”
“You’ve	a	captain	named	Bungle,	now,	nephew,”	Bult	said.	“Think	she’ll	be
there	in	polish	and	shine	next	briefing?”
“Not	a	chance,”	Lull	opined.	“She’s	probably	packing	her	gear	right	now.”
Coltaine	shook	his	head.	“They	win,”	he	said,	in	evident	wonder.	“I	am
defeated.”
Duiker	watched	the	three	men	walk	away,	still	discussing	what	had	just
happened.	Not	lies	after	all.	Tears	and	smiles,	something	so	small,	so	absurd…
the	only	possible	answer…The	historian	shook	himself,	and	looked	around
until	he	found	List.	“Corporal,	I	recall	you	had	something	to	show	me…”
“Yes,	sir.	Up	ahead,	not	far,	I	think.”
	
They	came	to	the	ruined	tower	before	reaching	the	forward	outlying	pickets.	A


squad	of	Wickans	had	commandeered	the	position,	filling	the	ringed	bedrock
floor	with	supplies	and	leaving	in	attendance	a	lone,	one-armed	youth.
List	laid	a	hand	on	one	of	the	massive	foundation	stones.	“Jaghut,”	he	said.
“They	lived	apart,	you	know.	No	villages,	no	cities,	just	single,	remote
dwellings.	Like	this	one.”
“Enjoyed	their	privacy,	I	take	it.”
“They	feared	each	other	almost	as	much	as	they	feared	the	T’lan	Imass,
sir.”
Duiker	glanced	over	at	the	Wickan	youth.	The	lad	was	fast	asleep.	We’re
doing	a	lot	of	that	these	days.	Just	dropping	off.	“How	old?”	he	asked	the
corporal.
“Not	sure.	A	hundred,	two,	maybe	even	three.”
“Not	years.”
“No.	Millennia.”
“So,	this	is	where	the	Jaghut	lived.”
“The	first	tower.	From	here,	pushed	back,	then	again,	then	again.	The	final
stand—the	last	tower—is	in	the	heart	of	the	plain	beyond	the	forest.”
“Pushed	back,”	the	historian	repeated.
List	nodded.	“Each	siege	lasted	centuries,	the	losses	among	the	T’lan	Imass
staggering.	Jaghut	were	anything	but	wanderers.	When	they	chose	a	place…”
His	voice	fell	off.	He	shrugged.
“Was	this	a	typical	war,	Corporal?”
The	young	man	hesitated,	then	shook	his	head.	“A	strange	bond,	unique
among	the	Jaghut.	When	the	mother	was	in	peril,	the	children	returned,	joined
the	battle.	Then	the	father.	Things…escalated.”
Duiker	nodded,	looked	around.	“She	must	have	been…special.”
Tight-lipped	and	pale,	List	pulled	off	his	helm,	ran	a	hand	through	his
sweaty	hair.	“Aye,”	he	finally	whispered.
“Is	she	your	guide?”
“No.	Her	mate.”
Something	made	the	historian	turn,	as	if	in	answer	to	a	barely	felt	shiver	of
air.	North,	through	the	trees,	then	above	them.	His	mind	struggled	to
encompass	what	he	saw:	a	column,	a	spear	lit	gold,	rising…rising.
“Hood’s	breath!”	List	muttered.	“What	is	that?”
A	lone	word	thundered	through	Duiker,	flooding	his	mind,	driving	out
every	thought,	and	he	knew	with	utter	certainty	the	truth	of	it,	the	single	word
that	was	answer	to	List’s	question.
“Sha’ik.”


	
Kalam	sat	in	his	gloomy	cabin,	inundated	with	the	sound	of	hammering	waves
and	shrieking	wind.	Ragstopper	shuddered	with	every	remorseless	crash	of	the
raging	seas,	the	room	around	the	assassin	pitching	in,	it	seemed,	a	dozen
directions	at	once.
Somewhere	in	their	wake,	a	fast	trader	battled	the	same	storm,	and	her
presence—announced	by	the	lookout	only	minutes	before	the	green	and
strangely	luminescent	cloud	rolled	over	them—gnawed	at	Kalam,	refusing	to
go	away.	The	same	fast	trader	we’d	seen	before.	Was	the	answer	a	simple	one?
While	we	squatted	in	that	shithole	of	a	home	port,	she’d	been	calmly
shouldering	the	Imperial	pier	at	Falar,	no	special	rush	in	resupplying	when	you
have	a	shore	leave	worth	the	name.
But	that	did	not	explain	the	host	of	other	details	that	plagued	the	assassin—
details	that,	each	on	their	own,	rang	a	minor	note	of	discord,	yet	together	they
created	a	cacophony	of	alarm	in	Kalam.	Blurred	passages	of	time,	perhaps
born	of	the	man’s	driving	aspiration	to	complete	this	voyage,	at	war	with	the
interminable	reality	of	day	upon	day,	night	upon	night,	the	very	sameness	of
such	a	journey.
But	no,	there’s	more	than	just	a	conflict	of	perspective.	The	hour-glasses,
the	dwindled	stores	of	food	and	fresh	water,	the	captain’s	tortured	hints	of	a
world	amiss	aboard	this	damned	ship.
And	that	fast	trader,	it	should	have	sailed	past	us	long	ago…
Salk	Elan.	A	mage—he	stinks	of	it.	Yet	a	sorcerer	who	could	twist	an	entire
crew’s	mind	so	thoroughly…that	sorcerer	would	have	to	be	a	High	Mage.	Not
impossible.	Just	highly	unlikely	among	Mebra’s	covert	circle	of	spies	and
agents.
There	was	no	doubt	in	Kalam’s	mind	that	Elan	had	woven	about	himself	a
web	of	deceit,	inasmuch	as	it	was	in	such	a	man’s	nature	to	do	so,	whether
necessary	or	not.	Yet	which	strand	should	the	assassin	follow	in	his	quest	for
the	truth?
Time.	How	long	has	this	journey	been?	Tradewinds	where	none	should	be,
now	a	storm,	driving	us	ever	southeastward,	a	storm	that	had	therefore	not
come	from	the	ocean	wastes—as	the	immutable	laws	of	the	sea	would	demand—
but	from	the	Falari	Isles.	In	its	dry	season—a	season	of	unbroken	calm.
So,	who	plays	with	us	here?	And	what	role	does	Salk	Elan	have	in	this
game,	if	any?
Growling,	the	assassin	rose	from	his	bunk,	grabbing	in	mid-swing	his
satchel	from	its	hook,	then	made	his	rocking	way	to	the	door.


The	hold	was	like	a	siege	tower	under	a	ceaseless	barrage	of	rocks.	Mist
filled	the	salty,	close	air	and	the	keel	was	awash	in	shin-deep	water.	There	was
no	one	about,	every	hand	committed	to	the	daunting	task	of	holding
Ragstopper	together.	Kalam	cleared	a	space	and	dragged	a	chest	free.	He
rummaged	in	his	satchel	until	his	hand	found	and	closed	on	a	small,	misshapen
lump	of	stone.	He	drew	it	out	and	set	it	on	the	chest-top.
It	did	not	roll	off;	indeed,	it	did	not	move	at	all.
The	assassin	unsheathed	a	dagger,	reversed	his	grip,	then	drove	the	iron
pommel	down	on	the	stone.	It	shattered.	A	gust	of	hot,	dry	air	washed	over
Kalam.	He	crouched	lower.
“Quick!	Quick	Ben,	you	bastard,	now’s	the	time!”
No	voice	reached	him	through	the	storm’s	incessant	roar.
I’m	beginning	to	hate	mages.	“Quick	Ben,	damn	you!”
The	air	seemed	to	waver,	like	streams	of	heat	rising	from	a	desert	floor.	A
familiar	voice	tickled	the	assassin’s	ears.	“Any	idea	the	last	time	I’ve	had	a
chance	to	sleep?	It’s	all	gone	to	Hood’s	shithole	over	here,	Kalam—where	are
you	and	what	do	you	want?	And	hurry	up	with	it—this	is	killing	me!”
“I	thought	you	were	my	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole,	damn	you!”
“You	in	Unta?	The	palace?	I	never	figured—”
“Thanks	for	the	vote	of	confidence,”	the	assassin	cut	in.	“No,	I’m	not	in	the
Hood-cursed	palace,	you	idiot.	I’m	at	sea—”
“Aren’t	we	all.	You’ve	just	messed	up,	Kalam—I	can’t	do	this	more	than
once.”
“I	know.	So	I’m	on	my	own	when	I	get	there.	Fine,	nothing	new	in	that.
Listen,	what	can	you	sense	of	where	I	am	at	this	moment?	Something’s	gone
seriously	awry	on	this	ship,	and	I	want	to	know	what,	and	who’s	responsible.”
“Is	that	all?	OK,	OK,	give	me	a	minute…”
Kalam	waited.	The	hair	rose	on	his	neck	as	he	felt	his	friend’s	presence	fill
the	air	on	all	sides,	a	probing	emanation	that	the	assassin	knew	well.	Then	it
was	gone.
“Uh.”
“What	does	that	mean,	Quick?”
“You’re	in	trouble,	friend.”
“Laseen?”
“Not	sure.	Not	directly—that	ship	stinks	of	a	warren,	Kalam,	one	of	the
rarest	among	mortals.	Been	confused	lately,	friend?”
“I	was	right,	then!	Who?”
“Someone,	maybe	on	board,	maybe	not.	Maybe	sailing	a	craft	within	that
warren,	right	alongside	you,	only	you’ll	never	see	it.	Anything	valuable


aboard?”
“You	mean	apart	from	my	hide?”
“Yes,	apart	from	your	hide,	of	course.”
“Only	a	despot’s	ransom.”
“Ah,	and	someone	wants	it	getting	somewhere	fast,	and	when	it	gets	there
that	someone	wants	every	damned	person	on	board	to	forget	where	that	place
is.	That’s	my	guess,	Kalam.	I	could	be	very	wrong,	though.”
“That’s	a	comfort.	You	said	you’re	in	trouble	over	there?	Whiskeyjack?
Dujek,	the	squad?”
“Scraping	through	so	far.	How’s	Fiddler?”
“No	idea.	We	decided	on	separate	ways…”
“Oh	no,	Kalam!”
“Aye,	Tremorlor.	Hood’s	breath,	it	was	your	idea,	Quick!”
“Assuming	the	House	was…at	peace.	Sure,	it	should’ve	worked.
Absolutely.	I	think.	But	something’s	gone	bad	there—every	warren’s	lit	up,
Kalam.	Chanced	on	a	Deck	of	Dragons	lately?”
“No.”
“Lucky	you.”
Realization	struck	the	assassin	with	a	sharply	drawn	breath.	“The	Path	of
Hands…”
“The	Path…oh.”	The	mage’s	voice	rose,	“Kalam!	If	you	knew—”
“We	didn’t	know	a	damned	thing,	Quick!”
“They	might	have	a	chance,”	Quick	Ben	muttered	a	moment	later.	“With
Sorry—”
“Apsalar,	you	mean.”
“Whatever.	Let	me	think,	damn	you.”
“Oh,	terrific,”	Kalam	growled.	“More	schemes…”
“I’m	losing	hold	here,	friend.	Too	tired…lost	too	much	blood	yesterday,	I
think.	Mallet	says…”
The	voice	trailed	away.	Cool	mist	seeped	back	in	around	the	assassin.
Quick	Ben	was	gone.	And	that’s	that.	On	my	own	in	truth,	now.	Fiddler…oh,
you	bastard,	we	should	have	guessed,	figured	it	out.	Ancient	gates…Tremorlor.
He	did	not	move	for	a	long	time.	Finally	he	sighed,	wiped	the	top	of	the
chest,	removing	the	last	of	the	crushed	rock	from	its	damp	surface,	and	rose.

The	captain	was	awake,	and	he	had	company.	Salk	Elan	grinned	as	Kalam
entered	the	cramped	room.	“We	were	just	talking	about	you,	partner,”	Elan


said.	“Knowing	how	set	you	get	in	your	mind,	and	wondering	how	you’d	take
the	news…”
“All	right,	I’ll	bite.	What	news?”
“This	storm—we’re	being	blown	off	course.	A	long	way.”
“Meaning?”
“Seems	we’ll	be	making	for	a	different	port	once	it’s	spent.”
“Not	Unta.”
“Oh,	eventually,	of	course.”
The	assassin’s	gaze	fell	to	the	captain.	He	looked	unhappy,	but	resigned.
Kalam	conjured	a	map	of	Quon	Tali	in	his	mind,	studied	it	a	moment,	then
sighed.	“Malaz	City.	The	island.”
“Never	seen	that	legendary	cesspool	before,”	Elan	said.	“I	can’t	wait.	I	trust
you’ll	be	generous	enough	to	show	me	all	the	sights,	friend.”
Kalam	stared	at	the	man,	then	smiled.	“Count	on	it,	Salk	Elan.”
	
They	had	paused	for	a	rest,	almost	inured	to	the	curdling	cries	and	screams
rising	from	other	paths	of	the	maze.	Mappo	lowered	Icarium	to	the	ground	and
knelt	beside	his	unconscious	friend.	Tremorlor ’s	desire	for	the	Jhag	was
palpable.	The	Trell	closed	his	eyes.	The	Nameless	Ones	have	guided	us	here,
delivering	Icarium	to	the	Azath	as	they	would	a	goat	to	a	hill	god.	Yet	it	is	not
their	hands	that	will	be	bloodied	by	the	deed.	I	am	the	one	who	will	be	stained
by	this.
He	struggled	to	conjure	the	image	of	the	destroyed	town—his	birthplace—
but	it	was	now	haunted	by	shadows.	Doubt	had	replaced	conviction.	He	no
longer	believed	his	own	memories.	Foolish!	Icarium	has	taken	countless	lives.
Whatever	the	truth	behind	my	town’s	death…
His	hands	clenched.
My	tribe—the	shoulder-women—would	not	betray	me.	What	weight	can	be
placed	on	Icarium’s	dreams?	The	Jhag	remembers	nothing.	Nothing	real.	His
equanimity	softens	truth,	blurs	the	edges…smears	every	color,	until	the	memory
is	daubed	anew.	Thus.	It	is	Icarium’s	kindness	that	has	snared	me…
Mappo’s	fists	ached.	He	looked	down	at	his	companion,	studied	the
expression	of	peaceful	repose	on	the	Jhag’s	blood-smeared	face.
Tremorlor	shall	not	have	you.	I	am	not	to	be	so	used.	If	the	Nameless	Ones
would	deliver	you,	then	they	shall	have	to	come	for	you	themselves,	and	through
me	first.
He	looked	up,	glared	into	the	heart	of	the	maze.	Tremorlor.	Reach	for	him
with	your	roots,	and	they	shall	feel	the	rage	of	a	Trell	warrior,	his	battle	dream


unleashed,	ancient	spirits	riding	his	flesh	in	a	dance	of	murder.	This	I	promise,
and	so	you	are	warned.
“It’s	said,”	Fiddler	murmured	beside	him,	“that	the	Azath	have	taken	gods.”
Mappo	fixed	the	soldier	with	hooded	eyes.
Fiddler	squinted	as	he	studied	the	riotous	walls	on	all	sides.	“What	Elder
gods—their	names	forgotten	for	millennia—are	caged	here?	When	did	they
last	see	light?	When	were	they	last	able	to	move	their	limbs?	Can	you	imagine
an	eternity	thus	endured?”	He	shifted	the	weight	of	the	crossbow	in	his	hands.
“If	Tremorlor	dies…imagine	the	madness	unleashed	upon	the	world.”
The	Trell	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	whispered,	“What	are	these
darts	that	you	fling	at	me?”
Fiddler ’s	brows	rose.	“Darts?	None	intended.	This	place	sits	on	me	like	a
cloak	of	vipers,	that	is	all.”
“Tremorlor	has	no	hunger	for	you,	soldier.”
Fiddler ’s	grin	was	crooked.	“Sometimes	it	pays	being	a	nobody.”
“Now	you	mock	in	truth.”
The	sapper ’s	grin	fell	away.	“Widen	your	senses,	Trell.	Tremorlor ’s	is	not
the	only	hunger	here.	Every	prisoner	in	these	walls	of	wood	feels	our	passage.
They	might	well	flinch	from	you	and	Icarium,	but	no	such	fear	constrains	their
regard	for	the	rest	of	us.”
Mappo	looked	away.	“Forgive	me.	I’ve	spared	little	thought	for	anyone
else,	as	you	have	noted.	Still,	do	not	think	I	would	hesitate	in	defending	you	if
the	need	arose.	I	am	not	one	to	diminish	the	honor	that	is	your
companionship.”
Fiddler	gave	a	sharp	nod,	straightened.	“A	soldier ’s	pragmatism.	I	had	to
know	one	way	or	the	other.”
“I	understand.”
“Sorry	if	I	offended	you.”
“Naught	but	a	knife-tip’s	prod—you’ve	stirred	me	to	wakefulness.”
Iskaral	Pust,	squatting	a	few	paces	away,	sputtered.	“Muddy	the	puddle,	oh
yes!	Yank	his	loyalties	this	way	and	that—excellent!	Witness	the	strategy	of
silence—while	the	intended	victims	unravel	each	other	in	pointless,	divisive
discourse.	Oh	yes,	I	have	learned	much	from	Tremorlor,	and	so	assume	a	like
strategy.	Silence,	a	faint	mocking	smile	suggesting	I	know	more	than	I	do,	an
air	of	mystery,	yes,	and	fell	knowledge.	None	could	guess	my	confusion,	my
host	of	deluded	illusions	and	elusive	delusions!	A	mantle	of	marble	hiding	a
crumbling	core	of	sandstone.	See	how	they	stare	at	me,	wondering—all
wondering—at	my	secret	wellspring	of	wisdom…”
“Let’s	kill	him,”	Crokus	muttered,	“if	only	to	put	him	out	of	out	misery.”


“And	sacrifice	such	entertainment?”	Fiddler	growled.	He	resumed	his
place	at	point.	“Time	to	go.”
“The	blathering	of	secrets,”	the	High	Priest	of	Shadow	uttered	in	a	wholly
different	voice,	“so	they	judge	me	ineffectual.”
The	others	spun	to	face	him.
Iskaral	Pust	offered	a	beatific	smile.
	
A	swarm	of	wasps	rose	above	the	tangled	root	wall,	sped	over	their	heads	and
past—paying	them	no	heed.	Fiddler	felt	his	heart	thud	back	into	place.	He	drew
a	shuddering	breath.	There	were	some	D’ivers	that	he	feared	more	than	others.
Beasts	are	one	thing,	but	insects…
He	glanced	back	at	the	others.	Icarium	hung	limp	in	Mappo’s	arms.	The
Jhag’s	head	was	stained	with	blood.	The	Trell’s	gaze	reached	beyond	the
sapper	to	the	edifice	that	awaited	them.	Mappo’s	expression	was	twisted	with
anguish,	so	thoroughly	unmasked	and	vulnerable	that	the	Trell’s	face	was	a
child’s	face,	with	an	attendant	need	that	was	all	the	more	demanding	for	being
wholly	unconscious.	A	mute	appeal	that	was	difficult	to	resist.
Fiddler	shook	himself,	pushing	his	attention	past	Mappo	and	his	burden.
Apsalar,	her	father	and	Crokus	stood	ranged	behind	the	Trell	in	a	protective
cordon	while	beyond	them	were	the	Hounds	and	Iskaral	Pust.	Five	pairs	of
bestial	eyes	and	one	human	burned	with	intent—dubious	allies,	our	rearguard.
Talk	about	a	badly	timed	schism—and	that	intent	was	fixed	on	the	unconscious
body	in	Mappo’s	arms.
Icarium	himself	wished	it,	and	in	so	saying	rendered	the	Trell’s	heart.	The
price	of	acquiescence	is	as	nothing	to	the	pain	of	refusal.	Yet	Mappo	will
surrender	his	life	to	this,	and	we’re	likely	to	do	the	same.	None	of	us—not	even
Apsalar—is	cold-hearted	enough	to	stand	back,	to	see	the	Jhag	taken.	Hood’s
breath,	we	are	fools,	and	Mappo	the	greatest	fool	of	us	all…
“What’s	on	your	mind,	Fid?”	Crokus	asked,	his	tone	suggesting	he	had	a
pretty	good	idea.
“Sappers	got	a	saying,”	he	muttered.	“Wide-eyed	stupid.”
The	Daru	slowly	nodded.
In	other	paths	of	the	maze,	the	taking	had	begun.	Shapeshifters—the	most
powerful	of	them,	the	survivors	who’d	made	it	this	far—had	begun	their
assault	on	the	House	of	the	Azath.	A	cacophony	of	screams	echoed	in	the	air,
battering	their	senses.	Tremorlor	defended	itself	the	only	way	it	could,	by
devouring,	by	imprisoning—but	there	are	too	many,	coming	too	quickly—wood
snapped,	woven	cages	shattered,	the	sound	was	of	a	forest	being	destroyed,


branch	by	branch,	tree	by	tree,	an	inexorable	progression,	closer,	ever	closer
to	the	House	itself.
“We’re	running	out	of	time!”	hissed	Iskaral	Pust,	the	Hounds	moving	in
agitation	around	him.	“Things	are	coming	up	behind	us.	Things!	How	much
clearer	can	I	be?”
“We	may	still	need	him,”	Fiddler	said.
“Oh,	aye!”	the	High	Priest	responded.	“The	Trell	can	throw	him	like	a	sack
of	grain!”
“I	can	bring	him	around	quickly	enough,”	Mappo	growled.	“I	still	carry
some	of	those	Denul	elixirs	from	your	temple,	Iskaral	Pust.”
“Let’s	get	moving,”	the	sapper	said.	Something	was	indeed	coming	up
behind	them,	making	the	air	redolent	with	sickly	spice.	The	Hounds	had	pulled
their	attention	from	Mappo	and	Icarium	and	now	faced	the	other	way,	revealing
restless	nerves	as	they	shifted	position.	The	trail	made	a	sharp	bend	twenty
paces	from	where	the	huge	beasts	stood.
A	piercing	scream	ripped	the	air,	coming	from	just	beyond	that	bend,
followed	by	the	explosive	sounds	of	battle.	It	ended	abruptly.
“We’ve	waited	too	long!”	Pust	hissed,	cowering	behind	his	god’s	Hounds.
“Now	it	comes!”
Fiddler	swung	his	crossbow	around,	eyes	fixed	on	the	place	where	their
pursuer	would	appear.
Instead,	a	small,	nut-brown	creature	half	flapped,	half	scampered	into	view.
Tendrils	of	smoke	drifted	from	it.
“Ai!”	Pust	shrieked.	“They	plague	me!”
Crokus	bolted	forward,	pushing	his	way	between	Shan	and	Gear	as	if	they
were	no	more	than	a	pair	of	mules.	“Moby?”
The	familiar	raced	toward	the	Daru	and	leaped	at	the	last	moment	to	land
in	the	lad’s	arms.	Where	it	clung	tenaciously,	wings	twitching.	Crokus’s	head
snapped	back.	“Ugh,	you	stink	like	the	Abyss!”
Moby,	that	damned	familiar…Fiddler ’s	gaze	flicked	to	Mappo.	The	Trell
was	frowning.
“Bhok’aral!”	The	word	came	from	Iskaral	Pust	as	a	curse.	“A	pet?	A	pet?
Madness!”
“My	uncle’s	familiar,”	Crokus	said,	approaching.
The	Hounds	shrank	from	his	path.
Oh,	lad,	much	more	than	that,	it	seems.
“An	ally,	then,”	Mappo	said.
Crokus	nodded,	though	with	obvious	uncertainty.	“Hood	knows	how	he
found	us.	How	he	survived…”


“Dissembler!”	Pust	accused,	creeping	toward	the	Daru.	“A	familiar?	Shall
we	ask	the	opinion	of	that	dead	shapeshifter	back	there?	Oh	no,	we	can’t,	can
we?	It’s	been	torn	to	pieces!”
Crokus	said	nothing.
“Never	mind,”	Apsalar	said.	“We’re	wasting	time.	To	the	House—”
The	High	Priest	wheeled	on	her.	“Never	mind?	What	conniving	deceit	has
arrived	among	us?	What	foul	betrayal	hangs	over	us?	There,	hanging	from	the
lad’s	shirt—”
“Enough!”	Fiddler	snapped.	“Stay	here	then,	Pust.	You	and	your	Hounds.”
The	sapper	faced	the	House	again.	“What	do	you	think,	Mappo?	Nothing’s	got
close	to	it	yet—if	we	make	a	run	for	it…”
“We	can	but	try.”
“Do	you	think	the	door	will	open	for	us?”
“I	do	not	know.”
“Let’s	find	out,	then.”
The	Trell	nodded.
They	had	a	clear	view	of	Tremorlor.	A	low	wall	surrounded	it,	made	of
what	appeared	to	be	volcanic	rock,	jagged	and	sharp.	The	only	visible	break	in
that	wall	was	a	narrow	gate,	over	which	arched	a	weave	of	vines.	The	House
itself	was	tawny	in	color,	probably	built	of	limestone,	its	entrance	recessed
between	a	pair	of	squat,	asymmetrical	two-story	towers,	neither	of	which
possessed	windows.	A	winding	path	of	flagstones	connected	the	gate	with	the
shadow-swallowed	door.	Low,	gnarled	trees	occupied	the	yard,	each
surmounting	a	hump.
A	sister	to	Deadhouse	in	Malaz	City.	Little	different	from	the	one	in
Darujhistan.	All	of	a	kind.	All	Azath—though	where	that	name	came	from	and
how	long	ago	no	one	knows	or	will	ever	know.
Mappo	spoke	in	a	low	voice	beside	the	sapper.	“It’s	said	the	Azath	bridge
the	realms—every	realm.	It’s	said	that	even	time	itself	ceases	within	their
walls.”
“And	those	doors	open	to	but	a	few,	for	reasons	unknown.”	Fiddler
scowled	at	his	own	words.
Apsalar	moved	to	the	front,	stepping	past	the	sapper.
Startled,	Fiddler	grunted.	“In	a	hurry,	lass?”
She	looked	back	at	him.	“The	one	who	possessed	me,	Fiddler…an	Azath
welcomed	him,	once.”
True	enough.	And	why	does	that	make	me	so	nervous	now,	and	here?	“So,
how’s	it	done?	Special	knock?	Key	under	the	loose	flagstone?”
Her	answering	smile	was	a	balm	to	his	agitation.	“No,	something	much


simpler.	Audacity.”
“Well,	we’ve	plenty	of	that.	We’re	here,	aren’t	we?”
“Aye,	we	are.”
She	led	the	way,	and	all	followed.
“That	conch	shell,”	Mappo	rumbled.	“Immense	damage	was	delivered	to
the	Soletaken	and	D’ivers,	is	still	being	delivered,	it	seems—for	the	Azath,	it
may	be	proving	enough.”
“And	you	pray	that	is	so.”
“Aye,	I	do.”
“So	why	didn’t	that	deathly	song	destroy	us	as	well?”
“You	are	asking	me,	Fiddler?	The	gift	was	given	to	you,	was	it	not?”
“Yes.	I	saved	a	little	girl—kin	to	the	Spiritwalker.”
“Which	Spiritwalker,	Fiddler?”
“Kimloc.”
The	Trell	was	silent	for	half	a	dozen	paces,	then	a	frustrated	growl	rose
from	him.	“A	girl,	you	said.	No	matter	how	close	a	kin,	Kimloc’s	reward	far
outweighed	your	gesture.	More,	it	seemed	precisely	intended	for	its	use—the
sorcery	in	that	song	was	aspected,	Fiddler.	Tell	me,	did	Kimloc	know	you
sought	Tremorlor?”
“I	certainly	didn’t	tell	him	as	much.”
“Did	he	touch	you	at	any	time—the	brush	of	a	finger	against	your	arm,
anything?”
“He	asked	to,	as	I	recall.	He	wanted	my	story.	I	declined.	But	Hood’s	breath,
Mappo,	I	truly	cannot	recall	if	there	was	some	chance	contact.”
“I	think	there	must	have	been.”
“If	so,	I	forgive	him	the	indiscretion.”
“I	imagine	he	anticipated	that	as	well.”
Even	as	Tremorlor	withstood	the	assault	that	raged	from	all	sides,	the
battles	were	far	from	over,	and	in	some	places	the	sound	of	shattering	wood
was	a	seemingly	unstoppable	progression,	coming	ever	closer.
Apsalar	increased	pace	as	one	of	those	unseen,	sundering	avalanches	drew
near	the	group,	driving	for	the	arched	gate.	A	moment	later,	amidst	a	rising
roar,	they	all	broke	into	a	run.
“Where?”	Fiddler	demanded	as	he	scrambled	forward,	head	darting	as	he
searched	frantically	in	all	directions.	“Where	in	Hood’s	name	is	it?”
The	answer	came	in	a	sudden	sleet	of	ice-cold	water	from	above,	the
savage	opening	of	a	warren.	Emerging	from	within	that	hovering,	strangely
suspended	spray—not	fifty	paces	behind	them—the	enormous	head	and	maw
of	a	dhenrabi	lunged	into	view,	wreathed	in	uprooted	sea	grasses,	kelp	and


strange,	skeletal	branches.
A	swarm	of	wasps	rose	before	it	and	was	devoured	entire	without	pause.
Three	more	dhenrabi	appeared	from	that	torrential	portal.	The	roiling
spume	of	water	that	held	them	seemed	to	burn	off	wherever	it	descended	upon
the	roots	of	the	maze,	yet	the	creatures	remained	suspended,	riding	the	hissing
maelstrom.
Images	flashed	through	Fiddler	within	the	span	of	a	single	heartbeat.	Kansu
Sea.	Not	a	Soletaken	after	all—not	a	single	beast,	but	a	pack.	A	D’ivers.	And
I’m	out	of	cussers—
A	moment	later,	it	became	clear	just	how	untested	the	Hounds	of	Shadow
had	been	thus	far.	He	felt	the	power	emanate	from	the	five	beasts—so	similar
was	it	to	that	of	dragons,	it	rolled	like	a	breath,	a	surge	of	raw	sorcery	that
preceded	the	Hounds	as	they	sprang	forward	with	blurring	speed.
Shan	was	the	first	to	reach	the	lead	dhenrabi,	the	first	to	plunge	into	its
gaping,	serrated	mouth—and	vanish	within	that	yawning	darkness.	The
creature	reared	back	lightning-quick,	and	if	that	massive,	blunt	visage	could
show	surprise,	it	did	so	now.
Gear	reached	the	next	one,	and	the	dhenrabi	lunged,	not	to	swallow,	but	to
bite	down,	to	flense	with	the	thousand	jagged	plates	of	its	teeth.	The	Hound’s
power	buckled	under	those	snapping	jaws,	but	did	not	shatter.	An	instant	later,
Gear	was	through,	past	those	teeth,	burying	itself	within	the	creature—where	it
delivered	mayhem.
The	other	Hounds	made	for	the	remaining	two	dhenrabi.	Only	Blind
remained	with	the	group.
The	lead	dhenrabi	began	thrashing	now,	whipping	its	enormous	bulk	as	the
torrent	of	its	warren	collapsed	around	it—crushing	flat	walls	of	the	maze,
where	long-imprisoned	victims	stirred	amidst	the	wreckage,	withered	limbs
reaching	skyward	through	mud-churned	water,	clutching	air.	The	second
dhenrabi	fell	into	the	same	writhing	tumult.
A	hand	clutched	Fiddler ’s	arm,	pulling	him	hard	around.
“Come	on,”	Crokus	hissed.	Moby	was	still	clinging	to	his	shirt.	“We’ve	got
more	company,	Fid.”
And	now	the	sapper	saw	the	object	of	the	Daru’s	attention—off	to	his	right,
almost	behind	Tremorlor,	still	a	thousand	paces	distant,	yet	fast	approaching.	A
swarm	like	no	other.	Bloodflies,	in	a	solid	black	cloud	the	size	of	a
thunderhead,	billowing,	surging	toward	them.
Leaving	the	dhenrabi	in	the	throes	of	violent	death	behind	them,	the	group
sprinted	for	the	House.
As	he	passed	beneath	the	leafless	arch	of	vines,	the	sapper	saw	Apsalar


reach	the	door,	close	her	hands	on	the	broad,	heavy	ring-latch	and	twist	it.	He
saw	the	muscles	rise	on	her	forearms,	straining.	Straining.
Then	she	staggered	back	a	step,	as	if	dismissively,	contemptuously	shoved.
As	Fiddler,	trailed	by	Crokus,	Mappo	with	his	charge,	Apsalar ’s	father,	then
Pust	and	Blind,	reached	the	flat,	paved	landing,	he	saw	her	spin	round,	her
expression	one	of	shock	and	disbelief.
It	won’t	open.	Tremorlor	has	refused	us.
The	sapper	skidded	to	a	halt,	whirled.
The	sky	was	black,	alive,	and	coming	straight	for	them.
	
At	Vathar ’s	sparse,	blistered	edge,	where	the	basolith	of	bedrock	sank	once
more	beneath	its	skin	of	limestone,	and	the	land	that	stretched	southward
before	and	below	their	vantage	point	was	nothing	but	studded	stones	in
windswept,	parched	clay,	they	came	upon	the	first	of	the	Jaghut	tombs.
Few	among	the	outriders	and	the	column’s	head	paid	it	much	attention.	It
looked	like	nothing	more	than	a	cairn	marker,	a	huge,	elongated	slab	of	stone
tilted	upward	at	the	southernmost	end,	as	if	pointing	the	way	across	the	Nenoth
Odhan	to	Aren	or	some	other,	more	recent	destination.
Corporal	List	had	led	the	historian	to	it	in	silence	while	the	others	prepared
rigging	to	assist	in	the	task	of	guiding	the	wagons	down	the	steep,	winding
descent	to	the	plain’s	barren	floor.
“The	youngest	son,”	List	said,	staring	down	at	the	primitive	tomb.	His	face
was	frightening	to	look	at,	for	it	wore	a	father ’s	grief,	as	raw	as	if	the	child’s
death	was	but	yesterday—a	grief	that	had,	if	anything,	grown	with	the	tortured,
unfathomable	passage	of	two	hundred	thousand	years.
He	stands	guard	still,	that	Jaghut	ghost.	The	statement,	a	silent	utterance
that	was	both	simple	and	obvious,	nevertheless	took	the	historian’s	breath
away.	How	to	comprehend	this….
“How	old?”	Duiker ’s	voice	was	as	parched	as	the	Odhan	that	awaited	them.
“Five.	The	T’lan	Imass	chose	this	place	for	him.	The	effort	of	killing	him
would	have	proved	too	costly,	given	that	the	rest	of	the	family	still	awaited
them.	So	they	dragged	the	child	here—shattered	his	bones,	every	one,	as	many
times	as	they	could	on	so	small	a	frame—then	pinned	him	beneath	this	rock.”
Duiker	had	thought	himself	beyond	shock,	beyond	even	despair,	yet	his
throat	closed	up	at	List’s	toneless	words.	The	historian’s	imagination	was	too
sharp	for	this,	raising	images	in	his	mind	that	seared	him	with	overwhelming
sorrow.	He	forced	himself	to	look	away,	watched	the	activities	among	the
soldiers	and	Wickans	thirty	paces	distant.	He	realized	that	they	worked	mostly


in	silence,	speaking	only	as	their	tasks	required,	and	then	in	low,	strangely
subdued	tones.
“Yes,”	List	said.	“The	father ’s	emotions	are	a	pall	unrelieved	by	time—so
powerful,	so	rending,	those	emotions,	that	even	the	earth	spirits	had	to	flee.	It
was	that	or	madness.	Coltaine	should	be	informed—we	must	move	quickly
across	this	land.”
“And	ahead?	On	the	Nenoth	plain?”
“It	gets	worse.	It	was	not	just	the	children	that	the	T’lan	Imass	pinned—still
breathing,	still	aware—beneath	rocks.”
“But	why?”	The	question	ripped	from	Duiker ’s	throat.
“Pogroms	need	no	reason,	sir,	none	that	can	weather	challenge,	in	any
case.	Difference	in	kind	is	the	first	recognition,	the	only	one	needed,	in	fact.
Land,	domination,	pre-emptive	attacks—all	just	excuses,	mundane
justifications	that	do	nothing	but	disguise	the	simple	distinction.	They	are	not
us.	We	are	not	them.”
“Did	the	Jaghut	seek	to	reason	with	them,	Corporal?”
“Many	times,	among	those	not	thoroughly	corrupted	by	power—the
Tyrants—but	you	see,	there	was	always	an	arrogance	in	the	Jaghut,	and	it	was	a
kind	that	could	claw	its	way	up	your	back	when	face	to	face.	Each	Jaghut’s
interest	was	with	him	or	herself.	Almost	exclusively.	They	viewed	the	T’lan
Imass	no	differently	from	the	way	they	viewed	ants	underfoot,	herds	on	the
grasslands,	or	indeed	the	grass	itself.	Ubiquitous,	a	feature	of	the	landscape.	A
powerful,	emergent	people,	such	as	the	T’lan	Imass	were,	could	not	but	be
stung—”
“To	the	point	of	swearing	a	deathless	vow?”
“I	don’t	believe	that,	at	first,	the	T’lan	Imass	realized	how	difficult	the	task
of	eradication	would	be.	Jaghut	were	very	different	in	another	way—they	did
not	flaunt	their	power.	And	many	of	their	efforts	in	self-defense	were…passive.
Barriers	of	ice—glaciers—they	swallowed	the	lands	around	them,	even	the
seas,	swallowed	whole	continents,	making	them	impassable,	unable	to	support
the	food	the	mortal	Imass	required.”
“So	they	created	a	ritual	that	would	make	them	immortal—”
“Free	to	blow	like	the	dust—and	in	the	age	of	ice,	there	was	plenty	of	dust.”
Duiker ’s	gaze	caught	Coltaine	standing	near	the	edge	of	the	trail.	“How
far,”	he	asked	the	man	beside	him,	“until	we	leave	this	area	of…of	sorrow?”
“Two	leagues,	no	more	than	that.	Beyond	are	Nenoth’s	true	grasslands,
hills…tribes,	each	one	very	protective	of	what	little	water	they	possess.”
“I	think	I	had	better	speak	with	Coltaine.”
“Aye,	sir.”


	
The	Dry	March,	as	it	came	to	be	called,	was	its	own	testament	to	sorrow.	Three
vast,	powerful	tribes	awaited	them,	two	of	them,	the	Tregyn	and	the	Bhilard,
striking	at	the	beleaguered	column	like	vipers.	With	the	third,	situated	at	the
very	western	edge	of	the	plains—the	Khundryl—there	was	no	immediate
contact,	though	it	was	felt	that	that	would	not	last.
The	pathetic	herd	accompanying	the	Chain	of	Dogs	died	on	that	march,
animals	simply	collapsing,	even	as	the	Wickan	cattle-dogs	converged	with
fierce	insistence	that	they	rise—dead	or	no—and	resume	the	journey.	When
butchered,	these	carcasses	were	little	more	than	ropes	of	leathery	flesh.
Starvation	joined	the	terrible	ravaging	thirst,	for	the	Wickans	refused	to
slaughter	their	horses	and	attended	them	with	eloquent	fanaticism	that	no	one
dared	challenge.	The	warriors	sacrificed	of	themselves	to	keep	their	mounts
alive.	One	petition	from	Nethpara’s	Council,	offering	to	purchase	a	hundred
horses,	was	returned	to	the	nobleborn	leader	smeared	in	human	excrement.
The	twin	vipers	struck	again	and	again,	contesting	every	league,	the	attacks
increasing	in	ferocity	and	frequency,	until	it	was	clear	that	a	major	clash
approached,	only	days	away.
In	the	column’s	wake	followed	Korbolo	Dom’s	army,	a	force	that	had
grown	with	the	addition	of	forces	from	Tarxian	and	other	coastal	settlements,
and	was	now	at	least	five	times	the	size	of	Coltaine’s	Seventh	and	his	Wickan
clans.	The	renegade	commander ’s	measured	pursuit—leaving	engagement	to
the	wild	plains	tribes—was	ominous	in	itself.
He	would	be	there	for	the	imminent	battle,	without	doubt,	and	was	content
to	wait	until	then.
The	Chain	of	Dogs—its	numbers	swollen	by	new	refugees	fleeing	Bylan—
crawled	on,	coming	within	sight	of	what	the	maps	indicated	was	the	Nenoth
Odhan’s	end,	where	hills	rose	in	a	wall	across	the	southern	horizon.	The	trader
track	cut	through	the	only	substantial	passage,	a	wide	river	valley	between	the
Bylan’sh	Hills	to	the	east	and	the	Saniphir	Hills	to	the	west,	the	track	running
for	seven	leagues,	opening	out	on	a	plain	that	faced	the	ancient	tel	of	Sanimon,
then	wrapped	around	it	to	encompass	the	Sanith	Odhan	and,	beyond	that,	the
Geleen	Plain,	the	Dojal	Odhan—and	the	city	of	Aren	itself.
No	relief	army	emerged	from	Sanimon	Valley.	A	profound	sense	of
isolation	descended	like	a	shroud	on	the	train,	even	as	the	valley’s	flanking
hills	began	to	reveal,	in	the	day’s	dying	light,	twin	encampments,	both	vast,	of
tribesmen—the	main	forces	of	the	Tregyn	and	the	Bhilard.
Here,	then,	at	the	mouth	of	the	ancient	valley…here	it	would	be.


	
“We’re	dying,”	Lull	muttered	as	he	came	up	alongside	the	historian	on	his	way
to	the	briefing.	“And	I	don’t	mean	just	figuratively,	old	man.	I	lost	eleven
soldiers	today.	Throats	swollen	so	bad	with	thirst	they	couldn’t	draw	breath.”
He	waved	at	a	fly	buzzing	his	face.	“Hood’s	breath,	I’m	swimming	in	this
armor—by	the	time	we’re	done,	we’ll	all	look	like	T’lan	Imass.”
“I	can’t	say	I	appreciate	the	analogy,	Captain.”
“Wasn’t	expecting	you	to.”
“Horse	piss.	That’s	what	the	Wickans	are	drinking	these	days.”
“Aye,	same	for	my	crew.	They’re	neighing	in	their	sleep,	and	more	than
one’s	died	from	it.”
Three	dogs	loped	past	them,	the	huge	one	named	Bent,	a	female,	and	the
lapdog	scrambling	in	their	wake.
“They’ll	outlive	us	all,”	Lull	grumbled.	“Those	damned	beasts!”
The	sky	deepened	overhead,	the	first	stars	pushing	through	the	cerulean
gauze.
“Gods,	I’m	tired.”
Duiker	nodded.	Oh,	indeed,	we’ve	traveled	far,	friend,	and	now	stand	face
to	face	with	Hood.	He	takes	the	weary	as	readily	as	the	defiant.	Offers	the	same
welcoming	grin.
“Something	in	the	air	tonight,	Historian.	Can	you	feel	it?”
“Yes.”
“Maybe	Hood’s	Warren	has	drawn	closer.”
“It	has	that	feel,	doesn’t	it?”
They	arrived	at	the	Fist’s	command	tent,	entered.
The	usual	faces	were	arrayed	before	them.	Nil	and	Nether,	the	last
remaining	warlocks;	Sulmar	and	Chenned,	Bult	and	Coltaine	himself.	Each	had
become	a	desiccated	mockery	of	the	will	and	strength	once	present	in	their
varied	miens.
“Where’s	Bungle?”	Lull	asked,	finding	his	usual	camp-chair.
“Listening	to	her	sergeant,	I’d	guess,”	Bult	said,	with	a	ghost	of	a	grin.
Coltaine	had	no	time	for	idle	talk.	“Something	approaches,	this	night.	The
warlocks	have	sensed	it,	though	that	is	all	they	can	say.	We	are	faced	with
preparing	for	it.”
Duiker	looked	to	Nether.	“What	kind	of	sense?”
She	shrugged,	then	sighed.	“Vague.	Troubled,	even	outrage—I	don’t	know,
Historian.”
“Sensed	anything	like	it	before?	Even	remotely?”


“No.”
Outrage.
“Draw	the	refugees	close,”	Coltaine	commanded	the	captains.	“Double	the
pickets—”
“Fist,”	Sulmar	said,	“we	face	a	battle	tomorrow—”
“Aye,	and	rest	is	needed.	I	know.”	The	Wickan	began	pacing,	but	it	was	a
slower	pace	than	usual.	It	had	lost	its	smoothness	as	well,	its	ease	and	elegance.
“And	more,	we	are	greatly	weakened—the	water	casks	are	bone	dry.”
Duiker	winced.	Battle?	No,	tomorrow	will	see	a	slaughter.	Soldiers	unable
to	fight,	unable	to	defend	themselves.	The	historian	cleared	his	throat,	made	to
speak,	then	stopped.	One	word,	yet	even	to	voice	it	would	be	to	offer	the
cruellest	illusion.	One	word.
Coltaine	was	staring	at	him.	“We	cannot,”	he	said	softly.
I	know.	For	the	rebellion’s	warriors	as	much	as	for	us,	the	end	to	this	must
be	with	blood.
“The	soldiers	are	beyond	digging	trenches,”	Lull	said	into	the	heavy,	alltoo-aware	silence.
“Holes,	then.”
“Aye,	sir.”
Holes.	To	break	mounted	charges,	snap	legs,	send	screaming	beasts	into	the
dust.
The	briefing	ended	then,	abruptly,	as	the	air	was	suddenly	charged,	and
whatever	threatened	to	arrive	now	announced	itself	with	a	brittle	crackle,	a	mist
of	something	oily,	like	sweat	clogging	the	air.
Coltaine	led	the	group	outside,	to	find	the	bristling	atmosphere	manifested
tenfold	beneath	the	night’s	sparkling	canopy.	Horses	bucked.	Cattle-dogs
howled.
Soldiers	were	rising	like	specters.	Weapons	rustled.
In	the	open	space	just	beyond	the	foremost	pickets,	the	air	split	asunder
with	a	savage,	ripping	sound.
Three	pale	horses	thundered	from	that	rent,	followed	by	three	more,	then
another	three,	all	harnessed,	all	screaming	with	terror.	Behind	them	came	a
massive	carriage,	a	fire-scorched,	gaudily	painted	leviathan	riding	atop	six
spoked	wheels	that	were	taller	than	a	man.	Smoke	trailed	like	thick	strands	of
raw	wool	from	the	carriage,	from	the	horses	themselves,	and	from	the	three
figures	visible	behind	the	last	three	chargers.
The	white,	screaming	train	was	at	full	gallop—as	if	in	headlong	flight
from	whatever	warren	it	had	come	from—and	the	carriage	pitched	wildly,
alarmingly,	as	the	beasts	plunged	straight	for	the	pickets.


Wickans	scattered	to	either	side.
Staring	with	disbelief,	Duiker	saw	all	three	figures	sawing	the	reins,
bellowing,	flinging	themselves	against	the	backrest	of	their	tottering	perch.
The	horses	drove	hooves	into	the	earth,	biting	down	on	their	momentum,
the	towering	carriage	slewing	behind	them,	raising	a	cloud	of	smoke,	dust	and
an	emanation	that	the	historian	recognized	with	a	jolt	of	alarm	as	outrage.	The
outrage,	he	now	understood,	of	a	warren—and	its	god.
Behind	the	lead	carriage	came	another,	then	another,	each	pitching	to	one
side	or	the	other	to	avoid	collision	as	they	skidded	to	a	halt.
As	soon	as	the	lead	carriage	ceased	its	headlong	plunge,	figures	poured
from	it,	armored	men	and	women,	shouting,	roaring	commands	that	no	one
seemed	to	pay	any	attention	to,	and	waving	blackened,	smeared	and	dripping
weapons.
A	moment	later,	even	as	the	other	two	carriages	stopped,	a	loud	bell
clanged.
The	frenzied,	seemingly	aimless	activities	of	the	figures	promptly	ceased.
Weapons	were	lowered,	and	sudden	silence	filled	the	air	behind	the	fading
echo	of	the	bell.	Snorting	and	stamping,	the	lathered	horses	tossed	their	heads,
ears	twitching,	nostrils	wide.
The	lead	carriage	was	no	more	than	fifteen	paces	from	where	Duiker	and
the	others	stood.
The	historian	saw	a	severed	hand	clinging	to	an	ornate	projection	on	one
side	of	the	carriage.	After	a	moment	it	fell	to	the	ground.
A	tiny	barred	door	opened	and	a	man	emerged,	with	difficulty	squeezing
his	considerable	bulk	through	the	aperture.	He	was	dressed	in	silks	that	were
drenched	in	sweat.	His	round,	glistening	face	revealed	the	passing	echoes	of
some	immense,	all-consuming	effort.	In	one	hand	he	carried	a	stoppered	bottle.
Stepping	clear,	he	faced	Coltaine	and	raised	the	bottle.	“You,	sir,”	he	said	in
strangely	accented	Malazan,	“have	much	to	answer	for.”	Then	he	grinned,
displaying	a	row	of	gold-capped,	diamond-studded	teeth.	“Your	exploits
tremble	the	warrens!	Your	journey	is	wildfire	in	every	street	in	Darujhistan,	no
doubt	in	every	city,	no	matter	how	distant!	Have	you	no	notion	how	many
beseech	their	gods	on	your	behalf?	Coffers	overflow!	Grandiose	plans	of
salvation	abound!	Vast	organizations	have	formed,	their	leaders	coming	to	us,
to	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild,	to	pay	for	our	fraught	passage—though,”	he
added	in	a	lower	tone,	“all	the	Guild’s	passages	are	fraught,	which	is	what
makes	us	so	expensive.”	He	unstoppered	the	bottle.	“The	great	city	of
Darujhistan	and	its	remarkable	citizens—dismissing	in	an	instant	your
Empire’s	voracious	desires	on	it	and	on	themselves—bring	you	this	gift!	By


way	of	the	shareholders—”	he	waved	back	at	the	various	men	and	women
behind	him,	now	gathering	into	a	group—”	of	Trygalle—the	foulest-tempered,
greediest	creatures	imaginable,	but	that	is	neither	here	nor	there,	for	here	we
are,	are	we	not?	Let	it	not	be	said	of	the	citizens	of	Darujhistan	that	they	are
insensitive	to	the	wondrous,	and,	dear	sir,	you	are	truly	wondrous.”
The	preposterous	man	stepped	forward,	suddenly	solemn.	He	spoke	softly.
“Alchemists,	mages,	sorcerers	have	all	contributed,	offering	vessels	with
capacities	belying	their	modest	containers.	Coltaine	of	Crow	Clan,	Chain	of
Dogs,	I	bring	you	food.	I	bring	you	water.”
	
Karpolan	Demesand	was	one	of	the	original	founders	of	the	Trygalle	Trade
Guild,	a	citizen	of	the	small	fortress	city	of	the	same	name,	situated	south	of
the	Lamatath	Plain	on	the	continent	of	Genabackis.	Born	of	a	dubious	alliance
between	a	handful	of	mages,	Karpolan	among	them,	and	the	city’s	benefactors
—a	motley	collection	of	retired	pirates	and	wreckers—the	Guild	came	to
specialize	in	expeditions	so	risk-laden	as	to	make	the	average	merchant	pale.
Each	caravan	was	protected	by	a	heavily	armed	company	of	shareholders—
guards	who	possessed	a	direct	stake	in	the	venture,	ensuring	the	fullest
exploitation	of	their	abilities.	And	such	abilities	were	direly	needed,	for	the
caravans	of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild—as	was	clear	from	the	very	outset—
traveled	the	warrens.
“We	knew	we	had	a	challenge	on	our	hands,”	Karpolan	Demesand	said
with	a	beatific,	glittering	smile	as	they	sat	in	Coltaine’s	command	tent,	with
only	the	Fist	and	Duiker	for	company	because	everyone	else	was	working
outside,	dispensing	the	caravan’s	life-giving	supplies	with	all	speed.	“That	foul
Warren	of	Hood	is	wrapped	about	you	tighter	than	a	funeral	shroud	on	a
corpse…if	you’ll	forgive	the	image.	The	key	is	to	ride	fast,	to	stop	for
nothing,	then	get	out	as	soon	as	humanly	possible.	In	the	lead	wagon,	I
maintain	the	road,	with	every	sorcerous	talent	at	my	command—a	grueling
journey,	granted,	but	then	again,	we	don’t	come	cheap.”
“I	still	find	it	hard	to	fathom,”	Duiker	said,	“that	the	citizens	of	Darujhistan,
fifteen	hundred	leagues	distant,	should	even	know	of	what’s	happening	here,
much	less	care.”
Karpolan’s	eyes	thinned.	“Ah,	well,	perhaps	I	exaggerated	somewhat—the
heat	of	the	moment,	I	confess.	You	must	understand—soldiers	who	not	long
ago	were	bent	on	conquering	Darujhistan	are	now	locked	in	a	war	with	the
Pannion	Domin,	a	tyranny	that	would	dearly	love	to	swallow	the	Blue	City	if	it
could.	Dujek	Onearm,	once	Fist	of	the	Empire	and	now	outlaw	to	the	same,	has


become	an	ally.	And	this,	certain	personages	in	Darujhistan	know	well,	and
appreciate…”
“But	there	is	more	to	it,”	Coltaine	said	quietly.
Karpolan	smiled	a	second	time.	“Is	this	water	not	sweet?	Here,	let	me	pour
you	another	cup.”
They	waited,	watching	the	trader	refill	the	three	tin	cups	arrayed	on	the
small	table	between	them.	When	he	was	done,	Karpolan	sighed	and	sat	back	in
the	plush	chair	he	had	had	removed	from	the	carriage.	“Dujek	Onearm.”	The
name	was	spoken	half	in	benediction,	half	in	wry	dismay.	“He	sends	his
greetings,	Fist	Coltaine.	Our	office	in	Darujhistan	is	small,	newly	opened,	you
understand.	We	do	not	advertise	our	services.	Not	openly,	in	any	case.	Frankly,
those	services	include	activities	that	are,	on	occasion,	clandestine	in	nature.	We
trade	not	only	in	material	goods	but	in	information,	the	delivery	of	gifts,	of
people	themselves…and	other	creatures.”
“Dujek	Onearm	was	the	force	behind	this	mission,”	Duiker	said.
Karpolan	nodded.	“With	financial	assistance	from	a	certain	cabal	in
Darujhistan,	yes.	His	words	were	thus:	‘The	Empress	cannot	lose	such	leaders
as	Coltaine	of	the	Crow	Clan.’	”	The	trader	grinned.	“Extraordinary	for	an
outlaw	under	a	death	sentence,	wouldn’t	you	say?”	He	leaned	forward	and	held
out	a	hand,	palm	up.	Something	shimmered	into	existence	on	it,	a	small	oblong
bottle	of	smoky	gray	glass	on	a	silver	chain.	“And,	from	an	alarmingly
mysterious	mage	among	the	Bridgeburners,	this	gift	was	fashioned.”	He	held	it
out	to	Coltaine.	“For	you.	Wear	it.	At	all	times,	Fist.”
The	Wickan	scowled	and	made	no	move	to	accept	it.
Karpolan’s	smile	was	wistful.	“Dujek	is	prepared	to	pull	rank	on	this,
friend—”
“An	outlaw	pulling	rank?”
“Ah,	well,	I	admit	I	voiced	the	same	query.	His	reply	was	this:	‘Never
underestimate	the	Empress.’	”
Silence	descended,	the	meaning	behind	that	statement	slowly	taking	shape.
Locked	in	a	war	against	an	entire	continent…stumbling	onto	a	recognition	of
an	even	greater	threat—the	Pannion	Domin…shall	the	Empire	alone	fight	on
behalf	of	a	hostile	land?	Yet…how	to	fashion	allies	among	enemies,	how	to
unify	against	a	greater	threat	with	the	minimum	of	fuss	and	mistrust?	Outlaw
your	occupying	army,	so	they’ve	“no	choice”	but	to	step	free	of	Laseen’s
shadow.	Dujek,	ever	loyal	Dujek—even	the	ill-conceived	plan	of	killing	the	last
of	the	Old	Guard—Tayschrenn’s	foolishness	and	misguided	idea—insufficient	to
turn	him.	So	now	he	has	allies—those	who	were	once	his	enemies—perhaps
even	Caladan	Brood	and	Anomander	Rake	themselves…Duiker	turned	to


Coltaine	and	saw	the	same	knowledge	there	in	his	drawn,	stern	visage.
The	Wickan	reached	out	and	received	the	gift.
“The	Empress	must	not	lose	you,	Fist.	Wear	it,	sir.	Always.	And	when	the
time	comes,	break	it—against	your	own	chest.	Even	if	it’s	your	last	act,	though
I	suggest	you	do	not	leave	it	until	then.	Such	were	its	creator ’s	frantic
instructions.”	Karpolan	grinned	again.	“And	such	a	man,	that	creator!	A	dozen
Ascendants	would	dearly	love	his	head	served	up	on	a	plate,	his	eyes	pickled,
his	tongue	skewered	and	roasted	with	peppers,	his	ears	grilled—”
“Your	point	is	made,”	Duiker	cut	in.
Coltaine	placed	the	chain	around	his	neck	and	slipped	the	bottle	beneath	his
buckskin	shirt.
“A	dire	battle	awaits	you	come	dawn,”	Karpolan	said	after	a	time.	“I	cannot
stay,	will	not	stay.	Though	mage	of	the	highest	order,	though	merchant	of
ruthless	cunning,	I	admit	to	a	streak	of	sentimentality,	gentlemen.	I	will	not
stand	witness	to	this	tragedy.	More,	we	have	one	more	delivery	to	make	before
we	begin	our	return	journey,	and	its	achievement	shall	demand	all	of	my	skills,
indeed,	may	exhaust	them.”
“I	had	never	before	heard	of	your	Guild,	Karpolan,”	Duiker	said,	“but	I
would	hear	more	of	your	adventures,	some	day.”
“Perhaps	the	opportunity	will	arise,	Historian.	For	now,	I	hear	my
shareholders	gathering,	and	I	must	see	to	reviving	and	quelling	the	horses—
although,	it	must	be	said,	they	seem	to	have	acquired	a	thirst	for	wild	terror.	No
different	from	us,	eh?”	He	rose.
“My	thanks	to	you,”	Coltaine	growled,	“and	your	shareholders.”
“Have	you	a	word	for	Dujek	Onearm,	Fist?”
The	Wickan’s	response	startled	Duiker,	slipping	a	rough	blade	of
suspicion	into	him	that	would	remain,	nagging	and	fearful.
“No.”
Karpolan’s	eyes	widened	momentarily,	then	he	nodded.	“We	must	be	gone,
alas.	May	your	enemy	pay	dearly	come	the	morrow,	Fist.”
“They	shall.”
	
Sudden	bounty	could	not	effect	complete	rejuvenation,	but	the	army	that	rose
with	the	dawn	revealed	a	calm	readiness	that	Duiker	had	not	seen	since	Gelor
Ridge.
The	refugees	remained	tightly	packed	in	a	basin	just	north	of	the	valley
mouth.	The	Weasel	and	Foolish	Dog	clans	guarded	the	position,	situating
themselves	along	a	rise	that	faced	the	assembled	forces	of	Korbolo	Dom.	More


than	thirty	rebel	soldiers	stood	ready	to	challenge	each	and	every	Wickan
horsewarrior,	and	the	inevitable	outcome	of	that	clash	was	so	obvious,	so
brutally	clear,	that	panic	ripped	through	the	massed	refugees	in	waves,
hopeless	rippling	surges	this	way	and	that,	and	wails	of	despair	filled	the	dustladen	air	above	them.
Coltaine	sought	to	drive	through	the	tribesmen	blocking	the	valley	mouth,
and	do	so	quickly,	and	he	thus	concentrated	his	Crow	Clan	and	most	of	the
Seventh	at	the	front.	A	fast,	shattering	breakthrough	offered	the	only	hope	for
the	rear-guard	clans,	and	indeed	for	the	refugees	themselves.
Duiker	sat	on	his	emaciated	mare,	positioned	on	a	low	rise	slightly	to	the
east	of	the	main	track	where	he	could	just	make	out	the	two	Wickan	clans	to	the
north—Korbolo	Dom’s	army	somewhere	unseen	beyond	them.
The	carriages	of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild	had	departed,	vanishing	with	the
last	minutes	of	darkness	before	the	eastern	horizon	began	its	pale	awakening.
Corporal	List	rode	up,	reining	in	beside	the	historian.	“A	fine	morning,
sir!”	he	said.	“The	season	is	turning—change	rides	the	air—can	you	feel	it?”
Duiker	eyed	the	man.	“One	as	young	as	you	should	not	be	so	cheerful	this
day,	Corporal.”
“Nor	one	as	old	as	you	so	dour,	sir.”
“Hood-damned	upstart,	is	this	what	familiarity	breeds?”
List	grinned,	which	was	answer	enough.
Duiker ’s	eyes	narrowed.	“And	what	has	your	Jaghut	ghost	whispered	to
you,	List?”
“Something	he	himself	never	possessed,	Historian.	Hope.”
“Hope?	How,	from	where?	Does	Pormqual	finally	approach?”
“I	don’t	know	about	that,	sir.	You	think	it’s	possible?”
“No,	I	do	not.”
“Nor	I,	sir.”
“Then	what	in	Fener ’s	hairy	balls	are	you	going	on	about,	List?”
“Not	sure,	sir.	I	simply	awoke	feeling…”	he	shrugged,	“feeling	as	if	we’d
just	been	blessed,	god-touched,	or	something…”
“A	fine	enough	way	to	meet	our	last	dawn,”	Duiker	muttered,	sighing.
The	Tregyn	and	Bhilard	tribes	were	readying	themselves,	but	the	sudden
blaring	of	horns	from	the	Seventh	made	it	clear	that	Coltaine	was	not	interested
in	the	courtesy	of	awaiting	them.	The	Crow	lancers	and	mounted	archers
surged	forward,	up	the	gentle	slope	toward	the	eastern	hill	of	the	Bhilard.
“Historian!”
Something	in	the	corporal’s	tone	brought	Duiker	around.	List	was	paying
no	attention	to	the	Crow’s	advance—he	faced	the	northwest,	where	another


tribe’s	riders	had	just	appeared,	spreading	out	as	they	rode	closer	in	numbers
of	appalling	vastness.
“The	Khundryl,”	Duiker	said.	“Said	to	be	the	most	powerful	tribe	south	of
Vathar—as	we	can	now	acknowledge.”
Horse	hooves	thundered	toward	the	rise	and	they	turned	to	see	Coltaine
himself	approach.	The	Fist’s	expression	was	impassive,	almost	calm	as	he
stared	northwestward.
Clashes	had	begun	at	the	rearguard	position—the	day’s	first	drawing	of
blood,	most	of	it	likely	to	be	Wickan.	Already	the	refugees	had	begun	pushing
southward,	in	the	hope	that	will	alone	could	see	the	valley	prised	open.
The	Khundryl,	in	the	tens	of	thousands,	formed	two	distinct	masses,	one
directly	west	of	Sanimon’s	mouth,	the	other	farther	to	the	north,	on	a	flank	of
Korbolo	Dom’s	army.	Between	these	two	was	a	small	knot	of	war	chiefs,	who
now	rode	directly	toward	the	rise	where	sat	Duiker,	List	and	Coltaine.
“Looks	like	personal	combat	is	desired,	Fist,”	Duiker	said.	“We’d	best	ride
back.”
“No.”
The	historian’s	head	turned.	Coltaine	had	uncouched	his	lance	and	was
readying	his	black-feathered	round	shield	on	his	left	forearm.
“Damn	you,	Fist—this	is	madness!”
“Watch	your	tongue,	Historian,”	the	Wickan	said	distractedly.
Duiker ’s	gaze	fixed	on	the	short	stretch	of	silver	chain	visible	around	the
man’s	neck.	“Whatever	that	gift	is	that	you’re	wearing,	it’ll	only	work	once.
What	you	do	now	is	what	a	war	chief	of	the	Wickans	would,	but	not	a	Fist	of
the	Empire.”
The	man	snapped	around	at	that	and	the	historian	found	the	barbed	point	of
the	lance	pricking	his	throat.
“And	just	when,”	Coltaine	rasped,	“can	I	choose	to	die	in	the	manner	I
desire?	You	think	I	will	use	this	cursed	bauble?”	Freeing	his	shield	hand,	he
reached	up	and	tore	the	chain	from	his	neck.	“You	wear	it,	Historian.	All	that
we	have	done	avails	the	world	naught,	unless	the	tale	is	told.	Hood	take	Dujek
Onearm!	Hood	take	the	Empress!”	He	flung	the	bottle	at	Duiker	and	it	struck
unerringly	the	palm	of	his	right	hand.	Fingers	closing	around	the	object,	he	felt
the	serpentine	slither	of	chain	against	calluses.	The	lance-point	kissing	his	neck
had	not	moved.
Their	eyes	locked.
“Excuse	me,	sirs,”	List	said.	“It	appears	this	is	not	an	instance	of	desired
combat.	If	you	would	both	observe…”
Coltaine	pulled	the	weapon	away,	swung	around.


The	Khundryl	war	chiefs	waited	in	a	row	before	them,	not	thirty	paces
away.	They	wore,	beneath	skins	and	furs	and	fetishes,	a	strange	grayish	armor
that	looked	almost	reptilian.	Long	mustaches,	knotted	beards	and	spiked	braids
—all	black—disguised	most	of	their	features,	though	what	remained	visible
was	sun-darkened	and	angular.
One	nudged	his	pony	a	step	closer	and	spoke	in	broken	Malazan.
“Blackwing!	How	think	you	the	odds	this	day?”
Coltaine	twisted	in	his	saddle,	studied	the	dust	clouds	now	both	north	and
south,	then	settled	back.	“I	would	make	no	wager.”
“We	have	long	awaited	this	day,”	the	war	chief	said.	He	stood	in	his
stirrups	and	gestured	to	the	south	hills.	“Tregyn	and	Bhilard	both,	this	day.”	He
waved	northward.	“And	Can’eld,	and	Semk,	aye,	even	Tithansi—what’s	left,
that	is.	The	great	tribes	of	the	south	odhans,	yet	who	among	them	all	is	the
most	powerful?	The	answer	is	with	this	day.”
“You’d	better	hurry,”	Duiker	said.	We’re	running	out	of	soldiers	for	you	to
show	your	prowess	on,	you	pompous	bastard.
Coltaine	seemed	to	have	similar	thoughts,	though	his	temper	was	cooler.
“The	question	belongs	to	you,	nor	do	I	care	either	way	its	answer.”
“Are	such	concerns	beyond	the	Wickan	clans,	then?	Are	you	not
yourselves	a	tribe?”
Coltaine	slowly	settled	the	lance’s	butt	in	its	socket.	“No,	we	are	soldiers	of
the	Malazan	Empire.”
Hood’s	breath,	I	got	through	to	him.
The	war	chief	nodded,	unperturbed	by	that	answer.	“Then	be	watchful,	Fist
Coltaine,	while	you	attend	to	this	day.”
The	riders	wheeled	about,	parting	to	rejoin	their	clans.
“I	believe,”	Coltaine	said,	looking	around,	“you	have	selected	a	good
vantage,	Historian,	so	here	shall	I	remain.”
“Fist?”
A	faint	smile	touched	his	lean	features.	“For	a	short	time.”
	
The	Crow	Clan	and	the	Seventh	gave	it	their	all,	but	the	forces	holding	the
mouth	of	the	valley—from	their	high	ground	to	either	side	and	farther	down
the	valley’s	throat—did	not	yield.	The	Chain	of	Dogs	contracted	between	the
hammer	of	Korbolo	Dom	and	the	anvil	of	the	Tregyn	and	Bhilard.	It	was	only
a	matter	of	time.
The	actions	of	the	Khundryl	clans	changed	all	that.	For	they	had	come,	not
to	join	in	the	slaughter	of	Malazans,	but	to	give	answer	to	the	one	question


demanded	of	their	pride	and	honor.	The	south	mass	struck	the	Tregyn	position
like	a	vengeful	god’s	scythe.	The	north	was	a	spear	thrusting	deep	into
Korbolo	Dom’s	flank.	A	third,	hitherto	unseen	force	swept	up	from	the	valley
itself,	behind	the	Bhilard.	Within	minutes	of	the	perfectly	timed	contacts,	the
Malazan	forces	found	themselves	unopposed,	while	the	chaos	of	battle	reigned
on	all	sides.
Korbolo	Dom’s	army	quickly	recovered,	reforming	with	as	much
precision	as	they	could	muster,	and	drove	back	the	Khundryl	after	more	than
four	hours	of	pitched	battle.	One	aim	had	been	achieved,	however,	and	that	was
the	shattering	of	the	Semk,	the	Can’eld	and	whatever	was	left	of	the	Tithansi.
Half	an	answer,	Coltaine	had	muttered	at	that	point,	in	a	tone	of	utter
bewilderment.
The	southern	forces	broke	the	Tregyn	and	Bhilard	an	hour	later,	and	set
off	in	pursuit	of	the	fleeing	remnants.
With	dusk	an	hour	away,	a	lone	Khundryl	war	chief	rode	up	to	them	at	a
slow	canter,	and	as	he	neared	they	saw	that	it	was	the	spokesman.	He’d	been	in
a	scrap	and	was	smeared	in	blood,	at	least	half	of	it	his	own,	yet	he	rode
straight	in	his	saddle.
He	reined	in	ten	paces	from	Coltaine.
The	Fist	spoke.	“You	have	your	answer,	it	seems.”
“We	have	it,	Blackwing.”
“The	Khundryl.”
Surprise	flitted	on	the	warrior ’s	battered	face.	“You	honor	us,	but	no.	We
strove	to	break	the	one	named	Korbolo	Dom,	but	failed.	The	answer	is	not	the
Khundryl.”
“Then	you	do	honor	to	Korbolo	Dom?”
The	war	chief	spat	at	that,	growled	his	disbelief.	“Spirits	below!	You
cannot	be	such	a	fool!	The	answer	this	day…”	The	war	chief	yanked	free	his
tulwar	from	its	leather	sheath,	revealing	a	blade	snapped	ten	inches	above	the
hilt.	He	raised	it	over	his	head	and	bellowed,	“The	Wickans!	The	Wickans!	The
Wickans!”


Chapter	Twenty

This	path’s	a	dire	thing,
the	gate	it	leads	to
is	like	a	corpse
over	which	ten	thousand
nightmares	bicker
their	fruitless	claims.
THE	PATH
T ROUT 	SEN’AL’	BHOK’ARALA
Seagulls	wheeled	above	them,	the	first	they’d	seen	in	a	long	while.	The	horizon
ahead,	on	their	course	bearing	of	south	by	southeast,	revealed	an	uneven
smudge	that	grew	steadily	even	as	the	day	prepared	for	its	swift	demise.
Not	a	single	cloud	marred	the	sky	and	the	wind	was	brisk	and	steady.
Salk	Elan	joined	Kalam	on	the	forecastle.	Both	of	them	were	wrapped	in
cloaks	against	the	rhythmic	spray	kicked	up	by	Ragstopper’s	headlong	plunge
into	the	troughs.	To	the	sailors	manning	stations	on	the	main	deck	and	aft,	the
sight	of	them	standing	there	at	the	bow	like	a	pair	of	Great	Ravens	was	blackwrought	with	omens.
Oblivious	to	all	this,	Kalam’s	gaze	held	on	the	island	that	awaited	them.
“By	midnight,”	Salk	Elan	said	with	a	loud	sigh.	“Ancient	birthplace	of	the
Malazan	Empire—”
The	assassin	snorted.	“Ancient?	How	old	do	you	think	the	Empire	is?
Hood’s	breath!”
“All	right,	too	romantic	by	far.	I	was	but	seeking	a	mood—”
“Why?”	Kalam	barked.
Elan	shrugged.	“No	particular	reason,	except	perhaps	this	brooding
atmosphere	of	anticipation,	nay,	impatience,	even.”
“What’s	to	brood	about?”
“You	tell	me,	friend.”
Kalam	grimaced,	said	nothing.


“Malaz	City,”	Elan	resumed.	“What	should	I	expect?”
“Imagine	a	pigsty	by	the	sea	and	that’ll	do.	A	rotten,	festering	bug-ridden
swamp—”
“All	right,	all	right!	Sorry	I	asked!”
“The	captain?”
“No	change,	alas.”
Why	am	I	not	surprised?	Sorcery—gods,	how	I	hate	sorcery!
Salk	Elan	rested	long-fingered	hands	on	the	rail,	revealing	once	again	his
love	of	green-hued	gems	set	in	gaudy	rings.	“A	fast	ship	could	take	us	across
to	Unta	in	a	day	and	a	half…”
“And	how	would	you	know	that?”
“I	asked	a	sailor,	Kalam,	how	else?	That	salt-crusted	friend	of	yours
pretending	to	be	in	charge,	what’s	his	name	again?”
“I	don’t	recall	asking.”
“It’s	a	true,	admirable	talent,	that.”
“What	is?”
“Your	ability	to	crush	your	own	curiosity,	Kalam.	Highly	practical	in	some
ways,	dreadfully	risky	in	others.	You’re	a	hard	man	to	know,	harder	even	to
predict—”
“That’s	right,	Elan.”
“Yet	you	like	me.”
“I	do?”
“Aye,	you	do.	And	I’m	glad,	because	it’s	important	to	me—”
“Go	find	a	sailor	if	you’re	that	way,	Elan.”
The	other	man	smiled.	“That	is	not	what	I	meant,	but	of	course	you’re	well
aware	of	that,	you	just	can’t	help	flinging	darts.	What	I’m	saying	is,	I	enjoy
being	liked	by	someone	I	admire—”
Kalam	spun	around.	“What	do	you	find	so	admirable,	Salk	Elan?	In	all
your	vague	suppositions,	have	you	discovered	a	belief	that	I’m	susceptible	to
flattery?	Why	are	you	eager	for	a	partnership?”
“Killing	the	Empress	won’t	be	easy,”	the	man	replied.	“But	just	imagine
succeeding!	Achieving	what	all	thought	to	be	impossible!	Oh	yes,	I	want	to	be
part	of	that,	Kalam	Mekhar!	Right	there	alongside	you,	driving	blades	into	the
heart	of	the	most	powerful	Empire	in	the	world!”
“You’ve	lost	your	mind,”	Kalam	said	in	a	quiet	voice,	barely	audible	above
the	seas.	“Kill	the	Empress?	Am	I	to	join	you	in	this	madness?	Not	a	chance,
Salk	Elan.”
“Spare	me	the	dissembling,”	he	sneered.
“What	sorcery	holds	this	ship?”


Salk	Elan’s	eyes	widened	involuntarily.	Then	he	shook	his’head.	“Beyond
my	abilities,	Kalam,	and	Hood	knows	I’ve	tried.	I’ve	searched	every	inch	of
Pormqual’s	loot,	and	nothing.”
“The	ship	herself?”
“Not	that	I	could	determine.	Look,	Kalam,	we’re	being	tracked	by	someone
in	a	warren—that’s	my	guess.	Someone	who	wants	to	make	certain	of	that
cargo.	A	theory	only,	but	it’s	all	I’ve	got.	Thus,	friend,	all	my	secrets	unveiled.”
Kalam	was	silent	a	long	moment,	then	he	shook	himself.	“I	have	contacts	in
Malaz	City—an	unexpected	converging	well	ahead	of	schedule,	but	there	it	is.”
“Contacts,	excellent—we’ll	need	them.	Where?”
“There’s	a	black	heart	in	Malaz	City,	the	blackest.	The	one	thing	every
denizen	avoids	mention	of,	willfully	ignores—and	there,	if	all	goes	well,	we
will	await	our	allies.”
“Let	me	guess:	the	infamous	tavern	called	Smiley’s,	once	owned	by	the
man	who	would	one	day	become	an	Emperor—the	sailors	tell	me	the	food	is
quite	awful.”
Kalam	stared	at	the	man	in	wonder.	Hood	alone	knows,	either
breathtakingly	sardonic	or…or	what,	by	the	Abyss?	“No,	a	place	called	the
Deadhouse.	And	not	inside	it,	but	at	the	gates,	though	by	all	means,	Salk	Elan,
feel	free	to	explore	its	yard.”
The	man	leaned	both	arms	on	the	rail,	squinting	out	at	the	dull	lights	of
Malaz	City.	“Assuming	a	long	wait	for	your	friends,	perhaps	I	shall,	perhaps	I
shall	at	that.”
It	was	unlikely	he	noticed	Kalam’s	feral	grin.
	
Iskaral	Pust	gripped	the	latch	with	both	hands,	his	feet	planted	against	the	door,
and,	gibbering	his	terror,	pulled	frantically—to	no	avail.	With	a	growl,	Mappo
stepped	over	Icarium	where	he	lay	at	the	foot	of	Tremorlor ’s	entrance,	and
prised	the	High	Priest	from	the	unyielding	barrier.
Fiddler	heard	the	Trell	straining	at	the	latch,	but	the	sapper ’s	attention	was
fixed	on	the	swarm	of	bloodflies.	Tremorlor	was	resisting	them,	but	the
advance	was	inexorable.	Blind	stood	at	his	side,	head	lifted,	hackles	raised.	The
four	other	Hounds	had	reappeared	on	the	trail	and	were	charging	toward	the
yard’s	vine-wreathed	gate.	The	shadow	cast	down	by	the	D’ivers	swept	over
them	like	black	water.
“It	either	opens	at	the	touch,”	Apsalar	said	in	a	startlingly	calm	voice,	“or	it
does	not	open	at	all.	Stand	back,	Mappo,	let	us	all	try.”
“Icarium	stirs!”	Crokus	cried	out.


“It’s	the	threat,”	the	Trell	answered.	“Gods	below,	not	here,	not	now!”
“No	better	time!”	Iskaral	Pust	shrieked.
Apsalar	spoke	again.	“Crokus,	you’re	the	last	to	try	but	Fiddler.	Come
here,	quickly.”
The	silence	that	followed	told	Fiddler	all	he	needed	to	know.	He	risked	a
glance	back	to	where	Mappo	crouched	over	Icarium.	“Awaken	him,”	he	said,
“or	all	is	lost.”
The	Trell	lifted	his	face	and	the	sapper	saw	the	anguished	indecision	writ
there.	“This	close	to	Tremorlor—the	risk,	Fiddler—”
“What—”
But	he	got	no	further.
As	if	speared	by	lightning,	the	Jhag’s	body	jolted,	a	high-pitched	keening
rising	from	him.	The	sound	buffeted	the	others	and	sent	them	tumbling.	Fresh
blood	streaming	from	the	wound	on	his	head	and	his	eyes	struggling	to	open,
Icarium	surged	to	his	feet.	The	ancient	single-edged	long	sword	slipped	free,
the	blade’s	strange,	shivering	blur.
The	Hounds	and	the	D’ivers	swarm	reached	the	yard	simultaneously.	The
grounds	and	ragged	trees	erupted,	chaotic	webs	of	root	and	branch	twisting
skyward	like	black	sails,	billowing,	spreading	wide.	Other	roots	snapped	out
for	the	Hounds—the	beasts	screamed.	Blind	was	gone	from	Fiddler ’s	side,
down	among	her	kin.
At	that	moment,	in	the	midst	of	all	he	saw,	Fiddler	grinned	inwardly.	Not
just	Shadowthrone	for	treachery—how	could	an	Azath	resist	the	Hounds	of
Shadow?
A	hand	gripped	his	shoulder.
“The	latch!”	Apsalar	hissed.	“Try	the	door,	Fid!”
The	D’ivers	struck.	Tremorlor ’s	last,	desperate	defense.	Wood	exploded.
The	sapper	was	pushed	against	the	door	by	a	pair	of	hands	on	his	back,
catching	a	momentary	glimpse	of	Mappo,	his	arms	wrapped	around	a	still
mostly	unaware	Icarium,	holding	the	Jhag	back	even	as	that	keening	sound
rose	and	with	it	an	overwhelming,	inexorable	power	burgeoned.	The	pressure
slapped	Fiddler	against	the	door ’s	sweaty,	dark	wood	and	held	him	there	in
effortless	contempt,	whispering	its	promise	of	annihilation.	He	struggled	to
work	his	arm	toward	the	latch,	straining	every	muscle	to	that	single	task.
Hounds	howled	from	the	farthest	reaches	of	the	yard,	a	triumphant,
outraged	sound	that	rose	toward	fear	as	Icarium’s	own	rage	swallowed	all	else.
Fiddler	felt	the	wood	tremble,	felt	that	tremble	spread	through	the	House.
His	sweat	mingling	with	Tremorlor ’s,	the	sapper	gave	one	last	surge	of	all
his	strength,	willing	success,	willing	the	achievement	of	moving	his	arm,


closing	a	hand	on	the	latch.
And	failed.
Behind	him	another	blood-curdling	noise	reached	through,	that	of	the
bloodflies,	breaking	through	the	wooden	nets,	coming	ever	closer,	only
moments	from	clashing	with	Icarium’s	deadly	anger—the	Jhag	will	awaken
then.	No	other	choice—and	our	deaths	will	be	the	least	of	it.	The	Azath,	the
maze	and	all	its	prisoners…oh,	be	very	thorough	in	your	rage,	Icarium,	for	the
sake	of	this	world	and	every	other—
Stabbing	pain	lanced	the	back	of	Fiddler ’s	hand—Bloodflies!—but	there
was	a	weight	behind	it.	Not	stings,	but	the	grip	of	small	claws.	The	sapper
cocked	his	head	and	found	himself	staring	into	Moby’s	fanged	grin.
The	familiar	made	its	way	down	the	length	of	his	arm,	claws	puncturing
skin.	The	creature	seemed	to	be	shifting	in	and	out	of	focus	before	Fiddler ’s
eyes,	and	with	each	blur	the	weight	on	his	arm	was	suddenly	immense.	He
realized	he	was	screaming.
Moby	clambered	beyond	the	sapper ’s	hand	onto	the	door	itself,	reached
out	a	tiny,	wrinkled	hand	to	the	latch,	touched	it.
Fiddler	tumbled	onto	damp,	warm	flagstones.	He	heard	shouts	behind	him,
the	scrabbling	of	boots,	while	the	House	groaned	on	all	sides.	He	rolled	onto
his	back,	and	in	the	process	came	down	on	something	that	snapped	and
crackled	beneath	his	weight,	lifting	to	him	a	bitter	smell	of	dust.
Then	Icarium’s	deathly	keening	was	among	them.
Tremorlor	shook.
Fiddler	twisted	into	a	sitting	position.
They	were	in	a	hallway,	the	limestone	walls	shedding	a	dull	yellow,
throbbing	light.	Mappo	still	held	Icarium	and	as	the	sapper	watched,	the	Trell
struggled	to	retain	his	embrace.	A	moment	later	the	Jhag	subsided,	slumping
once	again	in	the	Trell’s	arms.	The	golden	light	steadied,	the	walls	themselves
stilled.	Icarium’s	rage	was	gone.
Mappo	sagged	to	the	floor,	head	hanging	over	the	insensate	body	of	his
friend.
Fiddler	slowly	looked	around	to	see	if	they’d	lost	anyone.	Apsalar
crouched	beside	her	father,	their	backs	to	the	now	shut	door.	Crokus	had
dragged	a	cowering	Iskaral	Pust	in	with	him,	and	the	High	Priest	looked	up,
blinking	as	if	in	disbelief.
Fiddler ’s	voice	was	a	croak.	“The	Hounds,	Iskaral	Pust?”
“Escaped!	And	yet,	even	in	the	midst	of	betrayal,	they	threw	their	power
against	the	D’ivers!”	He	paused,	sniffed	the	dank	air.	“Can	you	smell	it?
Tremorlor ’s	satisfaction—the	D’ivers	has	been	taken.”


“That	betrayal	might	have	been	instinctive,	High	Priest,”	Apsalar	said.
“Five	Ascendants	in	the	House’s	yard—the	vast	risk	to	Tremorlor	itself,	given
Shadow’s	own	penchant	for	treachery—”
“Lies!	We	played	true!”
“A	first	time	for	everything,”	Crokus	muttered.	He	looked	across	to
Fiddler.	“Glad	it	opened	to	you,	Fid.”
The	sapper	started,	searched	the	hallway.	“It	didn’t.	Moby	opened	the	door
and	ripped	my	arm	to	shreds	in	the	process—where	is	that	damned	runt?	It’s	in
here	somewhere—”
“You’re	sitting	on	a	corpse,”	Apsalar ’s	father	observed.
Fiddler	glanced	down	to	find	himself	on	a	nest	of	bones	and	rotted
clothing.	He	clambered	clear,	cursing.
“I	don’t	see	him,”	Crokus	said.	“You	sure	he	made	it	inside,	Fid?”
“Aye,	I’m	sure.”
“He	must	have	gone	deeper	into	the	House—”
“He	seeks	the	gate!”	Pust	squealed.	“The	Path	of	Hands!”
“Moby’s	a	famil—”
“More	lies!	That	disgusting	bhok’aral	is	a	Soletaken,	you	fool!”
“Relax.	There	is	no	gate	in	here	that	offers	a	shapeshifter	anything,”
Apsalar	said,	slowly	rising,	her	eyes	on	the	withered	corpse	behind	Fiddler.
“That	would	have	been	the	Keeper—each	Azath	has	a	guardian.	I’d	always
assumed	they	were	immortal…”	She	stepped	forward,	kicked	at	the	bones.	She
grunted.	“Not	human—those	limbs	are	too	long,	and	look	at	the	joints—too
many	of	them.	This	thing	could	bend	every	which	way.”
Mappo	lifted	his	head.	“Forkrul	Assail.”
“The	least	known	of	the	Elder	Races,	then.	Not	even	hinted	of	in	any	Seven
Cities	legend	I’ve	heard.”	She	swung	her	attention	to	the	hallway.
Five	paces	from	the	door	the	passage	opened	on	a	T-intersection,	with
double	doors	directly	opposite	the	entrance.
“The	layout’s	almost	identical,”	Apsalar	whispered.
“To	what?”	Crokus	asked.
“Deadhouse,	Malaz	City.”
Pattering	feet	approached	the	intersection,	and	a	moment	later	Moby
scampered	into	view.	The	creature	flapped	up	and	into	the	Daru’s	arms.
“He’s	shaking,”	Crokus	said,	hugging	the	familiar.
“Oh,	great,”	Fiddler	muttered.
“The	Jhag,”	Pust	hissed	from	where	he	knelt	a	few	paces	from	Mappo	and
Icarium.	“I	saw	you	crushing	him	in	your	arms—is	he	dead?”
The	Trell	shook	his	head.	“Unconscious.	I	don’t	think	he’ll	awaken	for


some	time—”
“Then	let	the	Azath	take	him!	Now!	We	are	within	Tremorlor.	Our	need	for
him	has	ended!”
“No.”
“Fool!”
A	bell	clanged	somewhere	outside.	They	all	looked	at	each	other	in
disbelief.
“Did	we	hear	that?”	Fiddler	wondered.	“A	merchant’s	bell?”
“Why	a	merchant?”	Pust	growled,	eyes	darting	suspiciously.
But	Crokus	was	nodding.	“A	merchant’s	bell.	In	Darujhistan,	that	is.”
The	sapper	went	to	the	door.	From	within,	the	latch	moved	smoothly	under
his	hand,	and	he	swung	the	door	back.
Thin	sheets	of	tangled	root	now	rose	from	the	yard,	towering	over	the
House	itself	in	a	clash	of	angles	and	planes.	Humped	earth	steamed	on	all	sides.
Waiting	just	outside	the	arched	gate	were	three	huge,	ornate	carriages,	each
drawn	by	nine	white	horses.	A	roundish	figure	stood	beneath	the	arch,	wearing
silks.	The	figure	raised	a	hand	toward	Fiddler	and	called	out	in	Daru,	“Alas,	I
can	go	no	farther!	I	assure	you,	all	is	calm	out	here.	I	seek	the	one	named
Fiddler.”
“Why?”	the	sapper	barked.
“I	deliver	a	gift.	Gathered	in	great	haste	and	at	vast	expense,	I	might	add.	I
suggest	we	complete	the	transaction	as	quickly	as	possible,	all	things
considered.”
Crokus	now	stood	beside	Fiddler.	The	Daru	was	frowning	at	the	carriages.
“I	know	the	maker	of	those,”	he	said	quietly.	“Bernuk’s,	just	back	of	Lakefront.
But	I’ve	never	seen	them	that	big	before—gods,	I’ve	been	away	too	long.”
Fiddler	sighed.	“Darujhistan.”
“I’m	certain	of	it,”	Crokus	said,	shaking	his	head.
Fiddler	stepped	outside	and	studied	the	surroundings.	Things	seemed,	as
the	merchant	had	said,	calm.	Quiescent.	Still	uneasy,	the	sapper	made	his	way
down	the	path.	He	halted	two	paces	from	the	archway	and	eyed	the	merchant
warily.
“Karpolan	Demesand,	sir,	of	the	Trygalle	Trade	Guild,	and	this	is	a	run
that	I	and	my	shareholders	shall	never	regret,	yet	hope	never	to	repeat.”	The
man’s	exhaustion	was	very	evident,	and	his	silks	hung	soaked	in	sweat.	He
gestured	and	an	armored	woman	with	a	deathly	pale	face	stepped	past	him,
carrying	a	small	crate.	Karpolan	continued,	“Compliments	of	a	certain	mage
of	the	Bridgeburners,	who	was	advised—in	timely	fashion—of	your	situation
in	a	general	way,	by	the	corporal	you	share.”


Fiddler	accepted	the	box,	now	grinning.	“The	efforts	of	this	delivery
surpass	me,	sir,”	he	said.
“Me	as	well,	I	assure	you.	Now	we	must	flee—ah,	a	rude	bluntness—I
meant	‘depart,’	of	course.	We	must	depart.”	He	sighed,	looking	around.
“Forgive	me,	I	am	weary,	beyond	even	achieving	the	expected	courtesies	of
civil	discourse.”
“No	need	for	apologies,”	Fiddler	said.	“While	I	have	no	idea	how	you	got
here	and	no	idea	how	you’ll	get	back	to	Darujhistan,	I	wish	you	a	safe	and	swift
journey.	One	last	question,	however:	did	the	mage	say	anything	about	where
the	contents	of	this	crate	came	from?”
“Oh,	indeed	he	did,	sir.	From	the	Blue	City’s	streets.	An	obscure	reference
you	are	clearly	fortunate	to	understand	in	an	instant,	I	see.”
“Did	the	mage	give	you	any	warning	as	to	the	handling	of	this	package,
Karpolan?”
The	merchant	grimaced.	“He	said	we	were	not	to	jostle	too	much.
However,	this	last	stretch	of	our	journey	was	somewhat…rough.	I	regret	to	say
that	some	of	the	crate’s	contents	may	well	be	broken.”
Fiddler	smiled.	“I	am	pleased	to	inform	you	that	they	have	survived.”
Karpolan	Demesand	frowned.	“You	have	not	yet	examined	the	contents—
how	can	you	tell?”
“You’ll	just	have	to	trust	me	on	that	one,	sir.”
	
Crokus	closed	the	door	once	Fiddler	had	carried	the	crate	inside.	The	sapper
gingerly	set	the	container	down	and	prised	open	the	lid.	“Ah,	Quick	Ben,”	he
whispered,	eyes	scanning	the	objects	nestled	within,	“one	day	I	shall	raise	a
temple	in	your	name.”	He	counted	seven	cussers,	thirteen	masonry	crackers
and	four	flamers.
“But	how	did	that	merchant	get	here?”	Crokus	asked.	“From	Darujhistan!
Hood’s	breath,	Fid!”
“Don’t	I	know	it.”	He	straightened,	glanced	at	the	others.	“I’m	feeling
good,	comrades.	Very	good	indeed.”
“Optimism!”	Pust	snarled	in	a	tone	close	to	bursting	with	disgust.	The	High
Priest	yanked	at	the	wispy	remnants	of	his	hair.	“While	that	foul	monkey	pisses
terror	into	the	lad’s	lap!	Optimism!”
Crokus	now	held	the	familiar	out	from	him	and	stared	disbelieving	at	the
stream	pouring	down	to	splash	the	flagstones.	“Moby?”	The	creature	was
grinning	sheepishly.
“Soletaken,	you	mean!”


“A	momentary	lapse,”	Apsalar	said,	eyeing	the	squirming	creature.	“The
realization	of	what	has	come	about.	That,	or	an	odd	sense	of	humor.”
“What	are	you	babbling	about?”	Pust	demanded,	eyes	narrowing.
“He	thought	he’d	found	the	Path,	thought	that	what	called	him	here	was	the
ancient	promise	of	Ascendancy—and	in	a	way,	Moby	was	right	in	thinking	that.
The	bhok’aral	there	in	your	hands,	Crokus,	is	demonic.	In	true	form,	it	could
hold	you	as	you	now	hold	it.”
Mappo	grunted.	“Ah,	I	see	now.”
“Then	why	not	enlighten	us?”	Crokus	snapped.
Apsalar	nudged	the	corpse	at	her	feet.	“Tremorlor	needed	a	new	guardian.
Need	I	be	any	clearer?”
Crokus	blinked,	looking	again	at	Moby,	the	trembling	creature	in	his
hands.	“My	uncle’s	familiar?”
“A	demon,	at	the	moment	somewhat	intimidated	by	expectation,	we	might
assume.	But	I’m	sure	the	creature	will	grow	into	the	role.”
Fiddler	had	been	packing	the	Moranth	munitions	into	his	leather	sack	while
this	had	been	going	on.	Now	he	rose	and	gingerly	swung	the	bag	over	a
shoulder.	“Quick	Ben	believed	we’d	find	a	portal	somewhere	in	here,	a
warren’s	gate—”
“Linking	the	House!”	Pust	crowed.	“Outrageous	audacity—this	cunning
mage	of	yours	has	charmed	me,	soldier.	He	should	have	been	a	servant	of
Shadow!”
He	was,	but	never	mind	that.	If	your	god’s	of	a	mind	to,	he’ll	tell	you—
though	I	wouldn’t	hold	my	breath…“It’s	time	to	find	that	portal—”
“To	the	T-intersection,	down	the	left	passage	to	the	two	doors.	The	one	to
the	left	takes	us	into	the	tower.	Top	floor.”	Apsalar	smiled.
Fiddler	stared	at	her	a	moment,	then	nodded.	Your	borrowed	memories…
Moby	led	the	way,	revealing	a	return	of	nerve,	and	something	like
possessive	pride.	Just	beyond	the	intersection,	in	the	left-hand	passage,	there
was	an	alcove	set	in	the	wall,	on	which	hung	resplendent	scale	armor	suited	to
a	wearer	over	ten	foot	tall	and	of	massive	girth.	Two	double-bladed	axes
leaned	against	the	niche	walls,	one	to	either	side.	Moby	paused	there	to	play	a
tiny,	loving	hand	over	one	iron-sheathed	boot,	before	wistfully	moving	on.
Crokus	stumbled	in	passing	as	it	momentarily	gripped	his	full	attention.
Upon	opening	the	door,	they	entered	the	tower ’s	ground	floor.	A	stone
staircase	spiraled	up	from	its	center.	At	the	foot	of	the	saddlebacked	steps	lay
another	body,	a	young,	dark-skinned	woman	who	looked	as	if	she	had	been
placed	there	but	an	hour	before.	She	was	dressed	in	what	were	clearly
underclothes,	though	the	armor	that	had	once	covered	them	was	nowhere	to	be


seen.	Vicious	wounds	crisscrossed	her	slight	form.
Apsalar	approached,	crouched	down	and	rested	a	hand	on	the	girl’s
shoulder.	“I	know	her,”	she	whispered.
“Eh?”	Rellock	growled.
“The	memory	of	the	one	who	possessed	me,	Father,”	she	said.	“His	mortal
memory—”
“Dancer,”	Fiddler	said.
She	nodded.	“This	is	Dassem	Ultor ’s	daughter.	The	First	Sword	recovered
her	after	Hood	was	done	using	her,	and	brought	her	here,	it	seems.”
“Before	breaking	his	vow	to	Hood—”
“Aye,	before	Dassem	cursed	the	god	he	once	served.”
“That	was	years	ago,	Apsalar,”	Fiddler	said.
“I	know.”
They	were	silent,	all	studying	the	frail	young	woman	lying	at	the	foot	of
the	stairs.	Mappo	shifted	Icarium’s	weight	in	his	arms,	as	if	uneasy	with	the
echo	he	knew	he	had	become,	even	though	it	was	understood	that	he	would	not
do	with	his	burden	what	Dassem	Ultor	had	done.
Apsalar	straightened	and	cast	her	eyes	up	the	staircase.	“If	Dancer ’s
memory	serves,	the	portal	awaits.”
Fiddler	swung	to	the	others.	“Mappo?	You	will	join	us?”
“Aye,	though	perhaps	not	all	the	way—assuming	there’s	a	means	to	leave
that	warren	when	one	so	chooses—”
“Quite	an	assumption,”	the	sapper	said.
The	Trell	simply	shrugged.
“Iskaral	Pust?”
“Oh,	aye.	Of	course,	of	course!	Why	not,	why	ever	not?	To	walk	the	maze
back	out?	Insanity!	Iskaral	Pust	is	anything	but	insane,	as	you	all	well	know.
Aye,	I	shall	accompany	you…and	silently	add	to	naught	but	myself:	perhaps	an
opportunity	for	betrayal	will	yet	arise!	Betray	what?	Betray	whom?	Does	it
matter?	It	is	not	the	goal	that	brings	pleasure,	but	the	journey	taken	to	achieve
it!”
Fiddler	met	Crokus’s	sharp	gaze.	“Watch	him,”	he	said.
“I	shall.”
The	sapper	then	glanced	down	to	Moby.	The	familiar	squatted	by	the
doorway,	quietly	playing	with	its	own	tail.	“How	does	one	say	goodbye	to	a
bhok’aral?”
“With	a	boot	in	the	backside,	how	else?”	Pust	offered.
“Care	to	try	that	with	this	one?”	Fiddler	asked.
The	High	Priest	scowled,	made	no	move.


“He	was	out	there	when	we	traveled	the	storms,	wasn’t	he?”	Crokus	said,
approaching	the	tiny	wizened	creature.	“Recall	those	battles	we	could	not	see?
He	was	protecting	us…all	along.”
“Aye,”	the	sapper	said.
“Ulterior	motives!”	Pust	hissed.
“Nonetheless.”
“Gods,	he’ll	be	lonely!”	Crokus	gathered	the	bhok’aral	into	his	arms.
There	was	no	shame	to	the	tears	in	the	lad’s	eyes.
Blinking,	Fiddler	turned	away,	grimacing	as	he	studied	the	staircase.	“It’ll
do	you	no	good	to	draw	it	out,	Crokus,”	he	said.
“I’ll	find	a	way	to	visit,”	the	Daru	whispered.
“Think	on	what	you	see,	Crokus,”	Apsalar	said.	“He	looks	content	enough.
As	for	being	alone,	how	do	you	know	that	will	be	the	case?	There	are	other
Houses,	other	guardians…”
The	lad	nodded.	Slowly	he	released	his	grip	on	the	familiar	and	set	it
down.	“With	luck,	there	won’t	be	any	crockery	lying	around.”
“What?”
Crokus	smiled.	“Moby	always	had	bad	luck	around	crockery,	or	should	I
say	it	the	other	way	around?”	He	rested	a	hand	on	the	creature’s	blunt,	hairless
head,	then	rose.	“Let’s	go.”
	
The	bhok’aral	watched	the	group	ascend	the	stairs.	A	moment	later	there	was	a
midnight	flash	from	above,	and	they	were	gone.	The	creature	listened
carefully,	cocking	its	tiny	head,	but	there	was	no	more	sound	from	the	chamber
above.
It	sat	unmoving	for	a	few	more	minutes,	idly	plucking	at	its	own	tail,	then
swung	about	and	scampered	into	the	hallway,	coming	to	a	stop	before	the	suit
of	armor.
The	massive,	closed	great	helm	tilted	with	a	soft	creak,	and	a	ragged	voice
came	from	it.	“I	am	pleased	my	solitude	is	at	an	end,	little	one.	Tremorlor
welcomes	you	with	all	its	heart…even	if	you	have	made	a	mess	on	the	hallway
floor.”
	
Dust	and	gravel	sprayed,	rapping	against	Duiker ’s	shield,	as	the	Wickan
horsewarrior	struck	the	ground	and	rolled,	coming	to	a	stop	at	the	historian’s
feet.	No	more	than	a	lad,	the	Crow	looked	almost	peaceful,	eyes	closed	as	if	in


gentle	sleep.	But	for	him,	all	dreams	had	ended.
Duiker	stepped	over	the	body	and	stood	for	a	moment	in	the	dust	it	had
raised.	The	short	sword	in	his	right	hand	was	glued	there	by	blood,	announcing
every	shift	of	his	grip	with	a	thick,	sobbing	sound.
Riders	wheeled	across	the	hoof-churned	space	before	the	historian.
Arrows	sped	out	from	the	gaps	between	them,	hummed	like	tigerflies	through
the	air.	He	jerked	his	shield	around	to	catch	one	darting	for	his	face,	and
grunted	at	the	solid	whack	that	drove	the	hide-covered	rim	against	mouth	and
chin,	splitting	both.
Tarxian	cavalry	had	broken	through	and	was	only	moments	away	from
severing	the	dozen	remaining	squads	from	the	rest	of	the	company.	The	Crow
counterattack	had	been	savage	and	furious,	but	costly.	Worst	of	all,	Duiker	saw
as	he	moved	warily	forward,	it	might	well	have	failed.
The	infantry	squads	had	been	broken	apart	and	had	reformed	into	four
groups—only	one	of	them	substantial—which	now	struggled	to	re-knit.	Less
than	a	score	of	Crow	horsewarriors	remained	upright,	each	one	surrounded	by
Tarxians	hacking	at	them	with	their	broad-bladed	tulwars.	Everywhere	horses
writhed	and	screamed	on	the	ground,	kicking	out	in	their	pain.
The	back	end	of	a	cavalry	horse	nearly	knocked	him	over.	Stepping
around,	Duiker	closed	in	and	thrust	the	point	of	his	sword	into	a	Tarxian’s
leather-clad	thigh.	The	light	armor	resisted	a	moment,	until	the	historian	threw
all	his	weight	behind	the	stab,	feeling	the	point	pierce	flesh,	sink	deep	and	grate
against	bone.	He	twisted	the	blade.
A	tulwar	slashed	down,	biting	solidly	into	Duiker ’s	shield.	He	bent	low,
pulling	the	snagged	weapon	with	him.	Fresh	blood	drenched	his	sword	hand	as
he	yanked	his	blade	free.	The	historian	hacked	and	chopped	at	the	man’s	hip
until	the	horse	sidestepped,	carrying	the	rider	beyond	his	reach.
He	pushed	his	helm	rim	clear	of	his	eyes,	blinked	away	grit	and	sweat,	then
moved	forward	again,	toward	the	largest	knot	of	infantry.
Three	days	since	Sanimon	Valley	and	the	bloody	reprieve	granted	them	by
the	Khundryl	tribe.	Their	unexpected	allies	had	closed	that	battle	pursuing	the
remnants	of	their	rival	tribes	into	the	hours	of	dusk,	before	slipping	off	to
return,	presumably,	to	their	own	lands.	They	had	not	been	seen	since.
The	mauling	had	driven	Korbolo	Dom	into	a	rage—that	much	was	patently
clear—for	the	attacks	were	now	incessant,	a	running	battle	over	forty	hours
long	and	with	no	sign	that	it	would	relent	any	time	soon.
The	beleaguered	Chain	of	Dogs	was	struck	again	and	again,	from	the
flanks,	from	behind,	at	times	from	two	or	three	directions	at	once.	What
vengeful	blades,	lances	and	arrows	did	not	achieve,	exhaustion	was


completing.	Soldiers	were	simply	falling	to	the	ground,	their	armor	in	tatters,
countless	minor	wounds	slowly	draining	the	last	of	their	reserves.	Hearts
failed,	major	blood	vessels	burst	beneath	skin	to	blossom	into	bruises	that
were	deep	black,	as	if	some	dreadful	plague	now	ran	amok	through	the	troops.
The	scenes	Duiker	had	witnessed	were	beyond	horror,	beyond	his	ability	to
comprehend.
He	reached	the	infantry	even	as	the	other	groups	managed	to	close	and	link
up,	wheeling	into	a	bladed	wheel	formation	that	no	horse—no	matter	how	well
trained—would	challenge.
Within	the	ring,	a	swordsman	began	beating	sword	on	shield,	bellowing	to
add	his	voice	to	the	rhythm	of	blows.	The	wheel	spun,	each	soldier	stepping	in
time,	spun,	crossing	the	ground,	spun,	slowly	returning	to	where	the	remaining
company	still	held	the	line	on	this,	the	west	flank	of	the	Chain.
Duiker	moved	with	them,	part	of	the	outer	ring,	delivering	killing	blows	to
whatever	wounded	enemy	soldier	the	wheel	trampled.	Five	Crow	riders	kept
pace.	They	were	the	last	survivors	of	the	counterattack	and,	of	those,	two
would	not	fight	again.
A	few	moments	later	the	wheel	reached	the	line,	broke	apart	and	melted
into	it.	The	Wickans	dug	spurs	into	their	lathered	horses	to	race	southward.
Duiker	pushed	his	way	through	the	ranks	until	he	stumbled	into	the	clear.	He
lowered	his	quivering	arms,	spat	blood	onto	the	ground,	then	slowly	raised	his
head.
The	mass	of	refugees	marched	before	him,	a	procession	grinding	past	the
spot	where	he	stood.	Wreathed	in	dust,	hundreds	of	faces	were	turned	in	his
direction,	watching	that	thin	cordon	of	infantry	behind	him—all	that	lay
between	them	and	slaughter—as	it	surged,	buckled	and	grew	ever	thinner	with
each	minute	that	passed.	The	faces	were	expressionless,	driven	to	a	place
beyond	thought	and	beyond	emotion.	They	were	part	of	a	tidal	flow	where	no
ebb	was	possible,	where	to	drop	back	too	far	was	fatal,	and	so	they	stumbled
on,	clutching	the	last	and	most	precious	of	their	possessions:	their	children.
Two	figures	approached	Duiker,	coming	down	alongside	the	stream	of
refugees	from	the	vanguard	position.	The	historian	stared	at	them	blankly,
sensing	that	he	should	recognize	the	two—but	every	face	had	become	a
stranger ’s	face.
“Historian!”
The	voice	jarred	him	out	of	his	fugue.	His	split	lip	stung	as	he	said,
“Captain	Lull.”
A	webbed	jug	was	thrust	at	him.	Duiker	forced	his	short	sword	back	into	its
scabbard	and	accepted	the	jug.	The	cool	water	filled	his	mouth	with	pain	but	he


ignored	it,	drinking	deep.
“We’ve	reached	Geleen	Plain,”	Lull	said.
The	other	person	was	Duiker ’s	nameless	marine.	She	wavered	where	she
stood,	and	the	historian	saw	a	vicious	puncture	wound	in	her	left	shoulder,
where	a	lance-point	had	slipped	over	her	shield.	Broken	rings	from	her	armor
glittered	in	the	gaping	hole.
Their	eyes	met.	Duiker	saw	nothing	still	alive	in	those	once	beautiful	lightgray	eyes,	yet	the	alarm	he	felt	within	him	came	not	from	what	he	saw,	but
from	his	own	lack	of	shock,	the	frightening	absence	of	all	feeling—even
dismay.
“Coltaine	wants	you,”	Lull	said.
“He’s	still	breathing,	is	he?”
“Aye.”
“I	imagine	he	wants	this.”	Duiker	pulled	free	the	small	glass	bottle	on	its
silver	chain.	“Here—”
“No,”	Lull	said,	frowning.	“Wants	you,	Historian.	We’ve	run	into	a	tribe	of
the	Sanith	Odhan—so	far	they’re	just	watching.”
“Seems	the	rebellion’s	a	less	certain	thing	down	here,”	Duiker	muttered.
Sounds	of	battle	along	the	flanking	line	diminished.	Another	pause,	a	few
heartbeats	in	which	to	recover,	to	repair	armor,	quench	bleeding.
The	captain	gestured	and	they	began	walking	alongside	the	refugees.
“What	tribe,	then?”	the	historian	asked	after	a	moment.	“And,	more
importantly,	what’s	it	got	to	do	with	me?”
“The	Fist	has	reached	a	decision,”	Lull	said.
Something	in	those	words	chilled	Duiker.	He	thought	to	probe	for	more,
yet	dismissed	the	notion.	The	details	of	that	decision	belonged	to	Coltaine.	The
man	leads	an	army	that	refuses	to	die.	We’ve	not	lost	a	refugee	to	enemy	action
in	thirty	hours.	Five	thousand	soldiers…spitting	in	the	face	of	every	god…
“What	do	you	know	of	the	tribes	this	close	to	the	city?”	Lull	asked	as	they
continued	on.
“They’ve	no	love	of	Aren,”	Duiker	said.
“Worse	for	them	under	the	Empire?”
The	historian	grunted,	seeing	the	direction	the	captain	pursued	in	his
questions.	“No,	better.	The	Malazan	Empire	understands	borderlands,	the
different	needs	of	those	living	in	the	countryside—vast	territories	in	the
Empire,	after	all,	remain	nomadic,	and	the	tribute	demanded	is	never
exorbitant.	More,	payment	for	passage	across	tribal	lands	is	always	generous
and	prompt.	Coltaine	should	know	this	well	enough,	Captain.”
“I	imagine	he	does—I’m	the	one	that	needs	convincing.”


Duiker	glanced	at	the	refugees	on	their	left,	scanning	the	row	upon	row	of
faces,	young	and	old,	within	the	ever-present	shroud	of	dust.	Thoughts	pushed
past	weariness,	and	Duiker	felt	himself	tottering	on	an	edge,	beyond	which—he
could	now	clearly	see—waited	Coltaine’s	desperate	gamble.
The	Fist	has	reached	a	decision.
And	his	officers	balk,	flinch	back	overwhelmed	with	uncertainty.	Has
Coltaine	succumbed	to	despair?	Or	does	he	see	all	too	well?
Five	thousand	soldiers…
“What	can	I	say	to	you,	Lull?”	Duiker	asked.
“That	there’s	no	choice	left.”
“You	can	answer	that	yourself.”
“I	dare	not.”	The	man	grimaced,	his	scarred	face	twisting,	his	lone	eye
narrowing	amidst	a	nest	of	wrinkles.	“It’s	the	children,	you	see.	It’s	what	they
have	left—the	last	thing	they	have	left.	Duiker—”
The	historian’s	abrupt	nod	cut	out	the	need	to	say	anything	more—a	swiftly
granted	mercy.	He’d	seen	those	faces,	had	come	close	to	studying	them—as	if,
he’d	thought	at	the	time,	seeking	to	find	the	youth	that	belonged	there,	the
freedom	and	innocence—but	that	was	not	what	he	sought,	nor	what	he	found.
Lull	had	led	him	to	the	word	itself.	Simple,	immutable,	thus	far	still	sacrosanct.
Five	thousand	soldiers	will	give	their	lives	for	it.	But	is	this	some	kind	of
romantic	foolishness—do	I	yearn	for	recognition	among	these	simple	soldiers?
Is	any	soldier	truly	simple—simple	in	the	sense	of	having	a	spare,	pragmatic
way	of	seeing	the	world	and	his	place	in	it?	And	does	such	a	view	preclude	the
profound	awareness	I	now	believe	exists	in	these	battered,	footsore	men	and
women?
Duiker	swung	his	gaze	to	his	nameless	marine,	and	found	himself	meeting
those	remarkable	eyes,	as	if	she	had	but	waited	for	him—his	thoughts,	doubts
and	fears—to	come	around,	to	seek	her.
She	shrugged.	“Are	we	so	blind	that	we	cannot	see	it,	Duiker?	We	defend
their	dignity.	There,	simple	as	that.	More,	it	is	our	strength.	Is	this	what	you
wished	to	hear?”
I’ll	accept	that	minor	castigation.	Never	underestimate	a	soldier.
	
Sanimon	itself	was	a	massive	tel,	a	flat-topped	hill	half	a	mile	across	and	over
thirty	arm-spans	high,	its	jumbled	plateau	barren	and	windswept.	In	the	Sanith
Odhan	immediately	south	of	it,	where	the	Chain	now	struggled,	two	ancient
raised	roads	remained	from	the	time	when	the	tel	had	been	a	thriving	city.	Both
roads	ran	straight	as	spears	on	solid	cut-stone	foundations;	the	one	to	the	west


—now	unused	as	it	led	to	another	tel	in	hills	bone	dry	and	nowhere	else—was
called	Painesan’m.	The	other,	Sanijhe’m,	stretched	southwest	and	still	provided
an	overland	route	to	the	inland	sea	called	Clatar.	At	a	height	of	fifteen	armspans,	the	roads	had	become	causeways.
Coltaine’s	Crow	Clan	commanded	Sanijhe’m	near	the	tel,	manning	it	as	if
it	was	a	wall.	The	southern	third	of	Sanimon	itself	was	now	a	Wickan
strongpoint,	with	warriors	and	archers	of	the	Foolish	Dog	and	Weasel	clans.
As	the	refugees	were	led	along	the	east	edge	of	Sanimon,	the	tel’s	high	cliff
wall	obviated	the	need	for	a	flanking	guard	on	that	side.	Troops	moved	to
support	the	rearguard	and	the	eastern	flank.	Korbolo	Dom’s	forces,	which	had
been	engaged	in	a	running	battle	with	both	elements,	had	their	noses	bloodied
once	again.	The	Seventh	was	still	something	to	behold,	despite	its	diminished
numbers,	soldiers	among	it	pitching	dead	to	the	ground	without	a	visible
wound	on	them,	others	wailing	and	weeping	even	as	they	slayed	their	foes.	The
arrival	of	mounted	Wickan	archers	completed	the	rout,	and	the	time	had	come
once	more	for	rest.
Fist	Coltaine	stood	waiting,	alone,	facing	the	odhan	to	the	south.	His
feather	cloak	fluttered	in	the	wind,	its	ragged	edges	shivering	in	the	air ’s
breath.	Lining	a	ridge	of	hills	in	that	direction,	two	thousand	paces	distant,
another	tribe	sat	their	horses,	barbaric	war	standards	motionless	against	the
pale-blue	sky.
Duiker ’s	gaze	held	on	the	man	as	they	approached.	He	tried	to	put	himself
inside	Coltaine’s	skin,	to	find	the	place	where	the	Fist	now	lived—and	flinched
back	in	his	mind.	No,	not	a	failure	of	imagination	on	my	part.	An	unwillingness.
I	can	carry	no	one	else’s	burden—not	even	for	a	moment.	We	are	all	pulled
inside	ourselves	now,	each	alone…
Coltaine	spoke	without	turning.	“The	Kherahn	Dhobri—or	so	they	are
named	on	the	map.”
“Aren’s	reluctant	neighbors,”	Duiker	said.
The	Fist	turned	at	that,	his	eyes	sharp.	“We	have	ever	held	to	our	treaties,”
he	said.
“Aye,	Fist,	we	have—to	the	outrage	of	many	Aren	natives.”
Coltaine	faced	the	distant	tribe	again,	silent	for	a	long	minute.
The	historian	glanced	at	his	nameless	marine.	“You	should	seek	out	a
cutter,”	he	said.
“I	can	still	hold	a	shield—”
“No	doubt,	but	it’s	the	risk	of	infection…”
Her	eyes	widened	and	Duiker	was	felled	mute,	a	rush	of	sorrow	flooding
him.	He	broke	the	gaze.	You’re	a	fool,	old	man.


Coltaine	spoke.	“Captain	Lull.”
“Fist.”
“Are	the	wagons	ready?”
“Aye,	sir.	Coming	up	now.”
Coltaine	nodded.	“Historian.”
“Fist?”
The	Wickan	slowly	turned	round	to	face	Duiker.	“I	give	you	Nil	and
Nether,	a	troop	from	the	three	clans.	Captain,	has	Commander	Bult	informed
the	wounded?”
“Aye,	sir,	and	they	have	refused	you.”
The	skin	tightened	around	Coltaine’s	eyes,	but	then	he	slowly	nodded.
“As	has,”	Lull	continued,	looking	at	Duiker,	“Corporal	List.”
“I	admit,”	the	Fist	sighed,	“those	I	selected	from	my	own	people	are	none
too	pleased—yet	they	will	not	disobey	their	warleader.	Historian,	you	shall
command	as	you	see	fit.	Your	responsibility,	however,	is	singular.	Deliver	the
refugees	to	Aren.”
And	so	we	come	to	this.	“Fist—”
“You	are	Malazan,”	Coltaine	cut	in.	“Follow	the	prescribed	procedures—”
“And	if	we	are	betrayed?”
The	Wickan	smiled.	“Then	we	all	join	Hood,	here	in	one	place.	If	there
must	be	an	end	to	this,	let	it	be	fitting.”
“Hold	on	as	long	as	you	can,”	Duiker	whispered.	“I’ll	skin	Pormqual’s
face	and	give	the	order	through	his	lips	if	I	have	to—”
“Leave	the	High	Fist	to	the	Empress—and	her	Adjunct.”
The	historian	reached	for	the	glass	bottle	around	his	neck.
Coltaine	shook	his	head.	“This	tale	is	yours,	Historian,	and	right	now,	no
one	is	more	important	than	you.	And	if	you	one	day	see	Dujek,	tell	him	this:	it
is	not	the	Empire’s	soldiers	the	Empress	cannot	afford	to	lose,	it	is	its
memory.”
A	troop	of	Wickans	rode	toward	them,	leading	spare	mounts—including
Duiker ’s	faithful	mare.	Beyond	them,	the	lead	wagons	of	the	refugees	emerged
from	the	dust,	and	off	to	one	side	waited	three	additional	wagons,	guarded—
Duiker	could	see—by	Nil	and	Nether.
The	historian	drew	a	deep	breath.	“About	Corporal	List—”
“He	will	not	be	swayed,”	Captain	Lull	cut	in.	“He	asked	that	I	pass	on	his
words	of	farewell,	Duiker.	I	believe	he	muttered	something	about	a	ghost	at	his
shoulder,	whatever	that	means,	then	he	said:	‘Tell	the	historian	that	I	have	found
my	war.’	”
Coltaine	looked	away	as	if	those	words	had	struck	through	to	him	where


all	other	words	could	not.	“Captain,	inform	the	companies:	we	attack	within	the
hour.”
Attack.	Hood’s	breath!	Duiker	felt	awkward	in	his	own	body,	his	hands	like
leaden	lumps	at	his	sides,	as	if	the	question	of	what	to	do	with	his	own	flesh
and	bone—what	to	do	in	the	next	moment—had	driven	him	to	a	crisis.
Lull’s	voice	broke	through.	“Your	horse	has	arrived,	Historian.”
Duiker	released	a	shaky	breath.	Facing	the	captain,	he	slowly	shook	his
head.	“Historian?	No,	perhaps	I	shall	return	to	being	a	historian	a	week	from
now.	But	at	this	moment,	and	for	what’s	to	come…”	He	shook	his	head	a
second	time.	“I	have	no	word	for	what	I	should	be	called	right	now.”	He
smiled.	“I	think	‘old	man’	suffices—”
Lull	seemed	rattled	by	Duiker ’s	smile.	The	captain	faced	Coltaine.	“Fist,
this	man	feels	he	has	no	title.	He’s	chosen	‘old	man.’	”
“A	poor	choice,”	the	Wickan	growled.	“Old	men	are	wise—not	fools.”	He
scowled	at	Duiker.	“There	is	not	one	among	your	acquaintances	who	struggles
with	who	and	what	you	are.	We	know	you	as	a	soldier.	Does	that	title	insult	you,
sir?”
Duiker ’s	eyes	narrowed.	“No.	At	least,	I	don’t	think	so.”
“Lead	the	refugees	to	safety,	soldier.”
“Yes,	Fist.”
The	nameless	marine	spoke.	“I	have	something	for	you,	Duiker.”
Lull	grunted.	“What,	here?”
She	handed	him	a	tatter	of	cloth.	“Wait	a	while	before	you	read	what’s	on	it.
Please.”
He	could	only	nod	as	he	tucked	the	scrap	in	his	belt.	He	looked	at	the	three
figures	before	him,	wishing	Bult	and	List	had	been	present	for	this,	but	there
would	be	no	staged	goodbyes,	no	comfort	of	roles	to	step	into.	Like	everything
else,	the	moment	was	messy,	awkward	and	incomplete.
“Get	on	that	scrawny	beast	of	yours,”	Lull	said.	“And	stay	in	Hood’s
blindside,	friend.”
“I	wish	the	same	for	you,	all	of	you.”
Coltaine	hissed,	wheeling	to	face	north.	He	bared	his	teeth.	“Not	a	chance
of	that,	Duiker.	We	intend	to	carve	a	bloody	path…right	down	the	bastard’s
throat.”
	
Flanked	by	Nil	and	Nether,	Duiker	rode	at	the	head	of	the	refugee	train,
heading	toward	the	tribe	on	the	ridge.	The	Wickan	outriders	and	those
guarding	the	selected	wagons	that	trundled	directly	ahead	were	all	very	young


—boys	and	girls	still	with	their	first	weapons.	Their	collective	outrage	at
having	been	sent	from	their	clans	was	a	silent	storm.
Yet,	if	Coltaine	has	erred	in	this	gamble,	they	will	wield	those	weapons	one
more	time…one	last	time.
“Two	riders,”	Nil	said.
“Good	sign,”	Duiker	grunted,	eyes	focusing	on	the	Kherahn	pair	that	now
approached	at	a	canter.	Both	were	elders,	a	man	and	a	woman,	lean	and
weathered,	their	skin	the	same	hue	as	the	buckskins	that	clothed	them.	Hookbladed	swords	were	slung	under	their	left	arms	and	ornate	iron	helmets
covered	their	heads;	their	eyes	were	framed	in	robust	cheek-plates.
“Stay	here,	Nil,”	Duiker	said.	“Nether,	with	me,	please.”	He	nudged	his
mare	forward.
They	met	just	beyond	the	lead	wagons,	reining	in	to	face	each	other	with	a
few	paces	between	them.
Duiker	was	the	first	to	speak.	“These	are	Kherahn	Dhobri	lands,
recognized	by	treaty.	The	Malazan	Empire	honors	all	such	treaties.	We	seek
passage—”
The	woman,	her	eyes	on	the	wagons,	snapped	in	unaccented	Malazan,
“How	much?”
“A	collection	from	all	the	soldiers	of	the	Seventh,”	Duiker	said.	“In
Imperial	coin,	a	worth	totalling	forty-one	thousand	silver	jakatas—”
“A	full-strength	Malazan	army’s	annual	wages,”	the	woman	said,	scowling.
“This	was	no	‘collection.’	Do	your	soldiers	know	you	have	stolen	their	wages
to	buy	passage?”
Duiker	blinked,	then	said	softly,	“The	soldiers	insisted,	Elder.	This	was	in
truth	a	collection.”
Nether	then	spoke.	“From	the	three	Wickan	clans,	an	additional	payment:
jewelry,	cookware,	skins,	bolts	of	felt,	horseshoes,	tack	and	leather,	and	an
assortment	of	coins	looted	in	the	course	of	our	long	journey	from	Hissar,	in
an	amount	approaching	seventy-three	thousand	silver	jakatas.	All	given	freely.”
The	woman	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	then	her	companion	said
something	to	her	in	their	own	tongue.	She	shook	her	head	in	reply,	her	flat,	dun
eyes	finding	the	historian	again.	“And	with	this	offer,	you	seek	passage	for
these	refugees,	and	for	the	Wickan	clans,	and	for	the	Seventh.”
“No,	Elder.	For	the	refugees	alone—and	this	small	guard	you	see	here.”
“We	reject	your	offer.”
Lull	was	right	to	dread	this	moment.	Dammit—
“It	is	too	much,”	the	woman	said.	“The	treaty	with	the	Empress	is	specific.”
At	a	loss,	Duiker	could	only	shrug.	“Then	a	portion	thereof—”


“With	the	remainder	entering	Aren,	where	it	shall	be	hoarded	uselessly
until	such	time	as	Korbolo	Dom	breaches	the	gates,	and	so	you	end	up	paying
him	for	the	privilege	of	slaughtering	you.”
“Then,”	Nether	said,	“with	that	remainder,	we	would	hire	you	as	escort.”
Duiker ’s	heart	stuttered.
“To	the	city’s	gates?	Too	far.	We	shall	escort	you	to	Balahn	village,	and	the
beginning	of	the	road	known	as	Aren	Way.	This,	however,	leaves	a	portion
remaining.	We	shall	sell	you	food,	and	what	healing	may	prove	necessary	and
within	the	abilities	of	our	horsewives.”
“Horsewives?”	Nether	asked,	her	brows	rising.
The	elder	nodded.
Nether	smiled.	“The	Wickans	are	pleased	to	know	the	Kherahn	Dhobri.”
“Come	forward,	then,	with	your	people.”
The	two	rode	back	to	their	kin.	Duiker	watched	them	for	a	moment,	then	he
wheeled	his	horse	and	stood	in	his	stirrups.	Far	to	the	north,	over	Sanimon,
hung	a	dust	cloud.	“Nether,	can	you	send	Coltaine	a	message?”
“I	can	offer	him	a	knowing,	yes.”
“Do	so.	Tell	him:	he	was	right.”
	
The	sense	rose	slowly,	as	if	from	a	body	all	had	believed	cold,	a	corpse	in
truth,	the	realization	rising,	filling	the	air,	the	spaces	in	between.	Faces	took	on
a	cast	of	disbelief,	a	numbness	that	was	reluctant	to	yield	its	protective	barriers.
Dusk	arrived,	clothing	an	encampment	of	thirty	thousand	refugees	in	the
joining	of	two	silences—one	from	the	land	and	the	night	sky	with	its	crushedglass	stars,	the	other	from	the	people	themselves.	Dour-faced	Kherahnal
moved	among	them,	their	gifts	and	gestures	belying	their	expressions	and
reserve.	And	to	each	place	they	went,	it	was	as	if	they	brought,	in	their	touch,	a
release.
Sitting	beneath	that	glittering	night	sky,	surrounded	by	thick	grasses,
Duiker	listened	to	the	cries	that	cut	through	the	darkness,	wrenching	at	his
heart.	Joy	wrought	with	dark,	blistering	anguish,	wordless	screams,
uncontrolled	wailing.	A	stranger	would	have	believed	that	some	horror	stalked
the	camp,	a	stranger	would	not	have	understood	the	release	that	the	historian
heard,	the	sounds	that	his	own	soul	answered	with	burning	pain,	making	him
blink	at	the	stars	that	blurred	and	swam	overhead.
The	release	born	of	salvation	was	nevertheless	tortured,	and	Duiker	well
knew	why,	well	knew	what	was	reaching	down	from	the	north—a	host	of
inescapable	truths.	Somewhere	out	there	in	the	darkness	stood	a	wall	of	human


flesh,	clothed	in	shattered	armor,	which	still	defied	Korbolo	Dom,	which	had
purchased	and	was	still	purchasing	this	dread	salvation.	There	was	no	escape
from	that	knowledge.
Grasses	whispered	near	him	and	he	sensed	a	familiar	presence	crouch
down	beside	him.
“How	fares	Coltaine?”	Duiker	asked.
Nether	sighed.	“The	linkage	is	broken,”	she	said.
The	historian	stiffened.	After	a	long	moment	he	released	a	shaky	breath.
“Gone,	then?”
“We	do	not	know.	Nil	continues	with	the	effort,	but	I	fear	in	our	weariness
our	blood	ties	are	insufficient.	We	sensed	no	death	cry,	and	we	most	surely
would,	Duiker.”
“Perhaps	he’s	been	captured.”
“Perhaps.	Historian,	if	Korbolo	Dom	arrives	on	the	morrow,	these
Kherahn	will	pay	dearly	for	this	contract.	Nor	may	they	prove	sufficient	in…in
—”
“Nether?”
She	hung	her	head.	“I	am	sorry,	I	cannot	stop	my	ears—they	may	be
deluding	themselves.	Even	if	we	make	it	to	Balahn,	to	Aren	Way,	it	is	still	three
leagues	to	the	city	itself.”
“I	share	your	misgivings.	But	out	there,	well,	it’s	the	gestures	of	kindness,
don’t	you	see?	We	none	of	us	have	any	defense	against	them.”
“The	release	is	too	soon,	Duiker!”
“Possibly,	but	there’s	not	a	damned	thing	we	can	do	about	it.”
They	turned	at	the	sound	of	voices.	A	group	of	figures	approached	from
the	encampment.	A	hissing	argument	was	under	way,	quickly	quelled	as	the
group	neared.
Duiker	slowly	rose,	Nether	doing	the	same	beside	him.
“I	trust	we	are	not	interrupting	anything	untoward,”	Nethpara	called	out,
the	words	dripping.
“I	would	suggest,”	the	historian	said,	“that	the	Council	retire	for	the	night.
A	long	day	of	marching	awaits	us	all	tomorrow—”
“And	that,”	Pullyk	Alar	said	hastily,	“is	precisely	why	we	are	here.”
“Those	of	us	retaining	a	measure	of	wealth,”	Nethpara	explained,	“have
succeeded	in	purchasing	from	the	Kherahn	fresh	horses	for	our	carriages.”
“We	wish	to	leave	now,”	Pullyk	added.	“Our	small	group,	that	is,	and	make
with	all	haste	for	Aren—”
“Where	we	shall	insist	the	High	Fist	despatch	a	force	to	provide	guard	for
the	rest	of	you,”	Nethpara	said.


Duiker	stared	at	the	two	men,	then	at	the	dozen	figures	behind	them.
“Where	is	Tumlit?”	he	asked.
“Alas,	he	fell	ill	three	days	ago	and	is	no	longer	among	the	living.	We	all
deeply	mourn	his	passing.”
No	doubt.	“Your	suggestion	has	merit,	but	is	rejected.”
“But—”
“Nethpara,	if	you	start	moving	now,	you’ll	incite	panic,	and	that	is
something	none	of	us	can	afford.	No,	you	travel	with	the	rest	of	us,	and	must
be	content	with	being	the	first	of	the	refugees	to	pass	beneath	the	city	gates	at
the	head	of	the	train.”
“This	is	an	outrage!”
“Get	out	of	my	sight,	Nethpara,	before	I	finish	what	I	began	at	Vathar
Crossing.”
“Oh,	do	not	for	a	moment	believe	I	have	forgotten,	Historian!”
“An	additional	reason	for	rejecting	your	request.	Return	to	your	carriages,
get	some	sleep—we’ll	be	pushing	hard	tomorrow.”
“A	certainty!”	Pullyk	hissed.	“Korbolo	Dom	is	hardly	finished	with	us!
Now	that	Coltaine’s	dead	and	his	army	with	him,	we	are	to	trust	our	lives	to
these	stinking	nomads?	And	when	the	escort	ends?	Three	leagues	from	Aren!
You	send	us	all	to	our	deaths!”
“Aye,”	Duiker	growled.	“All,	or	none.	Now	I’m	done	speaking.	Leave.”
“Oh,	are	you	now	that	Wickan	dog	reborn?”	He	reached	for	the	rapier	at
his	belt.	“I	hereby	challenge	you	to	a	duel—”
The	historian’s	sword	was	a	blur,	the	flat	of	the	blade	cracking	Pullyk
Alar ’s	temple.	The	nobleborn	dropped	to	the	ground	unconscious.
“Coltaine	reborn?”	Duiker	whispered.	“No,	just	a	soldier.”
Nether	spoke,	her	eyes	on	the	prone	body.	“Your	Council	will	have	to	pay
dearly	to	have	that	healed,	Nethpara.”
“I	suppose	I	could	have	swung	harder	and	saved	you	the	coin,”	Duiker
muttered.	“Get	out	of	my	sight,	all	of	you.”
The	Council	retreated,	carrying	their	fallen	spokesman	with	them.
“Nether,	have	the	Wickans	watch	them.”
“Aye,	sir.”
	
Balahn	village	was	a	squalid	collection	of	low	mudbrick	houses,	home	to
perhaps	forty	residents,	all	of	whom	had	fled	days	earlier.	The	only	structure
less	than	a	century	old	was	the	Malazan	arched	gate	that	marked	the	beginning
of	the	Aren	Way,	a	broad,	raised	military	road	that	had	been	constructed	at


Dassem	Ultor ’s	command	early	in	the	conquest.
Deep	ditches	flanked	the	Aren	Way,	and	beyond	them	were	high,	flattopped	earthen	banks	on	which	grew	for	the	entire	ten-mile	stretch	and	in	two
precise	rows,	tall	cedars	that	had	been	transplanted	from	Geleen	on	the	Clatar
Sea.
The	Kherahn	spokeswoman	joined	Duiker	and	the	two	warlocks	in	the
wide	concourse	before	the	Way’s	gate.	“Payment	has	been	received	and	all
agreements	between	us	honored.”
“We	thank	you,	Elder,”	the	historian	said.
She	shrugged.	“A	simple	transaction,	soldier.	No	words	of	thanks	are
necessary.”
“True.	Not	necessary,	but	given	in	any	case.”
“Then	you	are	welcome.”
“The	Empress	will	hear	of	this,	Elder,	in	the	most	respectful	of	terms.”
Her	steady	eyes	darted	away	at	this.	She	hesitated,	then	said,	“Soldier,	a
large	force	approaches	from	the	north—our	rear-guard	has	seen	the	dust.	They
come	swiftly.”
“Ah,	I	see.”
“Perhaps	some	of	you	will	make	it.”
“We’ll	better	that	if	we	can.”
“Soldier?”
“Aye,	Elder?”
“Are	you	certain	Aren’s	gates	will	open	to	you?”
Duiker ’s	laugh	was	harsh.	“I’ll	worry	about	that	when	we	get	there,	I
think.”
“There’s	wisdom	in	that.”	She	nodded,	then	gathered	her	reins.	“Goodbye,
soldier.”
“Farewell.”
The	Kherahn	Dhobri	departed,	a	task	that	took	no	more	than	five	minutes,
the	wagons	under	heavy	escort.	Duiker	eyed	what	he	could	see	of	the	refugee
train,	their	presence	overwhelming	the	small	village’s	ragged	boundaries.
He’d	set	a	difficult,	grueling	pace,	a	day	and	a	night	with	but	the	briefest
pauses	for	rest,	and	the	message	had	clearly	reached	them,	one	and	all,	that
safety	would	be	assured	only	once	they	were	within	Aren’s	massively	fortified
walls.
Three	leagues	left—it’ll	take	us	until	dawn	to	achieve	that.	Each	league	I
push	them	hard	slows	those	that	follow.	Yet	what	choice	do	I	have?	“Nil,	inform
your	Wickans—I	want	the	entire	train	through	this	gate	before	the	sun’s	set.
Your	warriors	are	to	use	every	means	possible	to	achieve	that,	short	of	killing


or	maiming.	The	refugees	may	have	forgotten	their	terror	of	you—remind
them.”
“There	are	but	thirty	in	the	troop,”	Nether	reminded	him.	“And	all	youths
at	that—”
“Angry	youths,	you	mean.	Well,	let’s	offer	them	an	outlet.”
	
Aren	Way	accommodated	them	in	their	efforts,	for	the	first	third,	locally
known	as	Ramp,	was	a	gentle	downward	slope	toward	the	plain	on	which	the
city	sat.	Cone-shaped	hills	kept	pace	with	them	to	the	east,	and	would	do	so	to
within	a	thousand	paces	of	Aren’s	north	wall.	The	hills	were	not	natural:	they
were	mass	graves,	scores	of	them,	from	the	misguided	slaughter	of	the	city’s
residents	by	the	T’lan	Imass	in	Kellanved’s	time.	The	hill	nearest	Aren	was
among	the	largest,	and	was	home	to	the	city’s	ruling	families	and	the	Holy
Protector	and	Falah’dan.
Duiker	left	Nil	to	lead	the	vanguard	and	rode	at	the	very	rear	of	the	train,
where	he,	Nether	and	three	Wickans	shouted	themselves	hoarse	in	an	effort	to
hasten	the	weakest	and	slowest	among	the	refugees.	It	was	a	heartbreaking	task,
and	they	passed	more	than	one	body	that	had	given	out	at	the	pace.	There	was
no	time	for	burial,	nor	the	strength	to	carry	them.
To	the	north	and	slightly	east,	the	clouds	of	dust	grew	steadily	closer.
“They’re	not	taking	the	road,”	Nether	gasped,	wheeling	her	mount	around
to	glare	at	the	dust.	“They	come	overland—slower,	much	slower—”
“But	a	shorter	route	on	the	map,”	Duiker	said.
“The	hills	aren’t	marked,	are	they?”
“No,	non-Imperial	maps	show	it	as	a	plain—the	barrows	are	too	recent	an
addition,	I’d	guess.”
“You’d	think	Korbolo	would	have	a	Malazan	version—”
“It	appears	not—and	that	alone	may	save	us,	lass…”
Yet	he	could	hear	the	false	ring	in	his	own	words.	The	enemy	was	too	close
—less	than	a	third	of	a	league	away,	he	judged.	Even	with	the	burial	mounds,
mounted	troops	could	cover	that	distance	in	a	few-score	minutes.
Faint	Wickan	warcries	from	the	vanguard	reached	them.
“They’ve	sighted	Aren,”	Nether	said.	“Nil	shows	me	through	his	eyes—”
“The	gates?”
She	frowned.	“Closed.”
Duiker	cursed.	He	rode	his	mare	among	the	stragglers.	“The	city’s	been
sighted!”	he	shouted.	“Not	much	more!	Move!”
From	some	hidden,	unexpected	place,	reserves	of	energy	rose	in	answer	to


the	historian’s	words.	He	sensed,	then	saw,	a	ripple	run	through	the	masses,	a
faint	quickening	of	pace,	of	anticipation—and	of	fear.	The	historian	twisted	in
his	saddle.
The	cloud	loomed	above	the	cone-shaped	mounds.	Closer,	yet	not	as	close
as	it	should	have	been.
“Nether!	Are	there	soldiers	on	Aren’s	walls?”
“Aye,	not	an	inch	to	spare—”
“The	gates?”
“No.”
“How	close	are	we	up	there?”
“A	thousand	paces—people	are	running	now—”
“What	in	Hood’s	name	is	wrong	with	them?”
He	stared	again	at	the	dust	cloud.	“Fener ’s	hoof!	Nether,	take	your	Wickans
—ride	for	Aren!”
“What	about	you?”
“To	Hood	with	me,	damn	you!	Go!	Save	your	children!”
She	hesitated,	then	spun	her	horse	around.	“You	three!”	she	barked	at	the
Wickan	youths.	“With	me!”
He	watched	them	drive	their	weary	horses	forward	along	one	edge	of	the
Way,	sweeping	past	the	stumbling,	pitching	refugees.
The	train	had	stretched	out,	those	fleeter	of	foot	slipping	ever	farther
ahead.	The	elderly	surrounded	the	historian,	each	step	a	tortured	struggle.
Many	simply	stopped	and	sat	down	on	the	road	to	await	the	inevitable.	Duiker
screamed	at	them,	threatened	them,	but	it	was	no	use.	He	saw	a	child,	no	more
than	eighteen	months	old,	wandering	lost,	arms	outstretched,	dry-eyed	and
appallingly	silent.
Duiker	rode	close,	leaned	over	in	his	saddle	and	swept	the	child	into	one
arm.	Tiny	hands	gripped	the	torn	fragments	of	his	shirt.
A	last	row	of	mounds	now	separated	him	and	the	tail	end	of	the	train	from
the	pursuing	army.
The	flight	had	not	slowed	and	that	was	the	only	evidence	the	historian	had
that	the	gates	had,	at	last,	opened	to	receive	the	refugees.	Either	that	or	they’re
spreading	out	in	frantic,	hopeless	waves	along	the	wall—but	no,	that	would	be
a	betrayal	beyond	sanity—
And	now	he	could	see,	a	thousand	paces	away:	Aren.	The	north	gates,
flanked	by	solid	towers,	yawned	for	three-quarters	of	their	height—the	last,
lowest	quarter	was	a	seething	mass	of	figures,	pushing,	crowding,	clambering
over	each	other	in	their	panic.	But	the	tide’s	strength	was	too	great,	too
inexorable	to	stopper	that	passageway.	Like	a	giant	maw,	Aren	was	swallowing


the	refugees.	The	Wickans	rode	at	either	side,	desperately	trying	to	contain	the
human	river,	and	Duiker	could	now	see	among	them	soldiers	in	the	uniform	of
the	Aren	City	Garrison	joining	in	the	effort.
And	the	army	itself?	The	High	Fist’s	army?
They	stood	on	the	walls.	They	watched.	Row	upon	row	of	faces,	figures
jostling	for	a	vantage	point	along	the	north	wall’s	entire	length.	Resplendently
dressed	individuals	occupied	the	platforms	atop	the	towers	flanking	the	gates,
looking	down	at	the	starved,	bedraggled,	screaming	mob	that	thronged	the	city
entrance.
City	Garrison	Guards	were	suddenly	among	the	last	of	those	refugees	still
moving.	On	all	sides	around	Duiker,	he	saw	grimfaced	soldiers	pick	people	up
and	carry	them	at	a	half-jog	toward	the	gates.	Spotting	one	guardsman	bearing
the	insignia	of	a	captain,	the	historian	rode	up	to	him.	“You!	Take	this	child!”
The	man	reached	up	to	close	his	hands	around	the	silent,	wide-eyed
toddler.	“Are	you	Duiker?”	the	captain	asked.
“Aye.”
“You’re	to	report	to	the	High	Fist	immediately,	sir—there,	on	the	left-hand
tower—”
“That	bastard	will	have	to	wait,”	Duiker	growled.	“I	will	see	every	damned
refugee	through	first!	Now	run,	Captain,	but	tell	me	your	name,	for	there	may
well	be	a	mother	or	father	still	alive	for	that	child.”
“Keneb,	sir,	and	I	will	take	care	of	the	lass	until	then,	I	swear	it.”	The	man
then	hesitated,	freed	one	hand	and	gripped	Duiker ’s	wrist.	“Sir…”
“What?”
“I’m—I’m	sorry,	sir.”
“Your	loyalty’s	to	the	city	you’ve	sworn	to	defend,	Captain—”
“I	know	sir,	but	those	soldiers	on	the	walls,	sir—well,	they’re	as	close	as
they’re	allowed	to	get,	if	you	understand	me.	And	they’re	not	happy	about	it.”
“They’re	not	alone	in	that.	Now	get	going,	Captain	Keneb.”
	
Duiker	was	the	last.	When	the	gate	finally	emptied,	not	a	single	breathing
refugee	remained	outside	the	walls,	barring	those	he	could	see	well	down	the
road,	still	seated	on	the	cobbles,	unable	to	move,	drawing	their	last	breaths—
too	far	away	to	retrieve,	and	it	was	clear	that	the	Aren	soldiers	had	been	given
strict	orders	about	how	far	beyond	the	gate	they	were	permitted.
Thirty	paces	from	the	gate	and	with	the	array	of	guards	standing	in	the	gap
watching	him,	Duiker	wheeled	his	horse	around	one	final	time.	He	stared
northward,	first	to	the	dust	cloud	now	ascending	the	last,	largest	barrow,	then


beyond	it,	to	the	glittering	spear	that	was	the	Whirlwind.	His	mind’s	eye	took
him	farther	still,	north	and	east,	across	rivers,	across	plains	and	steppes,	to	a
city	on	a	different	coast.	Yet	the	effort	availed	him	little.	Too	much	to
comprehend,	too	swift,	too	immediate	this	end	to	that	extraordinary,	soulscarring	journey.
A	chain	of	corpses,	hundreds	of	leagues	long.	No,	it	is	all	beyond	me,
beyond,	I	now	believe,	any	of	us…
He	swung	his	horse	around,	eyes	fixing	on	that	yawning	gate	and	the
guards	gathered	there.	They	parted	to	form	a	path.	Duiker	tapped	his	heels	into
the	mare’s	flanks.
He	ignored	the	soldiers	on	the	wall,	even	when	the	triumphant	cry	burst
from	them	like	a	beast	unchained.
	
Shadows	flowed	in	silent	waves	over	the	barren	hills.	Apt’s	glittering	eye
scanned	the	horizon	for	a	moment	longer,	then	the	demon	dipped	her
elongated	head	to	look	down	on	the	boy	crouched	beside	her	forelimb.
He	too	was	studying	Shadow	Realm’s	eerie	landscape,	his	own	single,
multifaceted	eye	glistening	beneath	the	jutting	brow	ridge.
After	a	long	moment	he	lifted	his	head	and	met	her	gaze.	“Mother,”	he
asked,	“is	this	home?”
A	voice	spoke	from	a	dozen	paces	away.	“My	colleague	ever
underestimates	this	realm’s	natural	inhabitants.	Ah,	there	is	the	child.”
The	boy	turned	and	watched	the	tall,	black-clad	man	approach.	“Aptorian,”
the	stranger	continued,	“your	generous	shaping	of	this	lad—no	matter	how
well-meant—will	do	naught	but	scar	him	within,	in	the	years	to	come.”
Apt	clicked	and	hissed	a	reply.
“Ah,	but	you	have	achieved	the	opposite,	Lady,”	the	man	said.	“For	he	now
belongs	to	neither.”
The	demon	spoke	again.
The	man	cocked	his	head,	regarded	her	for	a	long	moment,	then	halfsmiled.	“Presumptuous	of	you.”	His	gaze	fell	to	the	boy.	“Very	well.”	He
crouched.	“Hello.”
The	boy	returned	the	greeting	shyly.
Casting	a	last	irritated	glance	at	Apt,	the	man	offered	the	child	his	hand.
“I’m…Uncle	Cotillion—”
“You	can’t	be,”	the	boy	said.
“Oh,	and	why	not?”
“Your	eyes—they’re	different—so	small,	two	fighting	to	see	as	one.	I	think


they	must	be	weak.	When	you	approached,	you	walked	through	a	stone	wall
and	then	the	trees,	rippling	the	ghost	world	as	if	ignorant	of	its	right	to	dwell
here.”
Cotillion’s	eyes	widened.	“Wall?	Trees?”	He	glanced	up	at	Apt.	“Has	his
mind	fled?”
The	demon	answered	at	length.
Cotillion	paled.	“Hood’s	breath!”	he	finally	muttered,	and	when	he	turned
back	to	the	child	it	was	with	an	expression	of	awe.	“What	is	your	name,	lad?”
“Panek.”
“You	possess	one,	then.	Tell	me,	what	else—apart	from	your	name—do
you	recall	of	your…other	world?”
“I	remember	being	punished.	I	was	told	to	stay	close	to	Father—”
“And	what	did	he	look	like?”
“I	don’t	remember.	I	don’t	remember	any	of	their	faces.	We	were	waiting
to	see	what	they’d	do	with	us.	But	then	we	were	led	away—the	children—away.
Soldiers	pushed	my	father,	dragged	him	in	the	opposite	direction.	I	was
supposed	to	stay	close,	but	I	went	with	the	children.	They	punished	me—
punished	all	of	the	children—for	not	doing	what	we	were	told.”
Cotillion’s	eyes	narrowed.	“I	don’t	think	your	father	had	much	choice,
Panek.”
“But	the	enemy	were	fathers	too,	you	see.	And	mothers	and	grandmothers
—they	were	all	so	angry	with	us.	They	took	our	clothes.	Our	sandals.	They
took	everything	from	us,	they	were	so	angry.	Then	they	punished	us.”
“And	how	did	they	do	that?”
“They	nailed	us	to	crosses.”
Cotillion	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment.	When	he	finally	spoke,	his	voice
was	strangely	flat.	“You	remember	that,	then.”
“Yes.	And	I	promise	to	do	as	I’m	told.	From	now	on.	Whatever	Mother
says.	I	promise.”
“Panek.	Listen	carefully	to	your	uncle.	You	weren’t	punished	for	not	doing
what	you	were	told.	Listen—this	is	hard,	I	know,	but	try	to	understand.	They
hurt	you	because	they	could,	because	there	was	no	one	there	who	was	capable
of	stopping	them.	Your	father	would	have	tried—I’m	sure	he	did.	But,	like	you,
he	was	helpless.	We’re	here	now,	with	you—your	mother	and	Uncle	Cotillion
—we’re	here	to	make	sure	you’ll	never	be	helpless	again.	Do	you
understand?”
Panek	looked	up	at	his	mother.	She	clicked	softly.
“All	right,”	the	boy	said.
“We’ll	teach	each	other,	lad.”


Panek	frowned.	“What	can	I	teach	you?”
Cotillion	grimaced.	“Teach	me	what	you	see…here,	in	this	realm.	Your
ghost	world,	the	Shadow	Hold	that	was,	the	old	places	that	remain—”
“What	you	walk	through	unseeing.”
“Aye.	I’ve	often	wondered	why	the	Hounds	never	run	straight.”
“Hounds?”
“You’ll	meet	them	sooner	or	later,	Panek.	Cuddly	mutts,	one	and	all.”
Panek	smiled,	revealing	sharp	fangs.	“I	like	dogs.”
With	a	slight	flinch,	Cotillion	said,	“I’m	sure	they’ll	like	you	in	turn.”	He
straightened,	faced	Apt.	“You’re	right,	you	can’t	do	this	alone.	Let	us	think	on
it,	Ammanas	and	I.”	He	faced	the	lad	again.	“Your	mother	has	other	tasks	now.
Debts	to	pay.	Will	you	go	with	her	or	come	with	me?”
“Where	do	you	go,	Uncle?”
“The	other	children	have	been	deposited	nearby.	Would	you	like	to	help	me
get	them	settled?”
Panek	hesitated,	then	replied,	“I	would	like	to	see	them	again,	but	not	right
away.	I	will	go	with	Mother.	The	man	who	asked	her	to	save	us	needs	to	be
looked	after—she	explained	that.	I	would	like	to	meet	him.	Mother	says	he
dreams	of	me,	of	when	he	first	saw	me.”
“I’m	sure	he	does,”	Cotillion	muttered.	“Like	me,	he	is	haunted	by
helplessness.	Very	well,	until	we	meet	again.”	He	shifted	his	attention	one	last
time,	stared	long	into	Apt’s	eye.	“When	I	Ascended,	Lady,	it	was	to	escape	the
nightmares	of	feeling…”	He	grimaced.	“Imagine	my	surprise	that	I	now	thank
you	for	such	chains.”
Panek	broke	in.	“Uncle,	do	you	have	any	children?”
He	winced,	looked	away.	“A	daughter.	Of	sorts.”	He	sighed,	then	smiled
wryly.	“We	had	a	falling-out,	I’m	afraid.”
“You	must	forgive	her.”
“Damned	upstart!”
“You	said	we	must	teach	each	other,	Uncle.”
Cotillion’s	eyes	widened	on	the	lad,	then	he	shook	his	head.	“The
forgiveness	is	the	other	way	around,	alas.”
“Then	I	must	meet	her.”
“Well,	anything	is	possible—”
Apt	spoke.
Cotillion	scowled.	“That,	Lady,	was	uncalled	for.”	He	turned	away,
wrapping	his	cloak	about	himself.
After	half	a	dozen	strides	he	paused,	glancing	back.	“Give	Kalam	my
regards.”	A	moment	later	shadows	engulfed	him.


Panek	continued	staring.	“Does	he	imagine,”	he	asked	his	mother,	“that	he
now	walks	unseen?”
	
The	greased	anchor	chain	rattled	smoothly,	slipping	down	into	the	black,	oily
water,	and	Ragstopper	came	to	a	rest	in	Malaz	Harbor,	a	hundred	yards	from
the	docks.	A	scatter	of	dull	yellow	lights	marked	the	lower	quarter ’s	front
street,	where	ancient	warehouses	interspersed	by	ramshackle	taverns,	inns	and
tenement	houses	faced	the	piers.	To	the	north	was	the	ridge	that	was	home	to
the	city’s	merchants	and	nobles—the	larger	estates	abutting	the	cliff	wall	and
its	switchback	stairs	that	ascended	to	Mock’s	Hold.	Few	lights	were	visible	in
that	old	bastion,	though	Kalam	could	see	a	pennant	flapping	heavily	in	a	high
wind—too	dark	to	make	out	its	colors.
A	shiver	of	presentiment	ran	through	him	at	the	sight	of	that	pennant.
Someone’s	here…someone	important.
The	crew	were	settling	down	behind	him,	grumbling	about	the	late	hour	of
arrival	which	would	prevent	them	from	immediately	disembarking	into	the
harbor	streets.	The	Harbormaster	would	wait	until	the	morrow	before	rowing
out	to	inspect	the	craft	and	ensure	that	the	sailors	were	hale—free	of	infections
and	the	like.
The	midnight	bell	had	sounded	its	atonal	note	only	minutes	earlier.	Salk
Elan	judged	rightly,	damn	him.
It	had	never	been	part	of	the	plan,	this	stop	in	Malaz	City.	Kalam	had
originally	intended	to	await	Fiddler	in	Unta,	where	they	would	finalize	the
details.	Quick	Ben	had	insisted	that	the	sapper	could	come	through	via
Deadhouse,	though	the	mage	was	typically	evasive	about	specifics.	Kalam	had
begun	to	view	the	Deadhouse	option	as	more	of	a	potential	escape	route	if
things	went	wrong	than	anything	else,	and	even	then	as	a	last	recourse.	He’d
never	liked	the	Azath,	had	no	faith	in	anything	that	appeared	so	benign.
Friendly	traps	were	always	far	deadlier	than	openly	belligerent	ones.
There	was	silence	behind	him	now,	and	the	assassin	briefly	wondered	at
how	swiftly	sleep	had	come	to	the	men	sprawled	on	the	main	deck.	Ragstopper
was	motionless,	cordage	and	hull	murmuring	their	usual	natural	noises.	Kalam
leaned	on	the	forecastle	rail,	eyes	on	the	city	before	him,	on	the	dark	bulks	of
ships	resting	in	their	berths.	The	Imperial	Pier	was	off	to	his	right,	where	the
cliff	face	reached	down	to	the	sea.	No	craft	was	visible	there.
He	thought	to	glance	back	up	at	the	pennant’s	dark	wing	above	the	Hold,
but	the	effort	seemed	too	much—too	dark	in	any	case—and	his	imagination
was	ever	fueled	by	thinking	the	worse	of	all	he	could	not	know.


And	now	came	sounds	from	farther	out	in	the	bay.	Another	ship,	edging	its
way	through	the	darkness,	another	late	arrival.
The	assassin	glanced	down	at	his	hands	where	they	rested	on	the	rail.	They
felt	like	someone	else’s,	that	polished,	dark-brown	hue	of	his	skin,	the	pale
scars	that	crossed	it	here	and	there—not	his	own,	but	the	victims	of	someone
else’s	will.
He	shook	off	the	sensation.
The	island	city’s	smells	drifted	out	to	him.	The	usual	stench	of	a	harbor:
sewage	warring	with	rot,	brackish	water	of	the	sea	mixing	with	a	pungent	whiff
from	the	sluggish	river	that	emptied	into	the	bay.	His	eyes	focused	again	on	the
dark,	snag-toothed	grin	of	the	harborfront	buildings.	A	few	streets	in,	he	knew,
occupying	one	squalid	corner	amidst	tenement	blocks	and	fish-stalls,	stood	the
Deadhouse.	Unmentioned	and	avoided	by	all	denizens	of	the	city,	and	to	all
outward	appearances	completely	abandoned,	its	yard	overgrown,	its	black,
rough	stones	smothered	in	vines.	No	lights	from	the	gaping	windows	in	the
twin	towers.
If	anyone	can	make	it,	it’s	Fiddler.	The	bastard’s	always	been	charmed.	A
sapper	all	his	life,	it	seems,	with	a	sapper’s	extra	sense.	What	would	he	say	if
he	stood	here	beside	me	right	now?	“Don’t	like	it,	Kal.	Something’s	awry	all
right.	Move	those	hands	of	yours…”
Kalam	frowned,	glanced	back	down	at	his	hands,	willing	them	to	lift	clear
of	the	rail.
Nothing.
He	attempted	to	step	back,	but	his	muscles	refused,	deaf	to	his	command.
Sweat	sprang	out	beneath	his	clothes,	beading	the	backs	of	his	hands.
A	soft	voice	spoke	beside	him.	“There’s	such	irony	in	this,	my	friend.	You
see,	it’s	your	mind	that’s	betrayed	you.	The	formidable,	deadly	mind	of	the
assassin	Kalam	Mekhar.”	Salk	Elan	leaned	on	the	rail	beside	him,	studying	the
city.	“I’ve	admired	you	for	so	long,	you	know.	You’re	a	damned	legend,	the
finest	killer	the	Claw	ever	had—and	lost.	Ah,	and	it’s	that	loss	that	rankles	the
most.	Had	you	the	will	for	it,	Kalam,	you	could	now	be	in	command	of	the
entire	organization—oh,	Topper	might	disagree,	and	I’ll	grant	you,	in	some
ways	he’s	your	superior	by	far.	He	would	have	killed	me	on	the	first	day,	no
matter	how	uncertain	he	was	of	whatever	risk	I	might	have	presented.	Even	so,”
Salk	Elan	continued	after	a	moment,	“knife	to	knife,	you’re	his	better,	friend.
“Another	irony	for	you,	Kalam.	I	was	not	in	Seven	Cities	to	find	you—
indeed,	we	knew	nothing	of	your	presence	there.	Until	I	came	across	a	certain
Red	Blade	who	did,	that	is.	She’d	been	following	you	since	Erhlitan,	before
you	delivered	the	Book	to	Sha’ik—did	you	know	you	led	the	Red	Blades


directly	to	that	witch?	Did	you	know	that	they	succeeded	in	assassinating	her?
That	Red	Blade	would	have	been	here	with	me,	in	fact,	if	not	for	an	unfortunate
incident	in	Aren.	But	I	prefer	working	alone.
“Salk	Elan,	a	name	I	admit	to	being	proud	of.	But	here	and	now,	of	course,
my	vanity	insists	that	you	know	my	true	name,	which	is	Pearl.”	He	paused,
looked	around,	sighed.	“You	threw	me	but	once,	with	that	sly	hint	that	maybe
Quick	Ben	was	hiding	in	your	baggage.	I	almost	panicked	then,	until	I	realized
if	that	were	true,	I’d	already	be	dead—sniffed	out	and	fed	to	the	sharks.
“You	should	never	have	left	the	Claw,	Kalam.	We	don’t	deal	with	rejection
very	well.	The	Empress	wants	you,	you	know,	wants	a	conversation	with	you,
in	fact.	Before	skinning	you	alive,	I	imagine.	Alas,	things	aren’t	so	simple,	are
they?
“And	so,	here	we	are…”
In	his	peripheral	vision,	Kalam	saw	the	man	draw	forth	a	dagger.	“It’s
those	immutable	laws	within	the	Claw,	you	see.	One	in	particular,	which	I’m
sure	you	well	know…”
The	blade	sank	deep	into	Kalam’s	side	with	a	dull,	distant	pain.	Pearl
withdrew	the	weapon.	“Oh,	not	fatal,	just	lots	of	blood.	A	weakening,	if	you
will.	Malaz	City	is	quiet	tonight,	don’t	you	think?	Not	surprising—there’s
something	in	the	air—every	cutpurse,	guttersnipe	and	thug	can	feel	it,	and
they’re	one	and	all	keeping	their	heads	low.	Three	Hands	await	you,	Kalam,
eager	for	the	hunt	to	start.	That	immutable	law,	Kalam…in	the	Claw,	we	deal
with	our	own.”
Hands	gripped	the	assassin.	“You’ll	awaken	once	you	hit	the	water,	friend.
Granted,	it’s	something	of	a	swim,	especially	with	the	armor	you’re	wearing.
And	the	blood	won’t	help—this	bay’s	notorious	for	sharks,	isn’t	it.	But	I’ve
great	confidence	in	you,	Kalam.	I	know	you’ll	make	it	to	dry	land.	That	far,	at
least.	After	that,	well…”
He	felt	himself	being	lifted,	edged	over	the	rail.	He	stared	down	at	the
black	water	below.
“A	damned	shame,”	Pearl	gasped	close	to	his	ear,	“about	the	captain	and
this	crew,	but	I’ve	no	choice,	as	I’m	sure	you	understand.	Farewell,	Kalam
Mekhar.”
The	assassin	struck	the	water	with	a	soft	splash.	Pearl	stared	down	as	the
disturbance	settled.	His	confidence	in	Kalam	wavered.	The	man	was	in	chain
armor,	after	all.	Then	he	shrugged,	drew	forth	a	pair	of	throat-stickers	and
swung	to	face	the	motionless	figures	lying	on	the	main	deck.	“A	good	man’s
work	is	never	done,	alas,”	he	said,	stepping	forward.
The	shape	that	emerged	from	the	shadows	to	face	him	was	huge,	angular,


black-limbed.	A	single	eye	gleamed	from	the	long-snouted	head,	and	hovering
dimly	behind	that	head	was	a	rider,	his	face	a	mockery	of	his	mount’s.
Pearl	stepped	back,	offered	a	smile.	“Ah,	an	opportunity	to	thank	you	for
your	efforts	against	the	Semk.	I	knew	not	where	you	came	from	then,	nor	how
you’ve	come	to	be	here	now,	or	why,	but	please	accept	my	gratitude—”
“Kalam,”	the	rider	whispered.	“He	was	here	but	a	moment	ago.”
Pearl’s	eyes	narrowed.	“Ah,	now	I	understand.	You	weren’t	following	me,
were	you?	No,	of	course	not.	How	silly	of	me!	Well,	to	answer	your	question,
child,	Kalam	has	gone	into	the	city—”
The	demon’s	lunge	interrupted	him.	Pearl	ducked	beneath	the	snapping
jaws—and	directly	into	the	sweeping	foreclaw.	The	impact	threw	the	Claw
twenty	feet,	crashing	him	up	against	a	battened-down	dory.	His	shoulder
dislocated	with	a	stab	of	pain.	Pearl	rolled,	forcing	himself	into	a	sitting
position.	He	watched	the	demon	stalk	toward	him.
“I	see	I’ve	met	my	match,”	Pearl	whispered.	“Very	well.”	He	reached	under
his	shirt.	“Try	this	one,	then.”
The	tiny	bottle	shattered	on	the	deck	between	them.	Smoke	billowed,	began
coalescing.
“The	Kenryll’ah	looks	eager,	wouldn’t	you	say?	Well—”	he	struggled	to
his	feet—“I	think	I’ll	leave	you	two	to	it.	There’s	a	certain	tavern	in	Malaz	City
I’ve	been	dying	to	see.”
He	gestured	and	a	warren	opened,	swept	over	him,	and	when	it	closed,
Pearl	was	gone.
Apt	watched	the	Imperial	demon	acquire	its	form,	a	creature	twice	its
weight,	hulking	and	bestial.
The	child	reached	down	and	patted	Apt’s	lone	shoulder.	“Let’s	be	quick
with	this	one,	shall	we?”
	
A	chorus	of	shudders	and	explosions	of	wood	awoke	the	captain.	He	blinked	in
the	darkness	as	Ragstopper	pitched	wildly	about	him.	Voices	screamed	on	deck.
Groaning,	the	captain	pushed	himself	off	the	bed,	sensing	a	clarity	in	his	mind
that	he’d	not	known	in	months,	a	freedom	of	action	and	thought	that	told
unequivocally	that	Pearl’s	influence	was	gone.
He	clambered	to	his	cabin	door,	limbs	weak	with	disuse,	and	made	his	way
into	the	passage.
Emerging	on	deck,	he	found	himself	in	a	crowd	of	cowering	sailors.	Two
horrific	creatures	were	battling	directly	in	front	of	them,	the	larger	of	the	two
a	mass	of	shredded	flesh,	unable	to	match	its	opponent’s	lightning	speed.	Its


wild	flailing	with	a	massive	double-bladed	axe	had	reduced	the	deck	and	the
rails	to	pulp.	An	earlier	swing	had	chopped	through	the	mast,	and	though	it
remained	upright,	snagged	in	cordage	somewhere	high	above	them,	it	leaned
precariously,	its	weight	canting	the	ship	hard	over.
“Captain!”
“Have	the	lads	drag	the	surviving	dories	clear,	Palet,	and	back	up	astern—
we’ll	lower	’em	from	there.”
“Aye,	sir!”	The	acting	First	Mate	snapped	out	the	commands,	then	swung
back	to	offer	the	captain	a	grin.	“Glad	you’re	back,	Carther—”
“Shut	your	face,	Palet—that’s	Malaz	City	out	there	and	I	drowned	years
ago,	remember?”	He	squinted	at	the	warring	demons.	“Ragstopper’s	not	going
to	survive	this—”
“But	the	loot—”
“To	Hood	with	that!	We	can	always	raise	her—but	we	need	to	be	alive	to
do	it.	Now,	let’s	lend	a	hand	with	those	dories—we’re	taking	on	water	and
going	down	fast.”
“Beru	fend!	The	sea’s	crawling	with	sharks!”
	
Fifty	yards	farther	out,	the	captain	of	the	fast	trader	stood	with	his	First	Mate,
both	of	them	straining	to	make	out	the	source	of	the	commotion	ahead.
“Back	oars,”	the	captain	said.	“Full	stop.”
“Aye,	sir.”
“That	ship’s	going	down.	Assemble	rescue	crews,	lower	the	boats—”
Horse	hooves	clomped	on	the	main	deck	behind	them.	Both	men	turned.
The	First	Mate	stepped	forward:	“You	there!	What	in	Mael’s	name	do	you	think
you’re	doing?	How	did	you	get	that	damned	animal	on	deck?”
The	woman	tightened	the	girth-strap	another	notch,	then	swung	up	into	the
saddle.	“I’m	sorry,”	she	said.	“But	I	cannot	wait.”
Sailors	and	marines	scattered	as	she	drove	the	horse	forward.	The	creature
cleared	the	side	rail	and	leaped	out	into	darkness.	A	loud	splash	followed	a
moment	later.
The	First	Mate	turned	back	to	his	captain,	jaw	hanging.
“Get	Ship’s	Mage	and	a	goat,”	the	captain	snapped.
“Sir?”
“Anyone	brave	and	stupid	enough	to	do	what	she	just	did	has	earned	our
every	assistance.	Have	Ship’s	Mage	clear	a	path	through	the	sharks	and
whatever	else	might	await	her.	Be	quick	about	it!”


Chapter	Twenty-one

Every	throne	is	an	arrow-butt.
KELLANVED
Beneath	the	whirlwind’s	towering	spire	was	a	lower	billowing	of	dust	as	the
massive	army	decamped.	Borne	on	wayward	gusts,	the	ochre	clouds	spread	out
from	the	oasis,	settling	here	and	there	among	the	weathered	folds	of	ruins.	The
air	was	lit	gold	on	all	sides,	as	if	the	desert	had	at	last	unveiled	its	memories	of
wealth	and	glory,	only	to	reveal	them	for	what	they	truly	were.
Sha’ik	stood	on	the	flat	roof	of	a	wooden	watchtower	near	the	palace
concourse,	the	scurrying	efforts	of	an	entire	city	beneath	her	almost	unnoticed
as	she	stared	into	the	opaqueness	to	the	south.	The	young	girl	she	had	adopted
kneeled	close	by,	watching	her	new	mother	with	sharp,	steady	eyes.
The	ladder	below	creaked	incessantly	to	someone’s	labored	ascent,	Sha’ik
slowly	realized,	and	as	she	turned	she	saw	Heboric’s	head	and	shoulders
emerge	through	the	trap.	The	ex-priest	clambered	onto	the	platform	and	laid	an
invisible	hand	on	the	girl’s	head	before	turning	to	squint	at	Sha’ik.
“L’oric’s	the	one	to	watch,”	Heboric	said.	“The	other	two	think	they’re
subtle,	but	they’re	anything	but.”
“L’oric,”	she	murmured,	returning	her	gaze	to	the	south.	“What	is	your
sense	of	him?”
“You’ve	knowledge	that	surpasses	mine,	lass—”
“Nevertheless.”
“I	think	he	senses	the	bargain.”
“Bargain?”
Heboric	moved	to	stand	beside	her	and	leaned	his	tattooed	forearms	on	the
thin	wooden	railing.	“The	one	the	goddess	made	with	you.	The	one	that	proves
that	a	rebirth	did	not	in	truth	occur—”
“Did	it	not,	Heboric?”
“No.	No	child	chooses	to	be	born,	no	child	has	any	say	in	the	matter.	You
had	both.	Sha’ik	has	not	been	reborn,	she	has	been	re-made.	L’oric	may	well


seize	on	this,	believing	it	to	be	a	gap	in	your	armor.”
“He	risks	the	wrath	of	the	goddess,	then.”
“Aye,	and	I	don’t	think	he’s	ignorant	of	that,	lass,	which	is	why	he	needs	to
be	watched.	Carefully.”
They	were	silent	for	a	time,	both	staring	out	into	the	south’s	impenetrable
shroud.	Eventually	Heboric	cleared	his	throat.	“Perhaps,	with	your	new	gifts,
you	can	answer	some	questions.”
“Such	as?”
“When	did	Dryjhna	choose	you?”
“What	do	you	mean?”
“When	did	the	manipulation	begin?	Here	in	Raraku?	Skullcup?	Or	on	a
distant	continent?	When	did	the	goddess	first	cast	her	gaze	upon	you,	lass?”
“She	never	did.”
Heboric	started.	“That	seems—”
“Unlikely?	Yes,	but	it	is	the	truth.	The	journey	was	mine,	and	mine	alone.
You	must	understand,	even	goddesses	cannot	foresee	unexpected	deaths,	those
twists	of	mortality,	decisions	taken,	paths	followed	or	not	followed.	Sha’ik
Elder	had	the	gift	of	prophecy,	but	such	a	gift,	when	given,	is	no	more	than	a
seed.	It	grows	in	the	freedom	of	a	human	soul.	Dryjhna	was	greatly	disturbed
by	Sha’ik’s	visions.	Visions	that	made	no	sense.	A	hint	of	peril,	but	nothing
certain,	nothing	at	all.	Besides,”	she	added	with	a	shrug,	“strategy	and	tactics
are	anathema	to	the	Apocalypse.”
Heboric	grimaced.	“That	doesn’t	bode	well.”
“Wrong.	We	are	free	to	devise	our	own.”
“Even	if	the	goddess	did	not	guide	you,	someone	or	something	did.	Else
Sha’ik	would	never	have	been	given	those	visions.”
“Now	you	speak	of	fate.	Argue	that	with	your	fellow	scholars,	Heboric.
Not	every	mystery	can	be	unravelled,	much	as	you	believe	otherwise.	Sorry	if
that	pains	you…”
“Not	half	as	sorry	as	I	am.	But	it	occurs	to	me	that	even	as	mortals	are	but
pieces	on	a	gameboard,	so	too	are	the	gods.”
“	‘Elemental	forces	in	opposition,’	”	she	said,	smiling.
Heboric’s	brows	rose,	then	he	scowled.	“A	quote.	A	familiar	one—”
“It	should	be.	It’s	carved	into	the	Imperial	Gate	in	Unta,	after	all.
Kellanved’s	own	words,	as	a	means	to	justify	the	balance	of	destruction	with
creation—the	expansion	of	the	Empire,	in	all	its	hungry	glory.”
“Hood’s	breath!”	the	old	man	hissed.
“Have	I	sent	your	mind	spinning	in	other	directions,	Heboric?”
“Aye.”


“Well,	save	your	breath.	The	subject	of	your	next	treatise—no	doubt	that
handful	of	obscure	old	fools	will	dance	in	excitement.”
“Old	fools?”
“Your	fellow	scholars.	Your	readers,	Heboric.”
“Ah.”
They	were	silent	again	for	some	time,	until	the	ex-priest	spoke	once	more.
“What	will	you	do?”	he	asked	softly.
“With	what	has	happened	out	there?”
“With	what’s	still	happening.	Korbolo	Dom	reaping	senseless	slaughter	in
your	name—”
“In	the	name	of	the	goddess,”	she	corrected,	hearing	the	brittle	anger	in	her
own	voice.	She’d	already	exchanged	sharp	words	with	Leoman	on	this	subject.
“Word	of	the	‘rebirth’	has	probably	reached	him—”
“No,	it	has	not.	I	have	sealed	Raraku,	Heboric.	The	storm	raised	around	us
can	scour	flesh	from	bones.	Not	even	a	T’lan	Imass	could	survive	the	passage.”
“Yet	you	have	made	an	announcement,”	the	old	man	said.	“The
Whirlwind.”
“Which	has	raised	in	Korbolo	Dom	doubts.	And	fears.	He	is	very	eager	to
complete	the	task	he’s	chosen.	He’s	still	unfettered,	and	so	is	free	to	answer	his
obsessions—”
“And	so,	what	will	you	do?	Aye,	we	can	march,	but	it	will	take	months	to
reach	the	Aren	Plain,	and	by	then	Korbolo	will	have	given	Tavore	all	the
justification	she	needs	to	deliver	a	ruthless	punishment.	The	rebellion	was
bloody,	but	your	sister	will	make	what’s	already	happened	seem	like	a	scratch
on	the	backside.”
“You	assume	she	is	my	superior,	Heboric,	don’t	you?	In	tactics—”
“There’s	precedent	for	how	far	your	sister	will	go	in	cruelty,	lass,”	he
growled.	“Witness	you	standing	here…”
“And	there	lies	my	greatest	advantage,	old	man.	Tavore	believes	she	will
face	a	desert	witch	whom	she	has	never	met.	Ignorance	will	not	sway	her
contempt	for	such	a	creature.	Yet	I	am	not	ignorant	of	my	enemy…”
A	subtle	change	had	come	to	the	distant	roar	of	the	Whirlwind	towering
behind	them.	Sha’ik	smiled.	Heboric’s	sense	of	that	change	came	moments
later.	He	turned.	“What	is	happening?”
“It	will	not	take	us	months	to	reach	Aren,	Heboric.	Have	you	not	wondered
what	the	Whirlwind	is?”
The	ex-priest’s	blind	eyes	widened	as	he	faced	that	pillar	of	dust	and	wind.
Sha’ik	wondered	how	the	man’s	preternatural	senses	perceived	the
phenomenon,	but	his	next	words	made	it	clear	that	whatever	he	saw	was	true.


“By	the	gods,	it’s	toppling!”
“Dryjhna’s	Warren,	Heboric,	our	whirling	road	to	the	south.”
“Will	it	take	us	there	in	time,	Fel—Sha’ik?	In	time	to	stop	Korbolo	Dom’s
madness?”
She	did	not	answer,	for	it	was	already	too	late.
	
As	Duiker	rode	in	through	the	gates,	gauntleted	hands	reached	out	to	grasp	the
halter	and	reins,	dragging	his	mare	to	a	stuttering	halt.	A	smaller	hand	closed
on	the	historian’s	wrist,	tugging	with	something	like	desperation.	He	looked
down,	and	saw	in	Nether ’s	face	a	sickly	dread	that	poured	ice	into	his	veins.
“To	the	tower,”	she	pleaded.	“Quickly!”
A	strange	murmuring	was	building	from	Aren’s	walls,	a	sound	of	darkness
that	filled	the	dusty	air.	Sliding	down	from	the	saddle,	Duiker	felt	his	heart
begin	to	thunder.	Nether ’s	hand	pulled	him	through	the	crowd	of	Garrison
Guards	and	refugees.	He	felt	other	hands	reach	out,	touch	lightly	as	if	seeking
a	blessing	or	conferring	one,	then	slip	past.
An	arched	doorway	suddenly	yawned	before	him,	leading	to	a	gloomy
landing	with	stone	steps	rising	along	the	inside	of	the	tower	wall.	The	sound
from	the	city	walls	was	building	to	a	roar,	a	wordless	cry	of	outrage,	horror
and	anguish.	It	echoed	with	mad	intent	within	the	tower,	and	rose	in	timbre	with
each	step	that	the	warlock	and	the	historian	climbed.
On	the	middle	landing	she	swept	him	past	the	T-shaped	arrow	slits,	edging
them	both	behind	the	pair	of	bowmen	pressed	against	the	narrow	windows,
then	on,	up	the	worn	stairs.	Neither	archer	even	so	much	as	noticed	them.
As	they	neared	the	shaft	of	bright	light	directly	beneath	the	roof	hatch,	a
quavering	voice	reached	down.
“There’s	too	many…I	can	do	nothing,	no,	the	gods	forgive	me—too	many,
too	many…”
Nether	ascended	the	shaft	of	light,	Duiker	following.	They	emerged	onto
the	broad	platform.	Three	figures	stood	at	the	outer	wall.	The	one	on	the	left
Duiker	recognized	as	Mallick	Rel—the	adviser	he	had	last	seen	in	Hissar—his
silks	billowing	in	the	hot	wind.	The	man	beside	him	was	probably	High	Fist
Pormqual,	tall,	wiry,	slope-shouldered	and	wearing	clothes	that	would	beggar
a	king,	his	pale	hands	skittering	across	the	top	of	the	battlement	like	trapped
birds.	To	his	right	stood	a	soldier	in	functional	armor,	a	torc	on	his	left	arm
denoting	his	commander ’s	rank.	He	held	his	burly	arms	wrapped	around
himself,	as	if	trying	to	crush	his	own	bones.	The	stress	bound	within	him
seemed	about	to	explode.


Near	the	hatch	sat	Nil,	a	disarrayed	jumble	of	limbs.	The	young	warlock
swung	a	gray,	aged	face	toward	Duiker.	Nether	swept	down	to	wrap	her	brother
in	a	fierce	hug	that	she	seemed	unwilling	or	unable	to	relax.
The	soldiers	lining	the	walls	to	either	side	were	screaming	now,	a	sound
that	cut	the	air	like	Hood’s	own	scythe.
The	historian	went	to	the	wall	beside	the	commander.	Duiker ’s	hands
reached	out	to	grip	the	sun-baked	stone	of	the	merlon.	Following	the	rapt	gaze
of	the	others,	he	could	barely	draw	breath.	Panic	surged	through	him	as	his
eyes	took	in	the	scene	on	the	slope	of	the	closest	burial	mound.
Coltaine.
Above	a	contracting	mass	of	less	than	four	hundred	soldiers,	three
standards	waved:	the	Seventh’s;	the	polished,	articulated	dog	skeleton	of	the
Foolish	Dog	Clan;	the	Crow’s	black	wings	surmounting	a	bronze	disc	that
flashed	in	the	sunlight.	Defiant	and	proud,	the	bearers	continued	to	hold	them
high.
On	all	sides,	pressing	in	with	bestial	frenzy,	were	Korbolo	Dom’s
thousands,	a	mass	of	footsoldiers	devoid	of	all	discipline,	interested	only	in
slaughter.	Mounted	companies	rode	past	them	along	both	visible	edges,
surging	into	the	gap	between	the	city’s	walls	and	the	mound—though	not
riding	close	enough	to	come	within	bow	range	from	Aren’s	archers.	Korbolo
Dom’s	own	guard	and,	no	doubt,	the	renegade	Fist	himself	had	moved	into
position	atop	the	mound	behind	the	last	one,	and	a	platform	was	being	raised,
as	if	to	ensure	a	clear	view	of	the	events	playing	out	on	the	nearer	barrow.
The	distance	was	not	enough	to	grant	mercy	to	the	witnesses	on	the	tower
or	along	the	city’s	wall.	Duiker	saw	Coltaine	there,	amidst	a	knot	of	Mincer ’s
engineers	and	a	handful	of	Lull’s	marines,	his	round	shield	a	shattered	mess	on
his	left	arm,	his	lone	long-knife	snapped	to	the	length	of	a	short	sword	in	his
right	hand,	his	feather	cloak	glistening	as	if	brushed	with	tar.	The	historian	saw
Commander	Bult,	guiding	the	retreat	toward	the	hill’s	summit.	Cattle-dogs
surged	and	leaped	around	the	Wickan	veteran	like	a	frantic	bodyguard,	even	as
arrows	swept	through	them	in	waves.	Among	the	creatures	one	stood	out,
huge,	seemingly	indomitable,	pin-cushioned	with	arrows,	yet	fighting	on.
The	horses	were	gone.	The	Weasel	Clan	was	gone.	The	Foolish	Dog
warriors	were	but	a	score	in	number,	surrounding	half	a	dozen	old	men	and
horsewives—the	very	last	of	a	dwindled,	cut-away	heart.	Of	the	Crow,	it	was
clear	that	Coltaine	and	Bult	were	the	last.
Soldiers	of	the	Seventh,	few	with	any	armor	left,	held	themselves	in	a	solid
ring	around	the	others.	Many	of	them	no	longer	raised	weapons,	yet	stood	their
ground	even	as	they	were	cut	to	pieces.	No	quarter	was	given,	every	soldier


who	fell	with	wounds	was	summarily	butchered—their	helmets	torn	off,	their
forearms	shattered	as	they	sought	to	ward	off	the	attacks,	their	skulls
crumpling	to	multiple	blows.
The	stone	beneath	Duiker ’s	hands	had	gone	slick,	sticky.	Iron	lances	of
pain	shot	up	his	arms.	He	barely	noticed.
With	a	wrenching	effort,	the	historian	pulled	back,	reaching	out	red	fingers
to	grip	Pormqual—
The	garrison	commander	blocked	him,	held	him	back.
The	High	Fist	saw	Duiker,	flinched	away.	“You	do	not	understand!”	he
screamed.	“I	cannot	save	them!	Too	many!	Too	many!”
“You	can,	you	bastard!	A	sortie	can	drive	right	to	that	mound—a	cordon,
damn	you!”
“No!	We’ll	be	crushed!	I	must	not!”
The	commander ’s	low	growl	reached	Duiker.	“You’re	right,	Historian.	But
he	won’t	do	it.	The	High	Fist	won’t	let	us	save	them—”
Duiker	struggled	to	free	himself	of	the	man’s	grip	but	was	pushed	back.
“For	Hood’s	sake!”	the	commander	snapped.	“We’ve	tried—we’ve	all	tried
—”
Mallick	Rel	stepped	close,	said	softly,	“My	heart	weeps,	Historian.	The
High	Fist	cannot	be	swayed—”
“This	is	murder!”
“For	which	Korbolo	Dom	shall	pay,	and	dearly.”
Duiker	spun	around,	lurched	back	to	the	wall.
They	were	dying.	There,	almost	within	reach—no,	within	a	soldier’s	reach.
Anguish	closed	a	black	fist	in	the	historian’s	gut.	I	cannot	watch.
Yet	I	must.
He	saw	fewer	than	a	hundred	soldiers	still	upright,	but	it	had	become	a
slaughter—the	only	battle	that	remained	was	among	Korbolo’s	forces	for	the
chance	of	delivering	fatal	blows	and	raising	grisly	trophies	with	triumphant
shrieks.	The	Seventh	were	falling,	and	falling,	using	naught	but	flesh	and	bone
to	shield	their	leaders—the	ones	who	had	led	them	across	a	continent,	to	die
now,	almost	within	the	shadow	of	Aren’s	high	walls.
And	on	those	walls	was	ranged	an	army,	ten	thousand	fellow	soldiers	to
witness	this,	the	greatest	crime	ever	committed	by	a	Malazan	High	Fist.
How	Coltaine	had	managed	to	get	this	far	was	beyond	Duiker ’s	ability	to
comprehend.	He	was	seeing	the	end	of	a	battle	that	must	have	run	without
cessation	for	days—a	battle	that	had	ensured	the	survival	of	the	refugees—and
this	is	why	that	dust	cloud	was	so	slow	to	approach.
The	last	of	the	Seventh	vanished	beneath	swarming	bodies.	Bult	stood	with


his	back	to	the	standard	bearer,	a	Dhobri	tulwar	in	each	hand.	A	mob	closed	on
him	and	drove	lances	into	the	veteran,	sticking	him	as	they	would	a	cornered
boar.	Even	then	he	tried	to	rise	up,	slashing	out	with	a	tulwar	to	chop	into	the
leg	of	a	man—who	reeled	back	howling.	But	the	lances	stabbed	deep,	pushed
the	Wickan	back,	pinned	him	to	the	ground.	Blades	flashed	down	on	him,
hacking	him	to	death.
The	standard	bearer	left	his	position—the	standard	itself	propped	up
between	corpses—and	leaped	forward	in	a	desperate	effort	to	reach	his
commander.	A	blade	neatly	decapitated	him,	sending	his	head	toppling	back	to
join	the	bloody	jumble	at	the	standard’s	base,	and	thus	did	Corporal	List	die,
having	experienced	countless	mock	deaths	all	those	months	ago	at	Hissar.
The	Foolish	Dog’s	position	vanished	beneath	a	press	of	bodies,	the
standard	toppling	moments	later.	Bloody	scalps	were	lifted	and	waved	about,
the	trophies	spraying	red	rain.
Surrounded	by	the	last	of	the	engineers	and	marines,	Coltaine	fought	on.
His	defiance	lasted	but	a	moment	longer	before	Korbolo	Dom’s	warriors
killed	the	last	defender,	then	swallowed	up	Coltaine	himself,	burying	him	in
their	mindless	frenzy.
A	huge	arrow-studded	cattle-dog	darted	to	where	Coltaine	had	gone	down,
but	then	a	lance	speared	the	beast,	raising	it	high.	It	writhed	as	it	slid	down	the
shaft,	and	even	then	the	creature	delivered	one	final	death	to	the	enemy
gripping	the	weapon,	by	tearing	out	the	soldier ’s	throat.
Then	it	too	was	gone.
The	Crow	standard	wavered,	leaned	to	one	side,	then	pitched	down,
vanishing	in	the	press.
Duiker	stood	unmoving,	disbelieving.
Coltaine.
A	high-pitched	wail	rose	behind	the	historian.	He	slowly	turned.	Nether
still	held	Nil	as	if	he	were	a	babe,	but	her	head	was	tilted	back,	raised
heavenward,	her	eyes	wide.
A	shadow	swept	over	them.
Crows.
And	to	Sormo	the	Elder	warlock,	there	on	the	wall	of	Unta,	there	came
eleven	crows—eleven—to	take	the	great	man’s	soul,	for	no	single	creature	could
hold	it	all.	Eleven.
The	sky	above	Aren	was	filled	with	crows,	a	black	sea	of	wings,	closing
from	all	sides.
Nether ’s	wail	grew	louder	and	louder	still,	as	if	her	own	soul	was	being
ripped	out	through	her	throat.


Shock	jolted	through	Duiker.	It’s	not	done—it’s	not	over—He	spun	round,
saw	the	cross	being	raised,	saw	the	still	living	man	nailed	to	it.
“They’ll	not	free	him!”	Nether	screamed.	She	was	suddenly	at	his	side	and
staring	out	at	the	barrow.	She	tore	at	her	hair,	clawed	at	her	own	scalp,	until
blood	streamed	down	her	face.	Duiker	grasped	her	wrists—so	thin,	so
childlike	in	his	hands—and	pulled	them	away	before	she	could	reach	her	own
eyes.
Kamist	Reloe	stood	on	the	platform,	Korbolo	Dom	at	his	side.	Sorcery
blossomed—a	virulent,	wild	wave	that	surged	up	and	crashed	against	the
approaching	crows.	Black	shapes	spun	and	tumbled	from	the	sky—
“No!”	Nether	shrieked,	writhing	in	Duiker ’s	arms,	seeking	to	fling	herself
over	the	wall.
The	cloud	of	crows	scattered,	reformed,	sought	to	approach	once	again.
Kamist	Reloe	obliterated	hundreds	more.
“Release	his	soul!	From	the	flesh!	Release	it!”
Beside	them,	the	garrison	commander	turned	and	called	to	one	of	his	aides
in	a	voice	of	ice,	“Get	me	Squint,	Corporal.	Now!”
The	aide	did	not	bother	darting	down	the	stairs—he	simply	went	to	the	far
wall,	leaned	out	and	screamed,	“Squint!	Up	here,	damn	you!”
Another	wave	of	sorcery	swept	more	crows	from	the	sky.	In	silence,	they
regrouped	once	again.
The	roar	from	Aren’s	walls	had	stilled.	Now	only	silence	held	the	air.
Nether	had	collapsed	against	the	historian,	a	child	in	his	arms.	Duiker
could	see	Nil	curled	and	motionless	on	the	platform	near	the	hatch—either
unconscious	or	dead.	He	had	wet	himself,	the	puddle	spreading	out	around	him.
Boots	thumped	on	the	stairs.
The	aide	said	to	the	commander,	“He’s	been	helping	the	refugees,	sir.	I
don’t	think	he	has	any	idea	what’s	going	on…”
Duiker	turned	again	to	look	out	at	the	lone	figure	nailed	to	the	cross.	He
still	lived—they	would	not	let	him	die,	would	not	free	his	soul,	and	Kamist
Reloe	knew	precisely	what	he	was	doing,	knew	the	full	horror	of	his	crime,	as
he	methodically	destroyed	the	vessels	for	that	soul.	On	all	sides,	screaming
warriors	pressed	close,	seething	on	the	barrow	like	insects.
Objects	started	striking	the	figure	on	the	cross,	leaving	red	stains.	Pieces	of
flesh,	gods—pieces	of	flesh—what’s	left	of	the	army—this	was	a	level	of	cruelty
that	left	Duiker	cowering	inside.
“Over	here,	Squint!”	he	heard	the	commander	growl.	A	figure	pushed	to
Duiker ’s	side,	short,	squat,	gray-haired.	His	eyes,	buried	in	a	nest	of	wrinkles,
were	fixed	on	that	distant	figure.	“Mercy,”	he	whispered.


“Well?”	the	commander	demanded.
“That’s	half	a	thousand	paces,	Blistig—”
“I	know.”
“Might	take	more	than	one	shot,	sir.”
“Then	get	started,	damn	you.”
The	old	soldier,	wearing	a	uniform	that	looked	as	if	it	had	not	been	washed
or	repaired	in	decades,	unslung	the	longbow	from	one	shoulder.	He	gathered
the	string,	stepped	into	the	bow’s	plane,	bent	it	hard	over	one	thigh.	His	limbs
shook	as	he	edged	the	string’s	loop	into	its	niche.	Then	he	straightened	up	and
studied	the	arrows	in	the	quiver	strapped	to	his	hip.
Another	wave	of	sorcery	struck	the	crows.
After	a	long	moment,	Squint	selected	an	arrow.	“I’ll	try	for	the	chest.
Biggest	target,	sir,	and	enough	good	hits	and	that’ll	do	the	poor	soul.”
“Another	word,	Squint,”	Blistig	whispered,	“and	I’ll	have	your	tongue.”
The	soldier	nocked	the	arrow.	“Clear	me	some	space,	then.”
Nether	was	limp	in	Duiker ’s	arms	as	he	dragged	her	back	a	step.
The	man’s	bow,	even	strung,	was	as	tall	as	he	was.	His	forearms	as	he	drew
the	string	back	were	like	hemp	ropes,	bundled	and	twisted	and	taut.	The	string
brushed	his	stubbled	jawline	as	he	completed	the	draw,	then	locked	it	in	place
with	a	slow,	even	exhalation.
Duiker	saw	the	man	tremble	suddenly,	and	his	eyes	widened,	revealing
themselves	for	the	first	time—black,	small	marbles	in	red-streaked	nests.
Raw	fear	edged	Blistig’s	voice.	“Squint—”
“That’s	got	to	be	Coltaine,	sir!”	the	old	man	gasped.	“You	want	me	to	kill
Coltaine—”
“Squint!”
Nether	raised	her	head	and	reached	out	one	bloody	hand	in	supplication.
“Release	him.	Please.”
The	old	man	studied	her	a	moment.	Tears	streamed	down	his	face.	The
trembling	stilled—the	bow	itself	had	not	moved	an	inch.
“Hood’s	breath!”	Duiker	hissed.	He’s	weeping.	He	can’t	aim—the	bastard
can’t	aim—
The	bowstring	thrummed.	The	long	shaft	cut	through	the	sky.
“Oh,	gods!”	Squint	moaned.	“Too	high—too	high!”
It	rose,	swept	through	the	massed	crows	untouched	and	unwavering,	began
arcing	down.
Duiker	could	have	sworn	that	Coltaine	looked	up	then,	lifted	his	gaze	to
greet	that	gift,	as	the	iron	head	impacted	his	forehead,	shattered	the	bone,	sank
deep	into	his	brain	and	killed	him	instantly.	His	head	snapped	back	between	the


spars	of	wood,	then	the	arrow	was	through.
The	warriors	on	the	barrow’s	slopes	flinched	back.
The	crows	shook	the	air	with	their	eerie	cries	and	plunged	down	toward
the	sagging	figure	on	the	cross,	sweeping	over	the	warriors	crowding	the
slopes.	The	sorcery	that	battered	at	them	was	shunted	aside,	scattered	by
whatever	force—Coltaine’s	soul?—now	rose	to	join	the	birds.
The	cloud	descended	on	Coltaine,	swallowing	him	entire	and	covering	the
cross	itself—at	that	distance	they	were	to	Duiker	like	flies	swarming	a	piece	of
flesh.
And	when	they	rose,	exploding	skyward,	the	warleader	of	the	Crow	Clan
was	gone.
Duiker	staggered,	leaned	hard	against	the	stone	wall.	Nether	slipped	down
through	his	motionless	arms,	her	blood-matted	hair	hiding	her	face	as	she
curled	around	his	feet.
“I	killed	him,”	Squint	moaned.	“I	killed	Coltaine.	Who	took	that	man’s	life?
A	broken	old	soldier	of	the	High	Fist’s	army—he	killed	Coltaine…Oh,	Beru,
have	mercy	on	my	soul…”
Duiker	wrapped	the	old	man	in	his	arms	and	held	him	fiercely.	The	bow
clattered	on	the	platform’s	wooden	slats.	The	historian	felt	the	man	crumpling
against	him	as	if	his	bones	had	turned	to	dust,	as	if	centuries	stole	into	him	with
each	ragged	breath.
Commander	Blistig	gripped	the	bowman	by	the	back	of	the	collar	and
yanked	him	upright.	“Before	the	day’s	through,	you	bastard,”	he	hissed,	“ten
thousand	soldiers	will	be	voicing	your	name.”	The	words	shook.	“Like	a
prayer,	Squint,	like	a	Hood-damned	prayer.”
The	historian	squeezed	his	eyes	shut.	It	had	become	a	day	to	hold	in	his
arms	broken	figures.
But	who	will	hold	me?
Duiker	opened	his	eyes,	raised	his	head.	High	Fist	Pormqual’s	mouth	was
moving,	as	if	in	a	silent	plea	for	forgiveness.	Shock	was	written	on	the	man’s
thin,	oiled	face	and,	as	he	met	the	historian’s	gaze,	a	flash	of	raw	fear.
Out	on	the	barrow	Korbolo	Dom’s	army	was	stirring,	like	reeds	in	eddies,
a	restless,	meaningless	motion.	The	aftermath	was	now	upon	them.	Voices
rose,	wordless	cries,	but	they	were	too	few	to	break	the	dreadful	silence	and	its
growing	power.
The	crows	were	gone,	the	crossed	spars	of	wood	stood	empty,	rising
above	the	masses	with	their	blood-streaked	shafts.
Overhead,	the	sky	had	begun	to	die.
Duiker ’s	gaze	returned	to	Pormqual.	The	High	Fist	seemed	to	shrink	into


Mallick	Rel’s	shadow.	He	shook	his	head	as	if	to	deny	the	day.
Thrice	denied,	High	Fist.
Coltaine	is	dead.	They	are	all	dead.


Chapter	Twenty-two

I	saw	the	sun’s	bolt
arc	an	unerring	path
to	the	man’s	forehead.
As	it	struck,	the	crows
converged	like	night
drawing	breath.
DOG	CHAIN
SEGLORA
Faint	ripples	licked	the	garbage-studded	mud	beneath	the	docks.	Night	insects
danced	just	beyond	the	water ’s	reach,	and	the	bank	itself	seethed	in	the	egglaying	frenzy	of	some	kind	of	eels.	In	their	thousands,	black	and	gleaming,	the
small	creatures	writhed	beneath	the	dancing	insects.	This	silent	breaching	of
the	harbor ’s	shore	had	for	generations	passed	almost	unnoticed	by	human	eyes
—a	mercy	granted	only	because	the	eels	were	wholly	unpalatable.
From	the	darkness	beyond	came	the	sound	of	cascading	water.	The	ripples
that	reached	shore	from	that	commotion	were	larger,	more	agitated,	the	only
indication	that	a	stranger	had	arrived	to	disturb	the	scene.
Kalam	stumbled	ashore,	collapsing	onto	mud	that	swarmed	beneath	him.
Warm	blood	still	leaked	between	the	fingers	of	his	right	hand	where	it	pressed
against	the	knife	wound.	The	assassin	wore	no	shirt,	and	his	chain	armor	was
even	now	settling	somewhere	in	the	mud	bottom	of	Malaz	Bay	behind	him,
leaving	him	with	only	buckskin	leggings	and	moccasins.
In	clambering	out	of	the	armor	during	his	sudden	plunge	into	the	deep,	he
had	been	forced	to	pull	off	his	belt	and	knife	harness.	In	his	desperate	need	to
return	to	the	surface,	to	draw	air	into	his	lungs,	he’d	let	everything	slip	from
his	grasp.
Leaving	him	now	unarmed.
Somewhere	out	in	the	bay	a	ship	was	being	torn	apart,	the	savage	noises
drifting	across	the	water.	Kalam	wondered	at	that,	but	only	briefly.	He	had


other	things	on	his	mind.
Faint	nips	told	him	that	the	eels	were	resenting	his	intrusion.	Struggling	to
slow	his	breathing,	he	squirmed	farther	up	the	slimy	bank.	Broken	crockery
dug	into	his	flesh	as	he	made	his	way	onto	the	first	of	the	stone	breakwaters.	He
rolled	onto	his	back	and	stared	up	at	the	seaweed-bearded	underside	of	the	pier.
A	moment	later	he	closed	his	eyes,	began	concentrating.
The	bleeding	in	his	side	slowed	to	a	thin	trickle,	then	ceased.
A	few	minutes	later	he	sat	up	and	began	pulling	off	the	eels	that	clung	like
leeches,	flinging	them	out	into	the	darkness	where	he	could	hear	the	skittering
of	the	harbor ’s	rats.	The	creatures	were	closing	in,	and	the	assassin	had	heard
enough	whispered	tales	to	know	he	was	anything	but	safe	from	the	fearless
hordes	in	this	underworld.
Kalam	could	wait	no	longer.	He	pushed	himself	up	into	a	crouch,	eyeing
the	ragged	piles	that	rose	beyond	the	breakwater.	If	the	tide	had	been	in,	the
massive	bronze	rings	bolted	three-quarters	of	the	way	up	those	wooden	boles
would	have	been	within	reach.	Black	pitch	coated	the	piles	except	where	ships
had	been	thrown	against	them,	leaving	gaping	dents	of	raw,	water-soaked
wood.
Only	one	way	up,	then…
The	assassin	made	his	way	along	the	base	of	the	barrier	until	he	stood
opposite	a	merchant	trader.	The	wide-bellied	ship	lay	canted	on	its	side	in	the
mud.	A	thick	hemp	rope	stretched	from	its	bow	to	one	of	the	brass	rings	high
on	the	pile.
Under	normal	circumstances	the	climb	would	have	been	a	simple	one,	but
even	with	the	inner	discipline	that	was	part	of	a	Claw’s	training,	Kalam	could
not	prevent	fresh	blood	welling	from	the	wound	in	his	side	as	he	made	his	way
up	the	rope.	He	felt	himself	weakening	as	he	worked	his	way	closer	to	the	ring,
and	when	he	reached	it	he	paused,	limbs	shaking,	while	he	sought	to	recover
his	strength.
There	had	been	no	time	for	thought	since	Salk	Elan	had	pitched	him	over
the	side,	and	none	now.	Cursing	his	own	stupidity	was	a	waste	of	time.	Killers
awaited	him	in	Malaz	City’s	dark,	narrow	streets	and	alleys.	His	next	few	hours
would,	in	all	likelihood,	be	his	last	this	side	of	Hood’s	Gates.
Kalam	had	no	intention	of	being	easy	prey.
Crouched	against	the	huge	ring,	he	worked	to	slow	his	breathing	once
more,	to	still	the	seep	of	blood	from	his	side	and	the	countless	leech-wounds.
Eyes	on	the	warehouse	roofs	with	sorcery-enhanced	vision,	and	I’ve	not
even	a	shirt	to	hide	my	body’s	heat.	They	know	I’m	wounded,	a	challenge	to	the
higher	disciplines—I	doubt	even	Surly	in	her	prime	could	manage	a	cooling	of


flesh	in	these	straits.	Can	I?
Once	more	he	closed	his	eyes.	Draw	the	blood	from	the	surface,	draw	it
down	to	hide	within	muscle,	close	to	bone.	Every	breath	must	be	ice,	every
touch	upon	cobble	and	stone	a	matching	of	temperature.	No	residue	in	passage,
no	bloom	in	movement.	What	will	they	expect	of	a	wounded	man?
Not	this.
He	opened	his	eyes,	released	one	hand	from	the	ring	and	pressed	his
forearm	against	the	pitted	metal.	It	felt	warm.
Time	to	move.
The	top	of	the	pile	was	within	easy	reach.	Kalam	straightened,	slowly
pulling	himself	onto	the	guano-crusted	surface.	Front	Street	stretched	out
before	him.	Cargo	carts	crowded	the	locked	warehouse	doors	facing	onto	the
street,	the	nearest	one	less	than	twenty	paces	away.
To	run	would	be	to	invite	death,	because	his	body	could	not	adjust	to
changes	in	temperature	fast	enough	and	the	bloom	would	be	unmissable.
One	of	those	eels	has	crawled	too	far,	and	is	about	to	crawl	farther	still.
Flat	on	his	belly,	Kalam	edged	forward	onto	the	damp	cobblestones,	his	face
against	them	as	he	sent	his	breath	down	beneath	him.
Sorcery	makes	a	hunter	lazy,	tuned	only	to	what	they	expect	will	be	obvious,
given	their	enhanced	senses.	They	forget	the	game	of	shadows,	the	play	of
darkness,	the	most	subtle	telltale	signs…I	hope.
He	could	not	look	up,	but	he	knew	that	he	was	in	truth	completely	exposed,
like	a	worm	crossing	a	flagstone	path.	A	part	of	his	mind	threatened	to	shriek
its	panic,	but	the	assassin	crushed	it	down.	Higher	discipline	was	a	ruthless
master—of	his	own	mind,	his	own	body,	his	own	soul.
His	greatest	dread	was	a	break	in	the	overcast	sky	above	the	city.	The	moon
had	become	his	enemy,	and	should	it	awaken,	even	the	laziest	of	watchers
could	not	fail	to	see	the	shadow	Kalam	would	throw	across	the	cobbles.
Minutes	passed	as	he	slid	his	agonizingly	slow	way	across	the	street.	The
city	beyond	was	silent,	unnaturally	so.	A	hunters’	maze,	prepared	for	him
should	he	manage	to	reach	it.	A	thought	slipped	through—I’ve	been	spotted
already,	but	why	spoil	the	game?	This	hunt’s	to	be	a	protracted	pleasure,
something	to	satisfy	the	brotherhood’s	thirst	for	vengeance.	After	all,	why
prepare	a	maze	if	you	kill	your	victim	before	he	can	even	reach	it?
The	bitter	logic	of	that	was	like	a	hot	dagger	in	his	chest,	threatening	to
shatter	his	camouflage	more	thoroughly	than	anything	else	could.	Yet	he
managed	to	slow	his	rise	from	the	street,	drawing	and	holding	his	breath
before	looking	up.
He	was	beneath	the	cart,	the	top	of	his	head	brushing	the	flatbed’s


underside.
He	paused.	They	were	expecting	a	contest	of	subtlety,	but	sleight	of	hand
was	only	one	of	Kalam’s	talents.	Always	an	advantage,	those	other,	unexpected
ones…The	assassin	slipped	forward,	cleared	the	first	wagon,	then	the	next	three
before	coming	to	the	warehouse	doors.
The	cargo	entrance	was	of	course	huge,	two	sliding	palisade-like	panels,
now	chained	together	with	a	massive	padlock.	To	one	side	of	them,	however,
was	a	smaller	side	door,	also	padlocked.
Kalam	darted	to	it	and	flattened	himself	against	the	weathered	wood.	Both
hands	closed	on	the	padlock.
There	was	nothing	subtle	in	the	brute	strength	the	assassin	possessed.
While	the	padlock	itself	resisted	the	twisting	force	he	delivered,	the	fittings	that
held	it	could	not.	His	body	pressing	against	the	lock	and	latch	muffled	the
splintering	sounds.
Lock	and	fittings	came	away	in	his	hands.	Cradling	them,	Kalam	reached
out	and	pulled	the	door	back	just	enough	to	let	him	slip	through	into	the
darkness	beyond.
A	rapid	search	through	the	main	chamber	led	him	to	a	large	tool	rack.	He
collected	a	pair	of	pick-tongs,	a	hatchet,	a	burlap	sack	of	cloth-tacks,	and	a
barely	serviceable	work-knife,	its	tip	broken	and	its	edge	heavily	nicked.	He
found	a	blacksmith’s	leather	workshirt	and	slipped	it	on.	In	the	backroom,	he
discovered	a	door	that	opened	onto	the	alley	behind	the	warehouse.
The	Deadhouse,	he	judged,	was	about	six	streets	away.	But	Salk	Elan	knows
—and	they’ll	be	waiting	for	me.	I’d	have	to	be	an	idiot	to	make	straight	for	it—
and	they	know	that,	as	well.
Slipping	his	various	makeshift	weapons	into	the	shirt’s	tool-loops,	Kalam
unlatched	the	door,	edged	it	open	a	crack	and	peered	out.	Seeing	no	movement,
he	pushed	it	open	a	few	inches	more,	scanning	the	nearest	rooftops,	then	the
sky.
No	one,	and	the	clouds	were	a	solid	cloak.	Faint	light	bled	from	a	few
shuttered	windows,	which	had	the	effect	of	deepening	the	gloom	everywhere
else.	Somewhere	in	the	distance	a	dog	barked.
He	stepped	outside	and	padded	down	one	edge	of	the	crate-littered	alley.
A	pool	of	deeper	darkness	occupied	an	alcove	near	the	alley	mouth	ahead.
Kalam’s	eyes	found	it,	locked	on	it.	He	pulled	out	his	knife	and	hatchet	and
without	pause	swept	straight	for	it.
The	darkness	poured	its	sorcery	over	him	as	he	plunged	into	the	alcove,
his	attack	so	sudden,	so	unexpected,	that	the	two	figures	within	had	no	time	to
draw	weapons.	The	brutal	blade	of	the	work-knife	tore	out	one	man’s	throat.


The	hatchet	chopped	down	to	crush	a	clavicle	and	snap	ribs.	He	released	that
weapon	and	slapped	the	palm	of	his	left	hand	over	the	man’s	mouth	as	he	drove
the	head	back	to	crunch	against	the	wall.	The	other	Claw—a	woman—slid
down	with	a	wet	gurgling	sound.
A	moment	later	Kalam	was	searching	their	bodies,	collecting	throwing
stars,	throwing	knives,	two	braces	of	short,	wide-bladed	stickers,	a	garrotte
and	the	most	cherished	prize	of	all,	a	ribless	Claw	crossbow,	screw-loaded,
compact	and	deadly—if	only	at	close	range.	Eight	quarrels	accompanied	it,
each	one	with	an	iron	head	that	glistened	with	the	poison	called	White	Paralt.
Kalam	appropriated	the	thin,	black	cloak	from	the	man’s	corpse,	pulling	up
its	hood	with	its	gauze	vents	positioned	over	his	ears.	The	projecting	cowl	was
also	of	gauze,	ensuring	peripheral	vision.
The	sorcery	was	fading	as	he	completed	his	accoutrements,	revealing	that
at	least	one	of	his	victims	had	been	a	mage.	Damned	sloppy—Topper’s	letting
them	get	soft.
He	emerged	from	the	alcove,	raised	his	head	and	sniffed	the	air.	A	Hand’s
link	had	been	broken—they	would	know	that	trouble	had	arrived,	and	would
even	now	be	slowly,	cautiously	closing	in.
Kalam	smiled.	You	wanted	a	quarry	on	the	run.	Sorry	to	disappoint	you.
He	set	out	into	the	night,	hunting	Claw.
	
The	Hand’s	leader	cocked	his	head,	then	stepped	into	the	clear.	A	moment	later
two	figures	emerged	from	the	alley	and	closed	to	confer.
“Blood’s	been	spilled,”	the	leader	murmured.	“Topper	shall	be—”
A	soft	clicking	made	him	turn.	“Ah,	now	we	learn	the	details,”	the	man
said,	watching	their	cloaked	companion	approach.
“The	killer	has	arrived,”	the	newcomer	growled.
“I	am	about	to	pluck	Topper ’s	strand—”
“Good,	it’s	time	he	understood.”
“What—”
Both	of	the	leader ’s	companions	fell	to	the	cobbles.	An	enormous	fist
connected	with	the	leader ’s	face.	Bone	and	cartilage	crunched.	The	leader
blinked	unseeing	eyes	that	filled	with	blood.	With	septum	lodged	in	his
forebrain,	he	crumpled.
Kalam	crouched	down	to	whisper	in	the	dead	man’s	ear.	“I	know	you	can
hear	me,	Topper.	Two	Hands	left.	Run	and	hide—I’ll	still	find	you.”
He	straightened,	retrieved	his	weapons.
The	corpse	at	his	feet	gurgled	a	wet	laugh	and	the	assassin	looked	down	as


a	spectral	voice	emerged	from	the	dead	man’s	lips.	“Welcome	back,	Kalam.
Two	Hands,	you	said?	Not	any	more,	old	friend—”
“Scared	you,	did	I?”
“Salk	Elan	appears	to	have	let	you	off	too	easily.	I	shall	not	be	as	kind,	I’m
afraid—”
“I	know	where	you	are,	Topper,	and	I’m	coming	for	you.”
There	was	a	long	silence,	then	the	corpse	spoke	one	last	time.	“By	all
means,	my	friend.”
	
The	Imperial	Warren	was	holed	like	cheesecloth	that	night,	as	Hand	after	Hand
of	Claw	pushed	through	into	the	city.	One	such	portal	opened	directly	in	a	lone
man’s	path—and	the	five	figures	announced	their	arrival	with	gasping	breaths
and	splashed	blood,	the	swift	and	as	swiftly	done	noises	of	dying.	Not	one	had
managed	more	than	a	step	onto	the	slick	cobbles	of	Malaz	City	before	their
flesh	began	cooling	in	the	gentle	night.
Screams	echoed	down	streets	and	alleys	as	denizens	foolish	enough	to
brave	the	open	paid	for	their	temerity	with	their	lives.	The	Claw	took	no	more
chances.
The	game	that	Kalam	had	turned,	turned	yet	again.
	
The	mosaic	at	their	feet	was	endless,	the	multicolored	stones	creating	a	pattern
that	defied	comprehension,	the	strange	floor	stretching	away	to	every	horizon.
The	echo	of	their	boots	was	muted	and	faintly	sonorous.
Fiddler	hitched	his	crossbow	over	one	shoulder,	with	a	shrug.	“We’d	see
trouble	from	a	league	away,”	he	said.
“You	are	all	betraying	the	Azath,”	Iskaral	Pust	hissed,	pacing	in	circles
around	the	group.	“The	Jhag	belongs	beneath	a	root-webbed	mound.	That	was
the	deal,	the	agreement,	the	scheme…”	His	voice	fell	away	briefly,	then
resumed	in	a	different	tone.	“What	agreement?	Did	Shadowthrone	receive	any
answers	to	his	query?	Did	the	Azath	reveal	its	ancient,	stony	face?	No.	Silence
was	the	reply—to	all.	My	master	could	have	pronounced	his	intention	to
defecate	on	the	House’s	portal	and	still	the	reply	would	not	have	changed.
Silence.
“Well,	it	certainly	seemed	there	was	a	consensus.	No	objections	were
voiced,	were	they?	No,	not	at	all.	Certain	assumptions	were	necessary,	oh	yes,
very	necessary.	And	in	the	end,	there	was	a	sort	of	victory,	was	there	not?	All


but	for	that	Jhag	there	in	the	Trell’s	arms.”	He	stopped,	panting	as	he	regained
his	breath.	“Gods,	we	are	walking	forever!”
“We	should	begin	our	journey,”	Apsalar	said.
“I’m	for	that,”	Fiddler	muttered.	“Only,	which	direction?”
Rellock	had	knelt	down	to	study	the	mosaic	tiles.	They	were	the	only
source	of	light—overhead	was	pitch	black.	Each	tile	was	no	larger	than	a
hand’s	width.	The	glow	they	cast	pulsed	in	a	slow	but	steady	rhythm.	The	old
fisherman	now	grunted.
“Father?”
“The	pattern	here—”	He	pointed	to	one	tile	in	particular.	“That	mottled
line…”
Fiddler	crouched	down	and	studied	the	floor.	“If	that’s	a	track	or
something,	it’s	a	crooked	one.”
“A	track?”	The	fisherman	looked	up.	“No,	here,	along	this	side.	That’s	the
Kanese	coastline.”
“What?”
The	man	ran	one	blunt	fingertip	down	the	ragged	line.	“Starts	on	the	Quon
coast,	down	to	Kan,	then	up	to	Cawn	Vor—and	there,	that’s	Kartool	Island,	and
southeast,	there,	in	the	tile’s	center,	that’s	Malaz	Island.”
“You’re	trying	to	tell	me	that	here,	on	this	one	tile	at	our	feet,	is	mapped
most	of	the	Quon	Tali	continent?”	Yet	even	as	he	asked,	the	pattern	resolved
itself,	and	before	him	was	indeed	what	Apsalar ’s	father	had	claimed.	“Then
what,”	he	asked	softly,	“is	on	the	rest	of	them?”
“Well,	they	ain’t	consistent,	if	that’s	what	you’re	wondering.	There’s
breaks—other	maps	of	other	places,	I	guess.	It’s	all	jumbled,	but	I’d	say	the
scale	was	the	same	on	all	of	them.”
Fiddler	slowly	straightened.	“But	that	means…”	His	voice	trailed	into
silence,	as	he	looked	out	upon	this	endless	floor,	stretching	for	leagues	in
every	direction.	Every	god	in	the	Abyss!	Are	these	all	the	realms?	Every	world
—every	place	home	to	a	House	of	the	Azath?	Queen	of	Dreams,	what	power	is
this?
“Within	the	warren	of	the	Azath,”	Mappo	said,	his	tone	one	of	awe,	“you
could	go…anywhere.”
“Are	you	sure	of	that?”	Crokus	asked.	“Here	are	the	maps,	yes,	but—”	he
pointed	down	at	the	tile	displaying	the	continent	of	Quon	Tali—“where’s	the
gate?	The	way	in?”
No	one	spoke	for	a	long	moment,	then	Fiddler	cleared	his	throat.	“You	got
an	idea,	lad?”
The	Daru	shrugged.	“Maps	are	maps—this	one	could	be	sitting	on	a


tabletop,	if	you	see	my	point.”
“So	what	do	you	suggest?”
“Ignore	it.	The	only	thing	these	tiles	signify	is	that	every	House,	in	every
place,	is	part	of	a	pattern,	a	grand	design.	But	even	knowing	that	doesn’t	mean
we	can	actually	make	sense	of	it.	The	Azath	is	beyond	even	the	gods.	We	can
end	up	getting	lost	in	suppositions,	in	a	mental	game	that	takes	us	nowhere.”
“That’s	true	enough,”	the	sapper	grunted.	“And	we’re	nowhere	closer	to
figuring	out	which	direction	to	walk	in.”
“Perhaps	Iskaral	Pust	has	the	right	idea,”	Apsalar	said.	Her	boots	grated	on
the	tiles	as	she	turned.	“Alas,	he	seems	to	have	disappeared.”
Crokus	spun	around.	“Damn	that	bastard!”
The	High	Priest	of	Shadow,	who	had	been	ceaselessly	circling	them,	was
indeed	nowhere	to	be	seen.	Fiddler	grimaced.	“So	he	figured	it	out	and	didn’t
bother	explaining	before	taking	his	leave—”
“Wait!”	Mappo	said.	He	set	Icarium	down,	then	took	a	dozen	paces.	“Here,”
he	said.	“Hard	to	make	out	at	first	but	now	I	see	it	clearly.”
The	Trell	seemed	to	be	staring	at	something	at	his	feet.	“What	have	you
found?”	Fiddler	asked.
“Come	closer—almost	impossible	to	see	otherwise,	though	that	makes
little	sense…”
The	others	approached.
A	gaping	hole	yawned,	a	ragged	gap	where	Iskaral	Pust	had	simply	fallen
through	and	vanished.	Fiddler	knelt,	edging	closer	to	the	hole.	“Hood’s
breath!”	he	groaned.	The	tiles	were	no	more	than	an	inch	thick.	Beneath	them
was	not	solid	ground.	Beneath	them	there	was…nothing.
“Is	that	the	way	out,	do	you	think?”	Mappo	asked	behind	him.
The	sapper	edged	back,	the	slick	tiles	suddenly	feeling	like	the	thinnest	ice.
“Damned	if	I	know,	but	I	don’t	plan	on	jumping	in	and	finding	out.”
“I	share	your	caution,”	the	Trell	rumbled.	He	turned	back	to	where	Icarium
lay	and	gathered	his	companion	once	again	in	his	arms.
“That	hole	might	spread,”	Crokus	said.	“I	suggest	we	get	moving.	Any
direction,	just	away	from	here.”
Apsalar	hesitated.	“And	Iskaral	Pust?	Perhaps	he’s	lying	unconscious	on	a
ledge	or	something?”
“Not	a	chance,”	Fiddler	replied.	“From	what	I	saw,	the	poor	man’s	still
falling.	One	look	and	every	bone	in	me	screamed	oblivion.	I	think	I’ll	trust	my
instincts	on	this	one,	lass.”
“A	sad	demise,”	she	said.	“I	had	grown	almost	fond	of	him.”
Fiddler	nodded.	“Our	very	own	pet	scorpion,	aye.”


Crokus	took	the	lead	as	they	moved	away	from	the	hole.	Had	they	waited	a
few	minutes	longer,	they	would	have	seen	a	dull	yellow	mist	rise	from	the
gaping	darkness,	thickening	until	it	was	opaque.	The	mist	remained	for	a	time,
then	it	began	to	dissipate,	and	when	it	finally	vanished,	so	too	had	the	hole—as
if	it	had	never	been.	The	mosaic	was	complete	once	more.

Deadhouse.	Malaz	City,	the	heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	There	is	nothing	for
us	there.	More,	an	explanation	that	made	sense	would	challenge	even	my
experienced	inventiveness.	We	must,	I	fear,	take	our	leave.
Somehow.
But	this	is	far	beyond	me—this	warren—and	worse,	my	crimes	are	like
wounds	that	refuse	to	close.	I	cannot	escape	my	cowardice.	In	the	end—and	all
here	know	it,	though	they	do	not	speak	of	it—my	selfish	desires	made	a	mockery
of	my	integrity,	my	vows.	I	had	a	chance	to	see	the	threat	ended,	ended	forever.
How	can	friendship	defeat	such	an	opportunity?	How	can	the	comfort	of
familiarity	rise	up	like	a	god,	as	if	change	itself	had	become	something
demonic?	I	am	a	coward—the	offer	of	freedom,	the	sighing	end	to	a	lifetime’s
vow,	proved	the	greatest	terror	of	all.
And	so,	the	simple	truth…the	tracks	we	have	walked	in	for	so	long	become
our	lives,	in	themselves	a	prison—
	
Apsalar	leaped	forward,	her	fingertips	touching	shoulder,	then	braids,	then
nothing.	Her	momentum	took	her	forward,	into	the	place	where	Mappo	and
Icarium	had	been	a	moment	earlier.	She	fell	toward	a	yawning	darkness.
Crying	out,	Crokus	grasped	her	ankles.	He	was	pulled	momentarily	along
the	tiles	toward	the	gaping	hole	before	a	fisherman’s	strong	hands	closed	on
him	and	anchored	him	down.
Together,	the	two	men	dragged	Apsalar	from	the	pit’s	edge.	A	dozen	paces
beyond	it	stood	Fiddler—the	Daru’s	cry	had	been	the	first	intimation	of
trouble.
“They’re	gone!”	Crokus	shouted.	“They	fell	through—there	was	no
warning,	Fid!	Nothing	at	all!”
The	sapper	softly	cursed,	lowering	himself	into	an	uneasy	crouch.	We’re
intruders	here…He’d	heard	rumors	of	warrens	that	were	airless,	that	were
instant	death	to	mortals	who	dared	enter	them.	There	was	an	arrogance	in
assuming	that	every	realm	in	existence	bowed	to	human	needs.	Intruders—this


place	cares	nothing	for	us,	nor	are	there	any	laws	demanding	that	it
accommodate	us.
Mind	you,	the	same	could	be	said	for	any	world.
He	hissed,	slowly	straightened,	fighting	against	the	sudden	welling	of	grief
at	the	loss	of	two	men	he	had	come	to	consider	friends.	And	which	of	us	is
next?	“To	me,”	he	growled.	“All	three	of	you—carefully.”	He	unslung	his
pack,	set	it	down	and	rummaged	inside	until	he	found	a	coiled	length	of	rope.
“We’re	trying	ourselves	together—if	one	goes,	either	we	save	him	or	her,	or
we	all	go.	Agreed?”
Relieved	nods	answered	him.
Aye,	the	thought	of	wandering	alone	in	this	warren	is	not	a	pleasant	one.
They	quickly	attached	the	rope	between	them.
The	four	travelers	had	walked	another	thousand	paces	when	the	air	stirred
—the	first	wind	they	had	felt	since	entering	the	warren—and	they	ducked	as
one	beneath	the	passage	of	something	enormous	directly	overhead.
Scrabbling	for	his	crossbow,	Fiddler	twisted	around	to	look	skyward.
“Hood’s	breath!”
But	the	three	dragons	were	already	past,	ignoring	the	humans	entirely.
They	flew	in	triangular	formation	like	a	flight	of	geese,	and	were	of	a	kind,
ochre-scaled,	their	wing-spans	as	far	across	as	five	wagons	end	to	end.	Long,
sinuous	tails	stretched	back	behind	them.
“Foolish	to	think,”	Apsalar	muttered,	“that	we’re	the	only	ones	to	make	use
of	this	realm.”
Crokus	grunted.	“I’ve	seen	bigger…”
A	faint	grin	cracked	Fiddler ’s	features.	“Aye,	lad,	I	know	you	have.”
The	dragons	were	almost	at	the	edge	of	their	vision	when	they	banked	as
one,	plunged	down	toward	the	ground	and	broke	through	the	tiles,	vanishing
from	sight.
No	one	spoke	for	a	long	minute,	then	Apsalar ’s	father	cleared	his	throat
and	said,	“I	think	that	just	told	us	something.”
The	sapper	nodded.	“Aye.”	You	go	through	when	you	get	to	where	you’re
going—even	if	you	don’t	exactly	plan	on	it.	He	thought	back	to	Mappo	and
Icarium.	The	Trell	would	have	had	no	reason	to	accompany	them	all	the	way	to
Malaz	City.	After	all,	Mappo	had	a	friend	to	heal,	to	coax	back	to
consciousness.	He’d	be	looking	for	a	safe	place	to	do	that.	As	for	Iskaral
Pust…Probably	at	the	cliff ’s	foot	right	now,	screaming	up	at	the	bhok’	arala	for
a	rope…
“All	right,”	Fiddler	said,	straightening.	“Seems	we’ve	just	got	to	keep
moving…until	the	time	and	place	arrives.”


“Mappo	and	Icarium	are	not	lost,	not	dead,”	Crokus	said	in	obvious	relief
as	they	began	walking	again.
“Nor	is	the	High	Priest,”	Apsalar	added.
“Well,”	the	Daru	muttered,	“I	suppose	we	have	to	take	the	bad	with	the
good.”
Fiddler	briefly	wondered	about	those	three	dragons—where	they	had	gone,
what	tasks	awaited	them—then	he	shrugged.	Their	appearance,	their	departure
and,	in	between	and	most	importantly,	their	indifference	to	the	four	mortals
below	was	a	sobering	reminder	that	the	world	was	far	bigger	than	that	defined
by	their	own	lives,	their	own	desires	and	goals.	The	seemingly	headlong
plunge	this	journey	had	become	was	in	truth	but	the	smallest	succession	of
steps,	of	no	greater	import	than	the	struggles	of	a	termite.
The	worlds	live	on,	beyond	us,	countless	unravelling	tales.
In	his	mind’s	eye	he	saw	his	horizons	stretch	out	on	all	sides,	and	as	they
grew	ever	vaster	he	in	turn	saw	himself	as	ever	smaller,	ever	more
insignificant.
We	are	all	lone	souls.	It	pays	to	know	humility,	lest	the	delusion	of	control,
of	mastery,	overwhelms.	And	indeed,	we	seem	a	species	prone	to	that	delusion,
again	and	ever	again…
	
Korbolo	Dom’s	warriors	celebrated	their	triumph	through	the	hours	of
darkness	after	the	Fall	of	Coltaine.	The	sounds	of	that	revelry	drifted	over
Aren’s	walls	and	brought	a	coldness	to	the	air	that	had	little	to	do	with	the
physical	reality	of	the	sultry	night.
Within	the	city,	facing	the	north	gates,	was	a	broad	concourse,	generally
used	as	a	caravan	staging	area.	This	open	space	was	now	packed	with	refugees.
The	task	of	billeting	would	have	to	await	the	more	pressing	needs	of	food,
water	and	medical	attention.
Commander	Blistig	had	set	his	garrison	to	those	efforts,	and	his	soldiers
worked	tirelessly,	displaying	extraordinary	compassion,	as	if	answering	their
own	need	to	respond	to	the	enemy’s	triumph	beyond	the	walls.	Coltaine,	his
Wickans	and	the	Seventh	had	given	their	lives	for	those	the	guard	now	tended.
Solicitude	was	fast	becoming	an	overwhelming	gesture.
Yet	other	tensions	rode	the	air.
The	final	sacrifice	was	unnecessary.	We	could	have	saved	them,	if	not	for
the	coward	commanding	us.	Two	powerful	honors	had	clashed—the	raw	duty	to
save	the	lives	of	fellow	soldiers,	and	the	discipline	of	the	Malazan	command
structure—and	from	that	collision	ten	thousand	living,	breathing,	highly


trained	soldiers	now	stood	broken.
Down	in	the	concourse,	Duiker	wandered	aimlessly	through	the	crowds.
Figures	loomed	before	him	every	now	and	then,	blurred	faces	murmuring
meaningless	words,	offering	information	that	they	each	believed—hoped—
would	soothe	him.	The	Wickan	youths	had	claimed	Nil	and	Nether	and	now
protected	them	with	a	fierceness	that	none	dared	challenge.	Countless	refugees
had	been	retrieved	from	the	very	edge	of	Hood’s	Gates,	each	one	a	source	of
savage	defiance—a	pleasure	revealed	in	glittering	eyes	and	bared	teeth.	Those
few	for	whom	the	final	flight—and	perhaps	the	release	of	salvation	itself—had
proved	too	much	for	their	broken,	riven	flesh,	were	fought	for	in	unyielding
desperation.	Hood	had	to	reach	for	those	failing	souls,	reach	for,	grasp	and
drag	them	into	oblivion,	with	the	healers	employing	every	skill	they	possessed
to	defeat	the	effort.
Duiker	had	found	his	own	oblivion	deep	inside	himself,	and	he	had	no
desire	to	leave	its	numbing	comfort.	Within	that	place,	pain	could	do	naught
but	gnaw	at	the	very	edges,	and	those	edges	seemed	to	be	growing	ever	more
distant.
Words	occasionally	seeped	through,	as	various	officers	and	soldiers
delivered	details	of	things	they	clearly	felt	the	historian	should	know.	The
caution	in	their	voices	was	not	necessary,	for	the	information	was	absorbed
stripped	of	feeling.	Duiker	was	beyond	hurting.
The	Silanda,	with	its	load	of	wounded	soldiers,	had	not	arrived,	he	learned
from	a	Wickan	youth	named	Temul.	Adjunct	Tavore’s	fleet	was	less	than	a
week	away.	Korbolo	Dom	was	likely	to	begin	a	siege,	for	Sha’ik	was	on	her
way	from	Raraku,	leading	an	army	twice	the	size	of	the	renegade	Fist’s	own
force.	Mallick	Rel	had	led	High	Fist	Pormqual	back	to	the	palace.	A	plan	was
now	in	the	air,	a	plan	to	reap	vengeance,	and	it	was	but	hours	away—
Blinking,	Duiker	tried	to	focus	on	the	face	before	him,	the	face	telling	him
this	news	in	an	urgent	tone.	But	the	first	brush	of	recognition	sent	the	historian
reeling	back	in	his	mind.	Too	much	pain	was	embedded	in	the	memories	that
were	so	closely	chained	to	that	recognition.	He	stepped	back.
The	figure	reached	out	a	strong	hand	that	closed	on	Duiker ’s	ragged	shirt
and	pulled	the	historian	closer	once	again.	The	bearded	mouth	was	moving,
shaping	words,	demanding,	angry	words.
“—through	to	you,	Historian!	It’s	the	assumptions,	don’t	you	see?	Our
only	reports	have	come	from	that	nobleman,	Nethpara.	But	we	need	a	soldier ’s
assessment—do	you	understand?	Damn	you,	it’s	almost	dawn!”
“What?	What	are	you	talking	about?”
Blistig’s	face	twisted.	“Mallick	Rel	has	got	through	to	Pormqual.	Hood


knows	how,	but	he	has!	We’re	going	to	strike	Korbolo’s	army—in	less	than	an
hour ’s	time,	when	they’re	still	drunk,	still	exhausted.	We’re	marching	out,
Duiker!	Do	you	understand	me?”
Cruel…so	cruel—
“How	many	are	out	there?	We	need	reliable	estimates—”
“Thousands.	Tens	of	thousands.	Hundreds—”
“Think,	damn	you!	If	we	can	knock	these	bastards	out…before	Sha’ik
arrives—”
“I	don’t	know,	Blistig!	That	army	grew	with	every	Hood-cursed	league!”
“Nethpara	judges	just	under	ten	thousand—”
“The	man’s	a	fool.”
“He’s	also	laying	the	deaths	of	thousands	of	innocent	refugees	at	Coltaine’s
feet—”
“W—What?”	The	historian	staggered,	and	if	not	for	Blistig’s	grip	would
have	fallen.
“Don’t	you	see?	Without	you,	Duiker,	that	version	of	what	happened	out
there	will	win	the	day.	It’s	already	spread	through	the	ranks	and	it’s	damned
troubling.	Certainty’s	crumbling—the	desire	for	vengeance	is	weakening—”
It	was	enough.	The	historian	felt	a	jolt.	Eyes	widening,	he	straightened.
“Where	is	he?	Nethpara!	Where—”
“He’s	been	in	with	Pormqual	and	Mallick	Rel	for	the	past	two	bells.”
“Take	me	there.”
A	succession	of	horns	echoed	behind	them,	the	call	for	assembly.	Duiker ’s
gaze	swept	past	the	commander	to	the	ranks	contracting	into	formation.	He
stared	skyward,	saw	the	stars	dimming	in	a	lightening	sky.
“Fener ’s	tusk,”	Blistig	growled.	“It	might	be	too	late—”
“Take	me	to	Pormqual—to	Mallick	Rel—”
“Follow	me,	then.”
The	refugees	were	stirring	as	garrison	soldiers	moved	among	them,
beginning	the	task	of	clearing	the	concourse	to	allow	room	for	the	High	Fist’s
army.
Blistig	pushed	through	the	crowd,	Duiker	a	step	behind	him.	“Pormqual’s
ordered	my	garrison	out	with	them,”	the	commander	said	over	his	shoulder.
“Rearguard.	That’s	in	defiance	of	my	responsibility.	My	task	is	to	defend	this
city,	yet	the	High	Fist	has	been	conscripting	from	my	own	soldiers,	bleeding
the	companies.	I’m	down	to	three	hundred	now,	barely	enough	to	hold	the
walls.	Especially	with	all	the	Red	Blades	under	arrest—”
“Under	arrest!	Why?”
“Seven	Cities	blood—Pormqual	doesn’t	trust	them.”


“The	fool!	They’re	the	most	loyal	soldiers	of	the	Empire	I’ve	ever	known
—”
“I	agree,	Historian,	but	my	opinion	is	worthless—”
“Mine	had	better	not	be,”	Duiker	said.
Blistig	paused,	turning.	“Do	you	support	the	High	Fist’s	decision	to
attack?”
“Hood,	no!”
“Why?”
“Because	we	don’t	know	how	many	are	out	there.	Wiser	to	wait	for
Tavore,	wiser	still	to	let	Korbolo	fling	his	warriors	against	these	walls—”
Blistig	nodded.	“We’d	cut	them	to	pieces.	The	question	is,	can	you
convince	Pormqual	of	all	you’ve	just	said?”
“You	know	him,”	Duiker	retorted.	“I	don’t.”
The	commander	grimaced.	“Let’s	go.”
The	standards	of	the	High	Fist’s	army	flanked	a	knot	of	mounted	figures
near	the	mouth	of	the	main	avenue	leading	off	from	the	concourse.	Blistig	led
the	historian	directly	for	them.
Duiker	saw	Pormqual	seated	atop	a	magnificent	warhorse.	The	High	Fist’s
armor	was	ornate,	more	decorative	than	functional.	The	jeweled	hilt	of	a
Grisian	broadsword	jutted	from	one	hip;	the	helm	bore	a	gold-threaded
sunburst	on	the	polished	iron	skullcap.	His	face	looked	sickly	and	bloodless.
Mallick	Rel	sat	on	a	white	horse	beside	the	High	Fist,	silk-cloaked	and
weaponless,	a	sea-blue	cloth	wrapped	about	his	head.	Various	officers,	both
mounted	and	on	foot,	surrounded	them,	and	among	that	group	Duiker	saw
Nethpara	and	Pullyk	Alar.
A	red	mist	descended	on	the	scene	as	Duiker ’s	stare	fixed	on	the	two
noblemen.	Increasing	his	pace,	he	pushed	past	Blistig,	who	snapped	a	hand	out
to	drag	the	historian	back.
“Leave	that	till	later,	man.	You’ve	got	a	more	immediate	responsibility	to
deal	with	first.”
Trembling,	Duiker	forced	his	rage	back.	He	managed	a	nod.
“Come	on,	the	High	Fist	has	seen	us.”
Pormqual’s	expression	was	cold	as	he	looked	down	on	Duiker.	His	voice
was	shrill	as	he	said,	“Historian,	your	arrival	is	timely.	We	have	two	tasks
before	us	this	day,	both	of	which	require	your	presence—”
“High	Fist—”
“Silence!	Interrupt	me	again	and	I’ll	have	your	tongue	cut	out!”	He	paused,
settled,	then	resumed	his	statement.	“First	of	all,	you	shall	yourself	accompany
us	in	the	battle	to	come.	To	witness	the	proper	means	of	dealing	with	that


rabble.	The	selling	of	the	lives	of	innocent	refugees	is	not	a	bargain	I	shall
make—there	shall	be	no	repetition	of	earlier	tragedies,	earlier	crimes	of
treason!	The	fools	out	there	have	only	now	settled	to	sleep—and	they	shall	pay
for	that	stupidity,	I	assure	you.
“Then,	when	the	renegades	have	been	slaughtered,	we	shall	attend	to	other
responsibilities,	primarily	your	arrest	and	that	of	the	warlocks	known	as	Nil
and	Nether—the	last	remaining	‘officers’	of	Coltaine’s	horrific	command.	And
I	assure	you,	the	punishment	following	your	conviction	shall	match	the
severity	of	your	crimes.”	He	gestured	and	an	aide	led	Duiker ’s	mare	forward.
“Alas,	your	beast	is	hardly	fit	for	the	company,	but	it	shall	suffice.
“Commander	Blistig,	prepare	your	soldiers	for	marching.	We	wish	our
rearguard	to	be	no	more	and	no	less	than	three	hundred	paces	behind	us.	I	trust
that	is	within	your	capabilities—if	not,	inform	me	now,	and	I	shall	happily
place	someone	else	in	command	of	the	garrison.”
“Aye,	High	Fist,	the	task	is	within	my	capabilities.”
Duiker ’s	gaze	swung	to	Mallick	Rel,	and	the	historian	wondered	at	the
satisfied	flush	in	the	priest’s	face,	but	only	for	a	moment.	Ah,	of	course,	past
slights.	Not	a	man	to	cross,	are	you,	Rel?
In	silence,	the	historian	walked	to	his	horse	and	climbed	into	the	saddle.	He
laid	a	hand	on	the	mare’s	thin,	ungroomed	neck,	then	gathered	the	reins.
The	lead	companies	of	medium	cavalry	were	assembled	at	the	gate.	Once
out	of	the	city,	little	time	would	be	wasted,	as	the	horsewarriors	would
immediately	part	in	a	sweeping	maneuver	intended	to	surround	Korbolo’s
encampment,	while	the	infantry	poured	out	from	the	gate	to	assemble	into	solid
phalanxes	before	marching	on	the	enemy	position.
Blistig	had	departed	the	scene	without	a	backward	glance.	Duiker	stared	at
the	distant	gate,	scanned	the	troops	gathered	there.
“Historian.”
He	turned	his	head,	looked	down	at	Nethpara.
The	nobleman	was	smiling.	“You	should	have	treated	me	with	more
respect.	I	suppose	you	see	that	now,	although	it’s	come	too	late	for	you.”
Nethpara	did	not	notice	Duiker	slip	his	boot	from	the	stirrup.
“For	the	insults	you	have	committed	upon	my	person…for	the	laying	of
hands	on	me,	Historian,	you	shall	suffer—”
“No	doubt,”	Duiker	cut	in.	“And	here’s	one	last	insult.”	He	kicked	out,	the
toe	of	his	boot	driving	into	the	nobleman’s	flabby	throat,	then	up.	Trachea
crumpled	inward,	head	snapped	back	with	a	crunching,	popping	sound,
Nethpara	pitched	backward,	thumped	heavily	on	the	cobblestones.	His	eyes
stared	up	unseeing	at	the	pale	sky.


Pullyk	Alar	shrieked.
Soldiers	closed	in	around	the	historian,	weapons	out.
“By	all	means,”	Duiker	said,	“I	shall	welcome	an	end	to	this—”
“You	shall	not	be	so	fortunate!”	Pormqual	hissed,	white	with	rage.
Duiker	sneered	at	the	man.	“You’ve	already	convicted	me	as	an
executioner.	What’s	one	more,	you	craven	pile	of	dung?”	He	shifted	his	gaze	to
Mallick	Rel.	“And	as	for	you,	Jhistal,	come	closer—my	life’s	still	incomplete.”
The	historian	did	not	notice—nor	did	anyone	else—the	arrival	of	a	captain
of	Blistig’s	garrison.	The	man	had	been	about	to	speak	with	Duiker,	to	inform
him	of	the	safe	delivery	of	a	child	to	a	grandfather.	But	at	the	word	“Jhistal”	he
stiffened,	then,	eyes	widening,	he	took	a	step	back.
The	gates	opened	just	then,	and	the	troops	of	cavalry	poured	through.
Motion	rippled	through	the	legions	of	infantry	as	weapons	were	readied.
Keneb	took	another	step	back,	that	lone	word	echoing	in	his	mind.	He	knew
it	from	somewhere,	but	full	awareness	eluded	him,	even	as	alarms	rang	in	his
mind.	A	voice	within	was	shouting	that	he	needed	to	find	Blistig—he	did	not
yet	know	why,	but	it	was	imperative—
But	he	had	run	out	of	time.
Keneb	stared	out	as	the	army	surged	toward	the	gate.	The	orders	had	been
given,	and	the	momentum	was	unstoppable.
The	captain	took	another	step	back,	his	words	to	Duiker	forgotten.	He
stumbled	over	Nethpara’s	body	unnoticing,	then	spun	about.	And	ran.
Sixty	paces	on,	Keneb’s	mind	was	suddenly	flooded	with	the	memory	of
when	he	had	last	heard	the	word	“Jhistal.”
	
Duiker	rode	with	the	mounted	officers	out	onto	the	plain.
Korbolo	Dom’s	army	looked	to	be	in	full	panicked	flight,	though	the
historian	noted	that	they	still	held	on	to	their	weapons	even	as	they	fled	back
over	the	mound	and	its	facing	slope.	The	High	Fist’s	cavalry	rode	hard	to
either	side,	quickly	outpacing	the	footsoldiers	as	they	pushed	to	complete	the
encirclement.	Both	wings	rode	beyond	line	of	sight,	into	the	evenly	distributed
hills	of	the	burial	ground.
The	High	Fist’s	legions	moved	at	double	time,	silent	and	determined.	They
had	no	hope	of	catching	the	fleeing	army	until	the	cavalry	had	completed	the
encirclement,	closing	off	all	avenues	of	escape.
“As	you	predicted,	High	Fist!”	Mallick	Rel	shouted	to	Pormqual	as	they
cantered	along.	“They	are	routed!”
“But	they	shall	not	escape,	shall	they?”	Pormqual	laughed,	pitching


unevenly	in	his	saddle.
Gods	below,	the	High	Fist	can’t	even	ride.
The	pursuit	took	them	up	and	over	the	first	barrow,	and	they	rode	among
the	corpses	of	the	Seventh	and	the	Wickans.	Those	looted	bodies	spread
northward	in	a	wide	swath,	mapping	the	route	of	Coltaine’s	running	battle,
over	the	next	barrow,	then	around	the	base	of	the	one	beyond.	Duiker	struggled
to	keep	from	scanning	those	corpses,	seeking	familiar	faces	in	their	unfamiliar
expressions	of	death.	He	stared	forward,	studying	the	fleeing	renegades.
Pormqual	periodically	slowed	their	pace	to	keep	within	the	midst	of	the
infantry.	The	wings	of	cavalry	were	somewhere	ahead,	and	had	not	reappeared.
In	the	meantime,	the	thousands	of	fleeing	soldiers	stayed	ahead	of	the
phalanxes,	sweeping	around	the	barrows,	leaving	booty	behind	as	they	went.
The	High	Fist	and	his	army	doggedly	pursued,	down	into	a	vast	basin,
packed	with	the	routed	enemy	who	began	pouring	up	the	gently	sloping	sides.
Dust	ringed	the	crest	to	the	east	and	west,	and	directly	ahead.
“The	encirclement	is	complete!”	Pormqual	cried.	“See	the	dust!”
Duiker	frowned	at	that	dust.	Faintly,	he	heard	the	sounds	of	battle.	A
moment	later	those	sounds	began	to	diminish,	while	the	rising	dust	thickened,
deepened.
The	infantry	marched	down	into	the	basin.
Something’s	wrong…
The	fleeing	soldiers	had	reached	the	crests	now	on	all	sides	but	the	south,
but	instead	of	continuing	their	panicked	pace,	they	slowed,	readied	their
weapons	and	turned	about.
The	curtain	of	dust	climbed	higher	behind	those	warriors,	then	mounted
figures	appeared—not	Pormqual’s	cavalry,	but	tribal	riders.	A	moment	later
the	ring	of	footsoldiers	thickened,	as	rank	after	rank	joined	them.
Duiker	spun	in	his	saddle.	Seven	Cities	cavalry	lined	the	south	skylines,
closing	the	back	door.
And	so	we	ride	into	the	simplest	of	traps.	Leaving	Aren	defenseless…
“Mallick!”	Pormqual	shrieked,	reining	in.	“What	is	happening!	What	has
happened?”
The	priest’s	head	was	jerking	in	all	directions,	his	jaw	dropping.
“Treachery!”	he	hissed.	He	swung	his	white	horse	around,	eyes	fixing	on
Duiker.	“This	is	your	doing,	Historian!	Part	of	the	bargain	Nethpara	hinted	at!
More,	I	see	the	sorcery	around	you	now—you	have	been	communicating	with
Korbolo	Dom!	Gods,	we	were	fools!”
Duiker	ignored	the	man,	his	eyes	squinting	as	he	studied	the	scene	to	the
south,	and	the	tag-end	elements	of	Pormqual’s	army	as	they	wheeled	about	to


face	the	threat	now	behind	them.	Clearly,	the	High	Fist’s	cavalry	wings	had
been	annihilated.
“We	are	surrounded!	They	are	in	the	tens	of	thousands!	We	shall	be
slaughtered!”	The	High	Fist	jabbed	a	finger	at	the	historian.	“Kill	him!	Kill	him
now!”
“Wait!”	Mallick	Rel	shouted.	He	turned	to	Pormqual.	“Please,	High	Fist,
leave	that	to	me,	I	beg	you!	Be	assured	that	I	shall	exact	a	worthy	punishment!”
“As	you	say,	then,	but—”	Pormqual	glared	about.	“What	shall	we	do,
Mallick?”
The	priest	pointed	to	the	north.	“There,	riders	approach	under	a	white	flag
—let	us	see	what	Korbolo	Dom	proposes,	High	Fist!	What	have	we	to	lose?”
“I	cannot	speak	with	them!”	Pormqual	gibbered.	“I	cannot	think!	Mallick—
please!”
“Very	well,”	the	Jhistal	priest	acceded.	He	swung	his	mount	around,	jabbed
spurred	heels	into	the	beast’s	flanks	and	rode	through	the	milling	ranks	of	the
High	Fist’s	trapped	army.
Midway	up	the	distant	north	slope,	the	converging	riders	met.	The	parley
lasted	less	than	a	minute,	then	Mallick	wheeled	and	rode	back.
“If	we	push	back	we	can	break	the	elements	to	the	south,”	Duiker	quietly
said	to	the	High	Fist.	“A	fighting	withdrawal	back	to	the	city’s	gates—”
“Not	another	word	from	you,	traitor!”
Mallick	Rel	arrived,	his	expression	filled	with	hope.	“Korbolo	Dom	has
had	enough	of	bloodshed,	High	Fist!	Yesterday’s	slaughter	has	left	him
sickened!”
“What	does	he	propose,	then?”	Pormqual	demanded,	leaning	forward.
“Our	only	hope,	High	Fist.	You	must	command	your	army	to	lay	down	its
arms—to	pass	them	out	to	the	edges,	then	withdraw	into	a	compact	mass	in	the
center	of	this	basin.	They	shall	be	prisoners	of	war,	and	therefore	treated	with
mercy.	As	for	you	and	me,	we	shall	be	made	hostages.	When	Tavore	arrives,
arrangements	will	be	made	for	our	honorable	return.	High	Fist,	we	have	no
choice	in	the	matter…”
A	strange	lassitude	seeped	into	Duiker	as	he	listened.	He	knew	he	could	say
nothing	to	sway	the	High	Fist.	He	slowly	dismounted,	reached	under	his	mare
and	unhitched	the	girth.
“What	are	you	doing,	traitor?”	Mallick	Rel	demanded.
“I’m	freeing	my	horse,”	the	historian	said	reasonably.	“The	enemy	won’t
bother	with	her—too	worn	out	to	be	of	any	use.	She’ll	head	back	to	Aren—it’s
the	least	I	can	do	for	her.”	He	removed	the	saddle,	dropped	it	to	the	ground	to
one	side,	then	pulled	the	bit	from	the	mare’s	mouth.


The	priest	stared	for	a	moment	longer,	a	slight	frown	on	his	face,	then	he
turned	back	to	the	High	Fist.	“They	await	our	reply.”
Duiker	stepped	close	to	his	horse’s	head	and	laid	a	hand	on	the	soft	muzzle.
“Take	care,”	he	whispered.	Then	he	stepped	back,	gave	the	animal	a	slap	on	the
rump.	The	mare	sprang	away,	wheeled,	then	trotted	southward—as	Duiker
knew	she	would.
“What	choice?”	Pormqual	whispered.	“Unlike	Coltaine,	I	must	consider
my	soldiers…their	lives	are	worth	everything…peace	will	return	to	this	land,
sooner	or	later…”
“Thousands	of	husbands,	wives,	and	fathers	and	mothers	will	bless	your
name,	High	Fist.	To	fight	now,	to	seek	out	that	bitter,	pointless	end,	ah,	they
will	curse	your	name	for	all	eternity.”
“I	cannot	have	that,”	Pormqual	agreed.	He	faced	his	officers.	“Lay	down
arms.	Deliver	the	orders—all	weapons	to	go	to	the	edges	and	left	there,	the
ranks	to	withdraw	to	the	center	of	the	basin.”
Duiker	stared	at	the	four	captains	who	listened	in	silence	to	the	High	Fist’s
commands.	A	long	moment	passed,	then	the	officers	saluted	and	rode	off.
Duiker	turned	away.
	
The	disarmament	took	close	to	an	hour,	the	Malazan	soldiers	yielding	their
weapons	in	silence.	Those	weapons	were	piled	on	the	ground	just	beyond	the
phalanxes,	then	the	soldiers	made	their	way	inward,	forming	up	in	tight,
restless	ranks	in	the	basin’s	center.
Tribal	horsewarriors	then	rode	down	and	collected	the	arms.	Twenty
minutes	later	an	army	of	ten	thousand	Malazans	crowded	the	basin,
weaponless,	helpless.
Korbolo	Dom’s	vanguard	detached	from	the	forces	on	the	north	ridge	and
rode	down	toward	the	High	Fist’s	position.
Duiker	stared	at	the	approaching	group.	He	saw	Kamist	Reloe,	a	handful	of
war	chiefs,	two	unarmed	women	who	were	in	all	likelihood	mages,	and
Korbolo	Dom	himself,	a	squat	half-Napan,	all	hair	shaved	from	his	body,
revealing	scars	in	tangled	webs.	He	was	smiling	as	he	reined	in	with	his
companions	before	the	High	Fist,	Mallick	Rel	and	the	other	officers.
“Well	done,”	he	growled,	his	eyes	on	the	priest.
The	Jhistal	dismounted,	stepped	forward	and	bowed.	“I	deliver	to	you	High
Fist	Pormqual	and	his	ten	thousand.	More,	I	deliver	to	you	the	city	Aren,	in
Sha’ik’s	name—”
“Wrong,”	Duiker	chuckled.


Mallick	Rel	faced	him.
“You’ve	not	delivered	Aren,	Jhistal.”
“What	claims	do	you	make	now,	old	man?”
“I’m	surprised	you	didn’t	notice,”	the	historian	said.	“Too	busy	gloating,	I
guess.	Take	a	close	look	at	the	companies	around	you,	especially	those	to	the
south…”
Mallick’s	eyes	narrowed	as	he	scanned	the	gathered	legions.	Then	he	paled.
“Blistig!”
“Seems	the	commander	and	his	garrison	decided	to	stay	behind	after	all.
Granted,	they’re	only	two	or	three	hundred,	but	we	both	know	that	that	will	be
enough—for	the	week	or	so	until	Tavore	arrives.	Aren’s	walls	are	high,	well
impregnated	these	days	with	Otataral,	I	believe—proof	against	any	sorcery.
Thinking	on	it,	I	would	predict	that	there	are	Red	Blades	lining	those	walls
now,	as	well	as	the	garrison.	You	have	failed	in	your	betrayal,	Jhistal.	Failed.”
The	priest	jerked	forward,	the	back	of	his	hand	cracking	against	Duiker ’s
face.	The	historian	was	spun	around	by	the	savage	blow,	and	the	rings	on	the
man’s	hand	raking	through	the	flesh	of	one	cheek	burst	the	barely	healed	splits
in	his	lips	and	chin.	He	fell	hard	to	the	ground	and	felt	something	shatter
against	his	sternum.
He	pushed	himself	up,	the	blood	streaming	down	his	lacerated	face.
Looking	down	at	the	ground	beneath	him,	he	expected	to	see	tiny	fragments	of
broken	glass,	but	there	were	none.	The	leather	thong	around	his	neck	now	had
nothing	on	it	at	all.
Hands	pulled	him	roughly	to	his	feet	and	dragged	him	around	to	face
Mallick	Rel	once	more.
The	priest	was	trembling	still.	“Your	death	shall	be—”
“Silence!”	Korbolo	snapped.	He	eyed	Duiker.	“You	are	the	historian	who
rode	with	Coltaine.”
The	historian	faced	him.	“I	am.”
“You	are	a	soldier.”
“As	you	say.”
“I	do,	and	so	you	shall	die	with	these	soldiers,	in	a	manner	no	different—”
“You	mean	to	slaughter	ten	thousand	unarmed	men	and	women,	Korbolo
Dom?”
“I	mean	to	cripple	Tavore	before	she	even	sets	foot	on	this	continent.	I
mean	to	make	her	too	furious	to	think.	I	mean	to	crack	that	façade	so	she
dreams	of	vengeance	day	and	night,	poisoning	her	every	decision.”
“You	always	fashioned	yourself	as	the	Empire’s	harshest	Fist,	didn’t	you,
Korbolo	Dom?	As	if	cruelty’s	virtue…”


The	pale-blue-skinned	commander	simply	shrugged.	“Best	join	the	others
now,	Duiker—a	soldier	of	Coltaine’s	army	deserves	that	much.”	Korbolo	then
turned	to	Mallick.	“My	mercy,	however,	does	not	extend	to	that	one	soldier
whose	arrow	stole	Coltaine	from	our	pleasure.	Where	is	he,	Priest?”
“He	went	missing,	alas.	Last	seen	an	hour	after	the	deed—Blistig	had	his
soldiers	search	everywhere,	without	success.	Even	if	he	has	now	found	him,	he
is	with	the	garrison,	afraid	to	say.”
The	renegade	Fist	scowled.	“There	have	been	disappointments	this	day,
Mallick	Rel.”
“Korbolo	Dom,	sir!”	Pormqual	said,	still	bearing	an	expression	of
disbelief.	“I	do	not	understand—”
“Clearly	you	do	not,”	the	commander	agreed,	his	face	twisting	in	disgust.
“Jhistal,	have	you	any	particular	fate	in	mind	for	this	fool?”
“None.	He	is	yours.”
“I	cannot	grant	him	the	dignified	sacrifice	I	have	in	mind	for	his	soldiers.
That	would	leave	too	bitter	a	taste	in	my	mouth,	I’m	afraid.”	Korbolo	Dom
hesitated,	then	sighed	and	made	a	slight	gesture	with	one	hand.
A	war	chief’s	tulwar	flashed	behind	the	High	Fist,	lifted	the	man’s	head
clean	from	his	shoulders	and	sent	it	spinning.	The	warhorse	bolted	in	alarm
and	broke	through	the	ring	of	soldiers.	The	beautiful	beast	galloped	down
among	the	unarmed	soldiers,	carrying	its	headless	burden	into	their	midst.	The
High	Fist’s	corpse,	Duiker	saw,	rode	in	the	saddle	with	a	grace	not	matched	in
life,	weaving	this	way	and	that	before	hands	reached	up	to	slow	the	frightened
horse,	and	Pormqual’s	body	slid	to	one	side,	falling	into	waiting	arms.
It	may	have	been	his	imagination,	but	Duiker	thought	he	could	hear	the
harsh	laughter	of	a	god.
	
There	was	no	shortage	of	spikes,	yet	it	took	a	day	and	a	half	before	the	last
screaming	prisoner	was	nailed	to	the	last	crowded	cedar	lining	Aren	Way.
Ten	thousand	dead	and	dying	Malazans	stared	down	on	that	wide,
exquisitely	engineered	Imperial	road—eyes	unseeing	or	eyes
uncomprehending—it	made	little	difference.
Duiker	was	the	last,	the	rusty	iron	spikes	driven	through	his	wrists	and
upper	arms	to	hold	him	in	place	high	on	the	tree’s	blood-streaked	bole.	More
spikes	were	hammered	through	his	ankles	and	the	muscles	of	his	outer	thighs.
The	pain	was	unlike	anything	the	historian	had	ever	known	before.	Yet
even	worse	was	the	knowledge	that	that	pain	would	accompany	his	entire	final
journey	down	into	eventual	unconsciousness,	and	with	it—an	added	trauma—


were	the	images	burned	into	him:	almost	forty	hours	of	being	driven	on	foot
up	Aren	Way,	watching	each	and	every	one	of	those	ten	thousand	soldiers
joined	to	the	mass	crucifixion	in	a	chain	of	suffering	stretching	over	three
leagues,	each	link	scores	of	men	and	women	nailed	to	every	tree,	to	every
available	space	on	those	tall,	broad	trunks.
The	historian	was	well	beyond	shock	when	his	turn	finally	came,	as	the	last
soldier	to	close	the	human	chain,	and	he	was	dragged	to	the	tree,	up	the
scaffolding,	pushed	against	the	ridged	bark,	arms	forced	outward,	feeling	the
cold	bite	of	the	iron	spikes	pressed	against	his	skin,	and	then,	when	the	mallets
swung,	the	explosion	of	pain	that	loosed	his	bowels,	leaving	him	stained	and
writhing.	The	greatest	pain	arrived	when	the	scaffolding	dropped	from	under
him,	and	his	full	weight	fell	onto	the	pinning	spikes.	Until	that	moment,	he	had
truly	believed	he	had	gone	as	far	into	agony	as	was	humanly	possible.
He	was	wrong.
After	what	seemed	like	an	eternity	when	the	ceaseless	shrieking	of	his
sundered	flesh	had	drowned	out	all	else	within	him,	a	cool,	calm	clarity
emerged,	and	thoughts,	scattered	and	wandering,	rose	into	his	fading
awareness.
The	Jaghut	ghost…why	do	I	think	of	him	now?	Of	that	eternity	of	grief?
What	is	he	to	me?	What	is	anyone	or	anything	to	me,	now?	I	await	Hood’s	Gate
at	last—the	time	for	memories,	for	regrets	and	comprehensions	is	past.	You
must	see	that	now,	old	man.	Your	nameless	marine	awaits	you,	and	Bult	and
Corporal	List,	and	Lull	and	Sulwar	and	Mincer.	Kulp	and	Heboric,	too,	most
likely.	You	leave	a	place	of	strangers	now,	and	go	to	a	place	of	companions,	of
friends.
So	claim	the	priests	of	Hood.
It’s	the	last	gift.	I	am	done	with	this	world,	for	I	am	alone	in	it.	Alone.
A	ghostly,	tusked	face	rose	before	his	mind’s	eye,	and	though	he	had	never
before	seen	it,	he	knew	that	the	Jaghut	had	found	him.	The	gravest	compassion
filled	that	creature’s	unhuman	eyes,	a	compassion	that	Duiker	could	not
understand.
Why	grieve,	Jaghut?	I	shall	not	haunt	eternity	as	you	have	done.	I	shall	not
return	to	this	place,	nor	suffer	again	the	losses	a	mortal	suffers	in	life,	and	in
living.	Hood	is	about	to	bless	me,	Jaghut—no	need	to	grieve…
Those	thoughts	echoed	only	a	moment	longer,	as	the	Jaghut’s	ravaged	face
faded	and	darkness	closed	in	around	the	historian,	closed	in	until	it	swallowed
him.
And	with	it,	awareness	ceased.


Chapter	Twenty-three

Laseen	sent	Tavore
Rushing	across	the	seas
to	clasp	Coltaine’s	hand
And	closing	her	fingers
She	held	crow-picked	bones.
THE	SHA’IK	UPRISING
WU
Kalam	threw	himself	into	the	shadows	at	the	base	of	a	low,	battered	wall,	then
dragged	the	still-warm	corpse	half	over	him.	He	ducked	his	head	down,	then
lay	still,	battling	to	slow	his	breathing.
A	few	moments	later,	light	footfalls	sounded	on	the	street’s	cobbles.	A
voice	hissed	an	angry	halt.
“They	pursued,”	another	hunter	whispered.	“And	he	ambushed	them—here.
Gods!	What	kind	of	man	is	he?”
A	third	Claw	spoke,	a	woman.	“He	can’t	be	far	away—”
“Of	course	he’s	close,”	snapped	the	leader	who	had	first	called	the	halt.
“He	doesn’t	have	wings,	does	he?	He’s	not	immortal,	he’s	not	immune	to	the
charms	of	our	blades—no	more	such	mutterings,	do	you	two	hear	me?	Now
spread	out—you,	up	that	side,	and	you,	up	the	other.”	Sorcery	cast	its	cold
breath.	“I’ll	stay	in	the	middle,”	the	leader	said.
Aye,	and	unseen,	meaning	you’re	first,	bastard.
Kalam	listened	as	the	other	two	headed	off.	He	knew	the	pattern	they	would
assume,	the	two	flankers	moving	ahead,	the	leader—hidden	in	sorcery—
hanging	back,	eyes	flicking	between	the	two	hunters,	scanning	alley	mouths,
rooftops,	a	ribless	crossbow	in	each	hand.	Kalam	waited	a	moment	longer,
then	slowly,	silently	slipped	free	of	the	corpse	and	rose	into	a	crouch.
He	padded	into	the	street,	his	bare	feet	making	no	sound.	To	someone	who
knew	what	to	look	for,	the	bloom	of	darkness	edging	forward	twenty	paces
ahead	was	just	discernible.	Not	an	easy	spell	to	maintain,	it	was	inevitably


weaker	to	the	rear,	and	Kalam	could	make	out	a	hint	of	the	figure	moving
within	it.
He	closed	the	distance	like	a	charging	leopard.	One	of	Kalam’s	elbows
connected	with	the	base	of	the	leader ’s	skull,	killing	him	instantly.	He	caught
one	of	the	crossbows	before	it	struck	the	cobbles,	but	the	other	eluded	him,
clattering	and	skittering	on	the	street.	Silently	cursing,	the	assassin	continued
his	charge,	angling	right,	toward	an	alley	mouth	twenty	paces	behind	the
flanker	on	that	side.
He	dived	at	the	muted	snap	of	a	crossbow	and	felt	the	quarrel	rip	through
his	cloak.	Then	he	was	rolling	into	the	alley’s	narrow	confines,	sliding	on
rotted	vegetables.	Rats	scattered	from	his	path	as	he	regained	his	feet	and
darted	into	deeper	shadows.
An	alcove	loomed	on	his	left	and	he	spun,	backed	into	its	gloom	and	pulled
free	his	own	crossbow.	Doubly	armed,	he	waited.
A	figure	edged	into	view	and	paused	opposite	him,	no	more	than	six	feet
away.
The	woman	ducked	and	twisted	even	as	Kalam	fired—and	the	assassin
knew	he	had	missed.	Her	dagger,	however,	did	not.	The	blade,	flashing	out
from	her	hand,	thudded	as	it	struck	him	just	beneath	his	right	clavicle.	A	second
thrown	weapon—an	iron	star—embedded	itself	in	the	alcove’s	wooden	door
beside	Kalam’s	face.
He	pressed	the	release	on	the	second	crossbow.	The	quarrel	took	her	low
in	the	belly.	She	tumbled	back	and	was	dead	of	the	White	Paralt	before	she
stopped	moving.
Kalam	was	not—the	weapon	jutting	from	his	chest	must	be	clean.	He	sank
down,	laying	the	two	crossbows	on	the	ground,	then	reached	up	and	withdrew
the	knife,	reversing	grip.
He’d	already	used	up	his	other	weapons,	although	he	still	retained	the
tongs	and	the	small	sack	of	cloth-tacks.
The	last	hunter	was	close,	waiting	for	Kalam	to	make	another	break—and
the	man	knew	precisely	where	he	hid.	The	body	lying	opposite	was	the	clearest
indication	of	that.
Now	what?
The	right-hand	side	of	his	shirt	was	wet	and	sticky,	and	he	could	feel	the
heat	of	the	blood	streaming	down	his	body	on	that	side.	It	was	his	third	minor
wound	of	the	night—a	throwing	star	had	found	his	back	during	the	next-to-last
skirmish.	Such	weapons	were	never	poisoned—too	risky	for	the	thrower,	even
when	gloved.	The	heavy	apron	had	absorbed	most	of	the	impact,	and	he’d
scraped	the	star	off	against	a	wall.


His	mental	discipline	in	slowing	the	flow	of	blood	from	the	various
wounds	was	close	to	tatters.	He	was	weakening.	Fast.
Kalam	looked	straight	up.	The	underside	of	a	wooden	balcony	was	directly
overhead,	the	two	paint-chipped	braces	about	seven	and	a	half	feet	above	the
ground.	A	jump	might	allow	him	to	reach	one,	but	that	would	be	a	noisy	affair,
and	success	would	leave	him	helpless.
He	drew	the	tongs	from	their	loop.	Gripping	the	bloody	knife	in	his	teeth,
he	slowly	straightened,	reaching	up	with	the	tongs.	They	closed	over	the	brace.
Now,	will	the	damned	thing	hold	my	weight?
Gripping	the	handles	hard,	he	cautiously	tensed	his	shoulders,	drew
himself	up	an	inch,	then	another.	The	brace	did	not	so	much	as	groan—and	he
realized	that	the	wooden	beam	in	all	likelihood	extended	into	a	deep	socket	in
the	stone	wall	itself.	He	continued	pulling	himself	upward.
The	challenge	was	maintaining	silence,	for	any	rustle	or	whisper	of	noise
would	alert	his	hunter.	Arms	and	shoulders	trembling,	Kalam	drew	his	legs	up,
a	fraction	at	a	time,	tucked	his	right	leg	even	higher,	then	edged	it,	foot	first,
through	the	triangular	gap	above	the	brace.
He	hooked	that	leg,	pulled,	and	was	finally	able	to	ease	the	strain	on	his
arms	and	shoulders.
Kalam	hung	there,	motionless,	for	a	long	minute.
Claws	liked	waiting	games.	They	excelled	in	contests	of	patience.	His
hunter	had	evidently	concluded	that	this	was	one	of	those	games,	and	he
intended	to	win	it.
Well,	stranger,	I	don’t	play	by	your	rules.
He	slipped	the	tongs	free,	held	them	out	and	lifted	them	toward	the
balcony’s	floor.	This	was	the	greatest	risk,	since	he	had	no	idea	what	occupied
that	floor	above	him.	He	probed	with	the	tongs	in	minute	increments	until	he
could	reach	no	farther,	then	he	lowered	the	tool	down	and	left	it	there.
The	knife	stayed	clenched	between	his	teeth,	filling	his	mouth	with	the	taste
of	his	own	blood.	With	both	hands	freed,	Kalam	gripped	the	balcony’s	ledge,
slowly	pulled	his	weight	away	from	the	brace	and	drew	himself	up.	Hands
climbing	the	railings,	he	swung	a	leg	over	and,	a	moment	later,	crouched	on
the	balcony	floor,	the	tongs	at	his	feet.
He	scanned	the	area.	Clay	pots	housing	various	herbs,	a	moulded	bread
oven	on	a	foundation	of	bricks	occupying	one	end,	the	heat	radiating	from	it
reaching	the	assassin’s	sweat-cooled	face.
A	barred	hatch	that	a	person	would	have	to	crawl	to	get	through	offered	the
only	way	into	the	room	beyond.
His	scan	ended	upon	meeting	the	eyes	of	a	small	dog	crouched	at	the	end


opposite	the	bread	oven.	Black-haired,	compactly	muscled	and	with	a	foxlike
snout	and	ears,	the	creature	was	chewing	on	half	a	rat,	and	as	it	chewed	it
watched	Kalam’s	every	move	with	those	sharp,	black	eyes.
Kalam	released	a	very	soft	sigh.	Another	dubious	claim	to	fame	for	Malaz
City:	the	Malazan	ratter,	bred	for	its	fearless	insanity.	There	was	no	predicting
what	the	dog	would	do	once	it	had	decided	its	meal	was	done.	It	might	lick	his
hand.	It	might	bite	his	nose	off.
He	watched	it	sniff	at	the	mangled	meat	between	its	paws,	then	gobble	it	up,
chewing	overlong	as	it	considered	Kalam.	Then	it	ate	the	rat’s	tail,	choking
briefly—the	sound	barely	a	whisper—before	managing	to	swallow	its	length.
The	ratter	licked	its	forepaws,	rose	into	a	sitting	position,	ducked	its	head
to	lick	elsewhere,	then	stood	facing	the	bleeding	assassin.
The	barking	exploded	in	the	night	air,	a	frenzy	that	had	the	ratter	bouncing
around	with	the	effort.
Kalam	leaped	up	onto	the	balcony	rail.	A	blur	of	motion	darted	beneath
him,	down	in	the	alley.	He	plunged	straight	for	it,	the	throwing	knife	in	his	left
hand.
Even	as	he	dropped	through	the	air,	he	was	sure	he	was	finished.	His	lone
hunter	had	found	allies—another	entire	Hand.
Sorcery	flared	upward	to	strike	Kalam	like	a	massive	fist.	The	knife	flew
from	nerveless	fingers.	Twisting,	his	trajectory	knocked	awry	by	the	mage’s
attack,	he	missed	his	target	and	struck	the	cobbles	hard	on	his	left	side.
The	maniacal	barking	overhead	continued	unabated.
Kalam’s	intended	target	charged	him,	blades	flashing.	He	drew	his	legs	up
and	kicked	out,	but	the	man	slipped	past	with	a	deft	motion.	The	knife	blade
scored	against	Kalam’s	ribs	on	either	side.	The	hunter ’s	forehead	cracked
against	his	nose.	Light	exploded	behind	the	assassin’s	eyes.
A	moment	later,	as	the	hunter	reared	back,	straddling	Kalam,	and	raised
both	knives,	a	snarling	black	bundle	landed	on	the	man’s	head.	He	shrieked	as
razorlike,	overlong	canines	ripped	open	one	side	of	his	face.
Kalam	caught	one	wrist,	snapped	it	and	pulled	the	knife	from	the	spasming
hand.
The	hunter	was	desperately	stabbing	at	the	ratter	with	the	other	knife,
without	much	luck,	then	he	threw	the	weapon	away	and	reached	for	the
writhing	dog.
Kalam	sank	his	knife	into	the	hunter ’s	heart.
Pushing	the	body	aside,	he	staggered	upright—to	find	himself	surrounded.
“You	can	call	your	dog	off,	Kalam,”	a	woman	said.
He	glanced	down	at	the	animal—it	hadn’t	slowed.	Blood	spattered	the


cobbles	around	the	corpse’s	head	and	neck.
“Alas,”	Kalam	growled.	“Not	mine…though	I	wish	I	had	a	hundred	of	the
beasts.”	The	pain	of	his	shattered	nose	throbbed.	Tears	streamed	from	his	eyes,
joining	the	flow	of	blood	dripping	from	his	lips	and	chin.
“Oh,	for	Hood’s	sake!”	The	woman	turned	to	one	of	her	hunters.	“Kill	the
damned	thing—”
“Not	necessary,”	Kalam	said,	stepping	over.	He	reached	down,	grabbed	the
creature	by	its	scruff	and	lobbed	it	back	toward	the	balcony.	The	ratter	yelped,
just	clearing	the	rail,	then	vanished	from	sight.	A	wild	skitter	of	claws
announced	its	landing.
A	wavering	voice	reached	down	from	the	balcony’s	hatch.	“Flower,
darling,	settle	down	now,	there’s	a	good	boy.”
Kalam	eyed	the	leader.	“All	right,	then,”	he	said.	“Finish	it.”
“With	pleasure—”
The	quarrel’s	impact	threw	her	into	Kalam’s	arms,	almost	skewering	him
on	the	great	barbed	point	jutting	from	her	chest.	The	four	remaining	hunters
dived	for	cover,	not	knowing	what	had	arrived,	as	horse	hooves	crashed	in	the
alley.
Kalam	gaped	to	see	his	stallion	charging	for	him	and,	crouched	low	over
the	saddle	and	swinging	back	the	clawfoot	on	the	Marine-issue	crossbow,
Minala.
The	assassin	stepped	aside	a	split	second	before	being	trampled,	grasped
an	edge	of	the	saddle	and	let	the	animal’s	momentum	swing	him	up	behind
Minala.	She	thrust	the	crossbow	into	his	hands.	“Cover	us!”
Twisting,	he	saw	four	shapes	in	pursuit.	Kalam	fired.	The	hunters	pitched
down	to	the	ground	as	one.	The	quarrel	careened	off	a	wall	and	skittered	away
into	the	darkness.
The	alley	opened	onto	a	street.	Minala	wheeled	the	stallion	to	the	left.
Hooves	skidded,	spraying	sparks.	Righting	itself,	the	horse	bolted	forward.
Malaz	City’s	harbor	district	was	a	tangle	of	narrow,	twisting	streets	and
alleys,	seemingly	impossible	for	a	horse	at	full	gallop,	in	the	dead	of	night.
The	next	few	minutes	marked	the	wildest	ride	Kalam	had	ever	known.	Minala’s
skill	was	breathtaking.
After	a	short	while,	Kalam	leaned	close	to	her.	“Where	in	Hood’s	name	are
you	taking	us?	The	whole	city’s	crawling	with	Claws,	woman—”
“I	know,	damn	you!”
She	guided	the	stallion	across	a	wooden	bridge.	Looking	up,	the	assassin
saw	the	upper	district	and,	beyond	it,	a	looming	black	shape:	the	cliff—and
Mock’s	Hold.


“Minala!”
“You	wanted	the	Empress,	right?	Well,	you	bastard,	she’s	right	there—in
Mock’s	Hold!”
Oh,	Hood’s	shadow!
	
The	tiles	gave	way	without	a	sound.	Cold	blackness	swallowed	the	four
travelers.
The	drop	ended	abruptly,	in	a	bone-jarring	impact	with	smooth,	polished
flagstones.
Groaning,	Fiddler	sat	up,	the	sack	of	munitions	still	strapped	to	his
shoulders.	He’d	injured	his	barely	healed	ankle	in	the	fall	and	the	pain	was
excruciating.	Teeth	clenched,	he	looked	around.	The	others	were	all	in	one
piece,	it	seemed,	slowly	clambering	to	their	feet.
They	were	in	a	round	room,	a	perfect	match	to	the	one	they	had	left	in
Tremorlor.	For	a	moment,	the	sapper	feared	they	had	simply	returned	there,
but	then	he	smelled	salt	in	the	air.
“We’re	here,”	he	said.	“Deadhouse.”
“What	makes	you	so	sure?”	Crokus	demanded.
Fiddler	crawled	over	to	a	wall	and	levered	himself	upright.	He	tested	the
leg,	winced.	“I	smell	Malaz	Bay—and	feel	how	damp	the	air	is.	This	ain’t
Tremorlor,	lad.”
“But	we	might	be	in	any	House,	in	any	place	beside	a	bay—”
“We	might,”	the	sapper	conceded.
“It’s	simply	a	matter	of	finding	out,”	Apsalar	said	reasonably.	“You’ve	hurt
your	ankle	again,	Fiddler.”
“Aye.	I	wish	Mappo	was	here	with	his	elixirs…”
“Can	you	walk?”	Crokus	asked.
“Not	much	choice.”
Apsalar ’s	father	approached	the	stair,	looked	down.	“Someone’s	home,”	he
said.	“I	see	lantern	light.”
“Oh,	that’s	just	wonderful,”	Crokus	muttered,	unsheathing	his	knives.
“Put	’em	away,”	Fiddler	said.	“Either	we’re	guests	or	we’re	dead.	Let’s	go
introduce	ourselves,	shall	we?”
Descending	to	the	main	floor—with	Fiddler	leaning	hard	on	the	Daru—
they	passed	through	an	open	door	into	the	hallway.	Lanterns	glowed	in	niches
along	its	length,	and	the	flicker	of	firelight	issued	from	the	open	double	doors
opposite	the	entranceway.
As	at	Tremorlor,	a	massive	suit	of	armor	filled	an	alcove	halfway	down


the	hall’s	length,	and	this	one	had	seen	serious	battle.
The	group	paused	to	regard	it	briefly,	in	silence,	before	continuing	on	to
the	opened	doors.
Apsalar	leading,	they	entered	the	main	chamber.	The	flames	in	the	stone
fireplace	seemed	to	be	burning	without	fuel,	and	a	strange	blackness	around	its
edges	revealed	it	as	a	small	portal,	opened	onto	a	warren	of	ceaseless	fire.
A	figure,	its	back	to	them,	stood	staring	into	those	flames.	Dressed	in	faded
ochre	robes,	the	man	was	solid,	broad-shouldered	and	at	least	seven	feet	tall.	A
long,	iron-hued	ponytail	swept	down	between	his	shoulders,	bound	just	above
the	small	of	his	back	with	a	dull	length	of	chain.
Without	turning,	the	guardian	spoke	in	a	low,	rumbling	voice.	“Your
failure	in	taking	Icarium	has	been	noted.”
Fiddler	grunted.	“In	the	end,	it	was	not	up	to	us.	Mappo—”
“Oh	yes,	Mappo,”	the	guardian	cut	in.	“The	Trell.	He	has	walked	at
Icarium’s	side	too	long,	it	seems.	There	are	duties	that	surpass	friendship.	The
Elders	scarred	him	deep	when	they	destroyed	an	entire	settlement	and	laid	the
blame	at	Icarium’s	feet.	They	imagined	that	would	suffice.	A	Watcher	was
needed,	desperately.	The	one	who	had	held	that	responsibility	before	had	taken
his	own	life.	For	months	Icarium	walked	the	land	alone,	and	the	threat	was	too
great.”
The	words	reached	into	Fiddler,	tore	at	his	insides.	No,	Mappo	believes
Icarium	destroyed	his	home,	murdered	his	family,	everyone	he	knew.	No,	how
could	you	have	done	that?
“The	Azath	has	worked	toward	this	taking	for	a	long	time,	mortals.”	The
man	turned	then.	Huge	tusks	framed	his	thin	mouth,	jutting	from	his	lower	lip.
The	greenish	cast	of	his	weathered	skin	made	him	look	ghostly,	despite	the
hearth’s	warm	light.	Eyes	the	color	of	dirty	ice	regarded	them.
Fiddler	stared,	seeing	what	he	could	not	believe—the	resemblance	was
unmistakeable,	every	feature	an	echo.	His	mind	reeled.
“My	son	must	be	stopped—his	rage	is	a	poison,”	the	Jaghut	said.	“Some
responsibilities	surpass	friendship,	surpass	even	blood.”
“We	are	sorry,”	Apsalar	said	quietly	after	a	long	moment,	“but	the	task	was
ever	beyond	us,	beyond	those	you	see	here.”
The	cold,	unhuman	eyes	studied	her.	“Perhaps	you	are	right.	It	is	my	turn	to
apologize.	I	had	such…hopes.”
“Why?”	Fiddler	whispered.	“Why	is	Icarium	so	cursed?”
The	Jaghut	cocked	his	head,	then	abruptly	swung	back	to	the	fire.
“Wounded	warrens	are	a	dangerous	thing.	Wounding	one	is	far	more	so.	My
son	sought	a	way	to	free	me	from	the	Azath.	He	failed.	And	was…damaged.	He


did	not	understand—and	now	he	never	will—that	I	am	content	here.	There	are
few	places	in	all	the	realms	that	offer	a	Jaghut	peace,	or,	rather,	such	peace	as
we	are	capable	of	achieving.	Unlike	your	kind,	we	yearn	for	solitude,	for	that
is	our	only	safety.”
He	faced	them	again.	“For	Icarium,	of	course,	there	is	another	irony.
Without	memory,	he	knows	nothing	of	what	once	motivated	him.	He	knows
nothing	of	wounded	warrens	or	the	secrets	of	the	Azath.”	The	Jaghut’s	sudden
smile	was	a	thing	of	pain.	“He	knows	nothing	of	me,	either.”
Apsalar	lifted	her	head	suddenly,	“You	are	Gothos,	aren’t	you?”
He	did	not	answer.
Fiddler ’s	gaze	was	drawn	to	a	bench	against	the	near	wall.	He	hobbled	to	it
and	sat	down.	Leaning	his	head	against	the	warm	stone	wall,	he	closed	his	eyes.
Gods,	our	struggles	are	as	nothing,	our	inner	scars	naught	but	scratches.	Bless
you,	Hood,	for	your	gift	of	mortality.	I	could	not	live	as	these	Ascendants	do—I
could	not	so	torture	my	soul…
“It	is	time	for	you	to	leave,”	the	Jaghut	rumbled.	“If	you	are	ailing	with
wounds,	you	shall	find	a	bucket	of	water	near	the	front	door—the	water	has
healing	properties.	This	night	is	rife	with	unpleasantries	in	the	streets	beyond,
so	tread	with	care.”
Apsalar	turned,	meeting	Fiddler ’s	eyes	as	he	blinked	them	open	and
struggled	to	focus	through	his	tears.	Oh,	Mappo,	Icarium…so	entwined…
“We	must	go,”	she	said.
He	nodded,	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.	“I	could	do	with	a	drink	of	water,”
he	muttered.
Crokus	was	taking	a	last	look	around,	at	the	faded	tapestries,	the	ornate
bench,	the	pieces	of	stone	and	wood	placed	on	ledges,	finally	at	the	numerous
scrolls	stacked	on	a	desktop	against	the	wall	opposite	the	double	doors.	With	a
sigh	he	backed	away.	Apsalar ’s	father	followed.
They	returned	to	the	hall	and	approached	the	entranceway.	The	bucket
stood	to	one	side,	a	wooden	ladle	hanging	from	a	hook	above	it.
Apsalar	took	the	ladle,	dipped	it	into	the	water,	offered	it	to	Fiddler.
He	drank	deep,	then	barked	in	pain	as	an	appallingly	swift	mending
gripped	his	ankle.	A	moment	later	it	passed.	He	sagged,	suddenly	covered	in
sweat.	The	others	eyed	him.	“For	Hood’s	sake,”	the	sapper	panted,	“don’t	drink
unless	you	truly	need	it.”
Apsalar	replaced	the	ladle.
The	door	opened	at	a	touch,	revealing	a	night	sky	and	a	shambles	of	a
yard.	A	flagstone	path	wound	its	way	to	an	arched	gate.	The	entire	grounds
were	enclosed	by	a	low	stone	wall.	Tenement	houses	rose	beyond,	every


shutter	closed.
“Well?”	Crokus	asked,	turning	to	Fiddler.
“Aye.	Malaz	City.”
“Damned	ugly.”
“Indeed.”
Testing	his	ankle	and	finding	not	a	single	tremor	of	pain,	Fiddler	walked
down	the	path	to	the	arched	gate.	In	the	dark	pool	of	its	shadow,	he	looked	out
onto	the	street.
No	movement.	No	sound.
“I	don’t	like	this	at	all.”
“Sorcery	has	touched	this	city,”	Apsalar	pronounced.	“And	I	know	its
taste.”
Fiddler	eyes	narrowed	on	her.	“Claw?”
She	nodded.
The	sapper	swung	his	pack	around	to	reach	beneath	the	flap.	“That	means
close-up	scuffles,	maybe.”
“If	we’re	unlucky.”
He	withdrew	two	sharpers.	“Yeah.”
“Where	to?”	Crokus	whispered.
Damned	if	I	know.	“Let’s	try	Smiley’s—it’s	a	tavern	both	Kalam	and	I	know
well…”
They	stepped	out	from	the	gate.
A	huge	shadow	unfolded	before	them,	revealing	a	hulking,	ungainly	shape.
Apsalar ’s	hand	shot	out	and	stilled	Fiddler ’s	arm	even	as	he	prepared	to
throw.	“No,	wait.”
The	demon	tilted	a	long-snouted	head	their	way,	regarding	them	with	one
silver	eye.	Then	a	figure	astride	its	shoulder	leaned	into	view.	A	youth,	stained
in	old	blood,	his	face	a	human	version	of	the	beast’s.
“Aptorian,”	Apsalar	said	in	greeting.
The	youth’s	fanged	mouth	opened	and	a	rasping	voice	emerged.	“You	seek
Kalam	Mekhar.”
“Yes,”	Apsalar	answered.
“He	approaches	the	keep	on	the	cliff—”
Fiddler	started.	“Mock’s	Hold?	Why?”
The	rider	cocked	his	head.	“He	wishes	to	see	the	Empress?”
The	sapper	spun,	eyes	straining	toward	the	towering	bastion.	A	dark
pennant	flapped	from	the	weathervane.	“Hood	take	us,	she’s	here!”
“We	shall	guide	you,”	the	rider	said,	offering	a	ghastly	smile.	“Through
Shadow—safe	from	the	Claw.”


Apsalar	smiled	in	return.	“Lead	on,	then.”
	
There	was	no	slowing	of	pace	as	they	rode	toward	the	foot	of	wide	stone	stairs
leading	up	the	cliff	face.
Kalam	gripped	Minala’s	arm.	“You’d	better	slow—”
“Just	hold	tight,”	she	growled.	“They	aren’t	so	steep.”
They	aren’t	so	steep?	Fener’s—
Muscles	surged	beneath	them	as	the	stallion	plunged	forward.	Before	the
beast’s	hooves	struck	the	stones,	however,	the	world	shifted	into	formless	gray.
The	stallion	screamed	and	reared	back,	but	too	late.	The	warren	swallowed
them.
Hooves	skidded	wildly	beneath	them.	Kalam	was	thrown	to	one	side,	met	a
wall	and	was	scraped	off.	A	polished	floor	rose	up	to	meet	him,	punched	the
air	from	his	lungs.	The	crossbow	flew	from	his	hands	and	skittered	away.
Gasping,	the	assassin	slowly	rolled	over.
They	had	arrived	in	a	musty	hallway,	and	the	stallion	was	anything	but
pleased.	The	ceiling	was	high	and	arched,	with	an	arm’s	reach	to	spare	above
the	rearing	animal.	Somehow	Minala	had	stayed	in	the	saddle.	She	struggled	to
calm	the	stallion,	and	a	moment	later	succeeded,	leaning	forward	to	rest	one
hand	lightly	just	behind	its	flaring	nostrils.
With	a	groan,	Kalam	climbed	to	his	feet.
“Where	are	we?”	Minala	hissed,	staring	up	and	down	the	long,	empty	hall.
“If	I’m	correct,	Mock’s	Hold,”	the	assassin	muttered,	retrieving	the
crossbow.	“The	Empress	knows	we’re	coming—seems	she’s	grown
impatient…”
“If	that’s	the	case,	Kalam,	we’re	as	good	as	dead.”
He	was	not	inclined	to	disagree,	but	said	nothing,	stepping	past	the	horse
and	eyeing	the	doors	at	the	far	end.	“I	think	we’re	in	the	Old	Keep.”
“That	explains	the	dust—even	so,	it	smells	like	a	stable.”
“Not	surprising—half	this	building’s	been	converted	into	just	that.	The
Main	Hall	remains,	though.”	He	nodded	toward	the	doors.	“Through	there.”
“No	other	approaches?”
He	shook	his	head.	“None	surviving.	Her	back	door	will	be	a	warren,	in
any	case.”
Minala	grunted	and	climbed	down	from	the	saddle.	“Do	you	think	she’s
been	watching?”
“Magically?	Maybe—you’re	wondering	if	she	knows	about	you.”	He
hesitated,	then	handed	her	the	crossbow.	“Let’s	pretend	she	doesn’t.	Hold	back


—I’ll	lead	the	stallion	through.”
She	nodded,	cocking	the	weapon.
He	looked	at	her.	“How	in	Hood’s	name	did	you	get	here?”
“The	Imperial	transport	that	left	a	day	after	Ragstopper.	This	horse	wasn’t
out	of	place	among	Pormqual’s	breeders.	We,	too,	were	caught	in	that	cursed
storm,	but	the	only	real	trouble	came	when	we	had	to	disembark	from	the	bay.
That’s	a	swim	I	don’t	want	to	repeat.	Ever.”
The	assassin’s	eyes	widened.	“Hood’s	breath,	woman!”	He	looked	away,
then	back.	“Why?”
She	bared	her	teeth.	“Can	you	really	be	that	dense,	Kalam?	In	any	case,	was
I	wrong?”
There	were	some	barriers	the	assassin	had	never	expected	to	be	breached.
Their	swift	crumble	left	him	breathless.	“All	right,”	he	finally	said,	“but	I’ll
have	you	know,	I’m	anything	but	subtle.”
Her	brows	arched.	“You	could	have	fooled	me.”
Kalam	faced	the	doors	once	again.	He	was	armed	with	a	single	knife	and
had	lost	too	much	blood.	Hardly	what	you’d	call	properly	equipped	to
assassinate	an	Empress,	but	it	will	have	to	do…Without	another	word	to
Minala,	he	slipped	forward,	gathering	the	stallion’s	reins.	The	animal’s	hooves
clopped	loudly	as	they	approached	the	old	double	doors.
He	laid	a	hand	against	the	wood.	The	dark-stained	planks	were	sweating.
There’s	sorcery	on	the	other	side.	Powerful	sorcery.	He	stepped	back,	met
Minala’s	eyes	where	she	stood	ten	paces	back,	and	slowly	shook	his	head.
She	shrugged,	lifting	the	crossbow	in	her	hands.
He	faced	the	doors	again	and	gripped	the	latch	of	the	one	to	his	left.	It	lifted
silently.
Kalam	pushed	the	door	open.
Inky	darkness	flowed	out,	bitter	cold.
“Step	within,	Kalam	Mekhar,”	a	woman’s	voice	invited.
He	saw	little	option.	He	had	come	for	this,	though	the	final	shaping	was	not
as	he	would	have	liked.	The	assassin	strode	into	the	dark,	the	stallion
following.
“That	is	close	enough.	Unlike	Topper	and	his	Claw,	I	do	not	underestimate
you.”
He	could	see	nothing,	and	the	voice	seemed	to	be	coming	from
everywhere	at	once.	The	door	behind	him—slightly	ajar—offered	a	slight
lessening	of	the	gloom,	but	that	reached	but	a	pace	or	two	before	the	blackness
absorbed	it	entirely.
“You’ve	come	to	kill	me,	Bridgeburner,”	Empress	Laseen	said	in	a	cool,


dry	voice.	“All	this	way.	Why?”
The	question	startled	him.
There	was	wry	amusement	in	her	voice	as	she	continued,	“I	cannot	believe
that	you	must	struggle	to	find	your	answer,	Kalam.”
“The	deliberate	murder	of	the	Bridgeburners,”	the	assassin	growled.	“The
outlawing	of	Dujek	Onearm.	The	attempted	murders	of	Whiskeyjack,	myself
and	the	rest	of	the	Ninth	Squad.	Old	disappearances.	A	possible	hand	in	Dassem
Ultor ’s	death.	The	assassination	of	Dancer	and	the	Emperor.	Incompetence,
ignorance,	betrayal…”	He	let	his	litany	fall	away.
Empress	Laseen	was	silent	for	a	long	time,	then	she	said	in	a	low	tone,
“And	you	are	to	be	my	judge.	And	executioner.”
“That’s	about	right.”
“Am	I	permitted	a	defense?”
He	bared	his	teeth.	The	voice	was	coming	from	everywhere—everywhere
but	one	place,	he	now	realized,	the	corner	off	to	his	left,	a	corner	that	he
estimated	was	no	more	than	four	strides	away.	“You	can	try,	Empress.”	Hood’s
breath,	I	can	barely	stand	upright,	and	she’s	most	likely	got	wards.	As	Quick
Ben	says,	when	you’ve	got	nothing,	bluff…
Laseen’s	tone	hardened.	“High	Mage	Tayschrenn’s	efforts	in	Genabackis
were	misguided.	The	decimation	of	the	Bridgeburners	was	not	a	part	of	my
intentions.	Within	your	squad	was	a	young	woman,	possessed	by	a	god	that
sought	to	kill	me.	Adjunct	Lorn	was	sent	to	deal	with	her—”
“I	know	about	that,	Empress.	You’re	wasting	time.”
“I	do	not	see	it	as	a	waste,	given	that	time	may	be	all	I	shall	enjoy	here	in
the	mortal	realm.	Now,	to	continue	answering	your	charges.	The	outlawing	of
Dujek	is	a	temporary	measure,	a	ruse,	in	fact.	We	perceived	the	threat	that	was
the	Pannion	Domin.	Dujek,	however,	was	of	the	opinion	that	he	could	not	deal
with	it	on	his	own.	We	needed	to	fashion	allies	of	enemies,	Kalam.	We	needed
Darujhistan’s	resources,	we	needed	Caladan	Brood	and	his	Rhivi	and	Barghast,
we	needed	Anomander	Rake	and	his	Tiste	Andii.	And	we	needed	the	Crimson
Guard	off	our	backs.	Now,	none	of	those	formidable	forces	are	strangers	to
pragmatism—one	and	all	they	could	see	the	threat	represented	by	the	Pannion
Seer	and	his	rising	empire.	But	the	question	of	trust	remained	problematic.	I
agreed	to	Dujek’s	plan	to	cut	him	and	his	Host	loose.	As	outlaws,	they	are,	in
effect,	distanced	from	the	Malazan	Empire	and	its	desires—our	answer,	if	you
will,	to	the	issue	of	trust.”
Kalam’s	eyes	narrowed	in	thought.	“And	who	knows	of	this	ruse?”
“Only	Dujek	and	Tayschrenn.”
After	a	moment	he	grunted.	“And	what	of	the	High	Mage?	What’s	his	role


in	all	this?”
He	heard	the	smile	as	she	said,	“Ah,	well,	he	remains	in	the	background,
out	of	sight,	but	there	for	Dujek	should	Onearm	need	him.	Tayschrenn	is
Dujek’s—how	do	you	soldiers	say	it—his	shaved	knuckle	in	the	hole.”
Kalam	was	silent	for	a	long	minute.	The	only	sounds	in	the	chamber	were
his	breathing	and	the	slow	but	steady	drip	of	his	blood	onto	the	flagstones.
Then	he	said,	“There	are	older	crimes	that	remain…”	The	assassin	frowned.
The	only	sounds…
“Assassinating	Kellanved	and	Dancer?	Aye,	I	ended	their	rule	of	the
Malazan	Empire.	Usurped	the	throne.	A	most	vicious	betrayal,	in	truth.	An
empire	is	greater	than	any	lone	mortal—”
“Including	you.”
“Including	me.	An	empire	enforces	its	own	necessities,	makes	demands	in
the	name	of	duty—and	that	particular	burden	is	something	you,	as	a	soldier,
most	certainly	understand.	I	knew	those	two	men	very	well,	Kalam—a	claim
you	cannot	make.	I	answered	a	necessity	I	could	not	avoid,	with	reluctance,
with	anguish.	Since	that	time,	I	have	made	grievous	errors	in	judgment—and	I
must	live	with	those—”
“Dassem	Ultor—”
“Was	a	rival.	An	ambitious	man,	sworn	to	Hood.	I	would	not	risk	civil	war,
so	I	struck	first.	I	averted	that	civil	war,	and	so	have	no	regrets	on	that.”
“It	seems,”	the	assassin	murmured	dryly,	“you’ve	prepared	for	this.”	Oh,
haven’t	you	just.
After	a	moment	she	went	on.	“So,	if	Dassem	Ultor	was	sitting	here	right
now,	instead	of	me—tell	me,	Kalam,	do	you	think	he	would	have	let	you	get
this	close?	Do	you	think	he	would	have	sought	to	reason	with	you?”	She	was
silent	for	a	few	more	breaths,	then	continued,	“It	seems	clear	that	my	efforts	to
disguise	the	direction	of	my	voice	have	failed,	for	you	face	me	directly.	Three,
perhaps	four	strides,	Kalam,	and	you	can	end	the	reign	of	Empress	Laseen.
What	do	you	choose?”
Smiling,	Kalam	shifted	the	grip	of	the	knife	in	his	right	hand.	Very	well,	I’ll
play	along.	“Seven	Cities—”
“Will	be	answered	in	kind,”	she	snapped.
Despite	himself,	the	assassin’s	eyes	widened	at	the	anger	he	heard	there.
Well,	what	do	you	know?	Empress,	you	did	not	need	your	illusions	after	all.
Thus,	the	hunt	ends	here.	He	sheathed	the	knife.
And	smiled	in	admiration	when	she	gasped.
“Empress,”	he	rumbled.
“I—I	admit	to	some	confusion…”


I’d	not	thought	acting	one	of	your	fortes,	Laseen…“You	could	have	begged
for	your	life.	You	could	have	given	more	reasons,	made	more	justifications.
Instead,	you	spoke,	not	with	your	voice,	but	with	an	empire’s.”	He	turned	away.
“Your	hiding	place	is	safe.	I	will	leave	your…presence—”
“Wait!”
He	paused,	brows	raised	at	the	sudden	uncertainty	in	her	voice.	“Empress?”
“The	Claw—I	can	do	nothing—I	cannot	recall	them.”
“I	know.	They	deal	with	their	own.”
“Where	will	you	go?”
He	smiled	in	the	darkness.	“Your	confidence	in	me	is	flattering,	Empress.”
He	swung	the	stallion	around,	strode	to	the	doorway,	then	turned	back	one	last
time.	“If	you	meant	to	ask,	will	I	come	for	you	again?	The	answer	is	no.”
Minala	was	covering	the	entrance	from	a	few	paces	away.	She	slowly
straightened	as	Kalam	stepped	into	the	hallway.	The	crossbow	held	steady	as
the	assassin	pulled	the	stallion	into	view,	then	went	around	and	shut	the	door.
“Well?”	she	demanded	in	a	hiss.
“Well,	what?”
“I	heard	voices—murmuring,	garbled—is	she	dead?	Did	you	kill	the
Empress?”
I	killed	a	ghost,	perhaps.	No,	a	scarecrow	I	made	in	Laseen’s	guise.	An
assassin	should	never	see	the	face	behind	the	victim’s	mask.	“Naught	but
mocking	echoes	in	that	chamber.	We’re	done	here,	Minala.”
Her	eyes	flashed.	“After	all	this…mocking	echoes?	You’ve	crossed	three
continents	to	do	this!”
He	shrugged.	“It’s	our	nature,	isn’t	it?	Again	and	again,	we	cling	to	the
foolish	belief	that	simple	solutions	exist.	Aye,	I	anticipated	a	dramatic,
satisfying	confrontation—the	flash	of	sorcery,	the	spray	of	blood.	I	wanted	a
sworn	enemy	dead	by	my	hand.	Instead—”	he	rumbled	a	laugh—“I	had	an
audience	with	a	mortal	woman,	more	or	less…”	He	shook	himself.	“In	any
case,	we’ve	the	Claw’s	gauntlet	ahead	of	us.”
“Terrific.	What	do	we	do	now,	then?”
He	grinned.	“Simple—straight	down	their	Hood-damned	throat.”
“A	foolish	belief	if	ever	I’ve	heard	one…”
“Aye.	Come	on.”
Leading	the	stallion,	they	went	down	the	hallway.
	
The	unnatural	darkness	slowly	dissipated	in	the	old	Main	Hall.	Revealed	in	one
corner	was	a	chair	on	which	was	seated	a	withered	corpse.	Wisps	of	hair


fluttered	lightly	in	a	faint	draft,	the	lips	were	peeled	back,	the	eye	sockets	two
depthless	voids.
A	warren	opened	near	the	back	wall	and	a	tall,	lean	man	draped	in	a	darkgreen	cloak	stepped	through.	He	paused	in	the	center	of	the	chamber,	cocked
his	head	toward	the	double	doors	opposite,	then	turned	to	the	corpse	on	the
chair.	“Well?”
Empress	Laseen’s	voice	emerged	from	those	lifeless	lips.	“No	longer	a
threat.”
“Are	you	sure,	Empress?”
“At	some	point	in	our	conversation,	Kalam	realized	that	I	was	not	here	in
the	flesh,	that	he	would	have	to	resume	his	hunt.	It	seemed,	however,	that	my
words	had	an	effect.	He	is	not	an	unreasonable	man,	after	all.	Now,	if	you
would	kindly	call	off	your	hunters.”
“We	have	been	over	this—you	know	that	is	impossible.”
“I	would	not	lose	him,	Topper.”
His	laugh	was	a	bark.	“I	said	I	cannot	call	off	my	hunters,	Empress—do
you	take	that	to	mean	you	actually	expect	them	to	succeed?	Hood’s	breath,
Dancer	himself	would	have	hesitated	before	taking	on	Kalam	Mekhar.	No,
better	to	view	this	disastrous	night	as	a	long-overdue	winnowing	of	the
brotherhood’s	weaker	elements…”
“Generous	of	you,	indeed.”
His	smile	was	wry.	“We	have	learned	lessons	in	killing	this	night,	Empress.
Much	to	ponder.	Besides,	I	have	a	victim	on	which	to	vent	my	frustration.”
“Pearl,	your	favored	lieutenant.”
“Favored	no	longer.”
A	hint	of	warning	entered	Laseen’s	tone.	“I	trust	he	will	recover	from	your
attentions,	Topper.”
He	sighed.	“Aye,	but	for	the	moment	I	will	leave	him	to	sweat…and
consider	Kalam’s	most	pointed	lesson.	A	certain	measure	of	humility	does	a
man	good,	I	always	say.	Would	you	not	agree,	Empress?
“Empress?”
I	have	been	talking	to	a	corpse.	Ah,	Laseen,	that	is	what	I	love	most	about
you—your	extraordinary	ability	to	make	one	eat	one’s	own	words…
	
The	captain	of	the	Guard	literally	stumbled	on	them	as	they	edged	their	way
alongside	the	old	keep’s	outer	wall.	Minala	raised	the	crossbow	and	the	man
cautiously	held	his	hands	out	to	the	sides.	Kalam	stepped	forward	and	dragged
him	into	the	shadows,	then	quickly	disarmed	him.


“All	right,	Captain,”	the	assassin	hissed.	“Tell	me	where	the	Hold’s
unwelcome	guests	are	hiding.”
“I	take	it	you	don’t	mean	yourselves,”	the	man	said,	sighing.	“Well,	the
gatehouse	guard’s	been	muttering	about	figures	on	the	stairs—of	course,	the
old	bastard’s	half	blind.	But	in	the	grounds	here…nothing.”
“You	can	do	better	than	that,	Captain…?”
The	man	scowled.	“Aragan.	And	here	I	am	only	days	away	from	a	new
posting…”
“And	that	doesn’t	have	to	change,	with	a	little	cooperation.”
“I’ve	just	done	the	rounds—everything’s	quiet,	as	far	as	I	can	tell.	Mind
you,	that	doesn’t	mean	a	thing,	does	it?”
Minala	glanced	pointedly	up	at	the	pennant	flapping	from	the	weathervane
above	the	Hold.	“And	your	official	guest?	No	bodyguards?”
Captain	Aragan	grinned.	“Oh,	the	Empress,	you	mean.”	Something	in	his
tone	hinted	at	great	amusement.	“She’s	not	aged	well,	has	she?”
Inky	blackness	billowed	in	the	courtyard.	Minala	shouted	a	warning	even
as	the	crossbow	bucked	in	her	hands.	A	voice	shouted	in	pain.
Kalam	straight-armed	the	captain,	sending	him	sprawling	to	one	side,	then
spun,	knife	flashing	in	his	hand.
Four	Hands	of	the	Claw	had	appeared—twenty	killers	were	converging	on
them.	Throwing	stars	hissed	through	the	darkness.	Minala	cried	out,	the
crossbow	flying	from	her	grip	as	she	staggered	back.	A	bucking	wave	of
sorcery	rolled	over	the	cobbles—and	vanished.
Shadows	swirled	in	the	midst	of	the	Hands,	adding	to	the	confusion.	When
something	huge	and	ungainly	stepped	into	view,	Kalam’s	eyes	widened	with
recognition.	Apt!	The	demon	lashed	out.	Bodies	flew	in	all	directions.	The
Hand	most	distant	turned	as	one	to	meet	this	new	threat.	A	rock-sized	object
flew	toward	them.	The	five	hunters	scattered—but	too	late,	as	the	sharper
struck	the	flagstones.
The	explosion	sent	shards	of	iron	scything	through	them.
A	lone	hunter	closed	with	Kalam.	Two	thin-bladed	knives	darted	forward
in	a	blur.	One	struck	the	assassin	in	his	right	shoulder,	the	other	missed	his	face
by	inches.	Kalam’s	knife	fell	from	nerveless	fingers	and	he	reeled	back.	The
hunter	leaped	at	him.
The	sack	of	cloth-tacks	intercepted	the	path	of	the	man’s	head	with	a
sickening	crunch.	The	hunter	dropped	to	writhe	on	the	ground.
Another	sharper	detonated	nearby.	More	screams	rang	through	the
courtyard.
Hands	gripped	Kalam’s	tattered	apron,	dragged	him	into	the	shadows.	The


assassin	weakly	struggled.	“Minala!”
A	familiar	voice	whispered	close	to	him.	“We’ve	got	her—and	Crokus	has
the	stallion—”
Kalam	blinked.	“Sorry?”
“It’s	Apsalar	these	days,	Corporal.”
The	shadows	closed	on	all	sides.	Sounds	faded.
“You’re	full	of	holes,”	Apsalar	observed.	“Busy	night,	I	take	it.”
He	grunted	as	the	knife	was	slowly	withdrawn	from	his	shoulder,	and	he
felt	the	blood	welling	in	the	blade’s	wake.	A	face	leaned	into	his	view,	a	graystreaked	red	snarl	of	beard,	a	battered	soldier ’s	visage	that	now	grinned.
“Hood’s	breath!”	Kalam	muttered.	“That’s	a	damned	ugly	face	you’ve	got
there,	Fid.”
The	grin	broadened.	“Funny,”	Fiddler	said,	“I	was	just	thinking	the	same—
and	that’s	what	I	don’t	get,	what	with	you	finding	this	flash	lady	for	company
—”
“Her	wounds—”
“Minor,”	Apsalar	said	from	close	by.
“Did	you	get	her?”	Fiddler	asked.	“Did	you	kill	the	Empress?”
“No.	I	changed	my	mind—”
“Damn,	we	could—you	what?”
“She’s	a	sweet	sack	of	bones	after	all,	Fid—remind	me	to	tell	you	the
whole	tale	some	time,	provided	you	repay	in	kind,	since	I	gather	you	managed
to	use	the	Azath	gates.”
“Aye,	we	did.”
“Any	problems?”
“Nothing	to	it.”
“Glad	to	hear	one	of	us	had	it	easy.”	Kalam	struggled	to	sit	up.	“Where	are
we?”
A	new	voice	spoke,	sibilant	and	wry.	“The	Realm	of	Shadow…My	realm!”
Fiddler	groaned,	looked	up.	“Shadowthrone	is	it	now?	Kellanved,	more
like	it!	We	ain’t	fooled,	y’	got	that?	You	can	hide	in	those	fancy	shadows	all
you	like,	but	you’re	still	just	the	damned	Emperor!”
“Ai,	I	quail!”	The	insubstantial	figure	giggled	suddenly,	edging	back.	“And
you,	are	you	not	a	soldier	of	the	Malazan	Empire?	Did	you	not	take	a	vow?	Did
you	not	swear	allegiance…to	me?”
“To	the	Empire,	you	mean!”
“Why	quibble	about	such	minor	distinctions?	The	truth	remains	that	the
aptorian	has	delivered	you…to	me,	to	me,	to	me!”
Sudden	clicking,	buzzing	sounds	made	the	god	shift	around	to	face	the


demon.	When	the	strange	noises	coming	from	Apt	ceased,	Shadowthrone	faced
the	group	once	again.	“Clever	bitch!	But	we	knew	that,	didn’t	we?	She	and	that
ugly	child	riding	her,	agh!	Corporal	Kalam	of	the	Bridgeburners,	it	seems
you’ve	found	a	woman—oh,	look	at	her	eyes!	Such	fury!	I	am	impressed,	most
impressed.	And	now	you	wish	to	settle	down,	yes?	I	wish	to	reward	you	all!”
He	gestured	with	both	hands	as	if	delivering	blessings.	“Loyal	subjects	that	you
all	are!”
Apsalar	spoke	in	her	cool,	detached	way.	“I	do	not	seek	any	reward,	nor
does	my	father.	We	would	have	our	associations	severed—with	you,	with
Cotillion,	and	with	every	other	Ascendant.	We	would	leave	this	warren,
Ammanas,	and	return	to	the	Kanese	coast—”
“And	I	with	them,”	Crokus	said.
“Oh,	wonderful!”	the	god	crooned.	“Synchronous	elegance,	this	fullest	of
full	circles!	To	the	Kanese	coast	indeed!	To	the	very	road	where	first	we	met,
oh	yes.	Go,	then!	I	send	you	with	the	smoothest	of	gestures.	Go!”	He	raised	an
arm	and	caressed	the	air	with	his	long,	ghostly	fingers.
Shadows	swept	over	the	three	figures,	and	when	they	cleared,	Apsalar,	her
father	and	Crokus	had	vanished.
The	god	giggled	again.	“Cotillion	will	be	so	pleased,	won’t	he	just.	Now,
what	of	you,	soldier?	My	magnanimity	is	rarely	seen—I	have	so	little	of	it!
Quickly,	before	I	tire	of	all	this	amusement.”
“Corporal?”	Fiddler	asked,	crouching	beside	the	assassin.	“Kalam,	I	ain’t
too	thrilled	with	a	god	making	offers,	if	you	know	what	I	mean—”
“Well,	we	haven’t	heard	much	of	those	offers	yet,	have	we?	Kell—
Shadowthrone,	I	could	do	with	a	rest,	if	that’s	what	you’ve	in	mind.”	He
glanced	across	and	met	Minala’s	eyes.	She	nodded.	“Some	place	safe—”
“Safe!	Nowhere	safer!	Apt	shall	be	at	your	side,	as	vigilant	as	ever!	And
comfort,	oh	yes,	much	comfort—”
“Ugh,”	Fiddler	said.	“Sounds	dull	as	death.	Count	me	out.”
The	god	seemed	to	cock	its	head.	“In	truth,	I	owe	you	nothing,	sapper.	Only
Apt	speaks	for	you.	Alas,	she’s	acquired	a	certain…leverage.	And	oh,	yes,	you
were	a	loyal	enough	soldier,	I	suppose.	You	wish	to	return	to	the
Bridgeburners?”
“No.”
Kalam	turned	in	surprise,	to	see	his	friend	frowning.
“On	our	way	up	to	Mock’s	Hold,”	the	sapper	explained,	“we	listened	in	on
a	group	of	guards	during	a	shift-change—seems	there’s	a	last	detachment	of
recruits	holed	up	in	Malaz	Harbor	on	their	way	to	join	Tavore.”	He	met
Kalam’s	eyes.	“Sorry,	Corporal,	but	I’m	for	getting	involved	in	putting	down


that	rebellion	in	your	homeland.	So,	I’ll	enlist…again.”
Kalam	reached	out	a	blood-smeared	hand.	“Just	stay	alive,	then,	that’s	all	I
ask.”
The	sapper	nodded.
Shadowthrone	sighed.	“And	with	such	soldiers,	it	is	no	wonder	we
conquered	half	a	world—no,	Fiddler,	I	do	not	mock.	This	once,	I	do	not	mock.
Though	Laseen	does	not	deserve	such	as	you.	Nonetheless,	when	these	mists
clear,	you	will	find	yourself	in	the	alley	back	of	Smiley’s	Tavern.”
“That	will	do	me	fine,	Kellanved.	I	appreciate	it.”
A	moment	later	the	sapper	was	gone.
The	assassin	turned	a	jaded	eye	on	Shadowthrone.	“You	understand,	don’t
you,	that	I	won’t	try	to	kill	Laseen—my	hunt’s	over.	In	fact,	I’m	tempted	to
warn	you	and	Cotillion	off	her—leave	the	Empire	to	the	Empress.	You’ve	got
your	own,	right	here—”
“Tempted	to	warn	us,	you	said?”	The	god	swept	closer.	“Bite	it	back,
Kalam,	lest	you	come	to	regret	it.”	The	shadow-wrapped	from	withdrew	again.
“We	do	as	we	please.	Never	forget	that,	mortal.”
Minala	edged	to	Kalam’s	side	and	laid	a	trembling	hand	on	his	uninjured
shoulder.	“Gifts	from	gods	make	me	nervous,”	she	whispered.	“Especially	this
one.”
He	nodded,	in	full	agreement.
“Oh,”	Shadowthrone	said,	“don’t	be	like	that!	My	offer	stands.	Sanctuary,	a
true	opportunity	to	settle	down.	Husband	and	wife,	hee	hee!	No,	mother	and
father!	And,	best	of	all,	there’s	no	need	to	wait	for	children	of	your	own—Apt
has	found	some	for	you!”
The	mists	surrounding	them	suddenly	cleared,	and	they	saw,	beyond	Apt
and	her	charge,	a	ragtag	encampment	sprawled	over	the	summit	of	a	low	hill.
Small	figures	wandered	among	the	tent	rows.	Woodsmoke	rose	from	countless
fires.
“You	wished	for	their	lives,”	Shadowthrone	hissed	in	glee.	“Or	so	Apt
claims.	Now	you	have	them.	Your	children	await	you,	Kalam	Mekhar	and
Minala	Eltroeb—all	thirteen	hundred	of	them!”


Chapter	Twenty-Four

The	priest	of	Elder	Mael
dreams	rising	seas…
DUSK
SETHAND
The	whirlwind’s	spinning	tunnel	opened	out	onto	the	plain	in	an	explosion	of
airborne	dust.	Wiry,	strangely	black	grasses	lay	before	Sha’ik	as	she	led	her
train	forward.	After	a	moment	she	slowed	her	mount.	What	she	had	first
thought	to	be	humped	stones	stretching	out	in	all	directions	she	now	realized
were	corpses,	rotting	under	the	sun.	They	had	come	upon	a	battlefield,	one	of
the	last	engagements	between	Korbolo	Dom	and	Coltaine.
The	grasses	were	black	with	dried	blood.	Capemoths	fluttered	here	and
there	across	the	scene.	Flies	buzzed	the	heatswollen	bodies.	The	stench	was
overpowering.
“Souls	in	tatters,”	Heboric	said	beside	her.
She	glanced	at	the	old	man,	then	gestured	Leoman	forward	to	her	other
side.	“Take	a	scouring	party,”	she	told	the	desert	warrior.	“See	what	lies
ahead.”
“Death	lies	ahead,”	Heboric	said,	shivering	despite	the	heat.
Leoman	grunted.	“We	are	already	in	its	midst.”
“No.	This—this	is	nothing.”	The	ex-priest	swung	his	sightless	eyes	toward
Sha’ik.	“Korbolo	Dom—what	has	he	done?”
“We	shall	discover	that	soon	enough,”	she	snapped,	waving	Leoman	and
his	troop	forward.
The	army	of	the	Apocalypse	marched	out	from	the	Whirlwind	Warren.
Sha’ik	had	attached	each	of	her	three	mages	to	a	battalion—she	preferred	them
apart,	and	distanced	from	her.	They	had	been	none	too	pleased	by	the	order	of
march,	and	she	now	sensed	the	three	sorcerers	questing	ahead	with	enhanced
sensitivities—questing,	then	flinching	back,	L’oric	first,	then	Bidithal	and
finally	Febryl.	From	three	sources	came	echoes	of	appalled	horror.


And,	should	I	choose	it,	I	could	do	the	same.	Reach	ahead	with	unseen
fingers	to	touch	what	lies	before	us.	Yet	she	would	not.
“There	is	trepidation	in	you,	lass,”	Heboric	murmured.	“Do	you	now
finally	regret	the	choices	you	have	made?”
Regret?	Oh,	yes.	Many	regrets,	beginning	with	a	vicious	argument	with	my
sister,	back	in	Unta,	a	sisterly	spat	that	went	too	far.	A	hurt	child…accusing	her
sister	of	killing	their	parents.	One,	then	the	other.	Father.	Mother.	A	hurt	child,
who	had	lost	all	reasons	to	smile.	“I	have	a	daughter	now.”
She	sensed	his	attention	suddenly	focusing	on	her,	the	old	man	wondering
at	this	strange	turn	of	thought,	wondering,	then	slowly—in	anguish—coming
to	understand.
Sha’ik	went	on,	“And	I	have	named	her.”
“I’ve	yet	to	hear	it,”	the	ex-priest	said,	as	if	each	word	edged	forward	on
thinnest	ice.
She	nodded.	Leoman	and	his	scouts	had	disappeared	beyond	the	next	rise.
A	faint	haze	of	smoke	awaited	them	there,	and	she	wondered	at	the	portent.
“She	rarely	speaks.	Yet	when	she	does…a	gift	with	words,	Heboric.	A	poet’s
eye.	In	some	ways,	as	I	might	have	become,	given	the	freedom…”
“A	gift	with	words,	you	say.	A	gift	for	you,	but	it	may	well	be	a	curse	for
her,	one	that	has	little	to	do	with	freedom.	Some	people	invite	awe	whether	they
like	it	or	not.	Such	people	come	to	be	very	lonely.	Lonely	in	themselves,
Sha’ik.”
Leoman	reappeared,	reining	in	on	the	crest.	He	did	not	wave	them	to	a
quicker	pace—he	simply	watched	as	Sha’ik	guided	her	army	forward.
A	moment	later	another	party	of	riders	arrived	at	the	desert	warrior ’s	side.
Tribal	standards	on	display—strangers.	Two	of	the	newcomers	drew	Sha’ik’s
attention.	They	were	still	too	distant	to	make	out	their	features,	but	she	knew
them	anyway:	Kamist	Reloe	and	Korbolo	Dom.
“She	will	not	be	lonely,”	she	told	Heboric.
“Then	feel	no	awe,”	he	replied.	“Her	inclination	will	be	to	observe,	rather
than	participate.	Mystery	lends	itself	to	such	remoteness.”
“I	can	feel	no	awe,	Heboric,”	Sha’ik	said,	smiling	to	herself.
They	approached	the	waiting	riders.	The	ex-priest’s	attention	stayed	on	her
as	they	guided	their	horses	up	the	gentle	slope.
“And,”	she	continued,	“I	understand	remoteness.	Quite	well.”
“You	have	named	her	Felisin,	haven’t	you?”
“I	have.”	She	turned	her	head,	stared	into	his	sightless	eyes.	“It’s	a	fine
name,	is	it	not?	It	holds	such…promise.	A	fresh	innocence,	such	as	that	which
parents	would	see	in	their	child,	those	bright,	eager	eyes—”


“I	wouldn’t	know,”	he	said.
She	watched	the	tears	roll	down	his	weathered,	tattooed	cheeks,	feeling
detached	from	their	significance,	yet	understanding	that	his	observation	was
not	meant	as	a	condemnation.	Only	loss.	“Oh,	Heboric,”	she	said.	“It’s	not
worthy	of	grief.”
Had	she	thought	a	moment	longer	before	speaking	those	words,	she	would
have	realized	that	they,	beyond	any	others,	would	break	the	old	man.	He
seemed	to	crumple	inward	before	her	eyes,	his	body	shuddering.	She	reached
out	a	hand	he	could	not	see,	almost	touched	him,	then	withdrew	it—and	even	as
she	did	so,	she	knew	that	a	moment	of	healing	had	been	lost.
Regrets?	Many.	Unending.
“Sha’ik!	I	see	the	goddess	in	your	eyes!”	The	triumphant	claim	was	Kamist
Reloe’s,	his	face	bright	even	as	it	seemed	twisted	with	tension.	Ignoring	the
mage,	she	fixed	her	gaze	on	Korbolo	Dom.	Half-Napan—he	reminds	me	of	my
old	tutor,	even	down	to	the	cool	disdain	in	his	expression.	Well,	this	man	has
nothing	to	teach	me.	Clustered	around	the	two	men	were	the	warleaders	of	the
various	tribes	loyal	to	the	cause.	There	was	something	like	shock	in	their	faces,
intimations	of	horror.	Another	rider	was	now	visible,	seated	with	equanimity
on	a	mule,	wearing	the	silken	robes	of	a	priest.	He	alone	seemed	untroubled,
and	Sha’ik	felt	a	shiver	of	unease.
Leoman	sat	his	horse	slightly	apart	from	the	group.	Sha’ik	already	sensed
a	dark	turmoil	swirling	between	the	desert	warrior	and	Korbolo	Dom,	the
renegade	Fist.
With	Heboric	at	her	side,	she	reached	the	crest	and	saw	what	lay	beyond.	In
the	immediate	foreground	was	a	ruined	village—a	scattering	of	smoldering
houses	and	buildings,	dead	horses,	dead	soldiers.	The	stone-built	entrance	to
the	Aren	Way	was	blackened	with	smoke.
The	road	stretched	away	in	an	even	declination	southward.	The	trees	lining
it	to	either	side…
Sha’ik	nudged	her	horse	forward.	Heboric	matched	her,	silent	and
hunched,	shivering	in	the	heat.	Leoman	rode	to	flank	her	on	the	other	side.
They	approached	the	Aren	Gate.
The	group	wheeled	to	follow,	in	silence.
Kamist	Reloe	spoke,	the	faintest	quaver	in	his	voice.	“See	what	has	been
made	of	this	proud	gate?	The	Malazan	Empire’s	Aren	Gate	is	now	Hood’s
Gate,	Seer.	Do	you	see	the	significance?	Do	you—”
“Silence!”	Korbolo	Dom	growled.
Aye,	silence.	Let	silence	tell	this	tale.
They	passed	beneath	the	gate’s	cool	shadow	and	came	to	the	first	of	the


trees,	the	first	of	the	bloated,	rotting	bodies	nailed	to	them.	Sha’ik	halted.
Leoman’s	scouts	were	approaching	at	a	fast	canter.	Moments	later	they
arrived,	reined	in.
“Report,”	Leoman	snapped.
Four	pale	faces	regarded	them,	then	one	said,	“It	does	not	change,	sir.
More	than	three	leagues—as	far	as	we	could	see.	There	are—there	are
thousands.”
Heboric	pulled	his	horse	to	one	side,	nudged	it	closer	to	the	nearest	tree
and	squinted	up	at	the	closest	corpse.
Sha’ik	was	silent	for	a	long	minute,	then,	without	turning,	she	said,	“Where
is	your	army,	Korbolo	Dom?”
“Camped	within	sight	of	the	city—”
“You	failed	to	take	Aren,	then.”
“Aye,	Seer,	we	failed.”
“And	Adjunct	Tavore?”
“The	fleet	has	reached	the	bay,	Seer.”
What	will	you	make	of	this,	sister?
“The	fools	surrendered,”	Korbolo	Dom	said,	his	voice	betraying	his	own
disbelief.	“At	High	Fist	Pormqual’s	command.	And	that	is	the	Empire’s	new
weakness—what	used	to	be	a	strength:	those	soldiers	obeyed	the	command.
The	Empire	has	lost	its	great	leaders—”
“Has	it	now?”	She	finally	faced	him.
“Coltaine	was	the	last	of	them,	Seer,”	the	renegade	Fist	asserted.	“This	new
Adjunct	is	untested—a	nobleborn,	for	Hood’s	sake.	Who	awaits	her	in	Aren?
Who	will	advise	her?	The	Seventh	is	gone.	Pormqual’s	army	is	gone.	Tavore
has	an	army	of	recruits.	About	to	face	veteran	forces	three	times	their	number.
The	Empress	has	lost	her	mind,	Seer,	to	think	that	this	pureblood	upstart	will
reconquer	Seven	Cities.”
She	turned	away	from	him	and	stared	down	the	Aren	Way.	“Withdraw	your
army,	Korbolo	Dom.	Link	up	with	my	forces	here.”
“Seer?”
“The	Apocalypse	has	but	one	commander,	Korbolo	Dom.	Do	as	I	say.”
And	silence	once	again	tells	its	tale.
“Of	course,	Seer,”	the	renegade	Fist	finally	grated.
“Leoman.”
“Seer?”
“Encamp	our	own	people.	Have	them	bury	the	dead	on	the	plain.”
Korbolo	Dom	cleared	his	throat.	“And	once	we’ve	regrouped—what	do
you	propose	to	do	then?”


Propose?	“We	shall	meet	Tavore.	But	the	time	and	place	shall	be	of	my
choosing,	not	hers.”	She	paused,	then	said,	“We	return	to	Raraku.”
She	ignored	the	shouts	of	surprise	and	dismay,	ignored	the	questions	flung
at	her,	even	as	they	rose	into	demands.	Raraku—the	heart	of	my	newfound
power.	I	shall	need	that	embrace…if	I	am	to	defeat	this	fear—this	terror—of	my
sister.	Oh,	Goddess,	guide	me	now…
The	protests,	eliciting	no	responses,	slowly	died	away.	A	wind	had	picked
up,	moaned	through	the	gate	behind	them.
Heboric’s	voice	rose	above	it.	“Who	is	this?	I	can	see	nothing—can	sense
nothing.	Who	is	this	man?”
The	corpulent,	silk-clad	priest	finally	spoke.	“An	old	man,	Unhanded	One.
A	soldier,	no	more	than	that.	One	among	ten	thousand.”
“Do—do	you…”	Heboric	slowly	turned,	his	milky	eyes	glistening.	“Do
you	hear	a	god’s	laughter?	Does	anyone	hear	a	god’s	laughter?”
The	Jhistal	priest	cocked	his	head.	“Alas,	I	hear	only	the	wind.”
Sha’ik	frowned	at	Heboric.	He	looked	suddenly	so…small.
After	a	moment	she	wheeled	her	horse	around.	“It	is	time	to	leave.	You
have	your	orders.”
	
Heboric	was	the	last,	sitting	helpless	on	his	horse,	staring	up	at	a	corpse	that
told	him	nothing.	There	was	no	end	to	the	laughter	in	his	head,	the	laughter	that
rode	the	wind	sweeping	through	Aren	Gate	at	his	back.
What	am	I	not	meant	to	see?	Is	it	you	who	have	truly	blinded	me	now,
Fener?	Or	is	it	that	stranger	of	jade	who	flows	silent	within	me?	Is	this	a	cruel
joke…or	some	kind	of	mercy?
See	what	has	become	of	your	wayward	son,	Fener,	and	know—most
assuredly	know—that	I	wish	to	come	home.
I	wish	to	come	home.
	
Commander	Blistig	stood	at	the	parapet,	watching	the	Adjunct	and	her	retinue
ascend	the	broad	limestone	steps	that	led	to	the	palace	gate	directly	beneath
him.	She	was	not	as	old	as	he	would	have	liked,	but	even	at	this	distance	he
sensed	something	of	the	rumored	hardness	in	her.	An	attractive	younger
woman	walked	at	her	side—Tavore’s	aide	and	lover,	it	was	said—but	Blistig
could	not	recall	if	he’d	ever	heard	her	name.	On	the	Adjunct’s	other	flank
strode	the	captain	of	her	family’s	own	house	guard,	a	man	named	Gimlet


Gamet,	or	some	such	thing.	He	had	the	look	of	a	veteran,	and	that	was
reassuring.
Captain	Keneb	arrived.	“No	luck,	Commander.”
Blistig	frowned,	then	sighed.	The	scorched	ship’s	crew	had	disappeared
almost	immediately	after	docking	and	offloading	the	wounded	soldiers	from
Coltaine’s	Seventh.	The	garrison	commander	had	wanted	them	present	for	the
Adjunct’s	arrival—he	suspected	Tavore	would	desire	to	question	them—and
Hood	knows,	those	irreverent	bastards	could	do	with	a	blistering…
“The	Seventh’s	survivors	have	been	assembled	for	her	inspection,	sir,”
Keneb	said.
“Including	the	Wickans?”
“Aye,	and	both	warlocks	among	them.”
Blistig	shivered	despite	the	sultry	heat.	They	were	a	frightening	pair.	So
cold,	so	silent.	Two	children	who	are	not.
And	Squint	was	still	missing—the	commander	well	knew	that	it	was
unlikely	he	would	ever	see	that	man	again.	Heroism	and	murder	in	a	single
gesture	would	be	a	hard	thing	for	any	person	to	live	with.	He	only	hoped	that
they	wouldn’t	find	the	old	bowman	floating	face	down	in	the	harbor.
Keneb	cleared	his	throat.	“Those	survivors,	sir…”
“I	know,	Keneb,	I	know.”	They’re	broken.	Queen’s	mercy,	so	broken.
Mended	flesh	can	do	only	so	much.	Mind	you,	I’ve	got	my	own	troubles	with	the
garrison—I’ve	never	seen	a	company	so…brittle.
“We	should	make	our	way	below,	sir—she’s	almost	at	the	gate.”
Blistig	sighed.	“Aye,	let’s	go	meet	this	Adjunct	Tavore.”
	
Mappo	gently	laid	Icarium	down	in	the	soft	sand	of	the	sinkhole.	He’d	rigged	a
tarp	over	his	unconscious	friend,	sufficient	for	shade,	but	there	was	little	he
could	do	about	the	stench	of	putrefaction	that	hung	heavy	in	the	motionless	air.
It	was	not	the	best	of	smells	for	the	Jhag	to	awaken	to…
The	ruined	village	was	behind	them	now,	the	black	gate’s	shadow	unable	to
reach	to	where	Mappo	had	laid	out	the	camp	beside	the	road	and	its	ghastly
sentinels.	The	Azath	warren	had	spat	them	out	ten	leagues	to	the	north,	days
ago	now.	The	Trell	had	carried	Icarium	in	his	arms	all	that	way,	seeking	a
place	free	of	death—he’d	hoped	to	have	found	it	by	now.	Instead,	the	horror
had	worsened.
Mappo	straightened	at	the	sound	of	wagon	wheels	clattering	on	the	road.
He	squinted	against	the	glare.	A	lone	ox	pulled	a	flatbed	cart	up	Aren	Way.	A
man	sat	hunched	on	the	buck-board	seat,	and	there	was	motion	behind	him—


two	more	men	crouched	down	on	the	bed,	bent	to	some	unseen	task.
Their	progress	was	slow,	as	the	driver	stopped	the	cart	at	every	tree,	the
man	spending	a	minute	or	so	staring	up	at	the	bodies	nailed	to	it,	before
moving	on	to	the	next	one.
Picking	up	his	sack,	Mappo	made	his	way	toward	them.
On	seeing	him,	the	driver	drew	the	cart	to	a	halt	and	set	the	brake.	He
casually	reached	over	the	back	of	the	seat	and	lifted	into	view	a	massive	flint
sword,	which	he	settled	sideways	across	his	thighs.
“If	you	mean	trouble,	Trell,”	the	driver	growled,	“back	away	now	or
you’ll	regret	it.”
The	other	two	men	straightened	up	at	this,	both	armed	with	crossbows.
Mappo	set	down	his	sack	and	held	out	both	hands.	All	three	men	were
strangely	hued,	and	the	Trell	sensed	a	latent	power	in	them	that	made	him
uneasy.	“The	very	opposite	of	trouble,	I	assure	you.	For	days	now	I’ve	walked
among	the	dead—you’re	the	first	living	people	I’ve	seen	in	that	time.	Seeing
you	has	been	a	relief,	for	I	had	feared	I	was	lost	in	one	of	Hood’s
nightmares…”
The	driver	scratched	his	red-bearded	jaw.	“I’d	say	you	are	at	that.”	He	set
his	sword	down,	twisted	around.	“Reckon	it’s	all	right,	Corporal—besides,
maybe	he	has	some	bandages	we	can	barter	from	him	or	something.”
The	older	of	the	two	men	on	the	flatbed	swung	down	to	the	ground	and
approached	Mappo.
The	Trell	said,	“You	have	injured	soldiers?	I’ve	some	skill	in	healing.”
The	corporal’s	smile	was	taut,	pained.	“I	doubt	you’d	want	to	waste	your
skills.	We	ain’t	got	hurt	people	in	the	wagon—we	got	a	pair	of	dogs.”
“Dogs?”
“Aye.	We	found	them	at	the	Fall.	Seems	Hood	didn’t	want	’em…not	right
away,	anyway.	Personally,	I	can’t	figure	out	why	they’re	still	alive—they’re	so
full	of	holes	and	chopped	up…”	He	shook	his	head.
The	driver	had	climbed	down	as	well,	and	was	making	his	way	up	to	the
end	of	the	road,	studying	each	and	every	corpse	before	moving	on.
Mappo	gestured	the	driver ’s	way.	“You’re	looking	for	someone.”
The	corporal	nodded.	“We	are,	but	the	bodies	are	pretty	far	gone,	it’s	kind
of	hard	to	tell	for	sure.	Still,	Stormy	says	he’ll	know	him	when	he	sees	him,	if
he’s	here.”
Mappo’s	gaze	flicked	from	the	corporal,	traveled	down	Aren	Way.	“How
far	does	this	go?”
“The	whole	way,	Trell.	Ten	thousand	soldiers,	give	or	take.”
“And	you’ve…”


“We’ve	checked	them	all.”	The	corporal’s	eyes	narrowed.	“Well,	Stormy’s
up	to	the	last	few,	anyway.	You	know,	even	if	we	wasn’t	looking	for	someone
particular…well,	at	the	very	least…”	He	shrugged.
Mappo	looked	away,	his	own	face	tightening.	“Your	friend	mentioned
something	called	the	Fall.	What	is	that?”
“The	place	where	Coltaine	and	the	Seventh	went	down.	The	dogs	were	the
only	survivors.	Coltaine	guided	thirty	thousand	refugees	from	Hissar	to	Aren.
It	was	impossible,	but	that’s	what	he	did.	He	saved	those	ungrateful	bastards	and
his	reward	was	to	get	butchered	not	five	hundred	paces	from	the	city’s	gate.	No
one	helped	him,	Trell.”	The	corporal’s	eyes	searched	Mappo’s.	“Can	you
imagine	that?”
“I	am	afraid	I	know	nothing	of	the	events	you	describe.”
“So	I	guessed.	Hood	knows	where	you’ve	been	hiding	lately.”
Mappo	nodded.	After	a	moment	he	sighed.	“I’ll	take	a	look	at	your	dogs,	if
you	like.”
“All	right,	but	we	don’t	hold	out	much	hope.	Thing	is,	the	lad’s	gone	and
taken	to	’em,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.”
The	Trell	walked	to	the	cart	and	clambered	aboard.
He	found	the	lad	hunched	down	over	a	mass	of	red,	torn	flesh	and	bone,
feebly	waving	flies	from	the	flesh.
“Hood’s	mercy,”	Mappo	whispered,	studying	what	had	once	been	a	cattledog.	“Where’s	the	other	one?”
The	youth	pulled	back	a	piece	of	cloth,	revealing	a	lapdog	of	some	kind.
All	four	legs	had	been	deliberately	broken.	Pus	crusted	the	breaks	and	the
creature	shook	with	fever.
“That	little	one,”	the	youth	said.	“It	was	left	lying	on	this	one.”	His	tone	was
filled	with	pain	and	bewilderment.
“Neither	one	will	make	it,	lad,”	Mappo	said.	“That	big	one	should	have
died	long	ago—it	may	well	be	dead	now—”
“No.	No,	he’s	alive.	I	can	feel	his	heart,	but	it’s	slowing.	It’s	slowing,	and
we	can’t	do	nothing.	Gesler	says	we	should	help	it	along,	that	slowing,	we
should	end	its	pain,	but	maybe…maybe…”
Mappo	watched	the	lad	fuss	over	the	hapless	creatures,	his	long-fingered,
almost	delicate	hands	daubing	the	wounds	with	a	blood-soaked	piece	of	cloth.
After	a	moment,	the	Trell	straightened,	slowly	turning	to	stare	down	the	long
road.	He	heard	a	shout	behind	him,	close	to	the	gate,	then	heard	the	corporal
named	Gesler	running	to	join	Stormy.
Ah,	Icarium.	Soon	you	will	awaken,	and	still	I	shall	grieve,	and	so	lead	you
to	wonder…My	grief	begins	with	you,	friend,	for	your	loss	of	memories—


memories	not	of	horror,	but	of	gifts	given	so	freely…Too	many	dead…how	to
answer	this?	How	would	you	answer	this,	Icarium?
He	stared	for	a	long	time	down	Aren	Way.	Behind	him	the	lad	crouched
over	the	cattle-dog’s	body,	while	the	crunch	of	boots	approached	slowly	from
up	the	road.	The	cart	pitched	as	Stormy	clambered	up	to	take	his	seat.	Gesler
swung	himself	into	the	flat-bed,	expressionless.
The	youth	looked	up.	“You	find	him,	Gesler?	Did	Stormy	find	him?”
“No.	Thought	for	a	minute…but	no.	He	ain’t	here,	lad.	Time	to	head	back
to	Aren.”
“Queen’s	blessing,”	the	youth	said.	“Then	there’s	always	a	chance.”
“Aye,	who	can	say,	Truth,	who	can	say.”
The	lad,	Truth,	returned	his	attention	to	the	cattle-dog.
Mappo	slowly	turned,	met	the	corporal’s	eyes	and	saw	the	lie	writ	plain.
The	Trell	nodded.
“Thanks	for	taking	a	look	at	the	dogs,	anyway,”	Gesler	said.	“I	know,
they’re	finished.	I	guess	we	wanted…well,	we	would	have	liked…”	His	voice
fell	away,	then	he	shrugged.	“Want	a	ride	back	to	Aren?”
Mappo	shook	his	head	and	climbed	down	to	stand	at	the	roadside.	“Thank
you	for	the	offer,	Corporal.	My	kind	aren’t	welcome	in	Aren,	so	I’ll	pass.”
“As	you	like.”
He	watched	them	turn	the	cart	around.
How	would	you	answer	this…
They	were	thirty	paces	down	the	road	when	the	Trell	shouted.	They	halted,
Gesler	and	Truth	straightening	to	watch	as	Mappo	jogged	forward,
rummaging	in	his	pack	as	he	did	so.
	
Iskaral	Pust	padded	down	the	rock-strewn,	dusty	path.	He	paused	to	scratch
vigorously	beneath	his	tattered	robes,	first	one	place,	then	another,	then
another.	A	moment	later	he	shrieked	and	began	tearing	at	his	clothes.
Spiders.	Hundreds	of	them,	spinning	away,	falling	to	the	ground,	scattering
into	cracks	and	crevices	as	the	High	Priest	thrashed	about.
“I	knew	it!”	Iskaral	screamed.	“I	knew	it!	Show	yourself!	I	dare	you!”
The	spiders	reappeared,	racing	over	the	sun-baked	ground.
Gasping,	the	High	Priest	staggered	back,	watching	as	the	D’ivers	sembled
into	human	form.	He	found	himself	facing	a	wiry,	black-haired	woman.
Though	she	was	an	inch	shorter	than	him,	her	frame	and	features	bore	a
startling	resemblance	to	his	own.	Iskaral	Pust	scowled.
“You	thought	you	had	me	fooled?	You	thought	I	didn’t	know	you	were


lurking	about!”
The	woman	sneered.	“I	did	have	you	fooled!	Oh,	how	you	hunted!	Thickskulled	idiot!	Just	like	every	Dal	Honese	man	I’ve	ever	met!	A	thick-skulled
idiot!”
“Only	a	Dal	Honese	woman	would	say	that—”
“Aye,	and	who	would	know	better!”
“What	is	your	name,	D’ivers?”
“Mogora,	and	I’ve	been	with	you	for	months.	Months!	I	saw	you	lay	the
false	trail—I	saw	you	painting	those	hand	and	paw	marks	on	the	rocks!	I	saw
you	move	that	stone	to	the	forest’s	edge!	My	kin	may	be	idiots,	but	I	am	not!”
“You’ll	never	get	to	the	real	gate!”	Iskaral	Pust	shrieked.	“Never!”
“I—don’t—want—to!”
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her	sharp-featured	face.	He	began	circling	her.
“Indeed,”	he	crooned,	“and	why	is	that?”
Twisting	to	keep	him	in	front	of	her,	she	crossed	her	arms	and	regarded
him	down	the	length	of	her	nose.	“I	escaped	Dal	Hon	to	be	rid	of	idiots.	Why
would	I	become	Ascendant	just	to	rule	over	other	idiots?”
“You	are	a	true	Dal	Honese	hag,	aren’t	you?	Spiteful,	condescending,	a
sneering	bitch	in	every	way!”
“And	you	are	a	Dal	Honese	oaf—conniving,	untrustworthy,	shifty—”
“Those	are	all	words	for	the	same	thing!”
“And	I’ve	plenty	more!”
“Let’s	hear	them,	then.”
They	began	down	the	trail,	Mogora	resuming	her	litany.	“Lying,	deceitful,
thieving,	shifty—”
“You	said	that	one	already!”
“So	what?	Shifty,	slimy,	slippery…”
	
The	enormous	undead	dragon	rose	silently	from	its	perch	on	the	mesa’s
summit,	wings	spreading	to	glow	with	the	sun’s	light,	even	as	the	membrane
dimmed	the	color	that	reached	through.	Black,	flat	eyes	glanced	down	at	the
two	figures	scrambling	toward	the	cliff	face.
The	attention	was	momentary.	Then	an	ancient	warren	opened	before	the
soaring	creature,	swallowed	it	whole,	then	vanished.
	
Iskaral	Pust	and	Mogora	stared	at	the	spot	in	the	sky	for	a	moment	longer.	A


half-grin	twitched	on	the	High	Priest’s	features.	“Ah,	you	weren’t	fooled,	were
you?	You	came	here	to	guard	the	true	gate.	Ever	mindful	of	your	duties,	you
T’lan	Imass.	You	Bonecasters	with	your	secrets	that	drive	me	mad!”
“You	were	born	mad,”	Mogora	muttered.
Ignoring	her,	he	continued	addressing	the	now	vanished	dragon.	“Well,	the
crisis	is	past,	isn’t	it?	Could	you	have	held?	Against	all	those	children	of
yours?	Not	without	Iskaral	Pust,	oh	no!	Not	without	me!”
Mogora	barked	a	contemptuous	laugh.
He	threw	her	a	glare,	then	scampered	ahead.
Stopping	beneath	the	lone,	gaping	window	high	in	the	cliff	tower,	he
screamed,	“I’m	home!	I’m	home!”	The	words	echoed	forlornly,	then	faded.
The	High	Priest	of	Shadow	began	dancing	in	place,	too	agitated	to	remain
still,	and	he	kept	dancing	as	a	minute	passed,	then	another.	Mogora	watched
him,	one	eyebrow	raised.
Finally	a	small,	brown	head	emerged	from	the	window	and	peered	down.
The	bared	fangs	might	have	been	a	smile,	but	Iskaral	Pust	could	not	be	sure
of	that.	He	could	never	be	sure	of	that.
“Oh,	look,”	Mogora	murmured,	“one	of	your	fawning	worshippers.”
“Aren’t	you	funny.”
“What	I	am	is	hungry.	Who’s	going	to	prepare	meals	now	that	Servant’s
gone?”
“You	are,	of	course.”
She	flew	into	a	spitting	rage.	Iskaral	Pust	watched	her	antics	with	a	small
smile	on	his	face.	Ah,	glad	to	see	I’ve	not	lost	my	charm…
	
The	enormous,	ornate	wagon	stood	in	a	cloud	of	dust	well	away	from	the	road,
the	horses	slow	to	lose	their	terror,	stamping,	tossing	their	heads.
Two	knee-high	creatures	scampered	from	the	wagon	and	padded	on	bandy
legs	toward	the	road,	their	long	arms	held	out	to	the	sides.	Outwardly,	they
resembled	bhok’arala,	their	small,	wizened	faces	corkscrewing	as	they
squinted	in	the	harsh	sunlight.
Yet	they	were	speaking	Daru.
“Are	you	sure?”	the	shorter	of	the	pair	said.
The	other	snarled	in	frustration.	“I’m	the	one	who’s	linked,	right?	Not	you,
Irp,	not	you.	Baruk	would	never	be	such	a	fool	as	to	task	you	with	anything—
except	grunt	work.”
“You	got	that	right,	Rudd.	Grunt	work.	I’m	good	at	that,	ain’t	I?	Grunt
work.	Grunt,	grunt,	grunt—you	sure	about	this?	Really	sure?”


They	made	their	way	up	the	bank	and	approached	the	last	tree	lining	the
road.	Both	creatures	squatted	down	before	it,	staring	up	in	silence	at	the
withered	corpse	nailed	to	the	bole.
“I	don’t	see	nothing,”	Irp	muttered.	“I	think	you’re	wrong.	I	think	you’ve
lost	it,	Rudd,	and	you	won’t	admit	it.	I	think—”
“I’m	one	word	away	from	killing	you,	Irp,	I	swear	it.”
“Fine.	I	die	good,	you	know.	Grunt,	gasp,	grunt,	sigh…grunt.”
Rudd	ambled	to	the	tree’s	base,	the	few	stiff	hairs	of	his	hackles	the	only
sign	of	his	simmering	temper.	He	clambered	upward,	pulled	himself	onto	the
chest	of	the	corpse	and	rummaged	with	one	hand	beneath	the	rotted	shirt.	He
plucked	loose	a	tattered,	soiled	piece	of	cloth.	Unfolding	it,	he	frowned.
Irp’s	voice	rose	from	below.	“What	is	it?”
“A	name’s	written	on	here.”
“Whose?”
Rudd	shrugged.	“	‘Sa’yless	Lorthal.’	”
“That’s	a	woman’s	name.	He’s	not	a	woman,	is	he?”
“Of	course	not!”	Rudd	snapped.	A	moment	later	he	tucked	the	cloth	back
under	the	shirt.	“Mortals	are	strange,”	he	muttered,	as	he	began	searching
beneath	the	shirt	again.	He	quickly	found	what	he	sought,	and	drew	forth	a
small	bottle	of	smoky	glass.
“Well?”	Irp	demanded.
“It	broke	all	right,”	Rudd	said	with	satisfaction.	“I	can	see	the	cracks.”	He
leaned	forward	and	bit	through	the	thong,	then,	clutching	the	bottle	in	one
hand,	scrambled	back	down.	Crouched	at	the	base,	he	held	the	bottle	to	the	sun
and	squinted	through	it.
Irp	grunted.
Rudd	then	held	the	bottle	against	one	pointed	ear	and	shook	it.	“Ah!	He’s	in
there	all	right!”
“Good,	let’s	go—”
“Not	yet.	The	body	comes	with	us.	Mortals	are	particular	that	way—he
won’t	want	another.	So,	go	get	it,	Irp.”
“There’s	nothing	left	of	the	damned	thing!”	Irp	squawked.
“Right,	then	it	won’t	weigh	much,	will	it?”
Grumbling,	Irp	climbed	the	tree	and	began	pulling	out	the	spikes.
Rudd	listened	to	his	grunts	with	satisfaction,	then	he	shivered.	“Hurry	up,
damn	you!	It’s	eerie	around	here.”
	
The	Jhag’s	eyes	fluttered	open	and	slowly	focused	on	the	wide,	bestial	face


looking	down	on	him.	Puzzled	recognition	followed.	“Mappo	Trell.	My
friend.”
“How	do	you	feel,	Icarium?”
He	moved	slightly,	winced.	“I—I	am	injured.”
“Aye.	I’m	afraid	I	gave	away	my	last	two	elixirs,	and	so	could	not	properly
heal	you.”
Icarium	managed	a	smile.	“I	am	certain,	as	always,	that	the	need	was	great.”
“You	may	not	think	so,	I’m	afraid.	I	saved	the	lives	of	two	dogs.”
Icarium’s	smile	broadened.	“They	must	have	been	worthy	beasts.	I	look
forward	to	that	tale.	Help	me	up,	please.”
“Are	you	certain?”
“Yes.”
Mappo	supported	Icarium	as	he	struggled	to	his	feet.	The	Jhag	tottered,
then	found	his	balance.	He	raised	his	head	and	looked	around.	“Where—where
are	we?”
“What	do	you	remember?”
“I—I	remember	nothing.	No,	wait.	We’d	sighted	a	demon—an	aptorian,	it
was,	and	decided	to	follow	it.	Yes,	that	I	recall.	That.”
“Ah,	well,	we	are	far	to	the	south,	now,	Icarium.	Cast	out	from	a	warren.
Your	head	struck	a	rock	and	you	lost	consciousness.	Following	that	aptorian
was	a	mistake.”
“Evidently.	How—how	long?”
“A	day,	Icarium.	Just	a	day.”
The	Jhag	had	steadied,	visibly	regaining	strength	until	Mappo	felt	it	safe	to
step	away,	though	one	hand	remained	on	Icarium’s	shoulder.
“West	of	here	lies	the	Jhag	Odhan,”	the	Trell	said.
“Yes,	a	good	direction.	I	admit,	Mappo,	I	feel	close	this	time.	Very	close.”
The	Trell	nodded.
“It’s	dawn?	Have	you	packed	up	our	camp?”
“Aye,	though	I	suggest	we	walk	but	a	short	distance	today—until	you’re
fully	recovered.”
“Yes,	a	wise	decision.”
It	was	another	hour	before	they	were	ready	to	leave,	for	Icarium	needed	to
oil	his	bow	and	set	a	whetstone	to	his	sword.	Mappo	waited	patiently,	seated	on
a	boulder,	until	the	Jhag	finally	straightened	and	turned	to	him,	then	nodded.
They	set	off,	westward.
After	a	time,	as	they	walked	on	the	plain,	Icarium	glanced	at	Mappo.	“What
would	I	do	without	you,	my	friend?”
The	nest	of	lines	framing	the	Trell’s	eyes	flinched,	then	he	smiled	ruefully


as	he	considered	his	reply.	“Perish	the	thought.”
As	it	reached	into	the	wasteland	known	as	the	Jhag	Odhan,	the	plain
stretched	before	them,	unbroken.


Epilogue

Hood’s	sprites	are	revealed
the	disordered	host
Whispering	of	deaths
in	wing-flap	chorus
Dour	music	has	its	own
beauty,	for	the	song	of	ruin
is	most	fertile.
WICKAN	DIRGE
FISHER
The	young	widow,	a	small	clay	flask	clutched	in	her	hands,	left	the	horsewife’s
yurt	and	walked	out	into	the	grassland	beyond	the	camp.	The	sky	overhead	was
empty	and,	for	the	woman,	lifeless.	Her	bare	feet	stepped	heavily,	toes
snagging	in	the	yellowed	grass.
When	she’d	gone	thirty	paces	she	stopped	and	lowered	herself	to	her
knees.	She	faced	the	vast	Wickan	plain,	her	hands	resting	on	her	swollen	belly,
the	horsewife’s	flask	smooth,	polished	and	warm	beneath	the	calluses.
The	searching	was	complete,	the	conclusions	inescapable.	The	child	within
her	was…empty.	A	thing	without	a	soul.	The	vision	of	the	horsewife’s	pale,
sweat-beaded	face	rose	to	hover	before	the	young	woman,	her	words
whispering	like	the	wind.	Even	a	warlock	must	ride	a	soul—the	children	they
claimed	were	no	different	from	children	they	did	not	claim.	Do	you	understand?
What	grows	within	you	possesses…nothing.	It	has	been	cursed—for	reasons
only	the	spirits	know.
The	child	within	you	must	be	returned	to	the	earth.
She	unstoppered	the	flask.	There	would	be	pain,	at	least	to	begin	with,	then
a	cooling	numbness.	No	one	from	the	camp	would	watch,	all	eyes	averted	from
this	time	of	shame.
A	storm	cloud	hung	on	the	north	horizon.	She	had	not	noticed	it	before.	It
swelled,	rolled	closer,	towering	and	dark.


The	widow	raised	the	flask	to	her	lips.
A	hand	swept	over	her	shoulder	and	clamped	onto	her	wrist.	The	young
woman	cried	out	and	twisted	around	to	see	the	horsewife,	her	breath	coming	in
gasps,	her	eyes	wide	as	she	stared	at	the	storm	cloud.	The	flask	fell	to	the
ground.	Figures	from	the	camp	were	now	running	toward	the	two	women.
The	widow	searched	the	old	woman’s	weathered	face,	seeing	fear	and…
hope?	“What?	What	is	it?”
The	horsewife	seemed	unable	to	speak.	She	continued	staring	northward.
The	storm	cloud	darkened	the	rolling	hills.	The	widow	turned	and	gasped.
The	cloud	was	not	a	cloud.	It	was	a	swarm,	a	seething	mass	of	black,	striding
like	a	giant	toward	them,	tendrils	spinning	off,	then	coming	around	again	to
rejoin	the	main	body.
Terror	gripped	the	widow.	Pain	shot	up	her	arm	from	where	the	horsewife
still	clutched	her	wrist,	a	hold	that	threatened	to	snap	bones.
Flies!	Oh,	spirits	below—flies…
The	swarm	grew	closer,	a	flapping,	tumbling	nightmare.
The	horsewife	screamed	in	wordless	anguish,	as	if	giving	voice	to	a
thousand	grieving	souls.	Releasing	the	widow’s	wrist,	she	fell	to	her	knees.
The	young	woman’s	heart	hammered	with	sudden	realization.
No,	not	flies.	Crows.	Crows,	so	many	crows—
Deep	within	her,	the	child	stirred.
	
This	ends	the	Second	Tale
of	the
Malazan
Book	of	the	Fallen


Glossary

Tribes	of	the	Seven	Cities	Subcontinent
Arak:	Pan’potsun	Odhan
Bhilard:	east	of	Nenoth	Odhan
Can’eld:	northeast	of	Ubaryd
Debrahl:	north	regions
Dhis’bahl:	Omari	and	Nahal	Hills
Gral:	Ehrlitan	foothills	down	to	Pan’potsun
Kherahn	Dhobri:	Geleen	Plain
Khundryl:	west	of	Nenoth	Odhan
Pardu:	north	of	Geleen	Grasslands
Semk:	Karas	Hills	and	Steppes
Tithan:	south	of	Sialk
Tregyn:	west	of	Sanimon
Seven	Cities	(Bisbrha	and	Debrahl)
Language	(Selected	Words)
bhok’arala:	a	squall	of	cliff-dwelling	winged	monkeys	(common)
(bhok’aral:	singular)
bloodfly:	a	biting	insect
chigger	fleas:	windborne	fleas	of	the	desert
dhenrabi:	a	large	marine	carnivore
Dryjhna:	the	Apocalypse
durhang:	an	opiate
emrag:	an	edible	cactus	favored	by	Trell
emulor:	a	poison	derived	from	flowers
enkar’al:	a	winged	reptile	equivalent	in	size	to	a	horse	(very	rare)
esanthan’el:	a	dog-sized	winged	reptile
guldindha:	a	broad-leafed	tree
jegura:	a	medicinal	cactus
kethra	knife:	a	fighting	weapon


Marrok:	dry-season	siesta
Mezla:	vaguely	pejorative	name	for	Malazans
odhan:	plains,	wastelands
rhizan:	a	squirrel-sized	winged	lizard	(common)
sawr’ak:	a	thin	light	beer	served	cold
sepah:	unleavened	bread
She’gai:	a	hot	wind	of	the	dry	season
simharal:	a	seller	of	children
tapu:	a	food-hawker
tapuharal:	a	seller	of	goat	meat	(cooked)
tapusepah:	a	seller	of	bread
taputasr:	a	seller	of	pastries
tasr:	sepah	with	honey
telaba:	a	sea	cloak	of	the	Dosii	(Dosin	Pali)
tralb:	a	poison	derived	from	mushrooms
White	Paralt:	a	poison	derived	from	spiders
Place	Names
Aren:	Holy	City	and	site	of	Imperial	Headquarters
Balahn	(Battle	of)
Bat’rol:	a	small	village	near	Hissar
Caron	Tepasi:	an	inland	city
Chain	of	Dogs:	Coltaine’s	train	of	soldiers	and	refugees	journeying	from
Hissar	to	Aren
Dojal	Spring	(Battle	of)
Dosin	Pali:	a	city	on	the	south	coast	of	Otataral	Island
Ehrlitan:	Holy	City
G’danisban:	a	city	near	Pan’potsun
Galeen:	a	city	on	the	coast	of	the	Clatar	Sea
Gelor	Ridge	(Battle	of	Gelor)
Guran:	an	inland	city
Hissar:	a	city	on	the	east	coast
Holy	Desert	Raraku:	a	region	west	of	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan
Karakarang:	a	Holy	City	on	Otataral	Island
Nenoth	(Battle	of)
Pan’potsun:	Holy	City
Rutu	Jelba:	a	port	city	on	north	Otataral	Island
Sanimon	(Battle	of)


Sekala	Plain	(Battle	of)
Silak:	a	city	on	the	east	coast
The	Path	of	Hands:	a	Soletaken	and	D’ivers	path	to	Ascendancy
Tremorlor	(the	Azath	House	in	the	Wastes,	also	Odhanhouse)
Ubaryd:	a	Holy	City	on	the	south	coast
Vathar	Crossing	(Coltaine’s	Crossing,	the	Vathar	Massacre):	the	Day	of	Pure
Blood,	Mesh’am	tho’ledann
Vin’til	Basin:	southwest	of	Hissar
The	World	of	Sorcery
T HE	WARRENS	(THE	PATHS—THOSE	WARRENS	ACCESSIBLE	TO	HUMANS)
Denul:	the	Path	of	Healing
D’riss:	the	Path	of	Stone
Hood’s	Path:	the	Path	of	Death
Meanas:	the	Path	of	Shadow	and	Illusion
Ruse:	the	Path	of	the	Sea
Rashan:	the	Path	of	Darkness
Serc:	the	Path	of	the	Sky
Tennes:	the	Path	of	the	Land
Thyr:	the	Path	of	Light
	
T HE	ELDER	WARRENS
Kurald	Galain:	the	Tiste	Andii	Warren	of	Darkness
Kurald	Emurlahn:	the	Tiste	Edur	Warren
Tellann:	the	T’lan	Imass	Warren
Omtose	Phellack:	the	Jaghut	Warren
Starvald	Demelain:	the	Tiam	Warren,	the	First	Warren
Titles	and	Groups
First	Sword	of	Empire:	Malazan	and	T’lan	Imass,	a	title	denoting	an	Imperial
champion
Fist:	a	military	governor	in	the	Malazan	Empire
High	Fist:	a	commander	of	armies	in	a	Malazan	Campaign
Kron	T’lan	Imass:	the	name	of	the	clans	under	the	command	of	Kron
Logros	T’lan	Imass:	the	name	of	the	clans	under	the	command	of	Logros
The	Bridgeburners:	a	legendary	élite	division	in	the	Malaz	2nd	Army


The	Pannion	Seer:	a	mysterious	prophet	ruling	the	lands	south	of	Darujhistan
The	Warlord:	the	name	for	Caladan	Brood
The	Claw:	the	covert	organization	of	the	Malazan	Empire
Peoples	(human	and	non-human)
Barghast	(non-human):	pastoral	nomadic	warrior	society
Forkrul	Assail	(non-human):	extinct	mythical	people	(one	of	the	Four
Founding	Races)
Jaghut	(non-human):	extinct	mythical	people	(one	of	the	Four	Founding
Races)
Moranth	(non-human):	highly	regimented	civilization	centered	in	Cloud
Forest
T’lan	Imass:	one	of	the	Four	Founding	Races,	now	immortal
Tiste	Andii	(non-human):	an	Elder	Race
Tiste	Edur	(non-human):	an	Elder	Race
Trell	(non-human):	pastoral	nomadic	warrior	society
The	Deck	of	Dragons—The	Fatid
(and	associated	Ascendants)
High	House	Life
King
Queen	(Queen	of	Dreams)
Champion
Priest
Herald
Soldier
Weaver
Mason
Virgin
	
High	House	Death
King	(Hood)
Queen
Knight	(once	Dassem	Ultor)
Magi
Herald


Soldier
Spinner
Mason
Virgin
	
High	House	Light
King
Queen
Champion
Priest
Captain
Soldier
Seamstress
Builder
Maiden
	
High	House	Dark
King
Queen
Knight	(Son	of	Darkness)
Magi
Captain
Soldier
Weaver
Mason
Wife
	
High	House	Shadow
King	(Shadowthrone/Ammanas)
Queen
Assassin	(the	Rope/Cotillion)
Magi
Hound
	


Unaligned
Oponn	(the	Jesters	of	Chance)
Obelisk	(Burn)
Crown
Scepter
Orb
Throne
	
Bonecaster:	a	shaman	of	the	T’lan	Imass
D’ivers:	a	higher	order	of	shapeshifting
Otataral:	a	magic-negating	reddish	ore	mined	from	the	Tanno	Hills,	Seven
Cities
Soletaken:	an	order	of	shape-shifting
Warrens	of	Chaos:	the	miasmic	paths	between	the	Warrens
Ascendants
Apsalar,	Lady	of	Thieves
Beru,	Lord	of	Storms
Burn,	Lady	of	the	Earth,	the	Sleeping	Goddess
Caladan	Brood,	the	Warlord
Cotillion/The	Rope	(the	Assassin	of	High	House	Shadow)
Dessembrae,	Lord	of	Tragedy
D’rek,	the	Worm	of	Autumn	(sometimes	the	Queen	of	Disease,	see	Poliel)
Fanderay,	She-Wolf	of	Winter
Fener,	the	Boar	(see	also	Tennerock)
Gedderone,	Lady	of	Spring	and	Rebirth
Great	Ravens,	ravens	sustained	by	magic
Hood	(King	of	High	House	Death)
Jhess,	Queen	of	Weaving
Kallor,	the	High	King
K’rul,	Elder	God
Mael,	Elder	God
Mowri,	Lady	of	Beggars,	Slaves	and	Serfs
Nerruse,	Lady	of	Calm	Seas	and	Fair	Wind
Oponn,	Twin	Jesters	of	Chance
Osserc,	Lord	of	the	Sky
Poliel,	Mistress	of	Pestilence


Queen	of	Dreams	(Queen	of	High	House	Life)
Shadowthrone/Ammanas	(King	of	High	House	Shadow)
Shedenul/Soliel,	Lady	of	Health
Soliel,	Mistress	of	Healing
Tennerock/Fener,	The	Boar	of	Five	Tusks
The	Crippled	God,	King	of	Chains
The	Hounds	(of	High	House	Shadow)
Togg	(see	Fanderay),	the	Wolf	of	Winter
Trake/Treach,	The	Tiger	of	Summer	and	Battle
Son	of	Darkness/Moon’s	lord/Anomander	Rake	(Knight	of	High	House
Dark)
Treach,	First	Hero


