HOUSE	OF	CHAINS
BOOK	FOUR	OF	THE
MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE	FALLEN

STEVEN	ERIKSON


House	of	Chains


This	is	a	work	of	fiction.	All	the	characters	and	events	portrayed	in	this	novel
are	either	fictitious	or	are	used	fictitiously.
HOUSE	OF	CHAINS:	BOOK	FOUR	OF	THE	MALAZAN	BOOK	OF	THE
FALLEN
Copyright	©	2002	by	Steven	Erikson
Originally	published	in	Great	Britain	in	2002	by	Bantam	Press,	a	division	of
Transworld	Publishers
All	rights	reserved,	including	the	right	to	reproduce	this	book,	or	portions
thereof,	in	any	form.
Maps	by	Neil	Gower
A	Tor	Book
Published	by	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC
175	Fifth	Avenue
New	York,	NY	10010
www.tor.com
Tor®	is	a	registered	trademark	of	Tom	Doherty	Associates,	LLC.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Erikson,	Steven.
						House	of	chains	/	Steven	Erikson.—1st	ed.
												p.	cm.—(Malazan	book	of	the	fallen;	bk.	4)
						“A	Tom	Doherty	Associates	book.”
						ISBN:	978-0-765-31574-8
						I.	Title.
				PR9199.4.E745H68	2006
				813'.6—dc22
2006040427


For	MARK	PAXTON 	MACRAE,	for	the	KO	punch.	This	one’s	all	yours,	my	friend.


Acknowledgements
The	author	wishes	to	thank	his	cadre	of	readers,	Chris	Porozny,	Richard	Jones,
David	Keck	and	Mark	Paxton	MacRae.	Clare	and	Bowen	as	always.	Simon
Taylor	and	the	crew	at	Transworld.	And	the	terrific	(and	patient)	staff	at	Tony’s
Bar	Italia:	Erica,	Steve,	Jesse,	Dan,	Ron,	Orville,	Rhimpy,	Rhea,	Cam,	James,
Konrad,	Darren,	Rusty,	Phil,	Todd,	Marnie,	Chris,	Leah,	Ada,	Kevin,	Jake,
Jamie,	Graeme	and	the	two	Doms.	Thanks	also	to	Darren	Nash	(for	the	yeast
always	rises)	and	Peter	Crowther.


MAPS




Dramatis	Personae

The	Uryd	Tribe	of	the	Teblor
Karsa	Orlong,	a	young	warrior
Bairoth	Gild,	a	young	warrior
Delum	Thord,	a	young	warrior
Dayliss,	a	young	woman
Pahlk,	Karsa’s	grandfather
Synyg,	Karsa’s	father
The	Adjunct’s	Army
Adjunct	Tavore
Fist	Gamet/Gimlet
T’amber
Fist	Tene	Baralta
Fist	Blistig
Captain	Keneb
Grub,	his	adopted	son
Admiral	Nok
Commander	Alardis
Nil,	a	Wickan	warlock
Nether,	a	Wickan	witch
Temul,	a	Wickan	of	the	Crow	Clan	(survivor	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs)
Squint,	a	soldier	in	the	Aren	Guard
Pearl,	a	Claw
Lostara	Yil,	an	officer	in	the	Red	Blades
Gall,	Warleader	of	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears
Imrahl,	a	warrior	of	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears
Topper,	the	Clawmaster
Marines	of	the	9th	Company,	8th	Legion


Lieutenant	Ranal
Sergeant	Strings
Sergeant	Gesler
Sergeant	Borduke
Corporal	Tarr
Corporal	Stormy
Corporal	Hubb
Bottle,	a	squad	mage
Smiles
Koryk,	a	half-Seti	soldier
Cuttle,	a	sapper
Truth
Pella
Tavos	Pond
Sands
Balgrid
Ibb
Maybe
Lutes
Selected	Heavy	Infantry	of	the	9th	Company,	8th	Legion
Sergeant	Mosel
Sergeant	Sobelone
Sergeant	Tugg
Flashwit
Uru	Hela
Bowl
Shortnose
Selected	Medium	Infantry	of	the	9th	Company,	8th	Legion
Sergeant	Balm
Sergeant	Moak
Sergeant	Thom	Tissy
Corporal	Deadsmell
Corporal	Burnt
Corporal	Tulip
Throatslitter


Widdershins
Galt
Lobe
Stacker
Ramp
Able
Other	Soldiers	of	the	Malazan	Empire
Sergeant	Cord,	2nd	Company,	Ashok	Regiment
Ebron,	5th	squad,	mage
Limp,	5th	squad
Bell,	5th	squad
Corporal	Shard,	5th	squad
Captain	Kindly,	2nd	Company
Lieutenant	Pores,	2nd	Company
Jibb,	Ehrlitan	Guard
Gullstream,	Ehrlitan	Guard
Scrawl,	Ehrlitan	Guard
Master	Sergeant	Braven	Tooth,	Malaz	City	Garrison
Captain	Irriz,	renegade
Sinn,	refugee
Gentur
Mudslinger
Hawl
Nathii
Slavemaster	Silgar
Damisk
Balantis
Astabb
Borrug
Others	on	Genabackis
Torvald	Nom
Calm
Ganal


Sha’ik’s	Army	of	the	Apocalypse
Sha’ik,	The	Chosen	One	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	(once	Felisin	of	House
Paran)
Felisin	Younger,	her	adopted	daughter
Toblakai
Leoman	of	the	Flails
High	Mage	L’oric
High	Mage	Bidithal
High	Mage	Febryl
Heboric	Ghost	Hands
Kamist	Reloe,	Korbolo	Dom’s	mage
Henaras,	a	sorceress
Fayelle,	a	sorceress
Mathok,	Warleader	of	the	Desert	Tribes
T’morol,	his	bodyguard
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas,	an	officer	in	Leoman’s	company
Scillara,	a	camp	follower
Duryl,	a	messenger
Ethume,	a	corporal
Korbolo	Dom,	a	renegade	Napan
Kasanal,	his	hired	assassin
Others
Kalam	Mekhar,	an	assassin
Trull	Sengar,	a	Tiste	Edur
Onrack,	a	T’lan	Imass
Cutter,	an	assassin	(also	known	as	Crokus)
Apsalar,	an	assassin
Rellock,	Apsalar ’s	father
Cotillion,	Patron	of	Assassins
Traveller
Rood,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Blind,	a	Hound	of	Shadow
Darist,	a	Tiste	Andii
Ba’ienrok	(Keeper),	a	hermit
Ibra	Gholan,	a	T’lan	Imass	Clan	Leader
Monok	Ochem,	a	Bonecaster	of	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass


Haran	Epal,	a	T’lan	Imass
Olar	Shayn,	a	T’lan	Imass
Greyfrog,	a	demon	familiar
Apt,	a	matron	demon	(Aptorian)	of	Shadow
Azalan,	a	demon	of	Shadow
Panek,	a	child	of	Shadow
Mebra,	a	spy	in	Ehrlitan
Iskaral	Pust,	a	priest	of	Shadow
Mogora,	his	D’ivers	wife
Cynnigig,	a	Jaghut
Phyrlis,	a	Jaghut
Aramala,	a	Jaghut
Icarium,	a	Jhag
Mappo	Runt,	a	Trell
Jorrude,	a	Tiste	Liosan	Seneschal
Malachar,	a	Tiste	Liosan
Enias,	a	Tiste	Liosan
Orenas,	a	Tiste	Liosan


Prologue

Verge	of	the	Nascent,	the	943rd	Day	of	the	Search
Burn’s	Sleep
Grey,	bloated	and	pocked,	the	bodies	lined	the	silt-laden	shoreline	for	as	far	as
the	eye	could	see.	Heaped	like	driftwood	by	the	rising	water,	bobbing	and
rolling	on	the	edges,	the	putrefying	flesh	seethed	with	black-shelled,	tenlegged	crabs.	The	coin-sized	creatures	had	scarcely	begun	to	make	inroads	on
the	bounteous	feast	the	warren’s	sundering	had	laid	before	them.
The	sea	mirrored	the	low	sky’s	hue.	Dull,	patched	pewter	above	and	below,
broken	only	by	the	deeper	grey	of	silts	and,	thirty	strokes	of	the	oar	distant,	the
smeared	ochre	tones	of	the	barely	visible	upper	levels	of	a	city’s	inundated
buildings.	The	storms	had	passed,	the	waters	were	calm	amidst	the	wreckage	of
a	drowned	world.
Short,	squat	had	been	the	inhabitants.	Flat-featured,	the	pale	hair	left	long
and	loose.	Their	world	had	been	a	cold	one,	given	the	thick-padded	clothing
they	had	worn.	But	with	the	sundering	that	had	changed,	cataclysmically.	The
air	was	sultry,	damp	and	now	foul	with	the	reek	of	decay.
The	sea	had	been	born	of	a	river	on	another	realm.	A	massive,	wide	and
probably	continent-spanning	artery	of	fresh	water,	heavy	with	a	plain’s	silts,
the	murky	depths	home	to	huge	catfish	and	wagon-wheeled-sized	spiders,	its
shallows	crowded	with	the	crabs	and	carnivorous,	rootless	plants.	The	river
had	poured	its	torrential	volume	onto	this	vast,	level	landscape.	Days,	then
weeks,	then	months.
Storms,	conjured	by	the	volatile	clash	of	tropical	air-streams	with	the
resident	temperate	climate,	had	driven	the	flood	on	beneath	shrieking	winds,
and	before	the	inexorably	rising	waters	came	deadly	plagues	to	take	those	who
had	not	drowned.
Somehow,	the	rent	had	closed	sometime	in	the	night	just	past.	The	river
from	another	realm	had	been	returned	to	its	original	path.
The	shoreline	ahead	probably	did	not	deserve	the	word,	but	nothing	else
came	to	Trull	Sengar ’s	mind	as	he	was	dragged	along	its	verge.	The	beach	was


nothing	more	than	silt,	heaped	against	a	huge	wall	that	seemed	to	stretch	from
horizon	to	horizon.	The	wall	had	withstood	the	flood,	though	water	now
streamed	down	it	on	the	opposite	side.
Bodies	on	his	left,	a	sheer	drop	of	seven,	maybe	eight	man-heights	to	his
right,	the	top	of	the	wall	itself	slightly	less	than	thirty	paces	across;	that	it	held
back	an	entire	sea	whispered	of	sorcery.	The	broad,	flat	stones	underfoot	were
smeared	with	mud,	but	already	drying	in	the	heat,	dun-coloured	insects	dancing
on	its	surface,	leaping	from	the	path	of	Trull	Sengar	and	his	captors.
Trull	still	experienced	difficulty	comprehending	that	notion.	Captors.	A
word	he	struggled	with.	They	were	his	brothers,	after	all.	Kin.	Faces	he	had
known	all	his	life,	faces	he	had	seen	smile,	and	laugh,	and	faces—at	times—
filled	with	a	grief	that	had	mirrored	his	own.	He	had	stood	at	their	sides
through	all	that	had	happened,	the	glorious	triumphs,	the	soul-wrenching
losses.
Captors.
There	were	no	smiles,	now.	No	laughter.	The	expressions	of	those	who
held	him	were	fixed	and	cold.
What	we	have	come	to.
The	march	ended.	Hands	pushed	Trull	Sengar	down,	heedless	of	his
bruises,	the	cuts	and	the	gouges	that	still	leaked	blood.	Massive	iron	rings	had
been	set,	for	some	unknown	purpose,	by	this	world’s	now-dead	inhabitants,
along	the	top	of	the	wall,	anchored	in	the	heart	of	the	huge	stone	blocks.	The
rings	were	evenly	spaced	down	the	wall’s	length,	at	intervals	of	fifteen	or	so
paces,	for	as	far	as	Trull	could	see.
Now,	those	rings	had	found	a	new	function.
Chains	were	wrapped	around	Trull	Sengar,	shackles	hammered	into	place
on	his	wrists	and	ankles.	A	studded	girdle	was	cinched	painfully	tight	about	his
midriff,	the	chains	drawn	through	iron	loops	and	pulled	taut	to	pin	him	down
beside	the	iron	ring.	A	hinged	metal	press	was	affixed	to	his	jaw,	his	mouth
forced	open	and	the	plate	pushed	in	and	locked	in	place	over	his	tongue.
The	Shorning	followed.	A	dagger	inscribed	a	circle	on	his	forehead,
followed	by	a	jagged	slash	to	break	that	circle,	the	point	pushed	deep	enough
to	gouge	the	bone.	Ash	was	rubbed	into	the	wounds.	His	long	single	braid	was
removed	with	rough	hacks	that	made	a	bloody	mess	of	his	nape.	A	thick,
cloying	unguent	was	then	smeared	through	his	remaining	hair,	massaged	down
to	the	pate.	Within	a	few	hours,	the	rest	of	his	hair	would	fall	away,	leaving	him
permanently	bald.
The	Shorning	was	an	absolute	thing,	an	irreversible	act	of	severance.	He
was	now	outcast.	To	his	brothers,	he	had	ceased	to	exist.	He	would	not	be


mourned.	His	deeds	would	vanish	from	memory	along	with	his	name.	His
mother	and	father	would	have	birthed	one	less	child.	This	was,	for	his	people,
the	most	dire	punishment—worse	than	execution	by	far.
Yet,	Trull	Sengar	had	committed	no	crime.
And	this	is	what	we	have	come	to.
They	stood	above	him,	perhaps	only	now	comprehending	what	they	had
done.
A	familiar	voice	broke	the	silence.	‘We	will	speak	of	him	now,	and	once
we	have	left	this	place,	he	will	cease	to	be	our	brother.’
‘We	will	speak	of	him	now,’	the	others	intoned,	then	one	added,	‘He
betrayed	you.’
The	first	voice	was	cool,	revealing	nothing	of	the	gloat	that	Trull	Sengar
knew	would	be	there.	‘You	say	he	betrayed	me.’
‘He	did,	brother.’
‘What	proof	do	you	have?’
‘By	his	own	tongue.’
‘Is	it	just	you	who	claims	to	have	heard	such	betrayal	spoken?’
‘No,	I	too	heard	it,	brother.’
‘And	I.’
‘And	what	did	our	brother	say	to	you	all?’
‘He	said	that	you	had	severed	your	blood	from	ours.’
‘That	you	now	served	a	hidden	master.’
‘That	your	ambition	would	lead	us	all	to	our	deaths—’
‘Our	entire	people.’
‘He	spoke	against	me,	then.’
‘He	did.’
‘By	his	own	tongue,	he	accused	me	of	betraying	our	people.’
‘He	did.’
‘And	have	I?	Let	us	consider	this	charge.	The	southlands	are	aflame.	The
enemy’s	armies	have	fled.	The	enemy	now	kneels	before	us,	and	begs	to	be	our
slaves.	From	nothing,	was	forged	an	empire.	And	still	our	strength	grows.	Yet.
To	grow	stronger,	what	must	you,	my	brothers,	do?’
‘We	must	search.’
‘Aye.	And	when	you	find	what	must	be	sought?’
‘We	must	deliver.	To	you,	brother.’
‘Do	you	see	the	need	for	this?’
‘We	do.’
‘Do	you	understand	the	sacrifice	I	make,	for	you,	for	our	people,	for	our
future?’


‘We	do.’
‘Yet,	even	as	you	searched,	this	man,	our	once-brother,	spoke	against	me.’
‘He	did.’
‘Worse,	he	spoke	to	defend	the	new	enemies	we	had	found.’
‘He	did.	He	called	them	the	Pure	Kin,	and	said	we	should	not	kill	them.’
‘And,	had	they	been	in	truth	Pure	Kin,	then…’
‘They	would	not	have	died	so	easily.’
‘Thus.’
‘He	betrayed	you,	brother.’
‘He	betrayed	us	all.’
There	was	silence.	Ah,	now	you	would	share	out	this	crime	of	yours.	And
they	hesitate.
‘He	betrayed	us	all,	did	he	not,	brothers?’
‘Yes.’	The	word	arrived	rough,	beneath	the	breath,	mumbled—a	chorus	of
dubious	uncertainty.
No-one	spoke	for	a	long	moment,	then,	savage	with	barely	bridled	anger:
‘Thus,	brothers.	And	should	we	not	heed	this	danger?	This	threat	of	betrayal,
this	poison,	this	plague	that	seeks	to	tear	our	family	apart?	Will	it	spread?	Will
we	come	here	yet	again?	We	must	be	vigilant,	brothers.	Within	ourselves.	With
each	other.	Now,	we	have	spoken	of	him.	And	now,	he	is	gone.’
‘He	is	gone.’
‘He	never	existed.’
‘He	never	existed.’
‘Let	us	leave	this	place,	then.’
‘Yes,	let	us	leave.’
Trull	Sengar	listened	until	he	could	no	more	hear	their	boots	on	the	stones,
nor	feel	the	tremble	of	their	dwindling	steps.	He	was	alone,	unable	to	move,
seeing	only	the	mud-smeared	stone	at	the	base	of	the	iron	ring.
The	sea	rustled	the	corpses	along	the	shoreline.	Crabs	scuttled.	Water
continued	to	seep	through	the	mortar,	insinuate	the	Cyclopean	wall	with	the
voice	of	muttering	ghosts,	and	flow	down	on	the	other	side.
Among	his	people,	it	was	a	long-known	truth,	perhaps	the	only	truth,	that
Nature	fought	but	one	eternal	war.	One	foe.	That,	further,	to	understand	this
was	to	understand	the	world.	Every	world.
Nature	has	but	one	enemy.
And	that	is	imbalance.
The	wall	held	the	sea.
And	there	are	two	meanings	to	this.	My	brothers,	can	you	not	see	the	truth
of	that?	Two	meanings.	The	wall	holds	the	sea.


For	now.
This	was	a	flood	that	would	not	be	denied.	The	deluge	had	but	just	begun—
something	his	brothers	could	not	understand,	would,	perhaps,	never
understand.
Drowning	was	common	among	his	people.	Drowning	was	not	feared.	And
so,	Trull	Sengar	would	drown.	Soon.
And	before	long,	he	suspected,	his	entire	people	would	join	him.
His	brother	had	shattered	the	balance.
And	Nature	shall	not	abide.


Book	One

Faces	in	the	Rock

	


The	slower	the	river,	the	redder	it	runs.
NATHII	SAYING


Chapter	One

Children	from	a	dark	house	choose	shadowed	paths.
NATHII	FOLK	SAYING
The	dog	had	savaged	a	woman,	an	old	man	and	a	child	before	the	warriors
drove	it	into	an	abandoned	kiln	at	the	edge	of	the	village.	The	beast	had	never
before	displayed	an	uncertain	loyalty.	It	had	guarded	the	Uryd	lands	with	fierce
zeal,	one	with	its	kin	in	its	harsh,	but	just,	duties.	There	were	no	wounds	on	its
body	that	might	have	festered	and	so	allowed	the	spirit	of	madness	into	its
veins.	Nor	was	the	dog	possessed	by	the	foaming	sickness.	Its	position	in	the
village	pack	had	not	been	challenged.	Indeed,	there	was	nothing,	nothing	at	all,
to	give	cause	to	the	sudden	turn.
The	warriors	pinned	the	animal	to	the	rounded	back	wall	of	the	clay	kiln
with	spears,	stabbing	at	the	snapping,	shrieking	beast	until	it	was	dead.	When
they	withdrew	their	spears	they	saw	the	shafts	chewed	and	slick	with	spit	and
blood;	they	saw	iron	dented	and	scored.
Madness,	they	knew,	could	remain	hidden,	buried	far	beneath	the	surface,	a
subtle	flavour	turning	blood	into	something	bitter.	The	shamans	examined	the
three	victims;	two	had	already	died	of	their	wounds,	but	the	child	still	clung	to
life.
In	solemn	procession	he	was	carried	by	his	father	to	the	Faces	in	the	Rock,
laid	down	in	the	glade	before	the	Seven	Gods	of	the	Teblor,	and	left	there.
He	died	a	short	while	later.	Alone	in	his	pain	before	the	hard	visages
carved	into	the	cliff-face.
This	was	not	an	unexpected	fate.	The	child,	after	all,	had	been	too	young	to
pray.
All	of	this,	of	course,	happened	centuries	past.
Long	before	the	Seven	Gods	opened	their	eyes.
Urugal	the	Woven’s	Year
1159	Burn’s	Sleep


They	were	glorious	tales.	Farms	in	flames,	children	dragged	behind	horses	for
leagues.	The	trophies	of	that	day,	so	long	ago,	cluttered	the	low	walls	of	his
grandfather ’s	longhouse.	Scarred	skull-pates,	frail-looking	mandibles.	Odd
fragments	of	clothing	made	of	some	unknown	material,	now	smoke-blackened
and	tattered.	Small	ears	nailed	to	every	wooden	post	that	reached	up	to	the
thatched	roof.
Evidence	that	Silver	Lake	was	real,	that	it	existed	in	truth,	beyond	the
forest-clad	mountains,	down	through	hidden	passes,	a	week—perhaps	two—
distant	from	the	lands	of	the	Uryd	clan.	The	way	itself	was	fraught,	passing
through	territories	held	by	the	Sunyd	and	Rathyd	clans,	a	journey	that	was	itself
a	tale	of	legendary	proportions.	Moving	silent	and	unseen	through	enemy
camps,	shifting	the	hearthstones	to	deliver	deepest	insult,	eluding	the	hunters
and	trackers	day	and	night	until	the	borderlands	were	reached,	then	crossed—
the	vista	ahead	unknown,	its	riches	not	even	yet	dreamed	of.
Karsa	Orlong	lived	and	breathed	his	grandfather ’s	tales.	They	stood	like	a
legion,	defiant	and	fierce,	before	the	pallid,	empty	legacy	of	Synyg—Pahlk’s
son	and	Karsa’s	father.	Synyg,	who	had	done	nothing	in	his	life,	who	tended
horses	in	his	valley	and	had	not	once	ventured	into	hostile	lands.	Synyg,	who
was	both	his	father ’s	and	his	son’s	greatest	shame.
True,	Synyg	had	more	than	once	defended	his	herd	of	horses	from	raiders
from	other	clans,	and	defended	well,	with	honourable	ferocity	and	admirable
skill.	But	this	was	only	to	be	expected	from	those	of	Uryd	blood.	Urugal	the
Woven	was	the	clan’s	Face	in	the	Rock,	and	Urugal	was	counted	among	the
fiercest	of	the	seven	gods.	The	other	clans	had	reason	to	fear	the	Uryd.
Nor	had	Synyg	proved	less	than	masterful	in	training	his	only	son	in	the
Fighting	Dances.	Karsa’s	skill	with	the	bloodwood	blade	far	surpassed	his
years.	He	was	counted	among	the	finest	warriors	of	the	clan.	While	the	Uryd
disdained	use	of	the	bow,	they	excelled	with	spear	and	atlatl,	with	the	tootheddisc	and	the	black-rope,	and	Synyg	had	taught	his	son	an	impressive	efficiency
with	these	weapons	as	well.
None	the	less,	such	training	was	to	be	expected	from	any	father	in	the	Uryd
clan.	Karsa	could	find	no	reason	for	pride	in	such	things.	The	Fighting	Dances
were	but	preparation,	after	all.	Glory	was	found	in	all	that	followed,	in	the
contests,	the	raids,	in	the	vicious	perpetuation	of	feuds.
Karsa	would	not	do	as	his	father	had	done.	He	would	not	do…nothing.	No,
he	would	walk	his	grandfather ’s	path.	More	closely	than	anyone	might
imagine.	Too	much	of	the	clan’s	reputation	lived	only	in	the	past.	The	Uryd	had
grown	complacent	in	their	position	of	pre-eminence	among	the	Teblor.	Pahlk
had	muttered	that	truth	more	than	once,	the	nights	when	his	bones	ached	from


old	wounds	and	the	shame	that	was	his	son	burned	deepest.
A	return	to	the	old	ways.	And	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	shall	lead.	Delum	Thord	is
with	me.	As	is	Bairoth	Gild.	All	in	our	first	year	of	scarring.	We	have	counted
coup.	We	have	slain	enemies.	Stolen	horses.	Shifted	the	hearthstones	of	the
Kellyd	and	the	Buryd.
And	now,	with	the	new	moon	and	in	the	year	of	your	naming,	Urugal,	we
shall	weave	our	way	to	Silver	Lake.	To	slay	the	children	who	dwell	there.
He	remained	on	his	knees	in	the	glade,	head	bowed	beneath	the	Faces	in	the
Rock,	knowing	that	Urugal’s	visage,	high	on	the	cliff-face,	mirrored	his	own
savage	desire;	and	that	those	of	the	other	gods,	all	with	their	own	clans	barring
’Siballe,	who	was	the	Unfound,	glared	down	upon	Karsa	with	envy	and	hate.
None	of	their	children	knelt	before	them,	after	all,	to	voice	such	bold	vows.
Complacency	plagued	all	the	clans	of	the	Teblor,	Karsa	suspected.	The
world	beyond	the	mountains	dared	not	encroach,	had	not	attempted	to	do	so	in
decades.	No	visitors	ventured	into	Teblor	lands.	Nor	had	the	Teblor	themselves
gazed	out	beyond	the	borderlands	with	dark	hunger,	as	they	had	often	done
generations	past.	The	last	man	to	have	led	a	raid	into	foreign	territory	had	been
his	grandfather.	To	the	shores	of	Silver	Lake,	where	farms	squatted	like	rotted
mushrooms	and	children	scurried	like	mice.	Back	then,	there	had	been	two
farms,	a	half-dozen	outbuildings.	Now,	Karsa	believed,	there	would	be	more.
Three,	even	four	farms.	Even	Pahlk’s	day	of	slaughter	would	pale	to	that
delivered	by	Karsa,	Delum	and	Bairoth.
So	I	vow,	beloved	Urugal.	And	I	shall	deliver	unto	you	a	feast	of	trophies
such	as	never	before	blackened	the	soil	of	this	glade.	Enough,	perhaps,	to	free
you	from	the	stone	itself,	so	that	once	more	you	will	stride	in	our	midst,	a
deliverer	of	death	upon	all	our	enemies.
I,	Karsa	Orlong,	grandson	of	Pahlk	Orlong,	so	swear.	And,	should	you
doubt,	Urugal,	know	that	we	leave	this	very	night.	The	journey	begins	with	the
descent	of	this	very	sun.	And,	as	each	day’s	sun	births	the	sun	of	the	next	day,	so
shall	it	look	down	upon	three	warriors	of	the	Uryd	clan,	leading	their	destriers
through	the	passes,	down	into	the	unknown	lands.	And	Silver	Lake	shall,	after
more	than	four	centuries,	once	again	tremble	to	the	coming	of	the	Teblor.
Karsa	slowly	lifted	his	head,	eyes	travelling	up	the	battered	cliff-face,	to
find	the	harsh,	bestial	face	of	Urugal,	there,	among	its	kin.	The	pitted	gaze
seemed	fixed	upon	him	and	Karsa	thought	he	saw	avid	pleasure	in	those	dark
pools.	Indeed,	he	was	certain	of	it,	and	would	describe	it	as	truth	to	Delum	and
Bairoth,	and	to	Dayliss,	so	that	she	might	voice	her	blessing,	for	he	so	wished
her	blessing,	her	cold	words…I,	Dayliss,	yet	to	find	a	family’s	name,	bless	you,
Karsa	Orlong,	on	your	dire	raid.	May	you	slay	a	legion	of	children.	May	their


cries	feed	your	dreams.	May	their	blood	give	you	thirst	for	more.	May	flames
haunt	the	path	of	your	life.	May	you	return	to	me,	a	thousand	deaths	upon	your
soul,	and	take	me	as	your	wife.
She	might	indeed	so	bless	him.	A	first	yet	undeniable	expression	of	her
interest	in	him.	Not	Bairoth—she	but	toyed	with	Bairoth	as	any	young
unwedded	woman	might,	for	amusement.	Her	Knife	of	Night	remained
sheathed,	of	course,	for	Bairoth	lacked	cold	ambition—a	flaw	he	might	deny,
yet	the	truth	was	plain	that	he	did	not	lead,	only	follow,	and	Dayliss	would	not
settle	for	that.
No,	she	would	be	his,	Karsa’s,	upon	his	return,	the	culmination	of	his
triumph	that	was	the	raid	on	Silver	Lake.	For	him,	and	him	alone,	Dayliss
would	unsheathe	her	Knife	of	Night.
May	you	slay	a	legion	of	children.	May	flames	haunt	the	path	of	your	life.
Karsa	straightened.	No	wind	rustled	the	leaves	of	the	birch	trees	encircling
the	glade.	The	air	was	heavy,	a	lowland	air	that	had	climbed	its	way	into	the
mountains	in	the	wake	of	the	marching	sun,	and	now,	with	light	fading,	it	was
trapped	in	the	glade	before	the	Faces	in	the	Rock.	Like	a	breath	of	the	gods,
soon	to	seep	into	the	rotting	soil.
There	was	no	doubt	in	Karsa’s	mind	that	Urugal	was	present,	as	close
behind	the	stone	skin	of	his	face	as	he	had	ever	been.	Drawn	by	the	power	of
Karsa’s	vow,	by	the	promise	of	a	return	to	glory.	So	too	hovered	the	other
gods.	Beroke	Soft	Voice,	Kahlb	the	Silent	Hunter,	Thenik	the	Shattered,	Halad
Rack	Bearer,	Imroth	the	Cruel	and	’Siballe	the	Unfound,	all	awakened	once
more	and	eager	for	blood.
And	I	have	but	just	begun	on	this	path.	Newly	arrived	to	my	eightieth	year
of	life,	finally	a	warrior	in	truth.	I	have	heard	the	oldest	words,	the	whispers,	of
the	One,	who	will	unite	the	Teblor,	who	will	bind	the	clans	one	and	all	and	lead
them	into	the	lowlands	and	so	begin	the	War	of	the	People.	These	whispers,	they
are	the	voice	of	promise,	and	that	voice	is	mine.
Hidden	birds	announced	the	coming	of	dusk.	It	was	time	to	leave.	Delum
and	Bairoth	awaited	him	in	the	village.	And	Dayliss,	silent	yet	holding	to	the
words	she	would	speak	to	him.
Bairoth	will	be	furious.
	
The	pocket	of	warm	air	in	the	glade	lingered	long	after	Karsa	Orlong’s
departure.	The	soft,	boggy	soil	was	slow	to	yield	the	imprint	of	his	knees,	his
moccasined	feet,	and	the	sun’s	deepening	glare	continued	to	paint	the	harsh
features	of	the	gods	even	as	shadows	filled	the	glade	itself.


Seven	figures	rose	from	the	ground,	skin	wrinkled	and	stained	dark	brown
over	withered	muscles	and	heavy	bones,	hair	red	as	ochre	and	dripping
stagnant,	black	water.	Some	were	missing	limbs,	others	stood	on	splintered,
shattered	or	mangled	legs.	One	lacked	a	lower	jaw	while	another ’s	left
cheekbone	and	brow	were	crushed	flat,	obliterating	the	eye-socket.	Each	of	the
seven,	broken	in	some	way.	Imperfect.	Flawed.
Somewhere	behind	the	wall	of	rock	was	a	sealed	cavern	that	had	been	their
tomb	for	a	span	of	centuries,	a	short-lived	imprisonment	as	it	turned	out.	None
had	expected	their	resurrection.	Too	shattered	to	remain	with	their	kin,	they
had	been	left	behind,	as	was	the	custom	of	their	kind.	Failure’s	sentence	was
abandonment,	an	eternity	of	immobility.	When	failure	was	honourable,	their
sentient	remnants	would	be	placed	open	to	the	sky,	to	vistas,	to	the	outside
world,	so	that	they	might	find	peace	in	watching	the	passing	of	eons.	But,	for
these	seven,	failure	had	not	been	honourable.	Thus,	the	darkness	of	a	tomb	had
been	their	sentence.	They	had	felt	no	bitterness	at	that.
That	dark	gift	came	later,	from	outside	their	unlit	prison,	and	with	it,
opportunity.
All	that	was	required	was	the	breaking	of	a	vow,	and	the	swearing	of	fealty
to	another.	The	reward:	rebirth,	and	freedom.
Their	kin	had	marked	this	place	of	internment,	with	carved	faces	each	a
likeness,	mocking	the	vista	with	blank,	blind	eyes.	They	had	spoken	their
names	to	close	the	ritual	of	binding,	names	that	lingered	in	this	place	with	a
power	sufficient	to	twist	the	minds	of	the	shamans	of	the	people	who	had	found
refuge	in	these	mountains,	and	on	the	plateau	with	the	ancient	name	of
Laederon.
The	seven	were	silent	and	motionless	in	the	glade	as	the	dusk	deepened.	Six
were	waiting	for	one	to	speak,	yet	that	one	was	in	no	hurry.	Freedom	was	raw
exultation	and,	even	limited	as	it	was	to	this	glade,	the	emotion	persisted	still.	It
would	not	be	long,	now,	until	that	freedom	would	break	free	of	its	last	chains
—the	truncated	range	of	vision	from	the	eye-sockets	carved	into	the	rock.
Service	to	the	new	master	promised	travel,	an	entire	world	to	rediscover	and
countless	deaths	to	deliver.
Urual,	whose	name	meant	Mossy	Bone	and	who	was	known	to	the	Teblor
as	Urugal,	finally	spoke.	‘He	will	suffice.’
Sin’b’alle—Lichen	For	Moss—who	was	’Siballe	the	Unfound,	did	not	hide
the	scepticism	in	her	voice.	‘You	place	too	much	faith	in	these	fallen	Teblor.
Teblor.	They	know	naught,	even	their	true	name.’
‘Be	glad	that	they	do	not,’	said	Ber ’ok,	his	voice	a	rough	rasp	through	a
crushed	throat.	Neck	twisted	and	head	leaning	to	one	side,	he	was	forced	to	turn


his	entire	body	to	stare	at	the	rock-face.	‘In	any	case,	you	have	your	own
children,	Sin’b’alle,	who	are	the	bearers	of	the	truth.	For	the	others,	lost
history	is	best	left	lost,	for	our	purposes.	Their	ignorance	is	our	greatest
weapon.’
‘Dead	Ash	Tree	speaks	the	truth,’	Urual	said.	‘We	could	not	have	so	twisted
their	faith	were	they	cognizant	of	their	legacy.’
Sin’b’alle	shrugged	disdainfully.	‘The	one	named	Pahlk	also…sufficed.	In
your	opinion,	Urual.	A	worthy	prospect	to	lead	my	children,	it	seemed.	Yet	he
failed.’
‘Our	fault,	not	his,’	Haran’alle	growled.	‘We	were	impatient,	too	confident
of	our	efficacy.	Sundering	the	Vow	stole	much	of	our	power—’
‘Yet	what	has	our	new	master	given	of	his,	Antler	From	Summer?’	Thek	Ist
demanded.	‘Naught	but	a	trickle.’
‘And	what	do	you	expect?’	Urual	enquired	in	a	quiet	tone.	‘He	recovers
from	his	ordeals	as	we	do	from	ours.’
Emroth	spoke,	her	voice	like	silk.	‘So	you	believe,	Mossy	Bone,	that	this
grandson	of	Pahlk	will	carve	for	us	our	path	to	freedom.’
‘I	do.’
‘And	if	we	are	disappointed	yet	again?’
‘Then	we	begin	anew.	Bairoth’s	child	in	Dayliss’s	womb.’
Emroth	hissed.	‘Another	century	of	waiting!	Damn	these	long-lived
Teblor!’
‘A	century	is	as	nothing—’
‘As	nothing,	yet	as	everything,	Mossy	Bone!	And	you	know	precisely	what
I	mean.’
Urual	studied	the	woman,	who	was	aptly	named	Fanged	Skeleton,	recalling
her	Soletaken	proclivities,	and	its	hunger	that	had	so	clearly	led	to	their	failure
so	long	ago.	‘The	year	of	my	name	has	returned,’	he	said.	‘Among	us	all,	who
has	led	a	clan	of	the	Teblor	as	far	along	our	path	as	I	have?	You,	Fanged
Skeleton?	Lichen	For	Moss?	Spear	Leg?’
No-one	spoke.
Then	finally	Dead	Ash	Tree	made	a	sound	that	might	have	been	a	soft
laugh.	‘We	are	as	Red	Moss,	silent.	The	way	will	be	opened.	So	our	new	master
has	promised.	He	finds	his	power.	Urual’s	chosen	warrior	already	possesses	a
score	of	souls	in	his	slayer ’s	train.	Teblor	souls	at	that.	Recall,	also,	that	Pahlk
journeyed	alone.	Yet	Karsa	shall	have	two	formidable	warriors	flanking	him.
Should	he	die,	there	is	always	Bairoth,	or	Delum.’
‘Bairoth	is	too	clever,’	Emroth	snarled.	‘He	takes	after	Pahlk’s	son,	his
uncle.	Worse,	his	ambition	is	only	for	himself.	He	feigns	to	follow	Karsa,	yet


has	his	hand	on	Karsa’s	back.’
‘And	mine	on	his,’	Urual	murmured.	‘Night	is	almost	upon	us.	We	must
return	to	our	tomb.’	The	ancient	warrior	turned.	‘Fanged	Skeleton,	remain
close	to	the	child	in	Dayliss	womb.’
‘She	feeds	from	my	breast	even	now,’	Emroth	asserted.
‘A	girl-child?’
‘In	flesh	only.	What	I	make	within	is	neither	a	girl,	nor	a	child.’
‘Good.’
The	seven	figures	returned	to	the	earth	as	the	first	stars	of	night	blinked
awake	in	the	sky	overhead.	Blinked	awake,	and	looked	down	upon	a	glade
where	no	gods	dwelt.	Where	no	gods	had	ever	dwelt.
	
The	village	was	situated	on	the	stony	bank	of	Laderii	River,	a	mountain-fed,
torrential	flow	of	bitter-cold	water	that	cut	a	valley	through	the	conifer	forest
on	its	way	down	to	some	distant	sea.	The	houses	were	built	with	boulder
foundations	and	rough-hewn	cedar	walls,	the	roofs	thick-matted,	humped	and
overgrown	with	moss.	Along	the	bank	rose	latticed	frames	thick	with	strips	of
drying	fish.	Beyond	a	fringe	of	woods,	clearings	had	been	cut	to	provide
pasture	for	horses.
Mist-dimmed	firelight	flickered	through	the	trees	as	Karsa	reached	his
father ’s	house,	passing	the	dozen	horses	standing	silent	and	motionless	in	the
glade.	Their	only	threat	came	from	raiders,	for	these	beasts	were	bred	killers
and	the	mountain	wolves	had	long	since	learned	to	avoid	the	huge	animals.
Occasionally	a	rust-collared	bear	would	venture	down	from	its	mountain
haunt,	but	this	usually	coincided	with	salmon	runs	and	the	creatures	showed
little	interest	in	challenging	the	horses,	the	village’s	dogs,	or	its	fearless
warriors.
Synyg	was	in	the	training	kraal,	grooming	Havok,	his	prized	destrier.
Karsa	could	feel	the	animal’s	heat	as	he	approached,	though	it	was	little	more
than	a	black	mass	in	the	darkness.	‘Red	Eye	still	wanders	loose,’	Karsa
growled.	‘You	will	do	nothing	for	your	son?’
His	father	continued	grooming	Havok.	‘Red	Eye	is	too	young	for	such	a
journey,	as	I	have	said	before—’
‘Yet	he	is	mine,	and	so	I	shall	ride	him.’
‘No.	He	lacks	independence,	and	has	not	yet	ridden	with	the	mounts	of
Bairoth	and	Delum.	You	will	lodge	a	thorn	in	his	nerves.’
‘So	I	am	to	walk?’
‘I	give	you	Havok,	my	son.	He	has	been	softly	run	this	night	and	still	wears


the	bridle.	Go	collect	your	gear,	before	he	cools	too	much.’
Karsa	said	nothing.	He	was	in	truth	astonished.	He	swung	about	and	made
his	way	to	the	house.	His	father	had	slung	his	pack	from	a	ridgepole	near	the
doorway	to	keep	it	dry.	His	bloodwood	sword	hung	in	its	harness	beside	it,
newly	oiled,	the	Uryd	warcrest	freshly	painted	on	the	broad	blade.	Karsa	drew
the	weapon	down	and	strapped	the	harness	in	place,	the	sword’s	leatherwrapped	two-handed	grip	jutting	over	his	left	shoulder.	The	pack	would	ride
Havok’s	shoulders,	affixed	to	the	stirrup-rig,	though	Karsa’s	knees	would	take
most	of	the	weight.
Teblor	horse-trappings	did	not	include	a	rider ’s	seat;	a	warrior	rode
against	flesh,	stirrups	high,	the	bulk	of	his	weight	directly	behind	the	mount’s
shoulders.	Lowlander	trophies	included	saddles,	which	revealed,	when
positioned	on	the	smaller	lowlander	horses,	a	clear	shifting	of	weight	to	the
back.	But	a	true	destrier	needed	its	hindquarters	free	of	extra	weight,	to	ensure
the	swiftness	of	its	kicks.	More,	a	warrior	must	needs	protect	his	mount’s	neck
and	head,	with	sword	and,	if	necessary,	vambraced	forearms.
Karsa	returned	to	where	his	father	and	Havok	waited.
‘Bairoth	and	Delum	await	you	at	the	ford,’	Synyg	said.
‘Dayliss?’
Karsa	could	see	nothing	of	his	father ’s	expression	as	he	replied	tonelessly,
‘Dayliss	voiced	her	blessing	to	Bairoth	after	you’d	set	out	for	the	Faces	in	the
Rock.’
‘She	blessed	Bairoth?’
‘She	did.’
‘It	seems	I	misjudged	her,’	Karsa	said,	struggling	against	an	unfamiliar
stricture	that	tightened	his	voice.
‘Easy	to	do,	for	she	is	a	woman.’
‘And	you,	Father?	Will	you	give	me	your	blessing?’
Synyg	handed	Karsa	the	lone	rein	and	turned	away.	‘Pahlk	has	already
done	so.	Be	satisfied	with	that.’
‘Pahlk	is	not	my	father!’
Synyg	paused	in	the	darkness,	seemed	to	consider,	then	said,	‘No,	he	is
not.’
‘Then	will	you	bless	me?’
‘What	would	you	have	me	bless,	son?	The	Seven	Gods	who	are	a	lie?	The
glory	that	is	empty?	Will	I	be	pleased	in	your	slaying	of	children?	In	the
trophies	you	will	tie	to	your	belt?	My	father,	Pahlk,	would	polish	bright	his
own	youth,	for	he	is	of	that	age.	What	were	his	words	of	blessing,	Karsa?	That
you	surpass	his	achievements?	I	imagine	not.	Consider	his	words	carefully,	and


I	expect	you	will	find	that	they	served	him	more	than	you.’
‘“Pahlk,	Finder	of	the	Path	that	you	shall	follow,	blesses	your	journey.”
Such	were	his	words.’
Synyg	was	silent	for	a	moment,	and	when	he	spoke	his	son	could	hear	the
grim	smile	though	he	could	not	see	it.	‘As	I	said.’
‘Mother	would	have	blessed	me,’	Karsa	snapped.
‘As	a	mother	must.	But	her	heart	would	have	been	heavy.	Go,	then,	son.
Your	companions	await	you.’
With	a	snarl,	Karsa	swung	himself	onto	the	destrier ’s	broad	back.	Havok
swung	his	head	about	at	the	unfamiliar	seating,	then	snorted.
Synyg	spoke	from	the	gloom.	‘He	dislikes	carrying	anger.	Calm	yourself,
son.’
‘A	warhorse	afraid	of	anger	is	next	to	useless.	Havok	shall	have	to	learn
who	rides	him	now.’	At	that,	Karsa	drew	a	leg	back	and	with	a	flick	of	the
single	rein	swung	the	destrier	smartly	round.	A	gesture	with	his	rein	hand	sent
the	horse	forward	onto	the	trail.
Four	blood-posts,	each	marking	one	of	Karsa’s	sacrificed	siblings,	lined
the	path	leading	to	the	village.	Unlike	others,	Synyg	had	left	the	carved	posts
unadorned;	he	had	only	gone	so	far	as	to	cut	the	glyphs	naming	his	three	sons
and	one	daughter	given	to	the	Faces	in	the	Rock,	followed	by	a	splash	of	kin
blood	which	had	not	lasted	much	beyond	the	first	rain.	Instead	of	braids
winding	up	the	man-high	posts	to	a	feathered	and	gut-knotted	headdress	at	the
peak,	only	vines	entwined	the	weathered	wood,	and	the	blunted	top	was
smeared	with	bird	droppings.
Karsa	knew	the	memory	of	his	siblings	deserved	more,	and	he	resolved	to
carry	their	names	close	to	his	lips	at	the	moment	of	attack,	that	he	might	slay
with	their	cries	sharp	in	the	air.	His	voice	would	be	their	voice,	when	that	time
arrived.	They	had	suffered	their	father ’s	neglect	for	far	too	long.
The	trail	widened,	flanked	by	old	stumps	and	low-spreading	juniper.
Ahead,	the	lurid	glare	of	hearths	amidst	dark,	squat,	conical	houses	glimmered
through	the	woodsmoke	haze.	Near	one	of	those	firepits	waited	two	mounted
figures.	A	third	shape,	on	foot,	stood	wrapped	in	furs	to	one	side.	Dayliss.	She
blessed	Bairoth	Gild,	and	now	comes	to	see	him	off.
Karsa	rode	up	to	them,	holding	Havok	back	to	a	lazy	lope.	He	was	the
leader,	and	he	would	make	the	truth	of	that	plain.	Bairoth	and	Delum	awaited
him,	after	all,	and	which	of	the	three	had	gone	to	the	Faces	in	the	Rock?
Dayliss	had	blessed	a	follower.	Had	Karsa	held	himself	too	aloof?	Yet	such
was	the	burden	of	those	who	commanded.	She	must	have	understood	that.	It
made	no	sense.


He	halted	his	horse	before	them,	was	silent.
Bairoth	was	a	heavier	man,	though	not	as	tall	as	Karsa	or,	indeed,	Delum.
He	possessed	a	bear-like	quality	that	he	had	long	since	recognized	and	had
come	to	self-consciously	affect.	He	rolled	his	shoulders	now,	as	if	loosening
them	for	the	journey,	and	grinned.	‘A	bold	beginning,	brother,’	he	rumbled,
‘the	theft	of	your	father ’s	horse.’
‘I	did	not	steal	him,	Bairoth.	Synyg	gave	me	both	Havok	and	his	blessing.’
‘A	night	of	miracles,	it	seems.	And	did	Urugal	stride	out	from	the	rock	to
kiss	your	brow	as	well,	Karsa	Orlong?’
Dayliss	snorted	at	that.
If	he	had	indeed	stridden	onto	mortal	ground,	he	would	have	found	but	one
of	us	three	standing	before	him.	To	Bairoth’s	jibe	Karsa	said	nothing.	He
slowly	swung	his	gaze	to	Dayliss.	‘You	have	blessed	Bairoth?’
Her	shrug	was	dismissive.
‘I	grieve,’	Karsa	said,	‘your	loss	of	courage.’
Her	eyes	snapped	to	his	with	sudden	fury.
Smiling,	Karsa	turned	back	to	Bairoth	and	Delum.	‘“The	stars	wheel.	Let	us
ride.”’
But	Bairoth	ignored	the	words	and	instead	of	voicing	the	ritual	reply	he
growled,	‘Ill	chosen,	to	unleash	your	wounded	pride	on	her.	Dayliss	is	to	be
my	wife	upon	our	return.	To	strike	at	her	is	to	strike	at	me.’
Karsa	went	motionless.	‘But	Bairoth,’	he	said,	low	and	smooth,	‘I	strike
where	I	will.	A	failing	of	courage	can	spread	like	a	disease—has	her	blessing
settled	upon	you	as	a	curse?	I	am	warleader.	I	invite	you	to	challenge	me,	now,
before	we	quit	our	home.’
Bairoth	hunched	his	shoulders,	slowly	leaned	forward.	‘It	is	no	failing	of
courage,’	he	grated,	‘that	stays	my	hand,	Karsa	Orlong—’
‘I	am	pleased	to	hear	it.	‘“The	stars	wheel.	Let	us	ride.”’
Scowling	at	the	interruption,	Bairoth	made	to	say	something	more,	then
stopped.	He	smiled,	relaxing	once	again.	He	glanced	over	at	Dayliss	and
nodded,	as	if	silently	reaffirming	a	secret,	then	intoned,	‘“The	stars	wheel.
Lead	us,	Warleader,	into	glory.”’
Delum,	who	had	watched	all	in	silence,	his	face	empty	of	expression,	now
spoke	in	turn.	‘“Lead	us,	Warleader,	into	glory.”’
Karsa	in	front,	the	three	warriors	rode	the	length	of	the	village.	The	tribe’s
elders	had	spoken	against	the	journey,	so	no-one	came	out	to	watch	them
depart.	Yet	Karsa	knew	that	none	could	escape	hearing	them	pass,	and	he	knew
that,	one	day,	they	would	come	to	regret	that	they	had	been	witness	to	nothing
more	than	the	heavy,	muffled	thump	of	hoofs.	None	the	less,	he	wished	dearly


for	a	witness	other	than	Dayliss.	Not	even	Pahlk	had	appeared.
Yet	I	feel	as	if	we	are	indeed	being	watched.	By	the	Seven	perhaps.	Urugal,
risen	to	the	height	of	the	stars,	riding	the	current	of	the	wheel,	gazing	down
upon	us	now.	Hear	me,	Urugal!	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	shall	slay	for	you	a	thousand
children!	A	thousand	souls	to	lay	at	your	feet!
Nearby,	a	dog	moaned	in	restless	sleep,	but	did	not	awaken.
	
On	the	north	valley	side	overlooking	the	village,	at	the	very	edge	of	the	tree
line,	stood	twenty-three	silent	witnesses	to	the	departure	of	Karsa	Orlong,
Bairoth	Gild	and	Delum	Thord.	Ghostly	in	the	darkness	between	the
broadleafed	trees,	they	waited,	motionless,	until	long	after	the	three	warriors
had	passed	out	of	sight	down	the	eastern	track.
Uryd	born.	Uryd	sacrificed,	they	were	blood-kin	to	Karsa,	Bairoth	and
Delum.	In	their	fourth	month	of	life	they	had	each	been	given	to	the	Faces	in
the	Rock,	laid	down	by	their	mothers	in	the	glade	at	sunset.	Offered	to	the
Seven’s	embrace,	vanishing	before	the	sun’s	rise.	Given,	one	and	all,	to	a	new
mother.
’Siballe’s	children,	then	and	now.	’Siballe,	the	Unfound,	the	lone	goddess
among	the	Seven	without	a	tribe	of	her	own.	And	so,	she	had	created	one,	a
secret	tribe	drawn	from	the	six	others,	had	taught	them	of	their	individual
blood	ties—in	order	to	link	them	with	their	unsacrificed	kin.	Taught	them,	as
well,	of	their	own	special	purpose,	the	destiny	that	would	belong	to	them	and
them	alone.
She	called	them	her	Found,	and	this	was	the	name	by	which	they	knew
themselves,	the	name	of	their	own	hidden	tribe.	Dwelling	unseen	in	the	midst
of	their	kin,	their	very	existence	unimagined	by	anyone	in	any	of	the	six	tribes.
There	were	some	they	knew,	who	might	suspect,	but	suspicion	was	all	they
possessed.	Men	such	as	Synyg,	Karsa’s	father,	who	treated	the	memorial
blood-posts	with	indifference,	if	not	contempt.	Such	men	usually	posed	no	real
threat,	although	on	occasion	more	extreme	measures	proved	necessary	when
true	risk	was	perceived.	Such	as	with	Karsa’s	mother.
The	twenty-three	Found	who	stood	witness	to	the	beginning	of	the
warriors’	journey,	hidden	among	the	trees	of	the	valley	side,	were	by	blood	the
brothers	and	sisters	of	Karsa,	Bairoth	and	Delum,	yet	they	were	strangers	as
well,	though	at	that	moment	that	detail	seemed	to	matter	little.
‘One	shall	make	it.’	This	from	Bairoth’s	eldest	brother.
Delum’s	twin	sister	shrugged	in	reply	and	said,	‘We	shall	be	here,	then,
upon	that	one’s	return.’


‘So	we	shall.’
Another	trait	was	shared	by	all	of	the	Found.	’Siballe	had	marked	her
children	with	a	savage	scar,	a	stripping	away	of	flesh	and	muscle	on	the	left
side—from	temple	down	to	jawline—of	each	face,	and	with	that	destruction	the
capacity	for	expression	had	been	severely	diminished.	Features	on	the	left	were
fixed	in	a	downturned	grimace,	as	if	in	permanent	dismay.	In	some	strange
manner,	the	physical	scarring	had	also	stripped	inflection	from	their	voices—
or	perhaps	’Siballe’s	own	toneless	voice	had	proved	an	overwhelming
influence.
Thus	bereft	of	intonation,	words	of	hope	had	a	way	of	ringing	false	to
their	own	ears,	sufficient	to	silence	those	who	had	spoken.
One	would	make	it.
Perhaps.
	
Synyg	continued	stirring	the	stew	at	the	cookfire	when	the	door	opened	behind
him.	A	soft	wheeze,	a	dragged	foot,	the	clatter	of	a	walking	stick	against	the
doorframe.	Then	a	harsh	accusatory	question.
‘Did	you	bless	your	son?’
‘I	gave	him	Havok,	Father.’
Somehow	Pahlk	filled	a	single	word	with	contempt,	disgust	and	suspicion
all	at	once:	‘Why?’
Synyg	still	did	not	turn	as	he	listened	to	his	father	make	a	tortured	journey
to	the	chair	closest	to	the	hearth.	‘Havok	deserved	a	final	battle,	one	I	knew	I
would	not	give	him.	So.’
‘So,	as	I	thought.’	Pahlk	settled	into	the	chair	with	a	pained	grunt.	‘For	your
horse,	but	not	for	your	son.’
‘Are	you	hungry?’	Synyg	asked.
‘I	will	not	deny	you	the	gesture.’
Synyg	allowed	himself	a	small,	bitter	smile,	then	reached	over	to	collect	a
second	bowl	and	set	it	down	beside	his	own.
‘He	would	batter	down	a	mountain,’	Pahlk	growled,	‘to	see	you	stir	from
your	straw.’
‘What	he	does	is	not	for	me,	Father,	it	is	for	you.’
‘He	perceives	only	the	fiercest	glory	possible	will	achieve	what	is
necessary—the	inundation	of	the	shame	that	is	you,	Synyg.	You	are	the
straggly	bush	between	two	towering	trees,	child	of	one	and	sire	to	the	other.
This	is	why	he	reached	out	to	me,	reached	out—do	you	fret	and	chafe	there	in
the	shadows	between	Karsa	and	me?	Too	bad,	the	choice	was	always	yours.’


Synyg	filled	both	bowls	and	straightened	to	hand	one	to	his	father.	‘The
scar	around	an	old	wound	feels	nothing,’	he	said.
‘To	feel	nothing	is	not	a	virtue.’
Smiling,	Synyg	sat	in	the	other	chair.	‘Tell	me	a	tale,	Father,	as	you	once
did.	Those	days	following	your	triumph.	Tell	me	again	of	the	children	you
killed.	Of	the	women	you	cut	down.	Tell	me	of	the	burning	homesteads,	the
screams	of	the	cattle	and	sheep	trapped	in	the	flames.	I	would	see	those	fires
once	more,	rekindled	in	your	eyes.	Stir	the	ashes,	Father.’
‘When	you	speak	these	days,	son,	all	I	hear	is	that	damned	woman.’
‘Eat,	Father,	lest	you	insult	me	and	my	home.’
‘I	shall.’
‘You	were	ever	a	mindful	guest.’
‘True.’
No	more	words	were	exchanged	until	both	men	had	finished	their	meals.
Then	Synyg	set	down	his	bowl.	He	rose	and	collected	Pahlk’s	bowl	as	well,
then,	turning,	he	threw	it	into	the	fire.
His	father ’s	eyes	widened.
Synyg	stared	down	at	him.	‘Neither	of	us	shall	live	to	see	Karsa’s	return.
The	bridge	between	you	and	me	is	now	swept	away.	Come	to	my	door	again,
Father,	and	I	shall	kill	you.’	He	reached	down	with	both	hands	and	pulled	Pahlk
upright,	dragged	the	sputtering	old	man	to	the	door	and	without	ceremony
threw	him	outside.	The	walking	stick	followed.
	
They	travelled	the	old	trail	that	paralleled	the	spine	of	the	mountains.	Old
rockslides	obscured	the	path	here	and	there,	dragging	firs	and	cedars	down
towards	the	valley	below,	and	in	these	places	bushes	and	broadleafed	trees	had
found	a	foothold,	making	passage	difficult.	Two	days	and	three	nights	ahead
lay	Rathyd	lands,	and	of	all	the	other	Teblor	tribes	it	was	the	Rathyd	with
whom	the	Uryd	feuded	the	most.	Raids	and	vicious	murders	entangled	the	two
tribes	together	in	a	skein	of	hatred	that	stretched	back	centuries.
Passing	unseen	through	Rathyd	territories	was	not	what	Karsa	had	in	mind.
He	intended	to	carve	a	bloody	path	through	real	and	imagined	insults	with	a
vengeful	blade,	gathering	a	score	or	more	Teblor	souls	to	his	name	in	the
process.	The	two	warriors	riding	behind	him,	he	well	knew,	believed	that	the
journey	ahead	would	be	one	of	stealth	and	subterfuge.	They	were,	after	all,	but
three.
But	Urugal	is	with	us,	in	this,	his	season.	And	we	shall	announce	ourselves
in	his	name,	and	in	blood.	We	shall	shock	awake	the	hornets	in	their	nest,	and


the	Rathyd	shall	come	to	know,	and	fear,	the	name	of	Karsa	Orlong.	As	will	the
Sunyd,	in	their	turn.
The	warhorses	moved	cautiously	across	the	loose	scree	of	a	recent	slide.
There	had	been	a	lot	of	snow	the	past	winter,	more	than	Karsa	could	recall	in
his	lifetime.	Long	before	the	Faces	in	the	Rock	awoke	to	proclaim	to	the
elders,	within	dreams	and	trances,	that	they	had	defeated	the	old	Teblor	spirits
and	now	demanded	obeisance;	long	before	the	taking	of	enemy	souls	had
become	foremost	among	Teblor	aspirations,	the	spirits	that	had	ruled	the	land
and	its	people	were	the	bones	of	rock,	the	flesh	of	earth,	the	hair	and	fur	of
forest	and	glen,	and	their	breath	was	the	wind	of	each	season.	Winter	arrived
and	departed	with	violent	storms	high	in	the	mountains,	the	savage	exertions	of
the	spirits	in	their	eternal,	mutual	war.	Summer	and	winter	were	as	one:
motionless	and	dry,	but	the	former	revealed	exhaustion	while	the	latter	evinced
an	icy,	fragile	peace.	Accordingly,	the	Teblor	viewed	summers	with	sympathy
for	the	battle-weary	spirits,	while	they	detested	winters	for	the	weakness	of	the
ascendant	combatants,	for	there	was	no	value	in	the	illusion	of	peace.
Less	than	a	score	days	remained	in	this,	the	season	of	spring.	The	high
storms	were	diminishing,	both	in	frequency	and	fury.	Though	the	Faces	in	the
Rock	had	long	ago	destroyed	the	old	spirits	and	were,	it	seemed,	indifferent	to
the	passage	of	seasons,	Karsa	secretly	envisioned	himself	and	his	two
companion	warriors	as	harbingers	of	one	last	storm.	Their	bloodwood	swords
would	echo	ancient	rages	among	the	unsuspecting	Rathyd	and	Sunyd.
They	cleared	the	recent	slide.	The	path	ahead	wound	down	into	a	shallow
valley	with	a	highland	meadow	open	to	the	bright	afternoon	sunlight.
Bairoth	spoke	behind	Karsa.	‘We	should	camp	on	the	other	side	of	this
valley,	Warleader.	The	horses	need	rest.’
‘Perhaps	your	horse	needs	rest,	Bairoth,’	Karsa	replied.	‘You’ve	too	many
feast	nights	on	your	bones.	This	journey	shall	make	a	warrior	of	you	once
again,	I	trust.	Your	back	has	known	too	much	straw	of	late.’	With	Dayliss	riding
you.
Bairoth	laughed,	but	made	no	other	reply.
Delum	called,	‘My	horse	needs	rest	as	well,	Warleader.	The	glade	ahead
should	make	a	good	camp.	There	are	rabbit	runs	here	and	I	would	set	my
snare.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘Two	weighted	chains	about	me,	then.	The	warcries	of
your	stomachs	leave	me	deafened.	So	be	it.	We	shall	camp.’
	
There	would	be	no	fire,	so	they	ate	the	rabbits	Delum	had	caught	raw.	Once,


such	fare	would	have	been	risky,	for	rabbits	often	carried	diseases	that	could
only	be	killed	by	cooking,	most	of	them	fatal	to	the	Teblor.	But	since	the
coming	of	the	Faces	in	the	Rock,	illnesses	had	vanished	among	the	tribes.
Madness,	it	was	true,	still	plagued	them,	but	this	had	nothing	to	do	with	what
was	eaten	or	drunk.	At	times,	the	elders	had	explained,	the	burdens	laid	upon	a
man	by	the	Seven	proved	too	powerful.	A	mind	must	be	strong,	and	strength
was	found	in	faith.	For	the	weak	man,	for	the	man	who	knew	doubt,	rules	and
rites	could	become	a	cage,	and	imprisonment	led	to	madness.
They	sat	around	a	small	pit	Delum	had	dug	for	the	rabbit	bones,	saying
little	through	the	course	of	the	meal.	Overhead,	the	sky	slowly	lost	its	colour,
and	the	stars	had	begun	their	wheel.	In	the	gathering	gloom	Karsa	listened	to
Bairoth	sucking	at	a	rabbit	skull.	He	was	ever	last	to	finish,	for	he	left	nothing
and	would	even	gnaw,	on	the	next	day,	the	thin	layer	of	fat	from	the	underside
of	the	skin.	Finally,	Bairoth	tossed	the	empty	skull	into	the	pit	and	sat	back,
licking	his	fingers.
‘I	have	given,’	Delum	said,	‘some	thought	as	to	the	journey	ahead.
Through	Rathyd	and	Sunyd	lands.	We	should	not	take	trails	that	set	us	against
skyline	or	even	bare	rock.	Therefore,	we	must	take	lower	paths.	Yet	these	are
ones	that	will	lead	us	closest	to	camps.	We	must,	I	think,	shift	our	travelling	to
night.’
‘Better,	then,’	Bairoth	nodded,	‘to	count	coup.	To	turn	the	hearthstones	and
steal	feathers.	Perhaps	a	few	lone	sleeping	warriors	can	give	us	their	souls.’
Karsa	spoke.	‘Hiding	by	day,	we	see	little	smoke	to	tell	us	where	the	camps
are.	At	night,	the	wind	swirls,	so	it	will	not	help	us	find	the	hearths.	The	Rathyd
and	Sunyd	are	not	fools.	They	will	not	build	fires	beneath	overhangs	or	against
rock-faces—we	shall	find	no	welcoming	wash	of	light	on	stone.	Also,	our
horses	see	better	during	the	day,	and	are	more	sure-footed.	We	shall	ride	by
day,’	he	finished.
Neither	Bairoth	nor	Delum	said	anything	for	a	moment.
Then	Bairoth	cleared	his	throat.	‘We	shall	find	ourselves	in	a	war,	Karsa.’
‘We	shall	be	as	an	arrow	of	the	Lanyd	in	its	flight	through	a	forest,
changing	direction	with	each	twig,	branch	and	bole.	We	shall	gather	souls,
Bairoth,	in	a	roaring	storm.	War?	Yes.	Do	you	fear	war,	Bairoth	Gild?’
Delum	said,	‘We	are	three,	Warleader.’
‘Aye,	we	are	Karsa	Orlong,	Bairoth	Gild	and	Delum	Thord.	I	have	faced
twenty-four	warriors	and	have	slain	them	all.	I	dance	without	equal—would
you	deny	it?	Even	the	elders	have	spoken	in	awe.	And	you,	Delum,	I	see
eighteen	tongues	looped	on	the	thong	at	your	hip.	You	can	read	a	ghost’s	trail,
and	hear	a	pebble	roll	over	from	twenty	paces.	And	Bairoth,	in	the	days	when


all	he	carried	was	muscle—you,	Bairoth,	did	you	not	break	a	Buryd’s	spine
with	your	bare	hands?	Did	you	not	drag	a	warhorse	down?	That	ferocity	but
sleeps	within	you	and	this	journey	shall	awaken	it	once	more.	Any	other
three…aye,	glide	the	dark	winding	ways	and	turn	hearthstones	and	pluck
feathers	and	crush	a	few	windpipes	among	sleeping	foes.	A	worthy	enough
glory	for	any	other	three	warriors.	For	us?	No.	Your	warleader	has	spoken.’
Bairoth	grinned	over	at	Delum.	‘Let	us	gaze	upward	and	witness	the	wheel,
Delum	Thord,	for	scant	few	such	sights	remain	to	us.’
Karsa	slowly	rose.	‘You	follow	your	warleader,	Bairoth	Gild.	You	do	not
question	him.	Your	faltering	courage	threatens	to	poison	us	all.	Believe	in
victory,	warrior,	or	turn	back	now.’
Bairoth	shrugged	and	leaned	back,	stretching	out	his	hide-wrapped	legs.
‘You	are	a	great	warleader,	Karsa	Orlong,	but	sadly	blind	to	humour.	I	have
faith	that	you	shall	indeed	find	the	glory	you	seek,	and	that	Delum	and	I	shall
shine	as	lesser	moons,	yet	shine	none	the	less.	For	us,	it	is	enough.	You	may
cease	questioning	that,	Warleader.	We	are	here,	with	you—’
‘Challenging	my	wisdom!’
‘Wisdom	is	not	a	subject	we	have	as	yet	discussed,’	Bairoth	replied.	‘We
are	warriors	as	you	said,	Karsa.	And	we	are	young.	Wisdom	belongs	to	old
men.’
‘Yes,	the	elders,’	Karsa	snapped.	‘Who	would	not	bless	our	journey!’
Bairoth	laughed.	‘That	is	our	truth	and	we	must	carry	it	with	us,	unchanged
and	bitter	in	our	hearts.	But	upon	our	return,	Warleader,	we	shall	find	that	that
truth	has	changed	in	our	absence.	The	blessing	will	have	been	given	after	all.
Wait	and	see.’
Karsa’s	eyes	widened.	‘The	elders	will	lie?’
‘Of	course	they	will	lie.	And	they	will	expect	us	to	accept	their	new	truths,
and	we	shall—no,	we	must,	Karsa	Orlong.	The	glory	of	our	success	must
serve	to	bind	the	people	together—to	hold	it	close	is	not	only	selfish,	it	is
potentially	deadly.	Think	on	this,	Warleader.	We	will	be	returning	to	the	village
with	our	own	claims.	Aye,	no	doubt	a	few	trophies	with	us	to	add	proof	to	our
tale,	but	if	we	do	not	share	out	that	glory	then	the	elders	will	see	to	it	that	our
claims	shall	know	the	poison	of	disbelief.’
‘Disbelief?’
‘Aye.	They	will	believe	but	only	if	they	can	partake	of	our	glory.	They	will
believe	us,	but	only	if	we	in	turn	believe	them—their	reshaping	of	the	past,	the
blessing	that	was	not	given,	now	given,	all	the	villagers	lining	our	ride	out.
They	were	all	there,	or	so	they	will	tell	you,	and,	eventually,	they	will
themselves	come	to	believe	it,	and	will	have	the	scenes	carved	into	their	minds.


Does	this	still	confuse	you,	Karsa?	If	so,	then	we’d	best	not	speak	of	wisdom.’
‘The	Teblor	do	not	play	games	of	deceit,’	Karsa	growled.
Bairoth	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	he	nodded.	‘True,	they	do	not.’
Delum	pushed	soil	and	stones	into	the	pit.	‘It	is	time	to	sleep,’	he	said,
rising	to	check	one	last	time	on	the	hobbled	horses.
Karsa	eyed	Bairoth.	His	mind	is	as	a	Lanyd	arrow	in	the	forest,	but	will	that
aid	him	when	our	bloodwood	blades	are	out	and	battlecries	sound	on	all	sides?
This	is	what	comes	when	muscle	turns	to	fat	and	straw	clings	to	your	back.
Duelling	with	words	will	win	you	nothing,	Bairoth	Gild,	except	perhaps	that
your	tongue	will	not	dry	out	as	quickly	on	a	Rathyd	warrior’s	belt.
	
‘At	least	eight,’	Delum	murmured.	‘With	perhaps	one	youth.	There	are	indeed
two	hearths.	They	have	hunted	the	grey	bear	that	dwells	in	caves,	and	carry	a
trophy	with	them.’
‘Meaning	they	are	full	of	themselves.’	Bairoth	nodded.	‘That’s	good.’
Karsa	frowned	at	Bairoth.	‘Why?’
‘The	cast	of	the	enemy’s	mind,	Warleader.	They	will	be	feeling	invincible,
and	this	will	make	them	careless.	Do	they	have	horses,	Delum?’
‘No.	Grey	bears	know	the	sound	of	hoofs	too	well.	If	they	brought	dogs	on
the	hunt,	none	survived	for	the	return	journey.’
‘Better	still.’
They	had	dismounted,	and	now	crouched	near	the	edge	of	the	tree	line.
Delum	had	slipped	ahead	to	scout	the	Rathyd	encampment.	His	passage	through
the	tall	grasses,	knee-high	stumps	and	brush	of	the	slope	beyond	the	trees	had
not	stirred	a	single	blade	or	leaf.
The	sun	was	high	overhead,	the	air	dry,	hot	and	motionless.
‘Eight,’	Bairoth	said.	He	grinned	at	Karsa.	‘And	a	youth.	He	should	be
taken	first.’
To	make	the	survivors	know	shame.	He	expects	us	to	lose.	‘Leave	him	to
me,’	Karsa	said.	‘My	charge	will	be	fierce,	and	will	take	me	to	the	other	side	of
the	camp.	The	warriors	still	standing	will	turn	to	face	me	one	and	all.	That	is
when	you	two	will	charge.’
Delum	blinked.	‘You	would	have	us	strike	from	behind?’
‘To	even	the	numbers,	yes.	Then	we	shall	each	settle	to	our	duels.’
‘Will	you	dodge	and	duck	in	your	pass?’	Bairoth	asked,	his	eyes	glittering.
‘No,	I	will	strike.’
‘They	will	bind	you,	then,	Warleader,	and	you	shall	fail	in	reaching	the	far
side.’


‘I	will	not	be	bound,	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘There	are	nine	of	them.’
‘Then	watch	me	dance.’
Delum	asked,	‘Why	do	we	not	use	our	horses,	Warleader?’
‘I	am	tired	of	talking.	Follow,	but	at	a	slower	pace.’
Bairoth	and	Delum	shared	an	unreadable	look,	then	Bairoth	shrugged.	‘We
will	be	your	witnesses,	then.’
Karsa	unslung	his	bloodwood	sword,	closing	both	hands	around	the
leather-wrapped	grip.	The	blade’s	wood	was	deep	red,	almost	black,	the	glassy
polish	making	the	painted	warcrest	seem	to	float	a	finger ’s	width	above	the
surface.	The	weapon’s	edge	was	almost	translucent,	where	the	blood-oil
rubbed	into	the	grain	had	hardened,	coming	to	replace	the	wood.	There	were
no	nicks	or	notches	along	the	edge,	only	a	slight	rippling	of	the	line	where
damage	had	repaired	itself,	for	blood-oil	clung	to	its	memory	and	would	little
tolerate	denting	or	scarring.	Karsa	held	the	weapon	out	before	him,	then
slipped	forward	through	the	high	grasses,	quickening	into	the	dance	as	he	went.
Reaching	the	boar	trail	leading	into	the	forest	that	Delum	had	pointed	out,
he	hunched	lower	and	slipped	onto	its	hard-packed,	flattened	track	without
breaking	stride.	The	broad,	tapered	sword-point	seemed	to	lead	him	forward	as
if	cutting	its	own	silent,	unerring	path	through	the	shadows	and	shafts	of	light.
He	picked	up	greater	speed.
In	the	centre	of	the	Rathyd	camp,	three	of	the	eight	adult	warriors	were
crouched	around	a	slab	of	bear	meat	that	they	had	just	unwrapped	from	a	fold
of	deer	hide.	Two	others	sat	nearby	with	their	weapons	across	their	thighs,
rubbing	the	thick	blood-oil	into	the	blades.	The	remaining	three	stood	speaking
to	one	another	less	than	three	paces	from	the	mouth	of	the	boar	trail.	The	youth
was	at	the	far	end.
Karsa’s	sprint	was	at	its	peak	when	he	reached	the	glade.	At	distances	of
seventy	paces	or	less,	a	Teblor	could	run	alongside	a	galloping	warhorse.	His
arrival	was	explosive.	One	moment,	eight	warriors	and	one	youth	at	rest	in	a
clearing,	the	next,	the	tops	of	the	heads	of	two	of	the	standing	warriors	were
cut	off	in	a	single	horizontal	blow.	Scalp	and	bone	flew,	blood	and	brain
sprayed	and	spat	across	the	face	of	the	third	Rathyd.	This	man	reeled	back,	and
pivoted	to	his	left	to	see	the	return	swing	of	Karsa’s	sword,	as	it	swept	under
his	chin,	then	was	gone	from	sight.	Eyes,	still	held	wide,	watched	the	scene	tilt
wildly	before	darkness	burgeoned.
Still	moving,	Karsa	leapt	high	to	avoid	the	warrior ’s	head	as	it	thudded	and
rolled	across	the	ground.
The	Rathyd	who	had	been	oiling	their	swords	had	already	straightened	and


readied	their	weapons.	They	split	away	from	each	other	and	darted	forward	to
take	Karsa	from	either	side.
He	laughed,	twisting	around	to	plunge	among	the	three	warriors	whose
bloodied	hands	held	but	butchering	knives.	Snapping	his	sword	into	a	closequarter	guard,	he	ducked	low.	Three	small	blades	each	found	their	mark,
slicing	through	leathers,	skin	and	into	muscle.	Momentum	propelled	Karsa
through	the	press,	and	he	took	those	knives	with	him,	spinning	to	rip	his	sword
through	a	pair	of	arms,	then	up	into	an	armpit,	tearing	the	shoulder	away,	the
scapula	coming	with	it—a	curved	plate	of	purple	bone	latticed	in	veins	attached
by	a	skein	of	ligaments	to	a	twitching	arm	that	swung	in	its	flight	to	reach
skyward.
A	body	dived	with	a	snarl	to	wrap	burly	arms	around	Karsa’s	legs.	Still
laughing,	the	Uryd	warleader	punched	down	with	his	sword,	the	pommel
crunching	through	the	top	of	the	warrior ’s	skull.	The	arms	spasmed	and	fell
away.
A	sword	hissed	towards	his	neck	from	the	right.	Still	in	close-quarter
guard,	Karsa	spun	to	take	the	blade	with	his	own,	the	impact	ringing	both
weapons	with	a	pealing,	sonorous	sound.
He	heard	the	closing	step	of	the	Rathyd	behind	him,	felt	the	air	cleave	to
the	blade	swinging	in	towards	his	left	shoulder,	and	he	pitched	instantly	down
and	to	his	right.	Wheeling	his	own	sword	around,	arms	extending	as	he	fell.
The	edge	swept	above	and	past	the	warrior ’s	savage	down-stroke,	cut	through
a	pair	of	thick	wrists,	then	tore	through	abdomen,	from	belly-button	and
across,	between	ribcage	and	point	of	hip,	then	bursting	clear.
Still	spinning	as	he	toppled,	he	renewed	the	swing	that	had	been	staggered
by	bone	and	flesh,	twisting	his	shoulders	to	follow	the	blade	as	it	passed
beneath	him,	then	around	to	the	other	side.	The	slash	cleared	the	ground	at	a
level	that	took	the	last	Rathyd’s	left	leg	at	the	ankle.	Then	the	ground
hammered	into	Karsa’s	right	shoulder.	Rolling	away,	his	sword	trailing
crossways	across	his	own	body,	deflecting	but	not	quite	defeating	a	downward
blow—fire	tearing	into	his	right	hip—then	he	was	beyond	the	warrior ’s	reach
—and	the	man	was	shrieking	and	stumbling	an	awkward	retreat.
Karsa’s	roll	brought	him	upright	once	more,	into	a	crouch	that	spurted
blood	down	his	right	leg,	that	sent	stinging	stabs	into	his	left	side,	his	back
beneath	his	right	shoulder	blade,	and	his	left	thigh	where	the	knives	were	still
buried.
He	found	himself	facing	the	youth.
No	more	than	forty,	not	yet	at	his	full	height,	lean	of	limb	as	the	Unready
often	were.	Eyes	filled	with	horror.


Karsa	winked,	then	wheeled	around	to	close	on	the	one-footed	warrior.
His	shrieks	had	grown	frenzied,	and	Karsa	saw	that	Bairoth	and	Delum	had
reached	him	and	had	joined	in	the	game,	their	blades	taking	the	other	foot	and
both	hands.	The	Rathyd	was	on	the	ground	between	them,	limbs	jerking	and
spurting	blood	across	the	trampled	grass.
Karsa	glanced	back	to	see	the	youth	fleeing	towards	the	woods.	The
warleader	smiled.
Bairoth	and	Delum	began	chasing	the	floundering	Rathyd	warrior	about,
chopping	pieces	from	his	flailing	limbs.
They	were	angry,	Karsa	knew.	He	had	left	them	nothing.
Ignoring	his	two	companions	and	their	brutal	torture,	he	plucked	the
butchering	knife	from	his	thigh.	Blood	welled	but	did	not	spurt,	telling	him	that
no	major	artery	or	vein	had	been	touched.	The	knife	in	his	left	side	had
skittered	along	ribs	and	lay	embedded	flat	beneath	skin	and	a	few	layers	of
muscle.	He	drew	the	weapon	out	and	tossed	it	aside.	The	last	knife,	sunk	deep
into	his	back,	was	harder	to	reach	and	it	took	a	few	attempts	before	he	managed
to	find	a	sure	clasp	of	its	smeared	handle	and	then	pull	it	out.	A	longer	blade
would	have	reached	his	heart.	As	it	was,	it	would	probably	be	the	most
irritating	of	the	three	minor	wounds.	The	sword-cut	into	his	hip	and	through
part	of	a	buttock	was	slightly	more	serious.	It	would	have	to	be	carefully	sewn,
and	would	make	both	riding	and	walking	painful	for	a	while.
Loss	of	blood	or	a	fatal	blow	had	silenced	the	dismembered	Rathyd,	and
Karsa	heard	Bairoth’s	heavy	steps	approach.	Another	scream	announced
Delum’s	examination	of	the	other	fallen.
‘Warleader.’	Anger	made	the	voice	taut.
Karsa	slowly	turned.	‘Bairoth	Gild.’
The	heavy	warrior ’s	face	was	dark.	‘You	let	the	youth	escape.	We	must
hunt	him,	now,	and	it	will	not	be	easy	for	these	are	his	lands,	not	ours.’
‘He	is	meant	to	escape,’	Karsa	replied.
Bairoth	scowled.
‘You’re	the	clever	one,’	Karsa	pointed	out,	‘why	should	this	baffle	you
so?’
‘He	reaches	his	village.’
‘Aye.’
‘And	tells	of	the	attack.	Three	Uryd	warriors.	There	is	rage	and	frenzied
preparations.’	Bairoth	allowed	himself	a	small	nod	as	he	continued.	‘A	hunt
sets	out,	seeking	three	Uryd	warriors.	Who	are	on	foot.	The	youth	is	certain	on
this.	Had	the	Uryd	had	horses,	they	would	have	used	them,	of	course.	Three
against	eight,	to	do	otherwise	is	madness.	So	the	hunt	confines	itself,	in	what	it


seeks,	in	its	frame	of	thought,	in	all	things.	Three	Uryd	warriors,	on	foot.’
Delum	had	joined	them,	and	now	eyed	Karsa	without	expression.
Karsa	said,	‘Delum	Thord	would	speak.’
‘I	would,	Warleader.	The	youth,	you	have	placed	an	image	in	his	mind.	It
will	harden	there,	its	colours	will	not	fade,	but	sharpen.	The	echo	of	screams
will	become	louder	in	his	skull.	Familiar	faces,	frozen	eternal	in	expressions
of	pain.	This	youth,	Karsa	Orlong,	will	become	an	adult.	And	he	will	not	be
content	to	follow,	he	will	lead.	He	must	lead;	and	none	shall	challenge	his
fierceness,	the	gleaming	wood	of	his	will,	the	oil	of	his	desire.	Karsa	Orlong,
you	have	made	an	enemy	for	the	Uryd,	an	enemy	to	pale	all	we	have	known	in
the	past.’
‘One	day,’	Karsa	said,	‘that	Rathyd	warleader	shall	kneel	before	me.	This,	I
vow,	here,	on	the	blood	of	his	kin,	I	so	vow.’
The	air	was	suddenly	chill.	Silence	hung	in	the	glade	except	for	the	muted
buzz	of	flies.
Delum’s	eyes	were	wide,	his	expression	one	of	fear.
Bairoth	turned	away.	‘That	vow	shall	destroy	you,	Karsa	Orlong.	No
Rathyd	kneels	before	an	Uryd.	Unless	you	prop	his	lifeless	corpse	against	a
tree	stump.	You	now	seek	the	impossible,	and	that	is	a	path	to	madness.’
‘One	vow	among	many	I	have	made,’	Karsa	said.	‘And	each	shall	be	kept.
Witness,	if	you	dare.’
Bairoth	paused	from	studying	the	grey	bear ’s	fur	and	defleshed	skull—the
Rathyd	trophies—and	glanced	back	at	Karsa.	‘Do	we	have	a	choice?’
‘If	you	still	breathe,	then	the	answer	is	no,	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘Remind	me	to	tell	you	one	day,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘Tell	me	of	what?’
‘What	life	is	like,	for	those	of	us	in	your	shadow.’
Delum	stepped	close	to	Karsa.	‘You	have	wounds	that	need	mending,
Warleader.’
‘Aye,	but	for	now,	only	the	sword-cut.	We	must	return	to	our	horses	and
ride.’
‘Like	a	Lanyd	arrow.’
‘Aye,	just	so,	Delum	Thord.’
Bairoth	called	out,	‘Karsa	Orlong,	I	shall	collect	for	you	your	trophies.’
‘Thank	you,	Bairoth	Gild.	We	shall	take	that	fur	and	skull,	as	well.	You	and
Delum	may	keep	those.’
Delum	turned	to	face	Bairoth.	‘Take	them,	brother.	The	grey	bear	better
suits	you	than	me.’
Bairoth	nodded	his	thanks,	then	waved	towards	the	dismembered	warrior.


‘His	ears	and	tongue	are	yours,	Delum	Thord.’
‘It	is	so,	then.’
	
Among	the	Teblor,	the	Rathyd	bred	the	fewest	horses;	despite	this,	there	were
plenty	of	wide	runs	from	glade	to	glade	down	which	Karsa	and	his
companions	could	ride.	In	one	of	the	clearings	they	had	come	upon	an	adult
and	two	youths	tending	to	six	destriers.	They	had	ridden	them	down,	blades
flashing,	pausing	only	to	collect	trophies	and	gather	up	the	horses,	each	taking
two	on	a	lead.	An	hour	before	darkness	fell,	they	came	to	a	forking	of	the	trail,
rode	down	the	lower	of	the	two	for	thirty	paces,	then	released	the	leads	and
drove	the	Rathyd	horses	on.	The	three	Uryd	warriors	then	slipped	a	single,
short	rope	around	the	necks	of	their	own	mounts,	just	above	the	collar	bones,
and	with	gentle,	alternating	tugs	walked	them	backwards	until	they	reached	the
fork,	whereupon	they	proceeded	onto	the	higher	trail.	Fifty	paces	ahead,	Delum
dismounted	and	backtracked	to	obscure	their	trail.
With	the	wheel	taking	shape	overhead,	they	cut	away	from	the	rocky	path
and	found	a	small	clearing	in	which	they	made	camp.	Bairoth	cut	slices	from
the	bear	meat	and	they	ate.	Delum	then	rose	to	attend	to	the	horses,	using	wet
moss	to	wipe	them	down.	The	beasts	were	tired	and	left	unhobbled	to	allow
them	to	walk	the	clearing	and	stretch	their	necks.
Examining	his	wounds,	Karsa	noted	that	they	had	already	begun	to	knit.	So
it	was	among	the	Teblor.	Satisfied,	he	found	his	flask	of	blood-oil	and	set	to
repairing	his	weapon.	Delum	rejoined	them	and	he	and	Bairoth	followed	suit.
‘Tomorrow,’	Karsa	said,	‘we	leave	this	trail.’
‘Down	to	the	wider,	easier	ones	in	the	valley?’	Bairoth	asked.
‘If	we	are	quick,’	Delum	said,	‘we	can	pass	through	Rathyd	land	in	a	single
day.’
‘No,	we	lead	our	horses	higher,	onto	the	goat	and	sheep	trails,’	Karsa
replied.	‘And	we	reverse	our	path	for	the	length	of	the	morning.	Then	we	ride
down	into	the	valley	once	more.	Bairoth	Gild,	with	the	hunt	out,	who	will
remain	in	the	village?’
The	heavy	man	drew	out	his	new	bear	cloak	and	wrapped	it	about	himself
before	answering.	‘Youths.	Women.	The	old	and	the	crippled.’
‘Dogs?’
‘No,	the	hunt	will	have	taken	those.	So,	Warleader,	we	attack	the	village.’
‘Yes.	Then	we	find	the	hunt’s	trail.’
Delum	drew	a	deep	breath	and	was	slow	in	its	release.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	the
village	of	our	victims	thus	far	is	not	the	only	village.	In	the	first	valley	alone


there	are	at	least	three	more.	Word	will	go	out.	Every	warrior	will	ready	his
sword.	Every	dog	will	be	unleashed	and	sent	out	into	the	forest.	The	warriors
may	not	find	us,	but	the	dogs	will.’
‘And	then,’	Bairoth	growled,	‘there	are	three	more	valleys	to	cross.’
‘Small	ones,’	Karsa	pointed	out.	‘And	we	cross	them	at	the	south	ends,	a
day	or	more	hard	riding	from	the	north	mouths	and	the	heart	of	the	Rathyd
lands.’
Delum	said,	‘There	will	be	such	a	foment	of	anger	pursuing	us,	Warleader,
that	they	will	follow	us	into	the	valleys	of	the	Sunyd.’
Karsa	flipped	the	blade	on	his	thighs	to	begin	work	on	the	other	side.	‘So	I
hope,	Delum	Thord.	Answer	me	this,	when	last	have	the	Sunyd	seen	an	Uryd?’
‘Your	grandfather,’	Bairoth	said.
Karsa	nodded.	‘And	we	well	know	the	Rathyd	warcry,	do	we	not?’
‘You	would	start	a	war	between	the	Rathyd	and	Sunyd?’
‘Aye,	Bairoth.’
The	warrior	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘We	are	not	yet	done	with	the	Rathyd,
Karsa	Orlong.	You	plan	too	far	in	advance,	Warleader.’
‘Witness	what	comes,	Bairoth	Gild.’
Bairoth	picked	up	the	bear	skull.	The	lower	jaw	still	hung	from	it	by	a
single	strip	of	gristle.	He	snapped	it	off	and	tossed	it	to	one	side.	Then	he	drew
out	a	spare	bundle	of	leather	straps.	He	began	tightly	wrapping	the	cheek
bones,	leaving	long	lengths	dangling	beneath.
Karsa	watched	these	efforts	curiously.	The	skull	was	too	heavy	even	for
Bairoth	to	wear	as	a	helm.	Moreover,	he	would	need	to	break	the	bone	away	on
the	underside,	where	it	was	thickest	around	the	hole	that	the	spinal	cord	made.
Delum	rose.	‘I	shall	sleep	now,’	he	announced,	moving	off.
‘Karsa	Orlong,’	Bairoth	said,	‘do	you	have	spare	straps?’
‘You	are	welcome	to	them,’	Karsa	replied,	also	rising.	‘Be	sure	to	sleep
this	night,	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘I	will.’
	
For	the	first	hour	of	light	they	heard	dogs	in	the	forested	valley	floor	below.
These	faded	as	they	backtracked	along	a	high	cliffside	path.	When	the	sun	was
directly	overhead,	Delum	found	a	downward	wending	trail	and	they	began	the
descent.
Midway	through	the	afternoon,	they	came	upon	stump-crowded	clearings
and	could	smell	the	smoke	of	the	village.	Delum	dismounted	and	slipped	ahead.
He	returned	a	short	while	later.	‘As	you	surmised,	Warleader.	I	saw	eleven


elders,	thrice	as	many	women,	and	thirteen	youths—all	very	young,	I	imagine
the	older	ones	are	with	the	hunt.	No	horses.	No	dogs.’	He	climbed	back	onto
his	horse.
The	three	Uryd	warriors	readied	their	swords.	They	then	each	drew	out
their	flasks	of	blood-oil	and	sprinkled	a	few	drops	around	the	nostrils	of	their
destriers.	Heads	snapped	back,	muscles	tensed.
‘I	have	the	right	flank,’	Bairoth	said.
‘And	I	the	centre,’	Karsa	announced.
‘And	so	I	the	left,’	Delum	said,	then	frowned.	‘They	will	scatter	from	you,
Warleader.’
‘I	am	feeling	generous	today,	Delum	Thord.	This	village	shall	be	to	the
glory	of	you	and	Bairoth.	Be	sure	that	no-one	escapes	on	the	other	side.’
‘None	shall.’
‘And	if	any	woman	seeks	to	fire	a	house	to	turn	the	hunt,	slay	her.’
‘They	would	not	be	so	foolish,’	Bairoth	said.	‘If	they	do	not	resist	they
shall	have	our	seed,	but	they	shall	live.’
The	three	removed	the	reins	from	their	horses	and	looped	them	around
their	waists.	They	edged	further	onto	their	mounts’	shoulders	and	drew	their
knees	up.
Karsa	slipped	his	wrist	through	the	sword’s	thong	and	whirled	the	weapon
once	through	the	air	to	tighten	it.	The	others	did	the	same.	Beneath	him,	Havok
trembled.
‘Lead	us,	Warleader,’	Delum	said.
A	slight	pressure	launched	Havok	forward,	three	strides	into	a	canter,	slow
and	almost	loping	as	they	crossed	the	stump-filled	glade.	A	slight	shifting	to
the	left	led	them	towards	the	main	path.	Reaching	it,	Karsa	lifted	his	sword	into
the	destrier ’s	range	of	vision.	The	beast	surged	into	a	gallop.
Seven	lengthening	strides	brought	them	to	the	village.	Karsa’s	companions
had	already	split	away	to	either	side	to	come	up	behind	the	houses,	leaving	him
the	main	artery.	He	saw	figures	there,	directly	ahead,	heads	turning.	A	scream
rang	through	the	air.	Children	scattered.
Sword	lashed	out,	chopped	down	easily	through	young	bone.	Karsa
glanced	to	his	right	and	Havok	shifted	direction,	hoofs	kicking	out	to	gather	in
and	trample	an	elder.	They	plunged	onward,	pursuing,	butchering.	On	the	far
sides	of	the	houses,	beyond	the	refuse	trenches,	more	screams	sounded.
Karsa	reached	the	far	end.	He	saw	a	single	youth	racing	for	the	trees	and
drove	after	him.	The	lad	carried	a	practice	sword.	Hearing	the	heavy	thump	of
Havok’s	charge	closing	fast—and	with	the	safety	of	the	forest	still	too	far	in
front	of	him—he	wheeled.


Karsa’s	swing	cut	through	practice	sword	then	neck.	A	head	thrust	from
Havok	sent	the	youth’s	decapitated	body	sprawling.
I	lost	a	cousin	in	such	a	manner.	Ridden	down	by	a	Rathyd.	Ears	and	tongue
taken.	Body	strung	by	one	foot	from	a	branch.	The	head	propped	beneath,
smeared	in	excrement.	The	deed	is	answered.	Answered.
Havok	slowed,	then	wheeled.
Karsa	looked	back	upon	the	village.	Bairoth	and	Delum	had	done	their
slaughter	and	were	now	herding	the	women	into	the	clearing	surrounding	the
village	hearth.
At	a	trot,	Havok	carried	him	back	into	the	village.
‘The	chief’s	own	belong	to	me,’	Karsa	announced.
Bairoth	and	Delum	nodded,	and	he	could	see	their	heightened	spirits,	from
the	ease	with	which	they	surrendered	the	privilege.	Bairoth	faced	the	women
and	gestured	with	his	sword.	A	middle-aged,	handsome	woman	stepped
forward,	followed	by	a	younger	version—a	lass	perhaps	the	same	age	as
Dayliss.	Both	studied	Karsa	as	carefully	as	he	did	them.
‘Bairoth	Gild	and	Delum	Thord,	take	your	first	among	the	others.	I	will
guard.’
The	two	warriors	grinned,	dismounted	and	plunged	among	the	women	to
select	one	each.	They	vanished	into	separate	houses,	leading	their	prizes	by	the
hand.
Karsa	watched	with	raised	brows.
The	chief’s	wife	snorted.	‘Your	warriors	were	not	blind	to	the	eagerness	of
those	two,’	she	said.
‘Their	warriors,	be	they	father	or	mate,	will	not	be	pleased	with	such
eagerness,’	Karsa	commented.	Uryd	women	would	not—
‘They	will	never	know,	Warleader,’	the	chief’s	wife	replied,	‘unless	you
tell	them,	and	what	is	the	likelihood	of	that?	They	will	spare	you	no	time	for
taunts	before	killing	you.	Ah,	but	I	see	now,’	she	added,	stepping	closer	to	stare
up	at	his	face.	‘You	thought	to	believe	that	Uryd	women	are	different,	and	now
you	realize	the	lie	of	that.	All	men	are	fools,	but	now	you	are	perhaps	a	little
less	so,	as	truth	steals	into	your	heart.	What	is	your	name,	Warleader?’
‘You	talk	too	much,’	Karsa	growled,	then	he	drew	himself	straight.	‘I	am
Karsa	Orlong,	grandson	of	Pahlk—’
‘Pahlk?’
‘Aye.’	Karsa	grinned.	‘I	see	you	recall	him.’
‘I	was	a	child,	but	yes,	he	is	well	known	among	us.’
‘He	lives	still,	and	sleeps	calm	despite	the	curses	you	have	laid	upon	his
name.’


She	laughed.	‘Curses?	There	are	none.	Pahlk	bowed	his	head	to	beg
passage	through	our	lands—’
‘You	lie!’
She	studied	him,	then	shrugged.	‘As	you	say.’
One	of	the	women	cried	out	from	one	of	the	houses,	a	cry	more	pleasure
than	pain.
The	chief’s	wife	turned	her	head.	‘How	many	of	us	will	take	your	seed,
Warleader?’
Karsa	settled	back.	‘All	of	you.	Eleven	each.’
‘And	how	many	days	will	that	take?	You	want	us	to	cook	for	you	as	well?’
‘Days?	You	think	as	an	old	woman.	We	are	young.	And,	if	need	be,	we	have
blood-oil.’
The	woman’s	eyes	widened.	The	others	behind	her	began	murmuring	and
whispering.	The	chief’s	wife	spun	and	silenced	them	with	a	look,	then	she
faced	Karsa	once	more.	‘You	have	never	used	blood-oil	in	this	fashion	before,
have	you?	It	is	true,	you	will	know	fire	in	your	loins.	You	will	know	stiffness
for	days	to	come.	But,	Warleader,	you	do	not	know	what	it	will	do	to	each	of	us
women.	I	do,	for	I	too	was	young	and	foolish	once.	Even	my	husband’s
strength	could	not	keep	my	teeth	from	his	throat,	and	he	carries	the	scars	still.
There	is	more.	What	for	you	will	last	less	than	a	week,	haunts	us	for	months.’
‘And	so,’	Karsa	replied,	‘if	we	do	not	kill	your	husbands,	you	will	upon
their	return.	I	am	pleased.’
‘You	three	will	not	survive	the	night.’
‘It	will	be	interesting,	do	you	not	think,’	Karsa	smiled,	‘who	among
Bairoth,	Delum	and	me	will	find	need	for	it	first.’	He	addressed	all	the	women.
‘I	suggest	to	each	of	you	to	be	eager,	so	you	are	not	the	first	to	fail	us.’
Bairoth	appeared,	nodded	at	Karsa.
The	chief’s	wife	sighed	and	waved	her	daughter	forward.
‘No,’	Karsa	said.
The	woman	stopped,	suddenly	confused.	‘But…will	you	not	want	a	child
from	this?	Your	first	will	carry	the	most	seed—’
‘Aye,	it	will.	Are	you	past	bearing	age?’
After	a	long	moment,	she	shook	her	head.	‘Karsa	Orlong,’	she	whispered,
‘you	invite	my	husband	to	set	upon	you	a	curse—he	will	burn	blood	on	the
stone	lips	of	Imroth	herself.’
‘Yes,	that	is	likely.’	Karsa	dismounted	and	approached	her.	‘Now,	lead	me
to	your	house.’
She	drew	back.	‘The	house	of	my	husband?	Warleader—no,	please,	let	us
choose	another	one—’


‘Your	husband’s	house,’	Karsa	growled.	‘I	am	done	talking	and	so	are
you.’
	
An	hour	before	dusk,	and	Karsa	led	the	last	of	his	prizes	towards	the	house—
the	chief’s	daughter.	He	and	Bairoth	and	Delum	had	not	needed	the	blood-oil,	a
testament,	Bairoth	claimed,	to	Uryd	prowess,	though	Karsa	suspected	the	true
honour	belonged	to	the	zeal	and	desperate	creativity	of	the	women	of	the
Rathyd,	and	even	then,	the	last	few	for	each	of	the	warriors	had	been
peremptory.
As	he	drew	the	young	woman	into	the	gloomy	house	with	its	dying	hearth,
Karsa	swung	shut	the	door	and	dropped	the	latch.	She	turned	to	face	him,	a
curious	tilt	to	her	chin.
‘Mother	said	you	were	surprisingly	gentle.’
He	eyed	her.	She	is	as	Dayliss,	yet	not.	There	is	no	dark	streak	within	this
one.	That	is…a	difference.	‘Remove	your	clothes.’
She	quickly	climbed	out	of	the	one-piece	hide	tunic.	‘Had	I	been	first,
Karsa	Orlong,	I	would	have	made	home	for	your	seed.	Such	is	this	day	in	my
wheel	of	time.’
‘You	would	have	been	proud?’
She	paused	to	give	him	a	startled	look,	then	shook	her	head.	‘You	have
slain	all	the	children,	all	the	elders.	It	will	be	centuries	before	our	village
recovers,	and	indeed	it	may	not,	for	the	anger	of	the	warriors	may	turn	them
on	each	other,	and	on	us	women—should	you	escape.’
‘Escape?	Lie	down,	there,	where	your	mother	did.	Karsa	Orlong	is	not
interested	in	escape.’	He	moved	forward	to	stand	over	her.	‘Your	warriors	will
not	be	returning.	The	life	of	this	village	is	ended,	and	within	many	of	you	there
shall	be	the	seed	of	the	Uryd.	Go	there,	all	of	you,	to	live	among	my	people.
And	you	and	your	mother,	go	to	the	village	where	I	was	born.	Await	me.	Raise
your	children,	my	children,	as	Uryd.’
‘You	make	bold	claims,	Karsa	Orlong.’
He	began	removing	his	leathers.
‘More	than	claims,	I	see,’	she	observed.	‘No	need,	then,	for	blood-oil.’
‘We	will	save	the	blood-oil,	you	and	I,	for	my	return.’
Her	eyes	widened	and	she	leaned	back	as	he	moved	down	over	her.	In	a
small	voice,	she	asked,	‘Do	you	not	wish	to	know	my	name?’
‘No,’	he	growled.	‘I	will	call	you	Dayliss.’
And	he	saw	nothing	of	the	shame	that	filled	her	young,	beautiful	face.	Nor
did	he	sense	the	darkness	his	words	clawed	into	her	soul.


Within	her,	as	within	her	mother,	Karsa	Orlong’s	seed	found	a	home.
	
A	late	storm	had	descended	from	the	mountains,	devouring	the	stars.	Treetops
thrashed	to	a	wind	that	made	no	effort	to	reach	lower,	creating	a	roar	of	sound
overhead	and	a	strange	calm	among	the	boles.	Lightning	flickered,	but	the
thunder ’s	voice	was	long	in	coming.
They	rode	through	an	hour	of	darkness,	then	found	an	old	campsite	near
the	trail	the	hunt	had	left.	The	Rathyd	warriors	had	been	careless	in	their	fury,
leaving	far	too	many	signs	of	their	passage.	Delum	judged	that	there	were
twelve	adults	and	four	youths	on	horseback	in	this	particular	party,	perhaps	a
third	of	the	village’s	entire	strength.	The	dogs	had	already	been	set	loose	to
range	in	packs	on	their	own,	and	none	accompanied	the	group	the	Uryd	now
pursued.
Karsa	was	well	pleased.	The	hornets	were	out	of	the	nest,	yet	flying	blind.
They	ate	once	more	of	the	ageing	bear	meat,	then	Bairoth	once	again
unwrapped	the	bear	skull	and	resumed	winding	straps,	this	time	around	the
snout,	pulling	them	taut	between	the	teeth.	The	ends	left	dangling	were	long,	an
arm	and	a	half	in	length.	Karsa	now	understood	what	Bairoth	was	fashioning.
Often,	two	or	three	wolf	skulls	were	employed	for	this	particular	weapon—
only	a	man	of	Bairoth’s	strength	and	weight	could	manage	the	same	with	the
skull	of	a	grey	bear.	‘Bairoth	Gild,	what	you	create	shall	make	a	bright	thread
in	the	legend	we	are	weaving.’
The	man	grunted.	‘I	care	nothing	for	legends,	Warleader.	But	soon,	we
shall	be	facing	Rathyd	on	destriers.’
Karsa	smiled	in	the	darkness,	said	nothing.
A	soft	wind	flowed	down	from	upslope.
Delum	lifted	his	head	suddenly	and	rose	in	silence.	‘I	smell	wet	fur,’	he
said.
There	had	been	no	rain	as	yet.
Karsa	removed	his	sword	harness	and	laid	the	weapon	down.	‘Bairoth,’	he
whispered,	‘remain	here.	Delum,	take	with	you	your	brace	of	knives—leave
your	sword.’	He	rose	and	gestured.	‘Lead.’
‘Warleader,’	Delum	murmured.	‘It	is	a	pack,	driven	down	from	the	high
ground	by	the	storm.	They	have	no	scent	of	us,	yet	their	ears	are	sharp.’
‘Do	you	not	think,’	Karsa	asked,	‘that	they	would	have	set	to	howling	if
they	had	heard	us?’
Bairoth	snorted.	‘Delum,	beneath	this	roar	they	have	heard	nothing.’
But	Delum	shook	his	head.	‘There	are	high	sounds	and	there	are	low


sounds,	Bairoth	Gild,	and	they	each	travel	their	own	stream.’	He	swung	to
Karsa.	‘To	your	question,	Warleader,	this	answer:	possibly	not,	if	they	are
unsure	whether	we	are	Uryd	or	Rathyd.’
Karsa	grinned.	‘Even	better.	Take	me	to	them,	Delum	Thord.	I	have	thought
long	on	this	matter	of	Rathyd	dogs,	the	loosed	packs.	Take	me	to	them,	and
keep	your	throwing	knives	close	to	hand.’
Havok	and	the	other	two	destriers	had	quietly	flanked	the	warriors	during
the	conversation,	and	now	all	faced	upslope,	ears	pricked	forward.
After	a	moment’s	hesitation,	Delum	shrugged	and,	crouching,	set	off	into
the	woods.	Karsa	followed.
The	slope	grew	steeper	after	a	score	of	paces.	There	was	no	path,	and
fallen	tree	trunks	made	traverse	difficult	and	slow,	though	thick	swaths	of
damp	moss	made	the	passage	of	the	two	Teblor	warriors	virtually	noiseless.
They	reached	a	flatter	shelf	perhaps	fifteen	paces	wide	and	ten	deep,	a	high
crack-riven	cliff	opposite.	A	few	trees	leaned	against	the	rock,	grey	with	death.
Delum	scanned	the	cliffside,	then	made	to	move	towards	a	narrow,	dirt-filled
crevasse	near	the	left	end	of	the	cliff	that	served	as	a	game	trail,	but	Karsa
restrained	him	with	a	hand.
He	leaned	close.	‘How	far	ahead?’
‘Fifty	heartbeats.	We’ve	still	time	to	make	this	climb—’
‘No.	We	position	ourselves	here.	Take	that	ledge	to	the	right	and	have	your
knives	ready.’
With	baffled	expression,	Delum	did	as	he	was	told.	The	ledge	was	halfway
up	the	cliffside.	Within	moments	he	was	in	place.
Karsa	moved	towards	the	game	trail.	A	dead	pine	had	fallen	from	above,
taking	the	same	path	in	its	descent,	coming	to	rest	half	a	pace	to	the	trail’s	left.
Karsa	reached	it	and	gave	the	trunk	a	nudge.	The	wood	was	still	sound.	He
quickly	climbed	it,	then,	feet	resting	on	branches,	he	twisted	round	until	he
faced	the	flat	expanse	of	shelf,	the	game	trail	now	almost	within	arm’s	reach	to
his	left,	the	bole	and	cliff	at	his	back.
Then	he	waited.	He	could	not	see	Delum	from	his	position	unless	he	leaned
forward,	which	might	well	pull	the	tree	away	from	the	cliffside,	taking	him
with	it	in	a	loud,	probably	damaging	fall.	He	would	have	to	trust,	therefore,	that
Delum	would	grasp	what	he	intended,	and	act	accordingly	when	the	time	came.
A	skitter	of	stones	down	the	trail.
The	dogs	had	begun	the	descent.
Karsa	drew	a	slow,	deep	breath	and	held	it.
The	pack’s	leader	would	not	be	the	first.	Most	likely	the	second,	a	safe	beat
or	two	behind	the	scout.


The	first	dog	scrambled	past	Karsa’s	position	in	a	scatter	of	stones,	twigs
and	dirt,	its	momentum	taking	it	a	half-dozen	paces	out	onto	the	flat	shelf,
where	it	paused,	nose	lifting	to	test	the	air.	Hackles	rising,	it	moved	cautiously
towards	the	shelf’s	edge.
Another	dog	came	down	the	trail,	a	larger	beast,	this	one	kicking	up	more
detritus	than	the	first.	As	its	scarred	head	and	shoulders	came	into	view,	Karsa
knew	that	he	had	found	the	pack’s	leader.
The	animal	reached	the	flat.
Just	as	the	scout	began	swinging	his	head	around.
Karsa	leapt.
His	hands	shot	out	to	take	the	leader	on	the	neck,	driving	the	beast	down,
spinning	it	onto	its	back,	his	left	hand	closing	on	the	throat,	his	right	gripping
both	flailing,	kicking	front	legs	just	above	the	paws.
The	dog	flew	into	a	frenzy	beneath	him,	but	Karsa	held	firm.
More	dogs	tumbled	in	a	rush	down	the	trail,	then	fanned	out	in	sudden
alarm	and	confusion.
The	leader ’s	snarls	had	turned	to	yelps.
Savage	teeth	had	ripped	into	Karsa’s	wrist,	until	he	managed	to	push	his
chokehold	higher	under	the	dog’s	jaw.	The	animal	writhed,	but	it	had	already
lost	and	they	both	knew	it.
As	did	the	rest	of	the	pack.
Karsa	finally	glanced	up	to	study	the	dogs	surrounding	him.	At	his	lifting
of	head	they	all	backed	away—all	but	one.	A	young,	burly	male,	who	ducked
low	as	it	crept	forward.
Two	of	Delum’s	knives	thudded	into	the	animal,	one	in	the	throat	and	the
other	behind	its	right	shoulder.	The	dog	pitched	to	the	ground	with	a	strangled
grunt,	then	lay	still.	The	others	of	the	pack	retreated	still	further.
The	leader	had	gone	motionless	beneath	Karsa.	Baring	his	teeth,	the
warrior	slowly	lowered	himself	until	his	cheek	lay	alongside	the	dog’s	jawline.
Then	he	whispered	into	the	animal’s	ear.	‘You	heard	the	deathcry,	friend?	That
was	your	challenger.	This	should	please	you,	yes?	Now,	you	and	your	pack
belong	to	me.’	As	he	spoke,	his	tone	soft	and	reassuring,	he	slowly	loosened
his	grip	on	the	dog’s	throat.	A	moment	later,	he	leaned	back,	shifted	his	weight
to	one	side,	withdrawing	his	arm	entirely,	then	releasing	the	dog’s	forelimbs.
The	beast	scrambled	to	its	feet.
Karsa	straightened,	stepped	close	to	the	dog,	smiling	to	see	its	tail	droop.
Delum	climbed	down	from	the	ledge.	‘Warleader,’	he	said	as	he
approached,	‘I	am	witness	to	this.’	He	retrieved	his	knives.
‘Delum	Thord,	you	are	both	witness	and	participant,	for	I	saw	your	knives


and	they	were	well	timed.’
‘The	leader ’s	rival	saw	his	moment.’
‘And	you	understood	that.’
‘We	now	have	a	pack	that	will	fight	for	us.’
‘Aye,	Delum	Thord.’
‘I	will	go	ahead	of	you	back	to	Bairoth,	then.	The	horses	will	need
calming.’
‘We	shall	give	you	a	few	moments.’
At	the	shelf’s	edge,	Delum	paused	and	glanced	back	at	Karsa.	‘I	no	longer
fear	the	Rathyd,	Karsa	Orlong.	Nor	the	Sunyd.	I	now	believe	that	Urugal	indeed
walks	with	you	on	this	journey.’
‘Then	know	this,	Delum	Thord.	I	am	not	content	to	be	champion	among	the
Uryd.	One	day,	all	the	Teblor	shall	kneel	to	me.	This,	our	journey	to	the
outlands,	is	but	a	scouting	of	the	enemy	we	shall	one	day	face.	Our	people	have
slept	for	far	too	long.’
‘Karsa	Orlong,	I	do	not	doubt	you.’
Karsa’s	answering	grin	was	cold.	‘Yet	you	once	did.’
To	that,	Delum	simply	shrugged,	then	he	swung	about	and	set	off	down	the
slope.
Karsa	examined	his	chewed	wrist,	then	looked	down	at	the	dog	and
laughed.	‘You’ve	the	taste	of	my	blood	in	your	mouth,	beast.	Urugal	now	races
to	clasp	your	heart,	and	so,	you	and	I,	we	are	joined.	Come,	walk	at	my	side.	I
name	you	Gnaw.’
There	were	eleven	adult	dogs	in	the	pack	and	three	not	quite	full-grown.
They	fell	in	step	behind	Karsa	and	Gnaw,	leaving	their	lone	fallen	kin
unchallenged	ruler	of	the	shelf	beneath	the	cliff.	Until	the	flies	came.
	
Towards	midday,	the	three	Uryd	warriors	and	their	pack	descended	into	the
middle	of	the	three	small	valleys	on	their	southeasterly	course	across	Rathyd
lands.	The	hunt	they	tracked	had	clearly	been	driven	to	desperation,	to	have
travelled	so	far	in	their	search.	It	was	also	evident	that	the	warriors	ahead	had
avoided	contact	with	other	villages	in	the	area.	Their	lengthening	failure	had
become	a	shame	that	haunted	them.
Karsa	was	mildly	disappointed	in	that,	but	he	consoled	himself	that	the	tale
of	their	deeds	would	travel	none	the	less,	sufficient	to	make	their	return
journey	across	Rathyd	territory	a	deadlier	and	more	interesting	task.
Delum	judged	that	the	hunt	was	barely	a	third	of	a	day	ahead.	They	had
slowed	their	pace,	sending	outriders	to	either	side	in	search	of	a	trail	that	did


not	yet	exist.	Karsa	would	not	permit	himself	a	gloat	concerning	that,	however;
there	were,	after	all,	two	other	parties	from	the	Rathyd	village,	these	ones
probably	on	foot	and	moving	cautiously,	leaving	few	signs	of	their	stealthy
passage.	At	any	time,	they	might	cross	the	Uryd	trail.
The	pack	of	dogs	remained	close	on	the	upwind	side,	loping	effortlessly
alongside	the	trotting	horses.	Bairoth	had	simply	shaken	his	head	at	hearing
Delum’s	recount	of	Karsa’s	exploits,	though	of	Karsa’s	ambitions,	Delum
curiously	said	nothing.
They	reached	the	valley	floor,	a	place	of	tumbled	stone	amidst	birch,	black
spruce,	aspen	and	alder.	The	remnants	of	a	river	seeped	through	the	moss	and
rotting	stumps,	forming	black	pools	that	hinted	nothing	of	their	depth.	Many	of
these	sinkholes	were	hidden	among	boulders	and	treefalls.	Their	pace	slowed
as	they	cautiously	worked	their	way	deeper	into	the	forest.
A	short	while	later	they	came	to	the	first	of	the	mud-packed,	wooden
walkways	the	Rathyd	of	this	valley	had	built	long	ago	and	still	maintained,	if
only	indifferently.	Lush	grasses	filling	the	joins	attested	to	this	particular	one’s
disuse,	but	its	direction	suited	the	Uryd	warriors,	and	so	they	dismounted	and
led	their	horses	up	onto	the	raised	track.
It	creaked	and	swayed	beneath	the	combined	weight	of	horses,	Teblor	and
dogs.
‘We’d	best	spread	out	and	stay	on	foot,’	Bairoth	said.
Karsa	crouched	and	studied	the	roughly	dressed	logs.	‘The	wood	is	still
sound,’	he	observed.
‘But	the	stilts	are	seated	in	mud,	Warleader.’
‘Not	mud,	Bairoth	Gild.	Peat.’
‘Karsa	Orlong	is	right,’	Delum	said,	swinging	himself	back	onto	his
destrier.	‘The	way	may	pitch	but	the	cross-struts	underneath	will	keep	it	from
twisting.	We	ride	down	the	centre,	in	single	file.’
‘There	is	little	point,’	Karsa	said	to	Bairoth,	‘in	taking	this	path	if	we	then
creep	along	it	like	snails.’
‘The	risk,	Warleader,	is	that	we	become	far	more	visible.’
‘Best	we	move	along	it	quickly,	then.’
Bairoth	grimaced.	‘As	you	say,	Karsa	Orlong.’
Delum	in	the	lead,	they	rode	at	a	slow	canter	down	the	centre	of	the
walkway.	The	pack	followed.	To	either	side,	the	only	trees	that	reached	to	the
eye	level	of	the	mounted	warriors	were	dead	birch,	their	leafless,	black
branches	wrapped	in	the	web	of	caterpillar	nests.	The	living	trees—aspen	and
alder	and	elm—reached	no	higher	than	chest	height	with	their	fluttering
canopy	of	dusty-green	leaves.	Taller	black	spruce	was	visible	in	the	distance.


Most	of	these	looked	to	be	dead	or	dying.
‘The	old	river	is	returning,’	Delum	commented.	‘This	forest	slowly
drowns.’
Karsa	grunted,	then	said,	‘This	valley	runs	into	others	that	all	lead
northward,	all	the	way	to	the	Buryd	Fissure.	Pahlk	was	among	the	Teblor
elders	who	gathered	there	sixty	years	ago.	The	river	of	ice	filling	the	Fissure
had	died,	suddenly,	and	had	begun	to	melt.’
Behind	Karsa,	Bairoth	spoke.	‘We	never	learned	what	the	elders	of	all	the
tribes	discovered	up	there,	nor	if	they	had	found	whatever	it	was	they	were
seeking.’
‘I	did	not	know	they	were	seeking	anything	in	particular,’	Delum	muttered.
‘The	death	of	the	ice	river	was	heard	in	a	hundred	valleys,	including	our	own.
Did	they	not	travel	to	the	Fissure	simply	to	discover	what	had	happened?’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘Pahlk	told	me	of	countless	beasts	that	had	been	frozen
within	the	ice	for	numberless	centuries,	becoming	visible	amidst	the	shattered
blocks.	Fur	and	flesh	thawing,	the	ground	and	sky	alive	with	crows	and
mountain	vultures.	There	was	ivory,	but	most	of	it	was	too	badly	crushed	to	be
of	any	worth.	The	river	had	a	black	heart,	or	so	its	death	revealed,	but	whatever
lay	within	that	heart	was	either	gone	or	destroyed.	Even	so,	there	were	signs	of
an	ancient	battle	in	that	place.	The	bones	of	children.	Weapons	of	stone,	all
broken.’
‘This	is	more	than	I	have	ever—’	Bairoth	began,	then	stopped.
The	walkway,	which	had	been	reverberating	to	their	passage,	had	suddenly
acquired	a	deeper,	syncopating	thunder.	The	walkway	ahead	made	a	bend,	forty
paces	distant,	to	the	left,	disappearing	behind	trees.
The	pack	of	dogs	began	snapping	their	jaws	in	voiceless	warning.	Karsa
twisted	round,	and	saw,	two	hundred	paces	behind	them	on	the	walkway,	a
dozen	Rathyd	warriors	on	foot.	Weapons	were	lifted	in	silent	promise.
Yet	the	sound	of	hoofs—Karsa	swung	forward	again,	to	see	six	riders	pitch
around	the	bend.	Warcries	rang	in	the	air.
‘Clear	a	space!’	Bairoth	bellowed,	driving	his	horse	past	Karsa,	and	then
Delum.	The	bear	skull	sprang	into	the	air,	snapping	as	it	reached	the	length	of
the	straps,	and	Bairoth	began	whirling	the	massive,	bound	skull	over	his	and
his	horse’s	head,	using	both	hands,	his	knees	high	on	his	destrier ’s	shoulders.
The	whirling	skull	made	a	deep,	droning	sound.	His	horse	loped	forward.
The	Rathyd	riders	were	at	full	charge.	They	rode	two	abreast,	the	edge	of
the	walkway	less	than	half	an	arm’s	length	away	on	either	side.
They	had	closed	to	within	twenty	paces	of	Bairoth	when	he	released	the
bear	skull.


When	two	or	three	wolf	skulls	were	used	in	this	fashion,	it	was	to	bind	or
break	legs.	But	Bairoth’s	target	was	higher.	The	skull	struck	the	destrier	on	the
left	with	a	force	that	shattered	the	horse’s	chest.	Blood	sprayed	from	the
animal’s	nose	and	mouth.	Crashing	down,	it	fouled	the	beast	beside	it—no
more	than	the	crack	of	a	single	hoof	against	its	shoulder,	but	sufficient	to	make
it	veer	wildly,	and	plunge	down	off	the	walkway.	Legs	snapped.	The	Rathyd
warrior	flew	over	his	horse’s	head.
The	rider	of	the	first	horse	landed	with	bone-breaking	impact	on	the
walkway,	at	the	very	hoofs	of	Bairoth’s	destrier.	Those	hoofs	punched	down	on
the	man’s	head	in	quick	succession,	leaving	a	shattered	mess.
The	charge	floundered.	Another	horse	went	down,	stumbling	with	a
scream	over	the	wildly	kicking	beast	that	now	blocked	the	walkway.
Loosing	the	Uryd	warcry,	Bairoth	drove	his	mount	forward.	A	surging
leap	carried	them	over	the	first	downed	destrier.	The	Rathyd	warrior	from	the
other	fallen	horse	was	just	clambering	clear	and	had	time	to	look	up	to	see
Bairoth’s	sword-blade	reach	the	bridge	of	his	nose.
Delum	was	suddenly	behind	his	comrade.	Two	knives	darted	through	the
air,	passing	Bairoth	on	his	right.	There	was	a	sharp	report	as	a	Rathyd’s	heavy
sword-blade	slashed	across	to	block	one	of	the	knives,	then	a	wet	gasp	as	the
second	knife	found	the	man’s	throat.
Two	of	the	enemy	remained,	one	each	for	Delum	and	Bairoth,	and	so	the
duels	could	begin.
Karsa,	after	watching	the	effect	of	Bairoth’s	initial	attack,	had	wheeled	his
mount	round.	Sword	in	his	hands,	blade	flashing	into	Havok’s	vision,	and	they
were	charging	back	down	the	walkway	towards	the	pursuing	band.
The	dog	pack	split	to	either	side	to	avoid	the	thundering	hoofs,	then	raced
after	rider	and	horse.
Ahead,	eight	adults	and	four	youths.
A	barked	order	sent	the	youths	to	either	side	of	the	walkway,	then	down.
The	adults	wanted	room,	and,	seeing	their	obvious	confidence	as	they	formed
an	inverted	V	spanning	the	walkway,	weapons	ready,	Karsa	laughed.
They	wanted	him	to	ride	down	into	the	centre	of	that	inverted	V—a	tactic
that,	while	it	maintained	Havok’s	fierce	speed,	also	exposed	horse	and	rider	to
flanking	attacks.	Speed	counted	for	much	in	the	engagement	to	come.	The
Rathyd’s	expectations	fit	neatly	into	the	attacker ’s	intent—had	that	attacker	been
someone	other	than	Karsa	Orlong.	‘Urugal!’	he	bellowed,	lifting	himself	high
on	Havok’s	shoulders.	‘Witness!’	He	held	his	sword,	point	forward,	over	his
destrier ’s	head,	and	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	Rathyd	warrior	on	the	V’s	extreme
left.


Havok	sensed	the	shift	in	attention	and	angled	his	charge	just	moments
before	contact,	hoofs	pounding	along	the	very	edge	of	the	walkway.
The	Rathyd	directly	before	them	managed	a	single	backward	step,
swinging	a	two-handed	overhead	chop	at	Havok’s	snout	as	he	went.
Karsa	took	that	blade	on	his	own,	even	as	he	twisted	and	threw	his	right	leg
forward,	his	left	back.	Havok	turned	beneath	him,	surged	in	towards	the	centre
of	the	walkway.
The	V	had	collapsed,	and	every	Rathyd	warrior	was	on	Karsa’s	left.
Havok	carried	him	diagonally	across	the	walkway.	Keening	his	delight,
Karsa	slashed	and	chopped	repeatedly,	his	blade	finding	flesh	and	bone	as
often	as	weapon.	Havok	pitched	around	before	reaching	the	opposite	edge,	and
lashed	out	his	hind	legs.	At	least	one	connected,	flinging	a	shattered	body	from
the	bridge.
The	pack	then	arrived.	Snarling	bodies	hurling	onto	the	Rathyd	warriors—
most	of	whom	had	turned	when	engaging	Karsa,	and	so	presented	exposed
backs	to	the	frenzied	dogs.	Shrieks	filled	the	air.
Karsa	spun	Havok	round.	They	plunged	back	into	the	savage	press.	Two
Rathyd	had	managed	to	fight	clear	of	the	dogs,	blood	spraying	from	their
blades	as	they	backed	up	the	walkway.
Bellowing	a	challenge,	Karsa	drove	towards	them.
And	was	shocked	to	see	them	both	leap	from	the	walkway.
‘Bloodless	cowards!	I	witness!	Your	youths	witness!	These	damned	dogs
witness!’
He	saw	them	reappear,	weapons	gone,	scrambling	and	stumbling	across
the	bog.
Delum	and	Bairoth	arrived,	dismounting	to	add	their	swords	to	the
maniacal	frenzy	of	the	surviving	dogs	as	they	tore	unceasing	at	fallen	Rathyd.
Karsa	drew	Havok	to	one	side,	eyes	still	on	the	fleeing	warriors,	who	had
been	joined	now	by	the	four	youths.	‘I	witness!	Urugal	witnesses!’
Gnaw,	black	and	grey	hide	barely	visible	beneath	splashes	of	gore,	panted
up	to	stand	beside	Havok,	his	muscles	twitching	but	no	wounds	showing.	Karsa
glanced	back	and	saw	that	four	more	dogs	remained,	whilst	a	fifth	had	lost	a
foreleg	and	limped	a	red	circle	off	to	one	side.
‘Delum,	bind	that	one’s	leg—we	will	sear	it	anon.’
‘What	use	a	three-legged	hunting	dog,	Warleader?’	Bairoth	asked,
breathing	heavy.
‘Even	a	three-legged	dog	has	ears	and	a	nose,	Bairoth	Gild.	One	day,	she
will	lie	grey-nosed	and	fat	before	my	hearth,	this	I	swear.	Now,	is	either	of	you
wounded?’


‘Scratches.’	Bairoth	shrugged,	turning	away.
‘I	have	lost	a	finger,’	Delum	said	as	he	drew	out	a	leather	strap	and
approached	the	wounded	dog,	‘but	not	an	important	one.’
Karsa	looked	once	more	at	the	retreating	Rathyd.	They	had	almost	reached
a	stand	of	black	spruce.	The	warleader	sent	them	a	final	sneer,	then	laid	a	hand
on	Havok’s	brow.	‘My	father	spoke	true,	Havok.	I	have	never	ridden	such	a
horse	as	you.’
An	ear	had	cocked	at	his	words.	Karsa	leaned	forward	and	set	his	lips	to
the	beast’s	brow.	‘We	become,	you	and	I,’	he	whispered,	‘legend.	Legend,
Havok.’	Straightening,	he	studied	the	sprawl	of	corpses	on	the	walkway,	and
smiled.	‘It	is	time	for	trophies,	my	brothers.	Bairoth,	did	your	bear	skull
survive?’
‘I	believe	so,	Warleader.’
‘Your	deed	was	our	victory,	Bairoth	Gild.’
The	heavy	man	turned,	studied	Karsa	through	slitted	eyes.	‘You	ever
surprise	me,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘As	your	strength	does	me,	Bairoth	Gild.’
The	man	hesitated,	then	nodded.	‘I	am	content	to	follow	you,	Warleader.’
You	ever	were,	Bairoth	Gild,	and	that	is	the	difference	between	us.


Chapter	Two

There	are	hints,	if	one	scans	the	ground	with	a	clear	and	sharp	eye,
that	this	ancient	Jaghut	war,	which	for	the	Kron	T’lan	Imass	was
either	their	seventeenth	or	eighteenth,	went	terribly	awry.	The
Adept	who	accompanied	our	expedition	evinced	no	doubt
whatsoever	that	a	Jaghut	remained	alive	within	the	Laederon
glacier.	Terribly	wounded,	yet	possessing	formidable	sorcery	still.
Well	beyond	the	ice	river ’s	reach	(a	reach	which	has	been
diminishing	over	time),	there	are	shattered	remains	of	T’lan	Imass,
the	bones	strangely	malformed,	and	on	them	the	flavour	of	fierce
and	deadly	Omtose	Phellack	lingering	to	this	day.
Of	the	ensorcelled	stone	weapons	of	the	Kron,	only	those	that
were	broken	in	the	conflict	remained,	leading	one	to	assume	that
either	looters	have	been	this	way,	or	the	T’lan	Imass	survivors
(assuming	there	were	any)	took	them	with	them…
THE	NATHII	EXPEDITION	OF	1012
KENEMASS	T RYBANOS,	CHRONICLER
‘I	believe,’	Delum	said	as	they	led	their	horses	down	from	the	walkway,	‘that
the	last	group	of	the	hunt	has	turned	back.’
‘The	plague	of	cowardice	ever	spreads,’	Karsa	growled.
‘They	surmised	at	the	very	first,’	Bairoth	rumbled,	‘that	we	were	crossing
their	lands.	That	our	first	attack	was	not	simply	a	raid.	So,	they	will	await	our
return,	and	will	likely	call	upon	the	warriors	of	other	villages.’
‘That	does	not	concern	me,	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘I	know	that,	Karsa	Orlong,	for	what	part	of	this	journey	have	you	not
already	anticipated?	Even	so,	two	more	Rathyd	valleys	lie	before	us.	I	would
know.	There	will	be	villages—do	we	ride	around	them	or	do	we	collect	still
more	trophies?’
‘We	shall	be	burdened	with	too	many	trophies	when	we	reach	the	lands	of
the	lowlanders	at	Silver	Lake,’	Delum	commented.


Karsa	laughed,	then	considered.	‘Bairoth	Gild,	we	shall	slip	through	these
valleys	like	snakes	in	the	night,	until	the	very	last	village.	I	would	still	draw
hunters	after	us,	into	the	lands	of	the	Sunyd.’
Delum	had	found	a	trail	leading	up	the	valley	side.
Karsa	checked	on	the	dog	limping	in	their	wake.	Gnaw	walked	alongside
it,	and	it	occurred	to	Karsa	that	the	three-legged	beast	might	well	be	its	mate.
He	was	pleased	with	his	decision	to	not	slay	the	wounded	creature.
There	was	a	chill	in	the	air	that	confirmed	their	gradual	climb	to	higher
elevations.	The	Sunyd	territory	was	higher	still,	leading	to	the	eastern	edge	of
the	escarpment.	Pahlk	had	told	Karsa	that	but	a	single	pass	cut	through	the
escarpment,	marked	by	a	torrential	waterfall	that	fed	into	Silver	Lake.	The
climb	down	was	treacherous.	Pahlk	had	named	it	Bone	Pass.
The	trail	began	to	wind	sinuously	among	winter-cracked	boulders	and
treefalls.	They	could	now	see	the	summit,	six	hundred	steep	paces	upward.
The	warriors	dismounted.	Karsa	strode	back	and	lifted	the	three-legged
dog	into	his	arms.	He	set	it	down	across	Havok’s	broad	back	and	strapped	it	in
place.	The	animal	voiced	no	protest.	Gnaw	moved	up	to	flank	the	destrier.
They	resumed	their	journey.
The	sun	was	bathing	the	slope	in	brilliant	gold	light	by	the	time	they	had
closed	to	within	a	hundred	paces	of	the	summit,	reaching	a	broad	ledge	that
seemed—through	a	sparse	forest	of	straggly,	wind-twisted	oaks—to	run	the
length	of	the	valley	side.	Scanning	the	terrace’s	sweep	to	his	right,	Delum
voiced	a	grunt,	then	said,	‘I	see	a	cave.	There,’	he	pointed,	‘behind	those	fallen
trees,	where	the	shelf	bulges.’
Bairoth	nodded	and	said,	‘It	looks	big	enough	to	hold	our	horses.	Karsa
Orlong,	if	we	are	to	begin	riding	at	night…’
‘Agreed,’	Karsa	said.
Delum	led	the	way	along	the	terrace.	Gnaw	scrambled	past	him,	slowing
upon	nearing	the	cave	mouth,	then	crouching	down	and	edging	forward.
The	Uryd	warriors	paused,	waiting	to	see	if	the	dog’s	hackles	rose,	thus
signalling	the	presence	of	a	grey	bear	or	some	other	denizen.	After	a	long
moment,	with	Gnaw	motionless	and	lying	almost	flat	before	the	cave	entrance,
the	beast	finally	rose	and	glanced	back	at	the	party,	then	trotted	into	the	cave.
The	fallen	trees	had	provided	a	natural	screen,	hiding	the	cave	from	the
valley	below.	There	had	been	an	overhang,	but	it	had	collapsed,	perhaps
beneath	the	weight	of	the	trees,	leaving	a	rough	pile	of	rubble	partially
blocking	the	entrance.
Bairoth	began	clearing	a	path	to	lead	the	horses	through.	Delum	and	Karsa
took	Gnaw’s	route	into	the	cave.


Beyond	the	mound	of	tumbled	stones	and	sand,	the	floor	levelled	out
beneath	a	scatter	of	dried	leaves.	The	setting	sun’s	light	painted	the	back	wall	in
patches	of	yellow,	revealing	an	almost	solid	mass	of	carved	glyphs.	A	small
cairn	of	piled	stones	sat	in	the	domed	chamber ’s	centre.
Gnaw	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	but	the	dog’s	tracks	crossed	the	floor	and
vanished	into	an	area	of	gloom	near	the	back.
Delum	stepped	forward,	his	eyes	on	a	single,	oversized	glyph	directly
opposite	the	entrance.	‘That	Bloodsign	is	neither	Rathyd	nor	Sunyd,’	he	said.
‘But	the	words	beneath	it	are	Teblor,’	Karsa	asserted.
‘The	style	is	very…’	Delum	frowned,	‘ornate.’
Karsa	began	reading	aloud,	‘“I	led	the	families	that	survived.	Down	from
the	high	lands.	Through	the	broken	veins	that	bled	beneath	the	sun…”	Broken
veins?’
‘Ice,’	Delum	said.
‘Bleeding	beneath	the	sun,	aye.	“We	were	so	few.	Our	blood	was	cloudy	and
would	grow	cloudier	still.	I	saw	the	need	to	shatter	what	remained.	For	the
T’lan	Imass	were	still	close	and	much	agitated	and	inclined	to	continue	their
indiscriminate	slaughter.”’	Karsa	scowled.	‘T’lan	Imass?	I	do	not	know	those
two	words.’
‘Nor	I,’	Delum	replied.	‘A	rival	tribe,	perhaps.	Read	on,	Karsa	Orlong.
Your	eye	is	quicker	than	mine.’
‘“And	so	I	sundered	husband	from	wife.	Child	from	parent.	Brother	from
sister.	I	fashioned	new	families	and	then	sent	them	away.	Each	to	a	different
place.	I	proclaimed	the	Laws	of	Isolation,	as	given	us	by	Icarium	whom	we	had
once	sheltered	and	whose	heart	grew	vast	with	grief	upon	seeing	what	had
become	of	us.	The	Laws	of	Isolation	would	be	our	salvation,	clearing	the	blood
and	strengthening	our	children.	To	all	who	follow	and	to	all	who	shall	read
these	words,	this	is	my	justification—”’
‘These	words	trouble	me,	Karsa	Orlong.’
Karsa	glanced	back	at	Delum.	‘Why?	They	signify	nothing	of	us.	They	are
an	elder ’s	ravings.	Too	many	words—to	have	carved	all	these	letters	would
have	taken	years,	and	only	a	madman	would	do	such	a	thing.	A	madman,	who
was	buried	here,	alone,	driven	out	by	his	people—’
Delum’s	gaze	sharpened	on	Karsa.	‘Driven	out?	Yes,	I	believe	you	are
correct,	Warleader.	Read	more—let	us	hear	his	justification,	and	so	judge	for
ourselves.’
Shrugging,	Karsa	returned	his	attention	to	the	stone	wall.	‘“To	survive,	we
must	forget.	So	Icarium	told	us.	Those	things	that	we	had	come	to,	those	things
that	softened	us.	We	must	abandon	them.	We	must	dismantle	our…”	I	know	not


that	word,	“and	shatter	each	and	every	stone,	leaving	no	evidence	of	what	we
had	been.	We	must	burn	our…”	another	word	I	do	not	know,	“and	leave	naught
but	ash.	We	must	forget	our	history	and	seek	only	our	most	ancient	of	legends.
Legends	that	told	of	a	time	when	we	lived	simply.	In	the	forests.	Hunting,
culling	fish	from	the	rivers,	raising	horses.	When	our	laws	were	those	of	the
raider,	the	slayer,	when	all	was	measured	by	the	sweep	of	a	sword.	Legends	that
spoke	of	feuds,	of	murders	and	rapes.	We	must	return	to	those	terrible	times.	To
isolate	our	streams	of	blood,	to	weave	new,	smaller	nets	of	kinship.	New	threads
must	be	born	of	rape,	for	only	with	violence	would	they	remain	rare
occurrences,	and	random.	To	cleanse	our	blood,	we	must	forget	all	that	we
were,	yet	find	what	we	had	once	been—”’
‘Down	here,’	Delum	said,	squatting.	‘Lower	down.	I	recognize	words.
Read	here,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘It’s	dark,	Delum	Thord,	but	I	shall	try.	Ah,	yes.	These	are…names.	“I	have
given	these	new	tribes	names,	the	names	given	by	my	father	for	his	sons.”	And
then	a	list.	‘Baryd,	Sanyd,	Phalyd,	Urad,	Gelad,	Manyd,	Rathyd	and	Lanyd.
These,	then,	shall	be	the	new	tribes…’	It	grows	too	dark	to	read	on,	Delum
Thord,	nor,’	he	added,	fighting	a	sudden	chill,	‘do	I	desire	to.	These	thoughts
are	spider-bitten.	Fever-twisted	into	lies.’
‘Phalyd	and	Lanyd	are—’
Karsa	straightened.	‘No	more,	Delum	Thord.’
‘The	name	of	Icarium	has	lived	on	in	our—’
‘Enough!’	Karsa	growled.	‘There	is	nothing	of	meaning	here	in	these
words!’
‘As	you	say,	Karsa	Orlong.’
Gnaw	emerged	from	the	gloom,	where	a	darker	fissure	was	now	evident	to
the	two	Teblor	warriors.
Delum	nodded	towards	it.	‘The	carver ’s	body	lies	within.’
‘Where	he	no	doubt	crawled	to	die,’	Karsa	sneered.	‘Let	us	return	to
Bairoth.	The	horses	can	be	sheltered	here.	We	shall	sleep	outside.’
Both	warriors	turned	and	strode	back	to	the	cave	mouth.	Behind	them,
Gnaw	stood	beside	the	cairn	a	moment	longer.	The	sun	had	left	the	wall,	filling
the	cave	with	shadows.	In	the	darkness,	the	dog’s	eyes	flickered.
	
Two	nights	later,	they	sat	on	their	horses	and	looked	down	into	the	valley	of
the	Sunyd.	The	plan	to	draw	Rathyd	pursuers	after	them	had	failed,	for	the	last
two	villages	they	had	come	across	had	been	long	abandoned.	The	surrounding
trails	had	been	overgrown	and	rains	had	taken	the	charcoal	from	the	firepits,


leaving	only	red-rimmed	black	stains	in	the	earth.
And	now,	across	the	entire	breadth	and	length	of	the	Sunyd	valley,	they
could	see	no	fires.
‘They	have	fled,’	Bairoth	muttered.
‘But	not	from	us,’	Delum	replied,	‘if	the	Sunyd	villages	prove	to	be	the
same	as	those	Rathyd	ones.	This	is	a	flight	long	past.’
Bairoth	grunted.	‘Where,	then,	have	they	gone?’
Shrugging,	Karsa	said,	‘There	are	Sunyd	valleys	north	of	this	one.	A	dozen
or	more.	And	some	to	the	south	as	well.	Perhaps	there	has	been	a	schism.	It
matters	little	to	us,	except	that	we	shall	gather	no	more	trophies	until	we	reach
Silver	Lake.’
Bairoth	rolled	his	shoulders.	‘Warleader,	when	we	reach	Silver	Lake,	will
our	raid	be	beneath	the	wheel	or	the	sun?	With	the	valley	before	us	empty,	we
could	camp	at	night.	These	trails	are	unfamiliar,	forcing	us	to	go	slowly	in	the
dark.’
‘You	speak	the	truth,	Bairoth	Gild.	Our	raid	will	be	in	daylight.	Let	us
make	our	way	down	to	the	valley	floor,	then,	and	find	us	a	place	to	camp.’
The	wheel	of	stars	had	travelled	a	fourth	of	its	journey	by	the	time	the
Uryd	warriors	reached	level	ground	and	found	a	suitable	campsite.	Delum	had,
with	the	aid	of	the	dogs,	killed	a	half-dozen	rock	hares	during	the	descent,
which	he	now	skinned	and	spit	while	Bairoth	built	a	small	fire.
Karsa	saw	to	the	horses,	then	joined	his	two	companions	at	the	hearth.
They	sat,	waiting	in	silence	for	the	meat	to	cook,	the	sweet	smell	and	sizzle
strangely	unfamiliar	after	so	many	meals	of	raw	food.	Karsa	felt	a	lassitude
settle	into	his	muscles,	and	only	now	realized	how	weary	he	had	become.
The	hares	were	ready.	The	three	warriors	ate	in	silence.
‘Delum	has	spoken,’	Bairoth	said	when	they	were	done,	‘of	the	words
written	in	the	cave.’
Karsa	shot	Delum	a	glare.	‘Delum	Thord	spoke	when	he	should	not	have.
Within	the	cave,	a	madman’s	ravings,	nothing	more.’
‘I	have	considered	them,’	Bairoth	persisted,	‘and	I	believe	there	is	truth
hidden	within	those	ravings,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘Pointless	belief,	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘I	think	not,	Warleader.	The	names	of	the	tribes—I	agree	with	Delum	when
he	says	there	are,	among	them,	the	names	of	our	tribes.	“Urad”	is	far	too	close
to	Uryd	to	be	accidental,	especially	when	three	of	the	other	names	are
unchanged.	Granted,	one	of	those	tribes	has	since	vanished,	but	even	our	own
legends	whisper	of	a	time	when	there	were	more	tribes	than	there	are	now.	And
those	two	words	that	you	did	not	know,	Karsa	Orlong.	“Great	villages”	and


“yellow	bark”—’
‘Those	were	not	the	words!’
‘True	enough,	but	that	is	the	closest	Delum	could	come	to.	Karsa	Orlong,
the	hand	that	inscribed	those	words	was	from	a	place	and	time	of
sophistication,	a	place	and	a	time	where	the	Teblor	language	was,	if	anything,
more	complex	than	it	is	now.’
Karsa	spat	into	the	fire.	‘Bairoth	Gild,	if	these	be	truths	as	you	and	Delum
say,	I	still	must	ask:	what	value	do	they	hold	for	us	now?	Are	we	a	fallen
people?	That	is	not	a	revelation.	Our	legends	all	speak	of	an	age	of	glory,	long
past,	when	a	hundred	heroes	strode	among	the	Teblor,	heroes	that	would	make
even	my	own	grandfather,	Pahlk,	seem	but	a	child	among	men—’
Delum’s	face	in	the	firelight	was	deeply	frowning	as	he	cut	in,	‘And	this	is
what	troubles	me,	Karsa	Orlong.	Those	legends	and	their	tales	of	glory—they
describe	an	age	little	different	from	our	own.	Aye,	more	heroes,	greater	deeds,
but	essentially	the	same,	in	the	manner	of	how	we	lived.	Indeed,	it	often	seems
that	the	very	point	of	those	tales	is	one	of	instruction,	a	code	of	behaviour,	the
proper	way	of	being	a	Teblor.’
Bairoth	nodded.	‘And	there,	in	those	carved	words	in	the	cave,	we	are
offered	the	explanation.’
‘A	description	of	how	we	would	be,’	Delum	added.	‘No,	of	how	we	are.’
‘None	of	it	matters,’	Karsa	growled.
‘We	were	a	defeated	people,’	Delum	continued,	as	if	he	hadn’t	heard.
‘Reduced	to	a	broken	handful.’	He	looked	up,	met	Karsa’s	eyes	across	the	fire.
‘How	many	of	our	brothers	and	sisters	who	are	given	to	the	Faces	in	the	Rock
—how	many	of	them	were	born	flawed	in	some	way?	Too	many	fingers	and
toes,	mouths	with	no	palates,	faces	with	no	eyes.	We’ve	seen	the	same	among
our	dogs	and	horses,	Warleader.	Defects	come	of	inbreeding.	That	is	a	truth.
The	elder	in	the	cave,	he	knew	what	threatened	our	people,	so	he	fashioned	a
means	of	separating	us,	of	slowly	clearing	our	cloudy	blood—and	he	was	cast
out	as	a	betrayer	of	the	Teblor.	We	were	witness,	in	that	cave,	to	an	ancient
crime—’
‘We	are	fallen,’	Bairoth	said,	then	laughed.
Delum’s	gaze	snapped	to	him.	‘And	what	is	it	that	you	find	so	funny,
Bairoth	Gild?’
‘If	I	must	needs	explain,	Delum	Thord,	then	there	is	no	point.’
Bairoth’s	laughter	had	chilled	Karsa.	‘You	have	both	failed	to	grasp	the
true	meaning	of	all	this—’
Bairoth	grunted,	‘The	meaning	you	said	did	not	exist,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘The	fallen	know	but	one	challenge,’	Karsa	resumed.	‘And	that	is	to	rise


once	more.	The	Teblor	were	once	few,	once	defeated.	So	be	it.	We	are	no
longer	few.	Nor	have	we	known	defeat	since	that	time.	Who	from	the	lowlands
dares	venture	into	our	territories?	The	time	has	come,	I	now	say,	to	face	that
challenge.	The	Teblor	must	rise	once	more.’
Bairoth	sneered,	‘And	who	will	lead	us?	Who	will	unite	the	tribes?	I
wonder.’
‘Hold,’	Delum	rumbled,	eyes	glittering.	‘Bairoth	Gild,	from	you	I	now
hear	unseemly	envy.	With	what	we	three	have	done,	with	what	our	warleader
has	already	achieved—tell	me,	Bairoth	Gild,	do	the	shadows	of	the	ancient
heroes	still	devour	us	whole?	I	say	they	do	not.	Karsa	Orlong	now	walks
among	those	heroes,	and	we	walk	with	him.’
Bairoth	slowly	leaned	back,	stretching	his	legs	out	beside	the	hearth.	‘As
you	say,	Delum	Thord.’	The	flickering	light	revealed	a	broad	smile	that
seemed	directed	into	the	flames.	‘“Who	from	the	lowlands	dares	venture	into
our	territories?”	Karsa	Orlong,	we	travel	an	empty	valley.	Empty	of	Teblor,
aye.	But	what	has	driven	them	away?	It	may	be	that	defeat	stalks	the	formidable
Teblor	once	more.’
There	was	a	long	moment	when	none	of	the	three	spoke,	then	Delum	added
another	stick	to	the	fire.	‘It	may	be,’	he	said	in	a	low	voice,	‘that	there	are	no
heroes	among	the	Sunyd.’
Bairoth	laughed.	‘True.	Among	all	the	Teblor,	there	are	but	three	heroes.
Will	that	be	enough,	do	you	think?’
‘Three	is	better	than	two,’	Karsa	snapped,	‘but	if	need	be,	two	will	suffice.’
‘I	pray	to	the	Seven,	Karsa	Orlong,	that	your	mind	ever	remain	free	of
doubt.’
Karsa	realized	that	his	hands	had	closed	on	the	grip	of	his	sword.	‘Ah,
that’s	your	thought,	then.	The	son	of	the	father.	Am	I	being	accused	of	Synyg’s
weakness?’
Bairoth	studied	Karsa,	then	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘Your	father	is	not
weak,	Karsa	Orlong.	If	there	are	doubts	to	speak	of	here	and	now,	they	concern
Pahlk	and	his	heroic	raid	to	Silver	Lake.’
Karsa	was	on	his	feet,	the	bloodwood	sword	in	his	hands.
Bairoth	made	no	move.	‘You	do	not	see	what	I	see,’	he	said	quietly.	‘There
is	the	potential	within	you,	Karsa	Orlong,	to	be	your	father ’s	son.	I	lied	earlier
when	I	said	I	prayed	that	you	would	remain	free	of	doubt.	I	pray	for	the	very
opposite,	Warleader.	I	pray	that	doubt	comes	to	you,	that	it	tempers	you	with	its
wisdom.	Those	heroes	in	our	legends,	Karsa	Orlong,	they	were	terrible,	they
were	monsters,	for	they	were	strangers	to	uncertainty.’
‘Stand	before	me,	Bairoth	Gild,	for	I	will	not	kill	you	whilst	your	sword


remains	at	your	side.’
‘I	will	not,	Karsa	Orlong.	The	straw	is	on	my	back,	and	you	are	not	my
enemy.’
Delum	moved	forward	with	his	hands	full	of	earth,	which	he	dropped	onto
the	fire	between	the	two	other	men.	‘It	is	late,’	he	muttered,	‘and	it	may	be	as
Bairoth	suggests,	that	we	are	not	as	alone	in	this	valley	as	we	believe	ourselves
to	be.	At	the	very	least,	there	may	be	watchers	on	the	other	side.	Warleader,
there	have	been	only	words	this	night.	Let	us	leave	the	spilling	of	blood	for	our
true	enemies.’
Karsa	remained	standing,	glaring	down	at	Bairoth	Gild.	‘Words,’	he
growled.	‘Yes,	and	for	the	words	he	has	spoken,	Bairoth	Gild	must	apologize.’
‘I,	Bairoth	Gild,	beg	forgiveness	for	my	words.	Now,	Karsa	Orlong,	will
you	put	away	your	sword?’
‘You	are	warned,’	Karsa	said,	‘I	will	not	be	so	easily	appeased	next	time.’
‘I	am	warned.’
	
Grasses	and	saplings	had	reclaimed	the	Sunyd	village.	The	trails	leading	to	and
from	it	had	almost	vanished	beneath	brambles,	but	here	and	there,	among	the
stone	foundations	of	the	circular	houses,	the	signs	of	fire	and	violence	could
be	seen.
Delum	dismounted	and	began	poking	about	the	ruins.	It	was	only	a	few
moments	before	he	found	the	first	bones.
Bairoth	grunted.	‘A	raiding	party.	One	that	left	no	survivors.’
Delum	straightened	with	a	splintered	arrow	shaft	in	his	hands.
‘Lowlanders.	The	Sunyd	keep	few	dogs,	else	they	would	not	have	been	so
unprepared.’
‘We	now	take	upon	ourselves,’	Karsa	said,	‘not	a	raid,	but	a	war.	We
journey	to	Silver	Lake	not	as	Uryd,	but	as	Teblor.	And	we	shall	deliver
vengeance.’	He	dismounted	and	removed	from	the	saddle	pack	four	hard
leather	sheaths,	which	he	began	strapping	onto	Havok’s	legs	to	protect	the
horse	from	the	brambles.	The	other	two	warriors	followed	suit.
‘Lead	us,	Warleader,’	Delum	said	when	he	was	done,	swinging	himself
onto	his	destrier ’s	back.
Karsa	collected	the	three-legged	dog	and	laid	it	down	once	more	behind
Havok’s	withers.	He	regained	his	seat	and	looked	to	Bairoth.
The	burly	warrior	also	remounted.	His	eyes	were	hooded	as	he	met
Karsa’s	gaze.	‘Lead	us,	Warleader.’
‘We	shall	ride	as	fast	as	the	land	allows,’	Karsa	said,	drawing	the	three-


legged	dog	onto	his	thighs.	‘Once	beyond	this	valley,	we	head	northward,	then
east	once	more.	By	tomorrow	night	we	shall	be	close	to	Bone	Pass,	the
southward	wend	that	will	take	us	to	Silver	Lake.’
‘And	if	we	come	across	lowlanders	on	the	way?’
‘Then,	Bairoth	Gild,	we	shall	begin	gathering	trophies.	But	none	must	be
allowed	to	escape,	for	our	attack	on	the	farm	must	come	as	a	complete
surprise,	lest	the	children	flee.’
They	skirted	the	village	until	they	came	to	a	trail	that	led	them	into	the
forest.	Beneath	the	trees	there	was	less	undergrowth,	allowing	them	to	ride	at	a
slow	canter.	Before	long,	the	trail	began	climbing	the	valley	side.	By	dusk,	they
reached	the	summit.	Horses	steaming	beneath	them,	the	three	warriors	reined
in.
They	had	come	to	the	edge	of	the	escarpment.	To	the	north	and	east	and
still	bathed	in	golden	sunlight,	the	horizon	was	a	jagged	line	of	mountains,
their	peaks	capped	in	snow	with	rivers	of	white	stretching	down	their	flanks.
Directly	before	them,	after	a	sheer	drop	of	three	hundred	or	more	paces,	lay	a
vast,	forested	basin.
‘I	see	no	fires,’	Delum	said,	scanning	the	shadow-draped	valley.
‘We	must	now	skirt	this	edge,	northward,’	Karsa	said.	‘There	are	no	trails
breaking	the	cliffside	here.’
‘The	horses	need	rest,’	Delum	said.	‘But	we	are	highly	visible	here,
Warleader.’
‘We	shall	walk	them	on,	then,’	Karsa	said,	dismounting.	When	he	set	the
three-legged	dog	onto	the	ground,	Gnaw	moved	up	alongside	her.	Karsa
collected	Havok’s	single	rein.	A	game	trail	followed	the	ridgeline	along	the
top	for	another	thirty	paces	before	dropping	slightly,	sufficient	to	remove	the
silhouette	they	made	against	the	sky.
They	continued	on	until	the	wheel	of	stars	had	completed	a	fifth	of	its
passage,	whereupon	they	found	a	high-walled	cul	de	sac	just	off	the	trail	in
which	to	make	camp.	Delum	began	preparing	the	meal	while	Bairoth	rubbed
down	the	horses.
Taking	Gnaw	and	his	mate	with	him,	Karsa	scouted	the	path	ahead.	Thus
far,	the	only	tracks	they	had	seen	were	those	from	mountain	goats	and	wild
sheep.	The	ridge	had	begun	a	slow,	broken	descent,	and	he	knew	that,
somewhere	ahead,	there	would	be	a	river	carrying	the	run-off	from	the	north
range	of	mountains,	and	a	waterfall	cutting	a	notch	into	the	escarpment’s
cliffside.
Both	dogs	shied	suddenly	in	the	gloom,	bumping	into	Karsa’s	legs	as	they
backed	away	from	another	dead-end	to	the	left.	Laying	a	hand	down	to	calm


Gnaw,	he	found	the	beast	trembling.	Karsa	drew	his	sword.	He	sniffed	the	air,
but	could	smell	nothing	awry,	nor	was	there	any	sound	from	the	dark-shrouded
dead-end	and	Karsa	was	close	enough	to	hear	breathing	had	there	been	anyone
hiding	in	it.
He	edged	forward.
A	massive	flat	slab	dominated	the	stone	floor,	leaving	only	a	forearm’s
space	on	the	three	sides	where	rose	the	rock	walls.	The	surface	of	the	slab	was
unadorned,	but	a	faint	grey	light	seemed	to	emanate	from	the	stone	itself.	Karsa
moved	closer,	then	slowly	crouched	down	before	the	lone,	motionless	hand
jutting	from	the	slab’s	nearmost	edge.	It	was	gaunt,	yet	whole,	the	skin	a	milky
blue-green,	the	nails	chipped	and	ragged,	the	fingers	patched	in	white	dust.
Every	space	within	reach	of	that	hand	was	etched	in	grooves,	cut	deep	into
the	stone	floor—as	deep	as	the	fingers	could	reach—in	a	chaotic,	crosshatched	pattern.
The	hand,	Karsa	could	see,	was	neither	Teblor	nor	lowlander,	but	in	size
somewhere	in	between,	the	bones	prominent,	the	fingers	narrow	and	overlong
and	seeming	to	bear	far	too	many	joints.
Something	of	Karsa’s	presence—his	breath	perhaps	as	he	leaned	close	in
his	study—was	sensed,	for	the	hand	spasmed	suddenly,	jerking	down	to	lie	flat,
fingers	spread,	on	the	rock.	And	Karsa	now	saw	the	unmistakable	signs	that
animals	had	attacked	that	hand	in	the	past—mountain	wolves	and	creatures	yet
fiercer.	It	had	been	chewed,	clawed	and	gnawed	at,	though,	it	seemed,	never
broken.	Motionless	once	more,	it	lay	pressed	against	the	ground.
Hearing	footsteps	behind	him,	Karsa	rose	and	turned.	Delum	and	Bairoth,
weapons	out,	made	their	way	up	the	trail.	Karsa	strode	to	meet	them.
Bairoth	rumbled,	‘Your	two	dogs	came	skulking	back	to	us.’
‘What	have	you	found,	Warleader?’	Delum	asked	in	a	whisper.
‘A	demon,’	he	replied.	‘Pinned	for	eternity	beneath	that	stone.	It	lives,	still.’
‘The	Forkassal.’
‘Even	so.	There	is	much	truth	in	our	legends,	it	seems.’
Bairoth	moved	past	and	approached	the	slab.	He	crouched	down	before	the
hand	and	studied	it	long	in	the	gloom,	then	he	straightened	and	strode	back.
‘The	Forkassal.	The	demon	of	the	mountains,	the	One	Who	Sought	Peace.’
‘In	the	time	of	the	Spirit	Wars,	when	our	old	gods	were	young,’	Delum
said.	‘What,	Karsa	Orlong,	do	you	recall	of	that	tale?	It	was	so	brief,	nothing
more	than	torn	pieces.	The	elders	themselves	admitted	that	most	of	it	had	been
lost	long	ago,	before	the	Seven	awoke.’
‘Pieces,’	Karsa	agreed.	‘The	Spirit	Wars	were	two,	perhaps	three
invasions,	and	had	little	to	do	with	the	Teblor.	Foreign	gods	and	demons.	Their


battles	shook	the	mountains,	and	then	but	one	force	remained—’
‘In	those	tales,’	Delum	interjected,	‘are	the	only	mention	of	Icarium.	Karsa
Orlong,	it	may	be	that	the	T’lan	Imass—spoken	of	in	that	elder ’s	cave—
belonged	to	the	Spirit	Wars,	and	that	they	were	the	victors,	who	then	left	never
to	return.	It	may	be	that	it	was	the	Spirit	Wars	that	shattered	our	people.’
Bairoth’s	gaze	remained	on	the	slab.	Now	he	spoke.	‘The	demon	must	be
freed.’
Both	Karsa	and	Delum	turned	to	him,	struck	silent	by	the	pronouncement.
‘Say	nothing,’	Bairoth	continued,	‘until	I	have	finished.	The	Forkassal	was
said	to	have	come	to	the	place	of	the	Spirit	Wars,	seeking	to	make	peace
between	the	contestants.	That	is	one	of	the	torn	pieces	of	the	tale.	For	the
demon’s	effort	it	was	destroyed.	That	is	another	piece.	Icarium	too	sought	to
end	the	war,	but	he	arrived	too	late,	and	the	victors	knew	they	could	not	defeat
him	so	they	did	not	even	try.	A	third	piece.	Delum	Thord,	the	words	in	the	cave
also	spoke	of	Icarium,	yes?’
‘They	did,	Bairoth	Gild.	Icarium	gave	the	Teblor	the	Laws	that	ensured	our
survival.’
‘Yet,	were	they	able,	the	T’lan	Imass	would	have	laid	a	stone	on	him	as
well.’	After	these	words,	Bairoth	fell	silent.
Karsa	swung	about	and	walked	to	the	slab.	Its	luminescence	was	fitful	in
places,	hinting	of	the	sorcery’s	antiquity,	a	slow	dissolution	of	the	power
invested	in	it.	Teblor	elders	worked	magic,	but	only	rarely.	Since	the
awakening	of	the	Faces	in	the	Rock,	sorcery	arrived	as	a	visitation,	locked
within	the	confines	of	sleep	or	trance.	The	old	legends	spoke	of	vicious
displays	of	overt	magic,	of	dread	weapons	tempered	with	curses,	but	Karsa
suspected	these	were	but	elaborate	inventions	to	weave	bold	colours	into	the
tales.	He	scowled.	‘I	have	no	understanding	of	this	magic,’	he	said.
Bairoth	and	Delum	joined	him.
The	hand	still	lay	flat,	motionless.
‘I	wonder	if	the	demon	can	hear	our	words,’	Delum	said.
Bairoth	grunted.	‘Even	if	it	could,	why	would	it	understand	them?	The
lowlanders	speak	a	different	tongue.	Demons	must	also	have	their	own.’
‘Yet	he	came	to	make	peace—’
‘He	cannot	hear	us,’	Karsa	asserted.	‘He	can	do	no	more	than	sense	the
presence	of	someone…of	something.’
Shrugging,	Bairoth	crouched	down	beside	the	slab.	He	reached	out,
hesitated,	then	settled	his	palm	against	the	stone.	‘It	is	neither	hot	nor	cold.	Its
magic	is	not	for	us.’
‘It	is	not	meant	to	ward,	then,	only	hold,’	Delum	suggested.


‘The	three	of	us	should	be	able	to	lift	it.’
Karsa	studied	Bairoth.	‘What	do	you	wish	to	awaken	here,	Bairoth	Gild?’
The	huge	warrior	looked	up,	eyes	narrowing.	Then	his	brows	rose	and	he
smiled.	‘A	bringer	of	peace?’
‘There	is	no	value	in	peace.’
‘There	must	be	peace	among	the	Teblor,	or	they	shall	never	be	united.’
Karsa	cocked	his	head,	considering	Bairoth’s	words.
‘This	demon	may	have	gone	mad,’	Delum	muttered.	‘How	long,	trapped
beneath	this	rock?’
‘There	are	three	of	us,’	Bairoth	said.
‘Yet	this	demon	is	from	a	time	when	we	had	been	defeated,	and	if	it	was
these	T’lan	Imass	who	imprisoned	this	demon,	they	did	so	because	they	could
not	kill	him.	Bairoth	Gild,	we	three	would	be	as	nothing	to	this	creature.’
‘We	will	have	earned	its	gratitude.’
‘The	fever	of	madness	knows	no	friends.’
Both	warriors	looked	to	Karsa.	‘We	cannot	know	the	mind	of	a	demon,’	he
said.	‘But	we	can	see	one	thing,	and	that	is	how	it	still	seeks	to	protect	itself.
This	lone	hand	has	fended	off	all	sorts	of	beasts.	In	that,	I	see	a	holding	on	to
purpose.’
‘The	patience	of	an	immortal.’	Bairoth	nodded.	‘I	see	the	same	as	you,
Karsa	Orlong.’
Karsa	faced	Delum.	‘Delum	Thord,	do	you	still	possess	doubts?’
‘I	do,	Warleader,	yet	I	will	give	your	effort	my	strength,	for	I	see	the
decision	in	your	eyes.	So	be	it.’
Without	another	word	the	three	Uryd	positioned	themselves	along	one	side
of	the	stone	slab.	They	squatted,	hands	reaching	down	to	grip	the	edge.
‘With	the	fourth	breath,’	Karsa	instructed.
The	stone	lifted	with	a	grinding,	grating	sound,	a	sifting	of	dust.	A
concerted	heave	sent	it	over,	to	crack	against	the	rock	wall.
The	figure	had	been	pinned	on	its	side.	The	immense	weight	of	the	slab
must	have	dislocated	bones	and	crushed	muscle,	but	it	had	not	been	enough	to
defeat	the	demon,	for	it	had,	over	millennia,	gouged	out	a	rough,	uneven	pit
for	half	the	length	of	its	narrow,	strangely	elongated	body.	The	hand	trapped
beneath	that	body	had	clawed	out	a	space	for	itself	first,	then	had	slowly
worked	grooves	for	hip	and	shoulder.	Both	feet,	which	were	bare,	had
managed	something	similar.	Spider	webs	and	the	dust	of	ground	stone	covered
the	figure	like	a	dull	grey	shroud,	and	the	stale	air	that	rose	from	the	space
visibly	swirled	in	its	languid	escape,	heavy	with	a	peculiar,	insect-like	stench.
The	three	warriors	stood	looking	down	on	the	demon.


It	had	yet	to	move,	but	they	could	see	its	strangeness	even	so.	Elongated
limbs,	extra-jointed,	the	skin	stretched	taut	and	pallid	as	moonlight.	A	mass	of
blue-black	hair	spread	out	from	the	face-down	head,	like	fine	roots,	forming	a
latticework	across	the	stone	floor.	The	demon	was	naked,	and	female.
The	limbs	spasmed.
Bairoth	edged	closer	and	spoke	in	a	low,	soothing	tone.	‘You	are	freed,
Demon.	We	are	Teblor,	of	the	Uryd	tribe.	If	you	will,	we	would	help	you.	Tell
us	what	you	require.’
The	limbs	had	ceased	their	spasming,	and	now	but	trembled.	Slowly,	the
demon	lifted	her	head.	The	hand	that	had	known	an	eternity	of	darkness	slipped
free	from	under	her	body,	probed	out	over	the	flat	stone	floor.	The	fingertips
cut	across	strands	of	hair	and	those	strands	fell	to	dust.	The	hand	settled	in	a
way	that	matched	its	opposite.	Muscles	tautened	along	the	arms,	neck	and
shoulders,	and	the	demon	rose,	in	jagged,	shaking	increments.	She	shed	hair	in
black	sheets	of	dust	until	her	pate	was	revealed,	smooth	and	white.
Bairoth	moved	to	take	her	weight	but	Karsa	snapped	a	hand	out	to	restrain
him.	‘No,	Bairoth	Gild,	she	has	known	enough	pressure	that	was	not	her	own.	I
do	not	think	she	would	be	touched,	not	for	a	long	time,	perhaps	never	again.’
Bairoth’s	hooded	gaze	fixed	on	Karsa	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	sighed
and	said,	‘Karsa	Orlong,	I	hear	wisdom	in	your	words.	Again	and	again,	you
surprise	me—no,	I	did	not	mean	to	insult.	I	am	dragged	towards	admiration—
leave	me	my	edged	words.’
Karsa	shrugged,	eyes	returning	once	more	to	the	demon.	‘We	can	only
wait,	now.	Does	a	demon	know	thirst?	Hunger?	Hers	is	a	throat	that	has	not
known	water	for	generations,	a	stomach	that	has	forgotten	its	purpose,	lungs
that	have	not	drawn	a	full	breath	since	the	slab	first	settled.	Fortunate	it	is	night,
too,	for	the	sun	might	be	as	fire	to	her	eyes—’	He	stopped	then,	for	the	demon,
on	hands	and	knees,	had	raised	her	head	and	they	could	see	her	face	for	the
first	time.
Skin	like	polished	marble,	devoid	of	flaws,	a	broad	brow	over	enormous
midnight	eyes	that	seemed	dry	and	flat,	like	onyx	beneath	a	layer	of	dust.	High,
flaring	cheekbones,	a	wide	mouth	withered	and	crusted	with	fine	crystals.
‘There	is	no	water	within	her,’	Delum	said.	‘None.’	He	backed	away,	then
set	off	for	their	camp.
The	woman	slowly	sat	back	onto	her	haunches,	then	struggled	to	stand.
It	was	difficult	to	just	watch,	but	both	warriors	held	back,	tensed	to	catch
her	should	she	fall.
It	seemed	she	noticed	that,	and	one	side	of	her	mouth	curled	upward	a
fraction.


That	one	twitch	transformed	her	face,	and,	in	response,	Karsa	felt	a
hammerblow	in	his	chest.	She	mocks	her	own	sorry	condition.	This,	her	first
emotion	upon	being	freed.	Embarrassment,	yet	finding	the	humour	within	it.
Hear	me,	Urugal	the	Woven,	I	will	make	the	ones	who	imprisoned	her	regret
their	deed,	should	they	or	their	descendants	still	live.	These	T’lan	Imass—they
have	made	of	me	an	enemy.	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	so	vow.
Delum	returned	with	a	waterskin,	his	steps	slowing	upon	seeing	her
standing	upright.
She	was	gaunt,	her	body	a	collection	of	planes	and	angles.	Her	breasts
were	high	and	far	apart,	her	sternum	prominent	between	them.	She	seemed	to
possess	far	too	many	ribs.	In	height,	she	was	as	a	Teblor	child.
She	saw	the	waterskin	in	Delum’s	hands,	but	made	no	gesture	towards	it.
Instead,	she	turned	to	settle	her	gaze	on	the	place	where	she	had	lain.
Karsa	could	see	the	rise	and	fall	of	her	breath,	but	she	was	otherwise
motionless.
Bairoth	spoke.	‘Are	you	the	Forkassal?’
She	looked	over	at	him	and	half-smiled	once	more.
‘We	are	Teblor,’	Bairoth	continued,	at	which	her	smile	broadened	slightly
in	what	was	to	Karsa	clear	recognition,	though	strangely	flavoured	with
amusement.
‘She	understands	you,’	Karsa	observed.
Delum	approached	with	the	waterskin.	She	glanced	at	him	and	shook	her
head.	He	stopped.
Karsa	now	saw	that	some	of	the	dustiness	was	gone	from	her	eyes,	and	that
her	lips	were	now	slightly	fuller.	‘She	recovers,’	he	said.
‘Freedom	was	all	she	needed,’	Bairoth	said.
‘In	the	manner	that	sun-hardened	lichen	softens	in	the	night,’	Karsa	said.
‘Her	thirst	is	quenched	by	the	air	itself—’
She	faced	him	suddenly,	her	body	stiffening.
‘If	I	have	given	cause	for	offence—’
Before	Karsa	drew	another	breath	she	was	upon	him.	Five	concussive
blows	to	his	body	and	he	found	himself	lying	on	his	back,	the	hard	stone	floor
stinging	as	if	he	was	lying	on	a	nest	of	fire-ants.	There	was	no	air	in	his	lungs.
Agony	thundered	through	him.	He	could	not	move.
He	heard	Delum’s	warcry—cut	off	with	a	strangled	grunt—then	the	sound
of	another	body	striking	the	ground.
Bairoth	cried	out	from	one	side,	‘Forkassal!	Hold!	Leave	him—’
Karsa	blinked	up	through	tear-filled	eyes	as	her	face	hovered	above	his.	It
moved	closer,	the	eyes	gleaming	now	like	black	pools,	the	lips	full	and	almost


purple	in	the	starlight.
In	a	rasping	voice	she	whispered	to	him	in	the	language	of	the	Teblor,
‘They	will	not	leave	you,	will	they?	These	once	enemies	of	mine.	It	seems
shattering	their	bones	was	not	enough.’	Something	in	her	eyes	softened
slightly.	‘Your	kind	deserve	better.’	The	face	slowly	withdrew.	‘I	believe	I	must
needs	wait.	Wait	and	see	what	comes	of	you,	before	I	decide	whether	I	shall
deliver	unto	you,	Warrior,	my	eternal	peace.’
Bairoth’s	voice	from	a	dozen	paces	away:	‘Forkassal!’
She	straightened	and	turned	with	extraordinary	fluidity.	‘You	have	fallen
far,	to	so	twist	the	name	of	my	kind,	not	to	mention	your	own.	I	am	Forkrul
Assail,	young	warrior—not	a	demon.	I	am	named	Calm,	a	Bringer	of	Peace,
and	I	warn	you,	the	desire	to	deliver	it	is	very	strong	in	me	at	the	moment,	so
remove	your	hand	from	that	weapon.’
‘But	we	have	freed	you!’	Bairoth	cried.	‘Yet	you	have	struck	Karsa	and
Delum	down!’
She	laughed.	‘And	Icarium	and	those	damned	T’lan	Imass	will	not	be
pleased	that	you	undid	their	work.	Then	again,	it	is	likely	Icarium	has	no
memory	of	having	done	so,	and	the	T’lan	Imass	are	far	away.	Well,	I	shall	not
give	them	a	second	chance.	But	I	do	know	gratitude,	Warrior,	and	so	I	give	you
this.	The	one	named	Karsa	has	been	chosen.	If	I	was	to	tell	you	even	the	little
that	I	sense	of	his	ultimate	purpose,	you	would	seek	to	kill	him.	But	I	tell	you
there	would	be	no	value	in	that,	for	the	ones	using	him	will	simply	select
another.	No.	Watch	this	friend	of	yours.	Guard	him.	There	will	come	a	time
when	he	stands	poised	to	change	the	world.	And	when	that	time	comes,	I	shall
be	there.	For	I	bring	peace.	When	that	moment	arrives,	cease	guarding	him.
Step	back,	as	you	have	done	now.’
Karsa	dragged	a	sobbing	breath	into	his	racked	lungs.	At	a	wave	of	nausea
he	twisted	onto	his	side	and	vomited	onto	the	gritty	stone	floor.	Between	his
gasping	and	coughing,	he	heard	the	Forkrul	Assail—the	woman	named	Calm
—stride	away.
A	moment	later	Bairoth	knelt	beside	Karsa.	‘Delum	is	badly	hurt,
Warleader,’	he	said.	‘There	is	liquid	leaking	from	a	crack	in	his	head.	Karsa
Orlong,	I	regret	freeing	this…this	creature.	Delum	had	doubts.	Yet	he—’
Karsa	coughed	and	spat,	then,	fighting	waves	of	pain	from	his	battered
chest,	he	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘You	could	not	know,	Bairoth	Gild,’	he	muttered,
wiping	the	tears	from	his	eyes.
‘Warleader,	I	did	not	draw	my	weapon.	I	did	not	seek	to	protect	you	as	did
Delum	Thord—’
‘Which	leaves	one	of	us	healthy,’	Karsa	growled,	staggering	over	to	where


Delum	lay	across	the	trail.	He	had	been	thrown	some	distance,	by	what	looked
to	be	a	single	blow.	Slanting	crossways	across	his	forehead	were	four	deep
impressions,	the	skin	split,	yellowy	liquid	oozing	from	the	punched-through
bone	underneath.	Her	fingertips.	Delum’s	eyes	were	wide,	yet	cloudy	with
confusion.	Whole	sections	of	his	face	had	gone	slack,	as	if	no	underlying
thought	could	hold	them	to	an	expression.
Bairoth	joined	him.	‘See,	the	fluid	is	clear.	It	is	thought-blood.	Delum
Thord	will	not	come	all	the	way	back	with	such	an	injury.’
‘No,’	Karsa	murmured,	‘he	will	not.	None	who	lose	thought-blood	ever
do.’
‘It	is	my	fault.’
‘No,	Delum	made	a	mistake,	Bairoth	Gild.	Am	I	killed?	The	Forkassal
chose	not	to	slay	me.	Delum	should	have	done	as	you	did—nothing.’
Bairoth	winced.	‘She	spoke	to	you,	Karsa	Orlong.	I	heard	her	whispering.
What	did	she	say?’
‘Little	I	could	understand,	except	that	the	peace	she	brings	is	death.’
‘Our	legends	have	twisted	with	time.’
‘They	have,	Bairoth	Gild.	Come,	we	must	wrap	Delum’s	wounds.	The
thought-blood	will	gather	in	the	bandages	and	dry,	and	so	clot	the	holes.
Perhaps	it	will	not	leak	so	much	then	and	he	will	come	some	of	the	way	back	to
us.’
The	two	warriors	set	off	for	their	camp.	When	they	arrived	they	found	the
dogs	huddled	together,	racked	with	shivering.	Through	the	centre	of	the
clearing	ran	the	tracks	of	Calm’s	feet.	Heading	south.
	
A	crisp,	chill	wind	howled	along	the	edge	of	the	escarpment.	Karsa	Orlong	sat
with	his	back	against	the	rock	wall,	watching	Delum	Thord	move	about	on	his
hands	and	knees	among	the	dogs.	Reaching	out	and	gathering	the	beasts	close,
to	stroke	and	nuzzle.	Soft,	crooning	sounds	issued	from	Delum	Thord,	the
smile	never	leaving	the	half	of	his	face	that	still	worked.
The	dogs	were	hunters.	They	suffered	the	manhandling	with	miserable
expressions	that	occasionally	became	fierce,	low	growls	punctuated	with
warning	snaps	of	their	jaws—to	which	Delum	Thord	seemed	indifferent.
Gnaw,	lying	at	Karsa’s	feet,	tracked	with	sleepy	eyes	Delum’s	random
crawling	about	through	the	pack.
It	had	taken	most	of	a	day	for	Delum	Thord	to	return	to	them,	a	journey
that	had	left	much	of	the	warrior	behind.	Another	day	had	passed	whilst	Karsa
and	Bairoth	waited	to	see	if	more	would	come,	enough	to	send	light	into	his


eyes,	enough	to	gift	Delum	Thord	with	the	ability	to	once	more	look	upon	his
companions.	But	there	had	been	no	change.	He	did	not	see	them	at	all.	Only	the
dogs.
Bairoth	had	left	earlier	to	hunt,	but	Karsa	sensed,	as	the	day	stretched	on,
that	Bairoth	Gild	had	chosen	to	avoid	the	camp	for	other	reasons.	Freeing	the
demon	had	taken	Delum	from	them,	and	it	had	been	Bairoth’s	words	that	had
yielded	a	most	bitter	reward.	Karsa	had	little	understanding	of	such	feelings,
this	need	to	self-inflict	some	sort	of	punishment.	The	error	had	belonged	to
Delum,	drawing	his	blade	against	the	demon.	Karsa’s	sore	ribs	attested	to	the
Forkrul	Assail’s	martial	prowess—she	had	attacked	with	impressive	speed,
faster	than	anything	Karsa	had	seen	before,	much	less	faced.	The	three	Teblor
were	as	children	before	her.	Delum	should	have	seen	that,	instantly,	should
have	stayed	his	hand	as	Bairoth	had	done.
Instead,	the	warrior	had	been	foolish,	and	now	he	crawled	among	the	dogs.
The	Faces	in	the	Rock	held	no	pity	for	foolish	warriors,	so	why	should	Karsa
Orlong?	Bairoth	Gild	was	indulging	himself,	making	regret	and	pity	and
castigation	into	sweet	nectars,	leaving	him	to	wander	like	a	tortured	drunk.
Karsa	was	fast	running	out	of	patience.	The	journey	must	be	resumed.	If
anything	could	return	Delum	Thord	to	himself,	then	it	would	be	battle,	the
blood’s	fierce	rage	searing	the	soul	awake.
Footsteps	from	uptrail.	Gnaw’s	head	turned,	but	the	distraction	was	only
momentary.
Bairoth	Gild	strode	into	view,	the	carcass	of	a	wild	goat	draped	over	one
shoulder.	He	paused	to	study	Delum	Thord,	then	let	the	goat	drop	in	a	crunch
and	clatter	of	hoofs.	He	drew	his	butchering	knife	and	knelt	down	beside	it.
‘We	have	lost	another	day,’	Karsa	said.
‘Game	is	scarce,’	Bairoth	replied,	slicing	open	the	goat’s	belly.
The	dogs	moved	into	an	expectant	half-circle,	Delum	following	to	take	his
place	among	them.	Bairoth	cut	through	connecting	tissues	and	began	flinging
blood-soaked	organs	to	the	beasts.	None	made	a	move.
Karsa	tapped	Gnaw	on	the	flank	and	the	beast	rose	and	moved	forward,
trailed	by	its	three-legged	mate.	Gnaw	sniffed	at	the	offerings,	each	in	turn,	and
settled	on	the	goat’s	liver,	while	its	mate	chose	the	heart.	They	each	trotted
away	with	their	prizes.	The	remaining	dogs	then	closed	in	on	what	remained,
snapping	and	bickering.	Delum	pounced	forward	to	wrest	a	lung	from	the	jaws
of	one	of	the	dogs,	baring	his	own	teeth	in	challenge.	He	scrambled	off	to	one
side,	hunching	down	over	his	prize.
Karsa	watched	as	Gnaw	rose	and	trotted	towards	Delum	Thord,	watched	as
Delum,	whimpering,	dropped	the	lung	then	crouched	flat,	head	down,	while


Gnaw	licked	the	pooling	blood	around	the	organ	for	a	few	moments,	then
padded	back	to	its	own	meal.
Grunting,	Karsa	said,	‘Gnaw’s	pack	has	grown	by	one.’	There	was	no
reply	and	he	glanced	over	to	see	Bairoth	staring	at	Delum	in	horror.	‘See	his
smile,	Bairoth	Gild?	Delum	Thord	has	found	happiness,	and	this	tells	us	that	he
will	come	back	no	further,	for	why	would	he?’
Bairoth	stared	down	at	his	bloodied	hands,	at	the	butchering	knife
gleaming	red	in	the	dying	light.	‘Know	you	no	grief,	Warleader?’	he	asked	in	a
whisper.
‘No.	He	is	not	dead.’
‘Better	he	were!’	Bairoth	snapped.
‘Then	kill	him.’
Raw	hatred	flared	in	Bairoth’s	eyes.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	what	did	she	say	to
you?’
Karsa	frowned	at	the	unexpected	question,	then	shrugged.	‘She	damned	me
for	my	ignorance.	Words	that	could	not	wound	me,	for	I	was	indifferent	to	all
that	she	uttered.’
Bairoth’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘You	make	of	what	has	happened	a	jest?
Warleader,	you	no	longer	lead	me.	I	shall	not	guard	your	flank	in	this	cursed
war	of	yours.	We	have	lost	too	much—’
‘There	is	weakness	in	you,	Bairoth	Gild.	I	have	known	that	all	along.	For
years,	I	have	known	that.	You	are	no	different	from	what	Delum	has	become,
and	it	is	this	truth	that	now	haunts	you	so.	Did	you	truly	believe	we	would	all
return	from	this	journey	without	scars?	Did	you	think	us	immune	to	our
enemies?’
‘So	you	think—’
Karsa’s	laugh	was	harsh.	‘You	are	a	fool,	Bairoth	Gild.	How	did	we	come
this	far?	Through	Rathyd	and	Sunyd	lands?	Through	the	battles	we	have
fought?	Our	victory	was	no	gift	of	the	Seven.	Success	was	carved	by	our	skill
with	swords,	and	by	my	leadership.	Yet	all	you	saw	in	me	was	bravado,	as
would	come	from	a	youth	fresh	to	the	ways	of	the	warrior.	You	deluded
yourself,	and	it	gave	you	comfort.	You	are	not	my	superior,	Bairoth	Gild,	not
in	anything.’
Bairoth	Gild	stared,	his	eyes	wide,	his	crimson	hands	trembling.
‘And	now,’	Karsa	growled,	‘if	you	would	survive.	Survive	this	journey.
Survive	me,	then	I	suggest	you	teach	yourself	anew	the	value	of	following.
Your	life	is	in	your	leader ’s	hands.	Follow	me	to	victory,	Bairoth	Gild,	or	fall
to	the	wayside.	Either	way,	I	will	tell	the	tale	with	true	words.	Thus,	how	would
you	have	it?’


Emotions	flitted	like	wildfire	across	Bairoth’s	broad,	suddenly	pale	face.
He	drew	a	half-dozen	tortured	breaths.
‘I	lead	this	pack,’	Karsa	said	quietly,	‘and	none	other.	Do	you	challenge
me?’
Bairoth	slowly	settled	back	on	his	haunches,	shifting	the	grip	on	the
butchering	knife,	his	gaze	settling,	level	now	on	Karsa’s	own.	‘We	have	been
lovers	a	long	time,	Dayliss	and	I.	You	knew	nothing,	even	as	we	laughed	at
your	clumsy	efforts	to	court	her.	Every	day	you	would	strut	between	us,	filled
with	bold	words,	always	challenging	me,	always	seeking	to	belittle	me	in	her
eyes.	But	we	laughed	inside,	Dayliss	and	I,	and	spent	the	nights	in	each	other ’s
arms.	Karsa	Orlong,	it	may	be	that	you	are	the	only	one	who	will	return	to	our
village—indeed,	I	believe	that	you	will	make	certain	of	it,	so	my	life	is	as	good
as	ended	already,	but	I	do	not	fear	that.	And	when	you	return	to	the	village,
Warleader,	you	will	make	Dayliss	your	wife.	But	one	truth	shall	remain	with
you	until	the	end	of	your	days,	and	that	is:	with	Dayliss,	it	was	not	I	who
followed,	but	you.	And	there	is	nothing	you	can	do	to	change	that.’
Karsa	slowly	bared	his	teeth.	‘Dayliss?	My	wife?	I	think	not.	No,	instead	I
shall	denounce	her	to	the	tribe.	To	have	lain	with	a	man	not	her	husband.	She
shall	be	shorn,	and	then	I	shall	claim	her—as	my	slave—’
Bairoth	launched	himself	at	Karsa,	knife	flashing	through	the	gloom.	His
back	to	the	stone	wall,	Karsa	could	only	manage	a	sideways	roll	that	gave	him
no	time	to	find	his	feet	before	Bairoth	was	upon	him,	one	arm	wrapping	about
his	neck,	arching	him	back,	the	hard	knife-blade	scoring	up	his	chest,	point
driving	for	his	throat.
Then	the	dogs	were	upon	them	both,	thundering,	bone-jarring	impacts,
snarls,	the	clash	of	canines,	teeth	punching	through	leather.
Bairoth	screamed,	pulled	away,	arm	releasing	Karsa.
Rolling	onto	his	back,	Karsa	saw	the	other	warrior	stumbling,	dogs
hanging	by	their	jaws	from	both	arms,	Gnaw	with	his	teeth	sunk	into	Bairoth’s
hip,	other	beasts	flinging	themselves	forward,	seeking	yet	more	holds.
Stumbling,	then	crashing	to	the	ground.
‘Away!’	Karsa	bellowed.
The	dogs	flinched,	tore	themselves	free	and	backed	off,	still	snarling.	Off
to	one	side,	Karsa	saw	as	he	scrambled	upright,	crouched	Delum,	his	face
twisted	into	a	wild	smile,	his	eyes	glittering,	hands	hanging	low	to	the	ground
and	spasmodically	snatching	at	nothing.	Then,	his	gaze	travelling	past	Delum,
Karsa	stiffened.	He	hissed	and	the	dogs	fell	perfectly	silent.
Bairoth	rolled	onto	his	hands	and	knees,	head	lifting.
Karsa	gestured,	then	pointed.


There	was	the	flicker	of	torchlight	on	the	trail	ahead.	Still	a	hundred	or
more	paces	distant,	slowly	nearing.	With	the	way	sound	was	trapped	within	the
dead-end,	it	was	unlikely	the	fighting	had	been	heard.
Ignoring	Bairoth,	Karsa	drew	his	sword	and	set	off	towards	it.	If	Sunyd,
then	the	ones	who	approached	were	displaying	a	carelessness	that	he	intended
to	make	fatal.	More	likely,	they	were	lowlanders.	He	could	see	now,	as	he
edged	from	shadow	to	shadow	on	the	trail,	that	there	were	at	least	a	half-dozen
torches—a	sizeable	party,	then.	He	could	now	hear	voices,	the	foul	tongue	of
the	lowlanders.
Bairoth	moved	up	alongside	him.	He	had	drawn	his	own	sword.	Blood
dripped	from	puncture	wounds	on	his	arms,	streamed	down	his	hip.	Karsa
scowled	at	him,	waved	him	back.
Grimacing,	Bairoth	withdrew.
The	lowlanders	had	come	to	the	cul	de	sac	where	the	demon	had	been
imprisoned.	The	play	of	torchlight	danced	on	the	high	stone	walls.	The	voices
rose	louder,	edged	with	alarm.
Karsa	slipped	forward	in	silence	until	he	was	just	beyond	the	pool	of	light.
He	saw	nine	lowlanders,	gathered	to	examine	the	now-empty	pit	in	the	centre
of	the	clearing.	Two	were	well	armoured	and	helmed,	cradling	heavy
crossbows,	longswords	belted	at	their	hips,	positioned	at	the	entrance	to	the	cul
de	sac	and	watching	the	trail.	Off	to	one	side	were	four	males	dressed	in	earthtoned	robes,	their	hair	braided,	pulled	forward	and	knotted	over	their
breastbones;	none	of	these	carried	weapons.
The	remaining	three	had	the	look	of	scouts,	wearing	tight-fitting	leathers,
armed	with	short	bows	and	hunting	knives.	Clan	tattoos	spanned	their	brows.	It
was	one	of	these	who	seemed	to	be	in	charge,	for	he	spoke	in	hard	tones,	as	if
giving	commands.	The	other	two	scouts	were	crouched	down	beside	the	pit,
eyes	studying	the	stone	floor.
Both	guards	stood	within	the	torchlight,	leaving	them	effectively	blind	to
the	darkness	beyond.	Neither	appeared	particularly	vigilant.
Karsa	adjusted	his	grip	on	the	bloodsword,	his	gaze	fixed	on	the	guard
nearest	him.
Then	he	charged.
Head	flew	from	shoulders,	blood	fountaining.	Karsa’s	headlong	rush
carried	him	to	where	the	other	guard	had	been	standing,	to	find	the	lowlander
no	longer	there.	Cursing,	the	Teblor	pivoted,	closed	on	the	three	scouts.
Who	had	already	scattered,	black-iron	blades	hissing	from	their	sheaths.
Karsa	laughed.	There	was	little	room	beyond	his	reach	in	the	high-walled
cul	de	sac,	and	the	only	chance	of	escape	would	have	to	be	through	him.


One	of	the	scouts	shouted	something	then	darted	forward.
Karsa’s	wooden	sword	chopped	down,	splitting	tendon,	then	bone.	The
lowlander	shrieked.	Stepping	past	the	crumpling	figure,	Karsa	dragged	his
weapon	free.
The	remaining	two	scouts	had	moved	away	from	each	other	and	now
attacked	from	the	sides.	Ignoring	one—and	feeling	the	broad-bladed	hunting
knife	rip	through	his	leather	armour	to	score	along	his	ribs—Karsa	batted
aside	the	other ’s	attack	and,	still	laughing,	crushed	the	lowlander ’s	skull	with
his	sword.	A	back	slash	connected	with	the	other	scout,	sent	him	flying	to	strike
the	stone	wall.
The	four	robed	figures	awaited	Karsa,	evincing	little	fear,	joined	in	a	low
chant.
The	air	sparkled	strangely	before	them,	then	coruscating	fire	suddenly
unfolded,	swept	forward	to	engulf	Karsa.
It	raged	against	him,	a	thousand	clawed	hands,	tearing,	raking,	battering
his	body,	his	face	and	his	eyes.
Karsa,	shoulders	hunching,	walked	through	it.
The	fire	burst	apart,	flames	fleeing	into	the	night	air.	Shrugging	the	effects
off	with	a	soft	growl,	Karsa	approached	the	four	lowlanders.
Their	expressions,	calm	and	serene	and	confident	a	moment	ago,	now
revealed	disbelief	that	swiftly	shifted	to	horror	as	Karsa’s	sword	ripped	into
them.
They	died	as	easily	as	had	the	others,	and	moments	later	the	Teblor	stood
amidst	twitching	bodies,	blood	gleaming	dark	on	his	sword’s	blade.	Torches
lay	on	the	stone	floor	here	and	there,	fitfully	throwing	smoky	light	to	dance
against	the	cul	de	sac’s	walls.
Bairoth	Gild	strode	into	view.	‘The	second	guard	escaped	up	the	trail,
Warleader,’	he	said.	‘The	dogs	now	hunt.’
Karsa	grunted.
‘Karsa	Orlong,	you	have	slain	the	first	group	of	children.	The	trophies	are
yours.’
Reaching	down,	Karsa	closed	the	fingers	of	one	hand	in	the	robes	of	one
of	the	bodies	at	his	feet.	He	straightened,	lifting	the	corpse	into	the	air,	and
studied	its	puny	limbs,	its	small	head	with	its	peculiar	braids.	A	face	lined,	as
would	be	a	Teblor ’s	after	centuries	upon	centuries	of	life,	yet	the	visage	he
stared	down	upon	was	scaled	to	that	of	a	Teblor	newborn.
‘They	squealed	like	babes,’	Bairoth	Gild	said.	‘The	tales	are	true,	then.
These	lowlanders	are	like	children	indeed.’
‘Yet	not,’	Karsa	said,	studying	the	aged	face	now	slack	in	death.


‘They	died	easily.’
‘Aye,	they	did.’	Karsa	flung	the	body	away.	‘Bairoth	Gild,	these	are	our
enemies.	Do	you	follow	your	warleader?’
‘For	this	war,	I	shall,’	Bairoth	replied.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	we	shall	speak	no
more	of	our…village.	What	lies	between	us	must	await	our	eventual	return.’
‘Agreed.’
	
Two	of	the	pack’s	dogs	did	not	return,	and	there	was	nothing	of	strutting
victory	in	the	gaits	of	Gnaw	and	the	others	as	they	padded	back	into	the	camp	at
dawn.	Surprisingly,	the	lone	guard	had	somehow	escaped.	Delum	Thord,	his
arms	wrapped	about	Gnaw’s	mate—as	they	had	been	throughout	the	night—
whimpered	upon	the	pack’s	return.
Bairoth	shifted	the	supplies	from	his	and	Karsa’s	destriers	to	Delum’s
warhorse,	for	it	was	clear	that	Delum	had	lost	all	knowledge	of	riding.	He
would	run	with	the	dogs.
As	they	readied	to	depart,	Bairoth	said,	‘It	may	be	that	the	guard	came	from
Silver	Lake.	That	he	will	bring	to	them	warning	words	of	our	approach.’
‘We	shall	find	him,’	Karsa	growled	from	where	he	crouched,	threading	the
last	of	his	trophies	onto	the	leather	cord.	‘He	could	only	have	eluded	the	dogs
by	climbing,	so	there	will	be	no	swiftness	to	his	flight.	We	shall	seek	sign	of
him.	If	he	has	continued	on	through	the	night,	he	will	be	tired.	If	not,	he	will	be
close.’	Straightening,	Karsa	held	the	string	of	severed	ears	and	tongues	out
before	him,	studied	the	small,	mangled	objects	for	a	moment	longer,	then
looped	his	collection	of	trophies	round	his	neck.
He	swung	himself	onto	Havok’s	back,	collected	the	lone	rein.
Gnaw’s	pack	moved	ahead	to	scout	the	trail,	Delum	among	them,	the	threelegged	dog	cradled	in	his	arms.
They	set	off.
Shortly	before	midday,	they	came	upon	signs	of	the	last	lowlander,	thirty
paces	beyond	the	corpses	of	the	two	missing	dogs—a	crossbow	quarrel	buried
in	each	one.	A	scattering	of	iron	armour,	straps	and	fittings.	The	guard	had
shed	weight.
‘This	child	is	a	clever	one,’	Bairoth	Gild	observed.	‘He	will	hear	us	before
we	see	him,	and	will	prepare	an	ambush.’	The	warrior ’s	hooded	gaze	flicked	to
Delum.	‘More	dogs	will	be	slain.’
Karsa	shook	his	head	at	Bairoth’s	words.	‘He	will	not	ambush	us,	for	that
will	see	him	killed,	and	he	knows	it.	Should	we	catch	up	with	him,	he	will	seek
to	hide.	Evasion	is	his	only	hope,	up	the	cliffside,	and	then	we	will	have	passed


him,	and	so	he	will	not	succeed	in	reaching	Silver	Lake	before	us.’
‘We	do	not	hunt	him	down?’	Bairoth	asked	in	surprise.
‘No.	We	ride	for	Bone	Pass.’
‘Then	he	shall	trail	us.	Warleader,	an	enemy	loose	at	our	backs—’
‘A	child.	Those	quarrels	might	well	kill	a	dog,	but	they	are	as	twigs	to	us
Teblor.	Our	armour	alone	will	take	much	of	those	small	barbs—’
‘He	has	a	sharp	eye,	Karsa	Orlong,	to	slay	two	dogs	in	the	dark.	He	will
aim	for	where	our	armour	does	not	cover	us.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘Then	we	must	outpace	him	beyond	the	pass.’
They	continued	on.	The	trail	widened	as	it	climbed,	the	entire	escarpment
pushing	upward	in	its	northward	reach.	Riding	at	a	fast	trot,	they	covered
league	after	league	until,	by	late	afternoon,	they	found	themselves	entering
clouds	of	mist,	a	deep	roaring	sound	directly	ahead.
The	path	dropped	away	suddenly.
Reining	in	amidst	the	milling	dogs,	Karsa	dismounted.
The	edge	was	sheer.	Beyond	it	and	on	his	left,	a	river	had	cut	a	notch	a
thousand	paces	or	more	deep	into	the	cliff-side,	down	to	what	must	have	been	a
ledge	of	some	sort,	over	which	it	then	plunged	another	thousand	paces	to	a
mist-shrouded	valley	floor.	A	dozen	or	more	thread-thin	waterfalls	drifted	out
from	both	sides	of	the	notch,	issuing	from	fissures	in	the	bedrock.	The	scene,
Karsa	realized	after	a	moment,	was	all	wrong.	They	had	reached	the	highest
part	of	the	escarpment’s	ridge.	A	river,	cutting	a	natural	route	through	to	the
lowlands,	did	not	belong	in	this	place.	Stranger	still,	the	flanking	waterfalls
poured	out	from	riven	cracks,	not	one	level	with	another,	as	if	the	mountains
on	both	sides	were	filled	with	water.
‘Karsa	Orlong,’	Bairoth	had	to	shout	to	be	heard	over	the	roar	rising	from
far	below,	‘someone—an	ancient	god,	perhaps—has	broken	a	mountain	in	half.
That	notch,	it	was	not	carved	by	water.	No,	it	has	the	look	of	having	been	cut	by
a	giant	axe.	And	the	wound…bleeds.’
Not	replying	to	Bairoth’s	words,	Karsa	turned	about.	Directly	on	his	right,
a	winding,	rocky	path	descended	on	their	side	of	the	cliff,	a	steep	path	of	shale
and	scree,	gleaming	wet.
‘This	is	our	way	down?’	Bairoth	stepped	past	Karsa,	then	swung	an
incredulous	look	upon	the	warleader.	‘We	cannot!	It	will	vanish	beneath	our
feet!	Beneath	the	hoofs	of	the	horses!	We	shall	descend	indeed,	like	stones
down	a	cliffside!’
Karsa	crouched	and	pried	a	rock	loose	from	the	ground.	He	tossed	it	down
the	trail.	Where	it	first	struck,	the	shale	shifted,	trembled,	then	slid	in	a
growing	wave	that	quickly	followed	the	bouncing	rock,	vanishing	into	the


mists.
Revealing	rough,	broad	steps.
Made	entirely	of	bones.
‘It	is	as	Pahlk	said,’	Karsa	murmured,	before	turning	to	Bairoth.	‘Come,
our	path	awaits.’
Bairoth’s	eyes	were	hooded.	‘It	does	indeed,	Karsa	Orlong.	Beneath	our
feet	there	shall	be	a	truth.’
Karsa	scowled.	‘This	is	our	trail	down	from	the	mountains.	Nothing	more,
Bairoth	Gild.’
The	warrior	shrugged.	‘As	you	say,	Warleader.’
Karsa	in	the	lead,	they	began	the	descent.
The	bones	were	lowlander	in	scale,	yet	heavier	and	thicker,	hardened	into
stone.	Here	and	there,	antlers	and	tusks	were	visible,	as	well	as	artfully	carved
bone	helms	from	larger	beasts.	An	army	had	been	slain,	their	bones	then	laid
out,	intricately	fashioned	into	these	grim	steps.	The	mists	had	quickly	laid
down	a	layer	of	water,	but	each	step	was	solid,	broad	and	slightly	angled	back,
the	pitch	reducing	the	risk	of	slipping.	The	Teblor ’s	pace	was	slowed	only	by
the	cautious	descent	of	the	destriers.
It	seemed	that	the	rockslide	Karsa	had	triggered	had	cleared	the	way	as	far
down	as	the	massive	shelf	of	stone	where	the	river	gathered	before	plunging
over	to	the	valley	below.	With	the	roaring	tumble	of	water	growing	ever	closer
on	their	left	and	jagged,	raw	rock	on	their	right,	the	warriors	descended	more
than	a	thousand	paces,	and	with	each	step	the	gloom	deepened	around	them.
Pale,	ghostly	light	broken	by	shreds	of	darker,	opaque	mists	commanded
the	ledge	that	spread	out	on	this	side	of	the	waterfall.	The	bones	formed	a	level
floor	of	sorts,	abutting	the	rock	wall	to	the	right	and	appearing	to	continue	on
beneath	the	river	that	now	roared,	massive	and	monstrous,	less	than	twenty
paces	away	on	their	left.
The	horses	needed	to	rest.	Karsa	watched	Bairoth	make	his	way	towards
the	river,	then	glanced	over	at	Delum,	who	huddled	now	among	Gnaw’s	pack,
wet	and	shivering.	The	faint	glow	emanating	from	the	bones	seemed	to	carry	a
breath	unnaturally	cold.	On	all	sides,	the	scene	was	colourless,	strangely	dead.
Even	the	river ’s	immense	power	felt	lifeless.
Bairoth	approached.	‘Warleader,	these	bones	beneath	us,	they	continue
under	the	river	to	the	other	side.	They	are	deep,	almost	my	height	where	I
could	see.	Tens	of	thousands	have	died	to	make	this.	Tens	of	tens.	This	entire
shelf—’
‘Bairoth	Gild,	we	have	rested	long	enough.	There	are	stones	coming	down
from	above—either	the	guard	descends,	or	there	will	be	another	slide	to	bury


what	we	have	revealed.	There	must	be	many	such	slides,	for	the	lowlanders
used	this	on	the	way	up,	and	that	could	not	have	been	more	than	a	few	days	ago.
Yet	we	arrived	to	find	it	buried	once	more.’
Sudden	unease	flickered	through	Bairoth’s	expression,	and	he	glanced
over	to	where	small	stones	of	shale	pattered	down	from	the	trail	above.	There
were	more	now	than	there	had	been	a	moment	ago.
They	gathered	the	horses	once	more	and	approached	the	shelf’s	edge.	The
descent	before	them	was	too	steep	to	hold	a	slide,	the	steps	switchbacking	for
as	far	down	as	the	Teblor	could	see.	The	horses	balked	before	it.
‘Karsa	Orlong,	we	shall	be	very	vulnerable	on	that	path.’
‘We	have	been	so	all	along,	Bairoth	Gild.	That	lowlander	behind	us	has
already	missed	his	greatest	opportunity.	That	is	why	I	believe	we	have
outdistanced	him,	and	that	the	stones	we	see	falling	from	above	portend
another	slide	and	nothing	more.’	With	that	Karsa	coaxed	Havok	forward	onto
the	first	step.
Thirty	paces	down	they	heard	a	faint	roar	from	above,	a	sound	deeper	in
timbre	than	the	river.	A	hail	of	stones	swept	over	them,	but	at	some	distance	out
from	the	cliff	wall.	Muddy	rain	followed	for	a	short	time	thereafter.
They	continued	on,	until	weariness	settled	into	their	limbs.	The	mists	might
have	lightened	for	a	time,	but	perhaps	it	was	nothing	more	than	their	eyes
growing	accustomed	to	the	gloom.	The	wheels	of	sun	and	stars	passed	unseen
and	unseeing	over	them.	The	only	means	of	measuring	time	was	through
hunger	and	exhaustion.	There	would	be	no	stopping	until	the	descent	was
complete.	Karsa	had	lost	count	of	the	switchbacks;	what	he	had	imagined	to	be
a	thousand	paces	was	proving	to	be	far	more.	Beside	them,	the	river	continued
its	fall,	nothing	but	mists	now,	a	hissing	deluge	bitter	cold,	spreading	out	to
blind	them	to	the	valley	below	and	the	skies	above.	Their	world	had	narrowed
to	the	endless	bones	under	their	moccasins	and	the	sheer	wall	of	the	cliff.
They	reached	another	shelf	and	the	bones	were	gone,	buried	beneath
squelching,	sodden	mud	and	snarled	bundles	of	vivid	green	grasses.	Fallen	tree
branches	cloaked	in	mosses	littered	the	area.	Mists	hid	all	else.
The	horses	tossed	their	heads	as	they	were	led,	finally,	onto	level	ground.
Delum	and	the	dogs	settled	down	into	a	clump	of	wet	fur	and	skin.	Bairoth
stumbled	close	to	Karsa.	‘Warleader,	I	am	distraught.’
Karsa	frowned.	His	legs	were	trembling	beneath	him,	and	he	could	not
keep	the	shivering	from	his	muscles.	‘Why,	Bairoth	Gild?	We	are	done.	We
have	descended	Bone	Pass.’
‘Aye.’	Bairoth	coughed,	then	said,	‘And	before	long	we	will	come	to	this
place	again—to	climb.’


Karsa	slowly	nodded.	‘I	have	thought	on	this,	Bairoth	Gild.	The	lowlands
sweep	around	our	plateau.	There	are	other	passes,	directly	south	of	our	own
Uryd	lands—there	must	be,	else	lowlanders	would	never	have	appeared	among
us.	Our	return	journey	will	take	us	along	the	edge,	westward,	and	we	shall	find
those	hidden	passes.’
‘Through	lowlander	territories	the	entire	way!	We	are	but	two,	Karsa
Orlong!	A	raid	upon	the	farm	at	Silver	Lake	is	one	thing,	but	to	wage	war
against	an	entire	tribe	is	madness!	We	will	be	hunted	and	pursued	the	entire
way—it	cannot	be	done!’
‘Hunted	and	pursued?’	Karsa	laughed.	‘What	is	new	in	that?	Come,	Bairoth
Gild,	we	must	find	somewhere	dry,	away	from	this	river.	I	see	treetops,	there,
to	the	left.	We	shall	make	ourselves	a	fire,	we	shall	rediscover	what	it	is	like	to
be	warm,	our	bellies	full.’
The	ledge’s	slope	led	gently	down	a	scree	mostly	buried	beneath	mosses,
lichens	and	rich,	dark	soil,	beyond	which	waited	a	forest	of	ancient	redwoods
and	cedars.	The	sky	overhead	revealed	a	patch	of	blue,	and	shafts	of	sunlight
were	visible	here	and	there.	Once	within	the	wood,	the	mists	thinned	to	a	musty
dampness,	smelling	of	rotting	treefalls.	The	warriors	continued	on	another
fifty	paces,	until	they	found	a	sunlit	stretch	where	a	diseased	cedar	had
collapsed	some	time	past.	Butterflies	danced	in	the	golden	air	and	the	soft
crunch	of	pine-borers	was	a	steady	cadence	on	all	sides.	The	huge,	upright
root-mat	of	the	cedar	had	left	a	bare	patch	of	bedrock	where	the	tree	had	once
stood.	The	rock	was	dry	and	in	full	sunlight.
Karsa	began	unstrapping	supplies	while	Bairoth	set	off	to	collect
deadwood	from	the	fallen	cedar.	Delum	found	a	mossy	patch	warmed	by	the
sun	and	curled	up	to	sleep.	Karsa	considered	removing	the	man’s	sodden
clothes,	then,	seeing	the	rest	of	the	pack	gather	around	Delum,	he	simply
shrugged	and	resumed	unburdening	the	horses.
A	short	while	later,	their	clothes	hanging	from	roots	close	to	the	fire,	the
two	warriors	sat	naked	on	the	bedrock,	the	chill	slowly	yielding	from	muscle
and	bone.
‘At	the	far	end	of	this	valley,’	Karsa	said,	‘the	river	widens,	forming	a	flat
before	reaching	the	lake.	The	side	we	are	now	on	becomes	the	south	side	of	the
river.	There	will	be	a	spar	of	rock	near	the	mouth,	blocking	our	view	to	the
right.	Immediately	beyond	it,	on	the	lake’s	southwest	shore,	stands	the
lowlander	farm.	We	are	very	nearly	there,	Bairoth	Gild.’
The	warrior	on	the	other	side	of	the	hearth	rolled	his	shoulders.	‘Tell	me
we	shall	attack	in	daylight,	Warleader.	I	have	found	a	deep	hatred	for	darkness.
Bone	Pass	has	shrivelled	my	heart.’


‘Daylight	it	shall	be,	Bairoth	Gild,’	Karsa	replied,	choosing	to	ignore
Bairoth’s	last	confession,	for	its	words	had	trembled	something	within	him,
leaving	a	sour	taste	in	his	mouth.	‘The	children	will	be	working	in	the	fields,
unable	to	reach	the	stronghold	of	the	farmhouse	in	time.	They	will	see	us
charging	down	upon	them,	and	know	terror	and	despair.’
‘This	pleases	me,	Warleader.’
	
The	redwood	and	cedar	forest	cloaked	the	entire	valley,	showing	no	evidence
of	clearing	or	logging.	There	was	little	game	to	be	found	beneath	the	thick
canopy,	and	days	passed	in	a	diffuse	gloom	relieved	only	by	the	occasional
treefall.	The	Teblor ’s	supply	of	food	quickly	dwindled,	the	horses	growing
leaner	on	a	diet	of	blueleaf,	cullan	moss	and	bitter	vine,	the	dogs	taking	to
eating	rotten	wood,	berries	and	beetles.
Midway	through	the	fourth	day,	the	valley	narrowed,	forcing	them	ever
closer	to	the	river.	Travelling	through	the	deep	forest,	away	from	the	lone	trail
running	alongside	the	river,	the	Teblor	had	ensured	that	they	would	remain
undiscovered,	but	now,	finally,	they	were	nearing	Silver	Lake.
They	arrived	at	the	river	mouth	at	dusk,	the	wheel	of	stars	awakening	in	the
sky	above	them.	The	trail	flanking	the	river ’s	boulder-strewn	bank	had	seen
recent	passage,	leading	northwestward,	but	no	sign	of	anyone’s	returning.	The
air	was	crisp	above	the	river ’s	rushing	water.	A	broad	fan	of	sand	and	gravel
formed	a	driftwood-cluttered	island	where	the	river	opened	out	into	the	lake.
Mists	hung	over	the	water,	making	the	lake’s	far	north	and	east	shores	hazy.
The	mountains	reached	down	on	those	distant	shores,	kneeling	in	the	breezerippled	waves.
Karsa	and	Bairoth	dismounted	and	began	preparing	their	camp,	though	on
this	night	there	would	be	no	cookfire.
‘Those	tracks,’	Bairoth	said	after	a	time,	‘they	belong	to	the	lowlanders
you	killed.	I	wonder	what	they’d	intended	on	doing	in	the	place	where	the
demon	was	imprisoned.’
Karsa’s	shrug	was	dismissive.	‘Perhaps	they’d	planned	on	freeing	her.’
‘I	think	not,	Karsa	Orlong.	The	sorcery	they	used	to	assail	you	was	godaspected.	I	believe	they	came	to	worship,	or	perhaps	the	demon’s	soul	could	be
drawn	out	from	the	flesh,	in	the	manner	of	the	Faces	in	the	Rock.	Perhaps,	for
the	lowlanders,	it	was	the	site	of	an	oracle,	or	even	the	home	of	their	god.’
Karsa	studied	his	companion	for	a	long	moment,	then	said,	‘Bairoth	Gild,
there	is	poison	in	your	words.	That	demon	was	not	a	god.	It	was	a	prisoner	of
the	stone.	The	Faces	in	the	Rock	are	true	gods.	There	is	no	comparison	to	be


made.’
Bairoth’s	heavy	brows	rose.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	I	make	no	comparison.	The
lowlanders	are	foolish	creatures,	whilst	the	Teblor	are	not.	The	lowlanders	are
children	and	are	susceptible	to	self-deception.	Why	would	they	not	worship	that
demon?	Tell	me,	did	you	sense	a	living	presence	in	that	sorcery	when	it	struck
you?’
Karsa	considered.	‘There	was…something.	Scratching	and	hissing	and
spitting.	I	flung	it	away	and	it	then	fled.	So,	it	was	not	the	demon’s	own	power.’
‘No,	it	wasn’t,	for	she	was	gone.	Perhaps	they	worshipped	the	stone	that
had	pinned	her	down—there	was	magic	in	that	as	well.’
‘But	not	living,	Bairoth	Gild.	I	do	not	understand	the	track	of	your
thoughts,	and	I	grow	tired	of	these	pointless	words.’
‘I	believe,’	Bairoth	persisted,	‘that	the	bones	of	Bone	Pass	belong	to	the
people	who	imprisoned	the	demon.	And	this	is	what	troubles	me,	Karsa
Orlong,	for	those	bones	are	much	like	the	lowlanders’—thicker,	yes,	but	still
childlike.	Indeed,	it	may	be	that	the	lowlanders	are	kin	to	that	ancient	people.’
‘What	of	it?’	Karsa	rose.	‘I	will	hear	no	more	of	this.	Our	only	task	now	is
to	rest,	then	rise	with	the	dawn	and	prepare	our	weapons.	Tomorrow,	we	slay
children.’	He	strode	to	where	the	horses	stood	beneath	the	trees.	Delum	sat
nearby	amidst	the	dogs,	Gnaw’s	three-legged	mate	cradled	in	his	arms.	One
hand	stroked	the	beast’s	head	in	mindless	repetition.	Karsa	stared	at	Delum	for
a	moment	longer,	then	turned	away	to	prepare	his	bedding.
The	river ’s	passage	was	the	only	sound	as	the	wheel	of	stars	slowly
crossed	the	sky.	At	some	point	in	the	night	the	breeze	shifted,	carrying	with	it
the	smell	of	woodsmoke	and	livestock	and,	once,	the	faint	bark	of	a	dog.	Lying
awake	on	his	bed	of	moss,	Karsa	prayed	to	Urugal	that	the	wind	would	not	turn
with	the	sun’s	rise.	There	were	always	dogs	on	lowlander	farms,	kept	for	the
same	reason	as	Teblor	kept	dogs.	Sharp	ears	and	sensitive	noses,	quick	to
announce	strangers.	But	these	would	be	lowlander	breeds—smaller	than	those
of	the	Teblor.	Gnaw	and	his	pack	would	make	short	work	of	them.	And	there
would	be	no	warning…so	long	as	the	wind	did	not	shift.
He	heard	Bairoth	rise	and	make	his	way	over	to	where	the	pack	slept.
Karsa	glanced	over	to	see	Bairoth	crouched	down	beside	Delum.	Dogs	had
lifted	their	heads	questioningly	and	were	now	watching	as	Bairoth	stroked
Delum’s	upturned	face.
It	was	a	moment	before	Karsa	realized	what	he	was	witnessing.	Bairoth
was	painting	Delum’s	face	in	the	battle-mask,	black,	grey	and	white,	the	shades
of	the	Uryd.	The	battle-mask	was	reserved	for	warriors	who	knowingly	rode
to	their	deaths;	it	was	an	announcement	that	the	sword	would	never	again	be


sheathed.	But	it	was	a	ritual	that	belonged,	traditionally,	to	ageing	warriors
who	had	elected	to	set	forth	on	a	final	raid,	and	thus	avoid	dying	with	straw	on
their	backs.	Karsa	rose.
If	Bairoth	heard	his	approach,	he	gave	no	sign.	There	were	tears	running
down	the	huge	warrior ’s	broad,	blunt	face,	whilst	Delum,	lying	perfectly	still,
stared	up	at	him	with	wide,	unblinking	eyes.
‘He	does	not	comprehend,’	Karsa	growled,	‘but	I	do.	Bairoth	Gild,	you
dishonour	every	Uryd	warrior	who	has	worn	the	battle-mask.’
‘Do	I,	Karsa	Orlong?	Those	warriors	grown	old,	setting	out	for	a	final
fight—there	is	nothing	of	glory	in	their	deed,	nothing	of	glory	in	their	battlemask.	You	are	blind	if	you	think	otherwise.	The	paint	hides	nothing—the
desperation	remains	undisguised	in	their	eyes.	They	come	to	the	ends	of	their
lives,	and	have	found	that	those	lives	were	without	meaning.	It	is	that
knowledge	that	drives	them	from	the	village,	drives	them	out	to	seek	a	quick
death.’	Bairoth	finished	with	the	black	paint	and	now	moved	on	to	the	white,
spreading	it	with	three	fingers	across	Delum’s	wide	brow.	‘Look	into	our
friend’s	eyes,	Karsa	Orlong.	Look	closely.’
‘I	see	nothing,’	Karsa	muttered,	shaken	by	Bairoth’s	words.
‘Delum	sees	the	same,	Warleader.	He	stares	at…nothing.	Unlike	you,
however,	he	does	not	turn	away	from	it.	Instead,	he	sees	with	complete
comprehension.	Sees,	and	is	terrified.’
‘You	speak	nonsense,	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘I	do	not.	You	and	I,	we	are	Teblor.	We	are	warriors.	We	can	offer	Delum
no	comfort,	and	so	he	holds	on	to	that	dog,	the	beast	with	misery	in	its	eyes.
For	comfort	is	what	he	seeks,	now.	It	is,	indeed,	all	he	seeks.	Why	do	I	gift	him
the	battle-mask?	He	will	die	this	day,	Karsa	Orlong,	and	perhaps	that	will	be
comfort	enough	for	Delum	Thord.	I	pray	to	Urugal	that	it	be	so.’
Karsa	glanced	skyward.	‘The	wheel	is	nearly	done.	We	must	ready
ourselves.’
‘I	am	almost	finished,	Warleader.’
The	horses	stirred	as	Karsa	rubbed	blood-oil	into	his	sword’s	wooden
blade.	The	dogs	were	on	their	feet	now,	pacing	restlessly.	Bairoth	completed
his	painting	of	Delum’s	face	and	headed	off	to	attend	to	his	own	weapons.	The
three-legged	dog	struggled	in	Delum’s	arms,	but	he	simply	held	the	beast	all
the	tighter,	until	a	soft	growl	from	Gnaw	made	the	whimpering	warrior	release
it.
Karsa	strapped	the	boiled	leather	armour	onto	Havok’s	chest,	neck	and
legs.	When	he	was	done,	he	turned	to	see	Bairoth	already	astride	his	own
horse.	Delum’s	destrier	had	also	been	armoured,	but	it	stood	without	a	rein.


The	animals	were	trembling.
‘Warleader,	your	grandfather ’s	descriptions	have	been	unerring	thus	far.
Tell	me	of	the	farmstead’s	layout.’
‘A	log	house	the	size	of	two	Uryd	houses,	with	an	upper	floor	beneath	a
steep	roof.	Heavy	shutters	with	arrow-slits,	a	thick,	quickly	barred	door	at	the
front	and	at	the	back.	There	are	three	outbuildings;	the	one	nearest	the	house
and	sharing	one	wall	holds	the	livestock.	Another	is	a	forge,	whilst	the	last	one
is	of	sod	and	likely	was	the	first	home	before	the	log	house	was	built.	There	is
a	landing	on	the	lakeshore	as	well,	and	mooring	poles.	There	will	be	a	corral
for	the	small	lowlander	horses.’
Bairoth	was	frowning.	‘Warleader,	how	many	lowlander	generations	have
passed	since	Pahlk’s	raid?’
Karsa	swung	himself	onto	Havok’s	back.	He	shrugged	in	answer	to
Bairoth’s	question.	‘Enough.	Are	you	ready,	Bairoth	Gild?’
‘Lead	me,	Warleader.’
Karsa	guided	Havok	onto	the	trail	beside	the	river.	The	mouth	was	on	his
left.	To	the	right	rose	a	high,	raw	mass	of	rock,	treed	on	top,	leaning	out
towards	the	lakeshore.	A	wide	strand	of	round-stoned	beach	wound	between	the
pinnacle	and	the	lake.
The	wind	had	not	changed.	The	air	smelled	of	smoke	and	manure.	The
farm’s	dogs	were	silent.
Karsa	drew	his	sword,	angled	the	glistening	blade	near	Havok’s	nostrils.
The	destrier ’s	head	lifted.	Trot	to	canter,	onto	the	pebbled	beach,	lake	on	the
left,	rock	wall	sliding	past	to	the	right.	Behind	him,	he	heard	Bairoth’s	horse,
hoofs	crashing	down	into	the	stones,	and,	further	back,	the	dogs,	Delum	and
his	horse,	the	latter	lagging	to	stay	alongside	its	once-master.
Once	clear	of	the	pinnacle,	they	would	shift	hard	right,	and	in	moments	be
upon	the	unsuspecting	children	of	the	farm.
Canter	to	gallop.
Rock	wall	vanishing,	flat,	planted	fields.
Gallop	into	charge.
The	farm—smoke-blackened	ruins	barely	visible	through	tall	corn	plants
—and,	just	beyond	it,	sprawled	all	along	the	lake’s	shore	and	back,	all	the	way
to	the	foot	of	a	mountain,	a	town.
Tall,	stone	buildings,	stone	piers	and	wood-planked	docks	and	boats
crowding	the	lake’s	edge.	A	wall	of	stones	enclosing	most	of	the	structures
inland,	perhaps	the	height	of	a	full-grown	lowlander.	A	main	road,	a	gate
flanked	by	squat,	flat-topped	towers.	Woodsmoke	drifting	in	a	layer	above	the
slate	rooftops.


Figures	on	those	towers.
More	lowlanders—more	than	could	be	counted—all	scurrying	about	now,
as	a	bell	started	clanging.	Running	towards	the	gate	from	the	cornfields,
farming	implements	tossed	aside.
Bairoth	was	bellowing	something	behind	Karsa.	Not	a	warcry.	A	voice
pitched	with	alarm.	Karsa	ignored	it,	already	closing	in	on	the	first	of	the
farmers.	He	would	take	a	few	in	passing,	but	not	slacken	his	pace.	Leave	these
children	to	the	pack.	He	wanted	the	ones	in	the	town,	cowering	behind	the	nowclosing	gate,	behind	the	puny	walls.
Sword	flashed,	taking	off	the	back	of	a	farmer ’s	head.	Havok	ran	down
another,	trampling	the	shrieking	woman	under	his	hoofs.
The	gate	boomed	as	it	shut.
Karsa	angled	Havok	to	the	left	of	it,	eyes	on	the	wall	as	he	leaned	forward.
A	crossbow	quarrel	flitted	past,	striking	the	furrowed	ground	ten	paces	to	his
right.	Another	whistled	over	his	head.
No	lowlander	horse	could	clear	this	wall,	but	Havok	stood	at	twenty-six
hands—almost	twice	the	height	and	mass	of	the	lowlander	breeds—and,
muscles	bunching,	legs	gathering,	the	huge	destrier	leapt,	sailing	over	the	wall
effortlessly.
To	crash,	front	hoofs	first,	onto	the	sloped	roof	of	a	shack.	Slate	tiles
exploded,	wood	beams	snapped.	The	small	structure	collapsed	beneath	them,
chickens	scattering,	as	Havok	stumbled,	legs	clawing	for	purchase,	then	surged
forward	onto	the	muddy	cart	ruts	of	the	street	beyond.
Another	building,	this	one	stone-walled,	reared	up	before	them.	Havok
slewed	to	the	right.	A	figure	suddenly	appeared	at	the	building’s	entrance,	a
round	face,	eyes	wide.	Karsa’s	crossover	chop	split	the	lowlander ’s	skull
where	he	stood	just	beyond	the	threshold,	spinning	him	in	place	before	his	legs
folded	beneath	him.
Hoofs	pounding,	Havok	swept	Karsa	down	the	street	towards	the	gate.	He
could	hear	slaughter	in	the	fields	and	the	road	beyond—most	of	the	workers
had	been	trapped	outside	the	town,	it	seemed.	A	dozen	guards	had	succeeded	in
dropping	a	bar	and	had	begun	fanning	out	to	take	defensive	positions	when	the
warleader	burst	upon	them.
Iron	helm	crunched,	was	torn	from	the	dying	child’s	head	as	if	biting	at	the
blade	as	it	was	dragged	free.	A	back-handed	slash	separated	another	child’s
arm	and	shoulder	from	his	body.	Trampling	a	third	guard,	Havok	pivoted,
flinging	his	hindquarters	around	to	strike	a	fourth	child,	sending	him	flying	to
crash	up	against	the	gate,	sword	spinning	away.
A	longsword—its	blade	as	puny	as	a	long	knife’s	to	Karsa’s	eyes—struck


his	leather-armoured	thigh,	cutting	through	two,	perhaps	three	of	the	hardened
layers,	before	bouncing	away.	Karsa	drove	his	sword’s	pommel	into	the
lowlander ’s	face,	felt	bone	crack.	A	kick	sent	the	child	reeling.	Figures	were
scattering	in	panic	from	his	path.	Laughing,	Karsa	drove	Havok	forward.
He	cut	down	another	guard,	whilst	the	others	raced	down	the	street.
Something	punched	the	Teblor ’s	back,	then	a	brief,	stinging	blossom	of
pain.	Reaching	over,	Karsa	dragged	the	quarrel	free	and	flung	it	away.	He
dropped	down	from	the	horse,	eyes	on	the	barred	gate.	Metal	latches	had	been
locked	over	the	bar,	holding	the	thick	plank	in	place.
Taking	three	strides	back,	Karsa	lowered	one	shoulder,	then	charged	it.
The	iron	pins	holding	the	hinges	between	blocks	of	mortared	stone	burst
free	with	the	impact,	sending	the	entire	gate	toppling	outward.	The	tower	on
Karsa’s	right	groaned	and	sagged	suddenly.	Voices	cried	out	inside	it.	The
stone	wall	began	to	fold.
Cursing,	the	Teblor	scrambled	back	towards	the	street	as	the	entire	tower
collapsed	in	an	explosion	of	dust.
Through	the	swirling	white	cloud,	Bairoth	rode,	threads	of	blood	and	gore
whipping	from	his	bloodsword,	his	mount	leaping	to	clear	the	rubble.	The
dogs	followed,	and	with	them	Delum	and	his	horse.	Blood	smeared	Delum
Thord’s	mouth,	and	Karsa	realized,	with	a	faint	ripple	of	shock,	that	the
warrior	had	torn	out	a	farmer ’s	throat	with	his	own	teeth,	as	would	a	dog.
Hoofs	spraying	mud,	Bairoth	reined	in.
Karsa	swung	himself	back	onto	Havok,	twisted	the	destrier	round	to	face
down	the	street.
A	square	of	pikemen	approached	at	a	trot,	their	long-poled	weapons
wavering,	iron	blades	glinting	in	the	morning	light.	They	were	still	thirty	paces
distant.
A	quarrel	glanced	off	the	rump	of	Bairoth’s	horse,	coming	from	a	nearby
upper	floor	window.
From	somewhere	outside	the	wall	came	the	sound	of	galloping	horses.
Bairoth	grunted.	‘Our	withdrawal	shall	be	contested,	Warleader.’
‘Withdrawal?’	Karsa	laughed.	He	jutted	his	chin	towards	the	advancing
pikemen.	‘There	can	be	no	more	than	thirty,	and	children	with	long	spears	are
still	children,	Bairoth	Gild.	Come,	let	us	scatter	them!’
With	a	curse,	Bairoth	unlimbered	his	bear	skull	bolas.	‘Precede	me,	then,
Karsa	Orlong,	to	hide	my	preparation.’
Baring	his	teeth	in	fierce	pleasure,	Karsa	urged	Havok	forward.	The	dogs
fanned	out	to	either	side,	Delum	positioning	himself	on	the	warleader ’s	far
right.


Ahead,	the	pikes	slowly	lowered,	hovering	at	chest	height	as	the	square
halted	to	plant	their	weapons.
Upper	floor	windows	on	the	street	opened	then,	and	faces	appeared,
looking	down	to	witness	what	would	come.
‘Urugal!’	Karsa	bellowed	as	he	drove	Havok	into	a	charge.	‘Witness!’
Behind	him	he	heard	Bairoth	riding	just	as	hard,	and	within	that	clash	of
sounds	rose	the	whirring	flow	of	the	grey	bear	skull,	round	and	round,	and
round	again.
Ten	paces	from	the	readied	pikes,	and	Bairoth	roared.	Karsa	ducked	low,
pitching	Havok	to	the	left	even	as	he	slowed	the	beast’s	savage	charge.
Something	massive	and	hissing	whipped	past	him,	and	Karsa	twisted	to	see
the	huge	bolas	strike	the	square	of	soldiers.
Deadly	chaos.	Three	of	the	five	rows	on	the	ground.	Piercing	screams.
Then	the	dogs	were	among	them,	followed	by	Delum’s	horse.
Wheeling	his	destrier	once	again,	Karsa	closed	on	the	shattered	square,
arriving	in	time	to	be	alongside	Bairoth	as	the	two	Teblor	rode	into	the	press.
Batting	aside	the	occasional,	floundering	pike,	they	slaughtered	the	children
the	dogs	had	not	already	taken	down,	in	the	passage	of	twenty	heartbeats.
‘Warleader!’
Dragging	his	bloodsword	from	the	last	victim,	Karsa	turned	at	Bairoth’s
bellow.
Another	square	of	soldiers,	this	time	flanked	by	cross-bowmen.	Fifty,
perhaps	sixty	in	all,	at	the	street’s	far	end.
Scowling,	Karsa	glanced	back	towards	the	gate.	Twenty	mounted	children,
heavily	armoured	in	plate	and	chain,	were	slowly	emerging	through	the	dust;
more	on	foot,	some	armed	with	short	bows,	others	with	double-bladed	axes,
swords	or	javelins.
‘Lead	me,	Warleader!’
Karsa	glared	at	Bairoth.	‘And	so	I	shall,	Bairoth	Gild!’	He	swung	Havok
about.	‘This	side	passage,	down	to	the	shoreline—we	shall	ride	around	our
pursuers.	Tell	me,	Bairoth	Gild,	have	we	slain	enough	children	for	you?’
‘Aye,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘Then	follow!’
The	side	passage	was	a	street	almost	as	wide	as	the	main	one,	and	it	led
straight	down	to	the	lake.	Dwellings,	trader	stores	and	warehouses	lined	it.
Shadowy	figures	were	visible	in	windows,	in	doorways	and	at	alley	mouths	as
the	Teblor	raiders	thundered	past.	The	street	ended	twenty	paces	before	the
shoreline.	The	intervening	space,	through	which	a	wide,	wood-planked
loadway	ran	down	to	the	docks	and	piers,	was	filled	with	heaps	of	detritus,


dominant	among	them	a	huge	pile	of	bleached	bones,	from	which	poles	rose,
skulls	affixed	to	their	tops.
Teblor	skulls.
Amidst	this	stretch	of	rubbish,	squalid	huts	and	tents	filled	every	clear
patch,	and	scores	of	children	had	emerged	from	them,	bristling	with	weapons,
their	rough	clothing	bedecked	with	Teblor	charms	and	scalps,	their	hard	eyes
watching	the	warriors	approach	as	they	began	readying	long-handled	axes,
two-handed	swords,	thick-shafted	halberds,	whilst	yet	others	strung	robust,
recurved	bows	and	nocked	over-long,	barbed	arrows—which	they	began	to
draw,	taking	swift	aim.
Bairoth’s	roar	was	half	horror,	half	rage	as	he	sent	his	destrier	charging
towards	these	silent,	deadly	children.
Arrows	flashed.
Bairoth’s	horse	screamed,	stumbled,	then	crashed	to	the	ground.	Bairoth
tumbled,	his	sword	spinning	away	through	the	air	as	he	struck,	then	broke
through,	a	sapling-walled	hut.
More	arrows	flew.
Karsa	shifted	Havok	sharply,	watched	an	arrow	hiss	past	his	thigh,	then	he
was	among	the	first	of	the	lowlanders.	Bloodsword	clashed	against	an	axe’s
bronze-sheathed	shaft,	the	impact	tearing	the	weapon	from	the	man’s	hands.
Karsa’s	left	hand	shot	out	to	intercept	another	axe	as	it	swung	towards	Havok’s
head.	He	plucked	it	from	the	man,	sent	it	flying,	then	lunged	forward	the	same
hand	to	take	the	lowlander	by	the	neck,	lifting	him	clear	as	they	continued	on.	A
single,	bone-crunching	squeeze	left	the	head	lolling,	the	body	twitching	and
spilling	piss.	Karsa	flung	the	corpse	away.
Havok’s	onward	plunge	was	brought	to	a	sudden	halt.	The	destrier
shrieked,	slewed	to	one	side,	blood	gushing	from	its	mouth	and	nostrils,
dragging	with	it	a	heavy	pike,	its	iron	head	buried	deep	in	the	horse’s	chest.
The	beast	stumbled,	then,	with	a	drunken	weave,	it	began	toppling.
Karsa,	screaming	his	fury,	launched	himself	from	the	dying	destrier ’s
back.	A	sword	point	rose	to	meet	him,	but	Karsa	batted	it	aside.	He	landed	atop
at	least	three	tumbling	bodies,	hearing	bones	snap	beneath	him	as	he	rolled	his
way	clear.
Then	he	was	on	his	feet,	bloodsword	slashing	across	the	face	of	a
lowlander,	ripping	black-bearded	jaw	from	skull.	An	edged	weapon	scored
deep	across	his	back.	Spinning,	Karsa	swung	his	blade	under	the	attacker ’s
outstretched	arms,	chopped	deep	between	ribs,	jamming	at	the	breastbone.
He	tugged	fiercely,	tearing	his	sword	free,	the	dying	lowlander ’s	body
cartwheeling	past	him.


Heavy	weapons,	many	of	them	bearing	knotted	Teblor	fetishes,	surrounded
him,	each	striving	to	drink	Uryd	blood.	They	fouled	each	other	as	often	as	not,
yet	Karsa	was	hard-pressed	blocking	the	others	as	he	fought	his	way	clear.	He
killed	two	of	his	attackers	in	the	process.
Now	he	heard	another	fight,	nearby,	from	where	Bairoth	had	crashed	into
the	hut,	and,	here	and	there,	the	snap	and	snarl	of	the	dogs.
His	attackers	had	been	silent	until	a	moment	ago.	Now,	all	were	screaming
in	their	gibbering	tongue,	their	faces	filled	with	alarm,	as	Karsa	wheeled	once
more	and,	seeing	more	than	a	dozen	before	him,	attacked.	They	scattered,
revealing	a	half-crescent	line	of	lowlanders	with	bows	and	crossbows.
Strings	thrummed.
Searing	pain	along	Karsa’s	neck,	twin	punches	to	his	chest,	another	against
his	right	thigh.	Ignoring	them	all,	the	warleader	charged	the	half-crescent.
More	shouts,	sudden	pursuit	from	the	ones	who	had	scattered,	but	it	was
too	late	for	that.	Karsa’s	sword	was	a	blur	as	he	cut	into	the	archers.	Figures
turning	to	run.	Dying,	spinning	away	in	floods	of	blood.	Skulls	shattering.
Karsa	carved	his	way	down	the	line,	and	left	a	trail	of	eight	figures,	some
writhing	and	others	still,	behind	him,	by	the	time	the	first	set	of	attackers
reached	him.	He	pivoted	to	meet	them,	laughing	at	the	alarm	in	their	tiny,
wizened,	dirt-smeared	faces,	then	he	lunged	into	their	midst	once	more.
They	broke.	Flinging	weapons	away,	stumbling	and	scrambling	in	their
panic.	Karsa	killed	one	after	another,	until	there	were	no	more	within	reach	of
his	bloodsword.	He	straightened,	then.
Where	Bairoth	had	been	fighting,	seven	lowlander	bodies	lay	in	a	rough
circle,	but	of	the	Teblor	warrior	there	was	no	sign.	The	screams	of	a	dog
continued	from	further	up	the	street,	and	Karsa	ran	towards	the	sound.
He	passed	the	quarrel-studded	corpses	of	the	rest	of	the	pack,	though	he	did
not	see	Gnaw	among	them.	They	had	killed	a	number	of	lowlanders	before
they	had	finally	fallen.	Looking	up,	he	saw,	thirty	paces	down	the	street,	Delum
Thord,	near	him	his	fallen	horse,	and,	another	fifteen	paces	beyond,	a	knot	of
villagers.
Delum	was	shrieking.	He	had	taken	a	dozen	or	more	quarrels	and	arrows,
and	a	javelin	had	been	thrust	right	through	his	torso,	just	above	the	left	hip.	He
had	left	a	winding	trail	of	blood	behind	him,	yet	still	he	crawled	forward—to
where	the	villagers	surrounded	the	three-legged	dog,	beating	it	to	death	with
walking	sticks,	hoes	and	shovels.
Wailing,	Delum	dragged	himself	on,	the	javelin	scraping	alongside	him,
blood	streaming	down	the	shaft.
Even	as	Karsa	began	to	run	forward,	a	figure	raced	out	from	an	alley


mouth,	coming	up	slightly	behind	Delum,	a	long-handled	shovel	in	its	hands.
Lifting	high.
Karsa	screamed	a	warning.
Delum	did	not	so	much	as	turn,	his	eyes	fixed	on	the	now-dead	threelegged	dog,	as	the	shovel	struck	the	back	of	his	head.
There	was	a	loud	crunch.	The	shovel	pulled	away,	revealing	a	flat	patch	of
shattered	bone	and	twisted	hair.
Delum	toppled	forward,	and	did	not	move.
His	slayer	spun	at	Karsa’s	charge.	An	old	man,	his	toothless	mouth
opening	wide	in	sudden	terror.
Karsa’s	downward	chop	cut	the	man	in	half	down	to	the	hips.
Tearing	his	bloodsword	free,	the	warleader	plunged	on,	towards	the	dozen
or	so	villagers	still	gathered	around	the	pulped	corpse	of	the	three-legged	dog.
They	saw	him	and	scattered.
Ten	paces	beyond	lay	Gnaw,	leaving	his	own	blood-trail	as,	back	legs
dragging,	he	continued	towards	the	body	of	his	mate.	He	raised	his	head	upon
seeing	Karsa.	Pleading	eyes	fixed	on	the	warleader ’s.
Bellowing,	Karsa	ran	down	two	of	the	villagers	and	left	their	twitching
corpses	sprawled	in	the	muddy	street.	He	saw	another,	armed	with	a	rust-pitted
mattock,	dart	between	two	houses.	The	Teblor	hesitated,	then	with	a	curse	he
swung	about	and	moments	later	was	crouched	beside	Gnaw.
A	shattered	hip.
Karsa	glanced	up	the	street	to	see	the	pike-wielding	soldiers	closing	at	a
jog.	Three	mounted	men	rode	in	their	wake,	shouting	out	commands.	A	quick
look	towards	the	lakeside	revealed	more	horsemen	gathering,	heads	turned	in
his	direction.
The	warleader	lifted	Gnaw	from	the	ground,	tucking	the	beast	under	his
left	arm.
Then	he	set	off	in	pursuit	of	the	mattock-wielding	villager.
Rotting	vegetables	crowded	the	narrow	aisle	between	the	two	houses
which,	at	the	far	end,	opened	out	into	a	pair	of	corralled	runs.	As	he	emerged
into	the	track	between	the	two	fence	lines,	he	saw	the	man,	still	running,	twenty
paces	ahead.	Beyond	the	corrals	was	a	shallow	ditch,	carrying	sewage	down	to
the	lake.	The	child	had	crossed	it	and	was	plunging	into	a	tangle	of	young
alders—there	were	more	buildings	beyond	it,	either	barns	or	warehouses.
Karsa	raced	after	him,	leaping	across	the	ditch,	the	hunting	dog	still	under
his	arm.	The	jostling	was	giving	it	great	pain,	the	Teblor	knew.	He
contemplated	slitting	its	throat.
The	child	entered	a	barn,	still	carrying	his	mattock.


Following,	Karsa	ducked	low	as	he	plunged	through	the	side	doorway.
Sudden	gloom.	There	were	no	beasts	in	the	stalls;	the	straw,	still	piled	high,
looked	old	and	damp.	A	large	fishing	boat	commanded	the	wide	centre	aisle,
flipped	over	and	resting	on	wooden	horses.	Double	sliding	doors	to	the	left,
one	of	them	slightly	pushed	back,	the	ropes	from	the	handle	gently	swinging
back	and	forth.
Karsa	found	the	last,	darkest	stall,	where	he	set	Gnaw	down	on	the	straw.	‘I
shall	return	to	you,	my	friend,’	he	whispered.	‘Failing	that,	find	a	way	to	heal,
then	journey	home.	Home,	among	the	Uryd.’	The	Teblor	cut	a	thong	of	leather
from	his	armour	strappings.	He	tore	from	his	belt-bag	a	handful	of	bronze
sigils	bearing	the	tribal	signs,	then	strung	the	thong	through	them.	None	hung
loose,	and	so	would	make	no	sound.	He	tied	the	makeshift	collar	round	Gnaw’s
thick,	muscled	neck.	Then	he	laid	one	hand	lightly	upon	the	dog’s	shattered	hip
and	closed	his	eyes.	‘I	gift	this	beast	the	soul	of	the	Teblor,	the	heart	of	the
Uryd.	Urugal,	hear	me.	Heal	this	great	fighter.	Then	send	him	home.	For	now,
bold	Urugal,	hide	him.’
He	withdrew	his	hand	and	opened	his	eyes.	The	beast	looked	up	at	him
calmly.	‘Make	fierce	your	long	life,	Gnaw.	We	will	meet	again,	this	I	vow	upon
the	blood	of	all	the	children	I	have	slain	this	day.’
Shifting	grip	on	his	bloodsword,	Karsa	turned	away	and	departed	the	stall
without	another	backward	glance.
He	padded	towards	the	sliding	door,	looked	out.
A	warehouse	stood	opposite,	high-ceilinged	with	a	loading	loft	beneath	its
slate-tiled	roof.	From	within	the	building	came	the	sounds	of	bolts	and	bars
dropping	into	place.	Smiling,	Karsa	darted	across	to	where	the	loading	chains
dangled	from	pulleys,	his	eyes	on	the	doorless	loft	platform	high	overhead.
As	he	prepared	to	sling	his	sword	back	over	a	shoulder,	he	saw,	with	a
start,	that	he	was	festooned	with	arrows	and	quarrels,	and	realized,	for	the	first
time,	that	much	of	the	blood	sheathing	his	body	was	his	own.	Scowling,	he
pulled	the	darts	out.	There	was	more	blood,	particularly	from	his	right	thigh
and	the	two	wounds	in	his	chest.	A	long	arrow	in	his	back	had	buried	its	barbed
head	deep	into	muscle.	He	attempted	to	drag	the	arrow	free,	but	the	pain	that
resulted	came	close	to	making	him	faint.	He	settled	for	snapping	the	shaft	just
behind	the	iron	head,	and	this	effort	alone	left	him	chilled	and	sweating.
Distant	shouts	alerted	him	to	a	slowly	closing	cordon	of	soldiers	and
townsfolk,	all	hunting	him.	Karsa	closed	his	hands	around	the	chains,	then
began	climbing.	Every	time	he	lifted	his	left	arm,	his	back	flashed	with	agony.
But	it	had	been	the	flat	of	a	mattock’s	blade	that	had	felled	Gnaw,	a	two-handed
blow	from	behind—the	attack	of	a	coward.	And	nothing	else	mattered.


He	swung	himself	onto	the	platform’s	dusty	floorboards,	padded	silently
away	from	the	opening	as	he	drew	his	sword	once	more.
He	could	hear	breathing,	harsh	and	ragged,	below.	Low	whimpering
between	gasps,	a	voice	praying	to	whatever	gods	the	child	worshipped.
Karsa	made	his	way	towards	the	gaping	hole	in	the	centre	of	the	platform,
careful	to	keep	his	moccasins	from	dragging,	lest	sawdust	drift	down	from
between	the	floorboards.	He	came	to	the	edge	and	looked	down.
The	fool	was	directly	beneath	him,	crouched	down,	trembling,	the	mattock
held	ready	as	he	faced	the	barred	doors.	He	had	soiled	himself	in	his	terror.
Karsa	carefully	reversed	grip	on	his	sword,	held	it	out	point	downward,
then	dropped	from	the	ledge.
The	sword’s	tip	entered	atop	the	man’s	pate,	the	blade	driving	down
through	bone	and	brain.	As	Karsa’s	full	weight	impacted	the	warehouse	floor,
there	was	a	massive,	splintering	sound,	and	Teblor	and	victim	both	plunged
through,	down	into	a	cellar.	Shattered	floorboards	crashed	down	around	them.
The	cellar	was	deep,	almost	Karsa’s	height,	stinking	of	salted	fish	yet	empty.
Stunned	by	the	fall,	Karsa	feebly	groped	for	his	sword,	but	he	could	not
find	it.	He	managed	to	raise	his	head	slightly,	and	saw	that	something	was
sticking	out	of	his	chest,	a	red	shard	of	splintered	wood.	He	was,	he	bemusedly
realized,	impaled.	His	hand	continued	searching	for	his	sword,	though	he
could	not	otherwise	move,	but	found	only	wood	and	fish-scales,	the	latter
greasy	with	salt	and	sticking	to	his	fingertips.
He	heard	the	sound	of	boots	from	above.	Blinking,	Karsa	stared	up	as	a
ring	of	helmed	faces	slowly	swam	into	view.	Then	another	child’s	face
appeared,	unhelmed,	his	brow	marked	in	a	tribal	tattoo,	the	expression	beneath
it	strangely	sympathetic.	There	was	a	lot	of	conversation,	hot	with	anger,	then
the	tattooed	child	gestured	and	everyone	fell	silent.	In	the	Sunyd	dialect	of	the
Teblor,	the	man	said,	‘Should	you	die	down	there,	warrior,	at	least	you’ll	keep
for	a	time.’
Karsa	sought	to	rise	once	more,	but	the	shaft	of	wood	held	him	fast.	He
bared	his	teeth	in	a	grimace.
‘What	is	your	name,	Teblor?’	the	child	asked.
‘I	am	Karsa	Orlong,	grandson	of	Pahlk—’
‘Pahlk?	The	Uryd	who	visited	centuries	ago?’
‘To	slay	scores	of	children—’
The	man’s	nod	was	serious	as	he	interjected,	‘Children,	yes,	it	makes	sense
for	your	kind	to	call	us	that.	But	Pahlk	killed	no-one,	not	at	first.	He	came
down	from	the	pass,	half	starved	and	fevered.	The	first	farmers	who’d	settled
here	took	him	in,	nourished	him	back	to	health.	It	was	only	then	that	he


murdered	them	all	and	fled.	Well,	not	all.	A	girl	escaped,	made	her	way	back
along	the	lake’s	south	shore	to	Orbs,	and	told	the	detachment	there—well,	told
them	everything	they	needed	to	know	about	the	Teblor.	Since	that	time,	of
course,	the	Sunyd	slaves	have	told	us	even	more.	You	are	Uryd.	We’ve	not
reached	your	tribe—you’ve	had	no	bounty	hunters	as	yet,	but	you	will.	Within
a	century,	I’d	hazard,	there	will	be	no	more	Teblor	in	the	fastnesses	of
Laederon	Plateau.	The	only	Teblor	will	be	the	ones	branded	and	in	chains.
Plying	the	nets	on	the	fishing	boats,	as	the	Sunyd	now	do.	Tell	me,	Karsa,	do
you	recognize	me?’
‘You	are	the	one	who	escaped	us	above	the	pass.	Who	came	too	late	to
warn	his	fellow	children.	Who,	I	know	now,	is	full	of	lies.	Your	tiny	voice
insults	the	Teblor	tongue.	It	hurts	my	ears.’
The	man	smiled.	‘Too	bad.	You	should	reconsider,	in	any	case,	warrior.
For	I	am	all	that	stands	between	your	living	or	dying.	Assuming	you	don’t	die
of	your	wounds	first.	Of	course,	you	Teblor	are	uncommonly	tough,	as	my
companions	have	just	been	reminded,	to	their	dismay.	I	see	no	blood	frothing
your	lips,	which	is	a	good	sign,	and	rather	astonishing,	since	you’ve	four
lungs,	while	we	have	two.’
Another	figure	had	appeared	and	now	spoke	to	the	tattooed	man	in
stentorian	tones,	to	which	he	simply	shrugged.	‘Karsa	Orlong	of	the	Uryd,’	he
called	down,	‘soldiers	are	about	to	descend,	to	tie	ropes	to	your	limbs	so	you
can	be	lifted	out.	It	seems	you’re	lying	on	what’s	left	of	the	town’s	factor,
which	has	somewhat	abated	the	anger	up	here,	since	he	was	not	a	well-liked
man.	I	would	suggest,	if	you	wish	to	live,	that	you	not	resist	the,	uh,
warleader ’s	nervous	volunteers.’
Karsa	watched	as	four	soldiers	were	slowly	lowered	down	on	ropes.	He
made	no	effort	to	resist	as	they	roughly	bound	his	wrists,	ankles	and	upper
arms,	for	the	truth	was,	he	was	incapable	of	doing	so.
The	soldiers	were	quickly	dragged	back	up,	then	the	ropes	were	drawn
taut,	and	Karsa	was	steadily	lifted.	He	watched	the	shaft	of	splintered	wood
slowly	withdrawing	from	his	chest.	It	had	entered	high,	just	above	his	right
shoulder	blade,	through	muscles,	reappearing	just	to	the	right	of	his	clavicle
on	that	side.	As	he	was	pulled	free,	pain	overwhelmed	him.
A	hand	was	then	slapping	him	awake.	Karsa	opened	his	eyes.	He	was	lying
on	the	warehouse	floor,	faces	crowding	him	on	all	sides.	Everyone	seemed	to
be	speaking	to	him	at	once	in	their	thin,	weedy	tongue,	and	though	he	could	not
understand	the	words	raw	hatred	rode	the	tone,	and	Karsa	knew	he	was	being
cursed,	in	the	name	of	scores	of	lowlander	gods,	spirits	and	mouldering
ancestors.	The	thought	pleased	him,	and	he	smiled.


The	soldiers	flinched	back	as	one.
The	tattooed	lowlander,	whose	hand	had	awakened	him,	was	crouched
down	at	Karsa’s	side.	‘Hood’s	breath,’	he	muttered.	‘Are	all	Uryd	like	you?	Or
are	you	the	one	the	priests	spoke	of?	The	one	who	stalked	their	dreams	like
Hood’s	own	Knight?	Ah	well,	it	doesn’t	matter,	I	suppose,	for	it	seems	their
fears	were	unfounded.	Look	at	you.	Half	dead,	with	a	whole	town	eager	to	see
you	and	your	companion	flayed	alive—there’s	not	a	family	to	be	found	not	in
mourning,	thanks	to	you.	Grasp	the	world	by	the	throat?	Not	likely;	you’ll	need
Oponn’s	luck	to	live	out	the	hour.’
The	broken	arrow	shaft	had	been	driven	deeper	into	Karsa’s	back	with	the
fall,	gouging	into	the	bone	of	his	shoulder	blade.	Blood	was	spreading	out	on
the	floorboards	beneath	him.
There	was	a	commotion	as	a	new	lowlander	arrived,	this	one	tall	for	his
kind,	thin	with	a	severe,	weather-lined	face.	He	was	dressed	in	shimmering
clothes,	deep	blue	and	trimmed	with	gold	thread	sewn	into	intricate	patterns.
The	guard	spoke	to	him	at	length,	though	the	man	himself	said	nothing,	nor	did
his	expression	change.	When	the	guard	was	finished,	the	newcomer	nodded,
then	gestured	with	one	hand	and	turned	away.
The	guard	looked	down	at	Karsa	once	more.	‘That	was	Master	Silgar,	the
man	I	work	for,	most	of	the	time.	He	believes	you	will	survive	your	wounds,
Karsa	Orlong,	and	so	has	prepared	for	you	a…a	lesson,	of	sorts.’	The	man
straightened	and	said	something	to	the	soldiers.	There	followed	a	brief
argument,	which	concluded	with	an	indifferent	shrug	from	one	of	the	soldiers.
Karsa’s	limbs	were	lifted	once	more,	two	lowlanders	to	each,	the	men
straining	to	hold	him	as	they	carried	him	to	the	warehouse	doors.
The	blood	dripping	down	from	his	wounds	was	slowing,	pain	retreating
behind	a	dull	lassitude	in	the	Teblor ’s	mind.	He	stared	up	at	blue	sky	as	the
soldiers	carried	him	to	the	centre	of	the	street,	the	sounds	of	a	crowd	on	all
sides.	They	set	him	down	propped	up	against	a	cart	wheel,	and	Karsa	saw
before	him	Bairoth	Gild.
He	had	been	tied	to	a	much	larger	spoked	wheel,	which	itself	rested	against
support	poles.	The	huge	warrior	was	a	mass	of	wounds.	A	spear	had	been
driven	into	his	mouth,	exiting	just	below	his	left	ear,	leaving	the	lower	jaw
shattered,	bone	gleaming	red	amidst	torn	flesh.	The	stubs	of	deep-driven
quarrels	crowded	his	torso.
But	his	eyes	were	sharp	as	they	met	Karsa’s	own.
Villagers	filled	the	street,	held	back	by	a	cordon	of	soldiers.	Angry	shouts
and	curses	filled	the	air,	punctuated	every	now	and	then	by	wails	of	grief.
The	guard	positioned	himself	between	Karsa	and	Bairoth,	his	expression


mockingly	thoughtful.	Then	he	turned	to	Karsa.	‘Your	comrade	here	will	tell
us	nothing	of	the	Uryd.	We	would	know	the	number	of	warriors,	the	number
and	location	of	villages.	We	would	know	more	of	the	Phalyd	as	well,	who	are
said	to	be	your	match	in	ferocity.	But	he	says	nothing.’
Karsa	bared	his	teeth.	‘I,	Karsa	Orlong,	invite	you	to	send	a	thousand	of
your	warriors	to	wage	war	among	the	Uryd.	None	shall	return,	but	the	trophies
will	remain	with	us.	Send	two	thousand.	It	matters	not.’
The	guard	smiled.	‘You	will	answer	our	questions,	then,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘I	will,	for	such	words	will	avail	you	naught—’
‘Excellent.’	The	guard	gestured	with	one	hand.	A	lowlander	stepped	up	to
Bairoth	Gild,	drawing	his	sword.
Bairoth	sneered	at	Karsa.	He	snarled,	the	sound	a	mangled	roar	that	Karsa
never	the	less	understood,	‘Lead	me,	Warleader!’
The	sword	slashed.	Through	Bairoth	Gild’s	neck.	Blood	sprayed,	the	huge
warrior ’s	head	flopping	back,	then	rolling	from	a	shoulder	to	land	with	a
heavy	thump	on	the	ground.
A	savage,	gleeful	roar	erupted	from	the	villagers.
The	guard	approached	Karsa.	‘Delighted	to	hear	that	you	will	co-operate.
Doing	so	buys	you	your	life.	Master	Silgar	will	add	you	to	his	herd	of	slaves
once	you’ve	told	us	all	you	know.	I	don’t	think	you	will	be	joining	the	Sunyd
out	on	the	lake,	however.	No	hauling	of	nets	for	you,	Karsa	Orlong,	I’m
afraid.’	He	turned	as	a	heavily	armoured	soldier	appeared.	‘Ah,	here	is	the
Malazan	captain.	Ill	luck,	Karsa	Orlong,	that	you	should	have	timed	your	attack
to	coincide	with	the	arrival	of	a	Malazan	company	on	its	way	to	Bettrys.	Now
then,	assuming	the	captain	has	no	objections,	shall	we	begin	the	questioning?’
	
The	twin	trenches	of	the	slave-pits	lay	beneath	the	floor	of	a	large	warehouse
near	the	lake,	accessed	through	a	trapdoor	and	a	mould-smeared	staircase.	One
side	held,	for	the	moment,	only	a	half-dozen	lowlanders	chained	to	the	tree
trunk	running	the	length	of	the	trench,	but	more	shackles	awaited	the	return	of
the	Sunyd	net-haulers.	The	other	trench	was	home	to	the	sick	and	dying.
Emaciated	lowlander	shapes	huddled	in	their	own	filth,	some	moaning,	others
silent	and	motionless.
After	he	had	done	describing	the	Uryd	and	their	lands,	Karsa	was	dragged
to	the	warehouse	and	chained	in	the	second	trench.	Its	sides	were	sloped,
packed	with	damp	clay.	The	centre	log	ran	along	the	narrow,	flat	bottom,	halfsubmerged	in	blood-streaked	sewage.	Karsa	was	taken	to	the	far	end,	out	of	the
reach	of	any	of	the	other	slaves,	and	shackles	were	fixed	to	both	wrists	and


both	ankles—whereas,	he	saw,	among	everyone	else	a	single	shackle	sufficed.
They	left	him	alone	then.
Flies	swarmed	him,	alighting	on	his	chilled	skin.	He	lay	on	his	side	against
one	of	the	sloping	sides.	The	wound	within	which	the	arrow-head	remained
was	threatening	to	close,	and	this	he	could	not	allow.	He	shut	his	eyes	and
began	to	concentrate	until	he	could	feel	each	muscle,	cut	and	torn	and	seeping,
holding	fast	around	the	iron	point.	Then	he	began	working	them,	the	slightest
of	contractions	to	test	the	position	of	the	arrow-head—fighting	the	pulses	of
pain	that	radiated	out	with	each	flex.	After	a	few	moments,	he	ceased,	let	his
body	relax,	taking	deep	breaths	until	he	was	recovered	from	his	efforts.	The
flanged	iron	blade	lay	almost	flat	against	his	shoulder	blade.	Its	tip	had	scoured
a	groove	along	the	bone.	There	were	barbs	as	well,	bent	and	twisted.
To	leave	such	an	object	within	his	flesh	would	make	his	left	arm	useless.
He	needed	to	drive	it	out.
He	began	to	concentrate	once	more.	Ravaged	muscles	and	tissue,	a	path
inward	of	chopped	and	sliced	flesh.
A	layer	of	sweat	sheathed	him	as	he	continued	to	focus	his	mind,
preparing,	his	breaths	slowing,	steadying.
He	contracted	his	muscles.	A	ragged	scream	forced	its	way	out.	Another
welter	of	blood,	amidst	relentless	pain.	The	muscles	spasmed	in	a	rippling
wave.	Something	struck	the	clay	slope	and	slid	down	into	the	sewage.
Gasping,	trembling,	Karsa	lay	motionless	for	a	long	while.	The	blood
streaming	down	from	his	back	slowed,	then	ceased.
‘Lead	me,	Warleader!’
Bairoth	Gild	had	made	those	words	a	curse,	in	a	manner	and	from	a	place
of	thought	that	Karsa	did	not	understand.	And	then,	Bairoth	Gild	had	died
senselessly.	Nothing	the	lowlanders	could	do	threatened	the	Uryd,	for	the	Uryd
were	not	as	the	Sunyd.	Bairoth	had	surrendered	his	chance	for	vengeance,	a
gesture	so	baffling	to	Karsa	that	he	was	left	stunned.
A	brutal,	knowing	glare	in	Bairoth’s	eyes,	fixed	solely	on	Karsa,	even	as
the	sword	flashed	towards	his	neck.	He	would	tell	the	lowlanders	nothing,	yet	it
was	a	defiance	without	meaning—but	no,	there	was	meaning…for	Bairoth
chose	to	abandon	me.
A	sudden	shiver	took	him.	Urugal,	have	my	brothers	betrayed	me?	Delum
Thord’s	flight,	Bairoth	Gild’s	death—am	I	to	know	abandonment	again	and
again?	What	of	the	Uryd	awaiting	my	return?	Will	they	not	follow	when	I
proclaim	war	against	the	lowlanders?
Perhaps	not	at	first.	No,	he	realized,	there	would	be	arguments,	and
opinions,	and,	seated	around	the	camp	hearths,	the	elders	would	poke


smouldering	sticks	into	the	fire	and	shake	their	heads.
Until	word	came	that	the	lowlander	armies	were	coming.
And	then	they	will	have	no	choice.	Would	we	flee	into	the	laps	of	the
Phalyd?	No.	There	will	be	no	choice	but	to	fight,	and	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	will	be
looked	upon	then,	to	lead	the	Uryd.
The	thought	calmed	him.
He	slowly	rolled	over,	blinking	in	the	gloom,	flies	scattering	all	around
his	face.
It	took	a	few	moments	of	groping	in	the	sludge	to	find	the	arrow-head	and
its	stubby,	splintered	fragment	of	shaft.	He	then	crouched	down	beside	the
centre	log	to	examine	the	fittings	holding	the	chains.
There	were	two	sets	of	chains,	one	for	his	arms	and	one	for	his	legs,	each
fixed	to	a	long	iron	rod	that	had	been	driven	through	the	trunk,	the	opposite
end	flattened	out.	The	links	were	large	and	solid,	forged	with	Teblor	strength
in	mind.	But	the	wood	on	the	underside	had	begun	to	rot.
Using	the	arrow-head,	he	began	gouging	and	digging	into	the	sewagesoftened	wood	around	the	flange.
Bairoth	had	betrayed	him,	betrayed	the	Uryd.	There	had	been	nothing	of
courage	in	his	last	act	of	defiance.	Indeed,	the	very	opposite.	They	had
discovered	enemies	to	the	Teblor.	Hunters,	who	collected	Teblor	trophies.
These	were	truths	that	the	warriors	of	all	the	tribes	needed	to	hear,	and
delivering	those	truths	was	now	Karsa’s	sole	task.
He	was	not	Sunyd,	as	the	lowlanders	were	about	to	discover.
The	rot	had	been	drawn	up	the	hole.	Karsa	dug	out	the	soaked,	pulpy	mass
as	far	as	the	arrow-head	could	reach.	He	then	moved	on	to	the	second	fitting.
The	iron	bar	holding	his	leg	chains	would	be	tested	first.
There	was	no	way	to	tell	if	it	was	day	or	night	outside.	Heavy	boots
occasionally	crossed	the	plank	floor	above	him,	too	random	to	indicate	a	set
passage	of	time.	Karsa	worked	unceasingly,	listening	to	the	coughs	and	moans
of	the	lowlanders	chained	further	down	the	trunk.	He	could	not	imagine	what
those	sad	children	had	done,	to	warrant	such	punishment	from	their	kin.
Banishment	was	the	harshest	sentence	the	Teblor	inflicted	on	those	among	the
tribe	whose	actions	had,	with	deliberate	intent,	endangered	the	survival	of	the
village,	actions	that	ranged	from	carelessness	to	kin-murder.	Banishment	led,
usually,	to	death,	but	that	came	of	starvation	of	the	spirit	within	the	one
punished.	Torture	was	not	a	Teblor	way,	nor	was	prolonged	imprisonment.
Of	course,	he	reconsidered,	it	may	be	that	these	lowlanders	were	sick
because	their	spirits	were	dying.	Among	the	legends,	there	were	fragments
whispering	that	the	Teblor	had	once	owned	slaves—the	word,	the	concept,	was


known	to	him.	Possession	of	another ’s	life,	to	do	with	as	one	wished.	A	slave’s
spirit	could	do	naught	but	starve.
Karsa	had	no	intention	of	starving.	Urugal’s	shadow	protected	his	spirit.
He	tucked	the	arrow-head	into	his	belt.	Setting	his	back	against	the	slope,
he	planted	his	feet	against	the	log,	one	to	either	side	of	the	fitting,	then	slowly
extended	his	legs.	The	chain	tautened.	On	the	underside	of	the	trunk,	the	flange
was	pulled	into	the	wood	with	a	steady	splintering,	grinding	sound.
The	shackles	dug	into	his	hide-wrapped	ankles.
He	began	to	push	harder.	There	was	a	solid	crunch,	then	the	flange	would
go	no	further.	Karsa	slowly	relaxed.	A	kick	sent	the	bar	thumping	free	on	the
other	end.	He	rested	for	a	few	moments,	then	resumed	the	process	once	more.
After	a	dozen	tries	he	had	managed	to	pull	the	bar	up	the	span	of	three
fingers	from	where	it	had	been	at	the	beginning.	The	flange’s	edges	were	bent
now,	battered	by	their	assault	on	the	wood.	His	leggings	had	been	cut	through
and	blood	gleamed	on	the	shackles.
He	leaned	his	head	back	on	the	damp	clay	of	the	slope,	his	legs	trembling.
More	boots	thumped	overhead,	then	the	trapdoor	was	lifted.	The	glow	of
lantern	light	descended	the	steps,	and	within	it	Karsa	saw	the	nameless	guard.
‘Uryd,’	he	called	out.	‘Do	you	still	breathe?’
‘Come	closer,’	Karsa	challenged	in	a	low	voice,	‘and	I	will	show	you	the
extent	of	my	recovery.’
The	lowlander	laughed.	‘Master	Silgar	saw	true,	it	seems.	It	will	take	some
effort	to	break	your	spirit,	I	suspect.’	The	guard	remained	standing	halfway
down	the	steps.	‘Your	Sunyd	kin	will	be	returning	in	a	day	or	two.’
‘I	have	no	kin	who	accept	the	life	of	slavery.’
‘That’s	odd,	since	you	clearly	have,	else	you	would	have	contrived	to	kill
yourself	by	now.’
‘You	think	I	am	a	slave	because	I	am	in	chains?	Come	closer,	then,	child.’
‘“Child,”	yes.	Your	strange	affectation	persists,	even	while	we	children
have	you	at	our	mercy.	Well,	never	mind.	The	chains	are	but	the	beginning,
Karsa	Orlong.	You	will	indeed	be	broken,	and	had	you	been	captured	by	the
bounty	hunters	high	on	the	plateau,	by	the	time	they’d	delivered	you	to	this
town	you’d	have	had	nothing	left	of	Teblor	pride,	much	less	defiance.	The
Sunyd	will	worship	you,	Karsa	Orlong,	for	killing	an	entire	camp	of	bounty
hunters.’
‘What	is	your	name?’	Karsa	asked.
‘Why?’
The	Uryd	warrior	smiled	in	the	gloom.	‘For	all	your	words,	you	still	fear
me.’


‘Hardly.’
But	Karsa	heard	the	strain	in	the	guard’s	tone	and	his	smile	broadened.
‘Then	tell	me	your	name.’
‘Damisk.	My	name	is	Damisk.	I	was	once	a	tracker	in	the	Greydog	army
during	the	Malazan	conquest.’
‘Conquest.	You	lost,	then.	Which	of	our	spirits	has	broken,	Damisk
Greydog?	When	I	attacked	your	party	on	the	ridge,	you	fled.	Left	the	ones	who
had	hired	you	to	their	fates.	You	fled,	as	would	a	coward,	a	broken	man.	And
this	is	why	you	are	here,	now.	For	I	am	chained	and	you	are	beyond	my	reach.
You	come,	not	to	tell	me	things,	but	because	you	cannot	help	yourself.	You
seek	the	pleasure	of	gloating,	yet	you	devour	yourself	inside,	and	so	feel	no
true	satisfaction.	Yet	we	both	know,	you	will	come	again.	And	again.’
‘I	shall	advise,’	Damisk	said,	his	voice	ragged,	‘my	master	to	give	you	to
the	surviving	bounty	hunters,	to	do	with	you	as	they	will.	And	I	will	watch—’
‘Of	course	you	will,	Damisk	Greydog.’
The	man	backed	up	the	stairs,	the	lantern’s	light	swinging	wildly.
Karsa	laughed.
A	moment	later	the	trapdoor	slammed	down	once	more,	and	there	was
darkness.
The	Teblor	warrior	fell	silent,	then	planted	his	feet	on	the	log	yet	again.
A	weak	voice	from	the	far	end	of	the	trench	stopped	him.	‘Giant.’
The	tongue	was	Sunyd,	the	voice	a	child’s.	‘I	have	no	words	for	you,
lowlander,’	Karsa	growled.
‘I	do	not	ask	for	words.	I	can	feel	you	working	on	this	Hood-damned	tree.
Will	you	succeed	at	whatever	it	is	you	are	doing?’
‘I	am	doing	nothing.’
‘All	right,	then.	Must	be	my	imagination.	We’re	dying	here,	the	rest	of	us.
In	a	most	terrible,	undignified	manner.’
‘You	must	have	done	great	wrong—’
The	answering	laugh	was	a	rasping	cough.	‘Oh	indeed,	giant.	Indeed.
We’re	the	ones	who	would	not	accept	Malazan	rule,	so	we	held	on	to	our
weapons	and	hid	in	the	hills	and	forests.	Raiding,	ambushing,	making
nuisances	of	ourselves.	It	was	great	fun.	Until	the	bastards	caught	us.’
‘Careless.’
‘Three	of	you	and	a	handful	of	your	damned	dogs,	raiding	an	entire	town?
And	you	call	me	careless?	Well,	I	suppose	we	both	were,	since	we’re	here.’
Karsa	grimaced	at	the	truth	of	that.	‘What	is	it	you	want,	lowlander?’
‘Your	strength,	giant.	There	are	four	of	us	over	here	who	are	still	alive,
though	I	alone	am	still	conscious…and	very	nearly	sane.	Sane	enough,	that	is,


to	comprehend	the	fullest	ignobility	of	my	fate.’
‘You	talk	too	much.’
‘For	not	much	longer,	I	assure	you.	Can	you	lift	this	log,	giant?	Or	spin	it
over	a	few	times?’
Karsa	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	‘What	would	that	achieve?’
‘It	would	shorten	the	chains.’
‘I	have	no	wish	to	shorten	the	chains.’
‘Temporarily.’
‘Why?’
‘Spin	the	damned	thing,	giant.	So	our	chains	wrap	around	it	again	and
again.	So,	with	one	last	turn,	you	drag	us	poor	fools	at	this	end	under.	So	we
drown.’
‘You	would	have	me	kill	you?’
‘I	applaud	your	swift	comprehension,	giant.	More	souls	to	crowd	your
shadow,	Teblor—that’s	how	your	kind	see	it,	yes?	Kill	me,	and	I	will	walk	with
honour	in	your	shadow.’
‘I	am	not	interested	in	mercy,	lowlander.’
‘How	about	trophies?’
‘I	cannot	reach	you	to	take	trophies.’
‘How	well	can	you	see	in	this	gloom?	I’ve	heard	that	Teblor—’
‘I	can	see.	Well	enough	to	know	that	your	right	hand	is	closed	in	a	fist.
What	lies	within	it?’
‘A	tooth.	Just	fallen	out.	The	third	one	since	I’ve	been	chained	down	here.’
‘Throw	it	to	me.’
‘I	will	try.	I	am	afraid	I’m	somewhat…worse	for	wear.	Are	you	ready?’
‘Throw.’
The	man’s	arm	wavered	as	he	lifted	it.
The	tooth	flew	high	and	wide,	but	Karsa’s	arm	shot	out,	chain	snapping
behind	it,	and	he	snatched	the	tooth	from	the	air.	He	brought	it	down	for	a
closer	look,	then	grunted.	‘It’s	rotted.’
‘Probably	why	it	fell	out.	Well?	Consider	this,	too.	You	will	succeed	in
getting	water	right	through	the	shaft,	which	should	soften	things	up	even	more.
Not	that	you’ve	been	up	to	anything	down	there.’
Karsa	slowly	nodded.	‘I	like	you,	lowlander.’
‘Good.	Now	drown	me.’
‘I	will.’
Karsa	slipped	down	to	stand	knee-deep	in	the	foul	muck,	the	fresh	wounds
around	his	ankles	stinging	at	the	contact.
‘I	saw	them	bring	you	down,	giant,’	the	man	said.	‘None	of	the	Sunyd	are


as	big	as	you.’
‘The	Sunyd	are	the	smallest	among	the	Teblor.’
‘Must	be	some	lowlander	blood	from	way	back,	I’d	imagine.’
‘They	have	fallen	far	indeed.’	Karsa	lowered	both	arms,	chains	dragging,
until	his	hands	rested	beneath	the	log.
‘My	thanks	to	you,	Teblor.’
Karsa	lifted,	twisted	the	log,	then	set	it	down	once	more,	gasping.	‘This
will	not	be	quick,	lowlander,	and	for	that	I	am	sorry.’
‘I	understand.	Take	your	time.	Biltar	slid	right	under	in	any	case,	and
Alrute	looks	about	to	the	next	time.	You’re	doing	well.’
He	lifted	the	log	once	more,	rolled	it	another	half-twist.	Splashes	and
gurgling	sounds	came	from	the	other	end.
Then	a	gasp.	‘Almost	there,	Teblor.	I’m	the	last.	One	more—I’ll	roll
myself	under	it,	so	it	pins	me	down.’
‘Then	you	are	crushed,	not	drowned.’
‘In	this	muck?	No	worries	there,	Teblor.	I’ll	feel	the	weight,	true,	but	it
won’t	cause	me	much	pain.’
‘You	lie.’
‘So	what?	It’s	not	the	means,	it’s	the	end	that	matters.’
‘All	things	matter,’	Karsa	said,	preparing	once	more.	‘I	shall	twist	it	all	the
way	round	this	time,	lowlander.	It	will	be	easier	now	that	my	own	chains	are
shorter.	Are	you	ready?’
‘A	moment,	please,’	the	man	sputtered.
Karsa	lifted	the	log,	grunting	with	the	immense	weight	pulling	down	on	his
arms.
‘I’ve	had	a	change	of	heart—’
‘I	haven’t.’	Karsa	spun	the	log.	Then	dropped	it.
Wild	thrashing	from	the	other	end,	chains	sawing	the	air,	then	frantic
coughing.
Surprised,	Karsa	looked	up.	A	brown-smeared	figure	flailed	about,
sputtering,	kicking.
Karsa	slowly	sat	back,	waiting	for	the	man	to	recover.	For	a	while,	there
was	naught	but	heavy	gasping	from	the	other	end	of	the	log.	‘You	managed	to
roll	back	over,	then	under	and	out.	I	am	impressed,	lowlander.	It	seems	you	are
not	a	coward	after	all.	I	did	not	believe	there	were	such	as	you	among	the
children.’
‘Sheer	courage,’	the	man	rasped.	‘That’s	me.’
‘Whose	tooth	was	it?’
‘Alrute’s.	Now,	no	more	spinning,	if	you	please.’


‘I	am	sorry,	lowlander,	but	I	must	now	spin	it	the	opposite	way,	until	the
log	is	as	it	was	before	I	started.’
‘I	curse	your	grim	logic,	Teblor.’
‘What	is	your	name?’
‘Torvald	Nom,	though	to	my	Malazan	enemies,	I’m	known	as	Knuckles.’
‘And	how	came	you	to	learn	the	Sunyd	tongue?’
‘It’s	the	old	trader	language,	actually.	Before	there	were	bounty	hunters,
there	were	Nathii	traders.	A	mutually	profitable	trade	between	them	and	the
Sunyd.	The	truth	is,	your	language	is	close	kin	to	Nathii.’
‘The	soldiers	spoke	gibberish.’
‘Naturally;	they’re	soldiers.’	He	paused.	‘All	right,	that	sort	of	humour ’s
lost	on	you.	So	be	it.	Likely,	those	soldiers	were	Malazan.’
‘I	have	decided	that	the	Malazans	are	my	enemy.’
‘Something	we	share,	then,	Teblor.’
‘We	share	naught	but	this	tree	trunk,	lowlander.’
‘If	you	prefer.	Though	I	feel	obliged	to	correct	you	on	one	thing.
Hateworthy	as	the	Malazans	are,	the	Nathii	these	days	are	no	better.	You’ve	no
allies	among	the	lowlanders,	Teblor,	be	sure	of	that.’
‘Are	you	a	Nathii?’
‘No.	I’m	Daru.	From	a	city	far	to	the	south.	The	House	of	Nom	is	vast	and
certain	families	among	it	are	almost	wealthy.	We’ve	a	Nom	in	the	Council,	in
fact,	in	Darujhistan.	Never	met	him.	Alas,	my	own	family’s	holdings	are	more,
uh,	modest.	Hence	my	extended	travels	and	nefarious	professions—’
‘You	talk	too	much,	Torvald	Nom.	I	am	ready	to	turn	this	log	once	more.’
‘Damn,	I	was	hoping	you’d	forgotten	about	that.’
	
The	iron	bar ’s	end	was	more	than	halfway	through	the	trunk,	the	flange	a	blunt,
shapeless	piece	of	metal.	Karsa	could	not	keep	the	aching	and	trembling	from
his	legs,	even	as	the	rest	periods	between	efforts	grew	ever	longer.	The	larger
wounds	in	his	chest	and	back,	created	by	the	splinter	of	wood,	had	reopened,
leaking	steadily	to	mix	with	the	sweat	soaking	his	clothes.	The	skin	and	flesh	of
his	ankles	were	shredded.
Torvald	had	succumbed	to	his	own	exhaustion,	shortly	after	the	log	had
been	returned	to	its	original	position,	groaning	in	his	sleep	whilst	Karsa
laboured	on.
For	the	moment,	as	the	Uryd	warrior	rested	against	the	clay	slope,	the	only
sounds	were	his	own	ragged	gasps,	underscored	by	softer,	shallow	breaths
from	the	far	end	of	the	trunk.


Then	the	sound	of	boots	crossed	overhead,	first	in	one	direction,	then	back
again,	and	gone.
Karsa	pushed	himself	upright	once	more,	his	head	spinning.
‘Rest	longer,	Teblor.’
‘There	is	no	time	for	that,	Torvald	Nom—’
‘Oh,	but	there	is.	That	slavemaster	who	now	owns	you	will	be	waiting	here
for	a	while,	so	that	he	and	his	train	can	travel	in	the	company	of	the	Malazan
soldiers.	For	as	far	as	Malybridge,	at	least.	There’s	been	plenty	of	bandit
activity	from	Fool’s	Forest	and	Yellow	Mark,	for	which	I	acknowledge	some
proprietary	pride,	since	it	was	me	who	united	that	motley	collection	of
highwaymen	and	throat-slitters	in	the	first	place.	They’d	have	already	come	to
rescue	me,	too,	if	not	for	the	Malazans.’
‘I	will	kill	that	slavemaster,’	Karsa	said.
‘Careful	with	that	one,	giant.	Silgar ’s	not	a	pleasant	man,	and	he’s	used	to
dealing	with	warriors	like	you—’
‘I	am	Uryd,	not	Sunyd.’
‘So	you	keep	saying,	and	I’ve	no	doubt	you’re	meaner—you’re	certainly
bigger.	All	I	was	saying	is,	be	wary	of	Silgar.’
Karsa	positioned	himself	over	the	log.
‘You	have	time	to	spare,	Teblor.	There’s	no	point	in	freeing	yourself	if
you’re	then	unable	to	walk.	This	isn’t	the	first	time	I’ve	been	in	chains,	and	I
speak	from	experience:	bide	your	time,	an	opportunity	will	arise,	if	you	don’t
wither	and	die	first.’
‘Or	drown.’
‘Point	taken,	and	yes,	I	understood	your	meaning	when	you	spoke	of
courage.	I	admit	to	a	moment	of	despair.’
‘Do	you	know	how	long	you	have	been	chained	here?’
‘Well,	there	was	snow	on	the	ground	and	the	lake’s	ice	had	just	broken.’
Karsa	slowly	glanced	over	at	the	barely	visible,	scrawny	figure	at	the	far
end.	‘Torvald	Nom,	even	a	lowlander	should	not	be	made	to	suffer	such	a	fate.’
The	man’s	laugh	was	a	rattle.	‘And	you	call	us	children.	You	Teblor	cut
people	down	as	if	you	were	executioners,	but	among	my	kind,	execution	is	an
act	of	mercy.	For	your	average	condemned	bastard,	prolonged	torture	is	far
more	likely.	The	Nathii	have	made	the	infliction	of	suffering	an	art—must	be
the	cold	winters	or	something.	In	any	case,	if	not	for	Silgar	claiming	you—and
the	Malazan	soldiers	in	town—the	locals	would	be	peeling	the	skin	from	your
flesh	right	now,	a	sliver	at	a	time.	Then	they’d	lock	you	inside	a	box	to	let	you
heal.	They	know	that	your	kind	are	immune	to	infections,	which	means	they
can	make	you	suffer	for	a	long,	long	time.	There’s	a	lot	of	frustrated


townsfolk	out	there	right	now,	I’d	imagine.’
Karsa	began	pulling	on	the	bar	once	more.
He	was	interrupted	by	voices	overhead,	then	heavy	thumping,	as	of	a	dozen
or	more	barefooted	arrivals,	the	sound	joined	now	by	chains	slithering	across
the	warehouse	floor.
Karsa	settled	back	against	the	opposite	trench	slope.
The	trapdoor	opened.	A	child	in	the	lead,	lantern	in	hand,	and	then	Sunyd—
naked	but	for	rough-woven	short	skirts—making	a	slow	descent,	their	left
ankles	shackled	with	a	chain	linking	them	all	together.	The	lowlander	with	the
lantern	walked	down	the	walkway	between	the	two	trenches.	The	Sunyd,	eleven
in	all,	six	men	and	five	women,	followed.
Their	heads	were	lowered;	none	would	meet	Karsa’s	steady,	cold	regard.
At	a	gesture	from	the	child,	who	had	halted	four	long	paces	from	Karsa’s
position,	the	Sunyd	turned	and	slid	down	the	slope	of	their	trench.	Three	more
lowlanders	had	appeared,	and	followed	them	down	to	apply	the	fixed	shackles
to	the	Teblor ’s	other	ankles.	There	was	no	resistance	from	the	Sunyd.
Moments	later,	the	lowlanders	were	back	on	the	walkway,	then	heading	up
the	steps.	The	trapdoor	squealed	on	its	hinges,	closing	with	a	reverberating
thump	that	sent	dust	drifting	down	through	the	gloom.
‘It	is	true,	then.	An	Uryd.’	The	voice	was	a	whisper.
Karsa	sneered.	‘Was	that	the	voice	of	a	Teblor?	No,	it	could	not	have	been.
Teblor	do	not	become	slaves.	Teblor	would	rather	die	than	kneel	before	a
lowlander.’
‘An	Uryd…in	chains.	Like	the	rest	of	us—’
‘Like	the	Sunyd?	Who	let	these	foul	children	come	close	and	fix	shackles
to	their	legs?	No.	I	am	a	prisoner,	but	no	bindings	shall	hold	me	for	long.	The
Sunyd	must	be	reminded	what	it	is	to	be	a	Teblor.’
A	new	voice	spoke	from	among	the	Sunyd,	a	woman’s.	‘We	saw	the	dead,
lined	up	on	the	ground	before	the	hunters’	camp.	We	saw	wagons,	filled	with
dead	Malazans.	Townsfolk	were	wailing.	Yet,	it	is	said	there	were	but	three	of
you—’
‘Two,	not	three.	Our	companion,	Delum	Thord,	was	wounded	in	the	head,
his	mind	had	fallen	away.	He	ran	with	the	dogs.	Had	his	mind	been	whole,	his
blood-sword	in	his	hands—’
There	was	sudden	murmuring	from	the	Sunyd,	the	word	bloodsword
spoken	in	tones	of	awe.
Karsa	scowled.	‘What	is	this	madness?	Have	the	Sunyd	lost	all	the	old	ways
of	the	Teblor?’
The	woman	sighed.	‘Lost?	Yes,	long	ago.	Our	own	children	slipping	away


in	the	night	to	wander	south	into	the	lowlands,	eager	for	the	cursed	lowlander
coins—the	bits	of	metal	around	which	life	itself	seems	to	revolve.	Sorely	used,
were	our	children—some	even	returned	to	our	valleys,	as	scouts	for	the
hunters.	The	secret	groves	of	bloodwood	were	burned	down,	our	horses	slain.
To	be	betrayed	by	our	own	children,	Uryd,	this	is	what	broke	the	Sunyd.’
‘Your	children	should	have	been	hunted	down,’	Karsa	said.	‘The	hearts	of
your	warriors	were	too	soft.	Blood-kin	is	cut	when	betrayal	is	done.	Those
children	ceased	being	Sunyd.	I	will	kill	them	for	you.’
‘You	would	have	trouble	finding	them,	Uryd.	They	are	scattered,	many
fallen,	many	now	sold	into	servitude	to	repay	their	debts.	And	some	have
travelled	great	distances,	to	the	great	cities	of	Nathilog	and	Genabaris.	Our
tribe	is	no	more.’
The	first	Sunyd	who	had	spoken	added,	‘Besides,	Uryd,	you	are	in	chains.
Now	the	property	of	Master	Silgar,	from	whom	no	slave	has	ever	escaped.	You
will	be	killing	no-one,	ever	again.	And	like	us,	you	will	be	made	to	kneel.	Your
words	are	empty.’
Karsa	straddled	the	log	once	more.	He	grasped	hold	of	the	chains	this	time,
wrapping	them	about	his	wrists	as	many	times	as	he	could.
Then	he	threw	himself	back.	Muscles	bunching,	legs	pushing	down	on	the
log,	back	straightening.	Grinding,	splintering,	a	sudden	loud	crack.
Karsa	was	thrown	backward	onto	the	clay	slope,	chains	snapping	around
him.	Blinking	the	sweat	from	his	eyes,	he	stared	down	at	the	log.
The	trunk	had	split,	down	its	entire	length.
There	was	a	low	hiss	from	the	other	end,	the	rustle	of	freed	chains.	‘Hood
take	me,	Karsa	Orlong,’	Torvald	whispered,	‘you	don’t	take	insults	well,	do
you?’
Though	no	longer	attached	to	the	log,	Karsa’s	wrists	and	ankles	were	still
chained	to	the	iron	bars.	The	warrior	unravelled	the	chains	from	his	battered,
bleeding	forearms,	then	collected	one	of	the	bars.	Laying	the	ankle	chain
against	the	log,	he	drove	the	bar ’s	unflanged	end	into	a	single	link,	then	began
twisting	it	with	both	hands.
‘What	has	happened?’	a	Sunyd	asked.	‘What	was	that	sound?’
‘The	Uryd’s	spine	has	snapped,’	the	first	speaker	replied	in	a	drawl.
Torvald’s	laugh	was	a	cold	chuckle.	‘The	Lord’s	push	for	you,	Ganal,	I’m
afraid.’
‘What	do	you	mean,	Nom?’
The	link	popped,	sending	a	piece	whipping	across	the	trench	to	thud
against	the	earthen	wall.
Karsa	dragged	the	chain	from	his	ankle	shackles.	Then	he	set	to	splitting


the	one	holding	his	wrists.
Another	popping	sound.	He	freed	his	arms.
‘What	is	happening?’
A	third	crack,	as	he	snapped	the	chain	from	the	iron	bar	he	had	been	using
—which	was	the	undamaged	one,	its	flange	intact,	sharp-edged	and	jagged.
Karsa	clambered	from	the	trench.
‘Where	is	this	Ganal?’	he	growled.
All	but	one	of	the	Sunyd	lying	in	the	opposite	trench	shrank	back	at	his
words.
‘I	am	Ganal,’	said	the	lone	warrior	who	had	not	moved.	‘Not	a	broken
spine	after	all.	Well	then,	warrior,	kill	me	for	my	sceptical	words.’
‘I	shall.’	Karsa	strode	down	the	walkway,	lifting	the	iron	bar.
‘If	you	do	that,’	Torvald	said	hastily,	‘the	others	will	likely	raise	a	cry.’
Karsa	hesitated.
Ganal	smiled	up	at	him.	‘If	you	spare	me,	there	will	be	no	alarm	sounded,
Uryd.	It	is	night,	still	a	bell	or	more	before	dawn.	You	will	make	good	your
escape—’
‘And	by	your	silence,	you	will	all	be	punished,’	Karsa	said.
‘No.	We	were	all	sleeping.’
The	woman	spoke.	‘Bring	the	Uryd,	in	all	your	numbers.	When	you	have
slain	everyone	in	this	town,	then	you	can	settle	judgement	upon	us	Sunyd,	as
will	be	your	right.’
Karsa	hesitated,	then	he	nodded.	‘Ganal,	I	give	you	more	of	your	miserable
life.	But	I	shall	come	once	more,	and	I	shall	remember	you.’
‘I	have	no	doubt,	Uryd,’	Ganal	replied.	‘Not	any	more.’
‘Karsa,’	Torvald	said.	‘I	may	be	a	lowlander	and	all—’
‘I	shall	free	you,	child,’	the	Uryd	replied,	turning	from	the	Sunyd	trench.
‘You	have	shown	courage.’	He	slid	down	to	the	man’s	side.	‘You	are	too	thin	to
walk,’	he	observed.	‘Unable	to	run.	Do	you	still	wish	for	me	to	release	you?’
‘Thin?	I	haven’t	lost	more	than	half	a	stone,	Karsa	Orlong.	I	can	run.’
‘You	sounded	poorly	earlier	on—’
‘Sympathy.’
‘You	sought	sympathy	from	an	Uryd?’
The	man’s	bony	shoulders	lifted	in	a	sheepish	shrug.	‘It	was	worth	a	try.’
Karsa	pried	the	chain	apart.
Torvald	pulled	his	arms	free.	‘Beru’s	blessing	on	you,	lad.’
‘Keep	your	lowlander	gods	to	yourself.’
‘Of	course.	Apologies.	Anything	you	say.’
Torvald	scrambled	up	the	slope.	On	the	walkway,	he	paused.	‘What	of	the


trapdoor,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘What	of	it?’	the	warrior	growled,	climbing	up	and	moving	past	the
lowlander.
Torvald	bowed	as	Karsa	went	past,	a	scrawny	arm	sweeping	out	in	a
graceful	gesture.	‘Lead	me,	by	all	means.’
Karsa	halted	on	the	first	step	and	glanced	back	at	the	child.	‘I	am
warleader,’	he	rumbled.	‘You	would	have	me	lead	you,	lowlander?’
Ganal	said	from	the	other	trench,	‘Careful	how	you	answer,	Daru.	There
are	no	empty	words	among	the	Teblor.’
‘Well,	uh,	it	was	naught	but	an	invitation.	To	precede	me	up	the	steps—’
Karsa	resumed	his	climb.
Directly	beneath	the	trapdoor,	he	examined	its	edges.	He	recalled	that	there
was	an	iron	latch	that	was	lowered	when	locked,	making	it	flush	with	the
surrounding	boards.	Karsa	jammed	the	chain-fixing	end	of	the	iron	bar	into	the
join	beneath	the	latch.	He	drove	it	in	as	far	as	he	could,	then	began	levering,
settling	his	full	weight	in	gradual	increments.
A	splintering	snap,	the	trapdoor	jumping	up	slightly.	Karsa	set	his
shoulders	against	it	and	lifted.
The	hinges	creaked.
The	warrior	froze,	waited,	then	resumed,	slower	this	time.
As	his	head	cleared	the	hatchway,	he	could	see	faint	lantern-glow	from	the
far	end	of	the	warehouse,	and	saw,	seated	around	a	small	round	table,	three
lowlanders.	They	were	not	soldiers—Karsa	had	seen	them	earlier	in	the
company	of	the	slavemaster,	Silgar.	There	was	the	muted	clatter	of	bones	on
the	tabletop.
That	they	had	not	heard	the	trapdoor ’s	hinges	was,	to	Karsa’s	mind,
remarkable.	Then	his	ears	caught	a	new	sound—a	chorus	of	creaks	and	groans,
and,	outside,	the	howl	of	a	wind.	A	storm	had	come	in	from	the	lake,	and	rain
had	begun	spraying	against	the	north	wall	of	the	warehouse.
‘Urugal,’	Karsa	said	under	his	breath,	‘I	thank	you.	And	now,	witness…’
One	hand	holding	the	trapdoor	over	him,	the	warrior	slowly	slid	onto	the
floor.	He	moved	far	enough	to	permit	Torvald’s	equally	silent	arrival,	then	he
slowly	lowered	the	hatch	until	it	settled.	A	gesture	told	Torvald	to	remain
where	he	was,	understanding	indicated	by	the	man’s	fervent	nod.	Karsa
carefully	shifted	the	bar	from	his	left	hand	to	his	right,	then	made	his	way
forward.
Only	one	of	the	three	guards	might	have	seen	him,	from	the	corner	of	his
eye,	but	his	attention	was	intent	on	the	bones	skidding	over	the	tabletop	before
him.	The	other	two	had	their	backs	to	the	room.


Karsa	remained	low	on	the	floor	until	he	was	less	than	three	paces	away,
then	he	silently	rose	into	a	crouch.
He	launched	himself	forward,	the	bar	whipping	horizontally,	connecting
with	first	one	unhelmed	head,	then	on	to	the	second.	The	third	guard	stared
openmouthed.	Karsa’s	swing	finished	with	his	left	hand	grasping	the	redsmeared	end	of	the	bar,	which	he	then	drove	crossways	into	the	lowlander ’s
throat.	The	man	was	thrown	back	over	his	chair,	striking	the	warehouse	doors
and	falling	in	a	heap.
Karsa	set	the	bar	down	on	the	tabletop,	then	crouched	down	beside	one	of
the	victims	and	began	removing	his	sword-belt.
Torvald	approached.	‘Hood’s	own	nightmare,’	he	muttered,	‘that’s	what
you	are,	Uryd.’
‘Take	yourself	a	weapon,’	Karsa	directed,	moving	on	to	the	next	corpse.
‘I	will.	Now,	which	way	shall	we	run,	Karsa?	They’ll	be	expecting
northwest,	back	the	way	you	came.	They’ll	ride	hard	for	the	foot	of	the	pass.	I
have	friends—’
‘I	have	no	intention	of	running,’	the	warleader	growled,	looping	both
sword-belts	over	a	shoulder,	the	scabbarded	longswords	looking	minuscule
where	they	rested	against	his	back.	He	collected	the	flanged	bar	once	more.	He
turned	to	find	Torvald	staring	at	him.	‘Run	to	your	friends,	lowlander.	I	will,
this	night,	deliver	sufficient	diversion	to	make	good	your	escape.	Tonight,
Bairoth	Gild	and	Delum	Thord	shall	be	avenged.’
‘Don’t	expect	me	to	avenge	your	death,	Karsa.	It’s	madness—you’ve
already	done	the	impossible.	I’d	advise	you	to	thank	the	Lady’s	pull	and	get
away	while	you	can.	In	case	you’ve	forgotten,	this	town’s	full	of	soldiers.’
‘Be	on	your	way,	child.’
Torvald	hesitated,	then	he	threw	up	his	hands.	‘So	be	it.	For	my	life,	Karsa
Orlong,	I	thank	you.	The	family	of	Nom	will	speak	your	name	in	its	prayers.’
‘I	will	wait	fifty	heartbeats.’
Without	another	word	Torvald	headed	to	the	warehouse’s	sliding	doors.
The	main	bar	had	not	been	lowered	into	its	slots;	a	smaller	latch	loosely	held
the	door	to	the	frame.	He	flipped	it	back,	pushed	the	door	to	one	side,	sufficient
only	to	pop	his	head	out	for	a	quick	look.	Then	he	shoved	it	open	slightly
more,	and	slipped	outside.
Karsa	listened	to	his	footfalls,	the	splash	of	bare	feet	in	mud,	hurrying
away	to	the	left.	He	decided	he	would	not	wait	fifty	heartbeats.	Even	with	the
storm	holding	fast	the	darkness,	dawn	was	not	far	away.
The	Teblor	slid	the	door	back	further	and	stepped	outside.	A	track
narrower	than	the	main	street,	the	wooden	buildings	opposite	indistinct	behind


a	slanting	curtain	of	hard	rain.	To	the	right	and	twenty	paces	distant,	light
showed	from	a	single	murky	window	on	the	upper	floor	of	a	house	standing
next	to	a	side	street.
He	wanted	his	bloodsword,	but	had	no	idea	where	it	might	be.	Failing	that,
any	Teblor	weapon	would	suffice.	And	he	knew	where	he	might	find	some.
Karsa	slid	the	door	shut	behind	him.	He	swung	right	and,	skirting	the	edge
of	the	street,	made	his	way	towards	the	lakefront.
The	wind	whipped	rain	against	his	face,	loosening	the	crusted	blood	and
dirt.	The	shredded	leathers	of	his	shirt	flapped	heavily	as	he	jogged	towards
the	clearing,	where	waited	the	camp	of	the	bounty	hunters.
There	had	been	survivors.	A	careless	oversight	on	Karsa’s	part;	one	he
would	now	correct.	And,	in	the	huts	of	those	cold-eyed	children,	there	would
be	Teblor	trophies.	Weapons.	Armour.
The	huts	and	shacks	of	the	fallen	had	already	been	stripped,	the	doors
hanging	open,	rubbish	strewn	about.	Karsa’s	gaze	settled	on	a	nearby	reedwalled	shack	clearly	still	occupied.	He	padded	towards	it.
Ignoring	the	small	door,	the	warrior	threw	his	shoulder	against	a	wall.	The
reed	panel	fell	inward,	Karsa	plunging	through.	There	was	a	grunt	from	a	cot
to	his	left,	a	vague	shape	bolting	into	a	sitting	position.	Iron	bar	swung	down.
Blood	and	bits	of	bone	sprayed	the	walls.	The	figure	sank	back	down.
The	small,	lone	room	of	the	shack	was	cluttered	with	Sunyd	objects,	most
of	them	useless:	charms,	belts	and	trinkets.	He	did	find,	however,	a	pair	of
Sunyd	hunting	knives,	sheathed	in	beaded	buckskin	over	wood.	A	low	altar
caught	Karsa’s	attention.	Some	lowlander	god,	signified	by	a	small	clay	statue
—a	boar,	standing	on	its	hind	legs.
The	Teblor	knocked	it	to	the	earthen	floor,	then	shattered	it	with	a	single
stomp	of	his	heel.
Returning	outside,	he	approached	the	next	inhabited	shack.
The	wind	howled	off	the	lake,	white-maned	waves	crashing	up	the	pebbled
beach.	The	sky	overhead	was	still	black	with	clouds,	the	rain	unceasing.
There	were	seven	shacks	in	all,	and	in	the	sixth	one—after	killing	the	two
men	entwined	together	in	the	cot	beneath	the	skin	of	a	grey	bear—he	found	an
old	Sunyd	bloodsword,	and	an	almost	complete	set	of	armour	that,	although	of
a	style	Karsa	had	never	seen	before,	was	clearly	Teblor	in	origin,	given	its	size
and	the	sigils	burned	into	the	wooden	plates.	It	was	only	when	he	began
strapping	it	on	that	he	realized	that	the	grey,	weathered	wood	was	bloodwood
—bleached	by	centuries	of	neglect.
In	the	seventh	hut	he	found	a	small	jar	of	blood-oil,	and	took	the	time	to
remove	the	armour	and	rub	the	pungent	salve	into	its	starved	wood.	He	used


the	last	of	it	to	ease	the	sword’s	own	thirst.
He	then	kissed	the	gleaming	blade,	tasting	the	bitter	oil.
The	effect	was	instantaneous.	His	heart	began	pounding,	fire	ripping
through	his	muscles,	lust	and	rage	filling	his	mind.
He	found	himself	back	outside,	staring	at	the	town	before	him	through	a
red	haze.	The	air	was	foul	with	the	stench	of	lowlanders.	He	moved	forward,
though	he	could	no	longer	feel	his	legs,	his	gaze	fixing	on	the	bronze-banded
door	of	a	large,	timbered	house.
Then	it	was	flying	inward,	and	Karsa	was	entering	the	low-ceilinged
hallway	beyond	the	threshold.	Someone	was	shouting	upstairs.
He	found	himself	on	the	landing,	face	to	face	with	a	broad-shouldered,
bald	child.	Behind	him	cowered	a	woman	with	grey-streaked	hair,	and	behind
her—now	fleeing—a	half-dozen	servants.
The	bald	child	had	just	taken	down	from	the	wall	a	longsword	still	in	its
jewel-studded	scabbard.	His	eyes	glittered	with	terror,	his	expression	of
disbelief	remaining	frozen	on	his	features	even	as	his	head	leapt	from	his
shoulders.
And	then	Karsa	found	himself	in	the	last	room	upstairs,	ducking	to	keep
his	head	beneath	the	ceiling	as	he	stepped	over	the	last	of	the	servants,	the
house	silent	behind	him.	Before	him,	hiding	behind	a	poster	bed,	a	young
female	lowlander.
The	Teblor	dropped	his	sword.	A	moment	later	he	held	her	before	him,	her
feet	kicking	at	his	knees.	He	cupped	the	back	of	her	head	in	his	right	hand,
pushed	her	face	against	his	armour ’s	oil-smeared	breastplate.
She	struggled,	then	her	head	snapped	back,	eyes	suddenly	wild.
Karsa	laughed,	throwing	her	down	on	the	bed.
Animal	sounds	came	from	her	mouth,	her	long-fingered	hands	snatching
up	at	him	as	he	moved	over	her.
The	female	clawed	at	him,	her	back	arching	in	desperate	need.
She	was	unconscious	before	he	was	done,	and	when	he	drew	away	there
was	blood	between	them.	She	would	live,	he	knew.	Blood-oil	was	impatient
with	broken	flesh.
He	was	outside	in	the	rain	once	more,	sword	in	his	hands.	The	clouds	were
lightening	to	the	east.
Karsa	moved	on	to	the	next	house.
Awareness	drifted	away	then,	for	a	time,	and	when	it	returned	he	found
himself	in	an	attic	with	a	window	at	the	far	end	through	which	streamed	bright
sunlight.	He	was	on	his	hands	and	knees,	sheathed	in	blood,	and	to	one	side	lay
a	child’s	body,	fat	and	in	slashed	robes,	eyes	staring	sightlessly.


Waves	of	shivering	racked	him,	his	breath	harsh	gasps	that	echoed	dully	in
the	close,	dusty	attic.	He	heard	shouts	from	somewhere	outside	and	crawled
over	to	the	round,	thick-glassed	window	at	the	far	end.
Below	was	the	main	street,	and	he	realized	that	he	was	near	the	west	gate.
Glass-distorted	figures	on	restless	horses	were	gathering—Malazan	soldiers.
As	he	watched,	and	to	his	astonishment,	they	suddenly	set	forth	for	the	gate.
The	thundering	of	horse	hoofs	quickly	diminished	as	the	party	rode	westward.
The	warrior	slowly	sat	back.	There	was	no	sound	from	directly	beneath
him,	and	he	knew	that	no-one	remained	alive	in	the	house.	He	knew,	also,	that
he	had	passed	through	at	least	a	dozen	such	houses,	sometimes	through	the
front	door,	but	more	often	through	recessed	side	and	rear	doors.	And	that	those
places	were	now	as	silent	as	the	one	in	which	he	now	found	himself.
The	escape	has	been	discovered.	But	what	of	the	bounty	hunters?	What	of
the	townsfolk	who	have	yet	to	emerge	onto	the	street,	though	the	day	is	already
half	done?	How	many	did	I	truly	kill?
Soft	footfalls	below,	five,	six	sets,	spreading	out	through	the	room	under
him.	Karsa,	his	senses	still	heightened	beyond	normal	by	the	blood-oil,	sniffed
the	air,	but	their	scent	had	yet	to	reach	him.	Yet	he	knew—these	were	hunters,
not	soldiers.	He	drew	a	deep	breath	and	held	it	for	a	moment,	then	nodded	to
himself.	Yes,	the	slavemaster’s	warriors.	Deeming	themselves	cleverer	than	the
Malazans,	still	wanting	me	for	their	master.
Karsa	made	no	move—any	shift	of	weight	would	be	heard,	he	well	knew.
Twisting	his	head	slowly,	he	glanced	back	at	the	attic’s	hatch.	It	was	closed—
he’d	no	recollection	of	doing	so,	so	probably	it	was	the	trapdoor ’s	own	weight
that	had	dropped	it	back	into	place.	But	how	long	ago?	His	gaze	flicked	to	the
child’s	corpse.	The	blood	dripping	from	his	gaping	wounds	was	thick	and
slow.	Some	time	had	passed,	then.
He	heard	someone	speak,	and	it	was	a	moment	before	he	realized	that	he
could	understand	the	language.	‘A	bell,	sir,	maybe	more.’
‘So	where,’	another	asked,	‘is	Merchant	Balantis?	Here’s	his	wife,	their
two	children…four	servants—did	he	own	more?’
There	was	more	movement.
‘Check	the	lofts—’
‘Where	the	servants	slept?	I	doubt	fat	old	Balantis	could	have	climbed	that
ladder.’
‘Here!’	another	voice	cried	from	further	in.	‘The	attic	stairs	are	down!’
‘All	right,	so	the	merchant’s	terror	gave	him	wings.	Go	up	and	confirm	the
grim	details,	Astabb,	and	be	quick.	We	need	to	check	the	next	house.’
‘Hood’s	breath,	Borrug,	I	nearly	lost	my	breakfast	in	the	last	place.	It’s	all


quiet	up	there,	can’t	we	just	leave	it	at	that?	Who	knows,	the	bastard	might	be
chopping	up	the	next	family	right	now.’
There	was	silence,	then:	‘All	right,	let’s	go.	This	time,	I	think	Silgar ’s	plain
wrong.	That	Uryd’s	path	of	slaughter	is	straight	for	the	west	gate,	and	I’d	lay	a
year ’s	column	he’s	heading	for	T’lan	Pass	right	now.’
‘Then	the	Malazans	will	run	him	down.’
‘Aye,	they	will.	Come	on.’
Karsa	listened	as	the	hunters	converged	on	the	front	door	then	headed	back
outside.	The	Teblor	remained	motionless	for	another	dozen	heartbeats.
Silgar ’s	men	would	find	no	further	scenes	of	slaughter	westward	along	the
street.	This	fact	alone	would	bring	them	back.	He	padded	across	to	the
trapdoor,	lifted	it	clear,	and	made	his	way	down	the	blood-spattered	wooden
steps.	There	were	corpses	strewn	along	the	length	of	the	hallway,	the	air	foul
with	the	reek	of	death.
He	quickly	moved	to	the	back	door.	The	yard	outside	was	churned	mud	and
puddles,	a	heap	of	pavestones	off	to	one	side	awaiting	the	arrival	of	labourers.
Beyond	it	was	a	newly	built	low	stone	wall,	an	arched	gate	in	its	centre.	The
sky	overhead	was	broken	with	clouds	carried	on	a	swift	wind.	Shadows	and
patches	of	sunlight	crawled	steadily	over	the	scene.	There	was	no-one	in	sight.
Karsa	crossed	the	yard	at	a	sprint.	He	crouched	down	at	the	arched	gate.
Opposite	him	ran	a	rutted,	narrow	track,	parallel	to	the	main	street,	and	beyond
it	a	row	of	irregular	heaps	of	cut	brush	amidst	tall	yellow	grasses.	The	back
walls	of	houses	reared	behind	the	heaps.
He	was	on	the	western	side	of	the	town,	and	here	there	were	hunters.	It
followed,	then,	that	he	would	be	safer	on	the	eastern	side.	At	the	same	time,	the
Malazan	soldiers	appeared	to	be	quartered	there…though	he’d	watched	at	least
thirty	of	them	ride	out	through	the	west	gate.	Leaving	how	many?
Karsa	had	proclaimed	the	Malazans	his	enemy.
The	warrior	slipped	out	onto	the	track	and	headed	east.	Hunched	low,	he
ran	hard,	his	eyes	scanning	the	way	ahead,	seeking	cover,	expecting	at	any
moment	the	shout	that	would	announce	his	discovery.
He	moved	into	the	shadows	of	a	large	house	that	leaned	slightly	over	the
alley.	In	another	five	strides	he	would	come	to	the	wide	street	that	led	down	to
the	lakeshore.	Crossing	it	undetected	was	likely	to	prove	a	challenge.	Silgar ’s
hunters	remained	in	the	town,	as	did	an	unknown	number	of	Malazans.	Enough
to	cause	him	trouble?	There	was	no	telling.
Five	cautious	strides,	and	he	was	at	the	edge	of	the	street.	There	was	a
small	crowd	at	the	far	end,	lakeside.	Wrapped	bodies	were	being	carried	out	of
a	house,	whilst	two	men	struggled	with	a	young,	naked,	blood-splashed


woman.	She	was	hissing	and	trying	to	claw	at	their	eyes.	It	was	a	moment
before	Karsa	recollected	her.	The	blood-oil	still	burned	within	her,	and	the
crowd	had	drawn	back	in	obvious	alarm,	their	attention	one	and	all	fixed	on
her	writhing	form.
A	glance	to	the	right.	No-one.
Karsa	bolted	across	the	street.	He	was	but	a	single	stride	from	the	alley
opposite	when	he	heard	a	hoarse	shout,	then	a	chorus	of	cries.	Skidding
through	sluicing	mud,	the	warrior	raised	his	sword	and	snapped	his	gaze
towards	the	distant	crowd.
To	see	only	their	backs,	as	they	fled	like	panicked	deer,	leaving	the
wrapped	corpses	strewn	in	their	wake.	The	young	woman,	suddenly	released,
fell	to	the	mud	shrieking,	one	hand	snapping	out	to	clamp	on	the	ankle	of	one
of	her	captors.	She	was	dragged	through	the	mud	for	a	body	length	before	she
managed	to	foul	the	man’s	stride	and	send	him	sprawling.	She	clambered	atop
him	with	a	snarl.
Karsa	padded	into	the	alley.
A	bell	started	a	wild	clanging.
He	continued	on,	eastward,	parallel	to	the	main	street.	The	far	end,	thirty	or
more	paces	distant,	seemed	to	face	onto	a	long,	stone-walled,	single	level
building,	the	windows	visible	bearing	heavy	shutters.	As	he	raced	towards	it,	he
saw	three	Malazan	soldiers	dart	across	his	field	of	vision—all	were	helmed,
visors	lowered,	and	none	turned	their	heads.
Karsa	slowed	his	pace	as	he	neared	the	alley’s	end.	He	could	see	more	of
the	building	ahead	now.	It	looked	somehow	different	from	all	the	others	in	the
town,	its	style	more	severe,	pragmatic—a	style	the	Teblor	could	admire.
He	halted	at	the	alley	mouth.	A	glance	to	his	right	revealed	that	the	building
before	him	fronted	onto	the	main	street,	beyond	which	was	a	clearing	to	match
that	of	the	west	gate,	the	edge	of	the	town	wall	visible	just	beyond.	To	his	left,
and	closer	to	hand,	the	building	came	to	an	end,	with	a	wooden	corral	flanked
by	stables	and	outbuildings.	Karsa	returned	his	attention	to	his	right	and	leaned
out	slightly	further.
The	three	Malazan	soldiers	were	nowhere	to	be	seen.
The	bell	was	still	pealing	somewhere	behind	him,	yet	the	town	seemed
strangely	deserted.
Karsa	jogged	towards	the	corral.	He	arrived	with	no	alarms	raised,	stepped
over	the	railing,	and	made	his	way	along	the	building’s	wall	towards	the
doorway.
It	had	been	left	open.	The	antechamber	within	held	hooks,	racks	and
shelves	for	weapons,	but	all	such	weapons	had	been	removed.	The	close	dusty


air	held	the	memory	of	fear.	Karsa	slowly	entered.	Another	door	stood
opposite,	this	one	shut.
A	single	kick	sent	it	crashing	inward.
Beyond,	a	large	room	with	a	row	of	cots	on	either	side.	Empty.
The	echoes	of	the	shattered	door	fading,	Karsa	ducked	through	the
doorway	and	straightened,	looking	around,	sniffing	the	air.	The	chamber
reeked	of	tension.	He	felt	something	like	a	presence,	still	there,	yet	somehow
managing	to	remain	unseen.	The	warrior	cautiously	stepped	forward.	He
listened	for	breathing,	heard	nothing,	took	another	step.
The	noose	dropped	down	from	above,	over	his	head	and	down	onto	his
shoulders.	Then	a	wild	shout,	and	it	snapped	tight	around	his	neck.
As	Karsa	raised	his	sword	to	slice	through	the	hemp	rope,	four	figures
descended	behind	him,	and	the	rope	gave	a	savage	yank,	lifting	the	Teblor	off
his	feet.
There	was	a	sudden	splintering	from	above,	followed	by	a	desultory	curse,
then	the	crossbeam	snapped,	the	rope	slackening	though	the	noose	remained
taut	around	Karsa’s	throat.	Unable	to	draw	breath,	he	spun,	sword	cleaving	in	a
horizontal	slash—that	passed	through	empty	air.	The	Malazan	soldiers,	he	saw,
had	already	dropped	to	the	floor	and	rolled	away.
Karsa	dragged	the	rope	free	of	his	neck,	then	advanced	on	the	nearest
scrambling	soldier.
Sorcery	hammered	him	from	behind,	a	frenzied	wave	that	engulfed	the
Teblor.	He	staggered,	then,	with	a	roar,	shook	it	off.
He	swung	his	sword.	The	Malazan	before	him	leapt	backward,	but	the
blade’s	tip	connected	with	his	right	knee,	shattering	the	bone.	The	man	shrieked
as	he	toppled.
A	net	of	fire	descended	on	Karsa,	an	impossibly	heavy	web	of	pain	that
drove	him	to	his	knees.	He	sought	to	slash	at	it,	but	his	weapon	was	fouled	by
the	flickering	strands.	It	began	constricting	as	if	it	possessed	a	life	of	its	own.
The	warrior	struggled	within	the	ever-tightening	net,	and	in	moments	was
rendered	helpless.
The	wounded	soldier ’s	screams	continued,	until	a	hard	voice	rumbled	a
command	and	eerie	light	flashed	in	the	room.	The	shrieks	abruptly	stopped.
Figures	closed	in	around	Karsa,	one	crouching	down	near	his	head.	A
dark-skinned,	scarred	face	beneath	a	bald,	tattoo-stitched	pate.	The	man’s	smile
was	a	row	of	gleaming	gold.	‘You	understand	Nathii,	I	take	it.	That’s	nice.
You’ve	just	made	Limp’s	bad	leg	a	whole	lot	worse,	and	he	won’t	be	happy
about	that.	Even	so,	you	stumbling	into	our	laps	will	more	than	make	up	for	the
house	arrest	we’re	presently	under—’


‘Let’s	kill	him,	Sergeant—’
‘Enough	of	that,	Shard.	Bell,	go	find	the	slavemaster.	Tell	him	we	got	his
prize.	We’ll	hand	him	over,	but	not	for	nothing.	Oh,	and	do	it	quietly—I	don’t
want	the	whole	town	outside	with	torches	and	pitchforks.’	The	sergeant	looked
up	as	another	soldier	arrived.	‘Nice	work,	Ebron.’
‘I	damned	near	wet	my	pants,	Cord,’	the	man	named	Ebron	replied,	‘when
he	just	threw	off	the	nastiest	I	had.’
‘Just	shows,	don’t	it?’	Shard	muttered.
‘Shows	what?’	Ebron	demanded.
‘Well,	only	that	clever	beats	nasty	every	time,	that’s	all.’
Sergeant	Cord	grunted,	then	said,	‘Ebron,	see	what	you	can	do	for	Limp,
before	he	comes	round	and	starts	screaming	again.’
‘I’ll	do	that.	For	a	runt,	he’s	got	some	lungs,	don’t	he	just.’
Cord	reached	down	and	carefully	slid	his	hand	between	the	burning	strands
to	tap	a	finger	against	the	bloodsword.	‘So	here’s	one	of	the	famed	wooden
swords.	So	hard	it	breaks	Aren	steel.’
‘Look	at	the	edge,’	Shard	said.	‘It’s	that	resin	they	use	that	makes	that	edge
—’
‘And	hardens	the	wood	itself,	aye.	Ebron,	this	web	of	yours,	is	it	causing
him	pain?’
The	sorcerer ’s	reply	came	from	beyond	Karsa’s	line	of	sight.	‘If	it	was
you	in	that,	Cord,	you’d	be	howling	to	shame	the	Hounds.	For	a	moment	or
two,	then	you’d	be	dead	and	sizzling	like	fat	on	a	hearthstone.’
Cord	frowned	down	at	Karsa,	then	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘He	ain’t	even
trembling.	Hood	knows	what	we	could	do	with	five	thousand	of	these	bastards
in	our	ranks.’
‘Might	even	manage	to	clean	out	Mott	Wood,	eh,	Sergeant?’
‘Might	at	that.’	Cord	rose	and	stepped	away.	‘So	what’s	keeping	Bell?’
‘Probably	can’t	find	no-one,’	Shard	replied.	‘Never	seen	a	whole	town	take
to	the	boats	like	that	before.’
Boots	sounded	in	the	antechamber,	and	Karsa	listened	to	the	arrival	of	at
least	a	half-dozen	newcomers.
A	soft	voice	said,	‘Thank	you,	Sergeant,	for	recovering	my	property—’
‘Ain’t	your	property	any	more,’	Cord	replied.	‘He’s	a	prisoner	of	the
Malazan	Empire,	now.	He	killed	Malazan	soldiers,	not	to	mention	damaging
imperial	property	by	kicking	in	that	door	there.’
‘You	cannot	be	serious—’
‘I’m	always	serious,	Silgar,’	Cord	quietly	drawled.	‘I	can	guess	what	you
got	in	mind	for	this	giant.	Castration,	a	cut-out	tongue,	hobbling.	You’ll	put


him	on	a	leash	and	travel	the	towns	south	of	here,	drumming	up	replacements
for	your	bounty	hunters.	But	the	Fist’s	position	on	your	slaving	activities	is
well	enough	known.	This	is	occupied	territory—this	is	part	of	the	Malazan
Empire	now,	like	it	or	not,	and	we	ain’t	at	war	with	these	so-called	Teblor.	Oh,
I’ll	grant	you,	we	don’t	appreciate	renegades	coming	down	and	raiding,	killing
imperial	subjects	and	all	that.	Which	is	why	this	bastard	is	now	under	arrest,
and	he’ll	likely	be	sentenced	to	the	usual	punishment:	the	otataral	mines	of	my
dear	old	homeland.’	Cord	moved	to	settle	down	beside	Karsa	once	more.
‘Meaning	we’ll	be	seeing	a	lot	of	each	other,	since	our	detachment’s	heading
home.	Rumours	of	rebellion	and	such,	though	I	doubt	it’ll	come	to	much.’
Behind	him,	the	slavemaster	spoke.	‘Sergeant,	the	Malazan	hold	upon	its
conquests	on	this	continent	is	more	than	precarious	at	the	moment,	now	that
your	principal	army	is	bogged	down	outside	the	walls	of	Pale.	Do	you	truly
wish	for	an	incident	here?	To	so	flout	our	local	customs—’
‘Customs?’	Still	gazing	down	at	Karsa,	Cord	bared	his	teeth.	‘The	Nathii
custom	has	been	to	run	and	hide	when	the	Teblor	raid.	Your	studious,
deliberate	corruption	of	the	Sunyd	is	unique,	Silgar.	Your	destruction	of	that
tribe	was	a	business	venture	on	your	part.	Damned	successful	it	was,	too.	The
only	flouting	going	on	here	is	yours,	with	Malazan	law.’	He	looked	up,	his
smile	broadening.	‘What	in	Hood’s	name	do	you	think	our	company’s	doing
here,	you	perfumed	piece	of	scum?’
All	at	once	tension	filled	the	air	as	hands	settled	on	sword-grips.
‘Rest	easy,	I’d	advise,’	Ebron	said	from	one	side.	‘I	know	you’re	a	Mael
priest,	Silgar,	and	you’re	right	on	the	edge	of	your	warren	right	now,	but	I’ll
turn	you	into	a	lumpy	puddle	if	you	make	so	much	as	a	twitch	for	it.’
‘Order	your	thugs	back,’	Cord	said,	‘or	this	Teblor	will	have	company	on
his	way	to	the	mines.’
‘You	would	not	dare—’
‘Wouldn’t	I?’
‘Your	captain	would—’
‘No,	he	wouldn’t.’
‘I	see.	Very	well.	Damisk,	take	the	men	outside	for	a	moment.’
Karsa	heard	receding	footsteps.
‘Now	then,	Sergeant,’	Silgar	continued	after	a	moment,	‘how	much?’
‘Well,	I	admit	I	was	considering	some	kind	of	exchange.	But	then	the
town’s	bells	stopped.	Which	tells	me	we’re	out	of	time.	Alas.	Captain’s	back—
there,	the	sound	of	the	horses,	coming	fast.	All	of	this	means	we’re	all	official,
now,	Silgar.	Of	course,	maybe	I	was	stringing	you	along	all	the	time,	until	you
finally	went	and	offered	me	a	bribe.	Which,	as	you	know,	is	a	crime.’


The	Malazan	troop	had	arrived	at	the	corral,	Karsa	could	hear.	A	few
shouts,	the	stamping	of	hoofs,	a	brief	exchange	of	words	with	Damisk	and	the
other	guards	standing	outside,	then	heavy	boots	on	the	floorboards.
Cord	turned.	‘Captain—’
A	rumbling	voice	cut	him	off.	‘I	thought	I’d	left	you	under	house	guard.
Ebron,	I	don’t	recall	granting	you	permission	to	rearm	these	drunken	louts…’
Then	the	captain’s	words	trailed	away.
Karsa	sensed	the	smile	on	Cord’s	face	as	he	said,	‘The	Teblor	attempted	an
assault	on	our	position,	sir—’
‘Which	no	doubt	sobered	you	up	quick.’
‘That	it	did,	sir.	Accordingly,	our	clever	sorcerer	here	decided	to	give	us
back	our	weapons,	so	that	we	could	effect	the	capture	of	this	overgrown
savage.	Alas,	Captain,	matters	have	since	become	somewhat	more
complicated.’
Silgar	spoke.	‘Captain	Kindly,	I	came	here	to	request	the	return	of	my	slave
and	was	met	with	overt	hostility	and	threats	from	this	squad	here.	I	trust	their
poor	example	is	not	indicative	of	the	depths	to	which	the	entire	Malazan	army
has	fallen—’
‘That	they’re	definitely	not,	Slavemaster,’	Captain	Kindly	replied.
‘Excellent.	Now,	if	we	could—’
‘He	tried	to	bribe	me,	sir,’	Cord	said	in	a	troubled,	distressed	tone.
There	was	silence,	then	the	captain	said,	‘Ebron?	Is	this	true?’
‘Afraid	it	is,	Captain.’
There	was	cool	satisfaction	in	Kindly’s	voice	as	he	said,	‘How	unfortunate.
Bribery	is	a	crime,	after	all…’
‘I	was	just	saying	the	same	thing,	sir,’	Cord	noted.
‘I	was	invited	to	make	an	offer!’	Silgar	hissed.
‘No	you	wasn’t,’	Ebron	replied.
Captain	Kindly	spoke.	‘Lieutenant	Pores,	place	the	slavemaster	and	his
hunters	under	arrest.	Detach	two	squads	to	oversee	their	incarceration	in	the
town	gaol.	Put	them	in	a	separate	cell	from	that	bandit	leader	we	captured	on
the	way	back—the	infamous	Knuckles	is	likely	to	have	few	friends	locally.
Barring	those	we	strung	up	beside	the	road	east	of	here,	that	is.	Oh,	and	send	in
a	healer	for	Limp—Ebron	seems	to	have	made	something	of	a	mess	in	his
efforts	on	the	unfortunate	man.’
‘Well,’	Ebron	snapped,	‘I	ain’t	Denul,	you	know.’
‘Watch	your	tone,	Mage,’	the	captain	calmly	warned.
‘Sorry,	sir.’
‘I	admit	to	some	curiosity,	Ebron,’	Kindly	continued.	‘What	is	the	nature	of


this	spell	you	have	inflicted	on	this	warrior?’
‘Uh,	a	shaping	of	Ruse—’
‘Yes,	I	know	your	warren,	Ebron.’
‘Yes,	sir.	Well,	it’s	used	to	snare	and	stun	dhenrabi	in	the	seas—’
‘Dhenrabi?	Those	giant	sea-worms?’
‘Yes,	sir.’
‘Well,	why	in	Hood’s	name	isn’t	this	Teblor	dead?’
‘Good	question,	Captain.	He’s	a	tough	one,	he	is,	ain’t	he	just.’
‘Beru	fend	us	all.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
‘Sergeant	Cord.’
‘Sir?’
‘I	have	decided	to	drop	the	charges	of	drunkenness	against	you	and	your
squad.	Grief	for	lost	ones.	An	understandable	reaction,	all	things	considered.
This	time.	The	next	abandoned	tavern	you	stumble	into,	however,	is	not	to	be
construed	as	an	invitation	to	licentiousness.	Am	I	understood?’
‘Perfectly,	sir.’
‘Good.	Ebron,	inform	the	squads	that	we	are	departing	this	picturesque
town.	As	soon	as	possible.	Sergeant	Cord,	your	squad	will	see	to	the	loading	of
supplies.	That	will	be	all,	soldiers.’
‘What	of	this	warrior?’	Ebron	asked.
‘How	long	will	this	sorcerous	net	last?’
‘As	long	as	you	like,	sir.	But	the	pain—’
‘He	seems	to	be	bearing	up.	Leave	him	as	he	is,	and	in	the	meantime	think
of	a	way	to	load	him	onto	the	bed	of	a	wagon.’
‘Yes,	sir.	We’ll	need	long	poles—’
‘Whatever,’	Captain	Kindly	muttered,	striding	away.
Karsa	sensed	the	sorcerer	staring	down	on	him.	The	pain	had	long	since
faded,	no	matter	what	Ebron’s	claims,	and	indeed,	the	steady,	slow	tensing	and
easing	of	the	Teblor ’s	muscles	had	begun	to	weaken	it.
Not	long,	now…


Chapter	Three

Among	the	founding	families	of	Darujhistan,	there	is	Nom.
THE	NOBLE	HOUSES	OF	DARUJHISTAN
MISDRY
‘I	missed	you,	Karsa	Orlong.’
Torvald	Nom’s	face	was	mottled	blue	and	black,	his	right	eye	swollen	shut.
He	had	been	chained	to	the	wagon’s	forward	wall	and	was	slouched	down
amidst	rotting	straw,	watching	as	the	Malazan	soldiers	levered	the	Teblor	onto
the	bed	using	stripped-down	saplings	that	had	been	inserted	beneath	the	limbs
of	the	huge,	net-wrapped	warrior.	The	wagon	shifted	and	groaned	as	Karsa’s
weight	settled	on	it.
‘Pity	the	damned	oxen,’	Shard	said,	dragging	one	of	the	saplings	free,	his
breath	harsh	and	his	face	red	with	exertion.
A	second	wagon	stood	nearby,	just	within	the	field	of	Karsa’s	vision	as	he
lay	motionless	on	the	weathered	boards.	In	its	back	sat	Silgar,	Damisk,	and
three	other	Nathii	lowlanders.	The	slavemaster ’s	face	was	white	and	patchy,	the
blue	and	gold	trim	of	his	expensive	clothes	stained	and	wrinkled.	Seeing	him,
Karsa	laughed.
Silgar ’s	head	snapped	around,	dark	eyes	fixing	like	knives	on	the	Uryd
warrior.
‘Taker	of	slaves!’	Karsa	sneered.
The	Malazan	soldier,	Shard,	climbed	onto	the	wagon’s	wall	and	leaned
over	to	study	Karsa	for	a	moment,	then	he	shook	his	head.	‘Ebron!’	he	called
out.	‘Come	look.	That	web	ain’t	what	it	was.’
The	sorcerer	clambered	up	beside	him.	His	eyes	narrowed.	‘Hood	take
him,’	he	muttered.	‘Get	us	some	chains,	Shard.	Heavy	ones,	and	lots	of	them.
Tell	the	captain,	too,	and	hurry.’
The	soldier	dropped	out	of	sight.
Ebron	scowled	down	at	Karsa.	‘You	got	otataral	in	your	veins?	Nerruse
knows,	that	spell	should	have	killed	you	long	ago.	What’s	it	been,	three	days


now.	Failing	that,	the	pain	should	have	driven	you	mad.	But	you’re	no	madder
than	you	were	a	week	ago,	are	you?’	His	scowl	deepened.	‘There’s	something
about	you…something…’
Soldiers	were	suddenly	clambering	up	on	all	sides,	some	dragging	chains
whilst	others	held	back	slightly	with	crossbows	cocked.
‘Can	we	touch	this?’	one	asked,	hesitating	over	Karsa.
‘You	can	now,’	Ebron	replied,	then	spat.
Karsa	tested	the	magical	constraints	in	a	single,	concerted	surge	that	forced
a	bellow	from	his	throat.	Strands	snapped.
Answering	shouts.	Wild	panic.
As	the	Uryd	began	dragging	himself	free,	his	sword	still	in	his	right	hand,
something	hard	cracked	into	the	side	of	his	head.
Blackness	swept	over	him.
He	awoke	lying	on	his	back,	spread-eagled	on	the	bed	of	the	wagon	as	it
rocked	and	jolted	beneath	him.	His	limbs	were	wrapped	in	heavy	chains	that
had	been	spiked	to	the	boards.	Others	crisscrossed	his	chest	and	stomach.	Dried
blood	crusted	the	left	side	of	his	face,	sealing	the	lid	of	that	eye.	He	could	smell
dust,	wafting	up	from	between	the	boards,	as	well	as	his	own	bile.
Torvald	spoke	from	somewhere	beyond	Karsa’s	head.	‘So	you’re	alive
after	all.	Despite	what	the	soldiers	were	saying,	you	looked	pretty	much	dead	to
me.	You	certainly	smell	that	way.	Well,	almost.	In	case	you’re	wondering,
friend,	it’s	been	six	days.	That	gold-toothed	sergeant	hit	you	hard.	Broke	the
shovel’s	shaft.’
A	sharp,	throbbing	pain	bloomed	in	Karsa’s	head	as	soon	as	he	tried	to	lift
it	clear	of	the	foul-smelling	boards.	He	grimaced,	settling	once	more.	‘Too
many	words,	lowlander.	Be	quiet.’
‘Quiet’s	not	in	my	nature,	alas.	Of	course,	you	don’t	have	to	listen.	Now,
you	might	think	otherwise,	but	we	should	be	celebrating	our	good	fortune.
Prisoners	of	the	Malazans	is	an	improvement	over	being	Silgar ’s	slaves.
Granted,	I	might	end	up	getting	executed	as	a	common	criminal—which	is,	of
course,	precisely	what	I	am—but	more	likely	we’re	both	off	to	work	in	the
imperial	mines	in	Seven	Cities.	Never	been	there,	but	even	so,	it’s	a	long	trip,
land	and	sea.	There	might	be	pirates.	Storms.	Who	knows?	Might	even	be	the
mines	aren’t	so	bad	as	people	say.	What’s	a	little	digging?	I	can’t	wait	for	the
day	they	put	a	pickaxe	in	your	hands—oh	my,	won’t	you	have	some	fun?	Lots
to	look	forward	to,	don’t	you	think?’
‘Including	cutting	out	your	tongue.’
‘Humour?	Hood	take	me,	I	didn’t	think	you	had	it	in	you,	Karsa	Orlong.
Anything	else	you	want	to	say?	Feel	free.’


‘I’m	hungry.’
‘We’ll	reach	Culvern	Crossing	by	tonight—the	pace	has	been	torturously
slow,	thanks	to	you,	since	it	appears	you	weigh	more	than	you	should,	more
even	than	Silgar	and	his	four	thugs.	Ebron	says	you	don’t	have	normal	flesh—
same	for	the	Sunyd,	of	course—but	with	you	it’s	even	more	so.	Purer	blood,	I
suppose.	Meaner	blood,	that’s	for	sure.	I	remember,	once,	in	Darujhistan,	I	was
just	a	lad,	a	troop	arrived	with	a	grey	bear,	all	chained	up.	Had	it	in	a	huge	tent
just	outside	Worry-town,	charged	a	sliver	to	see	it.	First	day,	I	was	there.	The
crowd	was	huge.	Everyone’d	thought	grey	bears	had	died	out	centuries	ago—’
‘Then	you	are	all	fools,’	Karsa	growled.
‘So	we	were,	because	there	it	was.	Collared,	chained	down,	with	red	in	its
eyes.	The	crowd	rushed	in,	me	in	it,	and	that	damned	thing	went	wild.	Broke
loose	like	those	chains	were	braids	of	grass.	You	wouldn’t	believe	the	panic.	I
got	trampled	on,	but	managed	to	crawl	out	from	under	the	tent	with	my
scrawny	but	lovely	body	mostly	intact.	That	bear—bodies	were	flying	from	its
path.	It	charged	straight	for	the	Gadrobi	Hills	and	was	never	seen	again.	Sure,
there’s	rumours	to	this	day	that	the	bastard’s	still	there,	eating	the	occasional
herder…and	herd.	Anyway,	you	remind	me	of	that	grey	bear,	Uryd.	The	same
look	in	your	eyes.	A	look	that	says:	Chains	will	not	hold	me.	And	that’s	what
has	me	so	eager	to	see	what	will	happen	next.’
‘I	shall	not	hide	in	the	hills,	Torvald	Nom.’
‘Didn’t	think	you	would.	Do	you	know	how	you	will	be	loaded	onto	the
prison	ship?	Shard	told	me.	They’ll	take	the	wheels	off	this	wagon.	That’s	it.
You’ll	be	riding	this	damned	bed	all	the	way	to	Seven	Cities.’
The	wagon’s	wheels	slid	down	into	deep,	stony	ruts,	the	jarring	motion
sending	waves	of	pain	through	Karsa’s	head.
‘You	still	here?’	Torvald	asked	after	a	moment.
Karsa	remained	silent.
‘Oh	well,’	the	Daru	sighed.
Lead	me,	Warleader.
Lead	me.
This	was	not	the	world	he	had	expected.	The	lowlanders	were	both	weak
and	strong,	in	ways	he	found	difficult	to	comprehend.	He	had	seen	huts	built
one	atop	another;	he	had	seen	watercraft	the	size	of	entire	Teblor	houses.
Expecting	a	farmstead,	they	had	found	a	town.	Anticipating	the	slaughter	of
fleeing	cowards,	they	had	instead	been	met	with	fierce	opponents	who	stood
their	ground.
And	Sunyd	slaves.	The	most	horrifying	discovery	of	all.	Teblor,	their
spirits	broken.	He	had	not	thought	such	a	thing	was	possible.


I	shall	snap	those	chains	on	the	Sunyd.	This,	I	vow	before	the	Seven.	I	shall
give	the	Sunyd	lowlander	slaves	in	turn—no.	To	do	such	would	be	as	wrong	as
what	the	lowlanders	have	done	to	the	Sunyd,	have	done,	indeed,	to	their	own
kin.	No,	his	sword’s	gathering	of	souls	was	a	far	cleaner,	a	far	purer
deliverance.
He	wondered	about	these	Malazans.	They	were,	it	was	clear,	a	tribe	that	was
fundamentally	different	from	the	Nathii.	Conquerors,	it	seemed,	from	a	distant
land.	Holders	to	strict	laws.	Their	captives	not	slaves,	but	prisoners,	though	it
had	begun	to	appear	that	the	distinction	lay	in	name	only.	He	would	be	set	to
work.
Yet	he	had	no	desire	to	work.	Thus,	it	was	punishment,	intended	to	bow	his
warrior	spirit,	to—in	time—break	it.	In	this,	a	fate	to	match	that	of	the	Sunyd.
But	that	shall	not	happen,	for	I	am	Uryd,	not	Sunyd.	They	shall	have	to	kill
me,	once	they	realize	that	they	cannot	control	me.	And	so,	the	truth	is	before	me.
Should	I	hasten	that	realization,	I	shall	never	see	release	from	this	wagon.
Torvald	Nom	spoke	of	patience—the	prisoner’s	code.	Urugal,	forgive	me,
for	I	must	now	avow	to	that	code.	I	must	seem	to	relent.
Even	as	he	thought	it,	he	knew	it	would	not	work.	These	Malazans	were	too
clever.	They	would	be	fools	to	trust	a	sudden,	inexplicable	passivity.	No,	he
needed	to	fashion	a	different	kind	of	illusion.
Delum	Thord.	You	shall	now	be	my	guide.	Your	loss	is	now	my	gift.	You
walked	the	path	before	me,	showing	me	the	steps.	I	shall	awaken	yet	again,	but
it	shall	not	be	with	a	broken	spirit,	but	with	a	broken	mind.
Indeed,	the	Malazan	sergeant	had	struck	him	hard.	The	muscles	of	his	neck
had	seized,	clenched	tight	around	his	spine.	Even	breathing	triggered	lancing
stabs	of	pain.	He	sought	to	slow	it,	shifting	his	thoughts	away	from	the	low
roar	of	his	nerves.
The	Teblor	had	lived	in	blindness	for	centuries,	oblivious	of	the	growing
numbers—and	growing	threat—of	the	lowlanders.	Borders,	once	defended
with	vicious	determination,	had	for	some	reason	been	abandoned,	left	open	to
the	poisoning	influences	from	the	south.	It	was	important,	Karsa	realized,	to
discover	the	cause	of	this	moral	failing.	The	Sunyd	had	never	been	among	the
strongest	of	the	tribes,	yet	they	were	Teblor	none	the	less,	and	what	befell	them
could,	in	time,	befall	all	the	others.	This	was	a	difficult	truth,	but	to	close	one’s
eyes	to	it	would	be	to	walk	the	same	path	yet	again.
There	were	failings	that	must	be	faced.	Pahlk,	his	own	grandfather,	had
been	something	far	less	than	the	warrior	of	glorious	deeds	that	he	pretended	to
be.	Had	Pahlk	returned	to	the	tribe	with	truthful	tales,	then	the	warnings	within
them	would	have	been	heard.	A	slow	but	inexorable	invasion	was	under	way,


one	step	at	a	time.	A	war	on	the	Teblor	that	assailed	their	spirit	as	much	as	it
did	their	lands.	Perhaps	such	warnings	would	have	proved	sufficient	to	unite
the	tribes.
He	considered	this,	and	darkness	settled	upon	his	thoughts.	No.	Pahlk’s
failing	had	been	a	deeper	one;	it	was	not	his	lies	that	were	the	greatest	crime,	it
was	his	lack	of	courage,	for	he	had	shown	himself	unable	to	wrest	free	of	the
strictures	binding	the	Teblor.	His	people’s	rules	of	conduct,	the	narrowly
crafted	confines	of	expectations—its	innate	conservatism	that	crushed	dissent
with	the	threat	of	deadly	isolation—these	were	what	had	defeated	his
grandfather ’s	courage.
Yet	not,	perhaps,	my	father’s.
The	wagon	jolted	once	more	beneath	him.
I	saw	your	mistrust	as	weakness.	Your	unwillingness	to	participate	in	our
tribe’s	endless,	deadly	games	of	pride	and	retribution—I	saw	this	as	cowardice.
Even	so,	what	have	you	done	to	challenge	our	ways?	Nothing.	Your	only	answer
was	to	hide	yourself	away—and	to	belittle	all	that	I	did,	to	mock	my	zeal…
Preparing	me	for	this	moment.
Very	well,	Father,	I	can	see	the	gleam	of	satisfaction	in	your	eyes,	now.	But
I	tell	you	this,	you	delivered	naught	but	wounds	upon	your	son.	And	I	have	had
enough	of	wounds.
Urugal	was	with	him.	All	the	Seven	were	with	him.	Their	power	would
make	him	impervious	to	all	that	besieged	his	Teblor	spirit.	He	would,	one	day,
return	to	his	people,	and	he	would	shatter	their	rules.	He	would	unite	the
Teblor,	and	they	would	march	behind	him…down	into	the	lowlands.
Until	that	moment,	all	that	came	before—all	that	afflicted	him	now—was
but	preparation.	He	would	be	the	weapon	of	retribution,	and	it	was	the	enemy
itself	that	now	honed	him.
Blindness	curses	both	sides,	it	seems.	Thus,	the	truth	of	my	words	shall	be
shown.
Such	were	his	last	thoughts	before	consciousness	once	more	faded	away.
	
Excited	voices	awoke	him.	It	was	dusk	and	the	air	was	filled	with	the	smell	of
horses,	dust	and	spiced	foods.	The	wagon	was	motionless	under	him,	and	he
could	now	hear,	mingled	with	the	voices,	the	sounds	of	many	people	and	a
multitude	of	activities,	underscored	by	the	rush	of	a	river.
‘Ah,	awake	once	more,’	Torvald	Nom	said.
Karsa	opened	his	eyes	but	did	not	otherwise	move.
‘This	is	Culvern	Crossing,’	the	Daru	went	on,	‘and	it’s	a	storm	swirling


with	the	latest	news	from	the	south.	All	right,	a	small	storm,	given	the	size	of
this	latrine	pit	of	a	town.	The	scum	of	the	Nathii,	which	is	saying	a	lot.	The
Malazan	company’s	pretty	excited,	though.	Pale’s	just	fallen,	you	see.	A	big
battle,	lots	of	sorcery,	and	Moon’s	Spawn	retreated—likely	headed	to
Darujhistan,	in	fact.	Beru	take	me,	I	wish	I	was	there	right	now,	watching	it
crossing	the	lake,	what	a	sight	that’d	be.	The	company,	of	course,	are	wishing
they’d	been	there	for	the	battle.	Idiots,	but	that’s	soldiers	for	you—’
‘And	why	not?’	Shard’s	voice	snapped	as	the	wagon	rocked	slightly	and	the
man	appeared.	‘The	Ashok	Regiment	deserves	better	than	to	be	stuck	up	here
hunting	bandits	and	slavers.’
‘The	Ashok	Regiment	is	you,	I	presume,’	Torvald	said.
‘Aye.	Damned	veterans,	too,	one	and	all.’
‘So	why	aren’t	you	down	south,	Corporal?’
Shard	made	a	face,	then	turned	away	with	narrowed	eyes.	‘She	don’t	trust
us,	that’s	why,’	he	murmured.	‘We’re	Seven	Cities,	and	the	bitch	don’t	trust	us.’
‘Excuse	me,’	Torvald	said,	‘but	if	she—and	by	that	I	take	you	to	mean	your
Empress—doesn’t	trust	you,	then	why	is	she	sending	you	home?	Isn’t	Seven
Cities	supposedly	on	the	edge	of	rebellion?	If	there’s	a	chance	of	you	turning
renegade,	wouldn’t	she	rather	have	you	here	on	Genabackis?’
Shard	stared	down	at	Torvald	Nom.	‘Why	am	I	talking	to	you,	thief?	You
might	damn	well	be	one	of	her	spies.	A	Claw,	for	all	I	know.’
‘If	I	am,	Corporal,	you	haven’t	been	treating	me	very	well.	A	detail	I’d	be
sure	to	put	in	my	report—this	secret	one,	the	one	I’m	secretly	writing,	that	is.
Shard,	wasn’t	it?	As	in	a	piece	of	broken	glass,	yes?	And	you	called	the
Empress	“bitch”—’
‘Shut	up,’	the	Malazan	snarled.
‘Just	making	a	rather	obvious	point,	Corporal.’
‘That’s	what	you	think,’	Shard	sneered	as	he	dropped	back	down	from	the
side	of	the	wagon	and	was	lost	from	sight.
Torvald	Nom	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment,	then,	‘Karsa	Orlong,	do
you	have	any	idea	what	that	man	meant	by	that	last	statement?’
Karsa	spoke	in	a	low	voice,	‘Torvald	Nom,	listen	well.	A	warrior	who
followed	me,	Delum	Thord,	was	struck	on	the	head.	His	skull	cracked	and
leaked	thought-blood.	His	mind	could	not	walk	back	up	the	path.	He	was	left
helpless,	harmless.	I,	too,	have	been	struck	on	the	head.	My	skull	is	cracked	and
I	have	leaked	thought-blood—’
‘Actually,	it	was	drool—’
‘Be	quiet.	Listen.	And	answer,	when	you	will,	in	a	whisper.	I	have	awakened
now,	twice,	and	you	have	observed—’


Torvald	interjected	in	a	soft	murmur.	‘That	your	mind’s	lost	on	the	trail	or
something.	Is	that	what	I	have	observed?	You	babble	meaningless	words,	sing
childhood	songs	and	the	like.	All	right,	fine.	I’ll	play	along,	on	one	condition.’
‘What	condition?’
‘That	whenever	you	manage	to	escape,	you	free	me	as	well.	A	small	thing,
you	might	think,	but	I	assure	you—’
‘Very	well.	I,	Karsa	Orlong	of	the	Uryd,	give	my	word.’
‘Good.	I	like	the	formality	of	that	vow.	Sounds	like	it’s	real.’
‘It	is.	Do	not	mock	me,	else	I	kill	you	once	I	have	freed	you.’
‘Ah,	now	I	see	the	hidden	caveat.	I	must	twist	another	vow	from	you,	alas
—’
The	Teblor	growled	with	impatience,	then	relented	and	said,	‘I,	Karsa
Orlong,	shall	not	kill	you	once	I	have	freed	you,	unless	given	cause.’
‘Explain	the	nature	of	those	causes—’
‘Are	all	Daru	like	you?’
‘It	needn’t	be	an	exhaustive	list.	“Cause”	being,	say,	attempted	murder,
betrayal,	and	mockery	of	course.	Can	you	think	of	any	others?’
‘Talking	too	much.’
‘Well,	with	that	one	we’re	getting	into	very	grey,	very	murky	shades,	don’t
you	think?	It’s	a	matter	of	cultural	distinctions—’
‘I	believe	Darujhistan	shall	be	the	first	city	I	conquer—’
‘I’ve	a	feeling	the	Malazans	will	get	there	first,	I’m	afraid.	Mind	you,	my
beloved	city	has	never	been	conquered,	despite	its	being	too	cheap	to	hire	a
standing	army.	The	gods	not	only	look	down	on	Darujhistan	with	a	protective
eye,	they	probably	drink	in	its	taverns.	In	any	case—oh,	shhh,	someone’s
coming.’
Bootsteps	neared,	then,	as	Karsa	watched	through	slitted	eyes,	Sergeant
Cord	clambered	up	into	view	and	glared	for	a	long	moment	at	Torvald	Nom.
‘You	sure	don’t	look	like	a	Claw…’	he	finally	said.	‘But	maybe	that’s	the	whole
point.’
‘Perhaps	it	is.’
Cord’s	head	began	turning	towards	Karsa	and	the	Teblor	closed	his	eyes
completely.	‘He	come	around	yet?’
‘Twice.	Doing	nothing	but	drooling	and	making	animal	sounds.	I	think	you
went	and	damaged	his	brain,	assuming	he	has	one.’
Cord	grunted.	‘Might	prove	a	good	thing,	so	long	as	he	doesn’t	die	on	us.
Now,	where	was	I?’
‘Torvald	Nom,	the	Claw.’
‘Right.	OK.	Even	so,	we’re	still	treating	you	as	a	bandit—until	you	prove


to	us	you’re	something	otherwise—and	so	you’re	off	to	the	otataral	mines	with
everyone	else.	Meaning,	if	you	are	a	Claw,	you’d	better	announce	it	before	we
leave	Genabaris.’
‘Assuming,	of	course,’	Torvald	smiled,	‘my	assignment	does	not	require
me	to	assume	the	disguise	of	a	prisoner	in	the	otataral	mines.’
Cord	frowned,	then,	hissing	a	curse,	he	dropped	down	from	the	side	of	the
wagon.
They	heard	him	shout,	‘Get	this	damned	wagon	on	that	ferry!	Now!’
The	wheels	creaked	into	sudden	motion,	the	oxen	lowing.
Torvald	Nom	sighed,	leaning	his	head	against	the	wall	and	closing	his
eyes.
‘You	play	a	deadly	game,’	Karsa	muttered.
The	Daru	propped	one	eye	open.	‘A	game,	Teblor?	Indeed,	but	maybe	not
the	game	you	think.’
Karsa	grunted	his	disgust.
‘Be	not	so	quick	to	dismiss—’
‘I	am,’	the	warrior	replied,	as	the	oxen	dragged	the	wagon	onto	a	ramp	of
wooden	boards.	‘My	causes	shall	be	“attempted	murder,	betrayal,	mockery,	and
being	one	of	these	Claws”.’
‘And	talking	too	much?’
‘It	seems	I	shall	have	to	suffer	that	curse.’
Torvald	slowly	cocked	his	head,	then	he	grinned.	‘Agreed.’
	
In	a	strange	way,	the	discipline	of	maintaining	the	illusion	of	mindlessness
proved	Karsa’s	greatest	ally	in	remaining	sane.	Days,	then	weeks	lying	supine,
spread-eagled	and	chained	down	to	the	bed	of	a	wagon	was	a	torture	unlike
anything	the	Teblor	could	have	imagined	possible.	Vermin	crawled	all	over	his
body,	covering	him	in	bites	that	itched	incessantly.	He	knew	of	large	animals	of
the	deep	forest	being	driven	mad	by	blackflies	and	midges,	and	now	he
understood	how	such	an	event	could	occur.
He	was	washed	down	with	buckets	of	icy	water	at	the	end	of	each	day,	and
was	fed	by	the	drover	guiding	the	wagon,	an	ancient	foul-smelling	Nathii	who
would	crouch	down	beside	his	head	with	a	smoke-blackened	iron	pot	filled
with	some	kind	of	thick,	seed-filled	stew.	He	used	a	large	wooden	spoon	to
pour	the	scalding,	malty	cereal	and	stringy	meat	into	Karsa’s	mouth—the
Teblor ’s	lips,	tongue	and	the	insides	of	his	cheeks	were	terribly	blistered,	the
feedings	coming	too	often	to	allow	for	healing.
Meals	became	an	ordeal,	which	was	alleviated	only	when	Torvald	Nom


talked	the	drover	into	permitting	the	Daru	to	take	over	the	task,	ensuring	that
the	stew	had	cooled	sufficiently	before	it	was	poured	into	Karsa’s	mouth.	The
blisters	were	gone	within	a	few	days.
The	Teblor	endeavoured	to	keep	his	muscles	fit	through	sessions,	late	at
night,	of	flexing	and	unflexing,	but	all	his	joints	ached	from	immobility,	and
for	this	he	could	do	nothing.
At	times,	his	discipline	wavered,	his	thoughts	travelling	back	to	the	demon
he	and	his	comrades	had	freed.	That	woman,	the	Forkassal,	had	spent	an
unimaginable	length	of	time	pinned	beneath	that	massive	stone.	She	had
managed	to	achieve	some	movement,	had	no	doubt	clung	to	some	protracted
sense	of	progress	as	she	clawed	and	scratched	against	the	stone.	Even	so,	Karsa
could	not	comprehend	her	ability	to	withstand	madness	and	the	eventual	death
that	was	its	conclusion.
Thoughts	of	her	left	him	humbled,	his	spirit	weakened	by	his	own	growing
frailty	in	these	chains,	in	the	wagon	bed’s	rough-hewn	planks	that	had	rubbed
his	skin	raw,	in	the	shame	of	his	soiled	clothes,	and	the	simple,	unbearable
torment	of	the	lice	and	fleas.
Torvald	took	to	talking	to	him	as	he	would	a	child,	or	a	pet.	Calming
words,	soothing	tones,	and	the	curse	of	talking	too	much	was	transformed	into
something	Karsa	could	hold	on	to,	his	desperate	grip	ever	tightening.
The	words	fed	him,	kept	his	spirit	from	starving.	They	measured	the	cycle
of	days	and	nights	that	passed,	they	taught	him	the	language	of	the	Malazans,
they	gave	him	an	account	of	the	places	they	travelled	through.	After	Culvern
Crossing,	there	had	been	a	larger	town,	Ninsano	Moat,	where	crowds	of
children	had	clambered	onto	the	wagon,	poking	and	prodding	him	until	Shard
arrived	to	drive	them	away.	Another	river	had	been	crossed	there.	Onward	to
Malybridge,	a	town	of	similar	proportions	to	Ninsano	Moat,	then,	seventeen
days	later,	Karsa	stared	up	at	the	arched	stone	gateway	of	a	city—Tanys—
passing	over	him,	and	on	either	side,	as	the	wagon	made	its	rocking	way	down
a	cobbled	street,	huge	buildings	of	three,	even	four	levels.	And	all	around,	the
sounds	of	people,	more	lowlanders	than	Karsa	had	thought	possible.
Tanys	was	a	port,	resting	on	tiered	ridges	rising	from	the	east	shore	of	the
Malyn	Sea,	where	the	water	was	brackish	with	salt—such	as	was	found	in	a
number	of	springs	near	the	Rathyd	borderlands.	Yet	the	Malyn	Sea	was	no
turgid,	tiny	pool;	it	was	vast,	for	the	journey	across	it	to	the	city	called
Malyntaeas	consumed	four	days	and	three	nights.
It	was	the	transferring	onto	the	ship	that	resulted	in	Karsa’s	being	lifted
upright—unwheeled	wagon	bed	included—for	the	first	time,	creating	a	new
kind	of	torture	as	the	chains	took	his	full	weight.	His	joints	screamed	within


him	and	gave	voice	as	Karsa’s	shrieks	filled	the	air,	continuing	without
surcease	until	someone	poured	a	fiery,	burning	liquid	down	his	throat,	enough
to	fill	his	stomach,	after	which	his	mind	sank	away.
When	he	awoke	he	found	that	the	platform	that	held	him	remained	upright,
strapped	to	what	Torvald	called	the	main	mast.	The	Daru	had	been	chained
nearby,	having	assumed	the	responsibility	for	Karsa’s	care.
The	ship’s	healer	had	rubbed	salves	into	Karsa’s	swollen	joints,	deadening
the	pain.	But	a	new	agony	had	arrived,	raging	behind	his	eyes.
‘Hurting?’	Torvald	Nom	murmured.	‘That’s	called	a	hangover,	friend.	A
whole	bladder	of	rum	was	poured	into	you,	lucky	bastard	that	you	are.	You
heaved	half	of	it	back	up,	of	course,	but	it	had	sufficiently	worsened	in	the
interval	to	enable	me	to	refrain	from	licking	the	deck,	leaving	my	dignity
intact.	Now,	we	both	need	some	shade	or	we’ll	end	up	fevered	and	raving—and
believe	me,	you’ve	done	enough	raving	for	both	of	us	already.	Fortunately	in
your	Teblor	tongue,	which	few	if	any	aboard	understand.	Aye,	we’ve	parted
ways	with	Captain	Kindly	and	his	soldiers,	for	the	moment.	They’re	crossing
on	another	ship.	By	the	way,	who	is	Dayliss?	No,	don’t	tell	me.	You’ve	made
quite	a	list	of	rather	horrible	things	you’ve	got	planned	for	this	Dayliss,
whoever	he	or	she	is.	Anyway,	you	should	have	your	sea-legs	by	the	time	we
dock	in	Malyntaeas,	which	should	prepare	you	somewhat	for	the	horrors	of
Meningalle	Ocean.	I	hope.
‘Hungry?’
The	crew,	mostly	Malazans,	gave	Karsa’s	position	wide	berth.	The	other
prisoners	had	been	locked	below,	but	the	wagon	bed	had	proved	too	large	for
the	cargo	hatch,	and	Captain	Kindly	had	been	firm	on	his	instructions	not	to
release	Karsa,	in	any	circumstances,	despite	his	apparent	feeble-mindedness.
Not	a	sign	of	scepticism,	Torvald	had	explained	in	a	whisper,	just	the	captain’s
legendary	sense	of	caution,	which	was	reputedly	extreme	even	for	a	soldier.
The	illusion	seemed	to	have,	in	fact,	succeeded—Karsa	had	been	bludgeoned
into	a	harmless	ox,	devoid	of	any	glimmer	of	intelligence	in	his	dull	eyes,	his
endless,	ghastly	smile	evincing	permanent	incomprehension.	A	giant,	once
warrior,	now	less	than	a	child,	comforted	only	by	the	shackled	bandit,	Torvald
Nom,	and	his	incessant	chatter.
‘Eventually,	they’ll	have	to	unchain	you	from	that	wagon	bed,’	the	Daru
once	muttered	in	the	darkness	as	the	ship	rolled	on	towards	Malyntaeas.	‘But
maybe	not	until	we	arrive	at	the	mines.	You’ll	just	have	to	hold	on,	Karsa
Orlong—assuming	you’re	still	pretending	you’ve	lost	your	mind,	and	these
days	I	admit	you’ve	got	even	me	convinced.	You	are	still	sane,	aren’t	you?’
Karsa	voiced	a	soft	grunt,	though	at	times	he	himself	was	unsure.	Some


days	had	been	lost	entirely,	simply	blank	patches	in	his	memory—more
frightening	than	anything	else	he’d	yet	to	experience.	Hold	on?	He	did	not
know	if	he	could.
The	city	of	Malyntaeas	had	the	appearance	of	having	been	three	separate
cities	at	one	time.	It	was	midday	when	the	ship	drew	into	the	harbour,	and	from
his	position	against	the	main	mast	Karsa’s	view	was	mostly	unobstructed.
Three	enormous	stone	fortifications	commanded	three	distinct	rises	in	the
land,	the	centre	one	set	back	further	from	the	shoreline	than	the	other	two.	Each
possessed	its	own	peculiar	style	of	architecture.	The	keep	to	the	left	was	squat,
robust	and	unimaginative,	built	of	a	golden,	almost	orange	limestone	that
looked	marred	and	stained	in	the	sunlight.	The	centre	fortification,	hazy
through	the	woodsmoke	rising	from	the	maze	of	streets	and	houses	filling	the
lower	tiers	between	the	hills,	appeared	older,	more	decrepit,	and	had	been
painted—walls,	domes	and	towers—in	a	faded	red	wash.	The	fortification	on
the	right	was	built	on	the	very	edge	of	the	coastal	cliff,	the	sea	below	roiling
amidst	tumbled	rocks	and	boulders,	the	cliff	itself	rotted,	pock-marked	and
battle-scarred.	Ship-launched	projectiles	had	battered	the	keep’s	sloped	walls	at
some	time	in	the	past;	deep	cracks	radiated	from	the	wounds,	and	one	of	the
square	towers	had	slumped	and	shifted	and	now	leaned	precariously	outward.
Yet	a	row	of	pennants	fluttered	beyond	the	wall.
Around	each	keep,	down	the	slopes	and	in	the	flat,	lowest	stretches,
buildings	crowded	every	available	space,	mimicking	its	particular	style.
Borders	were	marked	by	wide	streets,	winding	inland,	where	one	style	faced
the	other	down	their	crooked	lengths.
Three	tribes	had	settled	here,	Karsa	concluded	as	the	ship	eased	its	way
through	the	crowds	of	fisherboats	and	traders	in	the	bay.
Torvald	Nom	rose	to	his	feet	in	a	rustle	of	chains,	scratching	vigorously	at
his	snarled	beard.	His	eyes	glittered	as	he	gazed	at	the	city.	‘Malyntaeas,’	he
sighed.	‘Nathii,	Genabarii	and	Korhivi,	side	by	side	by	side.	And	what	keeps
them	from	each	other ’s	throats?	Naught	but	the	Malazan	overlord	and	three
companies	from	the	Ashok	Regiment.	See	that	half-ruined	keep	over	there,
Karsa?	That’s	from	the	war	between	the	Nathii	and	the	Korhivi.	The	whole
Nathii	fleet	filled	this	bay,	flinging	stones	at	the	walls,	and	they	were	so	busy
with	trying	to	kill	each	other	that	they	didn’t	even	notice	when	the	Malazan
forces	arrived.	Dujek	Onearm,	three	legions	from	the	2nd,	the	Bridgeburners,
and	two	High	Mages.	That’s	all	Dujek	had,	and	by	day’s	end	the	Nathii	fleet	was
on	the	bay’s	muddy	bottom,	the	Genabarii	royal	line	holed	up	in	their	bloodred	castle	were	all	dead,	and	the	Korhivi	keep	had	capitulated.’
The	ship	was	approaching	a	berth	alongside	a	broad,	stone	pier,	sailors


scampering	about	on	all	sides.
Torvald	was	smiling.	‘All	well	and	good,	you	might	be	thinking.	The
forceful	imposition	of	peace	and	all	that.	Only,	the	city’s	Fist	is	about	to	lose
two	of	his	three	companies.	Granted,	replacements	are	supposedly	on	the	way.
But	when?	From	where?	How	many?	See	what	happens,	my	dear	Teblor,	when
your	tribe	gets	too	big?	Suddenly,	the	simplest	things	become	ungainly,
unmanageable.	Confusion	seeps	in	like	fog,	and	everyone	gropes	blind	and
dumb.’
A	voice	cackled	from	slightly	behind	and	to	Karsa’s	left.	A	bandy-legged,
bald	officer	stepped	into	view,	his	eyes	on	the	berth	closing	ahead,	a	sour	grin
twisting	his	mouth.	In	Nathii,	he	said,	‘The	bandit	chief	pontificates	on	politics,
speaking	from	experience	no	doubt,	what	with	having	to	manage	a	dozen
unruly	highwaymen.	And	why	are	you	telling	this	brainless	fool,	anyway?	Ah,
of	course,	a	captive	and	uncomplaining	audience.’
‘Well,	there	is	that,’	Torvald	conceded.	‘You	are	the	First	Mate?	I	was
wondering,	sir,	about	how	long	we’d	be	staying	here	in	Malyntaeas—’
‘You	were	wondering,	were	you?	Fine,	allow	me	to	explain	the	course	of
events	for	the	next	day	or	two.	One.	No	prisoners	leave	this	ship.	Two.	We	pick
up	six	squads	of	the	2nd	Company.	Three,	we	sail	on	to	Genabaris.	You’re	then
shipped	off	and	I’m	done	with	you.’
‘I	sense	a	certain	unease	in	you,	sir,’	Torvald	said.	‘Have	you	security
concerns	regarding	fair	Malyntaeas?’
The	man’s	head	slowly	turned.	He	regarded	the	Daru	for	a	moment,	then
grunted.	‘You’re	the	one	might	be	a	Claw.	Well,	if	you	are,	add	this	to	your
damned	report.	There’s	Crimson	Guard	in	Malyntaeas,	stirring	up	the	Korhivi.
The	shadows	ain’t	safe,	and	it’s	getting	so	bad	that	the	patrols	don’t	go
anywhere	unless	there’s	two	squads	at	the	minimum.	And	now	two-thirds	of
them	are	being	sent	home.	The	situation	in	Malyntaeas	is	about	to	get	very
unsettled.’
‘The	Empress	would	certainly	be	remiss	to	discount	the	opinions	of	her
officers,’	Torvald	replied.
The	First	Mate’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘She	would	at	that.’
He	then	strode	ahead,	bellowing	at	a	small	group	of	sailors	who’d	run	out
of	things	to	do.
Torvald	tugged	at	his	beard,	glanced	over	at	Karsa	and	winked.	‘Crimson
Guard.	That’s	troubling	indeed.	For	the	Malazans,	that	is.’
	
Days	vanished.	Karsa	became	aware	once	again	as	the	wagon	bed	pitched


wildly	under	him.	His	joints	were	afire,	as	his	weight	was	shifted,	chains
snapping	taut	to	jolt	his	limbs.	He	was	being	wheeled	through	the	air,
suspended	from	a	pulley	beneath	a	creaking	framework	of	beams.	Ropes
whipped	about,	voices	shouting	from	below.	Overhead,	seagulls	glided	above
masts	and	rigging.	Figures	clung	to	that	rigging,	staring	down	at	the	Teblor.
The	pulley	squealed,	and	Karsa	watched	the	sailors	get	smaller.	Hands
gripped	the	bed’s	edges	on	all	sides,	steadying	it.	The	end	nearest	his	feet
dropped	further,	drawing	him	slowly	upright.
He	saw	before	him	the	mid-and	foredecks	of	a	huge	ship,	over	which
swarmed	haulers	and	stevedores,	sailors	and	soldiers.	Supplies	were	piled
everywhere,	the	bundles	being	shifted	below	decks	through	gaping	hatches.
The	bed’s	bottom	end	scraped	the	deck.	Shouts,	a	flurry	of	activity,	and	the
Teblor	felt	the	bed	lifted	slightly,	swinging	free	once	more,	then	it	was	lowered
again,	and	this	time	Karsa	could	both	hear	and	feel	the	top	edge	thump	against
the	main	mast.	Ropes	were	drawn	through	chains	to	bind	the	platform	in	place.
Workers	stepped	away,	then,	staring	up	at	Karsa.
Who	smiled.
Torvald’s	voice	came	from	one	side,	‘Aye,	it’s	a	ghastly	smile,	but	he’s
harmless,	I	assure	you	all.	No	need	for	concern,	unless	of	course	you	happen
to	be	a	superstitious	lot—’
There	was	a	solid	crack	and	Torvald	Nom’s	body	sprawled	down	in	front
of	Karsa.	Blood	poured	from	his	shattered	nose.	The	Daru	blinked	stupidly,	but
made	no	move	to	rise.	A	large	figure	strode	to	stand	over	Torvald.	Not	tall,	but
wide,	and	his	skin	was	dusky	blue.	He	glared	down	at	the	bandit	chief,	then
studied	the	ring	of	silent	sailors	facing	him.
‘It’s	called	sticking	the	knife	in	and	twisting,’	he	growled	in	Malazan.	‘And
he	got	every	damned	one	of	you.’	He	turned	and	studied	Torvald	Nom	once
more.	‘Another	stab	like	that	one,	prisoner,	and	I’ll	see	your	tongue	cut	out	and
nailed	to	the	mast.	And	if	there’s	any	other	kind	of	trouble	from	you	or	this
giant	here,	I’ll	chain	you	up	there	beside	him	then	toss	the	whole	damned	thing
overboard.	Nod	if	you	understand	me.’
Wiping	the	blood	from	his	face,	Torvald	Nom	jerked	his	head	in	assent.
The	blue-skinned	man	swung	his	hard	gaze	up	to	Karsa.	‘Wipe	that	smile
off	your	face	or	a	knife	will	kiss	it,’	he	said.	‘You	don’t	need	lips	to	eat	and	the
other	miners	won’t	care	either	way.’
Karsa’s	empty	smile	remained	fixed.
The	man’s	face	darkened.	‘You	heard	me…’
Torvald	raised	a	hesitant	hand,	‘Captain,	sir,	if	you	will.	He	does	not
understand	you—his	brain	is	addled.’


‘Bosun!’
‘Sir!’
‘Gag	the	bastard.’
‘Aye,	Captain.’
A	salt-crusted	rag	was	quickly	wrapped	about	Karsa’s	lower	face,	making
it	difficult	to	breathe.
‘Don’t	suffocate	him,	you	idiots.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
The	knots	were	loosened,	the	cloth	pulled	down	to	beneath	his	nose.
The	captain	wheeled.	‘Now,	what	in	Mael’s	name	are	you	all	standing
around	for?’
As	the	workers	all	scattered,	the	captain	thumping	away,	Torvald	slowly
climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Sorry,	Karsa,’	he	mumbled	through	split	lips.	‘I’ll	get	that
off	you,	I	promise.	It	may	take	a	little	time,	alas.	And	when	I	do,	friend,	please,
don’t	be	smiling…’
	
Why	have	you	come	to	me,	Karsa	Orlong,	son	of	Synyg,	grandson	of	Pahlk?
One	presence,	and	six.	Faces	that	might	have	been	carved	from	rock,
barely	visible	through	a	swirling	haze.	One,	and	six.
‘I	am	before	you,	Urugal,’	Karsa	said,	a	truth	that	left	him	confused.
You	are	not.	Only	your	mind,	Karsa	Orlong.	It	has	fled	your	mortal	prison.
‘Then,	I	have	failed	you,	Urugal.’
Failed.	Yes.	You	have	abandoned	us	and	so	in	turn	we	must	abandon	you.
We	must	seek	another,	one	of	greater	strength.	One	who	does	not	accept
surrender.	One	who	does	not	flee.	In	you,	Karsa	Orlong,	our	faith	was
misplaced.
The	haze	thickened,	dull	colours	flashing	through	it.	He	found	himself
standing	atop	a	hill	that	shifted	and	crunched	beneath	him.	Chains	stretched	out
from	his	wrists,	down	the	slopes	on	all	sides.	Hundreds	of	chains,	reaching	out
into	the	rainbow	mists,	and	at	the	unseen	ends	of	each	one,	there	was
movement.	Looking	down,	Karsa	saw	bones	beneath	his	feet.	Teblor.
Lowlander.	The	entire	hill	was	naught	but	bones.
The	chains	slackened	suddenly.
Movement	in	the	mists,	drawing	closer	from	every	direction.
Terror	surged	through	Karsa.
Corpses,	many	of	them	headless,	staggered	into	view.	The	chains	that	held
the	horrifying	creatures	to	Karsa	penetrated	their	chests	through	gaping	holes.
Withered,	long-nailed	hands	reached	towards	him.	Stumbling	on	the	slopes,	the


apparitions	began	climbing.
Karsa	struggled,	seeking	to	flee,	but	he	was	surrounded.	The	very	bones	at
his	feet	held	him	fast,	clattering	and	shifting	tighter	about	his	ankles.
A	hiss,	a	susurration	of	voices	through	rotting	throats.	‘Lead	us,
Warleader…’
He	shrieked.
‘Lead	us,	Warleader.’
Climbing	closer,	arms	reaching	up,	nails	clawing	the	air—
A	hand	closed	about	his	ankle.
Karsa’s	head	snapped	back,	struck	wood	with	a	resounding	crunch.	He
gulped	air	that	slid	like	sand	down	his	throat,	choking	him.	Eyes	opening,	he
saw	before	him	the	gently	pitching	decks	of	the	ship,	figures	standing
motionless,	staring	at	him.
He	coughed	behind	his	gag,	each	convulsion	a	rage	of	fire	in	his	lungs.	His
throat	felt	torn,	and	he	realized	that	he	had	been	screaming.	Enough	to	spasm
his	muscles	so	they	now	clenched	tight,	cutting	off	the	flow	of	his	air	passages.
He	was	dying.
The	whisper	of	a	voice	deep	in	his	mind:	Perhaps	we	will	not	abandon	you,
yet.	Breathe,	Karsa	Orlong.	Unless,	of	course,	you	wish	to	once	more	meet	your
dead.
Breathe.
Someone	snatched	the	gag	from	his	mouth.	Cold	air	flooded	his	lungs.
Through	watering	eyes,	Karsa	stared	down	at	Torvald	Nom.	The	Daru	was
barely	recognizable,	so	dark	was	his	skin,	so	thick	and	matted	his	beard.	He
had	used	the	very	chains	holding	Karsa	to	climb	up	within	reach	of	the	gag,
and	was	now	shouting	unintelligible	words	the	Teblor	barely	heard—words
flung	back	at	the	frozen,	fear-stricken	Malazans.
Karsa’s	eyes	finally	made	note	of	the	sky	beyond	the	ship’s	prow.	There
were	colours	there,	amidst	churning	clouds,	flashing	and	blossoming,	swirls
bleeding	out	from	what	seemed	huge,	open	wounds.	The	storm—if	that	was
what	it	was—commanded	the	entire	sky	ahead.	And	then	he	saw	the	chains,
snapping	down	through	the	clouds	to	crack	thunderously	on	the	horizon.
Hundreds	of	chains,	impossibly	huge,	black,	whipping	in	the	air	with
explosions	of	red	dust,	crisscrossing	the	sky.	Horror	filled	his	soul.
There	was	no	wind.	The	sails	hung	limp.	The	ship	lolled	on	lazy,	turgid
seas.	And	the	storm	was	coming.
A	sailor	approached	with	a	tin	cup	filled	with	water,	lifted	it	up	to	Torvald,
who	took	it	and	brought	it	to	Karsa’s	scabbed,	crusted	lips.	The	brackish	liquid
entered	his	mouth,	burning	like	acid.	He	drew	his	head	away	from	the	cup.


Torvald	was	speaking	in	low	tones,	words	that	slowly	grew
comprehensible	to	Karsa.	‘…long	lost	to	us.	Only	your	beating	heart	and	the
rise	and	fall	of	your	chest	told	us	you	still	lived.	It	has	been	weeks	and	weeks,
my	friend.	You’d	keep	hardly	anything	down.	There’s	almost	nothing	left	of
you—you’re	showing	bones	where	no	bones	should	be.
‘And	then	this	damned	becalming.	Day	after	day.	Not	a	cloud	in	the	sky…
until	three	bells	past.	Three	bells,	when	you	stirred,	Karsa	Orlong.	When	you
tilted	your	head	back	and	began	screaming	behind	your	gag.	Here,	more	water
—you	must	drink.
‘Karsa,	they’re	saying	you’ve	called	this	storm.	Do	you	understand?	They
want	you	to	send	it	away—they’ll	do	anything,	they’ll	unchain	you,	set	you
free.	Anything,	friend,	anything	at	all—just	send	this	unholy	storm	away.	Do
you	understand?’
Ahead,	he	could	see	now,	the	seas	were	exploding	with	each	lash	of	the
black,	monstrous	chains,	twisting	spouts	of	water	skyward	as	each	chain
retreated	upward	once	more.	The	billowing,	heaving	clouds	seemed	to	lean
forward	over	the	ocean,	closing	on	their	position	from	all	sides	now.
Karsa	saw	the	Malazan	captain	descend	from	the	foredeck,	the	blue-tinged
skin	on	his	face	a	sickly	greyish	hue.	‘This	is	no	Mael-blessed	squall,	Daru,
meaning	it	don’t	belong.’	He	jerked	a	trembling	finger	at	Karsa.	‘Tell	him	he’s
running	out	of	time.	Tell	him	to	send	it	away.	Once	he	does	that,	we	can
negotiate.	Tell	him,	damn	you!’
‘I	have	been,	Captain!’	Torvald	retorted.	‘But	how	in	Hood’s	name	do	you
expect	him	to	send	anything	away	when	I’m	not	even	sure	he	knows	where	he
is?	Worse,	we	don’t	even	know	for	sure	if	he’s	responsible!’
‘Let’s	see,	shall	we?’	The	captain	spun	round,	gestured.	A	score	of
crewmen	rushed	forward,	axes	in	hand.
Torvald	was	dragged	down	and	thrown	to	the	deck.
The	axes	chopped	through	the	heavy	ropes	binding	the	platform	to	the
mast.	More	crew	came	forward	then.	A	ramp	was	laid	out,	angled	up	to	the
starboard	gunnel.	Log	rollers	were	positioned	beneath	the	platform	as	it	was
roughly	lowered.
‘Wait!’	Torvald	cried	out.	‘You	can’t—’
‘We	can,’	the	captain	growled.
‘At	least	unchain	him!’
‘Not	a	chance,	Torvald.’	The	captain	grabbed	a	passing	sailor	by	the	arm.
‘Find	everything	this	giant	owned—all	that	stuff	confiscated	from	the
slavemaster.	It’s	all	going	with	him.	Hurry,	damn	you!’
Chains	ripped	the	seas	on	all	sides	close	enough	to	lift	spray	over	the	ship,


each	detonation	causing	hull,	masts	and	rigging	to	tremble.
Karsa	stared	up	at	the	tumbling	stormclouds	as	the	platform	was	dragged
along	the	rollers,	up	the	ramp.
‘Those	chains	will	sink	it!’	Torvald	said.
‘Maybe,	maybe	not.’
‘What	if	it	lands	wrong	way	up?’
‘Then	he	drowns,	and	Mael	can	have	him.’
‘Karsa!	Damn	you!	Cease	playing	your	game	of	mindlessness!	Say
something!’
The	warrior	croaked	out	two	words,	but	the	noise	that	came	from	his	lips
was	unintelligible	even	to	him.
‘What	did	he	say?’	the	captain	demanded.
‘I	don’t	know!’	Torvald	screamed.	‘Karsa,	damn	you,	try	again!’
He	did,	yielding	the	same	guttural	noise.	He	began	repeating	the	same	two
words,	over	and	over	again,	as	the	sailors	pushed	and	pulled	the	platform	up
onto	the	gunnel	until	it	was	balanced	precariously,	half	over	the	deck,	half	over
the	sea.
Directly	above	them,	as	he	uttered	his	two	words	once	more,	Karsa
watched	the	last	patch	of	clear	sky	vanish,	like	the	closing	of	a	tunnel	mouth.	A
sudden	plunge	into	darkness,	and	Karsa	knew	it	was	too	late,	even	as,	in	the
sudden	terror-stricken	silence,	his	words	came	out	clear	and	audible.
‘Go	away.’
From	overhead,	chains	snapped	down,	massive,	plunging,	reaching
directly	for—it	seemed—Karsa’s	own	chest.
A	blinding	flash,	a	detonation,	the	splintering	crackle	of	masts	toppling,
spars	and	rigging	crashing	down.	The	entire	ship	was	falling	away	beneath
Karsa,	beneath	the	platform	itself,	which	slid	wildly	down	the	length	of	the
gunnel	before	crunching	against	the	foredeck	railing,	pivoting,	then	plunging
for	the	waves	below.
He	stared	down	at	the	water ’s	sickly	green,	heaving	surface.
The	entire	platform	shuddered	in	its	fall	as	the	cargo	ship’s	hull	rolled	up
and	struck	its	edge.
Karsa	caught	an	upside-down	glimpse	of	the	ship—its	deck	torn	open	by
the	impact	of	the	huge	chains,	its	three	masts	gone,	the	twisted	forms	of	sailors
visible	in	the	wreckage—then	he	was	staring	up	at	the	sky,	at	a	virulent,
massive	wound	directly	overhead.
A	fierce	impact,	then	darkness.
His	eyes	opened	to	a	faint	gloom,	the	desultory	lap	of	waves,	the	sodden
boards	beneath	him	creaking	as	the	platform	rocked	to	someone	else’s


movement.	Thumps;	low,	gasping	mutters.
The	Teblor	groaned.	The	joints	of	every	limb	felt	torn	inside.
‘Karsa?’	Torvald	Nom	crawled	into	view.
‘What—what	has	happened?’
The	shackles	remained	on	the	Daru’s	wrists,	the	chains	connected	on	the
other	end	to	arm-length,	roughly	broken	fragments	of	the	deck.	‘Easy	for	you,
sleeping	through	all	the	hard	work,’	he	grumbled	as	he	moved	into	a	sitting
position,	pulling	his	arms	around	his	knees.	‘This	sea’s	a	lot	colder	than	you’d
think,	and	these	chains	didn’t	help.	I’ve	nearly	drowned	a	dozen	times,	but
you’ll	be	glad	to	know	we	now	have	three	water	casks	and	a	bundle	of
something	that	might	be	food—I’ve	yet	to	untie	its	bindings.	Oh,	and	your
sword	and	armour,	both	of	which	float,	of	course.’
The	sky	overhead	looked	unnatural,	luminous	grey	shot	through	with
streaks	of	darker	pewter,	and	the	water	smelled	of	clay	and	silts.	‘Where	are
we?’
‘I	was	hoping	you’d	know.	It’s	pretty	damned	clear	to	me	that	you	called
that	storm	down	on	us.	That’s	the	only	explanation	for	what	happened—’
‘I	called	nothing.’
‘Those	chains	of	lightning,	Karsa—not	one	missed	its	target.	Not	a	single
Malazan	was	left	standing.	The	ship	was	falling	apart—your	platform	had
landed	right-side	up	and	was	drifting	away.	I	was	still	working	free	when
Silgar	and	three	of	his	men	climbed	out	of	the	hold,	dragging	their	chains	with
them—the	hull	was	riven	through,	coming	apart	all	around	the	bastards.	Only
one	had	drowned.’
‘I	am	surprised	they	didn’t	kill	us.’
‘You	were	out	of	reach,	at	least	to	start	with.	Me,	they	threw	overboard.	A
short	while	later,	after	I’d	made	it	to	this	platform,	I	saw	them	in	the	lone
surviving	dory.	They	were	rounding	the	sinking	wreck,	and	I	knew	they	were
coming	for	us.	Then,	somewhere	on	the	other	side	of	the	ship,	beyond	my
sight,	something	must	have	happened,	because	they	never	reappeared.	They
vanished,	dory	and	all.	The	ship	then	went	down,	though	a	lot	of	stuff	has	been
coming	back	up.	So,	I’ve	been	resupplying.	Collecting	rope	and	wood,	too—
everything	I	could	drag	over	here.	Karsa,	your	platform	is	slowly	sinking.
None	of	the	water	casks	are	full,	so	that’s	added	some	buoyancy,	and	I’ll	be
slipping	more	planks	and	boards	under	it,	which	should	help.	Even	so…’
‘Break	my	chains,	Torvald	Nom.’
The	Daru	nodded,	then	ran	a	hand	through	his	dripping,	tangled	hair.	‘I’ve
checked	on	that,	friend.	It	will	take	some	work.’
‘Is	there	land	about?’


Torvald	glanced	over	at	the	Teblor.	‘Karsa,	this	isn’t	the	Meningalle
Ocean.	We’re	somewhere	else.	Is	there	land	nearby?	None	in	sight.	I	overheard
Silgar	talking	about	a	warren,	which	is	one	of	those	paths	a	sorcerer	uses.	He
said	he	thought	we’d	all	entered	one.	There	may	be	no	land	here.	None	at	all.
Hood	knows	there’s	no	wind	and	we	don’t	seem	to	be	moving	in	any	direction
—the	wreckage	of	the	ship	is	still	all	around	us.	In	fact,	it	almost	pulled	us
under	with	it.	Also,	this	sea	is	fresh	water—no,	I	wouldn’t	want	to	drink	it.	It’s
full	of	silt.	No	fish.	No	birds.	No	signs	of	life	anywhere.’
‘I	need	water.	Food.’
Torvald	crawled	over	to	the	wrapped	bundle	he	had	retrieved.	‘Water,	we
have.	Food?	No	guarantees.	Karsa,	did	you	call	upon	your	gods	or
something?’
‘No.’
‘What	started	you	screaming	like	that,	then?’
‘A	dream.’
‘A	dream?’
‘Yes.	Is	there	food?’
‘Uh,	I’m	not	sure,	it’s	mostly	padding…around	a	small	wooden	box.’
Karsa	listened	to	ripping	sounds	as	Torvald	pulled	away	the	padding.
‘There’s	a	mark	branded	on	it.	Looks…Moranth,	I	think.’	The	lid	was	pried
free.	‘More	padding,	and	a	dozen	clay	balls…with	wax	plugs	on	them—oh,
Beru	fend—’	The	Daru	backed	away	from	the	package.	‘Hood’s	dripping
tongue.	I	think	I	know	what	these	are.	Never	seen	one,	but	I’ve	heard	about
them—who	hasn’t?	Well…’	He	laughed	suddenly.	‘If	Silgar	reappears	and
comes	after	us,	he’s	in	for	a	surprise.	So’s	anyone	else	who	might	mean
trouble.’	He	edged	forward	again	and	carefully	replaced	the	padding,	then	the
lid.
‘What	have	you	found?’
‘Alchemical	munitions.	Weapons	of	war.	You	throw	them,	preferably	as	far
as	you	can.	The	clay	breaks	and	the	chemicals	within	explode.	What	you	don’t
want	to	happen	is	have	one	break	in	your	hand,	or	at	your	feet.	Because	then
you’re	dead.	The	Malazans	have	been	using	these	in	the	Genabackan
campaign.’
‘Water,	please.’
‘Right.	There’s	a	ladle	here…somewhere…found	it.’
A	moment	later	Torvald	hovered	over	Karsa,	and	the	Teblor	drank,	slowly,
all	the	water	the	ladle	contained.
‘Better?’
‘Yes.’


‘More?’
‘Not	yet.	Free	me.’
‘I	need	to	get	back	into	the	water	first,	Karsa.	I	need	to	push	some	planks
under	this	raft.’
‘Very	well.’
	
There	seemed	to	be	no	day	and	no	night	in	this	strange	place;	the	sky	shifted
hue	occasionally,	as	if	jostled	by	high,	remote	winds,	the	streaks	of	pewter
twisting	and	stretching,	but	there	was	no	change	otherwise.	The	air
surrounding	the	raft	remained	motionless,	damp	and	cool	and	strangely	thick.
The	flanges	anchoring	Karsa’s	chains	were	on	the	underside,	holding	him
in	place	in	a	fashion	identical	to	that	in	the	slave	trench	at	Silver	Lake.	The
shackles	themselves	had	been	welded	shut.	Torvald’s	only	recourse	was	to
attempt	to	widen	the	holes	in	the	planks	where	the	chains	went	through,	using
an	iron	buckle	to	dig	at	the	wood.
Months	of	imprisonment	had	left	him	weakened,	forcing	frequent	rests,
and	the	buckle	made	a	bloody	mess	of	his	hands,	but	once	begun	the	Daru
would	not	relent.	Karsa	measured	the	passing	of	time	by	the	rhythmic
crunching	and	scraping	sounds,	noting	how	each	pause	to	rest	stretched	longer,
until	Torvald’s	breathing	told	him	the	Daru	had	fallen	into	an	exhausted	sleep.
Then,	the	Teblor ’s	only	company	was	the	sullen	lap	of	water	as	it	slipped	back
and	forth	across	the	platform.
For	all	the	wood	positioned	beneath	it,	the	raft	was	still	sinking,	and	Karsa
knew	that	Torvald	would	not	be	able	to	free	him	in	time.
He	had	never	before	feared	death.	But	now,	he	knew	that	Urugal	and	the
other	Faces	in	the	Rock	would	abandon	his	soul,	would	leave	it	to	the	hungry
vengeance	of	those	thousands	of	ghastly	corpses.	He	knew	his	dream	had
revealed	to	him	a	fate	that	was	real,	and	inevitable.	And	inexplicable.	Who	had
set	such	horrid	creatures	upon	him?	Undead	Teblor,	undead	lowlander,	warrior
and	child,	an	army	of	corpses,	all	chained	to	him.	Why?
Lead	us,	Warleader.
Where?
And	now,	he	would	drown.	Here,	in	this	unknown	place,	far	from	his
village.	His	claims	to	glory,	his	vows,	all	now	mocking	him,	whispering	a
chorus	of	muted	creaks,	soft	groans…
‘Torvald.’
‘Uh…what?	What	is	it?’
‘I	hear	new	sounds—’


The	Daru	sat	up,	blinking	crusted	silt	from	his	eyes.	He	looked	around.
‘Beru	fend!’
‘What	do	you	see?’
The	Daru’s	gaze	was	fixed	on	something	beyond	Karsa’s	head.	‘Well,	it
seems	there’s	currents	here	after	all,	though	which	of	us	has	done	the	moving?
Ships,	Karsa.	A	score	or	more	of	them,	all	dead	in	the	water,	like	us.	Floating
wrecks.	No	movement	on	them…that	I	can	see	as	yet.	Looks	like	there	was	a
battle.	With	plenty	of	sorcery	being	flung	back	and	forth…’
Some	indiscernible	shift	drew	the	ghostly	flotilla	into	Karsa’s	view,	an
image	on	its	side	to	his	right.	There	were	two	distinct	styles	of	craft.	Twenty	or
so	were	low	and	sleek,	the	wood	stained	mostly	black,	though	where	impacts
and	collisions	and	other	damage	had	occurred	the	cedar ’s	natural	red	showed
like	gaping	wounds.	Many	of	these	ships	sat	low	in	the	water,	a	few	with	their
decks	awash.	They	were	single-masted,	square-sailed,	the	torn	and	shredded
sails	also	black,	shimmering	in	the	pellucid	light.	The	remaining	six	ships
were	larger,	high-decked	and	three-masted.	They	had	been	fashioned	from	a
wood	that	was	true	black—not	stained—as	was	evinced	from	the	gashes	and
splintered	planks	marring	the	broad,	bellied	hulls.	Not	one	of	these	latter	ships
sat	level	in	the	water;	all	leaned	one	way	or	the	other,	two	of	them	at	very	steep
angles.
‘We	should	board	a	few,’	Torvald	said.	‘There	will	be	tools,	maybe	even
weapons.	I	could	swim	over—there,	that	raider.	It’s	not	yet	awash,	and	I	see	lots
of	wreckage.’
Karsa	sensed	the	Daru’s	hesitation.	‘What	is	wrong?	Swim.’
‘Uh,	I	am	a	little	concerned,	friend.	I	seem	to	have	not	much	strength	left,
and	these	chains	on	me…’
The	Teblor	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then	he	grunted.	‘So	be	it.	No	more
can	be	asked	of	you,	Torvald	Nom.’
The	Daru	slowly	turned	to	regard	Karsa.	‘Compassion,	Karsa	Orlong?	Is	it
helplessness	that	has	brought	you	to	this?’
‘Too	many	empty	words	from	you,	lowlander,’	the	Teblor	sighed.	‘There
are	no	gifts	that	come	from	being—’
A	soft	splash	sounded,	then	sputtering	and	thrashing—the	sputtering
turning	into	laughter.	Torvald,	now	alongside	the	raft,	moved	into	Karsa’s	line
of	sight.	‘Now	we	know	why	those	ships	are	canted	so!’	And	the	Teblor	saw
that	Torvald	was	standing,	the	water	lapping	around	his	upper	chest.	‘I	can	drag
us	over,	now.	This	also	tells	us	we’re	the	ones	who’ve	been	drifting.	And
there’s	something	else.’
‘What?’


The	Daru	had	begun	pulling	the	raft	along,	using	Karsa’s	chains.	‘These
ships	all	grounded	during	the	battle—I	think	a	lot	of	the	hand	to	hand	fighting
was	actually	between	ships,	chest-deep	in	water.’
‘How	do	you	know	this?’
‘Because	there’s	bodies	all	around	me,	Karsa	Orlong.	Against	my	shins,
rolling	about	on	the	sands—it’s	an	unpleasant	feeling,	let	me	tell	you.’
‘Pull	one	up.	Let	us	see	these	combatants.’
‘All	in	good	time,	Teblor.	We’re	almost	there.	Also,	these	bodies,	they’re,
uh,	rather	soft.	We	might	find	something	more	recognizable	if	there’s	any	on
the	ship	itself.	Here’—there	was	a	bump—‘we’re	alongside.	A	moment,	while	I
climb	aboard.’
Karsa	listened	to	the	Daru’s	grunts	and	gasps,	the	slipping	scrabble	of	his
bare	feet,	the	rustle	of	chains,	finally	followed	by	a	muted	thud.
Then	silence.
‘Torvald	Nom?’
Nothing.
The	raft’s	end	beyond	Karsa’s	head	bumped	alongside	the	raider ’s	hull,
then	began	drifting	along	it.	Cool	water	flowed	across	the	surface,	and	Karsa
recoiled	at	the	contact,	but	could	do	nothing	as	it	seeped	beneath	him.	‘Torvald
Nom!’
His	voice	strangely	echoed.
No	reply.
Laughter	rumbled	from	Karsa,	a	sound	oddly	disconnected	from	the
Teblor ’s	own	will.	In	water	that,	had	he	been	able	to	stand,	would	likely	rise	no
higher	than	his	hips,	he	would	drown.	Assuming	there	would	be	time	for	that.
Perhaps	Torvald	Nom	had	been	slain—it	would	be	a	bizarre	battle	if	there	had
been	no	survivors—and	even	now,	beyond	his	sight,	the	Teblor	was	being
looked	down	upon,	his	fate	hanging	in	the	balance.
The	raft	edged	near	the	ship’s	prow.
A	scuffling	sound,	then,	‘Where?	Oh.’
‘Torvald	Nom?’
Footsteps,	half-stumbling,	moved	alongside	from	the	ship’s	deck.	‘Sorry,
friend.	I	think	I	must	have	passed	out.	Were	you	laughing	a	moment	ago?’
‘I	was.	What	have	you	found?’
‘Not	much.	Yet.	Bloodstains—dried.	Trails	through	it.	This	ship	has	been
thoroughly	stripped.	Hood	below—you’re	sinking!’
‘And	I	do	not	think	you	will	be	able	to	do	anything	about	it,	lowlander.
Leave	me	to	my	fate.	Take	the	water,	and	my	weapons—’
But	Torvald	had	reappeared,	rope	in	his	hand,	sliding	down	over	the


gunnel	near	the	high	prow	and	back	into	the	water.	Breathing	hard,	he	fumbled
with	the	rope	for	a	moment	before	managing	to	slip	it	underneath	the	chains.
He	then	drew	it	along	and	repeated	the	effort	on	the	other	side	of	the	raft.	A
third	time,	down	near	Karsa’s	left	foot,	then	a	fourth	loop	opposite.
The	Teblor	could	feel	the	wet,	heavy	rope	being	dragged	through	the
chains.	‘What	are	you	doing?’
Torvald	made	no	reply.	Still	trailing	the	rope,	he	climbed	back	onto	the
ship.	There	was	another	long	stretch	of	silence,	then	Karsa	heard	movement
once	more,	and	the	rope	slowly	tautened.
Torvald’s	head	and	shoulders	moved	into	view.	The	lowlander	was	deathly
pale.	‘Best	I	could	do,	friend.	There	may	be	some	more	settling,	but	hopefully
not	much.	I	will	check	again	on	you	in	a	little	while.	Don’t	worry,	I	won’t	let
you	drown.	I’m	going	to	do	some	exploring	right	now—the	bastards	couldn’t
have	taken	everything.’
He	vanished	from	Karsa’s	line	of	sight.
The	Teblor	waited,	racked	with	shivering	as	the	sea	slowly	embraced	him.
The	level	had	reached	his	ears,	muting	all	sounds	other	than	the	turgid	swirl	of
water.	He	watched	the	four	lengths	of	rope	slowly	growing	tighter	above	him.
It	was	difficult	to	recall	a	time	when	his	limbs	had	been	free	to	move
without	restraint,	when	his	raw,	suppurating	wrists	had	not	known	the
implacable	iron	grip	of	shackles,	when	he	had	not	felt—deep	in	his	withered
body—a	vast	weakness,	a	frailty,	his	blood	flowing	as	thin	as	water.	He	closed
his	eyes	and	felt	his	mind	falling	away.
Away…
Urugal,	I	stand	before	you	once	more.	Before	these	faces	in	the	rock,	before
my	gods.	Urugal—
‘I	see	no	Teblor	standing	before	me.	I	see	no	warrior	wading	through	his
enemies,	harvesting	souls.	I	do	not	see	the	dead	piled	high	on	the	ground,	as
numerous	as	a	herd	of	bhederin	driven	over	a	cliff.	Where	are	my	gifts?	Who	is
this	who	claims	to	serve	me?’
Urugal.	You	are	a	bloodthirsty	god—
‘A	truth	a	Teblor	warrior	revels	in!’
As	I	once	did.	But	now,	Urugal,	I	am	no	longer	so	sure—
‘Who	stands	before	us?	Not	a	Teblor	warrior!	Not	a	servant	of	mine!’
Urugal.	What	are	these	‘bhederin’	you	spoke	of?	What	are	these	herds?
Where	among	the	lands	of	the	Teblor—
‘Karsa!’
He	flinched.	Opened	his	eyes.
Torvald	Nom,	a	burlap	sack	over	one	shoulder,	was	climbing	back	down.


His	feet	made	contact	with	the	raft,	pushing	it	a	fraction	deeper.	Water	stung	the
outside	corners	of	Karsa’s	eyes.
The	sack	made	numerous	clunking	sounds	as	the	Daru	set	it	down	and
reached	inside.	‘Tools,	Karsa!	A	shipwright’s	tools!’	He	drew	forth	a	chisel	and
an	iron-capped	mallet.
The	Teblor	felt	his	heart	begin	pounding	hard	in	his	chest.
Torvald	set	the	chisel	against	a	chain	link,	then	began	hammering.
A	dozen	swings,	the	concussions	pealing	loudly	in	the	still,	murky	air,	then
the	chain	snapped.	Its	own	weight	swiftly	dragged	it	through	the	iron	ring	of
Karsa’s	right	wrist	shackle.	Then,	with	a	soft	rustle,	it	was	gone	beneath	the
sea’s	surface.	Agony	lanced	through	his	arm	as	he	attempted	to	move	it.	The
Teblor	grunted,	even	as	consciousness	slipped	away.
He	awoke	to	the	sounds	of	hammering,	down	beside	his	right	foot,	and
thundering	waves	of	pain,	through	which	he	heard,	dimly,	Torvald’s	voice.
‘…heavy,	Karsa.	You’ll	need	to	do	the	impossible.	You’ll	need	to	climb.
That	means	rolling	over,	getting	onto	your	hands	and	knees.	Standing.	Walking
—oh,	Hood,	you’re	right,	I’ll	need	to	think	of	something	else.	No	food
anywhere	on	this	damned	ship.’	There	was	a	loud	crack,	then	the	hiss	of	a	chain
falling	away.	‘That’s	it,	you’re	free.	Don’t	worry,	I’ve	retied	the	ropes	to	the
platform	itself—you	won’t	sink.	Free.	How’s	it	feel?	Never	mind—I’ll	ask	that
a	few	days	from	now.	Even	so,	you’re	free,	Karsa.	I	promised,	didn’t	I?	Let	it
not	be	said	that	Torvald	Nom	doesn’t	hold	to	his—well,	uh,	let	it	not	be	said
that	Torvald	Nom	isn’t	afraid	of	new	beginnings.’
‘Too	many	words,’	Karsa	muttered.
‘Aye,	far	too	many.	Try	moving,	at	least.’
‘I	am.’
‘Bend	your	right	arm.’
‘I	am	trying.’
‘Shall	I	do	it	for	you?’
‘Slowly.	Should	I	lose	consciousness,	do	not	cease.	And	do	the	same	for
the	remaining	limbs.’
He	felt	the	lowlander ’s	hands	grip	his	right	arm,	at	the	wrist	and	above	the
elbow,	then,	once	again,	mercifully,	blackness	swallowed	him.
When	he	came	to	once	more,	bundles	of	sodden	cloth	had	been	propped
beneath	his	head,	and	he	was	lying	on	his	side,	limbs	curled.	There	was	dull
pain	in	every	muscle,	every	joint,	yet	it	seemed	strangely	remote.	He	slowly
lifted	his	head.
He	was	still	on	the	platform.	The	ropes	that	held	it	to	the	ship’s	prow	had
prevented	it	from	sinking	further.	Torvald	Nom	was	nowhere	in	sight.


‘I	call	upon	the	blood	of	the	Teblor,’	Karsa	whispered.	‘All	that	is	within
me	must	be	used	now	to	heal,	to	gift	me	strength.	I	am	freed.	I	did	not
surrender.	The	warrior	remains.	He	remains…’	He	tried	to	move	his	arms.
Throbs	of	pain,	sharp,	but	bearable.	He	shifted	his	legs,	gasped	at	the	agony
flaring	in	his	hips.	A	moment	of	light-headedness,	threatening	oblivion	once
again…that	then	passed.
He	tried	to	push	himself	to	his	hands	and	knees.	Every	minuscule	shift	was
torture,	but	he	refused	to	surrender	to	it.	Sweat	streamed	down	his	limbs.
Waves	of	trembling	washed	through	him.	Eyes	squeezed	shut,	he	struggled	on.
He	had	no	idea	how	much	time	had	passed,	but	then	he	was	sitting,	the
realization	arriving	with	a	shock.	He	was	sitting,	his	full	weight	on	his
haunches,	and	the	pain	was	fading.	He	lifted	his	arms,	surprised	and	a	little
frightened	by	their	looseness,	horrified	by	their	thinness.
As	he	rested,	he	looked	about.	The	shattered	ships	remained,	detritus
clumped	in	makeshift	rafts	between	them.	Tattered	sails	hung	in	shrouds	from
the	few	remaining	masts.	The	prow	looming	beside	him	held	panels	crowded
with	carvings:	figures,	locked	in	battle.	The	figures	were	long-limbed,
standing	on	versions	of	ships	closely	resembling	the	raiders	on	all	sides.	Yet
the	enemy	in	these	reliefs	were	not,	it	seemed,	the	ones	the	ship’s	owners	had
faced	here,	for	the	craft	they	rode	in	were,	if	anything,	smaller	and	lower	than
the	raiders.	The	warriors	looked	much	like	Teblor,	thick-limbed,	heavily
muscled,	though	in	stature	shorter	than	their	foes.
Movement	in	the	water,	a	gleaming	black	hump,	spike-finned,	rising	into
view	then	vanishing	again.	All	at	once,	more	appeared,	and	the	surface	of	the
water	between	the	ships	was	suddenly	aswirl.	There	was	life	in	this	sea	after	all,
and	it	had	come	to	feed.
The	platform	lurched	beneath	Karsa,	throwing	him	off	balance.	His	left
arm	shot	out	to	take	his	weight	as	he	began	toppling.	A	jarring	impact,
excruciating	pain—but	the	arm	held.
He	saw	a	bloated	corpse	roll	up	into	view	alongside	the	raft,	then	a	black
shape,	a	broad,	toothless	mouth,	gaping	wide,	sweeping	up	and	around	the
corpse,	swallowing	it	whole.	A	small	grey	eye	behind	a	spiny	whisker	flashed
into	sight	as	the	huge	fish	swept	past.	The	eye	swivelled	to	track	him,	then	the
creature	was	gone.
Karsa	had	not	seen	enough	of	the	corpse	to	judge	whether	it	was	a	match	to
him	in	size,	or	to	the	Daru,	Torvald	Nom.	But	the	fish	could	have	taken	Karsa
as	easily	as	it	had	the	corpse.
He	needed	to	stand.	Then,	to	climb.
And—as	he	watched	another	massive	black	shape	break	the	surface


alongside	another	ship,	a	shape	almost	as	long	as	the	ship	itself—he	would
have	to	do	it	quickly.
He	heard	footsteps	from	above,	then	Torvald	Nom	was	at	the	gunnel	beside
the	prow.	‘We’ve	got	to—oh,	Beru	bless	you,	Karsa!	Can	you	stand	up?	You’ve
no	choice—these	catfish	are	bigger	than	sharks	and	likely	just	as	nasty.	There’s
one—just	rolled	up	behind	you—it’s	circling,	it	knows	you’re	there!	Stand	up,
use	the	ropes!’
Nodding,	Karsa	reached	up	for	the	nearest	stretch	of	rope.
An	explosion	of	water	behind	him.	The	platform	shuddered,	wood
splintering—Torvald	screamed	a	warning—and	Karsa	knew	without	looking
back	over	his	shoulder	that	one	of	the	creatures	had	just	risen	up,	had	just
thrown	itself	bodily	onto	the	raft,	splitting	it	in	two.
The	rope	was	in	his	hand.	He	gripped	hard	as	the	sloshing	surface	beneath
him	seemed	to	vanish.	A	flood	of	water	around	his	legs,	rising	to	his	hips.
Karsa	closed	his	other	hand	on	the	same	rope.
‘Urugal!	Witness!’
He	drew	his	legs	from	the	foaming	water,	then,	hand	over	hand,	climbed
upward.	The	rope	swung	free	of	the	platform’s	fragments,	threw	him	against
the	ship’s	hull.	He	grunted	at	the	impact,	yet	would	not	let	go.
‘Karsa!	Your	legs!’
The	Teblor	looked	down,	saw	nothing	but	a	massive	mouth,	opened
impossibly	wide,	rising	up	beneath	him.
Hands	closed	on	his	wrists.	Screaming	at	the	pain	in	his	shoulders	and	hips,
Karsa	pulled	himself	upward	in	a	single	desperate	surge.
The	mouth	snapped	shut	in	a	spray	of	milky	water.
Knees	cracking	against	the	gunnel,	Karsa	scrambled	wildly	for	a	moment,
then	managed	to	shift	his	weight	over	the	rail,	drawing	his	legs	behind	him,	to
sprawl	with	a	heavy	thump	on	the	deck.
Torvald’s	shrieks	continued	unabated,	forcing	the	Teblor	to	roll	over—to
see	the	Daru	fighting	to	hold	on	to	what	appeared	to	be	some	kind	of	harpoon.
Torvald’s	shouts,	barely	comprehensible,	seemed	to	be	referring	to	a	line.
Karsa	glanced	about,	until	he	saw	that	the	harpoon’s	butt-end	held	a	thin	rope,
which	trailed	down	to	a	coiled	pile	almost	within	the	Teblor ’s	reach.	Groaning,
he	scrabbled	towards	it.	He	found	the	end,	began	dragging	it	towards	the	prow.
He	pulled	himself	up	beside	it,	looped	the	line	over	and	around,	once,
twice—then	there	was	a	loud	curse	from	Torvald,	and	the	coil	began	playing
out.	Karsa	threw	the	line	around	one	more	time,	then	managed	something	like
a	half-hitch.
He	did	not	expect	the	thin	rope	to	hold.	He	ducked	down	beneath	it	as	the


last	of	the	coil	was	snatched	from	his	hands,	thrumming	taut.
The	galley	creaked,	the	prow	visibly	bending,	then	the	ship	lurched	into
motion,	shuddering	as	it	was	dragged	along	the	sandy	bottom.
Torvald	scrambled	up	beside	Karsa.	‘Gods	below,	I	didn’t	think—let’s
hope	it	holds!’	he	gasped.	‘If	it	does,	we	won’t	go	hungry	for	a	long	while,	no,
not	a	long	while!’	He	slapped	Karsa	on	the	back,	then	pulled	himself	up	to	the
prow.	His	wild	grin	vanished.	‘Oh.’
Karsa	rose.
The	harpoon’s	end	was	visible	directly	ahead,	cutting	a	V	through	the
choppy	waves—heading	directly	for	one	of	the	larger,	three-masted	ships.	The
grinding	sound	suddenly	ceased	beneath	the	raider,	and	the	craft	surged
forward.
‘To	the	stern,	Karsa!	To	the	stern!’
Torvald	made	a	brief	effort	to	drag	Karsa,	then	gave	up	with	a	curse,
running	full	tilt	for	the	galley’s	stern.
Weaving,	fighting	waves	of	blackness,	the	Teblor	staggered	after	the	Daru.
‘Could	you	not	have	speared	a	smaller	one?’
The	impact	sent	them	both	sprawling.	A	terrible	splitting	sound
reverberated	down	the	galley’s	spine,	and	all	at	once	there	was	water
everywhere,	foaming	up	from	the	hatches,	sweeping	in	from	the	sides.	Planks
from	the	hull	on	both	sides	parted	like	groping	fingers.
Karsa	found	himself	thrashing	about	in	waist-deep	water.	Something	like	a
deck	remained	beneath	him,	and	he	managed	to	struggle	upright.	And,	bobbing
wildly	directly	in	front	of	him,	was	his	original	bloodsword.	He	snatched	at	it,
felt	his	hand	close	about	the	familiar	grip.	Exultation	soared	through	him,	and
he	loosed	an	Uryd	warcry.
Torvald	sloshed	into	view	beside	him.	‘If	that	didn’t	freeze	that	fish’s	tiny
heart,	nothing	will.	Come	on,	we	need	to	get	onto	that	other	damned	ship.
There’s	more	of	those	bastards	closing	in	all	around	us.’
They	struggled	forward.
The	ship	they	had	broadsided	had	been	leaning	in	the	other	direction.	The
galley	had	plunged	into	its	hull,	creating	a	massive	hole	before	itself
shattering,	the	prow	with	its	harpoon	line	snapping	off	and	vanishing	within	the
ship’s	lower	decks.	It	was	clear	that	the	huge	ship	was	solidly	grounded,	nor
had	the	collision	dislodged	it.
As	they	neared	the	gaping	hole,	they	could	hear	wild	thrashing	from
somewhere	within,	deep	in	the	hold.
‘Hood	take	me!’	Torvald	muttered	in	disbelief.	‘That	thing	went	through
the	hull	first.	Well,	at	least	we’re	not	fighting	a	creature	gifted	with	genius.	It’s


trapped	down	there,	is	my	guess.	We	should	go	hunting—’
‘Leave	that	to	me,’	Karsa	growled.
‘You?	You	can	barely	stand—’
‘Even	so,	I	will	kill	it.’
‘Well,	can’t	I	watch?’
‘If	you	insist.’
There	were	three	decks	within	the	ship’s	hull,	in	so	far	as	they	could	see,
the	bottom	one	comprising	the	hold	itself,	the	other	two	scaled	to	suit	tall
lowlanders.	The	hold	had	been	half-filled	with	cargo,	which	was	now	tumbling
out	in	the	backwash—bundles,	bales	and	casks.
Karsa	plunged	into	waist-deep	water,	making	for	the	thrashing	sounds
deeper	within.	He	found	the	huge	fish	writhing	on	the	second	level,	in	sloshing,
foaming	water	that	barely	covered	the	Teblor ’s	ankles.	Spears	of	splintered
wood	jutted	from	the	fish’s	enormous	head,	blood	streaming	out	to	stain	the
foam	pink.	It	had	rolled	onto	its	side,	revealing	a	smooth,	silvery	underbelly.
Clambering	across	to	the	creature,	Karsa	drove	his	sword	into	its
abdomen.	The	huge	tail	twisted	round,	struck	him	with	the	strength	of	a
destrier ’s	kick.	He	was	suddenly	in	the	air,	then	the	curved	wall	of	the	hull
struck	his	back.
Stunned	by	the	impact,	the	Teblor	slumped	in	the	swirling	water.	He
blinked	the	drops	from	his	eyes,	then,	unmoving	in	the	gloom,	watched	the
fish’s	death-throes.
Torvald	climbed	into	view.	‘You’re	still	damned	fast,	Karsa—left	me
behind.	But	I	see	you’ve	done	the	deed.	There’s	food	among	these	supplies…’
But	Karsa	heard	no	more,	as	unconsciousness	took	him	once	again.
He	awoke	to	the	stench	of	putrefying	flesh	that	hung	heavy	in	the	still	air.	In
the	half-light,	he	could	just	make	out	the	body	of	the	dead	fish	opposite	him,	its
belly	slit	open,	a	pallid	corpse	partially	tumbled	out.	There	was	the	distant
sound	of	movement	somewhere	above	him.
Well	beyond	the	fish	and	to	the	right,	steep	steps	were	visible,	leading
upward.
Fighting	to	keep	from	gagging,	Karsa	collected	his	sword	and	began
crawling	towards	the	stairs.
He	eventually	emerged	onto	the	midship’s	deck.	Its	sorcery-scarred	surface
was	sharply	canted,	sufficient	to	make	traverse	difficult.	Supplies	had	been
collected	and	were	piled	against	the	downside	railing,	where	ropes	trailed	over
the	side.	Pausing	near	the	hatch	to	regain	his	breath,	Karsa	looked	around	for
Torvald	Nom,	but	the	Daru	was	nowhere	in	sight.
Magic	had	ripped	deep	gouges	across	the	deck.	There	were	no	bodies


visible	anywhere,	no	indications	of	the	nature	of	the	ship’s	owners.	The	black
wood—which	seemed	to	emanate	darkness—was	of	a	species	the	Teblor	did
not	recognize,	and	it	was	devoid	of	any	ornamentation,	evoking	pragmatic
simplicity.	He	found	himself	strangely	comforted.
Torvald	Nom	clambered	into	view	from	the	downside	rail.	He	had
managed	to	remove	the	chains	attached	to	his	shackles,	leaving	only	the	black
iron	bands	on	wrists	and	ankles.	He	was	breathing	hard.
Karsa	pushed	himself	upright,	leaning	on	the	sword’s	point	for	support.
‘Ah,	my	giant	friend,	with	us	once	more!’
‘You	must	find	my	weakness	frustrating,’	Karsa	grumbled.
‘To	be	expected,	all	things	considered,’	Torvald	said,	moving	among	the
supplies	now.	‘I’ve	found	food.	Come	and	eat,	Karsa,	while	I	tell	you	of	my
discoveries.’
The	Teblor	slowly	made	his	way	down	the	sloping	deck.
Torvald	drew	out	a	brick-shaped	loaf	of	dark	bread.	‘I’ve	found	a	dory,
and	oars	to	go	along	with	a	sail,	so	we	won’t	remain	victims	to	this	endless
calm.	We’ve	water	for	a	week	and	a	half,	if	we’re	sparing,	and	we	won’t	go
hungry	no	matter	how	fast	your	appetite	comes	back…’
Karsa	took	the	bread	from	the	Daru’s	hand	and	began	tearing	off	small
chunks.	His	teeth	felt	slightly	loose,	and	he	was	not	confident	of	attempting
anything	beyond	gentle	chewing.	The	bread	was	rich	and	moist,	filled	with
morsels	of	sweet	fruit	and	tasting	of	honey.	His	first	swallow	left	him
struggling	to	keep	it	down.	Torvald	handed	him	a	skin	filled	with	water,	then
resumed	his	monologue.
‘The	dory’s	got	benches	enough	for	twenty	or	so—spacious	for
lowlanders	but	we’ll	need	to	knock	one	loose	to	give	your	legs	some	room.	If
you	lean	over	the	gunnel	you	can	see	it	for	yourself.	I’ve	been	busy	loading
what	we’ll	need.	We	could	explore	some	of	the	other	ships	if	you	like,	though
we’ve	more	than	enough—’
‘No	need,’	Karsa	said.	‘Let	us	leave	this	place	as	quickly	as	possible.’
Torvald’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	Teblor	for	a	moment,	then	the	Daru
nodded.	‘Agreed.	Karsa,	you	say	you	did	not	call	upon	that	storm.	Very	well.	I
shall	have	to	believe	you—that	you’ve	no	recollection	of	having	done	so,	in
any	case.	But	I	was	wondering,	this	cult	of	yours,	these	Seven	Faces	in	the	Rock
or	however	they’re	called.	Do	they	claim	a	warren	for	themselves?	A	realm
other	than	the	one	you	and	I	live	in,	where	they	exist?’
Karsa	swallowed	another	mouthful	of	bread.	‘I	had	heard	nothing	of	these
warrens	you	speak	of,	Torvald	Nom.	The	Seven	dwell	in	the	rock,	and	in	the
dreamworld	of	the	Teblor.’


‘Dreamworld…’	Torvald	waved	a	hand.	‘Does	any	of	this	look	like	that
dreamworld,	Karsa?’
‘No.’
‘What	if	it	had	been…flooded?’
Karsa	scowled.	‘You	remind	me	of	Bairoth	Gild.	Your	words	make	no
sense.	The	Teblor	dreamworld	is	a	place	of	no	hills,	where	mosses	and	lichens
cling	to	half-buried	boulders,	where	snow	makes	low	dunes	sculpted	by	cold
winds.	Where	strange	brown-haired	beasts	run	in	packs	in	the	distance…’
‘Have	you	visited	it	yourself,	then?’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘These	are	descriptions	given	by	the	shamans.’	He
hesitated,	then	said,	‘The	place	I	visited…’	He	trailed	off,	then	shook	his	head.
‘Different.	A	place	of…of	coloured	mists.’
‘Coloured	mists.	And	were	your	gods	there?’
‘You	are	not	Teblor.	I	have	no	need	to	tell	you	more.	I	have	spoken	too
much	already.’
‘Very	well.	I	was	just	trying	to	determine	where	we	were.’
‘We	are	on	a	sea,	and	there	is	no	land.’
‘Well,	yes.	But	which	sea?	Where’s	the	sun?	Why	is	there	no	night?	No
wind?	Which	direction	shall	we	choose?’
‘It	does	not	matter	which	direction.	Any	direction.’	Karsa	rose	from	where
he	had	been	sitting	on	a	bale.	‘I	have	eaten	enough	for	now.	Come,	let	us	finish
loading,	and	then	leave.’
‘As	you	say,	Karsa.’
	
He	felt	stronger	with	each	passing	day,	lengthening	his	turns	at	the	oars	each
time	he	took	over	from	Torvald	Nom.	The	sea	was	shallow,	and	more	than
once	the	dory	ground	up	onto	shoals,	though	fortunately	these	were	of	sand
and	so	did	little	to	damage	the	hull.	They	had	seen	nothing	of	the	huge	catfish,
nor	any	other	life	in	the	water	or	in	the	sky,	though	the	occasional	piece	of
driftwood	drifted	past,	devoid	of	bark	or	leaf.
As	Karsa’s	strength	returned,	their	supply	of	food	quickly	dwindled,	and
though	neither	spoke	of	it,	despair	had	become	an	invisible	passenger,	a	third
presence	that	silenced	the	Teblor	and	the	Daru,	that	shackled	them	as	had	their
captors	of	old,	and	the	ghostly	chains	grew	heavier.
In	the	beginning	they	had	marked	out	days	based	on	the	balance	of	sleep
and	wakefulness,	but	the	pattern	soon	collapsed	as	Karsa	took	to	rowing
through	Torvald’s	periods	of	sleep	in	addition	to	relieving	the	weary	Daru	at
other	times.	It	became	quickly	evident	that	the	Teblor	required	less	rest,	whilst


Torvald	seemed	to	need	ever	more.
They	were	down	to	the	last	cask	of	water,	which	held	only	a	third	of	its
capacity.	Karsa	was	at	the	oars,	pulling	the	undersized	sticks	in	broad,
effortless	sweeps	through	the	murky	swells.	Torvald	lay	huddled	beneath	the
sail,	restless	in	his	sleep.
The	ache	was	almost	gone	from	Karsa’s	shoulders,	though	pain	lingered	in
his	hips	and	legs.	He	had	fallen	into	a	pattern	of	repetition	empty	of	thought,
unaware	of	the	passage	of	time,	his	only	concern	that	of	maintaining	a	straight
course—as	best	as	he	could	determine,	given	the	lack	of	reference	points.	He
had	naught	but	the	dory’s	own	wake	to	direct	him.
Torvald’s	eyes	opened,	bloodshot	and	red-rimmed.	He	had	long	ago	lost
his	loquaciousness.	Karsa	suspected	the	man	was	sick—they’d	not	had	a
conversation	in	some	time.	The	Daru	slowly	sat	up.
Then	stiffened.	‘We’ve	company,’	he	said,	his	voice	cracking.
Karsa	shipped	the	oars	and	twisted	round	in	his	seat.	A	large,	three-masted,
black	ship	was	bearing	down	on	them,	twin	banks	of	oars	flashing	dark	over
the	milky	water.	Beyond	it,	on	the	horizon’s	very	edge,	ran	a	dark,	straight	line.
The	Teblor	collected	his	sword	then	slowly	stood.
‘That’s	the	strangest	coast	I’ve	ever	seen,’	Torvald	muttered.	‘Would	that
we’d	reached	it	without	the	company.’
‘It	is	a	wall,’	Karsa	said.	‘A	straight	wall,	before	which	lies	some	kind	of
beach.’	He	returned	his	gaze	to	the	closing	ship.	‘It	is	like	those	that	had	been
beset	by	the	raiders.’
‘So	it	is,	only	somewhat	bigger.	Flagship,	is	my	guess,	though	I	see	no
flag.’
They	could	see	figures	now,	crowding	the	high	forecastle.	Tall,	though	not
as	tall	as	Karsa,	and	much	leaner.
‘Not	human,’	Torvald	muttered.	‘Karsa,	I	do	not	think	they	will	be	friendly.
Just	a	feeling,	mind	you.	Still…’
‘I	have	seen	one	of	them	before,’	the	Teblor	replied.	‘Half	spilled	out	from
the	belly	of	the	catfish.’
‘That	beach	is	rolling	with	the	waves,	Karsa.	It’s	flotsam.	Must	be	two,
three	thousand	paces	of	it.	The	wreckage	of	an	entire	world.	As	I	suspected,	this
sea	doesn’t	belong	here.’
‘Yet	there	are	ships.’
‘Aye,	meaning	they	don’t	belong	here,	either.’
Karsa	shrugged	his	indifference	to	that	observation.	‘Have	you	a	weapon,
Torvald	Nom?’
‘A	harpoon…and	a	mallet.	You	will	not	try	to	talk	first?’


Karsa	said	nothing.	The	twin	banks	of	oars	had	lifted	from	the	water	and
now	hovered	motionless	over	the	waves	as	the	huge	ship	slid	towards	them.
The	oars	dipped	suddenly,	straight	down,	the	water	churning	as	the	ship
slowed,	then	came	to	a	stop.
The	dory	thumped	as	it	made	contact	with	the	hull	on	the	port	side,	just
beyond	the	prow.
A	rope	ladder	snaked	down,	but	Karsa,	his	sword	slung	over	a	shoulder,
was	already	climbing	up	the	hull,	there	being	no	shortage	of	handholds.	He
reached	the	forecastle	rail	and	swung	himself	up	and	over	it.	His	feet	found	the
deck	and	he	straightened.
A	ring	of	grey-skinned	warriors	faced	him.	Taller	than	lowlanders,	but	still
a	head	shorter	than	the	Teblor.	Curved	sabres	were	scabbarded	to	their	hips,
and	much	of	their	clothing	was	made	of	some	kind	of	hide,	short-haired,	dark
and	glistening.	Their	long	brown	hair	was	intricately	braided,	hanging	down	to
frame	angular,	multihued	eyes.	Behind	them,	down	amidships,	there	was	a	pile
of	severed	heads,	a	few	lowlander	but	most	similar	in	features	to	the	greyskinned	warriors,	though	with	skins	of	black.
Ice	rippled	up	Karsa’s	spine	as	he	saw	countless	eyes	among	those	severed
heads	shift	towards	him.
One	of	the	grey-skinned	warriors	snapped	something,	his	expression	as
contemptuous	as	his	tone.
Behind	Karsa,	Torvald	reached	the	railing.
The	speaker	seemed	to	be	waiting	for	some	sort	of	response.	As	the	silence
stretched,	the	faces	on	either	side	twisted	into	sneers.	The	spokesman	barked
out	a	command,	pointed	to	the	deck.
‘Uh,	he	wants	us	to	kneel,	Karsa,’	Torvald	said.	‘I	think	maybe	we	should
—’
‘I	would	not	kneel	when	chained,’	Karsa	growled.	‘Why	would	I	do	so
now?’
‘Because	I	count	sixteen	of	them—and	who	knows	how	many	more	are
below.	And	they’re	getting	angrier—’
‘Sixteen	or	sixty,’	Karsa	cut	in.	‘They	know	nothing	of	fighting	Teblor.’
‘How	can	you—’
Karsa	saw	two	warriors	shift	gauntleted	hands	towards	sword-grips.	The
bloodsword	flashed	out,	cut	a	sweeping	horizontal	slash	across	the	entire	halfcircle	of	grey-skinned	warriors.	Blood	sprayed.	Bodies	reeled,	sprawled
backward,	tumbling	over	the	low	railing	and	down	to	the	mid-deck.
The	forecastle	was	clear	apart	from	Karsa	and,	a	pace	behind	him,	Torvald
Nom.


The	seven	warriors	who	had	been	on	the	mid-deck	drew	back	as	one,	then,
unsheathing	their	weapons,	they	edged	forward.
‘They	were	within	my	reach,’	Karsa	answered	the	Daru’s	question.	‘That	is
how	I	know	they	know	nothing	of	fighting	a	Teblor.	Now,	witness	while	I	take
this	ship.’	With	a	bellow	he	leapt	down	into	the	midst	of	the	enemy.
The	grey-skinned	warriors	were	not	lacking	in	skill,	yet	it	availed	them
naught.	Karsa	had	known	the	loss	of	freedom;	he	would	not	accept	such	again.
The	demand	to	kneel	before	these	scrawny,	sickly	creatures	had	triggered	in
him	seething	fury.
Six	of	the	seven	warriors	were	down;	the	last	one,	shouting,	had	turned
about	and	was	running	towards	the	doorway	at	the	other	end	of	the	mid-deck.
He	paused	long	enough	to	drag	a	massive	harpoon	from	a	nearby	rack,
spinning	and	flinging	it	at	Karsa.
The	Teblor	caught	it	in	his	left	hand.
He	closed	on	the	fleeing	man,	cutting	him	down	at	the	doorway’s
threshold.	Ducking	and	reversing	the	weapons	in	his	hands—the	harpoon	now
in	his	right	and	the	blood-sword	in	his	left—he	plunged	into	the	gloom	of	the
passage	beyond	the	doorway.
Two	steps	down,	into	a	wide	galley	with	a	wooden	table	in	its	centre.	A
second	doorway	at	the	opposite	end,	a	narrow	passage	beyond,	lined	by	berths,
then	an	ornate	door	that	squealed	as	Karsa	shoved	it	aside.
Four	attackers,	a	fury	of	blows	exchanged,	Karsa	blocking	with	the
harpoon	and	counter-attacking	with	the	bloodsword.	In	moments,	four	broken
bodies	dying	on	the	cabin’s	gleaming	wooden	floor.	A	fifth	figure,	seated	in	a
chair	on	the	other	side	of	the	room,	hands	raised,	sorcery	swirling	into	the	air.
With	a	snarl,	Karsa	surged	forward.	The	magic	flashed,	sputtered,	then	the
harpoon’s	point	punched	into	the	figure’s	chest,	tore	through	and	drove	into
the	chair ’s	wood	backing.	A	look	of	disbelief	frozen	on	the	grey	face,	eyes
locking	with	Karsa’s	own	one	last	time,	before	all	life	left	them.
‘Urugal!	Witness	a	Teblor ’s	rage!’
Silence	following	his	ringing	words,	then	the	slow	pat	of	blood	dripping
from	the	sorcerer ’s	chair	onto	the	rug.	Something	cold	rippled	through	Karsa,
the	breath	of	someone	unknown,	nameless,	but	filled	with	rage.	Growling,	he
shrugged	it	off,	then	looked	around.	High-ceilinged	for	lowlanders,	the	ship’s
cabin	was	all	of	the	same	black	wood.	Oil	lanterns	glimmered	from	sconces	on
the	walls.	On	the	table	were	maps	and	charts,	the	drawings	on	them	illegible	as
far	as	the	Teblor	was	concerned.
A	sound	from	the	doorway.
Karsa	turned.


Torvald	Nom	stepped	within,	scanning	the	sprawled	corpses,	then	fixing
his	gaze	on	the	seated	figure	with	the	spear	still	impaling	it.	‘You	needn’t
worry	about	the	oarsmen,’	he	said.
‘Are	they	slaves?	Then	we	shall	free	them.’
‘Slaves?’	Torvald	shrugged.	‘I	don’t	think	so.	They	wear	no	chains,	Karsa.
Mind	you,	they	have	no	heads,	either.	As	I	said,	I	don’t	think	we	have	to
concern	ourselves	with	them.’	He	strode	forward	to	examine	the	maps	on	the
table.	‘Something	tells	me	these	hapless	bastards	you	just	killed	were	as	lost	as
us—’
‘They	were	the	victors	in	the	battle	of	the	ships.’
‘Little	good	it	did	them.’
Karsa	shook	the	blood	from	his	sword,	drew	a	deep	breath.	‘I	kneel	to	noone.’
‘I	could’ve	knelt	twice	and	that	might	have	satisfied	them.	Now,	we’re	as
ignorant	as	we	were	before	seeing	this	ship.	Nor	can	the	two	of	us	manage	a
craft	of	this	size.’
‘They	would	have	done	to	us	as	was	done	to	the	oarsmen,’	Karsa	asserted.
‘Possibly.’	He	swung	his	attention	on	one	of	the	corpses	at	his	feet,	slowly
crouched.	‘Barbaric-looking,	these	ones—uh,	by	Daru	standards,	that	is.
Sealskin—true	seafarers,	then—and	strung	claws	and	teeth	and	shells.	The	one
in	the	captain’s	chair	was	a	mage?’
‘Yes.	I	do	not	understand	such	warriors.	Why	not	use	swords	or	spears?
Their	magic	is	pitiful,	yet	they	seem	so	sure	of	it.	And	look	at	his	expression
—’
‘Surprised,	yes,’	Torvald	murmured.	He	glanced	back	at	Karsa.	‘They’re
confident	because	sorcery	usually	works.	Most	attackers	don’t	survive	getting
hit	by	magic.	It	rips	them	apart.’
Karsa	made	his	way	back	to	the	doorway.	After	a	moment	Torvald
followed.
They	returned	to	the	mizzen	deck.	Karsa	began	stripping	the	corpses	lying
about,	severing	ears	and	tongues	before	tossing	the	naked	bodies	overboard.
The	Daru	watched	for	a	time,	then	he	moved	to	the	decapitated	heads.
‘They’ve	been	following	everything	you	do,’	he	said	to	Karsa,	‘with	their	eyes.
It’s	too	much	to	bear.’	He	removed	the	hide	wrapping	of	a	nearby	bundle	and
folded	it	around	the	nearest	severed	head,	then	tied	it	tight.	‘Darkness	would
better	suit	them,	all	things	considered…’
Karsa	frowned.	‘Why	do	you	say	that,	Torvald	Nom?	Which	would	you
prefer,	the	ability	to	see	things	around	you,	or	darkness?’
‘These	are	Tiste	Andii,	apart	from	a	few—and	those	few	look	far	too	much


like	me.’
‘Who	are	these	Tiste	Andii?’
‘Just	a	people.	There	are	some	fighting	in	Caladan	Brood’s	liberation
army	on	Genabackis.	An	ancient	people,	it’s	said.	In	any	case,	they	worship
Darkness.’
Karsa,	suddenly	weary,	sat	down	on	the	steps	leading	to	the	forecastle.
‘Darkness,’	he	muttered.	‘A	place	where	one	is	left	blind—a	strange	thing	to
worship.’
‘Perhaps	the	most	realistic	worship	of	all,’	the	Daru	replied,	wrapping
another	severed	head.	‘How	many	of	us	bow	before	a	god	in	the	desperate
hope	that	we	can	somehow	shape	our	fate?	Praying	to	that	familiar	face	pushes
away	our	terror	of	the	unknown—the	unknown	being	the	future.	Who	knows,
maybe	these	Tiste	Andii	are	the	only	ones	among	us	all	who	see	the	truth,	the
truth	being	oblivion.’	Keeping	his	eyes	averted,	he	carefully	gathered	another
black-skinned,	long-haired	head.	‘It’s	a	good	thing	these	poor	souls	have	no
throats	left	to	utter	sounds,	else	we	find	ourselves	in	a	ghastly	debate.’
‘You	doubt	your	own	words,	then.’
‘Always,	Karsa.	On	a	more	mundane	level,	words	are	like	gods—a	means
of	keeping	the	terror	at	bay.	I	will	likely	have	nightmares	about	this	until	my
aged	heart	finally	gives	out.	An	endless	succession	of	heads,	with	all-toocognizant	eyes,	to	wrap	up	in	sealskin.	And	with	each	one	I	tie	up,	pop!	Another
appears.’
‘Your	words	are	naught	but	foolishness.’
‘Oh,	and	how	many	souls	have	you	delivered	unto	darkness,	Karsa
Orlong?’
The	Teblor ’s	eyes	narrowed.	‘I	do	not	think	it	was	darkness	that	they
found,’	he	replied	quietly.	After	a	moment,	he	looked	away,	struck	silent	by	a
sudden	realization.	A	year	ago	he	would	have	killed	someone	for	saying	what
Torvald	had	just	said,	had	he	understood	its	intent	to	wound—which	in	itself
was	unlikely.	A	year	ago,	words	had	been	blunt,	awkward	things,	confined
within	a	simple,	if	slightly	mysterious	world.	But	that	flaw	had	been	Karsa’s
alone—not	a	characteristic	of	the	Teblor	in	general—for	Bairoth	Gild	had
flung	many-edged	words	at	Karsa,	a	constant	source	of	amusement	for	the
clever	warrior	though	probably	dulled	by	Karsa’s	own	unawareness	of	their
intent.
Torvald	Nom’s	endless	words—but	no,	more	than	just	that—all	that	Karsa
had	experienced	since	leaving	his	village—had	served	as	instruction	on	the
complexity	of	the	world.	Subtlety	had	been	a	venomed	serpent	slithering
unseen	through	his	life.	Its	fangs	had	sunk	deep	many	times,	yet	not	once	had


he	become	aware	of	their	origin;	not	once	had	he	even	understood	the	source
of	the	pain.	The	poison	itself	had	coursed	deep	within	him,	and	the	only	answer
he	gave—when	he	gave	one	at	all—was	of	violence,	often	misdirected,	a
lashing	out	on	all	sides.
Darkness,	and	living	blind.	Karsa	returned	his	gaze	to	the	Daru	kneeling
and	wrapping	severed	heads,	there	on	the	mizzen	deck.	And	who	has	dragged
the	cloth	from	my	eyes?	Who	has	awakened	Karsa	Orlong,	son	of	Synyg?
Urugal?	No,	not	Urugal.	He	knew	that	for	certain,	for	the	otherworldly	rage	he
had	felt	in	the	cabin,	that	icy	breath	that	had	swept	through	him—that	had
belonged	to	his	god.	A	fierce	displeasure—to	which	Karsa	had	found	himself
oddly…indifferent.
The	Seven	Faces	in	the	Rock	never	spoke	of	freedom.	The	Teblor	were
their	servants.	Their	slaves.
‘You	look	unwell,	Karsa,’	Torvald	said,	approaching.	‘I	am	sorry	for	my
last	words—’
‘There	is	no	need,	Torvald	Nom,’	Karsa	said,	rising.	‘We	should	return	to
our—’
He	stopped	as	the	first	splashes	of	rain	struck	him,	then	the	deck	on	all
sides.	Milky,	slimy	rain.
‘Uh!’	Torvald	grunted.	‘If	this	is	a	god’s	spit,	he’s	decidedly	unwell.’
The	water	smelled	foul,	rotten.	It	quickly	coated	the	ship	decks,	the	rigging
and	tattered	sails	overhead,	in	a	thick,	pale	grease.
Swearing,	the	Daru	began	gathering	foodstuffs	and	watercasks	to	load	into
their	dory	below.	Karsa	completed	one	last	circuit	of	the	decks,	examining	the
weapons	and	armour	he	had	pulled	from	the	grey-skinned	bodies.	He	found	the
rack	of	harpoons	and	gathered	the	six	that	remained.
The	downpour	thickened,	creating	murky,	impenetrable	walls	on	all	sides
of	the	ship.	Slipping	in	the	deepening	muck,	Karsa	and	Torvald	quickly
resupplied	the	dory,	then	pushed	out	from	the	ship’s	hull,	the	Teblor	at	the	oars.
Within	moments	the	ship	was	lost	from	sight,	and	around	them	the	rain
slackened.	Five	sweeps	of	the	oars	and	they	were	out	from	beneath	it	entirely,
once	again	on	gently	heaving	seas	under	a	pallid	sky.	The	strange	coastline	was
visible	ahead,	slowly	drawing	closer.
	
On	the	forecastle	of	the	massive	ship,	moments	after	the	dory	with	its	two
passengers	slipped	behind	the	screen	of	muddy	rain,	seven	almost	insubstantial
figures	rose	from	the	slime.	Shattered	bones,	gaping	wounds	bleeding	nothing,
the	figures	weaved	uncertainly	in	the	gloom,	as	if	barely	able	to	maintain	their


grip	on	the	scene	they	had	entered.
One	of	them	hissed	with	anger.	‘Each	time	we	seek	to	draw	the	knot	tight
—’
‘He	cuts	it,’	another	finished	in	a	wry,	bitter	tone.
A	third	one	stepped	down	to	the	mizzen	deck,	kicked	desultorily	at	a
discarded	sword.	‘The	failure	belonged	to	the	Tiste	Edur,’	this	one	pronounced
in	a	rasping	voice.	‘If	punishment	must	be	enacted,	it	should	be	in	answer	to
their	arrogance.’
‘Not	for	us	to	demand,’	the	first	speaker	snapped.	‘We	are	not	the	masters
in	this	scheme—’
‘Nor	are	the	Tiste	Edur!’
‘Even	so,	and	we	are	each	given	particular	tasks.	Karsa	Orlong	survives
still,	and	he	must	be	our	only	concern—’
‘He	begins	to	know	doubts.’
‘None	the	less,	his	journey	continues.	It	falls	to	us,	now,	with	what	little
power	we	are	able	to	extend,	to	direct	his	path	onward.’
‘We’ve	had	scant	success	thus	far!’
‘Untrue.	The	Shattered	Warren	stirs	awake	once	more.	The	broken	heart	of
the	First	Empire	begins	to	bleed—less	than	a	trickle	at	the	moment,	but	soon	it
will	become	a	flood.	We	need	only	set	our	chosen	warrior	upon	the	proper
current…’
‘And	is	that	within	our	power,	limited	as	it	still	remains?’
‘Let	us	find	out.	Begin	the	preparations.	Ber ’ok,	scatter	that	handful	of
otataral	dust	in	the	cabin—the	Tiste	Edur	sorcerer ’s	warren	remains	open	and,
in	this	place,	it	will	quickly	become	a	wound…a	growing	wound.	The	time	has
not	yet	come	for	such	unveilings.’
The	speaker	then	lifted	its	mangled	head	and	seemed	to	sniff	the	air.	‘We
must	work	quickly,’	it	announced	after	a	moment.	‘I	believe	we	are	being
hunted.’
The	remaining	six	turned	to	face	the	speaker,	who	nodded	in	answer	to
their	silent	question.	‘Yes.	There	are	kin	upon	our	trail.’
	
The	wreckage	of	an	entire	land	had	drawn	up	alongside	the	massive	stone	wall.
Uprooted	trees,	rough-hewn	logs,	planks,	shingles	and	pieces	of	wagons	and
carts	were	visible	amidst	the	detritus.	The	verges	were	thick	with	matted
grasses	and	rotted	leaves,	forming	a	broad	plain	that	twisted,	rose	and	fell	on
the	waves.	The	wall	was	barely	visible	in	places,	so	high	was	the	flotsam,	and
the	level	of	the	water	beneath	it.


Torvald	Nom	was	positioned	at	the	bow	whilst	Karsa	rowed.	‘I	don’t	know
how	we’ll	get	to	that	wall,’	the	Daru	said.	‘You’d	better	back	the	oars	now,
friend,	lest	we	ground	ourselves	on	that	mess—there’s	catfish	about.’
Karsa	slowed	the	dory.	They	drifted,	the	hull	nudging	the	carpet	of	flotsam.
After	a	few	moments	it	became	apparent	that	there	was	a	current,	pulling	their
craft	along	the	edge.
‘Well,’	Torvald	muttered,	‘that’s	a	first	for	this	sea.	Do	you	think	this	is
some	sort	of	tide?’
‘No,’	Karsa	replied,	his	gaze	tracking	the	strange	shoreline	in	the	direction
of	the	current.	‘It	is	a	breach	in	the	wall.’
‘Oh.	Can	you	see	where?’
‘Yes,	I	think	so.’
The	current	was	tugging	them	along	faster,	now.
Karsa	continued,	‘There	is	an	indentation	in	the	shoreline,	and	many	trees
and	logs	jammed	where	the	wall	should	be—can	you	not	hear	the	roar?’
‘Aye,	now	I	can.’	Tension	rode	the	Daru’s	words.	He	straightened	at	the
bow.	‘I	see	it.	Karsa,	we’d	better—’
‘Yes,	it	is	best	we	avoid	this.’	The	Teblor	repositioned	himself	at	the	oars.
He	drew	the	dory	away	from	the	verge.	The	hull	tugged	sluggishly	beneath
them,	began	twisting.	Karsa	leaned	his	weight	into	each	sweep,	struggling	to
regain	control.	The	water	swirled	around	them.
‘Karsa!’	Torvald	shouted.	‘There’s	people—near	the	breach!	I	see	a
wrecked	boat!’
The	breach	was	on	the	Teblor ’s	left	as	he	pulled	the	dory	across	the
current.	He	looked	to	where	Torvald	was	pointing,	and,	after	a	moment,	he
bared	his	teeth.	‘The	slavemaster	and	his	men.’
‘They’re	waving	us	over.’
Karsa	ceased	sweeping	with	his	left	oar.	‘We	cannot	defeat	this	current,’	he
announced,	swinging	the	craft	around.	‘The	further	out	we	proceed,	the
stronger	it	becomes.’
‘I	think	that’s	what	happened	to	Silgar ’s	boat—they	managed	to	ground	it
just	this	side	of	the	mouth,	stoving	it	in,	in	the	process.	We	should	try	to	avoid	a
similar	fate,	Karsa,	if	we	can,	that	is.’
‘Then	keep	an	eye	out	for	submerged	logs,’	the	Teblor	said	as	he	angled
the	dory	closer	to	shore.	‘Also,	are	the	lowlanders	armed?’
‘Not	that	I	can	see,’	Torvald	replied	after	a	moment.	‘They	look	to	be	in,
uh,	in	pretty	bad	condition.	They’re	perched	on	a	small	island	of	logs.	Silgar,
and	Damisk,	and	one	other…Borrug,	I	think.	Gods,	Karsa,	they’re	starved.’
‘Take	a	harpoon,’	the	Teblor	growled.	‘That	hunger	could	well	drive	them


to	desperation.’
‘A	touch	shoreward,	Karsa,	we’re	almost	there.’
There	was	a	soft	crunch	from	the	hull,	then	a	grinding,	stuttering	motion	as
the	current	sought	to	drag	them	along	the	verge.	Torvald	clambered	out,	ropes
in	one	hand	and	harpoon	in	the	other.	Beyond	him,	Karsa	saw	as	he	turned
about,	huddled	the	three	Nathii	lowlanders,	making	no	move	to	help	and,	if
anything,	drawing	back	as	far	as	they	could	manage	on	the	tangled	island.	The
breach’s	roar	was	a	still-distant	thundering,	though	closer	at	hand	were
ominous	cracks,	tearing	and	shifting	noises—the	logjam	was	coming	loose.
Torvald	made	fast	the	dory	with	a	skein	of	lines	tied	to	various	branches
and	roots.	Karsa	stepped	ashore,	drawing	his	bloodsword,	his	eyes	levelling	on
Silgar.
The	slavemaster	attempted	to	retreat	further.
Near	the	three	emaciated	lowlanders	lay	the	remains	of	a	fourth,	his	bones
picked	clean.
‘Teblor!’	Silgar	implored.	‘You	must	listen	to	me!’
Karsa	slowly	advanced.
‘I	can	save	us!’
Torvald	tugged	at	Karsa’s	arm.	‘Wait,	friend,	let’s	hear	the	bastard.’
‘He	will	say	anything,’	Karsa	growled.
‘Even	so—’
Damisk	Greydog	spoke.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	listen!	This	island	is	being	torn
apart—we	all	need	your	boat.	Silgar ’s	a	mage—he	can	open	a	portal.	But	not	if
he’s	drowning.	Understand?	He	can	take	us	from	this	realm!’
‘Karsa,’	Torvald	said,	weaving	as	the	logs	shifted	under	him,	his	grip	on
the	Teblor ’s	arm	tightening.
Karsa	looked	down	at	the	Daru	beside	him.	‘You	trust	Silgar?’
‘Of	course	not.	But	we’ve	no	choice—we’d	be	unlikely	to	survive
plunging	through	that	breach	in	the	dory.	We	don’t	even	know	this	wall’s
height—the	drop	on	the	other	side	could	be	endless.	Karsa,	we’re	armed	and
they’re	not—besides,	they’re	too	weak	to	cause	us	trouble,	you	can	see	that,
can’t	you?’
Silgar	screamed	as	a	large	section	of	the	logjam	sank	away	immediately
behind	him.
Scowling,	Karsa	sheathed	his	sword.	‘Begin	untying	the	boat,	Torvald.’	He
waved	at	the	lowlanders.	‘Come,	then.	But	know	this,	Slavemaster,	any	sign	of
treachery	from	you	and	your	friends	will	be	picking	your	bones	next.’
Damisk,	Silgar	and	Borrug	scrambled	forward.
The	entire	section	of	flotsam	was	pulling	away,	breaking	up	along	its


edges	as	the	current	swept	it	onward.	Clearly,	the	breach	was	expanding,
widening	to	the	pressure	of	an	entire	sea.
Silgar	climbed	in	and	crouched	down	beside	the	dory’s	prow.	‘I	shall	open
a	portal,’	he	announced,	his	voice	a	rasp.	‘I	can	only	do	so	but	once—’
‘Then	why	didn’t	you	leave	a	long	time	ago?’	Torvald	demanded,	as	he
slipped	the	last	line	loose	and	clambered	back	aboard.
‘There	was	no	path	before—out	on	the	sea.	But	now,	here—someone	has
opened	a	gate.	Close.	The	fabric	is…weakened.	I’ve	not	the	skill	to	do	such	a
thing	myself.	But	I	can	follow.’
The	dory	scraped	free	of	the	crumbling	island,	swung	wildly	into	the
sweeping	current.	Karsa	pushed	and	pulled	with	the	oars	to	angle	their	bow
into	the	torrential	flow.
‘Follow?’	Torvald	repeated.	‘Where?’
To	that	Silgar	simply	shook	his	head.
Karsa	abandoned	the	oars	and	made	his	way	to	the	stern,	taking	the	tiller	in
both	hands.
They	rode	the	tumbling,	churning	sea	of	wreckage	towards	the	breach.
Where	the	wall	had	given	way	there	was	an	ochre	cloud	of	mist	as	vast	and
high	as	a	thunderhead.	Beyond	it,	there	seemed	to	be	nothing	at	all.
Silgar	was	making	gestures	with	both	hands,	snapping	them	out	as	would	a
blind	man	seeking	a	door	latch.	Then	he	jabbed	a	finger	to	the	right.	‘There!’
he	shrieked,	swinging	a	wild	look	on	Karsa.	‘There!	Angle	us	there!’
The	place	Silgar	pointed	towards	looked	no	different	from	anywhere	else.
Immediately	beyond	it,	the	water	simply	vanished—a	wavering	line	that	was
the	breach	itself.	Shrugging,	Karsa	pushed	on	the	tiller.	Where	they	went	over
mattered	little	to	him.	If	Silgar	failed	they	would	plunge	over,	falling	whatever
distance,	to	crash	amidst	a	foaming	maelstrom	that	would	kill	them	all.
He	watched	as	everyone	but	Silgar	hunkered	down,	mute	with	terror.
The	Teblor	smiled.	‘Urugal!’	he	bellowed,	half	rising	as	the	dory	raced	for
the	edge.
Darkness	swallowed	them.
And	then	they	were	falling.
A	loud,	explosive	crack.	The	tiller ’s	handle	split	under	Karsa’s	hands,	then
the	stern	hammered	into	him	from	behind,	throwing	the	Teblor	forward.	He
struck	water	a	moment	later,	the	impact	making	him	gasp—taking	in	a
mouthful	of	salty	sea—before	plunging	into	the	chill	blackness.
He	struggled	upward	until	his	head	broke	the	surface,	but	there	was	no
lessening	of	the	darkness,	as	if	they’d	fallen	down	a	well,	or	had	appeared
within	a	cave.	Nearby,	someone	was	coughing	helplessly,	whilst	a	little	farther


off	another	survivor	was	thrashing	about.
Wreckage	brushed	up	against	Karsa.	The	dory	had	shattered,	though	the
Teblor	was	fairly	certain	that	the	fall	had	not	been	overly	long—they	had
arrived	at	a	height	of	perhaps	two	adult	warriors	combined.	Unless	the	boat
had	struck	something,	it	should	have	survived.
‘Karsa!’
Still	coughing,	Torvald	Nom	arrived	alongside	the	Teblor.	The	Daru	had
found	the	shaft	of	one	of	the	oars,	over	which	he	had	draped	his	arms.	‘What	in
Hood’s	name	do	you	think	happened?’
‘We	passed	through	that	sorcerous	gate,’	Karsa	explained.	‘That	should	be
obvious,	for	we	are	now	somewhere	else.’
‘Not	as	simple	as	that,’	Torvald	replied.	‘The	blade	of	this	oar—here,	look
at	the	end.’
Finding	himself	comfortably	buoyant	in	this	salty	water,	it	took	only	a
moment	for	Karsa	to	swim	to	the	end	of	the	shaft.	It	had	been	cut	through,	as	if
by	a	single	blow	from	an	iron	sword	such	as	the	lowlanders	used.	He	grunted.
The	distant	thrashing	sounds	had	drawn	closer.	From	much	farther	away,
Damisk’s	voice	called	out.
‘Here!’	Torvald	shouted	back.
A	shape	loomed	up	beside	them.	It	was	Silgar,	clinging	to	one	of	the	water
casks.
‘Where	are	we?’	Karsa	asked	the	slavemaster.
‘How	should	I	know?’	the	Nathii	snapped.	‘I	did	not	fashion	the	gate,	I
simply	made	use	of	it—and	it	had	mostly	closed,	which	is	why	the	floor	of	the
boat	did	not	come	with	us.	It	was	sheared	clean	off.	None	the	less,	I	believe	we
are	in	a	sea,	beneath	an	overcast	sky.	Were	there	no	ambient	light,	we’d	not	be
able	to	see	each	other	right	now.	Alas,	I	can	hear	no	coast,	though	it’s	so	calm
there	might	be	no	waves	to	brush	the	shoreline.’
‘Meaning	we	could	be	within	a	dozen	strokes	and	not	know	it.’
‘Yes.	Fortunately	for	us,	it	is	a	rather	warm	sea.	We	must	simply	await
dawn—’
‘Assuming	there	is	one,’	Torvald	said.
‘There	is,’	Silgar	asserted.	‘Feel	the	layers	in	this	water.	It’s	colder	down
where	our	feet	are.	So	a	sun	has	looked	down	upon	this	sea,	I	am	certain	of	it.’
Damisk	swam	into	view,	struggling	with	Borrug,	who	seemed	to	be
unconscious.	As	he	reached	out	to	take	hold	of	the	water	cask	Silgar	pushed
him	back,	then	kicked	himself	further	away.
‘Slavemaster!’	Damisk	gasped.
‘This	cask	barely	holds	my	weight	as	it	is,’	Silgar	hissed.	‘It’s	near	filled


with	fresh	water—which	we’re	likely	to	need.	What	is	the	matter	with	Borrug?’
Torvald	moved	along	to	give	Damisk	a	place	at	the	oar	shaft.	The	tattooed
guard	attempted	to	drape	Borrug’s	arms	over	it	as	well	and	Torvald	drew
closer	once	more	to	help.
‘I	don’t	know	what’s	wrong	with	him,’	Damisk	said.	‘He	may	have	struck
his	head,	though	I	can	find	no	wound.	He	was	babbling	at	first,	floundering
about,	then	he	simply	fell	unconscious	and	nearly	slipped	under.	I	was	lucky	to
reach	him.’
Borrug’s	head	kept	lolling	beneath	the	surface.
Karsa	reached	out	and	collected	the	man’s	wrists.	‘I	will	take	him,’	he
snarled,	turning	about	and	dragging	the	man’s	arms	around	his	neck.
‘A	light!’	Torvald	suddenly	shouted.	‘I	saw	a	light—there!’
The	others	swung	round.
‘I	see	nothing,’	Silgar	growled.
‘I	did,’	Torvald	insisted.	‘It	was	dim.	Gone	now.	But	I	saw	it—’
‘Likely	an	overwrought	imagination,’	Silgar	said.	‘Had	I	the	strength,	I’d
open	my	warren—’
‘I	know	what	I	saw,’	the	Daru	said.
‘Lead	us,	then,	Torvald	Nom,’	Karsa	said.
‘It	could	be	in	the	wrong	direction!’	Silgar	hissed.	‘We	are	safer	to	wait—’
‘Then	wait,’	Karsa	replied.
‘I	have	the	fresh	water,	not	you—’
‘A	good	point.	I	shall	have	to	kill	you,	then,	since	you	have	decided	to	stay
here.	We	might	need	that	water,	after	all.	You	won’t,	because	you	will	be	dead.’
‘Teblor	logic,’	Torvald	chuckled,	‘is	truly	wonderful.’
‘Very	well,	I	will	follow,’	Silgar	said.
The	Daru	set	off	at	a	slow	but	steady	pace,	kicking	beneath	the	surface	as
he	pulled	the	oar	shaft	along.	Damisk	kept	one	hand	on	the	length	of	wood,
managing	a	strange	motion	with	his	legs	that	resembled	that	of	a	frog.
Gripping	Borrug’s	wrists	in	one	hand,	Karsa	moved	into	their	wake.	The
unconscious	lowlander ’s	head	rested	on	his	right	shoulder,	his	knees	bumping
against	the	Teblor ’s	thighs.
Off	to	one	side,	feet	thrashing,	Silgar	propelled	the	water	cask	along.
Karsa	could	see	that	the	cask	was	far	less	filled	than	the	slavemaster	had
claimed—it	could	have	easily	borne	them	all.
The	Teblor	himself	felt	no	need.	He	was	not	particularly	tired,	and	it
seemed	that	he	possessed	a	natural	buoyancy	superior	to	that	of	the	lowlanders.
With	each	indrawn	breath,	his	shoulders,	upper	arms	and	the	upper	half	of	his
chest	rose	above	the	water.	And	apart	from	Borrug’s	knees	constantly	fouling


Karsa’s	kicking,	the	lowlander ’s	presence	was	negligible…
There	was,	he	realized,	something	odd	about	those	knees.	He	paused,
reached	down.
Both	legs	were	severed	clean	just	beneath	the	kneecaps,	the	water	warm	in
their	immediate	wakes.
Torvald	had	glanced	back.	‘What’s	wrong?’	he	asked.
‘Do	you	think	there	are	catfish	in	these	waters?’
‘I	doubt	it,’	the	Daru	replied.	‘That	was	fresh	water,	after	all.’
‘Good,’	Karsa	grunted,	resuming	his	swim.
There	was	no	recurrence	of	the	light	Torvald	had	seen.	They	continued	on
in	the	unrelieved	darkness,	through	perfectly	calm	water.
‘This	is	foolish,’	Silgar	pronounced	after	a	time.	‘We	exhaust	ourselves
for	no	purpose—’
Torvald	called,	‘Karsa,	why	did	you	ask	about	the	catfish?’
Something	huge	and	rough-skinned	rose	up	to	land	on	Karsa’s	back,	its
massive	weight	driving	him	under.	Borrug’s	wrists	were	torn	from	his	grip,
the	arms	whipping	back	and	vanishing.	Pushed	more	than	a	warrior ’s	height
beneath	the	surface,	Karsa	twisted	round.	One	of	his	kicking	feet	collided	with
a	solid,	unyielding	body.	He	used	the	contact	to	propel	himself	away	and	back
towards	the	surface.
Even	as	he	reached	it—bloodsword	in	his	hands—he	saw,	less	than	a	body
length	distant,	an	enormous	grey	fish,	its	jagged-toothed	mouth	closing	about
the	little	that	remained	visible	of	Borrug.	Lacerated	head,	shoulders	and
flopping	arms.	The	fish’s	wide	head	thrashed	wildly	back	and	forth,	its	strange
saucer-like	eyes	flashing	as	if	lit	from	within.
There	was	screaming	behind	Karsa	and	he	turned.	Both	Damisk	and	Silgar
were	kicking	wildly	in	an	effort	to	escape.	Torvald	was	on	his	back,	the	oar
held	tight	in	his	hands,	his	legs	kicking	beneath	the	surface—he	alone	was
making	no	noise,	though	his	face	was	twisted	with	fear.
Karsa	faced	the	fish	once	more.	It	seemed	to	be	having	trouble	swallowing
Borrug—one	of	the	man’s	arms	was	lodged	crossways.	The	fish	itself	was
positioned	close	to	vertical	in	the	water,	ripping	its	head	back	and	forth.
Growling,	Karsa	swam	towards	it.
Borrug’s	arm	came	free	even	as	the	Teblor	arrived,	the	corpse
disappearing	within	the	maw.	Taking	a	deep	breath	and	kicking	hard,	Karsa
half	rose	out	of	the	water,	his	bloodsword	a	curving	spray	as	it	chopped	down
into	the	fish’s	snout.
Warm	blood	spattered	Karsa’s	forearms.
The	fish	seemed	to	fling	its	entire	body	backward.


Karsa	lunged	closer,	closing	his	legs	around	the	creature’s	body	just
beneath	the	flanking	flippers.	The	fish	twisted	away	at	the	contact,	but	could	not
drag	itself	free	of	Karsa’s	tightening	grip.
The	Teblor	reversed	his	sword	and	plunged	it	deep	into	the	beast’s	belly,
ripped	it	downward.
The	water	was	suddenly	hot	with	blood	and	bile.	The	fish’s	body	became	a
dead	weight,	dragging	Karsa	downward.	He	sheathed	his	sword;	then,	as	he	and
the	fish	sank	beneath	the	surface,	he	reached	down	into	the	gaping	wound.	One
hand	closed	on	the	thigh	of	Borrug—a	shredded	mass	of	flesh—and	the
fingers	dug	in	to	close	around	bone.
Karsa	pulled	the	lowlander	through	a	cloud	of	milky,	eye-stinging	fluid,
then,	drawing	the	body	with	him,	returned	to	the	surface.
Torvald	was	shouting	now.	Turning,	Karsa	saw	the	Daru,	standing	in	waistdeep	water,	both	arms	waving.	Near	him,	Silgar	and	Damisk	were	wading	their
way	onto	some	kind	of	shore.
Dragging	Borrug	with	him,	Karsa	made	his	way	forward.	A	half-dozen
strokes	and	his	feet	thumped	and	scraped	on	a	sandy	bottom.	He	stood,	still
holding	one	of	Borrug’s	legs.	Moments	later,	he	was	on	the	beach.
The	others	sat	or	knelt	on	the	pale	strip	of	sand,	regaining	their	breaths.
Dropping	the	body	onto	the	beach,	Karsa	remained	standing,	his	head	tilted
back	as	he	sniffed	the	warm,	sultry	air.	There	was	heavy,	lush	foliage	beyond
the	strand’s	shell-cluttered	high-tide	line.	The	buzz	and	whine	of	insects,	a	faint
rustle	as	something	small	moved	across	dry	seaweed.
Torvald	crawled	close.	‘Karsa,	the	man’s	dead.	He	was	dead	when	the	shark
took	him—’
‘So	that	was	a	shark.	The	sailors	on	the	Malazan	ship	spoke	of	sharks.’
‘Karsa,	when	a	shark	swallows	someone	you	don’t	go	after	the	poor
bastard.	He’s	finished—’
‘He	was	in	my	care,’	Karsa	rumbled.	‘The	shark	had	no	right	to	him,
whether	he	was	dead	or	alive.’
Silgar	was	on	his	feet	a	few	paces	away.	At	Karsa’s	words	he	laughed,	the
sound	high-pitched,	then	said,	‘From	a	shark’s	belly	to	seagulls	and	crabs!
Borrug’s	pathetic	spirit	no	doubt	thanks	you,	Teblor!’
‘I	have	delivered	the	lowlander,’	Karsa	replied,	‘and	now	return	him	to
your	care,	Slavemaster.	If	you	wish	to	leave	him	for	seagulls	and	crabs,	that	is
for	you	to	decide.’	He	faced	the	dark	sea	once	more,	but	could	see	no	sign	of
the	dead	shark.
‘No-one	would	believe	me,’	Torvald	muttered.
‘Believe	what,	Torvald	Nom?’


‘Oh,	I	was	imagining	myself	as	an	old	man,	years	from	now,	sitting	in
Quip’s	Bar	in	Darujhistan,	telling	this	tale.	I	saw	it	with	my	own	eyes,	and	even
I	am	having	trouble	believing	it.	You	were	halfway	out	of	the	water	when	you
swung	that	sword	down—helps	having	four	lungs,	I	suppose.	Even	so…’	he
shook	his	head.
Karsa	shrugged.	‘The	catfish	were	worse,’	he	said.	‘I	did	not	like	the
catfish.’
‘I	suggest,’	Silgar	called	out,	‘we	get	some	sleep.	Come	the	dawn,	we	will
discover	what	there	is	to	discover	of	this	place.	For	now,	thank	Mael	that	we
are	still	alive.’
‘Forgive	me,’	Torvald	said,	‘but	I’d	rather	give	thanks	to	a	stubborn
Teblor	warrior	than	to	any	sea	god.’
‘Then	your	faith	is	sorely	misplaced,’	the	slavemaster	sneered,	turning
away.
Torvald	slowly	climbed	upright.	‘Karsa,’	he	murmured,	‘you	should	know
that	Mael’s	chosen	beast	of	the	sea	is	the	shark.	I’ve	no	doubt	at	all	that	Silgar
was	indeed	praying	hard	while	we	were	out	there.’
‘It	does	not	matter,’	Karsa	replied.	He	drew	a	deep	breath	of	jungle-scented
air,	slowly	released	it.	‘I	am	on	land,	and	I	am	free,	and	now	I	shall	walk	along
this	beach,	and	so	taste	something	of	this	new	land.’
‘I	will	join	you,	then,	friend,	for	I	believe	the	light	I	saw	was	to	our	right,
slightly	above	this	beach,	and	I	would	investigate.’
‘As	you	like,	Torvald	Nom.’
They	began	walking	along	the	strand.
‘Karsa,	neither	Silgar	nor	Damisk	possesses	a	shred	of	decency.	I,
however,	do.	A	small	shred,	granted,	but	one	none	the	less.	Thus:	thank	you.’
‘We	have	saved	each	other ’s	lives,	Torvald	Nom,	and	so	I	am	pleased	to
call	you	friend,	and	to	think	of	you	as	a	warrior.	Not	a	Teblor	warrior,	of
course,	but	a	warrior	even	so.’
The	Daru	said	nothing	for	a	long	time.	They	had	moved	well	out	of	sight
of	Silgar	and	Damisk.	The	shelf	of	land	to	their	right	was	rising	in	layers	of
pale	stone,	the	wave-sculpted	wall	webbed	with	creepers	from	the	thick	growth
clinging	to	the	overhang.	A	break	in	the	clouds	overhead	cast	faint	starlight
down,	reflecting	on	the	virtually	motionless	water	on	their	left.	The	sand
underfoot	was	giving	way	to	smooth,	undulating	stone.
Torvald	touched	Karsa’s	arm	and	stopped,	pointing	upslope.	‘There,’	he
whispered.
The	Teblor	softly	grunted.	A	squat,	misshapen	tower	rose	above	the	tangle
of	brush.	Vaguely	square	and	sharply	tapering	to	end	at	a	flat	roof,	the	tower


hunched	over	the	beach,	a	gnarled	black	mass.	Three-quarters	of	the	way	up	its
seaward-facing	side	was	a	deeply	inset	triangular	window.	Dull	yellow	light
outlined	the	shutter ’s	warped	slats.
A	narrow	footpath	was	visible	winding	down	to	the	shore,	and	nearby—
five	paces	beyond	the	high	tide	line—lay	the	collapsed	remnants	of	a
fisherboat,	the	sprung	ribs	of	the	hull	jutting	out	to	the	sides	wrapped	in
seaweed	and	limned	in	guano.
‘Shall	we	pay	a	visit?’	Torvald	asked.
‘Yes,’	Karsa	replied,	walking	towards	the	footpath.
The	Daru	quickly	moved	up	beside	him.	‘No	trophies,	though,	right?’
Shrugging,	the	Teblor	said,	‘That	depends	on	how	we	are	received.’
‘Strangers	on	a	desolate	beach,	one	of	them	a	giant	with	a	sword	almost	as
tall	as	me.	In	the	dead	of	night.	Pounding	on	the	door.	If	we’re	met	with	open
arms,	Karsa,	it	will	be	a	miracle.	Worse	yet,	there’s	not	much	likelihood	of	us
sharing	a	common	language—’
‘Too	many	words,’	Karsa	cut	in.
They	had	reached	the	base	of	the	tower.	There	was	no	entrance	on	the
seaward	side.	The	trail	curved	round	to	the	other	side,	a	well-trod	path	of
limestone	dust.	Huge	slabs	of	the	yellow	rock	lay	in	heaps—many	of	them
appearing	to	have	been	dragged	in	from	other	places	and	bearing	chisel	and
cut	marks.	The	tower	itself	was	constructed	of	identical	material,	though	its
gnarled	aspect	remained	a	mystery	until	Karsa	and	Torvald	drew	closer.
The	Daru	reached	out	and	ran	his	fingers	along	one	of	the	cornerstones.
‘This	tower	is	nothing	but	fossils,’	he	murmured.
‘What	are	fossils?’	Karsa	asked,	studying	the	strange	shapes	embedded	in
the	stone.
‘Ancient	life,	turned	to	stone.	I	imagine	scholars	have	an	explanation	for
how	such	transformation	occurred.	Alas,	my	education	was	sporadic	and,	uh,
poorly	received.	Look,	this	one—it’s	a	massive	shell	of	some	sort.	And	there,
those	look	like	vertebrae,	from	some	snake-like	beast…’
‘They	are	naught	but	carvings,’	Karsa	asserted.
A	deep	rumbling	laugh	made	them	swing	round.	The	man	standing	at	the
bend	in	the	path	ten	paces	ahead	was	huge	by	lowlander	standards,	his	skin	so
dark	as	to	seem	black.	He	wore	no	shirt,	only	a	sleeveless	vest	of	heavy	mail
stiffened	by	rust.	His	muscles	were	vast,	devoid	of	fat,	making	his	arms,
shoulders	and	torso	look	like	they	had	been	fashioned	of	taut	ropes.	He	wore	a
belted	loincloth	of	some	colourless	material.	A	hat	that	seemed	made	of	the
torn	remnant	of	a	hood	covered	his	head,	but	Karsa	could	see	thick,	grey-shot
beard	covering	the	lower	half	of	the	man’s	face.


No	weapons	were	visible,	not	even	a	knife.	His	teeth	flashed	in	a	smile.
‘Screams	from	the	sea,	and	now	a	pair	of	skulkers	jabbering	in	Daru	in	my
tower ’s	front	yard.’	His	head	tilted	upward	slightly	to	regard	Karsa	for	a
moment.	‘At	first	I’d	thought	you	a	Fenn,	but	you’re	no	Fenn,	are	you?’
‘I	am	Teblor—’
‘Teblor!	Well,	lad,	you’re	a	long	way	from	home,	aren’t	you?’
Torvald	stepped	forward.	‘Sir,	your	command	of	Daru	is	impressive,
though	I	am	certain	I	detect	a	Malazan	accent.	More,	by	your	colour,	I’d	hazard
you	are	Napan.	Are	we	then	on	Quon	Tali?’
‘You	don’t	know?’
‘Alas,	sir,	I	am	afraid	not.’
The	man	grunted,	then	turned	back	up	the	trail,	‘Carvings,	ha!’
Torvald	glanced	back	at	Karsa,	then,	with	a	shrug,	set	off	after	the	man.
Karsa	followed.
The	door	was	situated	on	the	inland	side.	The	path	forked	in	front	of	it,	one
trail	leading	to	the	tower	and	the	other	to	a	raised	road	that	ran	parallel	to	the
coastline,	beyond	which	was	a	dark	band	of	forest.
The	man	pushed	open	the	door	and	ducked	inside.
Both	Torvald	and	Karsa	had	involuntarily	paused	at	the	fork,	staring	up	at
the	enormous	stone	skull	that	formed	the	lintel	above	the	low	doorway.	It	was
as	long	as	the	Teblor	was	tall,	running	the	entire	width	of	the	wall.	The	rows	of
dagger-like	teeth	dwarfed	even	that	of	a	grey	bear.
The	man	reappeared.	‘Aye,	impressive,	isn’t	it?	I’ve	collected	most	of	the
bastard’s	body,	too—I	should’ve	guessed	it	would	be	bigger	than	I’d	first
thought,	but	it	was	the	forearms	I	found,	you	see,	and	they’re	puny,	so	there	I
was	picturing	a	beast	no	taller	than	you,	Teblor,	but	with	a	head	of	equal	size.
No	wonder	they	died	out,	I	told	myself.	Of	course,	it’s	mistakes	like	these	that
teach	a	man	to	be	humble,	and	Hood	knows,	this	one’s	humbled	me	good.
Come	inside;	I’m	brewing	some	tea.’
Torvald	grinned	up	at	Karsa.	‘See	what	happens	when	you	live	alone?’
The	two	entered	the	tower.
And	were	stunned	by	what	awaited	them.	The	tower	was	hollow,	with	only
a	flimsy	scaffold	projecting	out	from	the	seaside	wall,	just	below	the	lone
window.	The	floor	was	a	thick,	crunching	carpet	of	stone	chips.	Weathered
poles	reared	up	on	all	sides	at	various	angles,	joined	by	crossbeams	here	and
there	and	festooned	with	ropes.	This	wooden	framework	surrounded	the	lower
half	of	a	stone	skeleton,	standing	upright	on	two	thick-boned	legs—
reminiscent	of	a	bird’s—with	three-toed,	hugely	taloned	feet.	The	tail	was	a
chain	of	vertebrae,	snaking	up	one	of	the	walls.


The	man	was	seated	near	a	brick-lined	hearth	beneath	the	scaffold,	stirring
one	of	the	two	pots	resting	in	the	coals.	‘See	my	problem?	I	built	the	tower
thinking	there’d	be	plenty	of	room	to	reconstruct	this	leviathan.	But	I	kept
uncovering	more	and	more	of	those	Hood-damned	ribs—I	can’t	even	attach
the	shoulder	blades,	much	less	the	forearms,	neck	and	head.	I	was	planning	on
dismantling	the	tower	eventually,	anyway,	so	I	could	get	at	the	skull.	But	now
all	my	plans	are	awry,	and	I’m	going	to	have	to	extend	the	roof,	which	is
tricky.	Damned	tricky.’
Karsa	moved	over	to	the	hearth,	bent	down	to	sniff	at	the	other	pot,
wherein	a	thick,	soupy	liquid	bubbled.
‘Wouldn’t	try	that,’	the	man	said.	‘It’s	what	I	use	to	fix	the	bones	together.
Sets	harder	than	the	stone	itself,	takes	any	weight	once	it’s	cured.’	He	found
some	extra	clay	cups	and	ladled	the	herbal	tea	into	them.	‘Makes	good
dishware,	too.’
Torvald	dragged	his	eyes	from	the	huge	skeleton	looming	over	them	and
approached	to	collect	his	cup.	‘I	am	named	Torvald	Nom—’
‘Nom?	Of	the	House	of	Nom?	Darujhistan?	Odd,	I’d	figured	you	for	a
bandit—before	you	became	a	slave,	that	is.’
Torvald	threw	Karsa	a	grimace.	‘It’s	these	damned	shackle	scars—we	need
a	change	of	clothes,	something	with	long	sleeves.	And	moccasins	that	go	up	to
the	knees.’
‘Plenty	of	escaped	slaves	about,’	the	Napan	said,	shrugging.	‘I	wouldn’t
worry	too	much	about	it.’
‘Where	are	we?’
‘North	coast	of	Seven	Cities.	The	sea	yonder	is	the	Otataral	Sea.	The	forest
covering	this	peninsula	is	called	the	A’rath.	Nearest	city	is	Ehrlitan,	about
fifteen	days	on	foot	west	of	here.’
‘And	what	is	your	name,	if	I	may	ask?’
‘Well,	Torvald	Nom,	there’s	no	easy	answer	to	that	question.	Locally,	I’m
known	as	Ba’ienrok,	which	is	Ehrlii	for	“Keeper”.	Beyond	that,	in	the	fierce
and	unpleasant	world,	I’m	not	known	at	all,	except	as	someone	who	died	long
ago,	and	that’s	how	I	plan	on	keeping	it.	So,	Ba’ienrok	or	Keeper,	take	your
pick.’
‘Keeper,	then.	What	is	in	this	tea?	There	are	flavours	I	do	not	recognize,
and	from	someone	born	and	raised	in	Darujhistan,	that	detail	alone	is	close	to
impossible.’
‘A	collection	of	local	plants,’	Keeper	replied.	‘Don’t	know	their	names,
don’t	know	their	properties,	but	I	like	their	taste.	I	long	ago	weeded	out	the
ones	that	made	me	sick.’


‘Delighted	to	hear	that,’	Torvald	said.	‘Well,	you	seem	to	know	a	lot	about
that	fierce	and	unpleasant	world	out	there.	Daru,	Teblor…That	wrecked	boat
down	below,	was	that	yours?’
Keeper	slowly	rose.	‘Now	you’re	making	me	nervous,	Torvald.	It’s	not
good	when	I	get	nervous.’
‘Uh,	I’ll	ask	no	more	questions,	then.’
Keeper	jabbed	a	fist	against	Torvald’s	shoulder,	rocking	the	Daru	back	a
step.	‘Wise	choice,	lad.	I	think	I	can	get	along	with	you,	though	I’d	feel	better	if
your	silent	friend	said	a	thing	or	two.’
Rubbing	at	his	shoulder,	Torvald	turned	to	Karsa.
The	Teblor	bared	his	teeth.	‘I	have	nothing	to	say.’
‘I	like	men	with	nothing	to	say,’	Keeper	said.
‘Lucky	for	you,’	Karsa	growled.	‘For	you	would	not	wish	me	as	an
enemy.’
Keeper	refilled	his	cup.	‘I’ve	had	worse	than	you,	Teblor,	in	my	day.
Uglier	and	bigger	and	meaner.	Of	course,	they’re	mostly	all	dead,	now.’
Torvald	cleared	his	throat.	‘Alas,	age	takes	us	all,	eventually.’
‘That	it	does,	lad,’	Keeper	said.	‘Too	bad	none	of	them	had	the	chance	to
see	for	themselves.	Now,	I	expect	you’re	hungry.	But	to	eat	my	food,	you’ve
got	to	do	something	to	earn	it	first.	And	that	means	helping	me	dismantle	the
roof.	Shouldn’t	take	more	than	a	day	or	two.’
Karsa	looked	around.	‘I	will	not	work	for	you.	Digging	up	bones	and
putting	them	together	is	a	waste	of	time.	It	is	pointless.’
Keeper	went	perfectly	still.	‘Pointless?’	He	barely	breathed	the	word.
‘It’s	that	woeful	streak	of	Teblor	pragmatism,’	Torvald	said	hastily.	‘That
and	a	warrior ’s	blunt	manners,	which	often	come	across	as	unintentionally
rude—’
‘Too	many	words,’	Karsa	cut	in.	‘This	man	wastes	his	life	with	stupid	tasks.
When	I	decide	I	am	hungry,	I	will	take	food.’
Though	the	Teblor	was	anticipating	a	violent	reaction	from	Keeper,	and
though	Karsa’s	hand	was	close	to	the	grip	of	his	bloodsword,	he	was	unable	to
avoid	the	blurred	fist	that	lashed	out,	connecting	with	his	lower	ribs	on	his
right	side.	Bones	cracked.	The	air	in	his	lungs	exploded	outward.	Sagging,
Karsa	staggered	back,	incapable	of	drawing	breath,	a	flood	of	pain	darkening
his	vision.
He	had	never	been	hit	so	hard	in	his	life.	Not	even	Bairoth	Gild	had
managed	to	deliver	such	a	blow.	Even	as	consciousness	slipped	from	him,	he
swung	a	look	of	astonished,	unfeigned	admiration	on	Keeper.	Then	he
collapsed.


When	he	awoke,	sunlight	was	streaming	through	the	open	doorway.	He
found	himself	lying	in	the	stone	chips.	The	air	was	filled	with	mortar	dust,
descending	from	above.	Groaning	with	the	pain	of	cracked	ribs,	Karsa	slowly
sat	up.	He	could	hear	voices	from	up	near	the	tower ’s	ceiling.
The	bloodsword	still	hung	from	its	straps	on	his	back.	The	Teblor	leaned
against	the	stone	leg	bones	of	the	skeleton	as	he	climbed	to	his	feet.	Glancing
up,	he	saw	Torvald	and	Keeper,	balanced	in	the	wood	framework	directly
beneath	the	ceiling,	which	had	already	been	partly	dismantled.	The	Daru
looked	down.
‘Karsa!	I	would	invite	you	up	but	I	suspect	this	scaffold	wouldn’t	manage
your	weight.	We’ve	made	good	progress	in	any	case—’
Keeper	interrupted	with,	‘It’ll	take	his	weight.	I	winched	up	the	entire	spine
and	that	weighs	a	lot	more	than	a	lone	Teblor.	Get	up	here,	lad,	we’re	ready	to
start	on	the	walls.’
Karsa	probed	the	vaguely	fist-shaped	bruise	covering	his	lower	ribs	on	his
right	side.	It	was	painful	to	draw	breath;	he	was	unsure	whether	he	would	be
able	to	climb,	much	less	work.	At	the	same	time,	he	was	reluctant	to	show
weakness,	particularly	to	that	muscle-knotted	Napan.	Grimacing,	he	reached	up
to	the	nearest	crossbeam.
The	climb	was	agonizing,	torturously	slow.	High	above,	the	two
lowlanders	watched	in	silence.	By	the	time	Karsa	reached	the	walkway	beneath
the	ceiling,	dragging	himself	alongside	Keeper	and	Torvald,	he	was	sheathed
in	sweat.
Keeper	was	staring	at	him.	‘Hood	take	me,’	he	muttered,	‘I	was	surprised
that	you	managed	to	stand	at	all,	Teblor.	I	know	that	I	broke	ribs—damn’—he
lifted	a	splinted,	bandage-swathed	hand—‘I	broke	bones	of	my	own.	It’s	my
temper,	you	see.	It’s	always	been	a	problem.	I	don’t	take	insults	too	well.	Best
just	sit	there—we’ll	manage.’
Karsa	sneered.	‘I	am	of	the	Uryd	tribe.	Think	you	that	a	lowlander ’s	tap
concerns	me?’	He	straightened.	The	ceiling	had	been	a	single	slab	of
limestone,	slightly	projecting	beyond	the	walls.	Its	removal	had	involved
chiselling	away	the	mortar	at	the	joins,	then	simply	sliding	it	to	one	side	until	it
toppled,	crashing	into	pieces	down	at	the	foot	of	the	tower.	The	mortar	around
the	wall’s	large,	rough	blocks	had	been	cut	away	down	to	the	edge	of	the
scaffold.	Karsa	set	his	shoulder	against	one	side	and	pushed.
Both	men	snatched	at	the	bloodsword’s	straps	as	the	Teblor	toppled
forward,	a	huge	section	of	wall	vanishing	in	front	of	him.	A	thunderous
concussion	from	below	shook	the	tower.	There	was	a	moment	when	it	seemed
that	Karsa’s	weight	would	drag	all	three	of	them	over,	then	Keeper	hooked	a


leg	around	a	pole,	grunting	as	the	straps	drew	taut	at	the	end	of	one	arm.	All
hung	in	balance	for	a	heartbeat,	then	the	Napan	slowly	curled	his	arm,	drawing
Karsa	back	onto	the	platform.
The	Teblor	could	do	nothing	to	help—he	had	come	close	to	fainting	when
he	had	pushed	the	stones	over,	and	pain	roared	through	his	skull.	He	slowly
sank	to	his	knees.
Gasping,	Torvald	pulled	his	hands	free	of	the	straps,	sat	down	on	the
warped	boards	with	a	thump.
Keeper	laughed.	‘Well,	that	was	easy.	Good	enough,	you’ve	both	earned
breakfast.’
Torvald	coughed,	then	said	to	Karsa,	‘In	case	you	were	wondering,	I	went
back	down	to	the	beach	at	dawn,	to	retrieve	Silgar	and	Damisk.	But	they
weren’t	where	we’d	left	them.	I	don’t	think	the	slavemaster	planned	on
travelling	with	us—he	likely	feared	for	his	life	in	your	company,	Karsa,	which
you	have	to	admit	is	not	entirely	unreasonable.	I	followed	their	tracks	up	onto
the	coast	road.	They	had	headed	west,	suggesting	that	Silgar	knew	more	of
where	we	are	than	he’d	let	on.	Fifteen	days	to	Ehrlitan,	which	is	a	major	port.	If
they’d	gone	east,	it	would	have	been	a	month	or	more	to	the	nearest	city.’
‘You	talk	too	much,’	Karsa	said.
‘Aye,’	Keeper	agreed,	‘he	does.	You	two	have	had	quite	a	journey—I	now
know	more	of	it	than	I’d	care	to.	No	cause	for	worry,	though,	Teblor.	I	only
believed	half	of	it.	Killing	a	shark,	well,	the	ones	that	frequent	this	coast	are	the
big	ones,	big	enough	to	prove	too	much	for	the	dhenrabi.	All	the	small	ones
get	eaten,	you	see.	I’ve	yet	to	see	one	offshore	here	that’s	less	than	twice	your
height	in	length,	Teblor.	Splitting	one’s	head	open	with	a	single	blow?	With	a
wooden	sword?	In	deep	water?	And	what’s	that	other	one?	Catfish	big	enough
to	swallow	a	man	whole?	Hah,	a	good	one.’
Torvald	stared	at	the	Napan.	‘Both	true.	As	true	as	a	flooded	world	and	a
ship	with	headless	Tiste	Andii	at	the	oars!’
‘Well,	I	believe	all	that,	Torvald.	But	the	shark	and	the	catfish?	Do	you	take
me	for	a	fool?	Now,	let’s	climb	down	and	cook	up	a	meal.	Let	me	get	a	harness
on	you,	Teblor,	in	case	you	decide	to	go	to	sleep	halfway	down.	We’ll	follow.’
	
The	flatfish	that	Keeper	cut	up	and	threw	into	a	broth	of	starchy	tubers	had
been	smoked	and	salted.	By	the	time	Karsa	finished	his	two	helpings	he	was
desperately	thirsty.	Keeper	directed	them	to	a	natural	spring	close	to	the	tower,
where	both	he	and	Torvald	went	to	drink	deep	of	the	sweet	water.
The	Daru	then	splashed	his	face	and	settled	down	with	his	back	to	a	fallen


palm	tree.	‘I	have	been	thinking,	friend,’	he	said.
‘You	should	do	more	of	that,	instead	of	talking,	Torvald	Nom.’
‘It’s	a	family	curse.	My	father	was	even	worse.	Oddly	enough,	some	lines
of	the	Nom	House	are	precisely	opposite—you	couldn’t	get	a	word	out	of
them	even	under	torture.	I	have	a	cousin,	an	assassin—’
‘I	thought	you	had	been	thinking.’
‘Oh,	right.	So	I	was.	Ehrlitan.	We	should	head	there.’
‘Why?	I	saw	nothing	of	value	in	any	of	the	cities	we	travelled	through	on
Genabackis.	They	stink,	they’re	too	loud,	and	the	lowlanders	scurry	about	like
cliff-mice.’
‘It’s	a	port,	Karsa.	A	Malazan	port.	That	means	there	are	ships	setting	out
from	it,	heading	for	Genabackis.	Isn’t	it	time	to	go	home,	friend?	We	could
work	for	our	passage.	Me,	I’m	ready	to	enter	the	embrace	of	my	dear	family,
the	long-lost	child	returned,	wiser,	almost	reformed.	As	for	you,	I’d	think	your
tribe	would	be,	uh,	delighted	to	have	you	back.	You’ve	knowledge	now,	and
they	are	in	dire	need	of	that,	unless	you	want	what	happened	to	the	Sunyd	to
happen	to	the	Uryd.’
Karsa	frowned	at	the	Daru	for	a	moment,	then	he	looked	away.	‘I	shall
indeed	return	to	my	people.	One	day.	But	Urugal	guides	my	steps	still—I	can
feel	him.	Secrets	have	power	so	long	as	they	remain	secret.	Bairoth	Gild’s
words,	to	which	I	gave	little	thought	at	the	time.	But	now,	that	has	changed.	I	am
changed,	Torvald	Nom.	Mistrust	has	taken	root	in	my	soul,	and	when	I	find
Urugal’s	stone	face	in	my	mind,	when	I	feel	his	will	warring	with	my	own,	I
feel	my	own	weakness.	Urugal’s	power	over	me	lies	in	what	I	do	not	know,	in
secrets—secrets	my	own	god	would	keep	from	me.	I	have	ceased	fighting	this
war	within	my	soul.	Urugal	guides	me	and	I	follow,	for	our	journey	is	to
truth.’
Torvald	studied	the	Teblor	with	lidded	eyes.	‘You	may	not	like	what	you
find,	Karsa.’
‘I	suspect	you	are	right,	Torvald	Nom.’
The	Daru	stared	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	climbed	to	his	feet	and
brushed	sand	from	his	ragged	tunic.	‘Keeper	has	the	opinion	that	it	isn’t	safe
around	you.	He	says	it’s	as	if	you’re	dragging	a	thousand	invisible	chains
behind	you,	and	whatever ’s	on	the	ends	of	each	one	of	them	is	filled	with
venom.’
Karsa	felt	his	blood	grow	cold	within	him.
Torvald	must	have	noted	a	change	in	the	Teblor ’s	expression,	for	he	raised
both	hands.	‘Wait!	He	only	spoke	in	passing,	it	was	nothing	really,	friend.	He
was	simply	telling	me	to	be	careful	in	your	company—as	if	I	didn’t	already


know	that.	You	are	Hood’s	own	lodestone—to	your	enemies,	that	is.	In	any
case,	Karsa,	I’d	advise	you	not	to	cross	that	man.	Pound	for	pound	he’s	the
strongest	man	I’ve	ever	met—and	that	includes	you.	Besides,	while	you’ve
regained	some	of	your	old	strength,	you’ve	a	half-dozen	broken	ribs—’
‘Enough	words,	Torvald	Nom.	I	do	not	intend	to	attack	Keeper.	His	vision
troubles	me,	that	is	all.	For	I	have	shared	it,	in	my	dreams.	Now	you	understand
why	I	must	seek	out	the	truth.’
‘Very	well.’	Torvald	lowered	his	hands,	then	sighed.	‘Still,	I’d	advise
Ehrlitan.	We	need	clothes	and—’
‘Keeper	spoke	the	truth	when	he	said	I	am	dangerous	to	be	around,	Torvald
Nom.	And	that	danger	is	likely	to	increase.	I	will	join	you	on	the	journey	to
Ehrlitan.	Then,	I	will	see	to	it	that	you	find	a	ship,	so	that	you	may	return	to
your	family.	When	this	is	done,	we	shall	part	ways.	I	shall,	however,	keep	the
truth	of	your	friendship	with	me.’
The	Daru	grinned.	‘It’s	settled,	then.	Ehrlitan.	Come,	let	us	return	to	the
tower,	so	we	may	give	our	thanks	to	Keeper	for	his	hospitality.’
They	began	making	their	way	along	the	trail.	‘Rest	assured,’	Torvald
continued,	‘that	I	shall	hold	the	truth	of	your	friendship	in	me	as	well,	though
it’s	a	truth	no-one	else	is	likely	to	believe.’
‘Why	is	that?’	Karsa	asked.
‘I	was	never	very	good	at	acquiring	friends.	Acquaintances,	minions	and
the	like—that	was	easy.	But	my	big	mouth—’
‘Sends	potential	friends	fleeing.	Yes,	I	understand.	Clearly.’
‘Ah,	now	I	see.	You	want	to	throw	me	on	the	first	ship	just	to	get	away
from	me.’
‘There	is	that,’	Karsa	replied.
‘In	keeping	with	the	pathetic	state	of	my	life,	it	makes	sense	all	right.’
After	a	moment,	as	they	rounded	a	bend	and	came	within	sight	of	the	tower,
Karsa	scowled	and	said,	‘Making	light	of	words	is	still	difficult—’
‘All	that	talk	of	friendship	made	for	a	momentary	discomfort.	You	did	well
to	slide	away	from	it.’
‘No,	for	what	I	would	say	is	this.	On	the	ship,	when	I	hung	in	chains	from
the	mast,	you	were	my	only	hold	on	this	world.	Without	you	and	your	endless
words,	Torvald	Nom,	the	madness	I	had	feigned	would	have	become	a
madness	in	truth.	I	was	a	Teblor	warleader.	I	was	needed,	but	I	myself	did	not
need.	I	had	followers,	but	not	allies,	and	only	now	do	I	understand	the
difference.	And	it	is	vast.	And	from	this,	I	have	come	to	understand	what	it	is	to
possess	regrets.	Bairoth	Gild.	Delum	Thord.	Even	the	Rathyd,	whom	I	have
greatly	weakened.	When	I	return	on	my	old	path,	back	into	the	lands	of	the


Teblor,	there	are	wounds	that	I	shall	need	to	mend.	And	so,	when	you	say	it	is
time	to	return	to	your	family,	Torvald	Nom,	I	understand	and	my	heart	is
gladdened.’
Keeper	was	sitting	on	a	three-legged	stool	outside	the	tower ’s	doorway.	A
large	sack	with	shoulder-straps	rested	at	his	feet,	along	with	two	stoppered
gourds	glittering	with	condensation.	He	had	in	his	unbandaged	hand	a	small
bag,	which	he	tossed	towards	Torvald	as	the	two	men	arrived.
The	bag	jingled	as	the	Daru	caught	it.	Brows	lifting,	Torvald	asked,	‘What
—’
‘Silver	jakatas,	mostly,’	Keeper	said.	‘Some	local	coin,	too,	but	those	are
of	very	high	denomination,	so	be	careful	of	showing	them.	Ehrlitan’s	cutpurses
are	legendary.’
‘Keeper—’
The	Napan	waved	a	hand.	‘Listen,	lad.	When	a	man	arranges	his	own	death,
he	needs	to	plan	ahead.	A	life	of	anonymity	doesn’t	come	as	cheap	as	you’d
imagine.	I	emptied	half	of	Aren’s	treasury	a	day	before	my	tragic	drowning.
Now,	you	might	manage	to	kill	me	and	try	to	find	it,	but	it’d	be	hopeless.	So
thank	me	for	my	generosity	and	get	on	your	way.’
‘One	day,’	Karsa	said,	‘I	shall	return	here	and	repay	you.’
‘For	the	coin	or	the	broken	ribs?’
The	Teblor	simply	smiled.
Keeper	laughed,	then	rose	and	ducked	through	the	doorway.	A	moment
later,	they	could	hear	him	climbing	the	frame.
Torvald	collected	the	pack,	drawing	the	straps	over	his	shoulders,	then
handed	one	of	the	gourds	to	Karsa.
They	set	off	down	the	road.


Chapter	Four

‘Has	a	drowned	Napan’s	body	ever	surfaced?’
EMPRESS	LASEEN	TO	HIGH	MAGE	TAYSCHRENN
(FOLLOWING	THE	DISAPPEARANCES)
LIFE	OF	EMPRESS	LASEEN
ABELARD
There	were	villages	on	the	coastal	road,	usually	set	on	the	inland	side,	as	if	the
inhabitants	sought	nothing	from	the	sea.	A	scattering	of	adobe	dwellings,
flimsy	corrals,	goats,	dogs	and	dark-skinned	figures	hidden	within	swaths	of
full-length,	sun-bleached	cloth.	Shadowed	faces	tracked	the	Teblor	and	the
Daru	from	doorways	but	otherwise	made	no	move.
On	the	fourth	day,	in	the	fifth	of	such	villages,	they	found	a	merchant’s
wagon	drawn	up	in	the	virtually	empty	market	square,	and	Torvald	managed	to
purchase,	for	a	handful	of	silver,	an	antique	sword,	top-heavy	and	sharply
curved.	The	merchant	had	bolts	of	cloth	for	sale	as	well,	but	nothing	already
made	into	clothing.	The	sword’s	handle	fell	apart	shortly	afterwards.
‘I	need	to	find	a	wood-carver,’	Torvald	said	after	a	lengthy	and	rather
elaborate	string	of	curses.	They	were	once	more	walking	down	the	road,	the
sun	overhead	fiercely	hot	in	a	cloudless	sky.	The	forest	had	thinned	to	either
side,	low,	straggly	and	dusty,	allowing	them	a	view	of	the	turquoise	water	of
the	Otataral	Sea	to	their	right,	and	the	dun	tones	of	the	undulating	horizon
inland.	‘And	I’d	swear	that	merchant	understood	Malazan—even	as	bad	as	I
speak	it.	He	just	wouldn’t	admit	to	that	fact.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘The	Malazan	soldiers	in	Genabaris	said	the	Seven	Cities
was	going	to	rebel	against	their	occupiers.	This	is	why	the	Teblor	do	not	make
conquests.	Better	that	the	enemy	keeps	its	land,	so	that	we	may	raid	again	and
again.’
‘Not	the	imperial	way,’	the	Daru	responded,	shaking	his	head.	‘Possession
and	control,	the	two	are	like	insatiable	hungers	for	some	people.	Oh,	no	doubt
the	Malazans	have	thought	up	countless	justifications	for	their	wars	of


expansion.	It’s	well	known	that	Seven	Cities	was	a	rat’s	warren	of	feuds	and
civil	wars,	leaving	most	of	the	population	suffering	and	miserable	and	starving
under	the	heels	of	fat	warlords	and	corrupt	priest-kings.	And	that,	with	the
Malazan	conquest,	the	thugs	ended	up	spiked	to	the	city	walls	or	on	the	run.
And	the	wilder	tribes	no	longer	sweep	down	out	of	the	hills	to	deliver	mayhem
on	their	more	civilized	kin.	And	the	tyranny	of	the	priesthoods	was	shattered,
putting	an	end	to	human	sacrifice	and	extortion.	And	of	course	the	merchants
have	never	been	richer,	or	safer	on	these	roads.	So,	all	in	all,	this	land	is	rife
for	rebellion.’
Karsa	stared	at	Torvald	for	a	long	moment,	then	said,	‘Yes,	I	can	see	how
that	would	be	true.’
The	Daru	grinned.	‘You’re	learning,	friend.’
‘The	lessons	of	civilization.’
‘Just	so.	There’s	little	value	in	seeking	to	find	reasons	for	why	people	do
what	they	do,	or	feel	the	way	they	feel.	Hatred	is	a	most	pernicious	weed,
finding	root	in	any	kind	of	soil.	It	feeds	on	itself.’
‘With	words.’
‘Indeed,	with	words.	Form	an	opinion,	say	it	often	enough	and	pretty	soon
everyone’s	saying	it	right	back	at	you,	and	then	it	becomes	a	conviction,	fed	by
unreasoning	anger	and	defended	with	weapons	of	fear.	At	which	point,	words
become	useless	and	you’re	left	with	a	fight	to	the	death.’
Karsa	grunted.	‘A	fight	beyond	death,	I	would	say.’
‘True	enough.	Generation	after	generation.’
‘Are	all	the	people	of	Darujhistan	like	you,	Torvald	Nom?’
‘More	or	less.	Contentious	bastards.	We	thrive	on	argument,	meaning	we
never	go	past	the	stage	of	using	words.	We	love	words,	Karsa,	as	much	as	you
love	cutting	off	heads	and	collecting	ears	and	tongues.	Walk	down	any	street,
in	any	district,	and	everyone	you	speak	to	will	have	a	different	opinion,	no
matter	what	the	subject.	Even	the	possibility	of	being	conquered	by	the
Malazans.	I	was	thinking	a	moment	ago—that	shark,	choking	on	Borrug’s
body.	I	suspect,	should	Darujhistan	ever	become	part	of	the	Malazan	Empire,
the	empire	will	be	like	that	shark,	and	Darujhistan	like	Borrug.	We’ll	choke	the
beast	that	swallows	us.’
‘The	shark	did	not	choke	for	very	long.’
‘That’s	because	Borrug	was	too	dead	to	say	anything	about	it.’
‘An	interesting	distinction,	Torvald	Nom.’
‘Well	of	course.	Us	Daru	are	a	subtle	folk.’
They	were	approaching	another	village,	this	one	distinct	from	the	others
they	had	walked	through	for	having	a	low	stone	wall	encircling	it.	Three	large


limestone	buildings	rose	from	its	centre.	Nearby	was	a	pen	crowded	with
goats,	loudly	complaining	in	the	heat.
‘You’d	think	they’d	be	out	wandering,’	Torvald	commented	as	they	came
closer.
‘Unless	they	are	about	to	be	slaughtered.’
‘All	of	them?’
Karsa	sniffed	the	air.	‘I	smell	horses.’
‘I	don’t	see	any.’
The	road	narrowed	at	the	wall,	spanning	a	trench	before	passing	through	a
crumbling,	leaning	arch.	Karsa	and	Torvald	crossed	the	bridge	and	passed
under	the	arch,	emerging	onto	the	village’s	main	street.
There	was	no-one	in	sight.	Not	entirely	unusual,	as	the	locals	usually
retreated	into	their	homes	at	the	Teblor ’s	arrival,	although	in	this	case	the
doors	of	those	dwellings	were	firmly	shut,	the	windows	shuttered.
Karsa	drew	his	bloodsword.	‘We	have	walked	into	an	ambush,’	he	said.
Torvald	sighed.	‘I	think	you	are	right.’	He	had	wrapped	his	sword’s	tang	in
spare	leather	strapping	taken	from	the	pack—a	temporary	and	not	entirely
successful	effort	to	make	the	weapon	useful.	The	Daru	now	slid	the	scimitar
from	its	cracked	wooden	scabbard.
At	the	far	end	of	the	street,	beyond	the	large	buildings,	horsemen	now
appeared.	A	dozen,	then	two,	then	three.	They	were	covered	from	head	to	toe	in
loose,	dark	blue	clothing,	their	faces	hidden	behind	scarves.	Short,	recurved
bows,	arrows	nocked,	were	trained	on	Karsa	and	Torvald.
Horse	hoofs	from	behind	made	them	turn,	to	see	a	score	more	riders
coming	through	the	archway,	some	with	bows,	others	with	lances.
Karsa	scowled.	‘How	effective	are	those	tiny	bows?’	he	asked	the	Daru
beside	him.
‘Sufficient	to	punch	arrows	through	chain,’	Torvald	replied,	lowering	his
sword.	‘And	we’re	wearing	no	armour	in	any	case.’
A	year	ago	and	Karsa	would	have	attacked	none	the	less.	Now,	he	simply
reslung	his	bloodsword.
The	riders	behind	them	closed,	then	dismounted.	A	number	approached
with	chains	and	shackles.
‘Beru	fend,’	Torvald	muttered,	‘not	again.’
Karsa	shrugged.
Neither	resisted	as	the	shackles	were	fitted	onto	their	wrists	and	ankles.
There	was	some	difficulty	in	dealing	with	the	Teblor	in	this	matter—when	the
shackles	clicked	into	place,	they	were	so	tight	as	to	cut	off	the	blood	flow	to
Karsa’s	hands	and	feet.


Torvald,	watching,	said	in	Malazan,	‘Those	will	need	to	be	changed,	lest	he
lose	his	appendages—’
‘Hardly	a	consideration,’	said	a	familiar	voice	from	the	entrance	to	one	of
the	larger	buildings.	Silgar,	trailed	by	Damisk,	emerged	onto	the	dusty	street.
‘You	will	indeed	lose	your	hands	and	feet,	Karsa	Orlong,	which	should
effectively	put	an	end	to	the	threat	you	pose.	Of	course,	that	will	do	much	to
diminish	your	value	as	a	slave,	but	I	am	prepared	to	accept	the	loss.’
‘Is	this	how	you	repay	saving	your	miserable	lives?’	Torvald	demanded.
‘Why,	yes,	it	is.	Repayment.	For	the	loss	of	most	of	my	men.	For	the	arrest
by	the	Malazans.	For	countless	other	outrages	which	I	won’t	bother	listing,
since	these	dear	Arak	tribesmen	are	rather	far	from	home,	and,	given	that
they’re	somewhat	less	than	welcome	in	this	territory,	they	are	impatient	to
depart.’
Karsa	could	no	longer	feel	his	hands	and	feet.	As	one	of	the	Arak
tribesmen	pushed	him	forward	he	stumbled,	then	fell	to	his	knees.	A	thick
knout	cracked	into	the	side	of	his	head.	Sudden	rage	gripped	the	Teblor.	He
lashed	out	his	right	arm,	ripping	the	chain	from	an	Arak’s	hands,	and	swung	it
full	into	the	face	of	his	attacker.	The	man	screamed.
The	others	closed	in	then,	wielding	their	knouts—clubs	made	from	black,
braided	hair—until	Karsa	fell	senseless	to	the	ground.
When	he	finally	regained	consciousness,	it	was	dusk.	He	had	been	tied	to
some	sort	of	travois,	which	was	in	the	process	of	being	unhitched	from	a	train
of	long-legged,	lean	horses.	Karsa’s	face	was	a	mass	of	bruises,	his	eyes
almost	swollen	shut,	his	tongue	and	the	inside	of	his	mouth	cut	and	nicked	by
his	own	teeth.	He	looked	down	at	his	hands.	They	were	blue,	the	fingertips
darkening	to	black.	They	were	dead	weights	at	the	ends	of	his	limbs,	as	were
his	feet.
The	tribesmen	were	making	camp	a	short	distance	from	the	coastal	road.
To	the	west,	at	the	horizon’s	very	edge,	was	the	dull	yellow	glow	of	a	city.
A	half-dozen	small,	virtually	smokeless	fires	had	been	lit	by	the	Arak,
using	some	sort	of	dung	for	fuel.	Karsa	saw,	twenty	paces	distant,	the
slavemaster	and	Damisk	seated	among	a	group	of	the	tribesmen.	The	hearth
closest	to	the	Teblor	was	being	used	to	cook	suspended	skewers	of	tubers	and
meat.
Torvald	sat	nearby,	working	on	something	in	the	gloom.	None	of	the	Arak
seemed	to	be	paying	the	two	slaves	any	attention.
Karsa	hissed.
The	Daru	glanced	over.	‘Don’t	know	about	you,’	he	whispered,	‘but	I’m
damned	hot.	Got	to	get	out	of	these	clothes.	I’m	sure	you	are	as	well.	I’ll	come


over	and	help	you	in	a	moment.’	There	was	the	faint	sound	of	ripping	seams.
‘At	last,’	Torvald	murmured,	dragging	his	tunic	free.	Naked,	he	began	edging
closer	to	Karsa.	‘Don’t	bother	trying	to	say	anything,	friend.	I’m	surprised	you
can	even	breathe,	with	the	way	they	beat	you.	In	any	case,	I	need	your	clothes.’
He	came	up	alongside	the	Teblor,	spared	a	glance	towards	the	tribesmen—
none	of	whom	had	noticed	him—then	reached	up	and	began	tugging	at	Karsa’s
tunic.	There	was	but	a	single	seam,	and	it	had	already	been	stretched	and
sundered	in	places.	As	he	worked,	Torvald	continued	whispering.	‘Small	fires.
Smokeless.	Camping	in	a	basin,	despite	the	insects.	Talking	in	mumbles,	very
quiet.	And	Silgar ’s	words	earlier,	that	stupid	gloat—had	the	Arak	understood
him	they	would	probably	have	skinned	the	idiot	on	the	spot.	Well,	from	his
stupidity	was	born	my	brilliance,	as	you’ll	soon	see.	It’ll	likely	cost	me	my
life,	but	I	swear	I’ll	be	here	even	as	a	ghost,	just	to	see	what	comes.	Ah,	done.
Stop	shivering,	you’re	not	helping	things	at	all.’
He	pulled	the	tattered	tunic	from	Karsa,	then	took	it	with	him	back	to	his
original	position.	He	then	tore	handfuls	of	grasses	from	the	ground,	until	he
had	two	large	piles.	Bundling	both	pieces	of	tunic,	he	then	stuffed	them	with	the
grass.	Flashing	Karsa	a	grin,	he	crawled	over	to	the	nearest	hearth,	bundles	in
tow.
He	pushed	them	up	against	the	glowing	fragments	of	dung,	then	retreated.
Karsa	watched	as	first	one	caught	fire,	then	the	other.	Flames	flared	into	the
night,	a	roar	of	sparks	and	snake-like	blades	of	grass	lifting	high.
Shouts	from	the	Arak,	figures	rushing	over,	scrambling	for	handfuls	of
earth,	but	there	was	little	of	that	in	the	basin,	only	pebbles	and	hard,	sun-dried
clay.	Horse-blankets	were	found,	thrown	over	the	roaring	flames.
The	panic	that	then	swept	through	the	tribesmen	left	the	two	slaves	virtually
ignored,	as	the	Arak	rushed	to	break	camp,	repack	supplies,	saddle	their
horses.	Through	it	all,	Karsa	heard	a	single	word	repeated	numerous	times,	a
word	filled	with	fear.
Gral.

Silgar	appeared	as	the	Arak	gathered	their	horses.	His	face	was	filled	with	fury.
‘For	that,	Torvald	Nom,	you	have	just	forfeited	your	life—’
‘You	won’t	make	it	to	Ehrlitan,’	the	Daru	predicted	with	a	hard	grin.
Three	tribesmen	were	approaching,	hook-bladed	knives	in	their	hands.
‘I	will	enjoy	watching	your	throat	cut,’	Silgar	said.


‘The	Gral	have	been	after	these	bastards	all	this	time,	Slavemaster.	Hadn’t
you	realized	that?	Now,	I’ve	never	heard	of	the	Gral,	but	your	Arak	friends
have	one	and	all	pissed	onto	their	hearths,	and	even	a	Daru	like	me	knows	what
that	means—they	don’t	expect	to	live	through	the	night,	and	not	one	of	them
wants	to	spill	his	bladder	when	he	dies.	Seven	Cities	taboo,	I	gather—’
The	first	Arak	reached	Torvald,	one	hand	snapping	out	to	take	the	Daru	by
the	hair,	pushing	Torvald’s	head	back	and	lifting	the	knife.
The	ridgeline	behind	the	Arak	was	suddenly	swarming	with	dark	figures,
silently	sweeping	down	into	the	camp.
The	night	was	broken	by	screams.
The	Arak	crouched	before	Torvald	snarled	and	tore	the	knife	across	the
Daru’s	throat.	Blood	spattered	the	hard	clay.	Straightening,	the	tribesman
wheeled	to	run	for	his	horse.	He	managed	not	a	single	step,	for	a	half-dozen
shapes	came	out	of	the	darkness,	silent	as	wraiths.	There	was	a	strange
whipping	sound,	and	Karsa	saw	the	Arak’s	head	roll	from	his	shoulders.	His
two	companions	were	both	down.
Silgar	was	already	fleeing.	As	a	figure	rose	before	him,	he	lashed	out.	A
wave	of	sorcery	struck	the	attacker,	dropped	the	man	to	the	ground,	where	he
writhed	in	the	grip	of	crackling	magic	for	a	moment,	before	his	flesh
exploded.
Ululating	cries	pealed	through	the	air.	The	same	whipping	sound	sang	in
the	darkness	from	all	sides.	Horses	screamed.
Karsa	dragged	his	gaze	from	the	scene	of	slaughter	and	looked	over	at
Torvald’s	slumped	body.	To	his	amazement,	the	Daru	was	still	moving,	feet
kicking	furrows	in	the	pebbles,	both	hands	up	at	his	throat.
Silgar	returned	to	Karsa’s	position,	his	lean	face	gleaming	with	sweat.
Damisk	appeared	behind	him	and	the	slavemaster	gestured	the	tattooed	guard
forward.
Damisk	held	a	knife.	He	quickly	cut	at	the	bindings	holding	Karsa	to	the
travois.	‘No	easy	out	for	you,’	he	hissed.	‘We’re	leaving.	By	warren,	and	we’re
taking	you	with	us.	Silgar ’s	decided	to	make	you	his	plaything.	A	lifetime	of
torture—’
‘Enough	babbling!’	Silgar	snapped.	‘They’re	almost	all	dead!	Hurry!’
Damisk	cut	the	last	rope.
Karsa	laughed,	then	managed	to	form	words.	‘What	would	you	have	me	do
now?	Run?’
Snarling,	Silgar	moved	closer.	There	was	a	flare	of	blue	light,	then	the
three	of	them	were	plunging	into	fetid,	warm	water.
Unable	to	swim,	the	weight	of	his	chains	dragging	him	down,	Karsa	sank


into	the	midnight	depths.	He	felt	a	tug	on	his	chains,	then	saw	a	second	flash	of
lurid	light.
His	head,	then	his	back,	struck	hard	cobbles.	Dazed,	he	rolled	onto	his	side.
Silgar	and	Damisk,	both	coughing,	knelt	nearby.	They	were	on	a	street,	flanked
on	one	side	by	enormous	warehouses,	and	on	the	other	by	stone	jetties	and
moored	ships.	At	the	moment,	there	was	no-one	else	in	sight.
Silgar	spat,	then	said,	‘Damisk,	get	those	shackles	off	him—he	bears	no
criminal	brand,	so	the	Malazans	won’t	see	him	as	a	slave.	I	won’t	be	arrested
again—not	after	all	this.	The	bastard	is	ours,	but	we’ve	got	to	get	him	off	the
street.	We’ve	got	to	hide.’
Karsa	watched	Damisk	crawl	to	his	side,	fumbling	with	keys.	Watched	as
the	Nathii	unlocked	the	shackles	on	his	wrists,	then	his	ankles.	A	moment	later,
the	pain	struck	as	blood	flowed	back	into	near-dead	flesh.	The	Teblor
screamed.
Silgar	unleashed	magic	once	more,	a	wave	that	descended	on	the	Teblor
like	a	blanket—that	he	tore	off	with	unthinking	ease,	his	shrieks	slicing	into	the
night	air,	echoing	back	from	nearby	buildings,	ringing	out	across	the	crowded
harbour.
‘You	there!’	Malazan	words,	a	bellow,	then	the	swiftly	approaching	clash
and	clatter	of	armoured	soldiers.
‘An	escaped	slave,	sirs!’	Silgar	said	hastily.	‘We	have—as	you	can	see—
just	recaptured	him—’
‘Escaped	slave?	Let’s	see	his	brand—’
The	last	words	Karsa	registered,	as	the	pain	in	his	hands	and	feet	sent	him
plummeting	into	oblivion.
	
He	awoke	to	Malazan	words	being	spoken	directly	above	him.	‘…
extraordinary.	I’ve	never	seen	natural	healing	such	as	this.	His	hands	and	feet—
those	shackles	were	on	for	some	time,	Sergeant.	On	a	normal	man	I’d	be
cutting	them	off	right	now.’
Another	voice	spoke,	‘Are	all	Fenn	such	as	this	one?’
‘Not	that	I’ve	ever	heard.	Assuming	he’s	Fenn.’
‘Well,	what	else	would	he	be?	He’s	as	tall	as	two	Dal	Honese	put	together.’
‘I	wouldn’t	know,	Sergeant.	Before	I	was	posted	here,	the	only	place	I	knew
well	was	six	twisting	streets	in	Li	Heng.	Even	the	Fenn	was	just	a	name	and
some	vague	description	about	them	being	giants.	Giants	no-one’s	seen	for
decades	at	that.	The	point	is,	this	slave	was	in	bad	shape	when	you	first	brought
him	in.	Beaten	pretty	fierce,	and	someone	punched	him	in	the	ribs	hard	enough


to	crack	bones—wouldn’t	want	to	cross	whoever	that	was.	For	all	that,	the
swelling’s	already	down	on	his	face—despite	what	I’ve	just	done	to	it—and	the
bruises	are	damned	near	fading	in	front	of	our	eyes.’
Continuing	to	feign	unconsciousness,	Karsa	listened	to	the	speaker
stepping	back,	then	the	sergeant	asking,	‘So	the	bastard’s	not	in	danger	of
dying,	then.’
‘Not	that	I	can	see.’
‘Good	enough,	Healer.	You	can	return	to	the	barracks.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Various	movement,	boots	on	flagstones,	the	clang	of	an	iron-barred	door;
then,	as	these	echoes	dwindled,	the	Teblor	heard,	closer	by,	the	sound	of
breathing.
In	the	distance	there	was	some	shouting,	faint	and	muted	by	intervening
walls	of	stone,	yet	Karsa	thought	he	recognized	the	voice	as	belonging	to	the
slavemaster,	Silgar.	The	Teblor	opened	his	eyes.	A	low,	smoke-stained	ceiling
—not	high	enough	to	permit	him	to	stand	upright.	He	was	lying	on	a	strawlittered,	greasy	floor.	There	was	virtually	no	light,	apart	from	a	dim	glow
reaching	in	from	the	walkway	beyond	the	barred	door.
His	face	hurt,	a	strange	stinging	sensation	prickling	on	his	cheeks,
forehead	and	along	his	jaw.
Karsa	sat	up.
There	was	someone	else	in	the	small,	windowless	cell,	hunched	in	a	dark
corner.	The	figure	grunted	and	said	something	in	one	of	the	languages	of	the
Seven	Cities.
A	dull	ache	remained	in	Karsa’s	hands	and	feet.	The	inside	of	his	mouth
was	dry	and	felt	burnt,	as	if	he’d	just	swallowed	hot	sand.	He	rubbed	at	his
tingling	face.
A	moment	later	the	man	tried	Malazan,	‘You’d	likely	understand	me	if	you
were	Fenn.’
‘I	understand	you,	but	I	am	not	one	of	these	Fenn.’
‘I	said	it	sounds	like	your	master	isn’t	enjoying	his	stay	in	the	stocks.’
‘He	has	been	arrested?’
‘Of	course.	The	Malazans	like	arresting	people.	You’d	no	brand.	At	the
time.	Keeping	you	as	a	slave	is	therefore	illegal	under	imperial	law.’
‘Then	they	should	release	me.’
‘Little	chance	of	that.	Your	master	confessed	that	you	were	being	sent	to	the
otataral	mines.	You	were	on	a	ship	out	of	Genabaris	that	you’d	cursed,	said
curse	then	leading	to	the	ship’s	destruction	and	the	deaths	of	the	crew	and	the
marines.	The	local	garrison	is	only	half-convinced	by	that	tale,	but	that’s


sufficient—you’re	on	your	way	to	the	island.	As	am	I.’
Karsa	rose.	The	low	ceiling	forced	him	to	stand	hunched	over.	He	made	his
way,	hobbling,	to	the	barred	door.
‘Aye,	you	could	probably	batter	it	down,’	the	stranger	said.	‘But	then	you’ll
be	cut	down	before	you	manage	three	steps	from	this	gaol.	We’re	in	the	middle
of	the	Malazan	compound.	Besides,	we’re	about	to	be	taken	outside	in	any	case,
to	join	the	prisoners’	line	chained	to	a	wall.	In	the	morning,	they’ll	march	us
down	to	the	imperial	jetty	and	load	us	onto	a	transport.’
‘How	long	have	I	been	unconscious?’
‘The	night	you	were	carried	in,	the	day	after,	the	next	night.	It’s	now
midday.’
‘And	the	slavemaster	has	been	in	the	stocks	all	this	time?’
‘Most	of	it.’
‘Good,’	Karsa	growled.	‘What	of	his	companion?	The	same?’
‘The	same.’
‘And	what	crime	have	you	committed?’	Karsa	asked.
‘I	consort	with	dissidents.	Of	course,’	he	added,	‘I	am	innocent.’
‘Can	you	not	prove	that?’
‘Prove	what?’
‘Your	innocence.’
‘I	could	if	I	was.’
The	Teblor	glanced	back	at	the	figure	crouched	in	the	corner.	‘Are	you,	by
any	chance,	from	Darujhistan?’
‘Darujhistan?	No,	why	do	you	ask?’
Karsa	shrugged.	He	thought	back	to	Torvald	Nom’s	death.	There	was	a
coldness	surrounding	the	memory,	but	he	could	sense	all	that	it	held	at	bay.	The
time	for	surrender,	however,	was	not	now.
The	barred	door	was	set	in	an	iron	frame,	the	frame	fixed	to	the	stone
blocks	with	large	iron	bolts.	The	Teblor	gave	it	a	shake.	Dust	sifted	out	from
around	the	bolts,	pattered	onto	the	floor.
‘I	see	you’re	a	man	who	ignores	advice,’	the	stranger	observed.
‘These	Malazans	are	careless.’
‘Overconfident,	I’d	suggest.	Then	again,	perhaps	not.	They’ve	had	dealings
with	Fenn,	with	Trell,	Barghast—a	whole	host	of	oversized	barbarians.
They’re	tough,	and	sharper	than	they	let	on.	They	put	an	otataral	anklet	on	that
slavemaster—no	magic	from	him	any	more—’
Karsa	turned.	‘What	is	this	“otataral”	everyone	speaks	of?’
‘A	bane	to	magic.’
‘And	it	must	be	mined.’


‘Yes.	It’s	usually	a	powder,	found	in	layers,	like	sandstone.	Resembles
rust.’
‘We	scrape	a	red	powder	from	cliffsides	to	make	our	blood-oil,’	the
Teblor	murmured.
‘What	is	blood-oil?’
‘We	rub	it	into	our	swords,	and	into	our	armour.	To	bring	on	battle
madness,	we	taste	it.’
The	stranger	was	silent	for	a	moment,	though	Karsa	could	feel	the	man’s
eyes	on	him.	‘And	how	well	does	magic	work	against	you?’
‘Those	who	attack	me	with	sorcery	usually	reveal	surprise	on	their	faces…
just	before	I	kill	them.’
‘Well	now,	that	is	interesting.	It	is	believed	that	otataral	is	only	found	on	the
single	large	island	east	of	here.	The	empire	controls	its	production.	Tightly.
Their	mages	learned	the	hard	way	during	the	conquest,	in	the	battles	before	the
T’lan	Imass	got	involved.	If	not	for	the	T’lan	Imass,	the	invasion	would	have
failed.	I	have	some	more	advice	for	you.	Reveal	nothing	of	this	to	the
Malazans.	If	they	discover	there	is	another	source	of	otataral,	a	source	they	do
not	control,	well,	they	will	send	into	your	homeland—wherever	that	is—every
regiment	they	possess.	They	will	crush	your	people.	Utterly.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘The	Teblor	have	many	enemies.’
The	stranger	slowly	sat	straighter.	‘Teblor?	That	is	what	you	call
yourselves?	Teblor?’	After	a	moment,	he	leaned	back	again,	and	softly	laughed.
‘What	do	you	find	so	amusing?’
An	outer	door	clanged	open,	and	Karsa	stepped	back	from	the	barred	door
as	a	squad	of	soldiers	appeared.	The	three	at	the	front	had	unsheathed	their
swords,	while	the	four	behind	them	held	large,	cocked	crossbows.	One	of	the
swordsmen	stepped	up	to	the	door.	He	paused	upon	seeing	Karsa.	‘Careful,’	he
called	to	his	companions,	‘the	savage	has	awakened.’	He	studied	the	Teblor	and
said,	‘Do	nothing	stupid,	Fenn.	It	matters	nothing	to	us	whether	you	live	or	die
—the	mines	are	crowded	enough	for	them	not	to	miss	you.	Understand	me?’
Karsa	bared	his	teeth,	said	nothing.
‘You	there,	in	the	corner,	on	your	feet.	It’s	time	for	some	sunshine.’
The	stranger	slowly	straightened.	He	was	wearing	little	more	than	rags.
Lean	and	dark-skinned,	his	eyes	were	a	startling	light	blue.	‘I	demand	a	proper
trial,	as	is	my	right	under	imperial	law.’
The	guardsman	laughed.	‘Give	it	up.	You’ve	been	identified.	We	know
precisely	who	you	are.	Aye,	your	secret	organization	is	not	as	seamless	as	you
might	think.	Betrayed	by	one	of	your	own—how	does	that	feel?	Let’s	go,	you
come	out	first.	Jibb,	you	and	Gullstream	keep	your	crossbows	on	that	Fenn—I


don’t	like	his	smile.	Especially	now,’	he	added.
‘Oh	look,’	another	soldier	said,	‘you’ve	confused	the	poor	ox.	Bet	he
doesn’t	even	know	his	entire	face	is	one	big	tattoo.	Scrawl	did	good	work,
though.	Best	I’ve	seen	in	a	long	while.’
‘Right,’	another	drawled,	‘and	how	many	escaped	prisoner	tattoos	have
you	seen,	Jibb?’
‘Just	one,	and	it’s	a	work	of	art.’
The	source	of	the	stinging	sensation	on	Karsa’s	face	was	revealed	now.	He
reached	up,	seeking	to	feel	something	of	the	pattern,	and	slowly	began	tracing
lines	of	slightly	raised,	damp	strips	of	raw	skin.	They	were	not	contiguous.	He
could	make	no	sense	of	what	the	tattoo	portrayed.
‘Shattered,’	the	other	prisoner	said	as	he	walked	over	to	the	door,	which
the	first	guard	unlocked	and	swung	open.	‘The	brand	makes	your	face	look
like	it’s	been	shattered.’
Two	guards	escorted	the	man	outside,	whilst	the	others,	nervously	eyeing
Karsa,	waited	for	their	return.	One	of	the	crossbowmen,	whose	high	forehead
revealed	white	blotches—leading	the	Teblor	to	speculate	that	he	was	the	one
named	Gullstream—leaned	back	against	the	opposite	wall	and	said,	‘I	don’t
know,	I’m	thinking	Scrawl	made	it	too	big—he	was	ugly	enough	to	start	with,
now	he	looks	damned	terrifying.’
‘So	what?’	another	guard	drawled.	‘There’s	plenty	of	hill-grubbing
savages	that	carve	up	their	own	faces	to	frighten	weak-kneed	recruits	like	you,
Gullstream.	Barghast	and	Semk	and	Khundryl,	but	they	all	break	against	a
Malazan	legion	just	the	same.’
‘Well,	ain’t	none	of	them	being	routed	these	days,	though,	are	they?’
‘That’s	only	because	the	Fist’s	cowering	in	his	keep	and	wants	us	all	to	put
’im	to	bed	every	night.	Nobleborn	officers—what	do	you	expect?’
‘Might	change	when	the	reinforcements	arrive,’	Gullstream	suggested.
‘The	Ashok	Regiment	knows	these	parts—’
‘And	that’s	the	problem,’	the	other	retorted.	‘If	this	rebellion	actually
happens	this	time,	who’s	to	say	they	won’t	turn	renegade?	We	could	get	smilin’
throats	in	our	own	barracks.	It’s	bad	enough	with	the	Red	Blades	stirrin’	things
up	in	the	streets…’
The	guards	returned.
‘You,	Fenn,	now	it’s	your	turn.	Make	it	easy	for	us	and	it’ll	be	easy	for	you.
Walk.	Slow.	Not	too	close.	And	trust	me,	the	mines	ain’t	so	bad,	considering	the
alternatives.	All	right,	come	forward	now.’
Karsa	saw	no	reason	to	give	them	trouble.
They	emerged	onto	a	sunlit	compound.	Thick,	high	walls	surrounded	the


broad	parade	ground.	A	number	of	squat,	solid-looking	buildings	projected
out	from	three	of	the	four	walls;	along	the	fourth	wall	there	was	a	line	of
prisoners	shackled	to	a	heavy	chain	that	ran	its	entire	length,	bolted	to	the
foundation	stones	at	regular	intervals.	Near	the	heavily	fortified	gate	was	a	row
of	stocks,	of	which	only	two	were	occupied—Silgar	and	Damisk.	On	the
slavemaster ’s	right	ankle	there	glinted	a	copper-coloured	ring.
Neither	man	had	lifted	his	head	at	Karsa’s	appearance,	and	the	Teblor
considered	shouting	to	attract	their	attention;	instead,	he	simply	bared	his	teeth
at	seeing	their	plight.	As	the	guards	escorted	him	to	the	line	of	chained
prisoners,	Karsa	turned	to	the	one	named	Jibb	and	spoke	in	Malazan.	‘What
will	be	the	slavemaster ’s	fate?’
The	man’s	helmed	head	jerked	up	in	surprise.	Then	he	shrugged.	‘Ain’t
been	decided	yet.	He	claims	to	be	rich	back	in	Genabackis.’
Karsa	sneered.	‘He	can	buy	his	way	out	from	his	crimes,	then.’
‘Not	under	imperial	law—if	they’re	serious	crimes,	that	is.	Might	be	he’ll
just	be	fined.	He	may	be	a	merchant	who	deals	in	flesh,	but	he’s	still	a
merchant.	Always	best	to	bleed	’em	where	it	hurts	most.’
‘Enough	jawing,	Jibb,’	another	guard	growled.
They	approached	one	end	of	the	line,	where	oversized	shackles	had	been
attached.	Once	more,	Karsa	found	himself	in	irons,	though	these	were	not	tight
enough	to	cause	him	pain.	The	Teblor	noted	that	he	was	beside	the	blue-eyed
native.
The	squad	checked	the	fittings	one	more	time,	then	marched	away.
There	was	no	shade,	though	buckets	of	well-water	had	been	positioned	at
intervals	down	the	line.	Karsa	remained	standing	for	a	time,	then	finally	settled
down	to	sit	with	his	back	against	the	wall,	matching	the	position	of	most	of	the
other	prisoners.	There	was	little	in	the	way	of	conversation	as	the	day	slowly
dragged	on.	Towards	late	afternoon	shade	finally	reached	them,	though	the
relief	was	momentary,	as	biting	flies	soon	descended.
As	the	sky	darkened	overhead,	the	blue-eyed	native	stirred,	then	said	in	a
low	voice,	‘Giant,	I	have	a	proposal	for	you.’
Karsa	grunted.	‘What?’
‘It’s	said	that	the	mining	camps	are	corrupt,	meaning	one	can	carve	out
favours—make	life	easier.	The	kind	of	place	where	it	pays	to	have	someone
guarding	your	back.	I	suggest	a	partnership.’
Karsa	thought	about	it,	then	he	nodded.	‘Agreed.	But	if	you	attempt	to
betray	me,	I	will	kill	you.’
‘I	could	see	no	other	answer	to	betrayal,’	the	man	said.
‘I	am	done	talking,’	Karsa	said.


‘Good,	so	am	I.’
He	thought	to	ask	the	man’s	name,	but	there	would	be	time	enough	for	that
later.	For	now,	he	was	content	to	stretch	the	silence,	to	give	space	for	his
thoughts.	It	seemed	Urugal	was	willing	him	to	these	otataral	mines	after	all.
Karsa	would	have	preferred	a	more	direct—a	simpler—journey,	such	as	the
one	the	Malazans	had	originally	intended.	Too	many	blood-soaked	digressions,
Urugal.	Enough.
Night	arrived.	A	pair	of	soldiers	appeared	with	lanterns	and	sauntered
down	the	line	of	prisoners,	checking	the	fetters	one	more	time,	before	heading
off	to	the	barracks.	From	where	he	slumped,	Karsa	could	see	a	handful	of
soldiers	stationed	at	the	gate,	whilst	at	least	one	patrolled	the	walkway	along
each	wall.	Two	more	stood	outside	the	steps	of	the	headquarters.
The	Teblor	settled	his	head	against	the	stone	wall	and	closed	his	eyes.
Some	time	later	he	opened	them	again.	He	had	slept.	The	sky	was	overcast,
the	compound	a	mottled	pattern	of	light	and	darkness.	Something	had	awoken
him.	He	made	to	stand	but	a	hand	stayed	him.	He	looked	over	to	see	the	native
huddled	motionless	beside	him—head	lowered	as	if	still	asleep.	The	hand	on
the	Teblor ’s	arm	tightened	a	moment,	then	withdrew.
Frowning,	Karsa	settled	back.	And	then	he	saw.
The	guards	at	the	gate	were	gone,	as	were	those	outside	the	headquarters.
Along	the	wall	walkways…no-one.
Then,	alongside	a	nearby	building—movement,	a	figure	sliding	through
shadows	in	silence,	followed	by	another,	padding	along	with	far	less	stealth,
one	gloved	hand	reaching	up	to	steady	itself	every	now	and	then.
The	two	were	making	directly	for	Karsa.
Swathed	in	black	cloth,	the	lead	figure	halted	a	few	paces	from	the	wall.
The	other	moved	up	alongside	it,	then	edged	past.	Hands	lifted,	slipped	back	a
black	hood—
Torvald	Nom.
Bloodstained	bandages	encircling	his	neck,	the	face	above	it	deathly	pale
and	gleaming	with	sweat,	but	the	Daru	was	grinning.
He	drew	up	to	Karsa’s	side.	‘Time	to	go,	friend,’	he	whispered,	raising
something	that	looked	very	much	like	a	shackle	key.
‘Who	is	with	you?’	Karsa	whispered	back.
‘Oh,	a	motley	collection	indeed.	Gral	tribesmen	here	doing	the	sneaky
work,	and	agents	from	their	main	trading	partner	here	in	Ehrlitan…’	His	eyes
glittered.	‘The	House	of	Nom,	no	less.	Oh,	aye,	the	thread	of	blood	between	us
is	thin	as	a	virgin’s	hair,	but	it	is	being	honoured	none	the	less.	Indeed,	with
delighted	vigour.	Now,	enough	words—as	you	are	wont	to	say—we	don’t	want


to	wake	anyone	else—’
‘Too	late,’	murmured	the	man	chained	beside	Karsa.
The	Gral	behind	Torvald	moved	forward,	but	halted	at	a	strange,	elaborate
series	of	gestures	from	the	prisoner.
Torvald	grunted.	‘That	damned	silent	language.’
‘It	is	agreed,’	the	prisoner	said.	‘I	will	be	going	with	you.’
‘And	if	you	wasn’t,	you’d	be	sounding	the	alarm.’
The	man	said	nothing.
After	a	moment,	Torvald	shrugged.	‘So	be	it.	All	this	talk	and	I’m
surprised	everyone	else	in	this	line	isn’t	awake—’
‘They	would	be,	only	they’re	all	dead.’	The	prisoner	beside	Karsa	slowly
straightened.	‘No-one	likes	criminals.	Gral	have	a	particular	hatred	for	them,	it
seems.’
A	second	tribesman,	who	had	been	moving	along	the	line,	reached	them.	A
large,	curved	knife	was	in	one	hand,	slick	with	blood.	More	hand	gestures,	then
the	newcomer	sheathed	his	weapon.
Muttering	under	his	breath,	Torvald	crouched	to	unlock	Karsa’s	shackles.
‘You	are	as	hard	to	kill	as	a	Teblor,’	Karsa	murmured.
‘Thank	Hood	that	Arak	was	distracted	at	the	time.	Even	so,	if	not	for	the
Gral,	I’d	have	bled	to	death.’
‘Why	did	they	save	you?’
‘The	Gral	like	to	ransom	people.	Of	course,	if	they	turn	out	worthless,	they
kill	them.	The	trading	partnership	with	the	House	of	Nom	took	precedence
over	all	that,	of	course.’
Torvald	moved	on	to	the	other	prisoner.
Karsa	stood,	rubbing	his	wrists.	‘What	kind	of	trade?’
The	Daru	flashed	a	grin.	‘Brokering	the	ransoms.’
Moments	later	they	were	moving	through	the	darkness	towards	the	front
gate,	skirting	the	patches	of	light.	Near	the	gatehouse	a	half-dozen	bodies	had
been	dragged	up	against	the	wall.	The	ground	was	soaked	black	with	blood.
Three	more	Gral	joined	them.	One	by	one,	the	group	slipped	through	the
gateway	and	into	the	street	beyond.	They	crossed	to	an	alley	and	made	their
way	down	to	the	far	end,	where	they	halted.
Torvald	laid	a	hand	on	Karsa’s	arm.	‘Friend,	where	would	you	go	now?
My	own	return	to	Genabackis	will	be	delayed	awhile.	My	kin	here	have
embraced	me	with	open	arms—a	unique	experience	for	me,	and	I	plan	on
savouring	it.	Alas,	the	Gral	won’t	take	you—you’re	too	recognizable.’
‘He	will	come	with	me,’	the	blue-eyed	native	said.	‘To	a	place	of	safety.’
Torvald	looked	up	at	Karsa,	brows	rising.


The	Teblor	shrugged.	‘It	is	clear	that	I	cannot	be	hidden	in	this	city;	nor
will	I	further	endanger	you	or	your	kin,	Torvald	Nom.	If	this	man	proves
unworthy	I	need	only	kill	him.’
‘How	long	until	the	compound	guards	are	changed?’	the	blue-eyed	man
asked.
‘A	bell	at	least,	so	you	will	have	plenty—’
Sudden	alarms	shattered	the	night,	from	the	direction	of	the	Malazan
garrison.
The	Gral	seemed	to	vanish	before	Karsa’s	eyes,	so	quickly	did	they	scatter.
‘Torvald	Nom,	for	all	you	have	done	for	me,	I	thank	you—’
The	Daru	scurried	over	to	a	pile	of	rubbish	in	the	alley.	He	swept	it	aside,
then	lifted	into	view	Karsa’s	bloodsword.	‘Here,	friend.’	He	tossed	the	sword
into	the	Teblor ’s	hands.	‘Come	to	Darujhistan	in	a	few	years’	time.’
A	final	wave,	then	the	Daru	was	gone.
The	blue-eyed	man—who	had	collected	a	sword	from	one	of	the	dead
guards—now	gestured.	‘Stay	close.	There	are	ways	out	of	Ehrlitan	the
Malazans	know	nothing	of.	Follow,	and	quietly.’
He	set	off.	Karsa	slipped	into	his	wake.
Their	route	twisted	through	the	lower	city,	down	countless	alleys,	some	so
narrow	that	the	Teblor	was	forced	to	sidle	sideways	along	their	crooked
lengths.	Karsa	had	thought	that	his	guide	would	lead	them	towards	the	docks,
or	perhaps	the	outer	walls	facing	onto	the	wasteland	to	the	south.	Instead,	they
climbed	towards	the	single	massive	hill	at	Ehrlitan’s	heart,	and	before	long
were	moving	through	the	rubble	of	countless	collapsed	buildings.
They	arrived	at	the	battered	base	of	a	tower,	the	native	not	hesitating	as	he
ducked	in	through	the	gaping,	dark	doorway.	Following,	Karsa	found	himself
in	a	cramped	chamber,	its	floor	uneven	with	heaved	flagstones.	A	second	portal
was	barely	visible	opposite	the	entrance,	and	at	its	threshold	the	man	paused.
‘Mebra!’	he	hissed.
There	was	movement,	then:	‘Is	it	you?	Dryjhna	bless	us,	I	had	heard	that
you	had	been	captured—ah,	the	alarms	down	below…well	done—’
‘Enough	of	that.	Do	the	provisions	remain	in	the	tunnels?’
‘Of	course!	Always.	Including	your	own	cache—’
‘Good,	now	move	aside.	I’ve	someone	with	me.’
Beyond	the	portal	was	a	rough	series	of	stone	steps,	descending	into	even
deeper	darkness.	Karsa	sensed	the	man	Mebra’s	presence	as	he	edged	past,
heard	his	sharp	intake	of	breath.
The	blue-eyed	man	below	the	Teblor	halted	suddenly.	‘Oh,	and	Mebra,	tell
no-one	you	have	seen	us—not	even	your	fellow	servants	to	the	cause.


Understand?’
‘Of	course.’
The	two	fugitives	continued	on,	leaving	Mebra	behind.	The	stairs
continued	down,	until	Karsa	had	begun	to	think	that	they	were	approaching	the
bowels	of	the	earth.	When	it	finally	levelled	out,	the	air	was	heavy	with	damp,
smelling	of	salt,	and	the	stones	underfoot	were	wet	and	streaked	in	slime.	At
the	tunnel’s	mouth	a	number	of	niches	had	been	carved	into	the	limestone
walls,	each	one	holding	leather	packs	and	travel	gear.
Karsa	watched	as	his	companion	strode	quickly	to	one	niche	in	particular.
After	a	moment’s	examination,	he	dropped	the	Malazan	sword	he	had	been
carrying	and	drew	forth	a	pair	of	objects	that	moved	with	the	sound	of	rustling
chain.
‘Take	that	food-pack,’	the	man	instructed,	nodding	towards	a	nearby	niche.
‘And	you	will	find	a	telaba	or	two—clothes—and	weapon-belts	and	harnesses
—leave	the	lanterns,	the	tunnel	ahead	is	long	but	has	no	branches.’
‘Where	does	it	lead?’
‘Out,’	the	man	replied.
Karsa	fell	silent.	He	disliked	the	extent	to	which	his	life	was	in	this	native’s
hands,	but	it	seemed	that,	for	the	time	being,	there	was	nothing	he	could	do
about	it.	Seven	Cities	was	a	stranger	place	than	even	the	Genabackan	cities	of
Malyntaeas	and	Genabaris.	The	lowlanders	filled	this	world	like	vermin—
more	tribes	than	the	Teblor	had	thought	possible,	and	it	was	clear	that	none
liked	each	other.	While	that	was	a	sentiment	Karsa	well	understood—for	tribes
should	dislike	each	other—it	was	also	obvious	that,	among	the	lowlanders,
there	was	no	sense	of	any	other	sort	of	loyalty.	Karsa	was	Uryd,	but	he	was
also	Teblor.	The	lowlanders	seemed	so	obsessed	with	their	differences	that
they	had	no	comprehension	of	what	unified	them.
A	flaw	that	could	be	exploited.
The	pace	set	by	Karsa’s	guide	was	fierce,	and	though	most	of	the	damage
done	to	the	Teblor	was	well	along	in	healing,	his	reserves	of	strength	and
stamina	were	not	what	they	had	once	been.	After	a	time,	the	distance	between
the	two	began	to	lengthen,	and	eventually	Karsa	found	himself	travelling	alone
through	the	impenetrable	darkness,	one	hand	on	the	rough-hewn	wall	to	his
right,	hearing	only	the	sounds	of	his	own	passage.	The	air	was	no	longer
damp,	and	he	could	taste	dust	in	his	mouth.
The	wall	suddenly	vanished	under	his	hand.	Karsa	stumbled,	drew	to	a	halt.
‘You	did	well,’	the	native	said	from	somewhere	on	the	Teblor ’s	left.
‘Running	hunched	over	as	you	had	to	be…not	an	easy	task.	Look	up.’
He	did,	and	slowly	straightened.	There	were	stars	overhead.


‘We’re	in	a	gully,’	the	man	continued.	‘It	will	be	dawn	before	we	climb	out
of	it.	Then	it’s	five,	maybe	six	days	across	the	Pan’potsun	Odhan.	The
Malazans	will	be	after	us,	of	course,	so	we	will	have	to	be	careful.	Rest	awhile.
Drink	some	water—the	sun	is	a	demon	and	will	steal	your	life	if	it	can.	Our
route	will	take	us	from	one	place	of	water	to	the	next,	so	we	need	not	suffer.’
‘You	know	this	land,’	Karsa	said.	‘I	do	not.’	He	raised	his	sword.	‘But	know
this,	I	will	not	be	taken	prisoner	again.’
‘That’s	the	spirit,’	the	lowlander	replied.
‘That	is	not	what	I	meant.’
The	man	laughed.	‘I	know.	If	you	so	wish	it,	once	we	are	clear	of	this	gully
you	may	go	in	any	direction	you	like.	What	I	have	offered	you	is	the	best
chance	of	surviving.	There	is	more	than	recapture	by	the	Malazans	to	worry
about	in	this	land.	Travel	with	me,	and	you	shall	learn	how	to	survive.	But	as	I
said,	the	choice	is	yours.	Now,	shall	we	proceed?’
	
Dawn	arrived	to	the	world	above	before	the	two	fugitives	reached	the	end	of
the	gully.	While	they	could	see	bright	blue	sky	overhead,	they	continued
walking	through	chill	shadows.	The	means	of	exit	was	marked	by	a	tumbled
scree	of	boulders	where	a	past	flood	had	undercut	one	wall	sufficiently	to
trigger	a	collapse.
Clambering	up	the	slope,	they	emerged	onto	a	heat-blasted	land	of
weathered	crags,	sand-filled	riverbeds,	cacti	and	thorny	bushes,	the	sun
blindingly	bright,	making	the	air	shimmer	in	all	directions.	There	was	no-one
in	sight,	nor	was	there	any	sign	that	the	area	was	inhabited	by	anything	other
than	wild	creatures.
The	lowlander	led	Karsa	southwestward,	their	route	circuitous,	making	use
of	every	form	of	cover	available	and	avoiding	ridges	or	hilltops	that	would	set
them	against	the	sky.	Neither	spoke,	saving	their	breath	in	the	enervating	heat
as	the	day	stretched	on.
Late	in	the	afternoon,	the	lowlander	halted	suddenly	and	turned.	He	hissed	a
curse	in	his	native	language,	then	said,	‘Horsemen.’
Karsa	swung	round,	but	could	see	no-one	in	the	desolate	landscape	behind
them.
‘Feel	them	underfoot,’	the	man	muttered.	‘So,	Mebra	has	turned.	Well,	one
day	I	will	answer	that	betrayal.’
And	now	Karsa	could	sense,	through	the	callused	soles	of	his	bared	feet,
the	tremble	of	distant	horse	hoofs.	‘If	you’d	suspected	this	Mebra	why	did	you
not	kill	him?’


‘If	I	killed	everyone	I	was	suspicious	about	I’d	have	scant	company.	I
needed	proof,	and	now	I	have	it.’
‘Unless	he	told	someone	else.’
‘Then	he’s	either	a	traitor	or	stupid—both	lead	to	the	same	fatal
consequence.	Come,	we	need	to	make	this	a	challenge	for	the	Malazans.’
They	set	off.	The	lowlander	was	unerring	in	choosing	paths	that	left	no
footprints	or	other	signs	of	passage.	Despite	this,	the	sound	of	the	riders	drew
ever	nearer.	‘There’s	a	mage	among	them,’	the	lowlander	muttered	as	they
raced	across	yet	another	stretch	of	bedrock.
‘If	we	can	avoid	them	until	nightfall,’	Karsa	said,	‘then	I	shall	become	the
hunter	and	they	the	hunted.’
‘There’s	at	least	twenty	of	them.	We’re	better	off	using	the	darkness	to
stretch	the	distance	between	us.	See	those	mountains	to	the	southwest?	That	is
our	destination.	If	we	can	reach	the	hidden	passes,	we	will	be	safe.’
‘We	cannot	outrun	horses,’	Karsa	growled.	‘Come	dark,	I	will	be	done
running.’
‘Then	you	attack	alone,	for	it	will	mean	your	death.’
‘Alone.	That	is	well.	I	need	no	lowlander	getting	underfoot.’
	
The	plunge	into	night	was	sudden.	Just	before	the	last	light	failed,	the	two
fugitives,	slipping	onto	a	plain	crowded	with	enormous	boulders,	finally
caught	sight	of	their	pursuers.	Seventeen	riders,	three	spare	horses.	All	but	two
of	the	Malazans	were	in	full	armour,	helmed	and	armed	with	either	lances	or
crossbows.	The	other	two	riders	were	easily	recognizable	to	Karsa.	Silgar	and
Damisk.
Karsa	suddenly	recalled	that,	the	night	of	their	escape	from	the	compound,
the	stocks	had	been	empty.	He’d	thought	little	of	it	at	the	time,	assuming	that	the
two	prisoners	had	been	taken	inside	for	the	night.
The	pursuers	had	not	seen	the	two	fugitives,	who	quickly	moved	behind	the
cover	of	the	boulders.
‘I	have	led	them	to	an	old	campground,’	the	lowlander	at	Karsa’s	side
whispered.	‘Listen.	They’re	making	camp.	The	two	who	weren’t	soldiers—’
‘Yes.	The	slavemaster	and	his	guard.’
‘They	must	have	taken	that	otataral	anklet	off	him.	He	wants	you	badly,	it
seems.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘And	he	will	find	me.	Tonight.	I	am	done	with	those	two.
Neither	will	see	the	dawn,	this	I	swear	before	Urugal.’
‘You	cannot	attack	two	squads	on	your	own.’


‘Then	consider	it	a	diversion	and	make	good	your	escape,	lowlander.’
With	that	the	Teblor	swung	about	and	made	his	way	towards	the	Malazan	camp.
He	was	not	interested	in	waiting	for	them	to	settle.	The	crossbowmen	had
ridden	all	day	with	their	weapons	cocked.	They	would	probably	be	replacing
the	wrapped	cords	at	this	very	moment,	assuming	they	followed	the	practice
that	Karsa	had	seen	among	the	squads	of	the	Ashok	Regiment.	Others	would	be
removing	saddles	and	tending	to	the	horses,	whilst	most	of	the	remaining
soldiers	would	be	preparing	to	cook	meals	and	raise	tents.	At	most,	there
would	be	two	or	three	guards	establishing	a	picket	around	the	camp.
Karsa	paused	behind	a	huge	boulder	just	beyond	the	Malazans.	He	could
hear	them	setting	up	their	position	for	the	night.	The	Teblor	collected	a	handful
of	sand	and	dried	the	sweat	from	his	palms,	then	he	hefted	his	blood-sword	in
his	right	hand	and	edged	forward.
Three	fires	had	been	lit	using	dung,	the	hearths	ringed	with	large	rocks	to
cut	the	light	cast	out	by	the	flickering	flames.	The	horses	stood	within	a	rope
corral,	three	soldiers	moving	among	them.	A	half-dozen	crossbowmen	sat
nearby,	their	weapons	dismantled	on	their	laps.	Two	guards	stood	facing	the
plain	of	boulders,	one	positioned	slightly	behind	the	other.	The	soldier	closest
to	Karsa	held	a	drawn	short-sword	and	a	round	shield,	his	companion	six	paces
behind	him	a	short	bow,	arrow	nocked.
There	were,	in	fact,	more	guards	at	the	pickets	than	Karsa	would	have
liked,	one	visible	on	each	other	flank	of	the	encampment.	The	bowman	was	so
positioned	as	to	permit	him	a	field	of	fire	for	every	one	of	them.
Crouched	before	a	firepit	near	the	centre	of	the	camp	were	Silgar,	Damisk
and	a	Malazan	officer,	the	latter	with	his	back	to	Karsa.
The	Teblor	silently	worked	his	way	around	the	boulder.	The	guard	closest
to	him	was	looking	to	the	left	at	the	moment.	Five	paces	to	close	in	a	charge.
The	bowman	had	turned	in	his	restless	scanning	towards	the	guard	at	the	far
end	of	the	camp.
Now.
The	helmed	head	was	swinging	back,	the	weathered	face	pale	beneath	its
rim.
And	then	Karsa	was	alongside	him,	his	left	hand	snapping	out	to	close
around	the	man’s	throat.	Cartilage	collapsed	with	a	dry	popping	sound.
Enough	to	make	the	bowman	whirl.
Had	his	attacker	the	short	legs	of	a	lowlander,	he	would	have	had	a	chance
to	loose	his	arrow.	As	it	was,	he	barely	had	time	to	draw	before	the	Teblor
reached	him.
The	man’s	mouth	opened	to	shout	as	he	tensed	to	throw	himself	backward.


Karsa’s	sword	flashed	outward,	sending	the	helmed	head	tumbling	from
shoulders.	Armour	clattered	behind	him	as	the	corpse	fell	to	the	ground.
Faces	swung	round.	Shouts	rang	through	the	night.
Three	soldiers	rose	from	a	hearth	directly	in	front	of	the	Teblor.	Shortswords	hissed	from	scabbards.	One	Malazan	threw	himself	into	Karsa’s	path	in
an	effort	to	give	his	companions	time	to	find	their	shields.	A	brave	and	fatal
gesture,	for	his	weapon’s	reach	was	no	match	for	the	blood-sword.	The	man
shrieked	as	he	lost	both	forearms	to	a	vicious	lateral	slash.
One	of	the	next	two	Malazans	had	managed	to	ready	his	round	shield,
raising	it	into	the	path	of	Karsa’s	downward	swing.	The	bronze-banded	wood
exploded	at	the	impact,	the	arm	holding	it	shattering	beneath	it.	As	the	soldier
crumpled,	the	Teblor	leapt	over	him,	quickly	cutting	down	the	third	man.
A	blaze	of	pain	along	the	top	of	his	right	thigh	as	a	lance	ripped	a	path	to
thrum	into	the	dusty	ground	behind	him.	Wheeling,	he	whipped	his	blade
around	in	time	to	bat	aside	another	lance	which	had	been	about	to	strike	his
chest.
Footsteps	rushing	him	from	behind	and	to	the	left—one	of	the	picket
guards—while	directly	before	him,	three	paces	distant,	stood	Silgar,	Damisk
and	the	Malazan	officer.	The	slavemaster ’s	face	was	twisted	with	terror,	even
as	sorcery	rose	into	a	writhing	wave	in	front	of	him,	then	roared	towards
Karsa.
The	magic	struck	him	at	the	precise	moment	that	the	picket	guard	arrived.
Sorcery	engulfed	them	both.	The	Malazan’s	scream	ripped	through	the	air.
Grunting	at	the	writhing,	ghostly	tendrils	seeking	to	snare	him	in	place,	Karsa
surged	through	it—and	came	face	to	face	with	the	slavemaster.
Damisk	had	already	fled.	The	officer	had	thrown	himself	to	one	side,
deftly	ducking	beneath	Karsa’s	side-swing.
Silgar	threw	his	hands	up.
Karsa	cut	them	off.
The	slavemaster	reeled	back.
The	Teblor	chopped	down,	severing	Silgar ’s	right	leg	just	above	the	ankle.
The	man	toppled	onto	his	upper	shoulders,	legs	in	the	air.	A	fourth	swing	sent
the	left	foot	spinning.
Two	soldiers	rushed	Karsa	from	his	right,	a	third	one	trailing.
A	bellowed	command	rang	through	the	night,	and	the	Teblor—weapon
readied—was	surprised	to	see	the	three	men	peel	away.	By	his	count	there	were
five	others,	as	well	as	the	officer	and	Damisk.	He	spun,	glaring,	but	there	was
no-one—just	the	sounds	of	boots	retreating	into	the	darkness.	He	looked	to
where	the	horses	had	been	corralled—the	animals	were	gone.


A	lance	darted	towards	him.	Snarling,	Karsa	splintered	it	as	the	back	of	his
bloodsword	deflected	it	to	one	side.	He	paused,	then	padded	over	to	Silgar.	The
slavemaster	had	curled	into	a	tight	ball.	Blood	flowed	from	the	four	stumps.
Karsa	picked	him	up	by	his	silk	belt	and	carried	him	back	to	the	plain	of
boulders.
As	he	moved	around	the	first	of	the	massive	rocks	a	voice	spoke	low	and
clear	from	the	shadows.	‘This	way.’
The	Teblor	grunted.	‘You	were	supposed	to	have	fled.’
‘They	will	regroup,	but	without	the	mage	we	should	be	able	to	elude	them.’
Karsa	followed	his	companion	deeper	into	the	studded	plain,	then,	after
fifty	or	so	paces,	the	man	stopped	and	turned	to	the	Teblor.
‘Of	course,	with	your	prize	leaving	a	trail	of	blood,	there	will	be	little
trouble	in	following	us.	Do	something	with	him	now.’
Karsa	dropped	Silgar	to	the	ground,	kicked	him	onto	his	back.	The
slavemaster	was	unconscious.
‘He	will	bleed	to	death,’	the	lowlander	said.	‘You	have	your	revenge.	Leave
him	here	to	die.’
Instead,	the	Teblor	began	cutting	strips	from	Silgar ’s	telaba,	tying	them
tight	about	the	stumps	at	the	ends	of	his	arms	and	legs.
‘There	will	still	be	some	leakage—’
‘Which	we	shall	have	to	live	with,’	Karsa	growled.	‘I	am	not	yet	done	with
this	man.’
‘What	value	senseless	torture?’
Karsa	hesitated,	then	he	sighed.	‘This	man	enslaved	an	entire	tribe	of
Teblor.	The	Sunyd’s	spirit	is	broken.	The	slavemaster	is	not	as	a	soldier—he
has	not	earned	swift	death.	He	is	as	a	mad	dog,	to	be	driven	into	a	hut	and	killed
—’
‘So	kill	him.’
‘I	shall…once	I	have	driven	him	mad.’
Karsa	lifted	Silgar	once	more,	throwing	him	over	a	shoulder.	‘Lead	us	on,
lowlander.’
Hissing	under	his	breath,	the	man	nodded.
	
Eight	days	later,	they	reached	the	hidden	pass	through	the	Pan’potsun
Mountains.	The	Malazans	had	resumed	their	pursuit,	but	had	not	been	seen
since	two	days	past,	indicating	that	the	efforts	to	evade	them	had	succeeded.
They	ascended	the	steep,	rocky	trail	through	the	course	of	the	day.	Silgar
was	still	alive,	fevered	and	only	periodically	aware.	He	had	been	gagged	to


prevent	him	making	any	sounds.	Karsa	carried	him	on	his	shoulder.
Shortly	before	dusk	they	reached	the	summit,	and	came	to	the	southwest
edge.	The	path	wound	down	into	a	shadowed	plain.	At	the	crest	they	sat	down	to
rest.
‘What	lies	beyond?’	Karsa	asked	as	he	dropped	Silgar	to	the	ground.	‘I	see
naught	but	a	wasteland	of	sand	below.’
‘And	so	it	is,’	his	companion	replied	in	a	reverent	tone.	‘And	in	its	heart,
the	one	I	serve.’	He	glanced	over	at	Karsa.	‘She	will,	I	think,	be	interested	in
you…’	he	smiled,	‘Teblor.’
Karsa	scowled.	‘Why	does	the	name	of	my	people	amuse	you	so?’
‘Amuse?	More	like	appals.	The	Fenn	had	fallen	far	from	their	past	glories,
yet	they	remembered	enough	to	know	their	old	name.	You	cannot	even	make
that	claim.	Your	kind	walked	this	earth	when	the	T’lan	Imass	were	still	flesh.
From	your	blood	came	the	Barghast	and	the	Trell.	You	are	Thelomen
Toblakai.’
‘These	are	names	I	do	not	know,’	Karsa	growled,	‘even	as	I	do	not	know
yours,	lowlander.’
The	man	returned	his	gaze	to	the	dark	lands	below.	‘I	am	named	Leoman.
And	the	one	I	serve,	the	Chosen	One	to	whom	I	will	deliver	you,	she	is	Sha’ik.’
‘I	am	no-one’s	servant,’	Karsa	said.	‘This	Chosen	One,	she	dwells	in	the
desert	before	us?’
‘In	its	very	heart,	Toblakai.	In	Raraku’s	very	heart.’


Book	Two

Cold	Iron

	


There	are	folds	in	this	shadow…hiding	entire	worlds.
CALL	TO	SHADOW
FELISIN


Chapter	Five

Woe	to	the	fallen	in	the	alleys	of	Aren…
ANONYMOUS
A	single	kick	from	the	burly	soldier	in	the	lead	sent	the	flimsy	door	crashing
inward.	He	disappeared	into	the	gloom	beyond,	followed	by	the	rest	of	his
squad.	From	within	came	shouts,	the	sound	of	crashing	furniture.
Gamet	glanced	over	at	Commander	Blistig.
The	man	shrugged.	‘Aye,	the	door	was	unlocked—it’s	an	inn,	after	all,
though	such	a	lofty	title	for	this	squalid	pit	is	stretching	things	somewhat.	Even
so,	it’s	a	matter	of	achieving	the	proper	effect.’
‘You	misunderstood	me,’	Gamet	replied.	‘I	simply	cannot	believe	that	your
soldiers	found	him	here.’
Unease	flitted	across	Blistig’s	solid,	broad	features.	‘Aye,	well,	we’ve
rounded	up	others	in	worse	places,	Fist.	It’s	what	comes	of—’	he	squinted	up
the	street,	‘of	broken	hearts.’
Fist.	The	title	still	clambers	into	my	gut	like	a	starving	crow.	Gamet
frowned.	‘The	Adjunct	has	no	time	for	broken-hearted	soldiers,	Commander.’
‘It	was	unrealistic	to	arrive	here	expecting	to	stoke	the	fires	of	vengeance.
Can’t	stoke	cold	ashes,	though	don’t	take	me	wrong,	I	wish	her	the	Lady’s
luck.’
‘Rather	more	is	expected	of	you	than	that,’	Gamet	said	drily.
The	streets	were	virtually	deserted	at	this	time	of	day,	the	afternoon	heat
oppressive.	Of	course,	even	at	other	times,	Aren	was	not	as	it	once	had	been.
Trade	from	the	north	had	ceased.	Apart	from	Malazan	warships	and	transports,
and	a	few	fisherboats,	the	harbour	and	river	mouth	were	empty.	This	was,
Gamet	reflected,	a	scarred	populace.
The	squad	was	re-emerging	from	the	inn,	carrying	with	them	a	rag-clad,
feebly	struggling	old	man.	He	was	smeared	in	vomit,	the	little	hair	he	had	left
hanging	like	grey	strings,	his	skin	patched	and	grey	with	filth.	Cursing	at	the
stench,	the	soldiers	of	Blistig’s	Aren	Guard	hurried	their	burden	towards	the


cart’s	bed.
‘It	was	a	miracle	we	found	him	at	all,’	the	commander	said.	‘I	truly
expected	the	old	bastard	to	up	and	drown	himself.’
Momentarily	unmindful	of	his	new	title,	Gamet	turned	and	spat	onto	the
cobbles.	‘This	situation	is	contemptible,	Blistig.	Damn	it,	some	semblance	of
military	decorum—of	control,	Hood	take	me—should	have	been	possible…’
The	commander	stiffened	at	Gamet’s	tone.	The	guards	gathered	at	the	back
of	the	cart	all	turned	at	his	words.
Blistig	stepped	close	to	the	Fist.	‘You	listen	to	me	and	listen	well,’	he
growled	under	his	breath,	a	tremble	shivering	across	his	scarred	cheeks,	his
eyes	hard	as	iron.	‘I	stood	on	the	damned	wall	and	watched.	As	did	every	one
of	my	soldiers.	Pormqual	running	in	circles	like	a	castrated	cat—that	historian
and	those	two	Wickan	children	wailing	with	grief.	I	watched—we	all	watched
—as	Coltaine	and	his	Seventh	were	cut	down	before	our	very	eyes.	And	if	that
wasn’t	enough,	the	High	Fist	then	marched	out	his	army	and	ordered	them	to
disarm!	If	not	for	one	of	my	captains	delivering	intelligence	concerning
Mallick	Rel	being	an	agent	of	Sha’ik’s,	my	Guard	would	have	died	with	them.
Military	decorum?	Go	to	Hood	with	your	military	decorum,	Fist!’
Gamet	stood	unmoving	at	the	commander ’s	tirade.	It	was	not	the	first	time
that	he’d	felt	the	snap	of	this	man’s	temper.	Since	he	had	arrived	with	Adjunct
Tavore’s	retinue,	and	was	given	the	liaison	role	that	took	him	to	the	forefront
of	dealing	with	the	survivors	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs—both	those	who	had	come
in	with	the	historian	Duiker,	and	those	who	had	awaited	them	in	the	city—
Gamet	had	felt	under	siege.	The	rage	beneath	the	mantle	of	propriety	erupted
again	and	again.	Hearts	not	simply	broken,	but	shattered,	torn	to	pieces,
trampled	on.	The	Adjunct’s	hope	of	resurrecting	the	survivors—making	use	of
their	local	experience	to	steady	her	legions	of	untested	recruits—was,	to
Gamet,	seeming	more	and	more	unrealistic	with	each	day	that	passed.
It	was	also	clear	that	Blistig	cared	little	that	Gamet	made	daily	reports	to
the	Adjunct,	and	could	reasonably	expect	his	tirades	to	have	been	passed	on	to
Tavore,	in	culpable	detail.	The	commander	was	doubly	fortunate,	therefore,
that	Gamet	had	as	yet	said	nothing	of	them	to	the	Adjunct,	exercising	extreme
brevity	in	his	debriefings	and	keeping	personal	observations	to	the	minimum.
As	Blistig’s	words	trailed	away,	Gamet	simply	sighed	and	approached	the
cart	to	look	down	on	the	drunken	old	man	lying	on	its	bed.	The	soldiers	backed
away	a	step—as	if	the	Fist	carried	a	contagion.
‘So,’	Gamet	drawled,	‘this	is	Squint.	The	man	who	killed	Coltaine—’
‘Was	a	mercy,’	one	of	the	guards	snapped.
‘Clearly,	Squint	does	not	think	so.’


There	was	no	reply	to	that.	Blistig	arrived	at	the	Fist’s	side.	‘All	right,’	he
said	to	his	squad,	‘take	him	and	get	him	cleaned	up—and	under	lock	and	key.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
Moments	later	the	cart	was	being	pulled	away.
Gamet	faced	Blistig	once	more.	‘Your	rather	unsubtle	plan	of	getting
yourself	stripped	of	rank,	shackled	in	irons,	and	sent	back	to	Unta	on	the	first
ship,	will	not	succeed,	Commander.	Neither	the	Adjunct,	nor	I,	care	one	whit
for	your	fragile	state.	We	are	preparing	to	fight	a	war,	and	for	that	you	will	be
needed.	You	and	every	one	of	your	crumple-faced	soldiers.’
‘Better	we’d	died	with	the	rest—’
‘But	you	did	not.	We	have	three	legions	of	recruits,	Commander.	Wideeyed	and	young	but	ready	to	shed	Seven	Cities	blood.	The	question	is,	what	do
you	and	your	soldiers	intend	to	show	them?’
Blistig	glared.	‘The	Adjunct	makes	the	captain	of	her	House	Guard	into	a
Fist,	and	I’m	supposed	to—’
‘Fourth	Army,’	Gamet	snapped.	‘In	the	1st	Company	at	its	inception.	The
Wickan	Wars.	Twenty-three	years’	service,	Commander.	I	knew	Coltaine	when
you	were	still	bouncing	on	your	mother ’s	knee.	I	took	a	lance	through	the	chest
but	proved	too	stubborn	to	die.	My	commander	was	kind	enough	to	retire	me
to	what	he	figured	was	a	safe	position	back	in	Unta.	Aye,	captain	of	the	guard	in
the	House	of	Paran.	But	I’d	damn	well	earned	it!’
After	a	long	moment,	a	wry	grin	twisted	Blistig’s	mouth.	‘So	you’re	as
happy	to	be	here	as	I	am.’
Gamet	grimaced,	made	no	reply.
The	two	Malazans	returned	to	their	horses.
Swinging	himself	onto	the	saddle,	Gamet	said,	‘We’re	expecting	the	last
transport	of	troops	from	Malaz	Island	some	time	today.	The	Adjunct	wants	all
the	commanders	assembled	in	her	council	chambers	at	the	eighth	bell.’
‘To	what	end?’	Blistig	asked.
If	I	had	my	way,	to	see	you	drawn	and	quartered.	‘Just	be	there,
Commander.’
	
The	vast	mouth	of	the	Menykh	River	was	a	brown,	turgid	swirl	that	reached
half	a	league	out	into	Aren	Bay.	Leaning	on	the	transport’s	starboard	railing
just	behind	the	forecastle,	Strings	studied	the	roiling	water	below,	then	lifted
his	gaze	to	the	city	on	the	river ’s	north	shore.
He	rubbed	at	the	bristles	on	his	long	jaw.	The	rusty	hue	of	his	beard	in
youth	had	given	way	now	to	grey…which	was	a	good	thing	as	far	as	he	was


concerned.
The	city	of	Aren	had	changed	little	in	the	years	since	he	had	last	seen	it,
barring	the	paucity	of	ships	in	the	harbour.	The	same	pall	of	smoke	hanging
over	it,	the	same	endless	stream	of	sewage	crawling	the	currents	into	the
Seeker ’s	Deep—through	which	the	broad-beamed,	sluggish	transport	now
sailed.
The	newly	issued	leather	cap	chafed	the	back	of	his	neck;	it	had	damned
near	broken	his	heart	to	discard	his	old	one,	along	with	his	tattered	leather
surcoat,	and	the	sword-belt	he’d	stripped	from	a	Falah’dan	guard	who	no
longer	needed	it.	In	fact,	he	had	retained	but	one	possession	from	his	former
life,	buried	down	in	the	bottom	of	his	kit	bag	in	his	berth	below	decks,	and	he
had	no	intention	of	permitting	its	discovery	by	anyone.
A	man	came	alongside	him,	leaned	casually	on	the	rail	and	stared	out	over
the	water	to	the	city	drawing	ever	nearer.
Strings	offered	no	greeting.	Lieutenant	Ranal	embodied	the	worst	of
Malazan	military	command.	Nobleborn,	commission	purchased	in	the	city	of
Quon,	arrogant	and	inflexible	and	righteous	and	yet	to	draw	a	sword	in	anger.
A	walking	death	sentence	to	his	soldiers,	and	it	was	the	Lord’s	luck	that	Strings
was	one	of	those	soldiers.
The	lieutenant	was	a	tall	man,	his	Quon	blood	the	purest	it	could	be;	fairskinned,	fair-haired,	his	cheekbones	high	and	wide,	his	nose	straight	and	long,
his	mouth	full.	Strings	had	hated	him	on	sight.
‘It	is	customary	to	salute	your	superior,’	Ranal	said	with	affected
indifference.
‘Saluting	officers	gets	them	killed,	sir.’
‘Here	on	a	transport	ship?’
‘Just	getting	into	the	habit,’	Strings	replied.
‘It	has	been	plain	from	the	start	that	you	have	done	this	before,	soldier.’
Ranal	paused	to	examine	the	supple,	black	knuckles	of	his	gloved	hands.	‘Hood
knows,	you’re	old	enough	to	be	the	father	of	most	of	those	marines	sitting	on
the	deck	behind	us.	The	recruiting	officer	sent	you	straight	through—you’ve
not	trained	or	sparred	once,	yet	here	I	am,	expected	to	accept	you	as	one	of	my
soldiers.’
Strings	shrugged,	said	nothing.
‘That	recruiting	officer,’	Ranal	went	on	after	a	moment,	his	pale	blue	eyes
fixed	on	the	city,	‘said	she	saw	from	the	start	what	you’d	been	trying	to	hide.
Oddly,	she	considered	it—you,	to	be	more	precise—a	valuable	resource,	even
so	much	as	to	suggesting	I	make	you	a	sergeant.	Do	you	know	why	I	find	that
odd?’


‘No,	sir,	but	I	am	sure	you	will	tell	me.’
‘Because	I	think	you	were	a	deserter.’
Strings	leaned	far	forward	and	spat	down	into	the	water.	‘I’ve	met	more
than	a	few,	and	they’ve	all	got	their	reasons	and	no	two	of	them	alike.	But
there’s	one	thing	they	all	have	in	common.’
‘And	what	is	that?’
‘You’ll	never	find	them	in	an	enlistment	line,	Lieutenant.	Enjoy	the	view,
sir.’	He	turned	away	and	wandered	back	to	where	the	other	marines	sprawled
on	the	midship	deck.	Most	had	long	since	recovered	from	their	seasickness,	yet
their	eagerness	to	disembark	was	palpable.	Strings	sat	down,	stretched	out	his
legs.
‘Lieutenant	wants	your	head	on	a	plate,’	a	voice	murmured	beside	him.
Strings	sighed	and	closed	his	eyes,	lifting	his	face	to	the	afternoon	sun.
‘What	the	lieutenant	wants	and	what	he	gets	ain’t	the	same	thing,	Koryk.’
‘What	he’ll	get	is	the	bunch	of	us	right	here,’	the	Seti	half-blood	replied,
rolling	his	broad	shoulders,	strands	of	his	long	black	hair	whipping	across	his
flat-featured	face.
‘The	practice	is	to	mix	recruits	with	veterans,’	Strings	said.	‘Despite
everything	you’ve	heard,	there’s	survivors	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs	in	yon	city
over	there.	A	whole	shipload	of	wounded	marines	and	Wickans	made	it
through,	I’ve	heard.	And	there’s	the	Aren	Guard,	and	the	Red	Blades.	A	number
of	coastal	marine	ships	straggled	in	as	well.	Finally,	there’s	Admiral	Nok’s
fleet,	though	I	imagine	he’ll	want	to	keep	his	own	forces	intact.’
‘What	for?’	another	recruit	asked.	‘We’re	heading	for	a	desert	war,	aren’t
we?’
Strings	glanced	over	at	her.	Frighteningly	young,	reminding	him	of
another	young	woman	who’d	marched	alongside	him	a	while	ago.	He	shivered
slightly,	then	said,	‘The	Adjunct	would	have	to	be	a	fool	to	strip	the	fleet.	Nok’s
ready	to	begin	the	reconquest	of	the	coast	cities—he	could’ve	started	months
ago.	The	empire	needs	secure	ports.	Without	them	we’re	finished	on	this
continent.’
‘Well,’	the	young	woman	muttered,	‘from	what	I’ve	heard,	this	Adjunct
might	be	just	what	you	said,	old	man.	Hood	knows,	she’s	nobleborn,	ain’t	she?’
Strings	snorted,	but	said	nothing,	closing	his	eyes	once	more.	He	was
worried	the	lass	might	be	right.	Then	again,	this	Tavore	was	sister	to	Captain
Paran.	And	Paran	had	shown	some	spine	back	in	Darujhistan.	At	the	very	least,
he	was	no	fool.
‘Where’d	you	get	the	name	“Strings”,	anyway?’	the	young	woman	asked
after	a	moment.


Fiddler	smiled.	‘That	tale’s	too	long	to	tell,	lass.’
	
Her	gauntlets	thudded	down	onto	the	tabletop,	raising	a	cloud	of	dust.	Armour
rustling,	sweat	soaking	the	under-padding	between	her	breasts,	she	unstrapped
her	helmet	and—as	the	wench	arrived	with	the	tankard	of	ale—dragged	out	the
rickety	chair	and	sat	down.
Street	urchin	messenger.	Delivering	a	small	strip	of	green	silk	which	bore,
written	in	a	fine	hand,	the	Malazan	words:	Dancer’s	Tavern,	dusk.	Lostara	Yil
was	more	irritated	than	intrigued.
The	interior	of	Dancer ’s	Tavern	consisted	of	a	single	room,	the	four	walls
making	some	ancient	claim	to	whitewashed	plaster,	remnants	of	which	now
clung	to	the	adobe	bricks	in	misshapen,	wine-stained	patches,	like	a	map	of	a
drunkard’s	paradise.	The	low	ceiling	was	rotting	before	the	very	eyes	of	owner
and	patron,	dust	sifting	down	in	clouds	lit	by	the	low	sun	that	cast	streams	of
light	through	the	front	window’s	shutters.	Already,	the	foam-threaded	surface
of	the	ale	in	the	tankard	before	her	sported	a	dull	sheen.
There	were	but	three	other	patrons,	two	bent	over	a	game	of	slivers	at	the
table	closest	to	the	window,	and	a	lone,	mumbling,	semi-conscious	man
slumped	against	the	wall	beside	the	piss	trench.
Although	early,	the	Red	Blade	captain	was	already	impatient	to	see	an	end
to	this	pathetic	mystery,	if	mystery	it	was	meant	to	be.	She’d	needed	but	a
moment	to	realize	who	it	was	who	had	set	up	this	clandestine	meeting.	And
while	a	part	of	her	was	warmed	by	the	thought	of	seeing	him	again—for	all	his
affectations	and	airs	he	was	handsome	enough—she	had	sufficient
responsibilities	to	wrestle	with	as	Tene	Baralta’s	aide.	Thus	far,	the	Red	Blades
were	being	treated	as	a	company	distinct	from	the	Adjunct’s	punitive	army,
despite	the	fact	that	there	were	few	soldiers	available	with	actual	fighting
experience…and	even	fewer	with	the	backbone	to	put	that	experience	to	use.
The	disordered	apathy	rife	in	Blistig’s	Aren	Guard	was	not	shared	by	the
Red	Blades.	Kin	had	been	lost	in	the	Chain	of	Dogs,	and	that	would	be
answered.
If…
The	Adjunct	was	Malazan—an	unknown	to	Lostara	and	the	rest	of	the	Red
Blades;	even	Tene	Baralta,	who	had	met	her	face	to	face	on	three	occasions,
remained	unable	to	gauge	her,	to	take	her	measure.	Did	Tavore	trust	the	Red
Blades?
Maybe	the	truth	is	already	before	us.	She’s	yet	to	give	our	company
anything.	Are	we	part	of	her	army?	Will	the	Red	Blades	be	permitted	to	fight	the


Whirlwind?
Questions	without	answers.
And	here	she	sat,	wasting	time—
The	door	swung	open.
A	shimmering	grey	cloak,	green-tinted	leathers,	dark,	sun-burnished	skin,
a	wide,	welcoming	smile.	‘Captain	Lostara	Yil!	I	am	delighted	to	see	you
again.’	He	strode	over,	dismissing	the	approaching	serving	wench	with	a
casual	wave	of	one	gloved	hand.	Settling	into	the	chair	opposite	her,	he	raised
two	crystal	goblets	that	seemed	to	appear	from	nowhere	and	set	them	on	the
dusty	table.	A	black	bottle,	long-necked	and	glistening,	followed.	‘I	strongly
advise	against	the	local	ale	in	this	particular	establishment,	my	dear.	This
vintage	suits	the	occasion	far	better.	From	the	sun-drenched	south	slopes	of
Gris,	where	grow	the	finest	grapes	this	world	has	seen.	Is	mine	an	informed
opinion,	you	are	wondering?	Most	assuredly	so,	lass,	since	I	hold	a	majority
interest	in	said	vineyards—’
‘What	is	it	you	want	with	me,	Pearl?’
He	poured	the	magenta-hued	wine	into	the	goblets,	his	smile	unwavering.
‘Plagued	as	I	am	with	sentimentality,	I	thought	we	might	raise	our	glasses	to
old	times.	Granted,	they	were	rather	harrowing	times;	none	the	less,	we
survived,	did	we	not?’
‘Oh	yes,’	Lostara	replied.	‘And	you	went	your	way,	on	to	greater	glory	no
doubt.	Whilst	I	went	mine—straight	into	a	cell.’
The	Claw	sighed.	‘Ah	well,	poor	Pormqual’s	advisers	failed	him	dearly,
alas.	But	I	see	now	that	you	and	your	fellow	Red	Blades	are	free	once	more,
your	weapons	returned	to	you,	your	place	in	the	Adjunct’s	army	secure—’
‘Not	quite.’
Pearl	arched	an	elegant	brow.
Lostara	collected	the	goblet	and	drank	a	mouthful,	barely	noticing	its	taste.
‘We	have	had	no	indication	of	the	Adjunct’s	wishes	towards	us.’
‘How	strange!’
Scowling,	the	captain	said,	‘Enough	games—you	surely	know	far	more
about	it	than	we	do—’
‘Alas,	I	must	disabuse	you	of	that	notion.	The	new	Adjunct	is	as
unfathomable	to	me	as	she	is	to	you.	My	failure	was	in	making	assumptions
that	she	would	hasten	to	repair	the	damage	done	to	your	illustrious	company.
To	leave	unanswered	the	question	of	the	Red	Blades’	loyalty…’	Pearl	sipped
wine,	then	leaned	back.	‘You	have	been	released	from	the	gaols,	your	weapons
returned	to	you—have	you	been	barred	from	leaving	the	city?	From
headquarters?’


‘Only	her	council	chambers,	Pearl.’
The	Claw’s	expression	brightened.	‘Ah,	but	in	that	you	are	not	alone,	my
dear.	From	what	I	have	heard,	apart	from	the	select	few	who	have	accompanied
her	from	Unta,	the	Adjunct	has	hardly	spoken	with	anyone	at	all.	I	believe,
however,	that	the	situation	is	about	to	change.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Why,	only	that	there	will	be	a	council	of	war	tonight,	one	to	which	your
commander,	Tene	Baralta,	has	no	doubt	been	invited,	as	well	as	Commander
Blistig	and	a	host	of	others	whose	appearance	will	likely	surprise	one	and	all.’
He	fell	silent	then,	his	green	eyes	holding	on	her.
Lostara	slowly	blinked.	‘That	being	the	case,	I	must	needs	return	to	Tene
Baralta—’
‘A	fair	conclusion,	lass.	Unfortunately	wrong,	I	am	afraid.’
‘Explain	yourself,	Pearl.’
He	leaned	forward	once	more	and	topped	up	her	drink.	‘Delighted	to.	As
recalcitrant	as	the	Adjunct	has	been,	I	did	manage	to	have	occasion	to	present
to	her	a	request,	which	she	has	approved.’
Lostara’s	voice	was	flat.	‘What	kind	of	request?’
‘Well,	sentimentality	is	my	curse,	as	I	mentioned	earlier.	Fond	are	my
memories	of	you	and	me	working	together.	So	fond,	in	fact,	that	I	have
requested	you	as	my,	uhm,	my	aide.	Your	commander	has	of	course	been
informed—’
‘I	am	a	captain	in	the	Red	Blades!’	Lostara	snapped.	‘Not	a	Claw,	not	a	spy,
not	a	mur—’	She	bit	the	word	back.
Pearl’s	eyes	widened.	‘I	am	deeply	hurt.	But	magnanimous	enough	this
evening	to	excuse	your	ignorance.	Whilst	you	may	find	no	distinction	between
the	art	of	assassination	and	the	crude	notion	of	murder,	I	assure	you	that	one
exists.	Be	that	as	it	may,	permit	me	to	allay	your	fears—the	task	awaiting	you
and	me	will	not	involve	the	ghastlier	side	of	my	calling.	No	indeed,	lass,	my
need	for	you	in	this	upcoming	endeavour	depends	entirely	upon	two	of	your
numerous	qualities.	Your	familiarity	as	a	native	of	Seven	Cities,	for	one.	And
the	other—even	more	vital—your	unquestioned	loyalty	to	the	Malazan	Empire.
Now,	while	you	could	in	no	way	argue	the	veracity	of	the	former,	it	now	falls
to	you	to	reassert	your	claim	to	the	latter.’
She	stared	at	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	slowly	nodded.	‘I	see.	Very	well,
I	am	at	your	disposal.’
Pearl	smiled	once	more.	‘Wonderful.	My	faith	in	you	was	absolute.’
‘What	is	this	mission	we	are	to	embark	upon?’
‘Details	will	be	forthcoming	once	we	have	our	personal	interview	with	the


Adjunct	this	evening.’
She	straightened.	‘You	have	no	idea,	do	you?’
His	smile	broadened.	‘Exciting,	yes?’
‘So	you	don’t	know	if	it	will	involve	assassination—’
‘Assassination?	Who	knows?	But	murder?	Assuredly	not.	Now,	drink	up,
lass.	We	must	needs	march	to	the	palace	of	the	late	High	Fist.	I	have	heard	that
the	Adjunct	has	little	toleration	for	tardiness.’
	
Everyone	had	arrived	early.	Gamet	stood	near	the	door	through	which	the
Adjunct	would	appear,	his	back	to	the	wall,	his	arms	crossed.	Before	him,
stationed	in	the	long,	low-ceilinged	council	chamber,	were	the	three
commanders	who	had	been	assembled	for	this	evening’s	first	set	of	meetings.
The	next	few	bells,	with	all	the	orchestration	directing	them,	promised	to	be
interesting.	None	the	less,	the	once-captain	of	House	Paran	was	feeling
somewhat	intimidated.
He	had	been	a	common	soldier	years	back,	not	one	to	find	himself	in
councils	of	war.	There	was	little	comfort	in	this	new	mantle	of	Fist,	for	he
knew	that	merit	had	had	nothing	to	do	with	acquiring	the	title.	Tavore	knew
him,	had	grown	used	to	commanding	him,	to	leaving	to	him	the	tasks	of
organization,	the	arranging	of	schedules…but	for	a	noble	household.	Yet	it
seemed	she	intended	to	use	him	in	an	identical	manner,	this	time	for	the	entire
Fourteenth	Army.	Which	made	him	an	administrator,	not	a	Fist.	A	fact	of	which
no-one	present	in	this	room	was	unaware.
He	was	unused	to	the	embarrassment	he	felt,	and	recognized	that	the	bluster
he	often	displayed	was	nothing	more	than	a	knee-jerk	reaction	to	his	own	sense
of	inadequacy.	For	the	moment,	however,	he	did	not	feel	capable	of	managing
even	so	much	as	diffidence,	much	less	bluster.
Admiral	Nok	was	standing	a	half-dozen	paces	away,	in	quiet	conversation
with	the	imposing	commander	of	the	Red	Blades,	Tene	Baralta.	Blistig	sat
sprawled	in	a	chair	at	the	far	end	of	the	map	table,	farthest	from	where	the
Adjunct	would	seat	herself	once	the	meeting	commenced.
Gamet’s	eyes	were	drawn	again	and	again	to	the	tall	admiral.	Apart	from
Dujek	Onearm,	Nok	was	the	last	of	the	commanders	from	the	Emperor ’s	time.
The	only	admiral	who	didn’t	drown.	With	the	sudden	deaths	of	the	Napan
brothers,	Urko	and	Crust,	Nok	had	been	given	overall	command	of	the
imperial	fleets.	The	Empress	had	sent	him	and	a	hundred	and	seven	of	his	ships
to	Seven	Cities	when	the	rumours	of	rebellion	had	reached	fever	pitch.	Had	the
High	Fist	in	Aren	not	effectively	impounded	that	fleet	in	the	harbour,


Coltaine’s	Chain	of	Dogs	could	have	been	prevented;	indeed,	the	rebellion
might	well	be	over.	Now,	the	task	of	reconquest	promised	to	be	a	drawn-out,
bloody	endeavour.	Whatever	feelings	the	admiral	might	have	regarding	all	that
had	occurred	and	all	that	was	likely	to	come,	he	gave	no	outward	indication,
his	expression	remaining	cold	and	impersonal.
Tene	Baralta	had	his	own	grievances.	The	Red	Blades	had	been	charged
with	treason	by	Pormqual,	even	as	one	of	their	companies	fought	under
Coltaine’s	command—fought,	and	was	annihilated.	Blistig’s	first	order	once
the	High	Fist	left	the	city	had	been	their	release.	As	with	the	survivors	of	the
Chain	of	Dogs	and	the	Aren	Guard,	the	Adjunct	had	inherited	their	presence.
The	question	of	what	to	do	with	them—what	to	do	with	them	all—was	about	to
be	answered.
Gamet	wished	he	could	allay	their	concerns,	but	the	truth	was,	Tavore	had
never	been	free	with	her	thoughts.	The	Fist	had	no	idea	what	this	evening
would	bring.
The	door	opened.
As	was	her	style,	Tavore’s	clothes	were	well	made,	but	plain	and	virtually
colourless.	A	match	to	her	eyes,	to	the	streaks	of	grey	in	her	reddish,	shortcropped	hair,	to	her	unyielding,	unprepossessing	features.	She	was	tall,
somewhat	broad	in	the	hips,	her	breasts	slightly	oversized	for	her	frame.	The
otataral	sword	of	her	office	was	scabbarded	at	her	belt—the	only	indication	of
her	imperial	title.	A	half-dozen	scrolls	were	tucked	under	one	arm.
‘Stand	or	sit	as	you	like,’	were	her	first	words	as	she	strode	to	the	High
Fist’s	ornate	chair.
Gamet	watched	Nok	and	Tene	Baralta	move	to	chairs	at	the	table,	then
followed	suit.
Back	straight,	the	Adjunct	sat.	She	set	the	scrolls	down.	‘The	disposition	of
the	Fourteenth	Army	is	the	subject	of	this	meeting.	Remain	in	our	company,
Admiral	Nok,	please.’	She	reached	for	the	first	scroll	and	slipped	its	ties.
‘Three	legions.	The	8th,	9th	and	10th.	Fist	Gamet	shall	command	the	8th.	Fist
Blistig,	the	9th,	and	Fist	Tene	Baralta,	the	10th.	The	choice	of	officers	under
each	respective	command	is	at	the	discretion	of	each	Fist.	I	advise	you	to	select
wisely.	Admiral	Nok,	detach	Commander	Alardis	from	your	flagship.	She	is
now	in	charge	of	the	Aren	Guard.’	Without	pause	she	reached	for	a	second
scroll.	‘As	to	the	survivors	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs	and	sundry	unattached
elements	at	our	disposal,	their	units	are	now	dissolved.	They	have	been
reassigned	and	dispersed	throughout	the	three	legions.’	She	finally	looked	up
—and	if	she	took	note	of	the	shock	on	the	faces	that	Gamet	saw,	a	shock	he
shared,	she	hid	it	well.	‘In	three	days’	time,	I	will	review	your	troops.	That	is


all.’
In	numbed	silence,	the	four	men	slowly	rose.
The	Adjunct	gestured	at	the	two	scrolls	she	had	laid	out.	‘Fist	Blistig,	take
these	please.	You	and	Tene	Baralta	might	wish	to	reconvene	in	one	of	the	side
chambers,	in	order	to	discuss	the	details	of	your	new	commands.	Fist	Gamet,
you	can	join	them	later.	For	now,	remain	with	me.	Admiral	Nok,	I	wish	to
speak	with	you	privately	later	this	evening.	Please	ensure	that	you	are	at	my
disposal.’
The	tall,	elderly	man	cleared	his	throat.	‘I	shall	be	in	the	mess	hall,
Adjunct.’
‘Very	good.’
Gamet	watched	the	three	men	depart.
As	soon	as	the	doors	closed,	the	Adjunct	rose	from	her	chair.	She	walked
over	to	the	ancient,	woven	tapestries	running	the	length	of	one	of	the	walls.
‘Extraordinary	patterns,	Gamet,	don’t	you	think?	A	culture	obsessed	with
intricacies.	Well,’	she	faced	him,	‘that	was	concluded	with	unexpected	ease.	It
seems	we	have	a	few	moments	before	our	next	guests.’
‘I	believe	they	were	all	too	shocked	to	respond,	Adjunct.	The	imperial	style
of	command	usually	includes	discussion,	argument,	compromise—’
Her	only	reply	was	a	brief	half-smile,	then	she	returned	her	attention	to	the
weavings.	‘What	officers	will	Tene	Baralta	choose,	do	you	imagine?’
‘Red	Blades,	Adjunct.	How	the	Malazan	recruits	will	take—’
‘And	Blistig?’
‘Only	one	seemed	worthy	of	his	rank—and	he’s	now	in	the	Aren	Guard
and	so	not	available	to	Blistig,’	Gamet	replied.	‘A	captain,	Keneb—’
‘Malazan?’
‘Yes,	though	stationed	here	in	Seven	Cities.	He	lost	his	troops,	Adjunct,	to
the	renegade,	Korbolo	Dom.	It	was	Keneb	who	warned	Blistig	about	Mallick
Rel—’
‘Indeed.	So,	apart	from	Captain	Keneb?’
Gamet	shook	his	head.	‘I	feel	for	Blistig	at	the	moment.’
‘Do	you?’
‘Well,	I	didn’t	say	what	I	was	feeling,	Adjunct.’
She	faced	him	again.	‘Pity?’
‘Some	of	that,’	he	allowed	after	a	moment.
‘Do	you	know	what	bothers	Blistig	the	most,	Fist?’
‘Witnessing	the	slaughter—’
‘He	may	well	claim	that	and	hope	that	you	believe	it,	but	you	are	wrong	to
do	so.	Blistig	disobeyed	a	High	Fist’s	order.	He	stands	before	me,	his	new


commander,	and	believes	I	hold	no	faith	in	him.	From	that,	he	concludes	that	it
would	be	best	for	everyone	concerned	if	I	were	to	send	him	to	Unta,	to	face	the
Empress.’	She	turned	away	again,	was	silent.
Gamet’s	thoughts	raced,	but	he	finally	had	to	conclude	that	Tavore’s
thoughts	proceeded	on	levels	too	deep	for	him	to	fathom.	‘What	is	it	you	wish
me	to	tell	him?’
‘You	think	I	wish	you	to	tell	him	something	from	me?	Very	well.	He	may
have	Captain	Keneb.’
A	side	door	swung	open	and	Gamet	turned	to	see	three	Wickans	enter.	Two
were	children,	the	third	one	not	much	older.	While	the	Fist	had	yet	to	meet
them,	he	knew	who	they	must	be.	Nether	and	Nil.	The	witch	and	the	warlock.
And	the	lad	with	them	is	Temul,	the	eldest	among	the	warrior	youths	Coltaine
sent	with	the	historian.
Only	Temul	seemed	pleased	at	having	been	summoned	into	the	Adjunct’s
presence.	Nil	and	Nether	were	both	unkempt,	their	feet	bare	and	almost	grey
with	layers	of	dirt.	Nether ’s	long	black	hair	hung	in	greasy	ropes.	Nil’s	deerhide	tunic	was	scarred	and	torn.	Both	held	expressions	of	disinterest.	In
contrast,	Temul’s	war	gear	was	immaculate,	as	was	the	mask	of	deep	red	face
paint	denoting	his	grief,	and	his	dark	eyes	glittered	like	sharp	stones	as	he
drew	himself	to	attention	before	the	Adjunct.
But	Tavore’s	attention	was	on	Nil	and	Nether.	‘The	Fourteenth	Army	lacks
mages,’	she	said.	‘Therefore,	you	will	now	be	acting	in	that	capacity.’
‘No,	Adjunct,’	Nether	replied.
‘This	matter	is	not	open	for	discussion—’
Nil	spoke.	‘We	want	to	go	home,’	he	said.	‘To	the	Wickan	plains.’
The	Adjunct	studied	them	for	a	moment,	then,	gaze	unwavering,	said,
‘Temul,	Coltaine	placed	you	in	charge	of	the	Wickan	youths	from	the	three
tribes	present	in	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	What	is	the	complement?’
‘Thirty,’	the	youth	replied.
‘And	how	many	Wickans	were	among	the	wounded	delivered	by	ship	to
Aren?’
‘Eleven	survived.’
‘Thus,	forty-one	in	all.	Are	there	any	warlocks	among	your	company?’
‘No,	Adjunct.’
‘When	Coltaine	sent	you	with	the	historian	Duiker,	did	he	attach	warlocks
to	your	company	at	that	time?’
Temul’s	eyes	flicked	to	Nil	and	Nether	for	a	moment,	then	his	head	jerked
in	a	nod.	‘Yes.’
‘And	has	your	company	been	officially	dissolved,	Temul?’


‘No.’
‘In	other	words,	Coltaine’s	last	command	to	you	still	obtains.’	She
addressed	Nil	and	Nether	once	more.	‘Your	request	is	denied.	I	have	need	of
both	you	and	Captain	Temul’s	Wickan	lancers.’
‘We	can	give	you	nothing,’	Nether	replied.
‘The	warlock	spirits	within	us	are	silent,’	Nil	added.
Tavore	slowly	blinked	as	she	continued	to	regard	them.	Then	she	said,
‘You	shall	have	to	find	a	means	of	awakening	them	once	more.	The	day	we
close	to	battle	with	Sha’ik	and	the	Whirlwind,	I	expect	you	to	employ	your
sorcery	to	defend	the	legions.	Captain	Temul,	are	you	the	eldest	among	the
Wickans	in	your	company?’
‘No,	Adjunct.	There	are	four	warriors	of	the	Foolish	Dog,	who	were	on
the	ship	bearing	the	wounded.’
‘Do	they	resent	your	command?’
The	youth	drew	himself	straighter.	‘They	do	not,’	he	replied,	his	right	hand
settling	on	the	grip	of	one	of	his	long	knives.
Gamet	winced	and	looked	away.
‘You	three	are	dismissed,’	the	Adjunct	said	after	a	moment.
Temul	hesitated,	then	spoke.	‘Adjunct,	my	company	wishes	to	fight.	Are	we
to	be	attached	to	the	legions?’
Tavore	tilted	her	head.	‘Captain	Temul,	how	many	summers	have	you
seen?’
‘Fourteen.’
The	Adjunct	nodded.	‘At	present,	Captain,	our	mounted	troops	are	limited
to	a	company	of	Seti	volunteers,	five	hundred	in	all.	In	military	terms,	they	are
light	cavalry	at	best,	scouts	and	outriders	at	worst.	None	have	seen	battle,	and
none	are	much	older	than	you.	Your	own	command	consists	of	forty	Wickans,
all	but	four	younger	than	you.	For	our	march	northward,	Captain	Temul,	your
company	will	be	attached	to	my	entourage.	As	bodyguards.	The	ablest	riders
among	the	Seti	will	act	as	messengers	and	scouts.	Understand,	I	have	not	the
forces	to	mount	a	cavalry	engagement.	The	Fourteenth	Army	is	predominantly
infantry.’
‘Coltaine’s	tactics—’
‘This	is	no	longer	Coltaine’s	war,’	Tavore	snapped.
Temul	flinched	as	if	struck.	He	managed	a	stiff	nod,	then	turned	on	his	heel
and	departed	the	chamber.	Nil	and	Nether	followed	a	moment	later.
Gamet	let	out	a	shaky	breath.	‘The	lad	wanted	to	bring	good	news	to	his
Wickans.’
‘To	silence	the	grumbling	from	the	four	Foolish	Dog	warriors,’	the


Adjunct	said,	her	voice	still	holding	a	tone	of	irritation.	‘Aptly	named	indeed.
Tell	me,	Fist,	how	do	you	think	the	discussion	between	Blistig	and	Tene	Baralta
is	proceeding	at	this	moment?’
The	old	veteran	grunted.	‘Heatedly,	I	would	imagine,	Adjunct.	Tene	Baralta
likely	expected	to	retain	his	Red	Blades	as	a	discrete	regiment.	I	doubt	he	has
much	interest	in	commanding	four	thousand	Malazan	recruits.’
‘And	the	admiral,	who	waits	below	in	the	mess	hall?’
‘To	that,	I	have	no	idea,	Adjunct.	His	taciturnity	is	legend.’
‘Why,	do	you	think,	did	he	not	simply	usurp	High	Fist	Pormqual?	Why	did
he	permit	the	annihilation	of	Coltaine	and	the	Seventh,	then	of	the	High	Fist’s
own	army?’
Gamet	could	only	shake	his	head.
Tavore	studied	him	for	another	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	slowly	made
her	way	to	the	scrolls	lying	on	the	tabletop.	She	drew	one	out	and	removed	its
ties.	‘The	Empress	never	had	cause	to	question	Admiral	Nok’s	loyalty.’
‘Nor	Dujek	Onearm’s,’	Gamet	muttered	under	his	breath.
She	heard	and	looked	up,	then	offered	a	tight,	momentary	smile.	‘Indeed.
One	meeting	remains	to	us.’	Tucking	the	scroll	under	one	arm,	she	strode
towards	a	small	side	door.	‘Come.’
The	room	beyond	was	low-ceilinged,	its	walls	virtually	covered	in
tapestries.	Thick	rugs	silenced	their	steps	as	they	entered.	A	modest	round	table
occupied	the	centre,	beneath	an	ornate	oil	lamp	that	was	the	only	source	of
light.	There	was	a	second	door	opposite,	low	and	narrow.	The	table	was	the
chamber ’s	sole	piece	of	furniture.
Tavore	dropped	the	scroll	onto	its	battered	top	as	Gamet	shut	the	door
behind	him.	When	he	turned	he	saw	that	she	was	facing	him.	There	was	a
sudden	vulnerability	in	her	eyes	that	triggered	a	clutching	anxiety	in	his	gut—
for	it	was	something	he	had	never	before	seen	from	this	daughter	of	House
Paran.	‘Adjunct?’
She	broke	the	contact,	visibly	recovered.	‘In	this	room,’	she	quietly	said,
‘the	Empress	is	not	present.’
Gamet’s	breath	caught,	then	he	jerked	his	head	in	a	nod.
The	smaller	door	opened,	and	the	Fist	turned	to	see	a	tall,	almost
effeminate	man,	clothed	in	grey,	a	placid	smile	on	his	handsome	features	as	he
took	a	step	into	the	chamber.	An	armoured	woman	followed—an	officer	of	the
Red	Blades.	Her	skin	was	dark	and	tattooed	in	Pardu	style,	her	eyes	black	and
large,	set	wide	above	high	cheekbones,	her	nose	narrow	and	aquiline.	She
seemed	anything	but	pleased,	her	gaze	fixing	on	the	Adjunct	with	an	air	of
calculating	arrogance.


‘Close	the	door	behind	you,	Captain,’	Tavore	said	to	the	Red	Blade.
The	grey-clad	man	was	regarding	Gamet,	his	smile	turning	faintly
quizzical.	‘Fist	Gamet,’	he	said.	‘I	imagine	you	are	wishing	you	were	still	in
Unta,	that	bustling	heart	of	the	empire,	arguing	with	horse-traders	on	behalf	of
House	Paran.	Instead,	here	you	are,	a	soldier	once	more—’
Gamet	scowled	and	said,	‘I	am	afraid	I	do	not	know	you—’
‘You	may	call	me	Pearl,’	the	man	replied,	hesitating	on	the	name	as	if	its
revelation	was	the	core	of	some	vast	joke	of	which	only	he	was	aware.	‘And
my	lovely	companion	is	Captain	Lostara	Yil,	late	of	the	Red	Blades	but	now—
happily—seconded	into	my	care.’	He	swung	to	the	Adjunct	and	elaborately
bowed.	‘At	your	service.’
Gamet	could	see	Tavore’s	expression	tighten	fractionally.	‘That	remains	to
be	seen.’
Pearl	slowly	straightened,	the	mockery	in	his	face	gone.	‘Adjunct,	you
have	quietly—very	quietly—arranged	this	meeting.	This	stage	has	no	audience.
While	I	am	a	Claw,	you	and	I	are	both	aware	that	I	have—lately—incurred	my
master	Topper ’s—and	the	Empress’s—displeasure,	resulting	in	my	hasty
journey	through	the	Imperial	Warren.	A	temporary	situation,	of	course,	but
none	the	less,	the	consequence	is	that	I	am	at	something	of	a	loose	end	at	the
moment.’
‘Then	one	might	conclude,’	the	Adjunct	said	carefully,	‘that	you	are
available,	as	it	were,	for	a	rather	more…private	enterprise.’
Gamet	shot	her	a	glance.	Gods	below!	What	is	this	about?
‘One	might,’	Pearl	replied,	shrugging.
There	was	silence,	broken	at	last	by	the	Red	Blade,	Lostara	Yil.	‘I	am	made
uneasy	by	the	direction	of	this	conversation,’	she	grated.	‘As	a	loyal	subject	of
the	empire—’
‘Nothing	of	what	follows	will	impugn	your	honour,	Captain,’	the	Adjunct
replied,	her	gaze	unwavering	on	Pearl.	She	added	nothing	more.
The	Claw	half	smiled	then.	‘Ah,	now	you’ve	made	me	curious.	I	delight	in
being	curious,	did	you	know	that?	You	fear	that	I	will	bargain	my	way	back
into	Laseen’s	favour,	for	the	mission	you	would	propose	to	the	captain	and	me
is,	to	be	precise,	not	on	behalf	of	the	Empress,	nor,	indeed,	of	the	empire.	An
extraordinary	departure	from	the	role	of	Imperial	Adjunct.	Unprecedented,	in
fact.’
Gamet	took	a	step	forward,	‘Adjunct—’
She	raised	a	hand	to	cut	him	off.	‘Pearl,	the	task	I	would	set	to	you	and	the
captain	may	well	contribute,	ultimately,	to	the	well-being	of	the	empire—’
‘Oh	well,’	the	Claw	smiled,	‘that	is	what	a	good	imagination	is	for,	isn’t	it?


One	can	scrape	patterns	in	the	blood	no	matter	how	dried	it’s	become.	I	admit
to	no	small	skill	in	attributing	sound	justification	for	whatever	I’ve	just	done.
By	all	means,	proceed—’
‘Not	yet!’	Lostara	Yil	snapped,	her	exasperation	plain.	‘In	serving	the
Adjunct	I	expect	to	serve	the	empire.	She	is	the	will	of	the	Empress.	No	other
considerations	are	permitted	her—’
‘You	speak	true,’	Tavore	said.	She	faced	Pearl	again.	‘Claw,	how	fares	the
Talon?’
Pearl’s	eyes	went	wide	and	he	almost	rocked	back	a	step.	‘They	no	longer
exist,’	he	whispered.
The	Adjunct	frowned.	‘Disappointing.	We	are	all,	at	the	moment,	in	a
precarious	position.	If	you	are	to	expect	honesty	from	me,	then	can	I	not	do	so
in	return?’
‘They	remain,’	Pearl	muttered,	distaste	twisting	his	features.	‘Like	bot-fly
larvae	beneath	the	imperial	hide.	When	we	probe,	they	simply	dig	deeper.’
‘They	none	the	less	serve	a	certain…function,’	Tavore	said.
‘Unfortunately,	not	as	competently	as	I	would	have	hoped.’
‘The	Talons	have	found	support	among	the	nobility?’	Pearl	asked,	a	sheen
of	sweat	now	visible	on	his	high	brow.
The	Adjunct’s	shrug	was	almost	indifferent.	‘Does	that	surprise	you?’
Gamet	could	almost	see	the	Claw’s	thoughts	racing.	Racing	on,	and	on,	his
expression	growing	ever	more	astonished	and…dismayed.	‘Name	him,’	he
said.
‘Baudin.’
‘He	was	assassinated	in	Quon—’
‘The	father	was.	Not	the	son.’
Pearl	suddenly	began	pacing	in	the	small	chamber.	‘And	this	son,	how
much	like	the	bastard	who	spawned	him?	Baudin	Elder	left	Claw	corpses
scattered	in	alleys	throughout	the	city.	The	hunt	lasted	four	entire	nights…’
‘I	had	reason	to	believe,’	Tavore	said,	‘that	he	was	worthy	of	his	father ’s
name.’
Pearl’s	head	turned.	‘But	no	longer?’
‘I	cannot	say.	I	believe,	however,	that	his	mission	has	gone	terribly	wrong.’
The	name	slipped	from	Gamet’s	lips	unbidden	but	with	a	certainty	heavy	as
an	anchor-stone:	‘Felisin.’
He	saw	the	wince	in	Tavore’s	face,	before	she	turned	away	from	all	three
of	them	to	study	one	of	the	tapestries.
Pearl	seemed	far	ahead	in	his	thoughts.	‘When	was	contact	lost,	Adjunct?
And	where?’


‘The	night	of	the	Uprising,’	she	replied,	her	back	to	them	still.	‘The	mining
camp	called	Skullcup.	But	there	had	been	a…a	loss	of	control	for	some	weeks
before	then.’	She	gestured	at	the	scroll	on	the	table.	‘Details,	potential	contacts.
Burn	the	scroll	once	you	have	completed	reading	it,	and	scatter	the	ashes	in	the
bay.’	She	faced	them	suddenly.	‘Pearl.	Captain	Lostara	Yil.	Find	Felisin.	Find
my	sister.’
	
The	roar	of	the	mob	rose	and	fell	in	the	city	beyond	the	estate’s	walls.	It	was	the
Season	of	Rot	in	Unta,	and,	in	the	minds	of	thousands	of	denizens,	that	rot	was
being	excised.	The	dreaded	Cull	had	begun.
Captain	Gamet	stood	by	the	gatehouse,	flanked	by	three	nervous	guards.
The	estate’s	torches	had	been	doused,	the	house	behind	them	dark,	its	windows
shuttered.	And	within	that	massive	structure	huddled	the	last	child	of	Paran,
her	parents	gone	since	the	arrests	earlier	that	day,	her	brother	lost	and
presumably	dead	on	a	distant	continent,	her	sister—her	sister…madness	had
come	once	again	to	the	empire,	with	the	fury	of	a	tropical	storm…
Gamet	had	but	twelve	guards,	and	three	of	those	had	been	hired	in	the	last
few	days,	when	the	stillness	of	the	air	in	the	streets	had	whispered	to	the
captain	that	the	horror	was	imminent.	No	proclamations	had	been	issued,	no
imperial	edict	to	fire-lick	the	commoners’	greed	and	savagery	into	life.	There
were	but	rumours,	racing	through	the	city’s	streets,	alleys	and	market	rounds
like	dust-devils.	‘The	Empress	is	displeased.’	‘Behind	the	rot	of	the	imperial
army’s	incompetent	command,	you	will	find	the	face	of	the	nobility.’	‘The
purchase	of	commissions	is	a	plague	threatening	the	entire	empire.	Is	it	any
wonder	the	Empress	is	displeased?’
A	company	of	Red	Blades	had	arrived	from	Seven	Cities.	Cruel	killers,
incorruptible	and	far	removed	from	the	poison	of	noble	coin.	It	was	not	difficult
to	imagine	the	reason	behind	their	appearance.
The	first	wave	of	arrests	had	been	precise,	almost	understated.	Squads	in
the	dead	of	night.	There	had	been	no	skirmishes	with	house	guards,	no	estates
forewarned	to	purchase	time	to	raise	barricades,	or	even	flee	the	city.
And	Gamet	thought	he	knew	how	such	a	thing	came	to	pass.
Tavore	was	now	the	Adjunct	to	the	Empress.	Tavore	knew…her	kind.
The	captain	sighed,	then	strode	forward	to	the	small	inset	door	at	the	gate.
He	drew	the	heavy	bolt,	let	the	iron	bar	drop	with	a	clank.	He	faced	the	three
guards.	‘Your	services	are	no	longer	required.	In	the	murder	hole	you’ll	find
your	pay.’
Two	of	the	three	armoured	men	exchanged	a	glance,	then,	one	of	them


shrugging,	they	walked	to	the	door.	The	third	man	had	not	moved.	Gamet
recalled	that	he’d	given	his	name	as	Kollen—a	Quon	name	and	a	Quon	accent.
He	had	been	hired	more	for	his	imposing	presence	than	anything	else,	though
Gamet’s	practised	eye	had	detected	a	certain…confidence,	in	the	way	the	man
wore	his	armour,	seemingly	indifferent	to	its	weight,	hinting	at	a	martial	grace
that	belonged	only	to	a	professional	soldier.	He	knew	next	to	nothing	of	Kollen’s
past,	but	these	were	desperate	times,	and	in	any	case	none	of	the	three	new
hirelings	had	been	permitted	into	the	house	itself.
In	the	gloom	beneath	the	gatehouse	lintel,	Gamet	now	studied	the
motionless	guard.	Through	the	tidal	roar	of	the	rampaging	mob	that	drew	ever
closer	came	shrill	screams,	lifting	into	the	night	a	despairing	chorus.	‘Make
this	easy,	Kollen,’	he	said	quietly.	‘There	are	four	of	my	men	twenty	paces
behind	you,	crossbows	cocked	and	fixed	on	your	back.’
The	huge	man	tilted	his	head.	‘Nine	of	you.	In	less	than	a	quarter-bell
several	hundred	looters	and	murderers	will	come	calling.’	He	slowly	looked
around,	as	if	gauging	the	estate’s	walls,	the	modest	defences,	then	returned	his
steady	gaze	to	Gamet.
The	captain	scowled.	‘No	doubt	you	would	have	made	it	even	easier	for
them.	As	it	is,	we	might	bloody	their	noses	enough	to	encourage	them	to	seek
somewhere	else.’
‘No,	you	won’t,	Captain.	Things	will	simply	get…messier.’
‘Is	this	how	the	Empress	simplifies	matters,	Kollen?	An	unlocked	gate.
Loyal	guards	cut	down	from	behind.	Have	you	honed	your	knife	for	my	back?’
‘I	am	not	here	at	the	behest	of	the	Empress,	Captain.’
Gamet’s	eyes	narrowed.
‘No	harm	is	to	come	to	her,’	the	man	went	on	after	a	moment.	‘Provided	I
have	your	full	co-operation.	But	we	are	running	out	of	time.’
‘This	is	Tavore’s	answer?	What	of	her	parents?	There	was	nothing	to
suggest	that	their	fate	would	be	any	different	from	that	of	the	others	who’d	been
rounded	up.’
‘Alas,	the	Adjunct’s	options	are	limited.	She	is	under	some…scrutiny.’
‘What	is	planned	for	Felisin,	Kollen—or	whoever	you	are?’
‘A	brief	stint	in	the	otataral	mines—’
‘What!?’
‘She	will	not	be	entirely	alone.	A	guardian	will	accompany	her.	Understand,
Captain,	it	is	this,	or	the	mob	outside.’
Nine	loyal	guards	cut	down,	blood	on	the	floors	and	walls,	a	handful	of
servants	overwhelmed	at	flimsy	barricades	outside	the	child’s	bedroom	door.
Then,	for	the	child…no-one.	‘Who	is	this	“guardian”,	then,	Kollen?’


The	man	smiled.	‘Me,	Captain.	And	no,	my	true	name	is	not	Kollen.’
Gamet	stepped	up	to	him,	until	their	faces	were	but	a	hand’s	width	apart.	‘If
any	harm	comes	to	her,	I	will	find	you.	And	I	don’t	care	if	you’re	a	Claw—’
‘I	am	not	a	Claw,	Captain.	As	for	harm	coming	to	Felisin,	I	regret	to	say
that	there	will	be	some.	It	cannot	be	helped.	We	must	hope	she	is	resilient—it	is
a	Paran	trait,	yes?’
After	a	long	moment,	Gamet	stepped	back,	suddenly	resigned.	‘Do	you	kill
us	now	or	later?’
The	man’s	brows	rose.	‘I	doubt	I	could	manage	that,	given	those	crossbows
levelled	behind	me.	No,	but	I	am	to	ask	that	you	now	escort	me	to	a	safe	house.
At	all	costs,	we	must	not	permit	the	child	to	fall	into	the	mob’s	hands.	Can	I	rely
upon	your	help	in	this,	Captain?’
‘Where	is	this	safe	house?’
‘On	the	Avenue	of	Souls…’
Gamet	grimaced.	Judgement’s	Round.	To	the	chains.	Oh,	Beru	guard	you,
lass.	He	strode	past	Kollen.	‘I	will	awaken	her.’
	
Pearl	stood	at	the	round	table,	leaning	on	both	hands,	his	head	lowered	as	he
studied	the	scroll.	The	Adjunct	had	departed	half	a	bell	past,	her	Fist	on	her
heels	like	a	misshapen	shadow.	Lostara	waited,	arms	crossed,	with	her	back
against	the	door	through	which	Tavore	and	Gamet	had	left.	She	had	held	silent
during	the	length	of	Pearl’s	perusal	of	the	scroll,	her	anger	and	frustration
growing	with	each	passing	moment.
Finally,	she’d	had	enough.	‘I	will	have	no	part	of	this.	Return	me	to	Tene
Baralta’s	command.’
Pearl	did	not	look	up.	‘As	you	wish,	my	dear,’	he	murmured,	then	added:
‘Of	course	I	will	have	to	kill	you	at	some	point—certainly	before	you	report	to
your	commander.	It’s	the	hard	rules	of	clandestine	endeavours,	I	regret	to	say.’
‘Since	when	are	you	at	the	Adjunct’s	beck	and	call,	Pearl?’
‘Why,’	he	glanced	up	and	met	her	gaze,	‘ever	since	she	unequivocally
reasserted	her	loyalty	to	the	Empress,	of	course.’	He	returned	his	attention	to
the	scroll.
Lostara	scowled.	‘I’m	sorry,	I	think	I	missed	that	part	of	the	conversation.’
‘Not	surprising,’	Pearl	replied,	‘since	it	resided	in	between	the	words
actually	spoken.’	He	smiled	at	her.	‘Precisely	where	it	belonged.’
With	a	hiss,	Lostara	began	pacing,	struggled	against	an	irrational	desire	to
take	a	knife	blade	to	these	damned	tapestries	and	their	endless	scenes	of	past
glories.	‘You	will	have	to	explain,	Pearl,’	she	growled.


‘And	will	that	relieve	your	conscience	sufficiently	to	return	you	to	my
side?	Very	well.	The	resurgence	of	the	noble	class	in	the	chambers	of	imperial
power	has	been	uncommonly	swift.	Indeed,	one	might	say	unnaturally	so.
Almost	as	if	they	were	receiving	help—but	who?	we	wondered.	Oh,	absurd
rumours	of	the	return	of	the	Talons	persisted.	And	every	now	and	then	some
poor	fool	who’d	been	arrested	for	something	completely	unrelated	went	and
confessed	to	being	a	Talon,	but	they	were	young,	caught	up	in	romantic
notions	and	the	lure	of	cults	and	whatnot.	They	might	well	call	themselves
Talons,	but	they	did	not	even	come	close	to	the	real	organization,	to	Dancer ’s
own—of	which	many	of	us	Claw	possessed	firsthand	experience.
‘In	any	case,	back	to	the	matter	at	hand.	Tavore	is	of	noble	blood,	and	it’s
now	clear	that	a	truly	covert	element	of	Talons	has	returned	to	plague	us,	and
has	been	making	use	of	the	nobility.	Placing	sympathetic	agents	in	the	military
and	administration—a	mutually	profitable	infiltration.	But	Tavore	is	now	the
Adjunct,	and	as	such,	her	old	ties,	her	old	loyalties,	must	needs	be	severed.’
Pearl	paused	to	tap	a	finger	on	the	laid-out	scroll	before	him.	‘She	has	given	us
the	Talons,	Captain.	We	will	find	this	Baudin	Younger,	and	from	him	we	will
unravel	the	entire	organization.’
Lostara	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment.	‘In	a	sense,	then,’	she	said,	‘our
mission	is	not	extraneous	to	the	interests	of	the	empire	after	all.’
Pearl	flashed	a	smile.
‘But	if	so,’	Lostara	continued,	‘why	didn’t	the	Adjunct	just	say	so?’
‘Oh,	I	think	we	can	leave	that	question	unanswered	for	the	time	being—’
‘No,	I	would	have	it	answered	now!’
Pearl	sighed.	‘Because,	my	dear,	for	Tavore,	the	surrendering	of	the
Talons	is	secondary	to	our	finding	Felisin.	And	that	is	extraneous,	and	not	only
extraneous,	but	also	damning.	Do	you	think	the	Empress	would	smile	upon	this
clever	little	scheme,	the	lie	behind	this	all-too-public	demonstration	of	the	new
Adjunct’s	loyalty?	Sending	her	sister	to	the	otataral	mines!	Hood	take	us	all,
that’s	a	hard	woman!	The	Empress	has	chosen	well,	has	she	not?’
Lostara	grimaced.	Chosen	well…based	on	what,	though?	‘Indeed	she	has.’
‘Aye,	I	agree.	It’s	a	fair	exchange	in	any	case—we	save	Felisin	and	are
rewarded	with	a	principal	agent	of	the	Talons.	The	Empress	will	no	doubt
wonder	what	we	were	doing	out	on	the	Otataral	Isle	in	the	first	place—’
‘You	will	have	to	lie	to	her,	won’t	you?’
Pearl’s	smile	broadened.	‘We	both	will,	lass.	As	would	the	Adjunct,	and
Fist	Gamet	if	it	came	to	that.	Unless,	of	course,	I	take	what	the	Adjunct	has
offered	me.	Offered	me	personally,	that	is.’
Lostara	slowly	nodded.	‘You	are	at	a	loose	end.	Yes.	Out	of	favour	with	the


Clawmaster	and	the	Empress.	Eager	to	make	reparations.	An	independent
mission—you	somehow	latched	onto	the	rumour	of	a	true	Talon,	and	set	off
on	his	trail.	Thus,	the	credit	for	unravelling	the	Talons	is	to	be	yours,	and
yours	alone.’
‘Or	ours,’	Pearl	corrected.	‘If	you	so	desire.’
She	shrugged.	‘We	can	decide	that	later.	Very	well,	Pearl.	Now,’	she	moved
to	his	side,	‘what	are	these	details	with	which	the	Adjunct	has	so	kindly
provided	us?’
	
Admiral	Nok	had	been	facing	the	hearth,	his	gaze	on	its	cold	ashes.	At	the
sound	of	the	door	opening,	he	slowly	turned,	his	expression	as	impassive	as
ever.
‘Thank	you,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘for	your	patience.’
The	admiral	said	nothing,	his	level	gaze	shifting	to	Gamet	for	a	moment.
The	midnight	bell’s	muted	echoes	were	only	now	fading.	The	Fist	was
exhausted,	feeling	fragile	and	scattered,	unable	to	meet	Nok’s	eyes	for	very
long.	This	night,	he’d	been	little	more	than	the	Adjunct’s	pet,	or	worse,	a
familiar.	Tacitly	conjoined	with	her	plans	within	plans,	bereft	of	even	so	much
as	the	illusion	of	a	choice.	When	Tavore	had	first	drawn	him	into	her
entourage—shortly	after	Felisin’s	arrest—Gamet	had	briefly	considered
slipping	away,	vanishing	in	the	time-honoured	tradition	of	Malazan	soldiers
who	found	themselves	in	unwelcome	circumstances.	But	he	hadn’t,	and	his
reasons	for	joining	the	Adjunct’s	core	of	advisers—not	that	they	were	ever
invited	to	advise—had,	upon	ruthless	self-reflection,	proved	less	than	laudable.
He	had	been	driven	by	macabre	curiosity.	Tavore	had	ordered	the	arrests	of
her	parents,	had	sent	her	younger	sister	into	the	horrors	of	the	otataral	mines.
For	her	career’s	sake.	Her	brother,	Paran,	had	in	some	way	been	disgraced	on
Genabackis.	He	had	subsequently	deserted.	An	embarrassment,	granted,	but
surely	not	sufficient	to	warrant	Tavore’s	reaction.	Unless…There	were	rumours
that	the	lad	had	been	an	agent	of	Adjunct	Lorn’s,	and	that	his	desertion	had	led,
ultimately,	to	the	woman’s	death	in	Darujhistan.	Yet,	if	that	were	true,	then	why
did	the	Empress	turn	her	royal	gaze	upon	another	child	of	the	House	of	Paran?
Why	make	Tavore	the	new	Adjunct?
‘Fist	Gamet.’
He	blinked.	‘Adjunct?’
‘Seat	yourself,	please.	I	would	have	some	final	words	with	you,	but	they
can	wait	for	the	time	being.’
Nodding,	Gamet	glanced	around	until	he	spied	the	lone	high-backed	chair


set	against	one	of	the	small	room’s	walls.	It	looked	anything	but	comfortable,
which	was	probably	an	advantage,	given	his	weariness.	Ominous	creaks
sounded	when	he	settled	into	the	chair	and	he	grimaced.	‘No	wonder	Pormqual
didn’t	send	this	one	off	with	all	the	rest,’	he	muttered.
‘It	is	my	understanding,’	Nok	said,	‘that	the	transport	ship	in	question	sank
in	the	harbour	of	Malaz	City,	taking	the	late	High	Fist’s	loot	with	it.’
Gamet’s	wiry	brows	rose.	‘All	that	way…just	to	sink	in	the	harbour?	What
happened?’
The	admiral	shrugged.	‘None	of	the	crew	reached	the	shore	to	tell	the	tale.’
None?
Nok	seemed	to	note	his	scepticism,	for	he	elaborated,	‘Malaz	Harbour	is
well	known	for	its	sharks.	A	number	of	dories	were	found,	all	awash	but
otherwise	empty.’
The	Adjunct	had,	uncharacteristically,	been	permitting	the	exchange	to
continue,	leading	Gamet	to	wonder	if	Tavore	had	sensed	a	hidden	significance
to	the	mysterious	loss	of	the	transport	ship.	Now	she	spoke.	‘It	remains,	then,	a
peculiar	curse—unexplained	founderings,	empty	dories,	lost	crews.	Malaz
Harbour	is	indeed	notorious	for	its	sharks,	particularly	since	they	seem
uniquely	capable	of	eating	victims	whole,	leaving	no	remnants	whatsoever.’
‘There	are	sharks	that	can	do	just	that,’	Nok	replied.	‘I	know	of	at	least
twelve	ships	on	the	muddy	bottom	of	the	harbour	in	question—’
‘Including	the	Twisted,’	the	Adjunct	drawled,	‘the	old	emperor ’s	flagship,
which	mysteriously	slipped	its	moorings	the	night	after	the	assassinations,	then
promptly	plummeted	into	the	deeps,	taking	its	resident	demon	with	it.’
‘Perhaps	it	likes	company,’	Nok	observed.	‘The	island’s	fishermen	all
swear	the	harbour ’s	haunted,	after	all.	The	frequency	with	which	nets	are	lost
—’
‘Admiral,’	Tavore	cut	in,	her	eyes	resting	on	the	dead	hearth,	‘there	is	you,
and	three	others.	All	who	are	left.’
Gamet	slowly	straightened	in	his	chair.	Three	others.	High	Mage
Tayschrenn,	Dujek	Onearm,	and	Whiskeyjack.	Four…gods,	is	that	all	now?
Tattersail,	Bellurdan,	Nightchill,	Duiker…so	many	fallen—
Admiral	Nok	was	simply	studying	the	Adjunct.	He	had	stood	against	the
wrath	of	the	Empress,	first	with	Cartheron	Crust’s	disappearance,	then	Urko’s
and	Ameron’s.	Whatever	answers	he	had	given,	he	had	done	so	long	ago.
‘I	do	not	speak	for	the	Empress,’	Tavore	said	after	a	moment.	‘Nor	am	I
interested	in…details.	What	interests	me	is…a	matter	of	personal…curiosity.	I
would	seek	to	understand,	Admiral,	why	they	abandoned	her.’
There	was	silence,	filling	the	room,	growing	towards	something	like	an


impasse.	Gamet	leaned	back	and	closed	his	eyes.	Ah,	lass,	you	ask	questions
of…of	loyalty,	as	would	someone	who	has	never	experienced	it.	You	reveal	to
this	admiral	what	can	only	be	construed	as	a	critical	flaw.	You	command	the
Fourteenth	Army,	Adjunct,	yet	you	do	so	in	isolation,	raising	the	very
barricades	you	must	needs	take	down	if	you	would	truly	lead.	What	does	Nok
think	of	this,	now?	Is	it	any	wonder	he	does	not—
‘The	answer	to	your	question,’	the	admiral	said,	‘lies	in	what	was	both	a
strength	and	a	flaw	of	the	Emperor ’s…family.	The	family	that	he	gathered	to
raise	an	empire.	Kellanved	began	with	but	one	companion—Dancer.	The	two
then	hired	a	handful	of	locals	in	Malaz	City	and	set	about	conquering	the
criminal	element	in	the	city—I	should	point	out,	that	criminal	element
happened	to	rule	the	entire	island.	Their	target	was	Mock,	Malaz	Island’s
unofficial	ruler.	A	pirate,	and	a	cold-blooded	killer.’
‘Who	were	these	first	hirelings,	Admiral?’
‘Myself,	Ameron,	Dujek,	a	woman	named	Hawl—my	wife.	I	had	been	First
Mate	to	a	corsair	that	worked	the	sea	lanes	around	the	Napan	Isles—which	had
just	been	annexed	by	Unta	and	were	providing	a	staging	point	for	the	Untan
king’s	planned	invasion	of	Kartool.	We’d	taken	a	beating	and	had	limped	into
Malaz	Harbour,	only	to	have	the	ship	and	its	crew	arrested	by	Mock,	who	was
negotiating	a	trade	of	prisoners	with	Unta.	Only	Ameron	and	Hawl	and	I
escaped.	A	lad	named	Dujek	discovered	where	we	were	holed	up	and	he
delivered	us	to	his	new	employers.	Kellanved	and	Dancer.’
‘Was	this	before	they	were	granted	entry	into	the	Deadhouse?’	Gamet
asked.
‘Aye,	but	only	just.	Our	residency	in	the	Deadhouse	rewarded	us	with—as
is	now	clearly	evident—certain	gifts.	Longevity,	immunity	to	most	diseases,
and…other	things.	The	Deadhouse	also	provided	us	with	an	unassailable	base
of	operations.	Dancer	later	bolstered	our	numbers	by	recruiting	among	the
refugee	Napans	who’d	fled	the	conquest:	Cartheron	Crust	and	his	brother,
Urko.	And	Surly—Laseen.	Three	more	men	were	to	follow	shortly	thereafter.
Toc	Elder,	Dassem	Ultor—who	was,	like	Kellanved,	of	Dal	Honese	blood—
and	a	renegade	High	Septarch	of	the	D’rek	Cult,	Tayschrenn.	And	finally,
Duiker.’	He	half	smiled	at	Tavore.	‘The	family.	With	which	Kellanved
conquered	Malaz	Island.	Swiftly	done,	with	minimal	losses…’
Minimal…‘Your	wife,’	Gamet	said.
‘Yes,	her.’	After	a	long	moment,	he	shrugged	and	continued,	‘To	answer
you,	Adjunct.	Unknown	to	the	rest	of	us,	the	Napans	among	us	were	far	more
than	simple	refugees.	Surly	was	of	the	royal	line.	Crust	and	Urko	had	been
captains	in	the	Napan	fleet,	a	fleet	that	would	have	likely	repelled	the	Untans	if


it	hadn’t	been	virtually	destroyed	by	a	sudden	storm.	As	it	turned	out,	theirs
was	a	singular	purpose—to	crush	the	Untan	hegemony—and	they	planned	on
using	Kellanved	to	achieve	that.	In	a	sense,	that	was	the	first	betrayal	within	the
family,	the	first	fissure.	Easily	healed,	it	seemed,	since	Kellanved	already
possessed	imperial	ambitions,	and	of	the	two	major	rivals	on	the	mainland,
Unta	was	by	far	the	fiercest.’
‘Admiral,’	Tavore	said,	‘I	see	where	this	leads.	Surly’s	assassination	of
Kellanved	and	Dancer	shattered	that	family	irrevocably,	but	that	is	precisely
where	my	understanding	falters.	Surly	had	taken	the	Napan	cause	to	its
penultimate	conclusion.	Yet	it	was	not	you,	not	Tayschrenn,	Duiker,	Dassem
Ultor	or	Toc	Elder	who…disappeared.	It	was…Napans.’
‘Barring	Ameron,’	Gamet	pointed	out.
The	admiral’s	lined	face	stretched	as	he	bared	his	teeth	in	a	humourless
grin.	‘Ameron	was	half-Napan.’
‘So	it	was	only	the	Napans	who	deserted	the	new	Empress?’	Gamet	stared
up	at	Nok,	now	as	confused	as	Tavore.	‘Yet	Surly	was	of	the	royal	Napan	line?’
Nok	said	nothing	for	a	long	time,	then	he	sighed.	‘Shame	is	a	fierce,
vigorous	poison.	To	now	serve	the	new	Empress…complicity	and	damnation.
Crust,	Urko	and	Ameron	were	not	party	to	the	betrayal…but	who	would
believe	them?	Who	could	not	help	but	see	them	as	party	to	the	murderous	plot?
Yet,	in	truth,’	his	eyes	met	Tavore’s,	‘Surly	had	included	none	of	us	in	her
scheme—she	could	not	afford	to.	She	had	the	Claw,	and	that	was	all	she
needed.’
‘And	where	were	the	Talons	in	all	this?’	Gamet	asked,	then	cursed	himself
—ah,	gods,	too	tired—
Nok’s	eyes	widened	for	the	first	time	that	night.	‘You’ve	a	sharp	memory,
Fist.’
Gamet	clamped	his	jaws	tight,	sensing	the	Adjunct’s	hard	stare	fixing	on
him.
The	admiral	continued,	‘I	am	afraid	I	have	no	answer	to	that.	I	was	not	in
Malaz	City	on	that	particular	night;	nor	have	I	made	enquiries	to	those	who
were.	The	Talons	essentially	vanished	with	Dancer ’s	death.	It	was	widely
believed	that	the	Claw	had	struck	them	down	in	concert	with	the	assassinations
of	Dancer	and	the	Emperor.’
The	Adjunct’s	tone	was	suddenly	curt.	‘Thank	you,	Admiral,	for	your
words	this	night.	I	will	keep	you	no	longer.’
The	man	bowed,	then	strode	from	the	room.
Gamet	waited	with	held	breath,	ready	for	her	fiercest	castigation.	Instead,
she	simply	sighed.	‘You	have	much	work	ahead	of	you,	Fist,	in	assembling


your	legion.	Best	retire	now.’
‘Adjunct,’	he	acknowledged,	pushing	himself	to	his	feet.	He	hesitated,	then
with	a	nod	strode	to	the	door.
‘Gamet.’
He	turned.	‘Yes?’
‘Where	is	T’amber?’
‘She	awaits	you	in	your	chambers,	Adjunct.’
‘Very	well.	Goodnight,	Fist.’
‘And	to	you,	Adjunct.’
	
Buckets	of	salt	water	had	been	sloshed	across	the	cobbled	centre	aisle	of	the
stables,	which	had	the	effect	of	damping	the	dust	and	sending	the	biting	flies
into	a	frenzy,	as	well	as	making	doubly	rank	the	stench	of	horse	piss.	Strings,
standing	just	within	the	doors,	could	already	feel	his	sinuses	stinging.	His
searching	gaze	found	four	figures	seated	on	bound	rolls	of	straw	near	the	far
end.	Scowling,	the	Bridgeburner	shifted	the	weight	of	the	pack	on	his	shoulder,
then	headed	over.
‘Who	was	the	bright	spark	missing	the	old	smells	of	home?’	he	drawled	as
he	approached.
The	half-Seti	warrior	named	Koryk	grunted,	then	said,	‘That	would	be
Lieutenant	Ranal,	who	then	had	a	quick	excuse	to	leave	us	for	a	time.’	He’d
found	a	flap	of	hide	from	somewhere	and	was	cutting	long	strands	from	it	with
a	thin-bladed	pig-sticker.	Strings	had	seen	his	type	before,	obsessed	with	tying
things	down,	or	worse,	tying	things	to	their	bodies.	Not	just	fetishes,	but	loot,
extra	equipment,	tufts	of	grass	or	leafy	branches	depending	on	the	camouflage
being	sought.	In	this	case,	Strings	half	expected	to	see	twists	of	straw	sprouting
from	the	man.
For	centuries	the	Seti	had	fought	a	protracted	war	with	the	city-states	of
Quon	and	Li	Heng,	defending	the	barely	inhabitable	lands	that	had	been	their
traditional	home.	Hopelessly	outnumbered	and	perpetually	on	the	run,	they	had
learned	the	art	of	hiding	the	hard	way.	But	the	Seti	lands	had	been	pacified	for
sixty	years	now;	almost	three	generations	had	lived	in	that	ambivalent,
ambiguous	border	that	was	the	edge	of	civilization.	The	various	tribes	had
dissolved	into	a	single,	murky	nation,	with	mixed-bloods	coming	to	dominate
the	population.	What	had	befallen	them	had	been	the	impetus,	in	fact,	for
Coltaine’s	rebellion	and	the	Wickan	Wars—for	Coltaine	had	clearly	seen	that	a
similar	fate	awaited	his	own	people.
It	was	not,	Strings	had	come	to	believe,	a	question	of	right	and	wrong.


Some	cultures	were	inward-looking.	Others	were	aggressive.	The	former	were
rarely	capable	of	mustering	a	defence	against	the	latter,	not	without
metamorphosing	into	some	other	thing,	a	thing	twisted	by	the	exigencies	of
desperation	and	violence.	The	original	Seti	had	not	even	ridden	horses.	Yet
now	they	were	known	as	horse	warriors,	a	taller,	darker-skinned	and	more
morose	kind	of	Wickan.
Strings	knew	little	of	Koryk’s	personal	history,	but	he	felt	he	could	guess.
Half-bloods	did	not	lead	pleasant	lives.	That	Koryk	had	chosen	to	emulate	the
old	Seti	ways,	whilst	joining	the	Malazan	army	as	a	marine	rather	than	a	horse
warrior,	spoke	tomes	of	the	clash	in	the	man’s	scarred	soul.
Setting	down	his	pack,	Strings	stood	before	the	four	recruits.	‘As	much	as	I
hate	to	confess	it,	I	am	now	your	sergeant.	Officially,	you’re	4th	Squad,	one	of
three	squads	under	Lieutenant	Ranal’s	command.	The	5th	and	6th	squads	are
supposedly	on	their	way	over	from	the	tent	city	west	of	Aren.	We’re	all	in	the
9th	Company,	which	consists	of	three	squads	of	heavy	infantry,	three	of
marines,	and	eighteen	squads	of	medium	infantry.	Our	commander	is	a	man
named	Captain	Keneb—and	no,	I’ve	not	met	him	and	know	nothing	of	him.
Nine	companies	in	all,	making	up	the	8th	Legion—us.	The	8th	is	under	the
command	of	Fist	Gamet,	who	I	gather	is	a	veteran	who’d	retired	to	the
Adjunct’s	household	before	she	became	the	Adjunct.’	He	paused,	grimacing	at
the	slightly	glazed	faces	before	him.	‘But	never	mind	all	that.	You’re	in	the	4th
Squad.	We’ve	got	one	more	coming,	but	even	with	that	one	we’re	undermanned
as	a	squad,	but	so	are	all	the	others	and	before	you	ask,	I	ain’t	privy	to	the
reasons	for	that.	Now,	any	questions	yet?’
Three	men	and	one	young	woman	sat	in	silence,	staring	up	at	him.
Strings	sighed,	and	pointed	to	the	nondescript	soldier	sitting	to	Koryk’s
left.	‘What’s	your	name?’	he	asked.
A	bewildered	look,	then,	‘My	real	name,	Sergeant,	or	the	one	the	drill
sergeant	in	Malaz	City	gave	me?’
By	the	man’s	accent	and	his	pale,	stolid	features,	Strings	knew	him	as	being
from	Li	Heng.	That	being	the	case,	his	real	name	was	probably	a	mouthful:
nine,	ten	or	even	fifteen	names	all	strung	together.	‘Your	new	one,	soldier.’
‘Tarr.’
Koryk	spoke	up.	‘If	you’d	seen	him	on	the	training	ground,	you’d
understand.	Once	he’s	planted	his	feet	behind	that	shield	of	his,	you	could	hit
him	with	a	battering	ram	and	he	won’t	budge.’
Strings	studied	Tarr ’s	placid,	pallid	eyes.	‘All	right.	You’re	now	Corporal
Tarr—’
The	woman,	who’d	been	chewing	on	a	straw,	suddenly	choked.	Coughing,


spitting	out	pieces	of	the	straw,	she	glared	up	at	Strings	with	disbelief.	‘What?
Him?	He	never	says	nothing,	never	does	nothing	unless	he’s	told,	never—’
‘Glad	to	hear	all	that,’	Strings	cut	in	laconically.	‘The	perfect	corporal,
especially	that	bit	about	not	talking.’
The	woman’s	expression	tightened,	then	unveiled	a	small	sneer	as	she
looked	away	in	feigned	disinterest.
‘And	what	is	your	name,	soldier?’	Strings	asked	her.
‘My	real	name—’
‘I	don’t	care	what	you	used	to	be	called.	None	of	you.	Most	of	us	get	new
ones	and	that’s	just	the	way	it	is.’
‘I	didn’t,’	Koryk	growled.
Ignoring	him,	Strings	continued,	‘Your	name,	lass?’
Sour	contempt	at	the	word	lass.
‘Drill	sergeant	named	her	Smiles,’	Koryk	said.
‘Smiles?’
‘Aye.	She	never	does.’
Eyes	narrowing,	Strings	swung	to	the	last	soldier,	a	rather	plain	young
man	wearing	leathers	but	no	weapon.	‘And	yours?’
‘Bottle.’
‘Who	was	your	drill	sergeant?’	he	demanded	to	the	four	recruits.
Koryk	leaned	back	as	he	replied,	‘Braven	Tooth—’
‘Braven	Tooth!	That	bastard’s	still	alive?’
‘It	was	hard	to	tell	at	times,’	Smiles	muttered.
‘Until	his	temper	snapped,’	Koryk	added.	‘Just	ask	Corporal	Tarr	there.
Braven	Tooth	spent	near	two	bells	pounding	on	him	with	a	mace.	Couldn’t	get
past	the	shield.’
Strings	glared	at	his	new	corporal.	‘Where’d	you	learn	that	skill?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Don’t	know.	Don’t	like	getting	hit.’
‘Well,	do	you	ever	counter-attack?’
Tarr	frowned.	‘Sure.	When	they’re	tired.’
Strings	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	Braven	Tooth—he	was
dumbfounded.	The	bastard	was	grizzled	back	when…when	the	whole	naming
thing	began.	It	had	been	Braven	who’d	started	it.	Braven	who’d	named	most	of
the	Bridgeburners.	Whiskeyjack.	Trotts,	Mallet,	Hedge,	Blend,	Picker,	Toes…
Fiddler	himself	had	avoided	a	new	name	through	his	basic	training;	it	had	been
Whiskeyjack	who’d	named	him,	on	that	first	ride	through	Raraku.	He	shook
his	head,	glanced	sidelong	at	Tarr.	‘You	should	be	a	heavy	infantryman,
Corporal,	with	a	talent	like	that.	The	marines	are	supposed	to	be	fast,	nimble—
avoiding	the	toe-to-toe	whenever	possible	or,	if	there’s	no	choice,	making	it


quick.’
‘I’m	good	with	a	crossbow,’	Tarr	said,	shrugging.
‘And	a	fast	loader,’	Koryk	added.	‘It	was	that	that	made	Braven	decide	to
make	him	a	marine.’
Smiles	spoke.	‘So	who	named	Braven	Tooth,	Sergeant?’
I	did,	after	the	bastard	left	one	of	his	in	my	shoulder	the	night	of	the	brawl.
The	brawl	we	all	later	denied	happening.	Gods,	so	many	years	ago,	now…‘I
have	no	idea,’	he	said.	He	shifted	his	attention	back	to	the	man	named	Bottle.
‘Where’s	your	sword,	soldier?’
‘I	don’t	use	one.’
‘Well,	what	do	you	use?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘This	and	that.’
‘Well,	Bottle,	someday	I’d	like	to	hear	how	you	got	through	basic	training
without	picking	up	a	weapon—no,	not	now.	Not	tomorrow	either,	not	even	next
week.	For	now,	tell	me	what	I	should	be	using	you	for.’
‘Scouting.	Quiet	work.’
‘As	in	sneaking	up	behind	someone.	What	do	you	do	then?	Tap	him	on	the
shoulder?	Never	mind.’	This	man	smells	like	a	mage	to	me,	only	he	doesn’t
want	to	advertise	it.	Fine,	be	that	way,	we’ll	twist	it	out	of	you	sooner	or	later.
‘I	do	the	same	kind	of	work,’	Smiles	said.	She	settled	a	forefinger	on	the
pommel	of	one	of	the	two	thin-bladed	knives	at	her	belt.	‘But	I	finish	things
with	these.’
‘So	there’s	only	two	soldiers	in	this	outfit	who	can	actually	fight	toe-totoe?’
‘You	said	one	more’s	coming,’	Koryk	pointed	out.
‘We	can	all	handle	crossbows,’	Smiles	added.	‘Except	for	Bottle.’
They	heard	voices	from	outside	the	commandeered	stables,	then	figures
appeared	in	the	doorway,	six	in	all,	burdened	with	equipment.	A	deep	voice
called,	‘You	put	the	latrine	trench	outside	the	barracks,	for	Hood’s	sake!
Bastards	don’t	teach	ya	anything	these	days?’
‘Compliments	of	Lieutenant	Ranal,’	Strings	said.
The	soldier	who’d	spoken	was	in	the	lead	as	the	squad	approached.	‘Right.
Met	him.’
Aye,	nothing	more	need	be	said	on	that.	‘I’m	Sergeant	Strings—we’re	the
4th.’
‘Well	hey,’	a	second	soldier	said,	grinning	through	his	bushy	red	beard,
‘someone	can	count	after	all.	These	marines	are	full	of	surprises.’
‘Fifth,’	the	first	soldier	said.	There	was	a	strange,	burnished	cast	to	the
man’s	skin,	making	Strings	doubt	his	initial	guess	that	he	was	Falari.	Then	he


noted	an	identical	sheen	to	the	red-bearded	soldier,	as	well	as	on	a	much
younger	man.	‘I’m	Gesler,’	the	first	soldier	added.	‘Temporarily	sergeant	of
this	next-to-useless	squad.’
The	red-bearded	man	dropped	his	pack	to	the	floor.	‘We	was	coastal
guards,	me	and	Gesler	and	Truth.	I’m	Stormy.	But	Coltaine	made	us	marines
—’
‘Not	Coltaine,’	Gesler	corrected.	‘Captain	Lull,	it	was,	Queen	harbour	his
poor	soul.’
Strings	simply	stared	at	the	two	men.
Stormy	scowled.	‘Got	a	problem	with	us?’	he	demanded,	face	darkening.
‘Adjutant	Stormy,’	Strings	muttered.	‘Captain	Gesler.	Hood’s	rattling	bones
—’
‘We	ain’t	none	of	those	things	any	more,’	Gesler	said.	‘Like	I	said,	I’m
now	a	sergeant,	and	Stormy’s	my	corporal.	And	the	rest	here…there’s	Truth,
Tavos	Pond,	Sands	and	Pella.	Truth’s	been	with	us	since	Hissar,	and	Pella	was	a
camp	guard	at	the	otataral	mines—only	a	handful	survived	the	uprising	there,
from	what	I	gather.’
‘Strings,	is	it?’	Stormy’s	small	eyes	had	narrowed	suspiciously.	He	nudged
his	sergeant.	‘Hey,	Gesler,	think	we	should	have	done	that?	Changed	our
names,	I	mean.	This	Strings	here	is	Old	Guard	as	sure	as	I’m	a	demon	in	my
dear	father ’s	eye.’
‘Let	the	bastard	keep	whatever	name	he	wants,’	Gesler	muttered.	‘All	right,
squad,	find	some	place	to	drop	your	stuff.	The	6th	should	be	showing	up	any
time,	and	the	lieutenant,	too.	Word	is,	we’re	all	being	mustered	out	to	face	the
Adjunct’s	lizard	eyes	in	a	day	or	two.’
The	soldier	Gesler	had	named	Tavos	Pond—a	tall,	dark,	moustached	man
who	was	probably	Korelri—spoke	up.	‘So	we	should	polish	our	equipment,
Sergeant?’
‘Polish	whatever	you	like,’	the	man	replied	disinterestedly,	‘just	not	in
public.	As	for	the	Adjunct,	if	she	can’t	handle	a	few	scuffed	up	soldiers	then
she	won’t	last	long.	It’s	a	dusty	world	out	there,	and	the	sooner	we	blend	in	the
better.’
Strings	sighed.	He	was	feeling	more	confident	already.	He	faced	his	own
soldiers.	‘Enough	sitting	on	that	straw.	Start	spreading	it	out	to	soak	up	this
horse	piss.’	He	faced	Gesler	again.	‘A	word	with	you	in	private?’
The	man	nodded.	‘Let’s	head	back	outside.’
Moments	later	the	two	men	stood	on	the	cobbled	courtyard	of	the	estate
that	had	once	housed	a	well-off	local	merchant	and	was	now	the	temporary
bivouac	for	Ranal’s	squads.	The	lieutenant	had	taken	the	house	proper	for


himself,	leaving	Strings	wondering	what	the	man	did	with	all	those	empty
rooms.
They	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then	Strings	grinned.	‘I	can	picture
Whiskeyjack’s	jaw	dropping—the	day	I	tell	him	you	was	my	fellow	sergeant	in
the	new	8th	Legion.’
Gesler	scowled.	‘Whiskeyjack.	He	was	busted	down	to	sergeant	before	I
was,	the	bastard.	Mind	you,	I	then	made	corporal,	so	I	beat	him	after	all.’
‘Except	now	you’re	a	sergeant	again.	While	Whiskeyjack’s	an	outlaw.	Try
beating	that.’
‘I	just	might,’	Gesler	muttered.
‘Got	concerns	about	the	Adjunct?’	Strings	quietly	asked.	The	courtyard
was	empty,	but	even	so…
‘Met	her,	you	know.	Oh,	she’s	as	cold	as	Hood’s	forked	tongue.	She
impounded	my	ship.’
‘You	had	a	ship?’
‘By	rights	of	salvage,	aye.	I	was	the	one	who	brought	Coltaine’s	wounded
to	Aren.	And	that’s	the	thanks	I	get.’
‘You	could	always	punch	her	in	the	face.	That’s	what	you	usually	end	up
doing	to	your	superiors,	sooner	or	later.’
‘I	could	at	that.	I’d	have	to	get	past	Gamet,	of	course.	The	point	I	was
making	is	this:	she’s	never	commanded	anything	more	than	a	damned	noble
household,	and	here	she’s	been	handed	three	legions	and	told	to	reconquer	an
entire	subcontinent.’	He	glanced	sidelong	at	Strings.	‘There	wasn’t	many	Falari
made	it	into	the	Bridgeburners.	Bad	timing,	I	think,	but	there	was	one.’
‘Aye,	and	I’m	him.’
After	a	moment,	Gesler	grinned	and	held	out	his	hand.	‘Strings.	Fiddler.
Sure.’
They	clasped	wrists.	To	Strings,	the	other	man’s	hand	and	arm	felt	like
solid	stone.
‘There’s	an	inn	down	the	street,’	Gesler	continued.	‘We	need	to	swap
stories,	and	I	guarantee	you,	mine’s	got	yours	beat	by	far.’
‘Oh,	Gesler,’	Strings	sighed,	‘I	think	you’re	in	for	a	surprise.’


Chapter	Six

We	came	within	sight	of	the	island,	close	enough	to	gaze	into	the
depths	through	the	ancient	cedars	and	firs.	And	it	seemed	there	was
motion	within	that	gloom,	as	if	the	shadows	of	long	dead	and	long
fallen	trees	still	remained,	swaying	and	shifting	on	ghostly
winds…
QUON	SEA	CHARTING	EXPEDITION	OF	1127	BURN’S	SLEEP,	DRIFT	AVALII
HEDORANAS
The	journey	home	had	been	enough,	if	only	to	return	one	last	time	to	the	place
of	beginnings,	to	crumbled	reminiscences	amidst	sea-thrust	coral	sands	above
the	tide	line,	the	handful	of	abandoned	shacks	battered	by	countless	storms	into
withered	skeletons	of	wood.	Nets	lay	buried	in	glistening	drifts	blinding	white
in	the	harsh	sunlight.	And	the	track	that	had	led	down	from	the	road,
overgrown	now	with	wind-twisted	grasses…no	place	from	the	past	survived
unchanged,	and	here,	in	this	small	fisher	village	on	the	coast	of	Itko	Kan,	Hood
had	walked	with	thorough	and	absolute	deliberation,	leaving	not	a	single	soul
in	his	wake.
Barring	the	one	man	who	had	now	returned.	And	the	daughter	of	that	man,
who	had	once	been	possessed	by	a	god.
And	in	the	leaning	shack	that	had	once	housed	them	both—its	frond-woven
roof	long	since	stripped	away—with	the	broad,	shallow-draught	fisherboat
close	by	now	showing	but	a	prow	and	a	stern,	the	rest	buried	beneath	the	coral
sand,	the	father	had	laid	himself	down	and	slept.
Crokus	had	awakened	to	soft	weeping.	Sitting	up,	he	had	seen	Apsalar
kneeling	beside	the	still	form	of	her	father.	There	were	plenty	of	footprints	on
the	floor	of	the	shack	from	the	previous	evening’s	random	explorations,	but
Crokus	noted	one	set	in	particular,	prints	large	and	far	apart	yet	far	too	lightly
pressed	into	the	damp	sand.	A	silent	arrival	in	the	night	just	past,	crossing	the
single	chamber	to	stand	square-footed	beside	Rellock.	Where	it	had	gone	after
that	left	no	markings	in	the	sand.


A	shiver	rippled	through	the	Daru.	It	was	one	thing	for	an	old	man	to	die	in
his	sleep,	but	it	was	another	for	Hood	himself—or	one	of	his	minions—to
physically	arrive	to	collect	the	man’s	soul.
Apsalar ’s	grief	was	quiet,	barely	heard	above	the	hiss	of	waves	on	the
beach,	the	faint	whistle	of	the	wind	through	the	warped	slats	in	the	shack’s
walls.	She	knelt	with	bowed	head,	face	hidden	beneath	her	long	black	hair	that
hung	so	appropriately	like	a	shawl.	Her	hands	were	closed	around	her	father ’s
right	hand.
Crokus	made	no	move	towards	her.	In	the	months	of	their	travelling
together,	he	had	come,	perversely,	to	know	her	less	and	less.	Her	soul’s	depths
had	become	unfathomable,	and	whatever	lay	at	its	heart	was	otherworldly
and…not	quite	human.
The	god	that	had	possessed	her—Cotillion,	the	Rope,	Patron	of	Assassins
within	the	House	of	Shadow—had	been	a	mortal	man,	once,	the	one	known	as
Dancer	who	had	stood	at	the	Emperor ’s	side,	who	had	purportedly	shared
Kellanved’s	fate	at	Laseen’s	hands.	Of	course,	neither	had	died	in	truth.	Instead,
they	had	ascended.	Crokus	had	no	idea	how	such	a	thing	could	come	to	be.
Ascendancy	was	but	one	of	the	countless	mysteries	of	the	world,	a	world	where
uncertainty	ruled	all—god	and	mortal	alike—and	its	rules	were	impenetrable.
But,	it	seemed	to	him,	to	ascend	was	also	to	surrender.	Embracing	what	to	all
intents	and	purposes	could	be	called	immortality,	was,	he	had	begun	to	believe,
presaged	by	a	turning	away.	Was	it	not	a	mortal’s	fate—fate,	he	knew,	was	the
wrong	word,	but	he	could	think	of	no	other—was	it	not	a	mortal’s	fate,	then,	to
embrace	life	itself,	as	one	would	a	lover?	Life,	with	all	its	fraught,	momentary
fragility.
And	could	life	not	be	called	a	mortal’s	first	lover?	A	lover	whose	embrace
was	then	rejected	in	that	fiery	crucible	of	ascendancy?
Crokus	wondered	how	far	she	had	gone	down	that	path—for	it	was	a	path
she	was	surely	on,	this	beautiful	woman	no	older	than	him,	who	moved	in
appalling	silence,	with	a	killer ’s	terrible	grace,	this	temptress	of	death.
The	more	remote	she	grew,	the	more	Crokus	felt	himself	drawn	forward,
to	that	edge	within	her.	The	lure	to	plunge	into	that	darkness	was	at	times
overwhelming,	could,	at	a	moment’s	thought,	turn	frantic	the	beat	of	his	heart
and	fierce	the	fire	of	the	blood	in	his	veins.	What	made	the	silent	invitation	so
terrifying	to	him	was	the	seeming	indifference	with	which	she	offered	it	to
him.
As	if	the	attraction	itself	was…self-evident.	Not	worth	even	acknowledging.
Did	Apsalar	want	him	to	walk	at	her	side	on	this	path	to	ascendancy—if	that
was	what	it	was?	Was	it	Crokus	she	wanted,	or	simply…somebody,	anybody?


The	truth	was	this:	he	had	grown	afraid	to	look	into	her	eyes.
He	rose	from	his	bedroll	and	quietly	made	his	way	outside.	There	were
fisherboats	out	on	the	shoals,	white	sails	taut	like	enormous	shark	fins	plying
the	sea	beyond	the	breakers.	The	Hounds	had	once	torn	through	this	area	of	the
coast,	leaving	naught	but	corpses,	but	people	had	returned—there	if	not	here.
Or	perhaps	they	had	been	returned,	forcibly.	The	land	itself	had	no	difficulty
absorbing	spilled	blood;	its	thirst	was	indiscriminate,	true	to	the	nature	of	land
everywhere.
Crokus	crouched	down	and	collected	a	handful	of	white	sand.	He	studied
the	coral	pebbles	as	they	slipped	down	between	his	fingers.	The	land	does	its
own	dying,	after	all.	And	yet,	these	are	truths	we	would	escape,	should	we
proceed	down	this	path.	I	wonder,	does	fear	of	dying	lie	at	the	root	of
ascendancy?
If	so,	then	he	would	never	make	it,	for,	somewhere	in	all	that	had	occurred,
all	that	he	had	survived	in	coming	to	this	place,	Crokus	had	lost	that	fear.
He	sat	down,	resting	his	back	against	the	trunk	of	a	massive	cedar	that	had
been	thrown	up	onto	this	beach—roots	and	all—and	drew	out	his	knives.	He
practised	a	sequenced	shift	of	grips,	each	hand	reversing	the	pattern	of	the
other,	and	stared	down	until	the	weapons—and	his	fingers—became	little	more
than	blurs	of	motion.	Then	he	lifted	his	head	and	studied	the	sea,	its	rolling
breakers	in	the	distance,	the	triangular	sails	skidding	along	beyond	the	white
line	of	foam.	He	made	the	sequence	in	his	right	hand	random.	Then	did	the
same	for	his	left.
Thirty	paces	down	the	beach	waited	their	single-masted	runner,	its	magenta
sail	reefed,	its	hull’s	blue,	gold	and	red	paint	faint	stains	in	the	sunlight.	A
Korelri	craft,	paid	in	debt	to	a	local	bookmaker	in	Kan—for	an	alley	in	Kan
had	been	the	place	where	Shadowthrone	had	sent	them,	not	to	the	road	above
the	village	as	he	had	promised.
The	bookmaker	had	paid	the	debt	in	turn	to	Apsalar	and	Crokus	for	a
single	night’s	work	that	had	proved,	for	Crokus,	brutally	horrifying.	It	was	one
thing	to	practise	passes	with	the	blades,	to	master	the	deadly	dance	against
ghosts	of	the	imagination,	but	he	had	killed	two	men	that	night.	Granted,	they
were	murderers,	in	the	employ	of	a	man	who	was	making	a	career	out	of
extortion	and	terror.	Apsalar	had	shown	no	compunction	in	cutting	his	throat,
no	qualms	at	the	spray	of	blood	that	spotted	her	gloved	hands	and	forearms.
There	had	been	a	local	with	them,	to	witness	the	veracity	of	the	night’s
work.	In	the	aftermath,	as	he	stood	in	the	doorway	and	stared	down	at	the	three
corpses,	he’d	lifted	his	head	and	met	Crokus’s	eyes.	Whatever	he	saw	in	them
had	drained	the	blood	from	the	man’s	face.


By	morning	Crokus	had	acquired	a	new	name.	Cutter.
At	first	he	had	rejected	it.	The	local	had	misread	all	that	had	been	revealed
behind	the	Daru’s	eyes	that	night.	Nothing	fierce.	The	barrier	of	shock,	fast
crumbling	to	self-condemnation.	Murdering	killers	was	still	murder,	the	act
like	the	closing	of	shackles	between	them	all,	joining	a	line	of	infinite	length,
one	killer	to	the	next,	a	procession	from	which	there	was	no	escape.	His	mind
had	recoiled	from	the	name,	recoiled	from	all	that	it	signified.
But	that	had	proved	a	short-lived	rectitude.	The	two	murderers	had	died
indeed—at	the	hands	of	the	man	named	Cutter.	Not	Crokus,	not	the	Daru	youth,
the	cut-purse—who	had	vanished.	Vanished,	probably	never	to	be	seen	again.
The	delusion	held	a	certain	comfort,	as	cavernous	at	its	core	as	Apsalar ’s
embrace	at	night,	but	welcome	all	the	same.
Cutter	would	walk	her	path.
Aye,	the	Emperor	had	Dancer,	yes?	A	companion,	for	a	companion	was	what
was	needed.	Is	needed.	Now,	she	has	Cutter.	Cutter	of	the	Knives,	who	dances	in
his	chains	as	if	they	were	weightless	threads.	Cutter,	who,	unlike	poor	Crokus,
knows	his	place,	knows	his	singular	task—to	guard	her	back,	to	match	her	cold
precision	in	the	deadly	arts.
And	therein	resided	the	final	truth.	Anyone	could	become	a	killer.	Anyone
at	all.
She	stepped	out	of	the	shack,	wan	but	dry-eyed.
He	sheathed	his	knives	in	a	single,	fluid	motion,	rose	to	his	feet	and	faced
her.
‘Yes,’	she	said.	‘What	now?’
	
Broken	pillars	of	mortared	stone	jutted	from	the	undulating	vista.	Among	the
half-dozen	or	so	within	sight,	only	two	rose	as	tall	as	a	man,	and	none	stood
straight.	The	plain’s	strange,	colourless	grasses	gathered	in	tufts	around	their
bases,	snarled	and	oily	in	the	grey,	grainy	air.
As	Kalam	rode	into	their	midst,	the	muted	thunder	of	his	horse’s	hoofs
seemed	to	bounce	back	across	his	path,	the	echoes	multiplying	until	he	felt	as	if
he	was	riding	at	the	head	of	a	mounted	army.	He	slowed	his	charger ’s	canter,
finally	reining	in	beside	one	of	the	battered	columns.
These	silent	sentinels	felt	like	an	intrusion	on	the	solitude	he	had	been
seeking.	He	leaned	in	his	saddle	to	study	the	one	nearest	him.	It	looked	old,	old
in	the	way	of	so	many	things	within	the	Warren	of	Shadow,	forlorn	with	an	air
of	abandonment,	defying	any	chance	he	might	have	of	discerning	its	function.
There	were	no	intervening	ruins,	no	foundation	walls,	no	cellar	pits	or	other


angular	pocks	in	the	ground.	Each	pillar	stood	alone,	unaligned.
His	examination	settled	on	a	rusted	ring	set	into	the	stone	near	the	base,
from	which	depended	a	chain	of	seized	links	vanishing	into	the	tufts	of	grass.
After	a	moment,	Kalam	dismounted.	He	crouched	down,	reaching	out	to	close
his	hand	on	the	chain.	A	slight	upward	tug.	The	desiccated	hand	and	forearm	of
some	hapless	creature	lifted	from	the	grasses.	Dagger-length	talons,	four
fingers	and	two	thumbs.
The	rest	of	the	prisoner	had	succumbed	to	the	roots,	was	half	buried
beneath	dun-coloured,	sandy	soil.	Pallid	yellow	hair	was	entwined	among	the
grass	blades.
The	hand	suddenly	twitched.
Disgusted,	Kalam	released	the	chain.	The	arm	dropped	back	to	the	ground.
A	faint,	subterranean	keening	sound	rose	from	the	base	of	the	pillar.
Straightening,	the	assassin	returned	to	his	horse.
Pillars,	columns,	tree	stumps,	platforms,	staircases	leading	nowhere,	and
for	every	dozen	there	was	one	among	them	holding	a	prisoner.	None	of	whom
seemed	capable	of	dying.	Not	entirely.	Oh,	their	minds	had	died—most	of	them
—long	ago.	Raving	in	tongues,	murmuring	senseless	incantations,	begging
forgiveness,	offering	bargains,	though	not	one	had	yet—within	Kalam’s
hearing—proclaimed	its	own	innocence.
As	if	mercy	could	be	an	issue	without	it.	He	nudged	his	horse	forward	once
more.	This	was	not	a	realm	to	his	liking.	Not	that	he’d	in	truth	had	much	choice
in	the	matter.	Bargaining	with	gods	was—for	the	mortal	involved—an	exercise
in	self-delusion.	Kalam	would	rather	leave	Quick	Ben	to	play	games	with	the
rulers	of	this	warren—the	wizard	had	the	advantage	of	enjoying	the	challenge
—no,	it	was	more	than	that.	Quick	Ben	had	left	so	many	knives	in	so	many
backs—none	of	them	fatal	but	none	the	less	sure	to	sting	when	tugged,	and	it
was	that	tugging	the	wizard	loved	so	much.
The	assassin	wondered	where	his	old	friend	was	right	now.	There’d	been
trouble—nothing	new	there—and,	since	then,	naught	but	silence.	And	then	there
was	Fiddler.	The	fool	had	re-enlisted,	for	Hood’s	sake!
Well,	at	least	they’re	doing	something.	Not	Kalam,	oh	no,	not	Kalam.
Thirteen	hundred	children,	resurrected	on	a	whim.	Shining	eyes	following	his
every	move,	mapping	his	every	step,	memorizing	his	every	gesture—what
could	he	teach	them?	The	art	of	mayhem?	As	if	children	needed	help	in	that.
A	ridge	lay	ahead.	He	reached	the	base	and	brought	his	horse	into	a	gentle
canter	up	the	slope.
Besides,	Minala	seemed	to	have	it	all	under	control.	A	natural	born	tyrant,
she	was,	both	in	public	and	in	private	amidst	the	bedrolls	in	the	half-ruined


hovel	they	shared.	And	oddly	enough,	he’d	found	he	was	not	averse	to	tyranny.
In	principle,	that	is.	Things	had	a	way	of	actually	working	when	someone
capable	and	implacable	took	charge.	And	he’d	had	enough	experience	taking
orders	to	not	chafe	at	her	position	of	command.	Between	her	and	the	aptorian
demoness,	a	certain	measure	of	control	was	being	maintained,	a	host	of	life
skills	were	being	inculcated…stealth,	tracking,	the	laying	of	ambushes,	the
setting	of	traps	for	game	both	two-and	four-legged,	riding,	scaling	walls,
freezing	in	place,	knife	throwing	and	countless	other	weapon	skills,	the
weapons	themselves	donated	by	the	warren’s	mad	rulers—half	of	them	cursed
or	haunted	or	fashioned	for	entirely	unhuman	hands.	The	children	took	to	such
training	with	frightening	zeal,	and	the	gleam	of	pride	in	Minala’s	eyes	left	the
assassin…chilled.
An	army	in	the	making	for	Shadowthrone.	An	alarming	prospect,	to	say
the	least.
He	reached	the	ridge.	And	suddenly	reined	in.
An	enormous	stone	gate	surmounted	the	hill	opposite,	twin	pillars	spanned
by	an	arch.	Within	it,	a	swirling	grey	wall.	On	this	side	of	the	gate,	the	grassy
summit	flowed	with	countless,	sourceless	shadows,	as	if	they	were	somehow
tumbling	out	from	the	portal,	only	to	swarm	like	lost	wraiths	around	its
threshold.
‘Careful,’	a	voice	murmured	beside	Kalam.
He	turned	to	see	a	tall,	hooded	and	cloaked	figure	standing	a	few	paces
away,	flanked	by	two	Hounds.	Cotillion,	and	his	favoured	two,	Rood	and	Blind.
The	beasts	sat	on	their	scarred	haunches,	lurid	eyes—seeing	and	unseeing—on
the	portal.
‘Why	should	I	be	careful?’	the	assassin	asked.
‘Oh,	the	shadows	at	the	gate.	They’ve	lost	their	masters…but	anyone	will
do.’
‘So	this	gate	is	sealed?’
The	hooded	head	slowly	turned.	‘Dear	Kalam,	is	this	a	flight	from	our
realm?	How…ignoble.’
‘I	said	nothing	to	suggest—’
‘Then	why	does	your	shadow	stretch	so	yearningly	forward?’
Kalam	glanced	down	at	it,	then	scowled.	‘How	should	I	know?	Perhaps	it
considers	its	chances	better	in	yonder	mob.’
‘Chances?’
‘For	excitement.’
‘Ah.	Chafing,	are	you?	I	would	never	have	guessed.’
‘Liar,’	Kalam	said.	‘Minala	has	banished	me.	But	you	already	know	that,


which	is	why	you’ve	come	to	find	me.’
‘I	am	the	Patron	of	Assassins,’	Cotillion	said.	‘I	do	not	mediate	marital
disputes.’
‘Depends	on	how	fierce	they	get,	doesn’t	it?’
‘Are	you	ready	to	kill	each	other,	then?’
‘No.	I	was	only	making	a	point.’
‘Which	was?’
‘What	are	you	doing	here,	Cotillion?’
The	god	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	‘I	have	often	wondered,’	he	finally
said,	‘why	it	is	that	you,	an	assassin,	offer	no	obeisance	to	your	patron.’
Kalam’s	brows	rose.	‘Since	when	have	you	expected	it?	Hood	take	us,
Cotillion,	if	it	was	fanatical	worshippers	you	hungered	for,	you	should	never
have	looked	to	assassins.	By	our	very	natures,	we’re	antithetical	to	the	notion
of	subservience—as	if	you	weren’t	already	aware	of	that.’	His	voice	trailed	off,
and	he	turned	to	study	the	shadow-wreathed	figure	standing	beside	him.	‘Mind
you,	you	stood	at	Kellanved’s	side,	through	to	the	end.	Dancer,	it	seems,	knew
both	loyalty	and	servitude…’
‘Servitude?’	There	was	a	hint	of	a	smile	in	the	tone.
‘Mere	expedience?	That	seems	difficult	to	countenance,	given	all	that	the
two	of	you	went	through.	Out	with	it,	Cotillion,	what	is	it	you’re	asking?’
‘Was	I	asking	something?’
‘You	want	me	to…serve	you,	as	would	a	minion	his	god.	Some	probably
disreputable	mission.	You	need	me	for	something,	only	you’ve	never	learned
how	to	ask.’
Rood	slowly	rose	from	his	haunches,	then	stretched,	long	and	languorous.
The	massive	head	then	swung	round,	lambent	eyes	settling	on	Kalam.
‘The	Hounds	are	troubled,’	Cotillion	murmured.
‘I	can	tell,’	the	assassin	replied	drily.
‘I	have	certain	tasks	before	me,’	the	god	continued,	‘that	will	consume
much	of	my	time	for	the	near	future.	Whilst	at	the	same	time,	certain	other…
activities…must	be	undertaken.	It	is	one	thing	to	find	a	loyal	subject,	but
another	entirely	to	find	one	conveniently	positioned,	as	it	were,	to	be	of
practical	use—’
Kalam	barked	a	laugh.	‘You	went	fishing	for	faithful	servants	and	found
your	subjects	wanting.’
‘We	could	argue	interpretation	all	day,’	Cotillion	drawled.
There	was	a	detectable	irony	in	the	god’s	voice	that	pleased	Kalam.	In	spite
of	his	wariness,	he	admitted	that	he	actually	liked	Cotillion.	Uncle	Cotillion,	as
the	child	Panek	called	him.	Certainly,	between	the	Patron	of	Assassins	and


Shadowthrone,	only	the	former	seemed	to	possess	any	shred	of	selfexamination—and	thus	was	actually	capable	of	being	humbled.	Even	if	the
likelihood	was	in	truth	remote.	‘Agreed,’	Kalam	replied.	‘Very	well,	Minala
has	no	interest	in	seeing	my	pretty	face	for	a	time.	Leaving	me	free,	more	or
less—’
‘And	without	a	roof	over	your	head.’
‘Without	a	roof	over	my	head,	aye.	Fortunately	it	never	seems	to	rain	in
your	realm.’
‘Ah,’	Cotillion	murmured,	‘my	realm.’
Kalam	studied	Rood.	The	beast	had	not	relinquished	its	steady	stare.	The
assassin	was	growing	nervous	under	that	unwavering	attention.	‘Is	your	claim
—yours	and	Shadowthrone’s—being	contested?’
‘Difficult	to	answer,’	Cotillion	murmured.	‘There	have	been…trembles.
Agitation…’
‘As	you	said,	the	Hounds	are	troubled.’
‘They	are	indeed.’
‘You	wish	to	know	more	of	your	potential	enemy.’
‘We	would.’
Kalam	studied	the	gate,	the	swirling	shadows	at	its	threshold.	‘Where
would	you	have	me	begin?’
‘A	confluence	to	your	own	desires,	I	suspect.’
The	assassin	glanced	at	the	god,	then	slowly	nodded.
	
In	the	half-light	of	dusk,	the	seas	grew	calm,	gulls	wheeling	in	from	the	shoals
to	settle	on	the	beach.	Cutter	had	built	a	fire	from	driftwood,	more	from	the
need	to	be	doing	something	than	seeking	warmth,	for	the	Kanese	coast	was
subtropical,	the	breeze	sighing	down	off	the	verge	faint	and	sultry.	The	Daru
had	collected	water	from	the	spring	near	the	trail	head	and	was	now	brewing
tea.	Overhead,	the	first	stars	of	night	flickered	into	life.
Apsalar ’s	question	earlier	that	afternoon	had	gone	unanswered.	Cutter	was
not	yet	ready	to	return	to	Darujhistan,	and	he	felt	nothing	of	the	calm	he’d
expected	to	follow	the	completion	of	their	task.	Rellock	and	Apsalar	had,
finally,	returned	to	their	home,	only	to	find	it	a	place	haunted	by	death,	a
haunting	that	had	slipped	its	fatal	flavour	into	the	old	man’s	soul,	adding	yet
one	more	ghost	to	this	forlorn	strand.	There	was,	now,	nothing	for	them	here.
Cutter ’s	own	experience	here	in	the	Malazan	Empire	was,	he	well	knew,
twisted	and	incomplete.	A	single	vicious	night	in	Malaz	City,	followed	by	three
tense	days	in	Kan	that	closed	with	yet	more	assassinations.	The	empire	was	a


foreign	place,	of	course,	and	one	could	expect	a	certain	degree	of	discord
between	it	and	what	he	was	used	to	in	Darujhistan,	but	if	anything	what	he	had
seen	of	daily	life	in	the	cities	suggested	a	stronger	sense	of	lawfulness,	of
order	and	calm.	Even	so,	it	was	the	smaller	details	that	jarred	his	sensibilities
the	most,	that	reinforced	the	fact	that	he	was	a	stranger.
Feeling	vulnerable	was	not	a	weakness	he	shared	with	Apsalar.	She	seemed
possessed	of	absolute	calm,	an	ease,	no	matter	where	she	was—the	confidence
of	the	god	who	once	possessed	her	had	left	something	of	a	permanent	imprint
on	her	soul.	Not	just	confidence.	He	thought	once	more	of	the	night	she	had
killed	the	man	in	Kan.	Deadly	skills,	and	the	icy	precision	necessary	when	using
them.	And,	he	recalled	with	a	shiver,	many	of	the	god’s	own	memories
remained	with	her,	reaching	back	to	when	the	god	had	been	a	mortal	man,	had
been	Dancer.	Among	those,	the	night	of	the	assassinations—when	the	woman
who	would	become	Empress	had	struck	down	the	Emperor…and	Dancer.
She	had	revealed	that	much,	at	least,	a	revelation	devoid	of	feeling,	of
sentiment,	delivered	as	casually	as	a	comment	about	the	weather.	Memories	of
biting	knives,	of	dust-covered	blood	rolling	like	pellets	across	a	floor…
He	removed	the	pot	from	the	coals,	threw	a	handful	of	herbs	into	the
steaming	water.
She	had	gone	for	a	walk,	westward	along	the	white	beach.	Even	as	dusk
settled,	he	had	lost	sight	of	her,	and	he	had	begun	to	wonder	if	she	was	ever
coming	back.
A	log	settled	suddenly,	flinging	sparks.	The	sea	had	grown	entirely	dark,
invisible;	he	could	not	even	hear	the	lap	of	the	waves	beyond	the	crackling	fire.
A	cooler	breath	rode	the	breeze.
Cutter	slowly	rose,	then	spun	round	to	face	inland	as	something	moved	in
the	gloom	beyond	the	fire’s	light.	‘Apsalar?’
There	was	no	reply.	A	faint	thumping	underfoot,	as	if	the	sands	trembled	to
the	passage	of	something	huge…huge	and	four-legged.
The	Daru	drew	out	his	knives,	stepping	away	from	the	flickering	light.
Ten	paces	away,	at	a	height	to	match	his	own,	he	saw	two	glowing	eyes,	set
wide,	gold	and	seemingly	depthless.	The	head	and	the	body	beneath	it	were
darker	stains	in	the	night,	hinting	at	a	mass	that	left	Cutter	cold.
‘Ah,’	a	voice	said	from	the	shadows	to	his	left,	‘the	Daru	lad.	Blind	has
found	you,	good.	Now,	where	is	your	companion?’
Cutter	slowly	sheathed	his	weapons.	‘That	damned	Hound	gave	me	a	start,’
he	muttered.	‘And	if	it’s	blind,	why	is	it	looking	straight	at	me?’
‘Well,	her	name	is	something	of	a	misnomer.	She	sees,	but	not	as	we	see.’
A	cloaked	figure	stepped	into	the	firelight.	‘Do	you	know	me?’


‘Cotillion,’	Cutter	replied.	‘Shadowthrone	is	much	shorter.’
‘Not	that	much,	though	perhaps	in	his	affectations	he	exaggerates	certain
traits.’
‘What	do	you	want?’
‘I	would	speak	with	Apsalar,	of	course.	There	is	the	smell	of	death	here…
recent,	that	is—’
‘Rellock.	Her	father.	In	his	sleep.’
‘Unfortunate.’	The	god’s	hooded	head	turned,	as	if	scanning	the	vicinity,
then	swung	back	to	face	Cutter.	‘Am	I	your	patron	now?’	he	asked.
He	wanted	to	answer	no.	He	wanted	to	back	away,	to	flee	the	question	and
all	his	answer	would	signify.	He	wanted	to	unleash	vitriol	at	the	suggestion.	‘I
believe	you	might	be	at	that,	Cotillion.’
‘I	am…pleased,	Crokus.’
‘I	am	now	named	Cutter.’
‘Far	less	subtle,	but	apt	enough,	I	suppose.	Even	so,	there	was	the	hint	of
deadly	charm	in	your	old	Daru	name.	Are	you	sure	you	will	not	reconsider?’
Cutter	shrugged,	then	said,	‘Crokus	had	no…patron	god.’
‘Of	course.	And	one	day,	a	man	will	arrive	in	Darujhistan.	With	a	Malazan
name,	and	no-one	will	know	him,	except	perhaps	by	reputation.	And	he	will
eventually	hear	tales	of	the	young	Crokus,	a	lad	so	instrumental	in	saving	the
city	on	the	night	of	the	Fete,	all	those	years	ago.	Innocent,	unsullied	Crokus.	So
be	it…Cutter.	I	see	you	have	a	boat.’
The	change	of	subject	startled	him	slightly,	then	he	nodded.	‘We	have.’
‘Sufficiently	provisioned?’
‘More	or	less.	Not	for	a	long	voyage,	though.’
‘No,	of	course	not.	Why	should	it	be?	May	I	see	your	knives?’
Cutter	unsheathed	them	and	passed	them	across	to	the	god,	pommels
forward.
‘Decent	blades,’	Cotillion	murmured.	‘Well	balanced.	Within	them	are	the
echoes	of	your	skill,	the	taste	of	blood.	Shall	I	bless	them	for	you,	Cutter?’
‘If	the	blessing	is	without	magic,’	the	Daru	replied.
‘You	desire	no	sorcerous	investment?’
‘No.’
‘Ah.	You	would	follow	Rallick	Nom’s	path.’
Cutter ’s	eyes	narrowed.	Oh,	yes,	he	would	recall	him.	When	he	saw	through
Sorry’s	eyes,	at	the	Phoenix	Inn,	perhaps.	Or	maybe	Rallick	acknowledged	his
patron…though	I	find	that	difficult	to	believe.	‘I	think	I	would	have	trouble
following	that	path,	Cotillion.	Rallick’s	abilities	are…were—’
‘Formidable,	yes.	I	do	not	think	you	need	use	the	past	tense	when	speaking


of	Rallick	Nom,	or	Vorcan	for	that	matter.	No,	I’ve	no	news…simply	a
suspicion.’	He	handed	the	knives	back.	‘You	underestimate	your	own	skills,
Cutter,	but	perhaps	that	is	for	the	best.’
‘I	don’t	know	where	Apsalar ’s	gone,’	Cutter	said.	‘I	don’t	know	if	she’s
coming	back.’
‘As	it	has	turned	out,	her	presence	has	proved	less	vital	than	expected.	I
have	a	task	for	you,	Cutter.	Are	you	amenable	to	providing	a	service	to	your
patron?’
‘Isn’t	that	expected?’
Cotillion	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	laughed	softly.	‘No,	I	shall	not
take	advantage	of	your…inexperience,	though	I	admit	to	some	temptation.
Shall	we	begin	things	on	a	proper	footing?	Reciprocity,	Cutter.	A	relationship
of	mutual	exchanges,	yes?’
‘Would	that	you	had	offered	the	same	to	Apsalar.’	Then	he	clamped	his	jaw
shut.
But	Cotillion	simply	sighed.	‘Would	that	I	had.	Consider	this	new	tact	the
consequence	of	difficult	lessons.’
‘You	said	reciprocity.	What	will	I	receive	in	return	for	providing	this
service?’
‘Well,	since	you’ll	not	accept	my	blessing	or	any	other	investment,	I	admit
to	being	at	something	of	a	loss.	Any	suggestions?’
‘I’d	like	some	questions	answered.’
‘Indeed.’
‘Yes.	Such	as,	why	did	you	and	Shadowthrone	scheme	to	destroy	Laseen
and	the	empire?	Was	it	just	a	desire	for	revenge?’
The	god	seemed	to	flinch	within	his	robes,	and	Cutter	felt	unseen	eyes
harden.	‘Oh	my,’	Cotillion	drawled,	‘you	force	me	to	reconsider	my	offer.’
‘I	would	know,’	the	Daru	pressed	on,	‘so	I	can	understand	what	you	did…
did	to	Apsalar.’
‘You	demand	that	your	patron	god	justify	his	actions?’
‘It	wasn’t	a	demand.	Just	a	question.’
Cotillion	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment.
The	fire	was	slowly	dying,	embers	pulsing	with	the	breeze.	Cutter	sensed
the	presence	of	a	second	Hound	somewhere	in	the	darkness	beyond,	moving
restlessly.
‘Necessities,’	the	god	said	quietly.	‘Games	are	played,	and	what	may
appear	precipitous	might	well	be	little	more	than	a	feint.	Or	perhaps	it	was	the
city	itself,	Darujhistan,	that	would	serve	our	purposes	better	if	it	remained	free,
independent.	There	are	layers	of	meaning	behind	every	gesture,	every	gambit.	I


will	not	explain	myself	any	further	than	that,	Cutter.’
‘Do—do	you	regret	what	you	did?’
‘You	are	indeed	fearless,	aren’t	you?	Regret?	Yes.	Many,	many	regrets.
One	day,	perhaps,	you	will	see	for	yourself	that	regrets	are	as	nothing.	The
value	lies	in	how	they	are	answered.’
Cutter	slowly	turned	and	stared	out	into	the	darkness	of	the	sea.	‘I	threw
Oponn’s	coin	into	the	lake,’	he	said.
‘And	do	you	now	regret	the	act?’
‘I’m	not	sure.	I	didn’t	like	their…attention.’
‘I	am	not	surprised,’	Cotillion	muttered.
‘I	have	one	more	request,’	Cutter	said,	facing	the	god	again.	‘This	task	you
shall	set	me	on—if	I	am	assailed	during	it,	can	I	call	upon	Blind?’
‘The	Hound?’	The	astonishment	was	clear	in	Cotillion’s	voice.
‘Aye,’	Cutter	replied,	his	gaze	now	on	the	huge	beast.	‘Her	attention…
comforts	me.’
‘That	makes	you	rarer	than	you	could	imagine,	mortal.	Very	well.	If	the
need	is	dire,	call	upon	her	and	she	will	come.’
Cutter	nodded.	‘Now,	what	would	you	have	me	do	on	your	behalf?’
	
The	sun	had	cleared	the	horizon	when	Apsalar	returned.	After	a	few	hours’
sleep,	Cutter	had	risen	to	bury	Rellock	above	the	tide	line.	He	was	checking	the
boat’s	hull	one	last	time	when	a	shadow	appeared	alongside	his	own.
‘You	had	visitors,’	she	said.
He	squinted	up	at	her,	studied	her	dark,	depthless	eyes.	‘Aye.’
‘And	do	you	now	have	an	answer	to	my	question?’
Cutter	frowned,	then	he	sighed	and	nodded.	‘I	do.	We’re	to	explore	an
island.’
‘An	island?	Is	it	far?’
‘Middling,	but	getting	farther	by	the	moment.’
‘Ah.	Of	course.’
Of	course.
Overhead,	gulls	cried	in	the	morning	air	on	their	way	out	to	sea.	Beyond
the	shoals,	their	white	specks	followed	the	wind,	angling	southwestward.
Cutter	set	his	shoulder	to	the	prow	and	pushed	the	craft	back	out	onto	the
water.	Then	he	clambered	aboard.	Apsalar	joined	him,	making	her	way	to	the
tiller.
What	now?	A	god	had	given	him	his	answer.


There	had	been	no	sunset	in	the	realm	the	Tiste	Edur	called	the	Nascent	for	five
months.	The	sky	was	grey,	the	light	strangely	hued	and	diffuse.	There	had	been
a	flood,	and	then	rains,	and	a	world	had	been	destroyed.
Even	in	the	wreckage,	however,	there	was	life.
A	score	of	broad-limbed	catfish	had	clambered	onto	the	mud-caked	wall,
none	less	than	two	man-lengths	from	blunt	head	to	limp	tail.	They	were	wellfed	creatures,	their	silvery-white	bellies	protruding	out	to	the	sides.	Their	skins
had	dried	and	fissures	were	visible	in	a	latticed	web	across	their	dark	backs.
The	glitter	of	their	small	black	eyes	was	muted	beneath	the	skin’s	crinkled
layer.
And	it	seemed	those	eyes	were	unaware	of	the	solitary	T’lan	Imass
standing	over	them.
Echoes	of	curiosity	still	clung	to	Onrack’s	tattered,	desiccated	soul.	Joints
creaking	beneath	the	knotted	ropes	of	ligaments,	he	crouched	beside	the
nearest	catfish.	He	did	not	think	the	creatures	were	dead.	Only	a	short	time	ago,
these	fish	had	possessed	no	true	limbs.	He	was	witness,	he	suspected,	to	a
metamorphosis.
After	a	moment,	he	slowly	straightened.	The	sorcery	that	had	sustained	the
wall	against	the	vast	weight	of	the	new	sea	still	held	along	this	section.	It	had
crumbled	in	others,	forming	wide	breaches	and	foaming	torrents	of	silt-laden
water	rushing	through	to	the	other	side.	A	shallow	sea	was	spreading	out
across	the	land	on	that	side.	There	might	come	a	time,	Onrack	suspected,	when
fragments	of	this	wall	were	this	realm’s	only	islands.
The	sea’s	torrential	arrival	had	caught	them	unawares,	scattering	them	in
its	tumbling	maelstrom.	Other	kin	had	survived,	the	T’lan	Imass	knew,	and
indeed	some	had	found	purchase	on	this	wall,	or	on	floating	detritus,	sufficient
to	regain	their	forms,	to	link	once	more	so	that	the	hunt	could	resume.
But	Kurald	Emurlahn,	fragmented	or	otherwise,	was	not	amenable	to	the
T’lan	Imass.	Without	a	Bonecaster	beside	him,	Onrack	could	not	extend	his
Tellann	powers,	could	not	reach	out	to	his	kin,	could	not	inform	them	that	he
had	survived.	For	most	of	his	kind,	that	alone	would	have	been	sufficient	cause
for…surrender.	The	roiling	waters	he	had	but	recently	crawled	from	offered
true	oblivion.	Dissolution	was	the	only	escape	possible	from	this	eternal	ritual,
and	even	among	the	Logros—Guardians	of	the	First	Throne	itself—Onrack
knew	of	kin	who	had	chosen	that	path.	Or	worse…
The	warrior ’s	contemplation	of	choosing	an	end	to	his	existence	was


momentary.	In	truth,	he	was	far	less	haunted	by	his	immortality	than	most	T’lan
Imass.
There	was	always	something	else	to	see,	after	all.
He	detected	movement	beneath	the	skin	of	the	nearest	catfish,	vague	hints
of	contraction,	of	emerging	awareness.	Onrack	drew	forth	his	two-handed,
curved	obsidian	sword.	Most	things	he	stumbled	upon	usually	had	to	be	killed.
Occasionally	in	self-defence,	but	often	simply	due	to	an	immediate	and
probably	mutual	loathing.	He	had	long	since	ceased	questioning	why	this
should	be	so.
From	his	massive	shoulders	hung	the	rotted	skin	of	an	enkar ’al,	pebbled
and	colourless.	It	was	a	relatively	recent	acquisition,	less	than	a	thousand	years
old.	Another	example	of	a	creature	that	had	hated	him	on	first	sight.	Though
perhaps	the	black	rippled	blade	swinging	at	its	head	had	tainted	its	response.
It	would	be	some	time,	Onrack	judged,	before	the	beast	crawled	out	from
its	skin.	He	lowered	his	weapon	and	stepped	past	it.	The	Nascent’s
extraordinary,	continent-spanning	wall	was	a	curiosity	in	itself.	After	a
moment,	the	warrior	decided	to	walk	its	length.	Or	at	least,	until	his	passage
was	blocked	by	a	breach.
He	began	walking,	hide-wrapped	feet	scuffing	as	he	dragged	them
forward,	the	point	of	the	sword	inscribing	a	desultory	furrow	in	the	dried	clay
as	it	trailed	from	his	left	hand.	Clumps	of	mud	clung	to	his	ragged	hide	shirt
and	the	leather	straps	of	his	weapon	harness.	Silty,	soupy	water	had	seeped	into
the	various	gashes	and	punctures	on	his	body	and	now	leaked	in	trickling
runnels	with	every	heavy	step	he	took.	He	had	possessed	a	helm	once,	an
impressive	trophy	from	his	youth,	but	it	had	been	shattered	at	the	final	battle
against	the	Jaghut	family	in	the	Jhag	Odhan.	A	single	crossways	blow	that	had
also	shorn	away	a	fifth	of	his	skull,	parietal	and	temporal,	on	the	right	side.
Jaghut	women	had	deceptive	strength	and	admirable	ferocity,	especially	when
cornered.
The	sky	above	him	had	a	sickly	cast,	but	one	he	had	already	grown	used	to.
This	fragment	of	the	long-fractured	Tiste	Edur	warren	was	by	far	the	largest
he	had	come	across,	larger	even	than	the	one	that	surrounded	Tremorlor,	the
Azath	Odhanhouse.	And	this	one	had	known	a	period	of	stability,	sufficient	for
civilizations	to	arise,	for	savants	of	sorcery	to	begin	unravelling	the	powers	of
Kurald	Emurlahn,	although	those	inhabitants	had	not	been	Tiste	Edur.
Idly,	Onrack	wondered	if	the	renegade	T’lan	Imass	he	and	his	kin	pursued
had	somehow	triggered	the	wound	that	had	resulted	in	the	flooding	of	this
world.	It	seemed	likely,	given	its	obvious	efficacy	in	obscuring	their	trail.
Either	that,	or	the	Tiste	Edur	had	returned,	to	reclaim	what	had	once	been


theirs.
Indeed,	he	could	smell	the	grey-skinned	Edur—they	had	passed	this	way,
and	recently,	arriving	from	another	warren.	Of	course,	the	word	‘smell’	had
acquired	new	meaning	for	the	T’lan	Imass	in	the	wake	of	the	Ritual.	Mundane
senses	had	for	the	most	part	withered	along	with	flesh.	Through	the	shadowed
orbits	of	his	eyes,	for	example,	the	world	was	a	complex	collage	of	dull
colours,	heat	and	cold	and	often	measured	by	an	unerring	sensitivity	to	motion.
Spoken	words	swirled	in	mercurial	clouds	of	breath—if	the	speaker	lived,	that
is.	If	not,	then	it	was	the	sound	itself	that	was	detectable,	shivering	its	way
through	the	air.	Onrack	sensed	sound	as	much	by	sight	as	by	hearing.
And	so	it	was	that	he	became	aware	of	a	warm-blooded	shape	lying	a	short
distance	ahead.	The	wall	here	was	slowly	failing.	Water	spouted	in	streams
from	fissures	between	the	bulging	stones.	Before	long,	it	would	give	way
entirely.
The	shape	did	not	move.	It	had	been	chained	in	place.
Another	fifty	paces	and	Onrack	reached	it.
The	stench	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	was	overpowering,	faintly	visible	like	a
pool	enclosing	the	supine	figure,	its	surface	rippling	as	if	beneath	a	steady	but
thin	rain.	A	deep	ragged	scar	marred	the	prisoner ’s	broad	brow	beneath	a
hairless	pate,	the	wound	glowing	with	sorcery.	There	had	been	a	metal	tongue
to	hold	down	the	man’s	tongue,	but	that	had	dislodged,	as	had	the	straps	wound
round	the	figure’s	head.
Slate-grey	eyes	stared	up,	unblinking,	at	the	T’lan	Imass.
Onrack	studied	the	Tiste	Edur	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	stepped	over
the	man	and	continued	on.
A	ragged,	withered	voice	rose	in	his	wake.	‘Wait.’
The	undead	warrior	paused	and	glanced	back.
‘I—I	would	bargain.	For	my	freedom.’
‘I	am	not	interested	in	bargains,’	Onrack	replied	in	the	Edur	language.
‘Is	there	nothing	you	desire,	warrior?’
‘Nothing	you	can	give	me.’
‘Do	you	challenge	me,	then?’
Tendons	creaking,	Onrack	tilted	his	head.	‘This	section	of	the	wall	is	about
to	collapse.	I	have	no	wish	to	be	here	when	it	does.’
‘And	you	imagine	that	I	do?’
‘Considering	your	sentiments	on	the	matter	is	a	pointless	effort	on	my
part,	Edur.	I	have	no	interest	in	imagining	myself	in	your	place.	Why	would	I?
You	are	about	to	drown.’
‘Break	my	chains,	and	we	can	continue	this	discussion	in	a	safer	place.’


‘The	quality	of	this	discussion	has	not	earned	such	an	exercise,’	Onrack
replied.
‘I	would	improve	it,	given	the	time.’
‘This	seems	unlikely.’	Onrack	turned	away.
‘Wait!	I	can	tell	you	of	your	enemies!’
Slowly,	the	T’lan	Imass	swung	round	once	more.	‘My	enemies?	I	do	not
recall	saying	that	I	had	any,	Edur.’
‘Oh,	but	you	do.	I	should	know.	I	was	once	one	of	them,	and	indeed	that	is
why	you	find	me	here,	for	I	am	your	enemy	no	longer.’
‘You	are	now	a	renegade	among	your	own	kind,	then,’	Onrack	observed.	‘I
have	no	faith	in	traitors.’
‘To	my	own	kind,	T’lan	Imass,	I	am	not	the	traitor.	That	epithet	belongs	to
the	one	who	chained	me	here.	In	any	case,	the	question	of	faith	cannot	be
answered	through	negotiation.’
‘Should	you	have	made	that	admission,	Edur?’
The	man	grimaced.	‘Why	not?	I	would	not	deceive	you.’
Now,	Onrack	was	truly	curious.	‘Why	would	you	not	deceive	me?’
‘For	the	very	cause	that	has	seen	me	Shorn,’	the	Edur	replied.	‘I	am
plagued	by	the	need	to	be	truthful.’
‘That	is	a	dreadful	curse,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said.
‘Yes.’
Onrack	lifted	his	sword.	‘In	this	case,	I	admit	to	possessing	a	curse	of	my
own.	Curiosity.’
‘I	weep	for	you.’
‘I	see	no	tears.’
‘In	my	heart,	T’lan	Imass.’
A	single	blow	shattered	the	chains.	With	his	free	right	hand,	Onrack
reached	down	and	clutched	one	of	the	Edur ’s	ankles.	He	dragged	the	man	after
him	along	the	top	of	the	wall.
‘I	would	rail	at	the	indignity	of	this,’	the	Tiste	Edur	said	as	he	was	pulled
onward,	step	by	scuffing	step,	‘had	I	the	strength	to	do	so.’
Onrack	made	no	reply.	Dragging	the	man	with	one	hand,	his	sword	with
the	other,	he	trudged	forward,	his	progress	eventually	taking	them	past	the	area
of	weakness	on	the	wall.
‘You	can	release	me	now,’	the	Tiste	Edur	gasped.
‘Can	you	walk?’
‘No,	but—’
‘Then	we	shall	continue	like	this.’
‘Where	are	you	going,	then,	that	you	cannot	afford	to	wait	for	me	to


regain	my	strength?’
‘Along	this	wall,’	the	T’lan	Imass	replied.
There	was	silence	between	them	for	a	time,	apart	from	the	creaks	from
Onrack’s	bones,	the	rasp	of	his	hide-wrapped	feet,	and	the	hiss	and	thump	of
the	Tiste	Edur ’s	body	and	limbs	across	the	mud-layered	stones.	The	detritusfilled	sea	remained	unbroken	on	their	left,	a	festering	marshland	on	their	right.
They	passed	between	and	around	another	dozen	catfish,	these	ones	not	quite	as
large	yet	fully	as	limbed	as	the	previous	group.	Beyond	them,	the	wall
stretched	on	unbroken	to	the	horizon.
In	a	voice	filled	with	pain,	the	Tiste	Edur	finally	spoke	again.	‘Much
more…T’lan	Imass…and	you’ll	be	dragging	a	corpse.’
Onrack	considered	that	for	a	moment,	then	he	halted	his	steps	and	released
the	man’s	ankle.	He	slowly	swung	about.
Groaning,	the	Tiste	Edur	rolled	himself	onto	his	side.	‘I	assume,’	he
gasped,	‘you	have	no	food,	or	fresh	water.’
Onrack	lifted	his	gaze,	back	to	the	distant	humps	of	the	catfish.	‘I	suppose	I
could	acquire	some.	Of	the	former,	that	is.’
‘Can	you	open	a	portal,	T’lan	Imass?	Can	you	get	us	out	of	this	realm?’
‘No.’
The	Tiste	Edur	lowered	his	head	to	the	clay	and	closed	his	eyes.	‘Then	I	am
as	good	as	dead	in	any	case.	None	the	less,	I	appreciate	your	breaking	my
chains.	You	need	not	remain	here,	though	I	would	know	the	name	of	the
warrior	who	showed	me	what	mercy	he	could.’
‘Onrack.	Clanless,	of	the	Logros.’
‘I	am	Trull	Sengar.	Also	clanless.’
Onrack	stared	down	at	the	Tiste	Edur	for	a	while.	Then	the	T’lan	Imass
stepped	over	the	man	and	set	off,	retracing	their	path.	He	arrived	among	the
catfish.	A	single	chop	downward	severed	the	head	of	the	nearest	one.
The	slaying	triggered	a	frenzy	among	the	others.	Skin	split,	sleek	fourlimbed	bodies	tore	their	way	free.	Broad,	needle-fanged	heads	swung	towards
the	undead	warrior	in	their	midst,	tiny	eyes	glistening.	Loud	hisses	from	all
sides.	The	beasts	moved	on	squat,	muscular	legs,	three-toed	feet	thickly	padded
and	clawed.	Their	tails	were	short,	extending	in	a	vertical	fin	back	up	their
spines.
They	attacked	as	would	wolves	closing	on	wounded	prey.
Obsidian	blade	flashed.	Thin	blood	sprayed.	Heads	and	limbs	flopped
about.
One	of	the	creatures	launched	itself	into	the	air,	huge	mouth	closing	over
Onrack’s	skull.	As	its	full	weight	descended,	the	T’lan	Imass	felt	his	neck


vertebrae	creak	and	grind.	He	fell	backward,	letting	the	animal	drag	him	down.
Then	he	dissolved	into	dust.
And	rose	five	paces	away	to	resume	his	killing,	wading	among	the	hissing
survivors.	A	few	moments	later	they	were	all	dead.
Onrack	collected	one	of	the	corpses	by	its	hind	foot	and,	dragging	it,	made
his	way	back	to	Trull	Sengar.
The	Tiste	Edur	was	propped	up	on	one	elbow,	his	flat	eyes	fixed	on	the
T’lan	Imass.	‘For	a	moment,’	he	said,	‘I	thought	I	was	having	the	strangest
dream.	I	saw	you,	there	in	the	distance,	wearing	a	huge,	writhing	hat.	That	then
ate	you	whole.’
Onrack	pulled	the	body	up	alongside	Trull	Sengar.	‘You	were	not
dreaming.	Here.	Eat.’
‘Might	we	not	cook	it?’
The	T’lan	Imass	strode	to	the	seaside	edge	of	the	wall.	Among	the	flotsam
were	the	remnants	of	countless	trees,	from	which	jutted	denuded	branches.	He
climbed	down	onto	the	knotted	detritus,	felt	it	shift	and	roll	unsteadily	beneath
him.	It	required	but	a	few	moments	to	snap	off	an	armful	of	fairly	dry	wood,
which	he	threw	back	up	onto	the	wall.	Then	he	followed.
He	felt	the	Tiste	Edur ’s	eyes	on	him	as	he	prepared	a	hearth.
‘Our	encounters	with	your	kind,’	Trull	said	after	a	moment,	‘were	few	and
far	between.	And	then,	only	after	your…ritual.	Prior	to	that,	your	people	fled
from	us	at	first	sight.	Apart	from	those	who	travelled	the	oceans	with	the
Thelomen	Toblakai,	that	is.	Those	ones	fought	us.	For	centuries,	before	we
drove	them	from	the	seas.’
‘The	Tiste	Edur	were	in	my	world,’	Onrack	said	as	he	drew	out	his	spark
stones,	‘just	after	the	coming	of	the	Tiste	Andii.	Once	numerous,	leaving	signs
of	passage	in	the	snow,	on	the	beaches,	in	deep	forests.’
‘There	are	far	fewer	of	us	now,’	Trull	Sengar	said.	‘We	came	here—to	this
place—from	Mother	Dark,	whose	children	had	banished	us.	We	did	not	think
they	would	pursue,	but	they	did.	And	upon	the	shattering	of	this	warren,	we	fled
yet	again—to	your	world,	Onrack.	Where	we	thrived…’
‘Until	your	enemies	found	you	once	more.’
‘Yes.	The	first	of	those	were…fanatical	in	their	hatred.	There	were	great
wars—unwitnessed	by	anyone,	fought	as	they	were	within	darkness,	in	hidden
places	of	shadow.	In	the	end,	we	slew	the	last	of	those	first	Andii,	but	were
broken	ourselves	in	the	effort.	And	so	we	retreated	into	remote	places,	into
fastnesses.	Then,	more	Andii	came,	only	these	seemed	less…interested.	And	we
in	turn	had	grown	inward,	no	longer	consumed	with	the	hunger	of	expansion
—’


‘Had	you	sought	to	assuage	that	hunger,’	Onrack	said	as	the	first	wisps	of
smoke	rose	from	the	shredded	bark	and	twigs,	‘we	would	have	found	in	you	a
new	cause,	Edur.’
Trull	was	silent,	his	gaze	veiled.	‘We	had	forgotten	it	all,’	he	finally	said,
settling	back	to	rest	his	head	once	more	on	the	clay.	‘All	that	I	have	just	told
you.	Until	a	short	while	ago,	my	people—the	last	bastion,	it	seems,	of	the	Tiste
Edur—knew	almost	nothing	of	our	past.	Our	long,	tortured	history.	And	what
we	knew	was	in	fact	false.	If	only,’	he	added,	‘we	had	remained	ignorant.’
Onrack	slowly	turned	to	gaze	at	the	Edur.	‘Your	people	no	longer	look
inward.’
‘I	said	I	would	tell	you	of	your	enemies,	T’lan	Imass.’
‘You	did.’
‘There	are	your	kind,	Onrack,	among	the	Tiste	Edur.	In	league	with	our
new	purpose.’
‘And	what	is	this	purpose,	Trull	Sengar?’
The	man	looked	away,	closed	his	eyes.	‘Terrible,	Onrack.	A	terrible
purpose.’
The	T’lan	Imass	warrior	swung	to	the	corpse	of	the	creature	he	had	slain,
drew	forth	an	obsidian	knife.	‘I	am	familiar	with	terrible	purposes,’	he	said	as
he	began	cutting	meat.
‘I	shall	tell	you	my	tale	now,	as	I	said	I	would.	So	you	understand	what	you
now	face.’
‘No,	Trull	Sengar.	Tell	me	nothing	more.’
‘But	why?’
Because	your	truth	would	burden	me.	Force	me	to	find	my	kin	once	more.
Your	truth	would	chain	me	to	this	world—to	my	world,	once	more.	And	I	am	not
ready	for	that.	‘I	am	weary	of	your	voice,	Edur,’	he	replied.
The	beast’s	sizzling	flesh	smelled	like	seal	meat.
A	short	time	later,	while	Trull	Sengar	ate,	Onrack	moved	to	the	edge	of	the
wall	facing	onto	the	marsh.	The	flood	waters	had	found	old	basins	in	the
landscape,	from	which	gases	now	leaked	upward	to	drift	in	pale	smears	over
the	thick,	percolating	surface.	Thicker	fog	obscured	the	horizon,	but	the	T’lan
Imass	thought	he	could	sense	a	rising	of	elevation,	a	range	of	low,	humped
hills.
‘It’s	getting	lighter,’	Trull	Sengar	said	from	where	he	lay	beside	the	hearth.
‘The	sky	is	glowing	in	places.	There…and	there.’
Onrack	lifted	his	head.	The	sky	had	been	an	unrelieved	sea	of	pewter,
darkening	every	now	and	then	to	loose	a	deluge	of	rain,	though	that	had	grown
more	infrequent	of	late.	But	now	rents	had	appeared,	ragged-edged.	A	swollen


orb	of	yellow	light	commanded	one	entire	horizon,	the	wall	ahead	seeming	to
drive	towards	its	very	heart;	whilst	directly	overhead	hung	a	smaller	circle	of
blurred	fire,	this	one	rimmed	in	blue.
‘The	suns	return,’	the	Tiste	Edur	murmured.	‘Here,	in	the	Nascent,	the
ancient	twin	hearts	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	live	on.	There	was	no	way	of	telling,
for	we	did	not	rediscover	this	warren	until	after	the	Breach.	The	flood	waters
must	have	brought	chaos	to	the	climate.	And	destroyed	the	civilization	that
existed	here.’
Onrack	looked	down.	‘Were	they	Tiste	Edur?’
The	man	shook	his	head.	‘No,	more	like	your	descendants,	Onrack.
Although	the	corpses	we	saw	here	along	the	wall	were	badly	decayed.’	Trull
grimaced.	‘They	are	as	vermin,	these	humans	of	yours.’
‘Not	mine,’	Onrack	replied.
‘You	feel	no	pride,	then,	at	their	insipid	success?’
The	T’lan	Imass	cocked	his	head.	‘They	are	prone	to	mistakes,	Trull
Sengar.	The	Logros	have	killed	them	in	their	thousands	when	the	need	to
reassert	order	made	doing	so	necessary.	With	ever	greater	frequency	they
annihilate	themselves,	for	success	breeds	contempt	for	those	very	qualities	that
purchased	it.’
‘It	seems	you’ve	given	this	some	thought.’
Onrack	shrugged	in	a	clatter	of	bones.	‘More	than	my	kin,	perhaps,	the
edge	of	my	irritation	with	humankind	remains	jagged.’
The	Tiste	Edur	was	attempting	to	stand,	his	motions	slow	and	deliberate.
‘The	Nascent	required…cleansing,’	he	said,	his	tone	bitter,	‘or	so	it	was
judged.’
‘Your	methods,’	Onrack	said,	‘are	more	extreme	than	what	the	Logros
would	choose.’
Managing	to	totter	upright,	Trull	Sengar	faced	the	T’lan	Imass	with	a	wry
grin.	‘Sometimes,	friend,	what	is	begun	proves	too	powerful	to	contain.’
‘Such	is	the	curse	of	success.’
Trull	seemed	to	wince	at	the	words,	and	he	turned	away.	‘I	must	needs	find
fresh,	clean	water.’
‘How	long	had	you	been	chained?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Long,	I	suppose.	The	sorcery	within	the	Shorning	was
designed	to	prolong	suffering.	Your	sword	severed	its	power,	and	now	the
mundane	requirements	of	the	flesh	return.’
The	suns	were	burning	through	the	clouds,	their	combined	heat	filling	the
air	with	humidity.	The	overcast	was	shredding	apart,	vanishing	before	their
very	eyes.	Onrack	studied	the	blazing	orbs	once	more.	‘There	has	been	no


night,’	he	said.
‘Not	in	the	summer,	no.	The	winters,	it’s	said,	are	another	matter.	At	the
same	time,	with	the	deluge	I	suspect	it	is	fruitless	to	predict	what	will	come.
Personally,	I	have	no	wish	to	find	out.’
‘We	must	leave	this	wall,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said	after	a	moment.
‘Aye,	before	it	collapses	entirely.	I	think	I	can	see	hills	in	the	distance.’
‘If	you	have	the	strength,	clasp	your	arms	about	me,’	Onrack	said,	‘and	I
will	climb	down.	We	can	skirt	the	basins.	If	any	local	animals	survived,	they
will	be	on	higher	ground.	Do	you	wish	to	collect	and	cook	more	from	this
beast?’
‘No.	It	is	less	than	palatable.’
‘That	is	not	surprising,	Trull	Sengar.	It	is	a	carnivore,	and	has	fed	long	on
rotting	flesh.’
The	ground	was	sodden	underfoot	when	they	finally	reached	the	base	of
the	wall.	Swarms	of	insects	rose	around	them,	closing	on	the	Tiste	Edur	with
frenzied	hunger.	Onrack	allowed	his	companion	to	set	the	pace	as	they	made
their	way	between	the	water-filled	basins.	The	air	was	humid	enough	to	sheathe
their	bodies,	soaking	through	the	clothing	they	wore.	Although	there	was	no
wind	at	ground	level,	the	clouds	overhead	had	stretched	into	streamers,	racing
to	overtake	them	then	scudding	on	to	mass	against	the	range	of	hills,	where	the
sky	grew	ever	darker.
‘We	are	heading	right	towards	a	squall,’	Trull	muttered,	waving	his	arms
about	to	disperse	the	midges.
‘When	it	breaks,	this	land	will	flood,’	Onrack	noted.	‘Are	you	capable	of
increasing	your	pace?’
‘No.’
‘Then	I	shall	have	to	carry	you.’
‘Carry,	or	drag?’
‘Which	do	you	prefer?’
‘Carrying	seems	somewhat	less	humiliating.’
Onrack	returned	his	sword	to	its	loop	in	the	shoulder	harness.	Though	the
warrior	was	judged	tall	among	his	own	kind,	the	Tiste	Edur	was	taller,	by
almost	the	length	of	a	forearm.	The	T’lan	Imass	had	the	man	sit	down	on	the
ground,	knees	drawn	up,	then	Onrack	squatted	and	slipped	one	arm	beneath
Trull’s	knees,	the	other	below	his	shoulder	blades.	Tendons	creaking,	the
warrior	straightened.
‘There’s	fresh	gouges	all	around	your	skull,	or	what’s	left	of	it	at	any	rate,’
the	Tiste	Edur	noted.
Onrack	said	nothing.	He	set	forth	at	a	steady	jog.


Before	long	a	wind	arrived,	tumbling	down	from	the	hills,	growing	to
such	force	that	the	T’lan	Imass	had	to	lean	forward,	his	feet	thumping	along	the
gravel	ridges	between	the	pools.
The	midges	were	quickly	swept	away.
There	was,	Onrack	realized,	a	strange	regularity	to	the	hills	ahead.	There
were	seven	in	all,	arrayed	in	what	seemed	a	straight	line,	each	of	equal	height
though	uniquely	misshapen.	The	storm	clouds	were	piling	well	behind	them,
corkscrewing	in	bulging	columns	skyward	above	an	enormous	range	of
mountains.
The	wind	howled	against	Onrack’s	desiccated	face,	snapped	at	the	strands
of	his	gold-streaked	hair,	thrummed	with	a	low-pitched	drone	through	the
leather	strips	of	his	harness.	Trull	Sengar	was	hunched	against	him,	head
ducked	away	from	the	shrieking	blast.
Lightning	bridged	the	heaving	columns,	the	thunder	long	in	reaching	them.
The	hills	were	not	hills	at	all.	They	were	edifices,	massive	and	hulking,
constructed	from	a	smooth	black	stone,	seemingly	each	a	single	piece.	Twenty
or	more	man-lengths	high.	Dog-like	beasts,	broad-skulled	and	small-eared,
thickly	muscled,	heads	lowered	towards	the	two	travellers	and	the	distant	wall
behind	them,	the	vast	pits	of	their	eyes	faintly	gleaming	a	deep,	translucent
amber.
Onrack’s	steps	slowed.
But	did	not	halt.
The	basins	had	been	left	behind,	the	ground	underfoot	slick	with	windborne	rain	but	otherwise	solid.	The	T’lan	Imass	angled	his	approach	towards
the	nearest	monument.	As	they	came	closer,	they	moved	into	the	statue’s	lee.
The	sudden	falling	off	of	the	wind	was	accompanied	by	a	cavernous
silence,	the	wind	to	either	side	oddly	mute	and	distant.	Onrack	set	Trull	Sengar
down.
The	Tiste	Edur ’s	bewildered	gaze	found	the	edifice	rearing	before	them.
He	was	silent,	slow	to	stand	as	Onrack	moved	past	him.
‘Beyond,’	Trull	quietly	murmured,	‘there	should	be	a	gate.’
Pausing,	Onrack	slowly	swung	round	to	study	his	companion.	‘This	is
your	warren,’	he	said	after	a	moment.	‘What	do	you	sense	of	these…
monuments?’
‘Nothing,	but	I	know	what	they	are	meant	to	represent…as	do	you.	It	seems
the	inhabitants	of	this	realm	made	them	into	their	gods.’
To	that,	Onrack	made	no	reply.	He	faced	the	massive	statue	once	more,
head	tilting	as	his	gaze	travelled	upward,	ever	upward.	To	those	gleaming,
amber	eyes.


‘There	will	be	a	gate,’	Trull	Sengar	persisted	behind	him.	‘A	means	of
leaving	this	world.	Why	do	you	hesitate,	T’lan	Imass?’
‘I	hesitate	in	the	face	of	what	you	cannot	see,’	Onrack	replied.	‘There	are
seven,	yes.	But	two	of	them	are…alive.’	He	hesitated,	then	added,	‘And	this	is
one	of	them.’


Chapter	Seven

An	army	that	waits	is	soon	an	army	at	war	with	itself.
KELLANVED
The	world	was	encircled	in	red,	the	hue	of	old	blood,	of	iron	rusting	on	a
battlefield.	It	rose	in	a	wall	like	a	river	turned	on	its	side,	crashing	confused
and	uncertain	against	the	rough	cliffs	that	rose	broken-toothed	around	the	rim
of	Raraku.	The	Holy	Desert’s	most	ancient	guardians,	those	bleached	limestone
crags,	now	withering	beneath	the	ceaseless	storm	of	the	Whirlwind,	the	raging
goddess	who	could	countenance	no	rival	to	her	dominion.	Who	would	devour
the	cliffs	themselves	in	her	fury.
Whilst	the	illusion	of	calm	lay	within	her	heart.
The	old	man	who	had	come	to	be	known	as	Ghost	Hands	slowly	clambered
his	way	up	the	slope.	His	ageing	skin	was	deep	bronze,	his	tattooed,	blunt	and
wide	face	as	creased	as	a	wind-clawed	boulder.	Small	yellow	flowers	cloaked
the	ridge	above	him,	a	rare	blossoming	of	the	low-growing	desert	plant	the
local	tribes	called	hen’bara.	When	dried,	the	flowers	made	a	heady	tea,	mender
of	grief,	balm	against	pain	in	a	mortal	soul.	The	old	man	scrabbled	and
scraped	his	way	up	the	slope	with	something	like	desperation.
No	life’s	path	is	bloodless.	Spill	that	of	those	blocking	your	path.	Spill
your	own.	Struggle	on,	wade	the	growing	torrent	with	all	the	frenzy	that	is	the
brutal	unveiling	of	self-preservation.	The	macabre	dance	in	the	tugging
currents	held	no	artistry,	and	to	pretend	otherwise	was	to	sink	into	delusion.
Delusions.	Heboric	Light	Touch,	once	priest	of	Fener,	possessed	no	more
delusions.	He	had	drowned	them	one	by	one	with	his	own	hands	long	ago.	His
hands—his	Ghost	Hands—had	proved	particularly	capable	of	such	tasks.
Whisperers	of	unseen	powers,	guided	by	a	mysterious,	implacable	will.	He
knew	that	he	had	no	control	over	them,	and	so	held	no	delusions.	How	could
he?
Behind	him,	in	the	vast	flat	where	tens	of	thousands	of	warriors	and	their
followers	were	encamped	amidst	a	city’s	ruins,	such	clear-eyed	vision	was


absent.	The	army	was	the	strong	hands,	now	at	rest	but	soon	to	raise	weapons,
guided	by	a	will	that	was	anything	but	implacable,	a	will	that	was	drowning	in
delusions.	Heboric	was	not	only	different	from	all	those	below—he	was	their
very	opposite,	a	sordid	reflection	in	a	mangled	mirror.
Hen’bara’s	gift	was	dreamless	sleep	at	night.	The	solace	of	oblivion.
He	reached	the	ridge,	breathing	hard	from	the	exertion,	and	settled	down
among	the	flowers	for	a	moment	to	rest.	Ghostly	hands	were	as	deft	as	real
ones,	though	he	could	not	see	them—not	even	as	the	faint,	mottled	glow	that
others	saw.	Indeed,	his	vision	was	failing	him	in	all	things.	It	was	an	old	man’s
curse,	he	believed,	to	witness	the	horizons	on	all	sides	drawing	ever	closer.
Even	so,	while	the	carpet	of	yellow	surrounding	him	was	little	more	than	a
blur	to	his	eyes,	the	spicy	fragrance	filled	his	nostrils	and	left	a	palpable	taste
on	his	tongue.
The	desert	sun’s	heat	was	bludgeoning,	oppressive.	It	had	a	power	of	its
own,	transforming	the	Holy	Desert	into	a	prison,	pervasive	and	relentless.
Heboric	had	grown	to	despise	that	heat,	to	curse	Seven	Cities,	to	cultivate	an
abiding	hatred	for	its	people.	And	he	was	trapped	among	them,	now.	The
Whirlwind’s	barrier	was	indiscriminate,	impassable	both	to	those	on	the
outside	and	those	within—at	the	discretion	of	the	Chosen	One.
Movement	to	one	side,	the	blur	of	a	slight,	dark-haired	figure.	Who	then
settled	down	beside	him.
Heboric	smiled.	‘I	thought	I	was	alone.’
‘We	are	both	alone,	Ghost	Hands.’
‘Of	that,	Felisin,	neither	of	us	needs	reminding.’	Felisin	Younger,	but	that	is
a	name	I	cannot	speak	out	loud.	The	mother	who	adopted	you,	lass,	has	her	own
secrets.	‘What	is	that	you	have	in	your	hands?’
‘Scrolls,’	the	girl	replied.	‘From	Mother.	She	has,	it	seems,	rediscovered
her	hunger	for	writing	poetry.’
The	tattooed	ex-priest	grunted,	‘I	thought	it	was	a	love,	not	a	hunger.’
‘You	are	not	a	poet,’	she	said.	‘In	any	case,	to	speak	plainly	is	a	true	talent;
to	bury	beneath	obfuscation	is	a	poet’s	calling	these	days.’
‘You	are	a	brutal	critic,	lass,’	Heboric	observed.
‘Call	to	Shadow,	she	has	called	it.	Or,	rather,	she	continues	a	poem	her	own
mother	began.’
‘Ah,	well,	Shadow	is	a	murky	realm.	Clearly	she	has	chosen	a	style	to
match	the	subject,	perhaps	to	match	that	of	her	own	mother.’
‘Too	convenient,	Ghost	Hands.	Now,	consider	the	name	by	which	Korbolo
Dom’s	army	is	now	called.	Dogslayers.	That,	old	man,	is	poetic.	A	name
fraught	with	diffidence	behind	its	proud	bluster.	A	name	to	match	Korbolo


Dom	himself,	who	stands	square-footed	in	his	terror.’
Heboric	reached	out	and	plucked	the	first	flower	head.	He	held	it	to	his
nose	a	moment	before	dropping	it	into	the	leather	bag	at	his	belt.	‘“Squarefooted	in	his	terror.”	An	arresting	image,	lass.	But	I	see	no	fear	in	the	Napan.
The	Malazan	army	mustering	in	Aren	is	nothing	but	three	paltry	legions	of
recruits.	Commanded	by	a	woman	devoid	of	any	relevant	experience.	Korbolo
Dom	has	no	reason	to	be	afraid.’
The	young	girl’s	laugh	was	a	trill	that	seemed	to	cut	an	icy	path	through
the	air.	‘No	reason,	Ghost	Hands?	Many	reasons,	in	fact.	Shall	I	list	them?
Leoman.	Toblakai.	Bidithal.	L’oric.	Mathok.	And,	the	one	he	finds	most
terrifying	of	all:	Sha’ik.	My	mother.	The	camp	is	a	snake-pit,	seething	with
dissent.	You	have	missed	the	last	spitting	frenzy.	Mother	has	banished	Mallick
Rel	and	Pullyk	Alar.	Cast	them	out.	Korbolo	Dom	loses	two	more	allies	in	the
power	struggle—’
‘There	is	no	power	struggle,’	Heboric	growled,	tugging	at	a	handful	of
flowers.	‘They	are	fools	to	believe	that	one	is	possible.	Sha’ik	has	thrown
those	two	out	because	treachery	flows	in	their	veins.	She	is	indifferent	to
Korbolo	Dom’s	feelings	about	it.’
‘He	believes	otherwise,	and	that	conviction	is	more	important	than	what
might	or	might	not	be	true.	And	how	does	Mother	respond	to	the	aftermath	of
her	pronouncements?’	Felisin	swiped	the	plants	before	her	with	the	scrolls.
‘With	poetry.’
‘The	gift	of	knowledge,’	Heboric	muttered.	‘The	Whirlwind	Goddess
whispers	in	the	Chosen	One’s	ear.	There	are	secrets	within	the	Warren	of
Shadow,	secrets	containing	truths	that	are	relevant	to	the	Whirlwind	itself.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Heboric	shrugged.	His	bag	was	nearly	full.	‘Alas,	I	possess	my	own
prescient	knowledge.’	And	little	good	it	does	me.	‘The	sundering	of	an	ancient
warren	scattered	fragments	throughout	the	realms.	The	Whirlwind	Goddess
possesses	power,	but	it	was	not	her	own,	not	at	first.	Just	one	more	fragment,
wandering	lost	and	in	pain.	What	was	the	goddess,	I	wonder,	when	she	first
stumbled	onto	the	Whirlwind?	Some	desert	tribe’s	minor	deity,	I	suspect.	A
spirit	of	the	summer	wind,	protector	of	some	whirlpool	spring,	possibly.	One
among	many,	without	question.	Of	course,	once	she	made	that	fragment	her
own,	it	did	not	take	long	for	her	to	destroy	her	old	rivals,	to	assert	complete,
ruthless	domination	over	the	Holy	Desert.’
‘A	quaint	theory,	Ghost	Hands,’	Felisin	drawled.	‘But	it	speaks	nothing	of
the	Seven	Holy	Cities,	the	Seven	Holy	Books,	the	prophecy	of	Dryjhna	the
Apocalyptic.’


Heboric	snorted.	‘Cults	feed	upon	one	another,	lass.	Whole	myths	are	coopted	to	fuel	the	faith.	Seven	Cities	was	born	of	nomadic	tribes,	yet	the	legacy
preceding	them	was	that	of	an	ancient	civilization,	which	in	turn	rested	uneasy
on	the	foundations	of	a	still	older	empire—the	First	Empire	of	the	T’lan	Imass.
That	which	survives	in	memory	or	falters	and	fades	away	is	but	chance	and
circumstance.’
‘Poets	may	know	hunger,’	she	commented	drily,	‘but	historians	devour.
And	devouring	murders	language,	makes	of	it	a	dead	thing.’
‘Not	the	historian’s	crime,	lass,	but	the	critic’s.’
‘Why	quibble?	Scholars,	then.’
‘Are	you	complaining	that	my	explanation	destroys	the	mysteries	of	the
pantheon?	Felisin,	there	are	more	worthy	things	to	wonder	at	in	this	world.
Leave	the	gods	and	goddesses	to	their	own	sickly	obsessions.’
Her	laugh	struck	through	him	again.	‘Oh,	you	are	amusing	company,	old
man!	A	priest	cast	out	by	his	god.	An	historian	once	gaoled	for	his	theories.	A
thief	with	nothing	left	worth	stealing.	I	am	not	the	one	in	need	of	wonder.’
He	heard	her	climb	to	her	feet.	‘In	any	case,’	she	continued,	‘I	was	sent	to
find	you.’
‘Oh?	Sha’ik	seeks	more	advice	that	she	will	no	doubt	ignore?’
‘Not	this	time.	Leoman.’
Heboric	scowled.	And	where	Leoman	is,	so	too	will	be	Toblakai.	The
slayer’s	only	quality	his	holding	to	his	vow	to	never	again	speak	to	me.	Still,	I
will	feel	his	eyes	upon	me.	His	killer’s	eyes.	If	there’s	anyone	in	the	camp	who
should	be	banished…He	slowly	clambered	upright.	‘Where	will	I	find	him?’
‘In	the	pit	temple,’	she	replied.
Of	course.	And	what,	dear	lass,	were	you	doing	in	Leoman’s	company?
‘I	would	take	you	by	hand,’	Felisin	added,	‘but	I	find	their	touch	far	too
poetic.’
She	walked	at	his	side,	back	down	the	slope,	between	the	two	vast	kraals
which	were	empty	at	the	moment—the	goats	and	sheep	driven	to	the	pastures
east	of	the	ruins	for	the	day.	They	passed	through	a	wide	breach	in	the	dead
city’s	wall,	intersecting	one	of	the	main	avenues	that	led	to	the	jumble	of
sprawling,	massive	buildings	of	which	only	foundations	and	half-walls
remained,	that	had	come	to	be	called	the	Circle	of	Temples.
Adobe	huts,	yurts	and	hide	tents	fashioned	a	modern	city	on	the	ruins.
Neighbourhood	markets	bustled	beneath	wide,	street-length	awnings,	filling
the	hot	air	with	countless	voices	and	the	redolent	aromas	of	cooking.	Local
tribes,	those	that	followed	their	own	war	chief,	Mathok—who	held	a	position
comparable	to	general	in	Sha’ik’s	command—mingled	with	Dogslayers,	with


motley	bands	of	renegades	from	cities,	with	cut-throat	bandits	and	freed
criminals	from	countless	Malazan	garrison	gaols.	The	army’s	camp	followers
were	equally	disparate,	a	bizarre	self-contained	tribe	that	seemed	to	wander	a
nomadic	round	within	the	makeshift	city,	driven	to	move	at	the	behest	of
hidden	vagaries	no	doubt	political	in	nature.	At	the	moment,	some	unseen
defeat	had	them	more	furtive	than	usual—old	whores	leading	scores	of	mostly
naked,	thin	children,	weapon	smiths	and	tack	menders	and	cooks	and	latrine
diggers,	widows	and	wives	and	a	few	husbands	and	fewer	still	fathers	and
mothers…threads	linked	most	of	them	to	the	warriors	in	Sha’ik’s	army,	but
they	were	tenuous	at	best,	easily	severed,	often	tangled	into	a	web	of	adultery
and	bastardy.
The	city	was	a	microcosm	of	Seven	Cities,	in	Heboric’s	opinion.	Proof	of
all	the	ills	the	Malazan	Empire	had	set	out	to	cure	as	conquerors	then
occupiers.	There	seemed	few	virtues	to	the	freedoms	to	which	the	ex-priest	had
been	witness,	here	in	this	place.	Yet	he	suspected	he	was	alone	in	his	traitorous
thoughts.	The	empire	sentenced	me	a	criminal,	yet	I	remain	Malazan	none	the
less.	A	child	of	the	empire,	a	reawakened	devotee	to	the	old	emperor’s	‘peace	by
the	sword’.	So,	dear	Tavore,	lead	your	army	to	this	heart	of	rebellion,	and	cut	it
dead.	I’ll	not	weep	for	the	loss.
The	Circle	of	Temples	was	virtually	abandoned	compared	to	the	teeming
streets	the	two	had	just	passed	through.	The	home	of	old	gods,	forgotten	deities
once	worshipped	by	a	forgotten	people	who	left	little	behind	apart	from
crumbling	ruins	and	pathways	ankle-deep	in	dusty	potsherds.	Yet	something	of
the	sacred	still	lingered	for	some,	it	seemed,	for	it	was	here	where	the	most
decrepit	of	the	lost	found	meagre	refuge.
A	scattering	of	minor	healers	moved	among	these	destitute	few—the	old
widows	who’d	found	no	refuge	as	a	third	or	even	fourth	wife	to	a	warrior	or
merchant,	fighters	who’d	lost	limbs,	lepers	and	other	diseased	victims	who
could	not	afford	the	healing	powers	of	High	Denul.	There	had	once	numbered
among	these	people	abandoned	children,	but	Sha’ik	had	seen	to	an	end	to	that.
Beginning	with	Felisin,	she	had	adopted	them	all—her	private	retinue,	the
Whirlwind	cult’s	own	acolytes.	By	Heboric’s	last	cursory	measure,	a	week
past,	they	had	numbered	over	three	thousand,	in	ages	ranging	from	newly
weaned	to	Felisin’s	age—close	to	Sha’ik’s	own,	true	age.	To	all	of	them,	she
was	Mother.
It	had	not	been	a	popular	gesture.	The	pimps	had	lost	their	lambs.
In	the	centre	of	the	Circle	of	Temples	was	a	broad,	octagonal	pit,	sunk	deep
into	the	layered	limestone,	its	floor	never	touched	by	the	sun,	cleared	out	now
of	its	resident	snakes,	scorpions	and	spiders	and	reoccupied	by	Leoman	of	the


Flails.	Leoman,	who	had	once	been	Elder	Sha’ik’s	most	trusted	bodyguard.	But
the	reborn	Sha’ik	had	delved	deep	into	the	man’s	soul,	and	found	it	empty,
bereft	of	faith,	by	some	flaw	of	nature	inclined	to	disavow	all	forms	of
certainty.	The	new	Chosen	One	had	decided	she	could	not	trust	this	man—not	at
her	side,	at	any	rate.	He	had	been	seconded	to	Mathok,	though	it	seemed	that	the
position	involved	few	responsibilities.	While	Toblakai	remained	as	Sha’ik’s
personal	guardian,	the	giant	with	the	shattered	tattoo	on	his	face	had	not
relinquished	his	friendship	with	Leoman	and	was	often	in	the	man’s	sour
company.
There	was	history	between	the	two	warriors,	of	which	Heboric	was	certain
he	sensed	but	a	fraction.	They	had	once	shared	a	chain	as	prisoners	of	the
Malazans,	it	was	rumoured.	Heboric	wished	the	Malazans	had	shown	less
mercy	in	Toblakai’s	case.
‘I	will	leave	you	now,’	Felisin	said	at	the	pit’s	brick-lined	edge.	‘When	next
I	desire	to	clash	views	with	you,	I	will	seek	you	out.’
Grimacing,	Heboric	nodded	and	began	making	his	way	down	the	ladder.
The	air	around	him	grew	cooler	in	layers	as	he	descended	into	the	gloom.	The
smell	of	durhang	was	sweet	and	heavy—one	of	Leoman’s	affectations,	leading
the	ex-priest	to	wonder	if	young	Felisin	was	following	her	mother ’s	path	more
closely	than	he	had	suspected.
The	limestone	floor	was	layered	in	rugs	now.	Ornate	furniture—the
portable	kind	wealthy	travelling	merchants	used—made	the	spacious	chamber
seem	crowded.	Wood-framed	screens	stood	against	the	walls	here	and	there,
the	stretched	fabric	of	their	panels	displaying	woven	scenes	from	tribal
mythology.	Where	the	walls	were	exposed,	black	and	red	ochre	paintings	from
some	ancient	artist	transformed	the	smooth,	rippled	stone	into	multi-layered
vistas—savannas	where	transparent	beasts	roamed.	For	some	reason	these
images	remained	clear	and	sharp	to	Heboric’s	eyes,	whispering	memories	of
movement	ever	on	the	edges	of	his	vision.
Old	spirits	wandered	this	pit,	trapped	for	eternity	by	its	high,	sheer	walls.
Heboric	hated	this	place,	with	all	its	spectral	laminations	of	failure,	of	worlds
long	extinct.
Toblakai	sat	on	a	backless	divan,	rubbing	oil	into	the	blade	of	his	wooden
sword,	not	bothering	to	look	up	as	Heboric	reached	the	base	of	the	ladder.
Leoman	lay	sprawled	among	cushions	near	the	wall	opposite.
‘Ghost	Hands,’	the	desert	warrior	called	in	greeting.	‘You	have	hen’bara?
Come,	there	is	a	brazier	here,	and	water—’
‘I	reserve	that	tea	for	just	before	I	go	to	bed,’	Heboric	replied,	striding
over.	‘You	would	speak	with	me,	Leoman?’


‘Always,	friend.	Did	not	the	Chosen	One	call	us	her	sacred	triangle?	We
three,	here	in	this	forgotten	pit?	Or	perhaps	I	have	jumbled	my	words,	and
should	reverse	my	usage	of	“sacred”	and	“forgotten”?	Come,	sit.	I	have	herbal
tea,	the	kind	that	makes	one	wakeful.’
Heboric	sat	down	on	a	cushion.	‘And	what	need	have	we	to	be	wakeful?’
Leoman’s	smile	was	loose,	telling	Heboric	that	durhang	had	swept	away
his	usual	reticence.	‘Dear	Ghost	Hands,’	the	warrior	murmured,	‘it	is	the	need
of	the	hunted.	It	is	the	gazelle	with	its	nose	to	the	ground	that	the	lion	sups	with,
after	all.’
The	ex-priest’s	brows	rose.	‘And	who	is	stalking	us	now,	Leoman?’
Leaning	back,	Leoman	replied,	‘Why,	the	Malazans,	of	course.	Who
other?’
‘Why,	most	certainly	then	we	must	talk,’	Heboric	said	in	mock	earnestness.
‘I	had	no	idea,	after	all,	that	the	Malazans	were	planning	on	doing	us	harm.	Are
you	certain	of	your	information?’
Toblakai	spoke	to	Leoman.	‘As	I	have	told	you	before,	this	old	man	should
be	killed.’
Leoman	laughed.	‘Ah,	my	friend,	now	that	you	are	the	only	one	of	us	three
who	still	has	the	Chosen	One’s	ear…as	it	were…I	would	suggest	you
relinquish	that	subject.	She	has	forbidden	it	and	that	is	that.	Nor	am	I	inclined	to
agree	with	you	in	any	case.	It	is	an	old	refrain	that	needs	burying.’
‘Toblakai	hates	me	because	I	see	too	clearly	what	haunts	his	soul,’	Heboric
said.	‘And,	given	his	vow	to	not	speak	to	me,	his	options	for	dialogue	are	sadly
limited.’
‘I	applaud	your	empathy,	Ghost	Hands.’
Heboric	snorted.	‘If	there	is	to	be	subject	to	this	meeting,	Leoman,	let’s
hear	it.	Else	I’ll	make	my	way	back	to	the	light.’
‘That	would	prove	a	long	journey,’	the	warrior	chuckled.	‘Very	well.
Bidithal	is	back	to	his	old	ways.’
‘Bidithal,	the	High	Mage?	What	“old	ways”?’
‘His	ways	with	children,	Heboric.	Girls.	His	unpleasant…hungers.	Sha’ik
is	not	all-knowing,	alas.	Oh,	she	knows	Bidithal’s	old	predilections—she
experienced	them	firsthand	when	she	was	Sha’ik	Elder,	after	all.	But	there	are
close	to	a	hundred	thousand	people	in	this	city,	now.	A	few	children	vanishing
every	week…easily	passing	virtually	unnoticed.	Mathok’s	people,	however,	are
by	nature	watchful.’
Heboric	scowled.	‘And	what	would	you	have	me	do	about	it?’
‘Are	you	disinterested?’
‘Of	course	not.	But	I	am	one	man,	without,	as	you	say,	a	voice.	While


Bidithal	is	one	of	the	three	sworn	to	Sha’ik,	one	of	her	most	powerful	High
Mages.’
Leoman	began	making	tea.	‘We	share	a	certain	loyalty,	friend,’	he
murmured,	‘the	three	of	us	here.	With	a	certain	child.’	He	looked	up	then,
leaning	close	as	he	set	the	pot	of	water	on	the	brazier ’s	grate,	his	veiled	blue
eyes	fixing	on	Heboric.	‘Who	has	caught	Bidithal’s	eye.	But	that	attention	is
more	than	simply	sexual.	Felisin	is	Sha’ik’s	chosen	heir—we	can	all	see	that,
yes?	Bidithal	believes	she	must	be	shaped	in	a	manner	identical	to	her	mother
—when	her	mother	was	Sha’ik	Elder,	that	is.	The	child	must	follow	the
mother ’s	path,	Bidithal	believes.	As	the	mother	was	broken	inside,	so	too	must
the	child	be	broken	inside.’
Cold	horror	filled	Heboric	at	Leoman’s	words.	He	snapped	a	glare	at
Toblakai.	‘Sha’ik	must	be	told	of	this!’
‘She	has,’	Leoman	said.	‘But	she	needs	Bidithal,	if	only	to	balance	the
schemes	of	Febryl	and	L’oric.	The	three	despise	each	other,	naturally.	She	has
been	told,	Ghost	Hands,	and	so	she	tasks	us	three	in	turn	to	be…watchful.’
‘How	in	Hood’s	name	am	I	supposed	to	be	watchful?’	Heboric	snapped.	‘I
am	damned	near	blind!	Toblakai!	Tell	Sha’ik	to	take	that	wrinkled	bastard	and
flay	him	alive,	never	mind	Febryl	and	L’oric!’
The	huge	savage	bared	his	teeth	at	Leoman.	‘I	hear	a	lizard	hissing	from
under	its	rock,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	Such	bravado	is	quickly	ended	with	the
heel	of	a	boot.’
‘Ah,’	Leoman	sighed	to	Heboric,	‘alas,	Bidithal	is	not	the	problem.	Indeed,
he	may	prove	Sha’ik’s	saviour.	Febryl	schemes	betrayal,	friend.	Who	are	his
co-conspirators?	Unknown.	Not	L’oric,	that’s	for	certain—L’oric	is	by	far	the
most	cunning	of	the	three,	and	so	not	a	fool	by	any	measure.	Yet	Febryl	needs
allies	among	the	powerful.	Is	Korbolo	Dom	in	league	with	the	bastard?	We
don’t	know.	Kamist	Reloe?	His	two	lieutenant	mages,	Henaras	and	Fayelle?
Even	if	they	all	were,	Febryl	would	still	need	Bidithal—either	to	stand	aside
and	do	nothing,	or	to	join.’
‘Yet,’	Toblakai	growled,	‘Bidithal	is	loyal.’
‘In	his	own	way,’	Leoman	agreed.	‘And	he	knows	that	Febryl	is	planning
treachery,	and	now	but	awaits	the	invitation.	Whereupon	he	will	tell	Sha’ik.’
‘And	all	the	conspirators	will	then	die,’	Toblakai	said.
Heboric	shook	his	head.	‘And	what	if	those	conspirators	comprise	her
entire	command?’
Leoman	shrugged,	then	began	pouring	tea.	‘Sha’ik	has	the	Whirlwind,
friend.	To	lead	the	armies?	She	has	Mathok.	And	me.	And	L’oric	will	remain,
that	is	certain.	Seven	take	us,	Korbolo	Dom	is	a	liability	in	any	case.’


Heboric	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	He	made	no	move	when	with	a
gesture	Leoman	invited	him	to	partake	of	the	tea.	‘And	so	the	lie	is	revealed,’
he	finally	murmured.	‘Toblakai	has	told	Sha’ik	nothing.	Not	him,	nor	Mathok,
nor	you,	Leoman.	This	is	your	way	of	getting	back	into	power.	Crush	a
conspiracy	and	thereby	eliminate	all	your	rivals.	And	now,	you	invite	me	into
the	lie.’
‘Not	a	great	lie,’	Leoman	replied.	‘Sha’ik	has	been	informed	that	Bidithal
hunts	children	once	more…’
‘But	not	Felisin	in	particular.’
‘The	Chosen	One	must	not	let	her	personal	loyalties	place	the	entire
rebellion	at	risk.	She	would	act	too	quickly—’
‘And	you	think	I	give	a	damn	about	this	rebellion,	Leoman?’
The	warrior	smiled	as	he	leaned	back	on	the	cushions.	‘You	care	about
nothing,	Heboric.	Not	even	yourself.	But	no,	that	is	not	true,	is	it?	There	is
Felisin.	There	is	the	child.’
Heboric	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘I	am	done	here.’
‘Go	well,	friend.	Know	that	your	company	is	always	welcome	here.’
The	ex-priest	made	his	way	towards	the	ladder.	Reaching	it,	he	paused.
‘And	here	I’d	been	led	to	believe	that	the	snakes	were	gone	from	this	pit.’
Leoman	laughed.	‘The	cool	air	but	makes	them…dormant.	Be	careful	on
that	ladder,	Ghost	Hands.’
After	the	old	man	had	left,	Toblakai	sheathed	his	sword	and	rose.	‘He	will
head	straight	to	Sha’ik,’	he	pronounced.
‘Will	he?’	Leoman	asked,	then	shrugged.	‘No,	I	think	not.	Not	to	Sha’ik…’
	
Of	all	the	temples	of	the	native	cults	in	Seven	Cities,	only	the	ones	raised	in	the
name	of	a	particular	god	displayed	an	architectural	style	that	could	be	seen	to
echo	the	ancient	ruins	in	the	Circle	of	Temples.	And	so,	in	Heboric’s	mind,
there	was	nothing	accidental	to	Bidithal’s	choice	of	abode.	Had	the	foundations
of	the	temple	the	High	Mage	now	occupied	still	held	aloft	walls	and	ceiling,	it
would	be	seen	to	be	a	low,	strangely	elongated	dome,	buttressed	by	half-arches
like	the	ribs	of	a	vast	sea-creature,	or	perhaps	the	skeletal	framework	of	a
longship.	The	tent-cloth	covering	the	withered	and	crumbled	remnants	was
affixed	to	the	few	surviving	upright	wings.	These	wings	and	the	floor	plan
gave	sufficient	evidence	of	what	the	temple	had	originally	looked	like;	and	in
the	Seven	Holy	Cities	and	among	its	more	populated	lesser	kin,	a	certain	extant
temple	could	be	found	that	closely	resembled	this	ruin	in	style.
And	in	these	truths,	Heboric	suspected	a	mystery.	Bidithal	had	not	always


been	a	High	Mage.	Not	in	title	in	any	case.	In	the	Dhobri	language,	he	had	been
known	as	Rashan’ais.	The	archpriest	of	the	cult	of	Rashan,	which	had	existed	in
Seven	Cities	long	before	the	Throne	of	Shadow	had	been	reoccupied.	In	the
twisted	minds	of	humanity,	it	seemed,	there	was	nothing	objectionable	about
worshipping	an	empty	throne.	No	stranger	than	kneeling	before	the	Boar	of
Summer,	before	a	god	of	war.
The	cult	of	Rashan	had	not	taken	well	the	ascension	of	Ammanas—
Shadowthrone—and	the	Rope	into	positions	of	penultimate	power	within	the
Warren	of	Shadow.	Though	Heboric’s	knowledge	of	the	details	was	sketchy	at
best,	it	seemed	that	the	cult	had	torn	itself	apart.	Blood	had	been	spilled	within
temple	walls,	and	in	the	aftermath	of	desecrating	murder,	only	those	who
acknowledged	the	mastery	of	the	new	gods	remained	among	the	devotees.	To
the	wayside,	bitter	and	licking	deep	wounds,	the	banished	slunk	away.
Men	like	Bidithal.
Defeated	but,	Heboric	suspected,	not	yet	finished.	For	it	is	the	Meanas
temples	of	Seven	Cities	that	most	closely	mimic	this	ruin	in	architectural
style…as	if	a	direct	descendant	of	this	land’s	earliest	cults…
Within	the	Whirlwind,	the	cast-out	Rashan’ais	had	found	refuge.	Further
proof	of	his	belief	that	the	Whirlwind	was	but	a	fragment	of	a	shattered
warren,	and	that	shattered	warren	was	Shadow.	And	if	that	is	indeed	the	case,
what	hidden	purpose	holds	Bidithal	to	Sha’ik?	Is	he	truly	loyal	to	Dryjhna	the
Apocalyptic,	to	this	holy	conflagration	in	the	name	of	liberty?	Answers	to	such
questions	were	long	in	coming,	if	at	all.	The	unknown	player,	the	unseen
current	beneath	this	rebellion—indeed,	beneath	the	Malazan	Empire	itself—
was	the	new	ruler	of	Shadow	and	his	deadly	companion.	Ammanas
Shadowthrone,	who	was	Kellanved—emperor	of	Malaz	and	conqueror	of	Seven
Cities.	Cotillion,	who	was	Dancer—master	of	the	Talon	and	the	empire’s
deadliest	assassin,	deadlier	even	than	Surly.	Gods	below,	something	breathes
there…I	now	wonder,	whose	war	is	this?
Distracted	by	such	troubling	thoughts	as	he	made	his	way	to	Bidithal’s
abode,	it	was	a	moment	before	Heboric	realized	that	his	name	had	been	called.
Eyes	straining	to	focus	as	he	searched	for	the	originator	of	that	call,	he	was
suddenly	startled	by	a	hand	settling	on	his	shoulder.
‘My	apologies,	Ghost	Hands,	if	I	frightened	you.’
‘Ah,	L’oric,’	Heboric	replied,	finally	recognizing	the	tall,	white-robed
figure	standing	beside	him.	‘These	are	not	your	usual	haunts,	are	they?’
A	slightly	pained	smile.	‘I	regret	that	my	presence	is	seen	as	a	haunting—
unless	of	course	your	use	of	the	word	was	unmindful.’
‘Careless,	you	mean.	It	was.	I	have	been	in	the	company	of	Leoman,


inadvertently	breathing	fumes	of	durhang.	What	I	meant	was,	I	rarely	see	you
in	these	parts,	that	is	all.’
‘Thus	explaining	your	perturbed	expression,’	L’oric	murmured.
Meeting	you,	the	durhang	or	Leoman?	The	tall	mage—one	of	Sha’ik’s
three—was	not	by	nature	approachable,	nor	given	to	drama.	Heboric	had	no
idea	which	warren	the	man	employed	in	his	sorceries.	Perhaps	Sha’ik	alone
knew.
After	a	moment,	the	High	Mage	resumed,	‘Your	route	suggests	a	visit	to	a
certain	resident	here	in	the	Circle.	Further,	I	sense	a	storm	of	emotions	stirring
around	you,	which	could	lead	one	to	surmise	the	impending	encounter	will
prove	tumultuous.’
‘You	mean	we	might	argue,	Bidithal	and	I,’	Heboric	growled.	‘Well	yes,
that’s	damned	likely.’
‘I	myself	have	but	recently	departed	his	company,’	L’oric	said.	‘Perhaps	a
warning?	He	is	much	agitated	over	something,	and	so	short	of	temper.’
‘Perhaps	it	was	something	you	said,’	Heboric	ventured.
‘Entirely	possible,’	the	mage	conceded.	‘And	if	so,	then	I	apologize.’
‘Fener ’s	tusks,	L’oric,	what	are	you	doing	in	this	damned	army	of	vipers?’
Again	the	pained	smile,	then	a	shrug.	‘Mathok’s	tribes	have	among	them
women	and	men	who	dance	with	flare-necked	vipers—such	as	are	sometimes
found	where	grasses	grow	deep.	It	is	a	complicated	and	obviously	dangerous
dance	yet	one	possessed	of	a	certain	charm.	There	are	attractions	to	such
exercise.’
‘You	enjoy	taking	risks,	even	with	your	life.’
‘I	might	in	turn	ask	why	are	you	here,	Heboric?	Do	you	seek	to	return	to
your	profession	as	historian,	thus	ensuring	that	the	tale	of	Sha’ik	and	the
Whirlwind	will	be	told?	Or	are	you	indeed	ensnared	with	loyalties	to	the	noble
cause	of	liberty?	Surely,	you	cannot	say	you	are	both,	can	you?’
‘I	was	a	middling	historian	at	best,	L’oric,’	Heboric	muttered,	reluctant	to
elaborate	on	his	reasons	for	remaining—none	of	which	had	any	real
relevance,	since	Sha’ik	was	not	likely	to	let	him	leave	in	any	case.
‘You	are	impatient	with	me.	I	will	leave	you	to	your	task,	then.’	L’oric
made	a	slight	bow	as	he	stepped	back.
Watching	the	man	walk	away,	Heboric	stood	motionless	for	a	moment
longer,	then	he	resumed	his	journey.	Bidithal	was	agitated,	was	he?	An
argument	with	L’oric,	or	something	behind	the	veil?	The	High	Mage’s
dwelling	was	before	him	now,	the	tent	walls	and	peaked	ceiling	sun-faded	and
smoke-stained,	a	dusty	smear	of	mottled	magenta	squatting	above	the	thick
foundation	stones.	Huddled	just	outside	the	flap	entrance	was	a	sunburned,


filthy	figure,	mumbling	in	some	foreign	language,	face	hidden	beneath	long
greasy	strands	of	brown	hair.	The	figure	had	no	hands	and	no	feet,	the	stumps
showing	old	scar	tissue	yet	still	suppurating	a	milky	yellow	discharge.	The
man	was	using	one	of	his	wrist	stumps	to	draw	broad	patterns	in	the	thick	dust,
surrounding	himself	in	linked	chains,	round	and	round,	each	pass	obscuring
what	had	been	made	before.
This	one	belongs	to	Toblakai.	His	master	work—Sulgar?	Silgar.	The	Nathii.
The	man	was	one	of	the	many	crippled,	diseased	and	destitute	inhabitants	of	the
Circle	of	Temples.	Heboric	wondered	what	had	drawn	him	to	Bidithal’s	tent.
He	arrived	at	the	entrance.	In	tribal	fashion,	the	flap	was	tied	back,	the
customary	expansive	gesture	of	invitation,	the	message	one	of	ingenuousness.
As	he	ducked	to	step	through,	Silgar	stirred,	head	snapping	up.
‘Brother	of	mine!	I’ve	seen	you	before,	yes!	Maimed—we	are	kin!’	The
language	was	a	tangled	mix	of	Nathii,	Malazan	and	Ehrlii.	The	man’s	smile
revealed	a	row	of	rotting	teeth.	‘Flesh	and	spirit,	yes?	We	are,	you	and	I,	the
only	honest	mortals	here!’
‘If	you	say	so,’	Heboric	muttered,	striding	into	Bidithal’s	home.	Silgar ’s
cackle	followed	him	in.
No	effort	had	been	made	to	clean	the	sprawling	chamber	within.	Bricks	and
rubble	lay	scattered	across	a	floor	of	sand,	broken	mortar	and	potsherds.	A
half-dozen	pieces	of	furniture	were	positioned	here	and	there	in	the	cavernous
space.	There	was	a	large,	low	bed,	wood-slatted	and	layered	in	thin	mattresses.
Four	folding	merchant	chairs	of	the	local	three-legged	kind	faced	onto	the	bed
in	a	ragged	row,	as	if	Bidithal	was	in	the	habit	of	addressing	an	audience	of
acolytes	or	students.	A	dozen	small	oil	lamps	crowded	the	surface	of	a	small
table	nearby.
The	High	Mage	had	his	back	to	Heboric	and	most	of	the	long	chamber.	A
torch,	fixed	to	a	spear	that	had	been	thrust	upright,	its	base	mounded	with
stones	and	rubble,	stood	slightly	behind	Bidithal’s	left	shoulder,	casting	the
man’s	own	shadow	onto	the	tent	wall.
A	chill	rippled	through	Heboric,	for	it	seemed	the	High	Mage	was
conversing	in	a	language	of	gestures	with	his	own	shadow.	Cast	out	in	name
only,	perhaps.	Still	eager	to	play	with	Meanas.	In	the	Whirlwind’s	name,	or	his
own?	‘High	Mage,’	the	ex-priest	called.
The	ancient,	withered	man	slowly	turned.	‘Come	to	me,’	he	rattled,	‘I
would	experiment.’
‘Not	the	most	encouraging	invitation,	Bidithal.’	But	Heboric	approached
none	the	less.
Bidithal	waved	impatiently.	‘Closer!	I	would	see	if	your	ghostly	hands	cast


shadows.’
Heboric	halted,	stepped	back	with	a	shake	of	his	head.	‘No	doubt	you
would,	but	I	wouldn’t.’
‘Come!’
‘No.’
The	dark	wrinkled	face	twisted	into	a	scowl,	black	eyes	glittering.	‘You	are
too	eager	to	protect	your	secrets.’
‘And	you	aren’t?’
‘I	serve	the	Whirlwind.	Nothing	else	is	important—’
‘Barring	your	appetites.’
The	High	Mage	cocked	his	head,	then	made	a	small,	almost	effeminate
wave	with	one	hand.	‘Mortal	necessities.	Even	when	I	was	Rashan’ais,	we	saw
no	imperative	to	turn	away	from	the	pleasures	of	the	flesh.	Indeed,	the
interweaving	of	the	shadows	possesses	great	power.’
‘And	so	you	raped	Sha’ik	when	she	was	but	a	child.	And	scourged	from
her	all	future	chance	at	such	pleasures	as	you	now	espouse.	I	see	little	logic	in
that,	Bidithal—only	sickness.’
‘My	purposes	are	beyond	your	ability	to	comprehend,	Ghost	Hands,’	the
High	Mage	said	with	a	smirk.	‘You	cannot	wound	me	with	such	clumsy
efforts.’
‘I’d	been	given	to	understand	you	were	agitated,	discomfited.’
‘Ah,	L’oric.	Another	stupid	man.	He	mistook	excitement	for	agitation,	but	I
will	say	no	more	of	that.	Not	to	you.’
‘Allow	me	to	be	equally	succinct,	Bidithal.’	Heboric	stepped	closer.	‘If	you
even	so	much	as	look	in	Felisin’s	direction,	these	hands	of	mine	will	twist	your
head	from	your	neck.’
‘Felisin?	Sha’ik’s	dearest?	Do	you	truly	believe	she	is	a	virgin?	Before
Sha’ik	returned,	the	child	was	a	waif,	an	orphan	in	the	camp.	None	cared	a	whit
about	her—’
‘None	of	which	matters,’	Heboric	said.
The	High	Mage	turned	away.	‘Whatever	you	say,	Ghost	Hands.	Hood
knows,	there	are	plenty	of	others—’
‘All	now	under	Sha’ik’s	protection.	Do	you	imagine	she	will	permit	such
abuses	from	you?’
‘You	shall	have	to	ask	her	that	yourself,’	Bidithal	replied.	‘Now	leave	me.
You	are	guest	no	longer.’
Heboric	hesitated,	barely	resisting	an	urge	to	kill	the	man	now,	this	instant.
Would	it	even	be	pre-emptive?	Has	he	not	as	much	as	admitted	to	his	crimes?
But	this	was	not	a	place	of	Malazan	justice,	was	it?	The	only	law	that	existed


here	was	Sha’ik’s.	Nor	will	I	be	alone	in	this.	Even	Toblakai	has	vowed
protection	over	Felisin.	But	what	of	the	other	children?	Why	does	Sha’ik
tolerate	this,	unless	it	is	as	Leoman	has	said.	She	needs	Bidithal.	Needs	him	to
betray	Febryl’s	plotting.
Yet	what	do	I	care	for	all	of	that?	This…creature	does	not	deserve	to	live.
‘Contemplating	murder?’	Bidithal	murmured,	his	back	turned	once	more,
his	own	shadow	dancing	on	its	own	on	the	tent	wall.	‘You	would	not	be	the
first,	nor,	I	suspect,	the	last.	I	should	warn	you,	however,	this	temple	is	newly
resanctified.	Take	another	step	towards	me,	Ghost	Hands,	and	you	will	see	the
power	of	that.’
‘And	you	believe	Sha’ik	will	permit	you	to	kneel	before	Shadowthrone?’
The	man	whirled,	his	face	black	with	rage.	‘Shadowthrone?
That…foreigner?	The	roots	of	Meanas	are	found	in	an	elder	warren!	Once
ruled	by—’	he	snapped	his	mouth	shut,	then	smiled,	revealing	dark	teeth.	‘Not
for	you.	Oh	no,	not	for	you,	ex-priest.	There	are	purposes	within	the
Whirlwind—your	existence	is	tolerated	but	little	more	than	that.	Challenge	me,
Ghost	Hands,	and	you	will	know	holy	wrath.’
Heboric’s	answering	grin	was	hard.	‘I’ve	known	it	before,	Bidithal.	Yet	I
remain.	Purposes?	Perhaps	mine	is	to	block	your	path.	I’d	advise	you	to	think
on	that.’
Stepping	outside	once	more,	he	paused	briefly,	blinking	in	the	harsh
sunlight.	Silgar	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	yet	he	had	completed	an	elaborate
pattern	in	the	dust	around	Heboric’s	moccasins.	Chains,	surrounding	a	figure
with	stumps	instead	of	hands…yet	footed.	The	ex-priest	scowled,	kicking
through	the	image	as	he	set	forth.
Silgar	was	no	artist.	Heboric’s	own	eyes	were	bad.	Perhaps	he’d	seen	only
what	his	fears	urged—it	had	been	Silgar	himself	within	the	circle	of	chains	the
first	time,	after	all.	In	any	case,	it	was	not	important	enough	to	make	him	turn
back	for	a	second	look.	Besides,	his	own	steps	had	no	doubt	left	it	ruined.
None	of	which	explained	the	chill	that	clung	to	him	as	he	walked	beneath
the	searing	sun.
The	vipers	were	writhing	in	their	pit,	and	he	was	in	their	midst.
	
The	old	scars	of	ligature	damage	made	his	ankles	and	wrists	resemble
segmented	tree	trunks,	each	pinched	width	encircling	his	limbs	to	remind	him
of	those	times,	of	every	shackle	that	had	snapped	shut,	every	chain	that	had	held
him	down.	In	his	dreams,	the	pain	reared	like	a	thing	alive	once	more,	weaving
mesmerizing	through	a	tumult	of	confused,	distraught	scenes.


The	old	Malazan	with	no	hands	and	the	shimmering,	near	solid	tattoo	had,
despite	his	blindness,	seen	clearly	enough,	seen	those	trailing	ghosts,	the	windmoaning	train	of	deaths	that	stalked	him	day	and	night	now,	loud	enough	in
Toblakai’s	mind	to	drown	out	the	voice	of	Urugal,	close	enough	to	obscure	his
god’s	stone	visage	behind	veil	after	veil	of	mortal	faces—each	and	every	one
twisted	with	the	agony	and	fear	that	carved	out	the	moment	of	dying.	Yet	the
old	man	had	not	understood,	not	entirely.	The	children	among	those	victims—
children	in	terms	of	recently	birthed,	as	the	lowlanders	used	the	word—had	not
all	fallen	to	the	bloodwood	sword	of	Karsa	Orlong.	They	were,	one	and	all,	the
progeny	that	would	never	be,	the	bloodlines	severed	in	the	trophy-cluttered
cavern	of	the	Teblor ’s	history.
Toblakai.	A	name	of	past	glories,	of	a	race	of	warriors	who	had	stood
alongside	mortal	Imass,	alongside	cold-miened	Jaghut	and	demonic	Forkrul
Assail.	A	name	by	which	Karsa	Orlong	was	now	known,	as	if	he	alone	was	the
inheritor	of	elder	dominators	in	a	young,	harsh	world.	Years	ago,	such	a
thought	would	have	filled	his	chest	with	fierce,	bloodthirsty	pride.	Now	it
racked	him	like	a	desert	cough,	weakened	him	deep	in	his	bones.	He	saw	what
no-one	else	saw,	that	his	new	name	was	a	title	of	polished,	blinding	irony.
The	Teblor	were	long	fallen	from	Thelomen	Toblakai.	Mirrored
reflections	in	flesh	only.	Kneeling	like	fools	before	seven	blunt-featured	faces
carved	into	a	cliffside.	Valley	dwellers,	where	every	horizon	was	almost	within
reach.	Victims	of	brutal	ignorance—for	which	no-one	else	could	be	blamed—
entwined	with	deceit,	for	which	Karsa	Orlong	would	seek	a	final	accounting.
He	and	his	people	had	been	wronged,	and	the	warrior	who	now	strode
between	the	dusty	white	boles	of	a	long-dead	orchard	would,	one	day,	give
answer	to	that.
But	the	enemy	had	so	many	faces…
Even	alone,	as	he	was	now,	he	longed	for	solitude.	But	it	was	denied	him.
The	rattle	of	chains	was	unceasing,	the	echoing	cries	of	the	slain	endless.	Even
the	mysterious	but	palpable	power	of	Raraku	offered	no	surcease—Raraku
itself,	not	the	Whirlwind,	for	Toblakai	knew	that	the	Whirlwind	was	like	a
child	to	the	Holy	Desert’s	ancient	presence,	and	it	touched	him	naught.	Raraku
had	known	many	such	storms,	yet	it	weathered	them	as	it	did	all	things,	with
untethered	skin	of	sand	and	the	solid	truth	of	stone.	Raraku	was	its	own	secret,
the	hidden	bedrock	that	held	the	warrior	in	this	place.	From	Raraku,	Karsa
believed,	he	would	find	his	own	truth.
He	had	knelt	before	Sha’ik	Reborn,	all	those	months	ago.	The	young
woman	with	the	Malazan	accent	who’d	stumbled	into	view	half	carrying	her
tattooed,	handless	pet.	Knelt,	not	in	servitude,	not	from	resurrected	faith,	but	in


relief.	Relief,	that	the	waiting	had	ended,	that	he	would	be	able	to	drag	Leoman
away	from	that	place	of	failure	and	death.	They	had	seen	Sha’ik	Elder
murdered	while	under	their	protection.	A	defeat	that	had	gnawed	at	Karsa.	Yet
he	could	not	deceive	himself	into	believing	that	the	new	Chosen	One	was
anything	but	a	hapless	victim	that	the	insane	Whirlwind	Goddess	had	simply
plucked	from	the	wilderness,	a	mortal	tool	that	would	be	used	with	merciless
brutality.	That	she	had	proved	a	willing	participant	in	her	own	impending
destruction	was	equally	pathetic	in	Karsa’s	eyes.	Clearly,	the	scarred	young
woman	had	her	own	reasons,	and	seemed	eager	for	the	power.
Lead	us,	Warleader.
The	words	laughed	bitterly	through	his	thoughts	as	he	wandered	through
the	grove—the	city	almost	a	league	to	the	east,	the	place	where	he	now	found
himself	a	remnant	outskirt	of	some	other	town.	Warleaders	needed	such	forces
gathered	around	them,	arrayed	in	desperate	defence	of	self-delusion,	of
headlong	single-mindedness.	The	Chosen	One	was	more	like	Toblakai	than	she
imagined,	or,	rather,	a	younger	Toblakai,	a	Teblor	commanding	slayers—an
army	of	two	with	which	to	deliver	mayhem.
Sha’ik	Elder	had	been	something	else	entirely.	She	had	lived	long	through
her	haunting,	her	visions	of	Apocalypse	that	had	tugged	and	jerked	her	bones
ever	onward	as	if	they	were	string-tied	sticks.	And	she	had	seen	truths	in
Karsa’s	soul,	had	warned	him	of	the	horrors	to	come—not	in	specific	terms,
for	like	all	seers	she	had	been	cursed	with	ambiguity—but	sufficient	to	awaken
within	Karsa	a	certain…watchfulness.
And,	it	seemed,	he	did	little	else	these	days	but	watch.	As	the	madness	that
was	the	soul	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	seeped	out	like	poison	in	the	blood	to
infect	every	leader	among	the	rebellion.	Rebellion…oh,	there	was	truth	enough
in	that.	But	the	enemy	was	not	the	Malazan	Empire.	It	is	sanity	itself	that	they
are	rebelling	against.	Order.	Honourable	conduct.	‘Rules	of	the	common’,	as
Leoman	called	them,	even	as	his	consciousness	sank	beneath	the	opaque	fumes
of	durhang.	Yes,	I	would	well	understand	his	flight,	were	I	to	believe	what	he
would	present	to	us	all—the	drifting	layers	of	smoke	in	his	pit,	the	sleepy	look
in	his	eyes,	the	slurred	words…ah,	but	Leoman,	I	have	never	witnessed	you
actually	partake	of	the	drug.	Only	its	apparent	aftermath,	the	evidence
scattered	all	about,	and	the	descent	into	sleep	that	seems	perfectly	timed
whenever	you	wish	to	close	a	conversation,	end	a	certain	discourse…
Like	him,	Karsa	suspected,	Leoman	was	biding	his	time.
Raraku	waited	with	them.	Perhaps,	for	them.	The	Holy	Desert	possessed	a
gift,	yet	it	was	one	that	few	had	ever	recognized,	much	less	accepted.	A	gift	that
would	arrive	unseen,	unnoticed	at	first,	a	gift	too	old	to	find	shape	in	words,


too	formless	to	grasp	in	the	hands	as	one	would	a	sword.
Toblakai,	once	a	warrior	of	forest-cloaked	mountains,	had	grown	to	love
this	desert.	The	endless	tones	of	fire	painted	on	stone	and	sand,	the	bitterneedled	plants	and	the	countless	creatures	that	crawled,	slithered	or	scampered,
or	slipped	through	night-air	on	silent	wings.	He	loved	the	hungry	ferocity	of
these	creatures,	their	dancing	as	prey	and	predator	a	perpetual	cycle	inscribed
on	the	sand	and	beneath	the	rocks.	And	the	desert	in	turn	had	reshaped	Karsa,
weathered	his	skin	dark,	stretched	taut	and	lean	his	muscles,	thinned	his	eyes	to
slits.
Leoman	had	told	him	much	of	this	place,	secrets	that	only	a	true	inhabitant
would	know.	The	ring	of	ruined	cities,	harbours	one	and	all,	the	old	beach
ridges	with	their	natural	barrows	running	for	league	upon	league.	Shells	that
had	turned	hard	as	stone	and	would	sing	low	and	mournful	in	the	wind—
Leoman	had	presented	him	with	a	gift	of	these,	a	vest	of	hide	on	which	such
shells	had	been	affixed,	armour	that	moaned	in	the	endless,	ever-dry	winds.
There	were	hidden	springs	in	the	wasteland,	cairns	and	caves	where	an	ancient
sea-god	had	been	worshipped.	Remote	basins	that	would,	every	few	years,	be
stripped	of	sand	to	reveal	long,	high-prowed	ships	of	petrified	wood	that	was
crowded	with	carvings—a	long-dead	fleet	revealed	beneath	starlight	only	to	be
buried	once	more	the	following	day.	In	other	places,	often	behind	the	beach
ridges,	the	forgotten	mariners	had	placed	cemeteries,	using	hollowed-out
cedar	trunks	to	hold	their	dead	kin—all	turned	to	stone,	now,	claimed	by	the
implacable	power	of	Raraku.
Layer	upon	countless	layer,	the	secrets	were	unveiled	by	the	winds.	Sheer
cliffs	rising	like	ramps,	in	which	the	fossil	skeletons	of	enormous	creatures
could	be	seen.	The	stumps	of	cleared	forests,	hinting	of	trees	as	large	as	any
Karsa	had	known	from	his	homeland.	The	columnar	pilings	of	docks	and
piers,	anchor-stones	and	the	open	cavities	of	tin	mines,	flint	quarries	and
arrow-straight	raised	roads,	trees	that	grew	entirely	underground,	a	mass	of
roots	stretching	out	for	leagues,	from	which	the	ironwood	of	Karsa’s	new
sword	had	been	carved—his	bloodsword	having	cracked	long	ago.
Raraku	had	known	Apocalypse	first-hand,	millennia	past,	and	Toblakai
wondered	if	it	truly	welcomed	its	return.	Sha’ik’s	goddess	stalked	the	desert,
her	mindless	rage	the	shriek	of	unceasing	wind	along	its	borders,	but	Karsa
wondered	at	the	Whirlwind’s	manifestation—just	whose	was	it?	Cold,
disconnected	rage,	or	a	savage,	unbridled	argument?
Did	the	goddess	war	with	the	desert?
Whilst,	far	to	the	south	in	this	treacherous	land,	the	Malazan	army	prepared
to	march.


As	he	approached	the	heart	of	the	grove—where	a	low	altar	of	flatstones
occupied	a	small	clearing—he	saw	a	slight,	long-haired	figure,	seated	on	the
altar	as	if	it	was	no	more	than	a	bench	in	an	abandoned	garden.	A	book	was	in
her	lap,	its	cracked	skin	cover	familiar	to	Toblakai’s	eyes.
She	spoke	without	turning	round.	‘I	have	seen	your	tracks	in	this	place,
Toblakai.’
‘And	I	yours,	Chosen	One.’
‘I	come	here	to	wonder,’	she	said	as	he	walked	into	view	around	the	altar	to
stand	facing	her.
As	do	I.
‘Can	you	guess	what	it	is	I	wonder	about?’	she	asked.
‘No.’
The	almost-faded	pocks	of	bloodfly	scars	only	showed	themselves	when
she	smiled.	‘The	gift	of	the	goddess…’	the	smile	grew	strained,	‘offers	only
destruction.’
He	glanced	away,	studied	the	nearby	trees.	‘This	grove	will	resist	in	the
way	of	Raraku,’	he	rumbled.	‘It	is	stone.	And	stone	holds	fast.’
‘For	a	while,’	she	muttered,	her	smile	falling	away.	‘But	there	remains	that
within	me	that	urges…creation.’
‘Have	a	baby.’
Her	laugh	was	almost	a	yelp.	‘Oh,	you	hulking	fool,	Toblakai.	I	should
welcome	your	company	more	often.’
Then	why	do	you	choose	not	to?
She	waved	a	small	hand	at	the	book	in	her	lap.	‘Dryjhna	was	an	author
who,	to	be	gracious,	lived	with	malnourished	talent.	There	are	naught	but
bones	in	this	tome,	I	am	afraid.	Obsessed	with	the	taking	of	life,	the
annihilation	of	order.	Yet	not	once	does	he	offer	anything	in	its	stead.	There	is
no	rebirth	among	the	ashes	of	his	vision,	and	that	saddens	me.	Does	it	sadden
you,	Toblakai?’
He	stared	down	at	her	for	a	long	moment,	then	said,	‘Come.’
Shrugging,	she	set	the	book	down	on	the	altar	and	rose,	straightening	the
plain,	worn,	colourless	telaba	that	hung	loose	over	her	curved	body.
He	led	her	into	the	rows	of	bone-white	trees.	She	followed	in	silence.
Thirty	paces,	then	another	small	clearing,	this	one	ringed	tight	in	thick,
petrified	boles.	A	squat,	rectangular	mason’s	chest	sat	in	the	skeletal	shade	cast
down	by	the	branches—which	had	remained	intact	down	to	the	very	twigs.
Toblakai	stepped	to	one	side,	studied	her	face	as	she	stared	in	silence	at	his
works-in-progress.
Before	them,	the	trunks	of	two	of	the	trees	ringing	the	clearing	had	been


reshaped	beneath	chisel	and	pick.	Two	warriors	stared	out	with	sightless	eyes,
one	slightly	shorter	than	Toblakai	but	far	more	robust,	the	other	taller	and
thinner.
He	saw	that	her	breath	had	quickened,	a	slight	flush	on	her	cheeks.	‘You
have	talent…rough,	but	driven,’	she	murmured	without	pulling	her	eyes	from
their	study.	‘Do	you	intend	to	ring	the	entire	clearing	with	such	formidable
warriors?’
‘No.	The	others	will	be…different.’
Her	head	turned	at	a	sound.	She	stepped	quickly	closer	to	Karsa.	‘A	snake.’
He	nodded.	‘There	will	be	more,	coming	from	all	sides.	The	clearing	will
be	filled	with	snakes,	should	we	choose	to	remain	here.’
‘Flare-necks.’
‘And	others.	They	won’t	bite	or	spit,	however.	They	never	do.	They
come…to	watch.’
She	shot	him	a	searching	glance,	then	shivered	slightly.	‘What	power
manifests	here?	It	is	not	the	Whirlwind’s—’
‘No.	Nor	do	I	have	a	name	for	it.	Perhaps	the	Holy	Desert	itself.’
She	slowly	shook	her	head	to	that.	‘I	think	you	are	wrong.	The	power,	I
believe,	is	yours.’
He	shrugged.	‘We	shall	see,	when	I	have	done	them	all.’
‘How	many?’
‘Besides	Bairoth	and	Delum	Thord?	Seven.’
She	frowned.	‘One	for	each	of	the	Holy	Protectors?’
No.	‘Perhaps.	I	have	not	decided.	These	two	you	see,	they	were	my	friends.
Now	dead.’	He	paused,	then	added,	‘I	had	but	two	friends.’
She	seemed	to	flinch	slightly	at	that.	‘What	of	Leoman?	What	of	Mathok?
What	of…me?’
‘I	have	no	plans	on	carving	your	likenesses	here.’
‘That	is	not	what	I	meant.’
I	know.	He	gestured	at	the	two	Teblor	warriors.	‘Creation,	Chosen	One.’
‘When	I	was	young,	I	wrote	poetry,	in	the	path	that	my	mother	already
walked.	Did	you	know	that?’
He	smiled	at	the	word	‘young’	but	replied	in	all	seriousness,	‘No,	I	did
not.’
‘I…I	have	resurrected	the	habit.’
‘May	it	serve	you	well.’
She	must	have	sensed	something	of	the	blood-slick	edge	underlying	his
statement,	for	her	expression	tightened.	‘But	that	is	never	its	purpose,	is	it.	To
serve.	Or	to	yield	satisfaction—self-satisfaction,	I	mean,	since	the	other	kind


but	follows	as	a	returning	ripple	in	a	well—’
‘Confusing	the	pattern.’
‘As	you	say.	It	is	far	too	easy	to	see	you	as	a	knot-browed	barbarian,
Toblakai.	No,	the	drive	to	create	is	something	other,	isn’t	it?	Have	you	an
answer?’
He	shrugged.	‘If	one	exists,	it	will	only	be	found	in	the	search—and
searching	is	at	creation’s	heart,	Chosen	One.’
She	stared	at	the	statues	once	more.	‘And	what	are	you	searching	for?	With
these…old	friends?’
‘I	do	not	know.	Yet.’
‘Perhaps	they	will	tell	you,	one	day.’
The	snakes	surrounded	them	by	the	hundreds	now,	slithering	unremarked
by	either	over	their	feet,	around	their	ankles,	heads	lifting	again	and	again	to
flick	tongues	towards	the	carved	trunks.
‘Thank	you,	Toblakai,’	Sha’ik	murmured.	‘I	am	humbled…and	revived.’
‘There	is	trouble	in	your	city,	Chosen	One.’
She	nodded.	‘I	know.’
‘Are	you	the	calm	at	its	heart?’
A	bitter	smile	twisted	her	lips	as	she	turned	away.	‘Will	these	serpents
permit	us	to	leave?’
‘Of	course.	But	do	not	step.	Instead,	shuffle.	Slowly.	They	will	open	for
you	a	path.’
‘I	should	be	alarmed	by	all	this,’	she	said	as	she	edged	back	on	their	path.
But	it	is	the	least	of	your	worries,	Chosen	One.	‘I	will	keep	you	apprised	of
developments,	if	you	wish.’
‘Thank	you,	yes.’
He	watched	her	make	her	way	out	of	the	clearing.	There	were	vows
wrapped	tight	around	Toblakai’s	soul.	Slowly	constricting.	Some	time	soon,
something	would	break.	He	knew	not	which,	but	if	Leoman	had	taught	him	one
thing,	it	was	patience.
When	she	was	gone,	the	warrior	swung	about	and	approached	the	mason’s
chest.
Dust	on	the	hands,	a	ghostly	patina,	tinted	faintly	pink	by	the	raging	red
storm	encircling	the	world.
	
The	heat	of	the	day	was	but	an	illusion	in	Raraku.	With	the	descent	of	darkness,
the	desert’s	dead	bones	quickly	cast	off	the	sun’s	shimmering,	fevered	breath.
The	wind	grew	chill	and	the	sands	erupted	with	crawling,	buzzing	life,	like


vermin	emerging	from	a	corpse.	Rhizan	flitted	in	a	frenzied	wild	hunt	through
the	clouds	of	capemoths	and	chigger	fleas	above	the	tent	city	sprawled	in	the
ruins.	In	the	distance	desert	wolves	howled	as	if	hunted	by	ghosts.
Heboric	lived	in	a	modest	tent	raised	around	a	ring	of	stones	that	had	once
provided	the	foundation	for	a	granary.	His	abode	was	situated	well	away	from
the	settlement’s	centre,	surrounded	by	the	yurts	of	one	of	Mathok’s	desert
tribes.	Old	rugs	covered	the	floor.	Off	to	one	side	a	small	table	of	piled	bricks
held	a	brazier,	sufficient	for	cooking	if	not	warmth.	A	cask	of	well-water	stood
nearby,	flavoured	with	amber	wine.	A	half-dozen	flickering	oil	lamps	suffused
the	interior	with	yellow	light.
He	sat	alone,	the	pungent	aroma	of	the	hen’bara	tea	sweet	in	the	cooling
air.	Outside,	the	sounds	of	the	settling	tribe	offered	a	comforting	background,
close	enough	and	chaotic	enough	to	keep	scattered	and	random	his	thoughts.
Only	later,	when	sleep	claimed	all	those	around	him,	would	the	relentless
assault	begin,	the	vertiginous	visions	of	a	face	of	jade,	so	massive	it
challenged	comprehension.	Power	both	alien	and	earthly,	as	if	born	of	a
natural	force	never	meant	to	be	altered.	Yet	altered	it	had	been,	shaped,	cursed
sentient.	A	giant	buried	in	otataral,	held	motionless	in	an	eternal	prison.
Who	could	now	touch	the	world	beyond,	with	the	ghosts	of	two	human
hands—hands	that	had	been	claimed	then	abandoned	by	a	god.
But	was	it	Fener	who	abandoned	me,	or	did	I	abandon	Fener?	Which	of	us,
I	wonder,	is	more…exposed?
This	camp,	this	war—this	desert—all	had	conspired	to	ease	the	shame	of
his	hiding.	Yet	one	day,	Heboric	knew,	he	would	have	to	return	to	that	dreaded
wasteland	from	his	past,	to	the	island	where	the	stone	giant	waited.	Return.	But
to	what	end?
He	had	always	believed	that	Fener	had	taken	his	severed	hands	into
keeping,	to	await	the	harsh	justice	that	was	the	Tusked	One’s	right.	A	fate	that
Heboric	had	accepted,	as	best	he	could.	But	it	seemed	there	was	to	be	no	end	to
the	betrayals	a	single	once-priest	could	commit	against	his	god.	Fener	had	been
dragged	from	his	realm,	left	abandoned	and	trapped	on	this	world.	Heboric’s
severed	hands	had	found	a	new	master,	a	master	possessed	of	such	immense
power	that	it	could	war	with	otataral	itself.	Yet	it	did	not	belong.	The	giant	of
jade,	Heboric	now	believed,	was	an	intruder,	sent	here	from	another	realm	for
some	hidden	purpose.
And,	instead	of	completing	that	purpose,	someone	had	imprisoned	it.
He	sipped	at	his	tea,	praying	that	its	narcotic	would	prove	sufficient	to
deaden	the	sleep	to	come.	It	was	losing	its	potency,	or,	rather,	he	was	becoming
inured	to	its	effects.


The	face	of	stone	beckoned.
The	face	that	was	trying	to	speak.
There	was	a	scratching	at	the	tent	flap,	then	it	was	pulled	aside.
Felisin	entered.	‘Ah,	still	awake.	Good,	that	will	make	this	easier.	My
mother	wants	you.’
‘Now?’
‘Yes.	There	have	been	events	in	the	world	beyond.	Consequences	to	be
discussed.	Mother	seeks	your	wisdom.’
Heboric	cast	a	mournful	glance	at	the	clay	cup	of	steaming	tea	in	his
invisible	hands.	It	was	little	more	than	flavoured	water	when	cold.	‘I	am
uninterested	in	events	in	the	world	beyond.	If	she	seeks	wise	words	from	me,
she	will	be	disappointed.’
‘So	I	argued,’	Felisin	Younger	said,	an	amused	glint	in	her	eyes.	‘Sha’ik
insists.’
She	helped	him	don	a	cloak	then	led	him	outside,	one	of	her	hands	light	as
a	capemoth	on	his	back.
The	night	was	bitter	cold,	tasting	of	settling	dust.	They	set	out	along	the
twisting	alleyways	between	the	yurts,	walking	in	silence.
They	passed	the	raised	dais	where	Sha’ik	Reborn	had	first	addressed	the
mob,	then	through	the	crumbled	gateposts	leading	to	the	huge,	multichambered	tent	that	was	the	Chosen	One’s	palace.	There	were	no	guards	as
such,	for	the	goddess’s	presence	was	palpable,	a	pressure	in	the	chill	air.
There	was	little	warmth	in	the	first	room	beyond	the	tent	flap,	but	with	each
successive	curtain	that	they	parted	and	stepped	through,	the	temperature	rose.
The	palace	was	a	maze	of	such	insulating	chambers,	most	of	them	empty	of
furniture,	offering	little	in	the	way	of	distinguishing	one	from	another.	An
assassin	who	proceeded	this	far,	somehow	avoiding	the	attention	of	the
goddess,	would	quickly	get	lost.	The	approach	to	where	Sha’ik	resided
followed	its	own	torturous,	winding	route.	Her	chambers	were	not	central,	not
at	the	heart	of	the	palace	as	one	might	expect.
With	his	poor	vision	and	the	endless	turns	and	twists,	Heboric	was	quickly
confused;	he	had	never	determined	the	precise	location	of	their	destination.	He
was	reminded	of	the	escape	from	the	mines,	the	arduous	journey	to	the	island’s
west	coast—it	had	been	Baudin	in	the	lead,	Baudin	whose	sense	of	direction
had	proved	unerring,	almost	uncanny.	Without	him,	Heboric	and	Felisin	would
have	died.
A	Talon,	no	less.	Ah,	Tavore,	you	were	not	wrong	to	place	your	faith	in	him.
It	was	Felisin	who	would	not	co-operate.	You	should	have	anticipated	that.
Well,	sister,	you	should	have	anticipated	a	lot	of	things…


But	not	this.
They	entered	the	square,	low-ceilinged	expanse	that	the	Chosen	One
—Felisin	Elder,	child	of	the	House	of	Paran—had	called	her	Throne	Room.
And	indeed	there	was	a	dais,	once	the	pedestal	for	a	hearth,	on	which	was	a	tallbacked	chair	of	sun-bleached	wood	and	padding.	In	councils	such	as	these,
Sha’ik	invariably	positioned	herself	in	that	makeshift	throne;	nor	would	she
leave	it	while	her	advisers	were	present,	not	even	to	peruse	the	yellowed	maps
the	commanders	were	wont	to	lay	out	on	the	hide-covered	floor.	Apart	from
Felisin	Younger,	the	Chosen	One	was	the	smallest	person	there.
Heboric	wondered	if	Sha’ik	Elder	had	suffered	similar	insecurities.	He
doubted	it.
The	room	was	crowded;	among	the	army’s	leaders	and	Sha’ik’s	select,
only	Leoman	and	Toblakai	were	absent.	There	were	no	other	chairs,	although
cushions	and	pillows	rested	against	the	base	of	three	of	the	four	tent	walls,	and
it	was	on	these	that	the	commanders	sat.	Felisin	at	his	side,	Heboric	made	his
way	to	the	far	side,	Sha’ik’s	left,	and	took	his	place	a	few	short	paces	from	the
dais,	the	young	girl	settling	down	beside	him.
Some	permanent	sorcery	illuminated	the	chamber,	the	light	somehow
warming	the	air	as	well.	Everyone	else	was	in	their	allotted	place,	Heboric
noted.	Though	they	were	little	more	than	blurs	in	his	eyes,	he	knew	them	all
well	enough.	Against	the	wall	opposite	the	throne	sat	the	half-blood	Napan,
Korbolo	Dom,	shaved	hairless,	his	dusty	blue	skin	latticed	in	scars.	On	his
right,	the	High	Mage	Kamist	Reloe,	gaunt	to	the	point	of	skeletal,	his	grey	hair
cut	short	to	stubble,	a	tight-curled	iron	beard	reaching	up	to	prominent
cheekbones	above	which	glittered	sunken	eyes.	On	Korbolo’s	left	sat	Henaras,
a	witch	from	some	desert	tribe	that	had,	for	unknown	reasons,	banished	her.
Sorcery	kept	her	youthful	in	appearance,	the	heavy	languor	in	her	dark	eyes
the	product	of	diluted	Tralb,	a	poison	drawn	from	a	local	snake,	which	she
imbibed	to	inure	her	against	assassination.	Beside	her	was	Fayelle,	an	obese,
perpetually	nervous	woman	of	whom	Heboric	knew	little.
Along	the	wall	opposite	the	ex-priest	were	L’oric,	Bidithal	and	Febryl,	the
latter	shapeless	beneath	an	oversized	silk	telaba,	its	hood	opened	wide	like	the
neck	of	a	desert	snake,	tiny	black	eyes	glittering	out	from	its	shadow.	Beneath
those	eyes	gleamed	twin	fangs	of	gold,	capping	his	upper	canines.	They	were
said	to	hold	Emulor,	a	poison	rendered	from	a	certain	cactus	that	gifted	not
death,	but	permanent	dementia.
The	last	commander	present	was	on	Felisin’s	left.	Mathok.	Beloved	of	the
desert	tribes,	the	tall,	black-skinned	warrior	possessed	an	inherent	nobility,	but
it	was	the	kind	that	seemed	to	irritate	everyone	around	him,	barring	perhaps


Leoman	who	appeared	to	be	indifferent	to	the	war	chief’s	grating	personality.
There	was,	in	fact,	little	to	give	cause	to	the	dislike,	for	Mathok	was	ever
courteous,	even	congenial,	quick	to	smile—perhaps	too	quick	at	that,	as	if	the
man	dismissed	everyone	as	not	worth	taking	seriously.	With	the	exception	of	the
Chosen	One,	of	course.
As	Heboric	settled,	Sha’ik	murmured,	‘Are	you	with	us	this	evening,	Ghost
Hands?’
‘Well	enough,’	he	replied.
An	undercurrent	of	tense	excitement	was	in	her	voice,	‘You	had	better	be,
old	man.	There	have	been…startling	developments.	Distant	catastrophes	have
rocked	the	Malazan	Empire…’
‘How	long	ago?’	Heboric	asked.
Sha’ik	frowned	at	the	odd	question,	but	Heboric	did	not	elaborate.	‘Less
than	a	week.	The	warrens	have	been	shaken,	one	and	all,	as	if	by	an	earthquake.
Sympathizers	of	the	rebellion	remain	in	Dujek	Onearm’s	army,	delivering	to
us	the	details.’	She	gestured	to	L’oric.	‘I’ve	no	wish	to	talk	all	night.	Elaborate
on	the	events,	L’oric,	for	the	benefit	of	Korbolo,	Heboric,	and	whoever	else
knows	nothing	of	all	that	has	occurred.’
The	man	tilted	his	head.	‘Delighted	to,	Chosen	One.	Those	of	you	who
employ	warrens	will	no	doubt	have	felt	the	repercussions,	the	brutal	reshaping
of	the	pantheon.	But	what	specifically	happened?	The	first	answer,	simply,	is
usurpation.	Fener,	Boar	of	Summer,	has,	to	all	intents	and	purposes,	been
ousted	as	the	preeminent	god	of	war.’	He	was	merciful	enough	to	not	glance	at
Heboric.	‘In	his	place,	the	once	First	Hero,	Treach.	The	Tiger	of	Summer—’
Ousted.	The	fault	is	mine	and	mine	alone.
Sha’ik’s	eyes	were	shining,	fixed	on	Heboric.	The	secrets	they	shared	taut
between	them,	crackling	yet	unseen	by	anyone	else.
L’oric	would	have	continued,	but	Korbolo	Dom	interrupted	the	High	Mage.
‘And	what	is	the	significance	of	that	to	us?	War	needs	no	gods,	only	mortal
contestants,	two	enemies	and	whatever	reasons	they	invent	in	order	to	justify
killing	each	other.’	He	paused,	smiling	at	L’oric,	then	shrugged.	‘All	of	which
satisfies	me	well	enough.’
His	words	had	pulled	Sha’ik’s	gaze	from	Heboric.	An	eyebrow	rising,	she
addressed	the	Napan.	‘And	what	are	your	reasons,	specifically,	Korbolo	Dom?’
‘I	like	killing	people.	It	is	the	one	thing	I	am	very	good	at.’
‘Would	that	be	people	in	general?’	Heboric	asked	him.	‘Or	perhaps	you
meant	the	enemies	of	the	Apocalypse.’
‘As	you	say,	Ghost	Hands.’
There	was	a	moment	of	general	unease,	then	L’oric	cleared	his	throat	and


said,	‘The	usurpation,	Korbolo	Dom,	is	the	one	detail	that	a	number	of	mages
present	may	already	know.	I	would	lead	us,	gently,	towards	the	less	well	known
developments	on	far-away	Genabackis.	Now,	to	continue.	The	pantheon	was
shaken	yet	again—by	the	sudden,	unexpected	taking	of	the	Beast	Throne	by
Togg	and	Fanderay,	the	mated	Elder	Wolves	that	had	seemed	eternally	cursed
to	never	find	each	other—riven	apart	as	they	were	by	the	Fall	of	the	Crippled
God.	The	full	effect	of	this	reawakening	of	the	ancient	Hold	of	the	Beast	is	yet
to	be	realized.	All	I	would	suggest,	personally,	is	to	those	Soletaken	and
D’ivers	among	us:	‘ware	the	new	occupants	of	the	Beast	Throne.	They	may
well	come	to	you,	eventually,	to	demand	that	you	kneel	before	them.’	He
smiled.	‘Alas,	all	those	poor	fools	who	followed	the	Path	of	the	Hand.	The
game	was	won	far,	far	away—’
‘We	were	the	victims,’	Fayelle	murmured,	‘of	deception.	By	minions	of
Shadowthrone,	no	less,	for	which	there	will	one	day	be	a	reckoning.’
Bidithal	smiled	at	her	words,	but	said	nothing.
L’oric’s	shrug	affected	indifference.	‘As	to	that,	Fayelle,	my	tale	is	far
from	done.	Allow	me,	if	you	will,	to	shift	to	mundane—though	if	anything
even	more	important—events.	A	very	disturbing	alliance	had	been	forged	on
Genabackis,	to	deal	with	a	mysterious	threat	called	the	Pannion	Domin.
Onearm’s	Host	established	an	accord	with	Caladan	Brood	and	Anomander
Rake.	Supplied	by	the	supremely	wealthy	city	of	Darujhistan,	the	joined	armies
marched	off	to	wage	war	against	the	Domin.	We	were,	truth	be	told,	relieved
by	this	event	from	a	short-term	perspective,	though	we	recognized	that	in	the
long	term	such	an	alliance	was	potentially	catastrophic	to	the	cause	of	the
rebellion	here	in	Seven	Cities.	Peace	on	Genabackis	would,	after	all,	free
Dujek	and	his	army,	leaving	us	with	the	potential	nightmare	of	Tavore
approaching	from	the	south,	and	Dujek	and	his	ten	thousand	disembarking	at
Ehrlitan	then	marching	down	from	the	north.’
‘An	unpleasant	thought,’	Korbolo	Dom	growled.	‘Tavore	alone	will	not
cause	us	much	difficulty.	But	the	High	Fist	and	his	ten	thousand…that’s	another
matter.	Granted,	most	of	the	soldiers	are	from	Seven	Cities,	but	I	would	not
cast	knuckles	on	the	hope	that	they	would	switch	sides.	Dujek	owns	them	body
and	soul—’
‘Barring	a	few	spies,’	Sha’ik	said,	her	voice	strangely	flat.
‘None	of	whom	would	have	contacted	us,’	L’oric	said,	‘had	things	turned
out…differently.’
‘A	moment,	please,’	young	Felisin	cut	in.	‘I	thought	that	Onearm	and	his
host	had	been	outlawed	by	the	Empress.’
‘Thus	permitting	him	to	forge	the	alliance	with	Brood	and	Rake,’	L’oric


explained.	‘A	convenient	and	temporary	ploy,	lass.’
‘We	don’t	want	Dujek	on	our	shores,’	Korbolo	Dom	said.	‘Bridgeburners.
Whiskeyjack,	Quick	Ben,	Kalam,	Black	Moranth	and	their	damned	munitions
—’
‘Permit	me	to	ease	your	pattering	heart,	Commander,’	L’oric	murmured.
‘We	shall	not	see	Dujek.	Not	anytime	soon,	at	any	rate.	The	Pannion	War
proved…devastating.	The	ten	thousand	lost	close	to	seven	thousand	of	their
number.	The	Black	Moranth	were	similarly	mauled.	Oh,	they	won,	in	the	end,
but	at	such	a	cost.	The	Bridgeburners…gone.	Whiskeyjack…dead.’
Heboric	slowly	straightened.	The	room	was	suddenly	cold.
‘And	Dujek	himself,’	L’oric	went	on,	‘a	broken	man.	Is	this	news	pleasing
enough?	There	is	this:	the	scourge	that	is	the	T’lan	Imass	is	no	more.	They
have	departed,	one	and	all.	No	more	will	their	terrors	be	visited	upon	the
innocent	citizens	of	Seven	Cities.	Thus,’	he	concluded,	‘what	has	the	Empress
left?	Adjunct	Tavore.	An	extraordinary	year	for	the	empire.	Coltaine	and	the
Seventh,	the	Aren	Legion,	Whiskeyjack,	the	Bridgeburners,	Onearm’s	Host—
we	will	be	hard-pressed	to	best	that.’
‘But	we	shall,’	Korbolo	Dom	laughed,	both	hands	closed	into	paleknuckled	fists.	‘Whiskeyjack!	Dead!	Ah,	blessings	to	Hood	this	night!	I	shall
make	sacrifice	before	his	altar!	And	Dujek—oh,	his	spirit	will	have	been
broken	indeed.	Crushed!’
‘Enough	gloating,’	Heboric	growled,	sickened.
Kamist	Reloe	was	leaning	far	forward,	‘L’oric!’	he	hissed.	‘What	of	Quick
Ben?’
‘He	lives,	alas.	Kalam	did	not	accompany	the	army—no-one	knows	where
he	has	gone.	There	were	but	a	handful	of	survivors	from	the	Bridgeburners,
and	Dujek	disbanded	them	and	had	them	listed	as	casualties—’
‘Who	lived?’	Kamist	demanded.
L’oric	frowned.	‘A	handful,	as	I	said.	Is	it	important?’
‘Yes!’
‘Very	well.’	L’oric	glanced	over	at	Sha’ik.	‘Chosen	One,	do	you	permit	me
to	make	contact	once	more	with	my	servant	in	that	distant	army?	It	will	be	but	a
few	moments.’
She	shrugged.	‘Proceed.’	Then,	as	L’oric	lowered	his	head,	she	slowly
leaned	back	in	her	chair.	‘Thus.	Our	enemy	has	faced	irreparable	defeat.	The
Empress	and	her	dear	empire	reel	from	the	final	gush	of	life-blood.	It	falls	to
us,	then,	to	deliver	the	killing	blow.’
Heboric	suspected	he	was	the	only	one	present	who	heard	the	hollowness
of	her	words.


Sister	Tavore	stands	alone,	now.
And	alone	is	what	she	prefers.	Alone	is	the	state	in	which	she	thrives.	Ah,
lass,	you	would	pretend	to	excitement	at	this	news,	yet	it	has	achieved	the	very
opposite	for	you,	hasn’t	it.	Your	fear	of	sister	Tavore	has	only	deepened.
Freezing	you	in	place.
L’oric	began	speaking	without	raising	his	head.	‘Blend.	Toes.	Mallet.
Spindle.
Sergeant	Antsy.	Lieutenant	Picker…Captain	Paran.’
There	was	a	thump	from	the	high-backed	chair	as	Sha’ik’s	head	snapped
back.	All	colour	had	left	her	face,	the	only	detail	Heboric	could	detect	with	his
poor	eyes,	but	he	knew	the	shock	that	would	be	written	on	those	features.	A
shock	that	rippled	through	him	as	well,	though	it	was	but	the	shock	of
recognition—not	of	what	it	portended	for	this	young	woman	seated	on	this
throne.
Unmindful,	L’oric	continued,	‘Quick	Ben	has	been	made	High	Mage.	It	is
believed	the	surviving	Bridgeburners	departed	by	warren	to	Darujhistan,
though	my	spy	is	in	fact	uncertain	of	that.	Whiskeyjack	and	the	fallen
Bridgeburners…were	interred…in	Moon’s	Spawn,	which	has—gods	below!
Abandoned!	The	Son	of	Darkness	has	abandoned	Moon’s	Spawn!’	He	seemed
to	shiver	then,	and	slowly	looked	up,	blinking	rapidly.	A	deep	breath,	loosed
raggedly.	‘Whiskeyjack	was	killed	by	one	of	Brood’s	commanders.	Betrayal,	it
seemed,	plagued	the	alliance.’
‘Of	course	it	did,’	Korbolo	Dom	sneered.
‘We	must	consider	Quick	Ben,’	Kamist	Reloe	said,	his	hands	wringing
together	incessantly	on	his	lap.	‘Will	Tayschrenn	send	him	to	Tavore?	What	of
the	remaining	three	thousand	of	Onearm’s	Host?	Even	if	Dujek	does	not	lead
them—’
‘They	are	broken	in	spirit,’	L’oric	said.	‘Hence,	the	wavering	souls	among
them	who	sought	me	out.’
‘And	where	is	Kalam	Mekhar?’	Kamist	hissed,	inadvertently	glancing	over
his	shoulder	then	starting	at	his	own	shadow	on	the	wall.
‘Kalam	Mekhar	is	nothing	without	Quick	Ben,’	Korbolo	Dom	snarled.
‘Even	less	now	that	his	beloved	Whiskeyjack	is	dead.’
Kamist	rounded	on	his	companion.	‘And	what	if	Quick	Ben	is	reunited	with
that	damned	assassin?	What	then?’
The	Napan	shrugged.	‘We	didn’t	kill	Whiskeyjack.	Their	minds	will	be
filled	with	vengeance	for	the	slayer	among	Brood’s	entourage.	Do	not	fear
what	will	never	come	to	pass,	old	friend.’
Sha’ik’s	voice	rang	startlingly	through	the	room.	‘Everyone	out	but


Heboric!	Now!’
Blank	looks,	then	the	others	rose.
Felisin	Younger	hesitated.	‘Mother?’
‘You	as	well,	child.	Out.’
L’oric	said,	‘There	is	the	matter	of	the	new	House	and	all	it	signifies,
Chosen—’
‘Tomorrow	night.	We	will	resume	the	discussion	then.	Out!’
A	short	while	later	Heboric	sat	alone	with	Sha’ik.	She	stared	down	at	him
in	silence	for	some	time,	then	rose	suddenly	and	stepped	down	from	the	dais.
She	fell	to	her	knees	in	front	of	Heboric,	sufficiently	close	for	him	to	focus	on
her	face.	It	was	wet	with	tears.
‘My	brother	lives!’	she	sobbed.
And	suddenly	she	was	in	his	arms,	face	pressed	against	his	shoulders	as
shudders	heaved	through	her	small,	fragile	frame.
Stunned,	Heboric	remained	silent.
She	wept	for	a	long,	long	time,	and	he	held	her	tight,	unmoving,	as	solid	as
he	could	manage.	And	each	time	the	vision	of	his	fallen	god	rose	before	his
mind’s	eye,	he	ruthlessly	drove	it	back	down.	The	child	in	his	arms—for	child
she	was,	once	more—cried	in	nothing	other	than	the	throes	of	salvation.	She
was	no	longer	alone,	no	longer	alone	with	only	her	hated	sister	to	taint	the
family’s	blood.
For	that—for	the	need	his	presence	answered—his	own	grief	would	wait.


Chapter	Eight

Among	the	untried	recruits	of	the	Fourteenth	Army,	fully	half
originated	from	the	continent	of	Quon	Tali,	the	very	centre	of	the
empire.	Young	and	idealistic,	they	stepped	onto	blood-soaked
ground,	in	the	wake	of	the	sacrifices	made	by	their	fathers	and
mothers,	their	grandfathers	and	grandmothers.	It	is	the	horror	of
war	that,	with	each	newly	arrived	generation,	the	nightmare	is
reprised	by	innocents.
THE	SHA’IK	REBELLION,	ILLUSIONS	OF	VICTORY
IMRYGYN 	T ALLOBANT
Adjunct	Tavore	stood	alone	in	front	of	four	thousand	milling,	jostling
soldiers,	while	officers	bellowed	and	screamed	through	the	press,	their	voices
hoarse	with	desperation.	Pikes	wavered	and	flashed	blinding	glares	through	the
dusty	air	of	the	parade	ground	like	startled	birds	of	steel.	The	sun	was	a	raging
fire	overhead.
Fist	Gamet	stood	twenty	paces	behind	her,	tears	in	his	eyes	as	he	stared	at
Tavore.	A	pernicious	wind	was	sweeping	the	dust	cloud	directly	towards	the
Adjunct.	In	moments	she	was	engulfed.	Yet	she	made	no	move,	her	back
straight,	her	gloved	hands	at	her	sides.
No	commander	could	be	more	alone	than	she	was	now.	Alone,	and
helpless.
And	worse.	This	is	my	legion.	The	8th.	The	first	to	assemble,	Beru	fend	us
all.
But	she	had	ordered	that	he	remain	where	he	was,	if	only	to	spare	him	the
humiliation	of	trying	to	impose	some	kind	of	order	on	his	troops.	She	had,
instead,	taken	that	humiliation	upon	herself.	And	Gamet	wept	for	her,	unable	to
hide	his	shame	and	grief.
Aren’s	parade	ground	was	a	vast	expanse	of	hard-packed,	almost	white
earth.	Six	thousand	fully	armoured	soldiers	could	stand	arrayed	in	ranks	with
sufficient	avenues	between	the	companies	for	officers	to	conduct	their	review.


The	Fourteenth	Army	was	to	assemble	before	the	scrutiny	of	Adjunct	Tavore
in	three	phases,	a	legion	at	a	time.	Gamet’s	8th	had	arrived	in	a	ragged,
dissolving	mob	over	two	bells	past,	every	lesson	from	every	drill	sergeant
lost,	the	few	veteran	officers	and	non-coms	locked	in	a	titanic	struggle	with	a
four-thousand-headed	beast	that	had	forgotten	what	it	was.
Gamet	saw	Captain	Keneb,	whom	Blistig	had	graciously	given	him	to
command	the	9th	Company,	battering	at	soldiers	with	the	flat	of	his	blade,
forcing	them	into	a	line	that	broke	up	in	his	wake	as	other	soldiers	pressed
forward	from	behind.	There	were	some	old	soldiers	in	that	front	row,	trying	to
dig	in	their	heels—sergeants	and	corporals,	red-faced	with	sweat	streaming
from	beneath	their	helms.
Fifteen	paces	behind	Gamet	waited	the	other	two	Fists,	as	well	as	the
Wickan	scouts	under	the	command	of	Temul.	Nil	and	Nether	were	there	as
well,	although,	mercifully,	Admiral	Nok	was	not—for	the	fleet	had	sailed.
Impulses	at	war	within	him,	Gamet	trembled,	wanting	to	be	elsewhere—
anywhere—and	wanting	to	drag	the	Adjunct	with	him.	Failing	that,	wanting	to
step	forward,	defying	her	direct	order,	to	take	position	at	her	side.
Someone	came	alongside	him.	A	heavy	leather	sack	thumped	into	the	dust,
and	Gamet	turned	to	see	a	squat	soldier,	blunt-featured	beneath	a	leather	cap,
wearing	barely	half	of	a	marine’s	standard	issue	of	armour—a	random
collection	of	boiled	leather	fittings—over	a	threadbare,	stained	uniform,	the
magenta	dye	so	faded	as	to	be	mauve.	No	insignia	was	present.	The	man’s
scarred,	pitted	face	stared	impassively	at	the	seething	mob.
Gamet	swung	further	round	to	see	an	additional	dozen	decrepit	men	and
women,	each	standing	an	arm’s	reach	from	the	one	in	front,	wearing
unrepaired,	piecemeal	armour	and	carrying	an	assortment	of	weapons—few	of
which	were	Malazan.
The	Fist	addressed	the	man	in	the	lead.	‘And	who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you
people?’
‘Sorry	we	was	late,’	the	soldier	grunted.	‘Then	again,’	he	added,	‘I	could
be	lying.’
‘Late?	Which	squads?	What	companies?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘This	and	that.	We	was	in	Aren	gaol.	Why	was	we
there?	This	and	that.	But	now	we’re	here,	sir.	You	want	these	children	quelled?’
‘If	you	can	manage	that,	soldier,	I’ll	give	you	a	command	of	your	own.’
‘No	you	won’t.	I	killed	an	Untan	noble	here	in	Aren.	Name	of	Lenestro.
Snapped	his	neck	with	these	two	hands.’
Through	the	clouds	of	dust	before	them,	a	sergeant	had	clawed	free	of	the
mob	and	was	approaching	Adjunct	Tavore.	For	a	moment	Gamet	was	terrified


that	he	would,	insanely,	cut	her	down	right	there,	but	the	man	sheathed	his
short-sword	as	he	drew	up	before	her.	Words	were	exchanged.
The	Fist	made	a	decision.	‘Come	with	me,	soldier.’
‘Aye,	sir.’	The	man	reached	down	and	collected	his	kit	bag.
Gamet	led	him	to	where	Tavore	and	the	sergeant	stood.	An	odd	thing
happened	then.	There	was	a	grunt	from	the	veteran	at	the	Fist’s	side,	even	as	the
wiry,	red-and-grey-bearded	sergeant’s	eyes	flickered	past	the	Adjunct	and
fixed	on	the	soldier.	A	sudden	broad	grin,	then	a	quick	succession	of	gestures
—a	hand	lifting,	as	if	holding	an	invisible	rock	or	ball,	then	the	hand	flipping,
index	finger	inscribing	a	circle,	followed	by	a	jerk	of	the	thumb	towards	the
east,	concluded	with	a	shrug.	In	answer	to	all	this,	the	soldier	from	the	gaol
gave	his	kit	bag	a	shake.
The	sergeant’s	blue	eyes	widened.
They	arrived,	coming	alongside	the	Adjunct,	who	swung	a	blank	gaze	on
Gamet.
‘Your	pardon,	Adjunct,’	the	Fist	said,	and	would	have	added	more,	but
Tavore	raised	a	hand	and	made	to	speak.
She	didn’t	get	a	chance.
The	soldier	at	Gamet’s	side	spoke	to	the	sergeant.	‘Draw	us	a	line,	will
ya?’
‘I’ll	do	just	that.’
The	sergeant	pivoted	and	returned	to	the	heaving	ranks.
Tavore’s	eyes	had	snapped	to	the	soldier,	but	she	said	nothing,	for	the	man
had	set	his	bag	down,	drawn	back	its	flap,	and	was	rummaging	inside	it.
Five	paces	in	front	of	the	legion’s	uneven	ranks,	the	sergeant	once	more
drew	his	sword,	then	drove	its	blunt	tip	into	the	dust	and	set	off,	inscribing	a
sharp	furrow	in	the	ground.
Draw	us	a	line,	will	ya?
The	soldier	crouched	over	his	kit	bag	looked	up	suddenly.	‘You	two	still
here?	Go	back	to	them	Wickans,	then	all	of	you	pull	back	another	thirty,	forty
paces.	Oh,	and	get	them	Wickans	off	their	horses	and	a	tight	grip	on	the	reins,
and	all	of	ya,	take	for	yourselves	a	wide	stance.	Then	when	I	give	the	signal,
plug	your	ears.’
Gamet	flinched	as	the	man	began	withdrawing	a	succession	of	clay	balls
from	his	bag.	The	bag…that	thumped	down	beside	me	not	fifty	heartbeats	ago.
Hood’s	breath!
‘What	is	your	name,	soldier?’	Adjunct	Tavore	rasped.
‘Cuttle.	Now,	better	get	moving,	lass.’
Gamet	reached	out	and	touched	her	shoulder.	‘Adjunct,	those	are—’


‘I	know	what	they	are,’	she	snapped.	‘And	this	man’s	liable	to	kill	fifty	of
my	soldiers—’
‘Right	now,	lady,’	Cuttle	growled	as	he	drew	out	a	folding	shovel,	‘you
ain’t	got	any.	Now	take	it	from	me,	that	otataral	blade	at	your	comely	hip	ain’t
gonna	help	you	one	bit	if	you	decide	to	stand	here.	Pull	’em	all	back,	and	leave
the	rest	to	me	and	the	sergeant.’
‘Adjunct,’	Gamet	said,	unable	to	keep	the	pleading	from	his	tone.
She	shot	him	a	glare,	then	wheeled.	‘Let	us	be	about	it,	then,	Fist.’
He	let	her	take	the	lead,	paused	after	a	few	paces	to	glance	back.	The
sergeant	had	rejoined	Cuttle,	who	had	managed	to	dig	a	small	hole	in	what
seemed	an	absurdly	short	time.
‘Cobbles	down	there!’	The	sergeant	nodded.	‘Perfect!’
‘About	what	I	figured,’	Cuttle	replied.	‘I’ll	angle	these	crackers,	with	the
cusser	a	hand’s	width	deeper—’
‘Perfect.	I’d	have	done	the	same	if	I’d	thought	to	bring	some	with	me—’
‘You	supplied?’
‘Well	enough.’
‘What	I	got	here	in	my	bag	are	the	last.’
‘I	can	mend	that,	Cuttle.’
‘For	that,	Fid—’
‘Strings.’
‘For	that,	Strings,	you’ve	earned	a	kiss.’
‘I	can’t	wait.’
Gamet	pulled	himself	away	with	a	shake	of	his	head.	Sappers.
	
The	explosion	was	a	double	thump	that	shook	the	earth,	cobbles	punching	free
of	the	overburden	of	dust—which	had	leapt	skyward—to	clack	and	clash	in	a
maelstrom	of	stone	chips	and	slivers.	Fully	a	third	of	the	legion	were	thrown
from	their	feet,	taking	down	others	with	them.
Astonishingly,	none	seemed	fatally	injured,	as	if	Cuttle	had	somehow
directed	the	force	of	the	detonation	downward	and	out	under	the	cobbles.
As	the	last	rubble	pattered	down,	Adjunct	Tavore	and	Gamet	moved
forward	once	again.
Facing	the	silenced	mob,	Cuttle	stood	with	a	sharper	held	high	in	one	hand.
In	a	bellowing	voice,	he	addressed	the	recruits.	‘Next	soldier	who	moves	gets
this	at	his	feet,	and	if	you	think	my	aim	ain’t	any	good,	try	me!	Now,	sergeants
and	corporals!	Up	nice	and	slow	now.	Find	your	squads.	You	up	here	in	front,
Sergeant	Strings	here	has	drawn	us	a	tidy	nice	line—all	right,	so	it’s	a	bit


messy	right	now	so	he’s	drawing	it	again—walk	up	to	it	easy	like,	toes	a
finger ’s	width	away	from	it,	boots	square!	We’re	gonna	do	this	right,	or
people	are	going	to	die.’
Sergeant	Strings	was	moving	along	the	front	line	now,	ensuring	the	line
was	held,	spreading	soldiers	out.	Officers	were	shouting	once	more,	though
not	as	loud	as	before,	since	the	recruits	remained	silent.	Slowly,	the	legion
began	taking	shape.
Those	recruits	were	indeed	silent,	and…watchful,	Gamet	noted	as	he	and
the	Adjunct	returned	to	close	to	their	original	position—the	gaping,	smoking
crater	off	to	one	side.	Watchful…of	the	madman	with	the	sharper	held	high
above	his	head.	After	a	moment,	the	Fist	moved	up	to	stand	beside	Cuttle.
‘You	killed	a	nobleman?’	he	asked	in	a	low	voice,	studying	the	assembling
ranks.
‘Aye,	Fist.	I	did.’
‘Was	he	on	the	Chain	of	Dogs?’
‘He	was.’
‘As	were	you,	Cuttle.’
‘Until	I	took	a	spear	through	a	shoulder.	Went	with	the	others	on	the
Silanda.	Missed	the	final	argument,	I	did.	Lenestro	was…second	best.	I	wanted
Pullyk	Alar	to	start,	but	Alar ’s	run	off	with	Mallick	Rel.	I	want	both	of	them,
Fist.	Maybe	they	think	the	argument’s	over,	but	not	for	me.’
‘I’d	be	pleased	if	you	took	me	up	on	that	offer	of	command,’	Gamet	said.
‘No	thanks,	sir.	I’m	already	assigned	to	a	squad.	Sergeant	Strings’s	squad,
in	fact.	Suits	me	fine.’
‘Where	do	you	know	him	from?’
Cuttle	glanced	over,	his	eyes	thinned	to	slits.
Expressionless,	he	said,	‘Never	met	him	before	today,	sir.	Now,	if	you’ll
excuse	me,	I	owe	him	a	kiss.’

Less	than	a	quarter-bell	later,	Fist	Gamet’s	8th	Legion	stood	motionless	in
tight,	even	ranks.	Adjunct	Tavore	studied	them	from	where	she	stood	at
Gamet’s	side,	but	had	yet	to	speak.	Cuttle	and	Sergeant	Strings	had	rejoined	the
9th	Company’s	4th	squad.
Tavore	seemed	to	reach	some	decision.	A	gesture	behind	her	brought	Fists
Tene	Baralta	and	Blistig	forward.	Moments	later	they	came	up	alongside
Gamet	and	halted.	The	Adjunct’s	unremarkable	eyes	fixed	on	Blistig.	‘Your


legion	waits	in	the	main	avenue	beyond?’
The	red-faced	man	nodded.	‘Melting	in	the	heat,	Adjunct.	But	that	cusser
going	off	settled	them	down.’
Her	gaze	shifted	to	the	Red	Blade.	‘Fist	Baralta?’
‘Calmed,	Adjunct.’
‘When	I	dismiss	the	8th	and	they	depart	the	parade	ground,	I	suggest	the
remaining	soldiers	enter	by	company.	Each	company	will	then	take	position
and	when	they	are	ready	the	next	one	follows.	It	may	take	longer,	but	at	the
very	least	we	will	not	have	a	repetition	of	the	chaos	we	have	just	witnessed.	Fist
Gamet,	are	you	satisfied	with	the	assemblage	of	your	troops?’
‘Well	enough,	Adjunct.’
‘As	am	I.	You	may	now—’
She	got	no	further,	seeing	that	the	attention	of	the	three	men	standing
before	her	had	slipped	past,	over	her	shoulder;	and	from	the	four	thousand
soldiers	standing	at	attention,	there	was	sudden,	absolute	silence—not	a	rustle
of	armour,	not	a	cough.	For	the	8th	had	drawn	a	single	breath,	and	now	held	it.
Gamet	struggled	to	maintain	his	expression,	even	as	Tavore	raised	an
eyebrow	at	him.	Then	she	slowly	turned.
The	toddler	had	come	from	nowhere,	unseen	by	any	until	he	arrived	to
stand	in	the	very	spot	where	the	Adjunct	had	first	stood,	his	oversized	rust-red
telaba	trailing	like	a	royal	train.	Blond	hair	a	tangled	shock	above	a	deeply
tanned,	cherubic	face	smeared	with	dirt,	the	child	faced	the	ranks	of	soldiers
with	an	air	of	unperturbed	calculation.
A	strangled	cough	from	among	the	soldiers,	then	someone	stepped
forward.
Even	as	the	man	emerged	from	the	front	line,	the	toddler ’s	eyes	found	him.
Both	arms,	buried	in	sleeves,	reached	out.	Then	one	sleeve	slipped	back,
revealing	the	tiny	hand,	and	in	that	hand	there	was	a	bone.	A	human	longbone.
The	man	froze	in	mid-step.
The	air	above	the	parade	ground	seemed	to	hiss	like	a	thing	alive	with	the
gasps	of	four	thousand	soldiers.
Gamet	fought	down	a	shiver,	then	spoke	to	the	man.	‘Captain	Keneb,’	he
said	loudly,	struggling	to	swallow	a	welling	dread,	‘I	suggest	you	collect	your
lad.	Now,	before	ho-uh,	starts	screaming.’
Face	flushed,	Keneb	threw	a	shaky	salute	then	strode	forward.
‘Neb!’	the	toddler	shouted	as	the	captain	gathered	him	up.
Adjunct	Tavore	snapped,	‘Follow	me!’	to	Gamet,	then	walked	to	the	pair.
‘Captain	Keneb,	is	it?’
‘Your	p-pardon,	Adjunct.	The	lad	has	a	nurse	but	seems	determined	to	slip


through	her	grasp	at	every	opportunity—there’s	a	blown	graveyard	behind	the
—’
‘Is	he	yours,	Captain?’	Tavore	demanded,	her	tone	brittle.
‘As	good	as,	Adjunct.	An	orphan	from	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	The	historian
Duiker	placed	him	into	my	care.’
‘Has	he	a	name?’
‘Grub.’
‘Grub?’
Keneb’s	shrug	was	apologetic.	‘For	now,	Adjunct.	It	well	suits	him—’
‘And	the	8th.	Yes,	I	see	that.	Deliver	him	to	your	hired	nurse,	Captain.
Then,	tomorrow,	fire	her	and	hire	a	better	one…or	three.	Will	the	child
accompany	the	army?’
‘He	has	no-one	else,	Adjunct.	There	will	be	other	families	among	the	camp
followers—’
‘I	am	aware	of	that.	Be	on	your	way,	Captain	Keneb.’
‘I—I	am	sorry,	Adjunct—’
But	she	was	already	turning	away,	and	only	Gamet	heard	her	sigh	and
murmur,	‘It	is	far	too	late	for	that.’
And	she	was	right.	Soldiers—even	recruits—recognized	an	omen	when	it
arrived.	A	child	in	the	very	boot	prints	of	the	woman	who	would	lead	this	army.
Raising	high	a	sun-bleached	thigh	bone.
Gods	below…
	
‘Hood’s	balls	skewered	on	a	spit.’
The	curse	was	spoken	as	a	low	growl,	in	tones	of	disgust.
Strings	watched	Cuttle	set	his	bag	down	and	slide	it	beneath	the	low
flatboard	bed.	The	stable	that	had	been	transformed	into	a	makeshift	barracks
held	eight	squads	now,	the	cramped	confines	reeking	of	fresh	sweat…and	stark
terror.	At	the	back	wall’s	urine	hole	someone	was	being	sick.
‘Let’s	head	outside,	Cuttle,’	Strings	said	after	a	moment.	‘I’ll	collect	Gesler
and	Borduke.’
‘I’d	rather	go	get	drunk,’	the	sapper	muttered.
‘Later,	we’ll	do	just	that.	But	first,	we	need	to	have	a	small	meeting.’
Still	the	other	man	hesitated.
Strings	rose	from	his	cot	and	stepped	close.	‘Aye,	it’s	that	important.’
‘All	right.	Lead	on…Strings.’
As	it	turned	out,	Stormy	joined	the	group	of	veterans	that	pushed	silently
past	ashen-faced	recruits—many	of	them	with	closed	eyes	and	mouthing	silent


prayers—and	headed	out	into	the	courtyard.
It	was	deserted,	Lieutenant	Ranal—who	had	proved	pathetically	ineffective
at	the	assembly—having	fled	into	the	main	house	the	moment	the	troop
arrived.
All	eyes	were	on	Strings.	He	in	turn	studied	the	array	of	grim	expressions
around	him.	There	was	no	doubt	among	them	concerning	the	meaning	of	the
omen,	and	Strings	was	inclined	to	agree.	A	child	leads	us	to	our	deaths.	A	leg
bone	to	signify	our	march,	withered	under	the	curse	of	the	desert	sun.	We’ve	all
lived	too	long,	seen	too	much,	to	deceive	ourselves	of	this	one	brutal	truth:	this
army	of	recruits	now	see	themselves	as	already	dead.
Stormy’s	battered,	red-bearded	face	finally	twisted	into	an	expression	too
bitter	to	be	wry.	‘If	you’re	going	to	say	that	us	here	have	a	hope	at	Hood’s	gate
in	fighting	the	tide,	Strings,	you’ve	lost	your	mind.	The	lads	and	lasses	in	there
ain’t	unique—the	whole	damned	three	legions—’
‘I	know,’	Strings	cut	in.	‘We	ain’t	none	of	us	stupid.	Now,	all	I’m	asking	is
for	a	spell	of	me	talking.	Me	talking.	No	interruptions.	I’ll	tell	you	when	I’m
done.	Agreed?’
Borduke	turned	his	head	and	spat.	‘You’re	a	Hood-damned	Bridgeburner.’
‘Was.	Got	a	problem	with	that?’
The	sergeant	of	the	6th	squad	grinned.	‘What	I	meant	by	that,	Strings,	is
that	for	you	I’ll	listen.	As	you	ask.’
‘Same	with	us,’	Gesler	muttered,	Stormy	nodding	agreement	at	his	side.
Strings	faced	Cuttle.	‘And	you?’
‘Only	because	it’s	you	and	not	Hedge,	Fiddler.	Sorry.	Strings.’
Borduke’s	eyes	widened	in	recognition	of	the	name.	He	spat	a	second	time.
‘Thank	you.’
‘Don’t	thank	us	yet,’	Cuttle	said,	but	took	the	edge	off	with	a	slight	smile.
‘All	right,	I’ll	start	with	a	story.	Has	to	do	with	Nok,	the	admiral,	though	he
wasn’t	an	admiral	back	then,	just	the	commander	of	six	dromons.	I’d	be
surprised	if	any	of	you	have	heard	this	story	but	if	you	have	don’t	say	nothing
—but	its	relevance	here	should	have	occurred	to	you	already.	Six	dromons.	On
their	way	to	meet	the	Kartool	fleet,	three	pirate	galleys,	which	had	each	been
blessed	by	the	island’s	priests	of	D’rek.	The	Worm	of	Autumn.	Yes,	you	all
know	D’rek’s	other	name,	but	I	said	it	for	emphasis.	In	any	case,	Nok’s	fleet
had	stopped	at	the	Napan	Isles,	went	up	the	mouth	of	Koolibor	River	to	drag
barrels—drawing	fresh	water.	What	every	ship	did	when	heading	out	to
Kartool	or	beyond	on	the	Reach.	Six	ships,	each	drawing	water,	storing	the
barrels	below	decks.
‘Half	a	day	out	of	the	Napan	Isles,	the	first	barrel	was	broached,	by	a


cook’s	helper,	on	the	flagship.	And	straight	out	through	the	hole	came	a	snake.
A	paralt,	up	the	lad’s	arm.	Sank	both	fangs	into	his	left	eye.	Screaming,	he	ran
out	on	deck,	the	snake	with	its	jaws	wide	and	holding	tight,	writhing	around.
Well,	the	lad	managed	two	steps	before	he	died,	then	he	went	down,	already
white	as	a	sun-bleached	yard.	The	snake	was	killed,	but	as	you	can	imagine,	it
was	too	late.
‘Nok,	being	young,	just	shrugged	the	whole	event	off,	and	when	word
spread	and	sailors	and	marines	started	dying	of	thirst—in	ships	loaded	with
barrels	of	fresh	water	that	no-one	would	dare	open—he	went	and	did	the
obvious	thing.	Brought	up	another	barrel.	Breached	it	with	his	own	hands.’
Strings	paused.	He	could	see	that	no-one	else	knew	the	tale.	Could	see	that	he
had	their	attention.
‘The	damned	barrel	was	full	of	snakes.	Spilling	out	onto	the	deck.	A
damned	miracle	Nok	wasn’t	bitten.	It	was	just	starting	dry	season,	you	see.	The
paralts’	season	in	the	river	was	ending.	The	waters	fill	with	them	as	they	head
down	to	the	river	mouth	on	their	way	out	to	sea.	Every	single	barrel	on	those
six	dromons	held	snakes.
‘The	fleet	never	closed	to	do	battle	with	the	Kartoolians.	By	the	time	it
made	it	back	to	Nap,	half	of	the	complement	was	dead	of	thirst.	All	six	ships
were	holed	outside	the	harbour,	packed	with	offerings	to	D’rek,	the	Worm	of
Autumn,	and	sent	to	the	deep.	Nok	had	to	wait	until	the	next	year	to	shatter
Kartool’s	paltry	fleet.	Two	months	after	that,	the	island	was	conquered.’	He	fell
silent	for	a	moment,	then	shook	his	head.	‘No,	I’m	not	finished.	That	was	a
story,	a	story	of	how	to	do	things	wrong.	You	don’t	destroy	an	omen	by
fighting	it.	No,	you	do	the	opposite.	You	swallow	it	whole.’
Confused	expressions.	Gesler ’s	was	the	first	to	clear	and	at	the	man’s	grin
—startling	white	in	his	bronze-hued	face—Strings	slowly	nodded,	then	said,	‘If
we	don’t	close	both	hands	on	this	omen,	we’re	all	nothing	more	than	pallbearers	to	those	recruits	in	there.	To	the	whole	damned	army.
‘Now,	didn’t	I	hear	that	captain	mention	something	about	a	nearby
cemetery?	Blown	clear,	the	bones	exposed	to	all.	I	suggest	we	go	find	it.	Right
now.	All	right,	I’m	finished	talking.’
‘That	was	a	damned	thigh	bone,’	Stormy	growled.
Gesler	stared	at	his	corporal.
	
‘We	march	in	two	days’	time.’
Before	anything	else	happens,	Gamet	silently	added	to	the	Adjunct’s
announcement.	He	glanced	over	at	Nil	and	Nether	where	they	sat	side	by	side


on	the	bench	against	the	wall.	Both	racked	with	shivers,	the	aftermath	of	the
omen’s	power	leaving	them	huddled	and	pale.
Mysteries	stalked	the	world.	Gamet	had	felt	their	chill	breath	before,	a
reverberation	of	power	that	belonged	to	no	god,	but	existed	none	the	less.	As
implacable	as	the	laws	of	nature.	Truths	beneath	the	bone.	To	his	mind,	the
Empress	would	be	better	served	by	the	immediate	disbanding	of	the	Fourteenth
Army.	A	deliberate	and	thorough	breaking	up	of	the	units	with	reassignments
throughout	the	empire,	the	wait	of	another	year	for	another	wave	of	recruits.
Adjunct	Tavore’s	next	words	to	those	gathered	in	the	chamber	seemed	to
speak	directly	to	Gamet’s	thoughts.	‘We	cannot	afford	it,’	she	said,
uncharacteristically	pacing.	‘The	Fourteenth	cannot	be	defeated	before	it	sets
foot	outside	Aren.	The	entire	subcontinent	will	be	irretrievably	lost	if	that
happens.	Better	we	get	annihilated	in	Raraku.	Sha’ik’s	forces	will	have	at	least
been	reduced.
‘Two	days.
‘In	the	meantime,	I	want	the	Fists	to	call	their	officers	together,	rank	of
lieutenant	and	higher.	Inform	them	I	will	be	visiting	each	company	in	person,
beginning	tonight.	Give	no	indication	of	which	one	I	will	visit	first—I	want
them	all	alert.	Apart	from	guard	postings,	every	soldier	is	restricted	to
barracks.	Keep	a	particular	eye	on	veterans.	They	will	want	to	get	drunk,	and
stay	drunk,	if	they	can.	Fist	Baralta,	contact	Orto	Setral	and	have	him	assemble
a	troop	of	Red	Blades.	They’re	to	sweep	the	settlement	of	the	camp	followers
and	confiscate	all	alcohol	and	durhang	or	whatever	else	the	locals	possess	that
deadens	the	senses.	Then	establish	a	picket	round	that	settlement.	Any
questions?	Good.	You	are	all	dismissed.	Gamet,	send	for	T’amber.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’	Uncharacteristically	careless.	That	perfumed	lover	of	yours
has	been	kept	from	the	sights	of	everyone	here	but	me.	They	know,	of	course.
Even	so…
	
Outside	in	the	hallway,	Blistig	exchanged	a	nod	with	Baralta	then	gripped
Gamet’s	upper	arm.	‘With	us,	if	you	please.’
Nil	and	Nether	shot	them	a	glance	then	hurried	off.
‘Take	that	damned	hand	off	me,’	Gamet	said	quietly.	‘I	can	follow	without
your	help,	Blistig.’
The	grip	fell	away.
They	found	an	empty	room,	once	used	to	store	items	on	hooks	fixed	threequarters	of	the	way	up	all	four	walls.	The	air	smelled	of	lanolin.
‘Time’s	come,’	Blistig	said	without	preamble.	‘We	cannot	march	in	two


days’	time,	Gamet,	and	you	know	it.	We	cannot	march	at	all.	There	will	be	a
mutiny	at	worst,	at	best	an	endless	bleeding	of	desertions.	The	Fourteenth	is
finished.’
The	satisfied	gleam	in	the	man’s	eyes	triggered	a	boiling	rage	in	Gamet.
He	struggled	for	a	moment	then	managed	to	clamp	down	on	his	emotions,
sufficient	to	lock	gazes	with	Blistig	and	ask,	‘Was	that	child’s	arrival	set	up
between	you	and	Keneb?’
Blistig	recoiled	as	if	struck,	then	his	face	darkened.	‘What	do	you	take	me
for—’
‘Right	now,’	Gamet	snapped,	‘I	am	not	sure.’
The	once-commander	of	the	Aren	garrison	tugged	the	peace-loop	from	his
sword’s	hilt,	but	Tene	Baralta	stepped	between	the	two	men,	armour	clanking.
Taller	and	broader	than	either	Malazan,	the	dusk-skinned	warrior	reached	out
to	set	a	gloved	hand	on	each	chest,	then	slowly	pushed	the	men	apart.	‘We	are
here	to	reach	agreement,	not	kill	one	another,’	he	rumbled.	‘Besides,’	he	added,
facing	Blistig,	‘Gamet’s	suspicion	had	occurred	to	me	as	well.’
‘Keneb	would	not	do	such	a	thing,’	Blistig	rasped,	‘even	if	you	two
imagine	that	I	might.’
A	worthy	answer.
Gamet	pulled	away	and	strode	to	face	the	far	wall,	back	to	the	others.	His
mind	raced,	then	he	finally	shook	his	head.	Without	turning	round,	he	said,
‘She	asked	for	two	days—’
‘Asked?	I	heard	an	order—’
‘Then	you	were	not	listening	carefully	enough,	Blistig.	The	Adjunct,
young	and	untested	though	she	may	be,	is	not	a	fool.	She	sees	what	you	see—
what	we	all	see.	But	she	has	asked	for	two	days.	Come	the	moment	to	march…
well,	a	final	decision	will	become	obvious,	either	way,	at	that	moment.	Trust
her.’	He	swung	round.	‘For	this	and	this	alone,	if	need	be.	Two	days.’
After	a	long	moment,	Baralta	nodded.	‘So	be	it.’
‘Very	well,’	Blistig	allowed.
Beru	bless	us.	As	Gamet	made	to	leave,	Tene	Baralta	touched	his	shoulder.
‘Fist,’	he	said,	‘what	is	the	situation	with	this…this	T’amber?	Do	you	know?
Why	is	the	Adjunct	being	so…cagey?	Women	who	take	women	for	lovers—
the	only	crime	is	the	loss	to	men,	and	so	it	has	always	been.’
‘Cagey?	No,	Tene	Baralta.	Private.	The	Adjunct	is	simply	a	private
woman.’
The	ex-Red	Blade	persisted,	‘What	is	this	T’amber	like?	Does	she	exercise
undue	influence	on	our	commander?’
‘I	have	no	idea,	to	answer	your	latter	question.	What	is	she	like?	She	was	a


concubine,	I	believe,	in	the	Grand	Temple	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams,	in	Unta.
Other	than	that,	my	only	words	with	her	have	been	at	the	Adjunct’s	behest.	Nor
is	T’amber	particularly	talkative…’	And	that	is	an	understatement	of
prodigious	proportions.	Beautiful,	aye,	and	remote.	Has	she	undue	influence
over	Tavore?	I	wish	I	knew.	‘And	speaking	of	T’amber,	I	must	leave	you	now.’
At	the	door	he	paused	and	glanced	back	at	Blistig.	‘You	gave	good	answer,
Blistig.	I	no	longer	suspect	you.’
In	reply,	the	man	simply	nodded.
	
Lostara	Yil	placed	the	last	of	her	Red	Blade	accoutrements	into	the	chest	then
lowered	the	lid	and	locked	it.	She	straightened	and	stepped	back,	feeling	bereft.
There	had	been	a	vast	comfort	in	belonging	to	that	dreaded	company.	That	the
Red	Blades	were	hated	by	their	tribal	kin,	reviled	in	their	own	land,	had	proved
surprisingly	satisfying.	For	she	hated	them	in	turn.
Born	a	daughter	instead	of	the	desired	son	in	a	Pardu	family,	as	a	child	she
had	lived	on	the	streets	of	Ehrlitan.	It	had	been	common	practice—before	the
Malazans	came	with	their	laws	for	families—among	many	tribes	to	cast	out
their	unwanted	children	once	they	reached	the	fifth	year	of	life.	Acolytes	from
numerous	temples—followers	of	mystery	cults—regularly	rounded	up	such
abandoned	children.	No-one	knew	what	was	done	with	them.	The	hopeful
among	the	rough	circle	of	fellow	urchins	Lostara	had	known	had	believed	that,
among	the	cults,	there	could	be	found	a	kind	of	salvation.	Schooling,	food,
safety,	all	leading	to	eventually	becoming	an	acolyte	in	turn.	But	the	majority
of	children	suspected	otherwise.	They’d	heard	tales	of—or	had	themselves
seen—the	occasional	nightly	foray	of	shrouded	figures	emerging	from	the
backs	of	temples,	wending	down	alleyways	with	a	covered	cart,	on	their	way	to
the	crab-infested	tidal	pools	east	of	the	city,	pools	not	so	deep	that	one	could
not	see	the	glimmer	of	small	picked	bones	at	the	bottom.
One	thing	all	could	agree	on.	The	hunger	of	the	temples	was	insatiable.
Optimistic	or	pessimistic,	the	children	of	Ehrlitan’s	streets	did	all	they
could	to	evade	the	hunters	with	their	nets	and	pole-ropes.	A	life	could	be	eked
out,	a	kind	of	freedom	won,	bitter	though	it	might	be.
Midway	through	her	seventh	year,	Lostara	was	dragged	down	to	the	greasy
cobbles	by	an	acolyte’s	net.	Her	shrieks	went	unheeded	by	the	citizens	who
stepped	aside	as	the	silent	priest	dragged	his	prize	back	to	the	temple.
Impassive	eyes	met	hers	every	now	and	then	on	that	horrible	journey,	and	those
eyes	Lostara	would	never	forget.
Rashan	had	proved	less	bloodthirsty	than	most	of	the	other	cults	in	the


habit	of	hunting	children.	She	had	found	herself	among	a	handful	of	new
arrivals,	all	tasked	with	maintenance	of	the	temple	grounds,	destined,	it
seemed,	for	a	lifetime	of	menial	servitude.	The	drudgery	continued	until	her
ninth	year,	when	for	reasons	unknown	to	Lostara	she	was	selected	for
schooling	in	the	Shadow	Dance.	She	had	caught	rare	and	brief	glimpses	of	the
dancers—a	hidden	and	secretive	group	of	men	and	women	for	whom	worship
was	an	elaborate,	intricate	dance.	Their	only	audience	were	priests	and
priestesses—none	of	whom	would	watch	the	actual	dancers,	only	their
shadows.
You	are	nothing,	child.	Not	a	dancer.	Your	body	is	in	service	to	Rashan,	and
Rashan	is	this	realm’s	manifestation	of	Shadow,	the	drawing	of	darkness	to
light.	When	you	dance,	it	is	not	you	that	is	watched.	It	is	the	shadow	your	body
paints.	The	shadow	is	the	dancer,	Lostara	Yil.	Not	you.
Years	of	discipline,	of	limb-stretching	training	that	loosened	every	joint,
that	drew	out	the	spine,	that	would	allow	the	Caster	to	flow	with	seamless
movement—and	all	for	naught.
The	world	had	been	changing	outside	the	temple’s	high	walls.	Events
unknown	to	Lostara	were	systematically	crushing	their	entire	civilization.	The
Malazan	Empire	had	invaded.	Cities	were	falling.	Foreign	ships	had	blockaded
Ehrlitan’s	harbour.
The	cult	of	Rashan	was	spared	the	purges	of	the	new,	harsh	masters	of
Seven	Cities,	for	it	was	a	recognized	religion.	Other	temples	did	not	fare	as
well.	She	recalled	seeing	smoke	in	the	sky	above	Ehrlitan	and	wondering	at	its
source,	and	she	was	awakened	at	night	by	terrible	sounds	of	chaos	in	the
streets.
Lostara	was	a	middling	Caster.	Her	shadow	seemed	to	have	a	mind	of	its
own	and	was	a	recalcitrant,	halting	partner	in	the	training.	She	did	not	ask
herself	if	she	was	happy	or	otherwise.	Rashan’s	Empty	Throne	did	not	draw
her	faith	as	it	did	the	other	students’.	She	lived,	but	it	was	an	unquestioning	life.
Neither	circular	nor	linear,	for	in	her	mind	there	was	no	movement	at	all,	and
the	notion	of	progress	was	measured	only	in	terms	of	mastering	the	exercises
forced	upon	her.
The	cult’s	destruction	was	sudden,	unexpected,	and	it	came	from	within.
She	recalled	the	night	when	it	had	all	begun.	Great	excitement	in	the
temple.	A	High	Priest	from	another	city	was	visiting.	Come	to	speak	with
Master	Bidithal	on	matters	of	vast	importance.	There	would	be	a	dance	in	the
stranger ’s	honour,	for	which	Lostara	and	her	fellow	students	would	provide	a
background	sequence	of	rhythms	to	complement	the	Shadow	Dancers.
Lostara	herself	had	been	indifferent	to	the	whole	affair,	and	had	been


nowhere	close	to	the	best	of	the	students	in	their	minor	role	in	the
performance.	But	she	remembered	the	stranger.
So	unlike	sour	old	Bidithal.	Tall,	thin,	a	laughing	face,	remarkably	longfingered,	almost	effeminate	hands—hands	the	sight	of	which	awakened	in	her
new	emotions.
Emotions	that	stuttered	her	mechanical	dancing,	that	sent	her	shadow
twisting	into	a	rhythm	that	was	counterpoint	to	that	cast	by	not	only	her	fellow
students,	but	the	Shadow	Dancers	themselves—as	if	a	third	strain	had	slipped
into	the	main	chamber.
Too	striking	to	remain	unnoticed.
Bidithal	himself,	his	face	darkening,	had	half	risen—but	the	stranger	spoke
first.
‘Pray	let	the	Dance	continue,’	he	said,	his	eyes	finding	Lostara’s	own.	‘The
Song	of	the	Reeds	has	never	been	performed	in	quite	this	manner	before.	No
gentle	breeze	here,	eh,	Bidithal?	Oh	no,	a	veritable	gale.	The	Dancers	are
virgins,	yes?’	His	laugh	was	low	yet	full.	‘Yet	there	is	nothing	virginal	about
this	dance,	now,	is	there?	Oh,	storm	of	desire!’
And	those	eyes	held	Lostara	still,	in	fullest	recognition	of	the	desire	that
overwhelmed	her—that	gave	shape	to	her	shadow’s	wild	cavort.	Recognition,
and	a	certain	pleased,	but	cool…acknowledgement.	As	if	flattered,	but	with	no
invitation	offered	in	return.
The	stranger	had	other	tasks	that	night—and	in	the	nights	that	followed—
or	so	Lostara	would	come	to	realize	much	later.	At	the	moment,	however,	her
face	burned	with	shame,	and	she	had	broken	off	her	dance	to	flee	the	chamber.
Of	course,	Delat	had	not	come	to	steal	the	heart	of	a	Caster.	He	had	come
to	destroy	Rashan.
Delat,	who,	it	proved,	was	both	a	High	Priest	and	a	Bridgeburner,	and
whatever	the	Emperor ’s	reason	for	annihilating	the	cult,	his	was	the	hand	that
delivered	the	death-blow.
Although	not	alone.	The	night	of	the	killings,	at	the	bell	of	the	third	hour—
two	past	midnight—after	the	Song	of	Reeds,	there	had	been	another,	hidden	in
the	black	clothes	of	an	assassin…
Lostara	knew	more	of	what	had	happened	that	night	in	the	Rashan	Temple
of	Ehrlitan	than	anyone	else	barring	the	players	themselves,	for	Lostara	had
been	the	only	resident	to	be	spared.	Or	so	she	had	believed	for	a	long	time,
until	the	name	of	Bidithal	rose	once	more,	from	Sha’ik’s	Apocalypse	army.
Ah,	I	was	more	than	spared	that	night,	wasn’t	I?
Delat’s	lovely,	long-fingered	hands…
Setting	foot	onto	the	city’s	streets	the	following	morning,	after	seven


years’	absence,	she	had	been	faced	with	the	terrifying	knowledge	that	she	was
alone,	truly	alone.	Resurrecting	an	ancient	memory	of	when	she	was	awakened
following	the	fifth	birthday,	and	thrust	into	the	hands	of	an	old	man	hired	to
take	her	away,	to	leave	her	in	a	strange	neighbourhood	on	the	other	side	of	the
city.	A	memory	that	echoed	with	a	child’s	cries	for	her	mother.
The	short	time	that	followed	her	departure	from	the	temple,	before	she
joined	the	Red	Blades—the	newly	formed	company	of	Seven	Cities	natives
who	avowed	loyalty	to	the	Malazan	Empire—held	its	own	memories,	ones	she
had	long	since	repressed.	Hunger,	denigration,	humiliation	and	what	seemed	a
fatal,	spiralling	descent.	But	the	recruiters	had	found	her,	or	perhaps	she	found
them.	The	Red	Blades	would	be	a	statement	to	the	Emperor,	the	marking	of	a
new	era	in	Seven	Cities.	There	would	be	peace.	None	of	this	interested	Lostara,
however.	Rather,	it	was	the	widely-held	rumour	that	the	Red	Blades	sought	to
become	the	deliverers	of	Malazan	justice.
She	had	not	forgotten	those	impassive	eyes.	The	citizens	who	were
indifferent	to	her	pleas,	who	had	watched	the	acolyte	drag	her	past	to	an
unknown	fate.	She	had	not	forgotten	her	own	parents.
Betrayal	could	be	answered	by	but	one	thing,	and	one	thing	alone,	and	the
once-captain	Lostara	Yil	of	the	Red	Blades	had	grown	skilled	in	that	answer ’s
brutal	delivery.
And	now,	am	I	being	made	into	a	betrayer?
She	turned	away	from	the	wooden	chest.	She	was	a	Red	Blade	no	longer.
In	a	short	while,	Pearl	would	arrive,	and	they	would	set	out	to	find	the	cold,
cold	trail	of	Tavore’s	hapless	sister,	Felisin.	Along	which	they	might	find
opportunity	to	drive	a	blade	into	the	heart	of	the	Talons.	Yet	were	not	the
Talons	of	the	empire?	Dancer ’s	own,	his	spies	and	killers,	the	deadly	weapon
of	his	will.	Then	what	had	turned	them	into	traitors?
Betrayal	was	a	mystery.	Inexplicable	to	Lostara.	She	only	knew	that	it
delivered	the	deepest	wounds	of	all.
And	she	had	long	since	vowed	that	she	would	never	again	suffer	such
wounds.
She	collected	her	sword-belt	from	the	hook	above	the	bed	and	drew	the
thick	leather	band	about	her	hips,	hooking	it	in	place.
Then	froze.
The	small	room	before	her	was	filled	with	dancing	shadows.
And	in	their	midst,	a	figure.	A	pale	face	of	firm	features,	made	handsome
by	smile	lines	at	the	corners	of	the	eyes—and	the	eyes	themselves,	which,	as	he
looked	upon	her,	settled	like	depthless	pools.
Into	which	she	felt,	in	a	sudden	rush,	she	could	plunge.	Here,	now,	for	ever.


The	figure	made	a	slight	bow	with	his	head,	then	spoke,	‘Lostara	Yil.	You
may	doubt	my	words,	but	I	remember	you—’
She	stepped	back,	her	back	pressing	up	against	the	wall,	and	shook	her
head.	‘I	do	not	know	you,’	she	whispered.
‘True.	But	there	were	three	of	us	that	night,	so	very	long	ago	in	Ehrlitan.	I
was	witness	to	your…unexpected	performance.	Did	you	know	Delat—or,
rather,	the	man	I	would	eventually	learn	was	Delat—would	have	taken	you	for
his	own?	Not	just	the	one	night.	You	would	have	joined	him	as	a	Bridgeburner,
and	that	would	well	have	pleased	him.	Or	so	I	believe.	No	way	to	test	it,	alas,
since	it	all	went—outwardly—so	thoroughly	awry.’
‘I	remember,’	she	said.
The	man	shrugged.	‘Delat,	who	had	a	different	name	for	that	mission	and
was	my	partner ’s	responsibility	besides—Delat	let	Bidithal	go.	I	suppose	it
seemed	a…a	betrayal,	yes?	It	certainly	did	to	my	partner.	Certainly	to	this	day
Shadowthrone—who	was	not	Shadowthrone	then,	simply	a	particularly	adept
and	ambitious	practitioner	of	Rashan’s	sister	warren,	Meanas—to	this	day,	I
was	saying,	Shadowthrone	stokes	eternal	fires	of	vengeance.	But	Delat	proved
very	capable	of	hiding…under	our	very	noses.	Like	Kalam.	Just	another
unremarked	soldier	in	the	ranks	of	the	Bridgeburners.’
‘I	do	not	know	who	you	are.’
The	man	smiled.	‘Ah,	yes,	I	am	well	ahead	of	myself…’	His	gaze	fell	to	the
shadows	spread	long	before	him,	though	his	back	was	to	an	unlit,	closed	door,
and	his	smile	broadened	as	if	he	was	reconsidering	those	words.	‘I	am
Cotillion,	Lostara	Yil.	Back	then,	I	was	Dancer,	and	yes,	you	can	well	guess	the
significance	of	that	name,	given	what	you	were	being	trained	to	do.	Of	course,
in	Seven	Cities,	certain	truths	of	the	cult	had	been	lost,	in	particular	the	true
nature	of	Shadow	Dancing.	It	was	never	meant	for	performance,	Lostara.	It
was,	in	fact,	an	art	most	martial.	Assassination.’
‘I	am	no	follower	of	Shadow—Rashan	or	your	version—’
‘That	is	not	the	loyalty	I	would	call	upon	with	you,’	Cotillion	replied.
She	was	silent,	struggling	to	fit	sense	to	her	thoughts,	to	his	words.
Cotillion…was	Dancer.	Shadowthrone…must	have	been	Kellanved,	the
Emperor!	She	scowled.	‘My	loyalty	is	to	the	Malazan	Empire.	The	Empire—’
‘Very	good,’	he	replied.	‘I	am	pleased.’
‘And	now	you’re	going	to	try	to	convince	me	that	the	Empress	Laseen
should	not	be	the	empire’s	true	ruler—’
‘Not	at	all.	She	is	welcome	to	it.	But,	alas,	she	is	in	some	trouble	right	now,
isn’t	she?	She	could	do	with	some…help.’
‘She	supposedly	assassinated	you!’	Lostara	hissed.	‘You	and	Kellanved


both!’	She	betrayed	you.
Cotillion	simply	shrugged	again.	‘Everyone	had	their…appointed	tasks.
Lostara,	the	game	being	played	here	is	far	larger	than	any	mortal	empire.	But
the	empire	in	question—your	empire—well,	its	success	is	crucial	to	what	we
seek.	And,	were	you	to	know	the	fullest	extent	of	recent,	distant	events,	you
would	need	no	convincing	that	the	Empress	sits	on	a	tottering	throne	right
now.’
‘Yet	even	you	betrayed	the	Emper—Shadowthrone.	Did	you	not	just	tell	me
—’
‘Sometimes,	I	see	further	than	my	dear	companion.	Indeed,	he	remains
obsessed	with	desires	to	see	Laseen	suffer—I	have	other	ideas,	and	while	he
may	see	them	as	party	to	his	own,	there	is	yet	no	pressing	need	to	disabuse	him
of	that	notion.	But	I	will	not	seek	to	deceive	you	into	believing	I	am	allknowing.	I	admit	to	having	made	grave	errors,	indeed,	to	knowing	the	poison
of	suspicion.	Quick	Ben.	Kalam.	Whiskeyjack.	Where	did	their	loyalty	truly
reside?	Well,	I	eventually	got	my	answer,	but	I	am	not	yet	decided	whether	it
pleases	me	or	troubles	me.	There	is	one	danger	that	plagues	ascendants	in
particular,	and	that	is	the	tendency	to	wait	too	long.	Before	acting,	before
stepping—if	you	will—from	the	shadows.’	He	smiled	again.	‘I	would	make
amends	for	past,	at	times	fatal,	hesitation.	And	so	here	I	stand	before	you,
Lostara,	to	ask	for	your	help.’
Her	scowl	deepened.	‘Why	should	I	not	tell	Pearl	all	about	this…meeting?’
‘No	reason,	but	I’d	rather	you	didn’t.	I	am	not	yet	ready	for	Pearl.	For	you,
remaining	silent	will	not	constitute	treason,	for,	if	you	do	as	I	ask,	you	two	will
walk	step	in	step.	You	will	face	no	conflict,	no	matter	what	may	occur,	or	what
you	may	discover	in	your	travels.’
‘Where	is	this…Delat?’
His	brows	rose,	as	if	he	was	caught	off	guard	momentarily	by	the	question,
then	he	sighed	and	nodded.	‘I	have	no	hold	over	him	these	days,	alas.	Why?	He
is	too	powerful.	Too	mysterious.	Too	conniving.	Too	Hood-damned	smart.
Indeed,	even	Shadowthrone	has	turned	his	attentions	elsewhere.	I	would	love	to
arrange	a	reunion,	but	I	am	afraid	I	have	not	that	power.’	He	hesitated,	then
added,	‘Sometimes,	one	must	simply	trust	in	fate,	Lostara.	The	future	can	ever
promise	but	one	thing	and	one	thing	only:	surprises.	But	know	this,	we	would
all	save	the	Malazan	Empire,	in	our	own	ways.	Will	you	help	me?’
‘If	I	did,	would	that	make	me	a	Talon?’
Cotillion’s	smile	broadened.	‘But,	my	dear,	the	Talons	no	longer	exist.’
‘Oh,	really,	Cotillion,	would	you	ask	my	help	and	then	play	me	for	a	fool?’
The	smile	slowly	faded.	‘But	I	am	telling	you,	the	Talons	no	longer	exist.


Surly	annihilated	them.	Is	there	knowledge	you	possess	that	would	suggest
otherwise?’
She	was	silent	a	moment,	then	turned	away.	‘No.	I	simply…assumed.’
‘Indeed.	Will	you	help	me	then?’
‘Pearl	is	on	his	way,’	Lostara	said,	facing	the	god	once	again.
‘I	am	capable	of	brevity	when	need	be.’
‘What	is	it	you	want	me	to	do?’
	
Half	a	bell	later	there	was	a	light	rap	upon	the	door	and	Pearl	entered.
And	immediately	halted.	‘I	smell	sorcery.’
Seated	on	the	bed,	Lostara	shrugged	then	rose	to	collect	her	kit	bag.	‘There
are	sequences	in	the	Shadow	Dance,’	she	said	casually,	‘that	occasionally	evoke
Rashan.’
‘Rashan!	Yes.’	He	stepped	close,	his	gaze	searching.	‘The	Shadow	Dance.
You?’
‘Once.	Long	ago.	I	hold	to	no	gods,	Pearl.	Never	have.	But	the	Dance,	I’ve
found,	serves	me	in	my	fighting.	Keeps	me	flexible,	and	I	need	that	the	most
when	I	am	nervous	or	unhappy.’	She	slung	the	bag	over	a	shoulder	and	waited.
Pearl’s	eyebrows	rose.	‘Nervous	or	unhappy?’
She	answered	him	with	a	sour	look,	then	walked	to	the	doorway.	‘You	said
you’ve	stumbled	on	a	lead…’
He	joined	her.	‘I	have	at	that.	But	a	word	of	warning	first.	Those	sequences
that	evoke	Rashan—it	would	be	best	for	us	both	if	you	avoided	them	in	the
future.	That	kind	of	activity	risks	drawing…attention.’
‘Very	well.	Now,	lead	on.’
	
A	lone	guard	slouched	outside	the	estate’s	gate,	beside	a	bound	bundle	of	straw.
Pale	green	eyes	tracked	Lostara	and	Pearl	as	they	approached	from	across	the
street.	The	man’s	uniform	and	armour	were	dull	with	dust.	A	small	human
finger	bone	hung	on	a	brass	loop	from	one	ear.	His	expression	was	sickly,	and
he	drew	a	deep	breath	before	saying,	‘You	the	advance?	Go	back	and	tell	her
we’re	not	ready.’
Lostara	blinked	and	glanced	over	at	Pearl.
Her	companion	was	smiling.	‘Do	we	look	like	messengers,	soldier?’
The	guard’s	eyes	thinned.	‘Didn’t	I	see	you	dancing	on	a	table	down	at
Pugroot’s	Bar?’


Pearl’s	smile	broadened.	‘And	have	you	a	name,	soldier?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Well,	what	is	it?’
‘I	just	told	you.	Maybe.	Do	you	need	me	to	spell	it	or	something?’
‘Can	you?’
‘No.	I	was	just	wondering	if	you	was	stupid,	that’s	all.	So,	if	you’re	not	the
Adjunct’s	advance,	come	to	warn	us	about	that	surprise	inspection,	then	what
do	you	want?’
‘A	moment,’	Pearl	said,	frowning.	‘How	can	an	inspection	be	a	surprise	if
there’s	advance	warning?’
‘Hood’s	leathery	feet,	you	are	stupid	after	all.	That’s	how	it’s	done—’
‘A	warning,	then.’	He	glanced	at	Lostara	and	winked	as	he	added,	‘Seems
I’m	offering	those	all	day.	Listen,	Maybe,	the	Adjunct	won’t	be	warning	you
about	her	inspections—and	don’t	expect	your	officers	to	do	so	either.	She	has
her	own	rules,	and	you’d	better	get	used	to	it.’
‘You	still	ain’t	told	me	what	you	want.’
‘I	need	to	speak	to	a	certain	soldier	of	the	5th	squad	of	the	9th	Company,
and	I	understand	he	is	stationed	in	the	temporary	barracks	here.’
‘Well,	I’m	in	the	6th,	not	the	5th.’
‘Yes…so?’
‘Well,	it’s	obvious	then,	isn’t	it?	You	don’t	want	to	speak	to	me	at	all.	Go
on	in,	you’re	wasting	my	time.	And	hurry	up,	I’m	not	feeling	too	well.’
The	guard	opened	the	gate	and	watched	them	stride	inside,	his	eyes	falling
to	Lostara’s	swaying	hips	for	a	long	moment	before	he	slammed	the
reinforced	gate	shut.
Beside	him,	the	bale	of	straw	shimmered	suddenly	then	reformed	as	an
overweight	young	man	seated	cross-legged	on	the	cobbles.
Maybe’s	head	turned	and	he	sighed.	‘Don’t	do	that	again—not	near	me,
Balgrid.	Magic	makes	me	want	to	puke.’
‘I	had	no	choice	but	to	maintain	the	illusion,’	Balgrid	replied,	drawing	a
sleeve	across	his	sweat-beaded	brow.	‘That	bastard	was	a	Claw!’
‘Really?	I	could	have	sworn	I	saw	him	wearing	a	woman’s	clothes	and
dancing	at	Pug—’
‘Will	you	shut	up	with	that!	Pity	the	poor	bastard	he’s	looking	for	in	the
5th!’
Maybe	suddenly	grinned.	‘Hey,	you	just	fooled	a	real	live	Claw	with	that
damned	illusion!	Nice	work!’
‘You	ain’t	the	only	one	feeling	sick,’	Balgrid	muttered.


	
Thirty	paces	took	Lostara	and	Pearl	across	the	compound	to	the	stables.
‘That	was	amusing,’	said	the	man	at	her	side.
‘And	what	was	the	point?’
‘Oh,	just	to	see	them	sweat.’
‘Them?’
‘The	man	and	the	bale,	of	course.	Well,	here	we	are.’	As	she	reached	to
draw	back	one	of	the	broad	doors,	Pearl	closed	a	hand	on	her	wrist.	‘In	a
moment.	Now,	there’s	actually	more	than	one	person	within	that	we	need	to
question.	A	couple	of	veterans—leave	them	to	me.	There’s	also	a	lad,	was	a
guard	at	a	mining	camp.	Work	your	charms	on	him	while	I’m	talking	with	the
other	two.’
Lostara	stared	at	him.	‘My	charms,’	she	said,	deadpan.
Pearl	grinned.	‘Aye,	and	if	you	leave	him	smitten,	well,	consider	it	a	future
investment	in	case	we	need	the	lad	later.’
‘I	see.’
She	opened	the	door,	stepping	back	to	let	Pearl	precede	her.	The	air	within
the	stables	was	foul.	Urine,	sweat,	honing	oil	and	wet	straw.	Soldiers	were
everywhere,	lying	or	sitting	on	beds	or	on	items	from	a	collection	of	ornate
furniture	that	had	come	from	the	main	house.	There	was	little	in	the	way	of
conversation,	and	even	that	fell	away	as	heads	turned	towards	the	two
strangers.
‘Thank	you,’	Pearl	drawled,	‘for	your	attention.	I	would	speak	with
Sergeant	Gesler	and	Corporal	Stormy…’
‘I’m	Gesler,’	a	solid-looking,	bronze-skinned	man	said	from	where	he
sprawled	on	a	plush	couch.	‘The	one	snoring	under	those	silks	is	Stormy.	And
if	you	come	from	Oblat	tell	him	we’ll	pay	up…eventually.’
Smiling,	Pearl	gestured	at	Lostara	to	follow	and	strode	up	to	the	sergeant.
‘I	am	not	here	to	call	in	your	debts.	Rather,	I	would	like	to	speak	with	you	in
private…concerning	your	recent	adventures.’
‘Is	that	right.	And	who	in	Fener ’s	hoofprint	are	you?’
‘This	is	an	imperial	matter,’	Pearl	said,	his	gaze	falling	to	Stormy.	‘Will
you	wake	him	or	shall	I?	Further,	my	companion	wishes	to	speak	with	the
soldier	named	Pella.’
Gesler ’s	grin	was	cool.	‘You	want	to	wake	my	corporal?	Go	right	ahead.
As	for	Pella,	he’s	not	here	at	the	moment.’
Pearl	sighed	and	stepped	to	the	side	of	the	bed.	A	moment’s	study	of	the
heap	of	expensive	silks	burying	the	snoring	corporal,	then	the	Claw	reached


down	and	flung	the	coverings	clear.
The	hand	that	snapped	to	Pearl’s	right	shin—halfway	between	knee	and
ankle—was	large	enough	to	almost	close	entirely	around	the	limb.	The	surge
that	followed	left	Lostara	gaping.
Up.	Pearl	yelling.	Up,	as	Stormy	reared	from	the	bed	like	a	bear	prodded
from	its	hibernation,	a	roar	rolling	from	his	lungs.
Had	the	chamber	contained	a	ceiling	of	normal	height—rather	than	a	few
simple	crossbeams	spanning	the	space	beneath	the	stable	roof,	none	of	which
were,	mercifully,	directly	overhead—Pearl	would	have	struck	it,	and	hard,	as
he	was	lifted	into	the	air	by	that	single	hand	clasped	around	his	shin.	Lifted,
then	thrown.
The	Claw	cavorted,	arms	flailing,	his	knees	shooting	up	over	his	head,
spinning,	legs	kicking	free	as	Stormy’s	hand	let	go.	He	came	down	hard	on
one	shoulder,	the	breath	leaving	his	lungs	in	a	grunting	whoosh.	He	lay
unmoving,	drawing	his	legs	up,	in	increments,	into	a	curled	position.
The	corporal	was	standing	now,	shaggy-haired,	his	red	beard	in	wild
disarray,	the	oblivion	of	sleep	vanishing	from	his	eyes	like	pine	needles	in	a
fire—a	fire	that	was	quickly	flaring	into	a	rage.	‘I	said	no-one	wakes	me!’	he
bellowed,	huge	hands	held	out	to	either	side	and	clutching	at	the	air,	as	if	eager
to	close	on	offending	throats.	His	bright	blue	eyes	fixed	suddenly	on	Pearl,
who	was	only	now	moving	onto	his	hands	and	knees,	his	head	hanging	low.	‘Is
this	the	bastard?’	Stormy	asked,	taking	a	step	closer.
Lostara	blocked	his	path.
Grunting,	Stormy	halted.
‘Leave	them	be,	Corporal,’	Gesler	said	from	the	couch.	‘That	fop	you	just
tossed	is	a	Claw.	And	a	sharper	look	at	that	woman	in	front	of	you	will	tell	you
she’s	a	Red	Blade,	or	was,	and	can	likely	defend	herself	just	fine.	No	need	to
get	into	a	brawl	over	lost	sleep.’
Pearl	was	climbing	to	his	feet,	massaging	his	shoulder,	his	breaths	deep
and	shuddering.
Hand	on	the	pommel	of	her	sword,	Lostara	stared	steadily	into	Stormy’s
eyes.	‘We	were	wondering,’	she	said	conversationally,	‘which	of	you	is	the
better	storyteller.	My	companion	here	would	like	to	hear	a	tale.	Of	course,
there	will	be	payment	for	the	privilege.	Perhaps	your	debts	to	this	Oblat	can
be…taken	care	of,	as	a	show	of	our	appreciation.’
Stormy	scowled	and	glanced	back	at	Gesler.
The	sergeant	slowly	rose	from	the	couch.	‘Well,	lass,	the	corporal	here’s
better	with	the	scary	ones…since	he	tells	them	so	bad	they	ain’t	so	scary	any
more.	Since	you’re	being	so	kind	with…uh,	our	recent	push	of	the	Lord	at


knuckles,	me	and	the	corporal	will	both	weave	you	a	tale,	if	that’s	what	you’re
here	for.	We	ain’t	shy,	after	all.	Where	should	we	start?	I	was	born—’
‘Not	that	early,’	Lostara	cut	in.	‘I	will	leave	the	rest	to	Pearl—though
perhaps	someone	could	get	him	something	to	drink	to	assist	in	his	recovery.
He	can	advise	you	on	where	to	start.	In	the	meantime,	where	is	Pella?’
‘He’s	out	back,’	Gesler	said.
‘Thank	you.’
As	she	was	making	her	way	to	the	narrow,	low	door	at	the	back	of	the
stables,	another	sergeant	emerged	to	move	up	alongside	her.	‘I’ll	escort	you,’
he	said.
Another	damned	Falari	veteran.	And	what’s	with	the	finger	bones?	‘Am	I
likely	to	get	lost,	Sergeant?’	she	asked	as	she	swung	open	the	door.	Six	paces
beyond	was	the	estate’s	back	wall.	Heaps	of	sun-dried	horse	manure	were
banked	against	it.	Seated	on	one	of	them	was	a	young	soldier.	At	the	foot	of	a
nearby	pile	lay	two	dogs,	both	asleep,	one	huge	and	terribly	scarred,	the	other
tiny—a	snarl	of	hair	and	a	pug	nose.
‘Possibly,’	the	sergeant	replied.	He	touched	her	arm	as	she	made	to
approach	Pella,	and	she	faced	him	with	an	enquiring	look.	‘Are	you	with	one
of	the	other	legions?’	he	asked.
‘No.’
‘Ah.’	He	glanced	back	at	the	stables.	‘Newly	assigned	to	handmaid	the
Claw.’
‘Handmaid?’
‘Aye.	The	man	needs…learning.	Seems	he	chose	well	in	you,	at	least.’
‘What	is	it	you	want,	Sergeant?’
‘Never	mind.	I’ll	leave	you	now.’
She	watched	him	re-enter	the	stables.	Then,	with	a	shrug,	she	swung	about
and	walked	up	to	Pella.
Neither	dog	awoke	at	her	approach.
Two	large	burlap	sacks	framed	the	soldier,	the	one	on	the	soldier ’s	right
filled	near	to	bursting,	the	other	perhaps	a	third	full.	The	lad	himself	was
hunched	over,	holding	a	small	copper	awl	which	he	was	using	to	drill	a	hole
into	a	finger	bone.
The	sacks,	Lostara	realized,	contained	hundreds	of	such	bones.
‘Pella.’
The	young	man	looked	up,	blinked.	‘Do	I	know	you?’
‘No.	But	we	perhaps	share	an	acquaintance.’
‘Oh.’	He	resumed	his	work.
‘You	were	a	guard	in	the	mines—’


‘Not	quite,’	he	replied	without	looking	up.	‘I	was	garrisoned	at	one	of	the
settlements.	Skullcup.	But	then	the	rebellion	started.	Fifteen	of	us	survived	the
first	night—no	officers.	We	stayed	off	the	road	and	eventually	made	our	way	to
Dosin	Pali.	Took	four	nights,	and	we	could	see	the	city	burning	for	the	first
three.	Wasn’t	much	left	when	we	arrived.	A	Malazan	trader	ship	showed	up	at
about	the	same	time	as	us,	and	took	us,	eventually,	here	to	Aren.’
‘Skullcup,’	Lostara	said.	‘There	was	a	prisoner	there.	A	young	girl—’
‘Tavore’s	sister,	you	mean.	Felisin.’
Her	breath	caught.
‘I	was	wondering	when	somebody	would	find	me	about	that.	Am	I	under
arrest,	then?’	He	looked	up.
‘No.	Why?	Do	you	think	you	should	be?’
He	returned	to	his	work.	‘Probably.	I	helped	them	escape,	after	all.	The
night	of	the	Uprising.	Don’t	know	if	they	ever	made	it,	though.	I	left	them
supplies,	such	as	I	could	find.	They	were	planning	on	heading	north	then
west…across	the	desert.	I’m	pretty	sure	I	wasn’t	the	only	one	aiding	them,	but	I
never	found	out	who	the	others	were.’
Lostara	slowly	crouched	down	until	she	was	at	his	eye-level.	‘Not	just
Felisin,	then.	Who	was	with	her?’
‘Baudin—a	damned	frightening	man,	that	one,	but	strangely	loyal	to
Felisin,	though…’	He	lifted	his	head	and	met	her	gaze.	‘Well,	she	wasn’t	one	to
reward	loyalty,	if	you	know	what	I	mean.	Anyway.	Baudin,	and	Heboric.’
‘Heboric?	Who	is	that?’
‘Was	once	a	priest	of	Fener—all	tattooed	with	the	fur	of	the	Boar.	Had	no
hands—they’d	been	cut	off.	Anyway,	them	three.’
‘Across	the	desert,’	Lostara	murmured.	‘But	the	west	coast	of	the	island
has…nothing.’
‘Well,	they	were	expecting	a	boat,	then,	weren’t	they?	It	was	planned,	right?
Anyway,	that’s	as	far	as	I	can	take	the	tale.	For	the	rest,	ask	my	sergeant.	Or
Stormy.	Or	Truth.’
‘Truth?	Who	is	he?’
‘He’s	the	one	who’s	just	showed	up	in	the	doorway	behind	you…come	to
deliver	more	bones.’	He	raised	his	voice.	‘No	need	to	hesitate,	Truth.	In	fact,
this	pretty	woman	here	has	some	questions	for	you.’
Another	one	with	the	strange	skin.	She	studied	the	tall,	gangly	youth	who
cautiously	approached,	carrying	another	bulging	burlap	sack	from	which	sand
drifted	down	in	a	dusty	cloud.	Hood	take	me,	a	comely	lad…though	that	air	of
vulnerability	would	get	on	my	nerves	eventually.	She	straightened.	‘I	would
know	of	Felisin,’	she	said,	slipping	some	iron	into	her	tone.


Sufficient	to	catch	Pella’s	notice,	and	he	threw	her	a	sharp	look.
Both	dogs	had	awakened	at	Truth’s	arrival,	but	neither	rose	from	where
they	lay—they	simply	fixed	eyes	on	the	lad.
Truth	set	down	the	bag	and	snapped	to	sudden	attentiveness.	Colour	rose	in
his	face.
My	charms.	It’s	not	Pella	who’ll	remember	this	day.	Not	Pella	who’ll	find
someone	to	worship.	‘Tell	me	about	what	happened	on	the	western	shore	of
Otataral	Island.	Did	the	rendezvous	occur	as	planned?’
‘I	believe	so,’	Truth	replied	after	a	moment.	‘But	we	weren’t	part	of	that
plan—we	just	happened	to	find	ourselves	in	the	same	boat	with	Kulp,	and	it	was
Kulp	who	was	looking	to	collect	them.’
‘Kulp?	The	cadre	mage	from	the	Seventh?’
‘Aye,	him.	He’d	been	sent	by	Duiker—’
‘The	imperial	historian?’	Gods,	what	twisted	trail	is	this?	‘And	why	would
he	have	any	interest	in	saving	Felisin?’
‘Kulp	said	it	was	the	injustice,’	Truth	answered.	‘But	you	got	it	wrong—it
wasn’t	Felisin	that	Duiker	wanted	to	help.	It	was	Heboric.’
Pella	spoke	in	a	low	voice	quite	unlike	what	she	had	heard	from	him
moments	earlier.	‘If	Duiker	is	going	to	be	made	out	as	some	kind	of	traitor…
well,	lass,	better	think	twice.	This	is	Aren,	after	all.	The	city	that	watched.	That
saw	Duiker	delivering	the	refugees	to	safety.	He	was	the	last	one	through	the
gate,	they	say.’	The	emotion	riding	his	words	was	now	raw.	‘And	Pormqual
had	him	arrested!’
A	chill	rippled	through	Lostara.	‘I	know,’	she	said.	‘Blistig	loosed	us	Red
Blades	from	the	gaols.	We	were	on	the	wall	by	the	time	Pormqual	had	his	army
out	there	on	the	plain.	If	Duiker	was	seeking	to	free	Heboric,	a	fellow	scholar,
well,	I	have	no	complaint	with	that.	The	trail	we	are	on	is	Felisin’s.’
Truth	nodded	at	that.	‘Tavore	has	sent	you,	hasn’t	she?	You	and	that	Claw
inside,	listening	to	Gesler	and	Stormy.’
Lostara	briefly	closed	her	eyes.	‘I	am	afraid	I	lack	Pearl’s	subtlety.	This
mission	was	meant	to	be…secret.’
‘Fine	with	me,’	Pella	said.	‘And	you,	Truth?’
The	tall	lad	nodded.	‘It	doesn’t	really	matter	anyway.	Felisin	is	dead.	They
all	are.	Heboric.	Kulp.	They	all	died.	Gesler	was	just	telling	that	part.’
‘I	see.	None	the	less,	please	say	nothing	to	anyone	else.	We	will	be
pursuing	our	task,	if	only	to	gather	her	bones.	Their	bones,	that	is.’
‘That	would	be	a	good	thing,’	Truth	said	with	a	sigh.
Lostara	made	to	leave	but	Pella	gestured	to	catch	her	attention.	‘Here.’	He
held	out	to	her	the	finger	bone	he	had	been	drilling	a	hole	through.	‘Take	this


for	yourself.	Wear	it	in	plain	sight.’
‘Why?’
Pella	scowled.	‘You’ve	just	asked	a	favour	of	us…’
‘Very	well.’	She	accepted	the	grisly	object.
Pearl	appeared	in	the	doorway.	‘Lostara,’	he	called.	‘Are	you	done	here?’
‘I	am.’
‘Time	to	leave,	then.’
She	could	see	by	his	expression	that	he	too	had	been	told	of	Felisin’s	death.
Though	probably	in	greater	detail	than	the	little	that	Truth	had	said.
In	silence,	they	retraced	their	route	through	the	stables,	out	into	the
compound,	then	across	to	the	gate.	The	door	swung	open	as	they	arrived	and
the	soldier	named	Maybe	waved	them	out.	Lostara’s	attention	was	drawn	to	the
bale	of	straw,	which	seemed	to	be	wavering,	strangely	melting	where	it
squatted,	but	Pearl	simply	waved	her	on.
As	they	drew	some	distance	from	the	estate,	the	Claw	voiced	a	soft	curse,
then	said,	‘I	need	a	healer.’
‘Your	limp	is	barely	noticeable,’	Lostara	observed.
‘Years	of	discipline,	my	dear.	I’d	much	rather	be	screaming.	The	last	time	I
suffered	such	strength	used	against	me	was	with	that	Semk	demon,	that
godling.	The	three	of	them—Gesler,	Stormy	and	Truth—there’s	more	that’s
strange	about	them	than	just	their	skin.’
‘Any	theories?’
‘They	went	through	a	warren	of	fire—and	somehow	survived,	though	it
seems	that	Felisin,	Baudin	and	Heboric	didn’t.	Though	their	actual	fate	remains
unknown.	Gesler	simply	assumes	they	died.	But	if	something	unusual	happened
to	those	coastal	guards	in	that	warren,	then	why	not	the	same	to	the	ones	who
were	washed	overboard?’
‘I’m	sorry.	I	was	not	told	the	details.’
‘We	must	pay	a	visit	to	a	certain	impounded	ship.	I	will	explain	on	the	way.
Oh,	and	next	time	don’t	offer	to	pay	off	someone	else’s	debt…until	you	find
out	how	big	it	is.’
And	next	time,	leave	that	pompous	attitude	at	the	stable	doors.	‘Very	well.’
‘And	stop	taking	charge.’
She	glanced	over	at	him.	‘You	advised	me	to	use	my	charm,	Pearl.	It’s
hardly	my	fault	if	I	possess	more	of	that	quality	than	you.’
‘Really?	Let	me	tell	you,	that	corporal	was	lucky	you	stepped	between	us.’
She	wanted	to	laugh,	but	pushed	it	back.	‘You	clearly	did	not	notice	the
weapon	under	the	man’s	bed.’
‘Weapon?	I	care—’


‘It	was	a	two-handed	flint	sword.	The	weapon	of	a	T’lan	Imass,	Pearl.	It
probably	weighs	as	much	as	I	do.’
He	said	no	more	until	they	reached	the	Silanda.
The	ship’s	berth	was	well	guarded,	yet	clearly	permission	for	Pearl	and
Lostara	had	been	provided	earlier,	for	the	two	were	waved	onto	the	old
dromon’s	battered	deck	then	left	deliberately	alone,	the	ship	itself	cleared	of	all
others.
Lostara	scanned	the	area	amidships.	Flame-scarred	and	mud-smeared.	A
strange	pyramidal	mound	surrounded	the	main	mast,	draped	in	a	tarpaulin.
New	sails	and	sheets	had	been	fitted,	clearly	taken	from	a	variety	of	other
vessels.
Standing	at	her	side,	Pearl’s	gaze	fell	upon	the	covered	mound,	and	he
voiced	a	soft	grunt.	‘Do	you	recognize	this	ship?’	he	asked.
‘I	recognize	it’s	a	ship,’	Lostara	replied.
‘I	see.	Well,	it’s	a	Quon	dromon	of	the	old,	pre-imperial	style.	But	much	of
the	wood	and	the	fittings	are	from	Drift	Avalii.	Do	you	know	anything	of	Drift
Avalii?’
‘It’s	a	mythical	island	off	the	Quon	Tali	coast.	A	drifting	island,	peopled
with	demons	and	spectres.’
‘Not	mythical,	and	it	does	indeed	drift,	though	the	pattern	seems	to
describe	a	kind	of	wobbly	circle.	As	for	demons	and	spectres…well…’	he
strode	to	the	tarpaulin,	‘hardly	anything	so	frightening.’	He	drew	the	covering
back.
Severed	heads,	neatly	piled,	all	facing	outward,	eyes	blinking	and	fixing	on
Pearl	and	Lostara.	The	glimmer	of	wet	blood.
‘If	you	say	so,’	Lostara	croaked,	stepping	back.
Even	Pearl	seemed	taken	aback,	as	if	what	he	had	unveiled	was	not	entirely
what	he	had	expected.	After	a	long	moment	he	reached	down	and	touched	a
fingertip	to	the	pooled	blood.	‘Still	warm…’
‘B-but	that’s	impossible.’
‘Any	more	impossible	than	the	damned	things	being	still	conscious—or
alive	at	the	very	least?’	He	straightened	and	faced	her,	then	waved	expansively.
‘This	ship	is	a	lodestone.	There	are	layers	upon	layers	of	sorcery,	soaked	into
the	very	wood,	into	the	frame.	It	descends	upon	you	with	the	weight	of	a
thousand	cloaks.’
‘It	does?	I	don’t	feel	it.’
He	looked	at	her	blankly,	then	faced	the	mound	of	severed	heads	once
more.	‘Neither	demons	nor	spectres,	as	you	can	see.	Tiste	Andii,	most	of	them.
A	few	Quon	Talian	sailors.	Come,	let	us	go	and	examine	the	captain’s	cabin—


magic	tumbles	from	that	room	in	waves.’
‘What	kind	of	magic,	Pearl?’
He	had	already	begun	walking	towards	the	hatch.	A	dismissive	gesture.
‘Kurald	Galain,	Tellann,	Kurald	Emurlahn,	Rashan—’	He	paused	suddenly	and
swung	round.	‘Rashan.	Yet	you	feel	nothing?’
She	shrugged.	‘Are	there	more…heads…in	there,	Pearl?	If	so,	I	think	I’d
rather	not—’
‘Follow	me,’	he	snapped.
Inside,	black	wood,	the	air	thick	as	if	roiling	with	memories	of	violence.	A
grey-skinned,	barbaric-looking	corpse	pinned	to	the	captain’s	chair	by	a
massive	spear.	Other	bodies,	sprawled	here	and	there	as	if	grabbed,	broken
then	tossed	aside.
A	dull,	sourceless	glow	permeated	the	low,	cramped	room.	Barring
strange	patches	on	the	floor,	smeared	with,	Lostara	saw,	otataral	dust.
‘Not	Tiste	Andii,’	Pearl	muttered.	‘These	must	be	Tiste	Edur.	Oh,	there	are
plenty	of	mysteries	here.	Gesler	told	me	about	the	crew	manning	the	oars	down
below—headless	bodies.	Those	poor	Tiste	Andii	on	the	deck.	Now,	I	wonder
who	killed	these	Edur…’
‘How	does	all	this	lead	us	further	onto	Felisin’s	trail,	Pearl?’
‘She	was	here,	wasn’t	she?	Witness	to	all	this.	The	captain	here	had	a
whistle,	strung	around	his	neck,	which	was	used	to	direct	the	rowers.	It’s
disappeared,	alas.’
‘And	without	that	whistle,	this	ship	just	sits	here.’
Pearl	nodded.	‘Too	bad,	isn’t	it?	Imagine,	a	ship	with	a	crew	you	never
have	to	feed,	that	never	needs	rest,	that	never	mutinies.’
‘You	can	have	it,’	Lostara	said,	turning	back	to	the	doorway.	‘I	hate	ships.
Always	have.	And	now	I’m	leaving	this	one.’
‘I	see	no	reason	not	to	join	you,’	Pearl	said.	‘We	have	a	journey	ahead	of
us,	after	all.’
‘We	do?	Where?’
‘The	Silanda	travelled	warrens	between	the	place	where	it	was	found	by
Gesler,	and	where	it	reappeared	in	this	realm.	From	what	I	can	gather,	that
journey	crossed	the	mainland,	from	the	north	Otataral	Sea	down	to	Aren	Bay.
If	Felisin,	Heboric	and	Baudin	jumped	off,	they	might	well	have	reappeared	on
land	somewhere	on	that	route.’
‘To	find	themselves	in	the	midst	of	the	rebellion.’
‘Given	what	seems	to	have	led	up	to	it,	they	might	well	have	considered
that	a	far	less	horrendous	option.’
‘Until	some	band	of	raiders	stumbled	onto	them.’


	
Captain	Keneb’s	9th	Company	was	called	to	muster	in	three	successive
assemblies	on	the	parade	ground.	There	had	been	no	advance	warning,	simply
the	arrival	of	an	officer	commanding	the	soldiers	to	proceed	at	double-time.
Squads	1,	2	and	3	went	first.	These	were	heavy	infantry,	thirty	soldiers	in
all,	loaded	down	in	scale	armour	and	chain	vambraces	and	gauntlets,	kite
shields,	weighted	longswords,	stabbing	spears	strapped	to	their	backs,	visored
and	cheek-guarded	helms	with	lobster	tails,	dirks	and	pig-stickers	at	their	belts.
The	marines	were	next.	Ranal’s	4th,	5th	and	6th	squads.	Following	them
were	the	bulk	of	the	company’s	troops,	medium	infantry,	the	7th	to	the	24th
squads.	Only	slightly	less	armoured	than	the	heavy	infantry,	there	was,	among
them,	the	addition	of	soldiers	skilled	in	the	use	of	the	short	bow,	the	longbow,
and	the	spear.	Each	company	was	intended	to	work	as	a	discrete	unit,	selfreliant	and	mutually	supportive.
As	he	stood	in	front	of	his	squad,	Strings	studied	the	9th.	Their	first
assembly	as	a	separate	force.	They	awaited	the	Adjunct’s	arrival	in	mostly
precise	ranks,	saying	little,	not	one	out	of	uniform	or	weaponless.
Dusk	was	fast	approaching,	the	air	growing	mercifully	cool.
Lieutenant	Ranal	had	been	walking	the	length	of	the	three	squads	of
marines	for	some	time,	back	and	forth,	his	steps	slow,	a	sheen	of	sweat	on	his
smooth-shaven	cheeks.	When	he	finally	halted,	it	was	directly	before	Strings.
‘All	right,	Sergeant,’	he	hissed.	‘It’s	your	idea,	isn’t	it?’
‘Sir?’
‘Those	damned	finger	bones!	They	showed	up	in	your	squad	first—as	if	I
wouldn’t	have	noticed	that.	And	now	I’ve	heard	from	the	captain	that	it’s
spreading	through	every	legion.	Graves	are	being	robbed	all	over	the	city!
And	I’ll	tell	you	this—’	He	stepped	very	close	and	continued	in	a	rough
whisper.	‘If	the	Adjunct	asks	who	is	responsible	for	this	last	spit	in	her	face
over	what	happened	yesterday,	I	won’t	hesitate	in	directing	her	to	you.’
‘Spit	in	her	face?	Lieutenant,	you	are	a	raging	idiot.	Now,	a	clump	of
officers	have	just	appeared	at	the	main	gate.	I	suggest	you	take	your	place,	sir.’
Face	dark	with	fury,	Ranal	wheeled	and	took	position	before	the	three
squads.
The	Adjunct	led	the	way,	her	entourage	trailing.
Captain	Keneb	awaited	her.	Strings	remembered	the	man	from	the	first,
disastrous	mustering.	A	Malazan.	The	word	was	out	that	he	had	been
garrisoned	inland,	had	seen	his	share	of	fighting	when	their	company	had	been
overrun.	Then	the	flight	southward,	back	to	Aren.	There	was	enough	in	that	to


lead	Strings	to	wonder	if	the	man	hadn’t	taken	the	coward’s	route.	Rather	than
dying	with	his	soldiers,	he’d	been	first	in	the	rout.	That’s	how	many	officers
outlived	their	squads,	after	all.	Officers	weren’t	worth	much,	as	far	as	the
sergeant	was	concerned.
The	Adjunct	was	speaking	with	the	man	now,	then	the	captain	stepped	back
and	saluted,	inviting	Tavore	to	approach	the	troops.	But	instead	she	drew	a	step
closer	to	the	man,	reached	out	and	touched	something	looped	about	Keneb’s
neck.
Strings’s	eyes	widened	slightly.	That’s	a	damned	finger	bone.
More	words	between	the	man	and	the	woman,	then	the	Adjunct	nodded	and
proceeded	towards	the	squads.
Alone,	her	steps	slow,	her	face	expressionless.
Strings	saw	the	flicker	of	recognition	as	she	scanned	the	squads.	Himself,
then	Cuttle.	After	a	long	moment,	during	which	she	entirely	ignored	the
ramrod-straight	Lieutenant	Ranal,	she	finally	turned	to	the	man.	‘Lieutenant.’
‘Adjunct.’
‘There	seems	to	be	a	proliferation	of	non-standard	accoutrements	on	your
soldiers.	More	so	here	than	among	any	of	the	other	companies	I	have
reviewed.’
‘Yes,	Adjunct.	Against	my	orders,	and	I	know	the	man	responsible—’
‘No	doubt,’	she	replied.	‘But	I	am	not	interested	in	that.	I	would	suggest,
however,	that	some	uniformity	be	established	for	those…trinkets.	Perhaps
from	the	hip	belt,	opposite	the	scabbard.	Furthermore,	there	have	been
complaints	from	Aren’s	citizenry.	At	the	very	least,	the	looted	pits	and	tombs
should	be	returned	to	their	original	state…as	much	as	that	is	possible,	of
course.’
Ranal’s	confusion	was	obvious.	‘Of	course,	Adjunct.’
‘And	you	might	note,	as	well,’	the	Adjunct	added	drily,	‘that	you	are	alone
in	wearing	a…non-standard	uniform	of	the	Fourteenth	Army,	at	this	time.	I
suggest	you	correct	that	as	soon	as	possible,	Lieutenant.	Now,	you	may	dismiss
your	squads.	And	on	your	way	out,	convey	my	instruction	to	Captain	Keneb
that	he	can	proceed	with	moving	the	company’s	medium	infantry	to	the	fore.’
‘Y-yes,	Adjunct.	At	once.’	He	saluted.
Strings	watched	her	walk	back	to	her	entourage.	Oh,	well	done,	lass.
	
Gamet’s	chest	was	filled	with	aching	as	he	studied	the	Adjunct	striding	back	to
where	he	and	the	others	waited.	A	fiercely	welling	emotion.	Whoever	had
come	up	with	the	idea	deserved…well,	a	damned	kiss,	as	Cuttle	would	have


said.	They’ve	turned	the	omen.	Turned	it!
And	he	saw	the	rekindled	fire	in	Tavore’s	eyes	as	she	reached	them.	‘Fist
Gamet.’
‘Adjunct?’
‘The	Fourteenth	Army	requires	a	standard.’
‘Aye,	it	does	indeed.’
‘We	might	take	our	inspiration	from	the	soldiers	themselves.’
‘We	might	well	do	that,	Adjunct.’
‘You	will	see	to	it?	In	time	for	our	departure	tomorrow?’
‘I	will.’
From	the	gate	a	messenger	arrived	on	horseback.	He	had	been	riding	hard,
and	drew	up	sharply	upon	seeing	the	Adjunct.
Gamet	watched	the	man	dismount	and	approach.	Gods,	not	bad	news…not
now…
‘Report,’	the	Adjunct	demanded.
‘Three	ships,	Adjunct,’	the	messenger	gasped.	‘Just	limped	into	harbour.’
‘Go	on.’
‘Volunteers!	Warriors!	Horses	and	wardogs!	It’s	chaos	at	the	docks!’
‘How	many?’	Gamet	demanded.
‘Three	hundred,	Fist.’
‘Where	in	Hood’s	name	are	they	from?’
The	messenger ’s	gaze	snapped	away	from	them—over	to	where	Nil	and
Nether	stood.	‘Wickans.’	He	met	Tavore’s	gaze	once	more.	‘Adjunct!	Clan	of
the	Crow.	The	Crow!	Coltaine’s	own!’


Chapter	Nine

At	night	ghosts	come
In	rivers	of	grief,
To	claw	away	the	sand
Beneath	a	man’s	feet
G’DANII	SAYING
The	twin	long-knives	were	slung	in	a	faded	leather	harness	stitched	in	swirling
Pardu	patterns.	They	hung	from	a	nail	on	one	of	the	shop’s	corner	posts,
beneath	an	elaborate	Kherahn	shaman’s	feather	headdress.	The	long	table
fronting	the	canopied	stall	was	crowded	with	ornate	obsidian	objects	looted
from	some	tomb,	each	one	newly	blessed	in	the	name	of	gods,	spirits	or
demons.	On	the	left	side,	behind	the	table	and	flanking	the	toothless	proprietor
who	sat	cross-legged	on	a	high	stool,	was	a	tall	screened	cabinet.
The	burly,	dark-skinned	customer	stood	examining	the	obsidian	weapons
for	some	time	before	a	slight	flip	of	his	right	hand	signalled	an	interest	to	the
hawker.
‘The	breath	of	demons!’	the	old	man	squealed,	jabbing	a	gnarled	finger	at
various	stone	blades	in	confusing	succession.	‘And	these,	kissed	by	Mael—see
how	the	waters	have	smoothed	them?	I	have	more—’
‘What	lies	in	the	cabinet?’	the	customer	rumbled.
‘Ah,	you’ve	a	sharp	eye!	Are	you	a	Reader,	perchance?	Could	you	smell
the	chaos,	then?	Decks,	my	wise	friend!	Decks!	And	oh,	haven’t	they	awakened!
Yes,	all	anew.	All	is	in	flux—’
‘The	Deck	of	Dragons	is	always	in	flux—’
‘Ah,	but	a	new	House!	Oh,	I	see	your	surprise	at	that,	friend!	A	new	House.
Vast	power,	’tis	said.	Tremors	to	the	very	roots	of	the	world!’
The	man	facing	him	scowled.	‘Another	new	House,	is	it?	Some	local
impostor	cult,	no	doubt—’
But	the	old	man	was	shaking	his	head,	eyes	darting	past	his	lone	customer,
suspiciously	scanning	the	market	crowd—paltry	as	it	was.	He	then	leaned


forward.	‘I	do	not	deal	in	those,	friend.	Oh,	I	am	as	loyal	to	Dryjhna	as	the
next,	make	no	claims	otherwise!	But	the	Deck	permits	no	bias,	does	it?	Oh	no,
balanced	wise	eyes	and	mind	is	necessary.	Indeed.	Now,	why	does	the	new
House	ring	with	truth?	Let	me	tell	you,	friend.	First,	a	new	Unaligned	card,	a
card	denoting	that	a	Master	now	commands	the	Deck.	An	arbiter,	yes?	And
then,	spreading	out	like	a	runaway	stubble	fire,	the	new	House.	Sanctioned?
Undecided.	But	not	rejected	out	of	hand,	oh	no,	not	rejected.	And	the	Readers—
the	patterns!	The	House	will	be	sanctioned—not	one	Reader	doubts	that!’
‘And	what	is	the	name	of	this	House?’	the	customer	asked.	‘What	throne?
Who	claims	to	rule	it?’
‘The	House	of	Chains,	my	friend.	To	your	other	questions,	there	is	naught
but	confusion	in	answer.	Ascendants	vie.	But	I	will	tell	you	this:	the	Throne
where	the	King	shall	sit—the	Throne,	my	friend,	is	cracked.’
‘You	are	saying	this	House	belongs	to	the	Chained	One?’
‘Aye.	The	Crippled	God.’
‘The	others	must	be	assailing	it	fiercely,’	the	man	murmured,	his
expression	thoughtful.
‘You	would	think,	but	not	so.	Indeed,	it	is	they	who	are	assailed!	Do	you
wish	to	see	the	new	cards?’
‘I	may	return	later	and	do	that	very	thing,’	the	man	replied.	‘But	first,	let
me	see	those	poor	knives	on	that	post.’
‘Poor	knives!	Aaii!	Not	poor,	oh	no!’	The	old	man	spun	on	his	seat,
reached	up	and	collected	the	brace	of	weapons.	He	grinned,	blue-veined	tongue
darting	between	red	gums.	‘Last	owned	by	a	Pardu	ghost-slayer!’	He	drew	one
of	the	knives	from	its	sheath.	The	blade	was	blackened,	inlaid	with	a	silver
serpent	pattern	down	its	length.
‘That	is	not	Pardu,’	the	customer	growled.
‘Owned,	I	said.	You’ve	a	sharp	eye	indeed.	They	are	Wickan.	Booty	from
the	Chain	of	Dogs.’
‘Let	me	see	the	other	one.’
The	old	man	unsheathed	the	second	blade.
Kalam	Mekhar ’s	eyes	involuntarily	widened.	Quickly	regaining	his
composure,	he	glanced	up	at	the	proprietor—but	the	man	had	seen	and	was
nodding.
‘Aye,	friend.	Aye…’
The	entire	blade,	also	black,	was	feather-patterned,	the	inlay	an	ambertinged	silver—that	amber	taint…alloyed	with	otataral.	Crow	clan.	But	not	a
lowly	warrior’s	weapon.	No,	this	one	belonged	to	someone	important.
The	old	man	resheathed	the	Crow	knife,	tapped	the	other	one	with	a	finger.


‘Invested,	this	one.	How	to	challenge	the	otataral?	Simple.	Elder	magic.’
‘Elder.	Wickan	sorcery	is	not	Elder—’
‘Oh,	but	this	now-dead	Wickan	warrior	had	a	friend.	See,	here,	take	the
knife	in	your	hand.	Squint	at	this	mark,	there,	at	the	base—see,	the	serpent’s	tail
coils	around	it—’
The	long-knife	was	startlingly	heavy	in	Kalam’s	hand.	The	finger	ridges	in
the	grip	were	overlarge,	but	the	Wickan	had	compensated	for	this	with	thicker
leather	straps.	The	stamp	impressed	into	the	metal	in	the	centre	of	the	looped
tail	was	intricate,	almost	beyond	belief,	given	the	size	of	the	hand	that	must
have	inscribed	it.	Fenn.	Thelomen	Toblakai.	The	Wickan	had	a	friend	indeed.
And	worse,	I	know	that	mark.	I	know	precisely	who	invested	this	weapon.	Gods
below,	what	strange	cycles	am	I	striding	into	here?
There	was	no	point	in	bartering.	Too	much	had	been	revealed.	‘Name	your
price,’	Kalam	sighed.
The	old	man’s	grin	broadened.	‘As	you	can	imagine,	a	cherished	set—my
most	valuable	prize.’
‘At	least	until	the	dead	Crow	warrior ’s	son	comes	to	collect	it—though	I
doubt	he	will	be	interested	in	paying	you	in	gold.	I	will	inherit	that	vengeful
hunter,	so	rein	in	your	greed	and	name	the	price.’
‘Twelve	hundred.’
The	assassin	set	a	small	pouch	on	the	table	and	watched	the	proprietor
loosen	the	strings	and	peer	inside.
‘There	is	a	darkness	to	these	diamonds,’	the	old	man	said	after	a	moment.
‘It	is	that	shadow	that	makes	them	so	valuable	and	you	know	it.’
‘Aye,	I	do	indeed.	Half	of	what	is	within	will	suffice.’
‘An	honest	hawker.’
‘A	rarity,	yes.	These	days,	loyalty	pays.’
Kalam	watched	the	old	man	count	out	the	diamonds.	‘The	loss	of	imperial
trade	has	been	painful,	it	seems.’
‘Very.	But	the	situation	here	in	G’danisban	is	doubly	so,	friend.’
‘And	why	is	that?’
‘Why,	everyone	is	at	B’ridys,	of	course.	The	siege.’
‘B’ridys?	The	old	mountain	fortress?	Who	is	holed	up	there?’
‘Malazans.	They	retreated	from	their	strongholds	in	Ehrlitan,	here	and
Pan’potsun—were	chased	all	the	way	into	the	hills.	Oh,	nothing	so	grand	as	the
Chain	of	Dogs,	but	a	few	hundred	made	it.’
‘And	they’re	still	holding	out?’
‘Aye.	B’ridys	is	like	that,	alas.	Still,	not	much	longer,	I	wager.	Now,	I	am
done,	friend.	Hide	that	pouch	well,	and	may	the	gods	ever	walk	in	your


shadow.’
Kalam	struggled	to	keep	the	grin	from	his	face	as	he	collected	the
weapons.	‘And	with	you,	sir.’	And	so	they	will,	friend.	Far	closer	than	you
might	want.
He	walked	a	short	distance	down	the	market	street,	then	paused	to	adjust	the
clasps	of	the	weapon	harness.	The	previous	owner	had	not	Kalam’s	bulk.	Then
again,	few	did.	When	he	was	done	he	slipped	into	the	harness,	then	drew	his
telaba’s	overcloak	around	once	more.	The	heavier	weapon	jutted	from	under
his	left	arm.
The	assassin	continued	on	through	G’danisban’s	mostly	empty	streets.	Two
long-knives,	both	Wickan.	The	same	owner?	Unknown.	They	were
complementary	in	one	sense,	true,	yet	the	difference	in	weight	would	challenge
anyone	who	sought	to	fight	using	both	at	the	same	time.
In	a	Fenn’s	hand,	the	heavier	weapon	would	be	little	more	than	a	dirk.	The
design	was	clearly	Wickan,	meaning	the	investment	had	been	a	favour,	or	in
payment.	Can	I	think	of	a	Wickan	who	might	have	earned	that?	Well,	Coltaine—
but	he	carried	a	single	long-knife,	unpatterned.	Now,	if	only	I	knew	more	about
that	damned	Thelomen	Toblakai…
Of	course,	the	High	Mage	named	Bellurdan	Skullcrusher	was	dead.
Cycles	indeed.	And	now	this	House	of	Chains.	The	damned	Crippled	God—
You	damned	fool,	Cotillion.	You	were	there	at	the	last	Chaining,	weren’t
you?	You	should	have	stuck	a	knife	in	the	bastard	right	there	and	then.
Now,	I	wonder,	was	Bellurdan	there	as	well?
Oh,	damn,	I	forgot	to	ask	what	happened	to	that	Pardu	ghost-slayer…
	
The	road	that	wound	southwest	out	of	G’danisban	had	been	worn	down	to	the
underlying	cobbles.	Clearly,	the	siege	had	gone	on	so	long	that	the	small	city
that	fed	it	was	growing	gaunt.	The	besieged	were	probably	faring	worse.
B’ridys	had	been	carved	into	a	cliffside,	a	long-standing	tradition	in	the	odhans
surrounding	the	Holy	Desert.	There	was	no	formal,	constructed	approach—not
even	steps,	nor	handholds,	cut	into	the	stone—and	the	tunnels	behind	the
fortifications	reached	deep.	Within	those	tunnels,	springs	supplied	water.
Kalam	had	only	seen	B’ridys	from	the	outside,	long	abandoned	by	its	original
inhabitants,	suggesting	that	the	springs	had	dried	up.	And	while	such
strongholds	contained	vast	storage	chambers,	there	was	little	chance	that	the
Malazans	who’d	fled	to	it	had	found	those	chambers	supplied.
The	poor	bastards	were	probably	starving.
Kalam	walked	the	road	in	the	gathering	dusk.	He	saw	no-one	else	on	the


track,	and	suspected	that	the	supply	trains	would	not	set	out	from	G’danisban
until	the	fall	of	night,	to	spare	their	draught	animals	the	heat.	Already,	the	road
had	begun	its	climb,	twisting	onto	the	sides	of	the	hills.
The	assassin	had	left	his	horse	with	Cotillion	in	the	Shadow	Realm.	For	the
tasks	ahead,	stealth,	not	speed,	would	prove	his	greatest	challenge.	Besides,
Raraku	was	hard	on	horses.	Most	of	the	outlying	sources	of	water	would	have
been	long	since	fouled,	in	anticipation	of	the	Adjunct’s	army.	He	knew	of	a	few
secret	ones,	however,	which	would	of	necessity	have	been	kept	untainted.
This	land,	Kalam	realized,	was	in	itself	a	land	under	siege—and	the	enemy
had	yet	to	arrive.	Sha’ik	had	drawn	the	Whirlwind	close,	a	tactic	that	suggested
to	the	assassin	a	certain	element	of	fear.	Unless,	of	course,	Sha’ik	was
deliberately	playing	against	expectations.	Perhaps	she	simply	sought	to	draw
Tavore	into	a	trap,	into	Raraku,	where	her	power	was	strongest,	where	her
forces	knew	the	land	whilst	the	enemy	did	not.
But	there’s	at	least	one	man	in	Tavore’s	army	who	knows	Raraku.	And	he’d
damn	well	better	speak	up	when	the	time	comes.
Night	had	arrived,	stars	glittering	overhead.	Kalam	pressed	on.	Burdened
beneath	a	pack	heavy	with	food	and	waterskins,	he	continued	to	sweat	as	the	air
chilled.	Reaching	the	summit	of	yet	another	hill,	he	discerned	the	glow	of	the
besiegers’	camp	beneath	the	ragged	horizon’s	silhouette.	From	the	cliffside
itself	there	was	no	light	at	all.
He	continued	on.

It	was	midmorning	before	he	arrived	at	the	camp.	Tents,	wagons,	stone-ringed
firepits,	arrayed	haphazardly	in	a	rough	semicircle	before	the	rearing	cliffface	with	its	smoke-blackened	fortress.	Heaps	of	rubbish	surrounded	the	area,
latrine	pits	overflowing	and	reeking	in	the	heat.	As	he	made	his	way	down	the
track,	Kalam	studied	the	situation.	He	judged	that	there	were	about	five	hundred
besiegers,	many	of	them—given	their	uniforms—originally	part	of	Malazan
garrisons,	but	of	local	blood.	There	had	been	no	assault	in	some	time.
Makeshift	wooden	towers	waited	off	to	one	side.
He	had	been	spotted,	but	no	challenge	was	raised,	nor	was	much	interest
accorded	him	as	he	reached	the	camp’s	edge.	Just	another	fighter	come	to	kill
Malazans.	Carrying	his	own	food,	ensuring	he	would	not	burden	anyone	else,
and	therefore	welcome.
As	the	hawker	in	G’danisban	had	suggested,	the	patience	of	the	attackers


had	ended.	Preparations	were	under	way	for	a	final	push.	Probably	not	this	day,
but	the	next.	The	scaffolds	had	been	left	untended	for	too	long—ropes	had
dried	out,	wood	had	split.	Work	crews	had	begun	the	repairs,	but	without	haste,
moving	slowly	in	the	enervating	heat.	There	was	an	air	of	dissolution	to	the
camp	that	even	anticipation	could	not	hide.
The	fires	have	cooled	here.	Now,	they’re	only	planning	an	assault	so	they
can	get	this	over	with,	so	they	can	go	home.
The	assassin	noted	a	small	group	of	soldiers	near	the	centre	of	the	halfring	where	it	seemed	the	orders	were	coming	from.	One	man	in	particular,
accoutred	in	the	armour	of	a	Malazan	lieutenant,	stood	with	hands	on	hips	and
was	busy	haranguing	a	half-dozen	sappers.
The	workmen	wandered	off	a	moment	before	Kalam	arrived,	desultorily
making	for	the	towers.
The	lieutenant	noticed	him.	Dark	eyes	narrowed	beneath	the	rim	of	the
helm.	There	was	a	crest	on	that	skullcap.	Ashok	Regiment.
Stationed	in	Genabaris	a	few	years	past.	Then	sent	back	to…Ehrlitan,	I
think.	Hood	rot	the	bastards,	I’d	have	thought	they	would	have	stayed	loyal.
‘Come	to	see	the	last	of	them	get	their	throats	cut?’	the	lieutenant	asked
with	a	hard	grin.	‘Good.	You’ve	the	look	of	an	organized	and	experienced
man,	and	Beru	knows,	I’ve	far	too	few	of	them	here	in	this	mob.	Your	name?’
‘Ulfas,’	Kalam	replied.
‘Sounds	Barghast.’
The	assassin	shrugged	as	he	set	down	his	pack.	‘You’re	not	the	first	to
think	that.’
‘You	will	address	me	as	sir.	That’s	if	you	want	to	be	part	of	this	fight.’
‘You’re	not	the	first	to	think	that…sir.’
‘I	am	Captain	Irriz.’
Captain…in	a	lieutenant’s	uniform.	Felt	unappreciated	in	the	regiment,	did
you?	‘When	does	the	assault	begin,	sir?’
‘Eager?	Good.	Tomorrow	at	dawn.	There’s	only	a	handful	left	up	there.	It
shouldn’t	take	long	once	we	breach	the	balcony	entrance.’
Kalam	looked	up	at	the	fortress.	The	balcony	was	little	more	than	a
projecting	ledge,	the	doorway	beyond	narrower	than	a	man’s	shoulders.	‘They
only	need	a	handful,’	he	muttered,	then	added,	‘sir.’
Irriz	scowled.	‘You	just	walked	in	and	you’re	already	an	expert?’
‘Sorry,	sir.	Simply	an	observation.’
‘Well,	we’ve	a	mage	just	arrived.	Says	she	can	knock	a	hole	where	that
door	is.	A	big	hole.	Ah,	here	she	comes	now.’
The	woman	approaching	was	young,	slight	and	pallid.	And	Malazan.	Ten


paces	away,	her	steps	faltered,	then	she	halted,	light	brown	eyes	fixing	now	on
Kalam.	‘Keep	that	weapon	sheathed	when	you’re	near	me,’	she	drawled.	‘Irriz,
get	that	bastard	to	stand	well	away	from	us.’
‘Sinn?	What’s	wrong	with	him?’
‘Wrong?	Nothing,	probably.	But	one	of	his	knives	is	an	otataral	weapon.’
The	sudden	avarice	in	the	captain’s	eyes	as	he	studied	Kalam	sent	a	faint
chill	through	the	assassin.	‘Indeed.	And	where	did	you	come	by	that,	Ulfas?’
‘Took	it	from	the	Wickan	I	killed.	On	the	Chain	of	Dogs.’
There	was	sudden	silence.	Faces	turned	to	regard	Kalam	anew.
Doubt	flickered	onto	Irriz’s	face.	‘You	were	there?’
‘Aye.	What	of	it?’
There	were	hand	gestures	all	round,	whispered	prayers.	The	chill	within
Kalam	grew	suddenly	colder.	Gods,	they’re	voicing	blessings…but	not	on	me.
They’re	blessing	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	What	truly	happened	there,	for	this	to	have
been	born?
‘Why	are	you	not	with	Sha’ik,	then?’	Irriz	demanded.	‘Why	would
Korbolo	have	let	you	leave?’
‘Because,’	Sinn	snapped,	‘Korbolo	Dom	is	an	idiot,	and	Kamist	Reloe	even
worse.	Personally,	I	am	amazed	he	didn’t	lose	half	his	army	after	the	Fall.	What
true	soldier	would	stomach	what	happened	there?	Ulfas,	is	it?	You	deserted
Korbolo’s	Dogslayers,	yes?’
Kalam	simply	shrugged.	‘I	went	looking	for	a	cleaner	fight.’
Her	laugh	was	shrill,	and	she	spun	in	mocking	pirouette	in	the	dust.	‘And
you	came	here?	Oh,	you	fool!	That’s	so	funny!	It	makes	me	want	to	scream,	it’s
so	funny!’
Her	mind	is	broken.	‘I	see	nothing	amusing	in	killing,’	he	replied.	‘Though
I	find	it	odd	that	you	are	here,	seemingly	so	eager	to	kill	fellow	Malazans.’
Her	face	darkened.	‘My	reasons	are	my	own,	Ulfas.	Irriz,	I	would	speak
with	you	in	private.	Come.’
Kalam	held	his	expression	impassive	as	the	captain	flinched	at	the
imperious	tone.	Then	the	renegade	officer	nodded.	‘I	will	join	you	in	a
moment,	Sinn.’	He	turned	back	to	the	assassin.	‘Ulfas.	We	want	to	take	most	of
them	alive,	to	give	us	sport.	Punishment	for	being	so	stubborn.	I	especially
want	their	commander.	He	is	named	Kindly—’
‘Do	you	know	him,	sir?’
Irriz	grinned.	‘I	was	3rd	Company	in	the	Ashok.	Kindly	leads	the	2nd.’	He
gestured	at	the	fortress.	‘Or	what’s	left	of	it.	This	is	a	personal	argument	for
me,	and	that	is	why	I	intend	to	win.	And	it’s	why	I	want	those	bastards	alive.
Wounded	and	disarmed.’


Sinn	was	waiting	impatiently.	Now	she	spoke	up,	‘There’s	a	thought.	Ulfas,
with	his	otataral	knife—he	can	make	their	mage	useless.’
Irriz	grinned.	‘First	into	the	breach,	then.	Acceptable	to	you,	Ulfas?’
First	in,	last	out.	‘It	won’t	be	my	first	time,	sir.’
The	captain	then	joined	Sinn	and	the	two	strode	off.
Kalam	stared	after	them.	Captain	Kindly.	Never	met	you,	sir,	but	for	years
you’ve	been	known	as	the	meanest	officer	in	the	entire	Malazan	military.	And,	it
now	seems,	the	most	stubborn,	too.
Excellent.	I	could	use	a	man	like	that.
	
He	found	an	empty	tent	to	stow	his	gear—empty	because	a	latrine	pit	had
clawed	away	the	near	side	of	its	sand-crusted	wall	and	was	now	soaking	the
ground	beneath	the	floor ’s	single	rug	along	the	back.	Kalam	placed	his	bag
beside	the	front	flap	then	stretched	out	close	to	it,	shutting	his	mind	and	senses
away	from	the	stench.
In	moments	he	was	asleep.
He	awoke	to	darkness.	The	camp	beyond	was	silent.	Slipping	out	from	his
telaba,	the	assassin	rose	into	a	crouch	and	began	winding	straps	around	his
loose-fitting	clothes.	When	he	was	done,	he	drew	on	fingerless	leather	gloves,
then	wound	a	black	cloth	around	his	head	until	only	his	eyes	remained
uncovered.	He	edged	outside.
A	few	smouldering	firepits,	two	tents	within	sight	still	glowing	with
lamplight.	Three	guards	sitting	in	a	makeshift	picket	facing	the	fortress—about
twenty	paces	distant.
Kalam	set	out,	silently	skirting	the	latrine	pit	and	approaching	the	skeletal
scaffolding	of	the	siege	towers.	They	had	posted	no	guard	there.	Irriz	was
probably	a	bad	lieutenant,	and	now	he’s	an	even	worse	captain.	He	moved
closer.
The	flicker	of	sorcery	at	the	base	of	one	of	the	towers	froze	him	in	place.
After	a	long,	breathless	moment,	a	second	muted	flash,	dancing	around	one	of
the	support	fittings.
Kalam	slowly	settled	down	to	watch.
Sinn	moved	from	fitting	to	fitting.	When	she	finished	with	the	closest
tower,	she	proceeded	to	the	next.	There	were	three	in	all.
When	she	was	working	on	the	last	fitting	at	the	base	of	the	second	tower,
Kalam	rose	and	slipped	forward.	As	he	drew	near	her,	he	unsheathed	the
otataral	blade.
He	smiled	at	her	soft	curse.	Then,	as	realization	struck	her,	she	whirled.


Kalam	held	up	a	staying	hand,	slowly	raised	his	knife,	then	sheathed	it	once
more.	He	padded	to	her	side.	‘Lass,’	he	whispered	in	Malazan,	‘this	is	a	nasty
nest	of	snakes	for	you	to	play	in.’
Her	eyes	went	wide,	gleaming	like	pools	in	the	starlight.	‘I	wasn’t	sure	of
you,’	she	replied	quietly.	Her	thin	arms	drew	tight	around	herself.	‘I’m	still	not.
Who	are	you?’
‘Just	a	man	sneaking	to	the	towers…to	weaken	all	the	supports.	As	you
have	done.	All	but	one	of	them,	that	is.	The	third	one	is	the	best	made—
Malazan,	in	fact.	I	want	to	keep	that	one	intact.’
‘Then	we	are	allies,’	she	said,	still	hugging	herself.
She’s	very	young.	‘You	showed	fine	acting	abilities	earlier	on.	And	you’ve
surprising	skill	as	a	mage,	for	one	so…’
‘Minor	magicks	only,	I’m	afraid.	I	was	being	schooled.’
‘Who	was	your	instructor?’
‘Fayelle.	Who’s	now	with	Korbolo	Dom.	Fayelle,	who	slid	her	knife
across	the	throats	of	my	father	and	mother.	Who	went	hunting	for	me,	too.	But
I	slipped	away,	and	even	with	her	sorcery	she	could	not	find	me.’
‘And	this	is	to	be	your	revenge?’
Her	grin	was	a	silent	snarl.	‘I	have	only	begun	my	revenge,	Ulfas.	I	want
her.	But	I	need	soldiers.’
‘Captain	Kindly	and	company.	You	mentioned	a	mage	in	that	fortress.	Have
you	been	in	touch	with	him?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	have	not	that	skill.’
‘Then	why	do	you	believe	that	the	captain	will	join	you	in	your	cause?’
‘Because	one	of	his	sergeants	is	my	brother—well,	my	half-brother.	I	don’t
know	if	he	still	lives,	though…’
He	settled	a	hand	on	her	shoulder,	ignoring	the	answering	flinch.	‘All
right,	lass.	We	will	work	together	on	this.	You’ve	your	first	ally.’
‘Why?’
He	smiled	unseen	behind	the	cloth.	‘Fayelle	is	with	Korbolo	Dom,	yes?
Well,	I	have	a	meeting	pending	with	Korbolo.	And	with	Kamist	Reloe.	So,
we’ll	work	together	in	convincing	Captain	Kindly.	Agreed?’
‘Agreed.’
The	relief	in	her	voice	sent	a	twinge	through	the	assassin.	She’d	been	alone
for	far	too	long	in	her	deadly	quest.	In	need	of	help…but	with	no-one	around
to	whom	she	could	turn.	Just	one	more	orphan	in	this	Hood-cursed	rebellion.
He	recalled	his	first	sight	of	those	thirteen	hundred	children	he	had	unwittingly
saved	all	those	months	back,	his	last	time	crossing	this	land.	And	there,	in	those
faces,	was	the	true	horror	of	war.	Those	children	had	been	alive	when	the


carrion	birds	came	down	for	their	eyes…A	shudder	ran	through	him.
‘What	is	wrong?	You	seemed	far	away.’
He	met	her	eyes.	‘No,	lass,	far	closer	than	you	think.’
‘Well,	I	have	already	done	most	of	my	work	this	night.	Irriz	and	his
warriors	won’t	be	worth	much	come	the	morning.’
‘Oh?	And	what	did	you	have	planned	for	me?’
‘I	wasn’t	sure.	I	was	hoping	that,	with	you	up	front,	you’d	get	killed	quick.
Captain	Kindly’s	mage	wouldn’t	go	near	you—he’d	leave	it	to	the	soldiers	with
their	crossbows.’
‘And	what	of	this	hole	you	were	to	blast	into	the	cliff-face?’
‘Illusion.	I’ve	been	preparing	for	days.	I	think	I	can	do	it.’
Brave	and	desperate.	‘Well,	lass,	your	efforts	seem	to	have	far	outstripped
mine	in	ambition.	I’d	intended	a	little	mayhem	and	not	much	more.	You
mentioned	that	Irriz	and	his	men	wouldn’t	be	worth	much.	What	did	you	mean
by	that?’
‘I	poisoned	their	water.’
Kalam	blanched	behind	his	mask.	‘Poison?	What	kind?’
‘Tralb.’
The	assassin	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment.	Then,	‘How	much?’
She	shrugged.	‘All	that	the	healer	had.	Four	vials.	He	once	said	he	used	it	to
stop	tremors,	such	as	afflicted	old	people.’
Aye.	A	drop.	‘When?’
‘Not	long	ago.’
‘So,	unlikely	anyone’s	drunk	it	yet.’
‘Except	maybe	a	guard	or	two.’
‘Wait	here,	lass.’	Kalam	set	out,	silent	in	the	darkness,	until	he	came	within
sight	of	the	three	warriors	manning	the	picket.	Earlier,	they	had	been	seated.
That	was	no	longer	the	case.	But	there	was	movement,	low	to	the	ground—he
slipped	closer.
The	three	figures	were	spasming,	writhing,	their	limbs	jerking.	Foam
caked	their	mouths	and	blood	had	started	from	their	bulging	eyes.	They	had
fouled	themselves.	A	waterskin	lay	nearby	in	a	patch	of	wet	sand	that	was
quickly	disappearing	beneath	a	carpet	of	capemoths.
The	assassin	drew	his	pig-sticker.	He	would	have	to	be	careful,	since	to
come	into	contact	with	blood,	spit	or	any	other	fluid	was	to	invite	a	similar
fate.	The	warriors	were	doomed	to	suffer	like	this	for	what	to	them	would	be
an	eternity—they	would	still	be	spasming	by	dawn,	and	would	continue	to	do
so	until	either	their	hearts	gave	out	or	they	died	from	dehydration.	Horribly,
with	Tralb	it	was	often	the	latter	rather	than	the	former.


He	reached	the	nearest	one.	Saw	recognition	in	the	man’s	leaking	eyes.
Kalam	raised	his	knife.	Relief	answered	the	gesture.	The	assassin	drove	the
narrow-bladed	weapon	down	into	the	guard’s	left	eye,	angled	upward.	The
body	stiffened,	then	settled	with	a	frothy	sigh.
He	quickly	repeated	the	grisly	task	with	the	other	two.
Then	meticulously	cleaned	his	knife	in	the	sand.
Capemoths,	wings	rasping,	were	descending	on	the	scene.	Hunting	rhizan
quickly	joined	them.	The	air	filled	with	the	sound	of	crunching	exoskeletons.
Kalam	faced	the	camp.	He	would	have	to	stove	the	casks.	Enemies	of	the
empire	these	warriors	might	be,	but	they	deserved	a	more	merciful	death	than
this.
A	faint	skittering	sound	spun	him	around.
A	rope	had	uncoiled	down	the	cliff-face	from	the	stone	balcony.	Figures
began	descending,	silent	and	fast.
They	had	watchers.
The	assassin	waited.
Three	in	all,	none	armed	with	more	than	daggers.	As	they	came	forward
one	halted	while	still	a	dozen	paces	distant.
The	lead	man	drew	up	before	the	assassin.	‘And	who	in	Hood’s	name	are
you?’	he	hissed,	gold	flashing	from	his	teeth.
‘A	Malazan	soldier,’	was	Kalam’s	whispered	reply.	‘Is	that	your	mage
hanging	back	over	there?	I	need	his	help.’
‘He	says	he	can’t—’
‘I	know.	My	otataral	long-knife.	But	he	need	not	get	close—all	he	has	to	do
is	empty	this	camp’s	water	casks.’
‘What	for?	There’s	a	spring	not	fifty	paces	downtrail—they’ll	just	get
more.’
‘You’ve	another	ally	here,’	Kalam	said.	‘She	fouled	the	water	with	Tralb—
what	do	you	think	afflicted	these	poor	bastards?’
The	second	man	grunted.	‘We	was	wondering.	Not	pleasant,	what	happened
to	them.	Still,	it’s	no	less	than	they	deserved.	I	say	leave	the	water	be.’
‘Why	not	take	the	issue	to	Captain	Kindly?	He’s	the	one	making	the
decisions	for	you,	right?’
The	man	scowled.
His	companion	spoke.	‘That’s	not	why	we’re	down	here.	We’re	here	to
retrieve	you.	And	if	there’s	another	one,	we’ll	take	her,	too.’
‘To	do	what?’	Kalam	demanded.	He	was	about	to	say	Starve?	Die	of	thirst?
but	then	he	realized	that	neither	soldier	before	him	looked	particularly	gaunt,
nor	parched.	‘You	want	to	stay	holed	up	in	there	for	ever?’


‘It	suits	us	fine,’	the	second	soldier	snapped.	‘We	could	leave	at	any	time.
There’s	back	routes.	But	the	question	is,	then	what?	Where	do	we	go?	The
whole	land	is	out	for	Malazan	blood.’
‘What	is	the	last	news	you’ve	heard?’	Kalam	asked.
‘We	ain’t	heard	any	at	all.	Not	since	we	quitted	Ehrlitan.	As	far	as	we	can
see,	Seven	Cities	ain’t	part	of	the	Malazan	Empire	any	more,	and	there	won’t
be	nobody	coming	to	get	us.	If	there	was,	they’d	have	come	long	since.’
The	assassin	regarded	the	two	soldiers	for	a	moment,	then	he	sighed.	‘All
right,	we	need	to	talk.	But	not	here.	Let	me	get	the	lass—we’ll	go	with	you.	On
condition	that	your	mage	do	me	the	favour	I	asked.’
‘Not	an	even	enough	bargain,’	the	second	soldier	said.	‘Grab	for	us	Irriz.
We	want	a	little	sit-down	with	that	fly-blown	corporal.’
‘Corporal?	Didn’t	you	know,	he’s	a	captain	now.	You	want	him.	Fine.	Your
mage	destroys	the	water	in	those	casks.	I’ll	send	the	lass	your	way—be	kind	to
her.	All	of	you	head	back	up.	I	may	be	a	while.’
‘We	can	live	with	that	deal.’
Kalam	nodded	and	made	his	way	back	to	where	he’d	left	Sinn.
She	had	not	left	her	position,	although	instead	of	hiding	she	was	dancing
beneath	one	of	the	towers,	spinning	in	the	sand,	arms	floating,	hands	fluttering
like	capemoth	wings.
The	assassin	hissed	in	warning	as	he	drew	near.	She	halted,	saw	him,	and
scurried	over.	‘You	took	too	long!	I	thought	you	were	dead!’
And	so	you	danced?	‘No,	but	those	three	guards	are.	I’ve	made	contact	with
the	soldiers	from	the	fortress.	They’ve	invited	us	inside—conditions	seem
amenable	up	there.	I’ve	agreed.’
‘But	what	about	the	attack	tomorrow?’
‘It	will	fail.	Listen,	Sinn,	they	can	leave	at	any	time,	unseen—we	can	be	on
our	way	into	Raraku	as	soon	as	we	can	convince	Kindly.	Now,	follow	me—and
quietly.’
They	returned	to	where	the	three	Malazan	imperials	waited.
Kalam	scowled	at	the	squad	mage,	but	he	grinned	in	return.	‘It’s	done.	Easy
when	you’re	not	around.’
‘Very	well.	This	is	Sinn—she’s	a	mage	as	well.	Go	on,	all	of	you.’
‘Lady’s	luck	to	you,’	one	of	the	soldiers	said	to	Kalam.
Without	replying,	the	assassin	turned	about	and	slipped	back	into	the	camp.
He	returned	to	his	own	tent,	entered	and	crouched	down	beside	his	kit	bag.
Rummaging	inside	it,	he	drew	out	the	pouch	of	diamonds	and	selected	one	at
random.
A	moment’s	careful	study,	holding	it	close	in	the	gloom.	Murky	shadows


swam	within	the	cut	stone.	Beware	of	shadows	bearing	gifts.	He	reached	outside
and	dragged	in	one	of	the	flat	stones	used	to	hold	down	the	tent	walls,	and	set
the	diamond	onto	its	dusty	surface.
The	bone	whistle	Cotillion	had	given	him	was	looped	on	a	thong	around
his	neck.	He	pulled	it	clear	and	set	it	to	his	lips.	‘Blow	hard	and	you’ll	awaken
all	of	them.	Blow	soft	and	directly	at	one	in	particular,	and	you’ll	awaken	that
one	alone.’	Kalam	hoped	the	god	knew	what	he	was	talking	about.	Better	if
these	weren’t	Shadowthrone’s	toys…He	leaned	forward	until	the	whistle	was	a
mere	hand’s	width	from	the	diamond.
Then	softly	blew	through	it.
There	was	no	sound.	Frowning,	Kalam	pulled	the	whistle	from	his	lips	and
examined	it.	He	was	interrupted	by	a	soft	tinkling	sound.
The	diamond	had	crumbled	to	glittering	dust.
From	which	a	swirling	shadow	rose.
As	I’d	feared.	Azalan.	From	a	territory	in	the	Shadow	Realm	bordering	that
of	the	Aptorians.	Rarely	seen,	and	never	more	than	one	at	a	time.	Silent,
seemingly	incapable	of	language—how	Shadowthrone	commanded	them	was	a
mystery.
Swirling,	filling	the	tent,	dropping	to	all	six	limbs,	the	spiny	ridge	of	its
massive,	hunched	back	scraping	against	the	fabric	to	either	side	of	the	ridgepole.	Blue,	all-too-human	eyes	blinked	out	at	Kalam	from	beneath	a	blackskinned,	flaring,	swept-back	brow.	Wide	mouth,	lower	lip	strangely	protruding
as	if	in	eternal	pout,	twin	slits	for	a	nose.	A	mane	of	thin	bluish-black	hair	hung
in	strands,	tips	brushing	the	tent	floor.	There	was	no	indication	of	its	gender.	A
complicated	harness	crisscrossed	its	huge	torso,	studded	with	a	variety	of
weapons,	not	one	of	which	seemed	of	practical	use.
The	azalan	possessed	no	feet	as	such—each	appendage	ended	in	a	wide,
flat,	short-fingered	hand.	The	homeland	of	these	demons	was	a	forest,	and
these	creatures	commonly	lived	in	the	tangled	canopy	high	overhead,
venturing	down	to	the	gloomy	forest	floor	only	when	summoned.
Summoned…only	to	then	be	imprisoned	in	diamonds.	If	it	was	me,	I’d	be
pretty	annoyed	by	now.
The	demon	suddenly	smiled.
Kalam	glanced	away,	considering	how	to	frame	his	request.	Get	Captain
Irriz.	Alive,	but	kept	quiet.	Join	me	at	the	rope.	There	would	need	to	be	some
explaining	to	do,	and	with	a	beast	possessing	no	language—
The	azalan	turned	suddenly,	nostrils	twitching.	The	broad,	squat	head
dipped	down	on	its	long,	thickly	muscled	neck.	Down	to	the	tent’s	back	wall	at
the	base.


Where	urine	from	the	latrine	pit	had	soaked	through.
A	soft	cluck,	then	the	demon	wheeled	about	and	lifted	a	hind	limb.	Two
penises	dropped	into	view	from	a	fold	of	flesh.
Twin	streams	reached	down	to	the	sodden	carpet.
Kalam	reeled	back	at	the	stench,	back,	out	through	the	flap	and	outside	into
the	chill	night	air,	where	he	remained,	on	hands	and	knees,	gagging.
A	moment	later	the	demon	emerged.	Lifted	its	head	to	test	the	air,	then
surged	into	the	shadows—and	was	gone.
In	the	direction	of	the	captain’s	tent.
Kalam	managed	a	lungful	of	cleansing	air,	slowly	brought	his	shuddering
under	control.	‘All	right,	pup,’	he	softly	gasped,	‘guess	you	read	my	mind.’
After	a	moment	he	rose	into	a	crouch,	reached	back	with	breath	held	into	the
tent	to	retrieve	his	pack,	then	staggered	towards	the	cliff-face.
A	glance	back	showed	steam	or	smoke	rising	out	from	his	tent’s	entrance,
a	whispering	crackle	slowly	growing	louder	from	within	it.
Gods,	who	needs	a	vial	of	Tralb?
He	padded	swiftly	to	where	the	rope	still	dangled	beneath	the	balcony.
A	sputtering	burst	of	flames	erupted	from	where	his	tent	had	been.
Hardly	an	event	to	go	unnoticed.	Hissing	a	curse,	Kalam	sprinted	for	the
rope.
Shouts	rose	from	the	camp.	Then	screams,	then	shrieks,	each	one	ending	in
a	strange	mangled	squeal.
The	assassin	skidded	to	a	halt	at	the	cliff-face,	closed	both	hands	on	the
rope,	and	began	climbing.	He	was	halfway	up	to	the	balcony	when	the
limestone	wall	shook	suddenly,	puffing	out	dust.	Pebbles	rained	down.	And	a
hulking	shape	was	now	beside	him,	clinging	to	the	raw,	runnelled	rock.	Tucked
under	one	arm	was	Irriz,	unconscious	and	in	his	bedclothes.	The	azalan	seemed
to	flow	up	the	wall,	hands	gripping	the	rippled	ribbons	of	shadow	as	if	they
were	iron	rungs.	In	moments	the	demon	reached	the	balcony	and	swung	itself
over	the	lip	and	out	of	sight.
And	the	stone	ledge	groaned.
Cracks	snaked	down.
Kalam	stared	upward	to	see	the	entire	balcony	sagging,	pulling	away	from
the	wall.
His	moccasins	slipped	wildly	as	he	tried	to	scrabble	his	way	to	one	side.
Then	he	saw	long,	unhuman	hands	close	on	the	lip	of	the	stone	ledge.	The
sagging	ceased.
H-how	in	Hood’s	name—
The	assassin	resumed	climbing.	Moments	later	he	reached	the	balcony	and


pulled	himself	over	the	edge.
The	azalan	was	fully	stretched	over	it.	Two	hands	gripped	the	ledge.	Three
others	held	shadows	on	the	cliffside	above	the	small	doorway.	Shadows	were
unravelling	from	the	demon	like	layers	of	skin,	vaguely	human	shapes
stretching	out	to	hold	the	balcony	to	the	wall—and	being	torn	apart	by	the
immense	strain.	As	Kalam	scrambled	onto	its	surface,	a	grinding,	crunching
sound	came	from	where	the	balcony	joined	the	wall,	and	it	dropped	a	hand’s
width	along	the	seam.
The	assassin	launched	himself	towards	the	recessed	doorway,	where	he
saw	a	face	in	the	gloom,	twisted	with	terror—the	squad	mage.
‘Back	off!’	Kalam	hissed.	‘It’s	a	friend!’
The	mage	reached	out	and	clasped	Kalam’s	forearm.
The	balcony	dropped	away	beneath	the	assassin	even	as	he	was	dragged
into	the	corridor.
Both	men	tumbled	back,	over	Irriz’s	prone	body.
Everything	shook	as	a	tremendous	thump	sounded	from	below.	The	echoes
were	slow	to	fade.
The	azalan	swung	in	from	under	the	lintel	stone.	Grinning.
A	short	distance	down	the	corridor	crouched	a	squad	of	soldiers.	Sinn	had
an	arm	wrapped	round	one	of	them—her	half-brother,	Kalam	assumed	as	he
slowly	regained	his	feet.
One	of	the	soldiers	the	assassin	had	met	earlier	moved	forward,	edging
past	the	assassin	and—with	more	difficulty—the	azalan,	back	out	to	the	edge.
After	a	moment	he	called	back.	‘All	quiet	down	there,	Sergeant.	The	camp’s	a
mess,	though.	Can’t	see	anyone	about…’
The	other	soldier	from	before	frowned.	‘No-one,	Bell?’
‘No.	Like	they	all	ran	away.’
Kalam	offered	nothing,	though	he	had	his	suspicions.	There	was	something
about	all	those	shadows	in	the	demon’s	possession…
The	squad	mage	had	disentangled	himself	from	Irriz	and	now	said	to	the
assassin,	‘That’s	a	damned	frightening	friend	you	have	there.	And	it	ain’t
imperial.	Shadow	Realm?’
‘A	temporary	ally,’	Kalam	replied	with	a	shrug.
‘How	temporary?’
The	assassin	faced	the	sergeant.	‘Irriz	has	been	delivered—what	do	you
plan	on	doing	with	him?’
‘Haven’t	decided	yet.	The	lass	here	says	you’re	named	Ulfas.	Would	that	be
right?	A	Genabackan	Barghast	name?	Wasn’t	there	a	war	chief	by	that	name?
Killed	at	Blackdog.’


‘I	wasn’t	about	to	tell	Irriz	my	real	name,	Sergeant.	I’m	a	Bridgeburner.
Kalam	Mekhar,	rank	of	corporal.’
There	was	silence.
Then	the	mage	sighed.	‘Wasn’t	you	outlawed?’
‘A	feint,	one	of	the	Empress’s	schemes.	Dujek	needed	a	free	hand	for	a
time.’
‘All	right,’	the	sergeant	said.	‘It	don’t	matter	if	you’re	telling	the	truth	or
not.	We’ve	heard	of	you.	I’m	Sergeant	Cord.	The	company	mage	here	is	Ebron.
That’s	Bell,	and	Corporal	Shard.’
The	corporal	was	Sinn’s	half-brother,	and	the	young	man’s	face	was	blank,
no	doubt	numbed	by	the	shock	of	Sinn’s	sudden	appearance.
‘Where’s	Captain	Kindly?’
Cord	winced.	‘The	rest	of	the	company—what’s	left,	is	down	below.	We
lost	the	captain	and	the	lieutenant	a	few	days	ago.’
‘Lost?	How?’
‘They,	uh,	they	fell	down	a	well	shaft.	Drowned.	Or	so	Ebron	found	out,
once	he	climbed	down	and	examined	the	situation	more	closely.	It’s	fastrunning,	an	underground	river.	They	were	swept	away,	the	poor	bastards.’
‘And	how	do	two	people	fall	down	a	well	shaft,	Sergeant?’
The	man	bared	his	gold	teeth.	‘Exploring,	I	imagine.	Now,	Corporal,	it
seems	I	outrank	you.	In	fact,	I’m	the	only	sergeant	left.	Now,	if	you	aren’t
outlawed,	then	you’re	still	a	soldier	of	the	empire.	And	as	a	soldier	of	the
empire…’
‘You	have	me	there,’	Kalam	muttered.
‘For	now,	you’ll	be	attached	to	my	old	squad.	You’ve	got	seniority	over
Corporal	Shard,	so	you’ll	be	in	charge.’
‘Very	well,	and	what’s	the	squad’s	complement?’
‘Shard,	Bell	and	Limp.	You’ve	met	Bell.	Limp’s	down	below.	He	broke	his
leg	in	a	rock-slide,	but	he’s	mending	fast.	There’s	fifty-one	soldiers	in	all.
Second	Company,	Ashok	Regiment.’
‘It	seems	your	besiegers	are	gone,’	Kalam	observed.	‘The	world	hasn’t
been	entirely	still	while	you’ve	been	shut	up	in	here,	Sergeant.	I	think	I	should
tell	you	what	I	know.	There	are	alternatives	to	waiting	here—no	matter	how
cosy	it	might	be—until	we	all	die	of	old	age…or	drowning	accidents.’
‘Aye,	Corporal.	You’ll	make	your	report.	And	if	I	want	to	ask	for	advice	on
what	to	do	next,	you’ll	be	first	in	line.	Now,	enough	with	the	opinions.	Time	to
go	below—and	I	suggest	you	find	a	leash	for	that	damned	demon.	And	tell	it	to
stop	smiling.’
‘You’ll	have	to	tell	it	yourself,	Sergeant,’	Kalam	drawled.


Ebron	snapped,	‘The	Malazan	Empire	don’t	need	allies	from	the	Shadow
Realm—get	rid	of	it!’
The	assassin	glanced	over	at	the	mage.	‘As	I	said	earlier,	changes	have
come,	Mage.	Sergeant	Cord,	you’re	entirely	welcome	to	try	throwing	a	collar
round	this	azalan’s	neck.	But	I	should	tell	you	first—even	though	you’re	not
asking	for	my	advice—that	even	though	those	weird	gourds,	pans	and	knobby
sticks	strapped	on	to	the	beast’s	belts	don’t	look	like	weapons,	this	azalan	has
just	taken	the	lives	of	over	five	hundred	rebel	warriors.	And	how	long	did	that
take?	Maybe	fifty	heartbeats.	Does	it	do	what	I	ask?	Now	that’s	a	question	worth
pondering,	don’t	you	think?’
Cord	studied	Kalam	for	a	long	moment.	‘Are	you	threatening	me?’
‘Having	worked	alone	for	some	time,	Sergeant,’	the	assassin	replied	in	a
low	voice,	‘my	skin’s	grown	thin.	I’ll	take	your	squad.	I’ll	even	follow	your
orders,	unless	they	happen	to	be	idiotic.	If	you	have	a	problem	with	all	this,
take	it	up	with	my	own	sergeant	next	time	you	see	him.	That’d	be	Whiskeyjack.
Apart	from	the	Empress	herself,	he’s	the	only	man	I	answer	to.	You	want	to
make	use	of	me?	Fine.	My	services	are	available	to	you…for	a	time.’
‘He’s	on	some	secret	mission,’	Ebron	muttered.	‘For	the	Empress,	is	my
guess.	He’s	probably	back	in	the	Claw—that’s	where	he	started,	after	all,	isn’t
it?’
Cord	looked	thoughtful,	then	he	shrugged	and	turned	away.	‘This	is
making	my	head	ache.	Let’s	get	below.’
Kalam	watched	the	sergeant	push	between	the	clump	of	soldiers	crowding
the	corridor.	Something	tells	me	I’m	not	going	to	enjoy	this	much.
Sinn	danced	a	step.
	
A	blurred	sword	of	dark	iron	rose	along	the	horizon,	a	massive,	bruised	blade
that	flickered	as	it	swelled	ever	larger.	The	wind	had	fallen	off,	and	it	seemed
that	the	island	in	the	path	of	the	sword’s	tip	grew	no	closer.	Cutter	moved	up	to
the	lone	mast	and	began	storm-rigging	the	luffing	sail.	‘I’m	going	to	man	the
sweeps	for	a	while,’	he	said.	‘Will	you	take	the	tiller?’
With	a	shrug	Apsalar	moved	to	the	stern.
The	storm	still	lay	behind	the	island	of	Drift	Avalii,	over	which	hung	a
seemingly	permanent,	immovable	bank	of	heavy	clouds.	Apart	from	a	steeply
rising	shoreline,	there	seemed	to	be	no	high	ground;	the	forest	of	cedars,	firs
and	redwoods	looked	impenetrable,	their	boles	ever	cloaked	in	gloom.
Cutter	stared	at	the	island	for	a	moment	longer,	then	gauged	the	pace	of	the
approaching	storm.	He	settled	onto	the	bench	behind	the	mast	and	collected	the


sweeps.	‘We	might	make	it,’	he	said,	as	he	dropped	the	oar	blades	into	the
murky	water	and	pulled.
‘The	island	will	shatter	it,’	Apsalar	replied.
He	narrowed	his	eyes	on	her.	It	was	the	first	time	in	days	that	she	had
ventured	a	statement	without	considerable	prodding	on	his	part.	‘Well,	I	may
have	crossed	a	damned	ocean,	but	I	still	understand	nothing	of	the	sea.	Why
should	an	island	without	a	single	mountain	break	that	storm?’
‘A	normal	island	wouldn’t,’	she	answered.
‘Ah,	I	see.’	He	fell	silent.	Her	knowledge	came	from	Cotillion’s	memories,
appearing	to	add	yet	another	layer	to	Apsalar ’s	miseries.	The	god	was	with
them	once	more,	a	haunting	presence	between	them.	Cutter	had	told	her	of	the
spectral	visitation,	of	Cotillion’s	words.	Her	distress—and	barely	constrained
fury—seemed	to	originate	from	the	god’s	recruitment	of	Cutter	himself.
His	choosing	of	his	new	name	had	displeased	her	from	the	very	first,	and
that	he	had	now	become,	in	effect,	a	minion	of	the	patron	god	of	assassins
appeared	to	wound	her	deeply.	He	had	been	naïve,	it	now	seemed	in	retrospect,
to	have	believed	that	such	a	development	would	bring	them	closer.
Apsalar	was	not	happy	with	her	own	path—a	realization	that	had	rocked	the
Daru.	She	drew	no	pleasure	or	satisfaction	from	her	own	cold,	brutal
efficiency	as	a	killer.	Cutter	had	once	imagined	that	competency	was	a	reward
in	itself,	that	skill	bred	its	own	justification,	creating	its	own	hunger	and	from
that	hunger	a	certain	pleasure.	A	person	was	drawn	to	his	or	her	own
proficiency—back	in	Darujhistan,	after	all,	his	thieving	habits	had	not	been	the
product	of	necessity.	He’d	suffered	no	starvation	on	the	city’s	streets,	no
depredation	by	its	crueller	realities.	He	had	stolen	purely	for	pleasure,	and
because	he	had	been	good	at	it.	A	future	as	a	master	thief	had	seemed	a	worthy
goal,	notoriety	indistinguishable	from	respect.
But	now,	Apsalar	was	trying	to	tell	him	that	competence	was	not
justification.	That	necessity	demanded	its	own	path	and	there	was	no	virtue	to
be	found	at	its	heart.
He’d	found	himself	at	subtle	war	with	her,	the	weapons	those	of	silence	and
veiled	expressions.
He	grunted	at	the	sweeps.	The	seas	were	growing	choppy.	‘Well,	I	hope
you’re	right,’	he	said.	‘We	could	do	with	the	shelter…though	from	what	the
Rope	said,	there	will	be	trouble	among	the	denizens	of	Drift	Avalii.’
‘Tiste	Andii,’	Apsalar	said.	‘Anomander	Rake’s	own.	He	settled	them	there,
to	guard	the	Throne.’
‘Do	you	recall	Dancer—or	Cotillion—speaking	with	them?’
Her	dark	eyes	flicked	to	his	for	a	moment,	then	she	looked	away.	‘It	was	a


short	conversation.	These	Tiste	Andii	have	known	isolation	for	far	too	long.
Their	master	left	them	there,	and	has	never	returned.’
‘Never?’
‘There	are…complications.	The	shore	ahead	offers	no	welcome—see	for
yourself.’
He	drew	the	oars	back	in	and	twisted	round	on	the	seat.
The	shoreline	was	a	dull	grey	sandstone,	wave-worn	into	undulating	layers
and	shelves.	‘Well,	we	can	draw	up	easily	enough,	but	I	see	what	you	mean.	No
place	to	pull	the	runner	up,	and	tethering	it	risks	battering	by	the	waves.	Any
suggestions?’
The	storm—or	the	island—was	drawing	breath,	tugging	the	sail.	They
were	quickly	closing	on	the	rocky	coast.
The	sky’s	rumbles	were	nearer	now,	and	Cutter	could	see	the	wavering
treetops	evincing	the	arrival	of	a	high	and	fierce	wind,	stretching	the	clouds
above	the	island	into	long,	twisting	tendrils.
‘I	have	no	suggestions,’	Apsalar	finally	replied.	‘There	is	another	concern
—currents.’
And	he	could	see	now.	The	island	did	indeed	drift,	unmoored	to	the	sea
bottom.	Spinning	vortices	roiled	around	the	sandstone.	Water	was	pulled	under,
flung	back	out,	seething	all	along	the	shoreline.	‘Beru	fend	us,’	Cutter
muttered,	‘this	won’t	be	easy.’	He	scrambled	to	the	bow.
Apsalar	swung	the	runner	onto	a	course	parallel	to	the	shore.	‘Look	for	a
shelf	low	to	the	water,’	she	called.	‘We	might	be	able	to	drag	the	boat	onto	it.’
Cutter	said	nothing	to	that.	It	would	take	four	or	more	strong	men	to
manage	such	a	task…but	at	least	we’d	get	onto	shore	in	one	piece.	The	currents
tugged	at	the	hull,	throwing	the	craft	side	to	side.	A	glance	back	showed
Apsalar	struggling	to	steady	the	tiller.
The	dull	grey	sandstone	revealed,	in	its	countless	shelves	and	modulations,
a	history	of	constantly	shifting	sea	levels.	Cutter	had	no	idea	how	an	island
could	float.	If	sorcery	was	responsible,	then	its	power	was	vast,	and	yet,	it
seemed,	far	from	perfect.
‘There!’	he	shouted	suddenly,	pointing	ahead	where	the	coast’s	undulations
dropped	to	a	flat	stretch	barely	a	hand’s	width	above	the	roiling	water.
‘Get	ready,’	Apsalar	instructed,	half	rising	from	her	seat.
Clambering	up	alongside	the	prow,	a	coil	of	rope	in	his	left	hand,	Cutter
prepared	to	leap	onto	the	shelf.	As	they	drew	closer,	he	could	see	that	the	stone
ledge	was	thin,	deeply	undercut.
They	swiftly	closed.	Cutter	jumped.
He	landed	square-footed,	knees	flexing	into	a	crouch.


There	was	a	sharp	crack,	then	the	stone	was	falling	away	beneath	his
moccasined	feet.	Cold	water	swept	around	his	ankles.	Unbalanced,	the	Daru
pitched	backward	with	a	yelp.	Behind	him,	the	boat	rushed	inward	on	the	wave
that	tumbled	into	the	sinking	shelf’s	wake.	Cutter	plunged	into	deep	water,	even
as	the	encrusted	hull	rolled	over	him.
The	currents	yanked	him	downward	into	icy	darkness.	His	left	heel
thumped	against	the	island’s	rock,	the	impact	softened	by	a	thick	skin	of
seaweed.
Down,	a	terrifyingly	fast	plummet	into	the	deep.
Then	the	rock	wall	was	gone,	and	he	was	pulled	by	the	currents	under	the
island.
A	roar	filled	his	head,	the	sound	of	rushing	water.	His	last	lungful	of	air
was	dwindling	to	nothing	in	his	chest.	Something	hard	hammered	into	his	side
—a	piece	of	the	runner ’s	hull,	wreckage	being	dragged	by	the	currents—their
boat	had	overturned.	Either	Apsalar	was	somewhere	in	the	swirling	water	with
him,	or	she	had	managed	to	leap	onto	solid	sandstone.	He	hoped	it	was	the
latter,	that	they	would	not	both	drown—for	drowning	was	all	that	was	left	to
him.
Sorry,	Cotillion.	I	hope	you	did	not	expect	too	much	of	me—
He	struck	stone	once	more,	was	rolled	along	it,	then	the	current	tugged
him	upward	and	suddenly	spat	him	loose.
He	flailed	with	his	limbs,	clawing	the	motionless	water,	his	pulse	pounding
in	his	head.	Disorientated,	panic	ripping	through	him	like	wildfire,	he	reached
out	one	last	time.
His	right	hand	plunged	into	cold	air.
A	moment	later	his	head	broke	the	surface.
Icy,	bitter	air	poured	into	his	lungs,	as	sweet	as	honey.	There	was	no	light,
and	the	sounds	of	his	gasping	returned	no	echoes,	seeming	to	vanish	in	some
unknown	immensity.
Cutter	called	out	to	Apsalar,	but	there	was	no	reply.
He	was	swiftly	growing	numb.	Choosing	a	random	direction,	he	set	out.
And	quickly	struck	a	stone	wall,	thick	with	wet,	slimy	growth.	He	reached
up,	found	only	sheerness.	He	swam	along	it,	his	limbs	weakening,	a	deadly
lassitude	stealing	into	him.	He	struggled	on,	feeling	his	will	seep	away.
Then	his	outstretched	hand	slapped	down	onto	the	flat	surface	of	a	ledge.
Cutter	threw	both	arms	onto	the	stone.	His	legs,	numbed	by	the	cold,	pulled	at
him.	Moaning,	he	sought	to	drag	himself	out	of	the	water,	but	his	strength	was
failing.	Fingers	gouging	tracks	through	the	slime,	he	slowly	sank	backward.
A	pair	of	hands	closed,	one	on	each	shoulder,	to	gather	the	sodden	fabric


in	a	grip	hard	as	iron.	He	felt	himself	lifted	clear	from	the	water,	then	dropped
onto	the	ledge.
Weeping,	Cutter	lay	unmoving.	Shivers	racked	him.
Eventually,	a	faint	crackling	sound	reached	through,	seeming	to	come
from	all	sides.	The	air	grew	warmer,	a	dull	glow	slowly	rising.
The	Daru	rolled	onto	his	side.	He	had	expected	to	see	Apsalar.	Instead,
standing	above	him	was	an	old	man,	extraordinarily	tall,	his	white	hair	long
and	dishevelled,	white-bearded	though	his	skin	was	black	as	ebony,	with	eyes	a
deep,	glittering	amber—the	sole	source,	Cutter	realized	with	a	shock—of	the
light.
All	around	them,	the	seaweed	was	drying,	shrivelling,	as	waves	of	heat
radiated	from	the	stranger.
The	ledge	was	only	a	few	paces	wide,	a	single	lip	of	slick	stone	flanked	by
vertical	walls	stretching	out	to	the	sides.
Sensation	was	returning	to	Cutter ’s	legs,	his	clothes	steaming	now	in	the
heat.	He	struggled	into	a	sitting	position.	‘Thank	you,	sir,’	he	said	in	Malazan.
‘Your	craft	has	littered	the	pool,’	the	man	replied.	‘I	suppose	you	will	want
some	of	the	wreckage	recovered.’
Cutter	twisted	to	stare	out	on	the	water,	but	could	see	nothing.	‘I	had	a
companion—’
‘You	arrived	alone.	It	is	probable	that	your	companion	drowned.	Only	one
current	delivers	victims	here.	The	rest	lead	only	to	death.	On	the	isle	itself,
there	is	but	one	landing,	and	you	did	not	find	it.	Few	corpses	of	late,	of	course,
given	our	distance	from	occupied	lands.	And	the	end	of	trade.’
His	words	were	halting,	as	if	rarely	used,	and	he	stood	awkwardly.
She	drowned?	More	likely	she	made	it	onto	shore.	Not	for	Apsalar	the
ignoble	end	that	almost	took	me.	Then	again…She	was	not	yet	immortal,	as
subject	to	the	world’s	cruel	indifference	as	anyone.	He	pushed	the	thought	away
for	the	moment.
‘Are	you	recovered?’
Cutter	glanced	up.	‘How	did	you	find	me?’
A	shrug.	‘It	is	my	task.	Now,	if	you	can	walk,	it	is	time	to	leave.’
The	Daru	pushed	himself	to	his	feet.	His	clothing	was	almost	dry.	‘You
possess	unusual	gifts,’	he	observed.	‘I	am	named…Cutter.’
‘You	may	call	me	Darist.	We	must	not	delay.	The	very	presence	of	life	in
this	place	risks	his	awakening.’
The	ancient	Tiste	Andii	turned	to	face	the	stone	wall.	At	a	gesture,	a
doorway	appeared,	beyond	which	were	stone	stairs	leading	upward.	‘That
which	survived	the	wrecking	of	your	craft	awaits	you	above,	Cutter.	Come.’


The	Daru	set	off	after	the	man.	‘Awakening?	Who	might	awaken?’
Darist	did	not	reply.
The	steps	were	worn	and	slick,	the	ascent	steep	and	seemingly
interminable.	The	cold	water	had	stolen	Cutter ’s	strength,	and	his	pace	grew
ever	slower.	Again	and	again	Darist	paused	to	await	him,	saying	nothing,	his
expression	closed.
They	eventually	emerged	onto	a	level	hallway	down	which	ran,	along	the
walls,	pillars	of	rough-skinned	cedars.	The	air	was	musty	and	damp	beneath
the	sharp	scent	of	the	wood.	There	was	no-one	else	in	sight.	‘Darist,’	Cutter
asked	as	they	walked	down	the	aisle,	‘are	we	still	beneath	ground	level?’
‘We	are,	but	we	shall	proceed	no	higher	for	the	time	being.	The	island	is
assailed.’
‘What?	By	whom?	What	of	the	Throne?’
Darist	halted	and	swung	round,	the	glow	in	his	eyes	somehow	deepening.
‘A	question	carelessly	unasked.	What	has	brought	you,	human,	to	Drift	Avalii?’
Cutter	hesitated.	There	was	no	love	lost	between	the	present	rulers	of
Shadow	and	the	Tiste	Andii.	Nor	had	Cotillion	even	remotely	suggested	actual
contact	be	made	with	the	Children	of	Darkness.	They	had	been	placed	here,
after	all,	to	ensure	that	the	true	Throne	of	Shadow	remain	unoccupied.	‘I	was
sent	by	a	mage—a	scholar,	whose	studies	had	led	him	to	believe	the	island—
and	all	it	contained—was	in	danger.	He	seeks	to	discover	the	nature	of	that
threat.’
Darist	was	silent	for	a	moment,	his	lined	face	devoid	of	expression.	Then
he	said,	‘What	is	this	scholar ’s	name?’
‘Uh,	Baruk.	Do	you	know	him?	He	lives	in	Darujhistan—’
‘What	lies	in	the	world	beyond	the	island	is	of	no	concern	to	me,’	the	Tiste
Andii	replied.
And	that,	old	man,	is	why	you’re	in	this	mess.	Cotillion	was	right.	‘The
Tiste	Edur	have	returned,	haven’t	they?	To	reclaim	the	Throne	of	Shadow.	But
it	was	Anomander	Rake	who	left	you	here,	entrusted	with—’
‘He	lives	still,	does	he?	If	Mother	Dark’s	favoured	son	is	displeased	with
how	we	have	managed	this	task,	then	he	must	come	and	tell	us	so	himself.	It
was	not	some	human	mage	who	sent	you	here,	was	it?	Do	you	kneel	before	the
Wielder	of	Dragnipur?	Does	he	renew	his	claims	to	the	blood	of	the	Tiste
Andii,	then?	Has	he	renounced	his	Draconian	blood?’
‘I	wouldn’t	know—’
‘Does	he	now	appear	as	an	old	man—older	by	far	than	me?	Ah,	I	see	by
your	face	the	truth	of	it.	He	has	not.	Well,	you	may	go	back	to	him	and	tell	him
—’


‘Wait!	I	do	not	serve	Rake!	Aye,	I	saw	him	in	person,	and	not	very	long
ago,	and	he	looked	young	enough	at	the	time.	But	I	did	not	kneel	to	him—
Hood	knows,	he	was	too	busy	at	the	time	in	any	case!	Too	busy	fighting	a
demon	to	converse	with	me!	We	but	crossed	paths.	I	don’t	know	what	you’re
talking	about,	Darist.	Sorry.	And	I	am	most	certainly	not	in	any	position	to	find
him	and	tell	him	whatever	it	is	you	want	me	to	say	to	him.’
The	Tiste	Andii	studied	Cutter	for	a	moment	longer,	then	he	swung	about
and	resumed	the	journey.
The	Daru	followed,	his	thoughts	wild	with	confusion.	It	was	one	thing	to
accept	the	charge	of	a	god,	but	the	further	he	travelled	on	this	dread	path,	the
more	insignificant	he	himself	felt.	Arguments	between	Anomander	Rake	and
these	Tiste	Andii	of	Drift	Avalii…well,	that	was	no	proper	business	of	his.	The
plan	had	been	to	sneak	onto	this	island	and	remain	unseen.	To	determine	if
indeed	the	Edur	had	found	this	place,	though	what	Cotillion	would	do	with	such
knowledge	was	anyone’s	guess.
But	that’s	something	I	should	think	about,	I	suppose.	Damn	it,	Cutter—
Crokus	would’ve	had	questions!	Mowri	knows,	he	would’ve	hesitated	a	lot
longer	before	accepting	Cotillion’s	bargain.	If	he	accepted	at	all!	This	new
persona	was	imposing	a	certain	sense	of	stricture—he’d	thought	it	would	bring
him	more	freedom.	But	now	it	was	beginning	to	appear	that	the	truly	free	one
had	been	Crokus.
Not	that	freedom	ensured	happiness.	Indeed,	to	be	free	was	to	live	in
absence.	Of	responsibilities,	of	loyalties,	of	the	pressures	that	expectation
imposed.	Ah,	misery	has	tainted	my	views.	Misery,	and	the	threat	of	true
grieving,	which	draws	nearer—but	no,	she	must	be	alive.	Somewhere	up	above.
On	an	island	assailed…
‘Darist,	please,	wait	a	moment.’
The	tall	figure	stopped.	‘I	see	no	reason	to	answer	your	questions.’
‘I	am	concerned…for	my	companion.	If	she’s	alive,	she’s	somewhere
above	us,	on	the	surface.	You	said	you	were	under	attack.	I	fear	for	her—’
‘We	sense	the	presence	of	strangers,	Cutter.	Above	us,	there	are	Tiste	Edur.
But	no-one	else.	She	is	drowned,	this	companion	of	yours.	There	is	no	point	in
holding	out	hope.’
The	Daru	sat	down	suddenly.	He	felt	sick,	his	heart	stuttering	with	anguish.
And	despair.
‘Death	is	not	an	unkind	fate,’	Darist	said	above	him.	‘If	she	was	a	friend,
you	will	miss	her	company,	and	that	is	the	true	source	of	your	grief—your
sorrow	is	for	yourself.	My	words	may	displease	you,	but	I	speak	from
experience.	I	have	felt	the	deaths	of	many	of	my	kin,	and	I	mourn	the	spaces	in


my	life	where	they	once	stood.	But	such	losses	serve	only	to	ease	my	own
impending	demise.’
Cutter	stared	up	at	the	Tiste	Andii.	‘Darist,	forgive	me.	You	may	be	old,	but
you	are	also	a	damned	fool.	And	I	begin	to	understand	why	Rake	left	you	here
then	forgot	about	you.	Now,	kindly	shut	up.’	He	pushed	himself	upright,	feeling
hollowed	out	inside,	but	determined	not	to	surrender	to	the	despair	that
threatened	to	overwhelm	him.	Because	surrendering	is	what	this	Tiste	Andii	has
done.
‘Your	anger	leaves	me	undamaged,’	Darist	said.	He	turned	and	gestured	to
the	double	doors	directly	ahead.	‘Through	here	you	will	find	a	place	to	rest.
Your	salvage	awaits	there,	as	well.’
‘Will	you	tell	me	nothing	of	the	battle	above?’
‘What	is	there	to	tell	you,	Cutter?	We	have	lost.’
‘Lost!	Who	is	left	among	you?’
‘Here	in	the	Hold,	where	stands	the	Throne,	there	is	only	me.	Now,	best
rest.	We	shall	have	company	soon	enough.’
	
The	howls	of	rage	reverberated	through	Onrack’s	bones,	though	he	knew	his
companion	could	hear	nothing.	These	were	cries	of	the	spirits—two	spirits,
trapped	within	two	of	the	towering,	bestial	statues	rearing	up	on	the	plain
before	them.
The	cloud	cover	overhead	had	broken	apart,	was	fast	vanishing	in	thinning
threads.	Three	moons	rode	the	heavens,	and	there	were	two	suns.	The	light
flowed	with	shifting	hues	as	the	moons	swung	on	their	invisible	tethers.	A
strange,	unsettling	world,	Onrack	reflected.
The	storm	was	spent.	They	had	waited	in	the	lee	of	a	small	hill	while	it
thrashed	around	the	gargantuan	statues,	the	wind	howling	past	from	its	wild
race	through	the	rubble-littered	streets	of	the	ruined	city	lying	beyond.	And
now	the	air	steamed.
‘What	do	you	see,	T’lan	Imass?’	Trull	asked	from	where	he	sat	hunched,
his	back	to	the	edifices.
Shrugging,	the	T’lan	Imass	turned	away	from	his	lengthy	study	of	the
statues.	‘There	are	mysteries	here…of	which	I	suspect	you	know	more	than	I.’
The	Tiste	Edur	glanced	up	with	a	wry	expression.	‘That	seems	unlikely.
What	do	you	know	of	the	Hounds	of	Shadow?’
‘Very	little.	The	Logros	crossed	paths	with	them	only	once,	long	ago,	in
the	time	of	the	First	Empire.	Seven	in	number.	Serving	an	unknown	master,	yet
bent	on	destruction.’


Trull	smiled	oddly,	then	asked,	‘The	human	First	Empire,	or	yours?’
‘I	know	little	of	the	human	empire	of	that	name.	We	were	drawn	into	its
heart	but	once,	Trull	Sengar,	in	answer	to	the	chaos	of	the	Soletaken	and
D’ivers.	The	Hounds	made	no	appearance	during	that	slaughter.’	Onrack
looked	back	at	the	massive	stone	Hound	before	them.	‘It	is	believed,’	he	said
slowly,	‘by	the	bonecasters,	that	to	create	an	icon	of	a	spirit	or	a	god	is	to
capture	its	essence	within	that	icon.	Even	the	laying	of	stones	prescribes
confinement.	Just	as	a	hut	can	measure	out	the	limits	of	power	for	a	mortal,	so
too	are	spirits	and	gods	sealed	into	a	chosen	place	of	earth	or	stone	or	wood…
or	an	object.	In	this	way	power	is	chained,	and	so	becomes	manageable.	Tell
me,	do	the	Tiste	Edur	concur	with	that	notion?’
Trull	Sengar	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Do	you	think	we	raised	these	giant
statues,	Onrack?	Do	your	bonecasters	also	believe	that	power	begins	as	a	thing
devoid	of	shape,	and	thus	beyond	control?	And	that	to	carve	out	an	icon—or
make	a	circle	of	stones—actually	forces	order	upon	that	power?’
Onrack	cocked	his	head,	was	silent	for	a	time.	‘Then	it	must	be	that	we
make	our	own	gods	and	spirits.	That	belief	demands	shape,	and	shaping	brings
life	into	being.	Yet	were	not	the	Tiste	Edur	fashioned	by	Mother	Dark?	Did	not
your	goddess	create	you?’
Trull’s	smile	broadened.	‘I	was	referring	to	these	statues,	Onrack.	To
answer	you—I	do	not	know	if	the	hands	that	fashioned	these	were	Tiste	Edur.
As	for	Mother	Dark,	it	may	be	that	in	creating	us,	she	but	simply	separated
what	was	not	separate	before.’
‘Are	you	then	the	shadows	of	Tiste	Andii?	Torn	free	by	the	mercy	of	your
goddess	mother?’
‘But	Onrack,	we	are	all	torn	free.’
‘Two	of	the	Hounds	are	here,	Trull	Sengar.	Their	souls	are	trapped	in	the
stone.	And	one	more	thing	of	note—these	likenesses	cast	no	shadows.’
‘Nor	do	the	Hounds	themselves.’
‘If	they	are	but	reflections,	then	there	must	be	Hounds	of	Darkness,	from
which	they	were	torn,’	Onrack	persisted.	‘Yet	there	is	no	knowledge	of	such…’
The	T’lan	Imass	suddenly	fell	silent.
Trull	laughed.	‘It	seems	you	know	more	of	the	human	First	Empire	than
you	first	indicated.	What	was	that	tyrant	emperor ’s	name?	No	matter.	We
should	journey	onward,	to	the	gate—’
‘Dessimbelackis,’	Onrack	whispered.	‘The	founder	of	the	human	First
Empire.	Long	vanished	by	the	time	of	the	unleashing	of	the	Beast	Ritual.	It	was
believed	he	had…veered.’
‘D’ivers?’


‘Aye.’
‘And	beasts	numbered?’
‘Seven.’
Trull	stared	up	at	the	statues,	then	gestured.	‘We	didn’t	build	these.	No,	I	am
not	certain,	but	in	my	heart	I	feel…no	empathy.	They	are	ominous	and	brutal	to
my	eyes,	T’lan	Imass.	The	Hounds	of	Shadow	are	not	worthy	of	worship.	They
are	indeed	untethered,	wild	and	deadly.	To	truly	command	them,	one	must	sit	in
the	Throne	of	Shadow—as	master	of	the	realm.	But	more	than	that.	One	must
first	draw	together	the	disparate	fragments.	Making	Kurald	Emurlahn	whole
once	more.’
‘And	this	is	what	your	kin	seek,’	Onrack	rumbled.	‘The	possibility	troubles
me.’
The	Tiste	Edur	studied	the	T’lan	Imass,	then	shrugged.	‘I	did	not	share
your	distress	at	the	prospect—not	at	first.	And	indeed,	had	it	remained…pure,
perhaps	I	would	still	be	standing	alongside	my	brothers.	But	another	power
acts	behind	the	veil	in	all	this—I	know	not	who	or	what,	but	I	would	tear	aside
that	veil.’
‘Why?’
Trull	seemed	startled	by	the	question,	then	he	shivered.	‘Because	what	it
has	made	of	my	people	is	an	abomination,	Onrack.’
The	T’lan	Imass	set	out	towards	the	gap	between	the	two	nearest	statues.
After	a	moment,	Trull	Sengar	followed.	‘I	imagine	you	know	little	of	what
it	is	like	to	see	your	kin	fall	into	dissolution,	to	see	the	spirit	of	an	entire
people	grow	corrupt,	to	struggle	endlessly	to	open	their	eyes—as	yours	have
been	opened	by	whatever	clarity	chance	has	gifted	you.’
‘True,’	Onrack	replied,	his	steps	thumping	the	sodden	ground.
‘Nor	is	it	mere	naïveté,’	the	Tiste	Edur	went	on,	limping	in	Onrack’s	wake.
‘Our	denial	is	wilful,	our	studied	indifference	conveniently	self-serving	to	our
basest	desires.	We	are	a	long-lived	people	who	now	kneel	before	short-term
interests—’
‘If	you	find	that	unusual,’	the	T’lan	Imass	muttered,	‘then	it	follows	that	the
one	behind	the	veil	has	need	for	you	only	in	the	short	term—if	indeed	that
hidden	power	is	manipulating	the	Tiste	Edur.’
‘An	interesting	thought.	You	may	well	be	right.	The	question	then	is,	once
that	short-term	objective	is	reached,	what	will	happen	to	my	people?’
‘Things	that	outlive	their	usefulness	are	discarded,’	Onrack	replied.
‘Abandoned.	Yes—’
‘Unless,	of	course,’	the	T’lan	Imass	went	on,	‘they	would	then	pose	a	threat
to	one	who	had	so	exploited	them.	If	so,	then	the	answer	would	be	to	annihilate


them	once	they	are	no	longer	useful.’
‘There	is	the	unpleasant	ring	of	truth	to	your	words,	Onrack.’
‘I	am	generally	unpleasant,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘So	I	am	learning.	You	say	the	souls	of	two	Hounds	are	imprisoned	within
these—which	ones	again?’
‘We	now	walk	between	them.’
‘What	are	they	doing	here,	I	wonder?’
‘The	stone	has	been	shaped	to	encompass	them,	Trull	Sengar.	No-one	asks
the	spirit	or	the	god,	when	the	icon	is	fashioned,	if	it	wishes	entrapment.	Do
they?	The	need	to	make	such	vessels	is	a	mortal’s	need.	That	one	can	rest	eyes
on	the	thing	one	worships	is	an	assertion	of	control	at	worst,	or	at	best	the
illusion	that	one	can	negotiate	over	one’s	own	fate.’
‘And	you	find	such	notions	suitably	pathetic,	Onrack?’
‘I	find	most	notions	pathetic,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘Are	these	beasts	trapped	for	eternity,	do	you	think?	Is	this	where	they	go
when	they	are	destroyed?’
Onrack	shrugged.	‘I	have	no	patience	with	these	games.	You	possess	your
own	knowledge	and	suspicions,	yet	would	not	speak	them.	Instead,	you	seek	to
discover	what	I	know,	and	what	I	sense	of	these	snared	spirits.	I	care	nothing
for	the	fate	either	way	of	these	Hounds	of	Shadow.	Indeed,	I	find	it	unfortunate
that—if	these	two	were	slain	in	some	other	realm	and	so	have	ended	up	here—
there	are	but	five	remaining,	for	that	diminishes	my	chances	of	killing	one
myself.	And	I	think	I	would	enjoy	killing	a	Hound	of	Shadow.’
The	Tiste	Edur ’s	laugh	was	harsh.	‘Well,	I	won’t	deny	that	confidence
counts	for	a	lot.	Even	so,	Onrack	of	the	Logros,	I	do	not	think	you	would	walk
away	from	a	violent	encounter	with	a	Hound.’
The	T’lan	Imass	halted	and	swung	towards	Trull	Sengar.	‘There	is	stone,
and	there	is	stone.’
‘I	am	afraid	I	do	not	understand—’
In	answer,	Onrack	unsheathed	his	obsidian	sword.	He	strode	up	to	the
nearer	of	the	two	statues.	The	creature’s	forepaw	was	itself	taller	than	the	T’lan
Imass.	He	raised	his	weapon	two-handed,	then	swung	a	blow	against	the	dark,
unweathered	stone.
An	ear-piercing	crack	ripped	the	air.
Onrack	staggered,	head	tilting	back	as	fissures	shot	up	through	the
enormous	edifice.
It	seemed	to	shiver,	then	exploded	into	a	towering	cloud	of	dust.
Yelling,	Trull	Sengar	leapt	back,	scrambling	as	the	billowing	dust	rolled
outward	to	engulf	him.


The	cloud	hissed	around	Onrack.	He	righted	himself,	then	dropped	into	a
fighting	stance	as	a	darker	shape	appeared	through	the	swirling	grey	haze.
A	second	concussion	thundered—this	time	behind	the	T’lan	Imass—as	the
other	statue	exploded.	Darkness	descended	as	the	twin	clouds	blotted	out	the
sky,	closing	the	horizons	to	no	more	than	a	dozen	paces	on	all	sides.
The	beast	that	emerged	before	Onrack	was	as	tall	at	the	shoulder	as	Trull
Sengar ’s	full	height.	Its	hide	was	colourless,	and	its	eyes	burned	black.	A
broad,	flat	head,	small	ears…
Faint	through	the	grey	gloom,	something	of	the	two	suns’	light,	and	that
reflected	from	the	moons,	reached	down—to	cast	beneath	the	Hound	a	score	of
shadows.
The	beast	bared	fangs	the	size	of	tusks,	lips	peeling	back	in	a	silent	snarl
that	revealed	blood-red	gums.
The	Hound	attacked.
Onrack’s	blade	was	a	midnight	blur,	flashing	to	kiss	the	creature’s	thick,
muscled	neck—but	the	swing	cut	only	dusty	air.	The	T’lan	Imass	felt	enormous
jaws	close	about	his	chest.	He	was	yanked	from	his	feet.	Bones	splintered.	A
savage	shake	that	ripped	the	sword	from	his	hands,	then	he	was	sailing	through
the	grainy	gloom—
To	be	caught	with	a	grinding	snap	by	a	second	pair	of	jaws.
The	bones	of	his	left	arm	shattered	into	a	score	of	pieces	within	its	taut
hide	of	withered	skin,	then	it	was	torn	entirely	from	his	body.
Another	crunching	shake,	then	he	was	thrown	into	the	air	once	more.	To
crash	in	a	splintered	heap	on	the	ground,	where	he	rolled	once,	then	was	still.
There	was	thunder	in	Onrack’s	skull.	He	thought	to	fall	to	dust,	but	for	the
first	time	he	possessed	neither	the	will	nor,	it	seemed,	the	capacity	to	do	so.
The	power	was	shorn	from	him—the	Vow	had	been	broken,	ripped	away
from	his	body.	He	was	now,	he	realized,	as	those	of	his	fallen	kin,	the	ones	that
had	sustained	so	much	physical	destruction	that	they	had	ceased	to	be	one	with
the	T’lan	Imass.
He	lay	unmoving,	and	felt	the	heavy	tread	of	one	of	the	Hounds	as	it
padded	up	to	stand	over	him.	A	dust-	and	shard-flecked	muzzle	nudged	him,
pushed	at	the	broken	ribs	of	his	chest.	Then	lifted	away.	He	listened	to	its
breathing,	the	sound	like	waves	riding	a	tide	into	caves,	could	feel	its	presence
like	a	heaviness	in	the	damp	air.
After	a	long	moment,	Onrack	realized	that	the	beast	was	no	longer
looming	over	him.	Nor	could	he	hear	the	heavy	footfalls	through	the	wet	earth.
As	if	it	and	its	companion	had	simply	vanished.
Then	the	scrape	of	boots	close	by,	a	pair	of	hands	dragging	him	over,	onto


his	back.
Trull	Sengar	stared	down	at	him.	‘I	do	not	know	if	you	can	still	hear	me,’
he	muttered.	‘But	if	it	is	any	consolation,	Onrack	of	the	Logros,	those	were	not
Hounds	of	Shadow.	Oh,	no,	indeed.	They	were	the	real	ones.	The	Hounds	of
Darkness,	my	friend.	I	dread	to	think	what	you	have	freed	here…’
Onrack	managed	a	reply,	his	words	a	soft	rasp.	‘So	much	for	gratitude.’
	
Trull	Sengar	dragged	the	shattered	T’lan	Imass	to	a	low	wall	at	the	city’s	edge,
where	he	propped	the	warrior	into	a	sitting	position.	‘I	wish	I	knew	what	else	I
could	do	for	you,’	he	said,	stepping	back.
‘If	my	kin	were	present,’	Onrack	said,	‘they	would	complete	the	necessary
rites.	They	would	sever	my	head	from	my	body,	and	find	for	it	a	suitable	place
so	that	I	might	look	out	upon	eternity.	They	would	dismember	the	headless
corpse	and	scatter	the	limbs.	They	would	take	my	weapon,	to	return	it	to	the
place	of	my	birth.’
‘Oh.’
‘Of	course,	you	cannot	do	such	things.	Thus,	I	am	forced	into	continuation,
despite	my	present	condition.’	With	that,	Onrack	slowly	clambered	upright,
broken	bones	grinding	and	crunching,	splinters	falling	away.
Trull	grunted,	‘You	could	have	done	that	before	I	dragged	you.’
‘I	regret	most	the	loss	of	an	arm,’	the	T’lan	Imass	said,	studying	the	torn
muscles	of	his	left	shoulder.	‘My	sword	is	most	effective	when	in	the	grip	of
two	hands.’	He	staggered	over	to	where	the	weapon	lay	in	the	mud.	Part	of	his
chest	collapsed	when	he	leaned	down	to	retrieve	it.	Straightening,	Onrack	faced
Trull	Sengar.	‘I	am	no	longer	able	to	sense	the	presence	of	gates.’
‘They	should	be	obvious	enough,’	the	Tiste	Edur	replied.	‘I	expect	near	the
centre	of	the	city.	We	are	quite	a	pair,	aren’t	we?’
‘I	wonder	why	the	Hounds	did	not	kill	you.’
‘They	seemed	eager	to	leave.’	Trull	set	off	down	the	street	directly
opposite,	Onrack	following.	‘I	am	not	even	certain	they	noticed	me—the	dust
cloud	was	thick.	Tell	me,	Onrack.	If	there	were	other	T’lan	Imass	here,	then
they	would	have	done	all	those	things	to	you?	Despite	the	fact	that	you
remain…functional?’
‘Like	you,	Trull	Sengar,	I	am	now	shorn.	From	the	Ritual.	From	my	own
kind.	My	existence	is	now	without	meaning.	The	final	task	left	to	me	is	to	seek
out	the	other	hunters,	to	do	what	must	be	done.’
The	street	was	layered	in	thick,	wet	silt.	The	low	buildings	to	either	side,
torn	away	above	the	ground	level,	were	similarly	coated,	smoothing	every


edge—as	if	the	city	was	in	the	process	of	melting.	There	was	no	grand
architecture,	and	the	rubble	in	the	streets	revealed	itself	to	be	little	more	than
fired	bricks.	There	was	no	sign	of	life	anywhere.
They	continued	on,	their	pace	torturously	slow.	The	street	slowly
broadened,	forming	a	vast	concourse	flanked	by	pedestals	that	had	once	held
statues.	Brush	and	uprooted	trees	marred	the	vista,	all	a	uniform	grey	that
gradually	assumed	an	unearthly	hue	beneath	the	now-dominant	blue	sun,	which
in	turn	painted	a	large	moon	the	colour	of	magenta.
At	the	far	end	was	a	bridge,	over	what	had	once	been	a	river	but	was	now
filled	with	silt.	A	tangled	mass	of	detritus	had	ridden	up	on	one	side	of	the
bridge,	spilling	flotsam	onto	the	walkway.	Among	the	garbage	lay	a	small	box.
Trull	angled	over	towards	it	as	they	reached	the	bridge.	He	crouched	down.
‘It	seems	well	sealed,’	he	said,	reaching	out	to	pry	the	clasp	loose,	then	lifting
the	lid.	‘That’s	odd.	Looks	like	clay	pots.	Small	ones…’
Onrack	moved	up	alongside	the	Tiste	Edur.	‘They	are	Moranth	munitions,
Trull	Sengar.’
The	Tiste	Edur	glanced	up.	‘I	have	no	knowledge	of	such	things.’
‘Weapons.	Explosive	when	the	clay	breaks.	They	are	generally	thrown.	As
far	as	is	possible.	Have	you	heard	of	the	Malazan	Empire?’
‘No.’
‘Human.	From	my	birth	realm.	These	munitions	belong	to	that	empire.’
‘Well,	that	is	troubling	indeed—for	why	are	they	here?’
‘I	do	not	know.’
Trull	Sengar	closed	the	lid	and	collected	the	box.	‘While	I	would	prefer	a
sword,	these	will	have	to	do.	I	was	not	pleased	at	being	unarmed	for	so	long.’
‘There	is	a	structure	beyond—an	arch.’
Straightening,	the	Tiste	Edur	nodded.	‘Aye.	It	is	what	we	seek.’
They	continued	on.
The	arch	stood	on	pedestals	in	the	centre	of	a	cobbled	square.	Floodwaters
had	carried	silt	to	its	mouth	where	it	had	dried	in	strange,	jagged	ridges.	As	the
two	travellers	came	closer,	they	discovered	that	the	clay	was	rock	hard.
Although	the	gate	did	not	manifest	itself	in	any	discernible	way,	a	pulsing	heat
rolled	from	the	space	beneath	the	arch.
The	pillars	of	the	structure	were	unadorned.	Onrack	studied	the	edifice.
‘What	can	you	sense	of	this?’	the	T’lan	Imass	asked	after	a	moment.
Trull	Sengar	shook	his	head,	then	approached.	He	halted	within	arm’s
reach	of	the	gate’s	threshold.	‘I	cannot	believe	this	is	passable—the	heat
pouring	from	it	is	scalding.’
‘Possibly	a	ward,’	Onrack	suggested.


‘Aye.	And	no	means	for	us	to	shatter	it.’
‘Untrue.’
The	Tiste	Edur	glanced	back	at	Onrack,	then	looked	down	at	the	box	tucked
under	his	arm.	‘I	do	not	understand	how	a	mundane	explosive	could	destroy	a
ward.’
‘Sorcery	depends	on	patterns,	Trull	Sengar.	Shatter	the	pattern	and	the
magic	fails.’
‘Very	well,	let	us	attempt	this	thing.’
They	retreated	twenty	paces	from	the	gate.	Trull	unlatched	the	box	and
gingerly	drew	forth	one	of	the	clay	spheres.	He	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	gate,	then
threw	the	munition.
The	explosion	triggered	a	coruscating	conflagration	from	the	portal.
White	and	gold	fires	raged	beneath	the	arch,	then	the	violence	settled	back	to
form	a	swirling	golden	wall.
‘That	is	the	warren	itself,’	Onrack	said.	‘The	ward	is	broken.	Still,	I	do	not
recognize	it.’
‘Nor	I,’	Trull	muttered,	closing	the	munitions	box	once	more.	Then	his
head	snapped	up.	‘Something’s	coming.’
‘Yes.’	Onrack	was	silent	then	for	a	long	moment.	He	suddenly	lifted	his
sword.	‘Flee,	Trull	Sengar—back	across	the	bridge.	Flee!’
The	Tiste	Edur	spun	and	began	running.
Onrack	proceeded	to	back	up	a	step	at	a	time.	He	could	feel	the	power	of
the	ones	on	the	other	side	of	the	gate,	a	power	brutal	and	alien.	The	breaking	of
the	ward	had	been	noted,	and	the	emotion	reaching	through	the	barrier	was	one
of	indignant	outrage.
A	quick	look	over	his	shoulder	showed	that	Trull	Sengar	had	crossed	the
bridge	and	was	now	nowhere	in	sight.	Three	more	steps	and	Onrack	would
himself	reach	the	bridge.	And	there,	he	would	make	his	stand.	He	expected	to
be	destroyed,	but	he	intended	to	purchase	time	for	his	companion.
The	gate	shimmered,	blindingly	bright,	then	four	riders	cantered	through.
Riding	white,	long-limbed	horses	with	wild	manes	the	colour	of	rust.	Ornately
armoured	in	enamel,	the	warriors	were	a	match	for	their	mounts—paleskinned	and	tall,	their	faces	mostly	hidden	behind	slitted	visors,	cheek	and	chin
guards.	Curved	scimitars	that	appeared	to	have	been	carved	from	ivory	were
held	in	gauntleted	fists.	Long	silver	hair	flowed	from	beneath	the	helms.
They	rode	directly	towards	Onrack.	Canter	to	gallop.	Gallop	to	charge.
The	battered	T’lan	Imass	widened	his	stance,	lifted	his	obsidian	sword	and
stood	ready	to	meet	them.
The	riders	could	only	come	at	him	on	the	narrow	bridge	two	at	a	time,	and


even	then	it	was	clear	that	they	simply	intended	their	horses	to	ride	Onrack
down.	But	the	T’lan	Imass	had	fought	in	the	service	of	the	Malazan	Empire,	in
Falar	and	in	Seven	Cities—and	he	had	faced	horse	warriors	in	many	a	battle.	A
moment	before	the	front	riders	reached	him,	Onrack	leapt	forward.	Between
the	two	mounts.	Ignoring	the	sword	that	whirled	in	from	his	left,	the	T’lan
Imass	slashed	his	blade	into	the	other	warrior ’s	midsection.
Two	ivory	blades	struck	him	simultaneously,	the	one	on	his	left	smashing
through	clavicle	and	cutting	deep	into	his	shoulder	blade,	then	through	in	a
spray	of	bone	shards.	The	scimitar	on	his	right	chopped	down	through	the	side
of	his	face,	sheering	it	off	from	temple	to	the	base	of	the	jaw.
Onrack	felt	his	own	obsidian	blade	bite	deep	into	the	warrior ’s	armour.
The	enamel	shattered.
Then	both	attackers	were	past	him,	and	the	remaining	two	arrived.
The	T’lan	Imass	dropped	into	a	crouch	and	positioned	his	sword
horizontally	over	his	head.	A	pair	of	ivory	blades	hammered	down	on	it,	the
impacts	thundering	through	Onrack’s	battered	frame.
They	were	all	past	him	now,	emerging	out	onto	the	concourse	to	wheel
their	horses	round,	visored	heads	turned	to	regard	the	lone	warrior	who	had
somehow	survived	their	attacks.
Hoofs	thudding	the	clay-limned	cobbles,	the	four	warriors	reined	in,
weapons	lowering.	The	one	whose	armour	had	been	shattered	by	Onrack’s
obsidian	sword	was	leaning	forward,	one	arm	pressed	against	his	stomach.
Spatters	of	blood	speckled	his	horse’s	flank.
Onrack	shook	himself,	and	pieces	of	shattered	bone	fell	away	to	patter	on
the	ground.	He	then	settled	his	own	weapon,	point	to	the	ground,	and	waited
while	one	of	the	riders	walked	his	horse	forward.
A	gauntleted	hand	reached	up	to	draw	the	visor	upward,	revealing	features
that	were	startlingly	similar	to	Trull	Sengar ’s,	apart	from	the	white,	almost
luminous	skin.	Eyes	of	cold	silver	fixed	on	the	T’lan	Imass	with	distaste.	‘Do
you	speak,	Lifeless	One?	Can	you	understand	the	Language	of	Purity?’
‘It	seems	no	purer	than	any	other,’	Onrack	replied.
The	warrior	scowled.	‘We	do	not	forgive	ignorance.	You	are	a	servant	of
Death.	There	is	but	one	necessity	when	dealing	with	a	creature	such	as	you,	and
that	is	annihilation.	Stand	ready.’
‘I	serve	no-one,’	Onrack	said,	raising	his	sword	once	more.	‘Come,	then.’
But	the	wounded	one	held	up	a	hand.	‘Hold,	Enias.	This	world	is	not	ours
—nor	is	this	deathless	savage	one	of	the	trespassers	we	seek.	Indeed,	as	you
yourself	must	sense,	none	of	them	are	here.	This	portal	has	not	been	used	in
millennia.	We	must	needs	take	our	quest	elsewhere.	But	first,	I	require	healing.’


The	warrior	gingerly	dismounted,	one	arm	still	pressed	against	his	midsection.
‘Orenas,	attend	me.’
‘Allow	me	to	destroy	this	thing	first,	Seneschal—’
‘No.	We	shall	tolerate	its	existence.	Perhaps	it	will	have	answers	for	us,	to
guide	us	further	on	our	quest.	Failing	that,	we	can	destroy	it	later.’
The	one	named	Orenas	slipped	down	from	his	horse	and	approached	the
seneschal.
Enias	edged	his	horse	closer	to	the	T’lan	Imass,	as	if	still	mindful	of	a
fight.	He	bared	his	teeth.	‘There	is	not	much	left	of	you,	Lifeless	One.	Are
those	the	scorings	of	fangs?	Your	chest	has	been	in	the	jaws	of	some	beast,	I
think.	The	same	that	stole	your	arm?	By	what	sorcery	do	you	hold	on	to
existence?’
‘You	are	of	Tiste	blood,’	Onrack	observed.
The	man’s	face	twisted	into	a	sneer.	‘Tiste	blood?	Only	among	the	Liosan
is	the	Tiste	blood	pure.	You	have	crossed	paths	with	our	tainted	cousins,	then.
They	are	little	more	than	vermin.	You	have	not	answered	my	questions.’
‘I	know	of	the	Tiste	Andii,	but	I	have	yet	to	meet	them.	Born	of	Darkness,
they	were	the	first—’
‘The	first!	Oh,	indeed.	And	so	tragically	imperfect.	Bereft	of	Father	Light’s
purifying	blood.	They	are	a	most	sordid	creation.	We	tolerate	the	Edur,	for
they	contain	something	of	the	Father,	but	the	Andii—death	by	our	hands	is	the
only	mercy	they	deserve.	But	I	grow	weary	of	your	rudeness,	Lifeless	One.	I
have	asked	you	questions	and	you	are	yet	to	answer	a	single	one.’
‘Yes.’
‘Yes?	What	does	that	mean?’
‘I	agree	that	I	have	not	answered	them.	Nor	do	I	feel	compelled	to	do	so.
My	kind	has	much	experience	with	arrogant	creatures.	Although	that
experience	is	singular:	in	answer	to	their	arrogance	we	proclaimed	eternal
war,	until	they	ceased	to	exist.	I	have	always	believed	the	T’lan	Imass	should
seek	out	a	new	enemy.	There	is,	after	all,	no	shortage	to	be	noted	among
arrogant	beings.	Perhaps	you	Tiste	Liosan	are	numerous	enough	in	your	own
realm	to	amuse	us	for	a	time.’
The	warrior	stared,	as	if	shocked	speechless.
Behind	him,	one	of	his	companions	laughed.	‘There	is	little	value	in
conversing	with	lesser	creatures,	Enias.	They	will	seek	to	confound	you	with
falsehoods,	to	lead	you	away	from	the	righteous	path.’
‘I	see	now,’	Enias	replied,	‘the	poison	of	which	you	have	long	warned	me,
Malachar.’
‘There	will	be	more	to	come,	young	brother,	on	the	trail	we	must	follow.’


The	warrior	strode	up	to	Onrack.	‘You	call	yourself	a	T’lan	Imass,	yes?’
‘I	am	Onrack,	of	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Are	there	others	of	your	kind	in	this	ruined	realm,	Onrack?’
‘If	I	did	not	answer	your	brother ’s	questions,	why	imagine	I	would	answer
yours?’
Malachar ’s	face	darkened.	‘Play	such	games	with	young	Enias,	but	not	with
me—’
‘I	am	done	with	you,	Liosan.’	Onrack	sheathed	his	sword	and	swung	away.
‘You	are	done	with	us!	Seneschal	Jorrude!	If	Orenas	has	completed	his
ministrations,	I	humbly	request	your	attention.	The	Lifeless	One	seeks	to	flee.’
‘I	hear	you,	Malachar,’	the	seneschal	rumbled,	striding	forward.	‘Hold,
Lifeless	One!	We	have	not	yet	released	you.	You	will	tell	us	what	we	wish	to
know,	or	you	will	be	destroyed	here	and	now.’
Onrack	faced	the	Liosan	once	more.	‘If	that	was	a	threat,	the	pathos	of	your
ignorance	proves	an	amusing	distraction.	But	I	weary	of	it,	and	of	you.’
Four	ivory	scimitars	lifted	threateningly.
Onrack	drew	his	sword	once	more.
And	hesitated,	his	gaze	drawn	to	something	beyond	them.	Sensing	a
presence	at	their	backs,	the	warriors	turned.
Trull	Sengar	stood	fifteen	paces	away,	the	box	of	munitions	at	his	feet.
There	was	something	odd	about	his	smile.	‘This	seems	an	uneven	fight.	Friend
Onrack,	do	you	require	assistance?	Well,	you	need	not	answer,	for	it	has
arrived.	And	for	that,	I	am	sorry.’
Dust	swirled	upward	around	the	Tiste	Edur.	A	moment	later,	four	T’lan
Imass	stood	on	the	muddy	cobbles.	Three	held	weapons	ready.	The	fourth
figure	stood	a	pace	behind	and	to	Trull’s	right.	This	one	was	massively	boned,
its	arms	disproportionately	long.	The	fur	riding	its	shoulders	was	black,	fading
to	silver	as	it	rose	up	to	surround	the	bonecaster ’s	head	in	a	mangled	hood.
Onrack	allowed	his	sword’s	point	to	rest	on	the	muddy	cobbles	once	more.
With	his	link,	born	of	the	Ritual,	now	severed,	he	could	only	communicate	with
these	T’lan	Imass	by	speaking	out	loud.	‘I,	Onrack,	greet	you,	Bonecaster,	and
recognize	you	as	from	the	Logros,	as	I	once	was.	You	are	Monok	Ochem.	One
of	many	chosen	to	hunt	the	renegades,	who,	as	did	those	of	my	own	hunt,
followed	their	trail	into	this	realm.	Alas,	I	alone	of	my	hunt	survived	the
flood.’	His	gaze	shifted	to	the	three	warriors.	The	clan	leader,	its	torso	and
limbs	tightly	wrapped	in	the	outer	skin	of	a	dhenrabi	and	a	denticulated	grey
flint	sword	in	its	hands,	was	Ibra	Gholan.	The	remaining	two,	both	armed	with
bone-hafted,	double-bladed	axes	of	chalcedony,	were	of	Ibra’s	clan,	but
otherwise	unknown	to	Onrack.	‘I	greet	you	as	well,	Ibra	Gholan,	and	submit	to


your	command.’
Bonecaster	Monok	Ochem	strode	forward	with	a	heavy,	shambling	gait.
‘You	have	failed	the	Ritual,	Onrack,’	it	said	with	characteristic	abruptness,	‘and
so	must	be	destroyed.’
‘That	privilege	will	be	contested,’	Onrack	replied.	‘These	horse	warriors
are	Tiste	Liosan	and	would	view	me	as	their	prisoner,	to	do	with	as	they
please.’
Ibra	Gholan	gestured	to	his	two	warriors	to	join	him	and	the	three	walked
towards	the	Liosan.
The	seneschal	spoke.	‘We	release	our	prisoner,	T’lan	Imass.	He	is	yours.
Our	quarrel	with	you	is	at	an	end,	and	so	we	shall	leave.’
The	T’lan	Imass	halted,	and	Onrack	could	sense	their	disappointment.
The	Liosan	commander	regarded	Trull	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Edur—
would	you	travel	with	us?	We	have	need	of	a	servant.	A	simple	bow	will
answer	the	honour	of	our	invitation.’
Trull	Sengar	shook	his	head.	‘Well,	that	is	a	first	for	me.	Alas,	I	will
accompany	the	T’lan	Imass.	But	I	recognize	the	inconvenience	this	will	cause
you,	and	so	I	suggest	that	you	alternate	in	the	role	as	servant	to	the	others.	I	am
a	proponent	of	lessons	in	humility,	Tiste	Liosan,	and	I	sense	that	among	you
there	is	some	need.’
The	seneschal	smiled	coldly.	‘I	will	remember	you,	Edur.’	He	whirled.	‘On
your	horses,	brothers.	We	now	leave	this	realm.’
Monok	Ochem	spoke.	‘You	may	find	that	more	difficult	than	you	imagine.’
‘We	have	never	before	been	troubled	by	such	endeavours,’	the	seneschal
replied.	‘Are	there	hidden	barriers	in	this	place?’
‘This	warren	is	a	shattered	fragment	of	Kurald	Emurlahn,’	the	bonecaster
said.	‘I	believe	your	kind	have	remained	isolated	for	far	too	long.	You	know
nothing	of	the	other	realms,	nothing	of	the	Wounded	Gates.	Nothing	of	the
Ascendants	and	their	wars—’
‘We	serve	but	one	Ascendant,’	the	seneschal	snapped.	‘The	Son	of	Father
Light.	Our	lord	is	Osric.’
Monok	Ochem	cocked	its	head.	‘And	when	last	has	Osric	walked	among
you?’
All	four	Liosan	visibly	flinched.
In	his	affectless	tone,	the	bonecaster	continued,	‘Your	lord,	Osric,	the	Son
of	Father	Light,	numbers	among	the	contestants	in	the	other	realms.	He	has	not
returned	to	you,	Liosan,	because	he	is	unable	to	do	so.	Indeed,	he	is	unable	to
do	much	of	anything	at	the	moment.’
The	seneschal	took	a	step	forward.	‘What	afflicts	our	lord?’


Monok	Ochem	shrugged.	‘A	common	enough	fate.	He	is	lost.’
‘Lost?’
‘I	suggest	we	work	together	to	weave	a	ritual,’	the	bonecaster	said,	‘and	so
fashion	a	gate.	For	this,	we	shall	need	Tellann,	your	own	warren,	Liosan,	and
the	blood	of	this	Tiste	Edur.	Onrack,	we	shall	undertake	your	destruction	once
we	have	returned	to	our	own	realm.’
‘That	would	seem	expedient,’	Onrack	replied.
Trull’s	eyes	had	widened.	He	stared	at	the	bonecaster.	‘Did	you	say	my
blood?’
‘Not	all	of	it,	Edur…if	all	goes	as	planned.’


Chapter	Ten

All	that	breaks	must	be	discarded	even	as	the	thunder	of	faith
returns	ever	fading	echoes.
PRELUDE	TO	ANOMANDARIS
FISHER
The	day	the	faces	in	the	rock	awakened	was	celebrated	among	the	Teblor	by	a
song.	The	memories	of	his	people	were,	Karsa	Orlong	now	knew,	twisted
things.	Surrendered	to	oblivion	when	unpleasant,	burgeoning	to	a	raging	fire
of	glory	when	heroic.	Defeat	had	been	spun	into	victory	in	the	weaving	of
every	tale.
He	wished	Bairoth	still	lived,	that	his	sagacious	companion	did	more	than
haunt	his	dreams,	or	stand	before	him	as	a	thing	of	rough-carved	stone	in
which	some	chance	scarring	of	his	chisel	had	cast	a	mocking,	almost	derisive
expression.
Bairoth	could	have	told	him	much	of	what	he	needed	to	know	at	this
moment.	While	Karsa’s	familiarity	with	their	homeland’s	sacred	glade	was	far
greater	than	either	Bairoth’s	or	Delum	Thord’s,	and	so	ensured	the	likenesses
possessed	some	accuracy,	the	warrior	sensed	that	something	essential	was
missing	from	the	seven	faces	he	had	carved	into	the	stone	trees.	Perhaps	his
lack	of	talent	had	betrayed	him,	though	that	did	not	seem	the	case	with	the
carvings	of	Bairoth	and	Delum.	The	energy	of	their	lives	seemed	to	emanate
from	their	statues,	as	if	merged	with	the	petrified	wood’s	own	memory.	As
with	the	entire	forest,	in	which	there	was	the	sense	that	the	trees	but	awaited	the
coming	of	spring,	of	rebirth	beneath	the	wheel	of	the	stars,	it	seemed	that	the
two	Teblor	warriors	were	but	awaiting	the	season’s	turn.
But	Raraku	defied	every	season.	Raraku	itself	was	eternal	in	its
momentousness,	perpetually	awaiting	rebirth.	Patience	in	the	stone,	in	the
restless,	ever-murmuring	sands.
The	Holy	Desert	seemed,	to	Karsa’s	mind,	a	perfect	place	for	the	Seven
Gods	of	the	Teblor.	It	was	possible,	he	reflected	as	he	slowly	paced	before	the


faces	he	had	carved	into	the	boles,	that	something	of	that	sardonic	sentiment
had	poisoned	his	hands.	If	so,	the	flaw	was	not	visible	to	his	eyes.	There	was
little	in	the	faces	of	the	gods	that	could	permit	expression	or	demeanour—his
recollection	was	of	skin	stretched	over	broad,	robust	bone,	of	brows	that
projected	like	ridges,	casting	the	eyes	in	deep	shadow.	Broad,	flat	cheekbones,
a	heavy,	chinless	jaw…a	bestiality	so	unlike	the	features	of	the	Teblor…
He	scowled,	pausing	to	stand	before	Urugal	which,	as	with	the	six	others,
he	had	carved	level	with	his	own	eyes.	Serpents	slithered	over	his	dusty,	bared
feet,	his	only	company	in	the	glade.	The	sun	had	begun	its	descent,	though	the
heat	remained	fierce.
After	a	long	moment	of	contemplation,	Karsa	spoke	out	loud.	‘Bairoth
Gild,	look	with	me	upon	our	god.	Tell	me	what	is	wrong.	Where	have	I	erred?
That	was	your	greatest	talent,	wasn’t	it?	Seeing	so	clearly	my	every	wrong
step.	You	might	ask:	what	did	I	seek	to	achieve	with	these	carvings?	You	would
ask	that,	for	it	is	the	only	question	worth	answering.	But	I	have	no	answer	for
you—ah,	yes,	I	can	almost	hear	you	laugh	at	my	pathetic	reply.’	I	have	no
answer.	‘Perhaps,	Bairoth,	I	imagined	you	wished	their	company.	The	great
Teblor	gods,	who	one	day	awakened.’
In	the	minds	of	the	shamans.	Awakened	in	their	dreams.	There,	and	there
alone.	Yet	now	I	know	the	flavour	of	those	dreams,	and	it	is	nothing	like	the
song.	Nothing	at	all.
He	had	found	this	glade	seeking	solitude,	and	it	had	been	solitude	that	had
inspired	his	artistic	creations.	Yet	now	that	he	was	done,	he	no	longer	felt	alone
here.	He	had	brought	his	own	life	to	this	place,	the	legacies	of	his	deeds.	It	had
ceased	to	be	a	refuge,	and	the	need	to	visit	was	born	now	from	the	lure	of	his
efforts,	drawing	him	back	again	and	again.	To	walk	among	the	snakes	that
came	to	greet	him,	to	listen	to	the	hiss	of	sands	skittering	on	the	moaning
desert	wind,	the	sands	that	arrived	in	the	glade	to	caress	the	trees	and	the	faces
of	stone	with	their	bloodless	touch.
Raraku	delivered	the	illusion	that	time	stood	motionless,	the	universe
holding	its	breath.	An	insidious	conceit.	Beyond	the	Whirlwind’s	furious	wall,
the	hourglasses	were	still	turned.	Armies	assembled	and	began	their	march,	the
sound	of	their	boots,	shields	and	gear	a	deathly	clatter	and	roar.	And,	on	a
distant	continent,	the	Teblor	were	a	people	under	siege.
Karsa	continued	staring	at	the	stone	face	of	Urugal.	You	are	not	Teblor.	Yet
you	claim	to	be	our	god.	You	awakened,	there	in	the	cliff,	so	long	ago.	But	what
of	before	that	time?	Where	were	you	then,	Urugal?	You	and	your	six	terrible
companions?
A	soft	chuckle	from	across	the	clearing	brought	Karsa	around.


‘And	which	of	your	countless	secrets	is	this	one,	friend?’
‘Leoman,’	Karsa	rumbled,	‘it	has	been	a	long	time	since	you	last	left	your
pit.’
Edging	forward,	the	desert	warrior	glanced	down	at	the	snakes.	‘I	was
starved	for	company.	Unlike	you,	I	see.’	He	gestured	at	the	carved	boles.	‘Are
these	yours?	I	see	two	Toblakai—they	stand	in	those	trees	as	if	alive	and	but
moments	from	striding	forth.	It	disturbs	me	to	be	reminded	that	there	are	more
of	you.	But	what	of	these	others?’
‘My	gods.’	He	noted	Leoman’s	startled	expression	and	elaborated,	‘The
Faces	in	the	Rock.	In	my	homeland,	they	adorn	a	cliffside,	facing	onto	a	glade
little	different	from	this	one.’
‘Toblakai—’
‘They	call	upon	me	still,’	Karsa	continued,	turning	back	to	study	Urugal’s
bestial	visage	once	more.	‘When	I	sleep.	It	is	as	Ghost	Hands	says—I	am
haunted.’
‘By	what,	friend?	What	is	it	your…gods…demand	of	you?’
Karsa	shot	Leoman	a	glance,	then	he	shrugged.	‘Why	have	you	sought	me
out?’
Leoman	made	to	say	one	thing,	then	chose	another.	‘Because	my	patience
is	at	an	end.	There	has	been	news	of	events	concerning	the	Malazans.	Distant
defeats.	Sha’ik	and	her	favoured	few	are	much	excited…yet	achieve	nothing.
Here	we	await	the	Adjunct’s	legions.	In	one	thing	Korbolo	Dom	is	right—the
march	of	those	legions	should	be	contested.	But	not	as	he	would	have	it.	No
pitched	battles.	Nothing	so	dramatic	or	precipitous.	In	any	case,	Toblakai,
Mathok	has	given	me	leave	to	ride	out	with	a	company	of	warriors—and
Sha’ik	has	condescended	to	permit	us	beyond	the	Whirlwind.’
Karsa	smiled.	‘Indeed.	And	you	are	free	to	harass	the	Adjunct?	Ah,	I
thought	as	much.	You	are	to	scout,	but	no	further	than	the	hills	beyond	the
Whirlwind.	She	will	not	permit	you	to	journey	south.	But	at	least	you	will	be
doing	something,	and	for	that	I	am	pleased	for	you,	Leoman.’
The	blue-eyed	warrior	stepped	closer.	‘Once	beyond	the	Whirlwind,
Toblakai—’
‘She	will	know	none	the	less,’	Karsa	replied.
‘And	so	I	will	incur	her	displeasure.’	Leoman	sneered.	‘There	is	nothing
new	in	that.	And	what	of	you,	friend?	She	calls	you	her	bodyguard,	yet	when
did	she	last	permit	you	into	her	presence?	In	that	damned	tent	of	hers?	She	is
reborn	indeed,	for	she	is	not	as	she	once	was—’
‘She	is	Malazan,’	Toblakai	said.
‘What?’


‘Before	she	became	Sha’ik.	You	know	this	as	well	as	I—’
‘She	was	reborn!	She	became	the	will	of	the	goddess,	Toblakai.	All	that	she
was	before	that	time	is	without	meaning—’
‘So	it	is	said,’	Karsa	rumbled.	‘Yet	her	memories	remain.	And	it	is	those
memories	that	chain	her	so.	She	is	trapped	by	fear,	and	that	fear	is	born	of	a
secret	which	she	will	not	share.	The	only	other	person	who	knows	that	secret	is
Ghost	Hands.’
Leoman	stared	at	Karsa	for	a	long	moment,	then	slowly	settled	into	a
crouch.	The	two	men	were	surrounded	by	snakes,	the	sound	of	slithering	on
sand	a	muted	undercurrent.	Lowering	one	hand,	Leoman	watched	as	a	flareneck	began	entwining	itself	up	his	arm.	‘Your	words,	Toblakai,	whisper	of
defeat.’
Shrugging,	Karsa	strode	to	where	his	tool	kit	waited	at	the	base	of	a	tree.
‘These	years	have	served	me	well.	Your	company,	Leoman.	Sha’ik	Elder.	I
once	vowed	that	the	Malazans	were	my	enemies.	Yet,	from	what	I	have	seen	of
the	world	since	that	time,	I	now	understand	that	they	are	no	crueller	than	any
other	lowlander.	Indeed,	they	alone	seem	to	profess	a	sense	of	justice.	The
people	of	Seven	Cities,	who	so	despise	them	and	wish	them	gone—they	seek
nothing	more	than	the	power	that	the	Malazans	took	from	them.	Power	that
they	used	to	terrorize	their	own	people.	Leoman,	you	and	your	kind	make	war
against	justice,	and	it	is	not	my	war.’
‘Justice?’	Leoman	bared	his	teeth.	‘You	expect	me	to	challenge	your
words,	Toblakai?	I	will	not.	Sha’ik	Reborn	says	there	is	no	loyalty	within	me.
Perhaps	she	is	right.	I	have	seen	too	much.	Yet	here	I	remain—have	you	ever
wondered	why?’
Karsa	drew	out	a	chisel	and	mallet.	‘The	light	fades—and	that	makes	the
shadows	deeper.	It	is	the	light,	I	now	realize.	That	is	what	is	different	about
them.’
‘The	Apocalyptic,	Toblakai.	Disintegration.	Annihilation.	Everything.
Every	human…lowlander.	With	our	twisted	horrors—all	that	we	commit	upon
each	other.	The	depredations,	the	cruelties.	For	every	gesture	of	kindness	and
compassion,	there	are	ten	thousand	acts	of	brutality.	Loyalty?	Aye,	I	have	none.
Not	for	my	kind,	and	the	sooner	we	obliterate	ourselves	the	better	this	world
will	be.’
‘The	light,’	Karsa	said,	‘makes	them	look	almost	human.’
Distracted	as	he	was,	the	Toblakai	did	not	notice	Leoman’s	narrowing
eyes,	nor	the	struggle	to	remain	silent.
One	does	not	step	between	a	man	and	his	gods.
The	snake’s	head	lifted	in	front	of	Leoman’s	face	and	hovered	there,


tongue	flicking.
	
‘The	House	of	Chains,’	Heboric	muttered,	his	expression	souring	at	the	words.
Bidithal	shivered,	though	it	was	hard	to	tell	whether	from	fear	or	pleasure.
‘Reaver.	Consort.	The	Unbound—these	are	interesting,	yes?	For	all	the	world
like	shattered—’
‘From	whence	came	these	images?’	Heboric	demanded.	Simply	looking
upon	the	wooden	cards	with	their	lacquered	paintings—blurred	as	they	were—
was	filling	the	ex-priest’s	throat	with	bile.	I	sense…flaws.	In	each	and	every
one.	That	is	no	accident,	no	failing	of	the	hand	that	brushed	them	into	being.
‘There	is	no	doubting,’	L’oric	said	in	answer	to	his	question,	‘their
veracity.	The	power	emanating	from	them	is	a	sorcerous	stench.	I	have	never
before	witnessed	such	a	vigorous	birth	within	the	Deck.	Not	even	Shadow	felt
—’
‘Shadow!’	Bidithal	snapped.	‘Those	deceivers	could	never	unveil	that
realm’s	true	power!	No,	here,	in	this	new	House,	the	theme	is	pure.
Imperfection	is	celebrated,	the	twist	of	chaotic	chance	mars	one	and	all—’
‘Silence!’	Sha’ik	hissed,	her	arms	wrapped	tight	about	herself.	‘We	must
think	on	this.	No-one	speak.	Let	me	think!’
Heboric	studied	her	for	a	moment,	squinting	to	bring	her	into	focus,	even
though	she	sat	beside	him.	The	cards	from	the	new	House	had	arrived	the	same
day	as	the	news	of	the	Malazan	defeats	on	Genabackis.	And	the	time	since	then
had	been	one	of	seething	discord	among	Sha’ik’s	commanders,	sufficient	to
dampen	her	pleasure	at	hearing	of	her	brother	Ganoes	Paran’s	survival,	and
now	leading	her	to	uncharacteristic	distraction.
The	House	of	Chains	was	woven	into	their	fates.	An	insidious	intrusion,	an
infection	against	which	they’d	had	no	chance	to	prepare.	But	was	it	an	enemy,
or	the	potential	source	for	renewed	strength?	It	seemed	Bidithal	was	busy
convincing	himself	that	it	was	the	latter,	no	doubt	drawn	in	that	direction	by	his
growing	disaffection	with	Sha’ik	Reborn.	L’oric,	on	the	other	hand,	seemed
more	inclined	to	share	Heboric’s	own	misgivings;	whilst	Febryl	was	unique	in
remaining	silent	on	the	entire	matter.
The	air	within	the	tent	was	close,	soured	by	human	sweat.	Heboric	wanted
nothing	more	than	to	leave,	to	escape	all	this,	yet	he	sensed	Sha’ik	clinging	to
him,	a	spiritual	grip	as	desperate	as	anything	he’d	felt	from	her	before.
‘Show	once	more	the	new	Unaligned.’
Yes.	For	the	thousandth	time.
Scowling,	Bidithal	searched	through	the	Deck,	then	drew	out	the	card,


which	he	laid	down	in	the	centre	of	the	goat-hair	mat.	‘If	any	of	the	new
arrivals	is	dubious,’	the	old	man	sneered,	‘it	is	this	one.	Master	of	the	Deck?
Absurd.	How	can	one	control	the	uncontrollable?’
There	was	silence.
The	uncontrollable?	Such	as	the	Whirlwind	itself?
Sha’ik	had	clearly	not	caught	the	insinuation.	‘Ghost	Hands,	I	would	you
take	this	card,	feel	it,	seek	to	sense	what	you	can	from	it.’
‘You	make	this	request	again	and	again,	Chosen	One,’	Heboric	sighed.	‘But
I	tell	you,	there	is	no	link	between	the	power	of	my	hands	and	the	Deck	of
Dragons.	I	am	of	no	help	to	you—’
‘Then	listen	closely	and	I	shall	describe	it.	Never	mind	your	hands—I	ask
you	now	as	a	once-priest,	as	a	scholar.	Listen.	The	face	is	obscured,	yet	hints
—’
‘It	is	obscured,’	Bidithal	interrupted	in	a	derisive	tone,	‘because	the	card	is
no	more	than	the	projection	of	someone’s	wishful	thinking.’
‘Cut	me	off	again	and	you	will	regret	it,	Bidithal,’	Sha’ik	said.	‘I	have
heard	you	enough	on	this	subject.	If	your	mouth	opens	again	I	will	tear	out
your	tongue.	Ghost	Hands,	I	will	continue.	The	figure	is	slightly	above	average
in	height.	There	is	the	crimson	streak	of	a	scar—or	blood	perhaps—down	one
side	of	the	face—a	wounding,	yes?	He—yes,	I	am	certain	it’s	a	man,	not	a
woman—he	stands	on	a	bridge.	Of	stone,	shot	through	with	cracks.	The
horizon	is	filled	with	flames.	It	seems	he	and	the	bridge	are	surrounded,	as	if
by	followers,	or	servants—’
‘Or	guardians,’	L’oric	added.	‘Your	pardon,	Chosen	One.’
‘Guardians.	Yes,	a	good	possibility.	They	have	the	look	of	soldiers,	do	they
not?’
‘On	what,’	Heboric	asked,	‘do	these	guardians	stand?	Can	you	see	the
ground	they	stand	upon?’
‘Bones—there	is	much	fine	detail	there,	Ghost	Hands.	How	did	you	know?’
‘Describe	those	bones,	please.’
‘Not	human.	Very	large.	Part	of	a	skull	is	visible,	long-snouted,	terribly
fanged.	It	bears	the	remnants	of	a	helmet	of	some	sort—’
‘A	helmet?	On	the	skull?’
‘Yes.’
Heboric	fell	silent.	He	began	rocking	yet	was	only	remotely	aware	of	the
motion.	There	was	a	sourceless	keening	growing	in	his	head,	a	cry	of	grief,	of
anguish.
‘The	Master,’	Sha’ik	said,	her	voice	trembling,	‘he	stands	strangely.	Arms
held	out,	bent	at	the	elbows	so	that	the	hands	depend,	away	from	the	body—it	is


the	strangest	posture—’
‘Are	his	feet	together?’
‘Almost	impossibly	so.’
As	if	forming	a	point.	Dull	and	remote	to	his	own	ears,	Heboric	asked,
‘And	what	does	he	wear?’
‘Tight	silks,	from	the	way	they	shimmer.	Black.’
‘Anything	else?’
‘There	is	a	chain.	It	cuts	across	his	torso,	left	shoulder	down	to	right	hip.	It
is	a	robust	chain,	black	wrought	iron.	There	are	wooden	discs	on	his	shoulders
—like	epaulets,	but	large,	a	hand’s	span	each—’
‘How	many	in	all?’
‘Four.	You	know	something	now,	Ghost	Hands.	Tell	me!’
‘Yes,’	L’oric	murmured,	‘you	have	thoughts	on	this—’
‘He	lies,’	Bidithal	growled.	‘He	has	been	forgotten	by	everyone—even	his
god—and	he	now	seeks	to	invent	a	new	importance.’
Febryl	spoke	in	a	mocking	rasp.	‘Bidithal,	you	foolish	man.	He	is	a	man
who	touches	what	we	cannot	feel,	and	sees	what	we	are	blind	to.	Speak	on,
Ghost	Hands.	Why	does	this	Master	stand	so?’
‘Because,’	Heboric	said,	‘he	is	a	sword.’
But	not	any	sword.	He	is	one	sword,	above	all,	and	it	cuts	cold.	That	sword
is	as	this	man’s	own	nature.	He	will	cleave	his	own	path.	None	shall	lead	him.
He	stands	now	in	my	mind.	I	see	him.	I	see	his	face.	Oh,	Sha’ik…
‘A	Master	of	the	Deck,’	L’oric	said,	then	sighed.	‘A	lodestone	to	order…in
opposition	to	the	House	of	Chains—yet	he	stands	alone,	guardians	or	no,	while
the	servants	of	the	House	are	many.’
Heboric	smiled.	‘Alone?	He	has	always	been	thus.’
‘Then	why	is	your	smile	that	of	a	broken	man,	Ghost	Hands?’
I	grieve	for	humanity.	This	family,	so	at	war	with	itself.	‘To	that,	L’oric,	I
shall	not	answer.’
‘I	shall	now	speak	with	Ghost	Hands	alone,’	Sha’ik	pronounced.
But	Heboric	shook	his	head.	‘I	am	done	speaking,	for	now,	even	with	you,
Chosen	One.	I	will	say	this	and	nothing	more:	have	faith	in	the	Master	of	the
Deck.	He	shall	answer	the	House	of	Chains.	He	shall	answer	it.’
Feeling	ancient	beyond	his	years,	Heboric	climbed	to	his	feet.	There	was	a
stir	of	motion	beside	him,	then	young	Felisin’s	hand	settled	on	his	forearm.	He
let	her	guide	him	from	the	chamber.
Outside,	dusk	had	arrived,	marked	by	the	cries	of	the	goats	as	they	were
led	into	the	enclosures.	To	the	south,	just	beyond	the	city’s	outskirts,	rumbled
the	thunder	of	horse	hoofs.	Kamist	Reloe	and	Korbolo	Dom	had	absented


themselves	from	the	meeting	to	oversee	the	exercises	of	the	troops.	Training
conducted	in	the	Malazan	style,	which	Heboric	had	to	admit	was	the	renegade
Fist’s	only	expression	of	brilliance	thus	far.	For	the	first	time,	a	Malazan	army
would	meet	its	match	in	all	things,	barring	Moranth	munitions.	Tactics	and
disposition	of	forces	would	be	identical,	ensuring	that	numbers	alone	would
decide	the	day.	The	threat	of	the	munitions	would	be	answered	with	sorcery,
for	the	Army	of	the	Whirlwind	possessed	a	full	cadre	of	High	Mages,	whilst
Tavore	had—as	far	as	they	knew—none.	Spies	in	Aren	had	noted	the	presence
of	the	two	Wickan	children,	Nil	and	Nether,	but	both,	it	was	claimed,	had	been
thoroughly	broken	by	Coltaine’s	death.
Yet	why	would	she	need	mages?	She	carries	an	otataral	sword,	after	all.
Even	so,	its	negating	influence	cannot	be	extended	over	her	entire	army.	Dear
Sha’ik,	you	may	well	defeat	your	sister	after	all.
‘Where	would	you	go,	Ghost	Hands?’	Felisin	asked.
‘To	my	home,	lass.’
‘That	is	not	what	I	meant.’
He	cocked	his	head.	‘I	do	not	know—’
‘If	indeed	you	do	not,	then	I	have	seen	your	path	before	you	have,	and	this	I
find	hard	to	believe.	You	must	leave	here,	Ghost	Hands.	You	must	retrace	your
path,	else	what	haunts	you	will	kill	you—’
‘And	that	matters?	Lass—’
‘Look	beyond	yourself	for	a	moment,	old	man!	Something	is	contained
within	you.	Trapped	within	your	mortal	flesh.	What	will	happen	when	your
flesh	fails?’
He	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	asked,	‘How	can	you	be	so	sure
of	this?	My	death	might	simply	negate	the	risk	of	escape—it	might	shut	the
portal,	as	tightly	sealed	as	it	had	been	before—’
‘Because	there	is	no	going	back.	It’s	here—the	power	behind	those	ghostly
hands	of	yours—not	the	otataral,	which	is	fading,	ever	fading—’
‘Fading?’
‘Yes,	fading!	Have	not	your	dreams	and	visions	worsened?	Have	you	not
realized	why?	Yes,	my	mother	has	told	me—on	the	Otataral	Isle,	in	the	desert
—that	statue.	Heboric,	an	entire	island	of	otataral	was	created	to	contain	that
statue,	to	hold	it	prisoner.	But	you	have	given	it	a	means	to	escape—there,
through	your	hands.	You	must	return!’
‘Enough!’	he	snarled,	flinging	her	hand	away.	‘Tell	me,	did	she	also	tell
you	of	herself	on	that	journey?’
‘That	which	she	was	before	no	longer	matters—’
‘Oh,	but	it	does,	lass!	It	does	matter!’


‘What	do	you	mean?’
The	temptation	came	close	to	overwhelming	him.	Because	she	is	Malazan!
Because	she	is	Tavore’s	sister!	Because	this	war	is	no	longer	the	Whirlwind’s—
it	has	been	stolen	away,	twisted	by	something	far	more	powerful,	by	the	ties	of
blood	that	bind	us	all	in	the	harshest,	tightest	chains!	What	chance	a	raging
goddess	against	that?
Instead,	he	said	nothing.
‘You	must	undertake	the	journey,’	Felisin	said	in	a	low	voice.	‘But	I	know,
it	cannot	be	done	alone.	No.	I	will	go	with	you—’
He	staggered	away	at	her	words,	shaking	his	head.	It	was	a	horrible	idea,	a
terrifying	idea.	Yet	brutally	perfect,	a	nightmare	of	synchronicity.
‘Listen!	It	need	not	be	just	you	and	I—I	will	find	someone	else.	A	warrior,
a	loyal	protector—’
‘Enough!	No	more	of	this!’	Yet	it	will	take	her	away—away	from	Bidithal
and	his	ghastly	desires.	It	will	take	her	away…from	the	storm	that	is	coming.
‘With	whom	else	have	you	spoken	of	this?’	he	demanded.
‘No-one,	but	I	thought…Leoman.	He	could	choose	for	us	someone	from
Mathok’s	people—’
‘Not	a	word,	lass.	Not	now.	Not	yet.’
Her	hand	gripped	his	forearm	once	more.	‘We	cannot	wait	too	long,	Ghost
Hands.’
‘Not	yet,	Felisin.	Now,	take	me	home,	please.’
	
‘Will	you	come	with	me,	Toblakai?’
Karsa	dragged	his	gaze	from	Urugal’s	stone	face.	The	sun	had	set	with	its
characteristic	suddenness,	and	the	stars	overhead	were	bright.	The	snakes	had
begun	dispersing,	driven	into	the	eerily	silent	forest	in	search	of	food.	‘Would
you	I	run	beside	you	and	your	puny	horses,	Leoman?	There	are	no	Teblor
mounts	in	this	land.	Nothing	to	match	my	size—’
‘Teblor	mounts?	Actually,	friend,	you	are	wrong	in	that.	Well,	not	here,
true,	as	you	say.	But	to	the	west,	in	the	Jhag	Odhan,	there	are	wild	horses	that
are	a	match	to	your	stature.	Wild	now,	in	any	case.	They	are	Jhag	horses—bred
long	ago	by	the	Jaghut.	It	may	well	be	that	your	Teblor	mounts	are	of	the	same
breed—there	were	Jaghut	on	Genabackis,	after	all.’
‘Why	have	you	not	told	me	this	before?’
Leoman	lowered	his	right	hand	to	the	ground,	watched	as	the	flare-neck
unwound	down	the	length	of	his	arm.	‘In	truth,	this	is	the	first	time	you	have
ever	mentioned	that	you	Teblor	possessed	horses.	Toblakai,	I	know	virtually


nothing	of	your	past.	No-one	here	does.	You	are	not	a	loquacious	man.	You
and	I,	we	have	ever	travelled	on	foot,	haven’t	we?’
‘The	Jhag	Odhan.	That	is	beyond	Raraku.’
‘Aye.	Strike	west	through	the	Whirlwind,	and	you	will	come	to	cliffs,	the
broken	shoreline	of	the	ancient	sea	that	once	filled	this	desert.	Continue	on
until	you	come	to	a	small	city—Lato	Revae.	Immediately	to	the	west	lies	the	tip
of	the	Thalas	Mountains.	Skirt	their	south	edge,	ever	westward,	until	you	come
to	River	Ugarat.	There	is	a	ford	south	of	Y’Ghatan.	From	the	other	side,	strike
west	and	south	and	west,	for	two	weeks	or	more,	and	you	will	find	yourself	in
the	Jhag	Odhan.	Oh,	there	is	some	irony	in	this—there	were	once	nomadic
bands	of	Jaghut	there.	Hence	the	name.	But	these	Jaghut	were	fallen.	They	had
been	predated	on	for	so	long	they	were	little	more	than	savages.’
‘And	are	they	still	there?’
‘No.	The	Logros	T’lan	Imass	slaughtered	them.	Not	so	long	ago.’
Karsa	bared	his	teeth.	‘T’lan	Imass.	A	name	from	the	Teblor	past.’
‘Closer	than	that,’	Leoman	muttered,	then	he	straightened.	‘Seek	leave
from	Sha’ik	to	journey	into	the	Jhag	Odhan.	You	would	make	an	impressive
sight	on	the	battlefield,	astride	a	Jhag	horse.	Did	your	kind	fight	on	horseback,
or	simply	use	them	for	transport?’
Karsa	smiled	in	the	darkness.	‘I	will	do	as	you	say,	Leoman.	But	the
journey	will	take	long—do	not	wait	for	me.	If	you	and	your	scouts	are	still
beyond	the	Whirlwind	upon	my	return,	I	will	ride	out	to	find	you.’
‘Agreed.’
‘What	of	Felisin?’
Leoman	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	replied,	‘Ghost	Hands	has	been
awakened	to	the…threat.’
Karsa	sneered.	‘And	what	value	will	that	be?	I	should	kill	Bidithal	and	be
done	with	it.’
‘Toblakai,	it	is	more	than	you	that	troubles	Ghost	Hands.	I	do	not	believe
he	will	remain	in	camp	much	longer.	And	when	he	leaves,	he	will	take	the	child
with	him.’
‘And	that	is	a	better	option?	She	will	become	no	more	than	his	nurse.’
‘For	a	time,	perhaps.	I	will	send	someone	with	them,	of	course.	If	Sha’ik
did	not	need	you—or	at	least	believe	she	does—I	would	ask	you.’
‘Madness,	Leoman.	I	have	travelled	once	with	Ghost	Hands.	I	shall	not	do
so	again.’
‘He	holds	truths	for	you,	Toblakai.	One	day,	you	will	need	to	seek	him	out.
You	might	even	need	to	ask	for	his	help.’
‘Help?	I	need	no-one’s	help.	You	speak	unpleasant	words.	I	will	hear	them


no	more.’
Leoman’s	grin	was	visible	in	the	gloom.	‘You	are	as	you	always	are,
friend.	When	will	you	journey	into	the	Jhag	Odhan,	then?’
‘I	shall	leave	tomorrow.’
‘Then	I	had	best	get	word	to	Sha’ik.	Who	knows,	she	might	even
condescend	to	see	me	in	person,	whereupon	I	might	well	succeed	in	ending	her
distraction	with	this	House	of	Chains—’
‘This	what?’
Leoman	waved	a	dismissive	hand.	‘The	House	of	Chains.	A	new	power	in
the	Deck	of	Dragons.	It	is	all	they	talk	about	these	days.’
‘Chains,’	Karsa	muttered,	swinging	round	to	stare	at	Urugal.	‘I	so	dislike
chains.’
‘I	will	see	you	in	the	morning,	Toblakai?	Before	you	depart?’
‘You	shall.’
Karsa	listened	to	the	man	stride	away.	His	mind	was	a	maelstrom.	Chains.
They	haunted	him,	had	haunted	him	ever	since	he	and	Bairoth	and	Delum	rode
out	from	the	village.	Perhaps	even	before	then.	Tribes	fashioned	their	own
chains,	after	all.	As	did	kinship,	and	companions,	and	stories	with	their	lessons
in	honour	and	sacrifice.	And	chains	as	well	between	the	Teblor	and	their	seven
gods.	Between	me	and	my	gods.	Chains	again,	there	in	my	visions—the	dead	I
have	slain,	the	souls	Ghost	Hands	says	I	drag	behind	me.	I	am—all	that	I	am—
has	been	shaped	by	such	chains.
This	new	House—is	it	mine?
The	air	in	the	clearing	was	suddenly	cold,	bitterly	so.	A	final,	thrashing
rush	as	the	last	of	the	snakes	fled	the	clearing.	Karsa	blinked	his	eyes	into
focus,	and	saw	Urugal’s	indurated	visage…awakening.
A	presence,	there	in	the	dark	holes	of	the	face’s	eyes.
Karsa	heard	a	howling	wind,	filling	his	mind.	A	thousand	souls	moaning,
the	snapping	thunder	of	chains.	Growling,	he	steeled	himself	before	the
onslaught,	fixed	his	gaze	on	his	god’s	writhing	face.
‘Karsa	Orlong.	We	have	waited	long	for	this.	Three	years,	the	fashioning
of	this	sacred	place.	You	wasted	so	much	time	on	the	two	strangers—your
fallen	friends,	the	ones	who	failed	where	you	did	not.	This	temple	is	not	to	be
sanctified	by	sentimentality.	Their	presence	offends	us.	Destroy	them	this
night.’
The	seven	faces	were	all	wakeful	now,	and	Karsa	could	feel	the	weight	of
their	regard,	a	deathly	pressure	behind	which	lurked	something…avid,	dark
and	filled	with	glee.
‘By	my	hand,’	Karsa	said	to	Urugal,	‘I	have	brought	you	to	this	place.	By


my	hand,	you	have	been	freed	from	your	prison	of	rock	in	the	lands	of	the
Teblor—yes,	I	am	not	the	fool	you	believe	me	to	be.	You	have	guided	me	in
this,	and	now	you	are	come.	Your	first	words	are	of	chastisement?	Careful,
Urugal.	Any	carving	here	can	be	shattered	by	my	hand,	should	I	so	choose.’
He	felt	their	rage,	buffeting	him,	seeking	to	make	him	wither	beneath	the
onslaught,	yet	he	stood	before	it	unmoving,	and	unmoved.	The	Teblor	warrior
who	would	quail	before	his	gods	was	no	more.
‘You	have	brought	us	closer,’	Urugal	eventually	rasped.	‘Close	enough	to
sense	the	precise	location	of	what	we	desire.	And	there	you	must	now	go,
Karsa	Orlong.	You	have	delayed	the	journey	for	so	long—your	journey	to
ourselves,	and	on	to	the	path	we	have	set	before	you.	You	have	hidden	too	long
in	the	company	of	this	petty	spirit	who	does	little	more	than	spit	sand.’
‘This	path,	this	journey—to	what	end?	What	is	it	you	seek?’
‘Like	you,	warrior,	we	seek	freedom.’
Karsa	was	silent.	Avid	indeed.	Then	he	spoke.	‘I	am	to	travel	west.	Into	the
Jhag	Odhan.’
He	sensed	their	shock	and	excitement,	then	the	chorus	of	suspicion	that
poured	out	from	the	seven	gods.
‘West!	Indeed,	Karsa	Orlong.	But	how	do	you	know	this?’
Because,	at	last,	I	am	my	father’s	son.	‘I	shall	leave	with	the	dawn,	Urugal.
And	I	will	find	for	you	what	you	desire.’	He	could	feel	their	presence	fading,
and	knew	instinctively	that	these	gods	were	not	as	close	to	freedom	as	they
wanted	him	to	believe.	Nor	as	powerful.
Urugal	had	called	this	clearing	a	temple,	but	it	was	a	contested	one,	and
now,	as	the	Seven	withdrew,	and	were	suddenly	gone,	Karsa	slowly	turned
from	the	faces	of	the	gods,	and	looked	upon	those	for	whom	this	place	had
been	in	truth	sanctified.	By	Karsa’s	own	hands.	In	the	name	of	those	chains	a
mortal	could	wear	with	pride.
‘My	loyalty,’	the	Teblor	warrior	quietly	said,	‘was	misplaced.	I	served	only
glory.	Words,	my	friends.	And	words	can	wear	false	nobility.	Disguising	brutal
truths.	The	words	of	the	past,	that	so	clothed	the	Teblor	in	a	hero’s	garb—this
is	what	I	served.	While	the	true	glory	was	before	me.	Beside	me.	You,	Delum
Thord.	And	you,	Bairoth	Gild.’
From	the	stone	statue	of	Bairoth	emerged	a	distant,	weary	voice.	‘Lead	us,
Warleader.’
Karsa	flinched.	Do	I	dream	this?	Then	he	straightened.	‘I	have	drawn	your
spirits	to	this	place.	Did	you	travel	in	the	wake	of	the	Seven?’
‘We	have	walked	the	empty	lands,’	Bairoth	Gild	replied.	‘Empty,	yet	we
were	not	alone.	Strangers	await	us	all,	Karsa	Orlong.	This	is	the	truth	they


would	hide	from	you.	We	are	summoned.	We	are	here.’
‘None,’	came	Delum	Thord’s	voice	from	the	other	statue,	‘can	defeat	you
on	this	journey.	You	lead	the	enemy	in	circles,	you	defy	every	prediction,	and
so	deliver	the	edge	of	your	will.	We	sought	to	follow,	but	could	not.’
‘Who,	Warleader,’	Bairoth	asked,	his	voice	bolder,	‘is	our	enemy,	now?’
Karsa	drew	himself	up	before	the	two	Uryd	warriors.	‘Witness	my	answer,
my	friends.	Witness.’
Delum	spoke,	‘We	failed	you,	Karsa	Orlong.	Yet	you	invite	us	to	walk	with
you	once	again.’
Karsa	fought	back	an	urge	to	scream,	to	unleash	a	warcry—as	if	such	a
challenge	might	force	back	the	approaching	darkness.	He	could	make	no	sense
of	his	own	impulses,	the	torrential	emotions	threatening	to	engulf	him.	He
stared	at	the	carved	likeness	of	his	tall	friend,	the	awareness	in	those	unmarred
features—Delum	Thord	before	the	Forkassal—the	Forkrul	Assail	named	Calm
—had,	on	a	mountain	trail	on	a	distant	continent,	so	casually	destroyed	him.
Bairoth	Gild	spoke.	‘We	failed	you.	Do	you	now	ask	that	we	walk	with
you?’
‘Delum	Thord.	Bairoth	Gild.’	Karsa’s	voice	was	hoarse.	‘It	is	I	who	failed
you.	I	would	be	your	warleader	once	more,	if	you	would	so	permit	me.’
A	long	moment	of	silence,	then	Bairoth	replied,	‘At	last,	something	to	look
forward	to.’
Karsa	almost	fell	to	his	knees,	then.	Grief,	finally	unleashed.	At	an	end,	his
time	of	solitude.	His	penance	was	done.	The	journey	to	begin	again.	Dear
Urugal,	you	shall	witness.	Oh,	how	you	shall	witness.
	
The	hearth	was	little	more	than	a	handful	of	dying	coals.	After	Felisin	Younger
left,	Heboric	sat	motionless	in	the	gloom.	A	short	time	passed,	then	he
collected	an	armload	of	dried	dung	and	rebuilt	the	fire.	The	night	had	chilled
him—even	the	hands	he	could	not	see	felt	cold,	like	heavy	pieces	of	ice	at	the
end	of	his	wrists.
The	only	journey	that	lay	ahead	of	him	was	a	short	one,	and	he	must	walk
it	alone.	He	was	blind,	but	in	this	no	more	blind	than	anyone	else.	Death’s
precipice,	whether	first	glimpsed	from	afar	or	discovered	with	the	next	step,
was	ever	a	surprise.	A	promise	of	the	sudden	cessation	of	questions,	yet	there
were	no	answers	waiting	beyond.	Cessation	would	have	to	be	enough.	And	so	it
must	be	for	every	mortal.	Even	as	we	hunger	for	resolution.	Or,	even	more
delusional:	redemption.
Now,	after	all	this	time,	he	was	able	to	realize	that	every	path	eventually,


inevitably	dwindled	into	a	single	line	of	footsteps.	There,	leading	to	the	very
edge.	Then…gone.	And	so,	he	faced	only	what	every	mortal	faced.	The
solitude	of	death,	and	oblivion’s	final	gift	that	was	indifference.
The	gods	were	welcome	to	wrangle	over	his	soul,	to	snipe	and	snap	over
the	paltry	feast.	And	if	mortals	grieved	for	him,	it	was	only	because	by	dying
he	had	shaken	them	from	the	illusion	of	unity	that	comforted	life’s	journey.
One	less	on	the	path.
A	scratch	at	the	flap	entrance,	then	the	hide	was	drawn	aside	and	someone
entered.
‘Would	you	make	of	your	home	a	pyre,	Ghost	Hands?’	The	voice	was
L’oric’s.
The	High	Mage’s	words	startled	Heboric	into	a	sudden	realization	of	the
sweat	running	down	his	face,	the	gusts	of	fierce	heat	from	the	now	raging
hearth.	Unthinking,	he	had	fed	the	flames	with	piece	after	piece	of	dung.
‘I	saw	the	glow—difficult	to	miss,	old	man.	Best	leave	it,	now,	let	it	die
down.’
‘What	do	you	want,	L’oric?’
‘I	acknowledge	your	reluctance	to	speak	of	what	you	know.	There	is	no
value,	after	all,	in	gifting	Bidithal	or	Febryl	with	such	details.	And	so	I	shall
not	demand	that	you	explain	what	you’ve	sensed	regarding	this	Master	of	the
Deck.	Instead,	I	offer	an	exchange,	and	all	that	we	say	will	remain	between	the
two	of	us.	No-one	else.’
‘Why	should	I	trust	you?	You	are	hidden—even	to	Sha’ik.	You	give	no
reason	as	to	why	you	are	here.	In	her	cadre,	in	this	war.’
‘That	alone	should	tell	you	I	am	not	like	the	others,’	L’oric	replied.
Heboric	sneered.	‘That	earns	you	less	than	you	might	think.	There	can	be
no	exchange	because	there	is	nothing	you	can	tell	me	that	I	would	be	interested
in	hearing.	The	schemes	of	Febryl?	The	man’s	a	fool.	Bidithal’s	perversions?
One	day	a	child	will	slip	a	knife	between	his	ribs.	Korbolo	Dom	and	Kamist
Reloe?	They	war	against	an	empire	that	is	far	from	dead.	Nor	will	they	be
treated	with	honour	when	they	are	finally	brought	before	the	Empress.	No,	they
are	criminals,	and	for	that	their	souls	will	burn	for	eternity.	The	Whirlwind?
That	goddess	has	my	contempt,	and	that	contempt	does	naught	but	grow.	Thus,
what	could	you	possibly	tell	me,	L’oric,	that	I	would	value?’
‘Only	the	one	thing	that	might	interest	you,	Heboric	Light	Touch.	Just	as
this	Master	of	the	Deck	interests	me.	I	would	not	cheat	you	with	the	exchange.
No,	I	would	tell	you	all	that	I	know	of	the	Hand	of	Jade,	rising	from	the
otataral	sands—the	Hand	that	you	have	touched,	that	now	haunts	your	dreams.’
‘How	could	you	know	these—’	He	fell	silent.	The	sweat	on	his	brow	was


now	cold.
‘And	how,’	L’oric	retorted,	‘can	you	sense	so	much	from	a	mere
description	of	the	Master ’s	card?	Let	us	not	question	these	things,	else	we	trap
ourselves	in	a	conversation	that	will	outlive	Raraku	itself.	So,	Heboric,	shall	I
begin?’
‘No.	Not	now.	I	am	too	weary	for	this.	Tomorrow,	L’oric.’
‘Delay	may	prove…disastrous.’	After	a	moment,	the	High	Mage	sighed.
‘Very	well.	I	can	see	your	exhaustion.	Permit	me,	at	least,	to	brew	your	tea	for
you.’
The	gesture	of	kindness	was	unexpected,	and	Heboric	lowered	his	head.
‘L’oric,	promise	me	this—that	when	the	final	day	comes,	you	be	a	long	way
from	here.’
‘A	difficult	promise.	Permit	me	to	think	on	it.	Now,	where	is	the	hen’bara?’
‘Hanging	from	a	bag	above	the	pot.’
‘Ah,	of	course.’
Heboric	listened	to	the	sounds	of	preparation,	the	rustle	of	flower-heads
from	the	bag,	the	slosh	of	water	as	L’oric	filled	the	pot.	‘Did	you	know,’	the
High	Mage	murmured	as	he	worked,	‘that	some	of	the	oldest	scholarly
treatises	on	the	warrens	speak	of	a	triumvirate.	Rashan,	Thyr	and	Meanas.	As	if
the	three	were	all	closely	related	to	one	another.	And	then	in	turn	seek	to	link
them	to	corresponding	Elder	warrens.’
Heboric	grunted,	then	nodded.	‘All	flavours	of	the	same	thing?	I	would
agree.	Tiste	warrens.	Kurald	this	and	Kurald	that.	The	human	versions	can’t
help	but	overlap,	become	confused.	I	am	no	expert,	L’oric,	and	it	seems	you
know	more	of	it	than	I.’
‘Well,	there	certainly	appears	to	be	a	mutual	insinuation	of	themes	between
Darkness	and	Shadow,	and,	presumably,	Light.	A	confusion	among	the	three,
yes.	Anomander	Rake	himself	has	asserted	a	proprietary	claim	on	the	Throne
of	Shadow,	after	all…’
The	smell	of	the	brewing	tea	tugged	at	Heboric’s	mind.	‘He	has?’	he
murmured,	only	remotely	interested.
‘Well,	of	a	sort.	He	set	kin	to	guard	it,	presumably	from	the	Tiste	Edur.	It	is
very	difficult	for	us	mortals	to	make	sense	of	Tiste	histories,	for	they	are	such
a	long-lived	people.	As	you	well	know,	human	history	is	ever	marked	by
certain	personalities,	rising	from	some	quality	or	notoriety	to	shatter	the	status
quo.	Fortunately	for	us,	such	men	and	women	are	few	and	far	between,	and
they	all	eventually	die	or	disappear.	But	among	the	Tiste…well,	those
personalities	never	go	away,	or	so	it	seems.	They	act,	and	act	yet	again.	They
persist.	Choose	the	worst	tyrant	you	can	from	your	knowledge	of	human


history,	Heboric,	then	imagine	him	or	her	as	virtually	undying.	In	your	mind,
bring	that	tyrant	back	again	and	again	and	again.	How,	having	done	so,	would
you	imagine	our	history	then?’
‘Far	more	violent	than	that	of	the	Tiste,	L’oric.	Humans	are	not	Tiste.
Indeed,	I	have	never	heard	of	a	Tiste	tyrant…’
‘Perhaps	I	used	the	wrong	word.	I	meant	only—in	human	context—a
personality	of	devastating	power,	or	potential.	Look	at	this	Malazan	Empire,
born	from	the	mind	of	Kellanved,	a	single	man.	What	if	he	had	been	eternal?’
Something	in	L’oric’s	musings	had	reawakened	Heboric.	‘Eternal?’	He
barked	a	laugh.	‘Perhaps	he	is	at	that.	There	is	one	detail	you	might	consider,
perhaps	more	relevant	than	anything	else	that’s	been	said	here.	And	that	is,	the
Tiste	are	no	longer	isolated	in	their	scheming.	There	are	humans	now,	in	their
games—humans,	who’ve	not	the	patience	of	the	Tiste,	nor	their	legendary
remoteness.	The	warrens	of	Kurald	Galain	and	Kurald	Emurlahn	are	no	longer
pure,	unsullied	by	human	presence.	Meanas	and	Rashan?	Perhaps	they	are
proving	the	doors	into	both	Darkness	and	Shadow.	Or	perhaps	the	matter	is
more	complex	than	even	that—how	can	one	truly	hope	to	separate	the	themes
of	Darkness	and	Light	from	Shadow?	They	are	as	those	scholars	said,	an
interdependent	triumvirate.	Mother,	father	and	child—a	family	ever
squabbling…only	now	the	in-laws	and	grandchildren	are	joining	in.’
He	waited	for	a	reply	from	L’oric,	curious	as	to	how	his	comments	had
been	received,	but	none	was	forthcoming.	The	ex-priest	looked	up,	struggled
to	focus	on	the	High	Mage—
—who	sat	motionless,	a	cup	in	one	hand,	the	ring	of	the	brewing	pot	in	the
other.	Motionless,	and	staring	at	Heboric.
‘L’oric?	Forgive	me,	I	cannot	discern	your	expression—’
‘Well	that	you	cannot,’	the	High	Mage	rasped.	‘Here	I	sought	to	raise	the
warning	of	Tiste	meddling	in	human	affairs—to	have	you	then	voice	a	warning
in	the	opposite	direction.	As	if	it	is	not	us	who	must	worry,	but	the	Tiste
themselves.’
Heboric	said	nothing.	A	strange,	whispering	suspicion	flitted	through	him
for	a	moment,	as	if	tickled	into	being	by	something	in	L’oric’s	voice.	After	a
moment,	he	dismissed	it.	Too	outrageous,	too	absurd	to	entertain.
L’oric	poured	the	tea.
Heboric	sighed.	‘It	seems	I	am	to	be	ever	denied	the	succour	of	that	brew.
Tell	me,	then,	of	the	giant	of	Jade.’
‘Ah,	and	in	return	you	will	speak	of	the	Master	of	the	Deck?’
‘In	some	things	I	am	forbidden	to	elaborate—’
‘Because	they	relate	to	Sha’ik’s	own	secret	past?’


‘Fener ’s	tusk,	L’oric!	Who	in	this	rat’s	nest	might	be	listening	in	to	our
conversation	right	now?	It	is	madness	to	speak—’
‘No-one	is	listening,	Heboric.	I	have	made	certain	of	that.	I	am	not	careless
with	secrets.	I	have	known	much	of	your	recent	history	since	the	very
beginning—’
‘How?’
‘We	agreed	to	not	discuss	sources.	My	point	is,	no-one	else	is	aware	that
you	are	Malazan,	or	that	you	are	an	escapee	from	the	otataral	mines.	Except
Sha’ik,	of	course.	Since	she	escaped	with	you.	Thus,	I	value	privacy—with	my
knowledge	and	with	my	thoughts—and	am	ever	vigilant.	Oh,	there	have	been
probes,	sorcerous	questings—a	whole	menagerie	of	spells	as	various
inhabitants	seek	to	keep	track	of	rivals.	As	occurs	every	night.’
‘Then	your	absence	will	be	detected—’
‘I	sleep	restful	in	my	tent,	Heboric,	as	far	as	those	questings	are	concerned.
As	do	you	in	your	tent.	Each	alone.	Harmless.’
‘You	are	more	than	a	match	for	their	sorceries,	then.	Which	makes	you
more	powerful	than	any	of	them.’	He	heard	as	much	as	saw	L’oric’s	shrug,	and
after	a	moment	the	ex-priest	sighed.	‘If	you	wish	details	concerning	Sha’ik	and
this	new	Master	of	the	Deck,	then	it	must	be	the	three	of	us	who	meet.	And	for
that	to	occur,	you	will	have	to	reveal	more	of	yourself	to	the	Chosen	One	than
you	might	wish.’
‘Tell	me	this,	at	least.	This	new	Master—he	was	created	in	the	wake	of	the
Malazan	disaster	on	Genabackis.	Or	do	you	deny	that?	That	bridge	on	which	he
stands—he	was	of,	or	is	somehow	related	to,	the	Bridgeburners.	And	those
ghostly	guardians	are	all	that	remains	of	the	Bridgeburners,	for	they	were
destroyed	in	the	Pannion	Domin.’
‘I	cannot	be	certain	of	any	of	that,’	Heboric	replied,	‘but	what	you	suggest
seems	likely.’
‘So,	the	Malazan	influence	ever	grows—not	just	on	our	mundane	world,
but	throughout	the	warrens,	and	now	in	the	Deck	of	Dragons.’
‘You	make	the	mistake	of	so	many	of	the	empire’s	enemies,	L’oric.	You
assume	that	all	that	is	Malazan	is	perforce	unified,	in	intent	and	in	goal.	Things
are	far	more	complicated	than	you	imagine.	I	do	not	believe	this	Master	of	the
Deck	is	some	servant	of	the	Empress.	Indeed,	he	kneels	before	no-one.’
‘Then	why	the	Bridgeburner	guardians?’
Heboric	sensed	that	the	question	was	a	leading	one,	but	decided	he	would
play	along.	‘Some	loyalties	defy	Hood	himself—’
‘Ah,	meaning	he	was	a	soldier	in	that	illustrious	company.	Well,	things	are
beginning	to	make	sense.’


‘They	are?’
‘Tell	me,	have	you	heard	of	a	Spiritwalker	named	Kimloc?’
‘The	name	is	vaguely	familiar.	But	not	from	around	here.	Karakarang?
Rutu	Jelba?’
‘Now	resident	of	Ehrlitan.	His	history	is	not	relevant	here,	but	somehow	he
must	have	come	into	recent	contact	with	a	Bridgeburner.	There	is	no	other
explanation	for	what	he	has	done.	He	has	given	them	a	song,	Heboric.	A	Tanno
song,	and,	curiously,	it	begins	here.	In	Raraku.	Raraku,	friend,	is	the	birthplace
of	the	Bridgeburners.	Do	you	know	the	significance	of	such	a	song?’
Heboric	turned	away,	faced	the	hearth	and	its	dry	heat,	and	said	nothing.
‘Of	course,’	L’oric	went	on	after	a	moment,	‘that	significance	has	now
diminished	somewhat,	since	the	Bridgeburners	are	no	more.	There	can	be	no
sanctification…’
‘No,	I	suppose	not,’	Heboric	murmured.
‘For	the	song	to	be	sanctified,	a	Bridgeburner	would	have	to	return	to
Raraku,	to	the	birthplace	of	the	company.	And	that	does	not	seem	likely	now,
does	it?’
‘Why	is	it	necessary	a	Bridgeburner	return	to	Raraku?’
‘Tanno	sorcery	is…elliptical.	The	song	must	be	like	a	serpent	eating	its
tail.	Kimloc’s	Song	of	the	Bridgeburners	is	at	the	moment	without	an	end.	But
it	has	been	sung,	and	so	lives.’	L’oric	shrugged.	‘It’s	like	a	spell	that	remains
active,	awaiting	resolution.’
‘Tell	me	of	the	giant	of	jade.’
The	High	Mage	nodded.	He	poured	out	the	tea	and	set	the	cup	down	in
front	of	Heboric.	‘The	first	one	was	found	deep	in	the	otataral	mines—’
‘The	first	one!’
‘Aye.	And	the	contact	proved,	for	those	miners	who	ventured	too	close,
fatal.	Or,	rather,	they	disappeared.	Leaving	no	trace.	Sections	of	two	others
have	been	discovered—all	three	veins	are	now	sealed.	The	giants	are…
intruders	to	our	world.	From	some	other	realm.’
‘Arriving,’	Heboric	muttered,	‘only	to	be	wrapped	in	chains	of	otataral.’
‘Ah,	you	are	not	without	your	own	knowledge,	then.	Indeed,	it	seems	their
arrival	has,	each	time,	been	anticipated.	Someone,	or	something,	is	ensuring
that	the	threat	these	giants	impose	is	negated—’
But	Heboric	shook	his	head	at	that	and	said,	‘No,	I	think	you	are	wrong,
L’oric.	It	is	the	very	passage—the	portal	through	which	each	giant	comes—that
creates	the	otataral.’
‘Are	you	certain?’
‘Of	course	not.	There	are	too	many	mysteries	surrounding	the	nature	of


otataral	to	be	certain	of	anything.	There	was	a	scholar—I	forget	her	name—
who	once	suggested	that	otataral	is	created	by	the	annihilation	of	all	that	is
necessary	for	sorcery	to	operate.	Like	slag	with	all	the	ore	burned	out.	She
called	it	the	absolute	draining	of	energy—the	energy	that	rightfully	exists	in	all
things,	whether	animate	or	otherwise.’
‘And	had	she	a	theory	as	to	how	that	could	occur?’
‘Perhaps	the	magnitude	of	the	sorcery	unleashed—a	spell	that	is	alldevouring	of	the	energy	it	feeds	on.’
‘But	not	even	the	gods	could	wield	such	magic.’
‘True,	but	I	think	it	is	nevertheless	possible…through	ritual,	such	as	a
cadre—or	army—of	mortal	sorcerers	could	achieve.’
‘In	the	manner	of	the	Ritual	of	Tellann,’	L’oric	nodded.	‘Aye.’
‘Or,’	Heboric	said	softly	as	he	reached	for	the	cup,	‘the	calling	down	of	the
Crippled	God…’
L’oric	was	motionless,	staring	fixedly	at	the	tattooed	ex-priest.	He	said
nothing	for	a	long	time,	whilst	Heboric	sipped	the	hen’bara	tea.	He	finally
spoke.	‘Very	well,	there	is	one	last	piece	of	information	I	will	tell	you—I	see
now	the	need,	the	very	great	need	to	do	so,	though	it	shall…reveal	much	of
myself.’
Heboric	sat	and	listened,	and	as	L’oric	continued	speaking,	the	confines	of
his	squalid	hut	dimmed	to	insignificance,	the	heat	of	the	hearth	no	longer
reaching	him,	until	the	only	sensation	left	came	from	his	ghostly	hands.
Together,	there	at	the	ends	of	his	wrists,	they	became	the	weight	of	the	world.
	
The	rising	sun	washed	all	tones	from	the	sky	to	the	east.	Karsa	checked	his
supplies	one	last	time,	the	foodstuffs	and	waterskins,	the	additional	items	and
accoutrements	necessary	for	survival	in	a	hot,	arid	land.	A	kit	wholly	unlike
what	he	had	carried	for	most	of	his	life.	Even	the	sword	was	different—
ironwood	was	heavier	than	bloodwood,	its	edge	rougher	although	almost—but
not	quite—as	hard.	It	did	not	slice	the	air	with	the	ease	of	his	oiled	bloodwood
sword.	Yet	it	had	served	him	well	enough.	He	glanced	skyward;	dawn’s	colours
were	almost	entirely	gone,	now,	the	blue	directly	above	vanishing	behind
suspended	dust.
Here,	in	Raraku’s	heart,	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	had	stolen	the	colour	of
the	sun’s	own	fire,	leaving	the	landscape	pallid	and	deathly.	Colourless,	Karsa
Orlong?	Bairoth	Gild’s	ghostly	voice	was	filled	with	wry	humour.	Not	so.
Silver,	my	friend.	And	silver	is	the	colour	of	oblivion.	Of	chaos.	Silver	is	when
the	last	of	the	blood	is	washed	from	the	blade—


‘No	more	words,’	Karsa	growled.
Leoman	spoke	from	nearby.	‘Having	just	arrived,	Toblakai,	I	am	yet	to
even	speak.	Do	you	not	wish	my	farewell?’
Karsa	slowly	straightened,	slinging	his	pack	over	a	shoulder.	‘Words	need
not	be	spoken	aloud,	friend,	to	prove	unwelcome.	I	but	answered	my	own
thoughts.	That	you	are	here	pleases	me.	When	I	began	my	first	journey,	long
ago,	none	came	to	witness.’
‘I	asked	Sha’ik,’	Leoman	replied	from	where	he	stood	ten	paces	away,
having	just	passed	through	the	trail’s	gap	in	the	low,	crumbled	wall—the	mud
bricks,	Karsa	saw,	were	on	their	shaded	side	covered	with	rhizan,	clinging	with
wings	contracted,	their	mottled	colourings	making	them	almost	identical	to	the
ochre	bricks.	‘But	she	said	she	would	not	join	me	this	morning.	Even	stranger,
it	seemed	as	if	she	already	knew	of	your	intentions,	and	was	but	awaiting	my
visit.’
Shrugging,	Karsa	faced	Leoman.	‘A	witness	of	one	suffices.	We	may	now
speak	our	parting	words.	Do	not	hide	overlong	in	your	pit,	friend.	And	when
you	ride	out	with	your	warriors,	hold	to	the	Chosen	One’s	commands—too
many	jabs	from	the	small	knife	can	awaken	the	bear	no	matter	how	deep	it
sleeps.’
‘It	is	a	young	and	weak	bear,	this	time,	Toblakai.’
Karsa	shook	his	head.	‘I	have	come	to	respect	the	Malazans,	and	fear	that
you	would	awaken	them	to	themselves.’
‘I	shall	consider	your	words,’	Leoman	replied.	‘And	now	ask	that	you
consider	mine.	Beware	your	gods,	friend.	If	you	must	kneel	before	a	power,
first	look	upon	it	with	clear	eyes.	Tell	me,	what	would	your	kin	say	to	you	in
parting?’
‘“May	you	slay	a	thousand	children.”’
Leoman	blanched.	‘Journey	well,	Toblakai.’
‘I	shall.’
Karsa	knew	that	Leoman	could	neither	see	nor	sense	that	he	was	flanked
where	he	stood	at	the	trail’s	gap	in	the	wall.	Delum	Thord	on	the	left,	Bairoth
Gild	on	the	right.	Teblor	warriors,	blood-oil	smeared	in	crimson	tones	even
the	Whirlwind	could	not	eradicate,	and	they	stepped	forward	as	the	Teblor
swung	about	to	face	the	western	trail.
‘Lead	us.	Lead	your	dead,	Warleader.’
Bairoth’s	mocking	laugh	clicked	and	cracked	like	the	potsherds	breaking
beneath	Karsa	Orlong’s	moccasins.	The	Teblor	grimaced.	There	would	be,	it
seemed,	a	fierce	price	for	the	honour.
None	the	less,	he	realized	after	a	moment,	if	there	must	be	ghosts,	it	was


better	to	lead	them	than	to	be	chased	by	them.
‘If	that	is	how	you	would	see	it,	Karsa	Orlong.’
In	the	distance	rose	the	swirling	wall	of	the	Whirlwind.	It	would	be	good,
the	Teblor	reflected,	to	see	the	world	beyond	it	again,	after	all	these	months.	He
set	out,	westward,	as	the	day	was	born.
	
‘He	has	left,’	Kamist	Reloe	said	as	he	settled	onto	the	cushions.
Korbolo	Dom	eyed	the	mage,	his	blank	expression	betraying	nothing	of
the	contempt	he	felt	for	the	man.	Sorcerers	did	not	belong	in	war.	And	he	had
shown	the	truth	of	that	when	destroying	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	Even	so,	there	were
necessities	to	contemplate,	and	Reloe	was	the	least	of	them.	‘That	leaves	only
Leoman,’	he	rumbled	from	where	he	lay	on	the	pillows	and	cushions.
‘Who	departs	with	his	rats	in	a	few	days.’
‘Will	Febryl	now	advance	his	plans?’
The	mage	shrugged.	‘It	is	hard	to	say,	but	there	is	a	distinct	avidness	in	his
gaze	this	morning.’
Avidness.	Indeed.	Another	High	Mage,	another	insane	wielder	of	powers
better	left	untapped.	‘There	is	one	who	remains,	who	perhaps	presents	us	with
the	greatest	threat	of	them	all,	and	that	is	Ghost	Hands.’
Kamist	Reloe	sneered.	‘A	blind,	doddering	fool.	Does	he	even	know	that
hen’bara	tea	is	itself	the	source	of	the	thinning	fabric	between	his	world	and	all
that	he	would	flee	from?	Before	long,	his	mind	will	vanish	entirely	within	the
nightmares,	and	we	need	concern	ourselves	with	him	no	more.’
‘She	has	secrets,’	Korbolo	Dom	muttered,	leaning	forward	to	collect	a
bowl	of	figs.	‘Far	beyond	those	gifted	her	by	the	Whirlwind.	Febryl	proceeds
headlong,	unmindful	of	his	own	ignorance.	When	the	battle	with	the	Adjunct’s
army	is	finally	joined,	success	or	failure	will	be	decided	by	the	Dogslayers—
by	my	army.	Tavore’s	otataral	will	defeat	the	Whirlwind—I	am	certain	of	it.
All	that	I	ask	of	you	and	Febryl	and	Bidithal	is	that	I	am	unobstructed	in
commanding	the	forces,	in	shaping	that	battle.’
‘We	are	both	aware,’	Kamist	growled,	‘that	this	struggle	goes	far	beyond
the	Whirlwind.’
‘Aye,	so	it	does.	Beyond	all	of	Seven	Cities,	Mage.	Do	not	lose	sight	of	our
final	goal,	of	the	throne	that	will	one	day	belong	to	us.’
Kamist	Reloe	shrugged.	‘That	is	our	secret,	old	friend.	We	need	only
proceed	with	caution,	and	all	that	opposes	us	will	likely	vanish	before	our	very
eyes.	Febryl	kills	Sha’ik,	Tavore	kills	Febryl,	and	we	destroy	Tavore	and	her
army.’


‘And	then	become	Laseen’s	saviour—as	we	crush	this	rebellion	utterly.
Gods,	I	swear	I	will	see	this	entire	land	empty	of	life	if	need	be.	A	triumphant
return	to	Unta,	an	audience	with	the	Empress,	then	the	driven	knife.	And	who
will	stop	us?	The	Talon	are	poised	to	cut	down	the	Claws.	Whiskeyjack	and	the
Bridgeburners	are	no	more,	and	Dujek	remains	a	continent	away.	How	fares
the	Jhistal	priest?’
‘Mallick	travels	without	opposition,	ever	southward.	He	is	a	clever	man,	a
wise	man,	and	he	will	play	out	his	role	to	perfection.’
Korbolo	Dom	made	no	reply	to	that.	He	despised	Mallick	Rel,	but	could
not	deny	his	usefulness.	Still,	the	man	was	not	one	to	be	trusted…to	which	High
Fist	Pormqual	would	attest,	were	the	fool	still	alive.	‘Send	for	Fayelle.	I	would
a	woman’s	company	now.	Leave	me,	Kamist	Reloe.’
The	High	Mage	hesitated,	and	Korbolo	scowled.
‘There	is	the	matter,’	Kamist	whispered,	‘of	L’oric…’
‘Then	deal	with	him!’	Korbolo	snapped.	‘Begone!’
Bowing	his	head,	the	High	Mage	backed	out	of	the	tent.
Sorcerers.	Could	he	find	a	way	to	destroy	magic,	the	Napan	would	not
hesitate.	The	extinction	of	powers	that	could	slaughter	a	thousand	soldiers	in	an
instant	would	return	the	fate	of	mortals	to	the	mortals	themselves,	and	this
could	not	but	be	a	good	thing.	The	death	of	warrens,	the	dissolution	of	gods	as
memory	of	them	and	their	meddling	slowly	vanished,	the	withering	of	all
magic…the	world	then	would	belong	to	men	such	as	Korbolo	himself.	And	the
empire	he	would	shape	would	permit	no	ambiguity,	no	ambivalence.
His	will	unopposed,	the	Napan	could	end,	once	and	for	all,	the	dissonant
clangour	that	so	plagued	humanity—now	and	throughout	its	history.
I	will	bring	order.	And	from	that	unity,	we	shall	rid	the	world	of	every	other
race,	every	other	people,	we	shall	overpower	and	crush	every	discordant	vision,
for	there	can	in	the	end	be	only	one	way,	one	way	of	living,	of	ruling	this	realm.
And	that	way	belongs	to	me.
A	good	soldier	well	knew	that	success	was	found	in	careful	planning,	in
incremental	steps.
Opposition	had	a	way	of	stepping	aside	all	on	its	own.	You	are	now	at
Hood’s	feet,	Whiskeyjack.	Where	I	have	always	wanted	you.	You	and	your
damned	company,	feeding	worms	in	a	foreign	land.	None	left	to	stop	me,	now…


Chapter	Eleven

This	was	a	path	she	did	not	welcome.
THE	SHA’IK	REBELLION
T URSABAAL
The	breaths	of	the	horses	plumed	in	the	chill	morning	air.	Dawn	had	but	just
arrived,	the	air	hinting	nothing	of	the	heat	the	coming	day	would	deliver.
Wrapped	in	the	furs	of	a	bhederin,	old	sweat	making	the	lining	of	his	helm
clammy	as	the	touch	of	a	corpse,	Fist	Gamet	sat	motionless	on	his	Wickan
mount,	his	gaze	fixed	on	the	Adjunct.
The	hill	just	south	of	Erougimon	where	Coltaine	had	died	had	come	to	be
known	as	the	Fall.	Countless	humps	on	the	summit	and	slopes	indicated	where
bodies	had	been	buried,	the	metal-strewn	earth	already	cloaked	in	grasses	and
flowers.
Ants	had	colonized	this	entire	hill,	or	so	it	seemed.	The	ground	swarmed
with	them,	their	red	and	black	bodies	coated	in	dust	yet	glittering	none	the	less
as	they	set	about	their	daily	tasks.
Gamet,	the	Adjunct	and	Tene	Baralta	had	ridden	out	from	the	city	before
dawn.	Outside	the	gates	to	the	west,	the	army	had	begun	to	stir.	The	march
would	begin	this	day.	The	journey	north,	to	Raraku,	to	Sha’ik	and	the
Whirlwind.	To	vengeance.
Perhaps	it	was	the	rumours	that	had	drawn	Tavore	out	here	to	the	Fall,	but
already	Gamet	regretted	her	decision	to	bring	him	along.	This	place	showed
him	nothing	he	wanted	to	see.	Nor,	he	suspected,	was	the	Adjunct	well	pleased
with	what	they	had	found.
Red-stained	braids,	woven	into	chains,	draped	across	the	summit,	and
coiled	around	the	twin	stumps	of	the	cross	that	had	once	stood	there.	Dog
skulls	crowded	with	indecipherable	hieroglyphs	looked	out	along	the	crest
through	empty	sockets.	Crow	feathers	dangled	from	upright-thrust	broken
arrow	shafts.	Ragged	banners	lay	pinned	to	the	ground	on	which	were	painted
various	representations	of	a	broken	Wickan	long-knife.	Icons,	fetishes,	a	mass


of	detritus	to	mark	the	death	of	a	single	man.
And	all	of	it	was	aswarm	in	ants.	Like	mindless	keepers	of	this	now
hallowed	ground.
The	three	riders	sat	in	their	saddles	in	silence.
Finally,	after	a	long	while,	Tavore	spoke.	‘Tene	Baralta.’	Inflectionless.
‘Aye,	Adjunct?’
‘Who—who	is	responsible	for…for	all	of	this?	Malazans	from	Aren?
Your	Red	Blades?’
Tene	Baralta	did	not	immediately	reply.	Instead,	he	dismounted	and	strode
forward,	his	eyes	on	the	ground.	Near	one	of	the	dog	skulls	he	halted	and
crouched	down.	‘Adjunct,	these	skulls—the	runes	on	them	are	Khundryl.’	He
pointed	towards	the	wooden	stumps.	‘The	woven	chains,	Kherahn	Dhobri.’	A
gesture	to	the	slope.	‘The	banners…unknown,	possibly	Bhilard.	Crow
feathers?	The	beads	at	their	stems	are	Semk.’
‘Semk!’	Gamet	could	not	keep	the	disbelief	from	his	voice.	‘From	the	other
side	of	Vathar	River!	Tene,	you	must	be	in	error…’
The	large	warrior	shrugged.	He	straightened	and	gestured	towards	the
rumpled	hills	directly	north	of	them.	‘The	pilgrims	only	come	at	night—
unseen,	which	is	how	they	will	have	it.	They’re	hiding	out	there,	even	now.
Waiting	for	night.’
Tavore	cleared	her	throat.	‘Semk.	Bhilard—these	tribes	fought	against	him.
And	now	they	come	to	worship.	How	is	this?	Explain,	please,	Tene	Baralta.’
‘I	cannot,	Adjunct.’	He	eyed	her,	then	added,	‘But,	from	what	I	understand,
this	is…modest,	compared	with	what	lines	the	Aren	Way.’
There	was	silence	once	more,	though	Gamet	did	not	need	to	hear	her	speak
to	know	Tavore’s	thoughts.
This—this	is	the	path	we	now	take.	We	must	walk,	step	by	step,	the	legacy.
We?	No.	Tavore.	Alone.	‘This	is	no	longer	Coltaine’s	war!’	she	said	to	Temul.
But	it	seems	it	remains	just	that.	And	she	now	realizes,	down	in	the	depths	of
her	soul,	that	she	will	stride	that	man’s	shadow…all	the	way	to	Raraku.
‘You	will	both	leave	me	now,’	the	Adjunct	said.	‘I	shall	rejoin	you	on	the
Aren	Way.’
Gamet	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Adjunct,	the	Crow	Clan	still	claim	the	right	to
ride	at	the	forefront.	They	will	not	accept	Temul	as	their	commander.’
‘I	will	see	to	their	disposition,’	she	replied.	‘For	now,	go.’
He	watched	Tene	Baralta	swing	back	onto	his	horse.	They	exchanged	a
glance,	then	both	wheeled	their	mounts	and	set	off	at	a	canter	along	the	track
leading	to	the	west	gate.
Gamet	scanned	the	rock-studded	ground	rolling	past	beneath	his	horse’s


hoofs.	This	was	where	the	historian	Duiker	drove	the	refugees	towards	the	city
—this	very	sweep	of	empty	ground.	Where,	at	the	last,	that	old	man	drew	rein
on	his	weary,	loyal	mare—the	mare	that	Temul	now	rode—and	watched	as	the
last	of	his	charge	was	helped	through	the	gate.
Whereupon,	it	was	said,	he	finally	rode	into	the	city.
Gamet	wondered	what	had	gone	through	the	man’s	mind	at	that	moment.
Knowing	that	Coltaine	and	the	remnants	of	the	Seventh	were	still	out	there,
fighting	their	desperate	rearguard	action.	Knowing	that	they	had	achieved	the
impossible.
Duiker	had	delivered	the	refugees.
Only	to	end	up	staked	to	a	tree.	It	was	beyond	him,	Gamet	realized,	to
comprehend	the	depth	of	that	betrayal.
A	body	never	recovered.	No	bones	laid	to	rest.
‘There	is	so	much,’	Tene	Baralta	rumbled	at	Gamet’s	side.
‘So	much?’
‘To	give	answer	to,	Gamet.	Indeed,	it	takes	words	from	the	throat,	yet	the
silence	it	leaves	behind—that	silence	screams.’
Discomforted	by	Tene’s	admission,	Gamet	said	nothing.
‘Pray	remind	me,’	the	Red	Blade	went	on,	‘that	Tavore	is	equal	to	this
task.’
Is	that	even	possible?	‘She	is.’	She	must	be.	Else	we	are	lost.
‘One	day,	Gamet,	you	shall	have	to	tell	me	what	she	has	done,	to	earn	such
loyalty	as	you	display.’
Gods,	what	answer	to	make	to	that?	Damn	you,	Tene,	can	you	not	see	the
truth	before	you?	She	has	done…nothing.	I	beg	you.	Leave	an	old	man	to	his
faith.
	
‘Wish	whatever	you	like,’	Gesler	growled,	‘but	faith	is	for	fools.’
Strings	cleared	the	dust	from	his	throat	and	spat	onto	the	side	of	the	track.
Their	pace	was	torturously	slow,	the	three	squads	trailing	the	wagon	loaded
down	with	their	supplies.	‘What’s	your	point?’	he	asked	the	sergeant	beside
him.	‘A	soldier	knows	but	one	truth,	and	that	truth	is,	without	faith,	you	are
already	as	good	as	dead.	Faith	in	the	soldier	at	your	side.	But	even	more
important—and	no	matter	how	delusional	it	is	in	truth—there	is	the	faith	that
you	cannot	be	killed.	Those	two	and	those	two	alone—they	are	the	legs	holding
up	every	army.’
The	amber-skinned	man	grunted,	then	waved	at	the	nearest	of	the	trees
lining	Aren	Way.	‘Look	there	and	tell	me	what	you	see—no,	not	those	Hood-


damned	fetishes—but	what’s	still	visible	under	all	that	mess.	The	spike	holes,
the	dark	stains	of	bile	and	blood.	Ask	the	ghost	of	the	soldier	who	was	on	that
tree—ask	that	soldier	about	faith.’
‘A	faith	betrayed	does	not	destroy	the	notion	of	faith	itself,’	Strings
retorted.	‘In	fact,	it	does	the	very	opposite—’
‘Maybe	for	you,	but	there	are	some	things	you	can’t	step	around	with
words	and	lofty	ideals,	Fid.	And	that	comes	down	to	who	is	in	that	vanguard
somewhere	up	ahead.	The	Adjunct.	Who	just	lost	an	argument	with	that	pack	of
hoary	Wickans.	You’ve	been	lucky—you	had	Whiskeyjack,	and	Dujek.	Do	you
know	who	my	last	commander	was—before	I	was	sentenced	to	the	coastal
guard?	Korbolo	Dom.	I’d	swear	that	man	had	a	shrine	to	Whiskeyjack	in	his
tent—but	not	the	Whiskeyjack	you	know.	Korbolo	saw	him	differently.
Unfulfilled	potential,	that’s	what	he	saw.’
Strings	glanced	over	at	Gesler.	Stormy	and	Tarr	were	walking	in	step
behind	the	two	sergeants,	close	enough	to	hear,	though	neither	had	ventured	a
comment	or	opinion.	‘Unfulfilled	potential?	What	in	Beru’s	name	are	you
talking	about?’
‘Not	me.	Korbolo	Dom.	“If	only	the	bastard	had	been	hard	enough,”	he
used	to	say,	“he	could’ve	taken	the	damned	throne.	Should’ve.”	As	far	as	Dom
is	concerned,	Whiskeyjack	betrayed	him,	betrayed	us	all—and	that’s	something
that	renegade	Napan	won’t	forgive.’
‘Too	bad	for	him,’	Strings	growled,	‘since	there’s	a	good	chance	the
Empress	will	send	the	whole	Genabackan	army	over	in	time	for	the	final	battle.
Dom	can	take	his	complaints	to	Whiskeyjack	himself.’
‘A	pleasant	thought,’	Gesler	laughed.	‘But	my	point	was,	you’ve	had
commanders	worthy	of	the	faith	you	put	in	them.	Most	of	the	rest	of	us	didn’t
have	that	luxury.	So	we	got	a	different	feeling	about	it	all.	That’s	it,	that’s	all	I
was	trying	to	say.’
The	Aren	Way	marched	past	on	both	sides.	Transformed	into	a	vast,	openair	temple,	each	tree	cluttered	with	fetishes,	cloths	braided	into	chains,	figures
painted	on	the	rough	bark	to	approximate	the	soldiers	who	had	once	writhed
there	on	spikes	driven	in	by	Korbolo	Dom’s	warriors.	Most	of	the	soldiers
ahead	and	behind	Strings	walked	in	silence.	Despite	the	vast,	empty	expanse	of
blue	sky	overhead,	the	road	was	oppressive.
There	had	been	talk	of	cutting	the	trees	down,	but	one	of	the	Adjunct’s	first
commands	upon	arriving	in	Aren	had	been	to	forbid	it.	Strings	wondered	if	she
now	regretted	her	decision.
His	gaze	travelled	up	to	one	of	the	Fourteenth’s	new	standards,	barely
visible	through	clouds	of	roiling	dust	up	ahead.	She	had	understood	the	whole


thing	with	the	finger	bones	well	enough,	understood	the	turning	of	the	omen.
The	new	standard	well	attested	to	that.	A	grimy,	thin-limbed	figure	holding	a
bone	aloft,	the	details	in	shades	of	dun	colours	that	were	barely	visible	on	the
yellow	ochre	field,	the	border	a	woven	braid	of	the	imperial	magenta	and	dark
grey.	A	defiant	figure	standing	before	a	sandstorm.	That	the	standard	could	as
easily	apply	to	Sha’ik’s	army	of	the	Apocalypse	was	a	curious	coincidence.	As
if	Tavore	and	Sha’ik—the	two	armies,	the	forces	in	opposition—are	in	some	way
mirrored	reflections	of	the	other.
There	were	many	strange…occurrences	in	all	this,	nibbling	and	squirming
beneath	Strings’s	skin	like	bot-fly	larvae,	and	it	seemed	indeed	that	he	was
feeling	strangely	fevered	throughout	the	day.	Strains	of	a	barely	heard	song
rose	up	from	the	depths	of	his	mind	on	occasion,	a	haunting	song	that	made	his
flesh	prickle.	And	stranger	still,	the	song	was	entirely	unfamiliar.
Mirrored	reflections.	Perhaps	not	just	Tavore	and	Sha’ik.	What	of	Tavore
and	Coltaine?	Here	we	are,	reversing	the	path	on	that	blood-soaked	road.	And
it	was	that	road	that	proved	Coltaine	to	most	of	those	he	led.	Will	we	see	the
same	with	our	journey?	How	will	we	see	Tavore	the	day	we	stand	before	the
Whirlwind?	And	what	of	my	own	return?	To	Raraku,	the	desert	that	saw	me
destroyed	only	to	rise	once	more,	mysteriously	renewed—a	renewal	that
persists,	since	for	an	old	man	I	neither	look	nor	feel	old.	And	so	it	remains	for
all	of	us	Bridgeburners,	as	if	Raraku	stole	something	of	our	mortality,	and
replaced	it	with…with	something	else.
He	glanced	back	to	check	on	his	squad.	None	were	lagging,	which	was	a
good	sign.	He	doubted	any	of	them	were	in	the	shape	required	for	the	journey
they	were	now	on.	The	early	days	would	prove	the	most	difficult,	before
marching	in	full	armour	and	weapons	became	second	nature—not	that	it	would
ever	prove	a	comfortable	second	nature—this	land	was	murderously	hot	and
dry,	and	the	handful	of	minor	healers	in	each	of	the	companies	would	recall
this	march	as	a	seemingly	endless	nightmare	of	fending	off	heat	prostration
and	dehydration.
There	was	no	way	yet	to	measure	the	worth	of	his	squad.	Koryk	certainly
had	the	look,	the	nature,	of	the	mailed	fist	that	every	squad	needed.	And	the
stubborn	set	to	Tarr ’s	blockish	features	hinted	at	a	will	not	easily	turned	aside.
There	was	something	about	the	lass,	Smiles,	that	reminded	Strings	all	too
much	of	Sorry—the	remorseless	chill	of	her	eyes	belonged	to	those	of	a
murderer,	and	he	wondered	at	her	past.	Bottle	had	all	the	diffident	bluster	of	a
young	mage,	probably	one	versed	in	a	handful	of	spells	from	some	minor
warren.	The	last	soldier	in	his	squad,	of	course,	the	sergeant	had	no	worries
about.	He’d	known	men	like	Cuttle	all	his	life.	A	burlier,	more	miserable


version	of	Hedge.	Having	Cuttle	there	was	like…coming	home.
The	testing	would	come,	and	it	would	probably	be	brutal,	but	it	would
temper	those	who	survived.
They	were	emerging	from	the	Aren	Way,	and	Gesler	gestured	to	the	last
tree	on	their	left.	‘That’s	where	we	found	him,’	he	said	in	a	low	tone.
‘Who?’
‘Duiker.	We	didn’t	let	on,	since	the	lad—Truth—was	so	hopeful.	Next	time
we	came	out,	though,	the	historian’s	body	was	gone.	Stolen.	You’ve	seen	the
markets	in	Aren—the	withered	pieces	of	flesh	the	hawkers	claim	belonged	to
Coltaine,	or	Bult,	or	Duiker.	The	broken	long-knives,	the	scraps	of	feathered
cape…’
Strings	was	thoughtful	for	a	moment,	then	he	sighed.	‘I	saw	Duiker	but
once,	and	that	at	a	distance.	Just	a	soldier	the	Emperor	decided	was	worth
schooling.’
‘A	soldier	indeed.	He	stood	on	the	front	line	with	all	the	others.	A	crusty
old	bastard	with	his	short-sword	and	shield.’
‘Clearly,	something	about	him	caught	Coltaine’s	eye—after	all,	Duiker	was
the	one	Coltaine	chose	to	lead	the	refugees.’
‘I’d	guess	it	wasn’t	Duiker ’s	soldiering	that	decided	Coltaine,	Strings.	It
was	that	he	was	the	Imperial	Historian.	He	wanted	the	tale	to	be	told,	and	told
right.’
‘Well,	it’s	turned	out	that	Coltaine	told	his	own	tale—he	didn’t	need	a
historian,	did	he?’
Gesler	shrugged.	‘As	you	say.	We	weren’t	in	their	company	long,	just	long
enough	to	take	on	a	shipload	of	wounded.	I	talked	a	bit	with	Duiker,	and
Captain	Lull.	And	then	Coltaine	broke	his	hand	punching	me	in	the	face—’
‘He	what?’	Strings	laughed.	‘No	doubt	you	deserved	it—’
Stormy	spoke	behind	them.	‘Broke	his	hand,	aye,	Gesler.	And	your	nose,
too.’
‘My	nose	has	been	broke	so	many	times	it	does	it	on	instinct,’	the	sergeant
replied.	‘It	wasn’t	much	of	a	punch.’
Stormy	snorted.	‘He	dropped	you	to	the	ground	like	a	sack	of	turnips!	That
punch	rivalled	Urko’s,	the	time	he—’
‘Not	even	close,’	Gesler	drawled.	‘I	once	saw	Urko	punch	down	the	side	of
a	mudbrick	house.	Three	blows,	no	more	than	four,	anyway,	and	the	whole
thing	toppled	in	a	cloud	of	dust.	That	Napan	bastard	could	punch.’
‘And	that’s	important	to	you?’	Strings	asked.
Gesler ’s	nod	was	serious.	‘The	only	way	any	commander	will	ever	earn
my	respect,	Fid.’


‘Planning	on	testing	the	Adjunct	soon?’
‘Maybe.	Of	course,	I’ll	make	allowances,	she	being	nobleborn	and	all.’
Once	beyond	Aren	Way’s	battered	gate	and	the	abandoned	ruins	of	a	small
village,	they	could	now	see	the	Seti	and	Wickan	outriders	on	their	flanks—a
comforting	sight	to	Strings.	The	raiding	and	sniping	could	begin	at	any	time,
now	that	the	army	had	left	the	walls	of	Aren	behind.	Most	of	the	tribes	had,	if
the	rumours	were	true,	conveniently	forgotten	the	truces	they	had	won	from
the	Malazan	Empire.	The	old	ways	did	naught	but	sleep	restless	beneath	the
surface	of	such	peoples.
The	landscape	ahead	and	to	either	side	was	sun-blasted	and	broken,	a	place
where	even	wild	goats	grew	lean	and	listless.	The	mounded,	flat-topped	heaps
of	rubble	that	marked	long-dead	cities	were	visible	on	every	horizon.	Ancient
raised	roads,	now	mostly	dismantled,	stitched	the	rugged	hillsides	and	ridges.
Strings	wiped	sweat	from	his	brow.	‘Green	as	we	are,	it’s	about	time	she
called—’
Horns	sounded	along	the	massive	train’s	length.	Motion	ceased,	and	the
shouts	of	the	water	crews	rose	into	the	dusty	air	as	they	scrambled	for	the
barrels.	Strings	swung	about	and	studied	his	squad—they	were	already	on	the
ground,	sitting	or	sprawled,	their	long-sleeved	undershirts	darkened	with
sweat.
Among	Gesler ’s	and	Borduke’s	squads,	the	reaction	to	the	rest-halt	had
been	identical,	and	Borduke’s	mage,	Balgrid—slightly	overweight	and	clearly
unused	to	the	armour	he	was	wearing—looked	pale	and	shivering.	That
squad’s	healer,	a	quiet,	small	man	named	Lutes,	was	already	moving	towards
him.
‘A	Seti	summer,’	Koryk	said,	offering	Strings	a	carnivorous	smile.	‘When
the	grasslands	are	driven	to	dust	by	the	herds,	when	the	earth	underfoot	clicks
like	breaking	metal.’
‘Hood	take	you,’	Smiles	snapped.	‘This	land’s	full	of	dead	things	for	a
reason.’
‘Aye,’	the	Seti	half-blood	replied,	‘only	the	tough	survive.	There	are	tribes
aplenty	out	there—they’ve	left	enough	sign	in	passing.’
‘You	have	seen	that,	have	you?’	Strings	said.	‘Good.	You’re	now	the
squad’s	scout.’
Koryk’s	white	grin	broadened.	‘If	you	insist,	Sergeant.’
‘Unless	it’s	night,’	Strings	added.	‘Then	it’ll	be	Smiles.	And	Bottle,
assuming	his	warren	is	suitable.’
Bottle	scowled,	then	nodded.	‘Well	enough,	Sergeant.’
‘So	what’s	Cuttle’s	role,	then?’	Smiles	demanded.	‘Lying	around	like	a


beached	porpoise?’
Beached	porpoise?	Grew	up	by	the	sea,	did	you?	Strings	glanced	over	at
the	veteran	soldier.	The	man	was	asleep.	I	used	to	do	that,	back	in	the	days
when	nothing	was	expected	of	me,	when	I	wasn’t	in	charge	of	a	damned	thing.	I
miss	those	days.	‘Cuttle’s	task,’	Strings	replied,	‘is	keeping	the	rest	of	you	alive
when	I’m	not	close	by.’
‘Then	why	isn’t	he	the	corporal?’	Smiles	wanted	to	know,	a	belligerent	set
to	her	petite	features.
‘Because	he’s	a	sapper,	and	you	don’t	want	a	sapper	for	a	corporal,	lass.’
Of	course,	I’m	a	sapper,	too.	Best	keep	that	to	myself…
Three	soldiers	from	the	company’s	infantry	arrived	with	waterskins.
‘Drink	it	down	slow,’	Strings	instructed.	Gesler	caught	his	eye	from	a	few
paces	away,	near	the	wagon,	and	Strings	headed	over.	Borduke	joined	them.
‘Well,	this	is	curious,’	Gesler	muttered.	‘Borduke’s	sickly	mage—his
warren’s	Meanas.	And	my	mage	is	Tavos	Pond,	and	he’s	the	same.	Now,
Strings,	your	lad,	Bottle…’
‘I’m	not	sure	yet.’
‘He’s	also	Meanas,’	Borduke	growled,	pulling	at	his	beard	in	a	habitual
gesture	Strings	knew	would	come	to	irritate	him.	‘Balgrid’s	confirmed	it.
They’re	all	Meanas.’
‘Like	I	said.’	Gesler	sighed.	‘Curious.’
‘That	could	be	put	to	use,’	Strings	said.	‘Get	all	three	of	them	working	on
rituals—illusions	are	damned	useful,	when	done	right.	Quick	Ben	could	pull	a
few—the	key	is	in	the	details.	We	should	drag	them	all	together	tonight—’
‘Ah,’	said	a	voice	from	beyond	the	wagon,	and	Lieutenant	Ranal	strode
into	view,	‘all	my	sergeants	together	in	one	place.	Convenient.’
‘Come	to	eat	dust	with	the	rest	of	us?’	Gesler	asked.	‘Damned	generous	of
you.’
‘Don’t	think	I	haven’t	heard	about	you,’	Ranal	sneered.
‘Had	it	been	my	choice,	you’d	be	one	of	the	lads	carrying	those	waterskins,
Gesler—’
‘You’d	go	thirsty	if	I	was,’	the	sergeant	replied.
Ranal’s	face	darkened.	‘Captain	Keneb	wants	to	know	if	there’s	any	mages
in	your	squads.	The	Adjunct	needs	a	tally	of	what’s	available.’
‘None—’
‘Three,’	Strings	interrupted,	ignoring	Gesler ’s	glare.	‘All	minor,	as	would
be	expected.	Tell	the	captain	we’ll	be	good	for	covert	actions.’
‘Keep	your	opinions	to	yourself,	Strings.	Three,	you	said.	Very	well.’	He
wheeled	about	and	marched	off.


Gesler	rounded	on	Strings.	‘We	could	lose	those	mages—’
‘We	won’t.	Go	easy	on	the	lieutenant,	Gesler,	at	least	for	now.	The	lad
knows	nothing	of	being	an	officer	in	the	field.	Imagine,	telling	sergeants	to
keep	their	opinions	quiet.	With	Oponn’s	luck,	Keneb	will	explain	a	few	things
to	the	lieutenant,	eventually.’
‘Assuming	Keneb’s	any	better,’	Borduke	muttered.	He	combed	his	beard.
‘Rumour	has	it	he	was	the	only	one	of	his	company	to	survive.	And	you	know
what	that	likely	means.’
‘Let’s	wait	and	see,’	Strings	advised.	‘It’s	a	bit	early	to	start	honing	the
knives—’
‘Honing	the	knives,’	Gesler	said,	‘now	you’re	talking	a	language	I
understand.	I’m	prepared	to	wait	and	see,	as	you	suggest,	Fid.	For	now.	All
right,	let’s	gather	the	mages	tonight,	and	if	they	can	actually	get	along	without
killing	each	other,	then	we	might	find	ourselves	a	step	or	two	ahead.’
Horns	sounded	to	announce	the	resumption	of	the	march.	Soldiers	groaned
and	swore	as	they	clambered	upright	once	more.
	
The	first	day	of	travel	was	done,	and	to	Gamet	it	seemed	they	had	travelled	a
paltry,	pathetic	distance	from	Aren.	To	be	expected,	of	course.	The	army	was	a
long	way	from	finding	its	feet.
As	am	I.	Saddle	sore	and	light-headed	from	the	heat,	the	Fist	watched	from
a	slight	rise	alongside	the	line	of	march	as	the	camp	slowly	took	shape.
Pockets	of	order	amidst	a	chaotic	sea	of	motion.	Seti	and	Wickan	horse
warriors	continued	to	range	well	beyond	the	outlying	pickets,	far	too	few	in
number,	however,	to	give	him	much	comfort.	And	those	Wickans—
grandfathers	and	grandmothers	one	and	all.	Hood	knows,	I	might	well	have
crossed	blades	with	some	of	those	old	warriors.	Those	ancient	ones,	they	were
never	settled	with	the	idea	of	being	in	the	Empire.	They	were	here	for	another
reason	entirely.	For	the	memory	of	Coltaine.	And	the	children—well,	they
were	being	fed	the	singular	poison	of	bitter	old	fighters	filled	with	tales	of	past
glory.	And	so,	ones	who’ve	never	known	the	terror	of	war	and	ones	who’ve
forgotten.	A	dreadful	pairing…
He	stretched	to	ease	the	kinks	in	his	spine,	then	forced	himself	into	motion.
Down	from	the	ridge,	along	the	edge	of	the	rubble-filled	ditch,	to	where	the
Adjunct’s	command	tent	sat,	its	canvas	pristine,	Temul’s	Wickans	standing
guard	around	it.
Temul	was	not	in	sight.	Gamet	pitied	the	lad.	He	was	already	fighting	a
half-dozen	skirmishes,	without	a	blade	drawn,	and	he	was	losing.	And	there’s


not	a	damned	thing	any	of	us	can	do	about	it.
He	approached	the	tent’s	entrance,	scratched	at	the	flap	and	waited.
‘Come	in,	Gamet,’	the	Adjunct’s	voice	called	from	within.
She	was	kneeling	in	the	fore-chamber	before	a	long,	stone	box,	and	was
just	settling	the	lid	into	place	when	he	stepped	through	the	entrance.	A
momentary	glimpse—her	otataral	sword—then	the	lid	was	in	place.	‘There	is
some	softened	wax—there	in	that	pot	over	the	brazier.	Bring	it	over,	Gamet.’
He	did	so,	and	watched	as	she	brushed	the	inset	join	between	lid	and	base,
until	the	container	was	entirely	sealed.	Then	she	rose	and	swept	the	windblown
sand	from	her	knees.	‘I	am	already	weary	of	this	pernicious	sand,’	she
muttered.
She	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘There	is	watered	wine	behind
you,	Gamet.	Pour	yourself	some.’
‘Do	I	look	in	need,	Adjunct?’
‘You	do.	Ah,	I	well	know,	you	sought	out	a	quiet	life	when	you	joined	our
household.	And	here	I	have	dragged	you	into	a	war.’
He	felt	himself	bridling	and	stood	straighter.	‘I	am	equal	to	this,	Adjunct.’
‘I	believe	you.	None	the	less,	pour	yourself	some	wine.	We	await	news.’
He	swung	about	in	search	of	the	clay	jug,	found	it	and	strode	over.	‘News,
Adjunct?’
She	nodded,	and	he	saw	the	concern	on	her	plain	features,	a	momentary
revelation	that	he	turned	away	from	as	he	poured	out	a	cup	of	wine.	Show	me
no	seams,	lass.	I	need	to	hold	on	to	my	certainty.
‘Come	stand	beside	me,’	she	instructed,	a	sudden	urgency	in	her	tone.
He	joined	her.	They	faced	the	clear	space	in	the	centre	of	the	chamber.
Where	a	portal	flowered,	spreading	outward	like	liquid	staining	a	sheet	of
gauze,	murky	grey,	sighing	out	a	breath	of	stale,	dead	air.	A	tall,	green-clad
figure	emerged.	Strange,	angular	features,	skin	the	shade	of	coal-dust	marble;
the	man’s	broad	mouth	had	the	look	of	displaying	a	perpetual	half-smile,	but
he	was	not	smiling	now.
He	paused	to	brush	grey	dust	from	his	cloak	and	leggings,	then	lifted	his
head	and	met	Tavore’s	gaze.	‘Adjunct,	greetings	from	the	Empress.	And
myself,	of	course.’
‘Topper.	I	sense	your	mission	here	will	be	an	unpleasant	one.	Fist	Gamet,
will	you	kindly	pour	our	guest	some	wine?’
‘Of	course.’	Gods	below,	the	damned	master	of	the	Claw.	He	glanced	down
at	his	own	cup,	then	offered	it	to	Topper.	‘I	have	yet	to	sip.	Here.’
The	tall	man	tilted	his	head	in	thanks	and	accepted	the	cup.
Gamet	went	to	where	the	jug	waited.


‘You	have	come	directly	from	the	Empress?’	Tavore	asked	the	Clawmaster.
‘I	have,	and	before	that,	from	across	the	ocean…from	Genabackis,	where	I
spent	a	most	glum	evening	in	the	company	of	High	Mage	Tayschrenn.	Would	it
shock	you	to	know	that	he	and	I	got	drunk	that	night?’
Gamet’s	head	turned	at	that.	It	seemed	such	an	unlikely	image	in	his	mind
that	he	was	indeed	shocked.
The	Adjunct	looked	equally	startled,	then	she	visibly	steeled	herself.	‘What
news	have	you	to	tell	me?’
Topper	swallowed	down	a	large	mouthful	of	wine,	then	scowled.	‘Watered.
Ah	well.	Losses,	Adjunct.	On	Genabackis.	Terrible	losses…’
	
Lying	motionless	in	a	grassy	depression	thirty	paces	beyond	the	squad’s	fire,
Bottle	closed	his	eyes.	He	could	hear	his	name	being	called.	Strings—who	was
called	Fid	by	Gesler—wanted	him,	but	the	mage	was	not	ready.	Not	yet.	He	had
a	different	conversation	to	listen	to,	and	managing	that—without	being	detected
—was	no	easy	task.
His	grandmother	back	in	Malaz	City	would	have	been	proud.	‘Never	mind
those	damned	warrens,	child,	the	deep	magic	is	far	older.	Remember,	seek	out
the	roots	and	tendrils,	the	roots	and	tendrils.	The	paths	through	the	ground,	the
invisible	web	woven	from	creature	to	creature.	Every	creature—on	the	land,	in
the	land,	in	the	air,	in	the	water—they	are	all	linked.	And	it	is	within	you,	if	you
have	been	awakened,	and	spirits	below,	you’ve	been	awakened,	child!	Within
you,	then,	to	ride	those	tendrils…’
And	ride	them	he	did,	though	he	would	not	surrender	his	private
fascination	with	warrens,	with	Meanas	in	particular.	Illusions…playing	with
those	tendrils,	with	those	roots	of	being,	twisting	and	tying	them	into	deceptive
knots	that	tricked	the	eye,	the	touch,	that	deceived	every	sense,	now	that	was	a
game	worth	playing…
But	for	the	moment,	he	had	immersed	himself	in	the	old	ways,	the
undetectable	ways—if	one	were	careful,	that	is.	Riding	the	life-sparks	of
capemoths,	of	rhizan,	of	crickets	and	chigger	fleas,	of	roving	bloodflies.
Mindless	creatures	dancing	on	the	tent’s	wall,	hearing	but	not	comprehending
the	sound	shivers	of	the	words	coming	from	the	other	side	of	that	tent	wall.
Comprehension	was	Bottle’s	task.	And	so	he	listened.	As	the	newcomer
spoke,	interrupted	by	neither	the	Adjunct	nor	Fist	Gamet.	Listened,	and
comprehended.
	


Strings	glared	down	at	the	two	seated	mages.	‘You	can’t	sense	him?’
Balgrid’s	shrug	was	sheepish.	‘He’s	out	there,	hiding	in	the	dark
somewhere.’
‘And	he’s	up	to	something,’	Tavos	Pond	added.	‘But	we	can’t	tell	what.’
‘It’s	strange,’	Balgrid	muttered.
Strings	snorted	and	strode	back	to	Gesler	and	Borduke.	The	other	squad
members	were	brewing	tea	at	the	small	fire	they	had	built	to	one	side	of	the
path.	Cuttle’s	snores	were	loud	from	the	tent	beyond.	‘The	bastard’s	vanished,’
Strings	said.
Gesler	grunted.	‘Maybe	he’s	deserted,	and	if	that’s	the	case	the	Wickans
will	hunt	him	down	and	come	back	with	his	head	on	a	spear.	There	won’t	be—’
‘He’s	here!’
They	turned	to	see	Bottle	settling	down	by	the	fire.	Strings	stamped	over.
‘Where	in	Hood’s	name	have	you	been?’	he	demanded.
Bottle	looked	up,	his	brows	slowly	lifting.	‘Nobody	else	felt	it?’	He
glanced	over	at	Balgrid	and	Tavos	Pond,	who	were	both	approaching.	‘That
portal?	The	one	that	opened	in	the	Adjunct’s	tent?’	He	frowned	at	the	blank
expressions	on	the	faces	of	the	two	other	mages,	then	asked	in	a	deadpan	voice,
‘Have	you	two	mastered	hiding	pebbles	yet?	Making	coins	disappear?’
Strings	lowered	himself	opposite	Bottle.	‘What	was	all	that	about	a	portal?’
‘Bad	news,	Sergeant,’	the	young	man	replied.	‘It	all	went	foul	on
Genabackis.	Dujek’s	army	mostly	wiped	out.	The	Bridgeburners	annihilated.
Whiskeyjack’s	dead—’
‘Dead!’
‘Hood	take	us!’
‘Whiskeyjack?	Gods	below!’
The	curses	grew	more	elaborate,	along	with	postulations	of	disbelief,	but
Strings	no	longer	heard	them.	His	mind	was	numb,	as	if	a	wildfire	had	ripped
through	his	inner	landscape,	scorching	the	ground	barren.	He	felt	a	heavy	hand
settle	on	his	shoulder	and	vaguely	heard	Gesler	murmuring	something,	but
after	a	moment	he	shook	the	man	off,	rose	and	walked	into	the	darkness
beyond	the	camp.
He	did	not	know	how	long,	or	how	far	he	walked.	Each	step	was	senseless,
the	world	outside	his	body	not	reaching	through	to	him,	remaining	beyond	the
withered	oblivion	of	his	mind.	It	was	only	when	a	sudden	weakness	took	his
legs	that	he	sank	down	onto	the	wiry,	colourless	grasses.
The	sound	of	weeping,	coming	from	somewhere	ahead,	a	sound	of	sheer
despair	that	pierced	through	the	fog	and	thrummed	in	his	chest.	He	listened	to
the	ragged	cries,	winced	to	hear	how	they	seemed	torn	from	a	constricted


throat,	like	a	dam	finally	sundered	by	a	flood	of	grief.
He	shook	himself,	growing	mindful	once	more	of	his	surroundings.	The
ground	beneath	the	thin	skein	of	grasses	was	hard	and	warm	beneath	his	knees.
Insects	buzzed	and	flitted	through	the	dark.	Only	starlight	illuminated	the
wastes	stretching	out	to	all	sides.	The	encamped	army	was	easily	a	thousand	or
more	paces	behind	him.
Strings	drew	a	deep	breath,	then	rose.	He	walked	slowly	towards	the	sound
of	the	weeping.
A	lad,	lean—no,	damn	near	scrawny,	crouched	down	with	arms	wrapped
about	his	knees,	head	sunk	low.	A	single	crow	feather	hung	from	a	plain
leather	head-band.	A	few	paces	beyond	stood	a	mare,	bearing	a	Wickan	saddle,
a	tattered	vellum	scroll	hanging	from	the	horn.	The	horse	was	placidly	tugging
at	the	grass,	her	reins	dangling.
Strings	recognized	the	youth,	though	for	the	moment	he	could	not	recall
his	name.	But	Tavore	had	placed	him	in	command	of	the	Wickans.
After	a	long	moment,	the	sergeant	moved	forward,	making	no	effort	to
stay	quiet,	and	sat	down	on	a	boulder	a	half-dozen	paces	from	the	lad.
The	Wickan’s	head	snapped	up.	Tear-streaked	warpaint	made	a	twisted	net
of	his	narrow	face.	Venom	flared	in	his	dark	eyes	and	he	hissed,	a	hand
unsheathing	his	long-knife	as	he	staggered	upright.
‘Relax,’	Strings	muttered.	‘I’m	in	grief’s	arms	this	night	myself,	though
likely	for	an	entirely	different	reason.	Neither	of	us	expected	company,	but
here	we	are.’
The	Wickan	hesitated,	then	snapped	the	weapon	back	into	its	sheath	and
made	to	walk	away.
‘Hold	a	moment,	Horsewarrior.	There’s	no	need	to	flee.’
The	youth	spun	round,	mouth	twisting	into	a	snarl.
‘Face	me.	I	will	be	your	witness	this	night,	and	we	alone	will	know	of	it.
Give	me	your	words	of	sorrow,	Wickan,	and	I	will	listen.	Hood	knows,	it
would	serve	me	well	right	now.’
‘I	flee	no-one,’	the	warrior	rasped.
‘I	know.	I	just	wanted	to	get	your	attention.’
‘Who	are	you?’
‘Nobody.	And	that	is	how	I	will	stay,	if	you	like.	Nor	will	I	ask	for	your
name—’
‘I	am	Temul.’
‘Ah,	well.	So	your	bravery	puts	me	in	my	place.	My	name	is	Fiddler.’
‘Tell	me,’	Temul’s	voice	was	suddenly	harsh,	and	he	wiped	angrily	at	his
face,	‘did	you	think	my	grief	a	noble	thing?	Did	I	weep	for	Coltaine?	For	my


fallen	kin?	I	did	not.	My	pity	was	for	myself!	And	now	you	may	go.	Proclaim
me—I	am	done	with	commanding,	for	I	cannot	command	myself—’
‘Easy	there,	I’ve	no	intention	of	proclaiming	anything,	Temul.	But	I	can
guess	at	your	reasons.	Those	wrinkled	Wickans	of	the	Crow,	is	my	guess.
Them	and	the	survivors	who	walked	off	Gesler ’s	ship	of	wounded.	They	won’t
accept	you	as	their	leader,	will	they?	And	so,	like	children,	they	blunt	you	at
every	turn.	Defy	you,	displaying	a	mocking	regard	to	your	face	then
whispering	behind	your	back.	And	where	does	that	leave	you?	You	can’t
challenge	them	all,	after	all—’
‘Perhaps	I	can!	I	shall!’
‘Well,	that	will	please	them	no	end.	Numbers	alone	will	defeat	your	martial
prowess.	So	you	will	die,	sooner	or	later,	and	they	will	win.’
‘You	tell	me	nothing	I	do	not	know,	Fiddler.’
‘I	know.	I’m	just	reminding	you	that	you’ve	good	reason	to	rail	at	the
injustice,	at	the	stupidity	of	those	you	would	lead.	I	had	a	commander	once,
Temul,	who	was	faced	with	the	same	thing	you’re	facing.	He	was	in	charge	of	a
bunch	of	children.	Nasty	children	at	that.’
‘And	what	did	he	do?’
‘Not	much,	and	ended	up	with	a	knife	in	his	back.’
There	was	a	moment	of	silence,	then	Temul	barked	a	laugh.
Fiddler	nodded.	‘Aye,	I’m	not	one	for	stories	with	lessons	in	life,	Temul.
My	mind	bends	to	more	practical	choices.’
‘Such	as?’
‘Well,	I	would	imagine	that	the	Adjunct	shares	your	frustration.	She	wants
you	to	lead,	and	would	help	you	do	so—but	not	so	you	lose	face.	She’s	too
clever	for	that.	No,	the	key	here	is	deflection.	Tell	me,	where	are	their	horses
right	now?’
Temul	frowned.	‘Their	horses?’
‘Aye.	I	would	think	the	Seti	outriders	could	do	without	the	Crow	Clan	for	a
day,	don’t	you	think?	I’m	sure	the	Adjunct	would	agree—those	Seti	are	young,
by	and	large,	and	untested.	They	need	the	room	to	find	themselves.	There’s
good	reason,	then,	militarily,	to	keep	the	Wickans	from	their	horses	come
tomorrow.	Let	them	walk	with	the	rest	of	us.	Barring	your	loyal	retinue,	of
course.	And	who	knows,	a	day	might	not	be	enough.	Could	end	up	being	three,
or	even	four.’
Temul	spoke	softly,	thoughtfully.	‘To	get	to	their	horses,	we	would	need	to
be	quiet…’
‘Another	challenge	for	the	Seti,	or	so	I’m	sure	the	Adjunct	would	note.	If
children	your	kin	must	be,	then	take	away	their	favoured	playthings—their


horses.	Hard	to	look	tall	and	imperious	when	you’re	spitting	dust	behind	a
wagon.	In	any	case,	you’d	best	hurry,	so	as	not	to	awaken	the	Adjunct—’
‘She	may	already	be	asleep—’
‘No,	she	isn’t,	Temul.	I	am	certain	of	it.	Now,	before	you	leave,	answer	me
a	question,	please.	You’ve	a	scroll	hanging	from	your	mare’s	saddle.	Why?
What	is	written	on	it?’
‘The	horse	belonged	to	Duiker,’	Temul	answered,	turning	to	the	animal.
‘He	was	a	man	who	knew	how	to	read	and	write.	I	rode	with	him,	Fiddler.’	He
spun	back	with	a	glare.	‘I	rode	with	him!’
‘And	the	scroll?’
The	young	Wickan	waved	a	hand.	‘Men	such	as	Duiker	carried	such	things!
Indeed,	I	believe	it	once	belonged	to	him,	was	once	in	his	very	hands.’
‘And	the	feather	you	wear…to	honour	Coltaine?’
‘To	honour	Coltaine,	yes.	But	that	is	because	I	must.	Coltaine	did	what	he
was	expected	to	do.	He	did	nothing	that	was	beyond	his	abilities.	I	honour	him,
yes,	but	Duiker…Duiker	was	different.’	He	scowled	and	shook	his	head.	‘He
was	old,	older	than	you.	Yet	he	fought.	When	fighting	was	not	even	expected	of
him—I	know	this	to	be	true,	for	I	knew	Coltaine	and	Bult	and	I	heard	them
speak	of	it,	of	the	historian.	I	was	there	when	Coltaine	drew	the	others	together,
all	but	Duiker.	Lull,	Bult,	Chenned,	Mincer.	And	all	spoke	true	and	with
certainty.	Duiker	would	lead	the	refugees.	Coltaine	even	gave	him	the	stone	the
traders	brought—’
‘The	stone?	What	stone?’
‘To	wear	about	his	neck,	a	saving	stone,	Nil	called	it.	A	soul	trapper,
delivered	from	afar.	Duiker	wore	it,	though	he	liked	it	not,	for	it	was	meant	for
Coltaine,	so	that	he	would	not	be	lost.	Of	course,	we	Wickans	knew	he	would
not	be	lost.	We	knew	the	crows	would	come	for	his	soul.	The	elders	who	have
come,	who	hound	me	so,	they	speak	of	a	child	born	to	the	tribe,	a	child	once
empty,	then	filled,	for	the	crows	came.	They	came.’
‘Coltaine	has	been	reborn?’
‘He	has	been	reborn.’
‘And	Duiker ’s	body	disappeared,’	Strings	muttered.	‘From	the	tree.’
‘Yes!	And	so	I	keep	his	horse	for	him,	for	when	he	returns.	I	rode	with
him,	Fiddler!’
‘And	he	looked	to	you	and	your	handful	of	warriors	to	guard	the	refugees.
To	you,	Temul—not	just	Nil	and	Nether.’
Temul’s	dark	eyes	hardened	as	he	studied	Strings,	then	he	nodded.	‘I	go
now	to	the	Adjunct.’
‘The	Lady’s	pull	on	you,	Commander.’


Temul	hesitated,	then	said,	‘This	night…you	saw…’
‘I	saw	nothing,’	Strings	replied.
A	sharp	nod,	then	the	lad	was	swinging	onto	the	mare,	the	reins	in	one
long-fingered,	knife-scarred	hand.
Strings	watched	him	ride	into	the	darkness.	He	sat	motionless	on	the
boulder	for	a	time,	then	slowly	lowered	his	head	into	his	hands.
	
The	three	were	seated	now,	in	the	lantern-glow	of	the	tent’s	chamber.	Topper ’s
tale	was	done,	and	it	seemed	that	all	that	remained	was	silence.	Gamet	stared
down	at	his	cup,	saw	that	it	was	empty,	and	reached	for	the	jug.	Only	to	find
that	it	too	was	empty.
Even	as	exhaustion	tugged	at	him,	Gamet	knew	he	would	not	leave,	not	yet.
Tavore	had	been	told	of,	first,	her	brother ’s	heroism,	then	his	death.	Not	a
single	Bridgeburner	left	alive.	Tayschrenn	himself	saw	their	bodies,	witnessed
their	interment	in	Moon’s	Spawn.	But	lass,	Ganoes	redeemed	himself—
redeemed	the	family	name.	He	did	that	much	at	least.	But	that	was	where	the
knife	probably	dug	deepest.	She	had	made	harrowing	sacrifices,	after	all,	to
resurrect	the	family’s	honour.	Yet	all	along,	Ganoes	was	no	renegade;	nor	had
he	been	responsible	for	Lorn’s	death.	Like	Dujek,	like	Whiskeyjack,	his
outlawry	was	nothing	but	a	deception.	There	had	been	no	dishonour.	Thus,	the
sacrifice	of	young	Felisin	might	have,	in	the	end,	proved…unnecessary.
And	there	was	more.	Jarring	revelations.	It	had,	Topper	explained,	been	the
hope	of	the	Empress	to	land	Onearm’s	Host	on	the	north	coast,	in	time	to
deliver	a	double	blow	to	the	Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	Indeed,	the	expectation
all	along	had	been	for	Dujek	to	assume	overall	command.	Gamet	could
understand	Laseen’s	thinking—to	place	the	fate	of	the	imperial	presence	on
Seven	Cities	in	the	hands	of	a	new,	young	and	untested	Adjunct	was	far	too
long	a	reach	of	faith.
Though	Tavore	had	believed	the	Empress	had	done	just	that.	Now,	to	find
this	measure	of	confidence	so	lacking…gods,	this	had	been	a	Hood-damned
night	indeed.
Dujek	Onearm	was	still	coming,	with	a	scant	three	thousand	remaining	in
his	Host,	but	he	would	arrive	late,	and,	by	both	Topper ’s	and	Tayschrenn’s
unforgiving	assessments,	the	man’s	spirit	was	broken.	By	the	death	of	his
oldest	friend.	Gamet	wondered	what	else	had	happened	in	that	distant	land,	in
that	nightmarish	empire	called	the	Pannion.
Was	it	worth	it,	Empress?	Was	it	worth	the	devastating	loss?
Topper	had	said	too	much,	Gamet	decided.	Details	of	Laseen’s	plans


should	have	been	filtered	through	a	more	circumspect,	less	emotionally
damaged	agent.	If	the	truth	was	so	important,	after	all,	then	it	should	have	been
laid	out	for	the	Adjunct	long	before	now—when	it	actually	mattered.	To	tell
Tavore	that	the	Empress	had	no	confidence	in	her,	then	follow	that	with	the
brutal	assertion	that	she	was	now	the	empire’s	last	hope	for	Seven	Cities…well,
few	were	the	men	or	women	who	would	not	be	rocked	to	their	knees	by	that.
The	Adjunct’s	expression	revealed	nothing.	She	cleared	her	throat.	‘Very
well,	Topper.	Is	there	more?’
The	Clawmaster ’s	oddly	shaped	eyes	widened	momentarily,	then	he	shook
his	head	and	rose.	‘No.	Do	you	wish	me	to	convey	a	message	to	the	Empress?’
Tavore	frowned.	‘A	message?	No,	there	is	no	message.	We	have	begun	our
march	to	the	Holy	Desert.	Nothing	more	need	be	said.’
Gamet	saw	Topper	hesitate,	then	the	Clawmaster	said,	‘There	is	one	more
thing,	Adjunct.	There	are	probably	worshippers	of	Fener	among	your	army.	I
do	not	think	the	truth	of	the	god’s…fall…can	be	hidden.	It	seems	the	Tiger	of
Summer	is	the	lord	of	war,	now.	It	does	an	army	little	good	to	mourn;	indeed,
grief	is	anathema	to	an	army	as	we	all	well	know.	There	may	prove	some
period	of	difficult	adjustment—it	would	be	well	to	anticipate	and	prepare	for
desertions—’
‘There	will	be	no	desertions,’	Tavore	said,	the	flat	assertion	silencing
Topper.	‘The	portal	is	weakening,	Clawmaster—even	a	box	of	basalt	cannot
entirely	block	the	effects	of	my	sword.	If	you	would	leave	this	night,	I	suggest
you	do	so	now.’
Topper	stared	down	at	her.	‘We	are	badly	hurt,	Adjunct.	And	hurting.	It	is
the	hope	of	the	Empress	that	you	will	exercise	due	caution,	and	make	no
precipitous	actions.	Suffer	no	distraction	on	your	march	to	Raraku—there	will
be	attempts	to	draw	you	from	the	trail,	to	wear	you	down	with	skirmishes	and
pursuits—’
‘You	are	a	Clawmaster,’	Tavore	said,	sudden	iron	in	her	tone.	‘Dujek’s
advice	I	will	listen	to,	for	he	is	a	soldier,	a	commander.	Until	such	time	as	he
arrives,	I	shall	follow	my	own	instincts.	If	the	Empress	is	dissatisfied,	she	is
welcome	to	replace	me.	Now,	that	is	all.	Goodbye,	Topper.’
Scowling,	the	Clawmaster	swung	about	and	strode	without	ceremony	into
the	Imperial	Warren.	The	gate	collapsed	behind	him,	leaving	only	a	sour	smell
of	dust.
Gamet	let	out	a	long	sigh,	pushed	himself	gingerly	from	the	rickety	camp
chair.	‘You	have	my	sorrow,	Adjunct,	on	the	loss	of	your	brother.’
‘Thank	you,	Gamet.	Now,	get	some	sleep.	And	stop	by—’
‘T’amber ’s	tent,	aye,	Adjunct.’


She	quirked	an	eyebrow.	‘Is	that	disapproval	I	hear?’
‘It	is.	I’m	not	the	only	one	in	need	of	sleep.	Hood	take	us,	we’ve	not	even
eaten	this	night.’
‘Until	tomorrow,	Fist.’
He	nodded.	‘Aye.	Goodnight,	Adjunct.’
	
There	was	but	one	figure	seated	at	the	ebbing	fire	when	Strings	returned.
‘What	are	you	doing	up,	Cuttle?’
‘I’ve	done	my	sleep.	You’ll	be	dragging	your	feet	tomorrow,	Sergeant.’
‘I	don’t	think	rest	will	come	to	me	this	night,’	Strings	muttered,	sitting
down	cross-legged	opposite	the	burly	sapper.
‘It’s	all	far	away,’	Cuttle	rumbled,	tossing	a	last	scrap	of	dung	onto	the
flames.
‘But	it	feels	close.’
‘At	least	you’re	not	walking	in	the	footprints	of	your	fallen	companions,
Fiddler.	But	even	so,	it’s	all	far	away.’
‘Well,	I’m	not	sure	what	you	mean	but	I’ll	take	your	word	for	it.’
‘Thanks	for	the	munitions,	by	the	way.’
Strings	grunted.	‘It’s	the	damnedest	thing,	Cuttle.	We	always	find	more,	and
they’re	meant	to	be	used,	but	instead	we	hoard	them,	tell	no-one	we	have	them
—in	case	they	order	us	to	put	them	to	use—’
‘The	bastards.’
‘Aye,	the	bastards.’
‘I’ll	use	the	ones	you’ve	given	me,’	Cuttle	avowed.	‘Once	I’ve	crawled
under	Korbolo	Dom’s	feet.	I	don’t	mind	going	to	Hood	at	the	same	time,
either.’
‘Something	tells	me	that’s	what	Hedge	did,	in	his	last	moment.	He	always
threw	them	too	close—that	man	had	so	many	pieces	of	clay	in	him	you
could’ve	made	a	row	of	pots	from	his	insides.’	He	slowly	shook	his	head,	eyes
on	the	dying	fire.	‘I	wish	I	could	have	been	there.	That’s	all.	Whiskeyjack,
Trotts,	Mallet,	Picker,	Quick	Ben—’
‘Quick’s	not	dead,’	Cuttle	said.	‘There	was	more	after	you’d	left—I	heard
from	my	tent.	Tayschrenn’s	made	your	wizard	a	High	Mage.’
‘Well,	that	doesn’t	surprise	me,	actually.	That	he’d	survive,	somehow.	I
wonder	if	Paran	was	still	the	company’s	captain—’
‘He	was.	Died	with	them.’
‘The	Adjunct’s	brother.	I	wonder	if	she	grieves	this	night.’
‘Wondering’s	a	waste	of	time,	Fiddler.	We	got	lads	and	lasses	that	need


taking	care	of,	right	here.	Korbolo	Dom’s	warriors	know	how	to	fight.	My
guess	is,	we’ll	get	whipped	and	sent	back	with	our	tails	between	our	legs—and
it’ll	be	another	chain,	as	we	stagger	back	to	Aren,	only	this	time	we	won’t	get
even	close.’
‘Well,	that’s	a	cheering	prediction,	Cuttle.’
‘It	don’t	matter.	So	long	as	I	kill	that	Napan	traitor—and	his	mage,	too,	if
possible.’
‘And	what	if	you	can’t	get	close?’
‘Then	I	take	as	many	of	them	with	me	as	I	can.	I	ain’t	walking	back,	Fid,
not	again.’
‘I’ll	remember	that	if	the	moment	arrives.	But	what	about	taking	care	of
these	recruits	of	ours,	Cuttle?’
‘Well,	that’s	the	walk,	isn’t	it?	This	march.	We	deliver	them	to	that	battle,
we	do	that	much,	if	we	can.	Then	we	see	what	kind	of	iron	they’re	holding.’
‘Iron,’	Strings	smiled.	‘It’s	been	a	long	time	since	I	last	heard	that	saying.
Since	we’re	looking	for	revenge,	you’ll	want	it	hot,	I	expect.’
‘You	expect	wrong.	Look	at	Tavore—there	won’t	be	any	heat	from	her.	In
that	she’s	just	like	Coltaine.	It’s	obvious,	Fiddler.	The	iron	needs	to	be	cold.
Cold.	We	get	it	cold	enough,	who	knows,	we	might	earn	ourselves	a	name.’
Strings	reached	across	the	fire	and	tapped	the	finger	bone	hanging	from
Cuttle’s	belt.	‘We’ve	made	a	start,	I	think.’
‘We	might	have	at	that,	Sergeant.	Them	and	the	standards.	A	start.	She
knows	what’s	in	her,	give	her	that.	She	knows	what’s	in	her.’
‘And	it’s	for	us	to	bring	it	out	into	view.’
‘Aye,	Fid,	it	is	at	that.	Now,	go	away.	These	are	the	hours	I	spend	alone.’
Nodding,	the	sergeant	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘Seems	I	might	be	able	to	sleep
after	all.’
‘It’s	my	scintillating	conversation	what’s	done	you	in.’
‘So	it	was.’
As	Strings	made	his	way	to	his	small	tent,	something	of	Cuttle’s	words
came	back	to	him.	Iron.	Cold	iron.	Yes,	it’s	in	her.	And	now	I’d	better	search	and
search	hard…to	find	it	in	me.


Book	Three

Something	Breathes

	


The	art	of	Rashan	is	found	in	the	tension	that	binds	the	games
of	light,	yet	its	aspect	is	one	of	dissipation—the	creation	of
shadow	and	of	dark,	although	in	this	case	the	dark	is	not
absolute,	such	as	is	the	aspect	of	the	ancient	warren,	Kurald
Galain.	No,	this	dark	is	particular,	for	it	exists,	not	through	an
absence	of	light,	but	by	virtue	of	being	seen.
THE	MYSTERIES	OF	RASHAN—A	MADMAN’S	DISCOURSE
UNTURAL	OF	LATO	REVAE


Chapter	Twelve

Light,	shadow	and	dark—
This	is	a	war	unending.
FISHER
Glistening	silver,	the	armour	lay	over	a	t-shaped	stand.	Oil	had	dripped	down
from	the	ragged	knee-length	tassels	to	form	a	pool	on	the	flagstoned	floor
beneath.	The	sleeves	were	not	loose,	but	appeared	intended	to	be	worn	almost
skin-tight.	It	had	seen	much	use,	and	where	mended	the	rings	appeared	to	be	a
darker,	carbon-stained	iron.
Beside	it,	on	a	free-standing	iron	frame	with	horizontal	hooks,	waited	a
two-handed	sword,	the	scabbard	parallel	directly	beneath	it	on	another	pair	of
hooks.	The	sword	was	extraordinarily	thin,	with	a	long,	tapered	tip,	edges	on
both	sides,	twin-fluted.	Its	surface	was	a	strangely	mottled	oily	blue,	magenta
and	silver.	The	grip	was	round	instead	of	flat,	banded	in	gut,	the	pommel	a
single,	large	oblong	sphere	of	polished	haematite.	The	scabbard	was	of	black
wood,	banded	at	the	point	and	at	the	mouth	in	silver	but	otherwise	unadorned.
The	harness	belt	attached	to	it	was	of	small,	almost	delicate,	black	chain	links.
'
Chain	gauntlets	waited	on	a	wooden	shelf	on	the	wall	behind	the	armour.
The	dull	iron	helm	beside	them	was	little	more	than	a	skullcap	within	a	cage	of
studded	bars,	the	bars	reaching	down	like	a	massive	hand,	the	gnarled	fingers
curving	down	to	bridge	nose,	cheeks	and	jaw	lines.	A	lobster	tail	of	chain
descended	from	the	slightly	flared	neck	rim.
Standing	just	within	the	entrance	to	the	modest,	low-ceilinged	room,	Cutter
watched	as	Darist	began	preparations	for	donning	his	martial	accoutrements.
The	Daru	youth	was	finding	it	difficult	to	convince	himself	that	such	beautiful
weapons	and	armour—which	had	clearly	seen	decades,	if	not	centuries,	of	use
—could	belong	to	this	silver-haired	man,	who	carried	himself	like	an	absentminded	scholar,	whose	amber	eyes	seemed	to	hold	a	perpetual	look	of
confused	distraction	beneath	the	glowing	sheen.	Who	moved	slowly	as	if


protecting	brittle	bones—
Yet	I	have	experienced	the	old	Tiste	Andii’s	strength.	And	there	is	a
mindfulness	to	his	every	movement	which	I	should	recognize—for	I	last	saw	it
on	another	Tiste	Andii,	an	ocean	away.	A	racial	trait?	Perhaps,	but	it	whispers
like	a	song	of	threat,	sunk	deep	in	the	marrow	of	my	bones.
Darist	stood	facing	his	suit	of	armour,	as	if	frozen	in	some	startled
contemplation—as	if	he’d	forgotten	how	to	put	it	on.
‘These	Tiste	Edur,	Darist,’	Cutter	said.	‘How	many	are	there?’
‘Will	we	survive	the	coming	attack,	is	your	question?	Unlikely,	is	my
answer.	At	least	five	ships	survived	the	storm.	Two	have	reached	our	shore	and
managed	landing.	There	would	have	been	more,	but	they	were	engaged	by	a
Malazan	fleet	that	happened	upon	them	by	chance.	We	witnessed	the	clash	from
the	Cliffs	of	Purahl…’	The	Tiste	Andii	slowly	glanced	back	at	Cutter.	‘Your
human	kin	did	well—far	better	than	the	Edur	no	doubt	anticipated.’
‘A	sea	battle	between	the	Malazans	and	the	Tiste	Edur?	When	was	this?’
‘Perhaps	a	week	ago.	There	were	but	three	Malazan	war	dromons,	yet	each
managed	to	find	company	before	plunging	to	the	deep.	There	was	a	skilled
mage	among	the	humans—the	exchange	of	sorcery	was	impressive—’
‘You	and	your	kin	watched?	Why	didn’t	you	help?	You	must	have	known
the	Edur	were	seeking	this	island!’
Darist	stepped	towards	the	armour,	lifted	it	seemingly	effortlessly	from	its
frame.	‘We	no	longer	leave	this	island.	For	many	decades	now,	we	hold	to	our
decision	to	remain	isolated.’
‘Why?’
The	Tiste	Andii	gave	no	answer.	He	slipped	the	mail	suit	over	his
shoulders.	The	sound	it	made	as	it	flowed	down	was	like	liquid.	He	then
reached	for	the	sword.
‘That	looks	as	if	it	would	snap	with	the	first	block	of	a	heavier	weapon.’
‘It	will	not.	There	are	many	names	for	this	particular	sword.’	Darist	lifted	it
free	of	the	hooks.	‘Its	maker	named	it	Vengeance.	T’an	Aros,	in	our	language.
But	I	call	it	K’orladis.’
‘Which	means?’
‘Grief.’
A	faint	chill	rippled	through	Cutter.	‘Who	was	its	maker?’
‘My	brother.’	He	sheathed	the	sword,	slipped	his	arms	through	the	chain
harness.	Then	he	reached	for	the	gauntlets.	‘Before	he	found	one…more	suited
to	his	nature.’	Darist	turned,	his	gaze	travelling	the	length	of	Cutter,	head	to
toe,	then	back	again.	‘Do	you	have	skill	with	those	knives	hidden	about	your
person?’


‘Some,	though	I	draw	no	pleasure	from	spilling	blood.’
‘What	else	are	they	for?’	the	Tiste	Andii	asked	as	he	donned	the	helm.
Cutter	shrugged,	wishing	he	had	an	answer	to	that	question.
‘Do	you	intend	to	fight	the	Edur?’
‘Since	they	are	seeking	the	throne,	yes.’
Darist	slowly	cocked	his	head.	‘Yet	this	is	not	your	battle.	Why	would	you
choose	to	borrow	this	cause?’
‘On	Genabackis—my	homeland—Anomander	Rake	and	his	followers
chose	to	fight	against	the	Malazan	Empire.	It	wasn’t	their	battle,	but	they	have
now	made	it	so.’
He	was	surprised	to	see	a	wry	smile	twist	the	Tiste	Andii’s	weathered
features	beneath	the	crooked	iron	fingers	of	the	guards.
‘That	is	interesting.	Very	well,	Cutter,	join	me—though	I	tell	you	now	it
will	prove	your	final	fight.’
‘I	hope	not.’
Darist	led	him	from	the	room,	out	into	the	broad	hallway	once	more,	then
through	a	narrow,	black-wood-framed	archway.	The	passage	within	appeared
to	be	a	tunnel	through	a	single	piece	of	wood,	like	the	hollowed	core	of	a
massive,	toppled	tree	trunk.	It	stretched	on	into	the	gloom,	inclining	slightly
upward.
Cutter	walked	behind	the	Tiste	Andii,	the	sound	of	the	man’s	armour	soft	as
the	hiss	of	rain	on	a	beach.	The	tunnel	ended	abruptly	with	an	upward	turn,	the
ceiling	opening	to	reveal	a	vertical	shaft.	A	rough	ladder	of	roots	climbed
towards	a	small,	pale	disc	of	light.
Darist’s	ascent	was	slow	and	measured,	Cutter	impatient	on	the	rungs
directly	beneath	until	the	thought	that	he	might	soon	die	struck	him,	at	which
point	a	dull	lassitude	settled	into	his	muscles,	and	it	became	a	struggle	to	keep
up	with	the	ancient	Tiste	Andii.
They	eventually	emerged	onto	a	leaf-cluttered	floor	of	flagstones.	Sunlight
speared	shafts	of	dust	from	slitted	windows	and	gaps	in	the	roof	overhead—the
storm	seemed	to	have	missed	this	place	entirely.	One	wall	had	mostly	collapsed
and	it	was	towards	this	that	Darist	strode.
Cutter	followed.	‘Some	sort	of	upkeep	might	well	have	made	this
defensible,’	he	muttered.
‘These	surface	structures	are	not	Andii—they	are	Edur,	and	were	in	ruin
when	we	first	arrived.’
‘How	close	are	they?’
‘They	range	through	the	forest,	working	inland.	Cautious.	They	know	they
are	not	alone.’


‘How	many	can	you	sense?’
‘This	first	party	numbers	perhaps	a	score.	We	shall	meet	them	in	the
courtyard,	permitting	us	sufficient	room	for	swordplay	yet	allowing	us	a	wall
to	which	we	can	set	our	backs	in	the	last	few	moments.’
‘Hood’s	breath,	Darist,	if	we	drive	them	back	you’ll	likely	die	of	shock.’
The	Tiste	Andii	glanced	back	at	the	Daru,	then	gestured.	‘Follow	me.’
A	half-dozen	similarly	ruined	chambers	were	traversed	before	they	came
to	the	courtyard.	The	vine-latticed	walls	were	twice	the	height	of	a	human,
ragged-topped.	Faded	frescoes	were	hinted	at	beneath	the	overgrowth.
Opposite	the	inner	entrance	through	which	they	strode	was	an	arched	gateway,
beyond	which	a	trail	of	pine	needles,	snaking	roots	and	moss-covered	boulders
wound	into	the	shadows	of	enormous	trees.
Cutter	judged	the	yard	to	be	twenty	paces	wide,	twenty-five	deep.	‘There’s
too	much	room	here,	Darist,’	he	said.	‘We’ll	get	flanked—’
‘I	will	command	the	centre.	You	remain	behind,	for	those	who	might
indeed	try	to	get	past	me.’
Cutter	recalled	Anomander	Rake’s	battle	with	the	demon	on	the	Darujhistan
street.	The	two-handed	fighting	style	the	Son	of	Darkness	had	employed
demanded	plenty	of	room,	and	it	now	appeared	that	Darist	would	fight	in	a
similar	manner—but	the	sword’s	blade	was,	to	Cutter ’s	mind,	far	too	thin	for
such	fierce,	wheeling	swings.	‘Is	there	sorcery	invested	in	that	blade	of	yours?’
he	asked.
‘Not	as	investment	is	commonly	known,’	the	Tiste	Andii	replied,	drawing
the	weapon	and	wrapping	both	hands	about	the	grip,	one	high	under	the	hilt,	the
other	just	above	the	pommel.	‘The	power	of	Grief	lies	in	the	focused	intent	in
its	creation.	The	sword	demands	a	singular	will	in	its	wielder.	With	such	a	will,
it	cannot	be	defeated.’
‘And	have	you	that	singular	will?’
Darist	slowly	lowered	the	tip	to	the	ground.	‘Had	I,	human,	this	would	not
be	your	last	day	this	side	of	Hood’s	gate.	Now,	I	suggest	you	draw	your
weapons.	The	Edur	have	discovered	the	path	and	now	approach.’
Cutter	found	his	hands	were	trembling	as	he	drew	out	his	leading	knives.
He	possessed	four	others,	two	under	each	arm,	sheathed	in	leather	and	peacelooped	by	thongs—which	he	now	pulled	clear.	These	four	were	weighted	for
throwing.	Once	done,	he	adjusted	his	grip	on	the	knives	in	his	hands,	then	had
to	dry	his	palms	and	repeat	the	task.
A	soft	whisper	of	sound	made	him	look	up,	to	see	that	Darist	had	slipped
into	a	fighting	stance,	though	the	tip	of	the	sword	still	rested	on	the	flagstones.
And	Cutter	saw	something	else.	The	leaf	clutter	and	detritus	on	the


flagstones	was	in	motion,	crawling	as	if	pushed	by	an	unseen	wind,	gathering
towards	the	gate’s	end	of	the	courtyard,	and	out	to	heap	against	the	walls	to
either	side.
‘Keep	your	eyes	slitted,’	Darist	said	in	a	low	tone.
Slitted?
There	was	movement	in	the	gloom	beyond	the	gateway,	furtive,	then	three
figures	stepped	into	view	beneath	the	arch.
As	tall	as	Darist,	their	skin	a	dusky	pallor.	Long	brown	hair,	knotted	and
snarled	with	fetishes.	Necklaces	of	claws	and	canines	competed	with	the
barbarity	of	their	roughly	tanned	leather	armour	that	was	stitched	with
articulating	strips	of	bronze.	Their	helms,	also	bronze,	were	shaped	like	bear
or	wolf	skulls.
Among	them,	there	was	nothing	of	the	natural	majesty	evident	in	Darist—
or	in	Anomander	Rake.	A	far	more	brutal	cast,	these	Edur.	Tip-heavy	blackbladed	scimitars	were	in	their	hands,	sealskin-covered	round	shields	on	their
forearms.
They	hesitated	before	Darist,	then	the	one	in	the	centre	snarled	something
in	a	language	Cutter	could	not	understand.
The	silver-haired	Tiste	Andii	shrugged,	said	nothing.
The	Edur	shouted	something	that	was	clearly	a	demand.	Then	they	readied
their	weapons	and	swung	their	shields	around.
Cutter	could	see	more	of	the	savage	warriors	gathered	on	the	trail	beyond
the	gate.
The	three	stepped	from	the	archway,	spread	out	to	form	a	slight	pincer
position—the	centre	Edur	a	step	further	away	than	his	companions	on	either
side.
‘They	don’t	know	how	you	will	do	this,’	Cutter	murmured.	‘They’ve	never
fought	against—’
The	flankers	moved	forward	in	perfect	unison.
Darist’s	sword	snapped	upward,	and	with	that	motion,	a	fierce	gust	of	wind
lifted	in	the	courtyard,	and	the	air	around	the	three	Edur	was	suddenly	filled
with	skirling	leaves	and	dust.
Cutter	watched	as	the	Tiste	Andii	attacked.	The	blade	tipped	horizontal,
point	threatening	the	Edur	on	the	right,	but	the	actual	attack	was	with	the
pommel,	against	the	warrior	on	the	left.	A	blurring	sideways	dip	to	close,	then
the	pommel	struck	the	swiftly	upraised	shield,	splitting	it	clean	in	half.	Darist’s
left	hand	slipped	off	the	pommel	and	slapped	the	warrior ’s	sword	away	even	as
the	Tiste	Andii	dropped	into	a	squat,	drawing	the	edge	of	Grief	down	his
opponent’s	front.


It	seemed	there	was	no	contact	at	all,	yet	blood	gushed	from	a	rent	that
began	above	the	Edur ’s	left	collar	bone	and	descended	in	a	straight	line	down
to	his	crotch.
The	squat	became	a	backward	springing	motion	that	landed	Darist	two
paces	back,	his	blade	already	hissing	to	fend	off	the	other	two	warriors,	both
of	whom	leapt	away	in	alarm.
The	wounded	Edur	crumpled	in	a	pool	of	his	own	blood,	and	as	he	fell
Cutter	saw	that	Grief	had	cut	through	the	collar	bone	and	every	rib	in	the	cage
down	the	left	side.
The	warriors	beyond	the	archway	screamed	battlecries	and	surged	into	the
wind-whipped	courtyard.
Their	only	chance	of	success	lay	in	closing	on	Darist,	inside	the	man’s
reach,	closing	and	fouling	that	whispering	blade,	and	the	Edur	lacked	nothing
in	courage.
Cutter	saw	another	cut	down,	then	a	third	took	the	pommel	on	the	side	of
his	helm,	and	the	bronze	collapsed	inward	far	too	deep—the	warrior ’s	limbs
flailed	in	strange	jerking	motions	as	he	fell	to	the	flagstones.
Both	leading	knives	were	in	the	Daru’s	left	hand,	and	his	right	reached	to	a
throwing	knife.	He	sent	the	weapon	darting	out	with	a	back-handed	throw,	saw
it	sink	to	the	hilt	in	an	Edur ’s	eye	socket—and	knew	the	tip	had	snapped	against
the	inside	of	the	man’s	skull	at	the	back.	He	threw	the	second	one	and	swore	as
a	shield	lifted	to	take	it.
In	the	storm	of	spinning	leaves	Darist’s	sword	seemed	to	be	everywhere	at
once,	blocking	attack	after	attack,	then	an	Edur	flung	himself	forward	to
grapple,	and	managed	to	wrap	both	arms	around	the	Tiste	Andii’s	legs.
A	scimitar	lashed	in.	There	was	a	spray	of	blood	from	Darist’s	right
shoulder.	Grief’s	pommel	dented	the	helm	of	the	grappling	warrior,	and	the
Edur	sagged.	Another	swing	chopped	into	the	Tiste	Andii’s	hip,	the	blade
bouncing	back	out	from	the	bone.	Darist	staggered.
Cutter	rushed	forward	as	the	remaining	Edur	closed.	Through	spinning,
clattering	leaves,	into	the	calmed	air	at	the	centre.	The	Daru	had	already
learned	that	direct,	head-on	confrontation	was	not	an	ideal	tactic	when	fighting
with	knives.	He	chose	an	Edur	whose	attention	was	fixed	solely	on	Darist	and
was	therefore	turned	slightly	away—the	warrior	caught	sight	of	him
peripherally,	and	was	quick	to	react.
A	back-handed	slash	of	the	scimitar,	followed	by	the	shield	swinging
round.
Cutter	punched	his	left	knife	at	the	blade,	to	intercept	a	third	of	the	way
down	from	the	tip.	Simultaneously,	he	stop-hit	the	swing	with	his	other	knife,


midway	along	the	man’s	forearm—the	point	of	his	weapon	punching	through
leather	and	stabbing	between	the	bones	with	both	edges	on.	The	hilt	of	his	other
weapon	then	contacted	the	scimitar—and	knocked	the	weapon	from	a	numbed
hand.
The	Edur ’s	grunt	was	loud,	and	he	swore	as,	yanking	on	the	knife,	Cutter
moved	past	him.	The	blade	was	reluctant	to	pull	free	and	dragged	the	impaled
arm	after	it.	The	warrior ’s	legs	tangled	and	he	fell	to	one	knee.
Even	as	he	lifted	his	shield,	Cutter ’s	free	knife	darted	in	over	it,	spearing
him	through	the	throat.
The	shield’s	rim	cracked	hard	against	the	Daru’s	out-thrust	wrist,	nearly
springing	the	knife	loose,	but	he	managed	to	retain	his	grip.
Another	tug	and	the	other	knife	tore	free	of	the	Edur ’s	forearm.
A	shield	struck	him	a	body	blow	from	his	left,	lifting	Cutter	upward,	his
moccasins	leaving	the	flagstones.	He	twisted	and	slashed	out	at	the	attacker,	and
missed.	The	shield’s	impact	had	turned	his	left	side	into	a	mass	of	thrumming
pain.	He	hit	the	ground	and	folded	into	a	roll.
Something	thumped	in	pursuit,	bounced	once,	then	twice,	and	as	the	Daru
regained	his	feet	an	Edur ’s	decapitated	head	cracked	hard	against	his	right	shin.
The	agony	of	this	last	blow—absurdly	to	his	mind—overwhelmed	all	else
thus	far.	He	screamed	a	curse,	hopped	backward	one-legged.
An	Edur	was	rushing	him.
A	fouler	word	grated	out	from	Cutter.	He	flung	the	knife	from	his	left
hand.	Shield	surged	up	to	meet	it,	the	warrior	ducking	from	view.
Grimacing,	Cutter	lunged	after	the	weapon—while	the	Edur	remained
blind—and	stabbed	overhand	above	the	shield.	The	knife	sank	down	behind	the
man’s	left	collar-bone,	sprouting	a	geyser	of	blood	as	he	pulled	it	back	out.
There	were	shouts	now	in	the	courtyard—and	suddenly	it	seemed	the
fighting	was	everywhere,	on	all	sides.	Cutter	reeled	back	a	step	to	see	that	other
Tiste	Andii	had	arrived—and,	in	their	midst,	Apsalar.
Three	Edur	were	on	the	ground	in	her	wake,	all	writhing	amidst	blood	and
bile.
The	rest,	barring	their	kin	who	had	fallen	to	Apsalar,	Cutter	and	Darist,
were	retreating,	back	through	the	archway.
Apsalar	and	her	Tiste	Andii	companions	pursued	only	so	far	as	the	gate.
Slowly,	the	spinning	wind	dwindled,	the	leaf	fragments	drifting	down	like
ash.
Cutter	glanced	over	to	see	Darist	still	standing,	though	he	leaned	against	a
side	wall,	his	long,	lean	frame	sheathed	in	blood,	helm	gone,	his	hair	matted
and	hanging	down	over	his	face,	dripping.	The	sword	Grief	remained	in	his


two	hands,	point	once	more	on	the	flagstones.
One	of	the	new	Tiste	Andii	moved	to	the	three	noisily	dying	Edur	and
unceremoniously	slit	their	throats.	When	finished,	she	raised	her	gaze	to	study
Apsalar	for	a	long	moment.
Cutter	realized	that	all	of	Darist’s	kin	were	white-haired,	though	none	were
as	old—indeed,	they	appeared	very	young,	in	appearance	no	older	than	the
Daru	himself.	They	were	haphazardly	armed	and	armoured,	and	none	held
their	weapons	with	anything	like	familiarity.	Quick,	nervous	glances	were
thrown	at	the	gateway—then	over	to	Darist.
Sheathing	her	Kethra	knives,	Apsalar	strode	up	to	Cutter.	‘I	am	sorry	we
were	late.’
He	blinked,	then	shrugged.	‘I	thought	you’d	drowned.’
‘No,	I	made	shore	easily	enough—though	everything	else	went	with	you.
There	was	sorcerous	questing,	then,	but	I	evaded	that.’	She	nodded	to	the
youths.	‘I	found	these	camped	a	fair	distance	inland.	They	were…hiding.’
‘Hiding.	But	Darist	said—’
‘Ah,	so	that	is	Darist.	Andarist,	to	be	more	precise.’	She	turned	a	thoughtful
gaze	on	the	ancient	Tiste	Andii.	‘It	was	by	his	command.	He	didn’t	want	them
here…because	I	imagine	he	expected	they	would	die.’
‘And	so	they	shall,’	Darist	growled,	finally	lifting	his	head	to	meet	her
eyes.	‘You	have	condemned	them	all,	for	the	Edur	will	now	hunt	them	down	in
earnest—the	old	hatreds,	rekindled	once	more.’
She	seemed	unaffected	by	his	words.	‘The	throne	must	be	protected.’
Darist	bared	red-stained	teeth,	his	eyes	glittering	in	the	half-shadows.	‘If	he
truly	wants	it	protected,	then	he	can	come	here	and	do	it	himself.’
Apsalar	frowned.	‘Who?’
Cutter	answered,	‘His	brother,	of	course.	Anomander	Rake.’
	
It	had	been	a	guess,	but	Darist’s	expression	was	all	the	affirmation	needed.
Anomander	Rake’s	younger	brother.	In	his	veins,	nothing	of	the	Son	of
Darkness’s	Draconian	blood.	And	in	his	hands,	a	sword	that	its	maker	had
judged	insufficient,	when	compared	to	Dragnipur.	But	this	knowledge	alone
was	barely	a	whisper—the	twisted,	dark	storm	of	all	that	existed	between	the
two	siblings	was	an	epic	neither	man	was	ever	likely	to	orate,	or	so	Cutter
suspected.
And	the	skein	of	bitter	grievances	proved	even	more	knotted	than	the	Daru
had	first	imagined,	for	it	was	then	revealed	that	the	youths	were,	one	and	all,
close	kin	to	Anomander—grandchildren.	Their	parents	had	one	and	all


succumbed	to	their	sire’s	flaw,	the	hunger	for	wandering,	for	vanishing	into
the	mists,	for	shaping	private	worlds	in	forgotten,	isolated	places.	‘The	search
for	loyalty	and	honour’,	Darist	had	said,	with	a	sneer,	whilst	Phaed—the	young
woman	who	had	shown	mercy	to	Apsalar ’s	victims—bound	his	wounds.
A	task	not	done	quickly.	Darist—Andarist—had	been	slashed	at	least	a
dozen	times,	each	time	the	heavy	scimitar	parting	chain	then	flesh	down	to	the
bone,	in	various	places	on	his	body.	How	he	had	managed	to	stand	upright,
much	less	continue	fighting,	belied	his	earlier	claim	that	his	will	was	not	of
sufficient	purity	to	match	the	sword,	Grief.	Now	that	the	skirmish	had	been
suspended,	however,	the	force	that	had	fired	the	old	warrior	fast	dissipated.	His
right	arm	was	incapacitated;	the	wound	on	his	hip	dragged	him	onto	the
flagstones—and	he	could	not	rise	again	without	help.
There	were	nine	dead	Tiste	Edur.	Their	retreat	had	probably	been	triggered
by	a	desire	to	regroup	rather	than	being	hard-pressed.
Worse,	they	were	but	an	advance	party.	The	two	ships	just	off	the	shore
were	massive:	each	could	easily	hold	two	hundred	warriors.	Or	so	Apsalar
judged,	having	scouted	the	inlet	where	they	were	moored.
‘There	is	plenty	of	wreckage	in	the	water,’	she	added,	‘and	both	Edur	ships
have	the	look	of	having	been	in	a	fight—’
‘Three	Malazan	war	dromons,’	Cutter	said.	‘A	chance	encounter.	Darist
says	the	Malazans	gave	a	good	account	of	themselves.’
They	were	seated	on	some	tumbled	rubble	a	dozen	paces	from	the	Tiste
Andii,	watching	the	youths	hover	and	fuss	over	Darist.	Cutter ’s	left	side	ached,
and	though	he	did	not	look	beneath	his	clothes	he	knew	that	bruises	were
spreading.	He	struggled	to	ignore	the	discomfort	and	continued	eyeing	the
Tiste	Andii.
‘They	are	not	what	I	expected,’	he	said	quietly.	‘Not	even	schooled	in	the
art	of	fighting—’
‘True.	Darist’s	desire	to	protect	them	could	prove	a	fatal	one.’
‘Now	that	the	Edur	know	they	exist.	Not	a	part	of	Darist’s	plan.’
Apsalar	shrugged.	‘They	were	given	a	task.’
He	fell	silent,	pondering	that	brusque	statement.	He’d	always	believed	that	a
singular	capacity	to	inflict	death	engendered	a	certain	wisdom—of	the	fragility
of	the	spirit,	of	its	mortality—as	he	had	known,	and	experienced	first-hand,
with	Rallick	Nom	in	Darujhistan.	But	Apsalar	revealed	nothing	of	such
wisdom;	her	words	were	hard	with	judgement,	often	flatly	dismissive.	She	had
taken	focus	and	made	of	it	a	weapon…or	a	means	of	self-defence.
She	had	not	intended	any	of	the	three	Edur	she	had	taken	down	to	die
swiftly.	Yet	it	seemed	she	drew	no	pleasure,	as	a	sadist	might.	It	is	more	as	if


she	was	trained	to	do	so…trained	as	a	torturer.	Yet	Cotillion—Dancer—was	no
torturer.	He	was	an	assassin.	So	where	does	the	vicious	streak	come	from?	Does
it	belong	to	her	own	nature?	An	unpleasant,	disturbing	thought.
He	lifted	his	left	arm,	gingerly,	wincing.	Their	next	fight	would	likely	be	a
short	one,	even	with	Apsalar	at	their	side.
‘You	are	in	no	condition	to	fight,’	she	observed.
‘Nor	is	Darist,’	Cutter	retorted.
‘The	sword	will	carry	him.	But	you	will	prove	a	liability.	I	would	not	be
distracted	by	protecting	you.’
‘What	do	you	suggest?	I	kill	myself	now	so	I’m	not	in	your	way?’
She	shook	her	head—as	if	the	suggestion	had	been,	on	its	face,	entirely
reasonable,	just	not	what	she	had	in	mind—and	spoke	in	a	low	voice.	‘There
are	others	on	this	island.	Hiding	well,	but	not	well	enough	to	escape	my	notice.
I	want	you	to	go	to	them.	I	want	you	to	enlist	their	help.’
‘Who	are	these	others?’
‘You	yourself	identified	them,	Cutter.	Malazans.	Survivors,	I	would
assume,	from	the	three	war	dromons.	There	is	one	of	power	among	them.’
Cutter	glanced	over	at	Darist.	The	youths	had	moved	the	old	man	so	that	he
sat	with	his	back	against	the	wall	beside	the	inside	doorway,	opposite	the	gate.
His	head	was	lowered,	bearded	chin	to	chest,	and	only	the	faint	rise	and	fall	of
his	chest	indicated	that	he	still	lived.	‘All	right.	Where	will	I	find	them?’

The	forest	was	filled	with	ruins.	Crumbled,	moss-covered,	often	little	more
than	overgrown	heaps,	but	it	was	evident	to	Cutter	as	he	padded	along	the
narrow,	faint	trail	Apsalar	had	described	for	him	that	this	forest	had	risen	from
the	heart	of	a	dead	city—a	huge	city,	dominated	by	massive	buildings.	Pieces
of	statuary	lay	scattered	here	and	there,	figures	of	enormous	stature,
constructed	in	sections	and	fixed	together	with	a	glassy	substance	he	did	not
recognize.	Although	mostly	covered	in	moss,	he	suspected	the	figures	were
Edur.
An	oppressive	gloom	suffused	all	that	lay	beneath	the	forest	canopy.	A
number	of	living	trees	showed	torn	bark,	and	while	the	bark	was	black,	the
smooth,	wet	wood	underneath	was	blood	red.	Fallen	companions	revealed	that
the	fierce	crimson	turned	black	with	death.	The	wounded	upright	trees
reminded	Cutter	of	Darist—of	the	Tiste	Andii’s	black	skin	and	the	deep	red
cuts	slashing	through	it.


He	found	he	was	shivering	in	the	damp	air	as	he	padded	along.	His	left	arm
was	now	entirely	useless,	and	though	he	had	retrieved	his	knives—including
the	broken-tipped	one—he	doubted	that	he	would	be	able	to	put	up	much	of	a
fight	should	the	need	arise.
He	could	make	out	his	destination	directly	ahead.	A	mound	of	rubble,
pyramidal	and	particularly	large,	its	summit	sunbathed.	There	were	trees	on	its
flanks,	but	most	were	dead	in	the	strangling	grip	of	vines.	A	gaping	hole	of
impenetrable	darkness	yawned	from	the	side	nearest	Cutter.
He	slowed,	then,	twenty	paces	from	the	cave,	halted.	What	he	was	about	to
do	ran	against	every	instinct.	‘Malazans!’	he	called	out,	then	winced	at	his	own
loudness.	But	the	Edur	are	closing	on	the	Throne—no-one	nearby	to	hear	me.	I
hope.	‘I	know	you	are	within!	I	would	speak	with	you!’
Figures	appeared	at	the	flanking	edges	of	the	cave,	two	on	each	side,
crossbows	cocked	and	trained	on	Cutter.	Then,	from	the	centre,	emerged	three
more,	two	women	and	a	man.	The	woman	on	the	left	gestured	and	said,	‘Come
closer,	hands	out	to	your	sides.’
Cutter	hesitated,	then	stretched	out	his	right	hand.	‘My	left	arm	won’t	lift,
I’m	afraid.’
‘Come	ahead.’
He	approached.
The	speaker	was	tall,	muscular.	Her	hair	was	long,	stained	red.	She	wore
tanned	leathers.	A	longsword	was	scabbarded	at	her	hip.	Her	skin	was	a	deep
bronze	in	hue.	Cutter	judged	she	was	ten	or	more	years	older	than	him,	and	he
felt	a	shiver	run	through	him	when	he	lifted	his	gaze	and	met	her	tilted,	goldhued	eyes.
The	other	woman	was	unarmed,	older,	and	her	entire	right	side,	head,	face,
torso	and	leg,	was	horrifically	burned—the	flesh	fused	with	wisps	of	clothing,
mangled	and	melted	by	the	ravages	of	a	sorcerous	attack.	It	was	a	wonder	that
she	was	standing—or	even	alive.
Hanging	back	a	step	from	these	two	was	the	man.	Cutter	guessed	that	he
was	Dal	Honese,	dusky-skinned,	grey-shot	black	curled	hair	on	his	head	cut
short—though	his	eyes	were,	incongruously,	a	deep	blue.	His	features	were
even	enough,	though	crisscrossed	with	scars.	He	wore	a	battered	hauberk,	a
plain	longsword	at	his	belt,	and	an	expression	so	closed	he	could	be	Apsalar ’s
brother.
The	flanking	marines	were	in	full	armour,	helmed	and	visored.
‘Are	you	the	only	survivors?’	Cutter	asked.
The	first	woman	scowled.
‘I	have	little	time,’	the	Daru	went	on.	‘We	need	your	help.	The	Edur	are


assailing	us—’
‘Edur?’
Cutter	blinked,	then	nodded.	‘The	seafarers	you	fought.	Tiste	Edur.	They
are	seeking	something	on	this	island,	something	of	vast	power—and	we’d
rather	it	not	fall	into	their	hands.	And	why	should	you	help?	Because	if	it	does
fall	into	their	hands,	the	Malazan	Empire	is	likely	finished.	In	fact,	so	is	all	of
humanity—’
The	burned	woman	cackled,	then	broke	into	a	fit	of	coughing	that	frothed
her	mouth	with	red	bubbles.	After	a	long	moment,	the	woman	recovered.	‘Oh,
to	be	young	again!	All	of	humanity,	is	it?	Why	not	the	whole	world?’
‘The	Throne	of	Shadow	is	on	this	island,’	Cutter	said.
At	this,	the	Dal	Honese	man	started	slightly.
The	burned	woman	was	nodding.	‘Yes	yes	yes,	true	words.	The	sense	of
things	arrives—in	a	flood!	Tiste	Edur,	Tiste	Edur,	a	fleet	set	out	on	a	search,	a
fleet	from	far	away,	and	now	they’ve	found	it.	Ammanas	and	Cotillion	are
about	to	be	usurped,	and	what	of	it?	The	Throne	of	Shadow—we	fought	the
Edur	for	that!	Oh,	what	a	waste—our	ships,	the	marines—my	own	life,	for	the
Throne	of	Shadow?’	She	spasmed	into	coughing	once	more.
‘Not	our	battle,’	the	other	woman	growled.	‘We	weren’t	even	looking	for	a
fight,	but	the	fools	weren’t	interested	in	actually	talking,	in	exchanging
emissaries—Hood	knows,	this	is	not	our	island,	not	within	the	Malazan
Empire.	Look	elsewhere—’
‘No,’	the	Dal	Honese	rumbled.
The	woman	turned	in	surprise.	‘We	were	clear	enough,	Traveller,	in	our
gratitude	to	you	for	saving	our	lives.	But	that	hardly	permits	you	to	assume
command—’
‘The	Throne	must	not	be	claimed	by	the	Edur,’	the	man	named	Traveller
said.	‘I	have	no	desire	to	challenge	your	command,	Captain,	but	the	lad	speaks
without	exaggeration	when	he	describes	the	risks…to	the	empire	and	to	all	of
humanity.	Like	it	or	not,	the	Warren	of	Shadow	is	now	human-aspected…’	he
smiled	crookedly,	‘and	it	well	suits	our	natures.’	The	smile	vanished.	‘This
battle	is	ours—we	face	it	now	or	we	face	it	later.’
‘You	claim	this	fight	in	the	name	of	the	Malazan	Empire?’	the	captain
asked.
‘More	than	you	know,’	Traveller	replied.
The	captain	gestured	to	one	of	her	marines.	‘Gentur,	get	the	others	out
here,	but	leave	Mudslinger	with	the	wounded.	Then	have	the	squads	count
quarrels—I	want	to	know	what	we	have.’
The	marine	named	Gentur	uncocked	his	crossbow	then	slipped	back	into


the	cave.	A	few	moments	later	more	soldiers	emerged,	sixteen	in	all	when
counting	those	who	had	originally	come	out.
Cutter	walked	up	to	the	captain.	‘There	is	one	of	power	among	you,’	he
murmured,	casting	a	glance	at	the	burned	woman—who	was	leaning	over	and
spitting	out	murky	blood.	‘Is	she	a	sorceress?’
The	captain	followed	his	gaze	and	frowned.	‘She	is,	but	she	is	dying.	The
power	you—’
The	air	reverberated	to	a	distant	concussion	and	Cutter	wheeled.	‘They’ve
attacked	again!	With	magic	this	time—follow	me!’	Without	a	backward	look,
the	Daru	set	off	down	the	trail.	He	heard	a	faint	curse	behind	him,	then	the
captain	began	shouting	orders.
The	path	led	directly	to	the	courtyard,	and	from	the	thundering	detonations
pounding	again	and	again,	Cutter	judged	the	troop	would	have	no	difficulty	in
finding	the	place	of	battle—he	would	not	wait	for	them.	Apsalar	was	there,	and
Darist,	and	a	handful	of	untrained	Tiste	Andii	youths—they	would	have	little
defence	against	sorcery.
But	Cutter	believed	he	did.
He	sprinted	on	through	the	gloom,	his	right	hand	closed	about	his	aching
left	arm,	seeking	to	hold	it	in	place,	though	each	jostling	stride	lanced	pain	into
his	chest.
The	nearest	wall	of	the	courtyard	came	into	view.	Colours	were	playing
wildly	in	the	air,	thrashing	the	trees	to	all	sides,	deep	reds	and	magenta	and
blues,	a	swirling	chaos.	The	waves	of	concussions	were	increasing	in
frequency,	pounding	within	the	courtyard.
There	were	no	Edur	outside	the	archway—an	ominous	sign.
Cutter	raced	for	the	opening.	Movement	to	his	right	caught	his	attention,
and	he	saw	another	company	of	Edur,	coming	up	from	a	coast	trail	but	still
sixty	paces	distant.	The	Malazans	will	have	to	deal	with	those…Queen	of
Dreams	help	them.	The	gate	was	before	him,	and	he	caught	first	sight	of	what
was	happening	in	the	courtyard.
Four	Edur	stood	in	a	line	in	the	centre,	their	backs	to	him.	A	dozen	or	more
Edur	warriors	waited	on	each	flank,	scimitars	held	ready.	Waves	of	magic
rolled	out	from	the	four,	pulsing,	growing	ever	stronger—and	each	one
flowed	over	the	flagstones	in	a	tumbling	storm	of	colours,	to	hammer	into
Darist.
Who	stood	alone,	at	his	feet	a	dead	or	unconscious	Apsalar.	Behind	him,
the	scattered	bodies	of	Anomander	Rake’s	grandchildren.	Somehow,	Darist
still	held	his	sword	upright—though	he	was	a	shredded	mass	of	blood,	bones
visible	through	the	wreckage	of	his	chest.	He	stood	before	the	crashing	waves,


yet	would	not	take	a	single	step	back,	even	as	they	tore	him	apart.	The	sword
Grief	was	white	hot,	the	metal	singing	a	terrible,	keening	note	that	grew	louder
and	more	piercing	with	every	moment	that	passed.
‘Blind,’	Cutter	hissed	as	he	closed,	‘I	need	you	now!’
Shadows	blossomed	around	him,	then	four	heavy	paws	thumped	onto	the
flagstones,	and	the	Hound’s	looming	presence	was	suddenly	at	his	side.
One	of	the	Edur	spun	round.	Unhuman	eyes	widened	on	seeing	Blind,	then
the	sorcerer	snapped	out	something	in	a	harsh,	commanding	tone.
Blind’s	forward	rush	halted	in	a	skid	of	claws.
And	the	Hound	cowered.
‘Beru	fend!’	Cutter	swore,	scrabbling	to	draw	a	knife—
The	courtyard	was	suddenly	filled	with	shadows,	a	strange	crackling	sound
ripping	through	the	air—
And	a	fifth	figure	was	among	the	four	Edur	sorcerers	now,	grey-clad,
gloved,	face	hidden	in	a	rough	hood.	In	its	hands,	a	rope,	that	seemed	to	writhe
with	a	life	of	its	own.	Cutter	saw	it	snap	out	to	strike	a	sorcerer	in	one	eye,	and
when	the	rope	whipped	back	out,	a	stream	of	blood	and	minced	brains
followed.	The	sorcerer ’s	magic	winked	out	and	the	Edur	toppled.
The	rope	was	too	fast	to	follow,	as	its	wielder	moved	among	the	three
remaining	mages,	but	in	its	twisting	wake	a	head	tumbled	from	shoulders,
intestines	spilled	out	from	a	gaping	rip,	and	whatever	felled	the	last	sorcerer
happened	in	a	blur	that	left	no	obvious	result,	except	that	the	Edur	was	dead
before	he	hit	the	ground.
There	were	shouts	from	the	Edur	warriors,	and	they	converged	from	both
sides.
It	was	then	that	the	screams	began.	The	rope	lashed	out	from	Cotillion’s
right	hand;	a	long-knife	was	in	his	left,	seeming	to	do	little	but	lick	and	touch
everyone	it	came	close	to—but	the	result	was	devastating.	The	air	was	a	mist	of
suspended	blood	around	the	patron	god	of	assassins,	and	before	Cutter	drew
his	fourth	breath	since	the	battle	began,	it	was	over,	and	around	Cotillion	there
was	naught	but	corpses.
A	final	snap	of	the	rope	whipped	blood	across	a	wall,	then	the	god	threw
back	his	hood	and	wheeled	to	face	Blind.	He	opened	his	mouth	to	say
something,	then	shut	it	once	more.	An	angry	gesture,	and	shadows	swept	out	to
engulf	the	trembling	Hound.	When	they	dissipated	a	moment	later	Blind	was
gone.
There	was	the	sound	of	fighting	beyond	the	courtyard	and	Cutter	turned.
‘The	Malazans	need	help!’	he	shouted	to	Cotillion.
‘No	they	don’t,’	the	god	growled.


Both	spun	at	a	loud	clatter,	to	see	Darist	lying	motionless	beside	Apsalar,
the	sword	lying	nearby,	its	heat	igniting	the	leaves	it	lay	on.
Cotillion’s	face	fell,	as	if	with	a	sudden,	deep	sorrow.	‘When	he’s	done	out
there,’	he	said	to	Cutter,	‘guide	him	to	this	sword.	Tell	him	its	names.’
‘He?’
A	moment	later,	with	a	final	survey	of	the	mayhem	surrounding	him,
Cotillion	vanished.
Cutter	rushed	over	to	Apsalar.	He	knelt	down	beside	her.
Her	clothes	were	crisped,	smoke	rising	in	tendrils	in	the	now	still	air.	Fire
had	swept	through	her	hair,	but	only	momentarily,	it	seemed,	for	she	had	plenty
left;	nor	was	her	face	burned,	although	a	long	red	welt,	already	blistering,	was
visible	in	a	diagonal	slash	down	her	neck.	Faint	jerks	of	her	limbs—the	aftereffects	of	the	sorcerous	attack—showed	him	she	still	lived.
He	tried	to	wake	her,	failed.	A	moment	later	he	looked	up,	listened.	The
sounds	of	fighting	had	ceased	and	now	a	single	set	of	boots	slowly
approached,	crunching	on	scorched	ground.
Cutter	slowly	rose	and	faced	the	archway.
Traveller	stepped	into	view.	A	sword	broken	three-quarters	of	the	way	up
the	blade	was	in	one	gauntleted	hand.	Though	spattered	with	blood,	he	seemed
unwounded.	He	paused	to	study	the	scene	in	the	courtyard.
Somehow,	Cutter	knew	without	asking	that	he	was	the	last	left	alive.	Yet	he
moved	none	the	less	to	look	out	through	the	archway.	The	Malazans	were	all
down,	motionless.	Surrounding	them	in	a	ring	were	the	corpses	of	half	a
hundred	or	more	Tiste	Edur.	Quarrel-studded	others	lay	on	the	trail
approaching	the	clearing.
I	called	those	Malazans	to	their	deaths.	That	captain—with	the	beautiful
eyes…	He	returned	to	where	Traveller	walked	among	the	fallen	Tiste	Andii.
And	the	question	he	asked	came	from	a	constricted	throat.	‘Did	you	speak	true,
Traveller?’
The	man	glanced	over.
‘This	battle,’	Cutter	elaborated.	‘Was	it	truly	a	Malazan	battle?’
Traveller ’s	answering	shrug	chilled	the	Daru.	‘Some	of	these	are	still
alive,’	he	said,	gesturing	at	the	Tiste	Andii.
‘And	there	are	wounded	in	the	cave,’	Cutter	pointed	out.
He	watched	as	the	man	walked	over	to	where	lay	Apsalar	and	Darist.	‘She
is	a	friend,’	Cutter	said.
Traveller	grunted,	then	he	flung	his	broken	sword	aside	and	stepped	over
Darist.	He	reached	down	for	the	sword.
‘Careful—’


But	the	man	closed	his	gauntleted	hand	on	the	grip	and	lifted	the	weapon.
Cutter	sighed,	closed	his	eyes	for	a	long	moment,	then	opened	them	and
said,	‘It	is	named	Vengeance…or	Grief.	You	can	choose	which	best	suits	you.’
Traveller	turned,	met	Cutter ’s	eyes.	‘Do	you	not	wish	it	for	yourself?’
The	Daru	shook	his	head.	‘It	demands	its	wielder	possess	a	singular	will.	I
am	not	for	that	sword,	nor,	I	think,	will	I	ever	be.’
Traveller	studied	the	blade	in	his	hand.	‘Vengeance,’	he	murmured,	then
nodded	and	crouched	down	to	retrieve	the	scabbard	from	Darist’s	body.	‘This
old	man,	who	was	he?’
Cutter	shrugged.	‘A	guardian.	He	was	named	Andarist.	And	now	he’s	gone,
and	so	the	Throne	is	without	a	protector—’
Traveller	straightened.	‘I	will	abide	here	a	time.	As	you	said,	there	are
wounded	to	tend	to…and	corpses	to	bury.’
‘I’ll	help—’
‘No	need.	The	god	who	strode	through	this	place	has	visited	the	Edur	ships
—there	are	small	craft	aboard,	and	supplies.	Take	your	woman	and	leave	this
island.	If	more	Edur	chance	upon	this	location,	your	presence	will	only	impede
me.’
‘How	long	will	you	plan	on	staying	here,	in	Andarist’s	role?’
‘Long	enough	to	do	him	honour.’
A	groan	came	from	Apsalar,	drawing	Cutter	to	her.	She	began	thrashing,	as
if	fevered.
‘Carry	her	from	this	place,’	Traveller	said.	‘The	sorcery’s	effects	linger.’
He	looked	up,	met	those	eyes—and	saw	sorrow	there,	the	first	emotion	yet
to	be	revealed	from	the	man.	‘I	would	help	you	bury—’
‘I	need	no	help.	It	will	not	be	the	first	time	I	have	buried	companions.	Go.
Take	her.’
He	lifted	her	in	his	arms.	Her	thrashing	stilled	and	she	sighed	as	if	sinking
into	deep,	peaceful	sleep.	Then	he	stood	studying	Traveller	for	a	moment.
The	man	turned	away.	‘Thank	your	god,	mortal,’	he	growled,	his	back	still
to	Cutter,	‘for	the	sword…’
	
An	elongated	mass	of	the	stone	floor	had	fallen	away,	down	to	the	black
rushing	water	of	the	subterranean	river.	Athwart	the	gaping	hole	lay	a	bundle
of	spears,	around	which	was	tied	a	rope	that	reached	down	into	the	water,
snaking	about	as	the	current	tugged	at	it.	The	air	of	the	rough-hewn	chamber
was	chill	and	damp.
Kalam	crouched	at	the	edge	and	studied	the	swirling	water	below	for	a


long	moment.
‘The	well,’	Sergeant	Cord	said	from	where	he	stood	beside	the	assassin.
Kalam	grunted,	then	asked,	‘What	in	Hood’s	name	inspired	the	captain	and
lieutenant	to	climb	down	there?’
‘If	you	look	long	enough,	with	the	torches	gone	from	this	room,	you’ll	see
a	glow.	There’s	something	lying	on	the	bottom,	maybe	twice	a	man’s	height	in
depth.’
‘Something?’
‘Looks	like	a	man…all	in	armour.	Lying	spread-eagled.’
‘So	take	the	torches	out.	I	want	to	see	this.’
‘Did	you	say	something,	Corporal?	Your	demon	friend	has	disappeared,
remember—vanished.’
Kalam	sighed.	‘Demons	will	do	that,	and	in	this	case	you	should	be
thankful	for	that.	Right	now,	Sergeant,	I	am	of	the	opinion	that	you’ve	all	been
cooped	up	in	this	mountain	for	far	too	long.	I’m	thinking	maybe	you’ve	lost
your	minds.	And	I	have	also	reconsidered	your	words	about	my	position	in
your	company,	and	I’ve	reached	a	decision	and	it’s	this.’	He	turned	his	head	and
fixed	his	gaze	on	Cord’s	eyes.	‘I’m	not	in	your	company,	Cord.	I’m	a
Bridgeburner.	You’re	Ashok	Regiment.	And	if	that’s	not	enough	for	you,	I	am
resurrecting	my	old	status…as	a	Claw,	a	Leader	of	a	Hand.	And	as	such,	I’m
only	outranked	in	the	field	by	Clawmaster	Topper,	the	Adjunct,	and	the
Empress	herself.	Now,	take	the	damned	torches	out	of	here!’
Cord	suddenly	smiled.	‘You	want	to	take	command	of	this	company?	Fine,
you	can	have	it.	Though	we	want	to	deal	with	Irriz	ourselves.’	He	reached	up	to
collect	the	first	of	the	sputtering	torches	on	the	wall	behind	him.
The	sudden	alteration	of	attitude	from	Cord	startled	Kalam,	then	filled	him
with	suspicion.	Until	I	sleep,	that	is.	Gods	below,	I	was	far	better	off	on	my
own.	Where	did	that	damned	demon	go,	anyway?	‘And	when	you’ve	done	that,
Sergeant,	head	back	up	to	the	others	and	begin	preparations—we’re	leaving
this	place.’
‘What	about	the	captain	and	the	lieutenant?’
‘What	about	them?	They	were	swept	away	and	they	either	drowned	or	were
sprung	loose	in	some	watering	hole.	Either	way,	they’re	not	with	us	now,	and	I
doubt	they’re	coming	back—’
‘You	don’t	know	that—’
‘They’ve	been	gone	too	long,	Cord.	If	they	didn’t	drown	they	would	have
had	to	reach	the	surface	somewhere	close.	You	can	hold	your	breath	only	so
long.	Now,	enough	with	this	discussion—get	going.’
‘Aye…sir.’


A	torch	in	each	hand,	Cord	headed	up	the	stairs.
Darkness	swiftly	engulfed	the	chamber.
Kalam	waited	for	his	eyes	to	adjust,	listening	to	the	sergeant’s	bootsteps
growing	ever	fainter.
And	there,	finally,	far	below,	the	glowing	figure,	indistinct,	rippling
beneath	the	rushing	water.
The	assassin	retrieved	the	rope	and	coiled	it	to	one	side.	About	twenty	armlengths	had	been	played	out,	but	the	bundle	of	spears	held	a	lot	more.	Then	he
pried	a	large	chunk	of	stone	from	the	ragged	edge	and	tied	the	sodden,	icycold	end	of	the	rope	to	it.
With	Oponn’s	luck,	the	rock	was	sufficiently	heavy	to	sink	more	or	less
straight	down.	He	checked	the	knots	once	more,	then	pushed	it	from	the	ledge.
It	plummeted,	dragging	the	coiled	rope	down	with	it.	The	spears	clacked
tight,	and	Kalam	peered	down.	The	stone	was	suspended	the	full	length	of	the
rope—a	distance	that	Kalam,	and,	no	doubt,	the	captain	and	the	lieutenant,	had
judged	sufficient	to	make	contact	with	the	figure.	But	it	hadn’t,	though	it	looked
close.	Meaning	he’s	a	big	bastard.	All	right…let’s	see	how	big.	He	grasped	the
spears	and	began	lifting	and	rolling	the	bundle,	playing	out	ever	greater
lengths.
A	pause	to	study	the	stone’s	progress,	then	more	playing	out	of	rope.
It	finally	reached	the	figure—given	the	sudden	bowing	of	the	line	as	the
current	took	the	slack.	Kalam	looked	down	once	more.	‘Hood’s	breath!’	The
rock	lay	on	the	figure’s	chest…and	the	distance	made	that	stone	look	small.
The	armoured	figure	was	enormous,	three	times	a	man’s	height	at	least.
The	captain	and	the	lieutenant	had	been	deceived	by	the	scale.	Probably	fatally
so.
He	squinted	down	at	it,	wondering	at	the	strange	glow,	then	grasped	the
rope	to	retrieve	the	stone—
And,	far	below,	a	massive	hand	flashed	up	and	closed	on	it—and	pulled.
Kalam	shouted	as	he	was	pulled	down	into	the	torrent.
As	he	plunged	into	the	icy	water,	he	reached	up	in	an	attempt	to	grasp	the
bundle	of	spears.
There	was	a	fierce	tug,	and	the	spears	snapped	with	an	explosive
splintering	sound	directly	overhead.
The	assassin	still	held	on	to	the	rope,	even	as	the	current	swept	him	along.
He	felt	himself	being	pulled	down.
The	cold	was	numbing.	His	ears	popped.
Then	he	was	drawn	close	by	a	pair	of	massive	chain-clad	fists—close,	and
face	to	face	with	the	broad	grille	of	the	creature’s	helm.	In	the	swirling


darkness	beneath	that	grille,	the	glimmer	of	a	rotted,	bestial	visage,	most	of	the
flesh	in	current-fluttering	strips.	Teeth	devoid	of	lips—
And	the	creature	spoke	in	Kalam’s	mind.	‘The	other	two	eluded	me…but
you	I	will	have.	I	am	so	hungry—’
Hungry?	Kalam	answered.	Try	this.
He	drove	both	long-knives	into	the	creature’s	chest.
A	thundering	bellow,	and	the	fists	shot	upward,	pushing	Kalam	away—
harder	and	faster	than	he	had	thought	possible.	Both	weapons	yanked—almost
breaking	the	grip	of	his	hands,	but	he	held	on.	The	current	had	no	time	to	grasp
him	as	he	was	thrown	upward,	shooting	back	through	the	hole	in	an	exploding
geyser	of	water.	The	ledge	caught	one	of	his	feet	and	tore	the	boot	off.	He
struck	the	chamber ’s	low	stone	ceiling,	driving	the	last	of	his	breath	from	his
lungs,	then	dropped.
He	landed	half	on	the	pit’s	ledge,	and	was	nearly	swept	back	into	the	river,
but	he	managed	to	splay	himself,	clawing	to	regain	the	floor,	moving	clear	of
the	hole.	Then	he	lay	motionless,	numbed,	his	boot	lying	beside	him,	until	he
was	able	to	draw	in	a	ragged	lungful	of	bitter	cold	air.
He	heard	feet	on	the	stairs,	then	Cord	burst	into	the	chamber	and	skidded	to
a	halt	directly	above	Kalam.	The	sergeant’s	sword	was	in	one	hand,	a	torch
flaring	in	the	other.	He	stared	down	at	the	assassin.	‘What	was	that	noise?	What
happened?	Where	are	the	damned	spears—’
Kalam	rolled	onto	his	side,	looked	down	over	the	ledge.
The	frothing	torrent	was	impenetrable—opaqued	red	with	blood.	‘Stop,’
the	assassin	gasped.
‘Stop	what?	Look	at	that	water!	Stop	what?’
‘Stop…drawing…from	this	well…’
	
It	was	a	long	time	before	the	shivers	left	his	body,	to	be	replaced	with	countless
aches	from	his	collision	with	the	chamber ’s	ceiling.	Cord	had	left	then
returned	with	others	from	his	company,	as	well	as	Sinn,	carrying	blankets	and
more	torches.
There	was	some	difficulty	in	prying	the	long-knives	from	Kalam’s	hands.
The	separation	revealed	that	the	grips	had	somehow	scorched	the	assassin’s
palms	and	fingerpads.
‘Cold,’	Ebron	muttered,	‘that’s	what	did	that.	Burned	by	cold.	What	did	you
say	that	thing	looked	like?’
Kalam,	huddled	in	blankets,	looked	up.	‘Like	something	that	should	have
been	dead	a	long	time	ago,	Mage.	Tell	me,	how	much	do	you	know	of	B’ridys


—this	fortress?’
‘Probably	less	than	you,’	Ebron	replied.	‘I	was	born	in	Karakarang.	It	was
a	monastery,	wasn’t	it?’
‘Aye.	One	of	the	oldest	cults,	long	extinct.’	A	squad	healer	crouched	beside
him	and	began	applying	a	numbing	salve	to	the	assassin’s	hands.	Kalam	leaned
his	head	against	the	wall	and	sighed.	‘Have	you	heard	of	the	Nameless	Ones?’
Ebron	snorted.	‘I	said	Karakarang,	didn’t	I?	The	Tanno	cult	claims	a	direct
descent	from	the	cult	of	the	Nameless	Ones.	The	Spiritwalkers	say	their
powers,	of	song	and	the	like,	arose	from	the	original	patterns	that	the
Nameless	Ones	fashioned	in	their	rituals—those	patterns	supposedly	crisscross
this	entire	subcontinent,	and	their	power	remains	to	this	day.	Are	you	saying
this	monastery	belonged	to	the	Nameless	Ones?	Yes,	of	course	you	are.	But
they	weren’t	demons,	were	they—’
‘No,	but	they	were	in	the	habit	of	chaining	them.	The	one	in	the	pool	is
probably	displeased	with	its	last	encounter,	but	not	as	displeased	as	you	might
think.’
Ebron	frowned,	then	paled.	‘The	blood—if	anyone	drinks	water	tainted
with	that…’
Kalam	nodded.	‘The	demon	takes	that	person’s	soul…and	makes	the
exchange.	Freedom.’
‘Not	just	people,	either!’	Ebron	hissed.	‘Animals,	birds—insects!
Anything!’
‘No,	I	think	it	will	have	to	be	big—bigger	than	a	bird	or	insect.	And	when	it
does	escape—’
‘It’ll	come	looking	for	you,’	the	mage	whispered.	He	suddenly	wheeled	to
Cord.	‘We	have	to	get	out	of	here.	Now!	Better	still—’
‘Aye,’	Kalam	growled,	‘get	as	far	away	from	me	as	you	can.	Listen—the
Empress	has	sent	her	new	Adjunct,	with	an	army—there	will	be	a	battle,	in
Raraku.	The	Adjunct	has	little	more	than	recruits.	She	could	do	with	your
company,	even	as	beaten	up	as	it	is—’
‘They	march	from	Aren?’
Kalam	nodded.	‘And	have	likely	already	started.	That	gives	you	maybe	a
month…of	staying	alive	and	out	of	trouble—’
‘We	can	manage,’	Cord	grated.
Kalam	glanced	over	at	Sinn.	‘Be	careful,	lass.’
‘I	will.	I	think	I’ll	miss	you,	Kalam.’
The	assassin	spoke	to	Cord.	‘Leave	me	my	supplies.	I	will	rest	here	a	while
longer.	So	we	don’t	cross	paths,	I	will	be	heading	due	west	from	here,	skirting
the	north	edge	of	the	Whirlwind…for	a	time.	Eventually,	I	will	try	to	breach	it,


and	make	my	way	into	Raraku	itself.’
‘Lady’s	luck	to	you,’	Cord	replied,	then	he	gestured.	‘Everyone	else,	let’s
go.’	At	the	stairway,	the	sergeant	glanced	back	at	the	assassin.	‘That	demon…
did	it	get	the	captain	and	the	lieutenant,	do	you	think?’
‘No.	It	said	otherwise.’
‘It	spoke	to	you?’
‘In	my	mind,	aye.	But	it	was	a	short	conversation.’
Cord	grinned.	‘Something	tells	me,	with	you,	they’re	all	short.’
A	moment	later	and	Kalam	was	alone,	still	racked	with	waves	of
uncontrollable	shivering.	Thankfully,	the	soldiers	had	left	a	couple	of	torches.
It	was	too	bad,	he	reflected,	that	the	azalan	demon	had	vanished.	Seriously	too
bad.
	
It	was	dusk	when	the	assassin	emerged	from	the	narrow	fissure	in	the	rock,
opposite	the	cliff,	that	was	the	monastery’s	secret	escape	route.	The	timing	was
anything	but	pleasant.	The	demon	might	already	be	free,	might	already	be
hunting	him—in	whatever	form	fate	had	gifted	it.	The	night	ahead	did	not
promise	to	be	agreeable.
The	signs	of	the	company’s	egress	were	evident	on	the	dusty	ground	in
front	of	the	fissure,	and	Kalam	noted	that	they	had	set	off	southward,	preceding
him	by	four	or	more	hours.	Satisfied,	he	shouldered	his	pack	and,	skirting	the
outcropping	that	was	the	fortress,	headed	west.
Wild	bhok’arala	kept	pace	with	him	for	a	time,	scampering	along	the	rocks
and	voicing	their	strangely	mournful	hooting	calls	as	night	gathered.	Stars
appeared	overhead	through	a	blurry	film	of	dust,	dulling	the	desert’s	ambient
silver	glow	to	something	more	like	smudged	iron.	Kalam	made	his	way
slowly,	avoiding	rises	where	he	would	be	visible	along	a	skyline.
He	froze	at	a	distant	scream	to	the	north.	An	enkar ’al.	Rare,	but	mundane
enough.	Unless	the	damned	thing	recently	landed	to	drink	from	a	pool	of	bloody
water.	The	bhok’arala	had	scattered	at	that	cry,	and	were	nowhere	to	be	seen.
There	was	no	wind	that	Kalam	could	detect,	but	he	knew	that	sound	carried	far
on	nights	like	these,	and,	worse,	the	huge	winged	reptiles	could	detect	motion
from	high	above…and	the	assassin	would	make	a	good	meal.
Cursing	to	himself,	Kalam	faced	south,	to	where	the	Whirlwind’s	solid
wall	of	whirling	sand	rose,	three	and	a	half,	maybe	four	thousand	paces	distant.
He	tightened	the	straps	of	his	pack,	then	gingerly	reached	for	his	knives.	The
effects	of	the	salve	were	fading,	twin	throbbing	pulses	of	pain	slowly	rising.
He	had	donned	his	fingerless	gloves	and	gauntlets—risking	the	danger	of


infection—but	even	these	barriers	did	little	to	lessen	the	searing	pain	as	he
closed	his	hands	on	the	weapons	and	tugged	them	loose.
Then	he	set	off	down	the	slope,	moving	as	quickly	as	he	dared.	A	hundred
heartbeats	later	he	reached	the	blistered	pan	of	Raraku’s	basin.	The	Whirlwind
was	a	muted	roar	ahead,	steadily	drawing	a	flow	of	cool	air	towards	it.	He
fixed	his	gaze	on	that	distant,	murky	wall,	then	began	jogging.
Five	hundred	paces.	The	pack’s	straps	were	abraiding	the	telaba	on	his
shoulders,	wearing	through	to	the	lightweight	chain	beneath.	His	supplies	were
slowing	him	down,	but	without	them,	he	knew,	he	was	as	good	as	dead	here	in
Raraku.	He	listened	to	his	breathing	grow	harsher.
A	thousand	paces.	Blisters	had	broken	on	his	palms,	soaking	the	insides	of
his	gauntlets,	making	the	grips	of	the	long-knives	slippery,	uncertain.	He	was
drawing	in	great	lungfuls	of	night	air	now,	a	burning	sensation	settling	into	his
thighs	and	calves.
Two	thousand	paces	left,	in	so	far	as	he	could	judge.	The	roar	was	fierce,
and	sheets	of	sand	whipped	around	him	from	behind.	He	could	feel	the	rage	of
the	goddess	in	the	air.
Fifteen	hundred	remaining—
A	sudden	hush—as	if	he’d	entered	a	cave—then	he	was	cartwheeling
through	the	air,	the	contents	of	his	pack	loose	and	spinning	away	from	the
shredded	remains	on	his	back.	Filling	his	ears,	the	echoes	of	a	sound—a	bonejarring	impact—that	he	had	not	even	heard.	Then	he	struck	the	ground	and
rolled,	knives	flying	from	his	hands.	His	back	and	shoulders	were	sodden,
covered	in	warm	blood,	his	chain	armour	shredded	by	the	enkar ’al’s	talons.
A	mocking	blow,	for	all	the	damage	inflicted.	The	creature	could	more
easily	have	ripped	his	head	off.
And	now	a	familiar	voice	entered	his	skull,	‘Aye,	I	could	have	killed	you
outright,	but	this	pleases	me	more.	Run,	mortal,	to	that	saving	wall	of	sand.’
‘I	freed	you,’	Kalam	growled,	spitting	out	blood	and	grit.	‘And	this	is	your
gratitude?’
‘You	delivered	pain.	Unacceptable.	I	am	not	one	to	feel	pain.	I	only	deliver
it.’
‘Well,’	the	assassin	grated	as	he	slowly	rose	to	his	hands	and	knees,	‘it
comforts	me	to	know	in	these,	my	last	moments,	that	you’ll	not	live	long	in
this	new	world	with	that	attitude.	I’ll	wait	for	you	other	side	of	Hood’s	gate,
Demon.’
Enormous	talons	snapped	around	him,	their	tips	punching	through	chain—
one	in	his	lower	back,	three	others	in	his	abdomen—and	he	was	lifted	from	the
ground.


Then	flung	through	the	air	once	more.	This	time	he	descended	from	a
distance	of	at	least	three	times	his	own	height,	and	when	he	struck	blackness
exploded	in	his	mind.
Consciousness	returned,	and	he	found	himself	lying	sprawled	on	the
cracked	pan,	the	ground	directly	beneath	him	muddy	with	his	own	blood.	The
stars	were	swimming	wildly	overhead,	and	he	was	unable	to	move.	A	deep
thrumming	reverberation	rang	in	the	back	of	his	skull,	coming	up	from	his
spine.
‘Ah,	awake	once	more.	Good.	Shall	we	resume	this	game?’
‘As	you	like,	Demon.	Alas,	I’m	no	longer	much	of	a	plaything.	You	broke
my	back.’
‘Your	error	was	in	landing	head	first,	mortal.’
‘My	apologies.’	But	the	numbness	was	fading—he	could	feel	a	tingling
sensation,	spreading	out	through	his	limbs.	‘Come	down	and	finish	it,	Demon.’
He	felt	the	ground	shake	as	the	enkar ’al	settled	on	the	ground	somewhere
to	his	left.	Heavy	thumping	steps	as	the	creature	approached.	‘Tell	me	your
name,	mortal.	It	is	the	least	I	can	do,	to	know	the	name	of	my	first	kill	after	so
many	thousands	of	years.’
‘Kalam	Mekhar.’
‘And	what	kind	of	creature	are	you?	You	resemble	Imass…’
‘Ah,	so	you	were	imprisoned	long	before	the	Nameless	Ones,	then.’
‘I	know	nothing	of	Nameless	Ones,	Kalam	Mekhar.’
He	could	sense	the	enkar ’al	at	his	side	now,	a	massive,	looming	presence,
though	the	assassin	kept	his	eyes	shut.	Then	he	felt	its	carnivore’s	breath	gust
down	on	him,	and	knew	the	reptile’s	jaws	were	opening	wide.
Kalam	rolled	over	and	drove	his	right	fist	down	into	the	creature’s	throat.
Then	released	the	handful	of	blood-soaked	sand,	gravel	and	rocks	it	had
held.
And	drove	the	dagger	in	his	other	hand	deep	between	its	breast	bones.
The	huge	head	jerked	back,	and	the	assassin	rolled	in	the	opposite
direction,	then	regained	his	feet.	The	motion	took	all	feeling	from	his	legs	and
he	toppled	to	the	ground	once	more—but	in	the	interval	he	had	seen	one	of	his
long-knives,	lying	point	embedded	in	the	ground	about	fifteen	paces	distant.
The	enkar ’al	was	thrashing	about	now,	choking,	talons	ripping	into	the
bleached	earth	in	its	frenzied	panic.
Sensation	ebbed	back	into	his	legs,	and	Kalam	began	dragging	himself
across	the	parched	ground.	Towards	the	long-knife.	The	serpent	blade,	I	think.
How	appropriate.
Everything	shuddered	and	the	assassin	twisted	around	to	see	that	the


creature	had	leapt,	landing	splay-legged	directly	behind	him—where	he	had
been	a	moment	ago.	Blood	was	weeping	from	its	cold	eyes,	which	flashed	in
recognition—before	panic	overwhelmed	them	once	more.	Blood	and	gritty
froth	shot	out	from	between	its	serrated	jaws.
He	resumed	dragging	himself	forward,	and	was	finally	able	to	draw	his
legs	up	and	manage	a	crawl.
Then	the	knife	was	in	his	right	hand.	Kalam	slowly	turned	about,	his	head
swimming,	and	began	crawling	back.	‘I	have	something	for	you,’	he	gasped.
‘An	old	friend,	come	to	say	hello.’
The	enkar ’al	heaved	and	landed	heavily	on	its	side,	snapping	the	bones	of
one	of	its	wings	in	the	process.	Tail	lashing,	legs	kicking,	talons	spasming
open	and	shut,	head	thumping	repeatedly	against	the	ground.
‘Remember	my	name,	Demon,’	Kalam	continued,	crawling	up	to	the
beast’s	head.	He	drew	his	knees	under	him,	then	raised	the	knife	in	both	hands.
The	point	hovered	over	the	writhing	neck,	rose	and	fell	until	in	time	with	its
motion.	‘Kalam	Mekhar…the	one	who	stuck	in	your	throat.’	He	drove	the	knife
down,	punching	through	the	thick	pebbled	skin,	and	the	blood	of	a	severed
jugular	sprayed	outward.
Kalam	reeled	back,	barely	in	time	to	avoid	the	deadly	fount,	and	dropped
into	another	roll.
Three	times	over,	to	end	finally	on	his	back	once	more.	Paralysis	stealing
through	him	once	again.
He	stared	upward	at	the	spinning	stars…until	the	darkness	devoured	them.
	
In	the	ancient	fortress	that	had	once	functioned	as	a	monastery	for	the
Nameless	Ones,	but	had	been	old	even	then—its	makers	long	forgotten—there
was	only	darkness.	On	its	lowermost	level	there	was	a	single	chamber,	its	floor
rifted	above	a	rushing	underground	river.
In	the	icy	depths,	chained	by	Elder	sorcery	to	the	bedrock,	lay	a	massive,
armoured	warrior.	Thelomen	Toblakai,	pure	of	blood,	that	had	known	the
curse	of	demonic	possession,	a	possession	that	had	devoured	its	own	sense	of
self—the	noble	warrior	had	ceased	to	exist	long,	long	ago.
Yet	now,	the	body	writhed	in	its	magical	chains.	The	demon	was	gone,	fled
with	the	outpouring	of	blood—blood	that	should	never	have	existed,	given	the
decayed	state	of	the	creature,	yet	existed	it	had,	and	the	river	had	swept	it	to
freedom.	To	a	distant	waterhole,	where	a	bull	enkar ’al—a	beast	in	its	prime—
had	been	crouching	to	drink.
The	enkar ’al	had	been	alone	for	some	time—not	even	the	spoor	of	others


of	its	kind	could	be	found	anywhere	nearby.	Though	it	had	not	sensed	the
passage	of	time,	decades	had	in	fact	passed	since	it	last	encountered	its	own
kind.	Indeed,	it	had	been	fated—given	a	normal	course	of	life—to	never	again
mate.	With	its	death,	the	extinction	of	the	enkar ’al	anywhere	east	of	the	Jhag
Odhan	would	have	been	complete.
But	now	its	soul	raged	in	a	strange,	gelid	body—no	wings,	no	thundering
hearts,	no	prey-laden	scent	to	draw	from	the	desert’s	night	air.	Something	held
it	down,	and	imprisonment	was	proving	a	swift	path	to	mindless	madness.
Far	above,	the	fortress	was	silent	and	dark.	The	air	was	motionless	once
more,	barring	the	faint	sighs	from	draughts	that	flowed	in	from	the	outer
chambers.
Rage	and	terror.	Unanswered,	except	by	the	promise	of	eternity.
Or	so	it	would	have	remained.
Had	the	Beast	Thrones	stayed	unoccupied.
Had	not	the	reawakened	wolf	gods	known	an	urgent	need…for	a
champion.
Their	presence	reached	into	the	creature’s	soul,	calmed	it	with	visions	of	a
world	where	there	were	enkar ’al	in	the	muddy	skies,	where	bull	males	locked
jaws	in	the	fierce	heat	of	the	breeding	season,	the	females	banking	in	circles
far	above.	Visions	that	brought	peace	to	the	ensnared	soul—though	with	it
came	a	deep	sorrow,	for	the	body	that	now	clothed	it	was…wrong.
A	time	of	service,	then.	The	reward—to	rejoin	its	kin	in	the	skies	of
another	realm.
Beasts	were	not	strangers	to	hope,	nor	unmindful	of	such	things	as
rewards.
Besides,	this	champion	would	taste	blood…and	soon.
For	the	moment,	however,	there	was	a	skein	of	sorcerous	bindings	to
unravel…
	
Limbs	stiff	as	death.	But	the	heart	laboured	on.
A	shadow	slipping	over	Kalam’s	face	awakened	him.	He	opened	his	eyes.
The	wrinkled	visage	of	an	old	man	hovered	above	him,	swimming	behind
waves	of	heat.	Dal	Honese,	hairless,	jutting	ears,	his	expression	twisted	into	a
scowl.	‘I	was	looking	for	you!’	he	accused,	in	Malazan.	‘Where	have	you	been?
What	are	you	doing	lying	out	here?	Don’t	you	know	it’s	hot?’
Kalam	closed	his	eyes	again.	‘Looking	for	me?’	He	shook	his	head.	‘Noone’s	looking	for	me,’	he	continued,	forcing	his	eyes	open	once	more	despite
the	glare	lancing	up	from	the	ground	around	the	two	men.	‘Well,	not	any	more,


that	is—’
‘Idiot.	Heat-addled	fool.	Stupid—but	maybe	I	should	be	crooning,
encouraging	even?	Will	that	deceive	him?	Likely.	A	change	in	tactics,	yes.	You!
Did	you	kill	this	enkar ’al?	Impressive!	Wondrous!	But	it	stinks.	Nothing	worse
than	a	rotting	enkar ’al,	except	for	the	fact	that	you’ve	fouled	yourself.	Lucky
for	you	your	urinating	friend	found	me,	then	led	me	here.	Oh,	and	it’s	marked
the	enkar ’al,	too—what	a	stench!	Sizzling	hide!	Anyway,	it’ll	carry	you.	Yes,
back	to	my	haunted	abode—’
‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	are	you?’	Kalam	demanded,	struggling	to	rise.
Though	the	paralysis	was	gone,	he	was	crusted	in	dried	blood,	the	puncture
wounds	burning	like	coals,	his	every	bone	feeling	brittle.
‘Me?	You	do	not	know?	You	do	not	recognize	the	very	famosity	exuding
from	me?	Famosity?	There	must	be	such	a	word.	I	used	it!	The	act	of	being
famous.	Of	course.	Most	devoted	servant	of	Shadow!	Highest	Archpriest
Iskaral	Pust!	God	to	the	bhok’arala,	bane	of	spiders,	Master	Deceiver	of	all	the
world’s	Soletaken	and	D’ivers!	And	now,	your	saviour!	Provided	you	have
something	for	me,	that	is,	something	to	deliver.	A	bone	whistle?	A	small	bag,
perchance?	Given	to	you	in	a	shadowy	realm,	by	an	even	shadowier	god?	A
bag,	you	fool,	filled	with	dusky	diamonds?’
‘You’re	the	one,	are	you?’	Kalam	groaned.	‘The	gods	help	us.	Aye,	I	have
the	diamonds—’	He	tried	to	sit	up,	reaching	for	the	pouch	tucked	under	his	belt
—and	caught	a	momentary	glimpse	of	the	azalan	demon,	flowing	amidst
shadows	behind	the	priest,	until	oblivion	found	him.
	
When	he	awoke	once	more	he	was	lying	on	a	raised	stone	platform	that
suspiciously	resembled	an	altar.	Oil	lamps	flickered	from	ledges	on	the	walls.
The	room	was	small,	the	air	acrid.
Healing	salves	had	been	applied—and	likely	sorcery	as	well—leaving	him
feeling	refreshed,	though	his	joints	remained	stiff,	as	if	he	had	not	moved	for
some	time.	His	clothing	had	been	removed,	a	thin	blanket	stiff	with	grime	laid
over	him.	His	throat	ached	with	a	raging	thirst.
The	assassin	slowly	sat	up,	looking	down	at	the	purple	weals	where	the
enkar ’al’s	talons	had	plunged,	then	almost	jumped	at	a	scurrying	sound	across
the	floor—a	bhok’aral,	casting	a	single,	absurdly	guilty,	glance	over	a	knobby
shoulder	a	moment	before	darting	out	through	the	doorway.
A	dusty	jug	of	water	and	a	clay	cup	lay	on	a	reed	mat	on	the	stone	floor.
Flinging	the	blanket	aside,	Kalam	moved	towards	it.
A	bloom	of	shadows	in	one	corner	of	the	chamber	caught	his	attention	as


he	poured	a	cup,	so	he	was	not	surprised	to	see	Iskaral	Pust	standing	there
when	the	shadows	faded.
The	priest	was	hunched	down,	looking	nervously	at	the	doorway,	then
tiptoeing	up	to	the	assassin.	‘All	better	now,	yes?’
‘Is	there	need	to	whisper?’	Kalam	asked.
The	man	flinched.	‘Quiet!	My	wife!’
‘Is	she	sleeping?’
Iskaral	Pust’s	small	face	was	so	like	a	bhok’aral’s	that	the	assassin	was
wondering	at	the	man’s	bloodlines—no,	Kalam,	don’t	be	ridiculous
—‘Sleeping?’	the	priest	sputtered.	‘She	never	sleeps!	No,	you	fool,	she	hunts!’
‘Hunts?	What	does	she	hunt?’
‘Not	what.	Who.	She	hunts	for	me,	of	course.’	His	eyes	glittered	as	he
stared	at	Kalam.	‘But	has	she	found	me?	No!	We’ve	not	seen	each	other	for
months!	Hee	hee!’	He	jutted	his	head	closer.	‘It’s	a	perfect	marriage.	I’ve	never
been	happier.	You	should	try	it.’
Kalam	poured	himself	another	cup.	‘I	need	to	eat—’
But	Iskaral	Pust	was	gone.
He	looked	around,	bemused.
Sandalled	feet	approached	from	the	corridor	without,	then	a	wild-haired
old	woman	leapt	in	through	the	doorway.	Dal	Honese—not	surprisingly.	She
was	covered	in	cobwebs.	She	glared	about.	‘Where	is	he?	He	was	here,	wasn’t
he?	I	can	smell	him!	The	bastard	was	here!’
Kalam	shrugged.	‘Look,	I’m	hungry—’
‘Do	I	look	appetising?’	she	snapped.	A	quick,	appraising	glance	at	Kalam.
‘Mind	you,	you	do!’	She	began	searching	the	small	room,	sniffing	at	corners,
crouching	to	peer	into	the	jug.	‘I	know	every	room,	every	hiding	place,’	she
muttered,	shaking	her	head.	‘And	why	not?	When	veered,	I	was	everywhere—’
‘You’re	a	Soletaken?	Ah,	spiders…’
‘Oh,	aren’t	you	a	clever	and	long	one!’
‘Why	not	veer	again?	Then	you	could	search—’
‘If	I	veered,	I’d	be	the	one	hunted!	Oh	no,	old	Mogora’s	not	stupid,	she
won’t	fall	for	that!	I’ll	find	him!	You	watch!’
She	scurried	from	the	room.
Kalam	sighed.	With	luck,	his	stay	with	these	two	would	be	a	short	one.
Iskaral	Pust’s	voice	whispered	in	his	ear.	‘That	was	close!’
	
Cheekbone	and	orbital	ridge	were	both	shattered,	the	pieces	that	remained	held
in	place	by	strips	of	withered	tendon	and	muscle.	Had	Onrack	possessed


anything	more	than	a	shrunken,	mummified	nugget	for	an	eye,	it	would	have
been	torn	away	by	the	Tiste	Liosan’s	ivory	scimitar.
There	was,	of	course,	no	effect	on	his	vision,	for	his	senses	existed	in	the
ghostly	fire	of	the	Tellann	Ritual—the	unseen	aura	hovering	around	his
mangled	body,	burning	with	memories	of	completeness,	of	vigour.	Even	so,
the	severing	of	his	left	arm	created	a	strange,	queasy	sense	of	conflict,	as	if	the
wound	bled	in	both	the	world	of	the	ritual	ghost-shape	and	in	the	physical
world.	A	seeping	away	of	power,	of	self,	leaving	the	T’lan	Imass	warrior	with
vaguely	confused	thoughts,	a	malaise	of	ephemeral…thinness.
He	stood	motionless,	watching	his	kin	prepare	for	the	ritual.	He	was
outside	them,	now,	no	longer	able	to	conjoin	his	spirit	with	theirs.	From	this
jarring	fact	there	was	emerging,	in	Onrack’s	mind,	a	strange	shifting	of
perspective.	He	saw	only	their	physicality	now—the	ghost-shapes	were
invisible	to	his	sight.
Withered	corpses.	Ghastly.	Devoid	of	majesty,	a	mockery	of	all	that	was
once	noble.	Duty	and	courage	had	been	made	animate,	and	this	was	all	the
T’lan	Imass	were,	and	had	been	for	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years.	Yet,
without	choice,	such	virtues	as	duty	and	courage	were	transformed	into	empty,
worthless	words.	Without	mortality,	hovering	like	an	unseen	sword	overhead,
meaning	was	without	relevance,	no	matter	the	nature—or	even	the	motivation
behind—an	act.	Any	act.
Onrack	believed	he	was	finally	seeing,	when	fixing	his	gaze	upon	his
once-kin,	what	all	those	who	were	not	T’lan	Imass	saw,	when	looking	upon
these	horrific,	undead	warriors.
An	extinct	past	refusing	to	fall	to	dust.	Brutal	reminders	of	rectitude	and
intransigence,	of	a	vow	elevated	into	insanity.
And	this	is	how	I	have	been	seen.	Perhaps	how	I	am	still	seen.	By	Trull
Sengar.	By	these	Tiste	Liosan.	Thus.	How,	then,	shall	I	feel?	What	am	I
supposed	to	feel?	And	when	last	did	feelings	even	matter?
Trull	Sengar	spoke	beside	him.	‘Were	you	anyone	else,	I	would	hazard	to
read	you	as	being	thoughtful,	Onrack.’	He	was	seated	on	a	low	wall,	the	box	of
Moranth	munitions	at	his	feet.
The	Tiste	Liosan	had	pitched	a	camp	nearby,	a	picket	line	paced	out	and
bulwarks	of	rubble	constructed,	three	paces	between	each	single-person	tent,
horses	within	a	staked-out	rope	corral—in	all,	the	precision	and	diligence
verging	on	the	obsessive.
‘Conversely,’	Trull	continued	after	a	moment,	his	eyes	on	the	Liosan,
‘perhaps	your	kind	are	indeed	great	thinkers.	Solvers	of	every	vast	mystery.
Possessors	of	all	the	right	answers…if	only	I	could	pose	the	right	questions.


Thankful	as	I	am	for	your	companionship,	Onrack,	I	admit	to	finding	you
immensely	frustrating.’
‘Frustrating.	Yes.	We	are.’
‘And	your	companions	intend	to	dismantle	what’s	left	of	you	once	we
return	to	our	home	realm.	If	I	was	in	your	place,	I’d	be	running	for	the	horizon
right	now.’
‘Flee?’	Onrack	considered	the	notion,	then	nodded.	‘Yes,	this	is	what	the
renegades—those	we	hunt—did.	And	yes,	now	I	understand	them.’
‘They	did	more	than	simply	flee,’	Trull	said.	‘They	found	someone	or
something	else	to	serve,	to	avow	allegiance	to…while	at	the	moment,	at	least,
that	option	is	not	available	to	you.	Unless,	of	course,	you	choose	those	Liosan.’
‘Or	you.’
Trull	shot	him	a	startled	look,	then	grinned.	‘Amusing.’
‘Of	course,’	Onrack	added,	‘Monok	Ochem	would	view	such	a	thing	as	a
crime,	no	different	from	that	which	has	been	committed	by	the	renegades.’
The	T’lan	Imass	had	nearly	completed	their	preparations.	The	bonecaster
had	inscribed	a	circle,	twenty	paces	across,	in	the	dried	mud	with	a	sharpened
bhederin	rib,	then	had	scattered	seeds	and	dust-clouds	of	spores	within	the	ring.
Ibra	Gholan	and	his	two	warriors	had	raised	the	equivalent	of	a	sighting	stone
—an	elongated	chunk	of	mortared	fired	bricks	from	a	collapsed	building	wall
—a	dozen	paces	outside	the	circle,	and	were	making	constant	adjustments
beneath	the	confusing	play	of	light	from	the	two	suns,	under	Monok	Ochem’s
directions.
‘That	won’t	be	easy,’	Trull	observed,	watching	the	T’lan	Imass	shifting	the
upright	stone,	‘so	I	suppose	I	can	expect	to	keep	my	blood	for	a	while	longer.’
Onrack	slowly	swung	his	misshapen	head	to	study	the	Tiste	Edur.	‘It	is	you
who	should	be	fleeing,	Trull	Sengar.’
‘Your	bonecaster	explained	that	they	needed	only	a	drop	or	two.’
My	bonecaster…no	longer.	‘True,	if	all	goes	well.’
‘Why	shouldn’t	it?’
‘The	Tiste	Liosan.	Kurald	Thyrllan—this	is	the	name	they	give	their
warren.	Seneschal	Jorrude	is	not	a	sorcerer.	He	is	a	warrior-priest.’
Trull	frowned.	‘It	is	the	same	for	the	Tiste	Edur,	for	my	people,	Onrack—’
‘And	as	such,	the	seneschal	must	kneel	before	his	power.	Whereas	a
sorcerer	commands	power.	Your	approach	is	fraught,	Trull	Sengar.	You
assume	that	a	benign	spirit	gifts	you	that	power.	If	that	spirit	is	usurped,	you
may	not	even	know	it.	And	then,	you	become	a	victim,	a	tool,	manipulated	to
serve	unknown	purposes.’
Onrack	fell	silent,	and	watched	the	Tiste	Edur…as	a	deathly	pallor	stole	the


life	from	Trull’s	eyes,	as	the	expression	became	one	of	horrified	revelation.
And	so	I	give	answer	to	a	question	you	were	yet	to	ask.	Alas,	this	does	not	make
me	all-knowing.	‘The	spirit	that	grants	the	seneschal	his	power	may	be
corrupted.	There	is	no	way	to	know…until	it	is	unleashed.	And	even	then,
malign	spirits	are	highly	skilled	at	hiding.	The	one	named	Osseric	is…lost.
Osric,	as	humans	know	him.	No,	I	do	not	know	the	source	of	Monok	Ochem’s
knowledge	in	this	matter.	Thus,	the	hand	behind	the	seneschal’s	power	is
probably	not	Osseric,	but	some	other	entity,	hidden	behind	the	guise	and	the
name	of	Osseric.	Yet	these	Tiste	Liosan	proceed	unawares.’
It	was	clear	that	Trull	Sengar	was,	for	the	moment,	unable	to	offer
comment,	or	pose	questions,	so	Onrack	simply	continued—wondering	at	the
sudden	extinction	of	his	own	reticence—‘The	seneschal	spoke	of	their	own
hunt.	In	pursuit	of	trespassers	who	crossed	through	their	fiery	warren.	But
these	trespassers	are	not	the	renegades	we	hunt.	Kurald	Thyrllan	is	not	a	sealed
warren.	Indeed,	it	lies	close	to	our	own	Tellann—for	Tellann	draws	from	it.
Fire	is	life	and	life	is	fire.	Fire	is	the	war	against	the	cold,	the	slayer	of	ice.	It	is
our	salvation.	Bonecasters	have	made	use	of	Kurald	Thyrllan.	Probably,	others
have	as	well.	That	such	incursions	should	prove	cause	for	enmity	among	the
Liosan	was	never	considered.	For	it	seemed	there	were	no	Tiste	Liosan.
‘Monok	Ochem	considers	this,	now.	He	cannot	help	but	consider	this.
Where	are	these	Liosan	from?	How	distant—how	remote—their	home?	Why
are	they	now	awakened	to	resentment?	What	does	the	one	hidden	behind	the
guise	of	Osseric	now	seek?	Where—’
‘Stop!	Please,	Onrack,	stop!	I	need	to	think—I	need—’	Trull	rose	suddenly,
flinging	a	dismissive	gesture	at	the	T’lan	Imass,	then	strode	off.
‘I	think,’	Onrack	said	quietly	to	himself	as	he	watched	the	Tiste	Edur	storm
away,	‘that	I	will	revert	to	reticence.’
A	small	chunk	of	mortared	brick	had	now	been	positioned	in	the	centre	of
the	ring;	its	top	was	being	inscribed	with	slashes	and	grooves	by	the
bonecaster,	and	Onrack	realized	that	Monok	Ochem	had	already	discerned	the
celestial	patterns	of	the	two	suns	and	the	numerous	moons	that	wheeled
overhead.
Colours	played	constantly	over	this	landscape	in	sullen	blood	hues,
occasionally	overwhelmed	by	deep	blues	that	limned	everything	in	a	cold,
almost	metallic	sheen.	At	the	moment,	magenta	dominated,	a	lurid	tone	as	of
reflected	conflagration.	Yet	the	air	remained	still	and	damp,	eternally	pensive.
A	world	aswarm	in	shadows.	The	hounds	that	Onrack	had	inadvertently
freed	from	their	stone	prisons	had	cast	scores	of	them.	The	battered	warrior
wondered	where	the	two	beasts	had	gone.	He	was	fairly	certain	that	they	were


no	longer	in	this	realm,	in	this	place	known	as	the	Nascent.
Shadow	and	spirit	reunited…the	beasts	had	possessed	something…unusual.
As	if	each	was	shaped	of	two	distinct	powers,	two	aspects	chained	together.
Onrack	had	unleashed	those	hounds,	yet,	on	second	consideration,	perhaps	not
freed	them.	Shadow	from	Dark.	That	which	is	cast…from	that	which	has	cast	it.
The	warrior	lowered	his	gaze	to	study	his	own	multiple	shadows.	Was	there
tension	between	him	and	them?	Clearly,	there	was	a	binding.	But	he	was	the
master	and	they	his	slaves.
Or	so	it	seemed…Silent	kin	of	mine.	You	precede.	You	follow.	You	strive	on
my	flanks.	Huddle	beneath	me.	Your	world	finds	its	shape	from	my	bone	and
flesh.	Yet	your	breadth	and	length	belong	to	Light.	You	are	the	bridge	between
worlds,	yet	you	cannot	be	walked.	No	substance,	then.	Only	perception.
‘Onrack,	you	are	closed	to	us.’
He	lifted	his	gaze.	Monok	Ochem	stood	before	him.	‘Yes,	Bonecaster.	I	am
closed	to	you.	Do	you	doubt	me?’
‘I	would	know	your	thoughts.’
‘They	are…insubstantial.’
Monok	Ochem	cocked	his	head.	‘None	the	less.’
Onrack	was	silent	for	a	long	moment.	‘Bonecaster.	I	remain	bound	to	your
path.’
‘Yet	you	are	severed.’
‘The	renegade	kin	must	be	found.	They	are	our…shadows.	I	now	stand
between	you	and	them,	and	so	I	can	guide	you.	I	now	know	where	to	look,	the
signs	to	seek.	Destroy	me	and	you	shall	lose	an	advantage	in	your	hunt.’
‘You	bargain	for…persistence?’
‘I	do,	Bonecaster.’
‘Tell	us,	then,	the	path	the	renegades	have	taken.’
‘I	shall…when	it	becomes	relevant.’
‘Now.’
‘No.’
Monok	Ochem	stared	down	at	the	warrior,	then	swung	away	and	returned
to	the	circle.
Tellann	commanded	that	place	now.	Tundra	flowers	had	erupted	from	the
mud,	along	with	lichen	and	mosses.	Blackflies	swarmed	at	ankle	height.	A
dozen	paces	beyond	stood	the	four	Tiste	Liosan,	their	enamel	armour	glowing
in	the	strange	magenta	light.
Trull	Sengar	watched	from	a	position	fifteen	paces	to	Onrack’s	left,	his
arms	tightly	crossed	about	himself,	a	haunted	expression	on	his	lean	face.
Monok	Ochem	approached	the	seneschal.	‘We	are	ready,	Liosan.’


Jorrude	nodded.	‘Then	I	shall	begin	my	prayers,	Undead	Priest.	And	there
shall	be	proof	that	our	Master,	Osric,	is	far	from	lost	to	us.	You	shall	know	his
power.’
The	bonecaster	said	nothing.
‘And	when,’	Trull	asked,	‘shall	I	start	spraying	blood	around?	Which	one
of	you	has	the	pleasure	of	wounding	me?’
‘The	choice	is	yours,’	Monok	Ochem	replied.
‘Good.	I	choose	Onrack—he’s	the	only	one	here	I’m	prepared	to	trust.
Apologies	to	those	of	you	who	might	take	offence	at	that.’
‘That	task	should	be	mine,’	Seneschal	Jorrude	said.	‘Blood	lies	at	the	heart
of	Osric’s	power—’
Onrack	was	alone	noting	the	slight	start	from	the	bonecaster	at	that,	and	the
warrior	nodded	to	himself.	Much	answered	with	those	words.
‘—and	indeed,’	Jorrude	continued,	‘I	shall	have	to	spill	some	of	my	own	as
well.’
But	Trull	Sengar	shook	his	head.	‘No.	Onrack…or	no	one.’	And	he	then
uncrossed	his	arms,	revealing	a	clay	ball	in	each	hand.
There	was	a	snort	from	Jorrude,	and	the	Liosan	named	Enias	growled,
‘Grant	me	leave	to	kill	him,	Seneschal.	I	shall	ensure	that	there	is	no	shortage
of	Edur	blood.’
‘Do	so,	and	I	guarantee	the	same	lack	of	shortage,’	Trull	responded,
‘concerning	Liosan	blood.	Bonecaster,	do	you	recognize	these	munitions?’
‘They	are	known	by	the	Malazans	as	cussers,’	answered	Ibra	Gholan,	the
clan	leader.	‘One	will	suffice,	given	our	collective	proximities.’
Trull	grinned	over	at	the	T’lan	Imass	warrior.	‘Even	that	dhenrabi	skin	on
your	shoulders	won’t	help	much,	will	it?’
‘True,’	Ibra	Gholan	replied.	‘While	armour	is	not	entirely	ineffectual,	such
value	invariably	proves	wanting.’
Monok	Ochem	turned	to	the	seneschal.	‘Agree	to	the	stipulation,’	he	said.
‘Begin	your	prayers,	Liosan.’
‘Such	commands	are	not	for	you	to	utter,’	Jorrude	snarled.	He	glared	at
Trull.	‘You,	Edur,	have	much	to	learn.	We	shall	create	this	gate,	and	then	there
will	come	a	reckoning.’
Trull	Sengar	shrugged.	‘As	you	like.’
Adjusting	his	bloodstained	cloak,	the	seneschal	strode	into	the	centre	of	the
circle.	Then	he	lowered	himself	onto	his	knees,	chin	settling	onto	his	chest,
closing	his	gleaming,	silver	eyes.
Blackflies	formed	a	humming	cloud	around	him.
Whatever	link	existed	between	Jorrude	and	his	god	proved	both	strong	and


swift.	God	fire	flickered	into	life	here	and	there	beyond	the	circumference	of
the	circle.	The	remaining	three	Tiste	Liosan	returned	to	their	own	camp	and
began	packing.
Monok	Ochem	strode	into	the	circle,	followed	by	the	two	clansmen	Haran
Epal	and	Olar	Shayn.	The	clan	leader	faced	Onrack	and	said,	‘Guard	your
companion	close,	if	you	would	he	survive.	Cleave	to	that	singular	concern,
Onrack.	No	matter	what	you	might	witness.’
‘I	shall,’	Onrack	replied.	In	many	essential	matters,	the	warrior	realized,	he
had	no	need	for	a	binding	of	souls	with	his	kin…to	know	their	minds.	He
strode	to	Trull	Sengar.	‘Follow	me,’	he	instructed.	‘We	must	now	enter	the
circle.’
The	Tiste	Edur	scowled,	then	nodded.	‘Take	the	box	of	munitions,	then.	My
hands	are	full.’
Trull	had	fixed	straps	to	the	box.	Onrack	collected	it	then	led	his
companion	into	the	circle.
The	three	Liosan	had	completed	breaking	their	camp	and	were	now
saddling	their	white	horses.
The	fires	continued	flickering	in	and	out	of	existence	around	the	periphery,
none	large	enough	to	pose	a	threat.	But	Onrack	could	sense	the	approach	of	the
Liosan	god.	Or	at	least	the	outermost	layers	of	its	disguise.	Cautious,
mistrustful—not	of	the	seneschal,	of	course—but	for	this	to	work,	the	hidden
spirit	would	have	to	come	to	this	realm’s	very	edge.
And	when	Jorrude	offered	up	his	own	blood,	the	bridge	of	power	between
him	and	his	god	would	be	complete.
The	thud	of	horse	hoofs	announced	the	arrival	of	the	other	three	Liosan,
the	four	mounts	in	tow.
Onrack	drew	forth	from	beneath	rotted	furs	a	small	crescent-shaped
obsidian	knife,	single-edged	on	the	inward-curving	line,	and	held	it	out	to
Trull.	‘When	I	so	instruct	you,	Trull	Sengar,	cut	yourself.	A	few	drops	will
suffice.’
The	Tiste	Edur	frowned.	‘I	thought	you	were—’
‘I	would	not	be	distracted,	in	the	moment	of	crossing.’
‘Distracted?’
‘Say	nothing.	Attend	to	yourself.’
His	frown	deepening,	Trull	crouched	to	return	the	two	cussers	to	the	box,
affixed	the	lid	once	more	and	slung	the	contrivance	over	a	shoulder,	then
straightened	and	accepted	the	stone	blade.
The	flames	were	now	growing,	unbroken	immediately	beyond	the
inscribed	ring.	Kurald	Thyrllan,	but	the	ascendant	shaping	it	remained	unseen.


Onrack	wondered	at	its	nature.	If	these	Liosan	were	any	indication,	it	found
sustenance	from	purity,	as	if	such	a	thing	was	even	possible	Intransigence.
Simplicity.
The	simplicity	of	blood,	a	detail	whispering	of	antiquity,	of	primeval
origins.	A	spirit,	then,	before	whom	a	handful	of	savages	once	bowed.	There
had	been	many	such	entities,	once,	born	of	that	primitive	assertion	of	meaning
to	object,	meaning	shaped	by	symbols	and	portents,	scratchings	on	rock-faces
and	in	the	depths	of	caves.
No	shortage…but	tribes	died	out,	were	winnowed	out,	were	devoured	by
more	powerful	neighbours.	The	secret	language	of	the	scratchings,	the	caves
with	their	painted	images	that	came	alive	to	the	pounding	of	drums—those
most	mysterious	cathedrals	of	thunder…all	lost,	forgotten.	And	with	that
fading	away	of	secrets,	so	too	the	spirits	themselves	dwindled,	usually	into
oblivion.
That	some	lingered	was	not	surprising	to	Onrack.	Even	unto	usurping	the
faith	of	a	new	tribe.	What	was	new	to	the	warrior,	rising	like	a	tightness	into
his	desiccated	throat,	was	the	sense	of…pathos.
In	the	name	of	purity,	the	Liosan	worship	their	god.	In	the	name	of…of
nostalgia,	the	god	worships	what	was	and	shall	never	again	return.
The	spilling	of	blood	was	the	deadliest	of	games.
As	is	about	to	be	seen.
A	harsh	cry	from	the	seneschal,	and	the	flames	rose	into	a	wall	on	all	sides,
raging	with	unbridled	power.	Jorrude	had	laid	open	his	left	palm.	Within	the
circle,	a	swirling	wind	rose,	laden	with	the	smells	of	a	thaw—of	spring	in
some	northern	clime.
Onrack	turned	to	Trull.	‘Now.’
The	Tiste	Edur	slashed	the	obsidian	blade	across	the	edge	of	his	left	hand,
then	stared	down	disbelieving	at	the	gash—clear,	the	flesh	neatly	parted,
frighteningly	deep.
The	blood	emerged	a	moment	later,	welling	forth,	red	roots	racing	and
branching	down	his	grey-skinned	forearm.
The	gate	seemed	to	tear	itself	open,	surrounding	the	group	within	the
circle.	Spiralling	tunnels	reached	outward	from	it,	each	seeming	to	lead	on	into
eternity.	A	roar	of	chaos	on	the	flanks,	miasmic	grey	fire	in	the	spaces	between
the	portals.	Onrack	reached	out	to	catch	a	reeling	Trull	Sengar.	The	blood	was
spraying	out	from	his	left	hand,	as	if	the	Edur ’s	entire	body	was	being
squeezed	by	some	unseen,	but	unrelenting	pressure.
Onrack	glanced	over—to	see	Monok	Ochem	standing	alone,	head	tilted
back	as	the	winds	of	Tellann	whipped	the	silver-tipped	fur	around	his


unhelmed	head.	Beyond	the	bonecaster,	a	momentary	glimpse	of	Ibra	Gholan,
Olar	Shayn	and	Haran	Epal	vanishing	down	a	tunnel	of	fire.
The	seneschal’s	companions	were	now	running	towards	their	master ’s
prone,	unconscious	body.
Satisfied	that	the	others	were	occupied—temporarily	unmindful—Onrack
dragged	Trull	close	until	their	bodies	made	contact,	the	T’lan	Imass	managing
a	one-armed	embrace.	‘Hold	on	to	me,’	he	rasped.	‘Trull	Sengar,	hold	on	to	me
—but	free	your	left	hand.’
Fingers	clutched	at	Onrack’s	ragged	cloak,	began	dragging	with	growing
weight.	The	T’lan	Imass	relinquished	his	one-armed	hug	and	snapped	out	his
hand—to	close	on	Trull’s.	The	blood	bit	like	acid	into	flesh	that	had	forgotten
pain.	Onrack	almost	tore	his	grip	free	in	the	sudden,	overwhelming	agony,	but
then	he	tightened	his	hold	and	leaned	close	to	the	Tiste	Edur.	‘Listen!	I,	Onrack,
once	of	the	Logros	but	now	stranger	to	the	Ritual,	avow	service	to	Trull	Sengar
of	the	Tiste	Edur.	I	pledge	to	defend	your	life.	This	vow	cannot	be	sundered.
Now,	lead	us	from	here!’
Their	hands	still	locked	together,	sealed	for	the	moment	by	a	slowing	flow
of	blood.	Onrack	pulled	Trull	around	until	they	faced	one	of	the	spiralling
tunnels.	Then	they	plunged	forward.
Onrack	saw	the	bonecaster	wheel	to	face	them.	But	the	distance	was	too
great,	and	the	ritual	had	already	begun	tearing	itself	apart.
Then	Monok	Ochem	veered	into	his	Soletaken	form.	A	blur,	then	a
massive,	hulking	beast	was	thundering	in	pursuit.
Onrack	sought	to	tear	his	grip	from	Trull	to	reach	for	his	sword,	to	block
the	Soletaken	and	so	ensure	Trull’s	escape—but	the	Edur	had	turned,	had	seen,
and	would	not	let	go.	Instead,	he	pulled,	hard.	Onrack	stumbled	back.
Knuckles	pounded	on	the	ground—the	ape	that	Monok	Ochem	had	become
was,	despite	being	gaunt	with	death,	enormous.	Patched	grey	and	black	skin,
tufts	of	silver-tipped	black	hair	on	the	broad	shoulders	and	the	nape	of	the
neck,	a	sunken-eyed,	withered	face,	jaws	stretching	wide	to	reveal	canines—
voicing	a	deep,	grating	roar.
Then	Monok	Ochem	simply	vanished.	Swallowed	by	a	surge	of	chaos.
Onrack	stumbled	over	something,	crashed	down	onto	hard-packed	ground,
gravel	skidding	under	him.	Beside	him,	on	his	knees,	was	Trull	Sengar.
The	fall	had	broken	their	grip,	and	the	Tiste	Edur	was	staring	down	at	his
left	hand—where	only	a	thin,	white	scar	remained.
A	single	sun	blazed	down	on	them,	and	Onrack	knew	they	had	returned	to
his	native	realm.
The	T’lan	Imass	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘We	must	leave	this	place,


Trull	Sengar.	My	kin	shall	pursue.	Perhaps	only	Monok	Ochem	remains,	but	he
will	not	relent.’
Trull	raised	his	head.	‘Remains?	What	do	you	mean?	Where	did	the	others
go?’
Onrack	looked	down	on	the	Tiste	Edur.	‘The	Liosan	were	too	late	to
realize.	The	turning	of	Tellann	succeeded	in	driving	all	awareness	from	the
seneschal.	They	were	entirely	unprepared.	Ibra	Gholan,	Olar	Shayn	and	Haran
Epal	walked	into	the	warren	of	Kurald	Thyrllan.’
‘Walked	into?	Why?’
Onrack	managed	a	one-sided	shrug.	‘They	went,	Trull	Sengar,	to	kill	the
Liosan	god.’
	
Little	more	than	bones	and	scraps	of	armour,	what	had	once	been	an	army	lay
in	the	thick	grey	ash,	encircling	a	steeply	sloped	pit	of	some	kind.	There	was
no	way	to	tell	whether	the	army	had	faced	outward—defending	some	sort	of
subterranean	entrance—or	inward,	seeking	to	prevent	an	escape.
Lostara	Yil	stood	ankle-deep	in	the	trail’s	ashes.	Watching	Pearl	walk
gingerly	among	the	bones,	reaching	down	every	now	and	then	to	drag	some
item	free	for	a	closer	look.	Her	throat	was	raw,	her	hatred	of	the	Imperial
Warren	deepening	with	every	passing	moment.
‘The	scenery	is	unchanging,’	Pearl	had	noted,	‘yet	never	the	same.	I	have
walked	this	path	before—this	very	path.	There	were	no	ruins,	then.	And	no
heap	of	bones	or	hole	in	the	ground.’
And	no	winds	to	shift	the	ashes.
But	bones	and	other	larger	objects	had	a	way	of	rising	to	the	surface,
eventually.	Or	so	it	was	true	in	the	sands—why	should	ashes	be	any	different?
None	the	less,	some	of	those	ruins	were	massive.	Vast	expanses	of	flagstones,
unstained,	devoid	even	of	dust.	Tall,	leaning	towers—like	the	rotted	stubs	of
fangs.	A	bridge	spanning	nothing,	its	stones	so	precisely	set	that	a	knife-tip
could	not	be	slipped	between	them.
Slapping	the	dust	from	his	gloved	hands,	Pearl	strode	up.	‘Curious	indeed.’
Lostara	coughed,	hacked	out	grey	sputum.	‘Just	find	us	a	gate	and	get	us
out	of	here,’	she	rasped.
‘Ah,	well,	as	to	that,	my	dear,	the	gods	are	smiling	down	upon	us.	I	have
found	a	gate,	and	a	lively	one	it	is.’
She	scowled	at	him,	knowing	he	sought	the	inevitable	question	from	her,
but	she	was	in	no	mood	to	ask	it.
‘Alas,	I	know	your	thoughts,’	Pearl	continued	after	a	moment,	with	a	quick


wry	grin.	He	pointed	back	towards	the	pit.	‘Down	there…unfortunately.	Thus,
we	are	left	with	a	dire	choice.	Continue	on—and	risk	you	spitting	out	your
lungs—in	search	of	a	more	easily	approachable	gate.	Or	take	the	plunge,	as	it
were.’
‘You’re	leaving	the	choice	to	me?’
‘Why	not?	Now,	I’m	waiting.	Which	shall	it	be?’
She	drew	the	scarf	over	her	mouth	and	nose	once	more,	tightened	the
straps	on	her	pack,	then	marched	off…towards	the	pit.
Pearl	fell	in	step.	‘Courage	and	foolishness,	the	distinction	so	often	proves
problematic—’
‘Except	in	hindsight.’	Lostara	kicked	herself	free	of	a	rib	cage	that	had
fouled	her	stride,	then	swore	at	the	resultant	clouds	of	ash	and	dust.	‘Who	were
these	damned	soldiers?	Do	you	know?’
‘I	may	possess	extraordinary	powers	of	observation	and	unfathomable
depths	of	intelligence,	lass,	but	I	cannot	read	when	there	is	nothing	to	be	seen.
Corpses.	Human,	in	so	far	as	I	can	tell.	The	only	detail	I	can	offer	is	that	they
fought	this	battle	knee-deep	in	this	ash…meaning—’
‘That	whatever	crisped	this	realm	had	already	happened,’	Lostara	cut	in.
‘Meaning,	they	either	survived	the	event,	or	were	interlopers…like	us.’
‘Very	possibly	emerging	from	the	very	gate	we	now	approach.’
‘To	cross	blades	with	whom?’
Pearl	shrugged.	‘I	have	no	idea.	But	I	have	a	few	theories.’
‘Of	course	you	do,’	she	snapped.	‘Like	all	men—you	hate	to	say	you	don’t
know	and	leave	it	at	that.	You	have	an	answer	to	every	question,	and	if	you
don’t	you	make	one	up.’
‘An	outrageous	accusation,	my	dear.	It	is	not	a	matter	of	making	up
answers,	it	is	rather	an	exercise	in	conjecture.	There	is	a	difference—’
‘That’s	what	you	say,	not	what	I	have	to	listen	to.	All	the	time.	Endless
words.	Does	a	man	even	exist	who	believes	there	can	be	too	many	words?’
‘I	don’t	know,’	Pearl	replied.
After	a	moment	she	shot	him	a	glare,	but	he	was	studiously	staring	ahead.
They	came	to	the	edge	of	the	slope	and	halted,	looking	down.
The	descent	would	be	treacherous,	jumbled	bones,	swords	jagged	with
decay,	and	an	unknown	depth	of	ash	and	dust.	The	hole	at	the	base	was	perhaps
ten	paces	across,	yawning	black.
‘There	are	spiders	in	the	desert,’	Lostara	muttered,	‘that	said	build	such
traps.’
‘Slightly	smaller,	surely.’
She	reached	down	and	collected	a	thigh	bone,	momentarily	surprised	at	its


weight,	then	tossed	it	down	the	slope.
A	thud.
Then	the	packed	ash	beneath	their	boots	vanished.
And	down	they	went,	amidst	explosions	of	dust,	ashes	and	splinters	of
bone.	A	hissing	rush—blind,	choking—then	they	were	falling	through	a	dry
downpour.	To	land	heavily	on	yet	another	slope	that	tumbled	them	down	a
roaring,	echoing	avalanche.
It	was	a	descent	through	splintered	bones	and	bits	of	iron,	and	it	seemed
unending.
Lostara	was	unable	to	draw	breath—they	were	drowning	in	thick	dust,
sliding	and	rolling,	sinking	then	bursting	free	once	more.	Down,	down
through	absolute	darkness.	A	sudden,	jarring	collision	with	something—
possibly	wood—then	a	withered,	rumpled	surface	that	seemed	tiled,	and	down
once	more.
Another	thump	and	tumble.
Then	she	was	rolling	across	flagstones,	pushed	on	by	a	wave	of	ash	and
detritus,	finally	coming	to	a	crunching	halt,	flat	on	her	back,	a	flow	of	frigid
air	rising	up	on	her	left	side—where	she	reached	out,	groping,	then	down,	to
where	the	floor	should	have	been.	Nothing.	She	was	lying	on	an	edge,	and
something	told	her	that,	had	she	taken	this	last	descent,	Hood	alone	would	greet
her	at	its	conclusion.
Coughing	from	slightly	further	up	the	slope	on	her	right.	A	faint	nudge	as
the	heaped	bones	and	ashes	on	that	side	shifted.
Another	such	nudge,	and	she	would	be	pushed	over	the	edge.	Lostara
rolled	her	head	to	the	left	and	spat,	then	tried	to	speak.	The	word	came	out	thin
and	hoarse.	‘Don’t.’
Another	cough,	then,	‘Don’t	what?’
‘Move.’
‘Oh.	That	doesn’t	sound	good.	It’s	not	good,	is	it?’
‘Not	good.	Another	ledge.	Another	drop…this	one	I	think	for	ever.’
‘Judicious	use	of	my	warren	seems	appropriate	at	this	point,	don’t	you
think?’
‘Yes.’
‘A	moment,	then…’
A	dull	sphere	of	light	emerged,	suspended	above	them,	its	illumination
struggling	in	the	swirling	clouds	of	dust.
It	edged	closer—grew	larger.	Brightened.
Revealing	all	that	was	above	them.
Lostara	said	nothing.	Her	chest	had	contracted	as	if	unwilling	to	take


another	breath.	Her	heart	thundered.	Wood.	An	X-shaped	cross,	tilting	over
them,	as	tall	as	a	four-storey	building.	The	glint	of	enormous,	pitted	spikes.
And	nailed	to	the	cruciform—
—a	dragon.
Wings	spread,	pinned	wide.	Hind	limbs	impaled.	Chains	wrapped	about	its
neck,	holding	its	massive	wedge-shaped	head	up,	as	if	staring	skyward—
—to	a	sea	of	stars	marked	here	and	there	with	swirls	of	glowing	mist.
‘It’s	not	here…’	Pearl	whispered.
‘What?	It’s	right	above—’
‘No.	Well,	yes.	But…look	carefully.	It’s	enclosed	in	a	sphere.	A	pocket
warren,	a	realm	unto	itself—’
‘Or	the	entranceway,’	she	suggested.	‘Sealing—’
‘A	gate.	Queen	of	Dreams,	I	think	you’re	right.	Even	so,	its	power	doesn’t
reach	us…thank	the	spirits	and	gods	and	demons	and	ascendants	and—’
‘Why,	Pearl?’
‘Because,	lass—that	dragon	is	aspected.’
‘I	thought	they	all	were.’
‘Aye.	You	keep	interrupting	me,	Lostara	Yil.	Aspected,	I	was	saying.	But
not	to	a	warren.	Gods!	I	cannot	fathom—’
‘Damn	you,	Pearl!’
‘Otataral.’
‘What?’
‘Otataral.	Her	aspect	is	otataral,	woman!	This	is	an	otataral	dragon.’
	
Neither	spoke	for	a	time.	Lostara	began	edging	herself	away	from	the	ledge,
shifting	weight	incrementally,	freezing	at	every	increase	in	the	stream	of	dust
slipping	away	beneath	her.
Turning	her	head,	she	could	make	out	Pearl.	He	had	unveiled	enough	of	his
warren	to	draw	himself	upward,	hovering	slightly	above	the	slope.	His	gaze
remained	fixed	on	the	crucified	dragon.
‘Some	help	down	here…’	Lostara	growled.
He	started,	then	looked	down	at	her.	‘Right.	My	deepest	apologies,	lass.
Here,	I	shall	extend	my	warren…’
She	felt	herself	lifted	into	the	air.
‘Make	no	struggle,	lass.	Relax,	and	you’ll	float	up	beside	me,	then	pivot
upright.’
She	forced	herself	to	grow	still,	but	the	result	was	one	of	rigid	immobility.
Pearl	chuckled.	‘Lacks	grace,	but	it	will	do.’


A	half-dozen	heart-beats	later	she	was	beside	him,	hovering	upright.
‘Try	to	relax	again,	Lostara.’
She	glared	at	him,	but	he	was	staring	upward	once	more.	Reluctantly,	she
followed	his	gaze.
‘It’s	still	alive,	you	know,’	Pearl	whispered.
‘Who	could	have	done	this?’
‘Whoever	it	was,	we	have	a	lot	for	which	to	thank	him,	her…or	them.	This
thing	devours	magic.	Consumes	warrens.’
‘All	the	old	legends	of	dragons	begin	with	the	statement	that	they	are	the
essence	of	sorcery.	How,	then,	could	this	thing	even	exist?’
‘Nature	always	seeks	a	balance.	Forces	strive	for	symmetry.	This	dragon
answers	every	other	dragon	that	ever	existed,	or	ever	will.’
Lostara	coughed	and	spat	once	more,	then	she	shivered.	‘The	Imperial
Warren,	Pearl.	What	was	it	before	it	was…turned	to	ash?’
He	glanced	over	at	her,	eyes	narrowing.	He	shrugged	and	began	brushing
dust	from	his	clothes.	‘I	see	no	value	in	lingering	in	this	horrendous	place—’
‘You	said	there	was	a	gate	down	here—not	that	one,	surely—’
‘No.	Beyond	that	ledge.	I	suspect	the	last	time	it	was	used	was	by	whoever
or	whatever	nailed	this	dragon	onto	the	cross.	Surprisingly,	they	didn’t	seal	the
gate	behind	them.’
‘Careless.’
‘More	like	supremely	confident,	I	would	think.	We’ll	make	our	descent	a
little	more	orderly	this	time,	agreed?	You	need	not	move—leave	this	to	me.’
‘I	despise	that	suggestion	in	principle,	Pearl,	but	what	I	hate	more	is	that	I
see	no	choice.’
‘Haven’t	you	had	your	fill	of	bared	bones	yet,	lass?	A	simple	sweet	smile
would	have	sufficed.’
She	fixed	him	with	a	look	of	steel.
Pearl	sighed.	‘A	good	try,	lass.	We’ll	work	on	it.’
As	they	floated	out	over	the	ledge,	Lostara	looked	up	one	last	time,	but	not
at	the	dragon,	rather	at	the	starscape	beyond.	‘What	do	you	make	of	that	night
sky,	Pearl?	I	do	not	recognize	the	constellations…nor	have	I	ever	before	seen
those	glowing	swirls	in	any	night	sky	I’ve	looked	at.’
He	grunted.	‘That’s	a	foreign	sky—as	foreign	as	can	be.	A	hole	leading
into	alien	realms,	countless	strange	worlds	filled	with	creatures	unimaginable
—’
‘You	really	don’t	know,	do	you?’
‘Of	course	I	don’t!’	he	snapped.
‘Then	why	didn’t	you	just	say	so?’


‘It	was	more	fun	conjecturing	creatively,	of	course.	How	can	a	man	be	the
object	of	a	woman’s	interest	if	he’s	always	confessing	his	ignorance?’
‘You	want	me	to	be	interested	in	you?	Why	didn’t	you	say	no?	Now	I	will
hang	on	your	every	word,	of	course.	Shall	I	gaze	adoringly	into	your	eyes	as
well?’
He	swung	on	her	a	glum	look.	‘Men	really	have	no	chance,	do	they?’
‘Typical	conceit	to	have	thought	otherwise,	Pearl.’
They	were	falling	gently	through	darkness.	The	sorcerous	globe	of	light
followed,	but	at	some	distance,	smudged	and	faint	behind	the	suspended	dust.
Lostara	looked	downward,	then	snapped	her	head	up	and	closed	her	eyes,
fighting	vertigo.	Through	gritted	teeth	she	asked,	‘How	much	farther	do	we
sink,	do	you	think?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘You	could’ve	given	a	better	answer	than	that!’	When	he	made	no	reply	she
glanced	over	at	him	through	slitted	eyes.
He	looked	positively	despondent.
‘Well?’	she	demanded.
‘If	these	are	the	depths	of	despair,	lass,	we’re	almost	there.’
	
As	it	turned	out,	another	hundred	heartbeats	passed	before	they	reached	the
dust-laden	floor.	The	sphere	of	light	arrived	a	short	while	later,	illuminating
the	surrounding	area.
The	floor	was	solid	rock,	uneven	and	littered	with	still	more	bones.	No
walls	were	in	sight.
The	magic	that	had	slowly	lowered	them	dissipated.	Pearl	took	two	strides
then	gestured,	and,	as	if	he	had	flung	aside	an	invisible	current,	the	glimmering
outlines	of	a	gate	appeared	before	them.	The	Claw	grunted.
‘Now	what?’	Lostara	asked.
‘Thyr.	Or,	to	be	more	precise,	the	Elder	Warren	from	which	Thyr	derived.
I	can’t	recall	its	name.	Kurald	something.	Tiste.	Not	Edur,	not	Andii,	but	the
other	one.	And…’	he	added	in	a	low	voice,	‘the	last	things	to	use	it	left	tracks.’
Lostara	stared	down	at	the	threshold.	Somewhat	obscured,	but	discernible
none	the	less.	Dragons.	‘I	can	make	out	at	least	three	sets,’	she	said	after	a
moment.
‘More	like	six,	maybe	more.	Those	two	sets’—he	pointed—‘were	the	last
to	leave.	Big	bastards.	Well,	that	answers	the	question	of	who,	or	what,	was
capable	of	subduing	the	Otataral	Dragon.	Other	dragons,	of	course.	Even	so,	it
could	not	have	been	easy.’


‘Thyr,	you	said.	Can	we	use	it?’
‘Oh,	I	imagine	so.’
‘Well,	what	are	we	waiting	for?’
He	shrugged.	‘Follow	me,	then.’
Staying	close,	she	fell	in	step	behind	him.
They	strode	through	the	gate.
And	stumbled	into	a	realm	of	gold	fire.
Wild	storms	on	all	horizons,	a	raging,	blinding	sky.
They	stood	on	a	scorched	patch	of	glittering	crystals,	the	past	passage	of
immense	heat	having	burnished	the	sharp-edged	stones	with	myriad	colours.
Other	such	patches	were	visible	here	and	there.
Immediately	before	them	rose	a	pillar,	shaped	like	an	elongated	pyramid,
withered	and	baked,	with	only	the	surface	facing	them	dressed	smooth.	Words
in	an	unknown	language	had	been	carved	on	it.
The	air	was	searing	in	Lostara’s	lungs,	and	she	was	sodden	with	sweat.
But	it	was,	for	the	moment,	survivable.
Pearl	walked	up	to	the	pillar.
‘We	have	to	get	out	of	here!’	Lostara	shouted.
The	firestorms	were	deafening,	but	she	was	certain	he	heard	her,	and	chose
to	ignore	it.
Lostara	rarely	tolerated	being	ignored.	She	strode	after	him.	‘Listen	to
me!’
‘Names!’	He	spun	to	her.	‘The	names!	The	ones	who	imprisoned	the
Otataral	Dragon!	They’re	all	here!’
A	growing	roar	caught	her	attention,	and	she	turned	to	face	right—to	see	a
wall	of	flame	rolling	towards	them.
‘Pearl!’
He	looked,	visibly	blanched.	Stepped	back—and	his	foot	skidded	out	from
beneath	him,	dropping	him	hard	onto	his	backside.	Blankly,	he	reached	down
under	him,	and	when	he	brought	his	gloved	hand	back	up,	it	was	slick	with
blood.
‘Did	you—’
‘No!’	He	clambered	upright—and	now	they	both	saw	the	blood-trail,
cutting	crossways	over	the	patch,	vanishing	into	the	flames	on	the	other	side.
‘Something’s	in	trouble!’	Pearl	said.
‘So	are	we	if	we	don’t	get	moving!’
The	firestorm	now	filled	half	the	sky—the	heat—
He	grasped	her	arm	and	they	plunged	around	the	pillar—
—into	a	glittering	cavern.	Where	blood	had	sprayed,	gouted	out	to	paint


walls	and	ceiling,	and	where	the	shattered	pieces	of	a	desiccated	warrior	lay
almost	at	their	feet.
A	T’lan	Imass.
Lostara	stared	down	at	it.	Rotted	wolf	fur	the	colour	of	the	desert,	a	broken
bone-hafted	double-bladed	axe	of	reddish-brown	flint	almost	entirely	obscured
beneath	a	pool	of	blood.	Whatever	it	had	attacked	had	struck	back.	The
warrior ’s	chest	was	crushed	flat.	Both	arms	had	been	torn	off	at	the	shoulders.
And	the	T’lan	Imass	had	been	decapitated.	A	moment’s	search	found	the	head,
lying	off	to	one	side.
‘Pearl—let’s	get	out	of	here.’
He	nodded.	Then	hesitated.
‘Now	what?’
‘Your	favourite	question,’	he	muttered.	Then	he	scrambled	over	to	collect
the	severed	head.	Faced	her	once	more.	‘All	right.	Let’s	go.’
The	strange	cave	blurred,	then	vanished.
And	they	were	standing	on	a	sun-bleached	rock	shelf,	overlooking	a	stony
basin	that	had	once	known	a	stream.
Pearl	grinned	over	at	her.	‘Home.’	He	held	up	the	ghastly	head	before	him
and	spoke	to	it.	‘I	know	you	can	hear	me,	T’lan	Imass.	I’ll	find	for	you	the
crotch	of	a	tree	for	your	final	resting	place,	provided	I	get	some	answers.’
The	warrior ’s	reply	was	strangely	echoing,	the	voice	thick	and	halting.
‘What	is	it	you	wish	to	know?’
Pearl	smiled.	‘That’s	better.	First	off,	your	name.’
‘Olar	Shayn,	of	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass.	Of	Ibra	Gholan’s	clan.	Born	in	the
Year	of	the	Two-Headed	Snake—’
‘Olar	Shayn.	What	in	Hood’s	name	were	you	doing	in	that	warren?	Who
were	you	trying	to	kill?’
‘We	did	not	try;	we	succeeded.	The	wounds	delivered	were	mortal.	It	will
die,	and	my	kin	pursue	to	witness.’
‘It?	What,	precisely?’
‘A	false	god.	I	know	no	more	than	that.	I	was	commanded	to	kill	it.	Now,
find	for	me	a	worthy	place	of	rest,	mortal.’
‘I	will.	As	soon	as	I	find	a	tree.’
Lostara	wiped	sweat	from	her	brow,	then	went	over	to	sit	on	a	boulder.	‘It
doesn’t	need	a	tree,	Pearl,’	she	said,	sighing.	‘This	ledge	should	do.’
The	Claw	swung	the	severed	head	so	that	it	faced	the	basin	and	the	vista
beyond.	‘Is	this	pleasing	enough,	Olar	Shayn?’
‘It	is.	Tell	me	your	name,	and	you	shall	know	my	eternal	gratitude.’
‘Eternal?	I	suppose	that’s	not	an	exaggeration	either,	is	it?	Well,	I	am	Pearl,


and	my	redoubtable	companion	is	Lostara	Yil.	Now,	let’s	find	a	secure	place
for	you,	shall	we?’
‘Your	kindness	is	unexpected,	Pearl.’
‘Always	is	and	always	will	be,’	he	replied,	scanning	the	ledge.
Lostara	stared	at	her	companion,	surprised	at	how	thoroughly	her
sentiments	matched	those	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	‘Pearl,	do	you	know	precisely
where	we	are?’
He	shrugged.	‘First	things	first,	lass.	I’d	appreciate	it	if	you	allowed	me	to
savour	my	merciful	moment.	Ah!	Here’s	the	spot,	Olar	Shayn!’
Lostara	closed	her	eyes.	From	ashes	and	dust…to	sand.	At	least	it	was
home.	Now,	all	that	remained	was	finding	the	trail	of	a	Malazan	lass	who
vanished	months	ago.	‘Nothing	to	it,’	she	whispered.
‘Did	you	say	something,	lass?’
She	opened	her	eyes	and	studied	him	where	he	crouched	anchoring	stones
around	the	undead	warrior ’s	severed	head.	‘You	don’t	know	where	we	are,	do
you?’
He	smiled.	‘Is	this	a	time,	do	you	think,	for	some	creative	conjecture?’
Thoughts	of	murder	flashed	through	her,	not	for	the	first	time.


Chapter	Thirteen

It	is	not	unusual	to	see	the	warrens	of	Meanas	and	Rashan	as	the
closest	of	kin.	Yet	are	not	the	games	of	illusion	and	shadow	games
of	light?	At	some	point,	therefore,	the	notion	of	distinctions
between	these	warrens	ceases	to	have	meaning.	Meanas,	Rashan
and	Thyr.	Only	the	most	fanatic	of	practitioners	among	these
warrens	would	object	to	this.	The	aspect	all	three	share	is
ambivalence;	their	games	the	games	of	ambiguity.	All	is	deceit,	all
is	deception.	Among	them,	nothing—nothing	at	all—is	as	it	seems.
A	PRELIMINARY	ANALYSIS	OF	THE	WARRENS
KONORALANDAS
Fifteen	hundred	desert	warriors	had	assembled	at	the	southern	edge	of	the
ruined	city,	their	white	horses	ghostly	through	the	clouds	of	amber	dust,	the
glint	of	chain	vests	and	scaled	hauberks	flashing	dully	every	now	and	then
from	beneath	golden	telabas.	Five	hundred	spare	mounts	accompanied	the
raiders.
Korbolo	Dom	stood	near	Sha’ik	and	Ghost	Hands	atop	a	weathered
platform	that	had	once	been	the	foundation	of	a	temple	or	public	building	of
some	sort,	allowing	them	a	clear	view	of	the	assembling	warriors.
The	Napan	renegade	watched,	expressionless,	as	Leoman	of	the	Flails	rode
up	for	a	last	word	with	the	Chosen	One.	He	himself	would	not	bother	with	any
false	blessings,	for	he	would	much	prefer	that	Leoman	never	return.	And	if	he
must,	then	not	in	triumph	in	any	case.	And	though	his	scarred	face	revealed
nothing,	he	well	knew	that	Leoman	entertained	no	delusions	about	Korbolo’s
feelings	for	him.
They	were	allies	only	in	so	far	as	they	both	served	Sha’ik.	And	even	that
was	far	less	certain	than	it	might	have	outwardly	seemed.	Nor	did	the	Malazan
believe	that	the	Chosen	One	was	deluded	as	to	the	spite	and	enmity	that	existed
between	her	generals.	Her	ignorance	existed	solely	in	the	plans	that	were
slowly,	incrementally	settling	into	place	to	achieve	her	own	demise.	Of	that


Korbolo	was	certain.
Else	she	would	have	acted	long	before	now.
Leoman	reined	in	before	the	platform.	‘Chosen	One!	We	set	out	now,	and
when	we	return	we	shall	bring	you	word	of	the	Malazan	army.	Their
disposition.	Their	rate	of	march—’
‘But	not,’	Sha’ik	cut	in	sternly,	‘their	mettle.	No	engagements,	Leoman.
The	first	blooding	of	her	army	will	be	here.	By	my	hand.’
Mouth	pressing	into	a	thin	line,	Leoman	nodded,	then	he	said,	‘Tribes	will
have	conducted	raids	on	them,	Chosen	One.	Likely	beginning	a	league	beyond
the	walls	of	Aren.	They	will	have	already	been	blooded—’
‘I	cannot	see	such	minor	exchanges	as	making	a	difference	either	way,’
Sha’ik	replied.	‘Those	tribes	are	sending	their	warriors	here—they	arrive
daily.	Your	forces	would	be	the	largest	she	would	have	to	face—and	I	will	not
have	that.	Do	not	argue	this	point	again,	Leoman,	else	I	forbid	you	to	leave
Raraku!’
‘As	you	say,	Chosen	One,’	Leoman	grated.	His	startling	blue	eyes	fixed	on
Ghost	Hands.	‘If	you	require	anything,	old	man,	seek	out	Mathok.’
Korbolo’s	brows	rose.
‘An	odd	thing	to	say,’	Sha’ik	commented.	‘Ghost	Hands	is	under	my
protection,	after	all.’
‘Minor	requirements	only,	of	course,’	Leoman	said,	‘such	as	might	prove
distracting,	Chosen	One.	You	have	an	army	to	ready,	after	all—’
‘A	task,’	Korbolo	cut	in,	‘which	the	Chosen	One	has	entrusted	in	me,
Leoman.’
The	desert	warrior	simply	smiled.	Then	he	collected	his	reins.	‘May	the
Whirlwind	guard	you,	Chosen	One.’
‘And	you,	Leoman.’
The	man	rode	back	to	his	waiting	horse	warriors.
May	your	bones	grow	white	and	light	as	feathers,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.
Korbolo	swung	to	Sha’ik.	‘He	will	disobey	you,	Chosen	One.’
‘Of	course	he	will.’
The	Napan	blinked,	then	his	gaze	narrowed.	‘Then	it	would	be	madness	to
yield	the	wall	of	sand	to	him.’
She	faced	him,	her	eyes	questioning.	‘Do	you	fear	the	Adjunct’s	army,
then?	Have	you	not	said	to	me	again	and	again	how	superior	you	have	made
our	forces?	In	discipline,	in	ferocity?	This	is	not	Onearm’s	Host	you	will	be
facing.	It	is	a	shaky	mass	of	recruits,	and	even	should	they	have	known
hardening	in	a	minor	engagment	or	two,	what	chance	have	they	against	your
Dogslayers?	As	for	the	Adjunct…leave	her	to	me.	Thus,	what	Leoman	does


with	his	fifteen	hundred	desert	wolves	is,	in	truth,	without	relevance.	Or	are
you	now	revising	all	your	opinions,	Korbolo	Dom?’
‘Of	course	not,	Chosen	One.	But	a	wolf	like	Leoman	should	remain
leashed.’
‘Leashed?	The	word	you’d	rather	have	used	is	killed.	Not	a	wolf,	but	a	mad
dog.	Well,	he	shall	not	be	killed,	and	if	indeed	he	is	a	mad	dog	then	where
better	to	send	him	than	against	the	Adjunct?’
‘You	are	wiser	in	these	ways	than	I,	Chosen	One.’
Ghost	Hands	snorted	at	that,	and	even	Sha’ik	smiled.	The	blood	was
suddenly	hot	in	Korbolo’s	face.
‘Febryl	awaits	you	in	your	tent,’	Sha’ik	said.	‘He	grows	impatient	with
your	lateness,	Korbolo	Dom.	You	need	not	remain	here	any	longer.’
From	heat	to	ice.	The	Malazan	did	not	trust	himself	to	speak,	and	at	the
Chosen	One’s	dismissive	wave	he	almost	flinched.	After	a	moment,	he
managed	to	find	his	voice,	‘I	had	best	find	out	what	he	wants,	then,’	he	said.
‘No	doubt	he	views	it	as	important,’	Sha’ik	murmured.	‘It	is	a	flaw	among
ageing	men,	I	think,	that	brittle	self-importance.	I	advise	you	to	calm	him,
Korbolo	Dom,	and	so	slow	his	pounding	heart.’
‘Sound	advice,	Chosen	One.’	With	a	final	salute,	Korbolo	strode	to	the
platform’s	steps.
	
Heboric	sighed	as	the	Napan’s	bootsteps	faded	behind	them.	‘The	poor
bastard’s	been	left	reeling.	Would	you	panic	them	into	acting,	then?	With
Leoman	now	gone?	And	Toblakai	as	well?	Who	is	there	left	to	trust,	lass?’
‘Trust?’	Do	you	imagine	I	trust	anyone	but	myself,	Heboric?	Oh,	perhaps
Sha’ik	Elder	knew	trust…in	Leoman	and	Toblakai.	But	when	they	look	upon
me,	they	see	an	impostor—I	can	see	that	well	enough,	so	do	not	attempt	to
argue	otherwise.’
‘And	what	about	me?’	Heboric	asked.
‘Ah,	Ghost	Hands,	now	we	come	to	it,	don’t	we?	Very	well,	I	shall	speak
plain.	Do	not	leave.	Do	not	leave	me,	Heboric.	Not	now.	That	which	haunts	you
can	await	the	conclusion	of	the	battle	to	come.	When	that	is	done,	I	shall	extend
the	power	of	the	Whirlwind—back	to	the	very	edge	of	the	Otataral	Isle.	Within
that	warren,	your	journey	will	be	virtually	effortless.	Otherwise,	wilful	as	you
are,	I	fear	you	will	not	survive	the	long,	long	walk.’
He	looked	at	her,	though	the	effort	earned	him	little	more	than	a	blur
where	she	stood,	enfolded	in	her	white	telaba.	‘Is	there	anything	you	do	not
know	about,	lass?’


‘Alas,	far	too	much,	I	suspect.	L’oric,	for	example.	A	true	mystery,	there.
He	seems	able	to	fend	off	even	the	Whirlwind’s	Elder	magic,	evading	my
every	effort	to	discern	his	soul.	And	yet	he	has	revealed	much	to	you,	I	think.’
‘In	confidence,	Chosen	One.	I	am	sorry.	All	I	can	offer	you	is	this:	L’oric	is
not	your	enemy.’
‘Well,	that	means	more	to	me	than	you	perhaps	realize.	Not	my	enemy.
Does	that	make	him	my	ally,	then?’
Heboric	said	nothing.
After	a	moment,	Sha’ik	sighed.	‘Very	well.	He	remains	a	mystery,	then,	in
the	most	important	of	details.	What	can	you	tell	me	of	Bidithal’s	explorations
of	his	old	warren?	Rashan.’
He	cocked	his	head.	‘Well,	the	answer	to	that,	Chosen	One,	depends	in	part
on	your	own	knowledge.	Of	the	goddess’s	warren—your	Elder	warren
fragment	that	is	the	Whirlwind.’
‘Kurald	Emurlahn.’
He	nodded.	‘Indeed.	And	what	do	you	know	of	the	events	that	saw	it	torn
apart?’
‘Little,	except	that	its	true	rulers	had	ceased	to	exist,	thus	leaving	it
vulnerable.	The	relevant	fact	is	this,	however:	the	Whirlwind	is	the	largest
fragment	in	this	realm.	And	its	power	is	growing.	Bidithal	would	see	himself
as	its	first—and	its	penultimate—High	Priest.	What	he	does	not	understand	is
that	there	is	no	such	role	to	be	taken.	I	am	the	High	Priestess.	I	am	the	Chosen
One.	I	am	the	single	mortal	manifestation	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess.	Bidithal
would	enfold	Rashan	into	the	Whirlwind,	or,	conversely,	use	the	Whirlwind	to
cleanse	the	Shadow	Realm	of	its	false	rulers.’	She	paused,	and	Heboric	sensed
her	shrug.	‘Those	false	rulers	once	commanded	the	Malazan	Empire.	Thus.	We
are	all	here,	preparing	for	a	singular	confrontation.	Yet	what	each	of	us	seeks
from	that	battle	is	at	odds.	The	challenge,	then,	is	to	cajole	all	those	disparate
motives	into	one,	mutually	triumphant	effect.’
‘That,’	Heboric	breathed,	‘is	quite	a	challenge,	lass.’
‘And	so	I	need	you,	Ghost	Hands.	I	need	the	secret	you	possess—’
‘Of	L’oric	I	can	say	nothing—’
‘Not	that	secret,	old	man.	No,	the	secret	I	seek	lies	in	your	hands.’
He	started.	‘My	hands?’
‘That	giant	of	jade	you	touched—it	is	defeating	the	otataral.	Destroying	it.	I
need	to	discover	how.	I	need	an	answer	to	otataral,	Heboric.’
‘But	Kurald	Emurlahn	is	Elder,	Sha’ik—the	Adjunct’s	sword—’
‘Will	annihilate	the	advantage	I	possess	in	my	High	Mages.	Think!	She
knows	she	can’t	negate	the	Whirlwind	with	her	sword…so	she	will	not	even


try!	No,	instead	she	will	challenge	my	High	Mages.	Remove	them	from	the
field.	She	will	seek	to	isolate	me—’
‘But	if	she	cannot	defeat	the	Whirlwind,	what	does	that	matter?’
‘Because	the	Whirlwind,	in	turn,	cannot	defeat	her!’
Heboric	was	silent.	He	had	not	heard	this	before,	but	after	a	moment’s
thought,	it	began	to	make	sense.	Kurald	Emurlahn	might	be	Elder,	but	it	was
also	in	pieces.	Weakened,	riven	through	with	Rashan—a	warren	that	was
indeed	vulnerable	to	the	effects	of	otataral.	The	power	of	the	Adjunct’s	sword
and	that	of	Sha’ik’s	Whirlwind	Goddess	would	effectively	cancel	each	other
out.
Leaving	the	outcome	in	the	hands	of	the	armies	themselves.	And	there,	the
otataral	would	cut	through	the	sorcery	of	the	High	Mages.	In	turn	leaving	it	all
to	Korbolo	Dom.	And	Korbolo	knows	it,	and	he	has	his	own	ambitions.	Gods,
lass,	what	a	mess.	‘Alas,	Chosen	One,’	he	muttered,	‘I	cannot	help	you,	for	I	do
not	know	why	the	otataral	in	me	is	failing.	I	have,	however,	a	warning.	The
power	of	the	jade	giant	is	not	one	to	be	manipulated.	Not	by	me,	nor	by	you.	If
the	Whirlwind	Goddess	seeks	to	usurp	it,	she	will	do	more	than	suffer	in	the
attempt—she	will	likely	get	obliterated.’
‘Then	we	must	win	knowledge	without	yielding	an	opportunity.’
‘And	how	in	Hood’s	name	do	you	propose	achieving	that?’
‘I	would	you	give	me	the	answer	to	that,	Heboric.’
Me?	‘Then	we	are	lost.	I	have	no	control	over	that	alien	power.	I	have	no
understanding	of	it	at	all!’
‘Perhaps	not	yet,’	she	replied,	with	a	chilling	confidence	in	her	voice.	‘But
you	grow	ever	closer,	Heboric.	Every	time	you	partake	of	hen’bara	tea.’
The	tea?	That	which	you	gave	me	so	that	I	might	escape	my	nightmares?
Calling	upon	Sha’ik	Elder’s	knowledge	of	the	desert,	you	said.	A	gift	of
compassion,	I	thought.	A	gift…He	felt	something	crumbling	inside	him.	A
fortress	in	the	desert	of	my	heart,	I	should	have	known	it	would	be	a	fortress	of
sand.
He	swung	away,	made	insensate	by	layer	upon	layer	of	blindness.	Numbed
to	the	outside	world,	to	whatever	Sha’ik	was	now	saying,	to	the	brutal	heat	of
the	sun	overhead.
Stay?
He	felt	no	longer	able	to	leave.
Chains.	She	has	made	for	me	a	house	of	chains…
	
Felisin	Younger	came	to	the	edge	of	the	pit	and	looked	down.	The	sun	had	left


the	floor,	leaving	naught	but	darkness	below.	There	was	no	glimmer	of
hearthlight,	confirming	that	no-one	had	come	to	take	up	residence	in	Leoman’s
abode.
A	scraping	sound	nearby	made	her	turn.	Toblakai’s	once-slavemaster	had
crawled	into	view	around	a	wall	foundation.	His	sun-blistered	skin	was	caked
in	dust	and	excrement,	the	stumps	at	the	ends	of	his	arms	and	legs	weeping	a
yellow,	opaque	liquid.	The	first	signs	of	leprosy	marred	his	joints	at	elbow	and
knee.	Red-rimmed	eyes	fixed	on	Felisin	and	the	man	offered	a	blackened	smile.
‘Ah,	child.	See	me	your	humble	servant.	Mathok’s	warrior—’
‘What	do	you	know	of	that?’	she	demanded.
The	smile	broadened.	‘I	bring	word.	See	me	your	humble	servant.
Everyone’s	humble	servant.	I	have	lost	my	name,	did	you	know	that?	I	knew	it
once,	but	it	has	fled	me.	My	mind.	But	I	do	what	I	am	told.	I	bring	word.
Mathok’s	warrior.	He	cannot	meet	you	here.	He	would	not	be	seen.	You
understand?	There,	across	the	plaza,	in	the	sunken	ruin.	He	awaits.’
Well,	she	considered,	the	secrecy	made	sense.	Their	escape	from	the	camp
demanded	it,	although	Heboric	Ghost	Hands	was	by	far	the	one	most	likely	to
be	under	surveillance.	And	he	had	gone	into	his	tent	days	ago	and	refused	all
visitors.	Even	so,	she	appreciated	Mathok’s	caution.
Though	she	had	not	known	that	Toblakai’s	slavemaster	was	a	part	of	their
conspiracy.	‘The	sunken	temple?’
‘Yes,	there.	See	me	your	humble	servant.	Go.	He	awaits.’
She	set	out	across	the	flagstoned	plaza.	Hundreds	of	the	camp’s	destitute
had	settled	here,	beneath	palm-frond	shelters,	making	no	efforts	at
organization—the	expanse	reeked	of	piss	and	faeces,	streams	of	the	foul	mess
flowing	across	the	stones.	Hacking	coughs,	mumbled	entreaties	and	blessings
followed	her	as	she	made	her	way	towards	the	ruin.
The	temple’s	foundation	walls	were	hip	high;	within,	a	steep	set	of	stone
stairs	led	down	to	the	subterranean	floor.	The	sun’s	angle	had	dipped
sufficiently	to	render	the	area	below	in	darkness.
Felisin	halted	at	the	top	of	the	stairs	and	peered	down,	seeking	to	penetrate
the	gloom.	‘Are	you	there?’	she	called.
A	faint	sound	from	the	far	end.	The	hint	of	movement.
She	descended.
The	sandy	floor	was	still	warm.	Groping,	she	edged	forward.
Less	than	ten	paces	from	the	back	wall	and	she	could	finally	make	him	out.
He	was	seated	with	his	back	to	the	stone.	The	gleam	of	a	helm,	scale	armour	on
his	chest.
‘We	should	wait	for	night,’	Felisin	said,	approaching.	‘Then	make	our	way


to	Ghost	Hands’s	tent.	The	time	has	come—he	can	hide	no	longer.	What	is	your
name?’
There	was	no	reply.
Something	black	and	smothering	rose	up	to	clamp	over	her	mouth,	and	she
was	lifted	from	the	ground.	The	blackness	flowed	like	serpents	around	her,
pinning	her	arms	and	binding	her	thrashing	legs.	A	moment	later	she	hung
motionless,	suspended	slightly	above	the	sandy	floor.
A	gnarled	fingertip	brushed	her	cheek	and	her	eyes	widened	as	a	voice
whispered	in	her	ear.	‘Sweetest	child.	Mathok’s	fierce	warrior	felt	Rashan’s
caress	a	short	while	ago,	alas.	Now,	there	is	only	me.	Only	humble	Bidithal,
here	to	welcome	you.	Here	to	drink	all	pleasure	from	your	precious	body,
leaving	naught	but	bitterness,	naught	but	dead	places	within.	It	is	necessary,	you
understand.’	His	wrinkled	hands	were	stroking,	plucking,	pinching,	pawing	her.
‘I	take	no	unsavoury	pleasure	in	what	I	must	do.	The	children	of	the	Whirlwind
must	be	riven	barren,	child,	to	make	of	them	perfect	reflections	of	the	goddess
herself—oh,	you	did	not	know	that,	did	you?	The	goddess	cannot	create.	Only
destroy.	The	source	of	her	fury,	no	doubt.	So	it	must	be	with	her	children.	My
duty.	My	task.	There	is	naught	for	you	to	do	now	but	surrender.’
Surrender.	It	had	been	a	long	time	since	she	had	last	been	made	to
surrender,	to	give	away	all	that	was	within	her.	A	long	time	since	she’d	let
darkness	devour	all	that	she	was.	Years	ago,	she	had	not	known	the	magnitude
of	the	loss,	for	there	had	been	nothing	to	offer	a	contrast	to	misery,	hunger	and
abuse.
But	all	that	had	changed.	She	had	discovered	under	Sha’ik’s	protective
wing,	the	notion	of	inviolacy.
And	it	was	that	notion	that	Bidithal	now	proceeded	to	destroy.
	
Lying	on	the	landing	at	the	top	of	the	stairs,	the	creature	that	had	once	been	a
slavemaster	on	Genabackis	smiled	at	Bidithal’s	words,	then	the	smile	grew
wider	at	her	muffled	cries.
Karsa	Orlong’s	favoured	child	was	in	the	hands	of	that	sick	old	man.	And
all	that	would	be	done	to	her	could	not	be	undone.
The	sick	old	man	had	been	kindly	with	his	offers	of	gifts.	Not	just	the
impending	return	of	his	hands	and	feet,	but	the	promise	of	vengeance	against
the	Teblor.	He	would	find	his	name	once	more.	He	knew	he	would.	And	with	it,
the	confusion	would	go	away,	the	hours	of	blind	terror	would	no	longer
plague	him,	and	the	beatings	at	the	hands	of	the	others	in	this	plaza	would
cease.	It	would	have	to,	for	he	would	be	their	master.


They	would	pay	for	what	they	did.	Everyone	would	pay.	As	soon	as	he
found	his	name.
There	was	weeping	now.	Despair ’s	own	laughter,	those	racking	heaves.
That	lass	would	no	longer	look	upon	him	with	disgust.	How	could	she?
She	was	now	like	him.	It	was	a	good	lesson.	Viciously	delivered—even	the
slavemaster	could	see	that,	could	imagine	it	at	least,	and	wince	at	the	images	he
conjured	in	his	head.	But	still,	a	good	lesson.
Time	to	leave—footsteps	approached	from	below.	He	slithered	back	into
the	daylight,	and	the	sound	he	made	over	the	gravel,	potsherds	and	sand	was
strangely	reminiscent	of	chains.	Chains	dragging	in	his	wake.
	
Though	there	had	been	none	to	witness	it,	a	strange	glow	had	suffused	L’oric’s
tent	shortly	after	noon.	Momentary,	then	all	was	normal	once	more.
Now,	as	dusk	finally	approached,	a	second	flare	of	light	burgeoned	briefly
then	died	away,	again	unnoticed.
The	High	Mage	staggered	through	the	warren’s	impromptu,	momentary
gate.	He	was	drenched	in	blood.	He	stumbled	with	his	burden	across	the	hidecovered	floor,	then	sank	to	his	knees,	dragging	the	misshapen	beast	into	his
arms,	a	single	red	hand	pulling	free	to	stroke	its	thick,	matted	hair.
Its	whimpers	of	pain	had	ceased.	Mercifully,	for	each	soft	cry	had	broken
anew	L’oric’s	heart.
The	High	Mage	slowly	lowered	his	head,	finally	stricken	with	the	grief	he
had	been	forced	to	hold	back	during	his	desperate,	ineffectual	efforts	to	save
the	ancient	demon.	He	was	filled	with	self-loathing,	and	he	cursed	his	own
complacency.	Too	long	separated,	too	long	proceeding	as	if	the	other	realms
held	no	danger	to	them.
And	now	his	familiar	was	dead,	and	the	mirrored	deadness	inside	him
seemed	vast.	And	growing,	devouring	his	soul	as	sickness	does	healthy	flesh.
He	was	without	strength,	for	the	rage	had	abated.
He	stroked	the	beast’s	blood-caked	face,	wondering	anew	at	how	its
ugliness—now	so	still	and	free	of	pain—could	nevertheless	trigger	depthless
wellsprings	of	love	from	him.	‘Ah,	my	friend,	we	were	more	of	a	kind	than
either	of	us	knew.	No…you	knew,	didn’t	you?	Thus	the	eternal	sorrow	in	your
eyes,	which	I	saw	but	chose	to	ignore,	each	time	I	visited.	I	was	so	certain	of
the	deceit,	you	see.	So	confident	that	we	could	go	on,	undetected,	maintaining
the	illusion	that	our	father	was	still	with	us.	I	was…’	He	crumpled	then	and
could	speak	no	further	for	a	time.
The	failure	had	been	his,	and	his	alone.	He	was	here,	ensnaring	himself	in


these	paltry	games,	when	he	should	have	been	guarding	his	familiar ’s	back—
as	it	had	done	for	him	for	century	upon	century.
Oh,	it	had	been	close	in	any	case—one	less	T’lan	Imass,	and	the	outcome
might	have	proved	different—no,	now	you	lie	to	yourself,	L’oric.	That	first
axe-blow	had	done	the	damage,	had	delivered	the	fatal	wound.	All	that
transpired	thereafter	was	born	of	dying	rage.	Oh,	my	beloved	was	no	weakling,
and	the	wielder	of	that	stone	axe	paid	for	his	ambush.	And	know	this,	my	friend,
I	left	the	second	one	scattered	through	the	fires.	Only	the	clan	leader	escaped
me.	But	I	will	hunt	him	down.	This	I	swear.
But	not	yet.	He	forced	clarity	into	his	thoughts,	as	the	weight	of	the
familiar	where	it	lay	against	his	thighs	slowly	diminished,	its	very	substance
ebbing	away.	Kurald	Thyrllan	was	undefended,	now.	How	the	T’lan	Imass	had
managed	to	penetrate	the	warren	remained	a	mystery,	but	they	had	done	so,
completing	the	task	they	had	set	out	to	do	with	their	legendary	brutality.
Would	the	Liosan	have	sensed	the	death?	Perhaps	only	the	seneschals,	at
first.	Would	they	speak	of	it	to	the	others?	Not	if	they	pause,	for	even	a	moment,
and	think	about	it.	Of	course,	they	had	been	the	victims	of	the	deceit	all	along.
Osric	had	vanished—their	god	was	gone—and	Kurald	Thyrllan	was	ripe	for
usurpation.	And,	eventually,	those	seneschals	would	realize	that,	had	it	truly
been	Osric	behind	the	power	that	answered	their	prayers,	then	three	T’lan
Imass	warriors	would	not	have	been	enough—not	nearly	enough.	My	father	is
many	things,	but	weak	does	not	count	among	them.
The	withered,	bird-sized	thing	that	had	been	his	familiar	slipped	down	to
the	tent	floor.	L’oric	stared	at	it,	then	slowly	wrapped	himself	in	his	own	arms.
I	need…I	need	help.	Father’s	companions.	Which	one?	Anomander	Rake?	No.	A
companion,	yes,	on	occasion,	but	never	Osric’s	friend.	Lady	Envy?	Gods,	no!
Caladan	Brood…but	he	carries	his	own	burdens,	these	days.	Thus,	but	one
left…
L’oric	closed	his	eyes,	and	called	upon	the	Queen	of	Dreams.	‘By	your	true
name,	T’riss,	I	would	speak	with	you.	In	Osric	my	father ’s	name,	hear	my
prayer…’
A	scene	slowly	formed	in	his	mind,	a	place	unfamiliar	to	him.	A	formal
garden,	high-walled,	with	a	circular	pool	in	the	centre.	Marble	benches	waited
beneath	the	shadows	of	the	surrounding	growth.	The	flagstones	around	the
pool	were	rippled	with	fine,	white	sand.
He	found	himself	approaching	the	pool,	staring	down	into	the	mirrored
surface.
Where	swam	stars	in	inky	blackness.
‘The	resemblance	is	there.’


He	turned	at	the	liquid	voice,	to	see	a	woman	now	seated	on	the	pool’s
edge.	She	looked	to	be	no	more	than	twenty,	her	hair	copper-gold	and	long.	A
heart-shaped	face,	pale,	the	eyes	a	light	grey.	She	was	not	looking	at	him,	her
languid	gaze	on	the	pool’s	unmarred	surface	instead.	‘Although,’	she	added,
with	a	faint	smile,	‘you	have	done	well	to	hide	your	Liosan	traits.’
‘We	are	skilled	in	such	things,	Queen	of	Dreams.’
She	nodded,	still	not	meeting	his	eyes.	‘As	are	all	the	Tiste.	Anomander
once	spent	almost	two	centuries	in	the	guise	of	a	royal	bodyguard…human,	in
the	manner	you	have	achieved.’
‘Mistress,’	L’oric	said,	‘my	father—’
‘Sleeps.	We	all	long	ago	made	our	choices,	L’oric.	Behind	us,	our	paths
stretch,	long	and	worn	deep.	There	is	bitter	pathos	in	the	prospect	of	retracing
them.	Yet,	for	those	of	us	who	remain…awake,	it	seems	we	do	nothing	but	just
that.	An	endless	retracing	of	paths,	yet	each	step	we	take	is	forward,	for	the
path	has	proved	itself	to	be	a	circle.	Yet—and	here	is	the	true	pathos—the
knowledge	never	slows	our	steps.’
‘“Wide-eyed	stupid”,	the	Malazans	say.’
‘Somewhat	rough-edged,	but	accurate	enough,’	she	replied.	She	reached	a
long-fingered	hand	down	to	the	water.
L’oric	watched	it	vanish	beneath	the	surface,	but	it	was	the	scene	around
them	that	seemed	to	waken,	a	faint	turbulence,	the	hint	of	ripples.	‘Queen	of
Dreams,	Kurald	Thyrllan	has	lost	its	protector.’
‘Yes.	Tellann	and	Thyr	were	ever	close,	and	now	more	than	ever.’
A	strange	statement…that	he	would	have	to	think	on	later.	‘I	cannot	do	it
alone—’
‘No,	you	cannot.	Your	own	path	is	about	to	become	fraught,	L’oric.	And	so
you	have	come	to	me,	in	the	hopes	that	I	will	find	a	suitable…protector.’
‘Yes.’
‘Your	desperation	urges	you	to	trust…where	no	trust	has	been	earned—’
‘You	were	my	father ’s	friend!’
‘Friend?	L’oric,	we	were	too	powerful	to	know	friendship.	Our	endeavours
far	too	fierce.	Our	war	was	with	chaos	itself,	and,	at	times,	with	each	other.	We
battled	to	shape	all	that	would	follow.	And	some	of	us	lost	that	battle.	Do	not
misapprehend,	I	held	no	deep	enmity	for	your	father.	Rather,	he	was	as
unfathomable	as	the	rest	of	us—a	bemusement	we	all	shared,	perhaps	the	only
thing	we	shared.’
‘You	will	not	help?’
‘I	did	not	say	that.’
He	waited.


She	continued	holding	her	hand	beneath	the	pool’s	placid	surface,	had	yet
to	lift	her	head	and	meet	his	eyes.	‘This	will	take	some	time,’	she	murmured.
‘The	present…vulnerability…will	exist	in	the	interval.	I	have	someone	in
mind,	but	the	shaping	towards	the	opportunity	remains	distant.	Nor	do	I	think
my	choice	will	please	you.	In	the	meantime…’
‘Yes?’
She	shrugged.	‘We	had	best	hope	that	potentially	interested	entities	remain
suitably	distracted.’
He	saw	her	expression	suddenly	change,	and	when	she	spoke	again	the	tone
was	urgent.	‘Return	to	your	realm,	L’oric!	Another	circle	has	been	closed—
terribly	closed.’	She	drew	her	hand	from	the	pool.
L’oric	gasped.
It	was	covered	in	blood.
His	eyes	snapped	open,	and	he	was	kneeling	in	his	tent	once	more.	Night
had	arrived,	and	the	sounds	outside	were	muted,	peaceful,	a	city	settling	down
to	its	evening	meal.	Yet,	he	knew,	something	horrible	had	happened.	He	went
still,	questing	outward.	His	powers—so	weakened,	so	tremulous—‘Gods
below!’	A	swirl	of	violence,	knotted	upon	itself,	radiating	waves	of	agony—a
figure,	small,	twisted	inward,	in	shredded	clothes	soaked	through	with	blood,
crawling	through	darkness.
L’oric	lurched	to	his	feet,	head	spinning	with	anguish.
Then	he	was	outside,	and	suddenly	running.
He	found	her	trail,	a	smeared	track	through	sand	and	dust,	out	beyond	the
ruins,	into	the	petrified	forest.	Towards,	he	knew	instinctively,	the	sacred	glade
that	had	been	fashioned	by	Toblakai.
But	there	would	be	no	succour	for	her	there.	Another	abode	of	false	gods.
And	Toblakai	was	gone,	off	to	cross	blades	with	his	own	fate.
But	she	was	without	clear	thought.	She	was	only	pain,	lancing	out	to	fire
instincts	of	flight.	She	crawled	as	would	any	dying	creature.
He	saw	her	at	the	edge	of	the	glade,	small,	bedraggled,	pulling	herself
forward	in	torturous	increments.
L’oric	reached	her	side,	a	hand	reaching	to	settle	at	the	back	of	her	head,
onto	sweat-snarled	hair.	She	flinched	away	with	a	squeal,	fingers	clawing
against	his	arm.	‘Felisin!	He’s	gone!	It	is	L’oric.	You	are	safe	with	me.	Safe,
now—’
But	still	she	sought	to	escape.
‘I	shall	call	upon	Sha’ik—’
‘No!’	she	shrieked,	curling	tight	on	the	sand.	‘No!	She	needs	him!	She
needs	him	still!’	Her	words	were	blunted	by	broken	lips	but	understandable


none	the	less.
L’oric	sank	back,	struck	mute	by	the	horror.	Not	simply	a	wounded
creature,	then.	A	mind	clear	enough	to	weigh,	to	calculate,	to	put	itself
aside…‘She	will	know,	lass—she	can’t	help	but	know.’
‘No!	Not	if	you	help	me.	Help	me,	L’oric.	Just	you—not	even	Heboric!	He
would	seek	to	kill	Bidithal,	and	that	cannot	be.’
‘Heboric?	I	want	to	kill	Bidithal!’
‘You	mustn’t.	You	can’t.	He	has	power—’
He	saw	the	shudder	run	through	her	at	that.
L’oric	hesitated,	then	said,	‘I	have	healing	salves,	elixirs…but	you	will
need	to	stay	hidden	for	a	time.’
‘Here,	in	Toblakai’s	temple.	Here,	L’oric.’
‘I	will	bring	water.	A	tent.’
‘Yes!’
The	rage	that	burned	in	him	had	contracted	down	to	a	white-hot	core.	He
struggled	to	control	it,	his	resolve	sporadically	weakened	by	doubts	that	he	was
doing	the	right	thing.	This	was…monstrous.	There	would	be	an	answer	to	it.
There	would	have	to	be	an	answer	to	it.
Even	more	monstrous,	he	realized	with	a	chill,	they	had	all	known	the	risk.
We	knew	he	wanted	her.	Yet	we	did	nothing.
	
Heboric	lay	motionless	in	the	darkness.	He	had	a	faint	sense	of	being	hungry,
thirsty,	but	it	remained	remote.	Hen’bara	tea,	in	sufficient	amounts,	pushed	the
needs	of	the	outer	world	away.	Or	so	he	had	discovered.
His	mind	was	floating	on	a	swirling	sea,	and	it	seemed	eternal.	He	was
waiting,	still	waiting.	Sha’ik	wanted	truths.	She	would	get	them.	And	then	he
was	done,	done	with	her.
And	probably	done	with	life,	as	well.
So	be	it.	He	had	grown	older	than	he	had	ever	expected	to,	and	these	extra
weeks	and	months	had	proved	anything	but	worth	the	effort.	He	had	sentenced
his	own	god	to	death,	and	now	Fener	would	not	be	there	to	greet	him	when	he
finally	stepped	free	of	his	flesh	and	bones.	Nor	would	Hood,	come	to	that.
It	did	not	seem	he	would	awaken	from	this—he	had	drunk	far	more	of	the
tea	than	he	ever	had	before,	and	he	had	drunk	it	scalding	hot,	when	it	was	most
potent.	And	now	he	floated	on	a	dark	sea,	an	invisible	liquid	warm	on	his	skin,
barely	holding	him	up,	flowing	over	his	limbs	and	chest,	around	his	face.
The	giant	of	jade	was	welcome	to	him.	To	his	soul,	and	to	whatever	was
left	of	his	days	as	a	mortal	man.	The	old	gifts	of	preternatural	vision	had	long


vanished,	the	visions	of	secrets	hidden	from	most	eyes—secrets	of	antiquity,	of
history—were	long	gone.	He	was	old.	He	was	blind.
The	waters	slipped	over	his	face.
And	he	felt	himself	sliding	down—amidst	a	sea	of	stars	that	swirled	in	the
blackness	yet	were	sharp	with	sudden	clarity.	In	what	seemed	a	vast	distance,
duller	spheres	swam,	clustering	about	the	fiery	stars,	and	realization	struck
him	a	hammer	blow.	The	stars,	they	are	as	the	sun.	Each	star.	Every	star.	And
those	spheres—they	are	worlds,	realms,	each	one	different	yet	the	same.
The	Abyss	was	not	as	empty	as	he’d	believed	it	to	be.	But…where	dwell	the
gods?	These	worlds—are	they	warrens?	Or	are	the	warrens	simply	passageways
connecting	them?
A	new	object,	growing	in	his	vision	as	it	drifted	nearer.	A	glimmer	of
murky	green,	stiff-limbed,	yet	strangely	contorted,	torso	twisted	as	if	caught	in
the	act	of	turning.	Naked,	spinning	end	over	end,	starlight	playing	across	its
jade	surface	like	beads	of	rain.
And	behind	it,	another,	this	one	broken—a	leg	and	an	arm	snapped	clean
off	yet	accompanying	the	rest	in	its	silent,	almost	peaceful	sailing	through	the
void.
Then	another.
The	first	giant	cartwheeled	past	Heboric,	and	he	felt	he	could	simply
extend	a	hand	to	brush	its	supple	surface	as	it	passed,	but	he	knew	it	was	in	truth
far	too	distant	for	that.	Its	face	came	into	view.	Too	perfect	for	human,	the	eyes
open,	an	expression	too	ambiguous	to	read,	though	Heboric	thought	he
detected	resignation	within	it.
There	were	scores	now,	all	emerging	from	what	seemed	a	single	point	in
the	inky	depths.	Each	one	displaying	a	unique	posture;	some	so	battered	as	to
be	little	more	than	a	host	of	fragments	and	shards,	others	entirely	unmarred.
Sailing	out	of	the	blackness.	An	army.
Yet	unarmed.	Naked,	seemingly	sexless.	There	was	a	perfection	to	them—
their	proportions,	their	flawless	surfaces—that	suggested	to	the	ex-priest	that
the	giants	could	never	have	been	alive.	They	were	constructs,	statues	in	truth,
though	no	two	were	alike	in	posture	or	expression.
Bemused,	he	watched	them	spin	past.	It	occurred	to	him	that	he	could	turn,
to	see	if	they	simply	dwindled	down	to	another	point	far	behind	him,	as	if	he
but	lay	alongside	an	eternal	river	of	green	stone.
His	own	motion	was	effortless.
As	he	swung	round,	he	saw—
—and	cried	out.
A	cry	that	made	no	sound.


A	vast—impossibly	vast—red-limned	wound	cut	across	the	blackness,
suppurating	flames	along	its	ragged	edges.	Grey	storms	of	chaos	spiralled	out
in	lancing	tendrils.
And	the	giants	descended	into	its	maw.	One	after	another.	To	vanish.
Revelation	filled	his	mind.
Thus,	the	Crippled	God	was	brought	down	to	our	world.	Through	this…this
terrible	puncture.	And	these	giants…follow.	Like	an	army	behind	its
commander.
Or	an	army	in	pursuit.
Were	all	of	the	jade	giants	appearing	somewhere	in	his	own	realm?	That
seemed	impossible.	They	would	be	present	in	countless	locations,	if	that	was
the	case.	Present,	and	inescapably	visible.	No,	the	wound	was	enormous,	the
giants	diminishing	into	specks	before	reaching	its	waiting	oblivion.	A	wound
such	as	that	could	swallow	thousands	of	worlds.	Tens,	hundreds	of	thousands.
Perhaps	all	he	witnessed	here	was	but	hallucination,	the	creation	of	a
hen’bara-induced	fever.
Yet	the	clarity	was	almost	painful,	the	vision	so	brutally…strange…that	he
believed	it	to	be	true,	or	at	the	very	least	the	product	of	what	his	mind	could
comprehend,	could	give	shape	to—statues	and	wounds,	storms	and	bleeding,
an	eternal	sea	of	stars	and	worlds…
A	moment’s	concentration	and	he	was	turning	about	once	more.	To	face
that	endless	progression.
And	then	he	was	moving	towards	the	nearest	giant.
It	was	naught	but	torso	and	head,	its	limbs	shorn	off	and	spinning	in	its
wake.
The	mass	burgeoned	swiftly	before	him,	too	fast,	too	huge.	Sudden	panic
gripped	Heboric.	He	could	see	into	that	body,	as	if	the	world	within	the	jade
was	scaled	to	his	own.	The	evidence	of	that	was	terrible—and	horrifying.
Figures.	Bodies	like	his	own.	Humans,	thousands	upon	thousands,	all
trapped	within	the	statue.	Trapped…and	screaming,	their	faces	twisted	in	terror.
A	multitude	of	those	faces	suddenly	swung	to	him.	Mouths	opened	in	silent
cries—of	warning,	or	hunger,	or	fear—there	was	no	way	to	tell.	If	they
screamed,	no	sound	reached	him.
Heboric	added	his	own	silent	shriek	and	desperately	willed	himself	to	one
side,	out	of	the	statue’s	path.	For	he	thought	he	understood,	now—they	were
prisoners,	ensnared	within	the	stone	flesh,	trapped	in	some	unknown	torment.
Then	he	was	past,	flung	about	in	the	turbulent	wake	of	the	broken	body’s
passage.	Spinning	end	over	end,	he	caught	a	flash	of	more	jade,	directly	in
front	of	him.


A	hand.
A	finger,	plunging	down	as	if	to	crush	him.
He	screamed	as	it	struck.
He	felt	no	contact,	but	the	blackness	simply	vanished,	and	the	sea	was
emerald	green,	cold	as	death.
And	Heboric	found	himself	amidst	a	crowd	of	writhing,	howling	figures.
The	sound	was	deafening.	There	was	no	room	to	move—his	limbs	were
trapped	against	him.	He	could	not	breathe.
A	prisoner.
There	were	voices	roaring	through	his	skull.	Too	many,	in	languages	he
could	not	recognize,	much	less	comprehend.	Like	storm-waves	crashing	on	a
shore,	the	sound	hammered	through	him,	surging	and	falling,	the	rhythm
quickening	as	a	faint	reddish	gleam	began	to	stain	the	green.	He	could	not	turn,
but	did	not	need	to,	to	know	that	the	wound	was	moments	from	swallowing
them	all.
Then	a	string	of	words	reached	through	the	tumult,	close	as	if	whispered	in
his	ear,	and	he	understood	them.
‘You	came	from	there.	What	shall	we	find,	Handless	One?	What	lies
beyond	the	gash?’
Then	another	voice	spoke,	louder,	more	imperious:	‘What	god	now	owns
your	hands,	old	man?	Tell	me!	Even	their	ghosts	are	not	here—who	is	holding
on	to	you?	Tell	me!’
‘There	are	no	gods,’	a	third	voice	cut	in,	this	one	female.
‘So	you	say!’	came	yet	another,	filled	with	spite.	‘In	your	empty,	barren,
miserable	world!’
‘Gods	are	born	of	belief,	and	belief	is	dead.	We	murdered	it,	with	our	vast
intelligence.	You	were	too	primitive—’
‘Killing	gods	is	not	hard.	The	easiest	murder	of	all.	Nor	is	it	a	measure	of
intelligence.	Not	even	of	civilization.	Indeed,	the	indifference	with	which	such
death-blows	are	delivered	is	its	own	form	of	ignorance.’
‘More	like	forgetfulness.	After	all,	it’s	not	the	gods	that	are	important,	it	is
the	stepping	outside	of	oneself	that	gifts	a	mortal	with	virtue—’
‘Kneel	before	Order?	You	blind	fool—’
‘Order?	I	was	speaking	of	compassion—’
‘Fine,	then	go	ahead!	Step	outside	yourself,	Leandris!	No,	better	yet.	Step
outside.’
‘Only	the	new	one	can	do	that,	Cassa.	And	he’d	better	be	quick	about	it.’
Twisting,	Heboric	managed	to	look	down,	to	catch	a	glimpse	of	his	left
forearm,	the	wrist,	the	hand—that	was	not	there.	A	god.	A	god	has	taken	them.	I


was	blind	to	that—the	jade’s	ghost	hands	made	me	blind	to	that—
He	tilted	his	head	back,	as	the	screams	and	shrieks	suddenly	rose	higher,
deafening,	mind-numbing.	The	world	turned	red,	the	red	of	blood—
Something	tugged	on	his	arms.	Hard.	Once.	Twice.
Darkness.
Heboric	opened	his	eyes.	Saw	above	him	the	colourless	canvas	of	his	tent.
The	air	was	cold.
A	barely	human	sound	escaped	him,	and	he	rolled	onto	his	side	beneath	the
blankets,	curling	tight	into	a	ball.	Shivers	thrummed	through	him.
A	god.	A	god	has	found	me.
But	which	god?
It	was	night,	perhaps	only	a	bell	from	dawn.	The	camp	outside	was	silent,
barring	the	distant,	sorrow-filled	howls	of	desert	wolves.
After	a	while,	Heboric	stirred	once	more.	The	dung	fire	was	out.	No
lanterns	had	been	lit.	He	drew	aside	the	blankets	and	slowly	sat	up.
Then	stared	down	at	his	hands,	disbelieving.
They	remained	ghostly,	but	the	otataral	was	gone.	The	power	of	the	jade
remained,	pulsing	dully.	Yet	now	there	were	slashes	of	black	through	it.	Lurid
—almost	liquid—barbs	banded	the	backs	of	his	hands,	then	tracked	upward,
shifting	angle	as	they	continued	up	his	forearms.
His	tattoos	had	been	transformed.
And,	in	this	deepest	darkness,	he	could	see.	Unhumanly	sharp,	every	detail
crisp	as	if	it	was	day	outside.
His	head	snapped	round	at	a	sound	and	a	motion—but	it	was	simply	a
rhizan,	alighting	light	as	a	leaf	on	the	tent	roof.
A	rhizan?	On	the	tent	roof?
Heboric’s	stomach	rumbled	in	sudden	hunger.
He	looked	down	at	his	tattoos	once	more.	I	have	found	a	new	god.	Not	that
I	was	seeking	one.	And	I	know	who.	What.
Bitterness	filled	him.	‘In	need	of	a	Destriant,	Treach?	So	you	simply…took
one.	Stole	from	him	his	own	life.	Granted,	not	much	of	a	life,	but	still,	I	owned
it.	Is	this	how	you	recruit	followers?	Servants?	By	the	Abyss,	Treach,	you	have
a	lot	to	learn	about	mortals.’
The	anger	faded.	There	had	been	gifts,	after	all.	An	exchange	of	sorts.	He
was	no	longer	blind.	Even	more	extraordinary,	he	could	actually	hear	the
sounds	of	neighbours	sleeping	in	their	tents	and	yurts.
And	there,	faint	on	the	near-motionless	air…the	smell	of…violence.	But	it
was	distant.	The	blood	had	been	spilled	some	time	earlier	in	the	night.	Some
domestic	dispute,	probably.	He	would	have	to	teach	himself	to	filter	out	much


of	what	his	newly	enlivened	senses	told	him.
Heboric	grunted	under	his	breath,	then	scowled.	‘All	right,	Treach.	It	seems
we	both	have	some	learning	to	do.	But	first…something	to	eat.	And	drink.’
When	he	rose	from	his	sleeping	mat,	the	motion	was	startlingly	fluid,
though	it	was	some	time	before	Heboric	finally	noted	the	absence	of	aches,
twinges,	and	the	dull	throb	of	his	joints.
He	was	far	too	busy	filling	his	belly.
Forgotten,	the	mysteries	of	the	jade	giants,	the	innumerable	imprisoned
souls	within	them,	the	ragged	wound	in	the	Abyss.
Forgotten,	as	well,	that	faint	blood-scented	tremor	of	distant	violence…
The	burgeoning	of	some	senses	perforce	took	away	from	others.	Leaving
him	blissfully	unaware	of	his	newfound	singlemindedness.	Two	truths	he	had
long	known	did	not,	for	some	time,	emerge	to	trouble	him.
No	gifts	were	truly	clean	in	the	giving.
And	nature	ever	strives	for	balance.	But	balance	was	not	a	simple	notion.
Redress	was	not	simply	found	in	the	physical	world.	A	far	grimmer
equilibrium	had	occurred…between	the	past	and	the	present.

Felisin	Younger ’s	eyes	fluttered	open.	She	had	slept,	but	upon	awakening
discovered	that	the	pain	had	not	gone	away,	and	the	horror	of	what	he	had	done
to	her	remained	as	well,	though	it	had	grown	strangely	cold	in	her	mind.
Into	her	limited	range	of	vision,	close	to	the	sand,	a	serpent	slipped	into
view	directly	in	front	of	her	face.	Then	she	realized	what	had	awoken	her—
there	were	more	snakes,	slithering	over	her	body.	Scores	of	them.
Toblakai’s	glade.	She	remembered	now.	She	had	crawled	here.	And	L’oric
had	found	her,	only	to	set	off	once	again.	To	bring	medicine,	water,	bedding,	a
tent.	He	had	not	yet	returned.
Apart	from	the	whispering	slither	of	the	snakes,	the	glade	was	silent.	In	this
forest,	the	branches	did	not	move.	There	were	no	leaves	to	flutter	in	the	cool,
faint	wind.	Dried	blood	in	folds	of	skin	stung	as	she	slowly	sat	up.	Sharp	pains
flared	beneath	her	belly,	and	the	raw	wound	where	he	had	cut	flesh	away—
there,	between	her	legs—burned	fiercely.
‘I	shall	bring	this	ritual	to	our	people,	child,	when	I	am	the	Whirlwind’s
High	Priest.	All	girls	shall	know	this,	in	my	newly	shaped	world.	The	pain	shall
pass.	All	sensation	shall	pass.	You	are	to	feel	nothing,	for	pleasure	does	not
belong	in	the	mortal	realm.	Pleasure	is	the	darkest	path,	for	it	leads	to	the	loss


of	control.	And	we	mustn’t	have	that.	Not	among	our	women.	Now,	you	shall	join
the	rest,	those	I	have	already	corrected…’
Two	such	girls	had	arrived,	then,	bearing	the	cutting	instruments.	They	had
murmured	encouragement	to	her,	and	words	of	welcome.	Again	and	again,	in
pious	tones,	they	had	spoken	of	the	virtues	that	came	of	the	wounding.
Propriety.	Loyalty.	A	leavening	of	appetites,	the	withering	of	desire.	All	good
things,	they	said	to	her.	Passions	were	the	curse	of	the	world.	Indeed,	had	it	not
been	passions	that	had	enticed	her	own	mother	away,	that	were	responsible	for
her	own	abandonment?	The	lure	of	pleasure	had	stolen	Felisin’s	mother…
away	from	the	duties	of	motherhood…
Felisin	leaned	over	and	spat	into	the	sand.	But	the	taste	of	their	words
would	not	go	away.	It	was	not	surprising	that	men	could	think	such	things,
could	do	such	things.	But	that	women	could	as	well…that	was	indeed	a	bitter
thing	to	countenance.
But	they	were	wrong.	Walking	the	wrong	trail.	Oh,	my	mother	abandoned
me,	but	not	for	the	embrace	of	some	lover.	No,	it	was	Hood	who	embraced	her.
Bidithal	would	be	High	Priest,	would	he?	The	fool.	Sha’ik	would	find	a
place	for	him	in	her	temple—or	at	least	a	place	for	his	skull.	A	cup	of	bone	to
piss	in,	perhaps.	And	that	time	was	not	long	in	coming.
Still…too	long.	Bidithal	takes	girls	into	his	arms	every	night.	He	makes	an
army,	a	legion	of	the	wounded,	the	bereft.	And	they	will	be	eager	to	share	out
their	loss	of	pleasure.	They	are	human,	after	all,	and	it	is	human	nature	to
transform	loss	into	a	virtue.	So	that	it	might	be	lived	with,	so	that	it	might	be
justified.
A	glimmer	of	dull	light	distracted	her,	and	she	looked	up.	The	carved	faces
in	the	trees	around	her	were	glowing.	Bleeding	grey,	sorcerous	light.	Behind
each	there	was…a	presence.
Toblakai’s	gods.
‘Welcome,	broken	one.’	The	voice	was	the	sound	of	limestone	boulders
grinding	together.	‘I	am	named	Ber ’ok.	Vengeance	swarms	about	you,	with
such	power	as	to	awaken	us.	We	are	not	displeased	with	the	summons,	child.’
‘You	are	Toblakai’s	god,’	she	muttered.	‘You	have	nothing	to	do	with	me.
Nor	do	I	want	you.	Go	away,	Ber ’ok.	You	and	the	rest—go	away.’
‘We	would	ease	your	pain.	I	shall	make	of	you	my	special…responsibility.
You	seek	vengeance?	Then	you	shall	have	it.	The	one	who	has	damaged	you
would	take	the	power	of	the	desert	goddess	for	himself.	He	would	usurp	the
entire	fragment	of	warren,	and	twist	it	into	his	own	nightmare.	Oh,	child,
though	you	might	believe	otherwise—now—the	wounding	is	of	no	matter.	The
danger	lies	in	Bidithal’s	ambition.	A	knife	must	be	driven	into	his	heart.	Would


it	please	you	to	be	that	knife?’
She	said	nothing.	There	was	no	way	to	tell	which	of	the	carved	faces
belonged	to	Ber ’ok,	so	she	could	only	look	from	one	to	the	next.	A	glance	to
the	two	fully	rendered	Toblakai	warriors	revealed	that	they	possessed	no
emanation,	were	grey	and	lifeless	in	the	pre-dawn	darkness.
‘Serve	us,’	Ber ’ok	murmured,	‘and	we	in	turn	shall	serve	you.	Give	us
your	answer	quickly—someone	comes.’
She	noted	the	wavering	lantern	light	on	the	trail.	L’oric.	‘How?’	she	asked
the	gods.	‘How	will	you	serve	me?’
‘We	shall	ensure	that	Bidithal’s	death	is	in	a	manner	to	match	his	crimes,
and	that	it	shall	be…timely.’
‘And	how	am	I	to	be	the	knife?’
‘Child,’	the	god	calmly	replied,	‘you	already	are.’


Chapter	Fourteen

The	Teblor	have	long	earned	their	reputation	as	slayers	of
children,	butcherers	of	the	helpless,	as	mortal	demons	delivered
unto	the	Nathii	in	a	curse	altogether	undeserved.	The	sooner	the
Teblor	are	obliterated	from	their	mountain	fastnesses	the	sooner
the	memory	of	them	will	finally	begin	to	fade.	Until	Teblor	is	no
more	than	a	name	used	to	frighten	children,	we	see	our	cause	as
clear	and	singular.
THE	CRUSADE	OF	1147
AYED	KOURBOURN
The	wolves	loped	through	the	almost	luminescent	fog,	their	eyes	flashing
when	they	swung	their	massive	heads	in	his	direction.	As	if	he	was	an	elk,
struggling	through	deep	snow,	the	huge	beasts	kept	pace	on	either	side,
ghostly,	with	the	implacable	patience	of	the	predators	they	were.
Though	it	was	unlikely	these	mountain	beasts	had	ever	before	hunted	a
Teblor	warrior.	Karsa	had	not	expected	to	find	snow,	particularly	since	his
route	took	him	alongside	the	north	shoulder	of	the	jagged	range—it	was
fortunate	that	he	would	not	have	to	climb	through	any	passes.	On	his	right,	less
than	two	leagues	distant,	he	could	still	see	the	ochre	sands	of	the	desert	basin,
and	well	knew	that	down	there,	the	sun	blazed	hot—the	same	sun	that	looked
down	upon	him	now,	a	blurred	orb	of	cold	fire.
The	snow	was	shin-deep,	slowing	his	steady	jog.	Somehow,	the	wolves
managed	to	run	across	its	wind-hardened,	crusty	surface,	only	occasionally
plunging	a	paw	through.	The	fog	enshrouding	hunters	and	prey	was	in	fact
snow	crystals,	glittering	with	bright,	blinding	light.
Somewhere	to	the	west,	Karsa	had	been	told,	the	range	of	mountains	would
end.	There	would	be	sea	on	his	right,	a	narrow	rumpled	passage	of	hills	ahead
and	on	his	left.	Across	those	hills,	then	southward,	there	would	be	a	city.	Lato
Revae.	The	Teblor	had	no	interest	in	visiting	it,	though	he	would	have	to	skirt
it.	The	sooner	he	left	civilized	lands	behind,	the	better.	But	that	was	two	river


crossings	distant,	with	weeks	of	travel	between	now	and	then.
Though	he	ran	alone	along	the	slope,	he	could	feel	the	presence	of	his	two
companions.	Ghost	spirits	at	the	most,	but	perhaps	nothing	more	than	fractured
selves	of	his	own	mind.	Sceptical	Bairoth	Gild.	Stolid	Delum	Thord.	Facets	of
his	own	soul,	so	that	he	might	persist	in	this	dialogue	of	self-doubt.	Perhaps,
then,	nothing	more	than	an	indulgence.
Or	so	it	would	seem,	if	not	for	the	countless,	blood-scoring	edges	of
Bairoth	Gild’s	commentary.	At	times,	Karsa	felt	as	if	he	was	a	slave	once
more,	hunched	beneath	endless	flagellation.	The	notion	that	he	was	delivering
this	to	himself	was	beyond	contemplating.
‘Not	entirely	beyond,	Warleader,	if	you’d	spare	yourself	but	a	moment	to
regard	your	own	thoughts.’
‘Not	now,	Bairoth	Gild,’	Karsa	replied.	‘I	am	running	short	on	breath	as	it
is.’
‘Altitude,	Karsa	Orlong,’	came	Delum	Thord’s	voice.	‘Though	you	do	not
feel	it,	with	each	step	westward	you	are	descending.	Soon	you	will	leave	the
snow	behind.	Raraku	may	have	once	been	an	inland	sea,	but	it	was	a	sea
couched	in	the	lap	of	high	mountains.	Your	entire	journey	thus	far,	Warleader,
has	been	a	descent.’
Karsa	could	spare	that	thought	only	a	grunt.	He	had	felt	no	particular
descent,	but	horizons	played	deceptive	games	in	this	land.	The	desert	and
mountains	ever	lied,	he	had	long	since	discovered.
‘When	the	snow	is	gone,’	Bairoth	Gild	murmured,	‘the	wolves	will	attack.’
‘I	know.	Now	be	quiet—I	see	bare	rock	ahead.’
As	did	his	hunters.	They	numbered	at	least	a	dozen,	taller	at	the	shoulder
than	those	of	Karsa’s	homeland,	and	furred	in	tones	of	dun,	grey	and	speckled
white.	The	Teblor	watched	as	four	of	the	beasts	sprinted	ahead,	two	on	each
side,	making	for	the	exposed	rock.
Growling,	Karsa	unslung	his	wooden	sword.	The	bitter	cold	air	had	left	his
hands	slightly	numb.	Had	the	western	end	of	the	Holy	Desert	held	any	sources
of	water,	he	would	not	have	climbed	to	these	heights,	but	there	was	little	point
in	second-guessing	that	decision	now.
The	panting	breaths	of	the	wolves	were	audible	on	either	side	and	behind
him.
‘They	want	the	sure	footing,	Warleader.	Then	again,	so	do	you.	Beware	the
three	in	your	wake—they	will	strike	first,	likely	a	pace	or	two	before	you	reach
the	rock.’
Karsa	bared	his	teeth	at	Bairoth’s	unnecessary	advice.	He	well	knew	what
these	beasts	would	do,	and	when.


A	sudden	thumping	of	paws,	flurries	of	snow	springing	into	the	air,	and	all
the	wolves	raced	past	a	surprised	Karsa.	Claws	clattered	on	the	bared	rock,
water	spraying	from	the	sun’s	melt,	and	the	beasts	wheeled	to	form	a	halfcircle	before	the	Teblor.
He	slowed	his	steps,	readying	his	weapon.	For	once,	even	Bairoth	Gild	was
silenced—no	doubt	as	uncertain	as	he	himself	was.
A	rasping,	panting	stranger ’s	voice	hissed	through	Karsa’s	mind:	‘We
enjoyed	that,	Toblakai.	You	have	run	without	pause	for	three	nights	and	almost
four	days.	That	we	are	impressed	would	be	a	tragic	understatement.	We	have
never	before	seen	the	like.	See	our	heaving	flanks?	You	have	exhausted	us.	And
look	at	you—you	breathe	deep	and	there	is	red	around	your	eyes,	yet	you	stand
ready,	with	not	a	waver	in	your	legs,	or	from	the	strange	sword	in	your	hands.
Will	you	now	do	us	harm,	warrior?’
Karsa	shook	his	head.	The	language	was	Malazan.	‘You	are	like	a
Soletaken,	then.	But	many,	not	one.	This	would	be…D’ivers?	I	have	killed
Soletaken—this	fur	on	my	shoulders	is	proof	enough	of	that,	if	you	doubt	me.
Attack	me	if	you	will,	and	when	I	have	killed	all	of	you,	I	will	have	a	cloak
even	the	gods	will	envy.’
‘We	are	no	longer	interested	in	killing	you,	warrior.	Indeed,	we	accost	you
now	to	deliver	a	warning.’
‘What	kind	of	warning?’
‘You	are	on	someone’s	trail.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘Two	men,	both	heavy,	though	one	is	taller.	They	walk
side	by	side.’
‘Side	by	side,	yes.	And	what	does	that	tell	you?’
‘Neither	leads,	neither	follows.’
‘Danger	rides	your	shoulders,	Toblakai.	About	you	is	an	air	of	threat—
another	reason	why	we	will	not	cross	you.	Powers	vie	for	your	soul.	Too	many.
Too	deadly.	But	heed	our	warning:	should	you	cross	one	of	those	travellers…the
world	will	come	to	regret	it.	The	world,	warrior.’
Karsa	shrugged	a	second	time.	‘I	am	not	interested	in	fighting	anyone	at
the	moment,	D’ivers.	Although,	if	I	am	in	turn	crossed,	then	I	am	not	the	one	to
answer	for	whatever	regret	the	world	then	experiences.	Now,	I	am	done	with
words.	Move	from	my	path,	or	I	will	kill	you	all.’
The	wolves	hesitated.	‘Tell	them	that	Ryllandaras	sought	to	dissuade	you.
Before	you	make	your	last	living	act	one	that	sees	this	world	destroyed.’
He	watched	them	wheel	and	make	their	way	down	the	slope.
Bairoth	Gild’s	laugh	was	a	faint	thunder	in	his	mind.	Karsa	nodded.	‘None
would	accept	the	blame	for	what	has	not	yet	occurred,’	he	rumbled.	‘That,	by


itself,	constitutes	a	curiously	potent	warning.’
‘You	do	indeed	grow	into	yourself,	Karsa	Orlong.	What	will	you	do?’
Karsa	bared	his	teeth	as	he	reslung	his	sword	over	a	fur-clad	shoulder.
‘Do,	Bairoth	Gild?	Why,	I	would	meet	these	dire	travellers,	of	course.’
This	time,	Bairoth	Gild	did	not	laugh.
	
Strains	of	meltwater	flowed	over	the	brittle	rock	beneath	Karsa’s	moccasins.
Ahead,	the	descent	continued	into	a	crowded	maze	of	sandstone	mesas,	their
level	tops	capped	with	ice	and	snow.	Despite	the	bright,	mid-afternoon	sun	in
the	cloudless	sky,	the	narrow,	twisting	channels	between	the	mesas	remained	in
deep	shadow.
But	the	snow	underfoot	had	vanished,	and	already	he	could	feel	a	new
warmth	in	the	air.	There	seemed	but	one	way	down,	and	it	was	as	much	a
stream	as	a	trail.	Given	the	lack	of	signs,	the	Teblor	could	only	assume	that	the
two	strangers	ahead	of	him	had	taken	the	same	route.
He	moved	slower	now,	his	legs	heavy	with	fatigue.	The	truth	of	his
exhaustion	had	not	been	something	he	would	reveal	to	the	D’ivers	wolves,	but
that	threat	was	behind	him	now.	He	was	close	to	collapse—hardly	ideal	if	he
was	about	to	cross	blades	with	a	world-destroying	demon.
Still	his	legs	carried	him	forward,	as	if	of	their	own	accord.	As	if	fated.
‘And	fate,	Karsa	Orlong,	carries	its	own	momentum.’
‘Returned	at	last	to	hound	me	once	more,	Bairoth	Gild?	At	the	very	least,
you	should	speak	words	of	advice.	This	Ryllandaras,	this	D’ivers—portentous
words,	yes?’
‘Absurdly	so,	Warleader.	There	are	no	powers	in	this	world—or	any	other—
that	pose	such	absolute	threat.	Spoken	through	the	frenzied	currents	of	fear.
Likely	personal	in	nature—whoever	walks	ahead	has	had	dealings	with	the	one
named	Ryllandaras,	and	it	was	the	D’ivers	who	suffered	with	the	meeting.’
‘You	are	probably	right,	Bairoth	Gild.	Delum	Thord,	you	have	been	silent
a	long	while.	What	are	your	thoughts?’
‘I	am	troubled,	Warleader.	The	D’ivers	was	a	powerful	demon,	after	all.	To
take	so	many	shapes,	yet	remain	one.	To	speak	in	your	mind	as	would	a	god…’
Karsa	grimaced.	‘A	god…or	a	pair	of	ghosts.	Not	a	demon,	Delum	Thord.
We	Teblor	are	too	careless	with	that	word.	Forkrul	Assail.	Soletaken.	D’ivers.
None	are	demons	in	truth,	for	none	were	summoned	to	this	world,	none	belong
to	any	other	realm	but	this	one.	They	are	in	truth	no	different	from	us	Teblor,
or	the	lowlanders.	No	different	from	rhizan	and	capemoths,	from	horses	and
dogs.	They	are	all	of	this	world,	Delum	Thord.’


‘As	you	say,	Warleader.	But	we	Teblor	were	never	simplistic	in	our	use	of
the	word.	Demon	also	refers	to	behaviour,	and	in	this	manner	all	things	can	be
demonic.	The	one	named	Ryllandaras	hunted	us,	and	had	you	not	driven	it	into
exhaustion,	it	would	have	attacked,	despite	your	words	to	the	contrary.’
Karsa	considered,	then	nodded.	‘True	enough,	Delum	Thord.	You	advise
caution.	This	was	always	your	way,	so	I	am	not	surprised.	I	will	not	ignore
your	words	for	that,	however.’
‘Of	course	you	will,	Karsa	Orlong.’
A	last	stretch	of	sunlight,	then	the	Teblor	was	in	shadow.	The	run-off	swept
around	his	ankles	as	the	track	narrowed,	the	footing	growing	treacherous.
Once	more	he	could	see	his	breath.
A	short	climb	to	his	left	ran	a	broad	ledge	of	some	kind,	out	of	the	shadow
and	looking	bone	dry.	Karsa	swung	from	the	trail	and	clambered	up	the	gully’s
eroded	bank	until	he	was	able	to	pull	himself	onto	it.	He	straightened.	Not	a
natural	ledge	after	all.	A	road,	running	parallel	to	the	gorge	as	it	girdled	the
first	mesa	on	his	left.	The	wall	of	the	mesa	itself	seemed	to	have	been
smoothed	once,	long	ago,	to	a	height	twice	Karsa’s	own.	Faint	pictographic
images	were	visible	on	it,	pitted	and	made	colourless	by	passing	centuries.	A
procession	of	figures,	each	scaled	to	that	of	a	lowlander,	bareheaded	and
wearing	naught	but	a	loincloth.	They	held	their	hands	high	overhead,	fingers
stretched	out	as	if	clutching	at	empty	air.
The	road	itself	was	latticed	in	cracks,	battered	by	incessant	rocks	tumbling
down	from	the	mesa.	Despite	this,	it	seemed	as	if	the	road	was	made	of	a	single
piece	of	stone,	though	of	course	that	was	impossible.	Heaved	and	rumpled,	it
wound	along	the	curve	of	the	mesa	wall	then	shifted	away	onto	a	ramp	of	sorts,
hazy	in	the	distance,	that	presumably	led	down	to	the	plain.	The	horizon
directly	ahead	and	to	Karsa’s	right	was	cut	short	by	towers	of	stone,	though	he
knew	that,	beyond	them,	stretched	the	waters	of	the	Longshan	Sea.
Weariness	forced	the	Teblor	to	slowly	settle	on	the	road,	removing	his
pack	and	sitting	against	the	mesa’s	rock	wall.	The	journey	had	been	long,	but
he	knew	his	path	ahead	was	still	longer.	And,	it	seemed,	he	would	ever	walk	it
alone.	For	these	ghosts	remain	just	that.	Perhaps,	in	truth,	no	more	than	my
mind’s	own	conjuring.	A	displeasing	thought.
He	leaned	his	head	back	on	the	rough,	sun-warmed	stone.
His	eyes	blinked	open—to	darkness.
‘Awake	once	more,	Warleader?	We	were	wondering	if	your	sleep	would
prove	eternal.	There	are	sounds	ahead—can	you	hear	them?	Oh,	they’ve
travelled	far,	but	that	is	the	way	with	this	land,	isn’t	it?	Still…stones	are	being
moved,	I	think.	Tossed.	Too	slow,	too	regular	to	be	a	rockfall.	The	two	strangers,


one	might	conclude.’
Karsa	slowly	stood,	stretching	to	ease	his	sore,	chilled	muscles.	He	could
hear	the	steady	clack	of	stones	striking	stone,	but	Bairoth	Gild	was	right—they
were	distant.	The	warrior	crouched	down	beside	his	pack	and	removed
foodstuffs	and	a	bladder	of	meltwater.
It	was	near	dawn.	Whoever	it	was	working	somewhere	ahead	had	begun
early.
Karsa	took	his	time	breaking	his	fast,	and	when	he	was	finally	done	and
ready	to	resume	his	journey,	the	sky	was	pink	to	the	east.	A	final	examination
of	the	condition	of	his	sword	and	the	fittings	on	his	armour,	then	he	was	on	the
move	once	again.
The	steady	clangour	of	the	stones	continued	through	half	the	morning.	The
road	skirted	the	mesa	for	a	distance	that	was	longer	than	he	had	originally
judged,	revealing	the	ramp	ahead	to	be	massive,	its	sides	sheer,	the	plain
beneath	a	third	of	a	league	or	more	below.	Just	before	the	road	departed	the
mesa,	it	opened	out	into	a	shelf-like	expanse,	and	here,	set	into	the	mesa	wall,
was	the	face	of	a	city.	Rockslides	had	buried	fully	half	of	it,	and	the	spreading
ridges	of	secondary	slides	lay	atop	the	main	one.
Before	one	of	these	lesser	slides	sat	a	pair	of	tents.
Three	hundred	paces	away	from	them,	Karsa	halted.
There	was	a	figure	at	the	secondary	slide,	clearing	rocks	with	a	steady,
almost	obsessive	rhythm,	tossing	huge	chunks	of	sandstone	out	behind	him	to
bounce	and	roll	on	the	flat	concourse.	Nearby,	seated	on	a	boulder,	was	another
figure,	and	where	the	first	one	was	tall—taller	than	a	lowlander	by	far—this
one	was	impressively	wide	at	the	shoulders,	dark-skinned,	heavy-maned.	A
large	leather	sack	was	beside	him,	and	he	was	gnawing	on	a	smoke-blackened
hind	leg—the	rest	of	the	small	mountain	goat	was	still	spitted	on	a	huge	skewer
over	a	stone-lined	hearth	near	the	tents.
Karsa	studied	the	scene	for	a	time,	then,	shrugging,	made	his	way	towards
the	two	figures.
He	was	less	than	twenty	paces	away	before	the	huge,	barbaric	man	seated
on	the	boulder	swung	his	head	around.
And	gestured	with	the	haunch	in	his	hand.	‘Help	yourself.	The	thing	damn
near	brained	me,	falling	from	the	cliffside,	so	I	feel	obliged	to	eat	it.	Funny,
that.	You	always	see	them,	scampering	and	clambering	way	up	there,	and	so
you	naturally	believe	they	never	make	a	misstep.	Well,	another	delusion
shattered.’
He	was	speaking	a	desert	dialect,	a	lowlander	tongue,	yet	he	was	no
lowlander.	Large,	thick	canines,	hair	on	shoulders	like	a	boar ’s	bristles,	a


heavy-boned	face	wide	and	flat.	Eyes	the	hue	of	the	sandstone	cliffs	around
them.
At	his	words,	the	stranger ’s	companion	ceased	throwing	rocks	and
straightened,	and	was	now	regarding	Karsa	curiously.
The	Teblor	was	equally	frank	as	he	returned	the	stare.	Almost	as	tall	as	he
was,	though	leaner.	Greyish,	green-tinged	skin.	Lower	canines	large	enough	to
be	tusks.	A	longbow	leaned	nearby,	along	with	a	quiver,	and	a	leather-strap
harness	to	which	a	scabbarded	sword	was	attached.	The	first	weapons	Karsa
had	yet	seen—for	the	other	one	appeared	to	be	entirely	unarmed,	barring	the
thick	hunting	knife	at	his	belt.
The	mutual	examination	continued	for	a	moment	longer,	then	the	tusked
warrior	resumed	his	excavation,	disappearing	from	sight	as	he	strode	into	the
cavity	he	had	cleared	in	the	rockfall.
Karsa	glanced	back	at	the	other	man.
Who	gestured	again	with	the	goat	leg.
The	Teblor	approached.	He	set	down	his	pack	near	the	hearth	and	drew	a
knife,	then	cut	away	a	slab	of	meat	and	returned	to	where	the	other	sat.	‘You
speak	the	language	of	the	tribes,’	Karsa	said,	‘yet	I	have	never	before	seen	your
kind.	Nor	that	of	your	companion.’
‘And	you	are	an	equally	rare	sight,	Thelomen	Toblakai.	I	am	named
Mappo,	of	the	people	known	as	Trell,	who	hail	from	west	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.
My	singleminded	companion	is	Icarium,	a	Jhag—’
‘Icarium?	Is	that	a	common	name,	Mappo?	There	is	a	figure	in	my	tribe’s
own	legends	who	is	so	named.’
The	Trell’s	ochre	eyes	narrowed	momentarily.	‘Common?	Not	in	the	way
you	ask.	The	name	certainly	appears	in	the	tales	and	legends	of	countless
people.’
Karsa	frowned	at	the	odd	pedantry,	if	that	was	what	it	was.	Then	he
crouched	down	opposite	Mappo	and	tore	off	a	mouthful	of	the	tender	meat.
‘It	occurs	to	me,	of	a	sudden,’	Mappo	said,	a	hint	of	a	grin	flickering
across	his	bestial	features,	‘that	this	chance	encounter	is	unique…in	ways	too
numerous	to	list.	A	Trell,	a	Jhag,	and	a	Thelomen	Toblakai…and	we	each	are
likely	the	only	one	of	our	respective	kinds	in	all	of	Seven	Cities.	Even	more
extraordinary,	I	believe	I	know	of	you—by	reputation	only,	of	course.	Sha’ik
has	a	bodyguard…a	Thelomen	Toblakai,	with	an	armoured	vest	made	of
petrified	shells,	and	a	wooden	sword…’
Karsa	nodded,	swallowing	down	the	last	of	the	meat	in	his	mouth	before
replying,	‘Aye,	I	am	in	the	service	of	Sha’ik.	Does	this	fact	make	you	my
enemy?’


‘Not	unless	you	choose	to	be,’	Mappo	answered,	‘and	I	would	advise
against	that.’
‘So	does	everyone,’	Karsa	muttered,	returning	to	his	meal.
‘Ah,	so	you	are	not	as	ignorant	of	us	as	you	first	said.’
‘A	score	of	wolves	spoke	to	me,’	Karsa	explained.	‘Little	was	said,	barring
the	warning	itself.	I	do	not	know	what	makes	you	two	so	dangerous,	nor	do	I
much	care.	Impede	me	in	my	journey	and	I	will	kill	you.	It	is	as	simple	as	that.’
Mappo	slowly	nodded.	‘And	have	we	cause	to	impede	you?’
‘Not	unless	you	choose	to	have,’	Karsa	responded.
The	Trell	smiled.	‘Thus,	it	is	best	we	learn	nothing	of	each	other,	then.’
‘Aye,	that	would	be	best.’
‘Alas,’	Mappo	sighed,	‘Icarium	already	knows	all	he	needs	to	of	you,	and
as	to	what	he	intends,	while	already	decided,	he	alone	knows.’
‘If	he	believes	he	knows	me,’	Karsa	growled,	‘he	deceives	himself.’
‘Well,	let	us	consider	the	matter.	On	your	shoulders	is	the	fur	of	a
Soletaken.	One	we	both	happen	to	know—you	killed	a	formidable	beast,	there.
Luckily,	he	was	no	friend	of	ours,	but	the	measure	of	your	martial	prowess	has
been	taken.	Next,	you	are	haunted	by	ghosts—not	just	the	two	kinsmen	who
even	now	hover	behind	you.	But	the	ghosts	of	those	you	have	slain	in	your
short,	but	clearly	terrible	life.	They	are	appallingly	numerous,	and	their	hatred
for	you	is	a	palpable	hunger.	But	who	carries	their	dead	in	such	a	manner?
Only	one	who	has	been	cursed,	I	think.	And	I	speak	from	long	experience;
curses	are	horrible	things.	Tell	me,	has	Sha’ik	ever	spoken	to	you	of
convergence?’
‘No.’
‘When	curses	collide,	you	might	say.	Flaws	and	virtues,	the	many	faces	of
fateful	obsession,	of	singular	purpose.	Powers	and	wills	are	drawn	together,	as
if	one	must	by	nature	seek	the	annihilation	of	the	other.	Thus,	you	and	Icarium
are	now	here,	and	we	are	moments	from	a	dreadful	convergence,	and	it	is	my
fate	to	witness.	Helpless	unto	desperate	madness.	Fortunately	for	my	own	sake,
I	have	known	this	feeling	before.’
Karsa	had	been	eating	throughout	Mappo’s	words.	Now	he	examined	the
bone	in	his	hands,	then	tossed	it	aside,	wiped	his	palms	on	the	white	bear	fur	of
his	cloak,	and	straightened.	‘What	else	have	you	and	Icarium	discovered	about
me,	Mappo?’
‘A	few	more	things.	Ryllandaras	gauged	you,	and	concluded	that	he	had	no
wish	to	add	his	skins	to	your	collection.	He	is	ever	wise,	is	Ryllandaras.	A
score	of	wolves,	you	said?	His	power	has	grown,	then,	a	mystery	both
ominous	and	curious,	given	the	chaos	in	his	heart.	What	else?	Well,	the	rest	I


choose	not	to	reveal.’
Karsa	grunted.	He	untied	the	bear	cloak	and	let	it	fall	to	the	ground,	then
unslung	his	sword	and	turned	to	face	the	rockslide.
A	boulder	sailed	out	from	the	cavity,	of	a	size	and	weight	that	would	strain
even	Bairoth	Gild.	The	ground	shook	when	it	struck	and	bounced	and	rolled	to
a	dusty	halt.
‘Will	he	now	make	me	wait?’	Karsa	growled.
As	if	in	answer	Icarium	emerged	from	the	cave,	slapping	the	dust	from	his
long-fingered	hands.	‘You	are	not	Fenn,’	he	said.	‘Indeed,	I	believe	you	are
Teblor,	a	son	of	the	fallen	tribes	in	Laederon.	You	have	travelled	far,	warrior,
to	meet	your	end.’
‘If	you	are	so	eager,’	Karsa	growled,	‘cease	your	words.’
The	Jhag’s	expression	grew	troubled.	‘Eager?	No.	I	am	never	eager.	This
is	a	moment	of	pathos,	I	believe.	The	first	time	I	have	felt	such	a	thing,	which	is
strange.’	He	turned	to	his	companion.	‘Have	we	known	such	moments	as	this
one	before,	Mappo	Runt?’
‘Aye,	my	friend.	We	have.’
‘Ah,	well,	then	the	burden	of	recollection	is	yours	alone.’
‘As	it	ever	was,	Icarium.’
‘I	grieve	for	you,	friend.’
Mappo	nodded.	‘I	know	you	do.	Now,	best	unsheathe	your	sword,	Icarium.
This	Teblor	evinces	frustration	and	impatience.’
The	Jhag	went	to	his	weapon.	‘What	will	come	of	this,	Mappo?’
The	Trell	shook	his	head.	‘I	do	not	know,	but	I	am	filled	with	dread.’
‘I	shall	endeavour	to	be	efficient,	then,	so	as	to	diminish	the	duration	of
your	discomfort.’
‘Clearly	impossible,’	Karsa	muttered,	‘given	your	love	of	words.’	He
readied	his	sword.	‘Be	on	with	it,	then,	I	have	a	horse	to	find.’
Icarium’s	brows	rose	fractionally,	then	he	drew	out	his	sword.	An	unusual
weapon,	single-edged	and	looking	ancient.	He	approached.
The	Jhag’s	attack	was	a	flicker	of	motion,	faster	than	anything	Karsa	had
seen	before,	yet	his	sword	flashed	to	meet	it.
Blades	collided.
There	was	a	peculiar	snick	and	Karsa	found	himself	holding	nothing	more
than	a	handle.
Outrage	exploded	within	him	and	he	stepped	forward,	his	huge	fist
hammering	into	Icarium’s	face.	The	Jhag	was	thrown	backward,	leaving	his
feet,	his	sword	cartwheeling	away	to	clatter	on	the	slope	of	the	rockfall.
Icarium	landed	with	a	heavy	thump,	and	did	not	move.


‘Bastard	broke	my	sword—’	Karsa	began,	turning	towards	Mappo.
White	light	detonated	in	his	skull.
And	he	knew	no	more.
Mappo	stared	down	at	the	motionless	Thelomen	Toblakai,	noting	the	slow
rise	and	fall	of	the	giant’s	chest.	Hefting	his	mace,	he	glanced	over	to	where
Icarium	lay,	saw	a	hand	slowly	lift	from	the	ground,	twitch,	then	settle	once
more.
The	Trell	sighed.	‘Better	than	I	could	have	hoped	for,	I	think.’
He	walked	back	and	returned	his	weapon	to	the	large	leather	sack,	then	set
out	to	strike	the	camp.
	
Pounding	pain	behind	his	eyes,	a	sound	of	roaring,	as	of	a	river	raging
through	a	narrow	channel.	Karsa	groaned.
Some	time	passed	before	he	finally	pushed	himself	onto	his	hands	and
knees.
It	was	dawn…again.
‘Say	nothing,	Bairoth	Gild,’	he	muttered.	‘Nor	you,	Delum	Thord.	I	can
well	guess	what	happened.	That	bastard	Trell	struck	me	from	behind.	Aye,	he
didn’t	kill	me,	but	one	day	he	will	wish	he	had.’
A	slow,	cautious	look	around	confirmed	that	he	was	alone.	His	broken
sword	had	been	positioned	beside	him,	handle	and	blade	side	by	side,	with	a
small	bound	bundle	of	desert	flowers	lying	atop	them.
The	blow	to	his	head	left	him	nauseous,	and	he	found	he	was	shaking	once
he’d	managed	to	climb	to	his	feet.	He	unstrapped	his	dented	helm	and	tossed	it
aside.	Dried	blood	matted	his	hair	and	covered	the	back	of	his	neck.
‘At	least	you	are	now	well	rested,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘You	are	less	amused	than	you	would	have	me	think,	Bairoth	Gild.	The	one
named	Icarium.	He	is	the	one	from	our	legends,	isn’t	he?’
‘And	you	alone	among	the	living	Teblor	have	crossed	blades	with	him.’
‘He	broke	my	sword.’
There	was	no	reply	to	that.	Karsa	set	about	preparing	to	resume	his
journey,	once	more	donning	the	bear	cloak,	then	shouldering	the	pack.	He	left
the	wooden	sword	pieces	and	their	bouquet,	and	made	to	set	off	down	the
descending	road.	Then	he	paused,	turning	his	attention	instead	to	the	cavity	that
Icarium	had	excavated	into	the	rockslide.
The	Jhag’s	efforts	had	partially	uncovered	a	statue,	broken	here	and	there,
with	what	remained	fissured	with	cracks,	but	recognizable	none	the	less.	A
grotesque	construct,	as	tall	as	Karsa,	made	of	a	black,	grainy	stone.


A	seven-headed	hound.
It	had	been	completely	buried	by	the	fall,	and	so	would	have	revealed	no
sign	that	it	existed	beneath	the	rubble.	Yet	Icarium	had	found	it,	though	his
reasons	for	uncovering	the	monstrosity	were	still	unfathomable.	‘He	has	lived
too	long,	I	think,’	Karsa	murmured.
He	strode	back	out	from	the	cavity,	then	swung	onto	the	road.
	
Six	days	later,	the	city	of	Lato	Revae	far	behind	him,	the	Teblor	lay	prone	in
the	shadows	of	a	guldindha	tree	at	the	edge	of	a	grove,	watching	a	pair	of
drovers	switching	their	herd	of	goats	towards	a	dusty	corral.	A	small	village
lay	beyond,	its	low	buildings	roofed	in	palm	fronds,	the	air	above	it	hazy	with
dung	smoke	and	dust.
The	sun	would	be	down	soon,	and	he	could	resume	his	journey.	He	had
waited	out	the	day,	unseen.	These	lands	between	Lato	Revae	and	the	Mersin
River	were	relatively	crowded,	compared	to	all	that	he	had	seen	thus	far,
reminding	him	that	his	travels,	since	his	landing	at	Ehrlitan,	had	been	mostly
through	unbroken	wilderness.	The	Pan’potsun	Odhan—the	Holy	Desert	itself
—was	a	world	virtually	abandoned	by	civilization.
But	here,	irrigation	ditches	ribboned	the	plain.	Wells	and	groves	and
villages	abounded,	and	there	were	more	roads	than	he	had	ever	seen	before,
even	in	the	lands	of	the	Nathii.	Most	were	dusty,	winding	tracks	at	ground	level,
usually	situated	between	ditches.	Thus	far,	the	only	exceptions	were	the
imperial	tracks,	raised	and	straight	and	substantial	enough	to	permit	two
wagons	to	pass	each	other	with	room	to	spare.	These	Malazan	roads	had
suffered	in	the	last	year—despite	their	obvious	value,	foundation	boulders	had
been	dug	out,	league-markers	uprooted.	But	the	ditches	alongside	them	were
deep	and	wide,	and	Karsa	had	used	those	ditches	to	remain	hidden	from	sight
as	he	made	his	way	southwestward.
The	village	ahead	crouched	on	a	crossroads	of	Malazan	tracks,	and	a
squat,	square	tower	rose	above	the	low	roofs	near	the	centre.	Its	limestone
walls	were	stained	black,	streaks	flaring	up	from	arrow-slits	and	windows.
When	the	sun	finally	settled	beyond	the	horizon,	no	lights	showed	from	the
tower.
Though	it	was	likely	that	there	were	rebel	soldiers	of	the	Apocalypse
stationed	in	the	village,	given	its	strategic	placement	on	the	crossroads,	Karsa
had	no	interest	in	initiating	contact.	His	was	a	private	journey,	if	for	no	reason
but	that	he	chose	to	have	it	so.	In	any	case,	it	seemed	the	rebellion	was	not	quite
as	fierce	here;	either	that	or	the	unbridled	bloodthirst	had	long	since	abated.


There	had	been	no	widespread	destruction	of	farms	and	fields,	no	slaughter	in
the	village	and	town	streets.	Karsa	wondered	if	there	had	been	as	many
Malazan	traders	and	landowners	this	far	west,	or	if	the	garrisons	had	all	been
recalled	into	the	major	cities,	such	as	Kayhum,	Sarpachiya	and	Ugarat—their
fellow	noncombatants	accompanying	them.	If	so,	then	it	had	not	helped	them.
He	disliked	being	weaponless,	barring	the	Malazan	short-sword	he	used	as
a	knife,	sheathed	at	his	hip.	But	there	was	no	suitable	wood	in	this	region.
There	were	said	to	be	ironwood	trees	in	the	Jhag	Odhan,	and	he	would	wait
until	then.
The	swift	descent	into	night	was	done.	The	Teblor	warrior	stirred,
collecting	his	pack,	then	set	out	along	the	edge	of	the	guldindha	grove.	One	of
the	imperial	roads	led	off	in	the	direction	he	sought,	likely	the	main	artery
connecting	Lato	Revae	with	the	Holy	City	Ugarat.	If	any	bridges	across	the
Mersin	River	had	survived	the	uprising,	it	would	be	the	Malazan-built	one	on
that	road.
He	skirted	the	village	on	its	north	side,	through	knee-high	grains,	the	soil
soft	from	the	previous	night’s	irrigating.	Karsa	assumed	the	water	came	from
the	river	somewhere	ahead,	though	he	could	not	imagine	how	the	flow	was
regulated.	The	notion	of	a	life	spent	tilling	fields	was	repellent	to	the	Teblor
warrior.	The	rewards	seemed	to	be	exclusive	to	the	highborn	landowners,
whilst	the	labourers	themselves	had	only	a	minimal	existence,	prematurely
aged	and	worn	down	by	the	ceaseless	toil.	And	the	distinction	between	high	and
low	status	was	born	from	farming	itself—or	so	it	appeared	to	Karsa.	Wealth
was	measured	in	control	over	other	people,	and	the	grip	of	that	control	could
never	be	permitted	to	loosen.	Odd,	then,	that	this	rebellion	had	had	nothing	to
do	with	such	inequities,	that	in	truth	it	had	been	little	more	than	a	struggle
between	those	who	would	be	in	charge.
Yet	the	majority	of	the	suffering	had	descended	upon	the	lowborn,	upon	the
common	folk.	What	matter	the	colour	of	the	collar	around	a	man’s	neck,	if	the
chains	linked	to	them	were	identical?
Better	to	struggle	against	helplessness,	as	far	as	he	was	concerned.	This
blood-soaked	Apocalypse	was	pointless,	a	misdirected	explosion	of	fury	that,
when	it	passed,	left	the	world	unchanged.
He	bounded	across	a	ditch,	crossed	through	a	narrow	fringe	of	overgrown
brush,	and	found	himself	at	the	edge	of	a	shallow	pit.	Twenty	paces	across	and
at	least	thirty	paces	wide.	The	town’s	refuse	was	piled	here,	not	entirely
successful	at	covering	the	mass	of	lowlander	bones.
Here,	then,	were	the	Malazans.	As	tamed	and	broken	as	the	earth	itself.	The
wealth	of	flesh,	flung	back	into	the	ground.	Karsa	had	no	doubt	that	it	was	their


rivals	in	status	who	were	loudest	in	exhorting	their	deaths.
‘And	so,	once	again,	Karsa	Orlong,	we	are	given	the	truths	of	the
lowlanders.’	Bairoth	Gild’s	ghostly	voice	was	palpably	bitter.	‘For	every	virtue
they	espouse,	a	thousand	self-serving	evils	belie	their	piety.	Know	them,
Warleader,	for	one	day	they	will	be	your	enemy.’
‘I	am	no	fool,	Bairoth	Gild.	Nor	am	I	blind.’
Delum	Thord	spoke.	‘A	place	of	haunting	lies	ahead,	Karsa	Orlong.	As
ancient	as	our	own	blood.	Those	who	live	here	avoid	it,	and	have	always
avoided	it.’
‘Not	entirely,’	Bairoth	interjected.	‘Fear	has	inspired	them	on	occasion.	The
place	is	damaged.	None	the	less,	the	Elder	power	lingers.	The	path	beckons—
will	you	walk	it,	Warleader?’
Karsa	made	his	way	around	the	pit.	He	could	see	something	ahead,
earthworks	rising	to	break	the	flatness	of	the	surrounding	plain.	Elongated
barrows,	the	slabs	of	stone	that	formed	them	visible	in	places	although	they
were	mostly	covered	in	thorny	brush	and	tufts	of	yellow	grasses.	The	mounds
formed	an	irregular	ring	around	a	larger,	circular	hill	that	was	flat-topped,
though	slightly	canted	as	if	one	side	had	settled	over	time.	Rising	at	angles
from	the	summit	were	standing	stones,	a	score	or	more.
Rocks	from	clearing	the	nearby	fields	had	been	discarded	in	this	once-holy
site,	around	the	barrows,	heaped	against	the	slope	of	the	central	hill,	along	with
other	detritus:	the	withered	wooden	skeletons	of	ox	ploughs,	palm	fronds	from
roofs,	piles	of	potsherds	and	the	bones	of	butchered	livestock.
Karsa	slipped	between	two	barrows	and	made	his	way	up	the	central	slope.
The	nearest	standing	stone	reached	barely	to	his	waist.	Black	symbols	crowded
it,	the	spit	and	charcoal	paint	relatively	recent.	The	Teblor	recognized	various
signs,	such	as	had	been	employed	as	a	secret,	native	language	during	the
Malazan	occupation.	‘Hardly	a	place	of	fear,’	he	muttered.	Fully	half	of	the
stones	were	either	shattered	or	toppled,	and	from	the	latter	Karsa	noted	that
they	were,	in	fact,	taller	than	he	was,	so	deeply	had	they	been	anchored	in	the
artificial	hill.	The	summit	itself	was	pitted	and	uneven.
‘Oh,	these	are	the	signs	of	fear,	Karsa	Orlong,	do	not	doubt	that.	This
desecration.	Were	this	a	place	without	power,	the	answer	would	have	been
indifference.’
Karsa	grunted,	stepping	carefully	on	the	treacherous	ground	as	he
approached	the	nominal	centre	of	the	stone	ring.	Four	smaller	slabs	had	been
tilted	together	there,	the	wiry	grasses	stopping	a	pace	away	on	all	sides,
leaving	only	bare	earth	flecked	with	bits	of	charcoal.
And	fragments,	Karsa	noted	as	he	crouched,	of	bone.	He	picked	one	up	and


studied	it	in	the	starlight.	From	a	skull,	lowlander	in	scale	though	somewhat
more	robust,	the	outer	edge	of	an	eye	socket.	Thick…like	that	of	my
gods…‘Bairoth	Gild.	Delum	Thord.	Do	either	of	you	sense	the	presence	of	a
spirit	or	a	god	here?’
‘No,’	Delum	Thord	replied.
Bairoth	spoke.	‘A	shaman	was	buried	here,	Warleader.	His	head	was
severed	and	left	fixed	in	the	apex	of	the	four	cardinal	stones.	Whoever	shattered
it	did	so	long	afterwards.	Centuries.	Perhaps	millennia.	So	that	it	would	no
longer	see.	No	longer	watch.’
‘Then	why	is	this	place	of	value	to	me?’
‘For	the	way	through	it	offers,	Warleader.’
‘The	way	through	what,	Bairoth	Gild?’
‘Passage	westward,	into	the	Jhag	Odhan.	A	trail	in	the	dreamworld.	A
journey	of	months	will	become	one	of	mere	days,	should	you	choose	to	walk	it.
It	lives	still,	for	it	was	used	not	long	ago.	By	an	army.’
‘And	how	can	I	walk	this	trail?’
Delum	Thord	replied,	‘We	can	lead	you,	Karsa	Orlong.	For,	like	the	one
once	buried	here,	we	are	neither	dead	nor	alive.	The	lord	Hood	cannot	find	our
spirits,	for	they	are	here	with	you.	Our	presence	adds	to	the	god	of	death’s
hatred	of	you,	Warleader.’
‘Hatred?’
‘For	what	you	have	taken	and	would	not	give	to	him.	Will	not.	Would	you
become	your	own	Keeper	of	Souls?	So	he	must	now	fear.	When	last	did	Hood
know	a	rival?’
Karsa	scowled	and	spat	onto	the	ground.	‘I	have	no	interest	in	being	his
rival.	I	would	break	these	chains.	I	would	free	even	you	and	Bairoth	Gild.’
‘We	would	rather	you	did	not,	Warleader.’
‘You	and	Bairoth	Gild	are	perhaps	alone	in	that	sentiment,	Delum	Thord.’
‘What	of	it?’	Bairoth	snapped.
Karsa	said	nothing,	for	he	had	begun	to	understand	the	choice	that	lay
ahead,	sometime	in	the	future.	To	cast	off	my	enemies…I	must	also	cast	off	my
friends.	And	so	Hood	follows,	and	waits.	For	the	day	that	must	come.
‘You	hide	your	thoughts	now,	Karsa	Orlong.	This	new	talent	does	not	please
us.’
‘I	am	warleader,’	Karsa	growled.	‘It	is	not	my	task	to	please	you.	Do	you
now	regret	that	you	follow?’
‘No,	Karsa	Orlong.	Not	yet.’
‘Take	me	into	this	trail	in	the	dreamworld,	Delum	Thord.’
The	air	grew	suddenly	colder,	the	smell	reminding	Karsa	of	the	sloped


clearings	on	high	mountain	sides	when	spring	arrived,	the	smell	of	enlivened,
softened	lichen	and	moss.	And	before	him,	where	there	had	been	nightsoftened	farmland	a	moment	ago,	there	was	now	tundra,	beneath	a	heavily
overcast	sky.
A	broad	path	lay	before	him,	stretching	across	the	rolling	land,	where	the
lichen	had	been	crushed,	the	mosses	kicked	aside	and	trampled.	As	Bairoth
Gild	had	said,	an	army	had	passed	this	way,	although	by	the	signs	it	seemed
their	journey	had	been	but	a	moment	ago—he	half	expected	to	see	the	tail	end
of	that	solemn	column	on	the	distant	horizon,	but	there	was	nothing.	Simply	an
empty,	treeless	expanse,	stretching	out	on	all	sides.
He	moved	forward,	in	the	army’s	wake.
This	world	seemed	timeless,	the	sky	unchanging.	On	occasion,	herds
appeared,	too	distant	to	make	out	the	kind	of	beasts,	rolling	across	hillsides
then	slipping	from	view	as	they	streamed	down	into	valleys.	Birds	flew	in
arrowhead	formation,	a	strange	long-necked	breed	high	overhead,	all	of	them
consistently	flying	back	the	way	Karsa	had	come.	Apart	from	the	whine	of	the
insects	swarming	about	the	Teblor,	a	strange,	unreal	silence	emanated	from	the
landscape.
A	dream	world,	then,	such	as	the	elders	of	his	tribe	were	wont	to	visit,
seeking	portents	and	omens.	The	scene	not	unlike	what	Karsa	had	glimpsed
when,	in	delirium,	he	had	found	himself	before	his	god,	Urugal.
He	continued	on.
Eventually,	the	air	grew	colder,	and	frost	glittered	amidst	the	lichen	and
moss	to	either	side	of	the	wide	trail.	The	smell	of	rotting	ice	filled	Karsa’s
nose.	Another	thousand	paces	brought	him	to	the	first	dirt-studded	sweep	of
snow,	filling	a	shallow	valley	on	his	right.	Then	shattered	chunks	of	ice,	half
buried	in	the	ground	as	if	they	had	fallen	from	the	sky,	many	of	them	larger
than	a	lowlander	wagon.	The	land	itself	was	more	broken	here,	the	gentle	roll
giving	way	to	sharp-walled	drainage	gullies	and	channels,	to	upthrust	hillsides
revealing	banded	sandstone	beneath	the	frozen,	thick	skin	of	peat.	Fissures	in
the	stone	gleamed	with	greenish	ice.
Bairoth	Gild	spoke.	‘We	are	now	at	the	border	of	a	new	warren,	Warleader.
A	warren	inimical	to	the	army	that	arrived	here.	And	so,	a	war	was	waged.’
‘How	far	have	I	travelled,	Bairoth	Gild?	In	my	world,	am	I	approaching
Ugarat?	Sarpachiya?’
The	ghost’s	laughter	was	like	a	boulder	rolled	over	gravel.	‘They	are
behind	you	now,	Karsa	Orlong.	You	approach	the	land	known	as	the	Jhag
Odhan.’
It	had	seemed	no	more	than	a	half-day’s	worth	of	travel	in	this	dream


world.
Signs	of	the	army’s	passage	grew	less	distinct,	the	ground	underfoot
frozen	rock	hard	and	now	consisting	mostly	of	rounded	stones.	Ahead,	a	plain
studded	with	huge	flat	slabs	of	black	rock.
Moments	later,	Karsa	was	moving	among	them.
There	were	bodies	beneath	the	stones.	Pinned	down.
‘Will	you	free	these,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘No,	Delum	Thord,	I	shall	not.	I	shall	pass	through	this	place,	disturbing
nothing.’
‘Yet	these	are	not	Forkrul	Assail.	Many	are	dead,	for	they	had	not	the
power	their	kind	once	possessed.	While	others	remain	alive,	and	will	not	die	for
a	long	time.	Hundreds,	perhaps	thousands	of	years.	Karsa	Orlong,	do	you	no
longer	believe	in	mercy?’
‘My	beliefs	are	my	own,	Delum	Thord.	I	shall	not	undo	what	I	do	not
understand,	and	that	is	all.’
He	travelled	on,	and	soon	left	the	terrible	plain	behind.
Before	him	now	stretched	a	field	of	ice,	crack-riven,	with	pools	of	water
reflecting	the	silver	sky.	Bones	were	scattered	on	it,	from	hundreds,	perhaps
thousands	of	figures.	Bones	of	a	type	he	had	seen	before.	Some	still	sheathed	in
withered	skin	and	muscle.	Shards	of	stone	weapons	lay	among	them,	along
with	fragments	of	fur,	antlered	helms	and	torn,	rotting	hides.
The	fallen	warriors	formed	a	vast	semicircle	around	a	low,	square-walled
tower.	Its	battered	stones	were	limned	in	runnelled	ice,	its	doorway	gaping,	the
interior	dark.
Karsa	picked	his	way	across	the	field,	his	moccasins	crunching	through	the
ice	and	snow.
The	tower ’s	doorway	was	tall	enough	to	permit	the	Teblor	to	stride
through	without	ducking.	A	single	room	lay	within.	Broken	furniture	and	the
pieces	of	more	fallen	warriors	cluttered	the	stone	floor.	A	spiral	staircase	that
seemed	made	entirely	of	iron	rose	from	the	centre.
From	what	he	could	determine	from	the	wreckage,	the	furniture	was	of	a
scale	to	suit	a	Teblor,	rather	than	a	lowlander.
Karsa	made	his	way	up	the	ice-sheathed	staircase.
There	was	a	single	level	above,	a	high-ceilinged	chamber	that	had	once
held	wooden	shelves	on	all	four	walls.	Torn	scrolls,	bound	books	ripped	apart,
vials	and	clay	jars	containing	various	pungent	mixes	crushed	underfoot,	a
large	table	split	in	half	and	pushed	up	against	one	wall,	and	on	a	cleared	space
on	the	floor…
Karsa	stepped	off	the	landing	and	looked	down.


‘Thelomen	Toblakai,	welcome	to	my	humble	abode.’
Karsa	scowled.	‘I	crossed	blades	with	one	much	like	you.	He	was	named
Icarium.	Like	you,	yet	less	so.’
‘Because	he	is	a	half-blood,	of	course.	Whilst	I	am	not.	Jaghut,	not	Jhag.’
She	lay	spread-eagled	within	a	ring	of	fist-sized	stones.	A	larger	stone
rested	on	her	chest,	from	which	heat	rose	in	waves.	The	air	in	the	chamber	was
a	swirling	mix	of	steam	and	suspended	frost.
‘You	are	trapped	within	sorcery.	The	army	was	seeking	you,	yet	they	did
not	kill	you.’
‘Could	not	would	be	more	accurate.	Not	immediately,	in	any	case.	But
eventually,	this	Tellann	Ritual	will	destroy	this	core	of	Omtose	Phellack,	which
will	in	turn	lead	to	the	death	of	the	Jhag	Odhan—even	now,	the	north	forest
creeps	onto	the	plains,	whilst	from	the	south	the	desert	claims	ever	more	of	the
odhan	that	was	my	home.’
‘Your	refuge.’
She	bared	her	tusks	in	something	like	a	smile.	‘Among	the	Jaghut,	they	are
now	one	and	the	same,	Thelomen	Toblakai.’
Karsa	looked	around,	studying	the	wreckage.	He	saw	no	weapons;	nor	was
the	woman	wearing	armour.	‘When	this	core	of	Omtose	Phellack	dies,	so	will
you,	yes?	Yet	you	spoke	only	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.	As	if	your	own	death	was	of
less	importance	than	that	of	this	land.’
‘It	is	less	important.	On	the	Jhag	Odhan,	the	past	lives	still.	Not	just	in	my
fallen	kin,	the	Jhag—the	few	that	managed	to	escape	the	Logros	T’lan	Imass.
There	are	ancient	beasts	that	walk	the	treeless	lands	beside	the	sheets	of	ice.
Beasts	that	have	died	out	everywhere	else,	mostly	on	the	spears	of	the	T’lan
Imass.	But	there	were	no	Imass	in	the	Jhag	Odhan.	As	you	said,	a	refuge.’
‘Beasts.	Including	Jhag	horses?’
He	watched	her	strange	eyes	narrow.	The	pupils	were	vertical,	surrounded
in	pearlescent	grey.	‘The	horses	we	once	bred	to	ride.	Yes,	they	have	gone	feral
in	the	odhan.	Though	few	remain,	for	the	Trell	come	from	the	west	to	hunt
them.	Every	year.	They	drive	them	off	cliffs.	As	they	do	to	many	of	the	other
beasts.’
‘Why	did	you	not	seek	to	stop	them?’
‘Because,	dear	warrior,	I	was	hiding.’
‘A	tactic	that	failed.’
‘A	scouting	party	of	T’lan	Imass	discovered	me.	I	destroyed	most	of	them,
but	one	escaped.	From	that	moment,	I	knew	their	army	would	come,	eventually.
Granted,	they	took	their	time	about	it,	but	time	is	what	they	have	aplenty.’
‘A	scouting	party?	How	many	did	you	destroy?’


‘Seven.’
‘And	are	their	remains	among	those	surrounding	this	tower?’
She	smiled	again.	‘I	would	think	not,	Thelomen	Toblakai.	To	the	T’lan
Imass,	destruction	is	failure.	Failure	must	be	punished.	Their	methods	are…
elaborate.’
‘Yet	what	of	the	warriors	lying	below,	and	those	around	the	tower?’
‘Fallen,	but	not	in	failure.	Here	I	lie,	after	all.’
‘Enemies	should	be	killed,’	the	Teblor	growled,	‘not	imprisoned.’
‘I	would	not	argue	that	sentiment,’	the	Jaghut	replied.
‘I	sense	nothing	evil	from	you.’
‘It	has	been	a	long	time	since	I	heard	that	word.	In	the	wars	with	the	T’lan
Imass,	even,	that	word	had	no	place.’
‘I	must	answer	injustice,’	he	rumbled.
‘As	you	will.’
‘The	need	overwhelms	all	caution.	Delum	Thord	would	smile.’
‘Who	is	Delum	Thord?’
Not	answering,	Karsa	unslung	his	pack	then	threw	off	his	bear	cloak	and
stepped	towards	the	ring	of	stones.
‘Stay	back,	warrior!’	the	Jaghut	hissed.	‘This	is	High	Tellann—’
‘And	I	am	Karsa	Orlong,	of	the	Teblor,’	the	warrior	growled.	He	kicked	at
the	nearest	stones.
Searing	flame	swept	up	to	engulf	Karsa.	He	snarled	and	pushed	his	way
through	it,	reaching	down	both	hands	to	take	the	slab	of	stone,	grunting	as	he
lifted	it	from	the	woman’s	chest.	The	flames	swarmed	him,	seeking	to	rend	his
flesh	from	his	bones,	but	his	growl	simply	deepened.	Pivoting,	flinging	the
huge	slab	to	one	side.	Where	it	struck	a	wall,	and	shattered.
The	flames	died.
Karsa	shook	himself,	then	looked	down	once	more.
The	ring	was	now	broken.	The	Jaghut’s	eyes	were	wide	as	she	stared	up	at
him,	movement	stirring	her	limbs.
‘Never	before,’	she	sighed,	then	shook	her	head	as	if	in	disbelief.
‘Ignorance,	honed	into	a	weapon.	Extraordinary,	Thelomen	Toblakai.’
Karsa	crouched	down	beside	his	pack.	‘Are	you	hungry?	Thirsty?’
She	was	slow	in	sitting	up.	The	T’lan	Imass	had	stripped	her,	leaving	her
naked,	but	she	seemed	unaffected	by	the	bitter	cold	air	now	filling	the	chamber.
Though	she	appeared	young,	he	suspected	she	was	anything	but.	He	felt	her
eyes	watching	him	as	he	prepared	the	meal.
‘You	crossed	swords	with	Icarium.	There	had	ever	been	but	a	single
conclusion	to	such	an	ill-fated	thing,	but	that	you	are	here	is	proof	that	you


somehow	managed	to	avoid	it.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘No	doubt	we	will	resume	our	disagreement	the	next	time
we	meet.’
‘How	did	you	come	to	be	here,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘I	am	seeking	a	horse,	Jaghut.	The	journey	was	long,	and	I	was	led	to
understand	that	this	dream	world	would	make	it	shorter.’
‘Ah,	the	ghost-warriors	hovering	behind	you.	Even	so,	you	take	a	grave
risk	travelling	the	Tellann	Warren.	I	owe	you	my	life,	Karsa	Orlong.’	She
cautiously	climbed	to	her	feet.	‘How	can	I	repay	you?’
He	straightened	to	face	her,	and	was	surprised—and	pleased—to	see	that
she	almost	matched	him	in	height.	Her	hair	was	long,	murky	brown,	tied	at	the
back.	He	studied	her	for	a	moment,	then	said,	‘Find	for	me	a	horse.’
Her	thin	eyebrows	rose	fractionally.	‘That	is	all,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘Perhaps	one	more	thing—what	is	your	name?’
‘That	is	what	you	would	ask?’
‘No.’
‘Aramala.’
He	nodded	and	turned	once	more	to	readying	the	meal.	‘I	would	know	all
you	can	tell	me,	Aramala,	of	the	seven	who	first	found	you.’
‘Very	well.	If	I	may	ask	something	in	turn.	You	passed	through	a	place	on
your	way	here,	where	Jhag	had	been…imprisoned.	I	shall	of	course	free	those
who	have	survived.’
‘Of	course.’
‘They	are	half-bloods.’
‘Aye,	so	I	am	told.’
‘Do	you	not	wonder	at	what	the	other	half	is?’
He	glanced	up,	then	slowly	frowned.
She	smiled.	‘There	is	much,	I	think,	that	I	must	tell	you.’
	
Some	time	later,	Karsa	Orlong	strode	from	the	tower.	He	moved	on,	resuming
the	trail	of	the	army	where	it	began	once	again	beyond	the	frozen	ground	of
Omtose	Phellack.
When	he	finally	emerged	from	the	warren,	into	the	heat	of	late	afternoon
on	the	world	of	his	birth,	he	found	himself	on	the	edge	of	a	ridge	of	battered
hills.	Pausing,	he	glanced	behind	him,	and	could	make	out,	at	the	very	rim	of
the	horizon,	a	city—probably	Sarpachiya—and	the	glimmer	of	a	vast	river.
The	hills	ahead	formed	a	spine,	a	feature	on	the	land	that	he	suspected
showed	up	only	on	local	maps.	There	were	no	farms	on	the	lowlands	before	it,


no	herds	on	its	broken	slopes.
The	T’lan	Imass	had	reappeared	in	this	place	before	him,	though	their
passage	onwards,	into	those	hills,	left	no	sign,	for	decades	had	passed	in	this
world	since	that	time.	He	was	on	the	edge	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.
Dusk	had	arrived	by	the	time	he	reached	the	foothills	and	began	making	his
way	up	the	weathered	slope.	The	exposed	rock	here	had	a	diseased	look,	as	if
afflicted	by	some	kind	of	unnatural	decay.	Pieces	of	it	collapsed	under	his	feet
as	he	climbed.
The	summit	was	little	more	than	a	ridge,	less	than	three	paces	across,
crusted	with	rotten	stone	and	dead	grasses.	Beyond,	the	land	fell	away	sharply,
forming	a	broad	valley	marked	by	sunken,	banded	sandstone	mesas	rising
from	its	base.	The	valley’s	opposite	side,	five	thousand	or	more	paces	distant,
was	a	sheer	cliff	of	rust-coloured	rock.
Karsa	could	not	imagine	the	natural	forces	that	could	have	created	such	a
landscape.	The	mesas	below	were	born	of	erosion,	as	if	floods	had	run	the
length	of	the	valley,	or	perhaps	fierce	winds	roared	down	the	channels—less
dramatic	and	demanding	much	greater	lengths	of	time.	Or	the	entire	valley
could	have	once	stood	level	with	the	surrounding	hills,	only	to	suffer	some
subterranean	slump.	The	decayed	outcroppings	suggested	some	kind	of
leaching	process	afflicting	the	region.
He	made	his	way	down	the	steep	slope.
And	quickly	discovered	that	it	was	honeycombed	with	caves	and	pits.
Mines,	if	the	scree	of	calcreted	rubble	fanning	out	from	them	was	any
indication.	But	not	tin	or	copper.	Flint.	Vast	veins	of	the	glassy	brown	material
lay	exposed	like	raw	wounds	in	the	hillside.
Karsa’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	mesas	ahead.	The	bands	in	the	sandstone
were	all	sharply	tilted,	and	not	all	at	the	same	angle.	Their	caps	displayed
nothing	of	the	flat	plateau	formation	that	one	would	expect;	instead,	they	were
jagged	and	broken.	The	valley	floor	itself—for	as	far	as	he	could	see	amidst
the	squat	mesas—seemed	to	be	sharp-edged	gravel.	Shatter	flakes	from	the
mining.
In	this	single	valley,	an	entire	army	could	have	fashioned	its	weapons	of
stone…
And	the	flint	in	this	place	was	far	from	exhausted.
Bairoth	Gild’s	voice	filled	his	head.	‘Karsa	Orlong,	you	circle	the	truths	as
a	lone	wolf	circles	a	bull	elk.’
Karsa	grunted,	his	only	reply.	He	could	see,	on	the	cliff	on	the	other	side,
more	caves,	these	ones	carved	into	the	sheer	wall.	Reaching	the	shadowed
valley	floor,	he	set	out	for	them.	The	gravel	underfoot	was	thick,	shifting


treacherously,	the	sharp	edges	slicing	into	the	hide	soles	of	his	moccasins.	The
air	smelled	of	limestone	dust.
He	approached	a	large	cave	mouth	situated	a	third	of	the	way	up	the	cliff.	A
broad	slope	of	scree	led	up	to	within	reach	of	it,	though	it	shifted	ominously
under	the	Teblor	as	he	scrambled	upward.	He	finally	managed	to	clamber	onto
the	uneven	floor.
With	the	cliff	wall	facing	northeast,	and	the	sun	already	riding	the	horizon,
there	was	no	ambient	light	in	the	cave.	The	Teblor	set	down	his	pack	and	drew
out	a	small	lantern.
The	walls	were	calcined	limestone,	blackened	by	generation	upon
generation	of	woodsmoke,	the	ceiling	high	and	roughly	domed.	Ten	paces
further	in,	the	passage	swiftly	diminished	as	ceiling,	walls	and	floor
converged.	Crouching,	Karsa	slipped	through	the	choke	point.
Beyond	was	a	vast	cavern.	Dimly	seen	on	the	wall	opposite	was	a
monolithic	projection	of	solid,	pure	flint,	reaching	almost	up	to	the	ceiling.
Deeply	recessed	niches	had	been	bored	into	the	flanking	walls.	A	fissure	above
the	centre	of	the	hewn	chamber	bled	grey	light	from	the	dusk	outside.	Directly
beneath	it	was	a	heap	of	sand,	and	growing	from	that	mound	was	a	knotted,
twisted	tree—a	guldindha,	no	higher	than	the	Teblor ’s	knee,	its	leaves	a	deeper
hue	of	green	than	was	usual.
That	daylight	could	reach	down	two-thirds	of	this	cliff	was	itself	a
miracle…but	this	tree…
Karsa	walked	over	to	one	of	the	niches	and	extended	the	lantern	into	it.
Another	cavern	lay	beyond.	And	it	was	filled	with	flint	weapons.	Some	were
broken	but	most	were	whole.	Swords,	double-bladed	axes	with	bone	shafts,
hundreds	upon	hundreds	covering	the	floor.	The	next	niche	contained	the	same,
as	did	the	one	after	that.	Twenty-two	side-chambers	in	all.	The	weapons	of	the
dead.	The	weapons	of	the	failed.	In	every	cave	on	this	cliff,	he	knew,	he	would
find	the	same.
But	none	of	the	others	were	important	to	him.	He	set	the	lantern	down	near
the	pillar	of	flint,	then	straightened.	‘Urugal	the	Woven.	Beroke	Soft	Voice,
Kahlb	the	Silent	Hunter,	Thenik	the	Shattered,	’Siballe	the	Unfound,	Halad	the
Giant,	Imroth	the	Cruel.	Faces	in	the	Rock,	gods	of	the	Teblor.	I,	Karsa	Orlong
of	the	Uryd	Tribe	of	the	Teblor,	have	delivered	you	to	this	place.	You	were
broken.	Severed.	Weaponless.	I	have	done	as	you	commanded	me	to	do.	I	have
brought	you	to	this	place.’
Urugal’s	broken	rasp	replied,	‘You	have	found	that	which	was	taken	from
us,	Karsa	Orlong.	You	have	freed	your	gods.’
The	Teblor	watched	the	ghost	of	Urugal	slowly	take	shape	before	him.	A


squat,	heavy-boned	warrior,	shorter	than	a	lowlander	but	much	broader.	The
bones	of	his	limbs	were	split—where	Karsa	could	see	between	the	taut	straps
of	leather	and	hide	that	bound	them,	that	held	him	together.	More	straps	crossed
his	chest.
‘Karsa	Orlong,	you	have	found	our	weapons.’
The	warrior	shrugged.	‘If	indeed	they	are	among	the	thousands	in	the
chambers	beyond.’
‘They	are.	They	did	not	fail	us.’
‘But	the	Ritual	did.’
Urugal	cocked	his	head.	His	six	kin	were	taking	shape	around	him.	‘You
understand,	then.’
‘I	do.’
‘Our	physical	forms	approach,	Karsa	Orlong.	They	have	journeyed	far,
bereft	of	spirit,	held	only	by	our	wills—’
‘And	the	one	you	now	serve,’	the	Teblor	growled.
‘Yes.	The	one	we	now	serve.	We	have	guided	you	in	turn,	Warleader.	And
now	shall	come	your	reward,	for	what	you	have	given	us.’
’Siballe	the	Unfound	now	spoke.	‘We	have	gathered	an	army,	Karsa
Orlong.	All	the	children	sacrificed	before	the	Faces	in	the	Rock.	They	are
alive,	Warleader.	They	have	been	prepared.	For	you.	An	army.	Your	people	are
assailed.	The	lowlanders	must	be	driven	back,	their	armies	annihilated.	You
shall	sweep	down	with	your	legions,	down	into	their	lands,	and	reap
destruction	upon	the	lowlanders.’
‘I	shall.’
‘The	Seven	Gods	of	the	Teblor,’	Urugal	said,	‘must	now	become	Eight.’
The	one	named	Halad—the	largest	of	the	seven	by	far,	hulking,	bestial—
stepped	forward.	‘You	must	now	fashion	a	sword,	Karsa	Orlong.	Of	stone.	The
mines	outside	await	you—we	shall	guide	you	in	the	knowledge—’
‘There	is	no	need,’	Karsa	said.	‘I	have	learned	the	many	hearts	of	stone.
The	knowledge	is	mine,	and	so	too	shall	the	sword	be	mine.	Those	you	fashion
are	well	enough	for	your	own	kind.	But	I	am	Teblor.	I	am	Thelomen	Toblakai.’
With	that	he	swung	about	and	walked	towards	the	monolithic	pillar	of	flint.
‘That	spar	will	defeat	you,’	Halad	said	behind	him.	‘To	draw	a	long
enough	blade	for	a	sword,	you	must	strike	from	above.	Examine	this	vein
carefully,	and	you	will	see	that,	pure	as	it	is,	the	flow	of	the	stone	is
unforgiving.	None	of	our	kind	has	ever	managed	to	draw	forth	a	flake	longer
than	our	own	height.	The	spar	before	you	can	no	longer	be	worked;	thus	its
abandonment.	Strike	and	it	shall	shatter.	And	that	failure	shall	stain	your	next
efforts,	and	so	weaken	the	sorcery	of	the	making.’


Karsa	stood	before	the	brown,	almost	black,	flint	pillar.
‘You	must	fashion	a	fire	at	its	base,’	Halad	said.	‘Left	to	burn	without
cessation	for	a	number	of	days	and	nights.	There	is	little	wood	in	the	valley
below,	but	in	the	Jhag	Odhan	beyond,	the	bhederin	herds	have	travelled	in	their
multitudes.	Fire,	Karsa	Orlong,	then	cold	water—’
‘No.	All	control	is	lost	with	that	method,	T’lan	Imass.	Your	kind	are	not
unique	in	knowing	the	truths	of	stone.	This	task	is	mine	and	mine	alone.	Now,
enough	words.’
‘The	name	you	have	given	us,’	Urugal	rasped,	‘how	did	you	come	by	such
knowledge?’
Karsa	turned,	face	twisting	into	a	sneer.	‘Foolish	Teblor.	Or	so	you
believed.	So	you	would	have	us.	Fallen	Thelomen	Toblakai,	but	he	who	has
fallen	can	rise	once	again,	Urugal.	Thus,	you	were	once	T’lan	Imass.	But	now,
you	are	the	Unbound.’	The	sneer	became	a	snarl.	‘From	wandering	to	hold.
From	hold	to	house.’
The	warrior	climbed	the	spar	of	flint.	Perched	on	its	top,	he	drew	out	his
Malazan	short-sword.	A	moment’s	examination	of	the	stone’s	surface,	then	he
leaned	over	to	study	the	almost	vertical	sweep	of	flawless	flint	reaching	down
to	the	cave’s	floor.	Reversing	the	sword,	Karsa	began	scraping	the	top	of	the
pillar,	a	hand’s	width	in	from	the	sharp	edge.	He	could	see	the	tracks	of	old
blows—the	T’lan	Imass	had	tried,	despite	Halad’s	words,	but	had	failed.
Karsa	continued	roughing	the	surface	where	he	would	strike.	In	his	mind,
he	spoke.	Bairoth	Gild.	Delum	Thord.	Hear	me,	when	none	other	can.	One	day,	I
shall	break	my	chains,	I	shall	free	the	souls	that	now	hound	me.	You	would	not
be	among	them,	or	so	you	said.	Nor	would	I	wish	Hood’s	embrace	upon	you.	I
have	considered	your	desires	in	this.	And	have	fashioned	an	alternative…
‘Warleader,	Delum	Thord	and	I	understand	your	intent.	Your	genius	never
fails	to	astonish	me,	Karsa	Orlong.	Only	with	our	consent	will	you	succeed.	And
so	you	give	us	words	and	lo,	we	find	our	path	forced.	Hood’s	embrace…or	what
you	seek.’
Karsa	shook	his	head.	Not	just	me,	Bairoth	Gild.	But	you	yourself.	Do	you
deny	it?
‘No,	Warleader.	We	do	not.	Thus,	we	accept	what	you	offer.’
Karsa	knew	that	he	alone	could	see	the	ghosts	of	his	friends	at	this
moment,	as	they	seemed	to	dissolve,	reduced	to	pure	will,	that	then	flowed
down	into	the	flint.	Flowed,	to	find	a	shape,	a	form	of	cohesion…
Awaiting…He	swept	dust	and	grit	from	the	roughened	surface,	then	closed
both	hands	about	the	short-sword’s	stubby	grip.	He	lifted	the	weapon	high,
fixing	his	gaze	upon	the	battered	striking	platform,	then	drove	the	pommel


down.
A	strange	snapping	sound—
Then	Karsa	was	leaping	forward,	short-sword	flung	aside,	down	through
the	air,	spinning	as	he	dropped.	His	knees	flexed	to	absorb	the	impact,	even	as
he	raised	his	hands	to	intersect	the	toppling	spear	of	flint.
A	spear	almost	as	tall	as	the	Teblor	himself.
It	fell	away	from	the	pillar,	a	flattened	shard,	and	settled	into	his	hands.	A
warm	lick	on	his	palms,	and	suddenly	blood	was	running	down	his	forearms.
Karsa	quickly	backed	up,	lowering	the	blade	to	the	floor.	When	he	drew	his
hands	away	he	saw	that	they	had	been	cut	down	to	the	bone.	Clever	Bairoth,	to
drink	my	blood	to	seal	the	bargain.
‘You…surpass	us,’	Halad	whispered.
Karsa	went	to	his	pack	and	drew	out	a	bundle	of	field	dressings	and	a
sewing	kit.	There	would	be	no	infection,	of	course,	and	he	would	heal	swiftly.
Still,	he	would	need	to	close	the	cuts	before	he	could	hope	to	begin	work	on
the	huge	blade’s	edges,	and	hack	out	a	grip	of	sorts.
‘We	shall	invest	the	weapon,’	Urugal	announced	behind	him.	‘So	that	it
cannot	be	broken.’
Karsa	nodded.
‘We	shall	make	you	the	Eighth	God	of	the	Teblor.’
‘No,’	he	replied	as	he	began	working	on	his	left	hand.	‘I	am	not	as	you,
Urugal.	I	am	not	Unbound.	You	yourself	closed	the	chains	about	me.	By	your
own	hands,	you	saw	to	it	that	the	souls	of	those	I	have	slain	will	pursue	me
eternally.	You	have	shaped	my	haunting,	Urugal.	Beneath	such	a	curse,	I	can
never	be	unbound.’
‘There	is	place	for	you	none	the	less,’	Urugal	said,	‘in	the	House	of
Chains.’
‘Aye.	Knight	of	Chains,	champion	of	the	Crippled	God.’
‘You	have	learned	much,	Karsa	Orlong.’
He	stared	down	at	his	bloodied	hands.	‘I	have,	T’lan	Imass.	As	you	shall
witness.’


Chapter	Fifteen

How	many	times,	dear	traveller,	will	you	walk	the	same	path?
KAYESSAN
To	the	north,	the	dust	of	the	imperial	army	obscured	the	forest-mantled	hills	of
Vathar.	It	was	late	afternoon,	the	hottest	part	of	the	day,	when	the	wind	died	and
the	rocks	radiated	like	flatstones	on	a	hearth.	Sergeant	Strings	remained
motionless	beneath	his	ochre	rain	cloak,	lying	flat	as	he	studied	the	lands	to	the
southwest.	Sweat	streamed	down	his	face	to	prickle	in	his	iron-shot	red	beard.
After	a	long	moment	studying	the	mass	of	horse	warriors	that	had
emerged	out	of	the	dusty	odhan	in	their	wake.	Strings	lifted	a	gloved	hand	and
gestured.
The	others	of	his	squad	rose	from	their	places	of	concealment	and	edged
back	from	the	crest.	The	sergeant	watched	them	until	they	reached	cover	once
more,	then	slid	around	and	followed.
Endless	skirmishes	with	raiders	these	last	weeks,	beginning	just	outside
Dojal,	with	more	heated	clashes	with	Kherahn	Dhobri	tribes	at	Tathimon	and
Sanimon…but	nothing	like	the	army	now	trailing	them.	Three	thousand
warriors,	at	the	very	least,	of	a	tribe	they’d	not	seen	before.	Countless	barbaric
standards	rose	above	the	host,	tall	spears	topped	with	ragged	streamers,
antlers,	horns	and	skulls.	The	glitter	of	bronze	scale	armour	was	visible
beneath	the	black	telabas	and	furs,	as	well	as—more	prolific—a	strange
greyish	armour	that	was	too	supple	to	be	anything	but	hide.	The	helms,	from
what	Strings	could	make	out	with	the	distance,	looked	to	be	elaborate,	many	of
them	crow-winged,	of	leather	and	bronze.
Strings	slid	down	to	where	his	squad	waited.	They’d	yet	to	engage	in	handto-hand	combat,	their	sum	experience	of	fighting	little	more	than	firing
crossbows	and	occasionally	holding	a	line.	So	far…so	good.	The	sergeant
faced	Smiles.	‘All	right,	it’s	settled—climb	on	that	miserable	horse	down
below,	lass,	and	ride	to	the	lieutenant.	Looks	like	we’ve	got	a	fight	coming.’
Sweat	had	tracked	runnels	through	the	dust	sheathing	her	face.	She	nodded,


then	scrambled	off.
‘Bottle	go	to	Gesler ’s	position,	and	have	him	pass	word	to	Borduke.	I	want
a	meeting.	Quick,	before	their	scouts	get	here.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
After	a	moment,	Strings	drew	out	his	waterskin	and	passed	it	to	Corporal
Tarr,	then	he	tapped	Cuttle	on	the	shoulder	and	the	two	of	them	made	their	way
back	to	the	ridge.
They	settled	down	side	by	side	to	resume	studying	the	army	below.
‘These	ones	could	maul	us,’	the	sergeant	muttered.	‘Then	again,	they’re
riding	so	tight	it	makes	me	wonder…’
Cuttle	grunted,	eyes	thinned	to	slits.	‘Something’s	gnawing	my	knuckles
here,	Fid.	They	know	we’re	close,	but	they	ain’t	arrayed	for	battle.	They
should’ve	held	back	until	night,	then	hit	all	along	our	line.	And	where	are	their
scouts,	anyway?’
‘Well,	those	outriders—’
‘Way	too	close.	Local	tribes	here	know	better—’
A	sudden	scattering	of	stones	and	Strings	and	Cuttle	twisted	round—to	see
riders	cresting	the	ridge	on	either	side	of	them,	and	others	cantering	into	view
on	the	back-slope,	closing	on	his	squad.
‘Hood	take	us!	Where	did—’
Yipping	warcries	sounded,	weapons	waving	in	the	air,	yet	the	horse
warriors	then	drew	rein,	rising	in	their	stirrups	as	they	surrounded	the	squad.
Frowning,	Strings	clambered	to	his	feet.	A	glance	back	at	the	army	below
showed	a	vanguard	climbing	the	slope	at	a	canter.	The	sergeant	met	Cuttle’s
eyes	and	shrugged.
The	sapper	grimaced	in	reply.
Escorted	by	the	riders	on	the	ridge,	the	two	soldiers	made	their	way	down
to	where	Tarr	and	Koryk	stood.	Both	had	their	crossbows	loaded,	though	no
longer	trained	on	the	tribesmen	wheeling	their	mounts	in	a	prancing	circle
around	them.	Further	down	the	ridge	Strings	saw	Geslet	and	his	squad	appear,
along	with	Bottle;	and	their	own	company	of	horse	warriors.
‘Cuttle,’	the	sergeant	muttered,	‘did	you	clash	with	these	anywhere	north	of
the	River	Vathar?’
‘No.	But	I	think	I	know	who	they	are.’
None	of	these	scouts	wore	bronze	armour.	The	grey	hide	beneath	their
desert-coloured	cloaks	and	furs	looked	strangely	reptilian.	Crow	wings	had
been	affixed	to	their	forearms,	like	swept-back	fins.	Their	faces	were	pale	by
local	standards,	unusual	in	being	bearded	and	long-moustached.	Tattoos	of
black	tears	ran	down	the	lengths	of	their	weathered	cheeks.


Apart	from	lances,	fur-covered	wooden	scabbards	were	slung	across	their
backs,	holding	heavy-bladed	tulwars.	All	had	crow-feet	earrings	dangling
from	under	their	helms.
The	tribe’s	vanguard	reached	the	crest	above	them	and	drew	to	a	halt,	as,
on	the	opposite	side,	there	appeared	a	company	of	Wickans,	Seti	and	Malazan
officers.
Beru	fend,	the	Adjunct	herself ’s	with	them.	Also	Fist	Gamet,	Nil,	Nether
and	Temul,	as	well	as	Captain	Keneb	and	Lieutenant	Ranal.
The	two	mounted	forces	faced	one	another	on	either	side	of	the	shallow
gully,	and	Strings	could	see	Temul	visibly	start,	then	lean	over	to	speak	to	the
Adjunct.	A	moment	later,	Tavore,	Gamet	and	Temul	rode	forward.
From	the	tribe’s	vanguard	a	single	rider	began	the	descent	on	the	backslope.	A	chieftain,	Strings	surmised.	The	man	was	huge;	two	tulwars	were
strapped	to	a	harness	crossing	his	chest,	one	of	them	broken	just	above	the	hilt.
The	black	tears	tattooed	down	his	broad	cheeks	looked	to	have	been	gouged
into	the	flesh.	He	rode	down	fairly	close	to	where	Strings	and	Cuttle	stood	and
paused	beside	them.
He	nodded	towards	the	approaching	group	and	asked	in	rough	Malazan,
‘This	is	the	Plain	Woman	who	leads	you?’
Strings	winced,	then	nodded.	‘Adjunct	Tavore,	aye.’
‘We	have	met	the	Kherahn	Dhobri,’	the	chieftain	said,	then	smiled.	‘They
will	harass	you	no	more,	Malazan.’
Tavore	and	her	officers	arrived,	halting	five	paces	away.	The	Adjunct
spoke.	‘I	welcome	you,	Warchief	of	the	Khundryl.	I	am	Adjunct	Tavore	Paran,
commander	of	the	Fourteenth	Army	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’
‘I	am	Gall,	and	we	are	the	Burned	Tears	of	the	Khundryl.’
‘The	Burned	Tears?’
The	man	made	a	gesture	of	grief.	‘Blackwing,	leader	of	the	Wickans.	I
spoke	with	him.	My	warriors	sought	to	challenge,	to	see	who	were	the	greatest
warriors	of	all.	We	fought	hard,	but	we	were	humbled.	Blackwing	is	dead,	his
clan	destroyed,	and	Korbolo	Dom’s	Dogslayers	dance	on	his	name.	That	must
be	answered,	and	so	we	have	come.	Three	thousand—all	that	fought	for
Blackwing	the	first	time.	We	are	changed,	Adjunct.	We	are	other	than	we	once
were.	We	grieve	the	loss	of	ourselves,	and	so	we	shall	remain	lost,	for	all
time.’
‘Your	words	sadden	me,	Gall,’	Tavore	replied,	her	voice	shaky.
Careful	now,	lass…
‘We	would	join	you,’	the	Khundryl	warchief	rasped,	‘for	we	have	nowhere
else	to	go.	The	walls	of	our	yurts	look	strange	to	our	eyes.	The	faces	of	our


wives,	husbands,	children—all	those	we	once	loved	and	who	once	loved	us—
strangers,	now.	Like	Blackwing	himself,	we	are	as	ghosts	in	this	world,	in	this
land	that	was	once	our	home.’
‘You	would	join	us—to	fight	under	my	command,	Gall?’
‘We	would.’
‘Seeking	vengeance	against	Korbolo	Dom.’
He	shook	his	head.	‘That	will	come,	yes.	But	we	seek	to	make	amends.’
She	frowned	beneath	her	helm.	‘Amends?	By	Temul’s	account	you	fought
bravely,	and	well.	Without	your	intercession,	the	Chain	of	Dogs	would	have
fallen	at	Sanimon.	The	refugees	would	have	been	slaughtered—’
‘Yet	we	then	rode	away—back	to	our	lands,	Adjunct.	We	thought	only	to
lick	our	wounds.	While	the	Chain	marched	on.	To	more	battles.	To	its	final
battle.’	He	was	weeping	in	truth	now,	and	an	eerie	keening	sound	rose	from	the
other	horse	warriors	present.	‘We	should	have	been	there.	That	is	all.’
The	Adjunct	said	nothing	for	a	long	moment.
Strings	removed	his	helm	and	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	brow.	He	glanced
back	up	the	slope,	and	saw	a	solid	line	of	Khundryl	on	the	ridge.	Silent.
Waiting.
Tavore	cleared	her	throat.	‘Gall,	Warchief	of	the	Burned	Tears…the
Fourteenth	Army	welcomes	you.’
The	answering	roar	shook	the	ground	underfoot.	Strings	turned	and	met
Cuttle’s	eyes.	Three	thousand	veterans	of	this	Hood-damned	desert.	Queen	of
Dreams,	we	have	a	chance.	Finally,	it	looks	like	we	have	a	chance.	He	did	not
need	to	speak	aloud	to	know	that	Cuttle	understood,	for	the	man	slowly	nodded.
But	Gall	was	not	finished.	Whether	he	realized	the	full	measure	of	his	next
gesture—no,	Strings	would	conclude	eventually,	he	could	not	have—even	so…
The	Warchief	gathered	his	reins	and	rode	forward,	past	the	Adjunct.	He	halted
his	horse	before	Temul,	then	dismounted.
Three	strides	forward.	Under	the	eyes	of	over	three	hundred	Wickans,	and
five	hundred	Seti,	the	burly	Khundryl—his	grey	eyes	fixed	on	Temul—halted.
Then	he	unslung	his	broken	tulwar	and	held	it	out	to	the	Wickan	youth.
Temul	was	pale	as	he	reached	down	to	accept	it.
Gall	stepped	back	and	slowly	lowered	himself	to	one	knee.	‘We	are	not
Wickans,’	the	warchief	grated,	‘but	this	I	swear—we	shall	strive	to	be.’	He
lowered	his	head.
Temul	sat	unmoving,	visibly	struggling	beneath	a	siege	of	emotions,	and
Strings	suddenly	realized	that	the	lad	did	not	know	how	to	answer,	did	not
know	what	to	do.
The	sergeant	took	a	step,	then	swung	his	helm	upward,	as	if	to	put	it	back


on.	Temul	caught	the	flash	of	movement,	even	as	he	looked	about	to	dismount,
and	he	froze	as	he	met	Strings’s	eyes.
A	slight	shake	of	the	head.	Stay	in	that	saddle,	Temul!	The	sergeant	reached
up	and	touched	his	own	mouth.	Talk.	Answer	with	words,	lad!
The	commander	slowly	settled	back	into	his	saddle,	then	straightened.
‘Gall	of	the	Burned	Tears,’	he	said,	barely	a	tremble	to	his	voice,	‘Blackwing
sees	through	the	eyes	of	every	Wickan	here.	Sees,	and	answers.	Rise.	In
Blackwing’s	name,	I,	Temul	of	the	Crow	Clan,	accept	you…the	Burned
Tears…of	the	Crow	Clan,	of	the	Wickans.’	He	then	took	the	loop	of	leather	to
which	the	broken	tulwar	was	tied,	and	lowered	it	over	his	shoulder.
With	the	sound	of	a	wave	rolling	up	a	league-long	strand	of	beach,
weapons	were	unsheathed	along	the	ridge,	a	salute	voiced	by	iron	alone.
A	shiver	rippled	through	Strings.
‘Hood’s	breath,’	Cuttle	muttered	under	his	breath.	‘That	is	a	lot	more
frightening	than	their	warcries	were.’
Aye,	as	ominous	as	Hood’s	smile.	He	looked	back	to	Temul	and	saw	the
Wickan	watching	him.	The	sergeant	lowered	the	helm	onto	his	head	once
more,	then	grinned	and	nodded.	Perfect,	lad.	Couldn’t	have	done	better	myself.
And	now,	Temul	wasn’t	alone	any	more,	surrounded	by	sniping	arthritic
wolves	who	still	wouldn’t	accept	his	command.	Now,	the	lad	had	Gall	and	three
thousand	blooded	warriors	to	back	his	word.	And	that’s	the	last	of	that.	Gall,	if
I	was	a	religious	man,	I’d	burn	a	crow-wing	in	your	name	tonight.	Hood	take
me,	I	might	do	it	anyway.
‘Gall	of	the	Burned	Tears,’	the	Adjunct	announced.	‘Please	join	us	at	our
command	quarters.	We	can	discuss	the	disposition	of	your	forces	over	a	meal
—a	modest	meal,	alas—’
The	Khundryl	finally	straightened.	He	faced	the	Adjunct.	‘Modest?	No.	We
have	brought	our	own	food,	and	this	night	there	shall	be	a	feast—not	a	single
soldier	shall	go	without	at	least	a	mouthful	of	bhederin	or	boar!’	He	swung
about	and	scanned	his	retinue	until	he	spied	the	one	he	sought.	‘Imrahl!	Drag
your	carcass	back	to	the	wagons	and	bring	them	forward!	And	find	the	two
hundred	cooks	and	see	if	they’ve	sobered	up	yet!	And	if	they	haven’t,	I	will
have	their	heads!’
The	warrior	named	Imrahl,	an	ancient,	scrawny	figure	who	seemed	to	be
swimming	beneath	archaic	bronze	armour,	answered	with	a	broad,	ghastly
smile,	then	spun	his	horse	round	and	kicked	it	into	a	canter	back	up	the	slope.
Gall	swung	about	and	raised	both	hands	skyward,	the	crow-wings	attached
to	the	forearms	seeming	to	snap	open	beneath	them.	‘Let	the	Dogslayers
cower!’	he	roared.	‘The	Burned	Tears	have	begun	the	hunt!’


Cuttle	leaned	close	to	Strings.	‘That’s	one	problem	solved—the	Wickan
lad’s	finally	on	solid	ground.	One	wound	sewn	shut,	only	to	see	another	pried
open.’
‘Another?’	Oh.	Yes,	true	enough.	That	Wickan	Fist’s	ghost	keeps	rearing	up,
again	and	again.	Poor	lass.
‘As	if	Coltaine’s	legacy	wasn’t	already	dogging	her	heels…if	you’ll
excuse	the	pun,’	the	sapper	went	on.	‘Still,	she’s	putting	a	brave	face	on	it…’
No	choice.	Strings	faced	his	squad.	‘Collect	your	gear,	soldiers.	We’ve	got
pickets	to	raise…before	we	eat.’	At	their	groans	he	scowled.	‘And	consider
yourselves	lucky—missing	those	scouts	don’t	bode	well	for	our	capabilities,
now,	does	it?’
He	watched	them	assemble	their	gear.	Gesler	and	Borduke	were
approaching	with	their	own	squads.	Cuttle	grunted	at	the	sergeant’s	side.	‘In
case	it’s	slipped	your	mind,	Fid,’	he	said,	low,	‘we	didn’t	see	the	bastards,
either.’
‘You’re	right,’	Strings	replied,	‘it’s	slipped	my	mind	completely.	Huh,
there	it	goes	again.	Gone.’
Cuttle	scratched	the	bristle	on	his	heavy	jaw.	‘Strange,	what	were	we
talking	about?’
‘Bhederin	and	boar,	I	think.	Fresh	meat.’
‘Right.	My	mouth’s	watering	at	the	thought.’
	
Gamet	paused	outside	the	command	tent.	The	revelry	continued	unabated,	as
the	Khundryl	roved	through	the	camp,	roaring	their	barbaric	songs.	Jugs	of
fermented	milk	had	been	broached	and	the	Fist	was	grimly	certain	that	more
than	one	bellyful	of	half-charred,	half-raw	meat	had	returned	to	the	earth
prematurely	out	beyond	the	fires,	or	would	in	the	short	time	that	remained
before	dawn.
Next	day’s	march	had	been	halved,	by	the	Adjunct’s	command,	although
even	five	bells’	walking	was	likely	to	make	most	of	the	soldiers	regret	this
night’s	excesses.
Or	maybe	not.
He	watched	a	marine	from	his	own	legion	stumble	past,	a	Khundryl
woman	riding	him,	legs	wrapped	around	his	waist,	arms	around	his	neck.	She
was	naked,	the	marine	nearly	so.	Weaving,	the	pair	vanished	into	the	gloom.
Gamet	sighed,	drawing	his	cloak	tighter	about	himself,	then	turned	and
approached	the	two	Wickans	standing	guard	outside	the	Adjunct’s	tent.
They	were	from	the	Crow,	grey-haired	and	looking	miserable.


Recognizing	the	Fist	they	stepped	to	either	side	of	the	entrance.	He	passed
between	them,	ducking	to	slip	between	the	flaps.
All	of	the	other	officers	had	left,	leaving	only	the	Adjunct	and	Gall,	the
latter	sprawled	on	a	massive,	ancient-looking	wooden	chair	that	had	come	on
the	Khundryl	wagons.	The	warchief	had	removed	his	helm,	revealing	a	mass
of	curly	hair,	long	and	black	and	shimmering	with	grease.	The	midnight	hue
was	dye,	Gamet	suspected,	for	the	man	had	seen	at	least	fifty	summers.	The	tips
of	his	moustache	rested	on	his	chest	and	he	looked	half	asleep,	a	jug	gripped
by	the	clay	handle	in	one	huge	hand.	The	Adjunct	stood	nearby,	eyes	lowered
onto	a	brazier,	as	if	lost	in	thought.
Were	I	an	artist,	I	would	paint	this	scene.	This	precise	moment,	and	leave
the	viewer	to	wonder.	He	strode	over	to	the	map	table,	where	another	jug	of
wine	waited.	‘Our	army	is	drunk,	Adjunct,’	he	murmured	as	he	poured	a	cup
full.
‘Like	us,’	Gall	rumbled.	‘Your	army	is	lost.’
Gamet	glanced	over	at	Tavore,	but	there	was	no	reaction	for	him	to	gauge.
He	drew	a	breath,	then	faced	the	Khundryl.	‘We	are	yet	to	fight	a	major	battle,
Warchief.	Thus,	we	do	not	yet	know	ourselves.	That	is	all.	We	are	not	lost—’
‘Just	not	yet	found,’	Gall	finished,	baring	his	teeth.	He	took	a	long	swallow
from	his	jug.
‘Do	you	regret	your	decision	to	join	us,	then?’	Gamet	asked.
‘Not	at	all,	Fist.	My	shamans	have	read	the	sands.	They	have	learned	much
of	your	future.	The	Fourteenth	Army	shall	know	a	long	life,	but	it	shall	be	a
restless	life.	You	are	doomed	to	search,	destined	to	ever	hunt…for	what	even
you	do	not	know,	nor,	perhaps,	shall	you	ever	know.	Like	the	sands	themselves,
wandering	for	eternity.’
Gamet	was	scowling.	‘I	do	not	wish	to	offend,	Warchief,	but	I	hold	little
faith	in	divination.	No	mortal—no	god—can	say	we	are	doomed,	or	destined.
The	future	remains	unknown,	the	one	thing	we	cannot	force	a	pattern	upon.’
The	Khundryl	grunted.	‘Patterns,	the	lifeblood	of	the	shamans.	But	not
them	alone,	yes?	The	Deck	of	Dragons—are	they	not	used	for	divination?’
Gamet	shrugged.	‘There	are	some	who	hold	much	store	in	the	Deck,	but	I
am	not	one	of	them.’
‘Do	you	not	see	patterns	in	history,	Fist?	Are	you	blind	to	the	cycles	we	all
suffer	through?	Look	upon	this	desert,	this	wasteland	you	cross.	Yours	is	not
the	first	empire	that	would	claim	it.	And	what	of	the	tribes?	Before	the
Khundryl,	before	the	Kherahn	Dhobri	and	the	Tregyn,	there	were	the	Sanid,
and	the	Oruth,	and	before	them	there	were	others	whose	names	have	vanished.
Look	upon	the	ruined	cities,	the	old	roads.	The	past	is	all	patterns,	and	those


patterns	remain	beneath	our	feet,	even	as	the	stars	above	reveal	their	own
patterns—for	the	stars	we	gaze	upon	each	night	are	naught	but	an	illusion	from
the	past.’	He	raised	the	jug	again	and	studied	it	for	a	moment.	‘Thus,	the	past
lies	beneath	and	above	the	present,	Fist.	This	is	the	truth	my	shamans	embrace,
the	bones	upon	which	the	future	clings	like	muscle.’
The	Adjunct	slowly	turned	to	study	the	warchief.	‘We	shall	reach	Vathar
Crossing	tomorrow,	Gall.	What	will	we	find?’
The	Khundryl’s	eyes	glittered.	‘That	is	for	you	to	decide,	Tavore	Paran.	It
is	a	place	of	death,	and	it	shall	speak	its	words	to	you—words	the	rest	of	us
will	not	hear.’
‘Have	you	been	there?’	she	asked.
He	nodded,	but	added	nothing	more.
Gamet	drank	down	a	mouthful	of	wine.	There	was	a	strangeness	to	this
night,	to	this	moment	here	in	the	Adjunct’s	tent,	that	left	his	skin	crawling.	He
felt	out	of	place,	like	a	simpleton	who’d	just	stumbled	into	the	company	of
scholars.	The	revelry	in	the	camp	beyond	was	dying	down,	and	come	the	dawn,
he	knew,	there	would	be	silence.	Drunken	oblivion	was,	each	time,	a	small,
temporary	death.	Hood	walked	where	the	self	once	stood,	and	the	wake	of	the
god’s	passage	sickened	mortal	flesh	afterwards.
He	set	his	cup	down	on	the	map	table.	‘If	you’ll	forgive	me,’	he	muttered,
‘the	air	in	here	is	too…close.’
Neither	replied	as	he	walked	back	to	the	flap.
Outside,	in	the	street	beyond	the	two	motionless	Wickan	guards,	Gamet
paused	and	looked	up.	Ancient	light,	is	it?	If	so,	then	the	patterns	I	see…may
have	died	long	ago.	No,	that	does	not	bear	thinking	about.	It	is	one	of	those
truths	that	have	no	value,	for	it	offers	nothing	but	dislocation.
And	he	needed	no	fuel	for	that	cold	fire.	He	was	too	old	for	this	war.	Hood
knows,	I	didn’t	enjoy	it	much	the	first	time	round.	Vengeance	belonged	to	the
young,	after	all.	The	time	when	emotions	burned	hottest,	when	life	was	sharp
enough	to	cut,	fierce	enough	to	sear	the	soul.
He	was	startled	by	the	passing	of	a	large	cattle	dog.	Head	low,	muscles
rippling	beneath	a	mottled	hide	literally	seamed	with	countless	scars,	the	silent
beast	padded	down	the	aisle	between	the	tent	rows.	A	moment	later	and	it
disappeared	into	the	gloom.
‘I’ve	taken	to	following	it,’	a	voice	said	behind	him.
Gamet	turned.	‘Captain	Keneb.	I	am	surprised	to	find	you	still	awake.’
The	soldier	shrugged.	‘That	boar ’s	not	sitting	too	well	in	my	gut,	sir.’
‘More	likely	that	fermented	milk	the	Khundryl	brought—what	is	it	called
again?’


‘Urtathan.	But	no,	I	have	experienced	that	brew	before,	and	so	chose	to
avoid	it.	Come	the	morning,	I	suspect	three-quarters	of	the	army	will	realize	a
similar	wisdom.’
‘And	the	remaining	quarter?’
‘Dead.’	He	smiled	at	Gamet’s	expression.	‘Sorry,	sir,	I	wasn’t	entirely
serious.’
The	Fist	gestured	for	the	captain	to	accompany	him,	and	they	began
walking.	‘Why	do	you	follow	that	dog,	Keneb?’
‘Because	I	know	its	tale,	sir.	It	survived	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	From	Hissar	to
the	Fall	outside	Aren.	I	watched	it	fall	almost	at	Coltaine’s	feet.	Impaled	by
spears.	It	should	not	have	survived	that.’
‘Then	how	did	it?’
‘Gesler.’
Gamet	frowned.	‘The	sergeant	in	our	legion’s	marines?’
‘Aye,	sir.	He	found	it,	as	well	as	another	dog.	What	happened	then	I	have	no
idea.	But	both	beasts	recovered	from	what	should	have	been	mortal	wounds.’
‘Perhaps	a	healer…’
Keneb	nodded.	‘Perhaps,	but	none	among	Blistig’s	guard—I	made
enquiries.	No,	there’s	a	mystery	yet	to	be	solved.	Not	just	the	dogs,	but	Gesler
himself,	and	his	corporal,	Stormy,	and	a	third	soldier—have	you	not	noted
their	strangely	hued	skin?	They’re	Falari,	yet	Falari	are	pale-skinned,	and	a
desert	tan	doesn’t	look	like	that	at	all.	Curious,	too,	it	was	Gesler	who
delivered	the	Silanda.’
‘Do	you	believe	they	have	made	a	pact	with	a	god,	Captain?	Such	cults	are
forbidden	in	the	imperial	army.’
‘I	cannot	answer	that,	sir.	Nor	have	I	evidence	sufficient	to	make	such	a
charge	against	them.	Thus	far,	I	have	kept	Gesler ’s	squad,	and	a	few	others,	as
the	column’s	rearguard.’
The	Fist	grunted.	‘This	news	is	disturbing,	Captain.	You	do	not	trust	your
own	soldiers.	And	this	is	the	first	time	you’ve	told	me	of	any	of	this.	Have	you
considered	confronting	the	sergeant	directly?’
They	had	reached	the	edge	of	the	camp.	Before	them	stretched	a	broken
line	of	hills;	to	their	right,	the	dark	forest	of	Vathar.
To	Gamet’s	questions,	Keneb	sighed	and	nodded.	‘They	in	turn	do	not	trust
me,	Fist.	There	is	a	rumour	in	my	company…that	I	abandoned	my	last	soldiers,
at	the	time	of	the	uprising.’
And	did	you,	Keneb?	Gamet	said	nothing.
But	it	seemed	that	the	captain	heard	the	silent	question	none	the	less.	‘I
didn’t,	although	I	will	not	deny	that	some	of	the	decisions	I	made	back	then


could	give	cause	to	question	my	loyalty	to	the	empire.’
‘You	had	better	explain	that,’	Gamet	said	quietly.
‘I	had	family	with	me.	I	sought	to	save	them,	and	for	a	time	nothing	else
mattered.	Sir,	whole	companies	went	over	to	the	rebels.	You	did	not	know	who
to	trust.	And	as	it	turned	out,	my	commander—’
‘Say	no	more	of	that,	Captain.	I’ve	changed	my	mind.	I	don’t	want	to	know.
Your	family?	Did	you	manage	to	save	them?’
‘Aye,	sir.	With	some	timely	help	from	an	outlawed	Bridgeburner—’
‘A	what?	Who,	in	Hood’s	name?’
‘Corporal	Kalam,	sir.’
‘He’s	here?	In	Seven	Cities?’
‘He	was.	On	his	way,	I	think,	to	the	Empress.	From	what	I	gathered,	he	had
some	issues	he	wanted	to,	uh,	raise	with	her.	In	person.’
‘Who	else	knows	all	this?’
‘No-one,	sir.	I’ve	heard	the	tale,	that	the	Bridgeburners	were	wiped	out.	But
I	can	tell	you,	Kalam	was	not	among	them.	He	was	here,	sir.	And	as	to	where	he
is	now,	perhaps	the	Empress	alone	knows.’
There	was	a	smudge	of	motion	in	the	grasses,	about	twenty	paces	distant.
That	dog.	Hood	knows	what	it’s	up	to.	‘All	right,	Captain.	Keep	Gesler	in	the
rearguard	for	now.	But	at	some	point,	before	the	battle,	we’ll	have	to	test	him
—I	need	to	know	if	he’s	reliable.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
‘Your	beast	is	wandering	out	there.’
‘I	know.	Every	night.	As	if	looking	for	something.	I	think	it	might	be…
Coltaine.	Looking	for	Coltaine.	And	it	breaks	my	heart,	sir.’
‘Well,	if	it’s	true,	Captain,	that	the	dog’s	looking	for	Coltaine,	I	admit	to
being	surprised.’
‘What	do	you	mean,	sir?’
‘Because	the	bastard’s	here.	You’d	have	to	be	blind,	dumb	and	deaf	to	miss
him,	Captain.	Goodnight	to	you.’	He	turned	and	strode	off,	feeling	the	need	to
spit,	but	he	knew	the	bitter	taste	in	his	mouth	would	not	so	easily	leave	him.
	
The	fire	was	long	dead.	Wrapped	in	his	cloak,	Strings	sat	before	it,	looking	at
but	not	seeing	the	layered	bricks	of	ash	that	were	all	that	remained	of	the	pieces
of	dung.	Beside	him	lay	the	scrawny	Hengese	lapdog	that	Truth	said	was
named	Roach.	The	bone	the	creature	gnawed	on	was	bigger	than	it,	and	had	that
bone	teeth	and	appetite	it	would	be	the	one	doing	the	eating	right	now.
Contented	company,	then,	to	mock	this	miserable	night.	The	blanketed


forms	of	his	squad	lay	motionless	on	all	sides.	They’d	been	too	exhausted	to
get	drunk,	after	raising	the	pickets	then	sitting	first	watch,	and	full	bellies	had
quickly	dragged	them	into	sleep.	Well	enough,	he	mused,	they’d	be	among	the
few	spared	the	ravages	of	hangover	in	a	few	bells’	time.	Even	Cuttle	had	yet	to
awaken,	as	was	his	custom—or	perhaps	his	eyes	were	open	where	he	lay	with
his	back	to	the	hearth.
It	did	not	matter.	The	loneliness	Strings	suffered	could	not	be	alleviated	by
company,	not	such	as	he	might	find	here,	in	any	case.	Nor	were	his	thoughts	the
kind	he	would	willingly	share.
They’d	been	spitting	dust	almost	since	the	march	began.	Not	the	place	for
marines,	unless	a	massive	pursuit	threatened	the	rear	of	the	column,	which	was
not	the	case.	No,	Keneb	was	punishing	them,	and	Strings	had	no	idea	why.	Even
the	lieutenant,	who	had	somehow	managed	to	avoid	actually	being	present	to
command	the	squads,	was	uncertain	as	to	the	captain’s	motivations.	Though	not
displeased,	of	course.	Then	again,	how	can	Ranal	hope	to	acquire	his	stellar
reputation	with	his	soldiers	coughing	the	entire	Fourteenth’s	dust?
And	do	I	even	give	a	damn,	any	more?
The	night	air	stank	of	bile,	as	if	Poliel	herself	stalked	the	camp.	The	sudden
acquisition	of	three	thousand	veterans	had	done	much	to	lift	the	Fourteenth’s
spirits—Strings	hoped	there	was	no	omen	in	the	aftermath.
All	right	then,	let’s	consider	the	matter	at	hand.	This	army	has	its	chance,
now.	It	doesn’t	need	bastards	like	me.	Why	would	I	want	to	go	back	to	Raraku
anyway?	I	hated	it	the	first	time.	I’m	not	that	young,	mouthy	fool—not	what	I
once	was.	Did	I	really	think	I	could	recapture	something	in	that	holy	desert?
What,	exactly?	Lost	years?	That	charging	momentum	that	belongs	to	the
young?	To	soldiers	like	Smiles	and	Koryk	and	Bottle	and	Tarr.	I	joined	for
revenge,	but	it’s	not	filling	my	belly	like	it	used	to—Hood	knows,	nothing	does
any	more.	Not	revenge.	Not	loyalty.	Not	even	friendship.	Damn	you,	Kalam,	you
should’ve	talked	me	out	of	it.	Right	there	in	Malaz	City.	You	should’ve	called
me	a	fool	to	my	face.
Gesler ’s	cattle	dog	padded	into	view.
Roach	growled,	and	the	bigger	beast	paused,	nose	testing	the	air,	then
settled	down	a	few	paces	away.	The	lapdog	returned	to	its	gnawing.
‘Come	ahead,	then,	Gesler,’	Strings	muttered.
The	sergeant	appeared,	a	jug	in	one	hand.	He	sat	down	opposite,	studied	the
jug	for	a	moment,	then	made	a	disgusted	sound	and	tossed	it	away.	‘Can’t	get
drunk	any	more,’	he	said.	‘Not	me,	not	Stormy	or	Truth.	We’re	cursed.’
‘I	can	think	of	worse	curses,’	Strings	muttered.
‘Well,	so	can	I,	but	still.	What’s	really	bad	is	I	can’t	sleep.	None	of	us	can.


We	was	at	Vathar	Crossing—that’s	where	we	drew	the	Silanda	in	to	wait	for	the
Chain	of	Dogs.	Where	I	got	punched	good	and	hard,	too.	Damn,	but	that
surprised	me.	Anyway,	I’m	not	looking	forward	to	seeing	it	again.	Not	after
what	happened	there.’
‘So	long	as	the	bridge	hasn’t	been	swept	away,’	Strings	replied.
Gesler	grunted.
Neither	spoke	for	a	time,	then:	‘You’re	thinking	of	running,	aren’t	you,
Fid?’
He	scowled.
Gesler	slowly	nodded.	‘It’s	bad	when	you	lose	’em.	Friends,	I	mean.	Makes
you	wonder	why	you’re	still	here,	why	the	damned	sack	of	blood	and	muscle
and	bones	keeps	on	going.	So	you	run.	Then	what?	Nothing.	You’re	not	here,
but	wherever	you	are,	you’re	still	there.’
Strings	grimaced.	‘I’m	supposed	to	make	sense	of	that?	Listen,	it’s	not	just
what	happened	to	the	Bridgeburners.	It’s	about	being	a	soldier.	About	doing
this	all	over	again.	I’ve	realized	that	I	didn’t	even	like	it	much	the	first	time
round.	There’s	got	to	come	a	point,	Gesler,	when	it’s	no	longer	the	right	place
to	be,	or	the	right	thing	to	do.’
‘Maybe,	but	I	ain’t	seen	it	yet.	It	comes	down	to	what	you’re	good	at.
Nothing	else,	Fid.	You	don’t	want	to	be	a	soldier	no	more.	Fine,	but	what	are
you	going	to	do	instead?’
‘I	was	apprenticed	as	a	mason,	once—’
‘And	apprentices	are	ten	years	old,	Fiddler.	They	ain’t	crabby	creakbones
like	you.	Look,	there’s	only	one	thing	for	a	soldier	to	do,	and	that’s	soldiering.
You	want	it	to	end?	Well,	there’s	a	battle	coming.	Should	give	you	plenty	of
opportunity.	Throw	yourself	on	a	sword	and	you’re	done.’	Gesler	paused	and
jabbed	a	finger	at	Strings.	‘But	that’s	not	the	problem,	is	it?	It’s	because	now
you’ve	got	a	squad,	and	you’re	responsible	for	’em.	That’s	what	you	don’t	like,
and	that’s	what’s	got	you	thinking	of	running.’
Strings	rose.	‘Go	pet	your	dog,	Gesler.’	He	walked	off	into	the	darkness.
The	grass	was	wet	underfoot	as	he	made	his	way	through	the	pickets.
Muted	challenges	sounded,	to	which	he	replied,	and	then	he	was	out	beyond	the
camp.	Overhead,	the	stars	had	begun	to	withdraw	as	the	sky	lightened.
Capemoths	were	winging	in	swirling	clouds	towards	the	forested	hills	of
Vathar,	the	occasional	rhizan	diving	through	them,	upon	which	they	exploded
outward,	only	to	reform	once	the	danger	was	past.
On	the	ridge	three	hundred	paces	ahead	of	the	sergeant	stood	a	half-dozen
desert	wolves.	They’d	done	their	howling	for	the	night,	and	now	lingered	out
of	curiosity,	or	perhaps	simply	awaiting	the	army’s	departure,	so	they	could


descend	into	the	basin	and	pick	at	the	leavings.
Strings	paused	at	a	faint	singing,	low	and	mournful	and	jarring,	that
seemed	to	emanate	from	a	depression	just	this	side	of	the	ridge.	He’d	heard	it
other	nights,	always	beyond	the	encampment,	but	had	not	been	inclined	to
investigate.	There	was	nothing	inviting	to	that	thin,	atonal	music.
But	now	it	called	to	him.	With	familiar	voices.	Heart	suddenly	aching,	he
walked	closer.
The	depression	was	thick	with	yellowed	grasses,	but	a	circle	had	been
flattened	in	the	centre.	The	two	Wickan	children,	Nil	and	Nether,	were	seated
there,	facing	one	another,	with	the	space	between	them	occupied	by	a	broad,
bronze	bowl.
Whatever	filled	it	was	drawing	butterflies,	a	score	at	present,	but	more
were	gathering.
Strings	hesitated,	then	made	to	leave.
‘Come	closer,’	Nil	called	out	in	his	reedy	voice.	‘Quickly,	the	sun	rises!’
Frowning,	the	sergeant	approached.	As	he	reached	the	edge	of	the
depression,	he	halted	in	sudden	alarm.	Butterflies	swarmed	around	him,	a	pale
yellow	frenzy	filling	his	eyes—brushing	air	against	his	skin	like	a	thousand
breaths.	He	spun	in	place,	but	could	see	nothing	beyond	the	mass	of	fluttering
wings.
‘Closer!	He	wants	you	here!’	Nether ’s	high,	piping	voice.
But	Strings	could	not	take	another	step.	He	was	enveloped,	and	within	that
yellow	shroud,	there	was	a…presence.
And	it	spoke.	‘Bridgeburner.	Raraku	waits	for	you.	Do	not	turn	back	now.’
‘Who	are	you?’	Strings	demanded.	‘Who	speaks?’
‘I	am	of	this	land,	now.	What	I	was	before	does	not	matter.	I	am	awakened.
We	are	awakened.	Go	to	join	your	kin.	In	Raraku—where	he	will	find	you.
Together,	you	must	slay	the	goddess.	You	must	free	Raraku	of	the	stain	that	lies
upon	it.’
‘My	kin?	Who	will	I	find	there?’
‘The	song	wanders,	Bridgeburner.	It	seeks	a	home.	Do	not	turn	back.’
All	at	once	the	presence	vanished.	The	butterflies	rose	skyward,	spinning
and	swirling	into	the	sunlight.	Higher,	ever	higher…
Small	hands	clutched	at	him,	and	he	looked	down.	Nether	stared	up	at	him,
her	face	filled	with	panic.	Two	paces	behind	her	stood	Nil,	his	arms	wrapped
about	himself,	his	eyes	filling	with	tears.
Nether	was	screaming.	‘Why	you?	We	have	called	and	called!	Why	you!?’
Shaking	his	head,	Strings	pushed	her	away.	‘I—I	don’t	know!’
‘What	did	he	say?	Tell	us!	He	had	a	message	for	us,	yes?	What	did	he	say?’


‘For	you?	Nothing,	lass—why,	who	in	Hood’s	name	do	you	think	that
was?’
‘Sormo	E’nath!’
‘The	warlock?	But	he—’	Strings	staggered	another	step	back.	‘Stop	that
damned	singing!’
The	Wickans	stared.
And	Strings	realized	that	neither	was	singing—neither	could	have	been—
for	it	continued,	filling	his	head.
Nether	asked,	‘What	singing,	soldier?’
He	shook	his	head	again,	then	turned	and	made	his	way	back	towards	camp.
Sormo	had	no	words	for	them.	Nor	did	he.	Nor	did	he	want	to	see	their	faces—
their	helpless	desperation,	their	yearning	for	a	ghost	that	was	gone—gone	for
ever.	That	was	not	Sormo	E’nath.	That	was	something	else—Hood	knows	what.
‘We	are	awakened.’	What	does	that	mean?	And	who’s	waiting	for	me	in	Raraku?
My	kin—I’ve	none,	barring	the	Bridgeburners—gods	below!	Quick	Ben?
Kalam?	One,	or	both?	He	wanted	to	scream,	if	only	to	silence	the	song	that
whispered	through	his	head,	the	dreadful,	painfully	incomplete	music	that
gnawed	at	his	sanity.
Raraku,	it	seemed,	was	not	yet	done	with	him.	Strings	silently	railed.	Damn
all	of	this!
To	the	north,	through	the	smoky	wreaths	of	the	encampment,	the	mantled
hills	of	Vathar	seemed	to	unfurl	the	sun’s	golden	light.	On	the	ridge	behind
him,	the	wolves	began	howling.
	
Gamet	settled	back	in	the	saddle	as	his	horse	began	the	descent	towards	the
river.	It	had	not	been	long	enough	for	the	land	to	entirely	swallow	the	victims
of	the	slaughter	that	had	occurred	here.	Bleached	bones	gleamed	in	the	sandy
mud	of	the	shoreline.	Fragments	of	cloth,	pieces	of	leather	and	iron.	And	the
ford	itself	was	barely	recognizable.	Remnants	of	a	floating	bridge	were	heaped
on	it	on	the	upstream	side,	and	on	this	barrier	more	detritus	had	piled.	Sunken,
waterlogged	wagons,	trees,	grasses	and	reeds,	now	anchored	by	silts,	a
hulking,	bowed	mass	that	had	formed	a	kind	of	bridge.	To	the	Fist’s	eye,	it
seemed	the	whole	thing	was	moments	from	breaking	loose.
Scouts	had	crossed	it	on	foot.	Gamet	could	see	a	score	of	mud-smeared
Seti	on	the	opposite	side,	making	their	way	up	the	steep	slope.
The	forests	on	both	sides	of	the	river	were	a	mass	of	colour,	their	branches
festooned	with	strips	of	cloth,	with	braids	and	painted	human	bones	that	twisted
in	the	wind.


Mesh’arn	tho’ledann.	The	Day	of	Pure	Blood.	Upstream,	on	either	bank	for
as	far	as	he	could	see,	long	poles	had	been	thrust	into	the	mud	at	angles	so	that
they	hung	over	the	swirling	water.	The	carcasses	of	sheep	and	goats	hung	from
them.	From	some	the	blood	still	drained,	whilst	others	were	well	along	in	their
rot,	seething	with	flies,	capemoths	and	carrion	birds.	Small	white	flecks	rained
down	from	the	sacrificed	animals,	to	which	fish	swarmed,	and	it	was	a	moment
before	Gamet	realized	what	those	flecks	were—maggots,	falling	into	the	river.
Captain	Keneb	drew	his	horse	alongside	Gamet’s	own	as	they	approached
the	bank.	‘That’s	not	mud	binding	that	flotsam,	is	it?	Oh,	a	little	silt	and	sand,
but	mostly—’
‘Blood,	aye,’	Gamet	muttered.
They	were	trailing	the	Adjunct,	who	was	flanked	by	Nil	and	Nether.	The
three	reached	the	water ’s	edge	and	halted	their	mounts.	Behind	Gamet	and
Keneb,	the	front	companies	of	the	10th	Legion	were	on	the	slope,	within	sight
of	the	river	and	its	ragged	bridge.
‘Those	sacrifices,	do	you	think	they	were	done	to	welcome	us,	Fist?	I	can’t
imagine	such	slaughter	to	be	ongoing—the	herds	would	be	wiped	out	in	no
time.’
‘Some	have	been	here	a	while,’	Gamet	observed.	‘But	you	must	be	right,
Captain.’
‘So	we	would	cross	a	river	of	blood.	If	these	damned	tribes	consider	that
gesture	an	honourable	one,	then	the	Queen	has	stolen	their	sanity.	This	notion
of	seeing	the	world	metaphorically	has	ever	driven	me	to	distraction.	The
Seven	Cities	native	sees	everything	differently.	To	them,	the	landscape	is
animate—not	just	the	old	notion	of	spirits,	but	in	some	other,	far	more
complicated	way.’
Gamet	glanced	at	the	man.	‘Is	it	worth	making	a	study	of	it,	Captain?’
Keneb	started,	then	half	smiled,	adding	a	strangely	despondent	shrug.	‘That
particular	dialogue	spoke	of	the	rebellion	and	only	the	rebellion—for	months
and	months	before	it	finally	happened.	Had	we	bothered	to	read	those	signs,
Fist,	we	could	have	been	better	prepared.’
They	had	drawn	up	behind	the	Adjunct	and	the	two	Wickans.	At	Keneb’s
words,	Tavore	turned	her	horse	round	and	faced	the	captain.	‘Sometimes,’	she
said,	‘knowledge	is	not	enough.’
‘Your	pardon,	Adjunct,’	Keneb	said.
Tavore	fixed	her	flat	gaze	on	Gamet.	‘Bring	forward	the	marines,	Fist.	We
will	require	sappers	and	munitions.	We	shall	cross	a	ford,	not	a	bridge	of
detritus	held	in	place	by	blood.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.	Captain,	if	you	will	join	me…’


They	pulled	their	horses	round	and	made	their	way	back	up	the	slope.
Glancing	over	at	Keneb,	Gamet	saw	that	the	man	was	grinning.	‘What	amuses
you,	Captain?’
‘Munitions,	sir.	The	sappers	will	weep.’
‘So	long	as	they	don’t	destroy	the	ford	itself,	I	will	be	glad	to	give	them
comforting	hugs.’
‘I	wouldn’t	let	them	hear	a	promise	like	that,	sir.’
‘No,	I	suppose	you’re	right.’
They	reached	the	front	ranks	of	the	10th	Legion	and	Gamet	waved	a
messenger	over.	As	the	rider	approached,	Fist	Tene	Baralta	joined	the	woman
and	the	two	arrived	together.
‘Sappers?’	the	Red	Blade	asked.
Gamet	nodded.	‘Aye.’
Tene	Baralta	nodded	and	said	to	the	messenger,	‘Take	word	to	the	marine
lieutenants.	The	Adjunct	requires	some	demolition.	Immediately.’
‘Aye,	sir,’	she	replied,	wheeling	her	horse	round.
They	watched	her	canter	back	along	the	line,	then	the	Red	Blade	faced
Gamet.	‘They	will	see	it	as	an	insult.	This	bridge	of	blood	is	intended	as	a
blessing.’
‘She	knows	that,	Tene	Baralta,’	Gamet	replied.	‘But	the	footing	is	far	too
treacherous.	That	should	be	obvious,	even	to	our	hidden	observers.’
The	large	man	shrugged,	armour	clanking	with	the	motion.	‘Perhaps	a
quiet	word	to	Gall	of	the	Khundryl,	a	rider	sent	out	to	find	those	observers,	to
ensure	that	no	misunderstanding	occurs.’
‘A	good	suggestion,’	Gamet	replied.
‘I	shall	see	to	it,	then.’
The	Red	Blade	rode	off.
‘Forgive	me	if	I	am	too	forward,	Fist,’	Keneb	murmured,	‘but	what	just
occurred	strikes	me	as	the	very	thing	that	the	Adjunct	would	dislike	most.’
‘Do	you	believe	she	dislikes	initiative	among	her	officers,	Captain?’
‘I	wouldn’t	presume—’
‘You	just	did.’
‘Ah,	well,	I	see	your	point.	My	apologies,	Fist.’
‘Never	apologize	when	you’re	right,	Keneb.	Wait	here	for	the	squads.’	He
set	off	down	to	where	the	Adjunct	still	sat	astride	her	horse	at	the	shoreline.
Nil	and	Nether	had	dismounted	and	were	now	kneeling,	heads	bowed,	in
the	muddy	water.
Gamet	could	see,	upon	arriving,	Tavore’s	tightly	bridled	anger.	Aye,	they
cling	still	to	the	chains,	and	it	seems	letting	go	is	the	last	thing	they	would	do…


given	the	choice.	Well,	I	was	the	one	who	mentioned	initiative.	‘I	see	the
children	are	playing	in	the	mud,	Adjunct.’
Her	head	snapped	round	and	her	eyes	narrowed.
Gamet	went	on,	‘I	advise	we	assign	a	minder	for	them,	lest	they	injure
themselves	in	their	exuberance.	After	all,	Adjunct,	I	doubt	the	Empress	intended
you	to	mother	them,	did	she?’
‘Well,	no,’	she	drawled	after	a	moment.	‘They	were	to	be	my	mages.’
‘Aye,	so	I	wonder,	have	you	instructed	them	to	commune	with	the	ghosts?
Do	they	seek	to	appease	the	river	spirits?’
‘No,	again,	Fist.	In	truth,	I	have	no	idea	what	they’re	doing.’
‘I	am	of	the	opinion	that	you	are	proving	far	too	permissive	a	mother,
Adjunct.’
‘Indeed.	Then	I	give	you	leave	to	act	in	my	stead,	Fist.’
There	was	no	way	Nil	and	Nether	were	uncognizant	of	the	conversation
behind	them,	but	neither	altered	their	position.	With	a	loud	sigh,	Gamet
dismounted	and	walked	to	the	muddy	waterline.
Then	reached	down	and	closed	a	hand	on	their	hide	shirts,	just	behind	their
necks,	and	yanked	the	two	Wickans	upright.
Loud	squeals,	then	hissing	fury	as	the	Fist	shook	them	both	for	a	moment,
then	turned	them	round	until	they	faced	the	Adjunct.	‘This	is	what	a	Wickan
grandmother	would	have	done.	I	know,	somewhat	harsher	than	is	the	Malazan
style	of	parenting.	Then	again,	these	two	children	are	not	Malazan,	are	they?’
He	set	them	down.
‘Perhaps	it’s	too	late,	Fist,’	Tavore	said,	‘but	I	would	remind	you	that	these
two	children	are	also	warlocks.’
‘I’ve	seen	no	sign	of	it	yet,	Adjunct.	But	if	they	want	to	curse	me,	then	so	be
it.’
For	the	moment,	however,	neither	seemed	inclined	to	do	so.	Rage	had
given	way	to	something	very	much	resembling	a	sulk.
Tavore	cleared	her	throat.	‘Nil,	Nether,	I	believe	there	will	be	need	for
representatives	of	our	army	to	seek	out	the	local	tribes	in	this	forest,	to	assure
them	we	are	aware	of	the	meaning	behind	their	gesture.	None	the	less,	we	must
ensure	safe	passage	across	this	ford.’
‘Adjunct,	Fist	Tene	Baralta	has	suggested	something	similar,	but	using	the
Khundryl.’
‘Perhaps	representatives	from	both,	then.’	To	the	Wickans:	‘Report	to	Fist
Tene	Baralta.’
Gamet	watched	the	siblings	exchange	a	glance,	then	Nil	said	to	the	Adjunct,
‘As	you	wish.’


Nether	cast	a	parting	look	of	venom	at	Gamet	as	they	headed	off.
‘Pray	you	won’t	have	to	pay	for	that,’	Tavore	said	when	they	were	out	of
earshot.
Gamet	shrugged.
‘And	next	time,	have	Tene	Baralta	bring	his	suggestions	to	me	personally.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’
	
Cuttle	and	Strings	scrambled	back	from	the	shoreline.	Soaked	and	sheathed	in
blood-crusted	mud,	they	none	the	less	could	not	keep	grins	from	their	faces.	A
doubling	of	pleasure	in	that	the	munitions	had	come	from	the	Fourteenth’s
stores,	not	their	own.	Twelve	crackers	that	would	drive	the	explosions
horizontally,	three	cussers	placed	shallow	in	the	detritus	to	loosen	the
wreckage.
And	a	bare	handful	of	heartbeats	before	it	all	went	up.
The	rest	of	the	army	had	pulled	back	to	the	top	of	the	slope	on	this	side;	the
Seti	scouts	on	the	opposite	side	were	nowhere	to	be	seen.	Leaving	only	the	two
sappers—
—running	like	madmen.
A	thundering	whump	sent	both	men	flying.	Sand,	mud,	water,	followed	by	a
rain	of	debris.
Hands	over	their	heads,	they	lay	motionless	for	a	long	moment,	with	the
only	sound	to	reach	them	the	rush	of	water	sweeping	over	the	cleared	ford.
Then	Strings	looked	across	at	Cuttle,	to	find	him	looking	back.
Maybe	two	cussers	would	have	done.
They	exchanged	nods,	then	clambered	to	their	feet.
The	ford	was	indeed	clear.	The	water	beyond	seethed	with	flotsam,	now
making	its	way	down	to	the	Dojal	Hading	Sea.
Strings	wiped	mud	from	his	face.	‘Think	we	made	any	holes,	Cuttle?’
‘Nothing	that’ll	drown	anyone,	I’d	wager.	Good	thing	you	didn’t	run,’
Cuttle	added	in	a	murmur,	as	riders	made	their	way	down	the	slope	behind
them.
Strings	shot	the	man	a	glance.	‘What	don’t	you	hear?’
‘Not	a	question	I	can	answer,	is	it,	Fid?’
The	first	rider	arrived—their	fellow	sapper,	Maybe,	from	the	6th	squad.
‘Flat	and	clean,’	he	said,	‘but	you	left	it	too	close—what’s	the	point	of	making
a	big	explosion	when	you’ve	got	your	face	in	the	dirt	when	it	goes	off?’
‘Any	other	bright	comments	to	make,	Maybe?’	Cuttle	growled,	brushing
himself	down—a	gesture	that	clearly	had	no	chance	of	any	kind	of	measurable


success.	‘If	not,	then	kindly	ride	out	there	and	check	for	holes.’
‘Slowly,’	Strings	added.	‘Let	your	horse	find	its	own	pace.’
Maybe’s	brows	rose.	‘Really?’	Then	he	nudged	his	mount	forward.
Strings	stared	after	the	soldier.	‘I	hate	satirical	bastards	like	him.’
‘The	Wickans	will	skin	him	alive	if	he	breaks	that	horse’s	legs.’
‘That	has	the	sound	of	a	feud	in	the	making.’
Cuttle	paused	in	his	fruitless	efforts	to	clean	himself,	then	frowned.
‘What?’
‘Never	mind.’
Ranal	and	Keneb	rode	up.	‘Nicely	done,’	the	captain	said.	‘I	think.’
‘Should	be	all	right,’	Strings	replied.	‘So	long	as	nobody	starts	firing
arrows	at	us.’
‘Taken	care	of,	Sergeant.	Well,	to	your	squad,	the	privilege	of	first
crossing.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
There	should	have	been	pleasure,	in	a	task	well	done,	but	Strings	felt
nothing	beyond	the	initial	rush	that	had	immediately	followed	the	detonation.
The	broken	song	whispered	on	in	his	mind,	a	dirge	lying	beneath	his	every
thought.
‘The	way	ahead	seems	clear,’	Cuttle	muttered.
Aye.	Doesn’t	mean	I	have	to	like	it.
	
The	land	rose	steeply	on	the	north	side	of	the	Vathar	River,	with	a	treeless	butte
towering	over	the	trail	to	the	west.	The	army’s	crossing	continued	as	the
Adjunct	and	Gamet	climbed	the	goat	trail	towards	the	butte’s	summit.	The	sun
was	low	in	the	sky—their	second	full	day	at	the	ford—and	the	river	was	made
molten	by	the	lurid	streams	of	light	off	to	their	left,	although	this	side	of	the
rock	prominence	was	in	deep	shadow.
The	mud	covering	Gamet’s	leather-clad	legs	was	drying	to	a	stiff,	cracklatticed	skin	that	shed	dust	as	he	clambered	in	Tavore’s	wake.	He	was	breathing
hard,	his	undergarments	soaked	with	sweat.
They	reached	the	summit,	emerging	once	more	into	sunlight.	A	brisk,	hot
wind	swept	the	barren,	flat	rock.	A	ring	of	stones	on	a	lower	shelf,	on	what
passed	for	the	lee	side,	marked	where	a	hearth	or	watch-fire	had	once	been
constructed,	possibly	at	the	time	of	the	Chain	of	Dogs.
The	Adjunct	wiped	dust	from	her	gloves,	then	strode	to	the	north	edge.
After	a	moment,	Gamet	followed.
The	city	of	Ubaryd	was	visible,	dun-coloured	and	sheathed	in	smoke,	to	the


northeast.	Beyond	it	glittered	the	Dojal	Hading	Sea.	The	city’s	harbour	was
crowded	with	ships.
‘Admiral	Nok,’	the	Adjunct	said.
‘He’s	retaken	Ubaryd,	then.’
‘Where	we	will	resupply,	yes.’	Then	she	pointed	northward.	‘There,	Gamet.
Do	you	see	it?’
He	squinted,	wondering	what	he	was	supposed	to	look	at	across	the	vast
wasteland	that	was	the	Ubaryd	Odhan.	Then	the	breath	hissed	between	his	teeth.
A	fiery	wall	of	red	on	the	horizon,	as	if	a	second	sun	was	setting.
‘The	Whirlwind,’	Tavore	said.
Suddenly,	the	wind	was	much	colder,	pushing	hard	against	Gamet	where	he
stood.
‘Beyond	it,’	the	Adjunct	continued,	‘waits	our	enemy.	Tell	me,	do	you	think
Sha’ik	will	contest	our	approach?’
‘She	would	be	a	fool	not	to,’	he	replied.
‘Are	you	certain	of	that?	Would	she	rather	not	face	unblooded	recruits?’
‘It	is	a	huge	gamble,	Adjunct.	The	march	alone	will	have	hardened	the
Fourteenth.	Were	I	her,	I	would	prefer	to	face	a	battle-weary,	bruised	enemy.
An	enemy	burdened	with	wounded,	with	a	shortage	of	arrows,	horses	and
whatnot.	And	by	that	time	of	final	meeting,	I	would	also	have	learned
something	of	you,	Adjunct.	Your	tactics.	As	it	is,	Sha’ik	has	no	way	to	take
your	measure.’
‘Yes.	Curious,	isn’t	it?	Either	she	is	indifferent	to	me,	or	she	feels	she	has
already	taken	my	measure—which	of	course	is	impossible.	Even	assuming	she
has	spies	in	our	army,	thus	far	I	have	done	little	more	than	ensure	that	we
march	in	an	organized	fashion.’
Spies?	Gods	below,	I	hadn’t	even	considered	that!
Neither	spoke	for	a	time,	each	lost	in	their	own	thoughts	as	they	stared
northward.
The	sun	was	vanishing	on	their	left.
But	the	Whirlwind	held	its	own	fire.


Chapter	Sixteen

Power	has	voice,	and	that	voice	is	the	Song	of	the	Tanno
Spiritwalker.
KIMLOC
He	awoke	to	a	faint,	damp	nuzzling	against	his	side,	eyes	slowly	opened,	head
tilted	downward,	to	see	a	bhok’aral	pup,	patchy	with	some	sort	of	skin
infection,	curled	against	his	stomach.
Kalam	sat	up,	suppressing	the	urge	to	grab	the	creature	by	the	neck	and
fling	it	against	a	wall.	Compassion	was	not	the	consideration,	of	course.
Rather,	it	was	the	fact	that	this	subterranean	temple	was	home	to	hundreds,
perhaps	even	thousands	of	bhok’arala,	and	the	creatures	possessed	a	complex
social	structure—harm	this	pup	and	Kalam	might	find	himself	beneath	a	swarm
of	bull	males.	And	small	as	the	beasts	were,	they	had	canines	to	rival	a	bear ’s.
Even	so,	he	fought	to	contain	his	revulsion	as	he	gently	pushed	the	mottled	pup
away.
It	mewled	pathetically	and	looked	up	at	him	with	huge,	liquid	eyes.
‘Don’t	even	try,’	the	assassin	muttered,	slipping	free	of	the	furs	and	rising.
Flecks	of	mouldy	skin	covered	his	midriff,	and	the	thin	woollen	shirt	was
sodden	from	the	pup’s	runny	nose.	Kalam	removed	the	shirt	and	flung	it	into	a
corner	of	the	small	chamber.
He’d	not	seen	Iskaral	Pust	in	over	a	week.	Apart	from	occasional	tingling
sensations	at	the	tips	of	his	fingers	and	toes,	he	was	more	or	less	recovered
from	the	enkar ’al	demon’s	attack.	Kalam	had	delivered	the	diamonds	and	was
now	chafing	to	leave.
Faint	singing	echoed	from	the	hallway.	The	assassin	shook	his	head.
Maybe	one	day	Mogora	will	get	it	right,	but	in	the	meantime…gods	below,	it
grates!	He	strode	to	his	tattered	backpack	and	rummaged	inside	until	he	found
a	spare	shirt.
Sudden	thumping	sounded	outside	his	door,	and	he	turned	in	time	to	see	it
flung	open.	Mogora	stood	framed	in	the	doorway,	a	wooden	bucket	in	one


hand,	a	mop	in	the	other.	‘Was	he	here?	Just	now?	Was	he	here?	Tell	me!’
‘I	haven’t	seen	him	in	days,’	Kalam	replied.
‘He	has	to	clean	the	kitchen!’
‘Is	this	all	you	do,	Mogora?	Chase	after	Iskaral	Pust’s	shadow?’
‘All!’	The	word	was	a	shriek.	She	stormed	up	to	him,	mop	thrust	forward
like	a	weapon.	‘Am	I	the	only	one	using	the	kitchen!	No!’
Kalam	stepped	back,	wiping	spittle	from	his	face,	but	the	Dal	Honese
woman	advanced.
‘And	you!	Do	you	think	your	suppers	arrive	all	by	themselves?	Do	you
think	the	shadow	gods	simply	conjure	them	out	of	thin	air?	Did	I	invite	you
here?	Are	you	my	guest?	Am	I	your	serving	wench?’
‘Gods	forbid—’
‘Be	quiet!	I’m	talking,	not	you!’	She	thrust	the	mop	and	bucket	into
Kalam’s	hands,	then,	spying	the	bhok’aral	pup	curled	up	on	the	cot,	dropped
into	a	predatory	crouch	and	edged	closer,	fingers	hooked.	‘There	you	are,’	she
murmured.	‘Leave	your	skin	everywhere,	will	you?	Not	for	much	longer!’
Kalam	stepped	into	her	path.	‘Enough,	Mogora.	Get	out	of	here.’
‘Not	without	my	pet.’
‘Pet?	You’re	intending	to	wring	its	neck,	Mogora!’
‘So?’
He	set	the	mop	and	bucket	down.	I	can’t	believe	this.	I’m	defending	a
mangy	bhok’aral…from	a	D’ivers	witch.
There	was	movement	in	the	doorway.	Kalam	gestured.	‘Look	behind	you,
Mogora.	Harm	this	pup	and	you’ll	have	to	face	them.’
She	spun,	then	hissed.	‘Scum!	Iskaral’s	beget—always	spying!	That’s	how
he	hides—using	them!’
With	a	ululating	scream	she	charged	into	the	doorway.	The	bhok’arala
massed	there	shrieked	in	answer	and	scattered,	although	Kalam	saw	one	dart
between	her	legs	and	leap	onto	the	cot.	It	scooped	the	pup	up	under	one	arm
then	bolted	for	the	corridor.
Mogora’s	wailing	cries	dwindled	as	she	continued	her	pursuit.
‘Hee	hee.’
Kalam	turned.
Iskaral	Pust	emerged	from	the	shadows	in	the	far	corner.	He	was	covered
in	dust,	a	sack	draped	over	one	bony	shoulder.
The	assassin	scowled.	‘I’ve	waited	long	enough	in	this	madhouse,	Priest.’
‘Indeed	you	have.’	He	cocked	his	head,	tugging	at	one	of	the	few	wisps	of
hair	that	remained	on	his	pate.	‘I’m	done	and	he	can	go,	yes?	I	should	be
kindly,	open,	scattering	gold	dust	to	mark	his	path	out	into	the	waiting	world.


He’ll	suspect	nothing.	He’ll	believe	he	leaves	of	his	own	free	will.	Precisely	as
it	should	be.’	Iskaral	Pust	suddenly	smiled,	then	held	out	the	sack.	‘Here,	a	few
diamonds	for	you.	Spend	them	here	and	there,	spend	them	everywhere!	But
remember,	you	must	breach	the	Whirlwind—into	the	heart	of	Raraku,	yes?’
‘That	is	my	intent,’	Kalam	growled,	accepting	the	sack	and	stuffing	it	into
his	own	backpack.	‘We	do	not	proceed	at	cross-purposes,	Priest,	although	I
realize	you’d	rather	we	did,	given	your	perverse	mind.	Even	so…breach	the
Whirlwind…without	being	detected.	How	will	I	manage	that?’
‘With	the	help	of	Shadowthrone’s	chosen	mortal.	Iskaral	Pust,	High	Priest
and	Master	of	Rashan	and	Meanas	and	Thyr!	The	Whirlwind	is	a	goddess,	and
her	eyes	cannot	be	everywhere.	Now,	quickly	collect	your	belongings.	We	must
leave!	She’s	coming	back,	and	I’ve	made	another	mess	in	the	kitchen!	Hurry!’

They	emerged	from	the	warren	of	shadow	beneath	a	large	outcropping,	in
daylight,	less	than	a	hundred	paces	from	the	raging	wall	of	the	Whirlwind.
After	three	strides	forward	Kalam	reached	out	and	grabbed	the	priest	by	the
arm	and	spun	him	round.
‘That	singing?	Where	in	Hood’s	name	is	that	singing	coming	from,
Iskaral?	I’d	heard	it	in	the	monastery	and	thought	it	was	Mogora—’
‘Mogora	can’t	sing,	you	fool!	I	hear	nothing,	nothing	but	the	wild	winds
and	the	hiss	of	sands!	You	are	mad!	Is	he	mad?	Yes,	possibly.	No,	likely.	The
sun	broiled	his	brain	in	that	thick	skull.	A	gradual	dissolution—but	of	course
not,	of	course	not.	It’s	the	Tanno	song,	that’s	what	it	is.	Even	so,	he’s	probably
still	mad.	Two	entirely	separate	issues.	The	song.	And	his	madness.	Distinct,
unrelated,	both	equally	confounding	of	all	that	my	masters	plan.	Or	potentially
so.	Potentially.	There	is	no	certainty,	not	in	this	damned	land,	especially	not
here.	Restless	Raraku.	Restless!’
With	a	snarl,	Kalam	pushed	the	man	away,	began	walking	towards	the	wall
of	the	Whirlwind.	After	a	moment,	Iskaral	Pust	followed.
‘Tell	me	how	we’re	going	to	manage	this,	Priest.’
‘It’s	simple,	really.	She’ll	know	the	breach.	Like	a	knife	stab.	That	cannot
be	avoided.	Thus,	misdirection!	And	there	is	none	better	at	misdirection	than
Iskaral	Pust!’
They	arrived	to	within	twenty	paces	of	the	seething	wall	of	sand.	Swirling
clouds	of	dust	engulfed	them.	Iskaral	Pust	moved	close,	revealing	a	grin	filled
with	grit.	‘Hold	tight,	Kalam	Mekhar!’	Then	he	vanished.


A	massive	shape	loomed	over	the	assassin,	and	he	was	suddenly	gathered
up	in	a	swarm	of	arms.
The	azalan.
Running,	now,	flowing	faster	than	any	horse	along	the	edge	of	the
Whirlwind	Wall.	The	demon	tucked	Kalam	close	under	its	torso—then	plunged
through.
A	thundering	roar	filled	the	assassin’s	ears,	sand	flailing	against	his	skin.
He	squeezed	shut	his	eyes.
Multiple	thuds,	and	the	azalan	was	racing	across	packed	sand.	Ahead	lay
the	ruins	of	a	city.
Fire	flared	beneath	the	demon,	a	path	of	flames	raging	in	its	wake.
The	raised	tel	of	the	dead	city	rose	before	them.	The	azalan	did	not	even
slow,	swarming	up	the	ragged	wall.	A	fissure	loomed,	not	large	enough	for	the
demon—but	sufficient	for	Kalam.
He	was	flung	into	the	crack	as	the	azalan	flowed	over	it.	Landing	heavily
amidst	rubble	and	potsherds.	Deep	in	the	fissure’s	shadow.
Sudden	thunder	overhead,	shaking	the	rock.	Then	again	and	again,
seeming	to	stitch	a	path	back	towards	the	wall	of	sand.	The	detonations	then
ceased,	and	only	the	roar	of	the	Whirlwind	remained.
I	think	he	made	it	back	out.	Fast	bastard.
The	assassin	remained	motionless	for	a	time,	wondering	if	the	ruse	had
succeeded.	Either	way,	he	would	wait	for	night	before	venturing	out.
He	could	no	longer	hear	the	song.	Something	to	be	grateful	for.
The	walls	of	the	fissure	revealed	layer	upon	layer	of	potsherds	on	one
side,	a	sunken	and	heaved	section	of	cobblestone	street	on	another,	and	the
flank	of	a	building’s	interior	wall—the	plaster	chipped	and	scarred—on	the
last.	The	rubble	beneath	him	was	loose	and	felt	deep.
Checking	his	weapons,	Kalam	settled	down	to	wait.
	
Apsalar	in	his	arms,	Cutter	emerged	from	the	gateway.	The	woman’s	weight
sent	waves	of	pain	through	his	bruised	shoulder,	and	he	did	not	think	he	would
be	able	to	carry	her	for	long.
Thirty	paces	ahead,	at	the	edge	of	the	clearing	where	the	two	trails
converged,	lay	scores	of	corpses.	And	in	their	midst	stood	Cotillion.
Cutter	walked	over	to	the	shadow	god.	The	Tiste	Edur	lay	heaped	in	a	ring
around	a	clear	spot	off	to	the	left,	but	Cotillion’s	attention	seemed	to	be	on	one
body	in	particular,	lying	at	his	feet.	As	the	Daru	approached,	the	god	slowly
settled	down	into	a	crouch,	reaching	out	to	brush	hair	back	from	the	corpse’s


face.
It	was	the	old	witch,	Cutter	saw,	the	one	who	had	been	burned.	The	one	I
thought	was	the	source	of	power	in	the	Malazan	party.	But	it	wasn’t	her.	It	was
Traveller.	He	halted	a	few	paces	away,	brought	up	short	by	Cotillion’s
expression,	the	ravaged	look	that	made	him	suddenly	appear	twenty	years
older.	The	gloved	hand	that	had	swept	the	hair	back	now	caressed	the	dead
woman’s	scorched	face.
‘You	knew	her?’	Cutter	asked.
‘Hawl,’	he	replied	after	a	moment.	‘I’d	thought	Surly	had	taken	them	all
out.	None	of	the	Talon’s	command	left.	I	thought	she	was	dead.’
‘She	is.’	Then	he	snapped	his	mouth	shut.	A	damned	miserable	thing	to	say
—
‘I	made	them	good	at	hiding,’	Cotillion	went	on,	eyes	still	on	the	woman
lying	in	the	bloody,	trampled	grass.	‘Good	enough	to	hide	even	from	me,	it
seems.’
‘What	do	you	think	she	was	doing	here?’
Cotillion	flinched	slightly.	‘The	wrong	question,	Cutter.	Rather,	why	was
she	with	Traveller?	What	is	the	Talon	up	to?	And	Traveller…gods,	did	he
know	who	she	was?	Of	course	he	did—oh,	she’s	aged	and	not	well,	but	even
so…’
‘You	could	just	ask	him,’	Cutter	murmured,	grunting	as	he	shifted
Apsalar ’s	weight	in	his	arms.	‘He’s	in	the	courtyard	behind	us,	after	all.’
Cotillion	reached	down	to	the	woman’s	neck	and	lifted	into	view
something	strung	on	a	thong.	A	yellow-stained	talon	of	some	sort.	He	pulled	it
loose,	studied	it	for	a	moment,	then	twisted	round	and	flung	it	towards	Cutter.
It	struck	his	chest,	then	fell	to	lie	in	Apsalar ’s	lap.
The	Daru	stared	down	at	it	for	a	moment,	then	looked	up	and	met	the	god’s
eyes.
‘Go	to	the	Edur	ship,	Cutter.	I	am	sending	you	two	to	another…agent	of
ours.’
‘To	do	what?’
‘To	wait.	In	case	you	are	needed.’
‘For	what?’
‘To	assist	others	in	taking	down	the	Master	of	the	Talon.’
‘Do	you	know	where	he	or	she	is?’
He	lifted	Hawl	into	his	arms	and	straightened.	‘I	have	a	suspicion.	Now,
finally,	a	suspicion	about	all	of	this.’	He	turned,	the	frail	figure	held	lightly	in
his	arms,	and	studied	Cutter	for	a	moment.	A	momentary,	wan	smile.	‘Look	at
the	two	of	us,’	he	said,	then	he	swung	away	and	began	walking	towards	the


forest	trail.
Cutter	stared	after	him.
Then	shouted:	‘It’s	not	the	same!	It’s	not!	We’re	not—’
The	forest	shadows	swallowed	the	god.
Cutter	hissed	a	curse,	then	he	turned	to	the	trail	that	led	down	to	the
shoreline.
	
The	god	Cotillion	walked	on	until	he	reached	a	small	glade	off	to	one	side	of
the	path.	He	carried	his	burden	into	its	centre,	and	gently	set	her	down.
A	host	of	shadows	spun	into	being	opposite,	until	the	vague,	insubstantial
form	of	Shadowthrone	slowly	resolved	itself.	For	a	change,	the	god	said
nothing	for	a	long	time.
Cotillion	knelt	beside	Hawl’s	body.	‘Traveller	is	here,	Ammanas.	In	the
Edur	ruins.’
Ammanas	grunted	softly,	then,	shrugged.	‘He’ll	have	no	interest	in
answering	our	questions.	He	never	did.	Stubborn	as	any	Dal	Honese.’
‘You’re	Dal	Honese,’	Cotillion	observed.
‘Precisely.’	Ammanas	slipped	noiselessly	forward	until	he	was	on	the	other
side	of	the	corpse.	‘It’s	her,	isn’t	it.’
‘It	is.’
‘How	many	times	do	our	followers	have	to	die,	Cotillion?’	the	god	asked,
then	sighed.	‘Then	again,	she	clearly	ceased	being	a	follower	some	time	ago.’
‘She	thought	we	were	gone,	Ammanas.	The	Emperor	and	Dancer.	Gone.
Dead.’
‘And	in	a	way,	she	was	right.’
‘In	a	way,	aye.	But	not	in	the	most	important	way.’
‘Which	is?’
Cotillion	glanced	up,	then	grimaced.	‘She	was	a	friend.’
‘Ah,	that	most	important	way.’	Ammanas	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he
asked,	‘Will	you	pursue	this?’
‘I	see	little	choice.	The	Talon	is	up	to	something.	We	need	to	stop	them—’
‘No,	friend.	We	need	to	ensure	that	they	fail.	Have	you	found	a…trail?’
‘More	than	that.	I’ve	realized	who	is	masterminding	the	whole	thing.’
Shadowthrone’s	hooded	head	cocked	slightly.	‘And	that	is	where	Cutter	and
Apsalar	are	going	now?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are	they	sufficient?’
Cotillion	shook	his	head.	‘I	have	other	agents	available.	But	I	would


Apsalar	be	relatively	close,	in	case	something	goes	wrong.’
Ammanas	nodded.	‘So,	where?’
‘Raraku.’
Though	he	could	not	see	it,	Cotillion	knew	that	his	companion’s	face	was
splitting	into	a	broad	grin.	‘Ah,	dear	Rope,	time’s	come,	I	think,	that	I	should
tell	you	more	of	my	own	endeavours…’
‘The	diamonds	I	gave	Kalam?	I’d	wondered	about	those.’
Ammanas	gestured	at	Hawl’s	corpse.	‘Let	us	take	her	home—our	home,
that	is.	And	then	we	must	speak…at	length.’
Cotillion	nodded.
‘Besides,’	Shadowthrone	added	as	he	straightened,	‘Traveller	being	so
close	by	makes	me	nervous.’
A	moment	later,	the	glade	was	empty,	barring	a	few	sourceless	shadows
that	swiftly	dwindled	into	nothing.
	
Cutter	reached	the	sandstone	shoreline.	Four	runners	had	been	pulled	up	on	the
flat,	grainy	shelf	of	rock.	Anchored	in	the	bay	beyond	were	two	large
dromons,	both	badly	damaged.
Around	the	runners	gear	lay	scattered,	and	two	huge	trees	had	been	felled
and	dragged	close—probably	intended	to	replace	the	snapped	masts.	Barrels
containing	salted	fish	had	been	broached,	while	other	casks	stood	in	a	row
nearby,	refilled	with	fresh	water.
Cutter	set	Apsalar	down,	then	approached	one	of	the	runners.	They	were
about	fifteen	paces	from	bow	to	stern,	broad	of	beam	with	an	unstepped	mast
and	side-mounted	steering	oar.	There	were	two	oarlocks	to	a	side.	The	gunnels
were	crowded	with	riotous	carvings.
A	sudden	coughing	fit	from	Apsalar	swung	him	round.
She	bolted	upright,	spat	to	clear	her	throat,	then	wrapped	her	arms	about
herself	as	shivering	racked	through	her.
Cutter	quickly	returned	to	her	side.
‘D-Darist?’
‘Dead.	But	so	are	all	the	Edur.	There	was	one	among	the	Malazans…’
‘The	one	of	power.	I	felt	him.	Such…anger!’
Cutter	went	over	to	the	nearest	water	cask,	found	a	ladle.	He	dipped	it	full
and	walked	back.	‘He	called	himself	Traveller.’
‘I	know	him,’	she	whispered,	then	shuddered.	‘Not	my	memories.	Dancer ’s.
Dancer	knew	him.	Knew	him	well.	They	were…three.	It	was	never	just	the	two
of	them—did	you	know	that?	Never	just	Dancer	and	Kellanved.	No,	he	was


there.	Almost	from	the	very	beginning.	Before	Tayschrenn,	before	Dujek,
before	even	Surly.’
‘Well,	it	makes	no	difference	now,	Apsalar,’	Cutter	said.	‘We	need	to	leave
this	damned	island—Traveller	can	have	it,	as	far	as	I’m	concerned.	Are	you
recovered	enough	to	help	me	get	one	of	these	runners	into	the	water?	We’ve	a
bounty	in	supplies,	too—’
‘Where	are	we	going?’
He	hesitated.
Her	dark	eyes	flattened.	‘Cotillion.’
‘Another	task	for	us,	aye.’
‘Do	not	walk	this	path,	Crokus.’
He	scowled.	‘I	thought	you’d	appreciate	the	company.’	He	offered	her	the
ladle.
She	studied	him	for	a	long	moment,	then	slowly	accepted	it.
	
‘Pan’potsun	Hills.’
‘I	know,’	Lostara	drawled.
Pearl	smiled.	‘Of	course	you	would.	And	now,	at	last,	you	discover	the
reason	I	asked	you	along—’
‘Wait	a	minute.	You	couldn’t	have	known	where	this	trail	would	lead—’
‘Well,	true,	but	I	have	faith	in	blind	nature’s	penchant	for	cycles.	In	any
case,	is	there	a	buried	city	nearby?’
‘Nearby?	You	mean,	apart	from	the	one	we’re	standing	on?’	She	was
pleased	to	see	his	jaw	drop.	‘What	did	you	think	all	these	flat-topped	hills	were,
Claw?’
He	loosened	his	cloak.	‘Then	again,	this	place	will	suit	just	fine.’
‘For	what?’
He	cast	her	a	sardonic	glance.	‘Well,	dear,	a	ritual.	We	need	to	find	a	trail,	a
sorcerous	one,	and	it’s	old.	Did	you	imagine	we	would	just	wander
directionless	through	this	wasteland	in	the	hopes	of	finding	something?’
‘Odd,	I	thought	that	was	what	we’ve	been	doing	for	days.’
‘Just	getting	some	distance	between	us	and	that	damned	Imass	head,’	he
replied,	walking	over	to	a	flat	stretch	of	stone,	where	he	began	kicking	it	clear
of	rubble.	‘I	could	feel	its	unhuman	eyes	on	us	all	the	way	across	that	valley.’
‘Him	and	the	vultures,	aye.’	She	tilted	her	head	back	and	studied	the
cloudless	sky.	‘Still	with	us,	in	fact.	Those	damned	birds.	Not	surprising.	We’re
almost	out	of	water,	with	even	less	food.	In	a	day	or	two	we’ll	be	in	serious
trouble.’


‘I	will	leave	such	mundane	worries	with	you,	Lostara.’
‘Meaning,	if	all	else	fails,	you	can	always	kill	and	eat	me,	right?	But	what
if	I	decide	to	kill	you	first?	Obsessed	as	I	am	with	mundane	worries.’
The	Claw	settled	down	into	a	crosslegged	position.	‘It’s	become	much
cooler	here,	don’t	you	think?	A	localized	phenomenon,	I	suspect.	Although	I
would	imagine	that	some	measure	of	success	in	the	ritual	I	am	about	to	enact
should	warm	things	up	somewhat.’
‘If	only	the	excitement	of	disbelief,’	Lostara	muttered,	walking	over	to	the
edge	of	the	tel	and	looking	southwestward	to	where	the	red	wall	of	the
Whirlwind	cut	a	curving	slash	across	the	desert.	Behind	her,	she	heard	muted
words,	spoken	in	some	language	unknown	to	her.	Probably	gibberish.	I’ve	seen
enough	mages	at	work	to	know	they	don’t	need	words…not	unless	they’re
performing.	Pearl	was	probably	doing	just	that.	He	was	one	for	poses,	even
while	affecting	indifference	to	his	audience	of	one.	A	man	seeking	his	name	in
tomes	of	history.	Some	crucial	role	upon	which	the	fate	of	the	empire	pivots.
She	turned	as	he	slapped	dust	from	hands,	and	saw	him	rising,	a	troubled
frown	on	his	all-too-handsome	face.
‘That	didn’t	take	long,’	she	said.
‘No.’	Even	he	sounded	surprised.	‘I	was	fortunate	indeed.	A	local	earth
spirit	was	killed…close	by.	By	a	confluence	of	dire	fates,	an	incidental
casualty.	Its	ghost	lingers,	like	a	child	seeking	lost	parents,	and	so	would	speak
to	any	and	every	stranger	who	happens	by,	provided	that	stranger	is	prepared
to	listen.’
Lostara	grunted.	‘All	right,	and	what	did	it	have	to	say?’
‘A	terrible	incident—well,	the	terrible	incident,	the	one	that	killed	the	spirit
—the	details	of	which	lead	me	to	conclude	there	is	some	connec—’
‘Good,’	she	interrupted.	‘Lead	on,	we’re	wasting	time.’
He	fell	silent,	giving	her	a	wounded	look	that	might	well	have	been
sincere.	I	asked	the	question,	I	should	at	least	let	him	answer	it.
A	gesture,	and	he	was	making	his	way	down	the	tel’s	steep,	stepped	side.
She	shouldered	her	pack	and	followed.
Reaching	the	base,	the	Claw	led	her	around	its	flank	and	directly	southward
across	a	stony	flat.	The	sunlight	bounced	from	its	bleached	surface	with	a
fierce,	blinding	glare.	Barring	a	few	ants	scurrying	underfoot,	there	was	no
sign	of	life	on	this	withered	stretch	of	ground.	Small	stones	lay	in	elongated
clusters	here	and	there,	as	if	describing	the	shorelines	of	a	dying	lake,	a	lake
that	had	dwindled	into	a	scatter	of	pools,	leaving	nothing	but	crusted	salt.
They	walked	on	through	the	afternoon,	until	a	ridge	of	hills	became	visible
to	the	southwest,	with	another	massive	mesa	rising	to	its	left.	The	flat	began	to


form	a	discernible	basin	that	seemed	to	continue	on	between	the	two
formations.	With	dusk	only	moments	away,	they	reached	the	even	base	of	that
descent,	the	mesa	looming	on	their	left,	the	broken	hill	ahead	and	to	their	right.
Towards	the	centre	of	this	flat	lay	the	wreckage	of	a	trader ’s	wagon,
surrounded	by	scorched	ground	where	white	ashes	spun	in	small	vortices	that
seemed	incapable	of	going	anywhere.
Pearl	leading,	they	strode	into	the	strange	burned	circle.
The	ashes	were	filled	with	tiny	bones,	burned	white	and	grey	by	some
intense	heat,	crunching	underfoot.	Bemused,	Lostara	crouched	down	to	study
them.	‘Birds?’	she	wondered	aloud.
Pearl’s	gaze	was	on	the	wagon	or,	perhaps,	something	just	beyond	it.	At
her	question	he	shook	his	head.	‘No,	lass.	Rats.’
She	saw	a	tiny	skull	lying	at	her	feet,	confirming	his	words.	‘There	are	rats
of	a	sort,	in	the	rocky	areas—’
He	glanced	over	at	her.	‘These	are—were—D’ivers.	A	particularly
unpleasant	individual	named	Gryllen.’
‘He	was	slain	here?’
‘I	don’t	think	so.	Badly	hurt,	perhaps.’	Pearl	walked	over	to	a	larger	heap
of	ash,	and	squatted	to	sweep	it	away.
Lostara	approached.
He	was	uncovering	a	corpse,	nothing	but	bones—and	those	bones	were	all
terribly	gnawed.
‘Poor	bastard.’
Pearl	said	nothing.	He	reached	down	into	the	collapsed	skeleton	and	lifted
into	view	a	small	chunk	of	metal.	‘Melted,’	he	muttered	after	a	moment,	‘but	I’d
say	it’s	a	Malazan	sigil.	Mage	cadre.’
There	were	four	additional	heaps	similar	to	that	which	had	hidden	the
chewed	bones.	Lostara	walked	to	the	nearest	one	and	began	kicking	the	ash
away.
‘This	one’s	whole!’	she	hissed,	seeing	fire-blackened	flesh.
Pearl	came	over.	Together,	they	brushed	the	corpse	clear	from	the	hips
upward.	Its	clothing	had	been	mostly	burned	off,	and	fire	had	raced	across	the
skin	but	had	seemed	incapable	of	doing	much	more	than	scorch	the	surface.
As	the	Claw	swept	the	last	of	the	ash	from	the	corpse’s	face,	its	eyes
opened.
Cursing,	Lostara	leapt	back,	one	hand	sweeping	her	sword	free	of	its
scabbard.
‘It’s	all	right,’	Pearl	said,	‘this	thing	isn’t	going	anywhere,	lass.’
Behind	the	corpse’s	wrinkled,	collapsed	lids,	there	were	only	gaping	pits.


Its	lips	had	peeled	back	with	desiccation,	leaving	it	with	a	ghastly,	blackened
grin.
‘What	remains?’	Pearl	asked	it.	‘Can	you	still	speak?’
Faint	sounds	rasped	from	it,	forcing	Pearl	to	lean	closer.
‘What	did	it	say?’	Lostara	demanded.
The	Claw	glanced	back	at	her.	‘He	said,	“I	am	named	Clam,	and	I	died	a
terrible	death.’”
‘No	argument	there—’
‘And	then	he	became	an	undead	porter.’
‘For	Gryllen?’
‘Aye.’
She	sheathed	her	tulwar.	‘That	seems	a	singularly	unpleasant	profession
following	death.’
Pearl’s	brows	rose,	then	he	smiled.	‘Alas,	we	won’t	get	much	more	from
dear	old	Clam.	Nor	the	others.	The	sorcery	holding	them	animate	fades.
Meaning	Gryllen	is	either	dead	or	a	long	way	away.	In	any	case,	recall	the
warren	of	fire—it	was	unleashed	here,	in	a	strange	manner.	And	it	left	us	a
trail.’
‘It’s	too	dark,	Pearl.	We	should	camp.’
‘Here?’
She	reconsidered,	then	scowled	in	the	gloom.	‘Perhaps	not,	but	none	the
less	I	am	weary,	and	if	we’re	looking	for	signs,	we’ll	need	daylight	in	any
case.’
Pearl	strode	from	the	circle	of	ash.	A	gesture	and	a	sphere	of	light	slowly
formed	in	the	air	above	him.	‘The	trail	does	not	lead	far,	I	believe.	One	last
task,	Lostara.	Then	we	can	find	somewhere	to	camp.’
‘Oh,	very	well.	Lead	on,	Pearl.’
Whatever	signs	he	followed,	they	were	not	visible	to	Lostara.	Even
stranger,	it	seemed	to	be	a	weaving,	wandering	one,	a	detail	that	had	the	Claw
frowning,	his	steps	hesitant,	cautious.	Before	too	long,	he	was	barely	moving
at	all,	edging	forward	by	the	smallest	increments.	And	she	saw	that	his	face	was
beaded	with	sweat.
She	bit	back	on	her	questions,	but	slowly	drew	her	sword	once	more.
Then,	finally,	they	came	to	another	corpse.
The	breath	whooshed	from	Pearl,	and	he	sank	down	to	his	knees	in	front	of
the	large,	burned	body.
She	waited	until	his	breathing	slowed,	then	cleared	her	throat	and	said,
‘What	just	happened,	Pearl?’
‘Hood	was	here,’	he	whispered.


‘Aye,	I	can	well	see	that—’
‘No,	you	don’t	understand.’	He	reached	out	to	the	corpse,	his	hand	closing
into	a	fist	above	its	broad	chest,	then	punched	down.
The	body	was	simply	a	shell.	It	collapsed	with	a	dusty	crunch	beneath	the
blow.
He	glared	back	at	her.	‘Hood	was	here.	The	god	himself,	Lostara.	Came	to
take	this	man—not	just	his	soul,	but	also	the	flesh—all	that	had	been	infected
by	the	warren	of	fire—the	warren	of	light,	to	be	more	precise.	Gods,	what	I
would	do	for	a	Deck	of	Dragons	right	now.	There’s	been	a	change	in	Hood’s…
household.’
‘And	what	is	the	significance	of	all	this?’	she	asked.	‘I	thought	we	were
looking	for	Felisin.’
‘You’re	not	thinking,	lass.	Remember	Stormy’s	tale.	And	Truth’s.	Felisin,
Heboric,	Kulp	and	Baudin.	We	found	what	was	left	of	Kulp	back	at	Gryllen’s
wagon.	And	this’—his	gesture	was	fierce—‘is	Baudin.	The	damned	Talon—
though	the	proof’s	not	around	his	neck,	alas.	Remember	their	strange	skin?
Gesler,	Stormy,	Truth?	The	same	thing	happened	to	Baudin,	here.’
‘You	called	it	an	infection.’
‘Well,	I	don’t	know	what	it	is.	That	warren	changed	them.	There’s	no
telling	in	what	way.’
‘So,	we’re	left	with	Felisin	and	Heboric	Light	Touch.’
He	nodded.
‘Then	I	feel	I	should	tell	you	something,’	Lostara	continued.	‘It	may	not	be
relevant…’
‘Go	on,	lass.’
She	turned	to	face	the	hills	to	the	southwest.	‘When	we	trailed	that	agent	of
Sha’ik’s…into	those	hills—’
‘Kalam	Mekhar.’
‘Aye.	And	we	ambushed	Sha’ik	up	at	the	old	temple	at	the	summit—on	the
trail	leading	into	Raraku—’
‘As	you	have	described.’
She	ignored	his	impatience.	‘We	would	have	seen	all	this.	Thus,	the	events
we’ve	just	stumbled	upon	here	occurred	after	our	ambush.’
‘Well,	yes.’
She	sighed	and	crossed	her	arms.	‘Felisin	and	Heboric	are	with	the	army
of	the	Apocalpyse,	Pearl.	In	Raraku.’
‘What	makes	you	so	certain?’
She	shrugged.	‘Where	else	would	they	be?	Think,	man.	Felisin’s	hatred	of
the	Malazan	Empire	must	be	all-consuming.	Nor	would	Heboric	hold	much


love	for	the	empire	that	imprisoned	and	condemned	him.	They	were	desperate,
after	Gryllen’s	attack.	After	Baudin	and	Kulp	died.	Desperate,	and	probably
hurting.’
He	slowly	nodded,	straightened	from	his	crouch	beside	the	corpse.	‘One
thing	you’ve	never	explained	to	me,	Lostara.	Why	did	your	ambush	fail?’
‘It	didn’t.	We	killed	Sha’ik—I	would	swear	to	it.	A	quarrel	in	the	forehead.
We	could	not	recover	the	body	because	of	her	guards,	who	proved	too	much
for	our	company.	We	killed	her,	Pearl.’
‘Then	who	in	Hood’s	name	is	commanding	the	Apocalypse?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
‘Can	you	show	me	this	place	of	ambush?’
‘In	the	morning,	aye.	I	can	take	you	right	there.’
He	simply	stared	at	her,	even	as	the	sphere	of	light	above	them	began	to
waver,	then	finally	vanished	with	a	faint	sigh.
	
His	memories	had	awakened.	What	had	lain	within	the	T’lan	Imass,	layered,
indurated	by	the	countless	centuries,	was	a	landscape	Onrack	could	read	once
more.	And	so,	what	he	saw	before	him	now…gone	were	the	mesas	on	the
horizon,	the	wind-sculpted	towers	of	sandstone,	the	sweeps	of	windblown	sand
and	white	ribbons	of	ground	coral.	Gone	the	gorges,	arroyos	and	dead
riverbeds,	the	planted	fields	and	irrigation	ditches.	Even	the	city	to	the	north,
on	the	horizon’s	very	edge,	clinging	like	a	tumour	to	the	vast	winding	river,
became	insubstantial,	ephemeral	to	his	mind’s	eye.
And	all	that	he	now	saw	was	as	it	had	been…so	very	long	ago.
The	inland	sea’s	cloudy	waves,	rolling	like	the	promise	of	eternity,	along	a
shoreline	of	gravel	that	stretched	north,	unbroken	all	the	way	to	the	mountains
that	would	one	day	be	called	the	Thalas,	and	south,	down	to	encompass	the
remnant	now	known	as	the	Clatar	Sea.	Coral	reefs	revealed	their	sharkskin
spines	a	sixth	of	a	league	beyond	the	beach,	over	which	wheeled	seagulls	and
long-beaked	birds	long	since	extinct.
There	were	figures	walking	along	the	strand.	Renig	Obar ’s	clan,	come	to
trade	whale	ivory	and	dhenrabi	oil	from	their	tundra	homelands,	and	it	seemed
they	had	brought	the	chill	winds	with	them…or	perhaps	the	unseemly	weather
that	had	come	to	these	warm	climes	hinted	of	something	darker.	A	Jaghut,
hidden	in	some	fasthold,	stirring	the	cauldron	of	Omtose	Phellack.	Much	more
of	this	and	the	reefs	would	die,	and	with	them	all	the	creatures	that	depended	on
them.
A	breath	of	unease	fluttered	through	the	Onrack	who	was	flesh	and	blood.


But	he	had	stepped	aside.	No	longer	a	bonecaster	for	his	clan—Absin	Tholai
was	far	superior	in	the	hidden	arts,	after	all,	and	more	inclined	to	the	hungry
ambition	necessary	among	those	who	followed	the	Path	of	Tellann.	All	too
often,	Onrack	had	found	his	mind	drawn	to	other	things.
To	raw	beauty,	such	as	he	saw	before	him	now.	He	was	not	one	for
fighting,	for	rituals	of	destruction.	He	was	always	reluctant	to	dance	in	the
deeper	recesses	of	the	caves,	where	the	drums	pounded	and	the	echoes	rolled
through	flesh	and	bone	as	if	one	was	lying	in	the	path	of	a	stampeding	herd	of
ranag—a	herd	such	as	the	one	Onrack	had	blown	onto	the	cave	walls	around
them.	His	mouth	bitter	with	spit,	charcoal	and	ochre,	the	backs	of	his	hands
stained	where	they	had	blocked	the	spray	from	his	lips,	defining	the	shapes	on
the	stone.	Art	was	done	in	solitude,	images	fashioned	without	light,	on	unseen
walls,	when	the	rest	of	the	clan	slept	in	the	outer	caverns.	And	it	was	a	simple
truth,	that	Onrack	had	grown	skilled	in	the	sorcery	of	paint	out	of	that	desire	to
be	apart,	to	be	alone.
Among	a	people	where	solitude	was	as	close	to	a	crime	as	possible.	Where
to	separate	was	to	weaken.	Where	the	very	breaking	of	vision	into	its
components—from	seeing	to	observing,	from	resurrecting	memory	and
reshaping	it	beyond	the	eye’s	reach,	onto	walls	of	stone—demanded	a	fineedged,	potentially	deadly	propensity.
A	poor	bonecaster.	Onrack,	you	were	never	what	you	were	meant	to	be.	And
when	you	broke	the	unwritten	covenant	and	painted	a	truthful	image	of	a	mortal
Imass,	when	you	trapped	that	lovely,	dark	woman	in	time,	there	in	the	cavern
no-one	was	meant	to	find…ah,	then	you	fell	to	the	wrath	of	kin.	Of	Logros
himself,	and	the	First	Sword.
But	he	remembered	the	expression	on	the	young	face	of	Onos	T’oolan,
when	he	had	first	looked	upon	the	painting	of	his	sister.	Wonder	and	awe,	and	a
resurgence	of	an	abiding	love—Onrack	was	certain	that	he	had	seen	such	in	the
First	Sword’s	face,	was	certain	that	others	had,	as	well,	though	of	course	none
spoke	of	it.	The	law	had	been	broken,	and	would	be	answered	with	severity.
He	never	knew	if	Kilava	had	herself	gone	to	see	the	painting;	had	never
known	if	she	had	been	angered,	or	had	seen	sufficient	to	understand	the	blood
of	his	own	heart	that	had	gone	into	that	image.
But	that	is	the	last	memory	I	now	come	to.
‘Your	silences,’	Trull	Sengar	muttered,	‘always	send	shivers	through	me,
T’lan	Imass.’
‘The	night	before	the	Ritual,’	Onrack	replied.	‘Not	far	from	this	place
where	we	now	stand.	I	was	to	have	been	banished	from	my	tribe.	I	had
committed	a	crime	to	which	there	was	no	other	answer.	Instead,	events	eclipsed


the	clans.	Four	Jaghut	tyrants	had	risen	and	had	formed	a	compact.	They
sought	to	destroy	this	land—as	indeed	they	have.’
The	Tiste	Edur	said	nothing,	perhaps	wondering	what,	precisely,	had	been
destroyed.	Along	the	river	there	were	irrigation	ditches,	and	strips	of	rich
green	crops	awaiting	the	season’s	turn.	Roads	and	farmsteads,	the	occasional
temple,	and	only	to	the	southwest,	along	that	horizon,	did	the	broken	ridge	of
treeless	bluffs	mar	the	scene.
‘I	was	in	the	cavern—in	the	place	of	my	crime,’	Onrack	continued	after	a
moment.	‘In	darkness,	of	course.	My	last	night,	I’d	thought,	among	my	own
kind.	Though	in	truth	I	was	already	alone,	driven	from	the	camp	to	this	final
place	of	solitude.	And	then	someone	came.	A	touch.	A	body,	warm.	Soft	beyond
belief—no,	not	my	wife,	she	had	been	among	the	first	to	shun	me,	for	what	I
had	done,	for	the	betrayal	it	had	meant.	No,	a	woman	unknown	to	me	in	the
darkness…’
Was	it	her?	I	will	never	know.	She	was	gone	in	the	morning,	gone	from	all
of	us,	even	as	the	Ritual	was	proclaimed	and	the	clans	gathered.	She	defied	the
call—no,	more	horrible	yet,	she	had	killed	her	own	kin,	all	but	Onos	himself.	He
had	managed	to	drive	her	off—the	truest	measure	of	his	extraordinary	martial
prowess.
Was	it	her?	Was	there	blood	unseen	on	her	hands?	That	dried,	crumbled
powder	I	found	on	my	own	skin—which	I’d	thought	had	come	from	the
overturned	bowl	of	paint.	Fled	from	Onos…to	me,	in	my	shameful	cave.
And	who	did	I	hear	in	the	passage	beyond?	In	the	midst	of	our	lovemaking,
did	someone	come	upon	us	and	see	what	I	myself	could	not?
‘You	need	say	no	more,	Onrack,’	Trull	said	softly.
True.	And	were	I	mortal	flesh,	you	would	see	me	weep,	and	thus	say	what
you	have	just	said.	Thus,	my	grief	is	not	lost	to	your	eyes,	Trull	Sengar.	And	yet
still	you	ask	why	I	proclaimed	my	vow…
‘The	trail	of	the	renegades	is…fresh,’	Onrack	said	after	a	moment.
Trull	half	smiled.	‘And	you	enjoy	killing.’
‘Artistry	finds	new	forms,	Edur.	It	defies	being	silenced.’	The	T’lan	Imass
slowly	turned	to	face	him.	‘Of	course,	changes	have	come	to	us.	I	am	no
longer	free	to	pursue	this	hunt…unless	you	wish	the	same.’
Trull	grimaced,	scanned	the	lands	to	the	southwest.	‘Well,	it’s	not	as
inviting	a	prospect	as	it	once	was,	I’ll	grant	you.	But,	Onrack,	these	renegades
are	agents	in	the	betrayal	of	my	people,	and	I	mean	to	discover	as	much	as	I
can	of	their	role.	Thus,	we	must	find	them.’
‘And	speak	with	them.’
‘Speak	with	them	first,	aye,	and	then	you	can	kill	them.’


‘I	no	longer	believe	I	am	capable	of	that,	Trull	Sengar.	I	am	too	badly
damaged.	Even	so,	Monok	Ochem	and	Ibra	Gholan	are	pursuing	us.	They	will
suffice.’
The	Tiste	Edur ’s	head	had	turned	at	this.	‘Just	the	two	of	them?	You	are
certain?’
‘My	powers	are	diminished,	but	yes,	I	believe	so.’
‘How	close?’
‘It	does	not	matter.	They	withhold	their	desire	for	vengeance	against	me…
so	that	I	might	lead	them	to	those	they	have	hunted	from	the	very	beginning.’
‘They	suspect	you	will	join	the	renegades,	don’t	they?’
‘Broken	kin.	Aye,	they	do.’
‘And	will	you?’
Onrack	studied	the	Tiste	Edur	for	a	moment.	‘Only	if	you	do,	Trull
Sengar.’
	
They	were	at	the	very	edge	of	cultivated	land,	and	so	it	was	relatively	easy	to
avoid	contact	with	any	of	the	local	residents.	The	lone	road	they	crossed	was
empty	of	life	in	both	directions	for	as	far	as	they	could	see.	Beyond	the
irrigated	fields,	the	rugged	natural	landscape	reasserted	itself.	Tufts	of	grasses,
sprawls	of	water-smoothed	gravel	tracking	down	dry	gulches	and	ravines,	the
occasional	guldindha	tree.
The	hills	ahead	were	saw-toothed,	the	facing	side	clawed	into	near	cliffs.
Those	hills	were	where	the	T’lan	Imass	had	broken	the	ice	sheets,	the	first
place	of	defiance.	To	protect	the	holy	sites,	the	hidden	caves,	the	flint	quarries.
Where,	now,	the	weapons	of	the	fallen	were	placed.
Weapons	these	renegades	would	reclaim.	There	was	no	provenance	to	the
sorcery	investing	those	stone	blades,	at	least	with	respect	to	Tellann.	They
would	feed	the	ones	who	held	them,	provided	they	were	kin	to	the	makers—or
indeed	made	by	those	very	hands	long	ago.	Imass,	then,	since	the	art	among	the
mortal	peoples	was	long	lost.	Also,	finding	those	weapons	would	give	the
renegades	their	final	freedom,	severing	the	power	of	Tellann	from	their
bodies.
‘You	spoke	of	betraying	your	clan,’	Trull	Sengar	said	as	they	approached
the	hills.	‘These	seem	to	be	old	memories,	Onrack.’
‘Perhaps	we	are	destined	to	repeat	our	crimes,	Trull	Sengar.	Memories
have	returned	to	me—all	that	I	had	thought	lost.	I	do	not	know	why.’
‘The	severing	of	the	Ritual?’
‘Possibly.’


‘What	was	your	crime?’
‘I	trapped	a	woman	in	time.	Or	so	it	seemed.	I	painted	her	likeness	in	a
sacred	cave.	It	is	now	my	belief	that,	in	so	doing,	I	was	responsible	for	the
terrible	murders	that	followed,	for	her	leaving	the	clan.	She	could	not	join	in
the	Ritual	that	made	us	immortal,	for	by	my	hand	she	had	already	become	so.
Did	she	know	this?	Was	this	the	reason	for	her	defying	Logros	and	the	First
Sword?	There	are	no	answers	to	that.	What	madness	stole	her	mind,	so	that	she
would	kill	her	closest	kin,	so	that,	indeed,	she	would	seek	to	kill	the	First
Sword	himself,	her	own	brother?’
‘A	woman	not	your	mate,	then.’
‘No.	She	was	a	bonecaster.	A	Soletaken.’
‘Yet	you	loved	her.’
A	lopsided	shrug.	‘Obsession	is	its	own	poison,	Trull	Sengar.’
A	narrow	goat	trail	led	up	into	the	range,	steep	and	winding	in	its	ascent.
They	began	climbing.
‘I	would	object,’	the	Tiste	Edur	said,	‘to	this	notion	of	being	doomed	to
repeat	our	mistakes,	Onrack.	Are	no	lessons	learned?	Does	not	experience	lead
to	wisdom?’
‘Trull	Sengar.	I	have	just	betrayed	Monok	Ochem	and	Ibra	Gholan.	I	have
betrayed	the	T’lan	Imass,	for	I	chose	not	to	accept	my	fate.	Thus,	the	same
crime	as	the	one	I	committed	long	ago.	I	have	always	hungered	for	solitude
from	my	kind.	In	the	realm	of	the	Nascent,	I	was	content.	As	I	was	in	the	sacred
caves	that	lie	ahead.’
‘Content?	And	now,	at	this	moment?’
Onrack	was	silent	for	a	time.	‘When	memories	have	returned,	Trull
Sengar,	solitude	is	an	illusion,	for	every	silence	is	filled	by	a	clamorous	search
for	meaning.’
‘You’re	sounding	more…mortal	with	every	day	that	passes,	friend.’
‘Flawed,	you	mean.’
The	Tiste	Edur	grunted.	‘Even	so.	Yet	look	at	what	you	are	doing	right
now,	Onrack.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
Trull	Sengar	paused	on	the	trail	and	looked	at	the	T’lan	Imass.	His	smile
was	sad.	‘You’re	returning	home.’
	
A	short	distance	away	were	camped	the	Tiste	Liosan.	Battered,	but	alive.	Which
was,	Malachar	reflected,	at	least	something.
Strange	stars	gleamed	overhead,	their	light	wavering,	as	if	brimming	with


tears.	The	landscape	stretching	out	beneath	them	seemed	a	lifeless	wasteland	of
weathered	rock	and	sand.
The	fire	they	had	built	in	the	lee	of	a	humped	mesa	had	drawn	strange
moths	the	size	of	small	birds,	as	well	as	a	host	of	other	flying	creatures,
including	winged	lizards.	A	swarm	of	flies	had	descended	on	them	earlier,
biting	viciously	before	vanishing	as	quickly	as	they	had	come.	And	now,	those
bites	seemed	to	crawl,	as	if	the	insects	had	left	something	behind.
There	was,	to	Malachar ’s	mind,	an	air	of…unwelcome	to	this	realm.	He
scratched	at	one	of	the	lumps	on	his	arm,	hissed	as	he	felt	something	squirm
beneath	the	hot	skin.	Turning	back	to	the	fire,	he	studied	his	seneschal.
Jorrude	knelt	beside	the	hearth,	head	lowered—a	position	that	had	not
changed	in	some	time—and	Malachar ’s	disquiet	deepened.	Enias	squatted	close
by	the	seneschal,	ready	to	move	if	yet	another	fit	of	anguish	overwhelmed	his
master,	but	those	disturbing	sessions	were	arriving	ever	less	frequently.	Orenas
remained	guarding	the	horses,	and	Malachar	knew	he	stood	with	sword	drawn
in	the	darkness	beyond	the	fire’s	light.
There	would	be	an	accounting	one	day,	he	knew,	with	the	T’lan	Imass.	The
Tiste	Liosan	had	proceeded	with	the	ritual	in	good	faith.	They	had	been	too
open.	Never	trust	a	corpse.	Malachar	did	not	know	if	such	a	warning	was	found
in	the	sacred	text	of	Osric’s	Visions.	If	not,	he	would	see	that	it	was	added	to	the
collected	wisdom	of	the	Tiste	Liosan.	When	we	return.	If	we	return.
Jorrude	slowly	straightened.	His	face	was	ravaged	with	grief.	‘The
Guardian	is	dead,’	he	announced.	‘Our	realm	is	assailed,	but	our	brothers	and
sisters	have	been	warned	and	even	now	ride	out	to	the	gates.	The	Tiste	Liosan
will	hold.	Until	Osric’s	return,	we	shall	hold.’	He	slowly	swung	to	face	each	of
them	in	turn,	including	Orenas	who	silently	appeared	out	of	the	gloom.	‘For
us,	another	task.	The	one	we	were	assigned	to	complete.	On	this	realm,
somewhere,	we	will	find	the	trespassers.	The	thieves	of	the	Fire.	I	have	quested,
and	they	have	never	been	closer	to	my	senses.	They	are	in	this	world,	and	we
shall	find	them.’
Malachar	waited,	for	he	knew	there	was	more.
Jorrude	then	smiled.	‘My	brothers.	We	know	nothing	of	this	place.	But	that
is	a	disadvantage	that	will	prove	temporary,	for	I	have	also	sensed	the	presence
of	an	old	friend	to	the	Tiste	Liosan.	Not	far	away.	We	shall	seek	him	out—our
first	task—and	ask	him	to	acquaint	us	with	the	rigours	of	this	land.’
‘Who	is	this	old	friend,	Seneschal?’	Enias	asked.
‘The	Maker	of	Time,	Brother	Enias.’
Malachar	slowly	nodded.	A	friend	of	the	Tiste	Liosan	indeed.	Slayer	of	the
Ten	Thousand.	Icarium.


‘Orenas,’	Jorrude	said,	‘prepare	our	horses.’


Chapter	Seventeen

Seven	faces	in	the	rock
Six	faces	turned	to	the	Teblor
One	remains	Unfound
Mother	to	the	tribe	of	ghosts—
the	Teblor	children
we	were	told
to	turn	away
MOTHER’S	PRAYER	OF	GIVING
AMONG	THE	T EBLOR
Karsa	Orlong	was	no	stranger	to	stone.	Raw	copper	gouged	from
outcroppings,	tin	and	their	mating	that	was	bronze,	such	materials	had	their
place.	But	wood	and	stone	were	the	words	of	the	hands,	the	sacred	shaping	of
will.
Parallel	flakes,	long	and	thin,	translucent	slivers	punched	away	from	the
blade,	leaving	ripples	reaching	across,	from	edge	to	wavy	spine.	Smaller
flakes	removed	from	the	twin	edges,	first	one	side,	then	flipping	the	blade	over
between	blows,	back	and	forth,	all	the	way	up	the	length.
To	fight	with	such	a	weapon	would	demand	changes	to	the	style	with	which
Karsa	was	most	familiar.	Wood	flexed,	slid	with	ease	over	shield	rims,	skipped
effortlessly	along	out-thrust	sword-blades.	This	flint	sword’s	serrated	edges
would	behave	differently,	and	he	would	have	to	adjust,	especially	given	its
massive	weight	and	length.
The	handle	proved	the	most	challenging.	Flint	did	not	welcome	roundness,
and	the	less	angular	the	handle	became,	the	less	stable	the	striking	platforms.
For	the	pommel	he	worked	the	stone	into	a	step-fractured,	oversized	diamond
shape—the	nearly	right-angled	step-fractures	would	normally	be	viewed	as
dangerous	flaws,	inviting	a	focus	for	shattering	energies,	but	the	gods	had
promised	to	make	the	weapon	unbreakable,	so	Karsa	dismissed	his	instinctive
worry.	He	would	wait	until	he	found	suitable	materials	for	a	cross-hilt.


He	had	no	idea	how	much	time	passed	during	his	making	of	the	sword.	All
other	considerations	vanished	for	him—he	felt	no	hunger,	no	thirst,	and	did
not	notice	as	the	walls	of	the	cavern	grew	slick	with	condensation,	as	the
temperature	ever	rose,	until	both	he	and	the	stone	were	sheathed	in	sweat.	He
was	also	unmindful	of	the	fire	in	the	boulder-lined	hearth	that	burned
ceaselessly,	unfuelled,	the	flames	flickering	with	strange	colours.
The	sword	commanded	all.	The	feel	of	his	companion	ghosts	resonated
from	the	blade	into	his	fingertips,	then	along	every	bone	and	muscle	in	his
body.	Bairoth	Gild,	whose	cutting	irony	seemed	to	have	somehow	infused	the
weapon,	as	had	Delum	Thord’s	fierce	loyalty—these	were	unexpected	gifts,	a
mysterious	contortion	of	themes,	of	aspects,	that	imbued	a	personality	to	the
sword.
Among	the	legends	there	were	songs	celebrating	cherished	weapons	and
the	Teblor	heroes	who	wielded	them.	Karsa	had	always	held	that	the	notion	of
weapons	possessing	wills	of	their	own	was	little	more	than	a	poet’s	conceit.
And	those	heroes	who	had	betrayed	their	blades	and	so	suffered	tragic	ends,
well,	in	each	tale,	Karsa	had	no	difficulty	in	citing	other,	more	obvious	flaws
in	their	actions,	sufficient	to	explain	the	hero’s	demise.
The	Teblor	never	passed	down	weapons	to	heirs—all	possessions
accompanied	the	one	who	had	died,	for	what	worth	a	ghost	bereft	of	all	it	had
acquired	in	its	mortal	life?
The	flint	sword	that	found	shape	in	Karsa’s	hands	was	therefore	unlike
anything	he	had	known—or	heard	of—before.	It	rested	on	the	ground	before
him,	strangely	naked	despite	the	leather	he	had	wrapped	around	the	grip.	No
hilt,	no	scabbard.	Massive	and	brutal,	yet	beautiful	in	its	symmetry,	despite	the
streaks	of	blood	left	by	his	lacerated	hands.
He	became	aware	of	the	searing	heat	in	the	cavern,	and	slowly	looked	up.
The	seven	gods	stood	facing	him	in	a	flattened	crescent,	the	hearth’s
flames	flickering	across	their	battered,	broken	bodies.	They	held	weapons	to
match	the	one	now	lying	before	him,	though	scaled	down	to	suit	their	squat
forms.
‘You	have	come	in	truth,’	Karsa	observed.
The	one	he	knew	as	Urugal	replied,	‘We	have.	We	are	now	free	of	the
Ritual’s	bindings.	The	chains,	Karsa	Orlong,	are	broken.’
Another	spoke	in	a	low,	rasping	voice.	‘The	Warren	of	Tellann	has	found
your	sword,	Karsa	Orlong.’	The	god’s	neck	was	mangled,	broken,	the	head
fallen	onto	a	shoulder	and	barely	held	in	place	by	muscle	and	tendons.	‘It	shall
never	shatter.’
Karsa	grunted.	‘There	are	broken	weapons	in	the	caverns	beyond.’


‘Elder	sorcery,’	Urugal	answered.	‘Inimical	warrens.	Our	people	have
fought	many	wars.’
‘You	T’lan	Imass	have	indeed,’	the	Teblor	warrior	said.	‘I	walked	upon
stairs	made	of	your	kin.	I	have	seen	your	kind,	fallen	in	such	numbers	as	to
defy	comprehension.’	He	scanned	the	seven	creatures	standing	before	him.
‘What	battle	took	you?’
Urugal	shrugged.	‘It	is	of	no	significance,	Karsa	Orlong.	A	struggle	of
long	ago,	an	enemy	now	dust,	a	failure	best	forgotten.	We	have	known	wars
beyond	counting,	and	what	have	they	achieved?	The	Jaghut	were	doomed	to
extinction—we	but	hastened	the	inevitable.	Other	enemies	announced
themselves	and	stood	in	our	path.	We	were	indifferent	to	their	causes,	none	of
which	was	sufficient	to	turn	us	aside.	And	so	we	slaughtered	them.	Again	and
again.	Wars	without	meaning,	wars	that	changed	virtually	nothing.	To	live	is	to
suffer.	To	exist—even	as	we	do—is	to	resist.’
‘This	is	all	that	was	learned,	Karsa	Orlong,’	said	the	T’lan	Imass	woman
known	as	’Siballe.	‘In	its	totality.	Stone,	sea,	forest,	city—and	every	creature
that	ever	lived—all	share	the	same	struggle.	Being	resists	unbeing.	Order	wars
against	the	chaos	of	dissolution,	of	disorder.	Karsa	Orlong,	this	is	the	only
worthy	truth,	the	greatest	of	all	truths.	What	do	the	gods	themselves	worship,
but	perfection?	The	unattainable	victory	over	nature,	over	nature’s	uncertainty.
There	are	many	words	for	this	struggle.	Order	against	chaos,	structure	against
dissolution,	light	against	dark,	life	against	death.	But	they	all	mean	the	same
thing.’
The	broken-necked	T’lan	Imass	spoke	in	a	whisper,	his	words	a	droning
chant.	‘The	ranag	has	fallen	lame.	Is	distanced	from	the	herd.	Yet	walks	on	in
its	wake.	Seeking	the	herd’s	protection.	Time	will	heal.	Or	weaken.	Two
possibilities.	But	the	lame	ranag	knows	naught	but	stubborn	hope.	For	that	is	its
nature.	The	ay	have	seen	it	and	now	close.	The	prey	is	still	strong.	But	alone.
The	ay	know	weakness.	Like	a	scent	on	the	cold	wind.	They	run	with	the
stumbling	ranag.	And	drive	it	away	from	the	herd.	Still,	it	is	stubborn	hope.	It
makes	its	stand.	Head	lowered,	horns	ready	to	crush	ribs,	send	the	enemy
flying.	But	the	ay	are	clever.	Circle	and	attack,	then	spring	away.	Again	and
again.	Hunger	wars	with	stubborn	hope.	Until	the	ranag	is	exhausted.	Bleeding.
Staggering.	Then	the	ay	all	attack	at	once.	Nape	of	neck.	Legs.	Throat.	Until	the
ranag	is	dragged	down.	And	stubborn	hope	gives	way,	Karsa	Orlong.	It	gives
way,	as	it	always	must,	to	mute	inevitability.’
The	Teblor	bared	his	teeth.	‘Yet	your	new	master	would	harbour	that	lame
beast.	Would	offer	it	a	haven.’
‘You	cross	the	bridge	before	we	have	built	it,	Karsa	Orlong,’	Urugal	said.


‘It	seems	Bairoth	Gild	taught	you	how	to	think,	before	he	himself	failed	and	so
died.	You	are	indeed	worthy	of	the	name	Warleader.’
‘Perfection	is	an	illusion,’	’Siballe	said.	‘Thus,	mortal	and	immortal	alike
are	striving	for	what	cannot	be	achieved.	Our	new	master	seeks	to	alter	the
paradigm,	Karsa	Orlong.	A	third	force,	to	change	for	ever	the	eternal	war
between	order	and	dissolution.’
‘A	master	demanding	the	worship	of	imperfection,’	the	Teblor	growled.
’Siballe’s	head	creaked	in	a	nod.	‘Yes.’
Karsa	realized	he	was	thirsty	and	walked	over	to	his	pack,	retrieving	a
waterskin.	He	drank	deep,	then	returned	to	his	sword.	He	closed	both	hands
about	the	grip	and	lifted	it	before	him,	studying	its	rippled	length.
‘An	extraordinary	creation,’	Urugal	said.	‘If	Imass	weapons	could	have	a
god…’
Karsa	smiled	at	the	T’lan	Imass	he	had	once	knelt	before,	in	a	distant	glade,
in	a	time	of	youth—when	the	world	he	saw	was	both	simple	and…perfect.	‘You
are	not	gods.’
‘We	are,’	Urugal	replied.	‘To	be	a	god	is	to	possess	worshippers.’
‘To	guide	them,’	’Siballe	added.
‘You	are	wrong,	both	of	you,’	Karsa	said.	‘To	be	a	god	is	to	know	the
burden	of	believers.	Did	you	protect?	You	did	not.	Did	you	offer	comfort,
solace?	Were	you	possessed	of	compassion?	Even	pity?	To	the	Teblor,	T’lan
Imass,	you	were	slave-masters,	eager	and	hungry,	making	harsh	demands,	and
expecting	cruel	sacrifices—all	to	feed	your	own	desires.	You	were	the
Teblor ’s	unseen	chains.’	His	eyes	settled	on	’Siballe.	‘And	you,	woman,
’Siballe	the	Unfound,	you	were	the	taker	of	children.’
‘Imperfect	children,	Karsa	Orlong,	who	would	otherwise	have	died.	And
they	do	not	regret	my	gifts.’
‘No,	I	would	imagine	not.	The	regret	remains	with	the	mothers	and	fathers
who	surrendered	them.	No	matter	how	brief	a	child’s	life,	the	love	of	the
parents	is	a	power	that	should	not	be	denied.	And	know	this,	’Siballe,	it	is
immune	to	imperfection.’	His	voice	was	harsh	to	his	own	ears,	grating	out
from	a	constricted	throat.	‘Worship	imperfection,	you	said.	A	metaphor	you
made	real	by	demanding	that	those	children	be	sacrificed.	Yet	you	were—and
remain—unmindful	of	the	most	crucial	gift	that	comes	from	worship.	You
have	no	understanding	of	what	it	is	to	ease	the	burdens	of	those	who	would
worship	you.	But	even	that	is	not	your	worst	crime.	No.	You	then	gave	us	your
own	burdens.’	He	shifted	his	gaze.	‘Tell	me,	Urugal,	what	have	the	Teblor	done
to	deserve	that?’
‘Your	own	people	have	forgotten—’


‘Tell	me.’
Urugal	shrugged.	‘You	failed.’
Karsa	stared	at	the	battered	god,	unable	to	speak.	The	sword	trembled	in
his	hands.	He	had	held	it	up	for	all	this	time,	and	now,	finally,	its	weight
threatened	to	drag	his	arms	down.	He	fixed	his	eyes	on	the	weapon,	then	slowly
lowered	the	tip	to	rest	on	the	stone	floor.
‘We	too	failed,	once,	long	ago,’	’Siballe	said.	‘Such	things	cannot	be
undone.	Thus,	you	may	surrender	to	it,	and	so	suffer	beneath	its	eternal
torment.	Or	you	can	choose	to	free	yourself	of	the	burden.	Karsa	Orlong,	our
answer	to	you	is	simple:	to	fail	is	to	reveal	a	flaw.	Face	that	revelation,	do	not
turn	your	back	on	it,	do	not	make	empty	vows	to	never	repeat	your	mistakes.	It
is	done.	Celebrate	it!	That	is	our	answer,	and	indeed	is	the	answer	shown	us	by
the	Crippled	God.’
The	tension	drained	from	Karsa’s	shoulders.	He	drew	a	deep	breath,
released	it	slowly.	‘Very	well.	To	you,	and	to	the	Crippled	God,	I	now	give	my
answer.’
Rippled	stone	made	no	silent	passage	through	the	air.	Instead,	it	roared,
like	pine	needles	exploding	into	flame.	Up,	over	Karsa’s	head,	wheeling	in	a
sliding	circle	that	then	swept	down	and	across.
The	edge	taking	’Siballe	between	left	shoulder	and	neck.	Bones	snapping
as	the	massive	blade	ploughed	through,	diagonally,	across	the	chest,	severing
the	spine,	down	and	through	the	ribcage,	sweeping	clear	just	above	her	right
hip.
She	had	lifted	her	own	sword	to	intercept	at	some	point,	and	it	had
shattered,	flinging	shards	and	slivers	into	the	air—Karsa	had	not	even	felt	the
impact.
He	whipped	the	huge	blade	in	a	curving	arc	in	his	follow-through,	lifting	it
to	poise,	suddenly	motionless,	over	his	head.
The	ruined	form	that	was	’Siballe	collapsed	in	clattering	pieces	onto	the
stone	floor.	The	T’lan	Imass	had	been	cut	in	half.
The	remaining	six	had	raised	their	own	weapons,	but	none	moved	to	attack.
Karsa	snarled.	‘Come	ahead,	then.’
‘Will	you	now	destroy	the	rest	of	us?’	Urugal	asked.
‘Her	army	of	foundlings	will	follow	me,’	the	Teblor	growled,	sneering
down	at	’Siballe.	Then	he	glared	up	once	more.	‘You	will	leave	my	people—
leave	the	glade.	You	are	done	with	us,	T’lan	Imass.	I	have	delivered	you	here.	I
have	freed	you.	If	you	ever	appear	before	me	again,	I	will	destroy	you.	Walk
the	dreams	of	the	tribal	elders,	and	I	will	come	hunting	you.	And	I	shall	not
relent.	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	of	the	Uryd,	of	the	Teblor	Thelomen	Toblakai,	so


avow.’	He	took	a	step	closer,	and	the	six	T’lan	Imass	flinched.	‘You	used	us.
You	used	me.	And,	for	my	reward,	what	did	you	just	offer?’
‘We	sought—’
‘You	offered	a	new	set	of	chains.	Now,	leave	this	place.	You	have	all	you
desired.	Get	out.’
The	six	T’lan	Imass	walked	towards	the	cave	mouth.	A	momentary
occluding	of	the	sunlight	spilling	into	the	front	cavern,	then	they	were	gone.
Karsa	lowered	his	sword.	He	looked	down	at	’Siballe.
‘Unexpected,’	she	said.
The	warrior	grunted.	‘I’d	heard	you	T’lan	Imass	were	hard	to	kill.’
‘Impossible,	Karsa	Orlong.	We…persist.	Will	you	leave	me	here?’
‘There	is	to	be	no	oblivion	for	you?’
‘Once,	long	ago,	a	sea	surrounded	these	hills.	Such	a	sea	would	free	me	to
the	oblivion	you	speak	of.	You	return	me	to	a	fate—and	a	punishment—that	I
have	spent	millennia	seeking	to	escape.	I	suppose	that	is	apt	enough.’
‘What	of	your	new	master,	this	Crippled	God?’
‘He	has	abandoned	me.	It	would	appear	that	there	are	acceptable	levels	of
imperfection—and	unacceptable	levels	of	imperfection.	I	have	lost	my
usefulness.’
‘Another	god	that	understands	nothing	of	what	it	is	to	be	a	god,’	Karsa
rumbled,	walking	over	to	his	pack.
‘What	will	you	do	now,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘I	go	in	search	of	a	horse.’
‘Ah,	a	Jhag	horse.	Yes,	they	can	be	found	to	the	southwest	of	here,	on	the
odhan.	Rare.	You	may	be	searching	for	a	long	time.’
The	Teblor	shrugged.	He	loosened	the	strings	that	closed	the	mouth	of	the
pack	and	walked	over	to	the	shambles	that	was	’Siballe.	He	lifted	the	part	of	her
containing	the	head	and	right	shoulder	and	arm.
‘What	are	you	doing?’
‘Do	you	need	the	rest?’
‘No.	What—’
Karsa	pushed	her	head,	shoulder	and	arm	into	his	pack,	then	drew	the
strings	once	more.	He	would	need	a	harness	and	a	scabbard	for	the	sword,	but
that	would	have	to	wait.	He	shrugged	into	the	pack’s	straps,	then	straightened
and	leaned	the	sword	over	his	right	shoulder.
A	final	glance	around.
The	hearth	still	raged	with	a	sorcerous	fire,	though	it	had	begun	flickering
more	rapidly	now,	as	if	using	up	the	last	of	its	unseen	fuel.	He	thought	about
kicking	gravel	over	it	to	douse	it,	then	shrugged	and	turned	to	the	cave	mouth.


As	he	came	to	the	entrance,	two	figures	suddenly	rose	before	him,
blocking	the	light.
Karsa’s	sword	whipped	across	his	path,	the	flat	of	the	blade	thundering
against	both	figures,	sending	them	flying	off	the	ledge.
‘Get	out	of	my	way,’	the	warrior	growled,	stepping	out	into	the	sunlight.
He	spared	neither	intruder	another	glance	as	he	set	off	along	the	trail,
where	it	angled	southwest.
	
Trull	Sengar	groaned,	then	opened	his	eyes.	He	lifted	his	head,	wincing	at	the
countless	sharp	pains	pressing	into	his	back.	That	flint	sword	had	thrown	him
down	a	scree	of	stone	chips…although	it	had	been	hapless	Onrack	who	had
taken	the	brunt	of	the	blow.	Even	so,	his	chest	ached,	and	he	feared	his	ribs
were	bruised,	if	not	cracked.
The	T’lan	Imass	was	awkwardly	regaining	its	feet	a	dozen	paces	away.
Trull	spat	and	said,	‘Had	I	known	the	door	was	barred,	I	would	have
knocked	first.	That	was	a	damned	Thelomen	Toblakai.’
The	Tiste	Edur	saw	Onrack’s	head	snap	round	to	stare	back	up	at	the	cave.
‘What	is	it?’	Trull	demanded.	‘He’s	coming	down	to	finish	us?’
‘No,’	the	T’lan	Imass	replied.	‘In	that	cave…the	Warren	of	Tellann
lingers…’
‘What	of	it?’
Onrack	began	climbing	the	rock	slide	toward	the	cavern’s	mouth.
Hissing	his	frustration,	Trull	clambered	upward	and	followed,	slowly,
pausing	every	few	steps	until	he	was	able	to	find	his	breath	once	more.
When	he	entered	the	cave	he	gave	a	shout	of	alarm.	Onrack	was	standing
inside	a	fire,	the	rainbow-coloured	flames	engulfing	him.	And	the	T’lan	Imass
held,	in	its	right	hand,	the	shattered	remains	of	another	of	its	kind.
Trull	stepped	forward,	then	his	feet	skidded	out	from	under	him	and	he	fell
hard	onto	a	bed	of	sharp	flint	chips.	Pain	thundered	from	his	ribs,	and	it	was
some	time	before	he	could	breathe	once	more.	Cursing,	he	rolled	onto	his	side
—gingerly—then	carefully	climbed	upright.	The	air	was	hot	as	a	forge.
Then	the	cavern	was	suddenly	dark—the	strange	fire	had	gone	out.
A	pair	of	hands	closed	on	Trull’s	shoulders.
‘The	renegades	have	fled,’	said	Onrack.	‘But	they	are	close.	Come.’
‘Right,	lead	on,	friend.’
A	moment	before	they	emerged	into	the	sunlight,	sudden	shock	raced
through	Trull	Sengar.
A	pair	of	hands.


	
Karsa	skirted	the	valley	side,	making	his	way	along	what	passed	for	a	trail.
Countless	rockslides	had	buried	it	every	ten	paces	or	so,	forcing	him	to
scramble	across	uncertain,	shifting	gravel,	raising	clouds	of	dust	in	his	wake.
On	second	consideration,	he	realized	that	one	of	the	two	strangers	who	had
blocked	his	exit	from	the	cave	had	been	a	T’lan	Imass.	Not	surprising,	since	the
entire	valley,	with	all	its	quarries,	mines	and	tombs,	was	a	site	holy	to	them…
assuming	anything	could	be	holy	to	creatures	that	were	undead.	And	the	other
—not	human	at	all.	But	familiar	none	the	less.	Ah,	like	the	ones	on	the	ship.	The
grey-skinned	ones	I	killed.
Perhaps	he	should	retrace	his	route.	His	sword	had	yet	to	drink	real	blood,
after	all.	Barring	his	own,	of	course.
Ahead,	the	trail	cut	sharply	upward,	out	of	the	valley.	Thoughts	of	having
to	repeat	this	dust-fouled,	treacherous	route	decided	him.	He	would	save	the
blooding	of	his	sword	for	more	worthy	enemies.	He	made	his	way	upward.
It	was	clear	the	six	T’lan	Imass	had	not	taken	this	route.	Fortunate	for	them.
He	had	lost	his	patience	with	their	endless	words,	especially	when	the	deeds
they	had	done	shouted	louder,	loud	enough	to	overwhelm	their	pathetic
justifications.	He	reached	the	crest	and	pulled	himself	onto	level	ground.	The
vista	stretching	to	the	southwest	was	as	untamed	as	any	place	Karsa	had	yet	to
see	in	Seven	Cities.	No	signs	of	civilization	were	apparent—no	evidence	at	all
that	this	land	had	ever	been	broken.	Tall	prairie	grasses	waved	in	the	hot	wind,
cloaking	low,	rolling	hills	that	continued	on	to	the	horizon.	Clumps	of	low,
bushy	trees	filled	the	basins,	flickering	dusty	green	and	grey	as	the	wind	shook
their	leaves.
The	Jhag	Odhan.	He	knew,	suddenly,	that	this	land	would	capture	his	heart
with	its	primal	siren	call.	Its	scale…matched	his	own,	in	ways	he	could	not
define.	Thelomen	Toblakai	have	known	this	place,	have	walked	it	before	me.	A
truth,	though	he	was	unable	to	explain	how	he	knew	it	to	be	so.
He	lifted	his	sword.	‘Bairoth	Delum—so	I	name	you.	Witness.	The	Jhag
Odhan.	So	unlike	our	mountain	fastnesses.	To	this	wind	I	give	your	name—see
how	it	races	out	to	brush	the	grasses,	to	roll	against	the	hill	and	through	the
trees.	I	give	this	land	your	name,	Bairoth	Delum.’
That	warm	wind	sang	against	the	sword’s	rippled	blade	with	moaning
cadence.
A	flash	of	movement	in	the	grasses,	a	thousand	paces	distant.	Wolves,	fur
the	colour	of	honey,	long-limbed,	taller	than	any	he	had	ever	before	seen.
Karsa	smiled.


He	set	forth.
The	grasses	reached	to	just	beneath	his	chest,	the	ground	underfoot	hardpacked	between	the	knotted	roots.	Small	creatures	rustled	continually	from	his
path,	and	he	startled	the	occasional	deer—a	small	breed,	reaching	no	higher
than	his	knees,	that	hissed	like	an	arrow	between	the	stalks	as	it	fled.
One	proved	not	quite	fast	enough	to	avoid	his	scything	blade,	and	Karsa
would	eat	well	this	night.	Thus,	his	sword’s	virgin	thirst	was	born	of	necessity,
not	the	rage	of	battle.	He	wondered	if	the	ghosts	had	known	displeasure	at	such
an	ignoble	beginning.	They	had	surrendered	their	ability	to	communicate	with
him	upon	entering	the	stone,	though	Karsa’s	imagination	had	no	difficulty	in
finding	Bairoth’s	sarcastic	commentary,	should	he	seek	it.	Delum’s	measured
wisdom	was	more	difficult,	yet	valued	all	the	more	for	that.
The	sun	swept	its	even	arc	across	the	cloudless	sky	as	he	marched	on.
Towards	dusk	he	saw	bhederin	herds	to	the	west,	and,	two	thousand	paces
ahead,	a	herd	of	striped	antelope	crested	a	hilltop	to	watch	him	for	a	time,
before	wheeling	as	one	and	vanishing	from	sight.
The	western	horizon	was	a	fiery	conflagration	when	he	reached	the	place
where	they	had	stood.
Where	a	figure	awaited	him.
The	grasses	had	been	flattened	in	a	modest	circle.	A	three-legged	brazier
squatted	in	its	centre,	filled	with	orange-glowing	pieces	of	bhederin	dung	that
cast	forth	no	smoke.	Seated	behind	it	was	a	Jaghut.	Bent	and	gaunt	to	the	point
of	emaciation,	wearing	ragged	skins	and	hides,	long	grey	hair	hanging	in
strands	over	a	blotched,	wrinkled	brow,	eyes	the	colour	of	the	surrounding
grass.
The	Jaghut	glanced	up	as	Karsa	approached,	offering	the	Teblor
something	between	a	grimace	and	a	smile,	his	yellowed	tusks	gleaming.	‘You
have	made	a	mess	of	that	deer	skin,	Toblakai.	I	will	take	it	none	the	less,	in
exchange	for	this	cookfire.’
‘Agreed,’	Karsa	replied,	dropping	the	carcass	beside	the	brazier.
‘Aramala	contacted	me,	and	so	I	have	come	to	meet	you.	You	have	done
her	a	noble	service,	Toblakai.’
Karsa	set	down	his	pack	and	squatted	before	the	brazier.	‘I	hold	no	loyalty
to	the	T’lan	Imass.’
The	Jaghut	reached	across	and	collected	the	deer.	A	small	knife	flashed	in
his	hand	and	he	began	cutting	just	above	the	animal’s	small	hoofs.	‘An
expression	of	their	gratitude,	after	she	fought	alongside	them	against	the
Tyrants.	As	did	I,	although	I	was	fortunate	enough	to	escape	with	little	more
than	a	broken	spine.	Tomorrow,	I	will	lead	you	to	one	far	less	fortunate	than


either	Aramala	or	myself.’
Karsa	grunted.	‘I	seek	a	Jhag	horse,	not	an	introduction	to	your	friends.’
The	ancient	Jaghut	cackled.	‘Blunt	words.	Thelomen	Toblakai	indeed.	I	had
forgotten,	and	so	lost	my	appreciation.	The	one	I	will	take	you	to	shall	call	out
to	the	wild	horses—and	they	will	come.’
‘A	singular	skill.’
‘Aye,	and	hers	alone,	for	it	was,	by	and	large,	by	her	hand	and	her	will	that
the	horses	came	into	being.’
‘A	breeder,	then.’
‘Of	sorts,’	the	Jaghut	nodded	amicably.	He	began	peeling	the	hide	from	the
deer.	‘The	few	of	my	fallen	kin	still	alive	will	greatly	appreciate	this	skin,
despite	the	damage	wrought	by	your	ghastly	stone	sword.	The	aras	deer	are
fleet,	and	clever.	They	never	use	the	same	trail—ha,	they	do	not	even	make
trails!	And	so	one	cannot	lie	in	wait.	Nor	are	snares	of	any	use.	And	when
pursued,	where	do	they	go?	Why,	into	the	bhederin	herds,	under	the	very	beasts
themselves.	Clever,	I	said.	Very	clever.’
‘I	am	Karsa	Orlong,	of	the	Uryd—’
‘Yes,	yes,	I	know.	From	distant	Genabackis.	Little	different	from	my	fallen
kin,	the	Jhag.	Ignorant	of	your	great	and	noble	history—’
‘Less	ignorant	than	I	once	was.’
‘Good.	I	am	named	Cynnigig,	and	now	you	are	even	less	ignorant.’
Karsa	shrugged.	‘The	name	means	nothing	to	me.’
‘Of	course	not,	it’s	mine.	Was	I	infamous?	No,	though	once	I	aspired	to	be.
Well,	for	a	moment	or	two.	But	then	I	changed	my	mind.	You,	Karsa	Orlong,
you	are	destined	for	infamy.	Perhaps	indeed	you	have	already	achieved	it,	back
in	your	homeland.’
‘I	think	not.	No	doubt	I	am	believed	dead,	and	nothing	of	what	I	did	is
known	to	my	family	or	my	tribe.’
Cynnigig	cut	off	a	haunch	and	threw	it	on	the	flames.	A	cloud	of	smoke
rose	from	the	hissing,	spitting	fire.	‘So	you	might	think,	but	I	would	hazard
otherwise.	Word	travels,	no	matter	what	the	barriers.	The	day	you	return,	you
will	see.’
‘I	care	not	for	fame,’	Karsa	said.	‘I	did	once…’
‘And	then?’
‘I	changed	my	mind.’
Cynnigig	laughed	once	again,	louder	this	time.	‘I	have	brought	wine,	my
young	friend.	In	yonder	chest,	yes,	there.’
Karsa	straightened	and	walked	over.	The	chest	was	massive,	iron-bounded
and	thick-planked,	robust	enough	to	challenge	even	Karsa,	should	he	choose	to


lift	it.	‘This	should	have	wheels	and	a	train	of	oxen,’	the	Teblor	muttered	as	he
crouched	before	it.	‘How	did	you	bring	it	with	you?’
‘I	didn’t.	It	brought	me.’
Games	with	words.	Scowling,	Karsa	lifted	the	lid.
A	single	carafe	of	crystal	stood	in	its	centre,	flanked	by	a	pair	of	chipped
clay	beakers.	The	wine’s	deep	red	colour	gleamed	through	the	transparent
crystal,	bathing	the	otherwise	empty	interior	of	the	chest	with	a	warm,	sunset
hue.	Karsa	stared	down	into	it	for	a	moment,	then	grunted.	‘Aye,	I	can	see	that	it
would	fit	you,	provided	you	curled	up.	You	and	the	wine	and	the	brazier—’
‘The	brazier!	That	would	be	a	hot	journey!’
The	Teblor ’s	scowl	deepened.	‘Unlit,	of	course.’
‘Ah,	yes,	of	course.	Cease	your	gawking,	then,	and	pour	us	some	wine.	I’m
about	to	turn	the	meat	here.’
Karsa	reached	down,	then	snatched	his	hand	back.	‘It’s	cold	in	there!’
‘I	prefer	my	wine	chilled,	even	the	red.	I	prefer	everything	chilled,	in	fact.’
Grimacing,	the	Teblor	picked	up	the	carafe	and	the	two	beakers.	‘Then
someone	must	have	carried	you	here.’
‘Only	if	you	believe	all	that	I	tell	you.	And	all	that	you	see,	Karsa	Orlong.
A	T’lan	Imass	army	marched	by	here,	not	so	long	ago.	Did	they	find	me?	No.
Why?	I	was	hidden	in	my	chest,	of	course.	Did	they	find	the	chest?	No,	because
it	was	a	rock.	Did	they	note	the	rock?	Perhaps.	But	then,	it	was	only	a	rock.
Now,	I	know	what	you’re	thinking,	and	you	would	be	precisely	correct.	The
sorcery	I	speak	of	is	not	Omtose	Phellack.	But	why	would	I	seek	to	employ
Omtose	Phellack,	when	that	is	the	very	scent	the	T’lan	Imass	hunted?	Oh	no.	Is
there	some	cosmic	law	that	Jaghut	can	only	use	Omtose	Phellack?	I’ve	read	a
hundred	thousand	night	skies	and	have	yet	to	see	it	written	there—oh,	plenty	of
other	laws,	but	nothing	approaching	that	one,	neither	in	detail	nor	intent.	Thus
saving	us	the	bloody	recourse	of	finding	a	Forkrul	Assail	to	adjudicate,	and
believe	me,	such	adjudication	is	invariably	bloody.	Rarely	indeed	is	anyone
satisfied.	Rarer	still	that	anyone	is	left	alive.	Is	there	justice	in	such	a	thing,	I
ask	you?	Oh	yes,	perhaps	the	purest	justice	of	all.	On	any	given	day,	the
aggrieved	and	the	aggriever	could	stand	in	each	other ’s	clothes.	Never	a
question	of	right	and	wrong,	in	truth,	simply	one	of	deciding	who	is	least
wrong.	Do	you	grasp—’
‘What	I	grasp,’	Karsa	cut	in,	‘is	the	smell	of	burning	meat.’
‘Ah,	yes.	Rare	are	my	moments	of	discourse—’
‘I	had	no	idea.’
‘—which	cannot	be	said	for	this	meat.	Of	course	you	wouldn’t,	since	we
have	just	met.	But	I	assure	you,	I	have	little	opportunity	to	talk—’


‘There	in	your	chest.’
Cynnigig	grinned.	‘Precisely.	You	have	the	gist	of	it.	Precisely.	Thelomen
Toblakai	indeed.’
Karsa	handed	the	Jaghut	a	beaker	filled	with	wine.	‘Alas,	my	hand	has
warmed	it	some.’
‘I’ll	suffer	the	degradation,	thank	you.	Here,	help	yourself	to	the	deer.
Charcoal	is	good	for	you,	did	you	know	that?	Cleanses	the	digestive	tract,
confounds	the	worms,	turns	your	excrement	black.	Black	as	a	forest	bear ’s.
Recommended	if	you	are	being	pursued,	for	it	will	fool	most,	barring	those
who	have	made	a	study	of	excrement,	of	course.’
‘And	do	such	people	exist?’
‘I	have	no	idea.	I	rarely	get	out.	What	preening	empires	have	risen	only	to
then	fall	beyond	the	Jhag	Odhan?	Pomposity	choking	on	dust,	these	are	cycles
unending	among	short-lived	creatures.	I	do	not	grieve	for	my	own	ignorance.
Why	should	I?	Not	knowing	what	I	have	missed	means	I	do	not	miss	what	I	do
not	know.	How	could	I?	Do	you	see?	Aramala	was	ever	questing	for	such
pointless	knowledge,	and	look	where	it	got	her.	Same	for	Phyrlis,	whom	you
will	meet	tomorrow.	She	can	never	see	beyond	the	leaves	in	front	of	her	face,
though	she	ceaselessly	strives	to	do	so,	as	if	the	vast	panorama	offers
something	other	than	time’s	insectile	crawl.	Empires,	thrones,	tyrants	and
liberators,	a	hundred	thousand	tomes	filled	with	versions	of	the	same
questions,	asked	over	and	over	again.	Will	answers	deliver	their	promised
solace?	I	think	not.	Here,	cook	some	more,	Karsa	Orlong,	and	drink	more
wine—you	see	the	carafe	never	empties.	Clever,	isn’t	it?	Now,	where	was	I?’
‘You	rarely	get	out.’
‘Indeed.	What	preening	empires	have	risen	only	to	then	fall	beyond	the
Jhag	Odhan?	Pomposity	choking…’
Karsa’s	eyes	narrowed	on	the	Jhag	Odhan,	then	he	reached	for	the	wine.
	
A	lone	tree	stood	on	ground	that	was	the	summit	of	a	hill	that	in	turn	abutted	a
larger	hill.	Sheltered	from	the	prevailing	winds,	it	had	grown	vast,	its	bark	thin
and	peeling	as	if	it	was	skin	unable	to	contain	the	muscular	breadth	underneath.
Branches	as	thick	around	as	Karsa’s	thigh	reached	out	from	the	massive,
knotted	trunk.	Its	top	third	was	thickly	leaved,	forming	broad,	flattened
canopies	of	dusty	green.
‘Looks	old,	doesn’t	it?’	Cynnigig	said	as	they	climbed	towards	it,	the
Jaghut	walking	with	a	hooked,	sideways	gait.	‘You	have	no	idea	how	old,	my
young	friend.	No	idea.	I	dare	not	reveal	to	you	the	truth	of	its	antiquity.	Have


you	seen	its	like	before?	I	think	not.	Perhaps	reminiscent	of	the	guldindha,	such
as	can	be	found	here	and	there	across	the	odhan.	Reminiscent,	as	a	ranag	is
reminiscent	of	a	goat.	More	than	simply	a	question	of	stature.	No,	it	is	in	truth	a
question	of	antiquity.	An	Elder	species,	this	tree.	A	sapling	when	an	inland	sea
hissed	salty	sighs	over	this	land.	Tens	of	thousands	of	years,	you	wonder?	No.
Hundreds	of	thousands.	Once,	Karsa	Orlong,	these	were	the	dominant	trees
across	most	of	the	world.	All	things	know	their	time,	and	when	that	time	is
past,	they	vanish—’
‘But	this	one	hasn’t.’
‘No	sharper	an	observance	could	be	made.	And	why,	you	ask?’
‘I	do	not	bother,	for	I	know	you	will	tell	me	in	any	case.’
‘Of	course	I	shall,	for	I	am	of	a	helpful	sort,	a	natural	proclivity.	The
reason,	my	young	friend,	shall	soon	be	made	evident.’
They	clambered	over	the	last	of	the	rise	and	came	to	the	flat	ground,
eternally	shadowed	beneath	the	canopy	and	so	free	of	grasses.	The	tree	and	all
its	branches,	Karsa	now	saw,	were	wrapped	in	spiders’	webs	that	somehow
remained	entirely	translucent	no	matter	how	thickly	woven,	revealed	only	by	a
faint	flickering	reflection.	And	beneath	that	glittering	shroud,	the	face	of	a
Jaghut	stared	back	at	him.
‘Phyrlis,’	Cynnigig	said,	‘this	is	the	one	Aramala	spoke	of,	the	one	seeking
a	worthy	horse.’
The	Jaghut	woman’s	body	remained	visible	here	and	there,	revealing	that
the	tree	had	indeed	grown	around	her.	Yet	a	single	shaft	of	wood	emerged
from	just	behind	her	right	collarbone,	rejoining	the	main	trunk	along	the	side
of	her	head.
‘Shall	I	tell	him	your	story,	Phyrlis?	Of	course,	I	must,	if	only	for	its
remarkability.’
Her	voice	did	not	come	from	her	mouth,	but	sounded,	fluid	and	soft,	inside
Karsa’s	head.	‘Of	course	you	must,	Cynnigig.	It	is	your	nature	to	leave	no	word
unsaid.’
Karsa	smiled,	for	there	was	too	much	affection	in	the	tone	to	lend	the
words	any	edge.
‘My	Thelomen	Toblakai	friend,	a	most	extraordinary	tale,	for	which	true
explanations	remain	beyond	us	all,’	Cynnigig	began,	settling	down	crosslegged	on	the	stony	ground.	‘Dear	Phyrlis	was	a	child—no,	a	babe,	still
suckling	from	her	mother ’s	breast—when	a	band	of	T’lan	Imass	ran	them
down.	The	usual	fate	ensued.	The	mother	was	slain,	and	Phyrlis	was	dealt	with
also	in	the	usual	fashion—spitted	on	a	spear,	the	spear	anchored	into	the	earth.
None	could	have	predicted	what	then	followed,	neither	Jaghut	nor	T’lan	Imass,


for	it	was	unprecedented.	That	spear,	wrought	of	native	wood,	took	what	it
could	of	Phyrlis’s	lifespirit	and	so	was	reborn.	Roots	reached	down	to	grip	the
bedrock,	branches	and	leaves	sprang	anew,	and	in	return	the	wood’s	own
lifespirit	rewarded	the	child.	Together,	then,	they	grew,	escaping	their	relative
fates.	Phyrlis	renews	the	tree,	the	tree	renews	Phyrlis.’
Karsa	set	his	sword’s	point	down	and	leaned	on	it.	‘Yet	she	was	the	maker
of	the	Jhag	horses.’
‘A	small	role,	Karsa	Orlong.	From	my	blood	came	their	longevity.	The	Jhag
horses	breed	infrequently,	insufficient	to	increase,	or	even	maintain,	their
numbers,	were	they	not	so	long-lived.’
‘I	know,	for	the	Teblor—my	own	people,	who	dwell	in	the	mountains	of
north	Genabackis—maintain	herds	of	what	must	be	Jhag	horses.’
‘If	so,	then	I	am	pleased.	They	are	being	hunted	to	extinction	here	on	the
Jhag	Odhan.’
‘Hunted?	By	whom?’
‘By	distant	kin	of	yours,	Thelomen	Toblakai.	Trell.’
Karsa	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	he	scowled.	‘Such	as	the	one	known	as
Mappo?’
‘Yes	indeed.	Mappo	Runt,	who	travels	with	Icarium.	Icarium,	who	carries
arrows	made	from	my	branches.	Who,	each	time	he	visits	me,	remembers	naught
of	the	previous	encounter.	Who	asks,	again	and	again,	for	my	heartwood,	so
that	he	may	fashion	from	it	a	mechanism	to	measure	time,	for	my	heartwood
alone	can	outlive	all	other	constructs.’
‘And	do	you	oblige	him?’	Karsa	asked.
‘No,	for	it	would	kill	me.	Instead,	I	bargain.	A	strong	shaft	for	a	bow.
Branches	for	arrows.’
‘Have	you	no	means	to	defend	yourself,	then?’
‘Against	Icarium,	no-one	has,	Karsa	Orlong.’
The	Teblor	warrior	grunted.	‘I	had	an	argument	with	Icarium,	which
neither	of	us	won.’	He	tapped	his	stone	sword.	‘My	weapon	was	of	wood,	but
now	I	wield	this	one.	The	next	time	we	meet,	even	Mappo	Trell’s	treachery
shall	not	save	Icarium.’
Both	Jaghut	were	silent	for	a	long	moment,	and	Karsa	realized	that	Phyrlis
was	speaking	to	Cynnigig,	for	he	saw	his	expression	twist	with	alarm.	Ochre
eyes	flicked	momentarily	up	to	the	Teblor,	then	away	again.
Finally,	Cynnigig	loosed	a	long	sigh	and	said,	‘Karsa	Orlong,	she	now
calls	upon	the	nearest	herd—the	lone	herd	she	knows	has	come	close	to	this
area	in	answer	to	her	first	summons.	She	had	hoped	for	more—evidence,
perhaps,	of	how	few	Jhag	horses	remain.’


‘How	many	head	in	this	herd?’
‘I	cannot	say,	Karsa	Orlong.	They	usually	number	no	more	than	a	dozen.
Those	that	now	approach	are	perhaps	the	last	left	in	the	Jhag	Odhan.’
Karsa	lifted	his	gaze	suddenly	as	the	noise	of	hoofs	sounded,	rumbling
through	the	ground	underfoot.	‘More	than	a	dozen,	I	think,’	he	murmured.
Cynnigig	clambered	upright,	wincing	with	the	effort.
Movement	in	the	valley	below.	Karsa	swung	around.
The	ground	was	shaking,	the	roar	of	thunder	on	all	sides	now.	The	tree
behind	him	shook	as	if	struck	by	a	sudden	gale.	In	his	mind,	the	Teblor	heard
Phyrlis	cry	out.
The	horses	came	in	their	hundreds.	Grey	as	iron,	larger	even	than	those
Karsa’s	tribe	had	bred.	Streaming,	tossing	manes	of	black.	Stallions,	flinging
their	heads	back	and	bucking	to	clear	a	space	around	them.	Broad-backed
mares,	foals	racing	at	their	flanks.
Hundreds	into	thousands.
The	air	filled	with	dust,	lifting	on	the	wind	and	corkscrewing	skyward	as	if
to	challenge	the	Whirlwind	itself.
More	of	the	wild	horses	topped	the	hill	above	them,	and	the	thunder
suddenly	fell	away	as	every	beast	halted,	forming	a	vast	iron	ring	facing
inward.	Silence,	the	dust	cloud	rolling,	tumbling	away	on	the	wind.
Karsa	faced	the	tree	once	more.	‘It	seems	you	need	not	worry	that	they	near
extinction,	Phyrlis.	I	have	never	seen	so	many	foals	and	yearlings	in	a	herd.
Nor	have	I	ever	before	seen	a	herd	of	this	size.	There	must	ten,	fifteen	thousand
head—and	we	cannot	even	see	all	of	them.’
Phyrlis	seemed	incapable	of	replying.	The	tree’s	branches	still	shook,	the
branches	rattling	in	the	hot	air.
‘You	speak	true,	Karsa	Orlong,’	Cynnigig	rasped,	his	gaze	eerily	intent	on
the	Thelomen	Toblakai.	‘The	herds	have	come	together—and	some	have	come
far	indeed	in	answer	to	the	summons.	But	not	that	of	Phyrlis.	No,	not	in	answer
to	her	call.	But	in	answer	to	yours,	Karsa	Orlong.	And	to	this,	we	have	no
answer.	But	now,	you	must	choose.’
Nodding,	he	turned	to	study	the	horses.
‘Karsa	Orlong,	you	spoke	earlier	of	a	wooden	weapon.	What	kind	of
wood?’
‘Ironwood,	the	only	choice	remaining	to	me.	In	my	homeland,	we	use
bloodwood.’
‘And	blood-oil?’
‘Yes.’
‘Rubbed	into	the	wood.	Blood-oil,	staining	your	hands.	They	can	smell	it,


Karsa	Orlong—’
‘But	I	have	none.’
‘Not	on	you.	In	you.	It	courses	in	your	veins,	Karsa	Orlong.	Bloodwood	has
not	existed	in	the	Jhag	Odhan	for	tens	of	thousands	of	years.	Yet	these	horses
remember.	Now,	you	must	choose.’
‘Bloodwood	and	blood-oil,’	Cynnigig	said.	‘This	is	an	insufficient
explanation,	Phyrlis.’
‘Yes,	it	is.	But	it	is	all	I	have.’
Karsa	left	them	to	their	argument	and,	leaving	his	sword	thrust	upright	in
the	ground,	walked	down	to	the	waiting	horses.	Stallions	tossed	their	heads	at
his	approach	and	the	Teblor	smiled—careful	not	to	show	his	teeth,	knowing
that	they	saw	him	as	predator,	and	themselves	as	his	prey.	Though	they	could
easily	kill	me.	Among	such	numbers	I	would	have	no	chance.	He	saw	one
stallion	that	was	clearly	dominant	among	all	others,	given	the	wide	space
around	it	and	its	stamping,	challenging	demeanour,	and	walked	past	it,
murmuring,	‘Not	you,	proud	one.	The	herd	needs	you	more	than	I	do.’	He
spied	another	stallion,	this	one	just	entering	adulthood,	and	made	his	way
towards	it.	Slowly,	approaching	at	an	angle	so	that	the	horse	could	see	him.
A	mane	and	tail	of	white,	not	black.	Long-limbed,	muscles	rippling	beneath
its	sleek	hide.	Grey	eyes.
Karsa	halted	a	single	pace	away.	He	slowly	reached	out	his	right	hand,	until
his	fingertips	settled	on	the	beast’s	trembling	bridge.	He	began	applying
pressure.	The	stallion	resisted,	backing	up	a	step.	He	pushed	the	head	further
down,	testing	the	flexibility	of	the	neck.	Still	further,	the	neck	bowing,	until	the
horse’s	chin	almost	rested	in	the	space	between	its	breast	bones.
Then	he	withdrew	the	pressure,	maintaining	contact	as	the	stallion	slowly
straightened	its	neck.
‘I	name	you	Havok,’	he	whispered.
He	moved	his	hand	down	until	his	fingertips	rested,	palm	upward,	beneath
its	chin,	then	slowly	walked	backward,	leading	the	stallion	out	from	the	herd.
The	dominant	stallion	screamed	then,	and	the	herd	exploded	into	motion
once	more.	Outward,	dispersing	into	smaller	groups,	thundering	through	the
high	grasses.	Wheeling	around	the	twin	hills,	west	and	south,	out	once	more
into	the	heartland	of	the	Jhag	Odhan.
Havok’s	trembling	had	vanished.	The	beast	walked	at	Karsa’s	pace	as	he
backed	up	the	hillside.
As	he	neared	the	summit,	Cynnigig	spoke	behind	him.	‘Not	even	a	Jaghut
could	so	calm	a	Jhag	horse,	Karsa	Orlong,	as	you	have	done.	Thelomen
Toblakai,	yes,	you	Teblor	are	that	indeed,	yet	you	are	also	unique	among	your


kind.	Thelomen	Toblakai	horse	warriors.	I	had	not	thought	such	a	thing
possible.	Karsa	Orlong,	why	have	the	Teblor	not	conquered	all	of
Genabackis?’
Karsa	glanced	back	at	the	Jaghut.	‘One	day,	Cynnigig,	we	shall.’
‘And	are	you	the	one	who	will	lead	them?’
‘I	am.’
‘We	have	witnessed,	then,	the	birth	of	infamy.’
Karsa	moved	alongside	Havok,	his	hand	running	the	length	of	its	taut	neck.
Witness?	Yes,	you	are	witness.	Even	so,	what	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	shall	shape,	you
cannot	imagine.
No-one	can.
	
Cynnigig	sat	in	the	shade	of	the	tree	that	contained	Phyrlis,	humming	sofly.	It
was	approaching	dusk.	The	Thelomen	Toblakai	was	gone,	with	his	chosen
horse.	He	had	vaulted	onto	its	back	and	ridden	off	without	need	for	saddle	or
even	reins.	The	herds	had	vanished,	leaving	the	vista	as	empty	as	it	had	been
before.
The	bent-backed	Jaghut	removed	a	wrapped	piece	of	the	aras	deer	cooked
the	night	before	and	began	cutting	it	into	small	slices.	‘A	gift	for	you,	dear
sister.’
‘I	see,’	she	replied.	‘Slain	by	the	stone	sword?’
‘Aye.’
‘A	bounty,	then,	to	feed	my	spirit.’
Cynnigig	nodded.	He	paused	to	gesture	carelessly	with	the	knife.	‘You’ve
done	well,	disguising	the	remains.’
‘The	foundations	survive,	of	course.	The	House’s	walls.	The	anchor-stones
in	the	yard’s	corners—all	beneath	my	cloak	of	soil.’
‘Foolish,	unmindful	T’lan	Imass,	to	drive	a	spear	into	the	grounds	of	an
Azath	House.’
‘What	did	they	know	of	houses,	Cynnigig?	Creatures	of	caves	and	hide
tents.	Besides,	it	was	already	dying	and	had	been	for	years.	Fatally	wounded.
Oh,	Icarium	was	on	his	knees	by	the	time	he	finally	delivered	the	mortal	blow,
raving	with	madness.	And	had	not	his	Toblakai	companion	taken	that
opportunity	to	strike	him	unconscious…’
‘He	would	have	freed	his	father.’	Cynnigig	nodded	around	a	mouthful	of
meat.	He	rose	and	walked	to	the	tree.	‘Here,	sister,’	he	said,	offering	her	a	slice.
‘It’s	burnt.’
‘I	doubt	you	could	have	managed	better.’


‘True.	Go	on,	push	it	down—I	won’t	bite.’
‘You	can’t	bite,	my	dear.	I	do	appreciate	the	irony,	by	the	way—Icarium’s
father	had	no	desire	to	be	saved.	And	so	the	House	died,	weakening	the
fabric…’
‘Sufficiently	for	the	warren	to	be	torn	apart.	More,	please—you’re	eating
more	of	it	than	I	am.’
‘Greedy	bitch.	So,	Karsa	Orlong…surprised	us.’
‘I	doubt	we	are	the	first	victims	of	misapprehension	regarding	that	young
warrior,	brother.’
‘Granted.	Nor,	I	suspect,	will	we	be	the	last	to	suffer	such	shock.’
‘Did	you	sense	the	six	T’lan	Imass	spirits,	Cynnigig?	Hovering	there,
beyond	the	hidden	walls	of	the	yard?’
‘Oh	yes.	Servants	of	the	Crippled	God,	now,	the	poor	things.	They	would
tell	him	something,	I	think—’
‘Tell	who?	The	Crippled	God?’
‘No.	Karsa	Orlong.	They	possess	knowledge,	with	which	they	seek	to
guide	the	Thelomen	Toblakai—but	they	dared	not	approach.	The	presence	of
the	House,	I	suspect,	had	them	fearful.’
‘No,	it	is	dead—all	that	survived	of	its	lifespirit	moved	into	the	spear.	Not
the	House,	brother,	but	Karsa	Orlong	himself—that	was	who	they	feared.’
‘Ah.’	Cynnigig	smiled	as	he	slipped	another	sliver	of	meat	into	Phyrlis’s
wooden	mouth,	where	it	slid	from	view,	falling	down	into	the	hollow	cavity
within.	There	to	rot,	to	gift	the	tree	with	its	nutrients.	‘Then	those	Imass	are	not
so	foolish	after	all.’


Book	Four

House	of	Chains

	


You	have	barred	the	doors
caged	the	windows
every	portal	sealed
to	the	outside	world,
and	now	you	find
what	you	feared	most—
there	are	killers,
and	they	are	in	the	House.
HOUSE
T ALANBAL


Chapter	Eighteen

The	rage	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess
was	an	inferno,	beaten	on	the	forge
of	Holy	Raraku.
The	legions	that	marched	in	the	dust
of	blood	burned	by	the	eye	of	the	sun
were	cold	iron.
There,	on	the	dry	harbour	of	the	dead	city
where	the	armies	joined	to	battle
Hood	walked	the	fated	ground
where	he	walked	many	times	before.
THE	DIVIDED	HEART
FISHER
She	had	wormed	her	way	alongside	the	carefully	stacked	cut	stones,	to	the	edge
of	the	trench—knowing	her	mother	would	be	furious	at	seeing	how	she	had
ruined	her	new	clothes—and	finally	came	within	sight	of	her	sister.
Tavore	had	claimed	her	brother’s	bone	and	antler	toy	soldiers,	and	in	the
rubble	of	the	torn-up	estate	wall,	where	repairs	had	been	undertaken	by	the
grounds	workers,	she	had	arranged	a	miniature	battle.
Only	later	would	Felisin	learn	that	her	nine-year-old	sister	had	been,	in
fact,	recreating	a	set	battle,	culled	from	historical	accounts	of	a	century-old
clash	between	a	Royal	Untan	army	and	the	rebelling	House	of	K’azz	D’Avore.	A
battle	that	had	seen	the	annihilation	of	the	renegade	noble	family’s	forces	and
the	subjugation	of	the	D’Avore	household.	And	that,	taking	on	the	role	of	Duke
Kenussen	D’Avore,	she	was	working	through	every	possible	sequence	of	tactics
towards	achieving	a	victory.	Trapped	by	a	series	of	unfortunate	circumstances


in	a	steep-sided	valley,	and	hopelessly	outnumbered,	the	unanimous	consensus
among	military	scholars	was	that	such	victory	was	impossible.
Felisin	never	learned	if	her	sister	had	succeeded	where	Kenussen	D’Avore
—reputedly	a	military	genius—had	failed.	Her	spying	had	become	a	habit,	her
fascination	with	the	hard,	remote	Tavore	an	obsession.	It	seemed,	to	Felisin,
that	her	sister	had	never	been	a	child,	had	never	known	a	playful	moment.	She
had	stepped	into	their	brother’s	shadow	and	sought	only	to	remain	there,	and
when	Ganoes	had	been	sent	off	for	schooling,	Tavore	underwent	a	subtle
transformation.	No	longer	in	Ganoes’s	shadow,	it	was	as	if	she	had	become	his
shadow,	severed	and	haunting.
None	of	these	thoughts	were	present	in	Felisin’s	mind	all	those	years	ago.
The	obsession	with	Tavore	existed,	but	its	sources	were	formless,	as	only	a
child’s	could	be.
The	stigma	of	meaning	ever	comes	later,	like	a	brushing	away	of	dust	to
reveal	shapes	in	stone.
	
At	the	very	edge	of	the	ruined	city	on	its	south	side,	the	land	fell	away	quickly
in	what	had	once	been	clastic	slumps	of	silty	clay,	fanning	out	onto	the	old	bed
of	the	harbour.	Centuries	of	blistering	sun	had	hardened	these	sweeps,
transforming	them	into	broad,	solid	ramps.
Sha’ik	stood	at	the	head	of	the	largest	of	these	ancient	fans	born	of	a	dying
sea	millennia	past,	trying	to	see	the	flat	basin	before	her	as	a	place	of	battle.
Four	thousand	paces	away,	opposite,	rose	the	saw-toothed	remnants	of	coral
islands,	over	which	roared	the	Whirlwind.	That	sorcerous	storm	had	stripped
from	those	islands	the	formidable	mantle	of	sand	that	had	once	covered	them.
What	remained	offered	little	in	the	way	of	a	secure	ridge	on	which	to	assemble
and	prepare	legions.	Footing	would	be	treacherous,	formations	impossible.
The	islands	swept	in	a	vast	arc	across	the	south	approach.	To	the	east	was	an
escarpment,	a	fault-line	that	saw	the	land	falling	sharply	away	eighty	or	more
arm-lengths	onto	a	salt	flat—what	had	once	been	the	inland	sea’s	deepest	bed.
The	fault	was	a	slash	that	widened	in	its	southwestward	reach,	just	the	other
side	of	the	reef	islands,	forming	the	seemingly	endless	basin	that	was	Raraku’s
southlands.	To	the	west	lay	dunes,	the	sand	deep	and	soft,	wind-sculpted	and
rife	with	sink-pits.
She	would	assemble	her	forces	on	this	very	edge,	positioned	to	hold	the
seven	major	ramps.	Mathok’s	horse	archers	on	the	wings,	Korbolo	Dom’s	new
heavy	infantry—the	elite	core	of	his	Dogslayers—at	the	head	of	each	of	the
ramps.	Mounted	lancers	and	horse	warriors	held	back	as	screens	for	when	the


Malazans	reeled	back	from	the	steep	approaches	and	the	order	was	given	to
advance.
Or	so	Korbolo	Dom	had	explained—she	was	not	entirely	sure	of	the
sequence.	But	it	seemed	that	the	Napan	sought	an	initial	defensive	stance,
despite	their	superior	numbers.	He	was	eager	to	prove	his	heavy	infantry	and
shock	troops	against	the	Malazan	equivalent.	Since	Tavore	was	marching	to
meet	them,	it	was	expedient	to	extend	the	invitation	to	its	bitter	close	on	these
ramps.	The	advantage	was	entirely	with	the	Army	of	the	Apocalypse.
Tavore	was,	once	again,	Duke	Kenussen	D’Avore	in	Ibilar	Gorge.
Sha’ik	drew	her	sheep-hide	cloak	about	her,	suddenly	chilled	despite	the
heat.	She	glanced	over	to	where	Mathok	and	the	dozen	bodyguards	waited,
discreetly	distanced	yet	close	enough	to	reach	her	side	within	two	or	three
heartbeats.	She	had	no	idea	why	the	taciturn	warchief	so	feared	that	she	might
be	assassinated,	but	there	was	no	danger	in	humouring	the	warrior.	With
Toblakai	gone	and	Leoman	somewhere	to	the	south,	Mathok	had	assumed	the
role	of	protector	of	her	person.	Well	enough,	although	she	did	not	think	it
likely	that	Tavore	would	attempt	to	send	killers—the	Whirlwind	Goddess
could	not	be	breached	undetected.	Even	a	Hand	of	the	Claw	could	not	pass
unnoticed	through	her	multi-layered	barriers,	no	matter	what	warren	they
sought	to	employ.
Because	the	barrier	itself	defines	a	warren.	The	warren	that	lies	like	an
unseen	skin	over	the	Holy	Desert.	This	usurped	fragment	is	a	fragment	no
longer,	but	whole	unto	itself.	And	its	power	grows.	Until	one	day,	soon,	it	will
demand	its	own	place	in	the	Deck	of	Dragons.	As	with	the	House	of	Chains.	A
new	House,	of	the	Whirlwind.
Fed	by	the	spilled	blood	of	a	slain	army.
And	when	she	kneels	before	me…what	then?	Dear	sister,	broken	and	bowed,
smeared	in	dust	and	far	darker	streaks,	her	legions	a	ruin	behind	her,	feast	for
the	capemoths	and	vultures—shall	I	then	remove	my	warhelm?	Reveal	to	her,	at
that	moment,	my	face?
We	have	taken	this	war.	Away	from	the	rebels,	away	from	the	Empress	and
the	Malazan	Empire.	Away,	even,	from	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	herself.	We	have
supplanted,	you	and	I,	Tavore,	Dryjhna	and	the	Book	of	the	Apocalypse—for
our	own,	private	apocalypse.	The	family’s	own	blood,	and	nothing	more.	And
the	world,	then,	Tavore—when	I	show	myself	to	you	and	see	the	recognition	in
your	eyes—the	world,	your	world,	will	shift	beneath	you.
And	at	that	moment,	dear	sister,	you	will	understand.	What	has	happened.
What	I	have	done.	And	why	I	have	done	it.
And	then?	She	did	not	know.	A	simple	execution	was	too	easy,	indeed,	a


cheat.	Punishment	belonged	to	the	living,	after	all.	The	sentence	was	to	survive,
staggering	beneath	the	chains	of	knowledge.	A	sentence	not	just	of	living,	but
of	living	with;	that	was	the	only	answer	to…everything.
She	heard	boots	crunching	on	potsherds	behind	her	and	turned.	No
welcoming	smile	for	this	one—not	this	time.	‘L’oric.	I	am	delighted	you
deigned	to	acknowledge	my	request—you	seemed	to	have	grown	out	of	the
habit	of	late.’	Oh,	how	he	hides	from	me,	the	secrets	now	stalking	him,	see	how
he	will	not	meet	my	gaze—I	sense	struggles	within	him.	Things	he	would	tell
me.	Yet	he	will	say	nothing.	With	all	the	goddess’s	powers	at	my	behest,	and	still
I	cannot	trap	this	elusive	man,	cannot	force	from	him	his	truths.	This	alone
warns	me—he	is	not	as	he	seems.	Not	simply	a	mortal	man…
‘I	have	been	unwell,	Chosen	One.	Even	this	short	journey	from	the	camp
has	left	me	exhausted.’
‘I	grieve	for	your	sacrifice,	L’oric.	And	so	I	shall	come	to	my	point
without	further	delay.	Heboric	has	barred	his	place	of	residence—he	has
neither	emerged	nor	will	he	permit	visitors,	and	it	has	been	weeks.’
There	was	nothing	false	in	his	wince.	‘Barred	to	us	all,	mistress.’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘Yet,	you	were	the	last	to	speak	with	him.	At	length,
the	two	of	you	in	his	tent.’
‘I	was?	That	was	the	last	time?’
Not	the	reaction	she	had	anticipated.	Very	well,	then	whatever	secret	he
possesses	has	nothing	to	do	with	Ghost	Hands.	‘It	was.	Was	he	distressed	during
your	conversation?’
‘Mistress,	Heboric	has	long	been	distressed.’
‘Why?’
His	eyes	flicked	momentarily	to	hers,	wider	than	usual,	then	away	again.
‘He…grieves	for	your	sacrifice,	Chosen	One.’
She	blinked.	‘L’oric,	I	had	no	idea	my	sarcasm	could	so	wound	you.’
‘Unlike	you,’	he	replied	gravely,	‘I	was	not	being	facetious,	mistress.
Heboric	grieves—’
‘For	my	sacrifices.	Well,	that	is	odd	indeed,	since	he	did	not	think	much	of
me	before	my…rebirth.	Which	particular	loss	does	he	mark?’
‘I	could	not	say—you	will	have	to	ask	him	that,	I’m	afraid.’
‘Your	friendship	had	not	progressed	to	the	point	of	an	exchange	of
confessions,	then.’
He	said	nothing	to	that.	Well,	no,	he	couldn’t.	For	that	would	acknowledge
he	has	something	to	confess.
She	swung	her	gaze	from	him	and	turned	once	more	to	regard	the	potential
field	of	battle.	I	can	envision	the	armies	arrayed,	yes.	But	then	what?	How	are


they	moved?	What	is	possible	and	what	is	impossible?	Goddess,	you	have	no
answer	to	such	questions.	They	are	beneath	you.	Your	power	is	your	will,	and
that	alone.	But,	dear	Goddess,	sometimes	will	is	not	enough.	‘Korbolo	Dom	is
pleased	with	this	pending…arena.’
‘I	am	not	surprised,	mistress.’
She	glanced	back	at	him.	‘Why?’
He	shrugged,	and	she	watched	him	search	for	an	alternative	to	what	he	had
been	about	to	say.	‘Korbolo	Dom	would	have	Tavore	do	precisely	what	he
wants	her	to	do.	To	array	her	forces	here,	or	there,	and	nowhere	else.	To	make
this	particular	approach.	To	contest	where	he	would	have	her	contest.	He
expects	the	Malazan	army	to	march	up	to	be	slaughtered,	as	if	by	will	alone	he
can	make	Tavore	foolish,	or	stupid.’	L’oric	nodded	towards	the	vast	basin.	‘He
wants	her	to	fight	there.	Expects	her	to.	But,	why	would	she?’
She	shivered	beneath	the	cloak	as	her	chill	deepened.	Yes,	why	would	she?
Korbolo’s	certainty…is	it	naught	but	bluster?	Does	he	too	demand	something	to
be	simply	because	that	is	how	he	must	have	it?	But	then,	were	any	of	the	others
any	different?	Kamist	Reloe	and	his	tail-sniffing	pups,	Fayelle	and	Henaras?
And	Febryl	and	Bidithal?	Leoman…who	sat	with	that	irritating	half-smile,
through	all	of	Korbolo’s	descriptions	of	the	battle	to	come.	As	if	he	knew
something…as	if	he	alone	is	indeed	different.	But	then,	that	half-smile…the	fool
is	sunk	in	the	pit	of	durhang,	after	all.	I	should	expect	nothing	of	him,
especially	not	military	genius.	Besides,	Korbolo	Dom	has	something	to	prove…
‘There	is	danger,’	L’oric	murmured,	‘in	trusting	to	a	commander	who
wars	with	the	aim	of	slaughter.’
‘Rather	than	what?’
His	brows	rose	fractionally.	‘Why,	victory.’
‘Does	not	slaughter	of	the	enemy	achieve	victory,	L’oric?’
‘But	therein	lies	the	flaw	in	Korbolo’s	thinking,	Chosen	One.	As	Leoman
once	pointed	out,	months	ago,	the	flaw	is	one	of	sequence.	Mistress,	victory
precedes	slaughter.	Not	the	other	way	round.’
She	stared	at	him.	‘Why,	then,	have	neither	you	nor	Leoman	voiced	this
criticism	when	we	discussed	Korbolo	Dom’s	tactics?’
‘Discussed?’	L’oric	smiled.	‘There	was	no	discussion,	Chosen	One.
Korbolo	Dom	is	not	a	man	who	welcomes	discussions.’
‘Nor	is	Tavore,’	she	snapped.
‘That	is	not	relevant,’	L’oric	replied.
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Malazan	military	doctrine—something	Coltaine	well	understood,	but	also
something	that	High	Fist	Pormqual	had	clearly	lost	sight	of.	Tactics	are


consensual.	Dassem	Ultor ’s	original	doctrine,	when	he	was	finally	made	First
Sword	of	the	Malazan	Empire.	“Strategy	belongs	to	the	commander,	but	tactics
are	the	first	field	of	battle,	and	it	is	fought	in	the	command	tent.”	Dassem’s	own
words.	Of	course,	such	a	system	relied	heavily	upon	capable	officers.
Incompetent	officers—such	as	those	that	subseqently	infiltrated	the	chain	of—’
‘Nobleborn	officers,	you	mean.’
‘Bluntly,	yes.	The	purchasing	of	commissions—Dassem	would	never	have
permitted	that,	and	from	what	I	gather,	nor	does	the	Empress.	Not	any	more,	in
any	case.	There	was	a	cull—’
‘Yes,	I	know,	L’oric.	By	your	argument,	then,	Tavore’s	personality	has	no
relevance—’
‘Not	entirely,	mistress.	It	has,	for	tactics	are	the	child	of	strategy.	And	the
truth	of	Tavore’s	nature	will	shape	that	strategy.	Veteran	soldiers	speak	of	hot
iron	and	cold	iron.	Coltaine	was	cold	iron.	Dujek	Onearm	is	cold	iron,	too,
although	not	always—he’s	a	rare	one	in	being	able	to	shift	as	necessity
demands.	But	Tavore?	Unknown.’
‘Explain	this	“cold	iron”,	L’oric.’
‘Mistress,	this	subject	is	not	my	expertise—’
‘You	have	certainly	fooled	me.	Explain.	Now.’
‘Very	well,	such	as	I	understand	it—’
‘Cease	equivocating.’
He	cleared	his	throat,	then	turned	and	called	out,	‘Mathok.	Would	you	join
us,	please.’
Sha’ik	scowled	at	the	presumption	behind	that	invitation,	but	then	inwardly
relented.	This	is	important,	after	all.	I	feel	it.	The	heart	of	all	that	will	follow.
‘Join	us,	Mathok,’	she	said.
He	dismounted	and	strode	over.
L’oric	addressed	him.	‘I	have	been	asked	to	explain	“cold	iron”,	Warchief,
and	for	this	I	need	help.’
The	desert	warrior	bared	his	teeth.	‘Cold	iron.	Coltaine.	Dassem	Ultor—if
the	legends	speak	true.	Dujek	Onearm.	Admiral	Nok.	K’azz	D’Avore	of	the
Crimson	Guard.	Inish	Garn,	who	once	led	the	Gral.	Cold	iron,	Chosen	One.
Hard.	Sharp.	It	is	held	before	you,	and	so	you	reach.’	He	crossed	his	arms.
‘You	reach,’	L’oric	nodded.	‘Yes,	that’s	it.	You	reach.	And	are	stuck	fast.’
‘Cold	iron,’	Mathok	growled.	‘The	warchief’s	soul—it	either	rages	with
the	fire	of	life,	or	is	cold	with	death.	Chosen	One,	Korbolo	Dom	is	hot	iron,	as
am	I.	As	are	you.	We	are	as	the	sun’s	fires,	as	the	desert’s	heat,	as	the	breath	of
the	Whirlwind	Goddess	herself.’
‘The	Army	of	the	Apocalypse	is	hot	iron.’


‘Aye,	Chosen	One.	And	thus,	we	must	pray	that	the	forge	of	Tavore’s	heart
blazes	with	vengeance.’
‘That	she	too	is	hot	iron?	Why?’
‘For	then,	we	shall	not	lose.’
Sha’ik’s	knees	suddenly	weakened	and	she	almost	staggered.	L’oric	moved
close	to	support	her,	alarm	on	his	face.
‘Mistress?’
‘I	am…I	am	all	right.	A	moment…’	She	fixed	her	gaze	on	Mathok	once
more,	saw	the	brief	gauging	regard	in	his	eyes	that	then	quickly	slipped	once
again	behind	his	impassive	mien.	‘Warchief,	what	if	Tavore	is	cold	iron?’
‘The	deadliest	clash	of	all,	Chosen	One.	Which	shall	shatter	first?’
L’oric	said,	‘Military	histories	reveal,	mistress,	that	cold	iron	defeats	hot
iron	more	often	than	not.	By	a	count	of	three	or	four	to	one.’
‘Yet	Coltaine!	Did	he	not	fall	to	Korbolo	Dom?’
She	noted	L’oric’s	eyes	meet	Mathok’s	momentarily.
‘Well?’	she	demanded.
‘Chosen	One,’	Mathok	rumbled,	‘Korbolo	Dom	and	Coltaine	fought	nine
major	engagements—nine	battles—on	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	Of	these,	Korbolo
was	clear	victor	in	one,	and	one	only.	At	the	Fall.	Outside	the	walls	of	Aren.
And	for	that	he	needed	Kamist	Reloe,	and	the	power	of	Mael,	as	channelled
through	the	jhistal	priest,	Mallick	Rel.’
Her	head	was	spinning,	panic	ripping	through	her,	and	she	knew	L’oric
could	feel	her	trembling.
‘Sha’ik,’	he	whispered,	close	by	her	ear,	‘you	know	Tavore,	don’t	you?
You	know	her,	and	she	is	cold	iron,	isn’t	she?’
Mute,	she	nodded.	She	did	not	know	how	she	knew,	for	neither	Mathok	nor
L’oric	seemed	able	to	give	a	concrete	definition,	suggesting	to	her	that	the
notion	derived	from	a	gut	level,	a	place	of	primal	instinct.	And	so,	she	knew.
L’oric	had	lifted	his	head.	‘Mathok.’
‘High	Mage?’
‘Who,	among	us,	is	cold	iron?	Is	there	anyone?’
‘There	are	two,	High	Mage.	And	one	of	these	is	capable	of	both:	Toblakai.’
‘And	the	other?’
‘Leoman	of	the	Flails.’
	
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	lay	beneath	a	sheath	of	sand.	The	sweat	had	soaked
through	his	telaba	beneath	him,	packing	down	his	body’s	moulded	imprint,	and
had	cooled,	so	that	he	now	shivered	unceasingly.	The	sixth	son	of	a	deposed


chief	among	the	Pardu,	he	had	been	a	wanderer	of	the	wastelands	for	most	of
his	adult	life.	A	wanderer,	trader,	and	worse.	When	Leoman	had	found	him,
three	Gral	warriors	had	been	dragging	him	behind	their	horses	for	most	of	a
morning.
The	purchase	price	had	been	pathetically	small,	since	his	skin	had	been
flayed	away	by	the	burning	sands,	leaving	only	a	bloodied	mass	of	raw	flesh.
But	Leoman	had	taken	him	to	a	healer,	an	old	woman	from	some	tribe	he’d
never	heard	of	before,	or	since,	and	she	in	turn	had	taken	him	to	a	rockspring
pool,	where	he’d	lain	immersed,	raving	with	fever,	for	an	unknown	time,
whilst	she’d	worked	a	ritual	of	mending	and	called	upon	the	water ’s	ancient
spirits.	And	so	he	had	recovered.
Corabb	had	never	learned	the	reason	behind	Leoman’s	mercy,	and,	now
that	he	knew	him	well—as	well	as	any	who’d	sworn	fealty	to	the	man—he
knew	better	than	to	ask.	It	was	one	with	his	contrary	nature,	his	unknowable
qualities	that	could	be	unveiled	but	once	in	an	entire	lifetime.	But	Corabb	knew
one	thing:	for	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	he	would	give	his	life.
They	had	lain	side	by	side,	silent	and	motionless,	through	the	course	of	the
day,	and	now,	late	in	the	afternoon,	they	saw	the	first	of	the	outriders	appear	in
the	distance,	cautiously	ranging	out	as	they	ventured	onto	the	pan	of	cracked
salts	and	clay.
Corabb	finally	stirred.	‘Wickans,’	he	hissed.
‘And	Seti,’	Leoman	rumbled	in	reply.
‘Those	grey-armoured	ones	look…different.’
The	man	beside	him	grunted,	then	swore.	‘Khundryl,	from	south	of	the
Vathar	River.	I	had	hoped…Still,	that	arcane	armour	looks	heavy.	The	Seven
know	what	ancestral	tombs	they	looted	for	those.	The	Khundryl	came	late	to
the	horse,	and	it’s	no	wonder	with	that	armour,	is	it?’
Corabb	squinted	at	the	vast	dust	cloud	behind	the	outriders.	‘The	vanguard
rides	close	to	the	scouts.’
‘Aye.	We’ll	have	to	do	something	about	that.’
Without	another	word	the	two	warriors	edged	back	from	the	crest,	beyond
the	sight	of	the	outriders,	pausing	briefly	to	reach	back	and	brush	sand	over
where	their	bodies	had	lain,	then	made	their	way	back	to	the	gully	where	they’d
left	their	horses.
‘Tonight,’	Leoman	said,	collecting	his	mount’s	reins	and	swinging	up	into
the	saddle.
Corabb	did	the	same	and	then	nodded.	Sha’ik	would	know,	of	course,	that
she	had	been	defied.	For	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	had	her	eyes	on	all	her
children.	But	this	was	their	land,	wasn’t	it?	The	invaders	could	not	be	left	to


walk	it	uncontested.	No,	the	sands	would	drink	their	blood,	giving	voice	on	this
night	to	the	Shrouded	Reaper ’s	dark	promise.
	
L’oric	stood	near	the	trail	that	led	to	Toblakai’s	glade.	A	casual	look	around,
then	the	faintest	of	gestures	from	one	hand	marked	a	careful	unveiling	of
sorcery—that	vanished	almost	as	soon	as	it	arrived.	Satisfied,	he	set	off	down
the	trail.
She	might	be	distracted,	but	her	goddess	was	not.	Increasingly,	he	sensed
questing	attention	directed	towards	him,	sorcerous	tendrils	reaching	out	in	an
effort	to	find	him,	or	track	his	movements.	And	it	was	becoming	more	difficult
to	elude	such	probes,	particularly	since	they	were	coming	from	more	than	a
single	source.
Febryl	was	growing	more	nervous,	as	was	Kamist	Reloe.	Whilst	Bidithal’s
paranoia	needed	no	fuel—and	nor	should	it.	Sufficient,	then,	all	these	signs	of
increased	restlessness,	to	convince	L’oric	that	whatever	plans	existed	were
soon	to	seek	resolution.	One	way	or	another.
He	had	not	expected	to	discover	Sha’ik	so…unprepared.	True,	she	had
conveyed	a	none	too	subtle	hint	that	she	was	preternaturally	aware	of	all	that
went	on	in	the	camp,	including	an	alarming	ability	to	defeat	his	own	disguising
wards	intended	to	mask	his	travels.	Even	so,	there	was	knowledge	that,	had	she
possessed	it—or	even	suspected—would	have	long	since	triggered	a	deadly
response.	Some	places	must	remain	closed	to	her.	I	had	expected	her	to	ask	far
more	dangerous	questions	of	me	today.	Where	is	Felisin?	Then	again,	maybe
she	didn’t	ask	that	because	she	already	knew.	A	chilling	thought,	not	just	for
evincing	the	breadth	of	her	awareness,	but	for	what	it	suggested	about	Sha’ik
herself.	That	she	knows	what	Bidithal	did	to	Felisin…and	she	does	not	care.
Dusk	ever	seemed	eager	to	arrive	in	the	forest	of	stone	trees.	The	tracks	he
left	in	the	dusty	path	revealed,	to	his	relief,	that	he	was	still	alone	in	walking	the
trail	these	days.
Not	that	the	goddess	needed	trails.	But	there	was	a	strangeness	to
Toblakai’s	glade,	hinting	at	some	kind	of	investment,	as	if	the	clearing	had
undergone	a	sanctification	of	some	sort.	And	if	that	had	indeed	occurred,	then
it	might	exist	as	a	blind	spot	in	the	eye	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess.
But	none	of	this	explained	why	Sha’ik	did	not	ask	about	Felisin.	Ah,	L’oric,
you	are	the	blind	one.	Sha’ik’s	obsession	is	Tavore.	With	each	day	that	leaves
us,	bringing	the	two	armies	ever	closer,	her	obsession	grows.	As	does	her	doubt
and,	perhaps,	her	fear.	She	is	Malazan,	after	all—I	was	right	in	that.	And	within
that	waits	another	secret,	this	one	buried	deepest	of	all.	She	knows	Tavore.


And	that	knowledge	had	guided	her	every	action	since	the	Rebirth.	Her
recalling	the	Army	of	the	Apocalpyse	when	virtually	within	sight	of	the	Holy
City’s	walls.	Retreating	into	the	heart	of	Raraku…gods,	was	all	that	a	flight	of
terror?
A	notion	that	did	not	bear	thinking	about.
The	glade	appeared	before	him,	the	ring	of	trees	with	their	cold,	unhuman
eyes	gazing	down	upon	the	small,	bedraggled	tent—and	the	young	woman
huddled	before	the	stone-lined	hearth	a	few	paces	from	it.
She	did	not	look	up	as	he	came	near.	‘L’oric,	I	was	wondering,	how	can
one	tell	Bidithal’s	cult	of	murderers	from	Korbolo	Dom’s?	It’s	a	crowded
camp	these	days—I	am	glad	I	am	hiding	here,	and	in	turn	I	find	myself	pitying
you.	Did	you	finally	speak	with	her	today?’
Sighing,	he	settled	down	opposite	her,	removing	his	shoulder	pack	and
drawing	food	from	it.	‘I	did.’
‘And?’
‘Her	concerns	for	the	impending	clash	are…overwhelming	her—’
‘My	mother	did	not	ask	after	me,’	Felisin	cut	in,	with	a	slight	smile.
L’oric	looked	away.	‘No,’	he	conceded	in	a	whisper.
‘She	knows,	then.	And	has	judged	as	I	have—Bidithal	is	close	to	exposing
the	plotters.	They	need	him,	after	all,	either	to	join	the	conspiracy,	or	stand
aside.	This	is	a	truth	that	has	not	changed.	And	the	night	is	drawing	nearer,	the
night	of	betrayal.	And	so,	Mother	needs	him	to	play	out	his	role.’
‘I	am	not	sure	of	that,	Felisin,’	L’oric	began,	then	shut	up.
But	she	had	understood,	and	her	terrible	smile	broadened.	‘Then	the
Whirlwind	Goddess	has	stolen	the	love	from	her	soul.	Ah,	well,	she	has	been
under	siege	for	a	long	time,	after	all.	In	any	case,	she	was	not	my	mother	in
truth—that	was	a	title	she	assumed	because	it	amused	her	to	do	so—’
‘Not	true,	Felisin.	Sha’ik	saw	your	plight—’
‘I	was	the	first	one	to	see	her,	when	she	returned,	reborn.	A	chance
occurrence,	that	I	should	be	out	gathering	hen’bara	on	that	day.	Before	that	day,
Sha’ik	had	never	noticed	me—why	would	she?	I	was	one	among	a	thousand
orphans,	after	all.	But	then	she	was…reborn.’
‘Returned	to	the	living	as	well,	perhaps—’
Felisin	laughed.	‘Oh,	L’oric,	you	ever	strive,	don’t	you?	I	knew	then,	as
you	must	know	by	now—Sha’ik	Reborn	is	not	the	same	woman	as	Sha’ik
Elder.’
‘That	hardly	matters,	lass.	The	Whirlwind	Goddess	chose	her—’
‘Because	Sha’ik	Elder	died,	or	was	killed.	You	did	not	see	the	truth	as	I	did,
in	the	faces	of	Leoman	and	Toblakai.	I	saw	their	uncertainty—they	did	not


know	if	their	ruse	would	succeed.	And	that	it	did,	more	or	less,	was	as	much	to
me	as	to	any	of	them.	The	Whirlwind	Goddess	chose	her	out	of	necessity,
L’oric.’
‘As	I	said,	Felisin,	it	does	not	matter.’
‘Not	to	you,	perhaps.	No,	you	don’t	understand.	I	saw	Sha’ik	Elder	up
close,	once.	Her	glance	swept	past	me,	and	that	glance	saw	no-one,	and	at	that
moment,	child	though	I	was,	I	knew	the	truth	of	her.	Of	her,	and	of	her
goddess.’
L’oric	unstoppered	the	jug	that	had	followed	the	food	and	raised	it	to	wet	a
mouth	that	had	suddenly	gone	dry.	‘And	what	truth	was	that?’	he	whispered,
unable	to	meet	her	eyes.	Instead,	he	drank	down	a	deep	draught	of	the
unwatered	wine.
‘Oh,	that	we	are,	one	and	all,	nothing	but	slaves.	We	are	the	tools	she	will
use	to	achieve	her	desires.	Beyond	that,	our	lives	mean	nothing	to	the	goddess.
But	with	Sha’ik	Reborn,	I	thought	I	saw…something	different.’
His	peripheral	vision	caught	her	shrug.
‘But,’	she	continued,	‘the	goddess	is	too	strong.	Her	will	too	absolute.	The
poison	that	is	indifference…and	I	well	know	that	taste,	L’oric.	Ask	any	orphan,
no	matter	how	old	they	are	now,	and	they	will	tell	you	the	same.	We	all	sucked
at	that	same	bitter	tit.’
He	knew	his	tears	had	broken	from	his	eyes,	were	running	down	his
cheeks,	yet	could	do	nothing	to	stem	them.
‘And	now,	L’oric,’	she	went	on	after	a	moment,	‘we	are	all	revealed.	Every
one	of	us	here.	We	are	all	orphans.	Think	on	it.	Bidithal,	who	lost	his	temple,
his	entire	cult.	The	same	for	Heboric.	Korbolo	Dom,	who	once	stood	as	an
equal	in	rank	with	great	soldiers,	like	Whiskeyjack,	and	Coltaine.	Febryl—did
you	know	he	murdered	his	own	father	and	mother?	Toblakai,	who	has	lost	his
own	people.	And	all	the	rest	of	us	here,	L’oric—we	were	children	of	the
Malazan	Empire,	once.	And	what	have	we	done?	We	cast	off	the	Empress,	in
exchange	for	an	insane	goddess	who	dreams	only	of	destruction,	who	seeks	to
feed	on	a	sea	of	blood…’
‘And,’	he	asked	softly,	‘am	I	too	an	orphan?’
She	had	no	need	to	answer,	for	they	both	heard	the	truth	in	his	own	pained
words.
Osric…
‘Leaving	only…Leoman	of	the	Flails.’	Felisin	took	the	wine	from	his
hands.	‘Ah,	Leoman.	Our	flawed	diamond.	I	wonder,	can	he	save	us	all?	Will	he
get	the	chance?	Among	us,	only	he	remains…unchained.	No	doubt	the	goddess
claims	him,	but	it	is	an	empty	claim—you	do	see	that,	don’t	you?’


He	nodded,	wiping	at	his	eyes.	‘And	I	believe	I	have	led	Sha’ik	to	that
realization,	as	well.’
‘She	knows,	then,	that	Leoman	is	our	last	hope?’
His	sigh	was	ragged.	‘I	think	so…’
They	were	silent	for	a	time.	Night	had	arrived,	and	the	fire	had	died	down
to	ashes,	leaving	only	starlight	to	illuminate	the	glade.
It	seemed,	then,	that	eyes	of	stone	had	slowly	assumed	life,	a	crescent	row
fixed	now	upon	the	two	of	them.	A	regard	avid,	gleaming	with	hunger.	L’oric’s
head	snapped	up.	He	stared	out	at	the	ghostly	faces,	then	at	the	two	Toblakai
figures,	then	settled	once	more,	shivering.
Felisin	laughed	softly.	‘Yes,	they	do	haunt	one,	don’t	they?’
L’oric	grunted.	‘A	mystery	here,	in	Toblakai’s	creations.	Those	faces—
they	are	T’lan	Imass.	Yet…’
‘He	thought	them	his	gods,	yes.	So	Leoman	told	me,	once,	beneath	the
fumes	of	durhang.	Then	he	warned	me	to	say	nothing	to	Toblakai.’	She
laughed	again,	louder	this	time.	‘As	if	I	would.	A	fool	indeed,	to	step	between
Toblakai	and	his	gods.’
‘There	is	nothing	simple	about	that	simple	warrior,’	L’oric	murmured.
‘Just	as	you	are	not	simply	a	High	Mage,’	she	said.	‘You	must	act	soon,
you	know.	You	have	choices	to	make.	Hesitate	too	long	and	they	will	be	made
for	you,	to	your	regret.’
‘I	could	well	say	the	same	to	you	in	return.’
‘Well	then,	it	seems	we	still	have	more	to	discuss	this	night.	But	first,	let	us
eat—before	the	wine	makes	us	drunk.’
	
Sha’ik	recoiled,	staggered	back	a	step.	The	breath	hissed	from	her	in	a	gust	of
alarm—and	pain.	A	host	of	wards	swirled	around	Heboric’s	abode,	still
flickering	with	the	agitation	her	collision	had	triggered.
She	bit	down	on	her	outrage,	pitched	her	voice	low	as	she	said,	‘You	know
who	it	is	who	has	come,	Heboric.	Let	me	pass.	Defy	me,	and	I	will	bring	the
wrath	of	the	goddess	down,	here	and	now.’
A	moment’s	silence,	then,	‘Enter.’
She	stepped	forward.	There	was	a	moment’s	pressure,	then	she	stumbled
through,	brought	up	short	against	the	crumbled	foundation	wall.	A
sudden…absence.	Terrifying,	bursting	like	the	clearest	light	where	all	had
been,	but	a	moment	earlier,	impenetrable	gloom.	Bereft…yet	free.	Gods,	free—
the	light—‘Ghost	Hands!’	she	gasped.	‘What	have	you	done?’
‘The	goddess	within	you,	Sha’ik,’	came	Heboric’s	words,	‘is	not	welcome


in	my	temple.’
Temple?	Roaring	chaos	was	building	within	her,	the	vast	places	in	her	mind
where	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	had	been	now	suddenly	vacant,	filling	with	the
dark,	rushing	return	of…of	all	that	I	was.	Bitter	fury	grew	like	a	wildfire	as
memories	rose	with	demonic	ferocity	to	assail	her.	Beneth.	You	bastard.	You
closed	your	hands	around	a	child,	but	what	you	shaped	was	anything	but	a
woman.	A	plaything.	A	slave	to	you	and	your	twisted,	brutal	world.
I	used	to	watch	that	knife	in	your	hands,	the	flickering	games	that	were
your	idle	habits.	And	that’s	what	you	taught	me,	isn’t	it?	Cutting	for	fun	and
blood.	And	oh,	how	I	cut.	Baudin.	Kulp.	Heboric—
A	physical	presence	beside	her	now,	the	solid	feel	of	hands—jade	green,
black-barred—a	figure,	squat	and	wide	and	seemingly	beneath	the	shadow	of
fronds—no,	tattoos.	Heboric…
‘Inside,	lass.	I	have	made	you…bereft.	An	unanticipated	consequence	of
forcing	the	goddess	from	your	soul.	Come.’
And	then	he	was	guiding	her	into	the	tent’s	confines.	The	air	chill	and
damp,	a	single	small	oil	lamp	struggling	against	the	gloom—a	flame	that
suddenly	moved	as	he	lifted	the	lamp	and	brought	it	over	to	a	brazier,	where	he
used	its	burning	oil	to	light	the	bricks	of	dung.	And,	as	he	worked,	he	spoke.
‘Not	much	need	for	light…the	passage	of	time…before	tasked	with
sanctioning	a	makeshift	temple…what	do	I	know	of	Treach,	anyway?’
She	was	sitting	on	cushions,	her	trembling	hands	held	before	the	brazier ’s
growing	flames,	furs	wrapped	about	her.	At	the	name	‘Treach’	she	started,
looked	up.
To	see	Heboric	squatting	before	her.	As	he	had	squatted	that	day,	so	long
ago	now,	in	Judgement’s	Round.	When	Hood’s	sprites	had	come	to	him…to
foretell	of	Fener’s	casting	down.	The	flies	would	not	touch	his	spiral	tattoos.	I
remember	that.	Everywhere	else,	they	swarmed	like	madness.	Now,	those	tattoos
had	undergone	a	transformation.	‘Treach.’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	hers—a	cat’s	eyes,	now—he	can	see!	‘Ascended	into
god-hood,	Sha’ik—’
‘Don’t	call	me	that.	I	am	Felisin	Paran	of	House	Paran.’	She	hugged	herself
suddenly.	‘Sha’ik	waits	for	me…out	there,	beyond	this	tent’s	confines—beyond
your	wards.’
‘And	would	you	return	to	that	embrace,	lass?’
She	studied	the	brazier ’s	fire,	whispered,	‘No	choice,	Heboric.’
‘No,	I	suppose	not.’
A	thunderous	shock	bolted	her	upright.	‘Felisin!’
‘What?’


‘Felisin	Younger!	I	have	not…not	seen	her!	Days?	Weeks?	What—where	is
she!’
Heboric’s	motion	was	feline	as	he	straightened,	fluid	and	precise.	‘The
goddess	must	know,	lass—’
‘If	she	does,	she’s	not	told	me!’
‘But	why	would…’
She	saw	a	sudden	knowledge	in	his	eyes,	and	felt	her	own	answering	stab
of	fear.	‘Heboric,	what	do	you—’
Then	he	was	guiding	her	to	the	tent	flap,	speaking	as	he	drove	her	back
step	by	step.	‘We	spoke,	you	and	I,	and	all	is	well.	Nothing	to	concern	yourself
over.	The	Adjunct	and	her	legions	are	coming	and	there	is	much	to	do.	As	well,
there	are	the	secret	plans	of	Febryl	to	keep	an	eye	on,	and	for	that	you	must
rely	upon	Bidithal—’
‘Heboric!’	She	struggled	against	him,	but	he	would	not	relent.	They
reached	the	flap	and	he	pushed	her	outside.	‘What	are	you—’	A	hard	shove	and
she	stumbled	back.
Through	a	flare	of	wards.
Sha’ik	slowly	righted	herself.	She	must	have	stumbled.	Oh	yes,	a
conversation	with	Ghost	Hands.	All	is	well.	I’m	relieved	by	that,	for	it	allows
me	to	think	on	more	important	things.	My	nest	of	betrayers,	for	example.	Must
have	words	with	Bidithal	again	tonight.	Yes…
She	turned	from	the	ex-priest’s	tent	and	made	her	way	back	to	the	palace.
Overhead,	the	stars	of	the	desert	sky	were	shimmering,	as	they	often	did
when	the	goddess	had	come	close…Sha’ik	wondered	what	had	drawn	her	this
time.	Perhaps	no	more	than	casting	a	protective	eye	on	her	Chosen	One…
She	was	unmindful—as	was	her	goddess—of	the	barely	visible	shape	that
slipped	out	from	the	entrance	to	Heboric’s	tent,	flowing	in	a	blur	into	the
nearest	shadows.	Unmindful,	also,	of	the	scent	that	barbed	shape	now	followed.
Westward,	to	the	city’s	edge,	and	then	onto	the	trail,	padding	between	the
stone	trees,	towards	a	distant	glade.
	
Bidithal	sat	in	the	seething	shadows,	alone	once	more,	although	the	smile
remained	fixed	on	his	withered	face.	Febryl	had	his	games,	but	so	did	the	once
High	Priest	of	the	Shadow	cult.	Even	betrayers	could	be	betrayed,	after	all,	a
sudden	turning	of	the	knife	in	the	hand.
And	the	sands	would	fold	one	more	time,	the	way	they	did	when	the	air
breathed	hard,	in,	out,	back,	forth,	stirring	and	shifting	the	grains	as	would
waves	against	a	beach,	to	lay	one	layer	over	another	in	thin	seams	of	colour.


There	were	no	limits	to	the	number	of	layers,	and	this	Febryl	and	his	fellow
conspirators	would	soon	discover,	to	their	grief.
They	sought	the	warren	for	themselves.	It	had	taken	Bidithal	a	long	time	to
unveil	that	truth,	that	deep-buried	motivation,	for	it	had	remained	in	the	silence
between	every	spoken	word.	This	was	not	a	simple,	mundane	struggle	for
power.	No.	This	was	usurpation.	Expropriation—a	detail	that	itself	whispered
of	yet	deeper	secrets.	They	wanted	the	warren…but	why?	A	question	yet	to	be
answered,	but	find	an	answer	he	would,	and	soon.
In	this,	he	knew,	the	Chosen	One	relied	upon	him,	and	he	would	not	fail
her.	In	so	far	as	what	she	expects	from	me,	yes,	I	will	deliver.	Of	course,	there
are	other	issues	that	extend	far	beyond	Sha’ik,	this	goddess	and	the	Whirlwind
Warren	she	would	rule.	The	shape	of	the	pantheon	itself	is	at	stake…my	longoverdue	vengeance	against	those	foreign	pretenders	to	the	Throne	of	Shadow.
Even	now,	if	he	listened	very—very—carefully,	he	could	hear	them.	And
they	were	coming.	Closer,	ever	closer.
A	tremble	of	fear	took	his	limbs,	and	shadows	scurried	away	from	him
momentarily,	only	returning	when	he	had	settled	once	more.	Rashan…and
Meanas.	Meanas	and	Thyr.	Thyr	and	Rashan.	The	three	children	of	the	Elder
Warrens.	Galain,	Emurlahn	and	Thyrllan.	Should	it	be	so	surprising	that	they
war	once	more?	For	do	not	we	ever	inherit	the	spites	of	our	fathers	and
mothers?
But	a	ghost	of	that	fear	remained.	He	had	not	called	them,	after	all.	Had	not
understood	the	truth	of	what	lay	beneath	the	Whirlwind	Warren,	the	reason
why	the	warren	was	held	in	this	single	place	and	nowhere	else.	Had	not
comprehended	how	the	old	battles	never	died,	but	simply	slept,	every	bone	in
the	sand	restless	with	memory.
Bidithal	raised	his	hands	and	the	army	of	shadows	crowded	within	his
temple	gathered	closer.
‘My	children,’	he	whispered,	beginning	the	Closing	Chant.
‘Father.’
‘Do	you	remember?’
‘We	remember.’
‘Do	you	remember	the	dark?’
‘We	remember	the	dark.	Father—’
‘Ask	it	and	close	this	moment,	children.’
‘Do	you	remember	the	dark?’
The	priest’s	smile	broadened.	A	simple	question,	one	that	could	be	asked	of
anyone,	anyone	at	all.	And	perhaps	they	would	understand.	But	probably	not.
Yet	I	understand	it.


Do	you	remember	the	dark?
‘I	remember.’
As,	with	sighs,	the	shadows	dispersed,	Bidithal	stiffened	once	more	to	that
almost	inaudible	call.	He	shivered	again.	They	were	getting	close	indeed.
And	he	wondered	what	they	would	do,	when	they	finally	arrived.
	
There	were	eleven	in	all.	His	chosen.
Korbolo	Dom	leaned	back	on	his	cushions,	eyes	veiled	as	he	studied	the
silent,	shrouded	line	of	figures	standing	before	him.	The	Napan	held	a	goblet
carved	from	crystal	in	his	right	hand,	in	which	swirled	a	rare	wine	from	the
Grisian	valleys	on	Quon	Tali.	The	woman	who	had	kept	him	amused	earlier
this	night	was	asleep,	her	head	resting	on	his	right	thigh.	He	had	plied	her	with
enough	durhang	to	ensure	oblivion	for	the	next	dozen	bells,	though	it	was	the
expedience	of	security	rather	than	any	insipid	desire	on	his	part	that
necessitated	such	measures.
Drawn	from	his	Dogslayers,	the	eleven	killers	were	appallingly	skilled.
Five	of	them	had	been	personal	assassins	to	Holy	Falah’dan	in	the	days	before
the	Empire,	rewarded	with	gifts	of	alchemy	and	sorcery	to	maintain	their
youthful	appearance	and	vigour.
Three	of	the	remaining	six	were	Malazan—Korbolo	Dom’s	own,	created
long	ago,	when	he	realized	he	had	cause	to	worry	about	the	Claw.	Cause…now
that’s	a	simplification	almost	quaint	in	its	coyness.	A	multitude	of	realizations,
of	sudden	discoveries,	of	knowledge	I	had	never	expected	to	gain—of	things	I
had	believed	long	dead	and	gone.	There	had	been	ten	such	bodyguards,	once.
Evidence	of	the	need	for	them	stood	before	him	now.	Three	left,	the	result	of	a
brutal	process	of	elimination,	leaving	only	those	with	the	greatest	skill	and	the
most	fortuitous	alliance	of	Oponn’s	luck—two	qualities	that	fed	each	other
well.
The	remaining	three	assassins	were	from	various	tribes,	each	of	whom	had
proved	his	worth	during	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	The	arrow	from	one	had	slain
Sormo	E’nath,	from	a	distance	of	seventy	paces,	on	the	Day	of	Pure	Blood.
There	had	been	other	arrows	striking	true,	but	it	had	been	the	one	through	the
warlock’s	neck—the	assassin’s—that	had	filled	the	lad’s	lungs	with	blood,	that
had	drowned	his	very	breath,	so	that	he	could	not	call	upon	his	damned	spirits
for	healing…
Korbolo	sipped	wine,	slowly	licked	his	lips.	‘Kamist	Reloe	has	chosen
among	you,’	he	rumbled	after	a	moment,	‘for	the	singular	task	that	will	trigger
all	that	subsequently	follows.	And	I	am	content	with	his	choices.	But	do	not


think	this	diminishes	the	rest	of	you.	There	will	be	tasks—essential	tasks—on
that	night.	Here	in	this	very	camp.	I	assure	you,	you	will	get	no	sleep	that	night,
so	prepare	yourselves.	Also,	two	of	you	will	remain	with	me	at	all	times,	for	I
can	guarantee	that	my	death	will	be	sought	before	that	fateful	dawn	arrives.’
I	expect	you	to	die	in	my	place.	Of	course.	It	is	what	you	are	sworn	to	do,
should	the	need	arise.
‘Leave	me	now,’	he	said,	waving	his	free	hand.
The	eleven	assassins	bowed	in	unison,	then	filed	silently	out	of	the	tent.
Korbolo	lifted	the	woman’s	head	from	his	thigh,	by	the	hair—noting	how
she	remained	insensate	to	the	rough	handling—and	rose	from	the	cushions,
letting	her	head	thump	back	down.	He	paused	to	drink	a	mouthful	of	the	wine,
then	stepped	from	the	modest	dais	and	approached	the	side	chamber	that	had
been	partitioned	off	by	silk	hangings.
Within	the	private	room,	Kamist	Reloe	was	pacing.	Hands	wringing,
shoulders	drawn	up,	neck	taut.
Korbolo	leaned	against	a	support	post,	his	mouth	twisting	into	a	slight
sneer	at	seeing	the	High	Mage’s	fretting.	‘Which	of	your	many	fears	plagues
you	now,	Kamist?	Oh	do	not	answer.	I	admit	I’ve	ceased	caring.’
‘Foolish	complacency	on	your	part,	then,’	the	High	Mage	snapped.	‘Do
you	think	we	are	the	only	clever	people?’
‘In	the	world?	No.	Here,	in	Raraku,	well,	that’s	another	matter.	Who	should
we	fear,	Kamist	Reloe?	Sha’ik?	Her	goddess	devours	her	acuity—day	by	day,
the	lass	grows	less	and	less	aware	of	what	goes	on	around	her.	And	that
goddess	barely	takes	note	of	us—oh,	there	are	suspicions,	perhaps,	but	that	is
all.	Thus.	Who	else?	L’oric?	I’ve	known	many	a	man	like	him—creating
mystery	around	themselves—and	I	have	found	that	what	it	usually	hides	is	an
empty	vessel.	He	is	all	pose	and	nothing	more.’
‘You	are	wrong	in	that,	I	fear,	but	no,	I	do	not	worry	about	L’oric.’
‘Who	else?	Ghost	Hands?	The	man’s	vanished	into	his	own	pit	of	hen’bara.
Leoman?	He’s	not	here	and	I’ve	plans	for	his	return.	Toblakai?	I	think	we’ve
seen	the	last	of	him.	Who	is	left?	Why,	none	other	than	Bidithal.	But	Febryl
swears	he	almost	has	him	in	our	fold—it’s	simply	a	question	of	discovering
what	the	bastard	truly	desires.	Something	squalid	and	disgusting,	no	doubt.	He
is	slave	to	his	vices,	is	Bidithal.	Offer	him	ten	thousand	orphaned	girls	and	the
smile	will	never	leave	his	ugly	face.’
Kamist	Reloe	wrapped	his	arms	about	himself	as	he	continued	pacing.	‘It’s
not	who	we	know	to	be	among	us	that	is	the	source	of	my	concerns,	Korbolo
Dom,	it’s	who	is	among	us	that	we	do	not	know.’
The	Napan	scowled.	‘And	how	many	hundreds	of	spies	do	we	have	in	this


camp?	And	what	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	herself—do	you	imagine	she	will
permit	the	infiltration	of	strangers?’
‘Your	flaw,	Korbolo	Dom,	is	that	you	think	in	a	strictly	linear	fashion.	Ask
that	question	again,	only	this	time	ask	it	in	the	context	of	the	goddess	having
suspicions	about	us.’
The	High	Mage	was	too	distracted	to	notice	the	Napan’s	half-step	forward,
one	hand	lifting.	But	Korbolo	Dom’s	blow	died	at	that	very	moment,	as	the
import	of	Kamist	Reloe’s	challenge	reached	him.	His	eyes	slowly	widened.
Then	he	shook	his	head.	‘No,	that	would	be	too	great	a	risk	to	take.	A	Claw	let
loose	in	this	camp	would	endanger	everyone—there	would	be	no	way	to
predict	their	targets—’
‘Would	there	be	a	need	to?’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘We	are	the	Dogslayers,	Korbolo	Dom.	The	murderers	of	Coltaine,	the
Seventh,	and	the	legions	at	Aren.	More,	we	also	possess	the	mage	cadre	for	the
Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	Finally,	who	will	be	commanding	that	army	on	the
day	of	battle?	How	many	reasons	do	the	Claw	need	to	strike	at	us,	and	at	us
specifically?	What	chance	would	Sha’ik	have	if	we	were	all	dead?	Why	kill
Sha’ik	at	all?	We	can	fight	this	war	without	her	and	her	damned	goddess—
we’ve	done	it	before.	And	we’re	about	to—’
‘Enough	of	that,	Kamist	Reloe.	I	see	your	point.	So,	you	fear	that	the
goddess	will	permit	a	Claw	to	infiltrate…in	order	to	deal	with	us.	With	you,
Febryl	and	myself.	An	interesting	possibility,	but	I	still	think	it	remote.	The
goddess	is	too	heavy-handed,	too	ensnared	by	emotion,	to	think	with	such
devious,	insidious	clarity.’
‘She	does	not	have	to	initiate	the	scheme,	Korbolo	Dom.	She	need	only
comprehend	the	offer,	and	then	decide	either	to	acquiesce	or	not.	It	is	not	her
clarity	that	is	relevant,	but	that	of	Laseen’s	Claw.	And	do	you	doubt	the
cleverness	of	Topper?’
Growling	under	his	breath,	Korbolo	Dom	looked	away	for	a	moment.
‘No,’	he	finally	admitted.	‘But	I	do	rely	on	the	goddess	being	in	no	mind	to
accept	communication	from	the	Empress,	from	Topper,	or	anyone	else	who
refuses	to	kneel	to	her	will.	You	have	thought	yourself	into	a	nightmare,
Kamist	Reloe,	and	now	you	invite	me	to	join	you.	I	decline	the	offer,	High
Mage.	We	are	well	protected,	and	too	far	advanced	in	our	efforts	for	all	of	this
fretting.’
‘I	have	survived	this	long,	Korbolo	Dom,	because	of	my	talent	in
anticipating	what	my	enemies	would	attempt.	Soldiers	say	no	plan	of	battle
survives	contact	with	the	enemy.	But	the	game	of	subterfuge	is	the	very


opposite.	Plans	derive	from	persistent	contact	with	the	enemy.	Thus,	you
proceed	on	your	terms,	and	I	will	proceed	on	mine.’
‘As	you	like.	Now,	leave	me.	It	is	late,	and	I	would	sleep.’
The	High	Mage	stopped	pacing	to	fix	the	Napan	with	an	unreadable	look
for	a	moment,	then	he	swung	about	and	left	the	chamber.
Korbolo	listened	until	he	heard	the	flap	in	the	outer	room	swish	open,	then
close.	He	listened	on,	and	was	satisfied	to	hear	the	draws	being	tightened	by
one	of	his	bodyguards	positioned	just	outside	the	entrance.
Draining	the	last	of	the	wine—damned	expensive	but	tastes	no	different
from	the	dockside	swill	I	choked	down	on	the	Isle—he	flung	the	goblet	down
and	strode	to	the	mass	of	cushions	at	the	far	end.	Beds	in	every	room.	I	wonder
what	that	signifies	of	my	personality?	Then	again,	those	other	ones	are	not	for
sleeping	in,	are	they.	No,	only	this	one…
	
In	the	front	room	on	the	other	side	of	the	silk	partitions,	the	woman	lay
unmoving	on	her	own	heap	of	cushions,	where	Korbolo	had	left	her	some	time
back.
Continuous,	overwhelming	imbibing	of	durhang—like	any	other
intoxicant—created	a	process	of	diminishment	of	its	effects.	Until,	while	a
layer	of	insensate	numbness	still	persisted—a	useful	barrier	against	such
things	as	having	her	head	yanked	up	by	her	hair	then	dropped	back	down—
cool	awareness	remained	beneath	it.
Advantageous,	as	well,	the	rituals	her	master	had	inflicted	upon	her,	rituals
that	eliminated	the	weakness	of	pleasure.	There	could	be	no	loss	of	control,	not
any	more,	for	her	mind	no	longer	warred	with	feelings,	for	of	feelings	she	had
none.	An	easy	surrender,	she	had	found	to	her	delight,	for	there	had	been	little
in	her	life	before	her	initiation	to	seed	warm	remembrances	of	childhood.
And	so	she	was	well	suited	to	this	task.	Uttering	the	right	sounds	of
pleasure	to	disguise	her	indifference	to	all	of	Korbolo	Dom’s	peculiar
preferences.	And	lying	motionless,	unmindful	even	of	a	throat	slowly	filling
with	phlegm	from	the	near-liquid	smoke	of	the	durhang,	for	as	much	time	as
was	needed,	before	the	subtle,	tasteless	drops	she	had	added	to	his	wine	took
effect.
When	she	could	hear	his	deep,	slow	breaths	that	told	her	he	would	not
easily	awaken,	she	rolled	onto	her	side	in	a	fit	of	coughing.	When	it	had	passed
she	paused	again,	just	to	be	certain	that	the	Napan	still	slept.	Satisfied,	she
clambered	to	her	feet	and	tottered	to	the	tent	flap.
Fumbled	with	the	ties	until	a	gruff	voice	from	just	beyond	said,	‘Scillara,


off	to	the	latrines	again?’
And	another	voice	softly	laughed	and	added,	‘It’s	a	wonder	there’s	any
meat	on	her	at	all,	the	way	she	heaves	night	after	night.’
‘It’s	the	rust-leaf	and	the	bitter	berries	crushed	in	with	the	durhang,’	the
other	replied,	as	his	hands	took	over	the	task	of	loosening	the	draws,	and	the
flap	was	drawn	aside.
Scillara	staggered	out,	bumping	her	way	between	the	two	guards.
The	hands	that	reached	out	to	steady	invariably	found	unusual	places	to
rest,	and	squeeze.
She	would	have	enjoyed	that,	once,	in	a	slightly	offended,	irritated	way	that
none	the	less	tickled	with	pleasure.	But	now,	it	was	nothing	but	clumsy	lust	to
be	endured.
As	everything	else	in	this	world	had	to	be	endured,	while	she	waited	for
her	final	reward,	the	blissful	new	world	beyond	death.	‘The	left	hand	of	life,
holding	all	misery.	And	the	right	hand—yes,	the	one	with	the	glittering	blade,
dear—the	right	hand	of	death,	holding,	as	it	does,	the	reward	you	would	offer	to
others,	and	then	take	upon	yourself.	At	your	chosen	moment.’
Her	master ’s	words	made	sense,	as	they	always	did.	Balance	was	the	heart
of	all	things,	after	all.	And	life—that	time	of	pain	and	grief—was	but	one	side
of	that	balance.	‘The	harder,	the	more	miserable,	the	more	terrible	and
disgusting	your	life,	child,	the	greater	the	reward	beyond	death…’	Thus,	as	she
knew,	it	all	made	sense.
No	need,	then,	to	struggle.	Acceptance	was	the	only	path	to	walk.
Barring	this	one.	She	weaved	her	way	between	the	tent	rows.	The
Dogslayers’	encampment	was	precise	and	ordered,	in	the	Malazan	fashion—a
detail	she	knew	well	from	her	days	as	a	child	when	her	mother	followed	the
train	of	the	Ashok	Regiment.	Before	that	regiment	went	overseas,	leaving
hundreds	destitute—lovers	and	their	get,	servants	and	scroungers.	Her	mother
had	then	sickened	and	died.	She	had	a	father,	of	course,	one	of	the	soldiers.
Who	might	be	alive,	or	dead,	but	either	way	was	thoroughly	indifferent	to	the
child	he	had	left	behind.
Balance.
Difficult	with	a	head	full	of	durhang,	even	inured	to	it	as	she	had	become.
But	there	were	the	latrines,	down	this	slope,	and	onto	the	wooden	walkways
spanning	the	trench.	Smudge-pots	smouldering	to	cover	some	of	the	stench	and
keep	the	flies	away.	Buckets	beside	the	holed	seats,	filled	with	hand-sized
bundles	of	grass.	Larger	open-topped	casks	with	water,	positioned	out	over	the
trench	and	fixed	to	the	walkways.
Hands	held	out	to	either	side,	Scillara	navigated	carefully	across	one	of	the


narrow	bridges.
Long-term	camp	trenches	such	as	this	one	held	more	than	just	human
wastes.	Garbage	was	regularly	dumped	in	by	soldiers	and	others—or	what	had
passed	for	garbage	with	them.	But	for	the	orphans	of	this	squalid	city,	some	of
that	refuse	was	seen	as	treasure.	To	be	cleaned,	repaired	and	sold.
And	so,	figures	swarmed	in	the	darkness	below.
She	reached	the	other	side,	her	bare	feet	sinking	into	the	mud	made	by
splashes	that	had	reached	the	ridge.	‘I	remember	the	dark!’	she	sang	out,	voice
throaty	from	years	of	durhang	smoke.
There	was	a	scrabbling	from	the	trench,	and	a	small	girl,	sheathed	in
excrement,	clambered	up	to	her,	teeth	flashing	white.	‘Me	too,	sister.’
Scillara	drew	out	a	small	bag	of	coins	from	her	sash.	Their	master
frowned	on	such	gestures,	and	indeed,	they	ran	contrary	to	his	teachings,	but
she	could	not	help	herself.	She	pressed	it	into	the	girl’s	hands.	‘For	food.’
‘He	will	be	displeased,	sister—’
‘And	of	the	two	of	us,	I	alone	will	suffer	a	moment	of	torment.	So	be	it.
Now,	I	have	words	from	this	night,	to	be	brought	to	our	master…’
	
He	had	always	walked	with	a	pitching	gait,	low	to	the	ground,	sufficient	to	have
earned	him	a	host	of	unflattering	nicknames.	Toad,	crab-legs…the	names
children	gave	each	other,	some	of	which	were	known	to	persist	into	adulthood.
But	Heboric	had	worked	hard	as	a	youth—long	before	his	first,	fateful	visit
into	a	temple	of	Fener—to	excoriate	those	appellations,	to	eventually	earn
Light	Touch,	in	response	to	certain	skills	he	had	acquired	on	the	streets.	But
now,	his	sidling	walk	had	undergone	a	transformation,	yielding	to	an
instinctive	desire	to	drop	even	lower,	even	to	using	his	hands	to	propel	him
along.
Had	he	considered	it,	he	would	have	concluded,	sourly,	that	he	moved	less
like	a	cat	than	an	ape,	such	as	those	found	in	the	jungles	of	Dal	Hon.	Unpleasant
to	the	eye,	perhaps,	but	efficacious	none	the	less.
He	slowed	on	the	trail	as	he	approached	Toblakai’s	glade.	A	faint	smell	of
smoke,	the	dull	gleam	of	a	fast-cooling	fire,	the	murmur	of	voices.
Heboric	slipped	to	one	side,	among	the	stone	trees,	then	sank	down	within
sight	of	the	two	seated	at	the	hearth.
Too	long	his	self-obsession,	the	seemingly	endless	efforts	to	create	his
temple—that	now	struck	him	as	a	strange	kind	of	neurotic	nesting;	he	had
ignored	the	world	beyond	the	walls	for	too	long.	There	had	been,	he	realized
with	a	surge	of	bitter	anger,	a	host	of	subtle	alterations	to	his	personality,


concomitant	with	the	physical	gifts	he	had	received.
He	had	ceased	being	mindful.
And	that,	he	realized	as	he	studied	the	two	figures	in	the	glade,	had
permitted	a	terrible	crime.
She’s	healed	well…but	not	well	enough	to	disguise	the	truth	of	what	has
happened.	Should	I	reveal	myself?	No.	Neither	of	them	has	made	a	move	to
expose	Bidithal,	else	they	would	not	be	hiding	here.	That	means	they	would	try
to	talk	me	out	of	what	must	be	done.
But	I	warned	Bidithal.	I	warned	him,	and	he	was…amused.	Well,	I	think
that	amusement	is	about	to	end.
He	slowly	backed	away.
Then,	deep	in	the	shadows,	Heboric	hesitated.	There	was	no	clash	between
his	new	and	old	instincts	on	this	matter.	Both	demanded	blood.	And	this	night.
Immediately.	But	something	of	the	old	Heboric	was	reasserting	itself.	He	was
new	to	this	role	as	Destriant.	More	than	that,	Treach	himself	was	a	newly
arrived	god.	And	while	Heboric	did	not	believe	Bidithal	held	any	position—not
any	more—within	the	realm	of	Shadow,	his	temple	was	sanctified	to	someone.
An	attack	would	draw	in	their	respective	sources	of	power,	and	there	was
no	telling	how	swiftly,	and	how	uncontrollably,	that	clash	could	escalate.
Better	had	I	just	remained	old	Heboric.	With	hands	of	otataral	entwined
with	an	unknown	being’s	immeasurable	power…Then	I	could	have	torn	him
limb	from	limb.
He	realized	that,	instead,	he	could	do	nothing.	Not	this	night,	in	any	case.
He	would	have	to	wait,	seeking	an	opportunity,	a	moment	of	distraction.	But	to
achieve	that,	he	would	have	to	remain	hidden,	unseen—Bidithal	could	not
discover	his	sudden	elevation.	Could	not	learn	that	he	had	become	Destriant	to
Treach,	the	new	god	of	war.
The	rage	suddenly	returned,	and	he	struggled	to	push	it	away.
After	a	moment	his	breathing	slowed.	He	turned	round	and	edged	back
onto	the	trail.	This	would	require	more	thought.	Measured	thought.	Damn	you,
Treach.	You	knew	the	guise	of	a	tiger.	Gift	me	some	of	your	cunning	ways,	a
hunter’s	ways,	a	killer’s…
He	approached	the	head	of	the	trail,	and	halted	at	a	faint	sound.	Singing.
Muted,	a	child’s,	coming	from	the	ruins	of	what	had	once	been	a	modest
building	of	some	sort.	Indifferent	to	the	darkness,	his	eyes	caught	movement
and	fixed	hard	on	that	spot,	until	a	shape	resolved	itself.
A	girl	in	rags,	carrying	a	stick	that	she	held	in	both	hands.	A	dozen	or	so
dead	rhizan	hung	by	their	tails	from	her	belt.	As	he	watched,	he	saw	her	leap	up
and	swing	the	stick.	It	struck	something	and	she	scrambled	in	pursuit,	jumping


about	to	trap	a	tiny	shape	writhing	on	the	ground.	A	moment	later	and	she	lifted
the	rhizan	into	view.	A	quick	twist	of	the	neck,	then	another	tiny	body	was	tied
to	her	belt.	She	bent	down	and	retrieved	her	stick.	And	began	singing	once
more.
Heboric	paused.	He	would	have	difficulty	passing	by	her	unnoticed.	But	not
impossible.
Probably	an	unnecessary	caution.	Even	so.	He	held	to	the	shadows	as	he
edged	forward,	moving	only	when	her	back	was	turned,	his	eyes	never	leaving
her	form	for	a	moment.
A	short	while	later	and	he	was	past.
Dawn	was	approaching,	and	the	camp	was	moments	from	stirring	awake.
Heboric	increased	his	pace,	and	eventually	reached	his	tent,	slipping	inside.
Apart	from	the	girl,	he’d	seen	no-one.
And	when	she	judged	that	he	was	finally	gone,	the	girl	slowly	turned	about,
her	singing	falling	away	as	she	peered	out	into	the	gloom.	‘Funny	man,’	she
whispered,	‘do	you	remember	the	dark?’

A	sixth	of	a	bell	before	dawn,	Leoman	and	two	hundred	of	his	desert	warriors
struck	the	Malazan	encampment.	The	infantry	stationed	at	the	pickets	were	at
the	end	of	their	watch,	gathered	in	weary	groups	to	await	the	sun’s	rise—a
lapse	in	discipline	that	presented	easy	targets	for	the	archers	who	had,	on	foot,
closed	to	within	thirty	paces	of	the	line.	A	whispery	flit	of	arrows,	all	loosed	at
the	same	time,	and	the	Malazan	soldiers	were	down.
At	least	half	of	the	thirty	or	so	soldiers	had	not	been	killed	outright,	and
their	screams	of	pain	and	fear	broke	the	stillness	of	the	night.	The	archers	had
already	set	their	bows	down	and	were	darting	forward	with	their	kethra	knives
to	finish	the	wounded	sentries,	but	they	had	not	gone	ten	paces	before	Leoman
and	his	horse	warriors	thundered	around	them,	striking	hard	through	the
breach.
And	into	the	camp.
Corabb	Bhilan.	Thenu’alas	rode	at	his	commander ’s	side,	a	long-hafted
weapon	that	was	half	sword,	half	axe,	in	his	right	hand.	Leoman	was	the	centre
of	a	curved	sweep	of	attackers,	protecting	a	knot	of	additional	horse	warriors
from	which	a	steady	whirring	sound	rose.	Corabb	knew	what	that	sound
signified—his	commander	had	invented	his	own	answer	to	Moranth	munitions,
employing	a	pair	of	clay	balls	filled	with	oil	and	connected	by	a	thin	chain.	Lit


like	lamps,	they	were	swung	and	thrown	in	the	manner	of	bolas.
The	desert	warriors	were	among	the	huge	supply	wagons	now,	and	Corabb
heard	the	first	of	those	bolas	whip	outward,	the	sound	followed	by	a
whooshing	roar	of	fire.	The	darkness	vanished	in	a	red	glare.
And	then	Corabb	saw	a	figure	running	from	his	horse’s	path.	He	swung	his
long-bladed	axe.	The	impact,	as	it	struck	the	back	of	the	fleeing	Malazan’s
helmed	head,	nearly	dislocated	Corabb’s	shoulder.	A	spray	of	blood	spattered
hard	against	his	forearm	as	he	dragged	the	weapon	free—it	was	suddenly
heavier,	and	he	glanced	down	at	it,	to	see	that	the	blade	had	taken	the	helm	with
it,	having	cut	fully	half	through.	Brains	and	bits	of	bone	and	scalp	were	spilling
from	the	bronze	bowl.
Swearing,	he	slowed	his	mount’s	wild	charge	and	tried	to	shake	the	axe
clear.	There	was	fighting	on	all	sides,	now,	as	well	as	raging	flames	engulfing
at	least	a	dozen	wagons—and	squad-tents.	And	soldiers	appearing,	more	and
more	of	them.	He	could	hear	barked	orders	in	the	Malazan	tongue,	and
crossbow	quarrels	had	begun	flitting	through	the	air	towards	the	horse
warriors.
A	horn	sounded,	high	and	wavering.	His	curses	growing	fiercer,	Corabb
wheeled	his	horse	round.	He	had	already	lost	contact	with	Leoman,	although	a
few	of	his	comrades	were	in	sight.	All	of	them	responding	to	the	call	to
withdraw.	As	he	must,	as	well.
The	axe	dragged	at	his	aching	shoulder,	still	burdened	with	that	damned
helm.	He	drove	his	horse	back	up	the	broad	track	between	the	mess-tents.
Smoke	tumbled,	obscuring	the	view	before	him,	stinging	his	eyes	and	harsh	in
his	lungs.
Sudden	burning	agony	slashed	across	his	cheek,	snapping	his	head	around.
A	quarrel	clattered	against	the	ground	fifteen	paces	ahead	and	to	one	side.
Corabb	ducked	low,	twisting	in	search	of	where	it	had	come	from.
And	saw	a	squad	of	Malazans,	all	with	crossbows—all	but	one	cocked	and
trained	on	the	desert	warrior,	with	a	sergeant	berating	the	soldier	who	had
fired	too	early.	A	scene	taken	in,	in	its	entirety,	between	heartbeats.	The
bastards	were	less	then	ten	paces	distant.
Corabb	flung	his	axe	away.	With	a	scream,	he	pitched	his	horse	sideways,
directly	into	the	wall	of	one	of	the	mess-tents.	Ropes	tautened	and	snapped
heavy	stakes	skyward,	poles	splintering.	Amidst	this	stumbling	chaos,	the
warrior	heard	the	crossbows	loose—but	his	horse	was	going	down,	onto	its
side—and	Corabb	was	already	leaping	clear	of	the	saddle,	his	moccasined	feet
slipping	out	from	the	stirrups	as	he	dived.
Into	the	collapsing	tent	wall,	a	moment	before	his	horse,	rolling	with	a


scream,	followed.
The	pressure	of	that	waxed	fabric	vanished	suddenly	and	Corabb	tumbled
into	a	somersault,	once,	twice,	then	skidded	onto	his	feet,	spinning	round—
—in	time	to	see	his	horse	roll	back	upright.
Corabb	leapt	alongside	his	mount	and	vaulted	up	into	the	saddle—and	they
were	off.
And	in	the	desert	warrior ’s	mind:	numb	disbelief.
	
On	the	opposite	side	of	the	avenue,	seven	Malazan	marines	stood	or	crouched
with	spent	crossbows,	staring	as	the	rider	thundered	off	into	the	smoke.
‘Did	you	see	that?’	one	asked.
Another	frozen	moment,	shattered	at	last	when	the	soldier	named	Lutes
flung	his	weapon	down	in	disgust.
‘Pick	that	up,’	Sergeant	Borduke	growled.
‘If	Maybe	hadn’t	fired	early—’
‘I	wasn’t	sure!’	Maybe	replied.
‘Load	up,	idiots—there	might	be	a	few	left.’
‘Hey,	Sergeant,	maybe	that	horse	killed	the	cook.’
Borduke	spat.	‘The	gods	smiling	down	on	us	this	night,	Hubb?’
‘Well…’
‘Right.	The	truth	remains,	then.	We’ll	have	to	kill	him	ourselves.	Before	he
kills	us.	But	never	mind	that	for	now.	Let’s	move…’
	
The	sun	had	just	begun	to	rise	when	Leoman	drew	rein	and	halted	his	raiders.
Corabb	was	late	in	arriving—among	the	last,	in	fact—and	that	earned	a	pleased
nod	from	his	commander.	As	if	he’d	assumed	that	Corabb	had	been	taking	up
the	rear	out	of	a	sense	of	duty.	He	did	not	notice	that	his	lieutenant	had	lost	his
main	weapon.
Behind	them,	they	could	see	the	columns	of	smoke	rising	into	sunlit	sky,
and	the	distant	sound	of	shouts	reached	them,	followed	moments	later	by	the
thunder	of	horse	hoofs.
Leoman	bared	his	teeth.	‘And	now	comes	the	real	objective	of	our	attack.
Well	done	thus	far,	my	soldiers.	Hear	those	horses?	Seti,	Wickans	and
Khundryl—and	that	will	be	the	precise	order	of	the	pursuit.	The	Khundryl,
whom	we	must	be	wary	of,	will	be	burdened	by	their	armour.	The	Wickans	will
range	cautiously.	But	the	Seti,	once	they	sight	us,	will	be	headlong	in	their


pursuit.’	He	then	raised	the	flail	in	his	right	hand,	and	all	could	see	the	bloody,
matted	hair	on	the	spike	ball.	‘And	where	shall	we	lead	them?’
‘To	death!’	came	the	roaring	reply.
	
The	rising	sun	had	turned	the	distant	wall	of	spinning,	whirling	sand	gold,	a
pleasing	colour	to	Febryl’s	old,	watery	eyes.	He	sat	facing	east,	cross-legged
atop	what	had	once	been	a	gate	tower	but	was	now	a	shapeless	heap	of	rubble
softened	by	windblown	sand.
The	city	reborn	lay	to	his	back,	slow	to	awaken	on	this	day	for	reasons	of
which	only	a	scant	few	were	aware,	and	Febryl	was	one	of	those.	The	goddess
devoured.	Consuming	life’s	forces,	absorbing	the	ferocious	will	to	survive
from	her	hapless,	misguided	mortal	servants.
The	effect	was	gradual,	yet,	day	after	day,	moment	by	moment,	it	deadened.
Unless	one	was	cognizant	of	that	hunger,	of	course.	And	was	able	to	take
preventative	measures	to	evade	her	incessant	demands.
Long	ago,	Sha’ik	Reborn	had	claimed	to	know	him,	to	have	plumbed	his
every	secret,	to	have	discerned	the	hue	of	his	soul.	And	indeed,	she	had	shown
an	alarming	ability	to	speak	in	his	mind—almost	as	if	she	was	always	present,
and	only	spoke	to	occasionally	remind	him	of	that	terrifying	truth.	But	such
moments	had	diminished	in	frequency—perhaps	as	a	result	of	his	renewed
efforts	to	mask	himself—until,	now,	he	was	certain	that	she	could	no	longer
breach	his	defences.
Perhaps,	however,	the	truth	was	far	less	flattering	to	his	own	proficiencies.
Perhaps	the	influence	of	the	goddess	had	lured	Sha’ik	Reborn	into…
indifference.	Aye,	it	may	be	that	I	am	already	dead	and	am	yet	to	know	it.	That
all	I	have	planned	is	known	to	the	woman	and	goddess	both.	Am	I	alone	in
having	spies?	No.	Korbolo	has	hinted	of	his	own	agents,	and	indeed,	nothing	of
what	I	seek	will	come	to	pass	without	the	efforts	of	the	Napan’s	hidden	cadre	of
killers.
It	was,	he	reflected	with	bitter	humour,	the	nature	of	everyone	in	this	game
to	hide	as	much	of	themselves	from	others	as	they	could,	from	allies	as	well	as
enemies,	since	such	appellations	were	in	the	habit	of	reversing	without
warning.
None	the	less,	Febryl	had	faith	in	Kamist	Reloe.	The	High	Mage	had	every
reason	to	remain	loyal	to	the	broader	scheme—the	scheme	that	was	betrayal
most	prodigious—since	the	path	it	offered	was	the	only	one	that	ensured
Reloe’s	survival	in	what	was	to	come.	And	as	for	the	more	subtle	nuances
concerning	Febryl	himself,	well,	those	were	not	Kamist	Reloe’s	business.	Were


they?
Even	if	their	fruition	should	prove	fatal…to	everyone	but	me.
They	all	thought	themselves	too	clever,	and	that	was	a	flaw	inviting
exploitation.
And	what	of	me?	Eh,	dear	Febryl?	Do	you	think	yourself	clever?	He	smiled
at	the	distant	wall	of	sand.	Cleverness	was	not	essential,	provided	one	insisted
on	keeping	things	simple.	Complexity	beckoned	error,	like	a	whore	a	soldier
on	leave.	The	lure	of	visceral	rewards	that	proved	never	quite	as
straightforward	as	one	would	have	imagined	from	the	start.	But	I	will	avoid
that	trap.	I	will	not	suffer	deadly	lapses,	such	as	has	happened	to	Bidithal,
since	they	lead	to	complications—although	his	failings	will	lead	him	into	my
hands,	so	I	suppose	I	should	not	complain	too	much.
‘The	sun’s	light	folds	over	darkness.’
He	started,	twisted	around.	‘Chosen	One!’
‘Deep	breaths,	old	man,	will	ease	your	hammering	heart.	I	can	wait	a
moment,	for	I	am	patient.’
She	stood	almost	at	his	side—of	course	he	had	seen	no	shadow,	for	the	sun
was	before	him.	But	how	had	she	come	with	such	silence?	How	long	had	she
been	standing	there?	‘Chosen	One,	have	you	come	to	join	me	in	greeting	the
dawn?’
‘Is	that	what	you	do,	when	you	come	here	at	the	beginning	of	each	day?	I’d
wondered.’
‘I	am	a	man	of	humble	habits,	mistress.’
‘Indeed.	A	certain	bluntness	that	affects	a	quality	of	simplicity.	As	if	by
adhering	to	simple	habits	in	the	flesh	and	bone,	your	mind	will	in	turn	strive
towards	the	same	perfection.’
He	said	nothing,	though	his	heart	had	anything	but	slowed	its	thundering
pace.
Sha’ik	then	sighed.	‘Did	I	say	perfection?	Perhaps	I	should	tell	you
something,	then,	to	aid	you	in	your	quest.’
‘Please,’	he	gasped	softly.
‘The	Whirlwind	Wall	is	virtually	opaque,	barring	that	diffuse	sunlight.	And
so	I	am	afraid	I	must	correct	you,	Febryl.	You	are	facing	northeast,	alas.’	She
pointed.	‘The	sun	is	actually	over	there,	High	Mage.	Do	not	fret	so—you	have
at	least	been	consistent.	Oh,	and	there	is	another	matter	that	I	believe	must	be
clarified.	Few	would	argue	that	my	goddess	is	consumed	by	anger,	and	so
consumes	in	turn.	But	what	you	might	see	as	the	loss	of	many	to	feed	a	singular
hunger	is	in	truth	worthy	of	an	entirely	different	analogy.’
‘Oh?’


‘Yes.	She	does	not	strictly	feed	on	the	energies	of	her	followers,	so	much
as	provide	for	them	a	certain	focus.	Little	different,	in	fact,	from	that
Whirlwind	Wall	out	there,	which,	while	seeming	to	diffuse	the	light	of	the	sun,
in	fact	acts	to	trap	it.	Have	you	ever	sought	to	pass	through	that	wall,	Febryl?
Particularly	at	dusk,	when	the	day’s	heat	has	most	fully	been	absorbed?	It
would	burn	you	down	to	bone,	High	Mage,	in	an	instant.	So,	you	see	how
something	that	appears	one	way	is	in	truth	the	very	opposite	way?	Burnt	crisp
—a	horrible	image,	isn’t	it?	One	would	need	to	be	desert-born,	or	possess
powerful	sorcery	to	defy	that.	Or	very	deep	shadows…’
Living	simply,	Febryl	belatedly	considered,	should	not	be	made
synonymous	with	seeing	simply,	since	the	former	was	both	noble	and	laudable,
whilst	the	latter	was	a	flaw	most	deadly.	A	careless	error,	and,	alas,	he	had
made	it.
And	now,	he	concluded,	it	was	too	late.
And	as	for	altering	the	plans,	oh,	it	was	too	late	for	that	as	well.
Somehow,	the	newly	arriving	day	had	lost	its	glamour.


Chapter	Nineteen

It	was	said	the	captain’s	adopted	child—who	at	that	time	was	known
by	the	unfortunate	name	of	Grub—refused	the	wagon	on	the
march.	That	he	walked	the	entire	way,	even	as,	in	the	first	week
beneath	the	year ’s	hottest	sun,	fit	and	hale	soldiers	stumbled	and
fell.
This	is	perhaps	invention,	for	by	all	accounts	he	was	at	that	time
no	more	than	five	years	of	age.	And	the	captain	himself,	from
whose	journals	much	of	that	journey	and	the	clash	in	which	it
culminated	is	related	in	detail,	writes	very	little	of	Grub,	more
concerned	as	he	was	with	the	rigours	of	command.	As	a	result,	of
the	future	First	Sword	of	the	Late	Empire	period,	scant	details,
beyond	the	legendary	and	probably	fictitious,	are	known.
LIVES	OF	THE	THREE
MORAGALLE
The	sound	of	flies	and	wasps	was	a	solid,	buzzing	hum	in	the	hot	air	of	the
gorge,	and	already	the	stench	had	grown	overpowering.	Fist	Gamet	loosened
the	clasp	on	the	buckle	and	lifted	the	battered	iron	helmet	from	his	head.	The
felt	liner	was	sodden	with	sweat,	itching	against	his	scalp,	but,	as	the	flies
swarmed	him,	he	did	not	remove	it.
He	continued	watching	from	the	slight	rise	at	the	south	end	of	the	gorge	as
the	Adjunct	walked	her	horse	through	the	carnage	below.
Three	hundred	Seti	and	over	a	hundred	horses	lay	dead,	mostly	from
arrows,	in	the	steep-sided	ravine	they	had	been	led	into.	It	could	not	have	taken
long,	even	including	rounding	up	and	leading	off	the	surviving	mounts.	There
had	been	less	than	a	bell	between	the	advance	Seti	riders	and	the	Khundryl,	and
had	Temul	not	ordered	his	Wickans	back	to	cover	the	main	army…well,	we
would	have	lost	them	as	well.
As	it	was,	those	Wickans	had	prevented	another	raid	on	the	supply	train,
their	presence	alone	sufficient	to	trigger	a	sudden	withdrawal	by	the	enemy—


with	not	a	single	drop	of	blood	spilled.	The	warleader	commanding	the	desert
horse	warriors	had	been	too	cagey	to	see	his	force	ensnared	in	an	out-and-out
battle.
Far	better	to	rely	upon…errors	in	judgement.	The	Seti	not	assigned	as
flanking	riders	to	the	vanguard	had	defied	orders,	and	had	died	as	a	result.	And
all	the	bastard	needs	from	us	is	more	stupid	mistakes.
Something	in	the	scene	below	was	raising	the	hairs	on	his	neck.	The
Adjunct	rode	alone	through	the	slaughter,	her	back	straight,	unmindful	of	her
horse’s	skittish	progress.
It’s	never	the	flies	that	are	the	trouble,	it’s	the	wasps.	One	sting	and	that
well-bred	beast	will	lose	its	mind.	Could	rear	and	throw	her	off,	break	her	neck.
Or	could	bolt,	straight	down	the	gorge,	and	then	try	to	take	one	of	the	steep
sides…like	some	of	those	Seti	horses	tried	to	do…
Instead,	the	horse	simply	continued	picking	its	way	over	the	bodies,	and	the
clouds	of	wasps	did	little	more	than	rise	and	then	wheel	from	its	path,	alighting
once	more	upon	their	feast	as	soon	as	mount	and	rider	had	passed.
An	old	soldier	at	the	Fist’s	side	coughed	and	spat,	then,	at	Gamet’s	glance,
mumbled	an	apology.
‘No	need…Captain.	It’s	a	grisly	sight,	and	we’re	all	too	close…’
‘Not	that,	sir.	Only…’	he	paused,	then	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘Never	mind,
sir.	Just	an	old	memory,	that’s	all.’
Gamet	nodded.	‘I’ve	a	few	of	those	myself.	So,	Fist	Tene	Baralta	wants	to
know	if	he	needs	to	send	his	healers	forward.	The	answer	you	may	bring	him
lies	before	you.’
‘Aye,	sir.’
He	watched	the	grizzled	old	soldier	back	his	horse	clear	then	swing	it
round	and	ride	off.	Then	Gamet	fixed	his	attention	once	more	upon	the
Adjunct.
She	had	reached	the	far	end,	where	most	of	the	bodies	lay,	heaped	up
against	blood-splashed	stone	walls,	and,	after	a	long	moment,	during	which
she	scanned	the	scene	on	all	sides,	she	gathered	the	reins	and	began	retracing
her	path.
Gamet	set	the	helm	on	his	head	once	more	and	closed	the	clasp.
She	reached	the	slope	and	rode	up	to	halt	alongside	him.
He	had	never	before	seen	her	expression	so	severe.	A	woman	with	few	of	a
woman’s	charms,	as	they	say	of	her,	in	tones	approaching	pity.	‘Adjunct.’
‘He	left	many	of	them	wounded,’	she	said.	‘Anticipating,	perhaps,	that	we’d
reach	them	in	time.	Wounded	Malazans	are	better	than	dead	ones,	after	all.’
‘Assuming	that	warleader	seeks	to	delay	us,	aye.’


‘He	does.	Even	with	the	Khundryl	supply	lines,	our	resources	are	strained
as	it	is.	The	loss	of	the	wagons	last	night	will	be	felt	by	everyone.’
‘Then	why	didn’t	Sha’ik	send	this	warleader	against	us	as	soon	as	we
crossed	the	Vathar	River?	We’re	a	week	or	less	away	from	the	Whirlwind	Wall.
She	could	have	purchased	another	month	or	more,	and	we’d	be	in	far	worse
shape	when	we	finally	arrived.’
‘You	are	correct,	Fist.	And	I	have	no	answer	for	you.	Temul	has	gauged
this	raiding	party’s	strength	at	just	under	two	thousand—he	was	fairly	certain
that	the	midday	contact	on	the	flank	revealed	the	enemy’s	full	force,	since	he
sighted	supply	horses	as	well	as	those	taken	from	the	Seti.	Thus,	a	rather	large
raiding	army.’
Gamet	ruminated	on	this	for	a	time,	then	he	grunted.	‘It’s	almost	as	if	we’re
facing	a	confused	opposition,	one	at	odds	with	itself.’
‘The	same	thought	had	occurred	to	me.	For	the	moment,	however,	we	must
concern	ourselves	with	this	warleader,	else	he	bleed	us	to	death.’
Gamet	swung	his	horse	around.	‘More	words	with	Gall,	then,’	he	said,
grimacing.	‘If	we	can	get	them	out	of	their	great-grandfathers’	armour,	they
might	actually	manage	a	ride	up	a	hill	without	leaving	their	horses	blown.’
‘I	want	the	marines	out	tonight,	Fist.’
His	eyes	narrowed.	‘The	marines,	Adjunct?	On	foot?	You	wish	the	pickets
bolstered?’
She	drew	a	deep	breath.	‘In	the	year	1147,	Dassem	Ultor	was	faced	with	a
similar	situation,	with	a	much	smaller	army	and	three	entire	tribal	nations
mauling	him	virtually	every	night.’
After	a	moment	Gamet	nodded.	‘I	know	the	scenario,	Adjunct,	and	I	recall
his	answer.	The	marines	will	be	sent	out	tonight.’
‘Be	sure	they	understand	what	is	expected	of	them,	Fist	Gamet.’
‘There’s	some	veterans	among	them,’	he	replied.	‘And	in	any	case,	I	plan
to	command	the	operation	myself.’
‘That	will	not	be—’
‘Yes,	it	will,	Adjunct.	My	apologies.	But…yes,	it	will.’
‘So	be	it.’
It	was	one	thing	to	doubt	his	commander ’s	measure,	but	another	entirely	to
doubt	his	own.
	
There	were	three	types	of	scorpion	common	in	the	odhan,	none	of	which
displayed	any	toleration	for	either	of	the	others.	Early	in	the	second	week
Strings	had	drawn	his	two	fellow	sergeants	aside	to	unveil	his	scheme.	Both


Gesler	and	Borduke	had	proved	agreeable,	particularly	at	the	offer	of	splitting
the	profits	three	ways.	Borduke	was	first	to	draw	the	odd-coloured	stone	and
was	quick	to	choose	the	Red-backed	Bastard—outwardly	the	meanest	of	the
three	scorpion	types.	Gesler	had	followed,	choosing	the	amber	In	Out—so
named	for	its	transparent	exoskeleton	through	which,	if	one	was	inclined	to
look	carefully,	various	poisons	could	be	seen	racing	beneath	its	carapace.
The	two	sergeants	had	then	looked	with	pity	upon	their	hapless	companion.
The	Lord’s	luck	that	the	man	with	the	idea	in	the	first	place	should	be	left	with
the	Birdshit	scorpion—puny	and	flat	and	black	and	looking	like	its	namesake.
Of	course,	when	it	came	to	the	three-way	split	of	the	main	profits,	none	of	that
really	mattered.	Only	in	the	private	wagers	between	the	three	sergeants	would
Strings	come	out	wanting.
But	Strings	had	affected	only	mild	disappointment	at	being	left	with	the
Birdshit,	answering	with	naught	but	a	slight	shrug	as	he	collected	the	handful
of	pebbles	they	had	used	in	choosing	the	order	of	selection.	And	neither	Gesler
nor	Borduke	caught	the	old	sapper ’s	twitch	of	a	smile	as	he	turned	away,	nor
his	seemingly	casual	glance	to	where	Cuttle	sat	in	the	shade	of	a	boulder—a
glance	answered	with	the	slightest	of	nods.
The	squads	were	then	set	to	the	task	of	finding	their	respective	champions
whilst	on	the	march,	and,	when	that	failed,	at	dusk	when	the	horrid	little
creatures	were	wont	to	scuttle	out	from	their	hiding	places	in	search	of
something	to	kill.
Word	quickly	spread,	and	soon	the	wagers	started	pouring	in.	Borduke’s
soldier,	Maybe,	was	chosen	for	the	task	of	bet-holder,	given	his	extraordinary
ability	to	retain	facts.	And	one	Holder	was	selected	from	each	squad,	who	then
in	turn	selected	a	Trainer.
The	afternoon	following	the	raid	and	the	slaughter	of	the	Seti,	Strings
slowed	his	pace	during	the	march,	until	he	fell	in	step	with	Bottle	and	Tarr.
Despite	his	casual	expression,	the	truth	was,	the	bile	roiled	sour	in	his	stomach.
The	Fourteenth	had	found	its	own	scorpion,	out	there	in	the	wastes	beyond,	and
it	had	just	delivered	its	first	sting.	The	mood	of	the	soldiers	was	low,	and
uncertainty	gnawed	at	their	confidence.	None	had	believed,	it	was	clear,	that	the
first	blood	they	tasted	would	be	their	own.	Got	to	get	their	minds	off	it.
‘How’s	little	Joyful,	Bottle?’
The	mage	shrugged.	‘As	hungry	and	nasty	as	ever,	Sergeant.’
Strings	nodded.	‘And	how’s	the	training	coming	along,	Corporal?’
Tarr	frowned	beneath	the	rim	of	his	helm.	‘All	right,	I	suppose.	As	soon	as
I	figure	out	what	kind	of	training	it	needs,	I’ll	get	right	on	it.’
‘Good,	the	situation	sounds	ideal.	Spread	the	word.	First	battle’s	tonight,


one	bell	after	we	set	camp.’
Both	soldiers	swung	their	heads	round	at	this.
‘Tonight?’	Bottle	asked.	‘After	what	just—’
‘You	heard	me.	Gesler	and	Borduke	are	getting	their	beauties	primed,
same	as	us.	We’re	ready,	lads.’
‘It’s	going	to	draw	quite	a	crowd,’	Corporal	Tarr	said,	shaking	his	head.
‘The	lieutenant	won’t	help	but	wonder—’
‘Not	just	the	lieutenant,	I’d	imagine,’	Strings	replied.	‘But	there	won’t	be
much	of	a	crowd.	We’ll	use	the	old	word-line	system.	Run	the	commentary
back	through	the	whole	camp.’
‘Joyful’s	going	to	get	skewered,’	Bottle	muttered,	his	expression	growing
sorrowful.	‘And	here	I	been	feeding	her,	every	night.	Big	juicy	capemoths…
she’d	just	pounce	real	pretty,	then	start	eating	until	there	wasn’t	nothing	left	but
a	couple	wings	and	a	crunched-up	ball.	Then	she’d	spend	half	the	night
cleaning	her	pincers	and	licking	her	lips—’
‘Lips?’	Smiles	asked	from	behind	the	three	men.	‘What	lips?	Scorpions
don’t	have	lips—’
‘What	do	you	know?’	Bottle	shot	back.	‘You	won’t	even	get	close—’
‘When	I	get	close	to	a	scorpion	I	kill	it.	Which	is	what	any	sane	person
would	do.’
‘Sane?’	the	mage	retorted.	‘You	pick	them	up	and	start	pulling	things	off!
Tail,	pincers,	legs—I	ain’t	seen	nothing	so	cruel	in	my	life!’
‘Well,	ain’t	that	close	enough	to	see	if	it’s	got	lips?’
‘Where’s	it	all	go,	I	wonder?’	Tarr	muttered.
Bottle	nodded.	‘I	know,	it’s	amazing.	She’s	so	tiny…’
‘That’s	our	secret,’	Strings	said	quietly.
‘What	is?’
‘The	reason	why	I	picked	a	Birdshit,	soldiers.’
‘You	didn’t	pick…’
At	the	suspicious	silence	that	followed,	Strings	simply	smiled.	Then	he
shrugged.	‘Hunting’s	one	thing.	An	easy	thing.	Birdshits	don’t	need	to	get…
elaborate,	killing	a	maimed	capemoth.	It’s	when	they	have	to	fight.	Protecting
territory,	or	their	young.	That’s	when	the	surprise	comes.	You	think	Joyful’s
going	to	lose	tonight,	Bottle?	Think	your	heart’s	going	to	get	broken?	Relax,
lad,	old	Strings	here	has	always	got	your	tender	feelings	in	mind…’
‘You	can	drop	that	“Strings”	bit,	Sergeant,’	Bottle	said	after	a	moment.	‘We
all	know	who	you	are.	We	all	know	your	real	name.’
‘Well,	that’s	damned	unfortunate.	If	it	gets	out	to	the	command—’
‘Oh,	it	won’t,	Fiddler.’


‘Maybe	not	on	purpose,	but	in	the	heat	of	battle?’
‘Who’s	going	to	listen	to	our	screams	of	panic	in	a	battle,	Sergeant?’
Fiddler	shot	the	young	man	a	look,	gauging,	then	he	grinned.	‘Good	point.
Still,	be	careful	what	you	say	and	when	you	say	it.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.	Now,	could	you	explain	that	surprise	you	were	talking
about?’
‘No.	Wait	and	see.’
Strings	fell	silent	then,	noting	a	small	party	of	riders	approaching	down
the	line	of	march.	‘Straighten	up,	soldiers.	Officers	coming.’
Fist	Gamet,	the	sergeant	saw,	was	looking	old,	worn	out.	Getting	dragged
out	of	retirement	was	never	a	good	thing,	he	knew,	since	the	first	thing	that	an
old	soldier	put	away	was	his	nerve,	and	that	was	hard,	if	not	impossible,	to	get
back.	That	stepping	away,	of	course,	marked	a	particular	kind	of	retirement—
and	one	a	cautious	soldier	usually	avoided.	Abandoning	the	lifestyle	was	one
thing,	but	surrendering	the	deadly	edge	was	another.	Studying	the	Fist	as	the
man	rode	up,	Fiddler	felt	a	tremor	of	unease.
Accompanying	Gamet	were	Captain	Keneb	and	the	lieutenant,	the	latter	so
grim-faced	as	to	be	near	comical.	His	officer	mask,	with	which	he	tries	to	look
older	and	thus	more	professional.	Instead,	it’s	the	scowl	of	a	constipated	man.
Someone	should	tell	him…
The	threesome	reined	in	to	walk	their	horses	alongside	Fiddler ’s	own
squad—somewhat	unnerving	to	the	sergeant,	though	he	offered	them	a	nod.
Keneb’s	eyes,	he	noted,	were	on	Cuttle.
But	it	was	Ranal	who	spoke	first.	‘Sergeant	Strings.’
‘Aye,	sir?’
‘You	and	Cuttle,	please,	off	to	one	side	for	a	private	conversation.’	Then	he
raised	his	voice	to	the	squad	marching	ahead.	‘Sergeant	Gesler	and	Corporal
Stormy,	back	with	us	on	the	double.’
‘Four	should	be	enough,’	the	Fist	rumbled,	‘to	see	the	instructions	properly
delivered	to	the	other	squads.’
‘Yes,	sir,’	said	Ranal,	who	had	been	about	to	call	over	Borduke.
When	the	four	marines	were	assembled,	Fist	Gamet	cleared	his	throat,	then
began,	‘It’s	clear	you	are	all	veterans.	And	Captain	Keneb	informs	me	that	you
have	marched	in	these	lands	before—no,	I	need	no	more	details	of	that.	My
reliance	depends	on	that	very	experience,	however.	The	Adjunct	wishes	the
marines	to	answer	the	desert	raiders	tonight.’
He	fell	silent	then.
And	no-one	spoke	for	a	time,	as	the	significance	of	the	Fist’s	words	slowly
settled	in	the	minds	of	the	four	marines.


Finally,	Captain	Keneb	said,	‘Aye,	Dassem’s	answer,	all	those	years	ago.
It’s	fortunate,	then,	that	you’d	planned	on	using	the	word-line	this	evening.
Simple	enough	to	keep	it	going	once	the	three-way	fight’s	finished.’	He	leaned
over	slightly	in	his	saddle	and	said	to	Fiddler,	‘You’ve	the	Birdshit,	Sergeant?
What	are	the	odds	running	at	right	now?’
‘Maybe	says	it’s	about	forty	to	one,’	Fiddler	replied,	keeping	his	face
straight.
‘Even	better	than	I’d	hoped,’	Keneb	replied,	leaning	back.	‘But	I	should
add,	Sergeant,	that	I’ve	convinced	the	Fist	to	back	your	Birdshit	as	well.’
‘Ten	jakatas,’	Gamet	said,	‘and	in	this	I	rely	upon	the	captain’s…
experience.	And	yours,	Sergeant…Strings.’
‘Uh,	we’ll	do	our	best,	sir.’
Gesler	turned	to	Stormy.	‘Smell	something,	Corporal?’
The	huge	Falari	with	the	flint	sword	on	his	back	scowled.	‘Ain’t	no
scorpions	on	the	coasts,	dammit.	Aye,	Sergeant,	I’m	smelling	something	all
right.’
‘Get	used	to	it,’	Cuttle	advised.
Ranal	was	looking	confused,	but	wisely	said	nothing…for	now.
‘Use	the	word-line,’	Keneb	said,	resuming	his	instructions,	‘and	remember,
make	sure	the	toughest	squads	are	the	ones	showing	their	smiles.’
‘Aye,	Captain,’	Fiddler	replied,	wondering	if	he	should	reassess	his
opinion	of	Keneb.
‘One	last	thing,’	the	man	added.	‘Fist	Gamet	will	be	commanding	the
operation	tonight.	Accordingly,	I	want	your	two	squads	and	Borduke’s	to
double	your	duties	tonight.’
Oh,	Hood’s	balls	under	a	big	rock.	‘Understood,	Captain.’
	
The	soldiers	of	the	Fourteenth	Army	were	strangely	arrayed	throughout	the
encampment	once	the	tents	had	been	raised	and	the	cookfires	started,
seemingly	casually	seated	in	a	manner	that,	if	seen	from	on	high,	would	have
resembled	a	vast,	knotted	rope.	And	following	the	meal,	activities	seemed	to
cease	entirely,	barring	the	reluctant	marching	out	of	the	soldiers	on	first	picket
duty.
In	one	particular	place,	centred	on	the	marines	of	the	9th	Company	of	the
8th	Legion,	a	somewhat	different	assembly	of	soldiers	was	apparent—a
smallish,	exclusive	ring,	surrounding	a	still	smaller	ring	of	daggers	thrust	into
the	ground,	edge	inward,	at	a	spacing	of	two	finger-widths.	For	the	moment,
that	inner	ring	was	empty,	the	sand	smoothed	flat	and	free	of	pebbles.


Maybe	was	the	last	soldier	to	join	the	others	waiting	impatiently	around	the
modest	arena,	saying	nothing	though	his	lips	moved	in	a	silent	recitation	of
numbers	and	names.	Seeing	the	eyes	of	the	others	on	him,	he	gave	a	single	nod.
Fiddler	swung	to	Bottle.	‘Bring	out	Joyful	Union,	lad.’
Borduke	and	Gesler	issued	similar	instructions	for	their	respective
combatants.	The	Red-backed	Bastard	had	been	named	Mangonel	by	Borduke’s
squad,	while	Gesler	and	company	had	named	their	amber	In	Out	scorpion
Clawmaster.
The	three	boxes	were	brought	forward	and	Fiddler	said	to	his	fellow
sergeants,	‘All	right,	here	and	now	we’re	to	look	upon	our	beauties,	and	so
swear	that	no	alterations	have	been	made	to	them,	either	by	sorcery	or	alchemy
or	any	other	means.	They	are	natural	as	the	day	we	first	found	them.
Unchanged.	Each	of	us	will	examine	each	of	the	three	scorpions—as	closely	as
we	might	choose,	including	the	assistance	of	a	mage	if	desired,	and	then	swear
out	loud,	by	whatever	gods	we	normally	swear	by,	as	precise	a	statement	of
what	we	see	as	we	can.	Here,	I’ll	start.’
He	gestured	and	the	three	boxes	were	set	down	just	outside	the	knife	ring.
The	first	wooden	container—Borduke’s—had	its	lid	removed	and	Fiddler
leaned	close.	He	was	silent	for	a	long	time,	then	he	nodded.	‘I,	Sergeant	Strings
of	the	4th	squad	in	the	9th	Company	of	the	8th	Legion,	swear	by	the	ghosts	of
the	Deadhouse	and	every	other	nasty	nightmare	that	haunts	me	that	the	creature
before	me	is	a	natural,	unaltered	Red-backed	Bastard	scorpion.’
The	sergeant	then	moved	on	to	Gesler ’s	champion,	and	after	a	long
examination	he	sighed	and	nodded,	repeating	his	sworn	vow	on	behalf	of	the	In
Out	scorpion	scuttling	about	in	the	small	wooden	box.
He	then	concluded	with	his	own	Joyful	Union.
Gesler	followed	the	procedure,	seeking	the	added	opinions	of	both	Tavos
Pond	and	Sands	during	his	protracted	examination	of	Joyful	Union,	whilst
Fiddler	leaned	back	with	a	slight	smile	on	his	bearded	face,	waiting	patiently
until,	with	a	snarl,	Gesler	swore	his	vow.	‘I,	Sergeant	Gesler	of	the	5th	squad	in
the	9th	Company	of	the	8th	Legion,	swear	by	the	two	Lords	of	Summer,	Fener
and	Treach,	that	the	creature	before	me	is	a	natural,	unaltered	Birdshit	scorpion
—even	though	I	know	there’s	something	about	it	I’m	not	seeing	and	I’m	about
to	lose	my	life’s	savings	on	the	Sergeants’	Wager.’
Fiddler ’s	smile	broadened	momentarily.
Borduke	crawled	up	to	Joyful	Union	and	came	as	close	as	was	possible
without	being	stung,	his	face	almost	inside	the	small	box.	Since	that	draped	the
motionless	creature	in	shadow	he	cursed	and	leaned	back	slightly.	‘I	should
know	about	scorpions,	shouldn’t	I?	But	all	I	ever	do	is	stamp	on	them—like


any	sane	man	would	do.	Sure,	I	knew	a	whore	once	who	kept	one	on	a	thong
about	her	neck,	as	golden	as	the	skin	of	her	breasts—tender	nipples,	you	see,
and	she	didn’t	like	them	manhandled—’
‘Get	on	with	it,’	Gesler	snapped.
‘Don’t	rush	me.	I	don’t	like	being	rushed.’
‘All	right,	I	won’t	rush	you.	Just	swear	your	damned	vow	before	my	heart
flies	out	to	fill	my	breeches.’
‘I,	Borduke	of	the	6th	squad	in	the	9th	Company	of	the	8th	Legion,	swear
on	the	downy	belly	of	the	Queen	of	Dreams	that	the	creature	before	me	is	a
natural,	unaltered	Birdshit	scorpion,	and	may	my	father ’s	ghost	remain	in	its
tomb,	since	the	inheritance	was	mine	to	lose	anyway,	right?	Dead	means	you
don’t	care	any	more,	right?	It	had	better,	because	if	it	doesn’t,	then	I’m	doomed
to	paternal	haunting	for	the	rest	of	my	days.’
‘The	worst	kind,’	Lutes	muttered.
‘Another	word	from	you,	soldier,’	Borduke	growled,	moving	back	into	the
circle,	‘and	I’ll	make	you	the	only	one	smiling	later	tonight.’
‘Besides,’	Balgrid	said,	‘it	ain’t	the	worst	kind.	Maternal	haunting—now
that’s	a	killer.	How	long	can	a	man	stand	being	seven	years	old?’
‘Will	you	two	be	quiet!’	Borduke	snarled,	his	large-knuckled	fingers
clutching	as	if	squeezing	invisible	throats.
‘We	ready?’	Fiddler	quietly	asked.
‘She’ll	hide,	won’t	she?’	Gesler	demanded.	‘Wait	till	the	other	two	have
chopped	and	stabbed	each	other	up	before	pouncing	on	the	mangled	survivor!
That’s	it,	isn’t	it?	Her	jelly	brains	are	purer	than	theirs,	purer	and	smarter,
aren’t	they?’
Fiddler	shrugged.	‘Wouldn’t	know	about	that,	Gesler.	Are	you	done?’
The	bronzed-hued	marine	settled	back,	the	muscles	of	his	jaw	bunching.
‘How’s	the	word-line,	Cuttle?’
‘Been	repeating	every	word	since	we	first	settled,	Fid,’	the	sapper	replied.
‘And	so	legends	were	born,’	Koryk	rumbled	with	facetious	portent.
‘Into	the	arena,	then,’	Fiddler	instructed.
The	boxes	were	gingerly	lifted	and	held	over	the	arena.
‘Equidistant?	Good.	Tip	’em,	lads.’
Mangonel	was	the	first	to	land,	tail	arched	and	pincers	out	as	it	scuttled
close	to	the	knife-edge	barrier,	upon	which,	a	hair ’s	breadth	from	the	iron
blades,	it	halted	and	then	backed	away,	its	carapace	flushing	red	with	its
characteristic	mindless	rage.	Clawmaster	was	next,	seeming	to	leap	down
ready	for	war,	fluids	racing	beneath	its	amber-tinted	shell.
Joyful	Union	came	last,	slow	and	measured,	so	low	on	the	sand	as	to	seem


belly-down.	Pincers	tucked	away,	tail	curled	to	port	and	quiescent.	Dwarfed	by
the	other	two	scorpions,	its	black	shell	somewhere	between	glossy	and	flat.	Its
multiple	legs	scuttled	it	forward	slightly,	then	it	froze.
Gesler	hissed.	‘If	she	plucks	a	couple	knives	from	the	ring	and	uses	’em,
I’m	going	to	kill	you,	Fid.’
‘No	need,’	Fiddler	replied,	his	attention	divided	between	what	was	going
on	in	the	arena	and	Ibb’s	running	commentary,	the	man’s	voice	harsh	with
tension	as	he	waxed	creative	in	describing	what	had,	up	to	now,	been
essentially	nothing	worth	comment.
That	suddenly	changed	as	three	things	occurred	almost	simultaneously.
Joyful	Union	sauntered	into	the	middle	of	the	arena.	Mangonel’s	assortment	of
natural	weapons	all	cocked	in	unison,	even	as	the	creature	began	backing	up,
its	shell	turning	fiery	red.	Clawmaster	suddenly	wheeled	and	darted	straight	at
the	nearest	wall	of	blades,	halting	a	moment	before	impact,	pincers	waving
wildly.
‘He	wants	mommy,	looks	like,	Hubb,’	Koryk	drily	observed.
Clawmaster ’s	Holder	softly	whimpered	in	answer.
Then,	after	a	frozen	moment	from	all	three	scorpions,	Joyful	Union	finally
lifted	its	tail.
Upon	which,	all	but	Fiddler	stared	in	utter	disbelief,	as	Joyful	Union
seemed	to…split.	Horizontally.	Into	two	identical,	but	thinner,	flatter
scorpions.	That	then	raced	outward,	one	to	Mangonel,	the	other	to	Clawmaster
—each	like	a	village	mongrel	charging	a	bull	bhederin,	so	extreme	their
comparative	sizes.
Red-backed	Bastard	and	In	Out	both	did	their	best,	but	were	no	match	in
speed,	nor	ferocity,	as	tiny	pincers	snipped—audibly—through	legs,	through
tail,	through	arm-joints,	then,	with	the	larger	creature	immobile	and	helpless,	a
casual,	almost	delicate	stab	of	stinger.
With	In	Out’s	translucent	shell,	the	horrid	bright	green	of	that	poison	was
visible—and	thus	described	in	ghastly	detail	by	Ibb—as	it	spread	out	from	the
puncture	until	Clawmaster ’s	once	beautiful	amber	was	gone,	replaced	by	a
sickly	green	that	deepened	before	their	eyes	to	a	murky	black.
‘Dead	as	dung,’	Hubb	moaned.	‘Clawmaster…’
Mangonel	suffered	an	identical	fate.
With	its	enemies	vanquished,	the	two	Birdshit	scorpions	rushed	back	into
each	other ’s	arms—and,	in	the	blink	of	an	eye,	were	as	one	once	more.
‘Cheat!’	Stormy	bellowed,	rearing	to	his	feet	and	fumbling	to	draw	his	flint
sword.
Gesler	leapt	up	and,	along	with	Truth,	struggled	to	restrain	their	raging


comrade.	‘We	looked,	Stormy!’	Gesler	yelled.	‘We	looked	for	anything—then
we	swore!	I	swore!	By	Fener	and	Treach,	damn	you!	How	could	any	of	us	have
known	“Joyful	Union”	wasn’t	just	a	cute	name?’
Glancing	up,	Fiddler	met	Cuttle’s	steady	gaze.	The	sapper	mouthed	the
words	We’re	rich,	you	bastard.
The	sergeant,	with	a	final	glance	at	Gesler	and	Truth—who	were	dragging
a	foaming	Stormy	away—then	moved	to	crouch	down	beside	Ibb.	‘All	right,
lad,	what	follows	is	for	the	marines	only,	and	especially	the	sergeants.	We’re
about	to	become	our	own	Joyful	Union	to	big,	bad	Mangonel	tonight.	I’ll
explain	what	the	Adjunct	has	ordered—repeat	what	I	say,	Ibb,	word	for	word—
got	it?’
	
Three	bells	had	passed	since	the	sunset.	Dust	from	the	Whirlwind	Wall
obscured	the	stars,	making	the	darkness	beyond	the	hearth-fires	almost
impenetrable.	Squads	from	the	infantry	trooped	out	to	relieve	those	stationed	at
the	pickets.	In	the	Khundryl	camp,	the	warriors	removed	their	heavy	armour
and	prepared	to	settle	in	for	the	night.	Along	the	army	encampment’s
outermost	trenches,	Wickan	and	Seti	horse	warriors	patrolled.
At	the	4th	squad’s	fire,	Fiddler	returned	from	the	company’s	wagons	with
his	kit	bag.	He	set	it	down	and	untied	the	draws.
Nearby	sprawled	Cuttle,	his	eyes	glittering	reflected	flames,	watching	as
the	sergeant	began	withdrawing	variously	sized,	hide-wrapped	objects.
Moments	later	he	had	assembled	a	dozen	such	items,	which	he	then	began
unwrapping,	revealing	the	glint	of	polished	wood	and	blackened	iron.
The	others	in	the	squad	were	busy	checking	over	their	weapons	and
armour	one	last	time,	saying	nothing	as	the	tension	slowly	built	among	the
small	group	of	soldiers.
‘Been	some	time	since	I	last	saw	one	of	those,’	Cuttle	muttered	as	Fiddler
laid	out	the	objects.	‘I’ve	seen	imitations,	some	of	them	almost	as	good	as	the
originals.’
Fiddler	grunted.	‘There’s	a	few	out	there.	It’s	the	knock-back	where	the
biggest	danger	lies,	since	if	it’s	too	hard	the	whole	damn	thing	explodes	upon
release.	Me	and	Hedge	worked	out	this	design	ourselves,	then	we	found	a	Mare
jeweller	in	Malaz	City—what	she	was	doing	there	I’ve	no	idea—’
‘A	jeweller?	Not	a	weaponsmith?’
‘Aye.’	He	began	assembling	the	crossbow.	‘And	a	wood-carver	for	the
stops	and	plugs—those	need	replacing	after	twenty	or	so	shots—’
‘When	they’re	pulped.’


‘Or	splitting,	aye.	It’s	the	ribs,	when	they	spring	back—that’s	what	sends
the	shockwave	forward.	Unlike	a	regular	crossbow,	where	the	quarrel’s	fast
enough	out	of	the	slot	to	escape	that	vibration.	Here,	the	quarrel’s	a	pig,	heavy
and	weighted	on	the	head	end—it	never	leaves	the	slot	as	fast	as	you’d	like,	so
you	need	something	to	absorb	that	knock-back,	before	it	gets	to	the	quarrel
shaft.’
‘And	the	clay	ball	attached	to	it.	Clever	solution,	Fid.’
‘It’s	worked	so	far.’
‘And	if	it	does	fail…’
Fiddler	looked	up	and	grinned.	‘I	won’t	be	the	one	with	breath	to
complain.’	The	last	fitting	clicked	into	place,	and	the	sergeant	set	the	bulky
weapon	down,	turning	his	attention	to	the	individually	wrapped	quarrels.
Cuttle	slowly	straightened.	‘Those	ain’t	got	sharpers	on	them.’
‘Hood	no,	I	can	throw	sharpers.’
‘And	that	crossbow	can	lob	cussers	far	enough?	Hard	to	believe.’
‘Well,	the	idea	is	to	aim	and	shoot,	then	bite	a	mouthful	of	dirt.’
‘I	can	see	the	wisdom	in	that,	Fid.	Now,	you	let	us	all	know	when	you’re
firing,	right?’
‘Nice	and	loud,	aye.’
‘And	what	word	should	we	listen	for?’
Fiddler	noticed	that	the	rest	of	his	squad	had	ceased	their	preparations	and
were	now	waiting	for	his	answer.	He	shrugged.	‘Duck.	Or	sometimes	what
Hedge	used	to	use.’
‘Which	was?’
‘A	scream	of	terror.’	He	climbed	to	his	feet.	‘All	right,	soldiers,	it’s	time.’
	
When	the	last	grains	trickled	down,	the	Adjunct	turned	from	the	hourglass	and
nodded	to	Gamet.	‘When	will	you	join	your	companies,	Fist?’
‘In	a	few	moments,	Adjunct.	Although,	because	I	intend	to	remain	in	my
saddle,	I	will	not	ride	out	to	them	until	the	fighting	starts.’
He	saw	her	frown	at	that,	but	she	made	no	comment,	focusing	instead	on
the	two	Wickan	youths	standing	near	the	tent’s	entrance.	‘Have	you	completed
your	rituals?’
The	lad,	Nil,	shrugged.	‘We	have	spoken	with	the	spirits,	as	you	ordered.’
‘Spoken?	That	is	all?’
‘Once,	perhaps,	we	could	have…compelled.	But	as	we	warned	you	long
ago	in	Aren,	our	power	is	not	as	it	once	was.’
Nether	added,	‘This	land’s	spirits	are	agitated	at	the	moment,	easily


distracted.	Something	else	is	happening.	We	have	done	all	we	could,	Adjunct.
At	the	very	least,	if	the	desert	raiders	have	a	shaman	among	them,	there	will	be
little	chance	of	the	secret’s	unveiling.’
‘Something	else	is	happening,	you	said.	What,	specifically?’
Before	she	could	answer,	Gamet	said,	‘Your	pardon,	Adjunct.	I	will	take
my	leave	now.’
‘Of	course.’
The	Fist	left	them	to	resume	their	conversation.	A	fog	had	settled	on	his
mind,	the	moments	before	an	engagement	when	uncertainty	engendered	unease
and	confusion.	He	had	heard	of	this	affliction	claiming	other	commanders,	but
had	not	thought	it	would	befall	him.	The	rush	of	his	own	blood	had	created	a
wall	of	sound,	muting	the	world	beyond.	And	it	seemed	his	other	senses	had
dulled	as	well.
As	he	made	his	way	towards	his	horse—held	ready	by	a	soldier—he	shook
his	head,	seeking	to	clear	it.	If	the	soldier	said	something	to	him	when	he	took
the	reins	and	swung	up	into	the	saddle,	he	did	not	hear	it.
The	Adjunct	had	been	displeased	by	his	decision	to	ride	into	the	battle.	But
the	added	mobility	was,	to	Gamet’s	mind,	worth	the	risk.	He	set	out	through	the
camp	at	a	slow	canter.	Fires	had	been	allowed	to	die,	the	scenes	surrounding
him	strangely	ethereal.	He	passed	figures	hunched	down	around	coals	and
envied	them	their	freedom.	Life	had	been	simpler	as	a	plain	soldier.	Gamet	had
begun	to	doubt	his	ability	to	command.
Age	is	no	instant	purchase	of	wisdom.	But	it’s	more	than	that,	isn’t	it?	She
may	have	made	me	a	Fist	and	given	me	a	legion.	And	soldiers	might	well	salute
when	they	pass—though	of	course	not	here,	in	enemy	territory,	thank	Hood.	No,
all	these	trappings	are	no	assurance	of	my	competence.
This	night	shall	be	my	first	test.	Gods,	I	should	have	stayed	retired.	I	should
have	refused	her	insistence—dammit,	her	assumption—that	I	would	simply
accept	her	wishes.
There	was,	he	had	come	to	believe,	a	weakness	within	him.	A	fool	might
call	it	a	virtue,	such…pliable	equanimity.	But	he	knew	better.
He	rode	on,	the	fog	of	his	mind	growing	ever	thicker.
	
Eight	hundred	warriors	crouched	motionless,	ghostly,	amidst	the	boulders	on
the	plain.	Wearing	dulled	armour	and	telabas	the	colour	of	the	terrain	around
them,	they	were	virtually	invisible,	and	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	felt	a	surge
of	dark	pride,	even	as	another	part	of	his	mind	wondered	at	Leoman’s
protracted…hesitation.


Their	warchief	lay	flat	on	the	slope’s	rise	ten	paces	ahead.	He	had	not
moved	in	some	time.	Despite	the	chill,	sweat	trickled	beneath	Corabb’s	armour,
and	he	shifted	his	grip	once	more	on	the	unfamiliar	tulwar	in	his	right	hand.
He’d	always	preferred	axe-like	weapons—something	with	a	haft	he	could,	if
need	be,	grip	with	his	other	hand.	He	disliked	the	blade	edge	that	reached	down
all	the	way	to	the	hilt	and	wished	he’d	had	time	to	file	it	blunt	for	the	first	half
of	its	length.
I	am	a	warrior	who	cannot	tolerate	sharp	edges	close	to	his	body.	Which
spirits	thought	to	make	of	me	such	an	embodiment	of	confused	irony?	I	curse
them	all.
He	could	wait	no	longer,	and	slowly	crawled	up	alongside	Leoman	of	the
Flails.
Beyond	the	crest	sprawled	another	basin,	this	one	hummocked	and	thick
with	thorny	brush.	It	flanked	the	encamped	Malazan	army	on	this	side,	and	was
between	sixty	and	seventy	paces	in	breadth.
‘Foolish,’	Corabb	muttered,	‘to	have	chosen	to	stop	here.	I	think	we	need
have	nothing	to	fear	from	this	Adjunct.’
The	breath	slowly	hissed	between	Leoman’s	teeth.	‘Aye,	plenty	of	cover	for
our	approach.’
‘Then	why	do	we	wait,	Warchief?’
‘I	am	wondering,	Corabb.’
‘Wondering?’
‘About	the	Empress.	She	was	once	Mistress	of	the	Claw.	Its	fierce	potency
was	given	shape	by	her,	and	we	have	all	learned	to	fear	those	mage-assassins.
Ominous	origins,	yes?	And	then,	as	Empress,	there	were	the	great	leaders	of
her	imperial	military.	Dujek	Onearm.	Admiral	Nok.	Coltaine.	Greymane.’
‘But	here,	this	night,	Warchief,	we	face	none	of	those.’
‘True.	We	face	the	Adjunct	Tavore,	who	was	personally	chosen	by	the
Empress.	To	act	as	the	fist	of	her	vengeance.’
Corabb	frowned,	then	he	shrugged.	‘Did	the	Empress	not	also	choose	High
Fist	Pormqual?	Korbolo	Dom?	Did	she	not	demote	Whiskeyjack—the	fiercest
Malazan	our	tribes	ever	faced?	And,	if	the	tales	are	true,	she	was	also
responsible	for	the	assassination	of	Dassem	Ultor.’
‘Your	words	are	sharp,	Corabb.	She	is	not	immune	to	grave…errors	in
judgement.	Well	then,	let	us	make	her	pay	for	them.’	He	twisted	round	and
gestured	his	warriors	forward.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	grinned.	Perhaps	the	spirits	would	smile	on	him
this	night.	Pray	that	I	find	a	worthy	axe	or	mace	among	the	countless	dead
Malazan	soldiers.


	
Borduke’s	squad	had	found	a	small	hill	for	their	position,	swearing	and
cursing	as	they	clawed	their	way	to	its	modest	summit,	then	began	digging
holes	and	repositioning	rocks.
Their	hill	was	likely	some	old	round	barrow—the	hummocks	in	this	basin
were	far	too	regular	to	be	natural.	Twenty	paces	away,	Fiddler	listened	to	the
6th	squad	marines	muttering	and	shuffling	about	on	their	strong-point,	their
efforts	punctuated	every	now	and	then	by	Borduke’s	impatient	growl.	Fifty
paces	to	the	west	another	squad	was	digging	in	on	another	hill,	and	the	sergeant
began	to	wonder	if	they’d	held	off	too	long.	Barrows	tended	to	be	big	heaps	of
rocks	beneath	the	cloak	of	sandy	soil,	after	all,	and	burrowing	into	them	was
never	easy.	He	could	hear	rocks	being	pried	loose,	iron	shovels	grating	on
heavy	granite,	and	a	few	tumbling	wildly	down	the	hillsides	through	the	thick,
brittle	bushes.
Hood’s	breath,	how	clumsy	do	you	idiots	have	to	get?
	
As	Corabb	was	about	to	move	on	to	the	next	cover,	Leoman’s	gloved	hand
reached	out	and	snagged	his	shoulder.	The	warrior	froze.
And	now	he	could	hear	it.	There	were	soldiers	in	the	basin.
Leoman	moved	up	alongside	him.	‘Outlying	pickets,’	he	muttered	under
his	breath.	‘On	those	barrows.	It	seems	she’s	sent	us	a	gift	after	all,’	the
Warchief	added	with	a	grin.	‘Listen	to	them	stumble	about—they	waited	too
long,	and	now	the	darkness	confounds	them.’
There	was	no	difficulty	in	locating	the	enemy	positions—they’d	selected
the	barrows	one	and	all,	and	were	making	loud	work	of	digging	in.	And,
Corabb	realized,	they	were	spaced	too	far	apart	for	mutual	support.	Each
position	could	be	easily	isolated,	surrounded,	and	every	last	soldier
slaughtered.	Long	before	any	relief	could	arrive	from	the	main	camp.
Likely,	Corabb	reflected	as	he	slipped	through	the	darkness	towards	the
nearest	enemy	position,	the	Malazans	had	been	anticipating	a	pre-dawn	raid,
identical	to	the	first	one.	And	so	the	Adjunct	had	ordered	the	emplacements	as	a
preemptive	measure.	But,	as	Leoman	had	once	explained	to	him,	every	element
of	an	army	in	the	field	needed	to	follow	the	rules	of	mutual	support—even	the
pickets	where	first	contact	would	occur.	Clearly,	the	Adjunct	had	failed	to	apply
this	most	basic	tenet.
Added	to	her	inability	to	control	her	Seti	horse	warriors,	this	was	further
proof,	in	Corabb’s	eyes,	of	Tavore’s	incompetence.


He	adjusted	his	grip	on	the	tulwar,	halting	fifteen	paces	from	the	nearest
strong-point.	He	could	actually	see	the	helms	of	at	least	two	of	the	Malazan
soldiers,	poking	up	over	the	holes	they	had	dug.	Corabb	concentrated	on
slowing	his	breathing,	and	waited	for	the	signal.
	
Gamet	reined	in	at	the	edge	of	the	now	unoccupied	marine	camp.	The	quiet	call
would	have	gone	out	through	the	rest	of	the	army,	awakening	the	cutters	and
healers.	Precautionary,	of	course,	since	there	was	no	way	to	predict	whether	the
raiders	would	attack	from	the	approach	the	Adjunct	had	arranged.	Given	that
all	the	other	angles	held	either	natural	obstacles	or	easily	defensible	positions,
the	desert	warleader	might	well	balk	at	such	an	obvious	invitation.	As	he
waited,	the	Fist	began	to	think	that	nothing	would	come	of	this	gambit,	at	least
on	this	night.	And	what	were	the	chances	that	a	day’s	march	would	bring	the
army	to	yet	another	ideal	combination	of	terrain	and	timing?
He	settled	back	in	the	saddle,	the	strange,	cloying	lassitude	in	his	mind
deepening.	The	night	had,	if	anything,	grown	even	darker,	the	stars	struggling
to	pierce	the	veil	of	suspended	dust.
A	capemoth	flitted	in	front	of	his	face,	triggering	an	involuntary	flinch.	An
omen?	He	shook	himself	and	straightened	once	more.	Three	bells	remained
before	dawn.	But	there	could	be	no	recall	and	so	the	marines	would	take	shifts
on	the	wagons	come	the	morrow’s	march.	And	I	had	better	do	the	same,	if
we’re	to	repeat	this—
	
A	wavering	wolf	howl	broke	the	stillness	of	the	night.	Although	Corabb	had
been	waiting	for	it,	he	was	still	startled	into	a	momentary	immobility.	To	either
side,	warriors	rose	from	their	cover	and	sprinted	for	the	barrow.	Arrows
whispered,	struck	the	visible	helms	with	solid	crunching	sounds.	He	saw	one	of
those	bronze	helms	spin	away	through	the	air—realized	that	it	had	not	been
covering	a	soldier ’s	head.
A	flash	of	unease—
Warcries	filled	the	air.	The	glint	of	heavily	armoured	figures	rising	up	on
the	barrows,	crossbows	lowering.	Smaller	objects	flew	out,	one	of	them
striking	the	ground	five	paces	to	Corabb’s	right.
A	detonation	that	stabbed	at	his	ears.	The	blast	threw	him	to	one	side,	and
he	stumbled,	then	fell	over	a	thorn	bush.
Multiple	explosions—flames	shot	up	to	light	the	scene—


	
At	the	wolf’s	howl,	Fiddler	flattened	himself	still	further	beneath	his	cloak	of
sand	and	brush—not	a	moment	too	soon	as	a	moccasined	foot	thumped	down
on	his	back	as	a	raider	ran	over	him.
The	barrows	had	done	their	job—drawing	the	attackers	in	to	what,	by	all
outward	appearances,	seemed	isolated	positions.	One	squad	in	three	had	shown
face	to	the	enemy;	the	remaining	two	had	preceded	them	by	a	bell	or	more	to
take	cover	between	the	barrows.
And	now	the	trap	was	sprung.
The	sergeant	lifted	his	head,	and	saw	a	dozen	backs	between	him	and
Borduke’s	strong-point.	Their	charge	slowed	as	three	of	their	number
suddenly	pitched	down	to	the	ground,	quarrels	buried	deep.
‘Up,	dammit!’	Fiddler	hissed.
His	soldiers	rose	around	him,	shedding	dusty	sand	and	branches.
Crouching	low,	cusser-fitted	crossbow	cradled	in	his	arms,	the	sergeant	set
out,	away	from	Borduke’s	position.	Gesler ’s	marines	were	easily	sufficient	to
support	the	squad	at	the	barrow.	Fiddler	had	seen	a	mass	of	raiders	moving
along	the	ridge	beyond	the	basin—easily	two	hundred	in	all—and	suspected
they	were	moving	to	flank	the	ambush.	The	narrowest	of	corridors	awaited
them,	but	if	they	overran	the	infantry	picket	stationed	there,	they	could	then
strike	into	the	heart	of	the	supply	camp.
He	grinned	at	the	snapping	crack	of	sharpers	detonating	behind	him,	along
with	the	deadly	whoosh	of	burners	filling	the	basin	with	red,	flaring	light.	The
raid	had	been	stopped	in	its	tracks,	and	confusion	had	snared	the	attackers.
Fiddler	and	the	five	marines	trailing	in	his	wake	were	low	enough	to	keep	their
silhouettes	from	being	back-lit	by	the	flames	as	they	reached	the	base	of	the
slope.
They	had	ascended	halfway	to	the	ridge	when	Fiddler	held	up	a	fisted	hand.
Cuttle	scrambled	up	beside	him.	‘We	won’t	even	have	to	duck	on	this	one,’
he	growled.
The	sergeant	raised	his	crossbow,	sighting	well	above	the	crest	line	and
settling	the	metal	stock	against	his	shoulder.	He	drew	a	breath,	held	it,	and
slowly	pressed	the	release.
The	iron	ribs	thunked,	and	the	cusser	quarrel	leapt	away,	describing	a
graceful	arc	up	and	over	the	ridge.	It	sank	out	of	sight.
Bodies	were	thrown	skyward	at	the	explosion,	and	screams	filled	the	air.
‘Crossbows	to	bear,’	Cuttle	snapped,	‘in	case	they	come	rolling	over	the
—’


On	the	crest	above	them,	the	skyline	was	suddenly	crowded	with	warriors.
‘Fall	back!’	Fiddler	shouted	as	he	continued	to	reload.	‘Fall	back!’
	
After	sprawling	into	the	thorn	bush,	Corabb	dragged	himself	clear,	spitting
curses,	and	scrambled	to	his	feet.	The	bodies	of	his	comrades	lay	on	all	sides,
struck	down	by	heavy	crossbow	bolts	or	those	terrible	Moranth	munitions.
There	had	been	more	marines,	hidden	between	the	barrows,	and	now	he	could
hear	horses	behind	them,	sweeping	on	to	take	the	ridge—Khundryl—the
bastards	were	in	light	armour	only,	and	they	had	been	ready	and	waiting.
He	looked	for	Leoman,	but	could	not	see	him	among	those	warriors	made
visible	by	the	sheets	of	flames	left	by	the	Malazan	fire-grenados—and	of	those,
few	were	still	on	their	feet.	Time	had	come,	he	decided,	to	withdraw.
He	collected	the	tulwar	from	where	it	had	fallen,	then	spun	about	and	ran
for	the	ridge.
And	plunged	headlong	into	a	squad	of	marines.
Sudden	shouts.
A	huge	soldier	wearing	the	trappings	of	a	Seti	slammed	a	hide-wrapped
shield	into	Corabb’s	face.	The	desert	warrior	reeled	back,	blood	gushing	from
his	nose	and	mouth,	and	took	a	wild	swing.	The	tulwar ’s	heavy	blade	cracked
hard	against	something—and	snapped	clean	just	above	the	hilt.
Corabb	landed	hard	on	the	ground.
A	soldier	passed	close	and	left	something	on	his	lap.
Somewhere	just	up	on	the	ridge	another	explosion	ripped	through	the	night
—this	one	louder	by	far	than	any	he	had	yet	heard.
Stunned,	blinking	tears,	Corabb	sat	up,	and	saw	a	small	round	clay	ball	roll
down	to	land	in	front	of	his	crotch.
Smoke	rose	from	it—sputtering,	foaming	acid,	just	a	drop,	eating	its	way
through.
Whimpering,	Corabb	rolled	to	one	side—and	came	up	against	a	discarded
helm.	He	grabbed	it	and	lunged	back	at	the	sharper,	slamming	the	bronze	cap
over	it.
Then	he	closed	his	eyes.
	
As	the	squad	continued	its	retreat—the	slope	behind	it	a	mass	of	blasted	bodies
from	Fiddler ’s	second	cusser,	with	Khundryl	Burned	Tears	now	crashing	into
the	flank	of	the	remaining	attackers—Cuttle	grabbed	the	sergeant’s	shoulder


and	spun	him	around.
‘The	bastard	Koryk	knocked	down	is	about	to	be	surprised,	Fid.’
Fiddler	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	figure	just	now	sitting	up.
‘Left	a	smoking	sharper	in	his	lap,’	Cuttle	added.
Both	sappers	halted	to	watch.
‘Four…’
The	warrior	made	his	horrific	discovery	and	plunged	to	one	side.
‘Three…’
Then	rolled	back	directly	onto	the	sharper.
‘Two…’
Thumping	a	helm	down	over	it.
‘One.’
The	detonation	lifted	the	hapless	man	into	the	air	on	a	man-high	column	of
fire.
Yet	he	had	managed	to	hold	on	to	the	helm,	even	as	it	lifted	him	still
higher,	up	and	over.	Feet	scything	wildly	in	the	air,	he	plummeted	back	down,
landing	to	kick	up	a	cloud	of	dust	and	smoke.
‘Now	that—’
But	Cuttle	got	no	further,	and	both	sappers	simply	stared	in	disbelief	as	the
warrior	scrambled	upright,	looked	around,	collected	a	discarded	lance,	then
raced	off	back	up	the	slope.
	
Gamet	drove	heels	into	his	horse’s	flanks.	The	mount	pounded	down	into	the
basin	from	the	west	side,	opposite	where	the	Khundryl	had	come	from.
Three	knots	of	desert	warriors	had	managed	to	weather	the	cross-bow	fire
and	munitions	to	assault	one	of	the	strong-points.	They	had	driven	the	two
hidden	squads	back	onto	the	barrow	as	well,	and	the	Fist	saw	his	marines
dragging	wounded	comrades	into	the	trenchworks.	Fewer	than	ten	soldiers
among	the	three	squads	were	still	fighting,	desperately	holding	back	the
screaming	raiders.
Gamet	pulled	his	sword	free	as	he	urged	his	horse	directly	towards	the
beleaguered	position.	As	he	approached,	he	saw	two	marines	go	down	before
an	onrush	from	one	of	the	attacking	groups—and	the	barrow	was	suddenly
overrun.
The	fugue	gripping	his	senses	seemed	to	redouble,	and	he	began	sawing
the	reins,	confused,	bewildered	by	the	roar	of	sounds	surrounding	him.
‘Fist!’
He	lifted	his	sword,	as	his	horse	cantered,	as	if	of	its	own	will,	towards	the


barrow.
‘Fist	Gamet!	Pull	out	of	there!’
Too	many	voices.	Screams	of	the	dying.	The	flames—they’re	falling	away.
Darkness	closing	in.	My	soldiers	are	dying.	Everywhere.	It’s	failed—the	whole
plan	has	failed—
A	dozen	raiders	were	rushing	at	him—and	more	movement,	there,	to	his
right—another	squad	of	marines,	fast	closing,	as	if	they’d	been	on	their	way	to
relieve	the	overrun	strong-point,	but	now	they	were	sprinting	in	his	direction.
I	don’t	understand.	Not	here—the	other	way.	Go	there,	go	to	my	soldiers—
He	saw	something	large	fly	from	one	of	the	marines’	hands,	down	into	the
midst	of	the	warriors	attacking	him.
‘Fist!’
Two	lances	whipped	out,	seeking	him.
Then	the	night	exploded.
He	felt	his	horse	lifted	beneath	him,	pushing	him	down	over	the	back	of	the
saddle.	The	animal’s	head	snapped	upward,	impossibly	so,	as	it	continued
arching	back—to	thump	down	between	Gamet’s	thighs	a	moment	before	he
tumbled,	boots	leaving	the	stirrups,	over	the	horse’s	rump.
Down	into	a	mist	of	blood	and	grit.
He	blinked	his	eyes	open,	found	himself	lying	in	sodden	mud,	amidst
bodies	and	parts	of	bodies,	at	the	base	of	a	crater.	His	helmet	was	gone.	No
sword	in	his	hand.
I	was…I	was	on	a	horse…
Someone	slid	down	to	slam	against	his	side.	He	attempted	to	clamber	away,
but	was	dragged	back	down.
‘Fist	Gamet,	sir!	I’m	Sergeant	Gesler—Captain	Keneb’s	9th	Company—
can	you	hear	me?’
‘Y-yes—I	thought	you	were—’
‘Aye,	Fist.	But	we	dropped	’em,	and	now	the	rest	of	my	squad	and
Borduke’s	are	relieving	3rd	Company’s	marines.	We	need	to	get	you	to	a
healer,	sir.’
‘No,	that’s	all	right.’	He	struggled	to	sit	up,	but	something	was	wrong	with
his	legs—they	were	indifferent	to	his	commands.	‘Tend	to	those	on	the	barrow,
Sergeant—’
‘We	are,	sir.	Pella!	Down	here,	help	me	with	the	Fist.’
Another	marine	arrived,	this	one	much	younger—oh,	no,	too	young	for
this.	I	will	ask	the	Adjunct	to	send	him	home.	To	his	mother	and	father,	yes.	He
should	not	have	to	die—‘You	should	not	have	to	die.’
‘Sir?’


‘Only	his	horse	between	him	and	a	cusser	blast,’	Gesler	said.	‘He’s	addled,
Pella.	Now,	take	his	arms…’
Addled?	No,	my	mind	is	clear.	Perfectly	clear,	now.	Finally.	They’re	all	too
young	for	this.	It’s	Laseen’s	war—let	her	fight	it.	Tavore—she	was	a	child,	once.
But	then	the	Empress	murdered	that	child.	Murdered	her.	I	must	tell	the
Adjunct…

Fiddler	settled	wearily	beside	the	now	dead	hearth.	He	set	his	crossbow	down
and	wiped	the	sweat	and	grime	from	his	eyes.	Cuttle	eased	down	beside	him.
‘Koryk’s	head	still	aches,’	the	sapper	muttered,	‘but	it	don’t	look	like
anything’s	broken	that	wasn’t	already	broken.’
‘Except	his	helm,’	Fiddler	replied.
‘Aye,	except	that.	The	only	real	scrap	of	the	night	for	our	squad,	barring	a
few	dozen	quarrels	loosed.	And	we	didn’t	even	kill	the	bastard.’
‘You	got	too	cute,	Cuttle.’
The	man	sighed.	‘Aye,	I	did.	Must	be	getting	old.’
‘That’s	what	I	concluded.	Next	time,	just	stab	a	pig-sticker	in	the	bastard.’
‘Amazed	he	survived	it	in	any	case.’
The	pursuit	by	the	Khundryl	had	taken	the	Burned	Tears	far	beyond	the
ridge,	and	what	had	begun	as	a	raid	against	a	Malazan	army	was	now	a	tribal
war.	Two	bells	remained	before	dawn.	Infantry	had	moved	out	into	the	basin	to
collect	wounded,	retrieve	quarrels,	and	strip	down	the	Malazan	corpses—
leaving	nothing	for	the	enemy	to	use.	The	grim,	ugly	conclusion	to	every
battle,	the	only	mercy	the	cover	of	darkness.
Sergeant	Gesler	appeared	out	of	the	gloom	and	joined	them	at	the	lifeless
hearth.	He	drew	off	his	gauntlets	and	dropped	them	into	the	dust,	then	rubbed	at
his	face.
Cuttle	spoke.	‘Heard	a	position	was	overrun.’
‘Aye.	We’d	had	it	in	hand,	at	least	to	start.	Closing	in	fast.	Most	of	the	poor
bastards	could	have	walked	away	from	that	barrow.	As	it	is,	only	four	did.’
Fiddler	looked	up.	‘Out	of	three	squads?’
Gesler	nodded,	then	spat	into	the	ashes.
Silence.
Then	Cuttle	grunted.	‘Something	always	goes	wrong.’
Gesler	sighed,	collected	his	gauntlets	and	rose.	‘Could	have	been	worse.’
Fiddler	and	Cuttle	watched	the	man	wander	off.


‘What	happened,	do	you	think?’
Fiddler	shrugged.	‘I	suppose	we’ll	find	out	soon	enough.	Now,	find
Corporal	Tarr	and	get	him	to	gather	the	rest.	I	need	to	explain	all	the	things	we
did	wrong	tonight.’
‘Starting	with	you	leading	us	up	the	slope?’
Fiddler	grimaced.	‘Starting	with	that,	aye.’
‘Mind	you,	if	you	hadn’t,’	Cuttle	mused,	‘more	of	those	raiders	could	have
followed	down	to	the	overrun	barrow	through	the	breach.	Your	lobbed	cusser
did	its	work—distracted	them.	Long	enough	for	the	Khundryl	to	arrive	and
keep	them	busy.’
‘Even	so,’	the	sergeant	conceded.	‘But	if	we’d	been	alongside	Gesler,
maybe	we	could	have	saved	a	few	more	marines.’
‘Or	messed	it	up	worse,	Fid.	You	know	better	than	to	think	like	that.’
‘I	guess	you’re	right.	Now,	gather	them	up.’
‘Aye.’

Gamet	looked	up	as	the	Adjunct	entered	the	cutters’	tent.	She	was	pale—from
lack	of	sleep,	no	doubt—and	had	removed	her	helm,	revealing	her	shortcropped,	mouse-coloured	hair.
‘I	will	not	complain,’	Gamet	said,	as	the	healer	finally	moved	away.
‘Regarding	what?’	the	Adjunct	asked,	head	turning	to	scan	the	other	cots	on
which	wounded	soldiers	lay.
‘The	removal	of	my	command,’	he	replied.
Her	gaze	fixed	on	him	once	more.	‘You	were	careless,	Fist,	in	placing
yourself	at	such	risk.	Hardly	cause	to	strip	you	of	your	rank.’
‘My	presence	diverted	marines	rushing	to	the	aid	of	their	comrades,
Adjunct.	My	presence	resulted	in	lives	lost.’
She	said	nothing	for	a	moment,	then	stepped	closer.	‘Every	engagement
takes	lives,	Gamet.	This	is	the	burden	of	command.	Did	you	think	this	war
would	be	won	without	the	spilling	of	blood?’
He	looked	away,	grimacing	against	the	waves	of	dull	pain	that	came	from
forced	healing.	The	cutters	had	removed	a	dozen	shards	of	clay	from	his	legs.
Muscles	had	been	shredded.	Even	so,	he	knew	that	the	Lady’s	luck	had	been
with	him	this	night.	The	same	could	not	be	said	for	his	hapless	horse.	‘I	was	a
soldier	once,	Adjunct,’	he	rasped.	‘I	am	one	no	longer.	This	is	what	I
discovered	tonight.	As	for	being	a	Fist,	well,	commanding	house	guards	was	a


fair	representation	of	my	level	of	competence.	An	entire	legion?	No.	I	am
sorry,	Adjunct…’
She	studied	him,	then	nodded.	‘It	will	be	some	time	before	you	are	fully
recovered	from	your	wounds.	Which	of	your	captains	would	you	recommend
for	a	temporary	field	promotion?’
Yes,	the	way	it	should	be	done.	Good.	‘Captain	Keneb,	Adjunct.’
‘I	concur.	And	now	I	must	leave	you.	The	Khundryl	are	returning.’
‘With	trophies,	I	hope.’
She	nodded.
Gamet	managed	a	smile.	‘That	is	well.’
	
The	sun	was	climbing	near	zenith	when	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	reined	in
his	lathered	horse	alongside	Leoman.	Other	warriors	were	straggling	in	all	the
time,	but	it	might	be	days	before	the	scattered	elements	of	the	company	were
finally	reassembled.	In	light	armour,	the	Khundryl	had	been	able	to	maintain
persistent	contact	with	the	Raraku	horse	warriors,	and	had	proved	themselves
fierce	and	capable	fighters.
The	ambush	had	been	reversed,	the	message	delivered	with	succinct
precision.	They	had	underestimated	the	Adjunct.
‘Your	first	suspicions	were	right,’	Corabb	growled	as	he	settled	down	in
his	saddle,	the	horse	trembling	beneath	him.	‘The	Empress	chose	wisely.’
Leoman’s	right	cheek	had	been	grazed	by	a	crossbow	quarrel,	leaving	a
crusted	brown	line	that	glistened	in	places	through	the	layer	of	dust.	At
Corabb’s	observation	he	grimaced,	leaned	to	one	side	and	spat.
‘Hood	curse	those	damned	marines,’	Corabb	continued.	‘If	not	for	their
grenados	and	those	assault	crossbows,	we	would	have	taken	them	all	down.
Would	that	I	had	found	one	of	those	crossbows—the	loading	mechanism	must
be—’
‘Be	quiet,	Corabb,’	Leoman	muttered.	‘I	have	orders	for	you.	Select	a
worthy	messenger	and	have	him	take	three	spare	horses	and	ride	back	to
Sha’ik	as	fast	as	he	can.	He	is	to	tell	her	I	will	be	continuing	with	my	raids,
seeking	the	pattern	to	this	Adjunct’s	responses,	and	will	rejoin	the	Chosen	One
three	days	before	the	Malazan	army	arrives.	Also,	that	I	no	longer	hold	any
faith	in	Korbolo	Dom’s	strategy	for	the	day	of	battle,	nor	his	tactics—aye,
Corabb,	she	will	not	listen	to	such	words,	but	they	must	be	said	before
witnesses.	Do	you	understand?’
‘I	do,	Leoman	of	the	Flails,	and	I	shall	choose	the	finest	rider	among	us.’
‘Go,	then.’


Chapter	Twenty

Shadow	is	ever	besieged,	for	that	is	its	nature.	Whilst	darkness
devours,	and	light	steals.	And	so	one	sees	shadow	ever	retreat	to
hidden	places,	only	to	return	in	the	wake	of	the	war	between	dark
and	light.
OBSERVATIONS	OF	THE	WARRENS
INSALLAN 	ENURA
The	rope	had	visited	the	edur	ships,	corpses	lay	everywhere,	already	rotting	on
the	deck	beneath	squabbling,	shrieking	gulls	and	crows.	Cutter	stood	near	the
prow	and	watched	in	silence	as	Apsalar	walked	among	the	bodies,	pausing
every	now	and	then	to	examine	some	detail	or	other,	her	measured	calm
leaving	the	Daru	chilled.
They	had	drawn	the	sleek	runner	up	alongside,	and	Cutter	could	hear	its
steady	bumping	against	the	hull	as	the	morning	breeze	continued	to	freshen.
Despite	the	enlivening	weather,	lassitude	gripped	them	both.	They	were	to	sail
away,	but	precisely	where	had	not	been	specified	by	the	patron	god	of
assassins.	Another	servant	of	Shadow	awaited	them…somewhere.
He	tested	his	left	arm	once	more,	lifting	it	out	to	the	side.	The	shoulder
throbbed,	but	not	as	badly	as	yesterday.	Fighting	with	knives	was	all	very	well,
until	one	had	to	face	an	armoured	sword-wielder,	then	the	drawbacks	to	shortbladed,	close-in	stickers	became	all	too	apparent.
He	needed,	he	concluded,	to	learn	the	use	of	the	bow.	And	then,	once	he’d
acquired	some	competence,	perhaps	a	long-knife—a	Seven	Cities	weapon	that
combined	the	advantages	of	a	knife	with	the	reach	of	a	three-quarter-length
longsword.	For	some	reason,	the	thought	of	using	a	true	longsword	did	not
appeal	to	him.	Perhaps	because	it	was	a	soldier ’s	weapon,	best	used	in
conjunction	with	a	shield	or	buckler.	A	waste	of	his	left	hand,	given	his	skills.
Sighing,	Cutter	looked	down	at	the	deck	and,	fighting	revulsion,	scanned	the
corpses	beneath	the	jostling	birds.
And	saw	a	bow.	Its	string	had	been	cut	through,	and	the	arrows	lay


scattered	out	from	a	quiver	still	strapped	to	an	Edur ’s	hip.	Cutter	stepped	over
and	crouched	down.	The	bow	was	heavier	than	it	looked,	sharply	recurved	and
braced	with	horn.	Its	length	was	somewhere	between	a	longbow	and	a	horse
warrior ’s	bow—probably	a	simple	short	bow	for	these	Edur.	Unstrung,	it
stood	at	a	height	matching	Cutter ’s	shoulders.
He	began	collecting	the	arrows,	then,	waving	to	drive	back	the	gulls	and
crows,	he	dragged	the	archer ’s	corpse	clear	and	removed	the	belted	quiver.	He
found	a	small	leather	pouch	tied	near	it	containing	a	half-dozen	waxed	strings,
spare	fletching,	a	few	nuggets	of	hard	pine	sap,	a	thin	iron	blade	and	three
spare	barbed	arrowheads.
Selecting	one	of	the	strings,	Cutter	straightened.	He	slipped	one	of	the
cord-bound	ends	into	the	notch	at	the	bow’s	base	end,	then	anchored	the
weapon	against	the	outside	of	his	right	foot	and	pushed	down	on	the	upper	rib.
Harder	than	he’d	expected.	The	bow	shook	as	he	struggled	to	slip	the	loop
into	the	notch.	Finally	succeeding,	Cutter	lifted	the	bow	for	a	more	gauging
regard,	then	drew	it	back.	The	breath	hissed	between	his	teeth	as	he	sought	to
hold	the	weapon	taut.	This	would,	he	realized	as	he	finally	relaxed	the	string,
prove	something	of	a	challenge.
Sensing	eyes	on	him,	he	turned.
Apsalar	stood	near	the	main	mast.	Flecks	and	globules	of	dried	blood
covered	her	forearms.
‘What	have	you	been	doing?’	he	asked.
She	shrugged.	‘Looking	around.’
Inside	someone’s	chest?	‘We	should	go.’
‘Have	you	decided	where	yet?’
‘I’m	sure	that	will	be	answered	soon	enough,’	he	said,	bending	down	to
collect	the	arrows	and	the	belt	holding	the	quiver	and	kit	pouch.
‘The	sorcery	here	is…strange.’
His	head	snapped	up.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘I	am	not	sure.	My	familiarity	with	warrens	is	somewhat	vicarious.’
I	know.
‘But,’	she	continued,	‘if	this	is	Kurald	Emurlahn,	then	it	is	tainted	in	some
way.	Necromantically.	Life	and	death	magicks,	carved	directly	into	the	wood	of
this	ship.	As	if	warlocks	and	shoulder-women	had	done	the	consecrating.’
Cutter	frowned.	‘Consecrating.	You	make	it	sound	as	if	this	ship	was	a
temple.’
‘It	was.	Is.	The	spilling	of	blood	has	done	nothing	to	desecrate	it,	which	is
precisely	my	point.	Perhaps	even	warrens	can	sink	into	barbarity.’
‘Meaning	the	wielders	of	a	warren	can	affect	its	nature.	My	late	uncle


would	have	found	the	notion	fascinating.	Not	desecration,	then,	but
denigration.’
She	slowly	glanced	around.	‘Rashan.	Meanas.	Thyr.’
He	comprehended	the	thought.	‘You	think	all	warrens	accessible	to	humans
are	in	fact	denigrations	of	Elder	Warrens.’
She	raised	her	hands	then.	‘Even	blood	decays.’
Cutter ’s	frown	deepened.	He	was	not	sure	what	she	meant	by	that,	and
found	himself	disinclined	to	ask.	Easier,	safer,	to	simply	grunt	and	make	his
way	to	the	gunnel.	‘We	should	make	use	of	this	breeze.	Assuming	you’re	done
here.’
In	answer	she	walked	to	the	ship’s	side	and	clambered	over	the	rail.
Cutter	watched	her	climb	down	to	the	runner,	taking	her	place	at	the	tiller.
He	paused	for	a	final	look	around.	And	stiffened.
On	the	distant	strand	of	Drift	Avalii,	there	stood	a	lone	figure,	leaning	on	a
two-handed	sword.
Traveller.
And	Cutter	now	saw	that	there	were	others,	squatting	or	seated	around	him.
A	half-dozen	Malazan	soldiers.	In	the	trees	behind	them	stood	Tiste	Andii,
silver-haired	and	ghostly.	The	image	seemed	to	burn	in	his	mind,	as	of	a	touch
so	cold	as	to	feel	like	fire.	He	shivered,	pulling	his	gaze	away	with	an	effort,
and	quickly	joined	Apsalar	in	the	runner,	taking	the	mooring	line	with	him.
He	set	the	oars	in	their	locks	and	pushed	the	craft	away	from	the	ship’s
black	hull.
‘I	believe	they	intend	to	commandeer	this	Edur	dromon,’	Apsalar	said.
‘What	about	protecting	the	Throne?’
‘There	are	demons	from	Shadow	on	the	island	now.	Your	patron	god	has
clearly	decided	to	take	a	more	active	role	in	defending	the	secret.’
‘Your	patron	god.’	Thank	you	for	that,	Apsalar.	And	who	was	it	who	held
your	soul	cupped	in	his	two	hands?	A	killer’s	hands.	‘Why	not	just	take	it	back
to	the	Shadow	Realm?’
‘No	doubt	if	he	could,	he	would,’	she	replied.	‘But	when	Anomander	Rake
placed	his	kin	here	to	guard	it,	he	also	wrought	sorcery	around	the	Throne.	It
will	not	be	moved.’
Cutter	shipped	the	oars	and	began	preparing	the	sail.	‘Then	Shadowthrone
need	only	come	here	and	plant	his	scrawny	arse	on	it,	right?’
He	disliked	her	answering	smile.	‘Thus	ensuring	that	no-one	else	could
claim	its	power,	or	the	position	of	King	of	High	House	Shadow.	Unless,	of
course,	they	killed	Shadowthrone	first.	A	god	of	courage	and	unassailable
power	might	well	plant	his	scrawny	arse	on	that	throne	to	end	the	argument


once	and	for	all.	But	Shadowthrone	did	just	that,	once	before,	as	Emperor
Kellanved.’
‘He	did?’
‘He	claimed	the	First	Throne.	The	throne	of	the	T’lan	Imass.’
Oh.
‘Fortunately,’	Apsalar	continued,	‘as	Shadowthrone,	he	has	shown	little
interest	in	making	use	of	his	role	as	Emperor	of	the	T’lan	Imass.’
‘Well,	why	bother?	This	way,	he	negates	the	chance	of	anyone	else	finding
and	taking	that	throne,	while	his	avoidance	of	using	it	himself	ensures	that	noone	takes	notice	he	has	it	in	the	first	place—gods,	I’m	starting	to	sound	like
Kruppe!	In	any	case,	that	seems	clever,	not	cowardly.’
She	studied	him	for	a	long	moment.	‘I	had	not	thought	of	that.	You	are
right,	of	course.	Unveiling	power	invites	convergence,	after	all.	It	seems
Shadowthrone	has	absorbed	well	his	early	residence	in	the	Deadhouse.	More
so,	perhaps,	than	Cotillion	has.’
‘Aye,	it’s	an	Azath	tactic,	isn’t	it?	Negation	serves	to	disarm.	Given	the
chance,	he’d	probably	plant	himself	in	every	throne	in	sight,	then,	with	all	the
power	accrued	to	him,	he	would	do	nothing	with	it.	Nothing	at	all.’
Her	eyes	slowly	widened.
He	frowned	at	her	expression.	Then	his	heart	started	pounding	hard.	No.	I
was	only	kidding.	That’s	not	just	ambitious,	it’s	insane.	He	could	never	pull	it
off…but	what	if	he	did?	‘All	the	games	of	the	gods…’
‘Would	be	seriously…curtailed.	Crokus,	have	you	stumbled	onto	the	truth?
Have	you	just	articulated	Shadowthrone’s	vast	scheme?	His	prodigious	gambit
to	achieve	absolute	domination?’
‘Only	if	he	is	truly	mad,	Apsalar,’	the	Daru	replied,	shaking	his	head.	‘It’s
impossible.	He	would	never	succeed.	He	would	not	even	get	close.’
Apsalar	settled	back	on	the	tiller	as	the	sails	filled	and	the	runner	leapt
forward.	‘For	two	years,’	she	said,	‘Dancer	and	the	Emperor	vanished.	Left	the
empire	for	Surly	to	rule.	My	stolen	memories	are	vague	of	that	time,	but	I	do
know	that	both	men	were	changed,	irrevocably,	by	all	that	happened	to	them
during	those	two	years.	Not	just	the	play	for	the	Shadow	Realm,	which	no
doubt	was	central	to	their	desires.	Other	things	occurred…truths	revealed,
mysteries	uncovered.	One	thing	I	know	for	certain,	Crokus,	is	that,	for	most	of
those	two	years,	Dancer	and	Kellanved	were	not	in	this	realm.’
‘Then	where	in	Hood’s	name	were	they?’
She	shook	her	head.	‘I	cannot	answer	that	question.	But	I	sense	that	they
were	following	a	trail,	one	that	wound	through	all	the	warrens,	and	to	realms
where	even	the	known	warrens	do	not	reach.’


‘What	kind	of	trail?	Whose?’
‘Suspicions…the	trail	had	something	to	do	with,	well,	with	the	Houses	of
the	Azath.’
Mysteries	uncovered	indeed.	The	Azath—the	deepest	mystery	of	them	all.
‘You	should	know,	Crokus,’	Apsalar	continued,	‘that	they	knew	that	Surly
was	waiting	for	them.	They	knew	what	she	had	planned.	Yet	they	returned	none
the	less.’
‘But	that	makes	no	sense.’
‘Unless	she	proceeded	to	do	precisely	what	they	wanted	her	to	do.	After	all,
we	both	know	that	the	assassinations	failed—failed	in	killing	either	of	them.
The	question	then	becomes:	what	did	that	entire	mess	achieve?’
‘A	rhetorical	question?’
She	cocked	her	head.	‘No.’	Surprised.
Cutter	rubbed	at	the	bristle	on	his	jaw,	then	shrugged.	‘All	right.	It	left
Surly	on	the	Malazan	throne.	Empress	Laseen	was	born.	It	stripped	from
Kellanved	his	secular	seat	of	power.	Hmm.	Let’s	ask	it	another	way.	What	if
Kellanved	and	Dancer	had	returned	and	successfully	reclaimed	the	imperial
throne?	But,	at	the	same	time,	they	had	taken	over	the	Shadow	Realm.	Thus,
there	would	be	an	empire	spanning	two	warrens,	an	empire	of	Shadow.’	He
paused,	then	slowly	nodded.	‘They	wouldn’t	have	stood	for	that—the	gods,	that
is.	Ascendants	of	all	kinds	would	have	converged	on	the	Malazan	Empire.	They
would	have	pounded	the	empire	and	the	two	men	ruling	it	into	dust.’
‘Probably.	And	neither	Kellanved	nor	Dancer	was	in	any	position	to	mount
a	successful	resistance	to	such	a	protracted	assault.	They’d	yet	to	consolidate
their	claim	on	the	Shadow	Realm.’
‘Right,	so	they	orchestrated	their	own	deaths,	and	kept	their	identity	as	the
new	rulers	of	Shadow	a	secret	for	as	long	as	they	could,	whilst	laying	out	the
groundwork	for	a	resumption	of	their	grand	schemes.	Well,	that’s	all	very
cosy,	if	more	than	a	little	diabolical.	But	does	it	help	us	answer	the	question	of
what	they’re	up	to	right	now?	If	anything,	I’m	more	confused	than	ever.’
‘Why	should	you	be?	Cotillion	recruited	you	to	see	to	the	true	Throne	of
Shadow	on	Drift	Avalii,	the	outcome	of	which	could	not	have	proved	more
advantageous	to	him	and	Shadowthrone.	Darist	dead,	the	sword	Vengeance
removed	and	in	the	hands	of	a	darkly	fated	wanderer.	The	Edur	expedition
wiped	out,	the	secret	thus	resurrected	and	likely	to	remain	unviolated	for	some
time	to	come.	True,	it	ended	up	demanding	Cotillion’s	direct,	most	personal
intervention,	which	he	would	have	liked	to	have	avoided,	no	doubt.’
‘Well,	I	doubt	he	would	have	bothered	had	not	the	Hound	balked.’
‘What?’


‘I	called	upon	Blind—you	were	already	down.	And	one	of	the	Edur	mages
made	the	Hound	cower	with	a	single	word.’
‘Ah.	Then	Cotillion	has	learned	yet	another	vital	fact—he	cannot	rely	upon
the	Hounds	when	dealing	with	the	Tiste	Edur,	for	the	Hounds	remember	their
original	masters.’
‘I	suppose	so.	No	wonder	he	was	disgusted	with	Blind.’
They	would	have	continued,	Cutter	taking	full	advantage	of	Apsalar ’s	lapse
in	taciturnity,	had	not	the	sky	suddenly	darkened,	shadows	rising	on	all	sides,
closing	and	swallowing	them—
A	thunderous	crash—
	
The	huge	tortoise	was	the	only	object	to	break	the	flat	plain,	lumbering	with
the	infinite	patience	of	the	truly	mindless	across	the	ancient	seabed.	Twin
shadows	grew	to	flank	it.
‘Too	bad	there’s	not	two	of	them,’	Trull	Sengar	said,	‘then	we	could	ride	in
style.’
‘I	would	think,’	Onrack	replied,	as	they	slowed	their	pace	to	match	that	of
the	tortoise,	‘that	it	feels	the	same.’
‘Hence	this	grand	journey…indeed,	a	noble	quest,	in	which	I	find	a	certain
sympathy.’
‘You	miss	your	kin,	then,	do	you,	Trull	Sengar?’
‘Too	general	a	statement.’
‘Ah,	the	needs	of	procreation.’
‘Hardly.	My	needs	have	nothing	to	do	with	engendering	whelps	with	my
hairline,	nor,	gods	forbid,	my	ears.’	He	reached	down	and	tapped	the	tortoise’s
dusty	shell.	‘Like	this	fellow	here,	there’s	no	time	to	think	of	eggs	it	won’t	even
lay.	Singular	intent,	disconnected	from	time—from	those	messy	consequences
that	inevitably	follow,	if	only	to	afflict	whatever	lass	tortoise	our	dogged
friend	here	happens	to	pounce	upon.’
‘They	are	not	wont	to	pounce,	Trull	Sengar.	Indeed,	the	act	is	a	far	more
clumsy	endeavour—’
‘Aren’t	they	all?’
‘My	own	memories—’
‘Enough	of	that,	Onrack.	Do	you	think	I	want	to	hear	of	your	supple
prowess?	I	will	have	you	know	that	I	have	yet	to	lie	with	a	woman.	Thus,	I	am
left	with	naught	but	my	sparsely	seeded	imagination.	Inflict	no	luscious	details
upon	me,	I	beg	you.’
The	T’lan	Imass	slowly	turned	its	head.	‘It	is	your	people’s	custom	to


withhold	such	activities	until	marriage?’
‘It	is.	It	wasn’t	among	the	Imass?’
‘Well,	yes,	it	was.	But	the	custom	was	flouted	at	every	opportunity.	In	any
case,	as	I	explained	earlier,	I	had	a	mate.’
‘Whom	you	gave	up	because	you	fell	in	love	with	another	woman.’
‘Gave	up,	Trull	Sengar?	No.	Whom	I	lost.	Nor	was	that	loss	solitary.	They
never	are.	From	all	you	have	said,	I	assume	then	that	you	are	rather	young.’
The	Tiste	Edur	shrugged.	‘I	suppose	I	am,	especially	in	my	present
company.’
‘Then	let	us	leave	this	creature’s	side,	so	as	to	spare	you	the	reminder.’
Trull	Sengar	shot	the	T’lan	Imass	a	look,	then	grinned.	‘Good	idea.’
They	increased	their	pace,	and	within	a	few	strides	had	left	the	tortoise
behind.	Glancing	back,	Trull	Sengar	gave	a	shout.
Onrack	halted	and	swung	round.
The	tortoise	was	turning	back,	stumpy	legs	taking	it	in	a	wide	circle.
‘What	is	it	doing?’
‘It	has	finally	seen	us,’	Onrack	replied,	‘and	so	it	runs	away.’
‘Ah,	no	fun	and	games	tonight,	then.	Poor	beast.’
‘In	time	it	will	judge	it	safe	to	resume	its	journey,	Trull	Sengar.	We	have
presented	but	a	momentary	obstacle.’
‘A	humbling	reminder,	then.’
‘As	you	wish.’
The	day	was	cloudless,	heat	rising	from	the	old	seabed	in	shimmering
waves.	The	odhan’s	grassy	steppes	resumed	a	few	thousand	paces	ahead.	The
salt-crusted	ground	resisted	signs	of	passages,	though	Onrack	could	detect	the
subtle	indications	left	behind	by	the	six	renegade	T’lan	Imass,	a	scrape	here,	a
scuff	there.	One	of	the	six	dragged	a	leg	as	it	walked,	whilst	another	placed
more	weight	on	one	side	than	the	other.	They	were	all	no	doubt	severely
damaged.	The	Ritual,	despite	the	cessation	of	the	Vow	itself,	had	left	residual
powers,	but	there	was	something	else	as	well,	a	vague	hint	of	chaos,	of
unknown	warrens—or	perhaps	familiar	ones	twisted	beyond	recognition.
There	was,	Onrack	suspected,	a	bonecaster	among	those	six.
Olar	Ethil,	Kilava	Onas,	Monok	Ochem,	Hentos	Ilm,	Tem	Benasto,	Ulpan
Nodost,	Tenag	Ilbaie,	Ay	Estos,	Absin	Tholai…the	bonecasters	of	the	Logros
T’lan	Imass.	Who	among	them	are	lost?	Kilava,	of	course,	but	that	is	as	it	has
always	been.	Hentos	Ilm	and	Monok	Ochem	have	both	in	their	turn	partaken	of
the	hunt.	Olar	Ethil	seeks	the	other	armies	of	the	T’lan	Imass—for	the	summons
was	heard	by	all.	Benasto	and	Ulpan	remain	with	Logros.	Ay	Estos	was	lost	here
on	the	Jhag	Odhan	in	the	last	war.	I	know	naught	of	the	fate	of	Absin	Tholai.


Leaving	Tenag	Ilbaie,	whom	Logros	sent	to	the	Kron,	to	aid	in	the	L’aederon
Wars.	Thus.	Absin	Tholai,	Tenag	Ilbaie	or	Ay	Estos.
Of	course,	there	was	no	reason	to	assume	that	the	renegades	were	from	the
Logros,	although	their	presence	here	on	this	continent	suggested	so,	since	the
caves	and	the	weapons	caches	were	not	the	only	ones	to	exist;	similar	secret
places	could	be	found	on	every	other	continent.	Yet	these	renegades	had	come
to	Seven	Cities,	to	the	very	birthplace	of	the	First	Empire,	in	order	to	recover
their	weapons.	And	it	was	Logros	who	was	tasked	with	the	holding	of	the
homeland.
‘Trull	Sengar?’
‘Yes?’
‘What	do	you	know	of	the	cult	of	the	Nameless	Ones?’
‘Only	that	they’re	very	successful.’
The	T’lan	Imass	cocked	its	head.	‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘Well,	their	existence	has	remained	hidden	from	me.	I’ve	never	heard	of
them.’
Ah.	‘Logros	commanded	that	the	First	Throne	be	removed	from	this	land,
because	the	Nameless	Ones	were	drawing	ever	closer	to	discovering	its
location.	They	had	come	to	realize	that	its	power	could	be	claimed,	that	the
T’lan	Imass	could	be	made	to	bow	in	service	to	the	first	mortal	to	seat	him	or
herself	upon	it.’
‘And	Logros	didn’t	want	one	of	these	Nameless	Ones	to	be	that	mortal.
Why?	What	terrible	purpose	drives	them?	And	before	you	answer,	Onrack,	I
should	tell	you	that	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	“terrible	purpose”	has	rather	dire
measure,	given	both	your	kind	and	my	own.’
‘I	understand,	Trull	Sengar,	and	it	is	a	valid	point	you	make.	The	Nameless
Ones	serve	the	Houses	of	the	Azath.	Logros	believed	that,	had	a	priest	of	that
cult	taken	the	First	Throne,	the	first	and	only	command	given	to	the	T’lan
Imass	would	be	to	voluntarily	accept	eternal	imprisonment.	We	would	have
been	removed	from	this	world.’
‘So	the	throne	was	moved.’
‘Yes,	to	a	continent	south	of	Seven	Cities.	Where	it	was	found	by	a	mage—
Kellanved,	the	Emperor	of	the	Malazan	Empire.’
‘Who	now	commands	all	the	T’lan	Imass?	No	wonder	the	Malazan	Empire
is	as	powerful	as	it	seems	to	be—then	again,	by	now,	it	should	have	conquered
the	whole	world,	since	he	could	have	called	upon	all	the	T’lan	Imass	to	fight
his	wars.’
‘The	Emperor ’s	exploitation	of	our	abilities	was…modest.	Surprisingly
constrained.	He	was	then	assassinated.	The	new	Empress	does	not	command


us.’
‘Why	didn’t	she	just	sit	on	the	First	Throne	herself?’
‘She	would,	could	she	find	it.’
‘Ah,	so	you	are	free	once	more.’
‘So	it	seems,’	Onrack	replied	after	a	moment.	‘There	are	other…concerns,
Trull	Sengar.	Kellanved	was	resident	in	a	House	of	the	Azath	for	a	time…’
They	reached	the	slope	beyond	the	salt	flat,	began	making	their	way
upward.	‘These	are	matters	of	which	I	know	very	little,’	the	Tiste	Edur	said.
‘You	fear	that	the	Emperor	was	either	one	of	these	Nameless	Ones,	or	had
contact	with	them.	If	so,	then	why	didn’t	he	issue	that	one	command	you	so
dreaded?’
‘We	do	not	know.’
‘How	did	he	manage	to	find	the	First	Throne	in	the	first	place?’
‘We	do	not	know.’
‘All	right.	Now,	what	has	all	this	to	do	with	what	we	are	up	to	right	now?’
‘A	suspicion,	Trull	Sengar,	regarding	where	these	six	renegade	T’lan
Imass	are	heading.’
‘Well,	southward,	it	seems.	Oh,	I	see.’
‘If	there	are	among	them	kin	of	Logros,	then	they	know	where	the	First
Throne	will	be	found.’
‘Well,	is	there	any	reason	to	believe	that	you	are	unique	among	the	T’lan
Imass?	Do	you	not	think	others	of	your	kind	may	have	arrived	at	the	same
suspicion?’
‘I	am	not	sure	of	that.	I	share	something	with	the	renegades	that	they	do
not,	Trull	Sengar.	Like	them,	I	am	unburdened.	Freed	from	the	Ritual’s	Vow.
This	has	resulted	in	a	certain…liberation	of	thought.	Monok	Ochem	and	Ibra
Gholan	pursue	a	quarry,	and	the	mind	of	a	hunter	is	ever	consumed	by	that
quarry.’
They	reached	the	first	rise	and	halted.	Onrack	drew	out	his	sword	and
jammed	it	point	first	into	the	ground,	so	deep	that	it	remained	standing	upright
when	he	walked	away	from	it.	He	took	ten	paces	before	stopping	once	more.
‘What	are	you	doing?’
‘If	you	do	not	object,	Trull	Sengar,	I	would	await	Monok	Ochem	and	Ibra
Gholan.	They,	and	Logros	in	turn,	must	be	informed	of	my	suspicion.’
‘And	you	assume	that	Monok	will	spare	us	the	time	to	talk?	Our	last
moments	together	were	less	than	pleasant,	as	I	recall.	I’d	feel	better	if	you
weren’t	standing	so	far	away	from	your	sword.’	The	Tiste	Edur	found	a	nearby
boulder	to	sit	on,	and	regarded	Onrack	for	a	long	moment	before	continuing,
‘And	what	about	what	you	did	in	the	cave,	where	that	Tellann	Ritual	was


active?’	He	gestured	at	Onrack’s	new	left	arm	and	the	melded	additions	to	the
other	places	where	damage	had	occurred.	‘It’s…obvious.	That	arm’s	shorter
than	your	own,	you	know.	Noticeably.	Something	tells	me	you	weren’t
supposed	to	do…what	you	did.’
‘You	are	right…or	would	be,	were	I	still	bound	by	the	Vow.’
‘I	see.	And	will	Monok	Ochem	display	similar	equanimity	when	he	sees
what	you	have	done?’
‘I	do	not	expect	so.’
‘Didn’t	you	proclaim	a	vow	to	serve	me,	Onrack?’
The	T’lan	Imass	lifted	its	head.	‘I	did.’
‘And	what	if	I	don’t	want	to	see	you	put	yourself—and	me,	I	might	add—at
such	risk?’
‘You	make	a	valid	point,	Trull	Sengar,	which	I	had	not	considered.
However,	let	me	ask	you	this.	These	renegades	serve	the	same	master	as	do
your	kin.	Should	they	lead	one	of	your	mortal	kin	to	take	the	First	Throne,	thus
acquiring	mastery	over	all	the	T’lan	Imass,	do	you	imagine	they	will	be	as
circumspect	in	using	those	armies	as	was	Emperor	Kellanved?’
The	Tiste	Edur	said	nothing	for	a	time,	then	he	sighed.	‘All	right.	But	you
lead	me	to	wonder,	if	the	First	Throne	is	so	vulnerable,	why	have	you	not	set
someone	of	your	own	choosing	upon	it?’
‘To	command	the	First	Throne,	one	must	be	mortal.	Which	mortal	can	we
trust	to	such	a	responsibility?	We	did	not	even	choose	Kellanved—his
exploitation	was	opportunistic.	Furthermore,	the	issue	may	soon	become
irrelevant.	The	T’lan	Imass	have	been	summoned—and	all	hear	it,	whether
bound	to	the	Vow	or	freed	from	it.	A	new,	mortal	bonecaster	has	arisen	in	a
distant	land.’
‘And	you	want	that	bonecaster	to	take	the	First	Throne.’
‘No.	We	want	the	summoner	to	free	us	all.’
‘From	the	Vow?’
‘No.	From	existence,	Trull	Sengar.’	Onrack	shrugged	heavily.	‘Or	so,	I
expect,	the	Bound	will	ask,	or,	perhaps,	have	already	asked.	Oddly	enough,	I
find	that	I	do	not	share	that	sentiment	any	more.’
‘Nor	would	any	others	who’d	escaped	the	Vow.	I	would	think,	then,	that	this
new	mortal	bonecaster	is	in	grave	danger.’
‘And	so	protected	accordingly.’
‘Are	you	able	to	resist	that	bonecaster ’s	summons?’
‘I	am…free	to	choose.’
The	Tiste	Edur	cocked	his	head.	‘It	would	seem,	Onrack,	that	you	are
already	free.	Maybe	not	in	the	way	that	this	bonecaster	might	offer	you,	but


even	so…’
‘Yes.	But	the	alternative	I	represent	is	not	available	to	those	still	bound	by
the	Vow.’
‘Let’s	hope	Monok	Ochem	is	not	too	resentful.’
Onrack	slowly	turned.	‘We	shall	see.’
Dust	swirled	upward	from	the	grasses	at	the	edge	of	the	crest,	twin
columns	that	resolved	into	the	bonecaster	Monok	Ochem	and	the	clan	leader,
Ibra	Gholan.	The	latter	lifted	its	sword	and	strode	directly	towards	Onrack.
Trull	Sengar	stepped	into	the	warrior ’s	path.	‘Hold,	Ibra	Gholan.	Onrack
has	information	you	will	want	to	hear.	Bonecaster	Monok	Ochem—you
especially,	so	call	off	the	clan	leader.	Listen	first,	then	decide	whether	Onrack
has	earned	a	reprieve.’
Ibra	Gholan	halted,	then	took	a	single	step	back,	lowering	its	sword.
Onrack	studied	Monok	Ochem.	Though	the	spiritual	chains	that	had	once
linked	them	had	since	snapped,	the	bonecaster ’s	enmity—Monok’s	fury—was
palpable.	Onrack	knew	his	list	of	crimes,	of	outrages,	had	grown	long,	and	this
last	theft	of	the	body	parts	of	another	T’lan	Imass	was	the	greatest
abomination,	the	most	dire	twisting	of	the	powers	of	Tellann	thus	far.	‘Monok
Ochem.	The	renegades	would	lead	their	new	master	to	the	First	Throne.	They
travel	the	paths	of	chaos.	It	is	their	intent,	I	believe,	to	place	a	mortal	Tiste	Edur
upon	that	throne.	Such	a	new	ruler	of	the	T’lan	Imass	would,	in	turn,	command
the	new	mortal	bonecaster—the	one	who	has	voiced	the	summons.’
Ibra	Gholan	slowly	turned	to	face	Monok	Ochem,	and	Onrack	could	sense
their	consternation.
Onrack	then	continued,	‘Inform	Logros	that	I,	Onrack,	and	the	one	to
whom	I	am	now	bound—the	Tiste	Edur	Trull	Sengar—share	your	dismay.	We
would	work	in	concert	with	you.’
‘Logros	hears	you,’	Monok	Ochem	rasped,	‘and	accepts.’
The	swiftness	of	that	surprised	Onrack	and	he	cocked	his	head.	A
moment’s	thought,	then,	‘How	many	guardians	protect	the	First	Throne?’
‘None.’
Trull	Sengar	straightened.	‘None?’
‘Do	any	T’lan	Imass	remain	on	the	continent	of	Quon	Tali?’	Onrack	asked.
‘No,	Onrack	the	Broken,’	Monok	Ochem	replied.	‘This	intention	you
describe	was…unanticipated.	Logros’s	army	is	massed	here	in	Seven	Cities.’
Onrack	had	never	before	experienced	such	agitation,	rattling	through	him,
and	he	identified	the	emotion,	belatedly,	as	shock.	‘Monok	Ochem,	why	has
Logros	not	marched	in	answer	to	the	summons?’
‘Representatives	were	sent,’	the	bonecaster	replied.	‘Logros	holds	his	army


here	in	anticipation	of	imminent	need.’
Need?	‘And	none	can	be	spared?’
‘No,	Onrack	the	Broken.	None	can	be	spared.	In	any	case,	we	are	closest	to
the	renegades.’
‘There	are,	I	believe,	six	renegades,’	Onrack	said.	‘And	one	among	them	is
a	bonecaster.	Monok	Ochem,	while	we	may	well	succeed	in	intercepting	them,
we	are	too	few…’
‘At	least	let	me	find	a	worthy	weapon,’	Trull	Sengar	muttered.	‘I	may	end
up	facing	my	own	kin,	after	all.’
Ibra	Gholan	spoke.	‘Tiste	Edur,	what	is	your	weapon	of	choice?’
‘Spear.	I	am	fair	with	a	bow	as	well,	but	for	combat…spear.’
‘I	will	acquire	one	for	you,’	the	clan	leader	said.	‘And	a	bow	as	well.	Yet	I
am	curious—there	were	spears	to	be	found	among	the	cache	you	but	recently
departed.	Why	did	you	not	avail	yourself	of	a	weapon	at	that	time?’
Trull	Sengar ’s	reply	was	low	and	cool.	‘I	am	not	a	thief.’
The	clan	leader	faced	Onrack,	then	said,	‘You	chose	well,	Onrack	the
Broken.’
I	know.	‘Monok	Ochem,	has	Logros	a	thought	as	to	who	the	renegade
bonecaster	might	be?’
‘Tenag	Ilbaie,’	Monok	Ochem	immediately	replied.	‘It	is	likely	he	has
chosen	a	new	name.’
‘And	Logros	is	certain?’
‘All	others	are	accounted	for,	barring	Kilava	Onas.’
Who	remains	in	her	mortal	flesh	and	so	cannot	be	among	the	renegades.
‘Born	of	Ban	Raile’s	clan,	a	tenag	Soletaken.	Before	he	was	chosen	as	the
clan’s	bonecaster,	he	was	known	as	Haran	’Alle,	birthed	as	he	was	in	the
Summer	of	the	Great	Death	among	the	Caribou.	He	was	a	loyal	bonecaster—’
‘Until	he	failed	against	the	Forkrul	Assail	in	the	L’aederon	Wars,’	Monok
Ochem	cut	in.
‘As	we	in	turn	fail,’	Onrack	rasped.
‘What	do	you	mean?’	Monok	Ochem	demanded.	‘In	what	way	have	we
failed?’
‘We	chose	to	see	failure	as	disloyalty,	Bonecaster.	Yet	in	our	harsh
judgement	of	fallen	kin,	we	committed	our	own	act	of	disloyalty.	Tenag	Ilbaie
strove	to	succeed	in	his	task.	His	defeat	was	not	by	choice.	Tell	me,	when	have
we	ever	triumphed	in	a	clash	with	Forkrul	Assail?	Thus,	Tenag	Ilbaie	was
doomed	from	the	very	beginning.	Yet	he	accepted	what	was	commanded	of
him.	Knowing	full	well	he	would	be	destroyed	and	so	condemned.	I	have
learned	this,	Monok	Ochem,	and	through	you	shall	say	to	Logros	and	all	the


T’lan	Imass:	these	renegades	are	of	our	own	making.’
‘Then	it	falls	to	us	to	deal	with	them,’	Ibra	Gholan	growled.
‘And	what	if	we	should	fail?’	Onrack	asked.
To	that,	neither	T’lan	Imass	gave	answer.
Trull	Sengar	sighed.	‘If	we	are	to	indeed	intercept	these	renegades,	we
should	get	moving.’
‘We	shall	travel	by	the	Warren	of	Tellann,’	Monok	Ochem	said.	‘Logros
has	given	leave	that	you	may	accompany	us	on	that	path.’
‘Generous	of	him,’	Trull	Sengar	muttered.
As	Monok	Ochem	prepared	to	open	the	warren,	the	bonecaster	paused	and
looked	back	at	Onrack	once	more.	‘When	you…repaired	yourself,	Onrack	the
Broken…where	was	the	rest	of	the	body?’
‘I	do	not	know.	It	had	been…taken	away.’
‘And	who	destroyed	it	in	the	first	place?’
Indeed,	a	troubling	question.	‘I	do	not	know,	Monok	Ochem.	There	is
another	detail	that	left	me	uneasy.’
‘And	that	is?’
‘The	renegade	was	cut	in	half	by	a	single	blow.’
	
The	winding	track	that	led	up	the	boulder-strewn	hillside	was	all	too	familiar,
and	Lostara	Yil	could	feel	the	scowl	settling	into	her	face.	Pearl	remained	a
few	paces	behind	her,	muttering	every	time	her	boots	dislodged	a	stone	that
tumbled	downward.	She	heard	him	curse	as	one	such	rock	cracked	against	a
shin,	and	felt	the	scowl	shift	into	a	savage	smile.
The	bastard’s	smooth	surface	was	wearing	off,	revealing	unsightly	patches
that	she	found	cause	both	for	derision	and	a	strange,	insipid	attraction.	Too	old
to	dream	of	perfection,	perhaps,	she	had	instead	discovered	a	certain	delicious
appeal	in	flaws.	And	Pearl	had	plenty	of	those.
He	resented	most	the	relinquishing	of	the	lead,	but	this	terrain	belonged	to
Lostara,	to	her	memories.	The	ancient,	exposed	temple	floor	lay	directly
ahead,	the	place	where	she	had	driven	a	bolt	into	Sha’ik’s	forehead.	And,	if	not
for	those	two	bodyguards—that	Toblakai	in	particular—that	day	would	have
ended	in	even	greater	triumph,	as	the	Red	Blades	returned	to	G’danisban	with
Sha’ik’s	head	riding	a	lance.	Thus	ending	the	rebellion	before	it	began.
So	many	lives	saved,	had	that	occurred,	had	reality	played	out	as
seamlessly	as	the	scene	in	her	mind.	On	such	things,	the	fate	of	an	entire
subcontinent	had	irrevocably	tumbled	headlong	into	this	moment’s	sordid,
blood-soaked	situation.


That	damned	Toblakai.	With	that	damned	wooden	sword.	If	not	for	him,
what	would	this	day	be	like?	We’d	likely	not	be	here,	for	one	thing.	Felisin
Paran	would	not	have	needed	to	cross	all	of	Seven	Cities	seeking	to	avoid
murder	at	the	hands	of	frenzied	rebels.	Coltaine	would	be	alive,	closing	the
imperial	fist	around	every	smouldering	ember	before	it	rose	in	conflagration.
And	High	Fist	Pormqual	would	have	been	sent	to	the	Empress	to	give	an
accounting	of	his	incompetence	and	corruption.	All,	but	for	that	one	obnoxious
Toblakai…
She	passed	by	the	large	boulders	they	had	hidden	behind,	then	the	one	she
had	used	to	draw	close	enough	to	ensure	the	lethality	of	her	shot.	And	there,	ten
paces	from	the	temple	floor,	the	scattered	remains	of	the	last	Red	Blade	to	fall
during	the	retreat.
Lostara	stepped	onto	the	flagstoned	floor	and	halted.
Pearl	arrived	at	her	side,	looking	around	curiously.
Lostara	pointed.	‘She	was	seated	there.’
‘Those	bodyguards	didn’t	bother	burying	the	Red	Blades,’	he	commented.
‘No,	why	would	they?’
‘Nor,’	the	Claw	continued,	‘it	seems,	did	they	bother	with	Sha’ik.’	He
walked	over	to	a	shadowed	spot	between	the	two	pillars	of	an	old	arched	gate.
Lostara	followed,	her	heart	suddenly	pounding	in	her	chest.
The	form	was	tiny,	wrapped	in	wind-frayed	tent	cloth.	The	black	hair	had
grown,	and	grown,	long	after	death,	and	the	effect—after	Pearl	crouched	and
tugged	the	canvas	away	to	reveal	the	desiccated	face	and	scalp—was	horrific.
The	hole	the	quarrel	had	punched	into	her	forehead	revealed	a	skull	filled	with
windblown	sand.	More	of	the	fine	grains	had	pooled	in	the	corpse’s	eye
sockets,	nose	and	gaping	mouth.
‘Raraku	reclaims	its	own,’	Pearl	muttered	after	a	moment.	‘And	you’re
certain	this	was	Sha’ik,	lass?’
She	nodded.	‘The	Book	of	Dryjhna	was	being	delivered,	as	I	explained.
Directly	into	her	hands.	From	which,	it	was	prophesied,	a	rebirth	would	occur,
and	that	in	turn	would	trigger	the	Whirlwind,	the	Apocalypse…the	rebellion.’
‘Describe	for	me	again	these	bodyguards.’
‘A	Toblakai	and	the	one	known	as	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	Sha’ik’s	most
personal	bodyguards.’
‘Yet,	it	would	appear	that	the	rebellion	had	no	need	for	Sha’ik,	or	the
Whirlwind.	It	was	well	under	way	by	the	time	Felisin	arrived	at	this	place.	So,
what	occurred	in	that	time?	Are	you	suggesting	that	the	bodyguards	simply…
waited?	Here?	Waited	for	what?’
Lostara	shrugged.	‘For	the	rebirth,	perhaps.	The	beauty	of	prophecies	is


that	they	are	so	conveniently	open	to	countless	reinterpretations,	as	the	demand
presents	itself.	The	fools	waited,	and	waited…’
Frowning,	Pearl	straightened	and	looked	around.	‘But	the	rebirth	did
occur.	The	Whirlwind	rose,	to	give	focus—to	provide	a	raging	heart—for	the
rebellion.	It	all	happened,	just	as	it	had	been	prophesied.	I	wonder…’
Lostara	watched	him	from	beneath	half-closed	lids.	A	certain	grace	to	his
movements,	she	conceded.	An	elegance	that	would	have	been	feminine	in	a
man	less	deadly.	He	was	like	a	flare-neck	snake,	calm	and	self-contained…until
provoked.	‘But	look	at	her,’	she	said.	‘There	was	no	rebirth.	We’re	wasting
time	here,	Pearl.	So,	maybe	Felisin	stumbled	here,	onto	all	this,	before
continuing	onward.’
‘You	are	being	deliberately	obtuse,	dear,’	Pearl	murmured,	disappointing
her	that	he	had	not	risen	to	the	bait.
‘Am	I?’
Her	irritation	deepened	at	the	smile	he	flashed	her.
‘You	are	quite	right,	Lostara,	in	observing	that	nothing	whatsoever	could
have	been	reborn	from	this	corpse.	Thus,	only	one	conclusion	follows.	The
Sha’ik	alive	and	well	in	the	heart	of	Raraku	is	not	the	same	Sha’ik.	Those
bodyguards	found	a…replacement.	An	impostor,	someone	they	could	fit	neatly
into	the	role—the	flexibility	of	prophecies	you	noted	a	moment	ago	would
have	served	them	well.	Reborn.	Very	well,	younger	in	appearance,	yes?	An	old
woman	cannot	lead	an	army	into	a	new	war,	after	all.	And	further,	an	old
woman	would	find	it	hard	to	convince	anyone	that	she’d	been	reborn.’
‘Pearl.’
‘What?’
‘I	refuse	the	possibility—yes,	I	know	what	you	are	thinking.	But	it’s
impossible.’
‘Why?	Nothing	else	fits—’
‘I	don’t	care	how	well	it	fits!	Is	that	all	we	mortals	are?	The	victims	of
tortured	irony	to	amuse	an	insane	murder	of	gods?’
‘A	murder	of	crows,	a	murder	of	gods—I	like	that,	lass.	As	for	tortured
irony,	more	like	exquisite	irony.	You	don’t	think	Felisin	would	leap	at	the
chance	to	become	such	a	direct	instrument	of	vengeance	against	her	sister?
Against	the	empire	that	sent	her	to	a	prison	mine?	Fate	may	well	present	itself,
but	the	opportunity	still	must	be	embraced,	wilfully,	eagerly.	There	was	less
chance	or	coincidence	in	all	this—more	like	a	timely	convergence	of	desires
and	necessities.’
‘We	must	return	to	the	Adjunct,’	Lostara	pronounced.
‘Alas,	the	Whirlwind	stands	between	us.	I	can	use	no	warrens	to	hasten	our


journey	within	that	sphere	of	power.	And	it	would	take	us	far	too	long	to	go
around	it.	Fear	not,	we	shall	endeavour	to	reach	Tavore	in	time,	with	our
ghastly	revelation.	But	we	shall	have	to	pass	through	the	Whirlwind,	through
Raraku	itself,	and	quietly,	carefully.	Discovery	would	prove	fatal.’
‘You	are	delighted	with	this,	aren’t	you?’
His	eyes	widened—a	look	of	his	of	which	she	had	grown	far	too	fond,	she
realized	with	a	surge	of	irritation.	‘Unfair,	my	dear	Lostara	Yil.	I	am	satisfied
that	the	mystery	has	been	solved,	that	our	task	of	ascertaining	Felisin’s	fate	has
been	concluded.	As	far	as	we	can	take	it	at	the	moment,	that	is.’
‘And	what	of	your	hunt	for	the	leader	of	the	Talons?’
‘Oh,	I	think	I	will	find	satisfaction	in	that	area	soon,	as	well.	All	things	are
converging	nicely,	in	fact.’
‘See,	I	knew	you	were	pleased!’
He	spread	his	hands.	‘Would	you	rather	I	lacerate	my	flesh	in	flagellation?’
At	her	cocked	eyebrow	his	gaze	narrowed	suspiciously	for	a	brief	moment,
then	he	drew	a	breath	and	resumed,	‘We	are	nearly	done,	lass,	with	this
mission.	And	soon	we	will	be	able	to	sit	ourselves	down	in	a	cool	tent,	goblets
of	chilled	wine	in	our	hands,	and	ruminate	at	leisure	over	the	countless
discoveries	we	have	made.’
‘I	can’t	wait,’	she	remarked	drily,	crossing	her	arms.
He	swung	about	and	faced	the	Whirlwind.	The	roaring,	shrieking
maelstrom	commanded	the	sky,	spinning	out	an	endless	rain	of	dust.	‘Of
course,	first	we	will	have	to	breach	the	goddess’s	defences,	undetected.	You	are
of	Pardu	blood,	so	she	will	take	no	heed	of	you.	I,	on	the	other	hand,	am	onefourth	Tiste	Andii—’
She	started,	breath	catching.	‘You	are?’
He	looked	back,	surprised.	‘You	didn’t	know?	My	mother	was	from	Drift
Avalii,	a	half-blood	white-haired	beauty—or	so	I’m	told,	as	I	have	no	direct
recollection,	since	she	left	me	with	my	father	as	soon	as	I’d	been	weaned.’
Lostara’s	imagination	conjured	up	an	image	of	Pearl	suckling	at	his
mother ’s	breast,	and	found	the	scene	alarming.	‘So	you	were	a	live	birth?’
And	smiled	at	his	offended	silence.
	
They	made	their	way	down	the	trail	towards	the	basin,	where	the	Whirlwind’s
fierce	storm	raged	ceaselessly,	rising	to	tower	over	them	the	closer	they
approached.	It	was	nearing	dusk.	They	were	short	on	food,	though	they	had
plenty	of	water,	replenished	from	the	spring	near	the	ruined	temple.	Lostara’s
boots	were	falling	apart	around	her	feet,	and	Pearl’s	moccasins	were	now


mostly	wrapped	rags.	The	seams	of	their	clothing	had	frayed	and	grown	brittle
beneath	the	unrelenting	sun.	Leather	had	cracked	and	iron	had	become	pitted
and	layered	in	patination	and	rust-stains	from	their	harrowing	passage	through
the	Thyrllan	Warren.
She	felt	worn	out	and	weathered;	in	appearance,	she	knew,	looking	ten
years	older	than	she	was	in	truth.	All	the	more	reason	for	her	alternating	fury
and	dismay	at	seeing	Pearl’s	hale,	unlined	face	and	his	oddly	shaped	eyes	so
clear	and	bright.	The	lightness	of	his	step	made	her	want	to	brain	him	with	the
flat	of	her	sword.
‘How	do	you	intend	to	evade	the	Whirlwind’s	notice,	Pearl?’	she	asked	as
they	drew	closer.
He	shrugged.	‘I	have	a	plan.	Which	may	or	may	not	work.’
‘Sounds	like	most	of	your	plans.	Tell	me,	then,	what	precarious	role	do
you	have	in	mind	for	me?’
‘Rashan,	Thyr	and	Meanas,’	he	replied.	‘The	perpetual	war.	This	fragment
of	warren	before	us	is	not	fully	comprehended	by	the	goddess	herself.	Not
surprising,	since	she	was	likely	little	more	than	a	zephyr	spirit	to	begin	with.	I,
however,	do	comprehend…well,	better	than	her,	anyway.’
‘Are	you	even	capable	of	answering	succinctly?	“Do	your	feet	hurt?”	“Oh,
the	warrens	of	Mockra	and	Rashan	and	Omtose	Phellack,	from	which	arise	all
aches	below	the	knee—”’
‘All	right.	Fine.	I	intend	to	hide	in	your	shadow.’
‘Well,	I’m	already	used	to	that,	Pearl.	But	I	should	point	out,	that
Whirlwind	Wall	is	obscuring	the	sunset	rather	thoroughly.’
‘True,	yet	it	exists	none	the	less.	I	will	just	have	to	step	carefully.	Provided,
of	course,	you	make	no	sudden,	unexpected	moves.’
‘In	your	company,	Pearl,	the	thought	has	yet	to	occur	to	me.’
‘Ah,	that’s	good.	I	in	turn	feel	I	should	point	out,	however,	that	you	persist
in	fomenting	a	certain	tension	between	us.	One	that	is	anything	but,	uh,
professional.	Oddly	enough,	it	seems	to	increase	with	every	insult	you	throw
my	way.	A	peculiar	flirtation—’
‘Flirtation?	You	damned	fool.	I’d	be	much	happier	seeing	you	fall	flat	on
your	face	and	get	beaten	helpless	by	that	damned	goddess,	if	only	for	the
satisfaction	I’d	receive—’
‘Precisely	as	I	was	saying,	dear.’
‘Really?	So	if	I	was	to	pour	boiling	oil	all	over	you,	you’d	be	telling	me—
in	between	screams—to	get	my	head	out	from	between	your—’	She	shut	her
mouth	with	an	audible	snap.
Wisely,	Pearl	made	no	comment.


Flat	of	the	sword?	No,	the	edge.	‘I	want	to	kill	you,	Pearl.’
‘I	know.’
‘But	for	the	moment,	I’ll	settle	with	having	you	in	my	shadow.’
‘Thank	you.	Now,	just	walk	on	ahead,	a	nice	even	pace.	Straight	into	that
wall	of	sand.	And	mind	you	squint	your	eyes	right	down—wouldn’t	want	those
glorious	windows	of	fire	damaged…’
	
She’d	expected	to	meet	resistance,	but	the	journey	proved	effortless.	Six	steps
within	a	dull,	ochre	world,	then	out	onto	the	blasted	plain	of	Raraku,	blinking
in	the	dusk’s	hazy	light.	Four	more	steps,	out	onto	scoured	bedrock,	then	she
spun	round.
Smiling,	Pearl	raised	both	hands,	palms	upward.	Standing	a	pace	behind
her.
She	closed	the	distance,	one	gloved	hand	reaching	up	to	the	back	of	his
head,	the	other	reaching	much	lower	as	she	closed	her	mouth	on	his.
Moments	later	they	were	tearing	at	each	other ’s	clothes.
No	resistance	at	all.
	
Less	than	four	leagues	to	the	southwest,	as	darkness	descended,	Kalam	Mekhar
woke	suddenly,	sheathed	in	sweat.	The	torment	of	his	dreams	still	echoed,	even
as	their	substance	eluded	him.	That	song	again…I	think.	Rising	to	a	roar	that
seemed	to	grip	the	throat	of	the	world…He	slowly	sat	up,	wincing	at	the
various	aches	from	his	muscles	and	joints.	Being	jammed	into	a	narrow,
shadowed	fissure	was	not	conducive	to	restorative	sleep.
And	the	voices	within	the	song…strange,	yet	familiar.	Like	friends…who
never	sang	a	word	in	their	lives.	Nothing	to	quell	the	spirit—no,	these	voices
give	music	to	war…
He	collected	his	waterskin	and	drank	deep	to	wash	the	taste	of	dust	from
his	mouth,	then	spent	a	few	moments	checking	his	weapons	and	gear.	By	the
time	he	was	done	his	heart	had	slowed	and	the	trembling	was	gone	from	his
hands.
He	did	not	think	it	likely	that	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	would	detect	his
presence,	so	long	as	he	travelled	through	shadows	at	every	opportunity.	And,
in	a	sense,	he	well	knew,	night	itself	was	naught	but	a	shadow.	Provided	he	hid
well	during	the	day,	he	expected	to	be	able	to	reach	Sha’ik’s	encampment
undiscovered.


Shouldering	his	pack,	he	set	off.	The	stars	overhead	were	barely	visible
through	the	suspended	dust.	Raraku,	for	all	its	wild,	blasted	appearance,	was
crisscrossed	with	countless	trails.	Many	led	to	false	or	poisoned	springs;
others	to	an	equally	certain	death	in	the	wastes	of	sand.	And	beneath	the	skein
of	footpaths	and	old	tribal	cairns,	the	remnants	of	coastal	roads	wound	atop	the
ridges,	linking	what	would	have	been	islands	in	a	vast,	shallow	bay	long	ago.
Kalam	made	his	way	in	a	steady	jog	across	a	stone-littered	depression
where	a	half-dozen	ships—the	wood	petrified	and	looking	like	grey	bones	in
the	gloom—had	scattered	their	remnants	in	the	hard-packed	clay.	The
Whirlwind	had	lifted	the	mantle	of	sands	to	reveal	Raraku’s	prehistory,	the
long-lost	civilizations	that	had	known	only	darkness	for	millennia.	The	scene
was	vaguely	disturbing,	as	if	whispering	back	to	the	nightmares	that	had
plagued	his	sleep.
And	that	damned	song.
The	bones	of	sea-creatures	crunched	underfoot	as	the	assassin	continued
on.	There	was	no	wind,	the	air	almost	preternatural	in	its	stillness.	Two
hundred	paces	ahead,	the	land	rose	once	more,	climbing	to	an	ancient,
crumbled	causeway.	A	glance	up	to	the	ridge	froze	Kalam	in	his	tracks.	He
dropped	low,	hands	closing	on	the	grips	of	his	long-knives.
A	column	of	soldiers	was	walking	along	the	causeway.	Helmed	heads
lowered,	burdened	with	wounded	comrades,	pikes	wavering	and	glinting	in	the
grainy	darkness.
Kalam	judged	their	numbers	as	close	to	six	hundred.	A	third	of	the	way
along	the	column	rose	a	standard.	Affixed	to	the	top	of	the	pole	was	a	human
ribcage,	the	ribs	bound	together	by	leather	strips,	in	which	two	skulls	had	been
placed.	Antlers	rode	the	shaft	all	the	way	down	to	the	bearer ’s	pallid	hands.
The	soldiers	marched	in	silence.
Hood’s	breath.	They’re	ghosts.
The	assassin	slowly	straightened.	Strode	forward.	He	ascended	the	slope
until	he	stood,	like	someone	driven	to	the	roadside	by	the	army’s	passage,
whilst	the	soldiers	shambled	past—those	on	his	side	close	enough	to	reach	out
and	touch,	were	they	flesh	and	blood.
‘He	walks	up	from	the	sea.’
Kalam	started.	An	unknown	language,	yet	he	understood	it.	A	glance	back
—and	the	depression	he	had	just	crossed	was	filled	with	shimmering	water.
Five	ships	rode	low	in	the	waters	a	hundred	sweeps	of	the	oar	offshore,	three
of	them	in	flames,	shedding	ashes	and	wreckage	as	they	drifted.	Of	the
remaining	two,	one	was	fast	sinking,	whilst	the	last	seemed	lifeless,	bodies
visible	on	its	deck	and	in	the	rigging.


‘A	soldier.’
‘A	killer.’
‘Too	many	spectres	on	this	road,	friends.	Are	we	not	haunted	enough?’
‘Aye,	Dessimbelackis	throws	endless	legions	at	us,	and	no	matter	how
many	we	slaughter,	the	First	Emperor	finds	more.’
‘Not	true,	Kullsan.	Five	of	the	Seven	Protectors	are	no	more.	Does	that
mean	nothing?	And	the	sixth	will	not	recover,	now	that	we	have	banished	the
black	beast	itself.’
‘I	wonder,	did	we	indeed	drive	it	from	this	realm?’
‘If	the	Nameless	Ones	speak	true,	then	yes—’
‘Your	question,	Kullsan,	confuses	me.	Are	we	not	marching	from	the	city?
Were	we	not	just	victorious?’
The	conversation	had	begun	to	fade	as	the	soldiers	who	had	been	speaking
marched	onward,	but	Kalam	heard	the	doubting	Kullsan’s	reply:	‘Then	why	is
our	road	lined	with	ghosts,	Erethal?’
More	importantly,	Kalam	added	to	himself,	why	is	mine?
He	waited	as	the	last	of	the	soldiers	marched	past,	then	stepped	forward	to
cross	the	ancient	road.
And	saw,	on	the	opposite	side,	a	tall,	gaunt	figure	in	faded	orange	robes.
Black	pits	for	eyes.	One	fleshless	hand	gripping	an	ivory	staff	carved	spirally,
on	which	the	apparition	leaned	as	if	it	was	the	only	thing	holding	it	up.
‘Listen	to	them	now,	spirit	from	the	future,’	it	rasped,	cocking	its	head.
And	now	Kalam	heard	it.	The	ghost	soldiers	had	begun	singing.
Sweat	sprang	out	on	the	assassin’s	midnight	skin.	I’ve	heard	that	song
before…or	no,	something	just	like	it.	A	variation…‘What	in	the	Abyss…You,
Tanno	Spiritwalker,	explain	this—’
‘Spiritwalker?	Is	that	the	name	I	will	acquire?	Is	it	an	honorific?	Or	the
acknowledgement	of	a	curse?’
‘What	do	you	mean,	priest?’
‘I	am	no	priest.	I	am	Tanno,	the	Eleventh	and	last	Seneschal	of	Yaraghatan,
banished	by	the	First	Emperor	for	my	treasonous	alliance	with	the	Nameless
Ones.	Did	you	know	what	he	would	do?	Would	any	of	us	have	guessed?	Seven
Protectors	indeed,	but	far	more	than	that,	oh	yes,	far	more…’	Steps	halting,	the
spectre	walked	onto	the	road	and	began	dragging	itself	along	in	the	wake	of
the	column.	‘I	gave	them	a	song,	to	mark	their	last	battle,’	it	rasped.	‘I	gave
them	that	at	least…’
Kalam	watched	as	the	figures	disappeared	into	the	darkness.	He	swung
about.	The	sea	was	gone,	the	basin’s	bones	revealed	once	more.	He	shivered.
Why	am	I	witness	to	these	things?	I’m	reasonably	certain	I’m	not	dead…


although	I	soon	might	be,	I	suppose.	Are	these	death-visions?	He	had	heard	of
such	things,	but	held	little	stock	in	them.	Hood’s	embrace	was	far	too	random
to	be	knotted	into	the	skein	of	fate…until	it	had	already	occurred—or	so	the
assassin’s	experience	told	him.
He	shook	his	head	and	crossed	the	road,	slipping	down	the	crumbling
verge	to	the	boulder-strewn	flat	beyond.	This	stretch	had	once	been	naught	but
dunes,	before	the	Whirlwind’s	rise.	Its	elevation	was	higher—perhaps	twice	the
height	of	a	man—than	the	ancient	seabed	he	had	just	traversed,	and	here,
beyond	the	tumbled	stones,	lay	the	gridwork	foundations	of	a	city.	Deep	canals
cut	through	it,	and	he	could	make	out	where	bridges	had	once	spanned	them
here	and	there.	Few	of	the	wall	foundations	rose	higher	than	the	assassin’s
shins,	but	some	of	the	buildings	looked	to	have	been	large—a	match	to
anything	found	in	Unta,	or	Malaz	City.	Deep	pits	marked	where	cisterns	had
been	built,	where	the	seawater	from	the	other	side	of	the	causeway	could,
stripped	of	salt	by	the	intervening	sands,	collect.	The	remnants	of	terraces
indicated	a	proliferation	of	public	gardens.
He	set	out,	and	soon	found	himself	walking	down	what	had	once	been	a
main	thoroughfare,	aligned	north–south.	The	ground	underfoot	was	a	thick,
solid	carpet	of	potsherds,	scoured	and	bleached	by	sand	and	salt.	And	now	I	am
like	a	ghost,	the	last	to	walk	these	thoroughfares,	with	every	wall	transparent,
every	secret	revealed.
It	was	then	that	he	heard	horses.
Kalam	sprinted	to	the	nearest	cover,	a	set	of	sunken	stairs	that	once	led	to
the	subterranean	level	of	a	large	building.	The	thump	of	horse	hoofs	drew
closer,	approaching	from	one	of	the	side	avenues	on	the	opposite	side	of	the
main	street.	The	assassin	ducked	lower	as	the	first	rider	appeared.
Pardu.
Drawing	rein,	cautious,	weapons	out.	Then	a	gesture.	Four	more	desert
warriors	appeared,	followed	by	a	fifth	Pardu,	this	last	one	a	shaman,	Kalam
concluded,	given	the	man’s	wild	hair,	fetishes	and	ratty	goat-hide	cape.	Glaring
about,	eyes	glinting	as	if	raging	with	some	internal	fire,	the	shaman	drew	out	a
long	bone	and	began	waving	it	in	circles	overhead.	Then	he	lifted	his	head	and
loudly	sniffed	the	air.
Kalam	slowly	eased	his	long-knives	from	their	scabbards.
The	shaman	growled	a	few	words,	then	pivoted	on	the	high	Pardu	saddle
and	slipped	to	the	ground.	He	landed	badly,	twisting	an	ankle,	and	spent	the	next
few	moments	hobbling	about,	cursing	and	spitting.	His	warriors	swung	down
from	their	horses	in	a	more	graceful	fashion,	and	Kalam	caught	the	flash	of	a
quickly	hidden	grin	from	one	of	them.


The	shaman	began	stamping	around,	muttering	under	his	breath,	reaching
up	with	his	free	hand	to	tug	at	his	tangled	hair	every	now	and	then.	And	in	his
movements	Kalam	saw	the	beginnings	of	a	ritual.
Something	told	the	assassin	that	these	Pardu	did	not	belong	to	Sha’ik’s
Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	They	were	too	furtive	by	far.	He	slowly	sheathed	his
otataral	long-knife	and	settled	back	in	the	deep	shadow	of	the	recess,	to	wait,
and	watch.
The	shaman’s	muttering	had	fallen	into	a	rhythmic	cadence,	and	he	reached
into	a	bag	of	sewn	hides	at	his	belt,	collecting	a	handful	of	small	objects	which
he	began	scattering	about	as	he	walked	his	endless	circle.	Black	and	glittering,
the	objects	crackled	and	popped	on	the	ground	as	if	they	had	been	just	plucked
from	a	hearth.	An	acrid	stench	wafted	out	from	the	ritual	circle.
Kalam	never	discovered	if	what	occurred	next	had	been	intended;	without
doubt	its	conclusion	was	not.	The	darkness	lying	heavy	on	the	street	seemed	to
convulsively	explode—and	then	screams	tore	the	air.	Two	massive	beasts	had
arrived,	immediately	attacking	the	Pardu	warriors.	As	if	darkness	itself	had
taken	form,	only	the	shimmer	of	their	sleek	hides	betrayed	their	presence,	and
they	moved	with	blurring	speed,	amidst	spraying	blood	and	snapping	bones.
The	shaman	shrieked	as	one	of	the	enormous	beasts	closed.	Huge	black	head
swung	to	one	side,	jaws	opening	wide,	and	the	shaman’s	head	vanished	within
the	maw.	A	wet	crunch	as	the	jaws	ground	shut.
The	hound—for	that,	Kalam	realized,	was	what	it	was—then	stepped	away,
as	the	shaman’s	headless	body	staggered	back,	then	sat	down	with	a	thump.
The	other	hound	had	begun	feeding	on	the	corpses	of	the	Pardu	warriors,
and	the	sickening	sound	of	breaking	bones	continued.
These,	Kalam	could	well	see,	were	not	Hounds	of	Shadow.	If	anything,
they	were	larger,	bulkier,	massing	more	like	a	bear	than	a	dog.	Yet,	as	they
now	filled	their	bellies	with	raw	human	flesh,	they	moved	with	savage	grace,
primal	and	deadly.	Devoid	of	fear	and	supremely	confident,	as	if	this	strange
place	they	had	come	to	was	as	familiar	to	them	as	their	own	hunting	grounds.
The	sight	of	them	made	the	assassin’s	skin	crawl.	Motionless,	he	had
slowed	his	own	breathing,	then	the	pace	of	his	heart.	There	were	no	other
alternatives	available	to	him,	at	least	until	the	hounds	left.
But	they	seemed	to	be	in	no	hurry,	both	settling	down	to	split	the	last	long
bones	and	gnaw	at	joints.
Hungry,	these	bastards.	Wonder	where	they	came	from…and	what	they’re
going	to	do	now.
Then	one	lifted	its	head,	and	stiffened.	With	a	deep	grunt	it	rose.	The	other
continued	crunching	through	a	human	knee,	seemingly	indifferent	to	its


companion’s	sudden	tension.
Even	when	the	beast	turned	to	stare	at	the	place	where	Kalam	crouched.
It	came	at	him	fast.
Kalam	leapt	up	the	worn	stairs,	one	hand	reaching	into	the	folds	of	his
telaba.	He	pivoted	hard	and	sprinted,	even	as	he	flung	his	last	handful	of	smoky
diamonds—his	own	cache,	not	Iskaral	Pust’s—into	his	wake.
A	skittering	of	claws	immediately	behind	him,	and	he	flung	himself	to	one
side,	rolling	over	a	shoulder	as	the	hound	flashed	through	the	place	where	he
had	been	a	moment	earlier.	The	assassin	continued	rolling	until	he	was	on	his
feet	once	more,	tugging	desperately	at	the	whistle	looped	around	his	neck.
The	hound	skidded	across	dusty	flagstones,	legs	cycling	wildly	beneath	it
as	it	twisted	around.
A	glance	showed	the	other	hound	entirely	unmindful,	still	gnawing	away	in
the	street	beyond.
Then	Kalam	clamped	the	whistle	between	his	teeth.	He	scrambled	in	a	halfcircle	to	bring	the	scatter	of	diamonds	between	himself	and	the	attacking
hound.
And	blew	through	the	bone	tube	as	hard	as	he	could.
Five	azalan	demons	rose	from	the	ancient	stone	floor.	There	seemed	to	be
no	moment	of	disorientation	among	them,	for	three	of	the	five	closed	instantly
on	the	nearer	hound,	whilst	the	remaining	two	flanked	Kalam	as	they
clambered,	in	a	blur	of	limbs,	towards	the	hound	in	the	street.	Which	finally
looked	up.
Curious	as	he	might	have	been	to	witness	the	clash	of	behemoths,	Kalam
wasted	no	time	in	lingering.	He	ran,	angling	southward	as	he	leapt	over	wall
foundations,	skirted	around	black-bottomed	pits,	and	set	his	gaze	fixedly	on	the
higher	ground	fifteen	hundred	paces	distant.
Snaps	and	snarls	and	the	crash	and	grind	of	tumbling	stones	evinced	an
ongoing	battle	in	the	main	street	behind	him.	My	apologies,	Shadowthrone…but
at	least	one	of	your	demons	should	survive	long	enough	to	escape.	In	which
case,	you	will	be	informed	of	a	new	menace	unleashed	on	this	world.	And
consider	this—if	there’s	two	of	them,	there’s	probably	more.
He	ran	onward	through	the	night,	until	all	sounds	behind	him	vanished.
	
An	evening	of	surprises.	In	a	jewelmonger ’s	kiosk	in	G’danisban.	At	a
sumptuous,	indolent	dinner	shared	by	a	Kaleffa	merchant	and	one	of	his	prized
client’s	equally	prized	wives.	And	in	Ehrlitan,	among	a	fell	gathering	of	fleshtraders	and	murderers	plotting	the	betrayal	of	a	Malazan	collaborator	who	had


issued	a	secret	invitation	to	Admiral	Nok’s	avenging	fleet—which	even	now
was	rounding	the	Otataral	Sea	on	its	way	to	an	ominous	rendezvous	with
eleven	transports	approaching	from	Genabackis—a	collaborator	who,	it	would
turn	out,	would	awaken	the	next	morning	not	only	hale,	but	no	longer	facing
imminent	assassination.	And	on	the	coastal	caravan	trail	twenty	leagues	west	of
Ehrlitan,	the	quietude	of	the	night	would	be	broken	by	horrified	screams—loud
and	lingering,	sufficient	to	awaken	a	maul-fisted	old	man	living	alone	in	a
tower	overlooking	the	Otataral	Sea,	if	only	momentarily,	before	he	rolled	over
and	fell	once	more	into	dreamless,	restful	sleep.
At	the	distant,	virtually	inaudible	whistle,	countless	smoky	diamonds	that
had	originated	from	a	trader	in	G’danisban’s	market	round	crumbled	into	dust
—whether	placed	for	safe-keeping	in	locked	chests,	worn	as	rings	or	pendants,
or	residing	in	a	merchant’s	hoard.	And	from	the	dust	rose	azalan	demons,
awakened	long	before	their	intended	moment.	But	that	suited	them	just	fine.
They	had,	one	and	all,	appointed	tasks	that	demanded	a	certain	solitude,	at
least	initially.	Making	it	necessary	to	quickly	silence	every	witness,	which	the
azalan	were	pleased	to	do.	Proficiently	and	succinctly.
For	those	that	had	appeared	in	the	ruins	of	a	city	in	Raraku,	however,	to
find	two	creatures	whose	existence	was	very	nearly	lost	to	the	demons’	racial
memory,	the	moments	immediately	following	their	arrival	proved	somewhat
more	problematic.	For	it	became	quickly	apparent	that	the	hounds	were	not
inclined	to	relinquish	their	territory,	such	as	it	was.
The	fight	was	fierce	and	protracted,	concluding	unsatisfactorily	for	the
five	azalan,	who	were	eventually	driven	off,	battered	and	bleeding	and	eager	to
seek	deep	shadows	in	which	to	hide	from	the	coming	day.	To	hide,	and	lick
their	wounds.
And	in	the	realm	known	as	Shadow,	a	certain	god	sat	motionless	on	his
insubstantial	throne.	Already	recovered	from	his	shock,	his	mind	was	racing.
Racing.
	
Grinding,	splintering	wood,	mast	snapping	overhead	to	drag	cordage	down,	a
heavy	concussion	that	shivered	through	the	entire	craft,	then	only	the	sound	of
water	dripping	onto	a	stone	floor.
With	a	muted	groan,	Cutter	dragged	himself	upright.	‘Apsalar?’
‘I’m	here.’
Their	voices	echoed.	Walls	and	ceiling	were	close—the	runner	had	landed
in	a	chamber.
‘So	much	for	subtle,’	the	Daru	muttered,	searching	for	his	pack	amidst	the


wreckage.	‘I’ve	a	lantern.	Give	me	a	moment.’
‘I	am	not	going	anywhere,’	she	replied	from	somewhere	near	the	stern.
Her	words	chilled	him,	so	forlorn	did	they	sound.	His	groping	hands
closed	on	his	pack	and	he	dragged	it	close.	He	rummaged	inside	until	his	hand
closed	on	and	retrieved	first	the	small	lantern	and	then	the	tinder	box.
The	fire-making	kit	was	from	Darujhistan,	and	consisted	of	flint	and	iron
bar,	wick-sticks,	igniting	powder,	the	fibrous	inner	lining	from	tree	bark,	and	a
long-burning	gel	the	city’s	alchemists	rendered	from	the	gas-filled	caverns
beneath	the	city.	Sparks	flashed	three	times	before	the	powder	caught	with	a
hiss	and	flare	of	flame.	The	bark	lining	followed,	then,	dipping	a	wick-stick
into	the	gel,	Cutter	set	it	alight.	He	then	transferred	the	flame	to	the	lantern.
A	sphere	of	light	burgeoned	in	the	chamber,	revealing	the	crushed
wreckage	of	the	runner,	rough-hewn	stone	walls	and	vaulted	ceiling.	Apsalar
was	still	seated	near	the	splintered	shaft	of	the	tiller,	barely	illumined	by	the
lantern’s	light.	More	like	an	apparition	than	a	flesh	and	blood	person.
‘I	see	a	doorway	beyond,’	she	said.
He	swung	about,	lifting	the	lantern.	‘All	right,	at	least	we’re	not	in	a	tomb,
then.	More	like	some	kind	of	storage	room.’
‘I	smell	dust…and	sand.’
He	slowly	nodded,	then	scowled	in	sudden	suspicion.	‘Let’s	do	some
exploring,’	he	grated	as	he	began	collecting	his	gear,	including	the	bow.	He
froze	at	a	chittering	sound	from	the	doorway,	looked	up	to	see	a	score	of	eyes,
gleaming	with	the	lantern’s	reflected	light.	Close-set	but	framing	the	doorway
on	all	sides,	including	the	arch	where,	Cutter	suspected,	they	were	hanging
upside	down.
‘Bhok’arala,’	Apsalar	said.	‘We’ve	returned	to	Seven	Cities.’
‘I	know,’	the	Daru	replied,	wanting	to	spit.	‘We	spent	most	of	last	year
trudging	across	that	damned	wasteland,	and	now	we’re	back	where	we	started.’
‘So	it	would	seem.	So,	Crokus,	are	you	enjoying	being	the	plaything	of	a
god?’
He	saw	little	value	in	replying	to	that	question,	and	chose	instead	to
clamber	down	to	the	puddled	floor	and	approach	the	doorway.
The	bhok’arala	scampered	with	tiny	shrieks,	vanishing	into	the	darkness	of
the	hallway	beyond.	Cutter	paused	at	the	threshold	and	glanced	back.
‘Coming?’
Apsalar	shrugged	in	the	gloom,	then	made	her	way	forward.
The	corridor	ran	straight	and	level	for	twenty	paces,	then	twisted	to	the
right,	the	floor	forming	an	uneven,	runnelled	ramp	that	led	upward	to	the	next
level.	There	were	no	side	chambers	or	passages	until	they	reached	a	circular


room,	where	sealed	doorways	lining	the	circumference	hinted	at	entrances	to
tombs.	In	one	curved	wall,	between	two	such	doorways,	there	was	an	alcove	in
which	stairs	were	visible.
And	crouched	at	the	base	of	those	stairs	was	a	familiar	figure,	teeth
gleaming	in	a	wide	smile.
‘Iskaral	Pust!’
‘Missed	me,	didn’t	you,	lad?’	He	edged	forward	like	a	crab,	then	cocked
his	head.	‘I	should	soothe	him	now—both	of	them,	yes.	Welcoming	words,	a
wide	embrace,	old	friends,	yes,	reunited	in	a	great	cause	once	more.	Never
mind	the	extremity	of	what	will	be	demanded	of	us	in	the	days	and	nights	to
come.	As	if	I	need	help—Iskaral	Pust	requires	the	assistance	of	no-one.	Oh,	she
might	be	useful,	but	she	hardly	looks	inclined,	does	she?	Miserable	with
knowledge,	is	my	dear	lass.’	He	straightened,	managing	something	between	an
upright	stance	and	a	crouch.	His	smile	suddenly	broadened.	‘Welcome!	My
friends!’
Cutter	advanced	on	him.	‘I’ve	no	time	for	any	of	this,	you	damned	weasel
—’
‘No	time?	Of	course	you	have,	lad!	There’s	much	to	be	done,	and	much
time	in	which	to	do	it!	Doesn’t	that	make	for	a	change?	Rush	about?	Not	us.
No,	we	can	dawdle!	Isn’t	that	wonderful?’
‘What	does	Cotillion	want	of	us?’	Cutter	demanded,	forcing	his	fists	to
unclench.
‘You	are	asking	me	what	Cotillion	wants	of	you?	How	should	I	know?’	He
ducked	down.	‘Does	he	believe	me?’
‘No.’
‘No	what?	Have	you	lost	your	mind,	lad?	You	won’t	find	it	here!	Although
my	wife	might—she’s	ever	cleaning	and	clearing	up—at	least,	I	think	she	is.
Though	she	refuses	to	touch	the	offerings—my	little	bhok’arala	children	leave
them	everywhere	I	go,	of	course.	I’ve	become	used	to	the	smell.	Now,	where
was	I?	Oh	yes,	dearest	Apsalar—should	you	and	I	flirt?	Won’t	that	make	the
witch	spit	and	hiss!	Hee	hee!’
‘I’d	rather	flirt	with	a	bhok’aral,’	she	replied.
‘That	too—I’m	not	the	jealous	type,	you’ll	be	relieved	to	hear,	lass.	Plenty
of	’em	about	for	you	to	choose	from,	in	any	case.	Now,	are	you	hungry?
Thirsty?	Hope	you	brought	your	own	supplies.	Just	head	on	up	these	stairs,	and
when	she	asks,	you	haven’t	seen	me.’
Iskaral	Pust	stepped	back	and	vanished.
Apsalar	sighed.	‘Perhaps	his…wife	will	prove	a	more	reasonable	host.’
Cutter	glanced	back	at	her.	Somehow	I	doubt	it.


Chapter	Twenty-one

‘There	is	no	death	in	light.’
ANARMANN,	HIGH	PRIEST	OF	OSSERC
‘Mezla	one	and	all,’	Febryl	muttered	as	he	hobbled	along	the	worn,	dusty	path,
his	breath	growing	harsher.	There	was	little	in	this	world	that	much	pleased
him	any	more.	Malazans.	His	failing	body.	The	blind	insanity	of	power	so
brutally	evinced	in	the	Whirlwind	Goddess.	In	his	mind,	the	world	was
plunging	into	chaos,	and	all	that	it	had	been—all	that	he	had	been—was	trapped
in	the	past.
But	the	past	was	not	dead.	It	merely	slept.	The	perfect,	measured
resurrection	of	old	patterns	could	achieve	a	rebirth.	Not	a	rebirth	such	as	had
taken	Sha’ik—that	had	been	nothing	more	than	the	discarding	of	one,	badly
worn	vessel	for	a	new	one	not	nearly	so	battered.	No,	the	rebirth	Febryl
imagined	was	far	more	profound.
He	had	once	served	the	Holy	Falah’d	Enqura.	The	Holy	City	of	Ugarat	and
its	host	of	tributary	cities	had	been	in	the	midst	of	a	renaissance.	Eleven	great
schools	of	learning	were	thriving	in	Ugarat.	Knowledge	long	lost	was	being
rediscovered.	The	flower	of	a	great	civilization	had	turned	to	face	the	sun,	had
begun	to	open.
The	Mezla	and	their	implacable	legions	had	destroyed…everything.	Ugarat
had	fallen	to	Dassem	Ultor.	The	schools	were	assailed	by	soldiers,	only	to
discover,	to	their	fury,	that	their	many	riches	and	texts	had,	along	with
philosophers	and	academics,	vanished.	Enqura	had	well	understood	the	Mezla
thirst	for	knowledge,	the	Emperor ’s	lust	for	foreign	secrets,	and	the	city’s
Holy	Protector	would	give	them	nothing.	Instead,	he	had	commanded	Febryl,	a
week	before	the	arrival	of	the	Malazan	armies,	to	shut	down	the	schools,	to
confiscate	the	hundred	thousand	scrolls	and	bound	volumes,	the	ancient	relics
of	the	First	Empire,	and	the	teachers	and	scholars	themselves.	By	the
Protector ’s	decree,	Ugarat’s	coliseum	became	the	site	of	a	vast	conflagration,
as	everything	was	burned,	destroyed.	The	scholars	were	crucified—those	that


did	not	fling	themselves	on	the	pyre	in	a	fit	of	madness	and	grief—and	their
bodies	dumped	into	the	pits	containing	the	smashed	relics	just	outside	the	city
wall.
Febryl	had	done	as	he	had	been	commanded.	His	last	gesture	of	loyalty,	of
pure,	unsullied	courage.	The	terrible	act	was	necessary.	Enqura’s	denial	was
perhaps	the	greatest	defiance	in	the	entire	war.	One	for	which	the	Holy
Protector	paid	with	his	life,	when	the	horror	that	was	said	to	have	struck
Dassem	Ultor	upon	hearing	of	the	deed	transformed	into	rage.
Febryl’s	loss	of	faith	had	come	in	the	interval,	and	it	had	left	him	a	broken
man.	In	following	Enqura’s	commands,	he	had	so	outraged	his	mother	and
father—both	learned	nobles	in	their	own	right—that	they	had	disowned	him	to
his	face.	And	Febryl	had	lost	his	mind	that	night,	recovering	his	sanity	with
dawn	staining	the	horizon,	to	find	that	he	had	murdered	his	parents.	And	their
servants.	That	he	had	unleashed	sorcery	to	flay	the	flesh	from	the	guards.	That
such	power	had	poured	through	him	as	to	leave	him	old	beyond	his	years,
wrinkled	and	withered,	his	bones	brittle	and	bent.
The	old	man	hobbling	out	through	the	city	gate	that	day	was	beneath	notice.
Enqura	searched	for	him,	but	Febryl	succeeded	in	evading	the	Holy	Protector,
in	leaving	the	man	to	his	fate.
Unforgivable.
A	hard	word,	a	truth	harder	than	stone.	But	Febryl	was	never	able	to	decide
to	which	crime	it	applied.	Three	betrayals,	or	two?	Was	the	destruction	of	all
that	knowledge—the	slaying	of	all	those	scholars	and	teachers—was	it,	as	the
Mezla	and	other	Falad’han	later	pronounced—the	foulest	deed	of	all?	Fouler
even	than	the	T’lan	Imass	rising	to	slaughter	the	citizens	of	Aren?	So	much	so
that	Enqura’s	name	has	become	a	curse	for	Mezla	and	natives	of	Seven	Cities
alike?	Three,	not	two?
And	the	bitch	knew.	She	knew	his	every	secret.	It	had	not	been	enough	to
change	his	name;	not	enough	that	he	had	the	appearance	of	an	old	man,	when
the	High	Mage	Iltara,	most	trusted	servant	to	Enqura,	had	been	young,	tall	and
lusted	after	by	both	men	and	women?	No,	she	had	obliterated,	seemingly
effortlessly,	his	every	barricade,	and	plundered	the	pits	of	his	soul.
Unforgivable.
No	possessor	of	his	secrets	could	be	permitted	to	live.	He	refused	to	be
so…vulnerable.	To	anyone.	Even	Sha’ik.	Especially	Sha’ik.
And	so	she	must	be	removed.	Even	if	it	means	dealing	with	Mezla.	He	had
no	illusions	about	Korbolo	Dom.	The	Napan’s	ambitions—no	matter	what
claims	he	made	at	present—went	far	beyond	this	rebellion.	No,	his	ambitions
were	imperial.	Somewhere	to	the	south,	Mallick	Rel,	the	Jhistal	priest	of	Elder


Mael,	was	trekking	towards	Aren,	there	to	surrender	himself.	He	would,	in
turn,	be	brought	before	the	Empress	herself.
And	then	what?	That	snake	of	a	priest	would	announce	an	extraordinary
reversal	of	fortunes	in	Seven	Cities.	Korbolo	Dom	had	been	working	in	her
interests	all	along.	Or	some	such	nonsense.	Febryl	was	certain	of	his
suspicions.	Korbolo	Dom	wanted	a	triumphant	return	into	the	imperial	fold.
Probably	the	title	of	High	Fist	of	Seven	Cities	as	well.	Mallick	Rel	would	have
twisted	his	part	in	the	events	at	the	Fall	and	immediately	afterwards.	The	dead
man,	Pormqual,	would	be	made	the	singular	focus	for	the	debacle	of	Coltaine’s
death	and	the	slaying	of	the	High	Fist’s	army.	The	Jhistal	would	slip	through,
somehow,	or,	if	all	went	awry,	he	would	somehow	manage	to	escape.	Korbolo
Dom,	Febryl	believed,	had	agents	in	the	palace	in	Unta—what	was	being	played
out	here	in	Raraku	was	but	a	tremble	on	a	much	vaster	web.
But	I	shall	defeat	it	in	the	end.	Even	if	I	must	appear	to	acquiesce	right
now.	He	has	accepted	my	conditions,	after	all—a	lie,	of	course—and	I	in	turn
accept	his—another	lie,	naturally.
He	had	walked	through	the	outskirts	of	the	city	and	now	found	himself	in
the	wilder	region	of	the	oasis.	The	trail	had	the	appearance	of	long	disuse,
covered	in	crackling,	dried	palm	fronds	and	gourd	husks,	and	Febryl	knew	his
careless	passage	was	destroying	that	illusion,	but	he	was	indifferent	to	that.
Korbolo’s	killers	would	repair	the	mess,	after	all.	It	fed	their	self-deceptions
well	enough.
He	rounded	a	bend	in	the	path	and	entered	a	clearing	ringed	in	low	stones.
There	had	once	been	a	well	here,	but	the	sands	had	long	since	filled	it.	Kamist
Reloe	stood	near	the	centre,	hooded	and	vulpine,	with	four	of	Korbolo’s
assassins	positioned	in	a	half-circle	behind	him.
‘You’re	late,’	Kamist	Reloe	hissed.
Febryl	shrugged.	‘Do	I	look	like	a	prancing	foal?	Now,	have	you	begun	the
preparations?’
‘The	knowledge	here	is	yours,	Febryl,	not	mine.’
Febryl	hissed,	then	waved	one	claw-like	hand.	‘No	matter.	There’s	still
time.	Your	words	only	remind	me	that	I	must	suffer	fools—’
‘You’re	not	alone	in	that,’	Kamist	Reloe	drawled.
Febryl	hobbled	forward.	‘The	path	your…servants	would	take	is	a	long
one.	It	has	not	been	trod	by	mortals	since	the	First	Empire.	It	has	likely	grown
treacherous—’
‘Enough	warnings,	Febryl,’	Kamist	Reloe	snapped,	his	fear	showing
through.	‘You	need	only	open	the	path.	That	is	all	we	ask	of	you—all	we	have
ever	asked.’


‘You	need	more	than	that,	Kamist	Reloe,’	Febryl	said	with	a	smile.	‘Would
you	have	these	fools	stride	in	blind?	The	goddess	was	a	spirit,	once—’
‘That	is	no	secret.’
‘Perhaps,	but	what	kind	of	spirit?	One	that	rides	the	desert	winds,	you
might	think.	But	you	are	wrong.	A	spirit	of	stone?	Sand?	No,	none	of	these.’	He
waved	one	hand.	‘Look	about	you.	Raraku	holds	the	bones	of	countless
civilizations,	leading	back	to	the	First	Empire,	the	empire	of	Dessimbelackis.
And	still	further—aye,	the	signs	of	that	are	mostly	obliterated,	yet	some
remain,	if	one	has	the	eyes	to	see…and	understand.’	He	limped	over	to	one	of
the	low	stones	ringing	the	clearing,	struggling	to	hide	the	wince	of	pain	from
his	overworked	bones.	‘Were	you	to	dig	down	through	this	sand,	Kamist
Reloe,	you	would	discover	that	these	boulders	are	in	fact	menhirs,	stones
standing	taller	than	any	of	us	here.	And	their	flanks	are	pitted	and	grooved	in
strange	patterns…’
Kamist	swung	in	a	slow	circle,	studying	the	protruding	rocks	with
narrowed	eyes.	‘T’lan	Imass?’
Febryl	nodded.	‘The	First	Empire	of	Dessimbelackis,	Kamist	Reloe,	was
not	the	first.	That	belonged	to	the	T’lan	Imass.	There	was	little,	it	is	true,	that
you	or	I	might	recognize	as	being…imperial.	No	cities.	No	breaking	of	the
ground	to	plant	crops	or	irrigate.	And	its	armies	were	undead.	There	was	a
throne,	of	course,	upon	which	was	meant	to	sit	a	mortal—the	progeny	race	of
the	T’lan	Imass.	A	human.	Alas,	humans	viewed	empire…differently.	And	their
vision	did	not	include	T’lan	Imass.	Thus,	betrayal.	Then	war.	An	unequal
contest,	but	the	T’lan	Imass	were	reluctant	to	annihilate	their	mortal	children.
And	so	they	left—’
‘Only	to	return	with	the	shattering	of	the	warren,’	Kamist	Reloe	muttered,
nodding.	‘When	the	chaos	erupted	with	the	ritual	of	Soletaken	and	D’ivers.’	He
faced	Febryl	once	more.	‘The	goddess	spirit	is…was…T’lan	Imass?’
Febryl	shrugged.	‘There	were	once	texts—inscribed	on	fired	clay—from	a
cult	of	the	First	Empire,	copies	of	which	survived	until	the	fall	of	Ugarat.	The
few	T’lan	Imass	the	humans	managed	to	destroy	when	they	rebelled	were	each
buried	in	sacred	sites.	Sites	such	as	this	one,	Kamist	Reloe.’
But	the	other	mage	shook	his	head.	‘She	is	a	creature	of	rage.	Such	fury
does	not	belong	to	T’lan	Imass—’
‘Unless	she	had	reason.	Memories	of	a	betrayal,	perhaps,	from	her	mortal
life.	A	wound	too	deep	to	be	eradicated	by	the	Ritual	of	Tellann.’	Febryl
shrugged.	‘It	does	not	matter.	The	spirit	is	T’lan	Imass.’
‘It	is	rather	late	in	the	day	for	you	to	be	revealing	this	to	us,’	Kamist	Reloe
growled,	turning	his	head	to	spit.	‘Does	the	Ritual	of	Tellann	still	bind	her?’


‘No.	She	broke	those	chains	long	ago	and	has	reclaimed	her	soul—
Raraku’s	secret	gifts	are	those	of	life	and	death,	as	primal	as	existence	itself.	It
returned	to	her	all	that	she	had	lost—perhaps	even	the	rebirth	of	her	rage.
Raraku,	Kamist	Reloe,	remains	the	deepest	mystery	of	all,	for	it	holds	its	own
memories…of	the	sea,	of	life’s	very	own	waters.	And	memories	are	power.’
Kamist	Reloe	drew	his	cloak	tighter	about	his	gaunt	form.	‘Open	the	path.’
And	when	I	have	done	this	for	you	and	your	Mezla	friends,	High	Mage,	you
will	be	indebted	to	me,	and	my	desires.	Seven	Cities	shall	be	liberated.	The
Malazan	Empire	will	withdraw	all	interests,	and	our	civilization	shall	flower
once	more…
He	stepped	to	the	centre	of	the	ring	of	stones	and	raised	his	hands.
	
Something	was	coming.	Bestial	and	wild	with	power.	And	with	each	passing
moment,	as	it	drew	ever	nearer,	L’oric’s	fear	grew.	Ancient	wars…such	is	the
feel	of	this,	as	of	enmity	reborn,	a	hatred	that	defies	millennia.	And	though	he
sensed	that	no-one	mortal	in	the	oasis	city	was	the	subject	of	that	wrath,	the
truth	remained	that…we	are	all	in	the	way.
He	needed	to	learn	more.	But	he	was	at	a	loss	as	to	which	path	he	should
take.	Seven	Cities	was	a	land	groaning	beneath	unseen	burdens.	Its	skin	was
thick	with	layers,	weathered	hard.	Their	secrets	were	not	easily	prised	loose,
especially	in	Raraku.
He	sat	cross-legged	on	the	floor	of	his	tent,	head	lowered,	thoughts	racing.
The	Whirlwind’s	rage	had	never	before	been	so	fierce,	leading	him	suspect
that	the	Malazan	army	was	drawing	close,	that	the	final	clash	of	wills	was	fast
approaching.	This	was,	in	truth,	a	convergence,	and	the	currents	had	trapped
other	powers,	pulling	them	along	with	relentless	force.
And	behind	it	all,	the	whispers	of	a	song…
He	should	flee	this	place.	Take	Felisin—and	possibly	Heboric	as	well—
with	him.	And	soon.	Yet	curiosity	held	him	here,	at	least	for	the	present.	Those
layers	were	splitting,	and	there	would	be	truths	revealed,	and	he	would	know
them.	I	came	to	Raraku	because	I	sensed	my	father’s	presence…somewhere
close.	Perhaps	here	no	longer,	but	he	had	been,	not	long	ago.	The	chance	of
finding	his	trail…
The	Queen	of	Dreams	had	said	Osric	was	lost.	What	did	that	mean?	How?
Why?	He	hungered	for	answers	to	such	questions.
Kurald	Thyrllan	had	been	born	of	violence,	the	shattering	of	Darkness.
The	Elder	Warren	had	since	branched	off	in	many	directions,	reaching	to
within	the	grasp	of	mortal	humans	as	Thyr.	And,	before	that,	in	the	guise	of


life-giving	fire,	Tellann.
Tellann	was	a	powerful	presence	here	in	Seven	Cities,	obscure	and	buried
deep	perhaps,	but	pervasive	none	the	less.	Whereas	Kurald	Thyrllan	had	been
twisted	and	left	fraught	by	the	shattering	of	its	sister	warren.	There	were	no
easy	passages	into	Thyrllan,	as	he	well	knew.
Very	well,	then.	I	shall	try	Tellann.
He	sighed,	then	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.	There	were	plenty	of	risks,	of
course.	Collecting	his	bleached	telaba	in	the	crook	of	one	arm,	he	moved	to	the
chest	beside	his	cot.	He	crouched,	passing	a	hand	over	it	to	temporarily	dispel
its	wards,	then	lifted	back	the	lid.
Liosan	armour,	the	white	enamel	gouged	and	scarred.	A	visored	helm	of
the	same	material,	the	leather	underlining	webbed	over	eyes	and	cheeks	by
black	iron	mail.	A	light,	narrow-bladed	longsword,	its	point	long	and	tapering,
scabbarded	in	pale	wood.
He	drew	the	armour	on,	including	the	helm,	then	pulled	his	telaba	over	it,
raising	the	hood	as	well.	Leather	gauntlets	and	sword	and	belt	followed.
Then	he	paused.
He	despised	fighting.	Unlike	his	Liosan	kin,	he	was	averse	to	harsh
judgement,	to	the	assertion	of	a	brutally	delineated	world-view	that	permitted
no	ambiguity.	He	did	not	believe	order	could	be	shaped	by	a	sword’s	edge.
Finality,	yes,	but	finality	stained	with	failure.
Necessity	was	a	most	bitter	flavour,	but	he	saw	no	choice	and	so	would
have	to	suffer	the	taste.
Once	more	he	would	have	to	venture	forth,	through	the	encampment,
drawing	ever	so	carefully	on	his	powers	to	remain	unseen	by	mortals	yet
beneath	the	notice	of	the	goddess.	The	ferocity	of	her	anger	was	his	greatest
ally,	and	he	would	have	to	trust	in	that.
He	set	out.
	
The	sun	was	a	crimson	glare	behind	the	veil	of	suspended	sand,	still	a	bell
from	setting,	when	L’oric	reached	the	Toblakai’s	glade.	He	found	Felisin
sleeping	beneath	the	shade	they	had	rigged	between	three	poles	on	the	side
opposite	the	carved	trees,	and	decided	he	would	leave	her	to	her	rest.	Instead,
sparing	a	single	bemused	glance	at	the	two	Teblor	statues,	he	strode	over	to
stand	before	the	seven	stone	faces.
Their	spirits	were	long	gone,	if	they	had	ever	been	present.	These
mysterious	T’lan	Imass	who	were	Toblakai’s	gods.	And	the	sanctification	had
been	wrested	from	them,	leaving	this	place	sacred	to	something	else.	But	a


fissure	remained,	the	trail,	perhaps,	from	a	brief	visitation.	Sufficient,	he
hoped,	for	him	to	breach	a	way	into	the	Warren	of	Tellann.
He	unveiled	power,	forcing	his	will	into	the	fissure,	widening	it	until	he
was	able	to	step	through—
Onto	a	muddy	beach	at	the	edge	of	a	vast	lake.	His	boots	sank	to	the	ankles.
Clouds	of	insects	flitted	up	from	the	shoreline	to	swarm	around	him.	L’oric
paused,	stared	upward	at	an	overcast	sky.	The	air	was	sultry	with	late	spring.
I	am	in	the	wrong	place…or	the	wrong	time.	This	is	Raraku’s	most	ancient
memory.
He	faced	inland.	A	marshy	flat	extended	for	another	twenty	paces,	the	reeds
waving	in	the	mild	wind,	then	the	terrain	rose	gently	onto	savanna.	A	low	ridge
of	darker	hills	marked	the	horizon.	A	few	majestic	trees	rose	from	the
grasslands,	filled	with	raucous	white-winged	birds.
A	flash	of	movement	in	the	reeds	caught	his	attention,	and	his	hand	reached
for	the	hilt	of	his	sword	as	a	bestial	head	appeared,	followed	by	humped
shoulders.	A	hyena,	such	as	could	be	found	west	of	Aren	and,	more	rarely,	in
Karashimesh,	but	this	one	was	as	large	as	a	bear.	It	lifted	its	wide,	stubby	head,
nose	testing	the	air,	eyes	seeming	to	squint.
The	hyena	took	a	step	forward.
L’oric	slid	the	sword	from	the	scabbard.
At	the	blade’s	hiss	the	beast	reared	up,	lunging	to	its	left,	and	bolted	into
the	reeds.
He	could	mark	its	flight	by	the	waving	stalks,	then	it	appeared	once	more,
sprinting	up	the	slope.
L’oric	resheathed	his	weapon.	He	strode	from	the	muddy	bank,	intending	to
take	the	trail	the	hyena	had	broken	through	the	reeds,	and,	four	paces	in,	came
upon	the	gnawed	remains	of	a	corpse.	Far	along	in	its	decay,	limbs	scattered	by
the	scavenger ’s	feeding,	it	was	a	moment	before	the	High	Mage	could
comprehend	its	form.	Humanoid,	he	concluded.	As	tall	as	a	normal	man,	yet
what	remained	of	its	skin	revealed	a	pelt	of	fine	dark	hair.	The	waters	had
bloated	the	flesh,	suggesting	the	creature	had	drowned.	A	moment’s	search	and
he	found	the	head.
He	crouched	down	over	it	and	was	motionless	for	some	time.
Sloped	forehead,	solid	chinless	jaw,	a	brow	ridge	so	heavy	it	formed	a
contiguous	shelf	over	the	deep-set	eye	sockets.	The	hair	still	clinging	to
fragments	of	scalp	was	little	longer	than	what	had	covered	the	body,	dark
brown	and	wavy.
More	ape-like	than	a	T’lan	Imass…the	skull	behind	the	face	is	smaller,	as
well.	Yet	it	stood	taller	by	far,	more	human	in	proportion.	What	manner	of	man


was	this?
There	was	no	evidence	of	clothing,	or	any	other	sort	of	adornment.	The
creature—a	male—had	died	naked.
L’oric	straightened.	He	could	see	the	hyena’s	route	through	the	reeds,	and
he	set	out	along	it.
The	overcast	was	burning	away	and	the	air	growing	hotter	and,	if	anything,
thicker.	He	reached	the	sward	and	stepped	onto	dry	ground	for	the	first	time.
The	hyena	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	and	L’oric	wondered	if	it	was	still	running.
An	odd	reaction,	he	mused,	for	which	he	could	fashion	no	satisfactory
explanation.
He	had	no	destination	in	mind;	nor	was	he	even	certain	that	what	he	sought
would	be	found	here.	This	was	not,	after	all,	Tellann.	If	anything,	he	had	come
to	what	lay	beneath	Tellann,	as	if	the	Imass,	in	choosing	their	sacred	sites,	had
been	in	turn	responding	to	a	sensitivity	to	a	still	older	power.	He	understood
now	that	Toblakai’s	glade	was	not	a	place	freshly	sanctified	by	the	giant
warrior;	nor	even	by	the	T’lan	Imass	he	had	worshipped	as	his	gods.	It	had,	at
the	very	beginning,	belonged	to	Raraku,	to	whatever	natural	power	the	land
possessed.	And	so	he	had	pushed	through	to	a	place	of	beginnings.	But	did	I
push,	or	was	I	pulled?
A	herd	of	huge	beasts	crested	a	distant	rise	on	his	right,	the	ground
trembling	as	they	picked	up	speed,	stampeding	in	wild	panic.
L’oric	hesitated.	They	were	not	running	towards	him,	but	he	well	knew	that
such	stampedes	could	veer	at	any	time.	Instead,	they	swung	suddenly	the	other
way,	wheeling	as	a	single	mass.	Close	enough	for	him	to	make	out	their
shapes.	Similar	to	wild	cattle,	although	larger	and	bearing	stubby	horns	or
antlers.	Their	hides	were	mottled	white	and	tan,	their	long	manes	black.
He	wondered	what	had	panicked	them	and	swung	his	gaze	back	to	the	place
where	the	herd	had	first	appeared.
L’oric	dropped	into	a	crouch,	his	heart	pounding	hard	in	his	chest.
Seven	hounds,	black	as	midnight,	of	a	size	to	challenge	the	wild	antlered
cattle.	Moving	with	casual	arrogance	along	the	ridge.	And	flanking	them,	like
jackals	flanking	a	pride	of	lions,	a	score	or	more	of	the	half-human	creatures
such	as	the	one	he	had	discovered	at	the	lakeshore.	They	were	clearly
subservient,	in	the	role	of	scavengers	to	predators.	No	doubt	there	was	some
mutual	benefit	to	the	partnership,	though	L’oric	could	imagine	no	real	threat	in
this	world	to	those	dark	hounds.
And,	there	was	no	doubt	in	his	mind,	those	hounds	did	not	belong	here.
Intruders.	Strangers	to	this	realm,	against	which	nothing	in	this	world	can
challenge.	They	are	the	dominators…and	they	know	it.


And	now	he	saw	that	other	observers	were	tracking	the	terrible	beasts.
K’Chain	Che’Malle,	three	of	them,	the	heavy	blades	at	the	end	of	their	arms
revealing	that	they	were	K’ell	Hunters,	were	padding	along	a	parallel	course	a
few	hundred	paces	distant	from	the	hounds.	Their	heads	were	turned,	fixed	on
the	intruders—who	in	turn	ignored	them.
Not	of	this	world	either,	if	my	father’s	thoughts	on	the	matter	are	accurate.
He	was	Rake’s	guest	for	months	in	Moon’s	Spawn,	delving	its	mysteries.	But	the
K’Chain	Che’Malle	cities	lie	on	distant	continents.	Perhaps	they	but	recently
arrived	here,	seeking	new	sites	for	their	colonies…only	to	find	their	dominance
challenged.
If	the	hounds	saw	L’oric,	they	made	no	sign	of	it.	Nor	did	the	half-humans.
The	High	Mage	watched	them	continue	on,	until	they	finally	dipped	into	a
basin	and	disappeared	from	sight.
The	K’ell	Hunters	all	halted,	then	spread	out	cautiously	and	slowly	closed
to	where	the	hounds	had	vanished.
A	fatal	error.
Blurs	of	darkness,	launching	up	from	the	basin.	The	K’ell	Hunters,
suddenly	surrounded,	swung	their	massive	swords.	Yet,	fast	as	they	were,	in	the
span	of	a	single	heartbeat	two	of	the	three	were	down,	throats	and	bellies	torn
open.	The	third	one	had	leapt	high,	sailing	twenty	paces	to	land	in	a	thumping
run.
The	hounds	did	not	pursue,	gathering	to	sniff	at	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle
corpses	whilst	the	half-humans	arrived	with	hoots	and	barks,	a	few	males
clambering	onto	the	dead	creatures	and	jumping	up	and	down,	arms	waving.
L’oric	thought	he	now	understood	why	the	K’Chain	Che’Malle	had	never
established	colonies	on	this	continent.
He	watched	the	hounds	and	the	half-humans	mill	about	the	kill	site	for	a
while	longer,	then	the	High	Mage	began	a	cautious	retreat,	back	to	the	lake.	He
was	nearing	the	edge	of	the	slope	down	to	the	reeds	when	his	last	parting
glance	over	one	shoulder	revealed	the	seven	beasts	all	facing	in	his	direction,
heads	raised.
Then	two	began	a	slow	lope	towards	him.	A	moment	later	the	remaining
five	fanned	out	and	followed.
Oh…
Sudden	calm	descended	upon	him.	He	knew	he	was	as	good	as	already
dead.	There	would	be	no	time	to	open	the	warren	to	return	to	his	own	world—
nor	would	he,	in	any	case,	since	to	do	so	would	give	the	hounds	a	path	to
follow—and	I’ll	not	have	their	arrival	in	the	oasis	a	crime	staining	my	soul.
Better	to	die	here	and	now.	Duly	punished	for	my	obsessive	curiosity.


The	hounds	showed	nothing	of	the	speed	they	had	unveiled	against	the
K’ell	Hunters,	as	if	they	sensed	L’oric’s	comparative	weakness.
He	heard	water	rushing	behind	him	and	spun	round.
A	dragon	filled	his	vision,	low	over	the	water—so	fast	as	to	lift	a	thrashing
wave	in	its	wake—and	the	talons	spread	wide,	the	huge	clawed	hands	reaching
down.
He	threw	his	arms	over	his	face	and	head	as	the	enormous	scaled	fingers
closed	like	a	cage	around	him,	then	snatched	him	skyward.
A	brief,	disjointed	glimpse	of	the	hounds	scattering	from	the	dragon’s
shadow—the	distant	sound	of	half-human	yelps	and	shrieks—then	naught
before	his	eyes	but	the	glistening	white	belly	of	the	dragon,	seen	between	two
curled	talons.
He	was	carried	far,	out	onto	a	sea,	then	towards	an	island	where	stood	a
squat	tower,	its	flat	roof	broad	and	solid	enough	for	the	dragon,	wings
spreading	to	thunder	against	the	air,	to	settle.
The	claws	opened,	tumbling	L’oric	onto	the	gouged	and	scraped	stones.	He
rolled	up	against	the	platform’s	low	wall,	then	slowly	sat	up.
And	stared	at	the	enormous	gold	and	white	dragon,	its	lambent	eyes	fixed
upon	him	with,	L’oric	knew	instinctively,	reproach.	The	High	Mage	managed	a
shrug.
‘Father,’	he	said,	‘I’ve	been	looking	for	you.’
	
Osric	was	not	one	for	furnishings	and	decor.	The	chamber	beneath	the
platform	was	barren,	its	floor	littered	with	the	detritus	left	by	nesting	swallows,
the	air	pungent	with	guano.
L’oric	leaned	against	a	wall,	arms	crossed,	watching	his	father	pace.
He	was	pure	Liosan	in	appearance,	tall	and	pale	as	snow,	his	long,	wavy
hair	silver	and	streaked	with	gold.	His	eyes	seemed	to	rage	with	an	inner	fire,
its	tones	a	match	to	his	hair,	silver	licked	by	gold.	He	was	wearing	plain	grey
leathers,	the	sword	at	his	belt	virtually	identical	to	the	one	L’oric	carried.
‘Father.	The	Queen	of	Dreams	believes	you	lost,’	he	said	after	a	long
moment.
‘I	am.	Or,	rather,	I	was.	Further,	I	would	remain	so.’
‘You	do	not	trust	her?’
He	paused,	studied	his	son	briefly,	then	said,	‘Of	course	I	trust	her.	And	my
trust	is	made	purer	by	her	ignorance.	What	are	you	doing	here?’
Sometimes	longing	is	to	be	preferred	to	reality.	L’oric	sighed.	‘I	am	not
even	sure	where	here	is.	I	was…questing	for	truths.’


Osric	grunted	and	began	pacing	once	more.	‘You	said	earlier	you	were
looking	for	me.	How	did	you	discover	my	trail?’
‘I	didn’t.	My	searching	for	you	was	more	of	a,	ah,	generalized	sort	of
thing.	This	present	excursion	was	an	altogether	different	hunt.’
‘That	was	about	to	see	you	killed.’
L’oric	nodded.	He	looked	around	the	chamber.	‘You	live	here?’
His	father	grimaced.	‘An	observation	point.	The	K’Chain	Che’Malle
skykeeps	invariably	approach	from	the	north,	over	water.’
‘Skykeeps…such	as	Moon’s	Spawn?’
A	veiled	glance,	then	a	nod.	‘Yes.’
‘And	it	was	in	Rake’s	floating	fortress	that	you	first	embarked	on	the	trail
that	took	you	here.	What	did	you	discover	that	the	Tiste	Andii	Lord	of
Darkness	didn’t?’
Osric	snorted.	‘Only	that	which	was	at	his	very	feet.	Moon’s	Spawn	bore
signs	of	damage,	of	breaching.	Then	slaughter.	None	the	less,	a	few	survived,
at	least	long	enough	to	begin	it	on	its	journey	home.	North,	out	over	the
icefields.	Of	course,	it	never	made	it	past	those	icefields.	Did	you	know	that	the
glacier	that	held	Moon’s	Spawn	had	travelled	a	thousand	leagues	with	its	prize?
A	thousand	leagues,	L’oric,	before	Rake	and	I	stumbled	upon	it	north	of
Laederon	Plateau.’
‘You	are	saying	Moon’s	Spawn	was	originally	one	of	these	skykeeps	that
arrived	here?’
‘It	was.	Three	have	come	in	the	time	that	I	have	been	here.	None	survived
the	Deragoth.’
‘The	what?’
Osric	halted	and	faced	his	son	once	more.	‘The	Hounds	of	Darkness.	The
seven	beasts	that	Dessimbelackis	made	pact	with—and	oh,	weren’t	the
Nameless	Ones	shaken	by	that	unholy	alliance?	The	seven	beasts,	L’oric,	that
gave	the	name	to	Seven	Cities,	although	no	memory	survives	of	that	particular
truth.	The	Seven	Holy	Cities	of	our	time	are	not	the	original	ones,	of	course.
Only	the	number	has	survived.’
L’oric	closed	his	eyes	and	leaned	his	head	back	against	the	damp	stone
wall.
‘Deragoth.	What	happened	to	them?	Why	are	they	here	and	not	there?’
‘I	don’t	know.	Probably	it	had	something	to	do	with	the	violent	collapse	of
the	First	Empire.’
‘What	warren	is	this?’
‘Not	a	warren	at	all,	L’oric.	A	memory.	Soon	to	end,	I	believe,	since	it	is…
shrinking.	Fly	northward	and	by	day’s	end	you	will	see	before	you	a	wall	of


nothingness,	of	oblivion.’
‘A	memory.	Whose	memory?’
Osric	shrugged.	‘Raraku’s.’
‘You	make	that	desert	sound	as	if	it	is	alive,	as	if	it	is	an	entity.’
‘Isn’t	it?’
‘You’re	saying	it	is?’
‘No,	I’m	not	saying	that.	I	was	asking	you—have	you	not	just	come	from
there?’
L’oric	opened	his	eyes	and	regarded	his	father.	You	are	a	frustrating	man.
No	wonder	Anomander	Rake	lost	his	temper.	‘What	of	those	half-humans	that
ran	with	these	Deragoth?’
‘A	quaint	reversal,	wouldn’t	you	say?	The	Deragoth’s	only	act	of
domestication.	Most	scholars,	in	their	species-bound	arrogance,	believe	that
humans	domesticated	dogs,	but	it	may	well	have	been	the	other	way	round,	at
least	to	start.	Who	ran	with	whom?’
‘But	those	creatures	aren’t	humans.	They’re	not	even	Imass.’
‘No,	but	they	will	be,	one	day.	I’ve	seen	others,	scampering	on	the	edges	of
wolf	packs.	Standing	upright	gives	them	better	vision,	a	valuable	asset	to
complement	the	wolves’	superior	hearing	and	sense	of	smell.	A	formidable
combination,	but	the	wolves	are	the	ones	in	charge.	That	will	eventually
change…but	not	for	those	serving	the	Deragoth,	I	suspect.’
‘Why?’
‘Because	something	is	about	to	happen.	Here,	in	this	trapped	memory.	I
only	hope	that	I	will	be	privileged	to	witness	it	before	the	world	fades	entirely.’
‘You	called	the	Deragoth	“Hounds	of	Darkness”.	Are	they	children	of
Mother	Dark,	then?’
‘They	are	no-one’s	children,’	Osric	growled,	then	he	shook	his	head.
‘They	have	that	stench	about	them,	but	in	truth	I	have	no	idea.	It	just	seemed	an
appropriate	name.	“Deragoth”	in	the	Tiste	Andii	tongue.’
‘Well,’	L’oric	muttered,	‘actually,	it	would	be	Dera’tin’jeragoth.’
Osric	studied	his	son.	‘So	like	your	mother,’	he	sighed.	‘And	is	it	any
wonder	we	could	not	stand	each	other ’s	company?	The	third	day,	always	by	the
third	day.	We	could	make	a	lifetime	of	those	three	days.	Exaltation,	then
comfort,	then	mutual	contempt.	One,	two,	three.’
L’oric	looked	away.	‘And	for	your	only	son?’
Osric	grunted.	‘More	like	three	bells.’
Climbing	to	his	feet,	L’oric	brushed	dust	from	his	hands.	‘Very	well.	I	may
require	your	help	in	opening	the	path	back	to	Raraku.	But	you	might	wish	to
know	something	of	the	Liosan	and	Kurald	Thyrllan.	Your	people	and	their


realm	have	lost	their	protector.	They	pray	for	your	return,	Father.’
‘What	of	your	familiar?’
‘Slain.	By	T’lan	Imass.’
‘So,’	Osric	said,	‘find	yourself	another.’
L’oric	flinched,	then	scowled.	‘It’s	not	as	easy	as	that!	In	any	case,	do	you
hold	no	sense	of	responsibility	for	the	Liosan?	They	worship	you,	dammit!’
‘The	Liosan	worship	themselves,	L’oric.	I	happen	to	be	a	convenient
figure-head.	Kurald	Thyrllan	may	appear	vulnerable,	but	it	isn’t.’
‘And	what	if	these	Deragoth	are	servants	of	Darkness	in	truth?	Do	you	still
make	the	same	claim,	Father?’
He	was	silent,	then	strode	towards	the	gaping	entranceway.	‘It’s	all	her
fault,’	he	muttered	as	he	passed.
L’oric	followed	his	father	outside.	‘This…observation	tower.	Is	it	Jaghut?’
‘Yes.’
‘So,	where	are	they?’
‘West.	South.	East.	But	not	here—I’ve	seen	none.’
‘You	don’t	know	where	they	are,	do	you?’
‘They	are	not	in	this	memory,	L’oric.	That	is	that.	Now,	stay	back.’
The	High	Mage	remained	near	the	tower,	watching	his	father	veer	into	his
draconic	form.	The	air	suddenly	redolent	with	a	sweet,	spicy	aroma,	a	blurring
of	shape	before	L’oric’s	eyes.	Like	Anomander	Rake,	Osric	was	more	dragon
than	anything	else.	They	were	kin	in	blood,	if	not	in	personality.	I	wish	I	could
understand	this	man,	this	father	of	mine.	Queen	take	me,	I	wish	I	could	even
like	him.	He	strode	forward.
The	dragon	lifted	one	forelimb,	talons	opening.
L’oric	frowned.	‘I	would	rather	ride	your	shoulders,	Father—’
But	the	reptilian	hand	reached	out	and	closed	about	him.
He	resolved	to	suffer	the	indignity	in	silence.
	
Osric	flew	westward,	following	the	coastline.	Before	too	long	forest	appeared,
and	the	land	reached	around	northward.	The	air	whipping	between	the	dragon’s
scaled	fingers	grew	cold,	then	icy.	The	ground	far	below	began	climbing,	the
forests	flanking	mountain	sides	shifting	into	conifers.	Then	L’oric	saw	snow,
reaching	like	frozen	rivers	in	crevasses	and	chasms.
He	could	recall	no	mountains	from	the	future	to	match	this	ancient	scene.
Perhaps	this	memory,	like	so	many	others,	is	flawed.
Osric	began	to	descend—and	L’oric	suddenly	saw	a	vast	white	emptiness,
as	if	the	mountain	rearing	before	them	had	been	cut	neatly	in	half.	They	were


approaching	that	edge.
A	vaguely	level,	snow-crusted	stretch	was	the	dragon’s	destination.	Its
southern	side	was	marked	by	a	sheer	cliff.	To	the	north…opaque	oblivion.
Wings	pounding,	raising	clouds	of	powdery	white,	Osric	hovered	for	a
moment,	then	released	L’oric.
The	High	Mage	landed	in	waist-deep	snow.	Cursing,	he	kicked	his	way
onto	firmer	footing,	as	the	enormous	dragon	settled	with	a	shuddering	crunch
off	to	one	side.
Osric	quickly	sembled	into	Liosan	form,	the	wind	whipping	at	his	hair,	and
strode	over.
There	were…things	near	the	faded	edge	of	the	memory.	Some	of	them
moving	about	feebly.	Osric	stomped	through	the	deep	snow	towards	them,
speaking	as	he	went.	‘Creatures	stumble	out.	You	will	find	such	all	along	the
verge.	Most	of	them	quickly	die,	but	some	linger.’
‘What	are	they?’
‘Demons,	mostly.’
Osric	changed	direction	slightly,	closing	on	one	such	creature,	from	which
steam	was	rising.	Its	four	limbs	were	moving,	claws	scraping	through	the	slush
surrounding	it.
Father	and	son	halted	before	it.
Dog-sized	and	reptilian,	with	four	hands,	similar	to	an	ape’s.	A	wide,	flat
head	with	a	broad	mouth,	two	slits	for	nostrils,	and	four	liquid,	slightly
protruding	eyes	in	a	diamond	pattern,	the	pupils	vertical	and,	in	the	harsh	glare
of	the	snow	and	sky,	surprisingly	open.
‘This	one	might	suit	Kurald	Thyrllan,’	Osric	said.
‘What	kind	of	demon	is	it?’	L’oric	asked,	staring	down	at	the	creature.
‘I	have	no	idea,’	Osric	replied.	‘Reach	out	to	it.	See	if	it	is	amenable.’
‘Assuming	it	has	any	mind	at	all,’	L’oric	muttered,	crouching	down.
Can	you	hear	me?	Can	you	comprehend?
The	four	eyes	blinked	up	at	him.	And	it	replied.	‘Sorcerer.	Declaration.
Recognition.	We	were	told	you’d	come,	but	so	soon?	Rhetorical.’
I	am	not	from	this	place,	L’oric	explained.	You	are	dying,	I	think.
‘Is	that	what	this	is?	Bemused.’
I	would	offer	you	an	alternative.	Have	you	a	name?
‘A	name?	You	require	that.	Observation.	Of	course.	Comprehension.	A
partnership,	a	binding	of	spirits.	Power	from	you,	power	from	me.	In	exchange
for	my	life.	Uneven	bargain.	Position	devoid	of	clout.’
No,	I	will	save	you	none	the	less.	We	will	return	to	my	world…to	a	warmer
place.


‘Warmth?	Thinking.	Ah,	air	that	does	not	steal	my	strength.	Considering.
Save	me,	Sorcerer,	and	then	we	will	talk	more	of	this	alliance.’
L’oric	nodded.	‘Very	well.’
‘It’s	done?’	Osric	asked.
His	son	straightened.	‘No,	but	it	comes	with	us.’
‘Without	the	binding,	you	will	have	no	control	over	the	demon,	L’oric.	It
could	well	turn	on	you	as	soon	as	you	return	to	Raraku.	Best	we	resume	our
search,	find	a	creature	more	tractable.’
‘No.	I	will	risk	this	one.’
Osric	shrugged.	‘As	you	like,	then.	We	must	proceed	now	to	the	lake,
where	you	first	appeared.’
L’oric	watched	his	father	walk	away,	then	halt	and	veer	once	more	into	his
dragon	form.
‘Eleint!’	the	demon	cried	in	the	High	Mage’s	mind.	‘Wonder.	You	have	an
Eleint	for	a	companion!’
My	father.
‘Your	father!	Excited	delight!	Eager.	I	am	named	Greyfrog,	born	of
Mirepool’s	Clutch	in	the	Twentieth	Season	of	Darkness.	Proudly.	I	have	fathered
thirty-one	clutches	of	my	own—’
And	how,	Greyfrog,	did	you	come	here?
‘Sudden	moroseness.	One	hop	too	far.’
The	dragon	approached.
	
Greyfrog	dragged	itself	onto	the	warm	sand.	L’oric	turned	about,	but	the	gate
was	already	closing.	So,	he	had	found	his	father,	and	the	parting	had	been	as
blunt	as	the	meeting.	Not	precisely	indifference.	More	like…distraction.
Osric’s	interest	was	with	Osric.	His	own	pursuits.
Only	now	did	a	thousand	more	questions	rise	in	L’oric’s	thoughts,
questions	he	should	have	asked.
‘Regret?’
L’oric	glanced	down	at	the	demon.	‘Recovering,	Greyfrog?	I	am	named
L’oric.
Shall	we	now	discuss	our	partnership?’
‘I	smell	raw	meat.	I	am	hungry.	Eat.	Then	talk.	Firm.’
‘As	you	wish.	As	for	raw	meat…I	will	find	you	something	that	is
appropriate.	There	are	rules,	regarding	what	you	can	and	cannot	kill.’
‘Explain	them	to	me.	Cautious.	Not	wishing	to	offend.	But	hungry.’
‘I	shall…’


	
Vengeance	had	been	her	lifeblood	for	so	long,	and	now,	within	days,	she	would
come	face	to	face	with	her	sister,	to	play	out	the	game’s	end	run.	A	vicious
game,	but	a	game	none	the	less.	Sha’ik	knew	that	virtually	every	conceivable
advantage	lay	with	her.	Tavore’s	legions	were	green,	the	territory	was	Sha’ik’s
own,	her	Army	of	the	Apocalypse	were	veterans	of	the	rebellion	and
numerically	superior.	The	Whirlwind	Goddess	drew	power	from	an	Elder
Warren—she	now	realized—perhaps	not	pure	but	either	immune	or	resistant	to
the	effects	of	otataral.	Tavore’s	mages	amounted	to	two	Wickan	warlocks	both
broken	of	spirit,	whilst	Sha’ik’s	cadre	included	four	High	Mages	and	a	score
of	shamans,	witches	and	sorcerers,	including	Fayelle	and	Henaras.	In	all,	defeat
seemed	impossible.
And	yet	Sha’ik	was	terrified.
She	sat	alone	in	the	central	chamber	of	the	vast,	multi-roomed	tent	that	was
her	palace.	The	braziers	near	the	throne	were	slowly	dimming,	shadows
encroaching	on	all	sides.	She	wanted	to	run.	The	game	was	too	hard,	too
fraught.	Its	final	promise	was	cold—colder	than	she	had	ever	imagined.
Vengeance	is	a	wasted	emotion,	yet	I	have	let	it	consume	me.	I	gave	it	like	a	gift
to	the	goddess.
Fragments	of	clarity—they	were	diminishing,	withering	like	flowers	in
winter—as	the	hold	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	tightened	on	her	soul.	My	sister
traded	me	for	the	faith	of	the	Empress,	to	convince	Laseen	of	Tavore’s	own
loyalty.	All	to	serve	her	ambition.	And	her	reward	was	the	position	of	Adjunct.
Such	are	the	facts,	the	cold	truths.	And	I,	in	turn,	have	traded	my	freedom	for
the	power	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess,	so	that	I	can	deliver	just	vengeance
against	my	sister.
Are	we,	then,	so	different?
Fragments	of	clarity,	but	they	led	nowhere.	She	could	ask	questions,	yet
seemed	incapable	of	seeking	answers.	She	could	make	statements,	but	they
seemed	strangely	hollow,	devoid	of	significance.	She	was	being	kept	from
thinking.
Why?
Another	question	she	knew	she	would	not	answer,	would	not,	even,	make
an	effort	to	answer.	The	goddess	doesn’t	want	me	to	think.	Well,	at	least	that	was
a	recognition	of	sorts.
She	sensed	the	approach	of	someone,	and	issued	a	silent	command	to	her
guards—Mathok’s	chosen	warriors—to	permit	the	visitor	to	pass	within.	The
curtains	covering	the	entrance	to	the	chamber	parted.


‘A	late	night	for	an	ancient	one	such	as	you,	Bidithal,’	Sha’ik	said.	‘You
should	be	resting,	in	preparation	for	the	battle.’
‘There	are	many	battles,	Chosen	One,	and	some	have	already	begun.’	He
leaned	heavily	on	his	staff,	looking	around	with	a	slight	smile	on	his	wrinkled
lips.	‘The	coals	are	fading,’	he	murmured.
‘I	would	have	thought	the	growing	shadows	would	please	you.’
His	smile	tightened,	then	he	shrugged.	‘They	are	not	mine,	Chosen	One.’
‘Aren’t	they?’
The	smile	grew	more	strained	still.	‘I	was	never	a	priest	of	Meanas.’
‘No,	here	it	was	Rashan,	ghost-child	of	Kurald	Galain…yet	the	warren	it
claimed	was,	none	the	less,	Shadow.	We	are	both	well	aware	that	the
distinctions	diminish	the	closer	one	delves	into	the	mysteries	of	the	most
ancient	triumvirate.	Shadow,	after	all,	was	born	of	the	clash	between	Light	and
Dark.	And	Meanas	is,	in	essence,	drawn	from	the	warrens	of	Thyrllan	and
Galain,	Thyr	and	Rashan.	It	is,	if	you	will,	a	hybrid	discipline.’
‘Most	sorcerous	arts	available	to	mortal	humans	are,	Chosen	One.	I	do	not,
I	am	afraid,	comprehend	the	point	you	wish	to	make.’
She	shrugged.	‘Only	that	you	send	your	shadow	servants	here	to	spy	on
me,	Bidithal.	What	is	it	you	hope	to	witness?	I	am	as	you	see	me.’
He	spread	his	hands,	staff	resting	against	one	shoulder.	‘Perhaps	not	spies,
then,	but	protectors.’
‘And	I	am	in	such	dire	need	of	protection,	Bidithal?	Are	your	fears…
specific?	Is	this	what	you	have	come	to	tell	me?’
‘I	am	close	to	discovering	the	precise	nature	of	that	threat,	Chosen	One.
Soon,	I	will	be	able	to	deliver	my	revelations.	My	present	concerns,	however,
are	with	High	Mage	L’oric	and,	perhaps,	Ghost	Hands.’
‘Surely	you	do	not	suspect	either	of	them	of	being	part	of	the	conspiracy.’
‘No,	but	I	am	coming	to	believe	that	other	forces	are	at	play	here.	We	are	at
the	heart	of	a	convergence,	Chosen	One,	and	not	just	between	us	and	the
Malazans.’
‘Indeed.’
‘Ghost	Hands	is	not	as	he	once	was.	He	is	a	priest	once	more.’
Sha’ik’s	brows	lifted	in	frank	disbelief.	‘Fener	is	gone,	Bidithal—’
‘Not	Fener.	But	consider	this.	The	god	of	war	has	been	dethroned.	And
another	has	risen	in	its	place,	as	necessity	demanded.	The	Tiger	of	Summer,
who	was	once	the	First	Hero,	Treach.	A	Soletaken	of	the	First	Empire…now	a
god.	His	need	will	be	great,	Chosen	One,	for	mortal	champions	and	avatars,	to
aid	him	in	establishing	the	role	he	would	assume.	A	Mortal	Sword,	a	Shield
Anvil,	a	Destriant—all	of	the	ancient	titles…and	the	powers	the	god	invests	in


them.’
‘Ghost	Hands	would	never	accept	a	god	other	than	Fener,’	Sha’ik	asserted.
‘Nor,	I	imagine,	would	a	god	be	foolish	enough	to	embrace	him	in	turn.	You
know	little	of	his	past,	Bidithal.	He	is	not	a	pious	man.	He	has	committed…
crimes—’
‘None	the	less,	Chosen	One.	The	Tiger	of	Summer	has	made	his	choice.’
‘As	what?’
Bidithal	shrugged.	‘What	else	could	he	be	but	Destriant.’
‘What	proof	have	you	of	this	extraordinary	transformation?’
‘He	hides	well…but	not	well	enough,	Chosen	One.’
Sha’ik	was	silent	for	a	long	moment,	then	she	replied	with	a	shrug	of	her
own.	‘Destriant	to	the	new	god	of	war.	Why	wouldn’t	he	be	here?	We	are	at
war,	after	all.	I	will	think	of	this…development,	Bidithal.	At	the	moment,
however,	I	cannot—assuming	it	is	true—see	its	relevance.’
‘Perhaps,	Chosen	One,	the	most	significant	relevance	is	also	the	simplest
one:	Ghost	Hands	is	not	the	broken,	useless	man	he	once	was.	And,	given	his…
ambivalence	to	our	cause,	he	presents	us	with	a	potential	threat—’
‘I	think	not,’	Sha’ik	said.	‘But,	as	I	said,	I	will	give	it	some	thought.	Now,
your	vast	web	of	suspicions	has	snared	L’oric	as	well?	Why?’
‘He	has	been	more	elusive	of	late	than	is	usual,	Chosen	One.	His	efforts	to
disguise	his	comings	and	goings	have	become	somewhat	extreme.’
‘Perhaps	he	grows	weary	of	your	incessant	spying,	Bidithal.’
‘Perhaps,	though	I	am	certain	he	remains	unaware	that	the	one	ever	seeking
to	maintain	an	eye	on	his	activities	is	indeed	me.	Febryl	and	the	Napan	have
their	own	spies,	after	all.	I	am	not	alone	in	my	interests.	They	fear	L’oric,	for
he	has	rebuffed	their	every	approach—’
‘It	pleases	me	to	hear	that,	Bidithal.	Call	off	your	shadows,	regarding
L’oric.	And	that	is	a	command.	You	better	serve	the	Whirlwind’s	interests	in
concentrating	on	Febryl,	Korbolo	Dom	and	Kamist	Reloe.’
He	bowed	slightly.	‘Very	well,	Chosen	One.’
Sha’ik	studied	the	old	man.	‘Be	careful,	Bidithal.’
She	saw	him	pale	slightly,	then	he	nodded.	‘I	am	ever	that,	Chosen	One.’
A	slight	wave	of	her	hand	dismissed	him.
Bidithal	bowed	once	more,	then,	gripping	his	walking	stick,	he	hobbled
from	the	chamber.	Out	through	the	intervening	chambers,	past	a	dozen	of
Mathok’s	silent	desert	warriors,	then	out,	finally	into	the	cool	night	air.
Call	off	my	shadows,	Chosen	One?	Command	or	no,	I	am	not	so	foolish	as
to	do	that.
Shadows	gathered	around	him	as	he	strode	down	the	narrow	alleyways


between	tents	and	huts.	Do	you	remember	the	dark?
Bidithal	smiled	to	himself.	Soon,	this	fragment	of	shattered	warren	would
become	a	realm	unto	itself.	And	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	would	see	the	need	for
a	priesthood,	a	structure	of	power	in	the	mortal	world.	And	in	such	an
organization,	there	would	be	no	place	for	Sha’ik,	except	perhaps	a	minor
shrine	honouring	her	memory.
For	now,	of	course,	the	Malazan	Empire	must	be	dealt	with,	summarily,
and	for	that	Sha’ik,	as	a	vessel	of	the	Whirlwind’s	power,	would	be	needed.
This	particular	path	of	shadows	was	narrow	indeed.	Bidithal	suspected	that
Febryl’s	alliance	with	the	Napan	and	Kamist	Reloe	was	but	temporary.	The	mad
old	bastard	had	no	love	for	Malazans.	Probably,	his	plans	held	a	hidden,	final
betrayal,	one	concluding	in	the	mutual	annihilation	of	every	interest	but	his
own.
And	I	cannot	pierce	to	the	truth	of	that,	a	failure	on	my	part	that	forces	my
hand.	I	must	be…pre-emptive.	I	must	side	with	Sha’ik,	for	it	will	be	her	hand
that	crushes	the	conspirators.
A	hiss	of	spectral	voices	and	Bidithal	halted,	startled	from	his	dark
musings.
To	find	Febryl	standing	before	him.
‘Was	your	audience	with	the	Chosen	One	fruitful,	Bidithal?’
‘As	always,	Febryl,’	Bidithal	smiled,	wondering	at	how	the	ancient	High
Mage	managed	to	get	so	close	before	being	detected	by	his	secret	guardians.
‘What	do	you	wish	of	me?	It’s	late.’
‘The	time	has	come,’	Febryl	said	in	a	low,	rasping	tone.	‘You	must	choose.
Join	us,	or	stand	aside.’
Bidithal	raised	his	brows.	‘Is	there	not	a	third	option?’
‘If	you	mean	you	would	fight	us,	the	answer	is,	regrettably,	no.	I	suggest,
however,	we	withhold	on	that	discussion	for	the	moment.	Instead,	hear	our
reward	for	you—granted	whether	you	join	us	or	simply	remove	yourself	from
our	path.’
‘Reward?	I	am	listening,	Febryl.’
‘She	will	be	gone,	as	will	the	Malazan	Empire.	Seven	Cities	will	be	free	as
it	once	was.	Yet	the	Whirlwind	Warren	will	remain,	returned	to	the	Dryjhna—
to	the	cult	of	the	Apocalypse	which	is	and	always	has	been	at	the	heart	of	the
rebellion.	Such	a	cult	needs	a	master,	a	High	Priest,	ensconced	in	a	vast,	rich
temple,	duly	honoured	by	all.	How	would	you	shape	such	a	cult?’	Febryl
smiled.	‘It	seems	you	have	already	begun,	Bidithal.	Oh	yes,	we	know	all	about
your…special	children.	Imagine,	then,	all	of	Seven	Cities	at	your	disposal.	All
of	Seven	Cities,	honoured	to	deliver	to	you	their	unwanted	daughters.’


Bidithal	licked	his	lips,	eyes	shifting	away.	‘I	must	think	on	this—’
‘There’s	no	more	time	for	that.	Join	us,	or	stand	aside.’
‘When	do	you	begin?’
‘Why,	Bidithal,	we	already	have.	The	Adjunct	and	her	legions	are	but	days
away.	We	have	already	moved	our	agents,	they	are	all	in	place,	ready	to
complete	their	appointed	tasks.	The	time	for	indecision	is	past.	Decide.	Now.’
‘Very	well.	Your	path	is	clear,	Febryl.	I	accept	your	offer.	But	my	cult	must
remain	my	own,	to	shape	as	I	choose.	No	interference—’
‘None.	That	is	a	promise—’
‘Whose?’
‘Mine.’
‘And	what	of	Korbolo	Dom	and	Kamist	Reloe?’
Febryl’s	smile	broadened.	‘What	worth	their	vows,	Bidithal?	The	Empress
had	Korbolo	Dom’s	once.	Sha’ik	did	as	well…’
As	she	had	yours,	too,	Febryl.	‘Then	we—you	and	I—understand	each
other.’
‘We	do	indeed.’
Bidithal	watched	the	High	Mage	stride	away.	He	knew	my	shadow	spirits
surrounded	me,	yet	was	dismissive	of	them.	There	was	no	third	option.	Had	I
voiced	defiance,	I	would	now	be	dead.	I	know	it.	I	can	feel	Hood’s	cold	breath,
here	in	this	alley.	My	powers	are…compromised.	How?	He	needed	to	discover
the	source	of	Febryl’s	confidence.	Before	he	could	do	anything,	before	he
could	make	a	single	move.	And	which	move	will	that	be?	Febryl’s	offer…
appeals.
Yet	Febryl	had	promised	no	interference,	even	as	he	had	revealed	an
arrogant	indifference	to	the	power	Bidithal	had	already	fashioned.	An
indifference	that	bespoke	of	intimate	knowledge.	You	do	not	dismiss	what	you
know	nothing	of,	after	all.	Not	at	this	stage.
Bidithal	resumed	his	journey	back	to	his	temple.	He	felt…vulnerable.	An
unfamiliar	sensation,	and	it	brought	a	tremble	to	his	limbs.
	
A	faint	stinging	bite,	then	numbness	spreading	out	from	her	lungs.	Scillara
leaned	her	head	back,	reluctant	to	exhale,	believing	for	the	briefest	of	moments
that	her	need	for	air	had	vanished.	Then	she	exploded	into	coughing.
‘Be	quiet,’	Korbolo	Dom	snarled,	rolling	a	stoppered	bottle	across	the
blankets	towards	her.	‘Drink,	woman.	Then	open	those	screens—I	can	barely
see	with	all	the	water	wrung	from	my	eyes.’
She	listened	to	his	boots	on	the	rushes,	moving	off	into	one	of	the	back


chambers.	The	coughing	was	past.	Her	chest	felt	full	of	thick,	cloying	liquid.
Her	head	was	swimming,	and	she	struggled	to	recall	what	had	happened	a	few
moments	earlier.	Febryl	had	arrived.	Excited,	she	believed.	Something	about
her	master,	Bidithal.	The	culmination	of	a	long-awaited	triumph.	They	had	both
gone	to	the	inner	rooms.
There	had	been	a	time,	once,	she	was	fairly	certain,	when	her	thoughts	had
been	clear—though,	she	suspected,	most	of	them	had	been	unpleasant	ones.
And	so	there	was	little	reason	to	miss	those	days.	Except	for	the	clarity	itself—
its	acuity	that	made	recollection	effortless.	She	so	wanted	to	serve	her	master,
and	serve	him	well.	With	distinction	sufficient	to	earn	her	new	responsibilities,
to	assume	new	roles—ones	that	did	not,	perhaps,	involve	surrendering	her
body	to	men.	One	day,	Bidithal	would	not	be	able	to	attend	to	all	the	new	girls
as	he	did	now—there	would	be	too	many,	even	for	him.	She	was	certain	she
could	manage	the	scarring,	the	cutting	away	of	pleasure.
They	would	not	appreciate	the	freeing,	of	course.	Not	at	first.	But	she	could
help	them	in	that.	Kind	words	and	plenty	of	durhang	to	blunt	the	physical
pain…and	the	outrage.
Had	she	felt	outrage?	Where	had	that	word	come	from,	to	arrive	so	sudden
and	unexpected	in	her	thoughts?
She	sat	up,	stumbled	away	from	the	cushions	to	the	heavy	screens	blocking
the	outside	night	air.	She	was	naked,	but	unmindful	of	the	cold.	A	slight
discomfort	in	the	heaviness	of	her	unbound	breasts.	She	had	twice	been
pregnant,	but	Bidithal	had	taken	care	of	that,	giving	her	bitter	teas	that	broke
the	seed’s	roots	and	flushed	it	from	her	body.	There	had	been	that	same
heaviness	at	those	times,	and	she	wondered	if	yet	another	of	the	Napan’s	seeds
had	taken	within	her.
Scillara	fumbled	at	the	ties	until	one	of	the	screens	folded	down,	and	she
looked	out	onto	the	dark	street.
The	guards	were	both	visible,	near	the	entrance	which	was	situated	a	few
paces	to	her	left.	They	glanced	over,	faces	hidden	by	helms	and	the	hoods	of
their	telabas.	And,	it	seemed,	continued	staring,	though	offering	no	greeting,
no	comment.
There	was	a	strange	dullness	to	the	night	air,	as	if	the	smoke	filling	the	tent
chamber	had	settled	a	permanent	layer	over	her	eyes,	obscuring	all	that	she
looked	at.	She	stood	for	a	moment	longer,	weaving,	then	walked	over	to	the
entrance.
Febryl	had	left	the	flaps	untied.	She	pushed	them	aside	and	stepped	out
between	the	two	guards.
‘Had	his	fill	of	you	this	night,	Scillara?’	one	asked.


‘I	want	to	walk.	It’s	hard	to	breathe.	I	think	I’m	drowning.’
‘Drowning	in	the	desert,	aye,’	the	other	grunted,	then	laughed.
She	staggered	past,	choosing	a	direction	at	random.
Heavy.	Filled	up.	Drowning	in	the	desert.
‘Not	this	night,	lass.’
She	stumbled	as	she	turned	about,	threw	both	arms	out	for	balance,	and
squinted	at	the	guard	who	had	followed.	‘What?’
‘Febryl	has	wearied	of	your	spying.	He	wants	Bidithal	blind	and	deaf	in
this	camp.	It	grieves	me,	Scillara.	It	does.	Truly.’	He	took	her	by	the	arm,
gauntleted	fingers	closing	tight.	‘It’s	a	mercy,	I	think,	and	I	will	make	it	as
painless	as	possible.	For	I	liked	you,	once.	Always	smiling,	you	were,	though
of	course	that	was	mostly	the	durhang.’	He	was	leading	her	away	as	he	spoke,
down	from	the	main	avenue	into	the	rubbish-cluttered	aisles	between	tent-walls.
‘I’m	tempted	to	take	my	pleasure	of	you	first.	Better	a	son	of	the	desert	than	a
bow-legged	Napan	for	your	last	memory	of	love,	yes?’
‘You	mean	to	kill	me?’	She	was	having	trouble	with	the	thought,	with
thinking	at	all.
‘I’m	afraid	I	must,	lass.	I	cannot	defy	my	master,	especially	in	this.	Still,
you	should	be	relieved	that	it	is	me	and	not	some	stranger.	For	I	will	not	be
cruel,	as	I	have	said.	Here,	into	these	ruins,	Scillara—the	floor	has	been	swept
clean—not	the	first	time	it’s	seen	use,	but	if	all	signs	are	removed	immediately
there	is	no	evidence	to	be	found,	is	there?	There’s	an	old	well	in	the	garden	for
the	bodies.’
‘You	mean	to	throw	me	down	the	well?’
‘Not	you,	just	your	body.	Your	soul	will	be	through	Hood’s	gate	by	then,
lass.	I	will	make	certain	of	that.	Now,	lie	yourself	down,	here,	on	my	cloak.	I
have	looked	upon	your	lovely	body	unable	to	touch	for	long	enough.	I	have
dreamt	of	kissing	those	lips,	too.’
She	was	lying	on	the	cloak,	staring	up	at	dim,	blurry	stars,	as	the	guard
unhitched	his	sword-belt	then	began	removing	his	armour.	She	saw	him	draw	a
knife,	the	blade	gleaming	black,	and	set	it	to	one	side	on	the	flagstoned	floor.
Then	his	hands	were	pushing	her	thighs	apart.
There	is	no	pleasure.	It	is	gone.	He	is	a	handsome	man.	A	woman’s	husband.
He	prefers	pleasure	before	business,	as	I	once	did.	I	think.	But	now,	I	know
nothing	of	pleasure.
Leaving	naught	but	business.
The	cloak	was	bunching	beneath	her	as	his	grunts	filled	her	ears.	She
calmly	reached	out	to	one	side	and	closed	her	hand	around	the	hilt	of	the	knife.
Raised	it,	the	other	hand	joining	it	over	and	above	the	guard.


Then	she	drove	the	knife	down	into	his	lower	back,	the	blade’s	edge
gouging	between	two	vertebrae,	severing	the	cord,	the	point	continuing	on	in	a
stuttering	motion	as	it	pierced	membranes	and	tore	deep	into	the	guard’s
middle	and	lower	intestines.
He	spilled	into	her	at	the	moment	of	death,	his	shudders	becoming
twitches,	the	breath	hissing	from	a	suddenly	slack	mouth	as	his	forehead	struck
the	stone	floor	beside	her	right	ear.
She	left	the	knife	buried	halfway	to	its	hilt—as	deep	as	her	strength	had
taken	it—in	his	back,	and	pushed	at	his	limp	body	until	it	rolled	to	one	side.
A	desert	woman	for	your	last	memory	of	love.
Scillara	sat	up,	wanting	to	cough	but	swallowing	until	the	urge	passed.
Heavy,	and	heavier	still.
I	am	a	vessel	ever	filled,	yet	there’s	always	room	for	more.	More	durhang.
More	men	and	their	seeds.	My	master	found	my	place	of	pleasure	and	removed
it.	Ever	filled,	yet	never	filled	up.	There	is	no	base	to	this	vessel.	This	is	what	he
has	done.
To	all	of	us.
She	tottered	upright.	Stared	down	at	the	guard’s	corpse,	at	the	wet	stains
spreading	out	beneath	him.
A	sound	behind	her.	Scillara	turned.
‘You	murdering	bitch.’
She	frowned	at	the	second	guard	as	he	advanced,	drawing	a	dagger.
‘The	fool	wanted	you	alone	for	a	time.	This	is	what	he	gets	for	ignoring
Febryl’s	commands—I	warned	him—’
She	was	staring	at	the	hand	gripping	the	dagger,	so	was	caught	unawares	as
the	other	hand	flashed,	knuckles	cracking	hard	against	her	jaw.
Her	eyes	blinked	open	to	jostling,	sickening	motion.	She	was	being
dragged	through	rubbish	by	one	arm.	From	somewhere	ahead	flowed	the
stench	of	the	latrine	trench,	thick	as	fog,	a	breath	of	warm,	poisoned	air.	Her
lips	were	broken	and	her	mouth	tasted	of	blood.	The	shoulder	of	the	arm	the
guard	gripped	was	throbbing.
The	man	was	muttering.	‘…pretty	thing	indeed.	Hardly.	When	she’s
drowning	in	filth.	The	fool,	and	now	he’s	dead.	It	was	a	simple	task,	after	all.
There’s	no	shortage	of	whores	in	this	damned	camp.	What—who—’
He	had	stopped.
Head	lolling,	Scillara	caught	a	blurred	glimpse	of	a	squat	figure	emerging
from	darkness.
The	guard	released	her	wrist	and	her	arm	fell	with	a	thump	onto	damp,
foul	mud.	She	saw	him	reaching	for	his	sword.


Then	his	head	snapped	up	with	a	sound	of	cracked	teeth,	followed	by	a	hot
spray	that	spattered	across	Scillara’s	thighs.	Blood.
She	thought	she	saw	a	strange	emerald	glow	trailing	from	one	hand	of	the
guard’s	killer—a	hand	taloned	like	a	huge	cat’s.
The	figure	stepped	over	the	crumpled	form	of	the	guard,	who	had	ceased
moving,	and	slowly	crouched	down	beside	Scillara.
‘I’ve	been	looking	for	you,’	the	man	growled.	‘Or	so	I’ve	just	realized.
Extraordinary,	how	single	lives	just	fold	into	the	whole	mess,	over	and	over
again,	all	caught	up	in	the	greater	swirl.	Spinning	round	and	round,	and	ever
downward,	it	seems.	Ever	downward.	Fools,	all	of	us,	to	think	we	can	swim
clear	of	that	current.’
The	shadows	were	strange	on	him.	As	if	he	stood	beneath	palms	and	tall
grasses—but	no,	there	was	only	the	night	sky	above	the	squat,	broadshouldered	man.	He	was	tattooed,	she	realized,	in	the	barbs	of	a	tiger.
‘Plenty	of	killing	going	on	lately,’	he	muttered,	staring	down	at	her	with
amber	eyes.	‘All	those	loose	threads	being	knotted,	I	expect.’
She	watched	him	reach	down	with	that	glowing,	taloned	hand.	It	settled,
palm-downward,	warm	between	her	breasts.	The	tips	of	the	claws	pricked	her
skin	and	a	tremble	ran	through	her.
That	spread,	coursing	hot	through	her	veins.	That	heat	grew	suddenly
fierce,	along	her	throat,	in	her	lungs,	between	her	legs.
The	man	grunted.	‘I	thought	it	was	consumption,	that	rattling	breath.	But
no,	it’s	just	too	much	durhang.	As	for	the	rest,	well,	it’s	an	odd	thing	about
pleasure.	Something	Bidithal	would	have	you	never	know.	Its	enemy	is	not
pain.	No,	pain	is	simply	the	path	taken	to	indifference.	And	indifference
destroys	the	soul.	Of	course,	Bidithal	likes	destroyed	souls—to	mirror	his
own.’
If	he	continued	speaking	beyond	that,	she	did	not	hear,	as	sensations	long
lost	flooded	into	her,	only	slightly	blunted	by	the	lingering,	satisfying	haze	of
the	durhang.	She	felt	badly	used	between	her	legs,	but	knew	that	feeling	would
pass.
‘Outrage.’
He	was	gathering	her	into	his	arms,	but	paused.	‘You	spoke?’
Outrage.	Yes.	That.	‘Where	are	you	taking	me?’	The	question	came	out
between	coughs,	and	she	pushed	his	arms	aside	to	bend	over	and	spit	out
phlegm	while	he	answered.
‘To	my	temple.	Fear	not,	it’s	safe.	Neither	Febryl	nor	Bidithal	will	find	you
there.	You’ve	been	force-healed,	lass,	and	will	need	to	sleep.’
‘What	do	you	want	with	me?’


‘I’m	not	sure	yet.	I	think	I	will	need	your	help,	and	soon.	But	the	choice	is
yours.	Nor	will	you	have	to	surrender…anything	you	don’t	want	to.	And,	if
you	choose	to	simply	walk	away,	that	is	fine	as	well.	I	will	give	you	money	and
supplies—and	maybe	even	find	you	a	horse.	We	can	discuss	that	tomorrow.
What	is	your	name?’
He	reached	down	once	more	and	lifted	her	effortlessly.
‘Scillara.’
‘I	am	Heboric,	Destriant	to	Treach,	the	Tiger	of	Summer	and	the	God	of
War.’
She	stared	up	at	him	as	he	began	carrying	her	along	the	path.	‘I	am	afraid	I
am	going	to	disappoint	you,	Heboric.	I	think	I	have	had	my	fill	of	priests.’
She	felt	his	shrug,	then	he	smiled	wearily	down	at	her.	‘That’s	all	right.	Me
too.’
	
Felisin	awoke	shortly	after	L’oric	returned	with	a	freshly	slaughtered	lamb	for
his	demon	familiar,	Greyfrog.	Probably,	the	High	Mage	reflected	when	she
first	stirred	beneath	the	tarpaulin,	she	had	been	roused	to	wakefulness	by	the
sound	of	crunching	bones.
The	demon’s	appetite	was	voracious,	and	L’oric	admired	its
singlemindedness,	if	not	its	rather	untidy	approach	to	eating.
Felisin	emerged,	wrapped	in	her	blankets,	and	walked	to	L’oric’s	side.	She
was	silent,	her	hair	in	disarray	around	her	young,	tanned	face,	and	watched	the
demon	consuming	the	last	of	the	lamb	with	loud,	violent	gulps.
‘Greyfrog,’	L’oric	murmured.	‘My	new	familiar.’
‘Your	familiar?	You	are	certain	it’s	not	the	other	way	round?	That	thing
could	eat	both	of	us.’
‘Observant.	She	is	right,	companion	L’oric.	Maudlin.	I	would	waddle.	Alas.
Torpid	vulnerability.	Distraught.	All	alone.’
‘All	right.’	L’oric	smiled.	‘An	alliance	is	a	better	word	for	our
partnership.’
‘There	is	mud	on	your	boots,	and	snagged	pieces	of	reed	and	grass.’
‘I	have	travelled	this	night,	Felisin.’
‘Seeking	allies?’
‘Not	intentionally.	No,	my	search	was	for	answers.’
‘And	did	you	find	any?’
He	hesitated,	then	sighed.	‘Some.	Fewer	than	I	would	have	hoped.	But	I
return	knowing	one	thing	for	certain.	And	that	is,	you	must	leave.	As	soon	as
possible.’


Her	glance	was	searching.	‘And	what	of	you?’
‘I	will	follow,	as	soon	as	I	can.’
‘I’m	to	go	alone?’
‘No.	You	will	have	Greyfrog	with	you.	And	one	other…I	hope.’
She	nodded.	‘I	am	ready.	I	have	had	enough	of	this	place.	I	no	longer
dream	of	vengeance	against	Bidithal.	I	just	want	to	be	gone.	Is	that	cowardly	of
me?’
L’oric	slowly	shook	his	head.	‘Bidithal	will	be	taken	care	of,	lass,	in	a
manner	befitting	his	crimes.’
‘If	you	are	intending	to	murder	him,	then	I	would	advise	against	sending
Greyfrog	with	me.	Bidithal	is	powerful—perhaps	more	so	than	you	realize,	I
can	travel	alone—no-one	will	be	hunting	me,	after	all.’
‘No.	Much	as	I	would	like	to	kill	Bidithal	myself,	it	will	not	be	by	my
hand.’
‘There	is	something	ominous	in	what	you	are	saying,	or,	perhaps,	in	what
you’re	not	saying,	L’oric.’
‘There	will	be	a	convergence,	Felisin.	With	some…unexpected	guests.	And
I	do	not	think	anyone	here	will	survive	their	company	for	long.	There	will
be…vast	slaughter.’
‘Then	why	are	you	staying?’
‘To	witness,	lass.	For	as	long	as	I	can.’
‘Why?’
He	grimaced.	‘As	I	said,	I	am	still	seeking	answers.’
‘And	are	they	important	enough	to	risk	your	own	life?’
‘They	are.	And	now,	I	will	leave	you	here	in	Greyfrog’s	trust	for	a	time.
You	are	safe,	and	when	I	return	it	will	be	with	the	necessary	supplies	and
mounts.’
She	glanced	over	at	the	scaled,	ape-like	creature	with	its	four	eyes.	‘Safe,
you	said.	At	least	until	it	gets	hungry.’
‘Appreciative.	I	will	protect	this	one.	But	do	not	be	gone	too	long.	Ha	ha.’
	
Dawn	was	breathing	light	into	the	eastern	sky	as	Heboric	stepped	outside	to
await	his	visitor.	The	Destriant	remained	in	as	much	darkness	as	he	could
manage,	not	to	hide	from	L’oric—whom	he	now	watched	stride	into	view	and
approach—but	against	any	other	watchers.	They	might	well	discern	a	figure,
crouched	there	in	the	tent’s	doorway,	but	little	more	than	that.	He	had	drawn	a
heavy	cloak	about	himself,	hood	drawn	up	over	his	head,	and	he	kept	his	hands
beneath	the	folds.


L’oric’s	steps	slowed	as	he	drew	near.	There	would	be	no	hiding	the	truth
from	this	man,	and	Heboric	smiled	as	he	saw	the	High	Mage’s	eyes	widen.
‘Aye,’	Heboric	muttered,	‘I	was	reluctant.	But	it	is	done,	and	I	have	made
peace	with	that.’
‘And	what	is	Treach’s	interest	here?’	L’oric	asked	after	a	long,	uneasy
moment.
‘There	will	be	a	battle,’	Heboric	replied,	shrugging.	‘Beyond	that…well,
I’m	not	sure.	We’ll	see,	I	expect.’
L’oric	looked	weary.	‘I	was	hoping	to	convince	you	to	leave.	To	take
Felisin	away	from	here.’
‘When?’
‘Tonight.’
‘Move	her	camp	a	league,	out	beyond	the	northeast	edge	of	the	oasis.
Three	saddled	horses,	three	more	pack	horses.	Food	and	water	sufficient	for
three,	to	take	us	as	far	as	G’danisban.’
‘Three?’
Heboric	smiled.	‘You	are	not	aware	of	it,	but	there	is	a	certain…poetry	to
there	being	three	of	us.’
‘Very	well.	And	how	long	should	she	expect	to	wait?’
‘As	long	as	she	deems	acceptable,	L’oric.	Like	you,	I	intend	to	remain	here
for	a	few	days	yet.’
His	eyes	grew	veiled.	‘The	convergence.’
Heboric	nodded.
L’oric	sighed.	‘We	are	fools,	you	and	I.’
‘Probably.’
‘I	had	once	hoped,	Ghost	Hands,	for	an	alliance	between	us.’
‘It	exists,	more	or	less,	L’oric.	Sufficient	to	ensure	Felisin’s	safety.	Not	that
we	have	managed	well	in	that	responsibility	thus	far.	I	could	have	helped,’
Heboric	growled.
‘I	am	surprised,	if	you	know	what	Bidithal	did	to	her,	that	you	have	not
sought	vengeance.’
‘Vengeance?	What	is	the	point	in	that?	No,	L’oric,	I	have	a	better	answer	to
Bidithal’s	butchery.	Leave	Bidithal	to	his	fate…’
The	High	Mage	started,	then	smiled.	‘Odd,	only	a	short	time	ago	I	voiced
similar	words	to	Felisin.’
Heboric	watched	the	man	walk	away.	After	a	moment,	the	Destriant	turned
and	re-entered	his	temple.
	


‘There	is	something…inexorable	about	them…’
They	were	in	the	path	of	the	distant	legions,	seeing	the	glimmer	of	iron
wavering	like	molten	metal	beneath	a	pillar	of	dust	that,	from	this	angle,
seemed	to	rise	straight	up,	spreading	out	in	a	hazy	stain	in	the	high	desert
winds.	At	Leoman’s	words,	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	shivered.	Dust	was
sifting	down	the	folds	of	his	ragged	telaba;	the	air	this	close	to	the	Whirlwind
Wall	was	thick	with	suspended	sand,	filling	his	mouth	with	grit.
Leoman	twisted	in	his	saddle	to	study	his	warriors.
Anchoring	his	splintered	lance	into	the	stirrup	cup,	Corabb	settled	back	in
the	saddle.	He	was	exhausted.	Virtually	every	night,	they	had	attempted	raids,
and	even	when	his	own	company	had	not	been	directly	involved	in	the	fighting
there	had	been	retreats	to	cover,	counterattacks	to	blunt,	then	flight.	Always
flight.	Had	Sha’ik	given	Leoman	five	thousand	warriors,	the	Adjunct	and	her
army	would	be	the	ones	retreating.	All	the	way	back	to	Aren,	mauled	and
limping.
Leoman	had	done	what	he	could	with	what	he	had,	however,	and	they	had
purchased—with	blood—a	handful	of	precious	days.	Moreover,	they	had
gauged	the	Adjunct’s	tactics,	and	the	mettle	of	the	soldiers.	More	than	once,
concerted	pressure	on	the	regular	infantry	had	buckled	them,	and	had	Leoman
the	numbers,	he	could	have	pressed	home	and	routed	them.	Instead,	Gall’s
Burned	Tears	would	arrive,	or	Wickans,	or	those	damned	marines,	and	the
desert	warriors	would	be	the	ones	fleeing.	Out	into	the	night,	pursued	by	horse
warriors	as	skilled	and	tenacious	as	Leoman’s	own.
Seven	hundred	or	so	remained—they’d	had	to	leave	so	many	wounded
behind,	found	and	butchered	by	the	Khundryl	Burned	Tears,	with	various	body
parts	collected	as	trophies.
Leoman	faced	forward	on	his	saddle	once	more.	‘We	are	done.’
Corabb	nodded.	The	Malazan	army	would	reach	the	Whirlwind	Wall	by
dusk.	‘Perhaps	her	otataral	will	fail,’	he	offered.	‘Perhaps	the	goddess	will
destroy	them	all	this	very	night.’
The	lines	bracketing	Leoman’s	blue	eyes	deepened	as	he	narrowed	his
gaze	on	the	advancing	legions.	‘I	think	not.	There	is	nothing	pure	in	the
Whirlwind’s	sorcery,	Corabb.	No,	there	will	be	a	battle,	at	the	very	edge	of	the
oasis.	Korbolo	Dom	will	command	the	Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	And	you	and
I,	and	likely	Mathok,	shall	find	ourselves	a	suitable	vantage	point…to	watch.’
Corabb	leaned	to	one	side	and	spat.
‘Our	war	is	done,’	Leoman	finished,	collecting	his	reins.
‘Korbolo	Dom	will	need	us,’	Corabb	asserted.
‘If	he	does,	then	we	have	lost.’


They	urged	their	weary	horses	into	motion,	and	rode	through	the
Whirlwind	Wall.
	
He	could	ride	at	a	canter	for	half	a	day,	dropping	the	Jhag	horse	into	a	headdipping,	loping	gait	for	the	span	of	a	bell,	then	resume	the	canter	until	dusk.
Havok	was	a	beast	unlike	any	other	he	had	known,	including	his	namesake.	He
had	ridden	close	enough	to	the	north	side	of	Ugarat	to	see	watchers	on	the
wall,	and	indeed	they	had	sent	out	a	score	of	horse	warriors	to	contest	his
crossing	the	broad	stone	bridge	spanning	the	river—riders	who	should	have
reached	it	long	before	he	did.
But	Havok	had	understood	what	was	needed,	and	canter	stretched	out	into
gallop,	neck	reaching	forward,	and	they	arrived	fifty	strides	ahead	of	the
pursuing	warriors.	Foot	traffic	on	the	bridge	scattered	from	their	path,	and	its
span	was	wide	enough	to	permit	easy	passage	around	the	carts	and	wagons.
Broad	as	the	Ugarat	River	was,	they	reached	the	other	side	within	a	dozen
heartbeats,	the	thunder	of	Havok’s	hoofs	changing	in	timbre	from	stone	to
hard-packed	earth	as	they	rode	out	into	the	Ugarat	Odhan.
Distance	seemed	to	lose	relevance	to	Karsa	Orlong.	Havok	carried	him
effortlessly.	There	was	no	need	for	a	saddle,	and	the	single	rein	looped	around
the	stallion’s	neck	was	all	he	needed	to	guide	the	beast.	Nor	did	the	Teblor
hobble	the	horse	for	the	night,	instead	leaving	him	free	to	graze	on	the	vast
sweeps	of	grass	stretching	out	on	all	sides.
The	northern	part	of	the	Ugarat	Odhan	had	narrowed	between	the	inward
curl	of	the	two	major	rivers—the	Ugarat	and	the	other	Karsa	recalled	as	being
named	either	Mersin	or	Thalas.	A	spine	of	hills	had	run	north–south,	dividing
the	two	rivers,	their	summits	and	slopes	hard-packed	by	the	seasonal	migration
of	bhederin	over	thousands	of	years.	Those	herds	were	gone,	though	their
bones	remained	where	predators	and	hunters	had	felled	them,	and	the	land	was
used	now	as	occasional	pasture,	sparsely	populated	and	that	only	in	the	wet
season.
In	the	week	it	took	to	cross	those	hills,	Karsa	saw	naught	but	signs	of
shepherd	camps	and	boundary	cairns,	and	the	only	grazing	creatures	were
antelope	and	a	species	of	large	deer	that	fed	only	at	night,	spending	days
bedded	down	in	low	areas	thick	with	tall,	yellow	grasses.	Easily	flushed	then
run	down	to	provide	Karsa	with	an	occasional	feast.
The	Mersin	River	was	shallow,	almost	dried	up	this	late	in	the	dry	season.
Fording	it,	he	had	then	ridden	northeast,	coming	along	the	trails	skirting	the
south	flanks	of	the	Thalas	Mountains,	then	eastward,	to	the	city	of	Lato	Revae,


on	the	very	edge	of	the	Holy	Desert.
He	traversed	the	road	south	of	the	city’s	wall	at	night,	avoiding	all	contact,
and	reached	the	pass	that	led	into	Raraku	at	dawn	the	following	day.
A	pervasive	urgency	was	driving	him	on.	He	was	unable	to	explain	the
desire	in	his	own	mind,	yet	did	not	question	it.	He	had	been	gone	a	long	time,
and	though	he	did	not	believe	the	battle	in	Raraku	had	occurred,	he	sensed	it
was	imminent.
And	Karsa	wanted	to	be	there.	Not	to	kill	Malazans,	but	to	guard	Leoman’s
back.	But	there	was	a	darker	truth,	he	well	knew.	The	battle	would	be	a	day	of
chaos,	and	Karsa	Orlong	meant	to	add	to	it.	Sha’ik	or	no	Sha’ik,	there	are	those
in	her	camp	who	deserve	only	death.	And	I	shall	deliver	it.	He	did	not	bother
conjuring	a	list	of	reasons,	of	insults	delivered,	contempt	unveiled,	crimes
committed.	He	had	been	indifferent	for	long	enough,	indifferent	to	so	many
things.	He	had	reined	in	his	spirit’s	greatest	strengths,	among	them	his	need	to
make	judgements,	and	act	decisively	upon	them	in	true	Teblor	fashion.
I	have	tolerated	the	deceitful	and	the	malicious	for	long	enough.	My	sword
shall	now	answer	them.
The	Toblakai	warrior	was	even	less	interested	in	creating	a	list	of	names,
since	names	invited	vows,	and	he	had	had	enough	of	vows.	No,	he	would	kill	as
the	mood	took	him.
He	looked	forward	to	his	homecoming.
Provided	he	arrived	in	time.
Descending	the	slopes	leading	down	into	the	Holy	Desert,	he	was	relieved
to	see,	far	to	the	north	and	east,	the	red	crest	of	fury	that	was	the	Whirlwind
Wall.	Only	days	away,	now.
He	smiled	at	that	distant	anger,	for	he	understood	it.	Constrained—chained
—for	so	long,	the	goddess	would	soon	unleash	her	wrath.	He	sensed	her
hunger,	as	palpable	as	that	of	the	twin	souls	within	his	sword.	The	blood	of
deer	was	too	thin.
He	reined	in	Havok	at	an	old	camp	near	the	edge	of	a	salt	flat.	The	slopes
behind	him	would	provide	the	last	forage	and	water	for	the	horse	until	just	this
side	of	the	Whirlwind	Wall,	so	he	would	spend	time	here	bundling	grasses	for
the	journey,	as	well	as	refilling	the	waterskins	from	the	spring	ten	paces	from
the	camp.
He	built	a	fire	using	the	last	of	the	bhederin	dung	from	the	Jhag	Odhan—
something	he	did	only	rarely—and,	following	a	meal,	opened	the	pack
containing	the	ruined	T’lan	Imass	and	dragged	the	remnants	out	for	the	first
time.
‘You	are	impatient	to	get	rid	of	me?’	’Siballe	asked	in	a	dry,	rasping	voice.


He	grunted,	staring	down	at	the	creature.	‘We’ve	travelled	far,	Unfound.	It
has	been	a	long	time	since	I	last	looked	upon	you.’
‘Then	why	do	you	choose	to	look	upon	me	now,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘I	do	not	know.	I	regret	it	already.’
‘I	have	seen	the	sun’s	light	through	the	weave	of	the	fabric.	Preferable	to
darkness.’
‘Why	should	what	you	prefer	interest	me?’
‘Because,	Karsa	Orlong,	we	are	within	the	same	House.	The	House	of
Chains.	Our	master—’
‘I	have	no	master,’	the	Teblor	growled.
‘As	he	would	have	it,’	’Siballe	replied.	‘The	Crippled	God	does	not	expect
you	to	kneel.	He	issues	no	commands	to	his	Mortal	Sword,	his	Knight	of
Chains—for	that	is	what	you	are,	the	role	for	which	you	have	been	shaped
from	the	very	beginning.’
‘I	am	not	in	this	House	of	Chains,	T’lan	Imass.	Nor	will	I	accept	another
false	god.’
‘He	is	not	false,	Karsa	Orlong.’
‘As	false	as	you,’	the	warrior	said,	baring	his	teeth.	‘Let	him	rise	before
me	and	my	sword	will	speak	for	me.	You	say	I	have	been	shaped.	Then	there	is
much	to	which	he	must	give	answer.’
‘The	gods	chained	him.’
‘What	do	you	mean?’
‘They	chained	him,	Karsa	Orlong,	to	dead	ground.	He	is	broken.	In	eternal
pain.	He	has	been	twisted	by	captivity	and	now	knows	only	suffering.’
‘Then	I	shall	break	his	chains—’
‘I	am	pleased—’
‘And	then	kill	him.’
Karsa	grabbed	the	shattered	T’lan	Imass	by	its	lone	arm	and	stuffed	it	back
into	the	pack.	Then	rose.
Great	tasks	lay	ahead.	The	notion	was	satisfying.
A	House	is	just	another	prison.	And	I	have	had	enough	of	prisons.	Raise
walls	around	me,	and	I	will	knock	them	down.
Doubt	my	words,	Crippled	God,	to	your	regret…


Chapter	Twenty-two

Otataral,	I	believe,	was	born	of	sorcery.	If	we	hold	that	magic	feeds
on	hidden	energies,	then	it	follows	that	there	are	limits	to	those
energies.	Sufficient	unveiling	of	power	that	subsequently	cascades
out	of	control	could	well	drain	those	life-forces	dry.
Further,	it	is	said	that	the	Elder	warrens	resist	the	deadening
effect	of	otataral,	suggesting	that	the	world’s	levels	of	energy	are
profoundly	multilayered.	One	need	only	contemplate	the	life
energy	of	corporeal	flesh,	compared	to	the	undeniable	energy
within	an	inanimate	object,	such	as	rock.	Careless	examination
might	suggest	that	the	former	is	alive,	whilst	the	latter	is	not.	In	this
manner,	perhaps	otataral	is	not	quite	as	negating	as	it	would	first
appear…
MUSINGS	ON	THE	PHYSICAL	PROPERTIES	OF	THE	WORLD
T RYRSSAN	OF	MOTT
The	9th,	11th	and	12th	squads,	medium	infantry,	had	been	attached	to	the
marines	of	the	9th	Company.	There	were	rumours,	as	well,	that	the	1st,	2nd	and
3rd	squads—the	heavy	infantry	with	their	oversized	muscles	and	sloping
brows—would	soon	join	them	to	form	a	discrete	fighting	unit.
None	from	the	newly	arrived	squads	were	entirely	strangers	to	Strings.	He
had	made	a	point	of	learning	names	and	memorizing	faces	throughout	the	9th
Company.
Footsore	and	weary	from	interrupted	nights,	the	sergeant	and	his	squad
were	sprawled	around	a	cookfire,	lulled	by	the	incessant	roar	of	the	Whirlwind
Wall	a	thousand	paces	north	of	the	encamped	army.	Even	rage	could	numb,	it
seemed.
Sergeant	Balm	of	the	9th	squad	strode	over	after	directing	his	soldiers	into
their	new	camp.	Tall	and	wide-shouldered,	the	Dal	Honese	had	impressed
Strings	with	his	cool	indifference	to	pressure.	Balm’s	squad	had	already	done
its	share	of	fighting,	and	the	names	of	Corporal	Deadsmell,	Throatslitter,


Widdershins,	Galt	and	Lobe	were	already	among	the	tales	travelling	through
the	legion.	The	same	was	true	of	some	from	the	other	two	squads.	Moak,	Burnt
and	Stacker.	Thom	Tissy,	Tulip,	Ramp	and	Able.
The	heavy	infantry	were	yet	to	wet	their	swords,	but	Strings	had	been
impressed	with	their	discipline—easier	with	slope-brows,	of	course.	Tell	’em	to
stand	firm	and	they	take	root	down	to	the	bedrock.	A	few	of	them	were
wandering	in,	he	noted.	Flashwit,	Bowl,	Shortnose	and	Uru	Hela.	Meanlooking	one	and	all.
Sergeant	Balm	squatted	down.	‘You’re	the	one	named	Strings,	aren’t	you?
Heard	it’s	not	your	real	name.’
Strings	raised	his	brows.	‘And	“Balm”	is?’
The	dark-skinned	young	man	frowned,	his	heavy	eyebrows	meeting	as	he
did	so.	‘Why,	yes,	it	is.’
Strings	glanced	over	at	another	soldier	from	the	9th	squad,	a	man	standing
nearby	looking	as	if	he	wanted	to	kill	something.	‘And	what	about	him?	What’s
his	name	again,	Throatslitter?	Did	his	ma	decide	on	that	for	her	little	one,	do
you	think?’
‘Can’t	say,’	Balm	replied.	‘Give	a	toddler	a	knife	and	who	knows	what’ll
happen.’
Strings	studied	the	man	for	a	moment,	then	grunted.	‘You	wanted	to	see	me
about	something?’
Balm	shrugged.	‘Not	really.	Sort	of.	What	do	you	think	of	the	captain’s
new	units?	Seems	a	little	late	to	make	changes	like	this…’
‘It’s	not	that	new,	actually.	Greymane’s	legions	are	sometimes	set	up	in	the
same	manner.	In	any	case,	our	new	Fist	has	approved	it.’
‘Keneb.	Not	sure	about	him.’
‘And	you	are	about	our	fresh-faced	captain?’
‘Aye,	I	am.	He’s	nobleborn,	is	Ranal.	Enough	said.’
‘Meaning?’
Balm	looked	away,	started	tracking	a	distant	bird	in	flight.	‘Oh,	only	that
he’s	likely	to	get	us	all	killed.’
Ah.	‘Speak	louder,	not	everyone	heard	that	opinion.’
‘Don’t	need	to,	Strings.	They	share	it.’
‘Sharing	it	ain’t	the	same	as	saying	it.’
Gesler,	Borduke	and	the	sergeants	from	the	11th	and	12th	squads	came
over	and	muttered	introductions	went	round	the	group.	Moak,	of	the	11th,	was
Falari,	copper-haired	and	bearded	like	Strings.	He’d	taken	a	lance	down	his
back,	from	shoulder	to	tailbone,	and,	despite	the	healer ’s	efforts,	was	clearly
struggling	with	badly	knitted	muscles.	The	12th’s	sergeant,	Thom	Tissy,	was


squat,	with	a	face	that	might	be	handsome	to	a	female	toad,	his	cheeks	pocked
and	the	backs	of	his	hands	covered	in	warts.	He	was,	the	others	saw	when	he
removed	his	helm,	virtually	hairless.
Moak	squinted	at	Strings	for	a	long	moment,	as	if	seeking	to	conjure
recognition,	then	he	drew	out	a	fish	spine	from	his	belt	pouch	and	began
picking	his	teeth.	‘Anybody	else	hear	about	that	killer	soldier?	Heavy	infantry,
not	sure	what	company,	not	even	sure	what	legion.	Named	Neffarias	Bredd.	I
heard	he	killed	eighteen	raiders	all	in	one	night.’
Strings	lifted	his	gaze	to	meet	Gesler ’s,	but	neither	man’s	expression
changed.
‘I	heard	it	was	eighteen	one	night,	thirteen	the	next,’	Thom	Tissy	said.
‘We’ll	have	to	ask	the	slope-brows	when	they	show.’
‘Well,’	Strings	pointed	out,	‘there’s	one	over	there.’	He	raised	his	voice.
‘Flashwit!	Come	join	us	for	a	moment,	if	you	please.’
The	ground	seemed	to	tremble	with	the	woman’s	approach.	She	was	Napan
and	Strings	wondered	if	she	knew	she	was	female.	The	muscles	of	her	arms
were	larger	than	his	thighs.	She	had	cut	all	her	hair	off,	her	round	face	devoid
of	ornament	barring	a	bronze	nose-ring.	Yet	her	eyes	were	startlingly
beautiful,	emerald	green.
‘Have	you	heard	of	another	heavy,	Flashwit?	Neffarias	Bredd?’
Those	extraordinary	eyes	widened.	‘Killed	fifty	raiders,	they	say.’
‘Which	legion?’	Moak	asked.
She	shrugged.	‘Don’t	know.’
‘Not	ours,	though.’
‘Not	sure.’
‘Well,’	Moak	snapped,	‘what	do	you	know?’
‘He	killed	fifty	raiders.	Can	I	go	now?	I	have	to	pee.’
They	watched	her	walk	away.
‘Standing	up,	do	you	think?’	Thom	Tissy	asked	the	others	in	general.
Moak	snorted.	‘Why	don’t	you	go	ask	her.’
‘Ain’t	that	eager	to	get	killed.	Why	don’t	you,	Moak?’
‘Here	come	the	heavy’s	sergeants,’	Balm	observed.
Mosel,	Sobelone	and	Tugg	could	have	been	siblings.	They	all	hailed	from
Malaz	City,	typical	of	the	mixed	breed	prevalent	on	the	island,	and	the	air	of
threat	around	them	had	less	to	do	with	size	than	attitude.	Sobelone	was	the
oldest	of	the	three,	a	severe-looking	woman	with	streaks	of	grey	in	her
shoulder-length	black	hair,	her	eyes	the	colour	of	the	sky.	Mosel	was	lean,	the
epicanthic	folds	of	his	eyes	marking	Kanese	blood	somewhere	in	his	family
line.	His	hair	was	braided	and	cut	finger-length	in	the	fashion	of	Jakatakan


pirates.	Tugg	was	the	biggest	of	the	three,	armed	with	a	short	single-bladed
axe.	The	shield	strapped	on	his	back	was	enormous,	hardwood,	sheathed	in	tin
and	rimmed	in	bronze.
‘Which	one	of	you	is	Strings?’	Mosel	asked.
‘Me.	Why?’
The	man	shrugged.	‘Nothing.	I	was	just	wondering.	And	you’—he	nodded
at	Gesler—‘you’re	that	coastal	guard,	Gesler.’
‘So	I	am.	What	of	it?’
‘Nothing.’
There	was	a	moment	of	awkward	silence,	then	Tugg	spoke,	his	voice	thin,
emerging	from,	Strings	suspected,	a	damaged	larynx.	‘We	heard	the	Adjunct
was	going	to	the	wall	tomorrow.	With	that	sword.	Then	what?	She	stabs	it?	It’s
a	storm	of	sand,	there’s	nothing	to	stab.	And	aren’t	we	already	in	Raraku?	The
Holy	Desert?	It	don’t	feel	any	different,	don’t	look	any	different,	neither.	Why
didn’t	we	just	wait	for	’em?	Or	let	’em	stay	and	rot	here	in	this	damned
wasteland?	Sha’ik	wants	an	empire	of	sand,	let	her	have	it.’
That	fractured	voice	was	excruciating	to	listen	to,	and	it	seemed	to	Strings
that	Tugg	would	never	stop.	‘Plenty	of	questions	there,’	he	said	as	soon	as	the
man	paused	to	draw	a	wheezing	breath.	‘This	empire	of	sand	can’t	be	left	here,
Tugg,	because	it’s	a	rot,	and	it	will	spread—we’d	lose	Seven	Cities,	and	far	too
much	blood	was	spilled	conquering	it	in	the	first	place	to	just	let	it	go.	And,
while	we’re	in	Raraku,	we’re	on	its	very	edge.	It	may	be	a	Holy	Desert,	but	it
looks	like	any	other.	If	it	possesses	a	power,	then	that	lies	in	what	it	does	to
you,	after	a	while.	Maybe	not	what	it	does,	but	what	it	gives.	Not	an	easy	thing
to	explain.’	He	then	shrugged,	and	coughed.
Gesler	cleared	his	throat.	‘The	Whirlwind	Wall	is	sorcery,	Tugg.	The
Adjunct’s	sword	is	otataral.	There	will	be	a	clash	between	the	two.	If	the
Adjunct’s	sword	fails,	then	we	all	go	home…or	back	to	Aren—’
‘Not	what	I	heard,’	Moak	said,	pausing	to	spit	before	continuing.	‘We
swing	east	then	north	if	we	can’t	breach	the	wall.	To	G’danisban,	or	maybe
Ehrlitan.	To	wait	for	Dujek	Onearm	and	High	Mage	Tayschrenn.	I’ve	even
heard	that	Greymane	might	be	recalled	from	the	Korelri	campaign.’
Strings	stared	at	the	man.	‘Whose	shadow	have	you	been	standing	in,
Moak?’
‘Well,	it	makes	sense,	don’t	it?’
Sighing,	Strings	straightened.	‘It’s	all	a	waste	of	breath,	soldiers.	Sooner
or	later,	we’re	all	marching	in	wide-eyed	stupid.’	He	strode	over	to	where	his
squad	had	set	up	the	tents.
His	soldiers,	Cuttle	included,	were	gathered	around	Bottle,	who	sat	cross-


legged	and	seemed	to	be	playing	with	twigs	and	sticks.
Strings	halted	in	his	tracks,	an	uncanny	chill	creeping	through	him.	Gods
below,	for	a	moment	there	I	thought	I	was	seeing	Quick	Ben,	with	Whiskeyjack’s
squad	crowding	round	some	damned	risky	ritual…He	could	hear	faint	singing
from	somewhere	in	the	desert	beyond	the	camp,	singing	that	sliced	like	a
sword’s	edge	through	the	roar	of	the	Whirlwind	Wall.	The	sergeant	shook	his
head	and	approached.
‘What	are	you	doing,	Bottle?’
The	young	man	looked	up	guiltily.	‘Uh,	not	much,	Sergeant—’
‘Trying	a	divination,’	Cuttle	growled,	‘and	as	far	as	I	can	tell,	getting
nowhere.’
Strings	slowly	crouched	down	in	the	circle,	opposite	Bottle.	‘Interesting
style	there,	lad.	Sticks	and	twigs.	Where	did	you	pick	that	up?’
‘Grandmother,’	he	muttered.
‘She	was	a	witch?’
‘More	or	less.	So	was	my	mother.’
‘And	your	father?	What	was	he?’
‘Don’t	know.	There	were	rumours…’	He	ducked	his	head,	clearly
uncomfortable.
‘Never	mind,’	Strings	said.	‘That’s	earth-aspected,	the	pattern	you	have
there.	You	need	more	than	just	what	anchors	the	power…’
All	the	others	were	staring	at	Strings	now.
Bottle	nodded,	then	drew	out	a	small	doll	made	of	woven	grasses,	a	dark,
purple-bladed	variety.	Strips	of	black	cloth	were	wrapped	about	it.
The	sergeant’s	eyes	widened.	‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	is	that	supposed	to
be?’
‘Well,	the	hand	of	death,	sort	of,	or	so	I	wanted	it	to	be.	You	know,	where
it’s	going.	But	it’s	not	co-operating.’
‘You	drawing	from	Hood’s	warren?’
‘A	little…’
Well,	there’s	more	to	this	lad	than	I’d	first	thought.	‘Never	mind	Hood.	He
may	hover,	but	won’t	stride	forward	until	after	the	fact,	and	even	then,	he’s	an
indiscriminate	bastard.	For	that	figure	you’ve	made,	try	the	Patron	of
Assassins.’
Bottle	flinched.	‘The	Rope?	That’s	too,	uh,	close…’
‘What	do	you	mean	by	that?’	Smiles	demanded.	‘You	said	you	knew
Meanas.	And	now	it	turns	out	you	know	Hood,	too.	And	witchery.	I’m	starting
to	think	you’re	just	making	it	all	up.’
The	mage	scowled.	‘Fine,	then.	Now	stop	flapping	your	lips.	I’ve	got	to


concentrate.’
The	squad	settled	down	once	more.	Strings	fixed	his	gaze	on	the	various
sticks	and	twigs	that	had	been	thrust	into	the	sand	before	Bottle.	After	a	long
moment,	the	mage	slowly	set	the	doll	down	in	their	midst,	pushing	the	legs	into
the	sand	until	the	doll	stood	on	its	own,	then	carefully	withdrew	his	hand.
The	pattern	of	sticks	on	one	side	ran	in	a	row.	Strings	assumed	that	was	the
Whirlwind	Wall,	since	those	sticks	began	waving,	like	reeds	in	the	wind.
Bottle	was	mumbling	under	his	breath,	with	a	growing	note	of	urgency,
then	frustration.	After	a	moment	the	breath	gusted	from	him	and	he	sat	back,
eyes	blinking	open.	‘It’s	no	use—’
The	sticks	had	ceased	moving.
‘Is	it	safe	to	reach	in	there?’	Strings	asked.
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
Strings	reached	out	and	picked	up	the	doll.	Then	he	set	it	back	down…on
the	other	side	of	the	Whirlwind	Wall.	‘Try	it	now.’
Bottle	stared	across	at	him	for	a	moment,	then	leaned	forward	and	closed
his	eyes	once	more.
The	Whirlwind	Wall	began	wavering	again.	Then	a	number	of	the	sticks
along	that	row	toppled.
A	gasp	from	the	circle,	but	Bottle’s	scowl	deepened.	‘It’s	not	moving.	The
doll.	I	can	feel	the	Rope…close,	way	too	close.	There’s	power,	pouring	into	or
maybe	out	of	that	doll,	only	it’s	not	moving—’
‘You’re	right,’	Strings	said,	a	grin	slowly	spreading	across	his	features.
‘It’s	not	moving.	But	its	shadow	is…’
Cuttle	grunted.	‘Queen	take	me,	he’s	right.	That’s	a	damn	strange	thing—
I’ve	seen	enough.’	He	rose	suddenly,	looking	nervous	and	shaken.	‘Magic’s
creepy.	I’m	going	to	bed.’
The	divination	ended	abruptly.	Bottle	opened	his	eyes	and	looked	around	at
the	others,	his	face	glistening	with	sweat.	‘Why	didn’t	he	move?	Why	only	his
shadow?’
Strings	stood.	‘Because,	lad,	he	isn’t	ready	yet.’
Smiles	glared	up	at	the	sergeant.	‘So,	who	is	he?	The	Rope	himself?’
‘No,’	Bottle	answered.	‘No,	I’m	sure	of	that.’
Saying	nothing,	Strings	strode	from	the	circle.	No,	not	the	Rope.	Someone
even	better,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned.	As	far	as	every	Malazan	is	concerned,	for
that	matter.	He’s	here.	And	he’s	on	the	other	side	of	the	Whirlwind	Wall.	And	I
know	precisely	who	he’s	sharpened	his	knives	for.
Now,	if	only	that	damned	singing	would	stop…


	
He	stood	in	the	darkness,	under	siege.	Voices	assaulted	him	from	all	sides,
pounding	at	his	skull.	It	wasn’t	enough	that	he	had	been	responsible	for	the
death	of	soldiers;	now	they	would	not	leave	him	alone.	Now	their	spirits
screamed	at	him,	ghostly	hands	reaching	out	through	Hood’s	Gate,	fingers
clawing	through	his	brain.
Gamet	wanted	to	die.	He	had	been	worse	than	useless.	He	had	been	a
liability,	joined	now	to	the	multitude	of	incompetent	commanders	who	had	left
a	river	of	blood	in	their	wake,	another	name	in	that	sullied,	degrading	history
that	fuelled	the	worst	fears	of	the	common	soldier.
And	it	had	driven	him	mad.	He	understood	that	now.	The	voices,	the
paralysing	uncertainty,	the	way	he	was	always	cold,	shivering,	no	matter	how
hot	the	daytime	sun	or	how	highly	banked	the	nightly	hearths.	And	the
weakness,	stealing	through	his	limbs,	thinning	the	blood	in	his	veins,	until	it
felt	as	if	his	heart	was	pumping	muddy	water.	I	have	been	broken.	I	failed	the
Adjunct	with	my	very	first	test	of	mettle.
Keneb	would	be	all	right.	Keneb	was	a	good	choice	as	the	legion’s	new
Fist.	He	was	not	too	old,	and	he	had	a	family—people	to	fight	for,	to	return	to,
people	that	mattered	in	his	life.	Those	were	important	things.	A	necessary
pressure,	fire	for	the	blood.	None	of	which	existed	in	Gamet’s	life.
She	has	certainly	never	needed	me,	has	she?	The	family	tore	itself	apart,
and	there	was	nothing	I	could	do	about	it.	I	was	only	a	castellan,	a	glorified
house	guard.	Taking	orders.	Even	when	a	word	from	me	could	have	changed
Felisin’s	fate,	I	just	saluted	and	said,	‘Yes,	mistress.’
But	he	had	always	known	his	own	weakness	of	spirit.	And	there	had	been
no	shortage	of	opportunities	in	which	he	could	demonstrate	his	flaws,	his
failures.	No	shortage	at	all,	even	if	she	saw	those	moments	as	ones	displaying
loyalty,	as	disciplined	acceptance	of	orders	no	matter	how	horrendous	their
outcome.
‘Loud.’
A	new	voice.	Blinking,	he	looked	around,	then	down,	to	see	Keneb’s
adopted	whelp,	Grub.	Half	naked,	sun-darkened	skin	smeared	with	dirt,	his	hair
a	wild	tangle,	his	eyes	glittering	in	the	starlight.
‘Loud.’
‘Yes,	they	are.’	The	child	was	feral.	It	was	late,	maybe	even	nearing	dawn.
What	was	he	doing	up?	What	was	he	doing	out	here,	beyond	the	camp’s
pickets,	inviting	butchery	by	a	desert	raider?
‘Not	they.	It.’


Gamet	frowned	down	at	him.	‘What	are	you	talking	about?	What’s	loud?’
All	I	hear	is	voices—you	can’t	hear	them.	Of	course	you	can’t.
‘The	sandstorm.	Roars.	Very…very…very	very	very	LOUD!’
The	storm?	Gamet	wiped	grit	from	his	eyes	and	looked	around—to	find
himself	not	fifty	paces	from	the	Whirlwind	Wall.	And	the	sound	of	sand,	racing
between	rocks	on	the	ground,	hissing	skyward	in	wild,	cavorting	loops,	the
pebbles	clattering	here	and	there,	the	wind	itself	whirling	through	sculpted
folds	in	the	limestone—the	sound	was	like…like	voices.	Screaming,	angry
voices.	‘I	am	not	mad.’
‘Me	neither.	I’m	happy.	Father	has	a	new	shiny	ring.	Around	his	arm.	It’s
all	carved.	He’s	supposed	to	give	more	orders,	but	he	gives	less.	But	I’m	still
happy.	It’s	very	shiny.	Do	you	like	shiny	things?	I	do,	even	though	they	hurt	my
eyes.	Maybe	it’s	because	they	hurt	my	eyes.	What	do	you	think?’
‘I	don’t	think	much	of	anything	any	more,	lad.’
‘I	think	you	do	too	much.’
‘Oh,	really?’
‘Father	thinks	the	same.	You	think	about	things	there’s	no	point	in	thinking
about.	It	makes	no	difference.	But	I	know	why	you	do.’
‘You	do?’
The	lad	nodded.	‘The	same	reason	I	like	shiny	things.	Father ’s	looking	for
you.	I’m	going	to	go	tell	him	I	found	you.’
Grub	ambled	away,	quickly	vanishing	in	the	darkness.
Gamet	turned	and	stared	up	at	the	Whirlwind	Wall.	Its	rage	buffeted	him.
The	whirling	sand	tore	at	his	eyes,	snatched	at	his	breath.	It	was	hungry,	had
always	been	hungry,	but	something	new	had	arrived,	altering	its	shrill	timbre.
What	is	it?	An	urgency,	a	tone	fraught	with…something.
What	am	I	doing	here?
Now	he	remembered.	He	had	come	looking	for	death.	A	raider ’s	blade
across	his	throat.	Quick	and	sudden,	if	not	entirely	random.
An	end	to	thinking	all	those	thoughts…that	so	hurt	my	eyes.
	
The	growing	thunder	of	horse	hoofs	roused	him	once	more,	and	he	turned	to
see	two	riders	emerge	from	the	gloom,	leading	a	third	horse.
‘We’ve	been	searching	half	the	night,’	Fist	Keneb	said	as	they	reined	in.
‘Temul	has	a	third	of	his	Wickans	out—all	looking	for	you,	sir.’
Sir?	That’s	inappropriate.	‘Your	child	had	no	difficulty	in	finding	me.’
Keneb	frowned	beneath	the	rim	of	his	helm.	‘Grub?	He	came	here?’
‘He	said	he	was	off	to	tell	you	he’d	found	me.’


The	man	snorted.	‘Unlikely.	He’s	yet	to	say	a	word	to	me.	Not	even	in
Aren.	I’ve	heard	he	talks	to	others,	when	the	mood	takes	him,	and	that’s	rare
enough.	But	not	me.	And	no,	I	don’t	know	why.	In	any	case,	we’ve	brought
your	horse.	The	Adjunct	is	ready.’
‘Ready	for	what?’
‘To	unsheathe	her	sword,	sir.	To	breach	the	Whirlwind	Wall.’
‘She	need	not	wait	for	me,	Fist.’
‘True,	but	she	chooses	to	none	the	less.’
I	don’t	want	to.
‘She	has	commanded	it,	sir.’
Gamet	sighed,	walked	over	to	the	horse.	He	was	so	weak,	he	had	trouble
pulling	himself	onto	the	saddle.	The	others	waited	with	maddening	patience.
Face	burning	with	both	effort	and	shame,	Gamet	finally	clambered	onto	the
horse,	spent	a	moment	searching	for	the	stirrups,	then	took	the	reins	from
Temul.	‘Lead	on,’	he	growled	to	Keneb.
They	rode	parallel	to	the	wall	of	roaring	sand,	eastward,	maintaining	a
respectable	distance.	Two	hundred	paces	along	they	rode	up	to	a	party	of	five
sitting	motionless	on	their	horses.	The	Adjunct,	Tene	Baralta,	Blistig,	Nil	and
Nether.
Sudden	fear	gripped	Gamet.	‘Adjunct!	A	thousand	warriors	could	be
waiting	on	the	other	side!	We	need	the	army	drawn	up.	We	need	heavy	infantry
on	the	flanks.	Outriders—archers—marines—’
‘That	will	be	enough,	Gamet.	We	ride	forward	now—the	sun	already	lights
the	wall.	Besides,	can	you	not	hear	it?	Its	shriek	is	filled	with	fear.	A	new	sound.
A	pleasing	sound.’
He	stared	up	at	the	swirling	barrier	of	sand.	Yes,	that	is	what	I	could	sense
earlier.	‘Then	it	knows	its	barrier	shall	fail.’
‘The	goddess	knows,’	Nether	agreed.
Gamet	glanced	at	the	two	Wickans.	They	looked	miserable,	a	state	that
seemed	more	or	less	permanent	with	them	these	days.	‘What	will	happen	when
the	Whirlwind	falls?’
The	young	woman	shook	her	head,	but	it	was	her	brother	who	answered,
‘The	Whirlwind	Wall	encloses	a	warren.	Destroy	the	wall,	and	the	warren	is
breached.	Making	the	goddess	vulnerable—had	we	a	battalion	of	Claw	and	a
half-dozen	High	Mages,	we	could	hunt	her	down	and	kill	her.	But	we	can
achieve	no	such	thing.’	He	threw	up	his	hands	in	an	odd	gesture.	‘The	Army	of
the	Apocalypse	will	remain	strengthened	by	her	power.	Those	soldiers	will
never	break,	will	fight	on	to	the	bitter	end.	Especially	given	the	likelihood	that
that	end	will	be	ours,	not	theirs.’


‘Your	predictions	of	disaster	are	unhelpful,	Nil,’	the	Adjunct	murmured.
‘Accompany	me,	all	of	you,	until	I	say	otherwise.’
They	rode	closer	to	the	Whirlwind	Wall,	leaning	in	the	face	of	the	fierce,
battering	wind	and	sand.	Fifteen	paces	from	its	edge,	the	Adjunct	raised	a	hand.
Then	she	dismounted,	one	gloved	hand	closing	on	the	grip	of	her	sword	as	she
strode	forward.
The	rust-hued	otataral	blade	was	halfway	out	of	its	scabbard	when	a	sudden
silence	descended,	and	before	them	the	Whirlwind	Wall’s	stentorian	violence
died,	in	tumbling	clouds	of	sand	and	dust.	The	hiss	of	sifting	rose	into	the
storm’s	mute	wake.	A	whisper.	Burgeoning	light.	And,	then,	silence.
The	Adjunct	wheeled,	shock	writ	on	her	features.
‘She	withdrew!’	Nil	shouted,	stumbling	forward.	‘Our	path	is	clear!’
Tavore	threw	up	a	hand	to	halt	the	Wickan.	‘In	answer	to	my	sword,
Warlock?	Or	is	this	some	strategic	ploy?’
‘Both,	I	think.	She	would	not	willingly	take	such	a	wounding,	I	think.	Now,
she	will	rely	upon	her	mortal	army.’
The	dust	was	falling	like	rain,	in	waves	lit	gold	by	the	rising	sun.	And	the
Holy	Desert’s	heartland	was	gradually	becoming	visible	through	gaps	in	the
dying	storm.	There	was	no	waiting	horde,	Gamet	saw	with	a	flood	of	relief.
Naught	but	more	wastes,	with	something	like	an	escarpment	on	the	northeast
horizon,	falling	away	as	it	proceeded	west,	where	strangely	broken	hills	ran	in
a	natural	barrier.
The	Adjunct	climbed	back	onto	her	horse.	‘Temul.	I	want	scouts	out	far
ahead.	I	do	not	believe	there	will	be	any	more	raids.	Now,	they	wait	for	us,	at	a
place	of	their	own	choosing.	It	falls	to	us	to	find	it.’
And	then	will	come	the	battle.	The	death	of	hundreds,	perhaps	thousands	of
soldiers.	The	Adjunct,	as	the	fist	of	the	Empress.	And	Sha’ik,	Chosen	servant	of
the	goddess.	A	clash	of	wills,	nothing	more.	Yet	it	will	decide	the	fate	of
hundreds	of	thousands.
I	want	nothing	to	do	with	this.
Tene	Baralta	had	drawn	his	horse	alongside	Gamet.	‘We	need	you	now
more	than	ever,’	the	Red	Blade	murmured	as	the	Adjunct,	with	renewed	energy,
continued	conveying	orders	to	the	officers	now	riding	up	from	the	main	camp.
‘You	do	not	need	me	at	all,’	Gamet	replied.
‘You	are	wrong.	She	needs	a	cautious	voice—’
‘A	coward’s	voice,	is	the	truth	of	it,	and	no,	she	does	not	need	that.’
‘There	is	a	fog	that	comes	in	battle—’
‘I	know.	I	was	a	soldier,	once.	And	I	did	well	enough	at	that.	Taking	orders,
commanding	no-one	but	myself.	Occasionally	a	handful,	but	not	thousands.	I


was	at	my	level	of	competence,	all	those	years	ago.’
‘Very	well	then,	Gamet.	Become	a	soldier	once	more.	One	who	just
happens	to	be	attached	to	the	Adjunct’s	retinue.	Give	her	the	perspective	of	the
common	soldier.	Whatever	weakness	you	feel	is	not	unique—realize	that	it	is
shared,	by	hundreds	or	even	thousands,	there	in	our	legions.’
Blistig	had	come	up	on	the	other	side,	and	he	now	added,	‘She	remains	too
remote	from	us,	Gamet.	She	is	without	our	advice	because	we	have	no	chance
to	give	it.	Worse,	we	don’t	know	her	strategy—’
‘Assuming	she	has	one,’	Tene	Baralta	muttered.
‘Nor	her	tactics	for	this	upcoming	battle,’	Blistig	continued.	‘It’s
dangerous,	against	Malazan	military	doctrine.	She’s	made	this	war	personal,
Gamet.’
Gamet	studied	the	Adjunct,	who	had	now	ridden	ahead,	flanked	by	Nil	and
Nether,	and	seemed	to	be	studying	the	broken	hills	beyond	which,	they	all
knew,	waited	Sha’ik	and	her	Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	Personal?	Yes,	she	would
do	that.	Because	it	is	what	she	has	always	done.	‘It	is	how	she	is.	The	Empress
would	not	have	been	ignorant	of	her	character.’
‘We	will	be	walking	into	a	carefully	constructed	trap,’	Tene	Baralta
growled.	‘Korbolo	Dom	will	see	to	that.	He’ll	hold	every	piece	of	high
ground,	he’ll	command	every	approach.	He	might	as	well	paint	a	big	red	spot
on	the	ground	where	he	wants	us	to	stand	while	he	kills	us.’
‘She	is	not	unaware	of	those	possibilities,’	Gamet	said.	Leave	me	alone,
Tene	Baralta.	You	as	well,	Blistig.	We	are	not	three	any	more.	We	are	two	and
one.	Talk	to	Keneb,	not	me.	He	can	shoulder	your	expectations.	I	cannot.	‘We
must	march	to	meet	them.	What	else	would	you	have	her	do?’
‘Listen	to	us,	that’s	what,’	Blistig	answered.	‘We	need	to	find	another
approach.	Come	up	from	the	south,	perhaps—’
‘And	spend	more	weeks	on	this	march?	Don’t	you	think	Korbolo	would
have	thought	the	same?	Every	waterhole	and	spring	will	be	fouled.	We	would
wander	until	Raraku	killed	us	all,	with	not	a	single	sword	raised	against	us.’
He	caught	the	momentary	locking	of	gazes	between	Blistig	and	Tene
Baralta.	Gamet	scowled.	‘Conversations	like	this	one	will	not	mend	what	is
broken,	sirs.	Save	your	breaths.	I	have	no	doubt	the	Adjunct	will	call	a	council
of	war	at	the	appropriate	time.’
‘She’d	better,’	Tene	Baralta	snapped,	gathering	his	reins	and	wheeling	his
horse	round.
As	he	cantered	off,	Blistig	leaned	forward	and	spat.	‘Gamet,	when	that
council	is	called,	be	there.’
‘And	if	I’m	not?’


‘We	have	enough	baggage	on	this	train,	with	all	those	nobleborn	officers
and	their	endless	lists	of	grievances.	Soldiers	up	from	the	ranks	are	rare
enough	in	this	army—too	rare	to	see	even	one	throw	himself	away.	Granted,	I
didn’t	think	much	of	you	at	first.	You	were	the	Adjunct’s	pet.	But	you	managed
your	legion	well	enough—’
‘Until	the	first	night	we	fought	the	enemy.’
‘Where	a	cusser	killed	your	horse	and	nearly	took	your	head	off.’
‘I	was	addled	before	then,	Blistig.’
‘Only	because	you	rode	into	the	skirmish.	A	Fist	should	not	do	that.	You
stay	back,	surrounded	by	messengers	and	guards.	You	may	find	yourself	not
issuing	a	single	order,	but	you	are	the	core	position	none	the	less,	the
immovable	core.	Just	being	there	is	enough.	They	can	get	word	to	you,	you	can
get	word	to	them.	You	can	shore	up,	relieve	units,	and	respond	to
developments.	It’s	what	an	officer	of	high	rank	does.	If	you	find	yourself	in	the
midst	of	a	fight,	you	are	useless,	a	liability	to	the	soldiers	around	you,	because
they’re	obliged	to	save	your	skin.	Even	worse,	you	can	see	nothing,	your
messengers	can’t	find	you.	You’ve	lost	perspective.	If	the	core	wavers	or
vanishes,	the	legion	falls.’
Gamet	considered	Blistig’s	words	for	a	long	moment,	then	he	sighed	and
shrugged.	‘None	of	that	matters	any	more.	I	am	no	longer	a	Fist.	Keneb	is,	and
he	knows	what	to	do—’
‘He’s	acting	Fist.	The	Adjunct	made	that	clear.	It’s	temporary.	And	it	now
falls	to	you	to	resume	your	title,	and	your	command.’
‘I	will	not.’
‘You	have	to,	you	stubborn	bastard.	Keneb’s	a	damned	good	captain.	Now,
there’s	a	nobleborn	in	that	role,	replacing	him.	The	man’s	a	damned	fool.	So
long	as	he	was	under	Keneb’s	heel	he	wasn’t	a	problem.	You	need	to	return
things	to	their	proper	order,	Gamet.	And	you	need	to	do	it	today.’
‘How	do	you	know	about	this	new	captain?	It’s	not	even	your	legion.’
‘Keneb	told	me.	He	would	rather	have	promoted	one	of	the	sergeants—
there’s	a	few	with	more	experience	than	anyone	else	in	the	entire	army.
They’re	lying	low,	but	it	shows	anyway.	But	the	officer	corps	the	Adjunct	had
to	draw	from	was	filled	with	nobleborn—the	whole	system	was	its	own	private
enterprise,	exclusionary	and	corrupt.	Despite	the	Cull,	it	persists,	right	here	in
this	army.’
‘Besides,’	Gamet	nodded,	‘those	sergeants	are	most	useful	right	where	they
are.’
‘Aye.	So	cease	your	selfish	sulking,	old	man,	and	step	back	in	line.’
The	back	of	Gamet’s	gloved	hand	struck	Blistig’s	face	hard	enough	to


break	his	nose	and	send	him	pitching	backward	off	the	rump	of	his	horse.
He	heard	another	horse	reining	in	nearby	and	turned	to	see	the	Adjunct,	a
cloud	of	dust	rolling	out	from	under	her	mount’s	stamping	hoofs.	She	was
staring	at	him.
Spitting	blood,	Blistig	slowly	climbed	to	his	feet.
Grimacing,	Gamet	walked	his	horse	over	to	where	the	Adjunct	waited.	‘I
am	ready,’	he	said,	‘to	return	to	duty,	Adjunct.’
One	brow	arched	slightly.	‘Very	good.	I	feel	the	need	to	advise	you,
however,	to	give	vent	to	your	disagreements	with	your	fellow	Fists	in	more
private	locations	in	the	future.’
Gamet	glanced	back.	Blistig	was	busy	dusting	himself	off,	but	there	was	a
grim	smile	on	his	bloodied	face.
The	bastard.	Even	so,	I	owe	him	a	free	shot	at	me,	don’t	I?
‘Inform	Keneb,’	the	Adjunct	said.
Gamet	nodded.	‘With	your	leave,	Adjunct,	I’d	like	another	word	with	Fist
Blistig.’
‘Less	dramatic	than	the	last	one,	I	would	hope,	Fist	Gamet.’
‘We’ll	see,	Adjunct.’
‘Oh?’
‘Depends	on	how	patient	he	is,	I	suppose.’
‘Be	on	your	way	then,	Fist.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’
	
Strings	and	a	few	other	sergeants	had	climbed	up	onto	a	hill—everyone	else
being	busy	with	breaking	camp	and	preparing	for	the	march—for	a	clearer
view	of	the	collapsed	Whirlwind	Wall.	Sheets	of	dust	were	still	cascading
down,	though	the	freshening	wind	was	quickly	tearing	through	them.
‘Not	even	a	whimper,’	Gesler	sighed	behind	him.
‘The	goddess	withdrew,	is	my	guess,’	Strings	said.	‘I	would	bet	the	Adjunct
didn’t	even	draw	her	sword.’
‘Then	why	raise	the	wall	in	the	first	place?’	Borduke	wondered.
Strings	shrugged.	‘Who	can	say?	There	are	other	things	going	on	here	in
Raraku,	things	we	know	nothing	about.	The	world	didn’t	sit	still	during	the
months	we	spent	marching	here.’
‘It	was	there	to	keep	the	Claw	out,’	Gesler	pronounced.	‘Both	Sha’ik	and
her	goddess	want	this	battle.	They	want	it	clean.	Soldier	against	soldier,	mage
against	mage,	commander	against	commander.’
‘Too	bad	for	them,’	Strings	muttered.


‘So	you’ve	been	hinting	at.	Out	with	it,	Fid.’
‘Just	a	hunch,	Gesler.	I	get	those	sometimes.	They’ve	been	infiltrated.
That’s	what	I	saw	from	Bottle’s	divination.	The	night	before	the	battle,	that
oasis	will	get	hairy.	Wish	I	could	be	there	to	see	it.	Damn,	wish	I	could	be	there
to	help.’
‘We’ll	have	our	turn	being	busy,	I	think,’	Gesler	muttered.
The	last	sergeant	who	had	accompanied	them	sighed,	then	said	in	a	rasp,
‘Moak	thinks	we	won’t	be	busy.	Unless	the	new	captain	does	something	stupid.
The	Adjunct’s	going	to	do	something	unexpected.	We	may	not	get	a	fight	at
all.’
Strings	coughed.	‘Where	does	Moak	get	all	this,	Tugg?’
‘Squatting	over	the	latrine,	is	my	guess,’	Borduke	grunted,	then	spat.
The	heavy	infantry	sergeant	shrugged.	‘Moak	knows	things,	that’s	all.’
‘And	how	many	times	does	he	get	it	wrong?’	Gesler	asked,	clearing	his
throat.
‘Hard	to	say.	He	says	so	many	things	I	can’t	remember	them	all.	He’s	been
right	plenty	of	times,	I	think.	I’m	sure	of	it,	in	fact.	Almost	sure.’	Tugg	faced
Strings.	‘He	says	you	were	in	Onearm’s	Host.	And	the	Empress	wants	your
head	on	a	spike,	because	you’ve	been	outlawed.’	The	man	then	turned	to
Gesler.	‘And	he	says	you	and	your	corporal,	Stormy,	are	Old	Guard.	Underage
marines	serving	Dassem	Ultor,	or	maybe	Cartheron	Crust	or	his	brother	Urko.
That	you	were	the	ones	who	brought	that	old	Quon	dromon	into	Aren	Harbour
with	all	the	wounded	from	the	Chain	of	Dogs.	And	you,	Borduke,	you	once
threw	a	nobleborn	officer	off	a	cliff,	near	Karashimesh,	only	they	couldn’t
prove	it,	of	course.’
The	three	other	men	stared	at	Tugg,	saying	nothing.
Tugg	rubbed	his	neck.	‘Well,	that’s	what	he	says,	anyway.’
‘Amazing	how	wrong	he	got	it	all,’	Gesler	said	drily.
‘And	I	take	it	he’s	been	spreading	these	tales	around?’	Strings	asked.
‘Oh	no.	Just	me	and	Sobelone.	He	told	us	to	keep	our	mouths	shut.’	Tugg
blinked,	then	added,	‘But	not	with	you,	obviously,	since	you	already	know.	I
was	just	making	conversation.	Just	being	friendly.	Amazing	how	that
Whirlwind	Wall	just	collapsed	like	that,	isn’t	it?’
Horns	sounded	in	the	distance.
‘Time	to	march,’	Gesler	muttered,	‘praise	Hood	and	all…’
	
Keneb	rode	up	alongside	Gamet.	Their	legion	had	been	positioned	as
rearguard	for	this	day	of	travel	and	the	dust	was	thick	in	the	hot	air.


‘I’m	starting	to	doubt	the	Whirlwind	Wall	ever	vanished,’	Keneb	said.
‘Aye,	there’s	less	we’re	kicking	up	than	is	still	coming	down,’	Gamet
replied.	He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘My	apologies,	Captain—’
‘No	need,	sir.	I	am	in	fact	relieved—if	you’ll	excuse	the	pun.	Not	just	from
the	pressure	of	being	a	Fist,	but	also	because	Ranal’s	promotion	was	rescinded.
It	was	a	pleasure	informing	him	of	that.	Were	you	aware	he	had	restructured
the	units?	Using	Greymane’s	arrangements?	Of	course,	Greymane	was
fighting	a	protracted	war	over	a	huge	territory	with	no	defined	front.	He
needed	self-contained	fighting	units,	ready	for	any	contingency.	Even	more
irritating,	he	neglected	to	inform	anyone	else.’
‘Are	you	returning	the	squads	to	their	original	placement,	Captain?’
‘Not	yet,	sir.	Waiting	for	your	word.’
Gamet	thought	about	it	for	a	time.	‘I	will	inform	the	Adjunct	of	our
legion’s	new	structure.’
‘Sir?’
‘It	might	prove	useful.	We	are	to	hold	the	rear	at	the	battle,	on	a	broken
landscape.	Ranal’s	decision,	no	doubt	made	in	ignorance,	is	none	the	less
suitable.’
Keneb	sighed,	but	said	nothing,	and	Gamet	well	understood.	I	may	have
returned	as	Fist	with	the	Adjunct’s	confirmation,	but	her	decision	on	our
positioning	has	made	it	clear	she’s	lost	confidence	in	me.
They	rode	on	in	silence,	but	it	was	not	a	comfortable	one.


Chapter	Twenty-three

Who	among	the	pantheon	would	the	Fallen	One	despise	and	fear
the	most?	Consider	the	last	chaining,	in	which	Hood,	Fener,	the
Queen	of	Dreams,	Osserc	and	Oponn	all	participated,	in	addition
to	Anomander	Rake,	Caladan	Brood	and	a	host	of	other	ascendants.
It	is	not	so	surprising,	then,	that	the	Crippled	God	could	not	have
anticipated	that	his	deadliest	enemy	was	not	found	among	those
mentioned…
THE	CHAININGS
ISTAN 	HELA
‘Just	because	I’m	a	woman—all	woman—it	doesn’t	mean	I	can	cook.’
Cutter	glanced	across	at	Apsalar,	then	said,	‘No,	no,	it’s	very	good,	really
—’
But	Mogora	wasn’t	finished,	waving	a	grass-snarled	wooden	ladle	about	as
she	stomped	back	and	forth.	‘There’s	no	larder,	nothing	at	all!	And	guests!
Endless	guests!	And	is	he	around	to	go	find	us	some	food?	Never!	I	think	he’s
dead—’
‘He’s	not	dead,’	Apsalar	cut	in,	holding	her	spoon	motionless	above	the
bowl.	‘We	saw	him	only	a	short	while	ago.’
‘So	you	say,	with	your	shiny	hair	and	pouty	lips—and	those	breasts—just
wait	till	you	start	dropping	whelps,	they’ll	be	at	your	ankles	one	day,	big	as
they	are—not	the	whelps,	the	breasts.	The	whelps	will	be	in	your	hair—no,	not
that	shiny	hair	on	your	head,	well,	yes,	that	hair,	but	only	as	a	manner	of
speech.	What	was	I	talking	about?	Yes,	I	have	to	go	out	every	day,	climbing	up
and	down	that	rope	ladder,	scrounging	food—yes,	that	grass	is	edible,	just
chew	it	down.	Chew	and	chew.	Every	day,	armfuls	of	grasses,	tubers,	rhizan,
cockroaches	and	bloodflies—’
Both	Cutter	and	Apsalar	put	down	their	spoons.
‘—and	me	tripping	over	my	tits.	And	then!’	She	waved	the	ladle,	flinging
wet	grass	against	a	wall.	‘Those	damned	bhok’arala	get	into	my	hoard	and


steal	all	the	yummy	bits—every	single	cockroach	and	bloodfly!	Haven’t	you
noticed?	There’s	no	vermin	in	this	ruin	anywhere!	Not	a	mouse,	not	a	bug—
what’s	a	thousand	spiders	to	do?’
Cautiously,	the	two	guests	resumed	eating,	their	sips	preceded	by	close
examination	of	the	murky	liquid	in	their	spoons.
‘And	how	long	do	you	plan	to	stay	here?	What	is	this,	a	hostel?	How	do
you	expect	my	husband	and	me	to	return	to	domestic	normality?	If	it’s	not	you
it’s	gods	and	demons	and	assassins	messing	up	the	bedrooms!	Will	I	ever	get
peace?’	With	that	she	stomped	from	the	room.
After	a	moment,	Cutter	blinked	and	sat	straighter.	‘Assassins?’
‘Kalam	Mekhar,’	Apsalar	replied.	‘He	left	marks,	an	old	Bridgeburner
habit.’
‘He’s	back?	What	happened?’
She	shrugged.	‘Shadowthrone	and	Cotillion	have,	it	seems,	found	use	for
us	all.	If	I	were	to	guess,	Kalam	plans	on	killing	as	many	of	Sha’ik’s	officers
as	he	can.’
‘Well,	Mogora	did	raise	an	interesting	question.	Cotillion	wanted	us	here,
but	why?	Now	what?’
‘I	have	no	answers	for	you,	Crokus.	It	would	seem	Cotillion’s	interests	lie
more	with	you	than	with	me.	Which	is	not	surprising.’
‘It	isn’t?	It	is	to	me.	Why	would	you	say	otherwise?’
She	studied	him	for	a	moment,	then	her	eyes	shifted	away.	‘Because	I	am
not	interested	in	becoming	his	servant.	I	possess	too	many	of	his	memories,
including	his	mortal	life	as	Dancer,	to	be	entirely	trustworthy.’
‘That’s	not	an	encouraging	statement,	Apsalar—’
A	new	voice	hissed	from	the	shadows,	‘Encouragement	is	needed?	Simple,
easy,	unworthy	of	concern—why	can’t	I	think	of	a	solution!	Something	stupid
to	say,	that	should	be	effortless	for	me.	Shouldn’t	it?’	After	a	moment,	Iskaral
Pust	edged	out	from	the	gloom,	sniffing	the	air.	‘She’s	been…cooking!’	His
eyes	then	lit	on	the	bowls	on	the	table.	‘And	you’ve	been	eating	it!	Are	you
mad?	Why	do	you	think	I’ve	been	hiding	all	these	months?	Why	do	you	think	I
have	my	bhok’arala	sift	through	her	hoard	for	the	edible	stuff?	Gods,	you
fools!	Oh	yes,	fine	food…if	you’re	an	antelope!’
‘We’re	managing,’	Cutter	said.	‘Is	there	something	you	want	with	us?	If
not,	I’m	with	Mogora	on	one	thing—the	less	I	see	of	you	the	better—’
‘She	wants	to	see	me,	you	Daru	idiot!	Why	do	you	think	she’s	always
trying	to	hunt	me	down?’
‘Yes,	it’s	a	good	act,	isn’t	it?	But	let’s	be	realistic,	Pust,	she’s	happier
without	you	constantly	in	her	face.	You’re	not	wanted.	Not	necessary.	In	fact,


Pust,	you	are	completely	useless.’
The	High	Priest’s	eyes	widened,	then	he	snarled	and	bolted	back	into	the
corner	of	the	room,	vanishing	into	its	shadows.
Cutter	smiled	and	leaned	back	in	his	chair.	‘That	worked	better	than	I	could
have	hoped.’
‘You	have	stepped	between	husband	and	wife,	Crokus.	Not	a	wise	decision.’
He	narrowed	his	gaze	on	her.	‘Where	do	you	want	to	go	from	here,
Apsalar?’
She	would	not	meet	his	eyes.	‘I	have	not	yet	made	up	my	mind.’
And	Cutter	knew	that	she	had.
	
The	spear	was	a	heavy	wood,	yet	surprisingly	flexible	for	its	solid	feel.
Upright,	its	fluted	chalcedony	point	reached	to	Trull	Sengar ’s	palm	when	he
stood	with	one	arm	stretched	upward.	‘Rather	short	for	my	fighting	style,	but	I
will	make	do.	I	thank	you,	Ibra	Gholan.’
The	T’lan	Imass	swung	round	and	strode	to	where	Monok	Ochem	waited.
Onrack	watched	Trull	Sengar	blow	on	his	hands,	then	rub	them	on	his
tattered	buckskin	leggings.	He	flexed	the	spear	shaft	once	more,	then	leaned	it
on	one	shoulder	and	faced	Onrack.	‘I	am	ready.	Although	I	could	do	with	some
furs—this	warren	is	cold,	and	the	wind	stinks	of	ice—we’ll	have	snow	by
nightfall.’
‘We	shall	be	travelling	south,’	Onrack	said.	‘Before	long,	we	shall	reach
the	tree	line,	and	the	snow	will	turn	to	rain.’
‘That	sounds	even	more	miserable.’
‘Our	journey,	Trull	Sengar,	shall	be	less	than	a	handful	of	days	and	nights.
And	in	that	time	we	shall	travel	from	tundra	to	savanna	and	jungle.’
‘Do	you	believe	we	will	reach	the	First	Throne	before	the	renegades?’
Onrack	shrugged.	‘It	is	likely.	The	path	of	Tellann	will	present	to	us	no
obstacles,	whilst	that	of	chaos	shall	slow	our	enemies,	for	its	path	is	never
straight.’
‘Never	straight,	aye.	That	notion	makes	me	nervous.’
Ah.	That	is	what	I	am	feeling.	‘A	cause	for	unease,	granted,	Trull	Sengar.
None	the	less,	we	are	faced	with	a	more	dire	concern,	for	when	we	reach	the
First	Throne	we	must	then	defend	it.’
Ibra	Gholan	led	the	way,	Monok	Ochem	waiting	until	Onrack	and	the	Tiste
Edur	passed	by	before	falling	in	step.
‘We	are	not	trusted,’	Trull	Sengar	muttered.
‘That	is	true,’	Onrack	agreed.	‘None	the	less,	we	are	needed.’


‘The	least	satisfying	of	alliances.’
‘Yet	perhaps	the	surest,	until	such	time	as	the	need	passes.	We	must	remain
mindful,	Trull	Sengar.’
The	Tiste	Edur	grunted	in	acknowledgement.
They	fell	silent	then,	as	each	stride	took	them	further	south.
As	with	so	many	tracts	within	Tellann,	the	scars	of	Omtose	Phellack
remained	both	visible	and	palpable	to	Onrack’s	senses.	Rivers	of	ice	had
gouged	this	landscape,	tracing	the	history	of	advance	and,	finally,	retreat,
leaving	behind	fluvial	spans	of	silts,	rocks	and	boulders	in	screes,	fans	and
slides,	and	broad	valleys	with	basins	worn	down	to	smooth-humped	bedrock.
Eventually,	permafrost	gave	way	to	sodden	peat	and	marshland,	wherein
stunted	black	spruce	rose	in	knotted	stands	on	islands	formed	by	the	rotted
remains	of	ancestral	trees.	Pools	of	black	water	surrounded	these	islands,
layered	with	mists	and	bubbling	with	the	gases	of	decay.
Insects	swarmed	the	air,	finding	nothing	to	their	liking	among	the	T’lan
Imass	and	the	lone	mortal,	though	they	circled	in	thick,	buzzing	clouds	none
the	less.	Before	long,	the	marshes	gave	way	to	upthrust	domes	of	bedrock,	the
low	ground	between	them	steep-sided	and	tangled	with	brush	and	dead	pines.
The	domes	then	merged,	creating	a	winding	bridge	of	high	ground	along
which	the	four	travelled	with	greater	ease	than	before.
It	began	to	rain,	a	steady	drizzle	that	blackened	the	basaltic	bedrock	and
made	it	slick.
Onrack	could	hear	Trull	Sengar ’s	harsh	breathing	and	sensed	his
companion’s	weariness.	But	no	entreaties	to	rest	came	from	the	Tiste	Edur,
even	as	he	increasingly	used	his	spear	as	a	staff	as	they	trudged	onward.
Forest	soon	replaced	the	exposed	bedrock,	slowly	shifting	from
coniferous	to	deciduous,	the	hills	giving	way	to	flatter	ground.	The	trees	then
thinned,	and	suddenly,	beyond	a	line	of	tangled	deadfall,	plains	stretched
before	them,	and	the	rain	was	gone.	Onrack	raised	a	hand.	‘We	shall	halt	here.’
Ibra	Gholan,	ten	paces	ahead,	stopped	and	swung	round.	‘Why?’
‘Food	and	rest,	Ibra	Gholan.	You	may	have	forgotten	that	these	number
among	the	needs	of	mortals.’
‘I	have	not	forgotten,	Onrack	the	Broken.’
Trull	Sengar	settled	onto	the	grasses,	a	wry	smile	on	his	lips	as	he	said,
‘It’s	called	indifference,	Onrack.	I	am,	after	all,	the	least	valuable	member	of
this	war	party.’
‘The	renegades	will	not	pause	in	their	march,’	Ibra	Gholan	said.	‘Nor
should	we.’
‘Then	journey	ahead,’	Onrack	suggested.


‘No,’	Monok	Ochem	commanded.	‘We	walk	together.	Ibra	Gholan,	a	short
period	of	rest	will	not	prove	a	great	inconvenience.	Indeed,	I	would	the	Tiste
Edur	speak	to	us.’
‘About	what,	Bonecaster?’
‘Your	people,	Trull	Sengar.	What	has	made	them	kneel	before	the	Chained
One?’
‘No	easy	answer	to	that	question,	Monok	Ochem.’
Ibra	Gholan	strode	back	to	the	others.	‘I	shall	hunt	game,’	the	warrior	said,
then	vanished	in	a	swirl	of	dust.
The	Tiste	Edur	studied	the	fluted	spearhead	of	his	new	weapon	for	a
moment,	then,	setting	the	spear	down,	he	sighed.	‘It	is	a	long	tale,	alas.	And
indeed,	I	am	no	longer	the	best	choice	to	weave	it	in	a	manner	you	might	find
useful—’
‘Why?’
‘Because,	Monok	Ochem,	I	am	Shorn.	I	no	longer	exist.	To	my	brothers,
and	my	people,	I	never	existed.’
‘Such	assertions	are	meaningless	in	the	face	of	truth,’	Onrack	said.	‘You
are	here	before	us.	You	exist.	As	do	your	memories.’
‘There	have	been	Imass	who	have	suffered	exile,’	Monok	Ochem	rasped.
‘Yet	still	we	speak	of	them.	We	must	speak	of	them,	to	give	warning	to	others.
What	value	a	tale	if	it	is	not	instructive?’
‘A	very	enlightened	view,	Bonecaster.	But	mine	are	not	an	enlightened
people.	We	care	nothing	for	instruction.	Nor,	indeed,	for	truth.	Our	tales	exist
to	give	grandeur	to	the	mundane.	Or	to	give	moments	of	great	drama	and
significance	an	air	of	inevitability.	Perhaps	one	might	call	that	“instruction”	but
that	is	not	their	purpose.	Every	defeat	justifies	future	victory.	Every	victory	is
propitious.	The	Tiste	Edur	make	no	misstep,	for	our	dance	is	one	of	destiny.’
‘And	you	are	no	longer	in	that	dance.’
‘Precisely,	Onrack.	Indeed,	I	never	was.’
‘Your	exile	forces	you	to	lie	even	to	yourself,	then,’	Onrack	observed.
‘In	a	manner	of	speaking,	that	is	true.	I	am	therefore	forced	to	reshape	the
tale,	and	that	is	a	difficult	thing.	There	was	much	of	that	time	that	I	did	not
understand	at	first—certainly	not	when	it	occurred.	Much	of	my	knowledge	did
not	come	to	me	until	much	later—’
‘Following	your	Shorning.’
Trull	Sengar ’s	almond-shaped	eyes	narrowed	on	Onrack,	then	he	nodded.
‘Yes.’
As	knowledge	flowered	before	my	mind’s	eye	in	the	wake	of	the	Ritual	of
Tellann’s	shattering.	Very	well,	this	I	understand.	‘Prepare	for	the	telling	of


your	tale,	Trull	Sengar.	If	instruction	can	be	found	within	it,	recognition	is	the
responsibility	of	those	to	whom	the	tale	is	told.	You	are	absolved	of	the
necessity.’
Monok	Ochem	grunted,	then	said,	‘These	words	are	spurious.	Every	story
instructs.	The	teller	ignores	this	truth	at	peril.	Excise	yourself	from	the	history
you	would	convey	if	you	must,	Trull	Sengar.	The	only	lesson	therein	is	one	of
humility.’
Trull	Sengar	grinned	up	at	the	bonecaster.	‘Fear	not,	I	was	never	pivotal
among	the	players.	As	for	excision,	well,	that	has	already	occurred,	and	so	I
would	tell	the	tale	of	the	Tiste	Edur	who	dwelt	north	of	Lether	as	would	they
themselves	tell	it.	With	one	exception—which	has,	I	admit,	proved	most
problematic	in	my	mind—and	that	is,	there	will	be	no	aggrandizement	in	my
telling.	No	revelling	in	glory,	no	claims	of	destiny	or	inevitability.	I	shall
endeavour,	then,	to	be	other	than	the	Tiste	Edur	I	appear	to	be,	to	tear	away	my
cultural	identity	and	so	cleanse	the	tale—’
‘Flesh	does	not	lie,’	Monok	Ochem	said.	‘Thus,	we	are	not	deceived.’
‘Flesh	may	not	lie,	but	the	spirit	can,	Bonecaster.	Instruct	yourself	in
blindness	and	indifference—I	in	turn	intend	to	attempt	the	same.’
‘When	will	you	begin	your	tale?’
‘At	the	First	Throne,	Monok	Ochem.	Whilst	we	await	the	coming	of	the
renegades…and	their	Tiste	Edur	allies.’
Ibra	Gholan	reappeared	with	a	broken-necked	hare,	which	he	skinned	in	a
single	gesture,	then	flung	the	blood-smeared	body	to	the	ground	beside	Trull
Sengar.	‘Eat,’	the	warrior	instructed,	tossing	the	skin	aside.
Onrack	moved	off	while	the	Tiste	Edur	made	preparations	for	a	fire.	He
was,	he	reflected,	disturbed	by	Trull	Sengar ’s	words.	The	Shorning	had	made
much	of	excising	the	physical	traits	that	would	identify	Trull	Sengar	as	Tiste
Edur.	The	bald	pate,	the	scarred	brow.	But	these	physical	alterations	were	as
nothing,	it	appeared,	when	compared	to	those	forced	upon	the	man’s	spirit.
Onrack	realized	that	he	had	grown	comfortable	in	Trull	Sengar ’s	company,
lulled,	perhaps,	by	the	Edur ’s	steady	manner,	his	ease	with	hardship	and
extremity.	Such	comfort	was	deceiving,	it	now	seemed.	Trull	Sengar ’s	calm
was	born	of	scars,	of	healing	that	left	one	insensate.	His	heart	was	incomplete.
He	is	as	a	T’lan	Imass,	yet	clothed	in	mortal	flesh.	We	ask	that	he	resurrect	his
memories	of	life,	then	wonder	at	his	struggle	to	satisfy	our	demands.	The	failure
is	ours,	not	his.
We	speak	of	those	we	have	exiled,	yet	not	to	warn—as	Monok	Ochem
claims.	No,	nothing	so	noble.	We	speak	of	them	in	reaffirmation	of	our
judgement.	But	it	is	our	intransigence	that	finds	itself	fighting	the	fiercest	war


—with	time	itself,	with	the	changing	world	around	us.
‘I	will	preface	my	tale,’	Trull	Sengar	was	saying	as	he	roasted	the	skinned
hare,	‘with	an	admittedly	cautionary	observation.’
‘Tell	me	this	observation,’	Monok	Ochem	said.
‘I	shall,	Bonecaster.	It	concerns	nature…and	the	exigency	of	maintaining	a
balance.’
Had	he	possessed	a	soul,	Onrack	would	have	felt	it	grow	cold	as	ice.	As	it
was,	the	warrior	slowly	turned	in	the	wake	of	Trull	Sengar ’s	words.
‘Pressures	and	forces	are	ever	in	opposition,’	the	Edur	was	saying	as	he
rotated	the	spitted	hare	over	the	flames.	‘And	the	striving	is	ever	towards	a
balance.	This	is	beyond	the	gods,	of	course—it	is	the	current	of	existence—but
no,	beyond	even	that,	for	existence	itself	is	opposed	by	oblivion.	It	is	a	struggle
that	encompasses	all,	that	defines	every	island	in	the	Abyss.	Or	so	I	now
believe.	Life	is	answered	by	death.	Dark	by	light.	Overwhelming	success	by
catastrophic	failure.	Horrific	curse	by	breathtaking	blessing.	It	seems	the
inclination	of	all	people	to	lose	sight	of	that	truth,	particularly	when	blinded	by
triumph	upon	triumph.	See	before	me,	if	you	will,	this	small	fire.	A	modest
victory…but	if	I	feed	it,	my	own	eager	delight	is	answered,	until	this	entire
plain	is	aflame,	then	the	forest,	then	the	world	itself.	Thus,	an	assertion	of
wisdom	here…in	the	quenching	of	these	flames	once	this	meat	is	cooked.	After
all,	igniting	this	entire	world	will	also	kill	everything	in	it,	if	not	in	flames	then
in	subsequent	starvation.	Do	you	see	my	point,	Monok	Ochem?’
‘I	do	not,	Trull	Sengar.	This	prefaces	nothing.’
Onrack	spoke.	‘You	are	wrong,	Monok	Ochem.	It	prefaces…everything.’
Trull	Sengar	glanced	over,	and	answered	with	a	smile.
Of	sadness	overwhelming.	Of	utter…despair.
And	the	undead	warrior	was	shaken.
	
A	succession	of	ridges	ribboned	the	landscape,	seeming	to	slowly	melt	as	sand
drifted	down	from	the	sky.
‘Soon,’	Pearl	murmured,	‘those	beach	ridges	will	vanish	once	more
beneath	dunes.’
Lostara	shrugged.	‘We’re	wasting	time,’	she	pronounced,	then	set	off
towards	the	first	ridge.	The	air	was	thick	with	settling	dust	and	sand,	stinging
the	eyes	and	parching	the	throat.	Yet	the	haze	served	to	draw	the	horizons
closer,	to	make	their	discovery	increasingly	unlikely.	The	sudden	demise	of	the
Whirlwind	Wall	suggested	that	the	Adjunct	and	her	army	had	reached	Raraku,
were	even	now	marching	upon	the	oasis.	She	suspected	that	there	would	be	few,


if	any,	scouts	patrolling	the	northeast	approaches.
Pearl	had	announced	that	it	was	safe	now	to	travel	during	the	day.	The
goddess	had	drawn	inward,	concentrating	her	power	for,	perhaps,	one	final,
explosive	release.	For	the	clash	with	the	Adjunct.	A	singularity	of	purpose
locked	in	rage,	a	flaw	that	could	be	exploited.
She	allowed	herself	a	private	smile	at	that.	Flaws.	No	shortage	of	those
hereabouts,	is	there?	Their	moment	of	wild	passion	had	passed,	as	far	as	she
was	concerned.	The	loosening	of	long	pent-up	energies—now	that	it	was	done,
they	could	concentrate	on	other	things.	More	important	things.	It	seemed,
however,	that	Pearl	saw	it	differently.	He’d	even	tried	to	take	her	hand	this
morning,	a	gesture	that	she	decisively	rebuffed	despite	its	pathos.	The	deadly
assassin	was	on	the	verge	of	transforming	into	a	squirming	pup—disgust
threatened	to	overwhelm	her,	so	she	shifted	her	thoughts	onto	another	track.
They	were	running	short	on	time,	not	to	mention	food	and	water.	Raraku
was	a	hostile	land,	resentful	of	whatever	life	dared	exploit	it.	Not	holy	at	all,
but	cursed.	Devourer	of	dreams,	destroyer	of	ambitions.	And	why	not?	It’s	a
damned	desert.
Clambering	over	the	cobbles	and	stones,	they	reached	the	first	ridge.
‘We’re	close,’	Pearl	said,	squinting	ahead.	‘Beyond	that	higher	terrace,	we
should	come	within	sight	of	the	oasis.’
‘And	then	what?’	she	asked,	brushing	dust	from	her	tattered	clothes.
‘Well,	it	would	be	remiss	of	me	not	to	take	advantage	of	our	position—I
should	be	able	to	infiltrate	the	camp	and	stir	up	some	trouble.	Besides,’	he
added,	‘one	of	the	trails	I	am	on	leads	into	the	heart	of	that	rebel	army.’
The	Talons.	The	master	of	that	revived	cult.	‘Are	you	so	certain	of	that?’
He	nodded,	then	half	shrugged.	‘Reasonably.	I	have	come	to	believe	that	the
rebellion	was	compromised	long	ago,	perhaps	from	the	very	start.	That	the
aim	of	winning	independence	for	Seven	Cities	was	not	quite	as	central	to	some
as	it	should	have	been,	and	indeed,	that	those	hidden	motives	are	about	to	be
unveiled.’
‘And	it	is	inconceivable	to	you	that	such	unveilings	should	occur	without
your	hand	in	their	midst.’
He	glanced	at	her.	‘My	dear,	you	forget,	I	am	an	agent	of	the	Malazan
Empire.	I	have	certain	responsibilities…’
Her	eyes	lit	on	an	object	lying	among	the	cobbles—a	momentary
recognition,	then	her	gaze	quickly	shifted	away.	She	studied	the	murky	sky.
‘Has	it	not	occurred	to	you	that	your	arrival	might	well	jeopardize	missions
already	under	way	in	the	rebel	camp?	The	Empress	does	not	know	you’re	here.
In	fact,	even	the	Adjunct	likely	believes	we	are	far	away	from	this	place.’


‘I	am	not	uncomfortable	with	a	supporting	role—’
Lostara	snorted.
‘Well,’	he	amended,	‘such	a	role	is	not	entirely	reprehensible.	I	can	live
with	it.’
Liar.	She	settled	down	on	one	knee	to	adjust	the	greaves	lashed	to	her
leather-clad	shins.	‘We	should	be	able	to	make	that	terrace	before	the	sun	sets.’
‘Agreed.’
She	straightened.
They	made	their	way	down	the	rock-studded	slope.	The	ground	was	littered
with	the	tiny,	shrivelled	bodies	of	countless	desert	creatures	that	had	been	swept
up	into	the	Whirlwind,	dying	within	that	interminable	storm	yet	remaining
suspended	within	it	until,	with	the	wind’s	sudden	death,	falling	to	earth	once
more.	They	had	rained	down	for	a	full	day,	husks	clattering	and	crunching	on
all	sides,	pattering	on	her	helm	and	skidding	from	her	shoulders.	Rhizan,
capemoths	and	other	minuscule	creatures,	for	the	most	part,	although
occasionally	something	larger	had	thumped	to	the	ground.	Lostara	was
thankful	that	the	downpour	had	ended.
‘The	Whirlwind	has	not	been	friendly	to	Raraku,’	Pearl	commented,
kicking	aside	the	corpse	of	an	infant	bhok’aral.
‘Assuming	the	desert	cares	one	way	or	another,	which	it	doesn’t,	I	doubt	it
will	make	much	difference	in	the	long	run.	A	land’s	lifetime	is	far	vaster	than
anything	with	which	we	are	familiar,	vaster,	by	far,	than	the	spans	of	these
hapless	creatures.	Besides,	Raraku	is	already	mostly	dead.’
‘Appearances	deceive.	There	are	deep	spirits	in	this	Holy	Desert,	lass.
Buried	in	the	rock—’
‘And	the	life	upon	that	rock,	like	the	sands,’	Lostara	asserted,	‘means
nothing	to	those	spirits.	You	are	a	fool	to	think	otherwise,	Pearl.’
‘I	am	a	fool	to	think	many	things,’	he	muttered.
‘Do	not	expect	me	to	object	to	that	observation.’
‘It	never	crossed	my	mind	that	you	might,	Lostara	Yil.	In	any	case,	I	would
none	the	less	advise	that	you	cultivate	a	healthy	respect	for	the	mysteries	of
Raraku.	It	is	far	too	easy	to	be	blindsided	in	this	seemingly	empty	and	lifeless
desert.’
‘As	we’ve	already	discovered.’
He	frowned,	then	sighed.	‘I	regret	that	you	view…things	that	way,	and	can
only	conclude	that	you	derive	a	peculiar	satisfaction	from	discord,	and	when	it
does	not	exist—or,	rather,	has	no	reason	to	exist—you	seek	to	invent	it.’
‘You	think	too	much,	Pearl.	It’s	your	most	irritating	flaw,	and,	let	us	be
honest,	given	the	severity	and	sheer	volume	of	your	flaws,	that	is	saying


something.	Since	this	seems	to	be	a	time	for	advice,	I	suggest	you	stop	thinking
entirely.’
‘And	how	might	I	achieve	that?	Follow	your	lead,	perhaps?’
‘I	think	neither	too	much	nor	too	little.	I	am	perfectly	balanced—this	is
what	you	find	so	attractive.	As	a	capemoth	is	drawn	to	fire.’
‘So	I	am	in	danger	of	being	burned	up?’
‘To	a	blackened,	shrivelled	crust.’
‘So,	you’re	pushing	me	away	for	my	own	good.	A	gesture	of	compassion,
then.’
‘Fires	neither	push	nor	pull.	They	simply	exist,	compassionless,	indifferent
to	the	suicidal	urges	of	flitting	bugs.	That	is	another	one	of	your	flaws,	Pearl.
Attributing	emotion	where	none	exists.’
‘I	could	have	sworn	there	was	emotion,	two	nights	past—’
‘Oh,	fire	burns	eagerly	when	there’s	fuel—’
‘And	in	the	morning	there’s	naught	but	cold	ashes.’
‘Now	you	are	beginning	to	understand.	Of	course,	you	will	see	that	as
encouragement,	and	so	endeavour	to	take	your	understanding	further.	But	that
would	be	a	waste	of	time,	so	I	suggest	you	abandon	the	effort.	Be	content	with
the	glimmer,	Pearl.’
‘I	see…murkily.	Very	well,	I	will	accept	your	list	of	advisements.’
‘You	will?	Gullibility	is	a	most	unattractive	flaw,	Pearl.’
She	thought	he	would	scream,	was	impressed	by	his	sudden	clamping	of
control,	releasing	his	breath	like	steam	beneath	a	cauldron’s	lid,	until	the
pressure	died	away.
They	approached	the	ascent	to	the	last	ridge,	Lostara	at	her	most	contented
thus	far	this	day,	Pearl	likely	to	be	feeling	otherwise.
As	they	reached	the	crest	the	Claw	spoke	again.	‘What	was	that	you	picked
up	on	the	last	ridge,	lass?’
Saw	that,	did	you?	‘A	shiny	rock.	Caught	my	eye.	I’ve	since	discarded	it.’
‘Oh?	So	it	no	longer	hides	in	that	pouch	on	your	belt?’
Snarling,	she	plucked	the	leather	bag	from	her	belt	and	flung	it	to	the
ground,	then	drew	out	her	chain-backed	gauntlets.	‘See	for	yourself,	then.’
He	gave	her	a	startled	glance,	then	bent	down	to	collect	the	pouch.
As	he	straightened,	Lostara	stepped	forward.
Her	gauntlets	cracked	hard	against	Pearl’s	temple.
Groaning,	he	collapsed	unconscious.
‘Idiot,’	she	muttered,	retrieving	the	pouch.
She	donned	the	gauntlets,	then,	with	a	grunt,	lifted	the	man	and	settled	him
over	one	shoulder.


Less	than	two	thousand	paces	ahead	lay	the	oasis,	the	air	above	it	thick	with
dust	and	the	smoke	of	countless	fires.	Herds	of	goats	were	visible	along	the
fringes,	in	the	shade	of	trees.	The	remnants	of	a	surrounding	wall	curved
roughly	away	in	both	directions.
Carrying	Pearl,	Lostara	made	her	way	down	the	slope.
She	was	nearing	the	base	when	she	heard	horses	off	to	her	right.
Crouching	down	and	thumping	Pearl	to	the	ground	beside	her,	she	watched	as	a
dozen	desert	warriors	rode	into	view,	coming	from	the	northwest.	Their
animals	looked	half	starved,	heads	hanging	low,	and	she	saw,	among	them,	two
prisoners.
Despite	the	dust	covering	them,	and	the	gloom	of	approaching	dusk,
Lostara	recognized	the	remnants	of	uniforms	on	the	two	prisoners.	Malazans.
Ashok	Regiment.	Thought	they’d	been	wiped	out.
The	warriors	rode	without	outriders,	and	did	not	pause	in	their	steady
canter	until	they	reached	the	oasis,	whereupon	they	vanished	beneath	the
leather-leaved	branches	of	the	trees.
Lostara	looked	around	and	decided	that	her	present	surroundings	were
ideal	for	staying	put	for	the	night.	A	shallow	basin	in	the	lee	of	the	slope.	By
lying	flat	they	would	not	be	visible	from	anywhere	but	the	ridge	itself,	and
even	that	was	unlikely	with	night	fast	falling.	She	checked	on	Pearl,	frowning
at	the	purple-ringed	bump	on	his	temple.	But	his	breathing	was	steady,	the	beat
of	his	heart	unhurried	and	even.	She	laid	out	his	cloak	and	rolled	him	onto	it,
then	bound	and	gagged	him.
As	gloom	gathered	in	the	basin,	Lostara	settled	down	to	wait.
Some	time	later	a	figure	emerged	from	the	shadows	and	stood	motionless
for	a	moment	before	striding	silently	to	halt	directly	over	Pearl.
Lostara	heard	a	muted	grunt.	‘You	came	close	to	cracking	open	his	skull.’
‘It’s	harder	than	you	think,’	she	replied.
‘Was	it	entirely	necessary?’
‘I	judged	it	so.	If	you’ve	no	faith	in	that,	then	why	recruit	me	in	the	first
place?’
Cotillion	sighed.	‘He’s	not	a	bad	man,	you	know.	Loyal	to	the	empire.	You
have	sorely	abused	his	equanimity.’
‘He	was	about	to	interfere.	Unpredictably.	I	assumed	you	wished	the	path
clear.’
‘Initially,	yes.	But	I	foresee	a	certain	usefulness	to	his	presence,	once
matters	fully…unfold.	Be	sure	to	awaken	him	some	time	tomorrow	night,	if	he
has	not	already	done	so	on	his	own.’
‘Very	well,	since	you	insist.	Although	I	am	already	deeply	fond	of	my


newfound	peace	and	solitude.’
Cotillion	seemed	to	study	her	a	moment,	then	the	god	said,	‘I	will	leave
you	then,	since	I	have	other	tasks	to	attend	to	this	night.’
Lostara	reached	into	the	pouch	and	tossed	a	small	object	towards	him.
He	caught	it	in	one	hand	and	peered	down	to	study	it.
‘I	assumed	that	was	yours,’	she	said.
‘No,	but	I	know	to	whom	it	belongs.	And	am	pleased.	May	I	keep	it?’
She	shrugged.	‘It	matters	not	to	me.’
‘Nor	should	it,	Lostara	Yil.’
She	heard	a	dry	amusement	in	those	words,	and	concluded	that	she	had
made	a	mistake	in	letting	him	keep	the	object;	that,	indeed,	it	did	matter	to	her,
though	for	the	present	she	knew	not	how.	She	shrugged	again.	Too	late	now,	I
suppose.	‘You	said	you	were	leaving?’
She	sensed	him	bridling,	then	in	a	swirl	of	shadows	he	vanished.
Lostara	lay	back	on	the	stony	ground	and	contentedly	closed	her	eyes.
	
The	night	breeze	was	surprisingly	warm.	Apsalar	stood	before	the	small
window	overlooking	the	gully.	Neither	Mogora	nor	Iskaral	Pust	frequented
these	heights	much,	except	when	necessity	forced	them	to	undertake	an
excursion	in	search	of	food,	and	so	her	only	company	was	a	half-dozen	elderly
bhok’arala,	grey-whiskered	and	grunting	and	snorting	as	they	stiffly	moved
about	on	the	chamber ’s	littered	floor.	The	scattering	of	bones	suggested	that
this	top	level	of	the	tower	was	where	the	small	creatures	came	to	die.
As	the	bhok’arala	shuffled	back	and	forth	behind	her,	she	stared	out	onto
the	wastes.	The	sand	and	outcrops	of	limestone	were	silver	in	the	starlight.	On
the	rough	tower	walls	surrounding	the	window	rhizan	were	landing	with	faint
slaps,	done	with	their	feeding,	and	now,	claws	whispering,	they	began	crawling
into	cracks	to	hide	from	the	coming	day.
Crokus	slept	somewhere	below,	whilst	resident	husband	and	wife	stalked
each	other	down	the	unlit	corridors	and	in	the	musty	chambers	of	the
monastery.	She	had	never	felt	so	alone,	nor,	she	realized,	so	comfortable	with
that	solitude.	Changes	had	come	to	her.	Hardened	layers	sheathing	her	soul	had
softened,	found	new	shape	in	response	to	unseen	pressures	from	within.
Strangest	of	all,	she	had	come,	over	time,	to	despise	her	competence,	her
deadly	skills.	They	had	been	imposed	upon	her,	forced	into	her	bones	and
muscles.	They	had	imprisoned	her	in	blinding,	gelid	armour.	And	so,	despite
the	god’s	absence,	she	still	felt	as	if	she	was	two	women,	not	one.
Leading	her	to	wonder	with	which	woman	Crokus	had	fallen	in	love.


But	no,	there	was	no	mystery	there.	He	had	assumed	the	guise	of	a	killer,
hadn’t	he?	The	young	wide-eyed	thief	from	Darujhistan	had	fashioned	of
himself	a	dire	reflection—not	of	Apsalar	the	fisher-girl,	but	of	Apsalar	the
assassin,	the	cold	murderer.	In	the	belief	that	likeness	would	forge	the	deepest
bond	of	all.	Perhaps	that	would	have	succeeded,	had	she	liked	her	profession,
had	she	not	found	it	sordid	and	reprehensible.	Had	it	not	felt	like	chains
wrapped	tight	about	her	soul.
She	was	not	comforted	by	company	within	her	prison.	His	love	was	for	the
wrong	woman,	the	wrong	Apsalar.	And	hers	was	for	Crokus,	not	Cutter.	And
so	they	were	together,	yet	apart,	intimate	yet	strangers,	and	it	seemed	there	was
nothing	they	could	do	about	it.
The	assassin	within	her	preferred	solitude,	and	the	fisher-girl	had,	from	an
entirely	different	path,	come	into	a	similar	comfort.	The	former	could	not
afford	to	love.	The	latter	knew	she	had	never	been	loved.	Like	Crokus,	she
stood	in	a	killer ’s	shadow.
There	was	no	point	in	railing	against	that.	The	fisher-girl	had	no	life-skills
of	a	breadth	and	stature	to	challenge	the	assassin’s	implacable	will.	Probably,
Crokus	had	similarly	succumbed	to	Cutter.
She	sensed	a	presence	close	by	her	side,	and	murmured,	‘Would	that	you
had	taken	all	with	you	when	you	departed.’
‘You’d	rather	I	left	you	bereft?’
‘Bereft,	Cotillion?	No.	Innocent.’
‘Innocence	is	only	a	virtue,	lass,	when	it	is	temporary.	You	must	pass	from
it	to	look	back	and	recognize	its	unsullied	purity.	To	remain	innocent	is	to	twist
beneath	invisible	and	unfathomable	forces	all	your	life,	until	one	day	you
realize	that	you	no	longer	recognize	yourself,	and	it	comes	to	you	that
innocence	was	a	curse	that	had	shackled	you,	stunted	you,	defeated	your	every
expression	of	living.’
She	smiled	in	the	darkness.	‘But,	Cotillion,	it	is	knowledge	that	makes	one
aware	of	his	or	her	own	chains.’
‘Knowledge	only	makes	the	eyes	see	what	was	there	all	along,	Apsalar.
You	are	in	possession	of	formidable	skills.	They	gift	you	with	power,	a	truth
there	is	little	point	in	denying.	You	cannot	unmake	yourself.’
‘But	I	can	cease	walking	this	singular	path.’
‘You	can,’	he	acknowledged	after	a	moment.	‘You	can	choose	others,	but
even	the	privilege	of	choice	was	won	by	virtue	of	what	you	were—’
‘What	you	were.’
‘Nor	can	that	be	changed.	I	walked	in	your	bones,	your	flesh,	Apsalar.	The
fisher-girl	who	became	a	woman—we	stood	in	each	other ’s	shadow.’


‘And	did	you	enjoy	that,	Cotillion?’
‘Not	particularly.	It	was	difficult	to	remain	mindful	of	my	purpose.	We
were	in	worthy	company	for	most	of	that	time—Whiskeyjack,	Mallet,	Fiddler,
Kalam…a	squad	that,	given	the	choice,	would	have	welcomed	you.	But	I
prevented	them	from	doing	so.	Necessary,	but	not	fair	to	you	or	them.’	He
sighed,	then	continued,	‘I	could	speak	endlessly	of	regrets,	lass,	but	I	see	dawn
stealing	the	darkness,	and	I	must	have	your	decision.’
‘My	decision?	Regarding	what?’
‘Cutter.’
She	studied	the	desert,	found	herself	blinking	back	tears.	‘I	would	take	him
from	you,	Cotillion.	I	would	prevent	you	doing	to	him	what	you	did	to	me.’
‘He	is	that	important	to	you?’
‘He	is.	Not	to	the	assassin	within	me,	but	to	the	fisher-girl…whom	he	does
not	love.’
‘Doesn’t	he?’
‘He	loves	the	assassin,	and	so	chooses	to	be	like	her.’
‘I	understand	now	the	struggle	within	you.’
‘Indeed?	Then	you	must	understand	why	I	will	not	let	you	have	him.’
‘But	you	are	wrong,	Apsalar.	Cutter	does	not	love	the	assassin	within	you.
It	attracts	him,	no	doubt,	because	power	does	that…to	us	all.	And	you	possess
power,	and	that	implicitly	includes	the	option	of	not	using	it.	All	very	enticing,
alluring.	He	is	drawn	to	emulate	what	he	sees	as	your	hard-won	freedom.	But
his	love?	Resurrect	our	shared	memories,	lass.	Of	Darujhistan,	of	our	first
brush	with	the	thief,	Crokus.	He	saw	that	we	had	committed	murder,	and	knew
that	discovery	made	his	life	forfeit	in	our	eyes.	Did	he	love	you	then?	No,	that
came	later,	in	the	hills	east	of	the	city—when	I	no	longer	possessed	you.’
‘Love	changes	with	time—’
‘Aye,	it	does,	but	not	like	a	capemoth	flitting	from	corpse	to	corpse	on	a
battlefield.’	He	cleared	his	throat.	‘Very	well,	a	poor	choice	of	analogy.	Love
changes,	aye,	in	the	manner	of	growing	to	encompass	as	much	of	its	subject	as
possible.	Virtues,	flaws,	limitations,	everything—love	will	fondle	them	all,
with	child-like	fascination.’
She	had	drawn	her	arms	tight	about	herself	with	his	words.	‘There	are	two
women	within	me—’
‘Two?	There	are	multitudes,	lass,	and	Cutter	loves	them	all.’
‘I	don’t	want	him	to	die!’
‘Is	that	your	decision?’
She	nodded,	not	trusting	herself	to	speak.	The	sky	was	lightening,
transforming	into	a	vast,	empty	space	above	a	dead,	battered	landscape.	She


saw	birds	climb	the	winds	into	its	expanse.
Cotillion	persisted,	‘Do	you	know,	then,	what	you	must	do?’
Once	again,	Apsalar	nodded.
‘I	am…pleased.’
Her	head	snapped	round,	and	she	stared	into	his	face,	seeing	it	fully,	she
realized,	for	the	first	time.	The	lines	bracketing	the	calm,	soft	eyes,	the	even
features,	the	strange	hatch	pattern	of	scars	beneath	his	right	eye.	‘Pleased,’	she
whispered,	studying	him.	‘Why?’
‘Because,’	he	answered	with	a	faint	smile,	‘I	like	the	lad,	too.’
‘How	brave	do	you	think	I	am?’
‘As	brave	as	is	necessary.’
‘Again.’
‘Aye.	Again.’
‘You	don’t	seem	much	like	a	god	at	all,	Cotillion.’
‘I’m	not	a	god	in	the	traditional	fashion,	I	am	a	patron.	Patrons	have
responsibilities.	Granted,	I	rarely	have	the	opportunity	to	exercise	them.’
‘Meaning	they	are	not	yet	burdensome.’
His	smile	broadened,	and	it	was	a	lovely	smile.	‘You	are	worth	far	more
for	your	lack	of	innocence,	Apsalar.	I	will	see	you	again	soon.’	He	stepped
back	into	the	shadows	of	the	chamber.
‘Cotillion.’
He	paused,	arms	half	raised.	‘Yes.’
‘Thank	you.	And	take	care	of	Cutter.	Please.’
‘I	will,	as	if	he	were	my	own	son,	Apsalar.	I	will.’
She	nodded,	and	then	he	was	gone.
And,	a	short	while	later,	so	was	she.
	
There	were	snakes	in	this	forest	of	stone.	Fortunately	for	Kalam	Mekhar,	they
seemed	to	lack	the	natural	belligerence	of	their	kind.	He	was	lying	in	shadows
amidst	the	dusty,	shattered	fragments	of	a	toppled	tree,	motionless	as	serpents
slithered	around	him	and	over	him.	The	stone	was	losing	its	chill	from	the
night	just	past,	a	hot	wind	drifting	in	from	the	desert	beyond.
He	had	seen	no	sign	of	patrols,	and	little	in	the	way	of	well-trod	trails.
None	the	less,	he	sensed	a	presence	in	this	petrified	forest,	hinting	of	power
that	did	not	belong	on	this	world.	Though	he	could	not	be	certain,	he	sensed
something	demonic	about	that	power.
Sufficient	cause	for	unease.	Sha’ik	might	well	have	placed	guardians,	and
he	would	have	to	get	past	those.


The	assassin	lifted	a	flare-neck	to	one	side	then	drew	his	two	long-knives.
He	examined	the	grips,	ensuring	that	the	leather	bindings	were	tight.	He
checked	the	fittings	of	the	hilts	and	pommels.	The	edge	of	the	otataral	longknife’s	blade	was	slightly	rough—otataral	was	not	an	ideal	metal	for	weapons.
It	cut	ragged	and	needed	constant	sharpening,	even	when	it	had	seen	no	use,
and	the	iron	had	a	tendency	to	grow	brittle	over	time.	Before	the	Malazan
conquest,	otataral	had	been	employed	by	the	highborn	of	Seven	Cities	in	their
armour	for	the	most	part.	Its	availability	had	been	tightly	regulated,	although
less	so	than	when	under	imperial	control.
Few	knew	the	full	extent	of	its	properties.	When	absorbed	through	the	skin
or	breathed	into	the	lungs	for	long	periods,	its	effects	were	varied	and
unpredictable.	It	often	failed	in	the	face	of	Elder	magic,	and	there	was	another
characteristic	that	Kalam	suspected	few	were	aware	of—a	discovery	made
entirely	by	accident	during	a	battle	outside	Y’Ghatan.	Only	a	handful	of
witnesses	survived	the	incident,	Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	among	them,	and	all	had
agreed	afterwards	that	their	reports	to	their	officers	would	be	deliberately
vague,	questions	answered	by	shrugs	and	shakes	of	the	head.
Otataral,	it	seemed,	did	not	go	well	with	Moranth	munitions,	particularly
burners	and	flamers.	Or,	to	put	it	another	way,	it	doesn’t	like	getting	hot.	He
knew	that	weapons	were	quenched	in	otataral	dust	at	a	late	stage	in	their
forging.	When	the	iron	had	lost	its	glow,	in	fact.	Likely,	blacksmiths	had
arrived	at	that	conclusion	the	hard	way.	But	even	that	was	not	the	whole	secret.
It’s	what	happens	to	hot	otataral…when	you	throw	magic	at	it.
He	slowly	resheathed	the	weapon,	then	focused	his	attention	on	the	other.
Here,	the	edge	was	smooth,	slightly	wavy	as	often	occurred	with	rolled,
multilayered	blades.	The	water	etching	was	barely	visible	on	this	gleaming,
black	surface,	the	silver	inlay	fine	as	thread.	Between	the	two	long-knives,	he
favoured	this	one,	for	its	weight	and	balance.
Something	struck	the	ground	beside	him,	bouncing	with	a	pinging	sound
off	a	fragment	of	tree	trunk,	then	rattling	to	a	stop	down	beside	his	right	knee.
Kalam	stared	at	the	small	object	for	a	moment.	He	then	looked	up	at	the
tree	looming	over	him.	He	smiled.	‘Ah,	an	oak,’	he	murmured.	‘Let	it	not	be
said	I	don’t	appreciate	the	humour	of	the	gesture.’	He	sat	up	and	reached	down
to	collect	the	acorn.	Then	leaned	back	once	more.	‘Just	like	old	times…glad,	as
always,	that	we	don’t	do	this	sort	of	thing	any	more…’
	
Plains	to	savanna,	then,	finally,	jungle.	They	had	arrived	in	the	wet	season,	and
the	morning	suffered	beneath	a	torrential	deluge	before,	just	past	noon,	the	sun


burned	through	to	lade	the	air	with	steam	as	the	three	T’lan	Imass	and	one	Tiste
Edur	trudged	through	the	thick,	verdant	undergrowth.
Unseen	animals	fled	their	onward	march,	thrashing	heavily	through	the
brush	on	all	sides.	Eventually,	they	stumbled	onto	a	game	trail	that	led	in	the
direction	they	sought,	and	their	pace	increased.
‘This	is	not	your	natural	territory,	is	it,	Onrack?’	Trull	Sengar	asked
between	gasps	of	the	humid,	rank	air.	‘Given	all	the	furs	your	kind	wear…’
‘True,’	the	T’lan	Imass	replied.	‘We	are	a	cold	weather	people.	But	this
region	exists	within	our	memories.	Before	the	Imass,	there	was	another	people,
older,	wilder.	They	dwelt	where	it	was	warm,	and	they	were	tall,	their	dark
skins	covered	in	fine	hair.	These	we	knew	as	the	Eres.	Enclaves	survived	into
our	time—the	time	captured	within	this	warren.’
‘And	they	lived	in	jungles	like	this	one?’
‘Its	verges,	occasionally,	but	more	often	the	surrounding	savannas.	They
worked	in	stone,	but	with	less	skill	than	us.’
‘Were	there	bonecasters	among	them?’
Monok	Ochem	answered	from	behind	them.	‘All	Eres	were	bonecasters,
Trull	Sengar.	For	they	were	the	first	to	carry	the	spark	of	awareness,	the	first
so	gifted	by	the	spirits.’
‘And	are	they	now	gone,	Monok	Ochem?’
‘They	are.’
Onrack	added	nothing	to	that.	After	all,	if	Monok	Ochem	found	reasons	to
deceive,	Onrack	could	find	none	to	contradict	the	bonecaster.	It	did	not	matter
in	any	case.	No	Eres	had	ever	been	discovered	in	the	Warren	of	Tellann.
After	a	moment,	Trull	Sengar	asked,	‘Are	we	close,	Onrack?’
‘We	are.’
‘And	will	we	then	return	to	our	own	world?’
‘We	shall.	The	First	Throne	lies	at	the	base	of	a	crevasse,	beneath	a	city—’
‘The	Tiste	Edur,’	Monok	Ochem	cut	in,	‘has	no	need	for	learning	the	name
of	that	city,	Onrack	the	Broken.	He	already	knows	too	much	of	our	people.’
‘What	I	know	of	you	T’lan	Imass	hardly	qualifies	as	secrets,’	Trull	Sengar
said.	‘You	prefer	killing	to	negotiation.	You	do	not	hesitate	to	murder	gods
when	the	opportunity	arises.	And	you	prefer	to	clean	up	your	own	messes—
laudable,	this	last	one.	Unfortunately,	this	particular	mess	is	too	big,	though	I
suspect	you	are	still	too	proud	to	admit	to	that.	As	for	your	First	Throne,	I	am
not	interested	in	discovering	its	precise	location.	Besides,	I’m	not	likely	to
survive	the	clash	with	your	renegade	kin.’
‘That	is	true,’	Monok	Ochem	agreed.
‘You	will	likely	make	sure	of	it,’	Trull	Sengar	added.


The	bonecaster	said	nothing.
There	was	no	need	to,	Onrack	reflected.	But	I	shall	defend	him.	Perhaps
Monok	and	Ibra	understand	this,	and	so	they	will	strike	at	me	first.	It	is	what	I
would	do,	were	I	in	their	place.	Which,	oddly	enough,	I	am.
The	trail	opened	suddenly	into	a	clearing	filled	with	bones.	Countless
beasts	of	the	jungle	and	savanna	had	been	dragged	here	by,	Onrack	surmised,
leopards	or	hyenas.	The	longbones	he	noted	were	all	gnawed	and	split	open	by
powerful	jaws.	The	air	reeked	of	rotted	flesh	and	flies	swarmed	in	the
thousands.
‘The	Eres	did	not	fashion	holy	sites	of	their	own,’	Monok	Ochem	said,	‘but
they	understood	that	there	were	places	where	death	gathered,	where	life	was
naught	but	memories,	drifting	lost	and	bemused.	And,	to	such	places,	they
would	often	bring	their	own	dead.	Power	gathers	in	layers—this	is	the
birthplace	of	the	sacred.’
‘And	so	you	have	transformed	it	into	a	gate,’	Trull	Sengar	said.
‘Yes,’	the	bonecaster	replied.
‘You	are	too	eager	to	credit	the	Imass,	Monok	Ochem,’	Onrack	said.	He
faced	the	Tiste	Edur.	‘Eres	holy	sites	burned	through	the	barriers	of	Tellann.
They	are	too	old	to	be	resisted.’
‘You	said	their	sanctity	was	born	of	death.	Are	they	Hood’s,	then?’
‘No.	Hood	did	not	exist	when	these	were	fashioned,	Trull	Sengar.	Nor	are
they	strictly	death-aspected.	Their	power	comes,	as	Monok	Ochem	said,	from
layers.	Stone	shaped	into	tools	and	weapons.	Air	shaped	by	throats.	Minds	that
discovered,	faint	as	flickering	fires	in	the	sky,	the	recognition	of	oblivion,	of
an	end…to	life,	to	love.	Eyes	that	witnessed	the	struggle	to	survive,	and	saw
with	wonder	its	inevitable	failure.	To	know	and	to	understand	that	we	must	all
die,	Trull	Sengar,	is	not	to	worship	death.	To	know	and	to	understand	is	itself
magic,	for	it	made	us	stand	tall.’
‘It	seems,	then,’	Trull	Sengar	muttered,	‘that	you	Imass	have	broken	the
oldest	laws	of	all,	with	your	Vow.’
‘Neither	Monok	Ochem	nor	Ibra	Gholan	will	speak	in	answer	to	that	truth,’
Onrack	said.	‘You	are	right,	however.	We	are	the	first	lawbreakers,	and	that	we
have	survived	this	long	is	fit	punishment.	And	so,	it	remains	our	hope	that	the
Summoner	will	grant	us	absolution.’
‘Faith	is	a	dangerous	thing,’	Trull	Sengar	sighed.	‘Well,	shall	we	make	use
of	this	gate?’
Monok	Ochem	gestured,	and	the	scene	around	them	blurred,	the	light
fading.
A	moment	before	the	darkness	became	absolute,	a	faint	shout	from	the


Tiste	Edur	drew	Onrack’s	attention.	The	warrior	turned,	in	time	to	see	a	figure
standing	a	dozen	paces	away.	Tall,	lithely	muscled,	with	a	fine	umber-hued	pelt
and	long,	shaggy	hair	reaching	down	past	the	shoulders.	A	woman.	Her	breasts
were	large	and	pendulous,	her	hips	wide	and	full.	Prominent,	flaring
cheekbones,	a	broad,	full-lipped	mouth.	All	this	registered	in	an	instant,	even
as	the	woman’s	dark	brown	eyes,	shadowed	beneath	a	solid	brow,	scanned
across	the	three	T’lan	Imass	before	fixing	on	Trull	Sengar.
She	took	a	step	towards	the	Tiste	Edur,	the	movement	graceful	as	a	deer ’s
—
Then	the	light	vanished	entirely.
Onrack	heard	another	surprised	shout	from	Trull	Sengar.	The	T’lan	Imass
strode	towards	the	sound,	then	halted,	thoughts	suddenly	scattering,	a	flash	of
images	cascading	through	the	warrior ’s	mind.	Time	folding	in	on	itself,
sinking	away,	then	rising	once	more—
Sparks	danced	low	to	the	ground,	tinder	caught,	flames	flickering.
They	were	in	the	crevasse,	standing	on	its	littered	floor.	Onrack	looked	for
Trull	Sengar,	found	the	Tiste	Edur	lying	prone	on	the	damp	rock	a	half-dozen
paces	away.
The	T’lan	Imass	approached.
The	mortal	was	unconscious.	There	was	blood	smearing	his	lap,	pooling
beneath	his	crotch,	and	Onrack	could	see	it	cooling,	suggesting	that	it	did	not
belong	to	Trull	Sengar,	but	to	the	Eres	woman	who	had…taken	his	seed.
His	first	seed.	But	there	had	been	nothing	to	her	appearance	suggesting
virginity.	Her	breasts	had	swollen	with	milk	in	the	past;	her	nipples	had	known
the	pressure	of	a	pup’s	hunger.	The	blood,	then,	made	no	sense.
Onrack	crouched	beside	Trull	Sengar.
And	saw	the	fresh	wound	of	scarification	beneath	his	belly	button.	Three
parallel	cuts,	drawn	across	diagonally,	and	the	stained	imprints	of	three	more
—likely	those	the	woman	had	cut	across	her	own	belly—running	in	the
opposite	direction.
‘The	Eres	witch	has	stolen	his	seed,’	Monok	Ochem	said	from	two	paces
away.
‘Why?’	Onrack	asked.
‘I	do	not	know,	Onrack	the	Broken.	The	Eres	have	the	minds	of	beasts—’
‘Not	to	the	exclusion	of	all	else,’	Onrack	replied,	‘as	you	well	know.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Clearly,	this	one	had	intent.’
Monok	Ochem	nodded.	‘So	it	would	seem.	Why	does	the	Tiste	Edur
remain	unconscious?’


‘His	mind	is	elsewhere—’
The	bonecaster	cocked	its	head.	‘Yes,	that	is	the	definition	of	unconscious
—’
‘No,	it	is	elsewhere.	When	I	stepped	close,	I	came	into	contact	with	sorcery.
That	which	the	Eres	projected.	For	lack	of	any	other	term,	it	was	a	warren,
barely	formed,	on	the	very	edge	of	oblivion.	It	was,’	Onrack	paused,	then
continued,	‘like	the	Eres	themselves.	A	glimmer	of	light	behind	the	eyes.’
Ibra	Gholan	suddenly	drew	his	weapon.
Onrack	straightened.
There	were	sounds,	now,	beyond	the	fire’s	light,	and	the	T’lan	Imass	could
see	the	glow	of	flesh	and	blood	bodies,	a	dozen,	then	a	score.	Something	else
approached,	the	foot-falls	uneven	and	shambling.
A	moment	later,	an	aptorian	demon	loomed	into	the	light,	a	shape
unfolding	like	black	silk.	And	riding	its	humped,	singular	shoulder,	a	youth.	Its
body	was	human,	yet	its	face	held	the	features	of	the	aptorian—a	massive,	lone
eye,	glistening	and	patterned	like	honeycomb.	A	large	mouth,	now	opening	to
reveal	needle	fangs	that	seemed	capable	of	retracting,	all	but	their	tips
vanishing	from	sight.	The	rider	wore	black	leather	armour,	shaped	like	scales
and	overlapping.	A	chest	harness	bore	at	least	a	dozen	weapons,	ranging	from
long-knives	to	throwing	darts.	Affixed	to	the	youth’s	belt	were	two	single-hand
crossbows,	their	grips	fashioned	from	the	base	shafts	of	antlers.
The	rider	leaned	forward	over	the	spiny,	humped	shoulder.	Then	spoke	in
a	low,	rasping	voice.	‘Is	this	all	that	Logros	can	spare?’
‘You,’	Monok	Ochem	said,	‘are	not	welcome.’
‘Too	bad,	Bonecaster,	for	we	are	here.	To	guard	the	First	Throne.’
Onrack	asked,	‘Who	are	you,	and	who	has	sent	you	here?’
‘I	am	Panek,	son	of	Apt.	It	is	not	for	me	to	answer	your	other	question,
T’lan	Imass.	I	but	guard	the	outer	ward.	The	chamber	that	is	home	to	the	First
Throne	possesses	an	inner	warden—the	one	who	commands	us.	Perhaps	she
can	answer	you.	Perhaps,	even,	she	will.’
Onrack	picked	up	Trull	Sengar.	‘We	would	speak	with	her,	then.’
Panek	smiled,	revealing	the	crowded	row	of	fangs.	‘As	I	said,	the	Throne
Room.	No	doubt,’	he	added,	smile	broadening,	‘you	know	the	way.’


Chapter	Twenty-four

In	the	oldest,	most	fragmentary	of	texts,	will	be	found	obscure
mention	of	the	Eres’al,	a	name	that	seems	to	refer	to	those	most
ancient	of	spirits	that	are	the	essence	of	the	physical	world.	There
is,	of	course,	no	empirical	means	of	determining	whether	the
attribution	of	meaning—the	power	inherent	in	making	symbols	of
the	inanimate—was	causative,	in	essence	the	creative	force	behind
the	Eres’al;	or	if	some	other	mysterious	power	was	involved,
inviting	the	accretion	of	meaning	and	significance	by	intelligent
forms	of	life	at	some	later	date.
In	either	case,	what	cannot	be	refuted	is	the	rarely
acknowledged	but	formidable	power	that	exists	like	subterranean
layers	in	notable	features	of	the	land;	nor	that	such	power	is
manifested	with	subtle	yet	profound	efficacy,	even	so	much	as	to
twist	the	stride	of	gods—indeed,	occasionally	sufficient	to	bring
them	down	with	finality…
PREFACE	TO	THE	COMPENDIUM	OF	MAPS
KELLARSTELLIS	OF	LI	HENG
The	vast	shelves	and	ridges	of	coral	had	been	worn	into	flat-topped	islands	by
millennia	of	drifting	sand	and	wind.	Their	flanks	were	ragged	and	rotted,	pitted
and	undercut,	the	low	ground	in	between	them	narrow,	twisting	and	filled	with
sharp-edged	rubble.	To	Gamet’s	eye,	the	gods	could	not	have	chosen	a	less
suitable	place	to	encamp	an	army.
Yet	there	seemed	little	choice.	Nowhere	else	offered	an	approach	onto	the
field	of	battle,	and,	as	quickly	became	evident,	the	position,	once	taken,	was	as
defensible	as	the	remotest	mountain	keep:	a	lone	saving	grace.
Tavore’s	headlong	approach	into	the	maw	of	the	enemy,	to	the
battleground	of	their	choosing,	was,	the	Fist	suspected,	the	primary	source	of
the	unease	and	vague	confusion	afflicting	the	legions.	He	watched	the	soldiers
proceeding,	in	units	of	a	hundred,	on	their	way	to	taking	and	holding	various


coral	islands	overlooking	the	basin.	Once	in	place,	they	would	then	construct
from	the	rubble	defensive	barriers	and	low	walls,	followed	by	ramps	on	the
south	sides.
Captain	Keneb	shifted	nervously	on	his	saddle	beside	the	Fist	as	they
watched	the	first	squads	of	their	own	legion	set	out	towards	a	large,	bone-white
island	on	the	western-most	edge	of	the	basin.	‘They	won’t	try	to	dislodge	us
from	these	islands,’	he	said.	‘Why	bother,	since	it’s	obvious	the	Adjunct	intends
to	march	us	right	into	their	laps?’
Gamet	was	not	deaf	to	the	criticisms	and	doubt	hidden	beneath	Keneb’s
words,	and	he	wished	he	could	say	something	to	encourage	the	man,	to	bolster
faith	in	Tavore’s	ability	to	formulate	and	progress	sound	tactics.	But	even	the
Fist	was	unsure.	There	had	been	no	sudden	revelation	of	genius	during	the
march	from	Aren.	They	had,	in	truth,	walked	straight	as	a	lance	northward.
Suggesting	what,	exactly?	A	singlemindedness	worthy	of	imitation,	or	a	failure
of	imagination?	Are	the	two	so	different,	or	merely	alternate	approaches	to	the
same	thing?	And	now	they	were	being	arrayed,	as	stolid	as	ever,	to	advance—
probably	at	dawn	the	next	day—towards	the	enemy	and	their	entrenched
fortifications.	An	enemy	clever	enough	to	create	singular	and	difficult
approaches	to	their	positions.
‘Those	ramps	will	see	the	death	of	us	all,’	Keneb	muttered.	‘Korbolo
Dom’s	prepared	for	this,	as	any	competent,	Malazan-trained	commander
would.	He	wants	us	crowded	and	struggling	uphill,	beneath	an	endless	hail	of
arrows,	quarrels	and	ballista,	not	to	mention	sorcery.	Look	at	how	smooth	he’s
made	those	ramp	surfaces,	Fist.	The	cobbles,	when	slick	with	streaming	blood,
will	be	like	grease	underfoot.	We’ll	find	no	purchase—’
‘I	am	not	blind,’	Gamet	growled.	‘Nor,	we	must	assume,	is	the	Adjunct.’
Keneb	shot	the	older	man	a	look.	‘It	would	help	to	have	some	reassurance
of	that,	Fist.’
‘There	shall	be	a	meeting	of	officers	tonight,’	Gamet	replied.	‘And	again	a
bell	before	dawn.’
‘She’s	already	decided	the	disposition	of	our	legion,’	Keneb	grated,
leaning	on	his	saddle	and	spitting	in	the	local	fashion.
‘Aye,	she	has,	Captain.’	They	were	to	guard	avenues	of	retreat,	not	for	their
own	forces,	but	those	the	enemy	might	employ.	A	premature	assumption	of
victory	that	whispered	of	madness.	They	were	outnumbered.	Every	advantage
was	with	Sha’ik,	yet	almost	one-third	of	the	Adjunct’s	army	would	not
participate	in	the	battle.	‘And	the	Adjunct	expects	us	to	comply	with
professional	competence,’	Gamet	added.
‘As	she	commands,’	Keneb	growled.


Dust	was	rising	as	the	sappers	and	engineers	worked	on	the	fortifications
and	ramps.	The	day	was	blisteringly	hot,	the	wind	barely	a	desultory	breath.
The	Khundryl,	Seti	and	Wickan	horse	warriors	remained	south	of	the	coral
islands,	awaiting	the	construction	of	a	road	that	would	give	them	egress	to	the
basin.	Even	then,	there	would	be	scant	room	to	manoeuvre.	Gamet	suspected
that	Tavore	would	hold	most	of	them	back—the	basin	was	not	large	enough
for	massed	cavalry	charges,	for	either	side.	Sha’ik’s	own	desert	warriors
would	most	likely	be	held	in	reserve,	a	fresh	force	to	pursue	the	Malazans
should	they	be	broken.	And,	in	turn,	the	Khundryl	can	cover	such	a	retreat…or
rout.	A	rather	ignoble	conclusion,	the	remnants	of	the	Malazan	army	riding
double	on	Khundryl	horses—the	Fist	grimaced	at	the	image	and	angrily	swept
it	from	his	mind.	‘The	Adjunct	knows	what	she	is	doing,’	he	asserted.
Keneb	said	nothing.
A	messenger	approached	on	foot.	‘Fist	Gamet,’	the	man	called	out,	‘the
Adjunct	requests	your	presence.’
‘I	will	keep	an	eye	on	the	legion,’	Keneb	said.
Gamet	nodded	and	wheeled	his	horse	around.	The	motion	made	his	head
spin	for	a	moment—he	was	still	waking	with	headaches—then	he	steadied
himself	with	a	deep	breath	and	nodded	towards	the	messenger.
They	made	slow	passage	through	the	chaotic	array	of	troops	moving	to
and	fro	beneath	the	barked	commands	of	the	officers,	towards	a	low	hill
closest	to	the	basin.	Gamet	could	see	the	Adjunct	astride	her	horse	on	that	hill,
along	with,	on	foot,	Nil	and	Nether.
‘I	see	them,’	Gamet	said	to	the	messenger.
‘Aye,	sir,	I’ll	leave	you	to	it,	then.’
Riding	clear	of	the	press,	Gamet	brought	his	horse	into	a	canter	and
moments	later	reined	in	alongside	the	Adjunct.
The	position	afforded	them	a	clear	view	of	the	enemy	emplacements,	and,
just	as	they	observed,	so	too	in	turn	were	they	being	watched	by	a	small	knot	of
figures	atop	the	central	ramp.
‘How	sharp	are	your	eyes,	Fist?’	the	Adjunct	asked.
‘Not	sharp	enough,’	he	replied.
‘Korbolo	Dom.	Kamist	Reloe.	Six	officers.	Kamist	has	quested	in	our
direction,	seeking	signs	of	mages.	High	Mages,	specifically.	Of	course,	given
that	Nil	and	Nether	are	with	me,	they	cannot	be	found	by	Kamist	Reloe’s
sorceries.	Tell	me,	Fist	Gamet,	how	confident	do	you	imagine	Korbolo	Dom
feels	right	now?’
He	studied	her	a	moment.	She	was	in	her	armour,	the	visor	of	her	helm
lifted,	her	eyes	half-lidded	against	the	bright	glare	bouncing	from	the	basin’s


hard-packed,	crackled	clay.	‘I	would	think,	Adjunct,’	he	replied	slowly,	‘that	his
measure	of	confidence	is	wilting.’
She	glanced	over.	‘Wilting.	Why?’
‘Because	it	all	looks	too	easy.	Too	overwhelmingly	in	his	favour,	Adjunct.’
She	fell	silent,	returning	her	gaze	to	the	distant	enemy.
Is	this	what	she	wanted	me	for?	To	ask	that	one	question?
Gamet	switched	his	attention	to	the	two	Wickans.	Nil	had	grown	during	the
march,	leading	Gamet	to	suspect	that	he	would	be	a	tall	man	in	a	few	years’
time.	He	wore	only	a	loincloth	and	looked	feral	with	his	wild,	unbraided	hair
and	green	and	black	body-paint.
Nether,	he	realized	with	some	surprise,	had	filled	out	beneath	her	deer-skin
hides,	a	chubbiness	that	was	common	to	girls	before	they	came	of	age.	The
severity	of	her	expression	was	very	nearly	fixed	now,	transforming	what
should	have	been	a	pretty	face	into	a	mien	forbidding	and	burdened.	Her	black
hair	was	shorn	close,	betokening	a	vow	of	grief.
‘Kamist’s	questing	is	done,’	the	Adjunct	suddenly	pronounced.	‘He	will
need	to	rest,	now.’	She	turned	in	her	saddle	and	by	some	prearranged	signal
two	Wickan	warriors	jogged	up	the	slope.	Tavore	unhitched	her	sword-belt
and	passed	it	to	them.	They	quickly	retreated	with	the	otataral	weapon.
Reluctantly,	Nil	and	Nether	settled	cross-legged	onto	the	stony	ground.
‘Fist	Gamet,’	the	Adjunct	said,	‘if	you	would,	draw	your	dagger	and	spill	a
few	drops	from	your	right	palm.’
Without	a	word	he	tugged	off	his	gauntlet,	slid	his	dagger	from	its
scabbard	and	scored	the	edge	across	the	fleshy	part	of	his	hand.	Blood	welled
from	the	cut.	Gamet	held	it	out,	watched	as	the	blood	spilled	down	to	the
ground.
Dizziness	struck	him	and	he	reeled	in	the	saddle	a	moment	before
regaining	his	balance.
Nether	voiced	a	hiss	of	surprise.
Gamet	glanced	down	at	her.	Her	eyes	were	closed,	both	hands	pressed
against	the	sandy	ground.	Nil	had	assumed	the	same	posture	and	on	his	face
flitted	a	wild	sequence	of	emotions,	fixing	at	last	on	fear.
The	Fist	was	still	feeling	light-headed,	a	faint	roaring	sound	filling	his
skull.
‘There	are	spirits	here,’	Nil	growled.	‘Rising	with	anger—’
‘A	song,’	Nether	cut	in.	‘Of	war,	and	warriors—’
‘New	and	old,’	her	brother	said.	‘So	very	new…and	so	very	old.	Battle	and
death,	again	and	again—’
‘The	land	remembers	every	struggle	played	out	on	its	surface,	on	all	its


surfaces,	from	the	very	beginning.’	Nether	grimaced,	then	shivered,	her	eyes
squeezed	shut.	‘The	goddess	is	as	nothing	to	this	power—yet	she
would…steal.’
The	Adjunct’s	voice	was	sharp.	‘Steal?’
‘The	warren,’	Nil	replied.	‘She	would	claim	this	fragment,	and	settle	it
upon	this	land	like	a	parasite.	Roots	of	shadow,	slipping	down	to	draw
sustenance,	to	feed	on	the	land’s	memories.’
‘And	the	spirits	will	not	have	it,’	Nether	whispered.
‘They	are	resisting?’	the	Adjunct	asked.
Both	Wickans	nodded,	then	Nil	bared	his	teeth	and	said,	‘Ghosts	cast	no
shadows.	You	were	right,	Adjunct.	Gods,	you	were	right!’
Right?	Gamet	wondered.	Right	about	what?
‘And	will	they	suffice?’	Tavore	demanded.
Nil	shook	his	head.	‘I	don’t	know.	Only	if	the	Talon	Master	does	what	you
think	he	will	do,	Adjunct.’
‘Assuming,’	Nether	added,	‘Sha’ik	is	unaware	of	the	viper	in	her	midst.’
‘Had	she	known,’	Tavore	said,	‘she	would	have	separated	his	head	from
his	shoulders	long	ago.’
‘Perhaps,’	Nether	replied,	and	Gamet	heard	the	scepticism	in	her	tone.
‘Unless	she	and	her	goddess	decided	to	wait	until	all	their	enemies	were
gathered.’
The	Adjunct	returned	her	gaze	to	the	distant	officers.	‘Let	us	see,	shall	we?’
Both	Wickans	rose,	then	shared	a	glance	unwitnessed	by	Tavore.
Gamet	rubbed	his	uncut	hand	along	his	brow	beneath	the	helm’s	rim,	and
his	fingers	came	away	dripping	with	sweat.	Something	had	used	him,	he
realized	shakily.	Through	the	medium	of	his	blood.	He	could	hear	distant
music,	a	song	of	voices	and	unrecognizable	instruments.	A	pressure	was
building	in	his	skull.	‘If	you	are	done	with	me,	Adjunct,’	he	said	roughly.
She	nodded	without	looking	over.	‘Return	to	your	legion,	Fist.	Convey	to
your	officers,	please,	the	following.	Units	may	appear	during	the	battle	on	the
morrow	which	you	will	not	recognize.	They	may	seek	orders,	and	you	are	to
give	them	as	if	they	were	under	your	command.’
‘Understood,	Adjunct.’
‘Have	a	cutter	attend	to	your	hand,	Fist	Gamet,	and	thank	you.	Also,	ask	the
guards	to	return	to	me	my	sword.’
‘Aye.’	He	wheeled	his	horse	and	walked	it	down	the	slope.
The	headache	was	not	fading,	and	the	song	itself	seemed	to	have	poisoned
his	veins,	a	music	of	flesh	and	bone	that	hinted	of	madness.	Leave	me	in	peace,
damn	you.	I	am	naught	but	a	soldier.	A	soldier…


	
Strings	sat	on	the	boulder,	his	head	in	his	hands.	He	had	flung	off	the	helm	but
had	no	memory	of	having	done	so,	and	it	lay	at	his	feet,	blurry	and	wavering
behind	the	waves	of	pain	that	rose	and	fell	like	a	storm-tossed	sea.	Voices	were
speaking	around	him,	seeking	to	reach	him,	but	he	could	make	no	sense	of
what	was	being	said.	The	song	had	burgeoned	sudden	and	fierce	in	his	skull,
flowing	through	his	limbs	like	fire.
A	hand	gripped	his	shoulder,	and	he	felt	a	sorcerous	questing	seep	into	his
veins,	tentatively	at	first,	then	flinching	away	entirely,	only	to	return	with	more
force—and	with	it,	a	spreading	silence.	Blissful	peace,	cool	and	calm.
Finally,	the	sergeant	was	able	to	look	up.
He	found	his	squad	gathered	around	him.	The	hand	fixed	onto	his	shoulder
was	Bottle’s,	and	the	lad’s	face	was	pale,	beaded	with	sweat.	Their	eyes	locked,
then	Bottle	nodded	and	slowly	withdrew	his	hand.
‘Can	you	hear	me,	Sergeant?’
‘Faint,	as	if	you	were	thirty	paces	away.’
‘Is	the	pain	gone?’
‘Aye—what	did	you	do?’
Bottle	glanced	away.
Strings	frowned,	then	said,	‘Everyone	else,	back	to	work.	Stay	here,
Bottle.’
Cuttle	cuffed	Tarr	and	the	corporal	straightened	and	mumbled,	‘Let’s	go,
soldiers.	There’s	pits	to	dig.’
The	sergeant	and	Bottle	watched	the	others	head	off,	retrieving	their	picks
and	shovels	as	they	went.	The	squad	was	positioned	on	the	southwesternmost
island,	overlooking	dunes	that	reached	out	to	the	horizon.	A	single,	sufficiently
wide	corridor	lay	directly	to	the	north,	through	which	the	enemy—if	broken
and	fleeing—would	come	as	they	left	the	basin.	Just	beyond	it	lay	a	modest,
flat-topped	tel,	on	which	a	company	of	mounted	desert	warriors	were
ensconced,	the	crest	dotted	with	scouts	keeping	a	careful	eye	on	the	Malazans.
‘All	right,	Bottle,’	Strings	said,	‘out	with	it.’
‘Spirits,	Sergeant.	They’re…awakening.’
‘And	what	in	Hood’s	name	has	that	got	to	do	with	me?’
‘Mortal	blood,	I	think.	It	has	its	own	song.	They	remember	it.	They	came	to
you,	Sergeant,	eager	to	add	their	voices	to	it.	To…uh…to	you.’
‘Why	me?’
‘I	don’t	know.’
Strings	studied	the	young	mage	for	a	moment,	mulling	on	the	taste	of	that


lie,	then	grimaced	and	said,	‘You	think	it’s	because	I’m	fated	to	die	here—at
this	battle.’
Bottle	looked	away	once	more.	‘I’m	not	sure,	Sergeant.	It’s	way	beyond
me…this	land.	And	its	spirits.	And	what	it	all	has	to	do	with	you—’
‘I’m	a	Bridgeburner,	lad.	The	Bridgeburners	were	born	here.	In	Raraku’s
crucible.’
Bottle’s	eyes	thinned	as	he	studied	the	desert	to	the	west.	‘But…they	were
wiped	out.’
‘Aye,	they	were.’
Neither	spoke	for	a	time.	Koryk	had	broken	his	shovel	on	a	rock	and	was
stringing	together	an	admirable	list	of	Seti	curses.	The	others	had	stopped	to
listen.	On	the	northern	edge	of	the	island	Gesler ’s	squad	was	busy	building	a
wall	of	rubble,	which	promptly	toppled,	the	boulders	tumbling	down	the	far
edge.	Distant	hoots	and	howls	sounded	from	the	tel	across	the	way.
‘It	won’t	be	your	usual	battle,	will	it?’	Bottle	asked.
Strings	shrugged.	‘There’s	no	such	thing,	lad.	There’s	nothing	usual	about
killing	and	dying,	about	pain	and	terror.’
‘That’s	not	what	I	meant—’
‘I	know	it	ain’t,	Bottle.	But	wars	these	days	are	fraught	with	sorcery	and
munitions,	so	you	come	to	expect	surprises.’
Gesler ’s	two	dogs	trotted	past,	the	huge	cattle	dog	trailing	the	Hengese
Roach	as	if	the	hairy	lapdog	carried	its	own	leash.
‘This	place	is…complicated,’	Bottle	sighed.	He	reached	down	and	picked
up	a	large,	disc-shaped	rock.	‘Eres’al,’	he	said.	‘A	hand-axe—the	basin	down
there’s	littered	with	them.	Smoothed	by	the	lake	that	once	filled	it.	Took	days	to
make	one	of	these,	then	they	didn’t	even	use	them—they	just	flung	them	into
the	lake.	Makes	no	sense,	does	it?	Why	make	a	tool	then	not	use	it?’
Strings	stared	at	the	mage.	‘What	are	you	talking	about,	Bottle?	Who	are
the	Eres’al?’
‘Were,	Sergeant.	They’re	long	gone.’
‘The	spirits?’
‘No,	those	are	from	all	times,	from	every	age	this	land	has	known.	My
grandmother	spoke	of	the	Eres.	The	Dwellers	who	lived	in	the	time	before	the
Imass,	the	first	makers	of	tools,	the	first	shapers	of	their	world.’	He	shook	his
head,	fought	down	a	shiver.	‘I	never	expected	to	meet	one—it	was	there,	she
was	there,	in	that	song	within	you.’
‘And	she	told	you	about	these	tools?’
‘Not	directly.	More	like	I	shared	it—well,	her	mind.	She	was	the	one	who
gifted	you	the	silence.	It	wasn’t	me—I	don’t	have	that	power—but	I	asked,	and


she	showed	mercy.	At	least’—he	glanced	at	Strings—‘I	gather	it	was	a	mercy.’
‘Aye,	lad,	it	was.	Can	you	still…speak	with	that	Eres?’
‘No.	All	I	wanted	to	do	was	get	out	of	there—out	of	that	blood—’
‘My	blood.’
‘Well,	most	of	it’s	your	blood,	Sergeant.’
‘And	the	rest?’
‘Belongs	to	that	song.	The,	uh,	Bridgeburners’	song.’
Strings	closed	his	eyes,	settled	his	head	against	the	boulder	behind	him.
Kimloc,	that	damned	Tanno	Spiritwalker	in	Ehrlitan.	I	said	no,	but	he	did	it
anyway.	He	stole	my	story—not	just	mine,	but	the	Bridgeburners’—and	he	made
of	it	a	song.	The	bastard’s	gone	and	given	us	back	to	Raraku…
‘Go	help	the	others,	Bottle.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
‘And…thanks.’
‘I’ll	pass	that	along,	when	next	I	meet	the	Eres	witch.’
Strings	stared	after	the	mage.	So	there’ll	be	a	next	time,	will	there?	Just
how	much	didn’t	you	tell	me,	lad?	He	wondered	if	the	morrow	would	indeed	be
witness	to	his	last	battle.	Hardly	a	welcome	thought,	but	maybe	it	was
necessary.	Maybe	he	was	being	called	to	join	the	fallen	Bridgeburners.	Not	so
bad,	then.	Couldn’t	ask	for	more	miserable	company.	Damn,	but	I	miss	them.	I
miss	them	all.	Even	Hedge.
The	sergeant	opened	his	eyes	and	climbed	to	his	feet,	collecting	then
donning	his	helm.	He	turned	to	stare	out	over	the	basin	to	the	northeast,	to	the
enemy	emplacements	and	the	dust	and	smoke	of	the	city	hidden	within	the
oasis.	You	too,	Kalam	Mekhar.	I	wonder	if	you	know	why	you’re	here…
	
The	shaman	was	in	a	frenzy,	twitching	and	hissing	as	he	scuttled	like	a	crab	in
dusty	circles	around	the	flat	slab	of	bone	that	steadily	blackened	on	the	hearth.
Corabb,	his	mouth	filled	with	a	half-dozen	of	the	scarab	shells	strung	round	his
neck	to	ward	off	evil,	winced	as	his	chattering	teeth	crunched	down	on	one
carapace,	filling	his	mouth	with	a	bitter	taste.	He	plucked	the	necklace	from	his
mouth	and	began	spitting	out	pieces	of	shell.
Leoman	strode	up	to	the	shaman	and	grabbed	the	scrawny	man	by	his
telaba,	lifted	him	clear	off	the	ground,	then	shook	him.	A	flurry	of	cloth	and
hair	and	flying	spittle,	then	Leoman	set	the	shaman	down	once	more	and
growled,	‘What	did	you	see?’
‘Armies!’	the	old	man	shrieked,	tugging	at	his	nose	as	if	it	had	just	arrived
on	his	face.


Leoman	scowled.	‘Aye,	we	can	see	those	too,	you	damned	fakir—’
‘No!	More	armies!’	He	scrabbled	past	and	ran	to	the	southern	crest	of	the
tel,	where	he	began	hopping	about	and	pointing	at	the	Malazans	entrenching	on
the	island	opposite	the	old	drainage	channel.
Leoman	made	no	move	to	follow.	He	walked	over	to	where	Corabb	and
three	other	warriors	crouched	behind	a	low	wall.	‘Corabb,	send	another	rider
to	Sha’ik—no,	on	second	thought,	you	go	yourself.	Even	if	she	will	not	bother
acknowledging	our	arrival,	I	want	to	know	how	Mathok’s	tribes	will	be
arrayed	come	the	dawn.	Find	out,	once	you	have	spoken	with	Sha’ik—and
Corabb,	be	certain	you	speak	with	her	in	person.	Then	return	here.’
‘I	shall	do	as	you	command,’	Corabb	announced,	straightening.
Twenty	paces	away	the	shaman	wheeled	round	and	screamed,	‘They	are
here!	The	dogs,	Leoman!	The	dogs!	The	Wickan	dogs!’
Leoman	scowled.	‘The	fool’s	gone	mad…’
Corabb	jogged	over	to	his	horse.	He	would	waste	no	time	saddling	the
beast,	especially	if	it	meant	hearing	more	of	the	shaman’s	insane	observations.
He	vaulted	onto	the	animal,	tightened	the	straps	holding	the	lance	crossways	on
his	back,	then	collected	the	reins	and	spurred	the	animal	into	motion.
The	route	to	the	oasis	was	twisting	and	tortured,	winding	between	deep
sand	and	jagged	outcrops,	forcing	him	to	slow	his	mount’s	pace	and	let	it	pick
its	own	way	along	the	trail.
The	day	was	drawing	to	a	close,	shadows	deepening	where	the	path	wound
its	way	into	high-walled	gullies	closer	to	the	southwestern	edge	of	the	oasis.	As
his	horse	scrabbled	over	some	rubble	and	walked	round	a	sharp	bend,	the
sudden	stench	of	putrefaction	reached	both	animal	and	man	simultaneously.
The	path	was	blocked.	A	dead	horse	and,	just	beyond	it,	a	corpse.
Heart	thudding,	Corabb	slipped	down	from	his	mount	and	moved
cautiously	forward.
Leoman’s	messenger,	the	one	he	had	sent	as	soon	as	the	troop	had	arrived.
A	crossbow	quarrel	had	taken	him	on	the	temple,	punching	through	bone	then
exploding	out	messily	the	other	side.
Corabb	scanned	the	jagged	walls	to	either	side.	If	there’d	been	assassins
stationed	there	he	would	already	be	dead,	he	reasoned.	Probably,	then,	they
weren’t	expecting	any	more	messengers.
He	returned	to	his	horse.	It	was	a	struggle	coaxing	the	creature	over	the
bodies,	but	eventually	he	led	the	beast	clear	of	them	and	leapt	onto	its	back
once	more.	Eyes	roving	restlessly,	he	continued	on.
Sixty	paces	later	and	the	trail	ahead	opened	out	onto	the	sandy	slope,
beyond	which	could	be	seen	the	dusty	mantles	of	guldindha	trees.


Breathing	a	relieved	sigh,	Corabb	urged	his	horse	forward.
Two	hammer	blows	against	his	back	flung	him	forward.	Without	stirrups
or	saddlehorn	to	grab	on	to,	Corabb	threw	his	arms	out	around	the	horse’s
neck—even	as	the	animal	squealed	in	pain	and	bolted.	The	motion	almost
jolted	loose	his	panicked	grip,	and	the	horse’s	right	knee	cracked	hard,	again
and	again,	into	his	helm,	until	it	fell	away	and	the	knobby	joint	repeatedly
pounded	against	his	head.
Corabb	held	on,	even	as	he	continued	slipping	down,	then	around,	until	his
body	was	being	pummelled	by	both	front	legs.	The	encumbrance	proved
sufficient	to	slow	the	animal	as	it	reached	the	slope,	and	Corabb,	one	leg
dangling,	his	heel	bouncing	over	the	hard	ground,	managed	to	pull	himself	up
under	his	horse’s	head.
Another	quarrel	cracked	into	the	ground	and	skittered	away	off	to	the	left.
The	horse	halted	halfway	up	the	slope.
Corabb	brought	his	other	leg	down,	then	pivoted	around	to	the	opposite
side	and	vaulted	onto	the	animal	once	more.	He’d	lost	the	reins,	but	closed	both
fingers	in	the	horse’s	mane	as	he	drove	his	heels	into	the	beast’s	flanks.
Yet	another	quarrel	caromed	from	the	rocks,	then	hooves	were	thudding
on	sand,	and	sudden	sunlight	bathed	them.
Directly	ahead	lay	the	oasis,	and	the	cover	of	trees.
Corabb	leaned	onto	the	mount’s	neck	and	urged	it	ever	faster.
They	plunged	onto	a	trail	between	the	guldindhas.	Glancing	back,	he	saw	a
deep	rip	running	down	his	horse’s	left	flank,	leaking	blood.	And	then	he	caught
sight	of	his	lance,	dangling	loose	now	from	his	back.	There	were	two	quarrels
embedded	in	the	shaft.	Each	had	struck	at	a	different	angle,	and	the	impact	must
have	been	nearly	simultaneous,	since	the	splits	had	bound	against	each	other,
halting	the	momentum	of	both	quarrels.
Corabb	lifted	the	ruined	weapon	clear	and	flung	it	away.
He	rode	hard	down	the	trail.
	
‘A	tiger ’s	barbs,’	she	murmured,	her	eyes	veiled	behind	rust-leaf	smoke,
‘painted	onto	a	toad.	Somehow,	it	makes	you	look	even	more	dangerous.’
‘Aye,	lass,	I’m	pure	poison,’	Heboric	muttered	as	he	studied	her	in	the
gloom.	There	was	life	in	her	gaze	once	more,	a	sharpness	that	went	beyond	the
occasional	cutting	remark,	hinting	at	a	mind	finally	cleared	of	durhang’s
dulling	fog.	She	still	coughed	as	if	her	lungs	were	filled	with	fluid,	although
the	sage	mixed	in	with	the	rust-leaf	had	eased	that	somewhat.
She	was	returning	his	regard	with	an	inquisitive—if	slightly	hard—


expression,	drawing	steadily	on	the	hookah’s	mouthpiece,	smoke	tumbling
down	from	her	nostrils.
‘If	I	could	see	you,’	Heboric	muttered,	‘I’d	conclude	you’ve	improved
some.’
‘I	have,	Destriant	of	Treach,	though	I	would	have	thought	those	feline	eyes
of	yours	could	pierce	every	veil.’
He	grunted.	‘It’s	more	that	you	no	longer	slur	your	words,	Scillara.’
‘What	do	we	do	now?’	she	asked	after	a	moment.
‘Dusk	will	soon	arrive.	I	would	go	out	to	find	L’oric,	and	I	would	that	you
accompany	me.’
‘And	then?’
‘Then,	I	would	lead	you	to	Felisin	Younger.’
‘Sha’ik’s	adopted	daughter.’
‘Aye.’
Scillara	glanced	away,	meditative	as	she	drew	deep	on	the	rust-leaf.
‘How	old	are	you,	lass?’
She	shrugged,	‘As	old	as	I	have	to	be.	If	I	am	to	take	Felisin	Younger ’s
orders,	so	be	it.	Resentment	is	pointless.’
An	awkward	conversation,	progressing	in	leaps	that	left	Heboric
scrambling.	Sha’ik	was	much	the	same.	Perhaps,	he	reflected	with	a	grimace,
this	talent	for	intuitive	thinking	was	a	woman’s	alone—he	admittedly	had	little
experience	upon	which	he	could	draw,	despite	his	advanced	years.	Fener ’s
temple	was	predominantly	male,	when	it	came	to	the	holy	order	itself,	and
Heboric’s	life	as	a	thief	had,	of	necessity,	included	only	a	handful	of	close
associations.	He	was,	once	more,	out	of	his	depth.	‘Felisin	Younger	has,	I
believe,	little	interest	in	commanding	anyone.	This	is	not	an	exchange	of	one
cult	for	another,	Scillara—not	in	the	way	you	seem	to	think	it	is,	at	any	rate.
No-one	will	seek	to	manipulate	you	here.’
‘As	you	have	explained,	Destriant.’	She	sighed	heavily	and	sat	straighter,
setting	down	the	hookah’s	mouthpiece.	‘Very	well,	lead	me	into	the	darkness.’
His	eyes	narrowed	on	her.	‘I	shall…as	soon	as	it	arrives…’
	
The	shadows	were	drawing	long,	sufficient	to	swallow	the	entire	basin	below
their	position.	Sha’ik	stood	at	the	crest	of	the	northernmost	ramp,	studying	the
distant	masses	of	Malazan	soldiery	on	the	far	rises	as	they	continued	digging
in.	Ever	methodical,	was	her	sister.
She	glanced	to	her	left	and	scanned	Korbolo	Dom’s	positions.	All	was	in
readiness	for	the	morrow’s	battle,	and	she	could	see	the	Napan	commander,


surrounded	by	aides	and	guards,	standing	at	the	edge	of	the	centre	ramp,	doing
as	she	herself	was	doing:	watching	Tavore’s	army.
We	are	all	in	place.	Suddenly,	the	whole	thing	seemed	so	pointless.	This
game	of	murderous	tyrants,	pushing	their	armies	forward	into	an	inevitable
clash.	Coldly	disregarding	of	the	lives	that	would	be	lost	in	the	appeasement	of
their	brutal	desires.	What	value	this	mindless	hunger	to	rule?	What	do	you	want
with	us,	Empress	Laseen?	Seven	Cities	will	never	rest	easy	beneath	your	yoke.
You	shall	have	to	enslave,	and	what	is	gained	by	that?	And	what	of	her	own
goddess?	Was	she	any	different	from	Laseen?	Every	claw	was	outstretched,
eager	to	grasp,	to	rend,	to	soak	the	sand	red	with	gore.
But	Raraku	does	not	belong	to	you,	dear	Dryjhna,	no	matter	how	ferocious
your	claims.	I	see	that	now.	This	desert	is	holy	unto	itself.	And	now	it	rails—
feel	it,	goddess!	It	rails!	Against	one	and	all.
Standing	beside	her,	Mathok	had	been	studying	the	Malazan	positions	in
silence.	But	now	he	spoke.	‘The	Adjunct	has	made	an	appearance,	Chosen
One.’
Sha’ik	dragged	her	gaze	from	Korbolo	Dom	and	looked	to	where	the
desert	warchief	pointed.
Astride	a	horse	from	the	Paran	stables.	Of	course.	Two	Wickans	on	foot
nearby.	Her	sister	was	in	full	armour,	her	helm	glinting	crimson	in	the	dying
light.
Sha’ik’s	eyes	snapped	back	to	Korbolo’s	position.	‘Kamist	Reloe	has
arrived…he’s	opened	his	warren	and	now	quests	towards	the	enemy.	But
Tavore’s	otataral	sword	defies	him…so	he	reaches	around,	into	the	army	itself.
Seeking	High	Mages…unsuspected	allies…’	After	a	moment	she	sighed.	‘And
finds	none	but	a	few	shamans	and	squad	mages.’
Mathok	rumbled,	‘Those	two	Wickans	with	the	Adjunct.	They	are	the	ones
known	as	Nil	and	Nether.’
‘Yes.	Said	to	be	broken	of	spirit—they	have	none	of	the	power	that	their
clans	once	gave	them,	for	those	clans	have	been	annihilated.’
‘Even	so,	Chosen	One,’	Mathok	muttered,	‘that	she	holds	them	within	the
fog	of	otataral	suggests	they	are	not	as	weak	as	we	would	believe.’
‘Or	that	Tavore	does	not	want	their	weakness	revealed.’
‘Why	bother	if	such	failure	is	already	known	to	us?’
‘To	deepen	our	doubt,	Mathok,’	she	replied.
He	curtly	gestured,	adding	a	frustrated	growl.	‘This	mire	has	no	surface,
Chosen	One—’
‘Wait!’	Sha’ik	stared	once	again	at	Tavore.	‘She	has	sent	her	weapon	away
—Kamist	Reloe	has	withdrawn	his	questing—and	now…ah!’	The	last	word


was	a	startled	cry,	as	she	felt	the	muted	unveiling	of	power	from	both	Nil	and
Nether—a	power	far	greater	than	it	had	any	right	to	be.
Sha’ik	then	gasped,	as	the	goddess	within	her	flinched	back—as	if	stung—
and	loosed	a	shriek	that	filled	her	skull.
For	Raraku	was	answering	the	summons,	a	multitude	of	voices,	rising	in
song,	rising	with	raw,	implacable	desire—the	sound,	Sha’ik	realized,	of
countless	souls	straining	against	the	chains	that	bound	them.
Chains	of	shadow.	Chains	like	roots.	From	this	torn,	alien	fragment	of
warren.	This	piece	of	shadow,	that	has	risen	to	bind	their	souls	and	so	feeds
upon	the	life-force.	‘Mathok,	where	is	Leoman?’	We	need	Leoman.
‘I	do	not	know,	Chosen	One.’
She	turned	once	more	and	stared	at	Korbolo	Dom.	He	stood	foremost	on
the	ramp,	his	stance	squared,	thumbs	hitched	into	his	sword-belt,	studying	the
enemy	with	an	air	of	supreme	confidence	that	made	Sha’ik	want	to	scream.
Nothing—nothing	was	as	it	seemed.
To	the	west,	the	sun	had	turned	the	horizon	into	a	crimson	conflagration.
The	day	was	drowning	in	a	sea	of	flame,	and	she	watched	shadows	flowing
across	the	land,	her	heart	growing	cold.
	
The	alley	outside	Heboric’s	tent	was	empty	in	both	directions.	The	sun’s
sudden	descent	seemed	to	bring	a	strange	silence	along	with	the	gloom.	Dust
hung	motionless	in	the	air.
The	Destriant	of	Treach	paused	in	the	aisle.
Behind	him	Scillara	said,	‘Where	is	everyone?’
He	had	been	wondering	the	same	thing.	Then,	slowly,	the	hairs	rose	on	the
back	of	his	neck.	‘Can	you	hear	that,	lass?’
‘Only	the	wind…’
But	there	was	no	wind.
‘No,	not	wind,’	Scillara	murmured.	‘A	song.	From	far	away—the	Malazan
army,	do	you	think?’
He	shook	his	head,	but	said	nothing.
After	a	moment	Heboric	gestured	Scillara	to	follow	and	he	set	out	down
the	alley.	The	song	seemed	suspended	in	the	very	air,	raising	a	haze	of	dust	that
seemed	to	shiver	before	his	eyes.	Sweat	ran	down	his	limbs.	Fear.	Fear	has
driven	this	entire	city	from	the	streets.	Those	voices	are	the	sound	of	war.
‘There	should	be	children,’	Scillara	said.	‘Girls…’
‘Why	girls	more	than	anyone	else,	lass?’
‘Bidithal’s	spies.	His	chosen	servants.’


He	glanced	back	at	her.	‘Those	he…scars?’
‘Yes.	They	should	be…everywhere.	Without	them—’
‘Bidithal	is	blind.	It	may	well	be	he	has	sent	them	elsewhere,	or	even
withdrawn	them	entirely.	There	will	be…events	this	night,	Scillara.	Blood	will
be	spilled.	The	players	are,	no	doubt,	even	now	drawing	into	position.’
‘He	spoke	of	this	night,’	she	said.	‘The	hours	of	darkness	before	the	battle.
He	said	the	world	will	change	this	night.’
Heboric	bared	his	teeth.	‘The	fool	has	sunk	to	the	bottom	of	the	Abyss,	and
now	stirs	the	black	mud.’
‘He	dreams	of	true	Darkness	unfolding,	Destriant.	Shadow	is	but	an
upstart,	a	realm	born	of	compromise	and	filled	with	impostors.	The	fragments
must	be	returned	to	the	First	Mother.’
‘Not	just	a	fool,	then,	but	mad.	To	speak	of	the	most	ancient	of	battles,	as	if
he	himself	is	a	force	worthy	of	it—Bidithal	has	lost	his	mind.’
‘He	says	something	is	coming,’	Scillara	said,	shrugging.	‘Suspected	by	noone,	and	only	Bidithal	himself	has	any	hope	of	controlling	it,	for	he	alone
remembers	the	Dark.’
Heboric	halted.	‘Hood	take	his	soul.	I	must	go	to	him.	Now.’
‘We	will	find	him—’
‘In	his	damned	temple,	aye.	Come	on.’
They	swung	about.
Even	as	two	figures	emerged	from	the	gloom	of	an	alley	mouth,	blades
flickering	out.
With	a	snarl,	Heboric	closed	on	them.	One	taloned	hand	shot	out,	tore
under	and	into	an	assassin’s	neck,	then	snapped	upward,	lifting	the	man’s	head
clean	from	his	shoulders.
The	other	killer	lunged,	knife-point	darting	for	Heboric’s	left	eye.	The
Destriant	caught	the	man’s	wrist	and	crushed	both	bones.	A	slash	from	his
other	hand	spilled	the	assassin’s	entrails	onto	the	dusty	street.
Flinging	the	body	away,	Heboric	glared	about.	Scillara	stood	a	few	paces
back,	her	eyes	wide.	Ignoring	her,	the	Destriant	crouched	down	over	the
nearest	corpse.	‘Korbolo	Dom’s.	Too	impatient	by	far—’
Three	quarrels	struck	him	simultaneously.	One	deep	into	his	right	hip,
shattering	bone.	Another	plunging	beneath	his	right	shoulder	blade	to	draw
short	a	finger ’s	breadth	from	his	spine.	The	third,	arriving	from	the	opposite
direction,	took	him	high	on	his	left	shoulder	with	enough	force	to	spin	him
round,	so	that	he	tumbled	backward	over	the	corpse.
Scillara	scrabbled	down	beside	him.	‘Old	man?	Do	you	live?’
‘Bastards,’	he	growled.	‘That	hurts.’


‘They’re	coming—’
‘To	finish	me	off,	aye.	Flee,	lass.	To	the	stone	forest.	Go!’
He	felt	her	leave	his	side,	heard	her	light	steps	patter	away.
Heboric	sought	to	rise,	but	agony	ripped	up	from	his	broken	hip,	left	him
gasping	and	blinded.
Approaching	footsteps,	three	sets,	moccasined,	two	from	the	right	and	one
from	the	left.	Knives	whispered	from	sheaths.	Closing…then	silence.
Someone	was	standing	over	Heboric.	Through	his	blurred	vision,	he	could
make	out	dust-smeared	boots,	and	from	them	a	stench,	as	of	musty,	dry	death.
Another	set	of	boots	scuffed	the	ground	beyond	the	Destriant’s	feet.
‘Begone,	wraiths,’	a	voice	hissed	from	a	half-dozen	paces	away.
‘Too	late	for	that,	assassin,’	murmured	the	figure	above	Heboric.	‘Besides,
we’ve	only	just	arrived.’
‘In	the	name	of	Hood,	Hoarder	of	Souls,	I	banish	you	from	this	realm.’
A	soft	laugh	answered	the	killer ’s	command.	‘Kneel	before	Hood,	do	you?
Oh	yes,	I	felt	the	power	in	your	words.	Alas,	Hood’s	out	of	his	depth	on	this
one.	Ain’t	that	right,	lass?’
A	deep,	grunting	assent	from	the	one	standing	near	Heboric’s	feet.
‘Last	warning,’	the	assassin	growled.	‘Our	blades	are	sanctioned—they
will	bleed	your	souls—’
‘No	doubt.	Assuming	they	ever	reach	us.’
‘There	are	but	two	of	you…and	three	of	us.’
‘Two?’
Scuffing	sounds,	then,	sharp	and	close,	the	spray	of	blood	onto	the	ground.
Bodies	thumped,	long	breaths	exhaled	wetly.
‘Should’ve	left	one	alive,’	said	another	woman’s	voice.
‘Why?’
‘So	we	could	send	him	back	to	that	fly-blown	Napan	bastard	with	a
promise	for	the	morrow.’
‘Better	this	way,	lass.	No-one	appreciates	surprise	any	more—that’s	what’s
gone	wrong	with	the	world,	if	you	ask	me—’
‘Well,	we	wasn’t	asking	you.	This	old	man	going	to	make	it,	you	think?’
A	grunt.	‘I	doubt	Treach	will	give	up	on	his	new	Destriant	with	nary	a
meow.	Besides,	that	sweet-lunged	beauty	is	on	her	way	back.’
‘Time	for	us	to	leave,	then.’
‘Aye.’
‘And	from	now	on	we	don’t	surprise	no-one,	’til	come	the	dawn.
Understood?’
‘Temptation	got	the	better	of	us.	Won’t	happen	again.’


Silence,	then	footsteps	once	more.	A	small	hand	settled	on	his	brow.
‘Scillara?’
‘Yes,	it’s	me.	There	were	soldiers	here,	I	think.	They	didn’t	look	too	good
—’
‘Never	mind	that.	Pull	the	quarrels	from	me.	Flesh	wants	to	heal,	bone	to
knit.	Pull	’em	out,	lass.’
‘And	then?’
‘Drag	me	back	to	my	temple…if	you	can.’
‘All	right.’
He	felt	a	hand	close	on	the	quarrel	buried	in	his	left	shoulder.	A	flash	of
pain,	then	nothing.
	
Elder	Sha’ik’s	armour	was	laid	out	on	the	table.	One	of	Mathok’s	warriors	had
replaced	the	worn	straps	and	fittings,	then	polished	the	bronze	plates	and	the
full,	visored	helm.	The	longsword	was	oiled,	its	edges	finely	honed.	The	ironrimmed	hide-covered	shield	leaned	against	one	table	leg.
She	stood,	alone	in	the	chamber,	staring	down	at	the	accoutrements	left	by
her	predecessor.	The	old	woman	reputedly	had	skill	with	the	blade.	The	helm
seemed	strangely	oversized,	its	vented	cheek	guards	flared	and	full	length,
hinged	to	the	heavy	brow-band.	Fine	blackened	chain	hung	web-like	across	the
eye-slits.	A	long,	wide	lobster-tail	neck	guard	sprawled	out	from	the	back	rim.
She	walked	over	to	the	quilted	under-padding.	It	was	heavy,	sweat-stained,
the	laces	beneath	the	arms	and	running	the	length	of	the	sides.	Boiled	leather
plates	covered	her	upper	thighs,	shoulders,	arms	and	wrists.	Working
methodically,	she	tightened	every	lace	and	strap,	shifting	about	to	settle	the
weight	evenly	before	turning	to	the	armour	itself.
Most	of	the	night	remained,	stretching	before	her	like	infinity’s	dark	road,
but	she	wanted	to	feel	the	armour	encasing	her;	she	wanted	its	massive	weight,
and	so	she	affixed	the	leg	greaves,	footplates	and	wrist	vambraces,	then
shrugged	her	way	into	the	breastplate.	Sorcery	had	lightened	the	bronze,	and	its
sound	as	it	rustled	was	like	thin	tin.	The	design	allowed	her	to	cinch	the	straps
herself,	and	moments	later	she	picked	up	the	sword	and	slid	it	into	its	scabbard,
then	drew	the	heavy	belt	about	her	waist,	setting	the	hooks	that	held	it	to	the
cuirass	so	that	its	weight	did	not	drag	at	her	hips.
All	that	remained	was	the	pair	of	gauntlets,	and	the	under-helm	and	helm
itself.	She	hesitated.	Have	I	any	choice	in	all	this?	The	goddess	remained	a
towering	presence	in	her	mind,	rooted	through	every	muscle	and	fibre,	her
voice	whispering	in	the	flow	of	blood	in	her	veins	and	arteries.	Ascendant


power	was	in	Sha’ik’s	grasp,	and	she	knew	she	would	use	it	when	the	time
came.	Or,	rather,	it	would	use	her.
To	kill	my	sister.
She	sensed	the	approach	of	someone	and	turned	to	face	the	entrance.	‘You
may	enter,	L’oric.’
The	High	Mage	stepped	into	view.
Sha’ik	blinked.	He	was	wearing	armour.	White,	enamelled,	scarred	and
stained	with	use.	A	long,	narrow-bladed	sword	hung	at	his	hip.	After	a	moment,
she	sighed.	‘And	so	we	all	make	preparations…’
‘As	you	have	observed	before,	Mathok	has	over	three	hundred	warriors
guarding	this	palace,	Chosen	One.	Guarding…you.’
‘He	exaggerates	the	risk.	The	Malazans	are	far	too	busy—’
‘The	danger	he	anticipates,	Chosen	One,	lies	not	with	the	Malazans.’
She	studied	him.	‘You	look	exhausted,	L’oric.	I	suggest	you	return	to	your
tent	and	get	some	rest.	I	shall	have	need	for	you	on	the	morrow.’
‘You	will	not	heed	my	warning?’
‘The	goddess	protects	me.	I	have	nothing	to	fear.	Besides,’	she	smiled,
‘Mathok	has	three	hundred	of	his	chosen	warriors	guarding	this	palace.’
‘Sha’ik,	there	will	be	a	convergence	this	night.	You	have	readers	of	the
Deck	among	your	advisers.	Command	they	field	their	cards,	and	all	that	I	say
will	be	confirmed.	Ascendant	powers	are	gathering.	The	stench	of	treachery	is
in	the	air.’
She	waved	a	hand.	‘None	of	it	matters,	L’oric.	I	cannot	be	touched.	Nor	will
the	goddess	be	denied.’
He	stepped	closer,	his	eyes	wide.	‘Chosen	One!	Raraku	is	awakening.’
‘What	are	you	talking	about?’
‘Can	you	not	hear	it?’
‘The	rage	of	the	goddess	consumes	all,	L’oric.	If	you	can	hear	the	voice	of
the	Holy	Desert,	then	it	is	Raraku’s	death-cry.	The	Whirlwind	shall	devour	this
night.	And	any	ascendant	power	foolish	enough	to	approach	will	be
annihilated.	The	goddess,	L’oric,	will	not	be	denied.’
He	stared	at	her	a	moment	longer,	then	seemed	to	sag	beneath	his	armour.
He	drew	a	hand	across	his	eyes,	as	if	seeking	to	claw	some	nightmarish	vision
from	his	sight.	Then,	with	a	nod,	he	swung	about	and	strode	towards	the
doorway.
‘Wait!’	Sha’ik	moved	past	him	then	halted.
Voices	sounded	from	beyond	the	canvas	walls.
‘Let	him	pass!’	she	cried.
Two	guards	stumbled	in,	dragging	a	man	between	them.	Smeared	in	dust


and	sweat,	he	was	unable	to	even	stand,	so	exhausted	and	battered	was	he.	One
of	the	guards	barked,	‘It	is	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas.	One	of	Leoman’s
officers.’
‘Chosen	One!’	the	man	gasped.	‘I	am	the	third	rider	Leoman	has	sent	to
you!	I	found	the	bodies	of	the	others—assassins	pursued	me	almost	to	your
very	palace!’
Sha’ik’s	face	darkened	with	fury.	‘Get	Mathok,’	she	snapped	to	one	of	the
guards.	‘L’oric,	gift	this	man	some	healing,	to	aid	in	his	recovery.’
The	High	Mage	stepped	forward,	settled	a	hand	on	Corabb’s	shoulder.
The	desert	warrior ’s	breathing	slowed,	and	he	slowly	straightened.
‘Leoman	sends	his	greetings,	Chosen	One.	He	wishes	to	know	of	Mathok’s
deployment—’
‘Corabb,’	Sha’ik	cut	in.	‘You	will	return	to	Leoman—with	an	escort.	My
orders	to	him	are	as	follows—are	you	listening?’
He	nodded.
‘Leoman	is	to	ride	immediately	back	to	me.	He	is	to	take	over	command	of
my	armies.’
Corabb	blinked.	‘Chosen	One?’
‘Leoman	of	the	Flails	is	to	assume	command	of	my	armies.	Before	the
dawn.	L’oric,	go	to	Korbolo	Dom	and	convey	to	him	my	summons.	He	is	to
attend	me	immediately.’
L’oric	hesitated,	then	nodded.	‘As	you	command,	Chosen	One.	I	will	take
my	leave	of	you	now.’
He	exited	the	chamber,	made	his	way	through	the	intervening	rooms	and
passageways,	passing	guard	after	guard,	seeing	weapons	drawn	and	feeling
hard	eyes	on	him.	Korbolo	Dom	would	be	a	fool	to	attempt	to	reach	her	with
his	assassins.	Even	so,	the	night	had	begun,	and	in	the	oasis	beyond	starlight
now	played	on	drawn	blades.
Emerging	onto	the	concourse	before	the	palace,	L’oric	paused.	His	warren
was	unveiled,	and	he	made	that	fact	visible	through	a	spark-filled	penumbra
surrounding	his	person.	He	wanted	no-one	to	make	any	fatal	mistakes.	Feeling
strangely	exposed	none	the	less,	he	set	out	towards	Korbolo	Dom’s	command
tent.
The	Dogslayers	were	ready	in	their	reserve	trenches,	a	ceaseless	rustling
of	weapons	and	armour	and	muted	conversations	that	fell	still	further	as	he
strode	past,	only	to	rise	again	in	his	wake.	These	soldiers,	L’oric	well	knew,
had	by	choice	and	by	circumstance	made	of	themselves	a	separate	force.
Marked	by	the	butchery	of	their	deeds.	By	the	focus	of	Malazan	outrage.	They
know	that	no	quarter	will	be	given	them.	Their	bluster	was	betrayed	by


diffidence,	their	reputed	savagery	streaked	now	with	glimmers	of	fear.	And
their	lives	were	in	Korbolo	Dom’s	stained	hands.	Entirely.	They	will	not	sleep
this	night.
He	wondered	what	would	happen	when	Leoman	wrested	command	from
the	Napan	renegade.	Would	there	be	mutiny?	It	was	very	possible.	Of	course,
Sha’ik	possessed	the	sanction	of	the	Whirlwind	Goddess,	and	she	would	not
hesitate	to	flex	that	power	should	Leoman’s	position	be	challenged.	Still,	this
was	not	the	way	to	ready	an	army	on	the	night	before	battle.
She	has	waited	too	long.	Then	again,	perhaps	this	was	intended.	Designed
to	knock	Korbolo	off	balance,	to	give	him	no	time	to	prepare	any	countermoves.	If	so,	then	it	is	the	boldest	of	risks,	on	this,	the	most	jagged-edged	of
nights.
He	made	his	way	up	the	steep	pathway	to	the	Napan’s	command	tent.	Two
sentries	emerged	from	near	the	entrance	to	block	his	progress.
‘Inform	Korbolo	Dom	that	I	bring	word	from	Sha’ik.’
He	watched	the	two	soldiers	exchange	a	glance,	then	one	nodded	and
entered	the	tent.
A	few	moments	later	the	sorceress,	Henaras,	strode	out	from	the	entrance.
Her	face	knotted	in	a	scowl.	‘High	Mage	L’oric.	You	shall	have	to	relinquish
your	warren	to	seek	audience	with	the	Supreme	Commander	of	the
Apocalypse.’
One	brow	rose	at	that	lofty	title,	but	he	shrugged	and	lowered	his	magical
defences.	‘I	am	under	your	protection,	then,’	he	said.
She	cocked	her	head.	‘Against	whom	do	you	protect	yourself,	High	Mage?
The	Malazans	are	on	the	other	side	of	the	basin.’
L’oric	smiled.
Gesturing,	Henaras	swung	about	and	entered	the	command	tent.	L’oric
followed.
The	spacious	chamber	within	was	dominated	by	a	raised	dais	at	the	end
opposite	the	doorway,	on	which	sat	a	massive	wooden	chair.	The	high	headrest
was	carved	in	arcane	symbols	that	L’oric	recognized—with	a	shock—as
Hengese,	from	the	ancient	city	of	Li	Heng	in	the	heart	of	the	Malazan	Empire.
Dominating	the	carvings	was	a	stylized	rendition	of	a	raptor ’s	talons,
outstretched,	that	hovered	directly	over	the	head	of	the	seated	Napan,	who	sat
slouched,	his	hooded	gaze	fixed	on	the	High	Mage.
‘L’oric,’	he	drawled.	‘You	foolish	man.	You	are	about	to	discover	what
happens	to	souls	who	are	far	too	trusting.	Granted,’	he	added	with	a	smile,	‘you
might	have	assumed	we	were	allies.	After	all,	we	have	shared	the	same	oasis
for	some	time	now,	have	we	not?’


‘Sha’ik	demands	that	you	attend	her,	Korbolo	Dom.	Immediately.’
‘To	relieve	me	of	my	command,	yes.	With	the	ill-informed	belief	that	my
Dogslayers	will	accept	Leoman	of	the	Flails—did	you	peruse	them	on	your
way	here,	L’oric?	Were	you	witness	to	their	readiness?	My	army,	High	Mage,
is	surrounded	by	enemies.	Do	you	understand?	Leoman	is	welcome	to	attempt
an	approach,	with	all	the	desert	warriors	he	and	Mathok	care	to	muster—’
‘You	would	betray	the	Apocalypse?	Turn	on	your	allies	and	win	the	battle
for	the	Adjunct,	Korbolo	Dom?	All	to	preserve	your	precious	position?’
‘If	Sha’ik	insists.’
‘Alas,	Sha’ik	is	not	the	issue,’	L’oric	said.	‘The	Whirlwind	Goddess,
however,	is,	and	I	believe	her	toleration	of	you,	Korbolo	Dom,	is	about	to
end.’
‘Do	you	think	so,	L’oric?	Will	she	also	accept	the	destruction	of	the
Dogslayers?	For	destroy	them	she	must,	if	she	is	to	wrest	control	from	me.
The	decimation	of	her	vaunted	Army	of	the	Apocalypse.	Truly,	will	the
goddess	choose	this?’
L’oric	slowly	cocked	his	head,	then	he	slowly	sighed.	‘Ah,	I	see	now	the
flaw.
You	have	approached	this	tactically,	as	would	any	soldier.	But	what	you
clearly	do	not	understand	is	that	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	is	indifferent	to
tactics,	to	grand	strategies.	You	rely	upon	her	common	sense,	but	Korbolo,	she
has	none.	The	battle	tomorrow?	Victory	or	defeat?	The	goddess	cares	neither
way.	She	desires	destruction.	The	Malazans	butchered	on	the	field,	the
Dogslayers	slaughtered	in	their	trenches,	an	enfilade	of	sorcery	to	transform
the	sands	of	Raraku	into	a	red	ruin.	This	is	what	the	Whirlwind	Goddess
desires.’
‘What	of	it?’	the	Napan	rasped,	and	L’oric	saw	sweat	beading	the	man’s
scarred	brow.	‘Even	the	goddess	cannot	reach	me,	not	here,	in	this	sanctified
place—’
‘And	you	call	me	the	fool?	The	goddess	will	see	you	slain	this	night,	but
you	are	too	insignificant	for	her	to	act	directly	in	crushing	you	under	thumb.’
Korbolo	Dom	bolted	forward	on	the	chair.	‘Then	who?’	he	shrieked.	‘You,
L’oric?’
The	High	Mage	spread	his	hands	and	shook	his	head.	‘I	am	less	than	a
messenger	in	this,	Korbolo	Dom.	I	am,	if	anything	at	all,	merely	the	voice	of…
common	sense.	It	is	not	who	she	will	send	against	you,	Supreme	Commander.
It	is,	I	believe,	who	she	will	allow	through	her	defences.	Don’t	you	think?’
Korbolo	stared	down	at	the	High	Mage,	then	he	snarled	and	gestured.
The	knife	plunging	into	his	back	had	no	chance	of	delivering	a	fatal


wound.	L’oric’s	tightly	bound	defences,	his	innermost	layers	of	Kurald
Thyrllan,	defied	the	thirst	of	iron.	Despite	this,	the	blow	drove	the	High	Mage
to	his	knees.	Then	he	pitched	forward	onto	the	thick	carpets,	almost	at	the
Napan’s	boots.
And	already,	he	was	ignored	as	he	lay	there,	bleeding	into	the	weave,	as
Korbolo	rose	and	began	bellowing	orders.	And	none	were	close	enough	to
hear	the	High	Mage	murmur,	‘Blood	is	the	path,	you	foolish	man.	And	you	have
opened	it.	You	poor	bastard…’

‘Grim	statement.	Greyfrog	must	leave	your	delicious	company.’
Felisin	glanced	over	at	the	demon.	Its	four	eyes	were	suddenly	glittering,
avid	with	palpable	hunger.	‘What	has	happened?’
‘Ominous.	An	invitation	from	my	brother.’
‘Is	L’oric	in	trouble?’
‘There	is	darkness	this	night,	yet	the	Mother’s	face	is	turned	away.	What
comes	cannot	be	chained.	Warning.	Caution.	Remain	here,	lovely	child.	My
brother	can	come	to	no	further	harm,	but	my	path	is	made	clear.	Glee.	I	shall
eat	humans	this	night.’
She	drew	her	telaba	closer	about	herself	and	fought	off	a	shiver.	‘I	am,	uh,
pleased	for	you,	Greyfrog.’
‘Uncertain	admonition.	The	shadows	are	fraught—no	path	is	entirely	clear,
even	that	of	blood.	I	must	needs	bob	and	weave,	hop	this	way	and	that,	grow
still	under	baleful	glare,	and	hope	for	the	best.’
‘How	long	should	I	wait	for	you,	Greyfrog?’
‘Leave	not	this	glade	until	the	sun	rises,	dearest	she	whom	I	would	marry,
regardless	of	little	chance	for	proper	broods.	Besotted.	Suddenly	eager	to
depart.’
‘Go,	then.’
‘Someone	approaches.	Potential	ally.	Be	kind.’
With	that	the	demon	scrambled	into	the	shadows.
Potential	ally?	Who	would	that	be?
She	could	hear	the	person	on	the	trail	now,	bared	feet	that	seemed	to	drag
with	exhaustion,	and	a	moment	later	a	woman	stumbled	into	the	glade,	halting
in	the	gloom	to	peer	about.
‘Here,’	Felisin	murmured,	emerging	from	the	shelter.
‘Felisin	Younger?’


‘Ah,	there	is	but	one	who	calls	me	that.	Heboric	has	sent	you?’
‘Yes.’	The	woman	came	closer,	and	Felisin	saw	that	she	was	stained	with
blood,	and	a	heavy	bruise	marred	her	jaw.	‘They	tried	to	kill	him.	There	were
ghosts.	Defending	him	against	the	assassins—’
‘Wait,	wait.	Catch	your	breath.	You’re	safe	here.	Does	Heboric	still	live?’
She	nodded.	‘He	heals—in	his	temple.	He	heals—’
‘Slow	your	breathing,	please.	Here,	I	have	wine.	Say	nothing	for	now—
when	you	are	ready,	tell	me	your	tale.’
	
Shadow-filled	hollows	rippled	the	hills	that	marked	the	northwest	approach	to
the	oasis.	A	haze	of	dust	dulled	the	starlight	overhead.	The	night	had	come
swiftly	to	Raraku,	as	it	always	did,	and	the	day’s	warmth	was	fast	dissipating.
On	this	night,	there	would	be	frost.
Four	riders	sat	still	on	motionless	horses	in	one	such	hollow,	steam	rising
from	their	lathered	beasts.	Their	armour	gleamed	pale	as	bone,	the	skin	of
their	exposed	faces	a	pallid,	deathly	grey.
They	had	seen	the	approaching	horse	warrior	from	a	distance,	sufficient	to
permit	them	this	quiet	withdrawal	unseen,	for	the	lone	rider	was	not	their
quarry,	and	though	none	said	it	out	loud,	they	were	all	glad	for	that.
He	was	huge,	that	stranger.	Astride	a	horse	to	match.	And	a	thousand
ravaged	souls	trailed	him,	bound	by	ethereal	chains	that	he	dragged	as	if
indifferent	to	their	weight.	A	sword	of	stone	hung	from	his	back,	and	it	was
possessed	by	twin	spirits	raging	with	bloodthirst.
In	all,	a	nightmarish	apparition.
They	listened	to	the	heavy	hoofs	thump	past,	waited	until	the	drumming
sound	dwindled	within	the	stone	forest	on	the	edge	of	the	oasis.
Then	Jorrude	cleared	his	throat.	‘Our	path	is	now	clear,	brothers.	The
trespassers	are	camped	nearby,	among	the	army	that	has	marched	to	do	battle
with	the	dwellers	of	this	oasis.	We	shall	strike	them	with	the	dawn.’
‘Brother	Jorrude,’	Enias	rumbled,	‘what	conjuration	just	crossed	our
trail?’
‘I	know	not,	Brother	Enias,	but	it	was	a	promise	of	death.’
‘Agreed,’	Malachar	growled.
‘Our	horses	are	rested	enough,’	Jorrude	pronounced.
The	four	Tiste	Liosan	rode	up	the	slope	until	they	reached	the	ridge,	then
swung	their	mounts	southward.	Jorrude	spared	a	last	glance	back	over	his
shoulder,	to	make	certain	the	stranger	had	not	reversed	his	route—had	not
spied	them	hiding	there	in	that	hollow.	Hiding.	Yes,	that	is	the	truth	of	it,


ignoble	as	the	truth	often	proves	to	be.	He	fought	off	a	shiver,	squinting	into
the	darkness	at	the	edge	of	the	stone	forest.
But	the	apparition	did	not	emerge.
‘In	the	name	of	Osric,	Lord	of	the	Sky,’	Jorrude	intoned	under	his	breath
as	he	led	his	brothers	along	the	ridge,	‘thank	you	for	that…’
	
At	the	edge	of	the	glade,	Karsa	Orlong	stared	back	at	the	distant	riders.	He	had
seen	them	long	before	they	had	seen	him,	and	had	smiled	at	their	cautious
retreat	from	his	path.
Well	enough,	there	were	enemies	aplenty	awaiting	him	in	the	oasis,	and	no
night	lasted	for	ever.
Alas.


Chapter	Twenty-five

Hear	them	rattle
These	chains	of	living
Bound	to	every	moment	passed
Until	the	wreckage	clamours
In	deafening	wake
And	each	stride	trails
A	dirge	of	the	lost.
HOUSE	OF	CHAINS
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
He	sat	cross-legged	in	the	darkness,	perched	in	his	usual	place	on	the
easternmost	ridge,	his	eyes	closed,	a	small	smile	on	his	withered	face.	He	had
unveiled	his	warren	in	the	most	subtle	pattern,	an	unseen	web	stretched	out
across	the	entire	oasis.	It	would	be	torn	soon,	he	well	knew,	but	for	the	moment
he	could	sense	every	footpad,	every	tremble.	The	powers	were	indeed
converging,	and	the	promise	of	blood	and	destruction	whispered	through	the
night.
Febryl	was	well	pleased.	Sha’ik	had	been	isolated,	utterly.	The	Napan’s
army	of	killers	were	even	now	streaming	from	their	places	of	hiding,	as	panic
closed	hands	around	Korbolo	Dom’s	throat.	Kamist	Reloe	was	returning	from
his	secret	sojourn	through	the	warrens.	And,	across	the	basin,	the	Malazan
army	was	entrenching,	the	Adjunct	whetting	her	otataral	sword	in	anticipation
of	the	morning’s	battle.
There	was	but	one	troubling	detail.	A	strange	song,	faint	yet	growing.	The
voice	of	Raraku	itself.	He	wondered	what	it	would	bring	to	this	fated	night.
Hood	was	close—aye,	the	god	himself—and	this	did	much	to	mask	other…
presences.	But	the	sands	were	stirring,	awakened	perhaps	by	the	Lord	of
Death’s	arrival.	Spirits	and	ghosts,	no	doubt	come	to	witness	the	many	deaths
promised	in	the	hours	to	come.	A	curious	thing,	but	he	was	not	unduly
concerned.


There	will	be	slaughter.	Yet	another	apocalypse	on	Raraku’s	restless	sands.
It	is	as	it	should	be.
	
To	all	outward	appearances,	L’oric	was	dead.	He	had	been	roughly	dragged	to
one	wall	in	the	command	tent	and	left	there.	The	knife	had	been	yanked	from
his	back,	and	he	now	lay	with	his	face	to	the	rough	fabric	of	the	wall,	eyes	open
and	seemingly	sightless.
Behind	him,	the	Supreme	Commander	of	the	Apocalypse	was	speaking.
‘Unleash	them	all,	Henaras,	barring	my	bodyguards.	I	want	every	one	of
Bidithal’s	cute	little	spies	hunted	down	and	killed—and	find	Scillara.	That	bitch
has	played	her	last	game.
‘You,	Duryl,	take	another	and	ride	out	to	the	Adjunct.	Deliver	my	missive
—and	make	certain	you	are	not	seen	by	anyone.	Mathok	has	his	warriors	out.
Fayelle	will	work	sorcery	to	aid	you.	And	impress	upon	Tavore	the	need	to
withdraw	her	killers,	lest	they	do	the	Whirlwind	Goddess’s	work	for	her.’
‘Supreme	Commander,’	a	voice	spoke,	‘what	of	Leoman	of	the	Flails?’
‘The	4th	Company	and	Fayelle	are	to	leave	quietly	with	the	next	bell.
Leoman	will	get	nowhere	near	us,	or	the	army.	Corporal	Ethume,	I	want	you
within	cross-bow	range	of	Febryl—the	bastard’s	hiding	in	the	usual	place.
Now,	have	I	missed	anything?’
‘My	fear	is	deepening,’	Henaras	murmured.	‘Something	is	happening…in
the	holy	desert.	Worse,	I	feel	the	approach	of	terrible	powers—’
‘Which	is	why	we	need	the	Adjunct	and	her	damned	sword.	Are	we	safe
enough	in	here,	Henaras?’
‘I	think	so—the	wards	Kamist,	Fayelle	and	I	have	woven	about	this	tent
would	confound	a	god.’
‘That	claim	might	well	be	challenged,’	Korbolo	Dom	growled.
He	added	something	more,	but	a	strange	gurgling	sound,	from	just	beyond
the	tent	wall	in	front	of	L’oric,	overrode	the	Napan’s	voice.	A	wetness,
spattering	the	opposite	side,	then	a	sigh—audible	to	L’oric	only	because	he	was
so	close.	Talons	then	raked	along	the	base	of	the	wall,	reducing	the	fabric	to
ribbons.	A	four-eyed,	immeasurably	ugly	face	peered	in	through	the	gap.
‘Brother,	you	look	unwell.’
Appearances	deceive,	Greyfrog.	For	example,	you	have	never	looked
prettier.
The	demon	reached	in	and	grasped	L’oric	by	one	arm.	He	then	began
dragging	him	by	increments	through	the	tear.	‘Confident.	They	are	too
preoccupied.	Disappointed.	I	have	eaten	but	two	guards,	the	wards	sleep	and


our	path	of	retreat	is	clear.	Things	are	coming.	Suitably	ominous.	Frankly.	I
admit	to	fear,	and	advise	we…hide.’
For	a	time,	yes,	we	do	just	that.	Find	us	somewhere,	Greyfrog.
‘Assured.	I	shall.’
Then	leave	me	there	and	return	to	Felisin.	Assassins	are	out	hunting…
‘Delightful.’
	
Kasanal	had	been	a	Semk	shaman	once,	but	now	he	murdered	at	his	new
master ’s	bidding.	And	he	enjoyed	it,	although,	admittedly,	he	preferred	killing
Malazans	rather	than	natives.	At	least	his	victims	this	night	would	not	be	Semk
—to	slay	those	from	his	own	tribe	would	be	a	difficult	thing	to	accept.	But	that
did	not	seem	likely.	Korbolo	Dom	had	as	much	as	adopted	the	last	survivors	of
the	clans	that	had	fought	for	him	and	Kamist	Reloe	on	the	Chain	of	Dogs.
And	these	two	were	mere	women,	both	servants	of	that	butcher,	Bidithal.
He	was	now	lying	motionless	on	the	edge	of	the	glade,	watching	the	two.
One	was	Scillara,	and	Kasanal	knew	his	master	would	be	pleased	when	he
returned	with	her	severed	head.	The	other	one	was	also	familiar—he	had	seen
her	in	Sha’ik’s	company,	and	Leoman’s.
It	was	also	clear	that	they	were	in	hiding,	and	so	likely	to	be	principal
agents	in	whatever	Bidithal	was	planning.
He	slowly	raised	his	right	hand,	and	two	quick	gestures	sent	his	four
followers	out	along	the	flanks,	staying	within	the	trees,	to	encircle	the	two
women’s	position.	Under	his	breath,	he	began	murmuring	an	incantation,	a
weaving	of	ancient	words	that	deadened	sound,	that	squeezed	lassitude	into	the
victims,	dulling	their	every	sense.	And	he	smiled	as	he	saw	their	heads	slowly
settle	in	unison.
Kasanal	rose	from	his	place	of	concealment.	The	need	for	hiding	had
passed.	He	stepped	into	the	glade.	His	four	Semk	kin	followed	suit.
They	drew	their	knives,	edged	closer.
Kasanal	never	saw	the	enormous	blade	that	cut	him	in	half,	from	the	left
side	of	his	neck	and	out	just	above	his	right	hip.	He	had	a	momentary	sense	of
falling	in	two	directions,	then	oblivion	swallowed	him,	so	he	did	not	hear	the
cries	of	his	four	cousins,	as	the	wielder	of	the	stone	sword	marched	into	their
midst.
When	Kasanal	at	last	opened	ethereal	eyes	to	find	himself	striding	towards
Hood’s	Gate,	he	was	pleased	to	find	his	four	kinsmen	with	him.
	


Wiping	the	blood	from	his	sword,	Karsa	Orlong	swung	to	face	the	two	women.
‘Felisin,’	he	growled,	‘your	scars	burn	bright	on	your	soul.	Bidithal	chose	to
ignore	my	warning.	So	be	it.	Where	is	he?’
Still	feeling	the	remnants	of	the	strange	dullness	that	had	stolen	her	senses,
Felisin	could	only	shake	her	head.
Karsa	scowled	at	her,	then	his	gaze	shifted	to	the	other	woman.	‘Has	the
night	stolen	your	tongue	as	well?’
‘No.	Yes.	No,	clearly	it	hasn’t.	I	believe	we	were	under	sorcerous	attack.
But	we	are	now	recovering,	Toblakai.	You	have	been	gone	long.’
‘And	I	am	now	returned.	Where	is	Leoman?	Bidithal?	Febryl?	Korbolo
Dom?	Kamist	Reloe?	Heboric	Ghost	Hands?’
‘An	impressive	list—you’ve	a	busy	night	ahead,	I	think.	Find	them	where
you	will,	Toblakai.	The	night	awaits	you.’
Felisin	drew	a	shaky	breath,	wrapping	her	arms	about	herself	as	she	stared
up	at	the	terrible	warrior.	He	had	just	killed	five	assassins	with	five	sweeping,
almost	poetic	passes	of	that	enormous	sword.	The	very	ease	of	it	horrified	her.
True,	the	assassins	had	intended	the	same	for	her	and	Scillara.
Karsa	loosened	his	shoulders	with	a	shrug,	then	strode	towards	the	path
leading	to	the	city.	In	moments	he	was	gone.
Scillara	moved	closer	to	Felisin	and	laid	a	hand	on	her	shoulder.	‘Death	is
always	a	shock,’	she	said.	‘The	numbness	will	pass.	I	promise.’
But	Felisin	shook	her	head.	‘Except	for	Leoman,’	she	whispered.
‘What?’
‘Those	he	named.	He	is	going	to	kill	them	all.	Except	for	Leoman.’
Scillara	slowly	turned	to	face	the	trail,	a	cool,	speculative	look	stealing
across	her	face.
	
The	last	two	had	taken	down	four	warriors	and	come	within	thirty	paces	of	his
tent	before	finally	falling.	Scowling,	Mathok	stared	down	at	the	arrow-studded,
sword-slashed	corpses.	Six	attempted	assassinations	this	night	alone,	and	the
first	bell	had	yet	to	sound.
Enough.
‘T’morol,	gather	my	clan.’
The	burly	warrior	grunted	assent	and	strode	off.	Mathok	drew	his	furs
tighter	about	himself	and	returned	to	his	tent.
Within	its	modest	confines,	he	paused	for	a	long	moment,	deep	in	thought.
Then	he	shook	himself	and	walked	over	to	a	hide-covered	chest	near	his	cot.
He	crouched,	swept	aside	the	covering,	and	lifted	the	ornate	lid.


The	Book	of	Dryjhna	resided	within.
Sha’ik	had	given	it	into	his	keeping.
To	safeguard.
He	closed	the	lid	and	locked	it,	then	picked	up	the	chest	and	made	his	way
outside.	He	could	hear	his	warriors	breaking	camp	in	the	darkness	beyond.
‘T’morol.’
‘Warchief.’
‘We	ride	to	join	Leoman	of	the	Flails.	The	remaining	clans	are	to	guard
Sha’ik,	though	I	am	confident	she	is	not	at	risk—she	may	have	need	for	them
in	the	morning.’
T’morol’s	dark	eyes	were	fixed	on	Mathok,	cold	and	impervious	to
surprise.	‘We	are	to	ride	from	this	battle,	Warchief?’
‘To	preserve	the	Holy	Book,	such	flight	may	be	a	necessity,	old	friend.
Come	the	dawn,	we	hover…on	the	very	cusp.’
‘To	gauge	the	wind.’
‘Yes,	T’morol,	to	gauge	the	wind.’
The	bearded	warrior	nodded.	‘The	horses	are	being	saddled.	I	will	hasten
the	preparations.’
	
Heboric	listened	to	the	silence.	Only	his	bones	could	feel	the	tingling	hum	of	a
sorcerous	web	spanning	the	entire	oasis	and	its	ruined	city,	the	taut	vibrations
rising	and	falling	as	disparate	forces	began	to	move	across	it,	then,	with
savage	disregard,	tore	through	it.
He	stirred	from	the	cot,	groaning	with	the	stab	of	force-healed	wounds,
and	climbed	shakily	to	his	feet.	The	coals	had	died	in	their	braziers.	The	gloom
felt	solid,	reluctant	to	yield	as	he	made	his	way	to	the	doorway.	Heboric	bared
his	teeth.	His	taloned	hands	twitched.
Ghosts	stalked	the	dead	city.	Even	the	gods	felt	close,	drawn	to	witness	all
that	was	to	come.	Witness,	or	to	seize	the	moment	and	act	directly.	A	nudge
here,	a	tug	there,	if	only	to	appease	their	egos…if	only	to	see	what	happens.
These	were	the	games	he	despised,	source	of	his	fiercest	defiance	all	those
years	ago.	The	shape	of	his	crime,	if	crime	it	was.
And	so	they	took	my	hands.
Until	another	god	gave	them	back.
He	was,	he	realized,	indifferent	to	Treach.	A	reluctant	Destriant	to	the	new
god	of	war,	despite	the	gifts.	Nor	had	his	desires	changed.	Otataral	Island,	and
the	giant	of	jade—that	is	what	awaits	me.	The	returning	of	power.	Even	as	those
last	words	tracked	across	his	mind,	he	knew	that	a	deceit	rode	among	them.	A


secret	he	knew	but	to	which	he	would	fashion	no	shape.	Not	yet,	perhaps	not
until	he	found	himself	standing	in	the	wasteland,	beneath	the	shadow	of	that
crooked	spire.
But	first,	I	must	meet	a	more	immediate	challenge—getting	out	of	this	camp
alive.
He	hesitated	another	moment	at	the	doorway,	reaching	out	into	the
darkness	beyond	with	all	his	senses.	Finding	the	path	clear—his	next	twenty
strides	at	least—he	darted	forward.
	
Rolling	the	acorn	in	his	fingers	one	last	time,	he	tucked	it	into	a	fold	in	his	sash
and	eased	snake-like	from	the	crack.
‘Oh,	Hood’s	heartless	hands…’
The	song	was	a	distant	thunder	trembling	along	his	bones,	and	he	didn’t
like	it.	Worse	yet,	there	were	powers	awakened	in	the	oasis	ahead	that	even	he,
a	non-practitioner	of	sorcery,	could	feel	like	fire	in	his	blood.
Kalam	Mekhar	checked	his	long-knives	yet	again,	then	resheathed	them.
The	temptation	was	great	to	keep	the	otataral	weapon	out,	and	so	deny	any
magic	sent	his	way.	But	that	goes	both	ways,	doesn’t	it?
He	studied	the	way	ahead.	The	starlight	seemed	strangely	muted.	He	drew
from	memory	as	best	he	could,	from	what	he	had	seen	from	his	hiding	place
during	the	day.	Palms,	their	boles	spectral	as	they	rose	above	tumbled
mudbricks	and	cut	stone.	The	remnants	of	corrals,	pens	and	shepherds’	huts.
Stretches	of	sandy	ground	littered	with	brittle	fronds	and	husks.	There	were	no
new	silhouettes	awaiting	him.
Kalam	set	forth.
He	could	see	the	angular	lines	of	buildings	ahead,	all	low	to	the	ground,
suggesting	little	more	than	stretches	of	mudbrick	foundations	from	which
canvas,	wicker	and	rattan	walls	rose.	Occupied	residences,	then.
Far	off	to	Kalam’s	right	was	the	grey	smudge	of	that	strange	forest	of
stone	trees.	He	had	considered	making	his	approach	through	it,	but	there	was
something	uncanny	and	unwelcoming	about	that	place,	and	he	suspected	it	was
not	as	empty	as	it	appeared.
Approaching	what	seemed	to	be	a	well-trod	avenue	between	huts,	he	caught
a	flash	of	movement,	darting	from	left	to	right	across	the	aisle.	Kalam	dropped
lower	and	froze.	A	second	figure	followed,	then	a	third,	fourth	and	fifth.
A	hand.	Now,	who	in	this	camp	would	organize	their	assassins	into	hands?
He	waited	another	half-dozen	heartbeats,	then	set	off.	He	came	opposite	the
route	the	killers	had	taken	and	slipped	into	their	wake.	The	five	were	moving	at


seven	paces	apart,	two	paces	more	than	would	a	Claw.	Damn,	did	Cotillion
suspect?	Is	this	what	he	wanted	me	to	confirm?
These	are	Talons.
Seven	or	five,	it	made	little	difference	to	Kalam.
He	came	within	sight	of	the	trailing	assassin.	The	figure	bore	magically
invested	items,	making	his	form	blurry,	wavering.	He	was	wearing	dark	grey,
tight-fitting	clothes,	moccasined,	gloved	and	hooded.	Blackened	daggers
gleamed	in	his	hands.
Not	just	patrolling,	then,	but	hunting.
Kalam	padded	to	within	five	paces	of	the	man,	then	darted	forward.
His	right	hand	reached	around	to	clamp	hard	across	the	man’s	mouth	and
jaw,	his	left	hand	simultaneously	closing	on	the	head’s	opposite	side.	A	savage
twist	snapped	the	killer ’s	neck.
Vomit	spurted	against	Kalam’s	leather-sheathed	palm,	but	he	held	on	to	his
grip,	guiding	the	corpse	to	the	ground.	Straddling	the	body,	he	released	his
grip,	wiped	his	hand	dry	against	the	grey	shirt,	then	moved	on.
Two	hundred	heartbeats	later	and	there	were	but	two	left.	Their	route	had
taken	them,	via	a	twisting,	roundabout	path,	towards	a	district	marked	by	the
ruins	of	what	had	once	been	grand	temples.	They	were	drawn	up	at	the	edge	of
a	broad	concourse,	awaiting	their	comrades,	no	doubt.
Kalam	approached	them	as	would	the	third	hunter	in	the	line.	Neither	was
paying	attention,	their	gazes	fixed	on	a	building	on	the	other	side	of	the
concourse.	At	the	last	moment	Kalam	drew	both	long-knives	and	thrust	them
into	the	backs	of	the	two	assassins.
Soft	grunts,	and	both	men	sank	to	the	dusty	flagstones.	The	blow	to	the
leader	of	the	Talon’s	hand	was	instantly	fatal,	but	Kalam	had	twisted	the	other
thrust	slightly	to	one	side,	and	he	now	crouched	down	beside	the	dying	man.	‘If
your	masters	are	listening,’	he	murmured,	‘and	they	should	be.	Compliments
of	the	Claw.	See	you	soon…’
He	tugged	the	two	knives	free,	cleaned	the	blades	and	sheathed	them.
The	hunters’	target	was,	he	assumed,	within	the	ruined	building	that	had
been	the	sole	focus	of	their	attention.	Well	enough—Kalam	had	no	friends	in
this	damned	camp.
He	set	out	along	the	edge	of	the	concourse.
At	the	mouth	of	another	alley	he	found	three	corpses,	all	young	girls.	The
blood	and	knife-wounds	indicated	they	had	put	up	a	fierce	fight,	and	two
spattered	trails	led	away,	in	the	direction	of	the	temple.
Kalam	tracked	them	until	he	was	certain	that	they	led	through	the	halfruined	structure’s	gaping	doorway,	then	he	halted.


The	bitter	reek	of	sorcery	wafted	from	the	broad	entrance.	Damn,	this
place	has	been	newly	sanctified.
There	was	no	sound	from	within.	He	edged	forward	until	he	came	to	one
side	of	the	doorway.
A	body	lay	just	inside,	grey-swathed,	fixed	in	a	contortion	of	limbs,
evincing	that	he	had	died	beneath	a	wave	of	magic.	Shadows	were	flowing	in
the	darkness	beyond.
Kalam	drew	his	otataral	long-knife,	crept	in	through	the	doorway.
The	shadowy	wraiths	flinched	back.
The	floor	had	collapsed	long	ago,	leaving	a	vast	pit.	Five	paces	ahead,	at
the	base	of	a	rubble-strewn	ramp,	a	young	girl	sat	amidst	the	blood	and	entrails
of	three	more	corpses.	She	was	streaked	with	gore,	her	eyes	darkly	luminous
as	she	looked	up	at	Kalam.	‘Do	you	remember	the	dark?’	she	asked.
Ignoring	her	question,	he	stepped	past	at	a	safe	distance.	‘Make	no	move,
lass,	and	you’ll	survive	my	visit.’
A	thin	voice	chuckled	from	the	gloom	at	the	far	end	of	the	pit.	‘Her	mind	is
gone,	Claw.	No	time,	alas,	to	fully	harden	my	subjects	to	the	horrors	of
modern	life,	try	though	I	might.	In	any	case,	you	should	know	that	I	am	not
your	enemy.	Indeed,	the	one	who	seeks	to	kill	me	this	night	is	none	other	than
the	Malazan	renegade,	Korbolo	Dom.	And,	of	course,	Kamist	Reloe.	Shall	I
give	you	directions	to	their	abode?’
‘I’ll	find	it	in	due	course,’	Kalam	murmured.
‘Do	you	think	your	otataral	blade	sufficient,	Claw?	Here,	in	my	temple?
Do	you	understand	the	nature	of	this	place?	I	imagine	you	believe	you	do,	but	I
am	afraid	you	are	in	error.	Slavemaster,	offer	our	guest	some	wine	from	that
jug.’
A	misshapen	figure	squirmed	wetly	across	the	rubble	from	Kalam’s	left.
No	hands	or	feet.	A	mass	of	suppurating	sores	and	the	mangled	rot	of	leprosy.
With	horrible	absurdity,	a	silver	tray	had	been	strapped	to	the	creature’s	back,
on	which	sat	a	squat,	fired	clay	jug.
‘He	is	rather	slow,	I’m	afraid.	But	I	assure	you,	the	wine	is	so	exquisite	that
you	will	agree	it	is	worth	the	wait.	Assassin,	you	are	in	the	presence	of
Bidithal,	archpriest	of	all	that	is	sundered,	broken,	wounded	and	suffering.	My
own…awakening	proved	both	long	and	torturous,	I	admit.	I	had	fashioned,	in
my	own	mind,	every	detail	of	the	cult	I	would	lead.	All	the	while	unaware	that
the	shaping	was	being…guided.
‘Blindness,	wilful	and,	indeed,	spiteful.	Even	when	the	fated	new	House
was	laid	out	before	me,	I	did	not	realize	the	truth.	This	shattered	fragment	of
Kurald	Emurlahn,	Claw,	shall	not	be	the	plaything	of	a	desert	goddess.	Nor	of


the	Empress.	None	of	you	shall	have	it,	for	it	shall	become	the	heart	of	the	new
House	of	Chains.	Tell	your	empress	to	stand	aside,	assassin.	We	are	indifferent
to	who	would	rule	the	land	beyond	the	Holy	Desert.	She	can	have	it.’
‘And	Sha’ik?’
‘You	can	have	her	as	well.	Marched	back	to	Unta	in	chains—and	that	is	far
more	poetic	than	you	will	ever	know.’
The	shadow-wraiths—torn	souls	from	Kurald	Emurlahn—were	drawing
closer	round	Kalam,	and	he	realized,	with	a	chill,	that	his	otataral	long-knife
might	well	prove	insufficient.	‘An	interesting	offer,’	he	rumbled.	‘But
something	tells	me	there	are	more	lies	than	truths	within	it,	Bidithal.’
‘I	suppose	you	are	right,’	the	archpriest	sighed.	‘I	need	Sha’ik,	for	this
night	and	the	morrow	at	least.	Febryl	and	Korbolo	Dom	must	be	thwarted,	but	I
assure	you,	you	and	I	can	work	together	towards	such	an	end,	since	it	benefits
us	both.	Korbolo	Dom	calls	himself	Master	of	the	Talon.	Yes,	he	would	return
to	Laseen’s	embrace,	more	or	less,	and	use	Sha’ik	to	bargain	for	his	own
position.	As	for	Febryl,	well,	I	assure	you,	what	he	awaits	no-one	but	he	is	mad
enough	to	desire.’
‘Why	do	you	bother	with	all	this,	Bidithal?	You’ve	no	intention	of	letting
me	leave	here	alive.	And	here’s	another	thing.	A	pair	of	beasts	are	coming—
hounds,	not	of	Shadow,	but	something	else.	Did	you	summon	them,	Bidithal?
Do	you,	or	your	Crippled	God,	truly	believe	you	can	control	them?	If	so,	then
it	is	you	two	who	are	mad.’
Bidithal	leaned	forward.	‘They	seek	a	master!’	he	hissed.
Ah,	so	Cotillion	was	right	about	the	Chained	One.	‘One	who	is	worthy,’
Kalam	replied.	‘In	other	words,	one	who	is	meaner	and	tougher	than	they	are.
And	in	this	oasis,	they	will	find	no	such	individual.	And	so,	I	fear,	they	will	kill
everyone.’
‘You	know	nothing	of	this,	assassin,’	Bidithal	murmured,	leaning	back.
‘Nor	of	the	power	I	now	possess.	As	for	not	permitting	you	to	leave	here
alive…true	enough,	I	suppose.	You’ve	revealed	too	much	knowledge,	and	you
are	proving	far	less	enthusiastic	to	my	proposals	than	I	would	have	hoped.	An
unfortunate	revelation,	but	it	no	longer	matters.	My	servants	were	scattered
about	earlier,	you	see,	defending	every	approach,	requiring	time	to	draw	them
in,	to	arrange	them	between	us.	Ah,	Slavemaster	has	arrived.	By	all	means,
have	some	wine.	I	am	prepared	to	linger	here	for	that.	Once	you	are	done,
however,	I	must	take	my	leave.	I	made	a	promise	to	Sha’ik,	after	all,	and	I	mean
to	keep	it.	Should	you,	by	some	strange	miracle,	escape	here	alive,	know	that	I
will	not	oppose	your	efforts	against	Korbolo	Dom	and	his	cadre.	You	will
have	earned	that	much,	at	least.’


‘Best	leave	now,	then,	Bidithal.	I	have	no	interest	in	wine	this	night.’
‘As	you	wish.’
Darkness	swept	in	to	engulf	the	archpriest,	and	Kalam	shivered	at	the
uncanny	familiarity	of	the	sorcerous	departure.
The	wraiths	attacked.
Both	knives	slashed	out,	and	inhuman	screams	filled	the	chamber.	As	it
turned	out,	his	otataral	weapon	proved	sufficient	after	all.	That,	and	the	timely
arrival	of	a	god.
	
Korbolo	Dom	seemed	to	have	unleashed	an	army	upon	his	own	allies	this
night.	Again	and	again,	Karsa	Orlong	found	his	path	blocked	by	eager	killers.
Their	corpses	were	strewn	in	his	wake.	He	had	taken	a	few	minor	wounds	from
knives	invested	with	sorcery,	but	most	of	the	blood	dripping	from	the	giant
warrior	belonged	to	his	victims.
He	strode	with	his	sword	in	both	hands	now,	tip	lowered	and	to	one	side.
There	had	been	four	assassins	hiding	outside	Heboric	Ghost	Hands’s	dwelling.
After	killing	them,	Karsa	slashed	a	new	doorway	in	the	tent	wall	and	entered,
only	to	find	the	abode	empty.	Frustrated,	he	set	out	for	the	temple	round.
Leoman’s	pit	was	unoccupied	as	well,	and	appeared	to	have	been	so	for	some
time.
Approaching	Bidithal’s	temple,	Karsa	slowed	his	steps	as	he	heard	fierce
fighting	within.	Shrill	screams	echoed.	Raising	his	weapon,	the	Toblakai	edged
forward.
A	figure	was	crawling	out	from	the	doorway	on	its	belly,	gibbering	to
itself.	A	moment	later	Karsa	recognized	the	man.	He	waited	until	Slavemaster ’s
desperate	efforts	brought	him	up	against	the	Toblakai’s	feet.	A	disease-ravaged
face	twisted	into	view.
‘He	fights	like	a	demon!’	Silgar	rasped.	‘Both	blades	cut	through	the
wraiths	and	leave	them	writhing	in	pieces!	A	god	stands	at	his	shoulder.	Kill
them,	Teblor!	Kill	them	both!’
Karsa	sneered.	‘I	take	no	commands	from	you,	Slavemaster,	or	have	you
forgotten	that?’
‘Fool!’	Silgar	spat.	‘We	are	brothers	in	the	House	now,	you	and	I.	You	are
the	Knight	of	Chains,	and	I	am	the	Leper.	The	Crippled	God	has	chosen	us!
And	Bidithal,	he	has	become	the	Magi—’
‘Yes,	Bidithal.	He	hides	within?’
‘No—he	wisely	fled,	as	I	am	doing.	The	Claw	and	his	patron	god	are	even
now	slaying	the	last	of	his	shadow	servants.	You	are	the	Knight—you	possess


your	own	patron,	Karsa	Orlong	of	the	Teblor.	Kill	the	enemy—it	is	what	you
must	do—’
Karsa	smiled.	‘And	so	I	shall.’	He	reversed	his	grip	on	his	sword	and
drove	the	point	down	between	Silgar ’s	shoulder	blades,	severing	the	spine	then
punching	out	through	the	sternum	to	bury	itself	a	hand’s	width	deep	between
two	flagstones.
Vile	fluids	poured	from	the	Slavemaster.	His	head	cracked	down	on	the
stone,	and	his	life	was	done.	Leoman	was	right,	long	ago—a	quick	death	would
have	been	the	better	choice.
Karsa	pulled	the	sword	free.	‘I	follow	no	patron	god,’	he	growled.
He	turned	from	the	temple	entrance.	Bidithal	would	have	used	sorcery	to
escape,	drawing	shadows	about	himself	in	an	effort	to	remain	unseen.	Yet	his
passage	would	leave	footprints	in	the	dust.
The	Toblakai	stepped	past	the	body	of	Silgar,	the	man	who	had	once
sought	to	enslave	him,	and	began	searching.
	
Twenty	of	Mathok’s	clan	warriors	accompanied	Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	on
his	return	to	Leoman’s	encampment.	Their	journey	was	unopposed,	although
Corabb	was	certain	hidden	eyes	followed	their	progress.
They	rode	up	the	slope	to	the	hill’s	summit	and	were	challenged	by
sentinels.	A	more	welcoming	sound	Corabb	could	not	imagine.	Familiar
voices,	warriors	he	had	fought	alongside	against	the	Malazans.
‘It	is	Corabb!’	He	had	been	given	a	hook-bladed	sword	drawn	from	the
Chosen	One’s	armoury,	and	he	now	raised	it	high	in	salute	as	the	picket	guards
emerged	from	their	places	of	hiding.	‘I	must	speak	with	Leoman!	Where	is
he?’
‘Asleep,’	one	of	the	sentinels	growled.	‘If	you’re	lucky,	Bhilan,	your
arrival,	loud	as	it	was,	has	awakened	him.	Ride	to	the	centre	of	the	summit,	but
leave	your	escort	here.’
That	brought	Corabb	up	short.	‘They	are	Mathok’s	own—’
‘Leoman’s	orders.	No-one	from	the	oasis	is	allowed	to	enter	our	camp.’
Scowling,	Corabb	nodded	and	waved	back	his	fellow	horse	warriors.
‘Take	no	offence,	friends,’	he	called,	‘I	beg	you.’	Without	waiting	to	gauge
their	reaction,	he	dismounted	and	hurried	to	Leoman’s	tent.
The	warleader	was	standing	outside	the	flap,	drinking	deep	from	a
waterskin.	He	was	out	of	his	armour,	wearing	only	a	thin,	sweat-stained	linen
shirt.
Corabb	halted	before	him.	‘There	is	much	to	tell	you,	Leoman	of	the


Flails.’
‘Out	with	it,	then,’	Leoman	replied	when	he’d	finished	drinking.
‘I	was	your	only	messenger	to	survive	to	reach	Sha’ik.	She	has	had	a
change	of	heart—she	now	commands	that	you	lead	the	Army	of	the
Apocalpyse	come	the	morrow.	She	would	have	you,	not	Korbolo	Dom,	leading
us	to	victory.’
‘Would	she	now,’	he	drawled,	then	squinted	and	looked	away.	‘The	Napan
has	his	assassins	between	us	and	Sha’ik?’
‘Aye,	but	they	will	not	challenge	our	entire	force—they	would	be	mad	to
attempt	such	a	thing.’
‘True.	And	Korbolo	Dom	knows	this—’
‘He	has	not	yet	been	informed	of	the	change	of	command—at	least	he
hadn’t	when	I	left.	Although	Sha’ik	had	issued	a	demand	for	his	presence—’
‘Which	he	will	ignore.	As	for	the	rest,	the	Napan	knows.	Tell	me,	Corabb,
do	you	think	his	Dogslayers	will	follow	any	other	commander?’
‘They	shall	have	no	choice!	The	Chosen	One	has	so	ordered!’
Leoman	slowly	nodded.	Then	he	turned	back	to	his	tent.	‘Break	camp.	We
ride	to	Sha’ik.’
Exultation	filled	Corabb’s	chest.	Tomorrow	would	belong	to	Leoman	of
the	Flails.	‘As	it	should	be,’	he	whispered.
	
Kalam	stepped	outside.	His	clothes	were	in	tatters,	but	he	was	whole.	Though
decidedly	shaken.	He	had	always	considered	himself	one	of	the	ablest	of
assassins,	and	he	had	drawn	a	blade	against	a	veritable	host	of	inimical,	deadly
foes	over	the	years.	But	Cotillion	had	put	him	to	shame.
No	wonder	the	bastard’s	a	god.	Hood’s	breath,	I’ve	never	before	seen	such
skill.	And	that	damned	rope!
Kalam	drew	a	deep	breath.	He	had	done	as	the	Patron	of	Assassins	had
asked.	He	had	found	the	source	of	the	threat	to	the	Realm	of	Shadow.	Or	at
least	confirmed	a	host	of	suspicions.	This	fragment	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	will	be
the	path	to	usurpation…by	none	other	than	the	Crippled	God.	The	House	of
Chains	had	come	into	play,	and	the	world	had	grown	very	fraught	indeed.
He	shook	himself.	Leave	that	to	Cotillion	and	Ammanas.	He	had	other,
more	immediate	tasks	to	attend	to	this	night.	And	the	Patron	of	Assassins	had
been	kind	enough	to	deliver	a	pair	of	Kalam’s	favourite	weapons…
His	eyes	lit	upon	the	leprous	corpse	lying	a	half-dozen	paces	away,	then
narrowed.	Kalam	moved	closer.	Gods	below,	that	is	some	wound.	If	I	didn’t
know	better,	I’d	say	from	the	sword	of	a	T’lan	Imass.	The	blood	was	thickening,


soaking	up	dust	from	the	flagstones.
Kalam	paused	to	think.	Korbolo	Dom	would	not	establish	his	army’s	camp
among	the	ruins	of	this	city.	Nor	in	the	stone	forest	to	the	west.	The	Napan
would	want	an	area	both	clear	and	level,	with	sufficient	room	for	banking	and
trenches,	and	open	lines	of	sight.
East,	then,	what	had	once	been	irrigated	fields	for	the	city,	long	ago.
He	swung	in	that	direction	and	set	out.
From	one	pool	of	darkness	to	the	next,	along	strangely	empty	streets	and
alleys.	Heavy	layers	of	sorcery	had	settled	upon	this	oasis,	seeming	to	flow	in
streams—some	of	them	so	thick	that	Kalam	found	himself	leaning	forward	in
order	to	push	his	way	through.	A	miasma	of	currents,	mixed	beyond
recognition,	and	none	of	them	palatable.	His	bones	ached,	his	head	hurt,	and
his	eyes	felt	as	if	someone	was	stirring	hot	sand	behind	them.
He	found	a	well-trod	track	heading	due	east	and	followed	it,	staying	to	one
side	where	the	shadows	were	deep.	Then	saw,	two	hundred	paces	ahead,	a
fortified	embankment.
Malazan	layout.	That,	Napan,	was	a	mistake.
He	was	about	to	draw	closer	when	he	saw	the	vanguard	to	a	company
emerge	through	the	gate.	Soldiers	on	foot	followed,	flanked	by	lancers.
Kalam	ducked	into	an	alley.
The	troop	marched	past	at	half-pace,	weapons	muffled,	the	horses’	hoofs
leather-socked.	Curious,	but	the	fewer	soldiers	in	the	camp	the	better,	as	far	as
he	was	concerned.	It	was	likely	that	all	but	the	reserve	companies	would	have
been	ensconced	in	their	positions	overlooking	the	field	of	battle.	Of	course,
Korbolo	Dom	would	not	be	careless	when	it	came	to	protecting	himself.
He	calls	himself	master	of	the	Talon,	after	all.	Not	that	Cotillion,	who	was
Dancer,	knows	a	damned	thing	about	them.	Sparing	the	revelation	only	a	sneer.
The	last	of	the	soldiers	filed	past.	Kalam	waited	another	fifty	heartbeats,
then	he	set	out	towards	the	Dogslayer	encampment.
The	embankment	was	preceded	by	a	steep-sided	trench.	Sufficient
encumbrance	to	a	charging	army,	but	only	a	minor	inconvenience	to	a	lone
assassin.	He	clambered	down,	across,	then	up	the	far	side,	halting	just	beneath
the	crest-line.
There	would	be	pickets.	The	gate	was	thirty	paces	on	his	left,	lantern-lit.	He
moved	to	just	beyond	the	light’s	range,	then	edged	up	onto	the	bank.	A	guard
patrolled	within	sight	on	his	right,	not	close	enough	to	spot	the	assassin	as	he
squirmed	across	the	hard-packed,	sun-baked	earth	to	the	far	edge.
Another	trench,	this	one	shallower,	and	beyond	lay	the	ordered	ranks	of
tents,	the	very	centre	of	the	grid	dominated	by	a	larger	command	tent.


Kalam	made	his	way	into	the	camp.
As	he	had	suspected,	most	of	the	tents	were	empty,	and	before	long	he	was
crouched	opposite	the	wide	street	encircling	the	command	tent.
Guards	lined	every	side,	five	paces	apart,	assault	crossbows	cocked	and
cradled	in	arms.	Torches	burned	on	poles	every	ten	paces,	bathing	the	street	in
flickering	light.	Three	additional	figures	blocked	the	doorway,	grey-clad	and
bearing	no	visible	weapons.
Flesh	and	blood	cordon…then	sorcerous	wards.	Well,	one	thing	at	a	time.
He	drew	out	his	pair	of	ribless	crossbows.	A	Claw’s	weapons,	screwtorqued,	the	metal	blackened.	He	set	the	quarrels	in	their	grooves	and	carefully
cocked	both	weapons.	Then	settled	back	to	give	the	situation	some	thought.
Even	as	he	watched	he	saw	the	air	swirl	before	the	command	tent’s
entrance,	and	a	portal	opened.	Blinding	white	light,	the	flare	of	fire,	then
Kamist	Reloe	emerged.	The	portal	contracted	behind	him,	then	winked	out.
The	mage	looked	exhausted	but	strangely	triumphant.	He	gestured	at	the
guards	then	strode	into	the	tent.	The	three	grey-clothed	assassins	followed	the
mage	inside.
A	hand	light	as	a	leaf	settled	on	Kalam’s	shoulder,	and	a	voice	rasped,
‘Eyes	forward,	soldier.’
He	knew	that	voice,	from	more	years	back	than	he’d	like	to	think.	But	that
bastard’s	dead.	Dead	before	Surly	took	the	throne.
‘Granted,’	the	voice	continued,	and	Kalam	knew	that	acid-spattered	face
was	grinning,	‘no	love’s	lost	between	me	and	the	company	I’m	sharing…again.
Figured	I’d	seen	the	last	of	every	damn	one	of	them…and	you.	Well,	never
mind	that.	Need	a	way	in	there,	right?	Best	we	mount	a	diversion,	then.	Give	us
fifty	heartbeats…at	least	you	can	count	those,	Corporal.’
The	hand	lifted	away.
Kalam	Mekhar	drew	a	deep,	shaky	breath.	What	in	Hood’s	name	is	going	on
here?	That	damned	captain	went	renegade.	They	found	his	body	in	Malaz	City
the	morning	after	the	assassinations…or	something	closely	approximating	his
body…
He	focused	his	gaze	once	more	upon	the	command	tent.
From	beyond	it	a	scream	broke	the	night,	then	the	unmistakable	flash	and
earth-shaking	thump	of	Moranth	munitions.
Suddenly	the	guards	were	running.
Tucking	one	of	the	crossbows	into	his	belt,	Kalam	drew	out	the	otataral
long-knife.	He	waited	until	only	two	Dogslayers	were	visible,	both	to	the	right
of	the	entrance,	facing	the	direction	of	the	attack—where	screams	ripped	the
air,	as	much	born	of	horror	as	from	the	pain	of	wounds—then	surged	forward.


Raising	the	crossbow	in	his	left	hand.	The	recoil	thrumming	the	bones	of
his	arm.	The	quarrel	burying	itself	in	the	back	of	the	further	guard.	Long-knife
thrusting	into	the	nearer	man,	point	punching	through	leather	between	plates	of
bronze,	piercing	flesh	then	sliding	between	ribs	to	stab	the	heart.
Blood	sprayed	as	he	tugged	the	weapon	free	and	darted	into	the	tent’s
doorway.
Wards	collapsed	around	him.
Within	the	threshold	he	reloaded	the	crossbow	and	affixed	it	in	the	brace
on	his	wrist—beneath	the	voluminous	sleeves.	Then	did	the	same	with	the	other
one	on	his	left	wrist.
The	main	chamber	before	him	held	but	a	lone	occupant,	a	grey-robed
assassin	who	spun	at	Kalam’s	arrival,	a	pair	of	hooked	Kethra	knives	flashing
into	guard	position.	The	face	within	the	hood	was	expressionless,	a	narrow,
sun-darkened	visage	tattooed	in	the	Pardu	style,	the	swirling	artistry	broken	by
a	far	heavier	sigil	branded	into	the	man’s	forehead—a	talon.
The	grey-clad	assassin	suddenly	smiled.	‘Kalam	Mekhar.	I	suppose	you
don’t	remember	me.’
In	answer	Kalam	drew	out	his	second	long-knife	and	attacked.
Sparks	bit	the	air	as	the	blades	clashed	and	whispered,	the	Pardu	driven
back	two	steps	until,	with	a	sweeping	backslash,	he	leapt	to	the	right	and
sidestepped	round	to	give	himself	more	space.	Kalam	maintained	the	pressure,
weapons	flashing	as	they	darted	out,	keeping	the	Talon	on	the	defensive.
He	had	skill	with	those	heavy	Kethra	knives,	and	both	quickness	and
strength.	Kalam’s	blades	took	blocking	blows	that	reverberated	up	the	bones	of
his	arms.	Clearly,	the	Pardu	was	seeking	to	break	the	thinner	weapons,	and,
well	made	as	they	were,	nicks	and	notches	were	being	driven	into	the	edges.
Further,	Kalam	knew	he	was	running	out	of	time.	The	diversion	continued,
but	now,	along	with	the	crack	of	sharpers	ripping	the	air,	waves	of	sorcery	had
begun	rolling	in	deafening	counterpoint.	Whatever	the	nature	of	the	squads
attacking	the	Dogslayers,	mages	were	giving	answer.
Worse	yet,	this	Talon	didn’t	enter	here	alone.
Kalam	suddenly	shifted	stance,	extending	the	knife	in	his	left	hand	and
drawing	his	right	hand	back	to	take	guard	position.	He	led	with	the	point,
evading	the	parries,	and,	in	increments,	slowly	retracted	his	left	arm,
beginning	at	the	shoulder.	The	faintest	pivoting	of	hips,	drawing	the	lead	leg
back—
And	the	Pardu	closed	the	distance	with	a	single	step.
Kalam’s	right	hand	shot	across,	beating	aside	both	Kethra	blades,
simultaneously	lunging	high	with	his	left	hand.


The	Pardu	flung	both	weapons	up	to	parry	and	trap	the	thrust.
And	Kalam	stepped	in	still	closer,	stabbing	crossways	with	the	longknife	in
his	right	hand.	Punching	the	tip	into	the	man’s	lower	belly.
A	gush	of	fluids,	the	edge	gouging	along	the	spine,	the	point	then	plunging
out	the	other	side.
The	parry	and	trap	had	torn	the	long-knife	in	his	left	hand	from	its	grasp,
flinging	it	to	one	side.
But	the	Talon	was	already	sagging,	folding	over	the	belly	wound	and	the
weapon	impaling	him.
Kalam	leaned	closer.	‘No,’	he	growled.	‘I	don’t.’
He	tugged	his	knife	free	and	let	the	dying	man	fall	to	the	layered	rugs	of
the	tent	floor.
‘A	damned	shame,’	mused	a	voice	near	the	back	wall.
Kalam	slowly	turned.	‘Kamist	Reloe.	I’ve	been	looking	for	you.’
The	High	Mage	smiled.	He	was	flanked	by	the	other	two	Talons,	one	of
whom	held	Kalam’s	second	long-knife	and	was	examining	it	curiously.	‘We’ve
been	expecting	a	strike	by	the	Claws,’	Kamist	Reloe	said.	‘Although	an	attack
by	long-dead	ghosts	was,	I	admit,	not	among	our	expectations.	It	is	Raraku,
you	understand.	This	damned	land	is…awakening.	Well,	never	mind	that.	Soon,
there	will	be…silence.’
‘He	holds	an	otataral	weapon,’	the	assassin	on	Kamist’s	right	said.
Kalam	glanced	down	at	the	blood-smeared	long-knife	in	his	right	hand.
‘Ah,	well,	that.’
‘Then,’	the	High	Mage	sighed,	‘you	two	shall	have	to	take	him	in	the,	uh,
mundane	way.	Will	you	suffice?’
The	one	holding	the	long-knife	flung	it	behind	him	and	nodded.	‘We’ve
watched.	He	has	patterns…and	skill.	Against	either	one	of	us	singly	we’d	be	in
trouble.	But	against	both	of	us?’
Kalam	had	to	agree	with	the	man’s	assessment.	He	stepped	back,	and
sheathed	his	weapon.	‘He’s	probably	right,’	he	rumbled.	With	his	other	hand	he
drew	out	the	acorn	and	tossed	it	on	the	floor.	All	three	men	flinched	back	as	it
bounced	then	rolled	towards	them.	The	innocuous	object	came	to	a	halt.
One	of	the	Talons	snorted.	Kicked	it	to	one	side.
Then	the	two	assassins	stepped	forward,	knives	flickering.
Kalam	raised	both	arms,	twisted	his	wrists	outward,	then	flexed	them	hard.
Both	Talons	grunted,	then	staggered	backward,	each	impaled	by	a	quarrel.
‘Careless	of	you,’	Kalam	muttered.
Kamist	shrieked,	unveiling	his	warren.
The	wave	of	sorcery	that	struck	the	High	Mage	caught	him	entirely


unawares,	coming	from	one	side.	Death-magic	closed	around	him	in	a
sizzling,	raging	web	of	black	fire.
His	shriek	escalated.	Then	Kamist	Reloe	sprawled,	the	sorcery	still
flickering	over	his	twitching,	burned	body.
A	figure	slowly	emerged	from	where	the	Talon	had	kicked	the	acorn
moments	earlier,	and	crouched	down	beside	Kamist	Reloe.	‘It’s	disloyalty	that
bothers	us	the	most,’	he	said	to	the	dying	High	Mage.	‘We	always	answer	it.
Always	have.	Always	will.’
Kalam	recovered	his	second	long-knife,	eyes	on	the	closed	flaps	on	the
chamber ’s	back	wall.	‘He’s	through	there,’	he	said,	then	paused	and	grinned.
‘Good	to	see	you,	Quick.’
Quick	Ben	glanced	over	and	nodded.
The	wizard	was,	Kalam	saw,	looking	older.	Worn	down.	Scars	not	written
on	his	skin,	but	on	his	heart.	He	will,	I	suspect,	have	nothing	good	to	tell	me
when	all	this	is	done.	‘Did	you,’	he	asked	Quick	Ben,	‘have	anything	to	do	with
the	diversion?’
‘No.	Nor	did	Hood,	although	the	hoary	bastard’s	arrived.	This	is	all
Raraku.’
‘So	Kamist	said,	not	that	I	understand	either	of	you.’
‘I’ll	explain	later,	friend,’	Quick	Ben	said,	rising.	He	faced	the	back	flap.
‘He	has	that	witch	Henaras	with	him,	I	think.	She’s	behind	some	fierce	wards
that	Kamist	Reloe	raised.’
Kalam	approached	the	doorway.	‘Leave	those	to	me,’	he	growled,
unsheathing	his	otataral	long-knife.
The	room	immediately	beyond	was	small,	dominated	by	a	map	table,	on
which	was	sprawled	the	corpse	of	Henaras.	Blood	was	still	flowing	in	streams
down	the	table’s	sides.
Kalam	glanced	back	at	Quick	Ben	and	raised	his	brows.
The	wizard	shook	his	head.
The	assassin	gingerly	approached,	and	his	eyes	caught	something
glimmering	silver-white	on	the	woman’s	chest.
A	pearl.
‘Seems	the	way	is	clear,’	Kalam	whispered.
Another	flap	slashed	the	wall	opposite.
Using	the	points	of	his	knives,	Kalam	prised	it	open.
A	large	high-backed	chair	filled	the	next	chamber,	on	which	was	seated
Korbolo	Dom.
His	blue	skin	was	a	ghastly	grey,	and	his	hands	shook	where	they	rested	on
the	chair ’s	ornate	arms.	When	he	spoke	his	voice	was	high	and	tight,	jittery


with	fear.	‘I	sent	an	emissary	to	the	Adjunct.	An	invitation.	I	am	prepared	to
attack	Sha’ik	and	her	tribes—with	my	Dogslayers.’
Kalam	grunted.	‘If	you	think	we’ve	come	with	her	answer,	you’d	be	wrong,
Korbolo.’
The	Napan’s	eyes	darted	to	Quick	Ben.	‘We	assumed	you	were	either	dead
with	the	rest	of	the	Bridgeburners,	or	still	on	Genabackis.’
The	wizard	shrugged.	‘Tayschrenn	sent	me	ahead.	Even	so,	he’s	brought
the	fleet	across	on	mage-driven	winds.	Dujek	Onearm	and	his	legions	reached
Ehrlitan	a	week	past—’
‘What’s	left	of	those	legions,	you	mean—’
‘More	than	enough	to	complement	the	Adjunct’s	forces,	I	should	think.’
Kalam	stared	between	the	two	men.	The	Bridgeburners…dead?
Whiskeyjack?	Onearm’s	Host—gods	below,	what	happened	over	there?
‘We	can	salvage	this,’	Korbolo	Dom	said,	leaning	forward.	‘All	of	Seven
Cities,	returned	to	the	Empire.	Sha’ik	brought	in	chains	before	the	Empress—’
‘And	for	you	and	your	soldiers	a	pardon?’	Quick	Ben	asked.	‘Korbolo
Dom,	you	have	truly	lost	your	mind—’
‘Then	die!’	the	Napan	shrieked,	leaping	forward,	hands	reaching	for	the
wizard’s	throat.
Kalam	stepped	in	and,	knife	reversed,	struck	Korbolo	Dom	hard	against
the	side	of	the	head.
The	Napan	staggered.
A	second	fist	shattered	his	nose	and	sent	him	sprawling.
Quick	Ben	stared	down	at	the	man.	‘Truss	him	up,	Kalam.	That	diversion’s
over,	from	the	silence	outside—I’ll	find	us	a	way	out.’
Kalam	began	tying	the	unconscious	man’s	hands.	‘Where	are	we	taking
him?’
‘I’ve	a	thought	to	that.’
The	assassin	glanced	up	at	his	friend.	‘Quick?	The	Bridgeburners?
Whiskeyjack?’
The	hard,	dark	eyes	softened.	‘Dead.	Barring	Picker	and	a	handful	of
others.	There’s	a	tale	there,	and	I	promise	I	will	tell	it	in	full…later.’
Kalam	stared	down	at	Korbolo	Dom.	‘I	feel	like	cutting	throats,’	he	rasped.
‘Not	him.	Not	now.’
Hold	back	on	the	feelings,	Kalam	Mekhar.	Hold	back	on	everything.	Quick’s
right.	In	time.	In	time…
Oh,	Whiskeyjack…
	


There	was	time	for…everything.	This	night	and	for	the	day	to	come,	Bidithal
needed	Sha’ik.	And	the	Whirlwind	Goddess.	And	perhaps,	if	all	went	well,
there	would	be	the	opportunity	for	bargaining.	Once	the	goddess’s	rage	has
cooled,	annealed	into	beauty	by	victory—we	can	still	achieve	this.
But	I	know	now	what	Febryl	has	done.	I	know	what	Korbolo	Dom	and
Kamist	Reloe	plan	for	the	dawn.
They	could	be	stopped.	The	knives	could	be	turned.
He	hobbled	as	quickly	as	he	could	towards	Sha’ik’s	palace.	Ghosts	flitted
about	on	the	edges	of	his	vision,	but	his	shadows	protected	him.	In	the	distance
he	heard	screams,	detonations	and	sorcery—coming,	he	realized,	from	the
Dogslayers’	camp.	Ah,	so	that	Claw’s	made	it	that	far,	has	he?	Both	good	and…
troubling.	Well,	at	the	very	least	he’ll	keep	Kamist	occupied.
Of	course,	the	danger	posed	by	the	roving	assassins	still	existed,	though
that	was	diminishing	the	closer	he	got	to	Sha’ik’s	abode.
Still,	the	streets	and	alleys	were	disturbingly	deserted.
He	came	within	sight	of	the	sprawling	palace,	and	saw	with	relief	the	pools
of	torchlight	surrounding	it.
Counter	the	Napan’s	gambit—awaken	the	goddess	to	the	threat	awaiting
her.	Then	hunt	down	that	gnarled	bhok’aral	Febryl	and	see	his	skin	stripped
from	his	writhing	flesh.	Even	the	goddess—yes,	even	the	goddess	will	have	to
recognize	me.	My	power.	When	flanked	by	my	new	pets—
A	hand	shot	out	of	the	darkness	and	closed	about	Bidithal’s	neck.	He	was
lifted	into	the	air—flailing—then	thrown	hard	to	the	ground.	Blinded.	Choking.
His	shadow-servants	swarmed	to	defend	him.
A	growl,	the	hissing	swing	of	something	massive	that	cut	a	sweeping	path
—and	suddenly	the	wraiths	were	gone.
Slowly,	Bidithal’s	bulging	eyes	made	out	the	figure	crouched	above	him.
Toblakai—
‘You	should	have	left	her	alone,’	Karsa	Orlong	said	quietly,	his	voice
devoid	of	inflection.	Behind	and	around	the	giant	were	gathering	ghosts,
chained	souls.
We	are	both	servants	of	the	same	god!	You	fool!	Let	me	speak!	I	would	save
Sha’ik!
‘But	you	didn’t.	I	know,	Bidithal,	where	your	sick	desires	come	from.	I
know	where	your	pleasure	hides—the	pleasure	you	would	take	from	others.
Witness.’
Karsa	Orlong	set	down	his	stone	sword,	then	reached	between	Bidithal’s
legs.
A	hand	closed	indiscriminately	around	all	that	it	found.


And	tore.
Until,	with	a	ripping	of	tendons	and	shreds	of	muscle,	a	flood	of	blood	and
other	fluids,	the	hand	came	away	with	its	mangled	prize.
The	pain	was	unbearable.	The	pain	was	a	rending	of	his	soul.	It	devoured
him.
And	blood	was	pouring	out,	hot	as	fire,	even	as	deathly	cold	stole	across
his	skin,	seeped	into	his	limbs.
The	scene	above	him	blackened,	until	only	Toblakai’s	impassive,	battered
face	remained,	coolly	watching	Bidithal’s	death.
Death?	Yes.	You	fool,	Toblakai—
The	hand	around	his	neck	relaxed,	drew	away.
Involuntarily,	Bidithal	drew	in	an	agonizing	breath	and	made	to	scream—
Something	soft	and	bloody	was	pushed	into	his	mouth.
‘For	you,	Bidithal.	For	every	nameless	girl-child	you	destroyed.	Here.
Choke	on	your	pleasure.’
And	choke	he	did.	Until	Hood’s	Gate	yawned—
And	there,	gathered	by	the	Lord	of	Death,	waited	demons	who	were	of	like
nature	to	Bidithal	himself,	gleefully	closing	about	their	new	victim.
A	lifetime	of	vicious	pleasure.	An	eternity	of	pain	in	answer.
For	even	Hood	understood	the	necessity	for	balance.
	
Lostara	Yil	edged	up	from	the	sinkhole	and	squinted	in	an	effort	to	pierce	the
gloom.	A	glance	behind	her	revealed	a	starlit	desert,	luminous	and	glittering.
Yet,	ahead,	darkness	swathed	the	oasis	and	the	ruined	city	within	it.	A	short
while	earlier	she	had	heard	distant	thumps,	faint	screams,	but	now	silence	had
returned.
The	air	had	grown	bitter	cold.	Scowling,	Lostara	checked	her	weapons,
then	made	to	leave.
‘Make	no	move,’	a	voice	murmured	from	a	pace	or	two	off	to	her	right.
Her	head	snapped	round,	then	her	scowl	deepened.	‘If	you’re	here	to	watch,
Cotillion,	there’s	little	to	see.	I	woke	Pearl,	and	he	hardly	swore	at	all,	despite
the	headache.	He’s	in	there,	somewhere—’
‘Aye,	he	is,	lass.	But	already	he’s	returning…because	he	can	feel	what’s
coming.’
‘What’s	coming.	Enough	to	make	you	hide	here	beside	me?’
The	shadow-shrouded	god	seemed	to	shrug.	‘There	are	times	when	it	is
advisable	to	step	back…and	wait.	The	Holy	Desert	itself	senses	the	approach	of
an	ancient	foe,	and	will	rise	in	answer	if	need	be.	Even	more	precarious,	the


fragment	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	that	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	would	claim	is
manifesting	itself.	The	goddess	is	fashioning	a	portal,	a	gate—one	massive
enough	to	swallow	this	entire	oasis.	Thus,	she	too	makes	a	play	for	Raraku’s
immortal	heart.	The	irony	is	that	she	herself	is	being	manipulated,	by	a	far
cleverer	god,	who	would	take	this	fragment	for	himself,	and	call	it	his	House
of	Chains.	So	you	see,	Lostara	Shadow	Dancer,	best	we	remain	precisely	where
we	are.	For	tonight,	and	in	this	place,	worlds	are	at	war.’
‘It	is	nothing	to	Pearl	and	me,’	she	insisted,	squinting	hard	into	the	gloom.
‘We’re	here	for	Felisin—’
‘And	you	have	found	her,	but	she	remains	beyond	you.	Beyond	Pearl	as
well.	For	the	moment…’
‘Then	we	must	needs	but	await	the	clearing	of	the	path.’
‘Aye.	As	I	have	advised,	patience.’
Shadows	swirled,	hissed	over	sand,	then	the	god	was	gone.
Lostara	grunted.	‘Goodbye	to	you	as	well,’	she	muttered,	then	drew	her
cloak	tighter	about	herself	and	settled	down	to	wait.
	
Assassins	armed	with	crossbows	had	crept	up	behind	him.	Febryl	had	killed
them,	one	after	another,	as	soon	as	they	arrived,	with	a	host	of	most	painful
spells,	and	now	his	sorcerous	web	told	him	that	there	were	no	more.	Indeed,
Korbolo	Dom	and	Kamist	Reloe	had	been	bearded	in	their	den.	By	ghosts	and
worse—agents	of	the	Malazan	Empire.
Wide	and	bloody	paths	had	carved	messily	across	his	web,	leaving	him
blind	here	and	there,	but	none	stretched	anywhere	close	to	his	position…so	far.
And	soon,	the	oasis	behind	him	would	become	as	a	nightmare	wakened	into
horrid	reality,	and	Febryl	himself	would	vanish	from	the	minds	of	his	enemies
in	the	face	of	more	immediate	threats.
Dawn	was	but	two	bells	away.	While,	behind	him,	darkness	had	devoured
the	oasis,	the	sky	overhead	and	to	the	east	was	comparatively	bright	with	the
glitter	of	stars.	Indeed,	everything	was	proceeding	perfectly.
The	starlight	also	proved	sufficient	for	Febryl	to	detect	the	shadow	that	fell
over	him.
‘I	never	liked	you	much,’	rumbled	a	voice	above	him.
Squealing,	Febryl	sought	to	dive	forward.
But	was	effortlessly	plucked	and	lifted	high	from	the	ground.
Then	broken.
The	snap	of	his	spine	was	like	brittle	wood	in	the	cold	night	air.


	
Karsa	Orlong	flung	Febryl’s	corpse	away.	He	glared	up	at	the	stars	for	a
moment,	drew	a	deep	breath	into	his	lungs,	and	sought	to	clear	his	mind.
Urugal’s	withered	voice	was	screaming	in	his	skull.	It	had	been	that	voice,
and	that	will,	that	had	driven	him	step	by	step	from	the	oasis.
The	false	god	of	the	Uryd	tribe	wanted	Karsa	Orlong…gone.
He	was	being	pushed	hard…away	from	what	was	coming,	from	what	was
about	to	happen	in	the	oasis.
But	Karsa	did	not	like	being	pushed.
He	lifted	his	sword	clear	of	his	harness	rings	and	closed	both	hands	about
the	grip,	lowering	the	point	to	hover	just	above	the	ground,	then	forced
himself	to	turn	about	and	face	the	oasis.
A	thousand	ghostly	chains	stretched	taut	behind	him,	then	began	pulling.
The	Teblor	growled	under	his	breath	and	leaned	forward.	I	am	the	master
of	these	chains.	I,	Karsa	Orlong,	yield	to	none.	Not	gods,	not	the	souls	I	have
slain.	I	will	walk	forward	now,	and	either	resistance	shall	end,	or	the	chains
will	be	snapped.
Besides,	I	have	left	my	horse	tethered	in	the	stone	forest.
Twin	howls	tore	the	night	air	above	the	oasis,	sudden	and	fierce	as	cracks
of	lightning.
Karsa	Orlong	smiled.	Ah,	they	have	arrived.
He	lifted	his	sword’s	point	slightly	higher,	then	surged	forward.
It	would	not	do—it	turned	out—to	have	the	chains	sundered.	The	tension
suddenly	vanished,	and,	for	this	night	at	least,	all	resistance	to	Toblakai’s	will
had	ended.
He	left	the	ridge	and	descended	the	slope,	into	the	gloom	once	more.
	
Fist	Gamet	was	lying	on	his	cot,	struggling	to	breathe	as	a	tightness	seized	his
throat.	Thunder	filled	his	head,	in	thrumming	waves	of	pain	radiating	out	from
a	spot	just	above	and	behind	his	right	eye.
Pain	such	as	he	had	never	felt	before,	driving	him	onto	his	side,	the	cot
creaking	and	pitching	as	nausea	racked	him,	the	vomit	spraying	onto	the	floor.
But	the	emptying	of	his	stomach	offered	no	surcease	from	the	agony	in	his
skull.
His	eyes	were	open	but	he	was	blind.
There	had	been	headaches.	Every	day,	since	his	fall	from	his	horse.	But
nothing	like	this.


The	barely	healed	knife-slash	in	his	palm	had	reopened	during	his
contortions,	smearing	sticky	blood	across	his	face	and	brow	when	he	sought	to
claw	the	pain	out	from	his	head,	and	the	wound	now	felt	as	if	it	was	afire,
scorching	his	veins.
Groaning,	he	clambered	sideways	from	the	cot	and	then	halted,	on	his
hands	and	knees,	head	hanging	down,	as	waves	of	trembling	shivered	through
him.
I	need	to	move.	I	need	to	act.	Something.	Anything.
I	need—
A	time	of	blankness,	then	he	found	himself	standing	near	the	tent	flap.
Weighted	in	his	armour,	gauntlets	covering	his	hands,	helm	on	his	head.	The
pain	was	fading,	a	cool	emptiness	rising	in	its	wake.
He	needed	to	go	outside.	He	needed	his	horse.
Gamet	strode	from	the	tent.	A	guard	accosted	him	but	he	waved	the	woman
away	and	hurried	towards	the	corrals.
Ride.	Ride	out.	It’s	time.
Then	he	was	cinching	the	saddle	of	his	horse,	waiting	for	the	beast	to
release	its	breath,	then	drawing	it	a	notch	tighter.	A	clever	horse.	Paran	stables,
of	course.	Fast	and	of	almost	legendary	endurance.	Impatient	with
incompetence,	ever	testing	the	rider ’s	claim	to	being	in	charge,	but	that	was	to
be	expected	from	such	a	fine	breed.
Gamet	swung	himself	into	the	saddle.	It	felt	good	to	be	riding	once	more.
On	the	move,	the	ground	whispering	past	as	he	rode	down	the	back	ramp,	then
round	the	jagged	island	and	towards	the	basin.
He	saw	three	figures	ahead,	standing	at	the	ridge,	and	thought	nothing
strange	as	to	their	presence.	They	are	what	will	come.	These	three.
Nil.	Nether.	The	lad,	Grub.
The	last	turned	as	Gamet	reined	in	beside	them.	And	nodded.	‘The	Wickans
and	Malazans	are	on	the	flanks,	Fist.	But	your	assault	will	be	straight	up	the
Dogslayers’	main	ramp.’	And	he	pointed.
Footsoldiers	and	cavalry	were	massing	in	the	basin,	moving	through	the
thick	gloom.	Gamet	could	hear	the	whisper	of	armour,	feel	the	thud	of
countless	horse	hoofs.	He	saw	banners	and	standards,	hanging	limp	and
ragged.
‘Ride	to	them,	Fist,’	Grub	said.
And	he	saluted	the	child	and	set	heels	to	his	mount’s	flanks.
Black	and	rust-red	armour,	visored	helms	with	ornate	cheek-guards,	short
thrusting	javelins	and	kite	shields,	the	rumble	of	countless	booted	feet—he
rode	alongside	one	column,	casting	an	appraising	eye	over	the	companies	of


infantry.
Then	a	wing	of	cavalry	swept	round	to	engulf	him.	One	rider	rode	close.	A
dragon-winged	helm	swivelled	to	face	him.	‘Ride	with	us,	soldier?’
‘I	cannot,’	Gamet	replied.	‘I	am	the	Fist.	I	must	command.’
‘Not	this	night,’	the	warrior	replied.	‘Fight	at	our	sides,	as	the	soldier	you
are.	Remember	the	old	battles?	When	all	that	was	required	was	the	guarding	of
the	companions	flanking	you.	Such	will	be	this	night.	Leave	the	commanding
to	the	lords.	Ride	with	us	in	freedom.	And	glory.’
A	surge	of	exultation	swept	through	Gamet.	The	pain	in	his	head	was	gone.
He	could	feel	his	blood	racing	like	fire	in	his	muscles.	He	wanted	this.	Yes,	he
wanted	this	very	thing.
Gamet	unsheathed	his	sword,	the	sound	an	echoing	rasp	in	the	chill	air.
His	helmed	companion	laughed.	‘Are	you	with	us,	soldier?’
‘I	am,	friend.’
They	reached	the	base	of	the	cobbled	ramp,	slowing	to	firm	up	their
formation.	A	broad	wedge	that	then	began	assailing	the	slope,	hoofs	striking
sparks	off	the	stones.
The	Dogslayers	had	yet	to	sound	an	alarm.
Fools.	They’ve	slept	through	it	all.	Or	perhaps	sorcery	has	deadened	the
sounds	of	our	preparation.	Ah,	yes.	Nil	and	Nether.	They	are	still	there,	on	the
ridge	the	other	side	of	the	basin.
The	company’s	standard	bearer	was	just	a	few	horses	to	Gamet’s	left.	He
squinted	up	at	the	banner,	wondered	that	he	had	never	seen	it	before.	There	was
something	of	the	Khundryl	in	its	design,	torn	and	frayed	though	it	was.	A	clan
of	the	Burned	Tears,	then—which	made	sense	given	the	archaic	armour	his
comrades	were	wearing.	Archaic	and	half	rotting,	in	fact.	Too	long	stored	in
chests—moths	and	other	vermin	have	assailed	it,	but	the	bronze	looks	sound
enough,	if	tarnished	and	pitted.	A	word	to	the	commanders	later,	I	think…
Cool,	gauging	thoughts,	even	as	his	proud	horse	thundered	alongside	the
others.	Gamet	glared	upward,	and	saw	the	crest	directly	before	them.	He	lifted
high	his	longsword	and	loosed	a	savage	scream.
The	wedge	poured	over	the	crest,	swept	our	into	the	unaware	ranks	of
Dogslayers,	still	huddled	down	in	their	trenches.
Screams	on	all	sides,	strangely	muted,	almost	faint.	Sounds	of	battle,	yet
they	seemed	a	league	distant,	as	if	carried	on	the	wind.	Gamet	swung	his
sword,	his	eyes	meeting	those	of	Dogslayers,	seeing	the	horror	writ	there.
Watching	mouths	open	to	shriek,	yet	hardly	any	sound	came	forth,	as	if	the
sands	were	swallowing	everything,	absorbing	sound	as	eagerly	as	they	did
blood	and	bile.


Masses	surged	over	the	trenches,	blackened	swords	swinging	and
chopping	down.	The	ramp	to	the	east	had	been	overrun	by	the	Wickans.	Gamet
saw	the	waving	standards	and	grinned.	Crow.	Foolish	Dog.	Weasel.
Out	of	the	impenetrably	black	sky	descended	butterflies,	in	swarms,	to	flit
above	the	carnage	in	the	trenches.
On	the	ramp	to	the	west	there	was	the	flash	of	Moranth	munitions,	sending
grim	reverberations	through	the	earth,	and	Gamet	could	watch	the	slaughter
over	there,	a	scene	panoramic	and	dulled,	as	if	he	was	looking	upon	a	mural—
a	painting	where	ancient	armies	warred	in	eternal	battle.
They	had	come	for	the	Dogslayers.	For	the	butcherers	of	unarmed
Malazans,	soldier	and	civilian,	the	stubborn	and	the	fleeing,	the	desperate	and
the	helpless.	The	Dogslayers,	who	had	given	their	souls	to	betrayal.
The	fight	raged	on,	but	it	was	overwhelmingly	one-sided.	The	enemy
seemed	strangely	incapable	of	mustering	any	kind	of	defence.	They	simply
died	in	their	trenches,	or	seeking	to	retreat	they	were	run	down	after	but	a	few
strides.	Skewered	by	lances,	javelins.	Trampled	beneath	chopping	hoofs.
Gamet	understood	their	horror,	saw	with	a	certain	satisfaction	the	terror	in
their	faces	as	he	and	his	comrades	delivered	death.
He	could	hear	the	battle	song	now,	rising	and	falling	like	waves	on	a
pebbled	shore,	yet	building	towards	a	climax	yet	to	come—yet	to	come,	but
soon.	Soon.	Yes,	we’ve	needed	a	song.	We’ve	waited	a	long	time	for	such	a	song.
To	honour	our	deeds,	our	struggles.	Our	lives	and	our	deaths.	We’ve	needed	our
own	voice,	so	that	our	spirits	could	march,	march	ever	onward.
To	battle.
To	war.
Manning	these	walls	of	crumbled	brick	and	sand.	Defending	the	bone-dry
harbours	and	the	dead	cities	that	once	blazed	with	ancient	dreams,	that	once
flickered	life’s	reflection	on	the	warm,	shallow	sea.
Even	memories	need	to	be	defended.
Even	memories.
He	fought	on,	side	by	side	with	his	dark	warrior	companions—and	so
grew	to	love	them,	these	stalwart	comrades,	and	when	at	last	the	dragonhelmed	horse	warrior	rode	up	and	reined	in	before	him,	Gamet	whirled	his
sword	in	greeting.
The	rider	laughed	once	again.	Reached	up	a	blood-spattered,	gauntleted
hand,	and	raised	the	visor—to	reveal	the	face	of	a	dark-skinned	woman,	her
eyes	a	stunning	blue	within	a	web	of	desert	lines.
‘There	are	more!’	Gamet	shouted—though	even	to	his	own	ears	his	voice
sounded	far	away.	‘More	enemies!	We	must	ride!’


Her	teeth	flashed	white	as	she	laughed	again.	‘Not	the	tribes,	my	friend!
They	are	kin.	This	battle	is	done—others	will	shed	blood	come	the	morrow.
We	march	to	the	shores,	soldier—will	you	join	us?’
He	saw	more	than	professional	interest	in	her	eyes.
‘I	shall.’
‘You	would	leave	your	friends,	Gamet	Ul’Paran?’
‘For	you,	yes.’
Her	smile,	and	the	laugh	that	followed,	stole	the	old	man’s	heart.
A	final	glance	to	the	other	ramps	showed	no	movement.	The	Wickans	to
the	east	had	ridden	on,	although	a	lone	crow	was	wheeling	overhead.	The
Malazans	to	the	west	had	withdrawn.	And	the	butterflies	had	vanished.	In	the
trenches	of	the	Dogslayers,	an	hour	before	dawn,	only	the	dead	remained.
Vengeance.	She	will	be	pleased.	She	will	understand,	and	be	pleased.
As	am	I.
Goodbye,	Adjunct	Tavore.
	
Koryk	slowly	settled	down	beside	him,	stared	northeastward	as	if	seeking
to	discover	what	so	held	the	man’s	attention.	‘What	is	it?’	he	asked	after	a	time.
‘What	are	you	looking	at,	Sergeant?’
Fiddler	wiped	at	his	eyes.	‘Nothing…or	nothing	that	makes	sense.’
‘We’re	not	going	to	see	battle	in	the	morning,	are	we?’
He	glanced	over,	studied	the	young	Seti’s	hard-edged	features,	wanting	to
see	something	in	them,	though	he	was	not	quite	certain	what.	After	a	moment,
he	sighed	and	shrugged.	‘The	glory	of	battle,	Koryk,	dwells	only	in	the	bard’s
voice,	in	the	teller ’s	woven	words.	Glory	belongs	to	ghosts	and	poets.	What
you	hear	and	dream	isn’t	the	same	as	what	you	live—blur	the	distinction	at
your	own	peril,	lad.’
‘You’ve	been	a	soldier	all	your	life,	Sergeant.	If	it	doesn’t	ease	a	thirst
within	you,	why	are	you	here?’
‘I’ve	no	answer	to	that,’	Fiddler	admitted.	‘I	think,	maybe,	I	was	called
here.’
‘That	song	Bottle	said	you	were	hearing?’
‘Aye.’
‘What	does	it	mean?	That	song?’
‘Quick	Ben	will	have	a	better	answer	to	that,	I	think.	But	my	gut	is
whispering	one	thing	over	and	over	again.	The	Bridgeburners,	lad,	have
ascended.’
Koryk	made	a	warding	sign	and	edged	away	slightly.


‘Or,	at	least,	the	dead	ones	have.	The	rest	of	us,	we’re	just…malingering.
Here	in	the	mortal	realm.’
‘Expecting	to	die	soon,	then?’
Fiddler	grunted.	‘Wasn’t	planning	on	it.’
‘Good,	because	we	like	our	sergeant	just	fine.’
The	Seti	moved	away.	Fiddler	returned	his	gaze	to	the	distant	oasis.
Appreciate	that,	lad.	He	narrowed	his	eyes,	but	the	darkness	defied	him.
Something	was	going	on	there.	Feels	as	if…as	if	friends	are	fighting.	I	can
almost	hear	sounds	of	battle.	Almost.
Suddenly,	two	howls	rose	into	the	night.
Fiddler	was	on	his	feet.	‘Hood’s	breath!’
From	Smiles:	‘Gods,	what	was	that?’
No.	Couldn’t	have	been.	But…
And	then	the	darkness	above	the	oasis	began	to	change.
	
The	row	of	horse	warriors	rode	up	before	them	amidst	swirling	dust,	the
horses	stamping	and	tossing	heads	in	jittery	fear.
Beside	him,	Leoman	of	the	Flails	raised	a	hand	to	halt	his	company,	then
gestured	Corabb	to	follow	as	he	trotted	his	mount	towards	the	newcomers.
Mathok	nodded	in	greeting.	‘We	have	missed	you,	Leoman—’
‘My	shaman	has	fallen	unconcious,’	Leoman	cut	in.	‘He	chose	oblivion
over	terror.	What	is	going	on	in	the	oasis,	Mathok?’
The	warleader	made	a	warding	sign.	‘Raraku	has	awakened.	Ghosts	have
risen,	the	Holy	Desert’s	very	own	memories.’
‘And	who	is	their	enemy?’
Mathok	shook	his	head.	‘Betrayal	upon	betrayal,	Leoman.	I	have	withdrawn
my	warriors	from	the	oasis	and	encamped	them	between	Sha’ik	and	the
Malazans.	Chaos	has	claimed	all	else—’
‘So	you	do	not	have	an	answer	for	me.’
‘I	fear	the	battle	is	already	lost—’
‘Sha’ik?’
‘I	have	the	Book	with	me.	I	am	sworn	to	protect	it.’
Leoman	frowned.
Shifting	on	his	saddle,	Corabb	glared	northeastward.	Preternatural
darkness	engulfed	the	oasis,	and	it	seemed	to	swarm	as	if	filled	with	living
creatures,	winged	shadows,	spectral	demons.	And	on	the	ground	beneath,	he
thought	he	could	see	the	movement	of	masses	of	soldiery.	Corabb	shivered.
‘To	Y’Ghatan?’	Leoman	asked.


Mathok	nodded.	‘With	my	own	tribe	as	escort.	Leaving	almost	nine
thousand	desert	warriors	at	your	disposal…for	you	to	command.’
But	Leoman	shook	his	head.	‘This	battle	will	belong	to	the	Dogslayers,
Mathok.	There	is	no	choice	left	to	me.	I	have	not	the	time	to	greatly	modify	our
tactics.	The	positions	are	set—she	waited	too	long.	You	did	not	answer	me,
Mathok.	What	of	Sha’ik?’
‘The	goddess	holds	her	still,’	the	warleader	replied.	‘Even	Korbolo	Dom’s
assassins	cannot	get	to	her.’
‘The	Napan	must	have	known	that	would	happen,’	Leoman	muttered.	‘And
so	he	has	planned…something	else.’
Mathok	shook	his	head.	‘My	heart	has	broken	this	night,	my	friend.’
Leoman	studied	the	old	warrior	for	a	time,	then	he	nodded.	‘Until
Y’Ghatan,	then,	Mathok.’
‘You	ride	to	Sha’ik?’
‘I	must.’
‘Tell	her—’
‘I	will.’
Mathok	nodded,	unmindful	of	the	tears	glistening	down	his	lined	cheeks.
He	straightened	suddenly	in	his	saddle.	‘Dryjhna	once	belonged	to	us,	Leoman.
To	the	tribes	of	this	desert.	The	Book’s	prophecies	were	sewn	to	a	far	older
skin.	The	Book	was	in	truth	naught	but	a	history,	a	telling	of	apocalyptic	events
survived—not	of	those	to	come—’
‘I	know,	my	friend.	Guard	well	the	Book,	and	go	in	peace.’
Mathok	wheeled	his	horse	to	face	the	west	trail.	An	angry	gesture	and	his
riders	followed	as	he	rode	into	the	gloom.
Leoman	stared	after	them	for	a	long	moment.
Howls	shattered	the	night.
Corabb	saw	his	commander	suddenly	bare	his	teeth	as	he	glared	into	the
darkness	ahead.	Like	two	beasts	about	to	come	face	to	face.	Spirits	below,	what
awaits	us?
‘Weapons!’	Leoman	snarled.
The	company	thundered	forward,	along	the	trail	Corabb	had	now	traversed
what	seemed	countless	times.
The	closer	they	drew	to	the	oasis,	the	more	muted	the	sound	of	their
passage,	as	if	the	darkness	was	devouring	all	sound.	Those	howls	had	not	been
repeated,	and	Corabb	was	beginning	to	wonder	if	they	had	been	real	at	all.
Perhaps	not	a	mortal	throat	at	all.	An	illusion,	a	cry	to	freeze	all	in	their	tracks
—
The	vanguard	entered	a	defile	and	suddenly	quarrels	sprouted	from	riders


and	horses.	Screams,	toppling	warriors,	stumbling	horses.	From	further	back
in	the	column,	the	clash	of	swords	and	shields.
Dogslayers!
Somehow,	Corabb	and	his	horse	found	themselves	plunging	clear.	A	figure
darted	close	to	his	left	and	he	shrieked,	raising	his	weapon.
‘It’s	me,	damn	you!’
‘Leoman!’
His	commander ’s	horse	had	been	killed	beneath	him.	He	reached	up.
Corabb	clasped	Leoman’s	arm	and	vaulted	him	onto	his	horse’s	back.
‘Ride,	Bhilan!	Ride!’
	
Black-armoured	horse	warriors	plunged	through	the	low	wall,	massive	axes
whirling	in	their	gauntleted	hands.
Quick	Ben	yelped	and	dived	for	cover.
Cursing,	Kalam	followed,	Korbolo	Dom’s	bound	body	bouncing	on	his
shoulders.	He	flung	himself	down	beside	the	wizard	as	hoofs	flashed	over
them,	raining	sand	and	bits	of	mortar.
Then	the	heavy	cavalry	was	past.
Kalam	pushed	the	Napan	off	his	back	and	twisted	onto	his	side	to	glare	at
Quick	Ben.	‘Who	in	Hood’s	name	were	those	bastards?’
‘We’d	best	lie	low	for	a	time,’	the	wizard	muttered	with	a	grimace,	rubbing
grit	from	his	eyes.	‘Raraku’s	unleashed	her	ghosts—’
‘And	are	they	the	ones	singing?	Those	voices	are	right	inside	my	head—’
‘Mine,	too,	friend.	Tell	me,	had	any	conversations	with	a	Tanno
Spiritwalker	lately?’
‘A	what?	No.	Why?’
‘Because	that	is	what	you’re	hearing.	If	it	was	a	song	woven	around	these
ancient	ghosts	we’re	seeing,	well,	we’d	not	be	hearing	it.	In	fact,	we’d	not	be
hearing	much	of	anything	at	all.	And	we’d	have	been	chopped	into	tiny	pieces
by	now.	Kalam,	that	Tanno	song	belongs	to	the	Bridgeburners.’
What?
‘Makes	you	wonder	about	cause	and	effect,	doesn’t	it?	A	Tanno	stole	our
tale	and	fashioned	a	song—but	for	that	song	to	have	any	effect,	the
Bridgeburners	had	to	die.	As	a	company.	And	now	it	has.	Barring	you	and	me
—’
‘And	Fiddler.	Wait!	Fid	mentioned	something	about	a	Spiritwalker	in
Ehrlitan.’
‘It	would	have	had	to	have	been	direct	contact.	A	clasping	of	hands,	an


embrace,	or	a	kiss—’
‘That	bastard	sapper—I	remember	he	was	damned	cagey	about	something.
A	kiss?	Remind	me	to	give	Fiddler	a	kiss	next	time	I	see	him,	one	he’ll	never
forget—’
‘Whoever	it	was	and	however	it	happened,’	Quick	Ben	said,	‘the
Bridgeburners	have	now	ascended—’
‘Ascended?	What	in	the	Queen’s	name	does	that	mean?’
‘Damned	if	I	know,	Kalam.	I’ve	never	heard	of	such	a	thing	before.	A
whole	company—there’s	no	precedent	for	this,	none	at	all.’
‘Except	maybe	the	T’lan	Imass.’
The	wizard’s	dark	eyes	narrowed	on	his	friend.	‘An	interesting	thought,’
he	murmured.	Then	sighed.	‘In	any	case,	Raraku’s	ghosts	have	risen	on	that
song.	Risen…to	battle.	But	there’s	more—I	swear	I	saw	a	Wickan	standard	back
near	the	Dogslayer	trenches	just	as	we	were	hightailing	it	out	of	there.’
‘Well,	maybe	Tavore’s	taken	advantage	of	all	this—’
‘Tavore	knows	nothing	of	it,	Kalam.	She	carries	an	otataral	sword,	after
all.	Maybe	the	mages	she	has	with	her	sense	something,	but	the	darkness	that’s
descended	on	this	oasis	is	obscuring	everything.’
Kalam	grunted.	‘Any	other	good	news	to	tell	me,	Quick?’
‘The	darkness	is	sorcery.	Remember	whenever	Anomander	Rake	arrived
some	place	with	his	warren	unveiled?	That	weight,	the	trembling	ground,	the
overwhelming	pressure?’
‘Don’t	tell	me	the	Son	of	Darkness	is	coming—’
‘I	hope	not.	I	mean,	I	don’t	think	so.	He’s	busy—I’ll	explain	later.	No,	this
is	more,	uh,	primal,	I	think.’
‘Those	howls,’	Kalam	grated.	‘Two	hounds,	Quick	Ben.	I	had	a	run	in	with
them	myself.	They’re	like	the	Shadow	Hounds,	only	somehow	worse—’
The	wizard	was	staring	across	at	him.
‘Stop	it,	Quick.	I	don’t	like	that	look.	I	got	away	because	I	loosed	a	handful
of	azalan	demons	at	them.	Didn’t	stop	those	hounds,	but	it	was	enough	for	me
to	make	good	my	escape.’
Quick	Ben’s	brows	slowly	arched.	‘“A	handful	of	azalan	demons,”	Kalam?
And	where	have	you	been	lately?’
‘You	ain’t	the	only	one	with	a	few	tales	to	tell.’
The	wizard	cautiously	rose	into	a	crouch,	scanned	the	area	on	the	other
side	of	the	crumbled	wall.	‘Two	Hounds	of	Darkness,	you	said.	The	Deragoth,
then.	So,	who	broke	their	chains,	I	wonder?’
‘That’s	just	typical!’	Kalam	snapped.	‘What	don’t	you	know?’
‘A	few	things,’	the	wizard	replied	under	his	breath.	‘For	example,	what	are


those	hounds	doing	here?’
‘So	long	as	we	stay	out	of	their	path,	I	couldn’t	care	less—’
‘No,	you	misunderstood.’	Quick	Ben	nodded	towards	where	his	gaze	was
fixed	on	the	clearing	beyond.	‘What	are	they	doing	here?’
Kalam	groaned.
	
Their	bristly	hackles	were	raised	above	their	strangely	humped,	massive
shoulders.	Thick,	long	necks	and	broad,	flattened	heads,	the	jaw	muscles
bulging.	Scarred,	black	hides,	and	eyes	that	burned	pure	and	empty	of	light.
As	large	as	a	steppe	horse,	but	bulkier	by	far,	padding	with	heads	lowered
into	the	flagstoned	square.	There	was	something	about	them	that	resembled	a
hyena,	and	a	plains	bear	as	well.	A	certain	sly	avidness	merged	with	arrogant
brutality.
They	slowed,	then	halted,	lifting	glistening	snouts	into	the	air.
They	had	come	to	destroy.	To	tear	life	from	all	flesh,	to	mock	all	claims	of
mastery,	to	shatter	all	that	stood	in	their	path.	This	was	a	new	world	for	them.
New,	yet	once	it	had	been	old.	Changes	had	come.	A	world	of	vast	silences
where	once	kin	and	foe	alike	had	opened	throats	in	fierce	challenge.
Nothing	was	as	it	had	been,	and	the	Deragoth	were	made	uneasy.
They	had	come	to	destroy.
But	now	hesitated.
With	eyes	fixed	on	the	one	who	had	arrived,	who	now	stood	before	them,
at	the	far	end	of	the	square.
Hesitate.	Yes.
Karsa	Orlong	strode	forward.	He	addressed	them,	his	voice	low	and
rumbling.	‘Urugal’s	master	had…ambitions,’	he	said.	‘A	dream	of	mastery.	But
now	he	understands	better,	and	wants	nothing	to	do	with	you.’	Then	the	Teblor
smiled.	‘So	I	do.’
Both	hounds	stepped	back,	then	moved	to	open	more	space	between	them.
Karsa	smiled.	You	do	not	belong	here.	‘You	would	let	me	pass?’	He
continued	on.	And	I	have	had	my	fill	of	strangers.	‘Do	you	remember	the
Toblakai,	beasts?	But	they	had	been	gentled.	By	civilization.	By	the	soft
trappings	of	foolish	peace.	So	weakened	that	they	could	not	stand	before	T’lan
Imass,	could	not	stand	before	Forkrul	Assail	and	Jaghut.	And	now,	they	cannot
stand	before	Nathii	slavers.
‘An	awakening	was	needed,	friends.	Remember	the	Toblakai,	if	it	comforts
you.’	He	strode	directly	between	the	two	hounds,	as	if	he	intended	to	accept
their	invitation	to	pass.


The	hounds	attacked.
As	he	knew	they	would.
Karsa	dropped	into	a	crouch	that	leaned	far	to	his	left,	as	he	brought	up	the
massive	stone	sword	over	his	head,	point	sliding	left—directly	into	the	path	of
the	hound	charging	from	that	side.
Striking	it	in	the	chest.
The	heavy	sternum	cracked	but	did	not	shatter,	and	the	rippled	blade	edge
scored	a	bloody	path	down	along	the	ribs.
Karsa’s	crouch	then	exploded	after	his	weapon,	his	legs	driving	his
shoulder	forward	and	up	to	hammer	the	beast	at	the	level	of	its	collar	bones.
Jaws	snapped	above	the	back	of	the	Toblakai’s	neck,	then	the	impact	jolted
through	warrior	and	hound	both.
And	the	latter ’s	sword-gouged	ribs	splintered.
Jaws	closed	around	Karsa’s	right	leg	just	below	the	knee.
And	he	was	lifted	clear	of	the	ground.	Then	thrown	to	one	side,	though	the
jaws	did	not	loosen.	The	wrench	snapped	the	sword	from	his	hands.
Molars	ground	against	bone,	incisors	shredded	muscle.	The	second	hound
closed	on	Karsa,	savagely	shaking	the	leg	in	its	jaws.
The	first	hound	staggered	away	a	few	paces,	left	foreleg	dragging,	blood
spilling	out	beneath	it.
Karsa	made	no	effort	to	pull	away	from	the	beast	seeking	to	chew	off	his
lower	leg.	Instead,	he	pushed	himself	upright	on	his	one	free	leg	and	lunged
into	the	hound.	Arms	wrapping	around	the	rippling	body	behind	the	shoulders.
With	a	bellow,	the	Teblor	lifted	the	hound.	Hind	legs	kicked	in	wild	panic,
but	he	was	already	wrenching	the	entire	beast	over.
The	jaws	were	torn	loose	even	as	Karsa	drove	the	creature	down	onto	its
back.
Flagstones	cracked	with	explosions	of	dust.
The	Teblor	then	sank	to	his	knees,	straddling	the	writhing	hound,	and
closed	both	hands	around	its	throat.
A	snarling	frenzy	answered	him.
Canines	ripped	into	his	forearms,	the	jaws	gnawed	frantically,	chewing
free	chunks	of	skin	and	flesh.
Karsa	released	one	hand	and	pushed	it	against	the	hound’s	lower	jaw.
Muscles	contracted	as	two	unhuman	strengths	collided.
Legs	scored	Karsa’s	body,	the	claws	tearing	through	leathers	and	into
flesh,	but	the	Teblor	continued	pushing.	Harder	and	harder,	his	other	hand
edging	up	to	join	in	the	effort.
The	kicks	went	wild.	Panicked.


Karsa	both	felt	and	heard	a	grinding	pop,	then	the	flat	head	of	the	hound
cracked	against	the	flagstones.
A	strange	keening	sound	twisted	out	from	the	throat.
And	the	warrior	pulled	his	right	hand	back,	closed	it	into	a	fist,	and	drove
it	down	into	the	animal’s	throat.
Crushing	trachea.
The	legs	spasmed	and	went	limp.
With	a	roar,	Karsa	reared	upright,	dragging	the	hound	by	its	neck,	then
hammering	it	down	once	more.	A	loud	snap,	a	spray	of	blood	and	saliva.
He	straightened,	shook	himself,	his	mane	raining	blood	and	sweat,	then
swung	his	gaze	to	where	the	other	hound	had	been.
Only	a	blood	trail	remained.
Karsa	staggered	over	to	his	sword,	retrieved	it,	then	set	off	on	that
glistening	path.
	
Kalam	and	Quick	Ben	slowly	rose	from	behind	the	wall	and	stared	in	silence
after	the	giant	warrior.
Shadows	had	begun	swarming	in	the	darkness.	They	gathered	like
capemoths	to	the	carcass	of	the	Deragoth,	then	sped	away	again	as	if	in	terror.
Kalam	rolled	his	shoulders,	then,	long-knives	in	his	hands,	he	approached
the	hound.
Quick	Ben	followed.
They	studied	the	mangled	carcass.
‘Wizard…’
‘Aye?’
‘Let’s	drop	off	the	Napan	and	get	out	of	here.’
‘A	brilliant	plan.’
‘I	just	thought	it	up.’
‘I	like	it	very	much.	Well	done,	Kalam.’
‘Like	I’ve	always	told	you,	Quick,	I	ain’t	just	a	pretty	face.’
The	two	swung	about	and,	ignoring	the	shadows	pouring	out	of	the
burgeoning	shattered	warren	of	Kurald	Emurlahn,	returned	to	where	they	had
left	Korbolo	Dom.
	
‘Friend?’
Heboric	stared	at	the	four-eyed,	squat	demon	that	had	leapt	onto	the	path	in


front	of	him.	‘If	we’d	met,	demon,	I’m	sure	I	would	have	remembered	it.’
‘Helpful	explanation.	Brother	to	L’oric.	He	lies	in	clearing	twelve	paces	to
your	left.	Hesitant	revision.	Fifteen	paces.	Your	legs	are	nearly	as	short	as
mine.’
‘Take	me	to	him.’
The	demon	did	not	move.	‘Friend?’
‘More	or	less.	We	share	certain	flaws.’
The	creature	shrugged.	‘With	reservations.	Follow.’
Heboric	set	off	into	the	petrified	forest	after	the	shambling	demon,	his
smile	broadening	as	it	prattled	on.
‘A	priest	with	the	hands	of	a	tiger.	Sometimes.	Other	times,	human	hands
glowing	depthless	green.	Impressed.	Those	tattoos,	very	fine	indeed.	Musing.	I
would	have	trouble	tearing	out	your	throat,	I	think.	Even	driven	by	hunger,	as	I
always	am.	Thoughtful.	A	fell	night,	this	one.	Ghosts,	assassins,	warrens,	silent
battles.	Does	no-one	in	this	world	ever	sleep?’
They	stumbled	into	a	small	clearing.
L’oric’s	armour	was	stained	with	drying	blood,	but	he	looked	well	enough,
seated	cross-legged,	his	eyes	closed,	his	breathing	steady.	On	the	dusty	ground
before	him	lay	a	spread	of	the	Deck	of	Dragons.
Grunting,	Heboric	settled	down	opposite	the	High	Mage.	‘Didn’t	know	you
played	with	those.’
‘I	never	do,’	L’oric	replied	in	a	murmur.	‘Play,	that	is.	A	Master	has	come
to	the	Deck,	and	that	Master	has	just	sanctioned	the	House	of	Chains.’
Heboric’s	eyes	widened.	Then	narrowed,	and	he	slowly	nodded.	‘Let	the
gods	rail,	he	or	she	had	to	do	just	that.’
‘I	know.	The	Crippled	God	is	now	as	bound	as	is	every	other	god.’
‘In	the	game,	aye,	after	so	long	outside	it.	I	wonder	if	he’ll	one	day	come
to	regret	his	gambit.’
‘He	seeks	this	fragment	of	Kurald	Emurlahn,	and	is	poised	to	strike,
though	his	chances	are	less	now	than	they	were	at	sunset.’
‘How	so?’
‘Bidithal	is	dead.’
‘Good.	Who?’
‘Toblakai.’
‘Oh.	Not	good.’
‘Yet	Toblakai	has	become,	I	believe,	the	Knight	in	the	House	of	Chains.’
‘That	is	damned	unfortunate…for	the	Crippled	God.	Toblakai	will	kneel	to
no-one.	He	cannot	afford	to.	He	will	defy	all	prediction—’
‘He	has	already	displayed	that	penchant	this	night,	Ghost	Hands,	to	the


possible	ruination	of	us	all.	Still,	at	the	same	time,	I	have	come	to	suspect	he	is
our	only	hope.’	L’oric	opened	his	eyes	and	stared	across	at	Heboric.	‘Two
Hounds	of	Darkness	arrived	a	short	while	ago—I	could	sense	their	presence,
though	fitfully,	but	could	get	no	closer.	Otataral,	and	the	very	darkness	that
shrouds	them.’
‘And	why	should	Toblakai	step	into	their	path?	Never	mind,	I	can	answer
that	myself.	Because	he’s	Toblakai.’
‘Aye.	And	I	believe	he	has	already	done	so.’
‘And?’
‘And	now,	I	believe,	but	one	Deragoth	remains	alive.’
‘Gods	forbid,’	Heboric	breathed.
‘Toblakai	even	now	pursues	it.’
‘Tell	me,	what	brought	the	hounds	here?	What	or	who	has	Toblakai	just
thwarted?’
‘The	cards	are	ambivalent	on	that,	Destriant.	Perhaps	the	answer	is	yet	to	be
decided.’
‘Relieved	to	hear	some	things	remain	so,	truth	be	told.’
‘Ghost.	Hands.	Get	Felisin	away	from	this	place.	Greyfrog	here	will
accompany	you.’
‘And	you?’
‘I	must	go	to	Sha’ik.	No,	say	nothing	until	I	finish.	I	know	that	you	and	she
were	once	close—perhaps	not	in	a	pleasing	manner,	but	close	none	the	less.
But	that	mortal	child	is	soon	to	be	no	more.	The	goddess	is	about	to	devour	her
soul	even	as	we	speak—and	once	that	is	done,	there	shall	be	no	return.	The
young	Malazan	girl	you	once	knew	will	have	ceased	to	exist.	Thus,	when	I	go
to	Sha’ik,	I	go	not	to	the	child,	but	to	the	goddess.’
‘But	why?	Are	you	truly	loyal	to	the	notion	of	apocalypse?	Of	chaos	and
destruction?’
‘No.	I	have	something	else	in	mind.	I	must	speak	with	the	goddess—before
she	takes	Sha’ik’s	soul.’
Heboric	stared	at	the	High	Mage	for	a	long	time,	seeking	to	discern	what
L’oric	sought	from	that	vengeful,	insane	goddess.
‘There	are	two	Felisins,’	L’oric	then	murmured,	eyes	half	veiled.	‘Save	the
one	you	can,	Heboric	Light	Touch.’
‘One	day,	L’oric,’	Heboric	growled,	‘I	will	discover	who	you	truly	are.’
The	High	Mage	smiled.	‘You	will	find	this	simple	truth—I	am	a	son	who
lives	without	hope	of	ever	matching	my	father ’s	stride.	That	alone,	in	time,	will
explain	all	you	need	know	of	me.	Go,	Destriant.	Guard	her	well.’


	
Ghosts	pivoted,	armour	shedding	red	dust,	and	saluted	as	Karsa	Orlong	limped
past.	At	least	these	ones,	he	reflected	dully,	weren’t	shackled	in	chains.
The	blood	trail	had	led	him	into	a	maze	of	ruins,	an	unused	section	of	the
city	notorious	for	its	cellars	and	pitfalls	and	precariously	leaning	walls.	He
could	smell	the	beast.	It	was	close	and,	he	suspected,	cornered.
Or,	more	likely,	it	had	decided	to	make	a	stand,	in	a	place	perfectly	suited
for	an	ambush.
If	only	the	slow,	steady	patter	of	dripping	blood	had	not	given	away	its
hiding	place.
Karsa	kept	his	gaze	averted	from	that	alleyway	of	inky	shadows	five	paces
ahead	and	to	his	right.	He	made	his	steps	uncertain,	uneven	with	pain	and
hesitation,	not	all	of	it	feigned.	The	blood	between	his	hands	and	the	sword’s
grip	had	grown	sticky,	but	still	threatened	to	betray	his	grasp	on	the	weapon.
Shadows	were	shredding	the	darkness,	as	if	the	two	elemental	forces	were
at	war,	with	the	latter	being	driven	back.	Dawn,	Karsa	realized,	was
approaching.
He	came	opposite	the	alley.
And	the	hound	charged.
Karsa	leapt	forward,	twisting	in	mid-air	to	slash	his	sword	two-handed,
cleaving	an	arc	into	his	wake.
The	tip	slashed	hide,	but	the	beast’s	attack	had	already	carried	it	past.	It
landed	on	one	foreleg,	which	skidded	out	from	under	it.	The	hound	fell	onto
one	shoulder,	then	rolled	right	over.
Karsa	scrambled	back	to	his	feet	to	face	it.
The	beast	crouched,	preparing	to	charge	once	again.
The	horse	that	burst	out	of	a	side	alley	caught	both	hound	and	Toblakai	by
surprise.	That	the	panicked	animal	had	been	galloping	blind	was	made	obvious
as	it	collided	with	the	hound.
There	had	been	two	riders	on	the	horse.	And	both	were	thrown	from	the
saddle,	straight	over	the	hound.
The	impact	had	driven	the	hound	down	beneath	the	wildly	stamping	hoofs.
Somehow,	the	horse	stayed	upright,	staggering	clear	with	heavy	snorts	as	if
seeking	to	draw	breath	into	stunned	lungs.	Behind	it,	the	hound’s	claws	gouged
the	cobbles	as	it	struggled	to	right	itself.
Snarling,	Karsa	lunged	forward	and	plunged	the	sword’s	point	into	the
beast’s	neck.
It	shrieked,	surged	towards	the	Toblakai.


Karsa	leapt	away,	dragging	his	sword	after	him.
Blood	gushing	from	the	puncture	in	its	throat,	the	hound	rose	up	on	its
three	legs,	weaving,	head	swaying	as	it	coughed	red	spume	onto	the	stones.
A	figure	darted	out	from	the	shadows.	The	spiked	ball	at	the	end	of	a	flail
hissed	through	the	air,	and	thundered	into	the	hound’s	head.	A	second	followed,
hammering	down	from	above	to	audibly	crack	the	beast’s	thick	skull.
Karsa	stepped	forward.	An	overhead	two-handed	swing	finally	drove	the
hound	from	its	wobbling	legs.
Side	by	side,	Leoman	and	Karsa	closed	in	to	finish	it.	A	dozen	blows	later
and	the	hound	was	dead.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thenu’alas	then	stumbled	into	view,	a	broken	sword	in	his
hand.
Karsa	wiped	the	gore	from	his	blade	then	glared	at	Leoman.	‘I	did	not	need
your	help,’	he	growled.
Leoman	grinned.	‘But	I	need	yours.’
	
Pearl	staggered	from	the	trench,	clambering	over	sprawled	corpses.	Since	his
rather	elegant	assassination	of	Henaras,	things	had	gone	decidedly	downhill
—steeper	than	that	trench	behind	me.	Countless	guards,	then	the	ghostly	army
whose	weapons	were	anything	but	illusory.	His	head	still	ached	from	Lostara’s
kiss—damned	woman,	just	when	I	thought	I’d	figured	her	out…
He’d	been	cut	and	slashed	at	all	the	way	through	that	damned	camp,	and
now	stumbled	half	blind	towards	the	ruins.
The	darkness	was	being	torn	apart	on	all	sides.	Kurald	Emurlahn	was
opening	like	death’s	own	flower,	with	the	oasis	at	its	dark	heart.	Beneath	the
sorcerous	pressure	of	that	manifestation,	it	was	all	he	could	do	to	pitch
headlong	down	the	trail.
So	long	as	Lostara	stayed	put,	they	might	well	salvage	something	out	of	all
this.
He	came	to	the	edge	and	paused,	studying	the	pit	where	he’d	left	her.	No
movement.	She	was	either	staying	low	or	had	left.	He	padded	forward.
I	despise	nights	like	these.	Nothing	goes	as	planned—
Something	hard	struck	him	in	the	side	of	his	head.	Stunned,	he	fell	and	lay
unmoving,	his	face	pressed	against	the	cold,	gritty	ground.
A	voice	rumbled	above	him.	‘That	was	for	Malaz	City.	Even	so,	you	still
owe	me	one.’
‘After	Henaras?’	Pearl	mumbled,	his	words	puffing	up	tiny	clouds	of	dust.
‘You	should	be	owing	me	one.’


‘Her?	Not	worth	counting.’
Something	thumped	heavily	to	the	ground	beside	Pearl.	That	then	groaned.
‘All	right,’	the	Claw	sighed—more	dust,	a	miniature	Whirlwind—‘I	owe
you	one,	then.’
‘Glad	we’re	agreed.	Now,	make	some	more	noises.	Your	lass	over	there’s
bound	to	take	a	look…eventually.’
Pearl	listened	to	the	footfalls	pad	away.	Two	sets.	The	wizard	was	in	no
mood	to	talk,	I	suppose.
To	me,	that	is.
I	believe	I	am	sorely	humbled.
Beside	him,	the	trussed	shape	groaned	again.
Despite	himself,	Pearl	smiled.
To	the	east,	the	sky	paled.
And	this	night	was	done.


Chapter	Twenty-six

On	this	day,	Raraku	rises.
XXXIV.	II.1.81	‘WORDS	OF	THE	PROPHECY’

THE	BOOK	OF	DRYJHNA	THE	APOCALYPTIC
The	whirlwind	goddess	had	once	been	a	raging	storm	of	wind	and	sand.	A	wall
surrounding	the	young	woman	who	had	once	been	Felisin	of	House	Paran,	and
who	had	become	Sha’ik,	Chosen	One	and	supreme	ruler	of	the	Army	of	the
Apocalypse.
Felisin	had	been	her	mother ’s	name.	She	had	then	made	it	her	adopted
daughter ’s	name.	Yet	she	herself	had	lost	it.	Occasionally,	however,	in	the
deepest	hours	of	night,	in	the	heart	of	an	impenetrable	silence	of	her	own
making,	she	caught	a	glimpse	of	that	girl.	As	she	once	had	been,	the	smeared
reflection	from	a	polished	mirror.	Round-cheeked	and	flushed,	a	wide	smile
and	bright	eyes.	A	child	with	a	brother	who	adored	her,	who	would	toss	her
about	on	one	knee	as	if	it	was	a	bucking	horse,	and	her	squeals	of	fear	and
delight	would	fill	the	chamber.
Her	mother	had	been	gifted	with	visions.	This	was	well	known.	A	respected
truth.	And	that	mother ’s	youngest	daughter	had	dreamed	that	one	day	she	too
would	find	that	talent	within	her.
But	that	gift	only	came	with	the	goddess,	with	this	spiteful,	horrific
creature	whose	soul	was	far	more	parched	and	withered	than	any	desert.	And
the	visions	that	assailed	Sha’ik	were	murky,	fraught	things.	They	were,	she	had
come	to	realize,	not	born	of	any	talent	or	gift.	They	were	the	conjurings	of
fear.
A	goddess’s	fear.
And	now	the	Whirlwind	Wall	had	closed,	retracted,	had	drawn	in	from	the
outside	world	to	rage	beneath	Sha’ik’s	sun-darkened	skin,	along	her	veins	and
arteries,	careening	wild	and	deafening	in	her	mind.
Oh,	there	was	power	there.	Bitter	with	age,	bilious	with	malice.	And
whatever	fuelled	it	bore	the	sour	taste	of	betrayal.	A	heart-piercing,	very


personal	betrayal.	Something	that	should	have	healed,	that	should	have	numbed
beneath	thick,	tough	scar	tissue.	Spiteful	pleasure	had	kept	the	wound	open,	had
fed	its	festering	heat,	until	hate	was	all	that	was	left.	Hate	for…someone,	a	hate
so	ancient	it	no	longer	possessed	a	face.
In	moments	of	cold	reason,	Sha’ik	saw	it	for	what	it	was.	Insane,	raised	to
such	extremity	that	she	understood	that	whatever	had	been	the	crime	against	the
goddess,	whatever	the	source	of	the	betrayal,	it	had	not	earned	such	a	brutal
reaction.	The	proportions	had	begun	wrong.	From	the	very	start.	Leading	her
to	suspect	that	the	proclivity	for	madness	had	already	existed,	dark	flaws
marring	the	soul	that	would	one	day	claw	its	way	into	ascendancy.
Step	by	step,	we	walk	the	most	horrendous	paths.	Stride	tottering	along	the
edge	of	an	unsuspected	abyss.	Companions	see	nothing	amiss.	The	world	seems
a	normal	place.	Step	by	step,	no	different	from	anyone	else—not	from	the
outside.	Not	even	from	the	inside.	Apart	from	that	tautness,	that	whisper	of
panic.	The	vague	confusion	that	threatens	your	balance.
Felisin,	who	was	Sha’ik,	had	come	to	comprehend	this.
For	she	had	walked	that	same	path.
Hatred,	sweet	as	nectar.
I	have	walked	into	the	abyss.
I	am	as	mad	as	that	goddess.	And	this	is	why	she	chose	me,	for	we	are
kindred	souls…
Then	what	is	this	ledge	to	which	I	still	cling	so	desperately?	Why	do	I
persist	in	my	belief	that	I	can	save	myself?	That	I	can	return…find	once	more
the	place	where	madness	cannot	be	found,	where	confusion	does	not	exist.
The	place…of	childhood.
She	stood	in	the	main	chamber,	the	chair	that	would	be	a	throne	behind	her,
its	cushions	cool,	its	armrests	dry.	She	stood,	imprisoned	in	a	stranger ’s
armour.	She	could	almost	feel	the	goddess	reaching	out	to	engulf	her	on	all
sides—not	a	mother ’s	embrace,	no,	nothing	like	that	at	all.	This	one	would
suffocate	her	utterly,	would	drown	out	all	light,	every	glimmer	of	selfawareness.
Her	ego	is	armoured	in	hatred.	She	cannot	look	in,	she	can	barely	see	out.
Her	walk	is	a	shamble,	cramped	and	stiff,	a	song	of	rusty	fittings	and	creaking
straps.	Her	teeth	gleam	in	the	shadows,	but	it	is	a	rictus	grin.
Felisin	Paran,	hold	up	this	mirror	at	your	peril.
Outside	stole	the	first	light	of	dawn.
And	Sha’ik	reached	for	her	helm.
	


L’oric	could	just	make	out	the	Dogslayer	positions	at	the	tops	of	the	cobbled
ramps.	There	was	no	movement	over	there	in	the	grey	light	of	dawn.	It	was
strange,	but	not	surprising.	The	night	just	done	would	make	even	the	hardest
soldier	hesitant	to	raise	a	gaze	skyward,	to	straighten	from	a	place	of	hiding	to
begin	the	mundane	tasks	that	marked	the	start	of	a	new	day.
Even	so,	there	was	something	strange	about	those	trenches.
He	strode	along	the	ridge	towards	the	hilltop	where	Sha’ik	had	established
her	forward	post	to	observe	the	battle	to	come.	The	High	Mage	ached	in	every
bone.	His	muscles	shouted	pain	with	every	step	he	took.
He	prayed	she	was	there.
Prayed	the	goddess	would	deign	to	hear	his	words,	his	warning,	and,
finally,	his	offer.
All	hovered	on	the	cusp.	Darkness	had	been	defeated…somehow.	He
wondered	at	that,	but	not	for	long—there	was	no	time	for	such	idle	musings.
This	tortured	fragment	of	Kurald	Emurlahn	was	awakening,	and	the	goddess
was	about	to	arrive,	to	claim	it	for	herself.	To	fashion	a	throne.	To	devour
Raraku.
Ghosts	still	swirled	in	the	shadows,	warriors	and	soldiers	from	scores	of
long-dead	civilizations.	Wielding	strange	weapons,	their	bodies	hidden	beneath
strange	armour,	their	faces	mercifully	covered	by	ornate	visors.	They	were
singing,	although	that	Tanno	song	had	grown	pensive,	mournful,	sighing	soft
as	the	wind.	It	had	begun	to	rise	and	fall,	a	sussuration	that	chilled	L’oric.
Who	will	they	fight	for?	Why	are	they	here	at	all?	What	do	they	want?
The	song	belonged	to	the	Bridgeburners.	Yet	it	seemed	the	Holy	Desert
itself	had	claimed	it,	had	taken	that	multitude	of	ethereal	voices	for	itself.	And
every	soul	that	had	fallen	in	battle	in	the	desert’s	immense	history	was	now
gathered	in	this	place.
The	cusp.
He	came	to	the	base	of	the	trail	leading	up	to	Sha’ik’s	hill.	There	were
desert	warriors	huddled	here	and	there,	wrapped	in	their	ochre	telabas,	spears
thrust	upright,	iron	points	glistening	with	dew	as	the	sun’s	fire	broke	on	the
east	horizon.	Companies	of	Mathok’s	light	cavalry	were	forming	up	on	the
flats	to	L’oric’s	right.	The	horses	were	jittery,	the	rows	shifting	uneven	and
restless.	The	High	Mage	could	not	see	Mathok	anywhere	among	them—nor,	he
realized	with	a	chill,	could	he	see	the	standards	of	the	warleader ’s	own	tribe.
He	heard	horses	approach	from	behind	and	turned	to	see	Leoman,	one	of
his	officers,	and	Toblakai	riding	up	towards	him.
The	Toblakai’s	horse	was	a	Jhag,	L’oric	saw,	huge	and	magnificent	in	its
primal	savagery,	loping	collected	and	perfectly	proportionate	to	the	giant


astride	its	shoulders.
And	that	giant	was	a	mess.	Preternatural	healing	had	yet	to	fully	repair	the
terrible	wounds	on	him.	His	hands	were	a	crimson	ruin.	One	leg	had	been
chewed	by	vicious,	oversized	jaws.
Toblakai	and	his	horse	were	dragging	a	pair	of	objects	that	bounced	and
rolled	on	the	ends	of	chains,	and	L’oric’s	eyes	went	wide	upon	seeing	what	they
were.
He’s	killed	the	Deragoth.	He’s	taken	their	heads.
‘L’oric!’	Leoman	rasped	as	he	drew	rein	before	him.	‘Is	she	above?’
‘I	don’t	know,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.’
All	three	dismounted,	and	L’oric	saw	Toblakai	favouring	his	mangled	leg.
A	hound’s	jaws	did	that.	And	then	he	saw	the	stone	sword	on	the	giant’s	back.
Ah,	he	is	indeed	the	one,	then.	I	think	the	Crippled	God	has	made	a	terrible
mistake…
Gods,	he	killed	the	Deragoth.
‘Where	is	Febryl	hiding?’	Leoman	asked	as	the	four	of	them	began	the
ascent.
Toblakai	answered.	‘Dead.	I	forgot	to	tell	you	some	things.	I	killed	him.
And	I	killed	Bidithal.	I	would	have	killed	Ghost	Hands	and	Korbolo	Dom,	but	I
could	not	find	them.’
L’oric	rubbed	a	hand	across	his	brow,	and	it	came	away	wet	and	oily.	Yet
he	could	still	see	his	breath.
Toblakai	went	on,	inexorably.	‘And	when	I	went	into	Korbolo’s	tent,	I
found	Kamist	Reloe.	He’d	been	assassinated.	So	had	Henaras.’
L’oric	shook	himself	and	said	to	Leoman,	‘Did	you	receive	Sha’ik’s	last
commands?	Shouldn’t	you	be	with	the	Dogslayers?’
The	warrior	grunted.	‘Probably.	We’ve	just	come	from	there.’
‘They’re	all	dead,’	Toblakai	said.	‘Slaughtered	in	the	night.	The	ghosts	of
Raraku	were	busy—though	none	dared	oppose	me.’	He	barked	a	laugh.	‘As
Ghost	Hands	could	tell	you,	I	have	ghosts	of	my	own.’
L’oric	stumbled	on	the	trail.	He	reached	up	and	gripped	Leoman’s	arm.
‘Slaughtered?	All	of	them?’
‘Yes,	High	Mage.	I’m	surprised	you	didn’t	know.	We	still	have	the	desert
warriors.	We	can	still	win	this,	just	not	here	and	not	now.	Thus,	we	need	to
convince	Sha’ik	to	leave—’
‘That	won’t	be	possible,’	L’oric	cut	in.	‘The	goddess	is	coming,	is	almost
here.	It’s	too	late	for	that,	Leoman.	Moments	from	being	too	late	for
everything—’
They	clambered	over	the	crest.


And	there	stood	Sha’ik.
Helmed	and	armoured,	her	back	to	them	as	she	stared	southward.
L’oric	wanted	to	cry	out.	For	he	saw	what	his	companions	could	not	see.
I’m	not	in	time.	Oh,	gods	below—And	then	he	leapt	forward,	his	warren’s
portal	flaring	around	him—and	was	gone.
	
The	goddess	had	not	lost	her	memories.	Indeed,	rage	had	carved	their
likenesses,	every	detail,	as	mockingly	solid	and	real-seeming	as	those	carved
trees	in	the	forest	of	stone.	And	she	could	caress	them,	crooning	her	hatred	like
a	lover ’s	song,	lingering	with	a	touch	promising	murder,	though	the	one	who
had	wronged	her	was,	if	not	dead,	then	in	a	place	that	no	longer	mattered.
The	hate	was	all	that	mattered	now.	Her	fury	at	his	weaknesses.	Oh,	others
in	the	tribe	played	those	games	often	enough.	Bodies	slipped	through	the	furs
from	hut	to	hut	when	the	stars	fell	into	their	summer	alignment,	and	she	herself
had	more	than	once	spread	her	legs	to	another	woman’s	husband,	or	an	eager,
clumsy	youth.
But	her	heart	had	been	given	to	the	one	man	with	whom	she	lived.	That	law
was	sacrosanct.
Oh,	but	he’d	been	so	sensitive.	His	hands	following	his	eyes	in	the
fashioning	of	forbidden	images	of	that	other	woman,	there	in	the	hidden
places.	He’d	used	those	hands	to	close	about	his	own	heart,	to	give	it	to	another
—without	a	thought	as	to	who	had	once	held	it	for	herself.
Another,	who	would	not	even	give	her	heart	in	return—she	had	seen	to
that,	with	vicious	words	and	challenging	accusations.	Enough	to	encourage	the
others	to	banish	her	for	ever.
But	not	before	the	bitch	killed	all	but	one	of	her	kin.
Foolish,	stupid	man,	to	have	given	his	love	to	that	woman.
Her	rage	had	not	died	with	the	Ritual,	had	not	died	when	she	herself—too
shattered	to	walk—had	been	severed	from	the	Vow	and	left	in	a	place	of	eternal
darkness.	And	every	curious	spirit	that	had	heard	her	weeping,	that	had	drawn
close	in	sympathy—well,	they	had	fed	her	hungers,	and	she	had	taken	their
powers.	Layer	upon	layer.	For	they	too	had	been	foolish	and	stupid,	wayward
and	inclined	to	squander	those	powers	on	meaningless	things.	But	she	had	a
purpose.
The	children	swarmed	the	surface	of	the	world.	And	who	was	their
mother?	None	other	than	the	bitch	who	had	been	banished.
And	their	father?
Oh	yes,	she	went	to	him.	On	that	last	night.	She	did.	He	reeked	of	her	when


they	dragged	him	into	the	light	the	following	morning.	Reeked	of	her.	The
truth	was	there	in	his	eyes.
A	look	she	would—could—never	forget.
Vengeance	was	a	beast	long	straining	at	its	chains.	Vengeance	was	all	she
had	ever	wanted.
Vengeance	was	about	to	be	unleashed.
And	even	Raraku	could	not	stop	it.	The	children	would	die.
The	children	will	die.	I	will	cleanse	the	world	of	their	beget,	the	proud-eyed
vermin	born,	one	and	all,	of	that	single	mother.	Of	course	she	could	not	join	the
Ritual.	A	new	world	waited	within	her.
And	now,	at	last,	I	shall	rise	again.	Clothed	in	the	flesh	of	one	such	child,	I
shall	kill	that	world.
She	could	see	the	path	opening,	the	way	ahead	clear	and	inviting.	A	tunnel
walled	in	spinning,	writhing	shadows.
It	would	be	good	to	walk	again.
To	feel	warm	flesh	and	the	heat	of	blood.
To	taste	water.	Food.
To	breathe.
To	kill.
	
Unmindful	and	unhearing,	Sha’ik	made	her	way	down	the	slope.	The	basin
awaited	her,	that	field	of	battle.	She	saw	Malazan	scouts	on	the	ridge	opposite,
one	riding	back	to	the	encampment,	the	others	simply	watching.
It	was	understood,	then.	As	she	had	known	it	would	be.
Vague,	distant	shouts	behind	her.	She	smiled.	Of	course,	in	the	end,	it	is	the
two	warriors	who	first	found	me.	I	was	foolish	to	have	doubted	them.	And	I
know,	either	one	would	stand	in	my	stead.
But	they	cannot.
This	fight	belongs	to	me.	And	the	goddess.
	
‘Enter.’
Captain	Keneb	paused	for	a	moment,	seeking	to	collect	himself,	then	he
strode	into	the	command	tent.
She	was	donning	her	armour.	A	mundane	task	that	would	have	been	easier
with	a	servant	at	hand,	but	that,	of	course,	was	not	Tavore’s	way.
Although,	perhaps,	that	was	not	quite	the	truth.	‘Adjunct.’


‘What	is	it,	Captain?’
‘I	have	just	come	from	the	Fist’s	tent.	A	cutter	and	a	healer	were	summoned
at	once,	but	it	was	far	too	late.	Adjunct	Tavore,	Gamet	died	last	night.	A	blood
vessel	burst	in	his	brain—the	cutter	believes	it	was	a	clot,	and	that	it	was	born
the	night	he	was	thrown	from	his	horse.	I	am…sorry.’
A	pallor	had	come	to	her	drawn,	plain	face.	He	saw	her	hand	reach	down	to
steady	herself	against	the	table	edge.	‘Dead?’
‘In	his	sleep.’
She	turned	away,	stared	down	at	the	accoutrements	littering	the	table.
‘Thank	you,	Captain.	Leave	me	now,	and	have	T’amber—’
There	was	a	commotion	outside,	then	a	Wickan	youth	pushed	in.	‘Adjunct!
Sha’ik	has	walked	down	into	the	basin!	She	challenges	you!’
After	a	long	moment,	Tavore	nodded.	‘Very	well.	Belay	that	last	order,
Captain.	You	both	may	go.’	She	turned	to	resume	strapping	on	her	armour.
Keneb	gestured	the	youth	ahead	and	they	strode	from	the	tent.
Outside,	the	captain	hesitated.	It’s	what	Gamet	would	do…isn’t	it?
‘Will	she	fight	her?’	the	Wickan	asked.
He	glanced	over.	‘She	will.	Return	to	Temul,	lad.	Either	way,	we	have	a
battle	ahead	of	us	this	day.’	He	watched	the	young	warrior	hurry	off.
Then	swung	to	face	the	modest	tent	situated	twenty	paces	to	his	left.	There
were	no	guards	stationed	before	its	flap.	Keneb	halted	before	the	entrance.
‘Lady	T’amber,	are	you	within?’
A	figure	emerged.	Dressed	in	hard	leathers—light	armour,	Keneb	realized
with	a	start—and	a	longsword	strapped	to	her	hip.	‘Does	the	Adjunct	wish	to
begin	her	morning	practice?’
Keneb	met	those	calm	eyes,	the	colour	of	which	gave	the	woman	her	name.
They	seemed	depthless.	He	mentally	shook	himself.	‘Gamet	died	last	night.	I
have	just	informed	the	Adjunct.’
The	woman’s	gaze	flicked	towards	the	command	tent.	‘I	see.’
‘And	in	the	basin	between	the	two	armies,	Sha’ik	now	stands…waiting.	It
occurred	to	me,	Lady,	that	the	Adjunct	might	appreciate	some	help	with	her
armour.’
To	his	surprise	she	turned	back	to	her	tent.	‘Not	this	morning,	Captain.	I
understand	your	motives…but	no.	Not	this	morning.	Good	day,	sir.’
Then	she	was	gone.
Keneb	stood	motionless	in	surprise.	All	right,	then,	so	I	do	not	understand
women.
He	faced	the	command	tent	once	more,	in	time	to	see	the	Adjunct	emerge,
tightening	the	straps	on	her	gauntlets.	She	was	helmed,	the	cheek	guards	locked


in	place.	There	was	no	visor	covering	her	eyes—many	fighters	found	their
vision	too	impaired	by	the	slits—and	he	watched	her	pause,	lifting	her	gaze	to
the	morning	sky	for	a	moment,	before	she	strode	forward.
He	gave	her	some	distance,	then	followed.

L’oric	clawed	his	way	through	the	swirling	shadows,	scraped	by	skeletal
branches	and	stumbling	over	gnarled	roots.	He	had	not	expected	this.	There
had	to	be	a	path,	a	way	through	this	blackwood	forest.
That	damned	goddess	was	here.	Close.	She	had	to	be—if	he	could	but	find
the	trail.
The	air	was	sodden	and	chill,	the	boles	of	the	trees	leaning	this	way	and
that,	as	if	an	earthquake	had	just	shaken	the	ground.	Wood	creaked	overhead	to
some	high	wind.	And	everywhere	flitted	wraiths,	lost	shadows,	closing	on	the
High	Mage	then	darting	away	again.	Rising	from	the	humus	like	ghosts,
hissing	over	his	head	as	he	staggered	on.
And	then,	through	the	trees,	the	flicker	of	fire.
Gasping,	L’oric	ran	towards	it.
It	was	her.	And	the	flames	confirmed	his	suspicion.	An	Imass,	trailing	the
chains	of	Tellann,	the	Ritual	shattered—oh,	she	has	no	place	here,	no	place	at
all.
Chthonic	spirits	swarmed	her	burning	body,	the	accretions	of	power	she
had	gathered	unto	herself	over	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years.	Hatred	and
spite	had	twisted	them	all	into	malign,	vicious	creatures.
Marsh	water	and	mould	had	blackened	the	limbs	of	the	Imass.	Moss
covered	the	torso	like	dangling,	knotted	fur.	Ropes	of	snarled,	grey	hair	hung
down,	tangled	with	burrs.	From	her	scorched	eye	sockets,	living	flames	licked
out.	The	bones	of	her	cheeks	were	white,	latticed	in	cracks	from	the	heat.
Toothless,	the	heavy	lower	jaw	hanging—barely	held	in	place	by	rotting
strips	of	tendon	and	withered	muscle.
The	goddess	was	keening,	a	wavering,	eerie	cry	that	did	not	pause	for
breath,	and	it	seemed	to	L’oric	that	she	was	struggling.
He	drew	closer.
She	had	stumbled	into	a	web	of	vines,	the	twisted	ropes	entangling	her
arms	and	legs,	wrapped	like	serpents	about	her	torso	and	neck.	He	wondered
that	he	had	not	seen	them	earlier,	then	realized	that	they	were	flickering,	one
moment	there,	the	other	gone—although	no	less	an	impediment	for	their


rhythmic	disappearance—and	they	were	changing…
Into	chains.
Suddenly,	one	snapped.	And	the	goddess	howled,	redoubled	her	efforts.
Another	broke,	whipping	to	crack	against	a	tree.
L’oric	edged	forward.	‘Goddess!	Hear	me!	Sha’ik—she	is	not	strong
enough	for	you!’
‘My—my—my	child!	Mine!	I	stole	her	from	the	bitch!	Mine!’
The	High	Mage	frowned.	Who?	What	bitch?	‘Goddess,	listen	to	me,
please!	I	offer	myself	in	her	stead!	Do	you	understand?’
Another	chain	broke.
And	a	voice	spoke	low	behind	L’oric.	‘Interfering	bastard.’
He	spun,	but	too	late,	as	a	wide-bladed	knife	was	driven	deep	between	his
ribs,	tearing	a	savage	path	to	his	heart.
Or	where	his	heart	should	have	been,	had	L’oric	been	human.
The	serrated	tip	missed,	sliding	in	front	of	the	deep-seated	organ,	then
jammed	into	the	side	of	the	sternum.
L’oric	groaned	and	sagged.
The	killer	dragged	his	knife	free,	crouched	and	pulled	L’oric’s	head	back
by	the	jaw.	Reached	down	with	the	blade.
‘Never	mind	that,	fool!’	hissed	another	voice.	‘She’s	breaking	the	chains!’
L’oric	watched	the	man	hesitate,	then	growl	and	move	away.
The	High	Mage	could	feel	blood	filling	his	chest.	He	slowly	turned	onto
his	side,	and	could	feel	the	warm	flow	seep	down	from	the	wound.	The	change
in	position	gave	him	a	mostly	unobscured	view	of	the	goddess—
—and	the	assassins	now	closing	in	on	her.
Sorcery	streamed	from	their	knives,	a	skein	of	death-magics.
The	goddess	shrieked	as	the	first	knife	was	driven	into	her	back.
He	watched	them	kill	her.	A	prolonged,	brutal	butchering.	Korbolo’s
Talons,	his	chosen	assassins,	who	had	been	waiting	in	ambush,	guided	here	by
Febryl—no-one	else	could	have	managed	that	path—and	abetted	by	the
sorcerous	powers	of	Kamist	Reloe,	Henaras	and	Fayelle.	She	fought	back	with
a	ferocity	near	to	match,	and	soon	three	of	the	four	assassins	were	dead—torn
limb	from	limb.	But	more	chains	now	ensnared	the	goddess,	dragging	her
down,	and	L’oric	could	see	the	fires	dying	in	her	eye	sockets,	could	see	spirits
writhe	away,	suddenly	freed	and	eager	to	flee.	And	the	last	killer	darted	in,
hammering	down	with	his	knife.	Through	the	top	of	the	skull.	A	midnight
flash,	the	detonation	flinging	the	killer	back.	Both	skull	and	blade	had
shattered,	lacerating	the	Talon’s	face	and	chest.	Blinded	and	screaming,	he
reeled	back,	tripped	over	a	root	and	thumped	to	the	ground.


L’oric	listened	to	the	man	moaning.
Chains	snaked	over	the	fallen	body	of	the	goddess,	until	nothing	visible
was	left	of	her,	the	black	iron	links	heaped	and	glistening.
Whatever	high	wind	had	lashed	the	treetops	now	fell	away,	leaving	only
silence.
They	all	wanted	this	shattered	warren.	This	fraught	prize.	But	Toblakai
killed	Febryl.	He	killed	the	two	Deragoth.
He	killed	Bidithal.
And	as	for	Korbolo	Dom—something	tells	me	the	Empress	will	soon	speak
to	him	in	person.	The	poor	bastard.
Beneath	the	High	Mage,	his	lifeblood	soaked	the	moss.
It	came	to	him,	then,	that	he	was	dying.
Twigs	snapped	nearby.
‘I’m	hardly	surprised.	You	sent	your	familiar	away,	didn’t	you?	Again.’
L’oric	twisted	his	head	around,	stared	upward,	and	managed	a	weak	smile.
‘Father.’
‘I	don’t	think	much	has	changed	in	your	room,	son,	since	you	left	it.’
‘Dusty,	I	would	think.’
Osric	grunted.	‘The	entire	keep	is	that,	I	would	hazard.	Haven’t	been	there
in	centuries.’
‘No	servants?’
‘I	dismissed	them…about	a	thousand	years	ago.’
L’oric	sighed.	‘I’d	be	surprised	if	the	place	is	still	standing.’
Osric	slowly	crouched	down	beside	his	son,	the	sorcerous	glow	of	Denul
now	surrounding	him.	‘Oh,	it	still	stands,	son.	I	always	keep	my	options	open.
An	ugly	cut	you	have	there.	Best	healed	slowly.’
L’oric	closed	his	eyes.	‘My	old	bed?’
‘Aye.’
‘It’s	too	short.	It	was	when	I	left,	anyway.’
‘Too	bad	he	didn’t	cut	off	your	feet,	then,	L’oric.’
Strong	arms	reached	under	him	and	he	was	lifted	effortlessly.
Absurdly—for	a	man	my	age—he	felt	at	peace.	In	his	father ’s	arms.
‘Now,’	Osric	said,	‘how	in	Hood’s	name	do	we	get	out	of	here?’
The	moment	passed.
	
She	stumbled,	barely	managing	to	right	herself.	Behind	the	iron	mesh,	she
blinked	against	the	hot,	close	air.	All	at	once,	the	armour	seemed
immeasurably	heavy.	A	surge	of	panic—the	sun	was	roasting	her	alive	beneath


these	plates	of	metal.
Sha’ik	halted.	Struggled	to	regain	control	of	herself.
Myself.	Gods	below…she	is	gone.
She	stood	alone	in	the	basin.	From	the	ridge	opposite	a	lone	figure	was
descending	the	slope.	Tall,	unhurried,	the	gait	achingly	familiar.
The	ridge	behind	Tavore,	and	those	on	every	battered	island	of	ancient
coral,	was	now	lined	with	soldiers.
The	Army	of	the	Apocalypse	was	watching	as	well,	Sha’ik	suspected,
though	she	did	not	turn	about.
She	is	gone.	I	have	been…abandoned.
I	was	Sha’ik,	once.	Now,	I	am	Felisin	once	more.	And	here,	walking	towards
me,	is	the	one	who	betrayed	me.	My	sister.
She	remembered	watching	Tavore	and	Ganoes	playing	with	wooden
swords.	Beginning	on	that	path	to	deadly	familiarity,	to	unthinking	ease
wielding	the	weight	of	that	weapon.	Had	the	world	beyond	not	changed—had
all	stood	still,	the	way	children	believed	it	would—she	would	have	had	her
turn.	The	clack	of	wood,	Ganoes	laughing	and	gently	instructing	her—there
was	joy	and	comfort	to	her	brother,	the	way	he	made	teaching	subservient	to
the	game’s	natural	pleasures.	But	she’d	never	had	the	chance	for	that.
No	chance,	in	fact,	for	much	of	anything	that	could	now	return	to	her,
memories	warm	and	trusting	and	reassuring.
Instead,	Tavore	had	dismembered	their	family.	And	for	Felisin,	the	horrors
of	slavery	and	the	mines.
But	blood	is	the	chain	that	can	never	break.
Tavore	was	now	twenty	strides	away.	Drawing	out	her	otataral	sword.
And,	though	we	leave	the	house	of	our	birth,	it	never	leaves	us.
Sha’ik	could	feel	the	weight	of	her	own	weapon,	dragging	hard	enough	to
make	her	wrist	ache.	She	did	not	recall	unsheathing	it.
Beyond	the	mesh	and	through	the	slits	of	the	visor,	Tavore	strode	ever
closer,	neither	speeding	up	nor	slowing.
No	catching	up.	No	falling	back.	How	could	there	be?	We	are	ever	the	same
years	apart.	The	chain	never	draws	taut.	Never	slackens.	Its	length	is
prescribed.	But	its	weight,	oh,	its	weight	ever	varies.
She	was	lithe,	light	on	her	feet,	achingly	economical.	She	was,	for	this
moment,	perfect.
But,	for	me,	the	blood	is	heavy.	So	heavy.
And	Felisin	struggled	against	it—that	sudden,	overwhelming	weight.
Struggled	to	raise	her	arms—unthinking	of	how	that	motion	would	be
received.


Tavore,	it’s	all	right—
A	thunderous	clang,	a	reverberation	jolting	up	her	right	arm,	and	the
sword’s	enervating	weight	was	suddenly	gone	from	her	hand.
Then	something	punched	into	her	chest,	a	stunning	blossom	of	cold	fire
piercing	through	flesh,	bone—and	then	she	felt	a	tug	from	behind,	as	if
something	had	reached	up,	clasped	her	hauberk	and	yanked	on	it—but	it	was
just	the	point,	she	realized.	The	point	of	Tavore’s	sword,	as	it	drove	against	the
underside	of	the	armour	shielding	her	back.
Felisin	looked	down	to	see	that	rust-hued	blade	impaling	her.
Her	legs	gave	way	and	the	sword	suddenly	bowed	to	her	weight.
But	she	did	not	slide	off	that	length	of	stained	iron.
Her	body	held	on	to	it,	releasing	only	in	shuddering	increments	as	Felisin
fell	back,	onto	the	ground.
Through	the	visor ’s	slit,	she	stared	up	at	her	sister,	a	figure	standing
behind	a	web	of	black,	twisted	iron	wire	that	now	rested	cool	over	her	eyes,
tickling	her	lashes.
A	figure	who	now	stepped	closer.	To	set	one	boot	down	hard	on	her	chest
—a	weight	that,	now	that	it	had	arrived,	seemed	eternal—and	dragged	the
sword	free.
Blood.
Of	course.	This	is	how	you	break	an	unbreakable	chain.
By	dying.
I	just	wanted	to	know,	Tavore,	why	you	did	it.	And	why	you	did	not	love	me,
when	I	loved	you.	I—I	think	that’s	what	I	wanted	to	know.
The	boot	lifted	from	her	chest.	But	she	could	still	feel	its	weight.
Heavy.	So	very	heavy…
Oh,	Mother,	look	at	us	now.
	
Karsa	Orlong’s	hand	snapped	out,	caught	Leoman	before	the	man	fell,	then
dragged	him	close.	‘Hear	me,	friend.	She	is	dead.	Take	your	tribes	and	get	out
of	here.’
Leoman	lifted	a	hand	and	passed	it	across	his	eyes.	Then	he	straightened.
‘Dead,	yes.	I’m	sorry,	Toblakai.	It	wasn’t	that.	She’—his	face	twisted—‘she	did
not	know	how	to	fight!’
‘True,	she	did	not.	And	now	she’s	dead,	and	the	Whirlwind	Goddess	with
her.	It	is	done,	friend.	We	have	lost.’
‘More	than	you	know,’	Leoman	groaned,	pulling	away.
In	the	basin	below,	the	Adjunct	was	staring	down	at	Sha’ik’s	corpse.	From


both	armies	lining	the	ridges,	silence.	Karsa	frowned.	‘The	Malazans	do	not
cheer.’
‘No,’	Leoman	snarled,	turning	to	where	Corabb	waited	with	the	horses.
‘They	probably	hate	the	bitch.	We	ride	to	Y’Ghatan,	Toblakai—’
‘Not	me,’	Karsa	growled.
His	friend	paused	and	then	nodded	without	turning	around,	and	vaulted
onto	his	horse.	He	took	the	reins	from	Corabb	then	glanced	over	at	Toblakai.
‘Fare	well,	my	friend.’
‘And	you,	Leoman	of	the	Flails.’
‘If	L’oric	returns	from	wherever	he	went,	tell	him…’	His	voice	trailed
away,	then	he	shrugged.	‘Take	care	of	him	if	he	needs	help.’
‘I	shall,	but	I	do	not	think	we	will	see	him	again.’
Leoman	nodded.	Then	he	said	to	Corabb,	‘Tell	the	warchiefs	to	scatter	with
their	tribes.	Out	of	Raraku	as	fast	as	they	can	manage	it—’
‘Out	of	the	Holy	Desert,	Leoman?’	Corabb	asked.
‘Can’t	you	hear	it?	Never	mind.	Yes.	Out.	Rejoin	me	on	the	western	road—
the	ancient	one	that	runs	straight.’
Corabb	saluted,	then	pulled	his	horse	round	and	rode	off.
‘You	too,	Toblakai.	Out	of	Raraku—’
‘I	will,’	Karsa	replied,	‘when	I	am	done	here,	Leoman.	Now,	go—officers
are	riding	to	the	Adjunct.	They	will	follow	with	an	attack—’
‘Then	they’re	fools,’	Leoman	spat.
Karsa	watched	his	friend	ride	off.	Then	strode	to	his	own	mount.	He	was
tired.	His	wounds	hurt.	But	some	issues	remained	unsettled,	and	he	needed	to
take	care	of	that.
The	Teblor	swung	himself	onto	Havok’s	back.
	
Lostara	walked	down	the	slope,	the	cracked	ground	crunching	underfoot.	At
her	side	marched	Pearl,	breathing	hard	beneath	the	weight	of	Korbolo	Dom’s
bound,	limp	form.
Tavore	still	stood	alone	on	the	flats,	a	few	paces	from	Sha’ik’s	body.	The
Adjunct’s	attention	had	been	fixed	on	the	Dogslayer	trenches,	and	on	the	lone,
ragged	standard	rising	from	the	highest	ground	at	the	central	ramp’s	summit.
A	standard	that	had	no	right	being	here.	No	right	existing	at	all.
Coltaine’s	standard,	the	wings	of	the	Crow	Clan.
Lostara	wondered	who	had	raised	it,	where	it	had	come	from,	then	decided
she	didn’t	want	to	know.	One	truth	could	not	be	ignored,	however.	They’re	all
dead.	The	Dogslayers.	All.	And	the	Adjunct	did	not	need	to	even	raise	a	hand	to


achieve	that.
She	sensed	her	own	cowardice	and	scowled.	Skittering	away,	again	and
again,	from	thoughts	too	bitter	with	irony	to	contemplate.	Their	journey	to	the
basin	had	been	nightmarish,	as	Kurald	Emurlahn	swarmed	the	entire	oasis,	as
shadows	warred	with	ghosts,	and	the	incessant	rise	and	fall	of	that	song	grew
audible	enough	for	Lostara	to	sense,	if	not	hear.	A	song	still	climbing	in
crescendo.
But,	at	the	feet	of…of	everything.	A	simple,	brutal	fact.
They	had	come	too	late.
Within	sight,	only	to	see	Tavore	batter	Sha’ik’s	weapon	out	of	her	hands,
then	thrust	that	sword	right	through	her…name	it,	Lostara	Yil,	you	damned
coward.	Name	it!	Her	sister.	Through	her	sister.	There.	It’s	done,	dragged	out
before	us.
She	would	not	look	at	Pearl,	could	say	nothing.	Nor	did	he	speak.
We	are	bound,	this	man	and	I.	I	didn’t	ask	for	this.	I	don’t	want	it.	I’ll	never
be	without	it.	Oh,	Queen	forgive	me…
Close	enough	now	to	see	Tavore’s	face	beneath	the	helm,	an	expression
stern—almost	angry—as	she	turned	to	watch	their	approach.
Officers	were	riding	down,	though	slowly.
There	would	be	time,	Lostara	realized,	for	a	private	conversation.
She	and	Pearl	halted	six	paces	from	the	Adjunct.
The	Claw	dumped	Korbolo	Dom	onto	the	ground	between	them.	‘He	won’t
wake	up	any	time	soon,’	he	said,	taking	a	deep	breath,	then	sighing	and	looking
away.
‘What	are	you	two	doing	here?’	the	Adjunct	asked.	‘Did	you	lose	the	trail?’
Pearl	did	not	glance	at	Lostara,	but	simply	shook	his	head	in	answer	to
Tavore’s	question.	A	pause,	then,	‘We	found	her,	Adjunct.	With	deep	regret…
Felisin	is	dead.’
‘Are	you	certain?’
‘Yes,	Adjunct.’	He	hesitated,	then	added,	‘I	can	say	one	thing	for	certain,
Tavore.	She	died	quickly.’
Lostara’s	heart	felt	ready	to	explode	at	Pearl’s	quiet	words.	Jaws	clenching,
she	met	the	Adjunct’s	eyes,	and	slowly	nodded.
Tavore	stared	at	them	both	for	a	long	moment,	then	lowered	her	head.
‘Well,	there	is	mercy	in	that,	I	suppose.’
And	then	sheathed	her	sword,	turned	away	and	began	walking	towards	her
approaching	officers.
Under	her	breath,	so	low	that	only	Pearl	could	hear	her,	Lostara	said,	‘Yes,
I	suppose	there	is…’


Pearl	swung	to	her	suddenly.	‘Here	comes	Tene	Baralta.	Stall	him,	lass.’	He
walked	over	to	Sha’ik’s	body.	‘The	warrens	are	clear	enough…I	hope.’	He	bent
down	and	tenderly	picked	her	up,	then	faced	Lostara	once	more.	‘Yes,	she’s	a
heavier	burden	than	you	might	think.’
‘No,	Pearl,	I	don’t	think	that.	Where?’
The	Claw’s	smile	lanced	into	her	heart.	‘A	hilltop…you	know	the	one.’
Lostara	nodded.	‘Very	well.	And	then?’
‘Convince	them	to	get	out	of	Raraku,	lass.	As	fast	as	they	can.	When	I’m
done…’	he	hesitated.
‘Come	and	find	me,	Pearl,’	she	growled.	‘Or	else	I’ll	come	looking	for
you.’
A	flicker	of	life	in	his	weary	eyes.	‘I	will.	I	promise.’
She	watched	his	gaze	flit	past	her	shoulder	and	she	turned.	Tavore	was	still
twenty	paces	from	the	riders,	who	had	all	but	Baralta	halted	their	horses.	‘What
is	it,	Pearl?’
‘Just	watching	her…walking	away,’	he	replied.	‘She	looks	so…’
‘Alone?’
‘Yes.	That	is	the	word,	isn’t	it.	See	you	later,	lass.’
She	felt	the	breath	of	the	warren	gust	against	her	back,	then	the	day’s	heat
returned.	Lostara	hitched	her	thumbs	in	her	belt,	and	waited	for	Tene	Baralta.
Her	once-commander	would	have	wanted	Sha’ik’s	body.	A	trophy	for	this
day.	He	would	be	furious.	‘Well,’	she	muttered,	‘that’s	just	too	damned	bad.’
	
Keneb	watched	her	approach.	There	was	none	of	the	triumph	there	he	thought
he	would	see.	Indeed,	she	looked	worn	down,	as	if	the	falling	of	spirit	that
followed	every	battle	had	already	come	to	her,	the	deathly	stillness	of	the	mind
that	invited	dire	contemplation,	that	lifted	up	the	host	of	questions	that	could
never	be	answered.
She	had	sheathed	her	sword	without	cleansing	it,	and	Sha’ik’s	blood	had
run	crooked	tracks	down	the	plain	scabbard.
Tene	Baralta	rode	past	her,	on	his	way,	Keneb	suspected,	to	Sha’ik’s	body.
If	he	said	anything	to	the	Adjunct	in	passing,	she	made	no	reply.
‘Fist	Blistig,’	she	announced	upon	arriving.	‘Send	scouts	to	the	Dogslayer
ramps.	Also,	a	detachment	of	guards—the	Claw	have	delivered	to	us	Korbolo
Dom.’
Ah,	so	that	was	what	that	man	was	carrying.	Keneb	glanced	back	to	where
the	duel	had	taken	place.	Only	the	woman	stood	there	now,	over	the	prone
shape	that	was	the	Napan	renegade,	her	face	turned	up	to	Tene	Baralta,	who


remained	on	his	horse	and	seemed	to	be	berating	her.	Even	at	this	distance,
something	told	Keneb	that	Baralta’s	harangue	would	yield	little	result.
‘Adjunct,’	Nil	said,	‘there	is	no	need	to	scout	the	Dogslayer	positions.	They
are	all	dead.’
Tavore	frowned.	‘Explain.’
‘Raraku’s	ghosts,	Adjunct.’
Nether	spoke	up.	‘And	the	spirits	of	our	own	slain.	Nil	and	I—we	were
blind	to	it.	We’d	forgotten	the	ways	of…of	seeing.	The	cattle	dog,	Adjunct.
Bent.	It	should	have	died	at	Coltaine’s	feet.	At	the	Fall.	But	some	soldiers	saved
it,	saw	to	the	healing	of	its	wounds.’
‘A	cattle	dog?	What	are	you	talking	about?’	Tavore	demanded,	revealing,
for	the	very	first	time,	an	edge	of	exasperation.
‘Bent	and	Roach,’	Nil	said.	‘The	only	creatures	still	living	to	have	walked
the	Chain	the	entire	way.	Two	dogs.’
‘Not	true,’	Temul	said	from	behind	the	two	Wickan	shamans.	‘This	mare.	It
belonged	to	Duiker.’
Nil	half	turned	to	acknowledge	the	correction,	then	faced	Tavore	once
more.	‘They	came	back	with	us,	Adjunct—’
‘The	dogs.’
He	nodded.	‘And	the	spirits	of	the	slain.	Our	own	ghosts,	Adjunct,	have
marched	with	us.	Those	that	fell	around	Coltaine	at	the	very	end.	Those	that
died	on	the	trees	of	Aren	Way.	And,	step	by	step,	more	came	from	the	places
where	they	were	cut	down.	Step	by	step,	Adjunct,	our	army	of	vengeance	grew.’
‘And	yet	you	sensed	nothing?’
‘Our	grief	blinded	us,’	Nether	replied.
‘Last	night,’	Nil	said,	‘the	child	Grub	woke	us.	Led	us	to	the	ridge,	so	that
we	could	witness	the	awakening.	There	were	legions,	Adjunct,	that	had
marched	this	land	a	hundred	thousand	years	ago.	And	Pormqual’s	crucifed
army	and	the	legions	of	the	Seventh	on	one	flank.	The	three	slaughtered	clans
of	the	Wickans	on	the	other.	And	still	others.	Many	others.	Within	the	darkness
last	night,	Tavore,	there	was	war.’
‘Thus,’	Nether	said,	smiling,	‘you	were	right,	Adjunct.	In	the	dreams	that
haunted	you	from	the	very	first	night	of	this	march,	you	saw	what	we	could	not
see.’
‘It	was	never	the	burden	you	believed	it	to	be,’	Nil	added.	‘You	did	not	drag
the	Chain	of	Dogs	with	you,	Adjunct	Tavore.’
‘Didn’t	I,	Nil?’	A	chilling	half-smile	twisted	her	thin-lipped	mouth,	then
she	looked	away.	‘All	those	ghosts…simply	to	slay	the	Dogslayers?’
‘No,	Adjunct,’	Nether	answered.	‘There	were	other…enemies.’


‘Fist	Gamet’s	ghost	joined	them,’	Nil	said.
Tavore’s	eyes	narrowed	sharply.	‘You	saw	him?’
Both	Wickans	nodded,	and	Nether	added,	‘Grub	spoke	with	him.’
The	Adjunct	shot	Keneb	a	querying	look.
‘He	can	be	damned	hard	to	find,’	the	captain	muttered,	shrugging.	‘As	for
talking	with	ghosts…well,	the	lad	is,	uh,	strange	enough	for	that.’
The	Adjunct’s	sigh	was	heavy.
Keneb’s	gaze	caught	movement	and	he	swung	his	head	round,	to	see	Tene
Baralta	riding	back	in	the	company	of	two	soldiers	wearing	little	more	than
rags.	Both	were	unshaven,	their	hair	long	and	matted.	Their	horses	bore	no
saddles.
The	Fist	reined	in	with	his	charges.	His	face	was	dark	with	anger.	‘Adjunct.
That	Claw	has	stolen	Sha’ik’s	body!’
Keneb	saw	the	woman	approaching	on	foot,	still	twenty	paces	distant.	She
looked…smug.
Tavore	ignored	Tene	Baralta’s	statement	and	was	eyeing	the	two
newcomers.	‘And	you	are?’	she	asked.
The	elder	of	the	two	saluted.	‘Captain	Kindly,	Adjunct,	of	the	Ashok
Regiment.	We	were	prisoners	in	the	Dogslayer	camp.	Lieutenant	Pores	and
myself,	that	is.’
Keneb	started,	then	leaned	forward	on	his	saddle.	Yes,	he	realized,	through
all	that	filth…‘Captain,’	he	said	in	rough	greeting.
Kindly	squinted,	then	grimaced.	‘Keneb.’
Tavore	cleared	her	throat,	then	asked,	‘Are	you	two	all	that’s	left	of	your
regiment,	Captain?’
‘No,	Adjunct.	At	least,	we	don’t	think	so—’
‘Tell	me	later.	Go	get	cleaned	up.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’
‘One	more	question	first,’	she	said.	‘The	Dogslayer	camp…’
Kindly	made	an	involuntary	warding	gesture.	‘It	was	not	a	pleasant	night,
Adjunct.’
‘You	bear	shackle	scars.’
Kindly	nodded.	‘Just	before	dawn,	a	couple	of	Bridgeburners	showed	up
and	burned	out	the	locks.’
‘What?’
The	captain	waved	for	his	lieutenant	to	follow,	said	over	one	shoulder,
‘Don’t	worry,	they	were	already	dead.’
The	two	rode	into	the	camp.
Tavore	seemed	to	shake	herself,	then	faced	Keneb.	‘You	two	know	each


other?	Will	that	prove	problematic,	Captain?’
‘No.’
‘Good.	Then	he	won’t	resent	your	promotion	to	Fist.	Now	ride	to	your	new
legion.	We	will	follow	the	fleeing	tribes.	If	we	have	to	cross	this	entire
continent,	I	will	see	them	cornered,	and	then	I	will	destroy	them.	This	rebellion
will	be	ashes	on	the	wind	when	we	are	done.	Go,	Fist	Keneb.’
‘Aye,	Adjunct.’	And	he	gathered	his	reins.
‘Weapons	out!’	Temul	suddenly	shouted.
And	all	spun	to	see	a	rider	cantering	down	from	the	hill	where	Sha’ik	had
first	appeared.
Keneb’s	eyes	thinned,	even	as	he	drew	his	sword.	There	was	something
wrong…a	skewing	of	scale…
A	small	squad	from	Blistig’s	legion	had	been	detailed	as	guard	to	the
Adjunct,	and	they	now	moved	forward.	Leading	them	was	one	of	Blistig’s
officers—none	other,	Keneb	realized,	than	Squint.	The	slayer	of	Coltaine,	who
was	now	standing	stock	still,	studying	the	approaching	horse	warrior.
‘That,’	he	growled,	‘is	a	Thelomen	Toblakai!	Riding	a	damned	Jhag
horse!’
Crossbows	were	levelled.
‘What’s	that	horse	dragging?’	asked	the	woman	who	had	just	arrived	on
foot—whom	Keneb	now	recognized,	belatedly,	as	one	of	Tene	Baralta’s
officers.
Nether	suddenly	hissed,	and	she	and	her	brother	flinched	back	as	one.
Heads.	From	some	demonic	beasts—
Weapons	were	readied.
The	Adjunct	lifted	a	hand.	‘Wait.	He’s	not	drawn	his	weapon—’
‘It’s	a	stone	sword,’	Squint	rasped.	‘T’lan	Imass.’
‘Only	bigger,’	one	of	the	soldiers	spat.
No-one	spoke	as	the	huge,	blood-spattered	figure	rode	closer.
To	halt	ten	paces	away.
Tene	Baralta	leaned	forward	and	spat	onto	the	ground.	‘I	know	you,’	he
rumbled.	‘Bodyguard	to	Sha’ik—’
‘Be	quiet,’	the	Toblakai	cut	in.	‘I	have	words	for	the	Adjunct.’
‘Speak,	then,’	Tavore	said.
The	giant	bared	his	teeth.	‘Once,	long	ago,	I	claimed	the	Malazans	as	my
enemies.	I	was	young.	I	took	pleasure	in	voicing	vows.	The	more	enemies	the
better.	So	it	was,	once.	But	no	longer.	Malazan,	you	are	no	longer	my	enemy.
Thus,	I	will	not	kill	you.’
‘We	are	relieved,’	Tavore	said	drily.


He	studied	her	for	a	long	moment.
During	which	Keneb’s	heart	began	to	pound	hard	and	fast	in	his	chest.
Then	the	Toblakai	smiled.	‘You	should	be.’
With	that	he	wheeled	his	Jhag	horse	round	and	rode	a	westerly	path	down
the	length	of	the	basin.	The	huge	hound	heads	bounced	and	thumped	in	their
wake.
Keneb’s	sigh	was	shaky.
‘Excuse	my	speaking,’	Squint	rasped,	‘but	something	tells	me	the	bastard
was	right.’
Tavore	turned	and	studied	the	old	veteran.	‘An	observation,’	she	said,	‘I’ll
not	argue,	soldier.’
Once	more,	Keneb	collected	his	reins.
	
Surmounting	the	ridge,	Lieutenant	Ranal	sawed	hard	on	the	reins,	and	the	horse
reared	against	the	skyline.
‘Gods	take	me,	somebody	shoot	him.’
Fiddler	did	not	bother	to	turn	round	to	find	out	who	had	spoken.	He	was
too	busy	fighting	his	own	horse	to	care	much	either	way.	It	had	Wickan	blood,
and	it	wanted	his.	The	mutual	hatred	was	coming	along	just	fine.
‘What	is	that	bastard	up	to?’	Cuttle	demanded	as	he	rode	alongside	the
sergeant.	‘We’re	leaving	even	Gesler ’s	squad	behind—and	Hood	knows	where
Borduke’s	gone	to.’
The	squad	joined	their	lieutenant	atop	the	ancient	raised	road.	To	the	north
stretched	the	vast	dunes	of	Raraku,	shimmering	in	the	heat.
Ranal	wheeled	his	mount	to	face	his	soldiers.	Then	pointed	west.	‘See
them?	Have	any	of	you	eyes	worth	a	damn?’
Fiddler	leaned	to	one	side	and	spat	grit.	Then	squinted	to	where	Ranal	was
pointing.	A	score	of	riders.	Desert	warriors,	likely	a	rearguard.	They	were	at	a
loping	canter.	‘Lieutenant,’	he	said,	‘there’s	a	spider	lives	in	these	sands.	Moves
along	under	the	surface,	but	drags	a	strange	snakelike	tail	that	every	hungry
predator	can’t	help	but	see.	Squirming	away	along	the	surface.	It’s	a	big	spider.
Hawk	comes	down	to	snatch	up	that	snake,	and	ends	up	dissolving	in	a	stream
down	that	spider ’s	throat—’
‘Enough	with	the	damned	horse-dung,	Sergeant,’	snapped	Ranal.	‘They’re
there	because	they	were	late	getting	out	of	the	oasis.	Likely	too	busy	looting
the	palace	to	notice	that	Sha’ik	had	been	skewered,	the	Dogslayers	were	dead
and	everyone	else	was	bugging	out	as	fast	as	their	scrawny	horses	could	take
’em.’	He	glared	at	Fiddler.	‘I	want	their	heads,	you	grey-whiskered	fossil.’


‘We’ll	catch	them	sooner	or	later,	sir,’	Fiddler	said.	‘Better	with	the	whole
company—’
‘Then	get	off	that	saddle	and	sit	your	backside	down	here	on	this	road,
Sergeant!	Leave	the	fighting	to	the	rest	of	us!	The	rest	of	you,	follow	me!’
Ranal	kicked	his	lathered	horse	into	a	gallop.
With	a	weary	gesture,	Fiddler	waved	the	marines	on,	then	followed	on	his
own	bucking	mare.
‘Got	a	pinched	nerve,’	Koryk	called	out	as	he	cantered	past.
‘Who,	my	horse	or	the	lieutenant?’
The	Seti	grinned	back.	‘Your	horse…naturally.	Doesn’t	like	all	that	weight,
Fid.’
Fiddler	reached	back	and	readjusted	the	heavy	pack	and	the	assembled
lobber	crossbow.	‘I’ll	pinch	her	damned	nerve,’	he	muttered.	‘Just	you	wait.’
It	was	past	midday.	Almost	seven	bells	since	the	Adjunct	cut	down	Sha’ik.
Fiddler	found	himself	glancing	again	and	again	to	the	north—to	Raraku,	where
the	song	still	rushed	out	to	embrace	him,	only	to	fall	away,	then	roll,	forward
once	more.	The	far	horizon	beyond	that	vast	basin	of	sand,	he	now	saw,	now
held	up	a	bank	of	white	clouds.
Now	that	don’t	look	right…
Sand-filled	wind	gusted	suddenly	into	his	face.
‘They’ve	left	the	road!’	Ranal	shouted.
Fiddler	squinted	westward.	The	riders	had	indeed	plunged	down	the	south
bank,	were	cutting	out	diagonally—straight	for	a	fast-approaching	sandstorm.
Gods,	not	another	sandstorm…This	one,	he	knew,	was	natural.	The	kind	that
plagued	this	desert,	springing	up	like	a	capricious	demon	to	rage	a	wild,
cavorting	path	for	a	bell	or	two,	before	vanishing	as	swiftly	as	it	had	first
appeared.
He	rose	up	on	his	saddle.	‘Lieutenant!	They’re	going	to	ride	into	it!	Use	it
as	cover!	We’d	better	not—’
‘Flap	that	tongue	at	me	one	more	time,	Sergeant,	and	I’ll	tear	it	out!	You
hear	me?’
Fiddler	subsided.	‘Aye,	sir.’
‘Full	pursuit,	soldiers!’	Ranal	barked.	‘That	storm’ll	slow	them!’
Oh,	it	will	slow	them,	all	right…
	
Gesler	glared	into	the	blinding	desert.	‘Now	who,’	he	wondered	under	his
breath,	‘are	they?’
They	had	drawn	to	a	halt	when	it	became	obvious	that	the	four	strange


riders	were	closing	fast	on	an	intercept	course.	Long-bladed	white	swords
flashing	over	their	heads.	Bizarre,	gleaming	white	armour.	White	horses.
White	everything.
‘They’re	none	too	pleased	with	us,’	Stormy	rumbled,	running	his	fingers
through	his	beard.
‘That’s	fine,’	Gesler	growled,	‘but	they	ain’t	renegades,	are	they?’
‘Sha’ik’s?	Who	knows?	Probably	not,	but	even	so…’
The	sergeant	nodded.	‘Sands,	get	up	here.’
‘I	am,’	the	sapper	snapped.
‘What’s	your	range,	lad,	with	that	damned	thing?’
‘Ain’t	sure.	No	chance	to	try	it	yet.	Fid’s	is	anywhere	from	thirty	to	forty
paces	with	a	cusser—which	is	ugly	close—’
‘All	right.	Rest	of	you,	dismount	and	drive	your	horses	down	the	other
side.	Truth,	hold	on	good	to	their	reins	down	there—if	they	bolt	we’re	done
for.’
‘Saw	Borduke	and	his	squad	south	of	here,’	Pella	ventured.
‘Aye,	as	lost	as	we	are—and	you	can’t	see	’em	now,	can	you?’
‘No,	Sergeant.’
‘Damn	that	Ranal.	Remind	me	to	kill	him	when	we	next	meet.’
‘Aye,	Sergeant.’
The	four	attackers	were	tall	bastards.	Voicing	eerie	warcries	now	as	they
charged	towards	the	base	of	the	hill.
‘Load	up,	lad,’	Gesler	muttered,	‘and	don’t	mess	up.’
The	lobber	had	been	copied	from	Fiddler ’s	own.	It	looked	decent,	at	least
as	far	as	lobbers	went—which	ain’t	far	enough.	Thirty	paces	with	a	cusser.
Hood	roast	us	all…
And	here	they	came.	Base	of	the	slope,	horses	surging	to	take	them	up	the
hill.
A	heavy	thud,	and	something	awkward	and	grey	sailed	out	and	down.
A	cusser—holy	f—‘Down!	Down!	Down!’
The	hill	seemed	to	lift	beneath	them.	Gesler	thumped	in	the	dust,	coughing
in	the	spiralling	white	clouds,	then,	swearing,	he	buried	his	head	beneath	his
arms	as	stones	rained	down.
Some	time	later,	the	sergeant	clambered	to	his	feet.
On	the	hill’s	opposite	side,	Truth	was	trying	to	run	in	every	direction	at
once,	the	horses	trailing	loose	reins	as	they	pelted	in	wild	panic.
‘Hood’s	balls	on	a	skillet!’	Gesler	planted	his	hands	on	his	hips	and	glared
about.	The	other	soldiers	were	picking	themselves	up,	shaken	and	smeared	in
dust.	Stormy	closed	on	Sands	and	grabbed	him	by	the	throat.


‘Not	too	hard,	Corporal,’	Gesler	said	as	Stormy	began	shaking	the	sapper
about.	‘I	want	him	alive	for	my	turn.	And	dammit,	make	sure	he	ain’t	got	any
sharpers	on	his	body.’
That	stopped	Stormy	flat.
Gesler	walked	to	the	now	pitted	edge	of	the	hill	and	looked	down.	‘Well,’
he	said,	‘they	won’t	be	chasing	us	any	more,	I’d	say.’
‘Wonder	who	they	were?’	Pella	asked.
‘Armour	seems	to	have	weathered	the	blast—you	could	go	down	and
scrape	out	whatever ’s	left	inside	’em…on	second	thought,	never	mind.	We
need	to	round	up	our	horses.’	He	faced	the	others.	‘Enough	pissing	about,	lads.
Let’s	get	moving.’
	
Lying	on	the	smoking	edge	of	the	crater,	sprayed	in	horseflesh	and	deafened
by	the	blast,	Jorrude	groaned.	He	was	a	mass	of	bruises,	his	head	ached,	and	he
wanted	to	throw	up—but	not	until	he	pried	the	helm	from	his	head.
Nearby	in	the	rubble,	Brother	Enias	coughed.	Then	said,	‘Brother
Jorrude?’
‘Yes?’
‘I	want	to	go	home.’
Jorrude	said	nothing.	It	would	not	do,	after	all,	to	utter	a	hasty,	heartfelt
agreement,	despite	their	present	circumstance.	‘Check	on	the	others,	Brother
Enias.’
‘Were	those	truly	the	ones	who	rode	that	ship	through	our	realm?’
‘They	were,’	Jorrude	answered	as	he	fumbled	with	the	helm’s	straps.	‘And
I	have	been	thinking.	I	suspect	they	were	ignorant	of	Liosan	laws	when	they
travelled	through	our	realm.	True,	ignorance	is	an	insufficient	defence.	But
one	must	consider	the	notion	of	innocent	momentum.’
From	off	to	one	side,	Malachar	grunted.	‘Innocent	momentum?’
‘Indeed.	Were	not	these	trespassers	but	pulled	along—beyond	their	will—
in	the	wake	of	the	draconian	T’lan	Imass	bonecaster?	If	an	enemy	we	must
hunt,	then	should	it	not	be	that	dragon?’
‘Wise	words,’	Malachar	observed.
‘A	brief	stay	in	our	realm,’	Jorrude	continued,	‘to	resupply	and	requisition
new	horses,	along	with	repairs	and	such,	seems	to	reasonably	obtain	in	this
instance.’
‘Truly	judged,	brother.’
From	the	other	side	of	the	crater	sounded	another	cough.
At	least,	Jorrude	dourly	reflected,	they	were	all	still	alive.


It’s	all	the	dragon’s	fault,	in	fact.	Who	would	refute	that?
	
They	rode	into	the	sandstorm,	less	than	fifty	strides	behind	the	fleeing	horse
warriors,	and	found	themselves	floundering	blind	in	a	maelstrom	of	shrieking
winds	and	whipping	gravel.
Fiddler	heard	a	horse	scream.
He	drew	hard	on	his	own	reins,	the	wind	hammering	at	him	from	all	sides.
Already	he’d	lost	sight	of	his	companions.	This	is	wide-eyed	stupid.
Now,	if	I	was	the	commander	of	those	bastards,	I’d—
And	suddenly	figures	flashed	into	view,	scimitars	and	round	shields,
swathed	faces	and	ululating	warcries.	Fiddler	threw	himself	down	against	his
horse’s	withers	as	a	heavy	blade	slashed,	slicing	through	sand-filled	air	where
his	head	had	been	a	moment	earlier.
The	Wickan	mare	lunged	forward	and	to	one	side,	choosing	this	precise
moment	to	buck	its	hated	rider	from	the	saddle.
With	profound	success.
Fiddler	found	himself	flying	forward,	his	bag	of	munitions	rolling	up	his
back,	then	up	over	his	head.
Still	in	mid-air,	but	angling	down	to	the	ground,	he	curled	himself	into	a
tight	ball—though	he	well	knew,	in	that	instant,	that	there	was	no	hope	of
surviving.	No	hope	at	all.	Then	he	pounded	into	the	sand,	and	rolled—to	see,
upside-down,	a	huge	hook-bladed	sword	spinning	end	over	end	across	his	own
wake.	And	a	stumbling	horse.	And	its	rider,	a	warrior	thrown	far	back	on	his
saddle—with	the	munition	bag	wrapped	in	his	arms.
A	surprised	look	beneath	the	ornate	helm—then	rider,	horse	and	munitions
vanished	into	the	whirling	sands.
Fiddler	clambered	to	his	feet	and	began	running.	Sprinting,	in	what	he
hoped—what	he	prayed—was	the	opposite	direction.
A	hand	snagged	his	harness	from	behind.	‘Not	that	way,	you	fool!’	And	he
was	yanked	to	one	side,	flung	to	the	ground,	and	a	body	landed	on	top	of	him.
The	sergeant’s	face	was	pushed	into	the	sand	and	held	there.
	
Corabb	bellowed.	The	bulky,	heavy	sack	was	hissing	in	his	arms.	As	if	filled
with	snakes.	It	had	clunked	hard	against	his	chest,	arriving	like	a	flung	boulder
out	of	the	storm,	and	he’d	time	only	to	toss	his	sword	away	and	raise	both
arms.


The	impact	threw	him	onto	the	horse’s	rump,	but	his	feet	stayed	in	the
stirrups.
The	bag’s	momentum	carried	it	over	his	face,	and	the	hissing	filled	his
ears.
Snakes!
He	slid	on	his	back	down	one	side	of	the	mount’s	heaving	hindquarters,
letting	the	bag’s	weight	pull	his	arms	with	it.	Don’t	panic!	He	screamed.
Snakes!
The	bag	tugged	in	his	hands	as	it	brushed	the	ground.
He	held	his	breath,	then	let	go.
Tumbling	clunks,	a	burst	of	frenzied	hissing—then	the	horse’s	forward
charge	carried	him	blissfully	away.
He	struggled	to	right	himself,	his	leg	and	stomach	muscles	fiercely
straining,	and	finally	was	able	to	grasp	the	horn	and	pull	himself	straight.
One	pass,	Leoman	had	said.	Then	wheel	and	into	the	storm’s	heart.
He’d	done	that	much.	One	pass.	Enough.
Time	to	flee.
Corabb	Bhilan	Thun’alas	leaned	forward,	and	bared	muddy	teeth.
Spirits	below,	it	is	good	to	be	alive!
	
The	detonation	should	have	killed	Fiddler.	There	was	fire.	Towering	walls	of
sand.	The	air	concussed,	and	his	breath	was	torn	from	his	lungs	even	as	blood
spurted	from	his	nose	and	both	ears.
And	the	body	lying	atop	him	seemed	to	wither	in	shreds.
He’d	recognized	the	voice.	It	was	impossible.	It	was…infuriating.
Hot	smoke	rolled	over	them.
And	that	damned	voice	whispered,	‘Can’t	leave	you	on	your	own	for	a
Hood-damned	minute,	can	I?	Say	hello	to	Kalam	for	me,	will	ya?	I’ll	see	you
again,	sooner	or	later.	And	you’ll	see	me,	too.	You’ll	see	us	all.’	A	laugh.	‘Just
not	today.	Damned	shame	’bout	your	fiddle,	though.’
The	weight	vanished.
Fiddler	rolled	over.	The	storm	was	tumbling	away,	leaving	a	white	haze	in
its	wake.	He	groped	with	his	hands.
A	terrible,	ragged	moan	ripped	from	his	throat,	and	he	lifted	himself	onto
his	knees.	‘Hedge!’	he	screamed.	‘Damn	you!	Hedge!’
Someone	jogged	into	view,	settled	down	beside	him.	‘Slamming	gates,	Fid
—you’re	Hood-damned	alive!’
He	stared	at	the	man’s	battered	face,	then	recognized	it.	‘Cuttle?	He	was


here.	He—you’re	covered	in	blood—’
‘Aye.	I	wasn’t	as	close	as	you.	Luckily.	’Fraid	I	can’t	say	the	same	for
Ranal.	Someone	had	taken	down	his	horse.	He	was	stumbling	around.’
‘That	blood—’
‘Aye,’	Cuttle	said	again,	then	flashed	a	hard	grin.	‘I’m	wearing	Ranal.’
Shouts,	and	other	figures	were	closing	in.	Every	one	of	them	on	foot.
‘—killed	the	horses.	Bastards	went	and—’
‘Sergeant!	You	all	right?	Bottle,	get	over	here—’
‘Killed	the—’
‘Be	quiet,	Smiles,	you’re	making	me	sick.	Did	you	hear	that	blast?	Gods
below—’
Cuttle	clapped	Fiddler	on	one	shoulder,	then	dragged	him	to	his	feet.
‘Where’s	the	lieutenant?’	Koryk	asked.
‘Right	here,’	Cuttle	answered,	but	did	not	elaborate.
He’s	wearing	Ranal.
‘What	just	happened?’	Koryk	asked.
Fiddler	studied	his	squad.	All	here.	That’s	a	wonder.
Cuttle	spat.	‘What	happened,	lad?	We	got	slapped	down.	That’s	what
happened.	Slapped	down	hard.’
Fiddler	stared	at	the	retreating	storm.	Aw,	shit.	Hedge.
‘Here	comes	Borduke’s	squad!’
‘Find	your	horses,	everyone,’	Corporal	Tarr	said.	‘Sergeant’s	been
knocked	about.	Collect	whatever	you	can	salvage—we	gotta	wait	for	the	rest	of
the	company,	I	reckon.’
Good	lad.
‘Look	at	that	crater,’	Smiles	said.	‘Gods,	Sergeant,	you	couldn’t	have	been
much	closer	to	Hood’s	Gate	and	lived,	could	you?’
He	stared	at	her.	‘You’ve	no	idea	how	right	you	are,	lass.’
And	the	song	rose	and	fell,	and	he	could	feel	his	heart	matching	that
cadence.	Ebb	and	flow.	Raraku	has	swallowed	more	tears	than	can	be	imagined.
Now	comes	the	time	for	the	Holy	Desert	to	weep.	Ebb	and	flow,	his	blood’s
song,	and	it	lived	on.
It	lives	on.
	
They	had	fled	in	the	wrong	direction.	Fatal,	but	unsurprising.	The	night	had
been	a	shambles.	The	last	survivor	of	Korbolo	Dom’s	cadre	of	mages,	Fayelle
rode	a	lathered	horse	in	the	company	of	thirteen	other	Dogslayers	down	the
channel	of	a	long-dead	river,	boulders	and	banks	high	on	either	side.


Herself	and	thirteen	battered,	bloodied	soldiers.	All	that	was	left.
The	clash	with	Leoman	had	begun	well	enough,	a	perfectly	sprung	ambush.
And	would	have	ended	perfectly,	as	well.
If	not	for	the	damned	ghosts.
Ambush	turned	over,	onto	its	back	like	an	upended	tortoise.	They’d	been
lucky	to	get	out	with	their	lives,	these	few.	These	last.
Fayelle	well	knew	what	had	happened	to	the	rest	of	Korbolo’s	army.	She
had	felt	Henaras’s	death.	And	Kamist	Reloe’s.
And	Raraku	was	not	finished	with	them.	Oh	no.	Not	at	all	finished.
They	reached	a	slope	leading	out	of	the	defile.
She	had	few	regrets—
Crossbow	quarrels	whizzed	down.	Horses	and	soldiers	screamed.	Bodies
thumped	onto	the	ground.	Her	horse	staggered,	then	rolled	onto	its	side.	She’d
no	time	to	kick	free	of	the	stirrups,	and	as	the	dying	beast	pinned	her	leg	its
weight	tore	the	joint	from	her	hip,	sending	pain	thundering	through	her.	Her
left	arm	was	trapped	awkwardly	beneath	her	as	her	own	considerable	weight
struck	the	ground—and	bones	snapped.
Then	the	side	of	her	head	hammered	against	rock.
Fayelle	struggled	to	focus.	The	pain	subsided,	became	a	distant	thing.	She
heard	faint	pleas	for	mercy,	the	cries	of	wounded	soldiers	being	finished	off.
Then	a	shadow	settled	over	her.
‘I’ve	been	looking	for	you.’
Fayelle	frowned.	The	face	hovering	above	her	belonged	to	the	past.	The
desert	had	aged	it,	but	it	nevertheless	remained	a	child’s	face.	Oh,	spirits	below.
The	child.	Sinn.	My	old…student…
She	watched	the	girl	raise	a	knife	between	them,	angle	the	point	down,	then
set	it	against	her	neck.
Fayelle	laughed.	‘Go	ahead,	you	little	horror.	I’ll	wait	for	you	at	Hood’s
Gate…and	the	wait	won’t	be	long—’
The	knife	punched	through	skin	and	cartilage.
Fayelle	died.
Straightening,	Sinn	swung	to	her	companions.	They	were,	one	and	all,
busy	gathering	the	surviving	horses.
Sixteen	left.	The	Ashok	Regiment	had	fallen	on	hard	times.	Thirst	and
starvation.	Raiders.	This	damned	desert.
She	watched	them	for	a	moment,	then	something	else	drew	her	gaze.
Northward.
She	slowly	straightened.	‘Cord.’
The	sergeant	turned.	‘What—oh,	Beru	fend!’


The	horizon	to	the	west	had	undergone	a	transformation.	It	was	now
limned	in	white,	and	it	was	rising.
‘Double	up!’	Cord	bellowed.	‘Now!’
A	hand	closed	on	her	shoulder.	Shard	leaned	close.	‘You	ride	with	me.’
‘Ebron!’
‘I	hear	you,’	the	mage	replied	to	Cord’s	bellow.	‘And	I’ll	do	what	I	can
with	these	blown	mounts,	but	I	ain’t	guaranteeing—’
‘Get	on	with	it!	Bell,	help	Limp	onto	that	horse—he’s	busted	up	that	knee
again!’
Sinn	cast	one	last	glance	at	Fayelle’s	corpse.	She’d	known,	then.	What	was
coming.
I	should	be	dancing.	The	bloodied	knife	fell	from	her	hands.
Then	she	was	roughly	grasped	and	pulled	up	onto	the	saddle	behind	Shard.
The	beast’s	head	tossed,	and	it	shook	beneath	them.
‘Queen	take	us,’	Shard	hissed,	‘Ebron’s	filled	these	beasts	with	fire.’
We’ll	need	it…
And	now	they	could	hear	the	sound,	a	roar	that	belittled	even	the
Whirlwind	Wall	in	its	fullest	rage.
Raraku	had	risen.
To	claim	a	shattered	warren.
	
The	Wickan	warlocks	had	known	what	was	coming.	Flight	was	impossible,	but
the	islands	of	coral	stood	high—higher	than	any	other	feature	this	side	of	the
escarpment—and	it	was	on	these	that	the	armies	gathered.
To	await	what	could	be	their	annihilation.
The	north	sky	was	a	massive	wall	of	white,	billowing	clouds.	A	cool,
burgeoning	wind	thrashed	through	the	palms	around	the	oasis.
Then	the	sound	reached	them.
A	roar	unceasing,	building,	of	water,	cascading,	foaming,	tumbling	across
the	vast	desert.
The	Holy	Desert,	it	seemed,	held	far	more	than	bones	and	memories.	More
than	ghosts	and	dead	cities.	Lostara	Yil	stood	near	the	Adjunct,	ignoring	the
baleful	glares	Tene	Baralta	continued	casting	her	way.	Wondering…if	Pearl
was	on	that	high	ground,	standing	over	Sha’ik’s	grave…if	that	ground	was	in
fact	high	enough.
She	wondered,	too,	at	what	she	had	seen	these	past	months.	Visions	burned
into	her	soul,	fraught	and	mysterious,	visions	that	could	still	chill	her	blood	if
she	allowed	them	to	rise	before	her	mind’s	eye	once	more.	Crucified	dragons.


Murdered	gods.	Warrens	of	fire	and	warrens	of	ashes.
It	was	odd,	she	reflected,	to	be	thinking	these	things,	even	as	a	raging	sea
was	born	from	seeming	nothing	and	was	sweeping	towards	them,	drowning	all
in	its	path.
Odder,	still,	to	be	thinking	of	Pearl.	She	was	hard	on	him,	viciously	so	at
times.	Not	because	she	cared,	but	because	it	was	fun.	No,	that	was	too	facile,
wasn’t	it?	She	cared	indeed.
What	a	stupid	thing	to	have	let	happen.
A	weary	sigh	close	beside	her.	Lostara	scowled	without	turning.	‘You’re
back.’
‘As	requested,’	Pearl	murmured.
Oh,	she	wanted	to	hit	him	for	that.
‘The	task	is…done?’
‘Aye.	Consigned	to	the	deep	and	all	that.	If	Tene	Baralta	still	wants	her,
he’ll	have	to	hold	his	breath.’
She	looked	then.	‘Really?	The	sea	is	already	that	deep?’	Then	we’re—
‘No.	High	and	dry,	actually.	The	other	way	sounded	more…poetic.’
‘I	really	hate	you.’
He	nodded.	‘And	you’ll	have	plenty	of	time	in	which	to	luxuriate	in	it.’
‘You	think	we’ll	survive	this?’
‘Yes.	Oh,	we’ll	get	our	feet	wet,	but	these	were	islands	even	back	then.	This
sea	will	flood	the	oasis.	It	will	pound	up	against	the	raised	road	west	of	here—
since	it	was	the	coastal	road	back	then.	And	wash	up	close	to	the	escarpment,
maybe	even	reach	it.’
‘That’s	all	very	well,’	she	snapped.	‘And	what	will	we	be	doing,	stuck	here
on	these	islands	in	the	middle	of	a	landlocked	sea?’
Infuriatingly,	Pearl	simply	shrugged.	‘A	guess?	We	build	a	flotilla	of	rafts
and	bind	them	together	to	form	a	bridge,	straight	to	the	west	road.	The	sea	will
be	shallow	enough	there	anyway,	even	if	that	doesn’t	work	as	well	as	it	should
—but	I	have	every	confidence	in	the	Adjunct.’
The	wall	of	water	then	struck	the	far	side	of	the	oasis,	with	the	sound	of
thunder.	Palms	waved	wildly,	then	began	toppling.
‘Well,	now	we	know	what	turned	that	other	forest	to	stone,’	Pearl	said
loudly	over	the	thrashing	roar	of	water—
That	now	flowed	across	the	ruins,	filling	the	Dogslayer	trenches,	tumbling
down	into	the	basin.
And	Lostara	could	see	that	Pearl	was	right.	Its	fury	was	already	spent,	and
the	basin	seemed	to	swallow	the	water	with	a	most	prodigious	thirst.
She	glanced	over	to	study	the	Adjunct.


Impassive,	watching	the	seas	rise,	one	hand	on	the	hilt	of	her	sword.
Oh,	why	does	looking	at	you	break	my	heart?
	
The	sands	were	settling	on	the	carcasses	of	the	horses.	The	three	squads	sat	or
stood,	waiting	for	the	rest	of	the	legion.	Bottle	had	walked	up	to	the	road	to	see
the	source	of	the	roar,	had	come	staggering	back	with	the	news.
A	sea.
A	damned	sea.
And	its	song	was	in	Fiddler ’s	soul,	now.	Strangely	warm,	almost
comforting.
One	and	all,	they	then	turned	to	watch	the	giant	rider	and	his	giant	horse
thunder	along	that	road,	heading	westward.	Dragging	something	that	kicked	up
a	lot	of	dust.
The	image	of	that	stayed	with	Fiddler	long	after	the	clouds	of	dust	had
drifted	off	the	road,	down	the	near	side	of	the	slope.
Could	have	been	a	ghost.
But	he	knew	it	wasn’t.
Could	have	been	their	worst	enemy.
But	if	he	was,	it	didn’t	matter.	Not	right	now.
A	short	while	later	there	was	a	startled	shout	from	Smiles,	and	Fiddler
turned,	in	time	to	see	two	figures	stride	out	from	a	warren.
Despite	everything,	he	found	himself	grinning.
Old	friends,	he	realized,	were	getting	harder	to	find.
Still,	he	knew	them,	and	they	were	his	brothers.
Mortal	souls	of	Raraku.	Raraku,	the	land	that	had	bound	them	together.
Bound	them	all,	as	was	now	clear,	beyond	even	death.
Fiddler	was	unmindful	of	how	it	looked,	of	what	the	others	thought,	upon
seeing	the	three	men	close	to	a	single	embrace.
	
The	horses	clambered	up	the	slope	to	the	ridge.	Where	their	riders	reined	them
in,	and	one	and	all	turned	to	stare	at	the	yellow,	foaming	seas	churning	below.
A	moment	later	a	squat	four-eyed	demon	scrabbled	onto	the	summit	to	join
them.
The	Lord	of	Summer	had	lent	wings	to	their	horses—Heboric	could	admit
no	other	possibility,	so	quickly	had	they	covered	the	leagues	since	the	night
past.	And	the	beasts	seemed	fresh	even	now.	As	fresh	as	Greyfrog.


Though	he	himself	was	anything	but.
‘What	has	happened?’	Scillara	wondered	aloud.
Heboric	could	only	shake	his	head.
‘More	importantly,’	Felisin	said,	‘where	do	we	go	now?	I	don’t	think	I	can
sit	in	the	saddle	much	longer—’
‘I	know	how	you	feel,	lass.	We	should	find	somewhere	to	make	camp—’
The	squeal	of	a	mule	brought	all	three	around.
A	scrawny,	black-skinned	old	man	was	riding	up	towards	them,	seated
cross-legged	atop	the	mule.	‘Welcome!’	he	shrieked—a	shriek	because,	even	as
he	spoke,	he	toppled	to	one	side	and	thumped	hard	onto	the	stony	trail.	‘Help
me,	you	idiots!’
Heboric	glanced	at	the	two	women,	but	it	was	Greyfrog	who	moved	first.
‘Food!’
The	old	man	shrieked	again.	‘Get	away	from	me!	I	have	news	to	tell!	All	of
you!	Is	L’oric	dead?	No!	My	shadows	saw	everything!	You	are	my	guests!
Now,	come	prise	my	legs	loose!	You,	lass.	No,	you,	the	other	lass!	Both	of
you!	Beautiful	women	with	their	hands	on	my	legs,	my	thighs!	I	can’t	wait!	Do
they	see	the	avid	lust	in	my	eyes?	Of	course	not,	I’m	but	a	helpless	wizened
creature,	potential	father	figure—’
	
Cutter	stood	in	the	tower ’s	uppermost	chamber,	staring	out	of	the	lone	window.
Bhok’arala	chittered	behind	him,	pausing	every	now	and	then	to	make
crooning,	mournful	sounds.
He’d	woken	alone.
And	had	known,	instantly,	that	she	was	gone.	And	there	would	be	no	trail
for	him	to	follow.
Iskaral	Pust	had	conjured	up	a	mule	and	ridden	off	earlier.	Of	Mogora
there	was,	mercifully,	no	sign.
Thoroughly	alone,	then,	for	most	of	this	day.
Until	now.
‘There	are	countless	paths	awaiting	you.’
Cutter	sighed.	‘Hello,	Cotillion.	I	was	wondering	if	you’d	show	up…
again.’
‘Again?’
‘You	spoke	with	Apsalar.	Here	in	this	very	chamber.	You	helped	her
decide.’
‘She	told	you?’
He	shook	his	head.	‘Not	entirely.’


‘Her	decision	was	hers	to	make,	Cutter.	Hers	alone.’
‘It	doesn’t	matter.	Never	mind.	Odd,	though.	You	see	countless	paths.
Whilst	I	see…none	worth	walking.’
‘Do	you	seek,	then,	something	worthy?’
Cutter	slowly	closed	his	eyes,	then	sighed.	‘What	would	you	have	me	do?’
‘There	was	a	man,	once,	whose	task	was	to	guard	the	life	of	a	young	girl.
He	did	the	best	he	could—with	such	honour	as	to	draw,	upon	his	sad	death,	the
attention	of	Hood	himself.	Oh,	the	Lord	of	Death	will	look	into	a	mortal’s	soul,
given	the	right	circumstances.	The,	uh,	the	proper	incentive.	Thus,	that	man	is
now	the	Knight	of	Death—’
‘I	don’t	want	to	be	Knight	of	anything,	nor	for	anyone,	Cotillion—’
‘The	wrong	track,	lad.	Let	me	finish	my	tale.	This	man	did	the	best	he
could,	but	he	failed.	And	now	the	girl	is	dead.	She	was	named	Felisin.	Of	House
Paran.’
Cutter ’s	head	turned.	He	studied	the	shadowed	visage	of	the	god.	‘Captain
Paran?	His—’
‘His	sister.	Look	down	upon	the	path,	here,	out	the	window,	lad.	In	a	short
time	Iskaral	Pust	will	return.	With	guests.	Among	them,	a	child	named	Felisin
—’
‘But	you	said—’
‘Before	Paran’s	sister…died,	she	adopted	a	waif.	A	sorely	abused
foundling.	She	sought,	I	think—we	will	never	know	for	certain,	of	course—to
achieve	something…something	she	herself	had	no	chance,	no	opportunity,	to
achieve.	Thus,	she	named	the	waif	after	herself.’
‘And	what	is	she	to	me,	Cotillion?’
‘You	are	being	obstinate,	I	think.	The	wrong	question.’
‘Oh,	then	tell	me	what	is	the	right	question.’
‘What	are	you	to	her?’
Cutter	grimaced.
‘The	child	approaches	in	the	company	of	another	woman,	a	very
remarkable	one,	as	you—and	she—will	come	to	see.	And	with	a	priest,	sworn
now	to	Treach.	From	him,	you	will	learn…much	of	worth.	Finally,	a	demon
travels	with	these	three	humans.	For	the	time	being…’
‘Where	are	they	going?	Why	stop	here,	as	Iskaral’s	guests?’
‘Why,	to	collect	you,	Cutter.’
‘I	don’t	understand.’
‘Symmetry,	lad,	is	a	power	unto	itself.	It	is	the	expression,	if	you	will,	of
nature’s	striving	for	balance.	I	charge	you	with	protecting	Felisin’s	life.	To
accompany	them	on	their	long,	and	dangerous,	journey.’


‘How	epic	of	you.’
‘I	think	not,’	Cotillion	snapped.
Silence,	for	a	time,	during	which	Cutter	regretted	his	comment.
Finally,	the	Daru	sighed.	‘I	hear	horses.	And	Pust…in	one	of	his	nauseating
diatribes.’
Cotillion	said	nothing.
‘Very	well,’	Cutter	said.	‘This	Felisin…abused,	you	said.	Those	ones	are
hard	to	get	to.	To	befriend,	I	mean.	Their	scars	stay	fresh	and	fierce	with	pain
—’
‘Her	adopted	mother	did	well,	given	her	own	scars.	Be	glad,	lad,	that	she	is
the	daughter,	not	the	mother.	And,	in	your	worst	moments,	think	of	how	Baudin
felt.’
‘Baudin.	The	elder	Felisin’s	guardian?’
‘Yes.’
‘All	right,’	Cutter	said.	‘It	will	do.’
‘What	will?’
‘This	path.	It	will	do.’	He	hesitated,	then	said,	‘Cotillion.	This	notion	of…
balance.	Something	has	occurred	to	me—’
Cotillion’s	eyes	silenced	him,	shocked	him	with	their	unveiling	of
sorrow…of	remorse.	The	patron	of	assassins	nodded.	‘From	her…to	you.
Aye.’
‘Did	she	see	that,	do	you	think?’
‘All	too	clearly,	I’m	afraid.’
Cutter	stared	out	the	window.	‘I	loved	her,	you	know.	I	still	do.’
‘So	you	do	not	wonder	why	she	has	left.’
He	shook	his	head,	unable	to	fight	back	the	tears	any	more.	‘No,	Cotillion,’
he	whispered.	‘I	don’t.’
	
The	ancient	coast	road	long	behind	him,	Karsa	Orlong	guided	Havok
northward	along	the	shore	of	the	new	inland	sea.	Rain	clouds	hung	over	the
murky	water	to	the	east,	but	the	wind	was	pushing	them	away.
He	studied	the	sky	for	a	moment,	then	reined	in	on	a	slight	rise	studded
with	boulders	and	slipped	down	from	the	horse’s	back.	Walking	over	to	a
large,	flat-topped	rock,	the	Teblor	unslung	his	sword	and	set	it	point	downward
against	a	nearby	boulder,	then	sat.	He	drew	off	his	pack	and	rummaged	in	an
outside	pocket	for	some	salted	bhederin,	dried	fruit,	and	goat	cheese.
Staring	out	over	the	water,	he	ate.	When	he	was	done,	he	loosened	the
pack’s	straps	and	dragged	out	the	broken	remains	of	the	T’lan	Imass.	He	held	it


up	so	that	’Siballe’s	withered	face	looked	out	upon	the	rippling	waves.
‘Tell	me,’	Karsa	said,	‘what	do	you	see?’
‘My	past.’	A	moment	of	silence,	then,	‘All	that	I	have	lost…’
The	Teblor	released	his	grip	and	the	partial	corpse	collapsed	into	a	cloud
of	dust.	Karsa	found	his	waterskin	and	drank	deep.	Then	he	stared	down	at
’Siballe.	‘You	once	said	that	if	you	were	thrown	into	the	sea,	your	soul	would
be	freed.	That	oblivion	would	come	to	you.	Is	this	true?’
‘Yes.’
With	one	hand	he	lifted	her	from	the	ground,	rose	and	walked	to	the	sea’s
edge.
‘Wait!	Teblor,	wait!	I	do	not	understand!’
Karsa’s	expression	soured.	‘When	I	began	this	journey,	I	was	young.	I
believed	in	one	thing.	I	believed	in	glory.	I	know	now,	’Siballe,	that	glory	is
nothing.	Nothing.	This	is	what	I	now	understand.’
‘What	else	do	you	now	understand,	Karsa	Orlong?’
‘Not	much.	Just	one	other	thing.	The	same	cannot	be	said	for	mercy.’	He
raised	her	higher,	then	swung	her	body	outward.
It	struck	the	water	in	the	shallows.	And	dissolved	into	a	muddy	bloom,
which	the	waves	then	swept	away.
Karsa	swung	about.	Faced	his	sword	of	stone.	He	then	smiled.	‘Yes.	I	am
Karsa	Orlong	of	the	Uryd,	a	Teblor.	Witness,	my	brothers.	One	day	I	will	be
worthy	to	lead	such	as	you.	Witness.’
Sword	once	more	slung	on	his	back,	Havok	once	more	solid	beneath	him,
the	Toblakai	rode	from	the	shoreline.	West,	into	the	wastes.


Epilogue

And	now	here	I	sit,
on	my	brow	a	circlet	of	fire,
and	this	kingdom
I	rule
is	naught	but	the	host
of	my	life’s	recollections,
unruly	subjects,
so	eager	for	insurrection,
to	usurp	the	aged	man
from	his	charred	throne
and	raise	up
younger	versions
one	by	one.
THE	CROWN	OF	YEARS
FISHER	KEL	T ATH
By	any	standards,	she	was	a	grim	woman.
Onrack	the	Broken	watched	her	stand	in	the	centre	of	the	chamber	and	cast
a	harsh,	appraising	eye	upon	the	disposition	of	her	young	killers.	The	grimace
that	twisted	her	handsome	features	suggested	that	she	found	nothing	awry.	Her
gaze	fell	at	last	upon	the	Tiste	Edur,	Trull	Sengar,	and	the	grimace	shifted	into
a	scowl.
‘Must	we	watch	our	backs	as	well,	with	you	here?’
Seated	on	the	hewn	floor,	his	back	to	an	equally	rough	wall,	Trull	Sengar
shrugged.	‘I	see	no	easy	way	of	convincing	you	that	I	am	worthy	of	your	trust,
Minala.	Apart	from	weaving	for	you	my	lengthy	and	rather	unpleasant	story.’
‘Spare	me,’	she	growled,	then	strode	from	the	room.
Trull	Sengar	glanced	over	at	Onrack	and	grinned.	‘No-one	wants	to	hear	it.
Well,	I	am	not	surprised.	Nor	am	I	even	stung.	It	is	a	rather	squalid	tale—’
‘I	will	hear	your	story,’	Onrack	replied.


Near	the	entrance,	Ibra	Gholan’s	neck	creaked	as	the	T’lan	Imass	looked
back	over	one	shoulder	to	regard	Onrack	for	a	moment,	before	returning	to
his	position	guarding	the	approach.
Trull	Sengar	barked	a	laugh.	‘This	is	ideal	for	an	unskilled	weaver	of	tales.
My	audience	comprises	a	score	of	children	who	do	not	understand	my	native
tongue,	and	three	expressionless	and	indifferent	undead.	By	tale’s	end,	only	I
will	be	weeping…likely	for	all	the	wrong	reasons.’
Monok	Ochem,	who	was	standing	three	paces	back	from	Ibra	Gholan,
slowly	pivoted	until	the	bonecaster	faced	Onrack.	‘You	have	felt	it,	then,
Broken	One.	And	so	you	seek	distraction.’
Onrack	said	nothing.
‘Felt	what?’	Trull	Sengar	asked.
‘She	is	destroyed.	The	woman	who	gave	Onrack	her	heart	in	the	time
before	the	Ritual.	The	woman	to	whom	he	avowed	his	own	heart…only	to	steal
it	back.	In	many	ways,	she	was	destroyed	then,	already	begun	on	her	long
journey	to	oblivion.	Do	you	deny	that,	Onrack?’
‘Bonecaster,	I	do	not.’
‘Madness,	of	such	ferocity	as	to	defeat	the	Vow	itself.	Like	a	camp	dog	that
awakens	one	day	with	fever	in	its	brain.	That	snarls	and	kills	in	a	frenzy.	Of
course,	we	had	no	choice	but	to	track	her	down,	corner	her.	And	so	shatter	her,
imprison	her	within	eternal	darkness.	Or	so	we	thought.	Madness,	then,	to	defy
even	us.	But	now,	oblivion	has	claimed	her	soul	at	last.	A	violent,	painful
demise,	but	none	the	less…’	Monok	Ochem	paused,	then	cocked	its	head.	‘Trull
Sengar,	you—have	not	begun	your	tale,	yet	already	you	weep.’
The	Tiste	Edur	studied	the	bonecaster	for	a	long	moment,	as	the	tears	ran
down	his	gaunt	cheeks.	‘I	weep,	Monok	Ochem,	because	he	cannot.’
The	bonecaster	faced	Onrack	once	more.	‘Broken	One,	there	are	many
things	you	deserve…but	this	man	is	not	among	them.’	He	then	turned	away.
Onrack	spoke.	‘Monok	Ochem,	you	have	travelled	far	from	the	mortal	you
once	were,	so	far	as	to	forget	a	host	of	truths,	both	pleasant	and	unpleasant.
The	heart	is	neither	given	nor	stolen.	The	heart	surrenders.’
The	bonecaster	did	not	turn	round.	‘That	is	a	word	without	power	to	the
T’lan	Imass,	Onrack	the	Broken.’
‘You	are	wrong,	Monok	Ochem.	We	simply	changed	the	word	to	make	it
not	only	more	palatable,	but	also	to	empower	it.	With	such	eminence	that	it
devoured	our	souls.’
‘We	did	no	such	thing,’	the	bonecaster	replied.
‘Onrack’s	right,’	Trull	Sengar	sighed.	‘You	did.	You	called	it	the	Ritual	of
Tellann.’


Neither	Monok	Ochem	nor	Ibra	Gholan	spoke.
The	Tiste	Edur	snorted.	‘And	you’ve	the	nerve	to	call	Onrack	broken.’
There	was	silence	in	the	chamber	then,	for	some	time.
But	Onrack’s	gaze	remained	fixed	on	Trull	Sengar.	And	he	was,	if	he	was
anything,	a	creature	capable	of	supreme	patience.	To	grieve	is	a	gift	best
shared.	As	a	song	is	shared.
Deep	in	the	caves,	the	drums	beat.	Glorious	echo	to	the	herds	whose
thundering	hoofs	celebrate	what	it	is	to	be	alive,	to	run	as	one,	to	roll	in	life’s
rhythm.	This	is	how,	in	the	cadence	of	our	voice,	we	serve	nature’s	greatest
need.
Facing	nature,	we	are	the	balance.
Ever	the	balance	to	chaos.
Eventually,	his	patience	was	rewarded.
As	he	knew	it	would	be.
This	ends	the	fourth	tale	of
The	Malazan
Book	of	the	Fallen


Glossary

Ascendants
Anomander	Rake:	Son	of	Darkness
Apsalar:	Lady	of	Thieves
Beru:	Lord	of	Storms
Bridgeburners
Burn:	The	Sleeping	Goddess
Cotillion:	The	Rope,	Patron	of	Assassins,	High	House	Shadow
Dessembrae:	Lord	of	Tears
Draconus:	an	Elder	God	and	forger	of	the	sword	Dragnipur
D’rek:	The	Worm	of	Autumn
Fener:	the	Bereft
Gedderone:	Lady	of	Spring	and	Rebirth
Hood:	King	of	High	House	Death
Jhess:	Queen	of	Weaving
K’rul:	an	Elder	God	of	the	Warrens
Mael:	an	Elder	God	of	the	Seas
Mowri:	Lady	of	Beggars,	Slaves	and	Serfs
Nerruse:	Lady	of	Calm	Seas	and	Fair	Winds
Oponn:	Twin	Jesters	of	Chance
Osserc/Osseric/Osric:	Lord	of	the	Sky
Poliel:	Mistress	of	Pestilence	and	Disease
Queen	of	Dreams:	Queen	of	High	House	Life
Shadowthrone:	Ammanas,	King	of	High	House	Shadow
Sister	of	Cold	Nights:	an	Elder	Goddess
Soliel:	Lady	of	Health
The	Azath:	the	Houses
The	Crippled	God:	The	Chained	One,	Lord	of	High	House	of	Chains
The	Deragoth:	of	the	First	Empire	of	Dessimbelackis
The	Seven	Hounds	of	Darkness
The	Whirlwind	Goddess
Togg	and	Fanderay:	The	Wolves	of	Winter


Treach/Trake:	The	Tiger	of	Summer	and	Lord	of	War
The	Gods	of	the	Teblor	(The	Seven	Faces	in	the	Rock)
Urugal	the	Woven
’Siballe	the	Unfound
Beroke	Soft	Voice
Kahlb	the	Silent	Hunter
Thenik	the	Shattered
Halad	the	Giant
Imroth	the	Cruel
Elder	Peoples
Tiste	Andii:	Children	of	Darkness
Tiste	Edur:	Children	of	Shadow
Tiste	Liosan:	Children	of	Light
T’lan	Imass
Eres/Eres’al
Trell
Jaghut
Forkrul	Assail
K’Chain	Che’Malle
The	Eleint
The	Barghast
The	Thelomen	Toblakai
The	Teblor
The	Warrens
Kurald	Galain:	The	Elder	Warren	of	Darkness
Kurald	Emurlahn:	The	Elder	Warren	of	Shadow,	the	Shattered	Warren
Kurald	Thyrllan:	The	Elder	Warren	of	Light
Omtose	Phellack:	The	Elder	Jaghut	Warren	of	Ice
Tellann:	The	Elder	Imass	Warren	of	Fire
Starvald	Demelain:	The	Eleint	Warren
Thyr:	The	Path	of	Light
Denul:	The	Path	of	Healing
Hood’s	Path:	The	Path	of	Death
Serc:	The	Path	of	the	Sky


Meanas:	The	Path	of	Shadow	and	Illusion
D’riss:	The	Path	of	the	Earth
Ruse:	The	Path	of	the	Sea
Rashan:	The	Path	of	Darkness
Mockra:	The	Path	of	the	Mind
Telas:	The	Path	of	Fire
The	Deck	of	Dragons
High	House	Life
King
Queen	(Queen	of	Dreams)
Champion
Priest
Herald
Soldier
Weaver
High	House	Death
King	(Hood)
Queen
Knight	(once	Dassem	Ultor,	now	Baudin)
Magi
Herald
Soldier
Spinner
Mason
Virgin
High	House	Light
King
Queen
Champion	(Osseric)
Priest
Captain
Soldier
Seamstress
Builder
Maiden
High	House	Dark
King


Queen
Knight	(Anomander	Rake)
Magi
Captain
Soldier
Weaver
Mason
Wife
	
High	House	Shadow
King	(Shadowthrone/Ammanas)
Queen
Assassin	(The	Rope/Cotillion)
Magi
Hound
	
High	House	of	Chains
The	King	in	Chains
The	Consort	(Poliel?)
Reaver	(Kallor?)
Knight	(Toblakai)
The	Seven	of	the	Dead	Fires	(The	Unbound)
Cripple
Leper
Fool
	
Unaligned
Oponn
Obelisk	(Burn)
Crown
Sceptre
Orb
Throne
Chain
Master	of	the	Deck	(Ganoes	Paran)


Places	in	House	of	Chains
SEVEN 	CITIES
Aren:	a	Holy	City
Balahn:	a	small	village	north	of	Aren
Ehrlitan:	a	Holy	City	north	of	Raraku
Erougimon:	a	tel	north	of	Aren
G’danisban:	a	city	east	of	Raraku
Jhag	Odhan:	the	wastes	west	of	Seven	Cities
Lato	Revae:	a	city	west	of	Raraku
Sarpachiya:	a	city	west	of	Raraku
Thalas	River:	west	of	Raraku
The	Oasis:	Holy	Desert	Raraku
The	Whirlwind	Warren
Vathar	Crossing:	site	of	battle	on	Chain	of	Dogs
Y’Ghatan:	self-styled	First	Holy	City
	
GENABACKIS
Culvern:	a	town
Genabaris:	a	city
Laederon	Plateau
Malybridge:	a	town
Malyn	Sea
Malyntaeas:	a	city
Ninsano	Moat:	a	town
Silver	Lake
Tanys:	a	town
	
Drift	Avalii:	an	island	southwest	of	the	continent	of	Quon	Tali
The	Nascent:	a	flooded	world

